CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


irj 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104945 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 

AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL.  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


TON.  ARCHDEACOi>T  f .  W.  FAEEAE,  D.D.,  F.E.S.— EIGHT  EEV.  H.  COTTEEILL,  D.D.,  F.E.S.l 
-VEEY  EEV.  PEINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-EEY.  CANON  G.  EAWLINSON,  M.A. 
—EEV.  A.  PLUMMEE,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
Nev/  Yoek  AND  Toronto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED  BY  THE 


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 

nCAR  AND   RURAL  DEAN   OF   ST.    PANCRAS,    AND   EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TO   THE  LOU< 
niSHOF   OF   GLOUCESTER  AND  BRISTOL  : 


AND  BY  THE 

R^V.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,  M.A. 


I.   CORINTHIAlSrS. 

(S^poeition : 
Bv    THE    VEN.    ARCHDEACON    FARRAR,    D.D. 

^omilctits : 
By    rev.    DAVID    THOMAS,    D.D. 

EDITOR  OF  THE  "  HOMILIST." 

ffiomiliee  bg  t)ttrioH0  Authors : 

REV.  DONALD  FRASER,  D.D.,  REV.  PROF.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  H.A. 

REV.  EX-CHANCELLOR  LIPSCOMB,  LL.D.,       REV.  R.  TUCK,  B.A., 
REV.  E.  HURNDALL,  M.A.,  REV.  J.  WAITE,  B.A., 

REV.  H.  BREMNER,  B.D. 


FUNK    &.  WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoek  and  Toeonto. 

L,^    -- 


THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  OF 

PAUL  TO  THE  COKINTHIANS. 

INTRODUCTION. 


St.  Paul  at  Coeintii. 

A-iOKis,  and  mncli  disheartened  by  the  unfruitfulness  of  his  Bojonrn,  St 
Paul  left  Athens  after  his  memorable  address  in  the  Areopagus,  and  sailed 
to  Corinth.  In  about  five  hours  his  vessel  dropped  anchor  in  the  bright 
waters  of  the  Saronio  bay,  under  the  pine  woods  and  low  green  hills  of 
Cenchreae.  A  walk  of  about  eight  miles  along  the  valley  of  Hexamili 
brought  him  to  the  city,  nestling  under  the  huge  mass  of  its  citadel — the 
famous  Acrocorinthus,  which  flung  its  dark  shadow  over  each  of  the  city's 
double  seas.  In  that  city  he  spent  more  than  a  year  and  a  half  of  his 
life. 

The  city  of  Corinth  was  no  longer  the  old  city  so  famous  and  so 
powerful  in  the  days  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.  After  the  decline  of 
Sparta  and  Athens,  she  had  held  the  hegemony  of  Greece,  and  had  placed 
herself  at  the  head  of  the  Acheean  league.  In  B.c.  196,  Flamininus,  after 
the  battle  of  Cynocephalae,  had  proclaimed  at  Corinth  the  independence 
of  Hellas.  But  in  B.C.  146  the  city  had  been  taken,  its  buildings  committed 
to  the  flames,  its  treasures  rifled,  and  its  inhabitants  massacred  by  L. 
Mummius.  After  it  had  lain  in  ruins  for  a  hundred  years  the  prescient  eye 
of  Julius  Csesar  had  recognized  the  beauty  and  importance  of  the  site,  and, 
wishing  both  to  immortalize  his  own  name  and  to  call  attention  to  his 
mythic  descent  &om  Venus — who,  under  her  Greek  name  of  Aphrodite,  had 
been  the  patron  goddess  of  the  city — he  rebuilt  Corinth  from  its  foundations ; 
gave  it  the  name  of  Julia  Corinthna,  and  peopled  it  with  a  colony  of 
veterans  and  freedmen. 

With  the  advantage  of  its  two  harbours,  Lechaeum  and  Cenchreas,  and 
of  the  Diolkos,  or  land  channel,  over  which  ships  were  dragged. to  avoid  the 
circumnavigation  of  Cape  Malea,  the  town  at  once  became  important.  It 
was  "  the  bridge  of  the  sea."    Jews  flocked  to  it  for  trade ;  Phoenicians, 

L  COBINTHIAKa.  B 


IHTBODnonON  TO 


for  oommeroe;  Bomans,  in  order  to  Tint  a  place  so  famous  and  to  buy 
"antiquities,"  genuine  and  qrarions,  for  the  Boman  market;  men  of 
pleasure,  to  avail  themselyes  of  the  immorality  for  which  it  soon  became 
infamous.  Greeks  were  attracted  in  large  numbers  by  the  renown  of  the 
revived  Isthmian  games.  It  was  the  Greeks  who  stamped,  their  own 
character  upon  the  majorily  of  the  inhabitants.  They  became  proverbial 
for  litigious  shrewdness,  intellectual  restlessness,  and,  above  all,  sensual 
indulgence.  The  mixture  of  classes  and  nationalities  in  a  seaport  and 
emporium  of  commerce  produces  invariably  an  unfavourable  effect,  and 
Corinth — still  continuing  to  be  in  a  certain  sense  **  the  Star  of  Hellas," 
and  the  emporium  of  half  the  world— became  known  m  the  Yanity  Fair 
of  the  Boman  empire ;  alike  the  London  and  the  Paris  of  the  first  century 
after  Christ. 

Into  this  city  of  six  hundred  thousand  inhabitants — this  seething  mass 
of  Jews,  merchants,  philosophers,  ex-soldiers,  retailers,  and  agents  of  vice — 
the  lonely  and  suffering  apostle  found  his  way.  With  all  their  faults  of 
head  and  of  heart,  these  Greeks  aroused  his  deepest  interest.  Evidently  his 
stay  in  Corinth  impressed  his  imagination.  He  draws  many  illustrations 
from  their  stadium,  their  races,  their  boxing  matches,  their  courts  of 
justice,  their  theatres,  their  garlands  of  Isthmian  pine  (ch.  ix.  24,  27  ;  iv. 
9;  ix.  26;  2  Oor.  iL  14—16;  v.  10;  ix.  25).  He  learnt  to  love  the 
Corinthians  with  intense  affection,  though  he  never  had  to  deal  with  any 
Church  so  inflated  and  so  immoral,  so  indifferent  to  his  sufferings,  so 
contemptuous  towards  his  teaching,  or  so  tolerant  of  the  opposition  and  the 
calumnies  of  his  personal  enemies  and  rivals. 

The  worst  moral  sins  of  the  city  were  dishonesty,  drunkenness,  and 
above  all,  sensuality,  which  was  directly  due  to  the  worship  of  Aphrodite 
,  Fandemos,  and  to  the  thousand  female  hieroduU,  who  were  consecrated  to 
her  service.  Against  these  sins  again  and  again  the  apostle  lifted  up  his 
voice  (ch.  ▼.  10;  vi.  9—20;  x.  7,  8;  xL  21;  2  Cor.  vi  14;  vii.  1;  xii. 
21,  etc.). 

The  chief  intellectual  faults  were  a  litigious  spirit,  restless  speculation, 
eager  factiousness,  and  inflated  vanity.  To  these  St.  Paul  would  not 
pander  for  a  moment.  Perhaps  because  he  had  learnt  experience  from  the 
failure  of  his  more  recondite  and  philosophical  address  at  Athens,  he 
determined  to  discard  all  hu£nan  wisdom  and  eloquence,  and  to  preach  the 
gospel  in  its  uttermost  and  humblest  simplicity,  knowing  nothing  among 
them  but  Christ  Jesus,  yes,  and  Christ  oruoifled  (oh.  L  17,  23;  ii.  1 — 6; 
2Cor.  i.    8). 

The  volatile  suspicious  character  of  the  people  made  the  apostle  feel  the 
necessity  for  being  most  carefully  on  his  guard.  He  was  determined  to  set 
an  example  of  the  most  lofty  and  disinterested  self-denial.  He  had  been 
trained  to  a  trade,  like  every  other  Jewish  boy,  in  accordance  with  a  wise 
rule  of  the  rabbis.  His  trade  was  the  humble  and  mechanical  trade  of 
tent-making  j  and  finding  a  Jewish  compatriot  named  Aquila,  who  worked 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  Ul 

ftt  this  trade,  with  his  wife  Friscilla,  he  entered  into  partnership  with  them. 
They  had  been  expelled  from  Rome  by  a  decree  of  Glaudins,  in  X.v.  62,  and 
had  probably  been  converted  to  Christianity  by  the  unknown  disoiples  who 
had  founded  the  Boman  Church.  With  them  St.  Paul  formed  a  happy  and 
lifelong  friendship,  and  by  toiling  with  them,  he  was  able  to  earn  a  living, 
which  was,  however,  so  scanty  that  it  often  barely  sufBced  even  for  hia 
simpls  wants  (Acts  xx.  34 ;  ch.  iv.  11,  12 ;  ix.  4,  12 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  2 ;  xi.  9). 

After  a  time  he  was  joined  by  Silaa  and  Timotheus,  who  not  only  aided  . 
him  effectually  in  his  mission  work,  but  also  brought  a  welcome  supply  for 
his  needs  from  the  Church  of  Philippi,  the  only  Church  from  whioh  he  ever 
consented  to  accept  pecuniary  aid  (2  Cor.  xi.  9;  Phil.  iv.  15). 

The  mission  was  successful.  Crispus  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue  was 
baptized,  with  all  his  house.  The  Jews,  however,  as  a  body,  showed  such 
determined  opposition,  that  he  had  to  leave  their  synagogue  altogether  and 
turn  to  the  Gentiles.  He  went  with  his  converts  to  a  room  near  the 
synagogue,  which  was  placed  at  his  disposal  by  a  proselyte  named  Justus, 
and  there,  amid  much  physical  weakness  and  mental  depression,  he 
preached  for  many  months.  His  labours  brought  about  the  conversion  of 
many  Gentiles  (Acts  xviii.  8),  and  the  founding  of  Churches,  not  only  in 
Corinth,  but  also  at  Genchreaa  and  other  towns  of  Achaia  (2  Cor.  i.  1 ;  Bom.  - 
xvi.  1). 

The  Jews,  filled  with  bitter  hatred  against  him,  seized  the  opportunity 
offered  them  by  the  arrival  of  a  new  proconsul — Marcus  Anneeus  Novatus 
(Gallic),  a  brother  of  Seneca — to  accuse  him  of  acting  contrary  to  Law. 
Oallio,  indeed,  dismissed  their  accusation  with  true  Roman  contempt ;  but 
the  strong  indignation  of  the  apostle  against  his  obstinate  and  infatuated 
fellow-countrymen  breaks  out  in  his  First  Epistle  to  the  Thes^alonians 
(1  ThesB.  ii.  14 — 16),  the  earliest  of  his  extant  Epistles,  which,  like  the 
Second,  was  written  from  Corinth. 

After  staying  for  some  time  longer  at  Corinth,  he  sailed  to  Ephesns  on 
his  way  to  Jerusalem,  and,  returning  from  thence  to  Antiocb,  set  out  with 
Timothy  and  others  on  his  third  missionary  journey.  Fulfilling  his  promise 
that  he  would  revisit  Ephesus,  he  made  that  oity  his  head-quarters  for 
nesurly  three  years  (Acta  xx.  31). 

Date  and  Desiqh  or  thi  Epistu. 

It  was  during  the  latter  part  of  his  residence  in  the  Ionian  metropolis — 
probably  a  little  before  Pentecost,  a.d.  57 — that  he  wrote  his  First  Letter  to 
the  Corinthians.  His  intention  had  been  to  leave  Ephesus  shortly  and  to 
sail  to  Corinth.  After  a  brief  stay  with  the  Church,  he  purposed  to  visit 
Macedonia,  and  then  to  return  to  Corinth,  in  order  that,  after  a  second 
visit,  the  Church  might  help  him  forward  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem  (2  Cor. 
i.  16—17).  The  news  which  he  received  from  Corinth  frustrated  this  plan 
He  had  informed  them  of  it  (apparently)  in  a  lost  letter,  in  which  he  had 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


also  given  them  a  rule  "  not  to  company  with  fornicators,"  of  whioh  thej 
had  mistaken  the  due  Bignificance.  But  in  ch.  xvi.  he  had  silently  indicated 
his  change  of  plan,  and  this  had  led  his  opponents  to  charge  him  with 
insincerity  and  frivolity  (2  Cor.  i.  17). 

But  the  reason  for  this  change  of  plan  had  been  the  account  of  the  evil 
state  of  the  Church  at  Corinth,  which  he  had  received,  first  from  ApoUos ; 
then  from  a  letter  which  the  converts  had  addressed  to  him ;  and  lastly  from 
some  members  of  "  the  household  of  Chloe." 

From  ApoUoH  he  must  have  heard  generally  that  some  of  the  brethren 
were  only  too  likely  to  succumb  to  the  perils  of  the  heathendom  by  which 
they  were  surrounded ;  and  he  must  have  told  the  apostle  that  there  was 
pressing  need  for  him  to  meet  the  yearning  wish  of  all  the  most  faithful 
converts  by  paying  them  a  visit  as  soon  as  possible. 

The  letter  of  the  Corinthians  themselves  revealed  the  existence  of  some 
genuine  perplexity  and  of  many  eager  and  unhealthy  speculations. 

1.  They  had  asked  many  questions  about  mariiage  and  celibacy ;  about 
second  marriages ;  about  mixed  marriages ;  about  the  marriage  of  wards 
and  daughters. 

2.  They  wished  for  direction  in  the  bitter  disputes  which  had  arisen 
between  "  the  strong  "  and  "  the  weak  "  on  the  question  of  "  meats  offered 
to  idols." 

3.  They  had  asked  whether  men  or  women  ought  to  appear  in  the 
assemblies  with  their  heads  covered  or  uncovered. 

4.  They  had  di£Sculties  about  the  relative  value  of  spiritual  gifts,  and 
the  way  to  regulate  the  phenomena  of  glossolaly  ("speaking  with  the 
tongue  "). 

6.  They  were  perplexed  with  material  difiSculties  about  the  resurrection, 

6.  They  asked  about  the  collection  for  the  pour  in  Jerusalem. 

7.  They  invited  ApoUos  to  pay  them  another  visit. 

There  were  many  points  in  this  letter  which  gave  ground  for  anxiety  . 
but  this  was  as  nothing  to  the  grief  with  which  St.  Paul  heard  the  tidings 
brought  by  Stephanas,  FortunatUs,  and  Achaicus — tidings  which  he  should 
have  heard  from  the  Church,  but  which  their  letter  had  passed  over  with  a 
reticence  which  was  little  honourable  to  their  faithfulness  and  sincerity. 

First  of  all,  he  learnt  that  the  Church  was  rent  by  a  deplorable  party 
spirit.  Apollos  and  others,  especially  some  emissaries  from  or  representa- 
tives of  the  motlier  Church  of  Jerusalem,  had  visited  Corinth  during  St. 
Paul's  long  absence,  and  the  consequence  had  been  that  various  factions  had 
rallied  round  different  teachers.  One  party  still  adhered  to  the  name  of 
Paul;  others  preferred  the  stately  rhetoric  and  Alexandrian  refinements 
of  Apollos ;  others  claimed  allegiance  for  the  name  of  Cephas ;  and  some 
Judeso-Christians,  probably  of  the  narrowest  school,  vainly  wished  to  mono- 
polize for  their  section  the  name  of  Christ  himself. 

Then  grave  scandals  and  abuses  had  been  caused  in  the  Church  meetings 
by  the  forwardness  of  women,  by  the  egotism  of  rival  orators,  and  most  pi 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE   G0R1NTHIAN8.  t 

all  by  the  disordered  and  almost  insane  abuse  of  the  impulse  to  speak  with 
the  tongue. 

Further,  the  very  agapae  which  were  held  in  connection  with  the  Eucharist 
had  been  shockingly  disgraced  and  profaned  by  greed,  selfishness,  envy, 
gluttony,  and  even  by  the  besetting  Corinthian  vice  of  intoxication. 

Worst  of  all,  uncleanness  had  not  only  found  its  open  defenders  but 
a  considerable  section  of  the  Church,  in  its  inflated  sophistry,  had  condoned 
and  abetted  a  case  of  incest  so  flagraat  that  the  very  heathen  cried  shame 
upon  it. 

It  was  under  these  almost  heartrending  circumstances  that  St.  Paul 
wrote  his  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.  The  Epistle,  which  is  very 
characteristic  of  the  apostle,  JM  in  many  ways  most  deeply  interesting,  and 
especially  for  these  reasons — 

1.  It  shows  the  powerful  self-control  of  the  apostle  in  spite  of  his 
physical  weakness,  his  distressed  circumstances,  his  incessant  troubles,  and 
his  emotional  nature.  It  was  written,  he  tells  us,  in  bitter  anguish, "  out  of 
much  affliction  and  pressure  of  heart,  .  .  .  and  with  streaming  tears  "  (2  Cor. 
ii.  4) ;  yet  he  restrained  the  expression  of  his  feelings,  and  wrote  with  a 
dignity  and  holy  calm,  which  he  thought  most  calculated  to  win  back  his 
erring  children. 

2.  It  gives  lis  a  vivid  picture  of  the  early  Church  before  the  days  of  its 
organization  and  episcopal  government ;  and  it  entirely  dissipates  the  dream 
that  the  apostolic  Church  was  in  an  exceptional  condition  of  holiness  of 
life  or  purity  of  doctrine. 

3.  It  tihows  how  the  most  trivial  details  can  be  decided  by  great  and 
solemn  principles.  Problems  however  dark,  details  however  intricate, 
become  under  St.  Paul's  treatment  both  lucid  and  orderly  in  the  light  ot 
eternal  distinctness.  St.  Paul  shows  that  the  rule  of  charity  and  the 
voice  of  conscience  are  sufficient  to  decide  all  questions. 

4.  It  is  addressed  to  a  Church  predominantly  Gentile,  and  thus  shows 
us  the  method  adopted  by  the  greatest  of  Christian  teachers  when  brought 
face  to  face  with  the  problems  suggested  to  the  minds  of  oonverta  from 
paganism. 

AuTHumciTT. 

The  authenticity  of  the  Epistle  is  beyond  all  doubt.  It  ii  attested  from 
the  very  earliest  times,  and  among  others  by  St.  Clemens  Romanus  (a.d. 
96),  within  forty  years  of  the  date  when  the  letter  was  written.  Alike 
the  external  and  the  internal  evidence  is  so  indisputable,  that  not  a  single 
writer  of  the  smallest  importance,  however  "  advanced "  his  school  of 
criticism,  has  ever  ventured  to  question  its  cogency. 

Many  of  the  questions  which  are  sometimes  discussed  by  way  of 
Introduction  to  the  Epistle — such  as  the  supposed  unrecorded  visit  to 
Corinth,  the  nature  of  the  factions,  the  matter  and  style,  etc.-  will  be 
found  discussed  in  the  following  notes. 


vi    nrrBODUCTIOK  to  the  first  epistle  to  the  CORINTHIANS. 


^n  ontline  of  the  Epistle — owing  to  the  oircnmstances  in  which   ii 
originated — is  Teiy  simple.    It  is  as  follows : — 

1.  Greeting.     Ch.  i.  1—3. 

2.  Thanksgiving.    Vers.  4—9. 

3.  The  folly  and  sin  of  paktt  enarr.    Cb.  L  10 — Ir.  20. 

4.  The  incestuous  offender.    (Si.  iv.  21 — v.  18. 

6.  The  sin  of  going  to  law  before  the  heathen.    Ch.  tI.  IS. 
8.  The  sin  and  shame  of  fomicatioD.    Ch.  rL  9 — 20. 

7.  Answers  to  the  inquiries  of  the  Corinthians. 

(1^  As  to  HASRiAOB  and  csubaot.    Cb.  vii.  1 — 40. 

(2)  As  to  iDOii-oiTEBiireB.    ((%.  viii.  1 — xL  1 ;  with  a  long  illustration  from  hk 

own  example  of  self-deaial,  eh,  ix.  1 — ^x.  14.) 
(S)  At  to  puBuo  woBSHir. 

Cb)  The  covering  of  the  bead.    Ch.  xl.  2—16. 

flS  Disorders  at  the  agapss  and  the  Eucharist.     Ch.  xi.  17 — 34. 

le)  The  use  and  abuse  of  spiritual  gifts.    Ch.  xiL  1 — 30. 

(d)  The  supereminence  of  love.     Ch.  xil.  31 — xiii.  13. 

(e)  Use  and  abuse  of  the  gift  of  the  tongne.  ^Cb.  xiv.  1— 46l 
(4)  As  to  the  BESUBBEcnoN  of  the  dead.    Ch.  xv.  1—68. 

8.  GwcluMon.    Message*,  greetings,  and  final  bleating.    Oh.  xvL  l—Dk 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF 

PAUL  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTKR  L 


The  oldest  superscription  wu  probably, 
''To  the  Corinthians,  the  first  {Upht  Ko/hv 
elivs  rpiiTTi)"  This  is  foond  in  it.  A,  B, 
0,D. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Tk»  greeUng.  An  opening 
salutation  is  fonnd  in  all  the  Epistles  of 
St  Paul,  and  in  every  Epistle  of  the  New 
Testament  except  the  Epistle  to  the  He- 
brews and  the  first  Epistle  of  St.  John,  both 
of  which  were  more  in  the  nature  of  treatise* 
than  letters. 

Ver.  I.— Paul.  After  the  beginning  of 
the  first  missionary  journey  (a.d.  45)  ha 
seems  to  have  finally  abandoned  his  Hebrew 
name  of  Saul.  Called.  The  word  "  oallijd  " 
is  absent  from  A,  D,  E,  and  other  manusrripts, 
but  may  have  been  omitted  as  superfluous. 
It  oocurs  in  the  greeting  of  Bom.  i.  1,  but  not 
in  any  other  Epistle.  The  words  might 
also  be  rendered  "a  called  or  chosen 
apostle."  To  be  on  apostle.  He  uses  this 
title  in  eyery  letter  except  the  private  one 
to  Philemon,  the  peculiarly  friendly  and 
inibrmal  one  to  the  Philippians,  and  the 
two  to  the  Thessalonians,  which  were 
written  before  the  Judaizers  had  chullengod 
his  claim  to  this  title  in  its  more  special 
sense.  The  Epistle  to  the  Bomans  is  the 
first  in  which  he  calls  himself  "  a  ilav»  of 
Jesna  Christ"  (comp.  Phil.  L  1 ;  Titus  i.  1 ; 
Jas.  L  1 ;  2  Pet  L  1 ;  Jude  1).  It  was  ne- 
cessary for  him  to  assert  his  right  to  the 
apostolate  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word, 
as  one  who  had  received  from  Christ  himself 
an  authority  equal  to  that  of  the  twelve  (sea 
eh,  ix.  1—5 ;  XV.  9 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  5 ;  xii  11,  12 ; 
OaL  L  1—19,  etc.).  Of  Jesus  Christ  In 
the  Gospels  the  word  "Christ"  is  all  but 
invariably  "  the  Christ,"  i.e.  the  Anointed, 
the  Messiah.  It  is  the  designation  of  the 
office  of  Jesua  as  the  promised  Deliverer. 
Wa  traca  in  the  New  Testament  the  gradual 

T.  OOBINTHIAllS. 


transition  of  tha  word  fren  a  Ittla  Inta  ■ 

proper  name.  In  the  two  names  together 
our  Lord  is  represented  as  "  the  Saviour," 
and  the  anointed  Prophet,  Prleit,  and 
King,  first  of  the  chosen  people  and  then 
of  all  mankind.  Through  tha  will  of  Ckid 
(comp.  2  Corinthians;  Epbesians;  Coloa- 
sians;  2  Tim.  i.  1),  This  tpeeial  oall  to 
the  apostleship  is  emphatically  expanded 
in  OaL  i.  I.  The  vindication  of  the  Divln* 
and  independent  claim  was  essential  to  St. 
Paul's  work.  It  was  not  due  to  any  per- 
aonal  considerations,  bnt  to  the  necessity  of 
proving  that  no  human  authority  could  ba 
quoted  to  overthrow  the  gospel  which  waa 
peculiarly  "  his  gospel  "(see  Gal.  i.  11 ;  Eph. 
lii.  8),  of  which  one  main  feature  was  tlia 
freedom  of  the  Gentiles  from  the  yoke  ol 
Judaic  bondage.  And  Sosthenei.  The  asaiv 
elation  of  one  or  more  brethren  with  himself 
in  the  greeting  of  his  letten  b  peculiar  ta 
Bt.  Paul  Silitf  and  Timothy  are  associated 
ir.ih  him  in  1  and  2  Thessalonians;  and 
Timothy,  though  so  much  his  junior,  in  S 
Corinthians,  Philippians,  Colossians,  and 
Philemon;  doubtless  ha  would  have  l>een 
associated  with  St  Paul  in  this  Epistle  had 
he  not  been  absent  (ch.  iv.  17;  xvi  10). 
The  practice  arose  partly  from  St.  Paul'* 
exquisite  courtesy  and  consideration  towards 
his  companions,  partly  from  his  shrinking 
from  mere  personal  prominence.  It  ii 
owing  to  the  same  reasons  that  in  the  earlier 
Epistles  he  constantly  uses  "we"  for  "I,", 
and  sometimes  when  he  can  only  be  speak- 
ing of  himself  (1  Thess.  ii.  18).  But  even 
in  the  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  he  some- 
times relap.-es  from  "we"  into  "I"  (2 
Thess.  ii.  5).  Our  brother;  literally.  On 
brother;  i.e.  one  of  "the  brethren"  (comp. 
3  Cor.  i.  1).  Of  Sosthenes  nothing  what- 
ever is  known.  He  may  possibly  be  the 
amanuensis  whom  St.  Paul  employed  for 
this  letter.    Later  tradition,  which  in  such 


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [oh.l1— 3L 


matters  is  perfectly  valueless,  spoke  of  him 
as  "  one  of  the  leventy  disciples,  and  Bishop 
of  Colophon  "  (Eusebius, '  Hist.  Eocl.,'  i.  12). 
There  is  a  Jewish  Sosthenes,  a  ruler  of  the 
synagogue,  in  Acts  xviii.  17 ;  but  it  is  only 
a  vague  conjecture  that  he  may  have  been 
subsequently  converted,  and  may  have 
joined  St.  Paul  at  Ephesus.  It  is  obvious 
that  the  persons  named  in  the  greetings  of 
tlie  Epistles  were  not  in  any  way  supposed 
to  be  responsible  for  their  contents,  for  St. 
Paul  begins  with  "  I "  in  ver.  4.  Brother. 
At  this  time  tliere  was  no  recognized  title 
for  Christians.  In  the  Acts  they  are  vaguely 
spoken  of  as  "  those  of  this  way."  Among 
themselves  they  were  known  as  "the 
saints,"  « the  faithful,"  "  the  elect."  The 
name  "Christians"  was  originally  a  nick- 
name devised  by  the  Antiochenes.  In  the 
New  Testament  it  only  occurs  as  a  designa- 
tion used  by  enemies  (Acts  zi.  26 ;  xxvi.  28 ; 
1  Pet.  iv.  16). 

Ver.  2.— Unto  the  Churoli.  This  form 
of  address  is  used  in  1  and  2  Thes- 
salonians,  1  and  2  Corinthians,  and  Gala- 
tians.  In  St.  Paul's  later  Epistles,  for 
some  unknown  reason,  he  prefers  the  ad- 
dress "to  the  saints."  These  forms  of 
address  show  the  absence  of  any  fixed 
ecclesiastical  government.  He  does  not  in 
this  Epistle  address  any  "  bishops "  or 
"  presbyters "  whom  he  might  regard  as 
responsible  for  the  growing  disorders  wliich 
prevailed  at  Corinth,  but  he  appeals  to  the 
whole  Church.  The  word  eoclesia — signify- 
ing those  who  were  "called  out  of  the 
world,"  and  so  primarily  applied  to  "the 
congregation  of  Israel" — came  ultimately 
to  mean  "a  congregation."  The  only 
apostle  who  uses  the  word  "  synagogue  "  of 
the  Christian  assemblies  is  St.  James 
(u.  2).  Of  &od.  Not  the  Church  of  this 
or  that  party  leader.  Some  commentators 
give  to  these  words  an  emphasis  and  impor- 
tance which  does  not  seem  to  belong  to  them. 
Which  is  at  Corinth.  So  in  2  Cor.  i.  2. 
In  1  and  2  Thessalonians  he  prefers  the 
form,  "  the  Church  of  the  Thessalonians." 
"  The  Church  at  Corinth "  was  an  expres- 
sion which  involved  the  sharpest  of  con- 
trasts. It  brought  into  juxtaposition  the 
holiest  ideal  of  the  new  faith  and  the 
vilest  degradations  of  the  old  paganism. 
It  was  "a  glad  and  great  paradox" 
(Bengel).  The  condition  of  suciety  at 
Corinth,  at  once  depraved  and  sophis- 
tical, throws  light  on  many  parts  of  the 
Epistle.  Cicero  desoribes  the  city  as  "  illus- 
trious alike  for  wantonness,  ppulence,  and 
the  study  of  philosophy."  Even  them  mat 
are  sanctified.  The  apostles  could  only  write 
to  Churches  as  being  really  Churches,  and  to 
Christians  as  being  true  Christians.  In  all 
general  addresses  they  oonld  only  assume 


that  the  aetual  resembled  the  ideal.  They 
never  conceal  the  inmiense  chasm  which 
separated  the  real  condition  of  many  mem- 
bers of  their  Churches  from  the  vocation 
which  they  professed.  They  knew  also  that 
it  is  (as  Calvin  says)  "  a  perilous  temptation 
to  refuse  the  name  of  Church  to  every 
Church  in  which  there  is  not  perfect 
purity."  Ideally  even  the  Corinthian  Chris- 
tians were  redeemed  by  Christ's  expiation, 
consecrated  and  sanctified  by  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  They  could  only  be  ad- 
dressed in  accordance  with  their  ostensible 
position  (see  Hooker,  '  Ecol.  Pol.,'  iii.  1 ;  v. 
68).  Our  Prayer-book  is  constructed  on  the 
same  principle.  The  harvest  is  still  a  har- 
vest, though  amongst  the  corn  there  may  be 
many  tares.  In  Christ  Jesna.  The  words, 
"in  Christ,"  constitute  what  has  been 
happily  called  "  the  monogram  of  St.  PauL" 
The  life  of  the  true  Christian  is  no  longer 
his  own.  The  Christ  for  him  has  become 
the  Christ  in  liim.  His  natural  life  is 
merged  into  a  higher  spiritual  life.  Bap- 
tized into  Chiist,  he  has  become  one  with 
Christ.  Called  to  be  saints.  (On  this  Chris- 
tian calling,  see  Eph.  iv.  1, 1 ;  2  Thess.  i.  11 ; 
2  Tim.  i.  9 ;  Heb.  iii.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  10.)  They 
ar«  called  to  be  united  saints,  not  schismatic 
partisans  or  members  of  antagonistic  cliques. 
The  description  of  what  they  were  ideally  is 
the  more  emphatic  because  he  feels  how  much 
they  had  fallen  away.  With  all  that  .  .  . 
in  every  place.  Perhaps  this  may  mean  the 
same  as  2  Cor.  1. 1, "  With  all  the  saints  that 
are  in  the  whole  of  Achaia ; "  or  the  words 
may  imply  that  St.  Paul's  exhortations  are 
applicable  to  all  Christians,  wherever  they 
may  be  and  (as  is  expressed  in  the  next 
clause)  whatever  may  be  their  varying 
shades  of  individual  opinion.  It  was  well 
in  any  case  to  remind  the  Corinthians  that 
they  formed  but  a  fraction  of  the  Christian 
communities.  Catholicity,  not  provincialism, 
makes  the  true  Church  of  God.  Call  upon 
the  Name.  The  Greek  verb  is  here  in  the 
middle  voice,  not  "  who  are  called  by  the 
Name  "  (comp.  Jas.  ii.  7;  Amos  ix.  12,  LXX.). 
It  means,  therefore,  all  who  reverence  the 
Name  of  Christ,  all  who  adore  their  one 
"  Lord "  in  tha  fulness  of  his  nature  (see 
Joel  iii.  5 ;  Acts  ii.  21 ;  Bom.  x.  24 ;  2  Tim. 
ii.  22,  eto.) ;  in  other  wordsi  "  all  who  pro- 
fess and  call  themselves  Christians  "  (comp. 
Acts  XXV.  11).  Their  Lord  and  ours.  I  con- 
nect these  words,  not  with  "  place,"  as  in  the 
Vulgate,  In  omni  loco  ipsorum  et  noutro-  ■ 
which,  however  it  may  be  twisted,  can  give 
no  good  sense — but  with  "  Jesus  Christ." 
It  has  been  in  all  ages  a  fatal  temptation 
of  party  Christians  to  claim  a  monopoly  of 
Christ  for  tliemselves  and  their  own  sects, 
as  though  they  only  taught  tlie  gospel,  and 
were    the    only    Chiistiaus    or    the    wily 


OH.  1. 1—31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


" Evangelicals."  But  Christ  cannot  thus  be 
"  parcelled  into  fragments  "  (^ee  vers.  12, 13), 
nor  has  any  party  a  right  to  boast  ex- 
clusively, "  I  am  of  Christ."  The  addition, 
"  and  ours,"  could  not  be  regarded  as  super- 
fluous in  writing  to  a  Church  of  which  one 
section  wanted  to  assert  an  exclusive  right 
in  Christ. 

Ver.  3. — Oraoe  to  you  and  peace.  This 
is  St.  Paul's  greeting  in  all  the  Epistles 
except  the  pastoral  Epistles,  in  which  he 
beautifully  adds  the  word  "mercy."  It 
is  a  remarkable  blending  of  the  Greek 
and  Jewish  salutations.  The  Greeks  said 
Xatpetr,  and  to  them  the  word  "  grace  "  in- 
volved the  notions  of  joy  and  briKhtnesB 
and  prosperity.  The  calmer  and  more 
solemn  greeting  of  the  East  was,  "  Peace  be 
to  thee."  The  Church  unites  both  forms  of 
greeting — "  grace,"  the  beginning  of  every 
blessing ;  "  peace,"  the  end  of  all  blessings ; 
and  into  both  she  infuses  a  deeper  meaning, 
that  of  a  "joy"  which  defied  all  tribula- 
tions, and  •  "  peace  which  passeth  all  under- 
standing." Prom  Qod  our  Father  and  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  God  is  the  Source  of 
"every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift." 
God  is  our  Father  as  our  Creator,  and  as 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in 
whom  we  become,  in  a  higher  sense,  his 
children,  Christ,  in  liis  mediatorial  king- 
dom, is  specially  and  immediately  "our 
Lord,"  though  that  phrase,  now  so  univer- 
sal, only  occurs  (in  its  isolated  form)  in 
Heb.  vii.  14.  Jesus  Christ.  One  of  St.  Paul's 
peculiarities  of  style  is  the  constant  reite- 
rbtion  of  one  dominant  word.  In  the  first 
nine  verses  of  this  Epistle,  the  Name  "  Jesus 
Christ "  is  repeated  no  less  than  nine  times. 
«  Observe,"  says  St.  Chrysostom,  "  how  he 
tMtls  them  down  to  the  Name  of  Christ,  not 
mentioning  any  man,  either  apostle  or 
teacher,  but  continually  mentioning  him  for 
wliom  they  yearn,  as  men  preparing  to 
awaken  those  who  are  drowsy  aifter  a  de- 
bauch. For  nowhere  in  any  other  Epistle 
is  the  Name  of  Christ  so  continually  intro- 
duced. ...  By  means  of  it  he  weaves  to- 
gether almost  his  whole  exordium." 

Vers.  4 — 9. — The  thanksgiving.  The 
thanksgiving  is  a  feature  in  almost  every 
Epistle  of  St.  Paul,  except  the  Epistle  to 
the  Galatians,  in  which  be  plunges  at  once 
into  severe  reprobation. 

Ver.  4. — I  tliank  my  God.  It  is  probable, 
from  papyrus  rolls  in  the  British  Museum, 
that  the  general  form  and  outline  of  letters 
waa  more  or  less  conventional.  In  St.  Paul, 
however,  this  thanksgiving  i«  the  natural 
overflow  of  a  full  heart.  It  was  no  mere 
compliment  or  rhetorical  artifice  like  the 
captatio  henevolentix,  or  endeavouring  to 
win  the  hearers  by  flattery,  whicli  we  find  in 
KOft  ancient  ipeeohei.    My  Ood  (Bom.  i.  8). 


Always ;  that  is,  constantly ;  on  all  occasions 
of  special  prayer.  He  could  still  thank 
God  for  them,  though  his  letter  was  written 
"  witli  many  tears  "  (2  Cor.  ii.  4).  For  the 
grace  of  Ood.  The  grace  (x<^p's)  of  spiritual 
life  showing  itself  in  many  special  spiri- 
tual gifts  (xop^iTAiaTa),  BUcli  as  "  the  gift  <rf 
tongues."  Which  was  given  you.  This  is  one 
of  St.  Paul's  "baptismal  aorists."  He  al- 
ways regards  and  speaks  of  the  life  of  the  soul 
as  summed  up  potentially  in  one  supreme 
moment  and  crisis — namely,  the  moment  of 
conversion  and  baptism.  The  grace  given 
once  was  given  for  ever,  and  was  continually 
manifested.  In  Christ  Jesus.  St.  Paul  re- 
garded the  life  of  the  Christian  as  "  hid 
witli  Christ  in  God,"  and  of  Christ  as  being 
the  Christian's  life  (see  Bom.  vi.  23 ;  2  Cor. 
iv.  10, 11 ;  Col.  iiL  3,  4 ;  2  Tim.  L  1 ;  1  John 
v.  11,  etc.). 

Ver.5. — In  everything ;  i.e.  of  conrse,  eTery 
gift  which  belongs  specially  to  the  Christian 
life.  In  all  utterance ;  i.e.  in  all  "  elo- 
quence" (\6yiii),  or  perhaps  "in  all  doc- 
trine "  (bo  Luther,  Calvin,  Meyer,  ete.).  The 
word  for  "  utterance  "  is  rhema  ;  logos  means 
"  discourse  "  and  "  reason  "  (comp.  2  Cor. 
viii.  7).  Knowledge.  From  the  word  gnosis 
is  derived  the  name  Gnostic,  which  was  ap- 
plied to  so  many  forms  of  ancient  heresy. 
There  was  danger  to  the  Corinthian  Chris- 
tians in  the  exaggerated  estimate  of  what 
they  took  for  gnosis,  and  many  of  them  were 
tempted  to  pride  themselves  on  purely  intel- 
lectual attainments,  which  were  valueless 
for  the  spiritual  life.  St.  Clement  of  Bome 
also,  in  writing  to  them  ('  Ep.  ad  Cor.  i.') 
speaks  of  their  "mature  and  established 
faiowledge." 

Ver.  ti. — Even  as;  i.e.  "inasmuch  as." 
The  testimony  of  Christ.  The  te  ti  nony 
borne  to  Christ  by  the  apostle.  The  geni- 
tive is  thus  objective  (about  Christ),  not  sub- 
jective ("  the  testimony  borne  by  Christ "). 
In  reality,  however,  the  meaning  would  be 
the  s  me  in  either  case,  for  if  the  apostles 
testified  concerning  Christ,  so,  too,  Christ 
spoke  in  the  apostles.  Was  confirmed  in 
you.  This  does  not  merely  mean  "  that  the 
truth  of  Christianity  was  established  among 
them,"  but  that  they  were  living  confirma- 
tions of  the  apostolic  testimony. 

Ver.  7. — So  that  ye  come  behind  in  no  gift. 
The  "  gifts "  are  here  the  charismata, 
graces,  such  as  powers  of  healing,  ete., 
which  were  the  result  of  the  outpouring  of 
the  Spirit.  The  sequel  shows  that  they 
were  rather  out«  ard  than  inward ;  they  were 
splendid  endowme:its  rather  than  spiritua' 
fruits.  Yet  even  these  were  not  wholly 
wanting,  as  we  see  from  2  Cor.  viii.  7.  The 
Greek  may  also  mean  "causing  you  nut  to  ba 
conscious  of  inferiority."  Waiting ;  expect- 
ing, not  fearing  it.    This  was  the  constant 


THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OORINTHIANa    [om.  1. 1—81. 


attltnde  of  the  early  Christians  (Rom.  vilL 
19—25;  Phil.  iii.  20;  Heb.  ix.  20 ;  1  Thesi. 
i.  10;  Col.  iii.  4;  Titus  ii.  13).  Love  for 
Christ's  manifeslntion  was  a  Christian 
oharacteristic  (2  Tim.  It.  8).  The  revelation. 
Three  words  are  used  to  express  the  second 
advent:  apokcHypii*  (as  here  and  in. 9 
ThesB.  i7;  1  Pet.  i.  7,  13);  parousia  (at 
in  Matt.  xxiv.  3,  27,  etc. ;  1  Thess.  ii.  19 ; 
Jas.  v.  7,  8,  etc.);  and  epiphaneia,  in  the 
pastoral  Epistles  (1  Tim.  vi.  14;  2  Tim.  i.  10 ; 
iv.l— 8;  Titusii.l8).  St. Paul, however, only 
uses  parotuia  six  times  in  1  and  2  Thessa- 
lonians,  and  once  in  1  Cor.  xv.  23.  All  ChriS' 
tians  iJike  expected  the  return  of  Christ 
veiy  soon,  and  possibly  in  their  own  lifetime 
(1  Thess.  L  9,  10,  etcL ;  oh.  xv.  51 ;  Jas.  v, 
8,9;  1  Pet.  iv.  7;  1  John  ii.  18;  Bev.  xxii. 
20,  etc.).  Their  expectation  was  founded 
on  the  great  esohatologlcal  discourse  of  our 
Lord  (Matt.  xxiv.  29,  30,  31),  and  on  his 
express  promise  that  that  generation  should 
nut  pass  away  before  his  predictions  were 
fulfilled.  They  mere  fulfilled  in  the  fall  of 
Jerusalem  and  the  close  of  the  old  dispensa- 
tion, though  they  await  a  still  more  univenal 
fulfilment. 

Ver.  S.—Wh»}  dearly  Christ,  though  hit 
Name  is  again  repeated  in  the  next  clause. 
Shall  also  confirm  you.  This  natural  expres- 
sion of  the  apostle  B  yearning  hope  for  them 
must  not  beoverpressed  into  any  such  doclrine 
as  "  the  indefectibUity  of  grace."  All  honest 
mnd  eameBt  students  must  resist  the  ten- 
dency to  strain  the  meaning  of  Scripture 
texts  into  endless  logical  inferences  which 
were  never  intended  to  be  deduced  from  them, 
Unto  the  end;  namely,  to  the  end  of  "  this 
age,"  and  to  the  coming  of  Christ  (Matt. 
zxTiiL  20;  Heb.  iii.  6,  13;  vL  11).  That 
ye  be  nnreproTable;  rather,  unimpeaehed 
(anetMetous),  as  in  Ool.  i  22  ;  1  Tim.  iii 
18;  TitoB  i.  6.  It  is  not  the  word  rendered 
"  blameless  "  (amemptos)  in  Phil.  ii.  15  or  in 
2  Pet.  iii.  14.  A  Chiristian  can  only  be 
*<  blameless,"  not  as  being  sinless,  but  as 
having  been  forgiven,  renewed,  sanctified 
(oh.  vi.  11;  Bom.  viiL  80).  In  the  day  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  same  as  the 
apokalypsis or parousia.  Itissometimes  called 
simply  "the  day"  (comp.  oh.  iii.  13;  Acts 
i.  20;  Joel  iii.  4;  2  Thess.  L  10;  Bev.  vi.  17). 

Ver.  9. — God  ii  faithful.  He  will  not  leave 
bis  promises  unfulfilled  or  his  work  unfinished 
(ch.  X.  IS ;  2  ThesB.  iii.  3 ;  Heb.  x.  23 ;  Rom. 
viii.  28 — 30).  Hurongh  whom.  By  whom, 
■a  the  moving  cause  and  agent  in  yonr 
■alvation.  Te  were  called.  The  calling  was  a 
pledge  of  the  final  blessing  (Bom.  viii.  30). 
Into  the  fellowship  of  his  Son,  Union  (koino- 
lUa,  commonion)  with  Christ  is  the  sole  means 
of  Bpiritnid  life  (John  xv.  4 ;  Gal.  ii.  20). 
Through  the  Bon  we  also  have  fellowship 
with  the  Father  (1  John  L  8).    The  perfect 


sincerity  of  the  apostle  is  obiervable  Ib  thli 
thanksgiving.  He  speaks  of  the  Church  in 
general  in  terma  of  gratitude  and  hopeful- 
ness, and  dwells  on  its  rich  spiritual  endow- 
ments ;  but  he  has  not  a  wonl  of  praise  for 
any  moral  advance  such  as  that  which  he  so 
lovingly  recognized  in  the  Thessaloniant 
and  PhilippiauB. 

Vers.  18— 17.— Porto  $ptrit  at  Corinth. 
This  Bubjeot  is  poraued  in  various  forma  to 
ch.  iv.  21. 

Ver.  10 Now.    The  particle  implies  the 

transition  from  thanksgiving  to  reprooC 
Brethren.  This  very  title  involves  an  appeal 
to  them  to  aim  at  unity  among  themselves ; 
and  St.  Paul,  like  St.  James  (v.  10),  uses  it 
to  soften  any  austerity  which  might  seem  to 
exist  in  his  language  (oh.  vii.  29 ;  x.  1 ;  xi  v.  20, 
etc.).  Through  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ;  that  is,  by  the  whole  idea  of  Chrisfi 
being  and  ofBce — the  strongest  bond  of 
union  between  tme  Christians  (see  the 
powerful  appeal  in  Eph.  iv.  1 — 6).  That  ye 
all  speak  the  same  thing ;  that  is,  *■  that  ye 
may  all  with  one  mind  and  one  mouth 
glorify  God"  (Rom.  xt.  6>  They  were 
doing  the  very  reverse — each  glorifying 
himself  and  his  party  (ver.  12).  Divisioni 
(irxt(TiiaTa) ;  "  schisms "  nsed  of  bodies 
within  the  Church,  not  of  separatists  &om 
it  (ch.  xi.  18).  The  word  is  only  nsed  in 
this  special  sense  in  ttiis  Epistle.  In  Matt. 
ix.  16  and  Mark  iL  21  tehiima  means  **  ■ 
rent;"  in  John  (viL  43;  ix.  16;  x.  16),  "a 
division  of  opinion."  There  would  be  little 
or  no  harm  in  the  tchiemata  so  far  as  they 
affected  unessential  points,  if  it  was  not 
their  fatal  tendency  to  end  in  "  contentions  " 
(eridea)  and  "factions"  (haireeeia, oh.  xi.  19). 
Corinth  wSiS  a  place  where  such  divisions 
would  be  likely  to  spring  up,  partly  from 
the  disputatious  vivacity  and  intellectual 
conceits  of  the  inhabitants,  partly  from  the 
multitudes  of  strangers  whoconstantly  visited 
the  port,  partly  from  the  numerous  diversi- 
ties of  previous  training  through  which  the 
various  sections  of  converts  had  passed. 
Perfected  together;  literally,  repaired,  re- 
united. In  the  same  mind  and  in  the  same 
judgment ;  that  is,  in  what  they  tliink 
and  believe  (vot),  and  in  what  they  assert 
and  do  (yvti/iji).  The  exhortation,  "  bo  of 
one  mind,"  in  every  sense  of  the  word,  was 
as  necessary  in  the  ancient  as  in  the  modem 
Church  (Rom.  xv.  5;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11 ;  Phil,  i 
27;  ii2;  1  Pet.  ia  8). 

Ver.  11, — ^It  hath  been  signifled  unto  me. 
He  had  heard  these  saddening  rumours  to- 
wards the  close  of  his  stay  in  Ephesns.  By 
them  which  are  of  the  household  of  Chloe, 
The  Greek  only  has  "by  them  of  Chloe. 
St.  Paul  wisely  and  kindly  mentions  liis 
authority  for  these  reports.  Nothing  is 
known  of  Chloo  or  her  household.    It  lias 


CH.1. 1— 3L]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GOBINTHIANa 


been  eon jeotnred  that  StephanM,Fortniutiia, 
and  Aob  aicus,  Corinthiang  who  were  now  with 
8t.  Paul  at  Ephesus  (oh.  xvi.  16),  may  hare 
been  Chloe's  slaveH  or  freedmen.  Conten- 
tions. These  are  the  works  of  the  flesh 
(2  Cor.  xii.  20;  Oal.  t.  20;  1  Tim.  vi.  4). 
The  condition  of  the  Church  wm  the  same 
when  St.  Clement  of  Borne  wrote  to  them. 
He  had  still  to  complain  of  the  "strange 
and  alien  and,  for  the  elect  of  God,  detest- 
able and  unholy  spirit  of  faction  which  a 
few  rash  and  self-willed  persons  kindled  to 
Eucha  pitch  of  dementation"  ('Ep.  ad  Cor.  i.'). 
Ver.  12.— Now  this  I  mean ;  in  other  words, 
*'  what  I  mean  is  this."  Their  "  contentions  " 
are  defined  to  he  equiralent  to  "religions 
partisanships ; "  antagonistic  adoption  of  the 
names  and  views  of  special  teachers.  Each 
one  of  yon  saith.  That  party  spirit  ran  so 
high  that  they  were  all  listed  on  one  side  or 
another.  None  of  them  were  wise  enough  and 
spiritual-minded  enough  to  hold  aloof  from 
parties  altogether.  They  prided  themselves 
on  being  "uncompromising"  and  "party 
men."  oaitb;  in  a  self-assertive  way  (oh. 
iii.  21).  I  am  of  FanL  He  shows  his 
indignation  at  their  partisanship  by  first 
rebuking  those  who  had  used  hi$  own  name 
•s  a  party  watchward.  He  disliked  Paulin- 
ism  as  much  as  Fetrinism  (Bengel).  All 
the  Corinthians'^  would  probahly  have  been 
in  this  sense  Paulinists  but  for  the  visits  of 
subsequent  teachers.  At  present  the  Paul 
party  consisted  of  those  who  adhered  to  his 
views  about  Gentile  freedom,  and  who  liked 
the  simple  spirituality  of  his  teaching.  _  St. 
Paul  rose  above  the  temptation  of  consider- 
ing that  party  spirit  is  excusable  in  our  own 
partisans.  He  reproves  factiousness  even 
in  the  party  of  freedom.  And  I  of  Apollos. 
ApoUoB  personally  was  absolutely  loyal  and 
honourable,  but  his  visit  to  Corinth  had 
done  mischief.  His  impassioned  oratory, 
his  Alexandrian  refliieme'its,  his  allegorizing 
exegesis,  the  culture  and  polish  of  bis  style, 
had  charmed  the  fickle  Corinthians.  The 
Apollonians  were  the  party  of  culture. 
They  had,  as  we  see  from  later  parts  of  the 
Epistle,  exaggerated  St.  Paul's  views,  as 
expounded  by  Apollos,  into  extravagance. 
Faffed  up  with  the  conceit  of  knowledge,  they 
had  fallen  into  moral  inconsistency.  The 
egotism  of  oratorical  rivals,  the  contemptuous 
tone  towards  weaker  brethren,  the  sophistical 
oondouations  of  vice,  were  probably  due  to 
them.  Apollos,  aa  we  see  by  his  noble 
wfusal  to  visit  Corinth  under  present  cir- 
cumstances (ch.  xvi.  12),  was  as  indignant 
as  St.  Paul  himself  at  the  perversion  of  his 
name  into  an  engine  of  party  warfare,  (On 
Apollos,  see  Acts  xviii.  24 — 28 ;  xix.  1 ; 
Titus  iii.  IS.)  Nothing  further  is  known 
Mspecting  mm,  but  he  is  the  almost 
^donbtM    author  of  the  Epistle  to  the 


Hebrews,  which  proves  that  he  was  of  the 
school  of  St.  Paul,  while  at  the  same  time 
he  showed  a  splendid  originality  in  his  way 
of  arriving  at  the  same  conclusion  as  his 
teacher.  I  of  Cephas.  The  use  of  the  Ara- 
maic name  (ch.  iii.  22 ;  ix.  5 ;  xv.  6 ;  GaL  iL 
9),  perhaps,  shows  that  these  Petrinists  were 
Judaiiers  (though  it  should  be  added  that 
St.  Pa^  only  uses  the  name  "Peter"  in 
Gal.  ii.  7,  8).  They  personally  disliked 
St.  Paul,  and  questioned  his  apostolinal 
authority.  Perhaps  the  extravagances  of 
the  "  speaking  with  tongues  "  arose  in  this 
party,  who  recalled  the  effects  of  the  out- 
pouring of  the  Spirit  after  Peter's  great 
sermon  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  And  I  of 
Christ.  We  trace  the  origin  of  this  party  to 
one  man  in  particular  (2  Cor.  ii.  7),  who  was, 
or  professed  to  be,  an  adherent  of  James,  and 
therefore  one  of  the  more  rigid  Judaizers. 
He  may  have  been  one  from  the  circle  of 
Christ's  earthly  relatives — one  of  the  Des- 
posyni  (sea  ch.  ix.  5),  and,  like  St.  James, 
may  have  had  views  resembling  those  of  the 
Esdcnes  and  Ebionites.  If  so,  he  was  probably 
the  author  of  the  questions  about  celibacy  and 
marriage ;  and  perhaps  he  prided  himself  on 
having  seen  "Christ  in  the  flesh."  This 
party  at  any  rate,  like  some  modem  sects, 
was  not  ashamed  to  degrade  into  a  party 
watchword  even  the  sacred  name  of  Cluist, 
and  to  claim  for  a  miserable  clique  an  ex- 
clusive interest  in  the  Lord  of  the  whole 
Church.  It  is  the  privilege  of  every  Chris- 
tian to  say,  *'  Christiauus  sum;"  but  if  he 
says  it  in  a  haughty,  loveless,  and  exclusive 
spirit,  he  forfeits  his  own  claim  to  the  title. 
This  exclusive  Christ  party  is,  perhaps, 
specially  alluded  to  in  2  Cor.  x.  7—11.  The 
view  of  Chrysostom,  which  takes  these  words 
to  be  St.  Paul's  remark — "  But  I  belong  to 
Christ,"  is  untenable,  and  would  make  him 
guilty  of  ttie  very  self-assertivenesa  which 
he  is  reprobating. 

Ver.  13.— Is  Christ  divided  1  Has  Christ 
been  parcelled  into  fragments?  "Is  there 
a  Pauline,  a  Petrine,  an  Apollonian,  a 
Christian  Christ?"  Whether  you  call 
yourselves  Liberals,  or  Intelleotualists,  cr 
Catholics,  or  Bible  Christians,  your  party 
spirit  is  a  sin,  and  all  the  worse  a  sin  be- 
cause it  pranks  itself  out  in  the  guise  of 
pure  reli^ous  seal.  This  is  more  forcible 
than  to  take  the  clause  affirmativeW :  **  Christ 
lias  been  parcelled  into  fragments.  In  either 
case  we  see  "  the  tragic  result  of  party  spirit." 
Was  ?aal  orooified  for  yout  Again  he 
rebukes  the  partisanship  which  attached 
itself  to  bis  own  name.  This  showed  a 
splendid  courage  and  honesty.  The  intro- 
duction of  the  question  by  the  negative  nh 
expresses  astonished  indignation :  "  Can  you 
possibly  make  a  watchword  of  the  name  c^  a 
mere  man,  as  though  he  had  been  onieifled 


THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  IHK  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  L  1—31. 


for  yon  7  "  This  ontburst  of  feeling  is  very 
important,  as  proving  the  immeasurable  dis- 
tance which,  in  Paul's  own  view,  separated 
him  from  his  Lord.  It  is  also  instructive  to 
see  how  St.  Paul  at  once  denounces  the 
sir't  of  party  without  deigning  to  enter 
into  the  question  as  to  which  party  of  these 
wrangling  "  theologians  "  was  most  or  least 
in  the  riKht.  He  did  not  choose  to  pander 
to  their  sectarian  spirit  by  deciding  between 
their  various  forms  of  asrgressive  orthodoxy. 
Into  the  name  (comp.  Matt,  xxviii.  19). 

Ver.  14. — I  thank  Ood  that  I  baptized  none 
of  yon.  St.  Paul,  in  hie  characteristic  man- 
ner, "goes  off  at  the  word"  baptize.  He 
thanked  God,  not  by  way  of  any  disparage- 
ment to  baptism,  but  becausS  he  had  thus 
given  no  excuse  to  the  undue  exaltation  of 
his  own  name.  Compare  the  practice  of  onr 
Lord  himself,  in  leaving  his  disciples  to 
biptize  (John  iy.  2).  The  apostles  would 
not  have  approved  the  system  of  wholesale 
baptisms  of  tlie  heathen  which  has  prevailed 
in  some  Romanist  missions.  Save  Crispns. 
The  ruler  of  the  synagogue  (Acts  xviii.  8). 
Doubtless  there  were  some  strong  special 
reasons  why,  in  these  instances,  St.  Paul 
departed  from  his  general  rule  of  not  per- 
sonally baptizing  his  converts.  And  Gains. 
Gains  of  Corinth  (Eom.  ivi.  23).  It  was 
one  of  the  commonest  of  names.  There  was 
another  Gains  of  Derbe  (Acts  xn.  4),  and 
•nother  known  to  St.  John  (3  John  1). 

Ver.  15. — I  had  baptized.  The  better 
reading,  followed  by  the  Revised  Version, 
is,  Te  teere  baptized  unto  my  name;  n.  A, 
B,  0. 

Ver.  16. — And  I  baptized  also.  This  he 
recalls  by  an  afterthought,  being,  perhaps, 
reminded  of  it  by  Stephanas  himself.  The 
household  of  Stephanas.  Stephanas  and 
his  house  were  the  first  converts  in  Achaia 
(ch.  xvi.  5).  When  converts  became  more 
numerous,  St.  Paul  ceased  to  baptize  them 
personally  (comp.  Acts  x.  48).  I  know  not. 
The  inspiration  of  the  apostles  involved 
none  of  the  meohanical  infallibility  ascribed 
to  them  by  popular  dogma.  He  forgot  whether 
he  had  baptized  any  one  else  or  not,  but  this 
nade  no  difference  as  regards  his  main 
argument. 

Ver.  17. — Sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but ;  that 
is,  according  to  Semitic  idiom,  "  not  so  much 
to  baptize,  as"  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  The 
word  "sent"  (apeeteilen)  involves  the  mean- 
ing "  made  me  an  apostle  "  (apostolot).  The 
primary  function  of  the  apnstles  was  ''to 
bear  witness"  (Mark  xvl.  15;  Acts  i.  8, 
etc.).  To  preach  the  gospel.  St.  Paul  again 
"goes  off"  at  this  word,  nd  dwells  for 
eight  verses  on  the  character  of  his  preach- 
ing. Not  in  wisdom  of  words ;  not,  that  is, 
in  a  philosophio  and  oratorical  style.  The 
aimplicity  of  the  style  and  teaching  of  the 


apostles  awoke  the  sneers  of  philosophers 
like  Celsus  and  Porphyry.  The  cross  of 
Christ.  The  central  doctrine  of  Christianity, 
the  preaching  of  a  cmcifled  Redeemer. 
Should  be  made  void.  The  rendering  of  the 
Authorized  Version  is  too  strong ;  the 
cross  cannot  "  be  made  of  none  effect." 
The  word  means  "should  be  emptied" 
(comp.  oh.  ii.  15 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  3 ;  Phil.  ii.  7; 
Eom.  iv.  14);  made  void  of  its  special  and 
independent  power.  The  words,  "  the  cross 
of  Christ,"  form  the  emphatic  end  of  the 
sentence  in  the  Greek. 

Vers.  18— 25.— Z%e  nature  of  Irut  Chru- 
tian  preaching. 

Ver.  18. — for  the  preaohing  of  the  cross ; 
rather,  the  word  of  the  erou.  To  them  that 
are  perishing ;  rather,  to  the  perithing  ;  to  all 
those  who  are  now  walking  in  the  paths  that 
lead  to  destruction  (2  Cor.  ii.  15).  To  them 
it  was  foolishness,  because  it  requires 
spiritual  discernment  (ch.  ii.  14);  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  human  wisdom  is  foolishness 
with  God  (ch.  iii.  19).  Foolishness,  It  shows 
the  heroic  character  of  the  faith  of  St.  Paul 
that  he  deliberately  preached  the  doctrine 
of  the  cross  because  he  felt  that  therein  lay 
the  converi>ion  and  salvation  of  the  world, 
although  he  was  well  aware  that  he  could 
preach  no  truth  so  certain  at  first  to  revolt 
the  unregonerate  hearts  of  his  bearers.  To 
the  Jews  "  the  cross  "  was  the  tree  of  shame 
and  horror;  and  a  crucified  person  was 
"  accursed  of  God  "  (Deut.  xxi.  23 ;  Gal.  iii. 
1 3).  To  the  Greeks  the  cross  was  the  gibbet 
of  a  slave's  infamy  and  a  murderer's  punish- 
ment. There  was  not  a  single  association 
connected  with  it  except  those  of  shame 
and  agony.  The  thought  of  "»  cmcifled 
Messiah "  seemed  to  the  Jews  a  revolting 
folly ;  the  worship  of  a  crucified  malefactor 
seemed  to  the  Greeks  "  an  execrable  super- 
stition" (Tacitus,  'Ann.,'  xv.  44;  Pliny, 
'Epp.'  X.  97);  yet  lo  little  did  St.  Paul 
seek  for  popularity  or  immediate  success, 
that  this  was  the  very  dootrine  which  he 
put  in  the  forefront,  even  at  a  city  so 
refined  and  so  voluptuous  as  Corinth.  And 
the  result  proved  his  inspired  wisdom. 
That  very  cross  became  the  recognized 
badge  _  of  Christianity,  and  when  three 
centi.ries  had  elapsed  it  was  woven  in  gold 
upon  the  banners  and  set  in  jewels  on  the 
diadems  of  the  Roman  empire.  For  had  not 
Christ  prophesied,  "  And  1,  if  I  be  lifted  up, 
will  draw  all  men  unto  me  "  ?  Unto  us  which 
are  being  saved;  who  are  on  the  way  of  salva- 
tion. The  same  present  participle  is  need 
in  Luke  xiii.  23;  Acts  u.  47;  2  Cor.  ii.  15' 
Rev.  xxi.  24.  It  is  the  power  of  God' 
Because  the  cross  is  at  the  heart  of  that 
gospel  whioh  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation  to  every  one  that  believetb  "  (Rom. 
i.  16 ;  viii.  3),  though  many  were  tempttj 


OH- 1.1— 31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS. 


to  be  SBhamerl  of  it  It  could  lever  be  • 
carnal  weapon  of  warfare,  and  yet  was 
mighty  for  every  purpose  (2  Cor.  x.  4,  5). 

Ver.  19. — ^It  is  written.  This  formula 
(oh.  i.  31 :  ii.  9 ;  iii.  19 ;  ix.  9 ;  x.  7 ;  xv.  45  ; 
2  Cor.  viii.  15)  is  cliiefly  used  in  letters  to 
Churches  in  which  there  were  many  Jews. 
Thii  ia  a  free  citation  from  the  LXX.  of 
IsB.  xxix.  14  (the  same  thought  is  found 
in  Job  T.  12, 13 ;  see  too  Matt.  xi.  25).  The 
original  passage  refers. to  penal  judgments 
from  the  Assyrians,  which  would  test  the 
false  prophets  of  Israel. 

Ver.  20. — Where  is  the  wisel  etc.  (Isa. 
xxxiii.  18) ;  rather,  Where  ia  a  wiie  man  f  i,e. 
a  scribe,  etc.,  which  is  oven  more  incisive. 
These  questions  are  triumphant,  like  the 
"  Where  is  the  King  of  Hamath  and  of 
Arpad?"  The  same  impassioned  form  of 
speech  recurs  in  ch.  xv.  55  and  in  Bom.  iii. 
27.  The  questions  would  come  home  to  the 
Jews,  who  regarded  their  rabbis  and  the 
"pupils  of  the  wise"  as  exalted  beings  who 
could  look  down  on  all  poor  ignorant  persona 
(aniharatsim,  or  "  people  of  the  land  ") ;  and 
to  the  Greeks,  who  regarded  none  but  the 
philosophers  as  "  wise."  The  scribe,  With 
the  Jews  of  that  day  "  the  scribe  "  was  "  the 
thedogian,"  the  ideal  of  dignified  learning 
and  orthodoxy,  though  for  the  most  part 
he  mistook  elaborate  ignorance  for  profound 
knowledge.  The  disputer.  The  word  would 
specially  suit  the  disputatious  Greeks,  clever 
dialecticians.  The  verb  from  which  this 
word  ia  derived  occurs  in  Mark  viii.  11, 
and  the  abstract  sulistantive  ("  an  eager 
discussion  ")  in  Acts  xxviii.  29.  If  St.  Paul 
has  Isa.  xxxiii.  18  in  his  mind,  the  word 
"disputer"  corresponds  to  "the  counter  of 
the  towers"  (comp.  Pa.  xlviii.  12).  Even 
the  rabbis  say  that  when  Messiah  comes 
human  wisdom  is  to  become  needless.  Of 
the  world ;  rather,  of  thin  age,  or  aon.  The 
old  dispensation,  then  so  rapiilly  waning  to  its 
close,  was  called  "  this  age  "  (plam  hazzeh) ; 
the  next  or  Messianic  age  was  called  "  the 
age  to  come  "  ^olam  habbd).  The  Messianic 
age  had  dawned  at  the  birth  of  Christ,  but 
the  old  covenant  was  not  finally  annulled 
till  his  second  coming  at  the  fall  of  Jeru- 
salem. Hath  not  Ood  made  foolish  the 
wisdom  of  the  world  1  rather.  Did  not  God 
(by  the  cross)  stultify  the  wisdom,  etc.  ?  The 
oxymoron,  or  sharp  contrast  of  terms — a 
figure  of  which  St.  Paul  is  fond  (see  1  Tim. 
V.  6 ;  Kora.  1.  20,  etc. ;  and  my  "  Life  of  St. 
Paul,"  i.  628) — is  here  clearly  marked  in 
the  Greek.  The  thought  was  as  familiar  to 
the  old  prophets  (Isa.  xliv.  25)  as  to  St. 
Paul  (Rom.  i.  22);  and  even  Horace  saw 
that  heathen  philosophy  was  sometimes  no 
better  than  insaniena  sapientia  (Horace, 
•Od.,'  i.  34,  2). 

Ver.   21. — In  the  wisdom  of  God;   that 


ia,  as  a  part  of  his  Divine  economy.  The 
world  through  its  wisdom  knew  not  God. 
These  words  might  be  written  as  an  epitaph 
on  the  tomb  of  ancient  philosophy,  and  of 
modern  philosophy  and  science  so  far  as 
it  assumes  an  anti-Christian  form  (Luke  x. 
21).  Human  wisdom,  when  it  relies  solely 
on  itself,  may  "feel  after  God,"  but  hardly 
find  him  (Acts  xvii.  26,  27).  Through  the 
foolishness  of  the  preaching.  This  is  a  mis- 
translation. It  would  require  keruxeoa,  not 
kerttgmatoi.  It  should  be  by  the  foolishnesa 
(as  men  esteemed  it)  of  the  thing  preached, 

Ver.  22. — Jews  ask  for  signs ;  rather, 
Jews  demand  aigns.  This  had  been  their 
incessant  demand  during  our  Lord's  ministry ; 
nor  would  they  be  content  with  any  sign 
short  of  a  sign  from  heaven  (Matt.  xii.  38 ; 
xvi.  1 ;  John  ii.  18 ;  iv.  48,  eto.).  This  had 
been  steadily  refused  them  by  Christ,  who 
wished  them  rather  to  see  spiritual  signs 
(Luke  xvii.  20,  21).  Greeks  seek  after 
wisdom.  St.  Paul  at  Athens  had  found 
himself  surrounded  with  Stoics  and  Epi- 
cureans, and  the  aame  new  thing  which 
every  one  was  looking  for  mainly  took  the 
■1  lape  of  philosophic  novelties  (Acts  xvii.  21). 

Ver.  23. ^Christ  crucified ;  rather  perhaps, 
a  enunfied  Messiah.  It  was  only  by  slow 
degrees  that  the  title  "  the  Christ,"  t'.e.  the 
Anointed,  the  Messiah,  passed  into  the 
name  Christ.  A  stumbling-block.  They 
had  for  centuries  been  loolcing  for  a  reged 
and  victorious  Messiah,  who  should  exalt 
their  special  privileges.  The  notion  of  a 
suffering  and  humiliated  Messiah,  who 
reduced  them  to  the  level  of  all  God's  other 
children,  was  to  them  "  a  stone  of  stumbling 
and  a  rock  of  offence  "  (Rom.  ix.  33 ;  comp. 
Isa.  viii.  14).  Tlieae  two  verses,  translated 
into  Syriac,  furnish  a  marked  play  on  words 
(miacol,  stumbling-block ;  masheal,  folly ;  $eed, 
cross) ;  and  some  have  seen  in  this  a  sign 
that  St.  Paul  thought  in  Syriac.  Unto  the 
Greeks ;  rather,  unto  Gentiles ;  ^ ,  A,  B,  C, 
D.  TTnto  the  Jews  .  .  .  unto  the  Greeks. 
Both  alike  had  failed.  The  Jew  had  not 
attained  ease  of  conscience  or  moral  per- 
fectness;  the  Greek  had  not  unriddled 
the  secret  of  philosophy;  yet  both  alike 
rejected  the  peace  and  the  enlighten- 
ment which  they  had  professed  to  seek. 
Foolishness.  The  accent  of  profound 
contempt  ia  discernible  in  all  the  early 
allusions  of  Greeks  and  Romans  to  Chris- 
tianity. The  only  epithets  which  they 
could  find  for  it  were  "  execrable,"  "  malefic," 
"  depraved,"  "  damnable "  (Tacitus,  Sue- 
tonius, Pliny,  eto.).  The  milder  term  is  "  ex- 
cessive superstition."  The  heroic  constancy 
of  martyrs  appeared  even  to  M.  Aureliua  only 
under  the  aspect  of  a  "  bare  obstinacy." 
The  word  used  to  express  the  scorn  of  tho 
Athenian  philosophersfor  St. Paul's  "strange 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.     [ch.  l  1—31 


doctrine"  b  on*  of  the  coarsest  disdain 
llx^eiaCov),  and  they  called  him  "a  seed- 
peoker"  (Acts  xvii.  18,  82),  t.<.  •  mera 
pioker-up  of  "  learning's  ommbs." 

Ver.  24, — Vnto  them  that  are  called 
(we  Bom.  viii.  28);  literally,  to  the  called 
ihemselve:  Both  Jews  and  Oieeka.  Hence- 
forth the  middle  wall  of  partition  between 
them  is  thrown  down,  and  there  is  no  differ- 
ence (Bom.  ix.  24).  Christ  the  power  of 
God,  and  the  wisdom  of  Ood.  These  words 
•re  a  snmmary  of  the  gospel.  8t.  Fanl  i> 
the  best  commentator  on  himself.  He  speaka 
elsewhere  of  "the  exceeding  greatness  of 
God's  power  to  nsward  who  believe, . . .  which 
he  wrought  in  Christ"  (Eph.  i.  17— 20),  and 
•f  "  all  the  treasures  of  viisdom  and  know- 
ledge "  as  being  "  hid  in  Christ "  (Col.  ii.  3). 
And  the  world,  once  so  scornful,  has  learnt 
that  Christ  is  indeed  the  Fmcer  of  God. 
When  Budolph  of  Hapsburgh  was  being 
crowned,  and  in  the  hurry  no  sceptre  could 
be  found,  he  seized  acrnciiix,  and  swore  that 
that  should  be  his  only  sceptre.  When  St. 
Thomas  of  Aquinum  asked  St.  Bonaventura 
what  was  the  source  of  his  immense  learning, 
he  pointed  in  silence  to  his  crucifix. 

Yer.  25. — The  foolishness  of  Ood  ...  the 
weakness  of  God ;  the  method,  that  is, 
whereby  God  works,  and  which  men  take  to 
be  foolish  and  weak,  because  with  arrogant 
presumption  they  look  upon  themaelves  as 
the  measure  of  all  things.  ButGod  achieves 
the  mightiest  ends  by  the  humblest  means, 
and  the  gospel  of  Christ  allied  itself  from 
the  first,  not  with  the  world's  strength  and 
splendour,  but  with  all  which  the  world 
despised  as  mean  and  feeble — with  fisher- 
men and  tax-gatherers,  with  slaves,  and 
women,  and  artizans.  The  lesson  was  specially 
needful  to  the  Corinthians,  whom  Cicero 
describes  ('  De  Leg.  Age,'  ii.  32)  as  "  famous, 
not  only  for  their  luxuriousness,  but  also 
for  their  wealth  and  philosophic  culture." 

Vers.  26— 31.— Tfta  method  ofOndimikt 
$pread  of  (he  gospel. 

Ver.  26. — For  behold;  or, eonsiiJer (impera- 
tive, as  in  oh.  X.  18;  Phil.  iii.  2).  Your  call- 
ing; the  nature  and  method  of  your  heavenly 
calling;  the  "principle  God  has  followed  in 
calling  you"  (Beza);  see  Eph.  iv.  1;  Heb. 
iii.  1.  Not  many  wise  after  the  flesh.  Those 
who  hear  the  calling  are  alone  the  truly  wise ; 
but  they  are  not  wise  with  a  carnal  wisdom, 
not  wise  as  men  count  wisdom ;  they  have 
but  littje  of  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent  and  the 
wisdom  of  "  this  age."  The  Sanhedrin 
looked  down  on  the  apostles  as  "  unlearned 
and  ignorant  men  "  (Acts  iv.  13).  "  God," 
says  St.  Augustine,  "caught  orators  by 
fishermen,  not  fishermen  by  orators."  Hot 
many  mighty;  ».e.  not  many  persons  of 
power  and  influence.  Almost  the  first 
wowed    GentilH  Christian  of  the  highest 


rank  was  the  consul  Flavins  ClemeuB,  nncle 
of  the  Emperor  Domitian.  This  was  the  more 
marked  because  ihe  Jetoi  won  many  rich 
and  noble  proselytes,  such  as  the  Queen 
Helena  and  the  royal  family  of  Adiabene, 
Poppsea  the  wife  of  Nero,  and  others.  The 
only  illustrious  converts  mentioned  in  the 
New  Testament  are  Joseph  of  Arimathsea, 
Nicodemns,  Sergius  Paulus,  and  Dionysius 
the  Areopagite.  Not  many  noble.  All  this 
was  a  frequent  taunt  against  Christians,  bu' 
they  made  it  their  boiist.  Christianity  came 
to  redeem  and  elevate,  not  the  few,  but  the 
many,  and  the  many  must  ever  be  the  weak 
and  the  humble.  Hence  Christ  called 
fishermen  as  his  apostles,  and  was  known 
as  "  the  Friend  of  publicans  and  sinners." 
None  of  the  rulers  believed  on  him  (John 
vii.  48),  It  must,  however,  be  borne  in  mind 
that  these  words  apply  mainly  and  primarily 
to  the  first  age  of  Christianity.  It  was 
essential  that  its  victory  should  be  dne  to 
Divine  weapons  only,  and  that  it  should 
shake  the  world  "  by  the  irresistible  might 
of  weakness."  After  a  time,  the  wisest  and 
the  noblest  and  the  most  powerful  were 
called.  Kings  became  the  nursing  fathers 
of  the  gospel,  and  queens  its  nursing 
mothers.  Yet  the  ideal  truth  remains,  and 
human  power  shows  utter  weakness,  and 
human  wisdom  is  capable  of  sinking  into 
the  depths  of  folly. 

Ver.  27. — God  chose ;  not,  hath  ehoten 
out.  We  may  remark,  once  for  all,  that 
there  was  no  reason  why  the  translators  of 
16U  should  thus  have  turned  the  Greek 
aorists  of  the  New  Testament  into  perfects. 
In  this  and  in  many  instances  the  change 
of  tense  is  unimportant,  but  sometimes  it 
materially  and  injuriously  afiects  the  sensau 
The  foolish  things  ...  the  weak  things.  So, 
too,  the  psalmist,  "Out  of  the  mouths  of 
babes  and  sucklings  hast  thou  ordained 
strength"  (Ps.  viii.  2);  and  St.  James, 
"  Hath  not  God  chosen  the  poor  of  this  world 
rich  in  faith  ?  "  (Jas.  ii.  5). 

Ver.  28. — And  the  base  things ;  literally, 

low-born,  unborn  I  "tliose  who  are  sprung 

firom  no  one  in  particular " — nu2Zo  patro, 

nuUii  majoribus.    Nothing  conld  be  more 

ignoble  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  than  a  cross 

of  wood  upheld  by  feeble  hands,  and  yet 

before  it  "  kings  and  their  armies  did  flee  and 

were  discomfited,  and  they  of  the  household 

divided  the  spoil."    And  the  things  that 

are  not.     The   not  is  the  Greek  snbje*. 

tive  negative  {/lii) ;   things  of  which   men 

conceived  as  not  existing — "nonentities."   It 

is  like  the  expression  of  Clement  of  Bome, 

"Things  occoitnfed  OS  nothing."   Christianity 

!   was  "  the  little  stone,  cut  without  hands," 

I   which  God  called  into  existence.    We  find 

I  the  same  thought  in  SL  John  the  Baptist's 

I  sermon  (Matt  iii  9% 


OH. 


l1— 31.]    tBE  tlEST  EtlSTLE  l!0  THE  COEINTfllANa 


Ver.  29.— That  no  flesh  should  glory. '.  For 
the  weak  instruments  of  God's  triumphs  are 
•0  weak  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to 
ascribe  any  power  or  merit  to  themselves. 
In  contemplating  the  victory  of  the  cross,  the 
world  could  only  exclaim,  "  This  hath  God 
wrought."  "  It  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it 
is  marvellous  in  our  eyes." 

Ver.  30. — ^But  of  him  are  ye  in  Christ 
Teens.  Ye  do  not  belong  to  the  wise  and 
noble.  Your  strength  will  consist  in 
acknowledged  weakness;  for  it  is  solely 
derived  from  your  fellowship  with  God  by 
your  unity  with  Christ.  Who  was  made  unto 
us,  etc.  These  words  rather  mean,  "Who 
«ras  made  unto  us  wisdom  from  God — both 
righteousness  and  sanctification  and  redemp- 
tion." The  text  is  a  singularly  full  state- 
ment of  the  whole  result  of  the  work  of 
Ohrist,  M  the  source  of  "all  spiritual 
blessings  in  things  heavenly  "  (Bph.  i.  3), 
in  whom  we  are  complete  (Col.  ii.  10). 
Bighteonsnesa  (see  2  Cor.  v.  21).  "  Jehovah- 
tsidkenu — the  Lord  our  Kighteousnesa " 
(Jer.  xxiii.  5).  This  is  the  theiue  of  Kom. 
lit — ^vii.  Sanctification  (see  especially  ch. 
vi.  11  and  Eph.  v.  25, 26).  Bedemption.  One 
of  the  four  main  metaphors  by  which  the 
atonement  ia  daioiibed  i»  this  of  ransom 


(xirpov,  ivoxiTpuHris).  The  nieaning  and 
nature  of  the  act,  .a«  regards  God,  lie  in 
rcgi  >us  above  our  comprehension ;  so  that  aU 
speculations  as  to  the  person  to  whom  the 
ransom  was  paid,  and  the  reason  why  it  was 
indispensable,  have  only  led  to  centuries  of 
mistaken  theology.  But  the  meaning  and 
nature  of  it,  cu  regards  man,  is  our  deliverance 
from  bondage,  and  the  payment  of  the  debt 
which  we  had  incuned  (Titus  IL  14;  1 
Pet.  i.  18 ;  Matt.  xx.  28 ;  Bom.  viii  21—23). 
In  all  these  cases,  as  Stanley  well  observes, 
the  words  have  a  double  meaning — both  of 
an  inward  act  and  of  an  outward  result. 

Ver.  31. — As  it  is  written.  A  compressed 
quotation  from  the  Septuagint  Version  of  Jer. 
ix.  23,  24 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  10.  Let  him  glory  in 
the  Lord.  The  word  rendered  "glory"  ia 
more  literally,  boast  The  reference  is  to 
Jer.  ix.  23,  24 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  10  (LXX.).  The 
prevalence  of  "  boasting  "  among  the  Corin- 
thians and  their  teachers  drove  St.  Paul  to 
dwell  much  on  this  word — from  which  he 
so  greatly  shrinks— in  2  Cor.  x. — xii.  (where 
the  word  occurs  twenty  times),  and  tn  insist 
that  the  only  true  object  in  which  a  Christian 
can  glory  is  the  cross  (Gal.  vL  14),  not  in 
himself  or  in  the  world,  ot  ia  i 


HOMILBTICa 


Vers.  1 — 3. — To  feel,  to  ie,  and  to  df  sire.    "  Paul,  called  to  be  an  apostle,"  etc.    TkU 

salutation  of  Paul  succgests  (1)  what  all  ministers  should  feel;  (2)  what  all  Ohristioiu 
should  be ;  and  (8)  what  all  men  should  desire. 

L  What  all  ministbbs  bhodld  feel.  They  should  feel:  1.  That  they  have  a 
eaU  to  their  mi.ssion.  Paul  did  so.  "  Called  to  be  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  through 
the  will  of  God."  No  man  will  do  his  work  effectively  in  any  sphere  unless  he  is 
assui'ed  in  his  own  mind  that  he  is  called  to  it.  The  inner  evidence  of  this  call  is 
sympathy  with  the  work  and  aptitude  for  it.  2.  That  their  call  is  Divine.  Paul  felt 
called  "  through  the  will  of  God."  It  is  one  thing  to  feel  you  have  a  call  to  a  mission, 
and  another  thing  to  feel  that  call  is  Divine.  The  iiredominence  of  the  sympathy  and 
the  pre-eminence  of  the  aptitude  will  give  this  assurance.  No  man  succeeds  in  any 
mission  unless  he  feels  called  to  it. 

II.  What  all  men  should  bb.  The  description  given  of  the  persons  addressed, 
suggests  what  ill  men  should  be.  What?  1.  Religiously  social.  They  should  be. 
identified  with  a  religious  community.  "  The  Church  of  God  which  is  at  Coriiitha" 
All  men  should  be  in  fellowsln'p  with  the  good,  not  isolated.  2.  Consecrated  to 
Christ.  'Sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus."  Set  apart  to  him,  devoted  to  him,  and  thus 
"called  to  be  saints."  Called  to  live  holy  lives.  "In  every  place  call  upon  the 
Name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  A  reverent,  conscious  dependence  on  him 
everywhere.  3.  A  catholic  participation  in  Christ.  "Both  theirs  and  ouri.^ 
There  are  those  who  feel  that  Christ  is  their  special  property,  they  would  mono* 
polize.him.  An  un-Christly  feeling  this.  The  feeling  should  be  our  Christ.  "Our 
Father  which  art  in  heaven."  There  is  no  personal  Christianity  that  ia  not  catholic 
in  spirit. 

IlL  What  al^  men  sHouiiD  desire.  "  Grace  be  unto  you,  and  peace,  from 
ttod  our  Father,  and  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  In  this  we  have  the  WgKest 
philanthropy— a  philanthropy  that  desires  for  man :  1.  The  highest  good.    "  Grace  and 


It  tHte  PitlST  EPISTLE  OX)  TfiE  CORliJTfllANS.    toH.i.1-31 


peace."    If  men  have  these  they  have  alL    2.  The  highest  good  from  the  highest 
Source.    "  God  the  Father."    Men  need  this  good ;  Heaven  only  can  bestow  it. 

Vera.  4 — ^9. — Exemplary  gratitude  and  precious  confidence.  "I  thank  my  God 
always  on  your  behalf,"  etc.  Here  we  have  two  blessed  states  of  mind^l)  exemplary 
gratitude,  and  (2)  precious  confidence. 

I.  BxEMPLABY  aRATiTUDB.  "I  thank  my  God  always  on  your  behalf."  The 
gratitude  hern  was :  1.  Unselfish.  "  On  your  behalf."  It  is  right  and  well  to  praise 
God  for  what  he  has  done  for  us,  but  it  is  a  higher  and  nobler  thing  to  praise  him  for 
what  he  has  done  for  others.  No  man  rightly  appreciates  a  blessing  who  does  not 
desire  others  to  participate  in  it.  The  sublimity  of  a  landscape  is  more  than  doubly 
enjoyed  when  one  or  more  stand  by  your  side  to  share  your  admiration.  2.  For 
spiritual  good.  "For  the  grace  of  God."  (1)  That  grace  which  "enriched  in  all 
utterance  and  in  all  knowledge."  Two  splendid  gifts  these,  where  they  are  inspired 
by  the  "  grace  of  God,"  and  properly  related.  "  Utterance,"  apart  from  "  knowledge," 
is  worthless  and  pernicious.  Volubilities  and  jrarrulousness  are  social  evils.  "  Know- 
ledge" is  of  no  value  to  others,  unless  it  has  effective  "utterance."  Knowledge,  with 
a  powerful  natural  oratory,  will  move  the  world ;  it  has  shivered  dynasties,  converted 
millions,  and  created  Churches.  (2)  That  grace  which  confirmed  in  their  experience 
the  testimony  of  Christ.  Their  spiritual  experience  confirmed  the  testimony.  What 
higher  gift  than  this— a  personal  realization  of  Christianity?  (3)  That  grace  which 
inspired  them  with  a  practical  hope  of  the  appearance  of  Christ.  "  Waiting  for  the 
coming  of  our  Lord."  3.  An  habitual  state  of  mind.  "  I  thank  my  God  always."  It 
was  not  an  occasional  sentiment ;  it  was  a  settled  attitude  of  heart. 

n.  Precious  confidence.  The  apostle  seems  to  have  had  confidence  in  three  things 
in  relation  to  Christ.  1.  In  his  perfecting  character.  "  Who  shall  also  confirm  you 
unto  the  end."  So  perfecting  it  that  it  shall  be  "  blameless."  All  moral  Imperfections 
removed.  2.  In  his  appearing  again,  "  In  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The 
day — when  he  will  appear.  This  day  is  the  day  of  days  for  humanity.  3.  In  his 
granting  them  companionship,  "Unto  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord."  "  Where  I  am  there  ye  shall  be  also."  Unshaken  confidence  in  these  things, 
how  precioual 

Vers.  10 — 13. — The  importance  of  spiritual  unity.  "  Now  I  beseech  you,  brethren, 
by  the  Name  of  our  Lord,"  etc.  Here  the  apostle  comes  to  the  grand  object  of  writing 
this  letter :  it  was  to  put  an  end  to  that  party  spirit  that  had  riven  the  Ctiurch  at 
Corinth  into  conflicting  divisions.  His  remarks  on  this  subject  continue  to  ch.  iv.  20. 
There  are  two  things  here  which  show  the  transcendent  importance  which  he  attached 
to  epiritual  unity — (1)  his  solemn  exhortation,  and  (2)  his  earnest  expostulation. 

L  His  solemn  bxhobtation.  "  Now  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the  Name  of  our 
Loid  Jesus  Christ,  that  ye  all  speak  the  same  thing,"  etc.  What  union  does  he  seek  ? 
Not  ecclesiastical  union,  conformity  to  the  same  system  of  worship.  Not  theological 
union,  conformity  to  the  same  scheme  of  doctrine.  Such  unions  cannot  touch  hearts, 
cannot  weld  souls.  They  are  the  union  of  the  various  parts  of  the  machine,  not  the 
union  of  the  branches  of  a  tree.  1.  The  unity  he  seeks  is  that  of  spiritual  utterance. 
"  That  ye  all  speak  the  same  thing."  Not  the  same  thing  in  letter,  but  in  life. 
Let  the  utterances  be  as  varied  as  all  the  notes  in  the  gamut,  but  let  love,  like  the 
key-note,  tune'  them  into  music.  2.  The  unity  he  seeks  is  that  of  unity  of  soul. 
"  That  ye  be  perfectly  joined  together  in  the  same  mind  and  in  the  same  j\idgraent." 
These  include  unity  of  the  supreme  sympathy  and  aim.  Of  such  unity  Christ  alone 
is  the  Centre.  Creeds  divide ;  Christ  unites.  According  to  the  laws  of  mind,  all  that 
love  Christ  supremely,  though  separated  in  person  by  distances  immeasurable,  are  one 
•  in  heart,  one  as  planets  are  one,  revolving  round  the  same  centre.  This  is  the  union 
that  Paul  sought ;  this  is  Divine  socialism.  No  wonder  that  he  was  solemn  in  his 
entreaties.    "  In  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  he  asks  it. 

II.  His  earnest  expostulation.  Divisions  or  schisms  were  rife  and  rampant  in 
the  Church  at  Corinth  at  this  time.  Some  person  of  the  name  of  Chloe,  unknown  to 
us,  but  evidently  well  known  to  Paul  and  his  contemporaries  of  the  Corinthian  Church, 
brought  these  divisioiiB  under'  Paul's  notice,  told  him  of  the  contentions.    We  must,  I 


OH.1,1— 31.]    THE  FIRST  BPISILB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa.  H 

suppose,  assume  that  this  Chloe  was  a  good  character,  although,  as  a  rule,  the  most 
unamiable  persons  are  the  most  ready  to  parade  the  imperfections  of  others.  Now, 
what  were  the  divisions  aiainst  which  he  protests  ?  "  Now  this  I  say,  that  every  one 
of  you  saith,  I  am  of  Paul ;  and  I  of  ApoUos ;  and  I  of  Cephas  ;  and  I  of  Christ,"  etc. 
Their  divisions  consisted  in  rabid  preferences  for  certain  ministers.  One  party  set  up 
Paul  as  pre-eminent ;  another  party  sot  up  Apollos  as  unapproached  in  excellence ; 
others  Cephas,  or  Peter  ;  and  others  gave  Christ  the  pre-eminence,  and  they  were 
right.  Now,  to  put  down  these  divisions,  these  schisms,  Paul  expostulates  with  great 
vehemence.  "Is  Christ  divided?  Was  Paul  crucified  fur  you?  or  were  ye  baptized 
in  the  name  of  Paul  ?  "  Party  spirit  has  been  the  greatest  curse  to  Christianity;  it  has 
filled  Christendom  with  conflicting  sects.  Alas!  that  any  professed  minister  of  the 
gospel  should  defend  the  existence  of  separate  sects  and  Churches.  How  often  have 
I  heard  preachers  on  platforms  compare  the  different  denominations  to  regiments  in  the 
same  army  I  Do  regiments  in  an  army  fight  one  with  another,  and  do  they  misinterpret 
the  grand  purpose  of  the  campaign  ?  However,  so  long  as  men  have  vested  interests 
in  sects,  and  live  by  denominations,  I  fear  nothtug  but  the  crash  of  doom  will  destroy 
sectarianism, 

Ver.  17. — The  world's  greate$t  blessing  and  its  greatest  evil.  "Lest  the  cross  of 
Chrtot  should  be  made  of  none  effect."    Here  we  have — 

T.  The  greatest  blessing  in  the  world.  "The  cross  of  Christ."  By  "the  cross  of 
Christ "  the  apostle  did  not  mean,  of  course,  the  timber  on  which  Christ  was  crucified, 
or  any  imitation  of  that  in  wood,  brass,  marble,  gold,  silver,  or  paint.  He  uses  the  word 
as  a  symbol,  as  we  use  the  words  "  crown,"  "  court,"  "  bench,"  etc.  Ho  meant  the  eternal 
principles  of  which  the  cross  of  Christ  was  at  once  the  effect,  evidence,  and  expression 
— he  meant,  in  one  word,  all  that  we  mean  by  the  gospel.  And  this,  we  say,  is  the 
greatest  blessing  in  the  world  to-day.  The  human  world  lives  under  a  system  of  mercy, 
and  mercy  pours  on  it  every  hour  blessings  innumerable.  But  no  blessing  has  come 
to  it,  has  ever  been  found  in  it,  or  will  ever  come  to  it,  equal  to  the  cross  or  the  gospel. 
Look  at  it,  for  example,  in  only  three  of  its  many  aspects,  and  you  will  be  impressed 
with  its  incomparable  worth.  1.  As  a  revealer.  The  chief  value  of  the  material 
universe  is,  that  it  reveals  the  spiritual  and  the  eternal ;  but  the  gospel  reveals  all  that 
the  material  does  of  God  and  the  universe  with  much  greater  fulness  and  effect.  It 
presents  the  "  image  of  the  invisible  God."  All  true  theological  doctrine  and  ethical 
science  come  to  us  through  the  cross.  It  is  the  moral  light  of  the  world.  2.  As  an 
educator.  That  in  human  life  which  is  the  most  successful  in  quiclcening,  evolving, 
and  strengthening;  all  the  powers  of  the  human  mind  is  its  chief  blessing.  The  "  cross 
of  Christ"  has  done  this  a  thousand  times  more  effectively  than  any  other  agency. 
Art,  government,  science,  poetry,  philosophy,  owe  infinitely  more  to  it  than  to  any 
other  agent  in  the  world.  The  cross  is  to  the  human  soul  what  the  vernal  sunbeam  is 
to  the  seed ;  it  penetrates,  warms,  quickens,  and  brings  all  its  latent  powers  out  to 
perfection.  3.  As  a.  deliverer.  The  cross  is  more  than  a  revealer  or  an  educator ;  it  is  a 
deliverer.  The  human  soul  is  condemned,  diseased,  enthralled ;  everywhere  it  groans 
under  the  sentence  of  its  own  conscience.  It  languishes  under  a  moral  malady ;  it  is 
fettered  by  lusts,  prejudices,  evil  habits,  and  social  influences ;  its  deepest  cry  is,  "  O 
wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me?"  The  cross  bears  a  pen  to  cancel  the 
sentence,  a  balm  to  heal  the  wound,  a  weapon  to  break  the  fettering  chain.  Such,  and 
infinitely  niore,  is  the  cross.  What  would  human  life  be  without  it  ?  A  voyage  without 
a  compass,  chart,  or  star. 

II.  The  greatest  evil  in  the  world.  What  is  the  evil  ?  Making  this  orosg  of  "none 
effect."  That  is  "  none  effect "  so  far  as  its  grand  mission  is  concerned.  Some  effect  it 
must  have;  it  will  deepen  the  damnation  where  it  does  not  save.  "  We  are  unto  God 
a  sweet  savour,"  etc.  We  offer  three  remarks  concerning  this  tremendous  evil..  1.  It 
is  painfully  manifest.  The  fact  is  patent  to  all,  that  the  cross  has  not  to  any  great 
extent  in  Christendom  produced  its  true  effect.  Though  it  has  been  in  the  world 
upwards  of  eighteen  hundred  years,  not  one-tenth  of  the  human  population  know  any- 
thing about  it,  and  not  one-hundredth  of  those  who  know  something  of  it,  experience  its 
true  effect.  Intellectually,  socially,  politically,  it  has  confessedly  done  wonders  for  man- 
kind ;  but  morally,  bow  little !    How  little  genuine  holiness,  disinterested  philanthropr, 


li  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa    [oh.  1. 1—81. 


lelf-sacrificing  devotion  to  truth  and  God  I  How  little  Christliness  of  life !  In  all  mors! 
features,  England  is  well-tiigh  as  hideous  as  heathendom.'  2.  It  is  easily  explained. 
Howls  it  done?  The  apostle  in  this  verse  indicates  one  way  in  which  it  could  be  done, 
that  is,  by  "  wisdom  of  words,"  by  which  we  understand  him  to  mean  gorgeous 
rhetoric.  What  is  called  the  Church  has  done  it ;  that  is,  the  assembly  of  men  who 
profess  to  he  its  disciples,  representatives,  ministers,  and  promoters.  The  Church  has 
done  it :  (1)  By  its  theologies.  In  Its  name  it  has  propounded  dogmas  that  have 
clashed  with  reason  and  outraged  conscience.  (2)  By  its  polity.  It  has  sanctioned 
wars,  promoted  priestcraft,  established  hierarchies,  which  have  fattened  on  the 
ignorance  and  poverty  of  the  people.  (3)  By  its  spirit.  The  spirit  of  the  Church,  as 
a  rule,  is  in  direct  antagonism  to  the  spirit  of  the  cross.  The  spirit  of  the  cross  is  self- 
sacrificing  love ;  the  spirit  of  the  conventional  Church  has  beea  to  a  great  extent'  that 
of  selfishness,  greed,  ambition,  and  oppression.  Malrepresentation  of  Christ  by  the 
Church  is  the  instrument  that  has  made  the  cross  of  "  none  effect."  3.  It  is  ierrihly 
criminal.  It  is  wonderful  that  man  has  the  power  thus  to  pervert  Divine  institutions 
and  blessings ;  but  such  perverting  power  he  has,  and  he  uses  it  every  day  even  in 
natural  things.  He  forges  metals  into  weapons  for  murder,  he  turns  bread-corn  into 
liquids  to  blight  the  reason  and  to  damn  the  souls  of  men.  Wonderful  power  this  I  and 
teirible  is  the  crime  in  employing  it  for  perverting  the  cross  of  Christ.  A  greater  crime 
than  this  you  cannot  conceive  of.  Were  you  to  turn  all  bread  into  poison,  make 
the  flowing  rivers  pestiferous,  quench  the  light  of  the  sun,  mantle  the  stars  in  sack- 
cloth, you  would  not  perpetrate  a  crime  half  so  enormous  as  that  of  making  the  cross  of 
Christ  of  "  none  effect." 

Conclusion.  Two  questions.  1.  What  is  the  spiritual  influence  of  the  cross  on  us? 
Has  it  crucified  unto  us  the  world ;  destroyed  in  us  the  worldly  spirit — the  spirit  of 
practical  atheism,  materialism,  ami  selfishness?  2.  What  are  we  doing  with  the  cross? 
Are  we  abusing  it  or  rightly  employing  it? 

Vers.  18, 19. — Two  classes  of  gospel  hearers.  "For  the  preaching  of  the  cross  is  to 
them  that  perish  foolishness;  but  unto  us  which  are  saved  it  is  the  power  of  God. 
For  it  is  written,  I  will  destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  wise,  and  will  bring  to  nothing  the 
understanding  of  the  prudent."  Instead  of  the  "  preaching  of  the  cross,"  the  New 
Version  reads',  the  "  word  of  the  cross,"  and  the  word  of  the  cross  stands  in  contrast  to 
the  word  of  worldly  wisdom.  How  great  is  the  contrast  I  We  have  here  two  classes 
of  gospel  hearers. 

I.  'i'he  one  is  gradually  ferishino,  the  other  is  gradually  being  batkd.  The  perish- 
ing and  the  saving  are  gradual.  1.  There  is  a  class  in  every  congregation,  perhaps, 
gradually  perishing.  They  are  gradually  losing  moral  sensibility—  contracting  fresh 
guilt,  etc.  They  are  not  damned  at  once.  2.  There  is  a  class  in  every  congregation, 
perhaps,  gradually  being  saved.  Salvation  is  not  an  instantaneous  thing,  as  some 
suppose. 

II.  To  the  one  class  the  gospel  is  foolishness,  to  the  other  the  rowsB  or  God. 

1.  It  is  "foolishness"  to  them  that  are  perishing,  because  it  has  no  meaning,  no  reality. 

2.  It  is  a  Divine  "power"  to  them  that  are  being  saved.  Enlightening,  renovating, 
purifying,  ennobling.  The  power  of  God  stands  in  contrast  with  mere  philosophy  and 
eloquence. 

Vers.  20,  21.— Philosophy  and  the  gospel.  "  Where  is  the  wise  ?  "  etc.  The  '•  wise  " 
(iioip6s)  here  refers  specially  to  the  sages  of  Greece.  They  were  called  at  first  "  wise 
men,"  and  afterwards  assumed  a  more  modest  title,  "  lovers  of  wisdom,"  philosophers. 
The  "  scribe  "  refers  to  the  learned  among  the  Jews.  The  appeal  of  the  text,  therefore, 
is  to  the  wisdom  or  the  philosophy  of  the  world,  including  that  of  the  Greek  or  Jew. 
Here  we  have— - 

L  Philosophy  challenged  by  the  gospel.  The  apostle  here  challenges  the  wise  men 
of, the  .world  to  accomplish  the  end  which  the  gospel  had  in  view.  That  end  was  the 
impartation  to  men  of  the  saving  knowledge  of  God.    Where,  unaided,  had  it  ever 

'  See  'Modem  Christianity  •  Civilized  Heathenism.'  br  the  author  of  'Fisht  •< 
Pame'Faropa's  School.' 


tH.1.1— 31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  18 

lucceeded  in  accomplisbiiig  this?  Who  amongst  the  wise  will  come  forward  to  givn 
one  single  instance? 

n.  Philosophy  oomfounded  by  the  gospeL  "Hath  not  God  made  foolish  the 
wisdom  of  this  world?"  1.  By  doing  what  philosophy  could  not  do.  "  The  world  by 
wisdom  knew  not  God."  Though  the  pages  of  nature  lay  open  to  the  eye,  with  G-od's 
signature  on  the  whole,  man  failed  to  discover  him.  2.  By  doing  hy  the  simplest  instru- 
mentality what  philosophy  could  not  do.  The  proclamation  of  the  history  of  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  and  that  by  a  few  simple  men  regarded  as  the  offsoouring  of  all  things, 
did  the  work.     Hath  not  God  in  this  way  "  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  the  world  "? 

in.  Philosophy  superseded  hy  the  gospel.  "  It  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of 
preaching  to  save  them  that  believe."  The  preaching  is  not  foolish  in  itself,  only  in  the 
estimation  of  the  would-be  wise  men.  The  great  want  of  men  is  salvation — the  restora- 
tion of  the  soul  to  the  knowledge,  the  likeness,  the  fellowship  of  God.  This  want 
philosophy  cannot  supply ;  but  t£e  gospel  does.  It  has  done  so,  it  is  doing  so,  and  it 
will  continue  to  do  so. 

Vers.  22 — ^25. — ChriMmity  viewed  in  three  aspects.  "  For  the  Jews  require  *  sign," 
etc.    Our  subject  is  Ghristianity ;  and  here  we  see  it  in  three  aspects. 

I.  As  associated  with  a  great  fact.  "  Christ  crucified."  This  fact  may  be  looked 
at :  1.  Historically.  As  an  historical  fact,  it  is  the  most  famous,  influential,  and  best 
authenticated  in  the  annals  of  time.  2.  Theologically.  It  unfolds  the  Divine,  it  rends 
the  veil  in  the  great  temple  of  theological  truth,  and  exposes  the  inmost  and  holiest 
sanctuary ;  it  is  a  mighty  expression  of  God's  idea,  government,  and  heart.  3.  Morally. 
It  is  fraught  with  the  most  quickening,  elevating,  and  sanctifying  suggestions. 

II.  As  associated  with  populab  opinion.  It  was  a  "  stumbling-block  "  to  the  Jew ; 
it  was  "  foolishness  "  to  the  Greek.  It  had  not  suflBcient  of  the  gorgeous  philosophical 
ritualism  for  the  speculative  and  pedantic  Greek,  nor  sufficient  of  the  gorgeous  religious 
ritualism  for  the  sensuous  and  bigoted  Jew.  What  is  it  in  popular  sentiment  now  ? 
To  the  millions  it  is  nothing.  They  have  formed  no  idea  of  it ;  they  do  not  think  about 
it.  To  the  sceptic  it  is  a  fable ;  to  the  formalist  it  is  a  creed  to  be  repeated,  and  a 
ceremony  to  be  attended  to  on  certain  occasions,  and  nothing  more. 

III.  As  associated  with  Christian  consciousness.  "  But  unto  them  which  are  called, 
both  Jews  and  Greeks,  Christ,  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God."  The 
Christian  sees  the  highest  wisdom  in  a  system  which,  in  saving  the  sinner,  does  foui 
things.  1.  Manifests  the  righteousness  of  the  insulted  Sovereign.  2.  Augments  the 
influence  of  moral  government.  3.  Maintains  intact  all  the  principles  of  moral  freedom. 
4.  Develops,  strengthens,  and  perfects  all  the  original  powers  of  the  individual  soul. 
He  sees,  too,  the  highest  power  in  the  difiSculties  it  surmounts,  the  revolutions  it  effects, 
the  deeds  to  which  it  stimulates,  the  hopes  it  inspires,  and  the  deep  fountains  of  pleasure 
which  it  opens  up.  He  feels  it  is  both  wise  and  powerful.  What  is  Christianity  to  us  ? 
As  a  fact,  there  it.  is  in  the  archives  of  humanity,  for  ever  independent  of  us  ;  nothing 
will  ever  blot  it  out  from  the  page  of  history.  As  a  fact,  though  centuries  old,  it  is 
more  influential  than  ever.  It  will  be  a  fact  eternally.  Wha,t  is  it  to  us  ?  Is  it  folly 
and  weakness ;  or  is  it  wisdom  and  power?    This  is  the  question. 

Vers.  26 29. — Ood  destroying  the  conventionally  great  hy  the  conventionally  contemp- 
tible.   "  For  ye  see  your  calling,  brethren,"  etc.    These  verses  remind  us  of  two  facts. 

I.  Evil  exists  herb  under  conventionally  respectable  forms.  Evil  is  spoken 
of  in  these  verses  as  the  "  wise  "  and  the  "  mighty."  In  Corinth  dangerous  errors  wore 
the  costume  of  wisdom.  Power  was  also  on  their  side.  Sages,  poets,  artists,  statesmen, 
wealth,  and  influence  stood  by  them,  and  they  appeared  "  mighty."  Men  in  England,  at 
in  Corinth,  have  robed  evils  in  attractive  costumes,  and  labelled  them  with  brilliant 
names.  Often,  indeed,  has  religion  itself  been  used  as  a  means  of  covering  vices,  and 
of  Huang  the  vilest  passions  of  the  human  heart  into  the  spheres  of  worship.  Every- 
where evil  assumes  a  respectable  garb.  1.  Infidelity.  This  great  evil  writes  and  speaks 
in  the  stately  formularies  of  philosophy  and  science ;  borrows  its  sanctions  from  astronomy, 
chronology,  criticism,  and  metaphysics.  It  is  a  "  wise  "  thing  of  the  wrld.  2.  lAeen- 
tiousness.  This  evil,  which  involves  the  utter  neglect  of  all  social  obhgations,  and  the 
u^restiained  development  of  the  base  and  vicious  lusts  of  the  soul,  passes  under  tht 


14  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.    [ch.lI— 31. 

grand  name  of  liberty.  The  vaunted  religious  liberty  of  England's  population  means 
often  only  power  to  negiect  sacred  ordinances,  profane  the  holy  sabbath,  etc.  3.  Social 
injustice.  This  is  a  demon  which  works  in  every  sphere  of  life,  leading  the  crafty  to 
take  advantage  of  the  ignorant,  the  strong  of  the  weak,  the  rich  of  the  poor ;  and  this 
does  most  of  its  fiendish  work  in  the  name  of  law.  4.  Selfishness.  This  goes  under 
the  name  of  prudence..  The  man  whose  heart  knows  no  throb  of  sjrmpathy  for  another 
passes  through  life  with  the  reputation  of  a  prudent  man.  5;  Bigotry.  This,  which 
leads  men  to  brand  all  who  differ  from  them  as  heretics  and  doom  them  to  iierdltion, 
wears  the  sacred  name  of  religion.  6.  War.  This,  which  by  the  common  consent  of 
all  Christian  philosophers  is  the  pandemonium  where  all  evil  passions  of  the  human 
heart  run  riot  in  their  most  fiendish  forms,  is  called  glory.  Thus  here  and  now,  as 
everywhere  and  ever,  evil  appears  as  the  "  wise  "  and  tie  "  mighty."  That  errors  and 
evils  should  appear  in  respectable  forms  is  one  of  the  most  unfavoursible  symptoms 
in  all  the  history  of  man.  Could  we  but  take  from  sin  the  mantle  «if  reopeciability  that 
society  has  thrown  over  it,  we  should  do  much  towards  its  annihilation. 

n.  God  is  determined  to  oveethkow  evil  bt  conventionally  contemptible 
MEANS.  "  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise,"  etc. 
The  "  wise  "  and  the  "  mighty  "  cannot  protect  evil.  The  agency  to  sweep  evil  away  is 
here  represented  as  "  foolish,"  "  weak,"  "  I  ase,"  "  despised,"  and  "  things  which  are  not." 
What  does  this  language  mean?  1.  It  does  not  mean  that  the  ^os;^e2  is  an  inferior 
thing.  The  gospel  is  no  mean  thing.  It  has  proved  itself  the  wisdom  of  God  and  the 
power  of  God.  2.  It  does  not  mean  that  the  men  appointed  as  its  ministers  are  to  be 
inferior.  There  are  several  things  to  show  that  the  gospel  ministry  requires  the  highest 
order  of  mind.  (1)  The  character  of  the  work.  What  is  the  work  ?  Not  the  mere 
narration  of  facts  or  the  enunciation  of  the  current  opinions  of  men.  No ;  it  is  teaching 
men  in  all  wisdom.  Teaching  implies  the  impartation  to  others  of  what  they  are  ignorant 
of,  and  that  iif  such  a  way  as  will  commend  it  to  the  common  sense.  (2)  The  character 
ef  the  system.  If  a  man  is  to  teach  the  gospel,  he  must  first  learn  it.  What  a  system  it 
is  to  learn  1  Simpletons  call  the  gospel  simple ;  but  intelligence  has  ever  found  it  of  all 
■ubjects  the  most  profound  and  difficult.  The  greatest  thinkers  of  all  ages  have  found 
the  work  no  easy  task.  (3)  The  character  of  society.  Who  exerts  the  most  influence 
upon  the  real  life  of  the  men  and  women  around  him  ?  The  man  of  thought  and 
intelligence.  If  the  gospel  ministiy  is  to  influence  men  it  must  be  employed  by  men 
of  the  highest  type  of  culture  and  ability.  (4)  The  spirit  of  the  work.  What  is  the 
moral  spirit  in  which  the  gospel  should  be  presented  to  men?  Humble,  charitable, 
forbearing,  reverent.  Such  a  spirit  comes  only  from  deep  thought  and  extensive  know- 
ledge. (5)  The  character  of  the  oposite.  Wheie  can  you  find  greater  force  of  soul  than 
Paul  had  ?  more  searching  sagacity  than  James  had  ?  They  were  men  of  talent  and 
thought.  Away,  then,  with  the  thought  that  the  words  here  afford  any  encouragement 
■for  an  ignorant  or  feeble  ministry.  3.  What,  then,  do  they  mean  ?  (1)  That  the  gospel 
was  conventionally  mean.  The  Pounder  was  a  carpenter's  Son.  It  was  a  "  foolish  " 
thing  to  the  Greek,  etc.  (2)  That  the  first  ministers  were  conventionally  mean.  They 
were  fishermen,  clerks,  tent-makers,  etc.  The  system  and  its  ministers,  however,  are 
merely  conventionally  contemptible,  nothing  more.  These,  like  many  other  things  that 
erring  man  regards  as  insignificant  and  mean,  shall  do  a  great  work.  From  this  subject 
we  may  infer  :  (1)  That,  so  long  as  evils  exist  in  the  world,  great  commotions  are  to  he 
expected.  God  has  chosen  this  system  to  "  confound  and  biing  to  nought "  things  that 
are.  (2)  That  the  removal  of  evil  from  the  world  is,  under  God,  to  he  effected  through 
man  as  mam,.  The  gospel  is  to  mal?e  its  way  in  the  world,  not  by  men  invested  with 
adventitious  endowments,  such  as  scientific  attainments,  etc.,  but  by  men  as  men 
endowed  with  the  common  powers  of  human  nature,  but  these  powers  inspired  and 
directed  by  the  living  gospel. 

Vers.  30,  81. — The  union  of.  the  genuine  disciple  with  his  Master.  "  But  of  him  are 
ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  Uod  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sancti- 
fication,  and  redemiition  :  that,  according  as  it  is  written.  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory 
in  the  Lord."    Concerning  this  union — 

L  It  is  MOST  vital.  "  In  Christ,"  not  merely  in  his  dispensation,  in  his  school,  in 
bU  character,  but  in  himself,  as  the  branches  are  in  the  vine.    He  is  their  life. 


0H.L1— 3L]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  l£ 


IL  It  is  DiviNBLT  FORMED.  "  Of  him  are  ye  in  Christ."  Whom  ?  Of  God.  It  33 
the  eternal  Spirit  that  brings  the  soul  into  vital  connection  with  Christ.  "  My  Father 
is  the  Husbandman." 

III.  It  is  BLESSEDLY  PBODUOTIVE.  "  Wisdom,"  "  rightsousness,"  "  sanctiflcation," 
and  "  redemption ''  come  out  of  this  union.     What  transcendent  blessings  are  these  1 

IV.  It  is  EXDLTiNaLY  ADORiNa.  "  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord."  It 
inspires  the  highest  worship,  it  causes  the  soul  to  triumph  in  Gud  himself 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers,  1  -9. — St.  Paul  and  the  apostleship.  First  of  all,  ue  assbbts  thb  Dnriiiii 
AUTHORITY  OF  HIS  OFFICE,  to  which  he  wss  "  called  though  the  will  of  God."  This  pro- 
found sense  of  the  dignity  belonging  to  his  vocation,  as  one  sent  of  God,  was  a  supreme 
principle  of  his  nature ;  not  an  opinion,  but  a  conviction,  and  a  convictiontoo  strung  to 
be  dislodged  from  its  central  seat  in  his  mind  by  any  assault  of  adverse  circumstances. 
It  must  needs  be  subjected  to  manifold  and  severe  tests,  since  in  this  way  alone  can  a 
conviction  be  made  available  for  the  highest  moral  uses.  Owing  to  his  exceptional 
position,  St.  Paul  underwent,  in  this  respect,  a  series  of  peculiar  trials  which  distinguish 
him  from  the  other  apostles,  so  that,  while  he  shared  with  them  the  persecution  incident 
to  the  apostolate  in  itself,  he  had  an  experience  of  its  perplexities  and  sorrows,  personal 
to  himself,  in  the  distinctive  and  supplementary  attitude  he  was  ordained  to  maintain. 
Like  all  men,  he  had  fluctuant  moods,  the  ebb  and  flow  of  emotion  with  its  reflex 
influence  on  intellect  and  volition.  His  natural  temperament  was  extremely  sensitive, 
and  it  was  aggravated  by  hardship  and  disease.  The  blood  that  warmed  and  the  nerves 
that  thrilled  under  the  touch  of  outward  agencies,  had  their  counterpart  in  the  sensibility 
of  his  spiritual  life,  and,  accordingly,  body  and  soul  were  in  singularly  close  partnership 
in  his  nature,  and  acted  and  interacted  very  powerfully  on  each  other.  Yet,  in  spite  of 
this  liability  to  the  moods  of  subjective  sensations  and  internal  impressions,  the  convic- 
tion of  his  call  to  be  an  apostle  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  to  exercise  his  Divine  endowments 
in  A  specific  way,  stood  altogether  apart  from  the  variations  of  ordinary  thought  and 
feeling,  and  held  its  strength  of  consciousness  unimpaired  throughout  his  career.  So 
strong  and  yet  so  beautiful;  humility  the  ornament  of  its  energetic  vigomr,  so  that 
while  he  starts  with  "  Paul,  called  to  be  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,"  he  loses  not  a 
moment,  but  in  the  opening  verse  of  the  Epistle  introduces  "  Sosthenes  our  brother." 
Not  a  trace  of  Sosthenes  appears  in  the  Epistle  ;  the  production  is  Pauline  to  the  core ; 
and  yet  St.  Paul  would  associate  with  him  "  Sosthenes  our  brother."  If  St.  Paul  is  about 
to  rebuke  intellectual  pride  and  vanity,  and  condemn  the  evil  partisanship  that  grows 
out  of  selfishness  and  disguises  an  inflated  personality  under  the  mask  of  homage  to  a 
great  leader,  what  more  fitting  words  can  he  utter  on  the  threshold  of  his  letter  than 
"  Sosthenes  our  brother,"  whose  name  was  no  battle-cry  of  faction  ?  Naturally  enough, 
this  sense  of  unity  in  St.  Paul's  mind  with  all  Christians  finds  immediate  vent  in 
addressing  "the  Church  of  God"  at  Corinth,  "with  all  that  in  every  place  call  upon 
the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,"  adding  with  touching  expressiveness,  "  both  theirs 
and  ours."  A  true  sense  of  manhood  is  always  known  by  its  prompt  and  hearty  identi- 
fication with  the  manhood  of  the  race.  All  growth  and  culture  advance  from  the 
individual  and  the  personal  towards  the  universal,  until  at  last — the  providential  work 
of  development  on  earth  accomplished — the  narrow  horizon  that  was  quite  sufiicient  for 
youth  and  early  manhood,  widens  to  the  reach  of  the  world.  When  we  find  this 
circumference,  we  find  our  real  centre.  Not  otherwise  can  a  man  attain  genuine 
individuality'^  For  the  light  that  blesses  his  eyes,  for  the  air  that  feeds  his  lungs,  for 
the  food  nourishing  bodily  strength,  he  is  a  debtor  to  the  universe.  And  it  is  the  aim 
of  Christiinity  to  call  out  and  perfect  the  latent  vigour  of  this  instinct  of  race,  and,  but 
for  its  Divine  ofiBce,  the  sentiment  were  impossible  as  a  spiritual  actuality.  No  wonder, 
then,  that  St.  Paul  announces  to  the  mixed  population  of  Corinth — ^to  Romans,  Greeks, 
Asiatics,  in  the  Corinthian  Church — ^the  doctrine  of  grace  for  all,  and  emphasizes  the 
{{ift  as  "  both  theirs  and  ours."  The  formative  thought  of  the  first  chapter  is  thus 
intimated.  To  prepare  for  its  enlargement,  he  reminds  the  Corinthians  that  it  was  as  a 
Church  and  in  their  organic  capacity  they  were  "  saints ;  "  that,  as  members  of  Christ'l 


16  THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  i.  1—51 

body,  they  had  been  "  enriched  by  him  in  all  utterance,  and  in  all  knowledge;*  and  then 
proceeds  to  show  that  the  faithfulness  of  God  was  pledged  to  their  continued  progress  in 
this  selfsame  line  of  direction,  viz.  fellowship  in  Christ  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God  and 
Lord  of  humanity.  Here,  as  everywhere  in  St.  Paul's  writings,  the  two  ideas  of  the 
Divine  and  the  human  in  Christ  are  assumed  as  the  ground  of  our  fellowship  in  him 
and  with  one  another;  brethren  because  disciples,  one  below  because  one  above,  the 
strength  and  purity  and  permanence  of  the  tie  between  man  and  man  in  this  fellowship 
being  determined  solely  by  our  union  in  him.  On  no  other  basis  could  the  word  "fellow- 
ship "  have  taken  its  specialized  place  in  the  vocabulary  of  Christianity.  The  content! 
of  the  term  outreach  what  we  ordinarily  mean  by  respect,  confidence,  tatercourse,  and 
like  expressions,  and  signify  a  deep  sense  of  equality,  of  the  recognition  of  common 
lights  and  privileges,  and  of  a  sympathy  that  has  its  roots,  not  in  the  shallow  soil  of 
races  and  their  latitude  and  longitude  as  geographical  facts,  but  in  One  who  was  the 
Bepresentative  in  a  peculiar  and  exclusive  manner  of  the  human  race.  Fellowship  ia  an 
acknowledgment  of  redemption.  It  is  not  union  alone,  but  a  vital  unity,  a  communion 
of  man  with  man,  and  as  man  by  means  of  communion  with  Gk)d  in  Christ — a  bond  that 
exists  between  spirit  and  spirit  through  the  common  grace  of  the  Foly  Ghost,  as  the 
Executive  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  the  heart  of  every  believer.  Who  knew  more  of 
the  intensity  of  race-blood,  of  its  subtle  force,  of  its  open  and  virulent  activity  in  all  the 
practical  questions  of  the  age,  of  its  perpetuated  and  unyielding  traditions,  of  its  frantic 
•mergence  on  every  occasion  unless  repressed  by  the  arm  of  authority, — ^who  understood 
this  better  than  St.  Paul,  himself  a  notable  example  for  years  of  its  power  to  blind 
common  sense  and  stupefy  common  instincts  ?  And  where  was  there  a  city  of  such 
miscellaneous  activity  of  mind  and  such  collisions  of  inherited  beliefs  and  such  ill- 
adjusted  public  life  as  this  same  Corinth — a  huge  reservoir  for  aU  the  tributary  streams 
of  civilization  that  had  washed  down  into  its  bosom  whatever  had  survived  of  the 
degeneracy  in  Asia  Minor,  in  Egypt,  in  Italy  ?  Yet  this  St.  Paul  is  the  man  to  speak 
of  fellowship,  and  this  Corinth  is  the  community  to  which  he  would  address  himself  in 
bthalf  of  the  grace  "  both  theirs  and  ours," — ^L, 

Vers.  10 — 17. — Divigiotu  in  the  Ohurek  eondemntd.  The  formative  idea  of  the 
chapter  is  now  brought  into  full  view,  viz.  "  There  are  contentions  among  you,"  and  it 
is  prefaced  by  the  statement  of  a  principle,  to  which  St.  Paul  earnestly  directs  the 
attention  of  the  Corinthians,  viz.  "  that  they  be  joined  together  in  the  same  mind  and 
in  the  same  judgment,"  or  "  perfected  together,"  the  stress  being  laid,  as  before,  on 
their  corporate  or  organic  character  as  a  Church.  These  warring  divisions  were  not 
matters  merely  or  chiefly  personal,  but  they  involved  the  very  heart  and  soul  of  the 
Christian  community.  No  doubt  their  partisanship  in  the  supposed  interest  of  Paul, 
ApoUos,  and  Peter,  ay,  of  Christ  himself,  was  very  hurtful  to  them  as  individuals. 
But  the  point  he  urges  is  that  their  partisanship  was  a  disjunction  of  their  unity,  and 
hence  that  this  unity,  which  was  designed  to  grow  into  perfection,  was  arrested  by 
strife.  And  just  here  St.  Paul  strikes  the  great  fact  that  men  of  the  outside  world 
judge  of  Christianity  much  more  by  the  Church  in  its  totality  than  by  instances  of 
individual  character  in  the  Church.  History  is  fuU  of  exempliflcatioM  of  this  truth, 
from  the  times  of  Julian  and  Celsus  to  the  age  of  Voltaire  and  Rousseau.  Nor  should 
this  surprise  us ;  for  evidently  there  is  a  philosophy  in  it,  however  much  the  philosophy 
is  abused  by  the  wit  and  devices  of  men.  Individuals  are  "  members  one  of  another," 
members  of  the  body ;  but  the  body  is  the  Church,  and  the  organic  life  of  the  Church  is 
the  Divine  witness  to  the  glory  of  Christ  made  visible  through  the  Church  to  the  world. 
How  quickly  the  apostle  rises  into  fervid  utterance,  and  how  compact  his  words !  *•  Is 
Christ  divided  ?  was  Paul  crucified  for  you  ?  or  were  ye  baptized  in  the  name  of  Paul  ?  " 
If  his  services  to  the  Corinthian  Chtirch  are  to  be  perverted  in  tiiis  way,  St.  Paul  can 
only  thank  God  that  he  baptized  but  a  few  of  them.  At  the  moment,  St.  Paul  hastens 
to  assert  his  own  high  manhood  by  an  utter  refusal  to  be  made  an  object  of  partisan- 
ship, and  he  does  this  in  the  only  method  possible  to  his  argument,  by  coufessiug  hii 
obligations  to  Christ  who  had  sent  him  "  to  preach  the  gospaL" — ^L, 

Vers.  18 — 31. — Bow  St.  Pawl  regarded  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  By  an  easy 
movement  he  advances  to  the  gospel,  to  the  mode  of  preaching  it  as  essential  to  its 


OH.  L  1—81.]    THE  PIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  17 

Divine  success,  and  thus  reaches  the  climax  of  his  reasoning  in  the  first  chapter. 
Other  functions  of  his  apostleship  will  come  hereafter  into  view — the  resolute  disciplin- 
arian, the  firm  administrator,  the  tender  but  unyielding  executive  of  tlie  Head  of  the 
Church.  At  present,  howeveT,  one  thing  absorbs  him,  namely,  the  Divine  institution 
of  preaching.  What  is  his  foremost  relation  to  these  Corinthians  ?  It  is  that  of  a 
preacher  of  Christ's  gospel.  And  how  had  he  preached  it?  "Not  with  wisdom  of 
words" — not  as  a  speculative  thinker,  not  as  a  Greek  rhetorician,  not  in  the  spirit  of 
worldly  eloquence — "  lest  the  cross  of  Christ  should  be  made  of  none  effjct."  Two 
things  are  prominently  set  forth — the  gospel  and  its  manner  of  presentation ;  and 
Christ  is  in  each  of  them,  and  in  each  of  them  alike,  so  that  not  only  the  substance  of 
the  gosiiel,  but  the  mode  of  its  exhibition,  must  conform  to  his  sovereignty  as  the  Head 
of  the  Church.  AU  preaching  of  the  gospel  is  not  gospel  preaching.  Looking  at  the 
character  in  the  light  St.  Paul  viewed  it,  the  pieacher  was  an  original  creation  of  Christ, 
a  new  force  ordained  and  anointed  of  him,  and  introduced  by  him  for  the  proclamation 
of  the  gospel.  It  dated  no  further  back  than  Pentecost ;  it  was  of  universal  adaptation ; 
it  was  to  command  all  languages,  and  speak  to  the  simplest  instincts,  not  of  men,  but  of 
man  as  man;  and  this  original  creation,  this  new  force,  was  to  continue  through  all 
time,  and  never  surrender  its  rights  and  prerogatives  to  any  successor.  And  the  spirit 
and  manner  of  fulfilling  this  grand  office  were  thoroughly  unworldly,  so  much  so, 
indeed,  that,  it  would  strike  the  Greek  as  "  foolishness,"  and  prove  to  the  Jew  "  a 
stumbling-block."  But  in  contrast  with  the  Greek  and  his  search  after  wisdom,  and 
with  the  Jew  in  his  love  of  national  signs  as  the  elect  race  of  Jehovah,  Christ  was 
preached  as  "  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God."  The  word  "  power  "  is  not 
used  except  in  connection  with  the  preaching  of  "  Christ  crucified,"  and  its  value  in 
the  argument  is  assured  by  its  specialty  of  application.  All  the  aid  of  contrast  and 
comparison  is  given  to  this  one  word.  Power,  God's  power,  is  the  designation  of 
preaching  Christ  crucified.  Over  against  it  are  put  "  not  many  wise  men  after  the 
fl'e^h,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,"  and  the  array  of  dissimilarity  is  lengthened 
out  by  "  foolish  things,"  "  weak  things,"  "  base  things,"  and  "  things  despised."  But 
what  bearing  has  this  condensed  energy  of  a  single  idea  and  its  rapid  accumulation  of 
phraseological  forma  on  the  partisanship  of  these  Corinthians'!  Has  not  the  apostle 
wandered  from  the  main  idea  of  the  chapter — the  "contentions  among  you"?  Nay, 
this  very  partisanship  is  the  exact  opposite  of  Paul,  Peter,  ApoUos,  in  preaching  the 
gospel,  and  they  can  never  consent  to  this  abuse  of  their  position.  Nay,  further,  it  is 
in  downright  antagonism  to  "  Christ  crucified."  There  is  no  "power  "  in  it,  no  "  wisdom." 
It  is  the  idolatry  of  the  senses.  It  is  the  intellect  of  the  senses  repeating  the  folly  of 
Greek  and  Jew  in  another  but  equally  fatal  shape.  It  is  mere  seeking  to  find  them- 
selves and  their  glory  in  man.  Directly  opposite  to  this,  St.  Paul  argues,  we  preach 
"  Christ  crucified,"  so  that  "  no  flesh  should  glory  in  his  presence."  A  great  lesson 
it  is  in  the  true  spirituality  of  Christianity  as  the  only  strength  and  safeguard  of  the 
Church.  If  Christ  is  "  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanotificatlon,  and 
redemption;"  if  Christ  become  "the  power  of  God"  to  our  hearts  in  this  fourfold 
form  of  the  "  riches  of  grace ; "  the  root  of  all  worldliness  is  destroyed,  partisanship  is 
at  an  end,  because  self-seeking  is  ended,  and  henceforth  that  Scripture  has  a  very  real 
import  to  us,  "  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord."  A  man  may  admire 
others  for  their  own  sakes,  and  this  admiration  may  be  very  helpful.  To  admire  others 
because  our  image  is  projected  upon  them  can  only  augment  our  own  weakness.  Our 
praise  in  such  cases  is  but  the  echo  of  our  self-admiration,  and  echoes  are  dying 
sounds. — L. 

Ver.  2, — "Called  to  he  saints."  The  term  "saint  "is,  in  common  use,  limited  to 
certain  classes  of  holy  men.  It  is  applied  to  the  inspired  evangeUsts  and  apostles ;  to 
the  great  doctors  and  martyrs  of  the  early  Church,  especially  to  such  as  were 
"canonized;"  and  to  the  glorified  in  heaven.  But  the  New  Testament  usage  is  more 
geneiaL  In  the  Acts  and  in  the  Epistles,  Christians  generally,  otherwise  designated 
"disciples"  and  "brethren,"  are  also  called  "saints."  In  all  except  two  of  St.  Paul's 
Epistles,  the  Christians  to  whom  he  vrates  are  thus  designated  in  the  opening  salutations. 
Th«f'aippellation  is  one  very  significant  and  very  instructive. 

L  This  designation  reminds  Christians  of  what  thbt  eitheb  onot  were  ob 

l  OOBINTHIANS.  • 


18  THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANB.    [oh.  1. 1—81. 

woniiD  HATE  BEEN  BUT  FOE  THE  QBACE  OP  Gk)D.  Properly  and  literally,  a  eaint  is  one 
separated  and  consecrated,  made  holy  by  being  called  out  of  a  sinful  society  and  set 
apart  and  dedicated  to  God.  In  the  case  of  most  of  those  first  thus  addressed,  it  was 
literally  the  case  that  they  had  been  "  plucked  as  brands  from  the  burning."  Inhabitants 
of  one  of  the  most  luxurious,  voluptuous,  and  debased  cities  of  the  ancient  world,  these 
members  of  the  Corinthian  Church  had  been  rescued  and  saved  by  the  gospel  of  God's 
grace.  If  the  case  seems  different  with  hearers  of  Divine  truth  in  our  own  hsid  and  in 
our  own  day,  still  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  Christianity  alone  has  brought  about 
such  a  result  that  God  alone  has  made  us  differ. 

II.  This  designation  reminds  Christians  op  what  they  are.  1.  They  are  the 
creation,  the  "  new  creation  "  of  God's  Holy  Spirit.  His  cleansing  and  regenerating 
power,  symbolized  in  the  purifying  waters  of  baptism,  has  effected  this  great  change. 
2.  They  are  accordingly  consecrated  unto  God.  In  the  Corinthian  temple  of  Aphrodite, 
a  thousand  priestesses  were  "  consecrated "  as  prostitutes,  to  the  impure  worship  of 
the  goddess  of  lust.  In  the  Christian  Church  aU  members  are  devoted  to  the  holy 
service  of  a  holy  God.  3.  They  are  sanctified  in  character.  Negatively,  Christians  are 
represented  by  this  language  as  being  freed  from  the  bondage  and  service  of  sin. 
Positively,  they  are  arrayed  in  the  white  garments  of  spiritual  purity.  Outward, 
ceremonial  purity  is  insufficient ;  for  Christ  looks  for  and  values  the  purity  of  the  heart. 
4.  They  are  associated  with  a  holy  fellowship.  The  Church  is  a  holy  body,  and  an 
unholy  member  would  be  out  of  sympathy  with  the  body  to  which  it  professedly  belongs. 
Holiness  is  a  "  note  "  of  the  spiritual  brotherhood. 

III.  This  designation  reminds  Christians  op  what  thet  will  bb.  They  ara 
inheritors  of  a  holy  kingdom.  They  look  forward  to  immortal  citizenship  in  that  city 
into  which  entereth  nothing  that  defileth,  where  holiness  reigns  perfectly  and  for  ever, 
whose  occupations  of  service  and  of  praise  are  suited  to  holy  beings  and  to  a  holy 
place.  A  prospect  such  as  this  is  inspiring  as  well  as  delightful.  The  future  casts  its 
influence  upon  the  present.  "  He  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself,  even  as 
ChrUt  is  pure."— T. 

Ver.  6. — Enrichment  in  Christ,  Paul's  view  of  the  dignity  of  the  Christian  calling, 
of  the  privileges  and  honours  of  the  Christian  life,  was  both  just  and  instructive,  and 
luay  well  assist  us  in  our  endeavour  to  live  clear  of  and  above  the  false  and  worldly 
standard  with  which  we  often  meet.  How  could  the  grandeur  and  sacredness  of  our 
religious  position  be  more  effectively  set  before  us  than  by  this  inspiriting  language 
addressed  by  the  apostle  to  the  members  of  the  Christian  community  at  Coiinth :  "In 
everything  ye  were  enriched  in  Christ"? 

I.   A  PARADOX,  WHEN  WE  REGARD  THOSE   WHO  WERE   THUS  ADDBEBSED.      In  the  hoUSe 

of  one  Justus,  a  proselyte  to  Judaism,  who  had  become  a  Christian — a  house  close  by 
the  Hebrew  synagogue,  in  the  wealthy,  commercial,  pleasure-seeking  city  of  Corinth, 
there  assembled  in  a  large  apartment  a  company  of  disciples  of  the  Nazarene.  Some 
were  of  Jewish,  some  of  Gentile  race.  Most,  though  not  all,  of  the  brotherhood  were 
poor,  and  few  were  learned  or  of  high  station.  Perhaps  the  families  of  Crispus  the 
president,  of  Justus  himself,  and  of  Chloe  from  Cenchrea,  were  the  persons  in  the 
assembly  of  most  consideration  ;  for  Aquila,  ApoUos,  and  Sosthenes  were  absent.  Some 
of  those  assembled  to  hear  the  letter  of  the  apostle,  who  was  the  founder  of  the  Church 
at  Corinth,  were  bondsmen,  and  few  were  persons  of  any  note.  When  Titus  and 
Trophimus,  bearers  of  Paul's  Epistle,  accompanied  by  the  Corinthians — Stephanas, 
Fortunatus,  and  Achaicus,  who  had  also  just  come  from  the  apostle  then  labouring  at 
Ephesus — when  these  looked  round  upon  the  gathering  of  Corinthian  Christians,  they 
may  well  have  started  with  astonishment  as  the  language  of  the  Epistle  was  read  out, 
which  described  the  abundant  enrichment  of  these  lowly,  poor,  unlettered  disciples. 
Here  was  a  company,  including  "  not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty, 
not  many  noble,"  but  composed  of  the  ignorant,  the  weak,  the  base,  the  despised  of  the 
world.  A  few  Jewish  merchants,  a  few  handicraftsmen,  a  few  slaves,  a  few  industrious 
women,  and  perhaps  a  scholar  or  two,  were  declared  to  be  "  enriched  in  all  things." 
It  was  a  paradox ;  and  it  was  a  paradox  which  has  been  repeated  again  and  again 
during  the  past  nineteen  centuries. 

n.     A    F0B8IBILITT,    WHEN    WE    THINE    IN    WHOM    THIS    ENRIOHHENT     TOOK    FLAOB, 


ei.L  1—31.3    THE  FIRST  EPlSTLE  TO  TSE  CORINTHIANS.  19 

Nothing  but  the  consciousness  of  a  new  life  breathed  into  humanity,  a  new  bope 
dawning  upon  the  world,  could  account  for  these  Corinthians  being  thus  addressed 
by  a  teacher  like  Paul.  The  language  is  so  sweeping  and  unqualified,  and  the  state- 
ment is  made  with  so  much  confidence,  that  we  feel  that  something  very  remarkable 
must  have  occurred  to  account  for  Paul  addressing  such  persons  in  such  language. 
■  The  explanation  is  to  be  found  here — "  In  him, "  ye  were  enriched.  It  is  in  Christ  that 
th»  wealth  of  God  is  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  destitute  children  of  men.  1.  His 
Divine  nature  is  a  storehouse,  a  treasury  of  true  wealth;  in  him  all  fulness  dwells.  2. 
His  ministry  was  an  earnest  of  the  greater  blessings  which  should  follow;  for  he  was 
evisr  freely  giving.  3.  His  death  and  sacrifice  were  the  means  of  securing  to  us  the 
fulness  of  God ;  he  unlocked  the  treasury :  "  Though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  he 
be\ame  poor,  that  we,  through  his  poverty,  might  be  rich."  4.  His  ascension,  so  far  from 
impoverishing  the  race  he  came  to  save,  was  the  occasion  of  its  enrichment.  "He 
received  gifts  for  men ; "  he  poured  out  spiritual  blessings  from  on  high. 

IIL   A   FACT,  WHEN   WE   OONSIDEK   THE    ACTUAL    SPIRITUAL    POSSESSIOKS   ENJOYED   BY 

MANKIND  THROUGH  Jbsus  Christ.  As  the  sun  euriches  the  earth  with  luxuriant  fruit- 
fulness,  as  great  men  enrich  a  nation  by  their  heroic  deeds  and  saintly  self-sacrifice,  so 
does  Christ  actually  bestow  untold  blessings  upon  this  race.  Referring  to  the  Epistle, 
we  observe  that  wisdom  and  knowledge,  faith  and  healing,  miracles  and  prophecy, 
tongues  and  interpretation,  were  among  the  special  instances  of  wealth  with  which  the 
sarly  Church  was  dowered.  Yet  the  same  Epistle  assures  us  that  love  is  a  greater  gift 
than  all  these.  "  See  that  ye  abound  in  this  grace  also."  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are 
the  riches  of  the  Church.  The  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ  are  made  over  to  his 
redeemed  and  renewed  people.    To  them  it  was  said,  "  AU  things  are  yours." 

Application.  There  is  nothing  in  the  resources  or  the  purposes  of  God,  nothing 
in  the  heart  of  Christ,  to  limit  the  extent  to  which  thia  spiritual  wealth  may  be 
diffused.— T. 

Yer.  9.—"  The  fellowship  of  hit  Son.''  Social  ties  are  inevitable  either  for  good  or 
for  evil ;  some  are  made  for  us  and  others  are  made  by  us.  All  religions  have  made 
use  of  the  social  tendency,  the  social  necessity,  which  distinguish  human  nature. 
Christianity  adapts  itself  to  the  highest  form  of  the  tendency.  The  Divine  Christ  has 
made  himself  the  Associate,  the  Friend,  the  Brother  of  mankind. 

L  The  fellowship  op  faith  in  Christ's  redemption.  The  work  of  Christ  was 
perfect  in  itself,  but  its  benefits  are  only  to  be  enjoyed  through  spiritual  association  and 
affinity  with  Christ.  Union  of  heart  and  soul  with  Christ  is  the  condition  of  true 
salvation.  Christians  are  built  on  Christ  as  the  foundation,  grafted  into  Christ  as  into 
the  vine,  joined  to  Christ  as  to  the  body,  partakers  of  Christ  as  of  spiritual  bread, 
friends  with  Christ  as  by  a  congenial  attachment. 

II.  The  fellowship  op  spirit  with  Christ's  character.  The  frequent  expression, 
"  in  Christ,"  shows  what  was  the  view  of  the  Lord  himself  and  of  his  apostles  con- 
cerning the  identification  of  the  people  of  Jesus  with  their  Lord.  It  is  their  aspiration 
to  be  like  him,  to  have  the  mind  which  was  in  him.  They  are  followers,  disciples, 
imitators,  representatives  of  him  whose  name  they  bear.  Sympathizing  with  Christ's 
obedience  and  submission  to  the  Father,  they  are  practically  and  powerfully  and 
beneficially  affected  by  this  sympathy. 

III.  The  fellowship  op  the  active  life  with  the  work  of  Christ.  Christians 
recognize  their  Master's  devotion  to  the  highest  interests  of  men,  his  unwearied  efforts, 
his  imflinching  sacrifice.  In  communion  with  him  they  make  their  life  one  of  service, 
of  consecration.  In  motive  the  Christian  life  is  service  to  Christ ;  in  result  it  is  service 
to  man.  How  many  a  life  has  been  rescued  by  the  cross  from  selfishness  and  from  gin, 
and  made  a  life  of  devoted  and  successful  benevolence ! 

IV.  The  fellowship  op  heart  and  op  action  with  Christ's  people.  Union  with 
the  Head  is  the  basis  of  communion  with  the  members ;  yet  by  this  last  the  former  is 
fostered  and  perfected.  Congeniality  and  sympathy  of  disposition  and  aim,  worship 
and  ordinances  in  common,  mutual  aid,  conjoined  endeavours  and  testimony, — these  are 
the  results,  and,  at  the  »ame  time,  the  means  of  communion  with  Christ. 

V.  Fellowship  prospectively  in  Christ's  inheritance.  The  Lord  ever  encouraged 
hii  disciples,  who  shared  his  humiliation,  with  the  prospect  that  they  should  share 


aO  tHE  FIEST  EIPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  i.  i— 31 

his  exaltation.  It  was  his  promise,  "  Bucause  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also;"  it  was  his 
prayer,  "  Where  I  am,  there  may  also  my  people  be."  Fellowship  with  such  a  Being 
cannot  be  for  a  season,  it  must  be  imperishable.  To  be  "  ever  with  the  Lord  "  is  the 
bright  and  joyous  expectation  of  all  who  honour  and  who  love  his  appearing.  This 
shall  be  the  crown  of  communion.  Then  in  the  fullest  sense  shall  his  disciples  and 
friends  be  truly  "  partakers  of  Christ." — T. 

Ver.  17. — The  fission  to  preach.  No  man  did  so  much  as  Paul  to  prevent  Chris- 
tianity degenerating  into  form.  He  had  himself  been  galled  by  the  bondage  of  the  old 
dispensation,  and  he  the  more  rejoiced  in  the  liberty  of  the  new.  He  upheld  the  spirit 
against  the  letter,  the  life  against  the  ceremony.  He  did  not  depreciate  baptism,  for  it 
would  not  have  been  easy  to  depreciate  the  ordinance  and  at  the  same  time  to  honour 
the  spiritual  reality  it  symbolized.  But  others  could  and  might  administer  the  rite  of 
pi;?ification ;  he  was  at  liberty  to  leave  this  to  them,  in  order  to  give  himself  the  more 
devotedly  to  his  own  special  and  appointed  work,  the  preaching  or  the  gospel. 

i.  The  language  expeessbs  the  conviction  of  a  Divine  mission.  1.  The 
Christian,  and  emphatically  the  Christian  preacher,  does  not  go  his  own  way  and  do  his 
own  work  in  the  world.  He  does  not  claim  to  direct  his  own  steps.  2.  Chr  ist  is  the 
sender.  To  Paul  he  had  said,  "  Unto  whom  now  I  send  thee ; "  and  Paul  acknowledged 
concerning  his  commission,  "  I  received  it  not  of  men."  It  is  a  high  and  sacred  truth 
that  we  ai'e  sent  men.  The  soul  that  awakens  to  a  sense  of  the  reality  of  life  and 
hears  the  voice  of  God,  proves  its  vitaUty  by  exclaiming,  "  Here  am  I ;  send  Me." 
Eveiry  Christian  is,  in  a  sense,  a  missionary,  an  apostle  of  Christ. 

11.  The  language  assekts  the  vast  impobtancb  or  pbbachino.  It  is  common 
amongst  worldly  men  to  undervalue  this  spiritual  agency ;  they  think  more  of  pohtical 
or  physical  power  than  of  moral  influence.  What  is  preaching  ?  It  is  the  use  of  moral 
means  towards  a  moral  end.  It  is  the  presentation  of  truth  to  the  understanding,  of 
authority  to  the  conscience,  of  persuasion  to  the  heart.  Above  all,  it  is  the  use  of  a 
Divine  weapon,  though  with  an  arm  weak  and  ill  adapted  for  a  service  so  high.  Our 
Lord  himself  was  a  preacher,  Paul  was  a  preacher,  and  preachers  have  been  among  the 
greatest  moral  factors  in  the  history  of  all  Christian  nations.  Preaching  is  the  vehiclt 
efa  Divine  blessing,  the  means  towards  a  Divine  and  immortal  result. 

in.  The  language  lays  steess  upon  the  substance  of  Cheistian  FBEACHnra. 
Paul  felt  himself  called  and  qualified  to  preach  the  gospel.  1.  This  was  good  news. 
An  argument  may  be  reasoned,  au  oration  may  be  declaimed,  a  poem  may  be  sung,  but 
that  which  has  to  be  preached  is  good  news.  2.  It  was  good  news  from  God.  From 
any  inferior  source  good  tidings  could  scarcely  have  deserved  the  name.  Man  needed 
pardon,  the  principle  and  power  of  a  new  life,  hope  for  the  future ;  and  these  were 
blessings  God  alone  could  bestow.  3.  It  was  good  news  concerning  Christ.  Thus  to 
preach  Christ  and  to  preach  the  gospel  were  one  and  the  same  thing.  For  Christ 
was  to  man  the  wisdom,  the  power,  and  the  love  of  God.  4.  It  was  good  news  for 
all  men.  It  brought  liberty  to  the  Jew  and  light  to  the  Gentile,  truth  to  the  inquir- 
ing, comfort  to  the  sorrowful,  peace  to  the  sinful  penitent,  and  hope  to  the  down- 
trodden and  the  slave. 

Application.  1.  The  preacher  may  be  reminded  of  his  true  vocation.  2.  The 
hearer  of  the  gospel  may  be  reminded  of  his  precious  privilege  and  of  his  sacred 
responsibility. — T. 

Ver.  18. — Hie  doctrine  of  the  cross.    There  is  a  holy  zeal  of  indignation  In  the  spirit 

jmimating  this  passage.  Paul,  the  rabbinical  scholar,  not  untinctured  with  Hellenic 
culture,  must  have  felt  it  hard  that  the  life  he  had  voluntarily  adopted  often  brought 
him  into  disrepute  even  amongst  his  iatellectual  inferiors.  But  he  had  chosen  delibe- 
rately and  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  no  power  on  earth  could  make  him  swerve  from  his 
course.  His  own  mind  was  satisfied  that  the  gospel  could  do  for  man  what  no  other 
power  could  effect,  and  his  daily  observation  convinced  him  that  in  this  judgment  he 
was  right.  He  could  afford,  then,  to  endure  the  scorn  of  men,  for  the  doctrine  he  was 
promiJgating  was  attested  as  the  power  of  God. 

I.  The  bubbtance  of  the  doctrine,  ob  word,  of  the  cboss.  1.  The  cross  had 
te  Paul  no  merely  material  and  superstitious  meaning.    In  after  ages  men  heard  m-icb 


rat  1.1— 31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  C0RI>7THIANa  21 

of  "the  trae  cross,"  and  even  now  relics  (supposed)  of  the  instrument  of  our  Saviour's 
suffeiingB  are  treasured  and  revered.  The  cross  may  be  reproduced  in  shape,  in  orna- 
ment, in  architecture,  in  posture,  and  there  may  all  the  time  be  no  spiritual  under- 
standing of  the  cross.  2.  Nor  did  a  merely  sentimental  meaning  attach  itself  in  Paul's 
mind  to  the  cross.  Suffering,  and  especially  the  suffering  of  innocence,  awakens 
sympathy,  and  people  talk  about  the  cross  they  carry,  with  no  other  apprehension  ot 
the  meaning  of  the  phrase.  3.  But  it  was  a  symbol  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  Jesus  bare 
the  cross  before  he  set  out  for  Calvary ;  its  shadow  had  been  for  years  upon  his  spul. 
In  his  death  upon  the  cross  he  bore  our  sins,  and  secured  that  his  people  should  with 
him  be  crucified  unto  the  world.  Thus  the  tree  of  death  became  the  sign  of  redemption 
and  the  law  of  life. 

XL  The  offence  of  the  doctrine,  ob  word,  of  the  cboss.  1.  In  itself.  The 
cross  was  associated  in  men's  minds  with  slavery,  with  guilt  and  crime,  with  suffering, 
with  shame,  with  reviling,  and  with  denth.  2.  In  its  position  in  the  Christian  scheme. 
To  hope  to  convert  the  world  by  preaching  seemed  to  many  the  vainest  folly ;  by 
preaching  a  person,  ridiculous ;  by  preaching  a  person  judicially  put  to  death,  insanity ; 
by  preaching  one  crucified,  a  moral  obliquity  and  infamy.  3.  There  was  al  special 
reason  why  the  Jews  should  resent  this  doctrine.  They  cherished  a  carnal  love  of 
splendour  and  power  of  a  manifest  and  impressive  kind,  and  the  word  of  the  cross 
outraged  their  sentiments.  They  looked  for  a  temporal  deliverer  in  the  Messiah,  and 
this  expectation  was  disappointed  in  the  gospel  of  the  Crucified.  4.  There  was  a 
special  reason  why  the  Gentiles,  especially  those  of  education  and  philosophical  tastes, 
should  take  offence  at  the  word  of  the  cross.  They  disdained  the  barbarian  and 
despised  the  Jew,  and  they  contemned  the  form  in  which  Christianity  was  proclaimed. 
Thay  loved  health,  beauty  and  power,  and  had  no  sympathy  with  a  religion  which 
gloried  in  the  Crucifigd,  and  appealed  to  the  sinful  and  the  wretched.  Their  taste  for 
speculation  and  for  novelty  was  not  gratified  by  Christian  doctrine,  and  the  cross  would 
fit  into  none  of  their  schemes  of  the  universe. 

III.  The  power  op  the  doctrine,  or  word,  of  the  cross.  1.  The  sotme  of  this 
power.  It  is  Divine.  The  word  of  the  cross  expresses  the  Divine  mind,  shows  (Jod's 
estimate  of  human  sin,  exhibits  the  Divine  righteousness,  reveals  the  Divine  love, 
and  does  all  this  on  a  human  platform,  so  that  we  are  enabled  to  appreciate  the  mystery 
of  heavenly  counsels.  2.  The  sphere  of  this  power.  Unbelievers  cannot  recognize  it ; 
they  cannot  but  regard  it  as  folly,  for  they  are  perishing  in  the  sin  from  which  it  might 
deliver  them.  But  all  who  are  "  in  course  of  salvation  "  are  living  witnesses  to  the 
efficacy  of  the  gospel.  In  a  free  moral  nature,  truth  and  love  must  be  received  in  order 
that  they  may  operate.  3.  The  proofs  of  this  power.  Compare  it  with  any  other 
power,  and  its  superiority  is  manifest.  What  else  can  awaken  the  selfish,  the  sensual, 
and  the  obdurate  to  a  sense  of  sin ;  can  impel  the  low-minded  and  earthly  to  the  pursuit 
of  holiness ;  can  guide  and  graciously  constrain  to  a  life  of  consecrated  service ;  can 
enter  a  corrupt  society  as  leaven,  and  can  purify  it  as  salt? — T. 

Ver.  31. — Olorying  in  the  Lord.  The  one  condition  of  spiritual  blessing,  upon 
which  Scripture  universally  insists,  is  humility.  The  lowly  are  assured  of  acceptance, 
and  the  proud  and  self-confident  are  condemned  to  rejection.  The  terms  of  Ciiristianity 
correspond  with  the  teaching  of  the  Old  Testament ;  for  it  is  to  the  poor  in  spirit  and  to 
the  meek,  to  the  child-like  in  character  and  disposition,  that  the  blessings  of  the  new 
covenant  are  assigned.  The  same  spirit  which  is  a  means  of  obtaining  the  blessings  oi 
Christianity  is  distinctive  of  those  who  possess  these  blessings.  They  have  received  all 
they  enjoy  from  the  free  grace  of  God,  and  it  is  their  delight  to  abase  themselves  and 
to  exalt  him  from  whom  they  have  derived  their  spiritual  privileges  and  prospects. 
They  may  glory,  but  it  is  not  in  anything  which  is  their  own ;  it  is  in  him  of  whom 
and  to  whom  are  all  things. 

I.  Christians  repudiate  all  olortino  in  self.  1.  In  their  own  postesiioiu  and 
powers.  There  is  a  natural  tendency  to  think  highly  of  self,  and  to  depreciate  our 
fellow-men  and  their  gifts,  and  to  forget  our  God  the  Giver  of  all.  But  the  very  /act 
that  we  are  Christians  is  conclusive  against  the  lawfulness  of  such  moral  habits.  God 
has  made  us ;  Christ  has  redeemed  us,  and  we  are  not  our  own.  2.  In  the  gifts  oj 
OotPt  protidenee.    To  boast  of  wealth,  or  nationahty,  or  family,  is  to  overlook  the  greai 


22  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa    [oH.ul--3l 

question,  "What  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive?"  3.  In  their  privUerjes.  This 
the  Jews  were  constantly  in  the  hahit  of  doing ;  tliey  boasted  that  they  were  Abraham's 
children,  and  Moses'  disciples,  etc.  If  highly  favoured  by  Christian  privilege,  let  Christ's 
people  be  upon  their  watch  lest  they  claim  credit  for  what  they  owe  to  the  free  grace  of 
God.  4.  In  their  attainments.  The  Corinthians  seem  to  have  been  in  special  danger 
of  falling  into  this  snare.  Human  learning  and  philosophy  may  very  possibly  become 
an  occasion  of  stumbling  and  reproach.  5.  In  their  virtues.  This  was  the  Pharisaic 
spirit,  and  should  be  checked  by  the  remembrance  that  "we  are  unprofitable  servants." 
II.  Christians  cultivate  tbb  habit  of  gi.obting  in  thbie  Loud.  1.  This  is  a/wil 
and  reasonable  habit.  Eefleotion  assures  every  true  and  spiritual  Christian  that  he  is 
indebted  to  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ,  first  for  his  redemption  from  sin,  and  then  for 
every  grace,  all  help,  all  counsel,  all  comfort,  through  which  he  is  what  he  is.  There- 
fore in  the  Author  of  salvation  and  life  he  is  bound  to  rejoice.  2.  This  is  a  profitable 
habit.  To  glory  in  the  Lord  is  a  sure  preservative  against  ingratitude  and  murmuring, 
and  will  help  in  maintaining  a  cheerful  and  happy  tone  and  temper  of  mind.  It  is, 
moreover,  an  evident  and  beautiful  preparation  for  the  employments  of  heaven.  3.  This 
is  a  habit  for  which  we  have  the  apostolic  example  and  precedent.  It  was  the  habit  of 
Paul's  mind  to  glory,  not  in  man,  but  in  God.  He  could  glory  in  his  own  infirmities ; 
he  could  glory  in  the  blessing  God  bestowed  upon  his  labours,  though  then  he 
"became  a  fool  in  glorying."  But  this  was  the  prevailing  sentiment  of  his  spirit: 
"  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord ! " — T. 

Vera.  1 — 3. — Christian  salutation.  1.  Christian  salutation  should  be  courteous. 
Christianity  teaches  the  truest  politeness.  It  seeks  to  eradicate  the  harsh  and  the 
brutal  Life  is  rough  enough  without  our  making  it  rougher ;  Christianity  tends  to 
smooth  the  ruggedness  of  life  and  to  make  it  more  kindly.  Courtesy  in  others  towards 
ourselves  we  greatly  value ;  we  have  to  be  towards  others  what  we  would  have  them 
to  be  towards  us.  Paul's  courtesy  is  evidently  of  the  right  type — it  is  /learf-courtesy. 
Surface-courtesy  is  of  little  worth.     Besides  which  it  is  a  lie. 

II.  Christian  salutation  should  be  generous.  Paul's  is  not  conceived  in  a  carping 
spirit.  There  is  a  disposition  to  look  upon  the  better  side.  The  Corinthian  Church 
aflorded  plenty  of  inducement  to  severity  in  an  exordium.  The  apostle  declined  the 
temptation.  He  knew  the  way  to  the  human  heart,  and,  whilst  reserving  needed  rebuke, 
he  saluted  his  Corinthian  friends  (and  enemies)  in  a  manner  certain  to  impress  them  as 
charitable  and  large-hearted.  Whilst  strictly  adhering  to  truth,  we  must,  if  we  would 
win  men,  manifest  a  spirit  of  generosity.  We  are  sometimes  so  terribly  afraid  of  saying 
too  much,  that  we  say  altogether  too  little.  We  are  severely  anxious  to  be  just,  and 
become  really  unjust.  Large-heartedness  is  attractive,  and  wins ;  stinginess  in  sentiment 
is  repulsive,  and  loses.  Insistance  upon  the  dark  side  often  makes  it  darker.  Men  need 
encouragement  as  well  as  lecturing,  and  the  exhibition  of  a  noble,  sympathetic,  generous 
spirit  is  one  of  the  most  encouraging  spectacles  that  men  who  are  ening  and  imperfect 
can  be  called  to  look  upon. 

in.  Christian  salutatiom  should  be  cheerful.  Many  burdens  pressed  upon  the 
apostle's  heart,  but  he  nevertheless  gives  a  cheery  greeting  to  the  Corinthians.  To  start 
with  a  groan  is  not  propitious.  We  have  sometimes  cause  for  sorrow ;  we  have  always 
cause  for  joy  if  we  are  in  Christ.  To  wave  the  black  flag  is  to  give  but  poor  welcome.  We 
are  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord  always,  and  in  saluting  our  brethren  we  may  well  let  this  joy 
beam  forth.  Glumness  and  dismalness  are  not  the  chief  of  the  Christian  graces,  though 
some  seem  to  tliink  they  are.  We  are  not  looking  forward  to  a,  funeral,  but  to  a  wedding 
— "  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  In  Christian  intercourse  a  little  more  brightnei's 
and  gladness  would  not  be  out  of  place. 

IV.  Christian  salutation  may  well  be  extensive.  We  are  one  family,  and  all 
the  members  have  a  claim  upon  our  good  wishes.  Paul's  greeting  is  not  too  selectivo; 
his  sympathies  go  out  to  all  who  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  Some  are  very  fond 
of  siduting  the  rich,  and  have  no  fondness  for  saluting  the  poor.  One  might  suppose 
that  a  serious  mistake  had  been  made  in  the  non-calling  of  many  wise  and  mighty  and 
noble,  for  some  of  God's  people  seem  to  care  for  no  others.  Paul  sent  an  equal  greeting 
to  the  Ccrinthiaa  believers ;  his  sentiment  was  unaffecttd  by  poverty,  ignorance,  feeblo- 
neM,  or  obscurity.    Our  love  is  apt  to  become  cramped.    The  very  best  of  us  tend  to 


OH.  1.1—51.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.  23 

love  the  lovely  Christian,  and  to  give  the  cold  shoulder  to  the  unlovely.  We  need  more 
of  the  Spirit  of  the  One  who  came  to  help  the  sinful  and  the  unattractive,  and  who 
"  loved  the  world." 

V.  Chbibtian  salutation  shoitld  not  be  empty.  Much  salutation  says  nothing 
ftnd  means  it.  Paul's  salutation  is  very  ample  and  full  of  significance.  He  desires  for 
the  Corinthians  the  grace  or  favour  of  God  and  Christ — the  Divine  love  to  he  manifested 
towards  them.  " In  his  favour  is  life"  (Fs.  xxx'.  5).  All  hlessing  from  God  to  he  their 
portion.  And  peace  as  the  result  of  this — the  inward  assurance  of  the  friendship  of  God, 
that  sin  is  pardoned,  that  "  all  things  are  yours."  Under  the  terms  of  the  apostolic 
greeting  all  good,  whether  pruvidential  or  spiritual,  temporal  or  eternal,  is  included. 

VL  Chbistian  salutation  sbould  bavoub  much  of  Chbist.  1.  Here  Christ  is 
frequently  named ;  hut  in  no  affected  or  canting  way.  It  is  a  pity  that  when  men 
talk  of  Christ  in  friendly  intercourse  they  so  often  hecome  intensely  unnatural.  The 
holy  naturalness  of  Paul  when  talking  of  his  Master  is  refreshing.  2,  Here  is  much  of 
the  spirit  of  Christ.  The  salutation  breathes  forth  love,  tenderness,  unselfishness,  great- 
heartedness,  and  intense  sympathy. — ^H. 

Vers.  1 — ^9. — The  approach  to  rebuke.  The  occasion  of  this  letter  was  largely  fur- 
nished by  the  need  of  rebuke.  The  Corinthian  Church  had  erred  grievously.  To  rebuke 
is  frequently  painful,  but  when  called  for  it  should  not  he  shrunk  from ;  not  to  rebuke 
under  such  circumstances  is  unalloyed  cruelty.  To  rebuke,  often  painful,  is  always 
perilous.  By  maladroitness  we  may  easily  drive  men  from  the  right  instead  of  drawing 
them  to  it.  Unwise  rebuke  adds  to  the  ill.  We  need  to  prepare/or  rebuke  if  when  we 
reach  it  we  would  not  deserve  its  infliction.  Note  the  apostolic  procedure.  We  have 
here  one  of  the  finest  examples  of  preparing  men's  minds  for  well-deserved  censure. 

I.  Reuabe  soue  oenebal  featubes  of  this  pbepabatort  addbess.    We  find  in  it : 
1.  Courtesy.   A  graceful  and  gracious  sahitation.     The  apostle  does  not  rush  into  harsh 
words.     He  shows  no  eagerness  to  condemn.    Roughness  and  rudeness  add  no  strength 
to  admonition.    2.  Affection.    This  pervades  every  sentence,  and  culminates  in  the 
opening  of  the  tenth  verse,  "  Now  I  beseech  you,"  etc.    Love  keeps  in  check  apostolic 
authority  and  righteous  indignation.     We  shall  not  injure  delinquents  by  loving  them 
very  much.    Nothing  can  make  rebuke  more  telling  than  administering  before  and  after 
and  with  it,  unaffected  love.    If  men  see  that  we  are  imwUling  to  rebuke  them,  they  will 
be  very  much  more  likely  to  accept  our  rebuke.     To  enjoy  rebuking  is  to  demonstrate 
our  total  un6tness  for  it.     3.  Candov/r.    The  condemnation  is  not  to  be  wholesale. 
Some  can  see  nothing  but  fault  in  those  who  err,  but  the  apostle  perceives  excellences. 
He  generously  acknowledges  spiritual  attainment  and  endowment.    To  blind  our  eyes 
to  the  good  is  to  make  ourselves  powerless  to  remove  the  bad.    Many  rebukes  have 
worse  than  £dled  through  lack  of  strict  honesty  in  the  rebuker.    The  "  candid  friend  "  has 
often  proved  very  imcandid.    4.  Wisdom.    (1)  He  turns  the  thought  of  the  Corinthians 
to  their  oneness  (yet.  2).    His  message  is  to  them  as  one  people  in  Christ :  "  The  Church 
...  at  Corinth  — not  the  Churches.    The  Chvurch  of  God— not  of  many  leaders.    Pre- 
sently he  will  have  to  censure  them  for  lack  of  imity.    (2)  He  prays  that  they  may  have 
more  "  grace."    Soon  he  will  show  that  they  need  it.    The  Church  has  been  boasting  of 
its  man-power ;  Paul  thinks  its  great  need  is  God-power — enlightenment,  guidance,  help 
firom  above.    (3)  He  desires  that  they  may  have  "  peace  "  from  God — not  without  an  eye 
to  their  divirions  and  quarrels.   He  is  wisely  preparing  his  way.  5.  Absence  of  pomposity 
and  of  assumption  of  superiority.    It  is  not  the  great  man  speakmg  to  the  infinitesimal ; 
nor  the  spotless  to  the  utterly  depr.ived.    Paul  gets  as  near  to  the  Corinthians  as  he 
can.    He  seems  to  remember  that  liis  Master  was  made  "  in  the  likeness  of  men  "  (PhU. 
ii.  7).    "  Come  not  near  to  me,  for  I  am  holier  than  thou,"  is  likely  to  make  people  keep 
their  distance  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  us  or  our  wordL    Not  without  wise 
hvmiility  has  "  Sosthenes  our  brother  "  a  place  in  the  salutation.    6.  Yet  the  apostolia 
authority  is  not  lost  sight  of.    It  may  be  well  to  show  that  we  are  entitled  to  rebuke^ 
that  we  are  not  assuming  an  office  to  which  we  have  no  claim.    Rebukes  should  come 
from  projier  quarters.    Paul  was  the  "  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  through  the  will  of  God." 
It  was  manifestly  within  his  province  to  point  out  blemishes  in  the  Christian  Church 
and  to  reprove  evil-doers. 

TT.  Kon  HOW  EABNE8TLT  HE   8TBIVK8  TO  TUBN  THEIB  THOUGHTS  TO  QOD  AHB  W 


24  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAJiS.    [oh.  1. 1— 3t 


Chbwt.  This  is,  perhaps,  the  most  striking  feature  of  these  introductory  verses.  Read 
the  passage  and  nota  tht  extraordinary  number  of  times  mtntinn  is  made  of  God  and 
of  Christ.  The  connection  of  this  with  the  coming  rehiike  is  apparent.  The  Corin- 
thians have  forgotten  God,  and  therefore  they  have  gone  astray.  Christ  has  hecoma 
less  and  less  to  tliem,  and  so  they  have  sinned  more  and  more.  We  quarrel  with  one 
another  very  easUy  when  we  get  away  from  our  Master.  We  gi-ow  carnal  swiftly  when 
Godhegins  to  pass  out  of  our  thoughts.  With  heavenly  wisdom  the  apostle ^oois  the 
minds  of  the  Corinthians  with  thoughts  of  God  and  of  Christ.  If  they  can  he  brought 
into  the  light  of  the  Divine  presence  they  will  see  their  con-uption,  and  standing  once 
again  before  Jehovah  they  will  be  made  ready  to  receive  and  not  to  resent  a  deserved 
and  much-needed  rebuke.  If  they  can  be  brought  again  well  within  the  attractive 
influence  of  the  marvellous  self-sacrifice  and  love  of  their  Lord,  self-will  will  become 
crucified,  pride  humbled,  and  grateful  life  and  service  compelled.  Note  more  particu- 
larly :  1.  The  apostle  traces  his  apostleship  to  Chiist  and  Ood.  He  stands  before  the 
Corinthians  as  the  appointed  representative  of  their  Lord.  The  position  he  assumes 
was  given  to  him  by  Christ  through  the  will  of  God.  We  are  what  Cljrist  makes  us. 
2.  They  are  the  Church  of  Ood,  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  their  oneness  with  all 
other  Christians  is  through  Christ  (ver.  2).  3.  All  that  they  have  received,  and  in 
which  they  glory  so  much,  has  come  from  Ood  and  from  Christ  (vers.  4 — (i).  4.  Their 
right  position  is  one  of  waiting  for  the  revelation  of  Christ  (ver.  7).  5.  Their  con- 
tinuance in  the  faith  and  their  perfection  at  last  are  made  to  depend  upon  Christ.  6. 
At  first  they  were  called  by  Ood  into  the  fellowship  of  Christ.  Memories  of  conversion- 
time  are  potent.  Paul  thus  strives  in  every  way  to  lake  the  Corinthians  to  their  Father 
and  to  their  Lord.  The  battle  of  Christian  rebuke  is  half  won  when  gracious  thoughts 
of  God  and  Christ  are  revived.  Erring  Christians  are  likely  to  be  brought  to  their 
senses  wheu  they  are  brought  to  their  Master. 

III.  The  apostle  eeminds  his  keadebs  of  certain  thinos,  and  in  this  way 
PBEPABES  THEM  TOR  WHAT  IS  TO  FOLLOW.  1.  Their  Christian  profession.  They  are 
sanctified  or  supposed  to  be.  They  are  known  as  "  saints,"  and  therefore  should  live  as 
such.  2.  Past  mei-cies,privile(/es,  honours.  (Vers.  4 — 7.)  These  are  so  many  arguments 
to  seek  the  Divine  pleasure  and  not  their  own.  And  this  can  be  done  only  by  renounc- 
ing the  evil  and  cleaving  to  the  good.  All  the  redeemed  are  laid  under  infinite  obliga- 
tion to  live  unto  the  Lord.  3.  God's  faithfulness  to  them.  (Ver.  9.)  A  great  aigument 
that  they  should  be  exemplary  towards  him  and  his  kingdom.  4.  IVhat  they  are  look- 
ing forward  to.  (Ver.  7.)  Soon  they  will  be  in  the  visible  presence  of  Christ.  We  are 
not  far  from  the  judgment.  Well  may  we  bear  rebuke  here,  that  we  may  escape  rebuke 
there. — H. 

Vers.  10 — 17. — Divisions  in  the  Church.  How  numerous  these  have  been  since  Paul 
wrote  I  How  many  of  them  springing  directly  from  human  weakness,  folly,  or  wicked- 
ness 1  How  alien  to  the  true  spirit  of  Christianity,  and  to  the  prayer  of  Christ — ".That 
they  all  may  be  one  "  I 

L  A  GREAT  EVIL.  Cause  of:  1.  Weakness.  Co-operation  hindered.  Strength 
expended  in  opposing  each  other  instead  of  sin  and  Satan.  Great  opportunity  offered 
for  Satanic  attack.  Unity  is  strength  ;  division  is  weakness.  2.  Scandal.  The  con- 
tempt of  the  world  is  not  only  experienced,  but  largely  deserved.  The  Head  of  the  Church 
is  dishonoured.  The  renovator  Of  society  shows  its  own  need  of  renovation.  Satan  has 
achieved  a  triumph  in  the  very  Church  founded  to  overthrow  him.  3.  Unchristian 
feeling.  Unity  begets  more  love ;  division  more  hate.  Church  quarrels  have  often 
proved  most  bitter.  A  united  Church  is  an  Elim,  a  divided  Church  a  Marah.  4.  Hin- 
drance to  unbelievers.  Conversions  are  stayed  by  Church  divisions.  Men  seeking  peace 
hesitate  to  cast  in  their  lot  with  those  who  are  flying  at  one  another's  throats.  The 
strait  gate  is  sometimes  quite  blocked  up  by  bickering,  quarrelling  Christians.  A 
crucifiM  Christ  invites,  and  a  divided  Church  repels,  the  sinner.  Men  can  find  plenty 
of  division,  esti  angement,  hate,  and  fight  in  the  world,  without  troubling  to  enter  the 
Church.  Church  division  is  a  serious  stumbling-block  to  the  unbeliever,  and  often 
causes  him  to  continue  an  unbeliever. 

II.  Arise  from  various  causes.  1.  Frequently,  as  among  some  at  Corinth, /rom 
favouritiem  towards  leaders  in  the  Church.    This  favouritism  may  be :  (1)  In  respect  o/ 


a&Ll— 31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHlANa  25 

penonal  qualities  or  position.  Apolloswas  eloquent  and  captivating ;  Paul  spiritual  and 
simple ;  Cephas  had  peculiar  charm  through  his  long  association  with  Christ,  and 
represented  the  Jewish  element  to  the  minds  of  the  Corinthians.  Instead  of  enjoying 
all  the  teachers  in  common,  folly  suggrsted  division  and  mimopoly,  and  thus  loss  all 
round.  (2)  In  respect  of  real  or  supposed  doctrinal  tendencies.  Some  at  Corinth, 
having  a  love  for  "  wisdom  of  words''  and  the  philoso|ihies  of  men,  would  with  their  old 
and  only  half-discarded  beliefs  pleading  powerfully,  incline  towards  the  brilliant  scholar 
of  Alexandria,  who  might  seem  to  favour  a  more  rationalistic  system  than  that  of 
Paul.  Others,  with  Jewish  prejudices  still  strong,  might  shelter  themselves  under  the 
name  of  Cephas,  as  they  attempted  to  combine  Christianity  and  Judaism  by  a  large 
sacrifice  of  the  former.  Then,  as  now,  raen  asked  themselves  what  doctrines  they  liked, 
and  held  to  these.  Instead  of  seeking  "  the  mind  of  the  Lord,"  we  are  very  prone  to  seek 
our  own  minds ;  and  then,  what  wonder  if  there  be  "  divisions  among  us "  ?  If  truth 
were  mmght  instead  of  manufartured,  how  much  more  unity  of  doctrine  and  practice 
there  would  be  in  the  Church  of  Christ !  (3)  Through  the  carnal  disposition  to  exalt 
the  servant  unduly,  losing  sight  of  the  Master.  It  is  easier  tofoUnw  men  than  to  follow 
Ghrist.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  the  heathen  in  us ;  we  love  to  have  a  god  whom  we 
can  see.  We  are  much  like  the  Israelites  when  Moses  went  up  into  the  mount ;  and  it 
is  hot,  therefore,  very  surprising  if  we  soon  discover  that  our  new  teacher  and  guide  is  a 
gorgeous  and  resplendent  calf.  Only  Christ  is  fit  to  be  supreme  in  our  life.  Directly 
we  put  men  in  his  place,  we  begin  to  follow  that  which  is  impeifect,  and  we  draw  its 
imperfection  upon  and  into  ourselves.  2.  Sometimes,  as  with  one  section  at  Corinth, 
from  repudiation  of  all  earthly  leadi-rs.  "  We  are  not  of  Paul,  or  of  Apollos,  or  of  Cephas ; 
we  are  of  Christ."  This  position  has  been  assumed  in  later  times.  It  possesses  not 
a  little  plausibility,  but  investigation  discloses  its  true  character.  One  has  well  said  of 
the  Corinthian  section,  "  It  was  in  no  Christian  spirit  that  they  set  up  their  claim  to  be 
of  Christ."  That  love  to  Christ  is  more  than  suspicious  which  ignores  his  accredited 
servants.  It  is  no  great  compliment  to  a  king  to  reject  his  ambassador.  The  apostle 
could  say,  "  We  are  ambassadors  for  Christ."  Christ  has  a  ministry  which  is  not  to  be 
ignored.  As  Christ's  servants  are  never  to  be  put  in  Christ's  place,  so  the  place  of 
Christ's  servants  is  not  to  te  made  void.  Not  improbably  the.se  who  claimed  to  be  "  of 
Christ "  claimed  to  be  the  only  Christians  in  Corinth.  It  is  possible  to  cry,  "  Lord, 
Lord! "  very  loudly,  and  to  have  none  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  That  man  could  know 
nothing  truly  of  Christ  who  failed  to  rtcognize  in  the  Apostle  Paul  a  true  servant  of 
the  great  Master. 

III.  How  TO  BE  DEALT  WITH.  1.  In  a  Spirit  of  meekness.  "  I  leseech  you  ' — ^not  "  I 
comwand  you."  Assumption  and  arrogance  widen  the  breach.  2.  In  love.  "Brethren" 
— not  reprobates,  outcusts,  heretics.  Hard  words  make  hard  hearts.  3.  With  dis- 
cretion. Paxil  shows  discretion  in  not  mentioning  Cephas  or  Apollos  after  ver.  12.  He 
does  not  object  more  to  the  parties  under  their  names  than  to  the  one  under  his  own. 
It  is  most  suggestive  that  he  appears  to  castigate  his  own  party  chiefly.  He  objected  to 
a\l  parties.  For  himself,  he  viantei  only  his  legitimate  position.  To  rebuke  our  own 
followers  for  following  us  unduly  and  factiously  is  indeed  a  sign  of  grace  in  the  heart, 
and  of  heavenly  wisdom  too.  4.  With  candour.  "  Concealment  and  mystery  sow 
distrust  and  destroy  love."  5.  By  turning  thoughts  towards  Christ.  A  hidden  Christ 
makes  a  divided  Church.  If  we  saw  the  Master  more  clearly,  we  should  see  the  right 
place  of  the  servants  better.  Paul  beseeches,  not  for  his  own  sake,  but  for  Christ's  sake. 
lie  did  not  fear  that  this  would  encourage  those  who  said,  "  We  are  of  Christ."  He 
showed  them  the  real  Christ.  This  was  the  best  medicine  for  their  spiritual  ailment. 
They  had  been  making  a  Ghrist  to  go  before  them.  Many  false  Christs  are  wor- 
shipped and  served.  6.  By  argument.  The  reasonableness  of  unity.  Paul  urges  that 
Christ  is  not  and  cannot  be  divided,  and  that  if  the  Corinthians  are  Christ's,  they  should 
not  be  divided  either.  As  there  is  only  one  Head  of  the  Oliuroh,  there  should  be  only 
one  body.  By  divisions  Christ  will  seem  to  be  rent  asunder.  Teachers  are  not  centres 
af  unity ;  for  perfect  unity  there  can  be  but  one  centre — that  is,  Christ.  7.  By  taking 
a  blameless  course  one's  self.  Paul  will  do  notliing  to  foster  division.  In  his  condem- 
nation, as  we  have  seen,  he  sacrifices  his  own  party  first,  and  ridicules  the  idea  of  the 
undue  exaltation  of  himself :  "  Was  Paul  crucified  for  you?  "  Many  try  to  heal  Church 
divisions  by  abasing  their  opponents  and  exalting  themselves.     Paul  is  singularly  cleai 


2«  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa    [oh.  i.  1—31. 

in  this  matter ;  he  sharply  rebukes  those  who  would  transform  Paul  into  Pope,  Avoid- 
ing every  occasion  of  increasing  the  evil,  he  rejoices  that  he  has  not  baptized  many 
Corinthians,  lest  this  should  be  wrested  into  an  attempt  to  acquire  pre-eminence,  and 
consequently  dishonour  fall  upon  the  pre-eminent  Christ.  Some  Church  divisions  may 
seem  necessary :  for  example,  when  professors  walk  disorderly  or  embrace  erroneous 
views.  It  may  be  then  our  duty  to  separate ;  yet  we  should  preserve  the  spirit  of  charity, 
and  seek  to  be  most  loyal  to  Christ.  But  how  many  Church  divisions  are  more  or  less 
after  the  Corinthian  type  1 — H. 

Vera.  17 — 25. — JTft«  preaching  of  the  cron,  I.  The  cross  is  to  bb  preached.  The 
gospel  cannot  be  preached  unless  the  cross  is.  The  cross  is  the  central  fact.  The  con- 
verging point  of  the  Scriptures  is  found  in  "  Christ  crucified."  Without  the  cross 
Christianity  becomes  meaningless  and  powerless.  Salvation  and  the  cross  are  indis- 
solubly  linked :  the  cross  speaks  of  the  shedding  of  blood,  "  and  without  shedding  of 
blood  is  no  remission  "  (Heb.  ix.  22). 

II.  The  cnoss  is  to  be  plainly  preached.  As  "  not  many  wise  "  are  called,  it  is 
but  reasonable  that  the  unwise  and  simple-minded  should  be  specially  borne  in  mind. 
The  offence  of  the  cross  is  not  to  be  lessened  by  "  wisdom  of  words."  Knowledge  of 
the  meaning  of  the  cross  is  the  deepest  need  of  the  world ;  all  things  should  be  sub- 
ordinated to  conveying  that  knowledge  with  utmost  clearness  and  fulness.  Men  can- 
not be  saved  by  eloquence,  or  philosophy,  or  learning ;  they  can  by  the  cross.  "  Tlie 
great  preachers  have  been  natural  orators,  not  rhetoricians  or  actors."  The  greatest  care 
is  necessary  lest,  by  the  character  of  our  preaching,  the  cross  of  Christ  should  be  made 
of  none  effect.  Some  preaching  seems  designed  for  the  very  purpose,  and  succeeds 
deplorably. 

III.  The  cross  is  to  be  preached,  notwithstanding  its  unfavourable  reception. 
Some,  indeed,  receive  it  with  all  gladness,  but  our  obligation  to  preach  it  is  not  dependent 
upon  its  reception.  We  may  always  remember  that  the  cross  is  what  men  want,  though 
it  may  not  be  what  they  wish.     1.  To  the  Jew  the  cross  was  a  stumbling-block.     He 

.  looked  rather  for  a  military  than  for  a  martyr  Messiah — one  who  would  deliver  by 
sound  of  trumpet  and  sword,  not  hj  ignominy  and  death.  If  he  is  to  believe,  he  must 
have  signs  from  heaven  (ver.  22),  miraculous  interventions,  and  not  a  reiteration  of  the 
event  which  was  the  greatest  scandal  to  his  mind,  and  most  grievously  shocked  his 
prejudices  and  anticipations.  The  Jew  put  the  cross  very  low  down.  We  can  make 
anything  into  a  stumbling-block  if  we  will  only  put  it  low  enough.  2.  To  the  Greek 
the  cross  seemed  fooli-huess.  That  the  great  revelation  for  which  he  and  the  world  had 
been  looking  so  long  should  come  through  a  crucified  Jew,  and  be  most  closely  asso- 
ciated with  that  crucifixion  itself,  appeared  to  him  too  absurd.  He  would  have  wel- 
comed a  philosopher  with  a  new  philosophy.  He  sought  after  wisdom — that  is,  his 
wisdom.  In  the  cross  there  was  too  profound  a  wisdom  for  even  his  keen  eye  to 
discern,  and  so  he  called  it  folly.  He  thought  the  cross  was  shallow,  because  he  was 
shallow  himself,  though  he  little  suspected  it.  Further,  he  desired  philosophic  demon- 
stration about  matters  of  religion,  and  had  a  great  horror  of  "faith."  And  his  pride 
was  wounderl  (and  that  which  wounds  our  pride  is  always  folly).  That  all  must  come 
to  God  by  the  same  way,  making  a  similar  confession  of  sin  and  impotence,  was  in 
conflict  vvi;h  his  most  cherished  ideas.  The  approach  of  barbarians  to  the  cross  made 
it  a  way  of  foolishness  to  the  Greek.     There  are  many  "  Greeks  "  now. 

IV.  TuE  cross  IB  to  be  preached  with  the  knowledge  that  rr  operates  as  a 
great  test  of  condition.  The  character  of  its  reception  indicates  the  condition  of 
those  who  hear.  To  some  it  is  foolishness — but  only  to  those  that  ara  perishing. 
Only  to  them!  They  are  so  utterly  blind  that  the  brightness  of  the  cross  is  blackness! 
To  others  it  is  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God — ^and  they  are  the  saved.  They 
are  "  both  Jews  and  Greeks  "  (v  er.  24).  The  new  nature  has  conquered  the  old.  AU 
is  changed  when  the  heart  is.  Tliese  Jews  sought  for  power;  these  Greeks  sought  for 
wisdom;  and  here  both  were  found  when  Jew  and  Greek  responded  to  the  Divine  call 
1.  We  may  well  ask  ourselves— What  is  the  cross  to  us  ?  The  answer  will  indicate 
whether  we  are  perishing  or  being  saved.  The  preaching  of  the  cross  to  us  is  a  personal 
teat.  2,  In  preaching  the  cross,  we  should  strive  and  pray  that  it  may  not  be  foolish- 
new  to  our  bearers,  knowing  what  this  would  indicate.    3.  In  preaching  the  crosa,  wt 


te.  l1— 31.]    Tfite  flEST  EKSTLE  TO  TflE  COMNTHlANa  H 

mu»t  not  be  too  disconcerted  if  men  receive  onr  message  as  one  of  foolishness.  Thia 
will  not  indicate  faultiness  ia  the  cross,  but  in  those  who  hear  its  story,  though  of 
course  there  may  be  faultiness  in  our  mode  of  telling  that  story. 

V.  The  cross  is  to  be  preached  with  the  remembbakcbi  of  this  failure  op 
EARTHLY  WISDOM.  Anclcut  schemes  of  philosoi)her.s  having  some  external  indication  of 
wisdom,  what  has  become  of  them  ?  "  Where  is  the  wise  ?  "  etc.  Whore  are  the  scribes 
and  their  improvements  upon  the  Divine  Law?  God  has  made  in  the  course  of  the  ages 
all  such  "  wisdom  "  to  become  folly — recognized  folly,  "  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not 
God."  Human  wisdom  gave  the  world  no  more  piety,  but  much  more  pride.  Human 
wisdom  lias  failed  most  egrogiously  all  along  the  line  to  redeem  and  regenerate  men. 
Calvin  bluntly  says,  "We  must  here  carefully  notice  these  two  things — that  the 
knowledge  of  all  the  sciences  is  mere  smoke  where  the  heavenly  science  is  wanting,  and 
man  with  all  his  acuteness  is  as  stupid  for  obtaining  of  himself  a  knowledge  of  the 
mysteries  of  God  as  an  ass  is  unqualified  for  understanding  musical  harmonies."  If 
the  cross  fails,  failure  is  universal. — H. 

Vers.  26 — 29. — The  humble  status  of  the  Church,  I.  The  fact.  Not  many  wise  after 
the  flesh,  mighty,  nuble,  numbered  amongst  the  adherents  of  Christianity.  This  was 
true  in  apostolic  days ;  it  is  largely  true  in  our  own.  Christianity  was  not  established 
by  world-power.  The  Founder  and  his  disciples  were  poor  and  of  humble  social  position, 
and  in  the  ranks  of  the  early  Christians  were  comparatively  few  possessing  means, 
learning,  or  rank.  Christianity  has  not  been  preserved  or  promulgated  by  world-power. 
This  has  sometimes  been  called  to  its  aid,  but  the  "  call "  has  often  been  of  man  rather 
than  of  God.  The  "  aid "  has  frequently  been  injury.  The  "  arm  of  flesh "  has 
hindered  rather  than  helped.  The  Church  skiiild  not  snatch  at  world-power ;  this  is  not 
her  strength.  Sanctified  learning,  influence,  and  position  are  of  great  service ;  but  these 
things  in  themselves,  unsanctified,  whilst  to  carnal  judgment  promising  most  signal 
•dvantage,  often  operate  as  an  unmitigated  curse. — We  may  inquire  into  the  cause  of 
the  exclusion  as  arising  from  free-will.  And  we  may  be  sure  that  no  calling  by  God 
violates  human  responsibility.  1.  The  wise  after  the  flesh.  These,  like  the  Greeks  (ver. 
22),  are  often  iso  filled  with  human  wisdom  as  not  to  care  for  Divine — so  absorbed  by 
seeking  to  know  earthly  things  as  to  have  little  leisure  for  heavenly.  Pride  is  fostered, 
and  pride  bars  the  way  to  Christ  and  to  God.  It  is  difficult  for  a  very  "  wise  "  man  to 
become  "  as  a  little  child  "  (Luke  xviii.  17).  "  Heaven's  gates  are  not  so  highly  arched 
as  princes'  palaces  ;  they  who  enter  there  must  go  upon  their  knees."  The  wise  after 
the  flesh  are  apt  to  have  stiff  legs.  When  we  seek  earthly  wisdom  we  should  have 
a  care  of  its  tendency.  Human  knowledge  is  good,  but  it  need  be  kept  in  its  proper 
place,  and  that  is  not  the  first  place.  2.  The  mighty.  Often  subjects  of  adulation;  have 
so  many  at  their  feet  that  they  find  it  difficult  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  Jesr.s.  Excessive  self- 
reliance  does  not  encourage  Christ-reliance.  A  sense  of  sufiiciency  is  very  antagonistic 
to  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  The  mighty  are  wont  to  be  too  mighty,  so  that 
they  can  do  without  Christ.  The  mighty  know  their  might,  whereas  what  men  need 
is  to  know  their  weakness.  3.  The  noble.  High  places  are  slippery.  The  command 
of  temptations  is  great.  Wealth,  which  often  accomjianies  position,  multiplies  snares. 
Lofty  station  often  begets  a  sense  of  excellence ;  but  to  enter  the  kingdom  we  need  to 
feel  our  lack  of  excellence.  It  is  easy  to  be  great  among  men  and  very  little  before 
God.  Earthly  nobility  and  heavenly  are  two  orders — often  in  startling  contrast.  Note: 
Men  strive  eagerly  to  be  wise  after  the  flesh,  mighty,  noble,  wealthy — and  all  the.while 
they  may  be  building  barriers  between  themselves  and  God.  How  well  to  commit  our 
ways  to  the  guidance  of  the  unerring  wisdom  of  Ood ;  to  ask  him  to  "choose  our 
inheritance  for  us"  (Ps.  xlvii.  4);  to  give  or  withhold  as  he  sees  bestl 

II.  The  puepose.  Regarding  the  Church  as  weak  and  uninfluential,  we  might  feel 
some  despondency  as  to  its  future.  "  How  is  Christianity  to  get  on  ?  "  might  escape  our 
lips.  So  men  are  often  very  anxious  to  take  care  of  Christianity  instead  of  being  very 
anxious  that  Christianity  should  take  care  of  them.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  idea  of 
our  defending  the  faith  is  monstrous  and  absurd— it  is  not  we  who  defend  the  faith.  It  is 
the  faith  that  defends  us.  The  matter  is  cleared  by  the  revelation  of  a  Divine  purpose. 
God  designed :  1.  To  show  his  power.  He  would  prove  that  feeble  agencies  in  his 
hands  are  infinitely  more  mighty  than  the  greatest  and  most  influential  not  so  placed. 


28  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  l  1— 3L 


A  "bnifsed  reed"  in  his  hand  is  more  than  »  sword  in  another's.  Men  think  that 
"  things  seen  "  are  powerful ;  that  which  is  unseen  is  much  more  so.  The  foolish  things 
confounded  the  wise,  the  weak  things  the  mighty,  the  base  and  despised  things  the 
highly  esteemed, — because  Ood  was  in  the  former  and  not  in  the  latter.  How  this  was 
illustrated  in  the  early  Church !— the  foolishness  of  preaching  breaking:  down  everywhere 
the  "wise"  philosophic  systems;  thfl  weak  disci|iles  triumphing  over  the  marshaUed 
might  of  Rome ;  a  Church,  boasting  as  its  Founder  a  crucified  peasant,  and  possessing 
little  wealth,  influence,  or  human  learning,  spreading  on  all  hands,  and  destroying 
idolatries  venerable  in  age  and  powerful  in  adherents.  "  God  moves  in  a  mysterious 
way."  It  is  Ood  moving.  A  Church  is  made,  not  by  the  men  who  come  into  it,  but  by 
the  Ood  who  comes  into  it.  The  Church  needs  more  divinity.  Here  is  solace  for  the 
consciously  weak.  We  cry,  "Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things?"  There  is  but  one 
answer— God]  2.  To  humble  human  pride.  "That  no  flesh  should  glory  in  his 
presence."  The  pride  of  man  budded  at  the  Fall.  The  all-successful  stratagem  took  this 
form:  "  Ye  shall  be  as  gods."  This  pride  has  been  the  curse  of  man's  existence — it  has 
separated  him  Irom  God,  and  led  to  a  fearful  multiplication  of  transgression.  When 
God  works  in  man,  a  first  effect  is  the  abasement  of  pride.  The  pride  of  man  which 
is  altogether  of  the  devil,  has  persuaded  man  that  he  is  Ood.  God,  in  the  formation 
and  continuance  of  his  Church  on  earth,  dealt  a  deadly  blow  against  human  pride,  and 
showed  how  powerless  were  the  mightiest  things  of. man  when  confronted  with  Divine 
power  working  through  the  weakest.  The  lesson  is  that  henceforth  we  are  not  to 
glory  in  men — neither  in  ourselves  nor  in  others,  but  we  are  to  glory  in  the  Lord. 
When  we  are  humbled  at  his  feet,  we  are  in  our  right  posture  ;  when  we  acknowledge 
that  with  him  alone  are  might  and  dominion  and  true  wisdom,  we  are  in  our  right 
minds. — H. 

Ver.  80. —  What  Christ  is  to  the  believer.  What  is  Christ  to  «s  f  This  is  a  great,  an 
all-important  question.  The  answer  to  it  is  an  answer  to  all  vital  questions  respecting 
our  present  and  future.  To  God,  Christ  is  much  ;  to  the  angels,  much ;  to  many  men, 
nothing — a  mere  "root  out  of  a  dry  ground"  (Isa.  liii.  2).  What  to  us?  To  the 
believer  Christ  is — 

I.  Wisdom.  This  is  the  supply  of  a  great  want,  for  though  in  the  world  there  is  much 
talk  of  wisdom,  there  is  but  little  possession.  Every  philosopher  has  come  with  the 
promise  of  wisdom,  but  howfew  with  the  fulfilment!  'I'he  great  questions  of  life  have 
found  no  satisfactory  answers  in  even  the  profoundest  human  systems.  But  Christ 
is  made  to  us  the  truest  wisdom.  From  him  we  learn  what  to  choose,  reject,  pursue, 
enjoy,  in  daily  life.  BlB  tesiches  how  to  live.  He  is  the  Revealer  of  God.  We  have  glim- 
merings of  the  Divine  Being,  but  we  know  him  ncit  until  we  know  him  through  Christ. 
"  Neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Father,  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son 
will  reveal  him  "  (Matt.  xi.  27).  He  makes  us  wise  in  a  true  knowledge  of  God. 
Through  him  we  are  made  wise  unto  salvation.  He  discloses  to  us  the  future,  and  at 
the  same  time  he  instructs  us  in  the  fitting  preparation  for  it.  The  closer  our  union  with 
Christ,  the  wiser  shall  we  become ;  the  more  of  Christ  we  have,  the  more  of  wisdom  we 
have.  When  the  union  is  complete,  we  shall  know  even  as  we  are  known.  This  is  a 
wisdom  which  will  ndt  come  to  nought  (ch.  ii.  6). 

II.  Righteousness.  Our  natural  state  is  sinful;  our  righteousnesses  as  "filthy 
rags,"  that  is, complete  unrighteousne.ss.  But  when  we  receive  Christ,  his  righteousness 
is  imputed  to  us ;  as  our  Representative,  the  second  Adam,  he  was  righteous /or  us  in 
his  obedience  to  the  Divine  Law,  and  satisfied  the  claims  of  Divine  justice  in  his  death. 
So  we  cry,  "The  Lord  our  Righteousness."  He  took  our  sins  and  gave  us  his  righteous- 
ness. This  righteovisness  is  (1)  perfect,  (2)  accepted  by  God,  and  thus  (3)  of  justify- 
ing efficacy. 

III.  Sanctificatiok.  We  need  not  only  righteousness  imputed,  but  righteousness 
realized;  not  only  justification,  but  purification,  regeneration ;  not  only  a  vital  alteration 
in  our  relation  to  God,  but  a  vital  alteration  in  ourselves.  "  Verily,  verily,  1  say  unto 
thee,  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (John  iii.  3). 
Through  Christ  we  receive  the  Divine  Spirit,  who  renews  us  and  conforms  us  to  Christ. 
He  transforms  us  into  the  likeness  of  Christ,  and  when  our  sanctification  is  complete,  wo 
shall  b«  "  Like  him."     "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature  "  (2  Cor.  v.  17). 


CB.  1. 1—31.]    THE  FUIST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  29 

IV.  Bedemptioh.  Christ  redeems  us  from  the  curse  of  sin,  but  here  referenoe  is  to  the 
final  redemptioa  from  corruption,  pain,  peril,  sorrow,  death,  the  fiuits  of  sin,  which  we 
shall  experience  at  last  if  we  are  Christ's.  This  redemption  includes  the  redemption  of 
the  body.  How  bright  is  the  believer's  prospect !  Well  may  he  "  glory  in  the  Lord." 
Note :  1.  Christ  is  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctiflcation,  and  redemption,  only  to  those 
who  are  in  him.  To  be  in  Christ  is  to  believe  in  him,  to  love  him,  to  serve  him,  to 
follow  him.  2.  It  is  through  God,  of  Divine  grace  alone,  that  we  can  be  in  Christ : 
"  Of  htm  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus."  God  gave  Christ;  God  calls  us  to  find  salvation  and 
all  blessing  in  Christ;  and  faith  itself  is  the  gift  of  God  (Eph.  ii.  8).  As  no  man  ooineth 
unto  the  Father  but  by  the  Son  (Juhn  xiv.  6},  so  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Son  but  by 
the  Father  (John  vi.  44).  All  the  praise  of  our  salvation  must  be  rendered  to  God : 
"  According  as  it  is  written,  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord." — ^H. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  salutation.  As  usual  in  Paul's  Epistles,  this  preface  contain!  the 
name  of  the  writer,  the  persons  addressed,  and  a  prayer  for  blessing.     We  have — 

I.  Apostolic  authority.  Paul's  authority  as  an  apostle  was  disparaged  by  some  at 
Corinth,  who  regarded  him  as  inferior  to  the  twelve.  Each  of  the  oppusiug  tactions  had 
its  favourite  teacher  (ver.  12),  and  party  spirit  led  them  to  decry  all  but  their  own. 
In  opposition  to  this,  tne  apostle  opens  his  letter  by  presenting  his  credentials.  As  an 
apostle,  he  was:  1.  Called.  He  had  not  taken  this  office  of  himself.  2.  Called  by  Jesus 
Christ.  He  had  not  been  elected  by  the  Church,  nor  commissioned  by  any  of  the  twelve, 
but  had  been  directly  appointed  and  consecrated  by  the  Lord  himself.  "  Not  from  men, 
neither  through  man,  but  through  Jesus  Christ,  and  God  the  Father"  (Gal.  i.  1). 
3.  Called  through  the  will  of  Oud.  This  is  the  ultimate  ground.  His  apostleship  rests 
on  Divine  authority.  In  thus  magnifying  his  of&ce  (Bom.  xi.  13),  Paul  shows  his  own 
humility.  Learn :  (1)  Every  true  worker  has  a  call  tu  his  work.  This  is  true  of  secular 
as  of  spiritual  work.  Natural  aptitude,  hereditary  position,  providential  circumstances, 
may  clearly  indicate  to  each  man  his  calling.  For  spiritual  office  there  must  be  a  spiritual 
call — the  call  of  Christ.  What  mischief  is  done  in  the  Church  and  in  the  world  by  men 
intruding  into  office  without  a  calll  (2)  The  consciousness  of  this  call  is  a  source  oj 
strength.  Let  a  man  be  assured  that  ho  is  doing  the  work  assigned  him  by  God,  and 
nothing  will  stand  before  him  ;  but  if  he  doubts,  he  is  weak.  The  apostle,  the  preacher, 
the  missionary,  the  teacher,  need  above  all  to  have  this  assurance.  (3)  Look  well  to 
the  credentials  of  all  that  profess  to  speak  in  the  Name  of  Christ.  "  Prove  the  spirits, 
whether  they  are  of  God  '*  (1  John  iv.  1).  To  follow  a  false  prophet  is  as  dangerous  as 
the  refusal  to  listen  to  a  true  one. 

U.  Mabes  of  the  Church.  The  description  of  those  to  whom  Paul  writes  gives 
ua  some  notes  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  Its  members  are :  1.  Called.  This  designa- 
tion is  implied  in  the  word  translated  "  Church  "  {iKK\ii<ria),  which  is  the  body  of  those 
that  have  been  called, out  from  the  world.  There  is  an  outer  and  an  inner  call — the 
invitation  of  the  gospel  addressed  to  all,  and  the  effectual  call  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
compliance  with  which  the  sinner  arises  and  comes  to  Christ.  This  last  is  the  call 
referred  to  here.  Every  believer  has  come  out  from  his  old  position  in  obedience  to  a 
Divine  summons.  The  work  of  grace  in  the  heart  is  not  a  tiling  of  constraint.  It  is 
a  call  addressed  to  men  with  such  sweetly  persuasive  power  that  they  cannot  but  come 
to  him  who  calls  (comp.  ver.  9 ;  2  Tim.  i.  9 ;  Heb.  ix.  15  ;  1  Pet.  v.  10).  2.  Conse- 
crated. This  is  the  root-thought  in  the  words  "sanctify"  and  "saints."  The 
believer  is  separated  from  the  world  by  the  Divine  call  and  set  apart  for  God.  Israel 
was  the  people  of  Jehovah,  sacred  to  him.  Animals  devoted  in  sacrifice  could  never  be 
turned  to  any  common  use.  Even  so  Christians  are  "not  their  own"  (oh.  v.  19,  20), 
but  "  living  sacrifices  "  unto  God  (Kom.  xii^  1).  They  are  "  an  elect  race,  a  royal 
priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  people  for  God's  own  possession  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  What  a 
powerful  factor  in  Christian  life  should  this  thought  of  consecration  be  1  Devoted  in 
5hrist  Jesus  unto  God  1  3,  Eoly.  This  follows  naturally  from  the  foregoing  mark. 
Consecration  and  holiness  are  the  elements  of  sanctiflcation.  Believers  are  called  to 
holiness  (1  Pet.  i.  15).  They  are  separated  from  the  world  in  standing  that  they  may 
be  separated  from  it  in  character  (2  Cor.  vi.  14 — 18).  The  Church  at  Corinth  existed 
in  the  midst  of  a  community  that  was  fearfully  corrupt.  How  significant  for  them 
these  marks  of  consecration  and  holiness  I    Their  Christian  life  could  not  be  safe  ii 


BO  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [cm.  1. 1—31 


they  did  not  hold  themselves  aloof  from  the  evil  around  them,  and  regard  themselvei 
as  holy  unto  the  Lord.  Believers  now,  as  then,  must  keep  themselves  "  unspotted  from 
the  world,"  for  the  sake  of  their  spiritual  health  and  their  mission  as  the  "  salt  of  the 
earth."  4.  Prayerful.  They  "  call  upon  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  They 
worship  him  as  Lord.  This  is  the  distinguishing  mark  of  Christians  everywhere. 
They  "  honour  tlie  Son  even  as  they  honour  the  Father"  (John  v.  23).  The  believer 
is  a  man  of  prayer.  Jesus  Christ  is  to  him  a  living  Presence,  near  to  hear  and  help. 
He  worships  him  in  the  manifested  glory  of  bis  person  and  perfection  of  his  work.  A 
prayerless  Christian  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  6.  One  in  a  common  Lord.  The 
Chui'ch  Catholic  is  one  in  Christ.  True  unity  does  not  consist  in  anything  outward, 
as  in  a  visible  head,  an  identical  creed,  a  uniform  government ;  but  in  spiritual  union 
with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Hence  geographical  divisions,  denominational  differences, 
do  not  destroy  the  Church's  unity.  AH  believers  are  branches  of  the  same  vine  (John 
XV.  5),  members  of  the  same  body  (ch.  xii.  12).  The  diverging  radii  of  the  circle  find 
their  point  of  union  in  the  centre.  A  rebuke  to  the  spirit  of  faction  so  strong  in  the 
Corinthian  Church.  A  warning  against  the  narrowing  influence  of  country  or  sect. 
The  Church  is  not  a  mere  club.  The  communion  of  saints  is  fellowship  "  with  all  that 
call  on  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1'hese  marks  suggest :  (1)  The  distinc- 
tion between  the  Church  visible  and  the  Church  invisible.  The  Church  visible  consists 
of  all  that  profess  the  religion  of  Christ,  among  whom  there  may  be  many  that  are 
not  true  believers.  The  Church  invisible  consists  of  all  that  are  in  living  union  with 
Christ  the  Head — ^all  that  have  the  marks  heire  given.  Paul  addresses  the  tCctual 
Christian  community  at  Corinth  as  "  the  Church  of  God,"  although  it  was  disfigured 
by  many  corruptions.  A  field  of  wheat  may  have  many  weeds  growing  in  it,  but  you 
still  call  it  a  field  of  wheat.  The  field  as  it  is  is  a  picture  of  the  Church  visible ; 
remove  the  weeds  so  as  to  leave  nothing  but  the  pure  wheat,  and  you  have  the  Church 
Invisible.  There  never  has  been  a  perfectly  pure  Church  on  earth.  While  striving  to 
debar  from  her  communion  all  that  is  manifestly  unholy,  absolute  purity  can  never  be 
laid  down  as  a  test  of  whether  a  Church  is  true  or  false.  (2)  A  test  of  Christian 
profession.  Have  we  the  marks  here  specified?  Have  we  been  called?  Aia  we 
consecrated  ?  etc. 

III.  The  AFOSTOLto  benediction.  "  Once  to  you  and  peace."  This  is  the  usual 
form  of  the  apostolic  blessing  (Rom.  i.  7 ;  2  Cor.  i.  2,  etc.).  Sometimes  there  is  added 
"  mercy  "  (1  Tim.  i.  2  j  2  Tim.  i.  2) ;  and  in  Jude  2  we  have  "  mercy,  peace,  and  love." 
Grace  and  peace  include  all  the  blessings  of  salvation.  1.  Grace.  The  grace  of  God  is 
a  manifestation  of  love.  It  is  the  free  kindness  of  God  towards  the  guilty  and  ill 
deserving.  Grace  and  Mercy  are  twin  sisters  sent  forth  by  Love  to  bless  sinfiil  men. 
They  come  to  as  hand  in  hand,  alike,  yet  different.  Grace  looks  upon  the  guilty  and 
speaks  words  of  pardon ;  Mercy  looks  upon  the  miserable  and  stretches  out  the  hand  of 
pity.  The  idea  of  grace  runs  through  the  whole  work  of  redemption  from  beginning  to  end. 
In  purpose,  plan,  progress,  perfection, — all  is  of  grace.  The  prayer  that  grace  may  be  to 
a  Christian  means  that  he  may  realize  and  make  his  own  the  grace  of  Gh>d  in  all  the 
fulness  of  its  manifestation.  Grace  as  a  principle  in  the  heart,  the  inner  working  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  enables  us  to  appropriate  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ.  The  apostolic 
wish  covers  the  whole  of  the  Christian  life,  more  particularly :  (1)  The  grace  that 
justifies.  We  are  "justified  freely  by  his  grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  "  (Rom.  iii.  24).  "  It  is  of  faith,  that  it  may  be  according  to  grace"  (Bom.  it. 
16).  Faith  brings  us  immediate  pardon  and  acceptance  with  God  for  the  sake  of 
Jesus  Christ ;  yet  this  is  not  always  realized  as  a  fact.  The  consciousness  and  comfort  of 
this  will  not  be  enjoyed  till  it  is  seen  how  thoroughly  it  is  of  grace.  (2)  The  grace 
that  sanctifies.  Sin  as  a  polluting  and  perverting  power  must  be  overcome,  and  the  fair 
features  of  our  Father  brought  clearly  out.  This  also  is  of  grace.  Christ  was  made  unto 
us  sanctification  (ch.  i.  30),  and  this  becomes  ours  through  the  gracious  operation  of  the 
Spirit  (2  Tbess.  ii.  13  ;  1  Pet.  i.  2).  Grace  reigns  where  formerly  sin  reigned  (Bom.  v. 
21).  (3)  The  grace  that  strengthens  (2  Tim,  iL  1).  (o)  In  service  (Phil.  iv.  13).  (J) 
In  temptation  (Heb.  ii.  18).  (c)  In  trouble  (2  Cor.  viii.  9).  (d)  In  death  (Ps.  xxiii.  4 ; 
ch.  XV.  67).  (4)  The  grace  that  g'/orJ/?es  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11).  2.  Peace.  Peace  is  the  fruit 
of  grace.  It  may  be  regarded  as  covering  all  the  blessings  which  grace  bestown.  The 
angels  sang  of  "  Peace  on  earth  "  (Luke  ii.  14),  as  the  sum  of  the  good  thiiigi  to  b< 


OB.  1. 1— 3L]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.  81 

brought  by  the  Prince  of  Peace.  It  inchides :  (1)  Peace  with  God.  (Eom.  v.  1.)  By 
faith  we  are  justified,  our  sins  being  put  away  and  we  ourselves  accepted  as  righteous; 
and  thus  we  are  "reconciled  to  God  through  the  death  ofhis  Son"(l'om.  v.  10).  Hence- 
forth there  is  friendship  between  us  and  God,  We  becom?  sons  of  God  (Rom.  viii.  14 
— 17),  and  have  "  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  "  (1  John 
i.  3),  There  is  a  mutual  love  between  God  and  us,  as  between  father  and  child.  This 
leads  to:  (2)  Peace  vnthirt  owsdves.  The  knowledge  that  we  are  reconciled  to  God 
begets  an  inward  calm.  We  are  filled  with  "  peace  in  believing "  (Rom.  xv.  13). 
"  The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  guards  our  hearts  and  our 
thoughts  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Phil.  iv.  7).  Christ  gives  us  his  own  peace  (John  xiv.  27) — 
that  ineffable  oneness  with  the  Father  in  which  his  own  deep  joy  lay ;  and  this  peace 
rules  in  our  hearts  (Col.  iii.  15).  Such  a  peace  springs  only  from  reconciliation  to  God. 
"  There  U  no  peace  unto  the  wicked  "  (Isa.  xlviii.  22).  Only  when  men  discovered 
that  the  sun  ii  the  centre  of  our  planetary  system  did  all  its  parts  move  in  harmony; 
only  when  our  nature  finds  its  centre  in  Christ  is  it  truly  at  peace  with  itself.  Grace 
and  peace  come  to  us  "  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  gifts  of 
grace  come  to  us  from  God,  but  only  through  Jesus  Christ.  The  inspired  writers  never 
hesitate  to  join  the  Name  of  Christ  with  that  of  God  the  Father.  I'be  true  Godhood 
of  our  Lord  is  everywhere  taken  for  granted,  rather  than  formally  asserted.  How  great 
must  be  the  grace  and  the  peace  that  come  to  us  thus ! — B, 

Vers.  4—9. — Thanksgiving  on  account  of  their  gifts.  Paul,  as  is  his  woni,  begins 
by  congratulating  the  Corinthian  Church  on  aH  that  is  good  and  praisi  worthy  in  their 
character,  and  by  expressing  a  confident  hope  for  the  future.  This  is  just  in  itself, — tell 
a  man  his  good  points  as  well  as  his  bad  ;  and  it  is  wise,  for  thus  the  good  among 
them  will  be  encouraged,  and  the  evil  will  be  the  more  disposed  to  listen  to  rebuke. 
Consider — 

L  Their  gifts  (xapdr/toro).  1.  They  had  the  gift  of  "  all  utterance,"  as  appeared  in 
their  highly  gifted  teachers  and  preachers ;  and  they  had  "  all  knowledge,"  i.e.  an 
intelligent  apprehension  of  the  truth.  These  two  gifts  are  closely  connected.  There 
may  be  knowledge  without  utterance,  in  which  case  it  is  of  profit  only  to  the  indi- 
vidual ;  and  there  is  too  often  utterance  without  knowledge,  to  the  hurt  of  speaker 
and  hearer.  This  last  is  the  plague  of  our  time.  Whoso  feeds  on  empty  words 
becomes  lean.  But  how  blessed  is  the  union  of  thought  and  speech!  Happy  the 
Church  that  possesses  spiritual  insight  into  the  mind  of  God,  and  the  power  of  commu- 
nicating this  to  the  edification  of  others  I  2.  The  other  gift  is  that  of  "waiting  for 
the  revelation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Faith  rests  on  the  first  advent ;  hope  looks 
onward  to  the  second.  The  time  of  that  great  apocalypse  has  been  left  indefinite, 
even  the  Son  being  ignorant  of  it  (Matt.  xxiv.  36).  Sometimes  it  is  represented  as 
very  near  ("at  hand,"  Jas.  v.  8;  1  Pet.  iv.  7);  while  hints  are  dropped  that  this 
nearness  is  not  to  be  taken  according  to  our  time-measurement  (2  Pet.  iii.  8).  The 
purpose  of  this  uncertainty  is  that  we  may  watch  and  wait,  look  for  and  earnestly 
desire  the  day  of  the  Lord  (2  Pet.  iii.  12).  The  apostles  maintained  this  attitude  of 
expectancy,  and  exhorted  others  to  maintain  it.  It  is  noted  here  as  a  mark  of  true 
spirituality,  and  elsewhere  the  crown  of  righteousness  is  promised  to  all  them  that 
"  love  his  appearing  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  8).  Apart  from  all  points  of  dispute,  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  a  second  time  should  exercise  a  powerful  influence  on  the  Christian's  life.  What  a 
motive  to  holiness,  a  stimulus  to  work,  a  strength  to  endure  afQiction,  is  the  thought, 
"  The  Lord  is  at  hand  "  1  "  Amen  :  come,  Lord  Jesus  "  (Rev.  xxii.  20).  These  gifts 
are :  (1)  Of  grace.  They  are  not  natural  endowments.  They  are  given  by  the  free, 
good  pleasure  of  God.  (2)  Given  in  Christ  Jesus.  All  fulness  dwells  in  him,  the  ful- 
ness of  the  Godhead  (Col.  ii.  9).  The  gilts  of  grace  come  to  us  only  through  him  (comp. 
ch.  V.  3).  To  him,  therefore,  let  us  repair,  that  we  may  receive  of  his  fulness.  Ij.  him  we 
are  truly  enriched  ("  made  full,"  Col.  ii.  10).  (3)  A  cenfirmation  of  the  gospel.  The 
gospel  is  a  testimony  concerning  Christ,  not  a  system  of  doctrines.  This  was  specially 
true  of  apostolic  preaching:  "That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you" 
(1  John  i.  1 — 3);  and  it  is  true  of  all  right  preaching.  There  is  a  personal  testimony 
to  Christ  and  the  power  of  his  gospel  unto  salvation.  This  testimony  is  confirmed  when 
it  is  believed  and  acted  on.    Faith  and  its  fruits  are  the  best  evidences  of  Christianity, 


M  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  L  1—31 

"  He  that  hath  received  his  witness  hath  set  his  seal  to  this,  that  God  is  true  "  (John 
iii.  33). 

II.  Absubancr  of  Hui'B,  These  gifts  of  grace  are  pledges  of  future  blessings.  1. 
Confirmation  unto  the  end.  (Ver.  8.)  He  who  begins  the  good  work  in  us  will  perfect 
it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ  (Phil.  i.  6).  God  does  nothing  by  halves.  Ho  not 
only  brings  up  the  sinner  out  of  the  horrible  pit  and  sets  his  feet  upon  a  rock,  but  he 
also  establishes  his  goings  (Ps.  xL  2).  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  "  earnest  of  our  inheri- 
tance" (Eph.  i.  14),  the  first  instalment  of  the  full  heritage.  "The  God  of  all  grace, 
who  calUd  you  unlo  his  eternal  glory  in  Christ, .  .  .  shall  himself  perfect,  stablish, 
strengthen  you  "  (1  Pet.  v.  10).  Observe  the  links  of  the  chain  in  Rom.  viii.  29,  30. 
All  through  life,  onwards  to  the  end  of  the  world,  will  God  deliver  our  feet  from  falling 
(Ps.  Ivi.  13).  "  The  righteous  also  shall  hold  on  his  way,  and  he  that  hath  clean  hands 
shall  be  stronger  and  stronger"  (Job  xvii.  9).  This  confirmation  is  effected  by  the 
continued  iirijiartation  of  his  grace  to  the  believer.  2.  The  object  in  view — "  thxt  ye  he 
unreprovdble  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (Comp.  Col.  i.  22 ;  1.  Thess.  v.  23.) 
God  will  not  stop  short  in  his  work  of  grace  till  it  be  fully  completed.  Meanwhile 
believers  are  unreprovable  in  Christ ;  no  charge  can  be  brought  against  them  which  he 
does  not  meet.  Who  shall  impeach  the  perfection  of  his  work  for  us  ?  But  we  are  not 
morally  blameless  in  ourselves.  Personal  holiness  is  far  from  being  perfect.  In  the  daj 
of  Christ,  however,  this  work  shall  be  complete.  The  challenge,  "  Who  shall  lay  any- 
thing to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?"  (Rom.  viii.  33),  will  then  apply  to  character  as 
well  as  standing.  Gud's  ideal  will  be  realized  in  us  when  we  aru  holy  as  he  is  holy. 
What  a  comfort,  amid  conscious  imperfection  and  sinfulness,  to  know  that  we  shall 
one  day  be  "  set  before  the  presence  of  his  glory  without  blemish  in  exceeding  joy  " 
(Jude  24) !  3.  The  security  for  this.  "  God  is  faithful."  Not  our  faithfulness  to  him, 
but  his  faithfulness  to  us,  is  the  ground  of  our  assurance.  Having  called  us  into  the 
fellowship  of  his  Son,  all  else  will  follow  (Rom.  viii.  30).    (See  next  homily.) 

Learn  the  duty  of  giving  thanks  for  the  blessing  bestowed  upon  others.  Our  own  joy 
shall  thus  be  multiplied. — B. 

Ver.  9.-^The  faithfulness  of  Ood.  To  be  faithful  is  to  be  true  to  what  one  has  pro- 
mised or  engaged  to  do.  God  has  come  into  relation  with  the  universe  and  the  creatures 
he  has  made.  He  has  revealed  himself  to  us  in  various  wavs,  declaring  his  will,  and 
hence  we  can  speak  of  his  faithfulness.  As  the  unchanging  One,  ever  consistent  with 
himself,  he  is  true  to  all  be  has  spoken.  In  all  the  departments  of  his  working  this 
great  principle  may  be  traced. 

I.  The  faithfulness  of  God  is  exemplified  m  natubb.  What  we  call  "  the  laws 
of  nature"  are  not  mere  blind  forces,  beyond  which  we  cannot  see ;  they  are  simply  the 
modes  of  the  Almighty's  working,  the  impress  of  his  will  upon  creation.  On  what 
does  the  fixity  of  these  laws  rest  but  just  the  faithfulness  of  God  ?  The  movements 
of  the  heavenly  bodies,  the  succession  of  the  seasons,  the  production  of  like  effects  by 
like  causes, — these  have  been  uniform  since  the  present  course  of  things  began.  Upon 
this  uniformity  all  human  tictivity  depends.  The  husbandman  sows  his  seed,  relying 
on  the  laws  of  growth.  The  sailor  launches  his  vessel,  believing  that  the  waters  will 
bear  it  up,  and  that  the  breeze  will  fill  his  sails.  The  chemist  mixes  his  materials, 
knowing  that  they  will  combine  according  to  the  laws  of  chemical  afiinity.  To  the 
materialist  these  are  ultimate  facts,  of  which  he  has  no  explanation  to  offer;  to  the 
Christian  they  are  so  many  evidences  of  the  truth  that  God  is  faithful. 

II.  The  faithfulness  of  God  is  exemplified  in  the  moral  government  of  thb 
WOBLD.  On  what  principles  does  that  government  rest  ?  Ar§  the  ten  words  of  Sinai 
still  in  force  as  the  statute-book  of  the  world  ?  Is  that  old  announcement  as  true 
to-day  as  when  it  was  uttered  by  the  prophet  (Isa.  iii.  10,  11)? — "Say  ye  to  the 
righteous,  that  it  shall  be  well  with  him ;  woe  unto  the  wicked,  it  shall  be  ill  with 
him."  Good  and  evil  seem  to  us  inextricably  confused  in  this  world.  Bad  men 
frequently  get  the  best  of  life,  while  good  men  as  often  go  to  the  wall.  Is  God  faith- 
ful? Amid  all  apparent  anomalies  there  is  enough  to  show  that  he  is  on  the  side  of 
righteousness,  and  that  all  his  laws  are  working  for  that  end.  But  we  must  not  forget 
that  he  does  not  promise  to  strike  the  balance  between  good  and  evil  in  this  life. 
Things  are  meanwhile  in  process,  and  the  full  result  can  be  judged  of  only  hereafter. 


OH.  L  1—31.]    THE  FIRST  BpISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  33 


When  the  mists  have  rolled  away  from  this  world's  ongoings,  and  everything  is  seeij 
in  its  naked  reality,  the  faithfulness  of  God  will  stand  out  in  clear  relief. 

III.  The  faithfulness  of  God  is  exemplified  in  the  sphere  op  aRACB.  Here  ii 
shines  with  conspicuous  lustre.  All  round  the  circle  you  may  trace  it;  hut  a  few 
illustrations  will  suffice.  God  is  faithful:  1.  In  regard  to  Ms  promises.  They  an 
"  prt'ciiius  and  exceeding  great"  (2  Pet.  i.  4),  because  "  he  is  faithful  that  promised  '' 
(tieb.  X.  23).  Not  one  of  them  shall  fail  of  fulfilment.  The  great  promise  containe.i 
in  the  protevangel  (Gen.  iii.  15)  took  long  centuries  to  reach  its  development,  bin 
the  fulness  of  the  time  came  at  last,  and  the  seed  of  the  woman  blossoiiieil  into  tin 
Christ.  Similarly,  every  promise  of  God  shall  be  fulfilled  in  its  season.  What  Josliim 
said  to  Israel  may  be  said  to  us  when  we  have  entered  on  the  promised  inlieritance  : 
"  Ye  know  in  all  your  hearts  and  in  all  your  souls,  that  not  one  thing  hath  failed  o 
all  the  good  things  which  the  Lord  your  God  spake  concerning  you  "  (Josh,  xxiii.  14), 
2.  In  rega/td  to  the  pardon  of  sin.  "  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  righteout. 
to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrigliteousness  "  (1  John  i.  9). 
A  frank  and  full  confession  will  always  bring  forgiveness,  because  God  has  pledged 
himself  to  this.  What  an  encouragement  to  keep  nothin;?  back  from  him  I  His  faith- 
fulness and  righteousiiess  demand  the  pardon  of  the  penitent  child.  3.  In  regard  to 
ter'vtution.  "  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye 
are  able,"  etc.  (ch.  x.  13 ;  comp.  2  Thess.  iii.  3).  There  is  no  promise  to  exempt 
believers  from  trial.  Temptation  will  surely  come  to  us,  as  it  came  to  our  Saviour; 
and  in  that  hour  our  security  does  not  lie  in  our  own  watchfulness  or  strength,  but  in 
the  laitlifulness  of  God.  True  to  his  word,  true  to  the  obligation  implied  in  our 
effectual  calling,  he  will  always  "  deliver  us  from  the  evil."  4.  In  regard  to  perfect 
holiness.  It  is  introduced  in  this  connection  here  (vers.  8,  9)  and  in  1  Thess.  v.  23, 
24,  "  And  the  God  of  peace  himself  sanctify  you  wholly.  . .  .  Faithful  is  he  that  calleth 
you,  who  will  also  do  it."  Having  called  us,  he  will  complete  the  work  thus  begun. 
The  faithfulness  of  God  is  the  pledge  that  we  shall  at  last  be  "  holy  as  he  is  holy." 

Apply.  1.  To  Christians,  as  a  ground  of  comfort.  His  faithfulness  will  carry  you 
through  every  valley  of  death-shade,  and  bring  you  home  at  last.  2.  To  the  ungodly, 
as  a  ground  of  warning.  God  is  faithful  to  his  threatenings  aa  well  as  bib 
promises. — B. 

Vers.  10—17. — The  factions  at  Corinth.  The  word  translated  "divisions"  is  tin 
original  of  our  word  "  schism,"  which  means  a  "rent "  as  in  a  garment,  and  then  a  divi- 
sion in  a  society  or  a  separation  from  it.  These  internal  divisions  had  begun  to  show 
themselves  at  Corinth,  if  not  in  the  form  of  regularly  defined  parties,  at  least  as  forces 
that  were  moving  in  that  direction,  and  which,  if  not  checked,  might  soon  lead  to  open 
rupture.  On  what  principles  these  divisions  rested,  we  are  left  to  gather  from  the 
watchwords  of  each.  1.  The  Paul  party  would  consist  for  the  most  part  of  those  who 
were  the  firstfruits  of  the  apostle's  labours  at  Corinth,  and  who  asserted  his  full 
apostolic  authority.  Not  content  with  this,  they  had  ranged  themselves  under  his 
name  in  opposition  to  others.  They  seem  to  have  boa  (ted  of  their  liberty  in  respect 
of  some  things  which  gave  offence  to  more  scrupulous  consciences,  such  as  eating  things 
sacrificed  to  idols,  and  to  have  treated  uncharitably  Mie  more  contracted  views  of  the 
Jewish  Christiana.  2.  The  ApoVos  party  is  named  after  ApoUos,  who  came  to  Corinth 
shortly  after  Paul's  departure.  He  was  "  a  Jew,  born  at  Alexandria,  an  eloquent  man, 
and  mighty  in  the  Scriptures"  (Acts  xviii.  24);  and  from  his  education  in  his  native 
city  he  was  probably  well  acquainted  with  Greek  philosophy  and  literature.  Hence 
bis  style  of  teaching  was  more  learned  and  rhetorical  than  Paul's,  and  it  attracted  the 
more  cultured  among  the  Corinthians,  who  began  to  contrast  it  with  the  simple, 
unadorned  style  of  the  apostle.  Agreeing  in  doctrine  and  spirit,  the  two  teachers 
differed  only  in  gifts  and  manner  of  teaching ;  but  this  did  ^ot  prevent  the  would-be 
philosophers  and  rhetoricians  of  Corinth  from  using  the  eloquent  Alexandrian's  name 
as  a  party  watchword.  3.  The  Cephas  party  was  mainly  composed  of  Jewish  converts, 
unlike  the  two  previous  parties,  which  were  made  up  of  Gentiles.  In  it  we  recogniz. 
the  representatives  of  tliat  Judaizing  tendency  which  Paul  had  so  frequently  to  combat 
Bringing  with  them  their  notions  of  Jewish  prerogative,  they  sought  to  impose  the  Law 
of  Moses  even  on  Gentile  converts,  and  to  bind  about  the  neck  of  Chii-tainity  tL« 

I.  CORINTHIANS.  D 


U  THE  PIEST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  CORlNTUlAlJS.    iim.i.  l-^\ 

yoke  of  legalism.  It  was  natural  for  this  party  to  call  themselves  after  the  apostle  of 
the  circumcision,  and  to  contrast  his  eminence  among  the  twelve  with  the  position 
of  Paul;  while  they  sought  to  malie  compulsory  the  stricter  practice  of  their  favourite 
apostle,  in  opposition  to  the  greater  fiei.dom  allowed  by  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles. 
4.  The  precise  character  of  the  Christ  party  is  more  difficult  to  determine.  The  most 
likely  view  is  that  they  rejected  all  human  authority,  refusing  to  acknowledge  Paul, 
or  ApoUos,  or  Cephas,  or  any  other  eminent  teacher,  and  calling  themselves  simply  by 
the  name  of  Christ.  They  did  this,  however,  in  such  a  way  as  to  degrade  tliat  Name 
to  the  shibboleth  of  a  sect,  and  were  thus  as  guilty  as  the  others  whom  the  apostle 
here  condemns.  Among  the  parties  of  our  own  day  there  are  not  wanting  those  who 
disparage  an  accredited  ministry,  and  call  themselves  simply  "  Christians."  In  view 
of  these  factions  consider — 

I.  The  evil  or  party  spirit.  The  existence  of  parties  and  (Uffering  schools  oi 
thought  in  the  apostolic  Churches  leads  us  to  search  for  some  root  in  human  nature 
whence  they  spring,  and  this  we  find  in  the  limitations  and  varieties  of  mental 
constitutii)n.  No  single  mind  can  take  in  the  whole  of  Divine  truth  so  as  to  hold  it 
in  proper  balance.  There  is  sure  to  he  a  projection  of  one  portion  to  the  comparative 
obscuring  of  others, — a  looking  only  at  one  side  of  the  sphere  while  the  other  is  out 
of  view.  Witness  the  variety  to  be  found  among  the  apostles.  While  there  is  no 
contradiction  in  the  views  of  truth  presented  in  their  writings — all  teaching  the  same 
fundamental  doctrines — we  caunot  read  them  without  observing  that  each  lays  stress 
on  a  different,  portion  of  the  truth  from  the  others.  The  difference  between  Paul  and 
James,  e.(f.,  is  so  evident  tliat  not  a  few  shallow  readers  have  pronounced  them 
irreconcilable;  while  a  comparison  of  both  with  John  reveals  other  characteristics 
equally  peculiar.  And  what  is  true  of  these  inspired  teachers  is  true  of  the  Church  in 
all  ages.  Christianity  does  not  obliterate  individuality.  The  Holy  Spirit  works  on 
the  lines  already  laid  in  nature,  and  thus  the  foundation  is  prepared  for  varying  types 
of  doctrine  and  life.  This  diversity  is  not  a  thing  to  be  deplored,  but  rather  to  be 
rejoiced  in.  How  high  a  purpose  it  is  fitted  to  serve,  our  Lord  showed  in  selecting 
apostles,  each  one  of  whom  was  different  from  his  fellows.  It  needed  minds  of  different 
hues  to  transmit  the  dilierent  rays  of  which  the  pure  light  is  composed.  And  God 
still  makes  use  of  the  many  types  of  mind  to  hold  up  before  the  Church  the  many 
aspects  of  truth,  thus  enriching  the  general  body  of  Christ  and  preventing  it  from 
becoming  narrow  and  one-sided.  This  is  the  use  of  different  schools  and  parties  in  the 
Church.  They  serve  to  give  expression  to  the  many-sidedness  of  the  Christian  faith 
and  life.  But  how  readily  does  this  natural  and  useful  diversity  give  rise  to  hurtful 
divisions  in  the  body  of  Christ!  We  must  not  confound  the  factious  spirit  which 
Paul  denounces  with  an  enlightened  attachment  to  one  particular  branch  of  the 
Church.  We  may  prefer  that  branch  to  others  because  it  appears  to  us  the  most 
scriptural  in  doctrine,  government,  and  worship,  without  denying  to  other  branches 
the  marks  of  a  true  Church,  or  overlooking  the  part  they  play  as  members  of  the  one 
body.  Party  spirit  consists  in  elevating  that  which  is  peculiar  to  our  own  sect  above 
that  which  is  common  to  us  with  others,  and  thereby  unchurching  them.  The  progress 
of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  earth  is  made  subordinate  to  the  success  of  our  own 
denomination  or  faction.  The  spirit  that  wrought  such  mischief  at  Corinth  has  been 
liusy  in  the  Church  ever  since.  The  divisions  of  Christendom  aie  the  scandal  of 
Christianity.  It  is  not  merely  that  the  Church  is  everywhere  split  up  into  sections,  but 
that  this  has  led  to  party  strife  and  jealousy.  Huw  much  bitterness  of  feeling  has 
it  engendered!  how  much  unchristian  speaking!  Men  glory  in  their  distinctive 
shibboleths  more  than  in  the  great  doctrines  of  grace  which  are  our  common  heritage. 
The  guns  of  one  division  of  Christ's  army  are  too  often  directed  against  another 
division,  instead  of  being  turned  against  the  foe. 

II.  AnauMENTS  against  it.  1.  The  Head  of  the  Church  is  One.  "Is  Christ 
divided?"  There  is  no  schism  in  Christ  the  Head;  why  should  there  be  in  the  body  ? 
Why  rend  asunder  that  which  was  intended  to  he  one  ?  The  members  of  the  human 
body  have  different  functions  to  discharge,  but  the  one  does  not  deny  to  the  other  its 
due  place  in  the  body  (ch.  xii.  12,  etc.).  So  with  the  members  of  Christ's  Church ;  all 
belong  to  the  same  body,  which  owns  the  same  Head.  The  spirit  of  faction  breaks 
up  tbu  unity  into  a  monster  of  many  bodies  and  many  heads.     There  is  but  one  Head 


OH.  1, 1—81.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  35 

and  one  body — one  Christ  and  one  Church.  2.  Salvation  is  not  due  to  human  teachers, 
"  Was  Paul  crucified  for  you  ?  "  Do  you  owe  your  redemption  to  him  ?  If  not,  why 
should  you  call  yourselves  by  Ids  name?  Party  spiiit  raises  the  party  name  above 
that  of  the  common  Lord,  thus  putting  the  servant  in  the  Master's  place.  It  gives 
undue  prominence  to  men,  and  virtually  leads  to  idolatry.  He  who  died  for  us  must 
have  no  other  put  by  his  side,  and  no  name  but  his  own  called  over  his  chosen  and 
ransomed  Church,  3.  Party  spirit  is  opposed  to  the  true  significance  of  taptism. 
"  Were  ye  baptized  into  the  name  of  Paul  ?  "  The  baptismal  formula  (Miitt.  xxviii. 
19)  implies  tliat  all  thus  baptized  are  to  be  regarded  as  devoted  to  him  whose  sacred 
Name  is  pronouaced  over  them.  It  involves  a  vow  of  perpetual  allegiance.  The 
administrator  of  the  ordinance,  even  though  he  is  an  apostle,  is  of  no  consequence  in 
the  case.  Paul  thnnks  God  that  it  was  so  ordered  that  he  baptized  only  a  few  persons 
at  Corinth,  and  that  thus  no  pretext  was  afforded  for  calling  themselves  by  his  name. 
His  mission  was  not  to  baptize,  but  to  evangelize.  Baptism,  therefore,  is  hostile  to 
party  spirit,  since  we  are  not  baptized  into  the  name  of  man,  but  into  the  Name  of  the 
Three-One.  Hence,  like  the  sister  sacrament,  it  is  a  symbol  and  pleHge  and  expression 
of  the  unity  of  the  Church.  That  brother,  from  whom  you  differ  so  widely,  was 
baptized  into  the  same  thrice-holy  Name  as  yourself.  "One  Lord,  one  faith,  one 
baptism  "  (Eph.  iv.  5). 

IIL  Exhortation  to  unity.  The  apostle  is  not  content  with  a  negative,  but  sets 
before  them  the  positive  duty  of  unity.  1.  Uniti/  of  mind.  "  That  ye  be  perfected 
together  in  the  same  mind  and  in  the  same  judgment"  (ver.  10).  Oneness  of  disposi- 
tion and  oneness  of  view,  in  opposition  to  the  division  that  prevailed.  This  is  to  be 
cultivated  by  all  Christians.  It  was  a  characteristic  of  the  early  Church :  "  And  the 
multitude  of  them  that  believed  were  of  one  heart  and  soul "  (Acts  iv.  32).  When 
the  same  Spirit  is  dwelling  in  men's  hearts,  it  will  appear  in  unity  of  sentiment, 
opinion,  and  purpose  with  regard  to  religion.  2.  Unity  of  utterance.  "  That  ye  all 
speak  the  same  thing."  The  inner  unity  should  find  an  outward  expression.  Hence 
the  utility  of  confessions  of  faith  as  a  testimony  to  the  truth  held  in  common,  and  an 
evidence  of  unity  in  the  faith.  Short  of  this,  however,  there  is  implied  harmony 
in  the  utterances  of  the  Church  as  opposed  to  the  party  cries  that  were  heard  at 
Corinth.  Men  that  are  at  heart  one  should  take  care  lest  their  public  statements 
convey  an  opposite  impression.  In  every  free  and  healthy  Church  there  will  be  more 
or  less  discussion,  in  which  difference  of  opinion  on  matters  non-essential  will  be 
revealed;  but  this  should  be  conducted  in  such  a  way  as  "to  keep  the  unity  of  the 
Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace"  (Eph.  iv.  3).  There  may  be  a  saying  the  same  thing 
in  Paul's  sense,  while  there  is  no  mechanical  uniformity  of  expression.  3.  A  powerful 
motive  to  unity.  "  I  beseech  you  through  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  That 
Name  is  dear  to  all  Christians,  whatever  other  titles  thoy  may  give  themselves,  and 
a  regard  to  it  is  the  strongest  reason  that  can  be  urged  for  any  course  of  conduct.  If 
we  love  Christ  and  seek  his  glory,  let  us  cease  from  strife,  and  regard  all  believers  as 
our  brethren.    What  Christian  heart  can  resist  such  pleading  ? — B. 

Vers.  17 — 25. — Man's  wisdom  and  God's.  The  mention  of  baptism  leads  the  apostle 
to  speak  of  his  preaching  at  Corinth.  His  mission  was  "  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach 
the  gospel,"  and  he  proceeds  to  vindicate  his  discharge  of  that  mission  as  against  those 
who  preferred  the  "  wisdom  of  this  world." 

I.  The  thbmb  of  evangelical  pbbachiho.  He  calls  it  "  the  word  of  the  cross ; " 
"  Christ  crucified  "  (comp.  ch.  ii.  2).  Here  at  Corinth,  even  more  than  elsewhere,  Paul 
felt  the  necessity  of  adhering  to  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel  and  disclaiming  the 
"  wisdom  of  words"  upon  which  others  laid  stress.  The  central  point  in  his  teaching 
was  that  which  he  delighted  to  sum  up  in  the  expression,  "  the  cross  of  Christ."  _  He 
did  not  keep  the  Crucifixion  out  of  sight  as  a  thing  to  be  ashamed  of,  but  gloried  in  it 
as  the  distinguishing  feature  of  the  good  news  he  proclaimed.  The  humiliation  and 
death  of  the  Saviour  of  men,  his  "  becoming  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  denth  of 
the  cross"  (Phil.  ii.  8),  is  the  very  kernel  of  the  gospel,  the  key  which  unlocks  the 
mystery  of  his  T?ork.  Paul  might  have  told  them  of  a  purer  morality  than  their 
moralists  had  taught,  and  a  sublimer  philosophy  than  Socrates  or  Plato  had  imagined ; 
but  this  would  at  best  have  stirred  only  a  few  minds  to  new  thought,  and  made  a  fem 


36  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  1 1— 3L 

earnest  hearts  feel  that  perfection  was  further  ofif  than  ever.  It  was  otherwise  when 
he  could  spealv  to  them  of  the  cross  of  Clirist,  with  all  that  it  implied;  for  in  this  is 
the  Divine  answer  to  the  great  life-qniry  which  men  had  striven  in  vain  to  answer — 
How  can  man  be  just  with  God  ?  Here  is  the  One  dying  for  the  many,  the  Son  of 
God  suffmins;  as  a  substitute  for  sinners,  and  thus  salvation  actually  accomplished. 
To  preacli  this  was  truly  to  bring  glad  tidings.  The  example  of  the  apostle  is  a  pattern 
for  all  preachers.  Let  us  not  think  to  recommend  Christianity  by  hiding  the  cross  or 
reducing  it  to  a  figure  of  speech,  as  if  the  death  of  Christ  were  merely  a  testimony  to 
the  sincerity  of  his  life.  Christianity  without  the  cross  is  no  real  evangel  to  men. 
You  may  adm're  the  spotless  life  of  Jesus,  rejoice  in  his  wonderful  teaching,  bless  him 
for  his  Divine  philauthiopy,  and  weep  over  his  undeserved  fate ;  but  this  would  simply 
make  him  a  greater  Socrates  or  a  greater  Paul.  It  is  his  atoning  death  above  all  that 
makes  him  more  to  us  than  any  of  the  illustrious  teachers  or  martyrs  of  history.  But 
while  this  is  true,  we  must  not  suppose  that  preaching  Christ  means  nothing  more 
than  a  simple  recital  of  the  way  of  salvation.  Paul's  letters  are  virtually  summaries 
of  his  oral  teaching ;  and  in  them  we  see  how  the  one  theme  expands  into  the  whole 
circle  of  Christian  truth,  how  Christ  appears  as  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  and  how 
the  gospel  is  applied  to  the  trials  and  duties  of  actual  life.  Let  us  not  make  narrow 
what  God  has  made  so  broad.  Let  us  not  stunt  and  deform  our  spiritual  life  by 
feeding  only  on  one  kind  of  nourishment,  and  refusing  the  large  provision  he  has  made 
for  us.  We  shall  preach  Christ  aright  only  by  exhibiting  the  fulness  that  dwells  in 
him. 

IL  Thb  method  of  bvanqelical  preaching.  Whilst  the  main  reference  in  this 
passage  is  to  the  theme  of  the  preacher,  there  is  also  a  reference  to  the  manner  in 
which  that  theme  is  presented.  "  Not  in  wisdom  of  words,  lest  the  cross  of  Christ 
should  be  made  void."  We  may  preach  Christ  in  such  a  way  as  to  neutralize  the 
gospel's  peculiar  power.  1.  We  may  do  this  hy  merely  speculating  about  the  death  of 
Christ.  Philosophical  essays  on  the  work  of  Christ,  and  disquisitions  on  Christian 
doctrine,  have  tht.ir  place  and  value;  but  they  must  not  usurp  the  place  of  sin)ple 
preaching.  They  api)e;U  only  to  the  intellect,  whereas  the  sermon  appeals  to  the 
heart  and  conscience  as  welL  As  a  matter  of  experience,  it  is  found  that  the  style  of 
preaching  here  condemned  is  productive  of  little  spiritual  fruit.  2.  We  may  do  this 
by  a  rhetoric  which  hides  the  cross.  The  gospel  may  be  so  adorned  that  men's  attention 
is  drawn  to  the  gaudy  trappings  or  to  the  preacher  himself,  instead  of  being  fixed  on 
the  truth;  and  in  so  far  as  this  is  the  case  its  influence  is  lost.  The  flowers  with 
which  we  bedeck  the  cross  too  often  hide  it.  The  right  idea  of  preaching  may  be 
gathered  from  the  two  words  translated  "  preach  "  in  this  passage.  The  first  means  "  to 
bring  glad  tidings" — the  good  news  of  a  Saviour  for  sinners  (eiraTyeXffeo-Soj,  ver.  17); 
the  second  signifies  "  to  proclaim  as  a  herald  "  the  facts  of  salvation  and  the  invitations 
and  promises  founded  upon  •  them  (jciipiaaea/,  ver.  23).  Evangelical  preaching  is  a 
publication  of  the  good  news  to  men,  a  direct  setting  forth  of  Christ  in  all  his  ofBces. 
Thus  presented,  the  cross  is  full  of  power  to  draw  men  to  the  Saviour  (John  xii.  32). 

III.  How  THE  GOSPEL  APPEARS  TO  THOSE  THAT  REJECT  IT.  The  preaching  ol  the 
crosp  affects  men  according  to  their  prepossessions.  Bent  of  mind,  education,  sur- 
roundings, largely  determine  their  attitude  towards  Christ.  Two  classes  are  menti<ined 
by  the  apostle  who  rejected  the  gospel  for  two  different  reasons.  1.  The  Jews.  "Jews 
ask  fur  signs,"  i.e.  they  crave  for  some  outward  miraculous  exhibition  to  call  forth 
their  wonder.  "Master,  we  would  see  a  sign  from  thee"  (Matt.  xii.  38)  was  their 
constant  demand  of  Jesus;  and,  in  so  far  as  the  demand  was  a  legitimate  one,  it  was 
complied  with.  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  could  speak  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as 
"a  man  approved  of  God  unto  you  by  mighty  works  and  wonders  and  signs"  (Acts  ii. 
22).  The  chief  sign  of  all  was  the  cross ;  but  the  Jews  did  not  understand  it.  '1  hey 
stumbled  at  it  as  a  "scandal,"  which  they  could  not  get  over,  and  which  seemed  to 
them  to  say  the  opposite  of  what  G-od  intended.  The  cross  was  in  their  eyes  the 
token  of  humiliation  and  shame.  They  looked  for  a  Messiah  attended  by  far  different 
manifestations,  and  they  would  not  believe  in  One  who  had  been  crucified.  There  are 
still  those  among  us  who,  like  the  Jews,  seek  after  signs.  They  crave  for  the  outward, 
the  visible,  the  sensatioual — for  something  to  dazzle  and  startle.  The  Koman  Catholic 
will  go  hundreds  of  miles  to  visit  the  spot  where  "  our  Lady "  is  supposed  to  have 


BH.I.1— 31.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  «7 

ippeared,  will  gaze  with  devout  reverence  on  the  curdled  blood  of  JanuariuB  turning 
liquid  before  his  eyes,  and  will  touch  with  awe  the  relics  of  some  saint,  believing  that 
they  will  ciue  his  diseases.  The  Protestant,  disdaining  these  superstitions,  shows  the 
same  spirit  in  other  ways.  He  may  love  the  sensuous  in  worship  and  the  sensational 
in  preaching.  He  may  run  after  the  man  who  is  an  adept  in  oratorical  jugglery,  who 
knows  the  day  and  the  hour  when  the  world  is  to  end,  etc.  Whatever  is  novel, 
unusual,  popular,  is  sure  to  find  such  sign-seekers  among  its  ardent  supporters.  Tc 
men  of  this  temper  the  cross  of  Christ  is  still  a  "stumbling-block."  For  it  speaks  ol 
humiliation,  of  obedience  unto  death,  of  a  quiet  unostentatious  doing  of  the  will  of 
God;  and  this  is  the  very  thing  such  people  feel  to  be  distasteful.  To  go  with  Jesus 
into  the  garden,  and  there  drink  the  cup  God  puts  to  our  lips;  to  endure  with  him 
the  contradiction  of  sinners,  and  be  exjiosed  to  shame  and  hissing;  to  go  after  him, 
denying  ourselves  and  bearing  our  cross ; — this  is  the  meaning  of  the  sign.  Is  it  any 
wonder  if  men  stumble  at  it?  2.  The  Greeks.  "Greeks  seek  after  wisdom."  The 
dea  ot  a  crucified  Saviour  was  to  them  foolishness.  Accustomed  to  the  speculations 
of  their  own  .philosophers,  set  forth  with  leaming  and  subtlety,  these  lovers  of  wisdom 
applied  to  the  doctrine  of  the  cross  a  purely  intelli  ctual  test.  It  was  in  their  eyes  a 
Qew  philosophy,  and  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  to  be  tried  by  the  same  rules  as  the 
bunders  of  their  own  schools.  To  these  critical  Greeks  Paul  had  nothing  to  offer  but 
ihe  story  of  him  who  was  crucified  (compare  our  Lord's  words  to  the  Greeks,  John  xii. 
23,  etc.).  The  cross  for  them,  as  for  the  Jews,  had  but  one  language — it  spoke  of  the 
lowest  infamy ;  and  to  preach  salvation  by  a  cross  would  be  in  tlieir  view  the  sheerest 
ibsurdity.  These  Greeks  have  still  their  representatives  in  modern  life.  There  are 
,  those  who  glorify  human  intellect,  and  think  themselves  capable  of  solving  all 
mysteries.  How  many  of  our  men  of  science  seem  to  lose  their  heads  when  they  come 
10  speak  of  Christianity  I  They  have  notliing  but  a  sneer  for  a  "  theology  of  blood  ; " 
and  their  quarrel  with  Jesus  is  that,  after  giving  the  world  such  spl<ndid  precepts,  lie 
should  have  imagined  that  he  could  save  men  by  letting  them  crucify  him.  In  forms 
less  extreme  than  this  the  same  spirit  may  be  traced.  Many  hearers  of  the  Word  have 
more  regard  to  the  mental  grasp  of  the  prencher,  the  literary  finisli  of  the  discourse,  or 
the  manner  in  which  it  is  delivered,  than  to  the  scriptural  and  edilying  character  of 
the  truth  preached.  The  simiile  preaching  of  Christ  crucified  is  to  their  thinking 
comparative  folly.  Let  us  not  be  carried  away  by  this  craving  for  wisdom.  "  When 
once  the  idolatry  of  talent  enters  the  ChurcTi,  then  farewell  to  spirituality;  when  men 
ask  their  teachers,  not  for  that  which  will  make  them  more  bumble  and  Godlike,  but 
for  the  excitement  of  an  intellectual  banquet,  then  farewell  to  Christian  progress" 
(P.  W.  Robertson).  Observe  the  apostle's  statement  with  regard  to  these  despisers  of 
the  cross :  "  In  the  wisdom  of  God  the  world  through  its  wisilom  knew  not  God."  Men 
groped  after  him,  but  could  not  find  him.  It  was  part  of  the  Divine  scheme  that  the 
wisdom  of  the  world  should  have  fiee  scope  to  work ;  and  only  when  it  had  exhausted 
itself  was  the  world  ripe  for  the  bringing  in  of  the  gospel.  This  was  a  part  of  the 
preparation  for  Christ.  Human  wisdom  is  still  inadequate.  It  cannot  save  a  single 
soul.  Men  perish  as  they  speculate ;  men  die  as  they  frame  theories  of  life.  In 
God's  view,  man's  wisdom  is  folly ;  in  man's  view,  God's  wisdom  is  folly.  Which  is  the 
wiser? 

IV.  How  THE  GOSPEL  APPEARS  TO  THOSE  THAT  RECEIVE  IT.  They  are  described 
as  "  called  "  (ver.  24 ),  as  "  believers  "  (ver.  2 1 ),  as  "  being  saved  "  (ver.  18) ;  each  term 
presenting  a  different  aspect  of  their  condition.  They  are  called  by  God  out  of  the 
world  into  the  fellowship  of  Christ;  being  called,  they  believe  in  him;  and  believing, 
they  are  in  the  way  of  salvation.  There  is  no  salvation  without  faith,  and  no  faith 
without  the  calling  of  God  by  his  Word  and  Spirit.  Now,  to  all  such  Christ  is  "  the 
Power  of  God,  and  the  Wisdom  of  God."  The  Jew  stumbled  at  the  cross  as  a  thing  of 
weakness ;  the  believer  lejoices  in  it  as  a  thing  of  power.  It  has  done  for  him  what  all 
other  appliances  failed  to  accomplish.  It  has  made  him  a  new  creature,  brinjiing  him 
out  of  darkness  and  Heath  into  light  and  life.  Every  one  who  has  been  cured  by  a 
particular  medicine  is  a  witness  to  the  efficacy  of  that  medicine;  so  every  saved  sinner 
bears  testimony  to  the  power  of  the  cross.  And  there  is  wisdom  here  as  well  as  power 
— "  the  wisdom  of  God."  Christ  crucified  is  not  a  philosophy,  but  a  fact ;  yet  through 
this  fact  there  shines  the  highest  wisdom.     We  can  well  understand  how  the  Greek 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  1.1—31. 


mind,  once  brought  to  the  obedience  of  faith,  would  revel  in  this  view  of  the  cross.  Hi 
would  learn  to  see  in  Christ  "all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge"  (Col.  ii.  3). 
In  him  " God  is  just,  and  the  justifier  of  him  that  hath  faith  in  Jesus"  (Rom.  iii.  26). 
In  him  we  have  the  highest  exemplification  of  that  great  law  of  the  kingdom:  "He 
that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted"  (Matt,  xxiii.  12).  All  that  the  ancient 
philosophies  had  been  striving  after — the  knowledge  of  God,  the  nature  of  man,  and 
the  meaning  of  human  life — is  to  be  found  in  Christ  and  him  crucified.  Here  is  the 
centre  of  all  knowledge,  round  which  all  else  revolves  in  order  and  beauty.  Here  is 
the  shrine  where  the  wise  men  of  the  earth  must  fall  down  and  worship — the  touch- 
stone by  which  their  speculations  must  be  tried.  Here  is  "the  wisdom  of  God," 
outshining  every  other  manifestation  in  creation  and  providence — that  wisdom  by 
which  we  become  wise  unto  salvation. — B. 

Ver.  2i.— Christ  the  Power  of  God.  The  power  of  God  is  seen  in  nature  and  in 
providence,  but  here  we  have  a  new  conception  of  it.  Jesus  Christ  is  that  Power.  In 
his  person,  as  God  manifest  in  fie.'-h,  there  resides  the  potency  of  the  Highest;  but  the 
apostle  is  here  thinking  mainly  of  him  as  crucified.  In  that  cross,  which  ^eems  to  ua 
the  culmination  of  weakness,  he  sees  the  very  power  of  God.     Consider — 

I.  The  elements  of  Divine  poweb  to  be  foukd  in  the  ckoss  of  Cheist.    1.  The 
death  of  Christ  manifests  the  power  of  Qod'a  love.    As  soon  as  we  imderstand  the 
meaning  of  the  cross,  we  caiiDol  help  exclaiming, "  Herein  is  love  1 "     Kor  is  it  merely 
the  fact  of  his  love  to  men  which  it  reveals,  for  this  might  be  learned  elsewhere ;  but 
it  is  the  greatneas  of  his  love.    It  is  the  "  commendation  "  of  it  (Rom.  v.  8) — the  present- 
ing of  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  powerfully  impress  us  with  its  wonderful  character.     Here 
is  the  Son  of  God  dying  for  sinners ;  and  on  whichever  part  of  this  statement  we  fix 
attention,  it  casts  light  on  this  marvelluus  love.   (1)  The  Son  of  Godl    The  strength  of 
God's  love  to  us  may  be  gauged  by  the  fact  that  he  gave  up  to  death  his  own  Son. 
"  God  so  loved  the  world  tliat  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,"  etc.  (John  iii.  16) ;  "  He 
that  spared  not  his  own  Son,"  etc.  (Rom.  viii.  32).     What  a  power  of  love  is  here  1    Not 
an  angel,  nor  some  unique  being  specially  created  and  endowed  for  the  mighty  task, 
but  his  one  only  Son.     Human  love  has  rarely  touched  this  high-water  mark.    (2) 
For  sinners  1     "  While  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."    Human  measures  and 
analogies  fail  us  here.     "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his 
life  for  his  friends  "  (John  xv.  13) ;  hut  here  is  love  for  enemies.    And  love,  not  in 
mere  sentiment,  not  in  simple  forbearance,  hut  in  self-sacrifice — love  persisting  in  its 
purpose  of  salvation  in  the  face  of  hatred  and  scorn.     Thus  on  both  sides  the  love  of 
God  is  seen  in  power.     And  what  a  battery  to  play  upon  the  hearts  of  men  I     2.  The 
death  of  Christ  manifests  the  power  of  his  justice.    No  reading  of  the  cross  that  leaves 
this  element  out  of  account  can  explain  the  mystery.    In  a  work  the  professed  design  of 
which  is  to  restore  men  to  righteousness,  there  must  surely  he  no  breach  of  righteous- 
ness; yet  it  is  here  put  to  a  severe  test.     Is  the  Law  impartial?    Will  it  punish  sin 
wherever  it  is  found?     What  if  the  Son  of  God  himself  should  he  found  with  sin  upon 
him  ?    Shall  the  sword  awake  and  smite  the  man  tliat  is  God's  Fellow  (Zech.  xiii.  7)? 
Yes ;  for  he  dies  there  as  one  "  bruised  for  our  iniquities."     Surely  justice  must  be 
mighty  when  it  lays  its  hand  on  such  a  victim.     If  that  modern  description  of  God  as 
a  "  power  making  for  righteousness  "  is  applicable  anywhere,  it  is  so  here ;  for  nowhere 
is  he  so  severely  righteous  as  in  the  working  out  of  salvation  for  men.     Nothing  can 
more  powerfully  appeal  to  conscience  than  his  treatment  of  the  sinner's  Surety ;  and 
nothing  can  more  thoroughly  assure  us  that  the  pardon  which  comes  to  us  through  tlie 
cross  is  righteous. 

1 1.  The  power  op  God  in  the  cross  ab  been  in  its  practical  effects.  Our 
readiest  measuie  of  any  foice  in  nature  is  the  effect  it  produces,  and  in  this  way  we  may 
gauge  the  power  of  the  cross.  Take  it  :  1.  In  regard  to  the  powers  of  darkness.  "  For 
tills  purpose  the  Son  of  C5od  was  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil" 
(1  John  iii.  15 ;  comp.  Heb.  ii.  14).  'J  he  execution  of  this  purpose  is  intimated  in 
Col.  ii.  15,  "Having  put  off  from  himself  the  principalities  and  the  powers,  he  mada 
a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it  [the  cross]."  It  is  as  if  ten  thousand 
fiendish  arms  were  stretched  out  to  pluck  him  from  that  cross ;  but  he  strips  them  of! 
him.  and  hurls  them  back  into  the  abyss.    It  cost  him  much  to  win  that  victory,  even 


OH.1. 1— 31.]    THE  FIRST  EPJSTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  89 

" strong  crying  and  tears"  and  an  agony  of  soul  beyond  all  human  experience;  but  the 
trinmph  was  complete.  2.  In  regard  to  the  actual  salvation  of  sinners.  To  deliver  a 
man  from  sin  in  all  respects,  undo  its  direful  effects,  and  fit  him  to  take  his  glace 
among  Otxl's  sons, — what  power  is  adequate  to  this  ?  Take  Paul's  own  conversion,  on 
which  apologists  have  been  willing  to  stake  the  supernatural  character  of  Christianity. 
And  every  conversion  presents  substantially  the  same  features.  It  is  nothing  less  than 
a  new  creation  (2  Cor.  v.  17) — a' calling  of  light  out  of  darkness,  order  out  of  chaos,  life 
out  of  death ;  and  this  is  a  more  wonderful  exercise  of  power  than  that  which  gave 
existence  to  the  universe.  The  fair  temple  of  God  in  tlie  soul  has  to  be  built,  not  out 
of  fresh-hewn  stones,  but  out  of  the  ruins  of  our  former  selves.  A  poor  weak  man  is 
rescued  from  corruption,  defended  "  against  the  spiritual  hosts  of  wickedness  in  the 
heavenly  places  "  (Eph.  vi.  12),  and  presented  at  last  without  blemish  before  God, — 
what  but  Divine  power  can  accomplish  this  ?  Add  to  this  the  exercise  of  this  power  in 
a  countless  number  of  instances.  From  the  steps  of  the  throne  survey  that  radiant 
multitude,  beautiful  with  the  beauty  of  God  and  noble  with  the  nobility  of  Christ,  and 
the  might  of  the  cross  will  need  no  other  proof.  3,  In  regard  to  what  he  enables  his 
people  to  do  and  suffer  for  his  sake.  Take  an  active  missionary  life  like  that  of  Paul. 
Bead  such  a  catalogue  of  afflictions  as  he  gives  us  in  2  Cor.  xi.  23 — 33,  and  ask  why 
a  man  should  voluntarily  undergo  all  these.  Thousands  have  followed  his  example, 
meeting  toil,  privation,  death,  for  their  Lord's  sake.  Nor  does  the  power  of  the  cross 
shine  less  conspicuously  in  the  sick-chamber.  How  many  a  Christian  invalid  exhibits 
a  patience,  a  meekness,  a  cheerfulness,  which  can  be  found  nowhere  elsel — ^B. 

Vera,  26 — 31. — Salvation  all  of  Qod.  The  apostle  has  shown,  in  the  previous  section, 
that  the  cross  of  Christ,  which  men  count  foolish  and  weak,  is  really  the  wisdom  and 
the  power  of  God.  In  proof  of  this  he  now  calls  their  attention  to  the  social  status  of 
the  convsrts  at  Corinth.  For  the  most  part  theywere  of  no  account  in  the  world's 
esteem ;  but,  though  nobodies  according  to  the  flesh,.they  were  raised  to  true  dignity  in 
Christ. 

I.  The  Christian  calling  does  not  fboceed  on  the  frincifles  of  this  wobld. 
"For  behold  your  calling,  brethren,"  etc.  The,Church  at  Corinth  was  composed 
chiefly  of  the  poor  and  the  illiterate.  The  philosophers  and  the  rich  merchants,  the 
high-born  and  those  who  occupied  positions  of  influence,  had  but  few  representatives 
among  the  disciples  of  Jesus.  They  were  drawn  in  great  part  from  those  whom  the 
world  reckoned  foolish,  weak,  base,  and  of  no  importance.  And  the  case  of  Corinth 
was  not  singular.  It  is  characteristic  of  Christianity  to  begin  low  down.  The  Lord 
Jesus  himself  was  not  born  in  a  royal  palace  or  nursed  among  the  lordly  of  the  earth. 
His  birthplace  was  a  stable,  his  home  the  simple  dwelling  of  Joseph,  his  training- 
school  the  carpenter's  workshop.  His  disciples  were  derived  mainly  from  the  labouring 
classes.  One  or  two  of  the  twelve  may  have  been  in  easy  circumstances,  but  none  of 
them  appears  to  have  been  of  high  birth ;  and  outside  this  circle  his  followers,  with  the 
exception  of  Nicodemus  and  Joseph  of  Arimathsea,  were  almost  entirely  of  the  same 
class.  From  the  beginning,  therefore,  the  gospel  found  acceptance,  not  in  the  high 
places  of  the  land,  nor  among  the  representatives  of  the  learning  and  religion  of  the 
time,  but  among  the  plain,  unschooled,  unsophisticated  people.  "  The  poor  have  good 
tidings  preached  to  them  "  (Luke  vii.  22).  Beyond  the  bounds  of  Palestine  it  was  the 
same.  The  pride  of  wisdom  and  station  closed  the  ear  against  the  story  of  the  cross. 
It  did  not  flatter  the  wise  or  the  great.  It  spoke  to  all  alike  as  sinners  needing  a 
common  salvation,  and  summoned  all  to  repentance  and  faith.  The  result  may  be 
illustrated  by  comparing  the  reception  of  the  gospel  at  Athens  and  at  Corinth.  In  the 
metropolis  of  philosophy  and  art  only  a  few  were  converted  (Acts  xvii.  16—34) ;  in 
the  capital  of  trade  a  large  Church  was  formed.  So  also  at  Rome.  The  first  and  chief 
successes  of  the  gospel  were  among  the  lower  classes  of  society ;  and  this  was  urged  as 
an  objection  against  it.  Celsus  jeers  at  the  fact  that  "  wool-workers,  cobblers,  leather- 
dressers,  the  most  illiterate  and  clownish  of  men,  were  zealous  preachers  of  the  gospel, 
and  particularly  that  they  addressed  themselves,  in  the  first  instance,  to  women  and 
children."  The  proud  Roman  could  not  understand  a  religion  which  treated  the  slave 
as  a  man,  and  addressee  itself  equally  to  alL  But  the  leaven  thus  put  into  the  mass 
spread  not  only  outwards  but  upwards.    From  slave  to  master,  from  plebeian  to 


W  TBB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CWRINTHIANS.    [oh.  1. 1— St 


,jatrician,  did  the  blessed  influence  pass,  till  at  last  the  emperor  himself  wag  constrained 
CO  do  homage  to  Jesus  Christ.  To  a  large  extent  the  course  of  the  gospel  is  the  same 
still.'  In  our  own  country  the  profession  of  Christianity  is  not  confined  to  any  class  in 
society ;  but  a  livin<;  godliness  is  a  plant  of  rarer  growth.  Among  our  men  of  science, 
our  philosophers  and  poets,  and  our  hereditary  nobility,  there  are  to  be  found  eminent 
Christians,  whose  lives  evince  the  power  of  the  gospel  over  the  finest  intellects  and  the 
most  exalted  station ;  yet  it  is  mainly  among  those  less  privileged  that  the  Church  is 
strongest.  The  greatest  number  of  her  members  are  to  be  found  among  the  humbler 
classes,  especially  among  those  who  have  neither  riches  nor  poverty,  and  who  know 
the  meaning  of  honest  work.  Illustrate  also  from  the  history  of  modern  missions  to 
the  heathen. 

II.  Beasonb  tor  the  Divine  method.  When  men  inaugurate  any  new  scheme  or 
system,  they  seek  the  patronage  of  great  names  in  order  to  recommend  it  to  the  people; 
but  the  gospel  of  salvation  was  not  proclaimed  to  the  world  under  the  auspices  of  kings 
and  philosophers.  This  is  referied  to  the  purpose  of  God  (vers.  27,  28),  according  to 
which  all  things  proceed.  More  particularly  the  end  in  view  is :  1.  The  humiliation 
of  human  pride.  "  That  no  flesh  should  glory  before  God  "  (ver.  29).  Human  wisdom 
and  power  are  of  small  account  in  ttiis  matter.  Salvation  is  all  of  God.  Had  he 
chosen  the  wise  and  the  great,  pride  might  have  boasted  itself  before  him;  but  in 
choosing  the  foolish  and  the  weak,  all  ground  of  glorying  is  removed.  This  does  not 
iiuply  that  the  one  class  is  of  more  value  in  God's  sight  than  the  other ;  nor  docs  it 
put  a  premium  upon  ignorance  and  weakness.  It  means  that  the  wise  man  will  not 
be  saved  because  of  his  wisdom,  nor  the  nobleman  because  of  his  high  birth,  nor  the 
rich  man  because  of  his  wealth.  All  trust  in  these  things  must  be  put  to  shame,  as  is 
done  when  they  that  are  destitute  of  them  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven  more  readily. 
In  the  eye  of  the  gospel  all  men  are  equal,  which  means  that  some  must  be  humbled, 
while  others  are  exalted.  It  is  always  our  Father's  way  to  "  hide  these  things  from  the 
wise  and  understanding,  and  to  reveal  them  unto  babes  "  (Matt.  xi.  25).  Pride  is  at 
once  insulting  to  G<<d  and  hurtful  to  man;  and  it  is  in  mercy  that  he  requires  us  to 
"  become  as  little  children  "  (Matt,  xviii.  3).  In  like  manner,  the  advance  of  the  gospel 
in  the  earth  is  not  to  be  promoted  byan  arm  of  flesh  ("  not  by  might,  nor  by  power,"  etc., 
Zech.  iv.  6).  Christian  woik  must  not  be  undertaken  for  the  aggrandizement  of  persons, 
or  parties,  or  sects.  The  flesh  must  not  be  elevated  to  the  dishonour  of  God.  2.  The 
advancement  of  the  Divine  glory.  Human  pride  is  to  be  humbled,  that  the  honour  of 
salvation  may  belong  to  God  alone.  It  is  the  prerojtative  of  the  Almighty  to  make  his 
own  glory  the  chief  end  of  all  he  does.  No  created  being  can  do  so.  For  man  and 
sngel,  happiness  consists  in  seeking  the  glory  of  our  Father  in  heaven.  A  life  with  self 
as  the  centre,  self  as  the  aim,  must  be  a  life  of  misery.  Does  not  this  explain  the 
misery  of  Satan  ?  "  Better  to  reign  in  hell  than  serve  in  heaven  1 "  It  is  otherwise 
with  the  Most  High.  To  seek  his  own  glory  is  simply  to  desire  truth  and  reality.  In 
the  nature  of  things  all  praise  is  due  to  him  alone  who  is  the  Al]iha  and  the  Omega  of 
existence.  Hence  the  glory  of  God  coincides  with  the  greatest  happiness  of  men,  in 
the  matter  of  salvation  as  in  other  things.  "  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the 
Lord." 

III.  The  riches  in  Christ.  Salvation  is  due  entirely  to  God.  It  is  of  him  that  we 
are  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  believer's  union  wilh  Christ  has  been  brought  about  by  God 
Himself,  who  has  given  us  all  things  in  his  Son.  1.  Wisdom.  "In  him  are  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  hidden  "  (Col.  ii.  3).  He  reveals  to  us  Gud — his 
nature  and  his  will,  his  purpose  and  plan  of  grace.  In  the  person  and  work  of  Christ; 
in  his  incarnation,  life,  teaching,  atonement, — the  wisdom  of  God  shines  out  con- 
spicuously. And  in  union  with  Christ  we  become  truly  wise.  In  him  we  have  the  key 
which  opens  all  mysteries.  We  learn  to  know  God  and  to  know  ourselves  j  and  in 
him  the  broken  fellowship  between  God  and  us  is  restored.  The  quest  for  wisdom, 
alike  in  its  speculative  and  in  its  practical  form,  is  satisfic  d  only  in  him.  2,  Sighteous- 
nets.  He  is  "Jehovah  our  Righteousness"  (Jer.  xxiii.  6).  To  be  righteous  is  to  be 
in  entire  consistence  with  the  mind  and  Law  of  God ;  and  this  Jesus,  as  our  liepresen- 
tative,  was.  He  bore  the  penalty  of  our  sins,  and  met  the  positive  requirements  of  the 
Law;  and  thus  wrought  out  a  righteousness  for  us  (2  Cor.  v.  12;  Gal.  iii.  13;  1  Pet. 
{L  24).    AVhen  by  faith  we  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Saviour,  his  work  is  reckoned  to 


on.  L  1—31.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHlANa  «1 

us,  and  we  are  received  as  righteous  for  his  sake.  3,  Sanetification.  This  includes 
the  whole  of  the  process  by  which  we  are  restored  to  the  image  of  GK)d.  Not  only  is 
the  rigliteousness  of  Christ  imputed  to  us,  the  character  of  Christ  must  also  be  repro- 
duced in  us ;  and  this  is  the  worlt  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  his  to  illuminate,  regenerate, 
purify ;  and  the  whole  man  thus  renewed  is  consecrated  to  God.  Every  part  of  the 
nature — spirit,  soul,  body;  every  activity  of  thought,  affection,  desire,  purpose;  all  are 
transfurmed  and  devoted  to  the  noblest  service.  Justification  and  sanetification  are  the 
two  sides  of  one  whole,  never  to  be  separated.  4.  Rtdemption.  This  denotes  deliver- 
ance from  all  evil,  enemies,  afflictions,  death.  Soul  and  body  shall  be  completely 
emancipated,  and  presented  at  last  without  blemish  (Rom.  viii.  23;  Eph.  v.  26,  27). 

Lessons.  1.  To  be  emptied  of  sell'  is  a  necessary  condition  of  God's  working  in  us 
and  by  iu.  2.  Give  God  all  the  glory  of  salvation.  3.  Christ  is  the  Source  of  all 
blessings.    "  In  him  ye  are  made  full "  (Col.  ii.  10). — B. 

Ver.  6.—"  The  testimony  of  Ohrist."  There  are  two  kinds  of  testimony— the  external 
and  the  internal ;  the  revelation  without  and  the  revelation  within ;  the  written 
historical  testimony  that  God  has  given  us  of  his  Son,  and  that  which  consists  in  the 
facts  of  Christian  consciousness,  the  consciousness  of  one  in  whom  he  dwells.  These 
are  not  to  be  regarded  as  separate  and  iudepcudent.  The  external  record  is  vain  until 
graven  on  the  Uving  heart ;  while  there  could  be  no  such  inward  realization  apart 
from  the  outward  record,  with  all  that  helps  to  attest  and  substantiate  it.  The  one 
is  to  the  other  as  the' river  is  to  the  bed  in  which  it  flows,  as  the  echo  to  the  voice 
that  awakens  it,  as  the  musical  harmony  to  the  instrument  by  which  it  is  produced. 
The  revealed  truth  is  made  the  instrument  and  channel  of  a  hidilen  life.  The  written 
record  becomes  a  vital  experience.  The  testimony  finds  its  answer  in  the  living  heart. 
Thus  was  the  gospel  word  "confirmed"  in  the  Corinthians,  as  in  all  who  saringly 
receive  it.    Consider — (1)  The  testimony ;  (2)  the  confirmation. 

L  Thb  testimony.  It  is  the  truth  about  Christ  whioli  formed  the  sum  and  substance 
of  the  apostolic  message.  The  truth  "  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  1.  The  message  contains 
tvoo  dements — the  historical  and  the  doctrinal.  An  unwarrantable  separation  is  some- 
times made  between  these.  The  attempt  to  sever  the  historic  fact  from  some  form  of 
dogmatic  teaching  by  which  that  fact  is  linked  with  the  spiritual  interests  and  needs 
of  men,  as  the  Divine  answer  to  them,  is  irrational  and  vain.  The  fact  contains 
within  itself  the  doctrine.  It  is  not  a  meaningless  incident.  'What  is  the  doctrine 
but  just  the  articulate  expression  of  its  meaning?  Take  any  of  the  recorded  apostolic 
discourses — Peter's  sermon  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.),  Paul's  sermon  in  the 
synagogue  at  Antidcb  (Acts  xiii.),  or  his  summary  of  the  gospel  (ch.  xv.  1—4) — they 
are  none  of  them  bare  statements  of  historic  fact.  They  glow  with  the  living  force 
of  words  that  carry  the  historic  fact  home  to  the  consciences  and  hearts  of  men  as 
God's  condemnation  of  sin  and  pledge  of  forgiveness  and  promise  of  the  life  everlasting. 
2.  The  authority  of  this  message  of  minyled  fact  and  doctrine  lies  in  it$  divinity. 
It  Is  the  testimony  that  "  God  has  given  us  of  his  Son."  The  reason  men  disregard 
the  appeals  of  the  gospel  is  that  they  do  not  believe  or  feel  this.  Their  diviner 
sensibility  is  so  deadened  by  other  than  Divine  influences,  that  they  fail  to  recognize 
the  approach  of  God  to  their  souls.  If  they  know  that  God  is  speaking  to  them  how 
can  they  resist?  "If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  God  is  greater." 
We  readily  receive  the  witness  of  men.  Our  whole  social  existence  proceeds  on  the 
principle  of  faith  in  the  general  veracity  of  those  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  Why 
can  we  not  carry  up  into  the  higher  region  a  principle  of  action  that  in  the  lower  we 
feel  to  be  so  salutary  and  necessary?  Habitual  distrust  of  one's  fellow-creatures 
would  be  a  dishonour  done  to  our  common  nature,  would  poison  the  very  springs  of 
human  life,  and  turn  some  of  our  purest  joys  to  bitterness.  And  yet  men  cherish  on 
the  heavenward  side  of  their  being  a  cold,  repellent  spirit  of  unbelief  that  gives  the 
lie  to  a  (Jod  of  infinite  truth  and  righteousness  and  love.  "  He  that  hath  received 
his  testimony  hath  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true  "  (John  iii.  33) ;  "  He  that  believeth 
not  God  hath  made  him  a  liar,"  etc.  (1  John  v.  10). 

II.  The  confirmation.  For  the  testimony  to  assert  its  authonty  in  a  way  that 
cannot  be  gainsaid  is  one  thing ;  for  it  to  be  practically  and  savingly  efficacioai  is 
another.     No  man  to  whom  the  message  has  intelligibly  come  can  escape  the  speeial 


41  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa    [oH.i.1— 8L 

responsibility  nnder  which  it  places  him.  His  whole  position  as  an  accountable  being 
is  henceforth  chaiiged.  He  may  affect  to  disown  the  claim,  but  the  sovereign  authority 
of  that  claim  is  over  him  still,  and  he  must  answer  for  bis  neglect  (John  xii.  47). 
The  testimony  accomplishes  its  end  only  when  the  Spirit  of  God  writes  it  in  living 
characters  on  the  "  fleshy  table  of  the  heart."  How  important  a  transition  of  thought 
to  pass  from  the  region  of  words,  ideas,  outward  revelations,  to  that  of  the  perceptions, 
affections,  and  energies  of  a  personal  life  1  Consider  the  confirmation  :  1.  As  regards 
its  effeet  on  the  hdiever  himself.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the 
witness  in  himself"  (1  John  v.  10).  It  has  become  emphatically  his  own.  The 
Christ  revealed  to  him  is  now  "  in  him,"  a  quickening,  sanctifying  power,  "  the  hope 
of  glory,"  "  a  well  of  water  springing  up  unto  everlasting  life."  All  life  is  self-asserting, 
■elf-assuring.  It  proves  and  verifies  itself.  We  don't  question  the  reality  of  our 
physical  life.  We  know  that  we  live  in  living.  We  think,  feel,  breathe,  move,  act — 
therefore  we  live.  So  spiritually;  in  the  sensibilities  and  energies  that  accompany 
Christian  faith  we  have  sufficient  proof  of  the  power  of  Christ  "  to  give  eternal  life  to 
as  many  as  believe  in  him."  And  as  no  external  evidence  can  supply  the  place  of 
this,  so  no  outward  assault  of  the  forces  of  unbelief  can  have  any  real  power  against  it. 
"  We  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come,"  etc.  (1  John  v.  20).  This  is  what  is  wanted 
to  give  firmness  to  men  in  these  days  of  restless  thought  and  unsettled  opinion  ;  not 
mere  doctrinal  safeguards,  not  theological  rigidity,  but  the  deep  inward  consciousness 
of  the  life-giving  power  of  Christ.  2.  As  regards  its  effect  on  others.  The  testimony 
•f  Christ  wing  its  victories  in  the  world  on  the  strength,  not  so  much  of  historic  or 
miraculous  or  argumentative  proof,  but  of  what  it  is  and  what  it  can  do.  The  fruits 
c£  Christian  character  and  deed  are  the  mightiest  of  all  arguments.  Saintly,  conse- 
crated lives ; — it  is  these  that  give  convincing  force  to  the  doctrine,  "  Ye  are  our 
-epistle,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  iL  2,  3).— W. 

Ver.  13. — Divisions,  The  "  contentions "  in  the  Church  at  Corinth,  the  report  of 
vhich  had  reached  St.  Paul,  and  which  he  here  rebukes,  were  probably  not  the  out- 
(;rowth  of  definite  party  divisions,  but  were  individual  differences  as  to  who  among 
he  great  Christian  leaders  should  receive  superior  honour.  They  were  individual 
fitrifes,  however,  that  might  develop  into  very  serious  divisions — schisms  (^trxitritara^ 
*,hat  would  utterly  rend  asunder  the  fellowship  of  the  Church.  It  must  have  been 
leeply  painful  to  the  apostles  that  they  should  thus  be  set  in  rivalry  with  one  another, 
■\s  if  they  were  seeking  the  ends  of  their  own  vain  anibition,  and  still  more  that  their 
lames  should  be  permitted  in  any  way  to  obscure  the  glory  of  the  Name  of  their 
Divine  Master.    "  Is  Christ  divided  ?  "    The  question  suggests — 

I.  The  essential  unity  op  Christ.  Consider  diflferent  aspects  of  this  unity.  As 
t  regards :  1.  Bis  own  person.  In  him  we  see  the  blending  of  the  Divine  and  human 
jn  one  glorious  personality,  the  balance  and  harmony  of  all  conceivable  forms  of 
moral  excellence.  No  discord  in  his  being,  no  flaw  in  his  character,  no  failure  in  his 
life;  he  stands  before  us  in  every  light,  on  every  side,  a  complete,  symmetrical,  and 
perfect  whole.  2.  His  redeeming  purpose  and  the  means  by  which  he  effects  it.  He 
comes  to  deliver  men  from  the  power  of  evil,  to  turn  them  from  their  iniquities,  to 
restore  them  to  fellowship  with  God.  The  end  he  seeks  is  the  same  for  all.  "  There 
is  no  distinction ;  for  all  have  sinned,"  etc.  (Eom.  ilL  22 — 24).  And  as  all  human 
distinctions  are  lost  in  the  common  need  of  salvation,  so  in  Christ  the  same  possibility 
of  good  is  placed  within  the  reach  of  all :  "  As  through  one  trespass  the  judgment 
came  unto  all  men,"  etc.  (Rom.  v.  18).  There  is  but  one  gospel  message,  and  it  is 
"  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  lone  that  believeth."  3.  The  life  with  which 

he  inspires  those  who  receive  him.      In  whomsoever  it  dwells  this  life  is  always  one 

one  in  its  affections  and  energies,  in  the  laws  of  its  develujiment,  in  the  fruit  it  bears, 
in  the  ends  to  which  it  leads.  The  inspiration  of  a  common  spirit-life  is  the  grand 
uniting  principle  amid  endless  individual  diversities.  "By  one  Spirit  we  are  all 
baptized  into  one  body,"  etc.  (ch.  xii.  13).  4.  His  authority  as  the  sole  Head  of  the 
Church.  There  can  be  no  divided  authority.  In  the  very  nature  of  things,  Christ 
can  own  no  rival.  The  body  can  have  but  one  living  head,  the  source  of  informing, 
guiding,  and  controlling  power.  Its  own  unity  lies  mainly  in  the  recognition  of  this: 
"  One  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism,"  etc.  (Eph.  iv.  5,  6  ;  oh.  viii.  6  ;  xii.  5). 


OH.  L  1—31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  43 

n.  The  evil  or  everythino,  that  violates  this  unitt.  The  divisions  of  tlie 
Church  of  Ciipinth  were  deprecated  by  the  apostle  as  an  offence  against  the  fundamental 
principles  and  laws  of  the  Christian  fellowship.  All  such  divisions  have  certain  marked 
features  of  evil.  1.  Tliey  exalt  that  which  is  subordinate  and  accidental  at  the  expense 
of  the  vital  and  lupreme.  The  form  of  truth  is  placed  above  the  spirit,  doctrine  above 
life,  the  instrument  above  the  power,  appearances  above  realities,  the  shadow  above 
the  substance — creeds,  systems,  men,  above  Christ  Cch.  iii.  4,  5).  Examine  them 
closely,  and  you  find  that  all  "  contentions  "  in  the  Church  mean  this.  2.  They  engen- 
der mutual  animosities  which  are  destructive  of  the  fellowsliip  of  a  common  life. 
Here  lies  the  heart  and  core  of  the  evil.  Mere  outward  diversities  are  not  so  much  to 
be  dreaded.  Schism  is  a  thing  of  the  spirit.  It  lies  not  in  the  formal  separations 
that  conscience  may  dictate,  but  in  the  fierce  antagonisms  that  ma\-  unhappily,  but 
not  necessarily,  grow  out  of  them.  Sectarianism  consists  not  in  the  frank  outspoken 
assertion  of  individual  convictions,  but  in  thfe  bitterness  and  uncharitableness  with 
which  one  conscience  may  assert  itself  against  all  other  consciences.  So  that  the  very 
spirit  of  schism  may  inspire  that  passion  for  uniformity  which  would  suppress 
individual  liberty  of  thought  and  speech  and  action.  The  true  schismatics  are  those 
who  by  their  intolerance  create  divisions.  Whatever  tends  to  checli  the  flow  of 
spiritual  fellowship  violates  the  law  of  Christ.  We  do  well  carefully  to  watch  against 
the  estrangement  of  heart  that  difitjrence  of  religions  opinion  and  ecclesiastical  practice 
too  often  generates,'  "giving  diligence  to  l^eeu  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of 
peace  "  (Eph.  iv.  3).  3.  Tlii-y  bring  public  dishonour  on  the  Name  of  Christ.  That 
Name  is  the  symbol  of  a  Divine  reconciliation — the  reconciliation  of  man  to  man,  as 
well  as  man  to  God.  But  in  this  case  it  is  made  the  cause  of  separations.  Christ 
fnme  to  bind  men  together  in  a  true  brotherhood ;  but  thus  he  is  made  a  "  divider." 
"  Where  jealousy  and  faction  are  there  is  confusion  and  every  evil  work "  (Jas.  iii. 
16).  And  thus  the  very  essential  principle  and  purpose  of  the  Saviour's  mission  is 
falsified,  and  occasion  is  given  to  the  enemy  to  blaspheme.  Few  things  have  a  more 
disastrous  t-ffect  in  discrediting  the  Christian  cause  than  the  bitterness  of  contending 
partiesinthat  Church  which  is  "  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth."  4.  Theysqutnder 
and  dissipate  energies  that  ought  rather  to  be  devoted  to  active  service  in  the  Lord's 
kingdom.  Think  of  the  waste  of  spiritual  force  these  divisions  involve  1  If  half  the 
enthusiasm  mere  partisanship  has  engendered  had  been  expended  on  some  real 
substantial  work  for  the  good  of  humanity  and  the  glory  of  God,  how  blessed  the 
results  might  have  been  I  In  one  sense,  of  course,  all  zeal  for  truth,  however  subordi- 
nate the  position  of  the  particular  truth  may  be,  is  for  the  good  of  humanity  and  the 
glory  of  God ;  but  to  be  contending  for  the  maintenance  of  comparatively  trivial 
points  of  difference  in  violation  of  the  spirit  that  ought  to  harmonize  all  differences, 
and  of  the  grand  responsibilities  of  the  Christian  calling,  is  to  be  guilty  of  "  tithing 
I  he  mint  and  the  anise  and  the  cummin,  to  the  neglect  of  the  weightier  matters  of 
the  Law," 

III.  The  cube  for  these  evils.  There  is  but  one  cure — to  keep  Christ  in  all  the 
glory  of  his^  being  and  the  supremacy  of  his  claims  habitually  before  our  minds,  and 
to  open  our  hearts  freely  to  the  inspiration  of  his  Spirit.  This  will  raise  us  above 
the  Littleness  and  meanness  of  party  strife.  A  lofty  object  of  contemplation  and 
a  high  moral  purpose  must  needs  have  an  elevating  and  ennobling  influence  on  the 
whole  man.  It  will  subdue  within  us  all  base  affections,  will  rebuke  our  personal 
vanity,  will  enlarge  our  sympathies,  will  chasten  our  lesser  enthusiasms.  We  shall 
not  he  in  much  danger  of  helping  by  our  influence  to  violate  the  unity  of  the  firent 
household  of  faith,  when  our  souls  are  filled  with  the  full-orbed  glory  of  the  undivided 
Christ.  The  expansive  Spirit  he  gives  will  teach  us  to  say,  "  Qrace  be  with  all  them 
that  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity." — ^W. 

Vers.  22 — 24. — "  Christ  crucified."  It  is  difficult  for  us  to  realize  the  deep-rooted 
strength  of  the  prejudices  the  truth  of  Christ  encountered  on  its  first  proclamation. 
One  thing,  however,  is  clear — while  the  apostles  accommodated  the  mode  of  their 
teaching  to  those  prejudices,  they  never  so  accommodated  the  teaching  itself.  Their 
doctrine  was  the  same  for  all.  They  never  thought  of  modifying  it  or  softening  down 
its  essential  peculiarities,  to  suit  the  taste  of  any.    With  reference  to  the  form  of  hii 


44  THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  1. 1—31 


teaching,  St.  Paul  says,  "To  the  weak  I  became  weak," etc.  (ch.  ix.  22);  with  referenca 
to  the  substance,  "  Thoiigli  we  or  an  angel  from  heaven  should  preach  any  other  gospel," 
etc.  (Gal.  i.  8).  Jews  and  Greeks  are  the  two  broad  classes  under  which  these 
varieties  of  prejudice  might  be  grouped ;  and  here  are  their  prominent  characteristics. 
"  Jews  ask  for  signs."  It  was  so  in  the  days  of  Christ.  "  An  evil  and  adulterous 
generation,"  etc.  (Matt.  xii.  39) ;  "  Except  ye  see  signs  and  wonders,"  etc.  (John  iv. 
48).  And  in  the  apostolic  age  the  race  every"here  manifested  the  same  menial 
tendency.  They  were  sign-seeking  Jews.  "  Greeks  seek  after  wisdom  " — such  wisdom 
ifi  found  a  home  for  itself  in  their  own  philosophic  schools.  They  knew  no  other.  Thus 
each  of  these  classes  illustrated  a  particular  aspect  of  the  vanity  of  human  nature ;  the 
■)ne  craving  after  that  which  would  minister  to  the  pride  of  sense,  the  other  to  the  pride 
of  intellect.  For  lioth  Paul  had  but  one  message  :  "  Christ  and  him  crucified."  Note — 
L  The  theme  op  the  apostolic  teaching.  "  We  preach  Clirist  crucified  "  (see  also 
ch.  ii.  2  ;  Gal.  iii.  1).  This  is  the  surn  and  substance  of  evangelical  doctrine,  the  idea 
that  filled  the  foremost  place  in  the  apostle's  thought  and  supplied  the  chief  inspiration 
of  his  heroic  life.  Not  a  little  of  the  emphasis  falls  on  the  word  "crucified."  He 
preached  Christ  as  the  personal  Redeemer  of  men,  and  that,  not  merely  as  the  great 
miracle-working  Prophet  of  God,  the  moral  Reformer,  the  Eevealer  of  new  truth,  the 
Lawgiver  of  a  new  spiritual  kingdom,  the  Example  of  a  divinely  perfect  life,  but  as 
the  Victim  of  death.  It  was  in  the  death  of  Christ  that  the  whole  force  and  virtue  of 
the  apostolic  testimony  about  him  lay.  What  meaning  did  Paul  attach  to  this  death  ? 
The  mere  reiteration  of  the  fact  itself  would  be  powerless  apart  from  its  doctrinal  sig- 
nificance. If  he  had  represented  it  simply  as  the  crowning  act  of  a  life  of  devotion  and 
self-sacrifice  in  the  cause  of  God  and  of  humanity,  he  would  have  placed  the  Name  ol 
Christen  the  level  of  many  another  name,  and  his  death  on  a  level  with  the  death  of  many 
another  witness  for  truth  and  righteousness ;  instead  of  which  a  virtue  and  a  moral 
efiicacy  are  everywhere  imputed  to  it,  which  cannot  be  conceived  of  as  belonging  to  any 
other  death,  and  which  alone  explain  the  position  it  occupies  in  apostolic  teaching  (see 
ch.  V.  7 ;  Eph.  i.  7  ;  ii.  14, 16 ;  Col.  i.  21 ;  1  John  i.  7  ;  ii.  2).  Forgiveness  of  sins, 
spiritual  cleansing,  moral  freedom,  practical  righteousness,  fellowship  with  God,  the 
hope  of  eternal  glory, — all  are  set  forth  here  as  fruits  of  the  death  of  Christ  and  our 
faith  in  it.  St.  Paul  made  it  the  one  grand  theme  of  his  ministry,  because  he  knew 
that  it  would  meet  the  deep  and  universal  needs  of  humanity.  No  other  word  would 
bring  rest  to  the  troubled  conscience  and  satislaction  to  the  longing,  weaiy,  distracted 
heart  of  man ;  no  other  voice  could  awaken  the  world  to  newness  of  life  out  of  the 
dread  shadow  of  despair  and  death  in  which  it  lay. 

II.  The  reception  it  met  with,  from  "Jews,"  "Gentiles"  and  "them  that  are 
called."  1.  "  Unto  Jews  a  sturribling-hlock" — an  offence,  something  "  scamlalous."  On 
several  special  grounds  Christ  was  such  an  ofience  to  them.  (1)  The  lowliness  of  his 
origin.  (2)  The  unostentatious  character  of  his  life.  (3)  The  unworldliness  of  his  aims 
and  methods.  (4)  The  expansive  spirit  of  his  ductrine;  its  freedom  from  class  and 
national  exclusiveness.  (5)  The  universality  of  the  grace  he  offered.  (6)  Above  all,  the 
fact  of  his  crucifixion.  How  could  they  recngnize  as  their  Messiah  One  who  had  died  as 
the  vilest  of  malefactors ;  died  by  the  judgment  of  their  rulers  and  amid  the  derision  of 
the  people ;  died  by  a  death  that  above  all  others  they  abhorred  ?  The  cross,  which 
Paul  made  the  basis  of  human  hope  and  the  central  glory  of  the  universe,  was  to  them 
"a  stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offence."  2.  "  Unto  Gentiles  foolishness."  The 
Gentile  world  was  pervaded  by  Greek  sentiment.  "  Greece  had  now  for  more  than 
a  century  been  but  a  province  of  Rome ;  but  the  mind  of  Greece  had  mastered  that  ol 
Rome."  "  The  world  in  name  and  government  was  Roman,  but  in  feeling  and  civiliza- 
tiou  Greek."  Such  a  world  scorned  the  "preaching  of  the  cross  "because:  (1)  Itlowered 

the  pride  of  the  human  intellect,  both  by  its  simplicity  and  by  its  profumtity so  plain 

that  "  the  wayfaring  man  though  a  fool "  could  understand  it,  too  deep  for  the  utmost 
Btretch  of  thought  to  fathom.  (2)  It  revealed  the  rottenness  of  the  human  heart  beneath 
the  fturest  garment  of  civilization  and  culture.  It  made  man  de|iendent  for  all  his  lifht 
upcn  supernatural  revelations,  and  for  all  his  hopes  of  redemption  on  the  spontaneous 
impulse  of  sovereign  mercy.  No  wonder  it  was  "  foolishness  "  to  proud  Romans  and 
polished,  philosophic  Greeks.  And  have  we  nut  around  us  now  similar  phases  o) 
aversion  to  the  doctrine  of  "  Christ  crucified  "  ?   The  spirit  of  the  world  is  not  the  spirit 


OB.  L  1—31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.  45 

of  the  cross.  The  one  is  carnal,  vain,  selfish,  revengeful,  self-indulgent;  the  other  is 
spiritnal,  lowly,  benevolent,  forgiving,  self-abandoning.  The  cross  to  every  one  of  us 
means  submission,  humiliation,  self-sacrifice,  it  may  be  reproach  and  shame ;  and  these 
are  hard  to  hear.  It  is  hard  to  say,  with  Paul,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,"  etc. 
The  cross  may  occupy  a  prominent  place  in  our  creed,  our  worship,  our  sermons  and 
songs,  may  decorate  our  churches,  may  be  made  a  favourite  instrument  of  personal 
adornment ;  but  to  have  its  spirit  filling  our  hearts,  mouDing  and  goTerning  our  whole 
being  and  life,  is  another  thing.  3.  "  Unto  them  that  are  culled"  etc.  The  " called "  are 
they  who  "  are  being  saved  "  (ver.  18).  In  the  case  of  all  such  the  Divine  purpose  in 
the  gospel  is  answered.  They  are  called,  and  they  obey  the  call.  The  heavenly  voice 
foils  on  their  ears,  penetrates  the  secrecy  of  their  souls,  and  there  is  life  for  them  in  the 
sound,  because,  like  the  still,  small  voice  that  breathed  in  the  hearing  of  Elijah  at  the 
mouth  of  the  cave,  "  the  Lord  is  in  the  voice."  The  proof  they  have  that  the  gospel  is 
the  embodiment  of  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God  is  the  infallible  seal  of  the  Spirit,  the 
unanswerable  witness  of  a  Divine  and  heavenly  life.  Is  it  a  "  sign  "  that  you  ask  for  ? 
Believe  in  Christ,  and  you  shall  have  within  you  that  mightiest  of  all  wonders,  the 
miracle  of  grace  by  which  a  soul  is  translated  from  darkness  into  light,  and  from  the 
death  of  sin  to  the  life  of  holiness.  Is  it  "  wisdom  "  you  seek  after  ?  Believe  in  Christ, 
and  he  will  unlock  for  you  the  unsearchable  riches  of  the  mind  and  heart  of  God. — ^W. 

Ver.  7. — TKe  patience  of  hope.  "  Waiting  for  the  revelation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
Old  Testament  worthies  waited  for  the  advent  of  Messiah  and  the  consolation  of  Israel. 
New  Testament  saints  wait  for  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord,  the  completion  of  the 
Church  in  holiness,  and  its  entrance  into  his  glory  at  his  appearing.  They  already 
possess  Christ  by  faith.  He  answers  for  them  in  order  to  their  justification,  and  he 
dwells  in  them  in  order  to  their  sanctification.  They  love  him  as  their  Saviour 
unseen,  and  therefore  they  long  to  see  him  as  he  is.  Men  who  are  afraid  of  judgment 
hope  for  acquittal ;  men  who  are  weary  and  worn  hope  for  rest ;  men  whose  earthly 
course  has  been  disappointing  hope  for  a  better  world;  but  none  of  these  wishes  or 
expectations  come  up  to  the  blessed  hope  which  is  distinctively  Christian.  We  look 
for  the  Saviour.    We  wait  for  the  apocalypse  of  our  Lord. 

I.  The  geound  on  which  we  cherish  this  expectation.  It  is  simply  the  word  of 
promise.  In  parables,  and  in  plain  statements  also,  Jesus  Christ  assured  his  disciples 
that  he  would  return  in  an  unexpected  hour.  At  his  ascension  the  heavenly 
messengers, "  men  in  white  apparel,"  said  explicitly  to  the  "  men  of  Galilee  "  that  "  this 
Jesus "  would  return  from  heaven.  Accordingly  the  apostles  infused  this  hope  into 
the  early  Church  ;  all  the  Epistles  refer  to  it ;  and  the  last  book  of  the  Bible  closes  with 
a  repetition  of  the  Lord's  promise :  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly ;  "  and  the  response  of 
the  Church :  "  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus  I "  We  do  not  entertain  any  question  of 
probability.  For  Christians  the  matter  rests  on  a  sure  word  of  prophecy  and  promise, 
pledging  the  truth  of  the  Son  of  God.  If  any  persons  are  capable  of  believing  that  the 
Son  of  God  spoke  at  random  or  kindled  by  his  words  expectations  that  are  never  to  be 
fulfilled,  we  cannot  prove  to  them  that  Christ  will  come  again.  But  all  who  reverence 
him  as  One  in  whose  mouth  no  guile  was  ever  found,  are  bound  to  believe  that  he  will 
be  revcMled  in  his  glory ;  and  all  who  love  him  will  look  for  his  appearing. 

II.  Reasons  fob  oub  waiting  fob  the  Lobd.  1.  "We  see  not  yet  all  things  put 
under  him,"  and  we  long  to  do  so.  Promises  of  universal  sovereignty  and  honour 
made  to  Christ  in  the  Psalms  wait  for  falfilment.  Prayers  of  many  generations  made 
"for  him"  aa  well  as  through  him,  wait  for  the  answer.  Therefore  the  Church, 
believing  the  promises  and  continuing  the  prayers,  above  all,  loving  him  to  whom 
such  things  are  promised  and  the  ardour  of  such  prayers  is  devoted,  cannot  but  wait 
for  the  Lord  as  night-watchers  wait  for  the  morning.  Ever  since  the  Ascension,  Christ 
has  had,  by  appointment  of  the  Father, "  all  authority  in  heaven  and  earth."  The  glory 
in  heaven  is  hidden  from  us,  but  all  may  see  that  since  the  day  of  his  ascension  his 
Name  has  been  rising  continually  above  all  other  names  known  to  mankind,  and  has  so 
extended  the  area  of  its  fame  and  influence  that  it  is  beyond  question  the  mightiest  ■ 
name  upon  earth.  Still  Christ  has  many  enemies.  They  are  not  yet  made  "his  foot 
stool,"  And  many  of  those  who  are  called  Christians  are  at  heart  indifferent  to  his 
cause,  disobedient  to  his  Word,  apathetic  about  his  kingdom  and  glory.    Then  the 


te  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.    [oh.i.1— St 

tribes  and  nations  of  the  earth  do  not  to  any  appreciable  extent,  even  in  Christendom, 
acknowledsie  or  servo  the  Lord  Jesus;  and  there  are  vast  populations  that  have 
scarcely  heard  his  Name.  Even  in  our  own  country,  one  is  struck  with  the  avoidance 
of  any  express  mention  of  him  who  is  Lord  of  all,  as  Lord  over  us.  In  public  documents, 
expressive  of  the  national  mind  and  will,  there  may  be  reference  to  "  Almighty  God," 
and  to  a  superintending  Providence — cold  phrases  of  theism  ;  but  there  is  an  apparent 
reluctance  to  name  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  own  submission  to  his  Word.  This  is 
grievous  to  thoEe  wlio  love  him  and  know  that  he  is  the  sole  sufficient  Healer  of  man- 
kind. They  take  their  part  zealously  in  all  movements  to  check  iiljustioe,  to  stay  the 
foetid  streams  of  vice,  to  relieve  misery,  and  to  spread  virtue  and  peace ;  but  they  lament 
that  Christ  is  so  little  sought  and  honoured  in  the  efforts  of  philanthropy,  and  they 
often  cry  to  him  in  their  struggle,  "  Lord,  how  long  ?  When  wilt  thou  return  from 
the  far  country  ?  When  wilt  thou  take  thy  great  power,  and  reign  ?  "  2.  We  have  such 
correspondence  now  with  the  unseen  Saviour  as  makes  us  long  for  his  bright  presence. 
It  is  not  fair  or  reasonable  to  put  the  revelation  of  Christ  to  us  now  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
against  the  personal  revelation  to  his  saints  at  his  second  coming,  and  to  ask  which  oi 
them  is  the  more  to  be  desired.  Each  is  to  be  desired  in  its  season,  and  the  first  whets 
the  longing  for  the  second.  If  I  have  had  pleasant  and  profitable  correspondence  for 
years  with  one  whom  I  have  not  seen,  but  who  is  known  to  me  by  his  wisdom  and 
kindness ;  if  he  has  done  me  more  good  than  all  the  men  whom  I  have  seen,  taught  me, 
helped  me,  and  stamped  the  impression  of  himself  on  my  mind  and  heart ;  do  I  not  long 
to  see  him  face  to  face,  and  eagerly  wait  for  a  day  when  I  may  be  nearer  to  him  who 
has  become  indispensable  to  me,  the  very  life  of  my  life  ?  Surely  it  is  so  between 
Christians  and  Christ.  They  have  heard  his  words,  received  his  Spirit,  had  much 
correspondence  with  him  in  prayer  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  got  much  help  from  him  in 
time  of  need.  Though  unseen,  he  has  been  far  more  to  them  than  all  the  teachers  and 
friends  whom  they  have  seen ;  and  for  that  very  reason  they  long  to  behold  him.  Their 
hearts  can  never  be  quite  satisfied  till  they  see  the  Lord.  3.  We  are  weary  of  ourselves 
and  ashamed  of  our  faults,  and  therefore  long  to  be  perfected  at  his  coming.  It  is  true 
that  the  life  of  faith  has  deep  wells  of  comfort,  and  Christians  ought  to  be  happy.  It  is 
also  true  that  the  abiding  Spirit  of  Christ  is  able  to  keep  his  servants  from  sin,  and  to 
sustain  them  in  a  course  of  holy  obedience.  But  it  is  useless  to  dispute  the  fact  that  we 
are  all  impeifect  in  character  and  faulty  in  service.  We  -fall  short  of  our  best  aims, 
blunder  in  our  well-doing,  spoil  much  good  by  faults  of  temper  and  even  of  manner,  and 
ate  unprofitable  servants.  The  best  Christians,  in  whom  perhaps  we  see  no  blemish,  see 
in  themselves  sin  and  imperfection  to  the  last.  Kow,  we  make  no  excuse  for  fault  or 
inconsistency.  We  maintain  that  honest  servants  of  Jesus  Christ  will  aim  daily  and 
prayerfully  at  amendment,  and  endeavour  to  walk  more  closely  with  God.  Still,  there 
will  always  be  some  defect  till  the  servants  see  their  Lord.  It  is  his  coming  that  will 
give  the  signal  for  the  perfecting  of  his  people,  and  their  complete  transformation  into  his 
likeness.  Such  is  the  doctrine  often  taught  by  the  Apostle  Paul :  "  Unreprovable  in  the 
day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  8) ;  "  Unblamable  in  holiness  before  our  God  and 
Father  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  with  all  his  saints  "  (1  Thess.  iii.  13) ;  "  Without 
blame  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (1  Thess.  v.  23).  There  may  here  be 
added  the  prospect  of  the  Lord's  kind  approval  of  diligent  though  imperfect  service 
rendered  to  him,  for  which  he  will  award  a  kingly  recompense.  But  we  do  not  much 
dwell  on  this,  because  the  thought  of  getting  anything  from  the  King  is  not  so  dear  to 
those  who  love  him  as  the  expectation  of  lieing  made  like  him,  purified  as  he  is  pure. 
Therefore  the  intense  longing  of  the  saints  for  the  revelation  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  (1) 
Watch  and  be  sober.  Extravagance  of  mind,  glorying  in  the  fledi,  indulgence  of  inordU 
nate  desire,  are  not  becoming  in  men  who  wait  for  the  Lord.  Be  temperate  in  all  things. 
(2)  Watch  and  pray.  Ask  God  to  help  your  infirmities,  and  to  deliver  you  from  the 
spirit  of  slumber.  Your  lamps  will  not  go  out  so  long  as  you  pray ;  for  then  you  have 
a  continual  supply  of  oil.  (8)  Watch  and  work.  The  Lord  followed  up  the  parable  of 
the  waiting  virgins  with  that  of  the  trading  servants.  Blessed  is  the  faithful  and  wise 
servant  whom  the  Lord,  when  he  comes,  shall  find  doing  the  work  assigned  to  him. 
The  Master  bids  us  not  "  prepare  for  death,"  as  so  many  put  it,  but  prepare  to  render 
account  of  our  service  to  him  at  his  return.  Alas  for  the  wicked  and  slothful  serranta 
In  that  day  I— r. 


0B.L1--31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  47 

Var.  9. — Baored  partner Aip.  "Ye  were  called  into  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  Jesua 
Ohriat  our  Lord." 

L  What  is  meant  bt  this  feIiLowbhip?  It  Is  somethiag  more  than  discipleship 
or  even  friendship.  It  is  partnership.  It  is  a  fonn  of  the  word  which  is  used  when 
the  sons  of  Zebedee  are  described  as  "partners  with  Simon,"  and  when  the  early 
Christians  at.  Jerusalem  are  said  to  have  "  had  all  things  common."  St.  Paul  held  that 
heathen  worshippers  of  demons  were  sharers  with  the  demons — raaiie  common  cause 
with  them ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  worshippers  of  God  in  Christ  were  sharers 
with  Christ,  and  made  common  cause  with  him,  having  a  common  interest  in  the 
"day  of  grace,"  and  destined  to  a  common  inheritance  in  the  day  of  glory.  He 
was  theirs,  and  they  were  his.  It  was  a  partnersliip  which  God's  purpose  had  contem- 
plated from  of  old,  which  his  Spirit  had  constituted,  and  which  his  faithfulness  was 
pledged  to  maintain  and  defend.  Fail  not  to  observe  the  fulness  of  the  designation 
— "  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,"  Christians  are  made  sons  of  God  by  adoption, 
and, "  if  children,  then  heirs,  heirs  of  God,  and  co-heirs  with  Christ."  But  the  inheritance 
is  not  yet.  This  is  the  day  of  service,  perhaps  of  suffering.  Therefore  let  us  consider 
the  fellowship  with  the  Father  of  which  the  Son  Jesus  Christ  was  conscious  in  the 
time  of  his  service  and  sorrow  on  the  earth ;  for  the  holy  calling  is  into  the  fellowship 
of  the  Son.  In  the  Gospel  according  to  St.  John  it  is  shown  that  our  Saviour  had  not 
only  an  unbroken  communion  of  heart  and  purpose  with  the  Father  in  heaven,  but 
also  a  conscious  participation  with  the  Father.  All  things  that  the  Father  has  were 
his.  No  practical  line  of  division  could  be  drawn  between  the  Father's  will  and  his 
will,  the  Father's  works  and  his  works.  As  in  eternal  essence,  so  also  in  operation,  he 
and  the  Father  were  one.  The  Father  was  always  with  him.  He  spoke  words  which 
be  had  heard  with  his  Father.  He  did  works  which  were  the  Father's  works,  which 
indeed  the  Father  dwelling  in  him  performed.  He  received  and  kept  men  whom  the 
Father  had  given  to  him  out  of  the  world.  The  very  hatred  which  he  encountered  was 
the  hatred  of  the  world  to  the  Father;  and  the  glory  for  which  he  looked  was  glory 
with  the  Father  above  the  reach  of  human  scorn.  Now,  it  is  into  participation  with 
the  Son  as  thus  participating  with  the  Father  that  Christians  are  admitted  by  adoption, 
in  so  far  as  it  is  possible  for  the  human  to  share  with  the  Divine.  Made  one  with 
Christ  through  faith,  they  also  have  communion  with  him  in  the  sense  of  having 
a  common  cause  and  interest  with  him.  His  Father  is  their  Father,  and  his  God  their 
Gk>d.  The  same  Spirit  that  rested  on  him  is  imparted  to  them.  The  same  works  that 
he  did,  they  do  also.  The  adversaries  that  they  encounter  hated  him  bufore  they  hated 
them.  The  path  which  he  trod  is  the  path  for  them  also.  His  cause  is  their  concern ; 
and  their  cause  is  his  concern.  Nay,  the  very  love  with  which  the  Father  loved  the 
Son  is  in  and  on  them  also ;  and  their  hope  of  glory  is  the  hope  to  be  with  him  and 
behold  his  glory.  Thus  the  fellowship  means  more  than  friendship.  It  is  participation 
with  Christ.  His  disciples  are  in  his  work,  waiting  to  enter  into  his  rest ;  in  his  battle, 
looking  to  share  his  victory ;  and,  if  need  be,  co-sufiering  with  him,  long  to  be  also 
eo-glorified. 

U.  How  18  THIS  FELLOWSHIP  CONSTITUTED?  By  the  gracious  call  of  3toi,  The 
apostle  spoke  of  the  transfer  of  the  Corinthian  Christians  from  their  old  and  sinful 
fellowships  to  a  new  and  sacred  one,  proceeding  on  the  true  ideal  and  heavenly  calling 
of  the  Church,  notwithstanding  actual  defects  and  faults  which  he  saw  and  reproved 
in  the  particular  Christian  community  there,  and  in  some  of  its  individual  members. 
Heathen  society  was  in  his  view  a  region  of  darkness ;  Christian  society  a  region  of  light. 
The  one  was  a  temple  of  idols ;  the  other  a  temple  of  God.  The  one  was  the  fellow- 
ship of  Belial ;  the  other  the  fellowship  of  Christ.  The  transition  firom  the  one  to  the 
other  was  by  compliance  with  a  call  of  God,  which  was  a  public  call  to  all  men  in  the 
mouths  of  preachers  of  the  gospel,  an  effectual  call  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  all  who 
believed  and  obeyed. 

IIL   How  IS  THE  FELLOWSHIP  MANIFESTED,  AND  SO  THE  CALLING  MADE  SUBB  ?      1.  In 

resolutely  breaking  away  from  evil  associations.  Read  in  the  Book  ol'  Proverbs  how  "  the 
wicked  join  hand  in  hand,"  and  young  persons  are  ruined  by  casting  in  their  lot  with 
sinners  who  entice  them.  Read  in  this  Epistle  the  homely  saying  that  "had  company  cor- 
mpts  good  manners."  And  depend  on  it  that  it  is  as  needful  as  ever  to  shun  the  society 
of  evil-doers  and  scoffers.    The  tendency  of  the  time  is  to  obliterate  sharp  distinctions 


48  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIAN&    [oh.  L  1—81 

on  moral  grounds,  to  suggest  pleasant  compromises,  and  get  rid  of  all  that  is  difficult  or 
Btern  in  the  obligations  of  Christian  consistency.  But  those  who  really  obey  the  call 
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  hare  no  chnicu  but  to  follow  the  direction  of  his  Word,  cost 
what  it  may,  and  therefore  must  decline  intimacy  with  such  as  make  light  of  that 
Word,  and  must  not  be  conformed  to  this  world,  but  transformed  by  the  renewing  ol 
their  minds.  2.  In  adherence  to  those  who  retain  and  obey  the  doctrine  once  for  al" 
delivered  to  the  saints.  No  other  conditions  should  be  required.  To  confine  fellow- 
ship to  those  of  our  own  party  and  of  our  own  way  of  thinking  all  round  indicates 
sectarian  zeal  or  self-complacency  rather  than  brotherly  love.  The  Corinthians  broke 
into  parties  and  set  up  rival  names.  In  their  assemblies,  and  even  at  the  Eucharistic 
Supper,  individuals  courted  observation  and  scrambled  tor  precedence  over  others.  It 
was  sadly  inconsistent  with  the  fact  that  God  had  called  them  to  the  fellowship  of  his 
Son.  It  is  well  to  be  warned  in  this  matter,  so  as  to  have  patinnce  one  with  another^ 
avoid  party  spiiit,  and  cherish  regard  for  all  who,  having  the  doctrine  and  Spirit  of 
Jesus  Christ,  are  and  must  be  in  ihe  holy  fellowship.  3.  In  exhibiting  the  disposition 
and  mind  of  Christ.  They  who  hare  a  new  life  in  union  and  communion  with  Christ 
must  feel,  speak,  and  act  accordingly,  putting  away  evil  passions  and  all  deceit,  and 
putting  on  a  meek,  compassionate,  and  honest  heart.  In  the  third  chapter  of  the  Epistle 
to  the  Colossians  St.  Paul  beautifully  expounds  this  holy  obligation,  and  imparts  these 
two  pregnant  counsels :  "  Let  the  peace  of  Christ  rule  [arbitrate]  in  your  hearts ; "  "  Let 
the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly  in  all  wisdom." — ^F. 

Ver.  21. — Wisdom  and  foolishness.    "  Seeing  that  in  the  wisdom,"  etc. 

I.  The  contrast  at  Corinth.  The  Greeks  could  no  Ioniser  boast  of  great  soldiers 
or  statesmen,  for  military  and  political  power  liad  deserted  them  and  centred  at  Rome; 
but  they  had  among  them  rhetoricians  and  philosophers,  and  still  considered  themselves 
intellectual  leaders  of  the  world.  In  this  spirit  they  sat  in  judgment  on  the  gospel. 
As  to  its  treatment  of  the  problems  of  sin  and  righteousness,  they  were  not  deeply 
concerned ;  but  they  were  ready  to  weigh  and  measure  it  as  a  new  phil(is<>])hy,  and 
thought  it  deficient  in  intellectual  flavour,  and  quite  inferior  to  the  speculations  of 
Greek  teachers  on  the  nature  of  God  and  of  man,  the  order  of  the  world,  the  beautiful 
and  the  good.  St.  Paul  knew  this  feeling  well,  and  felt  the  sting  of  such  imputations, 
for  he  was  an  educated  man ;  but  with  his  usual  frankness  and  manliness  he  faced  this 
allegation  of  the  supercilions  Greeks,  and  with  a  sharp  spear  pricked  the  bubble  of  their 
■elf-conscious  wisdom.  Nay,  he  holdly  maintained  that  what  they  thought  wise  was 
foolish,  and  what  they  thouglit  foolish  was  wise.  At  the  same  time,  he  was  too  wary 
and  too  kind-hearted  to  irritate  his  readers  by  pointing  the  statement  at  Corinth,  or 
even  at  Greece  by  name.  He  spoke  of  the  wisdom  of  the  world.  Let  all  the  wisdom  to 
which  the  whole  world  had  attained  by  human  investigation  into  the  things  of  God  be 
gathered  into  a  heap,  and  displayed  in  all  the  light  that  the  world's  best  minds  could 
cast  upon  it,  and  he  would  maintain  that  it  was  weak,  dim,  and  futile  as  compared  with 
that  wisdom  which  he  and  other  preachers  of  Christ  could  inculcate  by  the  gospel. 
It  was  a  large  claim ;  but  those  who  know  "  the  wisdom  of  the  ancients  "  best,  and  are 
most  accurately  acquainted  with  the  ideas  and  usages  of  that  old  heathen  world,  will  be 
the  most  ready  to  say  that  St.  Paul  had  good  ground  for  his  assertion — that  his  claim 
was  absolutely  true. 

II.  The  conthast  to-dat.  Contemptuous  thoughts  about  the  evangelical  faith 
show  themselves  in  many  quarters.  Men  seem  to  forget  that  the  intellectual  advance- 
ment of  modern  society,  of  which  they  boast,  and  which  they  put  forward  as  superseding 
old-fashioned  Christianity,  is  itself  mainly  due  to  Christianity ;  that  the  great  schools 
and  universities  of  Europe  all  had  their  roots  in  religion ;  and  that  the  very  ideas  which 
give  tone  and  breadth  to  our  civilization,  the  appreciation  of  the  force  of  truth,  and 
the  sense  of  human  brotlierhood  as  something  far  above  mere  enthusiasm  for  one  iac« 
and  antipathy  to  all  others,  all  Lave  been  engendered  and  fostered  by  our  holy  faith 
Ungratefully  overlooking  this,  men  stand  to-day  on  an  eminence  which  Christianity 
has  cast  up,  and  thence  decry  Christianity.  Religion  is  pronounced  weak  and  quite 
unprovable.  It  is  not  good  enrngli  fur  these  very  knowing  people  and  hard  thinkers! 
Yet  nothing  is  more  certain  ihan  that  men  have  urgent  need  of  God,  and  of  those 
moral  helps  and  profound  consolations  which  are  bound  up  wim  a  knowledge  of  God 


OH.1.1— 31.J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,  49 

and  friendship  with  him.  And  the  heart  at  times  has  a  passionate  cry,  "  Where  is  my 
God?"  Put  aside  the  money-bags,  the  clever  schemes,  the  amusements,  the  news- 
papers, the   scientific  instruments,  and    the  social  engagements,   and  tell  me  this, 

0  wisdom  of  the  world!  "Where  is  God  my  Maker?  is  there  not  a  Highest  and 
Wisest  and  Best  ?    And  where  is  he  ?    '  Oh  that  1  knew  where  I  might  find  him  I  that 

1  might  come  even  to  his  seat  1 ' "  What  can  the  wisdom  of  this  world  reply  ?  It  does 
not  deny  Divine  existence,  though  a  good  many  persons  are  coldly  doubtful  and 
agnostic  on  the  subject.  But  as  in  the  first  century  any  effective  conception  of  the 
Divine  was  wearing  out  of  thoughtful  minds,  and  there  was  hardly  any  religious 
check  on  licentiousness  and  rapacity ;  so  now  there  are  mere  vague  and  high-sounding 
phrases  about  the  Almighty  current  among  the  worldly  wise,  without  as  much  real 
liaith  in  God  as  may  restrain  one  fit  of  passion  or  dry  one  bitter  tear.  He  is  a  force — 
personal  or  impersonal,  no  one  knows;  where  seated,  why  operative,  how  directed, 
none  can  tell.  Or,  he  is  a  dream  of  ineffable  beauty  and  a  foimtain  of  ineffable  pity ; 
but  how  to  reconcile  this  with  the  more  severe  aspects  of  nature  and  life  baiBes  all  the 
wisdom  of  the  world.  The  sages  are  puzzled  ;  the  multitude  know  not  what  to  think; 
and  so  the  world  by  wisdom  knows  not  God.  But  there  is  a  better  wisdom,  and  St.  Paul 
has  shown  it  to  us.  It  may  be  well  for  some  to  watch  the  weary  gropings  and 
struggles  of  the  world's  wisdom,  and  speak  or  write  on  the  evidences  of  Biblical  theology 
and  the  Christian  faith  when  they  find  a  fit  occasion.  Yet  those  to  whom  the  gos[)el 
is  committed  ought  not,  as  a  general  rule,  to  turn  aside  to  such  discussions.  They 
ought  to  preach  often  and  earnestly,  triisting  to  God's  vindication  of  the  wisdom  of  that 
which  men  call  foolishness.  "  What  will  this  babbler  say  ?  "  they  cried  against  St.  Paul 
in  Greece.  "  What  will  this  heretic  say?  "  they  cried  against  Wickliffe  in  England,  and 
afterwards  against  Luther  in  Germany,  "  What  will  this  tub-thumper  say  ?  "  they 
cried  against  Whitefield  and  Wesley — men  who,  under  God,  saved  the  moral  and 
religious  life  of  England.  But  however  preachers  may  be  mocked,  the  foolishness  of 
preaching  has  abundantly  shown  itself  to  be  wisdom  by  its  results.  Its  seeming  weak- 
ness covers  real  power.    0  wise  babbler  who  says,  "  Christ  crucified]" — F. 

Vers.  22 — ^24. — Apostolir  preaohing.  St.  Paul  magnified  the  function  of  preaching. 
He  could  leave  the  baptism  of  converts  and  the  details  of  Church  business  to  others,  but 
devoted  himself  to  the  proclamation  and  defence  of  the  truth.  No  encounter  of  resist- 
ance or  neglect  could  turn  him  away  from  preaching  Christ,  or  make  him  ashamed  of 
the  gospel.     His  occupation  gave  him  a  deep  and  solemn  joy. 

L  Tub  subject  of  pbeachino.  "  We  preach  Christ  crucified;"  not  Christianity, 
but  Christ ;  not  even  the  Crucifixion,  but  the  Christ  crucified.  There  are  many  topics 
on  which  we  may  discourse,  many  questions  we  may  discuss  ;  but  we  ought  to  preach 
Christ.  Indeed,  our  discourses  and  discussions  have  spiritual  freshness  and  force  only  as 
they  start  from  or  lead  up  to  this  central  object  and  inexhaustible  theme.  And  "  Christ 
crucified" — not  his  life  and  character  and  example  only,  but  his  dying  "for  our  sins 
according  to  the  Scriptures ; " — it  is  this  that  brings  peace  to  troubled  consciences  of 
men,  and  the  strongest  and  most  persuasive  appeal  to  their  hearts.  Little  does  he 
know  the  calling  of  a  New  Testament  preacher,  or  the  secret  of  success  in  proclaiming 
the  Word  of  truth,  who  contents  himself  with  occasional  and  distant  allusions  to  the 
"  great  Sacrifice.     The  preacher's  place  is  over  against  the  cross. 

II.  The  prejudice  which  this  peeachikg  provoked  and  encountered.  1,  The 
Jews  reqiured  signs.  Addicted  as  they  were  to  much  boasting  over  the  signs  and 
wonders  wrought  for  their  forefathers  by  the  hand  of  Moses  and  other  prophets,  they 
demanded  signs  or  prodigies  in  attestation  of  the  gospel.  It  was  a  demand  which  our 
Lord  always  refused  when  it  was  urged  on  him,  and  one  which  the  apostles  did  well 
to  discourage.  They  were  not  thaumaturgists,  but  preachers  of  righteousness.  There- 
fore the  Jews  believed  not.  To  them  Christ  crucified  was  a  stumbling-block.  A  Man 
whom  their  council  had  condemned  for  blasphemy,  and  whom  the  Roman  authorities 
had  put  to  death, — how  could  he  be  a  Saviour  ?  how  could  he  be  the  Messiah  ?  Why 
did  not  God  save  him  from  a  miserable  death  if  he  delighted  in  him  ?  Why  did  he 
himself  not  come  down  from  the  cross  ?  So  the  Jews  stumbled  and  fell  through 
unbelief.  And  to  this  day  they  b.'aspheme  the  Nazarene  as  the  Man  who  was  hanged 
upon  a  tree.     A  sii^'lar  prejudice  shows  itself  among  Gentile  hearers  of  the  gospel  also, 

L  00BINTHIAN8  ■ 


50  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [ob.l1— SL 

Men  who  have  little  sense  of  sin  dislike  any  distinct  doctrine  of  Christ  Buffering  for  qui 
sins.  And  men  who  think  chiefly  of  power  as  the  sign  of  Deity  stumhle  at  the  state- 
ment that  One  who  died  with  nails  through  his  hands  and  feet  was  the  Son  of  God 
and  is  the  Lord  of  all.  2.  The  Greeks  sought  after  wisdom.  And  to  them  the  preach- 
ing of  the  cross  seemed  to  be  mere  folly.  It  appealed  to  the  consciousness  of  sin,  which 
did  not  much  trouble  them ;  and  it  said  nothing  to  the  speculative  understanding,  hardly 
noticed  those  problems  over  which  the  philosophical  schools  of  Greece  had  talked  and 
disputed  for  generations.  The  same  prejudice  hinders  many  educated  men  at  the 
present  day  from  receiving  the  gospel.  Is  it  high  thought  ?  What  light  can  the  fate 
of  One  who  was  unjustly  crucified  among  the  Jews  long  ago  cast  on  the  intellectual 
problems  of  to-day  ?  The  gospel  seems  to  them  unworthy  of  the  serious  attention  of 
cultured  j  »sons.  It  may  have  its  uses  for  the  common  people ;  but  it  has  no 
philosophy,  and  so  it  is  foolishness !  But  blessed  are  they  who  are  not  offended  in 
Jesus.  When  the  gospel  is  preached  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  finds  some 
receptive  hearts.  There  are  always  some  on  whom  the  preaching  is  not  wasted  or 
lost. 

III.  The  oadi  which  accbubs  to  bblievebs.  They  are  described  as  "  the  called  " — 
a  phrase  evidently  not  tantamount  to  "  invited,"  for  all  are  invited.  By  "  them  that  are 
called"  are  meant  those  in  whom  the  gospel  finds  reverence  and  faith.  These  are  the 
called  according  to  God's  purpose.  And  see  what  Christ  crucified  is  to  them.  1.  Are 
they  Jews,  or  do  they  resemble  the  Jews  in  looking  for  signs  of  heavenly  power  ? 
Lol  they  have  in  Christ  a  power  far  greater  than  ever  dwelt  in  Moses  or  Elias.  He  is 
the  Power  of  God ;  and  that  not  merely  in  the  outward  sphere  in  which  the  Jews 
desired  to  see  signs  and  wonders,  but  also  in  the  inward  or  moral  sphere,  where  he  has 
shown  himself  able  to  loose  men  from  their  sins,  and  to-despoil  evil  principalities  and 
powers,  triumphing  over  them  on  the  cross.  Just  because  "  crucified  in  weakness," 
he  is  mighty  to  save.  And  all  believers  of  the  gospel  may  know  in  themselves  his 
sin-vanquishing  and  burden-bearing  power.  They  need  no  further  sign.  2.  Are  they 
disposed  by  nature,  or  education,  or  both,  to  seek  after  wisdom  hke  the  Greeks  ?  Have 
they  a  restless,  hungry  mind?  Here  is  the  best  provision  for  their  want,  if  not  for  their 
curiosity.  Christ  is  the  Wisdom  of  God.  The  highest  problems  receive  light  from 
Christ  crucified.  Reconciliation  of  the  claims  of  justice  with  the  yearnings  of  mercy ; 
justification  of  the  transgressors  of  moral  Law  without  detriment  or  dishonour  to  the 
Law  itself;  and  the  introduction  of  a  new  and  better  life  through  death,  as  wheat  grows 
firom  seed  that  has  died  in  the  earth ; — these  are  not  small  or  easy  problems,  and  they 
have  no  solution  till  we  receive  the  gospel  of  Christ  crucified.  He  who  would  nutke 
his  own  calling  sure  should  seek  the  evidence  in  his  own  attitude  of  mind  and  heart 
towards  Christ  cruciflc'l.  Is  he  in  your  eyes  weakness  or  power  ?  foolishness  or  wisdom  V 
As  the  Power  of  God,  has  he  subdued  you  to  himself?  As  the  Wisdom  of  God,  is  he 
the  Light  of  life  to  you — the  Wonderful,  the  Counsellor? — P. 

Vers.  30,  31. — All  sufficiency  in  Christ.  "  But  of  him  are  ye,"  etc.  Here  is  central 
truth  well  compacted.  And  |ilain  sermons  on  such  texts  ought  to  be  frequently  given, 
in  order  to  feed  the  Church  of  God,  wl.ich  grows  lean  on  mere  fine  phrases,  sounding 
periods,  controversial  jauglings,  and  vapid  exhortations. 

I.  The  WAT  OF  blessino.  It  is  obtained  from  the  grace  of  God,  and  by  a  twofold 
action  of  his  grace.  1.  "  Of  God  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus."  This  union  to  Christ, 
engrafting  into  Christ,  enclosure  in  Christ, is  the  root-secret  of  all  spiritual  blessing. 
And  while  we  take  action  in  fleeing  to  Christ,  clinging  to  him,  and  making  him  our 
Refuge,  this  very  action  on  our  part  is  ultimately  due  to  the  drawing  of  the  Father  and 
the  inward  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Therefore  "  of  God  "  we  are  in  Christ  Jesus. 
2.  "Of  God,  Christ  is  made  unto  you"  who  believe,  all-suHioient.  It  is  accorling  to 
God's  good  pln'=.,ure  that  the  merits,  riches,  and  perfections  of  Christ  are  made  available 
to  you.  It  is  ttC  all  events  conceivable  that  one  might  be  saved  in  and  through  Christ, 
and  yet  receive  only  in  part  and  scantily  out  of  his  fulness.  But  such  is  not  the  will 
of  God  concerning  us.  It  is  his  purpose  that  we  should  be,  not  merely  rescued  from 
destruction,  but  enriched  with  heavenly  blessings  in  Christ  Jesus. 

II.  Thk  bubstancb  or  blessing.    What  Christ  is  to  his  own,  who  are  in  him 
Wiidom,  for  they  are  foolish;  Righteousness,  for  they  are  unrighteous;  Sanctiflcatioa 


OKLl— 6L]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  61 

for  they  are  unholy ;  Redemption,  for  they  are  lost  as  other  men,  1.  Wisdom.  Tht 
early  Christians  were  made  wise,  not  after  the  type  of  Jewish  rahbis  or  Greek  sages, 
but  as  cast  into  a  higher  mould — the  mind  of  Clirist.  And  so  also  now.  It  must  b« 
confessed  that  some  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians  speak  and  act  foolishly ; 
but  the  more  Christian  at  heart  one  becomes,  the  more  does  he  gain  of  a  wisdom  far 
beyond  the  keenest  penetration  of  worldly  minds,  for  he  makes  his  estimates  in  the 
light  of  God,  and  learns  to  look  on  earthly  things  as  from  "  heavenly  places."  Christ 
in  u8  is  Wisdom  from  above.  2.  Sighteousnest.  '*  There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not 
one."  The  world  can  show  men  of  strength,  skill,  valour,  shrewdness,  eloquence, 
erudition,  enterprise ;  but  where  is  the  righteous  man  ?  Alas  I  there  is  not  one. 
Nay ;  but  there  is  One  righteous.  Jesus  Christ  was  and  is  that  "  Just  One."  And  ai 
the  wisdom  ascribed  to  him  is  "the  wisdom  of  God,"  so  also  the  righteousness 
attributed  to  him  is  "  the  righteousness  of  God."  This  righteous  One  died  for  ns, 
the  just  One  for  the  unjust  many.  And  in  his  restoration  from  the  dead  and  return 
as  the  righteous  One  to  the  Father,  there  is  the  basis  of  acceptance  for  all  who  are  "  oi 
God  in  him."  So  righteousness  is  imputed  without  works.  Christ  is  made  to  us 
Righteousness.  3.  Sanctiflcation.  "Holinessto  the  Lord  "is  not  known,  or  even  possible, 
without  Christ.  Yet "  without  holiness,  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  Now,  the  apostle 
does  not  say  that  Christ  is  made  to  us  Holiness ;  for  this  might  seem  to  favour  a 
doctrine  of  imputed  holiness,  which  is  full  of  peril.  But  he  is  made  to  us  Consecration ; 
so  that  in  him  we  are  constituted  saints,  separated  from  evil  to  the  service  of  the  holy 
God,  and  from  him  we  derive  purifying  and  sustaining  grace  for  that  newness  of  life  to 
which  we  are  called  and  pledged.  4.  Redemption.  There  is  no  need  to  say  "  complete 
redemption,"  or  "  final  redemption,"  as  some  menders  of  Scripture  have  been  wont 
to  do,  because  the  thing  in  view  is  not  "  the  redemption  of  the  purchased  possession,"  or 
the  redemption  of  the  body  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just ;  but  the  redemption  which 
is  now  obtained  by  reason  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  because  he  gave  himself  ■ 
ransom  for  us.  So  we  have  decisive  and  conclusive  quittance,  both  from  guilt  and  from 
"  the  house  of  bondage."    And  hero  also  Christ  is  all. 

III.  The  aim  and  issue  of  blessings  so  oonfbbbed.  (Ver.  31.)  That  the  saved 
may  have  confidence  in  the  Lord,  and  ascribe  to  him  all  the  praise  and  glory  of  their 
salvation.  It  is  a  good  test  of  doctrine,  whether  it  refers  all  sufficiency  and  renders 
all  praise  to  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  a  test  of  the  heart,  whether  it  delights  to  have 
it  so.  We  mean  not  merely  glory  and  thanks  to  God  for  sending  the  Saviour  into  the 
world — for  so  much  is  common  to  all  types  of  Christian  doctrine ;  but  also  glorr  knd 
praise  to  God  for  bringing  men  into  union  with  the  Saviour,  and  so  into  personal  pos- 
session of  the  blessings  of  salvation.  It  is  reckoned  a  mark  of  a  base  spirit  among  men 
that  it  assumes  credit  to  which  it  is  not  entitled,  and  ignores  its  obligations  to  others. 
But  noble  minds  are  the  first  to  say  that,  for  whatever  they  have  accomplished, 
they  were  not  sufficient  of  themselves,  but  had  help  of  Divine  providence,  help  of 
favouring  circumstances,  and  help  of  their  fellow-men.  When  grace  is  received  from 
Heaven,  how  base  and  unthankful  would  it  be  to  boast  as  if  one  had  not  received  it  I 
Some  cannot  give  glory  to  the  Lord,  because  they  really  are  not  in  Christ ;  and  some 
because,  though  perhaps  in  him,  they  do  not  trust  in  him  with  steady  faith.  Some 
too  are  always  trying  to  be  saved.  They  spend  their  lives  in  the  channel  of  the  Red 
Sea,  sore  afraid  of  the  Egyptians.  They  never  come  up  on  the  shore  where  the 
delivered  sing  to  the  Lord  who  has  triuujphed  gloriously. — F. 

Vers,  1 — 9. — Paul'*  daim  to  apostleship.  The  personal  appearance  and  eharao- 
teristic  disposition  of  Paul,  with  the  particular  circumstances  which  led  to  the  writing 
of  this  letter,  and  roused  intense  personal  feeling,  form  a  fitting  introduction.  Paul 
blends  Sosthenes  with  himself  in  the  salutation,  partly  because  of  this  man's  connection 
with  Corinth  (see  Acts  xviii.  17),  partly  as  an  answer  to  those  who  charged  him  with 
making  too  much  of  himself  and  his  apostolic  rights.  By  associating  this  name  in 
the  address,  Paul  intimates  that  he  did  not  desire  to  make  himself  the  sole  guide  of  the 
Church  nor  would  he  put  himself  before  Christ  in  the  thought  of  the  people.  The 
general  idea  of  apostleship  is  mission.  An  apostle  is  a  sent  one,  or  a  commissioned  one 
It  was  applied  to  other  than  the  twelve,  or  thirteen,  usually  so  called  ;  Barnabas  and 
Silas  coming  uaier  this  classifieation.    As  anplieH  to  the  "  twelve  "  (either  as  includio| 


52  THE  FIRST  BFISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  1.1—31 


Judas   or  Matthias),   the   term    involves  personal  knowledge  of  Christ  and  direel 
reception  of  the  commission  from  him  (Acts  i.  21,  22). 

I.  The  ground  of  Paul's  claim.  It  could  not  rest  on  personal  knowledge  of 
Christ's  ministry.  We  have  no  good  reason  for  assuming  that  Paul  ever  saw  Christ  in 
the  flesh.  That,  however,  was  not  the  more  essetitial  of  the  two  qualifications.  Paul 
had  received  a  direct  call  to  his  office  from  the  Lord  himself.  For  the  historical  facts, 
see  Acts  ix. ;  xiii.  2.  Such  a  direct  call  did  not  involve  infallibility  ;  but  it  did  form 
aground  for  kaWag  personal  confidence,  {ox  speaking  yt'ith.  prophetic  boldness,  and  for 
exercising  measures  ^ authority.  More  especially  when  we  find  the  "call  "  was  followed 
up  with  signs  of  the  Divine  presence  and  approval  in  the  working  of  miracles.  Paul 
ever  makes  much  of  the  directness  of  his  "call."  This  point  he  m<ist  era|phatically 
insists  on  when  writing  to  the  Galations  (Gal.  i.  1, 11,  12).  It  is  characteristic  of  Paul's 
training  and  habit  of  thought,  as  a  Jew,  that  even  this  "  call"  from  Christ  should  be 
conceived  only  as  agency  carrying  out  the  sovereign  and  holy  "  will  and  purjiose  "  of 
God  the  Father.  It  was,  through  all  the  ages,  a  characteristic  of  pious  Jews  that  they 
traced  everything  to  God's  supreme  will,  and  saw  that  will  woiking  through  all. 
Compare  and  illustrate  by  the  Mohammedan  conception  of  Islam,  or  submission  to  the 
will  of  God. 

II.  The  special  features  of  Paul's  commission.  It  was  in  full  harmony  with,  yet 
perfectly  distinct  from,  that  of  the  otlier  apostles.  Such  distinction  may  be  traced  in 
its  sphere.  He  was  to  go  to  the  Gentiles,  and  find  oppoitunities  of  labour  among  them. 
He  was  the  pioneer  of  Christian  missions  to  the  Gentile  world.  But  adaptation  to  this 
sphere  and  work  involved  a  further  distinction  in  the  subject  of  his  commission.  There 
is  a  marked  individuality  in  the  form  of  Paul's  presentation  of  the  truth  in  Christ. 
We  must  give  full  recognition  to  that  individuality,  and  its  adaptation  to  the  thought 
and  life  of  the  people  among  whom  Paul  laboured ;  but  we  should  carefully  guard  against 
exaggerations  which  would  set  Paul's  apprehension  of  the  Christian  truths  out  of 
harmony  with  that  of  the  earlier  apostles.  Paul's  leading  subject  may  be  thus  stated : 
Christ  is  risen ;  then  his  life-work  is  accepted  by  Ood ;  and  he  is  living,  prepared  for 
direct  saving  relations  with  all  wlio  look  to  him  in  penitence  and/a(<A.  To  enter  into 
direct,  personal,  living  relations  with  Christ  is  to  find  perfect  freedom  from  all  other 
religions  or  ecclesiastical  bondages,  old  or  new. 

Apply  by  showing  what  is  the  call  to  Christian  office  and  ministry  now.  There  is  a 
selection  of  men  by  Divine  endowmeiit  and  Divine  proHdence.  These  two  go  together, 
and  the  recognition  of  them  may  be  made  by  other  than  the  man  himself.  Such  a  "  call " 
still  involves  teacliing  power,  persuasive  inflvsnce,  and  gracious  authorities. — B.  T. 

Ver.  3. —  What  the  Church  is,  and  what  the  Church  ought  to  he.  In  introduction 
deal  with  the  features  of  Christian  life  in  towns  and  cities,  as  represented  in  Corinth, 
noticing  its  relation  to  complicated  civilization,  diversity  of  sects,  dass  distinctions, 
society  evils,  and  intellectual  /ride.  Out  of  the  population  of  such  a  town  as  Corinth 
Paul  gathered  what  he  calls  a  Church,  and  this  body  he  regards  ideally  and  practically. 
Here  the  full  conception  of  what  it  should  be  is  the  prominent  thing.  His  advice,  given 
later  on,  applies  to  the  Church  as  it  actually  was. 

I.  The  CuuncH  is  a  whole,  with  a  speciality.  A  whole,  for  it  is  the  Church— 
the  Church  of  Ood,  who  is  One;  and  it  includes  "all  that  call  upon  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  every  place."  We  fittingly  call  it  the  "one  holy  Catholic  and 
Apostolic  Church."  Bnt  it  has  a  characttristic  speciality.  It  can  be  localized.  It  can 
be  the  Church  at  Corinth  or  at  any  other  place,  but  the  localization  does  not  break  up 
the  unity.  It  is  but  a  condition  of  the  earthly  sphere  which  the  Church  must  of 
necessity  have,  and  need  in  no  way  destroy  our  sense  of  the  complete  oneness  and 
wholeness  of  the  Church.  The  tendency  tu  sectarian  division  can  best  be  checked  by 
fuller  presentations  of  the  essential,  ideal  "  wholeness  "  of  Christ's  Church.  And  tlie 
same  truth  alone  gives  efficient  place  to  the  conception  of  Christ's  living  and  universal 
rule,  with  its  relaied  fact,  the  unity  and  brotherhood  of  all  believers. 

II.  The  Churcu  is  a  body  actually  SANCTiFiiiD.  The  two  senses  in  which  the 
term  "  sanctified  "  may  be  used  need  careful  consideration.  It  may  mean  "  made  holy ; " 
and  it  may  mean  "  set  apart,"  or  "  consecrated,"  "  devoted  to  one  special  object,"  and 
this  latter' is  the  more  frequent  and  fan  i]i*r  use  in  Scripture,  especially  in  the  Old 


OH.  1,  ]-- 31.]    THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  58 


Testament,  where  cities,  lands,  persons,  and  things  were  constantly  "  sanctified "  in 
the  sense  of  being  devoted,  or  consecrated,  to  the  Divine  service.  Manifestly  the 
meaning  "  made  actually  holy  "  cannot  be  that  required  in  our  text,  for  this  has  never 
yet,  in  any  age,  been  the  fact  concerning  Christ's  Church ;  and,  indeed,  the  New 
Testament  holds  this  forth  only  as  the  sublime  attainment  of  the  future.  But  it  is  true 
of  each  sincere  member,  and  so  of  the  whole  Church,  that  they  are  sanctified  in  the  sense 
of  being  "  self-dedicated,"  "  devoted  to  God,"  and  so  ideally  a  "  holy  peoiile."  A  man 
IS  what  he  really  wishes  to  be  and  endeavours  to  be ;  he  is  what  he  sets  before  himself 
as  his  highest  attainment.  Guard  this  truth  against  misrepresentation  and  misuse,  and 
make  it  an  incentive  to  the  formation  of  high  ambitions  and  patient  ( ffort  for  theii 
attainment.  Add  that  the  pervading  dement,  atmosphere,  and  tone  of  Christ's  Church 
is  hoUnesi.  Christ  present  brings  the  surroundings  of  the  "  holy,"  and  we  are  "  called 
unto  holiness."    So,  ideally,  Christ's  Church  is  "  sanctified." 

HI.  The  Church  is  a  body  seeking  to  be  PRAcrnoALLY  what  it  is  mystically.  This 
opens  the  application  of  the  subject.  Our  response  to  and  acceptance  of  the  call  into 
Christ's  Church  puts  us  under  a  definite  and  distinct  pledge  and  responsibility.  We 
bind  ourselves  to  win  the  personal  holiness  that  will  match  our  call  and  worthily  follow 
it  up.  This  involves  due  self-watching  and  self-mastery,  as  well  as  fittins  use  of  tlie 
various  "  means  of  grace  "  provided  for  us.  What  we  ought  to  be  we  shall  be  found 
every  day  striving  to  be,  if  we  are  true-hearted  and  sincere. 

In  conclusion,  revert'  to  the  practical  bearings  of  the  oneness  and  wholeness  ol 
Christ's  Church.  It  involves  a  tender  and  helpful  common  brotherhood  in  rights,  in 
sentiments,  an<l  in  duties.  Such  brotherhood  is  "  becoming  to  saints,"  to  those  "  called 
to  be  saints."— R.  T. 

Ver.  3. — The  Hebraic  and  the  Christian  salutations.  The  formalities  of  politeness 
have  deep  meanings,  and  bear  important  relations  to  the  social  and  moral  life  of  cities 
and  nations.  The  heathen  benediction  was  Sa?«e,  or  "  Health  to  you."  The  modern 
salutation,  "  Gooii  morning,"  or  "  Good  day,"  is  a  brief  assertion  of  national  and 
individual  faith  in  the  one  Ood ;  for  it  really  means  "  God  bless  you  to-ilay,"  and  so  is 
a  perpetual  witness  against  infidelity.  The  salutation  in  the  text  is  a  blending  together 
of  the  characteristic  points  of  the  Hebrew  and  the  Christian  good  wishes. 

I.  From  the  Hebrew  point  of  view,  what  was  involved  in  wishing  "  Peace 
UNTO  you  "  ?  "  Peace  "  to  the  Hebrew  was  the  word  gathering  up  the  blessings  of  the 
keeping  of  the  Jehovah-covenant.  If  faithful  to  the  claims  of  that  covenant  and  to 
the  spirit  of  that  covenant,  tliey  would  realize  peace  in  the  heart,  in  the  home,  and  in 
the  state.  And  to  an  industrial  and  agricultural  i)eople,  "  peace  "  would  appear  the 
most  desirable  of  all  earthly  blessings,  ami  the  condition  of  enjoying  all  others.  It  may 
be  noticed  how  the  unsettled  years  of  later  Jewish  history  intensifieil  the  common 
desire  and  prayer  for  "  peace."  As  the  prosperity  of  the  whole  land  was  bound  up  in 
the  faithfulness  of  each  memher,  it  was  befitting  that  each  should  wish  for  the  other 
that  "peace"  which  can  alone  attend  on  righteousness.  So  the  forinaUty  of  the 
salutation  covered  a  real  anxiety  for  brotherly  faithfulness  to  Jehuvah. 

II.  From  the  Christian  point  op  view,  what  was  involved  in  wishino  "  Grace 
AND  PEACE  unto  you"?  The  addition  is  most  characteristic,  seeing  that  Christianity 
declares  the  "grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation."  Man  discovers  that  the  adequate 
keeping  of  covenant,  and  so  securing  "  peace,"  is  not  within  his  own  power.  It  is  tlii.- 
discovery  that  prepares  him  to  welcome  the  revelation  o(  grace  for  his  need.  With  tlie 
grace  he  can  attain  the  righteousness  which  ensures  the  peace,  and  so  he  recognizes  that 
both  the  grace  and  the  peace  come  from  Ood.  Then  the  wish  of  the  early  Christian  is 
that  a  special  manifestation  of  Divine  grace  may  be  made  to  the  individual.  The 
salutation,  in  effect,  is  this  :  May  you  enter  fully  into  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  into  the 
grace  brought  unto  men  in  Jesus  Christ ;  and  so  may  you  know  the  gospel  peace,  which 
you  will  find  a  hallowing  influence  resting  on  all  your  life!  How  may  we  put  into 
modem  Christian  language  the  Pauline  benediction  ?  And  how  should  we  so  watch 
over  even  the  formalities  of  every-day  speech  that  our  common  gooil  wishes  should  be 
filled  with  rich  and  fervent  Christian  meanings  f — R.  T. 

Ver.  3.— The  Father  and  the  lord.    From  the  Gospels  it  may  be  efficiently  set  fo  tfc 


54  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTHIANS.    [oH.i.1— 3i 

and  illustrated  that  the  FfAhefr-nams  for  Ood  was  a  most  marked  feature  in  our  Lord's 
life  and  teachings.  He  seldom  or  ever  used  any  other  name;  and  a  candid  reader 
cannot  fail  to  realize  that  in  this  "  Pather-name  "  must  lie  much  of  the  secret  of  his 
mission.  It  may  be  further  shown  from  the  Epistles  that  his  disciples  caught  his 
purpose;  and,  with  great  frequency,  they  use  the  names  Father  for  God,  and  its 
correlate.  Son,  Tor  the  Lord  Jesus.  This  appears  in  the  text,  but  connected  with  a 
different  name  for  the  Lord  Christ. 

Paul's  peevailinq  thought  fob  God.  The  Father;  our  Father;  the  Church's 
Father.  Towards  realizing  the  aspects  of  the  Divine  Being  that  are  gathered  under 
this  name,  we  gain  help  by  considering  the  natural  associations  and  duties  of  paternity ; 
the  idea  of  the  tribcd  patriarch  as  found  in  the  early  ages ;  and  the  prophetic  qualifi- 
cations of  the  sterner  and  governmental  conceptions  of  Ood  which  are  found  in  the 
Mosaic  system.  If  the  Father-name  for  God  be  an  essential,  and  a  foundation  of 
Christianity,  as  set  forth  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  then  we  must  expect  to  find  the  entire 
Christian  revelation  toned  and  conditioned  by  this  primary  conception  of  the  Divine 
Being  and  relations.  This  may  be  worked  out  and  illustrated  in  coimection  with 
either  of  the  primary  Christian  truths.  And  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  the  term 
"  Father  "  is  properly  inclusive  of  all  holy  demands,  all  governmental  authorities,  all 
reverential  relations ;  but  it  is  new  and  infinitely  precious  to  the  race,  because  it 
brings  home  the  possibility  of  God's  individual  and  personal  love  to  each  member  of  it. 
In  that  lies  a  great  part  of  the  attractive  and  persuasive  power  of  Christianity, — B,  T. 

Vers.  4 — 7. — Gifts  are  signs  of  grace.  The  introduction  will  naturally  deal  with 
the  fact,  universally  recognized,  that  talents  and  genius  and  particular  endowments 
come  from  Ood.  This  was  early  declared  in  the  call  of  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab,  and  was 
a  familiar  idea  even  to  the  heathen  nations.  It  is  one  that  needs  fresh  and  frequent 
statement  in  our  day.  In  the  early  Church  there  were  both  ordinary  and  special  gifts, 
but  the  manifest  Divine  origin  of  the  more  special  ones  was  designed  to  convince  of 
the  Divine  source  of  all  gifts,  gveat  and  small. 

I.  The  gifts  specially  entbusted  to  the  Corinthian  Chitroh.  They  included 
everything  that  could  be  regarded  as  necessary  to  their  maintenance  and  work  as  a 
Ch";rch.  But  only  two  things  are  mentioned  here :  1.  Utterance.  2.  Knowledge. 
Both  these  were  highly  valued  at  Corinth,  rhetoric  and  wisdom  being  eagerly  pursued. 
Consequently,  as  the  desire  for  these  found  expression  and  sphere  within  the  Christian 
community,  Paul  properly  leads  them  to  recognize  fully  the  source  of  such  endow- 
ments. And  to  know  the  source  is  to  recognize  the  responsibility  of  using  the  gifts 
only  in  the  Divine  spheres  and  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  will.  This  may  be 
pointedly  applied  to  all  the  modern  gifts  and  talents  in  Christ's  Church ;  all  are  from 
Ood,  all  are /or  Ood's  use,  and  all  are  to  be  used  on  Ood^s  conditions. 

II.  The  gbacb  seen  in  the  bestowmbnt  op  the  gifts.  This  may  be  recognized 
in  the  honour  of  receiving  such  trusts,  and  in  the  adaptation  of  the  gifts  to  the  various 
needs  of  the  Church. 

III.  The  agent  through  whom  the  gifts  are  bestowed.  The  living  Lord 
Jesus  Christ — "in  Christ  Jesus" — conceived  as  present  with  and  presiding  over  the 
Church;  dispensing  to  every  man  severally  as  he  wills,  for  the  general  edification. 

Apply  by  showing  the  importance  of  gifts  in  every  age,  the  proper  modesty  of  those 
who  have  the  trust  of  gifts,  and  the  thankfulness  and  hope  we  should  cherish  concerning 
those  among  us  who  are  divinely  endowed. — B.  T, 

Vers.  7 — ^9, — Christ  coming,  and  Christ  here.  The  early  Church  conceived  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  would  return,  in  some  material  manifestation,  during  their  tige. 
Inquire  how  far  this  idea  rested  on  the  view  they  held  of  Messiah  as  an  earthly 
Deliverer  and  Patriot-King.  Their  question,  after  our  Lord's  resurrection,  "  Wilt  thou 
at  this  time  restore  again  the  kingdom  to  Israel  ? "  indicated  a  bias  and  preoccupation 
of  mind  which  even  their  Lord's  ascension  did  not  correct ;  and  possibly  this  lingering 
misconception  helped  to  form  the  idea  of  Christ's  speedy  second  coming.  It  may  be 
further  shown  that  our  Lord's  assurances  about  his  coming  again  might  have  been 
taken  literally,  thouah  he  so  carefully  sought  to  impress  the  spiritual  bearing  of  his 
promises,  and  their  fulfilmei  t,  mainly  in  the  abiding  and  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost 


OH.  1. 1—31.]    THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEmTHIANS,  55 


Wltb  the  conception  of  this  speedy  coming  of  Christ  in  their  minds,  the  apostles 
regard  the  proper  attitude  of  the  Christian  and  the  Church  as  being  one  of  "  waiting." 
Such  waiting  becomes  a  virtual  "  preparing ; "  it  involves  a  care  to  have  and  hold  all 
things  ready,  and  this  is  a  good  sign  of  the  faithful  and  diligent  servant.  "The 
attitude  of  expectation  is  thought  of  as  the  highest  that  can  be  attained  here  by  the 
Christian.  It  implies  a  patient,  humble  spirit,  one  that  is  waiting  for,  one  that  is 
looking  forward  to,  something  nobler  and  better."  The  moral  influence  of  a  high  and 
noble  expectation  may  be  pointed  out.  "Where  your  treasure  is,  there  will  your 
heart  be  also;"  and  it  is  certain  that  to  fitness  for  it  your  life  and  conduct  will  be 
moulded.  In  these  verses  we  find  a  double  thought  associated  with  the  Lord's  second 
coming. 

L  Paul's  thought  of  Christ's  comino  to  rjbwabd.  As  he  has  been  writing  of 
"  gifts "  and  their  use  in  the  Church,  he  must  have  in  mind  Christ's  gracious  reward 
of  his  faithful  ones.  Reward  is  proper  from  one  occupying  the  position  of  Master. 
Rewards  may  be  given  for  work  that  is  far  short  of  perfection.  Rewards  may  be 
bestowed  when  no  absolute  claims  can  be  made  for  them.  Divine  rewards  can  only  be 
gifts  of  grace.  The  moral  ends  to  be  served  by  granting  rewards  are  such  as  God  may 
seek  by  such  means.  So  it  is  rational  and  right  that  we  should  still  watch,  work,  and 
use  our  gifts,  in  the  full  expectation  of  gracious  recognition  and  reward  in  due  season. 
Qualify,  however,  the  expectation,  by  showing  that  the  New  Testament  strives  to 
impress  on  us  that  Divine  and  future  rewards  must  be  spiritual,  not  material ;  we  are 
to  have  crowns,  but  they  are  crowns  of  life,  righteousness,  and  glory. 

II.  Paul's  thought  of  Christ's  presence  to  confirm.  Too  much  attention  to 
Christ's  coming  would  lighten  the  conviction  of  his  real,  though  spiritual,  presence 
now  with  the  individual  and  with  the  Church.  That  presence  Paul  conceives  as  the 
eomfirmation,  the  inspiration,  and  the  security  of  Christ's  servants.  In  it  they  have 
their  only,  but  their  all-suflicient,  guarantee  that,  amid  frailties,  temptations,  and  perils, 
they  shall  hold  out  unto  the  end,  attaining  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Either  ot 
these  thoughts  of  Christ  may  prove  misleading  if  'it  stanch  alime.  Each  tempers  and 
qualifies  the  other.  Both  together  keep  us  wisely  looking  down  on  our  imrk,  beside 
«•  at  OUT  helper,  and  on  to  our  reward.  The  thought  of  "  reward  "  makes  us  wonder 
how  the  Divine  One  will  ever  lie  able  to  testify  to  uur  "  blamelessness  and  unreprov- 
ableness."  Illustrate  by  David's  a])peal  to  his  "  integrity."  We  may  be  genuine  and 
(tncere.  A  standard  of  consistency  may  be  pressed  on  us  as  Church  members ;  but 
nothing  less  than  the  standard  of  abolate  purity  must  be  pressed  on  us  as  one  day  to 
■tand  in  the  presence  of  the  glorified  Christ. — R.  T. 

Vers.  11,  12. — The  spirit  (^faction.  Introduce  by  showing  the  varioui  element* 
of  which  the  Church  at  Corinth  was  composed.  There  are  signs  that  some  members 
were  wealthy  and  learned,  many  were  certainly  poor,  and  probably  many  were  slaves. 
Those  who  suddenly  become  wealthy  are  always  in  peril  of  showing  masterfulness,  and 
claiming  undue  authority  and  influence.  Party  feeling  ran  high  in  Corinth,  and  this, 
with  the  mixed  character  of  the  population,  tended  to  break  society  into  sects  and 
schools.  This  affected  the  Church,  and  Paul  received  reports  of  the  disposition  to 
make  parties  within  it,  and  so  destroy  the  unity  of  the  Church  in  Christ ;  such  reports 
greatly  distressed  him,  and  they  are  in  part  the  immediate  occasion  of  his  writing  this 
Epistle.  'The  subject  of  the  verses  before  us  we  may  take  to  be  Church  unity — how  it 
may  be  preserved  and  lost.  Our  Lord  and  his  apostles  manifest  a  peculiar  anxiety  for 
the  conservation  of  the  unity  of  the  Church,  and  appear  to  regard  that  unity  aa 
essential  to  the  Church's  stability  and  growth  and  witness. 

L  Chuboh  onitt  preserved  bt  uaking  everything  of  Christ.  He  is  the  One 
living  Head,  the  only  Master  and  Lord.  The  common  life  of  the  Church  is  the  life 
in  Christ.  The  Church  is  a  whole  vine,  made  up  of  many  branches,  but  Christ  is  tha 
uniting  and  quickening  Life  in  them  all.  The  direct  and  immediate  dependence  of 
each  individual  upon  the  same  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  one  secret  of  maintaining  the 
unity.  We  have  "  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism."  Then  it  follows  that  a  man 
keeps  in  the  unity  as  he  keeps  up  his  dependence  on  Christ,  and  the  unity  of  the 
Chureh  is  realized  only  in  the  completeness  of  the  loyalty  of  its  members  to  Christ. 
And  the  one  thing  that  mars  the  unity  is  the  one  thing  that  separates  from  Christ, 


M  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.    [oh.  1. 1—31, 

Tiz.  man'$  eelf-tBtllednets.  The  yielded  will  to  Christ's  living  lead  ii  not  a  crushed 
will.  Such  yielded  personal  wills  to  Christ  ensure  a  mutual  sympathy  which  will  ever 
preserve  brotherhood  and  unity  in  the  Church. 

II.  Chubch  unitt  lost  by  making  too  much  of  man.  We  are  greatly  helped  by 
human  teachers,  but  there  is  a  constant  peril  of  our  making  too  much  of  them,  and 
putting  their  modes  of  setting  the  truth  in  the  place  of  the  truth  itself.  Following 
after  favourite  preachers  has  always  been,  and  still  is,  one  of  the  weaknesses  of  Christian 
life  and  habit.  In  the  early  Church  differences  were  observed  in  the  teachings  even  of 
the  aposUes  themselves,  and  preferences  were  easily  based  on  these  differences.  The 
four  Gospels  have  marked  individuality,  and  the  writings  of  the  apostles  which  are 
preserved  for  us  indicate  that  particular  aspects  of  the  truth  gained  prominence  in  the 
teachings  of  each  of  them.  While  this. fact  secures  that  we  see  all  round  the  Christian 
revelation,  it  may  easily  be  exaggerated  and  misused.  It  is  when  it  is  made  the 
excuse  for  manifesting  the  party  spirit.  The  gospel  truth  is  a  many-sided  unity; 
the  unity  lies  in  the  revelation  of  one  Christ ;  the  many-sidedness  is  involved  in  the 
various  relations  to  men  in  which  the  one  Christ  stands.  Paul  put  forward  prominently 
"justification  by  faith,"  "the  salvability  of  the  Gentiles,"  and  "Christian  liberty." 
Apollos  had  a  singularly  attractive  power  of  eloquence,  and  became  a  sort  of  "popular 
preacher."  Peter  became  the  centre  round  which  the  Jewish  elements  of  the  community 
gathered. 

Apply,  by  showing  the  serious  moral  evils  of  sectarian  feeling  and  partisanship ;  its 
influence  on  the  man's  own  Christian  spirit  who  may  nourish  it;  its  mischievous 
influence  on  the  community;  and  the  hindrance  it  presents  to  the  progress  of  the 
gospel,  "  Nothing  more  certainly  eats  out  the  heart  and  life  of  religion  than  party 
spirit.     Christianity  is  love ;  party  spirit  is  the  death  of  love." — R.  T. 

Ver.  13. —  TTie  unique  relation  of  Christ  to  the  Church.  This  is  set  forth  because 
there  was  a  manifest  disposition  at  Corinth  to  make  Christ  a  mere  party  leader.  Some 
said,  "I  of  Christ;  "  as  if  Christ  stood  on  the  same  plane  as  Paul,  Apollos,  or  Cephas. 
Bring  out,  with  varied  Illustration,  two  points. 

I.  The  aqreemekts  between  a  teacher's  relation  to  the  Church  and  Christ's 
KELATION  TO  IT.  Christ's  teaching  is  original,  man's  is  derived.  Christ's  authority  is 
supreme,  man's  is  only  delegated.  Christ  is  the  Church's  Foundation,  the  human 
teacher  is  but  a  workman  engaged  in  the  superstructure.  Both  teach,  both  bear 
authority,  both  are  builders.  The  glory  of  the  human  teacher  is  that  he  can  be 
a  "co-worker  together  with  Christ,"  In  some  sense  human  teachers  may  think  of 
themselves  as  filling  the  vacant  earth-sphere  of  the  great  Teacher,  and  carrying  on  his 
gracious  mission.  See  Paul's  plea, "  Now  then  we  are  ambassadors  for  Christ."  So  far 
as  they  bear  the  Master's  spirit,  speak  the  Master's  truth,  and  carry  out  the  Master's 
will,vre  give  them  all  honour,  attention,  and  obedience  for  their  Master's  sake.  We  are 
"  followers  of  them  so  far  as  they  follow  Christ." 

II.  The  differences  between  a  teacher's  relation  to  the  Church  and  Christ's 
RELATION  TO  IT.  There  are  important  distinctions  and  differences  in  the  things  in 
which  both  agree.  And  there  are  positive  distinctions,  things  in  which  Christ  stands 
absolutely  alone.  No  other  was  "  crucified  for  us."  Into  no  other  "  name  "  were  we 
"  baptized.'^  The  relative  positions  of  Christ  and  the  ministry  are  indicated  by  the 
figures  of  the  Shepherd  and  the  under-shepherds.    The  careful  and  constant  preservation 

>f  Christ's  unique  position  in  the  Church,  and  relation  to  it,  is  the  secret  of  th«  main- 
tenance of  all  Church  order,  unity,  and  peace. — R.  T. 

Vers.  14 — 18. — PauFs  commission  from  Christ.  It  did  not  concern  baptism,  but 
peaching.  Bites  are  of  value  in  relation  to  the  Christian  life  and  culture.  But  rites 
may  .be  overvalued,  and,  instead  of  helping  the  apprehension  of  spiritual  realities  and 
duties,  may  be  sought  for  their  own  sakes.  This  peril  always  lies  in  symbols.  The 
commendation  or  the  establishment  of  rites  had  no  place  in  Paul's  mission.  They 
would  have  confused  his  presentation  of  the  doctrine  of  "  Christian  liberty  "  under 
Christ;  though  he  himself  observed  rites;  and  we  are  able  to  see  how  sacrament  and 
ceremonial  may  be  in  full  harmony  with  our  freedom  in  Christ.  The  expression 
"  baptized  into  fie  Name"  needs  explanation.    Here  "  baptism  "  is  the  public  ict  by 


OH.  1,1—31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHiANS.  57 

which  our  discipleship  to  a  person  !■  declared.  Illustrate  by  the  branding  of  cattle  oi 
Blaves,  or_  by  the  public  declaration  of  having  adopted  a  child  as  son  and  heir. 
Baptism  is  a  voluntary  taking  on  ourselves  of  a  Name ;  from  it  we  are  called 
"  Christians  ; "  we  bear  on  us  the  Name  into  which  we  were  baptized,  and  are  under 
pledge  to  live  in  the  spirit  worthy  of  that  Name.  With  the  administration  of  any  rite 
Paul  contrasts  his  call  to  preach  the  gospel.  The  nature  of  his  call  may  be  thus  enlarged 
on.     He  was— 

L  To  PREACH.  A  term  used  in  the  Acts  as  distinct  from  teach.  "  Daily  .  .  .  ceased 
not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus  Christ."  The  figure  in  the  word  is  that  of  the  herald, 
whose  duty  is  to  go  from  place  to  place,  and  announce,  or  declare,  a  message,  or 
proclamation.  John  the  Baptist  preached  as  a  herald.  When  our  Lord  sent  the 
apostles  foith  on  a  trial  mission,  he  would  instruct  them  in  their  work  as  preachers, 
"  As  ye  go  say.  Repent ;  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  Press,  that  still 
preaching  is  the  authoritative  announcement  of  God's  mercy  to  men  in  Christ,  and  the 
demand  at  once  to  accept  that  mercy. 

II.  To  PBSACH  THE  GOSPEL.  The  Very  essence  of  the  gospel  is  given  in  John  iii.  16. 
It  has  these  points — Man's  need  and  helplessness ;  God's  love  and  pity  ;  the  effective 
manifestation  of  that  love  in  Christ;  the  requirement  of  faith  in  the  Redeemer  thus  set 
torth.  Tlie  power  that  lies  in  the  simple  announcement  of  the  gospel  may  he  illus- 
trated by  the  familiar  story  of  Kajarnak  the  Greenlander  and  the  early  Moravian 
missionaries. 

III.  To  PEEACH  THE  GOSPEL  IN  SIMPLICITY.  Not  with  elaborations  of  "  human 
wisdoia,"  or  as  trusting  to  the  artifices  of  "  human  rhetoric."  Paul  wanted  no  other 
power  than  that  which  lay  in  personal  conviction  and  simple  fulfilment  of  the  duty 
imposed  upon  him.  To  him  the  persuasion  and  power  of  the  gospel  lay  in  its  simpli- 
city.-   He  preached  Christ,  and  strove  to  draw  men  to  him  in  trust  and  love. 

IV.  To  PEEACH  THE  GOSPEL  EVEN  IN  THE  ASPECT  THAT  MEN  WOULD  RESIST.      He  WaS 

not  to  hold  back  the  story  of  the  cross,  however  Jew  or  Greek  may  seem  to  be  offended 
at  it ;  he  was  to  declare  the  whole  gospel  he  had  received ;  and  he  was  to  be  quite 
confident  that  God  could  and  would  make  it  power  unto  salvation.  In  this  we  have 
the  very  essence  of  missionary  work  in  every  age.  A  kind  of  work  that  has  its  spheres 
both  at  home  and  abroad ;  and  finds  its  agents  in  all  who,  having  received  the  gospel, 
find  an  inward  impulse  urging  them  to  make  that  gospel  known. — B.  T. 

Vers.  19 — 25. — The  worMs  foolishness,  and  CoeCs  wisdom.  So  far  as  we  can  under- 
stand the  Divine  dealings  with  our  race,  it  appears  that,  for  some  four  thousand  years, 
God  left  the  nations  to  a  free  experiment.  They  might  find  out  for  themselves  what 
is  the  "  chief  good  of  man."  The  more  civilized  Gentile  nations  were  interested  in  one 
fonn  of  the  experiment,  viz. — Can  man  find  God,  and  all  in  God,  by  the  researches  of  his 
own  wisdom  ?  At  Corinth  much  was  made  of  man's  "  wisdom."  Therefore  Paul  deals 
with  it,  and  shows  that — 

I.  Hitherto  man's  wisdom  had  failed.  The  various  devices  of  »ct«?ice,  philosophy, 
and  religion  may  be  reviewed ;  and  the  actually  hopeless  moral  condition  of  Paul's  age 
should  be  forcibly  presented.  There  was  prevalent  atheism  ;  religion  was  mocked  at ; 
philosophy  was  an  amusement,  and  had  become  a  mere  logomachy,  an  arena  for  mere 
disputants;  and  there  was  no  satisfaction  for  man's  mind  or  heart  anywhere.  The 
foolishness  of  the  world's  wisdom  was  declared.  Impress  what  must  be  the  conse- 
quences always  if  man's  wisdom  is  made  mistress,  and  not  kept  handmaid. 

II.  Henoefoeth  man's  wisdom  must  be  displaced.  It  was  not  to  be  the  Divine 
agency  employed  in  the  redemption  of  the  world.  That  should  be  revelation,  not 
man's  discovery.  A  manifestation,  in  the  earthly  spheres,  beyond  human  imagination. 
A  life  and  death,  in  which  human  wisdom  would  see  nought  but  weakness  and  shame. 
And  the  simple  heralding  of  a  message,  the  proclaiming  of  a  fact  and  truth  given, 
which  the  wise  of  this  world  would  think  any  commonplace  and  ignorant  person  could 
do.  Yet  Ood^s  wisdom  proves  able  to  accomplish  that  in  which  man's  wisdom  failed. 
For  the  gospel  preaching  does  bring  God  near  to  men,  does  bring  home  to  them  the 
knowledge  of  him  and  the  love  of  him,  and  does  give  to  men  the  salvation,  satisf action, 
and  eternal  life  which  they  both  need  and  seek. — B.  T. 


W  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTUIANS.    [ch.  u.  1—16, 

Vers.  26 — 30. — Intellectual  power  and  moral  power  :  which  does  God  chiefly  honour 
and  uset  Paul's  point  appears  to  be  that  the  wisdom  of  God  is  declared  ia  bis  using 
moral  rather  than  material  or  intellectual  forces  in  carrying  out  his  great  purpose  of 
human  reileniption.  The  material  iorces  had  to  be  set  aside  in  order  that  the  moral 
forces  might  work  without  obstruction;  therefore  only  the  simplest  human  agents  were 
chosen  as  the  apostles  and  first  preachers  of  the  gospel.  It  is  still  true  that  Ttwral 
character  and  spiritual  affinities  are  the  best  fitnesses  for  Christian  service.  It  may 
be  well  to  compare  the  moral  and  the  intellectual  powers. 

I.  'JuET  AKE  OFTEN  CONNECTED  u;  THE  SAME  PERSON.  There  Is  no  natural  dlrorce- 
ment  between  them.    They  may  be  foUnd  in- becoming  harmony. 

II.  In  ideal  uanhooo  tuet  must  be  ^  connected.  For  the  ideal  man  has  all  the 
faculties  aud  powers  of  his  uature  proportionally  and  harmoniously  cultured  and 
developed. 

IIL  Ih  aotoal  fact  they  are  too  often  severed.  And  this  is  the  fact,  mainly 
by  reason  of  the  disturbance  aud  disorder  of  mau's  nature,  which  follows  as  the  con- 
sequence of  sin.  Self-will  tends  to  nourish  those  parts  of  our  nature  through  which 
we  may  gain  human  place  and  praise ;  and  so  it  fosters  the  material  and  intellectual 
ftt  the  expense  of  the  moral  and  spiritual. 

IV.  God  sets  moral  power  at  the  highest  value.  And  this  he  manifests  and 
declares  in  every  revelation  he  makes  to  men,  passing  by  the  "  rich  and  great  and  wise  " 
to  exalt  the  humble  and  the  meek.  He  honours  moral  power  because  of  its  sphere.  It 
is  character,  and  the  influence  of  character,  the  force  of  the  man  himself,  of  what  be 
is.  And  because  of  its  agent.  It  is  the  soul,  the  mau's  very  self,  and  not  the  mind, 
which  is  only  something  the  man  has.    Then  show  what  is  the  true  self-culture. — B.  T. 

Vers.  30,31. —  What  Christ  is  to  the  heart  that  welcomes  him.  The  Revised  New 
Testament  makes  a  slight  but  important  difference  in  the  renderings.  It  reaiis, "  Who 
was  made  unto  us  wisdom  from  Ood,  and  righteousness  and  sanctification,  and 
redemption."  This  alteration  suggests  that  the  wisdom  spoken  of  embraces  and 
includes  the  three  latter  terms ;  some,  however,  prefer  to  regard  wisdom  as  a  fourth 
term,  to  be  joined  with  the  others.  As  the  word  may  certainly  be  used  to  describa 
a  part  of  Christ's  gracious  work  in  us,  we  may  observe  Christ's  saving  work  in — 

I.  The  mind-sphere.  His  revelation  enlarges  knowleUge.  His  teachings  give 
practical  guidance.    His  Spirit  leads  into  all  truth.    He  is  the  only  safe  Thought-Leader. 

II.  The  relational  sphere.  The  word  "  righteousness  "  here  seems  to  be  equiva- 
lent to  "  justification,"  and  to  refer  to  our  "  standing  as  before  God."  Christ  is  our 
Righteousness,  as  our  Representative,  in  whomGud  sees  us,  and  whose  infinite  accept- 
ability stands  for  us. 

III.  •The  oharacter-spherb.,  Christ's  righteousness  we  are  under  pledge  to  win 
and  make  our  own.  But  over  the  winning  Christ  presides.  And  this  his  operation  in 
the  sphere  of  chHracter  we  call  sanctification.  Here  the  idea  of  "  making  personally 
holy  "  is  prominent,  rather  than  that  of  "  consecration  "  or  "  separation." 

IV.  The  circumstantial  sphere.  Conceived  as  surrounded  with  an  environment 
of  evil  influences  and  temptations,  the  Church  ia  in  the  hands  of  Christ  for  a  dcMif 
deliverance  and  redemption.  The  full  purjwse  of  the  Redeemer  is  not  accomplished 
until  we  are  wholly  rescued  from  self  and  from  sin.  This  is  practically  the  presejit 
work  of  Christ  in  every  heart  and  life,  that  is  opened  and  kept  open  to  his  gracious 
operations. — B.  T. 

EXPOSITION. 

CHAPTER  n. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — St.  PauVs  own  method. 

Ver.  1. — ^And  I ;  "  I  too ; "  I  in  accordance 
with  God's  method.  When  I  oame  to  you. 
The  date  of  his  first  visit  was  in  a.d.  52,  and 
he  had  stayed  a  year  and  a  half  (Acts  xviii. 
11).    He  had  since  been  (roughly  speak- 


at  Epiiesus.  Of  speeoh  or  of  wisdom. 
spoke  to  you  neitlier  oratorlcally  nor  philo^ 
Bophically.  Hence  the  Ajjollos  party,  fond 
of  the  brilliant  rhetoric  of  the  young  Alex- 
andrian, spoke  of  Paul's  speech  as  "con- 
temptible "  (2  Cor.  X.  10).  The  testimony  o4 
God;  that  is,  the  witness  borne  to  Christ 
by  the  Father  (1  John  V.  10,  11). 
ing)  "three  years"  Orpieriay,  Acts'  XI.  311  I      Ver.  2. — I  determined.     The  onadomad 


OH-n.  1— 16.J     THE   FIRST  El'ISTLE   TO  TUE   OOKlXTIIIANgl. 


68 


•implioity  of  my  teaching  was  part  of  a 
fixed  ilesign.  Not  to  know  anything.  Not, 
that  13,  to  depend  on  any  human  knowledge. 
Of  course,  St.  Paul  neither  means  to  set  aside 
•11  human  knowledge  nor  to  didparnge  other 
Christian  doctrines.  His  words  musit  not 
be  pressed  oat  of  their  due  context  and 
proportion.  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  oruoifled. 
Christ,  in  the  lowest  depth  of  his  abasement 
and  self-sacrifice.  He  would  "know" 
nothing  else ;  that  is,  be  would  make  thii 
the  central  point  and  essence  of  all  big 
knowledge,  because  he  knew  the  "excel- 
lency" of  this  knowledge  (Phil.  iii.  8) — 
knew  it  as  the  only  knowledge  which  rose 
to  the  heiglit  of  wisdom.  Christ  is  the 
only  Foundation  (ch.  iii.  11).  In  the  person 
and  tlie  work  of  Christ  ia  invoWed  the  whole 


Ver.  8. — I  was  with  you;  literally,/ 
iteame  or  proved  myaelf,  towarde  you,  as  in 
•h.  xvi.  10.  In  weakness.  Si:.  Puul  was 
physically  weak  and  liable  also  to  nervous 
weakness  and  depression  (ch.  iv.  7 — 12; 
Gal.  iv.  13;  2  Cor.  x.  1,  10;  xii.  7,  10). 
He  shows  an  occasional  self-ilistrust  rising 
from  thcoon.-<ciousness  of  personal  infirmities. 
This  enhances  our  sense  of  liis  heroic 
eourage  and  endurance.  Doubtless  this 
physical  weakness  and  nervous  depression 
were  connected  with  his  "  stake  in  tlie  flesh," 
which  seems  to  have  been  an  acute  and  dis- 
tressing form  of  ophtiialmia,  accompnnied 
with  cerebral  disturbance  (see  my  '  Life  of 
St.  Paul,'  i.  215 — 221).  In  fear,  and  in  much 
trembling.  Probably  tlie  words  are  even  liter- 
ally true,  though  they  are  a  common  phrase 
(2  Cor.  vii.  15;  Phil.  ii.  12,  13;  Eph.  vi.  5). 
It  must  be  remembered  that  in  his  first 
visit  to  Corinth  St  Paul  had  gone  through 
stormy  and  troubled  days  (Acts  iviii.  1 — 
12). 

Ver.  4. — My  speech  and  my  preaching; 
the  form  and  matter  of  my  discourse.  He 
would  not  attempt  to  use  the  ketn  sword  of 
philosophical  dialectics  or  human  eloquence, 
but  would  only  use  the  weapon  of  the  cross. 
Was  not  with  enticing  words  of  man's 
wisdom;  rather,  with  persuasive  words  of 
wisdom  (ttie  word  anthropines  is  a  gloss). 
This  simplicity  was  the  more  remarknble 
i^cause  "Corinthian  words"  was  a  proverb 
for  choice,  elaborate,  and  glHtering  phrases 
(Wetstein).  It  is  not  improbable  that  the 
almost  total  and  deeply  discouraging  want 
of  success  of  St.  Paul  in  preaching  at  Athens 
had  impressed  him  more  strongly  with  the 
nselessness  of  attempting  to  fight  Greek 
philosophers  with  their  own  blunt  and  im- 
perfect weapons.  In  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit  and  of  power.  So  he  says  to  the 
Thessnhmians,  "  Our  gospel  came  not  to  ynu 
in  word  onlv,  hut  also  in  power,  and  in  the 
Holy  Obor-t,  am!  in  much  assurauce."    The 


plain  facts,  eo  repellent  to  the  natural 
intellect,  were  ilriven  home  with  matchles- 
force  by  spiritUHl  conviction.  The  only 
heathen  critic  who  has  mentioned  St.  Paul'f 
method  is  Longinus,  the  author  of  the 
treatise  on  'The  Sublime  and  Beautiful,' 
who  falls  him  "a  master  of  unproved  dogma," 
meaning  apparently  that  his  force  lay  in  the 
irresistible  statement  of  the  facts  which  be 
came  to  preach. 

Ver.  5, — In  the  power  of  God.  So  in 
2  Cor.  iv.  7  he  says  that  the  treasure  they 
carried  was  "  in  earthen  vessels,  that  the 
excellency  of  the  power  may  be  of  Ood  and 
not  of  us." 

Vera.  6 — 16. — The  apparent  fooliikness  is 
the  only  uisdom. 

Ver.  6. — Howbeit.  In  this  passage  he 
shows  that  in  reality  a  crushing  irony  lay 
in  his  description  of  the  gospel  as  being,  in 
the  world's  judgment,  "weak"  and  "foolish." 
It  was  the  highest  wisdom,  but  it  could 
only  be  understood  by  the  perfect  Its 
apparent  folly  to  the  Corinthians  was  a 
proof  of  their  blindness  and  incapacity. 
Among  the  perfect.  The  word  either  means 
(1)  the  mature,  the  full-grown,  as  opposed 
to  babes  in  Christ  (ch.  iii.  1);  or  (2)  the 
fully  initiated  into  the  mysteiies  of  godliness 
(^iroirrai,  2  Pet.  i.  16).  A  wisdom  not  of  this 
world;  literally,  of  this  mm.  The  word 
kosmiis  means  the  world  in  its  material 
aspect;  enn  is  read  for  the  worhl  in  its 
moral  and  intellectual  aspect.  "  The  wisdom 
of  this  world  is  foolishness  with  God  "  (ch.  iiL 
19).  Nor  of  the  rulers  of  this  world.  Some 
have  taken  these  "  rulers  "  to  be  the  same 
as  "  the  world-rulers  of  this  darkness,"  i.e. 
the  evil  spirits,  in  Eph.  vi.  12  (John  xiii. 
27;  Luke  xxii.  53).  Ignatius  (?)  seems  to 
have  understood  it  thus ;  for  he  adopted  the 
strange  notion  that  "  the  prince  of  this  sbou  " 
(i.e.  Satan)  had  been  deceived  and  frustrated 
by  the  incarnation  from  a.  virgin,  and  the 
death  on  the  cross  (Ignat.,  '  Ad.  Eph.,'  19). 
It  means  more  probably  "  wisdom,"  as  under- 
stood by  Boman  governors  and  Jewish 
Saiihedrists,  who  treated  the  Divine  wisdum 
of  the  gospel  with  sovereign  cohtemp' 
(Acts  iv.  27).  That  [who]  come  to  nought-, 
literally,  who  are  being  done  away  with. 
Amid  all  the  feebleness  of  the  infant  Church, 
St.  Paul  saw  empires  vanishing  before  it. 

Ver.  7. — In  a  mystery;  that  is,  "in  b 
truth,  once  hidden,  now  revealed."  The 
word  is  now  used  for  what  is  dark  and  in- 
comprehensible, but  it  has  no  such  meaning 
in  the  New  Testament,  where  it  means  "  what 
was  once  secret,  but  has  now  been  made 
manifest "  (Kom.  xvi.  25 ;  Eph.  iii.  4, 9 ;  CoL 
i.  26;  1  Tim.  iii.  16).  It  implies  the  very 
reverse  of  any  esoteric  teaching.  Hidden. 
It  was  "  hidden  frun  the  wise  and  prudent 
but    revealed   to    babes"    (Matt    zi.    23> 


M 


TUE  FlRS'l   EPISTLE  TO  TUB  C0RINTU1AN8.    [ch,  n.  1—16. 


Before  the  woilds ;  literally,  before  the  aget ; 
before  time  began.  TTnto  our  glory.  The 
author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  clearly 
states  that  "the  future  age"  is  in  God's 
counsels  subjected,  not  to  the  angels,  but  to 
man.  But  "our  glory"  is  that  we  we 
"  called  to  his  eternal  glory  by  Christ  Jesn*  " 
(1  Pet.  V.  10). 

Ver.  8. — Had  they  known  it;  literally, 
had  they  recognized ;  had  they  got  to  know  it. 
The  apostles  often  dwell  on  this  ignorance 
as  being  in  part  a  palliation  for  the  sin  of 
rejecting  Christ  (see  especially  Acts  iii.  17 ; 
xiil.  27;  comp.  Isa.  ii  1).  Jews  and 
Bomans,  emperors,  procurators,  high  priests, 
Pharisees,  had  in  their  ignorance  conspired 
in  vain  to  prevent  what  God  had  fore- 
ordained. The  Lord  of  glory.  This  is  not 
a  mere  equivalent  of  "the  glorious  Lord," 
in  Ps.  zxiv.  10.  It  is  "the  Lord  of  the 
glory,"  i.e.  "the  Lord  of  the  Sheohinah" 
(comp.  Eph.  i.  17, "  the  Father  of  the  glory  "). 
The  Sheohinah  weis  the  name  given  by  the 
Jews  to  the  cloud  of  light  which  symbolized 
God's  presence.  'J'he  cherubim  are  called, 
in  Heb.  ix.  5,  "  cherubim  of  glory,"  because 
the  Shechinah  was  home  on  their  outspread 
wings  (see,  however.  Acts  vii.  2 ;  Eph.  i.  17). 
There  would  have  been  to  ancient  ears  a 
startling;  and  awful  paradox  in  the  words 
"  emcified  the  Lord  of  glory."  The  words 
brought  into  juxtaposition  the  lowest  igno- 
miny and  the  most  splendid  exaltation. 

Yer,  9.—  But  as  it  is  written.  The  whole 
sentence  in  the  Greek  is  unfinished.  The 
thought  seems  to  be, "  But  God  has  revealed 
to  us  things  which  eye  hath  not  seen,  etc., 
though  the  princes  of  this  world  were  igno- 
rant of  them."  Bcriptural  quotations  are 
often  thus  introduced,  apart  from  the  general 
grammar  of  the  sentence,  as  in  the  Greek 
of  ch.  i.  31.  Eye  hath  not  seen,  etc.  The 
Revised  Version  is  here  more  literal  and 
accurate.  The  quotation  as  it  stands  is  not 
found  in  the  Old  Testament.  It  most  re- 
sembles Isa.  Ixiv.  4,  but  also  vaguely 
resembles  Isa.  Iii.  15;  Ixv.  17.  It  may  be 
another  instance  of  a  loose  general  remi- 
niscence (comp.  ch.  ziv.  21 ;  Rom.  ix.  33). 
"Non  verbum  e  verbo  expressit,"  says  St 
Jerome,  "  sed  irapaippaaTtKu>s  eundem  semum 
aliis  senuonibus  indicavit."  St.  Chrysostom 
regards  the  woids  as  part  of  a  lost  prophecy. 
Origen,  Zacharias  of  Chryeopolis,  and  others 
say  that  the  words  occurred  in  an  apocryphal 
book,  the  'Apocalypse  of  Elias,'  but  if  so 
the  apocryphal  writer  must  have  bad  the 
passage  of  Isaiah  in  his  mind.  Some  regard 
the  words  as  a  fragment  of  some  ancient 
liturgy.  Origen  thought  that  they  ciime 
from  the  'Revelation  of  Elijah.'  They  were 
also  to  be  found  in  the  'Ascension  of  Isaiah' 
(Jer.  on  Isa.  Ixiv.  i),  and  they  occur  <n 
the  Talmud  (Sanheilr.  99«).     In  ft  curious 


firagment  of  Hegesippns  (oin.  a.d.  150) 
preserved  in  Photius  (Cod.  ccxzxii.),  that 
old  writer  indignantly  repudiates  this  pas- 
sage, saying  that  it  is  futile  and  "  utterly 
belies  (_KaTa\p(iS(iT6ai)  the  Holy  Scriptures 
and  the  Lord,  who  says, '  Blessed  are  your 
eyes  which  see,  and  your  ears  which  bear.' " 
Photius  cannot  understand  why  (gri  ical 
iraSiiv)  Hegesippus  should  speak  thus. 
Ronth  ('  Rel.  Sacr.,'  253)  hardly  knows  how 
to  excuse  him ;  but  perhaps  if  we  had  the 
context  of  the  fragment  we  should  see 
that  he  is  attacking,  not  the  words  them- 
selves, but  some  perversion  of  them  by 
heretics,  like  the  Docetss.  The  phrase, 
"As  it  is  written,"  decisively  marks  an 
intention  to  refer  to  Scripture.  Neither 
have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man;  liter- 
ally, thingi  which  have  not  set  foot  upon  the 
heart.  The  general  thought  is  that  God's 
revelations  (for  the  immediate  reference  is 
to  these,  and  not  to  future  bliss)  pass  all 
understanding.  The  quotation  of  these 
words  as  referring  to  heaven  is  one  of  the 
numberless  instances  of  texts  inaccurately 
applied. 

Ver.  10. — But  Ood  hath  revealed  them 
unto  us.  They  are  secret  no  longer,  but 
are  "  mysteries  svliich  now  it  is  given  us  to 
know"  (Matt.  xiii.  11).  By  his  Spirit.  The 
Spirit  guides  into  all  truth  (John  xiii.  16). 
In  ch.  xii.  8 — 11  St.  Paul  attributes  every 
gift  of  wisdom  directly  to  him.  Searcheth. 
"  How  unsearchable  are  his  judgments  I " 
(Rom.  xi.  33).  Yea,  the  deep  things  of  God. 
This  expression,  "The  depths  of  God," 
passed  into  the  cant  expression  of  the 
Gnostics,  and  it.  may  be  with  reference  to 
their  misuse,  of  it  that  St.  John  uses  the 
phrase,  "  The  depths  of  Satan  "  (Rev.  ii.  24) 
"  Oh,  the  depth,"  etc.  I  (Rom.  xi.  33). 

Ver.  11. — The  things  of  God  none 
knoweth.  Some  manuscripts  have  not  the 
same  word  QitSfv)  as  that  rendered  "  know- 
eth" in  the  earlier  clause,  but  "hath 
learnt"  (JtyvaKtv);  comp.  John  xxi.  17;  2 
Cor.  v.  16.  All  that  is  meant  is  that  our 
knowledge  of  God  must  always  be  relative, 
not  absolute.  It  is  not  possible  to  measure 
the  arm  of  God  with  the  finger  of  man. 

Ver.  12.— The  spirit  of  the  world.  The 
heathen  world  in  its  heathen  aspect  is  re- 
garded as  under  the  power  of  the  devil 
(2  Cor.  iv.  4 ;  Eph.  vi.  11, 12).  Freely  given 
to  as  by  God.  The  word  "  freely "  is  here 
involved  in  the  verb  (xapiffSeVra)  "gra- 
ciously bestowed."  It  is  diD'erent  from  the 
phrase  used  in  "  Freely  ye  have  received," 
which  is  gratuitously  (JSup^hv,  Matt  x.  8). 
All  God's  gifts  are" "without  money  and 
without  price "  (Isa.  Iv.  1),  and  not  "  to  be 
bought  with  money  "  (Acts  xviiL  20). 
1  Ver.  n  -Comparing  spiritual  things  with 
I  spi.itnal.    The  nitwiuug  of  this  clause   u 


OH.  n.  1—16.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTH  [ANa 


61 


rery  nnoeTtain.  It  has  been  rendered, 
"  Blending  spiritual  things  with  spiritual " 
(Kling,  Wordswortli),  t.e.  not  adulterating 
them  with  oamal  admixtures  (2  Cor.  ii.  17; 
1  Fet.ii.22).  "  Interpreting spirituitl  things 
to  spiritual  men  "  (Bengal,  Beichert,  Stanley, 
margin  of  Bevised  Version ;  see  Gen.  xl.  8 ; 
Dan.  V.  12,  LXX.).  "  Explaining  spiritual 
things  in  spiritual  words."  Tliis  meaning 
the  Greek  will  not  bear,  but  Calvin  and 
Beza  get  the  same  meaning  by  rendering 
it,  "Adapting  spiritual  things  to  spiritual 
words."  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  Greek 
verb  {tunkriiionlei)  can  be  rendered  "com- 
paring," which  comes  from  the  Vulgate, 
eomparantes.  WiokUife  has  the  version, 
"Maken  a  liknesse  of  spyritual  things  to 
goostli  men,  for  a  besteli  man  persuyved 
not  through  thingis."  The  commonest 
sense  of  the  word  in  the  LXX.  is  "inter- 
preting" (Gen.  xl.  8,  etc.),  and  the  best 
rendering  is,  "Explaining  spirituals  to 
spiritual  men."  If  it  be  supposed  that  the 
verb  auyKpiva  acquired  the  sense  of  "  com- 
paring" in  Hellenistic  Greek  (2  Cor.  x.  12; 
Wisd.  vii.  29;  xv.  18),  then  the  rendering 
of  our  Authorized  Version  may  stand. 

Ver.  14. — The  natural  man.  The  Greek 
word  is  >livxiKis  (psychical) ;  literally, 
toulish,  i.e.  the  man  who  lives  the  mere  life 
of  his  lower  understanding,  the  unspiritual, 
sensuuva,  and  egoistic  man.  He  may  be 
superior  to  the  fleshly,  sensual,  or  carnal 
man,  who  Hves  only  the  life  of  the  body 
(irafiaTiKhs);  but  is  far  below  the  spiritual 
man  (Tri/ev/uiTiKds).  St.  Paul  (1  Thess.  v. 
23)  recognizes  the  tripartite  nature  of  man 
— body,  soul,  spirit.  Eeoeiveth  not;  t.e. 
"does  not  choose  to  accept."  He  judges 
them  by  the  foregone  conclusions  of  his  own 
prejudice.  Because  they  are  spiritually 
judged.  The  organ  for  the  recognition 
of  such  truths — namely,  the  spirit — has 
become  paralyzed  or  fallen  into  atrophy, 
firom  neglect;  therefore  the  egoist  anil  the 
sensualist  have  lost  the  faculty  whereby 
alone  spiritual  truth  is  discernible.  It 
becomes  to  them  what  painting  is  to  the 
blind,  01  muaio  to  the  deal.    This  elemen- 


tary truth  is  again  an<?.  again  insisted  on  Id 
Scripture,  and  ignored  by  sceptics  (Rom. 
viii.  6,  7;  John  iii.  3;  vi.  44,  45;  xiv.  17; 
2  Cor.  iv.  3 — 6).  This  verse  is  sometimes 
used  to  depreciate  knowledge,  reason,  and 
intellect.  On  that  abuse  of  the  passage,  soo 
Hooker,  'Eccl.  Pol.,'  iii.  viii.  4—11,  an 
admirable  passage,  which  Bishop  Words- 
worth quotes  at  length.  It  is,  perhaps, 
sufficient  to  say  that  if  God  has  no  need  of 
human  knowledge,  he  has  still  less  need  of 
human  ignorance. 

Ver.  15. — Judgeth  all  things.  If  he  can 
judge  the  higher,  he  can  of  course  judge  the 
lower.  Being  spiritual,  he  becomes  intel- 
lectual also,  as  well  as  more  than  infellectual. 
He  can  see  into  the  difference  between  the 
dream  and  the  reality;  he  can  no  longer 
take  the  shadow  for  the  substance.  He 
can  not  only  decide  about  ordinary  matters, 
but  can  also  "discriminate  the  transcen- 
dent," i.e.  see  that  which  is  best  even  in 
different  alternatives  of  good.  "  The  Keeret 
of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him" 
(Ps.  XXV.  14).  Hehimself  is  judged  of  no  man, 
He  may  be  judged,  condemned,  depreciated, 
slandered  every  day  of  his  life,  but  the 
arrow-flights  of  human  judgment  fall  far 
short  of  him.  These  Corinthians  were 
judging  and  comparing  Paul  and  Apullos 
and  Cephas;  but  their  judgments  were 
false  and  worthless,  and  Paul  told  them 
that  it  was  less  than  nothing  to  him  to  be 
judged  by  them  or  by  man's  feeble  transi- 
tory day  (ch.  iv.  3).  "Evil  men,"  as 
Solomon  said,  "  understand  not  judgment " 
(Prov.  xxviil.  5). 

Ver.  16. — Who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the 
Lordl  "The  Lord"  is  Jehovah  (see  laa. 
xl.  13,  LXX.;  Rom.  xi.  34).  This  is  the 
reas<m  why  no  one  can  judge  the  spiritual 
man  in  his  spiritual  life.  To  do  so  is  like 
judging  God.  We  have  the  mind  of  Christ 
So  (Jhrist  himself  had  told  the  apostles 
(John  XV.  15);  and  St.  Paul  always  claimed 
to  have  been  taught  by  direct  revelaiiou 
from  Christ  (Gal.  i.  11,  12).  They  had  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  (Kom.  viii.  9),  and  therefor* 
the  mirtd  of  Christ 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — A  faithful  picture  of  a  true  gospel  preacher.  "  And  I,  brethren,  when 
I  came  to  you,  caiue  not  with  excellency  of  speech,"  etc.  These  words  may  be 
regarded  as  a  faithful  picture  of  a  true  gospel  preacher. 

1.  The  grand  subject  of  his  ministry  is  the  crucified  Christ.  1.  Christ  crucified, 
because  he  is  the  highest  revelation  of  Ooffs  love  for  man.  2.  Christ  crucified,  because 
he  is  the  most  thrilling  demonstration  of  the  wickedness  of  humanity.  3.  Christ 
crucified,  because  he  is  the  grandest  display  of  loyalty  to  moral  rectitude.  This  is  the 
theme — a  personal  "  Christ  crucified  ; "  not  a  creed  or  creeds  written  in  books.  H« 
himself;  not  the  theories  of  theologians  about  him. 

XL  The  grand  subject  of  his  ministry  is  to  him  souL-ABSOBBiNa.    "  I  determined  not 


«2  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  n.  1—16. 

to  know  anything  among  you,  ssive  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified."  The  man  who 
has  some  paramount  sentiment  loolis  at  the  universe  through  it,  ay,  and  values  tha 
universe  so  far  as  it  reflects  and  honours  that  sentiment.  Hence  to  Paul  Christ 
was  "  all  in  all."  All  other  subjects — political  and  philosophical— dwindled  into 
insignificance  in  its  presence ;  it  swallowed  up  his  great  soul. 

III.  1'he  grand  subject  of  his  ministry  makes  him  indiffebekt  to  all  bhetobioal 
CONSIDERATIONS.  "  I  .  .  .  came  not  with  excellency  of  speech."  In  order  to  exhibit 
this  theme  to  men,  he  never  tliought  of  brilliant  sentences  and  polished  periods 
and  studied  composition  ;  not  he.  The  theme  was  independent  of  it,  infinitely  too  great 
for  it.  Does  tiie  splendid  apple  tree  in  full  blossom  require  to  be  decorated  with  gaudy 
libbons?  Christ  crucified  is  eloquence,  mighty  eloquence.  Tell  the  story  of  his  lifo 
in  plain  vernacular,  with  the  notes  of  nature,  however  rough,  and  in  vital  sympathy 
with  its  spirit;  and  your  discourse  will  be  a  thousand  times  mightier  than  the  orations 
with  which  Demosthenes  shook  the  proud  democracy  of  Greece. 

IV.  The  grand  subject  of  his  ministry  BCBDnES  in  him  all  BELF-cONSCiousNEsa. 
"I  was  with  you  in  weakness,  and  in  fear,  and  in  much  trembling."  This  Paul  was 
naturally  a  strong,  intrepid  soul,  but  in  the  presence  of  this  grand  theme  he  felt  weak 
and  trembling.  "  Who  is  sufficient  for  the.=e  things  ? "  he  exclaims.  Vanity  in  any 
man  is  a  vile  and  disgusting  incongruity,  but  in  a  preacher  it  is  a  thousand  times  worse. 
A  vain  preacher  is  an  anomaly,  an  impostor.  He  has  failed  to  realize  the  grand  theme 
about  which  he  prates. 

V.  The  grand  subject  of  his  ministry  invests  him  with  Divine  power  over  mas. 
"  My  preaching  was  not  with  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  in  demonstration  of 
the  Spirit  and  of  power :  that  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but 
in  the  jiower  of  God."  There  is  as  truly  Divine  power  in  the  ministry  of  a  true 
preacher  as  there  is  in  the  heaving  of  ocean  or  the  rolling  of  planets ;  but  a  higher 
power  withal,  power  over  mind,  it  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation." 

"  Would  I  describe  a  preacher  such  as  Paul,"  etc. 

(Cowper.) 

Vers.  6,  7. —  The  gospel :  its  description,  preachers,  and  hearers.  "Ilowbeit  we  speak 
wisdom,"  etc.     In  these  words  we  have  three  things  concerning  the  gosjiel. 

I.  A  description  of  its  NATtJKB.  Paul  calls  it  the  "  wisdom  of  God."  The  wisdom 
of  a  system  may  be  determined  by  two  things.  1.  By  the  character  of  the  end  it 
contemplates.  A  system  which  aims  at  an  insignihcant  or  unworthy  end  would 
scarcely  be  considered  wise.  What  is  the  end  the  gospel  aims  at?  The  restoration  in 
human  souls  of  supreme  sympathy  with  God.  The  absence  of  this  sympathy  is  the 
cause  of  all  the  crimes,  evils,  and  sorrows  that  curse  humanity.  2.  By  the  fitness  of 
the  means  it  employs.  Though  a  system  contemplate  a  grand  end,  yet  if  the  mearis 
it  employs  are  unadapted,  it  could  scarcely  be  called  wise.  What  are  the  means 
Christianity  employs  to  generate  this  love  for  God  in  unloving  souls?  Ask  what  the 
souls  destitute  of  this  love  must  have  in  order  to  get  it,  and  our  answer  will  be  three 
things:  (1)  a  personal  manifestation  of  God;  (2)  a  human  manifestation  of  God; 
(3)  a  ?owj«5' manifestation  of  God.  These  things  we  tliink  efseniial  in  the  nature  of 
the  •  case,  and  these  three  things  the  gospel  gives.  It  is,  therefore,  emphaticallv  the 
"  wisdom  of  God." 

II.  A  RULE  FOR  its  PREACHERS.  "  We  sppak  wisdom  among  them  that  are  perfect." 
The  apostle  clearly  means  by  the  word  "  perfect "  those  in  the  Christian  community  who 
were  more  advanced  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  who  stood  most  in  contrast  with  those 
who  are  but  "  babes  in  Christ."  One  of  these  ideas  may  be  attached  to  the  language  of 
the  apostle.  Either  that  he  had  an  exoteric  and  esoteric  doctrine  for  men  or  that  the 
most  advanced  Christian  alone  could  discern  the  wisdom  of  his  doctrine,  or  that  he 
adapted  his  teaching  to  the  capacity  of  his  hearers.  The  last  is  the  idea  which  I  think 
we  are  to  accept  as  the  meaning,  in  another  place  he  tells  the  Christians  at  Corinth 
that  he  had  hitherto  "  fed  them  with  milk,  and  not  with  meat,  because  they  were  not 
able  to  bear  it."     His  conduct  is,  1  take  it,  a  rule  for  all  true  preaching. 

III.  An  obligation  upon  its  hearers.  If  the  higher  aspects  of  gospel  religion 
can  only  be  apiireciateu  b\  fhopc  who  are  "  perfect,"  those  who  have  attained  to  a  high 


OH.  n.  1—16.]    TUE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  COIilNTHIANa  ti 


stage  of  Christian  knowledfte,  it  is  manifestly  their  duty  to  advance  beyond  the  "first 
principles  of  the  oracles  of  God."  This  duty  hearers  owe  (1)  to  themtelves ;  (2)  to 
their  minister  ;  (3)  to  the  system  of  Christ. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Spiritual  ignorance  the  cause  of  immense  evil  and  the  occasion  of 
immente  good.  "  Wliich  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world,"  etc.  The  words  lead  us  to 
look  on  spiritual  ignorance — i.e.  ignorance  of  QoA  and  our  obligations  to  him — in  two 
very  opposite  aspects. 

I.  As  THE  CAUSE  OF  IMMENSE  EVIL.  These  "  princes  of  the  world,"  through  ignorance, 
"  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory."  A  greater  crime  was  never  perpetrated.  It  involved  : 
(1)  The  grossest  injustice.  He  was  innocent.  (2)  The  basest  ingratitude.  He  did 
good,  and  good  only.  (3)  The  most  heartless  cruelty.  They  crucified  him — the  most 
excruciating  death  that  infernal  malignity  could  desire.  (4)  The  most  daring  impiety. 
Whom  did  they  treat  thus?  "The  Lord  of  glory."  How  this  spiritual  ignorance  was 
the  cause  of  immense  evil  is  evident  from  two  considerations.  1.  Because  it  is  in 
itsflfan  evil,  and  like  will  produce  like.  There  is  an  ignorance  that  is  a  calamity. 
When  mind  and  meansAre  absent,  ignorance  is  a  calamity  ;  but  when  they  are  present, 
it  is  always  a  crime.  These  "princes"  had  both.  Their  ignorance  was  a  sin,  and 
sin,  like  virtue,  is  propagated.  That  this  spiritual  ignoiance  was  the  cause  of  evil  is 
clear  from  the  fact  that:  2,  Had  it  not  existed,  such  an  eoil  could  never  have  been 
perpetrated.     The  words  lead  us  to  look  at  s|aritual  ignorance — 

II.  As  THE  OCCASION  OF  IMMENSE  GOOD.  Paul  toUs  US  that  this  Crucifixion 
introduced  things  that  "  eye  had  never  seen  nor  ear  heard."  Divine  pardon,  spiritual 
purity,  immortal  hopes,  are  all  things  that  come  through  the  OrucifixidU.  From  the 
subject  learn  :  1.  That  the  sinner  is  always  engaged  in  accnm/ilixliing  that  which  he  never 
intended.  These  "princes"  did  two  things  they  never  intended.  (1)  They  ruined 
themselves;  (2)  they  served  God.  2.  That  whatever  good  a  man  may  acomplish 
contrary  to  his  intention,  is  destitute  of  all  praiseworthiness.  What  oceans  of  blessings 
come  to  the  world  through  the  Crucifixion  !  Yet  who  can  ever  praise  the  crucifiers? 
3.  That  no  man  should  act  without  an  intelligent  conception  of  what  he  is  do'ug.  How 
many  act  from  prejudice  and  blind  impulse  1  how  few  have  a  right  conception  of  what 
they  are  doing  I 

Vers.  10 — 16. — TTie  gospel  school.  "  But  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  U8  by  his 
Spirit,"  etc.  Because  man  naturally  craves  for  knowledge  and  deeply  needs  it,  schools 
abound  everywhere  throughout  the  civilized  world,  especial  ry  here  in  England — schools 
of  science,  schools  of  philosophy,  schools  of  art,  etc.  But  there  is  one  school  that 
transcends  all — the  gospel  school.     Three  facts  are  suggested  concerning  this  school. 

I.  That  here  the  student  is  instructed  in  the  sublimest  realities.  "  Deep  things 
of  God."  Thiirgs,  not  words,  not  theories.  "Deepthings;  "  deep  because  undiscoverable 
by  human  reason  ;  deep  because  they  come  from  the  fathomless  ocean  of  Divine  love. 
What  are  these  deep  things?  The  primary  elements  of  the  gospel,  and  the  necessary 
condition  of  soul-restoration.  These  "deep  things"  we  are  here  told  are:  1.  The/ree 
gifts  oj  Heaven.  "  Freely  given  to  us  of  God."  2.  Freely  r'iven  to  bo  communicated. 
"Which  things  also  we  speak,"  etc.  He  who  gets  these  things  into  his  mind  and 
heart,  not  only  can  communicate,  but  is  bound  to  tell  them  to  others,  and  that  in  plain 
natural  language,  free  from  the  affectations  of  rhetoric,  the  language  which  the  "  Holy 
Ghost  teacheth,"  language  wliicii  is  suagested  by  "comparing  spiritual  things  with 
«piritual."  Men  think  in  words;  thoughts  come  dressed  in  their  own  language;  the 
intellectual  thoughts  have  their  own  language,  and  spiritual  thoughts  have  a  language 
all  their  own. 

II.  That  here  the  student  is  taught  by  the  greatest  Tjiaoher.  Who  ie  the 
Teacher ?  The  Divine  S|iirit  himself,  here  called  the  "  Spirit  of  God  "  and  the  "  Holy 
Ghost."  1.  This  Teacher /jas  infinite  knowledge.  "The  Spirit  searcheth  all  things." 
The  word  "  searcheth  "  must  not  be  taken,  I  presume,  in  the  sense  of  investigation,  but 
rather  in  the  sense  of  complete  knowleiige.  In  the  last  clause  of  the  next  verse  it  ig 
said,  "The  things  of  God  knoweih  no  man,  but  the  Spirit  of  God."  He  knowetb  thoM 
things  of  God ;  he  knows  them  in  their  essence,  number,  issues,  bearings,  relations,  etc. 
1L  'J'his  'I'eacher  m  no  other  than  Ood  himself.     "What  man  knoweth  the  things  of  a 


64  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  n,  1— 1& 

man,  save  the  ipirit  of  man  which  is  in  him  ?  Even  so  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no 
man,  but  the  Spirit  of  God."  The  implication  is  that  this  Spirit  is  as  truly  God  a.* 
man's  mind  is  man.  No  one  knows  the  tilings  ia  man's  miiid  but  man  himself;  no  one 
knows  the  "  deep  things  of  God  "  but  God  himself.  "  Who  teacheth  like  God?  "  Ha 
knows  thoroughly  the  nature  of  the  student,  and  how  best  to  indoctrinate  that  natur>* 
with  his  own  "  deep  things." 

III.  That  here  the  student  must  develop  his  higher  nature.  "  But  the  natural 
man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him  : 
neither  can  he  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned."  Man  has  a  three 
fold  nature,  designated  by  St.  Paul  as  soma,  psyche,  and  pneuma — body,  soul,  and  spirit 
The  first  is  the  animal,  the  second  is  the  mental,  and  the  third  the  moral  or  spiritual. 
Tliis  is  the  conscience,  with  its  intuitions  and  sympathies,  and.  this  is  the  chief  part  of 
man,  nay,  the  man  himself,  the  core  of  his  being,  that  which  Paul  calls  "  the  inner  man," 
the  man  of  the  man,  Now,  this  part  of  the  man  alone  can  receive  the  "  things  of  the 
Spirit  of  God."  Set  these  things  before  tie  "  natural  man,"  his  mere  body  ;  they  are  no 
more  to  him  than  Euclid  to  a  brute.  Set  them  before  the  mere  psychical  or  intellectual 
man,  and  what  are  they  ?  Puzzles  over  which  he  will  speculate  ;  nay,  they  are 
"  foolishness  unto  him."  Mere  intellect  cannot  understand  hye,  cannot  appreciat« 
right.  It  concerns  itself  with  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  propositions,  and  the  advaiitaLies 
and  disadvantages  of  conduct — nothing  more.  Moral  love  only  can  interpret  and  feel 
the  things  of  moral  love,  the  "  deep  things  of  God."  Hence  this  moral  pneuma,  this 
spiritual  nature,  this  conscience  must  be  roused  from  its  dormancy,  and  become  the 
ascendant  nature  before  the  "  things  of  the  Spirit ''  can  be  "  disceiuod,"  and  tlien  the 
man  shall  judge  all  things,  all  spiritual  things,  whilst  he  himself  will  not  be  judged 
rightly  by  any  "  natural  man."  "  For  who  liath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord  ?  "  Who, 
thus  uninstructed,  can  "  know  the  miud  of  the  Lord  "  ? 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — ffow  St.  Paul  preached  the  gospel.  A  great  truth  is  cspab'e  ot 
manifold  presentations.  To  be  seen  Cully  it  must  be  viewed  in  various  aspects,  oach 
of  which  is  relative  to  the  wholeness  of  the  idea,  while  supplying  to  the  student 
an  increased  sensibility  to  its  excellence.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  speaks  of  his  disap- 
pointment when  he  first  saw  the  painting  of  the  Transfiguration,  but  it  grew  upon 
him  and  educated  his  eye,  the  mind  in  the  eye,  to  appreciate  its  sublimity.  Hazlitt 
mentions  a  similar  experience  in  his  own  case.  Such  im]>res5ions  are  not  due  to 
simple  recipiency  ;  the  active  intellect  is  aroused,  and  the  thinker  himself  becomes 
a  voluntary  party  to  the  object  affecting  him.  Evidently,  now,  St.  Paul's  idea  ot 
preaching,  as  given  in  the  first  chapter,  returned  upon  him  and  solicited  further  con- 
sideration. Accordingly,  we  find  him  in  the  second  chapter  detailing  his  personal 
history  as  a  preacher  while  at  Corinth,  and,  as  usual  in  his  Epistles,  the  autobiographical 
element  discloses  its  presence  in  his  logic.  Whenever  there  was  an  important  issue 
in  his  ministry,  we  see  the  man  in  the  fulness  of  his  proportions  and  look  into  his 
very  heart,  so  that  we  are  at  no  loss  to  understand  the  reason  of  his  .impassioniir' 
energy.  In  this  instance  he  declares  that  he  did  not  come  to  the  Corinthians  "  witi 
excellency  of  speech  or  of  wisdom,"  as  the  world  regarded  speech  and  wisdom.  But 
he  was  with  them  "in  weakness,  and  in  fear,  and  in  much  trembling."  It  was  not 
the  '•  weakness"  of  cowardice,  nor  the  "lear"  that  brings  a  snare,  nor  the  "  treniblinj;  ' 
that  comes  from  an  apprehension  of  criticism  and  hostility.  Agitation  and  solicitucie 
were  the  product  of  his  fine  sensibility,  not  rising  from  below,  but  descending  from  the 
highest  realm  of  his  being,  the  ideal  of  duty  and  responsibility  so  vast  within  him  as 
to  oppress  the  capacity  of  performance.  A  most  blessed  "  weakness "  this,  the  best 
possible  assurance  of  truthful  power,  the  most  reliable  token  our  latent  nature  ofiers 
aa  a  promise  of  success.  The  throb  of  the  engine  in  a  huge  Atlantic  steamship  sends 
its  own  quiver  into  every  plank  and  bolt  of  the  vessel.  There  is  a  "  trembling  "  in 
all  its  compartments,  but  it  is  the  trembling  of  power.  St.  Paul  had  no  gift  mora 
remarkable  than  me  gift  of  feeling  to  the  utmost  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel.  Chrisli 
in  him,  Christ  as  the  self  of  self,  was  the  Christ  he  preached  ;  and  hence  no  disrcun-fl 


OL  n.  1—16.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COfilNTHIANS.  65 

he  ever  delivered,  no  letter  he  ever  wrote,  aSected  others  as  much  as  they  affected  him. 
Effective  speakers  and  writers  are  never  on  a  level  with  their  hearers  and  readers. 
They  see  more,  feel  more,  than  those  whom  they  impress,  and  their  personality  is  no 
small  constituent  in  the  effect  produced.  Rightly  enough,  St.  Paul  specializes  "  my 
speech  and  my  preaching."  The  "my"  means  a  man  "determined  not  to  know 
anything  ._ .  .  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified."  Self-exallation  he  had  none ;  for 
self-exaltation  is  always  a  parody  on  the  truthfulness  of  one's  nature,  and  Christ  was 
so  real  to  St.  Paul  that  he  could  not  be  other  than  real  to  himself  in  his  ministerial 
work.  And,  in  accordance  with  this  fact,  his  manner  of  preaching  the  gospel  is  itself 
evidential  of  the  divineness  of  the  gosptl.  It  was  a  "  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and 
of  power."  Of  what  avail  that  the  "  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the  Greeks  seek  after 
wisdom"?  Give  them  the  "sign"  and  the  "wisflom:"  what  then?  The  belief,  or 
"  faith,"  if  you  so  call  it,  is  the  man's  own  product,  standing  in  his  own  strength,  the 
pride  of  his  own  intellect,  the  joy  of  his  own  vanity.  Not  so  the  doctrine  of  "  Christ 
crucified."  The  way  it  comes  to  the  soul  proves  its  infinite  truth.  It  does  not 
approach  a  man  on  the  sense  side  of  his  nature,  but  on  the  ^gMual  side.  Unlik* 
education  and  culture,  which  begin  with  the  intellect  of  the  Senses  and  develop 
upward,  Christianity  arises  from  the  instant  of  its  initial  contact  with  the  human  soul 
at  the  highest  moral  capacity,  and  recognizes  this  soul  as  it  stands  related  to  God  its 
Father,  to  Christ  its  Redeemer,  to  the  Holy  Ghost  its  Convincer  and  Sanctifier.  Man 
as  the  image  of  the  natural  universe  is  regarded  subsequently.  Therefore  the  emphasis 
of  St.  Paul  on  the  "demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power,"  and  therefore  the 
strength  and  glory  of  faith,  which  stands,  not  "  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power 
of  God."— L. 

Vers.  6 — 13. — Contents  of  the  revelation.  But  the  apostle  claims  "  wisdom  "  for 
the  gospel.  The  counterfeit  has  been  exposed,  and  the  genuine  coin  is  now  presented. 
And  how  does  he  proceed  to  verify  his  right  to  use  a  term  that,  in  the  estimation  of 
all  thinkers,  commanded  respect  and  admiration  ?  He  will  honour  the  Word ;  he  will 
restore  its  meaning  and  clear  it  of  obscurity,  nay,  expand  its  significance  and  invest 
it  with  a  charm  not  known  before.  Solomon  had  used  his  splendid  intellect  to  give 
Sie  word  "  wisdom"  a  wide  currency  among  his  people,  and  Socrates  had  laboured  for 
the  Greeks  in  a  similar  way,  each  of  them  an  agent  of  Providence,  to  teach  intellect  ita 
legitimate  uses  and  rescue  it  from  bondage  to  the  senses.  And  there  was  that  old 
world  in  which  these  men,  under  very  different  circumstances  and  sharing  very 
unlike  illumination,  had  taught  their  countrymen  what  they  knew  of  wisdom,  and 
this  remnant  of  its  former  state — the  mere  eflSgy  of  earlier  grandeur — stood  confronting 
St.  Paul  at  Corinth,  with  its  conceits,  prejudices,  and  animosities,  arrayed|  most  of  all 
against  him,  because  he  resisted  so  bravely  its  earthly  arts  and  methods.  From  a  lar 
loftier;  standpoint  .than  Greeks  and  Jews,  acknowledged,  an  infinite  distance,  indeed, 
between  the  disputants  of  either  side,  he  preached  wisdom  that  came  from  God — 
a  wisdoni  long  hidden  and  hence  called  "  a  mystery,"  but  now  revealed  in  the  fulness 
of  the  times.  Yet,  during  the  ages  when  this  wisdom  had  been  concealed,  when  eye 
and  ear  and  the  subtlest  imagination  had  been  unable  to  probe  the  secret,  when  human 
thought  had  exhausted  itself  in  vain  research,  and  had  sunk  at  last  into  unnatural 
content  with  its  own  imbecility, — through  all  this  probation  of  intellect  in  the  school 
of  the  senses,  God  had  reserved  "  the  hidden  wisdom  "  for  "  our  glory."  The  demon- 
stration of  man's  utter  weakness  had  to  be  made,  and  Judaea  and  Greece  had  been 
chosen  to  make  it.  Home's  task  was  to  gather  up  the  results  and  exhibit  them  in 
»  solidified  form;  nor  could  there  have  been  such  a  Rome  as  that  of  the  Caisars  unless 
the  experiment  with  the  "  wisdom  of  this  world,"  and  of  the  "  princes  of  this  world," 
had  proved  a  failure  disastrous  in  the  extreme.  That  time  had  passed.  And  now 
this  "hidden  wisdom"  had  been  made  known  as  a  spiritual  certainty,  which  was 
nothing  less  than  a  "  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power."  "  There  is  a  spirit  in 
man,"  and  it  "knoweth  the  things  of  a  man."  Who  can  gainsay  its  consciousness? 
Who  can  appeal  from  its  testimony  to  anything  higher  in  himself?  So  too  the  Spirit 
of  God  "  searcheth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God,"  and,  furthermore,  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  given  to  our  spirit  so  that  we  "  might  know  the  things  that  are  freely 
given  to  us  of  God,"    Just  before  St.  Paul  had  stated  that  the  mystery,  the  hidden 

I,  CORINTHIANS.  F 


€6  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  n.  1—16, 

wisdom,  had  been  held  back  for  "  our  glory."  And  is  not  the  truth  of  that  statement 
now  attested  ?  Understand  wherein  "  our  glory  "  lies.  It  is  in  this — man  has  a  spirit, 
and  God  communicates  his  own  secret  intelligence  unto  it  in  the  shape  of  a  "demon- 
stration of  the  Sjjirit  and  of  power."  Not  wisdom  alone,  not  only  perception  and 
reflection,  but  realization  and  assimilation  in  the  attending  form  of  power,  the  act  ol 
the  recipient  of  grace  not  being  the  functional  act  of  a  faculty,  but  of  the  whole  mind ; 
"  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual " — the  spirit  of  the  renewed  man  most  fully 
conscious'of  itself,  because  of  the  presence  of  God's  Spirit  and  the  expansion  thereby 
of  its  own  consciousness.  What  a  comparing  power  suddenly  wakens!  What  an 
oulreaching  process  begins  I  This  capacity  of  comparing,  beginning  our  development 
in  cliildhood  and  continuing  till  old  age,  is  one  of  the  mind's  foremost  activities.  It 
is  susceptible  of  more  culture  than  any  mental  property.  The  inventive  genius  ot 
poets  and  artists,  the  skill  of  th»  great  novelist,  the  discriminating  power  of  the 
sa<:acious  statesman,  are  alike  dependent  on  the  diversified  energy  of  comparison. 
Accuracy  of  judgment,  depth  of  insight,  breadth  of  sympathy  so  essential  to  largeness 
of  view,  are  mamJPnue  to  this  quality.  Give  it  fair  treatment,  and  three  score  and 
ten  years  witness  its  Tieautiful  efBoresceuce.  But  its  spiritual  uses  are  its  noblest  uses. 
"Comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual"  is  its  grandest  office.  When  the  human 
spirit  receives  the  Divine  Spirit,  what  a  glorious  enlarjiement,  by  reason  of  the 
superaddition  of  "  the  things  of  God,"  to  the  domain  of  thought,  emotion,  impulse ! 
Calmly  the  mind  works  on  ;  its  laws  never  disturbed,  its  strength  invigorated,  its  ideal 
of  greatness  opened  in  fuller  radiance,  its  range  and  compass  widened  by  a  new  horizon, 
a  motive  power  brought  to  bear  it  never  knew,  and  the  repose  of  strength  deepening 
evermore  in  the  peace  of  Christ. — L. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — Natural  man  and  tpiritval  man.  The  natural  man,  who'  had  not 
been  forgotten  by  St.  Paul  in  the  first  chapter,  now  comes  under  closer  inspection. 
We  can  see  him  from  the  point  of  view  occupied  in  the  second  chapter  What  is  said 
'jf  him?  He  "receiveth  nut  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God :  for  they  are  foolishness 
unto  him  :  neither  can  he  kiujw  them,  hecause  they  are  spiritually  discerned."  Nature 
is  represented  here  as  very  different  from  grace,  and  the  difference  has  the  breadth  ul 
contrast.  Low  and  vulvar  forms  of  nature  are  not  enumerated,  nor  would  it  have 
been  like  the  apostle  to  select  his  illustrations  from  exceptional  cases  of  human 
depravity.  Corinth  could  have  easily  supplied  such  instances.  But  the  noticeable 
fact  is  that  he  avoids  this  sort  of  specification,  and  chooses  his  typical  examples  from 
"the  wise,"  "the  scribe,"  "the  disputer  of  this  woild,"  yea,  the  very  "princes  of  this 
world ; "  and  these  are  they  who  lack  all  spiritual  disi  ernnient,  and  in  their  blindness 
look  upon  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ  as  "  foolishness."  And  the  portraiture  is  not 
finished  till  these  "  princes  of  this  world  "  are  sketched  against  the  darkest  of  possible 
backgrounds,  even  the  crucifixion  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  not  the  brutal  mob  that 
he  pictures  on  his  canvas,  but  the  best  specimens,  according  to  current  opinion,  of  the 
mind  and  culture  of  the  age.  Against  these — the  guides  of  public  sentiment  and  the 
accepted  leaders  of  .'^ooiety,  men  of  character  and  position — he  directs  his  condemnation. 
And  the  griet'  of  his  heart  is  that  these  are  the  very  men  whose  evil  spirit  has  infected 
the  Corinthian  Church,  and  introduced  vitiatini;  elements  long  ago  abandoned  by 
believers  as  utterly  inconsistent  with  morality  and  religion.  The  natural  man  of  that 
day  was  not  the  creature  of  the  day,  not  an  accident  of  those  volcanic  times  when  the 
foundations  of  civil  order  were  shaking,  and  even  the  majestic  hills  of  Rome  were 
threatened  with  upheaval.  No ;  time  and  opportunity  and  ample  means  for  develop- 
ment had  been  allowed ;  the  fairest  portions  of  the  world  had  been  given  him  for  home 
ajid  commerce ;  a  thousand  miles  around  the  Mediterranean  yielded  everything  that 
material  civilization  demanded;  art  and  philosophy  and  government  had  afforded 
whateyer  the  intellect  of  the  senses  craved;  and  Judaism  had  diffused  itself  far  and 
wide,  till  even  Stoicism  had  felt  its  influence.  After  all,  however,  the  natural  man 
has  wound  up  the  history  of  ancient  culture  by  crucifying  the  Lord  of  glory ;  and  now, 
the  stain  of  holy  blood  upon  him,  he  has  learned  nothing  from  his  own  experience,  but 
persists  in  treating  the  gospel  as  "  foolishness."  Nor  can  it  be  otherwise  so  long  aa 
the  man  remains  under  the  thraldom  of  nature.  Ammialous  it  may  seem,  but  it  is  non« 
the  less  true,  that  nature  is  morally  known  to  us  as  the  opjiosite  of  spirituality;  andj 


OH.  u.  1—10.]    THE   FlUaX  El'lSTLE  .TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  67 

though  a  human  spirit  is  in  the  man,  it  is  wholly  incapable  of  itself  to  see,  to  feel,  to 
will,  to  act,  as  a  spirit  in  anything  that  concerns  the  truly  Divine  functions  of  spirit. 
Hence  the  need  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  create  spirit ahI  d.scernment,  and  hence  the 
supreme  distinction  of  the  Christian  is  that  he  has  a  spiritual  judg;ment.  "  The  thin>;s 
of  God"  are  not  discovered  by  him, but  are  revealed  unto  his  spirit  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  discovering  intellect  of  man  is  a  splendid  endowment,  and  yet  it  is  altogether 
limited  to  the  senses  and  their  connections,  nor  can  it  pass  under  any  urgency  beyond 
the  spheie  of  the  visible  universe,  and  penetrate  the  secrets  of  the  Aliiiiglity.  If, 
indeed,  he  could  discover  them,  he  would  not  be  a  Christian  believer;  for  the  traits  of 
the  natural  man  woultl  adhere  to  him  and  be  merely  enhanced  by  power  thus  exerted, 
and  there  would  be  less  room  thnn  before  in  his  capacious  soul  for  intellectual  docility, 
for  childlike  trustfulness,  for  the  obtdienee  of  self-almegaiion.  And,  therefore,  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  consists  in  teaching  us  to  understand,  to  apireciate,  to 
•ssimilate,  the  Divine  truths  disclosed  by  him;  and,  accordingly,  what  he  reveals  is 
not  content  to  remain  as  ideas  and  dogmas,  but  seeks  the  inmost  heart,  allies  itself 
with  the  instincts,  and  communicates  to  man  a  sense  of  himself  and  of  the  possibilities 
«f  character  hitherto  unima;^ined.  Finally,  St.  Paul  argues,  "  We  have  the  mind  of 
Christ"  within  us;  and  what  better  compendium  of  all  embraced  in  spiritual  discern- 
ment than  this  expression,  "niiml  of  Christ"?  Par  more  than  the  truths  he  taught, 
and  the  practical  lessons  he  enforced,  is  meant  here;  lor  it  includes  the  entire  method, 
the  spirit,  the  aim,  of  his  teachings,  as  imparting  his  own  life  to  those  believing  iu 
him.  No  moral  principle,  no  doctrinal  lact,  no  phenomenon  of  spiritual  experience, 
now  occupies  ground  and  sustains  relations  to  thought  ami  volition  and  action  that  are 
independently  its  own.  Not  ime  of  them  is  competent  to  self-existence.  'I'here  is  not, 
there  cannot  be,  a  single  abstraction  in  Christianity.  "The  mind  of  Christ"  is  in 
every  ethical  truth,  in  every  miracle,  in  everything  that  involves  taste,  sensibility, 
reason,  conscience,  affection;  and  the  life  in  one  is  the  life  in  all.  To  dislocate  is  to 
destriiy.  And  this  "  mind  of  Christ,"  the  apostle  urges,  is  in  us,  and,  by  virtue  of  it» 
abiding  presence  and  inlinite  "  wisdom"  and  "power,"  the  breadth  of  contrast  between 
the  natural  man  and  the  spiritual  man  is  fully  brought  out.  After  eighteen  centuries, 
the  distinction  is  r-'i  luminous  as  ever.  The  very  words  remain  to  us — "  wis<lom," 
"  power,"  "  foolishness  " — and  "  the  princes  of  this  world  "  attest  their  ancient  lineage. 
The  "  natural  man"  of  our  day  has  grown  to  large  dimensions.  Never  had  the  sense- 
man,  the  intellectual  man,  the  man  of  physical  civilization,  so  much  to  boast  of;  for 
he  has  well-nigh  made  good  the  claim  of  his  scejitre  to  universal  dominion.  "  Wisdom  " 
was  never  so  conspicuous.  "  Power"  has  been  developed  in  a  greater  degree  than  its 
uses.  And  yet  in  this  very  hour,  when  destructive  strength  is  the  daily  terror  of 
mankind,  and  when  liberty  is  ever  threatening  to  riot  in  licentiousness,  we  see  just 
what  St.  Paul  saw  in  old  Corinth ;  and  the  commentary  on  God's  Word  which  the 
nineteenth  century,  like  all  centuries  since  Christ's  advent,  has  written  for  our  eyes, 
only  enforces  the  truth  that  "  the  natural  man "  knows  not  God,  and  "  receiveth  not 
the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  In  science  and  art,  in  government,  in  all  sorts  of 
internal  sovereignty,  "  the  natural  man  "  has  made  a  vast  advance  upon  himself.  But 
all  this  has  brought  him  and  his  institutions  and  his  well-being  no  nearer  to  "the 
mind  of  Christ." — L. 

Ver.  2. — Nfyne  hut  Christ  crucified.  What  is  personal  is  here,  as  throughout  these 
Epistles  to  the  Corinthians,  remarkably  combined  with  what  is  doctrinal.  These  are 
the  utterances  of  a  noble-minded  and  tender-hearted  man,  writing  to  fellow-men  in 
whom  he  takes  the  deepest  personal  interest.  Hence  he  writes  of  himself,  and  ha 
writes  of  his  correspondents ;  and  to  his  mind  both  have  the  highest  interest  through 
their  common  relation  to  the  Word  of  life.  These  Epistles  are  a  window  into  the 
heart  of  the  writer,  and  they  are  a  mirror  of  the  thoughts  and  conduct  of  the  readers. 
How  naturally,  when  thinking  of  present  successes  and  discouragements,  Paul  reverts 
in  memory  to  his  first  visit  to  Corinth  1  He  has  the  comfort  of  a  good  conscience  as 
he  calls  to  mind  the  purpose  and  the  method  of  that  ministry.  Human  philosophy 
and  eloquence  may  have  been  wanting ;  but  he  rejoices  to  remember  that  from  his  lip« 
the  Corinthians  had  received  the  testimony  of  God  and  the  doctrine  of  Christ  crucified, 

L  Thb  onk  obeat  theme  of  the  apostolic  and  or  aix  Cbbistian  uikistkt. 


m  TUB   FIKST   EPISTLE  XO  TUB  C0KLNTU1A^S.    \ou.  u.  1— IB. 

1.  A  Divine  Person  ii  exhibited.  Christian  preaching  sets  forth,  not  rahhinical 
learning,  not  Hellenic  wisdom,  not  a  code  of  nioralis,  uot  a  sysKuii  of  doctrine,  not  a 
ritual  of  ceremony,  but  a  Person,  even  Jesus  (Jlirist.  '^.  An  hi-turical  /act  is  related, 
even  the  crucifixion  of  him  who  is  proclaimed.  Kverytljiii<j  reiatiug  to  Christ's 
ministry  was  worthy  of  remembrance,  of  repetition,  of  meditatiuu  ;  but  one  aspect  of 
that  ministry  was  regarded,  and  still  is  regarded,  as  of  supreme  interest — the  Cross,  ai 
preceded  by  the  Incarnation,  and  as  fallowed  by  the  Resurrection.  In  his  earliest 
Epistle  Paul  had  written,  " God  foibid  that  I  should  glory  save  in  the  cross ; "  in  ons 
of  his  latest  he  taught  that  the  incarnate  Redeemer  became  obedient  nnto  "  the  death 
of  the  cross."  3.  Religious  teaching  of  hi>>hest  moment  was  based  upon  this  fact 
regarding  this  Person.  Thus  sin  was  condemned,  redemption  was  secured,  a  new 
motive  to  holiness  was  provided ;  for  the  cross  of  Christ  was  the  power  of  God  and  the 
wisdom  of  Giid. 

II.  Reasons  for  exclusive  devotion  in  the  ministry  op  religion  to  this  oni 
3REAT  theme.  1.  A  personal  and  experimental  nason  on  the  part  of  the  jjreacher. 
Paul  had  a  persona]  experience  of  the  excellence  and  power  of  the  doctiine  ol'  the  cross. 
The  knowledge  which  he  prized  he  communicated,  the  blessings  he  had  received  and 
enjoyed  he  could  oiler  to  others.  So  must  it  be  with  every  true  preacher.  2.  A  more 
general  reason — the  adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  the  wants  of  all  mankind.  For  Christ 
crucified  is  (1)  the  highest  revelation  of  the  Divine  attributes  of  righteousness  and 
mercy;  (2)  the  most  convincing  testimony  and  condemnation  of  the  world's  sinfulness 
and  guilt ;  (3)  the  Divine  provision  for  the  paidon  of  the  transgressors ;  and  (4)  the 
most  effectual  motive  to  Christian  obedience  and  service.  The  same  doctrine  is  also 
(5)  the  niighty  bond  of  Christian  societies;  and  therefore  (6)  the  one  hope  of  the 
regeneration  of  humanity. 

Application.  1.  Here  is  a  model  and  an  inspiration  for  those  who  teach  and  preach 
Jesus  Christ.  2.  Heie  is  a  representation  of  the  one  only  hope  of  sinful  nien ;  what 
they  may  seek  in  vain  elsewhere  they  will  find  here — reconciliation  with  God,  and  the 
power  of  a  new  and  endless  life. — T. 

Ver.  4. — Sjtiiitual  power.  Lanfjuage  like  this  sometimes  refers  to  those  special, 
supernatural  gifts  which  were  bestowed  upon  the  members  and  officers  of  the  Church 
in  the  ai)ostolic  days.  But,  as  the  apostle  is  speaking  of  the  gospel  of  the  cross  ot 
Christ  and  of  its  moral  and  spiritual  effects,  it  seems  reasonable  to  take  the  very 
strong  expressions  here  employed  as  referring  to  the  Divine  vigour  and  energy  accom- 
panying the  Word  of  salvation. 

I.  Chbistianitt  is  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  op  God.  The  Jews  would 
have  received  it  had  it  been  a  dispensation  of  miracle  and  irodigy  ;  the  Greeks,  had  it 
been  a  dispensation  of  rhetoric  and  philosophy.  But  God's  Spirit  has  his  own  mode  of 
operation,  withheld  from  the  apprehension  of  carnal  natures.  The  same  Spirit  who 
abode  upon  the  Saviour  at  his  baptism,  rested  as  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  illumination 
upon  the  inspired  apostles,  and  as  the  Spirit  of  power  accompanied  their  word  to  the 
henrts  of  men.  He  is  from  above,  as  the  Breath,  the  Wind,  the  Fire,  the  Dew,  the  Bain, 
the  Dove  of  God. 

Ii.  Human  souls  are  the  field  op  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Chris> 
tianity  is  no  mechanical  religion ;  its  ends  are  not  to  l>e  secured  by  any  external  con- 
formity; it  does  not  consist  in  buildings,  ceremonies,  priesthoods,  etc  He  only 
understands  the  nature  of  Christ's  purposes  who  can  join  in  the  consecration  and 
confessiou— ■ 

"  I  give  my  heart  to  thea, 

O  Jesus  most  desired  ; 
And  heart  for  heart  the  gift  shall  bo^ 
For  tliou  my  soiU  hast  fired. 
Thou  hearts  alone  wouldst  move] 
Thou  only  hearts  dost  love ; 
I  would  love  thee  as  thou  lov'st  ina^ 
O  Jesus  most  desired  I " 

in.   TfflB  OOSPEL  IB  THE    IMPLEMENT   AND   WEAPON  OF   THE   SPIRIT  OF  GoD.      God'l 

Spirit  approaches  man.'s  spiiit  m  every  true,  pure,  and  lofty  thought  in  every  revelation 


HH.  n.  1—16.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  6» 

of  pity,  love,  and  sacrifice.  But  God's  mind  is  made  known  with  special  reference  to 
man's  position  and  needs  in  "  tlie  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  It  is  hecause  the  Spirit 
is  in  the  Word  that  the  Word  is  living  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  the  two-edged 
sword. 

IV.  Faith  and  repentance,  obedience  and  holiness,  abb  th«  power  and 
DEMONSTRATION  01'  THE  SpiBiT  OF  GoD.  Here  We  have  "  the  witness  of  the  Spirit," 
telling  us  that  the  source  of  such  streams  is  above.  Here  we  have  "  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit,"  telling  us  whence  is  the  life  which  embodies  itself  in  such  results.  Doubtless 
under  the  conviction  of  the  Spirit  there  present  themselves  displays  of  feeling,  deep 
and  signal.  But  the  great  and  reliable  proofs  of  the  presence  and  action  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  are  to  be  sought  in  those  moral  efl'eots  which  can  be  traced  to  no  inferior  cause. 
The  weeds  sow  themselves;  but  an  abundant  and  previous  crop  is  witness  to  the  skill 
and  the  energy  of  the  husbanilinan. 

V.  Responsibility  is  involved  in  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  op  God.  1.  The 
preacher  of  the-gospel  is  reminded  that  his  reliance  should  be,  not  upon  his  own  gifts, 
but  upon  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God.  2.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  admonished  neither 
to  "  quench  "  nor  to  "  grieve  "  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  The  hearer  of  the  gospel  is  warned 
that  to  refuse  the  gospel  is  to  reject  the  Spirit;  and  deliberately,  persistently,  and 
finally  to  do  so  is  to  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost. — T. 

Ver.  7. —  The  Divine  mystery.  The  Apostle  Paul  was  accustomed  to  press  into  his 
service,  as  a  Christian  teacher,  all  the  institutions  and  usages  of  the  societies  witli  which 
he  was  in  any  way  and  at  any  time  associated.  Thus  in  this  passage  he  makes  use  of 
the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  with  which  his  readers  were  doubtless  familiar,  to  set  forth 
the  profundity  of  the  Divine  wisdom,  and  the  distinction  and  happiness  of  those  who 
were  initiated  into  the  glorious  secrets  of  Christianity.  "  We  speak  God's  wisdom  in 
\  mystery." 

I.  The  substance  or  the  mystery.  There  is  little  reason  to  believe  that  the 
ancient  Gjeoian  mysteries  had  any  substantial  and  valuable  truth  to  conserve  and 
communicate.  Observe  the  contrast:  the  New  Testament  tells  us  of  the  purpose  of 
God  to  save  mankind ;  not  Jews  only,  but  Gentiles  also,  in  the  exercise  of  his  wisdom 
and  compassion. 

II.  The  hiding  op  the  mystery.  It  is  not  for  us  to  explain  why  a  purpose  so 
gracious  should  have  been  so  long  concealed.  So  it  was.  And  for  generations  and  ages 
the  human  race  was  unacquainted  with  the  purpose  which  the  Supreme  had  conceived 
in  the  counsels  of  eternity.  We  can  see  that  the  Law  had  been  a  "pedagogue"  to 
bring  the  Jews,  and  philosophy  to  bring  the  Gentiles,  to  Christ.  But  the  fulness  of  the 
time  was  known  only  to  God. 

III.  The  revelation  of  the  mystery.  This  took  place  when  Christ  came  and,  in 
his  ministry  and  sacrifice,  made  known  the  gracious  designs  of  the  Father,  that  all  men 
should  be  drawn  unto  himself,  and  that  the  world  might  not  be  condemned  but  saved 
with  an  everlasting  salvation. 

IV.  The  communication  of  the  mystery.  This  took  place  in  the  gospeL  The 
fervour  which  Paul  and  his  fellow-labourers  displayed  in  the  preaching  of  the  glad 
tidings  shows  how  deeply  those  tidings  had  sunk  into  their  nature,  and  how  precious 
the  reception,  of  them  appeared  to  their  enlightened  minds.  They  unfolded  what  had 
been  wrapped  up;  they  brought  to  light  what  had  been  buried  beneath  the  soil,  even 
"  the  hid  treasure ; "  they  brought  out  Irom  the  deep  sea  that "  pearl  of  great  price"  which 
is  for  the  enrichment  of  every  possessor  and  for  the  delight  of  every  beholder. — T. 

Ver.  8. "  The  Lord  of  glory."    When  the  Jews  and  the  Roman  governor  united  in 

effecting  the  crucifixion  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  neither  party  to  the  proceeding  can  be  said 
to  have  understood  and  realized  what  was  being  done.  The  enemies  and  murderers  of 
the  Prophet  of  Nazareth  saw  neither  the  glory  of  his  character  and  person  more  than 
very  dimly,  nor  the  glory  of  his  redemption  in  any  measure  at  all.  Jesus  himself  had 
declared, "  They  know  not  what  they  do ; "  and  Paul  here  says  that,  had  they  known  ths 
counsels  of  God,  they  would  not  have  crucified  Christ.  This  does  not  justify  or  excuse 
their  act ;  for  they  certainly  knew  that  they  were  putting  to  a  cruel  death  One  who  was 
innocent  and  just.    Christ  is  tlie  Lord  of  glory— 


70  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [cH.  u.  1— 1& 

I.  Ik  right  of  his  own  natube  and  person.  This  he  himself  asserted,  when  h» 
spoke  of  the  glory  which  he  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was.  And  such  was 
the  teaching  of  the  apostles  concerning  him  who  was  "  the  Emanation,  the  Effulgence, 
of  the  Father's  glory,  and  tlie  very  Image  of  his  substance." 

II.  In  virtue  of  the  character  of  his  ministry  and  bacrifioe.  It  is  true  that 
the  life  of  Jesus  upon  earth  was  accompanied  by  lowly  circumstances,  and  was  not 
likely  to  dazzle  the  carnally  minded.  In  his  incarnation  he  emptied,  himself  of  his 
glory  and  took  the  form  of  a  slave.  Yet  tiiose  who  had  eyes  to  see  could  look  through 
the  humiliation  to  the  glory  beliiad  and  within.  And  they  have  left  their  witness  on 
record :  "  We  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  full  oi 
grace  and  truth."  Spiritual  discernment  recognized  Divine  glory  even  amidst  the 
ignominy  of  the  awful  death  of  the  Redeemer. 

III.  Bt  his  exaltation  and  the  events  that  followed  it.  The  Resurrection  and 
Ascension  were  the  completion  of  the  work  which  was  begun  by  the  Incarnation  and 
the  Sacrifice.  If  in  the  earlier  of  these  movements  constituting  the  redemptive  work 
the  glory  was  hidden,  in  the  later  it  was  conspicuously  revealeil.  Jesus  arose  "  in  the 
glory  of  the  Father ;  "  he  ascended, "  carrying  captivity  captive ;  "  he  shed  forth  the  gifts 
of  the  Spirit  in  royal  profusion ;  he  occupies  his  immortal  throne.  To  his  people  he  is 
the  eternal  "  King  of  glory." 

IV.  Because  he  secures  the  glorification  of  all  his  people.  Christ  is  described 
as  "  brini;ing  many  sons  unto  glory."  The  context  refers  especially  to  "  our  glory,"  i.e, 
to  the  heaveuly  happiness,  dignity,  and  reign  of  those  who  liave  a  part  in  Christ's 
redemption,  who  share  his  conflict  here,  and  to  whom  it  is  assured  that  they  shall  be 
partakers  of  his  majesiy  and  of  his  dominion  hereafter.  The  honour  of  Clirist  is  bound 
up  with  that  of  his  people.  It  is  not  intended  that  they  shall  behold  bis  majesty  and 
splendour  from  afar,  as  something  to  admire  and  to  adore,  but  not  to  share.  On  the 
sontrary,  his  glory  shall  be  reflected  upon  them ;  as  the  Lord  of  glory,  he  will  admit 
them  to  participate  in  it,  and  this  very  participation  shall  be  the  means  of  its 
enhancement. — T. 

Vers.  9, 10. — Th»  revelation  of  things  muem  and  unheard.  It  may  perhaps  have 
been  complained,  though  unreasonably  enough,  that  Paul's  compositions  were  lacking 
in  logic,  and  his  language  in  eloquence.  There  was  in  the  substance  of  his  teaching 
enough  to  compensate  any  deficiencies  of  such  kinds.  No  sage  communicated  such 
wisdom,  no  poet  such  wonders,  as  he.  Deep  things,  drawn  by  the  Spirit  from  the  ocean 
of  Gh)d's  unfathomable  nature,  were  brought  up,  and  were  by  him  presented  to  the 
Church  of  Christ — to  all  who  possess  the  spiritual  capacity  to  recognize  their  meaning 
and  to  appreciate  their  worth. 

L  Consider  what  these  revelations  were.  In  the  original  prophecy  the  reference 
vas  to  marvellous  and  Divine  deliverances  wrought  for  Israel ;  the  apostle  "  accommo- 
dates" the  prophet's  language  to  his  own  purpose,  to  express  the  display  of  Divine  wisdom 
and  power  evinced  in  the  gospel,  in  which  Christ  is  made  unto  his  people  wisdom  and 
righteousness,  sanctification  and  redemption.  The  privileges  of  the  Christian  calling 
enjoyed  in  the  present  are  an  earnest  of  the  higher  joys  of  the  eternal  future.  The 
gospel  manifests  the  favour  and  fellowship  of  God,  assures  of  sonship  and  of  heirship. 
It  reveals  Divine  truth,  and  it  imparts  Divine  grace. 

n.  Observe  how  inaccessible  these  blessings  were  to  the  ordinary  fowsbs  of 
men.  The  eye  can  range  over  the  surface  of  this  beautiful  earth,  and  can  explore  the  glories 
of  the  majestic  firmament.  The  ear  has  receptivity  tor  the  manifold  sounds  of  nature 
and  for  the  intricacies  and  the  charms  of  music.  The  heart  speaks  often  and  profoundly : 
"  A  man's  mind  is  sometimes  wont  to  tell  him  more  than  seven  watchmen  that  sit  in 
a  tower."  But  the  revelations  here  alluded  to  are  not  like  the  features  of  nature,  which 
are  recognizable  by  sense,  or  like  the  inspirations  of  practical  sagacity.  The  eye  can 
see  the  works  of  God,  but  not  the  Artificer;  the  ear  can  hear  the  voice  ot  God,  but 
knows  not  the  Speaker ;  the  heart  can  echo  the  appeals  of  God,  but  these  appeals  must 
reach  it  from  above. 

III.  Beuabk  that  these  eevelatioss  abb  made  by  the  Swbit  of  God  himself. 
We  possess  a  spiritual  nature  susceptible  of  Divine  impression  uud  ap()eal,  and  with 
this  nature,  created  after  his  own  likeness,  the  Fatter  of  spirits  is  in  direct  communi* 


OH.  u.  1—16.]    THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  COlilNTHlANa  71 

cation.  Not  that  truth  is  miraculously  conveyed ;  the  Spirit  takes  the  revealed  facts 
•od  applies  tliein  to  the  mind,  quir,keuing  aad  illumiuiug  tlie  powers  so  that  they  receive 
and  rejoice  in  the  truth  of  God. 

IV.  Ponder  the  condition  of  reoeivinq  this  knowledqe.  The  revelations  are 
for  those  who  love  God.  Not  the  great,  or  the  wise,  or  the  outwardly  righteous  are  the 
recipients  of  Heaven's  best  blessing;  but  those  who  possess  this  mural  and  spiritual 
qualification.  They  who  "  wait  for  God,"  as  Isaiah  puts  it;  they  who  "  love  Goil,"  as 
it  is  phrased  by  Paul, — are  the  enlightened  and  the  enriched.  The  spirit  that  is  filled 
with  gratitude  and  with  love  is  thereby  prepared  to  understand  and  appreciate  the 
mysteries  of  Divine  grace.  The  true  love,  which  puts  on  the  form  of  obedience,  is 
the  path  to  spiritual  perfection.  Love  grows,  and  with  it  knowledge ;  and  heaven  is 
attractive  because  it  is  at  once  the  abode  of  perfect  love  and  the  sphere  of  perfect 
knowledge. — T. 

Ver.  16. — "  The  mind  of  Christ."  Some  professed  Christians  have  the  name,  and 
only  the  name,  of  Christ.  Some  are  satisfied  to  have  in  saciamental  bread  what  repre- 
sents the  body  of  Christ.  "  We,"  says  the  apostle,  and  all  true  Christians  will-  in  a 
lowly  grateful  spirit  unite  in  the  same  profession — "  we  have  the  mind  of  Christ." 

1.  What  is  meant  by  "the  mind  of  Christ"?  His  earthly  ministry,  his  counsels 
and  promises  to  his  disciples,  his  willing  sacrifice,  revealed  that  mind;  and  that  so 
fully  and  so  clearly  that  we  may  justly  say,  that  mind  has  become  and  is  the  richest 
heritage  and  possession  of  humanity.  1.  His  was  the  mind  that  saw  the  truth.  He  did 
not  reason  it  out  or  accept  it  from  authority;  he  looked  it  in  the  face;  he  was  naturally 
and  perfectly  and  always  acquainted  with  it.  2.  His  was  the  mind  that  loued  the  yood. 
It  was  through  no  fierce  struggle  that  Jesus  came  to  admire  and  to  appreciate  moral 
beauty  ;  for  goodness  was  natural  to  him  and  perfectly  congenial  and  delightful  to  his 
being.  3.  His  vi&s  the  rami  that  chose  the  right.  The  will  of  man  is  often  vacillating  and 
varying,  and  in  some  cases  it  persistently  chooses  evil.  But  throughout  Clirist's  ministr}', 
righteousness  was  not  the  law  to  wiiich  he  submitted,  but  the  very  life  he  lived.  There 
is  no  instance  of  his  preferring  the  wrong ;  he  was  witliout  sin.  4.  His  was  the  mind 
that  thought  and  planned  and  suffered  for  all  men.  It  is  not  a  just  view  of  the  mind 
of  the  Lord  Christ  to  regard  it  as  p,  rsonal  character.  Fur  he  was  tlie  Son  of  man,  and 
took  all  humanity  into  the  embrace  of  his  great  and  comprehensive  mind.  He  thought 
and  spake  of  all  men  as  most  closely  related  to  himsulf.  To  know  his  mind  is  to  know 
alike  the  mind  of  man  and  the  mind  of  Uod. 

H.  Ilow  CAN  WE  PAttTAKB  "  THE  MIND  OF  Christ  "1  When  we  Consider  what  that 
mind  was,  we  may  well  be  all  but  hupeless  of  possessing  and  of  sharing  it.  Yet  it  is  his 
will  that  his  mind  should  be  ours,  and  he  has  made  provision  for  our  pirticipation  in, 
our  appropriation  of,  his  mind.  1.  We  acquire  knowledyt  of  that  mind  through  the 
record  of  the  gospel.  His  words,  his  miracles,  his  conduct,  his  sufferings,  were  all  a 
revelation  of  his  mind ;  pondering  them,  we  come  near  to  the  thonght,  to  the  heart,  of 
our  Saviour.  2.  We  receive  wUh  faith  tlie  all-sufficient  ledemptiun  lie  has  effected. 
He  is  not  only  a  Teacher,  he  is  not  only  a  Revelation  of  the  Father;  he  is  the  Saviour. 
And  it  is  in  accepting  the  salvation  wiiich  is  through  him  that  we  are  re-created  in  the 
likeness  of  his  holy  mind  and  nature.  3.  We  do  his  will,  and  learn  that  obedience  is 
the  method  by  which  we  attain  to  a  more  thorough  sympathy  witli  him.  Thus  a 
growing,  revelation  on  his  part  brings  about  a  growing  appropriation  on  ours. 

UL    How  CAN   WE   PROVE  OURSELVES  TO  HAVE  "  THE  MIND   OF  ClIRlST  "  ?       I.    By    OUr 

judgment  concerning  spiritual  things;  for  tliese  are  spiritually  discerned  by  the  dis- 
ciplined, the  sympathetic,  mind.  2.  By  our  life  of  lovmg  service  ;  for  "  if  a  man  have 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his." — T. 

Vers.  I— 5.— Pauline  preaching.  1.  What  it  wab  hot.  1.  It  was  not  "  with 
excellency  of  speech."  Paul  did  not  come  as  a  rhetorician ;  his  utterances  wore  not 
orations  of  highly  wrought  eloquence.  He  did  not  seek  to  make  the  gosiiel  palatable  by 
presentiii"  it'^with  "enticing  words."  His  manner  was  simple  and  unaffected;  his 
diction  pfain  and  easily  understood.  He  did  not  aim  to  carry  everything  before  him 
with  a  flood  of  words,  neither  did  he,  a  preacher,  seek  fame  as  an  orator.  He  had  a 
message  to  deliver,  and  would  not  obscure  it  by  many  words  j  he  dreaded  lest  anything 


n  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE   CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  n.  1—16. 

Bhotild  divert  attention  from  its  all-important  terms.  It  is  recorded  of  James  11.  that 
he  once  tat  for  his  portrait  to  a  great  flower-painter,  but  so  completely  was  the  canras 
filled  with  beautiful  garlands  of  flowers,  that  the  king  himself  was  lost  sight  ot  So 
many  paint  Christ  in  their  sermons  ;  when  they  preach  Christ  they  preach  everything 
except  Christ.  2.  /(  ivas  not  the  impartation  of  human  wisdom.  Paul  did  not  come 
as  a  philosopher ;  he  came  as  a  herald.  He  had  certain  facts  and  truths  to  proclaim, 
•nd  he  would  not  philosophize  about  them,  at  all  events  until  they  were  accepted,  for, 
until  accepted,  their  true  philosophy  could  not  be  imderstood.  Human  wisdom  had 
failed ;  Paul  brought  something  which  would  not  fail,  Paul  was  no  enemy  to  human 
wi&dom;  he  despised  it  only  as  a  means  of  human  redemption  f  it  was  very  con- 
temptible to  him  when  it  attempted  to  transcend  its  sphere. 

.  U.  What  it  was.  It  was  the  proclamation  of  "  Christ  and  him  crucified."  This  was 
pre-eminent,  excluding  philosophies  and  subordinating  all  other  things.  The  apostle 
would  not  know  aught  besides ;  this  should  fill  his  consciousness.  If  the  Corinthians 
would  not  receive  this,  he  had  nothing  more  for  them ;  he  must  turn  to  others  more 
willing.  A  myriad  other  things  had  been  presented  to  them  by  philosophers  and 
various  teachers ;  all  had  failed.  He  would  present  Christ,  and  this  Christ  crucified,  and 
stake  everything  upon  the  issue.  That  which  was  the  sum  and  substance  ot  Paul's 
preaching  is,  in  much  preaching,  like  the  proverbial  needle  in  the  haystack — exceedingly 
difiScult  to  discover  at  alL  1.  His  theme  was :  (1)  The  person  of  Christ.  The  subject 
of  prophecy,  of  history,  of  the  apostle's  own  knowledge.  Christ  the  Sent  of  God. 
Christ  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Son  of  man.  (2)  The  oflSce  of  Christ.  Christ  the 
Saviour  of  men.  Exhibited  as  the  Saviour  especially  in  that  tragedy  of  the  cross,  when 
"  he  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  and  bruised  for  our  iniquities."  2.  This  was 
"  the  testimony  of  God "  (ver.  1).  The  revelation  of  Divine  wisdom.  f>od  had 
nothing  greater  or  better  to  disclose  to  men  than  this.  Well  might  the  apcra'e  pass 
by  the  wisdom  of  man,  since  he  was  entrusted  with  the  wisdom  of  Croa.  The 
"  mystery  "  of  God.  Thought  of  in  past  eternal  ages,  long  hidden  from  men,  tran- 
scending the  poor  flights  of  boastful  human  intellect,  but  now  plainly  declared. 
Paul  spoke  not  his  own  words  or  thoughts,  but  God's.  3.  Note  a  special  feature 
of  his  preaching :  it  was  "  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power."  It  was  the 
utterance  of  certain  truths  with  reliance  upon  the  Divine  [Spirit  to  carry  them  to  the 
heart.  The  aixjstle,  in  proclaiming  the  gospel,  whilst  using  evidence  and  employing 
argument,  relied  upon  the  conviction  of  the  Spirit.  Words  and  human  wisdom  could ' 
not  efiftct  what  he  desired — conviction  of  sin,  of  the  need  of  a  Saviour,  conviction  that 
Christ  was  the  Saviour,  the  Only  Saviour,  the  "  Mighty  to  save."  Paul  preached 
waiting  for  the  witness  of  the  Spirit — and  that  witness  was  given.  It  is  somelimes  not 
given  because  it  is  tiot  sought.  All  preaching  without  it  is  useless,  and  yet  it  is  often 
the  last  thing  thought  of. 

III.  Its  ACC0MPAN1HENT8  ON  THE  OCCASION  IN  QUESTION.  1.  Weakness.  Possibly 
the  "  tlioin  in  the  flesh  "  was  at  that  time  specially  harassing,  or  the  apostle  may  have 
been  in  special  bodily  weakness.  But  perhaps  he  was  deeply  conscious  of  weakness  and 
insufiicieJicy  when  he  viewed  the  magnitude  and  importance  of  his  work.  Corinth  was 
a  stiong  Satanic  citadel  to  storm.  2.  Fear.  Under  a  sense  of  responsibility,  and  the 
issues  at  stake.  Apprehension  lest  mistakes  should  be  made,  and  evil  done  instead  of 
good.  It  might  be  well  if  there  was  more  of  this  "  fear  "  in  some  modern  preachers. 
3.  Much  trembling.  There  was  much  commotion  in  the  a^rastle's  spirit — he  was  deeply 
agitated.  With  no  "  light  heart  "  did  he  set  about  his  work.  A  very  pathetic  picture  1 
But  probahly  the  best  condition  for  the  apostle  under  the  circumstances.  This  apostolic 
condition  has  not  a  little  to  do  with  apostolic  success.  The  all-confident  may  suceed 
in  the  world,  but  they  will  fail  sooner  or  later  in  the  Church.  Such  a  state  as  that  of 
F«  il's  niaKea  us  feel  that  we  are  nothing,  and  that  we  can  do  nothing ;  and  then  Qod 
wurks.  When  we  are  weak,  then  are  we  strong  (2  Cor.  xii.  10).  The  despondencies, 
humiliations,  emptyings,  of  Christian  workers  have  frequently  been  the  preludes  of 
maiked  spiritual  successes.  We  are  often  too  strong  and  too  confident  for  God  to  make 
any  use  of  us. 

IV.  Its  aim.  1.  The  awakening  of  faith.  This  preaching  was  not  a  performance 
for  applause,  but  earnest  work  for  an  all-important,  spiritual  result.  Nothing  less  than 
pergonal  saving  faith  in  Christ  as  the  issue  of  his  preaching  could  satisfy  the  apostle 


OH.  n.  1—16.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COHINTHIANS.  7» 

a  faith  which  should  indissolubly  bind  to  Christ,  and  blossom  into  the  excellences  and 
beauties  of  the  Christian  life.  2.  Faith  well  founded.  Not  standins;  in  the  wisdom  of 
men  (ver.  5).  Not  built  upon  beautiful  words  or  fine-spun  theories,  but  having  the 
work  of  God  ir  the  heart  as  a  sure  foundation.  The  apostle  desired  divinely  wrought 
conviction  and  eonvertiwi.  So  in  his  preaching  he  sought  to  make  all  room  for  Ood, 
lie  did  not  desire  to  be  personally  proiuinent;  he  swept  away  philosophies  and  the 
cunning  arts  of  rhetoric,  fixed  the  attention  ufjon  the  God-sent  Saviour  and  his  victorious 
work  upon  the  cross,  and  relied  upon  God  to  make  this  break  down  the  opposition  of 
the  natural  heart  and  to  build  up  in  the  soul  a  stea<lliist,  abiding  faith  in  Christ. 
An  important  inquiry — What  is  our  faith  baseil  upon  ?  Do  we  know  anything  of  the 
"  power  of  God,"  the  "  demonstration  of  tlie  Spirit  "  ?  The  faith  of  not  a  few — such  as 
it  is — is  based  upon  the  iiuagiuatiuu,  eloquenc(j,  learning,  or  eccentricities  of  their 
ministers;  upon  the  authority  of  their  Oliurcli';  or  upon  their  own  unsanctioned 
fancies. — U. 

Vers.  6 — 16. — 7Vu«  wisdom.  I.  Is  found  in  Christianity.  Paul  has  been  speaking 
slightingly  of"  wisdom."  Might  lead  some  to  suppoi^e  that  Christianity  was  unwise,  or 
at  all  events  a  one-sided  system ;  that  it  was  a  religion  for  the  heart  only,  and  unfriendly 
to  the  intellect.  The  apostle  guards  against  this  damaging  supposition  by  claiming 
true  wisdom  for  Christiauity.  What  he  has  been  decrying  is  the  inctfective  wisdom  of 
the  world.  Christianity  is  for  the  whole  man.  When  a  man  is  in  a  right  condition, 
Cliristiauity  satisfies  both  his  head  and  heart.  Cliristianity  is  the  sublimett  philosophy. 
Its  creed  contains  the  profoundest  truths,  and  under  its  influeme  we  are  placed  on 
the  high  road  to  the  solution  of  all  that  is  mysterious  in  the  universe.  We  are  in 
alliance  with,  and  under  the  teaching  of,  tlie  Eternal  Mind,  which  will  at  last  lead  as 
into  all  truth.  An  intricate  piece  of  mechanism  may  baffle  the  intelli>jence  of  careful 
students,  but  those  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  the  inventor  may  obtain  from  him  a 
lucid  and  all-satisfactory  explanation.  God  is  the  great  Inventor  of  the  universe,  and 
all  its  puzzles  are  very  plain  things  to  him.  Those  who  are  on  terms  of  sacred  intimacy 
with  him — not  those  who  are  estranged — are  likely  to  enter  into  the  higher  knowledge 
of  things.  Christianity  places  us  in  this  all-advantageous  position.  We  are  on  the 
road  of  knowledge.  One  day  we  shall  know  even  as  we  are  known.  Perhaps  to  the 
lost  the  disheartening  puzzles  and  mysteries  will  continue  evermore. 

11.  Its  content.  The  knowledge  of  God's  redemptive  work  in  its  widest  significance 
(ver.  7).  Showing  how  man  is  i-estored  to  the  Divine  favour ;  his  relation  to  God  upon 
his  recovery ;  the  plan  of  his  new  life ;  shedding  much  light  upon  the  Divine  character 
and  upon  the  Divine  working  in  nature  and  in  providence,  since  these  are  allied  to 
and  inHuenced  by  his  working  in  grace  ;  leading  to  the  knowledge  of  many  deep  things 
of  God  (ver.  10),  profound  doctrines,  etc.  Man  learns  whence  he  came  ;  the  meaning 
of  his  present  life ;  whither  he  goes ;  the  cause  of  the  disorders  which  he  beholds  in  the 
world  and  realizes  in  himself;  how  this  cause  may  be  dealt  with  so  far  as  he  and  others 
are  concerned ;  how  he  and  they  may  escape  from  its  control  and  rise  from  it  to  Ood. 
Christianity  solves  now  the  mysteries  attaching  to  practical  moral  and  spiritual  life. 
It  shows  man  how  to  live.  The  Christ  of  Cliristianity  could  say,  "  1  am  the  Way,  the 
Truth,  and  <Ae  Life."  "  In  him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men  "  (John  L  4). 
Life-vdsdom  was  the  wisdom  the  world  needed  ;  it  was  found  in  Christianity.  The 
wisdom  of  the  world  was  powerless  to  answer  t\ie  great  question  of  life — in  this  province 
it  was  mere  folly.  Christianity  answered  every  question  that  really  required  an  answer; 
and,  in  its  marvellous  [ilan  of  salvation,  exhibited  the  sublimest  wisdom,  seeing  that 
the  Deity  is  hereby  glorified  and  man's  rescue  from  sin,  ennoblement,  purification,  and 
present  and  future  well-being  are  secured.  When  Paul  expounded  the  doctrines  of 
Christianity,  he  was  not  speaking  folly,  but  setting  forth  the  truest  and  highest  wisdom 
the  worla  had  ever  listened  to ;  and  those  who  truly  embraced  Christianity  became 
"  wise,"  seeing  that  they  then  possessed  true  views  of  God  and  of  human  life,  and 
moreover  yielded  themselves  to  the  control  of  an  influence  which  would  make  them 
practically  wise  in  cvery-day  conduct.  Let  us  realize  that  Christianity  contains  the 
profdurMtst  wisdom.  Men  laugh  at  Christianity, — not  because  it  is  foolish,  but  because 
thejf  are.  Let  us  guard  against  being  laughed  out  ^Christianity ;  for  if  we  are,  we  shall 
be  taugheil  out  of  wisulom  and  laughed  into  folly. 


74  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  il  1—16 

nL  Its  origin.  1.  Not  of  this  world.  The  true  wisdom  is  heaven-born,  not  earth- 
born.  The  world  is  at  enmity  with  God,  and  omits  him  from  its  schemes  of  wisdom; 
no  wonder  that  tliese  develop  into  utter  folly.  2.  Not  of  the  rulers  of  this  world. 
The  world's  great  men  did  not  produce  Christianity  ;  it  sprang  not  from  philosophers, 
rhetoricians,  politicians,  or  conquerors.  World-powers  tend  to  come  to  nought  and 
their  wisdom  with  them  (ver.  6).  The  true  wisdom  revealed  in  Christianity  never 
entered  the  heads  of  the  wise  men  of  the  world  (ver.  9) ;  it  was  alien  to  their  natures 
and  notions.  They  were  natural;  it  was  supernatural.  3.  Ood.  It  is  true  wisdom 
because  it  is  Divine  wisdom ;  its  origin  proves  its  quality.  It  springs  from  the 
Supreme  Mind ;  it  conveys  his  thoughts ;  it  reveals  his  purposes  and  acts.  In  Chris- 
tianity the  finite  mind  runs  upon  the  lines  of  the  infinite.  The  human  occupies  the  stand" 
point  of  the  Divine.  We  see  with  God's  eyes.  4.  Ancient.  We  speak  of  the  wisdom 
of  the  ancients :  this  is  the  wisdom  of  the  Ancient  of  days.  Older  than  the  worlds. 
Thought  out  by  God  in  a  past  eternity.  Conceived  then  for  our  well-being.  Wondrous 
thought  I  Here  Divine  love  takes  its  place  by  the  side  of  Divine  wisdom.  For  us  ; 
and  shall  we  mist  it  after  all  t  Because  fools  call  it  folly,  shall  we  ?  It  is  the  eternal 
wisdom,  prepared  for  us  before  time  was.  It  comes  to  us  down  through  the  ages 
unshattered,  unshaken,  by  the  assaults  of  the  centuries. 

IV.  By  whom  dnoebstood.  By  the  spiritual.  It  is  spoken  amongst  "  the  perfect " 
(ver.  6),  the  spiritually  minded,  the  matured.  Every  believer  has  some  comprehension 
of  it;  but  the  more  spiritual  a  man  is  the  keener  is  his  perception  of  its  beauty  and 
force,  the  greater  his  delight  in  it.  The  carnal  understand  it  not  Once  they  were  tested 
in  its  close  and  striking  approach  to  them  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  him 
they  sought  to  destroy  (ver.  8) ;  and,  could  they  have  done  so,  they  would  have  robbed 
the  world  of  light  and  left  it  to  interminable  darUi  ess.  To  the  "  ualural  man  "  the 
true  wisdom  is  folly  (ver.  14)  ;  as  the  ordinary  wisdom  of  laen  might  seem  to  creatures 
of  lower  grade.  The  spiritual  man  is  exalted,  and  sees  clearly  what  to  the  man  beneath 
appears  blurred,  unsightly,  puzzling,  and  undesirable.  The  carnal  man  has  a  valley 
view,  and  gazes  through  thick  and  distorting  mists ;  the  spiritual  man  has  a  muuntain- 
top  view,  and  the  more  spiiitual  he  is  the  clearer  is  the  atmosphere  through  which  he 
looks.  Many  men  who  quarrel  with  Cbrisliatiity  should  rather  quarrel  with  them- 
selves ;  the  fault  is  not  in  it,  but  in  them.  We  need  alteration,  not  God's  revelation. 
We  must  not  think  lightly  of  Christianity  because  many  reject  it ;  an  imbecile  throws 
away  bank-notes.  Honesty  is  good,  but  a  thief  will  have  none  of  it.  A  blind  man  has 
a  poor  opinion  of  pictures.  When  the  mouth  is  out  of  condition,  the  sweetest  meats  are 
unsavoury.  When  Ood  revealed  the  true  wisdom  in  Christianity,  he  announced  that  it 
would  be  unappreciated  by  many,  and  explained  why  this  would  be  so  (Rom.  viii.  7). 

V.  Its  POSSESSION  AND  EXERCISE  BY  THE  SPIRITUAL.  1.  Possessioii.  ( 1)  The  spiritual 
possess  the  Spirit  (vers.  10,  12,  I'i).  This  is  the  cause  of  their  being  spiritual.  By 
nature  we  are  all  carnal — the  children  of  darkness  ai)d  of  wrath.  Our  carnality  ig 
dissipated  by  the  coming  of  the  Divine  Spirit  into  our  hearts.  He  is  light,  we  are 
darkness;  the  light  chases  away  the  darkneas.  The  Divine  Spirit  commences  the 
work  of  grace  in  our  hearts  and  carries  it  ou  to  the  end.  How  eagerly  should  we  open 
our  hearts  to  this  Divine  Guest!  How  heedl'ul  should  we  be  to  the  command, "  Quench 
not  the  Spirit"  (1  Thess.  v.  19)1  To  quench  the  Spirit  would  be  to  involve  ourselves  again 
in  the  darkness  from  which  we  had  escaped.  (2)  The  Spirit  reveals  the  true  wisdom 
to  the  spiritual.  We  are  taught  of  the  Spirit.  Here  we  tread  the  road  of  the  highest 
and  truest  knowledge.  "Who  teacheth  like  him?  "  Here  is  the  school  for  all  Christians ; 
only  as  they  learn  here  do  they  learn  truly.  Men  have  boasted  of  their  teachers. 
How  many  sat  at  the  feet  of  Socrates,  Plato,  and  Aristotle!  and  one  very  familiar  to 
us  sat  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel.  But  what  an  honour  is  reserved  for  the  children  of 
God  to  have  as  their  Teacher  the  Holy  Sjiirit  I  A  Teacher,  too,  always  with  us,  for  he 
dwells  within  us ;  and  ever  i  eady  to  instruct.  How  diligent  should  we  be  in  learning  the 
lesson  set  for  us  by  this  Teacher!  (3)  The  Spirit  is  qualified  for  this  office.  What  a 
striking  testimony  to  the  divinity  of  the  Holy  Ghost  we  have  in  ver.  11 !  God  is 
represented  under  the  figure  of  a  man  ;  the  Holy  Ghost  under  the  figure  of  the  .spirit 
of  that  man.  How  full  the  knowledge !  how  intimate  the  associatiou !  how  indissoluble 
the  connection! — the  two  are  one  I     We  are  .aught  by  Ood,  and  who  can  teach  God's 

visdom,  the  true  wisdom,  like  Ood  himself  1    2.  Exercise.    The  Spirit  not  only  rev«al« 


OH.  II.  1— 16J    THE  FIRST  EPI/iTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  75 


wisdom  to  the  spiritual,  but  makes  them  practically  wise.  As  led  Vy  him,  all  their 
actions  are  wise  ;  their  fonlish  deeds  aie  the  fruits  of  refusing  to  be  sc  led.  (1)  They 
compare  spiritual  things  with  spiritual  (ver.  13).  This  expression  is  obscure.  Some 
have  thought  the  meaning  to  be,  comparing  passages  of  Scripture  together,  all  being 
recognized  as  inspired  by  the  Spirit,  and  one  being  expected  to  shed  light  upon  the 
other.  And  surely  such  "  comparing  "  is  wise.  Single-text  men  have  a  profound 
impression  of  their  own  wisdom,  but  no  one  else  has.  It  has  been  well  said  that  the 
best  commentary  on  Scripture  is  Scripture.  The  Spirit  has  certainly  made  ua  wise 
when  we  have  a  special  fondness  for  his  own  teaching.  Men  are  apt  to  search  every- 
thing before  they  search  the  Scriptures.  We  want  more  Bible  students.  Many  know 
a  good  deal  about  the  Bible,  and  very  little  of  the  Bible.  The  passage  has  been  thought 
to  mean,  joining  spiritual  truths  to  spiritual  (not  worldly-wise)  words,  thus  causing  it 
to  continue  the  thought  of  the  preceding  clause — upon  which,  by  the  way,  adherents  of 
the  verbal  inspiration  theory  lay  much  stress  as  supporting  their  views.  As  for  our- 
selves, if  we  are  wise,  we  shall  certainly  ^desire  to  be  led  by  the  Spirit,  not  only  in  thought, 
but  in  utterance.  Preachers  and  teachers  need  to  attend  the  Divine  school  of  language. 
Words  are  a  great  power ;  they  hinder  or  help  according  to  their  suitability.  How 
many  sermons  of  noble  and  useful  thought  have  been  thrown  away  because  of 
unsuitable  diction !  How  much  truth  has  been  suffocated  under  masses  of  verbiage  I 
How  much  repioof,  exhortation,  incitement,  has  been  made  pointless  by  being 
expressed  in  carefully  rounded  periods !  The  edge  has  been  taken  off;  the  sword  has  been 
blunted.  How  often  "eloquence"  has  hidden  Christ!  And  further,  how  often  false 
doctrine  has  been  fostered  by  carelessness  of  expression !  We  need  a  "  wisdom  of 
words ; "  though  not  that  false  wisdom  of  words  which  Paul  so  vigorously  condemned. 
The  modern  Church  requires  a  "  gift  of  tongues,"  and  must  look  for  it  whence  the 
ancient  gift  came.  The  ministers  of  Christ  should  speak  "  as  the  Spirit  gives  them 
utterance."  (2)  They  form  true  judgments.  In  the  degree  in  which  they  possess  the 
true  wisdom,  according  to  the  measure  in  which  they  are  taught  and  led  by  the  Divine 
Spirit.  The  reference  is,  no  doubt,  to  matters  moral  and  spiritual ;  but  it  must  be 
remembered  that  all  things  in  this  life  have  a  moral  or  spiritual  bearing,  and  it  is  in 
this  respect  that  the  spiiitual  have  true  discernment.  The  truly  spiritual  man  cannot 
be  judged  by  the  carnal.  The  carnal  cannot  form  a  true  estimate  of  spiritual  matters, 
because  these  are  spiritually  discerned  (ver.  14).  So  that  the  world's  judgment  of  the 
Christian,  per  se,  need  not  distress  him ;  it  is  the  judgment  of  ignorance  (see  ch. 
iv.  3).  This  true  wisdom,  so  priceless,  is  within  the  reach  of  all.  By  believing  in 
Christ  we  may  become  "  wise  unto  salvation,"  and,  under  the  Spirit's  teaching,  wise  for 
all  time  and  for  all  eternity. — H. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Paul  the  model  preacher.  The  apostle  has  shown  that  Qod  does  not 
save  men  by  human  wisdom,  but  by  the  preaching  of  Christ.  He  now  declares  that 
his  own  practice  at  Corinth  was  in  accordance  with  this  great  principle.  His  example 
is  a  pattern  for  all  preachers  of  the  gospel. 

I.  The  matter  and  method  of  Pi«EACHiiia.  Paul's  business  was  to  "proclaim 
the  mystery  of  God,"  "even  the  mystery  which  hath  been  hid  from  all  ages  and 
generations  ;  but  now  hath  it  been  manifested  to  his  saints  "  (Col.  i.  26).  The  substance 
of  that  mystery  is  set  forth  in  "  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucitied."  The  person  and 
the  work  of  Christ,  what  he  was  and  what  he  did,  constitute  the  great  theme  of  the 
preacher.  These  two  great  heads  cover  all  that  is  distinctively  called  the  gosp'J. 
How  is  this  to  be  preached  ?  "  Not  with  excellency  of  speech  or  of  wisdom ; "  "  not  m 
persuasive  words  of  wisdom.''  Not  as  a  new  philosophy  to  supplant  the  old ;  not  as 
a  well-reasoned  argument,  compelling  the  assent  of  the  mind;  not  as  a  rhetorical 
display,  taking  captive  the  imagination.  The  temptation  to  seek  to  win  men  in  this 
way  is  frequently  groat,  as  Paul  felt  it  to  be  at  Corinth,  but  it  must  not  be  yielded  to. 
The  preacher  is  the  bearer  of  a  Divine  message  to  men  which  needs  no  adventitious 
helps  (compare  what  is  said  above  on  ch.  i.  17 — 25). 

II.  The  source  of  powbr  in  preaching.  1.  Self-distrust.  "And  I  was  with 
you  in  weakness,  and  in  fear,  and  in  much  trembling,"  Paul  magnified  his  office  and 
humbled  himself.  In  presence  of  the  forces  arrayed  against  him  and  the  great  trust 
committed  to  him,  he  felt  his  own  weakness.     And  if  the  great  apostle  trembled  in 


Te  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [cb.  il  1—16. 

view  of  his  work,  doei  it  become  any  preacher  of  the  gospel  to  be  self-confident? 
Human  power  at  its  best  can  produce  no  spiritual  result.  The  most  highly  gifted  are 
impotent  to  convert  a  single  sinner.  To  bo  coniident  in  our  own  strength  is.to  b< 
weak;  for  this  confidence  preieuts  the  exercise  ot  Divine  power.  To  be  self-emptied, 
self-distrustful,  consciously  weak,  is  to  be  really  strong ;  for  then  God  can  work  by 
us.  Whilst  we  preach  the  Word,  we  are  to  stand  still  in  impotence  and  see  the  salvation 
of  God.  I'his  is  a  negative  source  of  power  to  the  preacher,  a  keeping  of  the  field  clear 
to  let  the  Divine  force  hare  full  play.  Here  also  the  law  holds,  "  He  that  exalteth 
himself  shall  be  humbled ;  but  he  that  humbleth  hiniself  shall  be  exalted."  2.  Tha 
presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The -apostle's  preaching  was  "in  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit  and  of  power."  The  truth  he  uttered  was  dtrried  home  to  men's  minds  and 
hearts  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  consequently  with  a  power  of  conviction  which  no 
force  of  reasoning  could  produce.  Here  lies  the  preacher's  strength.  Great  results 
may  be  wrought  by  human  power  on  a  lower  level :  logic  may  convince  the  intellect, 
rhetoric  may  dazzle  the  imagination,  pathos  may  touch  the  heart;  but  the  Holy 
Spirit  alone  can  convert,  and  nothing  short  of  conversion  should  satisfy  us.  As  the 
powder  to  the  ball,  as  the  strong  arm  to  the  swofd  (Heb.  iv.  12),  so  is  the  Spirit  to  the 
Word.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Ixjrd  of  hosts " 
(Zech.  iv.  6).  This  was  the  secret  of  the  apostle's  power,  and  all  workers  for  Christ 
must  depend  on  the  same  source  of  strength  if  they  would  "  be  strong  and  do  exploits." 
III.  '1 HB  CHIEF  END  OF  PRBACHINO.  Paul  aimed  at  producing  faith  in  Christ,  and 
he  was  careful  that  this  "  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the 
power  of  God."  Belief  in  Jesus  Christ  may  rest  upon  evidence  addressed  to  the 
understanding,  or  upon  the  authority  of  a  teacher  or  Church;  and  this  is  important  in 
its  own  place.  But  such  belief  implies  no  more  than  a  mental  assent  to  certain  facts 
or  truths,  and  requires  for  its  production  nothing  beyond  the  natural  force  of  proof 
The  faith  which  saves  is  the  product  of  the  Holy  Spirit  working  effectually  in  the 
hearers  of  the  Word,  and  is  based  upon  his  "demonstration"  of  the  truth.  It  is, 
therefore,  a  stable  and  abiding  thing,  upheld  by  him  who  produced  it ;  and  it  is  an 
operative  thing,  xfiecting  the  heart  and  life  of  the  believer.  The  end  of  gospel 
preaching  is  to  bring  men  to  exercise  this  living  faith.  Let  the  preacher  pray  and 
work  for  this ;  let  the  hearer  ask  hiqiself  if  he  has  obtained  it. — B. 

Vers.  6 — 10.— Spiritual  wisdom.  While  disclaiming  a  gospel  based  on  the  wisdom 
of  men,  Paul  is  careful  to  show  that  he  does  not  disparage  true  wisdom.  The  facts 
of  Christianity  are  the  embodiments  of  great  principles;  the  story  of  the  cross  has 
behind  it  the  sublimest  philosophy.  Hence  the  gospel  is  at  once  milk  for  babes  and 
meat  for  men  (ch.  iii.  2) ;  and  a  wise  teacher  knows  how  to  adapt  his  teaching  to  the 
capacities  of  his  pupils.  Among  the  newly  converted,  the  apostle  confined  himself  to 
a  simple  presentation  of  truth;  but  among  the  "perfect,"  or  more  advanced,  he 
exhihiti'd  that  truth  in  its  higher  relations.  The  Epistles  to  the  Romans  and  the 
Ephesians  are  examples  of  the  wisdom  which  he  communicated  to  the  full-grown  in 
the  Christian  Churches.  The  child  and  the  philosopher  find  a  common  point  of  interest 
in  Christ  crucified.  , 

L  The  characteristics  of  spiritual  wisdom.  These  are  set  forth  negatively 
and  positively.  1.  It  is  "not  of  this  world."  It  is  not  a  natural  product  springing 
out  of  earthly  soil.  It  is  not  the  invention  of  this  world's  princes,  the  leaders  of 
thought  and  the  wielders  of  power,  who  control  the  ongoings  of  the  age.  They  and 
their  works  belong  to  a  state  of  things  that  is  coming  to  nuught.  They  have  no  place 
as  such  within  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  their  wisdom  shall  perish  with  them. 
Christianity  derived  nothing  from  this  source,  and  all  attempts  to  improve  upon  it 
by  human  wisdom  have  been  futile.  2.  This  wisdom  is  of  Ood.  The  plan  of 
salvation  is  a  product  of  the  Divine  mind.  At  every  step  in  it  we  mark  his  impress. 
Its  conception  as  a  whole,  and  all  its  details,  speak  of  him.  The  characteristics  here 
enumerated  are  in  keeping  with  its  Divine  origin.  (1)  It  is  "  a  mystery."  This  is  a 
favourite  word  with  Paul  in  describing  the  way  of  redemption  (cf.  ch,  iv.  1;  Eph. 
i.  9 ;  vi.  19,  etc.).  Some  ancient  religions  had  their  so-called  mysteries,  into  which 
their  votaries  required  to  he  initiated ;  and  the  wisdom  of  God  so  far  resembles  thoM 
that  it  needs  a  Divine  preparation  in  order  to  understand  it.    Mere  natural  reasou 


.iLl—lS.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&  7T 


csnnot  Teeetve  It;  it  must  be  revealed  to  us  by  God  himself.  (2)  It  "hath  been 
hidden"— "kept  in  silence  through  times  eternal,  but  now  is  manifested"  (Bom.  xvL 
85, 26).  God's  secret  purpose  of  mercy  has  been  revealed  in  the  gospel.  God  has 
broken  the  silence  and  has  spoken.  (3)  It  was  "  foreordained  before  the  worlds  [ages]." 
Bedemption  is  a  forethought,  not  an  afterthought.  Before  the  world  was,  before  man 
was  made,  before  all  time,  the  thought  of  God  was  upon  sinners,  and  be  purposed  to 
MTe  them.  Follow  the  broad  river  of  salvation  back  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  back 
through  all  the  stages  of  iU  development,  and  you  come  at  last  to  the  spring  of  infinite 
love  in  the  heart  of  God.  This  great  tree,  which  in  the  course  of  the  ages  has  grown 
Into  strength  and  sent  out  many  branches,  has  its  roots  in  the  timeless  past,  and  its 
fally  ripened  fruits  in  the  eternal  future.  Who  shall  overturn  it  (Rom.  viii.  29,  et  $eq.)  f 
(4)  It  was  foreordained  "  unto  our  glory."  Here  are  the  first  and  last  links  of  the 
golden  chain  of  redemption.  Glory  is  the  final  completion  of  salvation,  the  full-blown 
flower  of  grace.  God  gives  all  his  sons  a  "  crown  of  glory,"  and  for  this  his  wisdom 
and  power  in  Christ  are  working.  The  Divine  origin  of  evangelical  wisdom  is 
confirmed  by  the  treatment  it  received  at  the  hands  of  men.  When  the  hidden 
mystery  was  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ,  they  knew  it  not.  Even  the  Lord  of  glory  had 
>o  charm  in  their  eyes — "  no  beauty  that  they  should  desire  him."  The  rulers  of  this 
world,  the  representatives  of  its  wisdom  and  power,  counted  him  worthy  of  a  cross. 
And  this  has  been  the  case  whenever  the  gospel  has  encountered  human  wisdom. 
Acting  on  its  principles,  men  have  rejected  Christianity  and  sought  to  crush  it  by 
force.  Every  day  the  same  blindness  is  seen  in  those  who  do  not  embrace  the  Saviour, 
leading  now  to  indifference  and  now  to  active  hostility. 

n.  How  BPIBITUAL  wiBDou  IS  BEVEALED.  To  give  point  to  the  contrast  he  has 
been  drawing  out,  Paul  quotes  freely  from  Isa.  Ixiv.  4,  to  show  whence  our  knowledge 
•f  heaTenly  wisdom  is  derived.  "  Whatsoever  things  God  prepared  for  them  that  love 
him  *  ii  a  beautiful  description  of  the  blessings  of  salvation — pardon,  peace,  renewal, 
life  eternal.  All  these  have  been  made  ready  in  the  working  out  of  the  scheme  of 
redemption.  During  the  Old  Testament  period  they  were  in  course  of  preparation, 
the  great  plan  step  by  step  unfolding  itself,  till  in  the  fulness  of  the  time  the  Christ 
appeared,  to  turn  shadow  into  substance,  prophecy  into  history.  And  these  prepared 
Uessiugs  are  for  them  that  love  him ;  for  they  alone  can  receive  them.  Love  has  an 
eye  to  see,  an  ear  to  hear,  a  heart  to  embrace,  the  things  of  salvation ;  and  to  love 
they  are  revealed.  1.  The  knowledge  of  these  things  it  not  attained  by  the  exercise  of 
natural  facultiet.  (1)  Not  by  sight:  "Eye  saw  not."  What  wealth  of  beauty  haa 
God  prepared  for  the  eye  I  Sky  and  earth  and  sea  teem  with  fair  forms  from  the 
Creator's  hand.  Much  knowledge  comes  to  us  through  this  noblest  of  our  senses;  but 
spiritual  things  lie  in  a  region  where  it  cannot  enter.  They  belong  to  the  invisibl* 
(2  Cor.  It.  18).  (2)  Not  by  hearing :  "  Ear  heard  not."  Many  sweet  sounds  in  nature 
bas  God  prepared  for  the  ear.  We  learn  much  through  the  medium  of  words,  spoken 
«r  written ;  but  spiritual  knowledge  does  not  come  thus.  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,* 
but  hearing  alone  does  not  produce  faith.  The  Pharisees  heard  Jesus,  but  they  did 
not  believe  on  nim.  The  men  of  Athens  and  Corinth  heard  Paul,  but  bow  few  under- 
stood his  message  I  Thousands  listen  to  the  gospel  again  and  again  without  entering 
into  its  real  meaning.  (3)  Not  by  thought:  "And  which  entered  not  into  the  heart 
of  man."  Wonderful  things  have  been  conceived  by  man.  Think  of  the  progress  he 
has  made  in  wresting  from  Nature  her  secrets  (the  sciences),  and  of  the  triumphs  of 
inventive  genius  (telegraph,  telephone,  electric  light,  spectroscope,  etc.).  Think  of 
the  speculations  of  philosophers  in  their  efforts  to  understand  all  mysteries,  the  dreams 
of  poets  in  creating  new  worlds  of  imagination.  But  here  is  something  which  science 
could  not  discover,  nor  genius  invent,  nor  imagination  create.  2.  They  an  rwealtd 
to  iM  by  the  Spirit  <^  Owl.  It  is  his  office,  as  the  Spirit  of  truth,  to  guide  us  into  all 
the  truth  (John  zvL  13).  Spirit  can  be  touched  only  by  spirit.  Our  inner  being  lies 
open  to  the  access  of  God,  who  can  put  his  finger  on  its  secret  springs  and  move  it  as 
he  pfeases.  The  influence  of  one  human  mind  upon  another  is  similar  to  this.  The 
process  by  which  the  things  of  God  are  made  known  to  us  is  here  called  revelation, 
A  twofold  unveiling  is  requisite.  The  Holy  Spirit  presents  the  truth  to  our  spirits, 
holds  up  before  us  Jesus  Christ  and  his  salvation:  whilst  at  the  same  time  he  with- 
dnwi  the  veil  from  the  mind,  touching  the  closed  eye  and  opening  the  deaf  ear.    Ot 


78  THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [«■•  «»•  1—16. 

Lydia  it  is  said,  "  Wliose  heart  tlie  Lord  opened,  to  give  heed  unto  the  things  which 
were  spoken"  (Acts  xvi.  14);  and  Paul  says,  "  It  was  the  good  pleasure  of  God  to 
reveal' his  Son  in  rae  "  (Gal.  i.  15,  16).  By  this  spiritual  unveiling,  and  not  by  natural 
sense  or  reason,  do  the  things  of  God  become  to  us  realities. — B. 

Vers.  10 — 16. —  The  Holy  Spirit  as  the  Sevaler.  In  this  section  the  apostle  derelopi' 
more  fully  the  subject  of  revelatiou  through  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  things  prepared 
by  God  for  them  that  love  him  have  not  been  discovered  by  human  wisdom,  nor  can 
they  be  appreliended  by  natural  reason.  As  they  come  from  God,  they  are  made 
known  to  us  by  God  through  the  operation  of  the  revealing  Spirit, 

I.  The  competence  op  the  revealino  Spirit.  "  For  the  Spirit  searcheth  all 
things,"  etc.  He  is  competent  to  reveal  to  ns  the  things  of  God,  because  he  has  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  them.  There  is  nothing  in  God  that  is  hid  from  him,  not  even 
the  "deep  things."  The  nature,  perfections,  purposes  of  the  Almighty  are  patent  to 
his  eye.  This  is  explained  by  an  analogy  between  the  spirit  of  a  man  and  the  Spirit 
of  God.  "  For  who  among  men  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,"  etc.?  The  depths  of 
my  being  do  not  lie  open  to  the  eyes  of  others.  They  cannot  observe  the  hidden 
motive,  the  secret  desire,  and  all  the  movements  thnt  precede  the  formation  of  a 
purpose.  They  see  only  what  is  without,  and  from  that  infer  what  is  within.  But 
to  my  own  spirit  all  that  inner  region  is  unveiled.  I  am  immediately  conscious  of  all 
that  is  going  on  within  me.  "  Even  so  the  things  of  God  none  knoweth,  save  the 
Spirit  of  God."  We  can  see  a  little  of  God's  working  in  the  universe,  and  from  that 
we  can  gather  something  of  his  mind ;  but  we  cannot  by  searching  find  him  out.  We 
can  only  make  dark'  gnesses  at  a  few  truths  regarding  liim,  whilst  the  matters  of  his 
grace  are  completely  hidden  from  us.  but  the  Spirit  of  God  knows  the  things  of  God,  as 
the  spirit  of  a  man  knows  the  things  of  the  man.  He  does  not  know  them  by  inference. 
As  dwelling  in  God  and  himself  God,  he  knows  them  immediately,  infallibly,  and 
perfectly.  The  analogy  is  not  to  be  pressed  beyond  this  particular  point.  The 
apostle  is  not  speaking  of  the  relation  between  the  Spirit  and  the  Godhead,  except  in' 
regard  to  the  Spirit's  perfect  knowledge.  From  all  this  the  fitness  of  the  Spirit  to  be 
our  Instructor  in  Jthe  things  of  God  is  manifest.  The  argument  is  not  that  he  is 
superior  to  every  other  teacher,  but  that  in  the  nature  of  things  he  is  the  only  Teacher. 
He  alone  fully  knows ;  he  alone  can  fully  reveal. 

II.  The  work  of  the  bevealino  Spirit.  The  all-knowing  Spirit,  proceeding 
from  God,  is  imparted  to  believers.  As  "  the  spirit  of  the  world "  works  in  the  sons 
of  disobedience  (Eph.  ii.  2),  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  and  works  in  the  children  of  faith. 
His  work  appears  in  two  ways.  1.  In  teaching  us  to  know  the  things  of  Ood.  "  That 
we  might  know,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  The  things  prepared  lor  them  that  love  God  are  the 
free  gifts  of  his  grace.  They  have  been  provided  at  infinite  cost,  but  to  ns  they  are 
given  "  without  money  and  without  price."  These  things  are  taught  us  by  the  Spirit, 
who,  as  "  the  Anointing  from  the  Holy  One,"  gives  us  to  know  all  things  (1  John  ii. 
20).  How  great  a  privilege  to  have  such  a  Teacher  I  How  far  does  it  raise  the 
Christian  above  the  wise  of  this  world!  How  accurate  and  assured  should  be  our 
knowledge  1  And  this  knowledge  is  more  than  the  apprehension  of  certain  doctrines 
as  true,  or  the  persuasion  that  the  gospel  is  God's  way  of  salvation.  We  know  his 
gracious  gifts  only  in  so  far  as  we  receive  them.  Justification  and  sanctification  are 
verities  only  to  the  justified  and  sanctified.  The  way  to  spiritual  knowledge  is  through 
faith  and  personal  experience.  2.  In  teaching  ut  to  speak  the  things  of  Ood.  Pa.ul 
has  in  view,  first  of  all,  his  own  case.  It  was  his  work  as  a  preacher  to  declare  the 
glad  tidings  to  men,  and  this  he  did,  "  not  in  words  which  man  s  wisdom  teacheth,  but 
which  the  Spirit  teacheth."  He  was  not  left  to  his  own  unaided  skill  in  choosing  the 
forms  under  which  he  presented  the  truth.  The  Spirit  gave  him  utterance  as  well  as 
knowledge,  taught  him  the  very  words  he  was  to  employ.  This  statement  covers  both 
his  oral  and  his  written  teaching.  Apart  from  theories  on  the  subject,  inspiration 
must  be  held  to  extend  to  the  verbal  framework  of  apostolic  teaching, as  well  as  to  the 
teaching  itself;  yet  so  as  to  give  free  play  to  the  writer's  own  form  of  thought  and 
style  of  expression.  He  fitted  spiritual  truth  to  words  suggested  by  the  Spirit  (this  is 
one  probable  meaning  of  nrfvuariKeit  irycv/uiTiKek  nyKpimrrts,  ver.  13),  and  so  interpreted 
ipiritual  things  to  spiritual  men  (according  to  another  probable  meaning).    Doe*  not 


OH.  n.  1— 16.J    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  79 

this  apply  in  measure  to  all  speakers  for  Christ  ?  The  apostles  had  a  special  inspiration 
{or  their  special  work,  but  many  in  the  Church  at  Corinth  had  a  gift  of  utterance 
(ch.  i.  5).  May  not  preachers,  teachers,  writers,  and  all  who  tell  the  story  of  Christ 
crucified,  expect  similar  help? 

III.  'liiE  NECKSsiTT  FOR  THE  REVEALING  SpiRiT.  Thii  appears  In  the  contrast  drawn 
between  tlie  natural  man  and  the  spiritual  man  (vers.  14 — 16).  The  natural  man 
(ifivxMis)  is  he  who  is  in  the  fallen  condition  into  which  sin  has  brought  mankind, 
and  in  whom  the  faculty  of  knowing  Divine  things  (the  spirit,  wveSfia)  is  dormant. 
Sich  a  man  is  not  necessarily  sensual  or  brutish,  but  he  is  earthly — all  his  movements 
being  governed  by  the  lower  part  of  his  incorporeal  nature  (i^ux^))  i^nd  directed  to 
selfish  ends.  The  spiritual  man  {vvfviiaTiKis)  is  he  in  whom  the  spiritual  faculty  {Trvevij.a\ 
by  which  we  discern  the  things  of  God,  lias  been  wakened  into  life  and  activity  by 
the  Spirit  of  God.  This  (inivki'iicd  spiiit,  dwelt  in  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  becomes  the 
ruling  part  of  his  nature,  to  which  thought,  (ifsire,  purpose,  passion,  are  in  subjection 
(ciimpare  the  threefold  division  of  human  nature  in  1  Thess.  v.  23,  which  may  be 
illustrated  by  the  threefold  division  of  the  tabernacle- -the  holy  of  holies,  the  holy  place, 
and  the  outer  court).  Hence :  1.  "  The  natural  man  (1)  receiueth  not  the  things  of  the 
Spirit  of  Ood  :  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him."  He  fails  to  understand  them,  and, 
not  thinking  that  the  fault  is  in  himself,  he  rejects  them  as  absurd.  They  cross  his 
prejudices  and  overturn  his  cherished  principles.  The  doctrine  of  the  new  birth  seemed 
foolish  to  Nicodemus.  Every  unconverted  hearer  of  the  gospel  confirms  the  truth  of 
this  statement.  (2)  This  rejection  arises  from  spiritual  inability.  "  And  he  cannot 
know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  judged."  The  natural  man  is  destitute  of  the 
faculty  by  which  spiritual  things  are  discerned,  as  a  blind  man  cannot  judge  of  colour. 
The  tints  of  the  rainbow,  the  gorgeous  hues  of  sunset,  awaken  no  sensation  in  him; 
and  for  a  like  reason  the  glorious  things  of  God's  grace  call  forth  no  appreciative  response 
frjm  the  natural  man.  How  humbling  to  hnman  pride  and  human  wisdom  1  How 
gieat  the  need  for  spiritual  illumination!  2.  The  spiritual  mAn  (1)"  J  udgeth  all  thingi." 
This  may  be  taken  broadly  as  covering  all  the  matters  on  which  the  spiritual  man  is 
called  to  decide.  He  alone  is  in  the  position  where  all  things  are  seen  in  their  proper 
relations,  for  he  alone  gives  the  spiritual  element  its  place  of  paramount  importance. 
But  the  apostle  has  specially  in  view  the  things  of  salvation,  which  are  perceived  and 
appreciated  only  by  the  renewed  man.  His  inner  eye  has  been  opened,  and  he  now 
lives  and  moves  in  the  region  of  spiritual  things,  where  the  natural  man  stumbles  and 
falls.  Many  an  unlettered.  Spirit-taught  Clirittian  has  a  clearer  insight  into  God's 
ways  of  grace  than  the  man  of  mere  learning.  Hence  every  believer  is  called  to  exercise 
his  own  judgment  as  to  Divine  truth,  and  not  to  rest  supinely  on  the  judgment  of 
another.  The  spiritual  eye,  like  the  natural,  is  given  us  to  be  used ;  and  in  the  us« 
comes  greater  clearness  of  discernment  and  accuracy  of  judgment.  But :  (2)  "  He 
himself  is  judg'd  of  no  man."  A  man  with  eyesight  can  judge  of  the  matters  of 
a  blind  man,  but  the  blind  man  cannot  judge  of  him.  The  spiritual  man  understands 
the  language  in  which  other  men  speak,  but  they  do  not  understand  his  language. 
Paul  undeistood  Greek  philosophy,  but  the  philosophers  did  not  understand  him. 
"  Thou  art  mad,"  said  Festus  (Acts  xxvi.  24) ;  "  This  babbler,"  said  the  Athenians 
(Acts  xvii.  18) ;  "  Fool,"  said  the  Corinthians.  None  but  a  poet  can  criticize  a  poet ; 
none  but  a  painter  can  judge  a  painter;  none  but  a  believer  can  appreciate  a  believer. 
The  spiritual  man  has  the  mind  of  Christ,  of  which  the  natural  man  is  destitute ;  and 
for  the  latter  to  sit  in  judgment  on  the  former  would  imply  that  he  is  capable  of 
instructing  the  Lord. — B. 

Ver.  7. The  wisdom  of  Ood  in  a  mystery.     The  word  "mystery"  has  a  twofold 

meaning  as  used  by  the  apostle.  It  means  that  which  is  concealed  from  men  until  the 
due  time  for  its  disclosure  has  come ;  and  it  also  means  that  wliich  in  itself,  by  reason 
of  its  twn  inherent  greatness,  surpasses  human  comprehension.  Both  meanings  are 
involved  here.  God's  wisdom  in  the  gospel,  though  foreordained  before  the  worlds,  had 
been  "  hidden  "  from  the  ages  and  generations  of  the  past.  As  it  would  seem  to  be 
with  many  of  the  secrets  of  nature,  there  was  the  proper,  the  "  appointed  "  time  iot  it  to 
be  brought  to  light.  The  men  of  the  earlier  ages  were  as  ignorant  of  it  as  our  fathers 
•Ten  of  the  last  generation  were  of  many  of  the  marvellous  things  that  are  now  among 


W  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIAN&    [oh.  a  1— 1& 

tbe  familiar  facts  of  our  social  life,  or  as  we  are  of  what  the  triumphs  of  scientifio 
discovery  a  hundred  years  hence  shall  be.  Not  that  the  discovery  of  this  Divine 
wisdom  is  like  a  mere  step  in  scientific  development.  It  is  a  supernatural  revelation. 
And  now  that  it  has  been  revealed,  it  is  still  a  "  mystery,"  too  profound  for  any  pcwer 
of  man  to  fathom.  The  apostle  "  speaks  "  it,  handles  it,  deals  with  it,  as  a  mystery — a 
mystery  which  even  he  himself  cannot  penetrate  and  solve  (see  also  Rom.  xvi.  25,  26 ; 
Eph.  iii.  6 ;  Col.  i.  26).  Having  special  regard  now  to  this  iiherent  characteiistic  (A 
the  gospel,  note — 

L  Whekbin  this  element  of  mystery  chiefly  lies.  It  lies  in  matters  such  as 
these.  1.  The  person  of  Christ  (1  Tim.  iii.  16).  2.  The  efficacy  of  his  atoning  sacrifice 
(Eph.  iii.  9, 10 ;  1  Pet.  i.  12).  3.  The  operation  of  his  Spirit  on  the  souls.of  men  (John 
iii.  8).  4.  The  nature  of  the  union  between  himself  and  bis  people  (John  vi.  53—63 ; 
Eph.  T.  32).  6.  The  ultimate  issues  of  his  redemption  (oh.  xv.  51:  1  John  iiL  2; 
Acts  iii.  21). 

n.  Cebtaih  considebations  that  vindicate  and  explain  it.  1.  That  which  is 
Divine  must  needs  transcend  the  limits  of  human  intelligence.  2.  It  shows  Christianity 
to  be  in  harmony  with  every  other  form  of  Divine  revelation.  3.  It  accords  with  the 
progressive  character  of  our  present  state  of  existence.  4.  It  serves  to  develop  in  us 
some  of  the  noblest  moral  qualities.  5.  It  heightens  our  impression  of  the  simplicity 
of  those  truths  which  are  vital  to  our  salvation.  6.  It  stimulates  our  longing  for  the 
brighter  and  better  future  (ch.  xiii.  9,  12). — W. 

Vers.  9, 10, 14. —  The  revelation  of  the  things  of  Ood.  It  may  be  that  we  have  here 
•  free  quotation  of  Isa.  Ixiv,  4.  But  whether  a  quotation  or  not,  it  expresses  a  principle 
true  in  every  age.  The  great  "  things  of  God  "  have  ever  been  beyond  the  reach  of  the 
anaided  powers  of  man.  What  are  these  "  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that 
love  him  "?  To  apply  this  expression,  as  is  sometimes  done,  merely  to  the  glories  and 
joys  of  the  heaven  of  the  future,  is  to  narrow  its  meaning.  Those  heavenly  things, 
indeed,  are  purely  matters  of  faith,  above  sense,  above  reason,  above  experience,  above 
the  loftiest  flights  of  imagination.  The  most  suggestive  teachings  of  Scripture,  even  the 
grand  apocalyptic  visions,  do  not  enable  us  in  the  remotest  degree  to  conceive  of  them. 

"  In  vain  our  fancy  strives  to  paint 
Tlie  moment  after  death." 

Bnt  the  "deep  things  of  God"  here  spoken  of,  "  the  things  freely  given  to  ni  of  God" 
(ver.  12),  are  matters  of  present  realization,  facts  of  consciousness,  and  not  merely 
anticipations  of  faith.  They  are  those  great  moral  and  spiritual  truths  of  which  the 
Name  of  Christ  is  the  symbol,  and  those  privileges  and  joys  which  are  the  distinguishing 
marks  of  Christian  life.  Consider  what  is  here  asserted  about  them :  (1)  Kegativdy — 
that  the  eye  and  the  ear  and  the  heart  have  not  apprehended  them ;  (2)  positivdy—that 
they  art  revealed  to  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

L  The  natural  powers  of  man  cannot  apprehend  these  thinos.  We  may  take 
the  eye  and  the  ear  and  the  heart  as  equivalent  to  the  whole  sum  of  our  natural 
faculties.  They  are  those  of  the  "  natural  man  "  as  contrasted  with  the  "  spiritual " 
(ver.  14).  Every  faculty  of  our  nature  has  its  own  proper  sphere,  the  "  things  "  that 
belong  to  it  and  with  which  it  is  conver-iant.  Sense  perceives  material  things,  and,  accord- 
ing to  the  delicacy  of  its  organization,  it  appreciates  the  truth  of  these — beauty  of  form 
and  colour,  variety  and  harmony  of  sound,  etc.  Intellect  moves  in  a  region  of  abstract 
thought,  entertains  ideas,  judges  their  relations,  etc.  Conscience  deals  with  moral 
questions,  determines  the  dictates  of  duty,  the  distinctions  of  right  and  wrong.  The 
heart  is  the  seat  and  tribunal  of  the  affections,  love  and  hate,  desire  and  aversion,  hope 
and  fear.  Each  faculty  has  its  particular  part  to  play  in  the  economy  of  our  life.  But 
when  we  come  to  the  higher  region  of  the  "  things  of  Ood,"  we  find  that  which  lies 
beyond  the  range  of  these  mere  natural  powers.  These  Greeks  of  Corinth  and  Athens 
With  whom  Paul  had  to  dp  were  many  of  them  men  of  fine  native  capacity  and  high 
culture,  men  of  subtle  thought  and  delicate  sensibility.  There  were  "  princes  "  among 
them,  men  who  had  risen  above  their  fellows  in  the  particular  departments  of  human 
interest  for  which  nature  qualified  them.  The  ruler,  the  senator,  the  economist,  could 
discern  the  exigencies  of  state,  and  judge  matters  of  law  and  policy.    The  philosopher 


OH.  n.  1—16.]    TUE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  81 

oould  weigh  the  evidences  of  science  and  thread  the  mazes  of  speculative  thought.  The 
poet  knew  what  the  "  fine  frenzy  "  of  imagination  meant,  and  could  portray  in  glowing 
speech  the  changeful  phases  of  human  passion  and  life.  The  sculptor  and  painter  had 
souls  alive  to  the  beauty  of  form  and  colour,  and  conversant  with  the  canons  of  (esthetic 
taste.  And  no  doubt  tiiere  were  among  them  men  of  tender  feeling  and  noble  character — 
benevolent  citizens ;  honourable  merchants ;  faithful,  loving  lathers,  husbands,  brother;;, 
friends.  And  yet  how  utterly  in  the  dark  were  they  as  to  the  real  nature  and  character 
of  the  Deity,  and  the  way  of  access  to  him ;  as  to  how  their  being  might  be  redeemed 
from  the  power  of  evil ;  and  how  they  might  solve  the  mystery  and  soothe  the  sadness 
of  death  and  of  the  tombl    There  had  been  among  them  many 

"  A  grey  spirit  yearning  with  desire 
To  follow  knowledge  like  a  sinkin":  star, 
Beyond  the  utmost  bouDdg  of  human  thought." 

But  they  could  not  gain  the  most  distant  glimpse  of  this  higher  knowledge.  It  was  as 
a  star  that  had  not  risen  upon  them  and  of  the  beauty  of  whose  light  they  could  not 
dream.  Indeed,  the  shadow  of  their  ignorance  had  settled  down  so  deeply  upon  them 
that  they  had  lost  the  hope  of  ever  seeing  the  light.  They  could  not  recognize  it  when 
it  came.  Paul's  preaching  was  "  foolishness  "  to  them.  He  was  but  one  of  the  tribe 
of  "  babblers,"  a  "  setter  forth  of  strange  gods."  His  voice  was  like  that  of  "  one  that 
crieth  in  the  wilderness."  It  awakened  for  .the  most  part  no  responsive  echo,  but  died 
away  upon  the  empty  air.  The  powers  of  the  naluruf  man  are  as  ineffectual  for  any 
saving  purpose  now  as  ever  they  were ;  as  incapable  of  receiving  the  deep  things  of  God 
as  they  were  of  discovering  them.  To  be  assured  of  this,  we  have  only  to  remember  to 
how  large  an  extent  the  intellect  of  the  age  goes  darkly  and  wildly  astray  from  Christ ; 
how  men  of  scientific  genius,  dealing  with  the  phenomena  and  laws  of  the  universe,  fail 
often  to  find  in  them  anything  Divine ;  and  how  many  there  are  whose  very  natural 
virtues  condemn  them  because  they  refuse  to  exercise  on  the  heavenward  side  of  their 
heing  affections  that  give  so  much  charm  to  their  lower  earthly  life.  All  this  tells  us 
that  men  must  be  inspired  by  a  Power  higher  than  any  that  is  latent  in  their  own  nature 
before  they  can  rise  to  the  apprehension  of  Divine  things  and  to  the  beauty  and  dignity 
of  the  life  of  God. 

II.  These  things  are  revealed  to  us  by  the  Spirit  op  God.  The  Spirit  is  plainly 
spoken  of  here  as  a  personal  Being,  entering  into  personal  contact  and  converse  with  the 
human  soul,  imparting  to  it  a  faculty  of  spiritual  apprehension  which  it  would  not 
otherwise  possess.  Note:  1.  The  Spirit  who  inspired  the  ajjostles  to  deliver  their  gospel 
message  prepared  men  rightly  to  receive  and  interpret  it.  It  was  the  same  power  in 
hoth  (John  xv.  26,  27;  xvi.  13;  vers.  4— 8;  I.John  ii.  20—27).  2.  This  interpre- 
tive/acuity is  far  less  a  matter  of  mental  penetration  than  of  spiritual  sympathy.  This 
is  seen  in  the  contrast  instituted  between  the  "sjiirit  of  the  world"  and  the  "spirit 
that  is  of  God."  The  spirit  of  the  world  is  ever  a  captious,  sophistical  spirit,  distrustful, 
carnal,  vain,  self-willed.  The  spirit  that  is  of  God  is  simple,  lowly,  loving,  trustful, 
suhmissive,  childlike.  Coming  from  God,  it  is  in  true  affinity  with  the  mind  of  God, 
and  with  that  Word  which  is  the  reflex  of  the  thought  and  of  the  heart  of  God.  When, 
in  answer  to  the  wondering  question  of  the  Jews,  "  How  knoweth  this  man  letters," 
etc.  ?  (John  vii.  15),  Jesus  answered,  "  My  teaching  is  not  mine,"  etc.,  he  placed  himself 
on  a  level  which  they  also  might  occupy.  Let  them  emulate  his  loving  loyalty  to  the 
will  of  the  Father,  and  they  also  shall  "  know."  We  must  huve  something  of  the  spirit 
of  the  well-beloved  Son  in  us  if  we  would  rightly  apprehend  "  the  things  that  are  freely 
given  to  us  of  God." — W. 

Ver.  15. — 3%e  judging  faculty.  "He  that  is  spiritual"  is  he  in  whom  the  Spirit  of 
God  dwells,  pervading  his  spirit  with  a  light  and  quickening  it  to  a  life  ahove  that  of 
nature.  This  higher  spirit-life  has  many  marks  of  distinction.  It  is  one  of  these  to 
which  the  apostle  here  gives  prominence.  Two  things  are  affirmed  of  the  spiritual 
man — (1)  His  power  to  judge;  (2)  his  freedom  from  heing  judged. 

L  His  power  to  judge.  The  attitude  of  mind  suggested  is  an  inquiring,  critical, 
testing  attitude—an  attitude  in  which  it  holds  its  faith  in  abeyance  until  perfectly  con- 
Tinced  that  that  which  claims  it  is  divinely  true, "  proving  all  things"  that  it  may 

I.  CORINTHIANS.  ■ 


82  TUE   H'iliST    EI'ISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTUIANS.    [ch.  il  1— 1& 

"  hold  fast  that  which  is  good."  The  spiritual  manhrings  everything  thus  to  the  secrat 
tribunal  of  his  own  soul.  1.  AH  forms  of  human  teaching  and  influt-nce,  the  Tarioua 
ways  in  which  men  seek  to  guide  our  opinions  and  our  conduct.  "  Believe  not  every 
spirit,  but  prove,"  etc.  (1  John  iv.  1).  We  may  apply  this  to  the  whole  action  of  the 
spirits  of  men  upon  us  through  the  ordinary  means  of  personal  influence.  The  spirit 
of  truth  and  the  spirit  of  error,  the  spirit  of  good  and  of  evil,  come  to  us  through  thesa 
human  channels;  and  our  mental  conditions,  our  daily  habits  of  thought  and  life,  are 
determined,  often  far  more  than  we  are  aware  of,  in  this  way.  The  spirits  of  men  are 
embodied  in  their  works  and  words,  and  thus  not  merely  when  they  are  physically 
present  with  us,  but  when  we  have  never  seen  them  face  to  face,  when  oceans  roll 
between  us,  when  they  have  passed  away  to  other  worlds,  we  may  feel  their  living 
touch  upon  our  souls.  Their  sway  ovnr  us  is  independent  (pf  the  conditions  of  space  and 
time.  "  Being  dead,  they  yet  speak."  "  They  rule  us  from  their  urns."  Their  very 
names  are  instruments  of  persuasive  spiritual  power.  The  grand  question  in  every  such 
case  is  whether  this  power  is  on  the  whole  favourable  or  otherwise  to  the  cause  of  truth 
and  righteousness.  It  is  by  some  criterion  of  right  and  wrong  in  our  own  souls  that 
this  question  must  be  determined,  and  what  can  the  criterion  be  but  the  "  spirit  of 
power  and  of  love  and  of  a  sound  mind  "  that  God  gives  ?  Books,  sermons,  newspapers, 
theories,  systems  of  religious  faith  and  ecclesiastical  polity,  the  personal  example  and 
converse  of  others,  the  social  sentiments  and  customs  that  prevail  around  us, — in  short, 
everything  that  possesses  a  moral  quality  and  wields  a  moral  influence  over  us,  must 
be  subjected  to  this  test.  This  is  the  Divine  "right  of  private  judgment,"  which  in  its 
highest  aspect  we  cannot  surrender  if  we  would.  2.  The  revelation  of  God,  coming  to 
us  as  it  does  through  human  and  natural  channels,  must  needs  be  amenable  to  the 
same  law.  According  to  its  own  teaching,  the  Divine  in  us  can  alone  discover  and 
recognize  the  Divine  element  in  it.  "He  that  is  of  God  heareth  the  words  of  God" 
(John  viii.  47) ;  "  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  my  voice  "  (John  xviii.  37); 
"  Ye  have  an  anointing  of  the  Holy  One,"  etc.  (1  John  ii.  20).  Men  justly  argue  that 
the  Bible,  like  every  other  book,  must  be  brought  to  the  tribunal  of  the  "  judging  faculty." 
But  what  is  that  faculty  ?  If  they  mean  by  it  the  Spirit  of  God  given  in  his  measure 
to  every  lowly  Christian  believer,  the  wondrous  supernatural  light  that  shines  from 
heaven  upon  every  soul  that  humbly  and  prayerfully  looks  up  for  it, — this  is  a  principle 
to  which  all  apostolic  voices  bear  witness.  But  if  they  mean  some  native  faculty,  some 
light  of  natural  reason,  some  power  of  spiritual  discernment  inherent  in  the  very  con- 
stitution of  our  being, — they  are  trusting  to  that  which  is  the  source  of  all  confusion 
of  thought  and  divergence  of  opinion,  an  ignis  faluus,  which  leads  through  mazes  of 
uncertainty  to  the  darkness  of  doubt  and  of  despair.  The  religious  sensibility  in  every 
man  to  which  revelation  appeals  is  one  thing;  the  interpretive  and  verifying  faculty, 
which  is  the  special  gift  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  which,  indeed,  is  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
man,  is  another.  How  shall  we  know  that  we  have  this  power  ?  In  one  view  of  it  it 
is  a  self-witnessing  power,  which  no  rival  authority  can  gainsay ;  in  another,  it  is  a 
power  that  proves  itself  by  its  qualities  and  results.  It  is  a  lowly,  loving,  patient, 
trustful,  obedient  spirit.  And  its  supreme  characteristic  is  that  it  testifies  to  Christ  as 
at  once  the  Centre  and  Circumference  of  our  highest  thought,  the  Source  and  End  of  our 
noblest  life.  It  is  the  "  mind  of  Christ,"  and  no  "  persuasion  "  can  bo  in  harmony  with 
it  that  does  not  lead  more  or  less  directly  to  him. 

II.  His  freedom  from  beino  judged.  "  He  himself  is  judged  of  no  man  "  who  has 
not  the  same  spiritual  faculty.  This  follows  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  the 
superiority  of  his  own  gift.  Take  it  in  different  ways.  1.  No  such  man  can  understand 
him.  The  workings  of  his  inner  life,  his  deepest  thoughts,  afiiections,  aspirations,  con- 
flicts, the  powers  that  sustain  and  the  principles  that  govern  his  whole  spiritual 
existence, — these  form  a  world  into  which  the  unspiritual  man  cannot  enter.  We  are 
all  mysteries  to  each  other  in  the  individuality  of  our  being.  Each  lives  in  his  own 
world,  and  the  painful  sense  of  solitude  will  often  seize  upon  the  thoughtful  spirit. 
Imperfect  sympathies  arising  from  imperfect  mutual  acquaintance  are  among  the  saddest 
features  of  our  social  existence,  and  will  often  awaken  strange  longings  for  a  state  of 
being  in  which  we  "  shall  know  even  as  also  we  are  known."  In  no  case  is  this  separa- 
tion so  complete  as  between  the  spiritual  and  the  carnal  man.  Here  lies  k  gulf  which 
00  artifice,  no  arrangement  of  outward  circumstances,  can  bridge  over.     When  a  g"od 


EH.  u.  1—16.]    THE  FIRST  EPiSTLE  TO  THE  COUINTHlAiJS.  83 

man's  lot  is  cast  among  uncongenial  society,  he  is  driven  in  upon  himself,  on  the  silent 
satisfactions  of  his  own  soul.  Like  the  Master,  he  "  has  meat  to  eat  which  the  world 
knows  not  of."  Many  a  tender  spirit  has  felt  thus  isolated  in  the  midst  of  those  most 
fondly  loved.  An  atmosphere  of  natural  affection  and  all  natural  endearments  of  life 
surround  them,  but  in  the  deepest  reality- of  their  being  they  dwell  alone.  2.  He  is  not 
open,  on  the  side  of  his  religiuus  thought  and  life,  to  the  hostile  criticism  of  any  man. 
How  shall  others  "judge"  that  with  which  they  have  nothing  in  common,  and  tlie 
very  essential  meaning  of  which  they  cannot  understand?  3.  No  false  influence  from 
man  can  lead  him  fatally  astray.  Who  shall  unsettle  the  faith  or  sliake  the  steadfast- 
ness of  one  who  is  thus  batlied  in  the  light  and  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  life  uf  God  ? 
Who  is  he  that  shall  bring  again  into  bondage  oue  whom  the  "  law  of  the  Spirit  of 
life  in  Christ  Jesus  "  has  thus  made  free  ?  Here  lies  the  grand  condition  alike  of  mental 
assurance  and  moral  strength. — W. 

Ver.  2. —  7%e  great  theme.  The  apostolic  preacher  considered  what  was  most  needful 
and  profitable  to  his  audience,  not  what  would  meet  their  curiosity  or  please  their 
taste.  So  he,  of  deliberate  purpose,  gave  prominence  to  a  theme  which  the  Greeks 
were  disposed  to  scum,  but  which  they,  in  common  with  all  sinners,  needed  to  hear — 
Christ  crucified.  A  modem  preacher  who  would  be  faithful  must  keep  his  soul  braced 
to  the  same  determination :  "  Not  anything  . . .  save  Jesus  Christ."  Not  Christianity, 
but  Christ ;  not  a  system,  but  the  Saviour  at  the  centre  of  it.  "  Whom  we  preach,"  etc. 
(Col.  L  28).  "  And  him  cruHfied."  That  which  appeared  to  men  the  indelible  disgrace 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  has  proved  to  be  his  great  power  over  human  conscience  and 
his  great  attraction  for  the  human  heart.  St.  Paul  had  seen  many  proofs  of  this  in 
his  public  ministry,  and  had  felt  the  force  of  this  in  his  own  soul.  And  the  chief  theme 
of  the  apostle  ought  to  be  the  chief  theme  still.  A  thousand  things  have  changed  in 
the  world,  but  nut  the  moral  and  spiritual  exigency  of  man.  The  preaching  of  Christ 
crucified  c»nnut  grow  obsolete.  Take  the  following  as  reasons  for  determining  to  preach 
Christ  and  him  crucified: — 

I.  REDEMprioN  IS  BY  Chbist  CRUCIFIED.  Whether  it  be  redemption  from  "all 
iniquity,"  from  "  the  curse  of  the  Law,"  or  from  a  "  vain  manner  of  life,"  it  is  distinctly 
ascribed  in  Scripture  to  the  blood  of  Christ  or  to  his  death  (see  Bph.  i.  7  ;  1  Pet.  i. 
18;  Gal.  iii.  13  ;  Ilev.  v.  9).  The  dignity  of  his  person,  the  purity  of  his  disposition, 
and  the  holiness  of  his  life  °ave  value  to 'his  death;  but  it  was  by  his  death  that  he 
obtained  eternal  redeiuptiun  fur  us. 

II.  Peace  of  conscience  comes  through  Christ  crucified.  No  study  of  nature, 
no  study  of  Scripture  apart  from  the  cross  of  Calvary,  can  relieve  the  distress  of  a 
conscience  alive  to  tiie  huiuousuess  of  sin  and  the  iinniiuence  of  jmlginent.  Not  even 
the  contemplatiuu  of  Jesus  Christ  in  his  sputless  example  can  give  any  relief.  How 
far  are  we  from  full  cunlbrniity  to  him  I  We  are  more  and  more  conscience-stricken 
till  we  behold  him  suffering  for  our  sins,  and  then  we  have  "  peace  by  the  blood  of 
his  cross." 

IIL  Death  to  sin  is  through  Christ  crucified.  We  are  baptized  into  his  death, 
and,  being  buried  with  him,  emerge  in  newness  of  life.  Through  faith  we  have  moral 
identification  with  our  Lord,  and,  dying  to  sin,  as  crucified  with  him,  we  live  to 
righteousness,  because  he  lives  in  us. 

IV.  The  supreme  argument  of  love  is  in  Christ  crucified.  At  the  cross  God 
commends  his  luve  to  us,  and  Christ  proves  himself  the  good  Shepherd  in  giving  his 
life  for  the  sheep.  The  jjlea  for  love  amoui;  Christiajis  is  thus  put  by  St.  Paul :  "  Walk 
in  love,  even  as  Christ  also  loved  you,  and  gave  himself  up,"  etc.  (Eph.  v.  2). 

V.  The  supreme  example  of  patience  is  in  Christ  crucified.  (See  1  Pet.  ii. 
20 — 24.)  Thus  it  is  that  many  sufferers  have  learned  submission  from  considering 
the  unmurmuring  endurance  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  who,  under  all  the  pressure  of  the  last 
sufferings,  made  no  complaint — "opened  not  his  mouth." 

VL  Enmitv  to  his  cross  is  represented  as  a  fatal  sin.  In  Heb.  x.  29  contempt 
of  "the  blood  of  the  coveiiant"  is  referred  to  as  desi:rving  of  the  sorest  punishment. 
In  Phil.  iii.  18,  19,  St.  Paul  writes,  not  without  tears,  of  the  destruction  which  awaits 
those  who  are  '  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ."  Men  are  such  enemies  when,  being 
(elf-righteous,  they  will  nut  put  their  trust  lor  salvatioa  in  Christ  crucified;  or  wtita 


84  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0BINTHIAN8.    [oil  n.  1— 1& 


being  self>willed  and  earthly  minded,  they  refuse  the  sanctifying  power  of  the  enta, 
and  will  not  have  their  "  old  man  crucified  with  Christ."  It  is  no  light  matter  ot 
venial  offence  to  ignore  or  despise  the  "  ons  Sacrifice  for  sins."  For  all  these  reasons, 
the  modern  preacher  should  resolve  as  St.  Paul  resolved,  and  let  no  passin°;  fashion  of 
the  time  shake  his  resolutiou.  Great  works  of  God  around  us  have  a  certain  freshness 
and  immortality.  The  flow  of  rivers,  the  surging  of  the  sea,  the  course  of  the  seasons, 
the  splendour  of  the  sun,  and  the  bright  order  of  the  stars  are  the  same  now  as  when 
man  first  observed  them.  So  also  it  is  with  the  great  work  of  God  in  Christ  for  our 
salvation,  finished  on  the  cross.  Its  wisdom  and  righteousness  and  love  are  as  worthy 
of  adoring  praise  to-day  as  they  were  in  the  days  when  apostles,  prophets,  and 
evangelists  went  to  and  fro  among  wondering  cities  of  the  East,  determined  to  know 
nothing  among  the  people  save  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified. — F. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  true  wisdom.  Often  in  the  Epistles  there  is  a  single  word  on  whicb 
the  whole  discussion  turns.  In  the  letter  to  the  Romans,  it  is  "  righteousness ; "  to  the 
CoLissians,  it  is  "fulness;"  to  the  Hebrews,  it  is  "perfection."  In  the  letter  to  the 
Corinthians,  it  is  "wisdom."  Those  Greeks  sought  after  wisdom.  It  was  nothing  to 
them  that  the  gospel  might  relieve  a  troubled  conscience  or  reform  an  unworthy  life, 
if  it  did  not  correspond  with  their  ideas  of  philosophy.  But  St.  Paul  had  an  answer 
to  give  them  for  which  they  were  not  at  all  prepared.  He  calmly  affirmed  that  they 
were  incompetent  judges  of  a  heavenly  wisdom,  and  that  in  his  gospel  to  the  people 
there  was  a  philosophy  beyond  their  power  of  apprehension — "  the  manifold  wisdom 
of  God."  Greek  philosophy  at  its  best  sought  to  ascertain  how  man  may,  by  knowledge 
and  the  pursuit  of  virtue,  reach  up  towards  the  highest  good.  But  the  gospel  taught 
that  the  highest  Good  had  come  down  to  dwell  among  men ;  and  that,  by  union  in  faith 
to  that  highest  Good,  man  becomes  more  than  a  philosopher — a  saint. 

I.  The  inaptitude  of  man  to  beceivb  the  Divine  wisdom  of  the  gospel.  This 
is  expressed  by  a  quotation  from  the  Old  Testament  (Isa.  Ixiv.  4)  :  "  Eye  hath  not 
seen  it."  The  reference  is  not,  as  in  a  well-known  poem,  to  "  the  better  land,"  but  to 
the  wisdom  of  God.  When  Jesus,  the  incarnate  Wisdom,  was  on  earth,  many  eyes 
saw  him  that  could  not  discern  the  glory  of  Gud  in  him.  And  many  an  eye  to-day 
sees  the  position  of  Christianity  in  the  world,  the  width  of  its  influence,  and  the  dignity 
of  its  institutions,  yet  does  not  "see  Jesus,"  and  the  things  which  God  has  prepared 
in  Jesus  for  those  that  love  hira.  "  Ear  hath  not  heard  it."  That  organ  which  receives 
£0  impartially  all  communications  fails  to  drink  in  the  wisdom  of  the  gospel.  It  is 
closed  by  earthliness  of  mind,  till  the  power  of  God's  Spirit  unstops  it,  so  to  hear  that 
the  soul  may  live.  "  Neither  have  entered  into  the  heart,"  etc.  (ver.  9).  The  heart 
is  hardened,  as  well  as  the  eye  closed  and  the  ear  stopped.  The  spirit  of  a  man  of 
itself  knows  only  "  the  things  of  a  man,"  conceives  of  wisdom  and  goodness  after  the 
manner  and  measure  of  man,  and  so  fails  to  conceive  the  ways  and  thoughts  of  GK)d. 
and  the  things  which  are  freely  given  by  him.  So  the  apostle  denied  that  a  man 
untaught  by  the  Spirit,  even  though  he  were  a  Greek,  could  rightly  estimate  the 
gospel.  He  could  remind  the  disputers  and  rhetoricians  of  Greece  that  their  philosophy 
might  sound  as  jargon  to  the  unlettered,  who  could  not  bring  to  it  a  sufficient 
intellectual  appreciation.  In  like  manner,  the  gospel  wliich  he  preached  might  seem 
to  them'  a  jargon  or  a  piece  of  "  foolishness,"  merely  because  they  were  out  of  moral 
symjiathy  with  it,  and  had  not  sufficient  spiritual  enlightenment  to  discern  and  value 
it.  It  was  the  same  lesson  which  our  Lord  impressed  on  Nicodemus,  "  Except  a  man 
be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  He  can  see  Churches,  preachers, 
forms  of  service,  but  not  the  kingdom  which  is  "  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  tha 
Holy  Ghost,"  till  he  is  born  again. 

II.  The  revelation  of  the  heavenly  wisdom  bt  the  Holt  Spirit.  1,  It  was 
made  known  to  holy  apostles  and  prophets  in  the  Spirit.  By  them  it  was  communicated 
to  the  Churches.  But  all  who  beard  them  required  the  unction  of  the  Spirit,  that 
they  might  receive  and  know  the  truth.  No  one  can  say  that  this  is  unreasonaUe. 
Every  kind  of  knowledge  Requires  for  its  reception  a  healthy  state  of  the  human 
understanding ;  and,  when  it  relates  to  morals,  a  healthy  condition  of  the  imagination, 
conscience,  and  affections,  because  of  the  effect  which  these  have  on  the  understanding. 
la  like  manner,  spiritual  things  can  be  interpreted  only  to  spiritual  men.    Tht  all- 


OLiLl— 16.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTHIANa  8S 

Marching  Spirit  of  Ood  must  act  on  the  spirits  of  men  to  whom  the  gospel  is  pro> 
claimed,  and  so  enlighten  and  empower  them  to  receive  "  the  deep  things  of  God." 
Thus  boasting  is  excluded  at  every  point.  Boasting  of  onr  righteousness  is  excluded 
by  the  work  of  the  Son  of  God,  aU-sufBcient  for  us ;  and  boasting  of  our  wisdom  by  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  all-sufficient  in  us.  By  the  Spirit  all  things  are  made  new. 
Eye  and  ear  and  heart  are  new.  The  eye  can  see,  the  ear  hear,  the  heart  conceive, 
"tKe  things  which  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God."  What  a  dignity  is  this !  What  a  joy! 
"We  have  received,  not  the  siiirit  of  the  world,  but  the  Spirit  wliich  is  of  God."  We 
are  taught  of  God,  so  as  to  enter  with  a  new  power  of  discernment  into  the  secret  of 
his  covenant  and  the  glory  of  his  gospel. — F. 

Ver.  2. — The  subject  of  the  Pauline  ministry.  The  power  of  preachers  is  very  various. 
Some  depend  on  the  rhetorical  form  in  which  they  present  their  message.  Their 
appeal  is  rather  to  feeling  than  to  intellect,  and  they  are  stronger  in  the  persuasive  than 
in  the  instructive  faculties.  Very  important  spheres  open  to  such  men,  though  their 
work  always  needs  carelul  and  wise  following  up  and  supplementing.  Others  depend 
almost  wholly  upon  the  value  of  their  subject-matter,  and  even  fail  to  win  the 
acceptance  they  might  in  consequence  of  their  so  entirely  neglecting  to  culture 
rhetorical  and  persuasive  forms  of  speech.  In  over-civilized  people,  such  as  were 
found  at  Corinth,  there  usually  grows  up  a  great  passion  for  the  merely  rhetorical,  as 
pleasing  to  the  ear  and  to  the  artistic  feeling.  The  Apostle  Paul,  in  his  zeal  and 
intensity,  despises  all  mere  arts  of  rhetoric,  and  relies  wholly  on  the  grandeur  of  his 
theme,  and  the  spiritual  power  with  which  its  announcement  is  to  be  accompanied. 
His  subject  was — 

I.  A  PEBSON.  "Jesus  Christ."  The  first  work  of  the  apostles  was  to  declare  the 
Christian /ac<s,  which  are  the  basis  of  the  Christian  system.  Those  facts  concern  the 
life,  teacliing,  miracles,  sufferings,  death,  and  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Of  all  these  things  the  apostles  had  precise  and  accurate  knowledge,  and  concerning 
them  they  could  render  personal  testimony.  Of  all  these  things  they  took  care  that 
adequate  and  satisfactory  records  should  be  preserved  (2  Pet.  i.  15,  16).  But  their 
interest  did  not  lie  in  the  mere  facts,  but  in  those  facts  as  throwing  light  upon  the 
person,  the  mission,  and  the  Divine  saving  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Salvation, 
they  declared,  comes  by  personal  trust  in  Christ ;  and  that  he  may  be  trusted  he  must 
be  known,  fully  known.  Therefore  the  apostle  went  evei-ywhere  preaching  Christ, 
setting  forth  Christ,  glorii'ying  Christ,  bidding  men  bow  to  him,  confess  to  him,  and 
receive  forgiveness  and  eternal  life  from  him.  It  is  still  true  for  us  that  the  preaching 
of  the  Christian  facts  must  set  forth  before  men  Christ,  the  person,  and  the  unfolding 
of  the  Christian  doctrines  must  glorify  the  "  living  Christ,"  who  has  all  power  to  save. 

II.  That  person's  history.  In  view  of  the  tendency  to  form  myths  and  legends 
in  those  days,  and  to'explain  everything  by  theories  of  myth  and  legend  in  our  days, 
it  is  important  that  we  press  the  historical  value  of  the  records  we  have  concerning 
Christ.  It  may  be  effectively  urged  that,  apart  from  the  question  of  the  miracles, 
which  demand  a  separate  treatment,  there  is  no  feature  of  our  Lord's  life  that  is  in 
any  way  unnatural,  or  likely  to  offend  the  historical  faculty.  No  hero  of  the  historic 
page  can  be' received  as  real  if  a  like  acceptance  be  not  given  to  the  story  of  Christ; 
for  the  records  we  have  of  him  will  stand  as  well  as  any  others  the  severest  historical 
tests.  In  our  day  it  is  necessary  to  lay  firmly  again  the  old  foundations  of  a  real 
human  life  and  human  relations.  We  must  hegin  with  the  "  Man  Christ  Jesus." 
It  may  further  be  urged  that,  apart  from  higher  considerations,  the  human  history  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  presents  features  of  supreme  and  fascinating  interest,  as  tha 
records  of  a  child,  a  man,  a  teacher,  a  physician,  and  a  sufferer. 

III.  That  person's  whole  history.  "And  him  crucified."  The  apostle  might 
have  been  tempted  to  withliold  (wrtions  of  our  Lord's  story.  His  own  intense  Jewish 
feeling  would  make  him  revolt  from  having  to  preach  salvation  by  One  crucified.  "  Wa 
can  scarcely  realize  now  th*  stumbling-block  which  the  preaching  of  a  crucified  Christ 
must  have  been  to  Jews  and  Greeks,  the  enormous  temptation  to  keep  the  cross  in  th« 
background,  which  the  early  teachers  would  naturally  have  felt,  and  the  sublime  and 
confident  faith  which  must  have  nerved  St.  Paul  to  maktt  it  the  central  fact  of  all  hia 
leaching."    He  must  have  had  •  revelation  of  the  glory  of  tha  mystery  of  th«  Crucifixion. 


86  THE   FIRST   El'lSTLE   TO   THE   CoIllNTHlANS.     [oh.  n.  1— 1& 

Hu  must  have  seen  how  it  "believed  Christ  tlms  to  suffer."  lie  knew  that  this  wai 
the  necessary  completion  of  liis  eiinlily  mission,  the  last  earthly  step,  to  be  followed 
by  a  footfall  m  the  "heavenly  jilacus"  where  lie  should  receive  authority  and  power  to 
save.  The  "history"  would  be  iucoiii])lete  without  the  Crucifixion,  'i'he  "  mii<sion  " 
would  have  been  altogether  a  failure  without  the  Crucifixion.  The  Chiistian  doctrina 
would  be  a  moral  scheme,  and  not  a  Divine  salvation,  without  the  Crucifixion. 

IV.  That  in  which  Christ's  whole  histoky  culminated.  St.  Paul  could  not 
stay  and  rest  in  a  human  Christ,  however  attractive  the  records  of  his  life  and  doings, 
or  however  quickening  to  human  sympathy  the  story  of  his  suffering  death.  He  siiys, 
"Though  we  have  known  Christ  after  the  flesh,  yet  now  henceforth  know  we  him 
[thus]  no  more."  The  earth-story  culminated  in  this,  viz.  that  he  is  exalted,  a  Prince 
and  a  Saviour.  He  is  endowed  with  a  present  saving  power.  Crucified  in  weakness, 
he  liveth  by  the  power  of  God.  From  the  cross  he  went  to  the  throne,  ami  St.  Paul 
himself  saw  him  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  St.  Paul's  subject  was — The  once-crucified 
Christ,  who  can  save  to  the  uttermost  now. 

Impress  that  men  find  shame  in  the  Crucified  until  they  can  read  the  mystery  of  the 
cross ;  then  they  glory  in  the  shame,  glory  even  in  the  cross.  There  will  always,  for 
true  Christian  hearts,  be  darkness  and  sadness  hanging  all  about  the  cross,  and  yet 
the  darkness  is  dispelled  with  streams  of  holy,  loving  light,  and  the  sadness  of  our 
sympathy  [lasses,  giving  place  to  songs  of  joyous  triumph. 

"  We  sing  the  praise  of  him  who  died, 
Of  him  who  died  upon  the  cross." 

RT. 

Vers.  3 — 5.— Personal  weakness  and  spiritual  strength.  In  both  the  ordinary 
daily  concerns  and  in  the  special  religinus  service  of  life,  a  man  may  be  just  himself 
alone,  confident  in  his  own  powers,  self-centred,  self-satisfied,  reliant  on  his  own  health 
of  body,  vigour  of  mind,  well-trained  habits,  quick  judgment,  and  sound  wisdom.  Then, 
no  matter  how  safe  and  strong  he  may  seem  to  be,  he  is  really  weak ;  and,  as  life 
advances  and  testing-times  take  new  and  severer  forms,  his  weakness  will  be  proved 
and  his  pride  effectively  humbled.  A  man  may  even  now  be  moved  and  possessed  by 
an  evil  spirit.  Still  the  solemn  fact  remains  that  man's  soul  lies  open  to  malign 
spiritual  infiuences,  which  work  through  the  bodily  lusts  and  passions.  Then  the 
man  himself  is  weak  indeed,  and  the  alien  force  within  him  shows  strength  only  unto 
things  that  are  debasing  and  evil.  A  man  may  be  Ood's  agent,  having  the  Spirit  of 
God  dwelling  in  him  and  working  through  him.  Then,  no  matter  what  may  be  the 
bodily  frailties  or  the  untoward  earthly  surroundings,  the  man  will  be  found  really 
stronir,  efficient  to  all  spiritual  work,  which  the  indwelling  Spirit  may  move  him  to 
undertake.  This  last  is  St.  Paul's  experience.  Men  saw  in  him. great  human  weak- 
ness. He  felt  within  him  great  spiritual  power,  for  he  was  the  agent  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

L  The  impression  made  by  St.  Paul's  appearance.  There  can  be  little  doubt 
thai  he  was  dindnutive  in  stature,  frail  in  health,  unskilful  as  a  rhetorician,  and  probably 
he  was  suffering  from  some  ditease  or  infirmity  which  made  his  appenrance  even 
unsightly.  Of  this  his  enemies  were  prepared  to  take  undue  advantage.  The  various 
descriptions  of  St.  Paul's  person  should  be  considered,  and  the  various  theories  cim- 
cerning  the  special  infiimity  from  which  he  suflered.  Marjy  of  God's  most  devoted 
servants  have,  like  Richard  Baxter,  Robert  Hall,  and  many  others,  had  to  bear  the 
heavy  burden  of  constitutional  disease,  of  intense  physical  snflering.  But  these  things 
have  been  overruled,  as  in  St.  Paul's  case,  for  good,  so  that  they  have  become  the  very 
forces  that  have  fitted  the  men  for  the  nobler  discliaige  of  their  great  life-works. 

II.  The  consciousness  of  fbailtt  with  which  all  his  work  was  done.  There 
was  not  only  the/ac<  of  suffering,  but  also  ihe  feeling  of  frailty.  There  was  the  sense 
of  "  fear,"  and  there  was  much  "  trembling."  He  did  not  overmaster  his  troublo,  but 
actually  worked  with  it  ever  pressing  upon  him.  "There  was  no  self-confidence, 
nothing  but  self-mistrust,  anxiety,  the  deepest  sense  of  unworthiness  "  (comp.  2  Cor. 
X.  10;  xi.  30;  xii.  5,  7,  U,  10;  Gal.  iv.  13,  14).  "There  was  a  large  element  of  that 
pelf-distrust  which  so  noble  and  sensitive  a  nature  would  feel  in  the  fulfilment  of  such 


OH.  n.  1—16.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TH>i  OOUlNTHIANa  8' 

an  exalted  mission  as  the  preaching  of  the  cross."  We  may  to  some  extent  realize  ai 
how  jjreat  a  cost  Christian  ministers  master  bodily  infirmity  in  order  to  do  us  service 
for  Christ's  sake ;  but  few  can  know  how  much  intenser  is  the  .struggle  with  inward 
fear  and  hesitation,  and  with  the  overwhelming  sense  of  unworthincss  and  unfitness. 
Only  in  the  strength  and  grace  of  God  are  these  diffidences  and  inward  fears  overcome. 

III.  The  OL0RI0U8  results  beached  by  St.  Paul's  woek.  These  are  implied  in 
his  appeal  to  the  Corinthians  that  his  work  had  bp^n  "  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit 
and  of  power."  Those  results  wire  of  two  kinds — (1)  conversions ;  (2)  edifications. 
Men  received  Christ  as  St.  Paul  unfolded  his  claims  and  his  love.  The  Church  was 
built  up  in  the  faith  through  the  Pauline  instructions.  Subsidiary  results,  such  as  over- 
throw of  idolatry,  and  change  of  daily  moral  life  and  relations,  may  be  further  con- 
sidered. The  Corinthians  were  themselves  among  the  most  interesting  results  of  his 
divinely  inspired  labours. 

IV.  The  bbckbt  of  his  success  in  his  openness  to  Divine  lead.  Men  would  havt 
found  it  in  his  "accent  of  conviction,"  his  intensity,  his  natural  gift  of  leadership,  the 
newness  of  his  subject,  the  preparedness  of  the  times,  or  the  appeal  to  men's  feelings; 
but  none  of  these  would  have  satisfied  St.  Paul.  He  would  have  said,  when  all  ha(1 
passed  by,  "  You  have  not  found  out  my  secret."  None  of  these  explanations  could 
satisfy  any  of  us  who  carefully  judged  the  phenomena.  St.  Paul  was  an  endowed 
man.  He  was  open  to  the  Divine  leadings.  He  was  inspired  by  the  Divine  Spirit.  God 
wrought  with  him,  and  these  were  the  signs  following.  True  spiritual  work  has  still 
no  other  explanation.  Men  are  mighty  in  the  measure  of  their  openness  to  the  Divine 
lead.  And  the  maintenance  of  this  openness  is  the  supreme  anxiety  of  all  earnest 
Christian  workers.  There  must  be,  for  all  noble  and  lasting  issues,  the  "  demonstration 
of  the  Spirit." 

Impress  the  mysterious  power  which  some  men  have  in  conversation  and  in  preach- 
ing ;  yet  how  often  they  are  men  or  women  :>{  frail  bodies,  sensitive  nerves,  and  wearying 
disease!  They  are  under  all  kinds  of  disabilities;  but  these  seem  only  to  culture  the 
higher  spiritual  power.  Illustrate,  e.g.,  McOheyne,  Henry  Martyn,  P.  Ridley  Havergal, 
etc.  This  openness  to  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  to  be  won.  Our  Lord  taught 
xa  how.  Such  power  conjes  through  prayer  and  fasting :  prayer,  or  closeness  and 
intimacy  of  communion  with  God;  fasting,  or  watchfulness,  self-denial,  and  mastery 
of  bodily  passion.  We  may  win  the  joy  of  being  "  co-workers  together  with  God." 
— R.T. 

Ver.  6.— TT^o  are  the  perfect  t  The  word  Is  used  in  various  senses  in  the  Kew 
Testament.  Our  Lord  applied  it  to  God,  saying,  "  Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even  as 
your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect."  It  is  used  to  express  what  a  Christian  ought  to  be, 
and  is  pledged  to  be,  and  is  striving  to  be,  very  much  as  the  term  "  saints  "  is  used  in 
the  Old  Testament.  Perfection,  as  presented  by  the  apostles,  is  the  idea,  the  aim,  to 
be  kept  in  the  soul  of  the  Christian,  there  to  work  as  a  perpetual  inspiration  to  the 
seeking  of  perfection  in  the  life.  St.  Paul  presents  the  distinction  between  full-grown 
men  and  little  children.  The  full-grown  men  are  the  perfect ;  they  have  reached  the 
fulness,  the  standard  of  Christian  manhood.  St.  John  has  a  similar  kind  of  expression; 
he  addresses  several  classes— the  fathers,  the  young  men,  the  little  children ;  viewing 
these  as  different  stages  on  the  way  to  the  perfect,  that  "  perfect "  being  kept  as  the 
thought  and  aim  in  the  soul  of  each.  In  one  passage  we  read,  "  That  ye  may  be 
perfect  and  entire."  The  idea  of  "  perfect "  comes  out  more  plainly  when  it  is  set  beside 
another  word.  A  man  "  entire  "  is  one  who  has  preserved  or  regained  a  lost  complete- 
ness, or  one  in  whom  no  grace  is  wanting  that  ought  to  be  found  in  a  Christian  man ; 
but  a  man  really  "  perfect "  is  one  who  has  attained  his  moral  end,  the  standard 
according  to  which  he  was  made ;  or  one  in  whom  no  grace  that  ought  to  be  found  in 
a  Christian  is  lacking,  none  are  imperfect  or  weak,  but  all  have  reached  a  certain  ripe- 
ness and  maturity,  St.  Paul's  idea  of  the  "  perfect,"  to  whom  he  could  speak  freely 
the  "  wisdom,"  the  higher  spiritual  mysteries  of  the  gospel,  may  be  considered  under 
thrw  figures — they  are  the  whole,  the  iound,  and  the  full-grown.  It  was  not  likely 
that  the  young  Church  at  Corinth  could  furnish  very  many  answering  to  this  descrip- 
tion ;  for  most  of  them  the  simpler  instruction  in  the  commonplaces  of  gospel  trutl) 
was  still  needfuL 


88  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [oL  n.  1^16 

L  The  whole  ;  or  the  entire,  the  complete.  Those  having  all  the  ChristiaD  faculties 
and  graces,  and  all  of  them  harmoniouiily  cultured.  The  figure  suggests  the  complete 
animal,  with  every  limb  well  formed,  and  every  organ  efficiently  working.  Too  oftei 
we  find  Christians  who  are  incomplete  ;  some  sides  of  their  natures  are  quite  unculti- 
vated, and  some  are  over-cultivated;  they  are  strong  in  some  things, but  weak  in 
others.  Just  as  we  see  in  animals,  there  are  Christian  "monstrosities,"  one-sidi'd 
growths,  deficiencies  of  some  important  members.  Wholeness,  perfectness,  requires 
the  due  culture  of  the  large  as  well  as  the  small  graces  and  powers.  And  such 
"  completeness,"  when  reached,  is  a  most  important  witness  to  Christ's  grace,  and 
appeal  to  men  to  seek  their  perfection  through  him. 

II.  The  SOUND;  that  is,  the  healthy.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  different  parts  are 
present,  and  fitted  together  in  good  and  practically  efficient  propurtions;  all  the  parts 
must  be  free  from  disease  and  full  of  vitality.  Perfection  demands  health  as  well  as 
completeness.  Christians  often  fail  of  the  standard  by  reason  of  sin-disease  affecting 
various  organs  of  their  spiritual  life,  e.g.  their  prayer;  their  activity  in  Christiar. 
service;  their  watchfulness  over  personal  habits,  or  tluir  tendency  to  depression  and 
doubt.  St.  John  very  tenderly  writes  to  the  well-beloved  Gaius,  "  1  wish  above  all 
things  that  thou  mayest  prosper  and  be  in  health,  even  as  thy  soul  prospereth." 

III.  The  FnLL-GEowN ;  or  the  developed  and  matured,  who  have  quite  passed  out  of 
the  infantile  or  childish  stage.  This  is  probably  the  precise  form  of  the  figure  as  it 
was  presented  to  the  mind  of  the  apostle.  He  elsewhere  speaks  of  adapting  his  teach  - 
ings  to  the  .incuitursct  a~d  unspiritual,  making  them  like  milk  that  is  suited  to  t>.e 
nourishment  of  babes.  He  means  to  press  on  the  Corinthians  that,  while  it  is  quite 
right  that  they  should  be  babes,  and  as  such  be  fed  with  the  simplicities  of  Christian 
doctrine,  it  is  not  right  that  they  should  remain  babes ;  they  should  reach  Christian 
manhood,  and  want  man's  food  of  tiath  and  mystery. 

Impress  how  reasonable  these  views  of  the  "  perfect "  are,  and  how  contrasted  with 
the  vague  and  sentimental  notions  of  an  absolute  freedom  I'rom  sin,  of  which  enthusiasts 
sometimes  dream, — B.  T. 

Ver.  8. — What  would  have  prevented  Christ's  crucifixion  t  Attention  is  directed  to 
the  second  clause  of  the  verse :  "  For  had  they  known  it,  they  would  not  have  cruci- 
fied the  Lord  of  glory."  From  the  point  of  view  of  merely  worldly  policy,  the 
crucifixion  of  Christ  was  a  profound  mistake.  Martyrdom  never  effects  the  objects 
sought  by  the  persecutors.  It  tends  rather  to  glorify,  in  the  popular  sentiment,  tha 
cause  for  which  the  inartyrs  died.  "  Nut  a  single  calculation  of  those  who  compassed 
I  lie  Saviour's  death  was  destined  to  be  fulfilled.  Pilate  did  not  escape  the  emperor's 
displeasure.  Caiaphas  (John  xi.  60)  did  not  save  Jerusalem.  The  scribes  and 
Pharisees  did  not  put  down  the  doctrine  of  Jestis."  Christ's  crucifixion  may  be 
regarded  from  several  points  of  view.  As  we  understand  how  it  actually  came  aboct, 
we  are  prepared  to  consider  what  might  conceivably  have  prevented  it.  1.  It  occurred 
in  the  order  of  Divine  providence.  Every  man's  life  is  a  plan  of  Gud.  Each  event  is 
fitted,  and  its  infiuence  used  or  overruled.  A  man's  incoming  to  life,  and  outgoing 
from  life,  are  arranged  by  the  Divine  wisdom.  The  time,  the  place,  and  the  mode  of 
a  man's  death  are  Divine  ordering.  This  is  true  of  every  man ;  it  is  recognized  and 
made  a  secret  of  calm  trustfulness  for  all  the  future  by  the  Christian  man ;  it  ia  in 
sublime  and  glorious  manner  true  of  God's  own  Son,  in  the  life  on  earth,  which  was  a 
special  Divine  mission.  2.  It  occurred  as  a  natural  result  of  operating  causes.  In 
coniidering  this  puint,  we  put  on  one  side  the  Divine  overrulings,  make  a  fair  estimate 
of  the  influence  exerted  by  Christ's  character,  example,  and  teaching  upun  the  various 
classes  constituting  the  people  among  whom  he  lived  and  laboured.  When  national 
prejudices  are  duly  weighed,  and  the  character  of  the  public  sentiment  concerning  the 
expected  Messiah,  it  no  longer  seems  strange  that  our  Lord  excited  an  opposition  which 
culminated  in  his  death.  S,  It  occurred  as  a  consequence  of  our  Lord's  own  conduct. 
He  did  not,  in  any  determined  way,  avoid  those  circumstances  and  situations  which 
tended  to  bring  about  his  death.  He  might,  humanly  speaking,  have  remained  in 
Galilee,  or  hidden  himself  in  Bethany,  or  fled  from  Gethsemane  as  the  arresting  party 
approached.  Instead,  we  find  him  day  by  day  following  the  Divine  lead;  in  no  way 
forcing  his  circumstances,  though  the  issue  of  them  was  evideut  enough  to  himself 


OE.n.1— 16.J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  89 

His  example  in  this  has  not  been  sufficiently  considered,  though  it  bears  so  directly  on 
his  characteristic  submission,  and  on  the  virtue  of  his  saciifice  as  purely  a  voluntary 
act.  Enemies  of  Christ  endeavour  to  set  this  to  his  disadvantage,  but  a  glorifying 
light  shines  up.on  it  from  the  consideration  that  he  knew  the  cross  to  be  then  and  there 
the  consummation  of  his  earthly  life  as  designed  by  the  Father.  Yet  the  apostle 
suggests  that  the  cross  miglit  conceivably  have  been  avoided.  We  can  seo  three- 
possible  ways  in  which  this  might  have  been. 

I.  Bt  an  exercise  of  God's  sovereiontt.  It  might  have  pleased  God  to  save  man- 
l^ind  in  another  way.  While  we  see  the  wonder  and.  the  grace  of  the  way  God  did 
choose,  we  are  not  justified  in  affirming  that  it  was  the  only  way  Divine  wisdom  could 
have  devised.  Or,  in  God's  sovereignty,  he  might  have  read  the  perfect  willingness 
and  obedience  of  Jesus,  and  spared  him  the  actual  shame  and  pain  of  the  cross.  If 
such  exercise  of  Divine  sovereignty  was  not  made,  we  may  be  sure  that  concern  for  us 
and  for  our  full  redemption  made  God  send  his  "  Lamb  to  the  slaughter."  That  which 
was  abstractly  possible  was  impossible  to  him  who  "  so  loved  the  world "  as  to  make 
even  so  extreme  a  sacrifice  tliat  it  mi^ht  be  saved  and  won. 

II.  Bt  Christ's  wilfulness.  He  mi^ht  hare  failed  in  obedience  under  this  last  and 
extreme  test.  He  might  have  refused  'the  cross,  and  put  away  from  him  his  Father's 
cup.  He  was  a  free  agent,  and  such  wilfulness  was  possible.  But  the  consequences 
would  have  been  so  serious  as  to  be  most  painful  for  us  to  conceive.  Man's  salvation, 
though  in  part  accomplished  by  our  Lord's  teactiing  and  life,  would  at  last  have  failed 
utterly.  Christ  could  have  won  no  saving  power.  He  would  have  been  no  more  than 
1  Moses,  a  Zoroaster,  a  Socrates,  or  the  Buddha ;  he  could  not  have  been  the  one  only 
,ind  all-sufficient  Sin-bearer  and  Saviour. 

III.  By    THE    BULEBS'   KNOWLEDGE   OF    WHO   HX    WAS    AND   WHAT    HIS   MISSIOF   WAS. 

This  is  St.  Paul's  point  here  in  the  text.  The  rulers  could  only  put  Christ  tc  death 
while  deceiving  themselves  or  deceived  as  to  his  character  and  claims.  The>  could 
not  have  put  Messiah  to  death.  The  whole  hope  of  their  race  centred  in  him.  But 
for  that  very  reason  their  feelings  were  the  more  intense  against  a  man  of  despised 
Nazareth,  who  claimed  to  be  the  Messiah,  and,  they  thought,  dishonoured  the  very  idea 
of  the  Messiahship  by  his  imposture.  Had  they  known — had  they  seen  his  glory, 
they  too  would  have  bowed  the  knee  to  him,  and  crowned  him  with  the  many  crowns. 
Had  they  known,  they  would  have  soTight  no  false  witnesses,  nor  started  the  cruel 
shout,  "  Crucify  him  !  crucify  him ! "  Often  we  go  over  in  our  thought  wJiat  might  hav6 
been,  and  wish  things  had  been  other  than  they  were ;  and  yet  God  so  overrulea  for 
good  that  we  may  even  rejoice  in  that  they  "  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory." 

From  our  meditations  two  things  come  impressively  to  view.  1,  Our  Lord's  death 
was  no  accidental  circumstance,  but  a  Divine  ordination  ;  and  this  is  true  though  the 
outworking  of  the  events  show  what  may  be  called  the  usual,  or  common,  orderings 
■of  Providence.  2.  Our  Lord's  death  was  entirely  a  voluntary  act.  His  will  was  set  on 
fully  carrying  out  the  Divine  will,  whatever  of  bearing,  doing,  or  suffering  that  will 
might  have  in  it.  The  virtue  of  the  sacrifice  lay  partly  in  the  sublime  nature  of  the 
Victim;  partly  in  the  representative  character  he  had  taken;  but  partly  also  in  the 
free  surrender  of  his  will  and  life  to  God,  and  the  unforced  voluntariness  of  his  obedi- 
ence, as  tested  by  a  painful  and  ignominious  death,  "  By  the  which  iviU  we  are 
sanctified."— R.  T. 

Ver.  9. — The  twrprising  freshness  of  the  new  dispensation.  The  precise  words,  •■ 
quoted  by  the  apostle,  are  not  found  in  the  Old  Testament.  They  are  probably  Isa. 
Ixiv.  4,  given  from  memory  and  modified  by  the  thought  of  phrases  found  in  other 
parts  of  Isaiah.  Only  an  unreasonable  sentiment  concerning  verbal  inspiration  would 
make  difficulty  about  the  inexactness  of  quotations  given  from  memory.  The  sense 
of  a  passage  may  be  precisely  indicated  when  the  words  are  set  in  a  different  order  and 
form.  This  text  has  often  been  used  as  the  basis  of  elaborate  descriptions  of  heaven, 
but  such  treatment  is  only  possible  when  ver.  9  is  separated  from  ver,  10.  The 
apostle  is  plainly  dealing  with  some,  glory  wliich  has  been  revealed  and  is  now 
realized.  He  conceived  of  the  Divine  dealings  with  men  as  having  been  arranged  in 
"ages,"  or  "dispensations."  We  may  thus  distinguish  the  Adamic,  Patriarchal, 
Uosaic,  Davidic,  Exilic,  and  post-Exilic.    In  the  passage  before  us  St.  Paul  showfi  not 


do  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa    [cm.  n.  1—16. 

merely  that  the  Christian  is  another  and  a  succeeding  dispensation,  but  alio  that,  in 
important  respects,  it  differs  from  others,  and  is  superior  to  others.  Previous  dis- 
pensations have  given  only  faint  si'ggesti"ns  of  the  surpassing  glory  of  this  one,  just 
as  Solomon's  magnificent  temple  did  but  hint  the  exceeding  glory  of  that  later  and 
spiritual  temple,  Christ's  Church.  We  may  dwell  on  some  of  thi>se  {lOints  in  which 
.the  Christian  revelation  seems  so  ni'w,  so  surprisingly  fresh,  so  utterly  beyond  what 
human  imagination  could  have  conceived  or  human  experience  sujigested. 

T.  Religion  is  not  a  ceremonial,  but  a  life.  To  a  Jew  this  was  so  fresh  a  oon- 
ceptiim  as  to  be  even  bewildering.  A  less  thoughtful  Jew  would  be  in  peril  of  cherish- 
ing the  sentiment  that  religion  was  onlt/  a  ceremonial,  a  round  of  ordinances,  festivals, 
and  sacrifices.  And  this  view  of  religion  had  become  the  general  and  prevailing  notion 
in  the  time  of  our  Lord.  A  more  thoughtful  and  pious  Jew  would  connect  personal 
godliness  with  outward  ceremonial,  and  strive  to  culture  an  inner  life  of  trust,  obedience, 
and  communion  with  the  outward  observance  of  rites  and  ceremonies.  But  the  new 
thing  reveali  d  in  Christianity  is,  that  religion  is,  essentially  and  only,  the  soul's  life,  and 
that  all  ceremonial  is  mere  expression  and  agency  in  the  work  of  culture.-  The  rela- 
tions are  manifestly  reversed.  Formerly  there  must  be  ceremonial,  and  there  ought  to 
be  life;  now  there  must  be  life,  and  there  maybe  ceremonial.  On  fully  maintaining 
these  later  relations,  the  health  and  vigour  of  Christianity  must  ever  depend. 

IL  Salvation  by  a  sufkerino  and  hying  Saviour.  This  is  indeid  a  fresh  and 
surprising  thing.  Triumph  is  to  lie  in  defeat.  Glory  is  to  blossom  out  of  shame,  A 
sublime  mission  is  to  be  accomplished  by  a  seeming  failure.  Life  for  men  is  to  come 
forth  out  of  death  for  Christ.  It  is  the  intriiduction  of  a  new  force,  a  moral  force. 
Christ  lifted  up  is  to  draw  men.  The  story  of  the  crucified  One  is  to  melt  men  into 
penitence,  win  their  fa;ih,  and  ensure  such  a  love  as  shall  make  even  self-sacrifice  for 
Christ  po.ssible.  Men  knew  before  of  love  that  would  work  for  those  it  loved,  and  love 
that  would  Jight  for  those  it  loved,  and  love  that  would  bear  fur  those  it  loved;  but  it 
was  new  that  love  should  die  such  a  death,  not  for  the  loved  only,  but  for  the  ungodly 
and  enemies  by  wicked  works.     "While  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us." 

III.  Sanotification  by  the  present  power  of  him  who  died.  This  is  altogether 
new.  Christ,  as  the  exalted  One,  by  his  Spirit,  is  now  carrying  out  his  redeeming 
purpose  in  all  hearts  and  lives  that  are  open  to  him  by  faith.  We  do  not  struggle  for 
righteousness  by  unaided  i)ersanal  efforts.  Unseen,  indeed,  still  the  Living  Christ  is 
ever  with  us.  Untraced,  indeed,  the  mighty  Spirit  of  Christ  is  ever  working  within  us, 
sanctifying  us  wholly.  And  so,  in  face  of  all  difficulties,  perplexities,  frailties,  or 
hindrances  to  spiritual  progress,  we  may  calmly  say,  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us?"    "  Greater  is  he  who  is  with  us  than  all  who  can  be  against  us." 

lY.  Man  the  dwelling-place  of  God  thuouoh  the  Spirit.  This  is  also  new ;  for 
hitherto  the  common  sentiment  had  been  that  God  dwelt  in  places,  on  the  mountain's 
crown,  at  the  altar,  in  shining  pillar-clouds,  in  tabernacle  or  in  temple.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  as  the  God-man,  shows  us  that  God  can  dwell  in  man  and  make  man's  body* 
his  temple.  He  can  even  dwell  in  us ;  and  an  apostle  may  jilead  with  his  people, 
saying,  "  Know  ye  not  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  in 
you?  "  Surely  such  an  honour  for  us  is  beyond  all  that  " eye  has  seen,  ear  heard,  or 
heart  conceived." 

Illustrate  that  aged  Simeon  loved  God  and  knew  something  of  him,  but  he  never 
could  have  dreamed  what  God  had  in  store  for  him — even  to  ho!d  the  woild's  Babe- 
Saviour  in  his  own  trembling  arms.  What  could  Abraham,  who  saw  Christ's  day  ;  or 
Moses,  who  spoke  of  the  great  prophet  to  come  ;  or  David,  who  sang  of  his  Lord  making 
his  foes  his  footstool, — have  really  known  of  the  Christian  glories,  the  spiritual  mysteries 
of  the  revelation  in  Christ?  Toe-io  spiritual  things  broke  more  and  more  clearly  on  the 
minds  of  Peter  and  John  and  Paul,  until,  in  utter  ravishment  and  wonder,  they 
exclaimed,  "Oh  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  Gk)dl 
How  unsearchable  are  his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  fiuding  out  1 " — U.  T, 

Vers.  12 — 14. — Speech  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  The  personal  references  'n  St 
Paul's  Epistles  are  suitable  to  the  epistolary  style  of  correspondence,  and  necessary  ai 
the  vindication  of  a  man  who  was  seriously  attacked  and  slandereid.  Geneially  hit 
allusions  are  more  or  less  directed  to  nis  claim  as  an  apostle.    Because  this  did  not 


oft.  0.1—14.]    TtiE  fi-iltSt  fiPtSTLlS  TO  THll  COBliJTfllAiiS.  di 

take  precisely  the  same  grounds  as  the  claims  of  the  earlier  apostles,  it  was  easy  for  his 
enemies  to  question  and  even  deny  his  rights.  St.  Paul's  chief  argument  is  that  the 
"  signs  of  an  apostle  were  wrought  by  him,"  and  here,  in  our  text,  he  urges  that  his 
teaching  was  manifestly  inspired  and  .sealed  by  tlie  Huly  ^,>irit,  and  that  hi»  api:>stcrlic 
claim  was  fully  recognized  by  all  "  spiritual  men."  WicUliffe  skilfully  renders  the  last 
clause  of  ver.  13,  "  Maken  a  liknesse  of  spyritual  things  to  goostli  men." 

I.  Tbe  Diyine  fbepabation  fob  apostolio  teaching.  1.  The  apostle  must  have 
received  the  Spirit  of  God.  Person«l  expeiieuce  of  regeneration,  and  personal  openness 
to  the  Divine  incuming,  are  absolutle  essentials  to  all  Christian  service  as  teachers,  in 
older  days  and  now,  in  the  lesser  spheres  as  well  as  the  greater.  Judas  can  teach 
nobody ;  only  as  "  converted  "  can  St.  Peter  "  strengthen  the  brethren  "  or  "  feed  the 
lambs."  2.  He  must  know  the  Vhings  of  God  through  the  Spirit's  teaching.  Here 
the  adequacy  of  the  Spirit  to  be  the  renewed  man's  Teacher  may  be  shown.  (1)  He 
knows  God.  (2)  He  knows  man.  (3)  He  has  access  to  man's  miud  and  heart,  and  an 
adaptation  to  each  individual  can  be  assured.  The  operations  of  the  Divine  Spirit  as 
the  renewed  roan's  Teacher  also  require  consideration.  Generally  it  may  be  said  that 
he  unfolds  the  redemption-mystery  in  its  practical  details  and  applications.  Our 
Lord's  division  of  his  work  is  that  he  teaches  (1)  of  sin;  (2)  of  righteousness ;  (3)  of 
judgment.  The  true  preparation  for  teaching  is  an  inner  spiritual  life,  a  Divine 
indwelling  and  endowment,  and  these  finding  expression  through  the  natural  powers 
and  relations.  There  is  a  full  sense  in  which  the  true  Christian  teacher  has  still  an 
inspired  and  sancti&ed  speech,  and  therefore  all  the  authority  which  the  Divine  Spirit 
can  give. 

II.  The  hinistbt  of  apostleship  in  human  LANOUAas.  "Which  things  we 
speak."  Speech  is  almost  our  best  force  for  the  communication  of  truth  and  lor  tbe 
impression  of  duty.  It  works  by  persuasion,  not  force.  It  has  no  physical,  but  wholly 
moral  power.  Yet  history  declares,  in  repeated  instances,  how  human  words  can  sway 
emotion  and  arouse  to  action  ;  e.g.  the  Crusades.  But  man's  words  may  be  mere  words, 
incapable  of  producing  more  than  limited  effects  upon  passion,  sentiment,  etc.  They 
may  have  a  Divine  life  in  them,  and  so  be  mighty  to  break  stubborn  hearts,  bow  the 
wicked  to  penitence,  draw  men  to  God,  and  change  the  whole  character  of  the  life. 
Words  which  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth  are  mighty  to  pull  down  strongholds.  By  the 
"  foolishness  of  preaching  "  men  are  saved  and  blessed.  But  the  sphere  of  apostolic  speech 
is  clearly  defined.  Such  a  teacher  speaks  spiritual  things ;  and  it  is  indicated  that  he 
will  speak  in  vain,  save  as  men  are  receptive,  spiritually  toned,  having  the  spiritual 
sensibility  quickened.  The  merely  natural  man  cannot  receive  God-inspired  teachings. 
So  there  is  at  once  a  preparation  of  the  teacher,  and  a  preparation  of  those  to  whom 
his  words  are  addressed.  The  practical  duty  of  culturing  Christian  life  and  feeling,  in 
order  to  gain  the  best  blessing  from  our  pastors  and  teachers,  may  be  made  the  subject 
of  an  earnest  and  effective  conclusion. — K.  T. 

Vera.  14, 16. — The  natural  and  the  spiritual  man.  This  is  not  m  common  division 
of  men,  or  one  that  can  be  recognized  from  a  worldly  point  of  view.  The  world  knows 
learned  men  and  ignorant  men,  rich  men  and  poor  men,  but  not  natural  men  and 
spiritual  men.  This  distinction  is  wholly  made  from  the  Christian  standpoint,  but  it 
becomes  the  all-important  one,  in  the  presence  of  which  all  merely  worldly  classifi- 
cations of  men  become  insignificant.  Modern  theories  of  man's  nature  may  be  revievfed. 
Some  regard  man  as  composed  of  body  and  soul ;  others  distinguish  the  rational  soul 
from  the  spiritual  and  immortal  nature,  and  divide  into  body,  mind,  and  soul.  Tliis 
mode  of  regarding  man  may  give  clearness  to  the  distinction  in  our  text  between  the 
natural  and  the  spiritual  man ;  but  the  apostle  would  seem  rather  to  have  in  mind  the 
principles  and  spirit  ruling  the  several  men,  and  making  the  difference  between  them, 
and  it  does  not  seem  likely  that  he  held  any  particular  theory  of  man's  nature.  It  is 
BufScient  that  the  two  kinds  of  men — the  natural  and  the  spiritual — have  been  recog- 
nized in  every  Christian  ago,  and  are  plain  to  our  view  now. 

L  CoMPAKE  THE  SPHERES  OF  THE  TWO.  Most  of  the  Spheres  are  common  to  both.  (1) 
The  physical  sphere ;  (2)  the  relational  sphere ;  (3)  the  social  sphere ;  (4)  the  intel- 
lectual sphere.  But  to  the  natural  man  the  intellectuJtl  is  the  highest  department.  He 
may  have  geniua  for  literature,  poetry,  painting,  sculpture;  but  be  can  never  transcend 


92 


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  m.  1—23 


the  sphere  of  mind.  "The  natural  man  is  he  whose  perceptions  do  not  extend  beyond 
the  region  of  the  intellect,  the  part  of  his  being  which  he  has  in  common  with  the 
animal  creation."  "  The  natural  man  is  he  in  whom  pure  intellectual  reason  and  the 
merely  natural  affections  predominate,"  But  though  the  natural  man's  sphere  is  thus 
limited,  there  is  glorious  fulness  within  the  limits;  the  perfection  of  art  is  yet  nnat- 
lained;  the  possibilities  of  knowledge  are  far  from  exhausted,  though  the  noble  minds 
of  the  long  ages  have  been  occupied  in  study  and  research.  We  need  not  undervalue 
the  natural  man's  sphere,  so  far  as  it  goes.  But  the  spiritual  man  enters  a  rpgipn 
altogether  unknown  to,  and  hopelessly  closed  to,  the  natural  man.  It  is  the  sphere  of 
the  unseen,  the  eternal,  the  spiritual ;  in  a  word,  of  God  and  the  things  of  God. 
Eegeneration  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  involves  and  includes  an  awakening  of  new 
sensibilities  to  Divine  and  eternal  things.  It  is  as  if  a  man  were  endowed  with  some 
new  senses,  and  found  revealed  to  him  what  his  fellow-men  might  not  know.  In  this 
higher  and  further  sphere  man  can  alone  find  satisfaction  for  his  full  powers.  It  is  an 
encircling  sphere  that  hallows  all  the  lesser  ones  in  which  he  shares  with  his  fellows. 

II.  CoMFABE  THE  CONDUCT  OP  THE  TWO.  As  a  rule,  the  conduct  of  the  natural  man 
will  be  ruled  and  toned  by  considerations  of  self-pleasing.  This  may  he  tempered  by 
goodness  of  the  natural  disposition,  or  by  culture  and  self-mastery ;  but  the  tendency 
always  lies  towards  bodily  indulgence  and  power  of  sensual  passion.  The  sky  over 
such  a  man  is  low,  and  he  fails  to  get  the  elevating  of  the  high,  vast,  pure  heavens. 
Another  sentiment  tones  the  conduct  of  the  spiritual  man.  For  him  life  is  God's,  the 
world  is  God's,  he  is  God's ;  and  there  is  no  question  with  him  as  to  what  he  would  like ; 
all  his  desire  is  to  know  what  God  would  wish.  His  whole  comluct  must  be  in  harmony 
with  and  must  tend  to  work  out  God's  purposes,  t'or  him  there  is  no  danger  of 
deterioration.  His  sphere  is  exhilarating,  his  thought  is  inspiring,  his  progress  is 
assured, 

III.  Compare  the  futubb  of  the  two.  The  natural  man  can  have  no  future  that 
Is  more  than  sentiment.  His  sphere  is  temporary.  He  must  make  what  he  can  of  thn 
life  that  now  is.  His  career  has  its  limits  here  and  its  good  things  now.  To  the 
spiritual  man  life  here  is  but  a  stage  of  the  true  life,  a  preparation-time  for  k  nobler 
life,  upon  which  he  is  soon  to  enter.  That  future  ceases  to  be  strange  to  him,  as  he 
fully  realizes  life  in  the  Divine  spheres  now. 

Impress  the  disabilities  of  the  "  natural  man,"  and  show  how,  by  God'i  gracious 
provision,  the  "natural"  may  become  "spiritual." — B.  T, 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  m. 


Ten.  1—4. — The  eamai  oonceU  o/  (ka 
wpiritaally  immature. 

Ver.  1. — I  .  .  .  could  not  speak  unto  you 
as  unto  spiritual.  Though  softened  by  the 
word  brethren,  there  was  a  crushing  irony 
of  reproof  in  these  words  :  "  You  thought 
yourselves  quite  above  the  need  of  my 
simple  teaching.  You  were  looking  down 
on  me  from  the  whole  height  of  your 
inferiority.  The  elementary  character  of 
my  doctrine  was  after  all  the  necessary 
consequence  of  your  own  incapacity  for 
anything  more  profound."  As  unto  carnal. 
The  true  reading  here  is  tarkinoix,  fleshen, 
not  larhikois,  fleshly,  or  carnal ;-  the  later 
and  severer  word  is  perhaps  first  used  in 
ver.  3.  The  word  sarkinos  (eameus), 
fleshen,  implies  earthliness  and  weakness 
and  the  absence  of  spirituality ;  but  earki- 
lco$  (camaUt)  involves  the  dominance  of 
the  lower  nature   and  antagonism  to  the 


spiritual.  As  unto  babes  in  Chtlgt  The 
word  "  babes  "  has  a  good  and  a  bad  sense. 
In  its  good  sense  it  implies  liuniility  and 
teachableness,  as  in  ch.  xiv.  20,  "  In  malice 
be  ye  babes ; "  and  in  1  Pet.  ii.  2,  "  As  new- 
born babes^  desire  tlie  sincere  milk  of  the 
Word ; "  and  in  Matt.  xi.  25.  Here  it  is  used 
in  its  bad  sense  of  spiritual  childishness. 

Ver,  2,-1  fed  you  with  milk.  The 
metaphor  is'expanded  in  Heb.  v.  13, "  Every 
one  that  partaketh  of  milk  is  without  ex- 
perience of  the  Word  of  rigliteousness ;  for 
he  is  a  babe,"  The  same  metaphor  is  fouml 
in  Philo;  and  tlie  young  pupils  of  the 
rabbis  were  called  "  sucklings  "  (nipwn)  and 
"little  ones"  (oomp.  Matt.  x.  42).  Not 
with  meat;  not  with  solid  food,  wldch  is  for 
full-grown  or  spiritually  perfect  men  (Heb. 
V,  14).  For  hitherto;  rather,  for  ye  tc«'e 
not  yet — when  I  preached  to  you — able  u> 
bear  it.  The  same  phrase  is  used  by  our 
Lord  in  John  xvi.  12,  "  I  have  miiny  things 
to  say  uuto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  then 


OH.  in.  1—23.1    THE   FIKST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


93 


now ; "  and  he  tanght  them  in  parables,  "  as 
they  were  able  to  bear  it"  (Mark  iv.  33). 
Not  even  now  are  ye  able.  Tliough  you 
imagine  that  yon  have  advanced  so  br 
beyond  my  simpler  teaching. 

Ver.  S. — ^For  ye  are  yet  oamal.  This  is 
the  reason  for  the  spiritual  dulness  which 
your  pride  prevents  you  from  recognizing. 
Envying,  and  strife,  and  divisions.  The 
two  latter  words  are  omitted  in  some  of  the 
best  manuscripts,  and  may  have  been  added 
from  Gal.  v.  20.  Partisanship  and  discord, 
the  sins  of  the  Corinthians — sins  which 
have  disgraced  so  many  ages  of  Church 
history — are  works  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  19), 
and  involve  many  other  sins  (Jas.  iii.  16),  and 
are  therefore  sure  proofs  of  the  carnal  mind, 
though  they  are  usually  accompanied  by 
a  boast  of  superior  spiritual  enlightenment. 
As  men  ;  that  is, "  as  men,  not  as  Christians." 
To  walk  as  a  mere  ordinary  human  being  is 
not  to  "walk  in  the  Spirit"  (Gal.  v.  25); 
comp.,  "  I  speak  as  a  man  "  (Bom.  iii.  5). 

Yer.  4. — For  when  one  saith,  I  am  of  Fanl. 
This  is  a  proof  that  there  were  jealousies 
and  partisanships  among  them.  We  again 
notice  the  generous  courage  of  St.  Paul  in 
rebuking  Gist  those  adherents  who  turned 
his  own  name  into  a  party  watchword. 
Are  ye  not  carnal?  The  true  reading  is, 
"Are  ye  not  men?"  (n,  A,  B,  C,  and  so  the 
Bevised  Version) ;  i.e.  Are  ye  not  swayed  by 
mere  human  passions?  The  Spirit  wliich 
you  received  at  baptism  ought  to  have  lifted 
you  above  these  mean  rivalries.  You  ought 
to  be  something  more  than  mere  men. 
Beligioua  partisanship  is,  in  the  eye  of  St. 
Paul,  simply  irreligious.  He  sets  down 
party  controversies  as  a  distinct  proof  of 
carnality.  Those  wlio  indulge  in  it  are  men 
devoid  of  the  spiritual  element. 

Vers.  5 — 15. — The  one  foundation  and  the 
diverse  superstructure. 

Ver.  5. — Who  then  is  Paul  1  The  better 
reading  is  v!?i<Ui  (n,  A,  B).  The  neuter 
would  imply  a  still  greater  depreciation  of 
the  importance  of  human  ministers.  Minis- 
ters. The  same  word  as  that  rendered 
"deacons"  (diakmoi);  "ministers  of  Christ 
on  your  behalf  "  (Col.  i.  7).  Through  whom 
ye  believed.  "  Through  whom,"  not  "  in 
whom "  (Bengel).  They  were  merely  the 
instruments  of  your  conversion.  In  the 
Hecond  Epistle  (2  Cor.  iii.  3)  he  calls  them 
"the  epistle  of  Christ  ministered  by  us 
written  .  .  .  with  the  Spirit  of  the  living 
God."  As  the  Lord  gave  to  him.  The  gifts 
differ  acoording  to  the  grafie  given  (Bom. 
xii.6). 

Ver.  6.— I  planted.  St.  Paul  everywhere 
recognized  that  his  gift  lay  pre-eminently  in 
the  ability  to  /ound  Churches  (comp.  Acts 
xviii.  1—11;  ch.  iv.  15;  ix.  1;  xv.  1). 
Apolloi  watered.     If.  as  is  now  generally 


believed,  Apollos  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  we  see  how  striking  was  bis  power 
of  strengtiiening  the  faith  of  wavering 
Gliurches.  Eloquence  and  a  deep  insight 
into  the  meaning  of  Scripture,  enriched  by 
Alexandrian  culture,  seem  to  have  been  his 
special  endowments  (Acts  xviii.  .  24,  27). 
The  reference  ,  of  the  word  "  watered "  iio 
baptism  by  Augustine  (Ep.  48)  is  one  o(  the 
numberless  instances  of  Scripture  distorted 
by  ecolesiastieism.  God  gave  the  increase 
(comp.  ch.  XV.  10 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  5).  The  thought 
of  every  true  teacher  always  is,  "  Not  unto 
u%  O  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy 
Name  ^ive  the  praise "  (Ps.  oxv.  1). 

Ver.  7. — Anything.  The  planter  and  the 
waterer  are  nothing  by  comparison.  They 
could  do  notliing  without  Christ's  aid  (John 
XV.  16),  and  were  nothing  in  themselves 
(2  Cor.  xii.  11).  But  God  that  giveth  the 
increase.  The  human  instruments  are  no- 
thing, but  God  is  everything,  because,  apart 
from  him,  no  result  would  follow. 

Ver.  8. — Are  one ;  literally,  one  thing.  God 
is  the  sole  Agent;  the  teachers,  so  far  from 
being  able  to  pose  as  rival  leaders,  form  but 
one  instrument  in  God's  hand,  'theit  relative 
differences  shrink  into  insignificance  when 
the  source  and  obji  cts  of  their  ministry  are 
considered.  His  own  reward  ...  his  own 
labour.  In  the  lower  individual  sphere  the 
work  of  teachers  shall  be  fairly  estimated 
and  rewarded  as  in  the  parable  of  the 
pounds  and  talents  (oomp.  John  iv.  86 ;  Bev. 
xxii.  12). 

Ver.  9. — God's  fellow-workers.  Through- 
out the  Bible  we  are  taught  that  God  requires 
the  work  of  man,  and  that  he  will  not  help 
those  who  will  do  nothing  for  themselves  or 
for  him.  The  world  was  to  be  evangelized, 
not  by  sudden  miracle,  but  by  faithful 
human  labour  (Mark  xvi.  20).  God's 
husbandry ;  rather,  God^i  field,  or  tilled  land. 
The  thought  which  he  desires  again  and 
again  to  enforce  is  that  they  belong  to  God, 
not  to  the  parties  of  human  teachers.  The 
word  "  husbandry  "  may  also  mean  vineyard, 
and  the  metaphor  is  the  same  as  in  Isa.  v.  I ; 
xxvii.  2;  John  xv.  1;  Matt.  xiii.  3^30;  Luke 
xlii.  6 — 9;  Bom.  xi.  16— 24.  God's  building. 
This  is  one  of  St.  Paul's  favourite  metaphors, 
as  in  vers.  16,  17;  2  Cor.  vi.  16;  Bph.  u.  20 
—22 ;  Bom.t  xv.  20 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  19  (oomp.  1 
Pet.  ii.  5 ;  Bev.  xxi.  14). 

Ver.  10.— Acoording  to  the  grace  of  God 
which  is  given  nntome;  rather,  which  was 
given.  Here,  again,  we  have  St.  Paul's 
haptismal  aorist — his  habit  of  regarding  his 
whole  spiritual  life  as  potentially  summed 
up  in  the  one  crisis  of  conversion  and 
baptism.  This  phrase  is  a  favourite  one  with 
him  (ch.  xv.lO;  Bom.  xv.  15;  Gal.  iL9;  Eph. 
iii.  2).  As  a  wise  master-builder.  **  Wice  " 
only  in  the  sense  of  subordinating  evwj 


84 


THE  PIUST  BPISI'LE  TO  THE  COKINTHIANS.    [oh.  in.  1—23. 


pretenae  ol  human  wisdom  to  the  will  of 

God ;  and  here  the  adjective  only  apijliea  to 
the  wisdom  required  by  a  builder.  In  other 
words,  "wise"  is  here  equivalent  to  "eKiir-il." 
Since  Paul  had  received  the  grace  of  God  for 
this  very  purpose,  he  was  made  "  wise  "  by 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  (for  the  metaphor 
of  bNilding.see  Matt,  vii.24;  xvL  18;  Epii.ii. 
21 ;  1  Pet.  it  5).  The  fonndation ;  rather,  a 
foundation.  Though  in  truth  there  is  but 
one  foundation,  as  he  proceeds  to  say,  St. 
Paul  always  refused  to  build  on  the  founda- 
tion laid  by  another  (Kom.  xv.  20).  Another. 
Perhaps  the  special  allusion  is  to  Apollos. 

Ver.  11. — Other  fonndation  oau  no  man 
lay.  Any  "other"  gospel  is  not  merely 
"  another,"  but "  a  different "  gospel  (Gal.  i. 
0).  That  whioh  is  laid ;  rather,  that  it  lying 
(oomp.  1  Pet.  ii.  6).  It  has  not  been  placed 
there  (reeevra)  by  any  human  hands,  but  lie» 
there  by  the  eternal  will.  Which  is  Jesus 
Christ.  "  The  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
foundation  of  all  theology ;  his  person  of  all 
life."  This  is  again  and  again  inculcated  in 
Scripture:  Isa.  xxviii.  16,  "Behold,  I  lay  in 
Zion  for  a  foundation,  a  stone,  a  tried  stone, 
a  precious  corner-stone,  a  sure  foundation." 
On  this  rock  the  Church  is  built  (Matt.  xvi. 
18;  Acts  iv.  11, 12;  Eph.  ii.  20). 

Ver.  12. — Gold,  silver.  Perhaps  St.  Paul 
thought  for  a  moment  of  the  gorgeous  metals 
and  rich  marbles  used  in  the  Corinthian 
temples,  as  well  as  in  the  temple  at  Jeru- 
salem. But  it  is  surely  fantastic  to  suggest 
that  his  reference  is  an  historical  reminis- 
cence of  the  melting  of  gold  and  silver  in 
the  burning  of  Corinth  by  Mummius,  nearly 
two  hundred  years  before.  Costly  stones ;  t.e. 
costly  marble  from  Faros,  Phrygia,  etc. 
Wood,  hay,  stnbble.  These  words  seem  to 
symbolize  erroneous  or  imperfect  doctrines, 
which  would  not  stand  the  test,  and  which 
I  ed  to  evil  practices .  Such  were  the  "  philo- 
sophy and  vain  deceit,"  "  the  weak  and 
beggarly  elements,"  "  the  rudiments  of  the 
world,"  of  which  he  speaks  in  Gal.  iv.  9 ;  Col. 
ii.  8.  So  in  the  Midrash  Tehillin,  the  words 
of  false  teachers  are  compared  to  hay.  The 
doctrines  to  which  he  alludes  are  not  anti- 
christian,  but  imperfect  and  human — such, 
foi  instance,  as, "  Humanascoustitutiunculas 
de  cnltu,  de  victu,  de  frigidis  ceremoniis  " 
(Erasmus). 

Ver.  13. — ^Each  man's  work  shall  he  made 
manifest.  The  real  tiature — the  worth  or 
worthlessness — of  eaoli  man's  work,  will  be 
made  dear  sooner  or  later.  The  day  shall 
declare  it.  "  The  day  "  can  only  mean  "  the 
day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (ch.  i.  8), 
which  would  specially  "  make  manifest  the 
counsels  of  the  hearts  "  (ch.  iv.5),  and  "judge 
the  secrets  of  men  "  (Bom.  ii.  16),  and  make 
ell  Ben  manifest  "before  the  judgment-seat 
of   Christ"   (2  Cor.  iv.  10).    It   shall   be 


revealed  by  fire ;  rather,  beeauie  U  U  being 
revealed,  in  fire.  The  phrase  "  is  being  "  is 
called  bad  English,  but  some  such  phrase  is 
positively  needed  to  render  the  continuous 
present  tense,  which  here  expresses  cer- 
tainty, natural  sequence,  perpetual  immi- 
nence. This  tense  is  constantly  used  to 
express  the  continuity  and  the  present 
working  of  Divine  laws  (comp.  Matt.  iii.  10). 
As  the  nominative  u  not  expressed,  it  is 
uncertain  whether  "it"  refers  to  "each 
man's  work  "  or  to  "  the  day."  Either  gives 
an  apposite  sense  (Mai.  iv.  1 ;  2  Thess.  i,  8). 
Some  would  make  "  he  "  (namely,  Christ)  the 
nominative,  because  "the  day"  means 
"  the  day  of  Christ ;  "-and  in  favour  of  this 
view  they  quote  2  Thess.  i.  7,  "  The  reve- 
lation of  tlie  Lord  Jesus  ftom  heaven  in 
flaming  fire."  But  the  ellipse  of  an  nnex- 
pressed  nominative  is  harsh.  The  fire  itself 
shall  prove  each  man's  work.  This  is  the 
"probatory"  or  testing  flre  of  the  day  of 
the  Lord,  of  which  we  read  very  frequently 
in  the  Fathers.  The  doctrine  of  purgatory 
has  been  in  some  measure  founded  on  this 
verse  (Council  of  Florence,  A.D.  1439) ;  but 
such  a  view  of  it  cannot  be  maintained.  The 
reader  will  find  the  subject  examined  and 
the  quotations  from  the  Fathers  given  in  the 
writer's  '  Mercy  and  Judgment,'  p.  69.  All 
that  is  said  here  is  that  the  fire  of  Christ's 
presence — the  consuming  flre  of  God's  love — 
shall  lest  the  work,  not  purge  it.  The  flre  is 
probatory,  not  purgatorial,  and  it  is  not  in 
itself  a  fire  of  wrath,  for  it  tests  the  gold  and 
silver  as  well  as  the  inferior  elements  of  the 
structure.  It  is  the  flre  of  the  refiner,  not 
of  the  avenger. 

Ver.  14. — If  any  man's  work  shaU  abide. 
St.  Paul  is  speaking  primarily  of  teachers, 
though,  of  course,  his  words  apply  by  analogy 
to  all  believers.  He  shall  receive  a  reward. 
One  of  the  teacher's  rewards  will  be  bis 
converts  (1  Thess.  ii.  19),  who  will  be  "  his 
joy  and  crown  of  glorying"  (PhiL  ii.  16); 
another  will  be  "a  crown  of  glory  that 
fadetli  not  away"  (1  Pet.  v.  2, 4;  Dan.  xii. 
8) ;  ]ret  another  will  be  fresh  opportunitieB 
for  higher  labour  (Matt.  xxv.  23). 

Ver.  15. — He  shall  suffer  loss.  He  shall 
not  receive  the  full  reward  to  which  he 
might  otherwise  look  (2  John  8).  He  him- 
self shall  be  saved.  It  is  an  inexpressible 
source  of  comfort  to  us,  amid  the  weakness 
and  ignorance  of  our  lives,  to  know  that  if 
we  have  only  erred  through  human  frailty 
and  feebleness,  while  yet  we  desired  to  he 
sincere  and  faithful,  the  work  will  be  burnt. 
yet  the  workman  will  be  saved.  Some  of 
the  Fatliers  gave  to  this  beautiful  verse  the 
shockingly  perverted  meaning  that  "the 
workman  would  be  preserved  alive  for  endless 
torments,"  "salted  witli  fire"  in  order  t* 
endure  interminable  agonies.    The  moaning 


CH.III.!— 23.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


ftfi 


ii  imp-issible,  for  it  reTersei  the  aense  of 
the  wonl  "  saved ; "  and  makes  it  equivalent 
to  "  damned ; "  but  the  interpretation  is  an 
awful  proof  of  the  distortiona  to  which  a 
mereilesii  human  rigorism  and  a  hard,  self- 
styled  orthodoxy  have  sometimes  subjected 
the  Word  of  God.  Yet  so  as  by  fire ;  rather, 
(krough  or  bj/  mean§  of  pre  (Sick  irupcis).  We 
may  be,  as  it  were,  "snatched  as  a  brand 
from  the  burning"  (Zech.  iii.  2;  Amos  iv. 
11;  Jude  23),  and  « scarcely"  saved  (1  Pet. 
iv.  VS).  Similarly  it  is  said  in  1  Pet.  iii.  20 
that  Noah  was  saved  "through  water" 
(St*  i'&aroi).  The  ship  is  lost,  the  sailor 
saved;  the  workman  is  saved,  the  work  is 
burned. 

Vera.  16— 23.— 3%«  peWI  and  /oily  o/ 
glorying  in  men. 

Ver.  16. — Know  ye  not.  The  phrase  is 
used  by  St.  Paul  in  this  Epistle  to  emphusize 
important  truths,  as  in  ch.  v.  6 ;  vi.  2, 9,  15; 
ix.  13, 21.  Out  of  this  Epistle  it  only  occurs 
in  Bom.  vi.  16;  xi.  2.  That  ye  are  the 
temple  of  God.  "Ye,"  both  collectively 
(Eph.  ii.  21)  and  individually  ;  ■•  God's 
shrine; "  not  built  for  men's  glory.  The  woid 
"  temple  "  in  the  Old  Tesi;iiment  always 
means  the  mateiial  temple ;  in  the  Gospels 
our  Lord  "  spake  of  the  temple  of  his  boi  ly ; " 
in  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament  thu  body 
of  every  baptized  Christian  is  the  tem[jle  of 
God  (ch.  vL  16),  because  "  God  dwelleth  in 
him  "  (I  John  iv.  16 ;  oomp.  John  xiv.  23). 
In  another  aspect  Cliristians  can  be  regarded 
as  "  living  stones  in  one  spiritual  liouse " 
(1  Pet.  ii.  5).  The  temple;  rather,  the  thrine 
(nooa)  wherein  God  dwells  (natei),  and  which 
is  the  holiest  part  of  the  temple  (hieron). 

Yer.  17. — If  any  man  defile  the  temple  of 
Ood.  The  verb  is  the  same  as  in  the  next 
clanse,  and  should  be  rendered.  If  any  man 
dettroy  the  temple  of  God ;  but  the  word  is 
perhaps  too  strong,  and  the  word  "mar"  or 
"  injure  "  might  better  convey  the  meaning 
(Olshausen).  The  two  verbs  are  brought 
into  vivid  juxtaposition  in  the  original:  "God 
shall  ruin  the  ruiner  of  his  temple."  St. 
Paul  was,  perhaps,  thinking  of  the  penalty 
of  death  attached  to  any  one  who  desecrated 
the  temple  of  Jerusalem.  Inscriptions  on  the 
ckS,  or  "  middle  wall  of  partition,"  threat- 
ened death  to  any  Gentile  who  set  foot 
within  the  sacred  enclosure."  Whioh  temple 
ye  are ;  literally,  the  which  are  ye ;  i.e.  ye  are 
holy.  St.  Paul  is  here  referring  to  the  Cliurch 
of  Corinth,  and  to  the  false  teachers  who 
desecrated  it  by  bringing  in  "factions  of 
destruction"  (2  Pet.  ii.  1).  Ideally  the 
Church  was  glorious,  "not  having  spot,  or 
wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing"  (Eph.  v.  27). 

Ver.  18. — Let  no  man  deceive  himsell 
Like  the  other  formula,  "  Be  not  deceived  " 
(eh.  vi  9;  xv.  33;  Gal.  vi  7);  "Deceive 
not  yourselves"  (Jer.  ixxvii.  9) ;  "Let  no 


man  deceive  you  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  4;  Luke  xxi. 
8;  2  Thess.  ii.  3;  Eph.  v.  6;  1  John  iii  7). 
We  are  so  liable  to  self-deception  (1  John  i. 
8 ;  Gal.  vi.  8),  as  well  as  to  being  deceived  by 
others  (2  Tim.  iii  13),  that  there  was  need 
to  repeat  this  warning  incessantly.  Seemeth 
to  be  wise ;  rather,  thinketh  that  he  i$  wise. 
He  is  referring  specially  to  the  Apollog 
party,  who  vaunted  their  esoteric  knowledge, 
and  so  were  "  wise  in  their  own  eyes,  prudent 
in  their  own  conceits ''  (Isa.  v.  21). 

Ver.  19. — The  wisdom  of  this  world.  Here 
the  word  for  "  world  "  is  kosmoi,  in  the  last 
verse  it  was  aion.  Koamoi  is  the  world 
regarded  objectively ;  aion  the  world  regarded 
in  its  moral  and  intellectual  aspect.  He 
that  taketh  the  wise  in  their  craftiness. 
This  is  one  of  the  few  references  to  the  Book 
of  Job  in  the  New  Testament.  It  oomea 
from  the  speech  of  Eliphaz  in  Job  v.  13,  but 
St.  Paul  substitutes  the  words  "clutching" 
(drassomenos)' and  "  craftiness  "  (jpanourgia) 
for  the  milder  hatalahon  and  phroneiei  of 
the  LXX. 

Ver.  20.— The  Lord  knoweth,  etc.  A 
quotation  from  Ps.  xoiv.  11.  St.  Panl  sub- 
stitutes "  the  wise  "  for  the  "  men  "  of  the 
orif^iiml,  l)ecause  the  psalmist  is  referring 
to  perverse  despisers  of  GoJ.  Vialoglsmoi  is 
rather  "  reasonings "  than  "thoughts."  It 
is  used  in  a  disparaging  senae,  as  in  Bom. 
i  21 ;  Eph.  iv.  17. 

Ver.  21.— Wherefore.  St.  Paul,  with  this 
word,  concludes  the  argument  of  warning  of 
the  previous  section,  as  in  ch.  iii.  7;  iv.  5; 
viii.  38;  xi  33;  xiv.  39;  xv.  58  tWords- 
worth).  All  things  are  yours.  It  is  always 
atendencyof  Christians  to  underrate  the  gran- 
deur of  their  privileges  by  exaggerating  their 
supposed  monopoly  of  iome  oS  them,  while 
many  equally  rich  advantages  are  at  their 
disposal.  Instead  of  becoming  partisans  of 
special  teachers,  and  champions  of  separate 
doctrines,  they  might  enjoy  all  that  was 
good  in  tlie  doctrines  of  all  teachers,  whether 
tliey  were  prophets,  or  pastors,  or  evangelists 
(Eph.  iv.  11, 12).  The  true  God  gives  us 
oK  things  richly  to  enjoy  (1  Tim.  vi.  17). 

Ver.  22. — ^Whether  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or 
Cephas.  All  were  their  servants  for  Jesus' 
sake  (2  Cor.  iv.  5).  Instead  of  becominir 
partisans  of  either,  they  could  enjoy  the 
greatness  of  ali  Or  t^  world.  The  sudden 
leap  from  Cephas  to  the  world  shows,  as 
Bengel  says,  the  impetuous  leap  of  thought. 
Tiiere  is  a  passage  of  similar  eloquence  in 
Bom.  viii  38,  39.  The  "hundredfold"  is 
promised  even  in  this  world  (Mark  x.  29, 30). 
Or  life.  Because  life  in  Christ  is  the  only 
real  life,  and  Christ  eame  that  we  might 
have  life,  and  have  it  more  abundantly  (see 
Bom.  viii.  38).  Or  death.  To  the  Christian, 
"  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain  "  (PliiL 
i.  21 ).    So  that  death  is  no  more  than 


M 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  ni.  1—2;^, 


"The  lifting  of  a  latch; 
Nonght  but  a  stip  into  tlie  open  air 
Out  of  a  tent  alreaily  luminous 
With  light  which  ehines  through  itg  trani- 
pareut  folds." 

Or  tilings  present,  or  things  to  oome.  "  He 
that  OTercometh  shall  inliorit  all  things" 
(Bev.  zxi.  7),  because  Christ  has  received 
all  things  from  the  Father. 

Ver.  23. — And  ye  are  Christ's  (see  oh. 
Ti.  19 ;  XV.  23 ;  Rom.  xiv.  8 ;  Gal.  iii.  29). 
Christians  possess  because  they  are  possessed 
by  Christ  (Meyer).  Christ  is  our  Master,  and 


God  onr  Father  (Matt,  xxiii.  10).  And 
Christ  is  God's;  because  *' Christ  is  equal 
to  the  Father  as  touching  his  Godhead,  but 
inferior  to  the  Futher  as  touching  his  man- 
hijoil."  Hence  in  ch.  xi.  3  he  says,  "The 
head  of  Christ  is  God  ;  "  and  in  ch.  xv.  28, 
we  read  of  Christ  resigning  iiis  mediatorial 
kingdom,  that  God  may  be  all  in  uil.  Per 
hM|s  St.  Paul  implies  the  thought  that 
Cliiist  belongs,  not  to  a  party,  but  to  God,  the 
Father  of  us  all.  But  the  ultimate  climax 
from  Christ  to  God  is  found  also  inch. It.  1; 
Bom.  XT.  S,  etc. 


H0MILETIC3. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Pefleetions  for  Churches,  "  And  I,  brethren,  could  not  apeak  unto  you 
as  unto  spiritual,"  etc.  In  these  verses  are  three  subjects  worthy  of  the  profoundest 
contem}<lation. 

I.  The  oraddating  method  of  tbachino.  "  And  I,  brethren,  could  not  speak  unto 
you  as  unto  spiritual,  lut  as  unto  carnnl,  even  as  unto  babes  in  Christ.  I  have  fed  you 
with  mill^,"  etc.  Truth  is  to  be  administered  with  a  practical  regard  to  the  receptiva 
powers  of  the  stuHent,  just  as  the  administration  of  budily  food  must  have  regard  to  the 
digestive  capacities  of  those  who  need  it ;  "  niilli "  for  children,  "  meat "  for  men.  This 
is  Paul's  metaphor ;  though  men  might  live  nn  milk,  strong  meat  would  kill  children. 
There  are  truths  in  the  gospel  of  such  an  elevated  character,  requiring  so  much  intellect 
and  culture  to  appreciate  them,  that  to  enforce  them  ou  the  attention  of  mental  and 
moral  children  would  be  posiiively  to  injure  them.  Christ  practised  this  method  of 
teaching.  He  had  many  things  to  say  which  his  disciples  could  not  bear.  Had  he 
preached  to  them  the  doctrines  of  the  cioss  at  first,  they  would  have  been  shocked. 
When  at  one  time  they  were  merely  intimated,  they  produced  a  kind  of  revulsion  in 
Peter,  and  lie  exclaimed,  "That  be  far  from  thee,  Lord."  'I'liis  method  of  teaching 
shows:  1.  That  a  minister  that  maybe  u.seful  to  one  class  of  men  maybe  unprofitable 
to  another.  2.  The  necessity  of  all  who  would  enjoy  the  higher  teaching  to  cultivate 
their  mental  and  moral  powers. 

II.  The  carnality  of  Churchisms.  "  For  whereas  there  is  among;  you  envying, 
and  strife,  and  divisions,  are  ye  not  carnal,  and  walk  as  men  ?  "  etc.  By  Churchisms  I 
mean  sectarianisms,  denuminationalisms,  etc.  What  are  Churches?  The  best  Churches 
in  Christendom  to-day  are  but  the  organization  of  certain  opinions  concerning  Christ 
and  his  gospel.  Some  men  extol  one  class  of  opinion  more  than  another,  and  they  set 
up  one  Church  in  opposition  to  another,  and  so  on.  Paul  says  this  is  "  carnal."  Carnal, 
because  it  engrosses  the  soul:  1.  In  the  human  rather  than  the  Divine.  2.  In  the 
personal  rather  than  in  the  universal.  3.  In  the  selfish  rather  than  in  the  sel/-denyiny. 
4.  In  the  transitory  rather  than  in  the  permanent. 

IlL  The  unity  of  all  TBUE  ministers.  "  Who  then  is  Paul?  and  who  is  ApoUos? 
but  ministers  by  whom  ye  believed,"  etc.  Asain,  "  He  that  planteth  and  he  that 
watereth  are  one."  1.  One,  notwithstanding  the  dii'ersity  of  talents  and  kinds  of  labour. 
Paul,  Peter,  and  ApoUos  differed  in  many  persimal  respects;  tiiey  differed  in  the  kind 
and  measure  of  their  faculties,  in  their  tempcrnments  and  attahmients;  still  they  were 
one  in  spirit  and  aim.  2.  One  in  grand  practical  aim.  What  were  they,  working  for  1 
The  spiritual  cultivation  of  mankind.  One  planting,  another  watering,  etc.  Different 
kinds  of  labour,  but  still  one.  3.  One  in  their  connection  with  Ood.  (1)  Whilst  all 
depended  on  God  for  success,  God  gave  the  "  increasi;."  (2)  All  were  co-workers  with 
him ;  "  labourers  together  with  God."  4.  One  in  their  ultimate  reward.  "  Every  man 
shall  receive  his  own  reward  according  to  bis  own  labour."  Each  from  the  same  God, 
each  according  to  his  work. 


Yar.  9. —  Qod  a  HuiAandman.    "  We  are  labourers  together  with  God ;  ye  are  God'i 


OH.  m.  1—23.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  «7 

husbandry,"  etc.    The  words  lead  us  to  look  at  Qod  as  the  great  Husbandman  of  hnman 
souls.    As  a  husbandman — 

I.  Hb  IB  THOROUGHLY  ACQUAINTED  WITH  THE  SOIL.  1.  He  kuowf  Its  Original  ttote. 
The  soil  in  its  pristine  state,  with  kll  its  original  powers,  he  knows.  2.  He  knows  its 
present  condition.  Its  present  barren  and  wilderness  state  he  understands.  To  him  it 
seems  like  the  "  field  of  the  slothful "  mentioned  by  Solomon.  It  is  stony,  weedy, 
and  thorny.  3.  He  knows  its  tillable  capabilities.  He  knows  what  can  be  made 
of  it,  notwithstanding  its  present  condition.  He  knows  what  every  soul  is  capable  of 
producing.  He  knows  that  some  are  far  more  capable  than  others.  Some  can  become 
the  majestic  cedar,  whilst  others  only  the  shrub. 

II.  He  has  all  necessary  insteumentalitibs.  This  stony,  weedy  ground  requires 
uertain  well-contrived  implements  to  work  it  into  a  fruitful  condition.  1.  He  has 
tijem  in  the  events  of  life.  All  the  dark  and  painful  circumstances  in  life  are  his 
implements  to  break  up  the' fallow  ground.  All  the  pleasant  and  propitious  are  instru- 
ments for  mellowing  the  soil.  2.  He  has  them  in  the  revelations  of  truth.  There  is 
Law  and  love,  Sinai  and  Calvary.     All  are  soul-culturing  implements. 

III.  He  possesses  the  pbopeb  seed.  The  seed  he  has  to  sow  is  good  seed,  and  seed 
adapted  to  the  soil.  What  is  it  ?  His  Word.  His  Word  is  seed  in  many  respects. 
I.  In  vitality.  Every  seed  has  life  in  it.  His  Word  is  Spirit  and  life.  2.  Ii.  complete- 
ness. The  seed  is  complete  in  itself.  3.  In  proUficness.  One  seed  in  course  of  time 
may  cover  a  continent.    The  Word  of  God  is  wonderfully  fruitful. 

IV.  He  cohuands  the  cultubing  elements.  The  best  agiiculturists,  who  under- 
stand the  soil,  possess  the  best  implements  and  the  best  seed,  are  thwarted  in  their 
efforts,  because  the  elements  are  not  propitious.  God  has  command  over  the  elements. 
He  is  the  great  Husbandman  of  souls,  and  we  his  husbandry. 

Vers.  10 — 15. — The  true  foundation  of  character,  "  According  to  the  grace  of  God," 
etc.     The  words  suggest  certain  important  thoughts  concerning  character. 

I.  That  there  is  an  analogy  between  the  fobmation  of  characteb  and  the 
ERECTION  OF  A  BUILDINQ.  "  If  any  man  build,"  etc.  It  is  like  a  building  in  three 
respects.  1.  In  the  variety  of  its  jnaterials.  Buildings  are  generally  formed  of  a 
variety  of  materials — stone,  wood,  iron,  etc.  Moral  character  is  built  up  by  a  variety  of 
tilings — the  impressions  that  are  made  on  us,  the  emotions  that  rise  in  us,  etc.  2.  In 
the  unity  of  its  design.  Every  building  is  formed  on  some  plan.  One  design  shapes 
the  whole.  So  with  character.  The  master-purpose  of  the  soul,  whatever  it  may  be, 
gives  unity  to  the  whole.  3.  In  the  function  it  fulfils.  Buildings  are  generally 
residences  of  some  kind  or  other.  The  soul  lives  in  the  character.  It  is  its  home.  In 
some  cases  the  home  is  the  mere  sty  of  the  animal ;  in  some,  the  shop  of  the  barterer ; 
in  some,  the  prison  of  the  guilty ;  in  some,  the  temple  of  the  saint. 

II.  That  Chbist  is  the  only  Foundation, op  a  tbub  chabactbb.  "For  other 
foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ."  There  are  some- 
times splendid  edifices  and  poor  foundations,  and  the  reverse.  All  characters  are  based 
upon  some  one  idea.  1.  Some  are  based  on  the  sensual  idea ;  such  as  that  on  which 
the  prodigal  son  started,  etc.  2.  Some  are  based  on  the  secular  idea.  On  this  Judas, 
the  young  lawyer,  and  Demas  built.  3.  Some  are  based  on  the  ambitious  idea. 
Absalom,  Haman,  Herod,  are  examples.  4.  Some  are  based  on  the  Christian,  idea. 
What  is  that?  Supreme  sympathy  with  God;  and  this  requires  Christ.  Christ  is  its 
Foundation,  for  he  does  two  things  to  generate  this  supreme  sympathy  in  the  soul. 
(1)  Demonstrates  to  man  the  propitiableness  of  God.  (2)  Iteveals  to  man  the  moral 
loveliness  of  God. 

III.  That  to  Chbist,  as  a  Foundation,  men  bring  wobthlbss  as  well  as  valuable 
materials.  Some  build  edifices  of  "  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,"  and  some  of  "  wood, 
hay,  stubble."  1.  There  are  edifices  partially  formed  of  "  wood,  hay,  stubble."  (1) 
The  mere  ereedal  character  is  worthless.  (2)  The  mere  sentimental  character  is 
worthless.  (3)  The  mere  ritualistic  character  is  worthless.  All  these  characters  are 
formed  of  "wood,  hay,  stubble" — things  of  no  solidity,  no  value,  no  duration.  2. 
There  are  edifices  entirely  formed  of  valuable  materials  brought  to  Christ.  They  are 
formed  of  "  gold,  silver,  precious  stones."  The  profoundest  thoughts,  the  strongest 
s\  "apathies,  the  gold  and  silver  of  the  soul,  are  connected  with  Christ. 

I.  oobinthians.  ■ 


»d  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TflE  COllLVTlllAWii.    icu.  m.  i- -^is. 

IV.  That  thbbg  is  an  era  to  dawn  when  all  the  edifices  built  oh  ten 
Foundation  shall  be  tried.  "  Evi  ry  man's  work  shall  be  made  manifest.  Heaven 
has  appointed  a  day  for  testing  character.  Individually,  it  is  the  diiy  that  dawns  at  the 
end  of  our  mortal  life  ;  universally,  it  is  the  day  that  dawns  at  the  end  of  this  world's 
history.  1.  Tliis  clay  will  be  injurioui  to  those  who  have  built  on  this  foundation  with 
worthlesi  materials.  (1)  They  will  suffer  loss — the  loss  of  labour,  oi)portunity, 
position.  (2)  Though  they  suffer  loss,  they  may  be  saved — "  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire." 
Thoufih  his  favourite  theories  and  cherished  hopes  shall  burn  like  "  wood  and  hay,"  yet 
he  himself  may  survive  the  flames.  2.  This  day  will  be  advantageous  to  those  who 
have  built  on  this  Foundation  with  right  materials.  "  If  any  man's  work  abide  which 
he  bath  built  thereupon,  he  shall  receive  a  reward." 

Vers.  16,  IT.-'Bumanity  the  temple  of  Ood.  "  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple 
uf  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelletli  in  you?  If  any  man  defile  the  temple  of 
God,  him  shall  God  destroy ;  for  the  temple  of  God  is  holy,  which  temple  ye  are." 
The  apostle  is  writing  not  to  those  who  were  spiritually  perfect ;  on  the  contrary,  to 
those  wlio  were  characterized  by  most  salient  moral  defects.  Yet  he  says,  "  Ye  are  the 
templii  of  God."    Let  us,  therefore,  look  at  man — 

I.  As  A  Divine  "temple."  "The  temple  of  God."  In  what  respects  a  temple ? 
1.  He  is  a  special  residence  of  Gol.  God  is  in  all  material  objects,  but  he  is  especially 
in  moral  mind.  2.  He  is  a  s;  ccial  manifestation  of  God.  God  is  seen  everywhere  in 
this  world,  but  never  so  fully  as  in  the  mind  of  man.  "  We  are  all  his  offspring,"  and 
we  are  like  the  Father  in  essence,  conscience,  freedom.  3.  He  is  a  special  meeting-place 
with  God.  The  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  God's  fecial  meeting-place  with  man. 
"  There  will  I  commune  with  thee."  Man  can  meet  with  God  in  material  nature,  but 
not  so  fully  and  consciously  as  in  mind.     "  The  highest  study  of  mankind  is  maa." 

II.  As  a  Divine  "  temple  "  that  might  be  destroyed.  "  If  any  man  defile  [destroy] 
the  temple  of  God."  The  destruction  of  a  temple  does  not  mean  the  destruction  of  all 
its  parts,  but  the  destruction  of  its  use.  Man  might  live  for  ever,  and  yet  be  destroyed 
as  the  temple  of  God,  the  special  residence,  manifestation,  and  meeting-place  of  God. 
Now,  maik,  this  destruction,  if  it  takes  )>lace,  is  not  by  God.  He  will  not  destroy  the 
temple,  unly  by  man.  "  If  any  man  defile  [destroy]  the  temple."  Alas  I  men  are 
destroying  this  temple,  i.e.  destroying  their  natures  as  the  temple  of  God.  An  awful 
work  tills  I 

III.  As  a  Divine  temple,  the  destroyer  of  which  will  be  destroyed  bt  God  him- 
self. "  Him  shall  God  destroy."  Destroy,  if  not  his  existence,  all  that  makes  exist- 
ence worth  having  or  even  tolerable.  "  He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh 
reap  corruption."  "  The  temple  of  God  is  holy,"  that  is,  ideally  holy,  ought  to  be 
holy. 

Vers.  18 — 20.— Worldly  wisdom.  "Let  no  man  deceive  himself.  If  any  man 
among  you  seemeth  to  be  wise  in  this  world,  let  him  become  a  fool,  that  he  may  be 
wise.  For  the  wisdom  of  this  woild  is  foolishness  with  God.  For  it  is  written.  He 
taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  crafiiness.  And  again.  The  Lord  knoweth  the  thoughts 
of  the  wise,  that  they  are  vain."  The  "wisdom"  here  referred  to  is  what  Paul  calls 
elsewliere  "  fleshly  wisdom,"  the  "  wisdom  of  the  world,"  or  of  the  age.  It  is  the  same 
wisdom  as  he  releis  to  in  ch.  i.  20.  The  "  wisdom  of  this  world  "  may  be  regarded  as 
mere  intellectual  knowledge,  applied  to  secular  and  selfish  ends;  however  vast  and 
varied  its  attainments,  it  is  worldly  in  the  apostolic  sense ;  it  is  "  earthly,"  "  sensual," 
"devilish,"  not  like  the  "wisdom  which  is  from  above,"  which  is  "first  pure,  then 
peaceable,  gentle,  and  easy  to  be  entreated,  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits."  In  relation 
to  this  wisdom  three  remarks  are  here  suggested. 

L  It  is  sblf-deludino.  "  Let  no  man  deceive  himself.  If  any  man  among  you 
seemeth  to  be  wise  in  this  world,"  etc.  1.  This  worldly  wisdom  deceives  a  man, 
inasmuch  as  it  leads  him  to  overrate  the  value  of  his  attainments.  He  ima;;ines  that 
this  kind  of  knowledge,  "wisdom,"  is  everything  for  a  man.  Hence  the  enthusiastic 
promotion  of  secular  schools  and  colleges.  But  all  such  knowledge  is  of  no  value  to 
man  as  man,  and  beyond  his  brief  and  uncertain  earthly  life.  He  deceives  himself  in 
its  value,     2.  This  worldly  wisdom  deceives  a   man,  inasmuch  as  it  leads  him  to 


earn.  1—23.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  »9 

overrate  his  own  importavce.  He  is  "  vainly  puffed  by  Us  earthly  mind,"  u  Paul 
says  elsewliere  (Col.  ii.  18).  Such  a  man  imagines  himself  to  be  very  great;  he 
becomes  a  pedant ;  he  "struts  and  stares  and  a'  that." 

II.  It  is  spiRi'iTfALLT  WORTHLESS.  A  man  with  this  worldly  wisdom  must  "  become 
a  foul,  that  he  may  be  wise."  Two  things  are  here  implied.  1.  That  with  all  his 
wisdom  be  is  already  really  a  "  fool."  He  is  a  "  fool ; "  for  he  looks  for  happiness  where 
it  is  not  to  be  found.  Happiness  docs  not  spring  from  a  man's  brain,  but  from  his 
heart ;  not  from  his  ideas,  but  from  his  affections.  Moreover,  he  is  a  "  fool "  because 
he  practically  ignores  the  chief  good,  which  is  love  for,  resemblance  to,  and  fellowship 
witli,  the  great  Grod.  Hence  God  esteems  this  wisdom  as  foolisliness.  "The  wisdom 
of  this  world  is  foolishness  with  God."  The  most  illustrious  scholar,  sage,  orator,  who 
is  considered  by  himself  and  by  most  of  his  contemporaries  to  be  a  man  of  wonderful 
wisdom,  to  the  eye  of  God  is  a  fool. 

III.  It  is  ULTIMATELY  CONFOUNDING.  "  It  is  Written,  He  taketh  the  wise  in  their 
own  craftiness."  It  must  cunfoimd  a  roan  sooner  or  later,  either  (1)  ker»  In  his 
conversion,  or  (2)  yonder  in  his  retribution. 

"Who  are  the  wise? 
They  who  have  govern'd  with  a  self-control 
Each  wild  and  baneful  passion  of  the  soul, 
Curb'd  the  strong  impulse  of  all-fierce  desiie^ 
But  kept  alive  affuotiou's  purer  fires ; 
They  who  have  pass'd  the  labyrinth  of  life 
Without  one  hour  of  weakness  or  of  strife, 
Prepar'd  each  change  of  fortune  to  endure, 
Humble  though  lich,  and  dignified  though  poor, 
Skill'd  in  the  latent  movements  of  the  heart, 
Learn'd  in  the  lore  which  nature  can  impart. 
Teaching  the  sweet  philosophy  aloud 
Which  sees  the  'silver  luiing'  of  the  cloud, 
Looking  for  good  in  all  beneath  the  skies ! — 
These  ue  the  truly  wise." 

(Prince.) 

Ten.  21 — ^23. — A  call  to  the  utmost  expansivenest  in  religious  sympathy.  "  There- 
fore let  no  man  glory  in  men.  For  all  things  are  yours,"  etc.  The  attendants  on  a 
Christian  ministry  may  be  divided  into  two  classes.  1.  Those  who  esteem  the  doctrine 
because  of  the  teacher.  There  are  not  a  few  in  all  congregations  who  accept  doctrines 
simply  because  of  the  strong  sympathies  they  have  with  the  preacher.  Paul  seems  to 
have  thought  of  these  when  he  wrote  this  chapter.  He  alludes  to  the  men  in  the 
Church  at  Corinth  who  had  been  taken  more  with  the  teachers  than  with  their 
doctrines.  The  other  class  of  attendants  on  a  Christian  ministry  are :  2.  Those  who 
esteem  the  teacher  because  of  his  doctrines.  A  man  who  preaches  to  them  they  feel 
is  estimable  only  as  he  embodies  and  propounds  the  true  doctrines  of  the  gospel.  The 
impropriety  of  gloi-ying  in  teachers  rather  than  in  their  doctrines  ii  strikingly  illus- 
trated in  these  verses  by  three  things. 

I.  The  ukiveese  ib  fob  the  Chubob.  "All  things  are  yourg."  "All  things," 
not  some  things.  1.  The  ministry  is  for  the  Church.  "  Whether  Paul,  or  ApoUos." 
There  is  no  agency  more  valuable  on  earth  than  the  Christian  ministry ;  in  every  way 
it  serves  man — intellectually,  socially,  materially.  But  its  grand  aim  is  to  restore  the 
human  spirit  to  the  knowledge,  image,  and  fellowship  of  its  Qoi.  Why,  then,  should 
it  glory  in  one  form?  Let  those  who  like  Paul  take  Paul,  and  be  thankful,  and  not 
find  fault  with  those  who  regard  Apollos  as  the  most  effective  preacher.  2.  The 
world  is  for  the  Church.  By  the  world  we  mean  the  earth,  with  all  its  beauties  and 
blessings.  In  the  sense  of  legal  possession  the  world,  of  course,  is  not  the  property  ot 
Christians,  nor  is  it  the  property  of  others.  For  he  who  claims  the  largest  number  of 
acres  has  but  a  handbreadth  compared  with  its  numerous  islands  and  vast  continents. 
Tet  in  the  highest  sense  it  is  the  property  of  the  Christian.  He  feels  an  intense 
sympathy  and  oneness  with  God  who  created  it.  3.  Life  is  the  property  of  the 
Church.    "  Or  life."    There  are  cer'-^ir  conditions  in  which  we  find  men  on  this  earth. 


100  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COHINTHIANS.    [eH.m.1— 23. 

in  which  they  cannot  be  said  to  live.  There  are  8ome  chained  in  their  cell,  nnder  the 
sentence  of  death ;  they  have  forfeited  their  life.  There  are  otliers  whose  limbs  are 
BO  paralyzed  that  they  can  neither  speak  nor  move ;  life  is  not  theirs.  Morally,  sinful 
man  is  as  a  criminni ;  he  is  under  the  sentence  of  death ;  he  is  dead  in  trespasses. 
But  life  Ls  the  Christian's ;  his  sentence  of  death  is  removed ;  his  moral  infirmities  ara 
healed,  and  all  his  faculties  and  powers  are  alive  unto  God.  4.  Death  is  the  property 
of  the  Church.  "Or  death."  What  is  death?  Who  shall  define  it?  Who  shaU 
penetrate  its  meaning  ?  The  word  has  unfathomable  depths  of  the  wonderful  and  the 
terrible.  But  it  is  for  the  Christian ;  it  is  his.  It  delivers  him  from  the  imperfection! 
of  the  present  state;  it  frees  him  from  all  that  is  incompatible  with  his  peace,  his 
safety,  and  his  advancement;  it  introduces  him  into  the  scenes,  the  services,  the 
society,  of  a  blessed  immortality.  It  is  his;  it  is  the  last  step  in  the  pilgrimage. 
6,  Qeneral  eventi  are  the  property  of  the  Church.  "Things  present,  or  things  to 
come" — an  expression  including  all  the  circumstances  of  existence.  "  I'hings  present," 
whatever  their  character,  are  ours.  "  Things  to  come : "  what  things  are  those  ?  Now, 
if  all  these  things  are  for  the  Church,  why  should  any  of  its  members  give  themselvei 
up  to  any  one  particular  ministry  to  the  disparagement  of  others  ? 

II.  The  Church  is  fob  the  Rbdeemee.  "  Ye  are  Christ's."  There  Me  two  Teiy 
different  senses  in  which  Christian  men  are  Christ's,  They  are  his :  1.  By  his  relation- 
ship  to  them.  He  is  the  Creator  of  all,  "  By  him  were  all  things  created."  He  is 
the  Mediator  of  all.  2.  By  their  pledge  to  him.  They  have  pledged  themselves  to 
him  as  their  moral  Leader,  They  have  vowed  unqualified  obedience  to  his  teaching. 
If  they  have  thus  consecrated  themselves  to  him  as  their  great  Teacher,  how  absurd 
to  glory  in  subordinate  and  lallible  teachers!  Why  live  under  the  rays  of  the  rush- 
light, when  you  can  bash  under  the  beams  of  the  sun  ?  Follow  a  Plato  in  philosophy, 
a  Solon  in  law,  a  Demosthenes  in  eloquence,  a  Bacon  in  sciences,  but  no  one  but 
Christ  in  religion.  Value  the  Calvins,  the  Luthers,  the  Wesleys,  for  what  they  are 
worth,  but  disclaim  them  as  leaders. 

III.  The  Bedeemeb  is  fob  Goo.  "  And  Christ  is  God's."  Jesus,  as  »  Mediator, 
!■  the  Messenger  and  Servant  of  the  Eternal.  1.  Christ  is  God's  Bevecder.  '  He  is  the 
Word  of  God,  the  Logos.  (1)  He  reveals  him  in  creation ;  (2)  he  reveals  him  in  his 
personal  ministry,  2,  Christ  is  God's  Servant.  He  came  here  to  work  out  God's  great 
plan  of  saving  mercy. 

Learn  from  this  subject :  1,  The  infinite  worth  of  Christianity.  It  gives  all  things 
to  its  true  disciples.  None  of  the  "all  things"  specified  here  are  possessed  by  those 
who  are  not  his  genuine  disciples.  The  ministry  is  not  theirs.  If  they  attend 
preaching  they  are  mere  instruments  in  the  hands  of  the  preacher;  they  are  carried 
away  by  the  emotions  of  the  hour.  The  world  is  not  theirs,  however  large  a  portion 
of  it  they  claim  legally ;  the  world  uses  them  as  its  tools.  Life  is  not  theirs ;  it  ii 
forfeited  to  justice.  They  have  no  true  enjoyment  in  it  Death  is  not  theirs ;  they  are 
its.  "  Through  fear  of  death  they  are  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  Iwndage."  "  Things 
present  and  things  to  come  "  are  not  theirs ;  they  are  the  mere  creatures  of  circum* 
stances.  It  is  Christianity  alone  that  makes  all  these  things  man's.  It  attunes  the 
soul  to  the  influences  of  God,  as  the  ^olian  harp  is  attuned  to  the  winds ;  and  every 
passing  breeze  in  its  history  strikes  out  in  music  the  anthem,  "The  Lord  is  my 
Portion,  saith  my  soul."  2.  The  contempt iblenets  of  religious  sectarianism.  How 
wretchedly  mean  and  base  does  sectarianism  appear  in  the  light  of  this  subject!  The 
men  who  glory  in  their  own  theological  peculiarities,  ecclesiastical  sect,  and  religioua 
teachers,  have  never  felt  the  grandeur  contained  in  the  text,  that  the  imivena  is  Cor 
the  Church,  the  Church  is  for  Christ,  and  that  Christ  is  for  God. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOSa 

Ters.  1 — 4. — Spiritual  condition  of  these  Corinthian  partisans  characterized.  These 
men  were  in  a  low  state  of  Christian  development,  their  growth  in  grace  having  been 
arrested  by  the  jealousy  and  strife  dominant  in  their  midst.  Under  such  circumstances, 
personal  progress  and  Church  progress  were  impossible.  Individual  self-assertion 
■ad  arrogance  could  not  but  lead  to  the  depreciation  of  others,  nnr  eonld  envious 


DH.  m.  1— >28b]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COmNTHIA]^&  101 

rivalries  tolerate  merit  and  worth  In  those  whom  it  sought  to  crush.  On  the  other 
band,  looking  at  the  Church  as  an  organic  body,  its  virtue  was  a  common  stock,  to  Iw 
cherished,  honoured,  and  diligently  maintained  by  every  one  of  its  members.  Itf 
zeal  wag  not  a  solitary  flame  burning  on  an  isolated  altar,  but  the  combined  warmth 
of  many  hearts.  Diversity,  too,  is  God's  law,  diversity  reaching  down  into  tempera- 
ment, diversity  in  the  highest  realm  of  gifts,  diversity  of  insight  and  experience,  and 
this  factious  temper  was  fatal  to  diversity.  Agreeably  to  the  Divine  method,  diversity 
was  preliminary  to  unity,  and  men  were  allowed  free  action  of  individuality,  that  the 
strongest  and  best  elements  of  character,  and  especially  its  latent  qualities,  might  be 
brought  out  and  incorporated  in  the  totality  of  the  Church.  A  very  miscellaneous 
world  environed  these  Corinthians;  the  Christian  community  itself  was  made  up  of 
Jews,  Greeks,  and  Bomans ;  and  the  reasons  were,  therefore,  exceptionally  stringent 
that  they  should,  as  brethren,  be  Tery  closely  banded  together  in  one  mind,  "  the  mind 
of  Christ"  Had  they  been  a  homogeneous  people,  circumstantial  motives,  which  hitn 
a  very  important  part  to  play  in  the  scheme  of  providence,  would  not  have  been  so 
imperative.  But  these  dissensions  involved  their  nntional  peculiarities,  and  hence  the 
antecedents  of  blood,  the  residuum  of  former  bitterness,  would  surely  come  in  to 
aggravate  their  animosities.  They  were  "babes  in  Christ,"  and  furthermore,  they 
were  "carnal;"  and  this  infantile  and  carnal  state,  in  which  all  growth  had  been 
stopped,  was  due  solely  to  intestine  discord.  Had  they  considered  what  a  grievous 
evil  it  was?  Paul  and  ApoUos,  Tarsian  and  Alexandrian,  had  been  put  by  no  choice 
of  theirs  in  a  position  very  unenviable,  nay,  in  des[)ite  of  their  earnest  remonstrance. 
Leaders  they  were,  leaders  they  must  be,  leaders  of  the  Church;  and  on  this  very 
account,  nothing  could  be  more  ill  timed,  nothing  more  abhorrent  to  their  personal 
feelings,  nothing  so  little  like  "  the  mind  of  Christ,"  as  the  attempt  to  make  them 
heads  of  factions.  Alas  for  such  unwise  friends,  blocking  up  their  way  and  multiplying 
the  hazards,  already  enormous,  of  their  ministry  in  Acbaial  If  this  audacious  effort 
continued,  how  could  they  withstand  their  enemies?  The  heart  of  St.  Paul  is  stirred, 
and,  in  this  chapter,  it  swells  to  the  full  compass  of  his  apostleship.  Intellectual 
heroism  is  needed  now,  and  ia  that,  at  in  the  other  qualities  or  an  habitual  hero,  he  b 
never  wanting. — L. 

Vera.  6 — 10. — St.  PauTi  view  «f  the  ministri/.  After  declaring  to  the  Corinthians 
that  they  were  carnal  in  their  estimates  of  God's  ministers,  the  apostle  exposes  their 
folly  in  this  particular,  by  assuring  them  that  he  and  ApoUos  were  but  ministers,  ol 
servants,  whom  God  had  commissioned  to  labour  in  their  behalf.  Half-way  work  he 
never  did.  To  show  their  error,  and  prove  that  it  was  a  worldly  sentiment  disguised 
under  a  fictitious  admiration,  he  sets  before  them  the  true  idea  of  the  ministry,  as  an 
instrument  through  which  the  Divine  agency  of  the  Holy  Giiost  operated.  No  one 
enjoyed  proper  sympathy  and  affectionate  regard  more  than  St.  Paul,  whose  heart 
overflowed  into  everything  that  offered  a  channel  for  its  diffusion.  There  is  nothing 
about  him  of  Cato,  whose  virtue  runs  into  the  fanaticism  of  hatred ;  or  of  Coriolanus, 
who  looks  upon  the  people  as  "  if  he  were  a  god  to  punish,  and  not  a  man  of  theii 
infirmity."  Nevertheless,  he  guards  his  tenderness  agHinst  effeminacy,  nor  will  he 
accept  the  slightest  tribute  to  himself  at  the  expense  of  truth.  The  hardest  thing  in 
onr  nature  to  organize  is  impulse;  and  yet  this  man,  whose  sensibilities  were  so  quicli 
and  strong  (ch.  iv.  14, 15 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  13),  could  not  tolerate  the  homage  paid  him  by 
partisans.  And  in  this  spirit  he  asks,  "  Who  then  is  Paul?"  Only  a  medium  used 
by  the  Spirit  for  their  faith,  and  the  medium  itself  valueless,  except  so  far  as  the 
Spirit  made  it  effective.  Their  very  capacity  to  receive  St.  Paul's  influence  was  the 
gift  of  God,  and  would  they  now  turn  the  gift  against  the  Giver?  St.  Paul's  figures 
are  not  poetic,  but  practical,  and  his  imagination  is  always  the  offspring  of  the  reason ; 
and  hence  the  illustrative  imacie — "  I  have  planted,  ApoUos  watered ;  but  God  gava 
the  increase" — began  and  ended  in  a  breath,  with  no  delight  in  it  beyond  utility 
Two  conclusions  follow :  one,  the  entire  dependence  upon  God  for  the  increase ;  and 
the  other,  the  co-working  with  him  who  is  the  only  Source  of  the  increase.  Neither 
the  sower  nor  the  seed,  however  good,  can  secure  the  yield :  this  is  from  the  great 
Husbandman,  who  apportions  the  result  according  to  his  sovereignty,  and  undei 
conditions  which  St.  Paul  subsequently  points  out.     The  workman  is  rewarde^i  for  i  i 


102  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  in.  1—23 


labour;  he  does  not  create  the  reward,  hut  receives  it  from  God;  nor  oould  reward 
have  any  other  basis  than  xee  and  unmerited  grace,  seeing  that  we  are  co-workers 
with  God.  If  this  were  not  the  law  of  nature  and  providence,  it  could  not  be  a  law 
of  grace,  nor  could  the  figure  of  seed  and  sower  have  any  logical  force.  But,  at  the 
same  time,  the  workman  under  the  gospel  has  a  special  relation  to  God,  and,  in  a 
sense  peculiar  to  the  gospel,  is  a  "co-worker."  This  is  one  of  St.  Paul's  favourite 
ideas  (see  2  Cor.  vi.  1).  It  is  not  working,  but  co-working,  that  evidences  the  spiritu- 
ality of  the  work  and  gains  the  recompense.  Among  the  sources  of  deception,  not  one 
is  so  insidious  as  our  wuik.  The  old  man,  long  a  servant  of  God,  looks  back  upon  his 
labours ;  his  eye  is  tranquil  now ;  it  has  grown  to  be  a  very  honest  eye ;  and  nothing 
in  the  past  surprises  him  so  much  as  the  mixture  of  self  with  work  that  he  once 
thought  was  unselfish.  Early  manhood  and  middle  life,  if  not  absolutely  incompetent 
to  form  a  perfect  idea  of  disinteresteilness,  are  yet  very  prone  to  fall  into  a  mistake  on 
this  subject.  No  doubt  St.  John  imagined  that  he  was  doing  Christ's  work  when  he 
forbade  the  man  casting  out  devils  in  Christ's  Name ;  and,  likely  enough,  St.  Peter  put 
a  special  value  on  his  courage  in  the  garden,  when  he  drew  his  sword  for  the  Lord's 
defence.  If  our  tastes  and  self-will  can  be  gratified,  we  are  often  ready  to  he  enthusi- 
astic workers  for  what  we  suppose  is  the  cause  of  Christ.  But  Ctod's  rule  is  unyielding. 
You  must  labour  according  to  his  will,  or  the  work  will  be  rejected.  And  just  here, 
hia  thought  in  transition  to  another  aspect  of  the  great  topic,  St.  Paul  brings  into  view 
the  co-relationship  of  ministers  and  people,  God  being  all  in  all.  "  We  "  and  "  ye  " — 
"  we  "  are  co-labourers  with  God,  and  "  ye  "  are  not  our  husbandry  and  building,  but 
God's.  What  claims  he  for  himself?  He  is  a  builder,  a  master-builder,  a  wise  one 
too ;  and  he  is  free  to  assert  it,  because  it  is  the  utterance  of  humility,  and  humility  is 
under  obligation  to  speak  the  exact  truth  about  itself,  under-valuation  being  wrong, 
as  well  as  over-valuation.  The  preface  attests  the  spiritual  purity  of  the  avowal: 
"  According  to  the  grace  of  God  which  is  giren  unto  me,"  while  the  elaboration  of  the 
figure,  taken  from  architecture,  indicates  mo  ;e  of  the  Grecian  mode  of  illustration  than 
the  Jewish. — L. 

Vers.  11 — 15. —  Workmen  and  their  works.  St.  Paul  affirms  that  he  had  laid  just 
such  a  foundation  in  Corinth  as  became  a  wise  master-builder.  Like  a  good  architect, 
he  had  made  sure  of  a  solid  basis,  but  had  the  edifice  in  process  of  erectaon  been  true 
to  the  corner-stone  ?  There  was  but  one  Foundation — Jesus  Christ — ^and  a  man  might 
build  rightly  or  wrongly  on  it  in  the  materials  used.  The  range  of  substances  which 
might  be  employed  in  the  superstructure  was  lar^e.  Large  it  must  needs  be,  for,  if  the 
builders  are  many,  the  material  must  be  manifold.  Individuality  in  workmen  must 
be  respected,  and,  though  the  risks  are  numerous  and  great,  yet  Christianity  can  only 
adhere  to  its  fundamental  principle  of  each  man  as  a  man  in  himself.  Brutus  sacri- 
ficed his  instincts  to  what  he  deemed  patriotism  in  the  murder  of  Csesar ;  Rome  taught 
her  best  men  to  have  no  conscience  except  what  she  dictated ;  but  Christianity  laid  a 
stress  on  personality  in  the  human  will  in  order  to  secure  the  full  activity  of  indiviilual 
responsibility.  Providence  ordains  our  home  and  life  in  a  very  ample  world.  The 
amplitude  is  seen,  not  in  its  size  nor  in  the  mere  variety  sf  its  objects,  but  in  the  endless 
adaptability  to  human  tastes  and  dispositions.  Despite  the  curse,  this  earth  is  a  grand 
historic  memorial  of  the  original  idea  of  humanity,  and  a  prophecy  likewise  of  a  glory 
to  be  recovered.  "  The  field  is  the  world ; "  and  this  is  true  of  every  man  in  it,  so 
true  indeed  thit  our  connections  with  the  great  world  are  far  more  vital  and  operative 
on  our  destiny  than  we  imagine.  This,  furthermore,  is  our  discipline.  We  have  a 
world  from  which  to  choose  our  resources,  means,  and  opportunities,  and  hence  the 
wonder  of  experience  is  the  multitudinous  additions  ever  making  to  the  world  wo 
inhabit  as  our  own  world.  Now,  to  each  Christian,  "  the  field  .is  the  world ; "  and 
therein  he  finds  a  vast  miscellany — "  guld,  silver,  precious  stones,"  and  they  are  side  by 
side  with  "  wood,  hay,  stubble."  Redeemed  man  is  treated  by  Providence  and  the 
Holy  Ghost,  not  on  the  bare  idea  of  what  he  is  in  an  earthly  condition,  but  also  and 
mainly  on  the  ideal  of  his  capacity  in  Christ.  And  consequently,  when  St.  Paul  says 
(ver.  21),  "  All  things  are  yours,"  ho  has  only  formally  wrought  out  the  truth  involved 
in  the  workman's  command  of  his  diversified  materials.'  Just  because  the  worker  is  in 
such  a  vast  and  heterogeneous  world,  he  must  "  take  heed."    Nothing  short  of  apiritual 


^H.  m.  1—23.]    THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  103 

discernment  can  protect  him  against  woeful  blunders.  A  hard  worker  he  may  be,  a 
sincere  and  ^thusiastic  worker,  but  he  must  have  Divine  insight,  and  show  himself  "  a 
worliman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,"  and  the  work  must  be  true  and  acceptable 
work,  or  his  labour  will  inevitably  perish.  St.  Jatnes  is  often  referred  to  as  the  sup- 
porter  and  defender  of  the  doctrine  of  work.  From  his  point  of  view  Chrislianity  was 
the  final  outgrowth  of  Judaism,  its  culmination  and  crown,  and,  quite  in  accord  with 
his  instincts,  he  presents  the  work  side  of  religion  with  a  very  vigorous  emphasis.  St. 
Paul,  however,  confines  himself  in  the  text  to  the  kind  of  work,  and  puts  forth  his 
strength  on  a  single  line  of  thought.  What  is  uppermost  in  his  mind  is  the  absolute 
need  of  spiritual  insight.  The  practical  man  is  in  the  eye  of  St.  James,  and  he  writes 
of  "  religion  pure  and  undefiled"  as  its  spectator  and  analyst  among  the  actualities  of 
the  world.  Cffisar,  in  the  '  Commentaries,'  is  not  more  terse  and  compact,  nor  does  he 
observe  more  rigidly  the  requirements  of  intensiveness  as  a  mental  law  than  St.  James 
in  his  great  monograph.  Be  it  noticed,  however,  that  St.  Paul  is  viewing  this  matter 
as  a  branch  or  offshoot  of  a  topic  engrossing  at  the  time  his  sympathies,  and,  conse- 
quently, he  limits  himself  to  the  difference  between  work  which  shall  be  found  worthy 
of  reward  and  work  undeserving  of  recompense.  Two  cases  are  before  him— in  the 
one  the  man  is  saved  and  his  work  rewarded ;  in  the  other,  the  man  is  saved  and  his 
work  disallowed  and  destroyed.  The  latter  suffers  loss,  but  not  the  loss  of  his  soul, 
and,  though  the  ordeal  be  severe,  the  man  is  "  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire."  Now,  this 
view  of  work,  truthful  in  itself,  was  specially  suited  to  these  noisy,  impulsive,  erratic 
Corinthians.  And  may  we  not  reasonably  conjecture  that  he  had  the  products  of  par- 
ti-anship  in  his  eye  while  writing  of  the  fiery  test?  Looking  at  the  world's  history, 
wu  can  scarcely  fail  to  see  that  the  fruits  of  factions  are  ttie  most  perishable  things  in 
civilization,  and,  in  Church  history,  the  fact  is  still  more  obvious.  But  the  apostle 
has  something  further  to  say. — ^L. 

Vers.  16 — 28, — Believers  at  the  temple  of  God.  Previously  St.  Paul  had  said,  "  Ye 
are  God's  building ;"  and  now  he  adds,  "  Ye  are  the  temple  of  God."  Along  with  this 
comes  the  idea  of  sanctity  :  "  The  temple  of  God  is  holy,  which  temple  ye  are."  If, 
then,  these  Corinthians  were  the  temple  of  God,  and  if  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelt  in  them, 
no  stronger  motive  could  bear  upon  them  than  the  need  of  holiness ;  and  this  holiness 
is  a  personal  matter.  "  If  any  man  " — whoever  he  be  and  whatever  his  gifts — "  if  any 
man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  shall  God  destroy."  The  man's  duties  to  the  Church 
are  duties  to  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  Church  ;  and  the  purity  of  principle  and  affection, 
purity  of  motive  and  aim,  purity  of  life,  which  he  is  bound  to  maintain, — in  brief,  his 
spiritual  character, grows  out  of  his  relation  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  Know  ye  not"  this 
fact — that  the  Church  is  much  more  than  a  society  for  mutual  helpfulness,  much  more 
than  a  human  institution,  and  most  truly  human  when  most  Divine  ?  To  violate  this 
relation  in  such  a  way  as  to  "  defile  the  temple  of  God  "  is  to  incur  a  fearful  punish- 
ment: "Him  shall  God  destroy."  Hitherto  in  the  argument  no  such  language  had 
been  used.  Did  the  thought  of  the  gross  sin — the  son  taking  the  father's  wife-Hjross 
his  mind  at  the  instant,  and  leave  its  darkness  in  his  memory  ?  Whether  so  or  not, 
St.  Paul  knew  of  moral  corruption  in  the  Church  as  well  as  religious  defection,  and 
lie  reminded  the  Corinthians  of  their  peril.  Observe  the  change ;  a  man's  work,  if 
rejected,  shall  be  burned,  but  he  shall  be  "  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire."  Amid  the  danger, 
God  will  rescue  him.  But  if  a  "man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  shall  Gud 
destroy."  And  now  the  exhortation  :  "  Let  no  man  deceive  himself."  And  wherein 
lies  the  danger  of  deception?  It  is  in  the  "wisdom  of  this  world."  Intellect  exposes 
us  to  dangers  because  it  is  the  great  organ  of  receptivity,  by  means  of  which  the 
outer  world  finds  unceasing  access  to  our  souls.  Through  the  open  avenues  of  the 
lenses,  myriad  influences  gain  an  entrance  within  and  distribute  themselves  over 
every  portion  of  our  nature.  Very  many  of  them  are  unchallenged.  Few  men 
criticize  "their  senses  and  hold  them  accountable  for  truth  and  fidelity  in  their 
momentous  functions.  What  habits  come  from  this  facile  power  of  sensuousness 
jver  the  mind,  we  all  understand,  alas  I  too  well.  The  natural  man  (animal  man) 
has  the  world  of  sensation  on  his  side.  Instead  of  the  body  growing  more  and 
more  mto  harmony  with  spirit  and  participating  in  its  elevation,  the  opposite  more 
commonly  occurs,  so  that  men  become  in  large  measure  the  creatures  of  the  senses. 


104  THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.    [oh.  m.  1— 2a 


St.  Faul  had  a  very  clear  insight  into  this  fact.  No  man  makes  so  many  references, 
direct  and  indirect,  to  the  pbysiological  connections  of  sin.  As  a  writer  of  Scripture, 
the  terrible  truth  of  the  "  fleshly  mind  "  is  often  before  him,  and  from  him  we  learn  the 
supreme  necessity  of  keeping  the  body  under,  lest  we  become  castaways.  "  Castaways  " 
are  far  more  numerous  than  we  take  knowledge  of.  Short  of  downright  materialism 
and  its  counterpart  in  sensual  degeneration,  we  hare  innumerable  evidences  of  the 
wreck  of  tlie  spiritual  nature.  These  nerves  of  ours — delicate  threads  that  interlace 
the  whole  body  and  are  frequently  too  fine  for  the  eye — what  a  machinery  for  the  hand 
of  Satan,  skilled  by  the  practice  of  centuries,  to  play  upon  1  We  err  when  we  confine 
our  view  of  materialism  to  its  professed  advocates.  We  err  also  when  we  measure  the 
sensualism  of  the  age  by  its  grosser  forms.  Far  greater,  far  more  harmful,  and  far 
more  widespread,  are  the  deleterious  effects,  often  unrecognized,  that  work  havoc  among 
our  spiritual  sensibilities.  It  is  this  deadening  of  the  intellect  by  the  sensuousness 
that  keeps  itself  aloof  from  overt  sensualism  which  St.  Paul  so  earnestly  assails  as  "  the 
wisdom  of  this  world."  Not  seldom  it  boasts  of  morality,  cultivates  beauty,  patronizes 
aesthetics,  and  abounds  in  animalized  poetry  and  (eloquence  and  science.  Meantime  it 
lends  all  its  aid,  acting  through  an  army  of  auxiliaries,  to  encourage  men  in  a  bloated 
sense  of  self-sufficiency,  until  there  is  no  felt  need  ot  God  and  still  less  of  Christ.  Most 
of  all,  this  state  of  mind  is  inimical  to  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  the  human 
heart,  and  consequently  we  find  in  our  times  a  much  more  wilful  and  violent  rejection 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  a  contempt  for  his  gracious  offices  than  hostility  to  the  Father 
and  the  Son.  Against  this  most  evil  and  fatal  habit  St.  Paul  lifts  a  vehement 
remonstrance.  And  he  was  the  only  man  of  his  day  competent  to  this  task.  No  rude 
Galilean  was  he;  no  obscure  and  unlettered  person;  but  a  cultured  soul,  whose  endow- 
ments had  been  signalized  before  he  went  forth  to  convert  an  empire  to  Christ. 
"Become  a  fool" — a  fool  in  the  world's  estimation — "that  ye  may  be  wise."  It  is 
"craftiness,"  argues  the  man  who  had  experimentally  known  it  all,  and,  furthermore, 
it  ensnares  itself  in  its  own  net.  And  hence  glory  not  in  man ;  there  is  no  wisdom  in 
it,  no  plea  and  no  .xcuse  for  it,  since  " all  things  are  yours."  Party  spirit  shuts  us  up 
in  narrow  limits ;  Christianity  gives  the  freedom  of  the  world.  Party  spirit  makes  us 
the  disciples  of  men ;  Christianity  declares  that  we  do  not  belong  to  Paul,  Apollos, 
Peter,  but  that  they  belong  to  us,  and  all  Divine  in  them  ministers  to  the  Divine  in 
ourselves,  so  that  our  life  superabounds  by  means  of  theirs.  Nor  is  this  all.  The  vast 
inventory  embraces  things  as  well  as  men :  "  The  world,  or  life,  or  death,  or  things 
present,  or  things  to  come ;  all  are  yours."  No  room  for  pride  here,  since  it  is  a  common 
possession  ;  no  opportunity  to  thank  God  like  the  Pharisee  that  we  are  not  as  others 
are,  for  God's  grace  humbles  the  natural  man,  that  it  may  endow  and  then  exalt  the 
Christian.  If  we  undertake  to  be  Chri&tians  of  a  particular  sort,  it  is  certain  that  we 
shall  be  cast  in  a  very  dwarfing  mould,  and  get  our  colouring  from  a  very  earthly  pig- 
ment. To  be  a  true  Christian  is  not  to  adopt  the  Name  of  Christ  as  the  watchword  of 
a  sect  or  party,  but  to  accept  and  venerate  it  as  the  watchword  of  humanity  redeemed 
in  the  Son  of  man.  Any  other  use  of  Christ's  Name  is  essentially  schismatic.  All 
things  are  ours  only  so  far  as  we  are  Christ's.  And  it  is  the  Christ  of  God^  the  Son  of 
God,  the  anointed  Messiah,  who  was  filled  with  the  miction  of  the  Spirit,  and  whc 
said,  "  I  do  nothing  of  myself," — it  is  this  Christ  who  is  ours.  Seen  in  him,  life  redeems 
itself  from  everything  low,  groveling,  and  merely  sensuous ;  and  even  the  human  body, 
whose  wants  and  demands  are  the  unmanageable  factor  in  all  civilization,  and  whose 
warfare  against  the  Spirit  is  the  most  fearful  hazard  in  moral  probation,  becomes,  through 
Christ,  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Spiritualize  in  this  sense  the  human  body; 
sanctify  its  large  and  beautiful  capacity  for  a  true  sensuousness ;  organize  its  habits 
until  it  becomes  almost  the  automaton  of  the  Sjiirit,  and  self-denial,  prayer,  and  praise, 
by  virtue  of  the  automatic  and  semi-automatic  laws  of  the  physical  system,  are  well- 
nigh  incorporated  in  the  nervous  functions.  Ask  art,  science,  philosophy,  to  attempt 
iuch  a  task,and  would  they  set  themselves  to  it?  Political  economy,  physiology,  hygiene, 
sanitary  science,  concern  themselves  much  with  the  human  body,  and  are  entitlei)  to 
honour  for  their  interest  in  its  welfare — welfare  only,  however,  stopping  very  far  short 
of  genuine  well-being.  Let  no  word  of  ours  be  understood  as  depreciating  thest 
invaluable  services.  But,  nevertheless,  their  field  lies  in  a  department  of  life  com- 
'*i .  Ay  bumble — life  as  existence,  as  organic  and  vegetative,  life  as  intellectual  and 


OH.  nu  1—28.]    THE  PIK8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIA^'B.  105 

moral,  not  in  life  at  spiritual.  Now,  at  this  very  point,  the  incompaTsble  glory  of 
Christianity  demonstrates  itself  by  a  profound  interest  in  the  human  body  as  a  religious 
question,  and,  first  and  last,  its  words  are,  "  temple  of  God."  No  wonder  that  St. 
Paul  rises  to  the  height  of  exultation.  The  eagle-wing  smites  the  upper  air  in  its 
buoyant  strength,  and  the  eagle-eye,  catching  a  radiance  unknown  in  the  thick  atmo- 
sphere of  earth,  commands  the  scope  of  a  vast  horizon.  One  of  his  grand  powers  was 
this  instinct — shall  we  call  it? — of  exultation,  always  held  in  check  till  the  Divine 
fulness  of  Christ  and  the  sublimity  of  humanity  in  Christ  kindled  it  into  rapture.  Nor 
is  he  ever  more  like  himself  nor  ever  nearer  to  us  than  in  these  moments — "  such  high 
hour  of  visitation  from  the  living  Ood." — L. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — Spiritual  husbandry  and  growth.  A  man,  looking  upon  the  world, 
gees  according  to  his  power  of  vision ;  i.e.  not  simply  according  to  what  he  finds  in  it, 
but  to  what  he  brings  to  it.  To  the  eye  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  the  world  was  a  «'iliierness 
which  might  be  made  a  garden.  There  was,  he  saw,  rude,  worthless  growth  to  be 
extirpated,  rich  soil  to  be  tilled,  plants  of  wurth  and  renown  to  replace  the  weeds. 
His  prophetic  eye  beheld  the  desert  rej.ioe  and  blossom  as  the  rose.  And  to  his  mind 
Christians  were  plants,  and  Christian  ministers  were  gardeners  and  husbandmen. 

I.  Spiritual  cultivation  needs  human  industbt.  There  is  need,  in  order  to  the 
progress  and  perfection  of  the  work  of  God,  of:  1.  Intelligent  and  willing  labourers. 
Men  are  employed  by  Divine  wisdom  to  labour  among  their  fellow-men.  Saved, 
renewed,  and  consecrated  labourers  have  ever  buen  blessed  in  the  work  of  securing  a 
spiritual  harvest.  The  olive-yard,  and  the  vineyard  cannot  floarish  and  prosper  with- 
out unstinted  toil,  vigilance,  skill,  and  care;  so  is  it  witii  the  garden  of  the  Lord. 
2.  Divinely  commissioned  labourers.  They  work  best  for  Jesus  who  liave  heard  his 
voice  saying,  "  Go,  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard ; "  whom  the  authoritative  Lord  has 
addressed  in  his  own  commanding  language,  "  Unto  men  I  now  send  thee"." 

II.  Spiritual  cultivation  demands  a  variety  of  character  and  ability  in  the 
toilers.  1.  One  class  of  labourers  are  especially  adapted  to  the  work  of  planting. 
There  are  Christian  missionaries  and  evangelists  who  have  the  gift  of  awakening 
attention,  arousing  concern,  eliciting  inquiry,  calling  forth  repentance,  founding 
Churches  even  among  the  ignorant  and  degraded  heathen.  2.  Another  class  possess 
the  grace  of  watering  the  plants  already  placed  in  the  spiritual  soil.  These,  as  pastors 
and  bishops,  impart  instruction,  administer  consolation,  exercise  guidance  and  control. 
Catechists  and  teachers  carry  on  the  work  which  missionaries  have  begun.  3.  All 
classes  co-operate  towards  the  one  great  end  in  view.  All  true  labourers  are  one  in 
motive  and  in  aim,  in  spirit,  in  mutual  confidence  and  love.  None  may  say  to  the  other, 
"  I  have  no  need  of  tlice."  Bach  has  his  service,  and  none  is  more  indispensable  than 
another.  4.  All  are  individually  noticed,  appreciated,  and ~ rewarded.  "Then  shall 
every  one  have  praise  of  God ; "  "I  will  give  unto  every  one  of  you  according  to  your 
works ; "  "  My  reward  is  with  me,  to  give  every  man  according  as  his  work  shall  be." 

III.  Spiritual  cultivation  depends  fob  its  efficiency  and  success  entirely 
UPON  the  blessinq  of  the  Lord.  1.  From  God  comes  the  vitality  oftlie  spiritual 
plant ;  his  is  the  gospel  and  his  the  Spirit,  by  whose  co-operation  the  result  is  brought 
about.  2.  From  God  comes  the  preparation  of  the  labourer ;  whose  intellectual  gifts, 
whose  emotional  sympathy,  and  whose  spiritual  power  are  all  alike  of  heavenly  origin. 
3.  From  God  comes  the  living  energy  to  which  is  owing,  the  progress  and  increase 
of  that  which  man  plants  and  waters.  Thug  the  •xcelloooy  of  the  power  is  seen  to 
be  of  God,  and  not  of  us.— T. 

Ver.  9. "  Qod's/ellow-workers."  God  is  ever  working.  Let  this  thought  shame  those 

foolish,  worthless  persons  who  deem  it  derogatory  to  labour.  Not  only  when  he 
fashioned  this  world  and  made  it  fit  for  our  dwelling-place,  not  only  when  he  created 
man,  but  always  and  everywhere  is  God  working.  The  laws  of  nature  are  the  opora- 
tions  of  the  Almighty,  and  he  is  working  as  well  in  the  spiritual  sphere  as  in  the 
physioaL 

I.  Tbub  Christians  abb  spiritual  labourers.  Christian  evangelists  and  paston, 
teachers  and  bishops,  are  all  working  in  prominent  positions  in  the  harvest-field  of 
spiritual  toil.    But  sp'ritual  labour  is  the  natural  outcome  of  the  spiritual  life.    Every 


106  THE  FIRST  TPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  ra.  1-23. 

sincere  follower  of  Christ  is  seelcing  an  end  outside  of  himself — the  promotion  of  th« 
kingdom  ol  righteousness  and  the  glory  of  the  Divine  Master.  Our  hearts  naay  rest  in 
the  Lord,  but  our  hands  work  for  him. 

IL  Christians  abk  fellow-laboubebs  oms  with  another.  1.  There  is  difference 
In  natural  powers,  in  spiritual  gifts,  in  ecclesiastical  position,  in  len^^th  of  service, 
2.  But  there  is  unity  in  aim,  in  hope,  in  the  relation  all  sustain  to  him  by  whose 
authority  and  for  whose  glory  they  toiL  3.  And  there  is  sympathy,  mutual  gond  will, 
and  helpfulness.  If  there  is  defect  here,  it  is  a  discredit  to  tlie  common  prufession,  n 
hindrance  to  the  general  usefulness,  a  grief  to  the  one  Lord. 

IIL  Christtans  arb  fellow-labourers  with  God  as  theib  Master.  1.  All  are 
alike  called  by  him  who  sends  forth  labourers  into  his  harvest.  Ha  is  in<lonendcnt  o( 
us,  and  it  is  to  his  grace  we  owe  it  that  we  are  permitted  to  labour  for  him.  2.  All 
are  alike  directed  to  labour  for  the  one  great  end — ^the  universal  and  immortal  reign 
of  truth  and  righteousness,  holiness  and  love.  3.  All  are  alilse  instiuctud  by  him  as  to 
the  special  means  by  which  the  one  end  is  to  be  secured.  He  gives  to  every  one  the 
appropriate  implement  for  his  toil,  the  weapon  adapted  to  his  warfare.  4.  All  alike 
receive  the  needed  strength  and  guidance  from  him,  the  spiritual  iuipulse  and  power 
which  gives  efficacy  to  their  service.  6.  All  rejoice  that,  whether  (hey  plant  or  water, 
the  same  Lord  "  gives  the  increase." 

IT.  Chbistians  are  labourers  with  God  as  theib  Fellow-worker.  This  inter* 
pretation,  whether  juslifiable  or  not  grammatically,  does  not  seem  liable  to  a  charge  of 
irreverence.  1.  In  Christ  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  we  have  the  supreme  Exemplar 
of  spiritual  labour.  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work."  Jesus  calls  us  to  do 
what  he  himself  is  doing.  What  power  there  is  in  his  appeal,  "  Work,  not  only /or  me, 
but  with  me  I "  2.  1'he  agency  of  the  Divine  Spirit  is  never  withheld.  The  husband- 
man  can  only  work  effectually  when  God  works  with  him  by  the  ai2:encies  of  nature; 
the  mechanist,  only  when  physical  forces  can  be  employed  under  his  controls  the 
physician,  only  when  his  treatment  is  in  harmony  with  physiological  laws.  So  the 
Christian  labourer  is  successfnl,  not  through  independence,  but  just  because  he  avails 
himself  of  the  co-operation  of  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  life ;  because,  in  all  devotion  and 
diligence  and  humility,  he  endeavours  to  live  and  to  toil  ai  » ftUoia-worker  with 
Oodl—r. 

Ver.  11. — J%«  one  Foundation.  There  was  a  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  Oorinthiani 
to  exalt  their  favourite  teachers  and  leaders.  Such  exaltation  could  not  but  be  at  the 
expense  of  the  Lord  Jesus  himself.  In  dissuasion  from  such  a  course  of  Church 
thought  and  practice,  the  inspired  Apostle  Paul  puts  in  a  just  and  clear  light  the 
relative  positions  of  the  teachers,  the  taught,  and  the  great  theme  of  all  Christian 
instruction.  He  makes  use  of  a  familiar  figure  of  speech,  based  U[x)n  the  common  craft 
of  masonry.  Christ  is  the  Foundation ;  the  people  of  Christ  are  the  stones  of  the 
structure  reared  thereon ;  and  the  apostles  and  other  teachers  are  builders  of  th* 
spiritual  edifice.     It  is  of  the  Foundation  that  the  text  especially  treats. 

I.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Foundaiion  op  tub  spiritual  temple.  1.  The  temple  ii 
composed  of  human  souls,  fashioned  into  a  Divine  unity  and  endowed  with  a  Divine 
life.  2.  The  temple  is  inhabited  and  inspired  by  the  Hi ily  Ghost  consecrating  and 
honouring  it.  3.  This  temple  has  actually  and  historically  been  called  into  existence 
by  the  ministry  and  mediation  of  Jesus  Chiist,  who  has  thus  constituted  himself  its 
Foundation.  As  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man,  as  the  accepted  Mediator,  as  the 
authoritative  Teacher  and  rightful  Lord,  he  is  the  Author  and  the  Basis  of  the  true 
Church. 

II.  The  pebfeot  suffioienot  of  this  Foundation.  1.  Christ  is  ■  Foundation 
deep  and  strung  enough  to  support  the  fabric  reared  upon  him.  No  Tear  need  be  enter- 
tained as  to  the  permanence  of  Christ's  Ctiurch.  It  may  be  assailed  by  the  stoims  of 
persecution,  it  may  he  threatened  by  the  decaying  force  of  time;  but  "the  gates  of 
Hades  shall  not  prevail  against  it."  It  rests  on  (Jhri<t,  and  the  Foundation  standeth 
lure.  2.  Christ  is  a  Foundatiun  broad  and  comprehensive  enougli  to  underlie  the 
widest,  stateliest  structure.  None  who  is  conversant  with  the  churacter,  the  designs, 
the  promises  of  Jesus  Christ,  can  questiun  this.  In  our  day,  all  systems  that  are 
narrow  are  doomed  to  contempt  and  destruction.     This  fate  Cliristiauity  need  not  lear 


OH.  m.  1—23.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  107 

it  has  only  to  be  trne  to  tlM  Divine  Head  and  Lord,  and  nought  can  OTCirturn  it  or  even 
injure  it. 

III.  The  exolusivekess  of  vhis  Foundation.  Upon  this  the  text  lays  an 
e8|«cial  stress.  1.  No  other  is  permitted  by  God.  It  would  be  dishonouring  to  the 
Father  to  suppose  that  his  Son  can  he  replaced  or  supplemented  by  any  other ;  the 
sufficiency  of  the  Divine  provision  does  not  admit  of  question.  2.  No  other  is  needed 
by  man.  3.  No  other  is  possible.  Any  other  than  the  Divine  Foundation  must  be  of 
man's  appointment,  must  be  indeed  merely  human.  The  apositle  teaches  that  he  and 
ApoUos  were  only  builders  upon  the  Foundation,  and  could  not  therefore  be  the 
Foundation  itself. 

IV.  The  relations  men  sustain  to  this  Foundation.  1.  All  Ghristians  are 
represented  as  living  stones  built  upon  Christ.  Each  has  his  own  place  and  his  own 
use ;  but  all  are  alike  in  this  fact — they  support  themselves  upon  the  strong 
foundation  laid  in  Jesus.  2.  All  Christian  pastors  and  teachers  are  building  upon 
Christ.  The  question  for  them  to  ask  is  this :  Are  we  building  into  the  walls  of  the 
temple  such  material  as  will  endure  the  test  of  trial  and  the  test  of  time  ?— T. 

Ver.  13. — The  test  of  fire.  "  Fire  is  a  good  servant,  but  a  bad  master."  The 
element  is  symbolical  of  proof  and  testing ;  for  where  it  has  its  liberty  and  may  do 
its  work  uncliecked,  there  is  little  that  can  withstand  its  assaults  and  outlast  its 
ravages.  How  many  a  city,  like  this  Corinth  itself,  has  been  burnt,  and  laid  for  the 
most  part  in  ashes,  so  that  only  the  most  substantial  buildings  have  survived  the  con- 
liiigration  1  So  shall  all  spiritual  work,  sooner  or  later,  be  tested  and  put  to  the  proof. 
I'hc  means  may  seem  severe,  but  the  result  shall  be  decisive. 

I.  The  wokk.  1.  It  is  spiritual,  not  material  work,  of  which  the  assertion  is  made. 
All  are  builders,  not  only  of  their  own  character  and  destiny,  but  of  the  character  and 
destiny  of  some  associates.  There  is  an  awful  solemnity  attaching  to  this  responnble 
work  in  which  men  are  bound  to  engage.  2.  Every  man's  work  is  in  question,  especially 
that  of  every  professedly  Christian  labourer  who  aims  to  build  in  the  temple  of  the 
living  God.  The  learned  and  tlie  illiterate,  the  sober  and  the  enthusiast,  the  sanguine 
and  the  desponding, — all  are  teaching  Christian  doctrine,  and  are  more  or  less  exercising 
influence  over  human  souls.  3.  Work  of  every  kind  is  included — genuine  and  ^eten- 
tious,  hasty  and  gradually  progressive,  sound  and  superficial. 

II.  The  fire.  This  must  be  something  universally  applicable,  since  it  is  not 
represented  as  an  accident  befalling  here  and  there  one,  but  as  an  incident  of  every 
man's  labour  of  every  kind  to  pass  through  this  fire.  We  shall  not  be  wrong  in 
terming  it  the  lire  of  judgment,  fire  being  the  discriminating  and  decisive  element. 
The  fire  may  purify,  and  it  may  consume.  It  is  possible  that  this  fire  may  bum  here 
and  now ;  it  is  certain  that  it  will  burn  hereafter,  when  God  "  shall  try  ewtry  man's 
work  of  what  sort  it  is." 

in.  The  test.  I'here  are  circumstances  and  times  which  have  no  virtue  of  nro- 
hation.  There  is  weather  in  which  the  soundly  built  house,  the  well>found  uiip, 
cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  most  ill-planned  and  faultily  constructed  house,  the 
most  unseaworthy  craft.  But  the  storm  tries  both.  And  the  fire  of  judgment  puts  to 
the  proof  the  workmanship  of  the  spiritual  labourer.  "  Judge  nothing  before  the  timet" 
"  The  day  will  declare  it,  for  it  shall  be  revealed  in  fire."  None  can  evade  tlus  trial  or 
deceive  him  who  shall  then  cast  all  work  into  the  furnace  of  his  probation. 

IV.  The  result.  It  shall  be  unmistakable  and  decisive.  1.  To  the  work  which  is 
sound  and  workmanlike  glory  shall  accrue,  and  credit  to  the  faithful  and  diligent 
labourer.  The  precious  metals  and  the  costly  marbles  shall  be  none  the  worse  but 
rather  the  better  for  the  test ;  their  qualities  shall  shine  out  the  more  resplendent. 
2.  To  the  work  which  is  bad  destruction  shall  come;  for  the  wood,  hay,  and  stubble  of 
false  doctrine  and  of  worthless  profession  shall  be  consumed  and  shall  disappear.  The 
builder  may  escape,  though  only  as  through  the  burning  embers  and  the  falling  srarks. 
"  If  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?" — T. 

Vers.  16,  17. — "  The  temple  of  God."  The  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  holy,  being 
constructed  according  to  Divine  directions,  inhabited  by  the  Divine  glory,  and  con- 
secrated by  divinely  appointed  services  and  sacrifices.     But  that  temple  was  local, 


106  TUE  flKST  EPISTLE  tO  TUB  CORINTUIANS.    [cH.  in.  1— 2i. 

temporary,  and  for  a  purpose.  It  was,  in  accordance  with  the  Lord's  predictiuu, 
destroyed  and  abolished  before  the  generation  which  rejected  him  passed  away.  Aud 
it  was  not  intended  that  it  should  be  replaced  by  any  material  editice.  The  spiritual 
temple  was  destined  to  supersede  the  material  and  to  abide  for  erer.  It  is  of  this 
spiritual  structure  that  the  apostle  here  speaks. 

L  The  matbrialb  of  which  thib  temple  is  composed.  "  Fe,"  says  the  apostle, 
"  are  the  temple."  Not  that  the  Corinthians  were  more  tlian  other  Christians  entitled 
to  this  honourable  distinction  ;  for  this  language  was  addressed  to  all  Christians.  All 
Christ's  people  were  and  are  living  stones,  each  in  its  proper  pl^ce,  and  all  alike  upon 
the  one  Foundation.  How  noble  a  conception !  how  worthy  of  Christ  himself,  to  whom 
the  material  was  ever  of  secondary  interest,  and  in  whose  view  the  spiritual  was  of 
■upreme  significance  and  value  1 

IL  The  prebence  bt  which  this  temple  is  consecbated.  The  first  temple  had  been 
hallowed  by  the  Sheciiinah-glory  which  hovered  over  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  The 
second  temple — the  body  of  the  Lord — had  been  consecjated  as  the  dwelling-place  of 
the  mind  of  the  Holy  One.  This  third  temple  is  the  residence  and  the  shrine  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  In  his  transforming,  quickening,  purifying  power,  the  eternal  Spirit 
jienetrates  his  separated  and  consecrated  society,  ami  makes  it  growingly  his  own. 
His  light  and  glory  glow  within  it,  so  that  its  spiritual  lustre  excels  that  of  the  holy 
house  at  Jerusalem. 

III.  The  worship  wbioh  is  n  this  temple  offered.  Here  is  the  living  oracle; 
here  is  the  consecrated  priesthood ;  here  are  the  spiritual  sacrilices.  The  offerings  are 
those  of  willing  obedience  and  grateful  praise;  the  incense  is  the  incessant  worship 
which  floats  in  fragrance  fron  the  spirits  of  the  just ;  the  music  that  fills  these  courts 
Is  the  anthem  of  adoration,  the  harmony  of  imperishable  love.  Worship  is  here  nut 
occasional,  not  frequent,  but  unceasing ;  there  is  no  moment  when  this  spiritual  temple 
li  not  telling  the  praises  of  the  Lord. 

IV.  The  attribute  by  which  this  templi  ib  ohabaotebized.  "  The  temple  of 
God  is  koly."  Tliis  expression  does  not  import  simply  a  ceremonial  and  nominal  holiness, 
but  such  a  character  as  was  both  exhibited  and  req,uired  by  the  Lord  Jesus  himself. 
Holiness,  not  only  of  word  and  deed,  but  of  purpose  and  desire,  is  required  by  him  who 
searches  the  heart  and  tries  the  reins  of  the  children  of  men — holiness  such  as  the  Holy 
Spirit  alone  can  create, 

V.  The  beoard  and  treatment  which  this  temple  should  beobivi.  1.  It 
deserves  to  be  re<;arded  with  reverence.  Men  treat  with  respect  the  palaces  of  kings. 
Of  how  much  deeper  a  reverence  is  that  true  palace  of  God,  that  temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  that  home  of  Christ,  deserving  I  2,  It  should  not  be  d.-fi  led  or  destroyed.  Every 
member  of  Christ's  Church  is  called  upon  to  purify  himself,  lest  his  impurity  should 
dishonour  the  sacred  edifice.    "  Holiness  becometh  thy  house,  0  Lord,  for  ever  1 " — T. 

Vers.  21 — 23. — "  All  ihingt  are  youn."  These  are  great  words ;  but  if  they  were  not 
so  great  they  would  here  be  out  of  place.  Men  are  given  to  boast  of  their  possessions ; 
but  the  Christian's  boast  is  in  this  respect  larger  and  grander  than  any  man's  beside. 
^len  are  wont  to  glory  in  belonging  to  some  select  society,  some  great  nation,  some 
illustrious  kins;  but  the  Christian  glories  in  l)elonglng  to  a  greater  than  the  greatest 
who  owes  his  honour  to  this  world.     "  All  things  "  are  his ;  and  he  is  "  Christ's." 

I.  OuB  pbopebty  m  all  thinqb.  To  Christians  it  may  be  said— it  was  said  by  the 
Inspired  apostle :  1.  KW  ministries  are  yours;  the  dead  and  the  livinj;,  the  speaking 
and  the  writing,  the  official  and  the  unrecognized.  (  1)  The  ministry  of  doctrine  and 
of  conversion,  such  as  that  of  Paul,  who  planted.  (2)  The  ministry  of  eloquence  and 
of  edification,  such  as  that  of  ApoUos,  who  watered.  (3)  The  ministry  of  morality 
and  zeal,  such  as  that  of  Cephas.  Each  has  his  gift,  and  the  Church  is  not  for  the 
ministry,  but  the  ministry  for  the  Church.  2.  All  circumstances  are  yours.  (1)  The 
world,  which  is  ours  by  the  gift  of  God  and  by  the  redemption  of  Christ.  (2)  Life  it 
yours.  In  its  opiiortunities  and  its  manifold  blessings.  (3)  Death  is  yonrs — not  youl 
master,  but  your  servant  and  your  friend.  3.  All  times  are  yours.  (1)  The  present,  in 
enjoyment,  which  is  more  the  Christian's  than  it  is  the  worliiling's.  (2)  The  future,  in 
reversion,  which  has  for  him  brightness,  glory,  and  joy.  The  future  can  deprive  thi 
Ohristian  of  un  real  good ;  it  musii  bring  him  advantages  unnumbered. 


OL  m.  1—23.]    THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIAKS.  109 

n.  Chbist'b  pbofertt  in  m.  To  Christians  it  may  be  said,  "Te  are  Christ's:* 
L  By  the  purchase  of  his  blood.  For,  "  Te  are  not  your  own ;  ye  are  bought  with  • 
piioe."  2.  By  his  choice  and  ours.  "I,"  says  he,  "  have  chosen  you,"  And,  "WeloTR 
him  because  he  first  loved  us."  8.  By  the  inhabiting  of  his  Spirit,  whose  gracious 
presence  makes  us  his.  It  is  not  a  case  of  mere  property,  but  of  spiritual  afBnity : 
"  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his."  4.  By  our  grateful  and  affectionate  service. 
That  Christians  are  his,  it  is  their  daily  aim  -to  prove,  by  their  delight  in  kis  Word, 
their  deTotion  to  his  cause,  tiieir  obedience  to  liis  oommands.— T. 

Yer.  l.—Oamal  Chritticmt.  L  Mabt  buoh  abx  Foxnn>  in  thn  Obuboh.  Chrisdans 
in  whom  Christianity  is  not  dominant.  They  have  a  portion  of  the  Spirit,  but  a  veiy 
large  portion  of  the  flesh.  They  allow  Satan  to  hinder  them.  The  world  has  still 
much  power  over  them  and  much  attraction  for  them.  They  love  Christ,  but  not 
enough  to  lead  them  to  live  very  near  to  him.  They  are  conspicuous  chiefly  for  fault 
•nd  failure.  They  reach  the  verge  of  Christianity  and  stay  there.  They  desire  "  to  be 
saved,"  and  beyond  this  they  have  few  spiritual  longings.  They  are  no  credit  to 
Ohilstianity,  but  make  it  questionable  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  Spiritual  dwarfs,  who 
have  not  even  the  advantage  of  stimulating  curiosity,  seeing  they  are  so  numerous. 

II.  Theib  belation  to  the  faith.  They  are  babes;  but  note — babes  tn  Christ. 
It  is  better  to  be  a  babe  in  Christ  than  a  full-grown  man  apart  from  him.  Still,  these 
are  babes  in  Christ  when  they  ought  to  be  men  in  Christ.  As  babes,  they  are :  1.  Of 
DO  practical  use  in  the  Church.  They  cannot  be  relied  upon  for  service ;  they  are  not 
fitted  for  real  work.  In  spiritual  things  they  are  weaklings.  They  draw  upon  the 
resources  of  the  Church  rather  than  add  to  them.  They  are  encumbrances — sources  of 
weakness  rather  than  of  strength.  They  require  much  looking  after.  The  Church  hai 
to  nurse  them  when  she  should  be  converting  the  world.  Yet  withal  they  often  have  a 
Teiy  high  opinion  of  their  own  powers,  and  sometimes  are  exceedingly  anxious  to  take 
up  a  great  work — as  anxious  as  they  soon  become  to  put  it  down  again.  Childish 
instability  of  purpose,  as  well  as  lack  of  spiritual  power,  prevents  them  from  being 
useful.  And  work  that  is  done  is  done  after  so  carnal  a  manner  that  often  it  had  better 
have  been  left  undone.  It  is  child's  work,  having  in  it  more  marring  than  making.  2. 
Not  a  source  of  joy.  A  babe  in  Christ  delights  the  hearts  of  all  true  Christians — when 
it  ought  to  he  a  hahe ;  but  continuous  babyhood  is  monstrous  and  revolting.  Carnal 
Christians  are  babes  without  promise ;  often  it  seems  as  though  they  would  never  get 
out  of  their  spiritual  long-clothes.  They  sadden  the  heart  of  their  spiritual  parent. 
They  as6  disappointments,  Hope  deferred  concerning  them  has  made  the  heart  sick. 
Neither  to  Christ,  nor  to  man,  nor  to  themselves,  ai'e  they  satisfactory.  The  Church 
which  has  many  of  them  will  have  its  share  of  spiritual  depression.  Carnal  Christians 
are  kill-joys.  3.  Often  fretful  and  peevish.  Carnal  Christians  are  often  quarrelsome 
(Siristiaus.  They  are  fault-finders,  and  if  they  cannot  find  faults  they  can  always 
make  them.  Into  the  Church  they  bring  ill  temper,  which  is  contagious,  and  thus  they 
become  the  cause  of  not  a  little  mischief.  They  have  considerable  destructive  power. 
They  have  only  enough  Christianity  to  make  them  miserable.  They  are  fractious  and 
self-willed,  and  always  want  to  have  their  way,  whether  it  is  a  good  way  or  an  ill. 
4.  Fond  of  toys.  They  must  have  their  playthings,  even  in  Church.  Things  pleasing 
to  the  senses  are  the  things  pleasing  to  them.  Ornate  ritual,  pretty  pictures,  gaudy 
decorations,  elaborate  but  unsuitable  music,  have  been  brought  into  the  Churches  by 
those  babes  in  Christ,  carnal  Christians.  Where  they  have  their  way  the  sanctuary 
resembles  nothing  so  much  as  a  toyshop  or  an  opera-house.  6.  Not  very  open  to  reason- 
able appeaL  They  are  wilful.  Having  very  little  knowledge,  they  believe  that  thej 
possess  alL  They  are  hard-mouthed,  and  the  bit  of  reason  controls  them  but  littla. 
To  argue  with  a  babe  is  not  promising,  but  it  is  quite  as  hopeful  as  to  reason  spiritually 
with  a  carnal  Christian. 

III.  Conspicuous  bionb  of  thb  oabnal  btatb.  1.  Jealousy,  Partisan  spirit 
rivalry,  pride;  in  opposition  to  "in  honour  preferring  one  another."  Leading  to 
2.  Strife.  Active  opposition  instead  of  hearty  co-operation.  Creation  of  causes  of  strife; 
evident  fondness  for  it.  The  carnal  Christian  is  seldom  at  peace  except  when  he  is  at 
war.  Love  of  fighting  other  Christians  rather  than  luve  of  fighting  Satan.  Ths 
disciples  at  the  table  tiad  a  strife  for  pre-eminence,  and  thus  showed  their  carnality. 


110  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  m.  1— 2a 

Leading  to :  3.  Division.  Estrangement,  separation,  hatred  ;  instead  of  unity,  peace, 
love.  The  carnal  Christian's  progress  it  very  different  to  the  true  pilgrim's  progress. 
4,  Men-followers  rather  than  Christ-followers.  The  carnal  Corinthians  showed  theii 
carnality  conspicuously  in  this  respect.  6.  Arrest  or  retardation  of  development. 
"Not  even  now  are  ye  able"(ver.  2).  If  the  carnal  Claistiaii  does  not  go  back,  he 
tends  to  stand  still.  6.  Weak  spiritual  digestion.  (Ver.  2.)  Poor  spiritual  appetite. 
Little  power  of  assimilation.  Spiritual  food  does  not  seem  to  feed  the  carnal  Mliever. 
He  is  lean.    There  are  many  religious  dyspeptics. 

rV.  How  TO  BE  DEALT  WITH.  1.  To  he  fed.  (Ver.  2.)  Not  to  be  neglected  as 
of  no  account  or  cast  out  as  eviL  Whilst  sume  of  these  babes  may  have  little  appe- 
tite, others  of  them  may  be  noisy  because  tliey  are  hungry.  To  be  fed ;  if  the  rod  is 
not  to  be  spared,  still  less  are  thespooa  and  cup.  Carnal  Christians  are  in  the 
care  of  the  Church,  and  must  be  dealt  with  kiadly  and  helpfully,  in  the  hope  that,  by 
the  Spirit*!  workings  manhood  may  be  attained  at  last.  2.  With  milk.  Food  suited 
to  their  condition.  With  milk — good  fuod ;  unadulterated,  for  they  need  the  best — the 
"  sincere  milk  of  the  Word."  Bweet  milk ;  for  babes  like  sweetness,  and  sour  milk  can 
only  injure  them.  With  milk,  which  may  nourish  and  strengthen ;  not  with  the 
vinegar  of  scolding  condemnation,  which  some  seem  to  favour.  Not  too  much  physic ; 
abundance  of  milk.  3.  Not  with  meat.  This  would  choke  them.  Babes  may  cry  for 
stroDg  meat,  but  they  must  not  have  it.  The  Corinthians  found  much  fault  with  the 
simplicity  of  Paul's  teaching;  but  Paul  knew  what  they  needed,  though  they  clamoured 
for  something  else.  Not  with  the  deeper  things  of  God,  which  can  be  appreciated  only 
by  the  matured  (ch.  ii.  6) ;  but  with  the  more  elejnentary  truths  put  in  elementary  forms. 
The  carnal  Christian  can  appreciate  only  the  exterior  parts  of  gospel  truths ;  tliese 
must  come  first ;  the  surface  must  be  passed  before  the  internal  can  l)e  reached.  Su, 
though  Paul  did  not  conceal  any  doctrines  from  the  carnal  Corinthians,  he  could  only 
carry  them  with  him  in  his  teaching  as  far  as  they  were  prepared  to  go.  Milk  is  the 
simple  religious  view ;  meat,  the  profounder.  The  same  doctrine  can  be  presented  as 
milk  and  meat;  the  carnal  Christian  only  goes  so  far  in  comprehendiug  it,  the 
spiritual  searches  into  its  depth*.  The  doctrine  of  Bomish  reserve  is  not  sanctioned 
by  Paul— H. 

Ver.  6. — Man's  work  and  OocTs.  L  Man's  wobk.  It  is :  1.  Varied,  Paul  speaks 
of  planting  and  watering ;  may  extend  to  the  multiform  operations  of  agriculture.  We 
cannot  all  do  the  same  work.  Let  us  seek  to  do  that  for  which  we  are  fitted.  Utere  is 
some  spiritual  work  suited  to  each  of  us.  In  agriculture  all  find  employment,  from  the 
boy  with  his  clapper  scaring  away  the  birds,  to  the  presiding  miud  which  controls  all 
operations.  If  Christians  do  nothing  it  is  because  they  want  to  du  nothing.  2.  Impor- 
tant, As  in  husbandry,  unless  we  sow  and  water  we  may  not  look  for  a  harvest,  so 
as  a  rule  in  things  spiritual.  Never  think  that  what  you  can  do  is  unimportant,  Tou 
may  think  too  little  of  your  work  as  well  as  too  much.  You  will  think  too  little  if  you 
think  that  your  work  may  safely  be  left  undone,  3.  Jlonourable.  Christian  work 
itself, — what  can  compare  with  it  for  an  instant  t  '  Further,  in  it  we  are  "  Ood's  fellow- 
workers  "  (ver.  9).  The  Christian  worker  is  one  of  God's  nobility.  4.  Limited.  We  can 
only  do  so  much.  We  may  sow  and  water,  but  not  give  the  increase.  It  belongs  to 
us  to  preach  and  teach,  not  to  convince ;  to  invite  and  warn,  not  to  coarert.  We  cannot 
produce  spiritual  results.  We  are  not  responsible  for  them.  6.  Not  independent.  We 
cannot  do  our  own  work  apart  from  God;  it  is  "as  the  Lord  gave  to  eveiy  man" 
(ver.  6).  The  seed  that  we  plant  is  God's ;  the  soil  and  water  are  God's ;  our  powers 
employed  are  not  "ours "but  "God's."  6.  To  be  rewarded.  Upon  just  principles; 
according  to  the  "  labour  "  (ver.  8) ;  according  to  faithfulness  in  the  labour  (Matt.  xxv. 
14—30).  Not  according  to  success.  We  cannot  command  this,  though  success  usually 
follows  faithful  labour,  and  lack  of  success  often  means  lack  of  diligence,  or  lack  oi 
something  which  should  not  have  been  lacking.  Many  Christians  have  cm  unhappy 
facility  in  accounting  for  failure. 

U.  God's  wobe.  1.  Wonderful,  Deeply  mysterious.  How  marvellous  the  develop- 
ment of  the  seed  after  it  is  planted  1  Before  this  expansion  and  multiplication  of  life 
science  stands  dumb  and  confounded.  So  with  the  seed  of  the  Word  in  tiie  human 
\\pait.    What  inexplicable  working  and  result  1    WelL  may  we  bow  in  adoring  awe 


OB.  m.  1—23.]    TUB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.  Ul 

before  this  mystery  of  Divine  might.  2.  All-imporfant.  The  great  need :  without 
til  is,  all  nothing.  If  the  increase  comes  not,  of  what  service  is  it  to  plant  and  irrigate? 
If  the  Divine  blessing  rests  uot  on  uui-  preaching  and  te  chiiig,  of  what  possible  service 
can  it  be?  Alasl  how  often  viefurget  tliin]  No  harvest  beciuse  Ood  ignored.  3.  /nafe- 
peTident.  God  is  not  iu  any  way  depende.it  upon  us  or  others  for  the  increase;  neither 
is  he  for  the  sowing  and  watering.  The  storm-wind  can  be  his  seed-sower,  the  nuns 
and  the  dews  are  his  servants. 

III.  Reflections.  1.  God's  work  and  man's  are  usually  conjoined.  God  works 
generally  by  means.  Let  us,  therefore,  see  that  our  part  is  done.  2.  As  our  part  is 
important,  let  us  do  it  with  the  utmcist  possible  efficiency.  3.  Let  us  ever  remember 
tliat  we  are  working  in  Ood's  field,  and  near  to  him,  under  his  observation,  etc.  4.  Let  us 
never  attempt  to  do  God's  part  or  take  any  of  the  glory  when  it  is  done.  5.  Let  us  ever 
l*ar  in  mind  the  relative  importance  of  God's  work  and  ours.  Our  work  is  nothing  in 
comparison  with  his ;  we  are  nothing  in  comparison  with  him  (ver.  7).  6.  When  we 
have  done  our  ])art,  let  us  look  in  faith  to  God  to  accomplish  his.  7.  Let  us  think 
little  «f  man,  much  of  God.  8.  Let  us  never  expect  God's  work  from  man.  9,  Aa  we 
work  with  and  for  the  same  God,  let  us  cultivate  unity. — H. 

Vers.  10, 11. — The  great  Foundation.  I.  What  it  ib.  It  is  Christ  (ver.  11).  He 
is  the  Foundation  of:  1.  Christianity..  Its  basis  is  conveyed  in  its  name.  It  rests  upon 
Christ.  If  he  be  removed,  it  falls  to  the  <!ronud  in  ruins;  if  he  be  diminished  (as  in 
the  denial  of  his  divinity,  for  example),  Cliristianity  becomes  weak  and  tottering.  As 
Christianity  is  of  Christ,  so  is  it  strong,  abiding,  glorious.  2.  The  Christian  Church.  Its 
doctrines  and  practice.  How  many  other  foundiitious  have  been  laid  for  it  from  time 
to  time!  how  often  there  has  been  an  attempt  d  union  of  other  foundations  with  the 
one  Foundation,  Jesus  Christ]  To  tamper  with  this  Foundation  is  perilous  indeed  ;  to 
add  to  it  is  to  deteriorate  and  to  threaten  the  whole  superstructure.  The  Christian 
Church  should  looh  to  her  Foundation,  and  clear  away  all  that  is  uot  of  Christ.  No 
hurricane  or  storm  will  move  her  if  she  is  on  the  Bock ;  but  if  her  dependence  be  upon 
the  shifting  sands  of  wealth,  position,  world-power,  human  learning,  or  other  things 
of  man,  woe  betide  herl  3.  Religious  work.  How  Panl  made  Christ  the  Foundation  of 
his  work  amongst  the  Corinthians  when  he  determined  to  know  nothing  but  Christ  and 
him  crucified  (oh.  iL  2)1  When  we  teach  we  should  teach  Christ,  when  we  preach  we 
should  preach  Christ.  Our  work  amongst  men  is  not  to  be  based  upon  our  fancies  or 
upon  human  theories,  but  upon  Christ  and  his  great  redemptive  work.  We  may 
amuse  men  with  the  fireworks  of  rhetoric  or  startling  snppoiiition,  but  the  blaze  will 
soon  be  over,  and  the  old  darkness  will  seem  more  intense  than  ever.  If  we  want  to 
bring  abiding  light  to  men,  we  must  not  divert  them  with  pyrotechnic  displays,  but 
we  must  bring  them  to  the  Sun — the  Sun  of  Highteousness.  Much  "  religious  work  " 
is  like  a  house  built  upon  nothing.  The  marvel  is,  not  that  it  should  last  so  short 
a  time,  but  that  it  should  last  at  all,  4.  Oodly  life.  There  is  no  sure  foundation  but 
tnis.  Christ  is  the  way  to  holiness.  A  life's  labour  after  true  excellence  will  be  thrown 
away  unless  Christ  be  the  Starting-point.  We  shall  not  reach  God  wiihout  Christ :  "  No 
man  cometb  unto  the  Father  but  by  me  "  (John  xiv.  6) ;  "  Without  me  ye  can  do 
nothing."  From  Christ  we  receive  power  to  live  aright.  Many  seek  to  be  godly  that 
they  may  come  to  Christ,  instead  of  coming  to  Christ  that  they  may  be  godly.  We 
have  heard  of  the  man  who  resolved  to  rear  the  house  first  and  put  in  the  foundation 
afterwards,  but  he  was  not  a  successful  builder.  5.  National  grentness.  A  nation  is 
truly  great  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  based  upon  Christ  and  the  principles  which  he 
expounded.  The  nations  have  perished  one  after  another;  their  greatness  was 
spurious,  and  therefore  they  were  ephemeral ;  they  rested  upon  that  which  moved,  not 
upon  that  which  is  immovable — "  The  same  yesterday,  tg-day,  and  fur  ever."  When  the 
nation  arises  which  shall  be  founded  upon  Christ  and  his  truth,  its  glory  and  greatness 
■hall  excel  the  palmiest  days  of  Solomon,  and  it  shall  abide.  Our  duty  as  subjects  is 
to  remove  from  the  national  foundations  all  that  is  not  of  Christ.  Sacrifice  may  ba 
entailed,  but  never  loss :  it  is  never  loss  to  cast  away  the  bad. 

II.  How  IT  IS  iiAiD.  1.  By  human  instrumentality.  At  Corinth  by  Paul :  "  wise  " 
(rer.  10)  was  he  as  a  master-builder  to  lay  this  foundation,  as  well  as  wise  in  his 
manner  of  laying  it    Here  is  marvellous  honour  conferred  upon  human  creatures,  that 


112  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [oH.ni.1— 2«. 

iif  laying  the  great  foundation.  We  may  participate  in  this  vast  privilege ;  we  may 
have  the  high  juy  of  laying  the  Foundation,  Jesus  Christ,  in  some  unsaved  souls.  If 
arcliangela  could  envy,  assuredly  tliey  would  envy  us  this  sublime,  all-gloiious  work. 
How  readily  should  we  run  to  it!  how  gladly  devote  to  it  our  every  power  1  how 
unceasingly  labour  and  pray  until  "Christ  be  formed  in "  those  whose  salvation  we 
desire!  ,2.  Under  Divine  direction  and  by  Divine  help.  What  wisdom  is  here  required ! 
aud  of  ourselves  we  are  but  foolish;  what  power  1  and  we  are  weaklings.  "Our  suffi- 
ciency is  of  God."  Only  are  we  "wise  master-builders"  when  we  constantly  look  up 
(or  guidance  and  rely  upon  Omnipotence.  If  we  do  anything  in  tliis  matter  it  can  only 
be  "  according  to  the  grace  of  God  "  (ver.  10).  Tliis  grace  must  be  sought.  When 
received  and  made  effective  in  our  lives,  all  the  glory  of  that  which  ia  accomplished 
must  be  ascribed  to  him  from  whom  the  grace  has  flowed. — H. 

Vers.  10 — 15. — Christian  work  and  %t»  testing.  I.  Christian  work:  1.  Shofdd  be 
rightly  based.  Christ  is  the  only  Foundation  for  the  spiritual  building.  This  Founda- 
tion may  have  been  already  laid  for  us  by  others  where  we  are  called  to  labour:  if  so, 
we  must  see  that  we  are  building  upon  it ;  if  it  be  not  laid,  by  "  the  grace  of  God  " 
(ver.  10)  we  must  seek  to  lay  it  without  delay.  All  our  teaching  must  rest  upon 
Christ.  He  is  not  only  the  Omega  to  be  ended  with,  but  the  Alpha  to  be  begun  with. 
All  our  efforts  will  be  fruitless  unless  identiSed  with  him.  The  well-constructed  house 
built  upon  the  sand  perishes ;  so  the  most  earnest  and  devoted  labour  is  thrown  away 
where  Christ  is  ignored.  The  Christian  builder  should  look  carefully  to  his  founda- 
tion. Whilst  others  build  upon  all  sorts  of  things,  he  should  build  only  upon  Christ. 
2.  Should  be  wisely  ordered.  It  is  not  enough  to  work ;  we  must  work  wisely  and 
well.  Some  seem  to  think  that  if  they  engage  in  Christian  service,  it  is  no  matter  how 
they  engage  in  it;  if  the  work  be  but  done,  it  is  no  matter  how  it  is  done.  Some  of 
the  most  slipshod  slatternly  work  under  God's  sun  is  done  in  God's  Name  and  in 
connection  with  his  kingdom.  In  other  departments  of  life,  care,  watchfulness, 
anxiety,  assiduity, are  demanded;  but  in  the  religious  sphere  the  thing  is  to  get  the 
work  done  somehow  or  other,  and  if  it  be  but  done  somehow,  all  is  likely  to  be  well! 
Such  careless  builders  sadly  need  the  apostolic  blast  of  warning :  "  Let  every  man  take 
heed  how  he  buildeth "  (ver.  10).  Christian  work  should  be  conformed  to  Christ  in 
every  particular.  The  superstructure  should  correspond  to  the  Foundation.  Epithets 
may  go  for  little  with  us;  in  our  teaching  we  should  be  just  as  "narrow"  as  Christ 
and  just  as  "  broad "  as  Christ.  Our  building  will  be  of  right  dimensions  if  it  is 
neither  wider  nor  less  wide  than  the  Rock-foundation  upon  which  it  rests.  As  to  being 
"  old-fashioned,"  we  need  not  greatly  dread  this  if  thereby  we  are  more  fully  identified 
with  oiu'  Lord ;  or  "  new-fangled,"  if  thus  we  and  our  work  are  more  truly  after  his 
mind.  Christian  work  is  planned  work.  As  the  architect  has  a  plan  for  his  work,  so 
the  great  Architect  has  a  plan  for  his  work,  and  /or  that  part  of  his  work  which  he 
entrusts  to  us  to  perform.  If  we  "  take  heed  how  we  build,"  we  shall  take  heed  that 
we  build  only  according  to  the  Divine  plan.  Knowledge  of  this  is  to  be  sought  in 
prayer  and  from  the  Divine  Word.  There  is  one  way  in  which  our  life-work  should 
be  done ;  that  way  has  been  conceived  by  the  Divine  mind  ;  we  should  seek  a 
revelation  of  it.  The  Christian  must  not  be  his  own  architect.  3.  In  Christian  work 
right  materials  should  be  used.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  teach ;  we  must  teach  the 
truth,  and  we  must  teach  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Our  doctrine  must  be  of  Christ, 
and  it  must  be  sound  doctrine,  the  "  sincere  milk "  of  the  Word ;  the  revelation  of 
God,  unedited  by  man.  What  rubbish  has  been  and  is  taught  by  not  a  few !  how  much 
"  wood,  hay,  stubble,"  placed  in  the  great  spiritual  building  I  No  wonder  that  the 
Christian  soldier  is  so  often  worsted  when  he  fights  with  gingerbread  weapons. 
Shame  upon  men  that,  when  the  right  material  for  labour  is  provided,  they  go  huntino 
about  for  the  wrong.  The  Scriptures  are  the  great  quarry  and  mine  in  which  costly 
stones  and  gold  and  silver  abound,  and  no  zealous  spiritual  builder  need  lack  who  will 
search  these  mines. 

II.  Christiah  WORK  WILL  BE  TESTED.  A  Solemn  thought.  Our  work  will  be  tested  1 
When  Christian  work  is  done,  that  is  not  the  end  of  it.  It  will  be  tried.  Well  may 
weask:l.  When?  On"theday,"  saysthe  iiimstle.  Christian  work  is  tested  on  many 
4i9a>    Much  of  it  does  not  stand  the  test  i>f  those  davg.    But  on  the  day— theday  Of 


OH.  m.  1—23.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  113 

days — the  jmlgment  day — all  shall  be  tested  axiifinaUy  tested.  "  Each  man's  work  shall 
be  made  manifest ; "  its  true  character  will  then  be  seen.  "  The  day  shall  declare  it" 
OS  it  is,  not  as  it  has  been  thought  to  be.  Now  it  may  look  well ;  but  then  f  A  veil 
now  rests  upon  Christian  work,  then  the  veil  shall  be  taken  away ;  now  the  scaffoldinir 
obscures  the  building,  then  it  shall  fall,  and  then  shall  be  seen  "  of  what  sort "  the  build 
ing  is.  The  y7«a?  tfsi  cannot  be  escaped  from.  2.  Howf  By  "  fire."  (Not  by  the  fires 
of  purgatory ;  the  apostle  speaks  of  fire  applied  to  work,  not  to  persons, — not  remedial, 
but  testing.)  The  test  will  be  thorough,  starching,  perfectly  efficient.  Tiie  false  work 
will  stand  this  test  when  hay  and  wood  and  stubble  can  abide  unchanged  in  the  flame ; 
but  not  till  then.  Our  work  may  look  well  now,  but  how  will  it  bear  the  fire-test? 
3.  By  whomf  God.  At  the  great  day  he  will  be  Judge,  and  will  try  every  man's 
work.  He  will  apply  the  fire-test.  He  loves  truth  and  hates  lies,  which  we  call  shams. 
On  that  day  he  will  manifest  the  truth  concerning  work  done  in  his  Name.  Whatever 
it  has  seemed  before,  it  will  then  seem  as  it  really  is.  The  careless  and  the  false  may 
well  tremble  at  the  thought  of  this  ordeal ;  but  the  sincere  and  faithful  may  have 
confidence ;  for  as  no  work  then  will  be  made  to  appear  better  than  it  is,  none  will  be 
made  to  appear  worse. 

III.  The  issues  of  the  testing  of  Christian  work.  1.  As  to  the  work  tested. 
Some  will  stand.  The  pessimists  will  then  be  ashamed ;  railers  and  mockers  will  then 
be  silenced.  There  is  some  work  (and  who  shall  say  that  it  is  little  ?)  which  will 
approve  itself  to  God,  and  stand  the  final  and  most  searching  trial.  This,  doubtless, 
will  be  the  work  done  in  Divine  strength,  and,  whilst  the  dueis  of  it  will  rejoice  with 
exceeding  joy,  they  will  as  assuredly  cry,  "  Not  unto  us."  Some  work  will  not  stand 
the  test.  As  hay  and  wood  and  stubble  are  speedily  consumed  in  the  fire,  so  this  work 
will  perish  in  the  last  testing  flames.  To  see  a  life-work  destroyed  in  a  day !  A  life 
lived  and  no  fruit.  No  "  Well  done"  because  all  has  been  ill  done.  And  perhaps  ali 
through  carelessness,  sluggishness,  self-reliance,  inattention  to  the  "  mind  of  Christ." 
Sad,  sad  close  of  a  "  Christian  course."  2.  As  to  workers.  Some  shall  "  receive  a 
reward;"  their  work  has  borne  the  test.  Though  they  say  truly  that  this  reward  is 
"  unmerited,"  they  shall  have  it.  "  Doth  Job  serve  God  for  nought?  "  Certainly  not ; 
no  man  ever  did  or  shall.  We  lose  nothing  by  labouring  for  Christ ;  and  note  that  we 
lose  nothing  by  labouring  thoroughly  for  him.  We  may  lose  by  labouring  half- 
heartedly— we  may  lose  our  reward.  It  is  best  every  way  to  do  our  best  in  Christ's 
service.  Some  receive  no  reward.  Their  work  perishes  and  they  "suffer  loss,"  but 
they  themselves  are  saved,  "  yet  so  as  by  flre,"  i.e.  barely,  with  difficulty.  The  reference 
is  to  those  who  hold  fundamental  truths  (for  they  are  supposed  to  build  on  the  one 
Foundation,  ver.  12),  but  who  mingle  with  their  teaching  the  wood,  hay,  arid  stubble 
of  human  notions.  Strikingly  are  we  here  taught  that  salvation  is  not  of  works;  for 
the  works  peiish,  but  the  salvation  abides.  Doubtless  we  must  suppose  that  in  such 
cises  there  is  true  Christian  living  and  a  real  desire  to  do  the  Master's  will ;  for  these 
are  necessary  evidences  of  a  saved,  regenerate  state;  but  the  vital  truth  of  salva- 
tion by  faith  is  pointedly  illustrated  by  the  chief  works  of  the  life  (upon  which  all 
would  have  been  resting  if  salvation  were  of  works)  suffering  ignominious  rejeetion. 
Being  saved  " so  as  by  fire  "  is  in  stiiking  contrast  to  "  the  abundant  entrance."  May 
we  have  the  ecstatic  joy  of  the  latter,  and  the  holy  gladness  which  comes  from  seeing 
that  we  have  not  "  lived  in  vain  " ! — H. 

Vers.  16,  17. — God's  temple.  Declared  to  be  the  Church  of  Christ.  Each  com- 
munity of  Christians  is  a  temple  of  God.  The  old  temple  has  perished ;  this  is  the  new 
and  the  imperishable.  The  Christian  Church  has  often  been  insignificant  in  numbers, 
wealth,  position,  earthly  learning;  men  have  despised  her;  judged  by  human  standards 
she  has  appeared  contemptible;  but  the  Divine  thought  has  been  this — the  temple 
o/Oodl 

I.  Resemblances.  1.  Erected  under  Divine  direction.  The  old  and  new  temples 
are  of  God ;  they  express  his  thought  and  purpose.  Believers  who  constitute  the  new 
temple  become  believers  through  him ;  for  faith  is  the  gift  of  God.  They  are  gathered 
into  the  Church  as  spiritual  stones,  by  his  servants,  under  his  direction,  and  each  has 
an  appropriate  place.  God  is  the  Author  of  the  constitution  of  the  Church.  2.  Erected 
fw  the  Divine  glory.    The  supreme  object.     Everything  in  the  Church  to  be  made 

I  CORINTHIANS. 


114  THE   FIRriT  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOJilNTlllANS.    [oh.iii.1— 2a 

.sabservient  to  this.  To  gl"rify  God  should  be  the  life-object  of  the  redeemed.  And: 
i.  Erect  d  for  the  welfare  of  men.  The  temple  of  old  was  for  God  and  also  for  man. 
The  Church  has  a  great  mission  to  the  world.  There  is  no  conflict  between  the  two 
ibjects.  As  the  Church  sce'KS  to  save  the  lost,  she  is  most  truly  seeking  to  bring 
glory  to  God.  Her  worship  is  likely  to  be  a  mockery  unless  her  wotk  is  faithfully  per- 
formed. 4.  Set  apart  for  Ood.  The  Church  should  bo  separate,  holy,  peculiarly  Ood^s. 
"A  peculiar  people — a  people  for  God's  own  possession"  (1  Pet.  ii.  9);  "  Ye  are  not 
your  own."  5.  An  object  (^beauty.  The  beauty  of  holiness  should  clothe  the  Church. 
I'he  world's  admiration  has  often  been  commanded,  in  early  days  and  since.  And  better 
still,  God  has  a|>i)roved.  6.  Of  great  variety  in  its  parts.  Vast  diversity  in  gift  and 
condition,  but  one  spiritual  building.  In  the  Christian  Church  there  cannot,  perhaps,' 
be  too  much  variety  as  there  certainly  cannot  be  too  much  oneness.  7.  The  dwelling- 
place  of  God.  Not  only /or  God,  but  God's  dwelling-place.  This  was  the  glory  of  the 
Jewish  tenip'e — the  Sheohinah — the  Divine  presence.  The  Church's  joy  and  glory  are 
that  "  God  is  in  the  midst  of  her."  He  dwells  not  now  in  temples  made  with  hands, 
though  he  docs  dwell  in  the  temples  made  by  the  Divine  hands.  The  ancient  temple 
was  unmeaning  and  useless  without  the  piesence  of  Jehovah.  So  is  the  Chiistiau 
Church:  "Ye  also  are  builded  together  for  a  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit" 
(Epb.  ii.  22).  8.  From  it  true  worship  should  arise.  Sanctuary  worship,  home  worship, 
business  worship,  recreation  worship,  worship  throughout  all  the  life  of  those  who 
constitute  the  temple.  9.  In  it  sfumld  ever  be  the  gnat  sacrifice.  Not  the  sacrifice  of 
the  Mass,  but  "  Christ  crucified"  manifestly  set  forth.  The  temple  of  old  would  have 
been  offensive  to  God  without  sacrifice,  so  we  cannot  be  acceptable  to  him  without  the 
atonement.  When  the  Church  loses  the  cross  she  loses  God.  In  every  Christian  coui- 
aiunity  there  must  be  a  Calvary.  And  the  true  Jerusalem  has  not  its  Calvary  "  without 
the  gate ; "  Christ  crucified  is  central,  chief,  predominant. 

II.  Punishment  fob  injuet.  Aaronic  priests  who  violated  the  ancient  temple  were 
doomed  to  death;  injurers  of  the  Church  of  Christ  will  meet  a  terrible  fate.  In  ver.  17 
the  Greek  verb,  which  means  "  to  bring  into  a  worse  state,"  is  repeated;  what  we  du 
to  the  Church,  God  will  do  to  us — if  we  injure  it,  he  will  injure  us.  At  Corinth  the 
dividers  of  the  Church  were  likely  to  become  destroyers,  and  -  so  God  will  "  destroy." 
These  are  far  more  serious  offenders  than  those  named  in  vers.  12  and  15.  God  is 
jealous  over  his  temple,  and  men  may  not  do  evil  to  it  with  impunity.  Those  who  sin 
against  it  sin  directly  against  him.  Note :  We  may  injure  the  temple  of  God  in  many 
ways.  For  example,  by  (1)  false  doctrine;  (2)  unchristian  spirit;  (3)  personal 
unholiness ;  (4)  conniving  at  unholiness  in  others ;  (5)  failing  to  do  our  part ;  (6)  failing 
to  take  our  place  in  the  Church. 

III.  How  OABEFUL  WE  SHOITLD  BE  IN  ALL  THAT  CONCERNS  THIS  TEMPLE.       In  Church 

life  and  Church  work.  How  serious  are  these  1  in  them  there  is  no  room  for  trifling. 
Alasl  how  many  are  living  in  the  Church,  and  even  labouring  in  it,  who  seem  to  feel 
little  or  no  responsibility  1  Let  us  realize  what  this  Church  is,  and  then  assuredly 
with  more  care  than  the  Aaronic  priests  shall  we  comport  ourselves.  To  avoid  offence 
and  injury  and  failure,  we  shall  need  the  wisdom  that  cometh  down  from  above  (vers. 
18— 20).— H. 

Vers.  21 — 23. — The  believer's  possessiont.  I.  What  these  are.  1.  Minister$,  The 
orinthians  had  made  a  strange  mistake  ;  they  had  been  regarding  ministers  as  masters, 

d  choosing  which  they  preferred  to  serve.  In  a  singular  loss  of  dignity  (singular 
because  many  of  them  were  not  a  little  afl3icted  with  pride)  they  had  become  ambitious 
of  belonging  to  ministers,  forgetting  that  ministers,  as  such,  belonged  to  them. 
Ministers  are  the  servants  of  the  Church,  and  thus  among  the  believer's  possessions  ; 
instead  of  quarrelling  over  them,  he  should  use  and  enjoy  them.  God  has  greatly 
enriched  his  people  by  sending  to  them  many  able  and  faithful  ministers.  Whilst  these 
should  be  highly  esteemed  for  their  work's  sake,  their  true  relation  to  the  Church 
should  never  be  lost  sight  of.  They  should  bear  it  in  mind,  and  thus  check  any  tendencies 
towards  lordship.  2.  The  world.  It  is  generally  thought  that  the  world  belongs  to 
the  Wicked  One  and  his  children,  seeing  that  it  appears  to  be  largely  in  their  bands. 
This  is  a  popular  blunder.  The  world  was  made  and  is  ke^  for  the  people  of  God, 
UnbeUevers  have  ti«  right  to  the  things  which  they  grasp.    The  ungodly  hold  theii 


,111.1—23.]    THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  llfi 


posaessions  upon  a  precari-j.u  tenure.  They  are  very  short  leaseholders,  or  rather  thcj 
are  tenants-at-wiU..  Believers  are  the  freeholders,  and  at  last  "  the  meek  shall  inherit 
the  earth."  The  child  of  God  has  not  yet "  come  of  age ;  "  but  his  title  is  good,  and  now 
he  enjoys  as  much  of  his  inheritance  as  is  good  for  him  in  his  pruseut  state.  But  a> 
believers  look  at  the  world  they  can  say,  "It  ia  ours — all  of  it,  and  all  things  in  it  wuri< 
together  for  our  good."    Cowper  says — 

"  The  Christian  looks  abroad  into  the  varied  field 
Of  nature,  and,  though  poor  perhaps  compar'd 
With  those  whose  mansions  glitter  in  his  sight) 
Calls  the  delightful  scenery  all  his  own. 
His  are  the  mountains,  and  the  valleys  his, 
And  the  resplendent  rivers;  his  t'  enjoy 
With  a  propriety  that  none  can  feel 
But  who,  with  filial  confidence  inspir'd. 
Can  lift  to  heaven  an  unpresumptuous  eye, 
And  smiling  say, '  My  Father  made  them  all.' " 

8.  TAft.  Without  Christ  there  is  nothing  worthy  of  the  name  of  life.  Life  is  emphatic- 
ally the  believer's.  What  possibilities  it  has  for  him  !  how  vast  are  his  ojipoi  tunities ! 
Pity  it  is  that  some  believers  seem  only  half  alive  to  this.     The  child  of  God  has  in 

life  the  experience  most  likely  to  benefit  him :  mercies,  joys,  trials,  temptatinns,  paius 

all  his,  to  do  hira  good.  The  lives  of  others  are  also  controlled  for  the  welfare  of  the 
redeemed.  ^.  Death.  Death,  a  precious  possession.  The  entrance  to  the  life  immortal. 
Death  conquered  has  become  the  believer's  servant.  Death,  the  dire  loss  of  the 
impenitent,  the  great  gain  of  the  saints.  The  death  of  those  outside  the  Church  is 
ordered  for  the  well-being  of  those  within.  God  strikes  down  the  foes  of  his  people 
when  the  right  hour  has  come.  5.  Things  present.  The  present  order  and  movement  in 
the  world;  all  governments  and  powers ;  the  march  of  the  ages ; — all  these  things  are 
made  subservient  to  the  great  work  of  redemption.  "  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way," 
hut  always  moves  for  his  people.  6.  Things  to  come.  Not  only  the  present  order  ol 
the  world,  but  the  future.  Believers  often  tremble  for  what  is  coming;  the  Church 
quakes,  for  she  dreads  some  future  movement,  glimmerings  of  which  she  can  discern, 
perhaps,  in  the  present.  But  God  is  in  the  future,  giving  that  future  to  his  people. 
All  discoveries,  all  increase  of  knowledge,  all  progress,  shall  be  for  the  wtal  of  Zion  : 
" The  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  And  the  believer  reckons  amongst  thiu's 
to  come,  the  heavenly  world,  the  life  immortal,  the  higher  service,  the  perfected  nature, 
the  unsullied  joy.  All  these  are  his.  How  rich,  how  blessed,  is  he  I  7.  All  things. 
Marvellous  truth,  that  there  is  nothing  of  which  he  can  say,  "It  is  not  mine." 

II.  Secubed  by  the  believer's  connection  with  Chbist.  Believers  are  Christ's. 
His  servants?  yes;  his  friends?  yes;  but  his  "brethren,"  and  thus  "heirs"  with  him 
— "joint-heirs  with  Christ "  (Rom.  viii.  17).  Christ  is  God's.  All  that  the  Father  hath 
is  the  Son's.  All  that  the  Son  hath  belongs  to  those  that  are  his ;  and  this  is  "  all 
things."  What  an  amazing  transformation,  then,  there  is  in  conversion  I  The  unsaved 
has  nothing ;  the  saved,  "  all  things."  Are  we  unutterably  poor  or  infinitely  rich  ' 
The  question  is  answered  when  another  is:  "Are  we  Christ's?" — H. 

Vers.  \.—%,~(}hristian  teachers  and  their  work.  The  apostle  has  still  in  view  the 
dissensions  prevailing  in  the  Corinthian  Cliurch.  Throughout  the  first  four  chapter." 
this  subject  is  never  absent  from  his  mind,  even  when  it  is  must  in  the  backgruuiiil. 
The  spirit  of  party,  with  the  various  pha&es  of  thought  and  life  that  foimd  ezpressiun 
therein,  suggests  the  several  topics  on  which  lii,  enlarges. 

I.  The  Christian  teacher  adapts  his  u'eachinq  to  the  capacities  of  ait 
heabebs.  (Vers.  1 — 4.)  Paul  has  already  said  (ch.  ii.  6)  that  he  "  spake  wisdom  among 
the  perfect,  and  here  he  presents  the  other  side.  1.  At  Corinth  be  had  to  deal  with 
carnal  Christians,  In  the  last  verses  of  the  previous  chapter  he  has  contrasted  the 
natural  man  and  the  spiritual  man,  the  latter  alone  being  able  to  discern  the  things  of 
the  Spirit.  Here  the  comparison  is  not  between  Christians  and  non-Christians,  but 
between  different  classes  of  Christians,  distinguished  according  to  spiritual  attainment. 
Bvery  believer  in  Christ  is  a  spiritual  man  as  compared  with  those  wb<  do  not  believe ; 


lie  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [cH.m.  1— 2a 

li  it  one  believer  may  be  carnal  in  comparison  with  another  believer.  The  new  naturs 
n'ay  be  weak  and  sickly  and  all  but  overlaid  by  the  old.  This  was  the  case  with  the 
Cuiinthians,  whoso  flesh liness  of  mind  appeared  in  the  prevalence  of "  jealousy  and  strife  " 
and  of  party  spirit.  These  things  spring  from  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  20),  wherever  they  are 
I'nund.  When  the  Church  is  rent  by  faction,  and  men  think  mainly  of  the  aggrandize- 
ment of  their  favourite  party,  no  further  proof  is  needed  of  the  reign  of  carnality. 
"  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  peace."  A  fleshly  Christian  I  What  opposites  must  we 
unite  in  describing  real  character  I  2.  They  v/ere  as  yet"  baies  in  Christ."  Conversion 
is  a  new  birth  :  young  converts  are  new-born  babes  (1  Pet.  ii.  2).  They  have  in  germ 
all  that  is  to  be  found  in  the  full-grown  man ;  but  they  aie  weak,  dependent,  immature. 
Young  Christians  have  the  rudiments  of  the  Christian  character  in  more  or  less  clear 
outline,  but  only  the  rudiments.  Infancy  is  beautiful  in  its  season,  and  so  is  the 
young  life  of  the  new  convert;  but  out  of  'iison,  its  beauty  is  gone.  A  child  with 
the  years  of  a  man  is  a  monstrosity  in  nature ,  an  old  Christian  with  the  crudeness  of 
a  young  convert  should  appear  to  us  as  great  a  monstrosity  in  grace.  The  "  babe  in 
Christ "  is  meant  to  develop  into  "  a  full-grown  man,  into  the  measure  of  the  stature  of 
the  fulness  of  Christ"  (Eph.  iv.  13).  3.  As  babes,  they  must  be  fed  "with  milk,  not 
with  meat."  Infants  and  men  must  each  have  food  suitable  to  their  capacity.  The 
doctrines  of  the  faith  may  be  presented  in  the  form  of  milk  or  of  solid  food.  Milk  has 
in  it  all  the  nourishing  elements  to  be  found  in  strong  meat,  though  in  more  diluted 
form.  The  facts  of  the  gospel  history  contain  all  the  truths  of  the  must  elaborate 
theological  system ;  a  child  can  digest  them  in  the  one  form,  but  not  in  the  other. 
Every  wise  teacher  will  adapt  his  teaching  to  the  capacity  of  his  hearers.  He  will  give 
to  each  only  such  food  as  he  can  receive  and  assimilate.  He  will  not  give  solid  food  to 
infants,  nor  will  he  feed  full-grown  men  merely  with  milk.  The  preacher  should 
consider  the  wants  of  women  and  children,  as  well  as  of  men,  and  adapt  some  part  of 
the  public  service  to  them  (comp.  Heb.  v.  12 — 14). 

II.  Ministers  are  God's  servants,  not  party  leaders.  The  childish  condition  of 
the  Corinthians  was  shown  in  their  party  divisions.  They  gloried  more  in  the  leader 
after  whom  their  faction  was  called  than  in  Jesus  Christ.  To  correct  this  the  apostle 
presents  the  right  view  of  spiritual  teachers  and  their  work.  1.  Ministers  are  hut 
servants.  They  are  not  heads  of  sects  or  schools,  whose  object  is  to  gather  disciples  for 
themselves.  They  are  servants  of  God,  doing  his  work.  Therefore  they  are  not  to  be 
lifted  above  their  position,  as  they  are  when  they  are  regarded  as  masters  in  the 
Church  ;  nor  are  they  to  sink  below  it,  as  they  do  when  they  take  the  law  from  any 
other  but  God.  2.  Mach  minister  has  his  ovm  peculiar  work.  "  I  planted,  ApoUos 
watered."  Paul  began  the  work  at  Corinth ;  Apollos  continued  it.  One  minister  is  sent 
to  preach  the  gospel  to  sinners,  another  to  edify  believers,  another  to  teach  the  ignorant, 
anotlier  to  comfort  the  sorrowful ;  liut  all  are  contributors  to  the  same  great  interest. 
The  servant's  work,  however,  is  but  a  subordinate  instrumentality.  Planting  and 
watering  are  the  ordinary  conditions  of  growth,  but  they  do  not  of  themselves  cause 
growth.  It  is  "  God  that  niveth  the  increase."  In  the  spiritual  sphere,  as  in  the  natural, 
the  life-giving'  power  is  Divine ;  but  in  both  cases  this  power  usually  works  through 
human  ministries.  It  is  only  in  connection  with  diligent  planting  and  watering  that 
we  can  expect  the  increase.  3.  Each  minister  has  his  oum peculiar  reward.  All  are  one, 
inasmuch  as  all  are  servants  of  one  Lord  and  engaged  about  the  same  work.  Hence 
they  are  not  to  be  set  against  each  other  as  rivals.  Theu'  work  is  one,  yet  diverse ;  and 
so  is  their  reward.  Ko  faithful  servant  shall  go  without  a  recompense  at  his  Master's 
hand;  but  each  sl.ull  receive  his  own,  alike  in  kind  and  in  degree.  The  principle  that 
determines  this  is—"  according  to  his  own  labour."  It  is  not  according  to  the  fruit  or 
result  of  our  labour,  but  simply  according  to  the  measure  of  our  labour.  What  reversals 
of  human  opinion  are  in  store  for  us  1  Men  applaud  success ;  God  praises  fidelity. 
Many  an  obscure  but  faithful  worker  shall  receive  a  greater  reward  than  he  who  has 
been  less  faithful  but  more  prominent  and  successful.  4.  Ministers  are  OocPs/ellow- 
workers.  All  God's  servants  are  fellow-servants  as  workers  for  him;  but  here  the 
fellowship  is  carried  still  higher.  We  are  workers  along  with  God,  who  is  pleased  to 
associate  us  with  himself  in  the  great  work  of  his  kini;dom.  What  a  thought  is  thisl 
(1)  What  dignity  it  gives  to  the  Christian  ministry !  It  is  to  work  with  God,  (2) 
tlow  inspiring  to  the  Christian  worker  t    Who  would  not  labour  when  God  ia  with 


OB.  ml— 23.]    THE  FIRST  HPiSTLB  TO  THE  C01UNTH1AN8.  ir. 

him  ?    (3)  How  sure  the  reward !    Will  QoA  leave  his  fellow- workers  without  a  due 
recompense  ? 

III.  Believers  are  God's  field.  The  same  idea  is  elsewhere  expresse.l  under  the 
figure  of  a  garden  (Isa.  Iviii.  11)  and  a  vineyard  (Isa.  v.).  Considr:  1.  The  Propriekn 
of  the  field.  The  Church  is  Qod's  field.  It  is  not  the  Church  of  l-'aul,  or  Apullos,  or  any 
other ;  but  "  the  Church  of  God,  which  he  purchased  with  his  own  blood  "  (Acts  xx. 
28).  It  belongs  to  him  ;  it  exists  for  him  ;  it  is  called  by  his  Name.  Hence  the  spirit 
of  faction,  which  ranges  parties  and  sects  under  the  names  of  rival  leaders,  robs  God  of 
his  glory  as  the  Church's  Lord.  2.  The  labourers  in  the  field.  These  are  aiiostles, 
evangelists,  pastors,  teachers,  etc.  (see  above).  3.  Tlie  field  itself.  (1)  Its  original 
condition.  Wild,  uniilled,  full  of  merely  natural  growths.  Believers  are  originally  a 
part  of  the  woild,  living  in  a  state  of  sin,  under  no  gracious  culture.  (2)  The  work 
bestowed  itpon  it.  Preparatory  work:  trenching,  ploughing,^ gathering  out  stones, 
fencing ;  and  then  the  sowing  of  seed,  planting,  weeding,  etc.  Corresponding  to  this 
there  is  a  preparation  of  heart  for  receiving  the  truth,  an  awakening  to  a  sense  of  sin 
and  need,  a  quickening  into  spiritual  life,  a  culture  of  the  new  life  into  fulness  and 
strength,  etc.  For  these  ends  every  true  labourer  works,  but  always  in  dependence  on 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  alone  can  make  our  labour  fruitful.  (3)  Its  produce. 
The  farmer  looks  for  a  return  from  his  held  in  the  form  of  fruit  in  liarvest ;  God  expects 
his  Church  to  yield  fruit  to  his  glory.  Christian  character,  life,  usefulness,  productive 
ness, — these  are  some  of  the  returns  for  which  the  Lord  of  the  field  looks  (comp.  Luke 
xiil.  6 — 9 ;  John  xv.  1,  etc.). — B. 

Vers.  10 — 15. — 2%e  Foundation  and  the  superstructure.  Under  the  figure  of  a 
building,  the  aiwstle  continues  to  speak  of  the  work  of  Christ's  ministers,  and  specially 
of  his  own  labours  at  Corinth.  As  the  first  to  preach  the  gospal  there,  he  had  laid  the 
foundation,  upon  which  the  teachers  that  succeeded  him  were  to  build.  The  reference 
is  primarily  to  doctrine,  but  the  principles  apply  to  work  and  life  as  well. 

1.  The  Foundation.  This  is  Jesus  Christ  the  Mediator  (Isa.  xxviii.  16;  1  Pet.  ii. 
6).  He  is  the  Foundation  of  truth :  the  system  of  Christian  theology  is  built  upon 
him.  All  Christian  teaching  and  preaching  must  have  him  for  their  basis.  The  entire 
structure  of  knowledge  rests  upon  him  who  is  the  Source  of  all  wisdom.  He  is  also  the 
Foundation  of  life.  The  Church  is  built  upon  him,  believers  being  "  living  stones"  in 
the  great  spiritual  temple.  In  both  these  respects  Jesus  Christ  is :  1.  A  Divine 
Foundation.  "  Behold  I  lay."  The  Church  requires  a  basis  laid  by  God  himself.  2. 
A  sure  Foundation.  No  work  of  God  can  fail.  Jesus  Christ  is  a  Foundation,  not  of  sand, 
but  of  solid  rock  (Matt.  vii.  24 — 27).  It  will  bear  any  strain,  even  the  weight  of  a 
world.  3.  The  only  Foundation.  'Phis  is  the  point  emphasized  here.  Men  build  on 
other  foundations  when  they  rest  their  systems  of  belief  on  humau  opinion,  or  base  their 
hope  of  heaven  upon  their  own  works,  the  merits  of  others,  the  general  mercy  of  God, 
etc.     But  "  other  foundation  can  (Siyarcu)  no  man  lay ;  "  there  is  but  one. 

IL  The  superstructure.  Having  found  the  true  Foundation,  we  must  "  take  heed 
how  we  build  thereon."  The  work  of  ministers  or  of  believers  in  general  is  here 
viewed  as  the  superstructure.  Two  kinds  of  materials  may  be  employed:  "gold,  silver, 
costly  stones " — the  beautiful  and  lasting  materials,  suited  for  a  temple ;  or  "  wood, 
hay,  stubble" — ^the  baser  and  more  perishable  materials,  fit  only  for  a  temporary  house. 
Apply  this  to :  1.  Doctrine.  The  "  gold,"  etc.,  represents  pure,  scriptural  teaching. 
Take  Paul's  Epistles,  e.g.,  as  a  noble  structure  of  truth  built  on  Jesus  Christ.  Such 
ductrine  is  precious  and  abiding,  like  its  Foundation.  The  "  wood,"  etc.,  represents 
human  opinions  and  speculations  put  in  the  place  of  God's  truth.  In  Paul's  time, 
Jewish  tradition.  Gnosticism,  etc. ;  in  ours.  Popery,  Eitualism,  etc.  Such  doctrines  are 
not  truly  edifying.  2.  Life.  The  "gold,"  etc.,  is  a  Christian  life  of  the  noblest  kind, 
built  out  of  faith,  hope,  love.  Puie,  unselfish,  Christ-like  character.  Variety  may  be 
indicated  in  the  three  materials.  Oold  may  denote  the  most  brilliant  service  rendered 
by  consecrated  genius,  heroic  faith,  patient  sutfering.  Silver  may  indicate  a  work  less 
brilliant,  but  useful— the  honesi  doing  of  the  Lord's  will.  Costly  stones— marble  or 
„ianite,  e.g. — ^a  life  of  solidity  and  strenuth,  on  which  others  may  lean.  Each  "f  theso 
classes  has  its  own  place  and  value.  All  are  genuine.  The  "  wood,"  etc.,  is  a  Chiistiau 
life  of  the  poorest  kind.     Dull  as   wood,  with  little  spiritual  insight.     Swayed   bj 


118  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINlHIANa    [oh.  m.  1— 2& 

public  opinion,  as  the  grass  by  every  breeze.  Barren  as  ttublle,  bringing  forth  littla 
to  the  glory  of  God.  What  differences  in  the  lives  of  Christians !  Gold  or  stubble : 
which  ? 

ni.  The  fiekt  trial.  The  true  nature  of  our  Bfe  and  work  is  not  always  seen  here. 
We  judge  wrongly  of  others  and  of  ourselves.  Men  praise  the  wood  as  if  it  were  gold ; 
depreciate  the  gold  as  if  it  were  wood.  But  "  the  day  shall  declare  it " — Dies  irse,  die* 
ilia — ^the  day  of  fire,  when  Christ  comes  to  judge  (Mai.  iii.  2,  3 ;  iv.  1 ;  2  Thess.  i.  8). 
Time  tests  but  partially  ;  the  thorough  test  is  the  judgment-fire.  Shall  our  work  stand 
that?  1.  The  edifice  of  "gold"  etc.,  shall  stand.  Truth  will  come  through  the  flro; 
so  will  a  genuine,  unselfish,  Christly  life.  Work  for  time  perishes  ;  work  for  eternity 
endures.  The  fiery  ordeal  will  only  bring  out  more  clearly  its  true  quality.  The 
builder  shall  receive  a  reward  in  seeing  his  work  abide  (Phil.  ii.  16),  in  being  recog- 
nized as  a  good  workman  (Matt,  zxv,  21),  and  in  wearing  the  crown  of  life  (Jas.  i. 
12).  Observe,  the  reward  is  not  for  being  on  the  Foundation,  but  for  what  is  built 
thereon.  Salvation  is  of  iree  grace ;  the  reward  is  "  according  as  his  work  "  (Rev.  xxii. 
12).  2.  The  structure  of  "  wood,"  etc.,  shall  be  burned  up.  Error,  falsehood,  unreality ; 
a  life  animated  by  a  worldly,  selfish  spirit ; — these  shall  be  consumed.  The  builder  is 
glad  to  get  away  with  his  life,  as  one  escapes  from  a  house  in  flames,  saved  "  so  as 
through  fire."  Picture  the  consternation  of  the  poor  builder  as  he  sees  the  fire  doing 
its  awful  work,  and  hears  the  crash  of  his  life-structure  I  He  himself  is  saved  for 
Christ's  sake,  but  his  labour  is  lost. 

Lessons.  1.  See  to  the  nature  of  your  life  and  work  as  Christians.  Apply  specially 
to  Christian  workers.  2.  Be  not  satisfied  with  bare  salvation  at  last.  Build  with 
materials  that  will  endure.  Have  an  eye  to  the  "  full  reward "  (2  John  8).  3.  If 
many  on  the  true  Foundation  shall  be  saved  only  "  so  as  through  fire,"  how  shall  they 
escape  that  are  building  on  a  false  foundation  ?  (1  Pet.  It.  17, 18). — B. 

Veia.  16, 17. —  I  he  temple  of  Ood.  Paul  again  takes  up  the  idea  of  a  building  and 
gires  it  a  new  direction.  The  noblest  of  all  edifices  is  a  temple  in  which  architecture 
finds  its  highest  and  worthiest  employment.  Under  this  figure  the  apostle  sets  forth 
sometimes  the  collective  Church  of  Christ,  sometimes  the  individual  believer  (ch.  vi. 
19  ;  Eph.  ii.  21).  Man  was  created  to  be  a  sanctuary  of  God,  but  this  sanctuary  was 
overturned  by  sin.  It  lay  in  ruins  till  the  Lord  Jesus  came  as  the  Restorer,  whose 
work  it  is  to  rebuild  the  ruined  walls;  and  now  the  temple  is  seen  rising  in  its  fur 
proportions  in  the  hearts  of  the  regenerated,  and  in  the  spiritual  house  built  of  these 
living  stones  (1  Pet.  ii.  5). 

I.  Believers  ABE  God's  TEMPLE.  1.  God  dwells  in  them.  The  temple  at  Jerusalem 
was  Jehovah's  dwelling-placo.  There  he  had  his  Shechinah  in  the  cloud  above  the 
mercy-seat  and  between  the  cherubim,  and  there  he  was  worshipped.  Even  so  "  the 
Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you."  The  Father  and  the  Son  make  their  abode  with 
the  man  who  loves  and  obeys  the  Son  (John  xiv.  23),  and  this  is  effected  by  the  Spirit. 
This  indwelling  is  the  culmination  of  the  work  of  grace  within  us.  The  heart  must 
first  be  quickened, renewed,  purified,  ere  the  Holy  Spirit  can  dwell  in  it.  How  wonderful 
a  truth  is  thisl  God  in  mel  It  is  not  the  dream  of  the  pantheist,  who  calls  me  a 
spark  from  the  eternal  fire — God  dwelling  in  me  because  I  am  only  a  mode  of  the  one 
universal  existence.  It  is  not  the  raving  of  the  mystic,  whose  imagination  has  betrayed 
him  into  a  hazy  confusion  of  ideas  regarding  his  relation  to  QtuA.  It  is  the  utterance 
of  solwr  truth.  In  me  the  creature — the  new  creature — God  the  Creator  makes  his 
abode ;  not,  indeed,  in  the  infinity  of  his  being,  as  if  our  tiny  vessels  could  contain  the 
ocean,  yet  really.  The  little  flower-cup  has  the  sun  dwelling  in  it  all  the  day,  though 
he  dwells  in  thousands  besides  ;  and  his  presence  is  made  known  by  the  colour  and 
fragrance  and  growth  of  the  flower.  The  same  Spirit  of  God  who  abides  in  the  Church 
abides  in  every  true  member  of  it ;  and  this  abiding  is  revealed  in  the  love  shed  abroad 
in  the  heart,  in  the  odour  that  breathes  through  the  life,  and  in  the  gracious  bending 
of  the  nature  to  all  that  is  righteous.  2.  They  are  holy.  As  the  place  where  Jehuvah 
dwelt,  the  Jewish  temple  was  holy — consecrated  to  him,  and  to  him  alone.  None  bul 
an  Israelite  could  tread  the  outer  court ;  none  but  the  priests  could  serve  in  the  holy 
place ;  none  but  the  high  priest  could  enter  the  holy  of  holies.  Believers  are  holy, 
set  apart  for  Ood  and  his  service.    They  are  not  a  public  street  or  common,  which  tha 


OH.  in,  1— 23.J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBDJTHIANa.  U» 

world  may  nw  u  it  likes ;  they  are  a  sacred  enclosure,  marked  off  and  devoted  to  holy 
OSes.  They  ara  God's  temple — body,  soul,  and  spirit  corresponding  to  the  three 
divisions  of  the  ancient  tabernacle.  Tliis  appliei  also  to  the  Church,  whidi,  ip  ho]j 
because  dwelt  in  by  God, 

II.  God's  tbmfle  must  hot  bk  habsei*.  This  follows  from  what  has  been  aald.  If 
God  dwells  in  believers,  an  injury  done  to  them  is  done  to  his  sanctuary.  Consider  i 
1.  Sow  the  temple  may  be  marred.  Sin  in  every  form  pollutes  and  injures  the  soul. 
It  is  an  outrage  on  God's  temple.  The  Holy  Spirit  cannot  dwell  with  unholiness. 
More  particularly :  (1)  Bff  letting  vp  idoU.  To  place  any  person  or  thing  beside  God 
is  to  be  guilty  of  idolatry.  He  will  not  dwell  in  the  temple  where  other  gods  are 
worshipped ;  it  is  polluted  (Isa.  xlii.  8 ;  1  John  v.  21).  (2)  By  throwing  it  open  to 
aU.  The  temple  was  holy  ground,  which  none  but  consecrated  feet  might  tread.  The 
heart  of  the  believer  is  not  to  be  fluag  open  to  the  world  or  to  unholy  thoughts  and 
desires ;  the  Church  is  not  to  act  on  worldly  principles,  or  employ  carnal  means,  or 
seek  secular  ends.  All  such  intruders  de&le  God's  temple  (John  li.  14 — 17).  2.  Hn* 
penalty  threatened  against  those  that  mar  Ood^e  temph.  He  who  demed  Ck>d'f 
sanctuary  was  punished  by  death  (Lev.  xv.  81;  comp.  Numb.  xix.  20).  He  who 
destroys  God's  spiritual  temple  shall  himself  be  destroyed.  The  grieved  Spirit  wiU 
depart  and  spiritual  death  will  ensue.  A  warning  to  Christians  against  espousing 
error,  or  practising  sin,  or  cherishiug  party  spirit.  A  warning  to  teachers  lest,  by 
preaching  false  doctrine  or  fomenting  strife,  they  incur  this  awful  punishment.  How 
watchful  should  we  be  over  our  own  hearts!  How  careful  should  we  be  la.  oar 
tnatment  of  fellow-Christians  I— & 

Vers.  18—^0. — The  way  f»  wisdom.    "  Wisdom  "  Is  one  of  the  key-words  of  these 

early  chapters  of  the  Epistle.  Here  again  the  contrast  between  true  and  false  wisdom 
appears  in  the  form  of  a  warning  against  self-conceit.    "  Let  no  man  deceive  himselC 

L  To  BX  WISE  WE  VLVST  FiBST  BECOME  FOOLS.  The  wisdom  of  this  world  has  its 
uses  within  its  own  sphere,  but  it  is  no  help  to  the  understanding  of  the  things  of 
God.  It  is  a  hindrance  which  must  be  removed  ere  we  can  learn  the  Divine  wisdom. 
We  must  divest  ourselves  of  our  fancied  wisdom  and  become  fools  in  our  own  eyes, 
in  order  to  be  spiritually  wise.  This  is  a  general  law.  Pride  or  self-conceit  in  regard 
to  any  branch  of  knowledge  or  art  is  an  effectual  bar  to  progress.  We  must  confess 
our  ignorance  in  order  to  knowledge,  our  weakness  tn  order  to  strength,  our  folly 
in  order  to  wisdom.  "  He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  This  truth  holds; 
1.  As  to  the  beginning  of  tlie  Christian  life.  How  often  are  anxious  souls  kept 
back  from  entering  into  peace  because  they  will  not  renounce  their  own  ideas  of  the 
way  of  salvation  I  Oidy  when  they  submit  entirely  to  God's  way  as  little  children  do 
they  enter  the  kingdom.  2.  A»  to  progress  in  the  Christian  lift.  Even  after  conver- 
sion we  must  be  careful  "  to  bring  every  thought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of 
Christ "  (2  Cor.  z.  6).  We  can  grow  in  spiritual  insight,  in  holiness,  in  patience,  in 
power  for  service^  in  faith  and  hope  and  love,  only  by  esteeining  ourselves  foolish 
and  being  content  to  rat  as  learners  at  the  Lord's  feet, 

II.  The  wisdom  of  this  wobld  is  foolishness.  This  explains  why  our  own 
wisdom  must  be  renounced.  In  the  judgment  of  the  All- wise  it  is  folly.  The  specula- 
tions of  men  regarding  God  and  our  relation  to  him,  however  much  of  truth  they 
contain,  are  yet  on  the  whole  vain,  inasmuch  as  they  fail  to  reach  an  adequate 
knowledge  of  him.  -Those  who  have  worked  the  longest  at  the  great  problems  of 
life  are  the  readiest  to  confess  this.  One  after  another  of  the  world's  wise  men  have 
wrestled  with  them  and  passed  them  down  to  their  successors  unsolved.  Or  look  at 
the  schemes  of  men  for  the  regeneration  of  the  world.  Education,  testhetio  culture, 
the  teaching  of  morality,  social  communism,  religion  made  easy, — all  have  been  tried 
ind  found  wanting.  None  of  them  can  redeem  mankind  from  sin  and  restore  them  to 
their  losi  dignity.  And  in  nothing  do  men  seem  so  foolish  as  just  in  those  things  in 
which  they  think  themselves  wise.  They  are  caught  in  their  own  neb  Their 
schemes  of  salvation  work  their  ruin. — B. 

Vers.  21 — 23. — The  Christian's  heritage.  Since  the  wisdom  of  men  is  foolishness, 
and  even  the  ministers  of  Divine  wisdom  are  but  servants,  all  glorying  in  men  is  to  be 


120  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  m.  1—23 

avoided.    Boast  not  in  this  one  or  tliat,  however  eminent ;  for  all  suoh  boasting  is  a 
degradation  to  one  who  is  possessed  of  so  rich  aa  inheritance. 
I.  I*  18  UNIVERSAL.    "  All  things  are  yours."    Man's  original  lordship  over  creation 

£8.  viii.  6)  has  1>een  lost  by  sin,  but  is  now  restored  in  Christ.    All  things  exist 
'  the  Chnstian ;  all  things  co-operate  for  his  good  (Bom.  viii.  28). 

"  For  ns  the  winds  do  blow ; 
The  earth  doth  rest,  heaven  move,  and  fountains  flow* 
No  thing  we  see  bat  means  unr  good. 
As  our  delight,  or  as  our  treasure : 
The  whole  is,  either  our  cupboard  of  food. 
Or  cabinet  of  pleasure. 

*Oht  mighty  love  I    Man  is  one  world,  and  hath 
i^other  to  attend  him." 

(George  Herbert.) 

1.  AU  tiaAen  Mong  to  the  Christian.  The  Church  was  not  made  for  Paol,  oi 
ApdloB,  or  Cephas ;  but  these  have  been  given  to  the  Church  for  its  planting  and 
watering  and  culture.  The  ministers  of  Christ  are  workmen  employed  in  erecting 
God's  temple.  One  lays  the  foundation,  another  hews  the  stones,  another  carves  the 
ornaments,  another  does  the  carpenter-work,  etc.  All  are  working  for  the  same  end, 
each  in  his  own  department.  Why  should  we  set  the  one  against  the  other,  as  if  the 
mason  were  everything  and  the  carpenter  nothing  ?  You  have  your  favourite  apostle : 
do  not  neglect  the  practical  James,  because  you  delight  in  the  fervid,  argumentative 
Paul ;  Or  the  dogmatic  Peter,  because  you  love  the  calm,  intuitive  John.  Learn  from 
Christian  men  of  various  schools  and  denominations,  whom  God  sends  with  a  message 
to  their  generation.  All  are  yours.  2.  The  world.  This  denotes  the  material  universe 
and  all  its  providential  arrangements.  However  evil  men  may  usurp  possession 
meanwhile,  it  is  the  saints  that  inherit  the  earth  (Matt.  v.  5).  It  is  maintained  for 
their  use,  ordered  with  a  view  to  their  welfare,  and  in  the  end  they  shall  be  its  sola 
possessors.  The  world,  with  all  its  forces  and  all  its  treasures,  lies  at  their  feet.  All 
has  been  given  to  make  life  happier  and  better,  and  to  help  us  to  glorify  our  Father  in 
heaven.  3.  Life  and  death.  The  term  of  our  sojourn  on  the  earth,  with  all  that  it 
brings,  is  ours.  Life  is  a  mighty  gift — a  great  field  in  which  to  sow  eternal  seed.  It 
is  ours  for  two  great  purposes — for  being  and  doing:  The  culture  of  the  new  life 
within  ns,  and  the  promotion  of  our  neighbour's  well-being, — in  these  two  directions 
life  is  our  opportunity.  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ."  There  are  ways  of  promoting 
God's  glory  which  are  peculiar  to  this  life,  and  which  can  never  come  to  us  t^ain. 
Death  also  is  ours  as  well  as  life.  That  grim,  horrid  thing,  whose  face  strikes  terror 
to  the  stoutest  heart,  and  whose  icy  grasp  freezes  the  fountains  of  life, — that,  too, 
becomes  our  servant.  As  the  sailor  conquers  the  winds  by  making  them  propel  his 
vessel,  so  death  ministers  to  our  adyancement.  "  To  die  is  gain."  It  releases  from 
the  pains,  and  toils,  and  conflicts,  and  limitations  of  this  mortal  state,  and  ushers  us  into 
tk*  enjoyment  of  our  inlieritance.  4.  !niings  present  and  things  to  come.  The  present 
and  the  future  in  the  most  comprehensive  sense.  Our  actual  lot  is  ours,  whether  it  be 
easy  or  hard,  pleasant  or  distressing.  It  is  ours  to  serve  us,  if  we  will  only  let  it  do  its 
work  and  tiun  it  to  the  best  account.  The  future  is  still  hid  from  us,  hut  it  can  bring 
us  nothing  which  shall  not  work  for  our  good.  Whatever  form  the  things  to  come 
may  take,  we  are  assured  that  they  are  ours. 

U.  Thk  title  IB  GOOD.  "  Te  are  Christ's ;  and  Christ  is  God's."  All  things  are 
ours  only  because  we  belong  to  Christ.  He  has  recovered  for  man  his  lost  sovereignty, 
and  in  him  we  receive  what  he  has  won  for  us.  The  crown  is  again  placed  on  our 
heads ;  we  become  joint-heirs  with  Christ  (Rom  viii.  17),  who  is  Heir  of  all  things 
(Heb.  L  2).  Apart  from  him  we  have  no  title.  And  belonging  to  Christ,  we  belong 
to  God ;  for  "  Christ  is  God's."  As  the  Son  of  God  manifest  in  flesh  for  the  redemption 
of  his  people,  he  is  the  Father's  Servant,  delighting  to  do  his  will ;  whilst  at  the  same 
time  he  is  the  Father's  equal  (ch.  xi.  3 ;  xv.  28).  Mark  the  successive  steps  of  thii 
great  ladder  of  being.  All  things  are  subject  to  the  saints ;  the  saints  are  subject  to 
Christ  their  Head ;  Christ  as  Mediator  is  subject  to  the  Father. 


BH.  IIL  1— 88.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa  121 


1.  Be  not  subject  to  men;  Christ  is  your  Head.  2,  How  valid  is  the 
believer's  title  to  bla  glorious  heritage  I  3.  Beckon  up  your  possessions  in  Christ; 
claim  them  as  jrour  own;  and  all  earthly  wealth  and  dignity  wiU  Ctil  to  dazzle 

you. — B. 

Ver.  9. — "OoePt  hiubandry."  The  leading  truth  in  the  context  would  seem  to  be  tbii> 
—that  the  most  honoured  and  most  successful  worker  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  but 
as  a  helpless  instrument  through  which  the  living  power  is  pleased  to  operate,  and 
that  power  is  in  God  alone.  The  name  of  God,  therefore,  occupies  the  emphatic  place 
in  e^h  clause  of  this  verse.  "  0/  Ood  ye  are  the  husbandry,"  This  is  spoken  of  the 
Corinthians,  not  so  much  as  individual  believers,  but  as  an  organized  Christian  society. 
Observe  the  view  it  gives  us  of — 

I.  The  natcbb  of  a  Chhistian  Chuboh.  It  is  Ood's  "  tilled  land."  Not  so  much 
the  process  of  husbandry,  but  the  field  in  which  the  process  is  wrought  out,  is  here 
intended.  Every  organized  Christian  society  is  the  sphere  of  a  spiritual  culture 
analogous  to  that  which  goes  on  in  the  realm  of  nature,  in  the  gardens,  the  vineyards, 
and  the  corn-fields.  Two  or  three  distinct  elements  of  thought  are  suggested.  1.  There 
is  the  idea  of  a  germ  of  Divine  life  implanted  in  the  hearts  of  men.  The  course  of 
nature's  husbandry  proceeds  on  the  law  that  when  the  seed-corn,  in  which  the 
mysterious  principle  of  vegetable  life  is  hidden,  is  brought  into  contact  with  certain 
quickening  and  nourishing  elements  of  the  soil,  it  will  germinate  and  be  productive. 
The  step  of  primary  importance  is  the  planting  of  the  seed  in  the  ground,  because 
that  establishes  the  necessary  connection  between  the  latent  forces  that  combine  to 
work  out  the  desired  result.  So  in  the  higher  sphere  of  man's  moral  life.  The  "  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus "  is  the  productive  germ,  in  which,  beneath  the  husk  of  the  literal 
verbal  form,  is  hidden  the  very  spirit  and  life  of  God.  And  the  condition  of  its 
unfolding  is  that  it  should  be  brought  into  real,  direct,  living  contact  with  the  soul 
(Matt.  xiii.  23 ;  Jas.  i.  21 ;  1  Pet.  i.  23).  There  is  no  uncertainty  in  the  result  when 
the  needful  conditions  are  supplied.  The  Church  is  God's  "  tilled  land."  "  The  field 
is  the  world ; "  but  then  the  world  has  its  "  wayside "  and  its  "  stony  and  thorny 
places ; "  the  "  good  ground  "  is  compos^  d  uf  those  who,  "  in  an  honest  and  good  heart," 
are  prepared  to  receive  the  imperishable  seed  of  the  kingdom.  2.  The  development  of 
(hit  germ  by  external  culture.  The  husbandry  of  the  earth  is  man's  effort  to  supply 
the  most  favourable  conditions  for  the  working  out  of  nature's  great  productive  law. 
Churches  exist  to  promote,  as  far  as  possible,  the  operation  of  the  spiritual  law.  Social 
life  generally,  with  all  its  relations  and  activities,  is  no  doubt  intended  by  God  to  be 
helpful  to  this.  We  rise  to  the  true,  broad  idea  of  religious  culture  only  when  we 
look  on  them  all  as  auxiliaries  to  the  great  work  of  spiritual  enlargement  and  enrich- 
ment. But  the  Church  relationship,  by  all  its  conditions  of  fellowship,  worship,  and 
work,  is  specially  fitted  to  accomplish  this  end.  Spiritual  culture  is  the  primary 
purpose  of  its  existence.  The  ideal  may  not  always  be  reached.  As  the  earth  has  its 
frigid  and  temperate  and  torrid  zones,  so  Christian  societies  differ  as  to  the  kindliness 
of  their  soil  and  atmosphere  for  the  development  of  the  germs  of  spiritual  life.  But 
this  is  their  Divine  intent — that  they  should  be  nurseries  of  all  truth  and  goodness, 
where  everything  that  is  best  and  noblest  and  loveliest  in  men  may  be  fostered  and 
brought  to  perfection.  3.  The  production  of  the  appropriate  fruits.  All  labour  is  for 
the  sake  of  the  "  profit "  that  can  be  got  out  of  it.  Seed-sowing,  "  planting  and  water- 
ing," point  on  to  the  harvest.  One  harvest  lays  the  foundation  for  another  and 
a  greater.  The  "  increase  "  is  the  end  of  all.  "  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye 
bear  much  fruit"  (John  xv.  8).  "These  things  [good  works]  are  good  and  profitable 
to  men "  (Titus  iii.  8).  Churches  exist  for  the  production  of  the  fruits  of  Divine 
goodness,  with  all  the  added  force  and  fulness  that  social  unity  can  give.  They 
answer  their  end  only  so  far  as  spiritual  power  goes  forth  from  them,  and  they  are 
felt  to  be  centres  and  sources  of  blessing  to  the  world,  producing  something  that  shall 
make  it  richer  and  happier  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been,  something  that  shall 
never  die. 

n.  The  belation  between  Divine  and  human  aoenot  in  the  development  of 
THE  LIFE  OF  THE  Chobch.  "  God's  husbandry."  Diyine proprietorship  is  an  important 
truth  involved  here,  but  Divine  activity  is  no  doubt  the  more  prominent.    The  field 


122  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  m.  1—23; 

not  only  belongs' to  God,  so  that  none  dare  claim  any  kind  of  "lordship"  over  It;  but 
it  is  one  in  wliich  Ood  is  the  great  Worker.  The  process  wrought  out  In  it  is  the 
result  of  his  productive  power,  and,  as  far  as  the  vital  part  of  it  is  concerned,  of  his 
alone.  Man  is  nothing  ;  God  is  "  all  in  all "  (ver.  7).  But  the  instrument  has  its 
needful  and  proper  place.  God  works  out  his  beneficent  ends  through  the  intervention 
of  man's  own  willing  co-operation,  and  in  this  lies  for  man  himself  an  infinite  bene- 
diction. He  might  have  made  the  earth  to  yield  its  fruits  without  any  culture  of  ours  ; 
but  would  that  have  been  a  merciful  arrangement  ?  In  those  parts  of  tbe  earth  where 
there  is  the  nearest  approach  to  such  a  condition  of  things,  human  life  is  always  found 
to  be  in  a  state  the  most  degraded.  Labour  is  the  law  of  man's  being.  And  though 
that  labour,  through  the  curse  of  sin,  presents  too  often  the  aspect  of  irksome  toil, 
3-et  still  it  is  a  "sublime  necessity,"  the  indispensable  condition  of  physical  health  and 
happiness.  In  the  spiritual  sphere,  too,  God  would  have  us  to  be  "  fellow-workers  " 
with  himself.  He  will  not  accomplish  his  beneficent  purposes  without  iis.  He  employs 
us  as  the  channels  and  vehicles  of  his  power.  His  working  in  us  is  the  motive  and 
the  inspiration  of  our  working  for  him.  "Work  out  your  own  falvaion  with  fear 
and  trembling ;  for,"  etc.  (Pliil.  ii.  12,  13).  We  can  expect  to  see  the  blessed  issue 
only  when  we  place  ourselves  as  ready  and  prepared  instruments  in  his  haudi.  But 
never  may  we  iorget'  that  tbe  power  is  his  and  not  ours. 

"  Should  e'er  his  wonder-working  graot 
Triumph  through  our  weak  aim, 
Let  nut  our  sinful  fancy  trace 
Auglit  human  in  the  charm." 

w. 

Ver.  11.— 7%e  one  Foundation,  It  is  of  the  personal,  not  the  doctrinal,  Christ  that 
the  apostle  here  speaks — of  Christ,  not  so  much  as  the  basis  of  a  system  of  religious 
teaching,  but  as  hini^eir  the  living  Foundation  of  living  souls.  Look  at  this  Foundation 
in  two  or  three  different  lights. 

L  As  THE  OBOUND  OF  THE  sinnbk's  HOPE  OF  SALVATION.  "  Neither  is  there  salvation 
in  any  other :  for  there  is  none  other  Name,"  etc.  (Acts  iv.  12).  The  apostles  never 
diverged  in  the  slightest  degree  from  this  testimony.  To  have  done  this  would  have 
been  to  preach  no  gospel  to  men  at  all,  but  only  to  flattir  them  with  a  false,  delusive 
hope.  The  reason  of  Paul's  unyielding  fidelity  to  the  simiilicity  of  his  gospel  message 
at  Corinth  and  everywhere  else,  lay  in  his  deep  sense  of  the  fact  that,  in  whatever 
land  or  age  or  grade  of  social  life  a  man  may  be  found,  whatever  the  level  of  his 
civilization  or  intellectual  culture,  "Christ  crucified"  can  alone  meet  his  spiritual 
necessities.  And  he  would  pay  just  as  little  respect  to  our  dreams  of  self-sufficiency 
as  he  did  to  those  of  the  men  of  his  own  times ;  for  they  have  just  as  little  solid  ground 
to  rest  uix>n.  Our  nature  is  the  same  as  theirs.  Our  spiritual  needs  are  the  same. 
There  is  the  same  insatiable  craving  within  us,  the  same  guilt  on  our  consciences,  the 
same  seeds  of  corruption  latent  in  our  hearts,  the  same  moral  dangers  besetting  the 
pathway  of  our  life.  The  same  eternal  spirit-world  surrounds  us,  and  wo  must  confront 
the  same  "  righteous  judgment  of  God."  What  can  we  do  but  cast  our  souls,  with  all 
the  wealth  of  their  affections  and  the  weight  of  their  immortal  interests,  on  Christ  ? 
What  other  "  refuge  "  have  we  but  the  "  hope  set  before  us  in  the  gospel "  ? 

II.  "The  basis  of  all  true  spiritual  oneness  and  fellowship  amonq  men.  The 
Church  at  Corinth  had  become  a  distracted  and  divided  communion.  It  failed  to 
maintain  the  "  unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace."  St.  Paul  knew  well  where 
the  secret  of  this  lay.  As  a  "  wise  master-builder,"  he  saw  at  once  that  the  breach, 
the  disruption  in  the  house  was  caused  by  some  fault  in  its  relation  to  the  Foundation 
on  which  it  was  supposed  to  rest.  In  spite  of  all  his  care,  the  superstructure  had  not 
been  based  with  sufficient  firmness  upon  that.  He  calls  them  back  to  the  principle 
and  ground  of  their  unity.  They  were  divided  because  they  had  in  some  way 
wandered  from  it,  had  slipped  off  from  it,  lost  their  hold  on  it.  The  uniting  principle 
had  liecome  less  to  them  than  the  forces  that  rend  asunder.  There  is  no  real,  living, 
lasting  union  among  men,  except  on  the  basis  of  a  common  life  in  Christ,  There  are 
appearances,  shadows  of  it,  approximations  to  it  more  or  less  near,  but  not  the  Divine 


CH.iitl— 23.]    tHE  FlBSt  Ei>IStliB  tO  THfi  CORllifTttlANS.  123 

reality.  Think  of  those  associations  into  which  men  enier  for  purposes  of  commerce, 
personal  enrichment,  science,  pleasure,  politics,  philanthropy ;  the  oneness  of  a  nation 
in  its  devotion  to  the  throne  and  constitution;  of  an  army  in  the  enthusiasm  of  its 
service ;  of  a  popular  assembly  under  the  spell  of  some  commanding  influence ;  th^ 
oneness  even  of  a  family,  with  its  identity  of  interest  and  interchange  of  natural 
afTection; — what  are  all  these  forms  of  unity  comi'ared  with  that  of  souls  that  are 
bound  together  in  the  fellowship  of  the  etei'nal  life  of  Christ,  members  of  his  body,  and 
therefore  "members  one  of  another"?  The  true  brotherhood,  which  men  seek  else- 
where in  vain,  they  find  in  the  Church  ransomed  by  the  blood  of  Christ  and  built 
on  him  as  its  eternal  Foundation. 

III.  The  boot  of  an  endurino  pbbbonal  righteousness.  In  what  the  apostle 
afterwards  says  of  the  different  ways  in  which  men  "  build,"  he  probably  has  religious 
teachers  and  the  quality  of  their  teaching  specially  in  view.  But  we  may  also  appl\' 
it  to  the  quality  of  a  man's  personal  character  and  life.  The  picture  is  presented  o. 
one  who,  as  regards  the  groundwork  of  his  being,  may  be  "in  Christ,"  but  whoso 
practice  is  not  altogether  worthy  of  the  sacred  relationship — a  loose  fabric  of  "wood, 
hay,  stubble."  In  the  day  "  when  every  man's  work  shall  be  made  manifest  of  what 
sort  it  is,"  how  mournfully  will  the  defective  doings  of  the  unfaithful  servant,  the 
careless  slothful  builder,  be  swept  away  before  the  consuming  fire !  "  He  shall  suffer 
loss ;  .  .  .  saved ;  yet  so  as  by  fire."  And  this  suggests  an  opposite  picture.  There  aro 
those  whose  virtue  has  no  living  root  in  Christ,  draws  none  of  its  inspiration  from  thi 
faith  of  which  he  is  the  "  Author  and  Finisher."  It  is  a  fabric  symmetrical  and  fair  tu 
look  upon,  but  it  rests  not  on  the  true  Foundation.  It  is  not  for  us  to  judge  anyman. 
"  To  his  own  Master  he  standeth  or  falleth."  But  this  we  know— that  the  criterion 
ly  which  Christ  will  judge  us  all  "  at  that  day "  is  the  relation  in  which  we  stand 
towards  himself,  and  "other  foundation"  of  personal  righteousness  "can  no  man 
lay»_W. 

Ver.  13. — Proof  by  fire.  There  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  what  day  it  is  that  is  here 
intended.  It  is  that' "great  and  dreadful  day"  of  the  Lord's' coming  to  judgment,  to 
which  all  Scripture  bears  more  or  less  distinct  prophetic  witness — the  day  when  the 
final  issues  of  time  shall  be  gathered  up,  and  time  itself  shall  melt  into  the  measureless 
eternity.  One  special  characteristic  of  the  day  is  that  then  all  human  works  will  be 
put  to  the  supreme  and  decisive  test.    Consider — 

L  The    instbumbnt  of   the  test.    "Th^  fire  shall  prove  each  man's  work." 

1.  Literal  elemental  fire.  It  is  the  plain  teaching  of  Scripture  that  the  visible,  material 
world  around  us  shall  undergo  some  wondrous  transformation  by  fire,  that  out  of  the 
ashes  of  the  old  there  may  arise  "the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  wherein 
dwelleth  righteousness"  (see  Mai.  iv.  1;  2  Thess.  L  8;  2  Pet.  iii.  7,  10).  And  science 
confirms  the  possibility,  if  not  actual  probability,  of  such  an  issue.  2.  2%e  fire  of 
Divine  holinest.  The  elemental  fire  is  but  the  outward  symbol  of  moral  judgment. 
It  was  for  such  judgment  that  Christ  came  into  the  world  at  first  (Isa.  x.  17 ;  Mai.  iii. 

2.  3 ;  Matt.  iii.  11,  12).  He  will  finally  and  completely  fulfil  in  the  last  day  this 
judicial  function.  The  holy  love  of  God,  in  its  fiery  antagonism  to  all  evil,  is  incar- 
nated in  "  that  Man  whom  he  hath  ordained  to  be  the  Judge  of  quick  and  desid." 

II.  The  purpose  op  the  test.  To  make  manifest  "  every  man's  work  of  what 
sort  it  is."  To  make  manifest :  1.  The  basis  on  which  it  restt.  Christ  is  the  Source  of 
all  true  saintliness  of  character  and  righteousness  of  life  in  men.  Only  as  our  souls  are 
"  rooted  and  grounded "  in  him  can  we  build  up  a  fabric  of  personal  virtue  that  will 
stand  the  searching  test  of  that  day.  "  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on 
him  whom  he  haih  sent"  (John  vi.  29).  2.  The  spirit  that  inspires  it.  The  mere 
form  of  the  work,  the  place  and  space  it  has  visibly  occupied  on  the  stage  of  the  world's 
history,  is  of  comparatively  small  moment.  The  spirit  that  has  animated  it,  this  is 
its  living  substance,  its  essential  quality.    It  is  this  that  makes  it  of  "  the  sort  it  is." 

3.  iJifi  practical  results  of  it.    Not  all  the  works  even  of  the  best  of  men  will  bear  the 
revealing  light  and  the  consuming  fire  of  that  day.    When  the  good  die,  "  their  works' 
do  folibw  them,"  as  grateful  memories,  as  enduring  fruits  of  goodness  and  of  blessin- 
to  the  world.    And  yei  uut  all.    There  may  have  been  worl^  among  them  that  wci 
too  mueh  "of  the  earth,  earthy."    They  perish  with  meaner  things,  not  worthy  ■ 


124  TkB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    ton- m.  i-23. 

Immortality.  While  in  the  case  of  some  men  it  is  as  if  all  were  lost ;  they  leave  no 
lasting  memorials  behind  them,  over  which  the  living  may  rejoice ;  but  like  one  flying 
from  his  burning  house,  escaping  with  bare  life,  they  are  "  saved ;  yet  so  as  by  fire." 
Prove  yourself  and  your  work  now  by  the  Divine  standard,  "  ihnt  when  He  shall  appear 
yoa  may  have  confidence,  and  not  he  ashamed  before  him  at  his  coming." — W. 

Vers.  16, 17. — The  New  Testament  temple.  Under  the  Old  Testament,  the  temple 
of  God  was  a  house  made  with  hands,  a  worldly  sanctuary.  The  New  Testament  or 
dispensation  reckons  the  people  of  God  to  be  his  temple,  "  the  habitation  of  G'  d  in  the 
Spirit."  At  Corinth  there  were  many  temples  to  the  gods,  but  one  temple  of  God.  And 
the  former  were  of  dead  stones,  however  beautiful  to  the  eye.  It  is  a  common  saying, 
"  As  dead  as  a  stone."  But  St.  Paul,  with  a  fine  audacity  of  thought,  conceived  of  the 
latter — the  temple  of  God — as  formed  of  living  stones,  from  the  Foundation  upwards. 

I.  The  constkuction  of  the  temple.  The  foundation  of  the  whole  Church  God 
himself  laid  in  raising  up  Christ  from  the  dead.  Whom  men  despised,  he  accepted ; 
whom  men  slew,  he  quickened.  And  this  living  One  is  made  "  the  Headstone  of  the 
corner."  A  "  tried  stone,"  too,  thoroughly  tested  and  proved  to  be  sufficient.  The 
foundation  of  the  local  Church  at  Corinth,  Paul  as  a  wise  master-builder  had  laid,  i,e, 
he  had  made  known  Jesus  Christ  as  crucified  and  risen  from  the  dead,  and  taught  the 
Corinthian  converts  to  rest  on  him.  Eloquent  Apollos  followed ;  and,  though  a  party 
formed  itself  under  his  name,  saying  "  I  am  of  Apollos,"  St.  Paul  never  blamed  the 
eloquent  preacher  for  this  or  showed  the  least  jealousy  of  his  influence.  On  the  con- 
trary, at  the  end  of  the  Epistle  he  promised  to  the  Corinthians  another  visit  from  "  our 
brother  Apollos,  .  .  .  when  he  shall  have  convenient  time."  Any  builder  was  welcome 
to  continue  the  work  and  enter  into  St.  Paul's  labours,  provided  that  he  did  not  disturb 
the  Foundation  which  had  been  laid  and  could  not  be  improved,  and  that  he  took  good 
heed  how  he  built  thereon.  The  duty  of  builders  is  first  to  gather  men,  even  though 
they  be  dead  stones,  to  Jesus  Christ,  that  they  may  live ;  and  then  to  build  them 
together,  or  edify  them  in  faith  and  love.  For  this  the  proper  means  are  found  in  the 
exposition  and  application  of  the  Word  with  tenderness,  pointedness,  comprehensiveness, 
fearlessness,  and  fidelity.  The  power  is  altogether  of  God.  Paul  planted,  Apollos 
watered ;  but  the  Church  at  Corinth  was  not  their  husbandry,  but  God's.  Paul 
laid  the  foundation,  Apollos  built  on  it ;  but  the  Church  was  God's  building,  not  theirs. 
It  is  so  always  and  everywhere.  "  Except  the  Lord  build  the  bouse,  they  labour  in 
▼ain  that  build  it." 

n.  The  cHABACTEBisTioe  OF  THE  TEUFLE.  1.  HoUnesB.  "  Holiness  becometh  thine 
house,  0  Lord,  for  ever."  The  temple  built  by  Solomon  was  holy,  or  separated  to 
sacred  use ;  but  when  its  holiness  was  outraged  by  the  idolatrous  images  and  altars 
afterwards  placed  within  its  courts,  it  still  retained  beauty,  because  it  was  material. 
But  now  that  the  temple  is  spiritual  only,  its  holiness  is  its  attraction.  Corrupt  the 
character,  degrade  the  purity  of  the  Church,  and  you  destroy  its  beauty  too.  The 
holiness  of  the  Church  is  produced  and  maintained  by  the  Holy  Ghost  abiding  therein. 
We  have  not  "influences  of  the  Spirit"  as  from  a  distance,  but  his  personal  presence. 
When  the  Lord  Jesus  stood  in  the  house  of  God  at  Jerusalem,  he  said,  "  In  this  place 
is  One  greater  than  the  temple."  For  once,  the  less  contained  the  Greater.  Now  in 
every  meeting  of  the  saints  is  One  greater  than  the  Church,  for  the  Holy  Spirit  is  there. 
And  it  concerns  his  Divine  honour  to  purify  the  place  of  his  habitation.  It  is  his  high 
prerogative  to  consecrate ;  and  the  New  Testament  temple  is  throughout  consecrated, 
not  by  man,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  And  as  it  is  in  calling  and  consecration,  so 
ought  it  to  be  in  fact  and  in  service — holy  to  the  Lord.  2.  Unity.  We  read  not  oi 
temples,  but  of  one  temple.  However  men  may  arrange  themselves  ecclesiastically, 
God  sees  but  one  temple  or  Church  in  each  city,  as  of  old  at  Corinth  or  at  Ephesus. 
Indeed,  there  is  but  one  temple,  one  Body  of  Christ,  in  all  the  world.  And  the  unity 
is  not  brought  about  by  negotiation  or  legislation ;  it  is  wrought  by  God.  "  By  one 
Spirit  are  we  all  baptized  into  one  Body."  We  have  nothing  to  do  with  making  the 
unity ;  but  we  are  to  know,  feel,  and  evince  it,  worshipping  together  with  joy,  helping 
and  exhorting  each  other,  working  together  for  the  glory  of  God  and  good  of  man,  and 
partaking  together  of  the  same  bread  and  the  same  cup,  not  as  partisans,  but  as 
Christians,  members  of  one  Body,  guided  by  one  Spirit,  and  cheered  by  one  hope  d 


oH.in.  1— 23.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  MB 

OUT  calliog.  3.  Variety,  There  are  various  courts,  wings,  towers,  and  porticoes  in 
this  great  building.  To  our  minds  theie  may  seem  to  be  confusion  and  incongruity ; 
but  the  supreme  Architect  knows  how  to  adjust  and  reconcile  all  in  a  building  "fitly 
framed  together."  Variety  is  not  desultoriness.  The  mere  heaping  of  stones  togethei 
gives  no  temple,  far  less  the  making  of  little  groups  or  heaps  here  and  there  over  a 
wide  field.  They  must  be  built  and  knit  together  in  love.  And  then,  too,  there  is 
variety  in  the  places  assigned  to  individual  Cliristians.  Some  "seem  to  be  pillars." 
They  are  like  those  vertical  columns  which  supported  a  horizontal  entablature  in  those 
classical  temples  with  which  the  Corinthians  were  familiar.  Others  must  be  content 
to  fill  a  niche  or  fit  into  a  corner.  It  is  an  honour  to  be  anywhere  in  the  spiritual 
house. 

III.  A  WAENINQ  AOAIKST  INJUEIKQ  THIS  TEMPLE.  One  may  mar  the  temple  by 
not  taking  heed  to  what  he  builds.  It  may  be  called  very  liberal  and  tolerant  to  make 
no  distinctions,  and  bestow  Christian  pi'i,vileges  on  all ;  but  St.  Paul  would  call  it 
the  building  of  "  wood,  hay,  and  stubble,"  which  cannot  abide  the  fiery  trial  that 
comes  on  every  man's  work.  One  may  also  mar  the  temple  by  introducing  the 
temper  of  the  market-place,  and  of  the  tables  of  the  money-changers  into  its  courts. 
Such  things  call  again  and  again  for  censure  and  a  whip  of  small  cords.  One  may 
destroy  the  temple,  i.e.  aim  blows  at  its  very  life,  by  sti iking  at  its  holiness,  its  unity, 
or  its  variety.  Not  that  any  one  can  actually  demolish  it ;  for  it  is  an  ever-living 
Church :  "  Tlie  gates  of  hades  shall  not  prevail  against  it."  It  is  a  capital  crime  against 
Christ  and  the  Church,  e.ther  (1)  to  bring  unholy  teachings  and  practices  into  the 
temple  ("  deeds  of  the  Nicolaitanes,  which  I  also  hate,"  Rev.  ii.  6) ;  or  (2)  to  disunite 
the  living  stones,  striking  the  pick-axes  of  dissension  and  a  "separating  humour"  into 
the  temple  wall ;  or  (3)  to  forbid  in  a  bigoted  spirit  all  variety  in  Christian  organiza- 
tion, and  say,  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we,"  instead  of  looking  with  an  eye  of 
charity  on  all  who  lore  the  Saviour  and  breathe  Us  Spirit,  saying,  "  'Ihe  temple  of  the 
Lord  are  these." — F. 

Vers.  21 — 23. — A  Christian'$  poBiessioru.    It  ia  a  folly  under'the  ran  to  live  aboTe 

one's  means.  It  is  the  folly  of  very  many  Christians  that  they  live  spiritually  far 
below  their  means  of  grace  and  godliness.  They  are  like  poor  people  who  have  come 
into  a  large  estate,  and  cannot  for  some  time  adapt  themselves  to  their  altered  position 
or  comport  themselves  as  befits  their  fortune.  They  still  betray  the  narrow  ideas  and 
awkward  manners  of  their  former  condition.  So  Christians  are  assureii  that  they  have 
unsearchable  riches  in  Christ,  but  cannot  elevate  their  ideas  and  modes  of  life  to  the 
high  level  of  their  spiritual  privilege.  They  still  betray  the  narrow  estimates  and 
unworthy  habits  of  their  time  of  imregeneracy  and  unbelief.  To  correct  this  tendency 
and  raise  the  standard  of  Christian  sentiment  and  conduct,  let  us  look  into  this 
inventory  of  a  believer's  possessions,  and  the  right  or  charter  by  which  they  are  his. 

L  The  pbopebtt.  "  All  things  are  yours."  It  is  at  once  real  and  movable  estate. 
It  has  »he  most  permanent  character ;  and  yet  it  may  be  taken  by  the  Christian 
whithersoever  he'  goes,  and  enjoyed  anywhere.  A  man  rich  in  this  world's  goods  has 
necessary  limits  to  his  possessions.  His  real  estate  is  irremovable  and  his  personalty 
or  movable  wealth  is  perishable.  But  he  whose  riches  are  intellectual  and  spiritual 
has  property  everywhere.  Cast  him  naked  and  shipwrecked  on  an  unknown  coast ; 
yet  he  is  rich.  Spoil  him  of  all  earthly  goods  ;  reduce  him  to  the  very  almshouse ; 
and  yet  he  Is  rich.  When  he  has  nothing,  he  still  possesses  all  things.  1.  The 
Chriitian  ministry,  represented  by  Paul,  Apollos,  and  Cephas.  The  Church  is  not  for 
the  ministry,  but  the  ministry  for  the  Church.  The  Corinthian  Christians  did  not 
belong  to  the  great  preachers  here  named,  but  the  great  preachers  belonged  to  them: 
Often  the  isolation  of  particular  flocks  under  their  own  pastors  is  carried  to  an  extent 
which  virtually  brings  the  doctrine  to  nought,  and  gives  them  no  enjoyment  of  other 
gilts  bestowed  by  the  Head  of  the  Church  for  the  perfecting  of  his  saints.  But  some 
are  best  for  planting,  others  for  watering.  Let  ministers  and  teachers  of  the  Word, 
variously  qualified,  be  welcomed  and  cherished.  All  of  them  are  yours.  2.  The  world. 
It  is  a  bad  master,  but  a  useful  servant.  All  things  in  it  that  are  not  ainful  may  be 
madte  serviceable  to  the  happiness  and  progress  of  the  Christian,  and  to  the  glory  of 
Uod.    "  Use  thia  world  as  not  abusing  it."    3.  Life,  with  all  its  vicissitudes  and  possi- 


126  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  I'HE  COBINTHIANS.    [oh.  m.  1— 23w 

bilitics,  iorrow  and  joy,  trial  and  success.  It  is  quite  different  to  the  Christian  from 
what  it  is  to  the  non-Chvistian.  He  is  ncvtir  helpless,  and  need  never  be  in  despair; 
for  he  may  be  sure  that  the  circumstances  of  his  life  are  ordered  by  his  heavenly 
Friend,  tlie  lines  of  his  life  are  drawn  according  to  the  plan  of  his  loving  Saviour.  4. 
Death  ;  which  comes,  not  as  a  grisly  terror,  but  to  do  a  kindly  office.  Death,  like  life, 
just  because  it  is  not  in  the  Christian's  power,  serves  his  best  interests.  "Whether 
we  live  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's,"  We  may  add — The  death  of  friends  is  yours,  soften- 
in;;  your  heart.  The  death  of  enemies  is  yours,  delivering  you  out  of  their  hand. 
And  as  for  yourself;  Boston  has  said,  "  Death  comes  to  the  godly  man  as  Haman  to 
Mordecai,  with  royal  apparel  and  the  horse,  .and  commission  to  do  him  honour,  though 
with  a  sullen  voice  and  unkind  countenance."  5.  Things  present.  The  Christian  has 
a  promise  that  he  will  lack  no  good  thing,  and  things  that  seem  evil,  wounds,  losses, 
disappointments,  all  tend  by  the  Divine  blessing  to  exercise  his  faith  and  patience, 
and  so  to  strengthen  his  soul.  6.  Things  to  come.  Of  these  we  cannot  speak.  The 
sights  we  may  see,  the  feelings  we  may  experience,  the  changes  we  may  witness,  within 
a  year  or  two,  who  can  tell?  How  much  less  can  we  descant  on  things  beyond?  But 
enough  to  know  that  the  future  is  ours.  There  will  be  no  power  among  things  to  come 
which  can  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God. 

II.  The  security  fob  all  this  propertt.  The  Christian  holds  all  throush  his 
relation  to  Christ,  "  the  Heir  of  all  things."  "  Ye  are  Christ's;  and  Christ  is  God's." 
Believers  belong  to  Christ,  as  gi\  en  to  him  by  the  Father,  redeemed  by  him  on  the 
cross,  effectually  called  and  mystically  united  to  him  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  Christ 
is  God's,  as  the  well-beloved  of  the  Father,  to  whom  all  things  are  made  subject  both 
in  heaven  and  earth.  Now  believers  inherit  through  Christ,  are  co-heirs  with  him.  It 
is  because  he  is  Heir  and  Lord  of  all,  that  all  things  are  theirs.  To  quote  an  old 
divine:  "The  saints  have  nothing  but  through  Christ;  and  whatsoever  is  his,  is 
thiirs.  His  God  is  their  God;  his  Father,  their  Father;  his  blood,  his  merits,  his 
Spirit,  his  victories,  all  the  spoil  he  hath  gotten,  all  the  revenue  and  income  of  his  life 
and  death, — all  is  theirs."  If  men  only  believed  that  these  things  are  so,  that  Christians 
have  such  treasures,  and  hold  them  by  such  a  tenure,  surely  a  motive  of  enlightened 
self-interest  would  urge  them  to  the  feet  of  Christ.  Alas  I  all  men  have  not  faith. 
The  current  ideas  of  wealth  and  substance  are  quite  unconnected  with  religion,  which 
seems  to  many  a  good  thing  to  die  with,  but  rather  a  hindrance  than  otherwise  in  lite. 
St.  Paul's  teaching  tells  a  different  tale.  It  is  the  Christless  who,  being  without  God 
in  the  world,  are  poor  and  indigent.  It  is  those  who  are  Christ's  who,  however  poor 
in  this  world,  are  rich  towards  God. — F. 

Ver.  1. — The  earnal  mind.  In  view  of  St.  Paul's  description  of  the  Immoralities 
and  sensualities  of  the  pagan  peoples,  given  in  Bom.  i.,  and  in  special  lists  of  prevailing 
iniquities^  such  as  are  given  in  Gal.  v.  19 — 21,  his  sense  of  the  hindrance  the  carnal 
mind  presents  to  the  reception  of  spiritual  teachings  can  be  fully  apprehended. 
Probably  the  severest  thing  St.  Paul  said  about  the  carnal  mind  is  that  it  is  "  enmity 
against  God :  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  Law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be.  They  that 
are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God  "  (Horn.  viii.  7,  8).  Possibly  a  distinction  between 
the  "  natural "  man  and  the  "  carnal "  man  may  be  intended.  Th»  natural  man  is  one 
"whose  hopes  and  desires  are  bounded  by  the  limits  of  the  physical  pr-ncip.e  of  life ; " 
the  carnal  man  is  regarded  as  more  or  less  under  the  influence  of  the  sensual  passions. 
But  St.  Paul  seems  to  recognize  that  the  Corinthian  tendency  to  disputes  and  religious 
strife  was  a  sign  that  the  carnal  principles  were  yet  strongly  working  in  them ;  and 
"  an  appetite  for  religious  strife  prevents  us  from  discerning  the  deeper  truths  of  the 
Christian  faith."  It  is  broadly  true  that  the  reception  of  spiritual  truth  mainly  depends 
on  the  openness  and  preparedness  and  culture  of  those  to  whom  such  teaching  is  given. 
The  teacher  may  indeed  be  unskilful,  but  more  often  the  hindrance  is  that  the  hearer  is 
unspiritual.  Q'he  preparation  of  the  teacher  is  considered  to  be  essential,  the  prepara- 
tion of  the  taught  is  left  to  the  accident  of  personal  earnestness. 

1.  The  signs  of  the  carnal  mikd.  With  the  hints  given  above  two  rigns  may  be 
fully  dealt  with  and  illustrated.  1.  Inability  to  receive  advanced  spiritual  instruction. 
Self-indulgence  in  meat  or  drink,  inordinate  pursuit  of  pleasure,  the  captivity  of 
mind  and  laeart  to  business  schemes,  the  deteriorating  influence  of  worldly  ambitions, 


OH.  m.  1—23.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANh.  12^ 


— all  destroy  Interest  in  Divine  things,  and  take  from  us  the  very  possibility  of  appre- 
hending the  higher  mysteries  of  the  kingdom.  2.  A  spirit  of  strife  and  division.  It  is 
never  the  best  people  in  a  Christian  community  who  are  the  cause  of  strife.  Contention 
and  controversy  are  only  interesting  to  those  who  are  not  really  growing  in  likeness 
to  and  nearness  to  Christ.  Schism  and  strife  we  sure  signs  of  carnality.  Men  who 
get  soul-visions  of  the  truth  never  can  want  to  contend  over  words.  It  would  seem 
that  St.  Paul  recognized  signs  of  remaining  carnality  in  the  regenerate  members  of  the 
Church,  and  found  this  to  be  a  principal  hindrance  to  the  advance  of  his  teaching. 
Such  signs  of  the  "  carnal  mind  "  are  still  observed  by  Christian  pastors,  and  are  the 
occasions  of  their  deepest  depressions  and  constant  grief. 

II.  The  food  fob  tub  carnal  iund.  St.  PaiS  does  not  neglect  it  or  refuse  to 
consider  it.  And  it  is  remarkable  that  he  does  not  deal  with  it  by  warnings  or 
threatenings,  but  by  food,  and  that  of  a  kind  carefully  appropriated  and  adapted.  So 
the  physician  deals  with  some  classes  of  disease ;  he  gives  no  medicine,  but  nourishes 
the  general  health,  with  a  full  expectancy  that  the  renewed  vitality  will  throw  ofiF,  out 
of  the  system,  the  specifiQ  disease.  St.  Paul  evidently  thinks  the  real  cause  of 
carnality  to  be  UnB  spiritual  vitality,  want  of  capacity  to  digest  and  assimilate  good 
strong  food  of  truth.  These  religious  men  were,  in  regard  to  religious  truths  and 
principles,  really  only  babes,  and  religious  food  suited  to  babes,  to  beginners,  must  be 
provided  for  them.  They  must  have  the  "  milk  "  of  gospel  simplicities  until  they  are 
strong  enough  to  take  the  "  meat "  of  gospel  mysteries.  Only  the  milk  was  to  be 
given  with  the  purpose  of  nourishing  the  powers  for  better  food.  First  principles 
duly  apprehended  would  prepare  the  way  for  higher  teachings. 

Impress  that  in  Christian  congregations  there  is  always  a  call  for  the  gospel 
simplicities,  but  that  call  should  not  be  continually  made,  as  it  so  often  and  so  sadl^ 
is,^  the  same 'persons.  Milk  prepares  the  way  for  meat.  It  may  be  earnestly  urged 
that,  after  all  these  centuries  of  Christian  teaching  in  the  home  and  in  the  Church, 
there  ought  to  be  an  earnest  and  a  mighty  cry  for  advanced  and  spiritual  preaching  of 
the  great  revealed  mysteries  of  God  in  Christ.    We  ought  to  be  "  men." — B.  T. 

Vers.  6—7. — MaiCs  work  and  OocPs.  Explain  the  agricultural  figure  used  in  ver.  6. 
In  the  production  of  the  year's  harvest  many  different  agencies  are  employed.  Each 
man  has  work  and  his  time  for  work,  and  upon  man's  labour  the  harvest  in  large  measure 
depends.  Yet  sun,  and  wind,  and  rain,  and  atmosphere,  and  soil,  are  things  quite  as 
essential  as  man's  work,  but  absolutely  out  of  man's  control.  Year  by  year  man 
ploughs,  man  plants,  man  tends,  but  Ood  gives  the  increase.  So  in  spiritual  things, 
there  is  an  important  sphere  for  man's  agency,  but  efficiency  and  result  depend'  on  the 
co-operating  grace  and  blessing  of  God. 

L  Man  neveb  oak  get  betond  ministby.  That  is  his  duty,  and  that  is  his  dignity. 
Even  Paul  and  Apollos  can  be  but  "  ministers  by  whom  we  believe."  Man  cannot 
control  the  plan  into  which  his  work  may  fit,  or  the  issues  which  his  work  should 
reach.  Man  never  can  be  independent,  so  as  to  take  up  anything  and  do  it  completely. 
He  never  has  entrusted  to  him  more  than  a  piece  or  part,  which,  if  well  done,  fits  into 
other  pieces  and  parts,  entrusted  to  other  men,  and  goes  to  complete  the  whole  purpose 
that  was  in  God's  thought.  And  so  no  honour  of  results  can  ever  attach  to  man  the 
agenti  Servants  only  ask  praise  for  faithfulness,  the  honour  of  the  work  belongs  wholly 
to  the  master  whose  thought  and  plan  are  thus  wrought  out.  This  feeling  should 
ensure  the  sincere  hwmility  of  all  Christian  teachers. 

n.  Behind  ministbt  ib  always  mastership.  We  serve  somebody.  "We  serve 
the  Lord  Christ."  But  in  the  case  of  spiritual  work,  we  may  say  that  in  God  is  more 
than  mastership,  there  is  presidency  over  and  use  of  more  important  agencies  than 
man's,  though  agencies  related  to  man's,  and  working  in  with  his.  Spiritual  agencies 
are  as  much  out  of  our  control  as  sun,  or  wind,  or  rain  ;  yet  God  uses  them,  with  ours, 
to  win  the  increase.  Man  can  never,  by  himself,  accomplish  any  moral  or  spiritual 
service.  Paul  and  Apollos  could  do  much  for  the  Church  at  Corinth,  but  they  stand 
aside,  and  let  men  see  hQW  gloriously  and  effectively  Ood  works, — B.  T, 

Vera.  9—12. — Foundations  and  hiUdings,  A  curious  and  interesting  blending  ot 
metaphors  is  found  in  ver.  9.    "  Ye  are  God's  husbandry,  ye  are  God's  building."    Ths 


123  TUB  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COElNTHIANiS.    [cH.m.1— 2a 

sudden  changing  of  metaphors  is  a  characteristic  of  St.  Paul's  style ;  for  instances, 
see  ch.  is.  7 ;  2  Cor.  x.  4 — 8 ;  Eph.  iii.  17 ;  C!ol.  ii.  6—7.  'I'he  apostle  now  dwells 
fully  on  the  arcbitecturnl  metaphor,  and  gives  some  thoughts  of  singular  depth  and 
importance  on  the  true  foundation  tor  a  noble  life-work,  and  the  kind  of  buildings 
which  may  hopefully  be  reared  upon  it.  The  apostle  speaks  of  himself  as  a  foundation- 
layer;  reminds  the  Corinthians  that  it  had  been  his  work  to  commence  or  found 
Christian  Churches ;  that  this  he  had  successfully  done  again  and  again  during  his 
missionary  travels ;  and  that  the  Corinthian  Church  had  its  first  announcement  of  the 
gospel  from  him,  and  the  first  stones  of  its  spiritual  Church  laid  by  him.  He  naturally 
felt  jealous  concerning  the  character  of  the  members  of  that  Church,  and  would  have 
them  such  as  would  stand  the  testing  of  the  great  day. 

I.  St.  Paul  as  a  latkr  of  foundations.  Only  the  layer,  not  the  maker.  The 
Foundation  was  provided  (ver.  11) ;  with  it  not  even  an  ajMstle  could  interfere.  St.  Paul 
was  fitted  for  the  work  of  laying  it,  or  of  commencing  a  Christian  Church  in  new 
districts,  (1)  by  his  special  gifts  as  a  missionary ;  (2)  by  his  having  received  a  personal 
revelation  from  Jesus  Christ,  which  gave  intensity  to  his  convictions ;  and  (3)  by  his 
clear  apprehension  of  the  gospel  message,  and  sympathetic  power  as  a  teacher.  His 
personal  and  j^ersuasive  influence  on  his  fellow-men  needs  to  be  taken  into  account. 
But  St.  Paul  did  not  look  upon  the  beginning  of  a  Church  or  the  conversion  of  a  soul 
IS  any  end  of  his  work.  Laying  foundations  involves  a  design  for  a  building  that  is  to 
be  raised  upon  it,  and  the  apostle  kept  up  his  relations  with  the  Churches  he  was 
honoured  to  found,  so  that  he  might  ensure  that  the  building  was  being  raised  in  a 
manner  worthy  of  the  Foundation,  and  in  harmony  with  it.  He  had  no  greater  joy 
than  to  know  that  "  his  children  walked  in  the  truth." 

II.  Otheb  teachers  as  builders  on  the  Foundation.  St.  Paul's  call  to  the 
missionary  work  involved  the  necessity  of  removing  from  place  to  place,  and  prevented 
his  personally  watching  over  the  uprising  or  growth  of  any  one  Church.  This  disability 
be  often  seriously  felt,  and  it  made  him  very  anxious  concerning  the  wisdom,  skill,  and 
character  of  those  teachers  who  continued  his  work.  That  anxiety  comes  out  in  our 
text,  and  it  made  him  appeal  even  to  the  individual  Church  member,  urging  him  to 
see  that,  whatever  might  be  the  character  of  his  teachers,  his  own  personal  character 
was  being  nobly  and  snfcly  reared.  The  following  points  may  be  dwelt  on : — 1.  The 
huilders  of  any  one  Chui  ch  may  he  many.  There  may  be  a  long  succession  of  pastors 
and  teachers,  with  very  various  gifts  and  endowments ;  but  each  may,  in  his  time  and 
way,  add  to  the  symmetrical  and  harmonious  growth  of  the  building.  Each  must 
have  done  so  up  to  the  measure  of  his  loyalty  to  Christ  and  openness  to  his  Divine 
lead.  Still  the  same  variety  and  succession  are  maintained,  and  under  the  many 
builders'  hands  the  great  Church  of  the  redeemed  advances  to  its  perfection.  -2.  The 
materiah  used  in  the  construction  may  differ.  Even  of  right  materials  there  is  diversity, 
represented  by  "  gold,  silver,  precious  stones."  Some  teachers  are  strong  in  Biblical 
exposition,  others  in  enforcenjent  of  practical  duties,  and  others  in  appeal  to  pious 
feeling;  but  all  bear  upon  the  harmonious  uprising  of  the  building.  3.  The  architec- 
tund/eatures  may  in  parts  differ.  The  general  design  cannot  be  altered,  but-  multi- 
tudes of  details  are  left  open.  A  Christian  character  and  a  Christian  Church  can  have 
but  one  general  form ;  but  there  may  be  decoration  and  tracery  according  to  men's 
thought  of  the  morally  beautiful  in  the  age  in  which  they  build,  and  the  whole  Church 
appears  at  last  as  a  composite  structure,  combining  all  architectural  thought  and  form. 
But  man's  work,  in  character  or  Church,  must  be  subject  to  a  final  and  fierce  testing, 
and  only  the  really  substantial  and  good  may  ho{ie  to  bear  that  test — R.  T. 

Vers.  13 — 15. — Mnal  testings  of  our  life-work.  In  treating  this  passage  it  should 
be  noted  that  the  first  and  chief  reference  of  it  is  to  Christian  teachers  and  their  work, 
and  that  it  can  only  in  a  second  sense  be  applied  to  the  ordinary  Christian,  and  the 
kind  of  influence  for  good  which  he  strives  to  exert.  Still,  a  great  principle  is  enun- 
ciated in  St.  Paul's  counsel  to  the  teachers,  and  we  may  give  that  principle  a  wide  and 
general  application.  The  apostle  is,  in  this  part  of  the  Epistle,  dealing  with  the 
tendency  of  the  teachers  at  Corinth  to  overpress  their  individual  apprehensions  of  the 
truth,  and  so  to  make  parties  under  their  lead,  instead  of  carefully  preserving  the  unity 
of  the  Church  in  the  common  truth  "  as  it  is  in  Christ  Jesus."    "  The  image,  in  these 


oH.ni.i— 23.]    TfiE  FIUST  fiPISTtE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.  129 


/erses,  is  taken  from  what  would  meet  the  eye  of  a  traveller  in  Ephesus,  where  St.  Paul 
now  was,  or  in  Co  inth,  where  his  letter  was  to  he  first  read.  It  is  such  a  contrast  as 
may  he  seen  (though  not  in  precisely  the  same  striking  form  of  difference)  in  London 
in  our  own  day.  The  stately  palaces  of  marhle  and  of  granite,  with  roof  and  column 
glittering  with  gold  and  silver  decorations,  and,  close  hy  these,  the  wretched  hovels  of 
tlie  poor  and  outcast,  the  walls  made  of  laths  of  wood,  with  the  interstices  stuffed  with 
straw,  and  a  thatched  roof  ahove.  Then  arose  before  the  apostle's  vision  the  thought  of 
a  city  being  visited  by  a  mighty  conflagration,  such  as  desolated  Corinth  itself  in  the 
I'me  of  Mummlus.  The  mean  structures  of  perishable  wood  and  straw  would  be 
utterly  consumed,  while,  as  was  actually  the  case  at  Corinth,  the  mighty  palaces  and 
temples  would  stand  after  the  fire  had  exhausted  itself"  (T.  T.  Shore).  The  point 
of  the  apostle  is  that,  sooner  or  later,  all  earthly  works  come  under  severe  and  searching 
testings,  which  prove  whether  tliere  is  anything  in  them  of  permanent  value,  and 
destroy  what,  had  but  a  temporary  use  or  was  really  worthless.  There  is  a  good  and 
imjiortant  sense  in  which  the  testing-day  is  a  continuous  day.  We  need  not  put  the 
thought  of  the  proving  of  our  life-work  off  to  some  indefiaite  future.  Every  day  tests 
iiiid  tries.  Every  night  we  may  think  that  God  weighs  the  day  and  its  works  in  his 
perfectly  adjusted  balances.  But  the  early  Christian  mind  was  very  fully  occupied 
with  the  idea  of  a  particular  day,  on  which  Christ  would  appear  and  the  judgment  of 
mankind  be  completed ;  see  2  Cor.  v.  10. 

I.  The  fire-test  for  all  lifk-work.  Fire  is  conceived  as:  1.  The  most  destructive 
agent.  2.  The  most  searching  agent.  Recent  fires  have  shown  how  it  can  destroy  even 
buildings  of  brick  and  stone.  Illustrate  from  the  great  Chicago  fire.  3,Tl)e  most, purify- 
ing agent.  Illustrate  its  power  to  cleanse  the  dross  from  metals.  Compare  the  two 
other  cleansing  agents  noticed  in  Scripture — water  and  blood.  Both  these  cleanse  by 
a  mechanical  process ;  fire  cleanses  by  a  chemical  process.  Nowailavs,  in  great 
cities  and  in  regard  to  great  buildings,  the  most  anxious  question  is,  "  \  1  the  walls 
etc.,  stand  fire  ?  "  We  try  to  build  places  that  shall  be  fire-proof.  Fire  fitly  represents 
the  searching  power  of  God:  "  As  fire  does,  so  does  God  in  the  end  thoroughly  search 
out  and  destroy  all  that  is  vile  or  refuse,  all  that  is  not  thoroughly  genuine  and 
durable."  For  passages  associating  fire-symbols  with  God,  see  Deut.  iv.  24 ;  ix.  3 ; 
Ps.  1.  3 ;  xcvii.  3 ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  15,  16 ;  Mai.  iii.  2,  3 ;  2  Thcss.  i.  8 ;  Heb.  xii.  29.  It 
may  be  shown  that  (1)  time,  (2)  difBcult  circumstances,  (3)  afflictions,  test  our  life-work, 
and  act  as  the  fire  of  God.  Sooner  or  later,  even  in  this  Ufe,  men  find  out  of  what  sort 
their  work  has  been,  but  all  mistake  and  delusion  about  the  quality  of  our  work  will 
be  swept  away  in  the  great  revealing  day  of  God. 

II.  The  reward  for  all  whose  life-work  abides  the  test.  The  reward  is  really 
found  in  the  abiding,  the  "permanent  character  of  the  work.  "  Those  who  have  built 
well  shall  have  their  reward  in  their  work  having  survived  the  trial  of  the  fire." 
F.  W.  Robertson  points  out  the  doctrine  of  the  rewardableness  of  work,  as  taught  in 
this  passage.  "  All  were  one,  on  the  one  Foundation ;  yet  St.  Paul  modifies  this :  they 
were  not  one  in  such  a  sense  that  all  their  work  was  equally  valuable,  ibr  '  every  man 
shall  receive  his  own  reward  according  to  his  labour.'  It  is  incredible  that  the  mere 
theologian,  defending  the  outworks,  writing  a  book  on  the  evidences  of  Christianity,  or 
elaborating  a  theological  system,  shall  be  as  blessed  as  he  who  has  hungered  and  thirsted 
with  Christ,  and  like  Christ  suffered.  Nevertheless,  each  in  his  own  way  shall  gain  the 
exact  recompense  of  what  he  has  done."  On  the  doctrine  of  rewards,  consider  (1)  the 
sense  in  which  they  are  present-,  (2)  the  sense  in  which  they  are  future ;  (3)  how  far  we 
may  think  of  them  as  material,  and  how  far  as  moral ;  (4)  their  precise  adaptation  to 
the  worker,  and  relation  to  the  work  he  had  done ;  and  (5)  their  coming  as  a  gift  of 
grace,  never  as  a  claim  of  merit.  _ 

HI.  The  loss  of  those  whose  life-work  will  not  abide  the  test.  Their  work 
will  perish.  It  is  proved  to  be  "  of  the  earth,  earthy."  It  had  no  abiding  spiritual 
character.  Reference,  no  doubt,  is  to  all  so-called  Christian  teaching  that  has  mind 
in  it,  energy  in  it,  individuality  in  it,  but  not  Christ  in  it,  and  Christ  wholly.  All 
work  that  only  glorifies  the  worker  must  perish.  Only  work  that  glorifies  Christ  can 
stand  the-  fire-test.  Show  with  what  care  we  should  test  our  own  work  in  God's  sight, 
to  be  sure  that  no  self-seeking  has  crept  into  it  and  spoiled  it.  "  If  we  would  judge 
ourselves  we  shall  not  be  judged."     But  St.  Paul,  while  writing  such  severe  and 

L  COBINTHIANS.  .  * 


130  TBB  first  epistle  -to  THE  OOEINTfllANB.    [oh.  m.  l-2a 

searching  thiogs,  makes  most  careful  qualifications,  so  that  none  should  he  unduly 
discouraged.  This  is  said  for  the  comfort  of  sincere  souls  whose  life-work  has  proved 
a  failure.  "  He  himself  shall  he  saved ;  yet  so  as  hy  fire."  "  He  shall  be  saved,  while 
all  his  work  shall  he  destroyed,  just  as,  to  use  St.  Paul's  metaphor,  a  builder  escapes 
from  bis  house  which  has  been  burnt  over  his  head,  and  stands  trembling  yet  safe, 
looking  on  his  work  in  ruins."  "  Surely  the  '  smell  of  fire '  may  be  said  to  pass  on  him 
who  seea  all  those  works  which  he  so  honestly  believed  to  be  for  God  vanishing  as 
worthless  stubble  in  the  searching  trial  which  will '  purge  .away  all  the  dross '  of  our 
human  doings,  and  leave  only  what  is  of  real  value  in  God's  sight."  Impress  how  entirely 
our  human  will  should  be  lost  in  the  Divine  will,  so  that  our  Christian  work  should  be 
in  no  sense  at  all  our  work,  but  entirely  God's  appointment  for  us,  and  wholly  done 
under  his  guidance  and  in  his  strength.  Work  that  has  the  self-seeking  stamp  on  it 
will  be  sure  to  bum  up.  Precious  stonework,  gold  and  silver  work,  is  work  done 
wholly  for  Christ,  in  which  the  lel/  does  not  appear.  Let  each  man,  then,  test  hii 
ministry,  his  teaching,  Iiis  influence,  now,  while  he  may  correct  his  errors,  and  begin  to 
do  better  things  in  a  better  spirit. — B.  T. 

Vers.  16, 17. — The  Church  a  temple.  It  is  usual  to  regard  these  verses  as  referring 
to  the  individual  Christian,  but  the  Epistle  is  addressed  "  unto  the  Church  of  God  which 
is  at  Corinth,"  and  we  may  profitably  dwell  on  some  thoughts  suggested  by  the  com- 
parison ;  premising  that  the  peculiarities  of  ancient  temples  are  well  understood.  The 
central  building  of  a  structure  called  a  temple  was  not  a  place  of  meeting  or  of  worship, 
it  was  the  sacred  shrine  or  dwelling-place  of  the  deity.  Bound  this  central  building 
were  grouped  the  courts  in  which  worship  was  conducted.  Eastern  people  are  extremely 
jealous  about  the  sanctity  of  their  temples.  The  Christian  system  transfers  the  sanctity 
from  the  bcaildings  to  the  body  of  believers,  and  even  to  the  individual  believer.  All 
the  sacredness  which  Jews  felt  to  surround  their  temple  at  Jerusalem  Christians  ought 
to  feel  surrounds  them  and  the  Church ;  consequently  each  Christian  should  anxiously 
gunrd  the  Church,  lest  it  should  be  injured  by  false  teachings  or  defiled  by  the  evil 
living  of  any  of  its  members.  No  doubt  St.  Paul  had  chiefly  in  mind  to  warn  all  those 
teachers  who  were  likely  so  to  teach  as  to  split  the  Church  into  divisions ;  for,  in  his 
thought,  the  Church  is  one  great  whole,  and  strife  and  party  feeling  are  the  very 
things  .that  most  seriously  deflle  it. 

I.  The  Chubch  a  TEMTiiB,  WITH  AN  iNDWBLLiifO  Deitt.  Compare  the  descent  of 
God,  in  his  symbol  of  fiery  cloud,  to  take  up  his  abode  in  Solomon's  temple,  with  the 
descent  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost — manifest  through  symbols  of  wind,  fire,  and  tongues — 
to  take  up  his  abode  in  his  Church,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Observe  how  clearly 
St.  Paul  apprehended  the  truth  of  God's  real  and  permanent  presence  with  his  Church, 
and  how  strongly  he  urges  the  consequent  sanctity  of  the  Church.  It  may  be  true 
tliat  God  is  not  seen,  but  he  was  not  seen  in  the  earlier  shrines  of  tabernacle  and 
temple.  He  is  not  therefore  unknown  or  unfelt.  Spiritual  worshippers  realized  hia 
presence  in  the  older  days ;  and  spiritually  quickened  men  and  women  feel  his  nearness 
now.  How  should  we  think  of  ourselves;  how  of  each  other;  and  how  of  the  Church, 
if  it  be  true  that  "  God  dwelleth  with  us,  and  is  in  us  "  ? 

IL  The  indwelling  Deity  unifies  and  sanctifies  the  whole  temple  fbecinctb. 
If  he  makes  that  innermost  chamber  the  "  holy  of  holies,"  because  his  cloud-symbol, 
his  Shechinah-glory,  rests  there ;  his  presence  makes  the  outer  chamber  holy,  and  the 
courts  all  holy,  and  the  altar  and  lavers  and  utensils  all  holy.  And  if  Christ  "  dwells 
in  our  hearts,"  and  makes  them  like  the  holy  of  holies,  we  must  realize  that  he 
sanctifies  all  our  being  and  all  our  relations;  sanctifies  mind,  afiection,  will,  body,  so 
that  the  prophetic  figure  should  be  fulfilled,  and  in  the  Cliristian  life  and  Christiau 
Church  holiness  should  be  inscribed  on  the  very  "  bells  of  the  horses."  The  one 
•nxiops  endeavour  of  a  Christian  life  is  to  get  all  the  "  courts "  of  our  body-temple 
wholly  Banctified. 

III.  The  old  laws  of  judgment  on  the  defilement  of  God's  temple  afflt  to 
the  Christian  temple.  Compare  Exod.  xxviii.  43  ;  Lev,  xvi.  2.  The  word  used  here, 
•'  defile  the  temple  of  God,"  is  better  read  "  destroy,"  as  the  opposite  of  "  building  up," 
which  is  the  Christian  teacher's  duty.  Ways  in  which  a  mar  may  defile,  or  destroy, 
the  tem^ple  of  God,  which  he  is  himself,  or  which  the  Church  is,  may  be  detailed  and 


OH.nLJ— 23.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  131 

illustrated.    We  may  be  sure  that  God  will  punish — does  punish — all  dishonoor  done 
to  his  spiritual  temples. 

Impress  how  the  cherished  thought  of  our  temple-like  sanctity  would  influence  our 
daily  life  and  conversation.  As  ever  present  with  us,  God  seems  to  say  to  ni  con- 
tinudly,  "  Be  ye  holy ;  for  I  am  holy."— E.  T. 

Vers.  18 — 23.— 2%e  cure  for  the  party  spirit.  Having  still  in  mind  the  difficulty 
occasioned  hy  those  who  claimed  to  be  superior  teachers ;  and  gathered  parties  round 
them,  the  apostle  proceeds  to  show  that  merely  human  wisdom  is  in  itself  worthless 
for  spiritual  purposes,  and,  therefore,  that  the  possession  of  it  alone  is  no  reason  for  the 
exaltation  of  the  teacher  who  is  endowed  with  it."  A  man  over-confident  in  his  superior 
knowledge  is  always  a  dangerous  man.  The  most  learned  are  always  the  most  humble. 
"  A  child-like  willingness  to  learn  is  the  first  step  towards  the  true  wisdom."  To  find 
the  cure  for  the  party  spirit,  we  must  search  for  the  real  root  of  its  evil ;  just  as  the 
physician  who  would  remove  disease  and' restore  health  must  discover  precisely  where 
the  disease  is  sented  and  what  are  its  essential  features. 

L  The  koot  of  the  party  spikit.  It  is  precisely  self-satisfaction,  but  it  may  take 
form  as  (I)  pride  of  wisdom ;  (2)  pride  of  place ;  (3)  pride  of  birth ;  (4)  pride  of  power. 
A  man  wants  to  be  separate  from  his  brethren  and  to  be  counted  superior  to  them. 
The  party  spirit  is  not,  however,  only  shown  in  the  leaders ;  there  are  persons  who  are 
weakly  willing  to  take  sides  and  follow  leaders,  and  he  who  follows  may  be  quite  as 
wrong  and  as  mischievous  as  he  who  leads.  The  root  of  tbe  evil,  the  self-seehing  spirit, 
may  be  equally  found  in  them  both.  Illustrate  the  evil  of  the  party  spirit  by  the 
silent,  spreading,  fatal  influences  of  a  cancer ;  and  give  cases  of  sectarian  evil  from 
Church  history.  In  every  age  the  Church  has  suffered  from  those  who  broke  away 
from  her  unity,  following  this  leader  and  that. 

n.  The  cube  of  the  party  spirit.  It  is  found  in  a  full  and  worthy  estimate  of 
our  rights,  privileges,  and  possessions  in  Christ.  If  we  enter  into  and  maintain  right 
relations  with  Christ,  we  shall  certainly  be  delivered  from  any  undue  allegiance  to  men. 
Christ  is  Lord,  and  he  is  supreme ;  all  teachers  are  but  ministers,  Divine  agents,  by 
whom  we  believe,  and  who  are  graciously  used  to  help  our  spiritual  joy.  Christ  alone 
is  ours  to  follow  and  obey,  ministers  and  teachers  are  ours  to  use  and  to  honour  for 
their  works'  sake.  All  are  God's ;  all  are  in  commission  to  Christ ;  all  are  in  use,  by 
him,  for  the  instruction  and  edification  of  his  Church ;  and  therefore  we  ought  to  follow 
after  no  one  of  them,  but  only  after  Christ.  "  Let  party  spirit  cease.  Do  not  degrade 
yourselves  by  calling  yourselves  after  the  names  of  any  man,  for  everything  is  yours — 
these  teachers  only  exist  for  you.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  apostle,  as  he  speaks  of  the 
privileges  of  Christians,  leads  him  on  beyond  the  bare  assertion  necessary  to  the  logical 
conclusion  of  his.  argument,  and,  enlarging  the  idea,  he  dwells,  in  a  few  brief  and 
impressive  utterances,  on  the  limitless  possessions  —in  life  and  in  death,  in  the  present 
life  and  that  which  is  future — which  belong  to  those  who  are  united  with  Christ." 
P.  W.  Robertson  finely  dwells  on  the  freedom  from  party  following  which  those  have  who 
are  supremely  loyal  to  Christ :  "  Then  it  is  that  he  is  emancipated  from  circumstances ; 
then,  all  things  are  his — this  marvellous  life,  so  full  of  endless  meanings,  so  pregnant 
with  infinite  opportunities.  Still  more  death,  which  seems  to  come  to  him  like  a  tyrant 
commanding  him  when  it  will — death  is  his  in  Christ,  his  minister  to  lead  him  to 
higher  life.  Paul  is  his,  to  teach  him  freedom.  Apollos  his,  to  animate  him  with  his 
eloquence.  Cephas  his,  to  fire  him  with  his  courage.  Every  author  his,  to  impart  to 
him  his  treasures.  But  remark,  that  St.  Paul  refers  all  this  to  the  universal  law  of 
sacrifice :  all  things  are  ours  on  this  condition — that  we  are  Christ's.  The  law  which 
made  Christ  God's  has  made  us  Christ's.  All  things  are  yours,  that  is,  serve  you ;  but 
they  only  discharge  the  mission  and  obey  the  law  involuntarily  that  you  are  called  on 
to  discharge  and  obey  voluntarily—  the  law  to  which  Christ  was  subject,  for  Christ 
'  was  God's.'  So  that,  when  the  law  of  the  cross  is  the  law  of  our  being — when  we 
have  learnt  to  surrender  ourselves — then,  and  then  only,  we  are  free  from  all  things : 
Vaey  are  ours,  not  we  theirs ;  we  use  them,  instead  of  being  crushed  by  them." 

Conclude  by  showing  the  peril  of  novurishing  the  party  spirit  in  these  days,  when 
particular  aspects  of  doctrine  are  so  hotly  contested.  There  may  be  party  feeling  doing 
berious  mischief  within  Christian  communities,  though  it  may  not  reach  the  length  of 


132 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  nr.  1— 2L 


Mpwration  or  ichism.    We  need  anxiously  to  watch  against  the  beginnings  of  this  avil 
Ik  •utmItm  and  in  others.— R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAFTEB  IT. 


Ten.  1— S. — JudgmetUi,  human  mnd 
Divine,  retpeeting  ministtr$. 

Ver.  1. — Let  a  man  so  aMonnt  of  na. 
Since  it  is  inevitable  tliat  Christians  should 
form  some  estimate  of  the  position  of  their 
ministers,  he  proceeds  to  tell  tliem  wljat 
that  estimate  should  be.  Ministers  are  not 
to  be  unduly  magnified,  for  their  position  ii 
subordinate ;  they  are  not  to  oe  unduly 
depreciated,  for  if  they  are  faithful  they 
may  appeal  from  frivolous  human  prejudices 
and  careless  depreciations  to  that  only 
Judge  and  Master  before  whom  they  stand 
or  fall.  Ministers;  here  huperetcu;  in  ch. 
iii.  5  diakonout.  They  are  huperetai  (in  its 
derivation  "  under-rowers")  iu  their  relation 
to  Christ ;  diakonoi  in  their  relation  to  men. 
Of  Cluist;  and  therefore  responsible  to 
Him.  Stewards;  dispensers,  subordinate 
distributors.  These  "agents"  were  higher 
slaves  (Luke  zvL  1—8).  Of  the  mysteries 
of  God.  The  word  "mysteries"  means 
truths  once  hidden  but  now  revealed ;  as  in 
Lake  viii.  10, "  Unto  you  it  is  given  to  know 
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God."  In 
later  patristic  usage  the  word  means  "  sa- 
eraments ; "  but  St.  Paul  has  expressly  said 
(ch.  i.  17)  that  his  mission  was  to  preach 
the  gospel,  not  primarily  to  administer  the 
sacraments.  (For  descriptions  of  the  work 
of  a  minister  according  to  St  Paul's  lofty 
ideal,  see  the  pastoral  Epistles,  and  1  Thess. 
it  7—11;  Col.  i.  25—29;  Acts  xx.  18—21, 
24—28.  St.  Peter's  is  given  m  1  Pet.  It. 
10,  11 ;  T.  8 — 1.)  A  minister  is  not  to  be 
estimated  a*  a  supernatural  teacher,  or  a 
civil  autocrat,  or  an  infallible  critic,  but  as 
an  ambassador  from  Clirist,  who  reveals  to 
the  "  initiated  "  that  wliich  they  could  not 
otherwise  know. 

Ver.  2. — Moreover.  The  true  reading 
(m,  a,  B,  0,  D,  F)  is  SSt  Koarhv,  here,  more- 
over;  Le.  "on  tliis  earth."  It  may  be  re- 
quired of  him  as  a  minister  that  he  should 
lie  faithful,  but  if,  being  faithful,  he  is  mis- 
judged and  depreciated,  his  oppeal  lies  to  a 
truer  and  loftier  tribunal.  It  is  required. 
This  is  the  reading  of  »,  A,  0,  D.  Other 
nanuscripts  have  "ye  require;"  but  the 
sound  of  the  two  words  iu  Hellenistic  Greek 
would  have  been  alino^it  iiidistinguisliable. 
That  a  man  be  found  faithful.  We  have  a 
right  to  demand  that  on  trial  he  bo  proved 
to  be  honest  and  diligent.  So  our  Lord  lias 
described  tlie  "failhful  and  wise  steward" 
in  Luke  xii.  42,  43.  What  is  required  of 
ministers  is  neither  brillianc  y,  nor  eloquence, 


nor  profound  knowledge^  nor 
only — fidelity, 

Ver.  3.— Bat  The  Corinthians  might 
have  expected  that  the  conclusion  of  St. 
Paul's  remarks  would  be  a  recognition  ot 
their  right  to  sit  in  judgment  on  his  faith- 
fulness ;  but  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  an  expres- 
sion of  his  complete  indifference  to  their 
shallow  and  unfair  estimate,  and  an  appeal 
to  the  approval  of  his  own  conscience  and 
to  the  judgment  of  the  Lord.  It  is  a  very 
small  thing;  literally,  it  i$  for  the  least. 
That  I  should  be  judged  of  you;  rather, 
thai  I  should  be  examined  by  yoa  (anaJcrithS), 
Technically  the  word  anakrisis  means  "  an 
examination  preliminary  to  trial."  Or  of 
man's  judgment;  literally,  of  man's  day. 
The  brief  day  of  human  life  is  bounded  by 
too  narrow  an  horizon  for  accurate  judg- 
ments. Many  of  the  greatest  and  best  men 
have  felt,  like  Lord  Bacon,  that  they  must 
leave  to  other  generations  the  right  estimate 
of  their  characters,  views,  and  aetioTis.  St. 
Jerome  reckons  the  expression  "day"  for 
"judgment "  among  the  "  Cilicisms  "  of  St. 
Paul  (Jer.,' Ad  Algas.,'  10),  i.e.  the  expres- 
sions due  to  his  early  training  in  Cilipi*. 
More  proliably  (as  Grotius  thinks)  there  is 
a  reference  to  the  "  day  "  fixed  for  earthly 
trials  ((2ten>  dieere,  equivalent  to  "to  im- 
peach"), and  to  the  phrase  "the  day  of 
judgment " — "  the  woeful  day  "  of  Jer.  xvii. 
16.  The  word  "  day  "  in  all  languages  and 
idioms  signifies  "judgment"  (Hammond). 
From  dies,  a  day,  comes  the  phrase  "  a  diet." 
A  "daysman"  means  an  arbitrator.  Tea, 
I  judge  not  mine  own  self.  Here,  as  in  the 
previous  clause  and  in  oh.  vi.  4,  the  verb  is 
not  krino,  I  judge,  but  anakrino,  I  examiue. 
Thus  the  verse  discourages  all  morbid  self- 
introspection.  It  also  shows  tliat  St.  Paul 
is  not  arrogantly  proclaiming  himself 
superior  to  the  opinion  of  the  Corintldans, 
but  is  pointing  out  the  necessary  inade- 
quacy of  all  human  judgments.  The  heart 
is  too  liable  to  self-deceit  (Jer.  xvii.  9, 10) 
to  enable  it  to  pronounce  a  judgment  with 
unerring  accuracy.  Hence  neither  a  man's 
contemporaries  nor  the  man  himself  can 
form  any  final  estimate  of  him  or  of  his 
fitting  position,  because  their  knowledge  is 
too  imperfect.  History  often  reverses  the 
decision  of  contemporaries. 

Ver.  4. — I  know  nothing  by  myself; 
rather,  nothing  against  myself.  The  phrnsa 
of  tlie  Anthcrized  Version  originally  meant 
this,  but  is  now  obsolete  in  this  sense.  "  I 
am  sorry  that  each  fault  can  be  proved  6| 
the  queen,"  says  Cranmer  to  Henry  VIlL 


CH.  IV.  1-21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa 


181 


It  is  like  the  Latin  ^i7  eometre  tSii.  The 
lame  phrase  occurs  in  the  LXX.  of  Job 
sxvii.  6.  St.  Paul  eays,  "The  verdict  of 
my  own  oonscience  acquits  me  of  all  in- 
tentional unfaitlifulnesa ; "  but  this  is  in- 
sufficient, because  God  sees  with  clearer 
eyes  than  onra.  "  Who  can  understand  his 
errors  ?  "  asks  the  psalmist  (Ps.  xiz.  12) ;  and 
the  "  secret  faults  "  against  which  ha  prays 
are  not  hidden  vices,  but  sins  of  which  ha 
was  himself  unconscious.  It  must  be  remem* 
bered  that  St.  Paul  is  here  only  speaking 
with  conscious  integrity  of  his  ministerial 
work.  Nothing  could  have  been  further 
from  the  mind  of  one  who  elsewhere  calls 
himself  "  the  chief  of  sinners"  than  to  claim 
an  absolute  immunity  from  every  form  of 
self-reproach.  They  who  claim  immaculate 
holiuess  can  as  little  quote  the  sanction  of 
St.  Paul  (ch.  is.  27;  xv.  9;  Eph.  iii.  8; 
Phil.  iii.  13,  etc.)  as  of  any  other  saint.  The 
confessions  of  the  holiest  are  ever  the  most 
humble.  Yet  am  I  not  hereby  justified. 
Becausi?  "  every  way  of  a  man  "  is  apt  to  be 
"  right  in  his  own  eyes,"  but  God  pondereth 
the  hearts,  and  therefore  in  God's  siglit 
'•  no  man  living  is  justified."  St.  Paul  ii 
here  using  the  word  in  its  legal  rather  than 
its  theological  sense.  He  tlu,t  judgeth  ma 
is  the  Lord.  This  is  a  reason  for  serious 
awe  and  deep  self-searcliiug  of  heart  (Ps. 
cxxx.  3;  Job  ix.  2).  Yet  also  for  hope 
and  confidence  when  a  man  can,  like  the 
modern  statesman,  "look  from  the  storm 
witliout  to  the  sunshine  of  an  approving 
conscience  within."  For  God,  being 
"greater  than  our  hearts"  (1  John  iii.  21)^ 
may  count  "  the  long  '  yes '  of  life  "  against 
the  one  "  no,"  or  the  single  faithless  minute. 
Knowing  whereof  we  are  made,  remembering 
that  we  are  but  dust,  he  looks  on  us 

»  With  larger  other  eyes  than  oni% 
To  make  allowance  for  us  all." 

Ver.  5.— Judge  nothing.  St.  Paul,  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Bomans,  insists  with  some 
indignation  on  this  duty  of  checking  the 
tendency  to  vain  depreciation,  both  because 
we  have  not  the  capacity  for  forming  ade- 
quate judgments,  and  because  censorious- 
ness  is  a  very  coniino.i  though  thoroughly 
unchiistian  vice  (Eom.  xiv.  4,  10,  13). 
Before  the  time.  The  time  is  when  God 
.shall  "judge  the  secrets  of  men"  (Kom.  ii. 
16),  and  when  "the  dajr  shall  try  every 
man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is  "  (ch.  iii.  13). 
Until  the  lord  come.  The  advent  is  called 
in  the  New  Testament  sometimes  the 
"epiphany,"  and  sometimes  the  parousia 
of  Christ.  The  word  used  for  "  until " 
(fieos  an)  points  to  a  time  entirely  indefinite. 
Both  ;  rather,  also ;  i.e.  among  olher  things. 
Ihe  hidden  things  of  darkness.  "  All  tilings 
are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him 


with  whom  we  have  to  do"  (Heb.  It.  13; 
comp.  Eccles.  xii.  14).  God  "shall  iUumi- 
nate  tlie  crypts  of  the  darkness  which 
naturally  fills  the  self-deceiving  heart" 
The  counsels  of  the  hearts.  These  may  bear 
no  scrutiny,  even  when  the  actions  of  the 
life  have  been  made  to  look  plausible 
enough.  And  then.  God  only  "seeth  in 
secret"  (Matt.  vi.  4),  and  therefore  the 
praise  and  blame  of  men  may  in  this  life 
be  equally  unjust.  Shall  every  man  have 
praise  of  Qod ;  rather,  each  one  shall  then 
have  his  praise  (i.e.  such  praise  as  he  de- 
serves) from  God.  Some  of  the  Greek 
Fathers  (e.9.  Theophylaot)  here  make 
"  praise "  a  "  word  of  intermediate  sense," 
involving  either  praise  or  blama  But  St. 
Paul  says  "  praise  "  for  two  reasons — partly 
because  he  is  thinking  of  faithful  teachers 
like  Cephas,  ApoUns,  and  himself,  who  were 
depreciated  by  rival  factions;  and  partly 
because  he,  like  other  apostles,  shows  an 
invariable  tendency  to  allude  to  the  bright 
rather  than  to  the  dark  side  of  jud^^ment. 
Tho  "praise  from  God"— the  "Well  done, 
good  and  faithful  servant" — ^is  so  infinitely 
precious  that  it  reduces  to  insignificance 
the  comparative  value  of  human  praise  or 
blame. 

Vers.  6 — 13. — Gonlratt  between  the  inflated 
lelf-suffieieney  of  the  Corinthians  arid  0>» 
earthly  humiliation  of  the  apostles. 

Ver.  6. — Brethren.  The  occasional  nse 
of  this  and  similar  expressions  ("  beloved," 
etc.)  often  serves  to  strengthen  an  appeal, 
or,  as  here,  to  soften  the  sterniiess  of  a 
rebuke.  I  have  in  a  figure  transferred  to 
myself  and  to  Apollos.  The  meaning  seems 
to  be  that  St.  Paul  has  prominently  trans- 
ferred to  himself  and  to  Apollos,  at  rattier 
to  the  parties  who  chose  their  names  as 
watchwords,  the  proof  as  to  the  sin  and 
futility  of  partisanship  which  applied 
equally  well  to  the  parties  which  ranged 
themselves  under  other  names.  (For  the 
verb  "  transfer  " — more  often  "  transform  " — 
see  2  Cor.  xi  13, 14, 15 ;  Phil.  iii.  21.)  He 
abstains  purposely  and  generously  from 
publicly  naming  the  fuglemen  of  the 
antagiinistic  factions.  For  your  sakes.  By 
rebuking  party  spirit  in  his  own  partisans 
and  those  of  tlie  teacher  who  was  most  closely 
allied  to  himself,  he  robbed  his  remarks  of 
all  semblance  of  personality  or  bitterness. 
It  showed  his  generous  delicacy  not  to 
allude  rather  to  the  adherents  of  Cephas 
and  the  Judsean  emissary.  Thau  ye  might 
learn  in  us.  I  made  Apollns  and  myself 
instances  of  the  umlesirability  of  over- 
exalting  human  teachers,  that  by  our  case 
you  might  learn  the  general  principle.  Not 
to  think  of  men  above  that  which  is  written. 
The  true  reading  is  merely,  not  above  the 
things  which  have  been  uiritten,  as  thougii  the 


iSi 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COaiNTHIAN&    [ch.  it.  1—21. 


word*  were  a  sort  of  prorerb,  like  Ne  quid 
nimU  or  Milton's  "  The  rule  of  not  too 
inuch  "  (lUrjSei/  Hyav).    The  word  "  to  think  " 
is  omitted  in  tbe  best  manuscripts.     The 
phrase,  "which  have  been  written,"  is  of 
veiy   uncertain    meaning.      It    may    refer 
generally  to  "  the  scriptural  rule "  that  all 
boasting  is  wrong  (Jer.  ix.  23),  or  to  the 
humble  estimate  of  teachers  which  he  has 
just  been  writing  down  for  them.     All  his 
Old  Testament  quotations  so  far  (ch.  i.  19, 
31;    iii.    19)   have    referred    to    humility. 
Some  see  in  it  a  refeience  to  llatt.  xxiii.  8, 
"  Be  not  ye  called  Eabbi ; "  but  it  is  uncer- 
tain whether  St.  Mattliew's  Gospel  was  yet 
written ;  and  St.  Paul  never  refers  so  directly 
to  any  written  Gospel.    Perhaps  it  is  a  sort 
of  proverb, "  Keep  always  to  strict  evidence;" 
"  Say  nothing  which  cannot  be  proved  in 
black  anU  white."    The  text,  like  so  many 
otiiers,  has  only  a  very  remote  connection 
with  the  sense  in  which  it  is  usually  quoted. 
That  no  one  of  yon  be  puffed  up.     St.  Paul 
was  painfully  impressed  by  this  inflation  of 
the  Corinthians,  and  he  often  recurs  to  this 
word  OS  a  description  of  their  vain  conceit 
(.ch.  iv.  18, 19;  v.  2;  viii.  1 ;  xiii.  4;  2  Cor. 
xii.  20).    In  other  Epistles  the  word  is  only 
found  once  (in  Col.  ii.  18).    For  one  against 
another.     The   expression   is   a   profound 
one.     The  glorying  in  men  (ch.  iii.  21), 
undesirable  in  any  circumstances,  becomes 
the  more  pernicious  because  the  exaltation 
of  one  set  of  teachers  is  almost  invariably 
accompanied  by  mean  and  unjust  deprecia- 
tion of  apy  who  could  be  supposed  to  be 
their  rivals.    The  Corinthian  who  was  "  for 
Cephas  "  would  be  almost  certain  to  be,  to 
some  extent,  "  against  Paul." 

Ver.  7.— Who  maketh  thee  to  differ  t 
literally,  Who  distinguisheth  thee  f  He 
means  that  this  gluritication  and  depre- 
ciation of  rival  views  and  rival  teachers 
sprang  from  unwarrantable  arrogance.  It 
involved  a  claim  to  superiority,  and  a  right 
to  sit  in  judgment,  which  they  did  not 
possess.  That  thou  didst  not  receive) 
Kven  supposing  that  you  have  some  special 
gift,  it  ii  a  gift,  nut  a  merit,  and  therefore  it 
is  a  boon  for  which  to  be  thankful,  not  • 
pre-eminence  of  which  to  boast. 

'  Satan,  I  know  thy  power,  and  thou  know'st 

mine, 
Neither  our  own,  but  given.    What  folly, 

then, 
To  try  what  arms  can  do  I " 

(Milton, '  Paradise  Lost') 

Ver.  8. — ITow  ye  are  full,  now  ye  are  rioh ; 
rather,  already  ye  have  been  sated,  aiready 
ye  grevi  rich.  There  is  a  strong  but  healing 
irony  in  these  expressions,  and  in  the  entire 
contrast  between  the  comfortable,  full  fed, 
-egal  self-satisfaction  of  the  Corinthians,  and 


the  depression  and  scorn  In  the  midst  of  which 
the  apostles  lived.  The  loving  delicate  irony 
is,  in  a  different  way,  as  effective  as  the  stern 
denunciation  of  St.  John:  "Thou  sayest,! 
am  rich.and  increased  with  goods, and  have 
need  of  notliing;  and  knowest  not  that  thou 
art  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and 
blind,  and  naked  "  (Eev.  liL  17).    St.  Paul's 
satire  is  always  akiu  to  charity ;  it  is  never 
satire  with  no  pity  in  it.    Ye  have  reigned 
as  kings.    The  word    simply  means  "ye 
reigned."     Like  the  Stoics,  so  each  little 
Corinthian  sectarian  regarded  himself  as  a 
king.  "To  reign"  was,  however,  a  proverbial 
phrase  (like  the  Latin  vivo  et  regnJ)  for  being 
"  happy  as  a  king."   Without  us  (comp.  Heb. 
xi.  40).     The  Corinthians  were  cultivated 
enough  to  appreciate  the  deep  irony  of  the 
phrase,  "  We  poorapostles  have  become  quite 
needless  to  you  in  your  lordly  independence." 
And  I  would  to  God  ye  did  reign.    The  words 
"  to  God  "  should  be  omitted.    The  loving 
heart  of  St.  Paul  could  never  long  keep  up 
a  strain  of  irony.    He  drops  the  satire,  and 
passes  on  to  impassioned  and  affectionate 
appeal.    That  we  also  might  reign  with  you. 
If  the  exalted  eminence  which  you  now  only 
enjoy  in  your  own  conceits  had  been  but  real, 
then  we,  whose  "  hope,  and  joy,  and  crown  of 
exultation  you  are  in  the  presence  of  Christ " 
(1  Thess.  ii  19),  should  share  the  grandeur 
with  you. 

Ver.  9.— lor.  This  word  shows  how  differ- 
ent was  the  reality.  Hath  set  forth;  dis- 
played as  on  a  stage  (2  Thess.  ii.  4).  Us  the 
apostles.  St.  Paul  identifies  them  with  him- 
self;  but  undoubtedly  he  had  "  laboured  more 
abundantly  than  they  all."  last.  Servants 
of  all;  in  the  lowest  circumstances  of 
humiliation  (comp.  Mark  ix.  35).  The 
apostles.  Not  the  twelve  only,  but  those 
who  might  bo  called  apostles  in  a  wider 
sense,  who  shared  the  same  afflictions  (Heb. 
X.  33).  As  it  were  appointed  to  death.  This 
iaily  doom  is  referred  to  by  St.  Paul  in  ch. 
XV.  30,  31 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  11 ;  Eom.  viii.  36.  Ter- 
tuUian  renders  the  word  "  veluti  bestiaries," 
like,orimiiial3  condemned  to  the  wild  beasts 
('De  Pudicit.,'  14).  But  the  day  had  not 
yet  come  when  Christians  were  to  hear  so 
often  the  terrible  cry,  "Christianos  od 
leonesl"  A  spectacle;  literally,  a  theatre. 
The  same  metaphor  is  used  iii  Heb.  x.  33. 
To  angels.  The  word,  when  used  without 
an  epithet,  always  means  good  angels,  who 
are  here  supposed  to  look  down  in  sympathy 
(comp.  Heb.  xii.  22). 

Ver.  10.— We  are  fools  for  Christ's  sake. 
The  irony  is  softened  by  the  intervening 
sentences,  and  as  regards  the  apostles  there 
is  no  irony.  St.  Paul  was  called  "a  seed*. 
pecker"  (rpermologot)  by  the  Epicureans 
and  Stoics  at  Athens,  and  Festus  in  full 
court  called  him  "mad."    Te  are  wiae  is 


OH.  IV.  1— 2L]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa 


US 


CiniBt.  He  could  not  tsy  as  befoie,  "  for 
Christ'isake;"  for  even  though  he  is  using 
the  langnage  of  irony,  "  the  pseudo-wisdom 
of  the  Corinthians  had  ofAer  moiiTea."  We 
•re  weak.  The  consciousneBB  of  physical 
Mtd  personal  weakness  weighed  heavily  on 
the  mind  of  6t.  Paul  in  moments  of  d»- 
presBion  (2  Cor.  x.  10;  zlii.  4).  Te  are 
honourahle,  but  we  are  despised;  literally, 
ye  are  glorious,  but  we  are  dishonoured.  The 
word  "dishonoured"  also  means  "disfiran- 
chised." 

Yer.  11.— Unto  this  present  hour.  In 
these  three  verses  he  draws  a  picture  of  the 
eondition  of  the  apostles,  especially  of  the 
trials  to  which  he  was  himself  subjected,  on 
which  the  best  comment  is  in  2  Cor.  xi. 
23—27.  This  letter  was  written  from 
Gphesus,  where  he  had  so  much  to  do  and 
to  endure  (Acts  xx.  81).  Hunger  and  thirst. 
"In  hunger  and  thirst,  in  fastings  often" 
(2  Cor.  xi.  27).  Are  naked  (Matt.  xxv.  36; 
Jaj.  ii.  15 ;  and  comp.  2  Cor.  xi.  27).  And 
■re  buffeted.  The  verb  means  literally,  are 
ilapped  in  the  face  (comp.  2  Cor.  xii.  7). 
Such  insults, togethir  with  scourgings,  fell 
to  the  lot  of  St.  Paul  (Acts  xxiiL  2,  etc.)  and 
the  other  apostles  (Acts  xvi.  23 ,  1  Pet.  iL 
20),  as  well  as  to  that  of  their  Lord  (Matt. 
zxvL  57,  etc.) .  It  showed  the  utter  contempt 
witii  which  they  were  treated ;  for  though 
St.  Paul  ought  to  have  been  exempt  from 
such  violence,  both  as  a  freeman  and  a 
Roman  citizen,  he  was  treated  as  vilely 
as  if  be  had  been  a  mere  foreign  slave. 
Have  no  certain  dwelling>plaae.  This 
homelessness  was  among  tlie  severest  of  all 
trials  (Matt.  viii.  20  ;  x.  23). 

Yer.  12. — Labour,  working  with  our  own 
hands.  St.  Paul  supported  himself  by  the 
dreary  toil  and  scant  earnings  of  atent-maker, 
in  the  express  determination  to  be  no  bunlen 
opon  his  converts  (Acts  xviii.  3;  xx.  31; 

1  These.  iL  9;  2  Thess.  iii.  8;  oh.  ix.  6; 

2  0or.  xi.  7,  etc.).  Such  conduct  was  the 
more  noble  because  all  mechanical  trades 
were  looked  down  upon  by  the  Greeks  aa 
■  sort  of  banautia.  And  though  it  was 
repellent  and  mechanical  work  to  be 
handling  the  strong-scented  black  goats' 
hair  all  day,  yet  by  this  labour  he  main- 
tained not  only  himself  but  also  his  brother 
missionaries  (Acts  xx.  31).  Being  reviled. 
The  early  Christians  were  falsely  accused  of 
the  most  execrable  crimes,  so  that  the  very 
name  "  Clirjstian  "  was  regarded  as  equiva- 
lent to  "  malefactor  "  (1  Pet.  iv.  14,  16).  We 
bless.  Herein  they  obeyed  the  direct  precept 
of  our  Ijord  (Mitt.  v.  44),  as  well  as  his 
3xample(Lukexxiii.44;  lPet.ii.23;  iii.9). 

Yer.  13. — Boing  defamed,  we  entreat. 
The  expression  "  we  entreat "  is  very  general. 
It  may  mean  "  we  entreat  men  not  to  speak 
tbw  injuriously  of  us"  (Calvin);  or  "w* 


exhort  them  to  do  right,"  As  the  111th  of  the 
world.  The  Greek  word  hatharmata  has 
•  teohnioal  sense,  in  which  it  means  "men 
devoted  to  death  for  purposes  of  expiation  " 
(homint$  piacularei).  The  word  perika- 
Ouarmata  has  the  sense  of  "sin  offerings" 
in  ProT.  xxi.  18;  Tobitv.  18.  It  is,  however, 
doubtful  whether  this  meaning  of  the  word 
eould  have  been  at  all  familiar  to  Greek 
readers,  and  it  is  only  in  a  very  general 
•nd  distantly  metaphorical  sense  that  the 
■ufferings  of  God's  saints  can  be  regarded 
as,  in  any  sense  of  the  word,  vicarious.  It 
is  better,  therefore,  here  to  retain  the  sense 
of  "  refuse "  (purgamenta,  things  vile  and 
worthless).  The  ofisooniing  of  all  things; 
perhaps  rather,  ^  all  men.  The  word 
periptema  means  "■  thing  scraped  ofi^"  and 
this  word  also  was  used  in  expiatory  human 
sacrifices,  where  the  formula  used  to  victims 
thus  flung  into  the  sea,  in  times  of  plague 
or  famine,  was,  "Become  our  peripsema" 
(■Schol.  on  Ar.;'  Plut,  456).  Thus  in 
Tobit  (v.  18),  Anna  the  wife  of  Tobias 
says, "  Let  the  money  be  used  as  mperipiema 
for  the  child ;"  and  Ignatius  uses  the  phrase, 
"  I  am  your  peripsema."  From  this  and  the 
similar  phrase  in  the  Letter  of  Barnabas,  "  I 
am  the  peripsema  of  your  love,"  it  seems  to 
have  become  a  current  expression  of  tender- 
ness among  Christians,  "I  am  your  peri- 
Ssema."  But  in  this  case  also  it  may  be 
oubted  whether  the  sacrificial  idea  was 
present  in  the  apostle's  mind.  He  is  thinking 
of  scenes  which  he  had  already  faced  and 
would  have  to  face  hereafter,  when  mobs 
shouted  against  him  that  he  was  "  a  pestilent 
fellow  "  (Acts  xxiv.  S)  and  not  fit  to  live 
(Acts  xxii.  22). 

Yers.  14 — 21. — TKe  practical  steps  which 
ke  intends  to  take  uiith  rejerence  to  these 
party  divisions. 

Yer.  14. — To  shame  yon.  Snoh  seemt  to 
be  the  meaning  of  the  word,  for  it  is  so  need 
in  the  LXX,  (compare  the  use  of  the  verb 
in  2  Thess.  iii.  14 ;  Titus  ii.  8 ;  and  of  the 
substantive  in  ch.  vi.  5 ;  xv.  34).  I  inm ; 
rather,  I  admonish.  St.  Paul  here  gives  the 
reason  why  he  cannot  write  angrily  or 
bitterly,  even  though  he  has  used  strong 
expostulation  and  keen  irony.  It  is  because 
he  regards  himself  as  their  spiritual  father 
(comp.  2  Cor.  vi.  13;  xii  14,  15;  1  Thess. 
iL  11). 

Yer.  IS.^Ten  thousand ;  never  so  many. 
The  word  in  Greek  is  nsed  indefinitely, 
but  here  implies  a  touch  of  impatience  at 
the  itch  of  teaching  which  seems  to  have 
.  prevailed  at  Corinth,  Tutors ;  rather,  peda- 
gogues, in  a  technical  sense.  We  have  no 
exact  equivalent  in  English  to  the  paida- 
gogos,  the  slave  who  led  boys  to  school. 
The  word  also  occurs  in  GaL  iii.  24,  2& 
The  father  loves  most,  wtd  has  tiia  neam 


13« 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [cH.  it.  1—21 


and  dearer  elaim.  In  ChilBt.  So  he  says, 
"The  Law  waB  our  paidagogoi  to  Christ." 
These  euides  or  guardians  were  such  "in 
GhrUt,'  '■«•  in  the  iphere  of  Christian  life. 
Kot  many  fathers.  St  Paul  felt  a  yearning 
desire  that  liis  unique  claim  as  the  founder 
of  their  Church  should  not  be  so  ungratefully 
overlooked,  as  though  it  were  of  no  impor- 
tanoe  (comp.  ch.  iii.  6;  ix.  1,  2;  Acts  xviii. 
11).  I  have  begotten  you.  The  word  is  here 
only  uied  in  a  secondary  and  metaphorio 
sense,  as  in  Pliilem.  10;  Gal.  iy.  19.  In  the 
highest  sense  n  e  are  only  begotten  by  the  will 
of  God,  by  that  Word  of  truth  (Jas.  i.  18),  to 
which  he  alludes  in  the  words  "  through  the 
gospel."  The  "  second  birth  "  is,  however, 
a  doctrine  more  dwelt  on  by  St.  John  (iii. 
8;  1  John  iii.  9;  v.  1,  etc.)  than  by  St. 
Paul,  who,  as  Mr.  Beet  observes,  only  refers 
to  it  in  Titus  iiL  5. 

Ver.  16.— Be  ye  followers ;  rather,  imiUi- 
ton.  He  makes  the  same  appeal  in  ch.  xi. 
1 ;  Phil.  iii.  17.  Of  course,  he  only  uses  his 
human  example  as  a  guide  to  them  in  the 
special  virtues  of  humility,  self-denial,  and 
faithfulness  (1  Pet.  v.  3;  Heb.  xili.  7). 
In  the  highest  sense  we  can  only  be 
"  imitators  of  God  "  (Eph.  v.  1). 

Ver.  17. — For  this  cause.  Because,  as  your 
spiritual  father,  I  naturally  take  the  deepest 
interest  in  your  well-being.  Have  I  sent ; 
rather,  I  tent.  Timothy  had  started  before 
this  letter  was  despatched  (Acts  six.  22), 
but  he  did  not  reach  Corinth  till  after  its 
arrival,  because  he  had  been  unable  to  go 
by  sea,  and  had  to  travel  round  by  Mace- 
donia. Bt.  Paul,  on  hearing  the  grave  news 
from  Corinth,  seems  to  have  counteimanded 
liim(cli.  xvi.  10,"Jif  Timotheus  come"),  but 
was  uncertain  whether  the  messenger  would 
reach  him  in  time.  The  necessity  for 
despatching  Titus  had  been  more  immediate. 
Uy  beloved  son,  and  faithful  in  the  Lord ; 
rather,  who  is  my  beloved  and  faithful  child 
{teknon)  in  the  Lord.  St.  Paul  had  converted 
him,  and  felt  towards  him  all  the  love  of  a 
father  (1  Tim.  L  2 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  2 ;  Phil.  u. 
20—22).  Shall  bring  yon  into  remembrance 
of  my  ways  which  be  in  Christ.  The 
expression  shows  all  Si  Fanl's  delicacy. 
He  is  not  sending  the  youthful  Timothy 
as  an  authoritative  teacher,  since  the  CJorin- 
thians,  fond  of  high  pretension  and  snaring 
oratory,  might  scorn  to  show  any  submission 
to  •  shy  and  shrinking  youth;  but  be  is 
only  sending  him  because,  as  his  closest 
oompanion,  Timothy  would  be  best  able  to 
explain  to  them  his  plans  and  wishes  in  the 
organization  of  Churches. 

Var.  18— Art  puffed    up;    mtbra,    iii«r« 


■piiffed  up;  at  the  time  that  they  made  thess 
disjjaraging  comparisons  of  me  with  others. 
As  though  I  would  not  come  to  yon ;  rather, 
at  though  I  were  not  coming  to  you.  St. 
Paul  was  on  the  eve  of  starting  for  Mace- 
donia on  his  way  to  visit  them  (ch.  xvi.  5), 
but,  owing  to  the  grievons  state  of  the 
Church,  he  subsequently  changed  his 
purpose  (2  Cor.  i.  15,  23).  When  he  left 
them  be  had  promised  to  return,  "if  God 
will "  (Acts  xviii.  21).  His  many  enemies 
and  critics  were  likely  to  say,  "He  is  afraid 
to  come  himsi  If,  and  so  he  sends  Timothy." 
They  flattered  themselves  that  he  was 
alarmed  by  their  culture  and  intellectualism. 

Ver.  19.— -I  will  come  to  you  shortly  (Pliil 
ii.  24 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  9).  He  came  soon  after 
writing  the  Second  Epistle.  At  this  time  he 
was  prepaiiiig  to  leave  Ephesus  (ch.  xvi.  8); 
his  actual  departure  was  precipitated  by  the 
tumult  (Acts  XI.  1,  2).  If  the  lord  will. 
Tlie  apostolic  use  of  the  phrase  was  some- 
thing more  than  a  mere  form  (Bom.  xv.  32 ; 
Heb.  vi.  3 ;  Jas.  iv.  15) ;  it  expressed  a  real 
and  humble  spirit  of  dependence.  Not  the 
speech  of  them  which  are  puffed  up,  but  the 
power.  He  will  use  his  gift  of  spiritual 
discernment  to  discover  whether  the  haughty 
self-assertion  and  sounding  phraseology  oif 
these  inflated  partisans  would  not  collapse 
when  confronted  with  real  authority.  The 
"  speech  "  was  there  in  abundance ;  but  was 
there  anything  genuine,  any  rt  al  spiritual 
force,  behind  it  ? 

Ver.  20.— The  kingdom  of  God.  The 
Christian  life,  with  all  its  attainments  and 
all  its  hopes.  Is  not  in  word,  but  in  power. 
It  is  not  a  matter  of  profession,  or  of 
eloquence,  or  of  phrases,  but  of  transforming 
efficacy.  St.  Paul  always  appeals  for  the 
corroboration  of  his  autliority  to  the  signs 
and  power  of  the  Spirit  (2  Cor.  x.  45 ;  Bom. 
XV.  19;  1  Thess.  i.  5),  to  the  "demonstra- 
tion "  of  which  he  has  already  referred  (ch. 
u.  4). 

Ver.  21.— What  will  yel  "The  whole 
thing  lies  with  you  "  (Chrysostom).  With  a 
rod;  literally,  in  a  rod  a  not  uncommon 
Greek  phrase.  Tiie  mi  aning  of  this  expres- 
sion is  best  seen  from  2  Cor.  x.  2 ;  xiii.  10. 
In  love.  He  would  come  to  them  "in  love" 
in  any  case ;  but  if  they  now  rejected  his 
appeals  the  love  would  be  compelled  to  mani- 
fest itself  in  sharpness  and  stern  deeds.  In 
the  spirit  of  mee^ess.  Meyer  here  gives  to 
the  word  "  spirit "  the  sense  of  "  the  Holy 
Spirit,"  as  in  John  xv.  26 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  J  3 ;  'jui 
the  simpler  sense  of  the  term  is  alnosi 
oertninly  the  true  OMb 


m.  lY.  1— 21.]    THE  FffiST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  13? 


HOMILETIC& 

Ven.  1'— 7. — A  true  and  a  false  estimate  of  genuine  minitten  of  the  gospel.  "Lei 
n  man  so  account  ofus  as  of  the  ministers  of  Christ,"  etc.    Hero  we  have — 

I.  A  TEUB  ESTIMATE  of  genuine  ministers  of  the  gospel.  1.  They  are  servants  of  Christ. 
■'  Let  a  man  so  account  of  us  as  of  the  ministers  of  Christ."  There  are  some  who 
regard  ministers  of  the  gospel  as  servants  of  their  Church.  The  Churches  guarantee 
their  stipend,  and  they  require  that  their  dogmas  shall  be  propounded  and  their  laws 
obeyed.  The  paymasters,  wliether  deacons,  or  elders,  or  the  state,  naturally  expect 
subordination  in  their  ministers.  He  who  yields  in  any  measure  to  such  an  expectation 
degrades  his  position,  and  is  hot  in  the  truest  sense  a  minister  of  Christ.  He  who  is 
the  true  servant  of  Christ  will  feel  and  act  as  the  moral  master  of  the  people — the 
leader  and  commander.  "  Obey  them  that  have  the  rule  over  you,"  etc.  There  is  no 
office  on  this  earth  so  dignified  and  royal  as  that  of  the  true  servant  of  Christ.  2.  As 
servants  of  Christ,  they  are  responsible.  "  Stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God."  The 
"  mysteries  of  God  "  here  mean  the  gospel,  which  in  the  second  chapter  is  said  to  be 
"  the  hidden  wisdom  which  God  ordained  before  the  world."  The  gospel  is  a  myst«ry, 
not  in  the  sense  of  absolute  incomprehensibility,  but  in  the  sense  of  progressive 
unfoldment,  both  in  respect  to  communities  and  individuals.  It  is  a  mystery  to 
tlie  man  who  at  firsts  be,in3  its  study,  but  as  he  gets  on  it  becomes  more  and 
more  clear.  The  true  minister  is  entrusted  with  these  "  mysteries ; "  he  is  to  bring 
tiiem  out,  translate  them  into  intelligible  ideas,  and  dispense  them  to  the  people. 
As  a  steward  of  such  things,  his  position  is  one  of  transcendent  responsibility,  3. 
As  servants  of  Christ,  they  are  faithful.  "  Moreover,  it  is  required  in  stewards, 
that  a  man  be  fouml  faithful."  Fidelity  is  an  essential  attribute  of  a  true  minister, 
lie  must  be  faithful  to  his  trust,  not  abuse  it,  but  use  it  according  to  the  directions 
of  its  owner.  Faithful  to  its  owner,  in  all  things  regulated  by  his  directions.  He 
must  be  faithful  to  his  hearers,  seeking  no  man's  applause,  fearing  no  man's  frown, 
"  commending  himself  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God."  4.  As  servants 
of  Christ,  they  are  independent.  "  But  with  me  it  is  a  very  small  thing  that  I  should 
be  judged  of  you,  or  of  man's  judgment."  Whilst  no  true  minister  will  despise  the 
l'avour°or  court  the  contempt  of  men,  he  will  not  be  concerned  about  their  judgment 
so  long  as  he  is  faithful  to  his  God.  Paul  gives  utterance  to  this  sentiment  in  order, 
no  doubt,  to  reprove  those  preachers  in  the  Corinthian  Church  who  were  seeking  the 
praise  of  men.  Paul  seems  to  indicate  here  thwe  reasons  for  this  feeling  of  indepen- 
dency. (1)  His  own  consciousness  of  fidelity.  "  For  I  know  nothing  by  myself;  yet 
am  I  not  hereby  justified."  "  The  sense  is,"  says  a  modern  expositor,  "  I  am  not 
conscious  of  evil  or  unfaithfulness  to  myself;  that  is,  in  my  ministerial  life."  It  is  weU 
remarked  by  Calvin  that  "  Paul  does  not  here  refer  to  the  whole  of  his  life,  but  only  to 
his  apostleship.  And  the  sense  is, '  I  am  conscious  of  integrity  in  this  office.  My  own 
mind  does  not  condemn  me  of  ambition  or  unfaithfulness.  Others  may  accuse  me,  but 
I  am  not  conscious  of  that  which  should  condemn  me  or  render  me  unworthy  of  this 
office.' "  (2)  His  confidence  in  the  judgment  of  God.  "  But  he  that  judgeth  me  is  the 
Lord."  I  am  content  to  abide  by  his  judgment.  If  his  judgment  of  me  agrees  not  with 
my  own  judgment  of  myself,  I  will  loyally  submit.-  (3)  His  belief  in  a  full  revelation 
of  that  judgment.  "  Therefore  judge  nothing  before  the  time,  until  the  Lord  come, 
who  both  will  brin_g  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness,"  etc.  Do  not  let  us  judge 
one  another ;  do  not  let  us  even  trust  too  much  to  our  own  judgment  of  ourselves. 
Let  us  await  Heaven's  judgment,  (a)  There  is  a  period  appointed  for  that  judgment, 
"  Judge  nothing  before  the  time,  until  the  Lord  come."  There  is  a  "  day  appointed  in 
which°he  will  judjie  the  world  in  righteousness."  Ah !  that  day.  (6)  At  that  period 
there  will  be  a  lull  revelation  of  our  characters.  "  Who  both  will  bring  to  light  the 
hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  will  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  hearts."  (c)  At 
that  period,  too,  every  man  shall  have  his  due.  "  And  then  shall  every  man  have  praise 
of  Qod."  "  Praise  ""here  does  not  mean  approbation,  but  that  every  man  shall  receive 
his  just  due.  Such  considerations  as  these  may  well  make  ministers  independent  of  the 
judgments  of  men,  and  regardless  alike  of  their  smiles  and  their  frowns. 

II.  ▲  FALs*  E8TIMATI  of  genuine  ministers  of  the  gospel.    "Aod  theie  tbin^, 


188  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  iv.  1—21. 

brethren,  I  have  In  •  figure  transferred  to  myself  and  to  Apollos,"  etc.  Paul  hert 
means  to  say  that  he  spoke  of  himself  and  Apollos  to  show  the  impropriety  of  ona 
minister  being  pitted  against  another.  The  members  of  the  Corinthian  Oliurch  had 
evidently  formed  an  incorrect  estimate  of  the  true  gospel  minister.  1.  They  seemed 
to  estimate  ministers  m  proportion  as  they  rnet  their  views  and  feelingt.  Every  true 
preacher  preaches  the  gospel  as  it  has  passed  through  his  own  mind,  and  as  it  passes 
through  his  own  mind  it  will,  of  course,  be  more  interesting  to  the  minds  most  in 
harmony  with  hii  own  experience, capacity,  and  sympathies.  Hence,  in  the  Corintliian 
Church,  those  who  preferred  Peter's  preaching  thought  no  one  was  like  Peter ;  those 
who  preferred  Apollos'  thought  there  were  none  like  him ;  and  so  with  Paul.  It  is  so 
now.  "  There  is  no  minister  like  our  minister ;  all  others  are  grades  below."  This  is 
rery  false,  for  inasmuch  as  the  great  balk  of  the  community  are  more  or  li'ss  unedu- 
cated, unreflecting,  and  sensuous,  the  preacher  who  approximates  most  to  their  type  of 
mind  will  attract  the  largest  crowd  and  get  the  loudest  hosannas.  But  is  he  on  that 
account  superior  to  others?  By  no  means.  Thus  it  is  that  some  of  the  most  inferior 
preachers  are  over-rated  and  the  most  elevated  and  devoted  degraded  ;  whereas  all  true 
ministers  are  "  servants  of  Christ,"  the  "  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God,"  and  as 
such  should  be  honoured.  2.  They  seemed  to  estimate  ministers  according  to  the 
greatness  of  their  natural  endowments.  "Who  maketh  thee  to  differ  from  another?" 
etc.  Between  the  natural  endowments  of  Paul,  Apollos,  and  Peter  there  was  a  great 
difference,  and,  indeed,  between  all  ministers  of  the  gospel  tliere  is  a  difference  in  natural 
endowments,  and  a  great  difference  in  the  quality  and  measure  of  mind.  But  what  of 
that?  There  is  notldng  in  those  natural  endowments  for  boasting ;  for  they  all  came 
from  God.  The  man  of  the  most  far-reaching  intellect,  the  most  brilliant  imagination, 
and  transcendent  genius  has  nothing  which  he  has  not  received  from  that  Spirit 
which  distributes  to  every  roan  according  to  his  own  will.  No  man  or  angel  deserves 
credit  on  account  of  natural  abilities. 

CoNCiiUSiON.  "  Let  us  strive,"  says  P.  W.  Robertson,  "  as  much  as  possible  to  be 
tranquil.  Smile  when  men  sneer ;  be  humble  when  they  praise ;  patient  when  they 
blame.  Their  judgment  will  not  last ; '  man's  judgment,'  literally, '  man's  day,'  is  only 
for  a  time,  but  God's  is  for  eternity.  So,  would  you  be  secure  alike  when  the  world 
frowns  its  censure  or  its  applause  upon  you?  feel  hourly  that  God  will  judge.  That  will 
be  your  safeguard  under  both.  It  will  be  a  small  thing  to  you  to  be  judged  of  any 
man's  judgment;  for  your  cause  will  be  pleaded  before  the  Judge  and  the  Disceraer  of 
all  secrets." 

Ver.  8.—Apostelie  treatment  of  vanity,  "  Now  ye  we  full,  now  ye  are  rich,  ye  have 
reigned  as  kings  without  us :  and  I  would  to  God  ye  did  reign,  that  we  also  might 
reign  with  you."  Vanity  is  a  state  of  mind  at  once  the  most  prevalent  and  detestable ; 
it  is  a  plant  that  springs  from  self-ignorance,  and  is  disgusting  to  the  spectator  in  ail 
its  forms  and  fruits.    See  how  the  apostle  treats  it  here. 

I.  With  WITHERING  SARCASM.  "  Now  ye  are  full,  now  ye  are  rich,  ye  have  reigned 
•a  kings  without  us."  The  Bible  furnishes  us  with  many  instances  of  irony  (see 
1  Kings  xviii.  27  ;  Job  zii.  2),  but  nowhere  have  we  it  in  language  more  full  and  force- 
ful than  here.  "  Now  ye  are  full,"  or  "  already  are  ye  filled."  You  have  had  enough, 
you  want  nothing;  "ye  are  rich"  or  "already  ye  are  become  rich."  You  are  affluent 
in  all  gifts  and  graces.  "  Ye  have  reigned  as  kings  without  us."  "  Here  are  three 
metaphors,  the  first  taken  from  persons  filled  with  food,  the  second  from  persons  so 
rich  that  they  require  no  more,  the  third  from  those  who  have  reached  the  highest 
elevation^btained  a  throne."  Paul  seems  to  say  to  these  conceited  teachers  that  they 
were  po  great  that  they  did  not  require  such  services  as  his.  We  scarcely  know  of  a 
more  effective  way  of  treating  vanity  than  by  sarcasm.  Treat  the  vain,  swaggering 
man  before  you,  not  according  to  your  judgment  of  him,  but  according;  to  his  estimate 
of  himself.  Speak  to  him  as  one  as  stupendous  as  he  believes  himself  to  be,  and  your 
irony  will  stab  him  to  the  quick.  Sarcasm  is  often  the  instrument  of  a  great  manly 
soul  when  roused  into  indignation. 

II.  With  A  NOBLE  OENBROSiTT.  "I  would  to  God  ye  did  reign,  that  we  also  might 
reign  with  you ; "  or,  "  I  would  ye  did  reign."  Here  the  north  wind  of  sarcasm  gives 
way  to  the  south  breezes  of  love.    What  be  means  is  »  wish  that  they  were  as  truly 


OH.  IT.  1—21.]    TUB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  136 


full,  rich,  and  royal  as  they  thought  themselves  to  be.    The  irony  of  a  Chrjstly  man, 
however  pungent,  is  not  malign,  but  generous. 

Ver.  9. — Man  an  object  of  angelic  observation.  "  For  I  think  that  God  hath  set  forth 
us  the  apostles  last,  as  it  were  appointed  to  death :  for  we  are  made  a  spectacle  unto 
the  world,  and  to  angels,  and  to  men."  The  margin  reads  "  theatre  "  for  "  spectacle," 
from  the  Greek  word  eearpov.  The  reference,  in  all  probability,  is  to  the  ancient  amphi- 
theatre, whose  arena  was  surrounded  by  circular  seats,  capable  of  accommodating 
thousands  of  spectators.  In  this  arena  trained  athletes  struggled  for  prizes  in  tha 
ancient  games ;  on  such  an  arena  Paul  speaks  of  himself  and  fellow-labourers  as  strug- 
gling, the  objects  not  only  of  human  but  of  angelic  spectators.  The  world  is  indeed 
a  moral  theatre,  every  man  an  actor,  and  disembodied  spirits  look  on  as  spectators. 
"We  are  encompassed  about,"  etc.  Angels  as  spectators  are  intelligi-nt,  interested, 
numerous,  constant.  If  the  eyes  of  such  intelligences  are  constantly  upon  us,  what  art 
the  practical  conclusions  ? 

I.  That  our  conduct  here  concerns  the  universe.  No  man  lives  unto  himself; 
each  unit  is  a  link  in  beiug's  endless  chain.  His  actions  must  tell  banefuUy  or 
beneficently  on  the  creation  ;  hence  all  loving  and  loyal  intelligences  direct  their 
attention  to  him  with  deep  and  unabating  interest.  Besides,  men  and  angels  are 
offsprings  of  the  same  Father,  participators  of  the  same  nature,  subjects  of  the  same 
moral  government.     No  wonder  they  are  so  conceriied. 

II.  Thvt  ouk  part  should  be  carefully  played.  How  doubly  careful  are  our 
actors  on  the  stage,  in  the  presence  of  spectators  distinguished  for  the  highest  genius, 
erudition,  and  artistic  culture  I  It  behoves  every  man  to  be  cautious  how  he  acts  in 
the  presence  of  his  fellow-creatures,  whether  they  are  children  or  adults,  plebeians  or 
princes ;  but  how  much  more  cautious  should  he  be  when  he  knows  that  angels,  whose 
pure  natures  loathe  sin  in  all  its  forms,  have  their  keenest  gaze  fastened  ever  on  his 
life. 

III.  That  there  is  no  chance  op  concbalikg  oub  sin.  The  attempt  to  cloak  or 
dissemble  our  sins  is  absurdly  futile.  Whilst  there  is  One  who  reads  the  heart,  there 
may  be  millions  who  iiiaik  all  our  overt  acts,  whether  wrought  in  darkness  or  in  light. 

IV.  That  we  may  expect  help  in  all  holy  endeavours.  Those  celestial  spirits 
are  sent  forth  to  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation.  They  have  received  a  Divine 
commission  to  bear  us  up,  lest  wc  dash  our  feet  against  a  stone.  In  all  ages  they  have 
rendered  assistance  to  the  good.  They  helped  Abraham  on  the  plains  of  Mamre,  and 
Lot  in  his  flight  towards  Zoar ;  they  freed  the  apostle  from  the  prison ;  they  bore  the 
spirit  of  Lazarus  to  the  bosom  of  Abraham. 

(conclusion.  "  Wherefore  seeing  we  also  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud 
of  witnesses,  let  ua  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  us  " 
(Heb.  xii.  1). 

Vers.  10 — 14. — PauVs  treatment  of  self-conceited  teacher$.  "We  are  fools  for 
Christ's  sake,  but  ye  are  wise  in  Christ ;  we  are  weak,  but  ye  are  strong ;  ye  are 
honourable,  but  we  are  despised.  Even  unto  this  present  hour  we  both  hunger,  and 
thirst,  and  are  naked,  and  are  buffeted,  and  have  no  certain  dwelling-place ;  and 
labour,  working  with  our  own  hands :  being  reviled,  we  bless  ;  being  persecuted,  we 
suffer  it ;  being  defamed,  we  entreat :  we  are  made  as  the  filth  of  the  world,  and  are 
the  offscouring  of  all  things  unto  this  day.  I  write  not  these  things  to  shame  you, 
but  as  my  beloved  sons  I  warn  you."  Paul  is  still  thinking  of  those  teachers  of  the 
Corinthian  Church  who  were  "puffed  up,"  inflated  with  conceit.  He  treats  them  here 
with — 

I.  An  ironic  appeal.  "  We  are  fools  for  Christ's  sake,  but  ye  are  wise  in  Christ ; 
we  are  weak,  but  ye  are  strong ;  ye  are  honourable,  but  we  are  despised ; "  or,  "  ye 
have  glory,  but  we  have  dishonour."  "  We  are  fools,"  we  know  nothing,  "  but  ye  are 
wise,"  you  know  everything  ;  "  we  are  weak,"  timid,  and  feeble,  "  but  ye  are  strong  " 
and  fearleiis.  "Ye  are  honourable,"  you  have  "glory,"  you  are  thought  a  deal  of, 
you  are  extolled,  but  "  we  are  despised,"  the  "  offscouring  of  all  things,"  All  this  ii 
sarcasm  again,  well  deserved,  and  well  directed.  How  would  our  little  penny-a-lixkeri 
feel  if  such  a  man  iis  Thomas  Carlyle  were  to  stand  before  them  and  speak  in  thii 


140  THE  FIRST  EFIPTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.    [oh.  it.  1—21 

way  ?  If  they  had  any  sense  remnining,  they  would  quiver  into  nothingness.  How 
much  more  wouM  those  small  pretentious  teachers  in  the  Corinthian  Church  feel  this 
stroke  of  satire  dealt  out  to  them  by  the  great  apostle  to  the  Gentiles  1 

II.  A  PERSONAL  HISTORY,  Here  he  refers  to  his  privations:  "Even  unto  this 
present  hour  we  both  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  are  naked,  and  are  buffeted,  and  have  no 
certain  dwelling-place" — without  nourisliment,  without  clothing,  without  the  shelter 
of  a  home.  Here  he  refers  to  his  labours :  "  And  labour,  working  with  our  own 
hands."  Here  he  refers  to  his  persecutions :  "  We  are  made  as  the  filth  of  the  world, 
and  are  the  offsoouring  of  all  things."  Then  he  refers  to  the  spirit  in  which  he  endured 
the  sufferings  :  "  Being  reviled,  we  bless ;  being  persecuted,  we  suffer  it ;  being  defamed, 
we  entreat."  Now,  why  did  he  state  all  this  ?  Not  for  the  sake  of  parading  his  great 
trials  and  toils,  but  for  the  sake  of  bringing  these  proud  teachers  to  their  senses.  They 
could  not  fail  to  acknowledge  that  he  was  an  apostle — a  pre-eminent  minister  of 
Christ;  notwithstanding  tliis,  in  the  world  he  was  treated  with  cruelty  and  contempt, 
he  was  poor  and  despised.     What,  then,  had  they  to  be  proud  of  as  ministers? 

Conclusion.  From  this  subject  it  is  natural  to  ask — Who  in  the  present  age 
engaged  in  the  Christian  ministry  are  most  likely  to  be  of  apostolic  succession  ? 
Those  who  are  "  full,"  and  "  rich,"  and  royal,  and  "  wise,"  and  "  strong,"  who  pride 
themselves  in  all  these  things ;  whom  the  people  favour  and  flatter  ?  or  those  who,  like 
the  Apostle  Paul,  in  the  discharge  of  their  ministry,  endure  privations,  persecutions,  and 
all  in  the  magnanimous  spirit  of  self-abnegation  and  generous  forgiveness  of  enemies  ? 
Call  no  man  a  successor  of  the  apostle  who  has  not  the  apostolic  character.  To  call  a 
man  a  successor  of  the  apostle  who  has  not  the  apostolic  character — manfully  noble, 
Christly  loyal,  and  wilhal  self-sacrificing — is  a  mischievous  imposture. 

Ver.  15. — Spiritual  paternity.  "  For  though  ye  have  ten  thousand  instructors  in 
Christ,  yet  have  ye  not  many  fathers :  for  in  Christ  Jesus  I  have  begotten  you  through 
the  gospeL"  The  subject  of  these  words  is  spiritual  paternity,  and  three  remarks  are 
suggested. 

I.  That  one  man  mat  become  the  spibitual  fatheb  of  anotheb.  What  is  it  to 
become  the  spiritual  father  of  another  ?  1.  Something  more  than  to  become  the  father 
of  one's  ideas.  There  are  men  in  society  gifted  with  that  intellectual  vitality  and 
vigour  which  enablis  them  to  generate  the  leading  ideas  in  the  minds  of  their  con- 
temporaries. This  they  do  by  their  conversation,  their  speeches,  their  writings.  But 
these  are  not  spiritual  fathers,  they  are  mere  schoolmasters  or  teachers.  Coleridge  and 
Carlyle  are  examples  of  this.  2.  Something  more  than  the  author  of  a  certain  style  of 
thinking.  There  are  men  in  society  who  not  only  generate  leading  thoughts  in  the 
minds  of  their  contemporaries,  but,  what  is  perhaps  something  liigher,  a  style  of 
thinking — a  style  characterized  by  precision,  freshness,  and  force.  Aristotle,  Bacon, 
etc.,  are  ejutmples.  But  a  spiritual  father  is  one  who  is  the  father  of  man's  moral 
character,  one  who  generates  in  another  his  own  spirit,  sympathies,  and  urns,  one  who 
transforms  the  character  of  another  into  his  own  image. 

II.  That  the  noblest  spibitual  fatheb  is  hb  who  beoets  in  anothes  the 
Chbistlt  chabaoteb.  Many  are  the  moral  characters  prevalent  amongst  men — the 
sensual,  the  sceptical,  the  selfish.  The  Christly  character  stands  in  sublime  contrast  to 
these;  it  is  disinterested,  spiritual.  Divine.  1.  The  man  who  generates  in  others  this 
character  imparts  the  highest  good.  In  the  Christly  character  is  harmony,  kinghood, 
and  paradise.  To  be  like  Christ  is  the  highest  end  of  being,  it  is  the  summum  bonum 
of  souls.  2.  The  man  who  generates  this  charanter  in  others  creates  the  highest  mutual 
affection.  Par  deeper  and  profounderis  the  affection  subsisiing  between  the  spiritual 
father  and  his  offs()ring  than  that  which  exists  between  the  physical.  Christ  recognized 
this  when  he  said,  "  Whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  God,  the  same  is  my  brother,  and 
my  sister,  and  my  mother."  Paul  called  Timothy  his  "  beloved  son  j "  and  elsewhere 
he  speaks  with  inexpressible  tenderness  of  his  converts  as  his  little  children,  with  whoui 
he  travailed  in  birth  (Gal,  iv.  10). 

III.  That  the  Chbibtlt  chabaoteb  is  only  begotten  in  others  by  thb  chmpei. 
OF  Chbist,  "I  have  begotten  you  througn  the  gospel."  Natural  relic/ion  cannot  dn 
it ;  Judaism  cannot  do  it ;  Mohammedanism  cannot  do  it ;  heathenism  cannot  do  it ;  in 
tpecdlative  creeds,  no  moral  codes,  no  ritualistic  religions  can  do  it.    The  gospel  aLin^ 


ofl.r».l— 2L]    THt5  FIRST  EPISTlE  TO  THE  CORlNTfllANS.  141 

is  the  power  to  generate  in  man  the  true  Christly  character ;  it  is  that  transformative 
glass  iuto  which  as  we  look  we  get  changed  into  the  same  image  from  "  glory  to  glory." 
Conclusion.  Learn  from  this :  1.  The  supreme  interest  of  man.  What  is  that  ? 
—learning,  wealth,  fame  ?  No ;  Christliness.  He  who  has  this  has  everything ;  all 
things  are  his.  He  who  has  not  this  has  "  nothing,"  says  Paul.  2.  The  grandest 
df'itinetions  amongst  men.  What  are  they? — sages,  soldiers,  sovereigns?  No; 
spiritual  sires.  The  man  who  generates  in  another  the  Christly  character  has  done 
a  greater  work  than  any  si^e  as  sage,  king  as  king,  has  ever  done.  Every  man  may 
and  ought  to  become  a  spiritual  father. 

Vers.  16 — ^21. — Six  subjects  worth  reflection.  "  Wherefore  I  beseech  yoo,  be  yi 
loUowers  of  me,"  etc.     There  ai-e  six  noteworthy  subjects  in  these  verses. 

L  A  BEMABKABiiE  REQUEST.  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me."  Were  Paul  an  ordinary 
man,  such  an  exhortation  would  resound  with  arrogance ;  but  he  was  a  man  of  pre- 
eminent excellence,  Christly  in  spirit,  deportment,  and  ministry.  There  were  three 
reasons  why  they  should  imitate  him.  1.  He  was  a,  follower  of  Christ.  There  was  no 
living  man  who  had  followed  his  Master  so  closely.  Elsewhere  he  says,  "  Be  ye 
followers  of  me,  as  I  also  am  of  Christ."  2.  He  was  their  spiritual  father.  He  had 
begotten  them  in  the  gospel ;  they  were  his  moral  offspring.  They  had  numerous 
instructors,  but  he  was  their  father ;  they  gave  them  ideas,  he  gave  them  character.  3. 
He  was  no  partisan.  Other  teachers  amongst  them  became  the  leaders  of  parties,  these 
parties  were  contending  one  with  another ;  but  Paul  belonged  to  no  party,  he  followed 
Christ,  knew  "nothing  amongst  men  but  Christ,  and  binn  crucified."  Such  a  man 
was  justified  in  calling  on  others  to  follow  him.  "Ministers,"  says  an  old  writer, 
''  should  so  live  that  their  people  may  take  pattern  from  them,  and  even  after  their 
copy ;  they  should  guide  them  by  their  lives  as  well  as  by  their  lips,  go  before  them  on 
the  way  to  heaven,  and  not  content  themselves  with  pointing." 

II.  A  HIGH  TESTIMONY.  "  For  this  cause  have  I  sent  unto  you.Timotheus,  who  is  my 
beloved  son,  and  faithful  in  the  Lord,  who  shall  bring  you  into  remembrance  of  my 
ways  which  be  in  Christ,  as  I  teach  everywhere  in  every  Church."  He  is  dear  to  me 
as  a  "  son ;"  he  is  "  faithful  in  the  Lord ; "  he  knows  my  "  ways."  High  testimony  this. 
And  this  is  the  man  he  promises  to  send  to  them.  What  for  ?  That  he  might  give  them 
good  reasons  why  they  should  be  followers  of  him.  I  do  not  want  you  to  follow  me  in 
the  dark ;  I  send  him  that  he  may  throw  light  upon  my  ways  everywhere^  "  In  every 
Church."  A  man  must  have  a  high  consciousness  of  rectitude  who  can  trust  the 
representation  of  his  character  to  one  who  knows  him  as  well  as  a  son  knows  his  father, 
and  withal  a  man  of  incorruptible  honesty. 

III.  A  FOOLISH  EXULTATION.  "  Now  some  are  puffed  np,  u  though  I  woold  not 
come  to  you."  There  were  those  in  the  Church  at  Corinth  who  were  out  of  sympathy 
with  Paul,  and  who  had  no  desire  that  he  should  visit  them,  and  as  the  "wish  is  father 
to  the  thought,*  when  they  heard  he  was  coming  they  would  not  believe  it.  When  the 
intelligence  that  he  was  sending  Timothy  to  them  reached  them,  they  would  be  likely 
to  say,  "  This  proves  the  truth  of  our  assertion;  he  is  afraid  to  come  himself,  and  so  he 
sends  Timothy."  In  this  they  seem  to  have  rejoiced ;  they  were  "  puffed  up."  Now,  I 
call  this  a  foolish  exultation,  because  the  visit  of  Paul  to  then  was  what  they  deeply 
needed,  and  was  intended  to  confer  on  them  the  highest  blessing.  Howoften  do  we 
foolishly  rejoice  in  deliverance  from  visitations  fraught  with  priceless  blessing!  I 

*■  Te  fearful  saints,  fresh  oonrage  tak«k 
The  clouds  ye  so  much  dread 
Are  big  with  mercy,  and  shall  break 
In  blessings  on  your  head." 

(Oowper.) 

IV.  Ah  exemplabt  decision.  "  But  I  will  come  to  yon  shortly  if  the  Lord  will," 
etc  Paul  believed  that  God  had  a  will  concerning  him,  and  that  will  determined  hii 
destiny.  Hunce  on  this  he  based  all  his  calculations  in  life ;  all  his  plans  and  purposes 
were  subject  to  that  will.  "  If  the  Lord  will*  This  is  an  exemplary  decision.  His 
will  is  nut  only  absolute  and  righteous,  but  benevolent ;  therefore  to  acquiesce  in  that 
wi^l  is  pot  only  right,  but  wise.    "  Go  to  now,  ye  that  say,  To-day  or  to-monow  W9  will 


142  THE  FIRST  EP:^TLE   TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  it.  1—21. 

go  into  auch  a  city,  and  continue  there  a  year,  and  buy  and  sell,  and  get  gain ;  whereas 
ye  know  not  what  will  he  on  the  morrow." 

V.  A  GLORIOUS  SYSTEM.  "  For  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word,  but  in  power." 
By  this  he  means,  I  presume,  the  gospel  ministry.  It  is  a  divinely  regal  "  kingdom  j  "  it 
Is  not  a  thing  of  sentiments  or  ceremony;  it  is  invested  with  Divine  authority.  It  is 
not  a  thing  of  mere  "  word ; "  it  transcends  all  Ian  luage,  however  logical  in  force  or 
rhetorical  in  beauty ;  it  is  "power  " — the  "  power  of  God  unto  salvation." 

VI.  A  SOLEMN  PROPOSAL.  "What  will  ye?  shall  I  come  unto  you  with  a  rod,  or  in 
love,  and  in  the  spirit  of  meekness?"  In  any  case  I  shall  come  as  a  father.  Shall  I 
come  as  a  father  to  chastise  you  with  a  "  rod,"  or  with  looks  of  "  love  "  and  words  of 
commendation  and  sympathy?  God's  minister  is  bound  to  deal  with  men  according  fci 
their  states  of  mind.  His  ministry  to  some  must  be  as  the  severity  of  Siuai,  with 
others  as  the  tenderness  of  Calvary.  Evermore  is  it  true  that  the  effects  of  Divine 
visitations  depend  on  the  spirit  in  which  they  are  received,  and  what  this  spirit  shall  be 
is  for  man  to  determine.  God  says  to  every  man,  "  What  will  ye  ?  shall  I  come  unto 
you  with  a  rod,  or  in  love,  and  in  the  spirit  of  meekness?"  This  ia  the  solemn 
propoaaL 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  1—7. — Ministers  as  stewards.  The  idea  of  the  ministry  as  a  Divine  institu- 
tion, set  apart  as  a  peculiar  calling  and  charged  with  an  infinite  trust,  cannot  as  yet 
relax  its  hold  on  St.  Paul's  mind.  Tenacity  of  a  great  truth  is  not  altogether  a  matter 
of  our  volition.  At  first  the  will  has  much  to  do  in  directing  attention  to  a  truth  and 
keeping  it  fixed ;  but  in  no  long  time,  if  the  man  has  trained  himself  to  reflect,  and, 
above  all,  if  he  is  an  earnest  man,  the  truth  recurs  by  some  process  of  self-suggestion. 
After  a  while,  indeed,  it  happens  with  many  who  give  themselves  to  profound  investi- 
gations, that  the  subject  gains  a  certain  mastery  over  them,  so  that  it  costs  more  effort 
to  dismiss  it  than  was  originally  needed  to  concentrate  attention.  No  capacity  of  the 
mind  is  so  pliant  as  the  capacity  to  be  absorbed  in  an  object  of  thought,  and  it  seems 
independent  of  idiosyncrasy.  Sir  Isaac  Newton  and  Sir  Walter  Scott  both  refer  to  the 
di£Sculty  they  had  in  disoliarging  a  topic  from  their  minds  if  it  had  eniisted  their 
interest.  St.  Paul  had  said  much  on  the  ofBce  of  the  ministry,  but  the  theme  was  by 
no  means  exhausted.  One  aspect,  a  special  one,  remained,  viz.  stewardship.  Ministers 
are  "stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God ;"  if  so,  fidelity  is  their  highest  duty,  or  rather 
the  soul  of  every  duty.  If  the  preacher  had  to  set  forth  so  unpopular  a  doctrine  as 
Christ  crucified,  so  obnoxious  to  worldly  culture,  so  alien  to  the  civilization  of  the  age, 
then  this  "  foolishness  of  preaching  "  was  a  very  urgpnt  reason  for  faithfulness.  What 
need  of  watchfulness  here  I  "  who  can  understand  his  errors,"  and  especially  these 
errors?  Apostles  were  "men  of  like  passions"  with  others;  and  this  very  likeness, 
while  fraught  with  dangers  both  obvious  and  occult,  made  them  fit,  under  God,  for  their 
work.  The  idea  of  stewardship  was  familiar  to  these  Corinthians,  perhaps  keenly  so  to 
some  of  them ; .  for  in  the  business  of  that  day  much  had  to  be  entrusted  to  agents. 
Now,  the  master  in  such  cases  cannot  give  detailed  instructions  to  his  stewards,  and 
hence  a  good  deal  must  be  left  to  their  judgment.  The  liazard,  let  it  be  observed,  is  not 
on  the  side  of  the  understanding ;  no  raie  intellectual  outfit  was  requisite  in  this  instance ; 
the  one  supreme  doctrine  of  Christ  crucified  had  wisdom  and  power  sufiScient  to  impart 
truth  of  thought  and  emotion  to  all  subordinate  doctrines.  But  the  danger  lay  in  a 
want  of  fidelity.  And  had  not  St.  Paul  evinced  this  faithfulness  while  with  these 
Corinthians?  Yet,  whether  they  admired  or  blamed,  whether  acquitted  or  condemned, 
what  was  that  to  him?  "A  very  small  thing  was  man's  judgment;"  nor,  forsooth, 
would  he  judge  himself,  but  leave  all  judgment  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  Spiritual  discern- 
ment has  its  tiinctions;  insight  is  a  glorious  gift;  but  the  Lord  reserves  judgment  to 
himself.  That  judgment  awaits  its  day  of  revelation,  when  "the  hidden  things  of 
darkness "  and  the  "  counsels  of  the  hearts  "  shall  be  made  manifest.  Then,  indeed, 
men  ritall  see  themselves  as  Christ  sees  them.  Here,  in  this  world,  even  in  our  most 
enlightened  state,  consciousness  is  partial.  Much  of  a  man  lies  far  down  in  unillumined 
depnis;  the  secrets  of  motives  and  impulses  evade  his  personal  cognizance;  onl^  iq 


oh.it.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLK  TO  THE  OORmTHIANS  143 

fragments  can  he  realize  himself;  how  much  less  can  he  comprehend  others  1  And, 
"  therefore,  judge  nothing  before  the  time."  Obviously,  then,  humility  of  judgment  is 
not  only  an  intellectual  excellence  but  a  spiritual  virtue.  It  is  a  Divine  discernment 
•f  our  limitations,  a  Bivine  insight  into  the  fact  that  there  is  an  unconscious  man  no 
less  than  a  conscious  one  in  every  human  being,  and  that,  meantime,  fidelity  stands 
free  of  all  restrictions  and  abatements.  Does  fidelity  look  at  office  ?  It  does  not  see 
popularity,  honour,  preferment,  but  duty,  duty  alone,  duty  ever ;  and  this  sense  of  duty, 
inspired  and  directed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  educates  the  man  in  tact  and  skill,  in  diligence 
and  patience.  Does  fidelity  look  at  others?  It  neither  exaggerates  nor  depreciates 
them,  nor  can  it  regard  them  as  rivals,  since  no  man  can  possibly  have  a  sense  of 
rivaliy  who  realizes  Christ  in  the  most  essential  fact  of  work,  viz.  orotherJwod.  And 
consequently,  one  of  the  many  beautiful  provisions  of  Christianity  to  secure  fidelity  is 
found  in  the  brotherhood  of  Christians.  Does  fidelity  look  into  its  own  heart  ?  Even 
then  infirmity  clings  to  its  energetic  searching.  On  its  good  side  it  may  be  too  self- 
exacting,  morbid,  harshly  critical  of  itself;  on  its  weak  side  it  may  be  lenient  and 
over-indulgent.  And  hence  St.  Paul,  while  conscious  of  knowing  nothing  against  him- 
self, declares,  "  Yet  am  I  not  hereby  justified,"  and  relies  solely  on  the  justification  of 
Christ  at  that  great  assize,  which,  among  all  its  wonders,  shall  surprise  men  most  of  all 
by  its  divinely  revealed  estimates  of  human  character.  "  For  your  sakes,"  so  he  argues, 
"I  have  been  thus  explicit  and  emphatic,  transferring  these  things  to  myself  and  ApoUos," 
in  order  that  the  Corinthians  might  clearly  see  his  own  disinterestedness.  This  point 
assured,  the  way  is  open  fur  remonstrance.  Why  are  ye  puffed  up?  If  we  are 
recipients ;  if  Paul  and  ApoUos  are  mere  stewards  of  the  Master's  riches ;  if  self-judg- 
ments and  judgments  of  others  are  impossible  to  men  under  the  limitations  of  conscious- 
ness and  observation ;  if  "  the  counsels  of  the  hearts  "  keep  out  of  sight  and  hold  their 
latency  intact  for  the  final  day ;  and  if,  meantime,  fidelity  to  duty  is  the  supreme  con- 
cern and  adequate  to  call  out  and  employ  all  the  spiritual  resources  of  our  nature  under 
grace ;  and,  6nally,  if  you  owe  all  your  means  of  acting  on  one  another  and  the  world 
to  the  brotherhood  of  the  Church ; — why  do  ye  stand  arrayed  in  sharp  hostility  against 
one  another  and  rend  asunder  the  Lord's  body  ? — L. 

Vers.  8—13. — A  vivid  contrast.  Having  shown  that  the  Christian  consciousness 
was  a  twofold  realization  of  the  worthlessness  of  whatever  was  its  own,  and  the  infinite 
worth  of  the  "  all  things  "  in  Christ,  and  having  proceeded  thence  to  the  idea  of  steward- 
ship and  the  urgent  need  of  faithfulness,  how  can  St.  Paul  withhold  the  stern  appli- 
cation of  such  truths?  Had  it  been  a  childish  self-complacency  with  which  he  was 
dealing,  we  know  how  he  would  have  treated  it.  But  it  was  an  active  jealousy,  a 
pompous  arrogance,  a  virulent  self-conceit,  a  carnal  temper  in  which  the  natural  man  sur- 
vived, that  he  had  to  combat.  Now,  therefore,  he  would  show  them  what  they  were. 
The  weapons  of  his  warfare  were  not  carnal,  but,  nevertheless,  they  were  weapons,  and 
withal  such  weapons  as  Elijah  had  employed,  and  even  the  Lord  Jesus  had  not  dis- 
dained to  use.  If,  by  means  of  contrast,  we  know  everything  external,  and  if  thereby 
we  know  ourselves  too  and  realize  our  identity  by  discriminating  one  mood  of  con- 
sciousness from  another,  it  follows  that  irony  has  its  legitimate  place  and  may  be 
sanctified  to  the  best  purposes.  Men  are  acutely  sensitive  to  its  caustic  probe,  and, 
as  they  will  not  exercise  it  on  themselves,  its  application  is  one  of  those  offices,  severe 
but  humane,  which  must  be  performed  on  them.  Is  the  conflict  over  and  the  victory 
won?  Full  and  rich,  lo!  ye  are  reigning  "as  kings,"  and  significantly  enough,  "  with- 
out us,"  the  apostles,  the  sent  of  God,  iu  this  movement.  And  what  dominion  is  that 
from  which  we  are  excluded  ?  Where  are  your  apostles  iu  this  hour  of  your  coronation 
as  kings?  "God  hath  set  us  forth" — a  terrible  contrast  to  their  self-glorification — ^at 
this  instant  are  we  so  set  forth,  like  criminals  doomed  to  death,  and  made  a  spectacle  as 
in  a  vast  theatre,  "  unto  the  world,  and  to  angels,  and  to  men."  Alas  I  the  only  use 
just  then  to  which  the  great  Apostle  to  the  Gentiles  could  put  his  knowledge  of  Greek 
games  in  the  amphitheatre  was  in  an  outburst  of  indignation  and  sorrow.  And  then 
follows  one  of  his  characteristic  sentences,  in  which  impassioned  feeling  is  quite  as  con- 
densed as  strong  thought :  fools,  weak,  despised,  are  we  the  apostles,  while  ye  are  wise 
and  strong  and  honourable.  The  formal  contrast  is  dropped,  and  now,  how  like  the , 
rapid  susunatiou  of  his  experience  to  the  sufferings  of  his  Lord  ?    Fidelity  in  suffering, 


144  THU  FIRST  EPISTLE  tO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    tdH,tV.J.— 21 

fidelity  to  raffering,  nconciliation  to  it,  scoeptanoe  of  its  law  as  basic  to  his  life,  not  an 
exceptiooal  thiug  occnrring  at  rare  interrals  as  most  of  our  sad  experiences,  but  common 
aud  Iiabitaal,  wounds  untiealed  and  yet  deeper  wounds,  "  even  unto  this  present  hour." 
Hunger  and  thirst,  nakedness,  buffetings,  homeless,  refusing  all  remuneration  and 
earning  our  own  support,  returning  good  for  evil  and  blessing  for  cnising,  objects  of 
}iers6CUtion,  denied  recognition  as  the  friends  of  humanity  and  lovers  of  their  kind, 
abused  and  vilified,  ay,  treated  in  the  centres  of  this  world's  intelligence  and  refinement 
as  "  the  filth  of  the  world  and  the  ofiscouring  of  all  things,"  and  no  break  or  cessation, 
"unto  this  day."  The  sameness  of  these  sufferings  is  twice  mentioned,  and  the 
wondrous  biography,  first  and  last,  is  one  chapter  of  woes.  Over  all  stands  a  single 
motto,  which  came  and  could  only  come  from  Christianity:  " For  Christ's  sake."  At 
this  juncture,  call  to  mind  a  fact  of  some  moment.  Men  are  wonderfully  individualized 
by  sufferings.  Considering  how  suffering  abounds,  it  is  noticeable  that  few  truly 
regard  themselves  as  providential  sufferers,  and  realize  in  their  experience  the  Divine 
discipline  they  are  appointed  to  undergo.  There  is  much  selfishness  in  our  ways  of 
enduring  the  ilb  of  life,  in  the  uses  made  of  afSiction,  and  the  habits  of  intellect  and 
sensibility  growing  therefrom ;  and  St.  Paul  strikes  the  heart  of  the  subjects  when  he 
connects  his  sufferings  with  "  Christ's  sake."  This  gives  an  instant  pathos  to  the 
ncital  and  an  instant  nobility  to  the  apostle  as  a  sufferer.  Furthermore,  only  for 
"  Christ's  sake"  does  he  go  into  this  affecting  detail  of  the  number,  variety,  and  con- 
tinuation of  bis  sorrows.  A  noble  sufferer  like  St.  Paul  could  find  no  selfish  pleasure 
in  such  an  enumeration ;  nay,  in  itself  it  would  be  painful.  Vain  men,  ignoble  men, 
gratify  their  littleness  in  recounting  what  they  have  endured,  and  these  pensioners  of 
public  opinion — it  may  be  the  public  opinion  of  a  very  diminutive  world — find  their 
account  in  the  illusory  sense  of  sympathy.  Far  from  this  weakness — very  far — was  this 
heroic  man,  to  whom  it  was  a  new  suffering  to  tell  his  sufferings,  but  who,  in  the 
courage  of  humility,  the  most  courageous  of  the  virtues  in  a  true  man,  was  even  ready 
to  uncover  a  bleeding  heart  for  "  Christ's  sake."  We  shall  now  see  that  his  love  for 
these  erring  Corinthians  prompted  him  to  make  the  narration  of  his  sufferings. — ^L. 

Vers.  14 — 2lj— Warnings  of  tenderness.  From  mood  to  mood,  yet  in  all,  St.  Paul 
had  the  same  dominant  zeal  and  affection  in  behalf  of  his  converts.  Bebuke  was  not 
with  him  a  pleasure  to  which  the  natural  man  ministered,  but  a  very  painful  duty  that 
proceeded  from  conscience  and  kept  sensibility  unalloyed  by  animal  passion.  Herein 
he  is  distinguished  from  men  who  love  authority  because  it  is  a  signal  of  personal 
eminence  and  a  means  to  make  others  feel  their  inferiority.  A  really  superior  mind 
never  likes  to  dwell  on  the  infirmities  of  ignorance  and  littleness  in  those  below  him. 
The  mountain  points  upward,  and  the  higher  the  summit  the  more  is  it  lost  in  the 
heavens.  "  Who  maketh  thee  to  differ  ? "  is  always  present  as  the  interrogatory  of 
consciousness  in  such  a  nature,  and  the  answer  thereunto,  whenever  a  true  man  has  to 
vindicate  his  authority  and  especially  in  rebuke,  is  as  Divine  as  the  questioiL  The 
delicacy  of  the  apostle  and  his  depth  of  insight  have  not  forsaken  him  in  this  trying 
hour,  nor  would  he  expose  the  vaiuty  of  such  as  made  themselves  leaders  and  assumed 
transcendent  powers,  save  in  a  manifest  spirit  of  self-abnegation.  ]\?anner  is  not  a  mere 
mode ;  it  is  a  spirit;  it  is  the  very  spirit  of  a  man  taking  on  a  vi»ih.e  embodiment,  and 
hence  the  rebuke  administered  by  St.  Paul  is  impregnated  wi(a  the  humility  of  his 
soul.    There  are  men  vrho  commit 

**  Mischievonl  foul  sin  in  chiding  sin ; " 

but  it  would  be  a  poor  compliment  to  the  apostle  to  say  that  he  was  not  one  of  this 
class.  What  is  most  truly  to  his  honour  is  his  purpose  to  make  the  Corinthians  sensible 
of  the  wrong  to  their  better  nature,  and  quicken  from  that  side  of  their  character  the 
feeling  of  repentance.  Thi?  brings  out  the  sentiment  of  his  soul  in  the  words,  "  I  write 
not  these  things  to  shame  you,  but  as  my  beloved  sons  I  warn  you;"  and  again  the 
master-thought  of  all  his  thinking  recurs — Christ  Jesus — in  whom  he  had  begotten  them 
through  the  gospel,  urging  them  to  be  imitators  of  Christ  in  him.  To  be  genuinely 
serviceable,  imitation  must  not  be  mtchnnical  and  servile,  not  be. the  literal  copying  of 
a  pattern  or  model,  but  an  education  in  the  art  of  discriminating,  and  particularly  a 
>  of  the  ideal  in  those  whom  we  foUow.    For  this  reason,  that  they  may  b«  reminded 


OB.  nr.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  U5 


of  bi«  "  ways  which  be  in  Christ,"  he  has  sent  Timotheus  unto  them.  Prudence  dictated 
this  course.  Circumstances  were  such  as  that  absence  would  be  his  most  eflfective 
presence — one  of  those  occasions  when  s  man's  thoughts  had  better  do  their  work 
unattended  by  the  emphasis  of  eye  and  voice.  But  would  they  misinterpret  this  and 
attribute  it  to  cowardice?  "  I  will  come  to  you  shortly,"  leaving  the  time  to  the  will 
of  the  Lord,  for  in  executing  a  grave  purpose  it  is  not  enough  that  we  have  the  Spirit  in 
our  motive  find  aim,  but  we  must  wait  patiently  on  the  providence  of  the  Spirit,  which 
is  often  our  best  discipline.  St.  Paul's  expectations  were  rarely  fulfilled  promjitly, — 
instance  his  visit  to  Rome  ;  hope  grew  more  reverent  by  delay ;  and  in  no  aspeot  is  his 
career  more  interesting  than  in  that  which  shows  how  postponed  gratification  of  desirt 
ennobled  the  desire  itself  and  secured  a  larger  good  to  others.  Fruit  must  grow,  ripen, 
mellow,  especially  inward  fruits,  and  St.  Paul  prized  the  mellowing  touch  of  time.  Many 
a  lesson  he  gives  us  unawares  in  psychology,  many  an  insight  into  the  philosophy  of 
true  feeling,  many  a  revelation  of  the  soul,  which  but  for  him  would  have  been  a  "  hidden 
mystery."  But,  while  waiting  for  "  time  and  place  to  cohere,"  he  utters  his  opinions 
strongly  as  to  those  who  are  "  puffed  up."  What  an  ever-recurring  sense  of  cardinal 
principles  1  Great  truths  are  never  long  out  of  sight,  and  hence  the  declaration,  "  The 
'  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word,  but  in  power."  Did  he  under-rate  language  ?  Nay ;  who 
ever  spoke  of  language  in  a  higher  strain  than  he  who  did  not  hesitate  to  allude  to  his 
own  preaching  as  not  in  the  "  words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth,  bat  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  teacheth  "?  But  the  idle  and  impotent  word,  the  word  of  swelling  vanity,  the  word 
that  dishonoured  the  Word, — for  this  he  had  only  rebuke  and  condemnation.  Such  use 
was  stolen  use,  the  gift  turned  against  the  Giver,  a  redeemed  gift  wrested  from  the 
Redeemer,  a  recognized  organ  of  the  Holy  Ghost  taken  from  its  only  Sanctifier.  For  this 
must  be  said  of  language,  that  it  is  not  merely  or  chiefly  a  medium  of  acting  on  others, 
but  that  it  reacts  on  the  man  himself.  Apart  from  its  conventional  functions,  it  is  an 
instrument  of  communion  with  self,  of  stating  self  to  self,  of  inspiring,  while  defining 
faculty  to  faculty  in  the  mind's  solitary  cognizance  of  its  own  powers.  Language  is  far 
mightier  for  introverted  conception,  for  images  that  never  escape  the  picturesque  world  in 
which  they  have  their  birth  and  life  and  death,  for  emotions  and  affections  to  which 
silence  is  the  most  precious  of  blessings — far  mightier,  we  say,  is  language  in  this  respect 
than  in  its  economic  uses.  From  the  lexicon  we  learn  the  language  that  gives  us  inter- 
course with  men.  From  our  own  souls  and  by  conversing  wi  th  them  we  learn  the  language 
by  means  of  which  we  compare  "  spiritual  things  with  spiritual."  Even  on  the  plane 
of  common  life,  the  forroer  is  confined  to  communication.  Expression  is  a  very  different 
thing  from  bald  communication.  Expression  is  due  to  the  ability  of  the  Spirit  to  vitalize 
words  by  imparting  its  own  life  to  them.  Something  individual,  something  distinctly 
personal,  imparts  itself  in  expression.  Hyperboles  are  matters  of  fact  to  the  inmost 
consciousness,  and  all  eloquence  and  poetry  are  but  symbols  of  what  the  soul  sees  and 
can  only  intimate  in  this  half-articulate  way.  "  I  will  know  when  I  come  " — so  St.  Paul 
reasons — "whether  your  speech  is  empty  words,  the  wisdom  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth 
and  is  foolishness  to  God,  or  the  power  of  the  Spirit."  This  is  the  test — God's  power. 
Only  through  that  power  can  these  Corinthians  advance  the  kingdom  of  God ;  for  only 
through  it  can  they  have  oneness  with  Christ  and  fellowship  with  his  disciples.  Come 
to  them  St.  Paul  will — come  to  them  as  a  father — the  acknowledgment  of  them  as  sons, 
beloved  sons,  precedes  him,  and  he  will  not  forget  his  relation  to  them ;  but  how  shall  he 
come?  With  a  father's  rod  or  in  love?  Will  they  relieve  him  of  the  necessity  of 
discipline  ?  And  the  thought  of  love  lingers  in  his  mind,  amplifies  itself,  seeks  fuller 
utterance,  and  the  father's  heart  throbs  once  mora  in  tha  associated  clause — "  the  apitit 
of  meekness." — ^L. 

Vera.  1,  2. — Spiritual  stewardship.  In  the  Corinthian  Church  two  errors  were 
prevalent  with  regard  to  the  apostolic  and  other  ministries — there  was  a  tendency  to 
exaggerate  the  importance  of  the  agents  by  whom  the  truth  was  communicated,  and 
there  was  a  disposition  to  set  one  of  these  agents  up  as  against  another;  so  that 
partisanship  and  sectarianism  violated  the  Christian  unity. 

I.  The  subordinate  position  of  Christian  teachers.  None  need  deem  it  a 
degradation  or  an  undue  humiliation  to  stand  where  the  apostle  stood ;  indeed,  Paul 
is  an  acknowledged  and  admired  model  to  all  who  work  for  the  kingdom.  1.  They' 
L  ooann'HiANa.  % 


146  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHlANa    [oh.  n.  1—21 

are,  in  relation  to  Chritit  himself,  minister$.  They  serve  him,  and  count  it  an  honour 
BO  to  do.  For  his  sake,  and  in  his  Name,  they  act  as  servants  to  their  fellow-men. 
2.  They  are,  in  relation  to  the  truth  they  promulgate,  stewards.  That  is  to  say,  the 
truth  is  not  revealed  by  them,  but  to  them ;  it  is  held  not  as  their  property,  but  as 
their  tiust ;  it  is  not  appropriated  to  their  own  use,  but  dispensed  by  them  for  the 
benefit  of  others ;  they  are  not  at  liberty  to  do  as  they  like  with  it — they  are  accountable 
to  the  Lord  of  all  for  the  way  in  which  they  deal  with  it.  3.  This  being  so,  faithfulness 
is  the  virtue  they  are  bound  to  cultivate  and  display.  Whilst  those  who  are  indepen- 
dent are  not  especially  bound  to  this  duty,  all  who  have  derived  from  another,  and  are 
accountable  to  that  other,  are  emphatically  called  to  be  faithful.  Such  ia  the  position 
of  all  the  ministers  of  Christ. 

II.  The  true  dignity  of  spiritual  servants  aeises  from  their  relation  to 
THEIR  Lord  and  to  his  Word.  There  is  a  contrast  between  the  service  and  the 
Master,  between  the  stewardship  and  the  mystery.  The  minister  cannot  think  too 
lowlily  of  himself  or  too  loftily  of  his  theme  and  trust.  1.  If  they  are  ministers,  they 
arc  ministers  of  Christ.  An  ambassador  may  be  a  person  of  lowly  birth  and  feeble 
powers,  but  if  he  is  an  ambassador,  his  relation  to  his  sovereign  and  the  credentials 
and  commission  he  has  received  entitle  his  message  to  peculiar  consideration.  And 
however  the  pastor,  teacher,  or  evaiigelist  may  in  himself  be  lacking  in  claims  upon 
the  respect  of  the  superficial  society  called  "  the  world,"  however  he  may  be  destitute  ol 
the  shining  gifts  which  command  the  admiration  of  the  Church,  still  neither  he  nor 
those  whose  welfare  he  seeks  are  ever  at  liberty  to  forget  that  he  is  an  ambassador 
from  heaven,  that  he  is  commissioned  and  authorized  by  the  King  of  kings,  2.  If  they 
are  stewards,  they  are  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God.  By  mysteries  the  apostle 
meant  truths  which  had  in  the  past  been  hidilen  but  were  now  revealed.  Revealed  in  • 
Christ,  the  Divine  purposes  of  grace,  salvation  and  life  to  all  mankind,  were  published 
by  the  apostles  and  their  fellow-labourers.  And  the  declaration  of  the  mind  and 
heart  of  God  was  well  worthy  of  being  regarded  as  the  impartation  of  a  mystery 
compared  with  which  all  the  wonders  of  Eleusis  sank  into  insignificance.  Of  this 
Paul  was  conscious,  and  it  would  be  well  if  every  preacher  of  the  gospel  were  ever  to 
have  this  before  his  mind.  We  have  this  treasure,  though  "in  earthen  vessels." 
The  solemnity  of  publishing  Divine  truth  and  the  responsibility  of  hearing  it  are 
alike  by  these  considerations  brought  very  vividly  before  the  mind.  Thus  are 
ministers  unto  some  a  savour  of  lite  unto  life,  unto  others  a  savour  of  death  unto 
death.— T. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — Judgment,  human  and  Divine.  No  man  can  work  entirely  with 
reference  to  his  own  labours  and  his  own  opinion  of  them.  We  all  need  to  live  under 
the  sense  that  others  are  taking  some  notice  of  what  we  do ;  and  with  most  there  is 
danger  of  attaching  exaggerated  importance  to  human  criticism.  But  it  is  well  for  us 
to  cherish  the  feeling  of  the  nearness  and  the  supervision  of  the  omniscient  Searcher 
of  hearts.  In  this  passage  St.  Paul  represents  the  effect  which  both  human  and 
Divine  judgment  should  have  upon  the  Christian's  life. 

I.  The  judgment  which  is  deprecated.  This  is  the  judgment :  1.  Of  our  fallible 
fellow-men.  For  they  have  not  the  necessary  material  or  the  due  knowledge  and 
opportunity  for  forming  a  just  judgment.  Men  are  influenced  in  the  opinions  they 
form  of  one  another  by  their  prejudices  and  prepossessions.  We  judge  our  friends  too 
favourably,  and  are  too  severe  in  our  censure  of  our  opponents.  Hence  our  Lord  has 
warned  us,  "Judge  notl"  2.  That  which  is  passed  at  this  present  time.  This  is 
the  time  for  work,  not  the  time  for  judging  and  for  recompense.  No  man's  work  can 
be  fairly  judged  until  it  is  completed.  And  beside  this,  we  cannot  see  life  in  its  true 
proportions  when  we  look  at  it  from  a  point  of  view  so  near.  To  judge  now  is  to  judge 
"  before  the  time." 

IL  The  judgment  which  is  anticipated.  1,  This  is  God's  judgment.  He  will 
bring  every  work  into  judgment.  His  acquaintance  with  all  who  shall  appear  before 
his  bar  is  pb.iect.  His  material  for  forming  a  judgment  is  complete.  Uis  mind  is 
unclouded  by  human  prejudices.  He  is  infinitely  just,  2.  This  shall  take  place  upon 
our  Lord's  return.  His  parousia  is  what  the  Church  looks  forward  to  with 
tfiactionftte  interest  and  hope.     Her  children  offer  the  frequent  prayer :  "  That  at  th. 


OH.IV.  1— 21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS*  i« 

MOond  coining  to  judge  the  world  we  may  be  found  an  acceptable  people  In  thy  sight." 
For  whilst  the  judgment  shall  be  Divine;  it  shall  be  accomplished  by  "that  Man 
whom  God  hatn  appointed  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead."  8.  This  shall  b« 
accompanied  by  revelation.  There  are  hidden  things  of  darkness  which  must  be 
brought  to  light ;  virtues  and  vices  of  which  the  world  has  taken  little  or  no  note,  but 
which  must  be  brought  forward  and  taken  into  account,  in  order  to  a  just  decision  and 
award.  There  are  counsels  of  the  heart  to  be  made  manifest;  for  whilst  men 
necessarily  judge  by  the  conduct,  God  will  take  into  account  the  secret  intentions  and 
motives  of  those  who  have  laboured  for  him,  both  good  and  evil.  4.  This  will  be  by 
a  perfect  discrimination.  The  hypocrite  shall  be  distinguished  bom  the  sincere,  the 
ililigent  from  the  idle,  the  time-server  and  men-pleaser  from  the  true  servant  of  God. 
5.  This  will  be  the  occasion  of  recompense.  The  case  of  the  utterly  unfaithful  is  left 
out  of  view  as  irrelevant  in  this  connection.  But  among  the  faithrul  it  is  presumed 
that  there  are  degrees  of  fidelity ;  and  every  man  shall  have  his  praite  from  Qod. 
This  implies  that  each  has  a  special  meed  for  special  service ;  and  it  also  implies  that 
praise  shall  be  accompanied  by  a  substantial  and  everlasting  recompense.  It  is  well, 
therefore,  to  work  "  as  ever  in  the  great  Taskmaster's  eye,"  to  avoid  judging  one's  self,  to 
be  indifferent  to  the  partial  judgment  of  men,  and  to  wait  for  the  revelation  and  the 
awards  of  eternity. — T. 

Ver.  7. — AU  <s  o/  grace,  Fbul's  quick,  impuIdTO  mind  here  flashes  out  into 
indignation  at  the  spectacle  of  partisanship  and  schism  in  the  Corinthian  Church. 
They  who  lay  great  stress  upon  individual  human  teachers  and  ministers  are  in  danger 
of  forgetting,  perhaps  already  have  forgotten,  two  things,  viz.,(l)  that  every  minister 
and  teacher  has  a  special  blessing  for  the  Church  ;  and  (2)  that  all  such  agents  are  but 
messengers  from  the  court  of  heaven,  and  distributors  of  the  blessings  of  God. 

L  Wb  mat  take  credit  to  ourselves  only  fob  oub  wants  and  fob  oub  capaoitt. 
Why  should  any  man  be  proud,  when  he  remembers  that  he  was  bom  a  helpless  babe ; 
that  he  was  dependent  upon  the  kind  services  of  others  for  the  preservation  of  life ; 
that  he  has  learned  nothing  which  he  was  not  taught ;  that  he  enjoys  nothing  except 
through  the  good  ofBces  of  his  fellow-men?  And  why  should  any  Christian  be 
"  puffed  up "  with  spiritual  conceit,  when  he  remembers  that  all  he  brought  to  the 
Scriptures,  to  the  Church,  to  the  Lord,  waa  just  his  necessities  and  his  capacity  to 
receive  spiritual  blessings  ? 

U.  We  abb  indebted  fob  all  thinqb  to  huhan  ministbatiomb.  When  we  regard 
our  circumstances,  our  worldly  possessions,  our  education,  our  position  in  life,  our 
family,  our  Mends,  this  fact  is  obvious  enough.  But  the  same  is  true  of  our  religious 
advantages,  our  spiritual  blessings.  .The  Bible  was  secured  to  us  by  human  efforts  and 
lalx>urs ;  the  go8|)el  was  preached  to  us  by  human  lips ;  the  Church  has  been  to  ua  the 
fellowship  of  our  human  teachers  and  brethren;  our  religious  knowledge  has  been 
conveyed  to  us  by  human  interpreters;  our  piety  has  been  inspired  by  human 
I'xamples. 

III.  Drvim  ugbot  has  hade  hcmah  imnBTBiEs  bubbebvient  to  oub  sfibitoal 
tvANTB.  It  is  not  wise  or  just  to  discriminate  too  nicely  between  human  gifts  and 
Divine.  The  human  gifts  are  Divine  gifts  bestowed  by  human  hands.  It  is  the 
privilege  of  the  devout  and  enlightened  mind  to  look  through  the  seen  to  the  unseen ; 
to  recognize  in  every  Christian  helper  and  friend  the  messenger  of  God,  the  minister 
of  Christ.  The  form,  the  voice,  may  be  earthly,  but  there  is  behind  a  spiritual 
presence  and  a  Divine  power.  It  is  the  Giver  of  every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift 
who  is  so  near. — T. 

Yer.  9. — A  spedach.  In  the  midst  of  his  irony  and  sarcasm,  Paul  here  reverts  to 
the  more  natural  habit  of  his  mind.  The  self-exaltation  and  self-importance  ot  the 
Corintliians  were  mingled  with  depreciation  of  the  apostle,  at  least  on  the  part  of  some. 
But  alasl  if  his  own  converts,  so  deeply  indebted  to  his  labours  and  his  care,  coold 
think  slightingly  of  him,  what  earthly  compensation  could  he  expect  for  all  the  pain, 
hardship,  contempt,  and  danger  he  cheerfully  endured  7  Were  not  he  and  his  fellow- 
apostles  like  gladiators  doomed  to  be  flung  to  the  wild  beasts — "a  speotaola  to  the 
world,  to  angels,  and  to  men  "  ? 


148  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.    [ch.  it.  1— 2L 

I.  The  obanseitb  and  sublimitt  of  theib  fositioh  deuaijidb  oub  aduibation. 

They  were  not  as  slaves  cast  to  the  lions.  They  were  men  who  might  have  led  a  quiet 
and  peaceful,  and  some  of  them  an  honourable  and  distinguished,  life.  But  they  gav« 
their  hearts  to  Christ,  and  having  done  so  gave  up  all  for  him.  There  was  no  exaggera- 
tion in  the  apostle's  langua,j;e.  On  the  contrary,  he  spoke  tliie  plain  truth  when  he 
represented  himself  as  standing  before  the  universe  as  a  witness  to  the  Lord  Christ. 
The  position  was  one  of  dignity  and  moral  impresaiveness ;  the  angels  felt  it  then,  and 
the  world  of  humanity  has  come  to  feel  it  now. 

II.  The  pathos  of  theib  position  demands  oub  sympathy.  We  obserre  the 
bodily  privations,  the  homelessness,  the  physical  toil,  the  ignominy,  the  persecutions, 
the  general  contempt,  which  the  apostles  passed  through  ;  and  we  cannot  observe  all 
this  unmoved.  Doubtless  it  touched  the  heart  of  that  Divine  Saviour  who  was  made 
[lerfect  through  sufferings;  doubtless  there  were  those  who  wept  with  their  leaders 
when  these  were  constrained  to  weep.  Nothing  in  all  human  history  is  more  profoundly 
affecting. 

III.  The  mobal  fubposb  of  theib  position  demands  oub  appbeciatioh.  The 
motives  that  induced  Paul  and  his  colleagues  voluntarily  to  submit  to  such  experience 
as  they  relate  were  two— fidelity  to  Christ  and  pity  for  men.  Christ  the  Master  had 
condescended  himself  to  he  upon  the  cross  a  spectacle  to  the  world ;  aud  those  who 
benefited  by  his  redemption  and  shared  his  Spirit  were  ready  to  follow  his  example. 
They  were  the  true  followers  of  him  who  "  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame."  And. 
their  aim  and  hope  was  to  bring  the  world  to  the  foot  of  the  Saviour's  cross.  For  this 
end  they  "counted  not  their  life  dear  unto  them."  It  was  for  the  sake  of  their  fellow- 
men  that  they  consented  to  brave  the  scorn  of  the  philosopher  and  the  jeer  of  the 
multitude. 

lY.  The  hobal  lessons  of  theib  position  demand  oub  study.  1.  It  is  a  rebuke 
to  self-indulgence  and  ease.  Shall  we  be  satisfied  and  enjoy  our  ease  in  the  midst  of 
the  world's  errors  and  sins,  when  we  call  to  mind  the  heroic  and  pathetic  sufferings  of 
our  Lord's  first  followers?  2.  It  is  a  consolation  under  any  contumely  and  discredit 
we  may  endure  in  the  Christian  profession  and  vocation  for  Christ's  sake.  "The  like 
afSictions  have  befallen  our  brethren  who  are  in  the  world,"  3.  It  points  on  to  the 
^lory  which  shall  be  revealed.  "  Through  much  tribulation  ye  must  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."  The  apostles  have  ended  their  struggles,  and  now  enjoy  their 
victory ;  the  Church  militant  will  soon  become  the  Church  triumphant. — ^T. 

Ter.  15. — Children,  tutors,  and  fatheri.  Our  religion  makes  use  of  all  the  many 
and  various  relationships  that  obtain  among  men  to  set  forth  and  to  assist  us  in 
understanding  spiritual  realities. 

I.  Genebally  bpeaeino,  Chbistians  hay  bk  descbibed  as  ceildben.  1.  Like 
the  Corinthians,  most  members  of  the  Church  of  Christ  need  constant  and  watehful 
care.  Providence  has  appointed  that  children  should  be  bom  more  dependent  than 
the  offspring  of  the  inferior  animals  upon  parental  attention  and  devotion.  From 
infancy  until  the  approach  of  manhood  and  womanhood,  human  beings  stand  in  need  of 
the  supervision  and  assistance  of  their  parents.  So  is  it  with  the  raehibers  of  Christ's 
Church.  They  are  in  need  of  pastoral  care  and  kindness,  and  without  this  are  not 
likely  either  to  grow  in  Christian  character  or  to  escape  the  assaults  of  their  foes.  2. 
In  addition  to  care,  they  need  wise  and  fatherly  counsel.  It  would  be  well  if  spiritual 
pastors  bore  in  mind  the  inexperience  of  a  large  proportion  of  the  flock,  Paul  was  a 
faithful  counsellor,  and  in  writing  to  these  Christians  at  Corinth  he  warned  them  very 
faithfully  against  the  faults  and  errors  they  were  in  danger  of  falling  into.  Not  with 
severity,  but  with  directness  and  earnestness,  he  admonished  his  spiritual  children,  and 
entreated  them  to  render  obedience  to  his  advice  and  directions.  Even  sincere  disciples 
of  Christ  are  often  in  peril  by  reason  of  their  own  want  of  knowledge  and  experience, 
and  by  reason  of  the  temptations  which  beset  them  in  this  world.  Hence  the  impor- 
tance of  such  pastoral  admonitions  as  those  of  which  Paul  here  gives  an  example, 

II.  ThIBE  ABE  IN  THE  CHUBCH  OF  CHBIST  THOSE  WHO  MAY  BE  DESIGNATED  BPIBITUAL 

fathebs.  At  Corinth  the  apostle  occupied  a  pre-eminently  honourabl''  and  influential 
position.  He  claims  in  this  passage  to  have  been,  what  the  history  of  the  Acts  shows 
ihat  he  was,  the  planter  of  tue  vineyard,  the  founder  of  the  edifice^  the  father  of  th« 


3H.it.  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  149 

family.  It  was  by  his  labours,  his  bravery,  his  perseverance,  that  the  Christian  com- 
munity came  into  existence.  In  the  highest  sense,  of  course,  the  Father  was  God 
himself,  who  gives  the  Spirit  of  adoption  to  all  his  people.  But  instrumentally,  the 
apostle  was  blessed  by  God,  through  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  to  the  begetting  and 
birth,  80  to  speak,  of  this  congregation,  this  spiritual  household.  This  relationship 
involvgd  the  obligation  on  their  part  to  reverence,  honour,  obey,  and  gratefully  to  love 
and  rejoice  in,  one  to  whom  they  were,  under  God,  so  immeasurably  indebted.  For  his 
was  a  unique  position  with  regard  to  them.  No  other  could  claim  to  stand  iu  the 
same  relation,  and  Paul  was  hold  to  tell  them  so.  Still  are  there  those  who  are 
honoured  by  the  calling  of  God  to  this  spiritual  fatherhood ;  and  such  should  meet 
with  that  respectful  and  grateful  recognition  which  is  the  due  of  benefactors  so  signally 
favoured  by  God  himself. 

III.  Tutors  and  instruotobs  in  Christ  occupy  in  thb  Church  a  position  only 
INFEBIOB  TO  THAT  OF  8PIRITUAI.  FATHERS.  At  Corinth  the  charisrni  of  teaching  seems 
to  have  been  imparted  and  exercised  in  a  measure  almost  embarrassing  in  its  abundance. 
Paul  speaks  hyperbulically  of  the  "myriads "of  tutors  who  followed  up  his  apostolic 
labours.  The  same  Spirit  bestows  gifts  in  multiplicity  and  variety.  Let  Christians  be 
gratefal  for  all  the  "  means  of  grace,"  and  especially  for  the  holy  and  devout  ministra- 
tions of  the  learned,  the  wise,  the  sympathetic,  and  the  strong.  For  thus  is  it  appointed 
that  the  Church  should  grow  in  grace. — T. 

Ver.  20, — Tlie  power  of  the  kingdom.  The  Corinthians  were  given  to  words;  they 
delighted  in  eloquence ;  they  were  addictid  to  disputations.  The  Apostle  Paul,  who 
fulfilled  his  ministry  by  language,  written  and  sp  ken,  was  not  the  man  to  disparage 
words.  But  no  man  was  more  impatient  of  mere  words — of  words  with  no' reality,  no 
force,  no  conviction.  He  had  nason  to  complam  of  his  converts  at  Corinth,  and  was 
resolved  to  bring  matters  to  an  issue  with  them ;  and  it  should  be  a  contest,  not  of 
barren  verbiage,  but  of  spiritual  force. 

I.  The  nature  of  God's  kingdom  proves  that  it  cannot  be  merely  in  word. 
1.  A  kingdom  implies  authority  exercised,  obedience  rendered.  Although  a  kingdom 
not  of  this  world,  not  maintained  and  supported  by  human  means,  by  laws  ami  arms, 
still  God's  empire  is  a  reality.  Christ  is  the  King  and  Head  ;  his  laws  are  binding  and 
stringent,  although  the  motives  that  inspire  obedience  are  gratitude  and  love — his 
subjects  are  willing  and  submissive.  2.  Such  a  kingdom  is  incompatible  with  the  reign 
of  words.  To  be  a  subject  of  Christ  is  not  (1)  to  be  merely  by  verbal  as.sent,  "its  by 
confirmation  or  any  other  form  of  admission  to  Church  privileges,  associatid  with  the 
society  of  Christians ;  nor  is  it  (2)  to  make  any  kind  of  profession ;  nor  (3)  to  recite 
and  maintain  the  great  Christian  creeds ;  nor  (4)  to  utter  words  expressive  of  devotion. 
Men  may  make  use  of  many  and  sacred  words,  and  be  none  the  nearer  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  A  nominal  and  verbal  kingdom  is  weak  and  despicable;  such  is  not  the 
spiritual  kingdom  of  our  Lord. 

IL  The  origin  and  nature  of  the  power  of  the  kinodom.  1.  Words  may  be  only 
from  man ;  power  is  from  God.  All  natural  and  physical  power  originates  in  him.  But 
moral  power  is  either  good  or  evil ;  and  the  good  only  biit  always  is  from  God.  Christ 
is  "  the  Power  of  God  "  2.  When  we  contemplate  this  spiritual  power  which  pervades 
the  new  kingdom,  what  do  we  find  it  to  be  ?  The  power  of  truth,  the  power  of  good- 
nets,  Hiie^yieiv  oi  pity  axAoilove. 

III.  Whebe  and  how  this  power  oiSFLAYa  ITSELF.  1.  Its  Seat  is  the  soul ;  there 
it  first  enthrones  itself,  and  thence  it  spreads  until  it  pervades  the  whole  nature, 
changing  the  beliefs,  the  feelings,  the  principles,  and  the  habits.  For  "  the  kingdom 
of  G«i  is  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  2.  The  power  of  this  king- 
dom manifests  itself  through  the  whole  realm  of  human  nature  and  life ;  both  by  the 
forces,  obstacles,  and  oppositions  it  overcomes,  and  by  the  results  it  produces.  We 
observe  these  efi'ects  especially  in  (I)  the  newness  of  life  which  is  characteristic  of  the 
kingdom,  as  emphatically  in  the  case  of  the  first  disciples,  brought  out  of  Judaism  and 
paganism  into  the  marvellous  light  of  the  gospel ;  (2)  in  the  social  results,  which  were 
exhibited  in  the  cities  where  the  gospel  took  root,  and  where  the  sentiment  of  brother- 
hood proved  a  new  power  in  humanity,  sanctifying  society  within  and  attracting  elements 
from  without.    (3)  We  have  a  proof  of  this  power  in  the  case  of  those  martyrs  who  foi 


160  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [cH.  it.  1—21. 

Christ's  sake  were  content  to  lay  down  their  life ;  for  here  we  have  evidently  •  new 
spiritual  force,  capable  of  inspiring  with  a  fortitude  In  the  cause  of  an  unseen  Lord 
which  surpassed  the  heroic  devotion  of  a  Roman  to  his  country's  good.  (4)  Tlie  jirogresa 
and  perpetuity  of  this  power  stamps  it  as  Divine,  as  the  one  great  prevalent  and 
■nccessful  force  working  in  human  society  for  iti  purification,  its  elevatioo,  ita  lastin| 
and  highest  welfare. — T. 

Vers.  1,  2. — "Minister!  of  Christ.'  L  What  thet  abi.  1.  Ministers,  Not 
masters;  servants,  not  lords.  The  word  means  literally  "  under-rower,"  or  common  sailor, 
and  is  generally  used  of  the  lower  class  of  servants.  Ministers  are  the  mere  servants  of 
Christ ;  tliey  have  no  authority  save  that  which  they  may  receive  from  him.  "  Be  not  y» 
called  Rabbi "  (Matt,  xxiii.  8).  A  domineering  despotic  spirit  is  altngether  out  of  place. 
If  any  will  be  cliief,  he  must  be  servant  of  all.  Many  ministers  have  trouble  with  their 
Churches  because  of  their  own  masterful  spirit.  Like  Rehoboam,  they  do  not  heed  the 
sage  counsel,  "  If  thou  wilt  be  a  servant  unto  this  people  this  day,  and  wilt  serve  them, 
and  answer  them,  and  speak  good  words  to  them,  then  they  will  be  thy  servants  for 
•ver "  (1  Kings  xii.  7).  Some  of  the  Corinthians  had  unduly  exalted  their  teachers 
(ch.  L  12) ;  others,  perhaps,  had  regarded  them  as  utterly  insignificant  ("  I  of 
Christ");  Paul  defines  the  legitimate  position.  Ministerial  activity  is  hinted  at; 
ministers  are  to  be  workers,  not  idlers.  2,  Ministers  of  Christ.  This  makes  their 
calling  most  honourable.  Tliey  are  servants  of  the  Church,  servants  of  their  fellows, 
but  not  primarHy.  They  serve  the  Church  and  their  fellow-men  because  they  desire 
to  serve  Christ.    They  are  (1)  ap[)oiiited  by  Christ ;  (2)  responsible  to  him ;  (3)  to  be 

i'udged  by  him ;  (4)  to  be  divoteil  to  him  ;  (5)  to  speak  in  his  Name ;  (6)  to  preach 
lim  and  his  redemption  ;  (7)  to  rely  upon  his  help ;  (8)  to  lake  orders  from  him ;  (9)  not 
to  originate,  but  to  ascertain  his  mind.  3.  Stewards.  A  position  (1)  of  trust  and  con- 
fidence ;  (2)  of  influence ;  (3)  of  resi)onsibility ;  (4)  of  some  peril ;  (5)  of  much  honour. 
4,  Stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  Ood.  "  Mystery  "  in  the  New  Testament  dees  not  mean 
something  incomprehensible,  but  something  beyond  the  reach  of  unaided  human  intel- 
ligence. The  "mysteries  of  God"  are  thus  "hidden"  (ch.  iL  7)  until  revealed  by 
him.  They  are  the  truths  of  the  gospel — "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  Ministers 
have  special  charge  concerning  these  truths — (1)  to  preserve  them ;  (2)  to  dispense 
them.  As  stewards,  they  should  be  deeply  impressed  with  (1)  the  vast  importance  of 
the  "  ilches  "  entrusted  to  them ;  (2)  the  need  of  atmost  care  in  discharging  the  duties 
of  their  office  ;  (3)  the  awful  issues  to  themselves  and  others  if  they  are  remiss.  Many 
are  satisfied  if  self-approved  or  if  praised  by  others ;  but  Paul  looked  to  the  judgment  of 
Christ  (ver.  4).  We  are  not  to  be  despondent  if  we  are  "  unpopular"  with  men,  so  that 
we  are  approved  by  our  Lord,  Though  "  unpopularity "  with  men  is  very  for  from 
being  an  argument  that  we  please  our  Master :  "  The  common  people  heard  him 
gladly,"  and  probably  would  so  hear  us  if  we  were  more  like  him. 

IL  A  NEOESSABT  QnALiFicATioN.  Faithfulness.  This  is  a  first  requisite  in  those 
who  are  "  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God."  Stewards  must  not  use  their  lord's  goods 
for  their  own  advantage.  What  evils  result  from  unfaithfulness  in  an  earthly  steward- 
ship! who  can  estimate  the  evils  flowing  from  an  unfaithful  ministry  1  A  minister 
should  be  faithful:  1.  To  Christ,  in  (1)  obedience,  (2)  love,  (3)  zeal,  (4)  devotion, 
(6)  holiness.  2.  To  his  flock.  (1)  Preaching  unadulterated  doctrine.  Not  corrupting 
the  Word  of  God.  Not  substituting  something  else  for  it.  (2)  Rightly  dividing  the 
word  of  truth.  (3)  Reproving,  rebuking,  exhorting  with  all  long-suffering  and  teaching 
(2  Tim.  iv.  2).  (4)  Striving  "to  present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus"  (CoL  L 
28).— H, 

Yers.  8—6. — Hmnan  and  Divint  Judgmenti,  I.  Reflect  that  hvuan  jusohekt 
■  FALiiiBLB.  It  is  needful  to  remember  this.  Many  laugh  at  "infallibility"  when 
it  affects  a  pope  at  Rome,  but  are  much  dis|iosed  to  believe  in  it  when  it  affects  a  pope 
at  home.  We  should  not  forget  that  (1)  our  powers  are  limited ;  (2)  our  information 
often  veiT defective;  (3)  our  minds  very  subject  to  bias.  Our  fallibility  should  lead  us: 
1.  To  take  heed  how  we  pronounce  final  judgments.  There  are  some  things  about 
which  we  should  not  judge  at  all,  as  altogether  transcending  our  powers  and  province. 
About  many  things  we  are  compelled  to  lorm  judgments,  and  to  act  npon  the  judgments 


ca.  IV,  1—21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  COBINTHIAUa  151 

formed.  But  finality  of  judgment  may  often  be  tirnStably  avoided.  We  ehonld 
particularly  observe  this  when  our  judgments  affect :  (1)  Tlie  providence  and  dealiugacrf 
God.  (2)  The  character,  motives,  deserts,  of  our  fellows.  We  see  the  deeds,  and  may 
pronouDce  upon  them  as  such,  but  we  must  remember  that  the  heart  is  hidden  from  us. 
(3)  Certain  matters  connected  with  ourselves.  It  may  be  well  to  judge  ourselves 
severely,  since  our  tendency  is  to  take  too  fuvourable  a  view  of  our  own  conduct.  Ws 
may  acquit  ourselves  when  we  ought  to  condemn  ourselves.  Implicit  faith  cannot 
be  reposed  in  the  voice  of  conscience ;  it  may  be  perverted.  Oar  judgment  of  ourselves 
should  command  oar  confUeace  only  when  we  feel  sure  that  our  judgment  agrees  with 
God's  judgment,  2.  Not  to  be  discmcerted  if  harshly  judged  by  our  felluws.  Ifaa 
enlightened  conscience  does  not  condemn,  fallible  human  judgment  should  not  greatly 
depress  us.  We  should  value  human  ju(ignient,  not  oiiervaltte  it.  Rightly  estimated, 
it  is  under  such  conditions  "  a  very  small  thing ; "  under  all  condilions,  a  very  small 
thing  compared  with  the  judgment  of  God.  To  our  own  Master  we  stand  or  falL  So 
fallible  is  human  judgment  that  often  the  best  men  have  been  counted  the  worst,  and 
the  worst  the  best. 

II.  Reflect  that  Drmn  jxtdgmknt  o  infallibt.b.  That  judgment  will  tw 
•xercisi'd  upon  us  and  all  around  us  wliou  the  Lord  comes  ;  or  rather,  tljat  judgment  is 
now  being  exorcised,  and  then  will  be  declared.  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  be  a  day  of 
universal  and  infallible  ju'lgment.  When  the  Lord  comes :  1.  Hidden  things  of  darkness 
will  be  brought  into  the  liglit.  So  much  is  liidilen  from  us  ;  nothing  will  be  hiilden  from 
him.  We  judge  from  port ;  he  sees  aU.  No  darkness  can  hide  from  him;  no  hidihg  can 
baffle  him.  2.  There  will  be  Aear^-revelation.  How  carefully  veiled  the  heart  often  is 
now  I  How  different  the  counsels  of  the  heart  from  the  expressions  of  the  lips  and  the 
actions  of  the  hand  I  Heart-revelation  must  bring  widespread  condemnation.  Yet  may 
we  not  Siiy  also  that  often,  if  we  had  known  the  counsels  of  the  iuart,  we  should  havt 
more  favourably  estimated  the  conduct  ?  The  whole  man  will  be  disclosed  at  the  day 
of  the  Lord.  3.  Tiiere  will  be  award.  Praise  will  be  administered — "  due  praise ;"  for 
so  the  rendering  might  be.  Therefore  valuable,  for  unmerited  praise  is  of  nothing  wortli. 
When  God  judges,  t.e  result  will  not  be  all  condemnation  by  any  means.  There  will 
be  1  raise  as  well  as  blame — "  due  praise,"  and,  let  us  not  forget,  "  due  blame."  The 
reference,  however,  is  not  to  our  aalvtUion,  but  to  God's  judgment  of  our  conduct  as  his 
servants, 

Li>e  for  the  judgment  of  "the  day  of  the  Lord,"  not  for  the  judgment  of  **  man's 
day"  (for  so  "m:m's  judgment"  may  be  rendered).  The  one  "a  small  thing"  indeed  I 
The  other  how  great  I  When  the  Lord  comes,  some  praised  of  men  wdl  be  censured, 
and  not  a  few  blamed  of  men  will  ha  praised. — H. 

Ver.  7. — Our  indeltedneai  to  Ood.  L  Bbfleot  cfon  tub  faot.  Are  apt  to  forget 
it  altogether.  So  anomaly  is  often  presented  of  our  quarrelling  over  "possessions" 
which  do  not  belong  to  us,  and  boasting  of  that  to  which  we  have  no  title.  The  air  we 
breathe,  the  world  we  dwell  upon,  our  food,  clothing,  and  shelter,  our  "  prosperity  "  at 
we  fondly  call  it, — these  things  are  leiit  to  us  by  God,  So  also  our  powers — yea,  our  very 
existence  is  not  of  ourselves,  but  of  God.  If  we  were  to  have  taken  away  from  ourselves 
all  that  we  have  received  through  the  free  benevolence  of  Geid,  what  would  be  left  t 
Our  salvation,  our  spiritual  joys,  our  glad  prospects,  are  also  of  him, 

II,  Due  remembrance  of  oub  indkbtedness  will  help  to  check  pbidb.  We  art 
apt  to  regard  things  as  though  we  had  not  received  them — as  though  they  were  our  own 
in  sums  other  sense  than  us  received  from  Ood,  Thus  we  become  proud  of  our  attain- 
ments and  belongings,  and  glory  in  ourselves  as  possessors,  if  not  originators,  and  not  in 
God.  For  the  luxury  of  boasting  we  easily  delude  ourselves,  A  gracious  recollection 
of  the  actucd  stale  of  the  case  should  do  something  in  the  way  of  shaking  the  throne  of 
conceit  and  vain-glory.  Pride  is  great  folly  as  well  as  great  sin,  and  when  we  indulge 
in  it  we  have  to  smother  our  common  sense.  And  of  all  pride,  "  spiritual  pride  "  is  the 
most  reprehensible,  and  the  most  absurd. 

HI,    UdE  EEMEMBRANCE  of  oub  LNDEBTBDNFSS  mat   INCLINB  us  to  USB  akiqht  WHAt 

WE  HAVE  beceived.  Instead  of  pride,  we  should  feel  reaponsihility.  Instead  ol 
boasting,  we  should  desire  to  employ  wisely  and  well  the  Divine  benefaction.  The 
things  which  we  handle,  see,  and  Lave,  are  not  ours,  but  God's.    We  are  stewards,  and 


IW  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.it.  1—21. 

prefMntly  Ehall  have  to  ^ve  an  account  of  our  stewardship.  We  should  ask,  For  what 
•re  these  things  given  ?    What  does  God  wish  us  to  do  with  them  ? 

r?.  Dub  bkmembranot  of  our  indebtedness  wiu.  tend  to  ikspirb  gratitude  and 
ton.  He  distinguishes  us  by  his  bounty.  All  we  receive  is  of  pure  benevolence  ;  wa 
have  Hone  no  work  fur  it,  we  have  not  merited  it.  If  only  a  little  had  been  withheld, 
we  should  have  lived  in  misery.  Our  joy  and  usefulness  are  dependent  upon  Divine 
gift.  We  thni  get  glimpses  at  the  loTe  of  Ood,  and,  as  he  has  first  loved  as,  we  should 
•lap  Jove  him. 

V.   Dni  BEUEHBBANOB  Or  CUB  IHDEBTEDNESe  WILL  TEND  TO  QUICKEN  rATTH.      HoW 

moch  Ood  hat  done  for  us  I  We  have  not  to  trust  for  that  I  It  has  come  to  pass. 
And  will  not  the  Unchangeable  continue  to  help  us  and  to  supply  all  our  need  ?  We 
hare  the  promises,  and  the  past  tells  us  of  no  broken  promisa  Fast  experience  should 
speak  death  to  present  doubt  and  fear.— H. 

Vers.  8— 10. — Irony  in  religion.  1.  Scriftuu  warbantb  the  use  of  iront  n 
OBBTAIN  oabeb.  Scrii  ture  is  here  fully  at  one  with  common  sense  and  exi  erience. 
There  are  certain  conditions  which  can  be  most  successfully  touched  by  the  slm'ts  of 
ridicule ;  certain  positions  which  can  be  carried  most  effectually  by  light  artillery.  In 
the  Old  Testament  the  folly  of  idolatry  is  often  exhibited  in  ludicrous  lights.  Take, 
for  example,  Elijah's  words  on  Cnrmel  (1  Kings  xviii.  2T).  Ilere  Paul  employs  the 
weapon  of  satire.  The  Corinthians,  in  their  carnality,  conceived  themselves  to  be  at  the 
rery  height  of  spirituality.  They  had  attained  already — and  that  without  much  know- 
ledge of  the  daily  cross.  They  had  reached  the  goal  suspiciously  early.  They  were 
full ;  their  knowledge  was  complete.  They  were  rich ;  never  were  there  such  amply 
endowed  Christians.  They  reigned  as  kings — none  so  high  as  they — monarchs  of  all 
they  surveyed.  And  all  this  without  the  insignificant  aid  of  such  a  very  commonplace 
teacher  as  PauI  I  They  had  far  transcended  their  early  master.  They  were  now  so  wise 
that  he  In  comparison  was  quite  •  fool  (ver.  10).  They  were  strong,  impregnable, 
triumphant ;  he  evidently  was  weak,  very  weak  stilL  Had  he  not  been  with  them 
**  in  weakness,  and  in  fear,  and  in  much  trembling  "  (ch.  ii.  3)  ?  Was  not  that  a  rery 
eommon  condition  for  him  to  be  in?  Upon  them  crowded  honour,  dignity ;  they  were 
"  all  honourable  men."  He  was  despised  and  despicable ;  clearly  they  were  in  paradise. 
In  the  paradise  of  fools  I  and  with  majestic  simplicity,  but  with  keenest  irony,  Paul 
■faktes  the  case  as  it  appeared  to  them,  and  as  it  necessarily  resulted  from  the  positioa 
which  they  had  assumed.  If  tliat  did  not  open  their  eyes,  they  were  blind  for  evermoiak 
The  Corinthians  resembled  the  Laodiceans  (l?ev.  iii.  17). 

II.  But  iront  ib  a  keen  and  dangerous  weapon,  and  should  bb  Biinx>TED  with 
aUAT  OABK.  A  suitable  weapon  for  the  hands  of  Paul,  not  of  necessity  for  ours. 
Appropriate  for  some  occasions,  not  for  all.  1.  Its  use  should  be  limited.  We  may 
easily  run  to  excess.  Irony  is  rather  a  pleasant  weapon  to  use.  Its  employment  in 
Scripture  is  not  frequent.  In  this  Epistle  it  is,  indeed,  used,  but  only  occasionally. 
2.  It  may  profitably  be  accompanied  by  sober  argument.  So  we  have  it  here.  3. 
It  should  be  employed  in  a  s|  irit  of  love  and  with  sincere  desire  to  benefit.  Not  to 
make  men  ridiculous  for  the  sake  of  making  them  so.  Not  for  our  own  diversion.  It 
should  not  be  bitter,  Paul  was  intensely  solicitous  to  benefit  the  Corinthians ;  he  had 
no  pleasure  in  causing  them  pain.  Note  how  in  the  midst  of  ironical  utterances  he 
expresses  his  fervent  longing,  "  Yea  uid  I  would  that  ye  did  reign "  (ver.  8).  The 
object  of  his  irony  is  to  lead  them  from  •  mock  kingship  to  •  true. — H. 

Vers.  11— 18.— 77i«  heit  and  most  useful  often  the  most  afflicted.  I.  Histobt  AH* 
RBBOHAL  OBSERVATION  TEACH  U8  THIS.  Read  Heb.  xi.  35 — 33.  Paul's  case  is  • 
striking  illustration.  Note  the  (I)  variety,  (2)  painfulness,  (3)  strangeness,  of  the 
apostolic  afillctionB.    See  also  another  list  (2  Cor.  xi.  23 — 27). 

II.  Let  us  LEARN  THAT :  1.  Affliction  is  not  always  signifleant  of  Divine  dis- 
pleasure.  Often  we  have  chastisement  because  of  our  sins,  but  sometimes  sorrow  comes 
to  us  when  most  firmly  we  tread  the  path  of  duty.  Under  such  circumstances  it 
should  not  dismay  or  depress  us.    2.  t'uffering — even  severe  svffering — is  not  alwayi 

•  talid  renRon  for   rdin.'  uisliing  active  service.      Some  peojle  are    too   anxious   to 

*  retire."    Wurk  done  under  eufiering  is  sometimes  marvellously  effective.    Our  woee 


OH.  it;  1—21.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.  16d 

fit  us  to  deal  with  the  woe-begone.  When  under  great  stress  we  feel  that  we  can 
do  nothing,  we  sometimes  become  Samsons ;  when  we  feel  that  we  can  do  everything, 
we  are  generally  mere  Philistines.  3.  Much  affliction  need  not  necessarily  he  even  a 
hindrance  to  us  in  our  work.  Paul's  sufferings  did  not  make  him  less  active  in 
the  cause  of  Christ.  He  abounded  in  toil  whilst  he  abounded  in  sorrow,  i.  JJ 
affliction  comes  to  us  in  the  path  of  duty,  it  should  not  drive  us  fvam,  that  path.  Most 
of  Paul's  sorrows  were  caused  by  his  zeal  and  faithfulness.  He  would  preach  Christ. 
To  choose  an  easier  path  would  not  have  been  wise  for  him — is  not  wise  for  us. 
5.  Affliction  is  sanctified  to  Qod's  faithful  servants.  Beyond  all  doubt  Paul  was 
greatly  the  better  for  his  many  sorrows.  Humanly  speaking,  he  could  never  have  been 
Paul  without  them.  That  which  seems  lively  to  hinder  may  help.  Men  who  have  to 
do  much  have  generally  to  suffer  much.  Biography  furnishes  multitudinous  illustrations 
of  this.  6.  Extraordinary  sufferings  sometimes  hear  with  them  the  promise  of  unusual 
vtstfultiess.  Idlers  have  thus  been  made  remai  kably  diligent,  sleepers  have  been  awakened, 
the  worldly  have  becone  consecrated.  The  first  true  and  inspiring  view  of  Christian 
service  has  bten  obtained  from  the  flame  of  the  furnace.  The  apprenticeship  of  some 
"  of  w  hom  the  wot  Id  was  not  worthy  "  has  been  served  in  the  fires.  Some  great  lives 
have  hegun  with  martyrdom.  7.  Affliction  should  he  received  in  a  spii  it  of  meekness, 
even  when  it  comes  directly  from  men  who  have  no  reason  to  use  us  ill.  Paul,  when  reviled, 
blessed ;  when  persecuted,  calmly  endured  it,  without  after-retaliation ;  when  defamed, 
he  entreated  (perhaps  God  to  pardon  his  enemies).  Herein  Paul  was  like  Christ.  He 
employed  conquering  kindness.  To  imitate  him  will  require  much  grace.  It  is  often 
much  easier  to  take  affliction  from  the  hands  of  God  than  from  the  hands  of  men. — ^H. 

Vers.  14 — 21. — Spintual  parentage.  I.  A  vert  tender  relationship.  Paul 
notices:  1.  The  way  in  which  the  relationship  is  formed.  (Ver.  15.)  The  s)iiritual  father 
(1)  "  begets  "  his  children  (2)  in  Christ  Jesus  (3)  through  the  gospel.  He  finds  them 
"  (-trangers  to  the  covenant  of  promise,"  strangers  to  Christ,  strang<  rs  to  the  Church ; 
but  under  the  preaching  of  the  truth  they  are  led  by  the  Spirit  to  lay  hold  of  salvation : 
fhey  become  in  Christ  "new  creatures,"  are  "born  again;"  and  he  who  has  been 
the  instrument  employed  in  their  conversion  becomes  their  spiritual  father.  This 
relationship  is  a  limited  one,  but  nevertheless  deeply  interesting  and  important.  2. 
That  it  differs  from  the  relationship  existing  between  a  mere  teacher  and  learnvr. 
None  can  be  to  us  what  those  are  who  have  brought  us  to  Christ.  They  iiave  a 
peculiar  cla'm  upon  our  love  and  gratitude.  "  Ten  thousand  instructors  make  not  one 
father."     We  may  love  our  teachers,  but  they  are  notour  parents. 

II.  The  duties  of  the  father  to  his  spiritual  children.  1.  He  should  he 
watchful  ourr  them.  As  Paul  was.  They  need  much  care ;  they  should  not  be 
left  to  shift  for  themselves.  A  pernicious  opinion  is  rife,  that  when  people  are  "  con- 
verted "  no  further  trouble  need  be  taken  about  them.  As  though  when  a  child  is 
"born"  it  is  to  be  cast  adrift  and  left  to  take  care  of  itself!  No  wonder  that 
there  are  so  many  spiritual  cripples,  so  many  diseased,  so  many  weaklings,  and  not 
a  few  religious  imbeciles.  Fathers  should  look  after  their  spiritual  children;  as 
far  as  possible  we  should  see  that  ova  converts,  if  not  under  ours,  are  under  good 
influences.  2.  He  should  manifest  a  loving  spirit  towards  them.  They  should  be 
peouliaily  dear  to  him.  In  many  ways  they  may  try  his  patience,  but  it  should  bear 
the  trial.  He  should  cherish  them.  Paul  fed  the  Corinthian  babes  with  milk  ;  he 
did  not  discard  them  because  they  were  not  what  he  would  have  had  them  to  be. 
He  dill  not  indulge  in  undue  severity;  fathers  are  not  "to  provoke  their  childien  to 
wrath  "  (Eph.  vi.  4).  3.  He  should  be  faithful,  ever  inclining  towards  tenderness,  but 
not  sparing  the  rod  when  it  is  coiled  for.  (Ver.  21.)  Willing  to  rebuke  when  rebuke 
is  necessary,  but  not  fond  of  rebuking.  Paul  was  gentle  but  decisive.  He  sought 
to  nip  evil  in  the  bud.  Foolish  fondness  lets  the  evil  grow  till  it  is  too  great  to 
cope  with.  Correction  must  be  wise,  or  it  will  be  pernicious.  Sometimes  the  placing 
of  a  faithful  child  amongst  the  unfaitliful  may  be  very  efficacious  for  the  latter.  Paid 
sent  Timothy  (ver.  17).  4.  Acting  and  living  so  as  to  be  a  fit  example.  We  have 
110  right  to  expect  our  spiritual  children  to  follow  us  closely  unless  we  are  following 
Christ  closely.  Paul  could  say,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ" 
(ch.  xL  1).    He  does  not  exhort  them  to  follow  him  as  a  party  leader,  but  to  imitatt 


164  THE  FlilST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHlANS.    [ch.  iv,  1—21. 

him  as  he  loaght  to  imitate  Christ,    He  set  a  good  example.    It  Is  what  we  an  rathet 
tliaii  what  we  %ay  that  has  influence.    Spiriuial  childien  laave  quick  eyes. — ^H. 

Vert.  1—6.—"  1!h»  ministers  of  Christ,"  The  Corinthians  were  to  be  delivered  from 
their  tendency  to  glory  in  men,  by  being  taught  to  regard  them  as  a  part  ot  their 
heritage.  All  teachers  were  for  their  use,  not  the  pavticular  one  whom  they  chose  u 
their  party  leader.  Besides,  a  right  view  of  the  ministerial  office  should  prevent  all 
boasting  in  men. 

I.  How  uiNisTERB  ABB  TO  BE  REOARDED.  They  are :  1.  ServanU  of  Christ.  They  ar« 
not "  lords  over  Gud's  heriiaga"  (1  Pet.  t.  3),  the  chiefs  of  the  kingdom.  Their  true 
dignity  lies  in  serving  the  Lord  Jesus,  from  whom  they  take  their  orders.  They  have 
no  authority  beyond  that  which  is  committed  to  them.  Nor  are  they  the  servants  of 
men.  Obedience  to  their  own  Master  delivers  them  from  subjection  to  every  other 
(oomp.  on  ch.  iiL  6).  2.  Stewards  vf  tJie  mysteries  of  God.  The  Cliurch  ia  God'a 
house,  in  which  he  alone  is  Master;  apostles  and  other  teachers  being  disi)en8er8  of  the 
good  things  of  the  house,  the  great  doctrines  of  the  faith.  Every  man  is  a  steward, 
being  entrusted  with  the  laying  out  of  tlie  gifts  conferred  upon  him,  and  the  imprcving 
ol  the  opportunities  put  in  bis  way.  But  this  is  true  in  a  special  sense  of  the  Christian 
minister.  He  is  entrusted  with  tlie  dispunsaiion  of  the  Divine  mysteries  to  men.  He 
is  not  called  to  deal  out  his  own  things,  but  the  saving  truth  of  Gud,  giving  to  each  his 
portion  of  meat  in  due  season.  How  responsible  an  office !  This  view  of  the  Christian 
ministry  should  guard  us  against  two  common  extremes.  On  the  one  side,  ministers 
lire  not  hrds,  endowed  with  a  kind  of  supernatural  power,  and  set  to  rule  the  con- 
sciences of  meu.  On  the  other  side,  ministers  are  not  the  servants  of  the  people, 
appointed  to  teach  only  some  favourite  type  of  doctrine  They  are  the  servants  ol 
Christ,  charge  d  to  deliver  his  truth,  whether  men  will  hear  it  or  not, 

IL  Faithfulness  the  great  rbquisitis.  Every  steward  must  give  account  of  Wt 
stewardship,  and  llie  chief  tiling  required  is  fidelity.  Men  ask  of  a  preacher,  "  Is  he  able, 
eloquent,  attractive?"  God  asks,  "Is  he  faithful?"  Fidelity  does  not  depend  on  the 
quality  or  quantity  of  the  original  gifts,  but  on  the  use  to  which  they  are  put.  The 
man  with  two  talents  receives  the  same  reward  as  the  man  with  five,  because  he  has 
been  equally  faithful  (Matt.  xxv.  21,  23).  Nor  is  fidelity  measured  by  what  men  call 
success,  since  it  is  often  incompatible  with  popularity.  liet  the  much-gifted  minister 
beware ;  let  the  little-gifted  take  comfort.    "  Well  done,  good  Kadi  faithful  servant." 

UL  The  minister's  .Iudob.  1.  Not  the  eongreyation.  It  was  a  very  small  thing  in 
Paul's  view  to  be  judged  of  men.  The  verdict  of  the  people  on  a  ministur's  discharge  of 
duty  is  not  to  be  liglitly  laid  aside.  If  they  praise,  let  us  beware  of  being  satisfied  with 
this;  if  they  condemn,  let  us  the  more  thoroughly  search  ourselves.  But  from  this 
verdict  there  must  ever  be  an  appeal  to  a  higher  tribunaL  Men  cannot  lead  the 
motives  that  lie  behind  the  outward  act,  nor  can  they  gauge  the  proportion  between 
a  minister's  powers  and  the  use  he  makes  of  them.  Their  measure  of  fidelity  must  always 
be  imperfect.  2.  Not  the  minister  himself.  The  apostle  disclaims  being  his  own  judge. 
He  cannot  charge  himself  with  any  remissness  in  duty,  but  he  does  not  regard  this  as 
an  unfailing  proof  of  fidelity.  He  distrusts  his  own  verdict.  Let  those  who  think 
themselves  perfect  ponder  this  statement.  A  good  conscience  la  very  precious,  bat  let 
US  not  run  into  the  folly  of  measuring  ourselves  by  ouiselves.  Conscience  is  not  the 
final  judge  in  the  matter.  3.  The  Lord  is  his  Judge.  "  Who  art  thou  that  judgest  the 
servant  of  another?  to  his  own  lord  he  standeth  or  falleth"  (fiom.  xiy.  4).  This  is 
man's  judgment-day ;  let  us  wait  "  until  the  Lord  come,  who  will  both  bring  to  light 
the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  hearts,"  The 
verdict  of  that  day  will  proceed  upon  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  whole  case,  and  every 
steward  shall  receive  the  praise  of  God  according  to  the  just  award  of  the  Judge. 
Wherefore:  (1)  JDo  all  your  work  remembering  that  Christ  is  your  Judge.  He  knows 
your  weakness  as  well  as  your  stieugth,  and  sees  the  honest  desire  to  serve  him  beneath 
many  an  apparent  failure,  (2)  Do  not  sit  in  Judgment  upon  others,  Christ  will  judge 
Lis  own  servants. — B. 

Vers.  6 — 13. — Against  self-conceit.  Party  spirit  leads  to  the  undue  exaltation  ol 
men.    The  head  of  a  faction  becomes  a  hero  in  the  eyes  of  those  that  belong  to  it,  Twc 


OH.  nr.  1—21.]    Ttifi  PIrST  EPISTlE  TO  THE  CORlkTHlAiTS.  16^ 

evil  consequences  follow — pride,  self-sufficiency,  conceit,  on  the  one  hand;  undue 
depreciation  of  others  and  boasting  against  them,  on  the  other  hand.  Against  this 
liateful  spirit  the  apostle  has  already  presented  a  variety  of  arguments ;  and  while 
speaking  chiefly  of  himself  and  Apolloa,  he  has  in  reality  been  teaching  us  how  to 
regard  all  the  ministers  of  Christ.  They  are  not  to  be  exalted  beyond  the  position 
assigned  them  in  Scripture,  nor  are  they  to  suffer  themselves  to  be  puffed  up  ^th  pride 
one  against  another. 

I.  A  COGENT  ABODMBNT.  "  For  who  maketh  thee  to  differ  ?  "  If  we  are  better  than 
our  neigh  hours,,  or  possess  gifts  which  they  do  not  pnsseSs,  we  have  God  to  thank  for  it. 
This  question  should  be  asked  in  view  of  all  earthly  privileges — health,  we  ilth,  position, 
education.  More  especially  with  regard  to  spiritual  benefits  Who  maketh  thee  to 
differ  from  that  reeling  drunkard,  that  erring  sister,  that  condemned  felon,  that  poor 
imbecile,  that  blind  heathen?  "By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am"  (ch.  xv.  10), 
The  thoughts  awakened  by  such  an  inquiiy  should  silence  all  boastfulness,  and  call  forth 
praise  to  him  to  whom  we  owe  all.    Spiritual  pride  robs  God  of  his  glory. 

II.  An  ironical  pictubb.  "  Already  are  ye  filled,  already  ye  are  become  rich,  ye 
have  reigned  without  us."  You  speak  as  if  you  had  already  attained  perfection  and 
participated  in  the  millennial  glory.  You  are  not  only  rich,  but  seated  as  kings  upon  the 
throne.  I  would  it  were  really  so,  for  then  we  also  might  share  in  your  glory;  but 
alas !  ye  reign  without  us.  You  fortunate  ones  are  exalted,  but  we  poor  apostles  are 
still  suffering  on  the  earth.  Thus  does  Pnul  hold  up  the  self-conceit  of  the  Corinthians 
to  derision.  A  warning  for  all  time  to  those  who  run  off  with  a  part  of  the  truth  as 
if  it  were  the  whole.  Like  the  perfectionists  of  our  day,  these  Corinthians  had  fallen 
into  the  delusion  that  they  had  reached  the  goaL  Spiritual  pride  is  very  suhtle  and 
very  dangerous.  This  picture  is  suggestive  when  viewed  in  connection  with  the  low 
morality  prevalent  in  the  Christian  community  at  Cori?ith.  Note  here  the  legitimate 
use  of  irony,  aa  in  the  case  of  Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii.  27)  and  Isaiah  (xliv.  9,  etc.).  Evil  has 
its  ludicrous  side,  and  the  exhibition  of  this  is  sometimes  more  effective  than  plain 
argument.  Irony,  however,  is  a  dangerous  weapon,  and  needs  to  be  handled  with  skill. 
The  anger  that  pours  ridicule  upon  an  opponent  must  have  behind  it  a  heart  of  love, 
if  its  wounds  are  to  prove  wholesome. 

III.  A  PATHETio  CONTRAST.  With  the  proud  position  of  the  Corinthians,  Paul 
contrasts  the  suffering  condition  of  himself  and  his  brother  apostles.  Consider :  1.  The 
general  picture.  "  For,  I  think,  God  hath  set  forth  us  the  apostles  last  of  alt,  as  men 
doomed  to  death.*"  He  seems  to  have  in  view  the  exhibitions  given  in  the  amphi- 
theatre, at  the  close  of  which  criminals  condemned  to  death  were  brought  in  to  fight 
with  wild  beasts  or  with  one  another.  The  sufferings  of  the  apostles  were  a  spectacle 
to  the  world,  men  and  angels  beholding  them  with  interest.  And  what  was  true  of 
these  servants  of  Christ  is  true  in  part  of  every  believer.  We  are  wrestlers  in  the  arena, 
fighting  for  dear  life,  with  a  myriad  eyes  upon  us  (comp.  Heb.  xii.  1).  2.  The  detaih 
of  the  picture.  Very  touching  is  this  description  of  apostolic  life,  supplemented  by  the 
fuller  details  in  the  Second  Epistle  (xl.  23 — 33).  Follow  the  steps  of  the  homeless 
evangelist  as  he  goes  from  place  to  place,  earning  his  own  bread  while  preaching  the 
gospel,  suffering  many  privations,  exposed  to  many  perils,  and  treated  as  the  refuse  of 
the  world.  No  wonder  if  men  called  him  a  fool.  Looked  at  from  the  outside,  scarcely 
any  life  could  appear  more  miserable;  but  all  is  changed  when  we  know  that  it  was 
lived  "  for  Christ's  sake."  Love  to  him  made  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings  a  matter  to 
boast  of.  Are  we  willing  to  endure  hardship  for  the  Lord's  sake  7  Are  we  taking  up 
the  cross  he  lays  athwai  t  our  path? 

IV.  A  Chbist-likb  spirit.  Suffering  for  Christ  is  also  suffering  with  Christ.  He 
too  W8k3  despised  and  rejected  of  men ;  and  where  he  is  there  must  also  his  servant  be. 
In  addition  to  this  we  have  here  suffering  endured  in  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  "  Being 
reviled,  we  bless ;  beins;  persecuted,  we  endure,  being  defamed,  we  entreat."  This  was 
according  to  the  Lord's  commandment  (Matt.  v.  44),  and  after  his  example  (I  Pet.  ii. 
23).  How  really  noble  is  such  a  lifel  The  truly  strong  man  is  he  who  can  rise  above 
the  reproach  and  hate  of  men,  and  regard  them  with  Christ-like  compassion.  Contrast 
th;i  humble  following  of  Jesus  with  the  proud  boasting  of  the  Corinthians. — ^B. 

Ven.  14— 2L — Tht  father  and  his  children.     The  apostle  has  used  sharp  words,  but 


156  TliB   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THfe  CORlNTUlAlJS.    [ok.  it.  1— 21 

they  have  hnen  dictated  by  love.    He  has  written  as  a  father  who  dpsires  the  correction 
and  not  the  shame  of  his  children. 

I.  Spiritual  fatherhood.  1.  How  cunstituted.  "  For  in  Christ  Jesus  I  begat  you 
thron;  a  the  gospel."  Conversion  is  the  beginning  of  a  new  life,  the  birth  by  wiiioh  we 
enter  jn  spiritual  being.  This  change  is  wrou.y:ht  by  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  on 
the  basis  of  Christ's  redemptive  work;  the  Spirit's  instrument  is  the  Word,  the  incor- 
ruptible seed  (1  Pet.  i.  23);  and  this  Word  is  administered  by  servants  of  the  gospel. 
In  a  subordinate  sense,  Paul  could  speak  of  himself  as  the  father  of  the  Corinthian 
Church,  inasmuch  as  he  was  the  means  of  introducing  them  to  the  Christian  life.  The 
relationship  is  a  peculiarly  tender  one,  carrying  with  it  much  honour  and  much  responsi- 
bility. 2.  How  distinguuhed.  "  For  though  ye  should  have  ten  thousand  tutors  in 
Christ,  yet  have  ye  not  many  fathers. "  The  teachers  who  succeeded  Paul  at  Corinth, 
and  of  whom  they  made  so  much,  were  like  pedagogues  who  superintended  the  education 
of  children.  Theirs  was  an  important  work,  but  it  did  not  alter  the  fiict  thut  the 
apostle  was  their  spiritual  father.  They  built  on  the  foundation  which  he  had  laid. 
There  is  no  disparagement  of  those  who  minister  to  the  culture  of  the  Christian  life,  as 
compared  with  those  who  are  instrumental  in  commenciau  it.  The  evangelist  and  the 
teacher  have  each  his  own  place  in  the  Divine  economy.  Yet  the  relation  of  spiritual  father, 
hood  is  one  by  itself,  different  from  that  snbsisting  between  teacher  and  scholar.  Often 
the  two  go  togeiher,  the  pastor  being  also  the  father.  3.  Implies  the  duty  of  admonition. 
It  is  tlie  part  of  a  father  to  "  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort,"  in  all  fidelity.  Spiritual  fathers 
must  not  be  blind  to  the  faults  of  their  childreu.  Love  must  patiently  instruct, 
aflfectionately  entreat,  sharply  chastise.  Witness  the  paternal  seveiity  of  the  apostle 
in  this  Epistle  as  he  "admonislus  his  beloved  children."  4.  Implies  the  setting  oj 
a  worthy  example.  "  Be  ye  imitators  of  me."  The  eyes  of  the  chiUlren  are  towards  the 
lather,  and  they  cannot  help  copying  him.  Examjile  is  jiowerful  in  all  spheres,  and 
most  of  all  in  a  sphere  so  consiiicuous  as  the  Christian  ministry.  It  confirms  the  truth 
taught,  encourazes  believers,  rebukes  the  ungodly,  draws  inquirers  to  the  Savicur.  Every 
servant  of  Christ  should  be  able  to  say,  "Follow  me,"  Yet  our  imitation  of  other 
Christians,  even  the  mcst  eminent,  has  its  limits.  Men  are  imperfect,  reflecting  bnt 
brokenly  the  image  of  Ohriat;  and  no  wise  teacher  will  desire  to  see  his  own  peculiar 
mannerisms  reflected  in  his  people.  Human  example  is  useful  only  in  so  far  as  it  helps 
us  to  imitate  Jesus. 

II.  Solicitude  for  the  Chuboh'b  spiritual  instuuction.  Like  a  true  father,  th« 
absent  apostle  desires  to  further  the  8]>iritual  growth  of  his  converts,  and  with  this  view 
sends  to  them  a  personal  de])uty,  1,  2'he  mission.  In  order  to  promote  their  imitation 
of  his  humble,  self-denying  life,  he  sends  a  messenger  to  recall  to  them  "  his  ways  in 
Christ."  The  remembrance  ot  a  good  man's  life  is  a  help  to  piety.  The  memory  of 
some  departed  saint  has  often  proved  a  guiding  star.  And  so  is  the  recollection  of  truth 
already  learned.  It  is  part  of  the  preaclier's  work  to  press  home  old  truths  and  deepen 
their  hold  of  the  heart  and  conscience.  2.  'ITie  missioiiary.  There  was  wisdom  in 
sending  a  deputy,  and  in  the  choice  of  Timothy  for  the  mission.  As  the  apostle's 
"beloved  and  faithful  child,"  he  stood  in  the  same  siiiritual  relation  to  him  as  did  the 
converts  at  Corinth.  He  could  speak  to  them  as  a  brother  of  their  common  father's 
doctrine  and  life.  The  visits  of  wise  and  faithful  servants  of  Christ  are  often  instru- 
mental in  reviving  the  Church's  life. 

HI,  Apostolic  visitation.  1.  Carried  out  in  the  face  of  detraction.  Those  who 
sought  to  undermine  Paul's  authority  asserted  that  he  would  not  again  venture  to  visit 
Corinth;  but  in  spite  of  this  he  declares  his  intention  of  doing  so.  The  servant  of 
Christ  needs  courage.  2,  Subject  to  Divine  direction,  "If  the  Lord  will"  (com p. 
Jas,  iv,  15),  Man  proposes,  but  God  disposes.  All  our  plans  for  the  future  must  be 
subject  to  his  control,  3.  To  test  spiritual  profession.  Ihe  pruud  boasters  at  Corinth 
were  great  in  talk,  and  Paul  wished  to  show  whether  there  was  reality  behind  it.  For 
power  is  the  chief  thing,  not  mere  speech.  The  kingdom  of  God,  i.e.  genuine  Chris- 
tianity, is  not  an  affair  of  words,  but  of  living  power.  "  Our  gospel  came  not  unto  you  in 
word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost "  (1  Thess.  i.  5).  Profession 
must  be  tested  by  practice,  A  religion'of  the  lip  is  vain  without  the  religion  of  the  life. 
i.  Proceeds  according  to  circumstances.  Whether  Paul  was  to  come  with  a  rod  or  in 
love  depended  on  themselves.    The  discipliiid  of  the  Church  takes  its  complexion  from 


om.r».  1— 31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTHIANa  Ul 


the  character  of  the  persons  with  whom  it  dekli,  being  Mvere  or  tender,  m  tht 
requires.    A  combination  of  fatherly  love  and  wisdom  ia  reqniied  In  thoae  who  an 
called  to  deal  with  the  erring. — B. 

Ter.  2. — Faithful  itewardihip.  Thla  is  a  principle  spprored  alike  of  God  and  man. 
Stewardship  implies  responsibility,  and  responsibility  demands  faithfulness.  The  prin- 
ciple IS  applicable  specially  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word.  No  responsibility  like  that 
of  those  who  are  called  to  keep  watch  and  guard  over  the  ihysteries  of  Qod,  to  ministei 
in  Christ's  Name  the  richest  treasures  of  1  is  grace.  Note  St.  Paul's  own  profound  sense 
of  his  responsibility.  It  was  a  comparatively  "small  thing"  to  him  to  be  "judged 
of  man's  judgment ; "  but  the  consciousness  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  was 
always  present  with  him,  and  the  anxiety  to  approve  himself  to  him  as  one  who 
"  needed  not  to  be  ashamed  "  was  perhaps  the  deepest  and  strongest  emotion  he  knew 
And  the  principle  may  be  applied  to  everything  that  distinguishes  us  personally 
among  men,  and  that  puts  any  power  for  good  into  our  hands  (Parables  of  the  Unjust 
Steward,  of  the  Talents,  etc.).  Intellectual  capacity,  educational  advantages,  wealth, 
social  position,  power  of  speech,  any  kind  of  artistic  or  constructive  skill,  idgour  of 
physical  health,  abundance  of  leisure  time,— these  and  such  aa  these  are  endowments 
that  put  the  possibility  of  incalculable  good  within  our  reach,  and  for  the  use  of  wliicb 
we  must  give  account.  All  human  life  is  a  sacred  stewardship.  In  every  position  in 
which  Providence  has  placed  us  our  fidelity  is  being  put  to  the  test,  our  loyalty  to  God 
and  to  conscience,  to  the  eternal  principles  of  truth  and  righteousness,  to  the  sovereign 
authority  of  the  Law  of  Christ.  It  is  required  of  us  that  we  should  be  faithful  always 
and  in  everything.  And  if  at  heart  we  are  faithful  men,  it  will  be  seen  to  be  so.  Obwrve 
respecting  this  stewardship — 

I.  That  it  is  indepemoent  or  what  etxia  to  bb  thi  bblativb  ihpobtanob  of 

THE  positions  WE  OCCCFT  AND  THE  MATTEBB  WITH  WHICH  WE  HAVE  TO  DEAL.      What 

we  call  the  trivial  and  commonplace  afiairs  of  life  are  quite  as  effectual  a  test  of  moral 
faithfulness  as  the  greater ;  often  more  so.  We  are  prone  to  treat  lightly  what  seem 
to  us  to  be  "  little  things,"  and  for  that  very  reason  they  are  often  the  truest  revealers 
of  our  character.  Our  real  dispositions  come  out  most  clearly  in  the  way  in  which  we 
deal  with  them,  because  then  our  behaviour  is  most  spontaneous,  unpremeditated,  free 
from  artifice.  If  you  want  to  know  what  a  man  really  is,  don't  judge  of  him  as  be 
appears  on  the  broad  open  platform  of  public  life,  but  follow  him  into  his  more  private 
ways,  and  see  how  he  speaks  and  acts  when  he  feels  himself  to  be  beyond  the  ear  and 
eye  of  the  world,  and  in  matters  on  which  no  great  consequence  seems  to  hang.  It  is 
quite  possible  to  raise  a  purely  artiflciai  standard  of  moral  obligation,  and  to  magnify 
unwisely  certain  scruples  of  conscience.  But  a  really  conscientious  man  will  be  con- 
scientious in  everything.  And  as  a  feather  or  a  straw  will  show  which  way  the  stream 
is  flowing,  so  do  the  trivial  circumstances  of  life  reveal  the  moral  drift  of  our  being. 
(Note  the  bearing  of  this  on  the  probation  to  which  Adam  was  subject :  "  Thou  shalt 
not  eat,"  etc.)  What  is  daily  life  to  every  one  of  us  but  a  series  of  silent  tests  of  our 
inward  fidelity  ?  We  are  hedged  in  by  little  restrictions,  called  ti>  take  upon  us  man- 
fully the  burden  of  many  unwelcome  duties ;  to  suffer  many  abstinences,  rebukes,  self- 
mortifications.  And  when  we  are  disposeil  to  overstep  the  boundary,  because  at  certain 
points  it  seems  so  narrow  or  so  low,  we  show  that  we  have  not  learnt  the  full  surrender 
of  the  spirit  of  obedience.  "  Offending  in  one  point "  of  the  law  of  our  allegiance,  we 
tietray  a  spirit  that  is  "  guilty  of  all."  So  as  regards  the  right  use  of  taculty  and 
passing  opportunities  of  doing  good.  The  temptations  that  belong  to  a  low  order  of 
personal  faculty  and  a  narrow  range  of  personal  influence  are  often  greater  than  those 
that  belong  to  the  highest  and  the  largest.  Yon  do  nothing  because  the  utmost  you 
can  do  is  so  little ;  or  you  do  carelessly  and  half-heartedly  what,  as  it  seems  to  you,  for 
anything  the  world  would  really  be  the  better  for  it,  you  might  neglect  to  do  at  aU. 
The  spirit  that  dictates  this  is  one  that  would  trifle  with  the  loftiest  powers  and  abuse 
the  noblest  possibilities  of  life.  "  He  that  is  futhl'ul  in  that  which  is  least,"  etc.  (Luke 
xvi.  10). 

II.  All  nuonoAL  noELm  n  thb  stswabdship  of  life  has  a  tehpknot  to 
9ETEL0P  IHTO  HiQHEB  OAPAOITT  AND  NOBLBB  DEED.  Note  here  the  power  of  habit 
Accustom  yourself  with  an  earnest  spirit  to  meet  the  claims  of  every-day  duty  as  in 


168  THE  FIRST  EPISTI.E  TO  THE   CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  it.  1—2.1 

the  Master's  sight,  and  you  call  to  your  lud  a  power  and  obey  a  law  of  life  by  which 
the  highest  moral  yictories  shall  ultimately  be  won.  Let  our  cbildron  be  trained  to 
act  from  principle  and  cot  from  mere  passion  or  policy,  to  habits  of  self-!iurreii(ler, 
to  simple  forms  of  Christian  service,  and  they  will  become  so  habituated  to  the  riglit 
way  that  when  the  heavier  resi>onsibilities  of  life  begin  to  fall  upon  them  they  will  be 
prepared  bravely  to  meet  them — the  "  yoke  will  be  easy  and  the  burden  light."  Thus 
is  it  given  to  us  all  to  educate  ourselves  for  what  awtiits  us  in  ihe  future.  The  Jews 
say  of  David  that  "God  tried  him  first  with  those  few  sheep  in  the  wilderness,  and  then, 
because  he  faithfully  and  bravely  kept  tliem,  took  him  from  the  sheepfolds  to  feed  his 
people  Israel."  Only  use  manfully  whatever  moral  power  you  possess,  and  you  need 
not  fear  any  strain  that  shall  ever  be  put  upon  it.  Cast  yoursell  freel>  upon  your  faith, 
and  though  it  be  now  but  as  a  "  grain  of  mustard  seed,"  it  shall  be  mighty  enough  one 
day  "  to  remove  mountains." 

III.  Such  fideutt  leads  to  blessed  issues  in  tee  great  futubixt.  It  is  not 
given  to  us  to  trace  the  path  of  moral  forces  very  far  in  this  world.  Our  judgments  are 
often  at  fault,  our  forecasts  often  strangely  falsified.  Only  very  imperfectly  and  with 
cautious  hesitating  steps  can  we  follow  the  winding  and  widening  stream  of  earthly 
issues.  And  who  shall  say  how  some  of  the  unnoticed  doings  of  every  human  life,  and 
the  results  that  grow  out  of  them,  will  appear  in  the  all-rtvealing  light  of  the  day  when 
"  God  will  bring  every  work  into  judgment  and  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good 
or  bad  "?  But  of  this  we  may  be  perfectly  well  assured,  that  to  a  lifelong  endeavour 
to  serve  and  please  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  there  must  be  a  blessed  eternal  reward.  Let 
our  life  be  a  faithlul  one,  a  work  tiaithfuUy  wrought  out  in  his  Name,  and  we  need  not 
fear  but  that  it  will  prove  itself  to  be  a  life  worth  living  and  that  ends  well.  "  Be  thou 
faitbfiil  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life  "  (Rev.  ii.  10). — W. 

Ver.  20. — Not  in  word,  hat  in  power.  The  exact  point  of  this  afSrmation  is  to  be 
determined  by  the  circumstances  that  called  it  forth.  The  apostle  refers  in  the  context 
to  his  personal  adversaries  in  the  Church  at  Corinth.  They  spoke  against  him,  "  puffeil 
up  "  by  the  spirit  of  proud  hostility.  But  he  will  come  and  put  their  pretensions  to  the 
test.  He  will  "know,  not  their  words"  only,  but  the  amount  of  real  "  power"  that 
there  is  in  them.  This  suggests  the  general  relation  of  the  "  word  "  to  "  the  power  " 
in  the  kingdom  of  God  as  an  organized  fellowship.     Seen  in  several  particulars. 

L  Its  membership.  Not  a  question  of  professed  creed,  or  ritual  observance,  or  formt 
of  godliness;  but  of  the  energy  of  a  Divine  life  in  the  soul,  transfonniiig  the  whole 
being  of  a  man  into  a  "  new  creature."  "  Except  a  man  be  bom  of  water  and  of  the 
Spirit,"  etc.  (John  iii.  5);  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,"  etc.  (Rom.  xiv. 
17) ;  "  In  Christ  Jesus  neither  circumcision,"  etc.  (Gal.  vi.  15). 

II.  Its  ministry.  Not  by  the  utterance  of  mere  forms  of  speech,  the  establishment 
of  ecclesiastical  systems,  the  multiplication  of  the  means  of  Christian  culture ;  but  by 
the  diffusion  of  the  living  force  of  truth,  and  the  silent  sovereign  power  of  the  Spirit  ol 
God,  .  "It  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth,"etc.(John  vi.  63);  "Our  gospel  came  unto  you 
not  in  word  only,"  etc.  (1  Thess.  i.  5). 

III.  Its  administration.  Not  by  hollow  pretence,  or  blatant  assumption,  or  self- 
constituted  ofBcialism ;  but  by  the  authority  that  lies  in  real  personal  capacity,  dis- 
tinguished goodness,  saintly  character,  effective  spiritual  power  (1  Tim.  iii.  1-^7 :  Titus 
i.  7— 9).— W. 

Ver.  20.-^I%e  kingdom  i»  power.  The  contrast  between  word  and  power  is  Camiliai 
to  our  minds.  To  say  of  a  man  that  he  is  a  stickler  for  the  letter,  a  pedant  about  forms, 
a  zealot  for  words,  is  to  say  that  he  is  shallow  and  tiresome.  A  wise  man  looks  beneath 
the  skin  and  shape  of  things  to  their  substance.  An  effective  man  goes  in  for  power. 
Yet  the  world  is  governed  by  words  as  the  expressions  of  thought  and  purpose.  Education 
is  conducted,  opinion  is  formed,  all  human  combinations  of  knowledge  and  practical 
force  are  got  together,  and  held  together,  by  means  of  fit  words.  The  kingdom  of  God 
itself  is  introduced  by  the  Word  of  testimony.  What  avails  not  is  mere  repetition  o/ 
words  after  the  manner  of  a  charm,  or  "  vain  jangling  "  about  verbal  forms.  Especially 
irksome  must  all  such  metallic  clatter  of  words  without  profit  have  been  to  •  man  so 
much  in  earnest  as  St.  Paul.     No  doubt  there  was  much  of  it  among  the  Christians  at 


OH.IV.  1— 21.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  169 

CSorinth,  where  to  the  minute  pedantry  of  Jews  was  added  the  inveterate  disputation  of 
Greeks.  The  apostle  wished  to  discourage  their  sharp  word-contests,  and  gave  notice 
that,  on  his  next  visit,  he  would  probe  the  arrogant  pretensions  of  certain  talkers  very 
closely.  Their  speech  would  avail  them  little  if  tbey  failed  in  spiritual  power.  Such 
cautions  against  religious  verhalism  are  needed  constantly.  Just  hecause  Cliristianity 
owes  80  much  to  true  and  faithful  utterances,  rests  on  testimony,  and  requires  mnch 
teaching,  it  is  peculiarly  liahle  to  be  weakened  by  hollow,  pretentious,  or  disputations 
speaking.  Therefore  must  we  emphasize  the  futility  of  religious  words  without  the 
informing  Spirit  of  life  and  power.  The  great  characteristic  oi  tie  l^ingdom  of  God,  as 
announced  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  spread  abroad  by  his  apostles,  was  its  penetrating  anil 
elevating  dynamic.  It  had  a  quiet  but  potent  energy.  It  could  "turn  the  world 
upside  down ; "  could  break  off  Jews  from  self-righteousness  and  Gentiles  from  idolatry, 
abase  the  proud  and  exalt  the  lowly,  make  the  wise  simple  and  the  simple  wise.  And 
what  was  this  power?  It  was  the  force  of  truth,  the  diffusive  element  of  light,  the 
majesty  of  righteousness,  the  sublime  persuasiveness  of  love.  It  was  all  this,  and  more. 
It  was  the  heart  piercing  and  enthralling  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  working  with  and 
by  the  Word.  God  gave  the  increase.  In  the  light  of  St.  Paul's  compact  and  weighty 
laying,  look  at — 

L  The  kinodom  op  God  amono  ourselves.  We  speak  not  of  a  particular  Church, 
but  of  the  kingdom  moving  forwards  in  the  midst  of  Churches  variously  constituted 
and  administered.  Church  usages  and  appointments  may,  and  indeed  must,  change.  It 
is  not  possible  or  desirable  to  reproduce  in  the  nineteenth  century,  and  in  the  West,  the 
very  Church  of  the  first  century  in  the  East.  But  the  kingdom  of  God  must  be,  and 
is,  the  same.  It  is  "  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  Wherevei 
these. are  found,  they  betoken  the  presence  of  a  heavenly  power.  But  a  Church  may 
appear  strong,  and  yet  be  at  heart  cold  and  weak.  It  may  be  irreproachable  in  word 
and  form,  clothed  with  venerable  traditions  as  some  old  wall  is  mantled  with  ivy ;  it 
may  be  exemplary  in  all  the  routine  of  prayer  and  preaching,  and  yt  be  barren  and 
ineffective,  because  it  has  nothing  but  forms  and  words ;  and  "  the  kingdom  of  God  if 
not  in  word,  but  in  power."  It  is  quite  impossible  to  overcome  the  world,  abase  the 
proud,  sober  the  frivolous,  arrest  the  mind  that  is  busy  with  a  thousand  trifles,  or  lift 
up  the  spirit  that  has  debased  itself  to  avaricious  deceits  or  to  ^hose  ileshly  vices 
which  civilization  cannot  overcome,  by  words  ever  so  well  chosen,  services  ever  so 
comely,  forms  of  godliness  ever  so  correct.  What  is  wanted  is  the  kingdom  of  God  in 
power. 

II.  Thb  kinodoh  of  God  elsbwhebe — evebtwhere.  Even  if  we  take  a  very 
nopeful  survey  of  missionary  work,  we  must  confess  that  Churches  have  been  too 
languid  in  purpose,  too  pedantic  in  method,  and  in  some  places  too  jealous  of  one  another, 
too  ready  to  cry,  "Lo,  here  I "  "Lo,  there! "  It  is  the  kingdom  of  God  which  should 
be  preached;  and  if  only  its  power  comes  to  be  felt,  we  might  all  keep  our  minds  com- 
paratively easy  about  the  moulds  into  which  new  life  may  flow,  or  the  forms  under 
which  Christian  activity  may  organize  itself  throughout  the  world.  It  is  a  startling  and 
mournful  fact  that  in  countries  where  our  faith  has  been  professed  for  centuries,  we  have 
yet  to  discuss  the  evidences  of  Christianity.  Christian  literature  has  reached  an  almost 
prodigious  development ;  and  Christian  teaching  and  preaching  are  not  scarce.  Yet  the 
world  does  not  believe  or  obey  the  gospel.  Surely  there  is  a  hiding  of  power.  Rise  up, 
Christians  I  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind.  Be  evidences  of  Christianity,  known  and 
read  of  all.  There  is  no  witness  so  luminous  and  so  irresistibly  convincing  as  that 
which  comes  from  the  practical  effect  of  the  gospel  on  the  minds,  consciences,  dispositions, 
«nd  conduct  ot  the  men  and  women  who  profess  to  believe  it. — F. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  Christian  teacher  a  steward.  The  apostle  here  intimates  what  are 
right  thoughts  for  Christian  people  to  cherish  concerning  their  teachers.  He  uses  tw  o 
words,  "  ministers,"  "  stewards,"  the  former  of  which  is  familiar,  the  latter  needs  some 
explanation.  A  minister  is  "  one  who  serves,"  and  no  more  honourable  thought  oun  be 
attached  to  the  Christian  teacher  than  that  he  serves  Christ  among  his  people,  anl  serves 
the  people  for  Christ's  sake.  Our  Lord  himself  said,  "  I  am  among  you  as  he  that 
serreth ; "  and  St.  Paul  says  to  his  converts,  "  Ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ."  We  propo"- 
now  to  dwell  more  fully  on  the  figure  of  the  steward.    A  Christian  teacher  m  to  1 


160  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [oB.nr.  1— 21. 

thought  of  as  a  "  steward  of  the  mysteries  of  GJod."  The  word  "  steward  "  is  used  in 
England  for  a  "  land  bailiff; "  but  in  the  East  it  was  employed  for  a  person  put  in  trust 
of  ^1  his  master's  goods — "  such  as  was  Eliezer  in  the  house  of  Abraham  (Gen.  zxiv.  2 
—12),  and  Joseph  in  the  house  of  Potiphnr  (Gen.  xxxix.  4).  It  was  one  of  the  main 
duties  of  such  a  steward  to  dispense  their  portions  of  food  to  the  different  members  of 
the  household  (Luke  xii.  42),  to  give  the  slaves  or  servants  their  "  portion  in  due  season." 
Compare  the  words  "  housekeeper,"  "  house-ruler,"  "  house-feeder,"  and  see  Matt.  xxlv. 
45.  The  apostle's  point  is  that  the  Christian  teacher  is  not  to  be  esteemed  for  an; 
particular  qualifications  which  he  may  have  of  his  own,  but  simply  for  his  faithfulness 
in  doing  his  work  as  the  servant  of  God.  Christian  congregations  may  fall  into  eitlei 
of  two  errors ;  the  "  Christian  minister  may  be  glorified,  or  made  an  idol  of,  in  two  ways 
— by  party  worship  of  the  mnn,  or  by  attnching  a  mystical  or  supernatural  power  to  the 
office."  Both  the  minister  himself,  and  those  among  whom  he  labours,  do  well  to  keep 
ever  in  mind  that  he  is  but  a  steward,  only  Christ's  servant,  to  minister  to  them  in 
Divine  things.    We  consider,  then — 

L  The  stewabd's  TRUSTS.  "The  mysteries  of  Gh)d."  Mysteries  were  familiar  things 
to  those  whom  the  apostle  addressed.  "The  word  'mysteries'  is  derived  from  a  word 
signifying  to  close,  to  shut,  and  was  in  the  old  Greek  civilization  used  to  denote  those 
rites  which  were  only  permitted  to  the  initiated,  and  were  kept  a  strict  secret  from  the 
outside  world.  Of  such  a  kind  were  the  well-known  Eleusinian  mysteries,  which  were 
kept  every  fifth  year  at  Elensis,  in  Attica;  the  rites  of  the  Bona  Dea,  which  were 
observed  at  Rome ;  and  those  of  Isis  and  Mithras,  which  were  of  Egyptian  and  Persian 
origin."  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  word  "  mystery  "  is  used  in  the  Scriptures  in 
two  distinct  senses:  (I)  for  things  that  are  hidden  from  the  ordinary  understanding; 
and  (2)  for  things  that  in  past  times  were  unknown,  but  are  now  revealed  to  those  who 
believe  the  gospel.  The  term  is  chiefly  used  in  this  latter  sense.  When  St.  Paul 
exclaims,  "  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness,"  he  means  the  "  revealed  mystery,"  of 
which  he  immediately  speaks,  even  God,  or  Christ,  being  "  manifest  in  the  flesh."  The 
trust  of  the  Christian  teacher  ie,  then,  the  revealed  mystery  of  the  gospel,  and  this  may 
be  said  to  have  three  centres  round  which  it  gathers:  (I)  the  Incarnation ;  (2)  the 
Sacrifice ;  (3)  the  Resurrection.  The  Incarnation  reveals  the  mysteries  of  God  and  of 
man ;  the  Sacrifice  reveals  the  mysteries  of  sin  and  of  redemption  from  sin ;  and  the 
HesuiTection  reveals  the  mysteries  of  immortality  and  of  sanctification.  So  these  are 
the  great  truths  and  trusts  of  which  the  Christian  teachers  are  "stewards."  Theii 
work  is  to  minister  these  truths,  in  all  their  varied  adaptations  and  applications,  to  the 
iieople  of  their  charge.  Happy,  indeed,  are  they  who  can  close  their  ministry  pleading 
i.a  St.  Paul  did,  "  I  have  not  shunned  to  declare  unto  you  the  whole  counsel  of  OroA." 

II.  The  steward's  response  to  his  trusts.  "  Found  faithful."  The  thought  of 
St.  Paul  seems  to  have  been  that  due  inquiry  is  made  into  the  character  and  trust- 
worthiness of  a  man  before  he  is  put  into  the  office  of  a  steward ;  as  he  elsewhere  says, 
"Let  them  first  be  proved."  But  we  may  fairly  include  under  his  language  the 
reasonable  expectation  that  the  man  who  is  entrusted  with  a  responsible  position  and 
work  will  be  "  found  faithful "  in  his  doing  of  it.  Then  we  must  inquire  what  should 
be  the  faithfulness  of  a  Christian  teacher,  or  indeed  of  the  Christian  man,  to  whom  the 
gospel  mysteries  have  been  revealed.  It  shouM  be  manifest  in  three  departments :  1. 
He  must  be  faithful  to  his  Master,  God ;  seekin<;  his  service  only,  and  his  glory  only. 
2.  He  must  be  faithful  to  the  truths  he  has  received  ;  carefully  setting  them,  and  not 
any  mere  ideas  he  may  have  about  them,  before  the  people ;  and  seeking  to  set  the 
whole  of  them,  and  not  merely  portions  in  which  he  may  be  personally  interested,  before 
his  congregation.  3.  He  must  be  faithful  to  the  people  to  whom  God  may  have  sent 
him;  taking  up  the  burden  of  their  spiritual  needs  on  his  own  heart;  feeling  ever  as 
did  good  Samuel  Rutherford  when  he  said,  "  God  is  my  witness,  that  your  salvation 
would  be  two  salvations  to  me,  and  your  heaven  two  heavens  to  me  I "  Impress  that 
the  more  deeply  we  feel  the  greatness  of  our  trusts,  as  having  had  the  great  religious 
mysteries  in  part  revealed  to  us,  the  more  serious  becomes  for  us  the  question  of  our 
"  faithfulness ; "  and  the  more  shall  we  feel  the  need  for  solemn  times  of  self-searching 
and  self-criticism.  It  is  an  unspeakable  honour  to  be  entrust^  with  the  "mysteries" 
of  God  and  of  Christ  and  of  redemption  from  sin ;  but  all  true  and  humble  lonls  say 
with  the  apostle,  "But  who  1b  sufficient  for  these  things?" — R.  T. 


ch.  TV.  1—21.]    TflE  PIEST  fiPlSTLB  tO  TflE  COBlHTaiAlilS.  161 

Vers.  3 — 5. — A  three/old  Judgment  of  the  Christian  teacher.  The  thought  of  the 
apostle  is  evidently  occupied  with  the  dispositioa  of  the  Corinthians  to  form  judgments 
for  and  against  different  Christian  teachers,  and  to  make  parties  hy  thdr  prefereace  for 
one  over  another.  There  seems  to  have  been  a  critical  habit,  which  was  applied  to  the 
work  of  each  minister ;  and  such  a  habit  is  always  found  seriously  to  injure  the  work 
of  our  ministers,  and  fatally  to  influence  that  openness  and  receptivity  of  spirit  on  which 
due  reception  of  Christian  teachings  depend.  It  may  be  especially  pointed  out  that  the 
habit  of  discussing  the  work  of  the  clergy  in  our  families,  depreciating  some  of  them, 
and  unduly  praising  others,  has  a  most  mischievous  influence  on  the  younger  members 
uf  our  households.  In  this  passage  St.  Paul  strongly  urges  his  indifference  to  any 
judgments  that  may  be  formed  about  him.  He  was  simply  but  heartily  trying  to  do 
Christ's  work  under  Christ's  lead,  and  he  could  wait  for  his  Master  to  judge  what  had 
been  the  quality  and  the  value  of  his  work.  He  speaks  of  three  kinds  of  judgment  to 
which  the  Christian  teacher  may  be  subject. 

I.  Mah'b  jusouent.  We  must  all  do  our  work  with  the  feeling  that,  at  least,  our 
fellow-men  have  their  eyes  upon  us,  and  form  their  opinions  concerning  us.  Illustrate 
how  we  form  estimates  of  one  another.  When  great  men  die,  the  judgments  which 
their  contemporaries  formed  of  their  work  finds  expression  in  numerous  articles  aod 
books ;  and  when  the  friends  of  simpler  folk  meet  at  their  funerals,  their  talk  shows 
how  the  tone  and  character  of  the  dead  man's  life  has  been  fully — sometimes  fairly,  and 
at  other  times  unfairly — estimated.  Now,  such  judgments  of  our  fellow-men  may  be 
helpful  to  us  when  they  find  expression  in  our  lifetime.  (1)  They  are  if  they  help  to 
increase  our  sense  of  the  seriousness  of  our  duty ;  (2)  they  are  if  they  lead  us  to  know 
ourselves  better,  to  see  and  to  correct  our  mistakes ;  (3)  they  are  if  they  make  us  more 
anxious  to  win  m^n's  approval  by  a  higher  faithfulness  to  our  duty.  But  the  thought 
uf  man's  judgment  may  be  mischievous  if  it  (1)  makes  us  nervously  sensitive  to  merely 
hiitman  opinion ;  (2)  if  it  makes  us  self-conscious ;  and  (3)  if  it  makes  us  in  any  sense 
ir  degree  more  anxious  about  the  praise  of  men  than  the  praise  of  God.  We  may 
7alue  men's  good  opinion  as  an  encouragement ;  we  may  consider  men's  severe  judg- 
ments as  helping  us  to  see  our  faults;  but  we  may  not  permit  our  settled  life-work  to 
be  hindered  by  men's  opinion,  nor  our  hearts  to  be  depressed  by  men's  criticisms.  We 
serve  the  Lord,  not  men. 

II.  Self-judombnt.  St.' Paul  says,  "I  judge  not  mine  own  self."  Show  how 
important  to  all  Christian  workers  is  self-knowledge,  and  the  power  to  fairly  weigh 
and  estimate  one's  own  doings.  So  many  fail  because,  while  heeding  everybody's 
criticism,  they  fail  to  criticize  themselves.  But  wise  and  helpful  self-judgments  are 
(1)  very  dependent  on  natural  disposition ;  (2)  on  particular  bodily  and  mental 
moods ;  and  (3)  on  the  measure  and  degree  of  a  roan's  self-love.  The  duty  is  plainly 
taught  by  the  apostle  when  he  said,  "  If  we  would  judge  ourselves,  we  should  not  be 
judged  "  (ch.  xi.  31). 

III.  Thb  Lobd's  judgment.  "  He  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord,"  That  judgment 
is  stricter  than  any  man's,  and  than  any  which  we  can  make  concerning  ourselves. 
These  points  may  be  illustrated  as  impressing  the  superiority  of  the  Lord's  judgment, 
(1)  It  is  most  searching  :  (2)  it  concerns  even  our  motives ;  (3)  it  is  infallibly  correct ; 
(4)  it  is  going  on  every  day  now ;  (5)  it  is  in  measure  revealed  to  us  now ;  (6)  it  is  in 
measure  kept  from  us  now,  that  our  freedom  may  not  be  unduly  limited ;  (7)  it  will  be 
fully  revealed  to  us  by-and-by ;  and  (8)  on  it  our  allotments  of  place  and  work  in  the 
"  eternities  "  must  entirely  depend. — B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Differences  according  to  grace  received.  One  can  but  be  struck  with  th« 
prudence  and  delicacy  of  the  apostle  in  not  mentioning  the  actual  names  of  the  party 
leaders  at  Corinth,  hut  illustrating  his  principle  from  such  more  prominent  names  as 
his  own,  that  of  St.  Peter,  and  that  of  ApoUos.  He  avoids  any  charge  of  personality  ; 
and  names  only  the  greater  leaders,  that  the  Corinthians  might  learn  not  to  be  puffed 
up  for  any  minister.  All  teachers  are  but  men,  and  all  are  to  be  esteemed  for  the 
Divine  gifts  that  may  be  entrusted  to  their  charge.  We  may  not  "  glory  in  mon,"  only 
in  Ood,  who  distiibuteth  to  each  man  severally  as  he  wills,  using  this  man  and  that  for 
whatever  service  he  may  please.  F.  W.  Hobertson,  speaking  of  the  Christian  ministry, 
well  says,  "  The  qualities  which  are  requisite  for  the  higher  part  of  the  ministry  are— 

I.  CORINTHIANS.  M 


I6i  TtiE  FIRST  EPIctLe  tO  THE   CORINTHIANS.    [Ch.  iv.  i— ^i. 

great  powers  uf  sympathy ;  a  mind  masculine  in  its  power,  feminine  in  its  tenderness  ; 
humbleness ;  wisdom  to  direct ;  that  knowledge  of  the  world  which  the  Bible  calls  the 
wisdom  of  the  serpent ;  and  a  knowledge  of  evil  that  comes  rather  from  repulsion  from 
it  than  from  personal  contact  with  it.  But  those  qualifications  which  adapt  a  man  for 
the  merely  showy  parts  of  the  Christian  ministry  are  of  an  inferior  order — fluency,  self- 
confidence,  tact,  a  certain  histrionic  power  of  conceiving  feelings,  and  expressing  them. 
Now,  it  was  precisely  to  this  class  of  qualities  that  Christianity  opened  a  new  field  in 
places  such  as  Corinth.  Men  who  had  been  unknown  in  their  trades  suddenly  foimd 
an  opportunity  for  public  addresses,  for  activity,  and  for  leadership.  They  became 
fluent  and  ready  talkers ;  and  the  more  shallow  and  self-sufficient  they  were,  the  more 
likely  it  was  that  they  would  become  the  leaders  of  a  faction."  The  correction  of  this 
evil  is  indicated  in  our  text.  The  humble  sense  of  grace  received,  and  the  burden  of 
responsibiMty  in  so  high  a  trust,  should  keep  all  Christian  teachers  in  their  right  place. 
Recognizing  the  differences  of  men's  gifts  according  to  the  grace  they  have  received,  we 
should  value  each  man  for  what  gift  and  grace  he  may  have ;  but  we  should  take  care 
never  to  make  contrasting  estimates,  nor  allow  ourselves  to  be  "  puffed  up  for  one  against 
another."  The  following  points  may  receive  illustration  from  other  portions  of  St. 
Paul's  Ejjistles,  especially  from  the  two  to  the  Corinthians,  and  fiom  those  known  as  the 
"Pastoral  Epistles  "  (1  and  2  Timothy  and  Titus)  :— 

I.  The  divebsitt  of  gifts  entrusted  to  Chbistiah  tkachers.  The  work  to  which 
they  are  called  is  very  various  in  its  forms  and  demands.  In  the  family  there  must  be 
a  variety  of  services,  and  ability  for  each ;  and  in  the  state  a  variety  of  offices,  and  a 
fitness  for  each.  So  in  the  Christian  Church.  For  its  upbuilding  there  is  needed  the  gift 
of  architect,  and  carver,  and  mason,  and  l.ibourer,  and  carpenter.  The  gift  of  the  preacher 
differs  from  that  of  the  teacher,  and  that  again  from  the  gift  of  the  orfranizer.  If  we 
once  fully  admit  that  all  gifts  are  of  grace,  and  each  an  nnspcakuble  honour  and  an 
overwhelming  responsibility  for  him  to  whom  it  is  entrusted,  envy  of  each  other  would 
)  ass  for  ever  away,  and  we  should  thankfully  use  each  man  for  the  service  Oroi  has 
fitted  him  to  render. 

II,  All  Divikb  gifts  aeb  unto  edification.  God  never  bestows  anything  on  any 
man  that  he  may  get  praise  of  men  or  worldly  honour  for  it.  All  God's  gilts  .are  foi 
use.  All  are  entrusted  to  us  for  the  sake  of  others.  All  bear  upon  the  "fully  furnish- 
ing of  our  fellow-men  unto  all  good  works." 

HI.  All,  togethbb,  will  be  found  to  make  up  a  complete  cibcle  op  the  heans 
OF  GRACE.  We  fail  in:  1.  The  effort  to  bring  out  the  various  gifts  of  men  into  use.  The 
Church  is  everywhere  rich  with  the  gifted  unknown,  and  the  gifted  idler.  2.  In  the 
due  recognition  of  the  spiritual  comi'letcness  which  Goil,  in  his  providential  leadings, 
brings  to  our  Churclies.  3.  In  the  consequent  freeing  of  men  from  duties  for  which 
they  are  unfitted,  that  they  may  fully  cultivate  and  use  their  special  gift.  Impress 
that  the  thankful  recipiency  and  use  of  the  Divine  provisions  for  our  spiritual  needs 
should  master  all  personal  feeling  towards  individuals.  We  should  honour  the  Master 
who  arranges  the  gifts,  and  honour  the  servants  only /or  his  sake. — E.  T. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — Suffering  for  others  a  pro' f  of  interest  in  their  welfare.  Recall  Palsy's 
argument  from  the  sufferings  of  the  early  Christians  as  to  the  sincerity  of  their  belief. 
Similarly,  St.  Paul  urges  here  that  the  troubles  and  persecutions  which  he  and  the 
other  teachers  had  endured  in  ministering  to  the  Churches,  ought  to  convince  the  people 
of  his  love  and  zeal  for  their  highest  welfare  ;  and  should  also  be  felt  to  set  him  in  such 
intimate  and  confiilential  relations  with  them  that  he  might  claim  the  right  to  reprove 
and  correct.  We  all  know  that  reproof  cannot  be  easily  or  usefully  accepted,  save  from 
those  whom  we  know  love  us  truly  and  sincerely  seek  our  highest  well-being.  From 
these  verses  two  subjects  may  claim  consideration — 

I.  God's  mission  fob  apostles,  looked  at,  kindles  enthusiasm.  "  We  are  made  a 
spectacle  unto  the  World,  and  to  angels,  and  to  men."  Watching  such  a  devoted,  self- 
sacrificing,  heroic  life  as  that  St.  Paul  lived  ought  to  stir  us  up  to  enthusinstic  efforts 
to  follow  so  noble  an  example.  Illustrate  how  the  story  of  great  martyrs  and  great 
missionaries  has,  in  all  ages,  been  used  to  inspire  lesser  men  to  noble  things.  "  Lives 
of  great  men  all  remind  us,"  etc. 

U.  God's  mssioN  for  apostles,  carried  out,  awakens  sympathy.    (Vets.  11, 12.) 


OE.  IT.  1— 2L]    THE  ITIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAHra  163 


Fully  detail  tbe  sufferings  which  St.  Paul  underwent,  and  the  bodily  frailty  which 
made  those  sufferings  so  exceedingly  trying  (see  2  Cor.  xi.  23 — 30).  After  our  Lord  in 
his  closing  sufferings,  no  man  ao  awakens  our  tenderest  sympathy  as  does  the  Apostle 
■9f  the  Gentiles.  Illustrate  how,  in  modern  missions,  the  Pattesons  and  Liviugstones 
have  excited  world-wide  sympathy.  Illustrate  also  how  their  constant  sufferings  made 
Baxter's  and  Robert  Hall's  continued  and  devoted  labours  so  affecting  to  us.  Or  refer 
to  the  power,  on  his  little  audience,  of  Adolplie  Monod's  talks  from  his  bed  of  suffering 
and  death.  St.  Paul  shows  what  made  his  sufferings  so  interesting  to  us — they  were 
borne  as  submissive  obedience  unto  Ood ;  and  as  vicarious /or  us ;  and  this  ought  to 
give  him  a  persuasive  power  and  a  full  right  to  advise,  and  reprove,  and  correct,  and 
warn,  and  teach. — B.  T. 

Ver.  16. — Imitators  of  men.  The  Revised  Version  of  this  passage  reads,  "  I  beseech 
you  therefore,  be  ye  imitators  of  me."  It  may,  however,  be  disputed  whether  the 
word  "  followers  "  is  not  a  better  and  more  suitable  one  to  express  the  apostle's  idea. 
Mere  imitating  is  the  work  of  tlie  unintelligent;  it  is  represented  by  the  mere  reproduc- 
tion of  sounds  and  manners  such  as  we  have  in  the  parrot  or  the  monkey,  or  more  fully 
in  the  child.  For  men,  all  mere  imitations  are  either  signs  of  mental  and  moral  weak- 
ness, or  they  are  the  acciilents  attending  on  an  intelligent  acceptance  of  the  principles 
which  another  man  exhibits  in  conduct.  We  are  not,  in  the  limited  sense  of  the  word, 
even  to  imitate  Clirist ;  we  are  to  "  cupy  his  example,"  and  to  "  follow  in  his  steps ; " 
but  when  more  fully  and  worthily  apprehended,  we  find  that  what  we  really  are  to  do 
is  to  "  let  that  mind  be  in  us  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus."  In  the  passage  now 
before  us  St.  Paul  has  been  speaking  of  his  relationship  to  the  Corinthian  Christians. 
He  was  their  father  in  Christ ;  "  For  in  Christ  Jesus  I  have  begotten  you  through  the 
gospel."  And  he  is  really  pleading  with  them  to  preserve  the  family  likeness  which 
should  accompany  such  a  relation.  But  it  may  be  said — Are  we  ever  justified  in  follow- 
ing or  imitating  our  fellow-men?  We  reply — Yes,  so  far  as  men  are  Christ-like, 
we  may ;  so  far  as  they  are  more  Christ-like  than  ourselves ;  so  far  as  they  have 
reached  any  Christly  virtue  or  grace  beyond  us,  we  may.  And  since  there  is  a 
sense  in  which  Christ  must  ever  seem  to  us  out  of  reach ;  since  of  his  virtue  we  must 
ever  say,  "  It  is  high,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it ; " — ^it  may  often  be  really  helpful  to 
us  to  see  his  virtue  reflected  in  a  fellow-man,  and  manifestly  brought  within  the 
reach  of  human  attainment.  This  may  help  us  while  we  are  weak,  but  when  we  more 
fully  grasp  the  truth  of  our  Lord's  humanity,  we  shall  realize  that  Divine  virtues  were 
shown  by  him  in  a  human  life  precisely  that  we  might  feel  the  possibility  of  attaining 
them,  and  so  seek  to  be  "  changed  into  his  image.''  After  dwelling  on  tlie  "  imitative 
faculty,"  its  uses  and  abuses,  consider  that — 

I.  Good  men  mat  become  models  fob  us.  Observe :  1.  That  in  every  age  some  men 
have  risen  above  their  fellows  in  moral  virtues ;  and  some  have  been  set  in  prominent 
positions  so  as  to  attract  the  attention  of  their  fellows.  2.  From  the  Scripture  modbls 
which  are  preserved  to  us,  learn  :  (1)  That  no  meie^y  human  being  can  present  tis  entire 
human  life,  the  whole  circle  of  his  doings,  for  our  imitation.  "  There  is  none  righteous ; 
no,  not  one."  Illustrate  the  sides  of  moral  infiruiity  in  all  Scripture  characters — Abra- 
ham, Moses,  David,  Hezekiah,  Peter,  Paul,  etc.  (2)  That  each  becomes  a  model  of 
some  one  characteristic  feature;  e.g.  Abraham  of  faith,  Moses  of  disinterestedness, 
David  of  habits  of  personal  piety,  Paul  of  singular  loyalty  to  the  living  Christ.  So 
with  modern  saints,  and  the  holy  ones  from  our  own  circles ;  in  some  one  thing  each  is 
strong,  and  just  in  that  one  thing  each  may  be  a  model. 

II.  Good  men's  models  abe,  at  the  best,  but  imfebfect.  Sensible  of  this,  David 
says  in  his  prayer  before  God,  "  My  goodness  extendeth  not  to  thee ;  but  to  the  saints 
that  are  in  the  earth,  and  to  the  excellent."  Even  in  the  one  thing  in  which  they  are 
strong,  God  can  find  weakness.  Wljen  we  most  admire,  we  are  compelled  sadly  to  feel 
that  the  "  trail  of  the  serpent  is  over  it  all."  So  we  must  use  men's  examples  as  but 
incomplete  copies  of  the  Divine,  and  remember  that  our  aim  is  to  transcend  any 
previous  human  attainments,  and  to  he  "  perfect,  even  as  our  Father  in  heaven  ii 
perfect."  Whatever  there  is  in  men  that  is  imitable  is  but  a  reflection  of  Christ,  and 
we  may  have  shining  on  us  what  they  have  in  measure  caught,  even  the  very  light 
of  Christ  himself.    We  may  "  follow  Ms  example,  who  did  no  sin." 


164  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa    few  it.  1—21 


IIL  ClTRIST  IB  OUIt  GREAT  MoDEL,  AND  MEN  ABE  UODELB  ONLY  80  FAB  AS  TBET  BBINO 

HTM  NEAR  AND  GLORIFY  HIM  TO  OUR  THOUGHT.  We  mu8t  take  this  knowledge  of  them 
that  they  have  been  with  Jesus,  and  have,  in  measure,  caught  his  likeness.  Impress 
that  we  may  fully  copy  Christ's  life,  but  only  very  seldom  can  we  copy  men's  aetiotu ; 
we  can  only  seek  to  be  possessed  and  ruled  by  the  same  principles. — B.  T. 

Vers.  18 — ^20. — Speech  and  power.  These  are  by  no  means  always  associated  together 
in  the  same  man.  Oftentimes  they  seem  quite  unable  to  dwell  tosether.  Speech  is  in 
inverse  ratio  to  power.  The  free  talker  is  seldom  a  vigorous  thinker ;  and  the  boaster 
can  never  gain  any  real  power  by  his  extravagances.  It  seems  that,  at  Corinth,  there 
were  some  loud  talkers,  who  depreciated  St.  Paul's  authority,  and  endeavoured  to 
destroy  his  influence.  They  made  out  that  his  "  bodily  presence  was  weak,  and  his 
speech  contemptible ; "  and  they  mockingly  said,  "  No  doubt  he  writes  very  vigorous 
and  terrible  letters,  but  he  is  afraid  to  come  himselt"."  "  These  persons  persuaded 
themselves  that  they  had  so  undermined  his  reputation  that  he  would  not  dare  to  come 
again  to  Corinth,  and  they  grew  more  self-asserting  in  consequence."  Paley  notices 
an  undesigned  coincidence  between  this  passage  and  2  Cor.  i.  15 — 17;  ii.  1.  There 
evidently  had  been  some  uncertainty  about  his  visit,  of  which  his  opponents  took 
undue  advantage. 

I.  Speech  without  power.  A  mere  gift  of  fluent  talk  is  granted  to  some  men.  It 
is  seldom  associated  with  vigorous  mental  power,  and  is  a  perilous  gift  because  it  can 
be  so  readily  misused.  Such  speech  may  be  pleasant  to  listen  to,  as  is  the  murmur  of 
a  flowing  stream.  It  may  be  popular ;  it  may  be  exciting  to  mere  sentiment ;  it  may 
be  boastful.  Its  influence  is  small  and  temporary.  It  bears  very  little  relation  to  the 
correction  of  moral  evils,  or  the  culture  of  the  godly  life. 

n.  Speech  vith  power.  Speech  which  is  (1)  the  utterance  of  thought ;  (2)  which 
bears  the  "  accent  of  con%'iction ; "  (3)  which  is  carefully  set  in  adaptation  to  the  hearer ; 
and  (4)  which  is  uttered  iu  dependence  on  Divine  leadings  and  inspirations.  Here  the 
word  ii  used  by  St.  Paul  especially  to  mean  "the  power  that  is  derived  from  Christ, 
which  he  himself  possesses  to  influence  the  heart  of  man.  It  includes,  no  doubt,  the 
power  of  working  miracles,  for,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  the  miracles  of  the  gospel 
were  manifestations  of  Christ's  power  to  deliver  humanity  from  the  dominion  of  evil 
and  its  consequences."  Speech  with  power  is  that  kind  of  speech  which  directly 
influences  the  heart  and  the  conscience,  and  leads  to  the  fuller  apprehension  of 
truth,  the  conviction  of  sin,  or  the  discovery  of  neglected  duty.  It  may  comfort, 
instruct,  counsel,  or  warn.  Dr.  Horace  Bushnell  says,  "Three  distinct  elements  must 
be  included  in  preaching  which  has  the  genuine  power.  (1)  A  descent  to  human  nature 
in  its  lower  plane  of  self-love  and  interested  motive,  and  a  beginning  made  with  the 
conscience,  the  fears,  and  the  boding  expectation  of  guiltiness.  (2)  The  due  exhibition 
of  the  Christian  facts.  In  the  Apostles'  Creed  nothing  is  included  but  the  simple 
facts  of  Christ's,  life.  Too  little  by  a  thousandfold  is  made  of  these  facts.  How  much 
easier  to  preach  the  decoction  (doctrine),  and  let  the  dried  herbs  of  the  story  go  1  It 
might  be  so  if  they  were  really  dry  ;  but  since  they  are  all  alive,  fresh  and  fhtgrant 
as  a  bank  of  roses,  how  much  better  to  go  and  breathe  among  them,  and  catch  the 
quickening  odours !  (3)  The  right  concej  tion  of  the  gospel,  and  the  fit  presentation  of 
it,  under  the  al far-forms  provided  for  it."  And  Canon  Lidilon,  in  his  'Bampton 
Lectures,'  pp.  168, 169,  has  the  following  passage: — "Picture  to  yourselves  a  teacher 
who  is  not  merely  under  the  official  obligation  to  say  something,  but  who  is  morally 
convinced  that  he  has  something  to  say.  Imagine  one  who  believes  alike  in  the  truth 
uf  his  message,  and  in  the  reality  of  his  mission  to  deliver  it.  Let  his  message  combine 
those  moral  contrasts  which  give  permanency  and  true  force  to  a  doctrine,  and  which 
the  gospel  only  has  combined  in  their  perfection.  Let  this  teacher  bo  tender,  yet 
searching ;  let  him  win  the  hearts  of  men  by  his  kindly  humanity,  while  he  probes, 
ay,  to  the  quick,  their  moral  sores.  Let  him  be  uniformly  calm,  yet  manifestly 
moved  by  the  fire  of  repressed  passion.  Let  him  be  stern  yet  not  unloving,  and 
resolute  without  sacrificing  the  elasticity  of  his  sympathy,  and  genial  without  con- 
descending to  be  the  weakly  accomplice  of  moral  mischief.  Let  him  puniue  and 
expose  the  latent  evil  of  the  human  heart,  through  all  the  mazes  of  its  unrivalled 
deceitfulness,  without  sullying  his  own  purity,  and  without  forfeiting  his  strong  belief 


OH.  T.  1—13.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COiaNTHIANb. 


1C5 


in  the  present  capacity  of  every  human  being  for  goodness.  Let  him  know  *  what  is 
in  man,'  and  yet,  with  this  knowledge  clearly  before  him,  let  him  not  only  not  despair 
of  humanity,  but  respect  it,  nay,  love  it  even  enthusiastically.  Above  all,  let  this 
teacher  lie  perfectly  independent.  Let  him  be  independent  of  the  voice  of  the  multitude : 
independent  of  the  enthusiasm  and  promptings  of  his  disciples ;  independent  even  when 
fice  to  face  with  the  bitter  criticism  and  scorn  of  his  antagonists ;  independent  of  all 
save  God  and  his  conscience.  In  a  word,  conceive  a  case  in  which  moral  authority  and 
moral  beauty  combine  to  elicit  a  simultaneous  tribute  of  reverence  and  of  love.  Clearly 
such  a  teacher  must  be  a  moral  power."  Impress  that  such  teachers  we  should  seek  to 
find ;  such  was  the  Apostle  Paul ;  and  under  the  power  such  can  exert  we  may  hope  to 
grow  into  the  "  stature  ot  the  perfect  man  in  Christ  Jesus." — ^B.  T. 

Ver.  21. — Adaptation  the  teacher's  power.  Evidently  St.  Paul  desired  to  be  precisely 
adapted  to  those  whom  he  would  teach.  The  tone  and  the  substance  of  his  teachings 
would  directly  depend  on  their  moral  condition.  As  a  faithful  teacher,  he  tells  them  it 
must  depend  on  them  whether  he  came  to  them  "  with  a  rod,  or  in  love,  and  in  the  spirit 
of  meekness."    A  brief  outline  will  sufSciently  guide  thought  on  this  subject. 

L  Adaptation  involves  knowledge.  1.  General  knowledge  of  human  nature.  2. 
Particular  knowledge  of  those  to  whom  we  minister.  3.  Sufficient  knowledge  of  the 
measure  of  our  authority  and  influence.  4.  Practical  knowledge  of  the  corrective 
instruments  which  we  may  use. 

II.  ADAPrATioN  INVOLVES  DISCERNMENT.  1.  Discrimination  of  the  precise  condition 
in  which  those  we  influence  are  at  the  time.  2.  Of  the  differences  in  which  each  one 
may  stand  related  to  the  evil  we  reprove.  3.  Of  the  limitations  to  which  reproof 
may  be  wisely  subject,  and  of  the  time  when  the  tone  may  be  changed  to  one  of 
encouragement. 

III.  Adaptation  mat  demand  severity.  Which  may  be  very  trying  to  our  feelings, 
and  very  difficult  in  view  of  our  disposition ;  but  must  be  made  to  characterize  our 
relations,  if  we  would  be  found  faithful.  The  severity  of  gentle  souls  is  the  mightiest 
persuasive  to  goodness.  It  was  quite  out  of  St.  Paul's  way  to  be  severe,  but,  for  that 
very  reason,  we  feel  his  severity  the  more. 

IV.  Adaptation  prefers  commendation.  So  St.  Paul  writes,  urging  the  Corinthians 
to  remove  the  evils  before  he  comes,  fir  he  would  so  much  rather  have  only  kindly  and 
encouraging  things  to  say.  Impress  that,  as  we  are  to  God,  he  must  show  himself  to 
UB.  See  Ps.  xviii.  24—26.  And  in  the  same  way,  as  we  are  in  godly  habits,  in 
moral  and  spiritual  condition,  lo — in  precise  adaptation — must  our  faitMul  teachers 
be.— R.T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Yen.  1 — 8. — ExcommunieaHon  of  an  in- 
eettwnu  offender. 

Ver.  1. — It  is  reported.  The  abruptness 
with  which  the  sub)ect  is  introduced  sIidws 
the  intensity  of  St.  Paul's  ftelingd,  and  his 
indignation  that  he  should  have  been  left 
to  hear  of  this  crime  by  common  report. 
The  news  had  come  to  him  "  from  those  of 
Ohloo's  household."  But  St.  Paul  was  not 
acting  on  mere  •'  report."  The  Greek  phrase 
impliei,  "  It  is  notorious  that  there  is  un- 
cleanness  among  you."  St.  Paul  must  have 
felt  it  to  be  a  bad  feature  in  the  chaiacter 
of  the  Corinthian  Church  that  they  had  not 
mentioned  this  gross  scandal  in  their  Ibtter, 
Commonly ;  rather,  actually  or  absolutely. 
Elsewhere  In  the  New  Testament  the  word 
only  occurs  in  Matt.  v.  24 :  ch.  vi.  7 ;  xv.  29. 
Tertullian  renders  it  "  in  totum."    St.  Paul 


has  no  need  in  this  instance  to  name  hii 
informants.  Every  one  knew  of  this  scandal. 
Fornication ;  a  general  word  for  all  kinds  of 
impurity.  And.  The  word  involves  an  in- 
dignant climax,  "Yes,  and  uncleanness  of 
such  a  kind  that,"  etc.  Is  not  so  much  as 
named.  The  true  reading  is,  does  not  even 
exiet.  This  form  of  incest  was,  indeed, 
"named"  among  the  Gentiles,  for  it  forma 
the  basis  of  the  story  of  Hippolytus,  the 
scene  of  which  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Corinth;  but  the  feeliuo;s  even  of  pagans 
were  so  shocked  by  it  that  Cicero  alludes 
to  such  a  crime  in  the  words,  "Oh,  in- 
credible wickedness,  and — except  in  this 
woman's  case — unheard  of  in  all  experience  1 " 
('  Pro  Cluent.,'  5).  At  this  very  epoch  Nero 
deepened  the  general  execration  against 
himself  by  the  generally  accepted  suspicion 
that  he  had  been  guilty  of  a  yet  more 
flagrant  crime.    Should  luive;  rather,  thai 


166 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.     [oh.  t.  1— li 


a  certain  perion  has  hit  fafhe^t  vAfe.  Ap- 
parently this  was  some  nominal  Christian, 
who  was  living  in  open  sin  with  his  step- 
mother, and  thereby  braving  the  curae  of 
Lev.  xviii  17 ;  Deut.  xxvii.  20.  We  gather 
from  2  Oor.  vii.  12  that  the  father  was  living, 
and  had  also  joined  the  Christian  com- 
munity. From  the  complete  silence  as  to 
the  crime  of  the  woman,  it  must  be  in- 
ferred that  Bhe  was  a  heathen.  Whether 
she  bad  been  divorced  or  not  does  not 
appear,  nor  whether  the  offender  was 
nominally  married  to  her  or  not.  His 
father's  wife.  He  might  have  nsed  the  one 
Greek  wnrd  for  step-mother  (fir)TpunJ),  but 
the  periphrasis  might  remind  some  of  the 
heinousness  of  the  sin,  and  of  Lev.  xviii.  8. 
Ver.  2. — ^And  yo  are  pnSed  np ;  perhaps 
rather.  And  have  ye  been  miffed,  up  1  The 
"ye,"  being  expressed  in  the  Greek,  ii 
•mphatio — "j^e,  the  very  persons  whose 
horror  ought  to  have  been  most  intense." 
It  might  seem  inconceivable  that  any  com- 
munity calling  itself  Christian  would  fall  so 
low  as  to  be  puffed  up  at  the  ej^istence  of 
such  an  offence  among  them.  There  is,  in- 
deed, a  sulitle  and  close  connection  between 
arrogance  and  sensuality,  and  both  are 
sometimes  fatally  linlced  to  the  conceit  of 
religious  knowledge  without  the  reality. 
But  not  even  a  heathen  community  could 
have  been  "  puffed  up "  on  such  grounds. 
Yet  the  Coriutliians  may  have  been  "  puffed 
np"  with  the  conceited  reasons  which  in- 
duced them  to  leave  the  offence  unrebuked, 
because  tliey  boasted  the  possession  of  some 
spurious  "knowledge."  Perhaps  they  liad 
seized  somo  deadly  notion  of  antinomian 
liberty,  such  as  has  existed  at  times  among 
Gnostic  sects,  like  the  Ophites  in  ancient 
and  tlie  Anabaptists  in  modem  days.  Per- 
haps they  sheltered  themselves  under  the 
arrogant  Jewish  rule  that  all  a  man's  con- 
ditions of  life  were  altered  by  becoming  a 
proselyte — thatold  relationsliips  were  for  him 
entirely  abolished ;  for  the  Jews  helil  that  a 
proselyte  was  like  "  a  new-born  child,"  and 
had  begun  life  a  second  time  (Bechoroth,  f. 
47,  1),  and  might  marry  any  of  his  relatives. 
Such  miseralile  sophisms  would  acquire  fresh 
force  from  the  universal  impurity  with  which 
Corinthian  society  was  stained,  and  which 
rendered  it  necessary  for  St  Paul  in  these 
Epistles  to  utter  his  most  solemn  warnings 
against  every  kind  of  gensualitv  (oh.  v.  11 ; 
vi.  15—18;  X.  8;  xv.  33,  34;  2  Cor.  v.  11, 
etc.).  But  besides  all  this,  St.  Paul's 
remark  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  their 
"  inflation  "  was  exclusively  connected  with 
Gnostic  excesses,  which  bore  on  the  case  of 
this  ofTender.  It  may  moan,  "Here  is  a 
gross  fault  in  the  niidst  of  yon,  and  yet — 
not  propter  hoc,  but  cum  hoc — the  character- 
istic of  your  religious  factions  is  pride  and 


conceit."  Thia  was  indeed  %apit>9ii(artcu, 
"to  play  the  Corinthian,"  in  the  worst 
sense  of  that  proverbial  taunt.  Possibly  the 
prominence  or  wealth  of  the  offender  may 
have  led  to  a  more  easy  condonation  of  his 
crime.  Exculpatory  soplrism  may  have  been 
Bugge-ted  by  self-interest.  That ;  <.«.  in 
order  that,  as  a  result  of  your  godly  sorrow, 
the  offemler  mi^ht  be  removed  from  your 
midst.  He  that  hath  done  this  deed.  The 
language  of  St.  Paul,  as  always,  U  as 
delicate  as  clearness  would  allow.  The  fact 
that  the  verb  is  in  the  past  aorist  may  per- 
haps allow  us  to  hope  that  the  offence,  at 
any  rate  in  its  most  aggravated  forms,  had 
ceased  to  be  committed.  The  manner  of 
the  crime  ("  in  such  a  way ")  seems  to 
have  been  an  agsfravation  of  the  crime  it- 
self. In  this  indignant  verse  we  have,  as 
Stanley  says,  "  the  burst  of  the  storm,  the 
mutterings  nf  which  bad  been  heard  in  the 
earlier  chapters."  So  intense  was  the  effect 
produced  by  St.  Paul's  stern  severity,  that  a 
great  part  of  the  Second  Epistle  had  to  be 
devoted  to  allaying  the  agitation  which 
these  words  had  excited  (see  especially  2 
Cor.  vii.  8—12). 

Ver.  3. — Por  I  verily.  The  broken  struc- 
ture of  the  verse  shows  the  deep  emotion 
with  which  it  was  penned — as  it  were  with 
sobs.  St.  Paul  contrasts  the  line  which  he 
means  to  take  with  the  lax  condonation 
granted  by  the  Corinthian  Church.  As 
absent ;  rather,  heing  absent  or  though  abtent. 
The  as  is  omitted  in  the  best  manuscripts. 
But  present  in  spirit ;  literally,  in  the  spirit; 
but  he  is  referring  to  his  own  spirit : 
"  Bodily  I  am  absent ;  but  speaking  as  though 
my  spirit  were  present  in  your  assembly 
[comp.  2  Kings  v.  26],  I  have  already 
judged,"  etc.  Have  jndged  already.  My 
decision  was  instantaneous  and  is  final. 
As  though  I  were  present.  My  sentence  is 
as  clear  as  though  I  were  at  this  moment 
standing  in  the  midst  of  you.  That  hath  Bo 
done.  The  verb  is  not  as  before,  poiesat,  but 
hatergasdmenon,  which  is  stronger,  **  the 
perpetrator  of  this  deed."  The  "  so  "  means 
"with  all  these  circumstances  of  aggrava- 
tion." The  same  verb  is  used  in  Rom.  i.  27. 
Tlie  broken  periods  of  the  Greek  reflect  ths 
emotion  of  the  writer.  The  passage  ia  aa 
it  were  written  with  sobs  (Wordsworth). 

Ver.  4. — In  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  The  word  "  Christ "  is  probably  an 
addition.  The  clause  may  either  be  taken 
with  "when  ye  are  gathered  together,"  or 
with  "to  deliver"  (oomp.  1  Tim.  t.  21). 
With  the  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  Each 
clause  adds  solemnity  to  the  scene  in  which 
St.  Paul  imagines  himself  as  standing 
with  them  in  the  spirit,  and  joining  with 
the  assembly  of  the  Church,  and  armed  with 
the  authority  of  Christ,  while  he  pronouneei 


oa.  V.  1—13.]    THE  FIfiST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS 


167 


on  the  offender  the  sentence  on  which  he 
had  already  determined.  That  be  could 
cloini  "the  power  of  the  Lord"  leBulted 
from  his  possession  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
the  special  commission  to  bind  and  to  loose, 
to  remit  and  to  retain,  on  earth,  which 
Christ  had  entrusted  to  the  apostles  (Matt. 
xTiii.  18, 20 ;  John  xx.  23). 

Yer.  5. — ^lo  deliver  such  a  one  unto  Satan. 
Scripture  nowhere  defines  the  character  and 
limits  of  such  a  sentence  as  this.  By  cutting. 
off  an  offender  from  Church  communion 
(2  Thess.  iii.  14,  15),  that  u,  from  all  the 
visible  means  of  grace,  he  was  for  the  time 
separated  from  spiritual  influences,  and  was, 
therefore,  so  far  handed  over  to  Satan.  The 
phrase  is  also  applied  to  Hymennus  and 
Alexander,  in  1  Tim.  i.  2ri  it  is  very 
doubtful  whether  it  was  nece..sarily  meant 
to  inTolve  such  physical  infiictions  as  fell 
on  Ananias,  Sapphira,  or  ijllymaa.  It  is, 
however,  important  to  observe  that  the 
intention  of  the  sentence,  like  the  true  inten- 
tion of  excommuuication,  when  exercised  in 
\  right  spirit  (see  Hooker, '  Eccl.  Pol.,'  iii. 
1,  {  18),  was  not  wrathful,  but  merciful.  It 
iras,  as  Calvin  says,  "medicinale  reme- 
lium" — "not  for  destruction,  but  for  edifi- 
cation" (2  Cor.  X.  8).  HymeniBUs  and 
Alexander  were  handed  to  Satan,  not  for 
their  final  ruin  and  damnation,  but  with 
a  kind  and  remedial  purpose,  "that  they 
may  learn  not  to  blaspheme"  (1  Tim.  i.  20), 
and  this  offender  with  the  express  object 
"  that  his  spirit  may  be  saved."  Had  these 
facts  been  more  deeply  studied,  there  would 
have  been  a  very  different  tone  and  spirit  in 
many  of  the  mediaeval  anathemas.  Such  a 
one  (oomp.  2  Cor.  ii.  7).  He  seems  to  liold 
aloof  ftom  the  man's  very  name.  So  "  such 
as  she "  (jhs  Toiairas)  is  used  of  the  adul- 
teress in  John  viii.  7.  For  the  destruction 
of  the  flesh;  i.e.  that  all  eamal  influencei 
in  him  might  be  destroyed.  It  is  not  bis 
"body"  which  is  to  be  destroyed,  but  the 
"  flesh,"  the  jetzer  ha-ra,  or  "evil  impulse," 
as  the  Jews  called  it.  When  this  was 
destroyed,  the  body  might  once  more  become 
a  temple  of  the  Holy  Grbost.  That  the  spirit 
may  he  saved.  The  destructioa  of  the  loweat 
element  of  our  human  nature  is  the  salva- 
tion of  the  highest;  it  is  the  cutting  away 
of  the  dead  corpse  from  the  living  soul.  In 
the  day  of  the  Lord;  when  the  Lord  should 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  The  merciful 
intention  of  St.  Paul  is  clearly  developed  in 
2  Cor.  ii.  6 — 11.  He  looked  on  God's  judg- 
ment! as  remedial,  not  as.  solely  retributive 
(ch.  xi  29 — 32).  Here,  as  Chrysostom 
finely  says,  the  apostle  lays  down,  as  it 
were,  his  laws  to  the  devil,  telling  him  how 
far,  and  how  far  only,  he  can  proceed.  The 
object  of  excommunication  is  tp  save  the 
o&nder,  and  not  to  do  the  devil's  work  by 


ensuring  his  eternal  ruin.  We  can  imagine 
how  awful  would  be  the  solemnity  of  these 
words  when  they  were  first  read  aloud  to 
the  little  Christian  communities  of  Corinth. 
It  was  natural  that  they  should  produce  an 
overwhelming  excitement. 

Ver.  6. — ^Your  glorying ;  rather,  tlie  auhject 
of  your  hoagting,  the  point  on  which  yim 
glorify  j/ounehet.  The  Greek  word  docs 
not  mean  the  act  of  boasting,  but  the  thing 
of  which  we  boast  Not  good.  The  Greek 
word  is  not  agathon,  but  halon,  an  almost 
untranslatable  word,  which  implies  all 
moral  beauty,  and  resembles  the  English 
word  "fair"  or  "noble."  When  he  says 
that  it  is  "not  good,"  he  uses  the  figure 
called  litotet,  which  is  an  expression  in- 
tentionally too  weak,  that  it  may  be  cor- 
rected into  a  stronger  one  by  the  involuntary 
indignation  of  the  reader;  as  when  Virgil 
calls  the  cannibal  tyrant  Busiris  "  un- 
praised."  Hence  the  clause  is  equivalent 
to  "  the  thing  of  which  you  are  boasting  is 
detestable."  Enow  ye  not.  This  clause  is 
used  by  St.  Paul  in  specially  solemn  ap- 
peals, and  almost  exclusively  in  these 
Epistles  (ob.  iii.  16;  vi.  16, 19;  ix.  18,  24). 
A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump 
(Gal.  V.  9).  The  taint  alluded  to  is  not 
only  ths  presence  of  the  unpunished  of- 
fender, but  the  general  laxity  and  impurity 
displayed  by  their  whole  bearing  in  the 
matter  (comp.  the  line  of  Menander  quoted 
in  cii.  XV.  33,  and  the  "  root  of  bitternesi " 
in  Heb.  xii.  15).  (For  the  word  "lump," 
see  Uom.  xi.  16.) 

Ver.  7. — Purge  out  therefore.  The  word 
"  therefore  "  is  absent  from  the  best  manu- 
scripts, and  the  abi-uptness  is  more  emphatic 
without  it.  No  doubt  the  metaphor  was 
suggested  by  the  fact  that  St.  Paul  was 
writing  about  the  time  of  the  Passover 
(Acts  xvi.  8).  The  most  essential  requisite 
of  the  Jewish  regulations,  with  which  his 
whole  training  had  made  him  so  familiar, 
was  the  absolute  putting  away,  and  even 
destruction,  of  every  trace  of  leaven,  which 
was  diligently  sought  for  the  day  before  the 
Passover  began.  The  putting  away  of 
leaven  was  a  type  of  sanctification.  The 
old  leaven.  "Old"  as  belonging  to  their 
unregenerate  and  unconverted  condition ;  a 
remnant  of  the  day  when  they  had  been 
Gentiles  and  Jews  who  had  not  known 
Christ,  The  least  willing  tolerance  of  the 
taint  would  cause  it  to  work  throughout  the 
whole  scoiety.  As  ye  are  unleavened. 
Leaven  is  the  type  of  evil  in  its  secret  and 
corrupting  workings.  Ideally,  Christians 
can  only  be  addressed  as  "unleavened," 
I.e.  as  "purged  from  their  own  old  sins" 
(2  Pet.  i.  9);  and  it  is  the  method  of  Scrip- 
ture (indeed,  it  is  the  only  possible  method  i 
to  address  Christians  ■■  being  Christiaini 


168 


THE   FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [cm.  y.  1— 1& 


indeed,  and  therefore  in  their  ideal  rather 
than  their  actual  character.  Some  have 
taken  these  words  tomean,"  You  are  actually 
keeping  the  PaesoTer,  and  therefore  have 
no  leaveu  among  yon;"  but  (1)  the  words 
cannot  bear  this  meaning;  nor  (2)  was  St. 
Paul  likely  to  appeal  so  prominently  to  a 
Jewish  ordinance;  and  (3)  he  is  thinking 
of  the  Christian  Easter,  and  only  borruwing 
a  casual  illustration  from  the  Jewish  Pass- 
over. For  even  Christ  our  Passover  is  sacri- 
ficed for  ns;  rather,  in  the  true  reading, 
for  oat  Pamover  also  ua«  aacrificed — even 
ChrUt.  As  Christians,  the  Gentile  Corin- 
thians certainly  did  not  keep  the  Jewish 
Passover;  but  St.  Paul  reminds  them  that 
they  too  had  a  Passover — ^that  for  them,  too, 
a  Paschal  Victim  had  been  offered,  whose 
tacrificial  blood  had  been  shed  for  their 
redemption  (John  i.  29;  six.  36;  1  Pet.  L 
19).  (Comp.  Heb.  xiii.  10,  "We  have  an 
altar.") 

Yer.  8. — Therefore  let  us  keep  the  feast,  Let 
W  keep  the  Christian  feast  of  Christ's  resur- 
lection  in  that  spirit  of  holiness — of  purging 
away  sin  from  the  midst  of  us — whiih  was 
symbolized  by  the  Jewibh  removal  of  leaven. 
Not  with  old  leaven.  For  now  ye  are  "in 
Christ,"  and,  therefore,  are  a  "  new  creation." 
Leaven  is  the  type  of  hypocrisy  (Luke  xii. 
l)in  its  secret  workings,  but  more  generally 
it  is  a  type  of  every  corrupting  iniluence. 
Of  sincerity  and  truth.  "All  that  corre- 
sponds to  an  unsullied,  uncontaminated,  and 
genuine  Christian  character."  The  beautiful 
Greek  word  for  "  sincerity  "  means  freedom 
from  all  admixture.  It  is,  perhaps,  derived 
from  "  testing  in  the  sunshine,"  and  is  used 
by  St.  Paul  in  2  Cor.  i.  12 ;  ii.  17.  "  Truth  " 
means  "reality." 

Vers.  9 — 13. — Correction  of  a  mistaken 
inference  which  Ihey  had  deduced  from  a 
former  letter  of  8t.  Paul's. 

Ver.  9. — In  an  Epistle;  rather,  tn  the 
Epistle  ;  in  some  former  letter  to  the  Church, 
which  is  no  longur  extant  (comp.  2  Cor.  x. 
10).  The  attempt  to  get  rid  of  so  plain  a 
statement,  in  the  supposed  interests  of  some 
superstitious  notion  that  every  line  which 
an  apostle  wrote  to  a  Church  must  neces- 
sarily have  been  inspired  and  infallible, 
is  at  once  unscriptural  and  grossly  super- 
stitious. The  notion  that  "the  Epistle" 
intended  is  Oiis  Epistle  is  an  absurdity 
invented  in  the  interests  of  the  same  fiction. 
The  only  hypothesis  which  could  give  the 
least  plausibility  to  such  a  view  is  that 
which  makes  this  paragraph  a  postscript 
or  marginal  addition  after  the  letter  was 
finished ;  but  there  is  little  or  nothing  in 
favour  of  such  a  view.  Not  to  company 
witJi.  The  Greek  word  is  rather  stronger : 
mttobe  mingled  up  among  (comp.  2  Thess. 
lit    14).     The  spirit   of  the  injunction  is 


repeated  in  Eph.  v.  11,  "  Have  no  fellow- 
ship with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness, 
but  rather  reprove  the.-n." 

Ver.  10. — Yet  not  altogether.    The  words 
correct  a  false  inference,  and  mean,  "  I  did 
not  intend  absolutely  to  prohibit  all  com- 
munication with  Gentiles  guilty  of  this  sin 
under  all   circumstances."    Of  this  world. 
Those  outside   the  pale  of  the  Christian 
Church  (comp.  ch.  iii.  19 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4).    Or 
with  the  covetous.    St.  Paul  often  usee  the 
Greek  word  in  immediate  connection  with 
sins  of  impurity  (ch.  vi.  10;  2  Cor.  ix.  6; 
Eph.  \.  3;  Col.  iii.  3),  and,  tliough  it  does 
not  exclude  the  connotation  of  greed  and 
avarice  (2  Cor.  ix.  7;  1  Thess.  ii.  5),  it 
seems  to  havo  been  used  euphemistically  of 
the  deadliest  form  of  heathen  sensuality.  The 
principle  of  selfishness  may  work  equally 
in  greed  and  in  lust.    EztortionerB.    The 
word  may  also  mean  "ravishers,"  but  there 
is    no   reason   to   abandon   the   sense  of 
I'  rapacious."    Idolaters.    This  is  the  earliest 
instance  of  the   use  of  this   word,   which 
does  not  occur  in  the  LZ.X.    No  Christian 
could  still  be  an  open  "  idolater."    So,  un- 
less  we  suppose  that  the  expression   has 
slipped  in  involuntarily,  we  must  here  give 
the  word  a  metaphorical  sense,  as  in  Col. 
iii.  5.    We  must  else  be  driven  to  suppose 
that  there  were  some  half-and-half  Christians, 
like  Constantino,  who  ''feared  the  Lord, 
and  served  their  own  gods  "  (comp.  ch.  vi 
9 ;  viii.  10 ;  x.  7,  14 ;  Eph.  v.  5).    Tor  then 
must  ye  needs  go  out  of  the  world ;  for  in 
that  case  (as  they  had  perliaps  implied  in 
their  letter  of  questions  to   St.  Paul)  ye 
would  have  been  morally  bound  to  leave  the 
world  altogether  and  seek  a  new  one.    The 
Greek  particle  ara  perhaps  refers   to  the 
astonisiiment  caused  by  their  misapprehen- 
sion of  St.  Paul's  rule.    The  clause  throws 
painful  light  on  the  condition  of  the  heathen 
world.     If  all  communication  with  "  forni- 
cators" was  to  be  forbidden,  the  sin  was 
so  univi  rsal,  especially  at  Corinth,  that  all 
intercourse  with  Gentiles  would  have  be- 
come impossible.     Even  some  who  professed 
to  be  stern  moralists  among  the  heathen, 
like  Cato  and  Cicero,   looked  on  the  sin 
as  being,  at  the  worst,  quite  venial,  and 
even,    under   certain    circumstances,   com- 
mendable. 

Ver.  1 1 . — But  now  I  have  written  unto  you. 
The  tense  used  is,  perhaps,  the  epistolary 
aorist,  and  is  therefore  equivalent  to  "  but 
now  I  write  to  you ; "  otherwise  the  sense 
is,  "but  what  I  meant  in  iny  letter  was," 
etc.  The  position  of  the  words  rather 
favours  this  view.  St.  Paul  expressly  telln 
them  in  ch.  x.  27  that  he  never  intended 
to  forbid  all  intercourse  with  heathens. 
They  were  not  to  be  "taken  out  of  tha 
world,"  but  to  be  free  from  evil  (John,  xvii 


cH.  V.  1—13.]    TUE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIASa 


161 


15).  It  any  man  that  is  oalled  a  brotheT. 
The  word  "brother"  wag  used  before  the 
name  "Christian"  was  accepted  by  the 
memberB  of  the  Church.  Or  an  idolater 
(see  oh.  v.  10;  z.  7,  14).  He  might  call 
himself  a  Christian,  and  yet  be  in  reality 
an  idolater  (Eph.  v.  5 ;  Col.  iii.  5 ;  Gal.  v. 
20;  1  John  t.  21).  With  such  a  one  no  not 
to  eat,  If  the  phrase  be  pressed,  it  would 
involve  exclusion  from  all  privileges  of  the 
body,  for  the  Holy  Communion  was  cele- 
brated in  connection  with  the  agapse.  But 
the  general  meaning  is  that  of  2  Tl  ess.  iii. 
6,  "  We  command  you  .  .  .  that  ye  withdraw 
yourselves  from  every  brother  that  walketh 
disorderly." 

Ver.  12. — For  what  have  I  to  do  to  judge 
them  also  that  are  without  1  To  pass 
sentence  on  heathens  is  no  concern  of  mine; 
it  is  no  part  of  my  ofSce.  The  phrase 
"them  that  are  without"  was  origin  illy  a 
Jewish  phrase.  To  the  Jews  all  men  were 
"outsiders"  (ehttionin)  except  themselves. 
The  phrase  was  adopted  by  Christians,  but 


in  a  less  contemptuous  sense  (1  Thess.  it. 
12;  Col.  iv.  5).  We  find  a  description  of 
"those  that  were  without" — ^"'aliens  from 
the  commonwealth  of  Isrnel,  and  strangera 
from  the  covenant  of  promise" — ^in  Eph.  ii. 
12.  Do  not  ye  judge  them  that  are  within } 
An  appeal  to  their  own  practice  and  to 
common  sense.  Christian  rules  can,  of 
course,  only  apply  to  Christian  communities. 
Ver.  13.— God  judgeth.  To  that  "judg- 
ment of  God"  (Eom.  i.  29)  Christians 
must  leave  them.  They  have  no  jurisdic- 
tion over  them.  The  mention  of  "judging" 
forms  a  natural  transition  to  the  next 
chapter.  Therefore.  Tlie  word  is  omitted 
in  tlie  best  mnnusoripts.  The  command  is 
more  abruptly  forcible  without  it.  Put 
away  from  among  yourselves  that  wicked 
person.  The  command  would  come  the 
more  powerfully  because  it  is  a  direct  refer- 
ence to  the  language  of  Dent.  xvii.  7 ;  xxiv. 
7.  The  explanation, "  Put  away  the  evil  one 
[i.e.  the  devil]  from  among  you  1 "  is  adopted 
by  Calvin,  but  is  too  general. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vera.  1 — 6. — 7%e  tocially  immoral  in  Ohurehet.  "  It  is  reported  commonly  thai, 
there  is  fornication  among  you,"  etc.  The  greater  portion  of  this  chapter  is  taken  up 
with  one  subject,  that  is,  gross  social  immorality.  The  verses  before  us  suggest  three 
general  remarks — 

I.  That  the  socially  ihuoral  sometimes  find  theib  way  into  Chbistian 
Chubches.  It  had  been  reported  to  Paul  that  there  were  some  members  of  the 
Corinthian  Church  guilty  of  gross  "  fornication ; "  that  one  of  the  members  had  actually 
married  his  father's  wife — not,  however,  his  own  mother,  but  his  step-mother.  Such  a 
piece  of  immorality  would  be  regarded  with  the  utmost  abhorrence,  even  through  the 
whole  Roman  empire.  Paul  says  tliat  such  a  case  was  not  "  so  much  as  named  among 
the  Gentiles."  How  such  a  character  became  a  member  of  the  Christian  community  is 
not  stated.  It  is  reasonable,  however,  to  suppose  that  it  was  through  imposition  on 
the  one  hand  and  the  lack  of  scrutiny  on  the  other.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  the 
admission  of  the  socially  immoral  into  Churches  has  in  every  age  been  too  common. 
How  many  Churches  are  there  in  England  entirely  free  from  those  who  every  day 
outrage  the  golden  rule,  "Do  unto  others  as  you  would  have  others  do  unto  you"? 
There  are  merchants  that  cheat  their  customers,  lawyers  that  swindle  their  clients, 
doctors  that  take  advantage  of  their  patients,  statesmen  that  deceive  their  constituents 
and  in  the  name  of  patriotism  promote  their  own  selfish  ends,  masters  and  mistresses 
that  oppress  their  servants,  servants  unfaithful  to  their  employers.  Ay,  the  Church 
is  a  field  in  which  grows  the  tare  as  well  as  the  wheat,  a  net  in  which  there  is  the 
"  unclean  "  as  well  as  the  "  clean." 

II.  That  Churches  in  their  internal  reliqious  disputations  are  in  danger  of 
OVERLOOKING  THE  SOCIALLY  IMMORAL  AMONG  THEM.  "  And  ye  are  puffcd  up,  and  have 
not  rather  mourned."  Probably  there  were  those  in  the  Churcli  who  were  proud  of 
the  membership  of  this  incestuous  man;  perhaps  he  was  an  orator,  or  had  along  purse, 
or  was  a  person  of  great  social  influence.  We  have  known  joint  stock  swindlers  who 
have  been  made  cliairmcn  of  religious  meetings,  and  who  have  been  cheered  to  the  echo. 
Party  feeling  was  so  strong,  and  leligious  disputation  so  rife  amongst  them,  that  such 
immoialitierescaped  their  notice.  Who  is  the  best  preacher  ?  what  is  the  sound  doctrine  ? 
what  are  the  ceremonies  to  be  observed  ?  Such  questions  as  these  were  all-absorbing 
amongst  them.  Moral  character  was  a  secondary  thing,  theories  and  beliefs  primary. 
This  has  ever  been  tof>  much  the  case  in  Christian  Churches.    Creeds  are  more  thought 


170  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh,  t.  1—13 

of  than  character,  doctrines  than  doings,  heretics  dreaded  more  than  rogues.  Some  ol 
the  worst  men  morally  I  have  ever  known  have  been  prominent  members  of  Churches. 
Hence  the  saying,  "  Sooner  trust  a  man  of  the  world  than  a  professor  of  religion." 

III.  That  the  exclusion  by  the  Chukches  of  such  members  fbom  theib 
MIDST  IS  AN  UKOENT  DUTT.  A  true  Church  is  a  community  of  Cliiit.tly  men,  and  the 
presence  of  such  characters  in  it  is  an  outrage.  The  verses  teach:  1.  That  their 
expulsion  should  he  practised  with  the  utmost  zeal.  It  would  seem  that  no  sooner  did 
Paul  hear  of  this  abomination  than  he  determined  to  put  an  end  to  it.  "  For  I  veiily, 
as  absent  in  body,  but  present  in  spirit,  have  judged  already,  as  thoujjh  I  were  present, 
concerning  him  that  hath  so  done  this^deed."  As  if  he  had  said,  "  Though  absent  from 
you,  as  soon  as  I  iieard  it  I  determined  to  get  such  a  vile  character  expelled  forthwith 
from  the  community  ; "  and  to  do  it  when  they  were  gathered  together  "  in  the  Name  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  that  is,  by  the  authority  and  power  of  Christ.  Paul  seems  to 
burn  with  zeal  in  the  matter.  Zeal  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  in  Churches :  in  some 
cases  and  seasons  it  becomes  a  glowing  passion ;  but,  alas !  it  is  too  often  concerned  more 
with  the  tenets  of  creeds  and  the  interests  of  sects  than  with  purity  of  life  in  its 
members.  2.  That  the  expulsion  should  be  practised  with  the  utmost  zeal,  not  to 
destroy,  hut  to  saoe  the  offender.  "  Deliver  such  a  one  unto  Satan  for  the  destruction 
of  the  flesh,  that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  Satan 
was  regarded  as  the  origin  of  Ml  iihysical  evils,  and  the  meaning  here  may  be — deliver 
the  immoral  person  over  to  the  sufferings  of  excommunication.  But  what  for?  Not  to 
destroy  him,  but  "  that  the  spirit  may  be  saved."  All  punishment  should  be  refor- 
mative— should  be  inflicted  to  correct,  not  to  crush.  "  Brethren,  if  a  man  be  overtaken 
in  tt  fault,  ye  which  are  spiritual,  restore  such  a  one." 

Vers.  6 — 13. — The  trxie  Church  a  feast.  "Tour  glorying  is  not  good,"  etc  There 
are  numerous  Churches,  but  only  one  true  Church,  viz.  that  commum'ty  of  men  who 
possess  the  Spirit  and  exemplify  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ.  These  verses  lead  us  to 
look  upon  the  true  Church — 

I.  Id  its  INTERNAL  ENJOYMENTS.  It  is  Called  here  a  "  feast."  Truly  the  association 
of  such  Christly  spirited  men  is  a  "feast"  of  the  sublimest  kind,  a  least  to  each  and 
all.  A  "  feast :  "  1.  Because  it  contains  the  choicest  elements  for  spiritual  nourishment. 
The  quickening,  elevating,  and  suggestive  ideas  current  in  such  fellowship,  current,  not 
only  in  language,  but  in  looks,  and  bearing,  and  acts,  and  spirit,  constitute  the  soul- 
banquet,  a  "  feast  of  fat  things,"  etc.  2,  Because  it  contains  the  choicest  elements  for 
spiritual  gratification.  A  feast  implies  not  merely  nourishment,  but  pleasure  and 
delight.  What  is  a  higher  delight  than  the  living  intercourse  of  kindred  souls,  free 
interchange  of  the  most  lofty  thoughts  and  purest  sympathies,  loving  souls  flowing  and 
reflowing  into  each  other?  The  true  Church  is  not  a  moody,  melarjclioly  assemblage, 
speaking  in  sepulchral  tones,  and  singing  doleful  dirges ;  it  is  the  brightest  and  most 
jubilant  fellowship  on  earth.  "These,  words  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  your  joy 
may  be  full ;"  "Rejoice,  .  .  .  and  again  I  say,  rejoice." 

IL  In  its  EXTERNAL  BELATioN  TO  THE  UNGODLY.  1.  There  Is  a  Connection  with 
ungodly  men  that  it  must  avoid.  They  must  not  be  admitted  to  its  "  feasts."  "  Purge 
out  therefore  the  old  leaven,  that  ye  may  be  a  new  lump,  as  ye  are  unleavened.  For 
even  Christ  our  Passover  is  sacrificed  for  us."  As  the  Jews  put  away  leaven  at  the 
celebration  of -the  Passover,  so  all  corrupt  men  must  be  excluded  from  the  Church  feasts. 
Christ  is  its  Passover,  its  Feast.  It  is  sufigested  that  the  presence  of  corrupt  men  at 
the  feast  would  be  contagious.  It  would  be  likely  to  act  as  "  leaven  "  through  the  com- 
munity. As  leaven  kneaded  into  a  lump  of  dough  spreads  from  particle  to  particle,  fer- 
ments in  its  process,  spreads  through  the  whole,  and  assimilates  all  to  its  own  character, 
so  a  bad  man's  spirit  may  work  through  the  community  of  the  good.  Therefore, 
because  it  is  so  contagious  and  pernicious,  exclude  it.  "  Therefore  let  us  keep  the  feast, 
not  with  old  leaven,  neitlier  with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness  ;  but  with  the 
unleavened  bread  of  rincerity  and  truth."  No  Church  that  has  such  leaven  in  it, 
whatever  its  intellectual,  social,  or  spiritual  advantages,  has  any  reason  for  exultation. 
"  Your  glorying  is  not  good,"  says  Paul :  "  know  ye  not  that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the 
whole  lump?"  Be  grave,  be  serious,  look  well  to  the  moral  character  of  your  inembers. 
2.  There  Is  •  connection  with  ungodly  njen  that  it  cannot  avoid.    "  1  wrote  unto  yon 


COLT.  1—13.]    THE  FIKST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  171 

in  an  Epistle  not  to  company  with  fornicators :  yet  not  altogether  with  the  fornicators 
of  this  world,  or  with  the  covetous,  or  extortioners,  or  with  idolaters ;  for  then  must 
ye  needs  go  out  of  the  world."  You  cannot  avoid  contact  and  some  kind  of  intercourse 
with  the  ungodly  men  outside.  Tou  cannot  attend  to  the  temporal  affairs  of  your  life 
without  them.  Nor  can  you  discharge  your  spiritual  obligations  without  going  amongst 
them.  As  a  Cliristian  you  are  bound  to  go  amongst  them,  to  correct  their  mistalces,  to 
enlighten  their  darkm  ss,  to  reprove  their  wrongs,  and  to  endeavour  to  "  turn  them  from 
darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  Qoi."  Over  such  you  have  no  legal 
control,  you  can  exercise  no  jurisdiction  ;  they  are  without.  You  have  no  power  to 
exclude  them  from  your  neighbourhood  or  your  country;  they  are  to  be  left  alone  in 
that  respect.  "  Them  that  are  without  God  judgeth."  But  if  you  find  such  characters 
inside  the  Church,  you  are  to  deal  with  them.  "  But  now  I  have  written  unto  you 
not  to  keep  company,  if  any  man  that  is  called  a  brother  be  a  fornicator,  or  covetous,  or 
an  idolater,  or  a  railer,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an  extortioner ;  with  such  a  one  no  not  to 
eat."  Observe  here :  (1)  Sin  in  man  takes  various  forms.  Paul  adds  to  the  incestuous 
man,  the  "  fornicator,"  the  "  covetous "  man,  the  "  idolater,"  the  "  railer,"  the 
"  dninkard,"  the  "  extortioner  ; "  all  have  to  be  avoided.  Sin  is  to  be  avoided  whatever 
form  it  takes ;  and  it  takes  many  forms.  What  is  a  temptation  to  one  man  is  not  to 
another.  Hence  one  is  tempted  to  be  a  "  fornicator ; "  another  a  miser,  "  covetous ; " 
another  an  "  idolater,"  worshipiiing  false  gods ;  another  a  scorner,  a  "  railer ;  "  another 
a  "  drunkard,"  intemperate ;  another  an  "  extortioner,"  overreaching,  overezacting, 
tyrannic.  (2)  In  whatever  forms  this  "  leaven "  shows  itself,  it  must  not  be  tolerated 
for  a  moment.    It  must  be  excluded  at  once. 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vsrs.  1 — 6. — Excision  of  a  flagrant  of enda- from  the  Church.  No  haste  was  erinced 
by  the  apostle  to  reach  a  question  that  gave  him  much  anxiety.  Among  the  striking 
phenomena  incident  to  mind  as  connected  with  body,  the  rate  of  movement  in  ideas  is 
worthy  of  notice.  Certain  classes  of  ideas,  such  as  those  associated  with  instinctive 
action,  are  very  rapid.  And  equally  noticeable  is  the  fact  that  thoughts  involving  the 
spontaneous  intellect  are  more  swift  than  those  belonging  to  the  volitional  intellect. 
And,  moreover,  the  same  man  thinks  with  more  rapidity  in  some  moods  than  in  others, 
We  all  know  how  the  physical  heart  is  accelerated  in  its  beat  and  how  the  lungs  breathe 
faster  under  certain  circumstances;  and,  beyond  doubt,  there  is  a  co-relation  in  these 
phenomena  between  mind  and  matter.  Now,  at  first  sijiht,  this  fact  may  not  strike  us, 
but,  on  a  nearer  view,  we  see  that  intellectual  and  moral  discipline  is  very  intimately 
bound  up  therewith.  Take  the  case  of  St.  Paul  in  the  matter  under  consideration. 
Here  was  a  scandal  in  the  Corinthian  Church,  a  case  of  incest,  a  son  taking  his  father's 
wife,  publicly  known,  so  shocking  as  to  be  under  the  ban  of  heathenism.  A  man  such 
as  St.  Paul,  intense,  full  of  impulse,  with  a  temperament  eager  to  act  on  the  spur  of  the 
moment — a  man  whose  sensations  instantly  turned  into  sensibilities,  and  whose  thoughts 
naturally  tended  to  immediate  words  and  deeds, — this  man,  in  one  of  his  most  anxious 
seasons  as  an  apostle,  holds  his  painful  solicitude  in  check  and  will  not  utter  his  heart 
till  the  way  has  been  fully  prepared.  Rare  self-control  this,  and  most  honourable — all 
the  more  so,  indeed,  as  he  had  other  grounds  for  just  indignation.  But  he  was  writing 
"  for  Christ's  sake,"  and  this  was  enough.  He  will  not  hurry  to  relieve  his  overfull 
mind.  Other  things  had  to  be  said  first.  The  glory  of  his  Lord  as  the  Wisdom  and 
Power  of  God,  the  Divine  idea  in  the  ministry,  the  broad  contrast  between  preaching 
the  gospel  and  all  utterances  merely  human,  the  evil  of  partisanship,  the  humiliation 
and  suffering  of  the  apostles,  and  especially  his  fatherly  care  over  sons  disturbing  the 
peace  of  the  Christian  household, — all  these  truths  were  to  be  set  forth,  illustrated, 
enforced,  before  he  entered  on  practical  questions.  Is  there  not  something  here  worthy 
of  reflection  ?  The  world's  practicalness  is  not  very  tolerant  of  general  ideas  and  their 
elaboration.  With  it,  brain  and  hand  are  near  neighbours ;  its  thoughts  and  actions 
hasten  into  alliances.  If  a  proper  degree  of  precaution  be  used,  thia  is  unquestionably 
a  wise  general  rule.    There  is  indeed 

'*  A  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men, 
Which,  taken  at  the  flood,  leads  on  to  fortune ;" 


172  THE   PlRSt   EPISTLE  TO  THE  COWNtHlAiJa    [oh.  T.  1—13. 

but  the  same  representatire  thinker  of  humanity  warns  us  that  when  we  "  mean  to 
build,"  we  ihould  "  gurvey  " 

"The  plot  of  the  situation,  and  the  model; 
Consent  upon  a  sure  foundation." 

PromptneH  ii  not  always  the  uynonym  of  prudence,  and  where  one  Hamlet  wastes 
excessive,  sensibility  on  mere  ideas  and  their  images,  so  that  "  enterprises  lose  the 
name  of  action,"  scores  of  men  wreck  themselves  in  an  opposite  direction.  Between 
these  extremes,  St.  Paul  was  happily  poised.  He  had  mastered  principles,  he  under- 
stood details  by  virtue  of  these  principles,  and  he  was  an  exception  even  among  great 
leaders,  because  he  saw  very  deeply  into  the  springs  of  actios.  Sc  ttat  when  he 
came  to  deal  with  the  case  of  the  notorious  offender  among  the  Corinthians,  a  broad 
spice  had  been  cleared  for  himself.  The  ideal  of  the  Church,  of  the  ministry,  of 
Cliristianity  itself,  had  been  resplendently  displayed.  Thought  had  been  elevated, 
feeling  quickened,  selfishness  put  to  shame,  and  a  state  of  mind  created  in  himself, 
and  we  may  hope  in  his  brethren,  favourable  to  fortunate  issues.  How  much  these 
Corinthians  needed  just  such  instruction,  and,  more  particularly,  what  obligations 
were  laid  upon  them  by  Christianity  to  be  h\imble,  we  see  plainly  enough  in  this 
chapter^  "Instead  of  expelling  the  offender  with  mourning  and  shame,  you — oh, 
strange  mystery  of  the  invariable  connection  between  sensuality  and  pride — have 
been  ir^ated  with  sophistical  excuses  about  the  matter  "  (Di*.  Farrar).  And  yet,  all 
the  while,  though  this  wickedness  is  an  outrage  on  common  decenfty,  and  in  shameless 
co&tempt  of  public  opinion,  at  which  even  paganism  would  blush,  St.  Paul  approaches 
the  (ubject  from  the  standpoint  of  Christianity.  He  never  takes  a  lower  way  when  the 
bigaer  is  possible.  For  with  him  it  is  a  cardinal  principle  that  the  higher  includes 
the  lower ;  this  is  his  method  of  thought ;  and  agreeably  thereunto  he  is  the  profounde.-'t 
of  intellectual  philosophers,  even  in  his  exposure  of  the  meagreness  and  vanity  of  the 
world's  reasonings.  Su  that  we  see  in  this  instance  that  he  felt  himself  set  for  the 
defence  of  true  reason,  no  less  than  of  genuine  religion,  working  down  to  the  instinct 
of  the  reason  as  he  workeii  down  to  the  depths  of  consciousness  in  all  else.  The  reality 
of  the  position,  the  solemnity  of  the  transaction,  the  whole  body  of  circumstances,  rise 
with  instant  vividness  before  the  eye  of  the  mind,  never  so  much  an  eye  as  when  outer 
vision  is  suspended.  Away  in  Ephesus,  the  apostle  had  brooded  over  this  severe  trial 
so  taxative  to  skill  and  patience,  since  the  roots  of  the  horrible  evil  were  as  a  cancer 
spreading  its  poisonous  fibres  through  the  body.  Night  and  day  it  clung  to  him,  and, 
wlierever  he  went,  some  new  rumour  of  the  disgrace  awaited  his  heart.  Ionia  was  as 
Achaia.  So  long  had  he  dwelt  upon  it,  so  many  prayers  had  gone  up  to  God  for 
enlightenment  and  guidance,  so  agoiiizin<!  had  been  the  wrestlings  of  his  spirit,  that  he 
was  as  if  on  the  spot.  "Absent  in  body,"  says  he,  "  but  iirrsent  in  spirit,"  and  I  have 
"judged  already,  as  though  I  were  present"  with  you  in  the  body.  And  thus  ideally 
in  their  midst,  the  whole  procedure  not  only  before  the  Church,  but  the  Church  partici- 
pating in  the  judicial  act,  he  himself  a  witness  and  an  actor,  and  Christ  Jesus  with  them 
in  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  this  shocking  offender  must  be  delivered  to  Satan.  Not  only 
bad  the  Church  been  dishonoured  by  the  guilty  man,  but  they  themselves  had  shared 
the  sin  and  the  reproach  by  neglecting  to  exercise  that  discipline  which  was  one  form, 
and  a  very  important  form,  of  the  kinirdom  that  was  "  not  in  word,  but  in  power." 
Deliverance  to  Satan  means  excommunication  from  Christian  fellowship.  How  much 
more  is  implied  it  is  difficult  to  determine.  Takiug  the  passage  in  its  immediate 
bearings  and  in  connection  with  the  general  tenor  of  the  Scri[jtures,  it  would  seem  to 
indicate  that  the  culprit  was  surrendered  to  the  power  of  Satan,  by  whose  influence  he 
had  already  been  corrupted ;  his  own  will  consenting  to  the  depravation.  This  act  of 
the  Church  gave  him  over  to  the  malignant  agency  of  Satan,  and  in  so  doing  fulfilled 
a  Divine  judgment.  Yet  it  contemplated  besides  a  merciful  discipline.  The  punish- 
ment  was  punishment  since  it  was  "  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,"  and  coincidently 
a  disciplinary  process  that  "the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 
Mercy  and  truth  meet  together  here,  and  righteousness  and  peace  kiss  each  other.  The 
door  of  repentance  is  not  closed  ;  still  less  is  the  possibility  of  reconciliation  forestalled. 
Christ  demonstrates  himself  in  and  through  the  Church,  his  representatire,  aa  Christ 


BH.  V.  1— 1S.J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  vJOBINTHIAMB.  173 

the  Judge.  But  it  is  Christ,  Head  of  the  Church,  not  Christ,  the  Judge  of  the  nations, 
on  the  throne  of  the  last  day.  Suffering  in  the  body  was  ordained  for  the  well- 
being  of  the  spirit.  Natural  laws,  if  violated,  revenge  themselves  on  the  violator. 
Apparently,  however,  much  more  is  rae»nt  in  this  instance.  The  culpiit  had  gone 
beyond  natural  law.  A  member  of  the  Church,  and  nominklly  retaining  his  place  among 
those  "called  to  be  saints,"  he  had  sacrificed,  in  a  most  ruthless  manner,  those  spiritual 
relations  which  are  to  the  immortal  man  more  sacred  and  enduring  than  any  and  all 
other  ties.  If  his  vice,  reeking  and  dripping  with  the  foulest  slime  of  earth,  had  mvaded 
the  spiritual  realm  of  Christ's  kingdom,  the  act  of  excommunication  cannot  pause  at 
simple  excision.  Nay ;  of  that  other  world,  whose  mysteries  envelop  us — a  wo>':J  of 
spirit  and  spirits  within  the  world  of  the  senses — the  offender  and  the  Church  and  St. 
Paul  were  inhabitants,  and,  hour  by  hour,  the  realities  of  life  were  most  real  in  this 
occult  domain.-  Tliere — the  great  secrets  lie,  the  secret  sources  of  motive  and  purpose, 
of  strength  and  weakness,  and  of  life  and  death.  Thvre — we  get  our  tragedies,  so  that 
Shakespeare  found  it  impossible  to  write  'Macbeth'  without  "  supernatural  solicitings," 
and  even  the  Platonic  iirutus  must  face  the  vengeance  of  the  other  world  in  the  tent 
near  Sardis.  And  there — this  judgment  allies  itself  with  Satanic  agency  in  subordina- 
tion to  Christ's  authority.  And  there,  finally,  over  all,  is  infinite  tenderness;  and, 
though  ruin  might  be  wrought  on  the  outward  man,  seeing  that  his  sin  was  specially 
heinous  and  involved  in  a  signal  way  the  most  terrible  retributions  of  an  outraged  body, 
yet  it  remained  possible  that  his  spirit  might  be  "saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord 
Jesus."— L, 

Vers.  6 — 13. — Supplementary  views  and  explanations.  Was  nothing  necessary 
except  to  get  rid  of  the  offender?  That  was  to  be  done,  but  sometliing  else  was  quite 
at  much  of  an  exigency.  Here,  then,  we  see  the  extent  to  which  the  enormous  evil 
had  spread,  for  the  whole  Church  had  been  infected.  If  the  vice  had  assumed  in  one 
man  the  completest  form  of  social  iniquity,  what  was  the  state  of  the  atmosphere  in 
which  this  was  possible?  Such  corruption  was  not  sporadic:  the  whole  air  was 
poisoned;  and  in  this  state  of  things  nothing  short  of  a  general  purification  would 
BufiSce.  For,  in  the  midst  of  this  widespread  taint,  you  are  breathing  out  your  com- 
placent self-conceits.  Glorying  (boasting)  is  cot  good.  To  glory  in  a  time  like  this  of 
your  privileges,  gifts,  eloquence,  devotion  to  leaders,  is  a  wretched  delusion,  bad  enough 
under  any  circumstances,  incomiiarably  worse  now,  because  of  the  immense  contrast 
between  your  state  of  mind  and  your  actual  condition.  Tliis  is  St.  Paul's  argument. 
But  his  logic  is  not  content  to  be  logic  only.  Buoyant  and  flexible  as  are  his  reasonings, 
he  must  have  the  help  of  metaphors,  since  all  our  greatest  thoughts  tend  to  perfect 
themselves  by  means  of  the  imagination.  Beyond  the  illustrative  imagination  (for  he 
is  very  utilitarian  in  the  use  of  images)  he  seldom  goes,  and  he  is  especially  given  to 
the  habit  of  using  the  interrogatory  imagination.  "  Know  ye  not  that  a  little  leaven 
Icaveneth  the  whole  lump  ?  "  Purge  it  out — an  earnest  word ;  cleanse  and  purify  by 
ridding  the  Church  of  its  moral  defilement,  and  so  complete  the  work  begun  in  the 
excommunication  of  the  incestuous  man.  It  is  "  old  leaven,"  the  relic  of  the  natural 
man,  and  it  threatens  to  destroy  the  new  man  of  Christ's  kingdom.  For  what  now  is  the 
Divine  ideal  ol  a  Christian?  A  new  creature  in  Christ.  And  what  the  ideal  of  the 
Church?  A  new  brotherhood  of  humanity  in  Christ.  Therefore,  purge  out  the  old 
leaven  and  be  a  new  lump,  remembering  that  even  discipline  executed  in  Christ's  name 
has  its' dangers,  and  may  divert  us  from  attention  to  our  own  spiritual  condition.  Inas- 
much, then,  as  St.  Paul  looked  on  the  excision  of  the  ungodly  member  of  the  Church, 
and  the  internal  purification  of  the  Church  in  all  its  members,  as  branches  of  one  and 
the  same  duty,  he  presses  his  argument  under  the  idea  of  a  new  lump— not  a  mere  outer 
reform,  but  a  thoroughgoing  inward  renewal  by  the  grace  of  the  Spirit.  Such  language 
could  have  emanated  Irom  no  man  who  had  nut  been  a  religious  Jew.  Nor  could  it 
have  proceeded  from  one  who  was  simply  a  spiritual  Jew.  It  was  a  Christian  thinker, 
a  thinker  of  catholic  insight,  who  saw  into  Judaisrc  from  the  cross  of  Calvary,  when  that 
cross  and  its  Divine  Sacrifice  had  the  great  darkness  under  which  they  stood  cleared 
away  by  Pentecost  Once  St.  Paul  had  understood  the  scrupulous  removing  of  the  leaven 
by  the  Jews  from  their  homes  in  a  very  different  way.  Once  he  had  seen  in  the  Pass- 
over and  kindred  institutions  a  life-giving  and  perpetual  force.    Now   however,  the 


174  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  t.  1—13 

images  lingered  in  his  thoughts,  only  to  remind  him  that  Christians  were  "nnlearened," 
and  that  all  the  leaven  of  impurity  must  be  put  away  from  them.    For  them  the 
Paschal  Lamb  had  been  slain,  and  in  the  Victim's  death  they  had  redemption.    "Let  us 
keep  the  feast ; "  our  consecrated  life  a  festival  of  gladness,  and  our  thauksgiving  con- 
tinually ascending  to  God.    And  how  shall  this  long  and  sacred  festivity  be  observed? 
No  external  demonstrations  are  mentioned.    Could  the  Jew  conceive  of  a  festival  like 
this?  Would  not  the  pomp  and  show  of  national  reunions,  the  booths  and  palm  boughs, 
the  cheer  of  open-air  life,  and  the  music  and  domestic  joy  of  the  congregated  caravans, 
rush  upon  him  with  their  thrilling  recollections  ?   And  would  not  the  Greek,  whose  senses 
were  so  finely  attuned  to  whatever  was  beautiful  in  material  nature,  and  whose  very 
birthright  was  the  luxury  of  existence  beneath  skies  and  amid  landscapes  that  seemed  to 
pour  their  sympathies  into  his  bosom, — would  not  he  recall  the  theatre  and  the  games  ? 
And  yet  St.  Paul  tells  them  of  a  festival  which  the  renewed  soul  may  keep  without  any 
of  these  things,  and  be  supremely  happy.    "  The  old  leaven,"  especially  "  the  leaven  of 
malice  and  wickedness,"  must  be  excluded,  and  the  feast  must  be  kept  "  with  the 
unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth."    The  evil  in  our  nature  must  be  destroyed, 
and,  in  its  place,  must  be  had  the  genuine  excellence  which  has  been  tried  and  proved, 
and  the  harmony  that  comes  from  self-control  because  the  human  will  is  controlled  by 
the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God.    Virtues  such  as  sincerity  and  truth  need  society,  and, 
assuredly,  society  needs  them.    Eao;er  to  communicate  and  in  turn  to  receive,  what  shall 
be  the  law  of  their  intercourse  with  mankind  ?    Fellowship  is  a  Christian  designation 
that  cannot  have  its  meaning  in  the  world.    But  Christians  are  in  the  world,  and  a  veiy 
important  element  in  its  life.    To  deny  its  associations  and  segregate  themselves  from 
others  is  to  commit  a  species  of  suicide.    On  a  former  occasion  St.  Paul  had  written  an 
Epistle  touching  this  subject.  Bnt  he  had  been  misunderstood,  and  now  he  would  rectify 
their  error.    They  had  blundered,  not  he.    And  now  he  sets  the  matter  clearly  before 
them  by  impressing  on  these  Corinthians  that  there  was  not  only  a  distinction  between 
the  Church  and  the  world,  but  likewise  between  the  good  and  the  evil  in  the  Church 
itself.    Tares  must  grow  with  the  wheat,  but  that  was  no  reason  why  they  should  treat 
the  tares  as  wheat.    Fornicators  in  the  Church  or  out  of  it  were  fornicators,  and  the 
brethren  were  not  to  keep  company  with  them.     And  hence  his  explicitness,  "  not 
to  company "  with  any  man  who  was  a  fornicator,  though  he  might  be  "  called  a 
brother."    Nor  does  he  stop  here.    Covetous  men,  idolaters,  railers,  drunkards,  extor- 
tioners, they  were  not  to  associate  with  on  such  terms  oi'  social  companionship  as  would 
be  symbolized  by  eating  with  tbem.     How  could  he  as  an  apostle  judge  those  who  were 
without?    If  he  did  not  do  this,  could  they  suppose  that  he  meant  to  require  it  of 
them  ?    The  outer  world  must  be  left  with  G>jd.    And  now  St.  Paul  returns  to  the 
matter  engrossing  his  solicitude:   "Put  away  from  among  yourselves  that  wicked 
person."    If,  indeed,  Christ  is  our  Paschal  Lamb  ;  if  through  that  ofiering  of  expiation 
and  reconciliation  in  itself  for  ever  perfect  and  by  us  realized  in  pardon  and  renewal 
and  sanctification,  life  becomes  an  Easter  of  glad  thanksgiving;  we  must  make  this 
sincerity  (purity)  and  this  truth  (harmony)  visible  to  the  world  in  our  social  sympathies. 
Bodily  sins  are  easily  condoned  among  men :   beware  of  that  evil.    Extortion  and 
covetousuess  grow  out  of  the  idolatry  of  the  senses,  and  they  must  not  be  countenanced 
liy  familiar  association.    How  modern  is  this  Epistle  1    No  thought  had  St.  Paul  of  us 
and  our  century,  but  these  words  of  his  rise  from  their  local  connections  and  assume 
universality  of  application.     Corinth  is  at  our  doors,  because  its  spirit  is  in  all  unsanctified 
hearts.     And  yet — thanks  to  the  grace  of  the  Spirit — in  all  the  foremost  civilizations  of 
this  age  and  over  a  wider  space  than  ever  before,  the  Paschal  Lamb  is  precious  to 
thousands.    Since  the  days  of  the  apostle,  human  life  has  expanded  its  outward  area. 
Myriads  of  things,  unknown  to  it  then,  are  its  possession  and  strength  and  glory  now. 
Two  wonderful  enlargements  have  gone  on — that  of  the  universe  to  our  comprehension, 
and  this  of  the  globe  and  the  world  to  which  we  belong.    And,  in  the  midst  of  all  the 
widening,  specially  in  the  fuller  opening  of  human  sympathies  and  the  growth  of  human 
intercourse,  the  blessed  festival  of  Christian  life  repeats  its  ancient  joy  and  multiplies 
the  participants  of  its  Divine  gladness. — L. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Impurity  in  the  Church.    There  could  scarcely  be  stronger  interna] 
.-vidence  of  the  genuineness  of  this  Epistle  than  is  supplied  by  tlus  very  punful  ch»ptor. 


OH.T.  1— 13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COIIINTHIANS.  176 

Real  circumstances  alone  could  account  for  the  devotion  of  a  considerable  portion  ol 
this  document  to  such  a  theme  as  la  here  treated.  Ths  solicitude  and  indignation 
of  the  apostle  are  highly  characteristic;  whilst  the  insight  afforded  into  the  moral 
state  of  the  Corinthian  congregation  is  obviously  one  which  only  unmistakable  facts 
Mn  justify  and  explain.  Moral  lessons  of  high  value  may  be  deduced  from  the 
apostle's  treatment  of  a  distressing  subject. 

L  We  obsgbvb  thb  debased  moral  sentimrnts  and  nAoricEB  with  whiob 
Chbistiakitt  had  to  contend.  We  need  not  go  to  the  moralists,  the  satirists,  the 
poets  of  classical  literature,  in  order  to  form  a  judgment  as  to  the  corruptions  which 
prevailed  among  the  nations  previously  to  the  promulgation  of  Christianity,  The  New 
Testament,  especially  St.  Paul's  writings,  are  a  sufficient  witness.  We  have  the 
opportunity  of  learning;,  through  our  travellers  and  missionaries,  how  largely  the  state 
of  the  heathen  world  at  the  present  time  correspunils  with  that  of  pre-Christian 
paganism.  1.  The  passage  before  us  furnishes  an  example  of  fornication,  which  was 
scarcely  thought  to  be  a  vice,  and  Indeed  was  a  religious  observance  among  the 
Toluptuous  society  of  Corinth.  2.  But  the  case  was  one  of  aggravated  adultery  and 
incest,  which  the  moralists  of  antiquity  admitted  to  be  crimes,  but  which  it  surprises 
ns  to  find,  even  in  an  individual  case,  in  one  of  the  early  Christian  communities. 
Such,  however,  was  the  moral  condition  for  which  oni  Divine  religion  brought  • 
remedy. 

II.  We  rehabe  the  laxity  on  the  fast  of  a  Christian  ooumunitt  which  could 
TOLERATE  SUCH  OFFENCES  AGAINST  MOBALiTT.  1,  The  Church  at  Corluth  allowed  the 
offender  to  remain  unreproved  in  their  midst,  as  though  nothing  had  happened  which 
called  for  especial  notice  and  vigorous  and  immediate  action.  2.  They  did  not  even 
mourn,  did  not  distress  themselves,  did  not  make  the  event  an  occasion  of  humiliation 
and  mourning ;  which  showed  a  sad  insensibility  to  the  eviL  8.  So  far  from  this,  at 
tiie  very  time  when  their  fellowship  was  so  disgraced,  they  were  "  puffed  up,"  boasting 
themselves  of  their  spiritual  gifts  and  intellectual  distinction! 

III.  We  obatefullt  note  the  protest  of  the  inspired  afostlk  aoainbt  ths 

OONDUCT  both  OF  THE  OFFENDER  AND  OF  THOSE  WHO  TOLERATED  HIM.      It  may  OCCUT  tO 

some  readers  of  the  Epistle  to  ask — ^Is  not  the  very  fact  that  such  sin  existed  and  was 
suffered  in  the  bosom  of  a  Christian  society  a  proof  that  Christianity  had  little  real, 
moral,  beneficent  power  in  the  world?  Wherein  was  this  Church  at  Corinth  better 
than  any  heathen  society  ?  Could  a  worse  state  of  things  exist  without  than  that  which 
admittedly  existed  within  ?  The  answer  to  this  objection  is  obvious  and  suflicient,  and 
is  very  iustructive  to  us.  1.  The  conduct  of  the  oiteuder  was  in  direct  violation  of  the 
laws  upon  which  the  society  to  which  he  nominally  belonged  was  built  Purity  was, 
as  much  as  justice  or  benevolence,  a  fundamental  law  of  the  Christian  king<luin.  2, 
This  conduct  was  also  in  flagrant  contrast  and  antagonism  to  the  spirit  and  \\h  of  the 
Divine  Founder  of  that  religion  which  was  professedly  received  by  these  Corinthian 
Christians.  Jesus  was  the  model  of  purity  of  heart,  and  his  life  and  character  were 
sinless,  holy,  blameless.  3.  The  inaction  and  tolerance  which  were  blamable  in  the 
congregation  were  inconsistent  with  their  well-known  duty.  The  Christian  Church  is 
not  a  club,  whose  members  are  at  liberty  to  receive  and  reject  whomsoever  they  choose. 
It  is  a'  society  of  which  Christ  is  the  Head  and  Lord,  and  is  bound  to  receive  tliote  who 
possess  his  Spirit,  and  to  reject  those  who  openly  and  unmistakably  grieve  and  outrage 
that  Spirit.  The  members  of  the  Church  were  termed  "  the  holy,"  or  "  saints ; "  and 
although  all  were  and  still  are  in  character  far  short  of  the  designation  they  bear,  there 
can  be  no  question  as  to  the  inconsistency  of  a  life  of  incest  with  a  Christiim  profession, 
4.  The  case  called  for  the  stern  interference  of  the  apostle,  as  an  authority  over  the 
(Siurches.  His  language  was  intended  to  quicken  the  conscience,  to  enlighten  the 
judgment,  to  call  forth  the  action,  of  those  who  were  very  negligent  and  culpable.  It 
was  a  new  thing  in  heathendom  that  such  a  stand  should  be  maile  as  that  wljich  was 
on  this  occasion  made  by  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  5.  Further,  the  action  of  the 
Church,  when  brought  to  a  proper  state  of  mind,  was  such  as  to  show  that  one  great 
•nd  of  the  existence  of  Christian  societies  was  the  promotion  of  moral  purity.  The 
excision  of  the  members  was  necessary  to  the  preservation  of  the  health  of  the  body. 
6.  The  ultimate  repentance  and  restoration  of  the  offender  is  a  proof  to  us  that  the 
Christian  Church  was  dpsigned  to  promote,  not  only  the  purity  of  the  pure,  but  the 


176  TUB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  v.l— 13, 


recovery  of  the  lapsed.     In  this  the  Church  showed  herself  to  be  penetrated  with 
the  compassionate  Spirit  of  her  Divine  Master  and  Head. — T. 

Ver.  3. — "  Absent  in  body,  but  present  in  spirit,"  Much  as  Paul  loved  his  convert! 
in  the  city  of  Corinth,  he  could  not,  at  the  period  when  he  wrote  this  Epistle,  think  of 
visiting  them.  Their  conduct  in  the  matter  treated  in  this  ciiapter  so  distressed  his 
pure  and  afTectionate  heart,  so  disappointed  his  expectfltions,  that  he  felt  constrained 
to  remain  absent  from  them.  But  in  so  doing  he  was  not  showing  any  lack  of  interest 
in  their  Christian  life  or  their  Church  proceedings.  Quite  the  cuntrary;  he  was  content 
to  stay  away  because,  as  the  text  makes  evident,  he  knew  there  was  a  sense  in  which 
he  was  really  with  them. 

I.  The  special  instance  of  this  principle  fobnishbd  in  the  case  of  Paul  and 
THE  Corinthians.  In  what  senses  could  the  apostle  deem  himself  to  be  with  these 
Corinthian  Christians  "in  spirit"?  1.  By  his  teaching.  He  had  long  laboured  in 
word  and  doctrine  in  this  great  centre  of  Greek  commerce  and  literature,  and  amongst 
this  company,  of  whom  not  many  were  wise  or  noble,  but  many  were  called  and  washed 
and  sanctified  by  the  gospel  of  Christ  and  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  His  teaching  laid  the 
foundation  upon  which  ApoUos  and  others  had  built.  And  we  know  enough  of  that 
teaching  to  be  sure  that  it  included  many  precepts  and  motives  to  holiness.  This 
instruction  had  sunk  into  the  hearts  of  the  spiritually  susceptible,  and  by  it  the  apostle 
yet  spake  of  this  society,  summoning  them  to  a  holy  life,  and  bidding  them  maintain 
a  standard  of  social  purity.  2.  By  his  authority.  Paul  never  forgot  that  he  was  an 
inspired  apostle  of  the  Lord.  He  spake  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  his  counsels 
were  not  those  of  human  wisdom  meiely,  but  of  celestial  authority.  \Yhat  the  Coriu- 
tbiaus  were  directed  to  do  they  were  to  do  in  his  name,  and  with  the  assuiance  that  their 
action  would  be  sanctioned  by  the  Divine  Head  of  the  Church.  In  vindicating  the 
purity  of  Christian  communion,  in  cleansing  the  Bride  of  Christ  from  any  stain  of  the 
vrotli  that  had  fallen  upon  her  white  robe,  the  Corinthians  were  to  feel  that  the  apostle 
was  with  them,  insjaring  and  corroborating  their  lawful  necessary  action. 

II.  The  oenbbal  operation  of  this  principle  in  the  living  Churou  <\f  Chbist 
Jesus.  1.  The  great  Saviour  and  Pounder  of  the  Church  is  absent  in  Ixxly,  but  present 
in  spirit.  He  himself  assured  his  disciples  that  it  was  good  for  them  that  he  should  go 
away,  for  that  thus  the  Comforter  should  come.  And  the  siriritual  and  universal  and 
perpetual  presence  of  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  is  thus  delightfully  and  graciously 
secured.  2.  Tiie  action  of  Christ's  Church,  when  in  accordance  with  the  express  and 
plain  instructions  of  our  Lord  and  of  his  inspired  apostles,  must  be  recognized  as 
prompted  by  his  Spirit  and  sanctioned  by  his  authority.  In  the  application  of  thi:i 
principle  there  are  and  will  be  many  dififerences  among  the  people  of  Christ,  but  with 
regard  to  the  principle  itself  there  should  tie  no  diversity  or  hesitation.  We  do  not  see 
his  form  or  hear  his  voice ;  but  we  cannot  qiiestion  his  spiritual  presence.  And  he  is 
at  hand,  not  only  to  teach  the  disciple,  to  comfort  the  sufferer,  to  counsel  the  perplexed, 
but  to  impart  a  Divine  authority  to  the  actions  and  to  tl;e  discipline  of  those  who  rely 
u[X)n  bis  Word  and  do  his  will. — T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — "  Purge  out  the  old  leaven."  The  apostle  sought  the  illustrations  with 
which  he  enforced  Christian  doctrine  and  duty  from  every  source,  Hebrew  and  Gentile 
alike.  In  this  passage  he  derives,  from  the  practices  of  his  coimtrymen  during  the 
festival  of  the  Passover,  a  figure  by  which  he  brings  before  his  readers  the  necessity  of 
moral  purity  in  life  and  in  fellowship.  As  the  Jews  were  accustomed  at  the  approach 
of  the  feast  to  search  out  every  scrap  of  leaven  to  be  found  in  their  houses,  that  they 
might  duly  keep  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread,  so  were  the  Corinthians  exhorted  to  clear 
themselves  of  all  moral  taint,  that  they  might  be  a  people  meet  for  the  fellowship  and 
'be  service  of  the  holy  Redeemer. 

I.  The  ideal  state  of  the  Christian  heart  and  of  the  Christian  society  is 
ONE  OP  PERFECT  FREEDOM  FROM  ALL  TAINT  OF  SIN.  It  was  a  high  and  uoble  aim  that 
which  the  Divine  Pounder  of  Uhristianily  set  before  him — the  formation  of  a  society 
which  should  be  pure  with  his  own  purity,  i.e.  both  of  life  and  of  heart.  It  is  to  auch 
an  aim  that  he  himself,  and  after  him  his  inspired  apostles,  encourage  all  Chriatiani  to 
ftspiie:  "Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect." 


CH.  T.  I— 13.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0RINTH1AN&.  177 


II.  These  ib  a  leaven  op  sinfot,  mFLUENOE  in  human  natuki  ard  in  hvuah 
BociEi-Y  WHICH  ENDANGERS  THE  P0RITY  OF  THE  Chuech.  1.  The  presence  of  Buch  a 
leaven  was  very  painfully  manifest  in  the  society  at  Corinth.  But  where  is  the  Christian 
community  which  is  absolutely  pure  ?  There  are  societies  which  make  great  professio  js 
in  this  matter ;  but  their  "  glorying  is  not  good."  Where  is  the  individual  Christian,  in 
whose  nature  there  is  no  trace  of  the  old,  worldly,  sinful,  corrupt  humanity  ?  Tbe 
purest  and  the  best  are  foremost  to  acknowledge  tliat  this  is  so.  2.  Leaven  furnishes 
an  illustration  of  the  diffusive,  contagious,  corrupting  power  of  sin.  A  little  leaven 
leavens  the  lump.  A  sin  tolerated,  a  sinner  countenanced,  in  a  Christian  society,  may 
imperil  the  general  purity,  "  One  sickly  sheep  infects  the  flock ; "  "  Behold  how  great 
a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth  I  "  These  and  other  proverbial  intimations  of  the  power  of 
this  principle  are  sufficient  to  put  us  upon  our  guard.  Each  heart  is  aware  of  the 
secret  temptations  to  evil  to  which  it  is  most  exposed;  and  perhaps  eveiy  one's 
experience  can  show  how  evil  habit  grows  when  unchecked  and  indulged. 

III.  The  Divine  summons  requires  that  the  leaten  of  sin  be  removed  that 
THE  MASS  MAY  BE  PRESERVED  IN  PURITY.  L  The  case  of  the  Corinthiaus  reminds 
us  that  the  excision  of  an  offending  member  may  be  necessary  in  order  to  vindicate 
Christian  purity  and  to  protest  against  the  encroachments  of  sin.  The  old  leaven 
must,  in  this  sense,  be  "  purged  out."  2.  There  is,  however,  a  wider  application  of 
this  principle.  Corruption  creeps  into  every  nature,  into  every  society.  And  the 
apostle  here  enjoins  that  we  submit  to  no  truce,  to  no  compromise  with  sin,  but  that, 
for  the  uake  of  our  own  spiritual  and  eternal  iutereuts,  we  keep  a  watch  upon  ourselvei^ 
lest  the  sour  leaven  steal  in  unobserved,  and  corrupt  our  nature  ere  we  be  aware  of  its 
operation,  or  at  all  events  its  power.  Holiness  becometh  the  house  of  the  Lord  for 
ever. — T. 

Ver.  7.—"  Christ  our  Passover."  The  connection  of  this  illustration  with  the  passage 
in  wMch  it  occurs  is  obvious.  The  Jews  commenced  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bre^ 
with  the  slaying,  roasting,  and  eating  of  the  Paschal  lamb.  Now,  the  apostle  has  been 
urging  the  Corinthians  to  moral  purity,  and  has  enjoined  them  to  put  away  the  leaven 
of  wickedness,  and  keep  the  feast  with  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth ; 
and,  as  a  motive  to  do  this,  he  reminds  them  that  the  Christian  dispensation  is  as  a 
spiritual  Passover,  which  commenced  with  the  sacrifice  of  "the  Lamb  of  God  who 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  The  Paschal  lamb  is  regarded  as  a  symbol  of 
Christ. 

I.  It  commemorated  a  great  delivebance.  The  Israelites  were  reminded  by  the 
Passover  feast  of  the  bondjge  from  which  their  ancestors  had  been  delivered  when  they 
were  brought  out  of  Egypt  "  with  a  high  hand  and  a  stretched-out  arm."  The  nation 
had  been  emancipated  from  the  tyranny  of  the  Pharaohs,  and  had  been  spared  the 
doom  of  the  first-born  of  the  people  of  the  land.  Christ's  redemption  set  his  people 
free  from  the  tyranny,  the  bondage,  the  unrewarded  toil,  the  darksome  night,  the  dreary 
hopelessness,  of  sin;  and  brought  them  out  into  the  freedom,  the  light,  the  gracious 
privileges,  the  glorious  hopes,  of  the  gospel. 

II.  It    was    SLAIN    AB    A    DIVINELY    ORDERED    SACRIFICE    AND    OFFERINO.       Put    to 

death  by  the  head  of  the  family,  the  lamb  was  taken  to  the  priest,  who  sprinkled  its 
blood  upon  the  altar  and  burned  its  fat,  according  to  the  ordinance.  Although  the 
lamb  was  offered  yearly,  it  was  in  the  first  instance  that  it  was  regarded  most  strictly 
as  a  sacrifice.  Christ  was  offered  once  only ;  "  There  remaineth  no  more  offering  for 
sin."  Yet  the  Eucharist  is  a  perpetual  memorial  of  the  great  Sacrifice  of  Calvary. 
It  is  by  the  willing,  accepted,  vicarious  sacrifice  of  our  Redeemer  that  mankind  have 
been  reconciled  and  consecrated  unto  God. 

III.  It  was  partaken  by  the  faithful  worshippers  in  the  Paschal  meal.  It 
was  in  this  way  that  every  Hebrew  family  was  reminded  of  its  share  in  the  covenant 
mercy  and  faithfulness  of  the  Eternal.  As  they  ate  the  lamb  in  the  appointed  way, 
and  with  the  appointed  observances  and  accompaniments,  the  children  of  Israel  wer« 
led  to  appropriate,  in  faith  and  obedience,  the  spiritual  provision  which  the  God  of 
their  fathers  had  made  for  them.  In  like  manner  tiie  members  of  the  spiritual  common- 
wealth of  Israel  "  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  man,"  taking  Christ 
as  the  nourishment  of  their  souls,  and  appropriating  the  strength,  the  wisdom,  the  grace 

L  oorintuianb.  K 


178  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  t.  1— la 

of  Ood  himself.  In  the  sacrament  }f  the  Supper,  they  who  eat  and  drink  in  bitb 
participate  in  the  provisions  of  Divine  hounty  and  love. 

IV.   It  was   8UGOE8TIVK  OF   INDIVIDUAL,  OF   HOUSEHOLD,   OP   NATIONAL,  PUBETT.      Id 

connection  with  the  Paschal  meal,  several  circumstances  may  be  noted.  The  lamb  was 
without  blemish  ;  the  house  was  freed  from  leaven ;  all  were  careful  to  avoid  ceremonial 
defilement.  These  arrangements  symbolized  "  holiness  unto  the  Lord,"  and  they  remiud 
us  that  those  who  regard  the  Christ  of  God  as  their  Passover  are  bound  by  every  sacred 
consideration  to  seek  that  purity  of  heart,  that  sanctification  of  nature,  which  can 
alone  render  a  man  and  a  society  acceptable  to  a  holy  and  heart-searching  God. — T. 

Ver.  8, — The  Christian  festive^.  The  apostle  seems  to  represent  the  whole  of  the 
Christian  life  as  one  long  Passover  festival  and  solemnity,  and  to  invite  his  readers  to 
unite  with  him  in  an  appropriate  and  perpetual  observance. 

I.  This  festival  is  based  upon  the  saceifiob  and  eedemption  of  Christ  Jesus. 
As  the  events  connected  with  Israel's  emancipation  from  Egypt  constituted  the  founda- 
tion of  the  national  and  religious  life  of  the  Hebrews,  so  we  Christians  date  our  fellow- 
ship, our  standing,  our  privileges  from  the  redeeming  and  mediatorial  work  of  our 
Divine  Saviour.  Apart  from  him  there  would  have  been  no  foundation  for  our  new  life 
and  hallowed  communion ;  he  accounts  for  all,  and  is  himself  "  all  and  in  all." 

II.  The  observance  of  this  festival  must  cor  respond  with  the  fubposb  and 
WITH  the  character  OF  ouB  LoRD.  "  The  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness  "  has  no 
place  in  the  household  of  faith  and  holiness.  As  the  Israelites  ate  the  unleavened  bread 
during  the  celebration  of  the  Passover  festival,  so  are  Christians  called  to  make  their 
daily  spirittial  feast  upon  the  purity,  the  sincerity,  the  truth  which  are  the  appropriate 
aliment  of  the  consecrated  Israel  of  God.  In  the  Church  which  Christ  has  purchased 
with  his  precious  blood,  nothing  impure,  corrupt,  defiling,  should  be  tolerated.  The 
Eucharistic  meal  should  impart  something  of  its  character  to  all  meals ;  and  the  holy 
and  public  observances  of  the  Church  should  cast  something  of  their  glow  and  beauty 
upon  the  daily  employments  of  the  Lord's  consecrated  people. 

HI,  This  is  an  unbroken  and  perpetual  festival.  The  times  and  seasons,  the 
sabbaths,  new  moons,  and  festivals,  which  were  observed  among  the  Jews,  were  doubt- 
less designed  to  inculcate  the  practice  and  to  familiarize  with  the  idea  of  holiness.  And 
they  were  intended  to  prepare  for  the  dispensation  which  teaches  that  all  days  and  all 
scenes,  all  relatio'nshi]is  and  all  actions,  are  holy  unto  God.  The  spiritual  festival  to 
which  Christians  are  bidden  is  one  which  never  ends,  the  viands  of  Divine  grace  are 
never  exhausted,  the  fellowship  of  the  saints  never  wearies,  and  the  Master  of  the 
banquet  never  departs. — T. 

Vers.  9 — 11. —  Tlie  limits  of  fellowship  "  No  man  liveth  unto  himself."  Attempts 
have  been  made  to  build  a  science  of  human  nature  and  a  scheme  of  human  life  upon 
the  foundation  of  the  individual  existence,  but  such  attempts  have  failed.  Man  is 
bom  into  society  and  lives  in  society,  and  is  inexplicable  apart  from  society.  For 
good  or  for  evil  we  are  with  one  another.  "As  iron  sharpeneth  iron,  so  a  man 
shai-peneth  the  countenance  of  his  friend ; "  "  Evil  communications  corrupt  good 
manners ;  "  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise." 

I  Christians  are  not  limited  to  the  society  of  theib  PELLow-CnRiSTiANS. 
St.  Paul  possessed  no  small  measure  of  what  has  been  humorously  called  "  sanctified 
common  sense."  He  saw  clearly  and  at  once  that  if  a  man  set  out  with  the  determin<i- 
tion  to  have  no  intercourse  with  those  of  different  principles  and  sentiments  from 
himself,  he  would  be  driven  in  consistency  to  "  go  out  of  the  world."  So  far  from 
forbidding  such  intercourse,  he  permitted  it,  and  even  in  some  instances  encouraged  it. 
1.  The  example  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  of  his  apostles  sanctions  intercourse  with 
general  society.  Jesus  talked  with  persons  of  all  sorts  and  conditions,  accepted  invita- 
tions to  the  houses  of  strangers,  and  even  of  enemies.  And  we  find  the  apostles  seeking 
introduction  to  Jews  and  Gentiles,  to  the  virtuous  and  the  vicious.  2.  Such  conduct 
exercises  a  power  of  attraction  over  all  who  are  affected  by  it.  The  assumption  of 
superior  sanctity  repels,  whilst  the  kindly  sympathy  of  neighbourhood,  the  good  offices 
of  social  life,  may  lead  to  a  desire  to  know  and  enjoy  the  blessings  of  the  gospel. 
3.  Opportunities  occur  in  social  intercourse  for  introducing,  either  dirertly  or  indirectly, 


CH.T.  1—13.1    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CiOBINTHIAliia  179 

the  truths  of  religion.  It  is  not  always  the  public  proclamation  of  the  truth  which 
reaches  the  heart  of  the  careless  and  ungodly.  "  A  word  spoken  in  season,  how  good 
it  isl"  Many  have  had  reason  for  lifelong  gratitude  towards  such  as  have  in  a  casual 
way  taken  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  commend  the  gospel  to  their  souls. 

II.   ChBISTIANS  are  EESTBALNED  from  FEBB   INTBBCOUESB  WITH   FELLOW-rnOFESSORS 
WHOSE   CONDUCT  IS  UNWORTHY  OF  THE   NAME   THEY  BEAU.      1.    It  mUSt  HOt  be  Supposed 

that  we  are  confined  to  the  fellowship  of  those  whose  character  is  mature  and  blameless. 
This  would  be  to  set  up  in  the  Church  an  aristocracy  of  the  worst  kind.  2.  Those 
whose  company  is  forbidden  are  such  as,  by  manifest  and  flagrant  violation  of  the 
moral  law,  prove  the  utter  insincerity  of  their  profession  to  be  followers  of  Christ. 
3.  The  reasons  for  this  prohibition  are  obvious.  (1)  It  could  scarcely  be  other  than 
injurious  to  our  own  moral  nature  to  be  intimate  with  those  whose  life  belies  their 
creed,  whose  hypocrisy  is  unmistakable.  (2)  Such  intimacy  would  be  Interpreted  by 
the  world  as  meaning  that  in  our  esteem  it  is  of  little  consequence  what  a  man  is,  if  he 
only  professes  to  be  Christ's.  (3)  And  there  can  be  no  question  that  to  cultivate  the 
friendship  of  a  hypocrite  would  tend  to  encourage  him  in  his  sinful  course,  whilst  to 
withdraw  from  his  society  might  lead  him  to  repentance. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Church  discipline.  I.  Flagrant  sin  is  hot  to  be  tolerated  in  the 
Church.  Though  the  precepts  of  Christianity  are  most  pure,  professors  are  sometimes 
impure.  The  Corinthian  Church  furnished  a  deplorable  example.  The  sin  of  one  of 
its  members  was  a  sin  which  was  "not  even  among  the  Gentiles."  Occasionally 
occurring  among  them,  but  exceptional  even  in  such  debased  communities ;  held  in 
general  leprobation,  not  countenanced  by  their  laws.  Into  the  purest  society  a  great 
impurity  may  creep.  But  in  the  Church  of  Christ  no  such  iniquity  must  be  winked 
at.  To  permit  its  continuance  would  be  :  1.  To  imperil  the  spiritual  life  of  the  whole 
community.  "  Know  ye  not  that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump  ?  "  Sin  has 
great  sprtading  power ;  it  is  marvellously  aggressive.  2.  To  bring  contempt  upon  the 
OhurtSi.  The  Church  has  often  to  endure  contempt,  but  she  should  never  deserve  it 
3.  To  annihilate  the  Church's  influence  for  good.  How  can  she  fight  against  evils 
without,  if  she  tolerates  them  within.  4.  Ta  grieve  the  Bead  of  the  Cliurch.  What  an 
anomaly  for  the  Church  to  foster  or  be  indifferent  to  the  sins  which  pierced  her  Lord  1 
5.  To  invite  the  judgment  (f  Ood.  For  transgression  the  ancient  Church  was  cast 
away,  and  shall  the  Church  of  the  new  dispensation  escape  if  she  gives  herself  to  folly 
and  sin  ? 

IL  To  BB  DEALT  WITH  :  1.  By  the  Church.  2.  The  flagrant  offender  to  he  excluded. 
For  slight  offences  warning  may  suffice,  but  serious  lapses  call  for  serious  remedies. 
Sufficient  recognition  of  the  sin  (as  in  excommunication)  may  be  well,  not  only  for  the 
Church,  but  for  the  transgressor,  if  the  Church  think  lightly  of  his  misdemeanour,  he 
will  probably  think  li^;htly  of  it  also.  luferentially  we  gather  that  the  social  position, 
wealth,  influence,  of  the  offender  do  not  conie  into  the  account.  The  law  of  the  Church 
is  the  same  for  rich  and  poor,  high  and  low.  3.  With  hope  of  the  offender's  reclamation. 
In  the  case  at  Corinth  the  guilty  one  is,  in  Paul's  language,  to  be  delivered  "  unto  Satan 
for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh."  The  meaning  probably  is  that  Satan  shall  have  power 
to  deal  with  him  somewhat  as  he  did  with  Job  (Job  ii.  4 — 7)  and  with  Paul  himself 
(2  Cor.  xii.  7) ;  that  the  sin  sliall  be  followed  by  suffering  ;  the  evil-doer,  outside  the 
Church,  being  placed  in  the  hands  of  Satan,  "  the  god  of  this  world,"  not  absolutely, 
but  largely,  so  far  as  bodily  aflliction  is  concerned.  Satan  is  represented  in  Scripture 
as  causing  bodily  pain  (see  Luke  xiii.  16).  This  deliverance  to  Satan  was  a  power 
delegated  to  the  Corinthian  Church  by  Paul,  who,  as  an  inspired  apostle,  possessed  it. 
The  object  of  ihe  deliverance  to  Satan  was  that  "  the  spirit  might  be  saved  in  the  day 
of  the  Lord  Jesus."  The  means,  "  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,"  not  the  destruction  of 
the  body,  which  is  to  have  a  place  in  the  resurrection,  but  by  affliction  of  the  body  the 
destruction  of  that  "flesh,"  that  carnality,  that  corrupt  nature,  which  cannot  inherit 
the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  charitable  to  hope  that  affliction  may  fall,  even  heavily, 
upon  flagrant  transgressors  in  the  Church.  This  may  lead  them  to  repentance  and  to  a 
holier  life.  Exclusion  from  Church  fellowship  is  to  have  this  object  in  view.  The 
sevenuce  is  with  a  view  to  reunion,  either  below  or  above.  We  give  up  fellowship,  but 
not  hope.    Our  expectation  and  prayer  should  be  that  those  excluded  may  be  foimd  in 


180  THE  FIEST  KPISTLK  TO  THE  COliLNTHlANa    [oh.  v.  1—13 

a  saved  condition  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  should  not  exclud«  out  of  vin- 
dictiveness,  nor  with  spirit  of  final  judgment,  nor  in  despair  of  Grod's  grace.  Note :  It 
is  a  yeiy  solemn  thing  to  be  excluded  from  the  visible  Church  of  Christ.  This  places  ua 
visibly  m  the  kingdom  of  Satan,  and  we  know  not  how  much  more  fully  under  Satanic 
influence.  The  Chvirch  is  a  shelter  and  refuge  appointed  by  God;  we  should  be  careful 
how  we  forfeit  our  place  in  it.  But,  however  sad  our  severance  from  the  Christian 
Church  may  be,  the  real  sadness  is  in  the  sin  which  causes  that  severance, 

III.  Chuboh  DisoiFLttiB  A  OAUSB  OF  Cbubch  sorbow.  1.  Incompatible  with  iocM(« 
ftdnest.  A  cause  of  humiliation.  Whilst  we  are  vainly  glorying,  the  devil  is  doing 
hia  work  diligently,  and  the  result  will  presently  appear.  Those  who  are  "  puffed  up  " 
are  preparing  for  a  great  abasement.  Corinthian  joy  is  the  herald  of  sorrow.  2.  Ori(^ 
for  the  excluded  one.  Once  a  brother — a  brother  greatly  beloved,  perhaps — and  now  f 
3.  Orief  tending  to  self -examination  on  the  part  of  those  stiU  in  fdlowship.  (1)  Pos- 
sibly the  lapsed  one  was  not  cared  for  as  he  should  have  been.  (2)  The  evil  was  not 
checked,  perhaps,  when  it  was  in  the  bud.  There  may  have  been  opportunities  to  save 
from  actual  and  open  transgression.  (3)  The  evil,  perhaps,  was  rather  fostered ;  indi- 
rectly, at  all  events,  by  too  light  an  estimate  of  its  heinousness.  This  may  have  been 
so  at  Corinth ;  in  a  city  so  notoriously  corrupt  some  believers  may  have  entertained  lax 
views  of  profligacy.  If  we  have  in  any  way  helped  a  brother  to  fall,  how  keen  should 
be  our  regret!  (4:)  The  offender  may  have  been  led  away  by  the  careless  living  of 
some  in  the  Church.  Or  (5)  may  have  been  influenced  by  the  general  tone  of  the 
Church.  At  Corinth,  no  doubt,  the  many  divisions  and  the  much  glorying  in  men  bred 
an  unhealthy  Church  atmosphere.— H. 

Vers.  7,8. — "Our  Passover."  What  the  Jews  had,  we  have — only  with  fuller  and 
richer  significance.  They  had  the  foretastes,  the  shadows ;  we  have  the  substance. 
T)ie  events  in  their  history  point  forward  to  the  greater  events  in  ours.  They  had  a 
Passover,  and  so  have  we ;  and  theirs  was  a  prefigurement  of  ours. 

I.  Christ  is  oub  Pabroveb.  1.  Ee  was  typified  by  the  Paschal  lamb. '  Often  called 
the  "  Lamb  "  (for  example,  John  i.  29 ;  Eev.  v.  12).  (1)  Appoirded  by  Ood.  Israel's 
Passovei  was  "  the  l.oid's  Passover"  (Exod.  xiL  27);  "  My  sacrifice  "  (Exod.  xxiii.  18). 
Jesus  is  the  "  Christ,"  the  Anointed  of  God,  "  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him." 
Here  is  our  confidence,  that  our  I'assover  is  the  Lord^s  Passover,  appointed  and  approved 
by  the  Eternal :  "  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  Salvation  by  the 
cross  is  Qod^a  plan  of  salvation ;  it  must,  therefore,  fully  commend  itself  to  Ood. 
(2)  Innocent.  Here  is  the  pathos  of  the  cross.  He  died  not  for  his  sins,  but  for  ours. 
He  had  not  transgressed,  but  we  had,  and  therefore  he  died.  (3)  H  ithout  blemish. 
"  With  the  -precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  "  (1  Pet.  i.  19 J. 
Keen  unfriendly  eyes  were  upon  Christ,  but  the  reluctant  verdict  was  "no  fault." 
"  Holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  Irom  sinners "  (Heb.  vii.  26).  (4)  blain.  Christ 
crucified.  The  converging  point — "Without  shcddii  g  of  blood  there  is  no  remission." 
The  Paschal  lamb  was  slain  by  those  for  whose  welfare  and  safety  it  was  appointed ; 
so  Christ  was  crucified  by  men  whom  he  came  to  redeem.  No  bone  broken  (comp. 
Exod.  xii.  46  with  John  xix.  36).  (5)  The  hlood  sprinkled.  The  Hood  shed  is  not 
enough,  it  must  be  applied.  The  blood  of  the  Paschal  lamb  was  applied  with  a  bunch 
of  hyssop,  a  type  of  "  laith "  which,  though  apparently  small  and  insignificant, 
brings  the  blood  of  Christ  into  saving  contaet  with  the  heart.  (6)  The  flesh 
eaten.  We  have  to  feed  upon  Christ.  "  My  flesh  is  meat  indeed."  The  Passover  w  as 
a  feast;  the  idea  of  enjoyment  is  involved.  So  those  who  feast  upon  Christ  obtain 
truest  happiness.  The  Paschal  lamb  was  eaten  by  the  Israelites  with  loins  girded, 
shoes  on  feet,  staff  in  hand ;  so  the  followers  of  Christ,  when  they  become  such,  confess 
themselves  to  be  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon  the  earth.  The  lamb  was  enten  in 
Egypt.  So  we  are  saved  as  sinners ;  we  have  not  to  come  up  out  of  the  Egypt  ol 
corruption.  We  have  ni't  to  yet  ourselves  ready  for  Christ;  we  are  ready  when  we  are 
lost  and  desire  to  be  found  of  him.  Many  are  hindered  by  their  "  un  worthiness ; "  Hub^ 
want  to  be  holy  before  they  seek  salvation,  which  means  that  the  patient. diesJcevfirfev 
cured  before  he  sends  for  the  doctor.  AnA  he  ccmes  to  us ;  we  do  i^altwmffiff  Mm, — «• 
are  in  Egypt  when  we  first  l^hold  the  Lamb  of  GoJ.  (7)  2ft«:  »Sofe  eatev  WeGmv 
not  to  take  a  part  of  Christ.     We  have  to  accept  the  /qg fa-w^ef  itiiHiiiiiy  not  those 


«a.T.  1—13.1    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  181 

only  that  most  please  ub,  Christ  and  his  cross  as  well  as  Christ  and  his  crown.  (8^ 
Eaten  with  bitter  herbs.  So  repentance  should  accompany  faith.  We  should  have 
bitter  sorrow  for  bitter  sins.  Our  sins  were  very  bitter  to  him.  We  have  never  tasted 
sin  fully — only  a  part  of  it,  the  sweeter  part  of  it.  He  tasted  the  bitter  part  for  us. 
2.  Ideritijied  with  ddiverance  from  wrath  and  bondage.  (1)  From  wrath.  The  destroy- 
ing angel  was  abroad,  and  smote  every  house  unprotected  by  the  sprinkled  blood.  So 
the  wrath  of  God  falls  upon  the  rejecters  of  Christ,  but  those  upon  whose  hearts  and 
consciences  the  blood  of  Cluist  is  sprinkled  are  preserved  from  the  stroke  of  Divine 
justice.  At  the  cross  "  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other "  (Ps.  Ixxxv. 
10).  The  blood  of  the  Paschal  lamb  made  the  Israelite  perfectly  safe ;  we  are  made 
BO  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  (2)  From  bondage.  The  Passover  and  the  Exodus  are 
indissolubly  united.  So  in  our  .spiritual  history.  When  God  pardons,  the  bondage  of 
Satan  is  destroyed.  We  are  no  longer  slaves  of  the  devil,  but  children  of  God.  And 
this  becomes  manifested ;  justification  and  sanctification,  joined  by  God,  are  not  put 
asunder.  We  begin  a  new  life ;  we  depart  from  our  old  master ;  we  "  spoil  the 
Egyptians,"  for  we  bring  everything  with  u.s  out  of  the  old  life  that  is  worth  bringing ; 
and  our  fiices  are  set  towards  the  new  Jerusalem,  the  everlasting  home  of  the  redeemed. 
II.  The  influence  of  cub  Passoveb  on  ocb  life.  At  the  Passover  the  Jews 
were  exceedingly  anxious  to  get  rid  of  every  particle  of  leaven  (Dent.  xvi.  4) ;  so  all 
who  can  call  Christ  their  Passover  should  search  and  purify  their  hearts.  As  the  Feast 
of  Unleavened  Bread  followed  the  slaying  of  the  Paschal  lamb,  .so  the  unleaven  of 
righteousness,  of  godly  life,  should  abide  with  all  who  have  part  in  the  great  Passover. 
This  is  "  keeping  the  feast."  It  is  then  a  feast,  a  time  of  joy  to  the  believer,  when  a  1 
leaven  of  "  malice  and  wickedness  "  is  excluded.  The  "  unleavened  brend  of  sincerity 
and  truth"  is  not  only  wholesome,  it  is  surprisingly  sweet.  The  influence  of  Christ's 
death  is  not  only  towards  salvation,  but  towards  holiness.  If  we  are  his  we  mut  t 
depart  from  evil.  We  must  have  works  as  well  as  faith — the  former  a  natural  outcome 
of  the  latter.  The  one  is  not  without  the  other— the  Passover  and  imleavened  bread  go 
together.  Profession  by  all  means,  but  certainly  practice  as  well.  We  must  show  that 
we  are  out  of  Egypt  by  a  repudiation  of  Egyptian  manners.  "  Christ  our  Passover ; " 
"  For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ."— H. 

Yen.  9 — 13. — Converse  with  the  ungodly.  I.  In  OUB  ordinabt  life  wb  kitr 
ASSOCIATE  MOBK  OB  LESS  WITH  THE  iHPUBE  AND  GODLESS.  Our  legitimate  buginess 
leads  us  among  such,  our  duties  as  citizens  and  subjects  as  well.  If  we  kept  ourselves 
entirely  apart,  we  should  have  "  to  go  out  of  the  world."  1.  Christianity  is  not  designed 
to  drive  us  "  out  of  the  world."  We  are  to  live  among  men  righteously.  Here  wj 
have  an  argument  agidnst  monasticism,  which  is  "  going  out  of  the  world  "  to  escape 
from  its  evils.  2.  Our  Lord  and  Master  mixed  freely  amongst  men.  3.  We  have 
many  opportunities  of  witnessing  for  Christ  when  we  come  in  contact  with  men  of  the 
world.  This  should  never  be  lost  sight  of;  private  Christians  thus  may  become 
ministers  and  missionaries.  And  they  may  thus  reach  classes  beyond  the  ordinary 
aggressive  means.  Christians  should  live  the  gospel  amidst  a  crooked  and  perverse 
generation.'  4.  Still,  we  must  recognize  the  peril  of  such  association  with  ungodly  men. 
Duty  may  call  us  to  mix  with  worldlings,  but  duty  will  never  call  us  to  shut  our  eyes 
to  the  danger  of  doing  this.  The  hunter  may  be  right  in  running  into  peril,  but  he 
can't  be  right  in  refusing  to  recognize  the  peril,  and  in  making  no  provision  for  it. 
When  we  go  into  the  world  we  should  go  armed.  "  The  whole  armour  of  God"  should 
be  our  panoply.  We  should  not  go  alone ;  we  may  go  with  Christ  if  the  path  be  the 
path  ofduty.  Prayer,  watchfulness,  God-reliance,  not  self-reliance,  sliould  be  remem- 
bered. We  are  then  not  only  in  an  enemy's  country,  but  the  enemy  is  around  us  and 
will  soon  attack.  "  Be  ye  also  ready : "  many  have  been  unready,  and  have  been  sorely 
wounded  of  the  archers.     Oo  not  further  into  the  world  than  duty  bids  you. 

IL  But  we  abe  not  to  associate  with  a  professed  Christian  who  walks  dis- 
OBDBBLT.  The  case  is  here  altered.  Those  outside  are  as  stiangers  to  us,  though  we 
mix  among  them ;  this  one  we  know  and  have  been  identified  «itli.  Those  outside  ar« 
left  to  the  judgment  of  God;  we  have  uo  part  in  judging  them.  But  we  have  in  the 
Base  of  an  offending  brother.  As  members  of  the  Church,  it  is  our  duty  to  sit  in  judg- 
ment upon  him  (vera  4, 5),  and,  if  the  offence  be  sufficiently  serious,  to  expel  him.    Hence- 


182  THE  WB8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORmTHIANS.    [oa.  v.  1— 13, 

forth,  until  he  repents  w«  are  not  to  hare  fellowship  with  him,  not  even  to  eat  with  him, 
but  to  show  him  by  bur  conduct  what  has  been  expressed  in  the  Church's  decree,  viz, 
that  he  is  separated  until  repentance  and  amendment.  If  this  were  not  so:  1.  'fkt 
force  of  Church  discipline  would  be  teriously  weakened.  It  would  become  largely 
unmeaning.  It  would  be  very  idle,  as  well  as  scandalously  contradictory,  to  tvA  ofi 
from  fellowship  and  to  admit  to  it  at  the  same  time.  2,  The  effect  upon  ike  offender 
wotdd  he  lessened.  Church  discipline  dues  not  lose  sight  of  hia  welfare ;  it  is  diricted 
towards  his  recovery  and  restoration.  But  if  it  is  to  produce  this  effect  it  must  be  felt. 
It  cannot  be  felt  if  practically  it  is  destroyed.  8.  It  would  seem  as  though  the  evil  werii 
lightly  esteemed.  This  would  bring  a  great  scandal  upon  Christianity.  It  would  not 
only  expose  it  to  contempt,  hnt  Justify  contempt.  4.  T/iere  would  be  much  peril  to  tht 
(4Mr  mentbers  ijf  the  Ghureh:  (1)  In  the  association.  There  is  often  more  peril  in 
associating  with  a  false  professor  than  with  an  open  evil-doer.  (2)  In  tiie  conviction 
that  they  could  sin  with  comparative  impunity  so  &r  as  the  Church  was  concerned. 
We  may  ask — What  kinds  of  sin  involve  such  separation?  The  apostle  gives  a  list  of 
tranEgressors.  (1)  Fomicatort.  The  unclean;  professing  purity,  practising  impurity. 
^2)  Th»  covetous.  Those  who  make  a  god  of  the  things  of  sense.  Heart-idolatry. 
(3)  Idolatere.  Probably  those  who,  professing  to  serve  the  only  true  God,  iimti&ei 
themselves  very  closely  with  idolaters,  joined  in  their  feasts  and  sacrifices,  and  so 
became  partakers  of  their  guilt.  There  are  many  professors  now  who  pay  hpnvage  to 
"  the  god  of  this  world."  A  little  wholesome  Church  discipline  minlit  not  be  altogether 
thrown  away  upon  some  of  these.  (4)  Bailers  or  revUers.  Those  who  say  they 
have  a  clean  heait,  but  keep  a  foul  mouth.  (5)  Drunkards.  Those  who  claim  to 
be  akin  to  Christ,  and  yet  sink  themselves  lower  than  the  brutes.  (6)  Uitlortioners. 
Greedy,  grasping  souls,  who  overreach  and  cheat  others,  but  who  overreach  and  cheat 
themselves  pre-eminently.  We  may  not  company  with  these ;  we  may  ptay  for  thi-m, 
we  may  labour  for  their  recovery.  We  may  do  so  gratefully,  hnmbly,  remembering 
that  we  stand  because  Divine  grace  upholds  us. — H. 

Ten.  1 — 6.— C%»reA  discipline.  From  the  subject  of  the  party  divisions  at  Corinth, 
the  apostle  passes  on  to  consider  other  evils  which  had  come  to  his  knowledge.  The  first, 
is  a  case  of  incest,  in  which  a  member  of  the  Church  had  married,  or  was  cohabiting 
with,  his  step-mother;  and  this  incestuous  person  was  permitted  to  remain  in  the 
Christian  community.  Such  a  case  gives  us  a  glimpse  into  the  sad  condition  of.  Corin- 
thian society.  This  heterogeneous  population  was  exposed  to  three  influences  that 
were  decidedly  adverse  to  a  high  morality:  extensive  commerce,  involving  contact 
with  the  vices  of  foreigners  and  developing  luxurious  living ;  the  Isthmian  games 
celebrated  in  the  neighbourhood ;  and  the  worship  of  Venus.  The  Church  that  was 
drawn  &om  such  a  community  could  not  escape  the  infection  of  its  low  moral  tone. 
Many  weeds  were  already  in  the  soil  into  which  the  good  seed  was  cast.  We  can  thus 
understand  how  tai  such  a  society  so  gross  a  case  as  this  might  arise. 

I.  SpibituaIj  pridb  akd  oeoss  sin  ABE  OFTEN  FOUND  TOGETHER.  The  Corlnthians 
were  puffed  up  because  of  their  fancied  attainments  (ch.  iv.  8),  whilst  this  awful 
wickedness  was  tolerated  among  them.  Spiritual  pride  is  a  distemper  sure  to  beget 
other  grosser  evils,  whether  in  individuals  or  Churches.  It  dims  the  spidtual  eye  and 
blunts  the  moral  sense,  and  thereby  leads  to  a  falL  Perfectionism  content  to  dwell 
with  incest  I 

II.  The  exbbcisb  of  disoiplinb.  1.  Its  warrant.  Every  society  has  the  right  to 
reject  members  whose  character  is  inconsistent  with  its  constitution  and  ends.  This 
is  tnie  of  the  state,  as  of  private  associations ;  and  the  same  right  is  not  to  be  denied 
to  the  Church.  As  a  healthy  body  throws  off  disease  which  finds  a  loflgme  t  in  an 
unhealthy  one,  so  a  healthy  Church  will  not  tolerate  in  its  bosom  open  transgressors. 
The  true  ideal  of  the  Church  is  not  collective,  but  selective — not  embracing  all  men  as 
such,  but  only  those  who  have  been  called  out  from  the  world  (^uKAtiafo).  The  dividing 
line  is  not  absolute— there  will  always  be  tares  among  the  wheat ;  but  some  line  there 
must  Vie.  And  this  inherent  right  is  confirmed  by  Divine  injiraction  (Matt,  xviii.  .17). 
2.  Its  form.  In  this  case  the  Church  is  to  assemble,  Paul  himself  being  present  ia 
spirit,  and  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  "  to  deliver  such  a  one  unto  Satan  "  (comjv 
I  Tim.  I.  20),     This  probably  points  to  sometliing  mcire  than  simjje  excommunication, 


OH.  T.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa  183 


perhaps  to  bodily  suffering  or  death,  which  the  apostles  in  certsun  instances  had  th« 
power  of  inflicting  (Ananias  and  Sapphira,  Acts  v.  1—11 ;  Blymas,  Acts  xiiL  11\ 
Apart  from  the  specialties  of  this  case,  it  is  plain  that  disciplinary  dealing  with 
scandalous  members  is  to  take  the  form  of  exclusion  from  the  fellowship  of  the  Christian 
society ;  and  this  is  to  be  the  solemn  act  of  the  Church,  either  collectively  or  by  duly 
appointed  representatives.  Such  a  judicial  sentence,  pronounced  in  virtue  of  the 
powet  conferred  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  should  carry  with  it  great  weight ;  and  that  it  may 
nave  its  due  effect  on  the  mind  of  the  offender,  let  there  be  joined  with  it  brotherly 
dealing  and  prayer.  3.  Its  ends.  (1)  As  regards  the  individual,  the  censures  of  the 
Church  have  in  view  his  true  well-being.  The  deliverance  to  Satan  has  for  its  object 
the  destruction  of  the  flesh  and  the  ultimate  saving  of  the  spirit  How  it  brings  this 
about  may  be  learnt  from  the  case  of  Peter  ("  Satan  asked  to  have  you,"  Luke  xxii.  31) ; 
from  Paul's  thorn  in  the  flesh  ("a  messenger  of  Satan,"  2  Cor.  xii.  7);  and  especially 
from  the  experience  of  Job  (Job  i.  12).  The  sifting  of  the  adversary  drives  away  the 
chaff;  his  buffeting  makes  us  feel  our  need  of  heavenly  grace ;  his  infliction  of  loss  and 
disease  weans  from  the  world  and  teaches  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  Such  discipline 
4  not  a  pleasant  thing  for  the  erring  one.  The  patient  does  not  like  the  surgeon's  knife ; 
out  if  it  cuts  out  a  cancer  or  amputates  a  diseased  limb,  and  thereby  saves  the  whole 
body,  it  is  endured  for  the  sake  of  the  good  it  effects.  Better  that  the  flesh  be  scorched 
by  the  fire  of  chastisement,  if  thereby  the  soul  be  saved  in  the  day  of  Christ.  We  may 
gather  from  2  Cor.  vii.  8 — 12  that  in  this  case  the  severe  discipline  produced  the 
desired  effect.  (2)  As  regards  the  Church,  discipline  is  a  protective  measure.  This 
one  flagrant  sinner,  suffered  to  remain  amongst  them,  would  act  as  a  corrupting  leaven 
upon  the  rest.  Others  would  be  emboldened  to  pursue  similar  courses,  until  at  length 
the  disease  would  infect  the  whole  body. — B. 

Vers.  7, 8. — The  Christ  tan  life  a  Pasdxi  feast.  The  mention  of  leaTen  recalls  to  the 
apostle's  mind  the  Jewish  Passover,  in  connsction  with  which  the  putting  away  of  leaven 
was  sttictly  enjoined.  A  most  careful  search  was  made  for  every  remnant  of  the  for- 
bidden substance,  especially  in  later  times,  when  eveiy  hole  and  corner  was  ransacked 
with  candlos.  What  was  done  then  with  leaven  should  be  done  now  with  that  of  which 
leaven  ia  the  type  (comp.  Exod.  xii.). 

I.  Chbist  oub  Paschal  Lamk.  Note  the  main  points  of  correspondence  tietweeii 
the  type  and  the  antitype.  1.  The  lamb  was  to  be  "  without  blemish."  Jesus  Christ 
was  "  holy,  guileless,  undefiled,  separated  from  sinners  "  (Heb.  vii.  26) ;  "  a  lamb  without 
blemish  and  without  spot"  (1  Pet.  i.  19).  2.  The  lamb  was  slain.  It  was  a  sacrifice, 
the  victim's  life  going  for  the  life  of  the  people.  Jesus  Christ  was  crucified  for  us, 
"  bearing  our  sins  in  his  body  upon  the  tree  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  24).  3.  The  blood  of  the  lamb 
was  sprinkled  "  on  the  two  side  posts  and  on  the  upper  door-post  of  the  houses."  It 
was  not  enough  that  the  blood  was  shed,  it  must  also  be  put  as  a  mark  on  the  door. 
"  And  when  1  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you  "  (Exod.  xii.  7, 13).  Even  so  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  must  be  api  ilied  to  each  individual  sinner  ere  it  can  avail  to  deliver 
from  the  condemnation.  Personal  faith  in  him  appropriating  his  atoning  sacrifice,  is  the 
hand  that  dips  the-hyssop  in  the  basin  and  sprinkles  the  blood  on  the  house.  4.  The 
lamb  was  to  be  eaten  that  night  by  the  household.  Its  blood  was  their  protection,  its  flesh 
their  food.  Jesus  Christ  is  our  Life  as  well  as  our  Atonement.  The  believer  sheltered 
by  Iiis  blood  draws  his  nourishment  from  him  (John  vi.  51). 

II.  The  Chbistian  life  an  unleavened  festival.  1.  It  is  a  festival.  "  Let  us 
keep  the  feast."  There  is  no  special  reference  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  but  to  the  wt/Je 
Christian  life.  What  the  Paschal  week  was  to  the  Jew,  the  believer's  life  is  to  be  tc 
him.  It  is  to  be  (1)  consecrated  to  God,  and  (2)  spent  in  grateful  remembrance  of  God's 
redeeming  mercy.  All  through  let  us  keep  festival  in  view  of  the  Lamb  slain,  with  the 
joy  of  those  who  have  been  delivered  from  bondage.  2.  It  is  to  be  kept  without  leaven. 
All  sin  is  to  be  purged  out.  The  Christian  is  ideally  unleavened.  Theoretically  no 
leaven  was  to  be  found  in  the  houses  of  Israel  during  the  Passover,  although  some  of  it 
might  eiicape  the  most  diligent  search ;  and  so  believers,  as  they  stand  in  Christ,  are 
dead  to  sin.  This  is  the  high  calling  which  we  are  to  make  Our  own  by  putting  away 
ttU  sin.  Let  us  be  in  reality  what  we  are  in  idea  (1  Pet.  ii.  9)— let  us  be  a  holy  people. 
Every  form  of  vice  and  wickedness  must  be  east  away  as  inconsistent  with  our 


184  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa    [oh.  ▼.  1—13 

unleavened  eondition,  and  only  "  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth  "  be  found 
in  our  homes.  A  pure,  transparent,  honest  life,  corresponding  in  all  things  to  the 
trutli,  becomes  those  who  rightly  "  keep  the  feast."— B. 

Vers.  0—13. — The  intercourse  of  Ohrittiam  with  the  world.  In  a  former  letter,  now 
lost,  Paul  had  given  the  Corinthians  Instructions  not  to  mix  themselves  up  with  persons 
of  evil  character.  These  instructions  had  been  misunderstood,  and  the  apostle  now 
explains  what  his  meaning  was. 

I.  Chbistianb  abb  not  to  avoid  nxoesbart  intercoubsb  with  thx  wobld.  Society 
at  Corinth  was  corrupt.  Every  law  in  both  tables  was  habitually  transgressed,  and  to 
avoid  meeting  such  teinsgressors  was  impossible.  And  this  is  true  uf  the  world  as  it 
now  is  outside  the  Church.  You  have  to  do  business  in  it,  and  to  deal  often  with  men 
whose  character  is  immoraL  You  canaot  help  formig  relationships  with  them,  and 
being  associated  with  them  in  many  ways.  But  while  this  is  a  necessity  of  our  situation 
in  a  wicked  world,  true  Christians  will  not  make  companions  of  such  sinners.  Duty 
may  take  you  into  unpleasant  and  dangerous  localities,  but  you  do  not  remain  there 
of  choice.    Whilst  you  are  in  the  world,  as  the  followers  of  Christ  you  are  not  of  it. 

IL  Fbofessinq  Chmstians  of  evil  chabacter  ABE  to  be  shunned.  Remember- 
ing the  condition  of  Corinthian  society,  we  are  not  astonished  to  find  such  sins  as  Paul 
here  mentions  appearing  in  the  Church.  A  so-called  Christian  living  in  the  practice  of 
these  or  similar  iniquities,  thereby  proves  himself  to  be  no  Christian  at  ^  There 
must  be  no  fellowship  with  such  persons,  no  eating  and  drinking  with  them  as  if  they 
belonged  to  the  Church.  They  are  to  be  put  out  of  the  Christian  society.  This  applies, 
not  only  to  the  judicial  act  of  the  Church,  but  also  to  the  conduct  of  individual  members 
towards  offenders.  There  must  be  a  holy  abhorrence  of  the  sin  as  defiling  the  body  of 
Christ,  and  a  careful  keeping  of  our  garments  clean.  Kot,  however,  with  the  mistaken 
aim  of  having  a  perfectly  pure  Church ;  for  discipline  can  take  cognizance  only  of  open 
and  scandalous  sins.  Nor  are  we  to  act  in  a  censorious  or  Pharisaic  spirit.  Along  with 
hatred  of  the  sin  let  there  be  a  Christ-like  compassion  for  the  sinner. — ^B. 

Vers.  7,  8. — "  Christ  our  Passover.''  At  no  point  is  the  relation  between  Christianity 
and  the  old  economy  of  the  Law  more  profoundly  interesting  and  significant  than  at 
that  which  is  indicated  in  this  passage.  Of  the  Passover  it  is  emphatically  true  that 
it  was  as  a  "  shadow,"  of  which  the  substance,  the  body,  is  in  Christ.  The  memorial 
of  tluit  grand  Divine  interposition  by  which  the  Hebrews  passed  out  of  their  primitive 
state  of  miserable  subjection  to  a  foreign  power  into  that  of  a  free  and  independent 
people  with  Jehovah  as  their  King,  it  also  foreshadowed  the  great  redemption  of  the 
Church,  and  the  establishment  of  that  eternal  kingdom  of  which  Christ  is  the  living 
Lord.    Consider— (1)  The  analogy ;  (2)  the  exhortation  biised  on  it. 

L  The  analoot.  "  Christ  our  Passover."  Both  in  the  type  and  in  the  antitype 
we  have:  1.  A  vicarious  sacrifice.  The  slaying  of  the  Paschal  lamb,  which  was  the 
leading  feature  in  the  whole  Passover  festival,  was  clearly  of  this  nature.  The  lamb 
was  a  blameless  creature,  the  very  emblem  of  simple,  guileless  innocence.  It  had  no 
share  in  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  the  people.  Unlike  them,  it  needed  no  redemption. 
It  was  the  victim  of  their  necessities.  It  suffered  death  for 'their  sakes,  died  to  serve 
the  interests  of  their  life.  The  broad  mark  of  resemblance,  in  this  respect,  between 
the  lamb  and  Christ  is  the  very  he^rt  and  core  of  the  meaning  of  the  text.  In  him 
we  see  the  highest  expression  of  that  great  law  of  self-sacrifice  which  pervades  the 
universe,  and  of  which  the  slaying  of  the  Paschal  lamb  (as,  indeed,  the  slaying  of  every 
lamb)  was  one  of  the  lower  forms.  "Not  for  himself  was  he  cut  off;"  "Wounded 
for  our  transgressions ; "  "  Slain  for  us."  The  innocence  of  the  lamb,  and  especially 
the  &ct  that  it  was  "  without  blemish,"  the  very  flower  of  the  flock,  was  typical  of 
his  unless  perfection,  his  absolute  exemption  from  the  evil  that  belongs  to  us.  While 
its  patient  yielding  up  of  its  life  dimly  imaged  forth  the  sublime  self-  surrender  of  his 
love,  when,  for  our  sakes,  he  "offered  himself  without  spot  unto  Qod."  2.  Tht 
instrument  of  a  great  delivera/nce.  The  sprinkling  of  the  blood  on  the  door-posts  ol 
the  Israelites  was  both  -the  condition  of  their  safety  and  the  sign  and  pledge  to  them 
that  they  were  safe  (Heb.  xi.  27).  There  could  be  no  fitness  in  the  phrase,  "  Christ 
our  Passover,"  except  as  meaning  that  the  blood  of  Christ  is  to  us  the  means  of  an 


OH.T.  1— 13.J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORmTHIAlJS.  185 

infinitely  greater  deliverance.  Salvation  from  death  for  the  human  race,  through  the 
virtue  of  his  death  as  its  Representative  and  Head,  is  the  fundameutal  truth  of  the 
Christian  system.  On  this  truth  rests  the  whole  fabric  of  the  kingdom  ol  God  among 
men.  It  is  a  kingdom  founded,  built  up,  consummated,  glorified,  by  the  power  ol 
a  crucified  Redeemer.    We  are  reminded  how — 

"  All  the  souls  that  are  were  forfeit  once, 
And  he  who  might  the  vantuge  best  have  took 
Found  out  the  remedy." 

"  We  hare  redemption  through  his  blood,"  delivered  by  it  from  "  the  power  oi 
darkness."  And  the  destroying  angel  cannot  touch  the  house  that  has  taken  sheltei- 
under  the  shield  of  its  efficacious  grace.  3.  The  ph'lge  and  seal  of  a  consecrated  life: 
The  first  Passover  marked  the  beginning  for  the  Hebrews  of  a  new  and  distinctly 
national  existence.  However  slow  they  may  have  been  to  recognize  the  full  meaning 
of  this,  the  most  prominent  feature  of  their  position  ever  after  was  that  principle  ol 
separation  and  consecration  to  the  Lord,  of  which  the  blood  of  the  Paschal  lamb  was  ihe 
symbol  and  the  seal.  Special  emphasis  is  given  to  this  by  the  lact  that  the  Passover 
was  at  first  a  purely  family  observance.  Its  moral  influence  began  at  the  very 
fountain-head  of  national  life — the  family  circle.  It  was  thus  the  memorial  of  a 
covenant  that  existed  before  the  Law,  before  the  priesthood ;  and  may  well  be  regarded 
as  prefiguring  a  grace  that  is  independent  of  all  national  and  ecclesiastical  conditions, 
all  Churches,  priesthoods,  ritual  orders — the  boad  of  the  fellowship  of  the  elect  and 
reconciled  children  of  God.  Thus  is  participation  in  Christ,  "  our  Passover,"  the 
beginning  of  a  new  life,  the  seal  of  a  new  Divine  relationship,  the  charter  of  spiritual 
freedom,  the  pledge  of  personal  consecration,  the  passport  to  citizenship  in  the  eternal 
kingdom  of  God. 

II.  The  bxhoetation.  "  Wherefore  let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  the  old  leaven," 
etc.  The  seven  days'  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  followed  the  slaying  of  the  Paschal 
lamb.  In  "  the  feast "  the  apostle  may  possibly  have  indirect  reference  to  that  sacred 
observance  of  "  the  Lord's  Supper,"  in  the  insti  ution  of  which  he  himself  developed 
the  Jewish  Passover  into  its  simpler  Christian  form  (Luke  xxii.  15, 16).  This  also, 
though  no  sacrifice,  is  both  a  memorial  and  a  prophecy.  "  As  often  as  ye  eat,"  etc. 
(1  Cor.  xi.  26).  But  the  reference  is  far  broader.  It  indicates  the  life-long  feast  of 
Christian  fellowship  and  service.  We  are  reminded:  1.  That  the  value  of  all  ihe 
solemnities  of  our  religion — sabbaths,  sacred  seasons,  special  Divine  manifeftations, 
acts  of  worship,  etc. — lies  in  the  influence  they  exert  on  our  personal  character  and 
conduct.  Let  our  daily  life  be  a  "  sacrament,"  a  solemn  yet  joyous  Passover  of  love, 
and  gratitude,  and  trust,  and  praise.  2.  That  in  order  to  this  we  must  he  "purged  from 
our  old  sins."  The  evil,  of  the  past  must  be  resolutely  abandoned.  "  Malice  and 
wickedness  "  cast  out  from  our  dwellings,  that  "  sincerity  and  truth "  may  take  their 
place.  Simplicity  of  mind,  singleness  of  heart,  honesty  of  purpose, — these  are  tlje 
cardinal  Christian  virtues,  the  very  "  bread  and  staff  of  life  "  to  all  Christian  strength 
and  nobleness. — W. 

Veri.  7,  8. — The  Passover  and  th«  Lor^i  Supper.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  not  the 
Passover ;  but  the  one  sprang  from  the  other,  and  is  to  Christians  what  the  other  was 
to  Hebrews,  the  memorial  of  redemption. 

I.  The  meaning  op  these  obdinanoes.  In  the  Passover  were  two  parts,  closely 
connected  and  yet  distinct.  1.  The  sacrifice  of  an  unspotted  lamb.  2.  The  feast  on 
the  sacrifice  kept  by  each  household.  Under  the  established  ritual  in  Israel,  the  former 
was  rendered  at  the  sanctuary.  It  required  an  altar,  and  the  hand  of  an  authorized 
priest  or  Levite.  The  latter  was  within  the  domestic,  circle.  It  required  no  other 
celebrant  than  the  head  of  a  household.  There  was  no  altar,  but  a  family  table.  The 
service  was  not  propitiatory,  but  commemorative  and  social.  The  Lord's  Supper  can 
never  be  clearly  understood  if  these  two  elements  are  superstitiously  confused  togetser. 
There  is  an  exhibition,  not  a  renewal,  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  The  altar  has  been 
served,  and  its  occupation  is  gone.  We  have  no  more  need  of  altar  on  earth,  or 
sacrificing  priest.  Christ  our  Passover  "  has  been  sacrificed."  What  remains  is  the 
feast  of  commemoration  and  communion ;  and  for  this  a  table  only  is  wanted,  with  <»a 


186  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa    [olt.I— 13. 

to  preside  and  lead  the  Mrvice,  not  »  priest  to  interpose  between  the  CSuistians  and 
Christ.  But  while  these  two  things  are  not  to  be  confounded,  they  are  not  to  be  put 
apart  in  oni  thoughts.  It  is  not  enough  to  say  of  the  Lord's  Supper  that  it  is  a  social 
pledge  of  Christiau  friendship  and  a  common  hope.  It  may  not  be  dissociated  from 
the  impressive  thought  and  fact  of  Christ's  atonement  for  our  sins ;  and  we  cannot 
regard  those  who  deny  the  propitiatory  character  and  value  of  the  Lord's  death  aa 
competent  to  administer  or  partake  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  Passover  was  a  family 
service,  because  it  commemorated  the  redemption  of  a  nation  which  was  reckoned  in 
tribes  according  to  families.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  observed  by  groups,  congregations, 
or  organized  companies  of  CLiistians,  because  it  commemorates  the  redemption  of  the 
Church  which  is  arranged  and  reckoned  in  congregations  or  groups,  all  forming  one 
••household  of  faith." 

IL  Thk  coMMUNiOAim.  "Let  u$  keep  the  feast."  No  alien  or  nncircumcised 
person  might  partake  of  the  Paschal  supper ;  but  all  the  congregation  of  Israel  was 
charged  to  observe  this  ordinance,  for  redemption  was  not  the  privilege  of  the  few, 
but  the  joy  of  the  whole  nation.  And  for  the  occasion,  distinctions  of  rank  and 
opulence  within  the  nation  were  ignored.  As  all  classes  h^id  shared  the  bondage,  so  were 
all  classes  to  share  the  joy  of  redemption.  Let  ail  who  have  redemption  through  the 
blood  of  Christ  "  keep  the  feast "  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  that  in  obedience  to  his 
command,  not  as  and  because  they  think  proper,  but  as  and  because  the  Lord  has 
appointed  it  in  his  Church.  And  let  no  difference  of  rank,  wealth,  or  social  position 
be  recognized.  The  eminent  and  the  obscure,  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  master  and 
the  servant,  are  at  this,  if  at  no  other  table,  to  eat  of  the  same  bread  and  drink  from 
the  same  cup.  Such  as  are  aliens  from  the  faith,  or  uucircumcised  in  heart,  are  not 
entitled  to  communicate. 

IIL  The  dispositions  which  ought  to  ohabacterizb  communicants.  The  Passovei 
was  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread.  Hence  the  apostle's  charge,  "  Purge  out  the  old 
leaven."  We  know  that  th^Jews  were  extremely  punctilious  in  this  respect,  and 
searched  their  houses  minutely,  lest  in  a  dark  comer  some  particle  of  leaven  might  lie 
unsuspected ;  for  leaven  was  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  corruption  and  of  the  self-propa- 
gating power  of  eviL  With  similar  earnestness  should  Christians  examine  themselves, 
and  so  eat  and  drink  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  Away  with  the  old  leaven ;  the  tendency 
to  corruption  which  belongs  to  the  old  life  is  sin.  Away  with  malice  and  wickedness ; 
purge  out  even  the  smallest  fragments  of  unholy  disposition  and  temper,  and  keep  the 
feast  with  sincerity  and  truth.  The  Corinthians  were  required  to  prove  their  sincerity 
by  excluding  from  communion  a  certain  "  wicked  person,  whose  conduct  had  brought 
reproach  on  the  Christiitn  name.  So  must  we  be  ready  at  all  times  to  prove  our 
sincerity  by  renouncing  fellowship  with  unrighteousness  and  concord  with  Bulial. 
They  were  also  required  to  have  "  truth  in  the  iiiward  parts,"  and  so  are  we.  We  fall 
short  of  that  strength  of  laith,  fervour  of  love,  and  depth  of  humility  which  would  well 
become  communicants  at  the  holy  table  of  our  Lord ;  but  at  all  events  we  may  bring, 
and  ought  to  bring,  to  the  feast  hearts  honest  and  true.  "  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things." 
Thou  knowest  our  shortcomings,  perversities,  stupidities,  follies,  prejudices,  errors,  and 
faults ;  but  "  thou  knowest  that  we  love  thee."  We  are  not  at  thy  table  playing  a  part 
or  affecting  devotion  to  ihee  in  order  to  be  seen  of  men.  Far  from  us  be  such  ghastly 
hypocrisy  1    Ours  be  tlio  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth. — ^F. 

Ven.  2 — 5. — Bight  feeling  towardi  erring  brethren.  There  have  been  a  great  variety 
of  forms  in  which  men  have  attempted  to  associate  religion  and  immorality.  Multiplied 
explanations  and  excuses  have  been  given,  if  so  be  the  indulgence  of  the  immoral  may 
be  maintained  ;  but  it  remains  as  searchingly  true  as  ever  it  was,  that  into  the  kingdom 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour — ^here  or  yonder — nothing  entereth  that  "  defileth,  or  worketh 
abomination,  or  maketh  a  lie  j "  and  that  every  Chiistian  man  should  know  how  to 
possess  the  vessel  of  his  body  in^sanctification  and  honour,  not  being  "  conformed  to  this 
world,  but  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  his  mind."  He  is  to  "  come  out  from  the 
world,  and  to  be  separate,  and  in  no  wise  touch  the  unclean  thing."  There  were  special 
forms  of  sensuality  characteristic  ol  and  encouraged  by  paganism;  but  the  sin  into 
which  the  member  of  the  Christian  Churcli  at  Corinth  had  fallen  was  one  which  would 
ie  iitteiiv  lepudiafed  and  condemned  by  Gentile  and  Jew  alike.     It  was  one  wholly 


«iLT.  1— 13.]    iHfe  i-IRST  tePlSTLE  fO  TAe  COMNTflUiia  Ist 

■ubversive  of  family  and  social  relations ;  and  an/thinp;  approaching  to  the  toleration  ol 
it  in  the  Christian  Church  would  eeriously  impeiil  its  character,  and  give  at  least 
apparent  ground  for  the  shameful  accusations  which  its  enemies  brought  against  it. 
For  the  Levitical  law  upon  the  matter,  see  Lev.  xviii.  8.  In  advising  the  Church  as  to 
its  mode  of  dealing  with  this  erring  brother,  there  is  an  unusual  severity  in  the  apostle's 
language ;  and  this  is  accounted  for  rather  by  the  attitude  which  he  understood  the 
Church  had  taken  towards  the  offender,  than  by  his  sense  of  the  enormity  of  the  offence. 
St.  Paul's  supreme  jealousy  was  ever  concerning  the  purity,  good  order,  and  moral 
worth  of  the  Churches.  He  seems  to  have  highly  valued  character — in  the  individual 
and  in  the  Church — as  being  the  best  witness  among  men  for  Christ.  He  strongly 
affirmed  the  absolute  necessity  of  the  connection  between  morality  and  Christianity, 
and  based  his  argument  on  this  foundation-principle — our  whole  being,  spirit,  mind, 
end  body,  is  the  Lord's ;  and  this  whole  being  is  redeemed  in  Christ,  and  is  to  be. 
In  actual  fact,  wholly  won  and  held  for  Christ.  It  may  also  be  noted,  in  introducing 
the  subject,  that  our  idea  as  to  the  purity,  unity,  and  moclel  order  of  the  early 
Church  is  quite  a  fanciful  one.  Probably  there  was  no  separate  Church  of  those  times 
that  came  anywhere  near  realizing  the  Christian  ideaL  We  consider,  from  these  verses, 
two  things. 

L  Thb  bin  of  a  CHBiSTiAit  FBOFEBBOB.  It  may  be  shown :  1.  Whence  it  may  eome, 
(1)  from  relics  of  old  evil ;  (2)  from  circumstances  reviving  old  feeling ;  (3)  from  neglect 
of  due  self-watchfiilness  and  culture ;  (4)  from  undue  fulness  of  eating  and  drinking ;  (6) 
from  the  friendship  of  those  who  may  lead  astray ;  (6)  from  sudden  influx  of  bodily 
passion ;  and  (7)  from  actual  occasions  of  temptation.  Though  regenerate  in  will  and 
life-principle,  the  Christian  must  never  forget  that  he  is  not  free  from  the  relics  of  evil 
in  his  nature  and  habits,  or  from  the  influence  of  evil  in  his  surroundings ;  and  therefore 
he  constantly  needs  the  counsel,  "  Watch  and  be  sober."  It  should  be  especially  pointed 
out  that  the  most  perilous  temptations  to  which  Christian  professors  are  subject  are 
those  which  come  suddenly,  reaching  them  at  momenta  when  some  unguardedness  or 
some  self-confidence  lays  them  open  to  assault.  2.  How  it  may  gain  its  support. 
Here  only  one  point  is  dwelt  on.  The  apostle  is  anxious  about  the  perversion  of  Christian 
doctrine  to  the  excusing  of  sin.  In  many  ways  what  is  known  as  the  autinomian  spirit 
has  been  made  the  excuse  of  sin.  It  cannot  be  too  constantly  afSrmed  that,  so  far  from 
releasing  its  members  from  the  claims  and  obligations  of  the  moral  Law,  Christianity 
presses  them  with  tenfold  urgency,  for  it  demands  an  obedience  that  shall  not  be  merely 
formal,  but  one  that  concerns  motive  and  feeling  and  wilL  See  the  teaching  of  our 
Lord  in  Matt.  v.  17 — 18. 

n.  The  relation  or  fellow-fbofesborb  to  sncH  bin.  Ko  doubt,  at  Corinth,  each 
individual  Christian  would  strongly  and  decidedly  condemn  this  erring  brother,  but 
party  spirit  was  ao  rife  in  the  Church,  that  some  took  his  side,  and  laboured  to  find 
excuses  for  him,  or  to  secure  the  continuance  of  his  membership.  It  is  still  found 
most  difScult  to  carry  out  the  due  discipline  of  the  Church,  seeing  that  party  feeling 
gathers  round  even  the  drunken,  the  dishonest,  and  the  immoral.  It  is,  indeed, 
important  that  all  judicial  action  should  be  taken  by  the  Church  itself,  and  that 
individuals  should  not  have  independent  authority  to  exclude  or  to  punisbj  but  only 
right  of  speaking  and  of  acting  in  the  Church's  name.  St.  Paul  urges:  1.  That  every 
•iffort  should  be  made  to  cherish  and  to  inculcate  right  sentiment  concerning  the  sin. 
2.  That  action  should  be  taken  which  would  clear  the  Church  of  any  suspicion  of 
cemplicity  in  or  approval  of  the  sin.  It  must  be  made  quite  plain  that  the  sin  is  the 
tin  of  an  individual,  and  is  an  outrage  on  the  Church's  principles  and  purity.  3.  And 
the  action  must  be  taken  in  such  a  way  as  may  hopefully  bear  on  the  recovery  of  the 
■inner  from  his  sin.  This  appears  to  be  the  idea  of  St.  Paul  in  the  figure  of  "  delivering 
to  Satan."  The  sinner  was  to  be  given  over  for  a  while  to  suffer  the  miserable  conse* 
quences  of  his  sin,  but  only  in  the  hope  that  he  would  be  humbled  and  brought  to 
penitence  and  confession ;  and  this  seems  to  have  been  the  result  in  the  case  of  the 
Corinthian  offender. 

In  conclusion,  press  that  (1)  the  moral  purity  of  the  Christian  Church  should  be  the 
supreme  anxiety  of  every  member  of  it ;  and  (2)  that  the  maintenance  of  such  purity  ia 
)uito  consistent  with  the  fullest  Christian  charity,  which,  through  all  its  dealings,  keeps 
steadily  in  view  the  reformation  of  the  offender. — B.  T. 


188  ••'flD  E'lKST  BPISTLti  TO  Tflfi  C0BIi!tTaiAlI8.    to"- ▼•  i— 1^ 

Ver.  6.-T-Z%e  very  sufferings  of  Christian  sinners  may  he  overruled  unto  sanctifying 
On  the  precise  meanings  and  references  of  the  terms  and  figures  used  in  this  verse,  tha 
exegetical  portion  of  the  Commentary  should  be  consulted.  Some  suppose  that  a 
temporal  judgment,  sickness,  or  loss,  followed  on  the  excommunication  of  this  ofTcndei 
(as  in  the  cases  of  Ananias,  Elymas,  etc.),  and  that  such  suffering  became  disciplinary, 
and  resulted  in  the  man's  full  moral  recovery.  "  As  a  man  soweth,  thus  shall  he  also 
reap ; "  and  we  need  only  explain  the  term  "  deliver  unto  Satan  "  as  meaning,  leave  the 
man  to  the  consequences  naturally  and  necessarily  following  on  his  sin ;  the  very  first 
of  these  consequences  being  his  separation  from  Christian  fellowship  and  Christian 
privileges.  "  It  should  be  carefully  noticed  that  it  is  not  the  hody,  but  the  flesh,  that  is, 
the  carnal  appetite,  that  is  to  be  destroyed  by  the  chastisement."  K  W.  Robertson 
Bays,  "  Here  the  peculiarly  merciful  character  of  Christianity  comes  forth  j  the  Church 
was  never  to  give  over  the  hope  of  recovering  the  fallen,  Pimishment,  then,  here  is 
remedial  If  St.  Paul  punished,  it  was  that  the  '  spirit  might  be  saved  in  the  day  oi 
the  Lord  Jesus.'  And  hence  (putting  capital  punishment  out  of  the  present  question) 
to  shut  the  door  of  repentance  upon  any  sin,  to  make  outcasts  for  ever,  and  thus  tO' 
produce  despair,  ia  contrary  to  the  idea  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  alien  from  big 
spirit."    Unfold  and  illustrate  both  from  Scripture  and  modern  life — 

L   How  CERTAINLY  ALL  SIN,  UNCHECKED,  BBAHS  ITS  PKTJITAGE  OF   SUTFEBINO.      There 

jQay  be  even  prolonged  delay,  and  consequent  presumption  in  keeping  on  in  sin.  But 
the  suffering  comes  at  last ;  it  is  certain  as  the  returning  harvest.  Take  two  cases.  1. 
The  familiar  one  of  the  drunkard.  Want  cometh,  on  him  and  his,  as  an  armed  man. 
2.  The  dishonest.  A  man  placed  in  a  position  of  trust  embezzles  secretlj'  for  years ; 
at  last,  just  as  his  children  are  on  the  threshold  of  manhood  and  womanhood,  ruin  and 
shame  come  on  them ;  flight,  desolation,  misery,  and  the  exile's  poverty  for  him.  Man 
cannot  take  "  fire  into  his  bosom  and  not  be  burned ;  nor  can  he.  touch  pitch  and  fail 
to  be  defiled."  The  laws  of  heredity  being  now  better  understood,  .we  can  feel  more 
deeply  how  a  man's  sins  can  carry  a  burden  of  suffering,  even  to  the  innocent  unborn 
generations. 

II.  How,  FOB  THE  EBBINQ  ChBISTIAN,  SUCH  NEOEBSABT  BUFFBBINa  OB  BUCH  DIBECT 

DiVDTB  JUDGMENT  MAT  BE  BEMEDIAL.'  Illustration  may  be  taken  from  David's 
experience,  as  indicated  in  his  words,  "Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray,  but  icw 
will  I  keep  thy  Word."  Explain  the  process  by  which,  under  God,  suffering  influences 
the  views  and  feelings  of  the  erring  Christian ;  but  point  out  carefully  how  suffering 
affects  differently  the  good  and  the  bad  man.  It  tends  rather  to  harden  the  bad,  because 
it  seems  to  him  mere  loss  and  disability.  It  softens  and  humbles  the  Christian,  because 
by  him  it  is  known  as  the  heavenly  Father's  chastening  hand.  Show  how  the  sancti- 
fying discipline  of  suffering  is  shown  in  the  very  story  of  our  human  race.  The  "  day 
of  the  Lord  Jesus"  may  be  conceived  as  the  time  when  a  man's  life-story  is  complete; 
then  it  can  come  into  consideration  and  judgment.  Then  it  may  be  seen  that,  through 
all  the  Bufferings  that  followed  upon  the  soilings,  "  the  spirit  has  been  saved."  Press 
that  "delivering  over  to  Satan"  does  not  put  the  erring  one  out  of  Christ's  loving 
thought  and  care,  and  therefore  it  should  never  put  him  out  of  our  Christian  interest 
and  prayer  and  sympathy.    We  must  ever  keep  his  welcome  back  awsuting  him. — ^B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — The  lesson  of  the  leaven.  It  is  very  confidently  affirmed  that  leaven  is  altvayi 
used  in  a  bad  sense  in  Scripture,  and  is  the  illustration  of  the  working  of  evil  principle. 
Some  forcing  of  Scripture  is,  however,  necessary  if  a  bad  sense  must  be  always  found ; 
«nd  while  we  must  admit  that  leavenino;  is,  in  measure,  a  corrupting  process,  we  should 
also  recognize  that  the  permeating  influence  of  leaven  may  be  used  to  illustrate  the 
advance  and  extension  of  good  principle.  Undoubtedly  it  is  the  tendency  cf  evil  to 
propagate  itself  rapidly,  and  infect  all  around  it,  on  which  the  apostle  here  dwells— a 
tendency  which  may  be  also  illustrated  by  the  insidious  spreading  of  contagious  and 
infectious  disease.  It  may  be  hclpftil  to  give  some  account  of  the  character  and  action 
of  "  leaven."  Hugh  Macmillan  says,  "  It  consists  of  myriads  of  the  cells  of  the  common 
green  mould  in  an  undeveloped  state.  If  a  fi-agment  of  the  dough  with  the  leaven  in  it 
be  put  aside  in  a  shady  place,  the  cells  of  the  fungus  in  the  leaven  will  vegetate,  and 
cova  the  dough  with  a  slight  downy  substance,  which  is  just  the  plant  in  its  complete 
lonn.    The  iwelling  of  the  dough,  «tnd  the  commotion  which  goes  on  in  the  leavened 


OH.  ▼.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  189 

mass,  are  owing  to  the  muUiplication  of  the  plant-cells,  which  takes  place  with 
astonishing  rapidity.  By  this  process  of  vegetation,  the  starch  and  sugar  of  the  dough 
are  converted  into  other  chemical  products.  But  it  is  only  allowed  to  go  to  a  certain 
length,  and  then  the  principle  of  growth  is  checked,  by  placing  the  dough  in  the  oven 
and  baking  it  into  bread.  Leaven  is  thus  a  principle  of  destruction  and  construction — 
of  decay  and  of  growth— of  death  and  of  life.  It  has  two  effects,  which  are  made  use  of 
as  types  in  Scripture.  On  the  one  side,  the  operation  of  leaven  upon  meal  presents  an 
analogy  to  something  evil  in  the  spiritual  world  j  for  it  decays  and  decomposes  the  matter 
with  which  it  comes  into  contact.  On  the  other  side,  the  operation  of  leaven  upon  menl 
presents  an  analogy  to  something  good  in  the  spiritual  world;  for  it  is  a  principle 
of  life  and  growth,  and  imiiarts  a  new  energy  and  a  beneficent  quality  to  the  matter 
with  which  it  comes  in  contact."  Archbishop  Trench  says,  "In  some  passages,  the 
pufBng  up,  disturbing,  souring  propetries  which  leaven  has  are  the  prominent  points 
of  comparison;  in  others,  its  warmth,  its  penetrative  energy,  the  power  which  a 
little  of  it  has  to  lend  its  own  lavoui  and  virtoe  to  much  wherewith  it  ia  brought  in 
contact." 

I.  Leaven  ib  a  fioubs  of  uobal  etil  m  the  Chubor.  It  suggests  (1)  the  insidious 
nature,  (2)  the  rapid  propagation,  (3)  the  corrupting  influence,  of  eviL  "Observe, 
the  evil  was  not  a  matter  of  example,  but  of  contagion.  Such  a  one  as  this  incestuous 
Uian — ^wicked,  impenitent,  and  unpunished— would  infect  the  rest  of  the  Church.  Who 
does  not  know  how  the  ione  of  evil  has  communicated  itself  ?  Worldly  minds,  irreverent 
minds,  licentious  minds,  leaven  society.  Tou  cannot  be  long  with  persons  who  by 
innuendo,  double  meaning,  or  lax  language,  show  an  acquaintance  with  evil,  without 
feeling  in  some  degree  assimilated  to  them,  nor  can  you  easily  retain  enthusiasm  for 
right  amongst  those  who  detract  and  scoff  at  goodnesa'-  The  corruptmg  influence  of 
evil  in  the  Church  may  be  illustrated  from  the  history  of  the  great  heresies,  mora 
especially  those  which  have  been  started  by  immoral  and  unworthy  men. 

II.  SX7CH  UOBAL  ETIL  IS  SURE  FBESEKTLY  TO  ATTBAOT  PUBLIC  ATTENTION.      Aud  80  it 

brings  a  wrong  estimate  of  the  Church,  and  excites  prejudice  against  it.  The  Church 
has  most  gravely  suffered,  in  every  age,  from  her  unworthy  members,  who  have  been 
only  too  readily  regarded,  by  outsiders,  as  the  Church's  re[jresentatives.  "  The  student 
of  history  will  remember  how  dexterously  Gibbon  contrives  to  throw  discredit  upon 
Christianity  by  enlarging  upon  the  shortcomings  of  the  early  Church,  and  by  evading 
the  comparison  between  its  moral  elevation  and  the  shocking  demoralization  of  heathen 
society." 

III.  SnOH    MOBAL   EVIL   HAS   A    DANOEROUSLT   ACTIVB   AND    FEBVA6IT1S    INFLUENOE. 

"It  leaveneth  the  whole  lump."  It  spreads  in  the  soil  as  the  roots  of  bindweed. 
Therefore,  as,  in  preparation  for  the  Paschal  feast,  the  Jews  carefully  and  minutely 
searched  for  every  particle  of  leaven,  to  turn  it  out  of  their  houses,  so  must  the  Christian 
Church  watch  lest  any  bad  person  come  into  its  membership,  and  must  strictly  exclude 
those  who  may  take  bad  ways  after  joining  its  membership,  lest  their  evil  influence 
should  be  found  to  pervade  the  whole  lump.  The  very  first  symptoms  and  indications 
of  moral  evil  demand  resolute  dealing,  and  should  be  immediately  met  by  the  strong 
jret  charitable  discipline  of  the  Church.  In  simple  language^  suited  fat  children,  the 
poet  expressei  the  danger  dealt  with  in  this  homily. 

■One  Biokl;^  sheep  Infects  the  BtxHt, 
And  poisons  all  the  rest." 

R.  T. 

Ver.  7. — The  (Jhrittlan  C%«re&  m  mnleavened,  "As  ye  an  nnleavened.*  The  idea 
of  the  Church  is  of  a  pure  and  unadulterated  and  uncorrupted  mass,  and  every  individual 
member  of  the  Church  is  under  obligation  to  aid  in  securing  and  maintaining  the  purity. 
The  Church  must  put  out,  purge  out,  and  keep  out,  the  very  relics  of  the  old  leaven. 
Reference  is  made  in  the  figure  which  St.  Paul  uses  to  the  Jewish  custom  of  searching 
for  leaven,  which  was  probably  retained  in  the  apostle's  time.  "  Because  Scripture 
■peaks  of '  searching  Jerusalem  with  candles '  (Zeph.  i.  12),  they  nsed  to  carry  out  this 
custom  of  searching  for  leaven  with  great  strictness,  taking  a  candle  and  '  prying  into 
every  mouse-hole  imd  cranny,'  as  St.  Chrysostom  says,  so  as  to  collect  even  the  smallest 


190  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0EINTHIAN8.     [oh.  t.  1—18. 

cnunb  of  leavened  braad,  which  was  to  be  placed  in  a  box  or  some  place  when  a  monae 
could  not  get  at  it." 

L  Thb  Chbistiax  oall  to  bi  uni^eayened.  "  Te  are  not  called  nnto  uncleanneaa, 
but  onto  holiness."  The  apostles  were  especially  called  to  witness  to  a  trnth  by  word 
of  Up;  but,  while  each  member  was  equally  called  to  speak  for  Christ,  the  testimony  of 
the  Church,  as  a  whole,  was  to  be  the  testimony  of  its  purity.  Its  very  aim  was  to  be 
to  keep  itself  separate  and  free  from  the  evils  and  defilements  of  the  world.  Show  how 
far  the  modern  Church  may  be  regarded  as  having  forgotten  the  Divine  call  nnto 
"  uncorruptness." 

XL  The  Chbistiah  febil  or  becomino  leavened.  A  peril  coming  (1)  frum  without, 
in  the  attractions  of  worldly  pleasure  and  success ;  (2)  from  within,  by  the  defection  of 
individuals,  and  their  evil  influence,  or  by  the  unwatchfulness  and  neglected  spiritual 
culture  of  many.  When  Christians  cease  to  find  their  joy  in  God,  they  easily  seek  for  it 
in  the  world  and  in  worldly  things. 

III.  The  Chbistian  cabs  to  keep  unleayeneo.  This  care  should  characteriie 
each  for  himself,  and  each  for  the  other.  And  it  should  ever  be  regarded  as  the  great 
life-burden  of  the  Christian  and  the  Church.  It  must  cost  constant  watchfulness  and 
effort ;  and  he  who  would  be  pure  must  learn  how  to  deal  sternly  with  himself. — B.  T. 

Ver.  7. — Christian  fellowship  a  Passover  feast.  The  sentence,  "  Even  Christ  our 
Passover  is  sacrificed  for  us,"  appears  to  be  suddenly  inserted  in  the  paragraph,  without 
any  immediately  evident  connection  with  it.  Such  connection  we  seek  to  discover,  and 
then  we  would  press  home  that  particular  duty  which  the  apostle  is  so  earnestly 
urging  upon  the  Corinthian  Church.  Exactly  rendered,  St.  Paul's  words  are, "  For  also 
Christ  our  Passover  is  slain."  ■  There  is  no  word  for  "  even ; '  the  words  "  for  us  "  are  not 
found  in  some  of  the  best  manuscripts ;  and  the  order  of  the  words  is  very  carefully 
arranged,  so  as  to  throw  the  stress  ol  the  sentence  on  the  term  "  is  slain."  The  apostle 
has  some  point  to  impress  by  this  fact,  "  Christ  is  slain : "  he  is  not  "  about  to  be 
slain,"  or  "  being  slain;"  it  is  an  accomplished,  completed,  historical  fact,  "he  is  slain ;" 
"  he  has  been  slain."  From  a  reference  in  one  oi  the  later  chapters,  we  find  that  St. 
Paul  wrote  this  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  just  about  the  time  of  the  Passover ;  his  mind 
was  occupied  with  the  associations  of  this  feast,  and  so,  in  a  very  natural  way,  he  took 
his  illustration  from  it.  Beverting  to  the  orijiinal  appointment  of  the  Passover,  we 
observe  that  the  Lord  designed  to  come  in  one  last  and  overwhelming  judgment  on  the 
rebellious  Egyptians.  GM's  people  dwelt  in  the  very  midst  of  them,  but  no  Divine 
judgments  hung  over  them.  Still,  it  was  necessary  that,  by  some  sign,  the  Israelites' 
houses  should  be  distinguished  from  others.  The  observance  of  on  appointed  sign 
would  prove  the  obedience  of  Israel,  and  clearly  mark  the  judgment  as  Divine.  The 
point  in  the  matter  to  which  St.  Paul  now  directs  attention  is,  however,  this — the 
slaying  of  the  lamb  was  the  beginning  of  the  Feast  of  the  Passover,  or  of  Unleavened 
Bread.  If  the  Iamb  was  killed,  the  feast-time  had  plainly  begun  (see  Exod.  xii.  18), 
and  no  leaven  ought  to  be  found  in  their  habitations.  This  is  the  thing  on  which 
the  apostle  Axes  for  the  enforcement  of  his  counsel.  It  is  as  if  he  had  said,  "  This  is  the 
time  of  the  Christian  feast  of  the  unleavened.  '  Christ  our  Passover  is  sacrificed ; '  the 
purity-time  has  therefore  come.  Our  feast  is  not  indeed  for  seven  days  only,  but  for  our 
whole  life.  We  too  are  under  the  most  solemn  responsibilities;  pledgeid  to  lives  ot 
holiness ;  bound  to  cleanse  out  every  relic  of  the  old  leaven  of  sin  and  self-will ,  urged 
by  every  persuasion  to  '  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God ; '  and  set  upon  '  possessing 
our  vessels  in  sanctification  and  honour.'"  We  must  be  practically  what  we  are 
theoretically,  a  new  and  regenerated  society.  Dwelling  on  the  Christian  su^estions  of 
the  text,  we  notice  — 

L  Tm  BLATiNO  OF  THE  Chbistian  Passoveb  Lamb.  Limit  the  thought  on  this  to 
the  one  thing  that  is  prominently  in  the  apostle's  mind.  The  word  "  Passover"  is  nsed 
by  him  for  that  seal  which  marked  the  Israelites  off  from  the  Egyptians,  so  that  the 
destroying  angel  might  pass  over  their  houses.  The  blood  of  the  lamb,  sprinkled  on 
the  lintel  and  posts,  was  the  sign  that  marked  them  as  the  Lord's  obedient  people,  the 
objects  of  his  grace,  experiencing  then  a  preservation  which  was  to  be  followed  by  a 
glorious  deliverance.  This  feature  of  the  old  Passover  may  be  pressed  on  the  Ohriatian 
Church.    The  apostle  says,  "  You  too  are  marked  off  as  God's ;  for  you  the  PaHovet 


OH.  Ti.  1—20.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


101 


Lamb  has  \)een  slain;  on  you  the  bloorl  has  been  sprinkled ;  for  you  the  great  deliverance 
has  been  wrought ;  you  are  actually  now  sealed  over,  as  a  Christian  Church,  un;o  God, 
by  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant.* 

II.  The  responsibilities  of  those  bfrinkled  with  thk  Pabsotxb  blood.  As 
sealed  over  to  God,  Israel  was  bound  to  realize  what  was  involved  in  their  side  of  the 
covenant  into  which  they  had  entered.  On  God's  side,  the  covenant  pledged  fatherly 
interest,  unceasing  care,,  gracious  provision  for  all  need,  and  the  fulfilment  of  certain 
defined  promises.  On  man's  side,  it  pledged  obedience,  service,  and  above  all  else, 
separation  from  the  world,  and  purity.  God  impressed  his  claim  to  this  purity  by 
instituting  the  seven  days  of  unleavened  feast  immediately  on  the  sealing  of  the  covenant, 
enjoining  that  what  they  did  symbolically  for  seven  days  they  were  in  moral  and 
spiritual  manner  to  ioall  their  days.  St.  Paul  applies  this  to  the  Corinthian  Christians, 
who  had,  as  it  were,  entered  fully  into  covenant  with  Go^  seeing  that  Christ,  their 
Passover,  had  been  slain.  They  too  should  remember  to  what  moral  life  and  conduct 
they  were  pledged.  They  must  realize  a  spiritual  separation  from  evil;  holiness 
becometh  the  people  of  God. 

Press  that  each  of  us  should  seek  to  realize  the  responsibilities  of  our  Christian  standing. 
This  is  the  time  when,  in  home,  and  family,  and  society,  and  business,  and  the  Church, 
we  have  to  remember  that  we  are  "  called  unto  holiness."  Christ  is  sacrificed,  and  this 
is  the  time  of  "  feast  of  the  unleavened." — ^B.  T. 

Yen,  7,  8. — Keeping  the  Christian  feast  of  the  unleavened.  Give,  in  introduction,  a 
careful  description  of  the  old  Passover.  Observe  especially  that  (1)  there  was  a  sacrificed 
lamb ;  (2)  that  its  blood  became  a  protection  and  a  sign;  (3)  that  the  meat  of  the  lamb 
was  partaken  of  together ;  (4)  that  all  the  food  was  unleavened ;  and  (5)  that  the  loins 
were  girt  ready  for  a  journey.  Then  show  how  tliis  old  Passover  may  be  regarded 
as  realized  in  the  Christian  feast.  1.  Jesus  is  the  slain  Lamb.  2.  His  blood  is  the 
Church's  protection  and  sign.  3.  His  truth  and  love^-that  is,  he  himself — is  the 
Church's  food.  4.  The  spirit  in  which  we  share  our  Divine  food  is  that  of  sincerity  and 
truth,  which  is  represented  by  the  "  unleavened."  5.  We  share  as  those  who  belong 
to  the  heavenly,  and  therefore  say,  "  This  is  not  our  rest,"  Press  that  the  presence  of  the 
leavened,  the  guileful,  and  the  sinner  spoib  the  simplicity  and  purity  of  our  Christian 
feast— B.  T. 

Vers.  9 — 13. — The  Christian  law  of  association  with  evO.  Two  points  require  to  be 
illustrated  and  enforced. 

I.  Common,  eveby-dat  lifb-assooiations  with  evil  have  to  be  maintained,  in 
(1)  family ;  (2)  business ;  (3)  society.  Yet  in  all  these  the  earnest  Christian  neel. 
never  find  it  difficult  to  make  a  firm  witness  for  truth,  righteousness,  and  charity. 

XL  Special  belations  of  pbiendship  with  evil  we  mat  not  make.  We  may 
not  (1)  for  our  own  sake ;  (2)  for  such  friends'  sake ;  (3)  for  the  sake  of  otners  who  may 
observe  our  friendship,  and,  above  all,  (4)  for  Christ's  sake,  who  said,  through  his  servant, 
"  Come  out  from  among  them, .  .  ,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing,  and  I  will  receive 
vou."— B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  VL 


Vers.  1 — 11. — Litigation  before  heathen 
eourts  forbidden. 

Ver.  1. — Dare  any  of  you  t  rather,  Dor« 
any  one  of  you  t  It  is  in  St.  Paul's  view  an 
audaeioui  defiance  of  Christian  duCes  to 
seek  from  the  heathen  the  justice  due  from 
brother  to  brother.  A  matter ;  some  ground 
of  civil  dispute.  Against  another ;  i.e.  against 
another  Christian.  When  one  of  the  litigants 
was  a  heathen.  Christians  were  allowed  to  go 
before  heathen  law  courts,  because  no  other 


remedy  was  possible.  Oo  to  law  before  the 
unjust.  The  "unjust"  is  here  used  for 
"  Gentiles,"  because  it  at  once  suggests  a 
reason  against  the  dereliction  of  Christian 
duty  involved  in  suoli  a  step.  How  "unjust " 
the  pagans  were  in  the  special  sense  of  the 
word,  the  Christians  of  that  day  had  daily 
opportunities  of  seeing ;  and  in  a  more  geueral 
sense,  the  Gentiles  were  "sinners"  (Matt. 
zzvi.  45).  Even  the  Jews  were  bound  to 
settle  their  civil  disputes  before  their  own 
tribunals.  T1ip  ideal  Jew  was  jashar,  or 
"the  npriglit  man,"  and   Jews  eould  not 


1^2 


THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  (JOKINTHIANS.    [oB.  Ti  1— 20. 


combtenUy  seek  integrity  from  those  who 
were  not  upright.  A  forliori.  Christians 
ought  not  to  do  bo.  Before  the  saints.  All 
Christians  were  ideailly  "  saints,"  just  as  the 
heathen  were  normally  "  unjust."  If 
Christians  went  to  law  with  one  another 
before  the  heathen,  they  belied  their  profes- 
sion of  mutual  love,  caused  ecamlal,  and  were 
Almost  necessarily  tempted  into  compliunce 
tvith  heathen  customs,  even  to  the  extent  of 
recognizing  idols.  Our  liord  had  already 
laid  down  the  rule  that  "brothers"  ought 
to  settle  their  quarrels  among  themselves 
(Matt  xviii.  15  -17). 

Var.  2. — So  ye  not  knSw  1  The  word 
"  or"  should  be  supplied  from  N,  A,  B,  C,  D, 
B",  etc.  Bishop  Wordsworth  points  nut  thut 
lliia  empliatic  question  occurs  ten  times  in 
iliese  two  Epistles  (ch.  iii.  6;  v.  6 ;  vi.  2, 3, 9, 
15, 16, 19;  ix.  13,  24),  and  only  twice  in  all 
the  lest  (Bom.  vi.  16;  zi  2).  It  was  a 
fitting  rebuke  to  those  who  took  for  knowr 
ledge  their  obvious  ignorance.  It  resembles 
the  "Have  ye  not  so  much  as  read?"  to 
Phaiisees  who  professed  such  profound 
Tamiliarity  with  the  Scriptures.  That  the 
saint!  shall  judge  the  world.  So  Daniel 
(vii.  22)  had  said,  "  The  Ancient  of  days 
came,  and  judgment  was  given  to  the  saints 
of  the  Most  High."  Our  Lord  had  confirmed 
tbis  promise  to  liis  apostlus,  "  Ye  also  shall 
»it  upon  twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel"  (Matt.  xix.  28).  Various 
modes  of  evading  the  literal  sense  have  been 
adopted,  but  even  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom  we 
find,  "  They  [the  righteous]  shall  judge  the 
nations,  and  have  dominion  over  the  people" 
(Wisd.  iii.  8).  All  speculation  as  to  the 
manner  and  ezteut  in  which  the  saints  shall 
.-•hare  in  the  work  of  Christ  as  Judge  of 
tlie  quick  and  dead,  are  obviously  futile. 
Shall  be  judged;  literally,  U  being  judged — 
the  present  points  to  the  future,  as  though 
tliat  which  is  inevitable  is  alieady  in  course 
of  fulfilment.  To  jndgethe  smallest  matters; 
literally,  of  (ke  imallest  judgments. 

Ver.  8. — That  we  shall  judge  angelt. 
Angels,  i.e.  some  who  belong,  or  once  did 
belong,  to  that  class.  The  statement  fur- 
iiishes  no  data  for  further  speculation.  It 
can  hardly  mean  "evil  spirits,"  for  where 
the  word  is  entirely  unqualified  it  always 
means  good  angels;  otherwise  we  might  refer 
it  to  the  "  angels  which  kept  not  their  first 
estate  "  (Jude  6),  It  is  impossible,  and  not 
straightforward,  to  explain  away  the  word 
"angels"  as  meaning  Church  officials,  etc., 
or  to  make  the  word  "  juilge  "  mean  "  involve 
a  condemnation  of  them  by  comparison  with 
ourselves."  All  that  we  can  say  is  that 
"Ood  chargeth  even  his  angels  with  folly, 
«nd  in  hi*  sight  tlie  very  heavens  are  not 
clean"  (Job  iv.  18);  and  that  "to  angels 
hath  he  not  subjected  the  world  to  come " 


(Heb.  ii.  5).  We  must  take  the  plain  mean- 
ing of  the  apostle's  words,  whether  we  can 
throw  any  light  on  his  conceptions  or  not. 
The  only  alternative  is  to  suppose  that  the 
word  means  "those  who  once  were  good 
angels,"  but  are  now  fallen  spirits.  It  was 
so  understood  by  TertuUian,  Chrysostona, 
etc.  How  much  more ;  rather,  to  say  nothing 
of.  The  accurate  rendering  of  these  veis^va 
is  a  matter  of  some  difficulty,  but  not  to  an 
extent  which  affects  the  material  sense,  or 
which  can  be  explained  without  a  minute 
knowledge  of  G<eek. 

Ver.  4.— If  then  ye  have,  etc.  The  verse 
implies  that  civil  ^sputes  might  naturally 
occur  among  them.  What  he  is  here  repro- 
bating is  their  objectionable  method  of 
settling  them.  Set  them  to  judge  who  are 
least  esteemed  in  the  Cburoh.  This  implies 
an  utter  scorn  of  trivial  quarrels  about 
personal  rights.  Surely  the  lowliest,  the 
most  uuregarded  members  of  the  Church 
— those  of  no  account — have  wisdom  enough 
to  decide  in  such  small  matters.  Th  us  when 
there  arose  a  murmuring  between  Hebrews 
and  Hellenists  about  the  daily  distribution 
to  widows,  the  apostles,  thinking  that  they 
had  much  more  important  work  in  hand  than 
the  adjustment  of  such  jealousies,  left  the 
whole  matter  in  the  hands  of  the  seven 
deacons.  Some  uuderstand  "those  held  of  no 
account  in  the  Cburch  "  to  mean  heathens ; 
but  he  is  here  forbidding  them  to  bring 
their  quarrels  before  the  heathens.  Of  course, 
ideally,  none  ought  to  be  '•  despised"  or 
"held  of  no  account"  in  the  Church;  but 
St.  Paul  is  here  speaking  relatively,  and 
with  reference  to  the  views  of  the  Corinthians 
themselves,  and  not  without  irony.  The 
perfect  participle,  "those  who  have  been 
set  at  nought,"  perhaps  means  persons  ot 
proved  inferiority  of  judgment. 

Ver.  5. — I  speak  to  your  shame.  He 
adds  this  to  account  for  the  severe  irony  of 
the  last  remark.  Not  a  wise  man  among 
yon.  Among  you,  who  set  yourselves  up 
•8  so  specially  wise  I  To  judge;  rather,  te 
decide. 

Ver.  7. — Kow  therefore;  rather,  Nay 
more,  already.  Vtterly;  rather,  generally, 
"altogether,"  "looking  at  the  question  as 
•  whole."  A  fault.  The  word  means  "a 
defect,"  or  possibly  "a  loss"  (Rom.  xi.  12, 
"the  diminishing").  Tour  going  to  law  is 
an  inferiority  or  deficiency;  you  ought  to 
know  of  "  a  more  excellent  way."  Why  do 
ye  not  rather  take  wrong  1  Strange  as  such 
advice  would  sound  to  heathens,  who  prided 
themselves  on  the  passionate  resentment 
of  injuries  as  though  it  were  a  virtue,  this 
had  been  the  distinct  teaching  of  onr  Lord: 
"Resist  not  evil"  (Matt.  v.  39). 

Ver.  8. — Nay,  ye  do  wrong  and  defrand. 
Thus  they  violated  a  rule  which  Paul  had 


OH.  Ti.  i— 26.]    THE  FIESt  EPISTLE  tO  THE  CORll^THIANS. 


193 


laid  down  to  the  Thessalonians  (1  Thesa. 
iy.  6),  and  incurred  God's  anger. 

Ver.  9. — ^Enow  ye  not;  rather,  i>r  knom 
ye  tiot,  as  before.  Are  you  defying  God,  or 
does  your  sin  arise  from  mere  ignorance? 
The  onrighteous;  better,  that  wrong-doers, 
the  verb  being  the  same  ais  "ye  do  wrong" 
in  ver.  8.  Perhaps  the  Corinthians  thought 
that  they  would  be  saved  by  the  mere  fact 
of  having  been  admitted  into  God's  king- 
dom (the  Christian  Church  in  all  its  highest 
privileges)  by  baptism.  St.  Paul  here  lays 
down,  as  distinctly  as  St.  James  does,  that 
faith  without  works  is  dead,  and  privileges 
without  holiness  are  abrogated.  Tiie  spirit 
of  hii4  warning  is  tiie  same  as  that  of  Jer. 
vii.  4,  "  Trust  ye  not  in  lying  words,  saying, 
The  temple  of  the  Lord  .  .  .  are  these ; " 
or  that  of  St..  John  the  Baptist,  "Say  not 
unto  yourselves.  We  be  Abraham's  sons." 
Christians  have  often  been  liable  to  the  temp- 
tation of  underrating  the  perU  wliioh  re- 
sults from  the  falling  iisuuder  of  action  from 
knowledge.  There  can  be  no  greater  danger 
than  that  of  talking  slightingly  of  "mere 
morality."  Beligion  is  not  an  outward 
service,  but  a  spiritual  life  manifested  by 
a  holy  living.  Be  not  deceived,  So  our 
Lord  says,  "Let  no  man  deceive  you"  (Mark 
xiii.  5 ;  comp.  1  John  iii.  7).  St.  Paul  uses 
the  warning  very  solemnly  again  in  oh.  xv. 
SS  and  Gal.  vi.  7,  and  St.  James  in  Jas.  i.  16. 
The  self-deception  of  merely  verbal  ortho- 
doxy is  the  most  dangerous  of  all.  Neither 
fornicators.  The  first  four  classus  of  sinners 
were  specially  prevalent  at  Corinth,  where, 
indeed,  impurity  formed  part  of  the  recog- 
nized cult  of  the  local  Aphrodite  (comp. 
2  Cor.  xii.  21).  Lists  of  these  "works  of 
the  flesli,"  which  were  the  all  but  universal 
curse  and  stain  of  heathendom,  occur  also 
in  GaJ.  v.  19—21;  1  Tim.  i  10,  etc.;  Col. 
iii.  5—7. 

Ver.  10. — Nor  thioTM,  ete.  (see  Bev. 
xxii.  15). 

Ver.  11. — ^And  such  were  some  of  yon; 
literally,  and  tJieie  things  some  of  you  were. 
As  Gentiles,  many  of  them  had  been  "  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins"  (Eph.  ii.  I).  (For 
a  similar  contrast  of  the  change  wrought  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  see  Titus  iii.  »— 7.)  But 
ye  are  washed.  The  voice  and  tense  in  the 
original  differ  from  those  of  the  following 
wor<ls.  This  cannot  be  accMentiil.  It  is 
better,  therefore,  to  render.  But  ye  washed 
away  your  tins;  i.o.  ye,  by  your  baptism, 
washed  away  those  stains  (Acts  xxii.  16). 
The  very  object  of  Christ's  death  had  been 
that  he  might  cleanse  his  Church  "  by  the 
washing  of  water  by  the  Word."  But  ye  are 
sanoti&ed,  but  ye  are  justified;  rather,  but 
ye  were  sanctified,  but  ye  were  justified, 
namely,  at  your  conversion.  By  "  sanc- 
tified"  is  meant,  not  the  progrresive  eoune 

J,  OOKINTHIANS. 


of  sanctifttation,  but  the  consecration  to  God 
by  baptia'n  (Wioklitt'e,  "halowed").  (For 
wha'  St  Paul  meant  by  justification,  see 
Rom.  iii.  24 — 26.)  In  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
JesDB,  etc.  This  clause  and  the  next  belonga 
to  a' I  the  three  previous  verbs.  Of  our  God 
In  the  word  "our "is  involved  that  appeal 
to  Christian  unity  of  which  he  never  loses 
sight  throughout  the  letter. 

Vers.  12 — 20.— The  inexeusabh  tin  and 
shame  6/ fornication. 

Ver.  12. — All  thic^  are  lawful  unto  me. 
The  abruptness  with  which  the  phrase  is 
introduced  perhips  shows  that,  in  the  letter 
of  the  Corinthians  to  St.  Paul,  they  had 
used  some  sueh  expression  by  way  of  pal- 
liating their  lax  tolerance  of  violations  of 
the  law  of  purity.  By  "all  things,"  of 
course,  is  only  meant  "all  things  which  are 
indifferent  in  themselves."  They  erro- 
neously applied  this  maxim  of  Christian 
liberty  to  that  which  was  inherently  sinful, 
and  tlius  were  tempted  to  "make  their 
liberty  a  cloak  of  viciousness." .  St.  Paul, 
as  Bengel  observes,  often,  and  especially  in 
this  Epistle,  uses  tlie  first  person  generally 
in  gnomic  or  semi-proverbial  sentences 
(ch.  vi.  15;  vii.  7;  x.  23,  29,  30;  xiv.  11). 
But.  This  is  St.  Paul's  correction  of  too 
broad  a  formula.  Are  not  expedient.  St. 
Paul  illustrates  this  in  ch.  viii.  8 — 10.  We 
have  no  right  to  do  even  that  which  is 
innocent,  if  it  bo  disadvantageous  to  the 
highest  interests  of  ourselves  or  others 
"  He  alone,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "  does  not 
&U  into  unlawful  things  who  sometimes 
abstains  by  way  of  caution  even  from  lawful 
ones."  Will  not  be  brought  under  the 
power.  The  play  of  words  in  the  original 
might  be  imitated  by  saying,  "All  tilings 
are  in  my  power,  but  I  will  not  be  brought 
under  the  power  of  any."  In  other  words, 
"boundless  intemperance"  may  become  a 
tyranny.  The  pretence  of  moral  freedom 
may  end  in  a  moral  bondage. 

"  Obedience  is  betterthan  freedom?  What's 

free? 
The  vexed  foam  on  the  wave,  the  tossed 

straw  on  the  sea ; 
The  ocean  itself,  as  it  rages  and  swells. 
In  the  bonds  of  a  boundless  obedience 

dwells." 

I  will  be  master  even  over  my  liberty  by 
keeping  it  under  the  beneficent  control  of 
law  and  of  charity. 

Ver.  13.— Meats  for  the  belly,  etc.  The 
argument  of  the  Corinthians  about  the 
indifference  of  eating  "meats"  which  were 
merely  ceremonially  unclean  was  quite 
tenable.  Thin^js  Levitically  unclean  might 
be  essentially  pure,  and  both  food  and  the 
body  which  lives  thereby  are  things  "  which 
perish  in  the  using"  (Col.  ii.  22).    Shall 

9 


19i 


THE  FIRST  EHSTl*  10  TfiE  CORINTHIAlJa    {aa.^i-^. 


deitray;  Aall  hring  to  nought  This  wonld 
occur  when  the  physical  body  becomes  a 
^ritnal  body,  like  that  of  the  angels  of 
God  (ch.  XT.  51,  52).  How  vile,  then,  is  it 
to  make  a  god  of  the.belly — only  to  sleep  and 
feed  I  Both  it  and  them.  There  shall  be  no 
need  for  the  belly  when  men  "  shall  hunger 
no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more"  (Rev.  vii 
16);  and  the  meat  alluded  to  is  "meat 
which  perisheth"  (Luke  xt.  16).  ITow  the 
body  is  not  for  fomioation,  but  for  the  Lord. 
The  argnment,  therefore,  which  would  class 
this  sin  as  a  matter  of  indifference,  as  was 
the  Levitical  distinction  between  different 
kinda  of  food,  at  once  fell  to  the  ground. 
Food  was  a  necessity,  and  the  stomach  was 
formed  for  its  assinulation.  Fornication  is 
•ot  a  venial  but  "  a  deadly  sin."  It  is  not 
a  natural  necessity,  but  a  consmning  evil 
The  body  was  created  for  higher  ends — 
namely,  to  be  a  temple  of  God.  "  God  hath 
not  called  us  unto  undeanness,  but  unto 
holiness"  (1  Thess.  iv.  7).  &nd  the  Lord 
for  the  body.  Therefore  our  members 
ought  to  be  used  "  as  instruments  of  right- 
eousness unto  God "  (Bom.  t.  13),  and  our 
bodies  presented  as  a  living,  holy,  reason- 
able, acceptable  sacrifice  to  him  (Bom.  xii. 
1).  The  end  of  our  existence  is  "  to  serve 
God  here  and  enjoy  him  for  ever  hereafter." 

Yer.  14. — God  hath  both  raised  up  the 
Lord.  St.  Paul  always  grounds  man's 
resorrection  and  immortally  on  the  re- 
surrection and  ascension  of  Christ  (see  oh. 
XV. ;  2  C!or.  iv.  11 ;  Rom.  vi  5, 8 ;  viii.  11). 

Yer.  15. — Uembers  of  Christ.  We  find 
the  tame  metaphor  in  ch.  xii.  12,  27;  Eph. 
V.  80.  The  Church  ii  often  alluded  to  as 
"the  body  of  Christ"  (Eph.  i.  23;  Col.  L 
18;  ii  19,  etc.).  Elsewhere  the  union 
between  Christ  and  Christians  is  described 
by  the  metaphor  of  a  tree  and  its  branches ; 
a  building  and  the  stones  of  which  it  is 
composed  (Eph.  ii.  21, 22).  God  forbid.  An 
admirable  idiom  to  express  the  real  force  of 
the  original,  whioh  means,  "May  it  never 
be  I "  (for  the  rationale  of  the  Greek  phrase, 
I  may  refer  to  my  '  Brief  Greek  Syntax,'  p. 
185).  It  occurs  in  Rom.  iii  4,  6,  81 ;  vi. 
15;  viL  7,  18;  ix.  14;  xi.  1,  11;  Gal.  ii 
17;  iii  21.  The  formula,  which  involves 
ihe  indignant  rejection  of  some  false  con- 
clusion, is  characteristic  of  the  second  group 
of  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  but  especially  (as  will 
be  seen)  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ronjans. 

Yer.  16.— What,  know  ye  not,  eto.  ?  The 
clause  is  used  to  explain  and  justify  the 
strong  expression  wluch  he  had  used  in 
ttie  previous  verse.  It  involves  an  argument 
against  Uie  sin  which  is  the  most  original 
and  impressive  which  could  have  been  used. 
To  this  passage  especially  is  due  the  tone 
iaken  by  Christians  aa  to  these  sins,  which 
differed   lo   totally  from   that    iakaa    by 


heathen.  They  two.  TLj  words  de  not  oeoni 
in  Gen.  ii.  24,  but  are  always  so  quoted  in 
the  New  Testament  (Matt.  xix.  5 ;  Mark  x, 
8;  Eph.  V.  31).  Saith  he.  This  is  a  vagna 
Jewish  formula  of  quotation,  adopted  to 
avoid  the  needless  introduction  of  the  sacred 
Name.  «  He  "  is  «  God  "  in  Scripture.  Shall 
be  one  flesh ;  rather,  shall  become.  This  ap- 
peal to  Gen.  ii.  24  (Matt.  xlx.  5)  is  equiva- 
lent to  the  rule  that  no  intercourse  between 
the  sexes  is  free  from  sin  except  onder 
the  sanction  of  marriage, 

Yer.  17. — ^Iliat  is  joined  onto  the  lord. 
This  phrase,  indicating  the  closest  possible 
nnion,  is  found  in  Dent.  x.  20;  2  Kings 
xvlii.  6.  Is  one  spirit.  There  is  a  "  mystical 
union,"  not  only  "betwixt  Christ  and  his 
Church,"  but  also  between  Christ  and  the 
holy  soul.  Hence,  to  St.  Paul,  spiritual 
life  meant  the  indwelling  of  Christ  in  the 
heart — the  life  "  in  Christ ; "  so  that  he 
could  say,  "It  is  no  more  I  that  live,  but 
Christ  Uiat  liveth  in  me  "  (Gai  ii.  20 ;  iii 
27  ;  CoL  iii.  17). 

Yer.  18. — Flee  fomioation.  In  the  battle 
against  sensual  sins,  there  is  no  victory 
except  in  absolute  flight,  for  the  reason 
which  immediately  follows,  namely,  that 
these  sins  have  their  dwelling  in  that  body 
which  is  part  of  our  being,  and  which  yet 
they  tend  to  destroy.  They  make  a  man 
his  own  deadliest  enemy.  Every  sin  .  .  . 
is  without  ^e  body.  Some  have  supposed 
that  this  cannot  apply  to  gluttony  and 
drunkenness,  which  they  therefore  class  with 
fornication;  but  even  in  those  sins,  as  in 
suicide,  the  cause  of  and  incentive  to  the  sin 
is  external,  whereas  the  source  of  undean- 
ness is  in  the  heart  and  in  the  thoughts, 
which  come  from  within,  and  so  defile  the 
man.  Other  sins  may  be  with  and  by  meant 
of  the  body,  and  may  injure  the  body ;  but 
none  are  so  directly  against  the  sanctity 
of  the  whole  bodily  being  as  fomioation. 
Binneth  against  his  own  body.  By  alien- 
ating it  from  the  service  of  him  to  whom 
it  belongs;  by  incorporating  it  with  the 
degradation  of  another;  by  staining  the 
flesh  and  the  body  (Prov.  v.  8—11 ;  vi  24— 
82;  vii  24 — 27);  by  subtly  ^isoning  thr 
inmost  sanctities  of  his  own  being.  St.  PavJ 
is  here  thinking  mainly,  however,  if  not 
exclusively,  of  the  moral  injury  and  deflle 
ment 

Yer.  19. — That  your  body  is  the  temple 
(or  rather,  a  sanctuary)  of  the  Holy  Ohost. 
He  has  already  said  that  the  Church  is  a 
shrine  oi'  sanctuary  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (oh. 
iii.  16);  but  here  for  the  first  time  ex- 
pression is  given  to  one  of  the  deepest  and 
newest  truths  of  Christianity  (comp.  2  Cor. 
vi.  16).  Three  great  epochs  are  marked  by 
the  use  of  the  word  "temple,"  In  the  OA 
Testament  it  means  the  material  temple^tbt 


OH.  VI.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


195 


lig^  of  a  localized  worship  and  a  separated 
people;  in  the  Gosj  el^  our  Loid  nsea  it  of 
his  own  mortal  body ;  in  the  Epistles  it  is 
useil  (as  here)  of  the  body  of  every  baptized 
Christian,  sanctified  by  the  indwelling 
Spirit  of  €k)d.  Ye  are  not  your  own  We 
cannot,  therefore,  use  our  bodies  as  though 
they  were  absolutely  under  our  own  control. 
They  belong  to  God,  and,  "  whether  we  live 
or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's"  (Rom.  xiv.  8). 

Ver.  20. — ^Te  are  bought  with  a  prioe. 
That  price  is  the  blood  of  Christ,  where- 
with he  purchased  the  Chnioh  (Acts  xx.  23 ; 
Heb.  ix.  12;  1  Pet.  i.  18,  19;  Rev.  v.  9). 
This  metaphor  of  ransom  (oh.  vii.  23 ;  2  Pet. 
il.  1)  has  its  full  and  absolute  applicability 
to  man.  The  effect  of  Christ's  death  for  us 
is  that  we  are  redeemed  from  slavery  and 
prison,  and  the  right  of  our  possession  is 
with  Christ.  Thus  by  various  metaphors 
the  effects  of  redemption  are  revealed  to  us 
on  the  human  side.  When  we  unduly  press 
the  metaphor,  and  ask  from  whmn  we  were 
purchased,  and  to  whom  the  price  was  paid, 
we  build  np  scholastio  systems  which 
have   only  led   to   error,   and   respecting 


which  the  Church  has  never  sanctioned  any 
exclusive  opinion.  The  thoughts  toucheil 
upon  in  this  verse  are  fully  developed  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans.  Glorify  God;  by 
behaving  as  his  redeemed  children,  and 
therefore  by  keeping  yourselves  pure.  Tn 
these  few  brief  words  St.  Paul  sums  up  nl! 
he  has  said,  as  he  did  in  ch.  v.  13.  In  your 
body.  The  folloiving  woids,  "and  in  your 
spirit,  which  are  God's,"  are  a  perfectly 
correct  and  harmless  glos6,  but  are  not 
found  in  the  best  manuscripts,  and  are 
foreij;n  to  the  drift  of  the  passage.  Your 
body  is  a  temple,  and  in  that  temple  God 
must  be  honoured.  (As  Augustine  says, 
"Dost  thou  wish  to  pray  in  a  teiuiile?  pray 
in  thyself.  But  first  be  a  temple  of  God.') 
"  Uncha4ity  dishonours  God,  and  that  in  his 
own  temple  (Rom.  ii.  23) "  (Meyer).  In 
these  clauses  St.  Paul  has  touched  on  three 
subjects  which  occupy  important  sections 
of  the  remainder  of  the  Epistle,  namely,  (1) 
the  relation  between  the  sexes  (ch.  vii.); 
(2)  the  question  of  idol-offerings  (ch.  viii.) ; 
and  (3)  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection 
(oh.  XV.). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1—8. — JRie  ideal  Church  a  tribunal.  "  Dare  any  of  yon,  having  a  matter  against 
another,"  etc.  ?  In  our  sketch  on  the  preceding  verses  we  looked  on  the  true  Church  as 
&  feast.  Here  we  have  to  look  on  it  as  a  tribunal,  a  court  of  judicature,  where  disputes 
are  to  be  settled  and  grievances  redressed.  It  would  appear  that  questions  arose  among 
the  Corinthian  Christians  that  required  settlement — questions  of  wrong  done  to  persona 
or  to  property,  and  that  too  the  litigious  spirit  was  so  rife  in  their  midst  that  they  took 
their  grievances  to  the  heathen  courts.  For  this  the  apostle  reproves  them.  "  Dare 
any  of  you,  having  a  matter  against  another,  go  to  law  before  the  unjust,  and  not  before 
the  saints  ?  "    Three  remarks  about  the  ideal  Church  as  a  tribunal. 

L   It   IB  BUFEBIOB  TO  OTHEB  TRIBUNALS  ON  THE  EARTH.      1.    It  Ig  a  OOUrt  formed  «f 

nurrally  righteous  mei^.  This  is  implied  in  the  words,  "Dare  any  of  you,  having  a 
matter  against  another,  go  to  law  before  the  unjust,  and  not  before  the  saints  t "  Saints, 
or  just  men,  form  the  tribunal.  In  worldly  conrts  of  judicature  men  are  judged  by 
legislative  enactments  or  judicial  decisions.  Not  so  in  this  court.  It  is  a  court  of  equity, 
a  court  that  tries  cases  not  by  statutory  precepts,  nor  by  ecclesiastical  laws,  but  by 
scriptural  principles,  and  these  principles  as  they  are  embodied  in  the  teaching  of  him 
who  delivered  the  Sermon  on  the  mount.  The  trae  Church  is  his  representative  and 
administrator.  2.  It  ia  a  eoxat  whose  jurisdiction  is  universal.  "  Do  ye  not  know  that 
the  saints  shall  judge  the  world  ?  "  In  many  ways  men  of  Christly  lives  are  judging 
the  world  now.  Their  ideas  of  right  and  wrong,  between  man  and  man,  and  man  and 
Glod,  form  that  standard  of  character  to  which  the  consciences  of  men  are  constantly 
ippealing,  and  to  which  they  are  forced  to  bow.  All  men  at  last  will  be  judged  by 
'.he  character  of  Christ,  and  the  Church  is  the  representative  of  that  character.  "Tlie 
words  I  Bay  unto  you,  they  shall  judge  you  in  the  kst  day."  Not  only  does  this  Church- 
tribunal  judge  the  world,  but  judges  angels  also.  "  Enow  ye  not  that  we  shall  judge 
angels?  Redeemed  humanity  is  in  some  respects  higher  than  angelic  natures.  It 
has  passed  through  greater  changes  and  is  brought  into  closer  connection  with  the 
Divine.  They  who  have  in  them  the  spirit  of  absolute  justice  in  the  highest  measure 
are  the  best  judges  of  character.  In.  modern  courts  this  spirit  is  often  very  feeble,  and 
in  some  cases  extinct.    Hence  the  sad  blunderings  about  the  interpretation  of  ■tatnt'i 


196  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh. Til— 20, 

and  the  decisions  of  judges.    But  the  spirit  of  absolute  justice  reigns  In  the  trua 

Church. 

n.  It  IB  A  TBiBiTKAii  FOR  THE  SETTLEMENT  OF  ALL  DISPUTES.  Paul  intimates  that  it 
is  to  judge  disputes  on  the  "  smallest  matters,"  and  of  "  things  pertaining  to  this  life.' 
These  expressions  seem  to  comprehend  all  disputes — not  merely  religious,  but  secular; 
not  only  disputes  on  great  subjects,  but  disputes  on  minor  subjects  as  well.  The 
instinct  of  Ctiristly  justice  whicli  inspires  it  peers  into  the  heart  of  all  moral  conduct. 
It  has  an  "anointing  from  the  Holy  Que,  by  which  it  knows  all  things,"  The  more 
spiritually  pure  a  man  is  the  more  readily  will  he  detect  the  wronsi.  Only  a  few  years 
ago  some  of  our  judges  occu|jied  twelve  months  or  more,  at  an  enormous  expense  to  the 
nation,  in  order  to  find  out  whether  a  man  was  an  impostor  or  not.  To  a  mind  full  of 
moral  justice  an  impostor  is  detected  instinctively  and  at  once.  No  logic  can  read  the 
hidden  principles  of  a  man's  heart.  Christ  knew  "what  was  in  man,"  and  those  highly 
imbued  with  his  Spirit  are  to  some  extent  gifted  with  the  same  insijjht. 

III.  Disputants  who  will  not  have  thbib  cases  settled  in  this  court  ark 
JUSTLY  liable  TO  BBPROACH.  1.  Reference  to  another  court  is  tmwise.  "If  then  ye 
have  judgments  of  things  pertaining  to  this  life,  set  them  to  judge  who  are  least  esteemed 
in  the  Church."  The  meaning  is  that  any  other  court  to  which  the  case  is  taken  is  of 
no  account  in  the  estimation  of  the  Church — ^it  is'a  morally  inferior  institution.  The 
tribunal  of  man  in  comparison  to  Christ's  tribunal  is  a  truly  contemptible  thing.  Tou 
Christians  degrade  yourselves  by  taking  disputes  to  such  tribunals.  "I  speak  to  your 
shame.  Is  it  so,  that  there  is  not  a  wise  man  among  you  ?  "  It  is  a  shame  to  yon  to 
have  your  disputes  carried  to  such  tribunals,  a  shame  that  you  cannot  settle  your 
disputes  among  yourselves,  that  "brother  should  go  to  law  with  brother,  before  the 
unbelievers."  2.  Reference  to  another  court  is  wrong.  "  Now  therefore,  there  is 
utterly  a  fault  [a  defect]  among  you,  beoRUse  ye  go  to  law  one  with  another."  Better 
than  to-  do  this,  better  than  to  go  to  a  worldly  tribunal  to  settle  your  disputes,  better 
you  should  suffer  wrong  than  take  your  grievance  into  the  worldly  coiirts.  "  The 
Church  has  principles,"  says  Robertson,  "accordiog  to  which  all  such  matters  may  be 
set  at  rest.  And  the  difference  between  the  worldly  court  of  justice  and  the  Christian 
court  of  arbitration  is  a  difference  of  diametrical  oppositioa.  Law  says,  '  You  shall  have 
your  rights ; '  the  spirit  of  the  true  Church  says,  '  Defraud  not  your  neighbour  of  Aw 
rights.'  Law  says, '  You  must  not  be  wronged ; '  the  Church  says, '  It  is  better  to  suffer 
wrong  than  to  do  wrong.' " 

Vers.  9 — 11. — Oenuine  reformation.  "Enow  ye  not  that  the  unrighteous  shall 
not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God?  Be  not  deceived:  neither  fornicators,  nor  idolaters, 
nor  adulterers,  nor  effeminate,  nor  abusers  of  themselves  with  mankind,  nor  thieves, 
nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers,  nor  extortioners,  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
God.  And  such  were  some  of  you :  but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  saoctified,  but  ye 
are  justified  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."  Reformation 
of  some  kind  or  other  is  an  object  most  earnestly  pursued  by  all  in  every  land  who  are 
alive  to  the  woes  and  wrongs  of  life.  Some  of  the  reformations  sought  are  of  a  ques- 
tionable utility ;  none  will  prove  of  any  essential  andpe  rmanent  service|but  that  presented 
in  the  text.    The  reformation  is— 

L  A  BEFOBMATION   OF  THE   MORAL  OHABAOTEB  OF  MANKIND.      "  EnOW  ye  not  that 

the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God?  Be  not  deceived:  neither 
fornicators,  nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor  effeminate,  nor  abusers  of  themselves  with 
mankind,"  etc.  Sin,  which  may  be  defined  as  self-gratification,  is  here  presented  in  a 
variety  of  forms — "  fornication,"  idolatry,  avarice,  intemperance,  etc.  All  these  manifesta 
tions  are  hideous  developments  of  the  same  ungodly  principle,  self-gratification.  The 
principle  of  sin,  like  holiness,  is  one  and  simple,  but  the  forms  are  multifarious.  Now, 
these  morally  corrupt  classes  we  are  here  told  were  changed ;  they  were  "  washed,"  and 
"sanctified,"  and  "justified,"  which,  stripped  of  figure,  means,  they  were  changed  in  the 
very  root  and  fountain  of  their  character.  They  were,  to  use  Scripture  phraseology, 
converted,  regenerated,  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus  to  good  works.  The  reformation 
was  not  doctrinal,  ecclesiastical,  or  institutional,  but  moral. 

II.  A  BEFOBMATION  INDISPENSABLE  TO  A  HAPFT  DESTINY.  What  is  tho  Only  happy 
dctitiny  for  man?    To  "inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."    What  is  the  "kingdom  of 


BH.VL1— 2a]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  191 

God  "?  Righteousness,  peace,  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  the  reign  of  truth,  purity, 
light,  harmony,  and  blessediess.  To  "  inherit "  that  empire,  to  be  in  it,  not  as  occasional 
visitors,  but  a,a  permanent  citizens,  holding  fellowship  with  its  Sovereign,  and  mingling 
with  the  great  and  the  good  of  all  worlds, — fliis  is  our  high  destiny.  For  this  we  were 
made,  and  for  nothing  lower.  IJence  Christ  urges  us  to  "  seek  first  the  kingdom  of 
God  and  his  righteousness,"  which  means — come  under  the  Divine  reign  of  truth  and 
right.  Now.  there  is  no  getting  into  this  kingdom  without  this  moral  ret'ormatiou.  All 
who  have  not  undergone  this  reformation  are  excluded. 

IIL   A   BEFOBMATION   EFFECTED   BT    THE   REDEMPTIVE    AGENCY    OF    CHRIST.      "  And 

such  were  some  of  jou:  but  ye  are  [were]  washed,  hut  ye  are  [were]  sanctified,  but  ye 
are  [were]  justified  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God." 
This  means  that  they  had  been  cleansed  from  all  moral  foulness,  "  washed ; "  that  they 
had  been  consecrated  to  holiness,  "  sanctified ;,"  that  they  had  heen  made  right  in  their 
being  and  relationships,  "  justitied."  And  all  this,  how  ?  "  In  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."  This  is  the  reformative  measure,  the  gospel ; 
nothing  on  this  earth  will  effect  this  moral  change  but  this.  Not  the  enactments  of 
legislations,  not  the  creations  of  genius,  not  scienlific  systems.  I  disparage  none  of 
these,  but  they  cannot  effect  this  reformation  of  soul,  the  reformation  which  humanity 
wants,  a  reformation  without  which  all  other  reformations  are  but  reformations  on 
^rchment,  a  change  in  mere  outward  forms  of  life.  "Marveljnot  that  I  said  unto  thee, 
Ye  must  be  bom  again."    "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 

Vers.  12 — 20. — Christianity  in  relation  to  the  body.  "All  things  are  lawful  unto 
me,  but  all  things  are  not  expedient,"  etc.  It  would  seem  that  there  were  those  in  the 
Church  at  Corinth  who  regarded  Christianity  as  giving  them  a  kind  of  liberty  to  do 
whatsoever  they  wished.  Some  of  them  having  left  Judaism  with  its  various  restraints, 
and  others  pagtnism,  which  also  had  restrictions,  they  were  too  ready  to  push  the 
doctrine  of  religious  liberty,  as  proclaimad  by  Paul,  far  beyond  its  limits.  The  apostle 
here  states,  perhaps  in  answer  to  a  quesiion  on  the  subject,  that  there  is  a  limitation 
to  Christian  liberty.  He  says,  "  All  things  are  lawful  unto  me,  but  all  things  are  not 
expedient."  As  the  liberty  which  they  seemed  to  covet  was  a  liberty  in  relation  to 
the  gratifications  of  bodily  appetites,  he  takes  occxsion  to  state  certain  things  in 
relation  to  the  body.  His  remarks  suggest  to  us  the  relation  of  Christianity  to  the 
human  body.    We  observe — 

I.  Teat  it  becookizes  attention  to  the  natural  needs  of  the  body  as  fbopkb. 
"  Meats  for  the  belly,  and  the  belly  for  meats."  This  means  the  body  has  appeUtes, 
and  there  are  provisions  intended  and  fitted  to  satisfy  them.  Christianity  allows  man 
to  partake  of  those  provisions  in  nature  necessary  to  satisfy  and  strengthen  his 
physical  nature.  To  act  thus  is  to  act  in  harmony  with  the  constitution  of  nature. 
All  animal  existences  act  in  this  way.  Christianity,  instead  of  requiring  you  to  starve 
the  body  by  fastings,  and  to  exhaust  its  energies  by  painful  pilgrimages  and  self- 
mortifications,  says,  "  Eat  and  be  satisfied,  eat  and  be  strong,  take  care  of  your  bodies. 
If  you  choose  to  eat  the  meat  offered  to  idols  to  allay  your  appetites  and  to  invigorate 
your  frames,  well,  eat  it."  Feeding  the  body,  however,  Christianity  regards,  though 
proper,  as  ♦ery  temporary ;  both  the  food  and  the  body  must  perish.  They  are  not  like 
spiritual  existences  and  spiritual  supplies,  that  have  regard  to  an  immeasurable  hereafter. 
"  All  flesh  is  grass." 

II.  That  it  rboognizeb  indulgence  in  the  oratifioations  of  the  body  as  wbono. 
"  Now  the  body  is  not  for  fornication,  but  for  the  Lord ;  and  the  Lord  for  the  body." 
This  is  not  a  necessity  of  the  body,  like  eating  and  drinking,  but  an  immoral  indulgence 
of  its  propensities.  Man  should  attend  to  his  bodily  propensities  as  reliefa,  not  as 
gratifications.  He  who  attends  to  his  physical  propensities  in  order  to  get  pleasure  ont 
of  them,  sinks  lower  than  a  brute,  violates  the  laws  of  his  nature,  degrades  his  being, 
knd  offends  his  God.  Hence  intemperance,  whether  in  eating  or  drinking,  is  a  moral 
outrage.  The  crime  and  curse  of  men  in  all  ages  have  been  seeking  happiness  out  of 
the  gastric,  the  sexual,  and  other  propensities  of  their  physical  being. 

lU.  That  it  BECoaNizBS  the  proper  treatment  of  the  body  as  identifyiho  xi 
with  Christ.  1.  It  is  a  property  of  Christ.  It  is  "  for  the  Lord ;  and  the  Lord  for 
the  body."    It  is  not  ours;  we  are  its  trustees,  not  its  proprietors;  we  hold  it  "for  the 


198  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  vi.  1—20. 

Lord,"  and  we  should  use  it  according  to  his  directions.  It  is  his  will  that  it  should 
be  used  by  the  soul  to  convey  from  the  external  universe  quickening  and  hallowing 
impressions  of  the  Divine,  and  used  to  express  and  develop  the  boly  thoughts  and 
purposes  which  such  impressions  should  produce.  It  is  to  let  in  God  to  the  soul  and 
to  reveal  God  to  our  race.  2.  It  is  a  member  of  Christ.  "  Know  ye  not  that  your 
bodies  are  the  members  of  Christ  ?  "  If  we  are  genuine  Christians,  he  regards  even 
our  bodies  as  having  a  vital  connection  with  him.  He  had  a  human  body,  and  that 
human  body  raised  to  heaven  is  the  model  into  which  our  bodies  shall  be  chained. 
This  being  so,  the  prostitution  of  the  body  to  sensual  indulgence  of  any  kind  is  an 
incongruity  and  an  outrage.  "  Shall  I  then  take  the  members  of  Christ,  and  make  them 
the  members  of  an  harlot?  God  forliid.  What?  know  ye  not  that  he  which  is  joined 
to  an  harlot  is  one  body  ?  for  two,  saith  he,  shall  be  one  flesh.  But  he  that  is  joined 
unto  the  Lord  is  one  spirit,"  etc.  3.  It  is  a-temple  of  Christ.  "  What  ?  kuow  ye  not 
that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  in  you,  'which  ye  have  of 
God  ?  "  Christ,  by  his  Spirit,  claims  the  body  as  a  temple,  in  which  he  is  to  dwdl,  be 
revealed  and  worshipped.  It  is  his  property.  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price:  therefore 
glorify  God  in  your  Ijody,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's."  The  language  here  is, 
of  course,  figurative.  It  does  not  mean  that  there  was  a  strictly  commercial  transaction 
in  the  redemption  of  man,  a  literal  quid  pro  qtto,  for  the  thing  spoken  of  pertains  to 
spiritual  interests  and  relations,  and  not  to  commerce. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—11. — CivU  relations  and  Church  membership ;  litigation  be/ore  heathen 
courts.  The  chapter  opens  abruptly.  "  Dare  any  of  you" — a  strong  expression  of  dis- 
approval— "having  a  matter  against  another,  go  to  law  before  the  unjust?  "  Judaism 
had  taught  the  Jews  not  to  go  before  Gentile  judges  with  a  lawsuit  against  their 
brethren ;  the  Romans  had  accorded  to  the  Jews  the  right  to  settle  their  disputes  among 
themselves,  and  Chi  istians  at  tfaat  time  might  avail  themselves  of  this  rule  (Lange). 
But  St.  Paul,  true  to  his  ruling  method,  views  the  matter  from  Christian  ground  and 
treats  it  solely  on  the  principles  of  the  gospel.  The  argument  in  the  preceding  chapter 
concerned  social  relations,  the  present  argiunent  applies  to  civil  relations,  and  yet  they 
are  sympathetic  in  his  mind.  Emotion  is  an  associative  force,  and  often  establishes  or 
rather  discloses  connections  of  ideas  not  perceptible  in  the  "  dry  light "  of  intellect. 
In  both  these  arguments  the  underlying  sentiment  is  the  same,  viz.  the  dignity  of 
Christian  character  and  the  supremacy  of  its  obligations  over  interest,  custom,  usage, 
and  every  form  of  self  not  compatible  with  the  generous  spirit  of  sacrifice  "  for  Christ's 
sake."  Bear  in  mind,  then,  in  reading  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  that  if  at  times  you  lose  the 
compactness  of  logic  and  its  tenacious  unity,  you  are  always  sure  to  find  that  more 
interior  tie  which  binds  thought  to  sentiment  and  displaces  order  for  the  gain  of  a 
higher  method.  Method,  rather  than  order,  marks  the  thinker  whose  vocation  is  to 
instruct  the  mass  of  mankind.  Saints,  as  saints  exist  in  the  ideal  of  Christianity, 
"  shall  judge  the  world."  They  are  to  rule  with  Christ,  to  share  his  glory,  and  be 
acknowledged  by  the  universe  as  participaats  in  the  fintd  triumph  of  his'mediatoriRl 
authority.  If  so,  the  mediatorial  honour  in  future  prospect  has  a  certain  .-■cope  of  present 
activity,  since  it  could  not  be  then,  unless  It  were  now.  Of  the  character  of  these 
functions  and  the  circumstances  incident  to  their  display,  what  know  we?  They  fall 
under  that  law  of  reserve  which  the  Lord  Jesus  spoke  of  when  he  said,  "  Of  the  times 
or  the  seasons,  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power,"  we  are  ke|it  ignorant,  and 
are  the  better  for  the  ignorance.  Details  of  great  facts  may  intensify  the  intellect  ol 
sense,  and  work  damage  to  the  higher  mind.  If  Christ  was  the  Son  of  man,  and  as  such 
filled  the  sphere  of  humanity,  while  admitting  as  such  the  limitation  of  his  knowledge 
in  one  direction,  viz.  "  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  man,"  surely  we  need  not 
perplex  ourselves  as  to  specific  theories  bearing  on  this  subject.  Christianity  lays  the 
stress  on  intelligence  rather  than  on  information,  and,  in  fact,  assures  us  that  restraint 
is  essential  in  otu:  condition  to  equable  development.  St.  Paul  argues  from  the  future 
to  the  present;  thus,  "shall  judge  the  world, ,  . .  shall  judge  angels;"  and  the  conclusioi: 
\s  emphasized, — "  how  mucu  more  things  that  pertaiu  (o  this  life  1 "    On  this  ground 


CR.TL1— 20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  199 

of  the  spiritual  superiority  of  the  saints  in  Christ,  he  claims  that  the  judgment  of 
believers  may  now  be  most  advantageously  exercised.  It  is  a  training  in  the  school 
of  Christ,  and  the  discipline,  while  varied,  is  adapted  to  the  highest  good.  Does  St 
Riul  mean  to  put  earthly  tribunals  under  the  ban  1  By  no  means.  Again  and  again 
lie  sought  ilieir  protection  against  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and,  if  Roman  law  had  not 
befriended  him,  his  apostleship  as  men  reason  would  have  had  a  speedy  termination. 
Who  was  more  explicit  and  earnest  than  he  in  urging  the  doctrine  that  human 
government  was  a  Divine  ordinance,  and  as  such  to  be  obeyed  and  honoured  ?  And 
who  among  statesmen-  and  philosophers  ever  saw  as  deeply  into  the  nature  and  func- 
tions of  sovereignty  as  an  essential  element  of  the  idea  of  man  in  the  scheme  of  the 
universe?  In  law,  In  its  administration  of  justice,  in  its  protection  of  persons  and 
property,  in  its  power  to  verify  and  conserve  the  mijtitudinous  interests  of  society,  he 
recognized  the  right  arm  of  Providence.  The  sense  of  providence  must  be  social  no  less 
than  individual,  must  transcend  geographical  bounds,  and  embrace  the  human  family 
as  a  fiimily  of  "  one  blood,"  or  it  failed  of  its  office.  So,  then,  he  has  no  issue  with  law 
and  its  adjudications  as  such.  But  the  uses  of  the  law  by  Christians ;  the  common  and 
facile  resort  to  it  in  order  to  gratify  covetousness,  pride,  ambition,  revenge,  and  any  and 
every  form  of  selfishness; — ^that  is  the  grave  matter  before  his  mind.  "There  is  utterly 
a  fault  among  you,"  a  weakness,  a  repudiation  of  noble  sentiment,  a  departure  from  the 
idea  of  the  true  self  in  Christ,  "  because  ye  go  to  law  one  with  another  "  before  unbe- 
lievers; brother  arrayed  against  brother;  and  this  exposure  of  a  mutilated  unity,  with 
its  accompanying  evils,  made  in  the  presence  of  men  whose  criticisms  would  be  only  too 
eager  to  detect  and  magnify  your  imperfections.  This  is  one  aspect  of  the  matter.  But 
you  gain  vuur  rights.  Ay,  and  rights  may  be  purchased  too  dearly.  Qo  to  law  and 
get  your  lights ;  and  then,  as  you  retire  from  the  seat  of  judgment,  think  of  what  you 
leave  behind  you — what  losses  of  pentiraent,  trist  in  others,  hope  of  humanity,  brother- 
liness  of  heart,  perchance  even  integrity  and  honour.  Right  and  rights,  how  often  they 
part  company,  and  the  one  is  the  burlesque,  the  shame,  the  bitter  contempt  of  the  other! 
"  Rather  take  wrong ; "  it  is  altogether  a  manlier  thing,  if  done  for  Christ's  sake.  Lord 
Ergkine,  when  at  the  bar,  once  said  to  Dr.  Parr, "  Accommodate  the  difference  amicably. 
...  I  can  scarcely  figure  to  myself  a  situation  in  which  a  lawsuit  is  not,  if  possible,  to 
be  avoided."  This  is  another  aspect  of  the  matter.  Alas !  there  is  an  aspect  yet  sadder. 
Law  is  used  as  a  means  to  inflict  a  wrong.  "  Ye  do  wrong,  and  defraud,  and  that  your 
brethren."  What  gigantic  wrongs  have  been  perpetrated  under  the  name  of  law,  we  all 
know ;  but  who  can  tell  how  far  this  spirit,  which  uses  justice  to  accomplish  injustice, 
has  gone  forth  into  all  the  relationships  of  men,  and  vitiated  life  among  the  sacred 
retreats  of  home  and  the  Church  ?  The  depravity  of  man's  lower  nature  is  fearful,  not 
because  it  is  cruel  and  brutal,  but  because  it  is  continually  re-enforced  and  invigorated 
by  the  depravity  of  his  higher  nature.  What  is  true  of  the  individual  in  this  respect 
is  true  also  of  society.  History  and  our  own  observation  warrant  the  statement  that 
the  grossest  perverters  of  law  and  justice  have  been  found  among  those  who  were 
wealthy,  or  in  high  office,  or  otherwise  influential.  Their  example,  in  very  many 
instances,  has  worked  downward,  just  as  certain  poisonous  gases,  too  heavy  to  ascend, 
have  infected  the  air  on  a  level  with  us.  Then  follows  a  question  containing  its  own 
answer :  "  Know  ye  not  thai  the  unjust  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  "  His 
impassioned  formula,  "  Be  not  deceived,"  introduces  a  catalogue  of  immoralities  that  shut 
out  men  from  God's  kingdom,  in  which  we  have  a  startling  revelation,  common  with 
St.  Paul,  of  bodily  sins,  "  Such  were  some  of  you."  But  how  different  now ! — washed, 
sanctified,  justified,  in  the  Name  of  Christ,  and  by  the  Spirit.  Would  they  fall  back 
into  their  heathenish  practices  ?  Within  the  compass  of  a  few  verses,  St.  Paul  gives 
us  principles  that  permeate  civil  society  no  less  than  religious.  If  carried  out,  we 
should  have  much  less  law  and  much  more  equity,  and  both  law  and  equity  would  ba 
immense  gainers  by  the  change.  The  tendency  of  the  argument  is  the  thing  to  notice. 
That  tendency  is  to  give  men  a  true  spiritual  conception  of  themselves,  and  to  develop 
their  thought  of  self  in  accordance  with  God's  thought  of  them.  The  sense  of  publio 
justice  may  compel  us  to  resort  to  law,  but  this  will  not  conflict  with  St,  Paul's  idea. 
On  the  other  hand,  any  abuse  of  an  institution,  whether  governmental  or  domestic, 
whether  ecclesiastical  or  earthly,  is  an  abuse  of  manhood,  and  on  this  truth  he  expends 
the  force  of  his  reasoning.    In  these  verses,  as  in  the  previous  chaptera,  arguin,^. 


zoo  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [0H.T1.1— 20 

denouncing,  exhorting,  pleading, — ^it  la  the  roloe  of  a  grand  doctrine  and  a  lofty  trust 
and  a  anblime  hope  that  we  hear.  And  we  hear  it  in  the  midst  of  strife  and  turbu- 
lence, out  of  the  depths  of  a  heart  most  sorrowful  and  yet  "  always  rejoicing,"  and  able 
to  command  itself  and  its  faculties  and  resources  whenever  and  wherever  ne^ed. — ^L. 

Yen.  12 — 20. — TTte  human  body  and  itt  relation  to  Ohrttt,  Among  the  objects 
about  him  proper  for  use  and  enjoyment — ^those  objects  which  accorded  with  his  nature 
and  position  as  a  redeemed  man — was  there  anything  ftom  which  he  was  excluded  ? 
"  All  things  are  lawful  unto  me,"  and,  in  this  sense,  liberty  and  law  are  identical,  the 
measure  of  the  one  being  the  measuie  of  the  other.  If  law  is  of  God,  so  is  freedom  ;  if 
the  former  is  the  expression  of  the  Divine  will  and  character,  so  is  the  latter ;  and  if 
man  is  the  image  of  Christ  in  law,  so  is  he  in  freedom.  Observe,  then,  that  it  is  not 
law  and  liberty  as  existing  in  a  piarfect  world  that  the  apostle  is  considering,  but  as 
found  in  this  mixed  and  disordered  world,  in  which  probation  is  going  on  to  its  eternal 
issues.  Ideally  "  all  things  are  lawful,"  and  yet,  because  life  is  a  discipline,  how  could 
it  be  otherwise  than  that  liberty  should  be  abridged?  One  of  the  main  purposes  of 
probation  is  to  discipline  the  will,  to  choose  for  itself  among  a  multitude  of  objects 
addressing  our  sensibilities.  Scores  of  things  appeal  daily  to  our  senses,  and,  if  all  our 
sensations  are  converted  into  desires,  thence  into  motives,  thence  accepted  1^  volition, 
and  made  a  part  of  ourselves,  then  certainly  this  is  not  freedom  for  the  ends  of  mora] 
discipline,  but  freedom  for  simple  and  universal  gratification.  Freedom  in  St.  Paul's 
view  is  not  a  final  cause,  it  is  a  means ;  and  he  would  have  the  Corinthian  remember 
that  one  of  their  greatest  obligations  was  to  restrain  this  freedom.  The  freedom  itself 
had  a  large  range  as  to  the  objects  allowed  its  use  and  enjoyment.  Should  it  cover  the 
whole  area  of  activity  ?  Nay,  says  the  apostle,  this  would  be  bondage  in  another  form. 
"  I  will  not  be  brought  under  the  power  of  any,"  for  "  all  things  are  lawful  unto  me," 
which  k  to  say,  "all  things  are  in  my  power,"  and  I  will  exercise  my  poiner  by 
imponng  limitations  on  self-indulgence.  Of  course,  then,  this  restraint  put  on  indi'- 
vidual  freedom  is  our  own  voluntary  act.  Such  is  the  stress  laid  on  personality  that  a 
man's  Christian  virtue  must  be  specifically  his  own,  and  recognized  by  infallible  signs 
as  his  own.  Development  is  a  common  duty,  self-development  segregates  a  man  from 
bis  fellows  that  he  may  grow  in  a  given  way.  Self-denial  is  a  common  duty,  but 
under  this  law  of  individuality  in  using  our  freedom,  self-denial  assumes  a  variety  of 
shapes,  and  becomes  wonderfully  potential  in  human  afEuis  by  the  diversity  it  presents. 
In  this  view  the  self-denial  of  A  ia  no  guide  for  B.  The  special  form  of  yoiur  self- 
demal  may  not  commend  itself  to  me,  nay,  it  may  be  hurtful  to  me ;  and,  assuredly,  it 
will  lose  its  virtue  if  I  adopt  it  merely  because  it  is  yours.  And  hence  the  value  of 
example  in  this  respect  is  not  to  create  a  slavish  imitation  on  the  part  of  others,  but  to 
set  forth  the  worth  inherent  in  the  spirit  of  self-deniaL  If  this  principle,  so  boldly 
turged  by  St.  Paul,  had  been  faithfully  adhered  to,  it  would  have  saved  the  Church 
from  many  inconsistencies.  Rivate  opinion,  while  it  is  content  to  be  such,  may  be 
over-stringent,  and  yet  do  no  great  harm.  But  in  many  cases  it  exceeds  the  limits  o 
individuality  and  takes  shape  as  the  tyranny  of  public  opinion.  Morbidness  is  rarely 
satisfied  till  it  acquires  notoriety  before  the  eyes  of  men,  and  so  it  comes  to  pass  that  we 
have  ecclesiastical  agitation  and  legislation  about  many  things — for  instance,  amuse- 
ments—concerning which  no  exact  standard  can  be  set  up  for  everybody.  If  we  could 
have  an  exact  standard,  it  would  not  compensate  for  the  loss  of  personal  freedom,  dnce 
this  is  precisely  one  of  those  matters  in  which  self-denial  owes  all  ite  excellence  to  tiie 
restrictions  that  it  imposes  upon  itself.  Si  Paul's  emphatic  "/"  In  this  connection  is 
the  "  I"  of  every  redeemed  man,  and  accordingly,  as  a  tmiversal  prerogative^  this 
exalted  characteristic  of  individuidity  is  most  carefully  guarded.  And  how  is  it 
guarded  ?  To  say  nothing  of  what  Christian  freedom  is  in  itself  as  delegated  by  God 
in  Christ,  and  conditioned  widely  different  from  Adam's  sovereignty  in  Eden;  to  say 
nothing  of  its  original  limitations  by  the  Divine  Law,  and  the  fixed  barriers  over  which 
H  may  not  pass,  and,  if  true  to  itself,  cannot  pass ;  what  is  this  liberty  but  a  glorious 
privilege  to  be  made  still  more  glorious  by  our  own  self-enacted  laws  of  restraint?  It 
is  a  new  limitetion  peculiar  to  man.  It  is  a  limitation  which  each  man  under  tin 
grace  of  the  Spirit  ori^nates  and  executes  in  attestation  of  his  own  endowment!  as 
Ood's  redeemed  servant.     It  is  sonship  in  ite  most  beautiful  and  tender  fonn-~th« 


oavLl— 20.1    THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS  201 

"  Abba,  Father,"  which  is  not  heard  in  the  responses  of  the  Church,  nor  in  hymni  of 
sodal  worship,  but  is  an  utterance  that  rises  to  Qod  in  those  hours  when  loneliness  ii 
a  supreme  joy.    I  liave  the  power ;  I  will  not  use  it ;  I  will  deny  myself  its  exercise, 
and  I  will  do  it  because  "  all  things  are  not  expedient."    What  other  eye  save  his 
own  could  penetrate  those  mysteries,  from  which  he  draws  reasons  and  motives  for 
particular  acts  of  self-denial  ?    Mysteries,  we  say ;  for  many  an  advanced  believer 
yields  in  this  phase  of  experience  to  half-awakened  instincts  and  undefined  impulses. 
How  can  ministers  of  the  gospel,  how  can  Churches  in  their  ofBcial  capacity,  get  at  the 
knowledge  of  what  is  wisest  and  best  in  those  matters  that  belong  to  the  very  highest 
attributes  of  personality  as  the  ground  of  individuality?     "Let  every  man  be 
fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind."    "  Fully  persuaded  "  he  can  never  be  unless  he  use 
his  liberty  untrammelled.    If  you  dogmatize  and  legislate,  the  fuU  perstmsion  cannot 
be  the  outcome  of  "his  own  mind."    If  God  can  trust  him,  why  not  you?     The 
safeguard  has  been  provided — ^it  is  expediency.    And  this  sense  of  expediency  or  of 
fitness  and  propriety  is  a  conservative  and  prudential  force,  which  operates  to  check 
all  excesses,  and  binds  about  the  man  the  golden  cestus  of  moderation.    Expediency 
is  never  self-willed  and  arbitrary.    It  presides  over  tastes  and  the  minor  moralities  no 
less  than  over  the  more  prominent  virtues;  nor  does  it  trifle  with  trifles  nor  disdain 
the  helps  of  look  and  tone  and  manner,  but  is  cardinal  to  whatsoever  reflects  the  man 
upon  his  associates.    Keenly  alive  to  discriminations,  it  educates  us  to  know  the  best 
from  the  merely  good,  and,  by  its  fine  tact  and  subtle  sagacity,  goes  on  swift  wing  to 
the  noblest  objects.    It  considers,  as  though  it  were  a  part  of  itself,  the  welfare  of 
others,  and  thus  becomes  a  guarantee  that  a  man's  liberty  shall  not  invade  the  rights 
of  his  fellow-man.     And  remembering  that  "all  things"  are  his  only  so  far  as  he  is 
Christ's,  he  realizes  that  it  is  "  no  more  I  that  live,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."    Then 
St.  Paul  proceeds  to  dwell  on  the  sanctity  of  the  human  body — a  favourite  topic,  on  which 
he  expends  much  thought.     In  the  third  chapter  he  had  discussed  it,  and  in  subsequent 
passages,  every  one  of  them  singularly  clear  and  vivid,  he  recurs  to  this  great  topic. 
Here  the  leading  idea  is  that  our  bodies  "  are  the  members  "  of  Christ's  body.     "  The 
body  is  for  the  l>ord,  and  the  Lord  for  the  body."    And  hence  St.  Paul,  in  his  concrete 
method  of  thinking,  refuses  to  separate,  even  in  thought,  body  and  soul,  as  they  are 
connected  with  redemption.    Matter  and  mind  are  perfectly  unlike;  they  are  known 
to  us  only  by  their  infinite  contrariety ;  and  yet  matter  and  mind  meet  and  unite  as 
body  and  soul,  and  the  union  is  human  nature.     These  two  substances  grow  each  in 
its  own  way,  the  natural  union  at  birth  becoming  closer  and  yet  closer  as  years 
progress,  and  the  body  subordinating  itself  more  and  more  to  the  mind's  service.     In 
the  mature  man — the  mechanic,  the  accountant,  the  artist,  the  poet,  the  philosopher — 
a  vast  advance  has  occurred  in  the  nearness  and  adaptability  of  the  corporeity  to  the 
wants,  demands,  and  aspirations  of  the  spirit.    If  the  providential  idea  in  education 
and  culture  be  fulfilled,  the  co-operative  activity  constantly  increases,  each  forward 
step  a  step  for  both,  and  the  law  of  development  taking  effect  in  mutuality  of 
advantage.    Still  more  fully  is  this  fact  brought  out  in  Christian  experience.    St. 
Paul's  figures  on  this  subject  stand  for  facts.    Bodily  appetites  cease  to  be  mere  animal 
instincts.    They  are  elevated  and  purified.    If  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead,  so  too 
our  bodies  shall  be  raised,  for  the  companionship  of  mind  and  matter  as  soul  and  body 
is  not  a  transient  but  an  eternal  fact.     One  may  speak  of  being  "  here  in  the  body 
pent "  and  of  the  "  body  of  humiliation  "  (vile  body},  but  the  idea  of  body  as  an 
investiture  of  spirit  and  an  auxiliary  to  its  functions  is  a  part  of  the  original  scheme 
of  humanity,  and  will  have  its  complete  development  in  the  future  life.    Little  do  we 
realize  that  the  resurrection-man  is  now  in  a  process  of  training  as  to  his  sorporeal 
form.    This  training  is  double — mental  and  material — and  hence,  while  it  is  true  that 
certain  physical  functions  will  expire  and  be  known  no  more,  yet  the  effects  of  their 
experience  will  survive  in  the  soul  itself.    "A  tpiritual  body"  is  assured  us  by 
Chiistianity  and  confirmed  to  us  by  Christ's  resurrection;  and,  agreeably  to  this 
doctrine,  the  present  growth  of  body  into  the  mind's  service,  the  tuition  of  the  senses, 
the  reduction  of  the  nerves  to  the  will,  the  command  which  is  acquired  over  the  lower 
organs,  all  indicate  that  the  resurrection-man  Of  body  and  spurit  is  now  in  process  of 
formation.    If  this  is  true;  if  the  resurrection  is  not  only  •  prospective  gloiy  but 
•  realization  now  |;oing  on  by  means  of  the  present  ennoblement  and  sanctification  of 


202  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CXJaiNTHIANS.    [oh.  Ti  1—20. 

the  human  body ;  and,  fnrthermore,  if  Christ's  education  of  his  own  bodj  to  the 
offices  he  filled  as  Teacher,  Miracle- Worker,  Philanthropist,  Redeemer,  etc.,  as  to  the 
spirit  actuating  him,  an  example  to  his  followers ; — then  surely  we  have  the  weightiest  of 
reasons  for  regarding  the  body  as  the  "  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Greek  philosophy 
had  abused  the  truth  that  all  creatures  are  for  man,  and  that  he  is  the  measure  of 
all  things.  Professing  Christians  had  followed  a  carnal  philosophy  in  the  application 
of  this  truth.  And  now  that  St.  Paul  has  rescued  it  from  its  perversions  and  set  it 
in  its  proper  light,  he  may  well  urge  the  conclusion,  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price : 
therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's."  Could 
anything  more  timely,  more  momentous,  more  significant  of  the  aim  of  Christianity 
as  it  respected  the  social  regeneration  of  mankind,  have  been  said  by  St.  Paul  ?  The 
sin  of  the  body ;  that  one  sin  which  surrenders  the  body  to  another  and  degrades  it 
as  nothing  else  can  degrade ;  that  sin  of  sins,  which  debauches  the  body  where  it  ought 
to  be  purest,  and  sinks  lowest  that  which  should  be  highest ; — could  its  wickedness  be 
set  forth  in  stronger  language  than  when  he  speaks  of  the  body  as  the  tabernacle,  in 
which  not  only  the  soul  but  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  ?  "  Which  ye  have  of  God,"  and 
therefore  "  not  your  own,"  but  "  bought  with  a  price."  And  yet  this  redeemed 
possession,  the  purchase  of  Christ's  blood,  a  member  of  his  mystical  body,  a  tabernacle 
of  the  Spirit,  alienated,  abused,  prostituted  to  the  most  shameful  and  the  most  fatal 
of  all  vices.  Of  nothing  is  it  so  true  as  of  this  vice,  that  we  become  like  that  with 
which  we  associate.  Association  is  assimilation,  and,  ia  this  case,  assimilation  is  the 
most  dreadful  form  of  desecratioo.  These  verses  (18 — 20)  contain,  as  has  been 
suggested  (Alford),  the  germ  of  the  three  weighty  sections  of  the  Epistle  about  to 
follow.  And  we  do  well  to  enter  into  their  meaning  and  implore  the  grace  of  Qod  to 
assist  UB,  lest  we  fail  to  receive  the  profound  impression  sought  to  be  made.  It  i>> 
useless  to  blink  the  fact  that  among  Christian  nations  and  in  the  nineteenth  century 
this  colossal  vice  of  a  desecrated  human  body  is  the  Satanic  citadel  of  iniquity.  Take 
all  the  vices  ai.J  sins  oii  earth,  aggregate  them  in  one  huge  bulk,  and  the  misfortunes, 
evils,  catastrophes,  tragic  disasters,  put  together,  would  not' outweigh  the  consequences 
morally  and  socially  viewed  of  this  enormity.  Half  of  the  maa  goes  straight  and 
quick  into  the  hands  of  the  devil,  and  the  other  half,  unless  God  interpose,  follows  on 
in  a  foscination  of  blindness  exceptional  amoug  illusions.  God  help  us !  For  verily 
"  vain,"  in  this  instance,  "  is  the  help  of  man."  We  need  a  much  larger  and  bolder 
discussion  of  the  religion  of  the  human  body ;  and  if  writers  and  preachers  would  study 
the  art  of  doing  this  work,  the  Church  and  the  world  would  be  vast  gainers.  Any 
way,  this  is  open  to  us  all,  viz.  to  lay  a  ranch  greater  stress  than  is  commonly  done 
on  the  dignity,  worth,  and  glory  of  the  human  body  as  seen  in  the  light  of  Christ's 
teaching.  Full  justice  is  not  doue  this  sulject,  not  even  approximative  justice,  and, 
therefore,  no  wonder  the  body  is  disparaged,  vilified,  tolerated  by  many  as  a  nuisance, 
and  immolated  by  thousands  as  a  creature  of  appetite  and  lust.  "  Bought  with 
a  price,"  the  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  paid  for  it — a  glorious  thing  to  be  bought  and 
not  too  precious  a  ransom  paid,  and  now  sprinkled  by  that  blood  and  hallowed  by  the 
indwelling  Spirit.  Oh  what  intenseness  of  soul  should  go  into  the  pleading,  "  Olorify 
Gk)d  in  your  body  "  1  — L. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Litigation ;  or.  How  shall  GJiristians  settle  their  differences  and  dilutes  1 
Remarkable  is  the  insight  which  this  Epistle  affords  us  into  the  interior  life  of  a  Church 
of  the  first  age.  We  seem  to  be  brought  into  the  presence  of  remarkable  virtues  and 
of  remarkable  faults,  and  are  impressed  with  the  incongruity  of  the  picture.  One  thing 
is  certain,  that  human  nature  was  tlien  what  it  is  now,  and  that  Christianity  offers 
the  one  Divine  remedy  for  individual  and  for  social  ills. 

I.  It  IB  TO  BE  EXFBOTGD  THAT  DIFFEBF.NCE3  AND  DISPUTES  WILL  ARISE   WITHIN  THE 

BOUNDABIES  OF  CHRISTIAN  COMMUNITIES.  The  occasious  are  manifold;  the  conflict 
of  interests  and  of  opinions  and  of  tastes  will  account  for  not  a  few.  It  is  irrational  to 
suppose  that  human  nature  can  be  at  once  transformed  from  the  condition  of  the  self- 
indulgent  pagan,  for  example,  to  the  position  of  a  mature  and  holy  servant  of  God 
There  are  to  be  found  in  the  Church  on  earth  persons  occupying  every  point  intermediate 
between  these  extremes ;  and  among  such  "  offences  will  come." 

IL  It  U  BOANDAIiOUS  THAT  BUOB  DISPUTES  SHOULD  BE  BROUOHT  BEFOBX  A  BBATHKH 


ra.  VI.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  201 

TBiBUKAL.  The  Qreekd  were  an  especially  disputatious  and  litigious  race.  It  wai 
uatural  enough  that  those  who  in  the  days  of  their  heathenism  had  been  accustomed 
to  refer  their  disputes  to  the  judges  of  the  city  should  still  carry  any  differences  that 
might  arise  ioto  the  same  courts.  But  reflijction,  as  the  apostle  urges,  must  have  made 
manifest  the  unwisdi)m  of  such  a  proceeding.  Christianity  proclaimed  itself  a  religion 
of  peace  and  loye ;  and  its  adherents  spoke  of  one  another  as  brothers ;  whilst  it  was 
known  that  the  great  Lord  had  enjoined  the  forgiveness  of  injuries,  and  had  himself  set 
an  example  of  such  forgiveness.  It  is  clear  that  for  Christians  to  go  to  law  with  one 
another  before  the  tribunals  of  the  heathen  was  to  create  a  scandal,  and  to  bring  both 
the  religion  and  its  professors  into  contempt.  The  same  reasonings  apply  wherever,  in 
our  own  day,  the  powers  that  be  are  unchristian,  and  the  followers  of  Jesus  are  but  as 
leaven  in  the  mass  of  heathenism. 

III.  Eyebt  Christian  booiett  contains  within  itself  eleub'Nts  capablk  of 
DEAUNG  with  SUCH  EMEBOENCiES.  Accordiug  to  the  apostle's  teaching,  the  "  saints  " 
shall  be  assessors  with  the  Lord  Christ  in  the  judgment  of  the  world  and  of  angels ;  and 
those  destined  to  fulfil  functions  so  majestic  may  surely  be  entrusted  with  tlie  settlement 
of  trivial  disputes.  It  is  best  if  the  two  persons  between  whom  a  misunderstanding  has 
nrisen  can  compose  their  differences  with  no  outside  assistance  ;  if  this  cannot  be  dune, 
it  is  well  to  call  in  the  aid  of  a  Christian  of  calm,  impartial  character  and  of  large 
experience,  with  a  common  agreement  to  accept  his  award  without  murmuring.  There 
is  surely  a  large  opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  the  virtues  of  wisdom  and  justice  in 
such  directions  as  these.  Much  bickering  and  heart-burning  might  be  avoided  were 
there  a  sincere  and  general  desire  to  act  upon  the  counsels  of  the  apostle.  The  courts  of 
justice,  even  in  Christian  countries,  might  thus  be  relieved  of  much  of  their  business,  to 
the  advantage  of  the  whole  community. 

IV.  The  best  preventive  of  quarrelling  is  a  disposition  to  suffer  injobies 
BATHER  THAN  TO  RESENT  OB  EVEN  TO  REDRESS  WBONO.  There  is  Something  Very 
startling  and  very  grand  in  the  apostle's  sudden,  unexpected  questions,  "Why  not  rather 
take  wrong  ?  why  not  rather  be  defrauded  1 "  These  are  "  counsels  of  perfection."  The 
alternative  already  suggested  is  good ;  but  this  is  better  far,  however  it  be  oppused  to  the 
inclinations  of  "  the  natural  man."  Christ  has  given  us  an  example  of  suffering  wrong. 
From  the  world  we  are  bound,  if  it  be  so  ordered,  to  accept  with  patience  language  of  con- 
tumely or  treatment  of  injustice.  And  it  is  suggested  that,  even  amongst  those  who  are 
fellow-members  of  the  same  body,  there  may  be  mutual  forbearance,  there  may  be  a 
patience  amounting  to  magnanimity,  a  renunciation  of  rights  which  shall  make  it  clear 
of  how  little  importance  are  all  those  matters  upon  which  it  is  possible  for  good  men  to 
differ. 

"  Learn  how  sublime  a  thing  it  if 
To  suffer,  and  be  strong  I " 

T. 

Ver.  11. — Pait,  present,  and  future.  In  the  tviro  preceding  verses  the  apostle  has 
il  escribed,  in  terse,  plain  terms,  the  awful  vices  to  which  the  heathen  inhabitants  of  Corinth 
were  addicted.  To  his  enlightened  mind  the  kingdom  of  Satan  and  the  kingdom  of  Ood 
were  diametri««>lly  opposed  j  and  the  test  by,  which  Paul  judged  them  was  the  test 
of  moral  character — a  test  which  the  reason  and  conscience  cannot  but  approve.  The 
apostle  knew  from  what  a  slough  some  of  his  Coridtliian  converts  had  been  delivered, 
and  he  points  the  contrast  between  the  kingdom  in  their  person  and  history. 

I.  A  BLEBBINa    AS   BESPLCTS   THE    PAST:    THE   CHRISTIAN    IB    WASHED    FBOH    MOBAL 

FOULNESS.  The  language  of  this  passage  must  have  gone  home  with  power  to  some 
hearts  :  "  Such  were  some  of  you ! "  They  had  indulged  in  sins  of  the  flesh  and  of  the 
spirit,  in  vices  which  were  deemed  pardonable,  and  in  vices  which  were  deemed  vile, 
in  transgressions  against  their  own  nature  and  against  society.  Some  had  been 
notorious  and  flagrant,  others  ordinary,  offenders.  But  all  had  contracted  moral 
defilement.  And  what  had  Christianity  done  for  them  ?  What  has  it  done  for  all  to 
whom  it  has  come?  It  has  purified  them  from  their  old  sins.  "Ye  were  washed.'' 
The  lustration  of  baptismal  waters  was  a  symbol  of  the  purification  wrought  in  the 
spirit  by  tlie  redemption  of  Christ,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God. 

II.  A  BLESSIVO  AS  BESPECTS  THE  PRESENT :  THE  ChBISTLAN  IS  BENEWKD  DT  HOLINKSS 


204  THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTSIANS.    [oh.  vl  1—20 

Porgiveness  and  cleansing  from  impurity  may  justly  be  regarded  as  the  means  to  an 
end ;  i.e.  to  hallowing  or  sanctification.  This  is  the  positive,  to  which  the  other  is  the 
negative,  side.  Set  free  from  vice  and  crime,  the  subject  of  the  Divine  power  of  the 
cross  comes  under  a  new  and  inspiring  influence.  The  Holy  Spirit  creates  the  nature 
afresh.  No  inferior  power  is  adequate  to  produce  a  change  so  vast.  It  is  a  proof  of  the 
Divine  origin  and  adaptation  of  Christianity  that  it  attempts  and  achieves  a  task  so 
superhuman.  These  moral  miracles  uf  sanctification  constitute  an  evidence  of  Chris- 
tianity which  is  to  many  minds  the  most  conclusive  of  all. 

III.   A    BLESSING    AB  EESPBOTS   THE    FTJTURB  :     THE    CHRISTIAN    IB    JUSTIFIED    FROM 

CONDEMNATION.  The  expression  employed  refers  to  the  government  of  God  and  our 
relation  to  it.  Justification  is  acquittal  at  the  bar  of  the  rigliteous  Judge.  By  anticipa- 
tion Scripture  represents  this  acquittal  as  already  pronounced  in  the  case  of  those  who 
have  accepted  the  terms  of  salvation.  For  such  the  Name  of  Jesus  Clirist  avails,  and 
in  such  the  Spirit  of  God  graciously  works.  Justification  is  conferred  now ;  but  the 
full  benefit  of  it  will  appear  by  contrast  in  the  day  of  juiigraent. 

Application,  1.  The  question  is  suggested  to  every  hearer  of  the  gospel — Could 
the  apostle  have  used  this  language  with  reference  to  mef  Are  the  signs  of  this 
mighty  change  manifest  in  my  life?  2.  The  reflection  is  suggested  to  those  who  have 
experienced  this  moral  transformation — How  wonderful  and  how  effectual  is  the  grace 
of  God  I  How  vast  is  the  debt  of  gratitude  we  owe  to  the  Father  who  loved  us,  the 
Saviour  who  redeemed  us,  the  Holy  Spirit  who  sanctifies  us  I — T. 

Vers.  12 — 16.— 1%«  sanctity  of  the  hody.  At  Corinth  idolatry  assumed  a  most 
imposing,  luxurious,  and  voluptuous  form.  It  is  quite  in  accordance  with  all  we  know 
of  the  opulent  and  pleasure-loving  Inhaliitants  of  and  visitors  to  "  the  star  of  Hellas,' 
that  those  controversies  and  scandals  which  are  dealt  with  so  fully  in  this  chapter 
should  arise  in  a  Christian  society  planted  by  the  apostle  at  Corinth.  It  should  be 
more  especially  noticed  that  there  is  a  sufificient  reason  for  the  remarkable  fact  that 
sexual  matters  should  be  treated  more  fully  in  this  Epistle  than  in  any  other  part  oi 
the  New  Testament.  The  apostle  in  this  passage  demolishes  the  sophistical  arguments 
and  excuses  by  which  certain  professed  Christians  at  Corinth  were  disposed  to  defend 
the  practice  of  fornication.  It  was  said  that  matters  relating  to  the  bodily  life  were 
indifferent  to  the  moral  welfare  of  men,  that  as  an  enlightened  man  will  eat  this  food  or 
that,  irrespectively  of  any  superstitious  prejudices,  inasmuch  as  food  and  the  digestive 
system  are  naturally  in  co-relation  with  each  other,  so  he  wiU  satisfy  the  sensual 
appetites  of  his  body  in  whatever  way  may  be  convenient  and  agreeable  to  him.  Against 
this  doctrine  of  devils  Paul  here  argues,  not  on  grounds  of  asceticism,  but  on  grounds 
which  must  be  conceded  as  secure  by  the  moral  and  especially  by  the  Christian  thinker. 

I.   ThB  GROUNDS  UPON  WraOH  CHRISTIANITy  ESTABLISHES  THE  8ANCTITT  OF  THE  BODY. 

As  here  presented,  they  may  appear  to  some  readers  to  be  mystical,  but  in  fact  they  are 
in  harmony  both  with  the  facts  of  human  nature  and  with  the  great  doctrines  of  the 
New  Testament.  1.  The  Lord  Christ  and  the  tody  of  man  are  "for  "  each  other.  In 
his  incarnation  Christ  has  assumed  the  human  body,  in  bis  ministry  he  has  honoured 
it,  in  his  death  he  has  redeemed  it.  Not  the  soul  only,  but  the  body,  is  God's  creation, 
and  the  object  of  Christ's  regard,  and  partaker  of  the  benefits  of  his  mediation.  As 
the  Lord  is  for  the  body,  so  is  the  body  for  the  Lord.  2.  More  particularly,  the  hodiet 
of  Christiant  are  memleri  of  Christ.  The  ransomed  and  renewed  humanity  is  one 
glorious  whole,  one  Divine  organism,  the  Lord  Jesus  being  himself  the  authoritative 
Head.  If  the  Head,  the  informing  Spirit,  is  holy,  must  not  also  the  subordinate 
members  be  also  pure  and  consecrated  ?  3.  Christ  having  been  raised  from  the  dead, 
it  is  appointed  that  the  hody  of  every  follower  and  friend  of  Christ  shall  share  in  this 
resuscitation  and  exaltation.  In  what  way  this  shall  take  place  is  immaV^rial  to  the 
argument.  The  spiritual  renewal  is  the  earnest  of  the  high  and  immortal  resurrection 
of  the  whole  man.  These  things  being  so,  the  body  of  the  Cliristian  standing  in 
relation  so  intimate  to  the  glorious  and  holy  Mediator  and  Lord, — is  there  any 
consistency  between  such  a  connection  with  the  King  of  saints  and  a  life  of  filthy 
sensuality  ?    The  incompatibility  is  apparent  and  undeniable. 

IL  Tm  PBAOTICAI.  CONSEQUENCES  WHICH  FOLLOW  UPON  THE  CHRISTIAN  DOCTBIBX  01 

THE  BODY.    These  are  broadly  distinguished  into  two  classes.    1.  Food  i$  a  matter  ^ 


tm.n.  1—20.1  THE  PlEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORmTHIANSw  20a 

indifference.  Many  weak  Christians  laid  great  stress  upon  clean  and  unclean  jfood ; 
lome  objected  to  eat  what  had  been  or  might  have  been  offered  to  idols.  Now,  the 
apostle  claims  all  this  as  a  province  of  Christian  liberty.  Diet  was  a  matter  "  with- 
out "  the  body.  All  things  were  lawful.  Those  who  ate  and  those  who  refiained  from 
eating  were  forbidden  to  despise  one  another ;  for  both  alike  were  called  upon  to  act  in 
this  matter  "  as  unto  the  Lord."  2.  Impurity  is  absolutely  forbidden.  There  is  a  vital 
difference  between  the  satisfaction  of  hunger  and  the  gratification  of  the  sexual  appetite. 
This  latter  is  only  permissible  within  the  boundaries  of  holy  matrimony.  Fornication 
is  an  abuse  of  the  body,  a  defilement  of  Christ's  members,  an  insult  to  the  Lord  himself, 
whose  property  it  not  only  takes  by  theft  from  him,  but  hands  over  to  a  harlot.  This 
is  very  plain  speaking  on  the  part  of  the  apostle.  But  it  is  just ;  and  if  it  was  necessary 
in  those  days,  it  is  equally  necessary  now.  Physiology  is  often  invoked  to  sanction 
vice ;  but  it  is  well  to  listen  to  the  nobler  and  purer  counsels  of  the  apostles,  which  are 
not  more  in  harmony  with  the  loftiest  ethics  than  they  are  with  the  soundest  conclu- 
sions of  physical  and  of  social  science. — T. 

Ver.  17. — Christ  and  his  people  are  one.  It  was  the  wont  of  the  apostle  to  associate 
the  commonest  duties  of  life  with  the  highest  motives  drawn  from  spiritual  realities 
and  relations.  In  dissuading  from  the  sin  of  impurity,  he  might  have  adduced  consi- 
derations drawn  from  physical  laws  or  from  social  conditions;  but  it  is  more  in  harmony 
with  his  convictions  and  habits  to  appeal  to  the  loftiest  principles  of  the  Christian 
religion. 

I.  The  bond  which  uniteb  Christians  to  theib  Lobd.  It  is  a  personal  relation 
which  is  here  asserted,  and  evidently  not  one  of  mere  external  association,  but  of  vital 
and  spiritual  union.  1.  It  is  a  bond  of  faith.  "Whom  not  having  seen,"  etc.  Christians 
receive  with  cordiality  the  gospel  concerning  Christ ;  they  receive  Christ  himself  to 
dwell  in  their  hearts  by  faith.  2.  It  is  a  bond  of  love.  They  are  joined  to  him  as  the 
bride  to  the  bridegroom,  in  a  spiritual  affection,  in  love  "  stronger  than  death."  3.  It 
is  a  bond  of  affinity.  Drawn  to  Jesus  as  sinners  to  the  Saviour,  they  remain  with  him 
as  friends  congenial  in  character,  in  disposition,  and  in  aims. 

IL  The  consequent  unity  between  Christians  and  theib  Lobd.  They  are  "ene 
spirit."  1.  They  are  in  a  spirit  of  subjection  to  the  Father,  whose  will  and  law  are 
authoritative  and  supreme.  2.  They  are  one  in  the  love  of  all  that  is  holy  and  morally 
admirable.  The  sympathy  that  exists  is  sympathy  with  regard  to  matters  of  the 
highest  moment,  with  regard  to  the  principles  that  animate  and  the  aims  that  dignify 
the  moral  life.  3.  They  are  one  in  the  bonds  of  an  immortal  fellowship.  Christ's  prayer 
for  his  people  was,  "  That  they  may  be  with  me  where  I  am  " — a  prayer  which  the 
Father  is  graciously  and  constantly  answering. 

III.  The  fbactical  fboofs  of  this  unity.  1,  A  repugnance  on  tha  part  of 
Christians  to  all  which  is  repugnant  to  their  Lord;  as  e.g.  those  vices  to  which 
allusion  is  made  in  the  context,  practised  by  the  heathen,  but  hateful  to  those  who  name 
the  N  ame  of  Christ.  2.  A  cultivation  of  the  spirit  of  brotherly  love.  The  "  one  spirit " 
must  needs  be  a  spirit  of  true  love,  linking  together  the  members  of  the  mystical  body 
of  Christ,  and  disposing  them  to  a  sympathetic  and  harmonious  action. — T. 

Vers.  19,  20^— A  purdiased  possession.  Every  noble  character  and  life  is  based  upon 
self-renunciation.  A  man,  in  order  to  make  his  mark  upon  the  world,  must  lose 
himself  in  some  great  cause,  that  e.^.  of  his  country,  of  science,  of  art,  of  humanity. 
Is  there  an  all-absorbing  aim  in  which  men  generally  may  justly  lose  then^elves  ? 
If  there  be,  it  must  be  the  highest,  all-comprehending,  perfectly  and  lastingly  satis- 
factory. Christians  have  found  this  secret :  they  live  to  God  in  Christ,  They  are 
not  their  own,  for  they  are  bought,  they  are  owned  by  the  Son  of  Qoi. 

I.  The  state  of  bondage  fbom  which  Chbistianb  abe  bansoued.  1.  There  was 
a  time,  a  state,  in  which  they  thought  themselves  "  their  own."  They  followed  their 
own  desires  and  went  their  own  way.  2.  But  in  reality  they  were  in  bondage — to  the 
Law  and  its  sentence  of  coodeianation ;  to  sin  and  its  cruel  fetters ;  to  Satan  and  his 
wretched  service.  3.  The  power  of  evil  then  fostered  the  delusion  of  libertyi  flattered 
pride  and  fostered  selfishness,  all  the  while  drawing  tighter  and  Mghter  the  chsina  oi 
spiritual  bondage. 


206  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa    [oh. Til— 20 

n.  Thk  Liberatob  to  whom  Chbistians  are  indebted  for  theib  ebdbmption. 
They  were  ransomed :  1.  By  One  whose  laws  and  service  had  been  forsaken  and  despised. 
2.  By  One  without  whose  help  bondage  would  have  been  eternal.  3.  By  One  upon 
whom  we  sinful  men  had  no  claim  based  upon  right  and  justice.  4.  By  One  whose 
heart  was  moved  with  pity  by  the  sad  spectacle  of  our  slavery.  6.  By  One  who  gra- 
ciously resolved  to  do  and  to  sufTer  all  that  might  be  involved  in  the  work  of  our 
deliverance. 

IIL  The  cost  at  wmoH  Chbistians  webe  bakbomed  fboh  slavebt  and  pubohased 
A8  THE  PKEE  BONDMEN  OF  GoD.  1.  It  was  a  price  which  no  mere  man  could  by  any 
possibility  have  paid.  2.  It  was  a  price  which  could  not  be  reckoned  and  estimated  in 
any  earthly  or  human  equivalent.  3.  It  was  a  price  in  order  to  pay  which  it  was 
necessary  that  the  Son  of  God  should  become  incarnate,  and  empty  himself  of  his 
glory.    4.  It  was  a  price  which  consisted  in  "  the  precious  blood  of  Christ." 

IV.  The  obligations  which  this  puechase  and  bedbmption  lat  upon  Chbistianb. 
These  may  be  regarded  in  two  aspects.  1.  Negatively.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own."  Tour 
heart  is  not  your  own,  but  Christ's ;  your  thoughts  are  not  your  own,  but  his  who 
liveth  in  you ;  your  time  is  not  your  own,  but  is  redeemed  for  the  Redeemer ;  your 
abilities  and  influence  are  not  your  own,  but  are  to  be  consecrated  to  him  to  whom 
you  owe  both  them  and  the  bias  which  has  been  given  them ;  your  property  is  not 
your  own,  but  his  who  claims  your  all.  2.  Positively.  "  Glorify  God  therefore."  The 
praise  is  due  to  lum  who  in  his  own  mind  conceived  the  purpose  of  redemption.  The 
service  is  due  to  him  whom  to  love  is  of  necessity  to  serve.  All  the  faculties  of  our 
nature  and  all  the  opportunities  of  our  life  may  well  be  laid,  as  a  consecrated  offering, 
upon  the  altar  of  God,  whose  we  are,  not  only  by  right  of  creation,  but  by  right  of 
grace  and  redemption,  whose  we  are  by  every  tie,  and  whom  we  are  bound  to  serve  as 
the  best  expression  of  our  gratitude  and  the  best  exercise  of  our  liberty. — T. 

Ver.  20.— "aiori/y  God."  "The  heavens  declare  the  gloiy  of  Gtod."  Hosts  of 
angelic  and  glorified  spirits  give  "glory,  honour,  and  thanksgiving  unto  him."  "All 
natioia  whom  he  hath  made  shall  come  and  glorify  his  Name." 

"  And  shall  man  alone  be  dumb 
Till  this  glorious  kingdom  come? 
No  t  the  Church  delights  to  raise 
Psalms  and  hymns  and  songs  of  praise." 

L  Ov  WHAT  OBOirNDB  SHOULD  CHRISTIANS  oLOBiFT  GkiD  ?  This  is  a  reasonable 
service,  a  reasonable  requirement.  1.  God  has  a  natural  right  over  us,  i.e.  by  his 
creative  power  and  providential  care.  "  Man's  chief  end,"  says  a  famous  Catechism, 
"  is  to  glorify  God."  2.  Redemption  is  the  great  reason  adduced  why  Christians  should 
glorify  God.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  context.  The  claim  of  purchase  is  added 
to  the  claim  of  creation. 

II.  Fbom  what  motives  SHOULD  Chbistians  olobift  God?  1,  From  a  remembrance 
of  the  danger  and  ruin  consequent  upon  any  other  end  in  life.  Exemplified  in 
Scripture  history,  as  in  the  instance  of  Belshazzar,  to  whom  it  was  said,  "  The  Gtod,  etc., 
bast  thou  not  glorified,"  and  in  the  instance  of  Herod,  who  "  gave  not  God  the  glory." 
2,  From  a  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  love  and  grace  to  which  they  are  indebted 
for  their  redemption.  The  ransom  and  redemption  do  indeed  avail  for  all  men ;  but 
multitudes  are  insensible  to  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord.  They  who  have  tested 
and  seen  that  the  Lord  is  good  are  prompted  by  their  experience  to  yield  themselves 
to  the  serrioe  of  their  Saviour.  3.  From  a  desire  to  secure  their  own  highest  happiness. 
They  have  learned  how  every  other  principle  of  life  fails  to  yield  a  deep  and  lasting 
satisfaction ;  and  now  they  are  learning,  by  happy  experience,  how  truly  blessed  is  the 
life  which  is  unto  the  Lord  of  love  and  glory.  This  is  exemplified  in  the  history  of  this 
very  Apostle  Paul,  4.  From  a  delight  in  the  Divine  commands.  It  is  an  invitation, 
but  it  is  also  a  behest :  "  Glorify  God,"  And  nothing  is  so  congenial  to  the  Christian 
as  what  is  enjoined  upon  him  by  his  Loru  s  authority.  , 

III.  In  what  manneb  mat  Christians  olorift  God?  l.'By  praise.  "Whoso 
ofiereth  praise  glorifieth  me."  "Confess  that  Jesus  Chrisi  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  Qoi 
the  Father."    Public,  cordial,  unceasing  praises  should  ascend  from  every  company  of 


mL-n.1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa  207 

the  redeemed.  2.  By  obedience  and  seryice ;  and  that  not  only  of  spirit,  m  is  presnmed, 
but  of  body,  as  is  here  expressed.  The  occasion  of  this  chapter,  the  prevalence  oi 
sensual  sin,  seems  to  give  an  especially  appositeness  and  force  to  this  admonition, 
"  Glorify  God  in  your  body."  That  which  had  been  the  instrument  of  unrighteousness 
and  uncleanness,  becomes,  through  the  redemption  of  Christ,  the  instrument  of  obedience 
»nd  holinesg. — T. 

Ven.  1 — 8. — Ghriitians  and  the  law  courtt.  How  far  are  Paul's  exhortations 
applicable  to  believers  in  the  present  day  ?  Amongst  the  ancients,  laws  were  often 
unjust,  judges  venal,  and  frequently  certain  objectionable  formalities,  such  as  adjura- 
tion by  false  deities,  had  to  be  observed.  In  our  own  land  and  time  these  things 
happily  are  not  as  of  old.  Yet  even  amongst  us  there  are  laws  tainted  with  injustice, 
and  there  is  not  a  little  in  our  modes  of  legal  procedure  which  is  objectionable.  Legal 
proceedings  are  sometimes  necessary.  Paul  appealed  to  Caasar.  And  our  duty  to 
society  may  render  it  incumbent  upon  us  not  to  allow  an  evil-doer  to  escape.  Never- 
theless litigation  between  professing  Christiana — 

L  Often  presents  a  melancholy  spectaclb.  1.  The  principals  frequentli/  receive 
injury.  Not  in  pocket  only ;  and  in  this  respect  he  who  gains  the  suit  is  generally 
little  better  off  than  he  who  loses.  But  morally  and  spiritually.  Anger  is  excited, 
and  ill  feeling,  if  not  positive  hatred,  towards  the  opponent.  There  is  the  direst 
temptation  to  take  every  possible  advantage.  The  legal  atmosphere  is  largely  of  the 
earth,  earthy,  and  does  not  engender  the  state  of  mind  needful  for  the  beautiful  but 
very  heart-searching  petition,  "Forgive  us  our  trespasses  as  we  forgive  them  that 
trespass  against  us."  The  prayer,  "Lead  us  not  into  temptation,"  may  indeed  be 
offered,  for  the  man  who  loves  legal  contests  requires  no  leading  into  temptation,  since 
he  runs  into  it  headlong  of  his  own  accord.  2.  Brings  scandal  upon  the  Church.  Both 
as  (1)  to  its  lack  of  wise  men  capable  of  forming  a  true  judgment ;  (2)  to  the  real 
condition  of  its  members.  The  world  judges  all  by  those  it  sees.  Irritated,  if  not 
vengeful,  litigants  will  be  taken  as  samples  fairly  representing  the  "  Church  of  the 
redeemed."  Thus:  3.  Christianity  itself  becomes  lowered  in  the  estimation  of  men. 
To  them  it  will  seem  as  though  the  religion  of  peace,  forbearance,  unity,  and  love  had 
failed  at  its  very  head-quarters.  So :  4.  A  great  injury  is  done  to  the  world.  By  preju- 
dicing it  against  the  truth  whereby  alone  it  can  be  saved.  Faulty  Christian  conduct 
drives  men  away  from  Christianity  itself.   Professors  of  religion  have  made  many  atheists. 

11.  Much  litioation  might  be  avoided  bt  :  1.  Desiring  mdy  the  right.  Men  who 
want  their  due  and  a  little  more  rush  to  the  courts.  Many  who  think  themselves 
very  just  are  very  unjust  in  their  desires.  It  is  very  easy  to  become  unjust  almost 
unconsciously.  If  men  would  only  judge  their  own  cause  justly  there  would  often  be 
an  end  of  the  dispute.  It  is  astonishing  how  many  men  fail  in  forming  a  fair  estimate 
of  their  own  claims :  there  seems  an  almost  invincible  tendency  to  exaggeration.  We 
should  sternly  educate  ourselves  in  principles  of  justice.  We  should  judge  our  own 
cause  impartially,  as  though  it  were  not  our  own.  2.  Being  content  oftentimes  to  take  less 
than  our  due.  The  law  promises  to  us  all  that  we  can  claim,  but  we  should  not  always 
seek  all  that  we  can  claim.  A  spirit  of  sacrifice  is  not  unchristian.  "  Suffering  wrong- 
fully "  is  not  altogether  deprecated  in  Holy  Writ.  Even  if  we  are  smitten  on  the 
cheek,  our  Master  does  not  counsel  to  instantly  cast  our  assailant  into  prison,  and  to 
keep  him  there  until  he  has  paid  the  last  farthing  of  damages.  Forgiveness,  disposition 
to  pass  by  injury,  the  most  charitable  view  of  an  opponent's  motives  and  conduct, — 
these  things  are  "  of  Christ,"  3.  Not  making  great  matters  of  little.  If  theoretically 
«re  deem  ourselves  justified  in  going  to  law,  we  may  well  ask  ourselves  the  question — 
la  the  matter  in  dispute  worth  disputing,  and  worth  causing  the  evils  likely  to  arise 
therefrom  ?  4,  Rememhrwnce  of  our  relationship.  "  All  ye  are  brethren."  If  Christians, 
we  are  trying  to  do  the  same  work,  to  follow  the  same  Lord,  to  serve  the  same  God,  to 
reach  the  same  home.  Is  the  contemplated  litigation  consistent  with  this  relationship, 
and  is  it  likely  to  promote  "  brotherly  love "  t  And  here  we  must  avoid  becoming 
prejudiced  against  our  opponent.  Opposing  us,  being  on  the  other  side,  often  makei 
all  the  difference.  If  on  our  side,  a  man  is  evidently  a  Christian,  consistent,  a  credit 
to  the  community ;  but  if  against  us,  he  is  very  apt  to  be  everything  objectionable^ 
So  some  have  s  very  easy  conscience  in  going  to  law  against  a  brother,  because  before 


208  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0KINTHIAN3,    [.oh.  Tt  1—20 


doing  so  tbey  have  mentally  ejected  him  from  the  brotherhood  on  account  of  his 
numerous  delinquencies.  6.  Submitting  the  matter  in  dispute  to  the  arbitration  of 
Christian  brethren.  Earnestly  does  the  apostle  recommend  this  course.  He  seeks  to 
•rouse  the  spiritually  dormant  Corinthians  by  the  sarcastic  supposition  that,  with  all 
their  boasted  wisdom,  they  have  not  a  man  sufficiently  wise  to  arbitrate  in  a  case  of 
dispute  between  two  brethren.  He  unfolds  a  startling  truth  respecting  believers,  viz. 
that  hereafter  they  shall  judge  (1)  the  world  (ver.  2) ;  (2)  angels  (ver.  3).  This  declara- 
tion has  much  mystery  attaching  to  it,  but  it  accords  trith  Christ's  promise  to  his 
disciples,  that  they  should  sit  upon  twelve  thrones  and  judge  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel 
(Matt.  xix.  28 ;  see  also  Hev.  iii.  21).  And  Jude  tells  us  (ver.  6)  that  fallen  angels  are 
reserved  for  future  judgment.  We  get  thus  a  glimpse  of  the  future  exaltation  of  the 
redeemed.  Having  shared  in  the  shame  of  Christ,  they  will  share  in  his  glory  and 
power.  He  is  the  great  Judge,  but  tliey  will  be  identified  with  him  in  judgment. 
"  I  in  them,  and  tbey  in  me."  As  the  Law  on  Sinai  was  ordained  by  means  of  angels, 
so  the  saints  shall  administer  the  kingdom  of  their  Lord.  (1)  If  believers  are  to 
exercise  such  exalted  functions  hereafter,  they  should  on  earth  be  able  to  judge  many 
of  the  causes  of  their  brethren,  and  to  do  so  with  fairness  and  impartiality,  borne  are 
shy  of  arbitration,  because  sometimes  it  has  had  very  little  justice  in  it.  (2)  In  thus 
administering  justice  below,  believers  are  preparing  themselves  for  the  duties  of  the 
life  to  come.  Such  work  should  not  be  slighted;  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  educational. 
It  should  be  performed  with  all  possible  care.  Injustice  done  to  others  is  always  injury 
done  to  ourselves. — ^H. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — Our  inheritance  in  peril.  I.  What  our  inhbbitanob  is.  "The 
kingdom  of  God  : "  present,  but  chiefly  future.  Of  which  Peter  speaks  (2  Pet.  iii.  13), 
"We,  according  to  his  promise,  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleih 
righteousness."  Heaven,  and  the  heavenly  life,  and  the  heavenly  joys ;  the  "  rest 
that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  Glod ; "  the  uightless,  sinless,  cur^eless;  painless  land ; 
the  "  many  mansions "  of  the  Father's  house ;  the  eternal  home,  where  we  "  shall  see 
his  face."  This  inheritance  is  in  a  certain  sense  the  inheritance  of  all,  since  Christ  died 
for  the  sins  of  the  world.  The  gospel  invitation  is  addressed  to  all.  We  disinherit 
ourselves. 

II.  Sins  wbios.  hindeb  us  fbou  inhebitino  the  kinqdoh  of  God.  1.  Bins  aj 
sensuaiity.  Brutal  lusts ;  unholy  indulgence.  Amongst  the  ancients  (and  also  amongst 
the  moderns  too)  vices  existed  which  must  not  be  so  much  as  named  amongst  the 
decent  and  pure.  2.  Idolatry.  If  we  serve  false  gods,  how  can  we  expect  a  reward 
from  the  true  God?  Some  have  keen  eyes  for  injuries  done  to  men;  idolatry  is  a  pre- 
eminent sin  against  God.  And  we  may  be  thorough  idolaters  whilst  we  are  professed 
Christians.  What  is  that  which  occupies  the  throne  of  our  heart  and  of  our  life  ? 
Is  it  an  idol  or  is  it  God?  3.  Theft,  covetousness,  extortion.  These  may  be  grouped 
together.  They  do  not  seem  so  heinous  as  the  foregoing,  but  they  are  associated  with 
them — and  through  them,  equally  with  the  others,  may  the  inheritance  he  lost.  Such 
sin  shows  that  our  heart  is  not  right  either  towards  man  or  God.  And  the  three  are 
much  upon  a  par.  Yet  many  a  man  would  be  horrified  at  the  thought  of  being  a  thief 
who  is  not  at  all  horrified  at  being  undoubtedly  covetous  and  extortionate.  How  names 
hetray  us  1  Why,  what  is  covetousness  but  theft  in  the  bud  1  And  extortion  is  theft 
— unmitigated  theft — in  the  blossom  1  Many  a  man  steals  mentally,  and  is  as  guilty 
as  if  he  stole  actually ;  for  nothing  but  the  restraints  of  society  and  the  dock  keep  his 
hands  still.  And  he  passes  for  an  honest  man  1  Many  a  theft  is  committed  in  a  court 
of  justice  before  the  very  eyes  of  judge  and  jury,  and  sometimes  with  the  assistance  of 
t  bewigged  counsel ;  for  example,  when  a  man  is  striving  to  get  more  than  his  due. 
4.  Drunkenness,  This  curse  of  our  land — what  men  lose  by  it!  Health,  respect, 
friends,  position,  home,  wealth — and  the  kingdom  of  Ood.  5.  Foul  language.  Reviling, 
railing,  sins  of  the  tongue.  Foul  lips  which  sptak  of  a  foul  heart,  for  the  sweet  fountain 
sends  not  forth  bitter  waters.  Sins  such  as  these  entail  the  forfeiture  of  the  great 
inheritance.  Plainly  are  we  here  taught  that  a  nominal  faith  can  never  save  us.  All 
the  profession  in  the  world  cannot  carry  us  an  inch  towards  the  promised  land.  It  ii 
the  old  pagan  notion  that  religion  consists  in  outward  observanoea  and  not  in  heart 
mnd  life 


eH.Ti.1— 20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  20S 

m.  These  hutdbanoes  mat  be  removed.  Here  is  consolation  for  great  sinners — 
•nd  who  are  small  ones  ?  When  a  man  is  deeply  convinced  of  sin  he  is  often  tempted 
to  despair.  Can  I,  the  unclean,  the  immoral,  the  foul-mouthed,  the  foul-hearted,  enter 
mto  the  kingdom  of  ineffable  holiness?  It  seems  impossible.  But  after  detailing  some 
of  the  vilest  acts  of  which  humanity  can  be  guilty,  the  apostle  turns  upon  the  Corinthians 
and  says,  "  And  such  were  some  of  you."  Of  greatest  sinners  God  has  sometimes  made 
greatest  saints.  If  the  heart  be  contrite,  there  is  no  cause  for  the  abandonment  of  hope. 
The  barriers  which  are  insuperable  to  man  can  be  cast  down  by  the  might  of  God.  In 
our  sin  we  need  look  to  God,  for  none  besides  can  aid  us.  Oar  sickness  is  beyond  all 
skill  save  that  of  the  great  Physician. 

IV.  The  hanneb  of  removal.  The  apostle  speaks  of  "washing" — the  great  need 
of  the  defiled — and  then  directs  attention  to  its  twofold  charaotei.  That  the  impure 
may  enter  into  the  all-pure  kingdom  of  God,  two  things  are  necessary.  1.  Justification 
— which  we  receive  through  Christ  (ver,  11 ).  He  took  our  place ;  he  bore  our  sins ;  he 
made  atonement  for  ns.  Our  sins  are  imputed  to  him  ;  his  righteousness  is  imputed 
to  na.  Through  him  God  can  be  just  and  yet  the  Justifier  of  the  ungodly,  "  With  his 
stripes  we  are  healed ; "  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  " 
(1  John  i.  7) ;  he  is  able  to  save  "  to  the  uttermost ; "  "  Though  your  sins  be  as 
scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow  "  (Isa.  i.  18).  2.  BcmcUfication — which  we 
receive  through  the  operation  of  "  the  Spirit  of  onr  God "  (ver.  11),  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Justification  is  that  which  is  done  for  us ;  sanctification  is  that  which  is  done  in  us. 
Yet  one  is  not  without  the  other.  By  the  Divine  Spirit  we  become  "  born  again,"  "  bom 
of  the  Spirit,"  made  pure  inwardly ;  our  affections  purged,  our  desires  corrected,  our 
spiritual  being  controlled  and  purified  (see  John  iii.  3). 

V.  A  CAUTION  IMPLIED.  "And  such  were  some  of  you."  Are  ye  becoming  so  again  ? 
We  need  beware  of  "  going  back  "  to  those  things  which  once  barred  our  access  tc  the 
kingdom  of  God,  and  which  will  do  so  again  if  indulged  in.  Our  great  inheritance  may 
bo  lost  after  all !  It  will  be,  unless  we  "  endure  to  the  end."  How  earnest,  anxious, 
prayerful,  watchful  should  we  be  lest  we  "come  short"!  There  is  One  who  is  "able 
to  keep  us  from  falling  "  (Jude  24).  "  Cleave  unto  the  Lord  your  God  "  (Josh,  zxiii. 
8).— H. 

Ver.  12. — The  lawful  and  the  eoapedient.  L  It  is  important  to  ascertain  what 
IB  LAWFUL  FOR  US  IN  LIFE.  All  things  indifferent  (t.e.  not  evil  in  themselves)  are 
lawful  for  the  Christian.  He  has  the  widest  liberty.  He  is  not  unf'er  the  restriction  of 
the  older  economy.  To  him  "  every  creature  of  God  is  good  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  4),  and  to  be 
received  with  thanksgiving.  The  Christian  must  abide  within  the  limits  of  the  lawful. 
Nothing  that  seems  expedient  outside  of  the  lawful  must  be  touched  by  him.  He  is 
under  the  rule  of  righteousness,  and  must  not  allow  himself  in  aught  that  is  unright- 
eous. Note :  Nothing  is  really  expedient  outside  of  the  limits  of  the  lawful,  but  many 
things  may  appear  to  he  so. 

II.  But  another   question   has  to   be   answered   before    conduct  can  be 

DETERMINED,    VIZ. — WhAT    IS    EXPEDIENT    WITHIN     THE     LIMITS     OF    THE    LAWFUL  ? 

The  Christian  must  not  use  his  liberty  indiscriminately ;  he  must  consider  probable 
results.  The  end  does  not  justify  the  means,  but  the  end  often  determines  whethei 
means  (justifiable  in  themselves)  shall  be  used  or  not.  Means,  good  enough  in 
themselves,  may  umier  certain  conditions  lead  to  most  undesirable  ends ;  those  ends 
foreseen  determine  for  the  believer  that  those  means  shall  not  be  employed.  The 
Christian  has  to  select  the  truly  expfdient  out  of  the  truly  lawful.  It  has  been  well 
said,  "  Unlawful  things  ruin  thousands,  lawful  things  (unlawfully  used)  ten  thousands." 
And  also,  "  Nowhere  does  the  devil  build  his  little  chapels  more  cunningly  than 
right  by  the  side  of  the  temple  of  Christian  liberty."  A  Christian,  before  availing 
himself  of  his  liberty,  had  need  ask  such  questions  as  the  following : — 1,  What  will 
be  the  effect  upon  myself!  Shall  I  be  made  less  spiritual,  less  useful,  less  pleasing  to 
God?  All  that  we  do  we  do  more  or  less  "  unto  ourselves."  We  mould  ourselves  very 
largely  by  what  we  allow  to  ourselves.  2.  What  will  he  the  effect  vpon  my  liberty  f 
Liberty  may  commit  suicide.  Undue  indulgence  of  liberty  results  in  davery.  Paul 
was  intensely  anxious  "  not  to  be  brought  under  the  power  of  any,"  even  lawful,  thing. 
It  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  the  moral  health  and  needful  freedom  of  the  aou 

L  CORINTHIANS.  P 


210  THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.    [oh.  vi.  1—20. 

that  it  should  not  be  in  Bubjection  to  any  appetite  or  desire,  however  innocent.  8.  What 
vrill  he  the  effect  upon  my  fellows  f  Will  it  aid  or  hinder  them  ?  "  No  man  liveth 
unto  himself."  Every  man  is  "a  man  of  influence."  Innocent  things  to  us  may  be  by 
no  means  innocent  things  to  others.  By  example  ve  may  lead  men  to  destruction, 
whilst  we  withal  escape.  "  If  meat  make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while 
the  world  standeth"  (ch,  viii.  13).  4,  How  loitt  my  conduct  appear  to  Oodt  Is 
this  that  I  propose  to  do,  not  only  good  in  itself,  but  the  best  thing  for  me  to  do  at  this 
time  ?  Whatever  the  Christian  does,  he  is  to  do  to  the  glory  of  God,  even  in  matters 
of  eating  and  drinking.  Can  I  do  this  to  the  glory  of  God  ?  The  familiar  question, 
"  Is  it  wrong  to  do  this  or  to  go  thither  ?  "  is  often  both  misleading  and  utterly  irrelevant. 
The  answer  to  the  question  may  he  "  No."  Then  the  fallacious  reasoning  follows,  "  If 
it  is  not  wrong,  I  may  do  it  without  sin.  Stop  I  that  is  unsound  logic.  The  thing 
thorougMy  right  may  be  unutterably  wrong  I  "  All  things  are  lawful  unto  me,  but 
all  things  are  not  expedient,"  and  the  Christian  is  bound  by  every  obligation  to  do  that 
which  is  expedient  within  the  realms  of  the  lawful.  He  must  do  what  is  best ;  to  do 
aught  else  is  to  sin.  What  he  ougM  to  do,  and  what  he  may  do  lawfully,  are  often  two 
very  difierent  things.  ••  Ye  are  not  your  own ;  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price  "  (vers. 
19,  20).— H. 

Vers.  13 — 19.— Duties  to  the  body.  Christianity  concerns  itself  about  man's  body  as 
well  as  about  man's  soul.  Christianity  is  a  religion  for  man — for  a  whole  man.  When 
considering  matters  of  religion,  we  are  apt  to  leave  the  body  too  much  out  of  account. 
Our  remissness  might  be  corrected  if  we  remembered  how  large  an  influence  the  body 
has  upon  the  mind  and  soul. 

I.  Consider  what  Christianity  sats  about  the  body.  It  is :  1.  For  the  Lord. 
(1)  For  his  service  and  glory.  We  may  serve  Christ  with  our  body.  We  may  glorify 
God  with  our  body  (ver.  Wi\  With  our  whole  being  we  should  serve  the  Lord.  Out 
body  should  be  "  set  apart  for  God.  How  much  more  useful  many  would  be  if  they 
did  but  cultivate  physical  health  I  Their  uncared-for  bodies  become  grievous  burdens 
and  woeful  hindrances.  Disorder  in  the  body  is  contagious,  and  often  spreads  to  mind 
and  soul.  Athletics,  rightly  ordered,  lie  within  the  realm  of  religion.  The  man  who, 
tiot  neglecting  other  duties,  seeks  to  make  his  body  thoroughly  strong  and  vigorous,  Li 
more  pious,  not  less.  With  others,  diseases  the  fruits  of  old  sins,  abide  and  greatly  check 
them  in  active  service  for  God.  (2)  The  body  of  the  Christian  is  a  member  of  Christ 
(ver.  16).  Closely  united  to  the  great  Head.  He  took  our  nature — not  only  our 
spiritual  and  mental  nature,  but  our  bodily  nature.  We  are  one  with  him  in  our  whole 
being.  (3)  Purchased  by  Christ.  When  he  redeemed  man  he  redeemed  man  in  his 
entirety..  Our  bodies  have  a  part  in  "the  great  salvation."  And  at  what  a  price  was 
the  purchase  made  I  2.  A  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Solemn  thought  1  Huw  true — 
yet  how  often  forgotten  I  Whilst  in  the  body,  God  dwells  in  us.  The  body  is  the 
outer  framework  of  the  sanctuary  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  It  is  thus  consecrated  for  a 
high,  holy,  and  sacred  purpose.  It  is  God's  possession  and  dwelling-place,  like  the 
temple  of  old.  Thus :  3.  It  is  not  our  ovm.  Then  we  must  not  deal  with  it  as  though 
it  were.  It  has  been  bought  by  Christ,  and  should  be  freely  and  fully  surrendered  to 
him.  When  we  give  him  our  heart  we  should  give  him  our  body  also.  Many  forget 
to  do  this.  4.  Oared  for  by  Ood.  "  The  Lord  is  for  the  body."  He  preserves,  feeds, 
clothes,  shelters,  guards  it.  How  soon  it  would  perish  if  uncaied  for  by  him  1  6.  To  be 
raised.  The  resurrection  of  the  body  is  a  cardinal  doctrine  of  Christianity,  and  insisted 
upon  at  great  length  by  the  apostle  in  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  this  Epistle.  We  aro  but 
too  apt  to  ignore  this,  and  practically  to  conclude  that  at  death  we  shall  part  with  the 
body  for  ever.  We  think  it  worthless,  but  God  does  not.  He  will  raise  it  in  a  glorified 
form.  Its  present  constitution  will  be  greatly  changed,  as  the  apostle  intimates  in  ver. 
13.  The  time  will  come  when  the  body  will  not  be  sustained,  as  it  now  is,  by  meats. 
Ft  will  be  a  "  glorious  body  "  (Phil.  iii.  21),  a  "  spiritual  body  "  (ch.  xv.  44). 

II.  These  truths  eespbcting  the  body  SHonLD:  1.  Greatly  ennoble  it  in  our 
tstimation.  It  is  not  to  be  thought  lightly  of  or  treated  with  contempt.  Ancient 
philosophy  taught  hatred  of  the  body,  but  ancient  philosophy  is  not  Christianity.  We 
must  not  despise  the  body ;  this  is  a  dire  mistake  often  perpetrated.  The  body  has  a 
great  part  to  play  bcth  here  and  hereafter.    It  has  been  an  occasion  of  sin,  often  i» 


aB.Ti.1— 2a]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa  211 

a  burden ;  but  it  is  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  he  will  fully  redeem  and  glorify  it.  It  b 
his  workmanship,  thrown  much  out  of  gear  by  evil ;  but  he  shall  rectify  its  defects, 
and  make  it  "  meet  for  the  inheritance."  2.  Lead  us  to  use  it  most  carefully.  Being 
precious  in  God's  sight,  purchased  by  Christ,  tenanted  by  the  Divine  Spirit, — shall  wo 
deal  with  it  as  though  it  were  a  common  thing  ?  There  is  one  sin  mentioned  by  the 
apostle  which  injures  the  body  grievously,  and  utterly  outrages  the  Divine  intent  con- 
cerning it.  Let  us  guard  carefully  against  this  and  kindred  evils ;  terrible  will  be  the 
punishment  of  those  who  defile  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ohost,  and  who  prostitute  to  boM 
uses  the  "members  of  Chriit,"  Pure  body,  pure  mind,  pure  soul; — may  thia  trinity  o< 
blessings  be  ours  I — H. 

Vers.  1—8. — On  going  to  law.  Among  other  evils  at  Corinth  calling  for  correction, 
a  litigious  spirit  had  begun  to  show  itself,  fostered  doubtless  by  the  unpleasant  friction 
of  parties,  lirother  went  to  law  with  brother  before  the  heathen  tribunals,  and  the 
Christian  name  was  thereby  brought  into  ill  repute.  For  this  the  apostle  rebukes  them, 
and  assigns  weighty  reasons  why  they  should  settle  their  disputes  otherwise. 

I.  The  .ruDiciAL  function  of  the  saints.  All  judgment  has  been  committed  to 
Christ  (John  v.  22),  and  in  the  exercise  of  this  function  his  saints  are  associated  with 
him.  Suffering  with  him  here,  they  shall  reign  with  him  hereafter  (2  Tim.  ii.  12),  a 
kingdom  being  given  to  them  (Dan.  vii.  22 ;  Matt.  xix.  28) ;  and  when  he  comes  again 
he  will  be  accompanied  by  them  in  glory  (Jude  14, 15).  la  this  capacity  they  shall 
judge,  not  only  mankind,  but  also  the  angels.  Whether  the  apostle  has  in  View  gooil 
angels  or  bad,  it  is  not  essential  to  inquire ;  the  point  is  that  the  judicial  dignity  of  the 
saints  is  so  great  that  they  sliall  sit  in  judgment  even  on  angelic  beings.  How  wonder- 
ful an  honour  I  Meantime  we  share  in  the  humiliation  of  our  Lord.  The  saints  are 
not  exalted  to  the  judgment-seats  of  the  earth.  They  walk  here  as  kings  in  disguise, 
unknown  by  a  world  that  lets  itself  be  governed  by  the  prince  of  darkness.  Even  now 
they  exercise  a  judging  influence,  their  holy  lives  condemning  the  ungodly  arouKd 
them;  but  the  full  manifestation  of  their  judicial  function  is  reserved  for  the  time 
when  Jesus  comes  in  power.  Oh,  it  will  be  a  bright  day  for  this  world  when  holiness 
is  exalted  to  the  throne  and  all  the  evil  of  eartli  and  hell  is  summoned  to  its  bar, 
when  the  moral  confusion  meantime  prevailing  shall  give  place  to  the  fair  order  of  the 
reign  of  righteousness  1  What  manner  of  persons  ought  they  to  be  who  are  appointed 
to  judge  the  universe  of  men  and  angels  ? 

II.  The  right  settlement  of  disputes  between  Chbistians.  1.  Do  not  take  them 
to  a  heathen  court.  To  seek  redress  from  unbelievers  is  an  offence  against  Christian 
dignity-.  If  the  saints  are  to  judge  the  world,  why  go  to  this  same  world  for  judgment  ? 
These  pagan  magistrates  shall  yet  stand  at  your  bar ;  why  demean  yourselves  by  stand- 
ing at  theirs  ?  The  question  comes,  huw  far  this  rule  is  binding  upon  us.  Are  we 
forbidden  in  every  case  to  go  to  law  with  a  biotlier?  Looking  stiictly  at  the  case  of 
a  quarrel  between  two  Christians,  the  spirit  of  the  apostolic  rule  is  certainly  of 
permanent  obligation.  While  our  courts  of  law  are  free  from  many  of  the  objectionable 
features  of  heathen  tribunals,  they  are  not  so  thoroughly  Christian  as  to  justify 
believers  in  appealing  to  them,  especially  when  redress  may  be  had  otherwise.  And 
it  is  as-unseemly  for  brother  to  sue  brother  at  law  as  for  members  of  the  same  family. 
Paul's  appeal  to  Casar  cannot  be  cited  against  his  prohibtion  here ;  tor  it  was  not  a 
going  to  law  at  his  own  instance,  but  an  appeal  from  one  court  to  another  where  justice 
was  more  likely  to  be  done.  2.  Refer  them  to  Christian  arbitration.  If  the  saints  are 
to  judge  the  world  and  angels,  surely  they  are  capable  of  deciding  in  matters  pertaining 
to  this  life.  Refer  the  quarrel  to  some  wise  Christian  brother  possessing  the  confidence 
of  both  parties,  and  let  him  judge.  Arbitration  has  much  to  recommend  it,  even  in 
matters  purely  civil ;  and  in  the  case  supposed,  it  tends  to  promote  brotherly  kindness, 
while  securing  the  ends  of  equity.  This  does  not  warrant  any  judicial  interference  of 
the  Church  in  matters  properly  belonging  to  the  state.  She  is  not  to  be  "  a  judge  ar 
•  divider  "  in  secular  a&irs  (Luke  xii  14).  It  is  in  disputes  arising  between  her  own 
members  that  she  is  to  adopt  this  method  of  friendly  settlement. 

III.  The  avoidance  of  disputes.  If  quarrels  between  Christians  arise,  let  them  he 
settled  as  directed ;  but  why  should  they  arise?  "  Why  not  rather  take  wrong?  whf 
not  rather  be  defrauded?"    This  is  the  spirit  of  our  Lord's  teaching  (Matt  t.  38—40), 


212  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.ti.1— 2a 

which  goes  to  the  root  of  the  evil.  Instead  of  iDsisting  on  yonr  legal  pound  of  flesh, 
it  is  better  to  suffer  yourselves  to  be  wronged.  This  is  the  sublime  unselfishness  ol 
Christianity.  Unworkable?  On  this  principle  Jesus  acted  (1  Fet,  ii.  23),  and  Paul 
(ch.  IT.  12);  and  in  pruportion  as  it  pervades  society  will  wrong-doing  cease.  There 
is  something  higher  than  mere  rights,  something  diviner  than  legal  justice ;  it  is  to 
"  endure  griefs,  suffering  wrongfully,"  in  the  spirit  of  him  who  won  his  triumph  by 
the  cross.  Thus  willing  to  suffer  injustice,  while  carefiil  to  do  no  wrong,  disputes  wiU 
be  avoided. — B. 

Vera.  9^11. — Befor*  and  after ;  ftw  pieturei.  The  apostle  reminds  them  that 
wrong-doing  of  every  kind  excludes  from  the  kingdom  of  Ood,  and  that  consequently 
their  quarrels  and  litigation  are  bringing  them  into  danger.  They  are  forgetting  the 
meaning  of  their  conversion. 

L  OuB  OBiaiNAL  CONDITION,  Though  this  dark  picture  is  meant  to  represent  sinneri 
•t  Corinth,  its  general  features  are  universally  applicable.  1.  Sin  is  various,  yet  one. 
The  branches  are  many,  but  they  grow  out  of  the  same  root.  "  For  out  of  the  heart 
come  forth  evil  thoughts,  murders,'"  etc.  (Matt.  xt.  19).  T^ey  are  all  "  works  of  the 
flesh  "  (GhtL  v.  19 — 21),  conceived  in  the  heart  and  brought  forth  in  the  life.  Soma 
are  sins  directly  against  God ;  some  against  our  neighbour's  person,  estate,  good  name ; 
some  against  ourselves.  Let  us  not  excuse  ourselves  by  looking  on  another's  sin,  and 
thanking  God  we  are  free  from  that.  In  some  other  form  it  besets  ns,  and  "  Whosoever 
shall  keep  the  whole  Law,  and  yet  stumble  in  one  point,  he  is  become  guilty  of  all ' 
(Jas.  ii.  10, 11).  How  awful  a  thing  is  sin  I  Let  it  work  its  way,  and  it  wiU  utterly 
corrupt  soul  and  body,  the  family  and  society.  Every  man  has  in  him  by  nature  the 
seed  whence  these  fruits  of  Sodom  grow,  2.  The  practice  of  tin  excludes  from  (A« 
kingdom  of  Qod.  Between  such  sins  and  the  kingdom  there  is  an  absolute  contra- 
diction. The  kingdom  is  righteousness  (Bom  xiv.  17),  and  these  are  forms  of 
nnrighteousnesB.  Religion  and  morality,  faith  and  works,  creed  and  conduct,  go 
together.  "  Regenerate  thieves  1  regenerate  libertines  I  regenerate  extortioners  I  There 
b  a  horrible  contradiction  in  the  very  thought "  (F.  W.  Robertson),  Let  as  guard 
against  deception  here.  No  amount  of  outward  observance  can  atone  tat  an  immoral 
Me.    "  Without  are  the  dogs  "  (Rev.  xxiL  15). 

n.  OuB  OHAKOED  coNDiTioH.  At  conversion  all  this  is  changed.  We  become  new 
creatures,  the  old  things  passing  away  (2  Cor.  r.  17).  Three  aspects  of  this  change  are 
mentioned.  1.  Washing.  Sin  is  pollution,  and  from  this  we  are  cleansed  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus  (1  John  L  7),  "  Through  the  washing  of  regeneration  and  renewing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost "  (Titus  iii.  6),  This  is  set  forth  in  baptism,  and  it  was  a  prominent  idea  in  the 
Old  Testament  ritual  (Exod.  xl,  30—32 ;  Fs,  Ii.  7).  2.  Sanctijication.  Devoted  to 
rin  once,  we  are  now  consecrated  to  God.  We  are  separated  from  the  world  and 
devoted  to  the  service  of  Christ.  3.  Justification.  The  guilt  of  sin  is  removed,  and  we 
•re  accepted  as  righteous  in  Christ  on  the  ground  of  what  he  has  done  for  us.  And 
this  many-sided  blessing  of  salvation  is  procured  for  ua  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
applied  to  us  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God. 

Compare  these  two  pictures  and :  1,  Ash  which  of  them  represents  you.  Have  you 
been  washed,  sanctified,  justified ?  Is  there  a  " but"  in  your  spiritual  history,  dividing 
the  new  from  the  old  ?  2.  Learn  your  indebtedness  to  saving  grace,  and  be  humble 
and  gratefuL  3.  Have  done  with  sin  in  every  form.  It  is  a  return  to  the  condition  from 
which  you  have  been  delivered.    "  Put  off  the  old  man  with  his  doings." — B. 

Vers.  12 — ^20. — Abuse  of  Christian  liberty.  It  appears  that  the  principle  of  Christian 
liberty,  "  All  things  are  lawful  for  me,"  had  been  greatly  abused  by  some  in  the  Church 
at  Corinth,  It  was  cited  in  defence  of  fornication,  as  well  as  of  eating  all  kinds  of 
meats.  They  confounded  it  with  the  philosophical  maxim  that  man  is  the  measure 
for  himself;  from  which  they  drew  the  conclusion  that  the  sexual  appetite  may  be 
gratified  in  the  same  indiscriminate  way  as  that  of  hunger.  This  pernicious  abuse 
the  apostle  corrects,  first  by  setting  the  doctrine  of  Christian  freedom  in  its  true  lights 
and  then  by  presenting  a  variety  of  arguments  against  the  sin  of  fornication. 

I.  CBBI8TIAN  LiBEBTT,  ITS  GROUNDS  AITD  LIMITS.  "  All  things  are  lawful  for  me.* 
Under  the  old  dispensation  there  was  curtailment  of  freedom  in  respect  of  meats  and 


Ofcftl— 20.]    THE  FIRST  KPISTLB  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa  213 

drinks  and  days;  bnt  tbli  It  now  removecl.  In  Jesns  Christ  the  believer  Is  restored 
to  dominion  over  the  creatures,  all  things  being  put  under  hia  feet  (Ps.  viiL  6 ;  Heh 
li.  7—9).  «'  All  things  are  yours"  (ch.  ilL  22).  The  world  and  its  contents  exist  for 
the  sons  of  God,  to  subserre  their  welfare.  But  this  large  freedom  has  obvious  Umitatlona. 
1.  The  limit  of  expedieney.  Many  things  In  onr  power  may  not  he  for  our  good,  eilJier 
in  themselves  or  because  of  special  circumstancea.  This  is  true  of  foods,  and  of  many 
forms  of  work  and  pleasure  lawful  in  themselves.  Here,  too,  the  good  of  others  oomes 
into  view  as  a  limiting  consideration.  The  exercise  of  my  liberty  must  be  tempered  faf 
a  regard  to  the  welfare  of  my  brother  (ch.  viiL  13).  Apply  this  to  certain  forms  m 
amusement,  the  use  of  wine,  eta  2.  The  limit  imposed  by  the  duty  of  preserving  our 
liberty.  "  I  will  not  be  brought  nnder  the  power  of  any."  "  Every  creature  of  God 
is  good "  (1  Tim.  Iv.  4),  but  only  when  used  as  a  servant.  We  must  not  suffer 
ourselves  to  be  brought  into  bondage  to  anything.  Musio^  c^.,  is  a  legitimate  and 
healthful  enjoyment,  but  I  must  not  become  its  slave. 

IL  The  sin  of  fobnioation.  1,  Fom,ication  it  not  warranted  by  the  analogy  tf 
meats.  "Meats  for  the  belly,  and  the  belly  for  meats."  The  one  has  been  created  for 
the  other.  The  stomach  demands  food,  and  all  kinds  of  food  have  been  made  for  tha 
stomach ;  hence  it  is  lawful  to  eat  whatever  is  good  for  us.  But  there  is  no  similar 
adaptation  between  the  body  and  sensuality.  The  one  was  not  made  for  the  other. 
Again,  both  the  belly  and  its  food  belong  to  a  transitory  condition  of  things.  Both 
shall  be  brought  to  nought  when  this  present  wovld-age  is  completed,  and  the  natural 
body  becomes  the  spiritual  body.  But  the  body  shall  not  tijus  perLsh;  it  has  an 
eternal  destiny.  In  both  these  respects,  thererore,  the  analogy  fails;  and  fornication 
cannot  be  defended  as  a  case  of  nature.  2.  It  takes  away  from  Christ  that  which 
belongs  to  him.  The  Christian's  body  is  the  Lord's.  (1)  It  exists  for  him,  and  he  for 
it.  The  relation  is  mutual.  Christ  redeems,  sustains,  rules,  and  glorifies  the  body ; 
the  body  is  subject  to  him  for  his  service.  (2)  It  is  a  "  member  of  Christ "  (ver.  16). 
Our  bodies  are  essential  parts  of  ourselves,  and  as  such  bt^long  to  Christ's  body  (Eph.  T. 
30).  The  same  Spirit  dwells  in  him  and  in  us  (ver.  17) ;  the  life  of  the  Head  is  the 
life  of  the  body  and  its  members.  How  awful  the  sin  of  prostituting  that  which  is  a 
member  of  Christ  1  3.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  eternal  destiny  of  the  body.  The  relation 
of  the  body  to  Christ  is  abiding.  He  who  raised  the  Lord  Jesus  from  the  dead  will  also 
quicken  our  mortal  bodies  (Rom,  viiL  11),  raising  them  to  a  glorious  life  in  him  (comp. 
ch.  XV.).  The  resurrection  of  the  body  tells  us  that  it  is  not  to  be  treated  as  a 
temporary  thing,  belonging  only  to  this  stage  of  existence.  It  is  not  to  be  destroyed 
like  the  belly  and  meats,  but  is  united  to  Christ  for  ever.  Fornication,  therefore, 
degrades  ihe  body,  inasmuch  as  it  is  thereby  treated  as  the  instrument  of  a  perishable 
appetite.  4,  /( is  in  its  oion  nature  degrading.  The  act  itself  is  a  union  with  the  vilest 
characters  (ver.  16).  Think  of  the  dignity  of  the  Christian's  person  as  a  member  of 
Christ,  standing  in  everlasting  union  with  him ;  and  with  what  holy  horror  should  we 
regard  this  sin  I  ^6.  It  is  peculiarly  a  sin  against  the  body.  (Ver,  18.)  "  Drunkenness  and 
gluttony  are  sins  done  in  and  by  the  body,  and  are  sins  by  abuse  of  the  body ;  but  they 
are  still  without  the  body — introduced  from  without,  sinful  not  in  their  act,  but  in  their 
effect,  which  effect  it  is  each  man's  duty  to  foresee  and  avoid.  But  fornication  is  the 
alienating  that  body  which  is  the  Lord's,  and  making  it  a  harlofs  body ;  it  ii  sin  against 
a  man's  own  body,  in  its  very  nature — against  the  verity  and  nature  of  his  body ;  not  an 
effect  on  the  body  from  participation  of  things  without,  but  a  contradiction  of  the  truth 
of  the  body,  wrought  within  itself"  (Alford).  The  awful  effects  of  this  sin  are 
frequently  written  in  characters  of  fire  in  the  phyracal  system.  6.  /<  ti  a  profanation 
of  the  Divine  temple.  The  body  is  "  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (ver.  19).  What 
was  sai  J  before  of  the  believer  is  here  said  of  the  body  (ch.  iii.  16,  where  see  homily). 
The  body  is  the  outer  court  of  the  temple,  but  still  a  part  of  it,  and  therefore  holy. 
Dare  we  admit  unholy  feet  to  tread  this  court  ?  Dare  we  profane  the  sanctuary  by 
devoting  it  to  sacrilegious  uses?  Will  the  Spirit  of  God  continue  to  dwell  in  a  polluted 
temple  ?  7.  It  contradicts  fhe  Divine  proprietorship  of  the  body.  Believers  are  not 
their  own,  but  the  purchased  possession  of  God,  bought  for  himself  with  precious  blood 
(ver.  20 ;  Acts  xx.  28 ;  1  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  Our  bodies  are  not  our  own  to  do  with 
them  as  we  please.  We  are  God's  bondservants,  bought  for  the  purpose  of  serving  and 
glorifying  him  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).    How  weighty  an  argument  for  entire  devotion  to  God's 


214  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  vi.  1—20. 

service  I    Love  to  oar  redeeming  Ood  is  the  only  sufficient  mbtive  for  a  holy  life. 
"  Glorify  Gkxi  therefore  in  your  body." 

Leakn  :  I.  The  sacredness  of  the  body.  2.  The  extent  of  sanctiflcation — ^it  reachei 
to  the  utmost  circumference  of  our  being  (1  Thess.  v.  23\  3.  Flee  foruication.  Victory 
here  is  to  be  won  by  flight,  not  by  fight  (Gen.  zxxix.  12},  4.  Watch  against  everything 
that  might  lead  to  this  sin. — ^B. 

Ver.  12. — Free,  and  yet  not  free.  The  first  step  to  a  right  understanding  of  this 
passage  is  to  observe  tliat  the  "all  things"  of  which  the  apostle  speaks  are  things  in 
themselves  indifferent  (iSiiJ^opa),  not  things  in  which  any  vital  principle  of  morality 
or  point  of  Christian  doctrine  is  involved.  Nothing  could  be  "  lawful "  to  him  that 
was  in  its  essential  nature  unlawful.  There  are  matters  in  which  the  question  of 
right  and  wrong  is  fixed,  absolute,  changeless;  and  there  are  others  in  which  it  is 
variable,  conditional,  determined  by  circumstances.  It  is  of  the  latter  that  he  speaks. 
He  is  consciously  raised  above  the  bondage  of  mere  conventional  or  traditionary 
distinctions  of  clean  and  unclean,  sacred  and  common,  etc.  A  man  is  free  from  the 
restraint  of  external  law  wheu  he  has  the  spirit  of  it  in  his  heart.  All  things  are 
lawful  to  him  when  the  governing  principle  of  his  life  is  that  "love  which  is  the 
fulfilling  "  of  all  holy  law.  The  singidarity  of  this  declaration  is  that,  while  the  apostle 
asserts  his  freedom,  he  at  the  same  time  surrenders  it.  He  asserts  it  by  voluntarily 
submitting  to  that  which  seems  to  be  a  denial  of  it.  There  is  something  paradoxical 
in  this.  But  are  we  not  familiar  with  many  similar  paradoxes  ?  External  nature  is 
a  marvellous  combination  of  what  seem  to  be  conflicting  elements — laws  that  limit, 
forces  that  balance  each  other,  processes  that  run  in  opposite  directions.  What  a 
strange  commingling  is  there  in  the  world  around  us  of  beauty  and  deformity,  economy 
and  waste,  order  and  disorder,  life  and  death  I  Divine  providence  presents  the  same 
characteristics.  The  wheels  of  the  great  providential  plan  move  in  different,  often 
contradictory,  directions;  but  the  sovereign  Spirit  that  controls  and  guides  them 
develops  from  them  one  grand  result.  What  is  every  man's  daily  history,  in  the 
common  relationships  of  life,  but  a  perpetual  working  and  counterworking  of  what 
seem  to  be  incongruous  principles  ?  fle  loses  that  he  may  win,  serves  that  he  may 
rule,  stoops  to  conquer,  sacrifices  liberty  in  one  direction  that  he  may  secure  it  in 
another,  denies  himself  to  please  himself,  Buffers  that  he  may  enjoy,  dies  that  he  may 
live.  No  wonder  there  should  be  a  similar  balancing  and  limiting  of  seemingly 
discordant  principles  in  the  sphcie  of  Christian  doctrine  and  Christian  life.  Two  views 
of  personal  freedom  are  here  given. 

L  Fbeedom  limited  bt  the  TEotroHT  OF  HOBAL  ADTAKTAOB.  That  Is  in  the 
highest  sense  "expedient"  which  is  morally  right  and  good.  A  thing  may  be 
"  lawful "  and  yet,  considering  all  the  conditions  of  the  case,  not  desirable,  be<»use 
unprofitable.  Legitimate  enough  in  itself,  it  may  have  bearings  and  iuvolve  conse- 
quences that  are  neither  right  nor  good.  In  such  a  case  a  man  of  fine  Christian 
sensibility  will  feel  that,  while  perfectly  free  in  one  sense,  in  another  sense  he  is  not 
free.  His  conscience  and  the  sympathies  and  affections  of  his  religious  life  will 
restrun  his  use  of  that  freedom.  There  is  something  dearer  to  a  noble  soul  than  even 
hheitj.  The  thought  of  the  higher  profitableness  of  a  thing  should  be  more  to  us 
than  the  thought  of  its  abstract  lawfulness.  Freedom  is  not  in  itself  an  end,  but  the 
means  to  an  end  above  and  beyond  itself.  To  seek  after  "  whatsoever  things  are  true, 
honest,  just,"  etc.,  even  though  it  may  involve  us  in  many  penalties,  is  better  than  to 
be  always  jealously  maintaining  our  exemption  from  the  bonds  of  external  restraint. 
One  of  the  finest  examples  of  this  principle  is  supplied  by  our  Lord's  payment  of  the 
temple  tax  (Matt.  xvii.  24 — 27).  Though  "  the  children  were  free,"  yet,  lest  there 
should  be  "  offence,"  he  will  pay  the  claim  and  work  a  m'racle  to  provide  the  means 
of  payment.  The  Sonship  that  relaxed  one  law  only  made  the  other  the  more  sacred 
and  binding.  The  apostolic  E}iistles  are  full  of  illustrations  of  the  same  principle 
fch.  ix.  14, 16, 19 — 22 ;  Gal.  v.  13 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  16).  Never  are  we  so  loftily  conscious 
sf  our  Christian  freedom,  and  never  is  that  freedom  so  manifest,  as  when,  for  soma 
i.'gh  end,  we  choose  to  forego  it. 

•*  A  life  of  self-renouncing  love 
b  a  life  of  liberty." 


CH.V1.1— 20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0EINTHJAX3.  215 

n.  Freedom  controlled  it  the  consciousness  of  moral  poweb.  "  I  will  not," 
etc._  This  is  self-asserti  jn  of  the  right  order ;  the  manly  use  of  the  power  by  which  it 
is  given  us  to  determine  our  own  course,  and  not  allow  it  to  be  left  at  the  mercy  of 
outward  influences,  or  to  be  determined  for  us  by  the  persuasive  force  that  happens  to 
be  the  strongest.  As  a  mere  act  of  self-discipline,  this  is  good ;  for  the  will,  like  anj 
other  faculty,  grows  by  use,  and  self-mastery  by  the  power  of  a  resolute  will  is  the 
basis  of  all  moral  excellence.  Think  what  differences  there  are  amons  men  in  this 
respect.  The  secret  of  success  or  failure  in  the  lower  interests  of  human  life  lies  mainly 
here.  It  depends  far  less  on  native  talent,  favourable  circumstances,  etc.,  than  it  does 
on  the  energy  of  a  self-regulating  will.  This  power  is  necessary  to  give  due  effect  to 
any  other  power.  Many  a  man  has  noble  qualities  both  of  mind  and  heart — quick 
intelligence,  wise  judgment,  warm  enthusiasm — but  lacks  the  steadfast  will  that  would 
bind  them  all  together,  giving  unity  and  strength  to  his  character  and  effective  force 
to  his  endeavour.  According,  however,  to  the  greatness  and  strength  of  this  facnlty, 
80  ia  the  danger  of  its  being  misdirected — ^like  the  forces  of  nature,  water,  steam, 
electricity, etc.  Self-will  is  blind,  lawless,  immoral,  and  therefore  not  really  free.  Mural 
freedom  lies  in  the  mastery  of  a  will  that  determines  for  the  right,  chooses  to  move 
in  harmony  with  the  Divine  will,  the  "  will  that  is  holy  and  just  and  good."  Learn 
chiefly  two  grand  lessons.  1.  That  things  lawful  and  innocent  in  themselves  may 
become  evil  by  being  allowed  to  gain  an  undue  mastery  over  us.  2.  That  our  only 
effectual  preservative  against  this  is  the  resistive  energy  of  a  will  inspired  by  the  Spirit 
of  the  well-beloved  Son. — W. 

Ver.  19. — Divine  ownership.  One  of  the  most  elementary  principles  of  Christian 
thought  and  life  is  expressed  in  these  words :  "  Ye  are  not  your  own."  The  sense  of 
Divine  ownership  rather  than  self-ownership  is  the  inspiration  of  all  Christian  dignity 
«:»d  strength.    Consider — 

L  The  nature  and  orocnde  of  this  persuasion.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  it 
is  true  of  all  men  that  they  are  not  their  own.  It  is  a  necessary  inference  from  the 
fact  that  they  are  created  and  dependent  beings.  But  more  than  this  is  meant  here. 
As  a  mere  truth  of  natuial  religion,  it  is  lifeless  and  profitless.  As  in  so  many  other 
cases,  it  must  be  elevated  to  the  level  of  a  Christian  doctrine,  linked  with,  set  in  the 
light  of,  the  great  facts  that  belong  to  the  "  record  God  has  given  us  of  his  Son," 
before  there  can  be  any  efBcacious  force  in  it.  As  a  reality  of  Christian  life,  then,  this 
Divine  ownership  rests  on  two  distinct  grounds.  1.  Purchase.  "Ye  were  bought 
with  a  price."  The  apostle  refers  to  a  historic  fact  of  the  past,  viz.  the  personal  sell- 
surrender  and  sacrifice  of  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  for  the  redemption  of  men.  This, 
with  all  that  it  involved  of  obedience,  humiliation,  and  suffering  even  unto  death,  was 
the  "  price  "  that  bought  us.  We  may  differ  in  our  abstract  ideas  as  to  the  nature  of 
the  atonement,  but  this  fact  is  to  the  Christian  mind  indisputable.  "  The  Son  of  man 
came  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many"  (Matt.  zx.  28);  "Christ  hath  redeemed  us 
from  the  curse,"  etc.  (Gal.  iii.  13) ;  "  Redeemed  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ," 
etc.  (1  Pet."  i.  19).  Like  the  noble  Roman  youth  who,  as  tradition  tells,  leaped  full- 
armed  into  the  yawning  chasm  because  the  city  could  only  be  saved  by  the  sacrifice  of 
her  best  treasure,  so  did  Jesus,  the  "  well-beloved  "  of  heaven,  the  noblest  treasure  of 
earth,  the  "  only-begotten  of  the  Father,"  the  Head  and  Chief  of  our  humanity,  yield  up 
his  life  to  redeem  the  life  of  the  world.  He  gave  himself  for  us,  "  He  suffered,  the  just 
for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  unto  God."  Not  that  there  was  any  essential 
moral  efficacy  in  the  mere  fact  of  suffering,  but  that  that  suffering  was  the  measure  of 
our  value  in  the  sight  of  infinite  and  eternal  Love.  Pure  love  invests  its  object  with  a 
value  in  comparison  with  which  all  that  belongs  to  itself  is  as  nothing.  The  heart  in 
which  it  dwells  finds  its  deepest  satisfaction  in  the  joy  of  another.  Saving  another, 
itself  it  "  cannot  save."  All  tender  human  relationships  are  meant  to  develop  in  us 
this  Divine  sensibility.  How  spontaneously  does  all  the  thought  and  care  and  passion 
of  the  mother's  soul,  the  deep  exfaaustless  wealth  of  her  being,  flow  out  towards  her 
child  I  She  loses  herself  to  flnd  a  dearer  self  in  him.  How  instinctively,  at  any  risk, 
does  she  shield  him  from  danger!  With  what  sublime  self-forgetfulness  does  sha 
surrender  her  own  ease  and  comfort,  to  toil  through  the  livelong  day,  and  watch 
through  the  weary  night,  and  let  her  very  life  ebb  slowly  and  silently  away,  that  she 


216  THE   FIRST  EPISILK  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.ti.1— 2a 

may  find  a  deeper  joy,  a  better  life,  in  nourishing  and  saving  his !  So  has  it  been  with 
Christ's  more  than  human,  more  than  mother's  love.  "  Herein  is  love,"  etc.  (1  John 
iv.  10).  It  is  the  memory  and  consciousness  of  this,  aud  all  that  it  means,  that 
produces  in  us  a  profound  impression  that  we  are  "  not  our  own."  Of  all  the  forces 
that  move  the  spirit  to  grateful  self-surrender,  none  so  mighty  as  this  sense  of  personal 
obligation  to  redeeming  love.    "  The  love  of  Christ  coiistraineth  us,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  v.  14). 

"Love  so  atiiaziiii;,  so  Divine, 
Demands  m;  soul,  my  life,  my  all." 

2.  Potsestion,  "Tour  body  is  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  context  require* 
that  we  give  to  this  a  strictly  individu^il  application.  It  is  spoken  here,  not  of  the 
Church  as  the  Body  of  Christ,  "  the  luluess  of  him  that  fiUeth  all  in  all,"  but  of  the 
physical  personality  of  eacli  individual  member  of  that  body.  And  it  is  spoken  of  as 
a  simple,  unquestionable  element  of  Chri^stian  knowledge  and  consciousness.  "  What, 
know  ye  not,"  etc.  ?  The  heathen  have  had  their  ideas  of  Divine  "  possession ; "  but 
their  possession  has  been  exceptional,  transitory,  fictitious,  the  device  of  priestcraft,  the 
wild  dream  of  mystic  superstition.  Here  the  Divine  possession  is  real,  reasonable, 
permanent,  fruitful  of  blessed  issues.  If  we  could  only  realize  it  more,  not  with  any- 
thing like  the  wildness  of  a  dangerous  fanaticism,  bat  with  the  calm  quiet  dignity  of 
a  spirit  that  is  consciously  walking  in  the  light  of  God,  what  strength  and  beauty  it 
would  give  to  our  life!  Imagine  the  awfnl  sanctity  with  which  the  temple  of  old 
must  have  been  invested  to  the  view  of  the  worshipping  people  as  soon  as  the  heaven- 
kindleil  fire  came  down,  and  "  tlie  glory  of  the  Lord  had  filled  the  house."  With  what 
higher  sanctity  still  shuuld  we  clutlie  the  being  of  a  man  in  whom  the  Holy  Spirit 
dwells !  Kliall  not  "  Huliness  unto  the  Lord "  be  the  acknowledged,  manifest,  and 
all-pervading  law  of  his  life  ? 

II.  The  practical  results  of  rr.  "Glorify  God  therefore  in  your  body."  This 
is  something  more  than  a  mere  passive,  negative  abstinence  from  evil.  It  is  the 
consecration  of  the  powers  of  our  nature  to  all  holy  service,  the  active  expression  ot 
the  inner  Divine  life  in  all  possible  forms  of  well-doing.  It  implies:  1.  Conscious 
spiritual  freedom.  Christ  delivers  us  from  all  kinds  of  degrading  moral  bondage  when 
he  thus  redeems  us  and  makes  us  his  own  for  ever.  And  "  where  the  Spirit  of  tiie 
Lord  is,  there  is  liberty."  Spiritual  freedom  lies  in  willing  personal  subjection  to  him 
who  is  our  rightful  Lord,  belf-hood  in  all  its  forms  and  pliases  is  the  slavery,  the 
paralysis,  and  death  of  the  soul.  Live  in  and  for  yourself,  as  if  you  were  "  your  own," 
aud  you  have  a  very  iiard  and  oppressive  taskmaster.  Live  unto  the  Lord,  and  you 
are  most  truly  and  joyously  free.  2.  The  mastery  of  the  spiritual  over  the  fleshly  part 
of  us.  The  apostle  has  in  view  a  special  and  most  important  aspect  of  the  sanctity 
of  the  body.  But  we  may  take  this  word  "  body "  as  symbolizing  the  whole  form 
and  fashion  and  habit  of  the  outward  life.  From  the  inner  shrine  of  a  spirit  that  has 
thus  become  the  Lord's,  the  glory  will  stream  forth  through  all  channels  of  self- 
revelation.  The  very  outskirts  of  our  being,  the  very  lowest  part  of  our  nature,  will 
be  sure  to  be  lighted  up,  spiritualized,  beautified  by  it.  We  are  apt  to  thitik  of  the 
body  as  being  necessarily  the  encumbrance  and  the  foe  of  the  spirit.  This  is  not 
a  Christian  way  of  thinking.  Rather  let  us  regard  it  as  an  instrument  that  God  has 
wisely  constructed,  "  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,"  and  through  which  the  holy 
energy  of  the  spirit  may  serve  his  purposes  and  do  him  honour. — W. 

Yer.  11. — Oreat  sinners  saved.  It  has  been  alleged  that  the  early  Christians  were 
gathered  from  the  mere  rabble  and  offscourings  of  the  ancient  world.  Gibbon  remarks, 
with  his  usual  sneer,  that  "  the  missionaries  of  the  gospel,  after  the  example  of  their 
Divine  Master,  disdained  not  the  society  of  men,  aud  especially  of  women,  oppressed 
by  the  consciousness  and  very  often  by  the  effects  of  their  vices."  But  it  is  not  the 
fact,  and  it  is  not  fair  to  insinuate,  that  the  Church  was  formed  from  the  mire  of 
aociety.  The  gospel  then,  as  now,  influenced  in  some  measure  all  ranks  of  society,  all 
orders  of  mind,  and  all  grades  of  moral  culture.  Yet  it  is  not  to  be  concealed,  and 
indeed  it  is  to  the  credit  of  the  gospel,  that  it  brought  newness  of  heart  and  life 
to  some  of  the  most  profligate  inbabitdnts  of  the  ancient  cities  where  it  was  preached. 
Not  only  in  Judasa  had  it  saved  the  very  harlots ;  but  in  the  licentious  cities  of  the 


fn.  n.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TUK  C0K1NTU1AN8  217 

heathen,  m  Ephesui,  Corinth,  and  Rome,  it  had  rescued  persons  who  were  steeped  in 
sensual  vice.  "  Such  were  some  of  yon,"  writes  the  apostle  to  the  members  of  "  the 
Church  of  God  at  Corinth."  lie  had  put  down  a  terrible  catalogue  of  sinners,  who 
WL-re  not  to  inherit  the  ,l(ingilom  of  Gud.  "  Such  were  some  of  you ;  but  you  are  so 
no  longer  •  1  recognize  the  mighty  change." 

I.  The  threefold  chanqe.  1.  "  Ye  were  unshed."  "  Ye  washed  yourselves.' 
A  definite  fact,  as  much  so  as  the  washing  of  Naaman  in  the  river  which  took  away 
his  leprosy.  Such  is  the  way  of  Divine  grace.  The  thought  of  man's  heart  is  that 
bis  sins  may  be  rubbed  out,  or  the  traces  worn  out  hy  lapse  of  time,  or  that  by 
repentance  and  amendment  of  life  they  are  atoned  for.  But  nothing  removes  sin  except 
washing.  "  'i  he  bluod  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanses  us  from  all  sin."  2. "  Ye  ware  sancti- 
fied.'' After  the  washing  conies  the  anointing  with  holy  oil.  They  who  are  cleansed  are 
consecrated  and  set  apart  for  Divine  use.  This  is  sauctification  of  the  Spirit,  which 
is  imparted  freely  and  at  once  to  those  who  receive  the  gospel,  thou3;h  it  is  only 
gradually  realized  in  experience  and  practice.  3.  "  Ye  were  justified."  Being 
defiled,  ye  were  cleansed ;  being  profane,  ye  were  hallowed  ;  and  being  nnriijhteous,  ye 
were  justified.  You  are  no  longer  under  condemniition,  but  being  regaided  as  "in 
Christ,"  you  are  reckoned  righteous  in  him.  And  this  too  is  an  accomplished  fact  in 
God's  grace.  Know  it  well,  fur  it  is  the  charter  of  your  acceptance,  aud  the  warrant 
of  your  peace. 

II.  The  philosophy  of  this  chanoe.  1.  "  Tn  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Ohriit," 
Warnings  of  the  consequences  of  vice,  expositions  of  the  beauty  and  advantage  of 
virtue,  can  do  little  in  such  cases  as  are  indicated  here.  It  was  not  for  want  of  sages 
to  sound  the  praise  and  discuss  the  nature  of  virtue  that  the  Greeks  of  Corinth  had 
been  so  vicious.  But  no  change  was  wrought  upon  them  till  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  was  published.  Here  was  nut  a  sage  turning  fine  sentences,  but  a 
Saviour  who  could  save  men  from  themselves,  and  make  them  sons  of  God.  In  this 
Name  it  was,  and  to  this  day  it  is,  that  the  soiled  are  washed,  the  unholy  sanctified, 
the  guilty  justified.  2.  "  And  by  the  /Spirit  of  our  God."  For  it  is  that  Spirit  who 
convinces  men  of  their  sins,  and  who  brings  and  unites  them  to-the  Saviour,  in  whom 
they  are  made  new  creatures.  What  condescension  in  that,  pure  and  Huly  Spirit,  to 
cniTje  near  to  such  vile  persons  M  the  previous  verse  descriiies,  and  transform  such 
unners  into  saints  I 

ill.  The  lessons  suggested.  1.  That  no  sinner's  case  is  too  desperate  for  the  gospel 
reintdy.  Chri-stianity  can  do  more  than  develop  germs  of  goodness  where  they  exist. 
It  has  a  new-creating  energy,  and  can  inspire  good  motives  and  feelings  where  there 
seemed  to  be  nothing  but  evil,  evil  continually.  There  is  no  case  so  sunk  and  lost  as 
to  bafSe  the  power  of  Christ's  Name  and  the  Holy  Spirit's  quickening  grace.  We  do 
not  make  light  of  moral  gradations.  It  is  a  thing  to  be  thankful  for,  if  one  has  been 
preserved  from  gross  sin.  It  is  a  thing  to  be  bitterly  lamented,  if  one  has  committed, 
even  in  thought,  such  sins  as  the  apostle  enumerates.  But  the  most  moral  man  has 
something  on  bis  heart  to  be  ashamed  of  before  Gud.  And  the  immoral  have  grievous 
confessions  to  make.  Let  the  sliame  and  grief  be  felt ;  they  are  wholesome  for  the  souL 
But  let  no  one  despond  or  despair.  The  Divine  grace  which  brings  salvation  is  no 
perquisite  of  the  higher  and  middle  classes  of  signers.  It  goes  down  through  all 
degrees  to  the  lowest  depth  of  human  sin  and  misery.  The  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  a  shield  for  the  most  unclean.  The  Spirit  of  our  God  can  renew  those  who 
are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  2.  That  a  Christian  is  to  be  known  hy  what  he  it, 
not  what  he  once  was.  Many  seem  to  have  no  real  conception  of  the  transforming 
power  which  the  Holy  Spirit  exerts  on  those  who  truly  receive  the  gospel;  and, 
accordingly,  when  one  who  was  known  to  be  a  sinner  begins  to  confess  the  Saviour'i 
Name,  many  virtuous  persons  shake  their  heads  suspiciously,  and  sometimes  wag  their 
heads  reproachfully,  and  relate  all  that  they  have  heard,  however  vaguely,  of  such 
a  person^  faults,  as  though  they  must  cleave  to  him  for  ever.  Thus  the  old  sins  are 
kept  hanging  as  a  perpetual  reproach  over  the  head  of  the  new  recruit  to  the  Christian 
army,  just  as  though  there  were  no  washing  possible,  no  sanctification,  no  justification. 
But  how  unreasonable  is  this  1  Is  it  not  from  the  ranks  of  sinners  that  the  ranks  of 
the  saints  have  always  been  filled  up?  Is  there  not  a  significant  "  but"  in  our  text, 
indi-uitiiig  the  transition  from  the  old  state  to  the  new?    And  is  it  not  true  in  life,  a» 


2U  TUE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKI^TUIANS.    [cKVLl^iOL 

weir  u  In  Scripture  T  Ton  tell  me  what  this  person  was :  I  bid  yon  lee  what  this 
peraon  i$,  and  glorify  God,  whose  grace  works  such  blessed  changes  among  the  children 
of  men.  Make  not  the  conversiun  of  a  sinner  more  difficult  than  it  need  be,  by  your 
•uspiciona.    Reserve  your  strictest  judgments  for  yourself. — F. 

Yen.  1 — 8. — 77ie  relationi  <f  Ohristiatu  to  public  law.  The  apostle  here  deals 
with  a  fresh  mistake  made  by  the  Corinthian  Christians,  In  view  of  the  extensive 
commercial  interests  of  Corinth,  we  can  well  understand  that  disputes  constantly  arose 
which  could  only  be  settled  by  the  common  law  courts.  St.  Paul  does  not  intend 
us  to  infer  that  these  law  courts  were  unjustly  conducted,  or  that,'  in  ordinary  matters 
and  under  ordinary  circumstances,  recourse  may  not  be  had  to  them.  He  only  i)oint» 
out  that  the  new  feeling  and  sentiment  which  they  should  have  and  cherish,  as 
Christian  disciples,  would  be  opposed  to  the  litigious  spirit,  and  fill  them  with  an 
anxiety  to  set  things  right  with  their  brethren  rather  than  to  struggle  for  the  securing 
of  their  own  rights.  He  glances,  further,  at  the  misconception  which  the  surrounding 
heathen  would  form  of  such  indications  of  quarrelling  among  the  Christians.  "  We 
can  well  understand  how  detrimental  to  the  best  interests  of  Christianity  it  would  be 
for  the  Christian  communion,  founded  as  it  was  on  principles  of  unity  and  love,  to 
be  perpetually,  through  the  hasty  temper  and  weakness  of  individual  members,  held 
up  to  the  scorn  of  the  heathen,  as  a  scene  of  intestine  strife."  The  principle  laid  down 
by  the  apostle  led  in  later  times  to  the  appointment  of  "courts  of  arbitration."  Of 
these  we  have  historical  evidence  in  the  middle  of  the  second  century.  It  has  been 
pointed  out  that  the  proper  illustration  of  St.  Paul's  principle  should  be  sought,  not 
in  a  Christian  country,  but  in  a  heathen  country  where  Uhristians  may  happen  to 
reside.    On  his  principle,  as  it  may  now  he  applicable  to  us,  we  propose  to  dwell, 

I.  St.  PauIi  throws  no  slight  on  public  law.  How  are  we  to  regard  law  ?  Ii  it 
the  arbitrary  command  of  a  ruler  ?  Or  is  it  a  national  code  created  by  the  gifts  of  some 
legal  genius,  some  Lycurgus  or  Justinian  ?  Is  it  not  rather  a  nation  discovering  the  impor- 
tance of  the  protection  of  its  persons  and  property,  mutually  agreeing  to  the  adoption 
of  rules  fur  the  securing  of  such  protection,  and  putting  the  applications  of  such  rules 
into  the  hands  of  certain  individuals,  called  kings,  judu;es,  or  magistrates?  So  for 
a  people  to  disobey  the  laws  is  more  truly  rebellion  against  themselves,  against  their 
best  interests,  than  against  their  rulers ;  and  every  individual  in  a  nation  is  bound 
both  to  honour  and  to  keep  the  law.  St.  Paul  would  fully  recognize  this,  aad  intend 
no  disresjtect  by  what  he  says  concerning  it.  We  should  observe  that  he  carefully 
distinguishes  the  sphere  of  law  to  which  he  refers.  Explain  the  dilference  between 
the  "  criminal "  and  "  equity  "  courts  at  our  assizes.  Bt.  Paul  deals  with  matters  of 
dispute,  with  equity  questions,  not  with  crime.  And  he  very  properly  urges  that 
such  disputes  usually  rest  on  "  strong  feeling,"  "  misunderstanding,"  etc.,  and  conse- 
quently can  be  best  dealt  with  from  within  the  Christian  brotherhood,  which  can 
recognize  "  feeling,"  and  help  its  members  to  overcome  "  faults."  Elsewhere  he  urges 
full  obedience  to  the  "  powers  that  be."  But  he  pleads  that  the  Christians  only  confessed 
'.heir  failure  from  the  Christian  spirit  when  they  could  not  give  way  one  to  the  other, 
but  were  compelled  to  get  outsiders  and  heathen  to  tell  them  what  was  just  and  right. 
So  still  we  may  say  there  are  only  a  few  things  in  respect  of  which  Christians  are 
justified  in  going  to  law,  and  they  concern  wholly  the  interpretations  of  national  law 
in  relation  to  rights  of  property.  For  these  it  is  sometimes  necessary  to  get  an 
authoritative  decision.  Happily,  the  principle  of  arbitration  is  spreading  in  trade 
disputes  and  in  national  differences.  Christians  will  hail  the  day  when  arbitration, 
the  handmaid  of  peace,  gains  her  rule  in  every  land,  and  men  and  nations  "  learn  war 
no  more." 

II.  St.  Paui.  assumes  the  autonomy  (self-rule)  of  Christ's  Church.  He 
would  have  them  fully  understand  that,  as  a  Church,  they  were  quite  com])etent  to 
manage  their  own  affairs— all  their  affairs,  and  certainly  all  internal  disputes.  Show 
on  what  frequently  declared  and  comprehensive  principles  the  apostle's  argument  is 
based.  1.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  a  society.  2.  It  is  a  separated  society,  standing 
free  from  the  world ;  in  it,  but  not  ^  it.  3.  It  is  a  complete  society ;  the  Head  and  the 
members  together  make  up  a  "  whole  body."  4.  It  is  a  society  resting  on  a  comnioi 
basis,  the  "  Ufe  in  Christ,   not  on  a  common  opinion,  nor  on  a  common  order,  but  on 


cavLl— 20.J    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TUB  CORINTHIANS.  tlfl 


a  common  life,  which  makes  it  m  one  family.  6,  It  is  a  society  under  •  living  Head. 
It  endures  as  " seeing  him  who  is  invisible;"  and  it  is  a  spiritual  realization  of  the 
"theocracy,"  or  direct  practical  ruling  of  the  Divine  Lord.  6.  It  is  a  society  with 
Jndicial  functions.  Sliow  that  the  Church  has  disciplinary  powers  which  it  may  bring 
to  bear  on  the  moral  otl'ender  (as  at  Corinth) ;  and  consultative  powers  which  it  may 
employ  to  settle  family,  trade,  or  society  disputes.  7.  It  is  a  society  with  a  cliaracter, 
one  of  whose  leading  features  is  "mutual  forbearance" — a  self-denying  regard  rather 
for  the  welfare  uf  others  than  for  our  own.  In  such  a  society  it  would  be  manifestly 
inappropriate  for  any  member  who  had  a  contention  with  a  fellow-member  to  "go  to 
law  before  the  unjust."  The  high  Christian  leeliug  finds  expression  in  St.  Paul's 
Intense  language,  "  Why  do  ye  not  rather  take  wrong  ?  why  do  ye  not  rather  suffer 
youraelves  to  be  defrauded  ?  " — R.  T. 

Vers.  2,  3. — The  judgment  of  the  lainti.  The  Christian  disciples  are  called  "saints," 
not  because  they  are  actually  holy,  but  because  they  are  (1)  consecrated  to  God;  (2) 
separated  for  the  world  ;  (3)  under  moral  obligation  to  seek  for  and  attain  personal 
holiness.  St.  Paul  here  siKsaks  of  them  as  "saints,"  to  remind  them  that  they  hold 
their  Christian  standing  by  virtue  of  their  character,  that  their  "goodness"  was  to  be 
their  power.  The  word  "  judge  "  should  be  treated  as  tiie  equivalent  of  "govern; "  it  does 
not,  as  used  by  St.  Paul  here,  merely  mean  "  give  legal  decisions."  Illustrate  by  the 
work  of  the  judges  in  ancient  Israel ;  they  were  virtually  rulers  of  the  country. 

I.  The  saints'  judgment  of  the  world.  F.  W.  Robertson  says,  "Successively 
have  force,  hereditary  right,  talent,  wealth,  been  the  aristocracies  of  the  earth.  But 
then,  in  tliat  kingdom  to  cume,  goodness  shall  be  the  only  condition  of  supremacy." 
For  the  idea  of  our  sharing  with  Christ  in  the  judgment,  at  his  second  coming,  see 
Dan.  vii.  22 ;  Matt.  xix.  28 ;  Luke  xxii.  30.  It  is  better,  however,  to  impress  the 
;cint  that  the  actual  ^aaunce  of  good  men  in  the  world,  in  society,  is  a  constant 
testing  and  showing  up  of  the  evil  of  the  world. 

II.  The  saints'  judgment  of  angelb.  This  must  refer  to  evil  angels  (comp.  2 
Pet.  ii.  4 ;  Jude  6).  We  may,  however,  treat  it  as  an  intense  expression  of  the  apostle's, 
uttered  under  the  deep  impress  of  all  that  might  be  involved  in  the  spiritual  union  of 
Christ  and  his  people.  Christ  rules  the  angels,  and  so  do  we,  since  we  are  in  him.  "  It 
is  better  to  regard  the  passage  as  a  climax  arising  out  of  the  apostle's  intense  realization 
of  the  unity  c-f  Christ  and  bis  Church  triumphant — a  point  which  seems  ever  present 
to  the  mind  of  St.  Paul  when  he  speaks  of  the  dignity  of  Christianity.  In  this  sense, 
redeemed  humanity  will  be  superior  to,  and  judges  of,  the  spiritual  world." 

III.  The  saints'  judgment  of  bveryday  matters.  The  argument  of  the  apostle 
is  that,  if  they  recognize  their  high  standing  and  privilege,  and  the  power  and 
responsibility  of  judging  such  external  things  as  the  "  world  "  and  the  "  angels,"  they 
ought  also,  and  much  more  anxiously,  to  recognize  their  power  to  rule  and  judge  all 
small  matters  arising  within  the  Christian  fellowship.  What  must  be  their  concdtiou 
if  they  could  not  find  among  themselves  an  efficient  arbitrator?  Illustrate  by  our 
Lord's  advice  to  his  disciples  in  relation  to  their  disputes.  (1)  The  two  disputants 
were  to  confer  together;  (2)  if  that  failed  to  settle  the  difficulty,  then  two  or  three 
witnesses  might  be  brought  into  the  conference ;  if  that  also  failed,  then  (3)  the 
matter  was  to  be  told  to  the  Church,  and  its  decision  sought.  The  apostle  does  but 
find  adaptation  for  the  comprehensive  principle  which  was  laid  down  by  Christ,  and 
can  be  equally  adapted  by  us  in  the  perplexities  and  misunderstandings  of  Church  and 
social  life.— R.  T. 

Ver.  9. — Inheriting  the  kingdom.  "  Know  ye  not  that  the  unrighteous  shall  not 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  "  The  phrases  "  kingdom  of  heaven,"  "  kingdom  of  God," 
are  familiar  enough  to  the  New  Testament  reader,  as  synonyms  for  the  new,  the 
Christian  dispensation.  The  apostles  seem  to  use  the  term  for  a  kingdom  which,  they 
conceive,  will  be  set  up  at  Christ's  second  coming  and  the  "  restitution  of  all  things." 
There  is  an  important  sense  in  which  we  are  to  recognize  that  the  "  kingdom "  ia 
actually  now  established ;  but  it  need  not  interfere  with  our  cheiishing  the  high  hope 
of  a  day  when  that  kingdom  shall  be  fully  perfected,  and  in  some  glorious  way  declared 
to  be  the  kingdom  of  the  world  become  the  kingdom  of  Gnd.    The  figure  eonuined  ia 


i;20  THE  ilKST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa    [oH.vi.1— 2a 

lh«  word  "Inherit"  ii  taken  from  Israel's  long  jonmey  through  the  deserts  to  the 
promised  land,  which  was  a  country  to  be  "  inherited."  Under  careful  limitations,  tha 
figure  may  be  carried  over  into  Christianity,  and  the  Christian  may  be  spoken  of  m 
"  Keking  a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  b  God."  We  are 
"heirs  of  salvation,"  which  is  "ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time."  John  Bunyan 
makes  his  pilgrim  talk  persuasively  to  Pliable,  and  say,  "  There  is  an  endless  kingdom 
to  be  inhabit^,  and  everlasting  life  to  be  given  us,  that  we  may  inhabit  that  kingdom 
for  orer,"  etc.  For  gracious  moral  purposes,  for  the  furtherance  of  his  sanctifying  work, 
God  would  bavo  us^  think  of  the  privileges  of  salvation  as  both  realized  now  and  to  be 
realized  more  Ailly  ^-and-by.  This  St.  Peter  states  with  the  utmost  plainness  in  his 
Epistle  (1  Pet.  i.  3 — 6).  A  present  keeping  and  a  present  joy  are  directly  associated 
with  the  "lively  hope"  of  an  "inheritance  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and- fading  not 
away."    Consider,  then — 

L  Thb  power  of  a  promised  future.  That  is,  its  bearing  on  the  Christian  (1) 
sjdiit,  (2)  character,  (3)  opinions,  (4)  conduct.  Hope  is  one  of  man's  most  important 
moral  forces ;  strong  according  to  the  reasonable  grounds  upon  which  it  rests.  A  man 
is  never  lost  until  he  has  lost  hope.  A  man  can  rise  up  out  of  the  uttermost  disability 
and  distress  so  long  as  he  can  imagine  a  brighter  future,  and  fix  his  hope  on  it  Explain 
the  relation  in  which  "  faith"  stands  to  "  hope,"  so  that  it  may  give  us  a  sense  of  the 
present  possess^ion  of  that  we  hope  for.  "  Faith  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for, 
the  evidence  of  things  not  seen.*  Also  show  the  influence  of  hope  as:  1.  Producing  a 
restful  feeling,  a  contentment  with  present  circumstances.  Illustrate  from  St.  Paul, 
who  could  say,  "  I  have  learned  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content,"  but 
only  because  he  could  also  say,  "  There  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness."  2. 
An  inspiration  to  patient  and  earnest  endeavour.  Thousands  are  kept  at  work  by  the 
hope  of  (uccess.  The  value  and  strength  of  the  inspiratioti  depend  greatly  on  tha 
character  of  the  hope.  How  great,  then,  must  be  the  inspiration  of  the  Christian  hope ! 
and  how  practically  purifying,  seeing  it  is  the  hope  of  perfect  and  everlasting 
righteoutnes$  I    "  We  shall  be  like  him ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is." 

IL  The  influence  op  a  sense  of  right  to  the  promised  future.  That  right  we 
have ;  but  it  is  not  of  merit  or  of  mere  birth,  it  is  wholly  by  grace,  and  belongs  to  our 
ntu  birth  through  the  Spirit.  Still,  we  have  a  distinct  sense  of  right ;  and  that  we 
ought  to  keep  and  to  cherish,  recognizing  that  varying  moods  of  feeling,  or  conditions 
of  frame,  can  in  no  way  affect  our  standing  and  our  rights.  "  If  we  believe  not, 
yet  he  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself; "  "  Fear  not,  little  flock ;  for  it  is  your 
Father's  good  i>leasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom."  Illustrate  by  the  influence  of  tha 
sense  of  rigM  and  possession  which  the  husband  and  wife  have  in  each  other.  Also  by 
the  spirit  of  noblesse  oblige,  which  gives  tone  and  character  to  all  the  sayings  and  doings 
of  the  young  heir.  Also  by  the  claim  to  nobility  which  the  Roman  felt  was  laid  on  him 
by  his  Roman, »;t;(;iAfg,  in  whatever  country  he  might  reside.  If  we  have  a  right  of 
heritage  in  God^  exedtasting' and hol^ kingdom,^ we «re  under  •  constant  impulsion  to 
"  walk  worthy  of  our  vocation."— R.  T. 

Ver.  It. — Recoiling  grace  received.  We  should  be  always  prepared  to  make  direct 
personal  api  iications  of  Il<ily  Scripture;  and  the  skill  of  a])plying  general  principles  to 
particular  cases  is  one  of  the  proper  results  of  Christian  culture  and  experience.  This, 
however,  often  involve-:  accommodation  and  modification.  Principles  which  Scripture 
illustrates  in  particular  instances  need  adaptation  when  refeiTed  to  new  and  different  cases; 
and  we  should  clearly  apprehend  that  Scripture  does  not  propose  to  provide  mere 
examples  for  a  bare  imitation,  but  rather  principles  which  are  so  truly  human  that 
they  may  be  applied  to  the  varying  conditions  and  circumstances  of  every  age  and 
clime,  BO  that  the  sacred  Word  has  really  been  written  "for  our  sakes,  on  whom  tha 
ends^the  world  are  come."  At  first  sight,  the  passage  now  before  us  does  not  seem 
suitedions.  IHic  list  of  sins  here  given-i'snot'our8-;~it  is  essentially^pagan.  We  do  not 
even  know  what  some  of  these  words  stand  for;  and  to  say  to  us,  "  Such  were  some  of 
you,"  rouses  a  feeling  of  indignation  and  opposition.  Yet  if  we  can  reach  beyond  the 
mere  terms  to  the  spirit  ami  principle  of  the  apo-stle's  appeal,  we  shall  find  it  bear*  its 
message  also  to  us.  St.  Paul  is  really  dealing  with  what  is  consistent  for  a  Christian ; 
and  he  puts  it  in  this  way,  "  What  is  in  true  harmony  with  one  who  is  washed,  aancti* 


DH.'n.l— 20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.  221 


fied,  and  justified?"  We  can  settle  every  difficult  question  by  asking — Is  the  thing 
befitting  a  sanctified  man?  And  to  realize  our  Ciiristian  standing  becomes  the  best 
resistance  of  evil, 

L  RepalIi  tour  SELr-BSEKiNO  PAW.  "Such  were  some  of  you."  Apply  to  the 
Ominthians.  Indicate  something  of  the  luxury  and  vice  of  Corinthian  society.  For 
them  it  was  •  marvellous  change  to  become  pure  and  sober-minded  Christians.  We 
think  that  we  hare  nQ  such  review ;  most  of  us  have  no  experience  of  violent  and  open 
fonns  of  ungodliness.  But  if  we  look  a  little  deeper,  may  we  not  see  that  those  Corinthian 
sini  were  but  the  forms  for  that  age  of  the  universal  sin  and  self-seeking  of  mankind  ? 
They  all  mean  just  this — man,  asserting  his  independence  of  Qod,  throwing  off  all 
bondages  of  authority,  and  seeking  his  own  will  and  pleasure.  Then  we  can  see  that 
the  aame  root  of  evil  has  been  in  our  past ;  and  we  must  not  let  the  mere  refinement 
of  modern  terms  for  sin  blind  us  to  the  fact  that,  in  us,  is  the  same  heart-evil  (see  Eph, 
ii.  1 — 3, 10 — 12).  In  the  light  of  this  fact  of  depravity  review  your  past,  see  the  stain 
of  self-seeking,  and  then  you  will  feel  that  St.  Paul  may  My  even  to  you,  "  And  such 
were  some  of  you.* 

IL  Estimate  toxjb  Chwbtian  stakdino,  "  Ye  are  washed,"  etc.  We  need  not  feat 
to  do  this ;  since  it  is  a  standing  of  grace,  our  BO  doing  need  not  nourish  any  pride  or 
self-reliance.  Our  "standing"  is  set  under  three  figures.  1.  Wdshed;  or  perhaps  the 
translation  should  be,  "  Ye  have  got  yourselves  washed."  The  figure  for  putting  away 
old  sins  and  sinful  habits.  2.  Sanctified.  The  figure  for  having  consecrated  your- 
selves ;  bein^  separated  unto  holy  uses ;  and  we  are  sealed  in  such  consecration,  by  the 
gift  and  abiding  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  ■  3.  Justified.  The  figure  for  our  being, 
as  washed  and  consecrated,  received  into  gracious  relations  of  acceptance  with  God. 
The  order  of  the  terms  seems  to  be  singular,  but,  when  rightly  understood,  it  is  seen 
to  be  correct :  (1)  put  away  sin ;  (2)  devote  yourself  to  God  ;  (3)  receive  the  sense  of 
acceptance.  And  this  is  our  present  Christian  standing;  we  are  eltan,  consecrated,  and 
accepted.    And  all  is  through  grace. 

III.  Renew  toub  sense  of  resfonsibilitt.  For  to  such  a  "  standing  "  something 
is  becoming;.  The  apostle  wants  us  so  to  feel  this  that  we  should  not  require  any 
telling.  We  are  under  obligation  to  live  such  a  life  as  would  worthily  express  our 
thankfulness  for  grace  received ;  such  a  life  as  would  manifestly  harmonize  with  our 
standing.  We  are  called  with  a  holy  calling.  But  we  have  to  find  out  what  precisely 
is  "holy"  and  "good"  in  our  times.  Everything  that  is  pure,  true,  self-denying, 
good,  and  kind  we  may  be  sure  is  becoming  to  our  Christian  standing.  Ifay,  we  may 
come  in  from  all  mere  general  terms,  and  we  may  say,  "  A  life  for  Christ,  and  a  life  like 
Christ's, — these  are  the  '  becoming '  for  all  those  who  have  received  his  salvation." 
"  What  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  godliness?  " — 
R.  T. 

Ver.  11. —  What  tee  uer«  and  uihat  ut  art.  The  early  Churches  were  gathered 
out  from  corrupt  heathenism,  and  this  was  sadly  sensual  and  immoral.  This 
occasioned  difiiculty  in  dealing  with  the  Churches.  'J'he  question  had  to  be  met — Is 
moral  defilement  absolutely  Incompatible  with  the  Christian  profession  ?  Show  how 
this  question  is  answered  note,  in  our  day,  and  by  the  Apostle  Paul  i  n  his  day.  Now  the 
answer  is  sadly  uncertain,  especially  if  moral  delinquency  happens  to  be  joined  with 
riches.  By  St.  Paul  it  is  answered  with  a  noble  firmness  and  fidelity.  Take  two 
to^cs  for  consideration. 

L  Out  of  the  self-luv.  Show  that  the  characteristic  of  a  Christian  is  his 
deliverance  from  the  slavery  of  the  self-rule.  Then  all  yieldings  to  self  and  passion 
must,  for  him,  be  wrong. 

IL  Into  the  Chbist-rulbd  life.  This  process  is  conceived  under  three  forms  and 
by  two  agents.  (1)  Washing;  (2)  sanctifying;  (3)  justifying.  The  two  agents  are 
(1)  the  Lord  Jesus;  (2)  the  Spirit  of  our  God.  Then  it  fullows  that  an  entire  yieliing 
to  the  pure  impulses  and  guidances  of  God's  indwelling  Spirit  in  all  the  life  and  all 
the  relationships  and  all  the  conduct  is  for  every  Christian  the  right  and  the  necessary 
thing.— B.T. 

Ver.  12. — The  lawful  and  Iht  expedient.    "All  things  are  lawful  forme:  hnt  not 


222  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.    [ch.»i.  1-2* 

•n  things  are  expedient."  This  is  the  statement  of  a  general  principle,  which  may  b* 
thus  expressed :  when  a  man  is  renewed  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  becomes  a  law  unto  himself^ 
bis  regenerate  conscience  sufficiently  attests  what  is  lawful  and  what  is  expedient.  The 
apostle  is  applying  the  principle  to  two  subjects  of  discussion  which  were  closely  con- 
nected with  the  heathen  worship :  (1)  whether  it  was  lawful  for  Christians  to  eat  food 
which  had  been  offered  in  sacrifice  to  idols;  (2)  whether  it  was  permissible  to  overlook, 
in  Christians,  indulgence  in  the  sin  of  fornication.  It  seems  that,  because  St.  Paul 
afSrmed  the  right  of  Christian  liberty  in  relation  to  the  heathen  food,  his  enemies 
declared  that  he  also  held  loose  notions  concerning  Christian  immoralities.  St.  Paul, 
therefore,  makes  it  quite  clear  that  the  liberty  which  he  claims  is  a  reasonable  liberty, 
duly  toned  and  tempered  by  a  quickened  and  sensitive  consciousness  of  what  is  becoming 
and  what  is  right.  "  There  is  such  a  thing  as  becoming  the  very  slave  of  liberty  itself. 
If  we  sacrifice  the  power  of  choice  which  is  implied  in  the  thought  of  liberty,  we  cease 
to  be  free;  we  are  brought  under  the  power  of  that  which  should  be  in  our  power." 
"  Starting  &om  the  doctrine  of  Christian  liberty  taught  by  Christ  (John  viii.  32,  36), 
and  proclaimed  with  one  mouth  by  his  apostles  (Rom.  viiL  2;  Jas.  ii.  12;  1  Pet  ii. 
16),  they  declared  that  the  Christian  was  bound  to  a  'service'  which  was  'perfect 
freedom.'  St.  Paul  accepts  the  principle,  but  with  limitations.  No  actions  were  in 
themselvei  unlawful,  he  was  ready  to  admit,  provided  (1)  that  they  were  in  accordance 
with  God's  design  in  creation ;  (2)  that  they  were  calculated  to  promote  the  general 
welfare  of  mankind ;  and  (3)  that  we  were  masters  of  our  actions,  not  they  of  us."  We 
here  consider  the  lawfid  and  the  expedient,  aud  we  observe  that — 

I.  Every  man  must  becoqnize  this  distinction.  In  all  the  practical  relations  of 
life  it  comes  up  to  view  continually ;  in  the  home,  in  the  business,  and  in  society,  a 
man  has  constantly  to  say,  "  I  may,  but  I  will  not.  I  have  an  absolute  right  to  do  it, 
yet  for  others'  tiakes  I  must  not  do  it."  Observe  that  the  expedient  is  not  here  the  sdf- 
serving  or  the  time-serving.  A  man's  limitations  are  not,  first  of  all,  his  own  personal 
interests,.but  (1)  the  sense  of  the  fitness  of  things;  and  (2)  the  well-being  of  others. 
Illustrate  the  distinction  as  applied  to  such  questions  as  the  use  of  strong  drinks ; 
modes  of  keeping  sabbath  ;  limits  of  permissible  amusements,  etc. 

II.  The  distinction  no  man  finds  bo  SEARcuma  as  bobs  the  Chbistian.  By 
reason  of  (1)  his  sensitiveness  to  what  is  in  harmony  with  the  Christian  profession ;  and 
(2)  his  charitable  consideration  of  even  the  weaknesses  of  others.  He  is  most  jealous  of 
himself,  lest  he  should  cast  a  stumbling-block  in  his  brother's  way.  The  subject  can 
be  efBcieutly  illustrated  from  the  details  of  modem  Christian  life.  And  tlie  following 
passa<^es  sufficiently  suggest  the  practical  application  of  the  subject : — "  Ye  are  called 
unto  liberty;  only  use  not  liberty  for  au  occasion  unto  the  flesh,  but  by  love  serve  one 
another ; "  "Be  not  conformed  to  this  world,  but  be  ye  transfoimed  by  the  renewing  of 
your  mind."  Our  Lord  Jesus  could  demand  absolute  liberty ;  all  things  were  lawlul  to 
him,  because,  his  will  being  wholly  right,  his  choices  and  preferences  and  decision!< 
were  fully  according  to  God's  will.  A  man  must  be  right  before  we  can  give  him 
liberty.— R.  T. 

Ver.  19. — The  tempie-body  and  its  sanctitf/.  The  idea  of  the  old  temple  was  not  tha 
of  the  modern  church,  which  is  a  building  in  which  men  may  gather  to  worship  God. 
'J  he  old  temple  was  a  shrine  for  Deity  to  dwell  in ;  and  this  Divine  presence  in  the 
central  shrine  was  conceived  as  hallowing  the  entire  temple  buildings,,  riglit  through  to 
the  outer  courts  and  gates.  Nothing  might  enter  the  precincts  that  defiled  or  worked 
abonjiuation.  Illustrate  from  Solomon's  temple,  and  the  extreme  jealousy  with  which 
the  Jews  regarded  the  sacred  place.  Two  points  may  be  dwelt  on  as  working  out  the 
figure  of  the  text. 

I.  The  Deity  in  tub  bhiiinb  sanctified  aix  thb  courts  making  ur  thk  templb 

BUILDINGS. 

II.  The  Deity  in  the  serine  sanctified  the  very  city  and  land.  So,  if  "Christ 
dwells  in  our  hearts  by  faith,"  if  our  souls  know  his  Divine  presence, — then  all  *he  forces 
and  powers  of  our  body  are  consecrated,  and  ought  to  be  hallowed.  Our  wkole  life,  in 
1(8  narrower  and  in  its  wider  circles  of  relationship,  must  be  thought  of  as  sanctified 
treated  as  pur. ,  made  and  kept  ever  "  clean,"  eTer  "  holy." — B.  T. 


«KTU.l— 40.]    TUB  FUCST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS. 


223 


Ter.  19.^T%«  Christian  ha$  no  personal  rights.  This  assertion  may  be  mads  both 
•onceraing  himself  and  ooacerning  the  things  which  ha  ia  said  to  possesa.  Tbrea 
points  claim  consideration. 

I.  Thb  Chbistian  is  not  hib  owv.  Before  conrerdon  be  may  have  so  thongbt  «f 
liimself.    The  essence  of  conversion  is  a  voluntary  surrender  of  will  and  life  to  Christ, 

II.  Hb  u  A  BocoHT  ONK.  And  he  dwells  with  holy  satisfaction  on  the  "  preciow 
blood  "  which  was  as  it  were  his  purchase  money  (1  Pet.  i.  18, 19). 

in.  Hb  is  a  bond-slavi  to  Chbist.  Held  indeed  by  purchase  rights,  but  quite  •■ 
truly  held  by  the  entire  and  willing  surrender  of  a  thankful  love.  Therefore  in  all  the 
Christian  is,  in  all  the  Christian  has,  and  in  all  the  Christian  can  be,  he  is  under  solemn 
obligation  to  glorify  God,  who  is  his  Lord.  And  the  Lord  whom  he  serves,  and  who 
holds  sole  right  in  him  and  his,  he  is  permitted  to  apprehend  and  recognize  as  his 
gracious  Master,  the  glorified  "  Man  Christ  Jesus^"  whose  service  ia  perfect  freedom  and 
Itbliebt  joy.— 0.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CUAPTEB  VtL 


Ten.  1 — 40. — Antuters  to  the  {n(iuMm  •/ 
Ihe  Corinthians  re»peeting  marriage. 

Vera.  1 — 11. — Tlie  Lawfulness  of  marriage, 
mnd  its  duties. 

Vet.  1. — Now  oonoeming.  This  refers  to 
qouetioDS  of  the  Corinthians  (comp.  ch.  vii. 
25;  viii.  1;  xii.  1).  It  is  good  for  a  man 
not  to  tonoh  a  woman.  The  word  used  is 
not  agathon,  good,  but  halon,  fair;  "an 
excellent  thing."  In  ver.  26  he  limits  the 
word  by  the  clause,  "  good  for  the  present 
necessity."  There  is  no  limitation  here,  and 
it  is  probable  that  St  Paul  is  quoting  the 
actual  words  of  the  letter  which  be  had 
received  from  Corinth.  There  had  sprung 
op  among  them  some  antinomians,  who, 
periia^iB  by  perverting  his  own  teaching 
or  that  of  A  polios,  hud  made  liberty  a 
cloak  of  lasciviouauiBs.  In  indignant  re- 
action against  such  las  ty,  others,  perhaps, 
with  Essene  proclivities,  iiad  been  led  to 
disparage  matrimony  aa  involving  an  inevit- 
able stain.  Gnnsficism,  and  the  spirit 
which  led  to  it,  osrilhited  between  the  two 
extremes  of  asceticism  nnd  uncleanneas. 
Both  extremes  were  gruumled  on  the  asser- 
tion that  matter  ia  inherently  evil.  Ascetio 
Gnostics,  tberufore,  strove  to  destroy  by 
severity  every  carnal  impulse;  antinumian 
Gnostics  argued  that  the  life  of  the  spirit 
*as  so"  utterly  iii.lependent  of  the  flesh 
that  what  the  flesh  did  was  of  no  conse- 
quence. We  find  the  germs  of  Gnostic 
heresy  long  liefore  the  name  appeared. 
Theoretically,  St.  Paul  inclines  to  the  as- 
cetic view,  not  in  the  abstract,  but  in  view 
of  the  near  ad  vent  of  Christ,  and  of  the  cares, 
distractions,  and  even  trials  which  marriage 
involved  in  days  uf  struggle  and  persecution. 
Ifet  his  wisdom  is  shown  in  the  cautious 
moderation  with  which  he  expresses  himself. 
The  tone  of  the  letter  written  by  Gregory 
the  Great  to  Augustine  with  reference  to 
ninillar  inquiries  about  Suxon  converts  ii 


very  different  The  example  of  Si  Paul 
should  have  shown  the  mediieval  moralisti 
and  even  the  later  Fathers  how  wrong  it 
is  "  to  give  themselves  aiis  of  certainty  on 
points  where  certainty  is  not  to  be  had." 
A'ot  to  touch  a  woman.  St.  Paul  means 
generally  "not  to  marry"  (comp.  Gen.  zx. 
4  [LXX.]).  Celibacy  under  the  then  exist- 
ing conditions  of  the  Christian  world  is,  he 
admits,  in  itself  an  honourable  and  morally 
salutary  thing,  though,  for  the  majority, 
marriage  may  be  a  positive  duty.  He  is  not 
dreaming  of  the  nominal  marriages  of 
mediiBval  ascetics,  for  he  assumes  and  directs 
that  all  who  marry  should  live  in  conjugal 
anion. 

Ver.  2. — Kevertheless.  In  this  single 
word  St.  Paul  practically  refutes  all  the 
dangerous  and  unwarrantable  inferences 
drawn  by  St.  Jerome  and  others  from  the 
previous  clause.  St.  Jerome  argues :  **  If  it  is 
good  for  a  man  not  to  touch  a  woman,  it 
must  be  bad  to  do  so,  and  therefore  celibacy 
is  a  holier  state  than  marriage."  He  also 
says,  "t  suspect  the  goodness  of  a  thing 
which  the  greatness  of  another  evil  enforce! 
as  a  lesser  evil."  Such  reasoning  shows: 
1.  The  danger  of  pressing  words  to  the  full 
extent  of  the  logical  inferences  which  may 
be  deduced  from  them.  2.  The  error* 
which  always  arise  from  arguing  upon 
isolated-  texts  ^dissevered  from  their  context 
and  from  all  consideration  of  the  circum* 
stances  under  wliicb  they  were  written. 
3.  The  necessity  of  following  the  guidanoo 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  when  he  shows,  by  history 
and  experience,  the  need  for  altering  precepts 
with  reference  to  altered  conditions.  Thero 
is  in  celibacy  a  moral  beauty— it  is  kalon ' 
there  are  eases  in  which  it  becomes  a  duty. 
But  in  most  cases  marriage,  being  no  less  • 
duty,  aa  St.  Paul  proct  eds  to  show,  is  even 
fairer  and  more  excellent.  Neither  state, 
the  wediled  or  the  un  wedded,  is  in  itself 
more  holy  than  the  other.  Each  hus  its  swa 
honour  and   loveliness,  and  can  only   be 


224 


THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    fcH.  vn.  1—40. 


judged  of  in  connection  witli  surrounding 
circumstances.  Those  who  make  St.  Paul 
judge  slightingly  of  marriage  contradict  his 
own  express  rules  and  statements  (Eph.  v. 
24,  31,  32 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  15),  and  make  him 
■peak  the  current  heatlien.  language  of 
heathen  epiciires,  who,  to  the  great  injury  of 
morals,  treated  marriage  as  a  disagreeable 
necessity,  which  whs,  if  possible,  to  be 
avoided.  If  the  "  it  is  a  "ood  thing  "  of  Pt. 
Paul  in  ver.  1  were  to  be  taken  absolutely, 
itwonid  have  to  be  corrected  (1)  by  the 
example  of  Christ,  who  beautifieil  with  his 
presence  the  marriage  at  Cana  (John  ii.  1, 
2);  (2)  by  the  primeval  law  which  said, 
*  It  is  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone  "  (Gen. 
ii.  18) ;  and  (3)  by  the  fact  that  marriage  is 
the  chosen  analogue  of  the  relation  between 
Christ  and  his  Church.  liut  the  very 
phrase  he  uses,  as  will  be  seen  by  reference 
to  ch.  ii.  1.");  Matt.  xv.  26;  Rom.  xiv  21, 
3tc.,  is  a  relative  not  an  absolute  one,  nml  St. 
Paul  uses  it  here  concessively,  but  with  t  he 
object  of  pointing  out  limitations  which 
almost  reverted  it.  To  avoid  fornication; 
rather,  because  of  fornication ;  i.e.  because  of 
the  many  forma  of  impurity  which  were 
current  everywhere,butespeciallyat  Corinth. 
Some  have  argued  that  St.  Paul  takes  a, 
"low"  and  "poor"  view  of  marriage  by 
regarding  it  only  in  the  lijjht  of  a  remedy 
against  fornication.  The  answer  is :  1.  That 
the  reason  which  he  assigns  is  a  true  reason 
in  itself,  and  with  reference  to  the  masses 
of  mankind ;  fir  which  reason  it  is  adopted 
by  our  Church   in  her  Marriage   Service. 

2.  He  is  addressing  those  who  were  living 
in  a  corrupt  and  semi-heathen  atmosphere. 

3.  He  is  not  here  speaking  of  the  idealized 
and  spiritual  aspect  of  marriage,  but  only  of 
large  practical  necessities.  When  he  speaks 
of  marriage  as  a  high  Christian  mystery 
(as  in  2  Cor.  xi.  2;  Eph,  v.  22- 33),  he 
adopts  a  very  different  tone.  let  every 
man  have.  A  rule,  not  a  mere  permis^sion. 
He  here  implies  the  truth  that  married  luve 
bears  no  analogy  whatever  to  the  vagse 
Ubidinet  of  those  who  live  like  "natural 
brute  beasts."  In  marringe  the  sensuous 
impulse,  by  being  controlled  and  placed 
under  religious  sanetions  is  reiined  and  puri- 
fied from  a  de^'radation  into  a  sacrament 
Instead  of  being  any  longer  the  source  of 
untold  curses  to  mankind,  it  becomes  the 
condition  of  their  continuance  and  an  element 
in  their  peace,  because  it  is  then  plared 
under  the  blessing  of  God  and  of  his  Church. 

Ver.  3. — Due  benevolence.  An  euphe- 
mistic and  needless  modification  by  the 
copyists  of  the  pure  and  simple  expression 
of  St.  Paul,  which,  as  ehown>  by  the  best 
manuscripts,  is  "  her  due  " — delntum  tori.  St. 
Paul  is  evidently  entering  on  these  subjects, 
not  ont  of  any  love  for  them,  bnt  bttvuse 


all  kinds  of  extreme  views— immoral  in- 
difference  and  over-scrupulous  ascetieisin — 
had  elairoed  dominance  among  the  Corin- 
thians. 

Ver.  4. — The  wife  hath  not  power. 
Marriage  is  not  a  capricious  union,  but  a 
holv  bond.  "  They  two "  become  "  one 
flesh." 

Ver.  5. — Defraud  ye  not.  St.  Paul  pur- 
posely leaves  the  expression  general. 
Primarily  he  is  thinking  of  "the  due"  nr 
"  the  power  "  which  eaeh  has  over  ihe  other, 
as  is  shown  by  the  next  verse ;  but  he  does 
not  con  fine  the  expression  to  this.  Except 
it  be;  literally,  unless  by  chance.  The 
exception  he  regards  as  80inethin>i;  possible, 
but  not  normal.  For  a  time.  By  this  and 
tlie  next  words  he  disparages,  by  anticipation, 
the  celibate  and  separate  married  lives 
which,  in  a  corrupt  age,  were  so  much  and  so 
unwisely  admired  in  the  ascetic  saints  of  the 
Middle  Ages.  Temporary  se|  aration  for 
special  reasons  had  been  recognized  from 
the  earliest  times  (Exod.  xix.  15 ;  1  Sam.  xxi. 
4).  Ye  may  give  yourselves ;  rather,  ye  may 
have  leisure.  The  verb  is  in  the  aorist, 
which  shows  that  the  "  leisure "  contem- 
plated was  for  brief  periods,  not  during 
continuous  years.  It  was  altered  to  the 
presevthy  the  officious  copyists,  who  believed 
in  external  and  mechanical  rules  of  holiness. 
To  fasting  and  prayer.  "  Fasting  "  is  an  asce- 
tic interpidation,  not  found  in  N,  A,  B,  0,  D, 
F.  On  this  interpolation,  and  pei  haps  on  the 
analogy  of  the  rule  given  by  Moses  at  Sinai 
(Exod.  xix.  15),  rose  the  practice  of  married 
persons  living  apart  at  Lent  (Stanley). 
Come  together  again.  The  prepossessions 
nf  ascetic  scribes  have  again  tampered  with 
the  text.  The  true  reading  is.  "  be  together 
again"  (?TeX  not  "come  together"  (^truvi/f 
XTjo-fle)-  ^T  y""^  incontinency ;  rather, 
because  of.  Their  past  lives  and  their 
present  temptations  were  a  warning  that 
they  could  not  lay  on  themsi-lvcs  burdens 
which  God  did  not  require.  They  should  not 
strive 

"...  to  wind  themselves  too  high 
For  sinful  man  beneath  the  sky." 

Violent,  unnatur.il,  self-tormenting,  repres- 
sions beyond  whnt  God  demands,  and 
adopted  without  reference  to  the  strength  or 
the  circumstances  of  individual  natures, 
only  tend,  as  all  ascetics  have  confessed, 
to  increase  rather  than  to  diminish  th« 
force  of  sensual  temptations. 

Ver.  6.— I  speak  this.  The  "this" 
applies  to  his  advice  in  general,  but  especi- 
ally to  the  last  verse.  By  permission.  This 
'  ]>hrase  is  generally  misunderstood.  It  does 
not  mean  that  St.  Paul  was  permitted  tluongh 
not  commanded  to  give  this  advice,  but  thai 
his   gentle  advice  wm  given  "by  way  at- 


ni.1— 40.j    TUE   FIKST   KPISTLE  TO  TUK   COIUNTIIIANS. 


22S 


permifigioii "  to  Ch'istiana,  not  "by  way  of 
injunction."  He  means  to  say  that  he 
leaves  the  details  of  their  lives,  whether 
celibate  or  married,  to  their  individual  con- 
sciences, though  with  large  hearted  wisdom 
and  charity  he  would  emaneipite  them 
from  human  and  unauthorized  restrictions. 
The  clause  is '  not,  therefore,,  a  parallel  to 
the  restrictions  on  the  authority  of  his 
utterances,  such  as  we  find  in  vers.  12, 29, 40, 
and  in  2  Cor.  viii.  10 ;  xi.  17. 

Ver.  7. — For  I  would.  The  verb  here 
used  ia  Ihelo  (will).  In  1  Tim.  v.  11  he 
says,  "  1  prefer  (boulomat)  that  the  younger 
women  marry."  Even  as  I  myself;  endowed, 
that  is,  with  the  gift  of  continence,  which 
would  (in  the  expected  nearness  of  Christ's 
coming)  render  marriage  needless,  and  the 
condition  of  man  like  that  of  the  angels  in 
heaven,  who  neither  marry  nor  are  given  in 
marriage,  His  proper  gift.  The  "gifts" 
alluded  to  are  the  "  graces  "  (charismata)  of 
the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  the  grace  of  perfect 
continence  does  not  exist  equally  in  all ' 
(Matt.  xix.  11).  One  after  this  manner, 
and  another  after  that.  The  remark  is 
general,  but  also  has  its  special  application 
to  continence  and  marriage  (Matt.  xix. 
12). 

Ver.  8. — To  the  nnmarried ;  including 
widowers.  In  my  '  Life  of  St.  Paul,'  i.  75 
— 82,  I  have  given  my  reasons  for  believing 
that  St.  Paul  was  a  widower.  It  is  good  for 
them.  It  is  an  expedient,  honourable,  and 
morally  "beautiful  thing,"  but,  as  he  so 
distinctly  points  out  further  on,  there  might 
be  a  "  better  "  even  to  the  "  good."  Even  as 
I.  In  the  unmarried  state,  whether  as  one 
who  had  never  married,  or,  as  I  infer  from 
various  circumstances,  as  a  widower  (so  too 
Clemens  of  Alexandria,  Grotius,  Luther, 
Ewald,  etc.);  see  my  '  Ufe  of  St.  Paul.'  i. 
,169).  Tertuilian  and  Jerome  (both  of  them 
ibiassed'  witnesses,'  and  with  no  ceilaiui 
support  of  tradilion)  say  that  St.  Paul  was' 
never  married. 

Ver.  9. — If  they  cannot  contain ;  rather, 
if  they  have  not  conlinency.  Let  them 
marry.  In  1  Tim.  v.  14  he  lays  down  and 
justifies  the  same  rule  with  reference  to 
young  widows.  It  is  better  to  marry  than 
to  bum.  The  original  tenses  give  greater 
force  and  beauty  to  this  obvious  rule  of 
Christian  common  sense  and  morality.  The 
"  marry "  is  in  the  aorist — "  to  marry  once 
for  all,"  and  live  in  holy  married  union; 
the  "  bnm  "  is  in  the  present — "  to  be  on  fire 
,.  with  concupiscence."  Marriage  once  tor  all 
is  better  than  coStin'u^us  l.Qet;  the  former  is' 
Dermitted,  the  latter  sinful. 

Ver.  10. — And;  rather,  hut.  TTnto  the 
married;  to  Christians  who  have  already 
married.  I  oommand.  This  is  an  injunc- 
tion, not B mire  ])ermission  ai in  ver. 6.     Not 

I,  ComvTHlAVK. 


I,  but  the  Lord.  Because  the  rule  had  been 
laid  down  by  Christ  himself  (Mark  x.  II, 
12;  Matt.  v.  32;  xix.  6;  Luke  xvi.  13). 
Let  not  the  wife  depart.  By  divorce  or 
otherwise.  The  wife  is  mentioned,  perhaps, 
because  the  Christian  wife,  in  the  new  sense 
iof  dignity  and  saoredness  which  Christianity 
had  bestowed  upon  her,  might  be  led  to 
claim  this  spurious  freedom ;  or  perhaps  the 
Christian  women  of  Corinth  had  been  more 
impressed  than  their  husbands  by  the 
Essene  notions  of  purity.  The  exception  of 
divorce  being  permissible  in  case  nf  forni- 
cation is  assume  I  (Matt.  v.  32 ;  xix.  9). 

Ver.  11. — If  she  depart.  'The  reference 
throughout  the  verse  is  to  separation  due  to 
incompatibility  of  temper,  etc. ;  not  to  legal 
divorce. 

Vers.  12 — 16. — Directions  about  mixed 
marriages. 

Ver.  12. — To  the  rest.  That  is,  to  those 
who  are  married,  but  are  lieathen.  They 
were  the  remiiining  class  about  whose  duties 
the  Corinthians  bad  made  inquiry.  Not 
the  Lord.  The  Lord  had  made  no  express 
reference  to  such  cases,  since  it  had  been  no 
part  of  his  mission  to  lay  down  minute 
details  wliich  would  be  duly  settled  from 
age  to  age  by  the  wisdom  taught  by  the 
Holy  Ghost.  She  be  pleased  to  dwell  with 
him.  It  is  assumed  that,  if  she  did  not 
please,  the  poor  Christian  convert  would 
have  no  protection  of  his  rights ;  pagan 
courts  would  regard  conversion  as  a  sufficient 
reason  for  breaking  off  marriages. 

Ver.  18. — Let  her  not  leave  him.  The 
verb  is  the  same  as  in  the  clause  rendered 
"  let  him  not  put  her  away." 

Ver.  14. — Is  sanctified;  literally,  Aa< been 
sanctified,  the  status  has  been  rendered  (so 
to  speak)  theoretically  clean.  By  the  wife ; 
literally,  in  the  wife.  The  bond  is  still 
holy;  its  holiness  rests  t'nthe  believing  wife 
or  husband.  .  The  reasoning  would  remove 
any  sornpres  which  Jewish  Christians  might 
derive  from  Dent.  vii.  3,  etc.  By  the 
husband;  TPither,  in  the  brother.  The  liberty 
implied  by  these  remarks,  contrasting  so 
strongly  with  the  rigid  rules  laid  down  in 
the  days  of  Ezra  (Ezra  ix.;  Neh.  ix.)  recall 
the  change  of  dispensatfon.  Unclean;  i.e. 
not  placed  in  immediate  covenant  relation 
to  God.  But  now  are  they  holy.  This  does 
not  necessarily  imply  that  they  were  bap- 
tized as  infants,  but  only  that  they  were 
hallowed  as  the  fruit  of  a  hallowed  union. 
See  the  remarkable  words  of  Malachi  (ii.  15). 
"If  the  root  be  holy,  so  are  the  branches" 
(Bom.  xi.  16). 

Ver.  l&.^If'thennhelieTing  depart.  The 
sense  of  the  word  rendered  "depart"  ia 
rather  "  wishes  to  be  separated."  Is  not 
under  bondage;  literally,  has  not  been 
eruJaerd.     Our    Lord    assumet    one    Muse 


tt6 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  tu.  1—40. 


alone— tmfaithfiilnen — ag  adequate  for  the 
disruption  of  the  marriage  tie ;  but  he  was 
not  oontemplatiog,  as  JSt.  Paul  is,  the  case 
«f  mixed  marriages.  To  peace;  rather,  in 
peoM.  Peace  is  to  be  the  sphere  in  which 
the  calling  comes,  and  in  which  it  issnea. 
Milton,  in  his  '  Tetrachordon,'  quotes 
Maimonidei  to  the  effect  that  "  divorce  wag 
permitted  by  Moses  to  preserve  peace  in 
marriage  and  quiet  in  the  family."  Similarly, 

•  voluntary  separation  might  be  the  only 
possible  means  of  preserving  mnral  peace 
where  the  union  was  between  souls  separated 
from 'each' other  by  so  vast  a  gulf  as  those  of 

•  pagan  and  a  Christian. 

Ver.  16. — For  what  knowest  thon,  0  wife, 
«to.  ?  The  meaning  is  as  follows : — You  may, 
perhaps,  plead  that,  by  refusing  to  sever  the 
union,  the  believing  partner  m.iy  convert  the 
unbelieving ;  but  that  possibility  is  too  dis- 
tant and  uncertain  on  which  to  act.  St. 
Peter  does  indeed  show  that  so  blessed  a 
result  is  possible  ("  That,  if  any  obey  not  the 
Word,  they  also  may  be  won ...  by  the  conver- 
sation of  the  wives,"  1  Pet.  iii.  1) ;  but  he  is 
only  speaking  of  cases  in  wliich  the  unbe- 
lieving husband  did  not  wish  the  union  to  be 
dissolved.  The  ancient  misiuterpretation  of 
the  passage  (due  to  neglect  of  the  context  and 
of  the  argument  as  a  whole)  viewed  it  as  an 
argument  for  mixed  marriages,  founded  on 
the  chance  of  thereby  winning  souls.  Most 
misinterpretations  of  Scripture  have  done 
deadly  harm ;  this  one,  however,  has  been 
OTcrruled  for  good,  and  led,  as  Dean  Stanley 
points  out,  to  such  happy  marriages  as 
that  of  Clotilde  with  Clovis,  and  Beitha 
with  Ethelbirt  of  Kent. 

Vers.  17 — 24. — Corroborative  instance*  of 
the  duty  of  remaining  in  the  itate  wherein 
each  was  called, 

Ver.  17.— But;  literally,  if  not.  The 
phrase  introduces  a  caution.  The  rule  is 
that  the  circumstances  of  our  lives  are 
regulated  by  the  providence  of  God,  and 
must  not  be  arbitmrily  altered  at  our  own 
caprice.  Christ  allotted  his  portion  to  each 
Christian,  God  hath  called  each  man;  that 
lot  and  that  call  are  to  guide  his  life.  -  "  Qu& 
positus  fueiis  in  ttatione  mane  "  (Uvid) . 
Hath  distributed;  rather,  apportioned.  8o 
ordain  I  in  sill  Churches.  Ue  proceeds  to 
give  specific  instances  to  which  his  rule 
applies. 

Ver.  18. — Being  oironmoised.  The  first 
instance  he  gives  is  that  of  Judaism  and 
paganism.  The  circumcised  Jew  is  to  remain 
circumcised ;  the  uncircnmoised  Gentile  is 
not  to  undergo  circumcision.  Become  un- 
oircnmciied,  The  Hellenising  Jews  in  the 
days  of  the  priest  Menelaus  (1  Mace.  i.  15; 
Josepbns, '  Ant.,'  xii.  5,  1)  had  discovered  a 
process  for  obliterating  the  appearance  of 
circumcision;  such  persons  were  known  as 


mainochim.  St.  Paul  does  not  permit  the 
adoption  of  this  course.  In  the  rebellion  of 
Barcocheba  many  obliterated  the  sign  of 
circumcision,  and  were  afterwards,  at  great 
danger  to  themselves,  recircumcised. 
('  Yevamoth,'  fel.  72, 1).  Let  him  not  be  cir- 
cnmoised.  This  rule  was  of  much  more 
practical  significance  than  the  other.  The 
early  fnrtunesof  Christianity  had  been  almost 
shipwrecked  by  the  attempt  of  Jewish 
rigorists  to  enforce  this  odious  bondnge  on 
the  Gentiles,  and  their  deliverance  from  it 
had  been  due  almost  solely  to  St.  Paul.  It 
was  his  inspired^  insight  which  had  swayed 
the  decision  of  the  synod  at  Jerusalem 
(Acts  zv.);  and  at  a  later  period  his  Epibtle 
tu  the  Galatians  was  the  manifesto  of  Gen- 
tile emancipation.  He  proved  that  after 
Christ's  death  "  circumcision "  (peritome) 
became  to  Gentiles  a  mere  pliysical  mutila- 
tion (hatatome)  (Phil.  iii.  2). 

Ver.  19. — Circumcision  is  nothing.  The 
Jews  regarded  it  as  everything;  and  to 
make  this  assertion  at  so  early  an  epoch  of 
Christian  history,  required  all  the  courage 
of  St.  Paul,  and  proved  his  grand  originality. 
He  was  the  first  to  prove  to  the  Jews  that 
circumcision  had, become  a  thing  intrinsic- 
ally indifferent,  which  might,  under  some 
circumstances,  be  desirable  (as  in  the  case 
of  Timothy),  but  could  never  be  reckoned 
among  essentials.  And  nnoironmcision  is 
nothing.  The  same  sentence  occurs  three 
times  in  St.  Paul,  summing  up,  as  it  were, 
the  liberty  which  it  bad  cost  him  endless 
peril  and  anguish  to  achieve.  Kach  time 
he  concludes  it  with  a  weighty  clause  to 
show  what  it  everything :  "  Circumcision  is 
nothing,  and  uncircumcision  is  nothing,  but 
the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God" 
(ver.  lU);  ".  .  .  but  faith  which  worketh  by 
love  "  (Gal.  v.  C) ;  " .  .  .  but  a  new  creation" 
(Gal.  vi.  15).  But  the  keeping  of  the  com- 
mandments.  So  St.  John  says,  "Hereby 
we  do  know  that  we  know  him,  if  we  keep 
his  commandments." 

Ver.  20. — Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same 
calling,  etc.  Id  accordance  with  this  general 
principle,  which  illustrates  the  distinction 
between  Christianity  and  violent  social 
revolutions,  St.  John  the  Baptist  had  not 
bidaen  publicans  or  soldiers  to  abandon 
their  callings,  but  to  do  thiir  duty  in  that 
state  ot  life  to  which  God  had  called  them 
(Luke  iii.  12—14).  The  "calling  "  alluded 
to  is  not  what  is  described  as  "  a  vocation," 
a  calling  in  life,  but  the  condition  in  which 
we  are  when  we  are  called  by  God  (comp. 
ch.  i.  26 ;  Eph.  i.  18  ;  iv.  1). 

Ver.  21. — Being  a  servant.  This  is  the 
second  instance  of  the  rule.  One  who  was 
converted  whilst  he  was  a  slave  is  not  ta 
strive  over-anxiously  for  freedom.  The 
word  "  emancipatioi  "  sometimes  seems  (as 


CH.  Til.  1—40.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE   l;OHlNTHiA^'S. 


227 


In  the  letter  to  Philemon)  to  be  **  trembling 
m  Paul's  llpa,"  but  he  never  utters  it, 
because  to  do  so  would  have  been  to  kiudle 
social  revolt,  and  lead  to  the  total  overthrow 
of  Christianity  at  the  very  commencement 
•f  its  career.  Oar  Lord  bad  taught  the 
apostles  to  adapt  means  to  ends;  and  the 
metliod  of  Chi  iutianity  was  to  inculcate 
great  principles,  the  acceptance  of  which 
involved,  witli  all  the  certainty  of  a  law,  the 
ultimate  regenerationof  the  world.  Christi- 
anity came  into  the  world  as  tlie  dawn,  not  ag 
the  uoon — a  shining  light,  which  brightened 
more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  Care 
not  for  it.  Do  not  be  troubled  by  the  fact, 
because  in  Christ  "  there  is  neither  bond 
nor  free"  (Gal.  iii.  28),  and  because  eartlily 
freedom  is  us  notliing  in  comparison  with 
the  freedom  which  Christ  givea  (Jolni  viii. 
.3ti).  Bat  if  thou  mayest  be  made  free,  nse 
it  rather.  The  words  may  mean,  (1 )  "  use 
freedom  " — avail  yourself  of  the  opportunity 
of  emancipation ;  or  (2)  "  use  slivery  " — be 
content  tn  remain  a  slave.  In  favour  of  the 
lirst  interpretation  is  the  fact  that  there  is 
nothing  extravagant  or  fantastic  in  Christian 
morality ;  and  that,  considering  what  ancient 
slavery  was — how  terrible  its  miseries,  how 
siiameful  and  perilously  full  of  temptations 
were  its  conditions — it  sounds  unnuiurul  to 
advise  a  Cliristian  slave  to  remain  a  slave 
when  he  might  gain  his  freedom.  Yet  the 
other  interpretation,  remain  a  tlave  by  pre- 
ferettee,  seems  to  be  required:  1.  By  the  strict 
interpretation  of  the  Greek  particles.  2.  By 
the  entire  context,  which  turns  on  the  rule 
that  each  man  should  stay  in  the  earthly 
condition  in  which  he  first  received  God's 
call.  3.  By  the  fact  that  even  the  Stoio 
moralists — like  Epiutetus,  wlio  was  him- 
self a  slave — gave  similar  advice  (Epict., 
'Dissert.,'  iii.  26;  '  Knchir.,'  x.  zxxii.) 
i.  By  the  indifference  which  St.  Paul  felt 
and  expressed  towards  mere  earthly  con- 
ditions (Gal.  iii.  28),  as  things  of  no  real 
sigtiificance  (Col.  iii.  22).  5.  By  bis  appeal 
to  the  nearness  of  the  day  of  Christ  (vera. 
29 — 31>  6.  By  the  preponderance  of  high 
authorities — Clirysostom,Theodoret,  Luther, 
Bengel,  De  Wette,  Mujer,  Alford,  etc.— in 
favour  of  this  view.  7.  By  its  parallelism 
to  the  advice  given  to  Christian  slaves  in 
1  Tim.  vi.  2,  where  they  are  urged  to  serve 
Christian  masters  all  the  more  zealously 
because  they  were  brethren.  8.  Lastly,  aU 
the  apparent  harshness  of  the  advice  is 
remoTed  when  we  remember  that  St.  Paul 
was  probably  thinking  only  of  tfi«  ChrUtian 
davet  of  Chrintian  matters,  between  whom 
the  relation  might  be  as  happy  as  that  of 
Philemon  to  the  forgiven  Onesimus. 

Ver.  22. — Is  the  Lbrd's  freeman;  rather, 
freedman.  Cleurly  the  entire  bearing  of 
Ihiii  verse  favours  the  view  which  we  have 


taken  of  the  previous  verse.  Christ's  servant. 
The  sharp  autithesid  of  this  verse  was  often 
present  to  the  mind  of  the  early  Christians. 
They  knew  that  the  bondnge  of  Satan  was 
■o  oruehing  that  mere  earthly  bondage  was,, 
in  comparison,  as  nothing;  and  that  the 
liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made  us  free,, 
though  it  might  seem  to  take  the  form  of 
service,  was  the  sole  perfect  freedom.  The 
freedmen  of  ^n  are  the  nio.st  hopeless  slaves; 
the  servants  of  God  alone  are  (tan  (see  Rom 
vl  22  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  26 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  IG). 

Ver.  23. — Ye  are  bought  with  a  price; 
rather,  ye  were  boutjM,  namely,  by  Christ ; 
snd  the  piice  paid  fur  yuu  was  his  blood 
(see  ch.  vi.  20 ;  1  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  Be  not 
ye;  ratlier,  become  not.  The  servants  of 
men.  There  is  a  grand  play  of  words  in 
the  advice  to  them  not  to  become  tiaves.  at 
the  very  moment  when  ho  is  advising  thent 
to  continue  in  slavery,  in  that  which  the 
world  called  "  slavery  "  the  Christian  slave 
might  enjoy  absolute  liberty.  The  price 
which  a  master  paid  for  them  was  but  an  un- 
meaning shadow;  they  bad  been  bought  once 
and  eternally  by  an  infinitely  nobler  price, 
and  that  purcliase  was  the  pledge  of  absolute 
emancipation. 

Yer.  21.— Therein  abide  with  God.  The 
verse  is  a  summary  and  reiteration  of  the 
advice  contained  in  the  whole  paragraph. 
"  With  God ; "  literally,  by  the  tide  of  God; 
'as  in  God's  eight;"  "doing  service  as  to 
the  Lor  J ; "  "  for  conscience  towards  QtxL" 
The  words  sum  up  the  essence  of  all  apostolic 
counsels  to  Cbristian  slaves  in  Eph.  vL  5 — 
8;  1  Tim.  vi.  1,  2;  Titus  ii.  9,  10;  1  Pet. 
ii.  18, 19,  etc. 

Vers.  25—iO.—Adviee  retpeeting  lh»  w 
married. 

Ver.  2.'>. — Now  conoeming  virgins.  Thie 
is  doubtless  another  reference  to  questions 
contained  in  the  letter  from  Corinth.  He 
commandment  of  the  Lord.  Christ  had 
never  directly  dealt  with  this  subject.  I 
give  my  judgment.  The  word  "command- 
ment" is  rendered  in  the  Yalg&te  eonsiliamy 
and  the  word  "jndgmenfprseeptUTn;  and 
thus,  as  Stanley  points  out,  has  originated 
the  modern  fiomish  distinction  between 
"precepts"  and  "counsels  of  perfection," 
which,  however,  have  clearly  no  connection 
with  the  real  meaning  of  the  passage.  To 
be  faithful.  As  a  steward  of  his  Word, 
which  is  the  first  essential  of  true  ministry 
(1  Tim.  i.  12).  "Faith  makes  a  true  casuist '' 
(Bengel). 

Ver.  26. — I  suppose.  St  Panl  only  states 
tliis  modestly,  and  somewhat  hesitatingly, 
as  his  personal  opinion.  For  the  present 
distress ;  rather,  on  account  of  the  preastng. 
ueceisity;  in  the  urgent  and  trying  con- 
ditions whii^h  at  the  present  moment  aur- 
lound  the  Christian's  life,  and  which  were 


'2ta 


THE   ITIKST   EPISTLE  TO  TUB  C01UNTUUN8.    [oh.  til  I— 4a 


tke  propheaied  "  woei  of  the  Messiah ' 
(Matt.  xzir.  8,  etc.).  For  a  man ;  iather,/or 
•  person — wbetlier  man  or  wuman.  Bo  to  be ; 
(liat  is,  "  uumarrieil."  The  words  are  not 
Improbably  a  quotation  from  the  Corinthian 
letter,  Otberwiso  we  might  explain  the 
"  lo  "  to  mean  "at  he  i$ — whether  married  or 
anmarried." 

Ver.  27. — Seek  not  a  wife,  It  ia  entirely 
•lien  from  St,  Paul's  purpose  to  take  this  a« 
•n  abstract  or  universal  rule.  He  gives  bis 
rnua/^oa  for  it  as  a  temporary  necestity. 

Yer.  28. — But  and  if  thon  marry,  thon  hast 
Bot  sinned.  This  advice  merely  touches  on 
the  question  of  expediency,  not  on  questions 
of  absolute  right  and  wrong.  Such.  Those 
who  marry.  Trouble  in  the  flesh.  Their 
marria;;e  will  in  these  days  necessarily 
involve  much  trouble  and  discomfort.  Com- 
mon experience  shows  that  in  days  of 
"  trouble  auU  rebuke  and  blasphemy  "  the 
carita  and  anxieties  of  those  who  have  to 
bear  the  burden  of  many  besiiles  themselves, 
and  those  dearer  to  them  thun  their  own 
aelvea,  are  far  the  most  trying.  Perhaps  St. 
Paul  was  thinking  of  the  "  Woe  unto  them 
that  are  with  child,  and  to  them  that  give 
auck  in  those  days,"  of  our  Lord  (Luke  xxi. 
23).  But  I  spare  yon.  I  desire  to  spare  you 
from  adding  to  the  inevitable  di&tress  which 
will  fall  upon  you  in  **  the  great  tribulation  " 
— "  the  travail-throea  of  the  Messiah,"  which 
we  all  expect. 

Ver.  29.— Bat  this  I  lay.  I  will  not  dwell 
on  ihoee  coming  trials,  but  will  only  remind 
you  that  they  are  imminent,  and  tuat  when 
they  come  all  earthly  distinctions  will 
vanish '  into  insignifiance.  The  time  is 
short;  literally, ihe Btason  has  heen.coiitraeted; 
in  other  words,  **  The  end  of  all  things  is  at 
hand"  (1  Pet.  iv.  7).  The  word  sunesl- 
almenot  eannot  mean  "disastrous."  The 
verb  ia  oied  for  "folding  up"  in  Acts  v.  6: 
"Tempusin  collects)  est "  (TertuUian).  It 
remaineth,  that.  Thereading  and  punctua- 
tion are  here  uncertain.  The  best  reading 
aeems  to  be  "  The  time  has  been  ahortened 
henceforth,  in  order  that,"  etc.  The  very 
object  of  the  hastened  end  is  that  Christians 
should  ait  loose  to  earthly  interests.  Ai 
though  they  had  none.  They  would  thus  be 
Bearer  to  the  condition  of  th«  "angels  In 
heaven." 

Yer.  30.— They  that  weep,  ete.  Earthly 
■orrow  and  joy  and  wealth  are  things 
which  are  merely  transient  and  unreal  when 
•ompared  with  the  awful,  eternal,  permanent 
realities  which  we  shall  all  soon  have  to 
fuce. 

Yer.  31. — ^As  not  abusing  it;  rathef,  as  not 
uting  it  to  the  full — not  draining  dry  the  cup 
of  earthly  advantages  (comp.  ch.  ix.  18). 
Like  Gideon's  true  heroes,  we  must  not  fling 
oorselvea  down  to  drink   greedily  of  the 


river  of  earthly  gifla,  bat  drink  them 
sparingly,  and  as  it  were  with  the  palm  ol 
the  hand.  The  fashion  of  this  world  passeth 
away.  So  St.  John  says,  "The  world 
passeth  away,  and  the  lust  thereof"  (1 
John  i.  18).  It  is  but  as  the  shifting  scene 
of  a  theatre,  or  aa  a  melting  vapour  (Jaa. 
It.  H). 

Ver.  82.— Bnt  I  would  have  you  without 
MrefolnesB.  lu  these  words  he  reverts  to 
ver.  28,  after  the  digression  about  the 
transiency  of  earthly  relations.  If  tliey  were 
"overcharged.  •  .  with  cares  of  thi.-- life,"  the 
day  of  the  Lord  might  easily  "  come  upon 
them  unawares  "  (Luke  xxi,  34). 

Ver.  33. — Carethfor  the  things  that  are  of 
the  world.  St.  Paul's  language  must  not 
be  extravagantly  pressed.  It  only  appliee 
absolutely  to  times  in  which  the  condition! 
are  the  same  as  they  then  were.  The 
"  anxious  carus  "  which  marriage  involves  may 
be  more  innocent  and  less  distracting  than 
those  which  attack  the  celibate  condition; 
and  when  that  is  the  case,  marriage,  on  St 
Paul's  own  principle,  becomes  a  duty.  Thus 
•ome  of  tlie  best  and  greatest  of  our  mis- 
aionariea  have  found  their  usefulness  as  God'a 
messengers  vastly  increased  by  marriage,  in 
epite  of  the  awful  trials  which  marriage  often 
involves.  The  apostles  and  brethren  of  the 
Lord  felt  the  same.  St.  Paul's  opinions  here 
•re,  as  he  tells  us,  opinions  only,  and  admit 
of  many  'moiliflcationa.  Advice  given  to 
men  and  women  when  Christians  believed 
that  the  Lord  was  coming,  perhaps  in  that 
very  age,  to  judge  the  world,  is  nut  univer- 
sally applicable  to  all  ages.  In  St.  Paul's 
later  Epistles  he  does  not  revert  to  thia 
advice,  but  assumes  that  marriage  ia  the 
normal  ronditinn. 

Ver.  34, — There  ii  difference  ~  also,  etc. 
The  reading,  punctuation,  and  exact  sense 
are  surrounded  with  uncertainty,  which  doee 
not,  however,  afiiect  the  general  meaning. 
This  is  probably  given  correctly  in  our 
English  Version.  He  implies  that  the 
married  woman  must  of  necessity  be  more  of 
a  Martha  than  a  Mary.  Nevertheless,  two 
things  are  certain :  (1)  that  God  intended 
marriage  to  be  the  normal  lot;  and  (2)  that 
marriage  is  by  no  means  incompatible  with 
the  most  absolute  saiutliness.  It  is  probable 
that  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  apostles  were 
married  men  (oh.  ix.  5),  The  spirit  of  St 
Paul's  advice — the  avoidance  of  distraction, 
and  the  determination  that  our  duty  to  Gtod- 
ahall  not  be  impaired  by  earthly  relationshipt 
— remains  eternally  si>;nificant.  Another 
ooranion  way  of  punctuating  the  wurds  is,^ 
"  The  married  man  cares  ,  .  ,  how  he  may 
please  lis  wife,  and  ia  dioided  [in  interests]." 
Ver.  35. — For  your  own  'profit.  My 
advice  turns  simply  on  questions  of  exp» 
dieoce.    Mot  that  I  may  oaat  a  uare  npaa 


on.  VII.  1— 40.j    TUE   FIRST   EWSTLE  TO  THE   COlJlNTIliANa 


;:/r 


fou.  He  does  not  wioh  to  "  fling  a  noose" 
over  them  to  win  tiiem  over  to  liis  ovrn 
priviite  views,  and  entangle  them  in  rules 
wliicli  tliey  might  not  be  able  to  bear. 
That  which  is  comely.  Seeiuliness ;  "the 
beauty  of  holinesa  "  (Rom.  xiii.  13).  Without 
distraotion.  The  phrases  nsid  in  this  clause 
make  it  prubable  that  St.  Paul  had  heard 
how  Martha  was  "  anxious  "  and  distracted 
(TepifffTTOTo)  abriut  much  serving,  while 
Mary  sat  at  Jesus'  feet  (Luke  x.  39  —41). 

Ver.  36. — Uncomely.  Ifunx  hit  er  thinks, 
by  keeping  his  virgin  daughi,ur  uumiiriied, 
he  is  ai'ting  in  a  way  which  may  cause  sin  or 
icandal,  then  let  him  permit  her  to  marry 
her  suitor.  The  word  "  uncomeliness "  is 
terribly  illustrated  in  Rnm.  i.  27.  (For 
" comely,"  see ch.  vii.  25;  xli.  24.)  Hisvirgin. 
Obviously  a  daughter  or  wardi  Fass  the 
flower  of  her  age.  If  she  be  more  than 
twenty  years  old,  wliicli  th.  ancients  regarded 
as  the  acme  of  the  woman's  life.  And  need 
■u  require.  Ii  there  be  somo  moral  obliga- 
tion or  necessity  in  the  case.  Let  them 
marry.  The  "them"  means  the  virgin 
and  her  unmarried  lover. 

Ver.  37. — Steadfast.  The  general  meaning 
of  the  Verse  is  that  the  father,  who,  from 
high  motives,  remained  uiisnaken  in  the 
resulve  to  dedicate  his  daughter  (as  Philip 
did)  to  the  virgin  lite,  doeth  well,  though 
uuitlier  Jews  nor  pagans  thought  su. 
Having  no  necessity.  Because  the  maiden 
did  not  wish  to  marry  or  was  not  sought 
iu  marriage. 

Ver.  38. — Doeth  well.  Because  "  marriage 
18  honourable  in  all."  Doeth  better. 
Obviously  not  murally,  because,  if  one  course 


be  morally  better  than  another,  we  an 
bound  to  take  it ;  but  "  better "  with  refer- 
ence to  expediency  in  "  the  urgent  necessity" 
which  rested  on  the  Christian  world  in  that 
day.  It  is  quite  clear  that.  If  these  words  are 
meant  to  disparage  matrimony  in  comparison 
with  celibacy,  or  to  treat  cel.bacy  in  the 
abstract  as  a  holier  state  that  marriage,  tiiey 
have  buen  set  aside  by  the  universal  practice 
and  theory  of  the  Christian  world.  But,  as 
we  li  ive  seen,  they  are  expressed  by  St.  Paul 
uniy  as  a  relative  and  diffident  opinion.  It  is 
remarkable  that  nut  one  word  is  said  as  to  the 
choice  of  the  virgin  herself  in  the  matter, 
whiuh  is  one  of  the  most  essential  points  on 
wlii  h  the  decis  on  must  turn.  St.  Paul,  no 
doubt,  assumes  the  acquiescence  or  preference 
of  thu  maiden  as  one  of  the  elements  iu  the 
absence  of  any  "  need  "  for  her  marriage ;  but 
also  he  wriies  after  lifelong  familiarity  with 
the  all  but  abanlute  control  exercised  by 
Jewish  parents  over  their  youthlul  daughters. 

Ver.  39. — Only  in  the  Lord.  The  sucund 
marriage  of  the  Christian  widow  must  be  a 
holy  and  a  Chiistian  marriage  (2  Cor.  vi. 
H). 

Ver.  40. — Happier.  Freer  from  cares, 
distractions,  and  entanglements.  If  she  so 
abide.  If  she  remain  a  widow.  I  think  also 
that  I  have  the  Spirit  of  Ood  ;  rather,  I  ihinh 
thai  I  also,  as  well  as  the  other  teachers  wlio 
have  claimed  spiritual  authority  for  the 
rules  they  have  given  you  about  tiiesa 
subjects.  The  claim  to  authoritative  deci- 
sion is  obviously  less  emphatic  than  it  is  in 
ch.  xiv.  37 ;  still,  it  is  an  expression  of 
|>eisonal  conviction  that  he  hai  the  Spirit^ 
not  an  implied  duubt  of  the  fact. 


U0MILETIC8. 

Vtn.  1 — 14,  25 — 28,  32 — 40. — PauFs  conception  of  marriagt.  "  Now  concerning 
the  things  whereof  ye  wrote  unto  me,"  etc.  All  that  Paul  here  says  of  marriage  is 
in  answer  to  some  communication  which  the  Church  had  addressed  to  him  on  the 
subject,  and  what  be  says  be  declares  is  not  "  of  commandment,"  that  is,  not  by  Divine 
authority,  but  by  "  permission."  All  Scripture  is  therefore  not  inspired,  even  all  the 
counsels  of  St.  Paul  do  not  seem  to  have  been  so.  So  desirous  did  he  seem  to  be  that 
all  he  says  on  this  subject  should  be  regarded  as  coming  from  himself  without  any 
inspiration  of  God,  that  he  declares  it  nut  only  in  the  sixth  verse,  but  also  in  the  twenty- 
fifth  verse,  in  which  he  says,  "  1  have  no  commandment  of  the  Lord."  My  purpose  now 
is  to  gather  up  from  all  these  verses  Paul's  personal  ideas  of  marriage.  Uis  idea  seems 
to  be— 

I.  That  marriage  is  not  a  dutt  bixdino  ok  mankind.  It  is  not  a  moral  obligation, 
lile  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  etc.  He  says,  "  It  is  good  for  a  man  nut  to 
touch  a  woman  "  (ver.  1) ;  again,  "  I  would  that  all  men  were  even  as  I  myself"  (ver.  7) ; 
and  again, "  It  is  good  lor  them  if  they  abide  even  as  I "  (ver.  8).  In  referring  to  the 
widow,  he  says,  "  She  is  happier  if  she  so  abide,  after  my  judgment ;  and  I  think  also 
that  I  have  the  Spirit  of  Gud  "  (ver.  40).  Su  Pad  seems  tu  teach  that  the  question  of 
marriage  is  optional,  not  ubligatory.  Some  may  fael  that  celibacy  is  best  for  them, 
(ben  lei  tltsm  remain  single;  others  think  that  marriage  is  the  most  desirable  state, 
then  l«t  them  enter  into  that  relationship.     Nuw,  it  does  strike  one  as  something 


230  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. "  [oh.  til  1—40. 

marrelloua  that  this  condition  of  life  on  which  the  yery  continuation  of  the  humaa 
race  depends  should  remain  thus  open  and  optional.  Suppose  that  to-day  every  indi'< 
Tidual  of  the  human  race  determined  not  to  enter  into  this  relationship,  and  to  havt 
no  intercourse  with  the  opposite  sex,  sixty  years  hence,  at  most,  the  race  would  h» 
extinct ;  no  man,  woman,  or  child  would  be  found  on  the  earth.  The  earth  would  be 
•8  it  once  was.  without  a  man,  a  school  without  a  student,  a  theatre  without  a  spectator,, 
a  temple  without  a  worshipper.  The  answer  to  the  question  which  some  may  give  ia 
this,  that  there  is  no  reason  for  a  written  command  on  this  subject — it  is  k  law  of  nature. 
God  does  not  command  us  to  eat  and  drink,  because  it  is  not  necessary — the  law  of  our 
nature  urges  us  to  it.  For  the  same  reason  he  does  not  command  us  to  marry.  How- 
ever, so  it  is,  and  it  is  a  wonderful  thought  that  upon  the  volition  of  this  generation 
on  this  question,  depends  the  continuation  or  non-continuation  of  the  race. 

11.  That  marriage  is  pbiharilt  for  SPiRiraAL  ends.  "  The  unbelieving  husband 
is  sanctified,"  etc.  (ver.  14).  The  view  given  of  the  end  of  marriage  in  the  Marriage 
Service,  viz,  the  "procreation  of  children,"  is  evidently  not  the  idea  that  Paul  had, and 
it  is  a  somewhat  degrading  one.  Paul's  idea  throughout  seems  to  be  that  the  grand 
purpose  of  marriage  is  mutual  spiritual  influence,  correcting  faults,  removing  unbelief, 
establishing  faith,  serving  the  Lord.  Those  who  enter  on  this  relationship  from  fleshly 
impulses  and  with  fleshly  ends  misunderstand  the  ordinance  and  are  never  truly 
married.  There  is  not  only  no  union  of  soul,  but  an  inner  division.  True  marriaga 
means  such  a  mutual  spiritual  affection  as  welds  two  souls  into  one  moral  personality, 

in.  That  marriage  involves  mutual  obligations  the  most  sacred,  1,  Mutuai 
lenevolenee.  "  Let  the  husband  render  unto  the  wife  due  benevolence :  and  likewise 
also  the  wife  to  the  husband."  Benevolence,  a  hearty  weJl-wishing,  each  wishing  the 
well-being  of  the  other.  The  New  Version  drops  the  word  "  benevolence."  2.  JmUual 
identification.  "  The  wife  hath  not  power  of  her  own  body,  but  the  husband :  and 
likewise  also  the  husband  hath  not  power  of  his  own  body,  but  the  wife."  The  both 
•re  one.  The  equal  rights  of  wife  and  husband  are  everywhere  recognized  in  the  Bible. 
3.  Mutuai  hvMsty.  "  Defraud  ye  not  one  the  other."  Deception  is  inimical  to  the 
true  union  of  souls.  Nothing  cuts  united  heaits  asunder  so  easily  and  effectively  aj 
artfulness  and  deception.  4.  Mutiial  forbearance.  "  If  any  brother  have  a  wife  that 
believeth  not,  and  she  be  pleased  to  dwell  with  him,  let  him  not  put  her  away.  And 
the  woman  which  hath  an  husband  that  believeth  not,  and  if  he  be  pleased  to  dwell 
with  her,  let  her  not  leave  him"  (vers.  12,  13).  Should  difference  of  opinion  on 
religious  subjects  crop  up,  should  the  faith  of  one  or  the  other  in  religious  matters  he 
shaken  or  wane,  forbear,  do  not  separate  on  that  account,  for  the  right  may  correct  the 
wrong,  the  believing  correct  the  unbelieving.  5.  Mutual  concession  <f  personal/reedom. 
"  But  if  the  unbelieving  depart,  let  him  depart.  A  brother  or  a  sister  is  not  under 
bondage  in  such  cases :  but  God  hath  called  us  to  peace  "  (ver.  15).  If  the  wife  feels 
it  in  her  conscience  to  be  a  duty  to  leave  her  husband,  he  should  not  coerce  her,  nor 
should  she  employ  compulsion,  should  be  feel  it  his  duty  to  withdraw, 

(yONCLUSiON.  Such  are  roughly  and  briefly  some  of  Paul's  personal  opinions  on  the 
question  of  marriage.  They  seem  to  be  on  the  whole  wise  and  just.  We  have  made 
marriage  a  civil  contract,  and  we  bind  two  persons  together  for  life  who  never  possessed 
those  mutual  afiBnities  which  are  the  essence  of  marriage.  The  essence  of  marriage  ia 
this — the  strongest  mutual  sympathies  and  aims  that  one  being  can  have  for  another ; 
the  bond  of  marriage  is  the  solemn  mutual  pledge.  Those  who  are  thus  married  are 
united  by  a  cord  stronger  than  adamant,  finer  than  the  finest  web,  too  weak  to  fetter, 
yet  too  strong  to  break. 

Vers.  15 — 24. — Abide  in  Christliness,  whatever  the  condition  in  life.  "  But  If  tha 
unbelieving  depart,  let  him  depart,"  etc.  As  St.  Paul  seems  desirous  that  most  of  his 
utterances  in  this  chapter  should  not  be  regarded  as  the  language  of  inspiration,  but 
rather  that  of  his  own  private  judgment  (for  twice  he  gives  the  assurance),  we  may  be 
justified  in  criticizing  his  opinions.  His  opinions  here  refer  to  three  conditions  in  man's 
existence  on  earth :  matrimonial  life,  ecclesiastical  connection,  and  domestic  slavery  •, 
and  concerning  each  of  these,  he  says,  "  Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling 
wherein  he  was  called."  Now,  if  by  "  calling  "  here  he  means  that  condition  of  life  in 
which  we  find  ourselves,  irrespective  of  our  choice,  or  into  which  we  have  entered  by 


«■.  TU.  1— 40.]    THE   FJKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTHIAJS'S.  23] 

depraved  choice,  I  can  scarcely  think  that  his  principle  here  can  be  accepted.    Apply 
It  for  example  to— 

L  Matbimonial  IiItk.  If  two  persona  have  entered  into  this,  of  all  relationship* 
the  most  solemn,  whose  temperaments,  beliefs,  tendencies,  tastes,  and  habits  are  noon 
found  to  be  80  antipathetic  as  to  produce  nothing  but  constant  quarrellings  and  mutual 
miseries,  are  they  to  "abide"  in  that  state?  If  Paul  means  this,  we  cannot  accept 
his  counsel,  for  such  unions  are  not  marriages  at  alL  But  he  does  not  mean  that,  tor 
ia  the  fifteenth  and  other  verses  of  this  chapter  he  seems  to  authorize  a  separation. 
"  But  if  the  vabelieving  depart,  let  him  depart.  A  brother  or  a  sister  is  nut  under 
bondage  in  such  cases.*  Chain  two  vessels  together  on  the  ocean,  allowing  them  to  be 
some  yards  or  even  feet  apart,  and  in  the  storm  they  will  soon  tear  themselves  to  pieces 
and  go  down  into  the  depths.  But  if  you  so  rivet  them  together  that  the  twain  wil) 
b«  one,  they  will  be  mutual  helps,  and  they  will  stand  the  tempest.  So  in  marriage. 
Unless  the  two  souls  are  so  tightly  riveted  or  clasped  together  by  the  strongest  mutual 
affection,  it  is  better  to  separate.  If  they  are  only  joined  by  a  chain  forged  by  civil  or 
ecclesiastical  law,  the  speedier  that  chain  is  snapped  asunder  the  better  for  both. 
Philanthropy  is  justified  in  promoting  the  divorce  of  such,  and  in  this  age  methinks,  it 
will  find  plenty  of  this  merciful  work  to  do. 

II.  EcoLESiABTiOAii  CONNECTION.  "  Is  any  man  called  being  eirenrocised?  let  him 
not  become  uncircumcised.  Is  any  called  in  uncircumcision  ?  let  him  not  be  circum- 
cised." Does  Paul  mean  by  this — If  you  find  yourself  in  an  ecclesiastical  system  which 
has  worthless  or  pernicious  rites  and  ceremonies,  abide  in  it,  make  no  effort  to  abolish 
the  unspiritual  institutions  ?  If  you  are  in  a  Church  which  exalts  ceremonies  and 
creeds,  works  for  money  and  by  money,  and  thus  misrepresents  the  sublime  genius  of 
the  gospel,  continue  where  you  are  7  If  he  does,  we  cannot  accept  his  advice.  But 
he  does  not  mean  this,  for  it  is  opposed,  not  only  to  his  own  teaching,  but  to  his  own 
religious  life. 

IIL  Domestic  ilatkbj.  "Art  thou  called  being  a  servant  [slave]?"  Does  Paul 
ineai^— If  you  find  yoursfflf  the  legal  property  of  another,  and  treated  by  your  master  as 
mere  goods  and  chattels,  make  no  effort  to  break  your  bonds  and  to  win  yonr  free- 
dom? If  he  meant  this,  we  repudiate  his  doctrine  ;  it  strikes  against  those  aspiratiuni 
for  liberty,  which  are  as  deep  as  the  human  soul  and  as  wide  as  humanity.  But  ha 
does  not  mean  this,  as  the  history  of  his  life  and  the  gonius  of  his  teaching  show 
What,  then,  does  he  mean  ?  The  principle,  "  Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling 
wherein  he  was  called,"  he  here  lays  down  in  connection  with  these  three  things- 
matrimonial  life,  ecclesiastical  connection,  and  domestic  slavery.  And  if  he  means  by 
"calling,"  conililion  of  life,  it  cannot  apply  to  either.  But  by  "calling"  Paul  doae 
aot  mean  this.  " '  Calling '  here  must  not  lie  regarded  in  the  modern  sense  of  profession 
or  condition  of  life ;  it  is  nowhere  so  used  in  the  New  Testament,  but  always  signifies 
God  calling  to  ua  (see  Rom.  xi.  29 ;  Eph.  i.  18).  Continue  to  be  Christians  of  the 
kind  which  God's  call  to  Christianity  made  you.  If  you  were  circumcised,  and  so 
God's  call  into  the  Christian  Church  made  you  a  circumcised  Christian,  continue  so; 
don't  do  anything  which  would  seem  to  imply  that  some  other  change  in  addition  to 
your  call  was  necessary  to  complete  your  admission  to  the  Church."  Understanding 
the  "  calling  "  here,  as  I  do,  to  be  personal  religion,  or  Cliristliness,  which  is  elsewhere 
sailed  the  "  heavenly  calling,"  Paul's  advice  to  abide  in  that  state,  in  whatever  relation- 
ship or  condition  we  are  found,  is  intelligible  and  right.  In  relation  to  matrimony,  it 
will  then  mean  this — Though  you  feel  your  conjugal  relation  to  be  such  a  bondage  and 
misery  that  you  break  away  from  it,  sever  your  connection  with  your  partner,  don't 
fsul  to  "abide  in  your  calling"  or  in  your  religion.  Whatever  your  dompstio 
grievances  and  storms  and  sepMrations,  hold  fast  to  yonr  religion.  Though  you  lods 
your  wife  or  your  husband,  hold  fast  your  religion,  your  "calling."  In  relation  to 
tcdesiaatical  connections,  it  will  mean  this — Whether  you  are^  "circumcised"  or 
uncircumcised,  whether  you  continue  in  your  old  Church  connections  or  break  away 
from  them,  "  abide  in  your  calling,"  your  religion ;  that  is  something  that  is  inde- 
pendent of  all  ecclesiastical  institutions  and  ceremonies,  can  live  with  or  without  then. 
U  relation  to  domestic  slavery,  it  will  mean  this — Whether  you  are  satisfied  with  joui 
bondage,  and  settle  down  in  it,  or  struggle  to  break  your  fetters  and  rise  into  full 
fteedom,  **  abide  in  your  calling,"  your  religion.    Personal  Christianity  may  exist  ia 


aa>  THE  FISST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIAKS.    [oh.  tu.  1— 4a 

all  conditions  of  life ;  it  ii  independent  of  family  relations,  independent  of  ecclesiastical 
InBtitutions,  independent  of  social  distinctions,  whether  slave  or  master,  rich  or  poor, 
and  where  it  exists  it  should  be  retained  amidst  all  changes  and  at  all  costa.  "  AlHila 
la  your  calling." 

Vers.  22—24. — Pertonal  Christianity  for  the  land  and  the  free.  "For  ha  that  Ii 
called  in  the  Lord,  being  a  servant,  is  tbe  Lord's  freeman :  likewise  also  he  that  is  called, 
being  fr«e,  is  Christ's  servant.  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price ;  be  not  ye  the  servants 
of  men.  Brethren,  let  every  man,  wherein  he  is  called,  therein  abide  with  God." 
Although  the  remarks  in  our  previous  sketch  include  these  three  rerses,  there  is 
sufficient  meaning  in  them  to  justify,  if  not  to  require,  a  separate  notice.  Und«r> 
standing,  as  before  intimated,  the  expression,  "  called  in  the  Lord,"  and  again,  "  abida 
with  God,"  to  mean  personal  Christianity,  the  verses  include  three  general  truths. 

L  That  personal  Cliristianity  may  be  possessed  bt  those  in  blatebt  as  well  Aa  bt 
TBOSE  IN  FBEEDOH.  "  For  he  that  is  called  in  the  Lord,  being  a  servant  [a  slave],  is  the 
Lord's  freeman."  Slavery  under  the  Greek  and  Roman  governments  was  an  established 
Institution.  In  Corinth  slaves  abounded.  Many  of  these  bad  been  converted  by  the 
gosjiel,  and  were  in  connection  with  the  Corinthian  Church.  Naturally  enough,  some 
would  desire  their  emancipation,  and  the  more  so  as  Christianity  gave  them  a  sublime 
sense  of  their  manhood.  Paul's  advice  is  not  to  be  too  anxious  on  the  subject  of  their 
enfranchisement,  but  rather  to  be  anxious  to  "  abide"  in  their  **  calling,"  their  religion. 
Christianity  is  for  man  as  man,  not  for  him  as  rich  or  poor,  erudite  or  rude,  bond  ac 
free,  but  for  him  as  a  man ;  it  comes  to  him  as  outward  nature  comes  to  him,  with 
equal  freeness  and  htness  for  all.  The  physical,  civil,  or  ecclesiastical  condition  of  a 
man,  therefore,  in  this  life  is  no  excuse  for  his  not  becoming  a  Christian :  though  bound 
In  chains,  his  soul  is  free — free  to  think,  to  resolve,  to  worship,  and  it  is  with  the  soul 
that  Christianity  has  to  do.  Hence  religion  in  slavery  is  not  an  uncommon  fact. 
Slaves  were  members  of  many  of  the  first  Churches,  and  religion  reigned  amongst  a 
large  number  of  those  who  were  held  in  bondage  in  the  Southern  States  of  America. 

II.  That  the  possession  of  personal  Christianity,  whether  by  the  bond  or  the  free, 
BIVEST8  MAN  WITH  THE  HIGHEST  LffiEBTT.  He  is  the  "  Lord's  freeman,"  whoever  he  is ; 
the  Lord  has  emancipated  his  soul,  however  firmly  manacled  his  budily  limbs.  All  the 
inner  chains  that  bound  his  soul,  to  mere  earthly  influence,  fleshly  pleasures,  and  sinful 
pursuits,  are  snapped  asunder,  and  he  revels  in  the  liberty  wherewith  "  Christ  makes 
Lis  people  free."  What  freedom  like  this  freedom  from  the  dominion  and  consequences 
of  moral  wrong  ?    This  is  the  "  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  Qod." 

*  He  ts  the  freeman  whom  the  truth  makei  ftt». 
And  all  are  slaves  besidea" 

TIL  That  the  possession  of  the  highest  liberty  lessens  no  Han's  miohtt  OBUaATloa 
TO  SERVE  Christ.  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price ;  be  not  ye  the  servants  of  men.*  All 
creatures  are  the  property  of  the  Creator.  No  creature  owns  itself.  The  highest  angel 
Ikas  nothing  in  him  that  he  can  call  bis  own.  Man  is  not  merely  the  property  of  God 
Ml  the  ground  of  creatureship,  but  on  the  groimd  of  Christ's  interposition.  "  Ye  are 
not  your  own :  ye  are  bought  with  a  price :  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in 
your  spirit,  which  are  God's."  This  being  the  case,  however  free  and  independent  of 
men,  yoti  must  ever  be  the  servant  of  Christ ;  serve  him  heartily,  faithfully,  loyally,  and 
for  ever.     His  service  is  perfect  freedom,  his  service  is  heaven. 

CoKCLUBioN.  See  how  Christianity  ia  to  work  out  necessary  reformatiou  tat  the 
world,  not  by  force  but  by  infiuence,  not  from  without  but  from  within,  by  working 
from  the  centre  to  the  circumference.  "There  are,"  says  F.  W.  Eobertson,  "two 
mistakes  which  are  often  made  upon  this  subject :  one  is  the  error  of  supposing  that 
outward  institutions  are  unnecessary  for  the  formation  of  character,  and  the  other  that 
of  supposing  that  they  are  all  th^it  is  required  to  form  the  human  soul.  If  we  rightly 
understand  the  duty  of  a  Christian  man,  it  is  this — to  make  his  brethren  free  inwardly 
and  outwardly :  first  inwardly,  so  tliat  they  may  become  masters  of  themselves,  rulers 
of  their  passions,  having  the  power  of  self-rule  and  self-control ;  and  then  outwardly, 
so  that  there  may  ie  every  power  and  opportunity  of  developing  tha  inward  Ufa ;  ia 


OE.  TD.  1— 40.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0B1NTUIAK8.  233 

the  language  of  the  prophet, "  to  break  the  rod  of  oppression,  and  Ut  the  eppcwMd 
go  fre«i* 

"Who  are  the  free? 

They  who  have  scorn'd  the  tyrant  and  his  rod. 

And  bow'd  in  worship  unto  nune  but  (Jod ; 

They  who  hare  made  the  conqueror's  glory  difl^ 

Uncbaiu'd  in  soul  thongli  manacled  in  limb, 

Unwarp'd  by  prejudice,  uuawed  by  wrong, 

Friends  to  the  weak,  and  fearless  of  the  strong  ; 

They  who  could  change  not  with  the  changing  hour. 

The  eelf-same  man  in  peril  and  in  power ; 

True  to  the  law  of  right,  as  warmly  prone 

To  grant  another's  as  maintain  their  own ; 

Voe*  of  oppression  wheresoe'er  it  be ; — 

These  are  the  proudly  free.* 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Yen,  1 — 11. —  Views  concerning  marriage  ;  the  inttitution  in  itself  anUn  nXation  to 
circumstances,  obligations,  and  duties.  We  have  seen  what  a  meeting-place  Corinth 
was  for  the  schools  of  philosophy  and  Judaism — a  sort  of  metropolitan  Coliseum,  in 
which  the  gladiators  of  intellect  were  in  unceasing  combat.  Neither  Rome,  nor 
Athens,  nor  Jerusalem,  aflforded  such  a  field  of  contention  as  this  proud  and  sensual 
city,  where  worldly  culture  and  elegance  existed  side  by  side  with  commerci^  wealth 
and  luxury.  Now,  we  know  what  occurs  when  the  waters  of  the  Gulf  Stream,  bearing 
northward  its  immense  store  of  heat  from  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  come  in  contact  ofi 
Newfoundland  with  the  Polar  currents,  and  wliat  a  vast  bank  of  fog  rises  from  the 
condensation  of  warm  vapour  in  a  cold  atmosphere.  This  may  symbolize  what  was 
going  on  in  Corinth  at  this  time.  A  century  before,  the  world  had  been  agitated  by 
the  ideas  and  schemes  of  Julius  Caesar,  the  foremost  man  of  his  age,  and  quite  as 
great  a  revolutiouizer  of  men's  ways  of  thinking  as  of  political  institutions. 
Imperialism  was  now  in  the  ascendancy,  and  the  nations  were  ostensibly  a  nation — a 
colossal  Rome.  But  the  quickening  of  thought  remained,  and  this  inured  to  the 
advantage  of  Christianity.  There  was  not  only  external  tranquillity,  but  the  precise 
kind  of  tranquillity  which  St.  Paul  needed  ;  and,  though  local  disturbances  often  arose 
and  at  times  violent  commotions,  yet  the  Roman  law  was  his  best  earthly  friend. 
At  Corinth  he  had  taught  and  preached  and  founded  a  Church.  For  three  years  he 
had  been  absent,  and,  meantime,  what  collisions  had  set  in,  and,  amidst  the  surging 
to  and  fro  of  opinions  and  prejudices  and  enmities,  what  disorders  had  been  tolerated  I 
Over  everything  and  everywhere  was  felt  the  chilly  mist,  a  twilight  to  some,  a 
midnight  to  others,  a  bewildering  gloom  to  all.  This,  however,  was  providential. 
Teachers  must  remand  pupils  to  themselves.  Such  a  new  and  singular  force  as  St. 
Paul  was  in  the  world — such  pre-eminently  as  he  had  shown  himself  in  Corinth  by  his 
opposition  to  the  views  of  Greeks  and  Jews,  and  by  his  uncompromising  zeal  in  behalf 
of  the  distinctive  tenets  of  the  gospel — ;must  be  suffered  to  do  its  work  independently 
of  his  presence  and  immediate  oversight.  And  we  now  see  in  this  chapter,  more  fully 
than  before,  what  conflicts  of  intellect  and  passion  were  in  progress,  what  strange 
alienations  had  transpired,  and  how  far  gone  many  of  his  disciples  were  from  the  path 
in  which  he  had  expected  their  feet  to  tread.  Had  anything  escaped  this  bilbwy 
sweep  of  strife?  It  was  even  dashing  against  the  institution  of  marriage,  which  mes 
had  agreed  to  honour  as  the  most  important  and  the  most  venerable  of  earthlf 
interests.  Incest  had  been  tolerated  in  the  Church,  and  St.  Paul  had  found  h 
necessary  to  argue  on  the  highest  religious  ground  against  the  sensual  erib  •( 
fornication.  Of  late  we  have  heard  much  concerning  a  scientific  basis  of  morality. 
If,  however,  we  follow  St.  Paul,  who  never  contradicts  history,  we  tee  that  erea 
enlightened  instincts  cannot  be  trusted  when  withdrawn  from  the  guidance  and 
support  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  Men  may  theorize  as  they  please.  One  thing,  never- 
theless, is  certain,  and  that  one  thing  is,  that  whenever  practical  men  deal  with  social 
queeiions,  they  accept  St.  Paul  as  tlie  thinker  of  humanity.     Even  instincts  need 


tM  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ca.  vii.  l—Hk 

flod  to  control  them.  Proceeding  to  discuH  the  qnestions  sabmitted  to  him  by  the 
Coiinthiana,  he  begins  this  chapter  by  considering  marriage  in  that  aspect  which  wm 
Wtder  debate  Just  then  at  Corinth.  Marriage  in  the  abstract  is  only  in  view  so  far  m 
neurrence  is  necessary,  in  the  conduct  of  the  argument,  to  the  fundamental  principles 
inseparable  irom  the  nistion.  He  treats  it,  in  view  of  existing  dronmstances,  as 
»  matter  to  be  decided  by  expediency,  each  one  judging  what  is  best.  Whether  the 
anmarried  shall  be  married  or  not  moat  be  determined  by  themselves  in  the  light  of 
their  personal  organization,  and  by  tka  indications  of  ProTidence  and  the  Spirit. 
Freedom  within  Ute  bounds  of  law  is  freedom  to  deny  the  use  of  lawful  rights  And 
privileges — so  St.  Paul  had  just  ar{^ed — and  marriage  comes  under  this  provision. 
But  here  as  every  where,  "  let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind,"  and  so 
reverential  la  he  in  his  attitude  towards  humanity,  that  in  the  application  of 
expediency  to  marriage,  he  will  go  no  further  than  offer  advice.  Under  the  circum- 
stances, it  was  the  only  proper  course  for  him  to  adopt.  No  sympathy  could  he  feel 
with  the  reaction  against  marriage  in  itself,  which  had  set  in  more  than  a  century 
before  among  the  Romans,  and,  while  an  effect,  was  also  a  cause  of  the  widespre:^ 
demoralizatien  of  the  age.  Doubtless  the  cares  of  a  family  in  that  troubled  period, 
and  the  supposed  nearness  of  Christ's  advent,  had  their  iufluence  on  his  mind,  and  yet 
Ite  is  well  aware  that,  in  the  lowest  view  of  marriage,  it  was  a  protection  against  vice^ 
Too  well  he  knew  the  evils  which  were  cursing  society  because  of  the  popular  free- 
thinking  on  this  subject.  For  five  hundred  and  twenty  years  not  a  divorce  had  been 
known  in  Rome,  but  we  may  form  some  idea  of  the  effect  of  class  wealth  aad 
debauching  leisure  if  we  recall  the  facts  that  in  the  last  days  of  the  republic,  Cato  of 
Utica,  a  religious  fanatic  in  his  way,  had  separated  from  his  wife  because  a  Mend 
wished  to  marry  her  and,  after  his  friend's  death,  had  made  her  his  wife  again.  "  On 
the  whole,"  says  Mr.  Lecky,  "it  is  probable  that  the  Roman  matron  was  from  the 
earliest  period  a  name  of  honour;  that  the  beautiful  sentence  of  a  jurisconsult  of  the 
empire,  who  defined  marriage  as  a  lifelong  fellowship  of  all  Divine  and  human  rights, 
expressed  most  faithfully  the  feelings  of  the  people;  and  that  female  virtue  shone  ia 
•very  age  conspicuously  in  Roman  biographies."  But  a  deplorable  change  had  set  in, 
such  a  change  that  Augustus  had  found  it  necessary  to  take  measures  for  the 
encouragement  of  marriage.  Nowhere  was  this  corruption  more  rife  than  in  Corinth, 
that  only  repeated  on  a  larger  scale  the  social  enormities  daily  witnessed  at  Bais, 
Herculaneum,  and  Pompeii.  Now,  in  this  state  of  free-thinking,  with  its  attendant 
wickedness,  St.  Paul's  duty  was  not  without  embarrassment.  Towards  the  evil  itself 
and  its  utter  grossness  his  course  was  plain  enough.  On  the  other  hand,  there  wera 
questions  of  casuistry  to  be  considered.  Marriage  as  a  safeguard  of  virtue,  marriage 
as  a  union  of  hearts,  marriage  as  the  highest  type  of  human  oneness,  marriage  in  its 
spiritual  import — all  involved  in  it  as  a  Divine  institution  and  as  the  basis,  vitality, 
■ecurity,  of  all  other  institutions — this  waa  realized  then  and  always  in  his  apostlesbip. 
Bat  there  were  pure  and  honest-minded  persons  among  his  Corinthian  converts,  who 
ware  troubled  by  doubts  and  misgivings,  and  to  whom  duty  was  by  no  means  clear. 
Tha  instincts  of  nature  had  something  to  say,ond  their  voice  was  entitled  to  a  hearing. 
And,  at  the  same  time,  prudence  and  conscience  were  not  to  be  dogmatically  silenced. 
St.  Paul  saw  what  to  do,  and  be  did  it.  He  was  profoundly  sensitive  to  princifdaa,  ho 
was  thoroughly  sympathetic  with  persons,  and  his  judgment  was  the  product  of  a  wis* 
comideration  of  gospel  truth  and  of  the  facts  at  Corinth  with  which  he  was  dealing. 
There  is  an  ideal  view  to  which  he  refers  in  the  opening  verse  of  this  cha[<ter,  but  the 
practical  view  in  contrast  with  it  is  that,  in  order  to  be  guarded  against  temptation 
and  escape  falling  into  the  worst  of  social  sins,  "  Let  every  man  have  his  own  wife, 
and  let  every  woman  have  her  own  husband."  For,  as  Neander  says,  "  we  must  not 
overlook  the  fact  that  Paul  is  here,  not  treating  of  marriage  in  general,  but  only  in  ita 
relation  to  the  caudition  of  things  at  Corinth,  where  he  feared  the  effect  of  moral 
prejudices  concerning  celibacy."  Nor  does  he  hesitate  to  say,  "  I  would  that  all  men 
were  even  as  myself,"  and  yet  he  qualifies  this  by  stating  that  "  every  man  hath  hia 
proper  gift  of  God,"  a  gift  of  grace,  "  one  after  this  manner,  and  another  after  that ;  * 
BO  that,  whether  married  or  single,  the  "gift  of  Ood"  must  be  recognized,  since,  as 
Bengel  remarks,  "  that  which  in  the  natural  man  ia  a  natural  habit,  becomes  ia  the 
sainta  a  gift  of  grace." — L. 


afcTiul— 40.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  239 

Vers.  12 — 28. — Mixed  marriages.    "  To  the  rest,"  those  cases  in  which  one  party 
was  a  lieliever  and  the  other  not  (mixed  marriages),  "  speak  I,  not  the  Lord."    Yet, 
while  St.  Paul  does  not  claim  to  expound  and  apply  a  formal  law,  he  must  not  be  con* 
«idered  as  abnegating  fur  the  time  his  apostolic  office  aud  giving  an  opinion  simply 
personal.    The  decision  pronounced  here  is  a  very  weighty  one,  and  obviously  it  iran 
utterance  of  God's  will.     "  If  any  brother  hath  a  wife  that  believeth  not,"  what  shall 
he  do?     That  depends  on  the  wife  herself.     The  initiative  step  is  not  with  the 
husband :  "  If  she  be  pleased  to  dwell  with  him,  let  him  not  put  her  away."    So  of  the 
wife  with  respect  to  her  husband.     Obviously,  then,  personal  will  is  contemplated,  and 
the  difference  between  marriage  where  both  parties  are  Christians,  aud  marriage  where 
only  one  party  is  a  Christian,  lies  in  the  fact  that,  in  the  latter  instance  (mixed 
niarria.ue8),  the  continuance  of  the  relationship  is  contiugent  on  the  adaptiveness  of 
the  parties  each  to  the  other  and  their  ready  disposition  to  be  a  mutual  source  of 
happiness.    The  will  of  the  Lord  is  that  they  keep  together,  and  they  should  endeavour 
to  fulfil  this  will,  but  if  controversies  exist  and  the  true  ends  of  marriage  are  not  only 
not  met,  but  cannot  be  met,  then  at  the  option  of  the  wife,  the  husband  may  put  her 
Away.    The  converse  holds  good,  so  that  in  the  case  of  either  P'lrty,  ini.iividual  will 
may  interpose  a  bar  to  the  continued  union.     "  God  hath  called  us  to  p6ace."    In  such 
^  solemn  act,  no  wilfulness,  no  passion,  no  worldly  and  selfish  motives,  must  have 
place.    "  Peace,"  and  "  peace  "  only,  can  warrant  the  step.     And  in  connection  with 
"peace"  he  presents  two  views,  one  antecedent,  the  other  subsequent,  to  the  state- 
ment, that  "  a  brother  or  a  sister  is  not  under  bondage  in  such  cases."     A  Christian 
husband  or  wife  sanctifies  the  marriage  tie,  and  accordingly  it  was  pleasing  to  God 
that  the  relationship  should  be  perpetuated.     "  I  am  not  the  rose,"  says  a  Persian 
proverb,  "  but  1  live  with  the  rose,  and  am  therefore  sweet."     What  grace  comes  to  us 
through  the  tender  associations  of  life,  much  of  it  unconscious,  silent  aud  secret,  asking 
no  leave,  provoking  nu  resist.mce,  floating  into  us  on  the  air  and  mingling  with  our 
blood,  sweetening  and  purifying  we  know  not  how,  and  all  the  more  precious  because  our 
aizency  is  for  a  while  quietly  set  aside,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  blessed  Jesue  asserts  his 
Divine  supremacy  I     "  Your  children,"  too !    The  declaration  is  strong  and  unequivocal : 
"  They  are  holy."    Age  was  before  the  Fall ;  childhood  came  after ;  and  childhood  had 
not  been  possible  but  for  the  promise  of  the  "Seed  of  the  woman"  antedating  her 
other  offspring.     "  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."    Baptism  does  not  create  this 
holiness,  but  acknowledges  its  existence,  and  testifies,  on  the  part  of  God  and  on 
behalf  of  the  Church,  that  "  your  children  "  are  in  Clirist  and  therefore  "  huly."     What 
a  motive  this,  that  the  marriage  relation  in  these  "  mixed  marriages  "  should  be  main- 
tained!    What  an  appeal  to  instinct,  to  memory  and  hope,  to  all  the  truest  and  noblest 
sentiments  which  are  the  strength  and  stay  of  home  I     All  the  grandest  influences  of 
Ohristianity  come  from  the  heart  of  Christ  to  our  hearts ;  and  whenever  intellect  is 
perplexed  and  doubts  arise  and  logic  confesses  its  weakness,  we  fall  back  on  the  great, 
sure,  primal  instincts  of  the  heart,  and  work  thence  aud   upward  into   light  and 
^.■isurance.     "  Your  heait  shall  live  for  ever,"  and  because  it  shall  "  live  for  ever,"  it 
lives  now  amidst  intellectual  conflicts  and  bewildering  questions  with  an  inherent 
testimony  to  Christ  and  his  truth  such  as  cuuld  only  spiing  from  the  immovable  con- 
sciousness of  its  immortal  birthright.     Turn  now  to  tlie  subsequent  statement  con- 
tained in  the  sixteenth  verse.    Hatred  and  contentions  may  arise;  if  incurable, "  peace  " 
must  be  had  by  separation.     But  St.  Paul  is  exceedini<ly  anxious  to  prevent  a  sever- 
ance of  the  marriage  tie,  and  hence  appeals  to  the  believing  husband  or  wile  to  con- 
tinue in  the  holy  relationship  in  view  of  the  possible  salvation  of  the  unbelieving 
partner.     By  some  learned  men  this  interpretation  is  contested.     According  to  their 
view,  St.  Paul  meant  to  express  uncertainty,  to  throw  doubt  on  the  sacred  utility  of 
the  marriage  union  with  regard  to  its  prospective  bearing  on  the  salvation  of  the 
unbelieving  party,  and  virtually  to  advise  the  believer  to  look  after  his  or  her  own 
spiritual  interest.     This  is  not  like  St.  Paul.     It  is  not  in  accord  with  his  generous 
solicitude  to  impress  upon  the  parties  the  sanctity  of  their  union.     It  is  at  Tarianot 
with  the  declaration  that  Christianity  recognizes  the  sanctification  of  the  unbulieviug 
party   by  the  believing.    It  conflicts  with  his  statement  concerning  the,  "holy" 
children,  or  at  least  abates  much  of  its  force  as  a  reason  why  the  marriage  should  not 
be  disrupted.     Cougruity  must  be  maintained,  and  congruity  in  this  instance — bo  it 


XM  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  Tn,  1—401, 

■eemi  to  us — demands  that  this  verso,  "  Wh»t  knowest  thou,"  etc.,  should  be  constraed 
in  close  sympathy  with  the  context.  A  break  here  would  not  only  be  at  the  expensa 
of  the  general  argument,  but  a  violation  of  unity  at  its  most  essential  point,  viz.  as  a 
m»xus  between  what  precedes  and  what  follows.  Understand  what  the  time  was. 
Outwardly  the  sceptre  of  Rome  ruled,  tranquillity  was  maintained,  and  the  disturbances 
which  came  on  some  years  later  scarcely  gave  a  threatening  sign  of  their  approach. 
But,  notwithstanding  this  condition  of  things,  the  foundations  of  society  were  under- 
mined, and  the  instincts  of  men,  though  unable  to  foresee  the  changes  that  were  to 
occur,  were  conscious  of  impending  revolutions.  Unrest  was  common,  and  unrest  never 
appears  alone.  A  hos^  of  apprehensions,  an  undcfinable  dread,  a  disposition  to  exagge- 
imte  dangers,  never  fail  to  attend  it.  St.  Paul's  disciples  could  not  escape  this  atmo- 
•pheric  feverishness,  and  consequently  one  of  his  solicitudes  was  to  keep  them  contented 
with  their  allotments  in  life.  If  Christianity  proposed  to  regenerate  human  society, 
ne  of  the  conditions  on  which  this  vast  result  rested  was:  "  Let  every  man  abide  in 
the  same  calling  wherein  he  was  called"  to  be  a  Christian.  Whether  circumcised  or 
uncircumcised,  let  him  remain  satisfied.  Was  he  a  servant  ?  "  Care  not  for  it :  but  U 
thou  mayest  be  made  free,  use  it  rather."  Providence  that  had  the  past  on  its  side 
was  the  best  providence  for  them.  "  Therein  abide  with  God."  Was  not  this  con- 
tentment one  of  the  elements  of  that  sanctification  in  marriage,  and  one  of  the  means 
of  holiness  in  children,  and  again  one  of  the  agencies  for  the  furtherance  of  the  Spirit's 
work  in  the  unbelieving  husband  or  wife?  To  this  one  point  all  the  lines  of  his 
thought  converge,  viz.  let  peace  be  your  object,  and,  in  order  to  attain  it,  be  contented 
with  your  position.  Beyond  question,  St.  Paul  ardently  desired  to  see  certain  of  these 
positions  changed,  but  he  would  not  have  his  disciples  to  be  agitators  and  revolu- 
tionizers.  Is  this  a  plea  for  blind  conservatism,  for  an  Oriental  lethargy,  for  an 
unaspiring  and  unhoping  slavishness  to  things  as  they  were?  Does  the  argument 
forestall  progress  ?  Nay,  at  that  very  moment  a  mighty  revolution  was  going  on  in 
society.  Christianity  guarded  all  rights  and  interests ;  Christianity  protected  the 
marriage  institution ;  Christianity,  in  due  time,  would  make  the  slave  a  freednian. 
But  "  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways  my  ways,"  antj 
Christianity  must  be  left  to  do  its  work  according  to  God's  method. — L. 

Vers  29 — 40. — Apostolic  counsels  for  the  times,  and  general  principles  applied  now 
a»  hrfort.  Some  minds  are  so  organized  as  to  be  peculiarly  ojien  to  those  impressions 
which  the  local  and  circumstantial  produce  on  thought  and  feeling.  If  these  become 
excessive,  they  are  almost  sure  to  trench  on  principles.  Such  persons  are  devotees  of 
sectionality ;  their  prudence  is  shrewd,  but  not  sagacious ;  intelligence  is  narrowed  down 
to  time,  place,  and  immediate  results ;  and  expediency  is  with  them  "  the  previous 
question.  St.  Paul  was  not  one  of  thesis  men.  Other  minds,  fond  of  abstractions  and 
habituated  to  cloister^!  thinking,  lose  the  helps  of  the  senses  and  especially  that  very 
important  culture,  derived  from  contact  with  the  open  world,  which  teaches  us  to  adjust 
principles  to  measures  and  measures  to  occasions.  Expediency  is  seldom  in  their  view. 
St.  Paul  was  not  one  of  these  men,  A  marked  fact  about  his  conversion  to  Christianity 
was  that  he  ceased  to  be  an  intellectual  extremist ;  not  only  his  opinions  and  convictions 
were  radically  changed,  but  likewise  his  method  of  looking  at  all  things.  We  see  in  this 
chapter  a  man  who  adheres  firmly  to  his  ideal  of  the  Christian  Church,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  a  man  who  is  thoroughly  sensible  of  the  uses  of  expediency.  With  him,  nothing 
that  Christ  had  settled  could  be  unsettled.  Nothing  wrong  could  be  expedient,  and, 
in  wery  case,  expediency  was  to  render  homage  to  fundamental  principles,  so  that  the 
SpiA  of  Christ  should  manifest  its  purity  and  beauty.  Such  an  expediency  is  always 
mora  ly  safe,  because  it  rests,  not  on  self-gratification,  but  on  self-deniaL  This  is  the 
'.emper  of  his  argument  in  the  paragraph  now  under  notice.  "  No  commandment  of 
the  I  ord ; "  and  yet  "  my  judgment "  as  an  apostle  is  entitled  to  respect  and  confidence ; 
the  truth  none  the  less  a  truth,  and  worthy  of  this  consideration  because  the  utterance 
4if  oE  e  who  had  "  obtained  mercy  of  the  Lord  to  be  faithful."  That  great  transparency 
was  not  then  glowing  as  in  special  hours  with  the  resplendency  behind  it ;  but  the 
t^an  i«  Divine  illumination  was  there,  and  every  line,  touched  by  the  almighty  haod, 
faithfully  represented  the  original.  "  Mercy  to  be  faithful; "  fidelity  to  truth  just  a« 
mvich  in  advice  and  counsel  as  in  dirpct  and  authoritative  command;    ay,  this  ia 


W.Tn.l--4aj    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBIKTHIAN&  8S1 


"  mtftej  *  indeed,  since  it  shows  the  dignity  of  spiritual  intellect,  and  what  importanoe 
nan  should  attach  to  its  daily  oGBces  in  life.  "  The  time  is  shortened : "  here  is  his 
starting-point ;  and  this  abridged  time  is  applied  instantly  to  a  certain  state  of  mind, 
K^ch  St.  Paul  would  have  his  conrerts  to  cultivate  with  regard  to  the  world  and  it* 
relations.  Future  time  is  not  ordinary  future  time.  It  has  been  narrowed,  in  order 
that  you  Corinthians  and  all  other  belieTers  may  hare  an  intenser-  conception  of 
opportunity,  a  deeper  sense  of  Christ  in  time,  and  so  learn  to  look  upon  human 
existence  under  this  aspect  of  its  solemnity.  First  of  all,  the  domestic  relation ;  this 
most  beautiful,  tender,  and  noble  of  all  earthly  relationships,  whose  spirit  refuses  to  be 
limited  by  what  its  loving  arms  embrace,  and  is  ever  reaching  towards  a  loftier  ideal, 
and  even  when  its  arms  are  paralyzed  still  symbolizes  alike  in  memory  and  hope  the 
Immortality  of  affection, — this  holy  relation  must  l>e  made  holier  by  the  fact,  "  the  time 
U  shortened."  If  true  of  this,  it  is  true  of  all  else.  Sorrow  may  be,  to  some  extent, 
pure  and  noble,  and  yet,  unawares  to  ourselves,  it  may  contain  a  selfish  element,  and, 
in  the  degree  this  is  present,  we  mourn  over  ourselves  as  losers  rather  than  over  the 
object  lost.  A  sorrow  truly  pure  and  noble  hides  its  tears  from  the  world,  takes  up  the 
cross  of  daily  work,  feels  its  loneliness  and  bears  it  silently,  and  toils  on  with  serene 
patience.  To  bo  a  Divine  discipline — the  most  purifying  and  exalting  of  which  we  are 
capable — it  must  loosen  us  from  earthly  things  and  raise  our  hearts  to  Ood.  The 
death  of  others,  even  of  our  dearest  friends,  is  thus  overruled  by  Providence,  as  the 
death  in  some  measure  of  our  pleasure-loving  nature.  "  Perfect  through  suffering " 
was  said  of  Christ,  and  in  so  far  as  we  realize  peifection,  it  is  only  attained  in  this  way. 
Our  joy  must  not  engross  us 'so  as  to  impair  our  lively  sense  of  things  spiritual. 
Business  must  leave  us  free  for  meditation  and  devout  exercises.  And  in  whatever  way 
we  use  the  world,  whether  the  world  of  home,  of  culture,  of  trade  and  commerce,  or  of 
professional  activity,  it  must  be  used  in  moderation  and  with  due  regard  to  its  moral 
significance.  "The  earth  hath  he  given  to  the  children  of  men,"  that  they  may 
be  more  than  earthly.  "  All  things  are  yours,"  that  ye  may  thereby  be  richer  in  Christ 
Jesus.  Viewed  in  this  light,  it  may  not  be  proper  to  say  that  these  things  are  "means 
of  grace,"  but  they  are  helpers  and  auxiliaries  to  goodness,  and  give  us  no  small 
furtherance  in  the  lite  Divine.  Much,  very  much,  in  this  world  is  capable  of  a  most 
blessed  utility.  Much  of  it  will  live  for  ever,  not  in  itself,  but  taken  into  us  and 
assimilated  and  glorified.  Bodily,  how  much  that  is  bodily,  is  ever  becoming  eternally 
mental  and  spiritual  I  It  is  the  immortal  soul,  born  of  God,  redeemed  by  Christ, 
sanctified  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  saves  mateiial  nature  from  being  a  picturesque 
■bow  and  a  deceptious  sham.  Plentifully,  indeed,  she  meets  our  physical  wants,  quite 
•■  lavishly  our  wishes,  generously  too  our  tastes,  and  yet,  while,  guaranteeing  her 
economic  and  intellectual  uses  with  a  royal  magnificence,  she  is  lucking  beyond  and 
afar,  and  her  thought  is  of  the  blessings  that  are  imperishable,  "  The  body  is  .  .  ,  for 
the  Lord ; "  and  through  the  pathways  of  the  body,  the  gates  of  the  senses,  the 
*  vaults,"  the  "  galleries,"  and  "  passage-ways  "  that  physiology  assures  us  exist  beneath 
the  grey  matter  of  the  upi^r  brain  ; — through  these  as  highways  what  vast  processions 
are  daily  moving  heavenwards  I  Beauty  and  sublimity  have  not  terminated  their  office* 
when  they  have  flashed  to  the  canvas  of  the  pfiinter  or  breathed  themselves  into  the 
marble  of  the  sculptor.  Poetry  has  not  finished  her  task  when  she  has  found  a  Dante, 
a  Shakespeare,  a  Milton.  Music  has  not  been  exhausted  in  the  act  of  creating  Mozart 
and  Beethoven  and  Mendelssohn.  Every  one  uf  these  influences  is  what  it  is  in  itself, 
because  of  man's  immortality.  The  training  we  get  in  the  body  and  through  the  body, 
■ueh  as  the  subjugation  of  the  material  organization  to  the  organism  of  the  man,  th* 
clear  common  sense  won  by  experience  from  toil  and  enterprise,  the  swift  energy,  the 
mastering  will  of  achievement,  the  patience  of  endeavour,  the  heroism  that  works  and 
waits,  and  the  discipline  of  the  social  and  rational  man, — all  this  complicated  training, 
which  suffers  no  constituent  of  manhood  to  tvaoe  its  grasp,  has  a  reference  distinctly 
providential  to  the  future  man.  The  idea  of  a  Chriiitian  probation  as  altogether  different 
from  other  conceivable  probations,  and  as  standing  specifically  by  itself  in  the  dispensations 
of  the  universe,  runs  through  all  the  economic  arrangements  of  our  world.  And  hence 
the  words  of  St.  Paul,  "  Use  this  world  as  not  abusing  it,"  using  it  not  to  the  full 
oi  the  senses  and  the  intellect  and  the  sensibilities  as  if  it  were  all,  but  using  it 
as  a  world  even  now  moving  from  beneath  your  feet,  and  which  has  no  permanency 


238  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANSw    [oh,  vu.  1—40. 

except  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  impressions  left  by  it  upon  your  souls.  "  The  fashiom 
of  this  world  passeth  away ;  "  the  whole  structure,  the  modes  of  existence,  the  relation! 
of  existence  in  their  vaiiety  and  multiplicity,  all  present  objects,  the  totality  which  im 
mind  cait  compute, — all  tbii  is  in  motion,  the  duration  has  been  shortened,  and  tbo  emi 
U  near  at  band.  Reviewing  this  argument  of  the  apostle,  may  we  not  claim  that 
it  presents  time  in  a  light  altogether  new,  that  its  estimate  of  duration  is  something 
intrinsically  different  from  that  measured  by  the  time-keeper  of  the  heavens,  and  that 
it  inspires  our  sense  of  successional  moments  in  a  way  peculiar  to  itself?  Nothing  in 
us  is  more  closely  connected  with  the  external  framework  of  the  universe  than  our 
sensibility  to  time.  Yet,  while  this  natural  capacity  is  subjected  to  an  outward  machinery, 
it  is  also  dominant  over  that  machinery,  so  that  an  instant  may  be  expanded  into  an 
hour  or  an  hour  into  days.  In  this  respect,  mouds  assert  a  mastering  force,  emotions 
are  well-nigh  omnipotent,  and  the  heavenly  orbs  take  their  motions  from  our  pulses. 
If  Christianity  took  no  knowledge  of  this  phenomenon  of  experience,  it  would  be  strangely 
exceptional  to  its  metliod  of  operating  on  man,  which  allows  no  recess  of  his  being  to 
remain  unvisited  by  its  light  and  warmth.  Its  teaching  is,  "  The  time  is  shortened," 
and  it  makes  its  doctrine  available  to  practise  us  in  the  highest  moral  wisdom,  using 
the  world  without  abusing  its  relations.  Now,  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  the  civi- 
lization  of  our  century  has  advanced  in  no  direction  more  remarkably  than  in  victory 
over  time.  The  era  opened  with  the  8team-en>;ine,  and  has  progressed  with  the 
telegra|>h  and  telephone,  and,  in  each  case,  the  triumph  has  been  in  a  fuller  control  of 
time.  Time  has  been  shortened  and  yet  lengthened,  so  that  we  do  in  weeks  what  our 
grandfathers  required  years  to  accomplish.  Time  has  been  intensified.  To-day  in 
Europe  is  to-day  in  the  backwoods  of  America,  and  the  yesterday  of  China  and  Egypt 
is  a  part  of  the  breakfast  table-talk  of  this  morning.  Obviously,  sensuous  life,  in  ita 
connections  and  sympathies,  gets  the  most,  at  present,  of  this  stimulation.  One, 
however,  who  takes  a  broad  view  of  providence,  cannot  think  that  the  tendency  of 
this  increased  sensuuusness  is  necessarily  downwards  into  sensualism.  For,  indeed, 
Christianity  is  often  most  active  where  we  least  suspect  its  presence,  since  the 
"kingdom  of  God,"  in  civilization  as  in  all  else,  "cometh  not  with  observation."  This 
enhanced  sensuousness,  if  we  read  aright  the  signs  of  the  times,  is  gathering  together  a 
vast  fund  of  raw  materials  for  transfurmation  into  a  more  capacious  and  robust  Christian 
manhood.  Within  the  realm  of  natural  law,  Christianity  is  signalizing  its  power  more 
and  more,  and  the  day  is  not  distant  when  "  uniformity,"  "  evolution,"  "homologies," 
will  have  a  wider  and  profounder  interpretation  than  they  hare  now.  "  The  earth 
helped  the  woman  ; "  it  still  helps  the  woman  ;  and  age  by  age  the  apocalyptic  wonder 
reveals  fresh  wonders.  Silently,  unobserved  by  the  multitude,  hidden  even  from 
scientific  thinkers,  God  is  reclaiming  nature  for  his  Son ;  and  he  who,  eighteen  hundred 
years  ago,  multiplied  bread  for  the  hungry,  healed  diseases,  and  established  his  claim  as 
the  Lord  of  nature,  is  making  ready  to  reaffirm  that  sovereignty  in  a  manner  more 
resplendent  than  by  miracles.  And  as  to  this  matter  of  shortened  and  intensified  time, 
who  but  the  Lord  Jesus  as  Son  of  man  was  the  first  sublime  instance  of  ascendancy  over 
the  limitations  of  time  ?  Thirty  years  of  seclusion,  three  years  of  work,  young  manhood 
cut  short  in  its  prime,  and  yet  those  three  years  giving  birth  to  centuries  which,  amid 
manifold  evils,  have  yet  steadily  progressed  in  the  direction  of  a  regenerated  humanity. 
Fw  him,  indeed,  time  was  thortened,  and  his  is  the  perfect  example  of  using  the  world 
without  the  slightest  abuse.  And  just  in  the  proportion  we  have  his  Spirit,  shall  we 
feel  that  the  soul  has  a  calendar  of  days  unknown  in  the  chronometiy  of  ths  material 
universe,— L. 

Ver.  2, — Christianity  and  marriagt.  The  human  mind  Is  Influenced  by  the  law  at 
action  and  reaction,  and  hence  human  opinion  tunda  to  extremes.  Corinth  was  a 
city  famous,  or  rather  infamous,  for  its  licentiousness;  not  only  was  society  corrupt ; 
religion  sanctioned  and  spread  the  prevali^nt  moral  corruption.  No  place  was  more 
remarkable  for  the  union  between  splendour  and  impurity.  When  a  Cliristian  com- 
munity was  formed  at  Corinth,  it  was  natural  enough  that  some  of  the  old  leaven  of 
sensuality  should  appear  and  threaten  to  corrupt  the  mass.  Hence  the  tolerance  of 
fomicatioB  and,  in  one  case,  even  of  adultery  and  incest.  But  what  is  remarkable  is 
that  ia  the  rery  mam  society  there  should  be  a  fution  or  a  tendency  of  thought  and 


OB.  Til.  1—40.]    THE  FiRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTHIANa  23S 

■entiment  in  the  direction  of  asceticism.  There  were  those  who  represented  all  sexuai 
intercourse  as  impure,  and  beneath  the  dignity  and  unworldliness  of  spiritual  men. 
Paul  himself,  though  his  language  was  afterwards  coloured  by  sectarian  transciiben  oi 
his  Epistle,  was  evidently  somewhat  inclined  to  severity  in  his  judgment  upon  the 
relations  between  man  and  woman.  Yet  in  this  verse  he  honours  and  authorizes  the 
estate  of  marriage. 

L   MaRRIAQB     IB     AN     INSTITUTION     AND     BBLATIONSHIP     BASED     UPON    THE    DlVINK 

COMMAND.  This  caunot  be  questioned  by  those  who  accept  the  Scriptures  as  credible 
and  authoritative.  The  primeval  commandment  stands  upon  record,  and  witnesses 
both  agaiust  the  unrestrained  and  licentious  intercourse  which  some  have  defended  as 
natural,  but  which  is  really  unnatural  and  debasing,  and  also  against  the  ascetic 
doctrine,  to  whicli  now  and  again  religious  societies  have  inclined,  tliat  all  sexual 
feeling  is  sinful.  It  is  noliceable  that  our  Lord  Jesus  himself  repeats  and  sanctions 
the  original  commandment  as  to  the  lawfulness  and  inviolability  of  marriage. 

IL  The  expuess  command  ib  in  hakmont  wiTn  tue  constitution  and  naturai. 
ADAPTATION  OF  TUE  SEXES.  There  is  nothing  arbitrary  and  meaningless  in  the 
provisions  of  the  moral  law.  That  law  is  written  upon  the  heart  and  conscience,  upon 
the  very  bodily  frame  of  man,  and  is  not  simply  uttered  in  the  voice  of  the  Divine 
Lawgiver.  Whoever  studies  the  human  constitution  in  body  and  in  mind  cannot  fail 
to  recognize  and  admire  the  adaptation  which  is  embodied  in  the  sacred  ordinance  of 
matrimony. 

111.  Marriage  is  pkomotivb  or  some  of  tub  best  and  purest  affections  of 
HUUAN  nature  in  those  whou  IT  UNITES.  There  is  no  institution  which  so 
emphatically  strikes  at  the  very  root  of  selfishness.  The  man  is  weaned  away  from 
the  too  common  practice  of  self-gratification ;  the  woman  has  called  forth  all  the  latent 
affection  and  devotion  of  her  being;  and  the  fanjily  becomes  the  sphere  of  self-denial 
and  self-sacrifice,  of  mutual  forbearance  and  helpfulness.  That  such  is  always  the  case 
is  not  asserted ;  but  such  is  the  proper,  and  to  a  very  large  extent  the  actual,  tendency 
of  this  institution.  True,  there  are  those  among  the  unmarried  who  cherish  love  which 
animates  them  to  many  labours;  but  there  is  no  room  for  comparison  between  the 
virtues  of  the  married  and  the  unmarried,  inasmuch  as,  amongst  men,  those  who 
shrink  from  marriage  usually  do  so  avowedly  to  escape  serious  obligations  and  to 
indulge  unbridled  desires. 

lY.  Marriage  is  the  best  preservative  against  vice  and  the  bbst  aid  to 
TIBTUE,  Paul  seems  to  have  admitted  the  contention  of  his  Corinthian  correspondents, 
that  in  some  cases  it  was  expedient  to  avoid  marriage,  and  that  such  a  course  might 
be  admirable  in  the  x:>assionless  and  peculiarly  spiritual.  But  what  in  modern  English 
is  called  "  common  sense "  was  very  strong  in  the  apostle,  and  he  gives  a  very  plain 
reason  for  a  very  plain  precept.  In  the  presence  of  the  voluptuousness  of  Corinth 
there  could  be  little  need  for  many  words ;  Paul's  words  are  few  and  pungent.  And 
whilst  human  nature  is  what  it  is,  his  counsels  will  hold  good,  and  those  of  superfine 
and  ascetic  moralists  will  be  discredited  by  the  facts  of  human  life. 

v.  6t  uarbiage  are  secured  tub  welfare  of  society  and  the  prosperity 
OF  THE  Church.  The  family  is  the  true  unit  in  human  society,  and  the  enemy  of 
marriage  is  the  enemy  of  humanity.  It  is  in  the  family  that  virtuous  and  honourable 
citizens  are  bred  and  reared,  and  there  principles  are  instilled  which  are  at  the  Ibundatian 
of  national  stability.  And  the  old  saying  is  equally  true,  that  by  marriage  heaven 
itself  is  replenished.  It  is  hence  that  the  Church  draws  its  members  and  its  officers ; 
it  is  here  that  the  natural  life  and  the  eternal  life  are  alike  commenced  and 
nurtured. — T. 

Ver.  7. — Distinct  gi/tt.  Paul  had  peculiar  natural  powers,  adapting  him  for  a  life 
of  consecration  and  a  life  of  service.  But  it  was  a  beautiful  feature  in  his  character 
that  he  did  not  expect  or  wish  all  Christians  to  resemble  himself  in  all  things ;  tuch 
resemblance  might  be  naturally  pleasing  to  him,  but  his  was  too  noble  a  nature  to 
constrain  him  to  see  and  judge  all  through  his  own  medium.  In  fellow-labourers  he 
recognized  adaptation  for  usefulness,  and  was  evidently  convinced  that  the  distribution 
«f  Irvine  gifts  was  appointed  by  the  wisdom  and  beneficence  of  the  great  Head  nvei 
aU  things  to  the  Church. 


840  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  vii.  1— 4* 

I.  Human  endowments  akb  Divinb  gifts  It  is  characteiistio  of  a  religious  and 
devout  mind  to  look  up  to  tiie  Source  and  Author  of  all.  If  to  God  we  are  to  attribnta 
tk«  providential  favours  we  enjoy,  shall  we  suppose  that  even  higher  gifts  are  to  ba 
traoed  to  an  inferior  source?  inspiration  enabled  our  great  teachers  to  see  the  Giver 
in  the  gift.  The  word  here  used  is  indeed  often  used  to  denote  those  special  super- 
natural powers,  such  as  healing,  tongues,  prophecy,  which  were  bestowed  upon 
memlDers  of  the  primitive  Church  for  a  season  and  for  a  purpose.  But  the  context 
shows  that  those  gifts  which  are  ordinary  are  as  justly  to  be  traced  to  the  favour  and 
bounty  of  Heaven  as  those  which  are  extraordinary.  Indeed,  it  may  asked  of  every 
Christian,  "  What  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive?" 

II.  Divine  gifts  are  bestowed  upon  men  in  great  diversity  and  variett. 
"Every  man  hath  his  proper  gift  of  God."  it  is  so  in  bodily  constitution — one  has 
muscular  strength,  anotlier  constitutional  endurance,  a  third  manual  dexterity,  etc. 
It  is  so  in  temperament — one  is  calm  and  wise,  another  is  tender  and  sympathetic,  a 
third  is  impulsive  and  commanding.  It  is  so  in  intellectual  character— one  reasons 
with  force,  another  persuades  with  fervour,  a  third  speaks  with  eloquence.  Where  are 
two  leaves  of  the  forest  alike,  or  two  faces  indistinguishable?  So  in  the  Church  of 
Christ — one  has  the  gift  to  rule,  another  the  gift  to  teach,  another  the  gift  to  console. 
One  is  fitted  for  a  pastor,  another  for  an  evangelist.  One  is  called  to  a  public  position, 
another  is  adapted  to  the  service  of  the  one  Kedeemer  in  private  life. 

III.  These  gifts  ake  complembntahv  to  one  anotheh,  and  in  theib  exerciss 
co-opbrate  to  the  general  good.  None  can  be  spared.  There  is  generosity,  but 
no  lavish  waste,  in  the  liberality  of  the  Divine  Giver.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no 
deficiency,  no  grudging  and  withliolding.  Pray  for  the  qualified  workman,  and  the 
work  shall  not  be  left  undone  for  want  of  the  necessary  helper.  Because  all  things 
are  Christ's,  all  things  are  ours.  One  sujiplies  another's  lack,  and  mutual  sympathy 
and  common  ministrations  subserve  the  general  goud. 

Practical  lessons.  1.  Gratitude  should  be  cultivated  as  due  to  him  who  is  Giver 
of  all.  2.  Pride  should  be  repressed ;  for  if  one  has  his  gift  he  has  to  remember  that 
it  is  a  gift  bestowed  in  grace.  3.  Forbearance  and  toleration  are  requisite.  It  is  vain 
to  expect  all  gifts  to  centre  in  the  same  person,  to  look  for  wliat  God  has  nut  bestowed, 
to  complain  because  a  man  has  "  his  proper  gift "  and  only  that. — T. 

Ver.  16. — Earthly  relationships  sanctified  to  heavenly  uses.  There  were  several  obviotif 
and  powerful  reasons  why  a  Christian  husband  or  wife  should  not  leave  a  partner  who 
was  married  in  days  when  both  were  unbelievers,  and  who  had  not  experienced  con- 
version from  heathenism  or  Judaism  to  Christianity.  And  to  some  extent  the  same 
reasons  hold  good  when  one  has  passed  from  merely  nominal  to  real  and  spiritual 
Christianity.  1.  An  obligation  has  been  undertaken  from  which  only  flagrant  immo- 
rality can  liberate  either  party.  2.  Children  may  have  been  born  during  the  union, 
whose  welfare  depends  upon  its  continuance.  3.  Affection  may  have  sprung  up  which 
it  would  be  a  cruel  outrage  to  suspend  or  check.  And  then,  in  addition,  there  is  the 
reason  given  in  the  text.  4.  The  continuance  of  the  union  may  make  the  Christian 
husband  or  wife  the  minister  of  spiritual  blessing  to  the  "unconverted"  consort. 

I.  An  attractive  representation  may  be  furnished  of  the  Christias 
OHABACTEB.  The  standard  of  moral  excellence  presented  in  the  Word  of  God  is  indeed 
singularly  high  and  admirable.  But  morality  in  a  book  is  one  thing,  morality 
embodied  in  the  life  is  quite  another  thing.  Morality  proclaimed  from  a  pulpit  is  far 
less  impressive  than  morality  speaking  from  the  domestic  hearth.  There  are  such 
virtues  as  truth,  meekness,  pity,  patience,  and  charity,  which  are  peculiarly  Christian; 
and  the  exhibition  of  these  is  likely  to  lead  to  the  inquiry — Whence  come  these  traits 
of  character  ?  What  is  the  secret  of  a  life  so  different  from  the  life  of  the  selfish  and 
the  ungoverned  ?  How  many  a  hu!^band  has  been  won  to  Christ,  beholding  in  his 
Christian  wife  a  "  a  chaste  conversation  coupled  with  fear  "  I 

IL  Ah  unconscious  ikflubncb  in  favour  of  true  religion  may  BE  exeroiseb 

BY   ONE  PRAYERFULLY   SOLICITOUS   FOB  THE  SALVATION   OF  A  SPOUSE.      Who  Can  kuOW, 

unmoved,  that  a  dear  consort  is  seeking  his  spiritual  welfare?  There  is  a  tone  imparted 
to  the  intercourse  of  daily  life  by  the  habit  of  intercessory  prayer.  And  there  is  a 
dignity,  a  gentleness,  a  spirituality,  of  manner  and  of  language,  which  cannot  eicape 


CH.  Til.  l-rW.]    TUE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  241 

the  observation  of  such  ab  are  associated  in  the  tcntierest  intimacies  of  life.  There  is 
no  desire  and  prayer  so  all-penetrating  and  all-influential  as  the  desire  and  prayer  for 
the  spiritual  and  eternal  welfare  of  those  who  are  nearest  and  dearest,  united  by  the 
most  sacied  and  endearing  of  earthly  ties. 

III.  An  opportonitt  is  given  in  these  kelationships  for  express  instruction 
AND  persuasion  WHICH  MAT  ISSUE  IN  SPIRITUAL  GOOD.  In  many  instances  it  may 
be  unwise  to  make  a  special  and  formal  effort  to  convince  and  to  persuade ;  it  may  be 
better  to  leave  religion  to  tell  its  own  tale  and  do  its  own  work.  But  cases  do  occui 
in  which  Providence  makes  an  opening  for  an  effort.  Stanley's  remark  upon  this  verse 
is  well  worth  quoting :  "  The  verse  .so  undeistood  has  probably  conduced  to  the  frequent 
instances  of  the  conversion  of  unbelieving  husbands  by  believing  wives.  Even  the 
stern  severity  of  Cbrysostom  relaxes  in  its  presence  into  the  declaration,  '  that  no 
teacher  has  sui;h  an  effect  in  conversion  as  a  wife/  and  tliis  passage,  thus  interpreted, 
probably  had  a  direct  influence  on  tlie  marriage  of  Clotilde  with  Clovis,  and  Bertha 
with  EllieUieit,  and  consequently  on  the  subsequent  conversion  of  the  two  great  king- 
doms of  tVani:e  and  England  to  the  Christian  faith."  There  are  few  Christian  ministers 
who  from  their  own  observation  could  not  tell  of  similar  instances  in  lowlier  life,  where 
God  has  blessed  the  influence  of  wife  to  husband,  or  of  husband  to  wife,  so  that  they 
have  become  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life.  Whilst,  on  the  one  hand,  the  mere 
hoi^e  of  exercising  such  influence  should  never  lead  a  man  or  a  woman  to  marry  an 
unbeliever,  on  the  other  hand,  when  unequal  unions  have  been  formed,  the  possibility 
opened  up  in  this  verse  sliould  lead  to  wise  and  affectionate  effurt,  and  to  earnest  and 
unwearying  prayer. — T. 

Ver.  19. —  Obedience  is  everything.  One  great  result  of  the  introduction  of  Chris- 
tianity into  the  world  was  to  diminish  the  importance  of  trifles  and  to  elevate  great 
things  into  their  due  prominence.  Tiue  religion  thus  acts  by  restoring  to  all  things 
their  due  proportions,  by  putting  all  things  in  their  due  perspective.  In  religions  nf 
human  device  the  greatest  stress  is  laid  upon  what  is  valueless  and  things  of  supreme 
moment  are  ignoi-ed.  In  nothing  is  the  religion  of  Christ  more  signally  in  contrast 
with  and  in  advance  of  the  religions  of  the  heathen  than  in  this  vital  point. 

I.  The  INDIFFERENCE  OF  OUTWARD  POSITION  AND  OBSERVANCE.  The  great  distinction 
in  the  time  of  the  apostles  and  in  the  society  in  which  they  moved  was  the  distinction 
between  Jews  and  Gentiles,  or,  as  it  was  the  custom  to  express  it,  between  the  cir- 
cumcision and  the  uncircumcision.  But  this  distinction  stands  butbre  us  as  represen- 
tative of  all  external  lines  of  demarcation,  of  all  parties  sundered  by  associations  and 
observances  amongst  men.  When  the  apostle  says  that  circumcision  and  uncircum- 
cision are  "nothing,"  he  uses  very  strong  language,  but  he  thus  sets  forth  the 
insignificance  of  a  man's  birth,  religious  associations,  reputation  in  this  world,  com- 
pared, with  his  personal  character.  A  lesson  this  which  we  find  also  in  his  Epistle  to 
the  Galatians,  who,  like  the  Corinthians,  were  assailed  by  false  teachers  who  sought  to 
substitute  formality  for  spirituality.  The  inference  is  valid  from  this  instance  to  all 
instances  embiaced  in  the  general  principle.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  this  apostolic 
teaching  has  two  applications.  1.  Those  who  insist  upon  forms  are  blamed  for  their 
narrowness.  2.  Those  who  insist  upon  the  neglect  of  forms  are  equally  blamed  for 
their  intolerance.  Neither  one  way  nor  the  other  is  it  allowable  for  one  to  dictate  to 
another  or  to  boast  over  another.  The  temperaments,  habits,  education,  opinions,  of 
Christians  will  probably  decide  whether  or  not  they  incline  to  express  their  religion  in 
ceremonies  or  to  dispense  with  such, 

II.  The  all-importance  of  an  obedient  heart  and  life.  When  it  is  afSrmed 
that  circumcision  and  uncircumcision  are  "  nothing,"  it  is  suggested  that  the  keeping 
of  the  Divine  commandments  is  everything — that  this  is  the  one  thing  of  supreme 
importance.  1.  There  is  implied  the  evangelical  motive  to  Christian  obedience.  Cer- 
tainly Paul  was  the  last  to  teach  that  the  mere  outward  compliance  and  conformity 
were  sufficient.  The  prohibitions  of  the  Law  may  be  observed,  yet  the  Searcher  of 
hearts  is  not  satisfied  if  the  soul  be  not  surrendered  and  devoted  to  bim.  And  our 
Lord  Jesus  has  very  clearly  and  pointedly  shown  the  relation  between  motive  and 
practice  in  his  saying,  "  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments ; "  "  Ye  are  my  friend*, 
if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you."    2.  There  is  implied  the  supreme  and  righteoiu 

L  CORINTHIANS.  S 


liia  XllJi  Jf'lliBT  Ki-ISTLK  TO  THE  (JOKliiTHlAiJa     [oh.  tu.  1—40, 

authority  of  God.  It  is  too  common,  in  representing  the  Creator  m  the  Bestower  o( 
•11  gifts  and  as  the  Nource  of  all  grace,  to  overlook  the  very  important  and  scriptura) 
Tiew  of  God  as  the  just  Governor  and  Kin;  of  men.  He  has  a  right  to  command ;  all 
his  ordinances  and  directions  are  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  eternal  and  flawless 
moral  law.  It  is  not  merely  a  superior  power,  it  is  a  rightful  authority  to  which  we 
are  bidden  to  submit,  and  to  this  our  own  reason  and  conscience  unequivocally  testify. 
9. 1'bere  is  implied  the  universal  range  and  sphere  of  the  religious  life.  Not  in  an 
occasional  act,  not  in  an  exceptional  observance,  lies  oar  conformity  to  the  Divine  will. 
The  commandments  of  Gud  apply  to  the  whole  moral  life  of  man,  leave  nothing 
antouched,  unblest — they  are  "  exceeding  broad."  All  the  activities  of  our  nature  and 
all  the  aspects  ot  our  life  are  contemplated  and  included  in  this  comprehensive  condition 
of  true  religion.  The  Jew  and  the  Gentile,  the  young  and  the  old,  the  learned  and  the 
illiterate,  however  they  may  be  reLiteil  to  ceremonial  observances,  are  all  one  in  this — 
all  can  recognize  the  obligation  to  Christian  obedience,  and  all  can  find  in  their  several 
positions  and  avocations  and  relationships  abundant  opportunity  for  practically  and 
cheerfully  fulfilling  the  obligation  they  are  alike  in  acknowledging. — T. 

Vera.  22,  23. — Freedom  and  Imidage.  To  the  mind  of  the  apostle  spiritual  and 
immortal  relations  seemed  so  vast  and  momentous  that  they  dwari'ed  those  relations 
which  are  earthly  and  temporary.  It  may  apjiear  to  some  readers  of  this  passage  of 
the  Epistle  as  if  Paul  did  not  attach  enough  importance  to  the  conditions  of  life  in 
which  Christians  may  find  themselves.  But  the  fact  is  that  the  friendship  of  Christ 
and  the  hopes  of  eternity  were  so  real  and  precious  to  him  that  all  beside  seemed 
insignificant ;  whilst  the  uncertainty  attaching  to  the  period  of  the  present  dispensation 
was  BO  present  to  his  mind  that  he  could  not  concern  himself  very  feelingly  with  what 
might  so  soon  for  ever  pass  away. 

L  Tbb  bondman's  fbeedom.  It  is  well  known  how  very  large  a  proportion  of 
the  Boman  empire  were  slaves,  and  how  pitiable  was  the  condition  of  the  whole 
class,  bow  wretched  and  hopeless  the  condition  of  a  large  portion  of  the  class. 
We  cannot  wonder  that  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  found  so  cordial  and  grateful 
a  welcome  from  the  bondmen  in  many  cities  of  the  empire.  In  many  instances 
Christianity  actually  ameliorated  the  lot  of  the  slave ;  in  many  more  it  enabled  the 
unfortunate  to  bear  their  trials  with  patience,-  and  to  look  beyond  them  to  the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  The  Epistle  to  Philemon  gives  us  an  insight  into  the 
relations  between  a  Christian  master  and  a  Christian  slave.  What  was  ihe  secret  of 
the  change  which  began  so  auspiciously,  and  which  has  proceeded  so  surely  and  so 
beneficially  with  the  lapse  of  centuries?  That  Christianity  had  from  the  first 
a  tendency  to  put  an  end  to  such  inequality,  none  can  doubt.  But  deeper  than  the 
social  morement  was  a  sjiiritual  energy  which  displayed  itself  in  the  individual  Ufa. 
Liberty  of  spirit  compensated  the  yoke  of  bondage.  The  humblest  slave  cherished  tha 
assurance  that  he  was  the  Lord's  freeman.  This  honourable  distinction,  the  privilegea 
and  Immunities  it  brought,  the  hopes  it  inspired,  made  the  heart  contented  and  the 
life  tranquil  and  bright.  The  same  process  may  take  place  in  cases  rery  different, 
yet  allied.  There  are  in  every  state  of  society  those  whose  position  is  lowly  and 
whose  earthly  prospects  are  cheerless,  who  may  nevertheless  enjoy  the  conviction  that 
the  Lord,  the  Son,  has  made  them  free,  so  that  they  are  free  indeed,  in  the  enjoyment 
of  a  spiritual  liberty  and  all  its  privileges  and  anticipations. 

U.  The  freeman's  bokdaoe.  The  passage  contains  a  twofold  paradox :  it  present* 
us  with  a  slave  enfranchised,  and  with  a  freeman  in  bonds.  If  the  poot  slave  was 
encouraged  not  to  allow  his  chains  to  tie  him  in  spirit  to  the  earth,  the  freeman  was 
reminded  that,  "  called  in  the  Lord,"  he  was  captive  to  a  Divine  will  and  consecrated 
to  a  Divine  service.  1.  The  cause  and  explanation  of  thii  servitude.  The  Christian  is 
reminded  that  he  is  "  bought  with  a  price."  Brought  into  a  new  bondage  by  the 
purchase  of  a  Saviour's  blood,  he  is  no  more  his  own.  Thus  Christ  and  bis  suQerings 
are  represented  as  tlie  source  of  the  new  obligations  which  the  ransomed  have  con- 
tracted. 2.  The  iieyative  side  of  the  change  thus  effected.  It  is  a  grand  and  stirring 
appeal  of  the  apostle :  "  Be  not  ye  the  servants  of  men."  Alas !  what  multitudes 
tuLrject  themselves  to  a  base  thraklom,  in  accepting  the  chains  of  human  slavery, 
whilst  they  disdain  tbe  easy  yoke  uf  the  Redeemer  I     But  it  is  the  prerogative  of  the 


0B.TIL1— 4a]     THE  FIRST  BPI8TLB  TO  THB  OORINTHIANa  243 

Ghrlstlan  to  be  mperior  alike  to  hnman  judgment  and  to  hnraan  authority.  S.  fU 
positive  tida.  He  is  "Christ's  servant"  who  is  called  in  the  Lord,  although  free  in 
■  eivil  sense.  From  Paul's  own  biography  we  are  able  to  form  a  judgment  as  to  the 
Tklue  which  he  set  on  Roman  citizenship.  But  his  highest  honour  was  to  subject  and 
darote  his  powers  to  his  Saviour.  So  far  from  there  being  any  degradation,  any 
ignominy  in  such  service,  it  is  most  hononrable,  most  illustrious.  Tet  it  murt  be 
■omething  more  than  a  name;  it  involves  the  brino^ing,  not  of  the  life  only,  bat  of 
•vary  thought,  "  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Jesus  Christ."— T. 

Vers.  29— 3t. — "  }V  Htm  U  ihort."  There  la,  and  there  ought  to  be,  a  narked 
difference  between  the  conduct  of  the  Christian  and  that  of  the  unbeliever.  This 
difference  originates  primarily  in  the  new  principles  with  which  the  mind  of  the 
disciple  of  Christ  is  possessed  and  by  which  it  is  governed ;  the  faith  and  gratitnde 
towards  the  Saviour  which  constitute  and  mark  the  man  a  Christian  make  him  a  new 
man.  Tet  there  is  another,  beside  this  loftiest  reason,  for  the  outward  differences. 
To  this  the  apostle  here  refers ;  the  rapidly  approaching  end  of  the  present  dispensation, 
when  really  expected,  must  exercise  considerable  influence  over  the  Christian  s  life. 

L  1'hb  transitoriness  akd  ferishableness  of  the  present  state  and  or  HI. 

TBAT  pertains  to  it  18  a  POWERFUL  HOTIVB  OTEB  TBK  CHRISTIAN'S  HIND  AND  UWE, 

The  apostle  pnts  this  matter  in  two  lights.  1.  The  time  is  short,  contracted  into 
a  amall  compass.  This  must  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  eternity  of  God,  with 
whom  "  one  day  is  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day ; "  and  also  in 
connection  with  the  mortality  of  man,  whose  days  on  earth  are  as  a  shadow,  whose  life 
passes  as  the  swift  ships.  The  season,  or  dispensation,  in  which  our  earthly  work  is 
to  be  done  and  our  earthly  witness  borne,  is  fleeting.  "  The  day  and  the  hour  knoweth 
no  man ; "  yet  our  Lord's  language  is  ever,  "  Watch  1 "  2.  "  The  fashion  of  this  world 
passeth  away."  It  is  like  a  cloud-shndow  on  the  sea,  a  wind-wave  on  the  com,  a  meteor 
in  the  sky.  Of  this  pathetic  truth  all  human  history  is  a  proof,  and  the  events  of  every 
generation  an  illustration  that  to  the  reflective  cannot  fail  to  be  impressive.  Nothing 
continueth  in  one  stay.  The  first  Christians  seem  sometimes  to  have  been  possessei 
with  the  conviction  that  the  end  of  the  age  and  the  advent  of  the  Lord  were  very  near. 
Nearer  still  are  they  to  us,  who  are  admonished  to  live  under  the  influenoa  of  the 
sublime  expectation. 

IL  Human  life  abounds  with  opportunities  fob  EXHreiTiNO  the  fbaotioal 
POWER  OF  THIS  principle  AND  HOTIVB.  1.  Human  relationships  are  influenced  by  the 
eonsidemtions  adduced.  The  apostle  refers  especially  to  marriage,  because  it  was  the 
question  concerning  the  expediency  of  matrimony  which  occasioned  the  introduction  of 
the  great  principle  of  the  passage.  On  account  of  present  uncertainties  and  the  preianre 
of  the  time,  Paul  thought  it  well  for  some  Christiana  not  to  marry,  and  for  the  married 
to  be  on  their  guard  against  absorption  in  family  cares.  2.  Human  emotions  should 
he  moderated  by  the  same  consideiations.  There  ia  no  room  for  extreme  joy  or  sorrow 
when  the  events  which  occasion  these  feelings  are  themselves  upon  the  wing.  The 
emotions  are  not  forbidden,  but  excessive  indulgence  of  them  is  deprecated.  3.  Human 
business  oinnot  be  allowed  to  be  too  absorbing ;  for  property  will  soon  be  valueless,  and 
the  world  itself  will  vanish  and  be  no  more  seen.  How  obvious  the  duty  to  hold 
earthly  possessions  with  a  light  hand,  and  to  use  the  world  and  all  it  contains  with 
a  wise  discretion,  and  to  avoid  misusing  what  ia  ao  little  able  to  afford  a  lasting 
aatisfaction  1 — T. 

Tera.  1,  t,  7 — 9  25 — 35. — Celibacy  and  marriage.  The  Corinthian  Christians  had 
written  to  the  apostle  for  direction  respecting  the  relative  desirability  and  incumbency 
of  single  and  wedded  life.  Probably  some  of  them  regarded  marriage  as  obligatory,  and 
others  perhaps  looked  u[ion  it  as  an  evil.  Amongst  Gentiles  there  was  at  this  period 
a  strong  tendency  towards  celibacy.  The  reputation  of  Corinth  was,  moreover, 
unenviable  for  wantonness  and  uncleanness.  There  was  therefore  great  need  for  full  and 
explicit  statement,  supplemented  by  apostolic  authority. 

I.  The  apostle  declakes  each  -btatb  to  be  lawful.  This  is  apparent  from  ths 
two  opening  versea  of  the  chapter.  In  itself  it  is  no  sin  to  marry;  it  is  no  sin  tx 
remain  mmaniad.    Perhaps  speciitHy  to  those  regarding  marriage  as  obligatory,  th» 


24«  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.    [oh.  tu.  1—40. 

aposfle  aays  "It  is  good  [expedient,  profitable]  for  a  man  not  to  touch  a  woman ; "  and  ta 
those  all  for  celibacy— speaking  generally,  "  Let  every  man  have  his  own  wife."  Both 
conditions  are  honourable.  We  are  left  to  choose  between  the  two.  But  rules  are  laid 
down  for  guidance. 

IL  Choice  between  the  two  should  bk  laboelt  determined  bt  oonditioh  axd 
mBcnusTANCE.  From  vers.  1,  7,  8,  38,  it  has  been  too  hastily  concluded  by  some 
that  Paul  decidedly  favours  celibacy  per  te.  But  ver.  7  is  ambiguous,  and  is  thought 
by  not  a  few  to  refer  to  the  gift  of  continence,  which  qualifies  a  man  for  ringle  or 
wedded  life,  as  circumstances  may  determine ;  and  the  ether  verses,  together  with  this 
verse,  must  not  be  dissevered  from  ver.  26,  which  qualifies  the  whole  chapter.  Paul  has 
vividly  before  his  mind  the  surroundings  of  the  Christian  Church  in  his  own  age. 
What  was  expedient  in  the  "present  distress"  might  not  be  desirable  under  other 
conditions.  And  similarly,  the  "  better  "  might  cease  to  be  so  under  changed  circum- 
stances. We  read  elsewhere  (fleb.  xiii.  4)  that  "  marriage  is  honourable  in^U."  And 
it  is  the  Apostle  Paul  himself  who  elevates  marriage  to  the  loftiest  position  by  employ- 
ing it  as  a  type  of  the  union  between  Christ  and  believers  (Eph.  v.  25 — 32).  It  is  also 
the  same  apostle  who  pronounces  the  prohibition  of  marriage  to  be  one  of  the  signs  of 
the  great  apostacy  (1  Tim.  iv.  3).  "  It  is  not  good  th^t  the  man  should  be  alone  " 
(Gen.  ii.  18).  On  Paul's  communication  to  the  Corinthians  it  has  been  aptly  said,  "  The 
truth  is  that  the  apostle  writes  to  the  Corinthians  as  be  would  do  to  an  army  about  to 
enter  on  a  most  unequal  conflict  in  an  enemy's  country  and  for  a  protracted  period. 
He  tells  them,  '  This  is  no  time  for  you  to  think  of  marriage.  You  have  a  right  to 
marry.  And  in  general  it  is  best  that  all  men  should  marry.  But  in  your  circum- 
stances marriage  can  only  lead  to  embarrassment  and  suffering.'"  This  is  putting  the 
matter  bluntly.  Perhaps  it  goes  a  little  beyond  the  apostle's  expressed  counsel,  yet  it 
shows  the  drift  of  his  advice.  It  would  seem  that  clioice  is  to  be  determined  by :  1.  Con- 
dition or  qualification.  Celibacy  is  not  commended  to  any  except  those  who  have  the 
gift  of  continence.  To  many  it  would  prove  a  snare — an  occasion  of  the  most  serious 
eviL  It  is  not  at  all  "  good  "  for  the  generality,  since  most  men  do  not  possess  the 
necessary  qualification.  Thus  the  almost  universal  injunction  in  the  second  verse 
follows  and  qualifies  the  commendation  in  the  first.  Even  under  adverse  temporal 
circumstances  it  may  thus  be  better  for  some  to  marry.  The  apostle  is  most  cautious 
upon  this  point,  and  is  in  great  contrast  to  Bomauists,  who  relegate  to  celibacy  the 
entire  priesthood.  2.  Oircumstancet,  The  "  present  distress,"  because  of  the  sorrows, 
perplexities,  and  sufierings  which  it  occasioned  in  so  large  a  degree  to  those  having 
upon  them  the  responsibilities  of  married  life,  inclined  the  apostle  to  cummend  celibacy 
to  those  qualified  to  practise  it.  We  have  here  valuable  suggestions.  Marriage  is  not 
to  be  rashly  entered  upon.  Temporal  surroundings  and  prospects  are  lo  b%  takes  into 
account.  Prudence  is  to  be  observed  in  affairs  matrimonial.  What  woeful  results 
have  followed  imprudent  unions  I  Many  who  fall  into  love  seem  to  fall  out  of  their 
senses  at  the  same  time.  Not  a  few  regard  marriage  as  a  goal  to  be  reached  at  all 
hazards.  They  display  infinitely  more  anxiety  to  get  to  it  than  they  do  to  get  to  heaven. 
Evidently  they  regard  it  as  a  most  perfect  paradise,  but  when  they  reach  it  by  the  road 
of  folly  they  generally  find  that  there  is  a  serpent  in  that  garden  as  in  the  one  of  old. 

IIL  The  apostle  directs  oub  thoughts  to  the  relative  advantages  of  thi 
TWO  STATES.  1.  Celibacy  hat  lets  care  attaching  to  it,  especially  in  troubloui  timet. 
The  unmarried  have  more  leisure  to  attend  to  the  things  of  the  Lord,  The  married 
must  concern  themselves  more  about  things  temporal,  and  this  may  prove  a  distraction 
injurious  to  higher  duties.  A  loving  wife  tends  to  occupy  her  mind  very  largely 
about  her  husband,  and  a  loving  husband  about  his  wife.  There  is  danger  here  lest 
the  claims  of  One  who  should  be  far  more  to  us  than  husband  oc  wife  be  neglected. 
This  is  especially  so  in  days  of  persecution  and  of  violent  and  sudden  change.  'The 
beloved  object  may  be  threatened  with  suffering ;  the  price  of  escape  may  be  unfaith- 
fulness to  God.  Here  is  the  pinch ;  felt  terribly  in  days  of  darkness.  It  is  easier  for 
many  to  suffer  themselves  than  to  see  their  dear  ones  suffer.  And  we  are  apt  to  excuse 
conduct  which  has  for  its  object  the  welfare  of  another — when  we  should  be  bound  to 
condemn  it  if  we  only  were  concerned.  Shall  I  see  my  wife  and  children  exposed  to 
nameless  insult  and  hideous  cruelty,  or  forswear  the  faith?  This  was  the  dread 
alternative  set  before  mnny  a  married  man  in  the  days  of  PauL    As  we  have  mn.  a 


n.Tn.1— 4a]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  24S 

oeUbate  may  devote  himself  tntirdy  to  the  Lord  and  his  lervice.  I  do  not  understand 
the  apostle  to  say  that  this  is  impossible  in  one  who  is  married,  hut  that  human  claims 
tnay  come  into  conflict  with  Dirine.  In  happy  peaceful  times  the  conflict  might  never 
arise ;  in  days  of  persecution  it  might  he  severe.  Note :  There  is  here  no  commendation 
of  monastic  or  isolated  celiliacy.  The  apostle  would  douhtless  expect  the  celibate  to 
e:diibit  his  devotion  to  God  very  largely  by  works  of  usefulness  amongst  his  fellow-mea 
(as  in  the  case  of  Paul  himself).  Observe :  The  single  state  is  not  to  be  sneered  at. 
It  has  special  opportunities.  Those  who  adopt  it  from  right  motives  are  worthy  of  all 
esteem.  And  those  who  are  compelled  to  it  by  circumstances,  if  they  use  its  advan- 
tages,  are  to  be  held  in  honour.  Frequently,  however,  they  are  considered  the  fittest 
objects  for  ridicule.  Yet  "  old  maids  "  are  sometimes  the  best  of  maids.  And  men 
unfettered  by  wedded  responsibilities  have  frequently  been  patterns  of  excellence  and 
usefulness.  2.  Marriage  is  the  safer  condition  morally.  (Ver.  2.)  It  is  freer  from 
temptaUon.  It  is  the  condition  appropriate  for  a  large  number.  And  let  us  not  forget 
that  Qod  has  so  made  us  that  the  generality  find  their  true  place  in  the  domestic 
circle  (ver.  7).  "  It  is  not  good  that  the  man  should  be  alone "  has  very  extensive 
application.  Marriage  is  needful  for  the  replenishing  of  the  earth.  There  are  some 
who  under  any  external  circumstances  will  find  it  easier  to  serve  God  in  the  married 
state.  Marriage  is  a  great  support  aud  source  of  strength  to  many.  The  home 
influence  is  felt  wherever  a  man  journeys,  and  often  upholds  him  in  good  resolution, 
and  animates  him  when  despondent.  It  expands  his  sympathies.  It  draws  him  out  of 
himself.  Celibacy  presents  many  perils  even  for  those  who  are  naturally  qualified  for 
it.  Tendencies  towards  narrowness,  selfishness,  lack  of  sympathy,  have  to  be  care- 
fully guarded  against.  Domestic  life  of  the  right  kind  supplies  an  antidote.  And  in 
the  home  and  in  its  duties  we  may  truly  serve  God.  When  we  rightly  "  care "  for 
those  near  and  dear  to  us  we  are  offering  acceptable  service  to  the  Most  High.  The 
home  may  and  should  be  a  true  sanctuary.  It  will  be  seen  that  this  applies  chiefiy  to 
quiet  times.  In  times  of  disturbance  and  insecurity,  "home"  exists  often  only  as  a 
name,  and  the  advantages  of  married  life  are  turned  into  serious  disadvantages.  Its 
powers  for  good  assume  then  the  form  of  perils.  Finally,  whichever  state  we  choose, 
we  must  ever  remember  the  "  shortness  of  the  time  "  (ver.  29),  and  must  not  settle  down 
in  this  world  as  though  it  were  our  abiding-place.  Eternity  has  opened  upon  our  view. 
For  that  we  are  chiefly  to  live.  With  an  eye  to  that  we  must  deteimine  our  conduct 
and  choices.  Time,  in  which  we  marry  and  are  given  in  marriage,  is  but  a  fiath 
(though  it  is  the  flash  of  preparation) ;  eternity  is  our  life. — H. 

Vers.  2 — 6,  10 — 17. — Marriage :  its  nature  and  duties.  I.  Nature.  1.  It  it  th« 
union  of  one  man  and  one  woman.  (Ver.  2.)  Polygamy  and  polyandry  are  rigorously 
excluded  from  the  sanction  of  the  Christian  faith.  The  former  was  tolerated  by  God  in 
early  times,  but  never  enjoined  or  commended.  The  first  union,  in  Eden,  was  of  the 
Christian  order.  The  wisdom  of  the  dictum  of  Christianity  has  been  exemplified  by 
universal  experience.  All  other  arrangements  are  prolific  of  evils.  2.  It  isa  union  for 
life.  (Ver.  39.)  No  hint  is  given  of  temporary  wedlock.  3.  ItisalondnottohelighUy 
fevered.  (1)  Not  by  difference  of  faith  (vers.  12,  13).  A  converted  husband  or  wife 
might  plausibly  argue  that  it  was  undesirable  to  further  consort  with  a  heathen.  The 
prohibition  illustrates  the  permanence  of  the  marriage  bond.  Continuance  in  the 
marriage  state  is  obligatory  under  such  circumstances.  "  But  to  the  rest  speak  I,  not 
the  Lord,"  does  not  signify  that  Paul  is  not  speaking  the  mind  of  the  Lord,  but  that 
]te  is  conveying  something  which  Christ  did  not  communicate  whilst  among  men. 
"  Yet  not  I,  but  the  Lord,"  in  ver.  10  means  that  Paul  was  only  repeating  what  Christ 
had  previously  taught.  The  apostle  in  ver.  14  advances  an  argument  for  the  con- 
tinuance of  such  a  marriage.  The  unbelievingone  is  sanctified  by  the  believing,  »'.«. 
brought  withm  the  covenant,  within  the  pale  of  Christianity.  Not  saved  or  converted, 
for  see  ver.  16,  but  as  all  Jews  were  sanctified,  brought  under  the  old  covenant,  although 
"  he  ia  not  a  Jew  which  is  one  outwardly  "  (Rom,  ii.  28).  In  this  sense  the  children  of 
Christian  parents  are  "  holy,"  and,  according  to  the  apostle's  statement,  equally  so  when 
one  parent  is  heSthen.  (2)  Not  by  taste  or  caprice  (ver,  10^,  (3)  Not  by  temporal 
exigencies  (ver.  27X  These  might  very  lawfully  prevent  marriage,  as  Paul  teachei,  but 
they  could  not  annul  it.    (4)  Not  by  anything  except  wilful  desertion  (ver.  16)  and 


248  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,     [ch.tii.1— 4a 

adultery,  m  taught  by  Christ  (Matt.  t.  32).  Paul's  teacliing  does  not  conflict  with 
Christ's.  It  is  not  lawful  to  put  away  except  for  adultery ;  the  apostle  adds  that  if 
the  believing  party  be,  without  just  cause,  put  away,  he  or  she  is  free.  But  this  mean- 
ing of  ver.  15  is  somewhat  open  to  question.  Note :  There  may  be  separation  without  the 
annulling  of  the  marriage  obligation.  The  apostle  supposes  such  a  case  (ver.  11),  and 
enjoins  that  no  second  marriage  be  entered  upon,  since  the  first  still  remains  in  force. 
4.  It  is  an  exclusive  union.  It  is  to  avoid  fornication  (ver.  2).  5.  Those  who  enter  upon 
it  must  do  so  prudently.  This  is  developed  in  the  apostle's  argument  as  to  the  respective 
advantages  of  celibacy  and  marrfage.  And :  6.  In  the  Lord  (ver.  39)  will  apply  to  all 
tones.  Marriages  are  to  be  continued  with  the  ungodly,  but  not  to  be  commenced.  Of 
our  choice  we  are  not  to  be  "  unequally  yoked."  We  are  not  to  marry  in  order  to  convert. 
Many  do  this  and,  soon  discover  their  mistake.  They  are  like  the  woman  who  journeyed 
to  Rome  to  convert  the  pope,  but  instead  of  converting  his  holiness,  his  holiness  cun- 
verted  her  1 

II.  Duties.  1.  The  hody  of  one  i»  to  he  surrendered  to  the  other,  (Ver.  4.)  Cohabitation 
may  be  susjiended  for  a  time  by  mutual  consent,  for  special  purposes,  but  with  distinct 
recognition  of  speedy  reunion.  Care  must  here  be  exercised,  lest  temptation  be  occasioned. 
There  is  no  command  for  this  temporary  separation ;  it  is  permitted,  not  enjoined  or 
even  recommended.  2.  Mutual  pleasing.  (Vers.  33, 34.)  '1  his,  referred  to  as  a  natural 
result,  may  be  regarded  as  an  implied  injunction.  Corroborated  by  Bph.  v.  21 — 25, 
It  is  evidently  needful.  But  it  has  limits;  we  must  not  displease  Grod  in  order  to 
please  husband  or  wife.  3.  The  highest  spirilualinterests  of  one  to  be  sought  by  the  other. 
(Ver.  16.)  A  special  case  is  supposed,  which,  however,  opens  up  a  wide  question  of  home 
influences.  How  earnestly  should  we  desire  the  salvation  of  those  most  closely  united 
to  us  I  How  terrible  the  thought  of  final  separation !  The  home  presents  the  best 
onTX>rtunities  of  winning  the  ungodly  to  Christ.  Not  by  words  so  much  as  by  life. 
The  influence  is  very  continuous,  and  is  exercised  by  those  nearest  and  often  dearest. 
Still,  much  grace  is  needed  for  such  a  ministry  as  this.  Faults,  jealously  concealed  in 
public,  are  often  undisuuised  and  freed  from  check  in  the  household.  We  may  do 
great  harm  as  well  as  great  good  in  the  home ;  we  may  drive  from  Christ  as  well  as 
draw  towards  him.  The  converted  husband  or  wife  is  the  pastor  of  the  unconverted. 
Solemn  respnnsibility  1  Care  for  the  higher  interests  involve  care  for  the  lower. 
In  all  things  those  united  in  marriage  should  seek  each  other's  good.  This  will  involve 
much — (1)  self-restraint,  (2)  self-denial,  (3)  unselfishness,  (4)  patience,  (5)  true 
affection. — H. 

Vers.  20 — 2i.— Christianity  and  slaves.  Christianity  found  slavory  in  existence. 
Proceeded  upon  wise  lines  for  its  extermination.  Not  by  revolutionary  violence. 
Worked  from  within  rather  than  from  without.  Inculcated  moral  principles  which, 
when  fully  realized  and  practically  observed,  involved  the  doom  of  slavery.  Such 
passages  as  Matt.  vii.  12  are  in  point.  Occasionally  there  is  more  direct  attack,  as  in 
the  condemnation  of  men-stealers  in  1  Tim.  i.  10.  What  message  had  Chiistianity  to 
the  slaves  ?    It  said — 

I.  Serve  God  as  tott  ari.  Ai  a  slave  you  may  do  a  good  and  irajiortant  work. 
Tour  condition  has  some  special  opportunities.  It  will  be  something  for  the  world  to 
see  a  pious,  conscientious,  faithful  slave.  This  you  can  be,  for  with  all  shackles  you 
may  he  "  the  Lord's  freedman."  A  lesson  for  us.  We  often  try  to  change  our  con- 
dition  instead  of  glorifying  Ood  in  it.  All  men  seem  to  have  fallen  into  the  wrong 
places  I  For  all  men  seem  intensely  anxious  to  change  their  condition.  The  powers, 
opportunities,  time,  of  not  a  few  are  practically  absorbed  in  this  endeavour.  And  the 
craze  is  continuous.  When  the  change  is  secured,  another  change  is  desired,  and  so  on 
interminably.  Men  are  used  up  in  this  insane  struggle.  It  is  not  necessary  to  'change 
our  condition  before  we  can  do  anything.  The  true  way  to  the  more  favourable  con- 
dition may  be  our  glorifying  God  in  the  less  favourable.  The  sterling  piety  of  a  slave 
became  a  strong  protest  against  slavery  itself.  In  various  conditions  the  world  needs 
to  see  tht  tame  faith  and  the  same  life.  A  man  need  care  comparatively  little  about 
his  external  condition  in  this  world,  who  is  freed  from  the  bondage  of  Satan  and  who 
tastes  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  makes  his  people  free.  TViat  is  nothing  compared 
with  thii.    No  human  shacJcles  can  bind  the  soul.     The  slave  with  all  his  bonds  could 


OH.  TO.  1—40.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  247 

not  be  hindered  from  coming  to  Christ.  No  one  can  stop  us.  Not  all  men.  Not  aU 
devils.  Not  all  adverse  circumstanceB.  We  can  come  if  we  will,  whoever  or  whatever 
we  are  or  in  whatsoever  condition.  The  responsibility  is  upon  our  shoulders.  Nona 
■hall  say  at  last  that  they  could  not  come.  God  hnth  not  permitted  man  so  to  bind 
his  fellow  that  the  journey  to  the  cross  is  an  impossibility. 

II.  If    Ton  CAN    obtain  TOUB    freedom    BT  BIGHTEOnS    UEANB,  DO  80.     Not  "do 

evil  that  good  may  come."  But  embrace  any  legitimate  opportunity,  for  as  a  freed- 
man  you  have  generally  more  opportunities  of  service  and  less  perils.  When  freed,  yon 
may  make  it  more  apparent,  perhaps,  that  you  are  "  Christ's  bondservant."  To  us : 
seek  a  freer  position  when  opportunity  is  presented,  since  in  that  you  may  more 
abundantly  serve  God.  That  is' the  object  which  you  must  ever  have  in  miud.  Let 
not  the  freer  position  be  for  self,  but  for  God,  A  more  comfortable  condition  is  not 
always  a  more  useful  one.  When  we  are  taking  off  one  shackle  we  may  l>e  putting  on 
another.    It  may  he  a  heavier  one. 

IIL  Do  NOT  BECOME  SLAVES.  It  may  be  your  duty  to  continue  slaves,  not  to  become 
such.  This  would  be  throwing  away  most  important  advantages.  You  are  Christ's, 
bought  with  a  price ;  have  by  choice  no  other  bonds  upon  you  than  your  Master's.  To 
us :  never  seek  a  position  in  which  service  to  Christ  may  be  prejudiced.  Here  is  a 
crucial  test.  1.  A  rise  in  the  social  scale  may  impair  our  usefulness.  The  new  house 
may  tax  our  purse  and  check  our  charity,  the  numerous  engagements  our  time,  the 
atmosphere  our  piety.  We  may  become  "  bondseiTants  of  men,"  and  very  miserable 
ones.  2.  A  more  lucrative  post  may  entail  loss  rather  than  gain — greater  occupation 
of  time,  larger  demands  upon  our  strength,  even  the  shortening  of  our  lives.  All 
such  things  come  into  the  account.  3.  The  removal  to  a  more  pleasant  place  of 
residence  may  mean  the  arrest  of  Christian  activity.  People  remove  from  where  they 
are  wanted  to  where  nobody  wants  them.  God  places  them  in  the  field  to  labour, 
where  there  is  much  to  be  done,  but  they  contract  a  fondness  for  mountain  air  and 
scenery,  and  off  they  go,  leaving  their  appointed  work  to  take  care  of  itself.  And 
when  they  get  to  the  mountain  of  delights  there  is  nothing  for  them  to  do  but  to 
grumble,  and  this,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  they  do  with  most  unflagging  zeal. 
Christians  seem  to  think  tliey  are  their  own  mastered  and  can  come  and  go  for  little 
reason  or  for  none,  and  without  any  reference  to  the  great  work  to  which  every 
Christian  is  pledged,  viz.  seeking  to  extend  the  kingdom  of  Christ  among  men.  "My 
Father's  business  "  should  be  first  with  the  disciple,  as  it  was  with  his  Lord.  Instead 
of  this,  it  is  often  practically  lost  sight  of  altogether,  and  people  go  without  a  thought 
01  care  from  where  the  Father's  business  is  urgent  and  almost  overwhelming  in  impor- 
tance, to  where  in  comparison  it  can  be  prosecuted  only  upon  a  most  limited  scale. 
Men  listen  to  the  "  call"  of  inclination,  not  to  the  "  call "  of  God  (note  vers.  20,  24). 
We  must  ever  beware  of  running  into  bonds.  Many  of  these  are  golden.  Not  the 
less  binding.  In  whatever  circumstances  we  may  be  placed  we  must  refuse  to  be  such 
bondservants  of  men  as  to  impair  our  relation  to  God.  At  all  costs,  in  every  condition, 
hie  will  and  glory  must  be  supreme. — H. 

Tera.  86—40. — Duties  of  pa/rents  to  children  as  to  marriage.  The  apostle's  wordi 
apply  directly  to  daughters  only.  Among  Jews  and  Greeks  the  disposal  of  the 
daughters  of  the  family  rested  with  the  father  What  is  said,  however,  may  extend 
ve^  largely  to  sons  as  well. 

L  Mabbiaoe  is  kot  to  be  insisted  upon.  It  too  commonly  is  in  many  circles, 
especially  in  the  case  of  daughters,  and  thus  becomes  prolific  of  evils.  The  apostle  rather 
commends  the  father  who  does'not  give  his  daughter  in  marriage  (ver.  38).  Doubtless 
with  an  eye  to  the  "  present  distress,"  but  assuredly  in  opposition  to  any  forcing  of 
the  inclination,  and  to  any  notion  that  marriage  is  universally  desirable.  It  is  not  the 
parent's  wiih  eo  much  as  the  child's  which  should  be  consulted.  Spheres  should  be 
opened  for  nnmarried  females.  This  has  been  done  largely  of  late  years,  but  •  greater 
extension  la  one  urgent  need  of  the  times. 

II.  Consent  to  habbiaoe  is  not  to  be  oapbioiouslt  withheld.  (Ver.  86.)  The 
dread  of  refusal  of  consent  has  often  led  to  rash  acts  involving  much  subsequent 
suffering.  Parents  often  blame  thrar  children  for  marrying  without  consent  when  they 
should  Dlame  themselves  for  withholding  it.    Some  parents  seem  to  think  that  theiT 


218  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.    [ch.  vu.  1—40. 

oonvenience  *nd  predilections  an  tha  chief  things  coDcerned,  as  though  It  were  their 
marriage  and  not  their  child's. 

III.  Tbb  child's  wishes  should  bb  consulted.  This  seems  to  be  involved  in  "  Let 
them  marry,"  as  though  a  specific  attachment  was  supposed,  "  Having  no  necessity  " 
(ver.  37)  and  "behaveth  himself  uncomely"  (ver,  36)  bear  also  upon  this  point. 
Certainly  obtains  in  case  of  widows  (ver.  39).  The  child's  wish,  not  only  as  to  marriage 
itself,  but  as  to  the  one  with  whom  a  union  is  proposed  should  never  be  left  out  of 
account.  Parental  counsel  and  guidance  are  wise  and  well;  parental  compulsion  is 
gross  folly.  Consent  to  marriage  may  be  withheld,  and  must  be,  if  there  are  sulificient 
grounds,  but  to  in  any  way  force  a  union  is  to  pave  the  way  for  misery,  if  not  for 
something  worse.  Modem  usages  much  more  favour  consultation  of  the  child's  wish 
than  ancient,  but  in  some  circles  there  seems  to  be  a  tendency  to  revert  to  barbaric 
customs.  In  the  land  where  there  are  no  slaves,  daughters  are  in  many  cases  as  truly 
sold  to  the  highest  bidder  as  was  ever  an  African  upon  an  American  auction>block. 
When  parental  selfishness  and  folly  run  to  such  lengths,  divorce  courts  are  likely  to  be 
in  great  request  and  never  to  lack  causes. 

IV.  Cbbistian  fabents  should  desibe  the  marriage  of  theib  children  "only 
IN  THE  Lobd."  Alas  I  how  many  professedly  Christian  parents  seem  to  have  but 
little  regard  for  this!  Position,  wealth,  influence,  titles, — if  these,  or  any  one  of  them, 
can  bs  attained,  there  is  not  only  satisfaction  but  jubilation.  Yet  what  possible  joy 
should  there  be  to  a  Christian  parent  in  giving  his  child  to  be  the  lifelong  companion 
of  an  enemy  of  Christ?  He  may  not  be  able  to  prevent  such  a  union,  but  to  rejoice  in 
it  is  quite  another  matter.  A  suitor's  spiritual  position  should  be  weighed  as  well  as 
his  temporal.  A  union  with  an  unbeliever  may  promise  much,  as  men  judge,  for  this 
world,  but  it  promises  very  little  for  the  next.  Such  marriages  are  not  "made  in 
heaven,"  nor  can  they  be  expected  to  lead  thither.  But  a  godly  husband  wonderfully 
aids  the  spiritual  lifeof  a  godAy  wife,  and  vice  versa ;  and  they  walk  well  together,  because 
they  are  "agreed."  Mixed  marriages  seem  generally  to  end  in  an  "agreement"  to 
give  up  attendance  at  the  house  of  God  on  the  sabbath,  and  to  care  nothing  for  the 
God  of  the  house  during  the  week.  Yet  many  parents  scarcely  consider  for  a  moment 
whetlier  they  are  giving  their  daughter  to  a  child  of  God  or  to  a  child  of  the  deviL 
And  sons  are  congratulated  if  they  succeed  in  making  "  a  good  match,"  which  is  very 
possibly  one  of  the  worst  matches  they  could  have  made.  Parents  should  give  the 
supreme  place  to  the  Bpiritual  interests  of  their  children. — H. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Cdibaey  and  marriage.  Hitherto  the  apostle  has  been  treating  of  abuses 
in  the  Church  at  Corinth,  which  had  come  to  his  knowledge,  either  through  the  house- 
hold of  Chloe  (ch.  i.  11)  or  through  common  report  (ch.  v.  1).  He  passes  now  to  deal 
with  certain  matters  regarding  which  the  Curiuthians  had  asked  his  advice  by  letter; 
and  the  first  of  these  is  marriage,  with  other  related  subjects.  While  treating  the 
whole  chapter  homiletically,  the  preacher  will  do  well  to  exercise  a  wise  delicacy  in 
introducing  many  of  the  points  to  a  mixed  congregation. 

1.  Celibaot.  The  preference  apparently  given  to  celibacy  in  this  chapter  calls  for 
careful  consideration.  1.  In  what  sense  is  it  called  "good"t  It  is  not  good  in  the 
sense  of  being  in  itself  and  always  superior  to  marriage.  Elsewhere  Paul  speaks  of  the 
married  state  with  the  greatest  respect,  as  an  image  of  the  union  between  Christ  and  his 
Oburch  (Eph.  t.  23 — 25),  and  gives  it.as  a  mark  of  the  false  teachers  of  later  times 
that  they  "  forbid  to  marry  "  (1  Tim.  iv,  3).  The  law  of  consistency,  then,  bids  us 
interpret  his  statements  here  as  in  no  sense  depreciatory  of  the  Divine  ordinance  of 
marriage.  A  single  life  is  good  in  the  sense  of  being  in  itself  honourable,  and  in  certain 
circumstances  expedient.  The  apostle's  "good"  here  must  always  be  read  in  view  of 
the  "not  good''  of  Gen.  ii,  18.  2.  IPTien  is  it  to  be  preferred  to  marriage  t  Leaving 
out  of  view  considerations  of  physical  health,  which  in  some  cases  may  render  marriage 
imprudent  or  even  culpable,  three  answers  to  our  question  may  be  gathered  from  this 
chapter.  (1)  In  circumstances  of  peculiar  distress  (ver,  26).  Such  trouble  had  either 
come  upon  the  Corinthians  or  was  near  at  hand,  that  Paul  judged  it  better  for  them 
to  keep  clear  of  such  engagements  as  would  only  increase  their  suffering.  In  times  of 
persecution  or  dearth  it  may  be  wise  not  to  marry.  (2)  When  called  to  some  peculiar 
service  for  the  Lord.    This  was  Paul's  case.    Other  apostles,  indeed,  were  mar.ied,  but 


OH.  TH.  1—40.]    THE  FlKbT  EPiSTLE  tO  THE  COKINTHIANS.  «« 

In  view  of  Ten.  32,  33,  we  niiiy  suppose  that  the  apostle  of  the  nations  judged  it  best 
for  hia  peculiar  mission  to  remain  unmarried.  Celibacy  may  be  preferred  "for  th« 
kingdom  of  heaven's  Bake "  (Matt.  zix.  12).  (3)  Both  these  considerations  must  be 
taken  along  i/itb  a  third  presented  in  ver.  7.  If  a  man  has  not  the  gift  of  continency, 
there  is  in  that  a  clear  indication  that  it  is  his  duty  to  marry  (ver.  9) ;  if  he  possesses 
this  gift,  then  he  is  free  to  give  vtreight  to  other  reasons  which  mn,y  turn  the  balance  in 
favour  of  celibacy.  Even  then,  however,  the  higher  ends  of  we.Uock  are  not  to  be  over- 
looked. 3.  It  is  not  to  be  made  obligatory.  The  Church  of  Home  ascribes  a  peculiar 
excellence  to  the  celibate  state,  as  fitted  to  promote  greater  sanctity.  Hence  her 
cultivation  of  monastic  and  conventual  life,  and  the  imposition  of  celibacy  on  the 
clergy.  There  is  no  warrant  for  this  in  the  teaching  of  the  apostle  here;  while 
experience  testifies  to  the  dreadful  evils  to  which  it  leads. 

II.  Mabriage.  1.  Marriage  is  a  sa/egttard  against  incontinence.  The  apostle  is  not 
here  treating  of  marriage  in  general  or  presenting  it  in  its  higher  aspects  and  bearings. 
The  pure  union  of  man  and  woman  in  wedlock  is  a  communion  of  soul  and  body  in 
love,  a  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  intention  clearly  expressed  in  our  nature.  Husband 
and  wife  thus  united  "  in  the  Lord  " — the  one  being  the  complement  of  the  other,  and 
set  "  like  perfect  music  unto  noble  words  " — are  joined  by  a  bond  so  holy,  so  exalted, 
so  mysterious,  that  it  is  the  earthly  reflex  of  the  spousal  union  between  Christ  and  his 
Church.  Still,  the  use  here  referred  to  by  the  apostle  is  not  to  be  overlooked,  especially 
in  view  of  such  licentiousness  as  prevailed  at  Corinth.  God  never  bids  us  eradicate  any 
natural  appetite,  as  asceticism  does,  but  provides  for  its  gratification  in  a  way  consonant 
to  our  nature  and  destiny.  2.  It  implies  the  rendering  of  conjugal  duty.  (Vers.  3,  4.) 
The  one  party  exists  for  the  other,  and  for  the  other  alone — the  twain  having  become 
one  flesh  (Gen.  ii.  24).  3.  Marriage  is  a  union  between  one  man  and  one  woman.  In 
polygamy  the  true  idea  of  marriage  is  lost.  The  original  appointment  was  the  union 
of  two  persons  only,  Adam  having  only  one  Eve ;  and  the  departure  from  this  was  due 
to  sin.  The  testimony  of  Soiipture,  alike  in  precept  and  in  its  purest  examples,  is  all  in 
favour  of  monogamy  (Gen.  ii.  24 ;  Matt.  six.  4,  5 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  2)  ;  and  the  statements 
of  the  apostle  here  take  this  for  granted.  The  domestic  bliss  of  which  poets  sing  is  not 
to  be  found  in  the  homes  of  polygamy. 

''Here  Love  his  golden  shafts  employs,  here  lights 
His  constant  lamp,  and  waves  his  purple  wings, 
Beigna  herp  and  revels." 

('  Paradise  Lost,'  iv.  768— 76&> 

"Domestic  happiness,  thou  only  bliss 
Of  Paradise,  that  has  survived  the  Fall  I . . . 
Thou  art  the  nurse  of  virtue ;  in  thine  arms 
She  smiles,  appearing,  as  in  truth  she  is, 
Heaven-bom,  and  destined  to  the  skies  again." 

(Cowper'i'Toik.O 

B. 

Vers.  10—16. — Divorce :  mixed  marriages.  Having  spoken  of  celibacy  and 
marriage,  and  having  presented  considerations  for  their  guidance  in  the  choice  of  the 
one  or  the  other,  the  apostle  proceeds  to  speak  of  persons  already  married.  And 
hei»  two  different  cases  are  dealt  with :  (1)  Where  both  the  parties  are  Christian ; 
(2)  where  one  of  the  parties  is  Christian  and  the  other  heathen. 

I.  Whebb  both  parties  are  Christian.  In  this  case  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  his 
recorded  teaching,  had  already  given  a  decision,  and  Paul  refers  them  to  his  words  {vide 
Matt.  v.  32 ;  xix.  9).  1.  'JTie  marriage  bond  is  indissoluble.  It  is  a  union  for  life, 
which  cannot  be  broken  up  without  sin.  It  is  not  to  be  dissolved  at  the  mere  will  of 
the  parties,  nor  for  any  frivolous  reason.  This  perpetuity  arises  from  the  relationship 
it'-elf,  as  well  as  from  the  Divine  appointment.  Husband  and  wife  are  ideally  one,  and 
their  separation  is  the  disrupting  of  a  bond  which  has  no  parallel  in  this  world.  An 
additional  sacredncss  attaches  to  the  marriage  covenant  in  the  case  of  Christians,  who 
invoke  the  blessing  of  God  upon  their  union.  2.  Sejiaration  is  not  to  le  final.  The 
case  supiiosed  is  tliat  of  a  wife  leaving  her  husband  on  the  ground  of  harsh  and  cruel 


250  THF  FIRST  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&    [0H.TILI— 40i 

treatment  or  for  some  rimilar  reason.  The  cause  of  separation  may  or  may  not  be 
sufficient  to  Justify  it,  but  in  either  case  it  must  not  be  regarded  as  severing  the 
marriage  tie.  Only  two  BltematiTes  are  open.  The  wife  thus  separated  must  remain 
unmarried,  since  a  new  imion  would  imply  that  the  previous  one  was  null  and  void ; 
or  she  must  be  reconciled  to  her  husband  and  return  to  live  with  him.  This  last  is  in 
every  way  the  desirable  course,  and  every  means  should  be  used  to  bring  it  about. 
Husband  and  wife  cannot  go  apart  without  sin  and  scandal  to  the  Christian  name,  and 
their  religious  profession  requires  them  to  reconsider  their  position  and  remove  every 
barrier  to  reunion.  The  apostle  is  not  here  speaking  of  adultery,  which  is  of  itself  a 
dissolution  of  the  marriage  bond  and  a  sufficient  ground  for  divorce  (Matt,  six.  9),  but 
simply  of  the  general  rule  that  married  persons  are  bound  to  each  other  for  life.  With 
what  prayerful  deliberation  should  such  a  union  be  contracted  1  A  step  that  cannot  be 
retraced  should  not  be  taken  without  thought. 

n.  Whebe  one  of  the  pabtieb  IB  Christian  and  the  otheb  heathen.  The  case 
supposed  is  not  that  of  a  Christian  entering  into  wedlock  with  a  heathen  spouse,  which 
Paul  in  another  place  forbids  (2  Cor.  vi.  14) ;  but  the  case  where  one  of  the  parties, 
already  married,  is  converted  to  Christianity.  This  must  have  frequently  happened  in 
the  early  history  of  the  Church,  Just  as  it  is  of  constant  occurrence  in  modern  missions 
among  the  heathen.  How  does  this  complication  affect  the  sanctity  of  the  marriage 
bond  ?  Is  it  not  a  union  of  the  dead  and  the  living,  between  whom  there  is  a  great  gulf? 
The  Lord  Jesus  had  given  no  utterance  on  the  subject  of  mixed  marriages,  and  there- 
fore the  apostle  gives  his  inspired  judgment  regarding  it.  If  the  unbelieving  partner  is 
content  to  remain,  the  Christian  partner  is  not  to  seek  a  separation.  If  the  unbelieving 
partner  refuses  to  remain,  the  Christian  partner  is  not  to  hinder  separation,  1.  Consider 
the  case  where  the  unbelieving  partner  it  content  to  remain.  The  Christian  spouse  is 
not  to  seek  a  separation  as  if  the  marriage  were  unholy ;  "  For  the  unbelieving  husband 
is  sanctiSed  in  the  wife,  and  the  unbelieving  wife  is  sanctified  in  the  husband"  (ver,  14). 
The  apostle  does  not  mean  that  an  unbeliever,  in  virtue  of  conjugal  union  with  a 
believer,  becomes  personally  holy;  but  that  be  or  she  is  thereby  consecrated  or 
hallowed.  As  the  altar  sanctificR  the  gift  that  is  laid  upon  it  (Matt,  xxiii.  19),  so  the 
Christian  reflects  something  of  his  own  character  upon  everything  connected  with  him. 
His  property,  his  business,  his  family,  are  all  in  a  sense  holy,  as  belonging  to  one  who 
is  in  covenant  with  God,  and  are  under  his  special  protection.  Hence  the  pagan  hus- 
band or  wife  is  a  privileged  person  on  the  ground  of  union  with  a  Christian  spouse. 
The  tares  in  the  wheat-field  are  sacred  for  the  sake  of  the  wheat  (Matt,  xiii,  29) ; 
the  ungodly  men  in  Israel  were  privileged  because  they  belonged  to  a  holy  nation.  The 
reason  adduced  by  Paul  in  support  of  this  position  is  very  significant.  "  Else  were 
your  children  unclean ;  but  now  are  they  holy  "  (ver.  14).  It  was  an  accepted  maxim 
that  the  children  of  such  mixed  marriages  were  born  within  the  Church.  This 
principle  was  recognized  among  the  Jews,  as  the  case  of  Timothy  shows  (Acts  ztL 
1 — 3).  But  if  the  children  of  such  a  marriage  are  reckoned  holy,  the  marriage  whence 
they  spring  cannot  be  unholy  or  inconsistent  with  the  Law  of  QoA,  "  If  the  root  is 
holy,  so  are  the.  branches  "  (Rom.  xi,  16) ;  and,  conversely,  "  If  the  branches  are  holy, 
so  is  the  root,"  The  children  take  their  standing  from  the  Christian  parent,  who  is 
regarded  as  the  nobler  of  the  two,  2,  Considei*  the  case  where  the  unbelieving  partner 
re/met  to  remain.  In  this  case  the  Christian  partner  is  not  to  insist  on  maintaining 
the  union,  but  to  let  the  other  depart.  For:  (I)  "  The  brother  or  the  sister  is  not  under 
bondage  in  such  cases."  The  marriage  is  not  to  be  dissolved  at  the  instance  of  the 
believing  partner;  but  if  the  other  refuses  to  remain,  the  contract  is  no  longer  binding. 
It  would  be  a  case  of  bondage  if  the  one  were  held  to  a  union  which  the  other  has 
wilfully  broken  up.  (2)  "  God  hath  called  us  in  peace."  The  gospel  was  not  intended 
to  produce  variance  and  strife  in  families ;  and  if  this  is  to  be  the  re^lt  of  the  heathen 
partner  continuing  to  dwell  with  the  Christian,  it  were  better  to  let  him  have  his  wish 
and  live  apart.  From  the  very  centre  of  life  out  to  its  circumference,  Ood  desires  ns  to 
live  in  peace.  (3)  The  Christian  partner  is  not  to  prevent  the  departure  of  the  other; 
in  the  hope  of  being  instrumental  in  his  or  her  conversion.  This  is  at  best  uncertain, 
and  peace  is  not  ta  be  hazarded  therefore.  And  if  such  a  union  is  not  to  be  maintained 
for  the  sake  of  a  possible  conversion,  much  less  is  it  to  be  contracted  with  that  view. 
RuiABKB,    1,  This  passage  is  generally  adduced  as  the  Bible  warrant  for  the  view 


ott.  TO.  1— 46.J    tHB  PIESt  fiPlSTLti  T?0  THfe  C0RINT1I1AN3.  f^l 

that  i("'^u2  desertion  ii  a  tuffleient  reason  for  divorce.    Such  desertion  ii  s  defiicU 

rupture  of  the  marriagebond,  and  stands  on  the  same  footing  as  adaltery.    2.  2%e  evil 
,  of  mixed  marriages:   (1)  Render  impossible  the  complete  fellowship  of  husband  and 
wife.    (2)  Break  up  domestic  peace.    (3)  Prevent  family  religion.    (4)  Interfere  with 
the  religious  training  of  children.    "Be  not  unequally  yoked  with  unbelieverg." — ^B. 

Vers.  17 — 24.. — Christianity  and  the  relations  of  life.  From  the  special  case  with 
which  he  has  just  dealt,  the  apostle  proceeds  to  lay  down  a  general  principle.  To 
understand  the  need  for  this,  we  have  only  to  remember  the  circumstances  of  the  time 
and  the  bearing  upon  these  of  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel.  To  many  minds  Christianity 
must  have  appeared  to  be  revolutionary  in  its  tendency.  It  proclaimed  the  equality 
of  all  men  in  the  sight  of  God,  the  temporary  nature  of  earthly  things,  the  approaching 
advent  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  a  new  era  was  to  dawn ;  and  men  who  drank  in 
these  views  as  the  new  wine  of  life  were  apt  to  become  intoxicated.  They  were  ready 
to  cast  off  family  obIi;^ations,  disrupt  social  ties,  and  break  up  every  earthly  relationship. 
Against  this  tendency  Paul  here  warns  them.  Christianity  was  not  meant  to  revolu- 
tionize society  in  this  violent  way.  On  the  contrary,  it  adapts  itself  to  every  position 
and  relation  in  life  in  which  men  may  be  placed. 

L  A  GENEBAL  EDLE.  This  rule  is  thrice  repeated  with  slight  variations  (vers.  17, 20, 
24).  "  Let  each  man  abide  in  that  calling  wherein  he  was  called."  1.  The  Christian 
view  of  life.  (1)  It  is  a  distribution  of  God— a  lot.  Our  station,  occupation,  relation- 
ships, are  of  Divine  appointment.  He  assigns  us  our  lot  (Ps.  xvi.  5,  6)  and  determines 
the  bounds  of  our  habitation  (Acts  xvii.  26).  (2)  It  is  a  calling.  Our  true  work  in 
the  world  is  that  to  which  the  voices  of  Providence  call  us.  If  we  are  where  we 
ought  to  be,  we  should  look  upon  our  occupation  as  a  -real  vocation  of  God.  2.  The 
Christianas  duty  in  relation  to  hit  -lot  or  calling  in  life.  The  general  rule  is — Bemain 
whsre  you  are.  This  follows  from  the  view  of  life  just  presented  ;  for  it  is  our  duty  to 
abide  by  the  Lord's  appointment,  and  conversion  does  not  necessarily  change  our 
gecukr  vocation.  If  he  finds  you  at  the  plough,  or  at  the  desk,  or  engaged  in  trade, 
or  in  the  married  state,  or  in  the  service  of  another, — serve  him  where  he  finds  you. 
Christianity  is  a  hardy  plant  that  thrives  in  every  clime.  Do  not  imagine  that  if  you 
were  in  a  different  line  of  things  it  would  be  easier  f6r  you  to  follow  Christ.  Nothing 
is  more  needed  in  our  day  than  a  consistent  exhibition  of  Christian  principle  in  the 
common  vsralks  of  life — the  family,  the  workshop,  the  office,  the  exchange,  etc.  Let 
your  light  shine  where  it  is  first  kindled,  continuing  there  "  with  God  "  (ver.  24).  To 
this  rule,  however,  there  are  two  obvious  exceptions.  (1)  When  we  discover  that  our 
occupation  is  inconsistent  with  the  Law  of  God.  A  wrong  course  of  life,  such  as  a 
business  which  cannot  be  conducted  on  Christian  principles,  should  be  abandoned  at 
once.  It  is  not  a  "lot  "or  a  "calling"  of  God.  (2)  When  there  is  a  clear  call  to  a 
poiiti:)n  of  greater  usefulness,  presenting  fuller  opportunities  of  serving  the  Lord.  Thus 
the  apostles  left  their  boats  and  nets  to  follow  Jesus.  Thus  many  a  young  man  is 
called  to  leave  his  secular  occupation  and  give  himself  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word. 

II.  iiLUSTBATioNS  OF  THE  BULE.  To  show  how  the  rule  applies,  Paul  takes  two 
illustrative  examples — the  one  from  religious  position,  the  other  from  social  position. 
1.  Circumcision.  If  a  Jew  is  called,  let  him  not  attempt  to  efface  the  mark  of  the 
covenant ;  if  a  Gentile  is  called,  let  him  not  think  it  needful  to  be  circumcised.  To 
do  otherwise  in  either  case  would  be  to  attach  a  value  to  external  forms  which  they  do 
not  possess.  Paul's  own  practice  in  circumcising  Timothy  (Acts  xvi.  3),  and  refusing 
to  circumcise  Titus  (Gal.  ii.  3,  4),  throws  light  upon  this.  To  have  acted  otherwise  in 
the  case  of  Timothy  would  have  been  to  attach  importance  to  the  omission  of  the  rite, 
since  one  of  his  parents  was  a  Jew  and  the  other  a  Greek.  To  have  allowed  it  in  the 
case  of  TitUs,  whose  parents  were  both  Gentiles,  would  have  been  to  attach  importance 
to  the  performance  of  the  rite,  and  so  to  submit  to  the  yoke  which  the  "  false  brethren  " 
sought  to  Impose.  By  acting  as  he  did  he  showed  that  both  circumcision  and  uncir- 
cumcision  were  to  him  matters  of  indifference.  Religion  is  not  an  affair  of  outward 
ceremonies,  rut  of  spiritual  oh.  dience.  Comp.  ver.  19  with  Gal.  v.  6  and  vi.  16,  in 
all  which  the  first  clause  is  the  same.  In  opposition  to  such  matters  of  ritual 
observance,  he  places :  (1)  "  Faith  working  through  love  ; "  (2)  "  A  new  creature ; " 
md  (3)  "  Th?  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God."    These  are  the  great  essentials 


252  tflB  FIRST  EPISTLE  lO  THE  COHINTHIANS.    [oh.  to.  1—40. 

of  Christianity  (see  Stanley,  in  Iqc),  2.  Slavery.  If  there  is  any  institution  to  which 
we  should  have  expected  Christianity  to  show  itself  hostile,  it  is  just  this.  Slavery 
strikes  at  the  root-idea  of  humanity,  denying  to  man  his  proper  dignity  as  a  person ; 
and  is  therefore  in  collision  with  the  axiom  on  which  tlie  gospel  proceeds,  that  "  He 
made  of  one  every  nation  of  men  "  (Acts  xvii.  26).  At  the  time  when  Paul  wrote,  it 
was  the  great  "  open  sore "  of  the  world,  and  was  frequently  accompanied  with  great 
hardship  and  cruelty.  Yet  he  does  not  counsel  the  Christian  slaves — a  numerous 
class — to  rise  in  rebellion  and  throw  off  their  bondage.  He  bids  them  "  care  not  for  it " 
(ver.  21).  Freedom,  indeed,  is  to  be  preferred  if  you  can  obtain  it ;  but  you  can  serve 
God  as  a  bondservant  as  truly  as  if  you  were  free.  It  was  not  by  dint  of  hacking  and 
cutting  that  the  fetters  were  to  be  struck  off,  but  by  a  surer  and  more  excellent  method. 
As  the  frost-fetters  of  winter  give  way  before  the  warm  breath  of  spring,  so  Christianity 
was  to  loosen  the  bonds  of  the  slave  wherever  it  came.  And  this  principle  wag  to 
regulate  individual  action.  For :  (1)  It  makes  no  difference  to  your  Christian  standing 
whether  you  be  hand  or  free.  You  were  bought  with  a  price,  and  so  redeemed  from 
the  bondage  of  sin  and  Satan  in  order  to  serve  Christ.  Hence,  though  you  are  a  bond- 
servant, you  are  really  the  Lord's  freedman ;  and  though  you  are  outwardly  free,  you 
are  really  Christ's  bondservant.  Man  must  serve,  but  he  cannot  serve  two  masters. 
Our  Redeemer  delivers  us  from  Satan,  so  that  we  are  now  free ;  but  this  freedom  shows 
itself  in  the  service  of  our  new  Master.  "  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me," 
is  still  the  Lord's  demand.  (2)  The  service  of  Ohiist  is  true  freedom.  It  delivers  us 
from  every  other  spiritual  service.  Christian  liberty  is  compatible  with  outward  slavery, 
but  not  with  subjection  to  men  in  spiritual  things.  Here  we  must  not  call  any  man 
"  master."  How  often  do  Christians  become  bondservants  of  men  1  We  fall  into  this  error 
when  we  shape  our  views  and  conduct  according  to  tradition,  or  party,  or  school,  or 
the  popular  voice,  instead  of  simply  asking,  "  What  saith  the  Lord  ?  " — B. 

Vers.  26 — 10. — Concerning  virgins  and  widows.  Paul  now  passes  to  another 
question  referred  to  him,  viz.  the  marriage  of  virgins  and  widows.  This  has  been  briefly 
touched  upon  already  (ver.  8),  and  is  now  dealt  with  more  in  detail.  Here  also  thi 
apostle  has  no  express  commandment  of  the  Lord  to  adduce,  and  he  therefore  proceedk 
to  give  his  own  inspired  judgment  on  the  matter,  "  as  one  that  hath  obtained  mercy 
of  the  Lord  to  be  faithful."  This  judgment  is  not  in  the  form  of  explicit  injunction, 
but  of  an  advice  given  in  view  of  existing  circumstances. 

I.  Advice  to  thb  unmabbied  of  both  sexes.  In  the  previous  sections  the 
apostle  has  argued  against  the  disrupting  of  social  ties,  even  when  these  are  of  so 
unpleasant  a  character  as  being  bound  to  a  heathen  spouse  or  subject  to  the  yoke 
of  slavery.  Here  he  gives  similar  counsel,  advising  against  a  change  of  condition. 
This  applies  to  married  persons,  who  are  not  to  seek  a  dissolution  of  the  bond ;  but 
especially  to  the  unmarried,  whom  he  advises  to  remain  as  they  are.  This  advice  does 
not  proceed  from  a  disparagement  of  marriage  in  itself  or  from  an  absolute  preference 
of  celibacy  (comp.  homily  on  vers.  1 — 9,  above),  but  is  based  upon  special  reasons 
which  are  afterwards  mentioned.  1.  The  present  distress.  (Ver.  26.)  This  may  refer 
to  persecution  already  commenced,  as  that  under  Nero  (a.d.  64),  or  to  the  troubles 
which  were  to  usher  in  the  second  advent  (comp.  Matt.  xxlv.).  In  view  of  this 
impending  crisis,  it  is  better  not  to  marry.  The  apostolic  advice  will  hold  in  all  similar 
cases ;  as  when  a  soldier  is  called  to  dangerous  military  duty,  or  a  man  is  approaching 
death,  or  during  the  prevalence  of  famine  and  pestilence.  2.  Tribulation  in  the  flesh. 
(Ver.  28.)  'J'his  arises  out  of  the  external  distress,  which  bears  more  hardly  upon  the 
married  than  the  single.  It  is  to  spare  them  this  affliction  that  Paul  advises  the 
unmarried  to  remain  as  they  are.  8.  The  shortness  of  the  time.  (Yer.  29.)  Here  again 
the  apostle  has  in  view  the  advent,  which  seemed  to  be  drawing  near.  Marriage 
belongs  to  a  transitory  condition  of  things — the  passing  fashion  of  this  world.  Life  is 
short,  just  that  our  affections  may  not  be  set  on  earthly  things.  They  that  have  wives 
must  soon  leave  them,  and  the  remembrance  of  this  should  render  marriage  or  celibacj 
a  matter  of  comparatively  little  moment.  4.  2'Ae  cares  incident  to  the  married  state. 
(Yer.  32.)  The  husband  is  bound  to  protect  and  provide  for  his  family,  and  in  troubled 
times  thu  causes  much  anxiety.  Husband  and  wife,  moreover,  have  to  consult  eacii 
Bther*!  wishes,  considering  how  they  may  please  each  other.     From  these  cares  the 


OH.  TO.  1—40.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOElNTHIANa  863 


nnmarried  are  free,  and  can  therefore  consider  "the  things  of  the  Lord"  with  less 
division  of  heart.  This  does  not  mean  that  marriage  is  less  favourable  to  holiness  than 
celibacy:  experience  warrants  no  such  statement.  The  apostle  compares  the  two 
conditions  only  in  respect  of  their  freedom  from  worldly  care,  and  in  this  the  unmarried 
have  the  advantage.  It  does  not  lie  in  his  way  to  indicate  counterbalancing  benefits 
belonging  to  the  married  state.  His  aim  is  to  deliver  us  from  distraction  in  attending 
upon  the  Lord  (ver.  35).  We  are  not  to  be  like  Martha, "  cumbered  about  mu(£ 
serving,"  "anxious  and  troubled  about  many  things;"  but  like  Mary,  sitting  with 
undivided  heart  at  the  Lord's  feet  (Luke  x.  38 — 42). 

II.  Adtice  to  fathers  beoarding  their  unmabbibd  dauohtebs.  In  the  East, 
marriages  are  arranged  by  parents  much  more  exclusively  than  with  us,  and  hence  the 
obligaliun  here  laid  on  the  father  of  judging  when  it  is  becoming  for  bis  daughter  to 
marry.  Very  much  depends  upon  the  Christian  wisdom  of  parents  in  this  matter. 
How  often  are  the  highest  interests  sacrificed  for  the  sake  of  a  union  that  offers  worldly 
attractions  I  Faithful  and  prudent  parental  guidance  may  prevent  an  unholy  alliance 
and  lead  to  a  happy  union  "  in  the  Lord."  The  point  before  the  apostle  now  is  the 
direction  of  fathers  as  to  when  they  may  grant,  and  when  withhold,  permission  for 
their  daughters  to  marry.  1.  When  permission  to  marry  should  be  granted.  (Ver.  36.) 
Generally,  when  the  refusal  would  lead  to  anything  unseemly.  In  particular,  if  the 
daughter  has  come  to  full  marriageable  age,  if  she  and  her  lover  are  bent  upon  the 
union ;  in  that  case,  for  the  father  to  enforce  celibacy  would  be  to  put  temptation  in  his 
daughter's  way.  The  general  advice  not  to  marry  because  of  present  distress,  is  over- 
borne by  stronger  consideralions  (see  ver.  2) ;  and  in  view  of  these  the  father  will  do 
well  to  put  no  barrier  in  the  way.  2.  When  permission  may  be  withheld.  The  father  is 
required  to  look  at  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  and  judge  accordingly.  The 
elements  determining  his  judgment  will  be  such.as  these:  (1)  'I'he  presence  or  absence 
of  such  considerations  as  have  been  mentioned  in  the  previous  case  ;  (2)  the  tempera- 
ment or  inclination  of  the  daughter  in  reference  to  marriage ;  (3)  her  fitness  for  the 
service  of  the  Lord  in  the  single  state ;  (4)  her  general  well-being,  both  temporal  and 
spiritual.  If  in  view  of  these  elements  he  judges  it  best  for  his  daughter  not  to  marry, 
he  may  properly  resist  the  solicitations  of  suitors  who  desire  to  have  her  to  wife.  That 
is,  he  is  at  Uberty  to  give  effect  to  the  apostolic  preference  of  celibacy  in  respect  of  the 
necessities  of  the  time. 

III.  Adtice  to  widovs.  This  proceeds  on  the  same  lines  as  the  advice  to  nnmarried 
persons.  The  wife  whose  husband  has  "  fallen  asleep  "  (/coijuriffg,  ver.  39 ;  comp.  1  Thess. 
iv.  13, 14,  and  our  cemetery)  is  no  longer  bound  (comp.  Rom.  vii.  1—3),  but  is  free  to 
remarry  if  she  chooses.  The  only  restriction  is  that  she  marry  "in  the  Lord,"  «.e.  that 
she  marry  a  Christian,  and  that  her  whole  conduct  in  the  matter  be  in  keeping  with  her 
profession.  Yet  here  also  the  apostle  advises  against  a  second  marriage,  on  grounds 
already  adduced  in  the  case  of  virgins.  A  widow  may  marry  again,  but  she  will  be 
more  free  from  care  and  trouble  if  she  remain  as  she  is. 

Bemabes.  1.  7%e  amplication  of  abiding  principle*  U  modified  by  changing 
eircumstanoei.  This  must  be  remembered  in  considering  how  far  the  advice  given  here 
is  generally  applicable.  What  is  prudent  in  a  Christian  country,  with  a  settled 
government,  and  at  peace,  may  be  imprudent  where  the  conditions  are  the  reverse. 
There  is  a  wide  sphere  for  the  exercise  of  true  wisdom  in  the  practical  conduct  of  such 
matters.  2.  Christians  should  marry  "  only  in  the  Lord."  On  its  lower  side,  marriage 
is  the  same  to  all  men,  irrespective  of  creed  and  character ;  but  the  Christian  is  called 
to  consider  the  interests  of  his  higher  life.  He  is  to  enter  upon  this  relationship  as  a 
follower  of  Christ,  and  seeking  therein  the  glory  of  God. — B. 

Vers,  29 — 81. — The  shortness  of  the  time.  Very  impressire  is  the  apostle's  manner  in 
always  rising  above  the  mere  details  of  duty  to  great  ruling  verities.  Throughout  thia 
chapter  there  is  a  constant  reference  from  rules  to  principles,  and  nowhere  is  this  more 
conspicuous  than  in  these  verses. 

L  Tan  Chbistian  tikw  of  this  life.  1.  "  The  time  <i  shortened."  The  apostle 
seems  to  have  in  view  the  coming  of  Christ,  of  which  the  troubles  of  the  Ume  appeared 
to  be  the  harbingers.  Any  day  the  "  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  "  might  be  seen  in  the 
heavens,  so  brief  was  the  Interval.    Long  aenturies  have  rolled  away  since  then,  and 


2M  TBE  flliST  EPISTLE!  TO  THE  COBUTTHIANa    [oa.  VS.  1—40 

Hkt  strained  eyes  of  the  Church  haye  not  yet  beheld  that  sign.  Still,  the  utterance  of 
the  apostle  is  not  mistaken.  Though  the  horizon  that  bounded  his  vision  has  been 
widening  with  the  ages,  the  time  is  still  short.  For  us  the  practical  truth  is  that  our 
life-span  here  is  brief,  whether  its  boundary  be  the  Lord's  coming  to  ns  or  our  going 
to  him.  (1)  The  time  is  short  as  compared  with  other  periods.  Brevity  b  a  relative 
thing,  according  to  the  standard  of  measurement.  The  present  average  of  human  life  is 
brief  compared  with  the  limitof  "three  score  years  and  ten;"  this  term  is  brief  compared 
with  that  of  the  antediluvians ;  the  years  of  Methuselah  are  but  an  handbreadth  com- 
pared with  the  duration  of  the  earth  ;  and  this  again  is  as  nothing  compared  with  eter- 
nity. Life  seems  long  in  firospect,  short  in  retrospect.  "Few  and  evil  (Oen,  zlvii.  9) 
is  ever  the  old  man's  plamt.  (2)  The  time  is  short  as  compared  with  our  life-task. 
Every  true  ideal  of  life  seems  to  mock  the  little  space  we  are  given  to  reach  it.  "  Art 
is  long  and  time  is  fleeting."  We  leam  little  more  than  the  alphabet  of  knowledge. 
We  have  but  placed  a  few  stones  on  the  -building  when  our  work-day  is  over,  and  we 
leave  the  structure  to  be  completed  by  others.  What  can  we  accomplish  in  one  short 
life  for  the  perfecting  of  our  Christian  manhood,  the  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom,  the 
redemption  of  our  fellow-men  ?  But  let  us  not  either  lower  our  ideal  within  attainable 
limits  or  fold  our  hands  in  despair.  The  true  work  of  this  life,  stripped  of  its  temporary 
form,  is  carried  over  into  the  life  to  come  and  continued  there.  2.  "  XTie  fashion  of  thit 
world  passeth  away'"  (yet.  81).  It  is  like  a  scene  in  a  theatre^vanishing  while  you 
gaze  on  it.  (1)  This  is  true  of  external  nature.  All  is  in  a  condition  of  flux ;  there  is 
nothing  permanent  The  face  of  the  earth,  the  boundaries  of  sea  and  land,  even  the 
everlasting  hills, — all  have  changed  and  are  changing.  And  at  last,  when  the' day  of 
the  Lord  comes,  "  the  earth  and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  bnmed  up*  (i  Pet. 
UL  10>    (2)  This  U  true  of  human  life. 

<■  All  the  world's  a  stage. 
And  all  the  men  and  women  merely  playerm,* 

C  As  Ton  Like  It,' aet  a  M  &) 

WitUn  •  single  lifetime  what  changes  do  we  see  I  Nations  rise  and  fall ;  governments 
come  and  go ;  public  men  play  their  parts  and  then  pass  oat  oi  sight.  How  few  of  the 
friends  of  our  youth  and  manhood  remain  with  us  till  old  age  I  New  actors  are  ever 
coming  on  the  stage  and  the  old  disappearing.  The  customs  of  society,  modes  of 
Uving,  the  whole  environment  of  life,  are  like  so  many  shifting  scenes.  (3)  This  is 
tme  of  ourselves.  The  seven  ages  (see  reference  above)  are  the  seven  acts  of  our  little 
lib-drama ;  and  each  successive  age  brings  its  characteristic  habits  of  mind.  Standing 
unid  all  this  transitoriness,  where  nothing  is  stable  and  abiding,  we  need  to  hold  by 
tlM  Unchanging  in  order  to  keep  our  balance. 

IL  Tub  fubfosb  or  God  in  tbe  brevitt  ov  ura.  The  time  has  been  shortened 
that  we  may  sit  loosely  to  all  earthly  things.  Their  temporary  character  is  to  be  remem- 
bered in  all  our  relations  to  them.  This  is  illustrated  in  several  particulars.  L  The 
married  lift.  "  That  those  that  have  wives  may  be  as  though  they  had  none."  The 
apostle  does  not  say  that  celibacy  is  a  more  spiritual  eondition  than  marriage.  There 
is  no  asceticism  in  his  teaching  here  or  elsewhere.  The  married  are  to  be  M  tiie 
unmarried,  remembering  that  marriage  Is  one  of  those  things  that  are  passing  away. 
While  loving  husband  and  wife,  we  are  not  to  forget  that  the  time  is  short.  This  stage 
of  existence  is  but  preparatory  to  another,  where  "  they  neither  marry  nor  are  given  in 
marriage  "  (Luke  xx.  35).  2.  Sorrow.  "  Those  that  weep,  as  thongn  they  wept  not* 
Tears  are  not  forbidden  to  the  Christian.  This  is  no  stoical  precept,  bidding  us  refrain 
fiiom  weeping  as  inconsistent  with  our  diguity.  Grief  is  human,  and  all  that  is  purely 
human  Christianity  encourages.  "  Jesus  wept "  (John  xi.  35).  The  liker  we  are  to  him, 
th«  more  tender  of  heart,  the  more  sympathetic  shall  we  become.  But  «e  are  to  weep 
nmembering  that  the  time  is  short.  Sorrow  also  is  transitory.  It  must  not  master  us 
•c  break  our  hearts.  Whatever  touches  the  spring  of  tears — bereavement,  loss,  pain, 
the  Bufferings  of  others — belongs  to  this  temporary  condition  of  things.  "  Weeping 
may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning  "  (Ps.  xxx.  5);  "And  he  shall 
wipe  away  every  tear  fiom  their  eyes,"  etc.  (Bev.  xxi.  4).  Therefore  weep  as  though 
you  wept  not.  3.  Joy,  "  'J'hose  that  rejoice,  as  though  they  rejoiced  uot.*  Christianity 
does  airt  from  upon  eaithly  happiness.    It  is  the  part  of  Satau  to  represent  tbe 


OH.  Tn.  1—40.]    THE  FIRST  BPISTLB  TO  THE  CORlKTfllANS.  J66 


religious  life  as  one  of  gloom,  udthe  teaehing  of  gome  Christians  gives  colour  to  the 
falsehood.  Nature,  literature,  the  arts,  society,  domestic  fellowship, — all  may  pour  their 
tributaries  into  the  stream  of  our  gladness.  None  should  enjoy  God's  world  like  God's 
own  child.  But  here  the  tempering  thought  comes  in — "  The  time  is  short."  Even 
this  is  not  our  highest  joy,  for  it  springs  from  a  source  that  will  soon  he  dried  up. 
The  "joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  "  (1  Pet,  i.  8)  belongs  to  the  region  of  faith, 
and  flows  from  those  things  which  faith  alone  apprehends.  Apply  this  to  amusementa. 
Pure  and  wholesome  entertainments  are  to  be  encouraged,  especially  for  the  young. 
But  whatever  will  not  bear  the  thought  of  the  brevity  of  life  is  not  good  for  a  Christian. 
Instead  of  the  sword  of  Damocles  or  the  death's  head,  the  believer  moderates  his  joy 
with  the  thought  that  "the  Lord  is  at  hand."  4.  Fossessiona,  "  Those  that  buy,  as 
though  they  possessed  not."  Christians  are  not  forbidden  to  engage  in  trade  or 
merchandise  with  a  view  to  the  acquisition  of  property.  Every  lawful  calling  is  open 
to  them.  They  are  not  prohibited  from  possessing  wealth.  The  real  question  is — What 
place  has  it  in  the  heart  ?  Earthly  possessions  are  to  be  held  under  the  recollection 
that  they  belong  to  a  transitory  state  of  things.  The  man  of  substance  is  to  sit  loosely 
to  what  he  possesses,  not  forgetting  that  "  the  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal " 
(2  Cor.  iv.  18).  5.  The  use  of  the  world.  "  Those  that  use  the  world,  as  not  abusing 
it."  All  that'God  gives  us  of  this  world  is  to  be  used  as  ministering  to  our  need.  The 
thing  to  be  guarded  against  is  the  wrong  use  of  it.  It  is  to  be  our  servant,  not  our 
master.  God  has  put  it  under  our  feet  (Ps.  viii.  6),  and  we  must  keep  it  there.  We 
abuse  the  world  (1)  if  we  seek  it  as  the  chief  good  of  life,  or  (2)  if  we  use  it  so  as  to 
hurt  or  hinder  our  spiritual  life. — ^B. 

Ver.  24. — Quietneis  of  spirit.  St.  Paul  knew  how  to  hold  the  balance  between  the 
stirring  forces  of  Christianity,  and  its  calming,  soothing  power.  He  exemplified  the 
combination  in  his  own  character;  for  he  wag  ever  moving  yet  never  restless,  ever 
aspiring  yet  always  content,  ever  fighting,  and  that  not  as  one  that  beats  the  air,  and  yet 
always  breathing  and  making  peace.  The  application  of  Christianity  to  actual  conditions 
of  society  in  ancient  Greece  raised  many  questions  on  which  the  Corinthian  Church  needed 
apostolic  guidance.  Such  were  the  continual  obligation  of  marriage  after  husband  or 
wife  had  become  a  Christian ;  the  question  whether  Judaism  should  yield  to  Gentilism, 
or  vice  versd,  in  the  new  community ;  and  the  problem  of  domestic  slavery.  St.  Paul 
had  no  express  command  from  the  Lord  Jesus  on  such  matters,  but  guided,  as  he  firmly 
believed,  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  he  handled  these  three  points  with  rare  wisdom  and 
foresight. 

L  The  lessok  fob  the  fibst  oentdbt.  The  introduction  of  the  Christian  fidth 
into  such  cities  as  Corinth  could  not  but  operate  as  a  disturbing,  unsettling  force.  It 
was  therefore  the  duty  of  the  Christians  to  avoid  as  far  as  possible  giving  alarm  to 
rulers,  by  abruptly  or  violently  assailing  the  forms  of  life  and  the  established  institutions 
round  about  them.  If  their  religion  should  present  itself  to  the  eye  of  observers  as 
mainly  an  agitation  or  social  revolution,  it  would  be  put  on  a  false  issue,  and  would  give 
to  its  adversaries  a  strong  argument  for  its  suppression.  Therefore,  though  the  apostle 
hated  all  social  injustice,  he  perceived  and  taught  that  precipitate  action,  even  with  the 
best  intentions,  would  be  a  serious  mistake;  and  that  the  only  sound  policy  was  to 
work  on  men's  consciences  and  subdue  their  hearts,  and  gradually  lift  them  up  into 
a  condition  of  moral  feeling  and  a  love  of  righteousness  which  could  no  longer  brook 
such  institutions  as  Greek  and  Soman  slaveholding.  On  this  topic,  therefore,  he  checked 
impatience.  The  first  thing  needful  was  to  bring  Jesus  Christ  into  every  station  and 
walk  of  human  life.  When  Christ  should  dwell  among  and  in  men,  society  would  take 
to  new  moulds  by  an  inward  necessity,  not  from  any  outward  dictation.  This  was 
the  best  course  to  be  taken  even  with  regard  to  slavery.  The  endurance  of  it  was  hard ; 
for  St.  Paul  wrote  at  a  period  when  the  rich  in  Gruxe  and  Italy  were  cruel  and 
contemptuous  to  their  slaves,  and  it  was  possible  for  a  Roman  emperor  to  give  their 
flesh  to  feed  his  pet  fishes.  But  the  institution  was  so  familiar  to  the  public  mind 
that  it  was  regarded  as  indispensable  ;  and  so  Christianity  was  not  to  assail  it  directly, 
but  to  teach  masters  to  give  to  their  slaves  wliat  was  just  and  equal,  and  slaves  to  be 
faithful  and  honest  in  service.  If  a  slave  could  get  his  liberty,  he  was  to  take  it 
joyfully — "use  it  rather."    If  not,  he  was  to  abide  with  God  in  that  calling.    Hig 


2W  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTlilANS.    [oh.  vn.  1—40 

spirit  was  with  Ood  in  a  far  loftier  sphere  than  could  be  conceived  of  by  the  heathen 
master,  who  probably  treated  him  with  scorn.  The  Christian  slave  was  the  Lord's 
freeman. 

n.  The  lesson  fob  the  nineteenth  oentuby,  1.  Negativdy.  (1)  This  text  must 
not  be  quoted  to  require  or  justify  adherence  to  a  questionable  calling  or  occupation.  A 
Christian  may  find  himself  in  a  trade  or  business  which  offeniis  his  now  eulightened 
conscience  and  is  hurtful  to  his  fellow-men :  he  may  be  in  a  place  or  appointment  which 
requires  him  to  practise  deceit  or  minister  to  vice.  Then  he  must  leave  it,  because  in  such 
a  place  it  is  not  possible  to  "  abide  with  Ood."  At  the  same  time,  such  abandonment  ol 
one's  situation  or  means  of  livelihood  must  be  only  under  real  stress  of  conscience,  and 
not  merely  beciiuse  the  work  is  hard  or  troublesome.  (2)  This  text  must  not  be  quoted 
to  retain  Christiaad  in  ecclesiastical  positions  which  they  see  to  be  at  variance  with  the 
Divine  Word.  The  presumptive  evidence  always  is  in  favour  of  one's  continuing  in  that 
Church  in  which  he  obtained  mercy  from  the  Lord,  and  it  is  foolish  and  ungrateful  to 
leave  it  so  soon  as  he  sees  a  flaw  or  fault  in  it.  He  who  cannot  live  in  a  Church  that 
has  faults  will  have  an  unhappy  Christian  career,  and  end  probably  in  a  small  clique  of 
impracticable  persons  like  himself.  At  the  same  time,  one  must  avoid  the  other  extreme 
of  refusing  to  consider  what  is  or  is  not  in  harmony  with  the  Law  of  Christ,  and  sheltfr- 
ing  or  defending  abuses  which  ought  to  be  confessed  and  corrected.  Such  a  mode  of 
acting  puts  a  stop  to  all  Church  reformation.  Of  small  faults  we  do  not  speak ;  but 
serious  errors  and  abuses  we  should  try  to  remove.  If  we  fail,  we  must  change  our 
position  in  order  to  "abide  with  God."  (3)  This  text  must  not  be  quoted  to  check 
human  aspirations.  It  is  not  to  be  implied  that,  because  a  man  was  poor  at  the  time  of 
his  conversion,  he  must  always  be  poor ;  or  if  he  was  a  servant,  must  continue  a  servatit 
to  his  dying  day.  Christianity  gives  no  countenance  to  the  idea  that  the  ranks  of  society 
should  be  stereotyped,  and  no  one  allowed  to  rise  above  the  station  in  which  he  was 
bom.  There  is  a  wriggling  anxiety  to  gain  personal  importance  which  is  not  worthy 
of  a  Christian ;  but  if,  by  honest  industry  or  conspicuous  ability,  one  should  rise  in 
position  and  influence,  the  thing  commends  itself  to  good  feeling  and  to  reason.  There- 
fore it  cannot  be  condemned  by  Christianity,  which  is  pervaded  by  good  feeling  and 
is  supremely  reasonable.  2.  Positively.  The  text  sets  a  wholesome  check  on  self- 
regarding  ambition.  The  great  problem  of  life  is  not  how  to  step  up  from  one  calling  or 
station  to  another,  but  bow,  in  this  calling  or  that  station,  to  abide  in  communion  with 
God  and  advance  his  glory.  No  doubt,  one  position  appears  to  great  advantage  over 
another,  for  happiness  and  for  usefulness;  but  the  difference  is  seldom  so  great  as 
appears.  That  which  has  outward  facilities  has  special  risks  and  anxieties,  and  that 
which  has  disadvantage  in  one  respect  has  compensalion  in  another.  But  to  "abide 
with  God,"  not  when  apart  from  our  worldly  calling,  gathered  into  a  church  on  a  holy 
day,  but  in  our  calling, — this  is  the  problem.  To  have  him  with  us  and  in  us  by  thi 
Holy  Spirit ;  to  walk  up  and  down  in  his  Name ;  to  work  and  to  rest  as  in  his 
sight ;  to  have  his  light  shining  on  our  path ;  to  have  his  grace  working  in  us 
both  to  will  and  to  do ;  to  have  our  labour  lightened,  our  care  relieved,  our  leisure 
sweetened,  by  his  lovel  This,  indeed,  is  life— high  life.  Oh,  to  abide  in  our  call- 
ing calmly  with  God — our  minds  and  hearts  open  to  his  impulse  and  direction — 
our  wills  submissive  to  his  I  This  is  what  will  bafde  the  tempter  and  silence  the  gain- 
sayer,  by  proving  that  our  religion  is  no  mere  selfish  hope  of  future  enjoyment,  but  a 
power  deep-seated  in  the  soul,  which  can  conquer  passion  and  covetousness,  and  diffuse 
over  the  life  a  sweet  serenity.  To  quote  an  English  poet  of  the  sixteenth  century,  now 
little  kuown-~ 

*  He  most  of  all  doth  bathe  in  bliw 
That  hath  a  quiet  mind." 

f. 

Ver.  82. — Frte  from  cares.  I.  Note  the  fbgcise  heanino  kkd  drift  of  this 
SHOBT  SENTENCE.  It  refers  to  the  anxieties  of  married  life.  Neither  in  Old  Testament 
nor  New  is  any  disrespect  shown  to  the  state  of  matrimony.  St.  Paul  himself,  when 
writing  of  the  reciprocal  duties  of  life,  gives  most  sympathetic  counsels  to  husbands  and 
wives;  and,  far  from  placing  marriage  in  an  unfavourable  light  as  compared  with  celibacy, 
describes  it  as  a  sign  of  the  sacred  union  of  Christ  and  the  Church.     But,  in  this  part 


<fi.  tn.  1-40.]    THE  WEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  267 

of  his  letter,  he  is  replying  to  a  question  put  to  him  from  Corinth  regarding  the  course 
most  expedient  in  the  special  circumstances  of  tlie  time,  i.e,  in  view  of  impending 
persecution  and  distress.  Should  unmarried  persons  marry  at  such  a  time?  Should 
parents  give  their  daughters  in  marriage?  Should  married  Christians,  if  joined  to 
heathens,  remain  in  the  marriage  bond  ?  These  questions  the  apostle  deals  with,  giving 
his  opinion,  not  for  all  time,  but  for  a  time  of  trouble.  It  was  no  sin,  or  even  fault,  iu 
any  one  to  marry ;  but  it  would  be  wise  to  form  no  new  ties  at  such  a  crisis,  not  to 
burden  one's  self  with  new  anxieties.  In  this  sense  the  text  is  not  for  us,  except  in 
special  emergencies  and  exceptional  circumstances.  It  is  hardly  needful  to  say  that 
a  man  who  is  about  to  start  on  a  dangerous  expedition,  or  one  who  is  involved  in  serious 
pecuniary  difficulty,  or  one  who  has  some  arduous  task  to  accomplish  by  a  given  date 
which  will  require  incessant  attention,  ought  not  to  marry.  Men  in  such  conditions 
ought  not  to  drag  another  into  their  difficulties  or  dangers,  nor  should  they  gratuitously 
add  to  their  own  anxieties.  Let  them  keep  their  minds  undistracted,  and  defer  marriage 
to  some  easier  and  more  auspicious  day, 

II.  Deduce  a  pbingiplg  which  will  applt  to  all  occasions.  It  la  this:  the 
Christian  life  ought  not  to  be  hampered  with  cares.  Well  for  it  to  move  on  simple 
lines,  as  much  as  possible  tree  from  distraction  and  solicitude.  Novelists  and  poets  ha^e 
said  much  against  over-anxiety  and  the  black  curse  of  care.  Spenser  describes  cai'e 
as  forging  iron  wedges  day  and  night. 

'Those  be  unquiet  thoughts  that  oanful  minds  invade" 
Shakespeare  say*— 

"  Oare  is  no  cure,  but  rather  corrosive. 
For  things  that  are  not  to  be  remedied." 

Another  writes  of  "  low-thoughted  care.''  And  it  is  easy  to  show  that  It  clouds  the 
judgment  and  defeats  itself  by  restlessness  and  over-anxiety  which  betray  men  into 
ruinous  mistakes.  But  after  all  that  has  been  said  against  care,  it  is  not  shaken  off — 
no,  not  by  those  moralists  and  poets  themselves.  Every  man  we  meet  has  some  vexing 
care  about  money,  or  reputation,  or  health,  about  the  conduct  or  misconduct  of  others. 
We  want  some  deeper  teaching  and  some  stronger  help.  We  have  both  in  and  from  our 
Master  Jesus  Christ — the  most  profound  teaching  and  the  most  timely  and  effectual 
help.  1.  The  life  without  care.  Our  Lord  spoke  of  it  in  the  Sermon  on  the  mount. 
His  disciples  should  not  be  anxious  about  food,  or  raiment,  or  the  possible  mishaps  of 
to-morrow.  Such  wisdom  they  might  learn  from  the  birds  and  from  the  flowers,  that  are 
fed  and  clothed  by  God,  If  it  be  rejoined  that  the  life  and  wants  of  birds  and  flowers 
are  very  much  more  limited  than  ours,  who  have  to  run  so  many  risks  and  are  vulner- 
able  at  so  many  points,  the  reply  is  obvious.  We  ought  so  to  conduct  our  lives  as  to 
keep  our  grounds  of  anxiety  at  the  lowest  possible  limit ;  in  short,  to  simplify  our  habi  ts, 
restrain  our  self-tormenting  bustle,  and,  reducing  our  external  wants,  give  more  voiov 
to  those  which  are  inward  and  spiritual.  2,  The  model  of  that  life.  It  is  Christ  him 
self;  for  the  perfect  Teacher  lived  all  his  doctrines,  practised  all  he  preached.  The  wa,N 
of  human  life  which  the  Son  of  Crod  selected,  and  to  which  he  adhered,  was  the  best  foi 
the  purpose  of  developing  a  model  humanity.  We  pass  over  the  station  in  which  he  wan 
born,  because  we  have  no  discretionary  power  over  our  own  birth.  But  we  take  note  of 
this,  that  he  grew  up  in  a  home  of  piety,  remote  from  those  excitements  and  temptations 
that  render  our  modem  town-bred  youth  so  precocious.  He  had  a  quiet  time  among 
the  hills  and  valleys  round  Nazareth,  to  let  his  thoughts  jtow  large  and  his  character 
acquire  deliberate  strength.  Then,  when  the  time  was  ripe  for  opening  his  prophetic 
mission,  he  kept  his  personal  life  as  simple  as  possible,  and  allowed  no  room  for  anxieties 
on  his  own  account.  He  also  surrounded  himself  with  friends  who  were  of  simple  ha  bits 
and  little  worldly  ambition.  He  taught  them  as  they  walked  from  one  village  to 
another  or  rowed  their  boat  upon  the  lake,  and  did  good  everywhere  without  a  particle 
of  ostentation.  And  so  he  went  on  to  the  end,  implicitly  trusting  and  obeying  the 
heavenly  Father  who  had  sent  him  and  was  always  with  him.  Thus  was  he  always 
calm  and  self-possessed.  No  dust  of  brooding  care  lay  upon  his  heart.  And,  indeed,  it 
was  because  he  held  himself  so.free  of  petty  entanglements,  that  he  could  be  and  was 
■o  engrossed  with  the  work  which  the  Father  gave  him  to  do.    Easily  satisfied  as  to 

L  00BINTHIAN8.  • 


188  THE  fIBST  EFIStLE  10  THE  COBINTHIAK&.    [ob.  Til  1—40 

Ibod,  and  raiment,  and  lodgings,  and  things  that  perish,  he  devoted  all  the  strength  oi 
Ut  thought  and  purpose  to  the  supreme  object  for  which  he  had  come  into  the  world. 
It  may  he  urged  that  this,  though  admirahle  in  him,  is  really  no  model  for  us.  We 
oannot  lead  anything  like  that  simple,  untrammelled,  unconventional  life  of  which  we 
rc«d  in  the  Gospels.  Now,  no  one  alleges  that  in  form  we  can  live  as  our  Saviour  lived, 
or  his  servant  Paul.  But  we  do  maintain  that  Christians  ongbt  to  catch  the  spirit  and 
principle  of  the  life  of  Christ,  and  therefore  should  not  let  artificial  wants  multiply  or 
needless  anxieties  entangle  their  hearts.  Unless  pains  be  taken  to  prevent  it,  life 
becomes  in  modem  times  very  much  of  •  jTtn<2— heart-wearing  and  perplexing.  Our 
hones  and  brains  are  weary.  Our  time  slips  away  from  us,  and  with  all  onr  fagging, 
we  find  our  work  drag.  We  are  caught  in  the  tyrannical  grasp  of  the  conventional, 
and  go  on  in  s  laborious  fashion,  not  happy,  certainly  not  Christ-like.  They  are  the 
wisest  and  the  happiest  who  lay  down  simple  lines  for  themselves,  reducing  the  ciun- 
brousness  of  the  outward  life  in  order  to  cultivate  more  fully  the  inward  life  of  faith, 
hope,  and  charity.  8.  The  principle  of  the  eare-renouncing  life.  It  is  faith  in  God. 
r^et  ui  cast  our  care  on  him,  for  he  cares  for  us.  On  this  principle  the  Man  Christ 
Jesus  walked,  believing  that  the  Father  heard  him  always  and  compassed  his  path. 
On  this  principle  he  assured  his  followers  that  the  very  hairs  of  their  heads  were 
numbered.  On  this  principle  have  all  patient  and  humble  Christian  lives  been  sus- 
tained. "  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd  j  I  shall  not  want."  The  thirty-seventh  psalm 
teaches  it  well.  Art  thou  anxious  about  temporal  wants  ?  "  Trust  in  the  Lord,  and  do 
good  i  so  shalt  thou  dwell  in  the  land,  and  verily  thou  shalt  be  fed  "  (Ps.  xxxvii.  3).  Art 
thou  keen  and  eager  for  a  lawful  object  ?  "  Delight  thyself  also  in  the  Lord  j  and  he 
shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart "  (Ps.  xxxvii.  4).  Art  thou  concerned  about 
the  issue  of  a  matter?  "  Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord  ;  trust  also  in  him ;  and  he 
shall  bring  it  to  pass  ■  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5).  Art  thou  hindered  or  discouraged  by  the  success 
of  unscrupulous  rivals  ?  "  Best  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him,  fret  not  thyself" 
etc.  (Ps.  xxxvii.  7).  With  these  simple  directions  laid  to  heart  and  obeyed,  one  may  go 
through  tba  greatest  vicissitudes  and  most  exhausting  toils  with  a  spirit  cheeiful  and 
seraDft 

"There  are,  In  this  loud  stunning  tid* 
Of  human  care  and  crime, 

With  whom  the  melodies  abide 
Of  th'  everlasting  chime, 

Vfho  carry  mueic  in  their  heart 

Through  dusky  Inne  aiid  wrangling  mai^ 
Plying  their  daily  task  with  busier  feet, 
Because  their  secret  souls  a  holy  strain  repeat* 

V. 

Yen.  1—7. — Advice  on  details  of  Christian  conduct.  In  dealing  with  these  versei^  It 
should  be  noticed :  1.  That,  concerning  such  matters  of  practical  detail,  St.  Paul  givea 
his  advice,  he  does  not  lay  down  authoritative  commands.  2.  The  apostle's  mission 
concerned  principles,  not  details,  which  are  properly  regarded  as  well  within  the  control 
of  cultured  Christian  thought  and  judgment.  Inspiration  is  wisely  limited  to  subjeots 
which,  for  any  reason,  are  out  of  ordinary  human  reach.  None  of  ue  need  precise 
authoritative  guidance  of  the  common  incidents  and  relations  of  life.  We  can  ourselves 
sufficiently  apply  Christian  principles.  S.  Principles  are  better  left  without  minute 
applications,  as  they  can  then  be  variously  adapted  to  the  differing  conditions  of  society 
in  each  age.  4.  St.  Paul,  when  induced  to  give  advice,  takes  care  to  bring  out  and  impress 
the  related  principle ;  and,  if  possible,  he  presents  his  own  example  for  imitation.  The 
principles  with  which  he  deals  in  these  verses  concern  :  (1)  The  subordinate  position  of 
woman.  On  this  matter  details  would  be  very  unadvisable,  as  will  be  fully  seen  if  we 
contrast  the  Eastern  and  Western,  the  ancient  and  modern,  sentiments  about  the  place 
and  work  of  woman.  (2)  The  mastery  of  bodily  passion  in  the  power  of  the  sanctified  will. 
This  is  enough,  and  we  can  make  all  necessary  applications.  "  Each  one  of  you  should 
know  how  to  possess  the  vessel  [of  his  body  ]  in  sanctification  and  honour."  (3)  The 
duty  of  using  for  the  service  of  others,  and  in  no  way  misusing  or  abusipg,  any  form  oi 
capacity  with  which  we  may  be  endowed  (ver.  7). — R.  T. 


OH.  vn.  1—40.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBLNTHIANS.  25d 

Van.  8 — 16. — 2%e  marriage  tie.  When  Christianity  ipread  abroad  •mong  tha 
heathen,  very  often,  in  a  family,  "  one  would  be  taken  and  another  left,"  and  much 
family  and  social  difficulty  was  made  when  a  heathen  husband  or  a  heathen  wife  wag 
sonverted,  and  the  other  partner  remained  in  heathen  darkness.  There  could  be  no 
doubt  that  Christianity  demanded  separation  from  heathenism,  and  even  declared  a 
social  connection  with  heathen  people  to  be  morally  perilous ;  and  it  might  very  readily 
be  inferred  that  this  applied  to  the  heathen  husband  or  the  heathen  wife,  and  that 
divorce  from  them  should  at  once  follow  upon  Christian  profession.  It  seems  that  tha 
heathen  in  ancient  times  held  the  marriage  bond  very  loosely,  as  do  the  heathen  in 
many  countries  now.  There  is  no  more  fruitful  scarce  of  national  immorality  than 
ease  in  procuring  divorce.  Christianity  has  exerted  such  an  ennobling  influence  on 
the  European  nations,  in  part  because  it  has  testified  so  firmly  to  the  sacredness  of  the 
marriage  bond.  Christianity  treats  marriage  as  the  main  foundation  of  moral  relations, 
and  the  proper  preventive  and  cure  of  social  evils.  The  relation  must,  therefore,  be 
anxiously  sustained,  and  almost  every  other  consideration  must  be  made  subservient 
to  its  muntenance.  Its  various  claims  must  be  duly  met ;  its  various  duties  must  tie 
properly  performed :  \.  For  the  Christian  partner's  own  sake,  whether  the  other  be 
Christian  or  not.  If  not,  then  maintaining  faithfully  the  marriage  relation  will  prove  a 
spiritual  discipline.  2.  For  the  sake  of  the  children  of  the  mixed  marriage,  over  whom 
the  Christinn  partner  can  exercise  a  holy  influence.  3.  And  even  for  the  heathen 
partner's  sake,  since  he  or  she  may  be  won  by  the  "chaste  conversation"  and  holy 
example  of  the  fellow-partner.  Impress  that  the  principle  applied  to  marriage  has  wide 
applications.  Whatever  our  spheres  and  relations  may  he,  the  man  in  Christ  ought 
*^o  master  and  mould  and  use  them  by  the  force  of  his  new  life  in  Christ.— R.  T. 

Ver.  14. — Ohristiam,  haptism,    "  But  now  are  they  holy." 

I.  Wbat  is  impued  in  thib  BTATEMEirr.  It  is  an  acknowledgment  of  their  virtual 
Church  membership. 

II.  The  BEABiNa  of  this  dootbink  on  the  baptism  of  infants.  By  this  act  of 
baptism  the  Church  (1)  expresses  its  own  evangelical  faith  ;  (2)  recognizes  the  children 
as  belonging  to  God  and  to  Christ ;  (3)  testifies  its  confidence  in  their  present  spiritual 
safety ;  (4)  pledges  itsilf  to  train  them  up  in  the  culture  of  the  Lord. 

ELL  General  inferences  concerning  Christian  baptism.  1.  It  is  only  an  external 
sign.  2.  Where  persons  are  not  baptized  as  infants,  they  should  not  afterwards  be 
submitted  to  the  rite  except  as  intelligent  believers  in  Christ.  3.  As  to  the  mode  of 
baptism,  it  may  be  performed  in  any  decent,  possible  way,  4.  It  may  be  administered 
by  any  one  qualified  or  appointed  to  represent  the  Christian  Church.  5.  It  should  be 
consummated  by  an  early  admission  to  the  Lord's  table.  6.  The  dutj  of  those  who 
were  never  baptized  in  infancy.— B.  T. 

y«r.  24. — Abiding  as  catUd.  Observe  the  peril  of  Christianity,  as  it  spread  among 
the  nations,  disturbing  the  social  conditions,  customs,  and  relations.  Yet  Christianity 
never  directlyjattacks  social  evils,  war,  slavery,  etc.  There  was  also  a  constant  danger 
of  men's  conceiving  Christianity  as  a  ceremonial  and  outward,  and  not  as  a  spiritual 
and  inward,  religion.  Our  Lord  had  constantly  to  resist  the  expectation  that  he  would 
prove  a  new  Maccabeus,  a  national  Messiah.  And  so  the  apostles  had  to  assert  constantly 
that  Christianity  is  not,  first  of  all,  an  ordering  of  conduct,  but  a  life,  an  inward  spiritual 
thing,  that  can  gain  expression  in  all  circumstances  and  through  all  relations.  A  man 
may  "abide"  in  whatever  state  he  is  when  "allied,"  seeing  that  he  can  tkert  live  out 
th«  Christian  spirit  and  the  Christian  life. 

L  The  Lobd's  oauu  Notice :  1.  Its  form.  It  eomei  through  himian  agency.  2. 
Its  efiFectuality.    It  is  accompanied  by  the  witness  and  the  sealing  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

II.  The  conditions  in  which  the  Lord's  call  may  find  us.  Illustrate :  1.  The 
personal  conditions,  as  suggested  by  the  distinction  of  circumcised  and  uncircumcised. 
2.  The  relative  conditions.  We  may  be  bond-slave  or  freeman,  master  or  servant. 
'  III.  The  Chbibtian'b  duty  in  belation  to  the  conditions  he  is  in  when  called. 
Aa  a  rule,  he  had  better  remain  in  them.  The  new  life  in  Christ  should  not  make  men 
nitless  concerning  their  circumstances.    It  is  always  a  far  nobler  thing  to  uonquei 


260  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.    [oh.  vn.  1—10, 

circnmstances  of  disability  by  the  power  of  Christian  principle  and  Christian  life,  than 
merely  to  change  our  circumstances,  and  shake  ourselves  free  from  the  disability. 

Press,  in  conclusion,  that  Qod's  presence  is  not  conditioned  by  any  outward  position!  ia 
which  we  may  be  placed.  He  dwells  with  contrite  hearts  everywhere,  and  pays  no  heed 
to  the  presence  or  absence  of  the  brand-marks  of  the  slave. — B.  T. 

Yer.  24. — Seligion  and  busines$.  The  apostle,  in  this  and  the  connected  chapters, 
is  givinc;  to  the  Corinthian  Christians  a  variety  of  counsels  respecting  the  various 
relationships  of  life  which  they  were  called  to  sustain.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ, 
which  brings  its  influence  first  to  bear  on  the  individual,  next  exerts  its  power  on  the 
family  and  social  relations ;  and  we  can  well  understand  how,  in  those  early  days,  a 
number  of  serious  practical  questions  would  arise  and  demand  consideration.  One 
of  these  questions  concerned  the  condition  of  servitude,  serfdom,  in  which  many  of  the 
early  converts  were  placed.  The  apostle  points  out  that  personal  religion  is  independent 
of  calling  or  of  social  position.  Whatever  our  earthly  lot  may  be,  we  can  be  truly 
godly  as  we  fulfil  it ;  and  St.  Paul  recommends  that  every  one  should  continue  in  the 
business  which  he  happened  to  be  pursuing  when  the  grace  of  God  came  to  him, 
provided  it  was  an  honest  and  honourable  business.  His  one  counsel  is  that,  whatever 
may  be  their  jilace  or  their  work,  they  should  therein  abide  witli  God,  in  fellowship 
with  God,  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  in  o|ienness  to  the  leadings  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  in  reliauce  upon  the  daily  strength  of  God.  Beganling  the  text  in  this  light, 
it  may  direct  us  to  consider  the  practical  influence  of  Christianity  on  a  man's  business. 
We  dwell  on  three  points.  1.  Religion  is  above  business.  2.  Religion  comes  into 
business.     3.  Religion  must  not  be  lost  in  business. 

I.  Religion  is  above  business.  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his 
righteousness."  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his 
own  soul  ?  "  1.  Religion  is  above  business  in  its  character.  Its  interests  are  different ; 
its  aims  are  different ;  its  prevailing  spirit  is  different  and  nobler.  It  is  the  heavenly 
occupation  and  the  heavenly  spirit.  2.  Religion  is  above  business  in  its  demands. 
Business  calls  for  the  exercise  of  mind  and  skill ;  it  asks  the  culture  of  our  bodily 
powers — it  develops  skill  of  hand,  promptness  of  judgment,  keennes!  af  insight, 
and  perseverance  in  eflbrt.  It  goes  even  further  than  this,  and  calls  out  certain  moral 
qualities,  the  more  simple  and  natural  qualities,  such  as  honesty,  integrity,  diligence, 
and  trutlifulness.  But  religion  demands  more,  even  purity,  unselfishness,  a  fine 
consideration  for  the  well-b.ing  of  others,  rightness  of  motive,  and  the  inspiration  of 
a  supreme  purpose  to  glorify  God.  Business  does  not  touch  the  affectiont.  Yet  we  are 
only  colli,  grasping,  self-seeking  creatures,  if  life  and  conduct  are  not  toned  by  affections ; 
and  the  religion  which  purifies  and  nourishes  our  affections  must  be  above  business. 
3.  Religion  is  above  business  in  its  issues.  Business  results  are  a  certain  measure  of 
worldly  conifort  in  our  home,  a  share  of  the  pleasures  which  the  world  can  afford,  and 
a  position  of  respect  and  influence  among  our  fellow-men.  What  more  than  this  can 
the  most  successful  business  bring?  It  wins  nothing  that  can  go  through  the  "  great 
gates  "  with  us.  Its  issues  have  rather  to  do  with  quantity  than  with  quality ;  they 
are  bounded  by  life,  and  ha\e  no  out-reachings  into  eternity.  Religion  is  above  it, 
since  "  godliness  hath  both  the  promise  of  the  hfe  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to 
come."  Religion  shines  down  on  common  life  all  the  golden  rays  that  make  the  beauty 
of  the  present  prospect,  and  it  assures  us  that  all  it  can  shed  now  are  but  a  few  scattered 
rays  of  an  "  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory,"  which  will  shine  for  ever  on  the 
"  good  and  faithful  servants," 

II.  Religion  comes  down  into  bdsinebs.  Because  it  is  higher  than  business,  it  claims 
to  take  it  up  into  its  grasp  and  glorify  it,  breathing  its  own  noble  spirit  into  all  business 
relations.  Some  men  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  religion  and  business  occupy  separate 
spheres.  Ward  Beecher  says,  "  How  hateful  is  that  religion  which  says,  'Business  is 
business,  and  politics  are  politics,  and  religion  is  religion '  I  Religion  is  using  everything 
for  God.  But  many  men  dedicate  business  to  the  devil,  and  shove  religion  into  the 
cracks  and  crevices  of  time,  and  make  it  the  hypocritical  outcrawling  of  their  leisure 
and  laziness."  1.  Religion  comes  into  business  as  a  new  force,  nourishing  diligence. 
William  Jay  used  to  say  that  Christian  tradesmen  ought  to  be  the  best  tradesmen,  and 
Christian  servants  should  be  the  best  servants,  and  he  wuuld  sometimes  quaintly  add, 


3S.  VD.  1—40.]    THE  PIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHlANa  26. 

"  There's  many  a  good  woman  who  is  not «  good  wasAer-woman."  8.  Religion  comes 
as  a  Divine  help  in  bearing  disappointment  and  loss.  Many  by  the  troubles  of  business 
lile  are  made  reckless  and  hard.  It  is  a  great  thing  that  religion,  in  a  world  where 
"  man  is  born  to  trouble,"  should  help  us  to  suffer  well.  3.  Religion  comes  into 
business  to  elevate  our  standards  of  honesty  and  uprightness.  We  ne^  not  affirm  that 
integrit}  is  only  connected  with  religion;  but  we  may  fully  admit  that  the  high 
standards  are  maintained  by  religion,  and  that  it  stands  foremost  among  the  forces  that 
preserve  business  morality.  4.  And  religion  comes  into  business  as  a  spirit  attempering 
business  relations.  It  makes  men  more  gentle,  considerate,  and  gracious  towards  others : 
and  elevates  the  tone  of  masterhood  and  servanthood,  establishing  mutual  helpfulness 
as  the  ruling  feature  in  all  relationships. 

III.  Belioion  must  not  be  lost  in  business.  This  it  may  be  in  two  ways.  1.  By 
excess  of  ambition  and  exertion  preventing  due  attention  to  relig;ious  duties  and  personal 
culture  (see  2  Tim.  ii.  4).  2.  By  the  wealth-getting  spirit  spoiling  the  Christian  spirit. 
Illustrate  by  our  Lord's  saying,  "How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  1 " — ^B.  T. 

Vers.  29 — 40. — An  argument  from  the  thortness  of  (he  time.  It  is  impossible  to 
understand  a  large  number  of  the  apostolic  allusions  unless  we  recognize  the  early 
Church  conception  that  the  Christian  dispensation  would  be  very  Ivief,  and  in  ail 
probability  closed  and  completed  in  the  first  century,  by  the  expected  reappearance  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  idea  certainly  prevailed  among  the  disciples.  To  some 
extent  at  least  it  was  shared  by  the  apostles;  but  it  is  evident  that  they  found  it 
necessary  to  check  a  tendency  to  extravagance  and  fanaticism,  and  in  some  quarters 
the  sentiment  was  allowed  to  nourish  an  antinomian  spirit,  which  seriously  imperilled 
the  Christian  morality.  The  notion  of  our  Lord's  second  coming  in  some  kind  of 
earthly  manifestation  could  only  have  been  entertained  by  those  who  failed  to  under- 
stand that  the  words  which  he  spake  were  "  spirit  and  life,"  and  were  to  be  spiritually' 
understood.  "  The  letter  killeth,  the  spirit  giveth  life."  Yet  there  is  a  proper  sense  in 
which  the  Christian  should  be  impressed  with  the  "  shortness  of  the  time."  Life  at  the 
longest  is  but  brief  Life,  in  comparison  with  eternity,  is  but  as  a  passing  breath  to  the 
long  day.  To  the  Christian,  life  is  so  full  of  solemn  claims  and  responsibilities  that  it 
seems  impossible  to  fulfil  them  all  in  the  narrow  limits  of  an  uncertain  earthly  career. 
The  apostle  argues  here  that  a  sense  of  the  "  shortness  of  time  "  should  influence— 

I.  Odr  human  relationships.  Having  this  particular  influence  on  them,  that  it 
prevents  our  being  wholly  absorbed  in  them,  and  helps  us  to  the  ri'^ht  use  of  them. 
St.  Paul's  principle  is  that  we  should  "use  this  world  as  not  abusing  it."  Here 
Christianity  stands  between  the  worldly  spirit  and  the  narrow  religious  spirit.  The 
worldly  spirit  says,  "  Time  is  short ;  take  your  fill ;  live  while  you  can."  The  narrow 
religious  spirit  says,  "All  the  pleasure  here  is  a  snare,  and  dangerous;  keep  out  of  it 
altogether."  In  opposition  to  this  narrow  spirit,  Christianity  says,  "  Use  the  world ;  " 
and  in  opposition  to  the  worldly  spirit,  "  Do  not  abuse  it.  All  thin  is  are  yours.  Take 
them  and  use  them;  but  never  let  them  interfere  with  the  higiier  life  which  you  an 
called  on  to  lead.  '  A  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  thin  ;s  whicli 
he  possesseth'"  (F.  W.  Robertson).  Illustrate,  in  relation  to  wives,  the  early  notions 
of  the  value  of  celibacy,  and  show  that  the  married  state  can  be  preserved  wiAoul 
interfering  with  the  soul's  culture,  and  that,  indeed,  the  married  state  is  found,  foi 
most  men,  singularly  helpful  to  the  religious  life, 

II.  Our  human  joys  and  sorrows.  Explain  what  an  amelioration  of  both  is  founri 
in  the  fact  that  they  are  strictly  limited.  Joys  soon  fade.  Affliction  is  but  fm 
a  moment.  For  both  the  "  time  is  short,"  and  we  need  not,  therefore,  be  unduly  afifected 
by  either.  We  may  gratefully  accept  the  pleasure  and  patiently  bear  the  trouble ;  for 
"  we  soon  fly  away  "  to  be  at  rest. 

III.  Our  earthly  toils.  St.  Paul  argues,  from  the  shortness  of  the  time,  that 
"  those  who  buy  "  should  be  "  as  though  they  possessed  not."  Resisting  the  tendency 
to  fix  thought  and  heart  on  what  we  can  gain,  and  realizing  that  we  can  take  nothing 
of  it  away  with  us.  Moderation  and  sobriety  may  well  mark  our  very  acquisitions. 
The  energy  that  wins  success  needs  to  be  kept  within  reasonable  bounds.  Though  not 
in  precisely  the  sense  in  which  St.  Paul  used  the  term,  still  for  us  also  the  "  time  it 


262  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  Tin.  1—18. 

short,"  and  we  may  therefore  wisely  sit  loosely  from  all  earthly  things,  and  remember 
that  where  onr  treasure  is  there  will  our  heart  be  also,  and  that,  as  Ohristians,  vat 
treasure  is  in  heaven, — R.  T. 

Ver.  31. — The  passing  world.  "For  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away."  The 
figure  used  by  the  apostle  is  that  of  a  shifting  scene  in  a  theatre.  We  may  better 
realize  the  figure  by  applying  it  to  a  moving  panorama.  On,  on  it  goes,  ever  new 
scenes  coming  into  view,  moving  across,  and  then  passing  for  ever  away.  Such  life 
appears  to  us  whenwe  can  seem  to  step  aside  and  look  at  it.  Sometimes  it  has  been 
likened  to  the  river,  which  bears  the  vessel  on  from  the  harbour  among  the  hills,  down 
past  ever-varying  scenes,  and  out  into  the  greiit  ocean.  Poetic  souls  are  touched  with 
a  fine  melancholy  as  they  see  the  "  stately  ships  pass  on,"  and  feel  how  each  resembles 
a  human  life.  Time  is  short;  the  voyage  is  brief,  and  the  ocean  is  so  vast,  so 
unexplored,  so  unknown.  "  The  word '  fashion '  has  not  here  the  popular  meaning  which 
has  been  generally  assigned  to  it.  It  docs  not  refer  to  those  customs  and  convention- 
alities which  vary  in  difierent  nations  and  different  ages, — all  these  pass  away ;  but  the 
word  refers  here  to  all  that  is  external  upon  earth  ;  all  that  has  form  and  shape  and 
scenery ;  all  that  is  visible  in  contradistinction  to  that  which  is  invisible."  Work  out 
and  illustrate  two  things. 

I.   It  is  OKIiV  THB  FASHION  OF  THE  WORLD  THAT  PASSES  AW  AT.      ThiS  We  should  feel 

if  we  could  rightly  understand  what  the  "  fashion  of  the  world  "  is.  Clearly  distin- 
guish between  the  "  essence "  and  the  "  accident "  of  a  thing.  It  may  be  quite  true 
that  the  "  essence  "  escapes  us ;  it  is  beyond  our  present  vision.  But  we  can  realize  it 
in  thought.  We  know  that  within  appearances  are  undying  realities,  and  that 
appearances  may  change  and  pass,  but  the  reality  is  eternal.  Phenomena  are  but  the 
utterance  of  eternal  things,  so  that  under  our  present  sense-limitations  we  may  know 
something  of  them.  This  is  best  apprehended  by  reference  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  was  "  God  manifest "  in  oiu:  sense-spheres.  The  mere  fashion  of  him,  as  the 
Fellow-man,  with  whom  we  might  have  se«ge-relations,  may  pass  away — it  did  pass 
away — but  snch  passing  in  no  way  touched  the  reality  of  his  abiding  presence  with 
ns.  So  we  seem  every  day  to  be  losing  things,  but  we  only  lose  the  fashion  of  them, 
the  outward  show.  Whatever  they  have  really  been  to  us,  for  good  or  for  bad,  they 
are  still,  and  they  shall  be  for  ever.  We  ourselves  must  presently  pass  away;  but  it  la 
only  the  fashion  that  passes ;  we  remain.  With  reverence  it  may  even  be  said  of 
us,  that  "  our  years  are  throughout  all  generations."  Then  we  can  looSe  from  our 
grasp  the  merely  "  seen  and  temporal,"  if  we  have  for  our  possession  the  "  unseen  and 
eternal." 

IL  It  is  tee  bealitt  or  the  wobld  that  is  abidiko.  If  we  can  only  find  «at 
what  that  reality  is.  And  surely  it  is  this — the  character  of  the  beings  that  pass 
under  its  thousandfold  influences.  There  is  nothing  else  that  is  abiding.  The  physical 
world  is  ever  changing  and  [assing  away.  We  talk  of  the  everlasting  mountains,  while 
they  are  crumbling  and  beiiig  washed  down  into  the  plains.  "  He  that  doeth  the  will 
of  God  abideth  for  ever,"  and  he  alone.  The  reality  of  the  world  is  just  that  unseen 
spiritual  sphere  in  which  Christ's  soul  and  the  Christian  soul  lives.  You  may  call  it 
earth  or  call  it  heaven,  according  to  the  fashion  in  which  it  is  apprehended.  So  the 
apostle  urges  his  practical  point — Do  not  even  try  to  satisfy  your  souls  in  the  merely 
sensuous  spheres  that  so  surely  pans  away.  Break  all  these  bonds  of  the  sensual,  if 
you  are  now  bound  with  them.  Keep  away  from  these  bonds  of  the  sensual,  if  in  any 
form  they  are  likely  to  entangle  you.  Live  in  the  Spirit.  "Walk  in  the  Spirit:  and 
you  wiU  not  fulfil  the  luBfas  of  the  flesh."— B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 
OHAPTEB  Vm. 


Vers.  I — 13. — The  fetation  of  love  to  Imouh 
ledge  with  respect  to  the  guestion  of  eating 
am-cferiiige. 


Ver.  I.— Ai  tonehing  things  offeiel  anti 
idols.  _  This  was  doubtless  one  of  the 
questions  on  which  the  Corinthians  had 
asked  for  advice.  We  judge  from  the  tone 
of  the  questions  to  which  St.  Paul  here 


CH.  Tui.  1— 13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COfilNTHIANa 


t63 


replies  that  the  majority  of  the  Corinthiana, 
being  liberal  in  their  views,  held  that  it  was 
a  matter  of  perfect  indifference  to  eat  idol- 
offerings;  and  that,  in  acting  upon  thii 
eonviction,  they  oonti  jmptuously  overrode  the 
oonvictiong  of  those  who  could  not  help 
thinking  that  when  they  did  lo  they 
committed  a  sin.  The  practical  decision  of 
the  question  was  one  of  immense  importance. 
If  it  were  unlawful  under  any  circumstances 
to  eat  idol-offerings,  then  the  Gentile  con- 
vert was  condemned  to  a  life  of  Levitism 
almost  as  rigorous  at  that  of  the  Jew.  The 
distinction  between  clean  and  unclean 
meats  formed  an  insuperable  barrier  between 
Jews  and  Gentiles.  Wherever  they  lived, 
Jews  required  a  butcher  of  their  own,  who 
had  been  trained  in  the  rules  and  ceremonies 
which  enabled  him  to  decide  and  to  ensure 
that  all  the  meat  which  they  ate  should  be 
dean  (tdhSr),  not  unclean  Qami).  They 
could  touch  no  meat  which  was  not  oertifled 
■8  free  from  legal  blemish  or  ceremonial 
pollution  by  the  affixed  leaden  seal  on 
which  was  engraved  the  word  "lawful" 
{haihar).  But  Gentiles  had  always  been 
accustomed  to  buy  meat  in  the  markets. 
Now,  much  of  this  meat  consisted  of  rem- 
nants of  animals  slain  as  sacrifices,  after  the 
priests  had  had  their  share.  So  completely 
was  this  case,  that  the  word  "  to  sacrlUce  " 
had  come  to  mean  "  to  kill "  in  Hellenistic 
Greek.  Theophrastus,  in  his  'Moral 
Sketches,'  defines  the  dose-handed  man  as 
one  who,  at  his  daughter's  wedJing  feast, 
sells  all  the  victims  offered  except  the 
sacred  parts ;  and  the  shameless  person  as 
one  who,  after  offering  a  sacrifice,  salts  the 
victim  for  future  use,  and  goes  out  to  dine 
with  some  one  else.  The  murket  was  there- 
fore stocked  with  meat  which  had  been 
connected  with  idol-sacrifices.  The  Christian 
could  never  be  sure  about  any  meat  which 
he  bought  if  he  held  it  wrong  to  partake  of 
these  offerings.  Further  thun  this,  he  wuuld 
— especially  if  he  were  poor — feel  it  a  great 
privation  to  be  entirely  cut  off  from  the 
public  feasts  (fiussitia),  which  perhaps  were 
often  his  only  chance  of  eating  meat  at  all ; 
and  also  to  be  foibidden  to  take  a  social  meal 
with  any  of  his  Gen  tile  neighbours  or  rela  tives. 
The  question  was  therefore  a  "burning" 
one.'  It  involved  mufh  of  the  comfort  and 
brightness  of  ancient  social  life  (Thuoydides, 
ii.  38;  Aristotle, '  Eth.,'  vii.  9,  §  5;  Oicero, 
*  Off.,'  ii  16 ;  Livy,  viii.  32,  etc.).  It  will  be 
seen  that  St.  Paul  treats  it  with  consum- 
mate wisdom  and  tenderness.  His  liberality 
of  thought  shows  itself  in  this— that  he 
sides  with  those  who  took  the  strong,  the 
broad,  the  common-sense  view,  that  sin  is 
Dot  a  mechanical  matter,  and  that  sin  is 
not  committed  where  no  sin  is  intended. 
He    neither  adopts  the  ascetia  view  nor 


does  he  taunt  the  inquirers  with  the  &of 
that  the  whole  weight  of  their  personal 
desires  and  interests  would  lead  them  to 
decide  the  question  in  their  own  favour. 
On  the  other  hand,  he  has  too  deep  a  Sym- 
pathy with  the  weak  to  permit  their 
scruples  to  be  overruled  with  a  violence 
which  would  wound  their  consciences. 
While  he  accepts  the  right  principle  of 
Christian  freedom,  he  carefully  guards 
against  its  abuse.  It  might  have  been 
supposed  that,  as  •  Jew,  and  one  who  had 
been  trained  as  a  "  Pharisee  of  Pharisees," 
St.  Paul  would  have  sided  with  those  who 
forbade  any  participation  in  idol-offerings. 
Jewish  rabbis  referred  to  passages  like 
Exod.  zxziv.  15;  Numb.  zzv.  2;  Ps.  cvi. 
28;  Dan.  i  8;  Tobit  i.  10,  11.  Eabbi 
Ishmael,  in  '  Avoda  Zara,'  said  that  a  Jew 
might  not  even  go  to  a  G  entile  funeral,  even 
if  he  took  with  him  his  own  meat  and  his 
own  servants.  The  law  of  the  drink  offering 
forbids  a  Jew  to  drink  of  a  cask  if  any  one 
has  even  touched  a  goblet  drawn  from  it 
with  the  presumed  intention  of  offering  a 
little  to  the  gods.  Besides  this,  the  Synod 
of  Jerusalem  had  mentioned  the  eating  of 
idol-offerings  as  one  of  the  four  things 
which  they  forbade  to  Gentile  converts, 
who  were  only  bound  by  the  Noachian 
precepts  (Acts  xv.  29).  But  St.  Paul 
judged  the  matter  independently  by  his 
own  apostolic  authority.  The  decision  of 
the  B^nod  had  only  had  a  local  validity  and 
was  inapplicable  to  such  a  oommimity  as 
that  of  Corinth.  St.  Paul  had  to  suffer  cruel 
misrepi'csuntation  and  bitter  persecution  as 
the  consequence  of  this  breadth  of  view 
(Acts  xxi.  21 — 24);  but  that  would  not  be 
likely  to  make  him  shrink  from  saying  the 
truth.  This  treatment  of  the  subject  closely 
resembles  that  which  he  subsequently 
adopted  in  Bom.  xiv.  We  know  that  we  aU 
have  knowledge.  It  is  very  probable  that 
this  is  a  semi-ironical  quotation  of  the 
'  mewhat  conceited  remark  which  had 
occurred  in  the  letter  from  Corinth.  No 
doubt  there  was  a  sense  in  which  it  might 
(theoretically)  be  regarded  as  true;  but  it 
was  St.  Paul's  duty  both  to  disparage  this 
kind  of  knowledge  and  to  show  that,  after 
all,  there  were  some  among  them  who  did 
not  possess  it  (ver.  7).  Knowledge  pnffeth 
up.  The  brief  energetic  clause,  "Knowledge 
puffeth  up;  love  buildeth  up,"  shows  the 
strong  feeling  with  which  the  apostle  enters 
on  the  discussion.  There  is  a  wide  distance 
between  theoretic  knowledge  and  heavenly 
wisdom  (Jas.  iii.  13—18).  "  He  who  is  fuU 
is  rich;  he  who  is  puffed  np  is  empty" 
(Stanley).  "  The  first  person  puffed  up  was 
the  devil "  (Beza).  Charity  edifleth.  There 
is  no  reason  whatever  for  the  rendering  of 
ayan^  sometimes  by  "  love,"  sometime!  bj 


264 


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINIHIANS.    [oh.  vm.  f— 13. 


"  charity."  The  fondni  ss  for  variation 
which  led  King  James's  trniislators  to  do  so 
only  obscures  the  i(le:itity  of  thought  which 
prevails  among  all  the  apostles  respect- 
ing the  absolute  primacy  of  love  as  the 
chief  sphere  and  test  of  the  Chiiftian  life. 
Edifieth.  Helps  to  build  us  up  as  stones  in 
the  spiritual  temple  (oh.  iii.  9;  Eom.  xiv. 
11) ;  Et)h.  iv.  12).  "If  because  of  meat  thy 
brother  is  grieved,  thou  walkest  no  longer 
in  love  "  (Kom.  xiv.  1 5). 

Yer.  2. — ^If  any  man  think  that  he  knoweth 
anything.  Humility  is  the  test  of  true 
knowledge,  and  love  the  inevitable  factor  in 
all  Christian  knowledge.  The  conceit  of 
knowledge  is  usually  the  ueurped  self- 
assertion  of  an  imaginary  infallibility. 
We  only  know  "  in  part,"  and  our  know- 
ledge, having  at  the  best  a  purely  relative 
value,  is  dcbtined  to  vanish  away  (ch.  xiii.  8). 
As  he  ought  to  know.  True  knowledge  lias 
in  it  an  element  of  moral  obligation,  and 
saiutliness  is  knowledge  and  supersedes  the 
necessity  for  formal  knowledge.  Love  is 
knowledge  which  has  passed  into  heavenly 
wisdom.  The  stud  cnt  may  say  to  the  mystic, 
"  All  that  you  see  I  know ; "  but  the 
mystio  may  retort,  "  All  that  you  know,  I 
see." 

Ver.  8. — If  any  man  love  God,  the  same  is 
known  of  him.  We  should  have  expected 
the  sentence  to  end  "  the  same  knows  him." 
St  Paul  purposely  alters  the  symmetry  of 
tlie  phrase.  He  did  not  wish  to  use  any 
terms  which  would  fostur  the  already  over- 
grown conceit  of  knowledge  wjiicli  was  in- 
flating the  minds  of  his  Corinthian  converts. 
Further  than  this,  he  felt  that  "  God  know- 
eth them  that  are  his"  (2  Tim.  iii.  19), 
but  that,  since  we  are  finite  and  God  is  in- 
finite, we  cannot  measure  the  arm  of  God 
by  the  finger  of  man.  Hence,  although  it  is 
quite  true  ttiat  "  Every  one  that  loveth  is 
begotten  of  God  and  knoweth  Ood  "  (1  John 
•"•  7),  yet  in  writing  to  those  whose  love 
was  very  imperfect,  St.  Paul  deliberately 
chooses  the  passive  form  of  expression  as  in 
Gal.  iv.  9,  "Now  that  ye  have  known  God 
or  are  rather  kiioian  of  God." 

Ver.  4. — We  know  that  an  idol  is  nothing 
in  the  world.  After  his  brief  but  pregnant 
digression  on  the  nature  of  true  knowledge, 
he  returns  to  these  questions,  and  probably 
onoe  more  quotes  their  own  words.  They 
had  given  this  reason  for  open  and  public 
indifference  with  respect  to  meat  offered  to 
idols.  With  respect  to  idols,  three  views 
were  possible  to  Christians :  either  (1)  that 
they  were  "demons" — the  spirits  of  deified 
dead  men;  or  (2)  that  they  were  evil  spirits 
— a  favourite  view  among  the  Jews  (ih.  x. 
20;  Deut.  xxxii.  17;  2  Chron.  xi.  15;  Ps. 
cvi.  37 :  Bev.  ix.  20);  or  (3)  that  they  were 
merely  dead  images  corresponding  to  nothing 


at  all  (Isa.  xliv.,  etc.).  That  there  is  nont 
other  dod  but  one.  This  belief  is  the  signo' 
ture  of  Judaism,  according  to  their  daily  and 
oft-repeated  shemd  (Deut.  vi,  4,  etc.). 

Ver.  5. — Fur  though  there  be  that  are 
called  gods.  The  verse  is  a  limitation  of 
the  phrnse  which  perhaps  he  lind  quoted 
from  their  letter.  There  are,  indeed,  demons, 
and  there  are  created  things,  like  the  host  of 
heaven  and  the  powers  of  nature,  which  are 
called  gods  and  pass  for  gods.  Oods  many, 
and  lords  many.  Perhaps  a  passing  allusion 
to  the  use  of  eliMm,  gods,  for  men  in  great 
positions,  and  to  the  habitual  deification  of 
Roman  emperors  even  in  their  lifetime.  The 
title  "  Augustus,"  which  they  all  had  borne, 
was  to  Jewish  ears  "  the  nnme  of  blasphemy  " 
(Rev.  xiii.  1),  implying  that  they  were  to  be 
objects  of  reverence.  Indeed,  the  worship 
of  the  CsBsars  was,  in  that  strange  epoch  of 
mingled  atbtdam  and  superstition,  almost 
the  only  sincere  cult  that  was  left. 

Ver.  6.— But  to  us.  The  "but"  means 
"  nevertheless."  We  Christians  only  regard 
these  "  gods,"  "  lords,"  and  "  idols  "  as  non- 
existent, except  so  far  as  they  correspond  to 
created  and  material  things.  The  Father, 
Not  only  by  creation  and  preservation,  but 
much  more  by  redemption  and  adoption, 
and  as  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
(Rom.  viii.  15 ;  Gal.  iii.  26).  Of  whom  are 
all  things.  All  things,  even  including  the 
gods  of  the  heathen,  "  visible  and  invisible^ 
whether  they  be  thrones,  or  dominions,  or 
principal.ties,  or  powers;  all  things  were 
created  by  him  and  for  him,  .  .  .  and  by  him 
all  things  consist"  (Col.i.  16,17).  And  we 
in  him;  rather, into  or  for  him.  He  is  the 
End  and  Goal  as  well  as  the  Author  of  our 
existence.  One  Lord,  The  only  real  "Lord," 
though  the  Roman  emperors  often  took  the 
title,  and  one  of  them — Domitian — insisted 
on  the  use  of  the  expression,  "  Dominus 
Deusgue  noster  "  ("  Our  Lord  and  God  "),  as 
applied  to  himself  (Suetonius,  '  Domit.,'  13). 
By  whom  are  all  things.  "  By  whom,"  as 
the  Agent  of  creation  and  redemption  (John 
i.  3,  10 ;  Heb  i.  2).  And  we  by  him.  «  By 
him,"  as  the  SleJiator  and  the  Giver  of  life 
(Rom.  xi.  36,  "  Of  him,  and  to  him,  and 
through  him  are  all  things"). 

Ver.  7. — There  is  not  in  every  man  that 
knowledge.  A  correction  of  the  somewhat 
haughty  assertion  of  the  Corinthians  in  ver. 
1.  With  conscience  of  the  idol ;  literally, % 
(heir  consciousness  of  the  idol.  In  eating 
meat  off,rcd  to  any  god  whom  they  had 
been  aoaustomed  to  worship,  "being  used 
t)  the  iilol,"  as  the  Revised  Version  renders 
it  (reading  "  by  familiarity  with,"  (ruyrjflti^ 
for  a-ui/etSifarfi)  cannot  dismiss  from  theii 
minds  the  painful  sense  that,  in  eating  the 
idol-sacrifice,  they  are  participating  in  the 
idol-worship.     Their  oonsoience  being  weak 


!M.  Tm.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANSt 


263 


is  defiled.  Being  Gentiles  who  till  recently 
bad  been  idolaters,  the  apparent  participa- 
tion in  their  old  idolatry  wore  to  them  the 
semblanoe  of  apostaoy.  The  thing  which 
they  were  eating  was,  in  its  own  essence, 
indifferent  or  clean,  but  since  they  could 
not  help  esteeming  it  unclean,  they  defied  a 
oonscieutious  doubt,  and  so  their  conduct, 
not  being  of  faith,  became  sinful  (Bom.  xiv. 
14,  23).  St.  Paul  admits  that  tliis  was  the 
sign  of  a  conscience  intellectually  weak ; 
but  the  weakness  was  the  result  of  past  habit 
and  imperfect  enlightenment,  and  it  was 
entitled  to  forbearance  and  respect. 

Ver.  8. — But  meat  oommeudeth  us  not  to 
God ;  rather,  will  not  recommend  us,  God 
wonld  think  none  the  better  of  tiiem  for 
eating  idol-sacrifices,  even  though  they 
asserted  thereby  a  freedom  which  was  the 
reward  of  clear  insight.  This  verse  will 
serve  to  show  why  "fasting"  is  nowhere 
rigidly  enjoined  on  Chrislians.  If  fasting  is 
a  help  to  our  spiritual  life,  then  we  should 
practise  it,  but  with  the  distinct  appre- 
hension of  the  truth  that  God  will  tuink 
none  the  better  of  us  merely  because  we  eat 
less,  but  only  if  the  fasting  be  a  suoce-ssful 
means  of  making  us  more  pure  and  more 
loving.  If  the  Bible  had  been  in  the  hands 
of  the  people  during  the  Middle  Ages,  this 
verse  would  have  rendered  impossible  the 
idle  superstition  that  to  eat  meat  in  Lent 
was  one  of  thre  deadliest  sins,  or  that  there 
was  any  merit  whatever  in  the  Lenten  fast 
except  aa  a  means  of  self-improvement  and 
self-mastery.  This  verse  says  exprcdsly, 
"We  lose  nothing  by  not  eating;  we  gain 
nothing  by  eating." 

Ver  0. — lest  this  liberty  of  yonis  become  a 
stumbling-block ;  rather,  this  power  or  right 
of  yours.  To  lead  any  one  to  do  that  which 
he  tliinks  to  be  wron>;  is  to  place  a  stone 
of  stumbling  in  his  way,  even  if  we  do  not 
think  the  act  to  be  wrong.  For  we  make 
men  worse  if  by  our  example  we  teach  them 
to  act  in  contradiction  of  tlieir  conscience. 
"  Let  your  motto  be  forbearance,  not  privi- 
lege, and  your  watchword  charity,  not  know- 
ledge. Never  flaunt  yonr  knowledge, 
seldom  use  yonr  privilege  "  (Evans). 

Ver.  10. — Sit  at  meat  in  the  [an]  idol's 
temple.  To  recline  at  a  banquet  in  the 
temple  <Df  Poseidon  or  Aphrodite,  especially 
in  such  a  place  as  Corinth,  was  certainly  an 
extravaji;ant  assertion  of  their  right  to 
Christian  liberty.  It  was  indeed  a  "bow- 
ing in  the  house  of  Eimmon  "  which  could 
bardly  fail  to  be  misunderstood.  The  very 
word  " idoleum  "  should  have  wainod  them. 
It  was  a  word  not  used  by  Gentiles,  and 
invented  by  believers  in  the  one  God,  to 
•void  the  use  of  "  temple  "  (yahs)  in  connec- 
tion with  idols.  The  Greeks  spoke  of  the 
''Athen»um,''or  "ApoUoneum,"  or  "Posi- 


deum ; "  but  Jews  only  of  an  "  idotemn" — a 

word  which  (like  other  Jewish  designations 
of  heathen  forms  of  worship)  involved  a 
bitter  taunt.  For  the  very  word  eidolon 
meant  a  shadowy,  fleeting,  unreal  image- 
Perhaps  the  Corinthian  Christians  might  ex- 
cuse their  boldness  by  pleading  that  all  the 
most  important  feasts  and  social  gatherings 
of  the  ancients  were  held  in  temples  (comp. 
1  Mace.  i.  47 ;  x.  83).  Be  emboldened;  rather, 
be  edified.  The  expression  is  a  very  bold 
paronomasia.  This  "edification  of  rnin" 
would  be  all  the  more  likely  to  ensue  be- 
cause self-interest  would  ple.id  powerfully 
in  the  same  direction.  A  little  compromise 
and  complicity,  a  little  suppression  of 
opinion  and  avoidance  of  antagonism  to 
things  evil,  a  little  immoral  acquiescence, 
would  have  gone  very  far  in  those  days  to 
save  Christians  from  incessant  persecution. 
Yet  no  Christian  could  be  "edified"  into 
a  more  dangerous  course  than  that  of  defy- 
ing and  defiling  his  own  tender  conscience. 

Ver.  11. — Shall  the  weak  brother  perish. 
The  fact  that  he  was  "  weak  "  constituted  a 
fresh  appeal  to  pity.  It  made  him  more 
emphatically  one  of  "Christ's  little  ones," 
and  Christ  had  pronounced  a  heavy  maledic- 
tion on  all  who  caused  such  to  offend.  But 
if  there  is  this  "  ruinous  edification  "  npon 
the  trembling  and  sandy  foundation  of  a 
weak  conscience,  what  could  possibly  follow 
but  a  gradual  destruction  ?  The  tense  is 
the  present  (the  prsesens  futurascens},  "  and 
he  wlio  is  weak,  in  thy  knowledges,  is  perish- 
ing " — "  the  brother  for  whose  sake  Christ 
died."  The  order  of  the  original  often 
gives  a  force  to  the  words,  which  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  reproduce,  as  here.  The  word  "  is 
perishing  "  becomes  very  emphatic  by  being 
placed  first  in  the  sentence.  "  Destroy  not 
him  with  thy  meat  for  whom  Christ  died  " 
(Bom.  xiv.  16).  Perish;  terrificum  verbum. 
Clarius.  He  could  usi^e  no  word  which  would 
more  effuctually  point  his  warning. 

Ver.  12. — And  wound  their  weak  oon- 
loienoe ;  rather,  and  in  smiting  their  con- 
science  which  is  weak.  "  Wiiat,"  asks  St. 
Chrysostom,  "can  be  more  ruthless  than  a 
man  who  strikes  one  who  is  sick  ?  "  Was  it 
not  a  cowardly  exercise  of  liberty  to  strike 
the  conscience  of  the  defenceless?  It  is 
another  form  of  "defiling"  (ver.  7)  the  con- 
science, but  brings  out  the  cruelty  of  such 
conduct.  Ye  sin  against  Christ.  Because 
Christ  lives  and  suffers  in  the  persons  of  the 
least  of  his  little  ones  (Matt.  xxv.  40,  45; 
Bom.  xii.  5,  etc.). 

Ver.  13.^-Uake  my  brother  to  offend. 
"  Make  to  offend"  is,  in  the  original,  the 
verb  "  scandalize."  The  v/ord  for  "  meat " 
means  any  kind  of  lood.  Flesh,  The  par- 
ticular subject  of  discussion  here.  "  I  will," 
says  St.  Paul,  "abstain  from   flesh  8lt» 


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COfilNTlllANS.    [oh.  tiil  1—13. 


gvthn  rather  than  bv  eating  It  lead  • 

weaker  brother  into  sin.  While  the  world 
standeth.  The  same  expression  is  elsewhere 
rendered  "  for  ever."  Literally  It  means  to 
the  con.  St.  Paul  is  often  led  into  tliese 
impetaona  expressioni  <tf  the  depth  of  hia 


feelings.  The  reader  will  find  the  whole 
question  argued  in  a  similar  spirit  in  Bom 
xiv,  19 — 22.  Lest ;  namely,  in  the  case  sup. 
posed.  In  reality  there  was  no  need  fol 
taking  ao  severe  a  pledge  of  abatineno*. 


HOMILETIOai 

Vers.  1—8. — A  twofold  knowledge.  "  Now  as  touching  things  offered  unto  idols, 
we  know  that  we  all  have  knowledge.  Knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  charity  edifieth. 
.And  if  any  man  think  that  he  knoweth  anything,  he  knoweth  nothing  yet  as  he  ought 
to  know.  But  if  any  man  love  God,  the  same  is  known  of  him."  Here  a  new  subject 
is  introduced.  Paul  had  already  touched  on  four  difficult  points  in  connection  with 
the  Corinthian  Church — points  on  which  it  seems  some  of  the  members  had  written 
to  him  for  information.  One  referred  to  matrimony,  another  to  ecclesiastical  ritualism, 
another  to  slavery,  and  another  to'the  eating  of  meats  that  were  offered  to  idols.  Meats 
used  for  sacrificial  purposes  in  the  heathen  temples  were,  according  to  custom,  offered 
in  Corinth  for  sale  as  food.  In  that  Clmrch  there  wero  some  who  had  scruples  about  the 
eating  of  such  meat,  and  some  who  had  not.  Paul's  counsel  was  sought  on  that  sub- 
ject, and  in  this  chapter  he  supplies  it.  In  this  sketch  I  shall  confine  my  attention  to 
the  twofold  knowledge  to  which  he  here  refers. 

L  A  PBIDE-OBNEBATING  KNOWLEDQB.  "  Knowledge  puffeth  up."  By  this  know- 
ledge he  means,  I  presume :  1.  A  knowledge  that  is  merely  intellectual — a  stock  of 
mental  conceptions  concerning  the  various  objects  brought  under  attention ;  they  might 
be  material  or  spiritual,  those  referring  tc  body  or  those  referring  to  mind,  to  the 
creature  or  to'the  Creator.  Now,  such  kncwledge,  even  though  it  be  of  a  theological 
and  ecclesiastical  character,  tends  to  self-conceit.  2.  A  knowledge  that  is  essentially 
superficial.  Mere  intellectual  knowledge  baa  a  tendency  to  generate  pride,  and  the 
more  superficial  that  knowledge  the  stronger  its  tendency.  The  men  who  go  furthest 
into  the  essence  of  things,  take  the  widest  view  of  the  domain  of  knowledge,  enter 
furthest  into  the  arcana  of  nature,  will  be  the  least  disposed  to  self-elation.  The  greatei 
the  scientist  the  more  humble  of  his  class. 

II.  A  UAN-EDJFTiKO  KNOWLEDQE.  "  Charity  cdificth.  And  if  any  man  think  that 
he  knoweth  anything,  he  knoweth  nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know.  But  if  any  man 
love  God,  the  same  is  known  of  him."  It  appears  from  this :  1.  That "  charity,"  or  love 
to  God,  is  the  true  knowledge.  Love  is  the  life  and  soul  of  all  science.  Mere  intel- 
lectual knowledge,  however  great,  is  a  tree  without  sap,  without  moral  beauty  or 
strengthening  fruit ;  love  is  the  root  of  the  universe,  and  you  must  have  love  rightly 
to  interpret  it.  2.  That  this  true  knowledge  luilds  up  the  soul.  It  "edifieth."  It 
builds  it  up,  not  as  a  house  is  built  up,  by  putting  dead  stunes  and  timber  together,  but 
as  the  oak  is  built  up,  by  the  world-appropriating  force  of  its  own  life,  compelling  out- 
ward nature  to  deepen  its  roots,  extend  its  bulk,  multiply  its  branches),  and  push  it 
higher  towards  the  heavens.  3.  'L'hat  this  true  knowledge  ensures  the  approval  of  God, 
"If  any  man  love  God,  the  samfe  is  known  of  him."  The  word  "known"  must  be 
taken  in  the  sense  of  approval.  In  the  last  day,  Christ  will  say  to  those  who  have  not 
this  love, "  Depart  from  me  :  I  never  knew  you,"  that  is,  never  approved  of  you.  This 
luve  for  God  in  the  heart  converts  the  tree  of  intellectual  knowledge  into  the  tree  of  life. 

Vers.  4 — 13. — Aspects  of  responsibility.  "As  concerning  therefore  the  eating  of 
those  things  that  are  offered  in  aacrifica  imto  idols,"  eto.  This  paragraph  suggests 
thre«  general  remarks. 

I.  That  the  mobal  oblioations  of  all  men  abe  detehmineu  by  their  relation 
TO  the  one  God  and  his  Son.  "  As  concerning  therefore  the  eating  of  those  things 
that  are  offered  in  sacrifice  unto  idols,  we  know  that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world, 
and  that  there  is  none  other  God  but  one."  There  are  many  objects  in  the  world  that 
men  call  gods,  and  treat  as  gods,  but  they  are  really  nothing,  their  existence  imposes  on 
them  no  moral  obligation.  There  is  One,  however,  and  only  One,  from  your  relation 
(O  ivhom  there  grows  up  all  moral  obligations.    "  One  God,"     Monotheism  is  demon- 


WLtra.1— 13.]    THE  FlKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,  261 

strated  by  air  mature,  by  all  consciences,  as  well  as  by  the  Bible.  1.  He  is  a  Father. 
"The  Father,  of  whom,"  etc.  The  Creator  of  the  universe,  but  the  Father  of  spirits: 
apirits  are  his  offspring.  2.  He  is  the  Source  of  all  things.  "Of  whom  are  all  things. 
The  mighty  univjerse  and  all  it  contains  are  but  streams  from  him,  the  Fountain  of  life. 
3.  He  is  our  End,  "  We  in  him,"  or  "unto  him,"  more  properly.  The  supreme  End 
of  our  existence  and  Object  of  our  love.  In  connection  with  him  there  is  another, "  one 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  This  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  not  only  his  creative  Agent,  "by 
whom  are  all  things,"  but  his  redemptive  Agent,  the  Mediator  between  God  and  men. 
And  we  by  him,"  or  "  through  him."  As  Christians,  we  are  what  we  are  through  him. 
Now,  the  will  of  this  one  God,  as  coming  through  Christ  to  us,  we  are  morally  bound  to 
fulfil.  An  obligation  this  which  not  only  can  never  be  abrogated,  but  never  modified 
by  any  circumstances,  age,  or  revolution. 

n.  That  what  might  be  wbong  fob  one  mas  to  do  might  not  be  so  fob  akother. 
The  apostle  teaches  that  those  in  the  Corinthian  Church  who  had  reached  the  conviction 
that  an  idol  was  nothing  in  the  world,  and  that  consequently  there  was  no  harm  to 
them  personally  in  eating  of  the  sacrifices  that  were  offered  to  idols,  would  commit  no 
wrong  in  doing  so.  The  meat  itself  had  not  been  corrupted  because  it  had  been  offered 
to  idols,  it  was  as  good  as  any  other  meat,  and  as  their  consciences  were  not  against  it 
there  would  be  no  wrong  in  them  participating  in  it  as  food.  On  the  other  hand,  those 
who  had  a  superstitious  idea  that  they  ought  not  to  touch  the  meat  they  saw  the  priests 
feeding  upon  in  heathen  temples,  would  commit  wrong  in  using  it  as  food.  "  Meat 
commendeth  us  not  to  God :  for  neither,  if  we  eat  are  we  the  better ;  neither,  if  we  eat 
not,  are  we  the  worse."  The  right  or  the  wrong  depended  on  each  man's  conscience. 
That  which  is  against  a  man's  conscience  may  not  be  against  the  eternal  law  of  right, 
but  is  against  his  own  sense  of  right,  and  therefore  should  be  avoided ;  and  that  which 
is  in  accord  with  a  man's  conscience,  though  it  may  not  be  in.aocord  with  the  principles 
of  abscdute  rectitude,  would  not  be  wrong  to  him.  Though  sincerity  is  not  a  virtue,  it 
ia  always  relatively  binding ;  insincerity  is  always  an  absolute  sin.  Thus  what  is 
relatively  wrong  to  one  man  is  not  so  to  another.  Here  is  the  principle,  "  Whatsoever 
is  not  of  faith  is  sin."  "  To  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it 
U  sin."    Therefore,  "  let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind." 

IIL  That  to  offend  the  conscience  of  a  good  man,  however  weak,  is  a  wboho 
IN  AIX.  "Take  heed  lest  by  any  means  this  liberty  of  yours  become  a  stumbling- 
block  to  them  that  are  weak."  Bespect  for  the  weak  consciences  of  good  men :  1.  May 
require  self-denial  on  our  part.  A  truly  enlightened  and  healthy  minded  Christian  may 
feel  at  perfect  liberty  to  do  that  from  which  a  weak-minded  disciple  would  recoil  with 
horror.  The  apostle,  for  example,  might  have  felt  at  perfect  liberty  to  sit  down  in 
heathen  temples,  and  feast  on  meat  that  had  been  offered  to  idols,  for  his  great  soul  had 
risen  up  out  of  the  letter  and  form  of  religion,  concerning  meats,  and  drinks,  and  cere- 
monies, and  statutory  laws,  and  exulted  in  that  "liberty  wherewith  Christ  nukes  his 
people  free."  Therefore  any  restriction  in  such  matters  would  involve  more  or  less  self- 
denial,  and  this  Paul  willingly  accepted,  rather  than  "  offend  "  a  "  weak  brother."  On  this 
principle  it  becomes  all  to  act.  Men  who  have  reached  the  higher  stages  of  Christly  life 
may  feel  at  liberty  to  do  many  things ;  but  if  they  are  surrounded  by  good  people  whose 
consciences  are  in  the  strongest  antagonism  to  aU  such  things,  it  is  their  duty  to  deny 
themselves  of  luch  liberty.  2,  Is  urged  on  the  strongest  considerations.  (1)  The  lack 
of  it  may  infiict  serious  injuries  on  the  weak,  (a)  It  may  "  become  a  stumbling-block 
to  them  that  are  weak."  This  means,  I  presume,  an  occasion  of  sin.  Their  £»ith  may 
be  shaken,  and  they  may  become  apostates ;  and,  more,  (6)  they  may  be  "  emboldened, 
encouraged  to  do  the  wrong.  Without  your  moral  strength,  imitation  of  you 
will  be  pernicious,  (e)  It  may  ruin  them.  "  And  through  thy  knowledge  shall  the 
weak  brother  perish,  for  whom  Christ  died  ?  "  Christ  died  for  all,  tasted  death  for  every 
man ;  yet  his  death,  it  seems,  does  not  necessarily  ensure  the  Rnlvation  of  any.  What  a 
solemn  thought,  that  the  conduct  even  of  an  advanced  Christian  may  lead  to  the  spiritual 
ruin  of  others  I  (2)  The  lack  of  it  is  a  sin  both  against  the  weak  brethren  and  against 
CihrUt.  "  When  ye  sin  so  against  the  brethren,  and  wound  theur  weak  conscience,  ye 
Bin  against  Christ,"  3.  Is  exemplified  in  the  sublime  resolve  of  the  apos&e  :  "  If  meat 
make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  standetl^  leit  I  make  my 
brother  to  offend."    Here  ii  benevolent  expediency,  the  itrongeat  groumi  oi  whioh  th« 


268  THE  F1B8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [on  vm.1— 13 

temperance  reformation  can  be  wisely  and  effectively  advocated.  In  this  sublimr 
utterance  you  have  the  self-sacrificing  and  magnanimous  spirit  of  the  gospel.  Give  up 
all  rather  than  ruin  souls.  Such  an  utterance  as  this  is  characteristic  of  Paul.  "  But 
I  could  wish  that  I  myself  were  accursed  for  my  brethren's  sake,  my  kinsmen  according 
to  the  flesh." 

CoNOLnsioN.  Where,  in  the  state  or  in  the  Church,  can  you  find  a  man  who 
approaches  in  spirit  the  sublime  philanthnipy  of  Paul?  In  the  state  we  have  men  who 
call  themselves  reformers,  who  grow  eloquent  in  proclaiming  the  rights  of  man  and  the 
glories  of  liberty ;  but  can  you  find  either  in  their  speeches  or  deeds  the  matchless  spirit 
of  philanthropy,  beaming  and  booming  in  these  words  of  the  apostle  ? — "  Wherefore,  if 
meat  make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  standeth."  Are 
not  our  reformers,  alas !  more  or  less  traders  and  hirelings  ?  Where  even  in  our  Churches 
do  we  find  preachers  aglow  with  this  unconquerable  love  for  man  ?  And  yet  this  is 
Christianity,  this  is  what  the  world  wants,  what  it  must  have  ere  it  can  be  morally 
redeemed.  "  There  never  did,"  says  Sir  Walter  Scott,  "  and  never  will,  exist  anything 
permanently  noble  and  excellent  in  a  character  which  was  a  stranger  to  the  exercise 
of  resolute  self-denial.  Teach  self-denial,  and  make  its  practice  pleasurable,  and  you 
create  for  the  world  a  destiny  mora  aubliiue  than  ever  issued  from  the  brain  of  the 
wildest  dreamer." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ven.  1 — 13. — Strength  and  weakness ;  knowledge  and  love.  The  discussions  contained 
in  this  chapter  relate  to  "  things  offeied  unto  idols."  Bear  in  mind  that  idolatry  was 
not  then  simply  a  religious  system,  but  a  system  immensely  extended  and  covering 
a  corresponding  surface  of  political,  social,  and  business  interests.  At  all  points  it 
touched  individuals  and  families,  and  was  connected  with  feasts,  entertainments,  and 
etiquette.  "Most  public  entertainments  and  many  private  meals  were  more  or  less 
remotely  the  accompaniments  of  sacrifice "  (Stanley).  How  far  might  knowledge 
assert  itself  and  put  on  independency?  What  was  the  true  use  of  expediency  ?  And 
what  the  offices  of  conscience  ?  And  to  what  extent  must  the  strong  be  tender  and 
considerate  towards  the  weak  ?  Two  parties  existed  on  this  subject  in  Corinth :  the 
one  that  rested  on  Christian  liberty,  and,  believing  that  "an  idol  is  nothing  in  the 
world,"  demonstrated  its  adliesion  to  this  belief  by  buying  and  eating  meats  sacrificed 
to  idols,  and  even  went  to  the  excess  of  attending  the  feasts  "  in  the  idol's  temple;" 
the  other  party  looked  upon  such  conduct  with  abhorrence.  If,  now,  Christianity 
had  been  a  rnere  scheme  of  human  thought,  an  elaborate  philosophy,  a  poetic  inspira- 
tion, it  is  obvious  that  no  such  earnest  dispute  could  have  arisen.  If,  again,  St.  Paul 
had  contemplated  the  subject  on  the  ground  only  of  abstract  and  theoretical  principles, 
following  out  the  logic  that  "an  idol  is  nothing,"  and  claiming  tlie  full  freedoni 
guaranteed  by  the  assumption,  a  very  different  chajiter  from  this  would  have  been 
written.  But  see  how  he  approaches  the  matter.  His  first  step  is  to  check  the 
liberalists,  and  he  does  it  efficaciously,  for  he  convicts  them  of  pride  and  recklessness 
on  the  side  of  intellect.  Intellect  he  does  not  condemn,  but  its  wrong  use.  His 
condemnation  is  founded  on  the  fact  that  the  intellect  arrogantly  claims  to  be  the 
mind,  to  be  the  equivalent  of  the  man  himself,  and,  consequently,  shuts  off  the 
recognition  of  anything  except  knowledge.  St.  Paul's  position  at  the  outset  is, 
"  Knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  charity  edifietb,"  It  is  vigorously  stated  and  is 
accompanied  by  evident  impulse.  The  "  knowledge  "  referred  to  is  knowledge  isolated 
from  its  rightful  and  essential  associations,  the  knowledge  of  a  truth,  and  yet  without 
its  checks  and  balances — an  engine  lacking  safety-valve  and  governor.  No  matter 
how  valuable  the  knowledge  may  be  in  itself;  call  it  insight,  call  it  what  you  please; 
if  it  abuse  itself  in  its  use,  it  loses  its  worth.  Selfishness  vitiates  its  excellence,  and 
makes  it  doubly  harmful,  pernicious  to  the  possessor,  and  obstructive  of  benefit  to  him 
on  whom  it  acts  objectively.  Men  are  prone  to  exaggerate  knowledge  as  knowledge. 
They  say,  "  Knowledge  is  power."  So  it  is,  but  whether  the  power  be  for  good  or  evil 
depends  on  the  man  behind  the  knowledge.  Think  of  the  intimate  connection  between 
the  intellect  and  the  body,  and  how  much  more  it  is  affected  thereby  than  othei 


OH.  vml— la]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa  269 

portions  of  the  mind ;  think  how  tangled  it  often  Is  in  the  nerves,  'and  imprisoned  in 
the  cells  of  the  brain, — and  can  you  wonder  at  the  distrust  that  wise  men  have  of  its 
functions,  unless  controlled,  and  that  sternly,  by  principle  and  sentiment?  What 
subtle  poisons  creep  into  the  blood  and  thence  into  thought  I  A  slight  imprudence 
in  eating,  a  bad  dream  last  night,  a  household  worry  or  a  business  vexation,  disturbed 
breathing  or  accelerated  heart-action,  and  the  intellect  is  warped  and  enfeebled. 
Do  what  we  may  to  curtail  the  evils,  infirmities  cling  to  all  its  activities.  Yet  much 
may  be  done,  and  it  is  done  in  no  other  way  than  that  suggested  by  the  apostle. 
"Charity  [love]  edifieth  [buildoth  up]."  By  this  he  means  that  the  heart  must 
be  under  the  influence  of  grace,  and  thus  inspire  the  intellect  so  that  it  may  be 
delivered  from  its  selfishness  and  especially  its  self-conceit.  And  so  fully  has  Chris- 
tianity indoctrinated  all  our  best  thinkers  with  this  idea,  that  they  have  come  to 
believe  that  wisdom  is  the  conjoint  product  of  right  thought  and  true  feeling.  "If 
any  man  love  God,  the  same  is  known  of  him,"  and  the  knowledge  here  predicated  of 
God  has  a  reflex  agency  on  the  man's  knowledge.  Instead  of  being  "  puffed  up," 
instead  of  an  immoderate  and  unjustifiable  use  of  his  Christian  freedom,  instead  of 
a  vaunting  display  of  his  superiority  to  prejudice  and  ignorance,  he  is  regardful  of  the 
scruples  of  others,  and,  while  aware  of  the  difference  between  them  and  himself,  turns 
the  difference  to  the  account  of  humility  and  forbearance.  The  idol  is  nothing,  but 
its  nothingness  is  no  reason  for  insensibility  to  the  claims  of  weak  brethren  on  his 
^  manly  sympathies.  For  the  great  doctrine  of  "  one  God,  the  Father,  of  whom  are  all 
*  things,  and  we  in  him,"  is  so  profoumlly  realized,  that  human  brotherhood  l»  its 
complement  in  his  character  and  conduct.  "  One  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  are 
all  things,  and  we  by  him,"  the  Mediator  of  the  natural  universe,  in  whose  sovereignty 
all  laws  and  institutions  and  objects  have  their  reason  and  end ;  the  Mediator  of  the' 
spiritual  universe,  who  has  consummated  the  manifestation  of  humanity  in  the  person 
and  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; — this  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  who  is  the  Christ  of  God  and 
Lord  over  all,  has  so  embodied  the  fatherhood  of  God  and  the  brotherhood  of  humanity 
in  his  own  incarnation  and  office,  that  henceforth  the  grandeur  of  the  one  is  the 
strength  and  joy  and  glory  of  the  other.  St.  Paul  loses  no  opportunity  to  enforce 
this  supreme  truth.  Does  he  argue  in  behalf  of  Christian  liberty  ?  Hero  is  his  basis. 
Does  he  plead  for  expediency?  Here  is  his  wan  ant.  Does  he  harmonize  them  as 
coexisting  and  co-operating  sentiments?  They  are  mutually  supporting  because 
their  possessor  has  the  knowledge  which  comes  from  God  in  Christ.  From  this 
sublime  height  he  is  never  long  absent.  Thitherward  is  he  always  tending,  nor  will 
he  decide  any  question,  whatever  its  bearings,  with  a  judgment  detached  from  the 
great  truth  Christ  taught :  "  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made 
perfect  in  one."  All,  however,  have  not  this  knowledge.  The  insight  of  some  is 
partial  and  confused,  "whose  Christian  faith  is  not  yet  so  emancipated  from  the 
religious  convictions  of  their  old  heathen  state,  and  who  are  still  in  the  lionds  of  their 
former  conscience,  moulded  by  heathen  ideas  "  (Dr.  Kling).  Having  this  "  conscience 
of  the  idol,"  looking  upon  the  idol  as  a  rtality,  and  forbidden  by  his  conscience  to 
eat  the  flesh  offered  to  an  idol,  the  "  weak  brother  "  is  offended.  The  meat  itself  is 
a  matter  of  indifference,  nor  are  you  the  "  better  "  or  the  "  worse  "  for  the  mere  act  of 
eating.  A  grave  question,  however,  lies  at  the  back  of  the  action.  It  concerns  "  this 
liberty  of  yours,"  and  the  spirit  actuating  your  mind  in  doing  this  thing.  "  Take 
heed;"  this  liberty  may  degenerate  into  a  haughty  self- valuation,  may  become  a 
"  stumbling-block,"  and  may  induce  the  "  weak  brother  "  to  imitate  your  example, 
and  thus  sacrifice  his  conscience  under  your  influence.  Though  the  conscience|  be 
weak,  it  is  conscience ;  it  is  his ;  its  authority  over  him  is  sacred ;  obey  it  he  must. 
Worse  than  all,  your  conduct,  taking  effect  upon  him,  may  imperil  the  salvation 
of  a  man,  "  for  whom  Christ  died."  Enlighten  his  conscience  all  you  can ;  help  to 
make  it  truthful  as  well  as  sincere ;  but,  meantime,  "  take  heed  "  lest  sympathy  and 
conventionality  embolden  him  to  err.  "  Weak  "  now,  you  will  only  weaken  him  the 
more  if  your  liberty  mislead  him.  The  only  element  in  him  out  of  which  strength 
can  grow  is  the  conscience.  Use  your  freedom  so  as  to  liberate,  not  to  enslave,  this 
highest  authority  in  our  nature.  Use  your  knowledge  to  illuminate,  not  to  dadrken, 
this  divinegt  of  all  the  organs  personal  to  the  soul,  through  which  truth  reachei  the 
man.     Use  your  Church  relation  to  buiM  np  and  not  pull  down  your  brother,  that 


270  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COfitNTHlANSL    [oh.  viii.  1— la 

you  may  be  a  co-worker  with  God  and  with  his  conscience  in  making  him  a  "  templt 
of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Then  comes  the  utterance  of  great-heartedness — the  declaration 
that  he  will  eat  no  such  meat  for  ever  if  it  make  his  brother  to  offend.  This  was  no 
sudden  effervescence  of  sentimentality.  It  was  genuine  sentiment.  It  was  organic  to 
the  man's  nature.  Impvilse  was  strong  because  conscience  was  stronger.  The  current 
of  feeling  was  no  cataract  leaping  from  a  rocky  bed  into  rocky  depths,  and  dashing 
itself  into  foam,  but  a  mighty  river  that  could  not  become  too  fvUl  for  its  banks. — L. 

Ver.  1. — Knowledge  and  low.  In  the  Divine  Being  himself  both  knowledge  and 
love  are  perfect;  he  is  light;  he  is  love,  Man,  made  in  God's  image,  is  capable  of 
both ;  but  his  knowledge  is  and  must  be  very  limited  and  partial,  whilst  he  has  vast 
capacities  for  love.  Not  only  so;  as  the  apostle  here  teaches,  love  is  better  than 
knowledge,  for  whilst  this  puffs  up,  that  edifies.  We  recognize  this  superiority  in 
leveral  particulars. 

L  In  ITS  DTFLnENCB  DFON  THB  otditidual's  owk  oharacteb.  Paul's  obserration 
convinced  him  that  this  was  the  case.  There  were  at  Corinth  those  who  Iwasted  of 
their  knowledge,  of  their  intellectual  powers  of  discrimination,  of  their  superiority  to 
the  ignorant  vulgar.  But  these  very  persons,  although  Christians  in  name,  were  very 
far  from  displaying  the  character  of  Christ  himself,  evincing  little  of  consideration  and 
forbearance  towards  their  fellow-believers.  In  fact,  they  were  "puffed  up,"  their 
knowledge  inflating  them,  but  imparting  to  them  no  real  stability  or  vigour  of  character.  • 
On  the  other  hand,  such  as  were  animated  by  the  purifying  and  elevating  principle  of 
love  were,  by  the  action  of  that  principle,  delivered  from  selfishness  and  self-seeking. 
They  were  "  edified,"  t.e.  built  up,  as  a  temple  in  stately  proportions,  upon  a  secure 
and  ample  foundation.  This  is  a  generalization,  the  justice  of  which  is  borne  out  by 
the  experience  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  A  show  of  knowledge  is  often  unlovely  when 
compared  with  tlie  reality  of  love,  which  imparts  a  beauty  and  a  radiance  to  the 
character  beyond  what  human  effort  and  culture  can  possibly  bestow. 

IL  In  its  influenoe  dfon  human  society.  It  has  been  maintained  in  our  own 
day  (by  Mr.  Buckle)  that  moral  beliefs  have  no  influence  in  the  development  of  society, 
which  is  due  to  the  advance  of  scientific  knowledge.  But  facts  are  in  contradiction 
to  this  theory.  Learning,  science,  art,  are  all  good  in  themselves ;  but  they  give  no 
guarantee  that  they  shall  be  wisely  and  beneficially  used,  and  they  may  be  far  from 
a  blessing  to  society.  But  where  compassion  and  benevolence  are  prevalent  and  ruling 
principles,  there  society  feels  the  benefit  of  their  operation.  The  Church  is  maintained 
in  peace  and  harmony ;  the  world  around  is  profited  by  the  self-denying  efforts  made 
for  the  amelioration  of  its  condition.  We  have  only  to  compare  the  condition  of 
ancient  Rome  with  that  of  modern  England  to  be  assured  of  this. 

IIL  In  its  ACotiFTABLENESs  TO  GoD.  We  are  not  to  understand  that  our  Divine 
Buler  is  indifferent  to  the  progress  of  knowledge.  "That  the  soul  be  without  knowledge 
is  not  good."  And  there  is  a  kind  of  knowledge  which  is  near  akin  to  love :  to  know 
Ch>d  is  life  eternal.  But  mere  intellectual  activity,  mere  speculative  acquaintance  with 
truth,  are  vun  and  worthless  in  his  sight  to  whom  all  things  are  known  from  the 
beginning.  But  love,  as  it  is  the  highest  expression  of  the  Divine  nature  and  character, 
is  peculiarly  congenial  and  acceptable  to  God.  With  the  loveless  soul  Gkid  has  no 
sympathy  ;  but  the  soul  that  is  on  fire  with  love  to  God  and  man  is  preparing  to  dwell 
in  the  everlasting  radiance  which  makes  and  blesses  heaven. — ^T. 

Ter.  8. — JnttTnaey  between  Ood  and  man.  As  the  passage  treats  of  man's  knowledge, 
professed,  supposed,  and  real,  we  should  expect  in  this  verse  to  find  a  statement  regarding 
man's  knowledge  of  God.  And  by  some  the  second  clause  of  this  verse  has  been 
interpreted  in  this  sense.  If  this  somewhat  strains  the  language,  and  if  it  is  necessary 
to  understand  that  we  have  here  an  assertion  that  the  lover  of  God  is  known  by  GhQd, 
all  the  Same  the  apostle  must  be  acknowledged  here  to  a£Srm  a  spiritual  intimacy 
between  the  human  spirit  and  the  Father  of  s|>irits. 

I.  Thk  condition  of  this  intijiaot.  1.  It  in  a  condition  which  could  scarcely 
occur  to  man  apart  from  revelation.  Men  fear  Gkd,  reverence  QoA,  worship  God,  seek 
to  avert  the  wrath  of  God ;  but  to  love  God  is  net  an  exercise  of  mind  which  seems 
congroous  to  the  relation  between  the  Creator  and  \iM  creatures.    2.  It  is  »  oonditi<» 


«■.  vni.  1-13,]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&  271 


which  Christianity  renders  possible  and  natural.  By  revealing  God  as  love,  by  bringing 
that  love  home  to  the  heart  in  the  incarnation  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God 
Christianity  makes  a  claim  upon  human  love.  The  manifestation  of  affectionate  interest 
and  benevolence  in  a  way  so  remaikable,  so  unique,  is  suCBcient  to  account  for  a  new 
relationship,  and  for  new  emotions  corresponding  therewith.  3.  It  is  a  condition  capable 
of  universal  fulfilment.  "  If  any  man  love  God."  Tliere  are  many  whose  natural  powers 
of  body  and  of  mind  are  very  limited.  But  there  is  none  who  has  not  the  capacity  for 
lova  There  may  be  a  moral  unpreparedness,  but  this  may  be  overcome.  The  Gentile 
•B  well  as  the  Jew,  the  illiterate  as  well  as  the  learned,  are  capable  of  loving  the  Author 
of  Balvation. 

II.  The  chasacteb  of  this  intimacy.  Love  is  represented  as  leading  to,  as 
involving,  knowledge.  1.  On  the  side  of  God  himself.  This  is  the  explicit  statement 
of  the  text :  "  The  same,"  ».«.  the  man  who  loves,  "  is  known  by  him,"  i.e.  by  God. 
Knowledge  is,  in  Scripture,  according  to  a  Hebrew  idiom,  often  used  as  equivalent  to 
favour ;  even  as  we  say  we  know  a  person  intimately,  meaning  in  the  knowledge  of 
friendship.  Of  course,  the  Omniscient  knows  all  his  creatures ;  but  he  has  a  friendly, 
fatherly,  alTectionaid,  intimate  knowledge  of  those  who  love  him.  He  teads  the  language 
of  their  hearts.  '•  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his."  He  knows  them  to  watch 
over  and  keep,  to  guide  and  govern,  to  strengthen  and  to  save  them.  2.  On  the  side 
of  man.  This  is  the  implicit  statement  of  the  text ;  for  he  who  in  the  sense  affirmed  is 
known  by  Gh)d  also  knows  God.  How  true  it  is  that  he  who  loves  Gbd  knows  him 
too !  There  are  many  respects  in  which  we  cannot  know  our  earthly,  human  associates, 
unless  we  are  drawn  to  them  by  the  cords  of  love.  Love  opens  the  doors  of  knowledge. 
It  creates  that  sympathy  which  gives  intensity  to  the  intuitive  gaze  of  the  soul.  Thus  it 
is  that,  whilst  many  learned  and  philosophic  minds  are  ignorant  of  the  Deity,  there  are 
to  be  found,  among  the  lowly,  the  ignorant,  and  the  feeble,  those  who,  with  hearts 
quickened  and  softened  with  grateful  love,  live  in  a  hallowed  intimacy  with  him  who 
ia  the  Father  of  their  spirits  and  the  Cbd  of  their  salvation. — T. 

Vers.  6, 6. — The  unity  of  Ood.  The  Apostle  Paul  had  been  trained  in  the  monotheism 
which  had  from  the  first  been  the  belief  of  the  Hebrew  race^and  from  which  tney  had 
not  for  centuries  previous  to  his  time  ever  swerved.  But  as  a  preacher  of  Christianity, 
a  religion  which  aspired  to  world-wide  empire,  he  was  constantly  brought,  especially 
IS  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  into  contact  with  the  worshippers  of  idols,  both 
philosophic  and  popular.  And  he  was  often  called  to  be  the  counsellor  of  those 
who,  although  called  out  of  heathenism,,8till  lived  in  a  heathen  atmosphere  and  were 
entangled  in  consequence  in  not  a  few  practical  difficulties.  In  discussing  for  the 
benefit  of  these  Corinthian  questions  of  conduct  arising  out  of  their  necessary  association 
with  those  who  practised  heathen  customs,  Paul  took  his  stand  boldly  and  uncom- 
promisingly upon  the  great  religious  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  God. 

L  The  onitt  of  God  ib  contrasted  with  polytheistic  belief  and  worship. 
1.  The  deities  of  the  heathen  are  called  gods.  They  are  called,  but  they  are  not ;  it  is 
ft  delusion.  "  An  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world."  The  grand  denunciation  of  the  Hebrew 
psalm  occurs  to  the  mind :  "  Byes  have  they,  but  they  see  not,"  etc.  2.  These  deities 
are  deemed  "gods"  and  "lords."  They  were  and  still  are,  in  heathen  lands,  deemed 
superhuman,  supernatural,  and  are  invested  by  the  imagination  with  some  claims  to  the 
homage,  reverence,  and  service  of  intelligent  men.  3.  They  are  in  number  many, 
every  river  and  grove  having  its  deity.  It  is  well  known  that  the  heathen  had  even 
their  household  gods,  e.g.  the  Romans  their  lares  et  penates.  4.  They  have  their 
several  localities  and  ranks  and  realms  of  dominion.  They  are  "in  heaven,"  as  the 
superior  Olymjiian  deities ;  or  "  on  earth,"  as  those  inferior  numina  which  haunt  this 
lower  world,  nymphs  and  fauns  and  dryads,  etc.  Such  was  the  system  which 
Christianity  found,  with  which  Christianity  came  into  conflict. 

II.  The  unity  of  God  furnishes  a  centre  and  an  aim  for  the  new  rklioious 
j-'-a  OF  MEN.  1.  In  himself  he  is  "the  one  God,  the  Father."  In  itself  this  was  a 
g.urioiis  revelation  ;  and  in  Jesus  Christ  provision  was  made  for  its  wide  promulgation 
and  acceptance.  'A.  He  is  the  Creator  and  Upholder  of  all ;  "  Of  whom  are  all  things." 
3.  And  especially  he  is  the  great  Object  of  our  faith,  love,  and  devotion.  We  are  "for, 
, . .  unto  liim."   It  is  at  this  point  that  the  great  revelation  of  the  new  theology  becomes 


272  THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  vm.  1—18. 

the  great  motive  of  the  new  religion.  Polytheism  distracted  the  mindi  of  the 
worshippers,  and  made  it  impossihle  that  faith  in  God  should  become  the  inspiration  of 
a  new  and  better  life ;  for  it  was  a  question — What  measure  of  reverence  and  of  service 
shall  be  offered  to  this  deity,  and  what  to  that  ?  But  Christianity  revealed  one  God, 
in  whom  are  all  perfections,  and  who  is  not  only  the  Creator  but  the  moral  Governor 
•nd  Saviour  of  mankind.  They  who  live  to  serve  this  God  have  an  elevating, 
purifying,  powerful  aim  in  the  conduct  of  their  life. 

III.  'Ihe  uhitt  of  God  furnishes  the  noblest  motive  to  the  kew  BEUcioiri 
LIFE.  1.  The  one  God  is  made  known  by  the  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  a  mis- 
understanding of  the  Scripture  doctrine  to  conceive  of  this  view  of  the  Redeemer  as 
conflicting  with  the  monotheism  which  is  the  glory  of  the  Bible  revelation.  The  one 
Lord  reveals  the  one  God,  as  the  Word  reveals  the  Utterer,  as  the  Son  reveals  the 
Father.  2.  Christ  is  the  universal  Mediator,  "  by  whom  are  all  things."  This  is  the 
doctrine  of  John  as  well  as  of  Paul.  And  we  may  well  understand  the  moral  as  well 
as  the  physical  creation  to  be  included.  For  all  the  blessings  which  the  Father 
destines  for  humanity  he  has  resolved  to  confer  by  Jesus  Christ.  3.  We  as  Christians 
are  what  we  are  "  through  him."  As  in  the  former  clause  we  recognized  the  great 
aim,  so  here  we  recognize  the  great  meani  and  motive  of  the  new,  the  distinctively 
Christian  life.  The  Divine  nature  and  mediation  of  Immanuel,  so  far  from  obscuring 
our  belief  in  the  unity  of  God,  is  the  best  and  strongest  and  most  effectual  support  oi 
that  doctrine.  Even  as  Jesus  himself  said,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  bath  seen  the 
Father ; "  and  "  No  man  cometb  unto  the  Father  but  by  me." — ^T. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Christian  liberty.  No  doubt  Paul  was  regarded  as  the  great  champion 
of  liberty.  The  apostles  at  Jerusalem  were  more  under  the  influence  of  the  old 
Judaism ;  Paul,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  gained  a  larger  spirit  of  tolerance  through 
his  association  with  men  of  various  races  and  habits.  The  Spirit  of  God  set  him  free 
from  restraints  by  which  many  good  men  were  fettered.  To  him  the  party  of  know- 
ledge, of  emancipation,  of  liberalism,  would  naturally  look  for  countenance  and 
encouragement,  when  scruples  about  trifling  matters  of  outward  observance  perplexed 
the  conscience  and  threatened  to  divide  the  Church.  And,  so  far  as  his  views  of 
religion  were  concerned,  Paul  was  with  this  party;  ye',  as  this  passage  reminds  us,  ic 
his  view,  religion  had  one  side  turned  towards  Gorl,  and  another  side  turned  towards 
men,  and  he  would  not  have  this  second  side  overlooked. 

I.  The  dtdiffebencb,  ab  a  matter  of  principle,  of  outward  observances.  1,  2%« 
general  doctrine.  It  is  not  what  we  eat  or  abstain  from  eating  that  God  regai-ds,  that 
God  will  judge  us  by.  The  reasons  for  this  doctrine  are  obvious.  (1)  The  nature  of 
God,  who  is  a  Spirit,  and  in  whose  view  what  is  spiritual  is  of  overmastering  and 
supreme  interest.  Priests  in  their  pettiness  may  think  matters  all-important  which 
in  God's  sight  are  trifles  light  as  air.  (2)  The  nature  of  man,  who  is  a  reasonable 
and  spiritual  being,  and  whose  highest  welfare  cannot  consist  in  what  food  enters  into 
his  body  and  what  food  he  refrains  from  pa.  caking.  (S)  The  nature  of  Christianity, 
which  is  a  spiritual  religion,  and  seeks  ^  take  possession  of  human  nature  and  so 
to  influence  human  life.  It  is  not  a  religion  of  feasts  and  fasts,  but  a  religion  of  faith, 
hope,  and  love.  2.  The  ipecial  application  of  the  doctrine.  The  query  propounded  by 
the  Corinthians  is  fairly  answered.  It  is  as  though  Paul  had  said,  "  So  far  as  GK>d  is 
concerned  it  makes  no  difference  at  all  whether  you  belong  to  the  scrupulous  party, 
and  refrain  from  eating  meat  which  may  possibly  have  been  offered  in  idol  sacrifice  and 
worship,  or  to  the  liberal  party,  and,  despising  such  distinctions,  eat  whatever  is 
purchased  in  the  market  or  placed  upon  the  table.  These  habits  of  yours  cannot 
make  you  either  better  or  worse,  cannot  commend  you  to  God  or  involve  you  in  his 
displeasure;  he  looks  at  something  very  different  from  such  things."  So  with  parallel 
cases ;  matters  may  have  importance  as  regards  the  Church,  as  regards  human  Bociety, 
which  are  utterly  unimportant  as  regards  our  relation  to  God. 

II.  The  danger  of  carrying  Christlan  liberty  so  fab  as  to  injiibe  odb  fellow- 
hen.  A  Christian  in  these  eiirly  days  might  be  himself  quite  superior  to  the  small 
■oniples  by  which  his  neighbours  were  influenced.  But,  at  the  same  time,  he  might 
be  justly  called  upon  to  consider  his  weak  brethren,  and  not  to  put  an  occasion  of 
offeno*  in  the  path  of  any.    The  best  things  may  be  abused,  and  it  is  often  m  with 


OH.  nn.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  273 

liberty.  Paul  cared  not  a  whit  for  idol  feasts  and  sacrifices,  and,  had  he  considered 
only  himself,  he  would  have  eaten  meat  that  had  been  presented  in  an  idol-temple ; 
but  he  cared  for  his  brethren,  and  he  oared  for  them  all  the  more  if  their  knowledge 
was  slight,  their  faith  feeble,  their  apprehensions  of  spiritual  realities  obscure.  He 
would  not  break  the  bruised  reed ;  he  would  rather  abstain  than  injure  a  brother's 
conscience.  It  was  a  grand  view  of  Christian  duty  tliis  which  Paul  toolc ;  a  noble 
resolution  this  which  Paul  formed.  A  lesson  to  the  whole  Church  of  God  in  all  the 
various  phases  of  ex[jerience  and  trial  through  which  it  is  called  to  pass.  Let  Christians 
think  first,  indeed,  of  their  own  position  in  the  sight  of  the  heart-searching  God.  But 
let  them  not  omit  to  think  of  their  relation  to  tlieir  brethren  in  Chiist,  and  let  them  so 
act  that  none  may  be  trouble.!  in  conscience  or  caused  to  fall  by  reason  of  any  want  of 
consideration  and  sympathy,  by  reason  of  any  disposition  to  push  liberty  to  too  great 
an  extreme.  God  is  our  Lord ;  yet  his  people,  however  feeble,  are  our  brethren.  Their 
interests  are  dear  to  our  hearts,  and  our  intercourse  with  them  is  to  be  guided  not  only 
by  wisdom  but  by  charity. — T. 

Ver.  11, — The  hrother's  claim.  It  seems  as  though  Paul  treated  of  this  case  of 
conscience  at  inordinate  length.  Perhaps  this  would  be  so  were  it  not  that,  in  dis- 
posing of  this  difficulty,  the  apostle  was  really  disposing  of  many  other  difficulties 
which  should  emerge  in  the  course  of  the  centuries.  Principles  are  laid  down  in  this 
"  casuistical "  portion  of  the  Epistle  which  are  applicable  to  Christian  conduct  in 
varying  states  of  society  and  throughout  all  time. 

I.  The  danger  to  Christian  bretueen  of  the  unrestrained  inddlobnok  of 
LiBEHTT.  Let  a  Christian  man  consider  only  what  will  commend  him  to  God,  what 
is  in  accordance  with  his  right  and  liberty;  and  what  will  be  the  result  ?  This  passage 
makes  this  very  evident,  showing  that  for  an  enlightened  Christian  to  partake  of  food 
offered  to  idols  may  prove  prejudicial  to  weak  brethren,  who  take  such  conduct  as  a 
sanction  of  idol-worship  and  of  idolatrous  practices  generally.  No  doubt  this  is  a 
misconception,  but  it  is  a  misconception  wliich  is  likely,  which  is  certain,  to  happen. 
Thus  the  man  of  weak  conscience,  of  little  enlightenment,  has  his  nature  defiled  and 
hardened,  and,  according  to  the  very  strong  expression  of  this  verse,  is  in  danger  of 
perishing.  An  awful,  unforeseen,  consequence  to  follow  upon  the  indulgence  in 
Christian  liberty.  The  possibility  of  such  a  consequence  is  in  itself  sufficient  to  make 
a  liberal  Christian  pause  lest  he  should  carry  his  liberty  too  far. 

II.  The  great  Christian  motive  which  restrains  the  exercise  op  libertt. 
The  apostle  calls  upon  the  enlightened  Corinthians  to  consider  who  he  is  whose  welfare 
and  salvation  are  endan;:ered  by  the  course  supposed.  1.  He  is  a  brother.  Who  will 
say,  "Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?"  On  the  contrary,  the  spiritual  bond  that  unites 
the  people  of  Christ  one  to  another  is  so  close  and  precious  that  anything  that 
threatens  its  permanence  should  be  regarded  with  suspicion  and  dread.  2.  Not  only 
so ;  he  is  one  for  whom  Christ  died.  Observe  the  contrast  which  is  so  powerfully 
presented  in  this  language.  The  Lord  of  glory  died  to  ransom  and  to  save  each 
disciple  and  friend  of  his ;  submitted  for  his  sake,  not  to  inconvenience  and  restraint, 
but  to  sufferings,  to  the  cross,  to  the  grave.  And  shall  any  follower  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
treat  with  contempt  even  the  wesikness  and  prejudice  of  one  whom  the  Lord  of  glory 
so  pitied  that  he  gave  up  his  own  life  to  save?  Who  are  we  that  we  should  act 
in  a  manner  so  contrary  to  the  action  of  our  Divine  Lord  and  Leader?  Let  him  be 
uUT  Example,  as  in  other  things,  so  in  this ;  let  his  self-sacrifice  be  our  model  and 
motive,  that  with  a  sympathizing  and  affectionate  disposition  we  hold  dear  the 
security  and  well-being  of  every  Christian  brother,  however  ignorant  and  however 
feeble.  So  far  from  assisting  in  the  ruin,  be  it  ours  to  promote  the  salvation  of  every 
member  of  the  spiritual  family,  every  sheep,  every  weak  and  helpless  lamb,  of  the  vast 
flock  of  that  good  Shepherd  who  laid  down  his  life  for  his  sheep. — ^T. 

Ver.  12. — "  Sin  against  Christ."  It  is  a  proof  of  the  personal  and  intimate  character 
•f  the  relation  between  Christ  and  his  people,  as  that  relation  was  conceived  in  the 
primitive  Churches,  that  it  should  be  the  very  climax  of  reproach  against  any  professed 
Christians  because  of  any  coarse  of  action  they  followed,  to  charge  them  with  lin 
•gainst  Christ.  It  is  surely  obvious  that  language  like  this  could  not  be  used  of  ttaj 
L  oobinthianb.  t 


274  THE  FIBST  EPISTLJS  TO  THE  OOBINTHIAUS.    [oh.  vui.  1— U 

merely  human  teacher  or  leader.  One  who  was  on  the  one  hand  w  closely  united  t* 
the  Divine  Father  and  on  the  other  hand  so  truly  a  Sou  of  man,  as  Jesus,  Imtnanuel, 
could  alone  he  spoken  of  thus.  It  was  not  possible  to  go  further  in  expostulation  than 
by  the  use  of  such  language  ai  this,  addressed  to  those  who  considered  too  little  tha 
conscience  of  a  weak  brother,  "  Ye  sin  against  Christ."  To  act  without  due  sympathy, 
consideration,  and  charity  towards  a  brother  Christian  if  to  lin  against  Christ,  becauio 
it  i»— 

L  To  ore^ND  aoaikst  Christ's  couuandhent.  Our  Lord's  great  commandment, 
his  new  commandment,  his  oft-repeated  commandment,  was  a  commandment  to  his 
disciples  to  love  one  another.  He  even  went  so  &r  as  to  make  obedience  to  this  law 
of  charity  a  test  and  note  of  discipleship :  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my 
disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to  another."  A  disregard  for  the  feelings,  the  conscience, 
the  spiritual  health,  of  a  Christian  brother  was  an  evident  and  flagrant  violation  of 
the  Lord's  great  precept,  and  was  therefore  "  sin  against  Christ." 

II.  To  coNTBADiOT  Ciirist'b  exaufle.  Our  Lord  did  not  enjoin  a  spirit  or  conduct 
which  hu  (lid  not  exemplify  in  his  own  life.  Whoever  reads  the  record  of  that  life  must 
observe  tliat  his  spirit  in  dealing  with  his  disciples  was  one  of  forbearance,  consideration, 
pity,  and  benevolence.  He  washed  his  disciples'  feet ;  he  bore  with  their  infirmities 
and  their  slowness  to  understand  him;  he  pitied  and  instructed  their  ignorance;  he 
overlooked  and  forgave  their  cowardice  and  desertion ;  in  a  word,  he  laid  himself  out  in 
every  way  for  their  spiritual  good.  How  then  could  any  Corinthian,  how  can  any  other 
professing  Christian,  be  a  follower  of  the  blessed  Lord,  if  he  display  an  inconsiderate, 
contemptuous,  unforgiving  spirit  towards  a  brother  in  Christ?  In  so  doing  he  sins 
against  the  Master. 

III.  To  INJURE  Christ  in  the  pebsoh  of  cm  or  his  littlk  ones.  Jesus  laid 
down  this  principle  with  great  clearness  when  he  identified  himself  with  his  own, 
assviring  us  that  what  was  done — good  or  ill — ^to  his  little  ones  he  should,  in  the 
judgment,  regard  as  done  unto  himself.  The  Head  is  insulted  when  the  member  is 
injured ;  the  King  is  aggrieved  when  his  subject  is  attacked ;  the  Shepherd  is  smitten 
when  bis  sheep  are  scattered.  Whosoever  is  inditferent  to  the  welfare  of  the  Lord's 
servant  sins  against  that  Lord  himself,  and  shall  not  be  held  guiltless.  Christ  expects 
all  his  people  to  act  as  if  he  were  present  ia  the  person  of  everyone  whom  he  loves  and 
for  whom  be  died.— T. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  (tM  guides — kwmihdgt  and  Um.  L  Thet  abb  both  excbu.ebt. 
This  requires  no  proof.  The  apostle  who  sat  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  would  have  been 
the  last  to  speak  slightingly  of  real  knowledge.  We  are  made  capable  of  an  ever- 
increasing  knowledge.  How  much  knowledge  has  been  the  means  of  accomplishing  in 
this  world  I  Ignorance  is  but  a  "  fool's  paradise ; "  "  Knowledge  is  power."  And  how 
excellent  is  love.  How  dull  and  sad  this  world  would  be  without  iti  How  much  more 
prolific  in  crime  and  evil  even  than  it  now  is  I  One's  only  regret  about  love  is  that 
there  is  so  little  of  it.  It  is  the  world's  great  want.  Herein  heaven  and  earth  contrast, 
seeing  that  there  is  much  love  there  and  Uttle  here.  The  triumphs  of  knowledge  are 
great,  but  greater  are  the  victories  of  love, 

II.  Thet  are  oomplementart.  One  is  not  without  the  other.  1.  Knowledge 
'  without  love  leads  to  (1)  pride ;  (2)  intolerance ;  (3)  sellishnoss ;  (4)  injury  to  others; 
(5)  many  blunders  in  thought,  feeling,  and  action.  Knowledge  is  not  enough  for  s 
people.  We  may  have  abundance  of  knowledge,  and  yet  be  very  unwise,  very  injurious, 
and  very  unlovable.  2.  Love  without  knowledge  leads  to  moral  catastrophe.  It  is 
impossible  to  predict  what  conduct  may  result  from  mere  affection.  Knowledge  is 
necessary  to  determine  within  what  limits  we  may  rightly  act.  Knowledge  can  decide 
for  us  what  is  "  lawful."  Love  determines  what,  within  the  circle  of  the  lawful,  we 
should  choose.  Knowledge  and  love  united  lead  to  that  more  perfect,  that  penetrating, 
that  true  practical  knowledge,  the  opposite  of  which  Paul  describes  in  ver.  2.  True 
love  controlling  sound  knowledge  leads  to  a  deeper  insight — in  other  words,  to  a  truer 
knowledge.  For  example,  a  man  may  know  God  as  God ;  may  have  some  conception 
of  the  Divine  attributes,  etc.  But  when  he  loves  God  his  knowledge  makes  incalculable 
strides ;  he  now  knows  God  so  much  more  fully  and  truly  that  his  former  knowledge 
la   little  better  really,  and  no  better  practically,  than  crass  ignorance.      Knowledge 


«L  Tin.  1—13.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE!  TO  THE  OOBINTHIAN&  STfi 

"  puffeth  np ;  *  by  itself  it  is  sometimes  toorse  than  ignoranca.   Lore^  not  aotlng  with* 

out  knowlerige,  but  on  tiie  lines  of  knowledge,  "  buildethup." 

III.  A  BPEOIAL  OABK  IN  ILLUSTBACION.  The  Corinthians  had  written  to  the  apostle 
respecting  their  liberty  to  eat  meats  which  had  been  offered  to  idols.  The  portion  of 
yictiras  not  consumed  upon  the  idol-altars  belonged  partly  to  the  priests  and  partly  to 
the  offerers.  Much  of  this  meat  found  its  way  to  the  public  markets,  or  was  consumed 
in  private  houses,  at  social  gatherings,  or  at  feasts  in  the  temples.  Christians  would  be 
often  tempted  to  partake  of  these  idol-meat*.  1.  The  apostle  shows  that  knowledge 
»lone  would  be  a  very  unsafe  guide  in  such  •  matter.  An  enlightened  mind  would 
perceive  that  meats  were  in  themselves  the  same,  whether  offered  or  not  offered  to  idols; 
and  knowing  also  that  "  meat  commendeth  us  not  to  God:  for  neither, if  we  eat,  are  we 
the  l)etter;  neither,if  we  eat  not,  are  we  the  worse;"  would  consider  the  matter  as  purely 
indifferent,  and  to  be  determined  solely  by  inclination.  But  here  mere  knowledge 
would  lead  to  error.  Love,  which  concerns  itself  about  others,  steps  in  and  saya,  "  Take 
heed  lest  by  any  means  this  liberty  of  yours  become  a  stumbling-block  to  them  that 
are  weak."  All  do  not  realize  the  nothingness  of  the  idol,  or  the  fact  that  Idol-meata 
are  unchanged  by  idol-contact.  Their  immature  and  weak  condition  leads  them  to 
conclude  that  the  idol  is  something,  and  to  them  the  eating  of  idol-meats  is  an  act 
which  identifies  them  with  idol-worship.  Thus  the  partaking  by  the  more  enlighten^ 
may  prove  both  a  §eandal  and  a  temptation  to  the  unenlightened.  Knowledge  sayi, 
"  Do  all  that  you  have  a  right  to  do ;  "  Love  says, "  Consider  others,  especially  the  weak.* 
Knowledge  alone  leads  to  contempt  of  the  weak  and  ignorant,  and  to  indifference  as  to 
how  they  are  affected ;  but  Love  champioDS  the  cause  of  those  who  specially  need  consi* 
deration  and  help.  Knowledge  does  not  take  into  account  the  weak  brother,  but  Leva 
yearns  over  his  welfare,  and  forgets  not  that  Christ  died  for  him.  Love  kindled  at  the 
cross  flames  forth  in  Christ-like  self-sacrifice.  Love,  directing  its  glance  around,  sees 
'  that  the  highest  interests  of  those  for  whom  Christ  died  may  be  imperilled  if  the  claims 
of  Ubei'ty  be  too  rigidly  enforced ;  and  so  she  leads  men  to  the  choice  of  that  "  better 
part,"  self-sacrifice  for  the  welfare  of  others.  This  is  the  •*  shining  way"  once  trodden 
by  the  feet  of  the  Son  of  God.  This  is  the  path  of  the  truest  knowledga  ;  for  here  we 
learn  not  only  what  we  may  do,  but  what  in  the  highest  sense  we  ought  to  do.  2.  Ths 
apostle  has  here  no  occasion  to  show  that  love  without  knowledge  would  proye  a  fikulty 
guide.  But  it  evidently  might.  Love  might  lead  the  weak  and  ignorant  to  eat  th« 
idol-meats,  so  as  to  please  those  more  enlightened,  and  so  as  not  to  be  a  check  upoa 
their  desires.    Ws  need,  for  safe  guidance,  the  twin  giudes,  knowledge  and  loTe.^H. 

Ver.  6. — "  One  God ...  on*  Lord."  L  Thb  one  Gon.   The  oneness  of  Deity  li  hen 

emphasized.  It  is  insisted  upon  throughout  the  Scriptures.  The  true  Israel,  ancient 
and  modern,  has  lieen  monotheistic.  The  conflict,  contradiction,  confusion,  and 
absurdity,  conspicuous  enough  in  the  polytheistic  systems,  find  no  place  in  Judaism  or 
Christianity.  The  oneness  of  Deity  is  confirmed  by  (1)  nature,  (2)  providence,  (3)  the 
moral  sense.  The  one  God  is  :  1.  The  Source  of  all  things.  "  Of  whom  are  all  things." 
He  ie  the  great  Originator ;  all  things  sprang  from  his  creative  touch.  We  know  not 
how — the  manner  is  not  revealed  to  us,  the  fad  is.  God  may  have  left  much  to  man's 
scientific  instinct  to  discover ;  he  may  have  intended  not  a  little  to  remain  enehrouded 
in  mystery.  We  may  travel  reverently  along  the  lines  of  true  knowledge  until  they 
sease  for  us ;  then  the  great  truth  remains  still  for  our  enlightenment  and  comfort. 
The  march  backward  of  science  is  towards  unity ;  revelation  began  with  it.  2.  The 
End  of  all  things.  "  We  unto  [not  'in*]  him."  What  is  here  asserted  of  some  of  God's 
works  ('*  we  ")  applies  to  all  (see  CoL  L  16).  All  things  were  created  "  unto  "  God ; 
the  object  of  their  existence  terminates  in  God,  they  show  forth  his  glory,  they  subsarre 
his  purposes.  The  whole  universe  looks  God-wards.  So  far  as  intelligent  creatures  do 
not  find  the  end  of  their  existence  in  God,  so  far  as  they  do  not  seek  the  Divine  glory,  so 
far  they  fall  out  of  harmony  with  the  rest  of  creation  and  bring  failure  into  their  lives. 
We  are  not  created  for  ourselves,  but  for  God ;  we  should  therefore  "  glorify  God  in  our 
bodies,  and  in  our  spirits,  which  are  hia"  and /or  him. 

II.  The  onb  Lokd.  This  is  Jesus  Christ— the  "  Son  of  man  "  and  the  "  Son  of  God." 
We  arehere  taught  that  the  Head  of  the  Ohristiari  Church  was  the  active  Power  in 
ereation.    0/  the  Deity,- as  such,  were  all  things;  through  the  ona  Lord,  the  second 


276  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKIMTHIANS.    [oh.  vm.  1—13 

person  in  the  Deity,  were  all  things.  Some  hare  been  led  by  this  verse  to  question  th< 
divinity  of  Christ :  it  appears  to  teach  it  in  a  very  impressive  and  convincing  manner. 
The  administrative,  mediating  position  occupied  by  Christ  is  indeed  recognized,  but 
the  assertion  that  "  through "  him  all  things  were  seems  scarcely  susceptible  of  a 
fair  interpretation  if  his  divinity  be  excluded.  Moreover,  this  very  expression, "  through 
him,"  is  applied  elsewhere  to  God  as  such  (see  Rom.  xi.  36 ;  Heb.  ii.  10).  And  the 
expression  which  we  have  here  applied  to  God,  "  unto  liim,"  is  in  Col.  i.  16  applied  to 
Christ.  The  apostle  is  speaking  to  the  Corinthians  about  idols  as  "  gods  and  lords." 
These  were  »11  regarded  as  deities.  In  carrying  over  the  same  terms  to  the  realm  of 
Christianity,  there  is  nothing  in  the  statements  made  which  should  lead  us  to  regard 
"  Lord  "  as  less  Divine  than  "  God." 

ILL  The  spboial  relations  sdbsistino  between  believebs  and  the  one  Lobd  and 
ONE  God.  1.  Believers  are  "  through  "  Jesus  Christ.  As  creatures,  they  are  amongst 
the  "  all  things  "  which  are  said  to  be  "  through  "  him.  But  the  additional  statement, 
"  we  through  him,"  indicates  a  very  special  relationship.  Believers  are  such  through 
Christ ;  they  believe  on  him.  Through  Christ  they  are  separated  from  the  "  all  things" 
and  made  a  "  peculiar  people."  All  that  distinguishes  them  from  others  in  condition  and 
prospect  is  "  through  "  him.  He  is  their  "  Alpha  and  Omega."  He  created  all  things, 
and  they  are  his  ntw  creation — a  creation  of  a  higher  order  and  with  sublimer  ends. 
Apart  from  Christ  believers  are  nothing  ;  through  him  they  become  "  heirs  of  God." 
As  through  Christ  in  the  realm  of  nature  the  chaos  became  order  and  beauty,  bo 
through  Christ  men  pass  from  the  disorders  of  a  lost  state  into  the  excellences  and 
glories  of  a  redeemed  and  consecrated  existence.  2.  Believers  are  "  unto  "  God.  All 
things  are,  but  believers  are  in  a  very  special  sense.  This  is  "  through  "  Jesus  Christ.  As 
all  the  cieatiou  i.nder  tlie  administration  of  Jesus  Christ  is  "  unto  God,"  so  in  a  peculiar 
and  lofty  sense  are  believers.  They  show  forth  the  Divine  glories  as  none  other  of  the 
human  race  can.  They  reflect  the  Divine  love  manifested  in  the  transcendent  work  of 
redemption.  They  are  presented  to  God  as  the  fruits  of  the  Divine  grace.  Their  "  life 
is  hid  with  Clirist  in  God."  They  are  "not  their  own."  Their  lives  are  devottd  to  tke 
Divine  service.  They  are  "servants  of  God."  Once  rebellious,  they  are  now  obedient; 
once  defiled,  now  purified ;  once  lost,  now  saved  "  uuto  God."  Here  is  pre-eminently 
the  believer's  condition  ;  he  is  emphatically  "  unto  Gud."  Is  this  so  with  us?  If  we 
are  saved  by  Christ, /or  wlutt,  to  what,axo  we  saved?  Some  seem  to  be  saved /or 
nothing  in  particular  I  Many  are  satisfied  with  being  "  saved,"  and  never  ask, "  Saved 
for  what?"  '6.  Qod  is  the  Father  to  believers.  In  a  certain  restricted  sense  he  is  the 
Father  of  all.  We  are  all  his  offspring.  But  in  a  spiritual  sense  God  is  not  the  Father 
of  all.  Of  certain  unbelievers  Christ  saiil,  "  Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil."  God 
cannot  be  our  Father  unless  we  are  his  children.  There  must  be  the  double  relationship 
or  none.  Some  are  willing  enough  for  God  to  be  their  Father,  but  not  willing  at  all  to 
he  hia  children  I  But  the  true  believer  has  received  the  adoi'tion  and  cries,  "  Abba, 
Father."  High  privilege  indeed  I  How  it  speaks  of  care,  and  support,  and  protection, 
and  guidance,  and  teaching,  and  love  I  How  near  to  God  we  are  brought  when  he 
becomes  our  Father!  Our  origination  is  in  the  mysterious  Deity ;  we  are  fashioned  by 
the  hands  of  Christ;  amid  the  infinities  of  creation  receiving  existence  for  the  Divine 
glory,  we  seek  our  own,  and  become  blots  on  the  imiverse  otherwise  so  fair ;  "  through" 
Jesus  Christ  we  become  changed,  red^oiued ;  by  him  we  are  led  back  to  God,  and  see  as 
life's  supreme  object  the  glory  of  God,  now  brought  so  much  nearer  to  our  grasp ;  and  as 
we  reach  the  dread  presence  of  the  Eternal,  whence  all  things  come,  we  lift  up  our  eyes 
and  behold  "  our  Father."  This  also  is  "  through  Christ."  God  is  the  Father  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  Jesus  Christ  has  become  our  Brother.  If  Christ  be  our  Brother,  his  Father 
is  our  Father. — H. 

Ver.  13. — The  great  argumtntfor  ahstine»ee,  I.  Abouments  vs  fayoub  or  absti- 
NEKOE  often  run  UPON  SUCH  LINES  AS  THE  FOLLOWING : — 1.  That  from  which  we  are 
enjoined  to  abstain  is  asserted  to  be  dangerous  to  ourselves,  since  we  may  be  led  te 
indulge  to  excess.  Or :  2.  Is  injurious  to  ourselves,  physically,  morally,  or  spiritually. 
Or :  3.  Is  pure  waste,  bringing  with  it  no  real  benefit.    Or :  4.  Is  intrinsically  wrong. 

II.  Such  AneuiiENTB  frequently  lack  cooenot.  1.  The  fourth  will  have  no 
applieatioa  to  the  large  class  of  things  indifferent  in  themselves,  and  it  ii  gentrally  in 


Oil.  via.  i— 13.]    'J'lJK    1)1  KST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  277 

respect  of  snoh  that  the  war  is  waged.  2,  The  second  and  third  will  generally  be  open 
to  question.  The  difficulty  of  proof  is  great.  Facts,  apparently  conflicting,  will  be 
adduced,  and  where  knowledge  is  limited  and  imperfect,  the  contest  is  likely  to  continue, 
the  advantage  now  seemingly  being  on  one  side  and  then  on  the  other.  3.  The  first 
seldom  carries  conviction,  since  every  man  deems  it  an  impossibility  for  him  to  fall. 
Every  one  else  may  be  weak,  but  we  are  certainly  strong.  The  argument  against 
often  acts  as  a  temptation,  for  when  human  nature  is  warned  of  peril  it  often  delights 
to  show  how  brave  and  steadfast  it  can  be. 

III.  Thx  apostolic  argument.  1.  The  apostle  enlarges  the  view  so  that  others  are 
included  as  well  as  ourselves.  Abstinence  is  not  for  ourselves  alone,  sometimes  not  for 
ourselves  at  all,  but  for  our  fellows.  "  Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  also 
on  the  things  of  others."  Whether  we  realize  it  or  not,  we  always  decide  for  more 
than  one.  We  are  units,  but  united  units.  We  cannot  legislate  merely  for  that  little 
area  which  we  ourselves  occupy.  2.  The  apostle  recognizes  the  influence  of  example. 
Mentally,  we  instantly  assent  to  this ;  practically,  we  generally  deny  it.  Our  words 
are  a  spider's  web ;  our  acts  are  a  cable.  Men  do  what  we  show  them,  not  what  we 
tell  them.  And  we  cannot  persuade  men  that  we  are  strong  and  that  they  are  weak  ; 
they  will  believe  the  opposite  with  very  little  persuasion.  Men  are  like  sheep :  though 
the  shepherd  calls  and  the  dog  barks,  if  one  sheep  leads  the  way  the  others  will  follow, 
though  it  be  over  a  precipice.  3.  The  apostle  asserts  the  obligation  of  self-sacrifice  for 
the  welfare  of  others.  That  which  is  "indifferent"  becomes  anything  rather  than 
indiflfeient  if  our  indulgence  in  it  is  likely  to  cause  injury  to  our  fellows.  We  are  not 
only  to  think  of  others,  but  to  deny  ourselves  for  others.  Our  sacrifice  will  often  seen 
very  small  indeed  compared  with  their  possible  loss.  Here  is  an  argument  which  will 
stand  where  many  others  fall.  It  has  special  foioe  for  Christians.  (1)  They  have  a  great 
example  of  self-sacrifice  in  their  Master.  They  are  to  imitate  him.  "  He  saved  others ; 
himself  he  cannot  save."  He  "  gave  himself  for  us."  The  apostle  seems  to  suggest 
a  comparison  of  Christ's  sacrifice  with  the  sacrifice  which  he  desired  the  Corinthians  to 
make.  Christ  died  to  save  men  :  you  are  called  upon  to  sacrifice  what  that  men  may 
not  fall  away  from  salvation :  how  little  compared  with  how  much  1  And  to  those  nob 
making  the  required  sacrifice  :  Christ  died  to  save  the  weak  brother ;  you,  to  gratify 
your  appetite,  are  causing  him  to  perish.  (2)  They  have  a  more  impressive  view  of  the 
issues  involved  in  the  fall  of  a  fellow-creature.  (3)  Their  non-abstinence  may  be  a  sin 
against  a  fellow-Christian  (ver.  11).  The  fall  may  be,  not  of  an  unbeliever,  but  of  a 
brother,  associated  in  Christian  fellowship  and  service.  And  thus  be  (4)  a  sin  against 
the  brethren  (ver.  12) ;  against  the  Church,  bringing  scandal  and  disgrace  through  a 
brother's  tall.  And  also  ?5)  a  sin  against  Christ  (ver.  12).  For  Christ  and  Christians 
are  one— he  the  Head  and  they  the  members.  (6)  They  have  in  their  ears  certain 
suggestive  utterances  of  their  Master's ;  such  as,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto 
one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me  "  (Matt.  xxv.  40) ;  and, 
"  Whoso  shall  o£Fend  ['  cause  to  stumble,'  as  in  text]  one  of  these  little  ones  which 
believe  in  me,  it  were  oetter  for  him  that  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck,  and 
that  he  were  drowned  in  the  depth  of  the  sea"  (Matt,  xviii.  6). — H, 

Vers.  1 — 13. — On  the  eating  of  sacrifices  offered  to  idols  t  liberty  and  expediency. 
Another  of  those  questions  which  troubled  the  Christian  community  at  Corinth  comes 
up  here  for  consideration.  To  understand  the  difflculties  connected  with  it  we  must 
bear  in  mind  that  the  religious  worship  of  the  pagans  entered  largely  into  their  social 
life.  The  victims  offered  in  sacrifice  to  the  gods  were  not  entirely  consumed  on  the 
altar.  A  portion  went  to  the  priests,  and  the  remainder  was  either  given  to  the  poor 
or  sent  to  the  public  market.  Thus  not  only  the  feasts  in  the  temples,  but  also  private 
meals,  were  brought  into  close  connection  with  idolatrous  worship ;  and  the  Christians 
could  never  be  sure  that  the  meat  they  purchased  had  not  formed  part  of  a  sacrifice. 
It  is  easy  to  see  how  this  interweaving  of  religious  with  social  life  would  occasion  com- 
plications and  perplexities  as  to  practical  duty.  To  the  Jewish  converts  the  eating  of 
things  sacrificed  to  idols  would  be  an  abomination.  Among  the  Gentile  converts  two 
classes  may  be  discerned.  1.  There  w  ^  .  those  who  had  been  completely  emancipated 
from  their  old  ideas  regarding  the  heutheu  divinities.  To  their  view  these  divinitiea 
were  mere  creatures  of  the  imagination,  having  no  real  existence ;  and  accordingly 


«t  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOBINTHIAK&    [oB.  ym.  1— U 

thq[  felt  themselves  qidte  free  to  partake  of  the  sacrificial  flesh  when  let  hefoie  them. 
2.  There  were  those  who  could  not  get  rid  of  the  idea  that  an  idol  WM  a  reality,  and 
that  consequently  everything  connected  with  the  system  they  had  ahandoned  wai 
polluted.  Thus  the  question  became  an  important  one,  and  the  decision  of  it  had  an 
interest,  not  only  for  the  Church  at  Corinth,  but  also  for  other  Churches  where  the 
nme  ^fficulties  had  arisen  (comp.  Bom.  xiv.)i  But  It  may  be  asked — Had  this 
matter  not  been  already  settled  by  the  conncil  at  Jerusalem  (Acts  xv.)?  The  apostle 
himself  was  present  on  that  occasion,  and  we  naturally  ask  why  he  does  not  simply 
refer  to  ^e  Jerusalem  decree,  instead  of  proceeding  to  give  a  judgment  of  his  own  in 
■ome  respects  opposed  to  it.  The  answer  is  to  be  found  in  a  right  view  of  the  grounds 
on  which  that  decree  proceeded,  which  were  grounds  of  expediency.  The  Qentilo 
converts  were  enjoined  to  abstain  firom  things  sacrificed  to  Idols,  out  of  regard  to  the 
feelings  of  the  Jewish  converts  among  whom  they  were  located.  But  this  reason  did 
not  hold  good  in  a  Gentile  community  like  Corinth ;  and  consequently  the  whole 
Bnbject  had  to  be  considered  on  its  merits  and  in  view  of  the  altered  circumstancea. 
The  question  in  itself  is  no  longer  a  living  question^  for  the  Church,  but  there  emeiga 
in  connection  with  it  great  abiding  principles  which  never  lose  their  value. 

L  Enowledob  and  love.  The  apostle  prefaces  his  treatment  of  the  question 
"  concerning  things  sacrificed  to  idols,"  by  a  statement  regarding  the  relative  value  ol 
knowledge  and  love.  1.  Knowledge  by  itte\f  puffeth  up.  Knowledge  without  lore 
inflates  the  mind  with  conceit.  Take  the  knowl^ge  of  God.  You  may  read  what  is 
written  on  the  pages  of  nature  and  of  Holy  Scripture,  so  as  to  know  a  good  deal  about 
him ;  but  if  there  be  no  outgoing  of  heart  towards  him,  you  do  not  really  know  him. 
What  you  have  learned  of  God  will  lead  to  a  false  exaltation,  inasmuch  as  you  rest  in 
it  as  sufficient  instead  of  advancing  to  a  personal  acquaintance  with  him.  Or  take  tha 
ease  in  hand.  The  knowledge  of  the  nullity  of  idols  led  many  of  the  Corinthians  ttt 
tliink  themselves  superior  to  their  brethren,  who  could  not  shake  themselves  clear  of 
the  notion  that  an  idol  had  a  real  existence.  They  were  filled  with  conceit,  which, 
being  nntempered  by  love  to  others,  led  them  to  please  only  themselves.  2.  Love  leads 
to  true  knowledge  and  true  edification.  The  way  to  knowledge  is  through  love.  This 
b  tme  of  the  Imowledge  of  God.  "  If  any  man  loveth  Ghxi,  the  same  is  known  ot 
him  "  (ver.  3).  "  Every  one  thait  loveth  is  begotten  of  God  and  knoweth  God.  He 
that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God ;  for  God  is  love"  (1  John  iv.  7,  8).  Love  give* 
itself  away  (o  the  object  beloved,  opens  out  the  nature  to  receive  impressions,  and  puts 
all  it  has  at  the  service  of  the  loved  one.  Love  to  God  brings  us  near  to  him,  and 
gives  ns  experience  of  his  gracious  dealing,  while  he  in  turn  opens  himself  to  us.  It  is 
only  where  mutual  love  exists  that  there  is  a  mutual  revelation  of  heart  to  heart ;  and 
this  holds  gaud,  with  necessary  limitations,  of  our  relation  to  God.  We  know  him 
only  in  proportion  as  we  love  him,  and  even  his  knowledge  oi  ns  turns  upon  love. 
"  TIm  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his  "  (2  Tim,  ii.  19),  in  a  way  that  he  knows  no 
•ttien.  Our  knowledge  of  God  is  more  correctly  his  knowledge  of  us ;  for  all  we  ean 
know  of  him  here  is  but  the  alphabet  of  that  more  perfect  knowledge  which  comes 
with  perfect  love  (comp.  ch.  xiii.  12).  Kow,  the  knowledge  that  comes  through 
love  is  not  an  empty  thing,  puffing  up  the  soul  as  a  bubble,  but  a  solid  thing,  impart- 
ing strength  and  stability.  It  luilds  up  the  spiritual  temple  within  with  the  stones 
•f  tmth.  The  lesson  is — ^You  can  know  God  only  by  loving  him,  and  the  measure  of 
yoor  love  will  be  the  measure  of  your  knowledge.  3.  Conceit  tf  one**  knou^edge  i» 
m  stcre  evidence  of  ignorance.  The  man  who  is  proud  of  what  he  knows  has  no  ade- 
quate view  of  the  greatness  of  the  object.  The  more  we  really  know  the  more  humble 
do  we  become.  This  is  true  of  secular  knowledge,  but  especially  of  Divine  knowledge. 
The  glimpses  we  get  of  God  lay  us  in  the  dust.  He  who  is  pi^ed  up  because  he  lias 
gathered  a  few  pebbles  on  the  shore  has  never  looked  out  on  the  great  ocean  of  truth. 

II.  The  liberty  that  combs  through  knowledge.  (Vers.  4—6.)  Returning  now 
ta  the  question  in  hand,  the  apostle  shows  how  the  faith  of  the  enlightened  Christian 
suggests  a  ready  answer.  1.  The  idols  which  the  heathen,  worship  are  mere  noiientitiet. 
Their  so-called  gods,  with  which  they  have  filled  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  have  no 
real  existence.  There  is  no  Jupiter,  no  Mars,  no  Venus.  They  are  simply  creatures 
of  the  imagination,  having  nothing  corresponding  to  them  in  the  universe.  This  view 
of  the  pagan  divinities  finds  fret^uent  expression  in  the  prophets,  who  ridicule  them  as 


OH.  vin.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TRP!  COUlNTHiANS.  278 

mere  vanities  (oomp.  Isa.  xliv,  9 ;  Jer.  x.  3  j  Ps.  cxv.  4).  How  melancholy  •  picture 
does  this  present  of  the  condition  of  those  who  know  not  the  true  God  I  Men  must 
worship,  and  so  strong  is  this  impulse  that  they  first  create  the  objects  of  worship  anc 
then  how  down  before  them.  It  is  the  blind  groping  of  the  human  mind  after  tha 
Most  High — a  creature,  with  dreamy  recollections  of  a  lost  glory,  stretching  out  suppliant 
hands  towards  a  silent  heaven.  2.  There  is  hut  one  living  and  trite  Qod.  This  is  the 
Christian's  simple  creed.  (1)  Instead  of  "gods  many,"  "to  us  there  is  one  God,  the 
Father,  of  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  imto  him."  This  Supreme  Being  is  the  Creator 
and  Primal  Source  of  all  things,  our  Father  in  heaven,  for  whose  glory  we  exist.  Thi; 
is  the  fundamental  doctrine  on  which  all  true  religion  rests,  and  which  at  once  takes 
the  ground  from  pagan  polytheism.  It  also  strikes  against  all  modern  idolatries  which 
are  practised  in  Christian  lands :  hero-worship,  mammon-worship,  etc.  (2)  Instead  of 
"  lords  many,"  there  is  "  one  Lord,  Jesus  Christ,  through  whom  are  all  things,  and  we 
through  him."  There  is  but  one  Governor  of  the  universe,  into  whose  hands  all  power 
has  been  committed,  Jesus  the  Messiah,  by  whose  agency  all  things  were  created,  and 
in  whom  we  are  made  iiew  creatures.  This  is  the  second  article  of  our  holy  faith. 
Instead  of  the  endless  series  of  gods  and  demigods,  who  were  supposed  to  hold  sway  over 
different  parts  of  the  universe,  "  there  is  one  God,  one  Mediator  also  between  God  and 
men,  himself  man,  Christ  Jesus  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  5).  3.  From  this  the  inference  is  plain  that 
eating  or  not  eating  of  things  offered  to  idols  is  a  matter  of  indifference.  If  an  idol  has 
no  real  existence,  it  cannot  defile  that  which  is  presented  to  the  image  in  the  temple. 
The  flesh  which  formed  part  of  a  sacrifice  is  neither  better  nor  worse  on  this  account, 
and  may  be  used  without  scruple.  Thus  the  enlightened  Christian  is  freed  from  the 
entanglement  of  such  petty  questions,  which  belong  to  the  bondage  of  legalism  rather 
.than  the  liberty  that  is  in  Christ.  How  important  is  a  full  acquaintance  with  Divine 
truth !  How  good  it  is  to  be  free  from  prejudice,  and  to  receive  the  whole  truth  as  to 
our  standing  in  Jesus  Christ  I     But  such  knowledge  is  dangerous  if  it  stands  alone. 

III.  Limitations  to  liberty  arising  from  Christian  love.  (Vers.  7 — 13.)  An 
enlightened  view  of  the  nature  of  heathen  divinities  delivers  the  Christian  from  questions 
as  to  the  lawfulness  of  eating  what  had  first  done  duty  as  a  sacrifice ;  but  all  Christians 
are  not  thus  enlightened.  There  were  at  Corinth  believers,  converts  from  heathenism, 
who  could  not  get  rid  of  the  idea  that  the  idols  they  had  formerly  worshipped  had 
a  real  existence,  and  who  consequently  regarded  the  flesh  used  in  sacrifice  as  polluted. 
A  due  regard  to  the  case  of  these  weaker  brethren  will  modify  the  use  of  their  Christian 
■  liberty  by  the  stronger.  1.  Consider  their  case.  Their  conscience  was  weak,  inasmuch 
as  it  could  not  rise  to  the  conviction  that  an  idol  is  nothing,  and  was  therefore  troubled 
with  scruples  as  to  the  lawfulness  of  partaking  of  a  thing  sacrificed  to  an  idol.  Hence 
such  persons  could  not  eat  without  defiling  their  conscience,  t.e.  without  the  feeling 
that  they  had  done  wrong.  This  carries  with  it  principles  that  have  an  important 
bearing  upon  Christian  ethics.  It  is  wrong  for  a  man  to  do  what  his  conscience  tells 
him  is  wrong,  or  what  it  does  not  clearly  approve.  The  thing  in  itself  may  be  good, 
but  if  you  are  in  doubt  about  it  you  are  thereby  debarred  from  doing  it.  The  dictates 
of  conscience  are  always  imperative,  but  with  this  there  goes  the  duty  of  seeing  that 
conscience  is  instructed.  Comp.  Rom.  xiv.  23,  where  Paul  is  treating  of  the  same 
subject :  "  He  that  doubteth  is  condemned  if  he  eat,  because  he  eateth  not  of  faith  ; 
and  whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin."  Apply  this  to  some  forms  of  amusement, 
doubtful  practices  in  trade,  extravagant  living,  etc.  It  is  not  enough  to  plead  the 
example  of  others,  if  you  are  in  doubt  regarding  their  rightness.  "Let  each  man 
be  fully  assured  in  his  own  mind."  Do  not  disregard  the  faithful  voice  within  your 
bosom,  even  when  it  speaks  in  whispers.  2.  The  eating  of  such  things  has  no  religious 
significance.  Neither  the  use  nor  the  abstinence  from  use  commends  us  to  God  or 
affects  our  standing  before  him.  To  abstain  from  eating  for  the  sake  of  weak  brethren 
is  not  to  surrender  any  spiritual  benefit.  It  is  a  matter  of  indifference.  "  The  kingdom 
of  God  is  not  eating  and  drinking"  (Rom.  xiv.  17).  Observe  the  doss  of  matters  to 
which  alone  the  apostle's  reasoning  is  meant  to  apply.  They  must  be  such  as 
involve  no  religious  principle — cases  where  accommodation  to  the  weakness  of  others 
does  not  imply  the  sacrifice  of  truth  or  duty.  In  such  cases  we  are  free  to  consider 
the  condition  of  our  brethren,  and  to  regulate  our  conduct  by  a  regard  to  them.  3.  The 
strong  must  not  vse  th^r  liberty  so  as  to  put  a  siumhling-hloch  t'n  the  path  of  the  weak. 


280  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  tol  1— !» 

If  a  weak  brother,  who  had  donbts  about  the  eating  of  ncrifieial  flesh,  should  by  the 

example  of  aQother  be  einboldened  to  eat  also,  in  that  case  ho  would  sin  and  his 
conscience  be  defiled.  The  more  enlightened  Christian  would  thus  be  the  occasion 
of  stumbling  to  his  brother,  bringing  him  into  danger  of  perishing  altogether,  and 
would  thereby  sin  against  Christ  who  died  for  him.  Bather  than  do  anything  that 
might  lead  to  this  result,  the  apostle  declares,  "  If  meat  maketh  my  brother  to 
stumble,"  etc.  This  is  the  principle  of  Christian  expediency,  of  which  Paul  is  the 
great  exponent,  and  which  enters  so  largely  into  the  believer's  practical  life.  It  has 
its  root  in  love,  which  leads  us  to  "  bear  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of 
Christ "  (Gal.  yi.  2).  It  is  an  outcome  of  that  spirit  of  self-denial  which  dwelt  in  him. 
"  Now  W9  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  not  to  please 
ourselves.  Let  each  one  of  us  please  his  neighbour  for  that  which  is  good,  unto 
edifying.  For  Christ  also  pleased  not  himself"  (Bom.  xt.  1 — 3).  In  applying  this 
principle,  note :  (1)  It  applies  only  to  things  in  themselves  indifferent.  Where  true 
Christian  liberty  was  in  danger,  Paul  refused  to  yield  (GaL  ii.  3 — 5).  ^)  It  is 
not  to  be  confounded  with  mere  time-serving  or  man-pleasing.  (3)  Each  Christian 
must  judge  for  himself  how  this  principle  requires  him  to  act  in  special  «arcumstances. 
Total  abstinence  from  strong  drink  for  the  sake  of  others  ia  a  good  example  of  its 
application. — B. 

Ver.  1. — Knowledge  and  lovt.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  being  "  puffed  n  p  " 
and  being  "  built  up."  The  one  implies  something  pretentious  and  plausible,  but  hollow 
and  unreal.  It  means  show  without  substance,  size  without  solidity,  inflation  without 
real  enlargement.  The  other  implies  the  gradual  accumulation  of  substantial  materials, 
on  a  firm  basis,  to  some  useful  and  enduring  result.  Now,  the  apostle  would  have  the 
C<.irintbian  Christians  determine  the  question  of  personal  duty  concerning  attendance 
at  feasts  in  honour  of  idols,  or  eating  of  meat  offered  in  sacrifice,  on  far  other  ground 
than  any  supposed  sagacity  of  their  own.  All,  no  doubt,  had  "  knowledge."  But  there 
is  a  higher  criterion  of  judgment  than  this.  Love  is  a  better  guide  in  such  matters  than 
knowledge.  In  all  these  things  let  it  be  that  delicate  regard  for  the  feelings  and 
interests  of  others  which  love  implies,  rather  than  any  abstract  ideas  about  their  own 
liberty,  that  deter  ines  their  conduct.  Hence  the  broad  principle, "  Knowledge  puffeth 
up,  love  edifieth."    Consider — 

L  Thk  knowledoe  that  pcffeth  m.  The  case  contemplated  ia  one  in  which 
the  purely  intellectual  element  in  the  determination  of  moral  questions  is  divorced  from 
right  feeling.  It  is  a  knowledge  ideal  and  speculative,  not  vital  and  spiritual.  The 
knowledge  of  the  theologian,  the  logician,  the  casuist ;  not  that  of  the  man  whose 
reason  and  conscience  and  heart  are  alike  alive  unto  God.  The  characteristic  of  this 
knowledge  is  that  it  makes  men  vain,  conceited,  self-asserting,  "  thinking  more  highly 
of  themsel  ves  than  they  ought  to  think."  A  true  knowledge  of  the  things  of  God  baa  no 
such  tendency  as  this.  "  If  a  man  thinketh  that  he  knoweth  anything,"  etc.  (ver.  2). 
Real  knowledge  in  the  spiritual  sphere  is  beyond  the  reach  of  one  who  is  destitute  of 
humility  and  luve.  Even  in  the  realm  of  purely  secular  science,  true  knowledge  docs 
not  make  men  vain.  The  lives  of  such  men  as  Newton,  Herschel,  Faraday,  etc., 
illustrate  the  truth  of  this.  They  were  men  of  lowly,  childlike  spirit.  They  stood 
reverently,  as  with  bared  head  and  unsandalled  feet,  before  the  infinite  mystery  of  the 
universe.  It  is  the  novice,  the  mere  tyro  in  learning,  the  man  of  shallow  thought  and 
narrow  view,  who  is  proud  of  his  attainments,  dogmatic  and  self-asserting.  Huw 
much  more  will  it  be  so  in  matters  purely  spiritnal,  belonging  to  a  region  into  which 
our  science  cannot  climb!  Take  St.  Paul  himself  as  an  example.  Wliile  he  moved 
within  the  narrow  circle  of  Jewish  tradition  and  prejudice,  he  was  probably  the  very 
type  of  personal  vanity.  His  I'harisaic  pride  was  not  only  that  of  legal  blamelessness, 
l>ut  tA  theological  culture.  Had  he  not  sat  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel  ?  Who  could  teach 
Ijim  what  he  did  not  know  ?  It  is  a  portrait  of  himself  that  he  paints  in  those  half- 
earcastic  words :  "  If  thou  bearest  the  name  of  a  Jew,  and  restest  upon  the  Law,"  etc, 
(Bom.  ii.  17 — 20).  But  when  the  light  from  heaven  shone  upon  him,  how  was  the 
loftiness  of  his  pride  laid  low  I  He  "  became  a  fool  that  he  might  be  wise."  Moreover, 
I  his  mere  theoretic  knowledge  is  as  profitless  in  its  effect  on  others  as  it  ia  to  one's  self. 
It  becomes  disputatious,  "  gendering  strifes  about  words,"  eta    There  ia  no  "  edifying' 


tu.  vin,  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHlANa  281 

quality  in  it.  It  dooa  not  make  men  one  whit  the  nobler,  purer,  more  gracious  in 
heart  and  life.  It  in  no  way  promotes  the  reign  of  those  Divine  principles  ol 
"righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  in  which  the  kingdom  of  God 
consists. 

II.  The  lots  that  bcildeth  tip.  Take  love  here  in  the  highest  and  broadest  sense, 
as  including  love  to  God  and  love  to  man.  These  are  but  two  sides  and  aspects  of  the 
same  afllction.  It  is  an  essentially  religious  alfcctlon.  'I'here  are  tender  sensibilities  and 
generous  sentiments  which  give  a  natural  grace  to  human  character  quite  apart  from  all 
religious  thought  and  feeling.  They  may  prepare  the  viay  for  the  awakening  of  this 
Divine  affection,  but  are  nut  to  be  confounded  with  it.  Only  by  personal  fellowship  with 
Christ  can  we  rise  into  the  atniosi>heru  of  a  pure,  unselfish,  all-embracing  love  like  his. 
[jOve  builds  up  the  temple  of  God.  The  separate  personality  of  every  Chiistian,  and  the 
complex,  many-membere  1  personality  of  the  whole  redeemed  Church,  are  the  dwelling- 
place  of  God,  prepared  by  gradual  enlargement  and  adornment  to  be  the  fitting  shrine  of 
liis  glory  ;'^nd  it  is  the  office  of  love  to  promote  this  process.  It  is  the  effective  power  in 
the  development  and  perfecting  of  personal  Christian  character  and  social  Christian  life. 
In  confirmation  of  this,  think  uf  it:  1.  As  the  essential  spirit  of  all  other  graces.  It 
gives  them  their  highest,  richest  quality.  It  is  the  life,  the  beauty,  the  strength,  the 
very  soul,  of  them  all.  Consider  the  position  love  occupies  in  the  circle  of  the  Divine 
attributes.  Truth,  justice,  purity,  goodness,  etc.,  are  attributes  of  the  Divine  character ; 
but  "  God  is  love."  A  similar  position  does  love  occupy  in  the  ideal  character  of  bis 
true  children.  We  are  such  poor,  fragmentary,  distorted  reflections  of  the  Divine  beauty 
that  even  in  the  best  of  us  this  truth  is  too  often  obscured.  Personal  Christianity 
assumes  many  forms — the  gentle  and  the  severe,  the  reserved  and  the  demonstrative, 
the  meditative  and  the  pr,ictical,  the  punctilious  and  the  free ;  but  this  is  the  essential 
spirit  of  all  its  Torms.  It  is  true  to  the  Divine  ideal  only  so  far  as  this  spirit  breathes 
through  all  its  moods.  2.  As  the  hond  of  Christian  unity.  Keenness  of  spiritual 
insight,  zeal  for  truth,  fidelity  to  conscience,  may  of  themselves  have  a  separating 
effect ;  but  love  draws  and  cements  men  together  in  a  real  fellowship  of  life.  Difierences 
in  opinion,  modes  of  thought,  ecclesiastical  usage,  etc.,  become  of  comparatively  small 
account,  "  so  love  at  heart  prevail."  3.  As  an  incentive  to  all  real  Christian  activity. 
It  is  the  distinction  of  Christianity  as  a  Divine  method  of  moral  culture  that  it  bases 
practical  and  social  virtue  on  this  foundation,  casts  it  freely  on  the  prompting  and 
sustaining  power  of  love.  "  Love  is  the  end  of  the  commandment,  the  fulfilling  of  the 
Law."  Get  your  soul  tilled  with  love,  and  you  will  never  want  for  an  efi'ectual  motive 
to  all  noble  living.  As  the  materials  uf  the  building  arrange  themselves  and  rise 
into  their  finished  form  in  olied  ence  to  the  thought  and  will  of  the  architect ;  as  the 
notes  fall,  as  if  by  an  instinct  of  their  own,  into  their  due  place  according  to  the  inspira- 
tion of  the  musician ;  as  the  words  flow  in  rhythmic  cadence  in  answer  to  the  mood  of 
the  poet's  genius;  as  the  grass  and  the  flowers  and  the  cum  grow  by  the  spontaneous 
energy  of  the  creative  and  formative  mind  that  animates  them  all ; — so  will  you  rear 
for  yourself  the  structure  of  a  beautiful  and  useful  Christian  life,-  if  your  heart  is 
filled  with  love.  4.  As  the  mightiest  of  all  instruments  of  hleasing  to  others.  By 
the  sweet  constraint  of  his  love  Christ  wins  the  hearts  of  those  for  whom  he  died. 
By  the  almightiness  of  his  love  he  will  ultimately  conquer  the  world  and  build  up 
that  glurious  temple  to  his  praise — a  redeemed  humanity,  a  creation  ransomed  from  the 
curse.  Let  liis  love  be  the  inspiration  of  our  life,  and  we  wield  a  moral  force  akin  to 
his ;  we  share  his  work,  his  triumph,  and  his  joy. — W. 

Ver.  1. — Knowledge  and  love.  Revised  Version,  "  Knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  love 
edifieth  ; "  Greek,  "  buildeth  up."  This  remark  is  made  at  the  outset  of  the  considerH- 
tion  of  a  new  topic.  It  embodies  a  principle  upon  which  Christians  may  safely  act  in 
any  of  the  practical  difficulties  that  may  arise.  The  precise  matter  which  engaged  the 
apostle's  attention  only  concerns  us  historically.  It  hardly  represents  any  kind  of 
difficulty  that  is  likely  to  arise  in  modern  society.  "In  Corinth  and  other  cities 
meat  was  offered  for  sale  which  had  been  used  for  sacrificial  purposes  in'  the  heathen 
temples,  having  been  sold  to  the  dealers  by  the  priests,  who  received  a  large  share  ot 
the  sacrifices  fur  themselves,  or  by  the  individuals  who  offered  them,  at.d  had  more 
lemaining  of  their  own  share  than  they  could  use  themselves.    Thui  a  Ohristiau 


a82  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  vni.  1— 13. 


might  unconsdously  eat  of  meat,  either  at  the  house  of  a  friend  or  by  purchasing  it 
himself  in  the  public  shambles,  which  had  been  previously  brought  in  contact  by 
sacrificial  use  with  an  idol."  Exactly  how  to  treat  such  a  matter  it  was  not  easy  to 
say.  Some  had  no  compunctions  in  partaking  of  such  food.  Others  had  very  trouble- 
some scruples ;  and  only  too  readily  contentions  might  arise  over  such  a  small  and 
insignificant  question.  Some  would  say  strongly,  "  Wo  know  that  an  idol  is  nothing, 
and  so  he  cannot  defile  the  meat."  Such  persons  would  be  likely  to  laugh  to  scorn  the 
feebleness  and  superstitions  (as  they  would  call  them)  of  the  weaker  brethren.  Their 
knowledge  would  "  puff  them  up,"  and  make  thern  positive  and  inconsideiate ;  whereas 
the  "  charity  "  which  "endureth  all  things,  and  thinketh  no  evil,"  would  make  them 
gentle  and  considerate,  ready  to  put  their  own  ideas  aside  if  pressing  them  unduly 
seemed  to  offend  the  weaker  brethren.  This  is  the  point  to  which  our  attention  is 
directed. 

I.  KwowLEDQB  TENDS  TO  FDFF  UP.  This  is  a  foct,  attested  by  the  experience  of 
all  ages,  and  well  within  our  own  observation  at  the  present  time.  There  is  often  a 
positiveness,  a  dogmatism,  and  a  contempt  of  others  about  persons  who  have  a  little 
knowledge,  which  may  properly  call  for  an  apostle's  reproof.  We  must,  however, 
remember  that  fulness  of  knowledge  is  almost  always  attended  with  humility,  con- 
siderateness,  and  cheerful  readiness  to  serve.  It  is  a  little  knowledge  that  has  the  injurious 
influence.  A  man  may  pride  himself  on  the  limited  pond  in  his  0"n  grounds,  but  he 
must  feel  humbled  when  he  stands  before  the  boundless  ocean,  and  knows  that  powers 
are  too  small  and  life  too  short  for  him  to  exhaust  the  infinite  stores.  I'ut  the  point 
which  St.  Paul  helps  us  to  impress  is  that  knowledge  puffs  up  because  it  keeps  a  man 
thinking  about  himself.  It  is  always  what  /  have  read,  what  /  know;  and  the 
egotistic  sphere  is  the  most  dangerous  for  any  of  us  to  dwell  in.  "  Look  not  every  man 
on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others." 

II.  Love  tends  to  bdild  up.  This  may  be  applied  both  to  the  man  and  to  the 
Church.  Self-seeking  and  self-worship  so  engross  a  man's  attentions  that  the  interest 
of  others  cannot  be  served,  little  things  are  easily  magnified  into  diSiculties,  and 
dissension  and  dispute  are  fostered.  But  "  love,"  "  charity,"  cares  more  for  others  than 
for  self;  concerns  itself  about  the  general  well-being ;  asks  about  everything — what 
influence  it  will  have  for  good  or  for  evil;  and  puts  strong  restraints  upon  personal 
feelings  and  preferences,  if  pressing  them  against  the  opinions  of  others  would  cause 
contention.  Love  is  set  upon  "edifying,"  upon  "culturing,"  upon  "up-building," 
upon  preserving  that  "  peace"  in  which  alone  souls  can  thrive  and  grow.  So  St.  Paul 
earnestly  urges  that  love  ought  to  rule  and  decide  in  all  our  Church  relations  and 
practical  difficulties. — B,  T. 

Ver.  3. — Knowing  Qod,  and  being  known  of  Ood.  The  construction  of  this  sentence 
18  peculiar.  We  expect  the  apostle  to  say  that  the  man  who  loves  God  is  alone  the 
man  who  can  be  said  to  know  God.  There  is,  however,  in  his  wurds  the  uudei -thought 
of  the  identity  between  knowing  God  and  being  known  of  him.  Olshausen  says,  "  The 
knowledge  of  God  presupposes  the  being  known  of  him  :  the  soul  will  not  vivify  with 
life  from  above  until  God  has  drawn  nigh."  It  may  be  noticed  that  St.  Paul,  in 
"  dealing  with  inquisitive  and  argumentative  people  like  the  Corinthians  and  Galatians, 
takes  care  to  invert  the  phrase,  so  as  to  exclude  all  glorifying  on  the  part  of  man." 
'J'he  statements  of  the  Apostle  John,  in  1  Epist.  iv.  7,  8,  should  be  compared  with  this. 
Fixing  attention  on  the  two  terms,  "knowing  God;"  "being  known  of  God," 
observe — 

I.  How  THESE  ABE  BELATED.  Are  they  two  parallel  things,  or  does  the  one  follow 
after  and  result  from  the  other  ?  If  we  take  this  latter  view,  which  of  the  two  comes 
first?  Show  that  the  knowledge  of  God  is  an  impossibility  for  unaided  man.  This 
impossibility  is  shown  (1)  from  the  facts  of  man's  depraved  and  distorted  nature ;  (2) 
from  the  statements  of  Holy  Scripture,  "  No  man,  by  searching,  can  find  out  God,"  etc. ; 
and  (3)  from  the  actual  experiences  of  men,  as  individuals  or  as  nations.  Four  thousand 
years  of  experiment  left  God  still  virtually  the  "  unknown  God."  God  must  graciously 
come  near  to  us,  reveal  himself  to  us,  manifestly  concern  himself  for  us,  and  show  that 
he  knows  us,  or  we  can  never  get  to  aj'prehend  him.  And  this  he  has  done  in  the 
tpauifcsiation  of  his  Son.    And  this  hf)  does  still  in  a  gracious  individual  response  to 


OH. Tin.  1—13.]    tHfe  i'UlSi'  SPIHTLB  *0  Me  COEtNtlilAi^S.  ^83 

the  open  and  trusting  soul.  If  we  are  tnown  of  God,  taken  into  his  special  regard,  and 
farour ;  if  he  "  lifts  upon  us  the  liglit  of  his  countenance," — then  we  can  he  said  to 
know  him.  But  the  knowledge  comes  always  by  Divine  condescension  to  us,  not  by 
the  unaided  efforts  of  our  intellect.  Our  Lord  put  this  truth  under  another  figure  when 
he  said,  "  No  man  can  come  unto  me  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw  him." 
Those  whom  God  knows,  in  the  seuse  of  "  approves,"  "reveals  himself  to,"  are  those  aL'«»e 
who,  in  any  high,  proper,  spiritual  sense,  can  be  said  to  "  know  God." 

D..  Whekeon  both  these  are  based.  "If  any  man  love  God."  Our  best  know- 
ledge comes  by  love,  not  by  intellect.  The  mutual  knowledge  of  husband  and  wife,  of 
mother  and  child,  come  not  by  mental  study  of  each  other,  but  by  the  relations  and 
revealings  of  love.  And  so  alone  can  we  know  our  heavenly  Father.  Let  him  come 
near  to  us  in  gracious  communions,  and  our  hearts  will  surely  find  out  how  precious 
he  is.  "  We  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  Bodily  vision  will  not  be  needed,  for  souls  can  see. 
Intellect  may  stand  back,  for  love  can  see  and  feel  and  know.  It  will  be  observed 
that  the  love  of  which  St.  Paul  here  speaks  is  seen,  not  on  its  sentimental  but  on  its 
practical  side.  It  is  the  charity  which  takes  due  account  of  the  frailties  of  others,  and 
acts  with  the  desire  to  help  them.  Charity  is  the  varied  expression  of  the  love  cherished 
in  the  heart ;  somewhat  as  obedience  is  the  expression  of  faith.  Faith  is  seen  in  good 
works,  and  love  is  seen  in  charity.  John  Tauler,  the  mystic,  suggestively  says, 
"  Rightly  is  God  called  the  '  Master  of  love,'  for  he  rewards  love ;  he  rewards  with 
love;  and  he  rewards  out  of  love."  See  the  Revised  Version  on  Luke  ii.  14,  "On 
earth  peace  among  men  in  whom  he  is  well  pleased,"  or  "  men  of  good  will " — of  love, 
or  charity.  Impress  how  earnestly  we  should  seek  that  disposition  and  character  which 
will  bring  God  near  to  us,  and  so  give  to  us  the  saving  apprehension  of  him.  "  We 
love  him  because  he  first  loved  us."  And  we  can  judge  of  our  love  to  God  by  our  feel- 
ing concerning  our  brother;  fur  "  If  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother,  he 
is  a  liar ;  "  "  And  this  commandment  have  we  from  him.  That  he  who  loveth  God  love 
his  brother  also."— E.  T. 

Vers.  5,  6. — Not  gods,  but  Qod.  Two  primary  and  foundation  truths  of  religion 
were  committed  to  the  keeiiirig  of  the  Jews  as  a  nation.  They  were  revealed  to,  and 
fully  apprehended  by,  Abraham,  and  were  the  reason  for  his  separation  from  his  poly- 
theistic surroundings  in  the  country  of  the  Chaldees,  and  for  the  subsequent  remark- 
able isolation  of  his  descendants  in  the  small,  compact,  yet  central  country  of  Palestine. 
Those  two  truths  were — the  unity  and  the  spirituality  of  God.  "  God  is  one ;  "  "  God 
is  a  Spirit."  It  is  the  first  of  these  truths  which  St.  Paul  here  reaffirms,  in  view  of  the 
pagan  conception  of  many  deities  and  divinities ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  concern- 
ing the  clear-cut  testimony  which  Christianity  makes  to  the  truth  of  the  Divine  unity. 
There  is  only  one  God,  whose  favour  and  reconciliation  we  have  to  seek,  and  whose 
claim  to  obedience  and  service  we  must  meet.  It  is  true  that  Mohammedanism  also 
a£Srms  the  unity  of  God,  but  it  adds  the  questionable  statement,  "  and  Mahomet  is  his 
prophet."  Christianity  does  indeed  declare  that  there  are  "  three  persons  in  one  God;" 
and  that  "  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  ; "  but  both  these  truths  are  to  be  held,  and 
can  be  held,  consistently  with  our  faith  in  the  Divine  unity.  We  have  to  avoid  the 
perils  of  tritheism,  and  of  conceptions  of  the  divinity  of  Christ  which  fall  short  of  his 
essential  Deity ;  for  "  the  Word  was  God ;  "  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  In  the  verses 
before  us  we  have^ 

I.  The  coMMo;ii  notion  of  gods  and  LOBoa.  "  As  there  be  gods  many,  and  lords 
many."  Paganism  peopled  earth  and  sea  and  sky  with  different  orders  of  divinities, 
and  imagined  gods  presiding  over  mountaiiis,  streams,  and  fluwers;  over  flood  and 
pestilence  and  fire ;  over  virtue  and  over  vice ;  over  families  and  nations.  Illustrate 
by  the  impressions  made  upon  St.  Paul  when  he  first  entered  Athens.  The  place 
seemed  to  him  crowded  with  idols,  "  given  over  to  idolatry."  There  was  a  regular 
hierarchy;  and  probably  a  dim  notion  of  one  supreme  god  to  whom  the  rest  were 
subordinate,  but  as  these  lesser  gods  and  lords  stood  in  direct  and  close  relations  with 
men,  it  was  inevitable  that  they  should  get  all  the  worship.  Illustrate  from  what  v 
observed  in  heathen  lands  now;  especially  where  heathenism  is  associated  with 
learning  and  civilization,  as  in  India.  Show  what  complicated  social  questions  arise  in 
that  country  out  of  the  conflicting  claims  of  the  multitudinous  gods  and  lordi ;  and  tht 


284  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTfllAKS.    [oh  vm.  1—13 

painful  uncertainty  which  men  in  idolatrous  countries  must  feel  as  to  wliether  they 
have  propitiated  the  right  god,  or  left  an  offended  one  still  to  execute  his  vengeance. 
In  contrast  with  elaborate  heathenism,  the  worship  and  service  of  the  one  Chxl  is  simple 
and  satisfying.    Fear  God,  and  there  is  no  one  else  to  fear. 

II.  The  Christian  notion  of  "  God"  and  "  Lord."  The  two  words  may  he  taken  tc 
include  the  Divine  Being  as  an  Object  of  worship,  and  as  our  practical  Ruler.  Our  God 
is  at  once  the  highest  Being  we  can  conceive,  who  rightly  claims  our  reverence;  and 
the  very  centre  of  all  authority,  to  whose  will  we  must  wholly  bow.  But  the  two 
terms  may  he  used  to  indicate  the  oneness,  yet  distinction,  of  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
The  term  "  lord "  suggests  the  immediacy  of  Christ's  relations  to  us.  So  the  word 
"  God  "  may  stand  for  the  essential  being ;  and  the  word  "  Lord  "  for  the  mediatorial 
being.  1.  The  essential  being — Qod.  Four  points  are  here  noticed  by  St.  Paul.  (1) 
God  is  one.  (2)  He  is  the  Father — that  relation  being  the  most  suitable  for  repre- 
senting him,  because  it  includes  the  personal  interest  of  his  love  for  each  one  of  his 
creatures,  which  such  words  as  "  King,"  "  Ruler,"  "  Judge,"  "  Moral  Governor,"  do  not. 

(3)  All  things  are  of  him.    He  is  the  one  and  only  Creator  of  things  and  of  men.     And 

(4)  we  are  witnesses  for  him,  who  are  bound  to  hold  firmly,  and  show  forth  fully,  this  first 
truth  of  the  one  Father-God.  2.  His  mediatorial  being.  Under  this  term  we  appre- 
hend the  one  God  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Clirist,  and  we  are  to  see  that  he  is  practically 
(1)  our  present  Lord  and  Ruler;  (2)  our  only  Mediator  in  his  manifestation  of  himself 
in  our  flesh  and  upon  our  earth ;  and  (3)  onr  Christian  standing  and  Christian  hope 
are  only  in  him  and  by  him.  Fully  embracing  this  truth  of  the  Divine  unity,  we  shall 
be  wholly  delivered  from  the  fear  of  offending  the  "  gods  many  or  lords  many,"  whether 
they  be  fellow-men  or  imagined  divinities. — R.  T. 

Ver.  9. — Our  dealings  with  weak  brethren.  Our  liberty  may  become  a  stumbling- 
1 '  vfc  to  others,  and  against  this  we  must  be  constantly  on  our  guard.  There  will 
always  be  around  us  some  "  weak  brethren."  1.  Tliey  may  be  intellectually  weak, 
really  unable  to  grasp  more  than  the  simplicities  of  the  truth,  and  readily  thinking 
that  what  they  can  neither  understand  nor  appreciate  must  be  error.  Tliere  is  also 
such  a  thing  as  mental  bias,  which  prevents  men  from  appreciating  or  receiving  more 
than  some  particular  side  of  truth.  And  this  mental  bias  is  often  the  affliction  of  men 
who  are  otherwise  intelligent ;  and  it  becomes  the  occasion  of  much  religious  bigotry. 
2.  They  may  be  weak  in  conscience.  Instead  of  firmly  attesting  what  is  right  and  what 
is  wrong,  their  conscience  May  only  present  scruples  and  questions  and  doubts.  It  is 
the  same  thing  to  say  that  they  have  little  power  of  decision ;  and  feel  restless  and 
uncertain,  and  weaily  full  of  fears,  when  a  decision  is  made.  3.  They  may  be  weak 
through  the  relies  of  old  habits.  A  man  cannot  immediately  separate  himself  from  all 
his  surroundings ;  and  it  was  very  difiScult  for  Gentile  Christians  to  shake  off  their 
heathen  notions.  Missionaries  now,  in  lieathen  lands,  are  gravely  perplexed  by  the 
lingering  sentiments  and  habits  of  their  converts.  And  in  Corinth  many  could  not  get 
out  of  the  idea  that  meat  offered  to  an  idol  must  be  defiled  and  unfit  for  their  eating 
as  Chiistians.  So  it  may  be  shown  that  there  are  "  weak  brethren  "  with  us  still ;  some 
who  are  offended  with  higher  truths,  which  they  are  intellectually  unable  to  reach ; 
others  who  have  scruples  about  what  is  permissible  to  Christians  in  social  life,  and  yet 
others  who  fix  narrow  limits  to  the  observance  of  the  sabbath,  and  other  details  of 
Christian  conduct.  Now,  St.  Paul  lays  down  some  of  the  principles  on  which  we  should 
deal  with  these  "  weak  brethren." 

I.  The  pbincifle  of  firmness.  More  especially  if  our  brother's  weakness  in  any  way 
imperils  the  truth.  Concessions  to  our  weaker  brethren  may  go  to  the  fullest  length 
so  long  as  they  concern  only  our  personal  relations  with  them.  But  we. may  concede 
nothing  if  our  brother's  weakness  puts  in  peril  vital  truth.  Then  we  must  be  firm 
and  stand  our  ground,  and  claim  our  full  liberty  to  receive  whatever  truth  God  may  be 
pleased  to  give  us.  And  it  is  even  found,  in  practical  life,  that  our  brother's  weakness 
in  matters  of  detail  is  bast  met  by  a  firm  and  intelligent  resistance.  We  need  to  be 
especially  careful  that  our  dealings  with  our  brethren  shall  in  no  way  foster  and 
encourage  their  weakness.  Modes  of  keeping  sabbath,  or  relations  of  Christians  to  public 
amusements,  will  furnish  necessary  illustrations. 

IL  Thx  rBisoirLK  or  hilpfulmkss;  wherever  we  stand  in  such  relations  to  th« 


oil.  vni.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  283 

"  weak  brethren  "  as  may  give  uk  a  power  of  influence  upon  them.  If  we  condescend  to 
them,  it  can  only  be  that  we  may  lift  them  out  of  their  weakness  into  strength.  Such 
helpful  influence  we  may  exert  (1)  by  direct  teachings;  (2)  by  our  own  personal 
example.  Others  may  see  that  what  they  call  "  our  liberty  "  in  no  way  injures  our 
spiritual  life,  and  seeing  that  may  best  help  them  to  correct  their  mistakes. 

IIL  The  principle  of  belf-saobificinq  chabitt.  Actually  depriving  ourselves  ol 
pleasures,  and  what  we  think  to  be  both  permissible  and  good  things,  in  order  that  wc 
may  be  no  hindrance  or  injury  to  others.  Illustrate  in  the  case  with  which  St.  Paul  is 
dealing  here;  and  show  how  many  good  Christians  nowadays  abstain  from  such 
things  as  balls  and  theatres  because  they  are  anxious  not  to  set  a  stumbling-block  in 
the  way  of  others.  Our  practical  difficulties  in  life  apply  to  things  indifferent ;  and  in 
such  matters  it  is  proper  that  we  should  regulate  our  conduct  by  the  effects  which  it 
may  have  on  otheri.  The  true  Christian  spirit  would  lead  us  to  say,  "  Bather  let  me 
suffer  by  abstaining  from  what  I  should  enjoy,  and  could  do  without  any  personal 
injury,  than  l«t  my  brother  suffer,  either  by  the  judgment  which  he  would  form  of 
my  doings,  or  by  hiis  imitating  my  example  to  his  own  serious  hurt.".— R.  T. 

Yer.  13. — 2%e  law  of  Christian  idf-rutraint.    No  more  perplexing  questions  are 

{>resented  to  the  Christian  than  those  which  deal  with  the  limitations  of  his  Christian 
iberty.  Were  the  Christian  man  alone  in  the  world,  or  were  he  assured  that  his 
actions  would  in  no  way  influence  those  around  him,  there  are  many  personal 
mjoyments  in  which  he  could  freely  indulge,  and  he  would  have  little  call  to  self- 
restraint.  He  would  at  least  be  a  "  law  unto  himself,"  and  need  make  no  laws  for 
himself  upon  consideration  of  others.  But  none  of  us  can  live  under  such  conditions. 
We  are  not  only  a  "  spectacle  unto  men  and  angels,"  but  every  act  of  ours  bears 
iufluence  on  some  one,  affecting  others  either  for  good  or  for  evil.  And  this  fact  we 
must  take  into  solemn  account.  The  relationships  of  life  are  main  sources  of  our 
pleasure,  but  they  bring  us  all  our  responsibilities,  and,  though  our  conduct  in  all 
essential  things  is  to  be  determined  only  by  what  is  right,  in  all  matters  that  are  left 
to  our  decision  we  are  bound  to  consider  how  Uher$  will  regard  uur  conduct ;  and  we 
should  even  take  into  account  how  they  may  misunderstand  and  misrepresent,  and 
so  make  mischief  out  of  our  actions.  It  is  true  that  "the  fear  of  man  bringeth 
a  snare,"  but  it  is  also  true  that  the  love  of  man,  and  sincere  desire  for  the  blessing  of 
others,  will  always  help  us  to  form  good  judgments  concerning  what  is  prudent  and 
advisable.  Sincere  hearts  are  full  of  anxiety  lest,  by  any  personal  indulgences  oi 
needless  displays  of  siyperior  moral  strength,  they  should  "sin  against  the  weaker 
brethren."  It  should  be  observed  that  upon  things  doubtful  God  lays  down  no  direct 
rules.  The  Christian  man  is  expected  to  make  his  own  wise  laws  of  self-restraint. 
If  he  be  sincere  and  earnest  he  will  make  for  himself  two  supreme  laws. 

L  The  law  of  chabitt  towards  oub  bboxheb.  That  is,  in  every  disputable  oi 
doubtful  case  he  will  give  the  advantage  to  his  brother,  and  act  taking  into  account 
even  his  weaknesses.  It  should  be  clearly  understood :  1.  That  when,  in  a  spirit  of 
charity,  a  Christian  man  puts  himself  under  strong  restraints,  he  does  not  alter  his 
views  of  the  weakness  of  his  brother's  difSculty  at  of  the  possibility  of  his  own  acting 
or  enjoying  without  personal  injury.  Tha  very  point  of  his  Christian  virtue  is  that, 
while  recognizing  the  Tightness  of  the  thing  for  himself,  he  refrains  for  the  sake  of 
others.  There  would  be  no  virtue  in  his  self-restraint  if  he  changed  his  opinion  as  to 
the  rightness  of  the  act.  He  holds  his  own  opinion,  but  in  Christian  love  he  yields 
to  the  opinion  of  another.  2.  We  may  also  see  that,  when  the  Christian  puts  himself 
under  restraint  for  the  sake  of  a  weak  brother,  it  is  that  he  may  gain  influence  upon 
him  that  shall  lift  him  up  out  of  his  weakness.  It  can  be  no  part  of  Christian  duty 
to  eondescend  to  a  toother's  weakness,  and  leave  him  weak.  If  St.  Paul  refirained 
from  Mting  the  meat  that  had  been  offered  to  idols,  it  waa  in  the  hope  of  presently 
getting  the  weak  brethren  to  see  that,  since  an  idol  is  "  nothing  at  all,"  he  cannot 
defile  Wkj  meat.  Our  charity  does  not  concern  the  particular  case,  but  the  entire 
wMiting  of  our  weaker  brother.  3.  It  may  further  be  shown  that  the  restraints 
under  which  tha  Christian  man  puts  himself,  by  the  persuasions  of  his  brotherly  lova, 
may  be  severe  and  trying  at  first,  but  become  easier  after  a  while,  and  will  often  turn 
into  blessing  fuc  lumself  at  the  last.    This  may  be  efficiently  illustrated  ia  Uie  casr 


286 


TUB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [,ch.iz.1— 27 


of  a  man  giviDg  up  all  alcoholic  drink  for  the  sake  of  helping  a  brother  who  is  ir. 
peril  from  the  enticements  of  the  drink-demon.  If  he  be  of  a  social  disposition,  it  may 
cost  him  a  great  deal  to  give  up  long-settled  habits,  but  he  may  prove,  in  both  health 
and  means,  that  the  self-restraint  of  Christian  charity  can  become  a  blessing  to  him 
who  manifests  it,  as  well  as  to  him  for  whose  sake  the  sacrifices  have  been  made. 
God  ever  graciuusly  secures  to  ug  the  rewards  of  right-doing,  and  makes  "  charity  twice 
blessed." 

II.  The  law  of  lotaltt  to  Christ.  Our  one  supreme  purpose  must  be  to  serve 
him,  and  he  has  told  ns  that  what  is  done  unto  "  the  least  of  the  brethren  "  is  "  done 
unto  him."  We  think  that,  in  the  greatness  of  our  loyalty,  we  would  do  anything  for 
Christ,  and  put  ourselves  under  any  kind  of  restraints,  were  he  really  here  with  us  in 
the  flesh.  But  he  puts  our  loyalty  under  a  severe  test  when  he  says,  "  Do  to  youi 
weak  brother,  do  for  your  weak  brother's  sake,  just  what  you  won  Id  have  done  for 
me."  We  think  we  could  go  without  meat,  or  put  away  drink,  at  once  and  for  ever, 
if  Jesus  wished.  It  is  Christ's  wish  that  is  expressed  to  us  when  we  are  led  to  see 
that  our  "  liberty  "  is  injuring  a  brother ;  and  our  Lord  counts  it  loyalty  to  him  when 
we  restrain  ourselves  tor  a  brother's  sake.  St.  Paul  makes  this  plain.  To  offend 
against  a  weak  brother,  to  refuse  proper  limitations  of  our  own  liberty  when  such 
limitations  would  help  a  brother,  is  to  sin  against  Christ,  even  against  Christ  who — 
at  the  uttermost  self-sacrifice — even  died  that  he  might  save  and  sanctify  the  weak 
brother.  Conclude  by  showing  that  the  appeal  may  be  made  to  us,  in  relation  to  this 
matter,  which  is  made  by  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  in  a  more  general 
way,  "  Ye  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin,"  In  how  few  of  us 
the  self-restraints  of  Christian  charity  can  be  said  yet  to  have  reached  the  lublime 
keightg  of  telf-Mcrifice  I — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  DL 


Vers.  1—27.— The  rights  and  (ht  ulf- 
denial  of  an  apostle. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — An  apostle's  right  to  main' 
temance. 

Vei.  1. — ^Am  I  not  an  apostle  1  am  I  not 
freel  The  order  of  the  best  manuscripts 
is.  Am  I  not  free  i  am  I  not  an  apostle  t 
St.  Paul  designed  in  this  chapter  to  show 
that  he  was  not  only  giving  a  precept,  but 
setting  an  example.  He  told  the  "  strong  " 
Corinthians,  who  had  "  knowletlge,"  that 
they  slioul  J  be  ready  to  abnegate  their  rights 
for  the  good  of  others.  He  now  wishes  to 
show  them  that,  in  a  matter  which  affected 
his  whole  life,  he  had  himself  abnegated 
his  own  rights.  Being  free  and  an  apostle, 
he  could,  if  he  had  chosen,  have  claimed,  as 
others  had  done,  a  right  to  be  supported  by 
the  Churches  to  which  he  preached.  He 
had  thought  it  more  for  their  goi;d  to  waive 
this  claim,  and  therefore  he  had  done  so  at 
the  oost  (as  appears  in  many  other  passageg : 
ch.  iv.  12;  Acts  xx.  34;  1  Thess.  ii  9)  of 
bitter  hardship  to  himself,  liut  St.  Paul 
practically  "  goes  off"  at  the  word  "apostle." 
It  was  BO  essential  for  him  to  vindicate, 
against  the  subterranean  malignity  of  hostile 
partisans,  his  dignity  as  an  apostle,  that  in 
asserting  that  authority  he  almost  loses 
sight  for  the  time  of  the  main  object  for 
wt'isb  he  bad  alluded  to  the  fact.     Hence 


much  that  he  says  is  of  the  nature  of  a 
digression — though  an  important  one — until 
he  resumes  the  main  thread  of  his  subject 
at  ch.  zi.  15.  Have  I  not  seen  Jesus  Christ: 
our  Lord  1  Doubtless  he  mainly  refers  to 
the  vision  on  the  road  to  Damascus  (Acts 
ix.  3,  17;  ch.  xv.  S),  though  he  received 
other  visions  and  revelations  also  (Acts 
xviil.  9 ;  xxii.  14,  IS ;  2  Cor.  xii.  1,  etc.). 
He  had  probably  not  seen  Christ  during 
his  life  on  earth  (see  my  '  Life  of  St.  Paul,' 
i.  73 — ^75).  The  words  are  added  to  remind 
them  that  those  who  boasted  of  personal 
knowledge  and  relation  with  Jesus — ^per- 
haps the  Christ  party — ^had  no  exclusive 
prerogative.  Are  not  ye  my  work  in  the 
Lord?  I  am  not  only  an  apostle,  but 
emphatically  your  apostle  (Acts  xviii.  1 — 
11 ;  ch.  iv.  15). 

Yer.  2. — ^Unto  others.  If  the  emissaries 
from  Jerusalem  or  the  Petrine  party  do 
not  choose  to  regard  me  as  their  apostle  or 
an  apostle  at  all,  yet  at  any  rate  I  am  yours. 
Doubtless;  rather,  at  least,  at  any  rale. 
The  seal  of  mine  apostleship.  Your  conver- 
sion attests  the  genuineness  of  my  claim,  as 
a  seal  attests  a  document.  Thu*  baptism  is 
the  seal  of  conversion  (Eph.  iv.  30;  comp. 
Eom.  iv,  11 ;  John  iii.  33). 

Ver.  3. — Mine  answer;  literally,  my 
defence ;  the  word  •'  examine  "  is  the  word 
used  for  a  legal  inquiry.  The  Oorinthians 
had  as  it  were  placed  Um  on  bis  defence  at 


OH.  IX,  1—27.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


287 


the  bar  of  their  ciiticiBm.  Is  this.  That  I 
was  the  cause  of  your  oonverBion.  In  2  Oor. 
zii.  12  he  refers  to  other  proofs  of  his  apos- 
tolic power. 

Ver.  4. — To  eat  and  to  drink.  To  be  sup- 
ported by  those  to  whom  we  preach  (Luke 
1.7). 

Ver.  5.— To  lead  about  a  sister,  a  wife. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  tliat  this  represents 
the  true  reading,  and  that  the  meaning  is, 
"  We  have  power  to  lead  about,  that  is,  to 
travel  in  company  with,  some  Chiistian 
sister  to  whom  we  are  married,  and  who  ii 
supported  at  the  expense  of  the  Church." 
This  plain  meaning,  however,  involving  the 
assertion  that  the  apostles  and  desposyni 
("  the  Lord's  brethren")  were  married  men, 
was  so  distasteful  to  the  morbid  asceticism 
which  held  celibacy  in  a  sort  of  Manichsean 
reverence,  that  the  scribes  of  the  fourth,  fifth, 
and  later  centuries  freely  tampered  with  the 
text,  in  the  happily  fruitless  attempt  to 
get  rid  of  this  meaning.'  They  endeavoured, 
by  putting  the  word  in  the  plural  or  by 
omitting  "  wife,"  to  suggest  that  the  women 
whom  the  apostles  travelled  with  were 
"  deaconesses."  Augustine,  Tertullian, 
Ambrose,  and  others  explain  the  verse  of 
"ministering  women"  (Luke  viii.  2,  3). 
The  false  interpretation  avenged  itself  on 
the  bias  which  led  to  it.  Valla  adopls  the 
wilful  invention  that  the  apostles,  though 
married,  travelled  with  their  wives  only  as 
sisters.  Such  subterfuges  have  eaten  away 
the  heart  of  honest  exegesis  from  many 
passages  of  Scripture,  and  originated  the 
taunt  that  it  is  a  "nose  of  wax,"  which 
readers  can  twist  as  they  like.  It  was  the 
cause  of  such  shameful  abuses  and  misre- 
presentations that  at  last  the  practice  of 
travelling  about  with  unmarried  women,  who 
went  under  the  name  of  "sisters,"  "  beloved," 
"companions,"  was  distinctly  forbidden  by 
the  third  canon  of  the  first  Council  of  Nice. 
Simon  Magus  miglit  unblushingly  carry 
about  with  him  a  Tyrian  woman  named 
Helena;  but  apostles  and  true  Christians 
would  never  have  been  guilty  of  any  conduct 
which  could  give  a  handle  to  base  suspicions. 
They  travelled  only  with  their  wives.  A 
tiiter.  K  Christian  woman  (ch.  vii.  15; 
Rom.  ivi.  1 ;  Jas.  ii.  1 5,  etc.).  A  wife ;  i.e. 
dg  a  wife.  Other  apostles.  This  is  a 
positive  mistranslation  for  "  the  rest  of  the 
apostles."  It  might  be  too  much  to  infer 
positively  from  this  that  every  one  of  tlie 
apostles  and  desposyni  were  married;  but 
there  is  independent  evidence  and  tradition 
to  (how  that  at  any  rate  most  of  them  were. 
The  brethren  of  the  Lord.  They  are  clearly 
and  undeniably  distinguixhed  from  the 
apostles.  Accord  ing  to  the  Hel  vidian  theory 
(to  which  the  plain  language  of  the  Gospels 
tu^Bis  to  point),  they  were  sons  of  Joseph  and 


Mary.  This  is  the  view  of  St.  Clement  of 
Alexandria  in  ancient  times,  and  writer* 
so  different  from  each  otlier  as  Di',  Wette, 
Neander,  Osiander,  Meyer,  Ewald,  and 
Alford,  in  modern.  The  theory  of  Jerome, 
that  they  were  cousins  of  Jesus,  being  sons 
of  Alpbseus  and  Mary,  a  sister  of  the 
Virgin,  is  6n  every  ground  absolutely  un- 
tenable, and  it  was  half  dropped  even  by 
St.  Jerome  himself,  when  it  had  served  his 
controversial  purpose.  The  theory  of  Epi- 
phanius,  that  they  were  sons  of  Joseph  by  a 
previous  marriage,  is  possible,  but  incapable 
of  proof.  It  comes  from  a  tainted  source — 
the  apocryphal  Gospels  (see  my  '  Early  Days 
of  Christianity,'  ii.).  Cephas,  St.  Paul 
also  uses  the  Aramaio  name  in  Gal.  ii.  9. 
Peter's  wife  is  mentioned  in  Matt.  viii.  14 
and  in  the  tradition  of  her  martyrdom  (Clem. 
Alex.,  '  Strom.,'  vii.  §  63). 

Ver.  6. — ^And  Barnabas.  Like  St.  Paul, 
Barnabas  was  in  every  respect  a  genuine 
apostle,  by  the  Divine  call  (Acts  xiii.  2; 
Gal.  ii.  9),  though  not  one  of  the  twelve.  He 
seems  to  have  continued  in  his  separate 
mission  work  the  preuitice  of  independence 
which  he  had  learnt  from  St.  Paul.  This 
allusion  is  interesting,  because  it  is  the  last 
time  that  the  name  of  Barnabas  occurs, 
and  it  shows  that,  even  after  the  quarrel  and 
separation, 'Paul  regarded  him  with  love  and 
esti  em.  To  forbear  working.  To  give  up 
the  manual  labour  by  which  we  maintain 
ourselves  without  any  expense  to  the 
Churches  (Acts  xviii.  3  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  8,  9). 
If,  then,  St.  Paul  toiled  at  the  dull, 
mechanical,  despised,  and  ill-paid  work  of 
tent-making,  he  did  so,  not  because  it  was, 
in  the  abstract,  his  duty  to  earn  his  own 
living,  but  because  he  chose  to  be  nobly 
independent,  tiiat  the  absolute  disinterested- 
ness of  his  motives  might  be  manifest  to  all 
the  world.  For  this  reason  even  when  he 
was  most  in  need  he  would  never  receive 
assistance  from  any  Church  except  that  of 
Philippi,  where  he  had  at  least  one  wealthy 
convert,  and  where  he  wns  beloved  with  a 
peculiar  warmth  of  affection. 

Ver.  7. — ^Who  goeth  a  warfare,  etc.  ?  In 
this  and  the  following  verses  he  adduces  six 
successive  arguments  to  prove  tlie  right  of 
a  minister  to  be  supported  by  his  congrega- 
tion. 1.  From  the  ordinary  laws  of  human 
justice  (ver.  7).  2.  By  analogy  .from  the 
Law  of  Moses  (vers.  8-— 10).  3.  A  fortiori, 
from  the  obligations  of  common  gratitude 
(ver.  11).  4.  From  their  concession  of  the 
right  to  others  who  had  inferior  claims  (ver. 
12).  5.  From  the  Jewish  provision  for  the 
maintenance  of  priests  (ver.  13).  6.  By 
the  ruie  iaid  down  by  Christ  himself  (ver.  14). 
Goeth  a  warfare.  Analogy  Srom  the  pay- 
ment of  soldiers  (2  Oor.  s.  4).  At  his  own 
ohargei.    The  word  used  for  "  cost "  meana 


236 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TUB  CORINTHlANa    [oh.  ix.  1—27 


literally  rationi  (Luke  iii.  14;  Rom.  ri. 
23).  Flanteth  a  vineyard.  Analogy  from 
the  support  of  the  vine-dressers  (Matt.  ix. 
37).  Feedeth  a  flock.  Analogy  from  the 
support  of  shepherdg  (1  Pet.  v.  2).  'I'he  two 
latter  classes  of  labourers  are  paid  in  kind 
in  the  East  to  this  day. 

Yer.  8. — Say  I  these  things  as  a  maat 
Am  I  relying  exclusively  on  mere  human 
analogies?  The  same  phrase  occurs  in 
Bom.  iii.  5 ;  Gal.  iii.  13.  Saith  not  the  Law. 
The  verbs  used  for  "  say  "  (XoXS)  and  "saith  " 
(\e7^i)  are  different :  "  Do  I  gpeak  [general 
wonl]  these  things  as  a  man  ?  or  saith  [a 
more  dignified  word]  not  the  Law,"  etc.  7 

Ver.  9. — ^In  the  Law  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxv. 
4).    He  uses  the  same  argument  again  in 
1  Tim.  T.  19.    The  mouth  of  the  ox  that 
treadeth  out  tlie  oom ;  rather,  an  ox  uhile 
treading  tntt  tlie  com.    Tlie  flail  was  not 
unknown,  but  a  common  mode  of  threshing 
was  to  let  oxen  tread  the   corn   on   the 
thrcBhing-floor.     Doth  God  take   care   for 
oxen  1    Certainly  he  does ;  and  St.  Paul  can 
hardly  mean   to  imply  that  lie  does  not, 
seeing  that  tenderness  for  the  brute  creation 
is  a  distinguishing  characteristic    of   the 
Mosaic  legislation   (Exod.    xxiii.    12,    19; 
Deut.  xxii.  6,  7,  10,  etc.).    If  St.  Paul  had 
failed  to  perceive  this  tmth,  he  must  have 
learnt  it  at  least  from  Ps.  cxlv,  l.o,  16 ;  Jonah 
iv.  11.    Even  the  Greeks  showed  by  their 
prpverb  that  they  could  pity  the  hunger  of 
the  poor  beasts  of  burden  starving  in   the 
midst  of  plenty.    It  is,  Ijowever,  a  tendency 
of  all  Semitic  idiom  verbally  to  exclude  or 
negative  the  inferior  alternative.    St.  Paul 
did  not  intend  to  say,  **  God  has  no  care  for 
oxen ; "  for  he  knew  that "  his  tender  mercies 
are  over  all  his  works : "  he  only  meant 
in  Semitic  fashion  to  say  that  the  precept 
was  much  more  important   in  its  human 
application;  and  herein  he  consciously  or 
unconsciously  adopts   the  tone  of  Fliilo's 
comment  on  the  same  passage  ('  De  Victim 
Offerentibus,'  §  1),  that,  for  present  purposes, 
oxen  might  be  left  out  of  accoimt     The 
rabbinic  Midrash,  which  gave  this  turn  to 
the  passage,  was  happier  and  wiser  than  most 
specimens  of  their  exegesis.    St.  Paul  sets 
the  typic'o-allegorical  interpretation  above 
the  literal  in  this  instance  (comp.  1  Tim.  t. 
18),  because  ho  regards  it  as  the  more  im- 
portant.   It  is  a  specimen  of  the  common 
Jewish  exegetio  method  of  a  fortiori  or  k 
minori  ad  magus.    Luther's  curious  comment 
is :  "  God  cares  for  all  things ;  but  he  does 
not  care  that  anything  should  be  written  for 
oxen,  because  they  cannot  read"  I 

Ver.  10. — Altogether.  It  is  probable  that 
St.  Paul  only  meant  the  word  to  be  taken 
argumentatively,  and  not  •«  jn'ed  de  la 
lettre.  This  application  (he  says)  is  so 
obvioHlj   Iht  tight  application,  that  the 


other  may  be  set  aside  as  far  as  our  purpose 
is  concerned.  In  the  margin  of  the  Revised 
Version  it  is  rendered  "Saith  he  it,  «  fte 
doubtless  doth,  for  onr  sakeP''  In  hope. 
St.  Paul's  large  experience  of  life,  and  his 
insiglit  into  character,  sufficed  to  show  him 
that  despairing  work  must  be  ineffectual 
work.  The  spring  and  elasticity  of  cheerful 
spirits  is  indispensable  to  success  in  any 
arduous  undertaking. 

"  Life  vrithout  hope  draws  nectar  in  a  sieve, 
And  hope  without  an  object  cannot  live." 

Ver.  11.— If  we.  The  tea  is  in  both 
clauses  emphatic,  to  show  that  the  argument 
applied  directly  to  St.  Paul's  own  case. 
Is  it  a  great  thing.  An  argument  a 
fortiori.  If  ordinary  labour  is  not  under- 
taken gratuitously,  is  the  spirilual  labourei 
to  be  left  to  starve?  St.  Paul  always 
recognized  the  rights  of  preachers  and 
ministers,  and  stated  them  with  emphasis 
(Gal.  vi.  6;  Bom.  xv.  27),  although  from 
higher  motives  he  waived  all  personal  claim 
to  profit  by  the  result  of  his  arguments. 

Ver.  12.— If  others.  St.  Paul  felt  a  touch 
of  natural  indignation  at  the  thought  that 
these  Corinthians  submitted  to  the  extremest 
and  haughtiest  exactions  from  other  teaulier* 
who  had  been  loud  in  the  statement  of  their 
own  pretensions,  while  his  own  claims  wen> 
shamefully  disparaged,  and  he  was  even 
left,  with  perfect  indifference,  to  suffer  teal 
privation.  We  shall  find  the  full  expression 
of  his  wounded  sensibilities  in  2  Cor.  zL 
1 — 15.  We  have  not  used  this  power 
This  strong  climax  here  asserts  itself  before 
the  tim^  It  anticipates  ver.  15.  Suffer. 
The  same  word,  wliioh  also  means  "to 
contain  without  leaking,"  is  used  in  ch.  ziit 
7 ;  1  Thess.  iiL  1, 5.  All  things.  Any  amount 
•f  privation  and  distress.  Hmder  the  gospel 
of  Christ.  By  giving  any  handle  for 
malicious  misrepresentations  as  to  our  being 
self-interested.  The  word  for  "  hindrance' 
means  etymologically  "cutting  into,"  ie 
an  impediment  on  a  path,  etc. 

Ver,  18. — They  wMoh  ministei  abont  holy 
things.  Jewish  priests.  He  adds  his  two 
final  arguments — since  the  right  whioh  he 
is  pleading  has  its  own  intrinsic  importance 
— ^before  proceeding  to  the  example  which 
he  set  in  order  to  prevail  on  the  strong 
to  give  up  their  right*  and  their  liberty, 
when  need  was,  for  the  sake  of  the  weak. 
Live ;  literally,  eat,  or  feed.  The  Zealots 
used  this  excuse  for  themselves  when  they 
broke  open  the  temple  store*  in  the  siege 
of  Jerusalem  (Josephus,  ■  Bell.  Jud.,'  t.  13^ 
§  6).  Of  the  things  of  the  temple.  They 
shared  in  the  victims  offered  (see  Numb. 
xviii.  8 — 13 ;  Deut.  xviii.  1).  Partakers  with 
the  altar.  Only  certain  portions  *f  <M'rteii 
victims  weie  allowed  them. 


(ili.tx.1— 27.]    THE  FIRST  EpISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIAN& 


289 


Ver.  14. — Hath  the  lord  ordained  (Matt. 
X.  10 ;  Luke  x.  7).  The  reference  has  special 
interest,  because  it  shows  that  St.  Paul  was 
at  least  orally  fainiltar  with  the  iliscouriies 
of  Christ.  Indeed,  there  Is  notliin<;  im- 
possible or  improbable  in  the  supposition 
that  some  of  these  were  already  being 
circulated  in  manuscript.  Should  live  of 
the  gospel.  If,  that  is,  they  desired  and 
had  need  to  do  so.  He  does  not  say,  "  to 
live  of  the  altar,"  because  Christiuns  have 
no  "altar"  except  in  the  metaphorical 
sense  in  which  the  cross  ii  called  an  altar 
in  Hob.  xiii.  10. 

Vers.  15 — 23. — Self-denying  ordinance  tf 
St.  Paul. 

Ver.  15. — I  have  used  none  of  these  things. 
None  of  the  forms  of  right  whicli  I  miglit 
claim  from  these  many  sanctions.  He  is 
appealing  to  his  own  abandonment  of  a 
right  to  encourage  them  to  waive,  if  need 
required,  the  claims  of  their  Christian  1  iberty. 
His  object  in  waiving  his  plain  right  was 
that  he  might  give  no  handle  to  any  who 
might  desire  to  accuse  him  of  interested 
motives  (oli.  ix.  4 ;  Gal.  vi.  6,  eio.').  Have  I 
written ;  rather,  do  I  write ;  the  epistolary 
•orist.  That  it  should  be  lO  done  unto  me. 
Do  not  take  my  argument  as  a  hint  to  you 
that  you  have  neglected  your  duty  of 
maintaining  me,  and  have  even  seen  me 
suffer  without  offering  me  your  assistance. 
Better  for  me  to  die.  Not "  to  die  of  hunger," 
aa  Chrysostom  supposes,  but  generally, 
"I  should  prefer  death  to  the  loss  of  my 
independence  of  attitude  towards  my 
converts."  Than  that  any  man  should  make 
my  glorying  void.  The  Greek  is  remarkable. 
Literally  it  is,  than  my  ground  of  boasting — 
that  any  one  thould  render  it  void.  Another 
reading  is,  better  for  me  to  die  than — no  OM 
eball  render  void  my  ground  of  boasting. 

Ver.  16. — I  have  nothing  to  glory  of.  He 
is  desirous  to  remove  all  appearance  of 
haughtiness  from  his  tone.  There  was, 
he  says,  no  merit  involved  in  his  preaching 
the  gospel.  He  did  so  from  the  sense  of 
overwhelming  moral  compulsion,  and  he 
would  have  been  miserable  if  ho  had  tried 
to  resist  it.  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me. 
"  We  cannot  but  speak  "  (Acts  iv.  20). 

Ver.  17. — ^If  I  do  this  thing  willingly. 
The  word  rather  means  "spontaneously," 
"witliout  compulsion."  He  was  preaching 
willingly,  but  still  it  was  in  obedience  to 
an  irretistible  behest  (Acts  ix.  6,  15).  I 
have  a  reward.  The  reward  (or  rather, 
"wage  ")  of  such  self-chosen  work  would  be 
the  power  to  fulfil  it  (comp.  Matt.  vi.  1). 
Against  my  will;  rathir,  involuntarily, 
"  under  Divine  constraint."  A  dispensation. 
He  was  appointed  a  "stewiird''  or  "dispenser" 
of  the  gOBpel,  and  could  only  regard  himself 
•X  the  best  as  "  an  unprofitable  slave,"  who 

I.  OOBIMTHIANS. 


had  done  merely  what  it  wag  his  twre  dnty 
to  do  (Luke  xvii.  10).  There  is  no  merit  in 
yielding  to  a  mutt. 

Ver.  18.— What  i«  my  reward  thent  The 
answer  is  that  it  was  not  such  "wages"  as 
would  ordinarily  be  considered  such,  but  it 
was  the  happiness  of  preaching  the  gospel 
without  cost  to  any.  I  abuse  not;  rather, 
/use  RO<fo<Ae/u{I,a8ln  ch.  viL  81.  It  may 
be  said  that  this  was  a  ground  af  boasting, 
not  a  reward.  It  was,  however,  a  point  t* 
which  St.  Paul  attached  the  highest  impor- 
tance (1  Thess.  ii.  9  i  2  Cor.  xi.  7— 12 ;  Acts 
XX.  33,  34),  and  he  might  therefore  spetdc 
of  it,  though  almost  with  a  touch  of  half- 
unconscious  irony,  as  hia  "  fee."  There  is 
no  need  to  adopt  the  construction  suggested 
by  Meyer:  "What  is  my  reward?  fnonel 
that  I  may  preach  gratuitously ; "  or  that  M 
Alford,  who  finds  the  reward  in  the  Mit 
verse. 

Ver.  19. — For  though  I  be  free ;  rather, 
though  I  uxM  free.  He  hag  voluntarily 
•bandiined  this  freedom.  The  true  render- 
ing of  the  verse  is,  For  being  free  from  aU 
men  [Gal.  L  10],  /  enslaved  myself  to  all. 
In  acting  thus  he  obeyed  his  own  principle 
of  not  abusing  his  liberty,  but "  by  love  serve 
•ne  another"  (Gal.  v.  13). 

Ver.  20. — Unto  the  Jews  I  became  as  a 
Jew.  When,  for  instance,  he  circumcised 
Timothy  (Acts  xii.  8)  and  probably  Titus 
also  (Gal.  it  3;  lee  'Life  of  St.  Paul,' 
i.  412,  sqq.);  and  he  was  continuing  this 
principle  of  action  when  he  took  the  vow 
of  the  Nazarite  (Acts  xxi.  21 — 26),  and 
called  himself  "  a  Pharisee,  a  son  of 
Pharisees"  (Acts  xxiii.  6).  To  them  that 
are  under  the  Law.  That  is,  not  only  to 
Jews,  but  even  to  the  most  rigorous  legalisia 
among  the  Jewg.  It  should  be  carefully 
observed  that  St.  Paul  is  hern  describing 
the  innocent  concessions  and  compliances 
which  arise  from  the  harmless  and  geneioua 
condescension  of  a  loving  spirit  He  never 
sank  into  the  fear  of  man,  which  maile  Peter 
at  Antioch  unfaithful  to  liis  real  principles. 
He  did  not  allow  men  to  form  from  his 
conduct  any  mistaken  inference  aa  to  iiig 
essential  views.  He  waived  his  pergonal 
predilections  in  matters  of  indifferenea 
which  only  affected  "  the  infinitely  little." 

Ver.  21. — To  them  that  are  without  law, 
as  without  law.  In  other  words,  I  so  fiir 
became  to  the  heathen  as  a  heathen  (Bom. 
ii.  12),  that  I  never  wilfully  insulted  their 
beliefs  (Acts  xix.  87)  nor  shocked  their 
prejudices,  but  on  the  contrary,  judged  them 
witli  perfect  forbearance  (Acts  xvii.  30)  and 
treated  them  with  invariable  courtesy.  St 
Paul  tried  to  look  at  every  subject,  ao  In 
as  be  could  do  so  innocently,  from  their 
point  of  view  (Acts  xvii.).  Be  defended 
tlioir  gogpel  liberty,  and  had  interaonraa 


",90  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  ix.  1—27 


mth  Gentile  converts  on  terms  of  perfect 
equality  (Gal.  ii.  12).  Not  without  law  to 
God.  Not  even  "without  law"  (anomos) 
Much  less  "opposed  to  law"  (antinomos), 
though  free  from  it  as  a  bondage  (Gal.  ii. 
19).  The  need  for  this  qualification  is 
Bhown  by  the  fact  that  in  the  Clementine 
writings,  in  the  spurious  letter  of  Peter 
to  James,  St.  Paul  is  surreptitiously  calum- 
Biated  lu  "the  lawleeg  one."  Even  the 
Gentiles  were  "not  without  law  to  God" 
(Bom.  ii.  14, 15).  So  that  St.  Paul  is  here 
using  language  which  base  opponents  might 
distort,  but  which  the  common  sense  of 
honest  readers  would  prevent  them  from 
misinterprL'ting. 

Ver.  22'. — To  the  weak.  His  whole  argu- 
ment here  is  a  plea  for  condescension  to  the 
infirmities  of  weak  converts.  A  similar 
condescension  to  their  prejudices  might  be 
necessary  to  win  them  to  Christianity  at  all 
(ch.  viii.  13 ;  "  We  that  are  strong  ouglit 
to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  not 
to  please  ourselves,"  Eom.  xv.  1).  St.  Paul 
often  touches  on  our  duties  to  weak  brethren 
(oh.  viii.  7 ;  Kom.  xiv.  1 ;  1  Thess.  v.  14 ; 
Acts  XX.  35).  All  things  to  all  men.  He 
repeats  the  same  principle  in  ch.  x.  33, 
"  I  please  all  men  in  all  things,  not  seeking 
mine  own  profit,  but  the  profit  of  many, 
that  they  may  be  saved ; "  and  once  more, 
at  the  end  of  his  course  (2  Tim.  ii.  10). 
This  condescension  laid  him  open  to  the 
malicious  attacks  of  religious  enemies  ( Gal. 
i.  10).  But  not  on  that  account  would  St. 
Paul  ever  be  led  to  abandon  the  fruitful  aid 
of  that  universal  sympathy  and  tolerance 
which  is  one  of  the  best  tests  of  Christian 
love.  That  I  might  by  all  means  save  some. 
He  adds  this  explanation  of  the  motive  of 
his  condescension  to  various  scruples  (avyKa- 
ripacis)  lest  any  should  accuse  him  of 
men-pleasing,  as  some  of  his  Galutian 
opponents  had  done  (Gal.  i.  10).  In  his 
desire  to  win  souls  he  acted  with  the  wisdom 
and  sympathy  taught  by  experience,  sup- 
pressing himself. 

Ver.  23.— And  this  I  do.  The  better 
reading  is,  and  I  do  all  things.  For  the 
gospel's  sake.  'J'his  is  a  wider  feeling  than 
even  "  for  the  elect's  sakes  "  of  2  Tim.  il.  10. 
With  you.  The  "  you  "  Is  not  expressed  in 
the  original,  where  we  only  have  "  a  fellow- 
partaker  [o-iryKoicoii/iij,  Bom.  xi.  17]  of  it." 
But  the  word  illustiatei  the  deep  humility 
of  A»  apostle. 

Vers.  24 — 27. — Exhortation  to  earneetneu 
ai  a  corollary  from  the  principles  here  stated. 

Ver.  24. — Enow  ye  not  that  they  which 
ran  in  a  race  run  all?  Tliey  as  Corin- 
thians would  well  know  the  full  bearing  of 
every  illustration  derived  from  the  triennial 
Istwaisn  games,  which  were  the  chief 
gleigr  «f  th&  eitr.  and  which  at  this  period 


had  even  thrown  the  Olympic  game*  intt 
the  shade.  The  words  "in  a  race,"  are 
rather,  in  the  stadium.  The  traces  of  the 
great  Corinthian  stadium,  where  the  games 
were  held  and  the  races  run,  are  still  visible 
on  the  isthmus.  This  mitaphor  of  "tlie 
race,"  which  has  pervaded  the  common 
language  of  Christianity,  is  also  found  in 
Heb.  xil.  1;  Phil.  iii.  14;  2  Tim.  iv.  7. 
The  prize.  The  bracium  was  the  wreath 
given  to  the  victor  by  the  judges.  The 
Christian  prize  is  that  of  "  the  lilgh  calling 
of  God  in  Jesus  Christ,"  towards  which 
St.  Paul  himself  was  pressing  forward. 

Ver.  25. — That  striveth  for  the  mastery ; 
rather,  that  strives  to  win  in  a  contest  St. 
Paul  never  allows  bis  converts  to  dream 
of  the  indefectibility  of  grace,  and  so  to 
slide  into  antinomian  security.  He  often 
reminds  them  of  the  extreme  severity  and 
continuousness  of  the  contest  (Epii.  vi.  12  ; 

1  Tim.  vi.  12).  Is  temperate  in  all  things. 
One  good  moral  result  which  sprang  from 
the  ancient  system  of  athleticism  was  the 
self-denial  and  self-mastery  which  it  re- 
quired. The  candidate  for  a  prize  had  to 
be  pure,  sober,  and  enduring  (Horace, '  Ars 
Poet.,'  412),  to  obey  oiders,  to  eat  sparely 
and  simply  and  to  bear  effort  and  fatigue 
(Bplct,, '  Enchir.,'  3S)  for  ten  months  before 
the  contest.  A  corruptible  crown.  A  fading 
garland  of  Istlimian  pine,  or  Nemean  parsley, 
or  Pythian  olive,  or  Olympian  bay.  An 
incorruptible  J  "  unwltherlng  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  4); 
"amaranthine"  (1  Pet.  v.  4);  "a  crown 
of  righteousness "  (2  Tim.  iv.  8) ;  "a  crown 
of  life  "  (Jas.  i.  12 ;  Bev.  iL  10 ;  comp.  also 

2  Tim.  ii.  5  ;  Bev.  iii.  11). 

Ver.  26  — Not  as  uncertainly.  My  eye 
is  fixed  on  a  definite  goal  (2  Tim.  i.-  12). 
So  fight  I  (Eom.  vii.  23 ;  Epli.  vi.  12 ;  2  Tim. 
iv.  7);  literally,  so  box  1.  Not  as  one  that 
beateth  the  air ;  rather,  as  not  beating  the  air. 
Not  whnt  the  Greeks  called  "a  shadow- 
battle."  I  strike  forthright  blows,  not 
feints,  or  blows  at  random. 

Ver.  27. — ^I  keep  under  my  body,  and  bring 
it  into  subjection ;  literally,  2  bruue  my  body, 
and  lead  it  about  as  a  slave.  The  word 
tamely  rendered  "  keep  In  subjection  "  means 
literally,  I  smite  under  the  eyes.  The  pugi- 
listic metaphor  is  kept  up,  and  the  pic- 
turesque force  of  the  words  would  convey 
a  vivid  Impression  to  Corinthians  familiar 
with  the  contests  of  the  Pancratum,  in  which 
boxing  with  the  heavy  lead-bound  ctestut 
played  a  prominent  port.  The  only  other 
place  in  the  New  Testament  where  the 
word  occurs  is  Luke  xviii.  5,  where  it 
seems  (on  the  lips  of  the  unjust  judge) 
to  have  a  sort  of  slang  sense.  How  St.  Paul 
"  bruised  his  body  "  may  be  seen  in  2  Cor. 
vi.  4,  5 ;  Col.  iii.  5 ;  Bom.  viii.  13.  It  was 
not  by  absurd  and  harmful  self-torture,  but 


OH.IX.  1— 27.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CO   INTHIANS. 


29) 


by  noble  labour  and  self-denial  for  the  good 
of  othera.  When  I  have  preached  to  others, 
I  myself  should  be  a  castaway.  "  Lest " — 
such  is  the  meaning  of  tbe  metaphor — 
"  after  proclaiming  to  others  tlie  laws  of  the 
contest  (as  a  herald),  I  should  myself 
violate  those  conditions,  and  be  not  only 
defeated  as  a  combatant,  but  ignominioasly 
rejected  &om  the  lists  and  not  allowed  to 
contend  at  all."  The  metaphor  is  not  strictly 
adhered  to,  for  the  herald  did  not  personally 
contend.  No  candidate  could  compete 
without  »  preliminary  loratiny,  and  to  b» 


"  rejected  "  was  regarded  as  a  deadly  Insult 
The  word  "rejected,"  "reprobate" — ^here 
rendered  "  a  castaway " — is  a  metaphoi 
derived  from  the  testing  of  metals,  and  the 
casting  aside  of  tbose  which  are  spurious. 
That  Paul  should  see  the  necessity  for  such 
serious  and  unceasing  effort  ehows  how  little 
he  believed  in  the  possibility  of  saintly 
"  works  of  supererogation,  over  and  above 
wliat  is  commanded."  "  When  the  cedar 
of  Lebanon  trembles,  what  shall  the  reed 
by  the  brookside  do  ?  " 


HOMILETICa 

Vew.  1 — 21. — The  leading  characteristics  of  a  truly  greed  gotpd  minister,    "  Am  I 

not  an  apostle?  am  I  not  free?"  etc.  Taking  these  verses  as  a  whole,  they  illustrate 
some  of  the  leading  characteristics  of  a  truly  great  gospel  minister,  and  I  offer  the 
following  remarks : — 

L  The  greater  the  minister  of  Christ,  the  horb  independent  of  oebehonial  bestbic- 
TIONS.  Paul  was  one  of  the  greatest,  if  not  the  greatest,  ministers  of  Christ  that  ever 
existed.  He  was  an  apostle,  and  had  "  seen  Christ " — a  qualification  that  distinguished 
him  as  a  minister  from  all,  but  eleven  others,  that  ever  lived.  Besides  this,  his  natural 
and  acquired  endowments  placed  him  in  the  very  first  rank  of  reasoners,  scholars,  and 
orators.  He  was  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  etc.  But  see  how  this  great 
minister  regarded  the  mere  conventionalities  of  religious  society.  "Am  I  not  an 
apostle?  am  I  not  free?"  He  refers  in  all  probability  to  the  preceding  chapter, 
which  treats  of  the  eating  of  meat  offered  to  idols,  and  concerning  which  he  says,  "  If 
meat  make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will  eat  no  fiesh  while  the  world  standeth."  As  if 
he  had  said,  "  I  am  free  to  eat  that  meat,  and  fi-ee  to  reject  it ;  I  am  not  bound  by  any 
conventional  custom  or  ceremonial  law,  for  I  am  '  an  apostle.' "  Now,  it  may  be  laid 
down  as  a  universal  truth  tliat,  the  greater  a  gospel  minister,  the  more  independent  of 
ceremonies.  Indeed,  the  greater  the  man,  always  the  more  independent  he  is  of  forms, 
fashions,  customs.  Hezekiah  called  that  which  his  countrymen  worshipped  "  Nehush- 
tan" — a  piece  of  brass.  Cromwell  called  that  glittering  insignia  of  authority  on  the  table 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  and  at  which  most  of  the  members,  perhaps,  trembled  with 
»we,  a  "  bauble."  Thomas  Carlyle  called  all  the  pageantry  of  ofSce  and  the  glitter  of 
wealth  "  shams."  Bums  called  the  swaggering  lordling  a  "  coof."  How  much  more 
would  a  man  like  Paul — who  possessed  that  spirit  of  Christ  which  gave  him  an  insight 
into  tbe  heart  of  things — look  down,  not  merely  with  indifference,  but  with  contempt, 
upon  all  that  the  world  considered  great  and  grand  1  The  more  Christly  inspiration  a 
man  has,  the  more  he  will  discern  degradation  on  thrones  and  pauperism  in  mansions. 
A  famous  French  preacher  began  his  funeral  address  over  the  coffin  of  his  sovereign 
with  these  words,  "There  is  nothing  great  but  God."  To  the  man  whose  soul  is 
charged  with  the  great  ideas  of  God,  all  the  distinctions  amongst  men  are  only  as  the 
distinctions  existing  among  the  various  bubbles  on  the  flowing  stream.  Some  are  a 
little  larger  than  others,  some  are  tinged  by  the  sunbeam,  and  some  are  pallid  in  the 
shade ;  but  all  have  the  same  common  nature,  and  all,  breaking  into  the  abyss,  are  lost 
for  ever.  "  Am  I  not  free  ?  "  says  Paiil.  A  grand  thing  this,  to  be  free  fo  'm  all  the 
conventionalities  of  society  and  the  ceremonies  of  religion.  What  cared  Elijah  for  the 
kings  of  Syria,  or  Israel,  or  Judah?  Nothing.  Agrippa  trembled  before  the  moral 
majesty  of  Paul,  even  in  chains.  Oh  for  such  ministers  as  Paul  in  this  age  of 
hypocrisies  and  forms  1 

U.  The  greater  the  minister  of  Christ,  the  hioheb  the  bebviob  hk  bendebs  to 
BOOiiETT.  What  high  service  did  this  great  minister  St.  Paul  reader  to  the  members  of 
the  CSorinthian  Church  I  "  Are  not  ye  my  work  in  the  Lord  ? .  .  .  The  seal  of  mine 
apostleship  are  ye  in  the  Lord."  Te  are,  as  far  as  ye  are  Christians,  "  my  work."  I 
converted  you ;  I  turned  you  away  from  idols  to  the  one  true  and  .living  uod,  from  th« 


292  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.    [oM.  ix.  1— 27. 

kingdom  of  Satan  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  No  work*  on  earth  equal  to  this.  "  He 
that  convertolh  a  sinner  from  the  error  of  hia  ways,"  etc.  This  work  which  I  effected 
in  you  "in  the  Lord,"  or  by  the  Lord,  is  a  demonstration  of  my  apostleship.  What 
work  again,  I  ask,  approaches  this  in  grandeur  and  importance?  It  is  the  work  of 
creating  men  "anew  in  Christ  Jesus;"  it  is  the  work  of  establishing  that  moral 
empire  in  the  world,  which  is  "  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost." 
The  man  who  succeeds  in  accomplishing  this  work  thereby  demonstrates  the  divinity 
uf  his  ministry.  Hence  Paul  says,  "  Mine  answer  to  them  that  do  examine  me  is  this." 
I'hose  that  question  or  deny  my  apostleship  I  refer  to  the  spiritual  work  I  have 
accomplished ;  "  this  is  my  answer,"  my  defence.  Truly  it  might  be  said  of  Paul,  "  No 
man  can  do  the  works  that  thou  doest,  except  God  be  with  him."  The  only  way  by 
which  we  can  prove  ourselves  true  ministers  is,  not  by  words,  but  by  spiritual  works. 

III.  The  greater  the  minister  of  Christ,  the  more  independent  hk  is  of  the 
ANIMAL  ENJOYMENTS  OF  LIFE.  "  Have  We  uot  power  to  eat  and  to  drink  ?  Have  we 
not  power  to  lead  about  a  sister,  a  wife,  as  well  as  other  apostles,  and  as  the  brethren  of 
the  Lord,  and  Cephas  ?  "  Paul  claims  the  privilege  to  eat  and  drink  as  he  pleased,  and 
to  marry  or  not  according  to  his  pleasure,  to  be  a  celibate  or  a  benedict.  Perhaps  some 
of  the  members  of  the  Corinthian  Church  questioned  Paul's  apostleship  because  he  was 
not  married.  Those  who  belonged  to  Peter's  party — who  was  a  married  man — ^would 
b>!  likely  to  say, "  Paul  cannot  be  an  apostle,  for  Cephas,  who  is  an  apostle,  has  his  wife, 
whom  he  takes  about  with  him  in  the  prosecution  of  his  mission."  And  then  the 
"  brethren  of  the  Lord,"  too,  they  have  their  wives.  Paul's  reply  to  this  is  virtually, "  I 
have  the  power  and  the  right  to  all  connubial  privileges  and  comforts,  the  right  to  feast 
at  banquets,  and  to  form  domestic  relations ;  but  I  forego  them,  I  am  independent  of 
them,  I  have  higher  tastes  and  sublimer  sources  of  enjoyment.  '  For  me  to  live  is 
Christ.'  He  is  the  all  and  in  all  of  my  souL"  The  more  brain  and  Chiistly  inspira- 
tion a  man  has,  the  less  carnal,  and  the  less  carnal  the  more  independent  of  material 
enjoyments. 

IV.  The  greater  the  minister  of  Christ,  the  uobe  claim  he  has  to  the  tempobal 
SUPPORT  OF  those  WHOM  HE  SPIRITUALLY  SERVES.  The  apostlc  gocs  On  from  the  sixth 
to  the  fourteenth  verse  to  say  that  he  and  Barnabas  would  be  right  if  they  were  to  for- 
bear working  for  thiir  livelihood,  and  claim  their  temporal  support  from  those  to  whom 
they  spiritually  niinistered.  He  goes  on  to  indicate  several  reasons  why  he  had  a  claim 
to  their  temporal  support.  1.  The  general  usage  of  mankind.  "  AVho  goeth  a  warfare 
any  time  at  his  own  charges?"  etc.  He  draws  three  illustrations  from  human  life 
to  show  the  equity  of  the  principle — from  the  soldier,  the  agriculturist,  and  the  shepherd. 
2.  T%e principle  of  the  Jewish  Late.  "  Say  I  these  things  as  a  man?  or  saith  not  the 
Law  the  same  also?"  etc.  On  a  space  of  hard  ground  called  a  threshing-floor  the  oxen 
in  Jewish  times  were  driven  to  and  fro  over  the  com  thrown  there,  thus  separating 
the  husk  from  the  grain.  "  God,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "  had  therein  ordered  that  the 
ox  should  not  be  muzzled  while  he  was  treading  out  the  corn,  nor  hindered  from  eating 
while  he  was  preparing  the  com,  for  man's  use,  and  treading  it  out  of  the  ear.  But  this 
law  was  not  chiefly  given  out  of  (Sod's  regard  to  oxen  or  concern  for  them,  but  to  teach 
mankind  that  all  due  encouragement  should  be  given  to  those  who  are  employed  by  us 
or  labouring  for  our  good,  that  the  labourers  should  taste  of  the  fi^it  of  their  labours." 
"  Doth  God  take  care  for  oxen  ?  "  Yes.  He  enjoined  that  the  mouth  of  the  working 
ox  should  not  be  muzzled,  but  should  have  food  to  eat.  Is  not  man  greater  than  the 
ox?  And  shall  he  work  and  be  deprived  of  temporal  supplies?  3.  The  principles  of 
common  equity.  "  If  we  have  sown  into  you  spirit' >al  things,  is  it  a  great  thing  if  ws 
shall  reap  your  carnal  things  ?  "  They  had  given  to  them  far  higher  things,  infinitely 
more  important  than  the  temporal  support  which  they  required.  He  who  gives  to  his 
race  Divine  ideas  gives  that  which  alone  can  secure  the  progress  of  humanity,  both  in 
temporal  and  spiritual  good.  True  ideas  destroy  bad  institutions  and  create  good  ones. 
4.  Other  apostles  and  their  wives  were  thus  supported.  "  Or  I  only  and  Barnabas,  have 
not  we  power  to  forbear  working  1"  ...  If  others  be  partakers  of  this  power  over  you, 
are  not  we  rather  ?  "  This  language  implies  that  all  the  others  who  worked  amongst 
them  obtained  their  temporal  support.  Why  should  not  we?  Have  we  done  less ?  la 
our  authority  inferior?  6.  The  support  of  the  Jewish  priesthood.  "  Do  ye  not  know 
that  they  which  minister  about  holy  things  live  of  the  things  of  the  temple  ?  and  thef 


CB.  IS.  1—27.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  IVi 

which  watt  tX  the  altar  are  partakers  with  the  altar?"  "The  first  part  of  the  passage 
refers  to  the  general  principle  that  the  priests  who  were  engaged  in  the  temple  services 
were  supported  from  the  various  offerings  which  were  brought  there;  and  the  second 
clause  more  dc6nitely  alludes  to  the  particular  fact  that,  when  a  sacrifice  was  offered  on 
the  altar,  the  sacrificing  priests  as  well  as  the  altar  had  a  share  of  the  animal."  6.  Thn 
ordination  of  Christ.  "  Even  so  hath  the  Lord  ordained  that  they  which  preach  the 
gospel  should  live  of  the  gospel"  (see  Matt.  x.  10).  "Should  live  of  the  gospel,"  not 
grow  rich  on  the  gospel,  but  have  from  it  that  which  is  needful  for  subsistence.  Look- 
ing at  all  that  Paul  says  on  that  question  here,  and  at  the  immense  service  that  a  true 
minister  renders  to  society,  the  conviction  cannot  be  avoided  that  no  man  Ijas  a  stronger 
claim  to  a  temporal  recompense  for  his  labour  than  a  true  gospel  minister.  Albeit  no 
claims  are  lo  universally  ignored.  What  Churches  in  these  modern  times  tender  to 
their  ministers  as  an  acknowledgment  of  their  service  is  regarded  as  a  charity  rather 
than  a  claim.  Charity,  indeed  1  Call  the  money  you  pay  to  your  butcher,  baker,  lawyer, 
doctor,  charity;  but  in  the  name  of  all  that  is  just,-do  not  call  that  charity  which  you 
tender  to  the  man  who  consecrates  his  entire  being  and  time  tb  impart  to  you  the 
elements  of  eternal  life. 

v.  The  greater  the  minister  of  Christ,  the  more  bradt  to  snRiiENDER  his  claimp 
FOB  THK  SAKK  OF  USEFULNESS.  Great  as  were  the  claims  of  Paul,  he  magnanimously 
surrenders  them  all  in  order  to  become  more  useful.  He  would  not  feast  at  banquets, 
enjoy  conjugal  life,  or  take  payment  for  his  services,  lest  his  usefulness  should  be  in  the 
least  impaired.  "  But  I  have  used  none  of  these  things :  neither  have  I  written  these 
things,  that  it  should  be  so  done  unto  me;  for  it  were  better  for  me  to  die,  than  that  any 
man  should  make  my  glorying  void."  I  would  sooner  die  than  be  dependent  on  you  for 
a  livelihood.  Grand  man  I  He  stood  before  his  congregations  and  said,  "  I  have 
coveted  no  man's  silver,  or  gold,  or  apparel.  Yea,  ye  yourselves  know,  that  these  hands 
hare  ministered  unto  my  necessities,  and  to  them  that  were  with  me." 

Ten,  22,  23. — Moral  identification  with  others  a  qitalification  of  the  eoangd.  These 
verses  and  the  context  are  sometimes  taken  as  expressive  of  the  accommodating  spiiil 
of  the  apostle  in  his  endeavours  to  save  men.  Hence  he  is  regarded  as  acting  in  a 
somewhat  Jesuitical  way,  pretending  to  be  what  he  was  not,  coming  down  to  the  pre- 
judices of  men,  and  taking  them  as  it  were  by  guile.  Such  a  view  of  the  apostle  is 
utterly  untrue.  From  his  very  constitution,  to  say  nothing  of  his  Christianity,  he 
could  not  bend  to  any  temporizing  expediency.  There  was  nothing  of  the  Jesuit  or  the 
diplomatist  in  him.  All  that  he  means,  I  think,  by  the  words  is  that  he  endeavoured 
to  put  himself  into  the  place,  or  rather  into  the  views  and  feelings,  of  those  whom  he 
endeavoured  to  win  to  Christ.  He  transmigrated  himself,  so  to  speak,  went  into  their 
souls,  clothed  himself  with  their  feelings,  and  argued  from  their  stand{X)iiit.  Now,  this 
way  of  influencing  men  is  both  right  and  wise.  As  a  debater,  whether  in  politics,  philo- 
sophy, or  religion,  he  only  acts  fairly  and  with  power  who  endeavours  to  put  himself 
into  die  very  position  of  his  opponent,  to  look  at  the  points  in  dispute  from  the 
opponent's  standpoint,  with  the  opponent's  eyes,  and  through  the  opponent's  passions. 
Such  a  man  becomes  mighty  in  debate.  This  is  what  Paul  did.  Ue  made  "  himsell 
all  things  to  all  men."  In  arguing  with  the  Jew  he  made  himself  a  Jew  in  feeling,  with 
the  Greek  a  Greek  in  feeling,  with  a  slave  a  slave  in  feeling,  with  a  master  a  master  in 
feeling.  Thus  he  was  a  philosopher  when  he  spoke  to  the  Athenians,  and  a  Jew  when 
he  spoke  to  the  Jews.  Now,  we  regard  this  power  of  moral  transmigration,  this 
power  of  passing  into  another  man's  soul  and  taking  another  man's  experience,  as  an 
essential  qualification  for  a  twxessfiil  evangel;  and  this  power  implies  at  least  thjce 
thinga. 

L  A  BiORLT  IHAOIKATIVB  TEMPERAMENT.  The  phlegmatic  man,  whose  nature  is 
incapable  of  taking  fire,  who  moves  with  the  creeping  legs  of  logic  rather  than  on  the 
wingi  of  moral  intuition,  would  find  it  all  but  impossible  to  realize  another  man's 
experiences.  He  could  not  be  a  dramatist.  He  could  not  show  another  man  to  himself. 
No  one  can  enter  into  the  experience  of  another  only  on  the  strong  warm  current  of 
social  sympathy.  Hence  no  young  men  should  be  encoaraged  to  assume  the  work  of 
the  Christian  ministry  who  have  not  that  fervid  imagination,  that  glowing  tempera- 
ment, that  constitute  a  dramatic  genius. 


294  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [cm.  ix.  1-27. 

II.  A  KSOWLBDGB  or  HUMAN  1 IFE.  It  IS  necessary  that  we  should  make  ourselvei 
thoroughly  acquainted,  not  merely  with  the  outward  circumstances  of  the  men  we  seek 
to  influence,  hut  with  their  inner  life — their  moods  of  thought,  their  habits  of  mind, 
their  leading  passions,  their  strongest  proclivities.  This  requires  study  of  men,  not  as  they 
appear  in  books,  but  as  they  appear  in  their  circle  ;  anrl  men,  not  in  the  mass,  but  m 
their  Indiridual  character  and  idiosyncrasies.  Can  an  Englishman  so  know  a  Hindoo^ 
•  Chinese,  or  a  Japanese,  as  to  put  himself  into  his  experience  ?    I  trow  not. 

III.  A  PASSIONATE  LOVE  FOB  SOULS.  Nothing  but  the  constraining  love  of  Christ  can 
inrest  man  either  with  the  disposition  or  the  power  for  such  a  work — a  work  requiring 
self-sacrifice,  patience,  tenderness,  invincible  determination,  and  hallowed  devotion. 
lliii  is  what  gave  Paul  the  power  to  be  "  made  all  things  to  all  men."  "  I  please  all 
men  ia  all  things,"  he  says,  "  not  seeking  mine  own  profit,  but  the  profit  of  many,  that 
thOT  may  be  saved." 

OoHOLUSioM.  The  work  of  a  moral  redeemer  is,  of  all  works,  the  greatest  and  the 
most  arduous.  There  is  no  work  in  all  the  departments  of  human  labour  thiit  requires 
such  high  qualifications  as  the  work  of  bringing  souls  to  Christ. 

Vers.  24 — 26. — The  Christian  race.  "Know  ye  not  that  they  which  run  in  •  race, 
run  all,  but  one  receiveth  the  prize?  So  mn,  that  ye  may  obtain.  And  every  man 
that  striveth  for  the  mastery  is  temperate  In  all  things.  Now  they  do  it  to  obtain  a 
corraptible  crown;  but  we  an  incorruptible.  I  therefore  so  run, not  as  uncertainly;  so 
fight  I,  not  as  one  that  beateth  the  air."  The  Christian  life  is  a  race,  and  w*  are 
exhorted  to  run  that  the  prize  may  be  obtained.    "So  run."    How? 

L  Bun  in  the  prescbibed  course.  The  course  is  marked  out  and  measured.  The 
rtarting-place  is  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and  the  goal  is  planted  in  the  grave. 

II.  Run  WITHOUT  INCUMBRANCE.  "  Lay  aside  every  weight,"  all  worldly  cares,  and 
inordinate  sympathetic  enjbarrassing  prejudices,  and  fettering  habits. 

III.  Run  WITH  ALL  POSSIBLE  CELERITY.  Shake  off  sloth  and  languor,  stretdi  evsry 
aauscle  and  limb,  throw  ttie  whole  force  of  your  being  into  the  effort. 

IT,  Run  WITB  UNTIRING  PEKSisTENCT.  Pausc  not,  nor  loiter  a  moment  nntil  the 
•nd  is  obtained.    "  So  run,  that  ye  may  obtain." 

T«r.  27. — Hdl  after  preaching,  "  But  I  keep^"  ete.  These  are  terrible  words,  and 
they  teach  at  least  three  things. 

L  That  delivebance  from  hell  demands  the  most  earnest  selp-discifline. 
"  I  keep  under  my  body."  I  subdue  the  flesh  by  violent  and  reiterated  blows.  The 
reason  for  this  mortification  of  the  flesh  is,  "  lest  that  by  any  means,  when  I  have 
preached  to  others,  I  myself  should  be  a  castaway."  Self-discipline  may  be  said  to  eon- 
■Ut  of  two  things.  1.  The  entire  subjugation  of  the  budy  to  the  mind.  The  body  was 
intended  to  be  the  organ,  the  servant,  and  the  instrument  of  the  mind,  bu<  it  has  become 
the  master.  The  supremacy  of  the  body  is  the  curse  of  the  world  and  Mm  ruin  of  the 
man.  2.  The  tulfjU(/aiion  of  the  mind  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  Though  tlie  mind  governs 
the  body,  if  the  mind  is  false,  selfish,  unloyal  to  Christ,  there  is  no  discipline.  The 
mind  must  be  the  servant  of  Christ  in  order  to  be  the  legitimate  sovereign  of  the  body. 
These  two  things  include  spiritual  discipline. 

IL  That  the  necessity  of  this  self-discipline  cannot  be  superseded  bt  the 
MOST  SUCCESSFUL  FBEACHINO.  "  When  I  have  preached  to  others."  Paul  had  preached 
to  others.  He  had  preached  to  many  in  difTerent  lands,  preached  earnestly  and  SDO- 
cessfuUy,  preached  so  that  thousands  were  converted  by  his  ministry,  preached  so  at 
no  ene  else  has  ever  preached;  yet  his  preaching,  he  felt,  did  not  do  the  work  of  self- 
discipline.  Indeed,  there  is  much  in  the  work  of  preaching  that  has  a  tendency  to 
operate  against  personal  spiritual  culture.  1.  Famili»rity  with  sacred  truths  destroys 
for  us  their  charm  of  freshness.  2.  A  professional  handling  of  Qod's  Word  interferes 
with  its  personal  application.  3.  The  o|iinions  of  audiences,  favourable  or  otherwise, 
exert  an  influence  unfavourable  to  spiritual  discipliue.  In  connection  with  all  this, 
Sataa  is  especially  active  in  opposing  the  growth  of  spiritual  piety  in  the  preacher's 
tone.  8o  that  there  is  a  terrible  danger  that,  whilst  the  preacher  is  cultivating  thi 
vineyards  of  others,  he  is  neglecting  bis  own. 

III.  Tn  host  sucoEBSFuii  rsEAOHiNa  uxr  be  tolu>wed  bt  ultimate  buik 


SB.  IX.  1—27.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  295 

"  I  mywif  flhonld  be  a  castaway  t" — rejected!  Who  shall  fathom  the  meaning  of  this 
word  ?  A  auccessfal  preacher  a  "  casta w(<,y  " — be  rejected  I  The  Tophet  of  him  who  has 
offered  mercy  to  others  which  he  has  despised,  urged  truths  on  the  credence  of  others 
that  ht  has  disbelieved,  enforced  laws  on  others  which  he  has  transgressed,  will  burn 
with  WTerer  fires  and  peal  with  more  awful  thunders.  A  magnifying-glass  held  in  a 
certain  position  by  the  hand  of  a  child  may  convey  sufiicient  fire  through  it  to  wrap  the 
neighbourhood  in  conflagration,  albeit  the  gl»ss  through  which  the  fire  has  passed 
remains  unheated,  cold  as  flint.  So  a  man  may  convey  to  others  the  rays  of  the  sud 
of  RightMusnegs,  and  yet  his  own  heart  remain  cold  as  ic&    Truly  a  terrible  fact  this. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  l—U,—Sow  St.  Paul  regarded  his  apostleship  and  it»  right*.  To  induce 
the  Corinthians  to  deny  themselves  the  exercise  of  a  liberty  they  had  in  things 
indifferent,  St.  Paul  had  made  the  argument  in  the  eighth  chapter.  Liberty  was 
amenable  to  conscience,  knowledge  secondary  to  love,  and  love  was  the  constructing 
or  building-up  power  of  the  new  spiritual  edifice.  Not  one  of  these  could  be  spared, 
for  they  were  all  constituents  of  manhood  in  Christ ;  but  they  must  be  adjusted  to  one 
another  under  the  supremacy  of  loTe.  If  one  had  a  true  reverence  for  his  own  con- 
science, he  would  reverence  conscience  in  others.  The  conscience  of  another  might  be 
weak,  and  he  might  pity  the  weakness,  and  yet  this  pity,  if  genuine,  would  not  allow 
scorn  or  contempt.  The  argument  was  a  lesson  in  patience  and  forbearance,  a  lesson  in 
self-abnegation,  and  a  lesson,  furthermore,  in  responsibility  for  our  example.  So  far  as 
the  immediate  issue  is  concerned  (meats  offered  to  idols  and  participating  in  feasts  held 
in  heathen  temples),  the  logic  is  direct  and  conclusive.  At  no  moment  does  the 
apostle  confine  himself  to  individual  rights  on  the  part  of  such  as  had  enlightened 
views  as  to  the  nothingness  of  idols.  He  looks  also  at  community-rights  and  discusses 
a  special  duty  on  the  ground  of  general  interests.  Here,  as  in  the  former  chapters,  the 
community-man,  the  community-Christian,  is  before  him ;  and  he  shows  the  great 
characteristic  of  a  teacher  in  the  fact  that  his  business  is  to  mould  a  body  of  men 
into  unity.  Of  what  value  are  minds  of  large  endowments,  in  their  social  relations,  if 
they  stand  for  a  narrow  and  cramped  individualism  ?  If  a  man  has  a  finer  eye  than 
others,  it  is  that  he  may  see  further  into  the  needs  of  the  race.  If  he  has  more  ardent 
sympathies,  it  is  for  their  wider  outgoing.  Genius  is  nature's  protest,  not  against 
ordinary  talents,  but  against  the  littleness  and  selfish  absorption  of  individuality. 
And  so  far,  genius  is  an  instinctive  yearning  in  the  direction  of  a  world-wide  appre- 
ciation and  love,  and  is  one  of  those  innumerable  parables  in  which  Christianity  lies 
imbedded  till  the  human  mind  can  be  prepared  to  receive  it.  Now,  St.  Paul  was  the 
foremost  representative,  in  a  certain  sense,  of  this  community-idea,  and,  unquestionably, 
Corinth  put  its  strength  and  compass  to  a  very  severe  test.  At  his  time  of  life,  at  that 
era  in  his  ministry,  and  from  just  such  a  mixed  people,  this  grand  sentiment  of 
universality  was  destined  by  Providence — so  we  may  conjecture — to  undergo  a  thorough 
discipline.  Bach  truth  has  its  own  peculiar  test.  Some  truths  need  a  hotter  furnace 
than  others  to  separate  the  human  dross  and  bring  out  the  refined  gold.  If,  then,  St. 
Paul  was  experiencing  a  special  mental  and  spiritual  training  in  respect  to  this  trans- 
cendent doctrine,  we  hare  an  insight  into  his  mode  of  argument,  and  even  into  the 
style  of  his  illustrations  and  enforcement.  Identified  with  his  doctrine,  he  himself 
merging,  as  it  were,  his  personality  in  its  nature  and  operations,  his  own  fortunes  bound 
up  inseparably  with  its  fortunes, — ^how  could  he  avoid  citing  his  own  example  to  confirm 
tha  views  he  so  fervently  advocated?  One  paragraph,  at  least,  must  be  given  to  his 
indlTidual  portraiture  as  a  community-man,  a  race-man,  intent  with  his  whole  heart 
on  bringing  a  world  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  And  he  had  sprung  to  this  high  level  of  his 
own  experience  and  history  when  he  said  in  the  thirteenth  verse  of  the  previous  chapter, 
"  I  will  eat  no  flesh,"  etc.  On  that  ground,  remote  as  it  was  from  that  occupied  by  some 
of  bis  Corinthian  friends,  he  was  perfectly  at  home ;  he  knew  his  strength  in  God ;  he 
sav  precisely  what  to  say  of  grace  and  its  workings  in  his  soul,  and  how  to  say  it  with 
unanswerable  force — straightforward,  vivid,  incisive.  The  movement  of  thought,  oven 
for  Um,  is  uncommonly  rapid.    Sentences  are  short ;  the  words  simple,  intense,  and 


296  THE  FIKST  Ei'ISTLB  TO  THE  COBINTHlAiJ&    [cH.  ix.  1— 27 

closely  linked.  Interrogation  abounds.  H«  is  an  apostle';  a  free  apostle ;  an  apostla 
who  saw  not  Christ  in  his  humiliation,  and  never  knew  him  after  the  flesh,  but  has  seen 
him  in  his  glorification,  and  dates  his  conversion  from  the  spectacle  of  his  Divine 
exaltation ;  and,  last  of  all,  an  apostle  whose  success  among  the  Corinthians  ("  my 
work  in  the  Lord; "  "the  seal  of  mine  apostleship ")  has  vindicated  and  verified  hie 
claims  as  Christ's  chosen  servant.  Self-assertion  becomes  under  some  circumstances  a 
very  important  duty,  and,  if  self  be  surrendered  to  God,  there  is  no  way  more  effective 
to  exemijlify  humility.  One  who  can  ascend  to  a  height  so  lofty,  and  stand  among  the 
sublimities  of  the  universe  apart  from  self  and  even  dead  to  self,  is  a  far  greater  man  in  the 
moral  scale  than  one  who,  on  the  low  plain  of  this  world,  merely  foregoes  lys  selfishness 
and  acts  disinterestedly  to  comply  with  an  earthly  contingency.  Pull  of  the  infinite  and 
eternal,  St.  Paul's  thoughts  are  God's  thoughts  finding  tone  and  accent  in  his  utterance. 
There  is  no  faltering,  no  nice  qualifyings,  no  hesitating  apprehension  lest  self  should 
insinuate  its  pretensions.  But  the  view  given  of  himsulf  is  large,  massive,  and,  for  its 
purpose,  strikingly  complete.  Men  cannot  speak  of  themselves  in  such  a  strain  unless 
an  utter  self-forgetfulness  be  precedent.  A  thinker's  illusirations  show  what  hold  a 
thought  has  on  him.  In  this  instance  St.  Paul's  illustrations  are  significant  as  well  as 
diversified.  Soldiers  is  the  field,  husbandmen  in  the  vineyard,  shepherds  with  their 
flocks,  supi'ly  his  imagination  with  analogies  to  establish  the  right  claimed  by  himself 
"  to  eat  and  to  drink,"  "  to  lead  about  a  sister,  a  wife,  as  well  as  other  apostles,"  and  "  to 
forbear  working."  On  all  grounds,  natural  and  civil  and  religious,  he  maintains  the 
right,  and  then  advances  to  Old  Testament  authority.  "  Doth  God  take  care  for  oxen  ?  " 
Yea,  not  only  for  their  sakes  as  animals,  but  for  man's  benefit,  the  providence  over 
the  lower  creation  being  tributary  to  the  providence  that  looks  to  man's  welfare  as  the 
final  earthly  cause  of  all  arrangements  in  the  kingdom  of  natui'e.  Yea,  verily,  we  are 
in  the  song  of  the  bird  and  the  muscle  of  the  horse  and  the  fidelity  of  all  domesticated 
creatures,  as  surely  as  in  the  grass  and  the  cereals  and  the  luscious  fruits  of  the  ground. 
Most  true  it  is  that — 

"  More  servants  wait  on  man 

Than  he'll  take  notice  of;  in  every  path 

He  treads  down  that  which  doth  befriend  hlM 

When  sickness  makes  him  pale  and  iran. 

Oik,  mighty  love  I    Man  is  one  world,  and  hath 
Another  to  attend  him." 

The  prefigurations  and  the  wondrous  homologies  are  all  from  below,  so  that  whaterer 
may  be  found  by  industry,  by  science  and  art,  in  the  amplitude  and  beneficence  of 
material  things  and  of  animal  existence,  are  but  so  many  prophecies  of  man's  natural 
position  of  headship.  Tet  what  incompleteness  were  in  all  this,  and  what  a  mockery 
of  man's  exaltation,  if  it  were  all ! — a  vast  pyramid  enclosing  a  mummy — a  magnificent 
temple,  like  the  heathen  temples,  in  which  you  walk  through  portico  and  corridor  and 
hall  to  confront  at  last  a  worthless  image  in  stone.  To  perfect  this  idea  of  man 
shadowed  forth  beneath  him  and  ever  advancing  towards  him,  there  must  be  a  counter- 
part. The  counterpart  is  the  archetype  above.  It  descends  to  man  in  Christ — Son  of 
man  because  Son  of  God.  "  For  our  sakes,  no  doubt,  this  is  written ; "  and  all  the 
writings,  below  and  above,  on  the  earth's  strata,  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  are  alike  in  this : 
"/or  our  sakes."  It  is  all  a  unity  or  it  is  all  nothing.  And  this  power  of  manhood 
St.  Paul  declares  to  belong  to  him,  and  vested  to  the  full  in  his  apostleship.  If,  now, 
St.  Paul  had  exhorted  the  Corintliians  so  urgently  to  obey  the  dictates  of  conscience  in 
a  matter  clearly  harmless,  and  thus  avoid  a  wrong  to  the  weaker  brethren  and  a  wrong 
to  their  own  souls ;  and  if  he  had  avowed  his  own  inflexible  resolution  to  "  eat  no  flesh  " 
(the  meat  of  which  he  had  been  speaking)  "for  ever;"  it  was  a  fit  occasion  to  testify 
to  his  own  self-denial  for  the  sake  of  the  gospel.  The  solace  of  domestic  life,  the 
special  tenderness  of  close  sympathy,  the  offices  of  watchful  affection,  ministerial  sup- 
port, "  carnal  things  "  that  might  have  lightened  the  burden  of  poverty  and  made  his 
toil  much  easier, — these  were  cheerfully  resigned.  Others  allowed  themselves  these 
aids  and  comforts ;  he  refused  them,  one  and  all.  From  the  common  order  of  apostolic 
life  he  would  stand  aside  in  his  own  isolated  lot,  and  "my  gospel"  should  have  in  his 
own  career  the  most  forcible  demonstration  of  his  glorious  individuality.  And  then, 
recdl-'.cting  the  law  of  the  temple  service  which  provided  for  the  support  of  the  priests, 


OB.  a.  1—27.1    THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  297 

h«  would  strengthen  the  analogical  argument  already  presented  in  faronr  of  his  rights, 
At  every  touch  the  individual  portrait  of  the  comrauaity  and  race-man  glows  more 
viyidly  on  the  canyas.  The  contrast  had  cost  him  much.  Poverty,  loneliness,  sorrow, 
had  heen  intensified,  but  there  it  was — a  contrast  with  the  soldier,  the  husbandman, 
the  shepherd,  the  priest,  the  apostles — self-assumed  and  a  perpetual  obligation — "  lest 
we  should  hinder  the  gospel  of  Christ." — L, 

Vers.  15—23. — Reasont  for  this  self-denial.  The  rights  had  been  resigned,  th« 
power  to  use  his  privileges  had  been  imused,  and  the  obligation,  self-assumed,  was  to  be 
perpetual.  Did  any  one  suspect  otherwise  ?  "  Better  for  me  to  die  "  than  this  matter  ol 
boasting  should  be  taken  from  me.  No  ground  for  boasting  existed  in  the  mere 
preaching  of  the  gospel;  but  he  could  claim  and  did  claim  that,  in  renouncing  his  right 
to  a  support  and  making  other  exceptional  sacrifices,  he  was  entitled  to  the  boast  ol 
preaching  a  free  gospel.  A  woe  is  iip.m  him  if  he  preach  not  the  gospel,  a  necessity  ha 
cannot  evade  while  true  to  his  moral  nature,  and  yet  a  necessity  which  he  will  tiansmute 
and  glorify  by  his  magnanimity  in  serving  without  remimeration.  Rights ;  what  were 
they?  Where  there  was  such  an  overpowering  sense  of  the  goodness  of  God  and  the 
grace  of  Ctirist  as  had  been  manifested  in  his  personal  salvation  and  in  conferring  upon 
him  the  apostleship,  "  better  die  "  than  measure  duty  by  mere  equivalence  of  action. 
Out  of  the  depths  of  gratitude  the  man  rises,  not  to  the  attitude  of  an  apostle,  but  an 
apostle  who  felt  with  the  utmost  intensity  the  obligations  of  sentiment  no  less  than 
those  of  principle.  Freely  had  he  received,  and  freely  would  he  give,  so  freely  indeed 
as  to  part  with  a  portion  of  freedom  and  to  gain  by  his  loss;  and  in  tMs  and  by  means 
of  this  he  had  his  reward.  Relinquishing  his  rights  and  descending  to  the  condition 
of  a  slave,  he  accommodated  himself  to  the  infirmities  and  prejudices  of  others  so  as  to 
save  ihe  greater  number.  Whenever  he  could  evince  his  regard  for  the  Jewish  nation 
and  conform  to  its  customs  and  usages  without  compromising  Christianity,  he  became 
"  as  a  Jew  unto  the  Jews."  Nor  did  he  limit  his  concessions  to  his  own  countrymen, 
but  he  became  "  all  things  to  all  men,"  never  yielding  the  truth,  never  compromising  a 
principle,  never  making  conscience  subservient  to  prudence,  never  finding  the  supreme 
law  of  action  in  any  utility,  and  always  resolute  to  concede  points  only  indifferent  and 
equally  resolute  to  maintain  that  things  indifferent  involved  no  moral  obligation.  And 
why  all  this  ?  There  were  two  reasons  for  it :  one  was  for  the  good  of  the  large  number, 
"  gain  the  more ; "  and  the  other  was  the  benefit  to  himself — a  fellow-" partaker  with  you" 
in  the  blessings  of  the  gospel.  "  Up  to  this  point  he  has  been  speaking  of  hia  self- 
denial  for  the  sake  of  others;  here  he  begins  to  speak  of  it  for  his  own  sake.  It  is  no 
longer  '  that  I  may  save  some,'  but '  that  I  may  be  a  partaker  of  the  gospel  with  you ' " 
(Stanley).— L. 

Vers.  24 — 27. — Self-denial  urged  in  view  of  the  heavenly  crown.  Vowet  is  no  sell- 
gniding  instinct  in  itself.  To  be  true  power,  it  must  be  directed  by  something  higher 
than  its  own  nature.  A  vast  fund  of  power  is  laid  up  within  us,  and  of  it  two  things 
may  be  said,  viz.  the  amount  of  power  abstractly  considered  is  far  greater  than  we  can 
use ;  and,  again,  our  available  power  must  be  held  under  check.  As  to  the  former, 
capacity  in  every  man  exceeds  ability,  and  much  of  our  education  consists  in  converting 
capacity  into  actual  ability.  And  this  latency  of  power  serves  another  purpose, 
inasmuch  as  it  is  a  reserved  fund  held  for  an  emergency.  At  times,  sudden  calls  are 
made  on  our  energies,  drafts  at  sight,  which  demand  extraordinary  effort.  Feats  of 
physical  strength  are  then  performed  which  are  amazing.  The  same  is  true  of  the 
mind ;  we  witness  its  faculties,  under  some  tremendous  pressure,  yielding  a  wisdom,  a 
patience,  a  persistency,  that  surpass  all  expectation.  On  the  other  hand,  our  available 
power  that  can  be  brought  any  moment  into  play  must  be  restrained,  or  injury  result's. 
'J'he  harm  is  manifold.  It  is  pernicious  to  others.  Power  antagonizes  the  power  of  our 
fellow-men  much  oftener  than  it  conciliates,  and,  acting  as  a  repellent  instead  of  an 
attractive  force  it  destroys  unity,  which  is  the  great  end  of  all  existence.  Nor  is  it  lesa 
hurtful  to  the  man  himself,  for,  in  pushing  his  power  to  extremes,  he  exhausts  the  very 
ability  concerned  in  using  the  power.  An  undue  use  of  power,  therefore,  overtaxes 
others  and  ourselves.  And,  accordingly,  St.  Paul  takes  both  these  facts  into  considera" 
tion,  advancing  from  self-denial  for  the  sake  of  others  to  self-denial  for  his  own  food, 


293  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANSb    [oe.  iz.  1— 27. 

and  in  thii  wajr  perfecting  the  ar^iment.  Was  he  not  »  philosopher  of  profound 
insight  in  this  method  of  mental  procedure  ?  Dismiss,  for  an  instant,  the  view  of  him  at 
a  Christian  apostle,  and  look  at  him  as  an  ethical  thiaker.  To  induce  men  to  practiso 
the  self-denial  of  power,  he  marshals  all  the  social  and  sympathetic  virtues  to  its  aid ; 
hrings  jMty  and  compassion  as  humane  instincts  to  its  service,  enlists  the  imagination 
and  it!  sensihilities  as  a  higher  form  of  emotional  energy,  and  crowns  the  ascending 
series  of  infiuenceB  by  conscience  and  moral  affection  in  behalf  of  our  fellow-men. 
This  is  the  first  training  of  self-denial.  Thence  it  proceeds  to  its  other  task.  It  gathers 
up  its  strength  and  resources,  and  turns  them  to  its  self-culture.  Was  this  the  method  of 
Stoicism  ?  Was  not  the  method  of  Stoicism  the  precise  opposite  of  this  ?  If  Seneca  had 
observed  this  law  of  culture,  would  not  his  exile  have  presented  a  very  different  spectacle? 
If  Marcus  Aurelius  had  trained  himself  to  discern  the  image  of  humanity  in  others,  instead 
of  looking  into  the  mirror  of  Stoicism  to  see  his  own  image,  could  he  have  been  guilty,  a 
man  of  such  beautiful  and  noble  virtues,  of  persecuting  Christianity  ?  Betum  to  St.  Paul 
as  a  Christian  apostle.  The  true  philosopher  is  here,  but  not  complacently  studying 
his  own  image  in  the  glass  that  Stoicism  held  up  before  its  disciples.  What  he  first  sees  is 
the  Christ  of  humanity  in  others,  who,  in  a  religious  sense,  are  bone  of  his  bone  and  flesh 
of  his  flesh.  And  there  is  an  expression  of  pain  on  the  brow,  and  of  the  sorrow  of  the 
heart  in  his  fixed  eye,  as  he  realizes  that  these  men  are  not  fully  conscious  of  their 
relationship  to  Christ,  and  therefore  very  imperfect  in  their  appreciation  of  others  and 
themselves.  But  he  comprehends  them  in  Christ,  and  he  can  bear  their  infirmities 
since  his  love  is  no  mere  aesthetic  sentiment.  Now,  then,  he  can  show  the  extent  of 
that  self-denial  required  to  attain  the  reward  of  the  gospel.  Of  course,  this  must  be 
done  by  figurative  language,  images  being  the  perfection  of  language  and  most  necessary 
when  spiritual  things  are  to  be  made  clear.  Naturally  enough,  the  Grecian  games 
occurred  to  him ;  and  as  the  pomp  and  splendour  of  these  national  shows  passed  before 
him,  was  it  the  gathered  multitude,  the  high  enthusiasm,  the  thrilling  suspense,  the 
heart  of  Achaia  throbbing  with  pride  and  exultation,  that  enlisted  his  interest?  What 
a  sense  it  was  to  the  senses,  and  even  more  than  to  the  senses,  as  Greeks  interpreted  its 
meanings  I  The  very  landscape  lent  a  charm  to  the  contests,  and  conspired  with  the 
Corinthian  citadel,  the  sloping  hills,  the  marble  seats,  and  the  eager  crowds,  to  per- 
petuate the  historic  memories  of  a  vanished  Greece.  Even  here,  degenerate  as  the  age 
was,  moral  elements  were  at  work.  A  better  past  had  not  left  itself  without  a  witness 
in  the  present.  Recollections  of  ancestry,  traditions  of  virtue  and  heroism,  honourable 
emulation,  an  energetic  will,  hard  and  continuous  discipline  for  ten  months,  were  associ- 
ated with  the  occasion.  But  St.  Paul's  mind  was  engrossed  by  the  symbolism  of  the 
Isthmian  games.  The  metaphor  of  the  racecourse  attracts  his  attention.  The  pre- 
paratory training,  the  diet,  the  willing  temperance  and  moderation,  the  regimen  of  the 
athlete,  and  the  studious  care  to  observe  the  conditions  of  success,  furnish  a  forcible 
illustration  of  what  was  essential  to  those  who  would  run  the  Christian  race  and  win 
an  immortal  crown.  Between  the  two  there  is  a  resemblance.  Between  the  two  there 
is  a  vast  dissimilarity.  "  They  do  it  to  obtain  a  corruptible  crown ;  but  we  an  incor- 
ruptible." Once  more,  St.  Paul  introduces  himself;  he  is  an  earnest  athlete  bent  on 
victory;  all  his  energies  are  in  training  and  have  long  been  in  training;  and,  changing 
the  figure  at  this  point,  the  boxer  is  mentioned :  "  So  fight  I,  not  as  one  that  beateth 
the  air" — not  as  one  who  wastes  strength  in  random  strokes,  but  one  whose  blows  are 
delivered  with  skill  and  an  achieving  purpose.  And  now,  just  as  one  who  has  toiled 
up  to  80me  mountain  summit  brings  back  to  the  plain  a  finer  light  of  beauty  in  his 
eye  and  a  larger  play  of  strength  in  the  muscle  of  the  heart,  so  St.  Paul  returns  from 
the  figurative  to  the  literal  with  his  thought  enhanced  in  vigour.  "  I  k«-ey  under  my 
body,  and  bring  it  into  subjection" — "buffet  the  body,"  "beat  it,"  and  "liring  it  into 
bondage."  What  I  is  the  body  a  contestant  against  us?  Is  it  an  adversary  tc  be 
bruised  and  beaten,  made  to  know  its  place  ?  So  indeed  St.  Paul  argues  in  respect 
to  his  own  body,  and  the  fact  in  his  case  is  the  fact  in  all  cases.  Ideally,  the  body 
is  the  soul's  helper,  furnishing  the  soul  with  very  many  true  and  lofty  ideas, 
giving  it  much  it  could  never  have  if  disembodied  or  in  an  organization  less  sensuous, 
and  securing  it  a  grandeur  of  developmcoi.  noi  possible  otherwise.  Practically,  the 
body  is  so  sensitive  t«  itself,  so  in  love  with  its  own  enjoyments,  so  enslaved  to  its  lusts 
and  appetites,  that  it  must  be  kept  under  and  brought  into  subjectioQ.    The  law  is  verj 


oB.ix.l—21.]    THE  ICIEST  fiflBTLB  TO  THE  COEINTHIAN&  2M 

phin.  It  has  to  be  obeyed  ia  soma  measure  by  every  one.  If  the  epicure  la  nothing 
but  an  epicure  and  always  an  epicure,  nature  is  soon  in  Tiolent  revolt.  To  be  an 
epicure,  he  must  have  some  prudence  in  his  indulgence,  and  order  times  and  season* 
into  the  service  of  his  pleasures.  To  be  itudents,  poets,  artists,  philosophen^  ay,  to 
be  mechanioa,  tradesmen,  farmers,  we  must  put  the  body  under  by  asserting,  fat  » 
certain  degree,  the  inherent  superiority  of  the  mind.  For  the  most  part,  however, 
there  are  reactions,  fearful  in  some,  hazardous  to  alL  Suppose,  now,  that  the  gross 
forms  of  sensuality  or  even  the  fascinating  forms  of  sensuousness,  are  held  under  mastery. 
What  then  ?  Is  the  Divine  ideal  of  the  body  realized  ?  Nay ;  the  body  may  be  made 
a  most  efficient  and  admirable  servant  to  the  business  man,  to  the  student,  to  the 
artist,  to  the  philosopher,  and  may  answer  all  the  earthly  and  social  ends  of  the  intellect 
and  the  natural  affections, an(2  yet  bean  undeveloped  human  body.  Only  in  conforming 
to  spiritual  relations,  only  in  sharing  Christ's  humanity,  can  it  be  developed.  Faith, 
hope,  love.  Christian  principles.  Christian  sentiments.  Christian  impulses,  are  fust  as 
requisite  to  form  and  shape  the  material  body  to  the  companionship  of  the  redeemed 
spirit,  as  food,  air,  sleep,  are  necessary  for  its  physical  existence.  The  argument  of  St 
Paul  implies  all  this,  nor  could  it  imply  less  and  be  congruous  with  his  purpose  and  aim. 
And,  therefore,  when  he  says,  "  I  keep  under  my  body,  and  bring  it  into  subjection," 
he  means  to  say, "  I  am  not  making  my  body  less  a  part  of  the  universe,  but  more  a  part 
thereof,  and  I  am  lifting  this  lower  nature  towards  the  higher,  and  developing  mj  body 
in  the  direction  of  the  nature  and  functions  of  the  lesnnection  body."^!!. 


Ten.  1,  2. — Sigm  tf  <^itleiMp.  Why  should  Paul,  departing  from  kii 
custom,  speak  here  of  himself  and  of  his  claims?  Undoubtedly  because  in  this 
Christian  society  at  Corinth  there  were  those,  prompted  by  Judaizing  teachers,  who 
called  in  question  his  apostleship,  his  equality  with  those  who  had  been  the  com^nions 
•f  Jesus  ill  his  ministry,  and  had  received  their  commission  before  his  ascension.  Wishing 
to  incite  the  Corinthians  to  self-denial,  Paul  put  himself  forward  as  an  example  of  this 
firtue.  But  to  make  this  example  effective,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  assert  and 
Tlndicate  his  position  and  rights.  If  he  had  no  special  commission  from  Christ,  there 
was  no  virtue  in  renouncing  privileges  which  were  never  his.  That  an  apostle  should 
live  as  he  did — a  life  of  celibacy  and  manual  labour — for  the  Church's  good,  was  very 
significant.  Such  was  Paul's  position;  be  sets  out*  therefore,  by  establishing  kb 
apostolic  claims  and  position, 

L  Thb  vision  of  the  Lobd  Chbist.  Not  that  every  one  who  saw  Jesus  became 
aa  apostle ;  but  that  none  became  an  apostle  who  had  not  seen  him,  who  had  not 
received  tl^e  commission  from  his  hps.  In  all  likelihood,  some  of  Paul's  opponents 
at  Corinth  had  contrasted  the  past  history  of  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  with  that  of 
the  twelve,  to  his  disadvantage.  The  others,  it  was  weU  known,  had  seen  the  Lord  ; 
but  was  it  certain  that  Paul  had  been  so  favoured  ?  Now,  Paul  would  not  submit  to 
an  imputation  which  must  needs  weaken  the  authority  of  all  he  might  say  or  do.  He 
had  seen  the  Lord  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  had  heard  his  voice,  and  had  by  him  been 
then  entrusted  with  a  special  commission  to  the  Gentiles.  It  was  not  simply  that  Paul 
had  seen  Jesus ;  he  had  been  endowed  with  his  Spirit  and  with  his  authority.  lie  was 
not  preaching  the  gospel  at  the  instigation  of  his  own  inclinations,  but  in  obedience 
to  a  command  laid  upon  him  by  the  highest  authority, 

XL  ScccEsa  m  afostolio  labocb.  The  craftsman  proves  his  ability  by  the  work 
he  does ;  the  sailor  by  his  navigation  of  the  vessel ;  the  soldier  by  his  bravery  and 
skill  in  war.  So  the  apostle  acknowledges  the  justice  of  the  practical  test,  and  subjects 
himself  thereto  accordingly.  There  may  be  a  shade  of  difference  in  the  meaning  of 
the  words  employed.  1.  Paul  appealed  to  his  work.  Labour  is  misspent  when  no 
results  ensue.  But  this  man's  labour  had  not  been  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  Jews  and 
Gentiles  bad  been  brought  to  the  faith  of  Christ  and  to  the  hope  of  life  etemaL  2. 
The  workmanship  of  the  apostle  was  also  liis  seal,  Le,  it  bore  the  mark,  impress,  and 
witness  of  his  own  character  and  ability  and  office.  A  competent  judge,  looking  to  the 
Churches  Paul  had  founded,  would  admit  them  to  be  evidence  of  his  apostleship.  3, 
It  is  observable  that  the  signs  were  manifest  in  the  very  community  in  which  his 
authority  was  questioned.  There  is  irony  and  force  in  the  appeal  made  to  the 
Corinthians,  whether  they  themse;lves  were  not,  in  their  own  Christian  position,  proof 


300  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  tO  TSE  CORINTHIANS.    toH.iz.1— 27 


of  Paul's  apostlesMp  Wnoever  raised  a  question,  whoever  offered  opposition,  tha 
Christians  of  Corinth  should  certainly  have  honoured  the  founder  of  their  Church  and 
the  hearer  of  the  gospel  to  their  souls. — T. 

Vera.  11, 12.— RighU  cuierted  and  foregone.  No  passage  in  Paul's  writings  more 
reveals  to  us  the  nobility  of  the  man's  nature  than  this.  As  we  road,  we  feel  that  such 
a  character  could  not  fail  to  command  the  admiration  and  sympathy  of  all  who  were 
capable  of  appreciating  it.  The  apostle's  abilities  wore  great;  but  his  moral  qualities 
towered  more  loftily  above  those  of  other  men,  even  than  did  his  intellectual  powers. 
Such  a  servant  of  God  was  well  fitted  to  be  the  first  and  the  greatest  preacher  of 
Christ  to  the  nations ;  for  he  so  shared  the  mind  of  the  Master,  that  they  who  saw, 
heard,  and  knew  him  must  have  been  brought  by  such  experience  very  near  to  the 
Saviour  whose  Spirit  he  possessed  and  whose  gospel  he  preached. 

I.  The  just  eights  the  apostle  asseetbd.  Paul  claimed  that,  like  other  teachers, 
he  had  a  claim  upon  his  scholars  for  recompense  and  support.  1.  He  supported  this  by 
striking  illiistiations.  The  soldier  has  his  rations  provided  by  his  country  on  whose 
behalf  he  fights ;  the  vine-dresser  eats  of  the  produce  of  the  vineyard ;  the  shepherd 
shares  in  the  profit  of  the  flock  which  he  feeds ;  the  husbandman  who  ploughs,  sows, 
and  threshes  does  so  in  the  expectation  that  he  shall  eat  of  the  corn  he  grows.  -  2.  He 
adds  an  argument  from  Scripture.  Ingeniously  does  he  apply  the  principle  involved  in 
the  humane  regulation  which  forbids  the  ox  to  be  muzzled  when  it  treadiis  out  the  com. 
A  principle  which  holds  good  even  with  regard  to  cattle  is  surely  valid  when  applied 
to  men,  to  Christian  labourers.  3.  He  urges  the  superiority  of  the  advantages  bestowed 
by  the  teacher  over  those  which  he  is  justified  in  expecting  by  way  of  acknowledgment 
if  not  of  return.  They  who  receive  spiritual  things  may  surely  yield  carnal  things. 
4.  This  right  Paul  claims  for  all  ministers  and  evangelists,  himself  included. 

IL  The  nobility  of  bfibit  with  which  the  apostle  was  wont  delibeeately 
to  fobeoo  these  RiOHTB.  1.  Observe  the  fact.  The  apostle  had  acted  upon  this 
principle  from  the  beginning.  An  open  statement  Uke  this  could  not  have  been  made 
had  it  not  corresponded  with  the  actual  and  well-known  facts  of  the  case.  2,  Consider 
what  this  purpose  involved,  viz.  hard  manual  labour.  Like  every  Jew,  Paul  had  been 
taught  a  trade ;  he  wove  the  Cilician  goats'  hair  into  the  fabric  used  for  tents  and  sails, 
etc.  It  was  a  tax  upon  his  energies  whilst  he  was  thinking,  writing,  and  preaching,  to 
spend  part  of  the  day  in  hard,  rough  toil.  3.  Remember  the  exception ;  from  the  Mace- 
donian Churches,  for  a  special  reason,  Paul  had  consented  to  receive  a  liberal  gift.  4. 
The  motive  which  animated  Paul  deserves  attention.  It  was  not  pride.  There  was 
a  personal  motive ;  whilst  preaching  was  a  necessity  in  his  case,  so  that  he  could  take 
no  credit  and  make  no  boast  for  his  ministry,  he  willingly  gave  up  his  right  to 
maintenance,  that  he  might  have  the  pleasure  of  a  voluntary  sacrifice,  a  ground  of 
lowly  glorying.  And  there  was  an  official  motive ;  his  design  was  to  remove  any 
hindrance  out  of  the  way  of  the  progress  of  the  gospel.  It  might  be  thought  by  some 
that  he  preached  for  gain,  and  such  a  supposition  would  render  his  hearers  suspicious  and 
unreceptive.  That  this  should  not  he  the  case,  he  chose  to  forego  his  rights,  that  the 
obvious  disinterestedness  of  his  conduct  might  support  and  render  effective  the  gospel 
which  he  proclaimed. — T. 

Ver.  16. — 27ie  obligation  of  preaching.  The  sincerity  of  the  strong  emphatic  language 
of  tb*  apostle  in  this  passage  is  not  to  he  questioned.  His  whole  life  is  a  proof  that 
it  was  with  him  as  he  here  affirmed.  A  law,  a  vow,  was  upon  him  ;  and  there  was  no 
discharge,  no  intermission,  until  his  fight  was  fought  and  his  course  was  run. 

L  Thk  special  obligation  laid  npoN  the  apostle.  1.  In  what  U  originated. 
There  is  no  room  for  doubt  upon  this  point.  Christ  himself  had  met  I'aul  on  the  way 
to  Damascus,  and  at  the  same  time  that  he  shed  Divine  light  upon  the  mind  of  the 
persecuting  Pharisee  Saul,  he  converted  him  into  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  and  gave 
him  the  "  marching  orders  "  upon  which  he  was  henceforth  to  act.  "  Depart :  for  I  will 
send  thee  far  hence  unto  the  Gentiles."  The  tones  of  tlmt  voice  rang  in  his  ears  through- 
out the  whole  of  the  ministry  which  was  thus  inaugurated.  2.  How  it  tuas  fulfilled. 
The  record  makes  it  plain  that  the  obligation  was  not  only  recognized,  but  practically 
fulfilled,  in  a  spirit  of  cheerfulness,  gratitude,  confidence,  and  devotion.     Sunh  is  the 


m.  a.  1—27.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHlANa.  801 

•xplanation  of  a  life  so  different  from  the  ordinary  life  of  men  ;  a  life  which  Paul 
himself  acknowledged  to  be  one  of  toil,  of  privation,  of  suffering,  ami  persecution. 
"  Necessity  was  laid  upon  him."  In  Asia  and  in  Europe,  to  Jews  and  to  Gentiles,  he 
offered  with  warmth  and  cordiality  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  3.  7%e  opening 
which  this  obligation  left  for  voluntary  devotion  and  sacrifie*.  Paul  says  plainly  that 
he  had  no  choice  as  to  preaching ;  preach  he  must ;  woe  is  to  him  if  he  refrains  from 
doing  sol  Yet  his  ardent,  generous  nature  desired  to  do  something  over  and  above 
what  was  required.  This  was  the  explanation  of  his  refusing  to  receive  pay  and 
maintenance  from  his  converts.  He  had  a  right  to  this,  even  as  his  fellow-lalioiirers  ; 
but  he  put  this  right  in  abeyance  ;  he  voluntarily  declined  what  he  might  have 
claimed,  and  thus  left  himself  somewhat  in  which  to  glory. 

11.  The  general  obligation  laid  upon  the  CnuBcn  of  Chbist.  The  acknowledg- 
ment here  made  by  the  apostle  is  one  which  may  appropriately  be  made  by  the  whole 
Church  of  Christ.  1.  An  obligation  of  authoritative  command.  The  Lord  Jesus,  who 
is  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  is  the  Monarch  of  his  Church.  His  order  is,  "  Go  ye  into 
all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  It  is  only  open  to  us  either 
to  dispute  his  authority  or  to  obey, his  direction.  2.  A  moral  obligation  of  gratitude. 
Jesus  himself  has  unfolded  the  law  :  "  Freely  ye  have  received  ;  freely  give."  If  we 
hare  a  just  sense  of  our  indebtedness,  first  to  the  love  and  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and 
then  to  the  self-denying  labours  of  those  whom  he  has  sent  to  labour  for  our  spiritual 
good,  we  shall  feel  the  gracious  constraint  leading  us  to  such  efforts  as  he  himself 
has  enjoined.  3.  An  obligation  enforced  by  many  illustrious  examples  fif  devotion. 
They  who  read  of  the  heroic  enterprises  of  Christian  evangelists,  and  of  the  noble 
fortitude  of  Christian  martyrs  who  have  died  at  the  hands  of  those  they  sought 
to  save,  may  well  gird  themselves  to  the  labours  to  which  they  are  invited  by  the 
spirit  of  benevolence,  as  well  as  commissioned  by  him  whose  authority  is  ever  binding 
and  whose  recompense  is  ever  sure. — T. 

Vers.  19 — 23. — Ministerial  pliancy  and  adaptation.  In  great  natures  we  sometimes 
meet  with  a  remarkable  combination  of  firmness  and  yielding.  To  do  a  great  work  in 
this  world,  a  man  needs  a  powerful  will,  a  resolution  not  easily  moved,  at  the  same 
time  that  he  displays  a  flexibility  of  disposition,  and  a  readiness  to  adapt  himself  to 
different  characters  and  to  changing  circumstances.  Without  the  determination  which 
approaches  obstinacy,  he  will  not  keep  the  one  aim  before  him ;  without  the  pliancy 
needed  in  dealing  with  men,  he  will  not  be  able  to  secure  the  aim.  Thus  the  same 
Apostle  Paul  who  said,  "  This  one  thing  I  do,"  is  here  found  professing  that  it  was  his 
principle  and  his  practice  to  become  all  things  to  all  men. 

I.  &8TAN0E8  OF  iiiNisTBKiAL  ADAPTATION.  Paul's  was  a  Very  Varied  life  and 
ninistry;  he  was  brought  into  association  with  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men. 
Himself  a  Jew  by  birth,  he  was  yet  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  and  he  was  equally 
it  home  with  those  of  either  race.  Himself  a  scholar,  he  was  prepared  to  deal  with 
.-abbis  and  with  philosophers ;  yet  he  delighted  to  minister  to  flie  rudest  barbarians. 
In  this  passage  Paul  mentions  three  instances  of  his  pliancy.  1.  To  the  Jews  he  was 
a  Jew,  i.e.  he  openly  honoured  the  Divine  Law  given  to  Moses ;  and  not  only  so,  in 
certain  circumstances  he  observed  the  ceremonies  of  his  nation.  This  is  evident  in  his 
circumcising  Timothy,  and  in  his  shearing  his  hair  and  fulfilling  a  vow.  2.  To  those 
without  the  Law,  outside  its  pale  and  regimen,  he  became  as  one  of  themselves,  t.e.  he 
was  superior  to  many  of  the  petty  prejudices  and  indifferent  to  many  of  the  customary 
observances  of  his  fellow-countrymen.  How  he  adapted  himself  to  the  Greeks  may  be 
seen  from  his  preaching  upon  the  Areopagus  at  Athens.  3.  To  the  weak  he  became 
as  weak ;  e.g.  in  the  matter  treated  in  the  preceding  chapter,  he  had  shown  his  con- 
sideration and  condescension  in  refraining  from  eating  what  might  possibly  be  cere- 
monially defiled. 

IL  The  pubposes  bought  by  this  course  of  ministerial  adaptation.  He  was 
"free"  in  so  far  as,  by  refusing  support  from  his  converts,  he  left  himself  at  liberty  to 
act  as  he  thought  fit  r  yet  he  made  himself  "  a  slave "  for  the  sake  of  those  whose 
welfare  he  sought.  The  aim  he  set  before  him  was  one  which  justified  the  use  of  the 
means  he  describes.  1.  He  desired  to  gain  some.  Whatever  he  might  lose,  it  was  his 
hope  and  purpose  to  *'  win  souls  " — a  rich  recompense  and  an  abundant  OMnpensatieB 


802  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  ix.  1—27, 

for  all  his  losses.  2.  He  desired  to  gave  some.  This  is  a  stronger  expression,  for  it 
implies  the  peril  to  which  the  hearers  of  the  gospel  were  exposed  whilst  they  remained 
in  unbelief,  and  it  implies  the  happiness,  security,  and  dignity  to  which  those  were 
brought  who  received  the  Word.  3.  He  did  what  he  did  /or  the  gospel's  sake.  For 
iu8  own  advantage  he  would  never  have  submitted  to  all  which  he  willingly  endured 
because  of  his  atiachment  to  the  truth  in  Christ  Jesus.  4.  Tet  there  was  a  personal 
aim  before  him.  He  hoped  to  be  partaker  himself  with  his  converts  of  the  blessings 
of  the  great  salvation.  His  own  interests  were  bound  up  with  theirs,  and  it  was  ever 
his  hope  to  share  in  the  joys  of  that  time  when  "  he  that  soweth  and  he  that  reapeth 
shall  rejoice  together." — T. 

Vers.  24,  26. — The  Ghristiaa  race.  Nothing  could  be  more  natural,  more  effective, 
than  an  allusion  of  this  kind,  occurring  as  it  does  in  a  letter  to  residents  at  Corinth. 
The  Isthmian  games,  celebrated  in  the  neighbourhood  of  their  own  city,  were  to  the 
inhabitants  of  this  famous  place  a  matter  of  the  greatest  concern  and  interest.  The 
gathering  of  representatives  from  all  parts  of  Greece  to  witness  Ae  athletic  contests 
which  took  place  in  the  stadium  of  the  isthmus,  gave  dignity  and  solemnity  to  the 
occasion.  And  the  honours  accorded  to  the  victors  were  so  highly  coveted  that  there 
could  have  been  but  few  of  the  ambitious  young  men  of  Achaia,  indeed,  of  the  whole 
of  Hellas,  who  were  not  fired  with  a  desire  to  distinguish  themselves  in  these  contests. 
No  wonder  that  Paul  should  stimulate  his  own  zeal  and  that  of  his  Christian  friends 
and  disciples  by  reminding  himself  and  them  of  the  efforts  and  the  sacrifices  which 
were  willingly  undertaken  for  the  sake  of  a  perishable  crown. 

I.  The  coubbe.  The  marble  stadium  of  the  isthmus  serves  as  a  picture  to  us  ol 
the  course  to  which  Christians  are  summoned.  The  Christian  course  is  one  of  faith 
and  obedience,  of  love  and  patience,  of  devotion  to  Ood  and  benevolence  toward  men. 

II.  The  spectators.  It  was  the  presence  of  the  illustrious  from  every  part  of 
Greece  which  gave  such  peculiar  dignity  to  the  Olympian  and  the  Istimiian  games. 
In  the  Christian  race,  they  who  run  are  encompassed  by  a  "great  cloud  of  witnesses" — 
the  Church  militant  and  triumphant,  the  glorious  angels,  and  the  Divine  Lord  liimself 
looking  on  with  the  deepest  interest,  and  perhaps  justifiable  anxiety. 

III.  The  combatants.  We  are  not  to  restrict  these  to  apostles,  to  preachers,  to 
public  labourers  for  Christ.  Every  disciple  is  a  spiritual  athlete,  is  called  upon  to  run 
the  race,  to  maintain  the  struggle.  No  room  in  the  course  for  the  indolent  and 
inactive. 

IV.  The  discipline  and  fbefabation.  It  is  well  known  that  for  many  months 
tlie  athletes  who  aspired  to  the  victor's  wreath  were  obliged  to  undergo  severe 
discipline,  under  the  guidance  and  care  of  a  skilful  trainer,  who  required  them  to  deny 
themselves  many  pleasures,  to  endure  much  fatigue,  hardship,  and  suffering.  Paul 
reminds  us  of  the  necessity  of  being  temperate  in  all  things,  of  bringing  under  the 
body — buffeting  it  with  many  blows.  The  Christian  life  is  not  one  of  ease  and  self- 
indulgence  ;  it  is  one  of  strenuous  effort  and  self-denial.  They  who  strive  for  masteries 
must  strive  lawfully,  must  accept  and  obey  the  Divine  conditions  of  the  course. 

V.  The  effort.  The  "  one  "  combatant  who  received  the  prize  did  so  as  the  result 
of  great  effort,  strenuous  and  persevering.  For  neither  apathy  nor  weariness  were 
compatible  with  success.  "  So  run,"  says  the  apostle,  meaning  that  we  are  to  imitate, 
not  those  who  fail,  but  him  who  succeeds  and  conquers.  What  need,  in  living  unto 
Christ,  is  there  of  diligence,  of  watchfulness,  and  above  all  of  endurance  1 

YI.  The  pbize.  At  the  isthmus  this  was  a  chaplet  of  pine  leaves,  which  soon 
faded.  Yet  its  possession  was  coveted,  and  was  counted  a  reward  for  the  training  and 
the  toil.  How  much  more  should  the  Christian  be  animated  by  the  prospect  of  an 
eternal  inheritance  and  an  amaranthine  crown  1 — ^T. 

Vtr.  25. — "An  incorruptible  croum."  There  was  an  ardour  of  temperament, 
a  resoluteness  of  purpose,  in  the  constitution  and  moral  life  of  Paul,  which  made  the 
imagery  of  this  passage  peculiarly  congenial  to  his  soul.  He  was  fired  with  a  sacred 
ambition,  and  he  sought  to  inspire  his  hearers  and  renders  with  something  of  his 
own  enthusiasm.  His  glowing  imagination  could  realize  something  of  the  glory 
gained  by  the  successful  athlete  who  was  welcomed  with  honoiu:  in  his  native  stale 


can.  1—27.]    THE  I'lKST  EP18TLF.  TO  THE  COEINTHIAKS.  308 

whose  statue  was  shaped  in  marble  by  somci  illustrious  sculptor,  aud  whose  praise  was 
embalmed  in  verse  deathless  as  that  of  Pindar.  How  much  more  must  he,  with  his 
cleared  moral  perceptions,  his  elevated  spiritual  aims,  have  sympatliized  with  the 
prospects  which  inspired  all  true  Christian  athletes,  who  endured  an  earthly  strife  and 
hoped  to  gain  a  heavenly  diadem  1 

I,  The  Giver  of  the  grown.  Christ  has  himseU  contended,  suffered,  and  overcome ; 
on  his  head  are  many  crowns.  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  couise  and  the  conflict.  Coming 
from  such  hands,  the  recompense  must  be  infinitely  precious.  He  sweetens  the  gift 
he  bestows  by  words  of  gracious  approval.  He  counts  the  crowns  of  his  people  m 
his  own. 

n.  Thk  wearer  of  the  cbowm.  He  who  is  to  partake  the  throne,  the  triumph, 
must  first  share  the  strife  aud  bear  the  cross  of  Jesus.  The  crown  of  thorns  comes 
before  the  crown  of  victory  and  empire.  They  who  shall  hereafter  triumph  are  they 
who  now  and  here  strive  and  suffer,  endure  and  hope.  Their  contest  must  be 
lawfully  conducted  and  strenuously  maintained.  It  is  they  who  are  "  faithful  unto 
death    to  whom  is  promised  the  fair  crown  of  life. 

m.  The  value  of  the  crown.  It  is  a  gift,  and  not  s  reward  to  which  there  is 
»  just  claim ;  there  is  no  case  of  merit  here.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  an  expression 
of  satisfaction  and  approval,  and  coming  from  Christ  has  in  consequence  a  peculiar 
value  to  his  people.  The  Isthmian  wreath  was  in  itself  of  no  worth ;  its  value  lay 
in  the  witness  it  bore  to  the  wearer's  prowess.  But  the  Christian's  crown  is  not  only 
a  token  of  Divine  approbation ;  it  is  accompanied  by  substantial  recompense,  especially 
by  promotion  to  rule  and  authority.  He  who  is  crowned  is  made  "  ruler  over  many 
things." 

IV.'  The  nirEBiSHABLENESs  of  the  crown.  It  is  not  a  material  crown,  like  the 
wreath  of  fading  leaves.  It  is  a  crown  of  righteousness  and  of  life,  and  is  consequently 
in  its  nature  immortal.  It  is  worn  in  the  land  of  incorruption  and  of  immortality.  It 
blooms  perennially  in  the  atmosphere  of  heaven. 

Pbaotioal  lessons.  1.  Here  is  an  appeal  to  the  aspiring.  Why  seek  earthly 
distinctions'  which  must  pass  away,  wlien  within  your  reach  is  the  unfading  crown  of 
glory?  2.  Here  is  an  inspiration  and  stimulus  to  the  Christian  combatant.  Why 
grow  weary  in  the  race,  why  sink  faint-hearted  in  the  contest,  when  there  is  stretched 
forth,  before  and  above  you,  the  Divine  and  imperishable  crown  of  life  ? — T. 

Yen.  1 — 16. — The  support  of  the  ministry.    Paul  recognizes  a  ministry  set  apart. 

I.  Thk  bioht  of  ministers  to  claim  adequate  support  fboh  their  people. 
Enforced  by :  1.  AiMogy,  (1)  The  soldier  who  gives  his  services  to  his  country 
receives  maintenanca  (Ij)  The  planter  of  a  vineyard  eats  of  its  fruit.  .  (3)  The 
shepherd  finds  the  means  of  his  support  in  the  flock  which  he  tends.  The  Christian 
minister  is  a  soldier,  fighting  the  battles  of  the  Lorii  and  of  his  Church ;  a  labourer  in 
the  vineyard  of  Christ,  planting,  watering,  pruning,  training;  a  shepherd,  watching  over 
the  sheep  and  lambs  of  his  flock,  seeking  the  wandering,  correcting  the  rebellious,  lead- 
ing, feeding,  etc.  2.  The  Mosaic  Law,  (1)  The  ox  treading  the  com  was  unmuzzled, 
that  he  might  feed  as  well  as  toil  (ver.  9 ;  Deut.  xxv.  4).  The  apostle  claims  that  this 
wab  commanded  more  with  an  eye  to  men  than  to  oxen  (ver.  10).  (2)  The  priests  and 
Levites  lived  on  the  things  of  the  temple.  Here  the  parallel  becomes  more  striking. 
The  ministers  under  the  old  dispensation  were  supported  out  of  the  offerings  of  the 
people :  why  should  not  the  ministers  of  the  new  be  also  ?  Moreover,  this  obtained 
amongst  men  generally.  Even  the  heathen  perceived  its  fitness,  3.  Common  sense. 
It  is  reasonable  that  those  who  give  up  their  time,  energies,  and  gifts  to  the  service  of 
the  Church  should  be  supported  by  it.  This  is  seen  more  strikingly  when  we  remember 
that  what  is  received  by  the  Church  is  of  infinitely  more  value  than  what  is  given:  "  If 
we  have  sown  unto  you  spiritual  things,  is  it  a  great  thing  if  we  shall  reap  your  carnal 
things  ?  "  The  Church  is  not  a  loser,  but  a  great  gainer.  What  blessings  God  Imi 
bestowed  in  the  past  through  the  channel  of  a  faithful  ministry  ?  What  may  ha  »ot 
in  the  future,  to  ourselves,  our  friends,  our  children  ?  4.  3%e  express  ordinattMt  tf 
Ckritt.  As  though  the  preceding  strong  arguments  were  not  strong  enough,  this 
the  strangest  and  lUtogether  unanswerable  one  is  added.  The  Head  of  the  Church 
eonunands.    He  sees  what  is  fitting  and  best.    We  nic  counter  to  his  mind  if  we  dc 


304  THE  FIRST  EPISTLR  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [rat  tt.  1—27. 

not  yield  prompt  and  willing  obedience.  Whatever  we  may  think,,  tills  is  what  A« 
thinks  (Matt.  x.  10 ;  Lulse  x.  8).  Ministerial  support :  (1)  Should  be  rendered  cheer- 
fully. Grudging  or  tardy  gift  in  such  a  matter  is  semi-disobedience  to  Christ,  and  not 
a  little  dishonouring  to  the  givers.  (2)  Should  not  be  regarded  as  an  equivalent  for 
what  is  received.  A  minister  is  not  paid  for  what  he  does.  He  is  not  in  receipt  of  a 
salary.  This  is  a  degrading  view  of  the  whole  matter.  A  minister  is  supported,  whilst 
he  lays  himself  out  foi  vhe  spiritual  profit  of  those  amongst  whom  his  lot  is  cast. 
(3)  Should  be  sufficient.  A  due  estimate  of  the  advantages  derived  from  a  faithful 
ministry  will  prompt  to  a  generous  support,  so  that,  amid  many  spiritual  cares,  temporal 
anxieties  may  not  unduly  press.  A  Church  failing  to  adequately  supjrort  its  ministers, 
whilst  possessing  the  ability  to  do  so,  inflicts  much  injury  upon  its  ministers,  but  much 
more  upon  itself.  Matthew  Henry  says, "  A  scandalous  maintenance  makes  a  scandalous 
ministry." 

II.  The  bight  mat  profitably  be  waived  undeb  oebtain  circttmstances.  1.  To 
remove  prejudice.  2.  To  prove  disinterestedness,  showing  that  we  are  not  actuated  by 
love  of  lucre.  3.  To  gain  more  independence,  which  may  be  desirable  under  certain  con- 
ditions  of  Church  life.  4.  To  make  a  strong  position  for  one's  self  when  unjust  charges 
are  apprehended.  The  Apostle  Paul  would  not  give  the  least  advantage  to  his  enemies. 
5.  For  any  other  reasons  which  promise  profit  to  the  interests  of  Christ's  kingdom.  If 
thereby  we  can  "  gain  the  more  "  (ver.  19).  There  is  nothing  derogatory  in  a  minister 
supporting  himself.  It  is  a  pity  that  there  should  be  so  much  absurd  prejudice  against 
it.  A  marvel  of  incongruity  that  the  title  of  "  Rev."  should  be  bestowed  upon  the 
mini^r  who  is  supported  by  his  people,  and  denied  to  the  minister  who  follows  the 
lead  of  the  apostolic  tent-maker  I  that  the  one  should  be  welcomed  to  certain  associa- 
tions and  circles,  and  the  other  kept  at  arm's  length  1  Not  that  the  title  of  "  Rev."  is 
appropriate  for  any  ;  yet  if  ever  a  man  deserved  such  a  designation,  I  suppose  it  was 
the  very  apostle,  who,  according  to  modern  notions,  disqualified  himself  for  it.  As  to 
privileged  societies,  men  of  good  sense  need  scarcely  worry  themselves  about  being 
excluded  from  those  which  would  have  blackballed  the  apostle  of  the  Qentiles. — H. 

Vers.  16, 17.— Gompulsory  gospel  preaching,  I.  The  true  mikisteb  becomes  such 
not  BY  mere  CHOICE  OB  PREDILECTION.  Preaching  the  gospel  is :  1,  Not  easy.  2.  Often 
disheartening.  3.  Its  joys  come  rather  after  triumph  over  natural  inclination.  4.  Too 
responsible  to  be  undertaken  without  authority. 

II.  The  true  minister  becomes  such  because  op  :  1.  God's  command.  Uttered  to 
heart — a  "  Divine  call,"  corroborated  by  suitability,  confirmed  by  blessing  on  labours, 
2,  Claims  of  fellow-creatures.     3.  Conscientious  promptings  towards  service. 

III.  Those  called  to  the  ministry  dare  not  refuse.  "  Woe  is  unto  me,  if  I 
preach  not  the  gospel  1 "  To  refuse  would  involve :  1.  God's  displeasure.  2.  The  blood 
of  our  fellows  resting  upon  us.  3.  The  non-employment  of  gifts,  and  the  consequences 
of  this. — H. 

Ver.  22.—  Soul-mving.  The  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  was  a  singular  man  and 
lived  a  strange  life.  Some  looking  at  him  pronounced  him  to  be  a  fool ;  others,  a 
madman.  He  seemed,  indeed,  strangely  destitute  of  that  wisdom  which  places  self- 
interest  in  the  front,  and  incites  to  the  pursuit  of  position,  power,  and  the  praise  of  men. 
When  brought  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  the  future  apostle  relinquished  the  course 
which  he  had  mapped  out,  and  his  association  with  Gairialiel  and  the  great  teachers. 
He  commenced  with  gigantic  self-sacritice ;  why  ?  He  desired  to  save  souls.  He 
became  a  great  tra\  eller — from  city  to  city,  town  to  town,  village  to  village,  he  went 
on  untiringly :  why  ?  To  save  souls.  He  underwent  extreme  sufferings  (2  Cor.  xi. 
24 — 29)— -to  save  souls.  He  exposed  himself  constantly  to  danger  and  death — to  save 
souls.  With  the  Jew  he  banished  from  his  mind  all  Gentile  tendencies — to  save  the  Jew. 
With  the  Gentile  he  severed  himself  from  all  Jewish  partialities — ^to  save  the  Gentile. 
He  was  willing  to  be  anything  or  nothing,  to  do  this  or  that,  if  by  any  means  he 
might  "  save  some."  Soul-saving  had  become  a  master-passion  of  his  sotd.  He  was 
in  the  world  for  it.     Everything  must  be  subordinated  to  it. 

L  Why  was  Paul  so  desirous  to  save  souls?  He  remembered:  1.  The  value  oj 
ike  mmI,    Of  this  be  had  the  deepest  conviction.    To  him  the  sonl  of  man  was  the  most 


t'H.  n,  1-2?.]     TflE  flRST  BPISTLB  TO  TH'fi  COBlNTHIANg.  605 

precious  thing  in  the  world.  Whilst  men  were  seeking  to  save  all  other  things,  he 
would  seek  to  save  thit.    All  other  gain  was  as  loss  compared  to  the  gain  of  a  soul. 

2.  The  fate  of  the  lost  sotd.  He  saw  the  unsaved  soul  going  down,  getting  further  and 
further  from  God,  becoming  viler,  ripening  for  hell.  The  fearful  words  of  his  Master 
rang  loudly  in  his  ears.  He  helieved  them,  he  did  not  refine  them  down  until  the; 
meant  nothing.  He  saw  the  souls  "cast  out;"  he  heard  the  dread  "Depart;"  the 
"  weeping  and  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth  "  sounded  in  his  heart ;  and  he  resolved 
that,  as  an  instrument  in  the  Divine  hand,  he  would  do  his  utmost  to  "  save  some." 

3.  The  future  of  the  saved  soul.  (1)  In  this  life.  Tending  upwards ;  becoming  p'lrified ; 
increasing  in  joy,  peace,  usefulness ;  indissolubly  united  to  God.  (2)  In  the  next 
life.  "  With  Christ."  The  fulness  of  joy.  Every  soil  of  sin  removed.  All  powers  becom- 
ing developed.  The  "  higher  ministry  "  commenced  and  continuing.  4.  The  glory  of 
Christ.  This  was  supreme  in  the  apostle's  mind.  The  Master  was  first.  Paul  was 
pre-eminently  a  "Jesus  Christ's  man."  Soul-saving  redounded  to  the  honour  and  praise 
of  his  Lord.  Christ  had  come  "  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  The  pur- 
pose of  the  Master  became  the  all-absorbing  desire  of  the  servant.  Paul  saw  that  his 
Master  was  glorified  by  the  victories  of  the  cross.  So  in  season  and  out  of  season  tho 
apostle  preached  "  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified  "  that  he  might  "  save  some."  Hn 
lived,  laboured,  suffered,  for  the  day  when  "  the  multitude  which  no  man  could  number  ' 
should  sing  to  the  praise  of  Christ  the  sweet  stanzus  of  the  "  new  song."  The  love  of 
Christ  constrained  him. 

II.  Note  some  ways  ih  which  Paul  souoht  to  save  souls.  1.  He  used  all 
means  at  hand.  (1)  Preaching.  He  had  a  definite  object  in  preaching.  (2)  Conversa- 
tion. He  could  preach  well  to  a  congregation  of  one !  (3)  Writing.  What  a  gift  he 
had  for  "  Epistles  "  I  Letter-writing  with  a  view  to  saving  souls  is  an  excellent  means, 
but  it  requires  dexterous  use.  Paul  could  not  "  drivel,"  or  be  "  goody-goody,"  or  "  talk 
cant."  Many  religious  letter- writers  can.  Hence  the  contrast  between  ancient  and 
modem  epistles.  (4)  Prayer.  He  "  bowed  his  knees."  Stiff-kneed  preachers  often  have 
atiff-necked  people.  (5)  Living  the  truth.  Here,  perhaps,  lay  the  transcendent  power 
of  Paul.  He  not  only  prayed,  wrote,  talked,  preached, — he  was.  Satan  is  more  afraid  of 
the  gospel  in  the  concrete  than  of  the  gospel  in  the  abstract.  2.  He  complied  with  pre- 
judice and  prepossession.  If  we  would  make  others  like  ourselves  in  tilings  essential, 
we  must  first  make  ourselves  like  them  in  things  indifferent.  Paul  tells  us  that  to  the 
Jew  he  became  a  Jew — remembered  Jewish  feeling,  looked  at  things  from  a  Jewish 
standpoint,  accorded  with  Jewish  observances.  To  the  Gentile  he  became  a  Gentile- 
accommodating  his  utterance,  manner,  form  of  thought,  mode  of  pi-esenting  the  truth, 
to  Gentile  predilection.  You  can  talk  to  a  man  more  easily  if  you  stand  on  the  same 
platform  with  him.  To  the  weak  Paul  became  as  weak  ;  not  insisting  upon  his  liberty 
or  ruthlessly  running  counter  to  imperfect  conceptions.  In  fact,  he  asserts  that  he 
became  "all  things  to  all  men  "  in  order  to  realize  his  su]ireme  object.  Personal  pre- 
dilections must  be  sacrificed,  and  unpleasant  restraints  submitted  to,  if  we  woulil  do 
effectively  the  greatest  work  under  heaven.  An  unbending  preacher  will  preach  to 
unbroken  hearts.  An  insistence  upon  our  rights  and  privile.;es  is  a  short  method, 
often  adopted,  of  ruining  all  hopes.  A  spirit  of  holy  compliance,  a  disposition  to  stand 
just  alongside  the  one  we  would  gain, — these  are  potent.  We  often  bar  and  bolt  the  very 
door  that  we  are  trying  to  unfasten.  Often  we  forget  that  we  are  speaking  to  very 
imperfect  men,  and  that  we  are  very  imperfect  ourselves.  Compliance  must,  of  course, 
not  be  unlimited.  (1)  We  must  exercise  discretion.  We  must  abide  in  the  realm  of 
"  the  lawful,"  and  select  what  will  be  truly  "  expedient."  Sound  judgment  need  be 
exercised.  We  must  look  to  probable  results.  (2)  We  must  never  sacrifice  the  right. 
Paul  was  most  compliant  in  things  indifferent,  but  most  unyielding  in  things  essential. 
When  he  yielded  he  not  only  confin-d  himself  to  things  indifferent,  but  made  it  to  be 
understood  that  the  tilings  were  indifferent.  When  they  were  regarded  as  essential  ha 
refused  to  comply.  This  is  striliingly  illustrated 'in  his  permitting  the  circumcision 
of  Timothy,  but  resisting  that  of  Titus.  3.  He  practised  great  self-sacrifice.  He  did 
not  think  oi himself,  but  of  those  he  sought  to  gain.  We  have  seen  how  willing  he  was  to 
sacrifice  his  personal  predilections.  He  went  furtlisr.  (1)  In  some  instances  he  sacrificed 
his  maintenance,  supporting  himself  by.the  labour  of  his  own  hands.  ^2)  He  sacrificed  his 
personal  ease  and  comfort.    (3)  He  sacrificed  much  of  his  freedom — ne  made  himself 

I.  COBISTHIANS.  t 


306  THE  WEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa    [ot.  ix.  1— 2t 

"servant  unto  •U"  (ver.  19).  A  man  who  is  prepared  for  illimitable  self-sacrifloe  can  do 
much.  No  Bacrifice  is  too  great  for  the  attainment  >f  Paul's  life-object.  Christ  laid 
down  hia  life  for  it.  He  who  bore  the  great  cross  spoke  of  crosses  for  his  followers. 
His  ministers  often  have  heavy  ones,  but  it  is  worth  while  to  carry  them,  if  by  doing 
BO  we  become  instrumental  in  saving  souls.  Souls  saved  will  be  our  "joy  and  crown  " 
at  last.  What  vast  possibilities  life  presents,  when  we  think  that  in  it  we  may  be 
the  means  of  saving  souls  I  This  applies  to  all  Christians.  Every  saint  should  toil 
for  the  salvation  of  men.  All  the  sorrows  endured  and  sacrifices  made  will  seem 
like  "the  dust  of  the  balance"  when  we  see  our  spiritual  children  welcomed  home. — ^H. 

Vers.  24— -27.— Spirittial  athhtict.  Paul  compares  the  Christian  life  to  a  foot-race 
and  to  a  boxing  contest.  These  were  familiar  to  the  Corinthians,  being  conspicuous 
features  of  the  celebrated  Isthmian  games.  A  wise  teacher  speaks  through  things 
known  of  things  unknown.  Christ  spoke  in  parables.  Passing  events  may  be  made  the 
vehicles  of  abiding  truths.  The  secular  may  often  illustrate  the  sacred.  There  is  no  loss 
of  dignity  or  impropriety  in  such  modes  of  instruction.  Some  people  are  shocked  by 
references  to  everyday  life ;  but  such  people  ought  to  be  shocked.  Homely  garb 
sometimes  wins  the  readier  admittance.     Note  some  points  of  resemblance, 

I.   ChBIBTIAN   life  B   a  FASSAaE — FBOM  SIN  TO  HOLINESS,  FROM  EABTR  TO  HEAVEN. 

It  is  a  daily  movement.  We  need  beware  of  stumbling-blocks,  of  straying  from  the 
right  course,  of  indulgence  which  may  hinder,  of  violation  of  laws,  of  loitering,  since 
the  time  is  short. 

n.  Christian  lite  ib  a  contest  with  enemieb.  The  "  race"  does  not  fully  illustrate 
it.  We  have  opponents,  many  and  resolute.  .We  have  a  trinity  against  ua  aa  well 
as  for  us — the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  We  hiave  not  oidy  to  "  run,"  but  to 
"  fight." 

111.  Fob  success  abe  needed:  1,  Preparation.  For  athletic  contests  how  much 
"  training  "  has  to  be  undergone,  often  very  painful  and  wearying  1  Our  preparation 
for  Christian  life  is  arduous  and  long,  but  it  does  not  commence  l^ors  we  enter  upon 
Christian  life,  but  as  we  enter,  and  continues  until  the  close.  We  "  train  "  oa  we  run 
and  as  we  fight.  2.  Earnestness.  No  indifferent  competitor  was  likely  to  win  in 
ancient  races  or  boxing  contests.  Indifference  kills  Christian  life.  The  half-hearted 
go  not  far  from  the  starting-point.  Many  have  only  enough  earnestness  to  "  enter"  for 
the  race  and  fight ;  as  soon  as  they  have  "  entered,"  they  think  aU  is  done.  3.  Striving. 
To  be  amongst  the  runners  is  not  enough ;  we  must  exert  our  powers ;  we  must  call 
into  activity  all  our  energies.  We  must  not  be  as  those  who  "  boat  the  air,"  but  as  those 
who  beat  their  enemies.  Christian  life  is  real,  with  issues  of  infinite  importance.  It  is 
not  for  exhibition  of  skill,  but  for  stern  work.  "  Strive  [agonize]  to  enter  in  at  the 
strait  gate."  Paul  would  have  each  Christian  to  be  as  the  winner,  who  "  spent  himself"  in 
snatching  the  victory  (ver.  24).  We  do  not  hinder  others  from  attaining,  and  for  this 
we  may  be  not  a  little  thankful;  but  we  each  needto  use  the  utmost  effort.  4.  Patience. 
Christian  life  is  not  soon  over.  At  first  we  may  do  well,  but  when  difficulties  arise  we  shall 
be  tested.  Some  who  run  fastest  at  first  run  slowest  at  last.  Our  aU-wise  Master  spoke 
of  "  enduring  to  the  end."  5.  Watchfulness.  Lest  we  trip.  Lest  our  enemy  gets  an 
advantage.  The  great  Preacher's  text  was  often  "  AVatch  1 "  6.  Resolution.  If  we  are  to 
endiire  to  the  end,  we  shall  need  stern  resolve.  Fixeilness  of  purpose  is  an  essential 
for  Christian  life.  We  should  determine  in  God's  strength  to  go  on,  whatever  may  lie 
in  our  path :  to  fight  on,  no  matter  what  enemies  confront  us.  Christian  life  demands 
courage  and  fortitude;  we  must  not  be  too  easily  frightened.  7.  Concentration. 
"  This  orie  thing  I  do."  The  "  whole  man  "  must  be  given  to  religion.  Some  professors 
are  "called  off"  from  the  race,  and  lose  it.  They  lower  their  guard,  for  their  hands 
must  be  about  earthly  things,  and  then  their  enemy  overthrows  them.  8.  Continuity. 
This  tries  many.  If  religion  were  spasmodic,  they  could  be  religious.  There  are 
many  "  now-and-then  "  Christians.  Pi  ople  like  to  be  pious  at  intervals.  9.  Mortifi- 
cation of  the  flesh.  Ancient  athletes  knew,  as  their  modem  brethren  do,  what  this 
means.  The  victor  was  "  temperate  in  all  things."  A  pampered  body  meant  disappoint- 
ment, disgrace,  loss.  Paul  said,  "  I  keep  under  [I  buffet,  I  brtuse]  my  body.  Our 
lower  nature  must  be  dealt  severely  with.  Indulgence  is  disaster ;  we  must  practise 
eelf-control,   self-denial,   self-sacrifice.     .10.  Cmifidence,  hut  not  excess  of  confidence. 


OH.  IX.  1—27.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OORINTHlANa  ROT 

Confidence  that  will  prompt  to  exertion,  not  confidence  which  killfl  effort.    "  Lest ...  I 
myself  should  be  a  castaway." 

IV.  Success  mbets  wttb  bewabd.  Contrast  the  crowns  of  earth  with  the  crown  of 
heaven.  Many  do  so  much  for  a  corruptible  crown,  and  we  so  little  for  an  incomtptibl* 
one.    A  garland  of  leaves  and  a  day's  popularity :  paradise  and  life  eternal. 

V.  Mant  spbotatobs  witness  the  contest.  The  eyes  of  the  ungodly  are  upon  at. 
Fellow-Christians  watch  us  closely.  The  angels  behold  us,  and  are  "  ministering  spirits  " 
to  us.  Perhaps  victors  of  the  past,  perhaps  those  who  have  failed  in  race  and  fight, 
watch  us.  The  King  sees  us — the  Judge — ^he  who  holds  "  the  crown  of  righteousness" 
for  those  who  have  "  fought  a  good  fight "  and  "  finished  the  course."  "  Wherefore 
seeing,"  etc.  (Heb.  xii.  1,  2).  When  we  think  of  the  race  and  fight,  we  should  ponder 
Phil.  iv.  13,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  me." — ^H. 

Vers.  1—3. — The  marks  of  apostleship.  This  chapter  grows  out  of  the  noble  utterance 
of  self-denial  with  which  the  previous  one  closes.  The  apostle  illustrates  and  enforces 
the  duty  of  curtailing  our  liberty  in  things  indifferent  for  the  sake  of  weaker  brethren, 
by  a  reference  to  his  own  example  in  foregoing  the  right  of  maintenance  by  the  Church, 
Was  he  not  free?  Hail  he  not  all  the  rights  belonging  to  Christians,  unfettered  by 
obligations  to  men  ?  Nay,  more,  was  he  not  an  apostle  ?  At  Corinth,  as  elsewhere,  there 
were  some  who  questioned  the  full  apostolic  authority  of  Paul,  on  the  ground  that  he 
was  not  one  of  the  twelve  ;  and  his  self-denial  seems  to  have  been  turned  into  an 
argument  against  him.  It  was  insinuated  that  he  refrained  from  asking  the  support  of 
his  converts,  as  the  other  apostles  were  in  the  habit  of  doing,  because  he  was  consciou* 
of  his  inferiority.  It  is  apparently  for  this  reason  that  he  here  presents  the  marks  of 
his  apostleship. 

I.  He  had  seen  Jesub  the  Lobb.  There  is  no  evidence  that  he  had  seen  Jesns  in 
the  days  of  his  flesh,  but  the  reference  is  mainly  to  the  appearance  near  Damascus 
(Acts  ix.  4 — 6).  On  that  occasion  the  Lord  met  him  and  gave  him  his  commission  as 
an  apostle ;  and  this  was  regarded  as  an  essential  mark  of  apostleship  in  the  highest 
sense,  as  we  see  from  the  election  of  Matthias  (Acts  i.  22 ;  comp.  ch.  XT.  8).  In  this 
respect  the  apostles  can  have  no  successors.  The  office  was  a  special  and  temporary 
one,  needful  for  the  planting  and  organizing  of  the  Church,  and  was  intended  to  expire 
with  the  men  who  held  it.~  Having  set  the  house  in  order,  they  were  to  deliver  the  keys 
to  the  wdinary  servants  who  were  left  in  charge.  Still,  every  one  whom  Christ  sends 
forth  to  do  his  work  must  first  have  had  the  sight  of  him  that  faith  gives.  Only  when 
we  have  beheld  him  in  his  glory,  invested  with  "  all  authority  in  heaven  and  on  earth," 
and  heard  from  his  Ii])s  the  call  to  go  forth,  shall  we  feel  ourselves  clothed  with  power 
as  his  ambassadors  (comp,  Isa.  vi. ;  Matt,  xxviii.  18,  19). 

II.  The  Corinthian  Christians  webe  the  seal  of  hu  apostleship.  Whatever 
reason  others  might  have  for  questioning  his  standing,  they  at  least  had  none ;  for  as  the 
instrument  of  their  conversion,  he  could  point  to  them  as  "  his  work  in  the  Lord." 
The  power  which  accompanied  his  preaching,  and  which  had  wrought  so  mighty  a  change 
in  them,  was  a  proof  that  he  had  not  run  unsent.  This  of  itself  did  not  prove  apostleship 
in  the  high  sense  in  which  Paul  claimed  it,  but  it  proved  that  the  Lord  was  with  him. 
This  kind  of  evidence  requires  to  be  adduced  with  caution,  inasmuch  as  it  is  difficult 
for  us  to  estimate  the  real  success  of  a  ministry ;  but  where  there  are  unmistakable 
proofs  of  the  conversion  of  sinners  and  the  edification  of  saints,  we  are  warranted  in 
viewing  these  as  the  seals  of  our  mission.  In  seeking  these  high  ends,  we  are  doing 
truly  apostolic  work.  Happy  the  minister  who  can  say  to  his  congregation,  "  Te  are 
my  work  in  the  Lord  "  I — B. 

Vers.  4 — 18. — Ministerial  support.  Having  vindicated  his  claim  to  be  reckoned 
among  the  apostles  of  Christ,  Paul  proceeds  to  assert  his  right  to  a  temporal  main- 
tenance at  the  hands  of  those  to  whom  he  ministered.  The  other  apostles  received 
support,  not  only  for  themselves,  but  also  for  their  wives :  why  should  he  not  make  the 
same  claim  ?  Though  he  was  unmarried,  and  though  he  had  hitherto  supported  him- 
self by  the  labour  of  his  own  hands,  this  did  not  invalidate  his  right.    Consider — 

I.  The  bight  of  ministebs  to  a  suitable  maintenance.  This  ia  upheld  by 
various  arguments  and  analogies.    1.  2%e  labourer  i$  worthy  </  hit  rtward,    Thiw 


30ft  THB  FlllST  KPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh,  tx.  1—27. 

instances  are  adduced  in  illustration  (ver.  7).  ,  (1)  The  soldier.  The  duty  of  fighting 
for  his  country  throws  the  burden  of  his  support  upon  others.  Why  should  it  be  other- 
wIbb  with  the  Christian  soldier  (2  Tim.  ii.  4)  7  (2)  The  husbandman.  His  labour  is 
rewarded  by  the  fruit.    The  minister  of  the  gospel  is  also  a  husbandman  (ch.  iii.  6—9). 

SThe  shepherd.  Doei  he  not  receive  the  milk  of  the  flock,  partly  for  food  and  partly 
exchange  ?  Why  should  not  the  Christian  pastor,  who  tends  the  flock  of  Christ, 
have  a  similw  return  (1  Pet.  t.  2)?  The  principle  in  these  instances  is  that  every 
occupation  in  common  life  yields  support  to  the  worker,  and  that  he  does  not  require  to 
go  beyond  it  for  daily  sustenance.  In  like  manner,  the  minister  of  the  gospel  is  entitled 
to  an  adequate  maiutenauce  without  having  to  resort  to  secular  work  to  supply  his 
wants.  2.  ITie  teaching  of  the  Moiaie  Law.  "  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox,"  etc.  (ver. 
9 ;  Dent  xzv.  4 ;  comp.  1  Tim.  v.  18).  What  was  the  meaning  of  this  injunction  ?  It 
shows,  indeed,  the  care  of  the  Lawgiver  for  the  brute  creation,  but  it  is  only  a  particular 
application  of  a  great  principle.  The  Law  has  regard  for  oxen,  not  for  their  own  sake, 
but  for  the  sake  of  him  to  whom  they  are  in  subjection.  And  if  even  the  labouring  ox 
was  to  be  fed,  how  much  more  should  the  plougher  and  the  thresher  work  in  hope  ol 
partaking  1  The  Law  of  Moses  thus  confirms  the  teaching  of  naturiil  analogy,  that  th« 
labourer  is  to  be  maintained  by  his  work.  3.  The  fairness  of  the  claim.  "  If  we  sowed 
unto  you  spiritual  things,"  etc.  (ver.  11).  In  every  case  the  sower  expects  to  reap ;  but 
tbere  is  more  than  this  in  the  apostle's  argument.  The  preacher  of  the  gospel  sows 
ipiritual  things — those  great  truths  that  minister  to  the  spirit ;  is  it  a  great  matter  if 
he  looks  for  carnal  things  in  return — those  things  that  minister  only  to  the  flesh  ?  If 
he  is  the  instrumeirt,  in  God's  hand,  of  saving  the  souls  of  his  hearers,  what  amount  of 
gold  can  be  an  adequate  recognition  of  the  service  rendered  ?  4.  Analogy  qf  the  Jewiih 
friesthood.  (Ver.  13.)  The  rule  was  that  they  who  served  at  the  altar  should  receive 
a  portion  of  the  sacrifices  and  other  gifts  that  were  constantly  brought  to  the  temple. 
A  sufficient  support  was  thus  secured ;  and  the  Divine  sanction  implied  in  that  ancient 
rule  applies  equally  to  the  case  of  the  Christian  ministry.  6.  Theexpreu  ordinance  of 
the  Lord  Christ.  (Ver.  14.)  When  he  sent  forth  his  apostles  to  preach,  he  said,  "  Get 
you  no  gold,  nor  silver,  nor  brass  in  your  purses ;  ...  for  the  lal>burer  is  worthy  of  hi-- 
food  "  (Matt.  X.  9,  10).  This  was  their  marching  order.  They  were  to  depend  on  the 
•fferings  of  the  people  among  whom  they  laboured  ;  and  the  reference  here  shows  that 
this  was  no  tem|x>rary  arrangement,  but  that  it  was  intended  to  be  the  New  Testament 
rule  for  preachers  of  the  gospel.  Instead  of  having  to  turn  aside  to  secular  pursuits, 
they  are  to  be  free  to  give  themselrei  wholly  to  their  work.  By  thess  varioui  arguments 
the  apostle  establishes  the  right  of  ministers  to  claim  support  at  the  hands  of  the 
Christian  people,  and  the  corresponding  duty  of  the  people  to  contribute  that  support. 
Both  the  right  and  the  duty  have  been  but  imperfectly  recognized  by  the  Church. 
This  will  appear  if  we  consider :  (1)  The  average  rate  of  ministerial  lupport.  Compare 
this  with  the  incomes  of  men  in  the  other  learned  professions  or  in  mercantile  pursuits, 
(2)  The  manner  in  which  giving  to  the  cause  of  Christ  is  frequency  regarded.  How 
many  either  give  with  a  grudge  or  do  not  give  at  alll  The  evil  resulting  is  twofold — 
•piritual  loss  to  the  individual,  and  a  crippling  of  the  Church  in  her  work.  Not  until 
•11  the  tithes  are  brought  into  the  storehouse  will  the  Lord  open  the  windows  of  heaven 
and  pour  out  a  blessing  (Mai.  iii.  8 — 10). 

IL  Tan  beitdnciation  of  this  bioht.  (Yen.  16 — 18.)  Strongly  as  Paul  insists 
upon  his  right  to  temporal  maintenance,  it  is  not  with  a  view  to  urge  bis  claim  upon  the 
Corinthians,  but  to  bring  into  clearer  relief  his  renunciation  of  it.  That  he  preached 
the  gospel  free  of  charge  was  to  him  a  matter  of  boasting  which  h«  would  rather  die 
than  he  deprived  ot  It  was  no  glory  to  him  that  he  was  a  preacher ;  for,  ag  a  steward 
put  in  trust  with  the  gospel,  this  was  his  simple  duty.  liut  it  was  no  part  of  his 
stewardship  to  labour  wittiout  support;  and  this,  accordin<;ly,  was  •  proof  of  his 
sincerity  in  which  he  was  entitled  to  boast.  In  this  act  of  self-denial  he  had  a  reward 
in  making  the  gospel  entirely  free,  and  in  securing  that  on  this  ground  no  hindrance 
should  be  put  in  its  way  (ver.  12).  Here  some  practical  considerations  emerge.  1. 
How  a  minister  of  the  gospel  should  bear  himself  towards  pecuniary  support.  There 
are  cases  in  which  he  may  forego  his  right,  especially  where  he  sees  that  this  renuncia- 
tion will  tend  to  the  advancement  of  the  gospel.  Usually,  however,  it  is  his  duty  to 
Msept  a  stipend  at  the  hands  of  the  Christian  peopla,  and  Uut  for  Um  reason  which  M 


OH.  n.  1—27.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  30i 


Paul  to  decline  it.  To  receive  •  reasonable  maintenance  is  to  be  in  the  best  poiiition 
for  devoting  one's  self  entirely  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word.  But  at  all  times  it  should 
be  manifest  that  the  servant  of  Christ  does  not  act  from  mercenary  motives.  The 
shepherd  is  not  to  tend  the  flock  for  the  sake  of  the  fleece.  "  Not  yours,  but  you," 
should  be  his  motto  (2  Cor.  xii.  14),  2.  The  obligation  to  preach  the  gospel. 
"  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me."  There  is  a  Divine  must  in  the  case  of  every  true  preacher, 
as  there  was  in  the  case  of  Jesus  (comp.  Mark  viii.  31 ;  Luke  iv.  43 ;  xix.  5 ;  John  iii. 
14).  The  love  of  Christ,  not  less  than  the  command  of  Christ,  constrains  him.  It  is 
with  him  as  with  the  ]>rophet:  "Then  I  said,  I  will  not  make  mention  of  him,  nor 
speak  any  more  in  his  Name.  But  his  word  was  in  mine  heart  as  a  burning  fiie  shiU  up 
in  my  bones,  and  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,  and  I  could  not  stay  "  (Jer.  xx.  9).  3. 
The  doctrine  of  reward.  The  apostle's  statement  regarding  the  reward  he  expected  for 
his  optional  renunciation  of  support  has  been  adduced  by  popish  divines  in  support  of 
their  doctrine  of  supererogation ;  but  it  will  not  bear  such  an  application.  The  distino* 
tion  he  makes  is  between  what  was  plainly  a  part  of  his  bounden  duty  as  a  steward, 
and  what  seemed  best  for  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel  in  bis  peculiar  circumstances. 
In  one  sense  it  was  a  matter  for  his  own  choice  whether  he  sbonld  accept  a  temporal 
maintenance,  but  this  is  not  the  sense  required  by  the  Romish  argument.  Whatever 
promises  to  conduce  to  the  furtherance  of  Christ's  kingdom,  becomes  thereby  a  duty  to 
the  apostle ;  for  "  to  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin  " 
( Jas.  iv.  17).  There  is  no  act  which  is  nut  included  under  love  to  Grod  and  love  to  man. 
There  is  no  self-denial  to  which  the  love  of  Christ  should  not  prompt  us.  The  gospel 
doctrine  of  reward  does  not  rest  on  any  theory  of  supererogation,  but  rather  OD  the 
principle  that  God  is  pleased,  to  recognize  the  fidelity  of  his  servants. — B. 

Vers.  19 — 23. — The  principle  of  accommodation.  Paul's  resolve  to  preach  the  gospel 
without  charge  was  but  one  instance  of  the  general  rule  which  guided  his  life.  Though 
under  obligation  to  none,  he  yet  became  the  servant  of  all — "  all  things  to  all  men." 
He  accommodated  himself  to  the  Jews  (ver.  20),  as  when  he  circumcised  Timothy  (Acts 
xvL  3)  and  purified  himself  in  the  temple  (Acts  xxi.  26).  He  accommodated  himself 
to  the  Gi  utiles  (ver.  21),  by  refusing  to  impose  the  Law  of  Moses  (Gal.  ii.  5)  and  by 
meeting  them  on  their  own  ground  (Acts  xvii.  22 — 31).  He  accommodated  himself  to 
the  weak  (ver.  22),  as  when  he  abstained  from  meat  because  of  their  scruples  (ch, 
viiL  13).     Consider — 

L  Accommodation  as  a  bulb  of  ministerial  fbactice.  There  is  a  high  sense  in 
which  every  minister  of  Christ  is  called  to  become  "  all  things  to  all  men."  We  are  to 
adapt  ourselves  to  the  circumstances,  modes  of  thought,  and  even  the  harmless  pre- 
judices of  those  among  whom  we  labour,  in  dealing  with  human  souls,  we  must  not 
stand  upon  points  of  etiquette,  but  be  ready  when  occasion  requires  to  sacrifice  our 
preferences  and  sometimes  our  rights.  This  principle  will  cover  matters  of  dress  and 
modes  of  living,  as  also  our  choice  of  recreation  and  amusement.  William  Burns, 
missionary  to  China,  adopted  the  Chinese  dicss  that  he  might  the  more  easily  gain 
access  to  the  people.  On  the  same  ground  we  shall  present  the  truth  in  language 
which  our  hearers  understand,  whether  they  are  children  or  adults.  This  happy  faculty 
of  adaptation  has  frequently  proved  of  great  service  to  the  gospel. 

II.  Limits  to  be  observed  in  roLLOwista  this  bulb.  The  highest  things  may 
frequently  be  mistaken  for  the  lowest.  Christian  accommodation  may  be  confounded 
with  time-serving,  but  nothing  is  more  unlike.  The  man  whose  princi[)lesare  flexible, 
who  trims  and  carves  to  serve  bis  purpose,  who  is  a  devout  Christian  in  this  company 
and  a  railing  scoflfer  in  that,  may  be  said  to  be  "all  things  to  all  men ;"  but  such  a 
man  is  a  mere  jelly-fish  character,  a  mass  of  moral  pulp.  For  such  accommodali.<u  as 
Paul  practised  there  is  needed  the  highest  principle,  the  strongest  consistency  ;  and  in 
order  to  this,  certain  limits  are  to  be  observed.  1.  It  must  not  lead  us  to  do  or  tolerate 
that  which  is  sinful.  This  limit  is  transgressed  by  Jesuit  missionaries  when  they 
suffer  their  converts  to  retain  part  of  their  old  idolatrous  worship;  2.  /(  must  not  lead 
us  to  keep  hack  any  essential  truth  hecavse  it  is  unpopular.  This  were  cowardice  and 
infidelity  to  our  trust.  3.  It  must  not  lead  us  to  do  anything  which  would  compromise 
the  Christian  name.     "Let  not  your  good  be  evil  spoken  of"  (Rom.  xiv.  16). 

III.  Motive*  that  pbompt  us  to  follow  this  bulb.    These  are :  1.  A  detire  to 


310  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORmTIlIANS.    [ch.  ix.  1—27. 

save  »Aen.  It  la  not  a  wish  to  please  men,  but  a  desire  to  remove  every  hindrance 
to  the  reception  of  the  gospel.  With  this  end  in  view,  we  shall  not  find  it  difficult  to 
become  "  all  things  to  Hi  men."  A  human  soul  is  cot  too  dearly  won  at  the  cost  ot 
a  little  self-sacrifice.  In  this  aspect  the  rule  we  are  considering  is  but  m  faint  copy  of 
the  great  accommodation— the  incarnation  and  work  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  A  regard  to 
our  personal  salvation,  (Ver.  23.)  Paul  connects  his  work  "  for  the  gospel's  sake  " 
with  his  being  a  "joint  partaker  "  of  its  blessings.  In  work  for  the  good  of  others  we 
must  not  be  unmindful  of  our  own  good ;  and  there  is  nothing  more  eonduoive  to  our 
spiritual  benefit  than  faithful,  self-denying  service  for  Christ.  "Continue  in  these 
things ;  for  in  doing  thia  thou  ibalt  both  save  thyself  and  them  that  hear  thee  " 
(1  Tim.  It.  16).— B. 

Vers.  24—27. — 5S«  rate  far  tke  priae.  The  thought  introduced  In  ret.  23,  that 
Paul's  self-denial  had  a  reference  to  his  own  salvation  as  well  as  the  salvation  of  others, 
is  here  carried  on  and  applied  generally  to  all  Christians.  The  imagery  is  derived 
from  the  Isthmian  games  celebrated  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Corinth,  and  therefore 
well  known  to  his  readers.  These  games  occupied  a  place  in  the  national  life  of  Greece 
corresponding  to  that  occupied  by  the  great  yearly  festivals  in  the  life  of  Israel. 
There  is  no  reference  to  them  in  the  Gospels,  as  they  were  unknown  in  Palestine,  but 
more  than  once  they  are  used  in  the  Ep  sties  as  a  metaphorical  representation  of  the 
Christian  life  (comp.  Phil.  iii.  14 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8 ;  Heb.  xii.  1),    Consider — 

L  The  baob.  The  stadium  presented  on  animating  spectacle.  At  this  end  stand 
the  competing  athletes,  awaiting  the  signal  to  start;  at  the  other  end  is  the  judge, 
holding  in  his  hand  the  prize ;  whilst  all  around,  rising  tier  upon  tier,  are  the  seats 
crowded  with  spectators.  The  Christian  life  is  a  race  for  the  great  prize  offered  by 
Qod  to  the  successful  runner.  At  conversion  we  take  our  place  in  the  racecourse  and 
have  our  names  proclaimed  by  the  herald.  The  leading  ideas  in  the  figure  are: 
1.  Progress.  "Forgetting  the  things  which  are  behind,  and  stretching  forward  to  the 
things  which  are  before,  I  press  on,"  eto.  (Phil.  iii.  13).  2.  Earnestness.  The  Christian 
life  k  one  of  strenuous  effort — every  muscle  strung,  every  facility  called  into  exercise. 
No  place  for  lukewarmness  or  indifference  here.  3.  Concentration.  "  One  tiling  1  do." 
The.  runner,  with  eye  on  the  goal  and  all  else  out  of  view,  bends  his  whole  strength 
to  this  single  effort.  Dissipation  of  energy,  the  multa  rather  than  the  multum,  is  a 
source  of  weakness  in  spiritual  life.  "  One  thing  is  needful."  4.  Endurance.  "  Let 
lis  ran  with  patience  "  (Heb.  xii.  1).  To  faint  or  fall  is  to  lose  the  prize.  The  cross 
must  be  home  to  tJie  end.  Nothing  but  "patient  Gontinuance  in  weU-dcnng"  will 
conduct  us  to  the  goal  (comp^  Jas.  L  12). 

IL  CoKDiTiONS  OF  BucoEBS  IN  THE  BACB.  To  mn  Well  we  must  mn  as  tbe  successful 
racer.  The  end  in  view  must  be  clear :  we  must  know  what  we  are  running  for  ("  not 
imcertainly").  Here  specially  emphasize  the  preparatory  condition — se^-ret^int. 
The  athlete  under  training  was  required  to  avoid  excess  in  eating  and  drinking,  and 
every  form  of  fleshly  indulgence.  The  Christian  athlete  must  practise  a  like  temper- 
ance if  he  would  run  his  course  with  success.  In  this  point  of  view  the  body  is  the 
antagonist  with  which  we  contend,  and  which  must  be  buifeted  and  bruised  rather 
I  ban  suffered  to  gain  the  mastery  over  as.  How  many  Christians  are  hindered  in  their 
»piritnal  course  by  lack  of  self-restraint  I  The  worship  of  comfort,  the  love  of  luxury, 
not  to  ^eak  of  such  indulgences  as  are  clearly  sinful,  cause  many  to  lag  in  the  race. 
An  intemperate  use  of,  or  affection  for,  things  in  themselves  good,  is  a  most  insidious 
snare  in  the  path  of  spiritual  advancement.  Bodily  mortification  is  not  spirituality, 
but  it  la  often  helpful  towards  its  attainment.  The  Christian  runner  must  lay  aside 
every  weight  as  well  as  every  sin  (Heb.  xii.  1). 

iJL  The  prize.  This  consisted  of  a  chaplet  of  leaves — olive,  parsley,  pine.  In 
addition,  the  name  of  the  victor  was  celebrated  in  a  triumphal  ode  and  a  statue  wu 
erected  to  his  memory.  It  was  a  great  honour — one  of  the  greatest  in  a  land  when 
the  gymnastic  art  was  so  highly  appreciated;  and  even  Roman  emperors  (Nero,  e.g.) 
did  not  hesitate  to  enter  the  lists.  But  at  best  it  was,  like  all  earthly  honours, 
corruptible.  These  crowns  would  quickly  &de,  that  applause  would  soon  cease.  The 
prize  for  which  the  Christian  contends  is  an  incorruptible  crown.  It  is  the  "  crown  o< 
righteousness"  (2  Tim.  iv.  8),  the  "  crown  of  life  "  (Jas.  i.  12 ;  Rev.  iL  10),  the  "crow* 


0&  DC.  1—27.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa  111 

of  glory  *  (1  Pet.  T.  4).  To  have  righteousness  and  life  in  perfection  is  our  true  glory, 
and  this  is  ^e  very  crown  of  our  being.  A  crown  composed  of  such  materials  cannot 
fade  away.  All  the  trees  in  that  country  are  evergreen.  What  an  object  to  fill  tht 
eye  and  fire  the  soul  I  A  proud  moment  when  the  successful  runner  had  the  chaplet  of 
leaves  put  on  his  browt  A  grander  moment  for  the  Ctiristian  athlete  when  the  pierced 
hand  of  Jesus  places  pn  his  head  the  crown  of  glory  1  And  if  men  endure  so  much  and 
strive  so  earnestly  for  the  corruptible,  how  much  moM  ahould  we  endure  and  strive  in 
order  to  obtain  the  incorruptible  1 

Bekabkb.  L  The  human  side  of  the  Ohristian  life  is  strongly  emphasized  in  the 
figure  of  the  race ;  but  along  with  this  we  must  take  the  other  side  of  the  truth. 
Without  the  grace  of  God  we  cannot  run.  Mark  the  striking  cumbination  in  Phil.  ii. 
12,  13.  2.  Notice  the  apostle's  self-distrust.  He  is  not  ashamed  to  confess  that  ha 
brings  his  body  into  subjection,  "  lest  by  any  means,  after  that  I  have  preached  to 
others,  I  myself  should  be  rejected."  Compare  such  outbursts  of  confident  assurance 
as  Bom.  viiL  38,  89,  and  2  Tim.  i.  12,  and  regard  the  one  as  the  complement  of  the 
other.  Self-diffidence  goes  hand-in-hand  with  genuine  aMuranoAi  A  lesson  for  all 
Christiana,  and  especially  for  all  preachers. — B. 

Ver.  16. — Compulsory  serviet.  The  apostle  here  afibrds  as  •  passing  glimpse  of  hii 
own  state  of  mind  in  reference  to  his  high  calling  as  a  "  preacher  of  the  gospel,"  The 
revelatirn  of  the  secret  workings  of  an  earnest  human  spirit  must  needs  be  deeply 
interesting  to  iia,anii  most  of  all  in  the  case  of  a  man  of  such  noble  nature  as  Paul,  and 
in  reference  to  a  matter  of  such  supreme  moment.  We  could  scarcely  have  a  finer 
view  of  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  a  finer  model  of  right  thought  and  feeling  about  it, 
than  is  presented  in  these  simple  but  lofty  worda.  Chiefly  three  elements  of  feeling 
are  here  expressed. 

I,  A  SENSE  OF  THE  DiQiOTT  OF  THE  freacheb'b  OFFICE.  The  preaching  of  the  Word 
s  evidently  regarded  here  as  a  fixed  and  permanent  institution  of  the  Church,  a  work 
CO  which  men  are  divinely  called  to  consecrate  themselves,  and  from  which  they  may 
draw  the  necessary  support  of  their  life  (ver.  14).  And  the  fact  that  Paul  disavows  all 
self-glorying  on  account  of  it,  implies  that  there  is  that  in  the  office  which  might  lead 
a  man  unduly  to  exalt  himself.  But  what  is  the  real  nature  of  its  Jigiiity  ?  It  is 
very  different  from  that  which  belongs  to  social  rank  or  any  kind  of  worldly  distinction. 
Much  mischief  springs  from  losing  sight  of  this  difference.  Ever  since  the  time  when 
a  lialo  of  worldly  glory  began  to  be  thrown  around  the  witness  for  Christ,  and  the  ideas 
of  social  elevation,  priestly  supremacy,  large  emolument,  luxurious  ease,  came  to  be 
associated  with  it,  it  has  been  degraded  by  the  intrusion  of  false  motive,  and  by  being 
made  the  prize  of  a  purely  carnal  ambition.  The  dignity  Paul  recognizes  in  it  is  that 
which  is  inherent  in  all  high  and  holy  service ;  the  honour  he  would  have  paid  to  it  is 
that  which  is  due  to  a  faithful  discharge  of  sacred  responsibility.  The  dignity  of  the 
preacher's  function  lies  in  such  facts  as  these :  1.  It  brinys  a  man,  more  than  any  other 
office  does,  into  habitual  contact  with  the  mind  of  Ood  and  with  the  realities  of  the 
invisible  world.  Not  that  he  who  sustains  it  has  in  this  respect  a  privilege  denied  to 
others.  Every  path  of  human  life  may  be  thus  gilded  and  gladdened  by  the  heavenly 
glory.  But  it  is  his  special  business,  by  habits  of  thought  and  prayer,  to  become  more 
deeply  conversant  than  other  men  with  the  revelations  of  God  and  the  things  unseen 
and  eternal.  And  the  fact  that  his  work  demands  that  mind  and  heart  should  be  ever 
dwelling  in  such  a  high  spiritual  region,  imparts  a  greatness  and  dignity  to  it  surpassing 
that  of  all  others.  2.  It  hringshim  into  a  purely  spiritual  relationship  with  his  fellow- 
men.  Other  human  relations  are  more  superficial.  The  world  recognizes  no  bonds  of 
union  but  such  as  grow  out  of  the  passing  interests  and  experiences  of  this  present  life. 
To  the  preacher  of  the  gospel,  as  such,  the  secular  aspect  of  the  position  men  occupy 
is  nothing  as  compared  with  the  spiritual.  He  "knows  no  man  after  the  flesh."  fie 
bas  to  do  with  the  nobler,  the  immortal  part  of  them,  "  to  watch  for  their  souls  as  one 
that  must  give  account."  3.  It  leads  on  to  eternal  issues.  All  the  grandeur  of  the 
endless  futurity  overshadows  it.  None  of  our  earthly  businesses  have  reference  merely 
to  the  issues  of  time.  Lines  of  moral  influence  are  connected  with  them  that  stretch 
out  into  the  great  hereafter.  But  this  is  specially  the  case  with  the  work  of  tha 
Christian  teacher.    It  must  have  infinite  developmenta.    It  ia  the  seed-sowing  for  ■■ 


3ia  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  ix.  1—27, 

eternal  harvest.  It  is  to  every  man  "  none  other  than  the  savour  of  llfo  vnto  life,  of 
of  death  unto  death." 

II.  The  sense  of  personal  UNVonTHiNEgf.  "  Though  I  preach  the  gospel,  I  have 
■othing  to  glory  of."  The  conscious  dignity  of  his  ofiBce  is  coupled  with  deep  humility. 
"Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things?"  (2  Cor.  ii.  16).  Paul's  humility,  indeed,  was  not 
ihat  of  the  man  who  is  always  doubting  his  right  to  the  position  he  occupies,  and  fitness 
for  the  work  he  is  doing.  He  knew  that  he  bore  the  stamp  and  seal  of  a  Divine  com- 
mission. And  every  true  preacher  of  the  Word  must  in  a  measure  share  this  feeling. 
If  a  man  has  no  conscious  or  acknowledged  fitness  for  the  work,  he  has  no  business  to 
undertake  it.  But  it  must  needs  be  that,  in  hours  of  calm  reflection,  in  tha  solitude  and 
■ilence  of  the  night,  he  will  often  lie 

"  Contemplating  his  own  nnmrthineM.* 

Many  things  will  serve  to  humble  him.  1.  The  thought  that  he  Is  but  an  iBstrument 
in  the  hands  of  God  (ch.  iii.  6 — 7).  2.  The  fact  that,  in  proclaiming  the  mercy  of  God 
to  sinners,  he  has  to  look  upon  himself  as  the  foremost  of  those  who  nce<i  that  mercy 
(1  Tim.  L  15,  16).  3.  The  light  the  Word  he  preaches  continually  sheds  on  the  evils 
of  his  own  heart  and  life.  4.  The  sense  of  the  subtle  spiritual  dangers  that  beset  his 
sacred  calling.  6.  The  fear  "  lest  that  by  any  means,  having  preached  to  others,  ha 
himself  should  be  a  castaway  "  (ver.  27). 

III.  A  SENSE  OF  uoBAL  CONSTRAINT.  "  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me,"  etc.  The  apostle 
felt  that  he  had  been  invested  by  the  riseB  Lord  with  a  very  solemn  stewardship,  and 
that  he  dared  not  be  unfaithful  to  it.  The  heaviest  of  all  "  woes,"  the  woe  of  a  remorse- 
fill  oouscience,  the  woe  of  a  spirit  that  has  fallen  from  the  height  of  a  glory  that  might 
have  been  its  own  for  ever,  would  fall  upon  him  if  he  did.  His  would  be  the  misery  of 
lielng  basely  untrue  to  himself  as  well  as  to  his  Divine  Master.  There  are  two  kinds 
of  moral  "  necessity  " — ^the  necessity  of  an  external  force  and  that  of  an  internal :  the 
necessity  of  an  outward  law,  backed  by  some  form  of  outward  penalty ;  and  the  necessity 
of  an  inward  impulse,  backed  by  tlie  sacred  fear  of  inward  shame  and  loss.  It  was 
this  latter  kind  of  necessity  of  which  ha  was  supremely  conscious.  It  was  consistent 
with  perfect  moral  freedom,  because  it  was  of  the  nature  of  a  resistless  force  in  the  depths 
of  his  own  soul,  the  decision  of  his  own  will,  the  impulse  of  his  own  heart.  The  will 
of  God  had  imposed  this  stewardship,  this  "  dispensation  of  the  gospel,"  upon  him.  He 
had  been  separated  unto  it  from  his  very  birth  (Rom.  i.  1 ;  Gal.  i.  15).  And  God's  will 
had  become  his  will,  God's  purj^ose  his  purpose.  The  manifested  love  of  Christ  had 
become  a  constraining  power  within  him,  leading  his  whole  being  into  captivity, 
drawing  forth  every  energy  of  his  nature  in  a  holy  and  joyous  service.  This  kind  of 
"necessity"  is  the  loftiest  principle  by  which  any  human  spirit  can  be  actuated. 
Kever  is  a  man  so  great,  so  free,  so  royal,  so  divinely  blessed,  as  when  he  is  intelligently 
conscious  of  it.  This  is  the  true  inspiration  of  gospel  ministry.  The  harvest  is  great. 
May  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  "  send  forth  labourers  "  thus  inwardly  constrained  to  aerve 
himl— W. 

Ter.  22. — "By  M  meant  save  $eme.'  Tw*  points  present  themselves  for  our 
consideration  here — (1)  The  end  tlie  apottle  had  m  view ;  (2)  the  method  hy  which  he 
mmght  to  secure  it, 

L  The  end.  "  To  save  some."  What  does  he  mean  by  this  ?  What  to  him  was 
the  salvation  of  men?  1.  It  certainly  means  deliverance  from  a  dread  future  calamity. 
"  The  wrath  to  come,"  "  the  perdition  of  ungodly  men,"  was  to  St.  Paul  no  dream,  but 
•n  awful  reality.  It  was  worth  all  possible  eifoit  and  self-sacrifice  to  save  men  from  it. 
If  he  bad  no  other  impulse  than  that  of  mere  human  sympathy  to  move  him,  we  have 
here  a  sufBcient  explanation  of  the  enthusiasm  of  his  zeal.  It  is  often  said  that  if 
Christian  people  really  believed  the  future  that  is  before  multitudes  of  their  fellow- 
ireatures  to  be  so  dark  and  dreadful  as  they  say  it  is,  they  could  never  rest  as  they  do 
m  their  own  natural  or  spiritual  satisfactions.  They  would  rather  be  beside  themselves 
with  a  frantic  agony  of  sympathetic  sorrow  and  desire  to  save.  There  is  truth  in  this. 
The  easy  inrlitVerence  with  which  too  many  of  us  regard  the  condition  and  prospects  of 
the  godless  world  around  us,  belies  the  reality  of  our  faith.  Our  conceptions  of  what 
the  solemn  issues  of  the  future  shall  be  may  differ.    Some,  after  anxious  and  earnest 


in.  a.  1—270    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANI.  tli 

thought,  may  have  aniyed  at  the  conclusion  that  to  forecast  the  nature  or  the  duration 
of  the  penalty  that  will  then  fall  on  the  transgressor  is  beyond  our  province,  and  that 
we  can  only  take  the  language  of  Scripture  as  it  stands,  without  attempting  to  penetrate 
the  haze  of  dreadful  mystery  that  hangs  around  it.  But  the  broad  and  certain  facts 
of  the  case  are  such  as  may  well  affect  us  far  more  deeply  than  they  do,  and  bring  forth 
in  us  far  richer  and  more  abundant  fruits  of  practical  beneficence.  It  is  to  Iw  feared 
that  doctrinal  controversy  about  the  future  tends  to  weaken  rather  than  deepen  and 
strengthen  our  impressions.  We  lose  in  speculation  and  debate  the  practical  earnest- 
ness the  subject  itself  might  be  expected  to  awaken.  St.  Paul  lived  in  the  clear  light 
of  the  future.  His  soul  was  thrilled  by  the  sense  of  its  tremendous  reality.  And  though 
its  issues  probably  were  no  more  distinct  and  definite  to  his  apprehension  than  they  art 
to  ours,  yet  his  faith  in  their  certainty  was  such  as  to  stir  up  all  the  noble  energies  of 
his  being  in  the  endeavour  to  save  his  fellow-men.  2.  But  the  foresight  of  the  future 
was  far  from  being  the  only  thing  that  moved  him ;  it  was  a  present  deliverance  from 
•  present  calamity  that  he  had  in  view.  To  save  men  now  from  the  evil  that  enthralled 
and  cursed  them,  ruining  their  Godlike  nature,  darkening  all  the  glory  of  their  life, — this 
was  the  end  he  sought.  He  was  no  visionary.  It  was  no  object  of  remote  and  uncer- 
tain utility,  but  one  of  most  practical  and  immediate  urgency  at  which  he  aimed. 
Whatever  its  bearing  on  the  future  may  be,  the  influence  of  the  gospel  on  the  present 
passing  life  of  men  is  so  benign  and  blessed  that  our  utmost  zeal  in  diffusing  it  is  fully 
justified.  If  we  think  of  nothing  more  than  the  superficial  social  changes  that  Chris- 
tianity has  introduced,  how  it  is  at  this  very  hour  the  prolific  root  of  all  social  progress 
in  every  land,  we  see  here  an  ample  reward  for  all  the  sacrifices  that  have  ever  been 
made  for  its  extension.  But  beneath  all  this  there  lies  the  fact  that,  as  sin  is  th« 
ruining,  destroying  power  in  man's  nature  and  life,  it  must  needs  be  a  Godlike  purpose 
that  seeks  to  deliver  him  from  it  (Matt.  L  21;  Acts  iii.  26).  "That  I  may  by  all 
means  save  some."  He  could  not  hope  for  all,  but  if  "some"  only  yielded  to  his 
persuasive  word,  it  would  be  a  blessed  recompense.  This  is  the  inspiring  hope  of  every 
true  preacher  and  worker  for  Christ.  The  net  is  cast,  the  arrow  is  shot  at  a  venture ; 
the  issue  is  not  now  made  manifest.  But  a  seemingly  profitless  work  may  be  linked 
indirectly  with  results  that  are  very  great  and  glorious.  Waves  of  spiritual  influence^ 
from  a  narrow  circle,  travel  out  where  none  can  follow  them.  While  there  are  those  who 
shall  find  at  last  that  the  "grent  and  wonderful  tilings"  they  supposed  they  had  done 
In  the  name  of  Christ  are  little  recognized,  there  are  others  who  will  be  amazed  to 
discover  that  their  lowly  endeavours  have  yielded  fruits  of  which  they  never  dreamed. 
And  to  "  save  some/'  to  be  able  to  lay  some  trophies  at  the  Master's  feet,  will  b«  a 
blessed  reward,  ' 

II.  The  hgtrod.  "  I  am  become  all  things  to  all  men.''  It  is  remarkable  that 
words  which  express  the  highest  nobleness  of  an  apostolic  spirit  should  have  come 
to  be  used  by  us  in  familiar  discourse  as  descriptive  of  a  type  (if  character  and  mode  of 
conduct  that  is  mean  and  despicable.  It  is  suggestive  of  the  behaviour  of  one  who 
has  no  steadfast  princii'le,  no  honest  outspokenness;  the  mere  obsequious  time-server, 
full  of  smiles  and  gilded  insincerities;  who,  to  serve  his  own  ends,  can  put  on  any 
face  that  suits  the  occasion  ; 

"A  man 

Versed  in  the  world  as  pilot  in  his  compass. 

The  needle  pointing  ever  to  that  interest 

Wliich  is  his  loile-star,  and  who  spreads  his  saflt 

With  vantage  to  the  gale  of  others'  passion." 

There  was  nothing  of  this  sort  in  Paul.  Nothing  could  be  more  abhorrent  to  hii 
spirit  than  a  time-serving  policy  or  a  habit  of  smiling,  plausible  deceit.  These  words 
from  his  lips  simply  indicate  that  his  strong  desire  to  save  men  and  win  them  to 
Christ  led  him  to  enter  as  much  as  possible  into  their  circumstances,  to  place  himself 
on  their  level.  Thus  would  he  disarm  their  prejudices  and  bring  his  heart  into 
sympathetic  contact  with  theirs.  Thus  would  he  cunuuend  to  them  the  love  of  him 
who  "  was  made  under  the  Law  that  he  might  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  Law;" 
"  who  for  our  sakes  becatue  poor,  that  we  through  his  povertj'  might  be  made  rich." 
(Examples :  Acts  xvL  3 ;  xvii.  22 — 31 ;  xxi.  26.)   The  lesson  for  all  Christian  preachers 


814  THE  FIRST  BPIBTLB  TO  THE  COEINTHIAN&    [oh.  b.  1—27 

•nd  workers  is  this :  Cultivate  a  broad  and  generous  human  sympathy.  In  dealing  with 
men  In  various  conditions — doubt,  error,  poverty,  sorrow,  temptation,  subjection  to  the 
power  of  evil — ^put  yourself  as  much  as  possible  in  their  place,  if  yoa  would  hope  to 
guide,  or  comfort,  or  save  them.— W. 

Ten.  24 — 27. — Sunning  and  flgliUng,  The  crowa  tt  eternal  life  is  here  set  forth 
U  the  issue  of  successful  conflict  with  difficulties  and  foes.  It  would  seem  as  if  all 
Divine  excellence  must  needs  present  itself  to  our  minds  as  the  negation  of  opposite 
forms  of  evil.  We  cannot  think  of  Qod  but  as  the  "  Light "  that  contends  with  our 
darkness,  the  "  Fire "  that  consumes  our  corruption.  God's  Law  is  but  the  Divine 
restraint  of  our  wayward  propensities,  the  Divine  rebuke  of  our  trangressions.  The 
Divine  life  in  the  soul  is  an  energy  that  reveals  itself  in  ceaseless  struggle  with  forces 
that  would  otherwise  destroy  it,  a  perpetual  battle  with  the  powers  of  death.  Heaven 
is  victory,  the  rising  up  of  the  soul  out  of  the  region  of  trial  and  strife  and  suffering  to 
its  true  destiny  and  inheritance  in  the  glorious  presence  of  God.  Look  at  this  passage 
w  suggesting  certain  conditions  of  success  in  this  spiritual  condict. 

L  C^NOENTBATION  OF  THOUGHT  ON  THB  FBIZB  AS  A  MATTES  Or  INTENSE  FEBSORAL 

DJTERBST.  "  All  run,  but  one  receiveth,"  etc.  The  analogy  here  instituted  is  not 
complete,  inasmuch  as  in  the  Christian  race  all  who  "  run  with  patience  "  will  attain. 
But  it  serves  to  enforce  the  need  of  great  fixedness  of  thought  and  purpose,  as  if 
each  runner  felt  that  only  one  could  win,  and  he  would  be  that  one.  There  is  nothing 
narrow,  envious,  selfish,  in  this.  A  great  difference  lies  here  between  the  heavenly  and 
the  earthly  striving.  He  must  be  a  man  of  very  elevated  spirit  who  is  able  to  rise 
entirely  above  the  narrowing  influence  of  secular  rivalry.  In  urging  his  way  to  success 
along  the  crowded  thoroughfares  of  the  world,  a  man  almost  inevitably  thrusts  some 
one  else  aside.  1'he  gigantic  system  of  commercial  competition  means  this.  And  it  is 
an  important  problem  of  social  life  to  determine  how  one  may  claim  as  he  ought  that 
personal  inheritance  in  the  world  that  Gixl  has  placed  within  his  reach,  and  yet 
mot  fall  into  the  sin  of  a  selfish  violation  of  the  rights  of  others.  There  is  no  room, 
however,  for  anything  of  this  kind  in  the  spiritual  race  and  warfare.  Mutual  emula- 
tion is  mutual  profit.  The  success  of  each  one  is  to  the  advantage  and  the  joy  of  all. 
Strive  to  win  the  heavenly  crown  as  if  you  alone  could  wear  it,  and  the  more  intensely 
earnest  you  are  in  your  striving,  the  more  does  your  example  inspire  your  fellow- 
combatant,  the  more  do  you  become  a  fount  of  healthful  influence,  a  source  of  enrich- 
ment and  blessing  to  all  around  you. 

II.  Self-eestraist  and  SELF-DisoiFLiint.  The  severe  physical  discipline  to  which 
the  athletes  subjected  themselves  was  gladly  borne  for  the  sake  of  the  "corruptible 
crown "  they  sought  to  win.  Not  that  the  perishable  wreath  of  wild  olive  encircling 
the  victor's  brow  was  in  itself  the  thing  he  cared  for.  It  was  but  the  symbol  ol 
something  else.  To  be  conscious  of  the  mastery,  to  have  his  name  proclaimed  by  the 
herald  before  the  assembled  multitude  as  one  who  had  conferred  honour  and  renown 
on  his  family,  his  tribe,  his  country, — ^that  was  his  reward.  So  that  the  very  ephemeral 
character  of  the  crown-  made  it  the  more  striking  witness  to  the  nobility  of  man'i 
nature,  to  the  truth  that  he  can  never  find  his  satisfactions  in  the  region  of  sense ; 
they  belong,  after  all,  to  the  super-sensible,  the  ideal  world.  Every  form  of  ambition 
greater  than  the  apparent  object  will  account  for  or  warrant,  is  proof  of  this.  The 
enthusiasm  that  magnifies  its  objects  beyond  their  real  dimensions,  and  invests  them 
with  a  fictitious  charm,  is  always  a  significant  memorial  of  man's  relation  to  a  higher 
and  a  better  world.  At  the  same  time,  this  striving  for  the  corruptible  crown  remindr 
na  how  vain  often  are  the  rewards  of  earthly  ambition,  and  how  the  price  men 
pay  often  for  their  successes  is  a  very  costly  one.  They  surrender  that  which  is 
far  more  precious  than  the  thing  they  gain.  They  "  spend  their  money  for  that  which 
is  not  bread,  and  their  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not."  In  "  seeking  to  save 
their  life,  they  lose  it."  The  law  of  the  heavenly  race  is  the  reverse  of  this.  As  the 
unsubstantial,  the  delusive,  the  perishable,  is  relinquished,  the  soul  wins  for  itself 
the  "inheritance  incorruptible,  and  undeflled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away."  You  lose 
the  lower  life  to  gain  the  higher.  "Temperate  in  all  things."  Let  not  the  word 
"  temperance  "  have  to  our  minds  a  limited  and  exclusive  meaning,  one  which,  howevM 
Important,  does  not  cover  the  whole  field  of  its  Scripture  application*.    The  Christiaa 


OH.  n.  1—27,]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CO&lNTflIAN&.  ii5 

l8  called  to  be  temperate  alike  In  all  his  thoughts,  emotions,  words,  and  ways; 
in  his  joys  and  sorrows,  his  schemes  and  activities,  iiis  personal  indulgences  and 
personal  mortifications ;  in  his  worldly  ambitions,  and  even  in  the  zeal  of  his  religious 
life.  But  "  the  flesh "  must  needs  be  the  chief  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  this 
■elf-regulating  grace.  "  I  buffet  my  body,  and  bring  it  into  bondage."  Nothing  could 
be  more  expressive  of  that  subjugation  of  our  lower  nature  by  which  we  can  alone  win 
the  crown  of  the  spirit.  Not  that  there  is  any  essential  virtue  in  mere  physical 
•naterities  and  moriilications. 

"  Pride  may  be  pampered  while  the  flesh  grows  lean." 

Asceticism  is  no  natural  outgrowth  of  Christianity,  but  rather  of  its  unnatural  al'.lAnc^ 
with  that  pagan  philosophy  which  regarded  matter  and  spirit  as  essentially  antagonistic 
principles.  Christ  teaches  us  to  honour  the  body  that  God's  wonder-working  hand 
has  framed,  and  that  he  makes  the  temple  of  his  Spirit.  But  then  do  we  most  honour 
the  body  when  we  make  it  most  thoroughly  the  submissive  servant  of  the  soul's 
diviner  purposes,  confronting  it,  meeting  it  full  in  the  face,  as  it  were,  with  the  swift 
violence  of  our  holy  purpose,  when  it  dares  to  obstruct  the  spirit  in  its  path  to  the 
heavenly  crown. 

III.  The  confidence  tii  \  i'  springs  fbom  faith.  "  Not  as  uncertainly,  not  as 
beating  theair."  Vivid  realization,  unwaveringassurance, — this  was  the  secretof  Paul's 
strength.  The  prize  of  his  high  calling  stood  out  clear  and  luminous  to  his  view.  He 
had  no  misgivings  as  to  the  reality  of  it.  It  filled  the  whole  field  of  his  vision  with  its 
glory,  and  the  whole  energy  of  his  nature  was  consecrated  to  its  pursuit.  We  must 
rise  above  the  chilling,  paralyzing  mists  of  doubt,  and  see  the  heavenly  crown  clearly 
before  us,  if  we  would  have  there  to  be  any  real  vigour  in  our  siiiritual  striving,  "  Thk 
is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,_even  our  faith." — W. 

Vers,  26,  27. — A  good  servant  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  was  quite  In  St.  Paul's  manner 
to  support  his  exhortations  to  Christian  service  by  adducing  his  own  example  and 
experience.  Those  who  were  not  acquainted  with  him  might  misconstrue  such 
references  and  set  them  down  to  a  vain-glorious  spirit,  but  no  one  could  do  so  who 
knew  how  fully  and  fervently  this  apostle  ascribed  all  that  he  was  and  did  as  a 
Christian  to  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ.  "  Not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with 
me."    "  Not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me." 

I.  Illustrations  of  Christian  service.  1.  St.  Paul  was  as  a  runner  in  the 
Isthmian  games,  and  so  ran  "  not  uncertainly."  Suppose  one  to  attempt  that  course 
without  his  mind  made  up  as  to  the  reason  why  or  the  goal  to  which  he  should  run, 
moving  without  spirit  or  purpose,  looking  to  this  side  and  to  that;  he  could  take  no 
prize.  One  must  have  a  clear  course  and  a  definite  aim  in  the  race  which  is  set 
before  the  servants  of  Christ.  2.  St.  Paul  was  as  a  boxer  in  the  arena,  and  fought 
not  as  one  "  beating  the  air."  The  poet  Virgil  has  the  same  expression  in  describing 
a  boxer  who  missed  his  antagonist :  "  Vires  in  ventum  effudit "  (' MaAA'  bk.  v.  446). 
To  do  so  is  to  waste  force.  He  fights  well  who  plants  his  blows  skilfully  and  makes 
them  tell.  The  apostle  was  a  man  of  peace,  but  he  needed  boldness  and  firmness,  as 
well  as  love  and  patience,  for  his  hard  service.  He  had  journeys  to  make,  trials  to  bear, 
testimonies  to  raise,  controversies  to  conduct^  difficulties  to  adjust,  calumnies  to  refute, 
sorrows  to  assuage — a  great  and  arduous  career ;  and,,  by  the  grace  of  God,  he  put 
all  his  force  into  it,  ran  his  race  of  duty  with  ardour,  fought  his  fight  of  faith  with 
resolution. 

II.  Training  and  discipline  for  such  serviob.  "  I  buffet  my  body,  and  bring  it 
into  subjection,"  He  who  would  subdue  evil  in  others  must  suppress  it  in  himself. 
Now,  the  apostle  found  that  the  gospel  was  hindered,  not  so  much  by  intellectual 
objection,  as  by  moral  deiuavity.  The  flesh  lusted  against  the  spirit.  He  had  felt  this 
in  himself,  and  knew  that  the  flesh  prevailed  by  fastening  on  the  organs  of  the  body 
and  inducing  indulgence  or  excess.  So  he  brought  himself  into  good  training  for  active 
Christian  work  by  bruising  the  body  and  "  mortifying  its  deeds."  He  would  not  sur- 
feit or  pamper  it,  lest  he  should  stupefy  the  soul.  This  is  something  quite  different 
from  that  "  neglect  of  the  body  "  which  St,  Paul  elsewhere  mentions  among  the  super- 
ititioDS  of  a  delumve  piety.    To  deprive  the  body  of  necessary  food  and  sleep  is  to 


11  d  THE  FiaST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  ix.  1— 27. 


diBable  the  powers  of  the  mind  in  hope  of  purifying  the  souL  Such  has  been  the 
practict  of  men  and  women  in  the  ascetic  life,  and  at  one  time  it  took  the  form  of  a 
frenzy,  when  the  Flagellants  traversed  a  considerable  part  of  Europe  in  long  proces- 
lions,  with  covered  faces,  chanting  penitential  hymns,  and  continually  applying  the 
icourge  to  one  another's  naked  backs.  Those  fanatics  meant  well,  and,  indeed,  supposed 
that  they  were  following  the  Apostle  Paul.  But  to  such  foolish  and  cruel  actions 
few  of  us  are  prone  at  the  present  day.  Our  danger  lies  on  the  opposite  side.  We  do 
not  hold  the  body  sufficiently  under  control.  We  give  it  ease  and  luxury  and  orna- 
ment ;  we  allow  dangerous  scope  to  those  cravings  and  passions  which  have  a  physical 
basis,  and  so  our  spiritual  life  languishes,  and  we  can  put  no  glow  of  feeling  or  strength 
of  purpose  into  the  service  of  Christ.  Corinth  was  a  city  notorious  for  profligacy.  The 
Christians  there  must  have  known  that,  if  a  young  athlete  did  not  hold  himself  apart 
from  the  vices  of  the  place,  he  could  win  no  distinction  in  the  public  games.  Every 
such  competitor  had  to  resist  indulgence,  and  bring  his  frame  to  a  firmness  of  muscle 
and  a  full  strength  of  vitality  which  would  enable  it  to  bear  the  fatigue  and  strain 
of  the  Isthmian  contests.  In  like  manner  St.  Paul,  for  a  higher  purpose,  restrained  and 
governed  himself,  cultivated  simplicity  in  the  tastes  and  habits  of  his  outward  life, 
studied  to  keep  himself  in  spiritual  health  and  vigour,  that  he  might  run  well  and 
fight  well  for  his  heavenly  Master. 

III.  An  eye  to  consequences.  To  sustain  his  purpose,  St.  Paul  kept  in  view  the 
prize  of  success  and  the  disgrace  of  failure.  1.  The  prize  would  he  an  incorruptible  crown. 
In  desiring  this,  the  good  servant  is  not  open  to  any  charge  of  selfishness  or  vain-glory. 
He  thought  of  no  prize,  conceived  of  no  praise  or  glory  for  himself  which  was  not 
wrapped  up  in  the  praise  and  glory  of  Jesus.  He  had  no  desire  to  sit  by  himself  on 
a  high  seat,  with  a  chaplet  or  garland  on  his  brow,  drinking  in  his  own  praises.  To 
see  the  people  who  had  been  converted  to  Christ  through  his  labours  safe  in  the  king- 
dom would  be  to  him  a  crown  of  rejoicing.  And  to  see  Christ  praised  and  magnified 
would  be  to  the  good  servant  a  great  recompense  of  reward.  2.  The  disgrace  of  failure 
vmvM  he  the  Master's  disapproval.  How  mortifying  for  one  who  had  been  a  herald  to 
others  to  be  excluded  at  last  as  unworthy  of  a  prize!  Paul  had  preached  to  others,  and 
called  them  to  the  Christian  race,  like  the  herald  at  the  public  games  of  Greece,  who 
proclaimed  the  rules  and  conditions  of  the  contest,  and  summoned  runners  or  com- 
batants to  the  lists.  Alas  for  him  if,  through  self-indulgence  or  want  of  thoroughness 
in  his  ministry,  he  should  be  disapproved  by  the  great  Judge  at  the  close  of  the  day  1 
It  is  quite  a  mistake  to  infer  from  this  that  St.  Paul  was  still  uncertain  about  his 
ultimate  salvation,  and  afraid  of  being  cast  away  in  his  sins.  That  would,  indeed,  be 
strange  and  perplexing  in  the  face  of  his  strong  expressions  to  the  contrary  in  such 
passages  as  Eom.  viii.  38,  39 ;  2  Tim.  i.  12.  The  question  here  is  not  of  a  sinner's 
salvation,  but  of  a  believer's  service — of  doing  well  or  ill  in  ministry ;  and  fear  of  failure 
was  and  always  is  the  obverse  side  of  the  desire  of  success.  St.  Paul  was  a  very 
favoured  servant  of  Christ,  but  it  was  none  the  less  necessary  for  him  to  remember 
the  need  of  diligence  and  self-government  in  view  of  the  day  when  the  Master  will  call 
all  his  servants  to  account,  and  either  reward  or  disapprove  them  at  his  coming. 
Indeed,  the  remembrance  of  this  is  needful  for  all  of  us  as  a  caution  against  presump- 
tuous and  careless  living.  If  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  grace  be  taught  alone,  men 
are  apt  to  abuse  it,  and  become  spiritually  conceited  and  morally  heedless.  The  cor- 
rective is  the  call  to  service.  "If  a  man  serve  me,  him  will  my  Father  honour."  Be 
not  half-hearted.  So  run  as  to  attain :  so  fight  as  to  overcome.  Be  no^  faint-hearted. 
Pray  as  you  run :  pray  as  you  fight.  "  They  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  renew  their 
strength."— P. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  rights  of  apostksMp.  One  of  St.  Paul's  chief  difficulties  arose  from 
the  efforts  of  his  enemies  to  disprove  his  claims  to  apostleship.  There  does  not  seem  to 
have  been  in  the  early  Church  a  common  understanding  as  to  what  constituted  an 
apostle,  and  it  was  readily  observed  that  the  grounds  of  St.  Paul's  claim  differed  from 
the  grounds  on  which  the  older  apostles  claimed.  This,  indeed,  was  but  a  surface 
appearance  of  difference,  and  did  not  reach  the  heart  of  the  matter  j  but  it  sufSced  to 
give  the  enemies  of  St.  Paul  an  opportunity  of  questioning  his  authority,  and  even  of 
asserting  that,  in  the  extravagance  of  his  self-esteem,  he  had  assumed  a  position  and 


OH.  ix.  1—27.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBIiJTHIANS.  317 

officn  which  in  no  sense  helonged  to  him.  It  will  be  seen  from  his  letters  that  he  wm 
very  jealous  of  his  position  as  an  apostle,  and  persisted  in  claiming  the  rights  which 
belonged  to  the  ofBce.  We  may,  therefore,  recall  to  mind  the  general  grounds  on  whick 
he  believed  himself  to  be  an  apostle,  and  the  more  special  signs  of  his  apostleship  which 
ought  to  have  commended  his  claim  to  the  Corinthians.  St,  Peter,  on  the  occasion  of 
filling  the  betrayer's  place,  had  declared  a  condition  of  apostleship  for  which  he  gives 
no  kind  of  authority.  According  to  his  idea  (Acts  i.  21,  22),  "  Of  the  men  therefore 
which  have  companied  with  us  all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  among 
us,  beginning  from  the  baptism  of  John,  unto  the  day  that  he  was  received  up  from  us, 
of  these  must  one  become  a  witness  with  us  of  his  resurrection."  Probably  St.  Peter 
was  led  to  this  idea  by  our  Lord's  appointment  of  the  apostles  as  his  witnessa,  and  he 
conceived  that  an  apostle  must  have  a  complete  knowledge  to  be  a  true  witness.  But 
the  essential  condition  of  apostleship  is  rather  to  be  found  in  the  direct  pershnal  call 
to  the  office  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself.  Each  one  of  the  first  twelve  our  Lord 
personally  called.  St.  Paul  he  directly  and  personally  called.  No  man  can  claim  the 
office.  The  number  can  never  be  increased,  unless  Christ  should  be  pleased  to  make 
himself  manifest  again,  and  call  men  to  the  office.  St.  Paul  saw  the  Son  of  man,  and 
heard  his  voice,  and  received  his  direct  call,  when  smitten  by  the  light  near  Damascus. 
Where  there  had  been  this  direct  personal  call  of  Christ,  there  would  surely  be  a  seal 
of  the  call  in  a  Divine  endowment  of  miraculous  power.  This  the  first  twelve  apostles 
had,  and  this  it  is  certain  St.  Paul  also  had.  This,  then,  was  the  general  ground  of  his 
claim ;  but  he  further  urges  upon  the  Corinthians  that  they  had  special  reasons  for 
accepting  him  as  an  apostle.  The  power  of  Christ  which  had  come  to  them  through 
him  carried  its  own  testimony.  "  The  seal  of  mine  apostleship  are  ye  in  the  Lord." 
Grod  had  witnessed  to  him  by  crowning  his  labours  with  success ;  and  the  Corinthians 
had.  felt  his  apostolic  power.  Now  St.  Paul  had  to  vindicate  his  personal  dignity  and 
liberty  and  right  as  an  apostle.  He  had  persisted  in  working  for  his  own  living  at  the 
trade  of  the  tent-maker,  in  which  he  had  been  brought  up,  and  his  malicious  enemies 
argued  that  he  did  so  because  he  felt  that  he  could  not  press  his  claim  to  maintenance, 
as  did  the  other  apostles.  "  The  followers  of  St.  Peter,  with  malicious  ingenious  logic, 
argued  from  this  practice  of  St.  Paul  that  his  dignity  and  authority  were  thereby  proved 
to  be  somewhat  inferior  to  that  of  St.  Peter  and  the  Lord's  brethren,  who  were  supported 
by  the  Christian  Church."  In  this  chapter  St.  Paul  declares  his  apostolic  liberty  and 
rights,  especially  in  three  matters. 

I.  His  bioht  of  entebino  into  social  belationshifs.  St.  Peter  had  a  wife.  Other 
apostles  were  married  men.  And  St.  Paul  might  have  been  had  he  chosen  to  be.  If  he 
voluntarily  refrained  from  entering  into  this  social  relation,  because  of  the  limitations 
which  its  responsibilities  would  entaU  on  him,  and  because  of  the  itinerant  character  of 
his  labours,  no  one  need  assume  that  he  abandoned  his  rights  or  failed  to  recognize 
them.  Had  he  so  minded,  he  could  have  made  both  wife  and  family  chargeable  to  the 
Churches,  and  the  burden  those  who  loved  him  would  gladly  have  borne.  Volxmtary 
abstention  from  the  pressing  of  a  man's  rights  ought  never  to  be  construed  as  the 
surrender  of  those  rights.  So  8t.  Paul  lays  down  the  true  and  only  principle  upon 
which  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy  can  be  recognized.  Every  clergyman  has  the  right  to 
"  lead  about  a  sister,  a  wife,"  but  any  clergyman  may  refuse  to  exercise  his  right,  and 
may  voluntarily  set  his  own  liberty  in  bonds,  if  he  thinks  that  he  may  thus  gain  a 
higher  power  in  the  service  of  his  Divine  Lord.  The  principle  is  equally  applicable  in 
the  life  of  the  ordinary  Christian.  Abridgments  of  liberty  are  oftentimes  necessary,  and 
yet  more  often  advisable,  but  they  never  involve  abandonments  of  rights.  Constantly 
the  Christian  man  says, ."  I  may,  but  I  will  not — I  will  not  for  Christ's  sake." 

II.  His   BIOHT   OF  WORKINQ    FOR   INDEPENDENT   HAINTENANOB.      This    WaS    OertainlT 

a  peculiarity  in  St.  Paul,  and  no  doubt  other  teachers  felt  it  to  be  a  kind  of  reproach 
upon  them.  But  St.  Paul  never  argues  that  it  was  a  necessary  duty  for  others.  Any 
other  man  might  feel  it  a  duty,  just  as  he  did ;  but  he  had  no  intention  of  making  hii 
conduct  in  this  respect  even  an  example.  He  was  placed  in  peculiar  circumstances ;  he 
was  of  a  singularly  sensitive  temperament ;  he  laboured  among  all  classes,  and  was 
anxious  to  keep  away  everything  that  might  be  made  a  reproach  of  the  gospel ;  he  was 
determined  to  make  his  motives  quite  clear,  and  so  he  would  receive  from  the  Churches 
DO  maintenance,  only,  in  times  of  necessity,  some  kindly  and  heloful  gifts.     Now,  «• 


818  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  ix.  1— 27. 

need  not  even  say  that  St.  Paul  was  right  in  this.  He  had  an  unquestioned  ministerial 
claim  to  support  in  carnal  things.  We  can  only  say  he  had  a  right  also  to  exercise  hii 
liberty,  and  work  for  his  own  living,  if  he  chose  so  to  do.  Those  who  work  for  their 
Sying  may  serve  Christ  in  the  preaching  of  his  gospel ;  and  those  who  preach  Ma  gospel 
may  work  for  their  living,  if  they  prefer  so  to  do. 

III.  His  bight  of  claiming  thk  hue  rewards  of  his  work.  (Vet.  7.)  ThU  U 
urged  by  three  figures :  the  support  of  the  soldier  in  war ;  the  partaking  of  the  fruitage 
of  his  vineyard  by  the  yine-dresser ;  and  the  sharing  of  the  milk,  given  by  the  cattle,  by 
him  who  has  them  in  charge.  The  true  rewards  of  Christian  service  for  others  are  (1) 
their  loving  confidence  and  esteem ;  (2)  the  expressions  of  that  love  in  their  holy  lives 
snd  labours ;  and  (3)  the  more  personal  expressions  of  their  love  in  gifts  and  care  and 
kindly  concern  for  the  temporal  well-being  of  their  teachers. — B.  T. 

Vers.  7 — 12. — The  duty  of  tupporting  the  ministry.  The  separation  of  certaie 
members  of  the  Christian  Church  to  the  specific  work  of  the  pastor,  the  teacher,  or  the 
missionary,  may  be  said  to  have  begun  at  the  election  of  the  "  seven,"  commonly  called 
"  deacons,"  which  is  narrated  in  Acts  vi.  1 — 6.  Then  certain  persons  gave  themselves 
up  to  the  study  and  ministry  of  the  Word  and  to  prayer.  The  question  how  they 
were  to  be  fed  and  supported  was  at  once  met  by  the  members  of  the  Church,  who,  in 
response  to  a  natural  and  reasonable  demand,  and  in  full  accordance  with  the  princi]jlei 
and  practices  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  made  provision  for  their  material  necessities. 
Our  Lord,  in  sending  out  his  disciples  on  their  trial  mission,  had  laid  down  the  principle 
that  they  should  not  supply  their  own  material  wants,  because  "  the  labourer  is  worthy 
of  his  hire."  Much  has  been  said  in  recent  times  against  an  organized  Christian  ministry, 
dependent  on  the  good  will  of  the  several  Churches  they  may  serve ;  but  the  Scripture 
uannot  be  read  with  unprejudiced  mind,  and  the  reader  fail  to  perceive  that  "  they  who 
preach  the  gospel  should  live  of  the  gospel."  In  the  verses  now  before  us  St.  Paul 
urges  the  duty  of  supporting  the  ministry  by  three  lines  of  argument  and  illustration, 

L  Bt  common  wobldlt  illustration.  1,  The  soldier,  who,  if  he  fights  Uie 
battles  of  his  country,  reasonably  expects  his  country  to  provide  for  Us  maintenance 
and  his  comfort,  'i.  The  vine-dresser,  who  expects  to  reap  in  fruitage  the  reward  cA 
his  labours  in  the  vineyard.  3,  And  the  keeper  of  a  flock,  who  day  by  day  lives  upon 
the  milk  of  the  flock.  These  illustrations  only  touch  the  general  principle  that  the 
worker  has  a  claim  to  a  portion  at  least  of  the  results  of  his  labour.  The  illustration 
of  the  soldier  is  the  one  most  to  St.  Paul's  point,  because,  while  doing  a  special  kind  of 
work  for  us,  he  looks  for  our  care  of  his  temporal  necessities.  So  the  minister,  ia  doing 
a  spiritual  work  for  us,  commits  to  us  the  care  of  his  "  carnal  things." 

n.  By  Scbiptukb  rules.  (Ver.  9.)  The  law  is  taken  from  Deut.  xxt.  4.  Tlie  figure 
is  that  of  the  oxen,  who  were  driven  to  and  firo  over  a  hard  space  of  ground,  called  a 
threshing-floor,  on  which  the  corn-stalks  were  spread,  so  that  by  their  "  treadings  "  the 
grain  might  he  separated  ftom  the  husk.  Those  oxen  were  engaged  in  doing  work 
for  the  good  of  others,  and  it  was  only  fitting  that  they  should  be  provided  for  while 
they  laboured. 

III.  By  the  ritual  laws  of  the  older  Mosaism.  (Ver.  13.)  Priests  and  Levites 
k*d  special  maintenance,  and  this  almost  entirely  by  the  offerings  and  good  will  of  the 
people.  They  had  certain  towns  allotted  for  their  resilience,  certain  portions  of  the  sacri- 
fices for  their  food,  and  certain  tithes  for  the  supply  of  their  other  necessities,  and  sucli 
a  regulation  could  in  no  sense  be  regarded  as  an  imreasonable  burden.  St.  Paul  eveil 
declares,  upon  his  apostolic  authority,  that  "  Even  so  hath  the  Lord  ordained  that  they 
which  preach  the  gospel  should  live  of  the  gospel."  When  we  have  sufficiently  proved 
that  the  material  support  of  a  spiritual  ministry  is  one  of  the  first  duties  of  the  Christian 
professor,  we  are  prepared  to  argue  and  to  illustrate  further  that  a  generous,  liberal, 
hearty,  and  even  self-denying  provision  is  comely  and  noble;  and  that  in  securing  suck 
generous  provision  our  thankful  love  may  find  a  most  fitting  expressioiL^B.  T. 

Vers.  16 — 23. — St.  Paul  an  exception.  He  wishes  it  to  be  understood  that  he  doei 
precisely  what  he  thinks  to  be  right,  but  does  not  wish  the  peculiarity  of  his  conduct 
to  be  made  a  model  for  others.  There  are  things  in  life  concerning  which  each  man 
must  make  his  own  individual  stand,  upon  which  he  may  find  himself  compelled  t« 


OT.  IX.  1—27.]    THE  FiBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  8l!» 

take  an  individual  and  exceptional  line.  And  he  may  do  tins  without  opposition  to  others, 
without  making  himself  in  any  way  objectionable.  St.  Paul  found  sufficient  reason  for 
the  adoption  of  a  singular  course  of  conduct  in  relation  to  his  a[iostleship  or  ministry. 
He  would  receive  nothing  in  a  way  of  payment  or  reward  from  the  Churches  among 
whom  he  laboured.  His  reasons  probably  were :  1.  That  the  older  apostles  never  quite 
approved  of  his  work,  and  he  found  it  better  to  act  in  an  independent  way,  and  make 
no  one  responsible  for  his  modes  of  work,  or  the  advanced  truths  which  were  given  him 
to  teach.  2.  That  he  was,  throughout  his  missionary  labours,  keenly  watched  by 
active  and  bitter  enemies,  who  were  ever  ready  to  misrepresent  his  conduct,  and 
fashion  accusations  against  him.  He  well  knew  how  promptly  ^hey  would  seize  on  bis 
receiving  payments,  and  declare  that  he  was  mercenary,  and  only  preached  for  selfish 
ends.  3.  That  he  had,  in  his  hands,  a  kind  of  skill — that  of  tent-making — ^which  he 
could  readily  turn  to  account  wherever  he  went.  Probably  it  was  the  second  of  these 
reasons  that  more  particularly  influenced  him.  It  was  most  important  that  he  should 
give  his  enemies  no  opportunities  or  advantages  against  him  ;  and  he  would  even  refuse 
some  of  his  rights  and  privileges,  if  the  assertion  of  them  could  be  made  into  a 
hindrance  of  his  work.  The  point  to  be  considered  from  his  exceptional  conduct  is  the 
force  of  the  double  law  that  must  rule  k  Christian  life.  We  must  ask  both  what  is 
lawfvi  and  what  is  expedient,  both  what  is  necessary  and  what  is  hecoming.  We  must 
beware  of  forcing  our  rights,  as  they  may  stand  by  the  rule  and  by  the  law ;  and  we 
should  see  that  our  personal  and  individual  conduct  must  be  ordered  so  that  the 
impressions  which  others  receive  from  it  shall  be  helpful  to  them  and  to  the  Church. 
We  must  watch  against  even  unintentionally  causing  offence  and  hindering  Christ's 
work.— B.  T. 

Vers.  20,  21. —  Under  the  Law  tmd  without  Law,  both  to  be  one  for  Ghriit.  The 
apostle  is  illustrating  what  we  may  call  the  "  Christian  law  of  accommodation,"  and  is 
urging  (1)  the  objects  for  which  such  accommodation  may  be  permitted;  and  (2)  the  careful 
limitations  under  which  such  accommodation  must  be  put.  There  can  be  no  accommoda- 
tion of  Christian  principle  and  truth.  The  sphere  for  it  is  (1)  the  expression  of  principle 
in  adaptation  to  persons  and  circumstances ;  and  (2)  things  indifferent,  such  as  the 
wearing  of  Chinese  dress  by  English  missionaries  in  China,  which  might  seem  to  have 
the  appearance  of  disguise,  but  may  be  advisable  in  order  not  to  shock  the  conservative 
prejudices  of  the  race.  Still,  in  application  to  modern  life,  accommodation,  with  full 
preservation  of  principle,  is  demanded,  and  is  the  secret  of  gracious  and  kindly  relations 
in  the  family,  in  society,  and  in  the  Church.  So  St.  Paul  submitted  to  "  take  vows," 
"and  be  at  charges,"  in  accordance  with  Jewish  regulations ;  and  so  he  accommodated 
himself  to  Greek  notions,  as  at  Athens,  by  references  to  philosophy  and  poetry.  For 
some  illustrations  of  his  method  of  action,  see  Acts  xvi.  3;  xviii.  18;  xxi.  26;  xxiii.  6; 
xxvi.  4,  5,  6,  22,  27 ;  and  also  Gal.  ii.  3,  12,  1 4.  In  the  verses,  observe  the  expla- 
natory parenthesis  in  ver.  21,  which  is  a  kind  of  apology  for  the  use  of  the  term  "  without 
Law."  See  St.  Paul's  argument  in  Rom.  ii.  14, 15.  Gentiles  might  be  so  regarded  by 
the  Jews,  who  were  under  well-recognized  Mosaic  rules,  but  they  were  really  under  the 
living  law  of  Christ,  to  whom  they  had  yielded  heart  and  life.     We  notice  thatr— 

L  Mkn  are  classed  by  their  RELATioKS  TO  LAW.  The  term  "law"  may  be  applied 
to :  1.  The  natural  conditions  under  which  God  has  created  us  and  set  us.  These  are 
known,  more  or  less  distinctly,  to  every  man.  2.  Particular  laws,  directly  revealed 
to  certain  nations  of  men.  Reference  here  is  to  the  particular  revelation  of  law  made 
to  the  Jews,  which  was  rendered  necessary,  (1)  to  secure  their  isolation  from  other 
nations ;  and  (2)  to  £ud  them  in  holding  fast  the  special  trust  of  two  truths — the  unity 
and  the  spirituality  of  God  —which  had  been  committed  to  their  charge.  That  Law  given 
to  the  Jews  was  (1)  civil,  (2)  ceremonial,  (3)  moral.  The  moral  law  alone  was  of 
permanent  obligation;  and  it  was  precisely  the  same  moral  law  that  was,  in  other  forms 
and  terms,  revealed  to  the  enth'e  human  race.  The  civil  and  ceremonial  laws  of 
Mosaism  were  but  a  fence  around  the  moral  law,  and  an  aid  to  keeping  it.  St.  Paul 
recognized  no  permanent  obli«;ation  in  it.  But  seeing  he  had  to  do  with  men  who 
exaggerated  the  importance  of  this  formal  law,  he  would  stand  with  them  on  their  level, 
and  hope  to  raise  them  up  to  his.  The  secret  of  all  good  teaching,  and  of  all  high 
spiritual  influence,  is  condescending  to  the  level  of  those  whom  we  would  uplift  and  bless 


»20  THE  rUtST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,     [on.  ix.  1—27 

IL  Men  snabdbd  ab  independent  or  law.  That  is,  of  particular  and  ceremonial 
law.  The  mass  of  mankind  never  came  under  the  shadow  of  Mosaiim.  Yet  they  too 
were  "God's  offspring,"  for  whom  he  surely  cared,  and  to  whom,  in  wise  and  gnudous 
ways,  he  had  also  revealed  his  will.  Such  men  came  tmder  (1)  natural  law,  written  in 
the  conscience ;  (2)  under  social  laws,  tahulated  hy  rulers  and  governors ;  and,  (3)  when 
they  became  Christians,  they  volimtarily  put  themselves  under  Christ'si  living  rule, 
which  is  the  everlasting  law  of  God,  finding  present  daily  adaptations  precisely  to  us. 
To  these  St.  Paul  brought  the  gospel,  and  he  persisted  in  dealing  with  them  just  as 
they  were.  He  would  not  require  them  to  come  under  Jewish  yokes  in  order  to  gain  p 
Christian  standing  through  Mosaism. 

IIL  Men  dealt  with  on  their  cohuon  BTANDmo-aBODND.  The  gospel  knowp 
nothing  of  such  peculiarities  as  "  under  Law  "  or  "  without  Law."  It  recognizes  only 
two  standings  of  men  before  God.  1.  Sinners.  And  to  men,  as  such,  it  brings  a 
message  of  forgiveness  and  eternal  life.  2.  In  Christ.  And  to  them  it  brings  its 
varied  unfoldings  of  Christian  duty  and  of  Christian  privilege.  Impress  the  limita  of 
the  adaptations  made  by  the  Christian  worker. — B.  T. 

Vers.  24 — 27. — The  Jawiofthe  Christian  race.  The  illustration  used  in  these  verses 
is  one  which  St.  Paul  frequently  employs,  and  we  cannot  but  think  that  he  must  have 
actually  seen  some  of  these  games,  for  the  impression  made  by  them  on  his  mind  is 
that  which  comes  from  personal  observation  and  impression  rather  than  from  know- 
ledge through  books.  There  is  special  force  in  his  allusions  to  the  games  in  writing 
to  the  Corinthians,  because  the  set  of  games  known  as  the  Isthmian  were  held  in  the 
isthmus  on  which  Corinth  stood.  For  details  of  the  games,  reference  may  be  mado 
to  the  exegetical  portion  of  this  Commentary,  and  to  the  articles  in  classical  and 
Biblical  cyclopaedias.  They  cannot  be  precisely  compared  with  anything  that  we 
have  in  modern  times,  because  they  were  regarded  by  the  Greeks  as  great  national 
and  religious  festivals.  Dean  Stanley,  writing  of  these  Isthmian  games,  says,  "  This 
was  one  of  the  festivals  which  exercised  so  great  an  influence  over  the  Grecian  mind, 
which  were,  in  fact,  to  their  imaginations  what  the  temple  was  to  the  Jews  and 
the  triumph  to  the  Romans."  St.  Paul  refers  to  the  game  in  order  to  enforce  his 
exiiortation  to  self-restraint,  and  we  may  find  three  great  practical  laws  commended 
by  him. 

I.  The  law  of  TBAmnia.  "  For  thirty  days  previous  to  the  conflicts  the  candidates 
had  to  Mtend  the  exercises  of  the  gymnasium,  and  only  after  the  fulfilment  of  these 
conditions  were  they  allowed,  when  the  time  arrived,  to  contend  in  the  sight  of 
assembled  Greece."  The  training  was  very  severe,  conducted  upon  carefully  prescribed 
rules,  and  designed  to  nourish  vigorous  physical  power  and  precise  skill  for  the  kind  of 
contest  in  which  the  man  was  to  engage.  We  are  to  apply  the  illustration  to  moral 
and  religious  culture.  Observing :  1.  How  God  applies  the  law  of  training;  in  the  pre- 
paration of  his  servants  for  their  work ;  as  by  sending  Joseph  into  bondage ;  looses  to 
the  Egyptian  court  and  the  Horeb  desert ;  David  into  the  wilderness  of  Jiidah ;  our 
Lord  into  the  scenes  of  temptation ;  and  Bt.  Paul  into  Arabia.  The  providential  dealings 
with  men  are  meant  to  afford  opportunities  of  training  for  their  life-work.  2.  How  men 
are  required  to  meet  the  "  law  of  training  "  by  making  personal  efforts  to  secure  fitness 
for  the  work  to  which  they  are  caUi.d,  such  training  taking  the  general  form  of  soul- 
culture,  and  the  specific  forms  of  adaptation  to  work.  Anything  that  is  worth  our  doing 
is  worth  our  preparing  to  do  well. 

II.  The  law  of  temperatbnesb.  (Ver.  25.)  We  are  wont  to  associate  this  law 
only  with  drinking.  It  applies  to  all  the  passions  of  the  body,  indulgences  of  the 
•ppetite,  and  relationships  of  the  life.  The  Grecian  philosopher  says,  "  Wouldest  thou 
eonquer  at  the  games  ?  Thou  must  be  orderly,  spare  in  food,  must  abstain  from  con- 
fections, exercise  at  a  fixed  hour  whether  in  heat  or  cold,  and  drink  not  cold  water  nor 
wine."  Apjilied  to  moral  and  religious  life,  the  law  requires  us  (1)  to  avoid  the  haste 
and  hurry  that  plucks  from  us  rest,  and  quiet,  and  calmness,  and  meditative  moods ; 
(2)  to  keep  from  those  religious  excitements  which  are  characteristic  of  our  times,  but 
unfriendly  to  real  spiritual  growth  ;  (3)  to  take  up  Christian  work  with  a  seriousness  that 
will  ensure  "  patient  continuance  in  well-doing ;"  (4)  to  keep  Christian  habits,  of  reading, 
"isiting,  etc.,  under  judicious  control,  so  that  we  may  not  be  brought  under  the  power  ol 


OH.  II.  1—27.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  321 

any.    Everything  is  at  our  service  and  for  our  use,  within  careful  limits,  and  these  limits 
"  BO  rules  can  fix,  only  our  own  good  judgment  decides  them. 

III.  The  law  of  self-mabtert.  (Ver.  27.)  This  reminds  us  that  training  means 
trial,  and  temperateness  means  severe  and  painful  dealings  with  self.  "  The  Christian 
career  is  not  merely  a  race,  but  a  conflict;  and  a  conflict,  not  only  with  others,  but  with 
one's  self.  St.  Paul  had  to  contend  with  the  fleshly  lusts  of  the  body,  the  love  especially 
of  ease,  the  indisposition  to  hardship  and  toil  so  natural  to  humanity."  The  contest  oi 
life  is  between  the  regenerate  will  and  the  enslaved  and  corrupt  body  with  its  inclina- 
tions and  motions  (see  Rom.  vii.).  St.  Paul  says  that  the  renewed  will  must  hold  the 
body  in  subjection  and  service.  But  such  complete  self-mastery  is  the  product  of  long 
struggle.  He  who  fully  gains  it  has  won  the  moral  race,  and  may  receive  the  "  incor- 
ruptible crown." — It.  T. 

Ver.  27.— ZTle  relation  o/personai  consistency  to  public  labours.  The  expression  used 
by  the  apostle  here,  and  translated,  "I  keep  under  my  boily,''is  literally,  "I  strike 
under  the  eye  ;  I  heat  black  and  blue "  (comp.  Luke  xviii.  5).  Mastery  of  the  body, 
repression  of  the  lusts  and  indulgences  and  evil  inclinations  of  the  body,  a  strong  hand 
upon  the  "self,"  are  necessary  to  ensure  "consistency;"  yet  what  is  the  worth  of  a 
Christian  teacher  whose  life  tells  one  story  and  his  lips  another?  St.  Paul  contemplates 
with  horror  the  possibility  of  his  preaching  the  gospel  to  others,  and,  by  reason  of  his 
personal  inconsistencies,  proving  at  last  a  "  castaway."  No  amount  of  religious  profes- 
sion, no  fervour  in  religious  work,  no  mere  utterance  of  religious  sentiment,  can  avail 
without  personal  and  practical  consistency  of  life.    On  this  point  we  dwell  further. 

I.  The  senses  in  which  personal  consistbnot  and  pcjblio  labour  abb  distinct 
THmos.  It  may  be  urged  that  the  question  is  one  ot  gifts  for  a  particular  work,  and  not 
of  personal  character.  It  may  be  said  that  we  do  work  with  the  skill  and  power 
entrusted  to  us,  and  the  good  workman  may  be  personally  of  good  or  bad  character. 
However  true  that  may  be  in  common  life — and  we  should  be  prepared  to  contest  its 
truth  even  there — it  cannot  possibly  be  true  in  the  religious  spheres,  because  all 
Christian  work  is  the  impress  of  the  man  himself,  is  inseparable  from  the  force  which 
his  character  gives  to  it.  Exactly  what  we  ask  for  in  religious  spheres  is  not  mere 
truth,  but  truth  with  some  stamp  of  personal  conviction  upon  it ;  not  mere  duty,  but 
duty  pressed  on  us  by  the  force  of  some  holy  example.  The  true  preacher  is  the  man 
who  bears  in  on  us  the  force  of  his  own  life  and  feeling.  The  true  teacher  is  the  man 
who  can  win  our  confidence  in  himself.  The  true  visitor  benefits  and  blesses  the  poor 
and  the  sick  by  the  restings  and  comfortings  of  his  own  quick  sympathies,  that  come 
from  sanctified  character.  So  in  the  religious  spheres  there  can  be  no  separation 
between  holy  character  and  faithful  labour.  Show  that,  just  here,  serious  mistake  is 
made,  and  much  seeming  service  is  unacceptable  to  God  and  of  no  real  value  to  men. 

II.  The  possibilitt  of  the  inconsistent  man  doing  qood  wobk.  In  view  of  what 
has  been  said  in  the  previous  division,  it  would  seem  to  be  an  impossibility,  but  those 
remarks  may  be  limited  to  the  higher  forms  of  Christian  work  and  the  exertion  of 
spiritual  influence.  Scripture  teaches  us,  by  its  examples,  that  God  claims  the  service 
of  even  ungodly  men,  and  deigns  to  work  by  them.  Of  Cyrus  God  says,  "  I  girded  thee, 
though  thou  hast  not  known  me,"  etc.  But  perhaps  there  is  no  distress  in  life  like  that 
which  we  feel  on  finding  that  those  who  have  helped  us  in  our  religious  life  fail 
morally.  When  such  distress  comes  to  us,  we  are  almost  ready  to  make  shipwreck  of 
our  faith. 

III.  The  foecb  added  to  all  good  wokk  by  the  consistent  ohaeaotbb  of  the 
WOBKEB.  Reviewing  the  influences  for  good  which  have  rested  upon  our  life,  we  can  but 
feel  that  the  holiest  and  mightiest  and  best  have  come  from  consistent  and  holy  men 
and  women,  who  bore  upon  us  the  force  of  saintly  character,  and  whose  memories  still 
keep  us  true  and  faithful.  When  McCheyne  died,  a  note  was  found  unopened  on  his 
study  table.  It  was  from  some  one  who  had  recently  been  brought  to  God  through  his 
preaching,  but  the  note  said  it  was  not  so  much  the  truth  that  had  impressed,  as  the 
sincerity  and  holy  fervour  of  the  preacher.  It  is  the  great  secret  of  the  highest  work. 
What  a  man  is  tells  more  for  the  honour  of  God  and  the  blessing  of  men  tiian  merely 
what  a  man  does.  So  we  may  be  warned  by  the  apostle,  and  take  heed  lest,  while 
working  for  others,  we  ourselves  ahoull  prove  "  castaways.''— R.  T. 

I.  COniNTHIANS.  T 


322 


THE  FIRST  EPISILE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  x.  1—33 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  X. 


Vers.  1 — 14. —  Warnings  againtt  over-eon- 
fidence  in  relation  to  idolatry  and  other 
lennptations. 

Ver.  1. — Moreover  ;  rather,  for.  He  has 
just  shown  them,  by  his  own  example,  the 
necessity  for  strenuous  watchfulness  and 
effort.  In  continuance  of  the  same  lesson, 
he  teaches  them  historically  that  the  pos- 
session of  great  privileges  is  no  safeguard, 
and  that  the  seductions,  even  of  idolatry, 
must  not  be  carelessly  despised.  Although 
the  connection  of  the  various  paragraphs  is 
not  stated  with  logical  precision,  we  see 
that  they  all  bear  on  the  one  truth  which 
he  wants  to  inculcate,  namely,  that  it  is 
both  wise  and  kind  to  limit  our  personal 
freedom  out  of  sympathy  with  others.  The 
reading  "  but"  (Be,  morever)  is  probably  a 
correction  of  the  true  reading  (7(1^,  for),  due 
to  the  failure  to  understand  the  whole  train 
of  thought.  I  would  not  that  ye  should  be 
ignorant.  This  is  a  favourite  phrase  of  St. 
Paul's  (ch.  xii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  i.  8 ;  Rom.  i.  13 ; 
xi.  25 ;  1  Thesi.  iv.  13).  The  ignorance  to 
which  he  refers  is  not  ignorance  of  the  fads, 
but  of  the  meaning  of  the  facts.  All  our 
fathers.  He  repeats  the  "all"  five  times, 
beoauM  he  wishes  to  show  that,  tiiough 
"all"  partook  of  spiritual  blessings,  most 
(ver.  6)  fell  in  spite  of  them.  He  says,  "  our 
fathers,"  not  only  because  he  was  himself  a 
Jew,  but  also  because  the  patriarchs  and  the 
Israelites  were  spiritually  the  fathers  of  the 
Christian  Chnrch.  Were  under  the  cloud. 
The  compressed  Greek  plirase  implies  that 
they  uent  under  it,  and  remained  under  its 
shadow.  The  "cloud"  ia  the  "pillar  of 
cloud"  (Exoii.  xiii.  21),  of  which  David  says, 
"He  spread  a  cloud  for  a  covering"  (Ps. 
cv.  39).  The  Book  of  Wisdom  (x.  17)  calls 
it  "  a  cover  unto  them  by  day,"  and  (xix,  7) 
"  a  clond  shadowing  the  camp."  All  passed 
thronghthe  sea  (Exod.  xiv.  22). 

Ver.  2. — Were  all  baptized.  This  reading, 
though  well  supported,  may,  perhaps,  be  a 
correction  for  the  middle,  "thoy  baptized 
tliemselves,"  t.e.  accepted  baptism.  The 
passing  under  the  cloud  (Bxod.  xiv.  19)  and 
through  the  sea,  constituting  as  it  did  their 
deliverance  from  bondage  into  freedom,  their 
death  to  Egypt,  and  their  biith  to  a  new 
covenant,  was  a  general  type  or  dim 
shadow  of  Ohiistian  baptism  (compare  our 
colleot,  "figuring  thereby  thy  holy  bap- 
tism"). But  the  typology  is  quite  incidental ; 
it  is  uie  moral  lesson  which  is  paramouut. 
TJntoMosea;  rather,  into.  By  this  "baptism" 
they  accepted  Mosei  as  their  Heaven-sent 
guide  and  teaohei. 


Ver.  3.—  And  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual 
meat.  As  the  cloud  and  the  Red  Sea  sym- 
bolized the  waters  of  baptism,  so  the  manna 
and  the  water  of  the  rock  symbolized  the  ele- 
ments ef  the  other  Christian  sacrament,  the 
Lord's  Supper.  Themannami;<litbeoalled"a 
spirituiil  food,"  both  because  it  was  "angels' 
food  "  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  25 ;  Wisd.  xvi.  20)  and 
"  bread  from  heaven "  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  24 ; 
John  vi.  31),  and  also  bcamse  it  was  a  type 
of  "God's  good  Spirit,"  wliichhe  "gave  to 
instruct  them  "  (Neh.  ix.  20).  St.  Paul  only 
knows  of  two  i-acraments. 

Ver.  4.  -The  same  spiritual  drink.  The 
water  fmm  the  smitten  rock  might  (Exod. 
xvii.  6 ;  Numb.  xx.  11 )  be  calk  d  a  "spiritual" 
drink,  both  as  being  a  miraculous  gi  ft  (comp. 
Gal.  iv.  29,  where  Isaac  is  said  to  be  "  bom 
after  the  spirit"),  and  as  being  a  type  ol 
that  "living  water"  which  "  springs  up  into 
everlasting  life"  (John  iv.  14  ;  vii.  37),  and 
of  the  blood  of  Christ  in  the  Eucharist 
(John  vi.  55).  ,  These  "  waters  in  the  wilder- 
ness "  and  "  rivers  in  the  desert "  were  a 
natural  symbol  of  the  grace  of  God  (Isa. 
xliii.  23;  Iv.  1),  especially  as  bestowed  in 
the  sacrament  through  material  signs. 
They  drank;  literally,  they  were  drinking, 
implying  a  continuous  gift.  Of  that  spiritual 
Bock  that  followed  them;  rather,  liter^y, 
of  a  spiritual  following  Bock.  This  is  ex- 
plained (1)  as  a  mere  figure  of  speech,  in 
which  the  natural  rock  which  Moses  smote 
is  left  out  of  sight  altogether;  and  (2)  as 
meaning  that  not  the  rock,  but  the  water 
from  the  rock,  followed  after  thorn  in  their 
wanderings  (Deut.  ix.  21).  There  can,  how- 
ever, be  little  or  no  doubt  that  St.  Paul 
refers  to  the  common  Jewish  Hagadah,  that 
the  actual  material  rock  did  follow  the 
Israelites  in  their  wanderings.  'The  rabbis 
said  that  it  was  round,  and  rolled  itself  up 
like  a  swarm  of  bees,  and  that,  when  the 
tabernacle  was  pitched,  this  rock  came  and 
settled  in  its  vestibule,  and  began  to  flow 
when  the  princes  came  to  it  and  sang, 
"Spring  up,  O  well;  sing  ye  unto  it" 
(Numb.  xxi.  17).  It  does  not,  of  course, 
follow  from  this  allusion  that  St.  Paul,  or 
even  the  rabbis,  believed  their  Hagadah  in 
other  than  a  metaphorical  sense.  The  Jewish 
Hagadoth  —  legends  and  illustrations  and 
inferences  of  an  imaginative  Oriental  people 
— are  not  to  be  taken  au  pied  de  la  lettre. 
Bt.  Paul  obviates  the  laying  of  any  stress  on 
the  mere  legend  by  the  qualifying  word,  "  a 
spiritual  Rock."  And  that  Rock  was  Christ. " 
The  writings  of  Philo,  and  the  Alexandrian 
school  of  thought  in  general,  had  familiarized 
all  Jewish  readers  with  langnage  of  this 
kind.    They  were  accustomed  to  lee  typet 


aH.x.1— 3S.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa 


of  God,  or  of  the  Word  (Logos),  In  almost 
every  inoident  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt 
and  the  wanderings  in  the  wildorneas. 
Thus  in  Wisd.  x.  15  and  xi.  4  it  is  Wisdom 
— another  form  of  the  Logos — who  leads  and 
Bupports  the  Israelites.  The  frequent  com- 
parison of  God  to  a  Bock  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment (Dent,  xxxii.,  passim ;  1  Sam.  ii.  2 ; 
Pb.  xoi.  12,  etc.)  would  render  the  symbolism 
more  easy,  especially  as  in  Exod.  ivii.  6  we 
find,  '  Behold,  I  [Jehovah]  will  stand  before 
thee  there  upon  the  rock  in  Horeb." 

Ver.  5. — ^With  many  of  them ;  rather,  ailh 
mosto/thtm.  They  were  overthrown  in  the 
wilderness.  A  quotation  from  the  LXX.  of 
Nnmb,  xiv.  16.  All  but  Caleb  and  Joshua 
perished  (Numb.  xxvi.  64,  65 ;  oomp.  Jude 
5).  In  Heb.  iii.  17  the  word  used  is  "  they 
fell." 

Ver.  6. — ^These  things  were  onr  examples. 
If  this  rendering  be  adopted,  perhaps  "  exam- 
ples "  is  the  best  equivaleat  of  the  original 
lupoi,  as  in  Phil.  iii.  17,  "  Walk  so  as  ye 
have  us  for  an  example  (tupon)."  It  may, 
liowever,  mean  "types,"  i.e.  foieshadowing 
symbols,  as  in  Bom.  v.  14,  where  Adam  is 
the  "figure"  (tupos)  of  Christ.  But,  in 
spite  of  Alford's  decisive  rejection  of  it,  the 
rendering,  "Now  in  these  things  they  proved 
to  be  fi>;ures  of  us,"  is  at  least  equally  pro- 
bable. To  the  intent.  Of  course,  the  events 
had  their  own  immediate  instruction,  but 
the  example  which  they  involved  was  the 
ulterior  purpose  of  their  being  so  ordained 
by  the  providence  of  God.  As  they  also 
lusted.  (For  quails.  Numb.  zL  4^  33;  and 
see  Pb.  icv.  7 — 11.) 

Ver.  7. — As  were  some  of  them.  As  in 
the  case  of  the  golden  calf,  the  worship  of 
Moloch,  Bemphan,  Baal-peor,  etc.  In  the 
prominent  instance  of  the  calf-worship,  they 
(like  the  Corinthians)  would  have  put  forth 
sophistical  pleas  in  their  own  favour,  saying 
that  they  were  not  worshipping  idols,  but 
only  paying  honour  to  cherubic  emblems  of 
Jehovah.  To  play.  The  word  is,  perhaps, 
used  euphemistically  for  the  worst  con- 
comitants of  a  sensual  nature- worship  (Exod. 
xxxii.  3 — 6),  which  resembled  the  depraved 
and  orgiastic  worship  of  Aphrodite  Pandemos 
at  Corinth. 

Ver.  8. — Commit  fornication.  This  sin 
was  not  only  an  ordinary  accompaniment  of 
idolatry,  but  often  a  consecrated  part  of  it, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  thousand  hierodouloi, 
or  female  attendants,  in  the  temple  of 
Aphrodite  on  Acro-Corinthus.  Three  and 
twenty  thousand.  The  number  given  in 
Numb.  XXV.  9  is  twenty-four  thousand.  We 
cannot  give  any  account  of  the  discrepancy, 
which  is,  however,  quite  unimportant. 

Ver.  9. — Tempt  Christ  (see  the  note  on 
ver.  4).  Christ  is  here  identified  with  the 
angel  which  went  before  the  Israelites,  wbom 


they  were  specially  warned  not "  to  provoks," 
because  "my  Name  is  in  him"  (Exod.  xxiiL 
20,  21).  Another  reading  is  "  the  Lord." 
"  Christ "  may  have  come  in  from  a  marginal 
gloss.  On  the  other  hand,  since  "  Christ " 
is  the  more  difficult  reading,  it  was,  perhaps, 
the  more  likely  to  be  altered  by  copyists. 
The  word  for  "tempt"  means  "tempt 
utterly,"  "  tempt  beyond  endurance."  As 
some  of  them  (Exod.  xvii.  2,  7 ;  Numb, 
xiv.  22;  xxi.  5,  6).  Of  serpents;  rather, 
perished  by  the  serpents,  viz.  the  "  fiery  ser- 
pents "  of  the  wilderness  (Numb.  xxi.  6). 

Ver.  10. — Neither  murmur  ye  (Numb, 
xiv.  2,  29;  ivi.  41,  49).  The  Corinthians 
were  at  this  time  murmuring  against  their 
teacher  and  apostle.  Of  the  desteoyer.  All 
plagues  and  similar  great  catastrophes,  as 
well  as  all  Individual  deaths,  were  believed 
by  the  Jews  to  be  the  work  of  an  angel 
whom  tliey  called  Samraael  (see  Exod.  xii. 
23;  2  Sam.'xxiv.  16;  Job  xxxiii.  22;  2 
Mace.  XV,  22).  In  the  retribution  narrated 
in  Numb.  xvi.  41,  etc.,  fourteen  thousand 
seven  hundred  perished. 

Ver.  11. — ^For  ensamples;  literally,  &2/ way 
of  figure;  typically.  Tlie  rabbis  said, 
"Whatever  happened  to  the  fathers  is  a 
sign  to  their  children."  The  thought  is 
the  same  as  in  Bom.  xv.  4,  "  Whatsoever 
things  were  written  aforetime  were  written 
for  our  learning."  The  example  in  this 
instance  would  come  home  more  forcibly 
from  the  sickness  and  mortality  thMi 
prevalent  among  the  Corinthian  Chjistiani 
(ch.  xi.  30).  The  ends  of  the  world;  rather, 
of  the  ages.  The  expression  is  in  accordance 
with  the  view  which  regarded  the  then 
epoch  as  "  the  close  or  consummation  of  the 
ages"  (Matt.  xiii.  39;  1  Pet.  iv.  7,  "The 
end  of  all  things  is  at  hand ; "  1  John  ii,  18, 
« It  is  the  last  time ; "  Heb.  ix.  26 ;  Matt.  xiii. 
39). 

Ver.  12.— Take  heed  lest  he  fall.  The 
Corinthians,  thinking  that  they  stood,  as- 
serting that  they  all  had  knowledge,  proud 
of  the  insight  which  led  them  to  declare 
that  "  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world,"  were 
not  only  liable  to  underrate  the  amount  et 
forbearance  due  to  weaker  consciences,  but 
were  also  in  personal  danger  of  falling  away. 
To  them,  as  to  the  Bomans,  St.  Paul  means 
to  say, "  Be  not  highminded,  but  fear  "  (Bom. 
li.  20). 

Ver.  13. — But  such  as  is  common  to  man; 
rather,  except  such  as  is  human ;  i.e.  such  as 
man  can  bear.  The  last  verse  was  a  warn- 
ing; this  is  an  encouragement.  Having 
just  heard  what  efforts  even  St.  Paul  had  to 
make  to  run  in  the  Cliristian  race,  and  how 
terribly  their  fathers  in  the  wilderness  had 
failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  God,  they 
might  be  inclined  to  throw  up  every  effort 
in  despair.  St.  Paul,  therefore,  reminds  titeai 


1124 


THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa    tea.  x.  1—33 


Hiat  these  temptations  were  not  siipeibuman, 
bat  were  such  as  meu  had  resisted,  and  such 
■8  thty  could  resist.  Qod  ia  faithful.  He 
bad  called  them  (oh.  i.  9),  and'  since  he 
knew  "how  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of 
temptations  "  (2  Pet.  ii.  9),  lie  would  surely 
perform  his  side  of  the  coveuant,  and,  if 
they  did  thuir  parts,  would  stablish  and 
keep  them  from  evil  (2  Thess.  ill.  3;.  Also. 
The  mode  of  duliverance  shall  be  ready 
simultaneously  with  the  temptation.  A  way 
to  escape;  rather,  the  way  to  escape.  The 
way  to  escape  is  different  in  different 
temptations,  but  for  each  temptation  God 
would  provide  the  tpecM  means  of  escaping 
it 

Yer.  14. — Wherefore.  As  a  result  of  the 
whole  reasoning,  which  has  been  meant  to 
inspire  the  weak  with  a  more  liberalizing 
knowledge,  and  the  btrong  with  a  more  fra- 
ternal sympathy.  Dearly  beloved.  The 
word  "dearly"  should  be  omitted.  Flee 
£ram  idolatry.  The  original  implies  that 
they  were  to  turn  their  backs  on  idolatry, 
and  80  fly  from  it. 

Vers.  15 — 22. — The  inhereiU  disgraceful- 
ness  of  any  tampering  with  idolatry. 

Yer.  IS. — I  speak  as  to  wise  men ;  judge 
ye  what  I  say.  An  appeal  to  their  own 
reason  to  confirm  his  argument  (comp.  ch. 
xi.  13),  perhaps  with  a  touch  of  iruny  in  the 
first  clause  (ch.  iv.  10;  2  Cor.  xL  19).  The 
word  for  "  I  say  "  is  fnj/ui,  I  affirm. 

Yer.  16. — The  oup  of  blessing.  A  trans- 
lation of  the  name  e6>  haberachah  (comp.  Ps. 
cxvL  13),  over  which  a  blessing  was  invoked 
by  the  head  of  the  family  after  the  Passover. 
The  name  is  here  transferred  to  the  chalice 
in  the  Eucharist,  over  which  Christ  "  gave 
thanks  "(ch.xi.  24;  Matt.  ixvi.  27).  There 
seems  to  be  a  dose  connection  between  the 
idea  of  "blessing"  (etdogeias,  Matt.  xxvi. 
22;  Mark  xiv.  22)  and  "giving  tl.anks" 
(eueharisteaas,  Luke  xxii.  19),  and  here,  as 
always,  St.  Paul  and  St.  Luke  resemble  each 
other  in  their  expressions.  The  communion 
sf;  literally,  a  jjarticipation  in.  By  means 
of  the  cup  we  realize  our  share  in  the  bene- 
fits wrought  by  Christ's  pieoious  blood- 
shedding.  The  oup  is  at  once  a  symbol 
and  a  medium.  The  blood  of  Christ;  of 
which  tlie  wine  is  the  sacramental  symbol. 
By  rightly  drinking  the  wine,  we  spiritually 
partake  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  we  become 
sharers  in  his  Divine  life.  The  bread; 
perhaps  rather,  the  loaf,  which  was  appa- 
rently passed  from  hand  to  hand,  that  each 
miglit  break  off  a  piece.  Is  it  not  the  com- 
munion of  the  body  of  Christ  f  The  best 
comment  on  the  verse  is  John  vi.  41 — 59,  in 
which  our  Lord  taught  that  there  could  be 
no  true  spiritual  life  without  the  closest 
union  witk  him  aod  incorporation  into  his 
Kfe. 


Yer.  17. — We  being  many  are  one  bread, 
and  one  body.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  we  an 
"one  body,"  of  which  Christ  is  the  Head, 
and  we  are  the  members.  This  is  the  meta- 
phor used  in  ch.  xii.  12,  13  and  Bom.  xii.  5. 
The  more  difficult  expression,  "we  are  one 
bread,"  is  explained  in  the  next  clause. 
The  meaning  seems  to  be — We  all  partake 
of  the  loaf,  and  thereby  become  qualitatively, 
as  it  were,  apart  of  it,  as  it  of  us,  even  as  wo 
all  become  members  of  Christ's  one  body, 
which  that  loaf  sacramentally  represents. 
Some  commentators,  disliking  the  harshness 
of  the  expression,  render  it,  "  Because  there 
is  one  bread,  we  being  many  are  one  body ;  " 
or, "  For  thsre  is  one  bread.  We  being  many 
are  one  body."  But  the  language  and 
context  support  the  rendering  of  our 
version ;  and  the  supposed  "  physiology  "  is 
not  so  modern  as  to  be  at  all  surprising. 

Yer.  18. — Partakers  of  the  altar.  It  is 
better  to  render  it  "Have  they  not  communion 
with  the  altar  i  "  for  the  word  is  differtnt  from 
that  in  the  last  verse.  The  meaning  is  that, 
by  sharing  in  the  sacrifices,  the  Jews  stood 
in  direct  association  with  the  altar,  the 
victims,  and  all  that  they  symbolized  (Deut. 
xii.  27).  And  St.  Paul  implied  that  the 
same  thing  is  true  of  those  wUo  sympathetic- 
ally partook  of  idol-offerings. 

Ver,  19. -What  say  I  then!  What  is  it, 
then,  which  I  am  maintaining  (^iimO  '^  ^hat 
the  idol  is  anything.  St.  Paul  repudiates 
an  inference  which  he  had  already  deni«d 
(ch.  viii.  4),  Is  anything.  Has  any  intrin- 
sic value,  meaning,  or  importance.  In 
itself,  the  idol-offering  is  a  mere  dead, 
indifferent  thing.  Of  itself,  the  idol  is  an 
eidolon — a  shadowy,  unreal  thing,  one  of  the 
elilim ;  but  in  another  aspect  it  was  "  really 
something,"  and  so  alone  could  the  rabbis 
account  for  phenomena  which  seemed  to 
imply  the  reality  of  infernal  miracles  ('  Avo- 
da  Zarah,'  fol.  54,  2 ;  55, 1 ;  and  see  note  in 
•Life  of  St.  Paul,'  ii.  74). 

Yer.  20. — But.  The  word  rejects  the 
former  hypothesis.  "[NoIdoTiofadmit  that], 
but  what  I  say  is  that,"  etc.  They  sacrifice 
to  devils,  and  not  to  God.  The  word 
"demons  "  should  be  used,  not "  devils  "  (Deut. 
x^il.  17).  The  argument  is  that,  though 
the  Idol  is  nothing — a  mere  stock  or  stone — 
it  is  yet  the  material  symbol  of  a  demon  (see 
Fs.  xovL  5;  cvi.  37;  Baruch  iv.  7).  So 
Milton— 

"  And  devils  to  adore  for  deities; 
Then  were  they  known  to  men  by  varioas 

names. 
And  various  idols  through  the  heathen 

world,  .  .  . 
The  chief  were  those  who,  from  the  pit  of 

hell, 

aming  to  seek  theii  prey  on  earth,  dunt 

fix 


OH.  X.  1—33.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTH]  ANa 


S2S 


Their  seati  long  after  next  the  seat  of 

God, 
Their  altars  by  his  altar,  gods  adored 
Among  the  nations  round." 

('  Paradise  Lost,'  L) 

St.  Paul  uses  a  word,  which,  wliilo  it  would 
not  be  needlessly  offensive  to  Gentiles, 
conveyed  his  meaning.  The  Greeks  them- 
selves called  their  deities  daimonia,  and  St. 
Paul  adopts  the  word ;  but  to  Jewish  ears 
it  meant,  not  "  deities  "  or  *•  demigods,"  but 
"  demons." 

Ver.  21. — Te  cannot.  It  is  a  moral  impos- 
sibility that  yon  should.  The  Lord's  table. 
This  is  the  first  instance  in  whioli  tliis 
expression  is  used,  and  it  has  originated  the 
name.  The  table  of  devils  (see  Deut.  xxxii. 
37).  In  tlie  fine  legend  of  PersephonS,  she 
might  have  been  altogether  liberated  from 
tLe  nether  world  if  she  had  eaten  notldug 
since  her  sojourn  there ;  but  unhappily  she 
had  eaten  something,  though  it  was  only 
the  few  grains  of  a  pomegranate ;  and  hence 
she  must  leave  the  upper  air,  and  become 
the  Queen  of  Hades. 

Ver.  22. — Do  we  provoke  the  Lord  to 
jealousy? (Deut. xxxii. 21, "They have  moved 
me  to  jealousy  by  that  which  is  not  God  "). 
The  exprtssion,"a  jealous  God,"  is  used  in  the 
second  commandment  with  express  reference 
to  idolatry,  as  in  Exod.  xxxiv.  14,  15.  Are 
we  stronger  than  he?  Can  we,  therefore, 
with  impunity,  kindle  his  anger  against  us? 
"  He  is  .  .  .  mighty  in  strength :  who  hath 
hardened  himself  againsthim,and  hath  pros- 
pered ?"  (Job  ix.  4). 

Ver.  23 — ch.  xi.  1. — Direction!  about  eat- 
ing idol-offerings,  founded  on  theee  prindplei, 

Ver.  23. — All  things  are  lawful  for  me 
(see  ch.vi.  12).  The  "for  me  "  is  not  found  in 
tt, A,  B,  G,  D.  St.  Paul  repeats  the  assertion 
audits  limitations,  because  lie  has  now  proved 
their  force.  He  has  shown  that  Christian 
liberty  must  be  modified  by  considerations 
of  expediency  and  edification  in  accordance 
with  the  feelings  of  sympathy  and  charity. 

Ver.  24. — But  every  man  another's  wealth. 
The  addition  of  the  word  "  wealth "  is  very 
inreliL'itous.  Bather,  as  in  the  Bevised 
Version,  but  each  hia  neighbour's  good  (oomp. 
ver.  33  and  Rom.  xv.  2). 

Ver.  25.— Whatsoever  is  sold.  By  thi« 
practical  rule  of  common  sense  he  protects 
the  weak  Christian  from  being  daily  worried 
by  over-scrupulosity.  If  a  Christian  merely 
bought  his  meat  in  the  open  market,  no  one 
eould  suspect  him  of  meaning  thereby  to  con- 
nive at  or  show  favour  to  idolatry.  It  would, 
therefore,  be  needless  for  him  to  entertain 
fantastic  scruples  about  a  matter  purely 
indifferent.  The  fact  of  its  forming  part  of  an 
idol-ofiering  made  no  intrinsic  difference  in 
the  food.  Shambles;  latheT^ood-market.  Ask- 


ing no  question  for  conscienoe  sake.  Dn  not 
trouble  your  conscience  by  scruples  arLiing 
from  needless  investigation  (avcucplymi/) 
about  the  food. 

Ver.  26. — For  the  earth  is  the  Iord'8  (Ps. 
xxiv.  1).  Consequently,  "Every  creature  of 
God  is  good,  and  nothing  to  be  refused,  if  it 
be  received  with  thanksgiving  "  (1  Tim.  Iv. 
4).  The  text  formed  the  ordinary  Jewish 
"grace  before  meat."  The  fulness  thereof. 
The  plenitude  of  its  created  furniture- 
plants,  animals,  etc. 

Ver.  27.— Bid  you  to  a  feast.  It  is  assumed 
that  the  feast  is  to  take  place  in  a  piivate 
house,  not  an  idol-temple  (oh.  viii.  10).  Te 
be  disposed  to  go ;  rather,  ye  wish  to  go,  with 
an  emphasis  on  the  "wish,"  which,  as  Grotius 
says,  perhaps  implies  that  the  wish  is  not 
particularly  commendable,  although  the 
apostle,  in  his  large-hearted  tolerance,  does 
not  actually  blame  it.  The  rabbis  decided 
very  differently.  "  If,"  said  Rabbi  Isbmael, 
"  an  idolater  makes  a  feast  in  bonour  of  his 
son,  and  invites  all  the  Jews  of  his  town, 
they  eat  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  dead,  even 
though  they  eat  and  drink  of  their  own" 
('AvodahZarah,'fol.  18,1).  There  are  many 
passages  of  tlie  Talmud  which  raise  the 
suspicion  that  the  rabbis  are  purposely 
running  counter  to  the  teaching  of  the  New 
Testament. 

Ver.  28. — But  if  any  man  say  unto  yon. 
Who  is  the  '•  any  man "  is  left  undefined. 
Perhaps  some  "  weak "  Christian  is  meant, 
who  happens  to  be  a  fellow-guest.  This 
is  offered  in  sacrifice  nuto  idols.  The  true 
reading  is  probably,  hierothuUm,  sacred 
sacrifice,  not  eidolothuton,  idol-sacrifice. 
Perhaps  there  is  a  touch  of  delicate  reserve 
in  the  word,  implying  that  the  remark  is 
made  at  the  table  of  heathens,  who  would  be 
insulted  by  the  word  eidolothuton,  sacrifioed 
to  idols.  Whoever  the  interlocutor  is  sup- 
posed to  be— heathen  host  or  Christian 
guest — the  mere  fact  of  attention beingdrawn 
to  the  food  as  forming  part  of  a  heathen 
sacrifice  is  enough  to  make  it  your  duty  tn 
give  no  overt  sanction  to  idolatry.  In  that 
case, therefore,  you  ought  to  refuse  it.  It  will 
be  seen  how  gross  was  the  calumny  which 
asseited  that  St.  Paul  taught  men  to  be 
indifferent  about  eating  things  offered  to 
idols.  He  only  tau};ht  indifference  in  cases 
where  idolatry  could  not  he  directly  in- 
volved in  the  question.  He  only  repudiates 
the  idle  superstition  that  the  food  became 
inherently  tainted  by  such  a  consecration 
when  the  eater  was  unaware  of  it.  In  later 
times,  when  the  eating  of  such  ofTcriugs  wa« 
deliberately  erected  into  a  test  of  apostasy, 
he  would  have  used  language  as  strong 
against  every  semblance  of  compliance  as 
any  which  was  used  by  St.  Johu  himself 
or  by  Justla  Martyr.   Difference  of  time  and 


S2« 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOBINTHIAN&    [on.  x.  1—33 


aiteiiiiutances  necessarily  Involves  a  differ- 
euoein  the  mode  of  viewing  matteiB  whicli  in 
Ihenuelve*  are  animportant.  For  the  earth  is 
the  Lord's.  It  ii  doubtful  whether  the 
repetition  of  this  clause  is  genuiua  It  ia 
omitted  by  all  the  best  uncials. 

Ter.  29. — Consoienoe,  I  say,  not  thine  own, 
bnt  of  the  other,  You  may  be  well  aware 
that  you  intend  no  sanction  of  idolatry,  bnt 
if  the  other  mpposei  that  yon  do,  you  wound 
his  conscience,  which  you  have  no  right  to 
do.  Your  own  ooneoience  has  already 
decided  for  itself.  For  why  is  my  liberty 
judged  of  another  man's  conscience  1  These 
words  explain  why  lie  said  "  conscience  not 
tliine  own."  The  mere  fact  that  another 
person  thinki  that  we  are  doing  wrong  does 
not  furnish  the  smallest  proof  that  we  are 
doing  wrong.  We  stand  or  fall  only  to  our 
own  Master,  and  our  conecienoes  are  free  to 
form  their  own  independent  conclusion. 
Perhaps  in  this  clause  and  the  next  verse  we 
have  an  echo  of  the  arguments  used  by  the 
Corinthian  "liberals,"  who  objected  to 
sacrifice  themselves  to  the  scruples  of  the 
weak.  The  independence  of  conscience  is 
powerfully  maintained  in  Enm.  xiv.  2 — 5. 

Ver.  30.— For  if  I.  The  "  for  "  should  be 
omitted.  There  is  no  copula  in  the  best 
manuscripls.  By  grace.  The  word  may  also 
mean  "  with  thankfulness "  (comp.  Bom. 
xiv.  6,  "  He  that  eateth,  to  the  Lord  he 
eatetb,  for  he  giveth  God  thanks ; "  1  Tim.  It. 
3,  "Meats  which  God  hath  created  to  be 
received  with  thanksgiving  ; "  compare  our 
phrase,  "  saying  grace  ").  Another  view  of 
these  clauses  interprets  them  to  mean  "  You 
should  refrain  because,  b^  not  doing  so,  you 
give  oocasion  to  others  to  judge  you  " — a  rule 


which  has  been  compared  with  Bom.  zIt.  16, 
"  Let  not  your  good  be  evil  spoken  of." 
Whichever  view  be  taken,  it  is  clear  that 
(heoretically  St.  Paul  sided  with  the  views 
of  the  "  strong,"  bnt  tympathetieatty  with 
those  of  the  "  weak."  He  pleaded  for  some 
concession  to  the  scrupulosity  of  ever- morbid 
oonsciences.  He  disapproved  of  •  defiant, 
ostentations,  insulting  liberalism.  On  tha 
other  hand,  he  discouraged  the  miserable 
micrology  of  a  purblind  and  bigoted  super- 
stition, which  exaggerated  the  importance  of 
things  external  and  indifferent.  He  desi- 
derated more  considerateness  and  self-denial 
on  the  one  side ;  and  on  the  other,  a  more 
robust  and  instructed  faith.  He  would 
always  tolerate  the  scruples  of  the  weak, 
but  would  not  suffer  either  weakness  or 
strength  to  develop  itself  into  a  vexations 
tyranny. 

Yer.  81. — ^AIL  There  la  much  grandeur 
in  the  sweeping  universality  of  tiie  rule 
which  implies  that  all  life,  and  every  act 
of  life,  ma;  be  consecrated  by  holy  motives. 
To  the  glory  of  God.  Not  to  the  glorifica- 
tion either  of  your  own  breadth  of  mind  or 
your  over-Bcrnpulosity  of  conscience,  but 
"that  God  in  all  things  may  be  glorified" 
(1  Pet.  iv.  11). 

Ver.  32, — Give  none  offence.  Of  course 
St.  Paul  means  "give  no  offence  in  unim- 
portant, indifferent  matters  "  (comp.  Bom. 
xiv.  13).  "Offence"  means  "occasion  of 
stumbling.'"  The  word  only  occurs  in  Acts 
xxiv.  16;  Phil,  i  16.  Nor  to  the  Gentiles; 
rather,  nor  to  the  Greeks. 

Yer.  83.— That  they  may  be  MTed.  All 
the  sympathy,  tolerance,  forbearance,  which 
I  try  to  practise  has  this  one  supreme  object. 


HOMILETICa 

Vera.  1 — 16. — Tke  age*.  "  Moreover,  brethren,  I  would  not  thkt  w  shonld  be 
ignorant,  how  that  all  our  fathers  were  under  the  cloud,  and  all  passed  through  the 
sea ;  and  were  all  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea ;  and  did  all  eat 
the  same  spiritual  meat;  and  did  all  drink  the  same  spiritual  drink:  for  they  drank 
of  that  spiritual  Book  that  followed  them :  and  that  Keck  was  Christ.  But  with  many 
of  them  God  was  not  well  pleased :  for  they  were  overthrown  in  the  wilderness.  Now 
these  things  were  our  examples,  to  the  intent  we  should  not  lust  after  evil  things,  as 
they  also  lusted.  Neither  be  ye  idolaters,  as  were  some  of  them ;  as  it  is  written, 
Thepeople  sat  dovm  to  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up  to  play.  Neither  let  us  commit 
fornication,  as  some  of  them  committed,  and  fell  in.  one  day  three  and  twenty  thousand. 
Neither  let  us  tempt  Christ,  as  some  of  them  also  tempted,  and  were  destroyed  of 
serpents.  Neither  murmur  ye,  as  some  of  them  also  murmured,  and  were  destroyed 
of  the  destroyer.  Now  all  these  things  happened  unto  them  for  ensamples :  and  they 
are  written  for  our  admonition,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  come.  Where- 
fore let  hini  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall.  There  hath  no  tempta- 
tion taken  you  but  such  as  is  common  to  man  :  but  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer 
you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able ;  but  will  with  the  temptation  also  make 
a  way  to  escape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  hear  it.  Whereloie,  my  dearly  beloved,  flee 
from  idolatry.  I  speak  as  to  wise  men ;  judge  ye  what  I  say."  From  this  passage 
several  things  may  be  inferred  concerning  the  age.'i  of  human  history. 


CH.X.1— 33.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  827 

L  The  uobal  belationship  of  the  ages.  Paul  teaches  here  that  the  age  of  tha 
Jew  in  the  wiWerness  sustained  a  twofold  relation  to  men  of  all  future  times — the 
relation  of  a  representative  and  of  an  admonisher.  1.  It  was  a  representative.  Things 
that  happened  in  the  wilderness  happened  as  "  ensamples."  (1)  Their  blessings  were 
"ensamples."  Their  "pillar"  represented  the  Bible.  Their  baptism  unto  Moses 
represented  the  dedication  of  Christians  to  the  religion  of  Christ.  Their  manna  and 
their  water  from  the  rock  represented  Christ — the  Bread  and  Water  of  spiritual  life. 
(2)  Their  imperfections  were  "  ensamples."  Their  lusts,  idolatries,  frivolity,  discontent, 
represent  the  sins  to  which  men  are  liable  through  all  Christian  times.  (3)  1'heir 
punishments  were  "  ensamples."  Thousands  died  in  the  wilderness  in  consequence 
of  their  sins,  and  this  represents  the  fact  that  sin  and  misery  are  indissolubly  con- 
nected. 2.  It  was  an  admonisher.  "  They  are  written  for  our  admonition."  The 
principles  embodied  in  their  history  are  of  universal  application.  They  are :  (1)  The 
special  care  which  God  exercises  over  those  who  commit  themselves  to  him.  (2) 
The  tendency  of  the  depraved  heart  ta  go  wrong.  (3)  The  inviolable  connection 
between  sin  and  suffering. 

II.  The  Divine  superintendence  <rf  the  ages.  It  ii  here  taught  that  Gkid  employs 
one  age  as  a  minister  to  another.  He  ia  in  all  ages.  He  makes  the  events  that 
liappened  to  the  Jews  in  the  wilderness  thousands  of  years  ago  minister  to  the  good  of 
men  of  all  future  times.  This  fact :  1.  Should  restrain  us  from  hasty  judgments  of  his 
providence.    2.  Should  impress  us  with  the  seriousness  of  life. 

III.  The  growinq  responsibilitt  of  the  ages.  "  Upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world 
are  come."  The  patriarchal  was  succeeded  by  the  Mosaic,  the  Mosaic  by  the  Christian. 
The  Cliristian  is  the  last.  All  the  past  has  come  down  to  us:  1.  Through  literature. 
Books  bring  down  to  us  the  poets,  the  sages,  the  orators,  the  preachers  of  past 
ages,  etc.  2.  Through  tradition.  Were  there  no  books,  one  generation  would  impart 
iti  thoughts,  spirit,  art,  institutions,  to  another. 

lY.  The  common  temptation  of  the  ages.  "  There  hath  no  temptation  taken  you 
but  such  as  is  commom  to  man,"  etc.  Men  through  all  times  have  been  subject  to 
similar  temptations.  (1)  All  men  are  temptahle.  (a)  Men  are  constitutiondlly 
temptable.  All  moral  creature!  In  the  universe  are  temptable,  even  the  highest  angel. 
There  Is  no  virtue  where  there  is  no  temptability.  (6)  All  men  as  fallen  creatures  are 
specially  temptable.  Having  yielded  to  temptation  by  the  law  of  habit,  they  have 
gained  a  tendency  to  do  this,  and  this  tendency  is  ever  on  the  increase.  (2)  All  men 
are  in  tempting  circumstancei.  In  heaven  there  may  be  no  incentives  to  wrong,  no 
seductive  influences.  Earth  is  full  of  the  tempting.  The  passage  here  teaches  us  two 
things.  1.  That  our  temptations  require  great  caution.  "Wherefore  let  him  that 
thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  The  Jews  in  the  wilderness  baa  great 
privileges.  Inspired  men  were  with  them.  Supernatural  manifestations  surrounded 
them ;  God  himself  was  specially  with  them.  Yet  they  yielded  to  their  temptations, 
and  they  fell.  Wherefore  let  all  "  take  heed."  Privileges  are  no  security.  2.  That 
our  temptations  must  he  resisted.  They  are  resistible :  (1)  Because  God  does  not  allow 
any  temptation  to  happen  to  us  that  outmeasures  our  power  of  resistance.  "  He  will 
not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able."  He  is  in  all  the  events  of  life. 
He  proportions  the  burden  to  the  back.  If  temptations  came  outstripping  our  capa- 
bilities of  resistance,  our  yielding  to  them  might  be  a  calamity,  but  would  not  be  a 
crime.  Such  a  case,  I  presume,  never  happens  in  the  history  of  man.  The  righteous 
God  would  not  allow  it  to  transpire.  (2)  Because  if  we  are  in  earnest  in  our  resistance, 
he  wUl  enable  us  to  escape.  He  "  will  with  the  temptation  also  make  a  way  to  escape, 
that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it."  "  There  is  no  valley  so  dark,"  says  an  old  expositor, 
"  but  he  can  find  a  way  through  it,  no  affliction  so  grievous  but  he  can  prevent  or 
remove  or  enable  us  to  support  it,  and,  in  the  end,  overrule  it  to  our  advantage." 

Conclusion.  1.  Do  not  suppose  that  the  advantages  of  past  times  were  greater  than 
our$.  There  are  men  who  are  constantly  referring  us  to  the  past,  saying  the  former 
times  were  better  than  the  present.  Of  all  the  ages  that  are  past,  what  age  had  the 
advantages  of  this?  Not  the  patriarchal;  for  under  it  the  Deluge  came.  Not  the 
Mosaic ;  for  under  it  came  the  ruin  of  Jerusalem  and  the  destruction  of  the  Jewish 
commonwealth.  Not  the  apostolic;  for  in  it  grievous  heresies  arose  and  moral 
abominations  grew  rife.    2,  Do  not  suppose  that  the  type  (^excellence  reached  by  out 


X28  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  x.  1—33 


aneeitors  it  high  enough  for  u$.     We  ought  to  be  more  noble  than  the  old  patriarch!, 
moM  anlightened  and  Christ-like  than  the  best  Christians  of  apostolic  times. 

On  ui,  great  God,  on  us  are  oontm 

The  ends  of  rolling  time; 
We  would  begin  each  opening  day 

With  gratitude  sublime. 
Men  after  men  have  come  and  gone^ 

Myriiuls  have  passed  away ; 
But  thou  hast  lived  uncliaugcd,  0  God, 

And  brought  us  to  this  day. 

The  past,  an  ocean  under  thee, 

Boro  onward  thy  great  plan. 
And  every  billow,  as  it  broke, 

Was  fraught  witli  good  to  man. 
The  dispensations  under  wliich 

Our  fathers  lived  and  died 
Were  only,  as  compared  with  orut. 

Dim  daybreak  to  noontide. 

"A  goodly  heritage"  hare  W9, 

Ages  of  choicest  lore ; 
Wliat  "kings  and  prophets  long'd"  ta  W« 

Aro  ours  for  evermore. 
The  great  men  of  the  past  are  ours, 

To  help  us  on  life's  way ; 
The  Sun  of  Righteousness  we  hav% 

To  flood  01U  hearts  with  day. 

All  thnt  past  times  have  given  u 

Blay  we  employ  aright, 
And  live  a  grand  and  godly  lif«^ 

Full  worthy  of  our  light. 
We  follow  in  the  awful  march 

Of  all  the  mighty  dead. 
Eternal  Father,  succour  us 

When  all  oui  years  have  fled  I 

fern.  16 — 22. — The  Christian  feast.  "The  cup  of  blessing  vhich  we  bless.  Is  H  not 
the  communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ?"  etc.  Ihe  text  undoubtedly  refers  to  the 
feast  which  Christ  instituted  the  night  on  which  he  was  betrayed,  and  the  words  lead 
us  to  look  at  that  feast  in  two  aspects. 

I.  As  A  MEDIUM  FOB  SPIRITUAL  coMMUNiOK.  "  The  cup  of  blcssing  which  we  bless, 
is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ?  The  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not 
the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ?"  The  shed  blood  and  broken  body  of  Chrisi 
ire  here  regarded,  and  must  ever  be  regarded,  as  the  effects  and  expressions  of  his  selt- 
sacrificing  love,  llis  "  flesh  "  and  "  blood"  mean  his  spiritual  life.  What  was  that  spirit- 
life  that  animated  and  controlled  him?  Self-sacrificing  love.  This  made  him  Christ, 
marked  him  off  from  all  other  men  that  ever  lived;  it  was  the  very  " body "  and 
"  blood  "  of  his  soul.  When  we  are  commanded,  therefore,  to  eat  his  flesh  and  drink 
his  blood,  it  means  that  we  are  to  take  his  spirit  into  tis,  his  spirit  of  self-sacrificing 
philanthropy.  This  spirit  is,  indeed,  the  only  true  food  for  souls.  It  alone  answers 
the  two  great  purposes  of  food — it  gives  strength  and  satisfaction.  No  man  can  become 
morally  strong,  or  morally  satisfied,  without  appropriating  the  self-sacrificing  love  of 
Christ.  Now,  in  the  true  spiritual  celebration  of  this  feast,  there  is  a  twofold  "com- 
munion." 1.  A  "communion  "  of  the  disciples  with  Christ.  They  drink  in  his  spirit, 
and  by  a  living  sympathy  are  brought  into  a  close  and  tender  fellowship  with  him. 
Christ  comes  in  to  them  and  sups  with  them,  and  they  with  him.  We  are  always 
bringing  those  with  whom  we  have  the  strongest  sympathy  into  our  inmost  being. 
2.  A  "  communion  "  of  the  disciples  with  one  another.  "  For  we  being  many  aie  one 
bread,  and  one  body  :  for  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread."    "  This  verse  explains 


CB.X.I— 88.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANfl.  9S» 


how  the  breaking  of  the  bread  was  the  Bignificant  act,  which  expressed,  Bacramentallj, 
the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ.  There  is  one  bread,  it  is  broken  in  many  ]>iece*, 
and  as  we  all  (though  each  receiTes  only  a  fragment)  partake  of  the  one  bread,  which, 
unbroken,  consisted  of  these  pieces,  we,  though  many  individuals,  are  one  body,  even 
the  body-  of  Christ,  with  whom,  as  well  as  with  each  other,  we  have  communion  in  that 
act."  All  who  have  a  supreme  sympathy  for  one  common  object  will,  by  a  law  of  their 
nature,  be  brought  into  communion  one  with  another.  All  hearts  will  throb  with  one 
groat  feeling,  all  thoughts  will  flow  into  one  common  channel.  Thus  all  true  Christians 
are  united  one  with  another,  as  all  the  planets  are  united  by  circling  round  one  centre, 
and  deriving  therefrom  a  common  impulse,  a  common  life,  and  a  common  order. 

II.  Ab  the  exclusitk  fbivileqe  of  Christians.  Paul  speaks  in  these  verses  of  two 
other  feasts.  1.  The  feast  of  the  Jewish  priesthood,  "  Behold  Israel  after  the  flesh." 
The  Jewish  lacriHce  was  divided,  a  portion  ofiered  om  the  altar,  and  a  portion  taken 
and  eaten.  2.  The  feast  of  the  idolatrous  heathen.  "  What  say  I  then  that  the 
idol  is  anything,  or  that  which  is  ofiered  in  sacrifice  to  idols  is  anything?"  etc  The 
heathen  had  their  feasts ;  they  partook  of  that  which  they  ofiered  to  their  gods.  But 
the  spirit  manifested  in  the  partakers  of  both  of  these  Teasts — Jewish  or  heathen — 
would  exclude  from  the  feast  which  Christ  ordained.  In  the  one  there  was  only  a 
formal  respect  for  Jehovah,  and  in  the  other,  for  demons  and  evil  spirits.  "  But  I  say, 
that  the  things  which  'the  Gentiles  sacrifice,  they  sacrifice  to  devils,  and  not  to  God ; 
and  I  would  not  that  ye  should  have  fellowship  with  devils."  None  are  to  he  admitted 
to  Christ's  feasts  who  are  not  in  vital  sympathy  with  him.  "Ti  wnnot  drink  the  cup 
•f  the  Lord,  and  ths  cup  of  devils." 

Vers.  23 — 33. — Oospel  eaeuistry.  "  All  things  are  lawful  fi>r  m«^  Imt  all  things  irs 
not  expedient,"  etc.    These  verses  teach  us  the  following  lessons  ^— 

I.  A  GOOD  MAN  MAT  HAVE  A  BIOHT  TO  DO  THAT  WHICH  MAT  NOT  ALWATB  BE  tXTtr 

DiENT  FOB  THE  SAKE  OF  OTHERS.  "  All  things  are  lawful  for  me,  but  all  things  are  not 
sxpedient :  all  things  are  lawful  for  me,  but  all  things  edify  not."  What  has  not  a  good 
man  a  right  to?  He  has  a  right  to  go  wherever  he  pleases,  to  eat  whatever  he  pleases, 
to  dress  as  he  pleases,  for  a  good  man  will  be  actuated  evermore  from  a  good  motive. 
But  for  him  to  use  his  full  right  would  manifestly  be  often  inexpedient  and  even 
pernicious  to  others.  "Things  lawful"  for  him  would  not  always  be  things  that 
would  "  edify,"  build  up,  souls  in  reverent  faith  and  true  worship.  Therefore,  it  is  not 
always  right  to  stand  upon  our  rights,  it  is  right  to  conciliate  and  yield  for  the  sake 
•f  others. 

II.  Small  scruples  on  minob  VATrEBS  should  not  be  encouraged.  1.  If  you  are 
•rer-scrupulous  about  what  you  eat,  it  will  interfere  with  your  participation  in  the 
provisions  which  nature  has  made  for  you.  "  Whatsoever  is  sold  in  the  shambles,  that 
eat,  asking  no  question  for  con>^cience  sake."  Some  of  the  meat  which  had  been 
used  for  sacrificial  purposes  in  heathen  temples  was  afterwards  exposed  in  the  markets 
for  sale.  If  it  is  good  meat,  it  is  not  the  worse  for  human  food  because  used  in  sacrifice. 
Your  nature  is  exhausted,  it  requires  replenishment;  you  are  hungry,  there  is  the  fco'l 
hung  up  for  sale;  buy  it,  do  not  let  superstitious  feelings  interfere  with  the  claims  of 
nature.  How  wretched  and  wan  some  of  our  co-religionists  look,  because  their  scru|iles 
keep  them  from  food  I  2.  If  you  are  over-scrupulous  about  the  beliefs  of  men,  you 
will  be  deprived  of  social  enjoyments.  "  If  any  of  them  that  believe  not  bid  you  to 
8  feast,  and  ye  be  disposed  to  go ;  whatsoever  is  set  before  you,  eat,  asking  no  question 
fur  conscience  sake."  Free,  genial,  hearty  social  intercourse  is  one  of  the  greatest 
blessings  of  this  life.  Our  Saviour  came  "eating  and  drinking,"  but  if  you  are  over- 
scrupulous about  the  credenda  of  your  host  and  his  provisions,  you  sacrifice  all  tliis 
and  injure  your  nature.  Remember  always  that  the  world  was  given  for  your  enjuy- 
ment.     "  The  earth  hath  he  given  to  the  children  of  men."    "  All  things  are  yoi.rs." 

III.  A  defebencb  to  the  consciekces  of  others  should  always  be  bendkred. 
•If  any  man  say  unto  you.  This  is  offered  in  sacrifice  unto  idols,  eat  not  for  his  sake 
that  showed  it,  and  for  conscience  sake,"  etc.  When  at  the  table  with  meats  sjiread 
before  you  which  have  been  sacrificed  to  idols,  and  a  fellow-guest  conscientiumly 
abstains  from  touching  them,  and  he  reminds  you  of  the  fact,  then,  out  of  deference  to  hii 
weak  conscience,  do  not  you  touch  them.    However  delicious  they  may  appear,  Uowever 


330  THE  FmST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [oH.x.1— SS 

fragrant  in  aroma,  however  hungry  you  may  be,  out  ol  regard  to  that  weak  brother') 
conscience  deny  yourself.  The  most  sacred  thing  under  these  heavens  is  the  conscience. 
The  weakest  conscience  should  be  respected ;  to  wound  the  conscience  is  to  wound  the 
man.     What  are  meats  and  drinks  in  comparison  with  a  human  conscience? 

IV.  Supreme  regard  for  the  qloby  of  God  should  rule  us  in  all.  "  Whether 
therefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  "  These 
words  embrace  all  life.  The  definite  acts  of  eating  aud  drinking  are  mentioned 
expressly,  as  they  are  the  subject  immediately  under  consideration.  They  are,  how- 
ever, to  be  regulated  by  the  same  priuciple  which  guides  all  true  life.  The  modem 
idea  of  some  acts  being  religious  and  some  secular  is  neither  here  nor  elsewhere  recog- 
nized by  St.  Paul.  No  act  of  life  is  in  itself  either  religious  or  secular  The  quality 
of  each  act  depends  on  the  spirit  which  guides  it  and  the  motives  from  which  it  springs. 
The  commonest  thing  may  be  done  in  a  highly  Christian  spirit;  the  greatest  deed  may 
spring  from  a  low  and  selfish  motive.  A  religious  act  done  in  a  secular  spirit  is 
(ecular ;  a  secular  thing  done  in  a  religious  spirit  is  religious.  This  is  the  first  great 
principle  of  Christian  life." 

V.  The  good  of  others,  and  not  the  gratification  of  self,  should  n  our 
OONBTAITT  AIH.  "  Let  no  man  seek  his  own,  but  every  man  another's  wealth."  "  Give 
none  offence,  neither  to  tlie  Jews,  nor  to  the  Gentiles,  nor  to  the  Church  of  God:  even 
as  I  please  all  men  in  all  things,  not  seeking  mine  own  profit,  but  the  profit  of  many, 
that  they  may  be  saved." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Yen.  1—13. — Subject  continued;  arguments  from  the  Old  Testament;  naming 
against  false  security.     Reference  had  been  made  in  the  preceding  chapter  to  the  law 
of  Moses  respecting  oxen,  and  to  the  priests  of  tlie  temple,  for  whose  suppoit  lliere 
was  a  special  provision.    But  St.  Paul  had  introduced  a  striking  illustration  from 
Grecian  life  to  show  the  importance  of  earnest  and  exact  discipline  in  matters  per- 
taining to  the  soul's  salvation.    The  body,  with  its  infirmities  and  sins,  was  a  very 
serious  danger,  and,  unless  kept  under  by  the  power  of  grace,  would  acquire  mastery 
over  the  spirit.     Even  he,  though  an  upostle,  might  become  "  a  castaway."     The 
terrible  liability  was  before  him  as  a  personal  thing,  the  idea  lingered  and  demanded 
a  fuller  emphasis,  and  how  could  he  contemplate  himself  without  considering  the 
hazardous  exposure  of  his  brethren?    Every  fibre  of  his  private  heart  was  a  public  tie 
that  bound  him  to  others,  and  hence  he  could  not  see  his  own  peril  and  be  blind  to 
the  peril  of  the  Church.     Under  the  pressure  of  this  anxiety,  his  mind  reverts  to  the 
history  of  the  Jewish  Church.      Historical  examples  are  very   powerful,  and  where 
could  he  find  them  except 'in  the  Old  Testament?     Grecian  games  pass  out  of  view, 
and  the  stately  procession  of  wonders,  beginning  in  the  deliverance  of  the  elect  race 
from  Egyptian  bondage  and  progressing  through  the  events  of  the  desert,  moves  before 
his  eye.    "  Our  fathers  "  indicates  how  true  he  was  to  ancestral  blood,  and  this  warm- 
hearted sense  of  country,  in   which  patriotism  and  piety  interblended,  exemplifies 
the  origin  and  tenacity  of  the  feeling  that  prompted  him  in  the  previous  chapter  to 
put  in  the  foreground  tliis  fact,  "Unto  the  Jews  I  became  as  a  Jew."     Let  us 
remember  that  his  peculiar  state  of  mind  at  the  moment  took  its  colouring  from  one 
single  thing,  viz.  the  hazards  of  moral  probation  because  of  the  body.     How  pre- 
dominant this  idea  was  appears  in  the  instances  enumerated  to  show  the  unfaithfulness 
of  God's  people  to  their  covenanted  engagements.     Such  words  as  "lust,"  "lusted," 
"  eat  and  drink,"  "  rose  up  to  play,"  "  commit  fornication,"  are  significant  of  his 
intense  feeling,  and  they  are  as  reverberations  from  what  was  to  him  an  awful  term — 
"ewttaway,"  "  rejected,"  "fail  shamefully  of  the  prize."    According  to  his  conception, 
brain  and  nerves,  all  the  facts  of  the  physical  organism,  had  to  be  taken  into  account 
in  looking  at  the  practical  side  of  Christianity.     And  it  was  a  practical  question, 
because  it  rested  on  a  broad  generalization  of  man's  place,  order,  and  destiny  in  the 
universe.    No  empiric  was  he,  but  a  thinker  of  most  penetrating  insight,  far  in  advance 
•f  his  times,  in  advance  too  of  our  century ;  and  while  he  was  not  a  psychologist  nor 
•  physiologist  in  our  sense  of  the  terms,  yet  no  man  has  ever  seen  so  clearly,  so  deeply, 


ML  L  1— U.]    THE  FIRST  EFISTLB  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa.  8S1 

Int*  the  principles  underlying  pBychology  and  physiology  in  their  relationi  to  spiritual 
life.  His  own  personal  experience  turned  his  Noughts  to  this  study.  Providence 
mad*  him  this  sort  of  a  student,  and  the  Holy  Qhost  enlarged  and  sanctified  his 
inTestigationa.  Bach  thinkers  generally  come  as  precursors  to  scientists  and 
philosophers ;  but  St  Paul  was  much  more  than  a  precursor,  for  we  find  in  him,  not 
merely  a  knowledge  of  facts,  but  of  truths,  and  a  facility  in  applying  them  altogether 
remarkable.  What  a  volume  on  this  subject  lay  open  in  his  own  consciousness  I 
A  temperament  of  singular  impressionablcness';  a  natural  activity  that  sprang  quite 
as  much  from  the  interaction  of  bis  mental  faculties  and  their  quick  sympathy  with 
one  another  as  from  the  accesses  of  the  outer  world ;  feeble  health,  and  yet  that  kind 
of  weakness  in  certain  functions  which  is  sometimes  connected  with  other  organs  of 
great  strength,  and  is  consistent  with  astonishing  power  of  endurance ;  the  "  thorn  in 
the  flesh,  the  messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet "  him  ;  add  to  all  this  the  manner  of  life 
he  led,  and  the  physical  sufierings  that  enemies  inflicted  on  him ; — and  bow  could  he 
help  being  reminded  what  a  factor  the  body  was  in  his  manhood  and  apostleship  7 
Think  of  the  effect  on  the  associating  and  suggt^stive  faculty,  on  the  imagination, 
on  his  use  of  language  both  for  thought  and  expression,  that  this  mass  of  disturbed 
sensibility  must  have  produced,  and  for  which  there  was  no  earthly  anodyne. 
Observe,  moreover,  how  the  wisdom  of  God  manifests  itself  in  the  temperament  of 
this  man  and  its  specific  discipline.  Probably  temperament  is  the  secret  of  individu- 
ality, but  whether  so  or  not,  it  must  be  reckoned  as  of  no  little  significance  as  to  the 
influence  of  the  books  we  read,  the  teachers  that  instruct,  and  the  other  countless 
agencies  which  make  up  the  total  of  educative  forces.  Now,  in  this  particular,  mark 
the  contrast  between  St.  Peter  and  St,  Paul.  The  fisherman  of  Galilee,  healthy, 
robust,  abounding  in  the  instinctive  joyousness  of  natural  sensations,  trustful  to  an 
extreme  of  his  emotions,  pliant  towards  himself,  singularly  impulsive ;  what  a  problem 
was  in  that  temperament  and  its  physiological  laws,  when  ■  the  Lord  Jesus  began  to 
educate  his  nerves,  arteries,  brains,  for  discipleship,  and  through  the  disciple  to  develop 
the  apostle  of  the  "Bock"  and  the  "  £ey$" I  Yet  it  was  done,  and  done  thoroughly, 
so  that  the  changed  body  of  St.  Peter  is  quite  as  noteworthy  as  the  changed  mind,  the 
same  body  but  functionally  subdued  to  a  well-governed  organism.  During  the  forty 
days  between  the  Lord's  resurrection  and  ascension,  the  man  and  the  apostle  emerged 
from  the  chrysalis.  At  Pentecost,  what  a  commanding  figure  he  presents  I  No  haste, 
no  spasmodic  action,  now,  but  equipoise  and  cool  wisdom  and  the  courage  of  repose. 
In  temperament,  no  less  than  in  official  position,  St.  Peter  is  the  antecedent  of  St. 
FauL  And  their  difference  herein,  according  to  providential  ordina'tion,  was  carried 
out  in  their  training  and  culture,  so  that  diversity,  jealous  of  its  rights  in  all  things, 
is  only  self-insistent  for  the  sake  of  prospective  unity.  Now,  St.  Paul  wishes  to  put 
this  subject  of  danger  on  the  bodily  side  of  human  life  in  the  strongest  possible  light 
for  his  own  benefit  and  that  of  the  Corinthians.  What  then?  A  nation  rises  before 
him.  By  the  arm  of  Jehovah,  Egypt  has  been  smitten,  the  Bed  Sea  has  opened 
a  pathway  to  their  triumphant  march,  and  waves  and  winds  have  chanted  the  anthem 
of  a  victory  in  which  they  bad  no  share.  And  this  nation  "  passed  through  the  sea," 
and  "  were  all  baptized  unto  Moses,"  as  their  mediatorial  leader,  "  in  the  cloud  and 
in  the  sea."  Nay,  mure ;  the  typical  idea  is  still  further  wrought  out,  and  baptism 
and  the  Lord's  Supper  are  conjoined.  "  All  did  eat  the  same  spiritual  meat ;  all  did 
drink  the  same  spiritual  drink  ; "  the  meat  and  drink  were  from  above ;  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  present  as  the  source  of  the  miracles  and  the  Divine  Agent  of  blessing; 
the  "  spiritual "  is  insisted  on,  for  "  that  Hock  was  Christ."  There  was  a  revelation 
to  the  senses  and  there  was  a  revelation  to  the  spirit.  To  deny  the  supersensuous 
element  is  to  destroy  the  force  of  the  analogy,  since  it  is  not  a  resemblande.  to  the 
imagination  alone,  but  a  real  likeness  to  the  reason,  Christianity  and  its  sacraments 
being  prominent  in  St.  Paul's  view.  It  was  not,  then,  a  mere  miracle  to  the  Iwdy  and 
for  the  body.  It  was  likewise  a  supernatural  demonstration,  a  gracious  influence  from 
the  Ht)ly  Ghost,  a  prelusive  .blessedness  brought  within  reach  of  experience,  in  that 
dispensation  of  types  and  shadows.  It  was  not  our  spirituality ;  nevertheless.  It  was 
apihtual,  since  "  that  Bock  was  Christ."  Our  Lord  said  in  his  Capernaum  discourse, 
just  after  his  great  miracle  that  fed  thousands,  "  Your  fathers  did  eat  manna  in  the 
wilderness,  and  are  dead.    This  is  the  bread  which  comeih  down  firom  heaven,  thai 


332  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  x.  1—31 

»  man  may  eat  thereof,  and  not  die."  IMd  not  the  miracle,  wrought  so  lavishly  for 
the  public,  wrought  without  solicitation,  seem  to  the  excited  multitude  a  sign  that 
Christ  was  the  national  Messiah  their  hearts  craved  to  have?  Next  day,  he  disen- 
chanted them  by  sweeping  away  the  secular  illusion  and  telling  them  plainly,  "  I  am 
that  Bread  of  life."  The  contrast  between  the  manna  of  the  wilderness  and  the  bread 
of  life  was  stated  and  enforced  at  a  time,  in  a  way,  under  circumstances,  calculated 
to  secure  its  object.  It  did  not  effect  its  purpose.  "  From  that  time  many  of  his  disciples 
went  hack,  and  walked  no  more  with  him  ;  "  and  henceforth  the  popular  expectation 
of  *  worliily  Messiah  was  a  waning  moon  in  a  darkening  ui;^ht.  And  this  contrast 
was  recognized  by  St.  Paul  even  while  adhering  most  closely  to  the  parallelism.  On 
the  ground  of  the  parallelism,  he  argues  the  eminent  privileges  of  the  Jews,  the 
opportunities  enjoyed,  the  Divine  manifestation,  the  spiritual  influence  secured  to  the 
nation  in  the  desert.  They  failed  to  understand  and  appreciate  their  position. 
Appetite,  lust,  idolatry,  overcame  them ;  "  they  were  overthrown  in  the  wilderness," 
and  so  swift  was  Ood's  wrath  and  so  overwhelming,  that  there  "  fell  in  one  day  three 
and  twenty  thousand."  Here  was  »  supernatural  economy ;  here  was  a  religion  that 
provided  for  bodily  necessities,  and  even  gave  "  angels'  food  ;  "  here,  at  the  same  time 
that  the  claims  of  a  true  and  proper  sensuousness  were  divinely  met,  a  "  spiritual " 
agency  was  established  and  administered — ^here,  in  the  solitudes  of  sand  and  rock, 
where  the  chosen  people  were  alone  with  God,  and  where  neither  day  nor  night  was 
allowed  to  wear  its  accustomed  face  because  of  the  presence  of  the  pillar-cloud  of  glory ; 
and  yet  amid  such  displays  of  the  providence  and  Spirit  of  God,  men  fell  into  idolatry, 
murmured  against  God,  tempted  him,  and  perished  under  miraculous  judgments.  It 
is  not  simply  a  lesson  frnm  individuals  to  individuals.  It  is  a  warning  from  a  com- 
munity to  a  community.  Vice  as  personal,  vice  as  social,  vice  as  an  epidemic  in  the 
air, — this  is  the  vice  of  bodily  dec;radation  as  it  exhibits  its  raging  enormity  in  lust, 
fornication,  and  idol-worship.  "These  things  were  our  examples,"  "for  ensara pies," 
"written  for  our  admonition,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  come,"  the 
coalescence  of  the  ages  in  the  grand  demonstration  of  Christianity  as  the  completed 
revelation  to  mankind  of  God  in  Christ.  "  Wherefore  . . .  take  heed."  We  have  more 
light,  larger  privileges,  nobler  opportunities,  but  there  is  no  mechanical  security 
in  these  things.  The  crisis-age  has  come,  the  crisis-trial  has  come  with  it.  "  Where- 
fore let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  To  encourage  theil 
holy  endeavours,  he  assures  them  that  there  is  no  fatality  in  temptation.  Oftentimes 
it  happens  that  men  are  morally  disabled  before  the  struggle,  before  an  incitement  to 
do  evil  has  fairly  set  in.  By  this  proneness  to  believe  in  fate,  they  surrender  in 
advance.  Remote  causes  are  frequently  more  potent  than  proximate  causes,  and  many 
a  man  has  been  the  victim  of  a  false  philosophy  of  morals  long  before  he  has  fallen 
as  an  actual  prey  to  Satan.  Bodily  sins  have  something  in  them  which  renders  their 
subjects  uncommonly  liable  to  this  destructive  belief,  and  "I  could  not  help  it; 
I  cannot  help  it,"  are  words  that  easily  rise  to  their  lips.  But  the  doctrine  of  St. 
Paul  is  a  protest  against  such  a  demoralizing  idea.  "  No  trial  has  come  upon  you 
beyond  man's  power  to  bear"  (Conybeare  and  Howson).  "God  is  faithful."  The 
laws  of  the  universe  and  their  administration,  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  as  the 
universal  Helper,  and  the  glory  of  Christianity  as  the  consummation  of  the  ages,  are 
so  many  IHvine  assurances  that  no  man  is  doomed  beforehand  to  fall  into  the  snare 
of  the  deviL  Satan  himself  is  only  Satan,  man's  adversary,  within  certain  limits. 
God  holds  him  in  check.  At  first,  the  influence  of  evil  takes  effect  on  the  involuntary 
nature,  sensations  are  awakened,  passions  excited,  but  it  becomes  a  temptation  when 
these  lower  instruments  are  brought  to  bear  on  the  consent  of  the  will.  "  God  is 
faithful "  to  the  human  wilL  There  is  nothing  in  man  which  ia  to  constantly 
quickened  and  energized  ms  »  defensive  force.  And,  furthermore,  as  a  positive  and 
aggressive  force,  what  resources  are  at  its  command  1  If  temptation  is  subtle  and 
insinuating,  who  knows  the  number  and  '•variety  of  the  Spirit's  secret  avenues  to  the 
will  ?  There  is  always  "  a  way  to  escape,"  and  this  way  is  provided  by  our  heavenly 
Father,  who  is  evermore  answering  the  prayer,  "  Lead  ui  not  into  temptation,  but 
deliver  us  from  eviL" — L. 

Veri.  14 — SS.—Argmment  /itrther  enforced ;  feUowthip  with  Ghriit  by  meani  tf  M« 


aa.z.1— S3.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTUIAKS.  833 

communion ;  idolatrous  feasts  a  communion  with  demons ;  law,  expediency,  eonseienee. 

"  Wherefore,"  says  St.  Paul,  as  a  deduction  from  the  foregoing  argument,  "  my  dearly 

beloTed,"  his  heart  kindled  anew  towards  hii  brethren,  "flee  from  idolatrp."    This 

^read  of  idolatry  is  the  key  to  what  follows.    Idolatry,  in  those  days,  was  •  sin  that 

included  all  sins,  and  Corinth  was  behind  no  city  in  the  charm  and  splendour  It  threw 

around  this  iniquity.    Bodily  indulgences  of  the  wont  sort  were  notorious.   Throughout 

Qreece,  Corinth  was  th«  common  synonym  of  the  most  ghamerul  vices,  and  that  <too, 

not  in  despite  of  idolatir,  but  as  a  constituent  of  religious  worship,  especially  of  Venus. 

Art  among  the  Greeks  had  done  Its  utmost  to  destroy  the  uglier  features  of  the  old 

heathenism,  had  called  beauty  and  culture  into  the  service  of  the  priests  and  the 

ceremonial  of  the  temples,  and  had  succeeded  in  making  the  aesthetic  a  reproach  to  pure 

taste  and  a  mocking  insult  to  every  moral  virtne.    Corinth  was  a  leading  centre  of  all  the 

corrupting  and  lascivious  influence  of  idolatry,  and  hence  St.  Paul's  tender  and  fervent 

entreaty,  "  My  dearly  beloved,  flee  from  idolatry."    The  connection  with  his  foregoii^ 

argument  is  clear.    If  the  athlete  must  subject  himself  to  a  severe  and  protracted 

discipline;   if  Ghxl's  elect  race  so  largely  perished  in  the  wilderness  by  reason  of 

transgression;   if  any  and  every  temptation  may  be  successfully  resisted,  so  that 

neither  the  throng  of  evil-doers  nor  the  show  and  fascination  of  a  pompous  idol-worship 

can  be  an  excuse  for  sin ; — with  what  force  could  lie  nrge,  "  Flee  from  idolatry  "  I    St, 

Paul  knew  the  strength  of  his  appeal.    And  he  credited  these  Corinthians  with  insight 

sufficient  to  see  this  strength,  for  he  bade  them  hear  him  "as  wise  men,"  and  "judge  " 

what  he  said.    Is  he  satisfied  to  leave  the  ar<;ument  at  this  stage?    Observation 

of  current  facts,  historical  examples  preserved  from  oblivion  for  their  warning,  Gkd's 

faithfulness,  have  been  brought  to  bear  on  the  question ;  and  yet,  so  far  from  being 

content  to  dismiss  the  subject,  he  resumes  it  with  new  vigour  of  thought  and  a 

deepened  intensity  of  emotion.    The  language  changes.    Few  or  no  metaphoric  words 

occur.    Throughout  the  paragraph,  it  is  the  vocabulary  of  pure  feeling  and  impassioned 

earnestness  that  he  employs,  for  the  imagination  has  retired  from  iU  task  and  left 

the  heart  to  consummate  the  work.    He  begins  with  the  sacrament  of  the  Lwd's 

Supper,  binding  the  argument  to  the  point  whence  he  had  digressed  at  the  opening 

of  the  ninth  chapter.    "  This  liberty  of  yours,"  he  had  said,  "  might  prove  ruinous  to 

weak  brethren  'for  whom   Christ  died,'"  and   therefore  such  an  abuse  of  freedom 

was  a  sin  "against  the  brethren"  and  a  "sin  against  Christ."    What  is  the  special 

connection  of  the  Lord's  Supper  with  the  completion  of  the  argument  ?    Obviously 

the  position  it  occupies  in  the  logic  of  the  case  is  one  of  eminence,  St.  Paul  having 

reserved  it  for  his  conclusion.    It  would  seem  that  he  had  before  his  mind  one 

particular  and  engrossing  idea  in  relation  to  the  Supper,  which,  although  perfectly 

consistent  with  other  ideas  of  the  sacrament,  and,  indeed,  essential  to  their  import, 

was  detached  at  the  moment  and  set  forth  with  Tery  distinct  and  commanding 

prominence.    It  is  the  idea  of  the  communion,    "  Cup  of  blessing,"  "  bread  which  we 

break,"  the  thanksgiving,  the  faith  and  love  exercised,  the  recollected  obligations,  the 

spiritual  conception  of  "  the  blood  "  and  "  the  body  of  Christ "  as  means  of  an  inward 

holiness;  are  not  these  a  communication,  a  participation,  an  entering  into  Christ's 

death,  •  true  and  real  fellowship  with  him  as  "  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away 

the  sin  of  the  world"?    If  so,  it  means  separation  from  all  evil  compliances  and  from 

all  dangerous  associations.    "  Separate  from  sinners "  was  a  distinguishing  fact  in 

Christ's  life;"  not  only  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled,"  but,  by  his  separation  frommen, 

exhibiting  in  the  fullest  and  most  effective  way  the  three  characteristics  mentioned. 

Near,  very  near,  to  all  about  him,  and  yet  the  nearer  he  was  the  further  removed 

he  stood  in  the  dignity  of  his  person  and  the  exclusiveness  of  his  office,  so  that 

the  mysterious  awe  which  invested  him  was  profoundly  felt  by  his  friends  even  while 

ignorant  of  his  nature  and  mediatorship  as  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man,  and  on  various 

occasions  acknowledged  by  his  enemies.     And  this  separateness  appeared  even  more 

conspicuously  in  his  vicarious  and  propitiatory  death.     His  life  was  a  new  revelation 

of  life ;  his  death  was  a  new  revelation  of  death.     "  Separate  "  was  that  death  from 

all  deaths  actual  and  possible.     He  spokeof  it  as  he  never  spake  of  aught  else  involving 

himself.    He  had  feelings  concerning  it  that  he  never  indicated  as  touching  other 

esrsonal  interests.    For  its  loneliness  and  secret  agony,  for  its  public  dishonour  sad 
umiliatton,  for  its  apparent  triumph  of  his  foes  and  its  seeming  discomfiture  e< 


334  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa    [oh.  z.  1— 83L 

himself,  for  Ito  Jewish  »nd  Roman  and  world-wide  aspects,  for  its  wlf-sacrifice,  fbr  It 
as  the  divinely  ordained  means  to  reconcile  God  to  n><in  and  man  to  God,  be  prepared 
himself  as  one  who  realized  the  infiniteness  of  the  act.    Previously  to  the  great  passion- 
hour,  natore  had  given  him,  of  her  own  accord,  no  recognition  of  his  Divine  majesty. 
It  was  his  act,  not  hers,  when  miracles  transpired.    But,  at  his  death,  she  put  forth 
the  power  of  her  attestation  to  the  fiwt  that  he  was  "  separate  from  sinners,"  and 
by  the  darkness,  and  the  earthquake,  and  the  opened  graves,  and  the  rent  veil,  signified 
that,  "Truly  this  man  was  the  Son  of  Gh>d.      Now,  in  St.  Paul's  view,  partaking 
of  the  Lord  s  Supper  is  partaking  spiritually  of  the  blood  and  body  of  Christ,  and 
if  so,  it  is  communion  with  him,  the  communion — a  special  form  of  confessing  him, 
a  particular  and  most  solemn  act  of  acknowledging  him  as  our  Bedeemer  and  Lord, 
in  a  word,  a  iacrament.    Wine  and  bread  are  symbols;  but  the  sacrament  must 
not  be  limited  to  ordinary  symbolism.    It  is  •  tact,  a  vital  and  absolute  fact,  a  Divine 
reality,  to  the  believer's  soul,  a  spiritual  realization  of  Christ.    Nothing  magical  and 
superstitious,  nothing  mechanical,  nothing  that  derives  virtue  from  priest  and  cet^ 
menials  in  the  form  of  sacerdotal  consecration,  belongs  to  its  nature,  use,  and  end. 
It  is  simple,  it  is  personal  to  the  faith  and  love  of  the  humble  disciples  of  the  cross, 
it  is  sublime  because  so  perfectly  spiritual  In  the  union  and  fellowship  with  Christ 
which  it  is  intended  to  secure.    But  is  this  all?    By  no  means;  it  is  communion 
and  fellowship  among  believers.    "We  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread."    Now, 
there  are  common  ties  among  Christians  that  grow  out  of  their  relation  to  one  another 
in  Christ  considered  as  Son  of  man.    If  he  was  Philanthropist,  Benefactor,  Friend, 
Healer,  Teacher,  Inspirer,  he  has  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  in  his 
steps,  and  this  example-  is  beautifully  potent  when  we  co-operate  in  these  l)eneficent 
duties.    Yet  there  is  a  higher  expression  of  our  union  when  we  partake  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  since  this  recognizes  his  atoning  death  as  the  bond  that  makes  us  one.    And 
as  Christ's  works  of  power  and  mercy  throughout  Galilee  and  Judasa  went  forward 
and  attained  their  fullest  manifestation  in  the  atonement  of  Calvary,  so  our  sympathies 
with  one  another  and  harmonious  activity  in  daily  acts  of  kindness  must  be  ratified 
and  sealed  by  being  "  partakers  of  that  one  bread."    Jesus  said,  "  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted 
up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."    No  such  drawing  power  did  he 
claim  for  his  miracles,  nor  for  other  marvellous  forces  that  radiated  in  every  direction 
from  him  as  the  great  Centre  of  blessing  in  his  day  to  the  poor,  the  diseased,  the 
demoniac.    Where  he  is  mightiest  we  are  most  mighty ;  for  it  pleased  him,  in  varying 
the  manifestations  of  his  omnipotence  and  adapting  them  to  the  different  instincts 
of  man  as  he  dealt  one  by  one  with  these  primal  qualities,  it  pleased  him,  we  say,  to 
leave  similar  channels  of  activity  for  us  to  occupy.    Therefore  it  is  that  the  cross  Ufts 
us  up  into  a  higher  companionship  with  one  another.    Even  in  common  life,  there 
is  no  such  reconciler  as  death.    A  corpse  in  a  divided  household  is  a  peace-maker. 
We  are  all  brothers  at  a  funeral.    The  presence  of  death  lingers  not  in  the  senses, 
nor  pauses  in  the  imagination,  nor  rests  in  the  understanding,  but  goes  down  into 
the  great  original  instincts,  where  the  sense  of  humanity  lies  embedded  under  the 
shadow  of  the  infinite.    Of  what  immeasurable  value,  then,  is  the  death  of  Christ 
as  a  uniting  influence  in  behalf  of  brotherhood  I     And  what  an  appeal  the  communion 
makes  to  that  social  sentiment  which  is  so  precious  to  Christianity  I     And  who  can 
go  in  a  devout  frame  of  mind  to  the  table  of  the  Lord  without  feeling  that  "life's 
poor  distinctions  vanish  here,"  without  a  larger  consciousness  of  the  Divine  loveliness 
of  forbearance,  and  of  patience  with  others,  and  of  forgiveness  of  enemies,  and  of  the 
blessedness  unspeakable  and  fuU  of  glory  in  charity  when  charity  as  "the  greatest" 
possesses  intellect,  heart,  and  life  ?    God  be  praised  for  such  hours  1    Finer  spheres 
than  sun  and  planets  measure  their  coming,  their  stay,  and  their  going.    Nor  does 
the  argument  rest  at  this  point.     "  To  partake  of  a  Jewish  sacrifice  as  a  sacrifice,  and 
m  a  holy  place,  was  an  act  of  Jewish  worship "  (Hodge).     Here  are  "  our  fathers," 
"  Israel  after  the  flesh,"  and  they  were  "  partakers  of  the  altar ; "  and  here  are  we,  to 
whom  "  the  ages "  have  brought  their  light  and  privileges  and  been  perfected  in  the 
epoch  of  Christianity,  and  who  "  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread."    Shall  we  be 
found  feasting  in  idol-temples  ?     This  is  heathenish  idolatry,  this  is  communion  with 
devils,  this  is  fatal  to  brotherhood,  this  is  treachery  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    What 
do  I  say  ?    Do  I  declare  that  the  idol  is  anything  or  the  sacrifice  anything?    I,  Paul, 


ni.  1. 1—33.]    THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  335 

My  to  you,  that  ye  cannot  "  drink  the  cup ''  consecrated  to  the  Lcrd  and  "  drink  the 
cup"  consecrated  by  the  heathen  to  "their  demons — deities  to  the  Gentiles,  evil  spirits 
to  Jews  and  Christians.  For  this  use  of  the  cup  is  an  acknowledgment  of  fellowship 
with  these  "evil  spirits,"  and  a  fraternization  with  their  worshippers.  Such  conduct 
is  utterly  tinjiistifiable ;  it  will  "  provoke  the  Lord  to  jealousy,"  and  to  a  jealousy  like 
that  when  wedded  love  has  proved  faithless  to  its  holy  vow.  And  can  ye  Corinthians 
withstand  such  a  devouring  flame  of  anger  ?  Then  he  recurs  to  the  statement  made 
in  ch.  vi.  12,  "  All  things  are  lawful,"  etc.,  and  reaffirms  the  ethical  principle  of 
restraint  on  personal  liberty.  And  with  the  mightier  impulse  which  has  just  accented 
its  deep  tones  of  warning,  the  thought  of  expediency  widens  its  application.  What 
is  the  great  tap-root  of  all  our  evils?  Selfishness.  And  this  selfishness  assumes 
manifold  forms,  intellectual  and  social,  physical  and  commercial.  Subtle  one  moment 
and  palpable  the  next ;  disguised  and  then  open ;  endless  in  shifts  and  turns ;  inex- 
haustible in  resources ;  skilled  in  every  ^variety  of  means;  sharp,  vigilant,  unwearied; 
its  five  senses  multiplied  in  its  unnumbered  agents ; — what  save  Christianity,  would 
entertain  such  a  hope  of  the  human  race  aa  to  warrant  the  strong  utterance,  "  Let  no 
man  eeek  his  own,  but  every  man  another's  wealth  "  ?  This  is  laying  the  axe  to  the 
root  of  the  gigantic  tree  with  its  trunk  and  branches.  Anything  less  than  iinselflsh 
love  will  not  satisfy  the  argument  at  this  stage.  Whither  has  the  fiery  logician  been  ? 
Where  has  he  arrested  his  course  and  paused  to  meditate  and  analyze  ?  The  death 
of  Christ  and  the  memorials  of  that  death,  fellowship  with  his  sufferings,  communion 
with  the  "  great  High  Priest  that  is  passed  into  the  heavens ; "  and,  along  with  this 
theme,  the  communion  with  brethren  and  the  burdening  sense  of  that  unity  of  believers 
which  all  grea|  souls  aspire  to,  but  have  to  mourn  over  as  a  postponed  reality  ; — such 
were  the  truths  that  had  engaged  the  strength  of  his  intellect  and  the  ardour  of  his 
feelings.  Could  he  tolerate  the  idea  of  one  making  himself  the  supreme  object  of 
consideration  ?  Could  he  think  of  a  man  in  Christ  shutting  himself  out  of  the  very 
heart  of  Christ  ?  Only  in  such  words  as  these  can  he  appease  the  yearnings  of  his 
nature :  "  Let  no  man  seek  his  own,  but  every  man  another's  wealth."  Suppose,  then, 
that  these  Corinthian  Cbristiass  were  at  a  private  feast,  enjoying  the  hospitality  of 
a  friend ;  would  it  be  proper  for  the  man  of  scruples  to  inquire  into  the  meats?  Nay, 
this  is  not  a  "  communiou,"  though  a  social  union,  and  hence  you  are  at  liberty  to  eat ; 
"  asking  no  question  for  conscience  sake."  Sentiment  has  its  obligations  no  less  than 
conscience,  and,  in  fact,  conscience  is  honoured  when  you  remember  that  "  the  earth 
is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof."  If,  however,  some  one  says  to  you,  "  This  is 
offered  in  sacrifice  unto  idols,"  the  matter  takes  another  aspect.  For  the  sake  of  a 
brother  guest  whose  scruples  are  wide  awake,  do  not  eat.  It  is  his  conscience  that 
your  conscience  is  to  respect,  and  therefore  abstain.  If  a  weak  brother  were  to  ask  you 
to  do  ■omething  or  avoid  something  for  the  sake  of  bis  conscience  that  your  own 
conscience  would  not  suffer  you  to  do  or  to  forbear,  resist  him  and  by  no  means  comply. 
Weakness  may  be  yielded  to  simply  as  the  infirmity  of  another,  but  if  it  becorne 
dogmatic  and  aggressive,  seeking  to  impose  its  restraints  on  our  convictions,  Christianity 
never  requires  of  us  to  submit  to  such  meddling  dictation.  Condescension  to  an  infirm 
mind  is  very  proper  and  commendable,  provided  it  do  not  make  us  infirm.  Easy 
compliances  of  this  lax  sort  are  dangerous  snares.  In  the  one  case,  the  compliance  is 
on  principle ;  in  the  other,  the  non-compliance  is  on  principle ;  and,  in  each  instance, 
conscience  is  upheld.  Then  the  apostle  rises  again  to  a  broad,  general  truth,  "  Do  all 
to  the  glory  of  God."  For  this  statement,  that  extends  the  sentiment  of  a  spiritual 
mind  over  all  duties,  he  had  already  prepared  the  way.  Twice  had  he  said,  "  The  earth 
is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof,"  and,  in  the  third  chapter  of  the  Epistle,  he  had 
declared,  "  All  is  yours;"  We  are  not  like  trees  that  can  only  grow  in  certain  soils  and 
climates.  We  are  not  like  animals  that  are  found  exclusively  on  this  or  that  continent. 
We  are  not  creatures  limited  to  their  immediate  surroundings.  To  form  a  human  soul, 
a  world  and  a  universe  of  worlds  are  needed.  Influences  acting  on  us  are  not  counted 
and  tabulated  by  the  intellect  of  the  senses.  These  senses  shut  us  up  in  the  body. 
They  are  for  to-day  and  for  appropriating  what  is  at  hand.  Intellect  is  under  stern 
limitations.  Yet  the  sphere  of  the  inner  life  is  for  ever  widening  beyond  the  sphere  of 
sensuous  existence,  and  on  the  eyes  of  "  three  score  and  ten  "  the  stars  shine  with  a 
home-light  unknown  to  ywmg  manhood.    Growth  is  within,  but  there  is  no  hU> 


336  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  x.  1— 3& 

nutrition.  All  the  materials  that  nourish  and  build  np  the  man  come  from  without, 
and,  hence,  it  is  not  by  looking  merely  at  ourselves' and  our  capacities,  but  by  regarding 
the  world  and  the  universe  as  fiimishing  the  occasions  and  supplying  the  means  oi 
development,  that  we  learn  to  measure  our  ability  by  the  gaace  of  God  stored  up  in  all 
things  for  our  enrichment.  Where  we  are  interprets  what  we  are.  Now,  in  view  of 
this,  St.  Paul  lays  down  the  principle, "  Whether ...  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  jt 
do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  The  range  is  immense ;  the  world  is  not  to  be  cut  up 
into  fragments,  and  the  "  glory  of  God  "  identified  solely  with  them  ;  but,  as  the  primary 
condition  of  glorifying  him,  we  are  to  believe  that  his  Divine  presence  is  in  whatever 
be  has  created.  There  is  nothing  speculative  and  remote  in  this  doctrine.  How  are 
we  to  glorify  God  ?  By  bein?  most  truly  human ;  by  realizing  that  others  are  a  part 
of  ourselves  and  we  a  part  of  them ;  by  acting  on  the  truth  that  individuality  attains 
its  perfection  in  brotherhood;  and  therefore  we  should  "please  all  men  in  all  things." 
Nothing  selfish  must  appear  in  it ;  "  not  seeking  mine  own  profit."  Nothing  of 
effeminacy,  nothing  of  calculating  acquiescence,  must  taint  its  purity,  and  wa  must 
please  others  for  their  profit,  that  they  may  he  saved. — tu 

Ver.  4. — "  That  epiritual  Rock."  There  is  no  need,  in  explaining  this  passage,  t« 
suppose  a  reference  on  the  part  of  the  writer  to  the  Jewish  fable  that  the  rock  in 
question  was  rolled  along  with  the  advancing  camp  of  Israel  through  the  wilderness  of 
wandering,  and  that  upon  the  chant  of  the  chiefs, "  Spring  up,  0  well  1 "  the  water  gushed 
forth  for  the  supply  of  the  thirsting  tribes.  There  seems  to  be  no  need  even  to  adopt 
the  common  supposition  that  water  sprang  miraculously  from  rocks  at  every  station  of 
the  wonderful  journey.  It  is  enough  to  accept  the  plain  record  that  (the  miraculous 
event  did  happen,  once  at  the  commencement  and  once  towards  the  close  of  the 
pilgrimage  of  the  chosen  people.  The  apostle's  mind  was  filled  with  memories  of  the 
consecrated  nation,  and  so  clear  before  that  mind  was  the  unity  of  the  two  dispensations, 
that  it  seemed  most  natural  to  him,  in  drawing  a  parallel  between  the  Israelites  and  the 
Corinthian  Christians,  to  assert  that  the  spiritual  Bock  was  Christ — the  Source  and 
Author  of  all  blessings  in  every  period  of  history  and  in  all  circumstances  of  humanity. 
The  assertion  may  be  regarded — 

L  HisTOBioALLT.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Word,  the  Wisdom  of  God,  was  the  Angel 
of  the  Church  in  the  wilderness.  It  is  the  privilege  of  the  Christian  to  trace  his 
Saviour's  presence  throughout  the  whole  of  human  history.  He  who  was  the  Rock  ot 
salvation  to  the  tribes  ready  to  die  from  thirst,  is  the  same  to  all  mankind  in  every  age. 
His  presence  never  removes  and  his  grace  never  fails.  He  is  Jehovah,  the  Rock  of 
eternal  ages. 

II.  SpiEiTUAiiLT.  Evidently  the  apostle  draws  his  readers'  attention  to  the  supply 
of  other  than  physical  necessities.  To  Israel  and  to  the  Church  of  this  dispensation 
of  grace  the  Lord  Christ  is  the  all-sufficient  channel  of  Divine  mercy  and  blessing.  1. 
OeneraMy  speaking,  there  is  an  obvious  aptness  in  the  similitude.  (1)  As  a  Rock,  Christ, 
is  distinguished  by  stability,  and  is  not  to  be  shaken  or  removed.  (2)  He  has  heights 
for  refuge  into  which  his  people  can  flee,  a  stronghold  and  security  to  all  who  put  their 
trust  in  him.  (3)  As  the  rock  has  cliiTs  and  clefts  for  shadow  and  for  shelter  fi'om  the 
great  heat  in  a  dry  and  thirsty  land  where  no  water  is,  so  Christ  screens  the  soul  from 
fiery  temptations  and  distresses.  2.  Specially,  and  upon  the  suggestion  of  the  incident 
referred  to,  it  must  be  remarked  that  Christ  is  the  Rook  because  he  is  the  Source  of 
living  waters.  This  is  no  doubt  the  central  thought  of  the  passage,  ami  the  resemblance 
is  very  striking  and  very  full  and  rich.  Thus  it  is  apparent :  (1)  That  Christ  supplies  an 
urgent  need.  It  was  in  the  sorest  extremity  of  the  nation  that  the  rock  was  smitten 
and  yielded  the  streams  which  the  dry  desert  knew  not;  and,  in  like  manner,  the  need 
of  humanity  was  distressing  and  urgent  when  the  Divine  Rock  gave  forth  the  springs 
of  life  eternal.  (2)  The  supply  came  from  an  unexpected  source.  What  so  unlikely  as 
the  hard  rock  of  the  desert  to  yield  rivulets  of  limpid  water  ?  And  who  that  saw  Christ 
in  his  humiliation,  who  grew  up  "  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground,"  could  imagine  what 
stores  of  blessing  were  in  his  sacred  being?  (3)  From  Christ  procoe'ds  satisfaction  for 
all  spiritual  wants.  These  are  the  thirst  of  the  soul,  which  desires  knowledge,  favour, 
peace,  refreshment,  and  joy, — all  which  is  included  in  the  phrase  "  eternal  Hfe."  "  II 
any  maa  thirst,"  says  Jesus,  "  let  him  come  unto  me,  and  drink.*    He  has  promised 


OH.  X.  1—33.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0RIKTHIAN8.  387 

"  liying  water,  of  which  whoso  drinks  shall  not  thirst  again."  The  dying  revlTe,  the 
thirsting  are  satisfied,  the  weary  are  refreshed,  the  labourers  are  cheered,  w  they 
together  draw  near  to  the  spiritual  fountains  which  flow  from  Christ.  (4)  The 
blessings  which  proceed  from  Jesus  proceed  in  an  enduring  and  tmfailing  stream  of 
supply.  Generations  drink  at  the  same  spring,  and  qumoh  thflir  thirst,  only  to 
commend  the  living  fountun  to  all  succeeding 'ages. 

III.  Saobamgntallt.  The  allusion  is  unraistakahlo  to  thi  oommnnion  of  the 
Lord's  Supper.  Both  the  streams  in  the  wilderness  and  the  cap  of  the  Eucharist 
symbolize  the  spiritual  participation,  which  is  the  privilege  of  those  to  whom  the  Word 
of  the  Lord  is  addressed,  in  the  supply  afforded  by  the  Divine  and  living  Rock.  The 
voice  of  heaven  reaches  our  grateful  ear :  "  Eat,  0  friends ;  drink,  ...  0  beloved  I  " 
The  superiority  of  the  new  covenant  is  manifest :  the  Israelites  drank  of  water ;  Ohrist 
is  not  only  the  Stream  of  water  in  the  desert,  he  is  the  Gup  of  inne  at  the  banqueting 
table.  "  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  blood  of 
Ohrist  f"—T. 

Ver.  6.—"  Ouir  examplei,''    The  force  of  example,  both  to  encourage  and  to  deter,  Is 

familiar  and  admitted.  The  principle  is  nsed  in  education,  in  the  arts,  in  government 
and  law.  It  is  justly  believed  that  a  readier  and  deeper  impression  is  produced  by 
living  characters  and  real  events  than  by  abstract  propositions.  The  principle  is 
employed  by  religion.  The  Bible  is  full  of  examples  of  sin,  punishment,  repentance, 
virtue,  reward.  The  Old  Testament  has  been  termed  the  pictiire-book  accompanying 
and  illustrating  the  lessons  of  the  New  Testament.  The  text  assumes  the  special 
applicability  of  the  history  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  to  the  spiritual  instruction,  first 
of  the  Corinthians,  and  then  also  of  all  professed  Christians.  Paul  points  and  emphasizes 
his  appeals  to  diligence,  purity,  cheerfulness,  etc.,  by  referring  to  the  well-known 
incidents  of  the  journey  of  Israel  from  Egypt  to  the  land  of  promise. 

I.  IsBABL  IN  THE  wiLDEBNESs  IS  AN  EXAMPLE  OF  WARNiNQ.  1.  Against  mwmurtng, 
which,  it  is  to  be  feared,  never  appears  to  many  Christians  to  be  of  the  nature  of  sin, 
and  against  which  accordingly  many  are  not  upon  their  guard.  But  murmuring  is 
against  Divine  appointment,  and  is  therefore  against  Grod  himself.  2.  Against  sensvality. 
Into  these  it  was  not  surprising  that  Israel  should  fall,  having  only  just  escaped  from 
Egypt,  and  being  surrounded  by  the  licentious  heathen.  And  what  more  important 
and  necessary  than  a  caution  against  defiling  and  destroying  the  temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost?  3.  Against  rehellion,  Israel  again  and  again  rebelled  against  Moses  the 
servant  of  God,  and  against  Jehovah  himself.  And  Christians  need  to  be  reminded 
that  to  violate  God's  Law,  to  defy  the  authority  of  God's  inspired  apostles,  to  resist  the 
Divine  message  of  God's  ministers,  is  treason,  and  cannot  go  unpunished.  4.  Against 
unbelief.  This  was  the  sin  which  lay  at  the  root  of  the  others,  as  is  shown  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  It  contrasts  with  that  childlike  faith  which  is  becoming 
in  the  privileged  people  of  the  Lord.  All  such  conduct,  as  we  may  leam  from  the  Old 
Testament  narrative  referred  to,  is  observed,  disapproved,  and  censured  by  the 
omniscient  Ruler.  It  is  tempting  Christ.  We  ue  reminded  of  the  possibility  and  of 
the  culpability  of  such  sin. 

IL  Israel  in  the  wildebnbsb  u  an  kxamplk  of  bnooubaoehent.  If  we  look  at 
the  humau  side,  the  lesson  is  one  of  warning;  but  if  we  regard  the  Divine  side,  there 
we  see  much  to  cheer,  animate,  and  inspire  us.  We  remark :  1.  Divine  guidance.  As 
Israel  was  led  by  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire,  so  will  all  who  look  up  and  commit 
their  way  unto  the  Lord,  experience  his  directing  grace. .  2.  Divine  care,  bounti/,  and 
goodness.  As  Israel  ate  of  the  manna  from  heaven  and  drank  of  the  streams  from  the 
rock,  so  that,  when  earth  failed,  heaven  interposed,  in  like  manner  will  the  beneficence 
of  God  satisfy  the  wants  of  all  who  in  necessity  and  straits  call  upon  him.  8.  Divine 
protection.  As  Israel's  foes  were  discomfited,  as  threatening  dangers  were  averted,  so 
shall  a  way  of  escape  and  a  door  of  deliverance  be  provided  for  all  who  trust  in  • 
gracious  and  redeeming  Gud.  The  arm  of  flesh  may  fail,  but  the  arm  of  Omnipotence 
shall  prove  ready  and  victorious.  4.  The  final  possession  of  the  promises.  Gk)d  led  hii 
people  to  the  land  he  promised  to  their  fathers ;  not  immediately,  not  by  a  way  thej 
knew,  not  without  difficulties,  hardships,  contests,  yet  surely,  safely,  victoriously. 
Chose  who  are  "  on  their  way  to  God "  may  well  be  animated  by  sudi  reoolleotioni, 

Ii  C0BINTHIAN8.  ■ 


338  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  x.  1— 8J, 


and  by  the  light  they  cast  upon  the  position  and  the  hopes  of  the  Christian.  Heaven 
may  seem  to  vis  "the  land  which  is  very  far  off;"  yet  faith  can  bring  it  near  and  makt 
it  oon  even  now. 

"  E'en  now  by  faith  I  see  thee, 
E'en  now  thy  walls  discern, 
To  thee  my  thoughts  are  kindled, 
And  itrive  and  pant  and  yearn."  m 

▼er.  9. — Tempting  Christ.  Whether  we  read  hero  "the  Lord,"  or  "Christ"  the 
meaning  is  the  same.  The  relation  of  Israel  to  Jehovah  was  parallel,  was  identical, 
with  the  relation  of  Christians  to  their  Lord  Christ.  If  we  are  loj'al  to  our  King  Jesus, 
then  we  are  in  the  position  of  the  Hebrews  when  they  reverenced  and  served  the  Lord 
their  God ;  if  we  are  traitors  to  him  whom  we  (fall  Master  and  Lord,  then  we  stand  in 
the  same  condemnation  as  rebellious  Israel.  The  language  of  the  apostle  implies  that 
there  is  danger  lest  we  presumptuously  test,  by  our  unbelief,  ingratitude,  and  rebellion, 
the  forbearance  and  the  grace  of  him  whose  we  profess  to  be,  whom  we  profess  to  serve. 

L  The  ways  in  which  wb  abb  in  danger  of  tempting  Chbist.  1.  Some  hearers 
of  the  gospel  tempt  the  Lord  by  neglecting  his  gospel  as  unimportant  and  unnecessary. 

2.  Some  by  deferring  that  adhesion  and  devotion  to  Christ  which  his  authority  and 
circumstances  require.  3.  Some  Christians  tempt  the  Lord  by  their  longings  for  the 
sins  from  which  he  came  and  died  to  deliver  them.  As  the  Israelites  lusted  for  the 
flesh-pots  of  Egypt,  so  it  is  to  be  feared  there  are  Christians  who  cast  a  longing  eye 
upon  the  sinful  and  worldly  pleasures  from  which  they  should  be  dehvered.  4.  Some 
by  their  ingratitude,  murmuring,  and  rebelliousness.  As  at  Corinth  there  were  those 
who  were  dissatisfied  with  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel,  those  who  resisted  the  authority 
of  the  apostle,  those  who  had  little  sympathy  with  the  Christian  spirit  of  self-denial ; 
so  in  the  Church  are  there  not  a  few  whose  temper  and  conduct  are  such  as  to  put  to 
the  utmost  trial  the  long-suffering  and  forbearance  of  the  Lord. 

II.   Q'EE   BEAB0N8    TO    BE    FOUND   IN    ChBIST  HIMSELF  WHY    HIS  PEOPLE   BHO0U>  HOT 

TBHFT  HIM.  1.  They  are  bound  to  honour  and  obey  him  as  the  Son  of  QoA.  2.  They 
are  bound  to  acknowledge  his  claims  upon  their  gratitude,  love,  and  service.  3.  They 
may  well  be  affected  by  the  touching  spectacle  of  his  patience  and  long-suffering.  Has 
he  not  "borne  with  their  manners  in  the  wilderness"?  Can  they  any  longer  subject 
him  to  a  trial  so  unjust  and  so  cruel  ? 

UL  The  seasons  belatino  to  themselves  wht  Chbist's  people  bhocld  not 
TEMPT  him.  1.  Continuance  in  unbelief  and  rebellion  will  certainly  harden  the  heart, 
and  unfit  and  indispose  for  his  service.  2.  The  blessed  and  sacred  opportunity 
which  life  affords  for  grateful  consecration  and  obedience  will  pass  by  unimproved. 

3.  An  example  of  the  kind  deprecated  will  tend  to  embolden  others  to  persevere  in 
Irreligion  and  in  iniquity.  4.  It  must  not  he  forgotten  that,  although  Christ  is  a  Saviour, 
he  is  also  a  Judge.  His  forbearance  will  not  last  for  ever.  Where  he  cannot  acquit, 
he  must  and  wiU  condemn.  Men  may  try  Christ  too  long  and  too  for.  Sentence  may 
be  deferred,  but  it  will  be  pronounced  and  it  will  be  executed.  After  all,  it  is  not  so 
much  the  case  that  we  are  testing  and  trying  Christ,  as  that  he  is  testing  and  trying  us. 
Now  is  the  time  of  our  probation.    How  do  we  endure  when  he  puts  us  to  the  proof? — ^T. 

Yen  10.—"  Neither  murmur  ye."  Many  were  the  occasions  upon  which  Israel  in 
the  wilderness,  murmured  against  their  QoA.  They  murmured  against  the  manna  and 
longed  for  flesh ;  against  the  authority  and  appointments  of  Moses  and  Aaron ;  against 
the  reports  which  the  spies  brought  concerning  the  land  of  Canaan ;  against  the 
difBcultios  which  beset  them  and  the  foes  who  encountered  them  upon  their  journey. 
No  wonder  that  their  gracious  and  forbearing  Ruler  exclaimed,  "  Forty  years  long  was 
I  grieved  with  this  generation."  The  conduct  of  the  chosen  people  in  this  respect  is  by 
the  apostle  brought  under  the  notice  of  the  Corinthian  Christians  as  recorded  for  their 
advantage,  to  serve  as  a  warning  and  a  corrective  to  themselves.  And  there  is  no 
congregation  in  which  there  are  not  those  who  stand  in  especial  need  of  the  inspired 
admonition,  "  Neither  murmur  ye." 

I.  Human  life  abounds  with  offobtdnitdbi  and  tekftations  to  KUBiniiL 
1.  There  are  such  as  are  etaunon  to  the  human  lot    There  may  be  mentioned  amoBg 


0H.X.1— as.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   THE   CORINTHIANS.  S39 

thea*— infirmity  and  BufferiDg  of  body:  th«  brevity  of  its  iife,  and  its  ronsequent 
insufficiency  for  carrying  out  faTOurite  Bcnemes  or  studies ;  the  limitation  of  the  mental 
powers  and  of  knowledge;  the  imperfections  of  human  society,  civil,  social,  and 
religious.  2.  There  are  such  as  may,  at  any  time,  be  special  to  individuals.  Some  are 
called  upon  to  endure  personal  sufferings  and  privations ;  others,  sorrows  and  l)ereave- 
ments ;  others,  unremitting  toil ;  others,  uncongenial  occupations ;  others,  calamities  and 
disappcintments ;  others,  very  limited  opportunities ;  others,  trials  and  persecutions  for 
Christ's  sake.  All  these  may  be  occasions  for  murmuring,  and  sometimes  those  who 
are  thus  tried  must  need  special  grace  to  refrun  from  complaints,  and  to  cultivate 
a  cheerful,  grateful,  submissive  spirit. 

II.  The  uuBMUBiKa  hebe  censubed  is  a  oebtaut  sinful  Kimt  or  dissatistaotion 
AND  complaint.  The  admonition  may  be  misunderstood.  The  apostle  does  not  exhort 
us  to  be  fatalistically  contented  with  whatever  actually  exists,  to  be  silent  In  the 
presence  of  human  wrongs  and  ills,  to  be  careless  and  indifferent  as  to  the  improvement 
and  amelioration  of  the  condition  of  society.  But  we  are  warned  against  rebelling 
against  God,  complaining  of  his  ways,  and  resisting  his  will.  XJircumstances  may  be 
displeasing  and  uncongenial  to  us,  yet  they  may  be  permitted  by  the  wisdom  and 
goodness  of  Gk>d.  The  spirit  of  discontentment  and  rebellion  must  be  repressed,  and 
language  expressing  it  must  be  silenced. 

III.  These  abb  considebatioks  waiOH  hat  act  as  dissuabiyeb  add  oobbectitbs. 
1.  The  injurious  moral  effect  of  murmuring.  This  is  undeniable;  we  recognize  its 
effect  upon :  (1)  The  murmurer  himself,  whom  it  renders  unhappy,  using  up  energies 
which  might  be  otherwise  and  well  employed,  and  unfitting  him  for  the  service  of  God. 
^2)  Upon  society  generally ;  for  the  habit  is  most  contagious,  and  is  one  which  pro- 
duces a  very  depressing  effect  upon  all  who  yield  to  it  and  upon  all  who  listen  to  their 
dismal  complaints.  2.  The  dishonour  done  to  God's  providence.  In  &ct,  to  murmur 
is  to  call  into  question,  or  at  all  events  to  cast  some  suspicion  upon,  God's  wisdom, 
goodness,  purposes  of  benevolence  concerning  us,  and  interest  in  and  care  for  vs. 
3.  Christ's  example  should  deter  his  followers  from  murmuring.  How  cheerful  wac 
his  demeanour  I  how  acquiescent  was  he  in  the  humiliation  of  his  lot  I  how  patient  in 
suffering!  how  submissive  in  death  and  sacrifice  I  Followers  and  disciples  of  Jesus  are 
inconsistent  indeed  when  they  ^ve  way  to  a  spirit  of  complaint,  i.  Murmuring  is 
inconsistent  with  the  proper  exercises  of  religion.  It  cannot  contribute  to  obedience ; 
it  is  not  consistent  with  giving  of  thanks  and  with  praise ;  it  is  not  the  fruit  of  prayer. 
6.  The  hope  of  the  future  should  banish  murmuring.  The  occasions  for  complaint — ^the 
trials  of  the  earthly  life — ^will  soon  be  over.  Let  them  have  their  way  and  do  their 
work  now.  The  prospect  before  us  is  one  which  may  well  inspire  a  contented,  patient, 
uncomplaining  disposition  and  habit. 

Fbactical  lessons  and  afflioation.  1.  The  admonition  of  the  text  Is  the  voice 
of  Divine  authority :  how  dare  we  resist  it  ?  2.  It  is  the  voice  of  wisdom  and 
reason :  why  should  we  resist  it  ?  3.  It  is  the  voice  of  love  and  persuasion :  how  can 
we  resist  it  ?  "  Be  careful  for  nothing,  but  in  everything,  by  prayer  and  thank<!gi vbgg^ 
Ut  youi  requests  be  maJe  known  unto  God." 

"  Borne  murmur,  when  their  sky  is  deaf 

Anil  wholly  bright  to  view, 
If  one  sn\all  speck  of  dark  appear 

In  tlieir  great  heaven  of  blue ; 
And  snme  with  thankful  love  are  filled 

If  but  one  streak  of  light. 
One  ray  of  God's  good  mercy,  gild 

I'lie  darkness  of  their  niguL 

*In  palaces  are  hearts  that  ask. 
In  iliscontent  and  pride, 
Why  life  is  such  a  dreary  task. 
And  all  things  good  denied. 
And  licarts  in  poorest  huts  admire 

How  love  lias  in  their  aid 
(Love  that  not  ever  seems  to  tire) 
Buoh  riob  provision  made." 

(TrenA) 


340  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  0OBINTIIIAN8.    [oh.  x,  1—33 


Ver.  12. — The  danger  of  self-confldence.  To  "  stand "  is  to  be  and  to  continus 
uprigbt  in  the  Christian  life,  and  they  truly  stand  whose  character  and  habits  agree 
with  their  profession.  To  "  fall "  is  to  act  with  inconsistency,  to  yield  to  the  tempter, 
to  stumble  over  the  stone  of  offence,  to  be  caught  by  the  snare  which  is  spread ;  and 
this,  either  temporally  or  permanently.  Life  is  a  probation,  and  is  as  much  so  to  the 
Christian  as  to  others.  The  apostle  puts  all  his  reailers  upon  their  guard,  reminding 
them  that  this  is  a  scene,  a  period,  of  probation,  and  that  the  true  preparation  is  not  to 
be  found  in  self-confidence  and  boastfulness,  but  in  watchfulness,  humility,  and  prayer. 
"  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  staudeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 

I.  Thk  disposition  aoainbt  which  this  admonition  18  DiBEonsD.  It  is  self-con- 
fidence. 1.  Rtliance  upon  outward  privileges.  As  Israel  was  a  chosen  nation,  so 
Christians  are  Gfod's  "  peculiar  people ; "  and  there  is  danger  lest  this  should  be  adduced, 
perhaps  to  one's  self,  as  a  ground  for  presumption  and  arrogance.  2.  Reliamce  upon 
personal  strength  and  purity  of  character.  A  man  is  assured  that  he  can  take  good 
care  of  himself,  that  no  temptation  can  overtake  and  overmaster  him,  that  he  is  clad  ir 
armour  proof  against  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked.  No  need  to  warn  him  ;  he  is  safe  i 
3.  Boastfulness.  The  man  who  thinks  himself  so  secure  is  likely  to  glory  in  his  own 
position,  his  strength  of  character,  his  superiority  to  infirmities, — to  make  a  loud  pro- 
fession, and  to  regard  the  timid  with  a  compassionate  disdain. 

II.  The  pebils  accoufantino  such  a  disposition.  Paul  knew  how  necessaiy  and 
appropriate  was  his  counsel;  his  own  experience  of  human  nature  and  life,  elevated 
and  cleared  by  a  Divine  inspiration,  led  him  to  this  most  wise  and  salutary  admonition. 
1.  Such  a  peril  is  suggested  by  the  facts  of  human  nature.  It  is  supposed  that  there 
is  an  inflated,  unguarded  state  of  mind ;  that  a  violent  and  sudden  temptation  comes  in 
the  way ;  and  that  there  follows  an  unexpected  and  grievous  fall.  That  a  self-con- 
fident spirit  is  more  dangerous  because  more  liable  to  temptation  than  a  lowly  spirit, 
distrustful  of  self,  is  well  known  to  all  who  have  experience  of  human  nature.  Those 
who  boast  of  sinlessness  are  on  the  verge  of  sin.  2.  Notable  examples  recorded  in 
Scripture  prove  the  assertion  now  made.  Hazael  was  indignant  at  the  very  supposition 
that  he  could  be  guilty  of  barbarities  and  cruelties  such  as  the  prophet  foretold ;  but 
when  the  temptation  came,  he  fell  into  the  snare.  Peter  was  vehement  in  his  protesta- 
tions, "  Though  I  die  with  thee,  I  will  not  deny  thee  I "  Tet  when  he  was  tempted 
by  cowardice,  he  denied  his  Lord. 

III.  The  effectual  bemedibs  against  a  spiritual  fall.  If  self-confidence  ia  o( 
no  avail,  where  is  safety  to  be  found  ?  1.  In  self-abasement  and  distrust.  2.  In  a 
simple  trust  in  the  protecting,  preserving,  delivering  power  of  God.  3.  In  watchfulness ; 
for  the  Christian  soldier  must  never  be  ofi'  his  guard ;  he  must  arm  himself,  watch,  and 
withstand  his  foe.  4.  In  prayer,  which  is  a  confession  that  we  are  exposed  to  danger, 
and  is  a  waiting  upon  God  and  seeking  his  providential  interposition  and  his  siniitual 
aid.— T. 

Ver.  13. — Temptation.  With  warning  the  inspired  teacher  conjoins  encouragement. 
The  self-confident  are  admonished  lest  their  high  opinion  of  themselves  should  be  the 
occasion  of  their  fall.  And,  in  the  next  verse,  the  timid  are  cheered  by  the  assurance 
that,  although  they  must  be  tempted,  a  Divine  Deliverer  shall  appear  upon  their  behalf, 
and  they  shall  be  led  in  the  path  of  safety.  This  is  an  assurance  consolatory  to  all  who 
are  desirous  to  turn  the  discipline  of  life  to  high  spiritual  account,  and  especially  to  the 
doubtful  and  the  diffident. 

I.  Temptation  is  permitted  bt  God.  1.  Seeing  that  it  is  allowed  by  Providence  to 
be  an  incident  of  human  life,  none  need  expect  to  escape.  The  young  are  tempted  by 
the  pleasures  of  sense  and  of  society;  the  old  by  avarice  and  the  love  of  ease;  the 
learned  by  self-confldence ;  the  great  by  ambition ;  the  pious  and  the  useful  by  spiritual 
pride.  2.  There  is  in  this  very  fact  an  element  of  con.solation.  To  every  tempted  soul 
it  may  be  said,  "  Your  case  is  not  peculiar ;  all  the  good  have  attained  to  goodness  by 
passing  through  the  fiery  furnace  of  a£9iction  and  persecution,  of  doubt  and  spiritual 
conflict."  Christ  himself  was  surely  tempted,  and  the  disciple  is  not  above  his  Lord 
It  is  the  common  lot,  in  which  we  have  fellowship  with  one  another  and  with  Christ. 

II.  Temptation  is  withstood  through  the  faithfulness  of  God.  1.  God  has 
undertaken  to  defend  and  deliver  his  servants:  "  Ue  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly 


OH.  X.  1—33.]    THE  FIIIST  EPIrfTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  841 

out  of  temptation."  The  faithfulness  of  a  true  and  unchanging  God  is  the  anchor  by 
which  the  tempted  shall  ride  out  the  fiercest  storm.  2.  God  effects  this  by  the  instru- 
mentality of  his  Word.  This  is  "  the  sword  of  the  Spirit."  When  Jesus  was  beset  by 
the  adversary,  he  warded  off  every  thrust  by  the  jower  of  the  Scripture.  3.  God 
encourages  his  people  to  call  upon  him  in  the  day  of  trial.  The  sentry  does  not 
advance  to  meet  the  approaching  foe ;  he  falls  back,  and  gives  warning  to  the 
garrison  and  the  commander.  So,  when  tempted,  should  we  arise  and  call  upon  our 
God. 

III.  Temptation  is  iTSEur  tempebed  by  an  ovebbulino  Providence.  It  shall  not 
exceed  our  powers  of  endurance  and  resistance.  It  may  be  subtle ;  it  may  be  sudden  ; 
yet  the  watchful,  prayerful  soul  shall  repel  and  overcome.  The  dart  which  would 
pierce  the  unarmed  falls  broken  firom  the  coat  of  mail ;  the  flaming  torch,  which  would 
explode  the  powder  did  it  fall  into  a  powder  magazine,  drops  harmless  into  a  pool  of 
water;  and  the  Buler  of  all  can  both  moderate  the  force  of  the  onset  and  impart 
strength  to  stand  in  the  evil  day. 

IV.  Temptation  is,  in  the  case  of  God's  people,  accompanied  by  a  means  of 
GSOAPE.  The  same  God  who  delivered  Daniel  from  the  lions'  den,  and  Peter  from  the 
prison,  makes  a  path  of  safety  for  all  who  trust  in  him.  The  experience  of  every 
Christian  verifies  this  a.ssurance.  The  story  of  the  soul  is  the  same  as  the  story  of  the 
ChiU'ch ;  dangers  and  distresses  ever  recur,  but  they  ever  affonl  to  the  Divine  Lord  an 
opportunity  for  revealing  his  compassion,  and  for  eificting  an  interposition  and  securing 
a  deliverance.  It  is  only  when  Christ's  followers  have  entered  the  gates  of  heavan  that 
they  will  be  beyond  the  reach  of  the  tempter's  arm. — T. 

Ver.  15. — The  judgment  of  the  wise.  The  apostle,  being  specially  and  divinely  inspired, 
claimed  to  have  authority  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  Yet  it  is  observable  that  he  did 
not  require  an  unintelligent  and  unreasoning  assent  to  his  doctrine  and  counsel.  If  his 
words  were  true  and  right,  he  had  the  reason  and  the  conscience  of  the  rational  and  the 
spiritual  upon  his  side.  Hence  the  frankness  and  fearlessneas  of  his  appeal.  If  Paul 
tiwk  such  a  position,  his  language  may  well  be  adopted  by  teachers  and  preachers  of 
Christianity,  who,  whatever  their  abilities,  piety,  and  zeal,  do  not  profess  to  enjoy  the 
sjiecial  and  supernatural  guidance  vouchsafed  to  an  apostle. 

1.  The  spirit  and  method  propeb  to  the  Christian  fbeaoheb  and  teaohbb.  1.  He 
should  not  speak  as  to  the  ignorance  of  the  ignorant,  as  if  his  aim  were  to  take  advantage 
of,  to  impose  upon,  persons  whose  slender  knowledge,  ability,  and  opportunities  incapa- 
citated and  forbade  them  to  receive  and  appreciate  the  truth.  2.  He  should  not  address 
himself  to  the  credulity  and  superstition  of  men ;  for  there  are  too  many  who  are  con- 
tent to  believe  upon  the  authority  of  man,  when  they  ought  to  inquire  with  regard  to 
what  conies  to  them  whether  it  comes  with  the  authority  of  truth,  of  God.  3,  He  should 
not  appeal  to  the  selfish  interests  or  the  selSsh  fears  of  men ;  for  these  are  methods 
which  are  certain  to  produce  an  immediate  and  powerfiil  effect,  but  are  unlikely  to 
work  real  good.  4.  But  he  should  speak  as  unto  wise  men,  inviting  their  attention 
and  inquiries.  Christ  and  his  apostles  proceeded  upon  this  method ;  they  apiealed  to 
the  thoughtfulness,  the  conscience,  the  right  feelings  of  those  whom  they  addressed. 
Compare  the  language  of  Scripture  with  that  of  arrogant  priests,  of  domineering 
pastors,  of  superficial  revivalists ;  and  what  is  the  result  of  the  comparison  ?  It  is  to 
produce  the  impression — How  just,  temperate,  thoughtful,  reasonable,  convincing,  per- 
iuasive,  are  the  arguments,  expositions,  and  appeals  of  Scripture  ! 

n.  The  spirit  and  method  pbopeb  to  hearers  and  readers  or  the  Wobd.  1.  Let 
them  cultivate  wisdom ;  for  it  is  to  wise  men  that  the  Word  of  God  is  addressed.  In 
the  Old  Testament,  especially  in  the  Proverbs,  there  are  innumerable  eulogies  of 
wisdom,  and  the  sons  of  men  are  entreated  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  wisdom,  to  cherish, 
seek,  and  pray  for  it.  And  in  the  New  Testament,  our  Lord's  discourses  evince  the 
same  appreciation  of  this  quality  of  mind.  Christ  commends  the  wise  man  who  built 
his  house  upon  the  rock,  the  wise  virgins  who  took  oil  in  their  vessels,  the  wiM  and 
faithful  servant  who  did  his  Lord's  will,  the  disciples  who  are  wise  as  serpents.  Not  a 
pretentious  and  proud  spirit,  but  the  wisdom  of  humility,  is  the  preparation  for  the 
kingdom :  the  wise  of  this  world,  the  wise  in  their  own  conceit,  are  not  in  the  way  for 
the  blessing.    2.  Let  them  judge  the  religious  teaching  they  recdve.    This  admonition 


342  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0BINTHIAX8.    [oh.  x.  1—33, 

of  St.  Paul's  is  »  copy  of  that  of  Christ  himself:  "Why  even  of  yourielTeg  jndge  y« 
not  what  is  right?"  It  was  an  admonition  which  the  apostle  seems  often  to  have 
repeated ;  "  Prove  all  things ; "  "  Judge  ye  if  it  is  not  unseemly,"  etc. ;  "  We  who  are 
spiritual  judge  all  things."  Then  is  abundant  material  for  judging,  in  nature  and  in 
revelation ;  there  are  canons  and  counsels  of  judgment  which  all  may  use ;  and  each 
Christian  has  a  certain  ability  and  opportunity  to  judge  for  himself.  Happily  the  most 
really  important  matters  are  the  least  difficult  to  judge.  3.  Let  them  judge  with  a 
view  to  practical  conduct  and  under  a  constant  sense  of  responsibility.  We  are  not 
called  upon  to  judge  other  men,  but  to  judge  of  what  relates  to  our  duty  as  followers 
of  Christ  Jesus.  The  questions  for  ua  to  decide  are  questions  of  pressing  moment  for 
ourselves.  The  responsibility  of  deciding  such  questions  cannot  be  shifted  from  our 
shoulders  to  those  of  others.  The  messenger  and  minister  of  Christ  speaks  as  unto  wise 
men ;  as  wise  men  let  the  hearers  of  the  Word  hear,  judge,  and  act. — T. 

Vers.  16,  17. — Communion.  This  passage  and  another  in  the  following  chapter 
would  in  themselves  «uffice  to  prove  the  antiquity  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  And  as  this 
Epistle  is  of  undisputed  genuineness,  it  may  be  taken  as  established  that  the  Eucharist 
has  been  observed  in  an  imbroken  chain  from  its  institution  by  the  Founder  of 
Christianity  down  to  our  own  days.  Important  light  is  cast  by  these  two  verses  upon 
the  spiritual  and  social  significance  of  the  Supper  of  the  Lord. 

I.  The  Holy  Commukion  is  a  distikctivk  badge  or  the  Christian  Cbuboh.  It  is 
only  by  recognizing  this  fact  that  we  understand  the  introduction  of  a  reference  to  it  in 
this  place.  St.  Paul  was  anxious  to  dissuade  the  Corinthian  Christians  from  partici- 
pating in  the  idolatrous  festivals  of  the  heathen.  And  he  brings  forward,  with  this  end 
in  view,  the  distinction  between  heathenism  and  Christianity  in  their  characteristic 
festivals  and  observances.  The  Jews  had  their  Passover,  the  Greeks  their  eranoi,  the 
early  Christians  tlieir  agapa.  The  peculiar  and  distinctive  observance  of  the 
Christians  was,  however,  the  Eucharist.  The  Corinthians  were  justly  reminded  that 
they  must  take  their  stand,  that  they  could  not  be  upon  both  sides,  that  they  must  not 
at  the  same  time  frequent  the  idol-feasts  and  sit  down  at  the  table  of  the  Lord  Christ. 
And  this  distinction  still  sulistautially  holds  good.  And  young  people  especially  may 
justly  be  urged  to  take  their  stand  upon  the  Lord's  side  and  pledge  themselTes  to 
Christian  fidelity  in  the  ordinance  distinctive  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 

II.  The  Holt  Communion  is  a  means  by  which  Christians  comkemobate  thb 
DEATH  OF  Chbist  AND  PARTAKE  OF  ITS  SPIRITUAL  BENEFITS.  1.  Prominence  is  given 
to  our  Lord's  death  by  the  mention  of  his  body  and  his  blood.  In  the  following  chapter 
St.  Paul  expreisly  reminds  his  readers  that  in  the  sacrament  they  show  (proclaim)  his 
death — untU  he  come.  2.  But  for  his  purpose  the  apostle,  in  this  place,  lays  special 
stress  upon  communion  in  the  Lord's  body  and  blood.  Amidst  alLthe  diversities  ol 
opinion  and  controversies  which  have  arisen  with  regard  to  this  sacrament,  it  may, 
perhaps,  he  affirmed  that  to  spiritually  minded  Christians  of  all  Churches,  the  observance 
of  the  Lord's  Supper  has  been  an  act  of  obedience  to  Christ,  and  the  means  of  spiritual 
union  and  fellowship  with  him.  The  true  participation  in  the  Lord's  death  is  the 
privilege  of  the  lowly,  believing,  reverent  communicant.  Necessary  as  are  food  and 
drink  for  the  sustenance  of  the  bodily  life  with  its  functions  and  activities,  equally 
necessary  is  it  for  the  spiritual  health  of  the  Christian  that  he  should  receive  Divine 
nourishment^that  he  should  feed  by  faith  upon  the  Son  of  God. 

III.  The  Holy  Communion  is  a  biqn  and  a  means  or  Cbbistian  fellowship. 
This  passage  casts  light,  not  only  upon  the  work  of  Christ  and  upon  the  individual 
appropriation  of  the  benefits  of  that  work,  but  also  upon  the  character,  constitution, 
and  purposes  of  the  Church.  It  is  observable  that  great  stress  is  laid  upon  communion, 
i.e.  upon  the  common  interest  in  the  one  Saviour  and  the  one  salvation,  and  the  mutual 
regard  of  interest,  confidence,  and  brotherly  love,  which  is  the  proper  consequence  of  union 
to  Jesus.  The  one  cup,  the  one  bread,  of  which  all  partake,  are  the  symbol  of  •  spiritual 
unity.  Nay,  Christians  are  actually  denominated,  in  virtue  of  their  unity  with  their 
Lora  and  with  one  another,  "one  bread,  one  body."  The  language  must  have  been 
startling  when  first  employed ;  it  sounds  very  strong,  even  to  ua  who  are  familiar  with 
it.    Yet  it  expresses  the  simple  and  literal  truth.    A  unity  which  no  power  on  earth 

riuld  effect,  and  which  no  thinker  could  have  conceived,  is  in  couim  of  Nalisi^Mi, 


CH.  X.  1—33.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  343 

tbrongh  the  cne  Saviour  and  the  one  Spirit ;  and  of  this  the  Holy  Communion  ii  a 
divinely  appointed  and  effectual  witness. — T. 

Ver.  23. — Expedience  and  edification.  Like  a  true  rhetorician,  as  Qn  the  best 
«ense)  Paul  was,  he  took  up  the  positions  of  his  opponents,  and  turned  them  to  good 
account  for  his  own  cause.  Those  of  the  Corinthians  who  adopted  the  laxer  view 
and  practice  with  reference  to  association  with  idolatry,  put  forward  the  natural  and 
unquestionable  plea — AU  things  indifferent  in  themselves  are  lawful  for  a  Christian. 
"  True,"  answered  Paul,  "it  is  so ;  none  has  more  than  myself  insisted  upon  this  principle  : 
you  learned  it  from  my  lips.  Yet  it  does  not  follow  that,  because  an  action  is  lawful, 
it  is  also  expedient  or  edifying ;  and  in  all  his  conduct  the  Christian  has  to  consider 
this."  Judged  by  this  standard,  conduct  may  be  disapproved  which  by  the  other 
standard  might  be  vindicated. 

I.  The  LABan  limits  of  Christian  liberty.  The  Christian  religion  is  not  one 
which  lays  down  exact  and  minute  laws  for  the  regulation  and  guidance  of  human 
life.  It  provides  principles,  and  leaves  their  application  to  the  iudividual.  There  is 
thus  large  scope  for  the  exercise  of  Christian  wisdom.  This  arrangement  is  an 
incidental  proof  of  the  Divine  origin  of  Christianity ;  and  it  is  also  in  harmony  with  the 
universality  of  its  intended  diffusion.  There  are  no  local  or  temporary  elements  in 
this  religion,  which  is  the  religion  of  God,  the  religion  of  humanity. 

II.  Conduct  that  approaches  the  extreme  limits  op  what  is  lawful  mat  bb 
injurious  to  the  individual  agent  himself.  1.  It  may  promote  a  selfish  disposi- 
tion and  habit  of  mind.  He  who  says,  "  I  am  enlightened ;  I  am  not  bound  by  rules  ; 
I  can  neglect  such  and  such  usual  observances;  I  can  indulge  in  such  and  such 
practices ; "  and  all  because  he  is  living  under  a  dispensation  of  liberty,  and  all  things 
are  lawful  to  him,  u  ill  probably  confiroi  the  natural  selfishness  which  he  should  aim 
at  repressing.  2.  Such  conduct  may  also  gradually  deteriorate  the  religious  character. 
There  are  those  who  need  the  assistauce  and  the  restraint  of  rules;  and  although 
these  may  not  be  laid  down  by  inspired  authority,  they  may  be  very  expedient,  and 
their  neglect  may  be  very  prejudicial  to  the  spiritual  life. 

III.  The  too  free  use  of  liberty  may  be  unedifyino  and  hurtful  to  Christian 
society.  1.  It  restricts  the  range  and  the  operation  of  sympathy.  If  Christians  are 
members  one  of  another,  then,  if  one  member  suffers,  all  suffer  with  it.  But  where  the 
only  question  is,  "What  may  I  do?"  and,  "What  must  I  do  ?  "  instead  of,  "  How  may 
I  act  for  my  brother's  welfare  ?  "  there  an  element  of  discord  is  introduced  into  society, 
for  "all  seek  their  own."  2.  It  encourages  some  to  conduct  which  their  conscience 
condemns,  and  so  indirectly  leads  them  into  sin.  So  it  was  at  Corinth,  where  the 
freedom  with  which  some  Christians  partook  of  things  offered  to  idols  emboldened 
the  scrupulous  to  partake  when  their  conscience  condemned  them,  and  brethren  were 
thus  led  into  sin  by  the  inconsiderateness  of  those  who  deemed  themselves  the  strong. 
Well  is  it  to  ask,  concerning  any  proposed  conduct  of  a  doubtful  character,  not  only, 
"Is  it  lawful?"  but,  "WUl  it  tend  to  the  adification  of  those  for  whom  duist 
died  ?"— T. 

Ver.  24. — Unselfishness.  Cases  of  perplexity  and  difficulty  as  to  the  separate 
actions  of  Christians  may  often  be  decided  by  the  application  of  a  general  principle. 
If  we  possess  this,  and  both  know  how  to  bring  it  to  bear  and  have  the  disposition  and 
purpose  to  do  so,  we  shall  not  be  at  a  loss  as  to  how  to  conduct  ourselves  in  the 
circumstances  and  relations  of  practical  life.  This  will  serve  us  better  than  a  code  of 
laws,  a  book  of  casuistry,  a  human  oracle.  How  could  we  desire  a  nobler  law  than 
this,  which  was  laid  down  for  the  guidance  of  the  Corinthians  in  deciding  upon  their 
intercourse  with  heathen  neighbours  ? — "  Let  no  one  seek  his  own,  but  every  one  his 
neighbour's  good." 

L  A  OAUTioN.  "  Let  no  one  njek  his  own."  1.  Now,  this  is  a  very  necessary 
caution,  for  that  which  is  here  condemned  is  what  most  persons  are  in  danger  of  doing, 
and  what  even  society  encourages  men  to  do,  and  praises  them  for  doing.  2.  And 
such  action  is  even  sanctioned  by  a  certain  view  of  religion.  Under  pretence,  perhaps 
with  a  sincere  intention  of  promoting  their  own  salvation,  men  sometimes  overlook  the 
olaimi  «f  others  upon  their  interest  and  services.     Thus  monks  and  hermits  and  othei 


844  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa    [oh.  x.  1—33. 

selfish  religionists  hare  retired  from  the  world,  to  make  sure  of  their  own  spiritual 
welfare.  3.  Yet  it  is  not  intended  to  forbid  or  censure  a  due  attention,  on  the  jart  ol 
every  Christian,  to  his  own  welfare,  bodily  and  spiritually.  There  have  been  those 
who  in  bitter  anguish  have  exclaimed,  "They  made  us  keepers  of  the  vineyard,  but 
our  own  vineyard  have  we  not  kept."  One  thing  ought  we  to  do,  yet  not  to  leave  the 
other  undone. 

II.  A  BXTLE.  "Let  every  one  seek  his  neighbour's  good."  1.  It  ia  a  rule  which 
expressly  applies  to  all.  Whatever  a  person's  position  in  the  family,  in  the  Church, 
in  society,  he  is  equally  under  obligation  to  self-denial,  benevolence,  and  helpfulness. 
"  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens."  2.  There  is  abundant  scope  in  human  society  for 
such  unselfish  effort.  There  are  the  ignorant  to  instruct,  the  sad  to  console,  the 
miserable  to  relieve,  the  young  to  protect,  the  sinner  to  restore,  etc.  3.  The  rule  may 
be  especially  obeyed  by  spreading  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  want  of  the  gospel 
being  the  root  of  human  ills,  the  supply  of  the  gospel  is  the  radical  cure.  Paul's 
missionary  life  was  a  proof  that  it  was  in  this  light  he  regarded  his  brethren  of  this 
sinful  race ;  in  hia  toils  and  his  sufferings  he  was  ever  seeking  the  good  of  all. 

III.  A  UOTIVB.  This  is  not  expressed,  but  it  is  implied ;  for  the  apostle  wrote  aa 
a  Christian,  and  assumed  the  action  and  operation  of  distinctively  Christian  principles. 
1.  The  example  of  Christ's  life  and  death  was  an  example  of  unselfishuess ;  in  all  he 
did  and  said  he  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  in  his  steps.  2.  Clirist's 
love  and  sacrifice  constitute  the  moral  power  of  benevolence.  He  died  for  us  that  we 
might  live  for  others — first  to  him,  and  then  to  those  for  whom  he  died.  His  death 
is  the  death  of  selfishness  ;  for  this  sin  was  nailed  to  his  cross.  3.  It  is  assumed  that, 
in  the  conflict  with  natural  seltishness,  and  in  the  new  and  holy  life  of  benevolence,  we 
seek  and  receive  the  aid  and  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God. — T. 

Ver.  31. — The  aim  of  the  Christian'$  life.  Nothing  is  more  characteristic  of  Paul's 
mind  than  the  way  in  which,  upon  Svery  suggestion,  he  ascends  to  great  principles. 
He  begins  with  what  it  seems  must  be  a  homely  and  practical  and  almost  trivial 
discussion  concerning  idol-feasts.  But  now  and  again,  before  he  quits  the  subject,  he 
rises  to  some  sublime  truth  and  principle.  What  could  be  a  grander  precept  in  itself, 
what  could  be  worthier  of  acceptance  by  all  rational  beings,  not  to  say  all  sincere 
Christians,  than  the  command  of  the  text? — "  Do  all  to  the  glory  of  God." 

I.  The  principle  is  to  be  explained.  1.  What  is  the  glory  of  God  ?  It  is  the 
bringing  into  prominence  of  his  attributes,  the  working  out  of  his  purposes,  and  this 
especially  by  intelligent  and  voluntary  beings.  It  is  the  gratitude  which  all  owe,  the 
obedience  to  which  all  are  summoned,  which  show  forth  God's  glory.  2.  How  can  men 
do  aught  to  God's  glory?  Kot  surely  by  the  mere  invocation  of  God's  Name,  so 
common  and  customary  among  Jews  and  Mohammedans.  But  they  may  fall  in  with 
his  purposes,  reverence  his  laws,  recommend  his  service,  utter  his  praise. 

II.  The  pbactical  application  of  the  pbinoiple  is  to  be  exhibited.  1.  It  is  so 
minute  and  searching  that  it  «xtends  to  the  most  ordinary  and  trivial  acts  of  life. 
Even  eating  and  drinking  are  included ;  probably  they  are  mentioned  here  upon  the 
suggestion  of  meals  partaken  in  common  with  idolaters.  "  Epictetus,  on  being  asked 
how  any  one  could  eat  so  as  to  please  God,  answered,  '  By  eating  justly,  temperately, 
and  thankfully.' "  If  a  heathen  moralist  could  take  so  noble  a  view  of  religion,  shall 
Christians  sever  their  daily  life  and  its  manifuld  occupations  from  the  high  aims  and 
sacred  motives  of  their  lofty  vocation  in  Christ?  2.  It  is  so  vast  that  nothing  escapes 
it.  It  is  universal  in  its  operation,  "  embracing  all  things."  No  interest  in  life  is  so 
wide,  no  relationship  so  sacred,  no  occupation  so  honourable,  as  not  to  come  under 
this  principle,  which  can  give  dignity  and  sweetness  to  all  the  functions  of  human  life. 

III.  The  adyantages  of  this  pbinoifls  A.qE  to  be  ubobd.  1.  It  delivers  him  who 
adopts  it  from  miserable  and  debasing  self-seeking.  How  many  there  are  who  do  all 
things  to  the  glory  of  self  I  And  what  a  degrading  and  deteriorating  influence  does 
such  an  aim  exercise  over  the  character  of  those  who  adopt  it  I  On  the  other  band, 
to  live  for  God  is  to  rise  at  a  bound  above  the  murky  atmosphere  of  earth  into  the 
serenest  afr  of  heaven  itself.  2.  It  conduces  to  the  well-being  of  society.  When  all 
men  seek  their  own,  society  is  afiiicted  with  discord  and  is  threatened  with  dissolution, 
WhsB  ail  seek  their  Maker's  honour,  this  common  aim  and  endeavOxir  tend  to  symfatiiy 


0H.X.1— 33J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0KINTHIAN8.  845 

harmony,  co-operation.  8.  It  is  an  aim  in  life  just  and  satisfying  to  tlie  mind— the 
right  aim  and  motive,  and  the  only  one  of  which  we  shall  never  repent  and  never 
feel  ashamed.  4.  It  is  a  stable  and  eternal  aim.  With  this  design  and  hope  the 
angels  serve  and  wait  and  praise  in  heaven.  And  the  glorified  saints  who  have 
finished  their  course  on  earth,  when  translated  to  the  presence  of  God,  may  change 
place  and  occupation,  hut  the  end  and  aim  of  their  being  remains  the  same,  for  it  is 
capable  of  no  improvement,  of  no  elevation. — ^T. 

Ver.  83. — Benevolence.  Paul  recommended  to  the  Corinthians  that  course  of 
conduct  which  he  followed  himself.  As  a  religious  teacher,  he  practised  what  he 
taught.  And  the  lessons  of  his  lips  and  of  his  pen  were  enforced  with  a  tenfold 
power  by  the  actions  of  his  life.  In  nothing  was  this  more  observable  and  undeniable 
than  in  his  devotion  to  the  welfare  of  others,  and  his  habit  of  adapting  himself  to  all 
men,  in  order  that'  he  might  win  some  for  Christ. 

I.  The  coNsnoT  abjubed.  Paul  sought  not  his  own  profit;  and  he  dissuades 
Cliristians  generally  from  duing  so.  By  this  we  are  to  understand  that  our  own 
profit  is  not  to  be  the  one  ruling  principle  of  our  life.  Certainly  it  is  not  wronf 
to  seek  our  own  spiritual  welfare  and  eternal  salvation ;  for  this  we  are  responsible, 
to  this  we  are  called.  But  having  found  Christ  ourselves,  we  are  not  to  make  our 
personal  advantage  our  one  and  only  concern.  They  who  seek  such  an  end  always 
fail ;  none  are  more  stuntedin  spiritual  growth  than  those  whose  only  thought  is  how 
they  may  obtain  abundant  nourishment  for  themselves.  Christians  must  be  prepared 
to  sacrifice  religions  advantages  and  enjoyments,  when  such  a  sacrifice  is  demanded  in 
the  interests  of  their  fellow-men. 

II.  The  bule  adopted.  Paul's  rule,  which  he  commends  to  us,  was  to  "  please  all 
men."  This  might  easily  be  misunderstood, ,  for  nothing  is  baser  than  a  habit  of 
pandering  to  the  passions  and  courting  the  favour  and  humouring  the  prejudices  of 
all  we  meet  with.  But  there  is  a  pliancy  and  adaptation  of  character  and  demeanour, 
which  flows  from  and  expresses  sympathy,  and  which  is  a  sure  road  to  most  men's 
hearts.  It  is  no  degradation  to  condescend  to  the  simple  and  illiterate,  to  enter  into 
the  thoughts  and  pursuits  of  the  scholarly,  to  talk  the  languages  of  the  foreigner,  to 
share  the  ways  and  the  life  of  any  man,  in  innocence  and  without  duplicity.  It  was 
by  this  habit,  carried  to  excess,  that  the  Jesuits  gained  their  hold  upon  individual 
natures  and  Upon  general  society.  And  it  is  by  this  habit,  rather  than  by  great 
powers  of  thought  or  of  speech,  that  successful  servants  of  Christ  usually  achieve 
their  success. 

III.  The  aim  sought.  1.  It  respects  "  the  many.*"  This  is  just  like  the  large 
heart  of  Paul,  who  in  this  was  a  true  follower  of  Christ  himself.  The  Lord's  purpose 
is  to  draw  "all  men"  unto  himself;  his  prediction,  that  "  many"  shall  come  and  sit 
down  in  his  kingdom ;  and  his  commission :  "  Preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature." 
He  gave  his  life  a  ransom  "  for  many  ; "  his  blood  was  shed  for  "  many ; "  he  bare  the 
sins  of  "  many."  2.  It  is  their  immediate  "  profit "  or  advantage.  What  he  concerned 
himself  not  about,  as  far  as  he  himself  was  concerned,  he  anxiously  sought  for  others. 
3.  The  final  aim  is  the'  salvation  of  mankind ;  a  purpose  and  hope  which  mny  well 
justify,  and  indeed  all  but  compel,  self-denial  and  effort ;  for  salvation  includes  all 
blessings  of  which  human  nature  is  capable,  and  the  prolongation,  the  perpetuation,  of 
those  blessings  throughout  a  glorious  eternity. — T. 

Vers.! — 12. — Old  2Wament  pictures.    Painted  from  life.    Painted  for  our  inspection 

and  instruction.     Painted  by  the  genius  of  inspiration. 

I.  A  PICTUKB  OF  PBlviLEQE.  The  privileges  of  the  Israelites  were,  like  our  own, 
multifarious.  Five  are  here  enumerated.  1.  2Tie  Israelites  were  all  "  under  the  cloud." 
They  were  thus  signally  protected  hy  Ood.  He  was  in  the  cloud ;  "  The  Lord  went 
before  them  by  day  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud,  to  lead  them  the  way ;  and  by  night  in  a  pillar 
of  fire,  to  give  them  light  "(Exod.  xiii.  21).  Divine  protection  is  a  great  privilege. 
How  safe  we  are  if  God  keeps  us !  Of  themselves,  the  Israelites  were  peculiarly  help- 
less and  defenceless;  hut  they  were  stronger  than  the  strongest  because  God  was 
with  them.  Our  great  ally  is  God.  2.  They  ail  "passed  through  the  sea."  Special 
ieliverajice  was  theirs.    M<)nac«/d  by  fearful  dauger,  they  were  required  merdjr  to  uialk 


346  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  x.  1—33. 

on,  and  they  walJfed  out  of  the  peril.  They  were  hedged  in,  but  God  made  for  them 
a  path  through  the  waters.  God  always  leaves  one  safe  way  for  those  whom  h« 
favours.  God  helps  us  when  we  tire  at  our  wits'  end.  Everything  fails,  but  God 
never  fails.  3.  They  were  all  "  baptized  unto  Mos  s."  They  became  his  disciples — were 
under  his  leadership ;  he,  under  God,  was  their  ruler  and  head.  A  great  privilege,  for 
Moses  was  a  prince  among  men.  Association  with  such  a  man,  divinely  commissioned 
for  his  great  work,  was  no  slight  mark  of  God's  favour.  We  are  baptized  unto  a 
greater  tiian  Moses.'  The  "cloud  and  sea"  were  their  baptism,  typifying  the  "water 
and  Spirit"  of  ours  (John  iii.  5).  4.  They  were  all  fed.  A  table  was  spread  for  them 
in  the  wilderness — and  a  good  table  too ;  God  does  not  half-starve  his  children.  No 
ordinary  fare  was  theirs ;  it  was  "  spiritual  meat."  It  was  not  coarse ;  it  was  "  angels' 
food"  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  25).  It  was  "spiritual,"  being  derived  from  the  great  Spirit;  Ood 
fed  them.  This  meat  had,  therefore,  a  message  for  tlieir  spirits,  as  well  as  sustenance 
for  their  bodies ;  it  spoke  of  the  love  of  God ;  it  was  thus  still  further."  spiritual  meat." 
Moreover,  it  pointed  to  the  bread  which  should  by-and-by  come  down  from  heaven 
(■lohn  vi.  35),  of  which  it  is  now  our  privilege  to  partake,  and  which  the  pious  Israelite 
fed  upon  by  faith.  5.  They  were  all  supplied  with  drink.  "  They  ^ank  of  that 
spiritual  Rock  that  followed  them,  and  that  Rock  was  Christ."  The  water  which  oamo 
to  them  was  from  God,  and  was  thus  like  the, meat,  "  siiiritual ; "  and,  if  intelligently 
received  as  from  Divine  love,  quenched  spiritual  as  well  as  physical  thirst.  But  we  are 
told  that  "  that  Rock  was  Christ."  Not  only  did  it  foreshadow  him,  who  was  smitten 
that  the  waters  of  salvation  might  flow  out  to  a  perishing  world  (Isa.  liii.  5),  but  from 
him  came  the  supply  of  the  physical  wants  of  the  Israelites.  He,  having  had  all  things 
connected  with  the  administration  of  the  world  committed  to  him,  was  with  the 
people  of  God  in  the  wilderness  and  ministered  to  their  neuds.  The  expected  Messiah 
was  in  their  midst  as  Ruler  and  miraculous  Worker ;  yet  then,  as  afterwards,  he  was 
hidden  from  their  eyes.  The  spiritual  Rock  "  followed  them ; "  Christ  ministered  to 
their  physical  and  spiritual  need  continuously.  Divine  favours  never  fail  the  believer. 
Always  in  the  wilderness  here,  but  always  cared  for. 

II.  A  PicTTJKE  OF  TBANSQRESSION.     As  fivc  Special  privileges  are  enumerated,  five 
instances  of  transgression  are  recorded.    1.  They  lusted  after  evil  things.    They  were 
not  content  with  the  good  things  provided  by  God.     They  complained  of  the  manna 
and  longed  for  the  flesh-pots  of  Egypt.     That  these  were  identified  with  their  bondage 
seemed  to  matter  to  them  but  little.     Professors  of  leligion  sometimes  hanker  after  old 
delights,  though  these  are  associated  with  their  earlier  years  of  disobedience  and  sin. 
The  provisions  of  God's  house  are  "  light  bread ; "  they  want  the  more  tasty  dishes  of 
the  world.    The  Corinthians  were  tempted  by  meats  identified  with  idol- worship ;  they 
were  in  danger  of  imitating  the  sin  of  Israel.     Egypt-tastes  cling  to  us;  we  should 
mortify  them.    2.  They  became  idolatrous.     Almost  insensibly,  but  very  truly.    When 
they  made  the  golden  calf,  they  no  doubt  intended  it  only  as  a  symbol  of  deity,  and 
designed  to  worship  the  true  God  through  it  (Exod.  xxxii.  5),  but  they  began  by  dis- 
obedience to  an  express  command  (Exod.  xx.  4, 5),  and  they  terminated  in  gross  idolatry 
and  in  many  evils  often  connected  with  it.    They  went  near  to  the  fire,  and  were  burned. 
People  do  not  become  idolatrous  instantly,  but  by  steps.    The  Israelites  were  impatient, 
had  a  gi'eat  sense  of  their  own  importance  and  of  their  privileges,  cast  off  restraint — 
and  fell.    On  the  spot  where  they  had  solemnly  promised  odedience  they  transgressed. 
The  danger  of  the  Corinthians  was  similar.    They  did  csat  intend  to  worship  idols  when 
they  inclined  towards  the  sacrificial  feasts  of  the  heathen,  but  this  was  the  practical 
peril,  and  those  who  participated  in  these  feasts  were  in  danger  of  becoming  apostatei 
nigh  to  the  very  spot  which  had  witnessed  their  confession  of  Christ.     We  should  not 
seek  to  go  to  the  end  of  our  tether ;  under  the  strain  the  tether  may  break.     Those 
who  seek  to  go  as  far  as  they  may,  ofuin  go  much  further.    Liberty  and  licence  live 
next  door  to  each  other.     3.  TViey  fell  into  immorality.     False  worship  leads  to  false 
life.     Idolatry  to  the  Israelites  was  the  door  of  sensuality  (Numb.  xxv.  1 — ^9).    It 
threatened  to  be  so  to  the  Corinthians.     First  idol-recognition,  then  participation  in  idol- 
rites,  many  of  which  were  scandalously  impure.     It  might  be  difficult  to  draw  the  line; 
not  theoretically  perhaps,  but  practically.    And  the  temptation  tr>  go  further  would 
assuredly  be  strong.    When  we  get  away  from  God,  corruption  soo»  masters  us.    On 
the  devil's  ground  the  devil  has  great  power.    We  laugh  at  the  danger,  Init  the  author 


oft.  x.i— 33.]    tafi  toST  EPISTLE  TO  t^B  CORINTHIAMS.  ^47 

of  the  danger  laughs  at  us.  How  lowthe  privileged  mayfalU  Tie  chosen  people  have 
become  as  moral  scum  and  refuse.  4.  Tluy  tempted  Ood.  Or  Christ,  as  the  Angel 
(Exod.  xxiii.  20)  and  Administrator  of  the  Divine  kingdom.  By  their  sinfulness  they 
tried  the  forbearance  of  Goil — they  provoked  him.  Their  unbelief  and  disobedience 
strained  his  long-suffering  to  the  utmost.  This  was  a  great  sin.  The  Corinthians  were 
in  peril  of  committing  it  by  verging  towards  idolatry  and  liviL-g  as  much  like  men  oi 
the  world  as  they  dared.  We  should  ask,  not  only  what  effect  our  conduct  may  have 
upon  ourselves,  but  how  it  affects  Ood.  It  may  arouse  the  Divine  anger.  It  was  to 
those  who  provoked  him  that  God  sware  "  they  shall  not  enter  into  my  rest."  5.  They 
murmured  against  Ood.  And  this  murmuring  was  of  no  insignificant  character.  It 
was  an  impugning  of  the  Divine  character — a  charge  of  evil  against  the  infinitely  good. 
The  reference  may  be  to  Numb.  xiv.  2  and  to  Numb.  xvi.  41.  The  justice,  the 
wisdom,  and  the  love  of  God  were  assailed;  and  what  could  be  a  greater  crime? 
"  Murmuring  j "  we  say  and  think  but  little  of  it.  What  creatures  of  words  we  are  I 
The  charge  against  God  was  none  the  less  evil  that  it  was  indirect — it  was  made 
directly  against  Moses  aud  Aaron.  In  Numb.  xvi.  41  the  Israelites  say,  "  Te  have 
killed  the  people  of  the  Lord,"  thoUj^h  it  must  have  beeu  patent  to  all  that  Moses  and 
Aaron  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  actual  death  of  Korah  and  his  company.  The 
Israelites'  sin  was  made  no  better  by  the  cowardice  which  prompted  iheiii  to  make  a 
charge  against  men,  which  they  intended  for  God,  but  dared  not  make  against  him. 
The  Cormthians,  many  of  them,  murmured  against  Paul,  and  perhaps  would  murmur 
more  after  his  sharp  rebukes.  Now,  here  was  a  question  suggested  for  them, "  Against 
whom  are  you  really  murmuring  ?  "  A  pregnant  question  for  us.  We  may  half  uncon- 
sciously veil  our  attacks  upon  God  by  directing  them  against  onr  fellows.  But  after 
all,  what  is  it  we  find  fault  with  ?  Is  it  of  man,  confined  to  him  ?  Or  is  it  of  God, 
coming  to  us  through  men  1  We  should  ponder  what  is  involved  in  making  charges 
against  God  indirectly.  Note :  Privilege  cannot  "  keep  us  from  failing."  It  cannot 
hold  us  up.  Though  numbered  amongst  God's  people  and  participating  in  Divine 
favours,  we  may  perish.  Though  we  have  sailed  over  many  spiritual  seas,  we  may  yet 
"make  shipwreck  of  faith."  We  need  to  be  watchful  and  diligent,  lest  we  become 
"  castaways."  The  peril  of  the  Corinthians  under  higher  privilege  than  that  of  Israel 
was  so  clearly  foreseen  that  these  things  were  written  for  their  admonition  (ver.  11), 
and  these  "  examples  "  of  privilege  and  fall  were  for  their  eyes  to  behold  (ver.  6). 
They  are  for  ours  also,  for  upon  us,  with  them,  "  the  ends  of  the  ages  are  come  "  (ver.  11). 
Especially  do  those  need  to  beware  who  are  over-confident.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh 
he  standcth  take  heed  lest  he  fall "  (ver.  12).  Some  are  so  sure,  that  tiiey  run  into 
temptation  and  perish.     Self-confidence  leads  to  disaster,  God-confidence  to  security. 

lU.  A  I'lCTDKB  OF  PUNISHMENT.  Great  privilege — great  sin — great  punishment. 
Jehovah  will  "  by  no  means  spare  the  guilty."  Condign  punishment  followed  Israel's 
transgression.  God's  stern  messengers  to  her  were:  1.  Sword;  as  Exod.  xxxii.  27. 
2.  Plague;  as  Numb.  xvL  44 — 49  and  xiv.  9.  3.  Serpents;  as  Numb.  xxi.  6.  4. 
Other  death-heralds,  followed  by  the  overthrow  in  the  wilderness  of  those  who  had 
sinned  (vers.  5,  10).  "  God  is  not  mocked :  for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he 
also  reap  "  (Gal.  vi.  7)-  As  privilege  cannot  save  us  from  sin,  neither  can  it  save  us 
from  punishment.  God's  justice  was  impugned,  but  it  was  not  impaired ;  thos«  who 
murmured  against  it  felt  its  stroke.  How  gracious  is  God  to  those  who  submit  them- 
selves and  are  obedient  I  how  terrible  to  those  who  dare  him  I  If  his  chosen  people  did  not 
escape,  "  how  shall  we  escape  ?  "  Our  fall  will  be  greater,  as  our  privileges  are.  "  Of 
how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose  ye,  shall  he  be  thought  worthy,  who  hath  trodden 
under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith 
he  was  sanctified,  an  unholy  thing,  and  hath  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace  ?  " 
(Heb.  T.  29).  These  ar*  three  companion  pictures  to  be  hung  in  our  gallery  and  to  b* 
often  studied. — H. 

Ver.  13. — 3%e  hour  of  temptation.  I.  Txhftation  oohbb  to  Ahu.  It  came  to  tlw 
writw  of  this  Epistle,  to  all  the  apostles^  to  Christ  himself.  It  has  come  to  the  great 
and  good  in  all  ages,  as  well  as  to  tiie  insignificant  and  evil.  It  will  come  to  us.  The 
conditioH  of  •or  life  on  earth  make  it  unavoidable.  It  must  not  be  regarded  as 
Indieativ*  ot  Diriaa  disfavour  or  as  an  evil  altogether.    The  salutary  effaot  of  the  hour 


348  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTfilAiTS.    [oh.  x.  1—^3. 

of  temptation  has  often  been  shown  in  the  hour  after  temptation.    Many  who  have 
fallen  "into  manifold  temptations"  have  been  led  to  "  count  it  all  joy"  (Jas,  i.  2). 

II.  To  BE  TEMPTED  IB  NOT  TO  SIN.  We  need  to  remember  this.  Some  sensitive 
natures  conclude  that  they  must  be  very  sinful  iecause  they  are  so  much  tempted, 
whereas  multiplicity  of  temptation  is  often  rathtr  an  evidence  of  faithfulness  and 
integrity.  The  strongest  attacks  are  made  upon  the  strongest  forts.  Satan  does  not 
waste  his  ammunition.  He  would  not  be  so  earnestly  seeking  to  capture  us  if  we  were 
already  completely  his  captives.  Repeated  temptation  argues  the  existence  of  resistance^ 
Sin  is  consent  to  the  temptation.  Where  there  is  no  acquiescence  there  is  no  sin.  Tha 
greatly  tempted  Christ  was  the  perfectly  sinless  Christ. 

III.  Temptation  is  not  compulsion.  Some  dread  temptation,  because  they  think 
it  will  force  them  to  that  wliich  is  evil.  Bu{  since  the  world  was,  no  man  has  ever  been 
compelled  to  commit  a  sinyle  sin.  Satan  has  no  power  of  compulsion.  Indeed,  to  be 
"  compelled  to  sin  "  involves  a  contradiction  in  terms ;  if  we  are  compelled,  there  can 
be  no  sin.  We  could  not  be  responsible  if  we  were  under  compulsion.  Temptation  at 
its  strongest  is  only  inditcement.  Satan  said  to  Christ,  "  Cast  thyself  down ; "  he  can 
say  no  more  to  us ;  he  cannot  cast  us  down.  Here  the  responsibility  of  sin  comM  in. 
Every  sin  that  we  commit  is  voluntary.     We  do  it — no  one  else. 

IV.  God's  obacious  peovision  fob  his  tempted  people.  1.  Ee  will  not  allow  them 
to  be  Widuly  tempted.  Our  temptations  are  under  his  control.  His  eye  is  upon  us 
whilst  we  are  tempted.  His  hand  is  stretched  out.  His  voice  says,  "Thus  far." 
Though  he  never  tempts  us  in  an  evil  sense,  every  temptation  is  weighed  by  him  before 
it  reaches  us.  He  is  faithfiil  to  his  covenant  with  believers  (1  Thess.  v.  24).  2,  He  will 
provide  the  appropriate  means  for  dealing  with  the  temptation.  A  "  way  of  escape," 
not  necessarily  from  the  temptation,  but  from  the  peril  of  it.  As  with  Job,  Daniel,  Paul 
(2  Cor.  xii.  8,  9).  "  Tlie  way  of  escape  "  as  it  should  be  rendered — the  precise  way  in 
which  the  temptation  should  be  received,  home,  resisted.  This  way  of  escape  comes  with 
the  temptation :  when  the  temptation  comes,  this  comes  also ;  to  the  true  believer  the 
two  are  inseparable.  With  the  sickness  comes  the  cure,  with  the  shaft  the  shield.  In 
temptation  we  should  look  to  God;  from  him  cometh  our  help.  When  the  enemy 
comes  in  like  a  flood,  he  lifts  up  the  standard  against  him.  The  promise  is  only  to  those 
who  are  in  alliance  with  God.  Others  go  down  under  temptation,  not  because  they  are 
compelled,  but  because  to  the  invitation  from  without  there  is  a  quick  response  from 
within.  We  should  enter  into  covenant  with  Ghid  through  Christ ;  then  we  simll  \»  in 
his  hands  who  can  "  keep  us  from  falling"  and  who  will. — H. 

Vers.  14 — 22. — Warinest  in  Christian  walk.  A  burning  question  amongst  Corinthian 
Christians  was  whether  they  were  justified  in  partaking  of  sacrifices  offered  to  idols. 
With  this  the  apostle  deals  in  several  parts  of  tiiese  Epistles.  Note  the  course  of  his 
argument  here. 

L  He  lifts  the  veil  fbom  idolatbt.  He  ia  quite  willing  to  allow  that  an  idol 
is  nothing  in  itself,  and  that  meats  offered  to  an'  idol  are  in  themselves  as  though  they 
had  not  been  so  offered.  But  he  thrusts  upon  the  attention  the  startling  truth  that,  when 
men  professedly  sacrifice  to  idols,  they  really  sacrifice  to  devils.  "  They  sacrificed  unto 
devils,  not  to  God;  to  gods  whom  they  knew  not"  (Deut.  xxxii.  17).  1.  The  character 
<f  many  of  the  heathen  deities  was  Satanic.  The  conception  of  the  worshippers  was 
largely  a  conception  of  the  character  of  devils.  2.  Paganism  is  a  part  of  this  Satanic 
kingdom.  It  is  not  of  the  true  God,  and  what  is  not  of  him  is  of  the  deviL  There 
are  but  two  masters.  Pagan  worship  is  the  worship  of  the  false,  and  the  false  ia  oi 
Satan,  not  of  God.  Behind  every  idol,  because  it  is  an  idol,  lurks  a  devil.  The  dumb 
image  and  the  supposed  deity  associated  with  it  are  but  masks  hiding  the  face  of  the 
Send.  An  idol  is  nothing ;  yes,  but  "  nothings  "  are  generally  the  veik  of  very  palpable 
" sometliings."  Beware  of  the  nothings  of  life;  they  are  most  dangerous  because 
least  dreaded.  3,  When  any  objects  are  worshipped  in  the  place  of  Ood,  tjie  devil-king- 
dom it  served.  Idolatry  of  whatever  sort  involves  "sacrifice  to  devUs."  All  liii  is 
homage  and  offering  to  Satan,  the  "  god  of  this  world."  The  truth  applies  when  pure 
things,  as  well  as  when  impure,  are  substituted  for  God.  Satanic  interests  aie  advanced ; 
a  sa^ifice  is  laid  upon  the  altar  of  darkness. 

XL   Hm  IBOWB  what  PABTAKnia  OF   HEATHEN   SACRIFICES   INTOLyn,      1,    T»  mO.      As 


OB.  X  1—33.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  819 


the  sacrifice  is  virtually  offered  to  devils,  partaking  of  it  when  it  is  in  the  form  of  a  sacri- 
fice— this  would  not  apply  to  meat  sold  in  the  shambles  (ver.  25)  or  to  meat  at  a  friend's 
house  (ver.  27)— involves  fellowship  with  devils.  Established  by  reference  to :  (1) 
Jewish  sacrifices.  Those  who  partook  of  these  sacrifices  identified  themselves  with 
Jehovah  and  his  altar.  To  partake  of  Jewish  sacrifices  was  to  proclaim  one's  self  a  Jew 
and  a  follower  of  Israel's  God.  So  to  partake  of  sacrifices  offered  to  devils  was  to 
identify  one's  self  with  the  service  of  devils  and  to  have  communion  with  them.  (2)  The 
Lord's  Supper.  When  the  bread  and  wine  are  partaken  of,  there  is  a  profession  of 
attachment  to  him  whose  flesh  and  blood  are  thus  set  forth^f  fellowship  with  him, 
of  association  in  his  service,  of  union  with  him.  The  union  set  forth  is  so  close  that 
it  unites  those  who  gather  at  the  table  (ver.  17).  The  Lord's  Supper  pre-eminently 
identifies  us  with  Chnst.  At  his  table  we  may  look  for  the  closest  fellowship.  Similarly 
at  the  table  of  devils  men  are  closely  associated  with  these  evil  spirits.  2.  To  Ghris- 
Uans  specially.  It  is  an  attempt  to  serve  God  and  his  greatest  enemies.  This  is  what 
it  amounts  to  really,  though  not  necessarily  with  fiill  realization  of  the  fact  on  th<>  part 
of  the  participants.  (1)  A  moral  impossibility.  Ye  cannot  serve  two  masters,  espeoially 
masters  diametrically  opposed.  "Ye  cannot  drink,"  etc.  (ver.  21).  (2)  A  horrible 
spectacle.  That  those  who  have  been  so  near  to  Christ  should  get  correspondingly  near 
to  Satan  and  his  angels.  That  om  they  have  been  to  their  Lord,  «o  will  they  be  to  his 
foes.  (3)  A  great  provocation  to  the  Lord.  Our  God  is  "  a  jealous  God  "  (ver.  22). 
Men  might  plead  that  they  did  not  even  think  of  idols  or  devils  whilst  they  partook. 
But  it  was  a  public  act,  and  God  would  regard  its  true  import.  A  great  provocation  that 
his  people  should  do  this  outwardly ;  and  the  outward  would  surely  affect  the  inward 
sooner  or  later.  (4)  An  act  of  great  folly.  Running  into  extreme  danger.  "  Can  a 
man  touch  pitch  and  not  be  defiled?"  We  should  not  see  how  near  we  may  get  to 
sin,  but  how  far  w^  may  keep  away.  The  exercise  of  our  "  liberty "  may  leatd  u*  to 
bondage.    Tempting  Ood;  "  Are  we  stronger  than  he?"  (ver.  22). — H. 

Ver.  26. — The  great  Proprietor.  I.  Bealizb  and  biihehbisb  thb  fact  or  CKjd's 
UNivXBSAii  PBOPBIETOBSHIP.  It  Ls  oasy  to  say  that  all  things  are  God's,  but  difficult  to 
adequately  grasp  and  to  retain  this  in  our  minds.  We  yield  a  ready  acquiescence, 
are  but  little  impressed  because  the  truth  is  cloudy  to  us,  and  then  go  our  way  thinking, 
speakii^,  and  acting,  as  though  God  did  not  own  a  square  foot  of  ground  in  the  universe  I 
Yet  all  things  are  his — ^the  earth  and  its  fulness,  small  things  and  great,  "  our  posses- 
sions "  and  the  possessions  of  others,  things  consecrated  to  him  and  things  imconsecrated, 
creatures  who  obey  and  creatures  who  disobey, — all  are  his. 

II.  Gdd'b  fboprietorship  makes  the  wobld  more  BEAnTiFOL.  1.  His  possessions 
become  associated  with  himself.  We  prize  certain  things  because  they  belong  or 
belonged  to  our  dear  ones.  AU  around  us  has  been  and  is  God's.  Interesting  in  them- 
selves,'their  interest  is  increased  without  limit  as  the  whisper  comes  to  us,  "  They  are  aU 
Ood^s  and  of  God."  2.  As  his  proprietorship  springs  from  his  creation  of  all  things,  we 
may  be  able  to  trace  his  mind  in  objects  around  us,  to  see  the  marks  of  his  fingers,  to 
behold  his  skill  and  power.  He  will  be  refiected  to  some  extent  in  his  works.  3.  He 
has  purposes  in  connection  with  his  possessions.  Everything  was  made  for  some  end. 
We  may  discern  some  of  these  ends.  We  may  know  that  the  principle  is  universal, 
and  may  thus  be  stimulated  to  seek  for  further  knowledge.  4.  Brings  good  cheer  into  a 
world  where  there  is  much  to  sadden.  Not  the  earth  was  the  Lord's,  but  the  earth  is 
the  Lord's.  It  is  still  in  his  hands.  Here  is  light  amid  dense  darkness.  The  world 
has  not  slipped  from  the  grasp  of  the  Eternal — hie  holds  it  now. 

III.  God's  PBOPBIETOBSHIP  should  influence  OUB  USaorTHEWOBIiDAHDTmBTmNOS 

THEBBOF.  If  all  things  are  God's,  they  should  not  be  used  (1)  thoughtlessly,  ^2) 
irreverently,  (3)  selfishly,  (4)  injuriously,  (5)  contrary  to  hb  revealed  wUl,  (6)  to  tiia 
dishonour  of  his  Name. 

IV.  GK>d'b  PBOPBIETOBSHIP  EXTENDS  TO  ouRSBLyKs.  If"  the  ewth  is  the  Lord's,  and 
the  fulness  thereof,"  we  are  his.  1.  We  are  not  our  owm.  2.  Let  lu  not  think,  feel, 
speak,  or  act  88  though  we  were. 

y.  Ir  wx  ABK  BBDEBHKD,  WB  8HABB  Of  Qod'b  PBOPBIETOBSHIP.  As  children  do  \r. 
the  possesstons  of  their  father.  If  we  ai«  in  Christ,  God  is  our  Father.  We  have 
received  the  adoptiea      ..<»<-        We  are  "  hmrs  of  QxA  and  joint-heirs  witii  Christ." 


360  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0BINTHIAN8.     [oh.  x.  1—33. 

How  rich  is  the  condition  of  the  poorest  believer  I  how  exalted  the  status  of  the 
humblest  I  The  way  to  power,  dignity,  and  wealth  is  the  way  of  the  cross ;  for  thus 
wa  become  the  inheritors  of  all  things.     "  All  things  are  yours." — H. 

Ver.  31. — The  great  rule  of  life.     I.  What  it  is.    To  seek  the  glory  of  Qo4.    Thew 

have  been  and  are  many  life-rules ;  this  alone  is  flawless.  Many  have  themselves  as 
life-ends.  Some  enjoin  us  to  make  tlie  welfare  of  others  our  life-object,  and  preach  to 
us  "  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number,"  which  would  prove  a  very  high 
and  excellent  object  to  aim  at  were  it  a  little  less  obscure  and  a  little  more  practicable ; 
but  it  would  not  be  high  enough  even  tlien.  God  must  be  the  Sun  of  our  .system,  not 
ourselves  or  others.  Then  order  and  well-being  result,  but  otherwise  confusion,  con- 
tradiction, cliaos.  When  we  truly  seek  God's  glory,  neither  our  own  interest  nor  that 
of  others  will  be  prejudiced,  but  the  reverse.  This  life-rule  is:  1.  Reasonable.  As 
creatures,  we  should  live  to  our  Creator.  All  we  have,  and  all  we  are,  belong  to  God ; 
it  is  intensely  reasonable  that  they  should  be  used  for  his  pleasure.  2.  Ben^ieial.  It 
fulfils  the  object  of  our  creation.  If  that  object  be  frustrated,  God  is  robbed,  others  are 
injured,  and  we  cannot  profit.  Our  life  must  be  according  to  the  Divine  intent,  or  it 
will  becinio  pernicious  all  round.  3.  Joy-bringing.  We  are  "out  of  gear"  until  our 
lives  are  thus  ordered.  We  may  gain  excitement,  but  we  shall  lack  solid  satisfaction. 
The  joy  of  heaven  arises  from  the  fact  that  those  in  it  live /or  Ood;  heaveidy  joy 
comes  to  earth  where  heavenly  life  comes. 

XL  To  WHAT  IT  APPLIES.  The  answer  is  brief — to  everything.  It  is  a  rule  for  mil 
life,  for  every  part  of  life.  Note  particularly  that  it  applies  to  small  things  as  well  as 
great,  to  so-called  secular  things  as  to  sacred.  But  the  distinction  is  destroyed — ii 
makes  all  things  sacred.  It  saves  anything/rom  becoming  insignificant  by  giving  it  this 
supreme  significance,  "  the  glory  of  God."  It  makes  everything  interesting  and  useful. 
The  apostle  particularizes  such  acts  as  eating  and  drinking — the  most  familiar  and 
commonplace.  A  man  should  eat  and  drink  so  as  to  be  fitted  for  serving  God.  How 
many  by  gluttony  and  wine-bibbing  are  unfitted  1  "  Sunday  religion  "  is  a  flagrant 
violation  of  the  apostolic  precept.  Obedience  will  make  our  piety  continiwus,  and  there 
is  no  piety  which  is  not  so.  How  different  our  lives  would  be  if  this  commandment 
were  ever  in  our  thoughts  !  What  a  check  it  would  prove  to  self-seeking  and  to  sin 
generally  I  How  much  we  should  have  to  discontinue  because  such  things  could  not 
possibly  be  done  to  the  Divine  glory  1  How  strangely  beautifal  our  lives  would 
become  if  we  yielded 'a  full  obedience  1 

IIL  What  it  involves.  1.  Conversion,  However  it  may  be  with  others,  we  to 
whom  the  gospel  has  come  cannot  live  to  the  glory  of  God  if  we  reject  Christ.  Apart 
from  Christ  we  are  the  enemies  of  God.  Our  lives  may  be  moral,  but  the  rejection  of 
Christ  is  like  poison  mixed  with  good  food — resulting  in  a  poisonous  mass.  We  must 
come  to  God  in  the  appointed  way  before  we  can  serve  him.  There  is  a  parallel 
passage  to  the  text :  "  Whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed,  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  "  (Col.  iii.  17).  We  must  start  at  Calvary,  We  must  be  converted  to  God  before 
we  can  glorify  him.  "  They  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God  "  (Bom.  viii.  8). 
2.  Direct  service  offered  to  Ood.  In  worship.  In  Christian  enterprise  and  labour.  II 
we  use  the  smaller  opportunities  of  bringing  glory  to  God,  we  shall  not  neglect  the 
greater.  The  man  who  serves  Qoi  in  his  home  and  business  will  seek  to  serve  him 
also  in  the  Church  and  in  spheres  of  Christian  usefiilness.  The  man  who  professes 
to  serve  God  on  one  day  out  of  seven  is  more  than  open  to  suspicion,  and  so  is  the  man 
who  professes  to  serve  God  on  six.  3.  Duties  to  ourselves.  Our  duties  to  ourselves  are 
our  duties  to  God.  We  cannot  glorify  God  unless  we  observe  his  laws,  and  many 
of  these  are  directed  towards  our  personal  well-being.  By  self-improvement,  by  growth 
in  grace,  by  increase  in  physical,  mental,  and  spiritual  health,  we  may  glorify  our 
Father  who  is  in  heaven.  4,  Duties  to  others.  The  first  and  second  commandments 
(Matt.  xxii.  37 — 89)  are  indissolubly  united.  When  we  truly  serve  men  we  serve  God. 
We  may  glorify  God  by  seeking  to  advance  the  true  interests  of  our  fellow-creatures. 
Under  the  guidance  of  this  principle,  we  shall :  (1)  Kot  offend  men's  consciences  (ver, 
28),     (2)  Not  hinder  them  in  their  spiritual  life  or  cause  them  to  sin  (ver,  32) 

S3)  Earnestly  seek  their  salvation  (ver.  33).     (4)  Be  willing  to  praotiw  mndt  mU 
enial  (ver.  33).— H. 


OH.  X.  1—33.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COiUiJTMiAiJS.  351 

Yen.  1 — 4. — Ancient  type*.  These  incidents  of  patriarchal  history  were  typical  of 
what  belongs  to  the  Christian  age  (ver.  11).  A  "  type  "  is  one  of  two  things — it  i» 
either  a  figure  and  prophecy  of  something  to  come,  the  antitype,  in  which  the  idea  ol 
the  type  finds  its  full  and  complete  unfuldiag ;  or  it  is  the  example  and  repi-esentativa 
of  a  class,  combining  and  setting  forth  most  distinctly  the  characteristics  of  that  clasi. 
Both  these  meanings  may  to  some  extent  be  involved  here,  but  we  take  the  latter  to  be 
the  more  prominent  and  the  more  important.  To  say  that  these  incidents  mystically 
foreshadowed  the  "  sacraments  of  the  Christian  Church,"  or  that  they  are  "  a  standing 
testimony  to  the  importance  of  the  Christian  sacraments  as  necessary  to  the  member- 
ship of  Christ "  (Alford) ;  or  to  attempt  to  gather  from  them  definite  teaching  as  to  the 
mode  and  order  of  those  sacraments, — all  this  is  to  subordinate  the  inner  truth  and 
meaning  of  the  subject  to  the  mere  accidental  form.  We  take  these  incidents  as  typical 
of  principles  rather  than  ordinances,  of  living  truths  rather  than  of  the  ritual  forms 
in  which  those  truths  may  be  embodied.    There  are  three  representative  facts  here. 

I.  The  cloud  and  the  sea.  (For  the  narrative  of  the  crossing  of  the  Bed  Sea  and 
the  movement  of  the  cloud,  see  Exod.  xiv.)  From  this  it  would  appear  that  the 
Israelites,  in  a  very  literal  sense,  passed  "  under  the  cloud  and  through  the  sea,"  i.e. 
through  the  bed  and  channel  of  it,  through  its  very  depths.  The  cloud  was  to  them 
emphatically  "  a  guide,  a  glory,  a  defence,"  and  the  divided  sea  the  instrument  of  their 
deliverance— the  grave  of  their  enemies,  but  to  them  the  gate  into  a  region  of  freer, 
nobler  life.  See  here  a  beautiful  memorial  of  the  grand  truth  of  God's  perpetual 
guidance  and  guardianship  of  his  people.  The  Divine  providence  of  human  life, 
specially  of  all  consecrated  life,  was  thus  made  visibly,  palpably  manifest  to  the  men  oi 
that  age.  The  providence  that  assumes  a  variety  of  forms  but  is  always  animated  by 
one  and  the  same  spirit ;  the  providence  that  arranges  circumstances  and  determines 
issues,  that  both  marks  out  and  clears  the  way,  that  shields  from  harm  and  aveuge.s 
it,  that  interposes  difficulties  and  also  removes  them,  that  leads  into  danger  and  then 
makes  a  way  of  escape ;  the  ever-watchful,  kindly,  faithful  providence  of  an  all-wise 
Father,  a  gracious  and  almighty  Bedeemer ; — it  is  this  that  we  here  see  typically  repre- 
sented. The  miraculous  apparition  or  incident,  which  in  its  very  nature  was  local  and 
temporary,  did  but  bear  witness  to  the  universal  and  abiding  fact.  It  is  in  accordance 
with  our  advanced  position  in  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God  that  we  should  be 
thrown  more  entirely  on  the  exercise  of  our  faith  for  the  apprehension  of  this,  as  of  every 
other  Divine  truth.  But  the  wing  of  the  same  beneficent  providence  is  over  us,  though 
we  have  no  such  significant  symbol  of  it.  The  overshadowing  cloud  leads  ns,  often  in 
"  a  way  that  we  know  not," — ^it  may  be  into  the  entanglement  of  mountain  difficulties, 
through  deep  waters  of  sorrow,  over  waste  wildernesses  of  unrest ;  but  always  in  the 
right  way,  the  way  that  is  best  fitted  to  "  prove  "  us  and  to  develop  in  us  the  needful 
moral  qualities.  And  it  is  a  way  signalized  often  by  unexpected  deliverances.  The 
mountains  are  not  found  to  be  so  terrible  as  they  seemed.  The  waters  divide  whan  we 
step  down  into  them.  The  very  wilderness  abounds  with  fruits  of  tender,  succouring 
love  that  we  could  scarcely  have  known  if  we  had  never  entered  U.  The  angel  ot  the 
liord  still  goes  before  his  people  as  in  the  days  of  old — 

**  Leader  of  faithful  souls  and  gnide 
Of  all  who  travel  to  the  sky." 

n.  Thi  baftibu  uitTo  MoBES.  We  regard  this  as  referring  to  nothing  in  OhrUtiaD 
baptism  beyond  the  essential  idea  and  principle  of  it.  As  a  formal  rite,  there  was 
nothing  in  the  experience  of  the  Israelites  in  coming  out  of  Egypt  that  bearg  the 
remotest  resemblance  to  it,  and  it  is  a  waste  of  ingenuity  to  attempt  to  find  out  aoeh  a 
resemblance.  But  what  is  the  essential  moral  meaning  of  this  rite?  It  is  consecration, 
dedication.  It  is  a  sign  and  a  plei^ge,  the  avowal  of  a  faith,  the  oath  of  an  allegiance. 
In  passing  "  under  the  cloud  and  through  the  sea,"  the  fathers  became  the  avowed 
followers  of  Moses.  It  was  the  pledge,  the  sign,  the  seal,  of  their  allegiance  to  him  as 
God's  anointed  "  leader  and  commander  of  the  peo^e."  And  his  leadership  of  that 
emancipated  host  did  but  dimly  shadow  forth  Christ's  headship  of  his  ransomed 
Church  (Heb.  iii.  5,  6).  As  the  uprising  of  that  host,  with  all  its  tribes  and 
families,  at  the  call  of  Moses,  was  the  formal  pledge  of  submission  to  him,  so  our 
assumption  of  the  sacred  name  of  "  Christian "  commits  us  to  the  responsibility  ol 


352  THE  FIRST  EPISTL2  JO  THE  CX)RINTHIANa    [oh.  x.  1—33 

follo^ng  and  obeying  Christ,  The  aupreme  fact  in  the  higtory  of  all  the  ages  is  God'i 
redemption  of  the  human  race  by  Jesus  Christ  his  Son.  Through  him  God  enters  into 
a  new  relation  to  humanity.  In  him  humanity  rises  into  its  true  freedom  and  dignity. 
By  him  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  earth  is  est-ablished,  consummated,  led  on  through 
varying  fortunes  to  final  victory  and  glorious  everlasting  rest.  "  The  Head  of  every 
man  is  Christ."  He  bears  to  every  man  the  triple  relation  of  "  Prophet,  Priest,  and 
King."  Shall  not  this  historical  covenant  relation  of  the  fathers  to  Moses  teach  us 
seriously  to  consider  how  far  we  are  worthily  maintaining  our  true  personal  allegiance 
to  Sim  t 

III.  The  BPiBXTirAL  meat  and  dbink.  The  word  "spiritual,''  as  applied  to  the 
manna  and  the  water  from  the  rock,  refers  to  their  supernatural  origin,  rather  than  te 
their  essential  quality.  They  were  not  the  result  of  ordinary  physical  causes,  but  the 
direct  and  miraculous  product  of  an  unseen  spiritual  power.  Whether,  in  saying  the 
rock  "  followed  them,"  the  apostle  gives  countenance  to  a  fanciful  Jewish  tradition  or 
not,  this  deeper  truth  is  sure — "  that  Bock  was  Christ."  Both  the  manna  from  heaven 
and  the  water  from  the  rock  were  shadows,  the  substance,  the  "  body,"  of  which  is  in 
Christ  (John  iv.  13,  14 ;  vi.  32 — 35,  49 — 51).  Here,  again,  is  an  old-world  witness 
to  that  grand  truth  which  is  at  once  the  centre  and  the  circumference  of  the  whole 
circle  of  Divine  revelations — that  in  Christ  alone  is  there  life  for  the  souls  of  men. 
He  alone  can  satisfy  their  hunger  and  allay  their  thirst;  he  alone  can  nourish  and 
build  up  the  fabric  of  their  being  unto  a  blessed  Immortality.  Faintly  gleaming 
through  those  ancient  types  and  figures,  as  in  the  morning  twilight,  it  is  to  us  the 
glorious,  full-orbed  revelation  of  the  gospel  day— life  from  God  for  a  perishing  world 
through  Jesus  Christ  his  Son.  "  This  is  the  record,"  etc.  (1  John  v.  11).  The  providence, 
the  lordship,  and  the  life-giving  power  of  Christ  are  the  three  great  truths  that  we 
find  typically  represented  in  these  historical  memorials.  How  nobly  did  the  lives  of 
many  of  our  fathers  bear  witness  to  their  faith  in  these  truths!  The  world  in  which 
they  moved  may  have  beeu  strangely  different  in  its  outward  aspects  from  outs,  but  the 
substantial  realities  of  human  life  were  the  same, 

"The  old  order  changeth,  giving  place  to  new;" 

but  the  yital  principles  that  underlie  that  order  change  not.  As  regards  the  IMvine 
relationships  and  the  essential  needs  of  our  being,  we  stand  just  where  our  fathers  did. 
We  are  encompassed  by  the  same  almighty  power  and  love.  We  pass  through  the 
same  kind  of  discipline,  are  exposed  to  the  same  dangers,  realize  the  same  deliverances, 
bear  the  same  burdens  of  responsibility.  We  live  by  the  same  spiritual  food,  are  saved 
by  the  same  mercy,  redeemed  by  the  same  atoning  sacrifice.  "  AH  flesh  is  as  grass,  and 
ail  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  of  grass,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  i.  24,  25). — W. 

Ver,  31. — Mating  and  drinking  to  the  glory  of  Ood.  The  particular  questions 
with  which  the  apostle  here  deals  may  be  of  comparatively  little  interest  to  us,  but,  as 
usual  in  such  cases,  he  brings  to  bear  on  them  principles  that  affect  the  moral  life 
of  man  in  every  age.  So  far  as  he  speaks  of  the  right  or  wrong  of  eating  that  which 
has  been  offered  in  sacrifice  to  idols,  or  attending  heathen  festivals,  he  is  treating  ol 
what  may  have  been  of  great  moment  to  Corinthian  Christians  in  apostolic  times,  but 
does  not  much  concern  us  now.  When,  however,  he  says,  "  All  things  are  lawful  for 
me,"  etc. ;  "  Let  no  man  seek  his  own,"  etc. ;  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's, "  etc. ;  "  Whether 
therefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God,"  he  is  laying 
down  laws  that  are  of  universal  and  eternal  obligation.  Our  aim  must  be  to  distinguish 
this  vital  and  enduring  element  from  all  that  is  local  and  temporary ;  to  extract  from 
that  which  may  seem  foreign  to  our  interest  those  Divine  lessons  that  bear  on  the 
deepest  realities  of  our  individual  and  social  life.  Here,  then,  lies  one  grand  condition 
of  all  true  nobility  of  character  and  deed.  Every  man  is  great  and  honourable  in  pro- 
portion as  ho  makes  the  "  glory  of  God  "  the  definite  and  conscious  aim  of  his  existence. 
"  Whether  therefore  ye  eat  or  drinls,"  etc.    Note  respecting  this  apostolic  exhortation — 

L  The  obound  on  which  it  bests— the  absolute  sovereignty  of  God's  claims.  The 
twofold  character  of  this  Divine  right  is  recognized.  1.  NaturcU  proprietorship.  "  The 
earth  is  the  Lord's,"  etc.  (vers.  26,  28 ;  Ps.  xxiv.  12) ;  "  Of  him,  and  through  him,  and 
to  him,  are  all  things :  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever "  (Bom.  xL  36).    The  end  of  all 


oii.x.i— 33.J    TMte  J*1RST  KPISILE  tO  THE  COKINTMlAJJa  363 

creatural  existence  must  needs  be  the  glory  of  him  who  created  it.    In  proportion  as 

we  recognize  the  fact  that  all  the  springs  of  our  being  are  in  God,  that  all  the  faculties 
of  our  nature,  all  the  resources,  materials,  and  relations  of  our  life  are  from  him,  we 
shall  feel  that  our  existence  answers  its  true  end,  life  is  worth  living,  just  so  far  as  it 
fuHls  his  purposes.  2.  Personal  redemption.  There  is  a  more  tender  but  not  less 
powerful  claim  established  by  that  marvellous  act  of  grace  of  which  the  "  table  of  the 
Lord,"  with  its  "  cup  of  blessing  "  and  its  "  broken  bread,"  is  the  pei'petual  memoriaL 
"  Ye  are  not  your  own,  ye  are  bought  with  a  price,'"  etc.  (ch.  ri,  19,  20).  Here  is  a 
proprietorship  superadded  to  that  of  the  original  and  natural  relation.  See  the 
fatherhood  of  God  as  it  appears  in  the  cross  of  Jesus,  and  the  sovereignty  of  his  claims 
comes  home  to  yon,  not  with  the  mere  force  of  natural  authority,  but  with  the  resistless 
persuasiveness  of  unparalleled  self-surrendering  love. 

II.  Thk  bbnsb  of  moral  freedom  in  us  to  which  it  makes  its  APPEAib  The 
essential  dignity  of  our  nature  is  implied  in  this  assertion  of  Gbd's  claims  oTor  us. 
The  inferior  creatures  show  forth  his  glory  by  fulQlling  the  ends  for  which  he  has 
created  them,  but  their  service  is  rendered  by  a  law  and  necessity  of  their  being  which 
they  have  no  power  to  resist.  The  myriad  forms  of  lower  life  that  people  the  earth 
and  air  and  sea  cannot  but  obey  the  instincts  of  their  nature,  and  in  that  blind, 
instinctive  obedience  the  end  of  their  existence  is  attained.  To  us  alone  belongs  the 
mysterious,  Silf-regulating  power  by  which  it  lies  with  ourselves  to  determine  whether 
we  will  respond  to  the  Divine  appeal  or  refuse  to  do  so.  These  inferior  creatures  of 
Q-od,  all  of  which  in  themselves  "  are  good "  (1  Tim.  iv.  4),  are  intended  to  he  the 
instruments  of  our  higher  purpose.  We  are  "  crowned  with  glory  and  honour  "  above 
them  all,  that  we  may  interpret  their  voices  and  utilize  their  powers  in  presenting 
to  him  our  living  tribute  of  gratitude  and  love  and  service.  Our  daily  life,  in  its 
deeper  moral  meaning,  proclaims  how  far  this  is  really  the  case  with  us.  As  every  new 
day  dawns  upon  us,  God  throws  it  upon  us  afresh  to  decide  whether  we  will "  use  the 
world"  as  wo  ought  to  use  it  by  living  to  his  glory,  or  will  "abuse  it "  by  following  the 
impulses  of  our  own  self-will  and  serving  the  idols  oS  our  own  imagination  or  carnal 
appetite. 

III.  The  familiab  oommonplaok  field  of  interest  vet  which  it  ib  to  be  ful- 
filled. "  Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,"  etc.  The  simplest  materials  of  our  life  are  to  be 
conseeiated  to  his  service,  and  the  meanest  doings  of  life  are  to  be  made  designedly  a 
tribute  to  his  praise.  We  greatly  err  if  we  imagine  certain  things  to  be  so  purely 
physical  or  so  trivial  as  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  sublimer  interests  and 
responsibilities  of  our  being.  You  learn  the  deepest  truth  of  things  only  when  you 
come  to  see  spiritual  principles  and  laws  and  issues  enshrined  in  them ;  that  every-  - 
thing,  in  fact,  in  the  root  of  it,  in  its  inmost  heart  and  core,  is  spiritual,  and  bears  some 
relation  to  that  higher  part  of  us  which  will  endure  for  ever.  No  doubt  life  is  for  the 
most  part  an  aggregate  of  many  tittle  things.  To  some  it  may  seem  but  a  monotonous 
round  of  trivialities — the  same  things  done  day  after  day  in  the  same  way  and  to  the 
same  end,  and  that  an  end  of  very  little  moment.  But  may  not  the  noblest  principles 
of  moral  feeling  and  life,  as  motive  powers,  be  underlying  these  seemingly  insignificant 
activities,  and  making  them  really  great  ?  Infuse  something  of  the  wealth  of  a  devout 
and  godly  soul  into  them,  and  the  meanest  doings  of  your  life  become  no  longer  mean. 
That  inner,  invisible  greatness  of  holy  thought  and  feeling  makes  them  great.  There 
is  no  motive  so  lofty  but  it  may  be  brought  to  bear  upon  the  so-called  trifles  that 
make  up  the  story  of  our  days.  The  minutest  movements  of  the  material  world  around 
us  aia  «^ected  by  the  same  forces  as  govern  the  most  majestio, 

**  The  very  law  that  moulds  a  tear 
And  makes  it  trickle  from  its  souroe^ 
That  law  preserves  the  earth  a  sphere 
And  guides  the  planets  in  their  course." 

So  may  the  grand  motives  of  reverence  for  God  and  love  to  the  Savioor  giTe  shape 
and  beauty,  consistence  and  harmony,  to  everything  we  do.  And  then,  he  who  "seeth 
not  as  man  seeth,"  who  recognizes  none  of  our  distinctions  of  great  and  small,  will 
accept  it  as  a  welcome  tribute  to  his  praise.  The  poor  widow's  consecration  of  her  "  two 
mites  "  to  the  Lord's  treasury,  the  "  cup  of  cold  water "  given  to  tha  disciple  In  the 

L  OOBINTHIAjra.  2  A 


364  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKlNTfllAUS.    [ch.  x.  1—33. 

name  of  s  disciple,  the  simplest  act  of  real  Christian  service  and  self-sacrificing  loTe, — 
these  are  as  pleasing  to  him  as  the  heroism  of  a  Paul  compassing  sea  and  land  with 
painful  toil  and  travail  that  he  may  win  souls,  or  a  Luther  daring  the  dark  powers  of 
earth  and  hell  in  Ms  brave  witness  for  the  truth.  Learn  to  fill  your  common  everyday 
life  with  the  inspiration  of  a  high  and  holy  purpose.  This  will  make  it  far  other  than 
it  seems  to  be,  more  real,  more  satisfying,  less  like  a  mere  feverish  pursuit  of  unsub- 
stantial shadows.  It  will  then  become  a  thing  of  imperishable  beauty  and  worth.  Its 
outward  incidents  will  be  but  as  the  scaffolding  within  which  the  structLiie  of  a  holy 
character  and  glorious  destiny  is  being  raised.  The  outer  form  of  it  will  be  a  matter 
of  small  concern  to  you  so  that  that  interior  work  is  going  on  well.  Take  this  spiritual 
view  of  things,  and  yours  shall  be  indeed  a  consecrated  life,  in  which  every  work  you  do 
will  be  as  a  "  sacrament,"  »nd  every  step  you  take  will  lead  you  nearer  to  your  home 
in  God.— W. 

Vers.  3,  4. — Meit  and  drink  for  God's  people.  By  a  few  master  strokes  of  his  pen 
St.  Paul  indicated  tlie  typical  significance  of  Israel's  life  in  the  wilderness.  His  object 
in  these  allusions  to  the  Old  Testament  was  to  correct  party  spirit  among  the  Greek 
Christians  of  the  first  century,  by  showing  that,  like  the  tribes  of  Israel  in  the  old  time, 
the  people  of  Christ  are  one  in  respect  of  their  redemption  and  consolation  in  him.  As 
all  the  Hebrew  fathers  were  delivered  from  slavery  in  Egypt,  so  all  the  Chiistians  are 
delivered  from  the  bondage  of  the  flesh.  As  all  of  them  were  baptized  unto  Moses  in 
the  cloud  and  the  sea,  so  all  the  Christians  have  been  baptized  into  Christ  by  death 
and  burial  with  him.  As  all  of  them  ate  of  the  manna  from  the  Lord,  so  all  Chi  istians 
have  the  same  spiritual  food  ;  and  as  all  of  them  drank  of  the  water  from  the  smitten 
rook  in  Horeb,  so  all  Christians  drink  of  the  same  spiritual  Rook,  which  is  Ciirist.  Thus 
what  God  did  for  Israel,  he  did  for  all ;  what  he  gave  to  Israel,  he  gave  to  all  that  people. 
It  was  the  fault  of  the  people  that  this  unity  was  broken.  "  Some  of  them  were  idol- 
aters ; "  "  some  of  them  commieted  fornication  ; "  "  some  of  them  tempted  the  Lord;" 
"  some  of  them  murmured."  Christians  should  mark  this,  and  beware  lest  any  of  them, 
throui^h  temptations  to  idolatry,  fleshliness,  or  wilfulness,  forfeit  what  the  Lord  has 
provided  for  all  of  them  without  respect  of  persons.  Here  are  the  necessaries  of  the 
spiritual  as  of  the  natural  life — food  and  drink,  bread  and  water. 

I.  Spiritual  food.  The  Israelites  got  manna  as  a  direct  and  free  gift  from  God. 
Christians  receive  Christ  as  "  the  true  Bread  which  came  down  from  heaven,"  a  direct 
and  a  free  gift  from  God.  The  bread  is  his  flesh  which  he  has  given  for  the  life  of  the 
world ;  i.e.  Christ  nourishes  his  people  through  the  efficacy  of  his  atonement.  Who- 
soever heartily  believes  in  Christ  crucified  eats  by  faith  of  the  flesh  which  is  heavenly 
bread.  The  emphasis  in  this  passage  lies  on  the  words,  "  They  all  did  eat  the  same." 
In  the  wilderness,  every  family  of  the  whole  redeemed  nation  ate  daily  of  exactly  the 
same  bread  with  every  other  family.  Moses  himself  partook  of  the  manna,  and  so  did 
the  lowest  of  the  people.  There  was  no  difference  between  the  princes  of  Israel  and 
the  feeblest  in  the  tribes,  between  the  old  people  and  the  children,  or  between  masters 
and  servants.  All  partook  of  the  same  daily  bread.  So  there  is  the  same  Christ  for  all 
of  us.  Believers  have  the  same  life  and  the  same  support  or  staff  of  life.  No  matter 
what  social  and  intellectual  distinctions  may  be  among  us,  or  what  varieties  of  view  on 
secondary  points ;  in  this  we  are  at  one,  that  we  have  the  same  spiritual  food.  And  we 
show  this  when  we  all  partake  together  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

II.  Spiritual  drink.  The  water  from  the  rock  at  Horeb  not  only  supplied  the 
immediate  want,  but  was  of  use  to  the  tribes  of  Israel  for  many  days.  Now,  that  rock 
signified  Clirist.  Jehovah  saiil  to  Moses,  "  I  will  stand  before  thee  there  upon  the  rock 
in  Horeb."  So  God  is  now  before  us  in  Christ  Jesus,  able  and  willing  to  satisfy  all  the 
poor  and  needy  whose  hearts  faint  and  "  fail  them  for  thirst."  Christ  as  the  Rock  smitten 
is  a  Fountain  of  life,  available  to  us  now,  and  not  now  only,  but  all  our  lives  long.  As  the 
bread  resolves  itself  into  the  flesh,  so  the  stream  also  into  the  precious  blood  of  Christ. 
We  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  man,  according  to  his  own  teaching 
at  Capernaum.  Thus  we  are  again  brought  to  the  fact  and  virtue  of  the  atonement. 
That  which  it  would  be  gross  and  intolerable  to  eat  and  drink  after  a  literal  and  carnal 
manner,  is,  after  a  spiritual  manner,  full  of  sweetness  and  strength.  And  again,  the 
empbasia  is  on  the  participation  by  all  Christians  of  the  same  spiritual  drink,  which 


OH.  X.  1—38.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.  8i 

i8  Bymbolised  In  the  Lord's  Snpper.  "  The  oup  of  blesdng  which  we  blew,  Is  It  not 
the  communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ?"  Other  Scriptures  follow  more  closely  tlie 
idea  of  water  gushing  from  a  rocky  fountain.  As  the  blood  of  Christ  signifies  h'» 
atonement,  so  the  water  is  a  sign  of  the  commuuication  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  By  tho 
former  our  Lord  gives  peace  to  the  conscience  ;  by  the  latter,  cleansing  and  healin.j 
to  the  heart.  Christ,  our  Bock,  spoke  more  than  once  of  his  power  to  impart  to  a1) 
comers  the  water  of  life  (John  iv.  10 — 14 ;  yii.  37 — 39).  And  now,  as  from  a  heigh  i 
above  the  plain  on  which  his  people  still  walk  as  pilgrims,  our  Saviour  ia  heaven  give,' 
this  water  to  the  thirsty.  To  it  aU  are  welcome.  Water  is  no  luxury  for  the  few, 
but  an  acknowledged  universal  necessary  of  life;  and  so  a  participation  of  the  Spirit 
of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  is  no  privilege  of  a  few  superlative  Christians,  but  necessary 
to  the  inward  life  of  every  one  who  is  a  Christian  at  all.  "  If  any  man  have  not 
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his."  How  can  a  rook  follow  ?  The  rock  in  Horeb 
did  not  move  from  its  place,  but  followed  the  people  in  the  stream  which  issued  from 
it  and  flowed  through  the  lower  levels  of  the  wilderness.  So  Jesus  Christ  remaius 
at  God's  right  band ;  yet  is  with  us  always  in  the  continual  e£Scacy  of  his  shed  blood 
and  the  continual  fellowship  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  The  fountain  never  runs  dry.  Wi- 
never  find  anything  less  than  fulness  in  him.  And  there  is  no  need  to  go  on  a  long 
pilgrimage  to  our  sacred  well.    The  Bock  follows  us. 

III.  How  TO  GET  THIS  NOURISHMENT.  By  grace,  through  faith.  When  the  childrei! 
of  Israel  saw  the  manna,  they  "  wist  not  what  it  was."  Then  Moses  told  them  from 
Gk>d  what  it  was,  and  bade  them  gather  it,  "  every  man  according  to  his  eating."  So 
now,  men  do  not  know  of  themselves  what  Christ  is ;  but  it  is  preached  or  proclaimed 
as  from  God  that  this  is  the  true  Bread.  Take,  and  eat,  and  live.  Why  should  any 
household  be  without  the  heavenly  Bread?  When  the  rock  was  smitten,  no  one  stood 
by  but  Moses  and  the  elders,  who  had  gone  in  advance  of  the  host.  One  can 
imagine  those  elders  hastening  back  to  the  camp,  and  calling  aloud  to  the  several 
tribes,  "  Water !  water !  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  to  the  waters  I  "  Shall  we 
who  have  found  life  and  peace  in  Jesus  Christ  hold  our  peace  ?  Nay,  but  we  call 
to  every  thirsty  soul,  "  Come,  aad  drink,  and  live." — F. 

Ver.  2. — Baptism  unto  Moses.  The  expression  used  here  is  a  singular  and  suggestive 
one,  and  one  that  seems  to  require  an  enlargement  of  our  associationg  with  the  term 
"  baptized."  "  Were  all  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea."  It  may  be 
noted  that  more  precisely  the  passage  should  read,  "  all  baptized  themselves  unto 
Moses."  St.  Paul  sees,  in  the  incidents  of  the  crossing  of  the  Bed  Sea  under  the 
guidance  of  the  pillar-cloud,  a  symbol  of  that  Christian  confession  which  puts  us  wholly 
under  the  redeemings  and  guidings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  For  the  incidents,  see 
Exod.  xiv.  21,  22.  The  point  is  that  the  "  fathers,"  the  "  Israelites,"  voluntarily 
dedicated  themselves  to  the  leadership  of  Moses  when  they  went  through  the  waters  at 
his  command.  They  came  up  out  of  the  waters,  on  the  further  shore,  a  new  people, 
devoted  to  Moaes  as  the  earthly  ruler  representing  Jehovah.  "  The  Israelites  were 
baptized  'unto  Moses'  because,  by  passing  through  the  cloud  and  the  sea,  they  had 
become  connected  with  him,  dependent  on  his  commands  and  guidance."  F.  W! 
Robertson  well  points  out  the  reason  for  the  warnings  here  given.  "  The  peril  of  the 
Corinthian  Church  lay  in  their  false  security.  They  were  tempted  to  think  that  all 
things  were  safe  to  do,  because  all  things  were  lawful.  They  were  ready  to  rest  satisfied 
with  the  knowledge  that  they  were  God's  people  and  God's  Church.  Now,  the  apostle 
shakes  this  sense  of  their  safety  by  reminding  them  that  the  ancient  Chnich  of  Israel 
fell,  although  it  had  the  same  privileges;  therefore  he  infers  that  spiritual  privileges 
are  not  perfect  security.  Now,  the  argument  by  which  he  proves  that  the  privileges  of 
ancient  Israel  were  similar  to  theirs  is  remarkable.  That  people  had  a  baptism  as  well 
as  they,  and  a  spiritual  food  and  drink.  Baptism  is  the  solemn  profession  of  our 
Christianity;  and  the  passing  through  the  Red  Sea  was  the  Israelites'  profession  of 
discipleship  to  Moses."  Here,  then,  baptism  is  the  symbol  of  confession,  or  profession  ; 
it  is  the  act  by  which  we  voluntarily  yield  ourselvHg  to  the  leadership  of  another.  This 
may  receive  four  illustrations. 

I.  CoMFABE  John's  baptism.  Observe  the  comertion  between  John's  teaching  and 
John's  rite.    Those  who  accepted  his  teaching  ^  Mded  themselves  to  his  leadersUp  by 


35«  THB  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOBINTHIANS.    [cm.  x.  1—83 

the  act  of  Bubmitting  to  his  rita.  He  led  them  to  »  change  in  their  ideas  aad  expecta- 
tions of  Mesbiah  which  should  have  prepared  them  to  recognize  in  him  a  spiritual 
Saviour — a  Saviour  from  sin.  Through  voluntary  submission  to  John'f  baptism,  they 
publicly  confessed  themselves  to  be  John's  disciples. 

IL  CouPARE  OUR  Lord's  baptisms.  It  does  not  appear  that  he  personally  baptized 
any  one ;  but  his  disciples  did  so  in  his  Name.  Here,  again,  the  act  was  a  public  and 
outward  acknowledgment  or  confession  of  the  Messiahship  of  Christ,  and  a  voluntary 
submission  to  his  rule  and  law.  It  was  the  faith  of  the  disciple  gaining  expression  in 
a  solemn  public  act.  It  brought  the  disciple  under  our  Lord's  leadership,  just  as  follow- 
ing Moses  into  the  sea  involved  full  submission  to  his  guidance. 

in,  CoMPABK  St.  Paul's  teachimo  about  baptism.  It  is  always  with  him  the 
equivalent  of  confession  It  is  confession  by  an  act  rather  than  by  a  word.  Such 
confession  St.  Paul  declares  to  be  an  absolute  necessity  for  salvation.  With  characteristic 
point  and  force,  he  even  makes  it  as  necessary  as  faith,  saying  in  Rom.  x.  9,  "  If  tliou 
shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God 
hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved."  And  from  this  St.  Paul  argues 
that  we  are  now,  by  our  own  consecration,  "  under  law  to  Christ."  "  We  serve  the 
Lord  Christ." 

IV.  CoMPABK  PBESENT-DAT  msoiFLESHip.  The  rite  1b  perhaps  less  regarded,  but  that 
which  it  stands  for  is  still  essential.  Impress  that  the  following  things  are  the  proper 
stages  of  religious  experience : — 1.  Repentance,  with  du3  forsaking  of  sinful  ways. 
2.  Faith  in  Christ  as  able  to  grant  forgiveness  and  to  give  life.  3.  Confession  of  Christ, 
by  some  form  of  voluntary  and  public  testimony.  4.  Full  and  submissive  practical 
obedience  to  his  rule  and  law  in  everyday  life  and  conduct.— B.  T. 

Yen,  3,  4. — I7m  ipiritual  meat  and  drink.  Give  account  of  the  historical  facts  to 
which  the  apostle  refers.  It  seems  as  if  he  had  in  mind  also  the  Jewish  tradition  that 
the  rock — i.e.  a  fragment  broken  off  from  the  rock  smitten  by  Moses — followed  the 
Israelites  through  their  journey.  St.  Paul  sees,  in  that  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence 
and  providing,  an  aid  towards  our  realizing  the  gracious  abiding  presence  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  with  his  Church.  His  point  here  is  that  God's  people,  in  the  olden  times 
and  still,  are  divinely  2ef2  and  divinely /e(2;  so  no  excuse  for  apostasy  can  be  found  in  any 
"  straitening  in  God." 

I.  DrvisELY  LED.  By  God  in  the  pillar-cloud  that  loomed  dark  against  the  clear 
sky  by  day,  but  shone  like  fire  at  night,  and  moved  or  rested  to  direct  the  people's 
joumeyings.  By  God's  power  through  the  Red  Sea,  whose  waters  were  held  back, 
making  a  great  pathway  over  the  dri^  sands.  The  fact  of  such  leadings  ought  to  have 
bound  the  people  to  Jehovah  in  everlasting  bonds,  'i'hen  show  what  is  the  answering 
Christian  fact  to  this,  and  how,  when  we  are  brought  to  Christ,  a  new  light  shines  upon 
the  wondrous  providencas  of  our  whole  lives,  and  so  we  feel  freshly  bound  to  our  Lord, 
auds^— 

"Jesus,  still  lead  on. 
Till  oni  rest  be  woa." 

n.  IhvniEiiT  FED,    By  God  in  the  provision  of  the  manna  day  by  day.    By  God  in 

the  smitten  rock,  that  provided  in  a  miraculous  manner  for  them  when  natural  supplies 
failed.  Such  dally  signs  of  Divine  presence  and  care  ought  to  have  held  them  fast  to 
daily  obedience  and  service.  Then  we  may  realize  that  (1)  the  manna  answers  to 
Christ,  the  Bread  of  life  for  us ;  and  (2)  the  water  answers  to  Cbrist,  the  Rock  sorely 
smitten  for  us.  And  then  we  should  feel  how,  in  the  daily  provisions  of  Christ's  grace 
in  the  supply  of  all  our  need,  we  are  bound  to  bis  .'service,  duly  urged  to  "  yield  our- 
selves unto  him,  and  our  members  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  his  service." — B.  T. 

Yer.  ll^-Ensamphs/rom  the  uHldemets-life.  The  words  of  this  verse  may  be  better 
rendered,  "  happened  unto  them  typicalli/,"  "  The  real  point  of  the  passage  is — ^These 
things  which  occurred  to  them  are  to  be  looked  upon  by  us,  not  merely  as  interestmg 
historical  events,  but  as  having  a  typical  significance.  Their  record  remains  as  a  stand- 
ing warning  that  great  privileges  may  be  enjoyed  by  many,  and  used  by  them  to  theii 
destructioB."    la  introducing  this  subject,  dwell  on  the  mission  of  history  and  biograph'y 


cm.  X.  1—33.1    THE  FIRST  BPISTLK  TO  THE  CORlNTHIANa  857 

ID  relation  to  education  and  culture.  If  science  and  mathematics  bear  most  powerfully 
on  mental  training,  history  and  biography  are  the  most  important  agenciea  ia  m»ral 
rultun.    As  the  poet  Longfellow  says — 

"  Live*  of  great  men  all  remind  m 
We  may  make  our  livei  lublime." 

There  Is  an  important  sense  in  which  there  is  "  nothing  new  under  the  nm."  Circum- 
stances, situations,  and  the  relations  of  men  to  them,  constantly  repeat  themselves; 
with  sulUcient  variety,  indeed,  to  give  individuality  and  to  impress  responsibility,  but 
with  sufficient  sameness  for  us  to  recognize  the  adaptation  of  the  warning  or  the 
example  to  vs.  One  age  can  become  thus  a  power  upon  another,  but  the  power  is 
related  to  general  principles  rather  than  to  minute  details.  So  the  records  of  ancient 
and  Eastern  life,  given  to  us  in  Holy  Scripture,  become  a  gracious  power  on  us.  The 
records  have  been  written  for  our  admonition,  upon  whom  the  "  ends  of  the  age ''  are 
come.  The  story  of  ancient  Israel,  especially  in  tbe  forty  years  of  its  wilderness-life, 
is  for  the  most  part  one  of  warning.  As  such,  the  apostle  here  call*  it  to  mind.  We 
may  find  in  it  warning  of  four  possible  perils. 

I.  Yielding  to  bodily  passions.  In  all  ages  there  are  found  indications  of  man's  danger 
^rom  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  his  own  body.  Adam  and  Eve  sinned  by  yielding  the 
conscience  of  duty  to  the  bodily  inclination ;  and  brought  upon  the  race  an  undue  force 
of  carnal  passion,  which  makes  the  life-conflict  to  win  righteousness  a  heavy  and  a  hard 
one  for  every  man.  Some  have  felt  this  so  deeply  that  they  have  thought  virtue  must 
crime  by  the  crushing  down  of  the  body,  the  absolute  repression  of  all  its  inclinations. 
This  ia  the  inspiring  thought  which  has  driven  men  into  hermits'  caves  and  monkish 
c^lls ;  but  it  is  a  truer  conception  of  life  that  regards  the  body  as  providing  the  very 
conditions  of  our  moral  trial ;  and  the  problem  for  us  to  work  out  is  the  conquering  and 
efficient  using  of  every  power  and  faculty.  The  Christian  triumph  is  to  know  how 
to  "  possess  the  vessel  of  our  body  in  sanctiScation  and  honour."  This  may  be  illus- 
trated from  the  perils  of  the  Corinthian  Christians,  who  had  to  live  in  the  midst  of  a 
society  where  bodily  pleasure  reigned  supreme.  'The  passions  by  which  we  may  be 
overcome  are:!.  Self-indulgence ;  over-responding  to  the  appetites  fur  (I)  food,  (2)  drink, 
(3)  society,  (4)  pleasure,  (5)  learning,  (6)  art.  All  for  our  use  and  for  our  good; 
but  all  may  be  unduly  pursued,  to  our  moral  peril.  2.  Sensuality}  the  passions  which 
bear  relation  to  our  life-associations.  It  is  important  to  learn,  frum  the  example  of  the 
Israelites,  and  from  the  usual  scenes  at  pagan  and  heathen  festivals,  that  unusual 
excitement  in  religion  fosters  the  sensual  passions  into  undue  strength. 

II.  YiELDiKa  TO  IDOLATBT.  It  may  seem  as  if  no  such  peril  could  be  near  to  us  in 
these  Christian  times.  Bat  the  Apostle  John  starts  us  upon  searching  thoughts  of  our 
own  dangers  when  he  says,  "Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols."  For  us 
now,  (1)  children  may  be  idols ;  (2)  friends  may  be;  (3)  success  may  he;  (4)  our  house 
and  home  may  be ;  (5)  our  pursuits  may  be ;  for  an  idol  is  anything  in  a  man's  life 
which  succeeds  in  pushing  itself  before  God, 

IIL  YiELDiNa  TO  PBESUMPTioN.  (Ver.  9.)  David  shows  a  remarkable  insight  of  his 
own  frailty  when  he  prays,  "  Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presumptuous  sins ;  let 
them  not  have  dominion  over  me."  This  is  the  subtle  peril  of  advanced  and  experienced 
Christian  life.  A  man  may  take  advantage  of  God ;  presume  upon  what  is  his  will, 
without  asking  him  ;  and  even  may  put  God  to  the  test ;  these  being  sure  signs  of  lost 
humility  and  lost  childlike  dependence.  It  was  the  sin  of  Rebekah ;  she  presumed 
on  the  promise  made  her  concerning  Jacob,  and  so  was  set  upon  trying  to  fulfil  the 
promise  by  schemes  of  her  own. 

IV.  Yielding  to  oomflainino.  (Ver.  10.)  A  peril  that  comes  to  us  aU  when  the 
circumstances  of  life  will  not  go  "  according  to  our  mind."  Troubles  and  disappoint- 
ments and  failures  are  Divine  testings  of  our  professed  trust ;  and  for  us  to  complain 
and  fret  and  murmur  is  plainly  to  show  lost  submission  and  lost  trust.  He  never 
complains  who  holds  firmly  the  assurance  that  "  all  things  work  together  for  good  to 
them  that  love  God."— K.  T. 

y«r.  12. — Bet/seeurUy  U  inseewity.    Over-confidence  in  a  religious  proTessioa  ii  one 


358  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  x.  1—83 

of  the  molt  periloui  of  Christian  faults.  He  who  presumes  upon  his  position  and  his 
privileges  is  only  too  liliely  to  be  un watchful  of  his  conduct.  A  solemn  lesson  is 
learned  from  the  wilderness-life  of  God's  people  Israel  Though  so  honoured,  so  guarded, 
go  guided,  and  so  provided  for,  only  a  very  few  of  those  who  came  out  of  Egypt  kept 
their  faithfulness  and  were  permitted  to  enter  the  "  promised  land."  "  It  is  not 
EufiScient  to  have  beeen  admitted  into  the  Christian  corenaut ;  we  need  watchfulness 
in  order  to  use  our  privileges  aright "  (Bom.  xi.  20).  1.  Distinguish  between  the  man 
who  "  standeth "  and  the  man  who  "  thinketh  he  standeth."  2.  The  man  who 
"  standeth  "  is  not,  necessarily,  in  any  danger  of  falling.  3.  The  man  who  "  thinketh 
he  standeth"  hsts  just  cause  to  fear.  So  we  are  led  to  understand  that  a  man's  moral 
peril  never  lies  merely  in  the  circumstances  in  which  he  is  placed ;  never  merely  in  his 
outward  surroundings,  but  always  in  his  inward  moods— in  his  conditions  of  mind 
and  feeling,  and  tlie  relations  in  which  they  set  him  towards  outward  circumstances. 
Our  standing  or  our  falling  depends  on  our  heart-rightness.  Anywhere  we  might  stand 
if  but  our  heart  be  right  with  God.  Everywhere  we  must  fall  if  we  fail  to  "  keep  our 
heart  with  all  diligence."  And  what  may  we  regard  as  the  one  essential  thing  in  heart- 
rightness?  Surely  it  is  the  humility  that  keeps  us  ever  leaning  hard  on  our  strong 
Lord,  hiding  in  him  when  calamities  come  nigh,  doing  all  things  only  "  through  him 
that  strengtheneth  us."  It  may  be  urged,  in  conclusion,  that  the  falls  of  the  self-secure 
and  over-confident  are  usually  sudden,  violent,  and  overwhelming  falls ;  though  eveii 
these  may  be  only  permitted  to  break  down  the  ovei-confidence  and  to  humble  them 
under  God's  mighty  hand. — B.  T, 

Ver.  13.— JVje  commonntsa  of  our  temptation.  "  No  temptation  taken  you  but  such 
as  is  common  to  man."  In  Christian  experience  there  is  constant  fresh  surprise  at  the 
forms  which  temptation  can  take  ,•  and  one  of  our  gravest  difficulties  arises  from  our  fear 
that  the  forms  are  special  to  us— such  as  no  otliers  have  known.  We  are  thus  led  to 
tliink  that  we  must  battle  with  the  temptation  alone,  since  we  can  hope  to  gain  no  real 
help  from  the  symijathy  or  the  experience  of  our  Christian  brethren.  It  is  a  great  joy 
to  us  when  we  find  out  that  all  the  ages  are  linked  together  in  a  common  experience  of 
the  possible  forms  of  temptations.  Human  nature  is  the  same  in  every  age  and  every 
place.  The  corruption  of  human  nature  shows  itself  in  the  same  forms  among  all 
classes.  Kven  in  what  we  think  to  be  quite  subtle  ami  peculiar  forms  of  sinful  incli'ia- 
tion  and  passion,  we  are  really  but  shnring  a  common  experience  ;  our  temptation  is  one 
that  is  common  to  men.  Again  and  again,  as  life  advances,  we  find  this  out,  often 
with  a  great  surprise;  and,  although  the  finding  it  out  does  not  relieve  us  from  the 
conflict  with  the  evil,  it  does  relieve  us  from  the  strain  of  feeling  that  our  experience  is 
unique,  our  tempter  a  hitherto  unconqu'  red  one.  We  seem  to  gain  new  strength  when 
we  can  say,  "  Our  brothers  have  mastered  this  very  foe  many  a  time ;  and  God  haa 
adapted  his  grace  to  those  tempted  just  as  I  am  over  and  over  again."  TLe  Revised 
Version  gives  a  somewhat  different  tui'n  to  the  sentence  :  "  There  hath  no  temptatioi 
taken  you  but  such  as  man  can  hear;"  i.e.  such  as  is  fairly  within  the  limitations  of  i. 
human  and  earthly  experience. 

I.  Temptation  is  a  common  human  bxpbribnob.  It  is  a  necessity  of  our  proba- 
tionary state;  it  is  the  condition  of  our  changing  the  mere  innocence  of  ignorance  for 
the  virtue  that  comes  by  knowledge  and  will.  If  God  were  pleased  to  give  ns,  as  moral 
creatures,  the  discernment  between  right  and  wrong,  with  a  distinct  understanding  that 
he  stood  by  the  right,  then  he  must  set  his  creatures  in  the  midst  of  circumstances 
which  would  test  their  good  will  towards  the  right.  So,  in  one  sense,  temptations 
around  us,  taking  their  thousan  'fold  forms,  make  the  battle  and  the  bitterness  of  out 
human  life.  But,  in  another  sense,  our  surrounding  of  teniptation  is  but  the  great 
-sphere  in  which  we  are  to  win  holiness  and  virtue.  None  of  us  can  get  out  of  the  way 
of  temptation.  It  goes  with  ns  where  we  go,  because  God  will  not  leave  us  alone :  he 
wants  us  to  be  holy. 

n.  Christian  life  is  not  exempt  from  tkmftation.  It  cannot  be  too  fully  shown 
that  becoming  a  Christian  never  alters  a  man's  circumstances ;  it  only  alters  his  relation 
to  the  eircumstanees.  The  laws  of  life  rule  on  for  the  Christian  and  the  unrenewed 
man  ;  and,  flrom  his  higher  position,  the  Christian  has  still  to  see  all  virtue  wrung  from 
the  tempter.    Temptation  may  even  t^ake  more  subtle  and  perilous   terms   for   the 


CH.  X.  1—33.]      THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  359 

Christian.  His  new  thoi^ht  uid  feeling  may  even  diMorer  temptations  tritere  dolkt 
souls  would  miss  them. 

in.    ThK    EBLATI0N8    IN    WHICH    GOD    STANDS    TO    TEMPTATION,    AS    AJFECTINO    THl 

Cbbibtiaii.  Here  three  points  need  treatment.  1.  God  modifies  the  temptation  to  the 
learing  potvtr  of  the  man  to  whom  it  comes.  We  may  be  sure  that  God  will  "  not 
suffer  us  to  be  tempted  above  that  we  are  able."  2.  God  will  provide  the  necessary 
escapes  either  from  or  through  the  temptation.  3.  God  comforts  with  gracious 
"■>romises  and  assurances,  to  which  he  is  ever  faithful.  "  God  permits  the  temptation  by 
allowing  the  circumstances  which  create  temptation  to  arise,  but  he  takes  care  that  no 
fate  bars  the  path  of  retreat."  Then  "  all  that  a  Christian  has  to  do  is  to  live  in  humble 
dependence  upon  lum,  neither  perplexed  in  the  present  nor  anxious  for  the  future." 
— li.  T. 

Ver.  16. — ra«  jommitnion  ofgouh  in  Christ.  These  words  are  uttered  in  illustration 
of  an  important  practical  principle,  which  St.  Panl  is  urging  as  sufficient  to  guide  the 
Corinthians  safely  through  many  of  the  difficulties  of  the  (Jhristian  life.  Explain,  the 
question,  which  threatened  to  break  up  the  unity  and  peace  of  the  Church  at  Corinth, 
whether  "  a  Christian  man  was  justified  in  eating  meat  which  had  been  offered  in  sacrifica 
to  idols."  Show  under  what  circumstances  of  social  life  this  question  arose,  and  the 
different  ways  in  which  persons  of  different  temperament  were  disposed  to  treat  it. 
St.  Paul  in  no  way  encourages  superstitious  notions,  but  he  pleads  that  consideration 
for  others  and  Christian  charity  will  readily  decide  our  conduct  in  every- case  that 
may  arise.  Having  had  to  refer  to  the  heathen  feasts,  he  is  led  to  think  of  the  one 
Christian  feast.  He  says  that  is  a  sealing  of  the  union  of  all  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ;  it  is  a  joint  partaking  as  it  were  of  the  redemption,  and  so  a  community  of 
sentiment  and  feeling  and  life  which  involves  that  each  member  shiU  be  concerned  for 
the  highest  well-being  of  the  others,  and  willing  to  put  his  own  preferences  aside  if  they 
stand  in  the  way  of  his  brother's  good.  We  have  two  subjects  here  brought  before  us, — 
(1)  The  reality  of  the  communion  of  souls  in  Christ ;  and  (2)  the  value  of  a  symbolical 
feast  which  will  assert  that  communion. 

I.  The  bbality  of  the  communion  of  souls  in  Christ.  The  word  "  communion  " 
is  often  applied  to  the  intercourse  of  friendsliip,  the  fellowship  of  two  kindred  souls 
between  whom  there  is  a  recognized  community  of  sentiment  and  feeling.  The  word 
is  applied  to  our  privilege  of  access  to  God ;  we  are  said  to  have  communion  with 
God,  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  the  term  would  be 
more  precisely  applied  to  that  feeling  of  mutual  interest  which  two  persons  have  in 
each  other  because  of  their  common  interest  in  some  object,  or  common  love  to  some 
third  person.  We  may  not  even  be  personally  known  to  each  other,  but  if  we  are  both 
interested  in  the  same  thing,  and  working  for  the  same  ends,  we  have  "  communion  "with 
one  another.  Illustrate  that  this  is  the  basis  on  which  societies  and  associations  of  men 
are  formed.  Those  who  have  the  same  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  feel  that  they  are 
boimd  to  one  another ;  they  gather  themselves  into  Churches  that  they  may  have  "  com- 
munion "  with  each  other.  Christianity  demands  love  to  a  Person.  It  sets  forth  one 
Person,  the  One  who  is  worthy  to  receive  the  devotion  of  every  soul.  Usually,  indeed,  if 
two  love  one  person,  there  rises  a  deadly  jealousy  and  hatred  between  them,  but  that 
only  springs  from  the  fact  that  both  cannot  possess  the  oliject  of  their  aflfoction  in  the 
oorae  sense ;  but  even  here  on  earth  there  are  many  cases  in  which  two  may  love  the  same 
person,  and  find  their  common  love  brings  them  nearer  to  each  other.  You  may  fall 
into  conversation  with  a  fellow-traveller,  and  may  find  that  you  both  know  and  love 
some  third  person,  and  at  once  all  strangeness  passes,  and  you  converse  together  as  do 
long-known  friends.  Now,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  can  be  as  much  to  one  believer  as  to 
another.  He  can  be  all  to  each  one,  and  so  there  need  be  no  jealousy,  but  mutual  love 
for  Christ  may  make  it  easy  for  us  to  love  each  other.  But  our  text  significantly  calls 
our  communion  the  "communion  of  the  Hood  and  body  of  Christ  ;"and  this  we  must 
try  to  understand.  In  the  story  of  the  heathen  gods  there  is  generally  some  one  incident 
which  is  regarded  as  specially  characteristic  of  each  one,  and  from  which  he  may  even  take 
his  name  or  fashion  his  symbol.  Something  of  the  same  kind  may  be  observed  in 
Scripture  and  modern  biographies.  There  is  some  event  of  the  life  which  is  regarded 
ibove  all  others  as  revealing  the  man.    Thus  we  have  in  the  Bible,  Jacob  the  sup- 


360  THS  FIBST  EFISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTUIANa.    [okz.!— S^L 

plantar,  Moses  the  meek,  impulsire  Peter,  eta,  the  qualifying  tenns  recalling  lome 
chaiaeteristic  incident.  In  the  reference  of  the  text  to  the  "  body  and  blood  of  Christ '' 
we  have  something  of  the  same  kind.  Everything  in  the  life  of  Jesus  is  of  supreme 
concern  to  us,  but  the  Christian  heart  has  always  regarded  the  "body-breaking  and 
blood-shedding "  as  the  characteristic  incident,  the  one  so  peculiarly  significant  as 
revealing  the  person,  the  spirit,  and  the  mission  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  That  "  body  and 
blood"  reveal  to  us  these  things — duty,  love,  self-sacrifice.  This  trinity  expresses  the 
very  essence  of  Christ's  religion.  And  "  communiqn  in  the  body  and  the  blood"  is  the 
fellowship  of  those  in  whom  the  essential  spirit  of  Christianity  is  found ;  who  are  toned 
and  ruled  by  duty,  out  of  their  sonship  to  G-od ;  by  love,  because  the  "  love  of  Christ 
is  shed  abroad  in  their  hearts;"  by  ul/sacrijioi,  because  the  spirit  of  their  Master 
has  become  theirs.  Those  who  have  thus  "  communion  in  the  body  and  the  blood" 
can  enter  into  the  meaning  and  power  of  that  "  cup  of  blessing  which  we  Uesi,"  and 
of  that  "  bread  which  we  break." 

n.  The  yalus  or  ▲  btubouoak  aot  whiob  will  abbebt  that  coHumnoH.  As  in 
everything,  so  in  respect  of  symbols,  two  extremes  are  possible,  and  both  are  to  be 
avoided.  He  is  «nhuman  who  thinks  he  may  refuse  the  help  of  any  symbol. 
He  is  too  human  who  multiplies  symbols,  glorifies  symbols,  until  thej/  occupy  all  his 
thought,  and  he  has  no  room  for  the  realities  of  which  they  should  testify.  Symbols 
of  spiritual  things  will  be  not  only  useful,  they  will  be  necessary,  so  long  as  we  are 
in  t^e  body.  We  have  embraced  spiritual  truths,  but  they  came  to  us  in  symbolic 
words;  they  are  represented  to  us  in  symbolic  acts.  There  can  be  no  question  as  to  our 
need  of  symbols ;  the  only  questions  concern  their  character  and  their  kind.  Our  Lord 
met  our  need  in  the  institution  of  the  "  Lord's  Supper,"  the  "  communion  of  the  body 
and  the  blood."  We  are  drawn  into  a  great  and  tender  fellowship  as  we  share  together 
the  one  loaf,  as  we  make  affirmation  of  our  common  life  in  Christ ;  and  our  communion 
finds  fitting  expression  in  a  gentle  patience  with  our  brother's  failings,  a  loving 
consideration  for  even  our  brother's  prejudices,  and  a  cheerful  willingneia  to  put  our 
own  preferences  aside,  if  they  grieve  or  hinder  our  brethren.— B.  T. 

Ver.  24.—Thtprimar]/  law  of  Ghristian  auoetation.  "  Let  no  man  seek  his  own, 
but  every  man  another's  wealth ; "  the  word  "  wealth  "  being  here  used  in  the  general 
sense  of  "  well-being,"  and,  more  especially,  "  moral  well-being  "  (comp.  Bom.  XT.  1—8 ; 
Phil.  ii.  4).    Here  is  given  to  us — 

L  Ths  pbuaby  law  of  hitman  assooiatiov.  It  is  the  law  of  brotherhood  which 
leads  us  to  regard  our  brother's  interests  as  of  more  importance  than  our  own.  Show 
how  such  a  law  universally  working  would,  of  necessity,  make  a  heaven  of  eai-th.  But 
it  may  be  said,  "Are  we  not  to  care  for  ourselves,  and  consider  our  own  interests?" 
We  shall  not  need  to  do  so  if,  while  we  care  for  our  brother's  well-being,  that  brother  is 
as  anxious  to  put  his  own  aside  that  he  may  secure  ours.  In  the  mutuality  of  our 
service  will  lie  our  common  safety,  and  our  common  blessing.  To  this  hei^t,  of  a 
practically  working  l^otherliness,  Christianity  is  seeking  to  uplift  the  world. 

IL  The  hindbanceb  to  the  work  of  this  law  put  by  human  selfishness.  Bin 
repeats  before  God,  age  after  age,  the  words  of  the  self-seeking  Cain,  "  Am  I  my  brother's 
keeper  ?  "  An  exaggeration  of  the  distinction  between  "  mine  and  thine  "  keeps  men 
separate  from  oaoh  other,  and  makes  the  separation  take  all  sorts  of  forms  of  class- 
distinction. 

III.  The  bwtobation  of  the  law  to  rm  full  powbb  thbouoh  the  adoption 
OF  the  Chbibtian  pbinoiplb.  What  shall  bring  men  together  in  mutual  helpfulness? 
Try  society  schemes,  bonds  of  commerce,  ameliorations  through  education  and  science. 
None  of  these  can  reach  the  very  root  of  selfishness.  But  if  we  could  win  a  supreme 
love  for  Christ  and  full  consecration  to  him,  we  would  be  sure  to  "  loTO  oar  brother 
also; "  and  find  out  practically  Iksw  to  "  seek  another's  wealth." — B.  T. 

Vers.  81 — 33. — All  for  Ood  will  he  Mfor  men.  *  Do  all  to  the  glory  of  God ; "  mnd 
then  it  will  not  be  difficult  for  you  to  "  please  all  men  in  all  things  .  .  .  seeking  the 
profit  of  many,  that  they  may  be  saved."  "No  act  of  life  is  in  itself  either  religious 
•r  secular.  Tlie  quality  of  each  act  depends  on  the  spiiit  which  guides  it  and  the 
motive  from  which  it  springs.    The  commonest  thin^  may  be  done  in  a  high  Christian 


M.  It.  1—84.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THB  COBINTHIANS. 


Ml 


BpiliK.  The  greatest  deed  msy  aprlng  from  a  low  and  selfish  motive."  "  The  glory  af 
God,  thkt  is  to  be  the  end  of  all  your  actions."  And  St.  Paul  ventures  to  affirm  tlmt 
th«  Bum  who  holds  a  supreme  piupose — to  glorify  God,  will  be  found  the  kindest,  moct 
gennooB,  and  most  helpful  man  by  all  his  fulow-men. 

L  T>I8  n  AX  AOTUAL  FACT.  The  truly  pious  are  the  truly  philanthropicaL  Illus- 
trate from  the  general  influence  of  Christianity  in  securing  care  for  the  suffering  and 
the  poor ;  and  &om  individual  cases,  such  as  those  of  Howard,  Wilberforce,  Nightin- 
gale, etc. ;  appeal  may  also  be  made  to  cases  within  our  personal  experience.  A  weak 
recognition  of  the  claims  of  the  brotherhood  is  one  of  the  surest  sign*  «f  •  frail, 
tumourished  piety. 

IL  It  IB  BEA80MABLB  THAT  THIS  SHOULD  BK  THB  ACTUAL  FACT.  This  may  be  argued  : 
I.  From  the  impression  of  the  fatherhood  of  God  which  the  Christian  gains.  If  he 
turn  his  eyes  down  from  up-looking  to  the  Father,  he  cannot  fail  to  see  the  Father's 
children.  2.  From  the  growth  of  Christian  life,  which  is  a  changing  into  Gk)d'B 
image,  until  we  come  to  think  about  his  children  as  he  thinks,  and  to  work  for  them 
as  he  works.  3.  From  that  simple,  unquestioning  obedience  to  God's  will  which  would 
Bure^  characterize  ua if  w«  really  held  all  for  Qoi  and  were  set  upon  securing  "his 
glory."— B.  T. 


KXPOSITION. 


OHAFTEB  XL 


Ver.  I. — Followers  of  me ;  rather,  imUa- 
ton  of  me;  follow  herein  ray  example,  as  I 
follow  Christ's.  What  Christ's  example  was, 
in  tliat  he  too  "pleased  not  himself,"  he 
sets  fortli  in  Bom.  zv.  1 — 3;  and  the 
general  principle  of  self-abnegation  f'^r  the 
sake  of  others  in  Phil.  li.  4 — 8.  This  verse 
ought  to  be  included  in  oh.  x.  It  sums 
up  the  whole  argument,  and  explains  the 
long  digresBlon  of  ch.  ix.  As  I  also  am  of 
Christ.  This  limits  the  reference  to  his  own 
example.  I  only  ask  you  to  imitate  me  in 
points  in  which  I  imitate  Christ. 

Vers.  2 — 16. — Bulei  and  princiiiles  respect- 
ing Ote  covering  of  the  head  hy  women  tn 
CAuroA  amemblie*. 

Yet.  2. — Now;  rather,  hnt,  on  the  other 
hand.  That  ye  remember  me  in  all  things, 
and  keep,  eto.  This  is  probably  a  quotation 
from  their  letter.  He  thanks  them  fur  this 
kind  message,  but  points  out  one  particular 
in  which  their  practice  was  not  quite  com- 
mendable. The  ordinances.  The  word 
literally  means  traditione,  but  is  here  rightly 
applied  to  rules  which  he  had  delivered  to 
them.  The  Vulgate  has  prsecepta.  The 
word  is  11  '  in  Matt.  xv.  2  of  the  rules  and 
precedeiuo  luid  down  by  the  rabbis. 

Ver.  3. — But  I  would  have  you  know; 
rather,  but  I  wish  you  to  know.  That  the  head 
of  every  man  is  Christ.  St.  Paul,  as  was 
customary  with  him,  applies  the  loftiest 
principles  to  the  solution  of  the  humblest 
difSculties.  Given  a  question  as  to  what  is 
right  or  wrong  in  a  particular  instance,  he 
always  aims  at  laying  down  some  great 
eternal  fact  to  which  the  duty  or  decision  is 
ultimately  referable,  and  deduces  the 
required  rifle  &oin  the^t  f%ot     The 


ship  of  Christ  is  stated  In  Eph.  L  n ;  ir.  15 ; 
and  its  application  to  the  superiority  of  man 
is  laid  down  also  in  Eph.  v.  23.  The  sub- 
ordinate position  of  the  woman  is  also  stated 
in  1  Tim.  ii.  11, 12;  1  Pet.  ui.  1,  5,  6,  etc. 
This,  however,  is  merely  an  ordinance  of 
earthly  application.  In  the  spiritual  realm 
"there  is  neither  male  nor  female"  (Gal. 
iiL  28).  The  head  of  the  woman  is  the 
man.  In  Christ  the  distinctions  of  the 
sexes  are  done  away.  It  was,  perhaps,  an 
abuse  of  this  principle  which  had  led  the 
Corinthian  women  to  assert  themselves  and 
their  rights  more  prominently  than  decorum 
warranted.  The  head  of  Christ  is  God. 
That  Christ  is  "  inferior  to  the  Father  as 
touching  his  manhood,"  that  his  media- 
torial kingdom  involves  (so  far)  a  subordi- 
nation of  his  coequal  Godliead,  has  been 
already  stated  in  oh.  iii.  23,  and  is  further 
found  in  ch.  xv.  27,  28.  This  too  is  the 
meaning  of  John  ziv.  28,  "  My  Father  is 
greater  than  I." 

Ver.  1. — prophesying ;  that  is,  precuAtng. 
Having  his  head  covered.  Tins  was  a 
Jewish  custom.  The  Jewish  worshipper 
in  praying  always  covers  his  head  with  hi« 
tallith.  'The  Jew  (like  Orientals  generally) 
uncovered  his  feet  because  the  place  ou 
which  he  stood  was  holy  ground;  but  he 
covered  his  head  by  way  of  humility,  even 
as  the  angels  veil  their  faces  with  their 
wings.  Mueaa  is  said  by  Servius  to  have 
introduced  this  custom  into  Italy.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  Greek  custom  was  to  pray 
with  the  head  uncovered.  St  Paul — as 
some  discrepancy  of  custom  seems  to  have 
arisen^-deoidrd  in  favour  of  the  Greek 
custom,  on  the  high  ground  that  ('l.iist,  by 
his  innarnation,  became  man,  and  ther^ore 
the  Christian,  who  is  "in  Ohiistf"  iwr  stend 


d62 


THE  FIBST  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    foB-XLl— Si. 


with  nnre'-led  head  in  the  premnee  of  hit 
Father.  Sishonoareth  his  head.  He  dig- 
honometh  his  own  head,  which  is  as  it  were 
a  sharer  in  the  glory  of  Ohrist,  who  is  Head 
of  the  whole  Church.  "We  pray,"  says 
TertuUian,  "with  bare  heads  because  we 
blush  not."  The  Christian,  being  no  longer 
a  slave,  bnt  a  son  (Gal.  iv.  7),  may  claim 
his  part  in  the  glory  of  the  eternal  Son. 
The  head  was  covered  in  mourning  (2  Sum. 
XV.  30;  Jer.  xlv.  13),  and  the  worship  of  the 
Christian  is  joyous. 

Ver.  5.— Or  prophesieth.  Although  St. 
Paul  "  thinks  of  one  thing  at  a  time,"  and 
is  not  here  touching  on  the  question 
whether  women  ought  to  teach  in  public, 
it  appears  from  this  expression  that  the  rule 
which  he  lays  down  in  cli.  xiv.  34,  35,  and  1 
Tim.  ii  12  was  not  meant  to  be  absolute. 
See  the  case  of  Philip's  daughters  (Acts 
xxi.  9  and  ii.  17).  With  her  head  un- 
oovered.  For  a  woman  to  do  this  in  a 
pnblio  aggembly  was  against  the  national 
custom  of  all  ancient  communities,  and 
might  lead  to  the  gravest  misconoeptione. 
As  a  rule,  modest  women  covered  their 
heads  with  the  peplum  or  with  a  veil  when 
they  worshipped  or  were  in  public.  Chris- 
tian women  at  Corinth  must  have  caught 
sometliing  of  the  "inflation"  which  was 
oharacteristio  of  their  Church  before  I  hey 
could  have  acted  with  such  repielienaible 
boldness  as  to  adopt  a  custom  identified 
with  the  character  of  immodest  women. 
Dishonoureth  her  head,  Calvin,  witli  terse 
good  sense,  observes,  "As  the  man  honours 
his  head  by  proclaiming  his  liberty,  so  the 
woman  by  acknowledging  her  subjection." 

Ver.  6. — Let  her  also  be  shorn.  Not  a 
command,  hut  a  sort  of  scornful  inference, 
or  reductio  ad  absurdum.  If  it  be  a  shame 
for  a  woman  to  be  shorn  or  shaven.  When 
a  woman  was  tried  by  "  the  ordeal  of  the 
water  of  jealousy,"  her  head  was  uncovered 
by  the  priest  (Numb.  v.  18).  To  be  shorn 
or  shiiveu  was  a  sign  of  mourning  (Deut, 
xxi.  12),  and  was  a  disgrace  inflicted  on 
adulteresses. 

Ver.  7.— He  i»  the  image  and  glory  of 
God.  Because  he  reflects  and  pai  takes  in 
the  glory  of  Ohrist,  who  is  the  effulgence  of 
God  and  the  impress  of  his  substance  (Gen. 
i.  27;  Ps.  viii.  6;  Heb.  i.  2).  The  woman 
is  the  glory  of  the  man.  As  moonlight  is 
to  sunlight,  or  as  the  earthshine  is  to  the 
moonshine.  Man  reflects  God ;  woman,  in 
her  general  nature  in  this  earthly  and 
temporal  dispensation,  reflects  the  glory  of 
man. 

Ver.  8. — But  the  woman  of  the  man.  An 
allusion  to  Gen.  ii.  21,  22. 

Ver.  9.— But  the  woman  for   the 
A*  ia  expressly  stated  in  Qm.  ii.  18. 


Ver.  10.— To  hare  power  on  her  Itead. 
A  great  deal  of  irrelevant  guesswork  hai 
been  written  on  this  verse.  Under  this 
head  must  be  classed  the  idle  attempts  to 
twist  the  word  exousia,  power,  or  authority, 
into  some  other  reading — an  attempt  which 
may  be  set  aside,  because  it  is  hot  sanctioned 
by  a  single  manuscript.  We  may  also 
dismiss  the  futile  efforts  to  make  exousia 
have  any  other  primary  meaning  than 
"authority."  Tlie  context  shows  that  tho 
word  has  here  a  secondary  sense,  and  implies 
tome  kind  of  covering.  The  verse,  therefore, 
points  the  same  lessons  as  Gen.  xxiv.  64, 
65.  This  much  may  be  regarded  as  certain, 
and  this  view  ia  adopted  by  the  steadfast 
good  sense  of  our  English  translators,  both 
in  the  Authorized  and  Bevised  Versions. 
The  only  question  worth  asking  is  why 
the  word  exo/aaia  had  come  at  Corinth,  or 
in  the  Corinthian  Church,  to  be  used  for 
"a  veil,"  or  "covering."  The  simplest 
answer  is  that  just  as  the  word  "  kingdom  " 
in  Greek  may  be  used  fir  "  a  crown  "  (comp. 
regno  as  the  name  of  the  pope's  tiara),  so 
"  authority  "  may  mean  "  a  eign  of  authority  " 
(Revised  Version),  or  "  a  covering,  in  sign 
that  she  is  under  the  power  of  her  husband  " 
(Authorized  Version,  margin).  The  margin 
of  the  BeviseU  Version,  "autliority  over  her 
head,"  is  a  strange  suggestion.  Some  have 
explained  the  word  of  Aer  own  true  authority, 
which  consists  in  accepting  the  rule  of  her 
husband;  but  it  probably  means  a  sign  of 
her  husband's  authority  over  her.  Similarly 
the  traveller  Chardin  says  that  in  Persia 
the  women  wear  a  veil,  in  sign  that  they 
are  "under  subjection."  If  so,  the  best 
comment  on  the  word  may  be  found  in  the 
exquisite  lines  of  Milton,  which  illustrate 
the  passage  in  other  ways  also — ' 

"  She,  as  a  veil,  down  to  the  slender  waist 
Her  unadorned  golden  tresses  wore  .  .  . 
As  the  vine  curves  her  tendrils,  which 

implied 
Subjection,  but  required  with  gentle  sway. 
And  by  her  yielded,    by  him  best   re- 
ceived." 

The  fact  that  Callistrntus  twioe  vses 
tTumsia  of  "abundance  of  hair"  is  probably 
a  mere  coincidence,  resembling  the  Irish 
expression  "a  power  of  hair."  Nor  can 
there  be  any  allusion  to  tlie  isolated  fact 
that  Samson's  strength  lay  in  his  hair. 
The  very  brief  comment  of  Luther  sums  up 
all  the  best  of  the  many  pages  which  have 
been  written  on  the  subject.  He  says  that 
exousia  means  "the  veil  or  covering,  by 
which  one  may  see  that  she  is  under  her 
husband's  autliority"  (Gen.  iii.  16).  Be- 
cause of  the  angels.  In  this  clause  also 
we  must  set  aside,  as  idle  waste  of  time,  the 
attempts  to  alter  the  text,  or  to  twist  the 


CH.  XI.  1—84.]    THE   FittST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORII^THiAN^. 


363 


phln    wordi    into    ImpoadUe  meanings. 

The  word  "aiigeU"  caimot  mean  "Chiuch 
officials,"  or  "  lioly  mon,"  or  "  prophets,"  or 
"  delegates,"  or  "  bridejjrooin's  men,"  or 
anything  but  angels.  Nor  can  the  verie 
mean,  as  Bengel  supposes,  that  women  are 
to  veil  themselves  because  the  angels  do  so 
(Isa.  vi.  2),  or  (as  Augustine  says)  because 
the  angels  approve  of  it.  The  only  queslion 
i>  whether  the  allusion  is  to  good  or  bad 
angels.  In  favour  of  the  latter  view  is  (1) 
the  universal  tradition  among  the  Jews 
that  the  augels  fell  by  lust  for  mortal 
women,  which  was  the  Jewish  way  of 
interpreting  Gen.  vi.  1,  2.  This  is  the 
view  of  Tertuliian  ('  De  Virg.  Vel.,'  7)  in 
writing  on  this  subject.  A  woman,  in 
the  opinion  and  trailitions  of  Oriental 
Jewa,  is  liable  to  injury  from  the  ehedim, 
if  (he  appears  in  public  unveiled;  and 
these  evil  spirits  are  supposed  to  delight  in 
the  appearance  of  nnveiled  women.  The 
objection  to  this  view,  that  angeloi  alone  is 
never  used  of  evil  but  always  of  good 
angels,  is  not  perhaps  decisive  (see  ok.  vi. 
3).  The  verse  may,  however,  mean  (in 
•eoordance  with  the  Jewish  belief  of  those 
days]  that  good  angels,  being  under  the 
possibility  of  falling  from  the  same  cause 
as  their  evil  brethren,  ily  away  at  once  from 
the  presence  of  unveiled  women.  Thus 
Khadijflh  tested  that  the  visitant  of  her 
husband  Mohammed  really  was  the  angel 
Gabriel,  because  he  disappeared  the  moment 
she  unveiled  her  head.  On  the  whole, 
however,  the  meaning  seems  to  be,  out  of 
respect  and  reverence  for  (he  holy  angeU, 
ttho  are  always  inviiibly  present  in  th« 
Christian  assemblies.  (On  this  point,  see 
Luke  XV.  10;  Eph.  iii.  10;  Heb.  i.  14;  xii. 
1;  Eccles.  ».  6;  Ps.  cxxxvlii.  1  [LXX.]; 
Tobit  xii.  12.  See  Latimer's  'Sermons,' 
p.  253).  "Beverence  the  angela"  ia  St 
Ohrysostom's  remark. 

Ver.  11. — Nevertheless.  The  verse  is 
meant  to  correct  any  tenrlency  on  the  part 
of  men  to  domineer.  Man  and  woman  are 
"  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Gal.  iii.  28). 

"The  two-celled  hcMrt,  beating  with  one 
full  strok»— 
Life." 

Ver.  12. — By  the  woman;  that  la,  "bom 
of  a  woman  "  (Job  xiv.  1).  But  all  things  of 
God.  And  all  things  also  "tlirougli  liim 
and  to  him,"  made  by  him,  aud  tending  to 
him  as  their  end  (Bom.  xi.  6G). 

Ver.  13. — Is  it  comely,  etc.  ?  An  appeal  to 
the  decision  of  their  instinctive  sense  of  pro- 
priety. 

Ver.  14. — Doth  not  even  nature  itself 
teaoh  yout  "Nature"  here  has  much  the 
tune  sense  as  "  instinct." 


"His   fair  large  flnnt   and  oje  anblime 

declared 
Absolute  rule;  and  hyaeinthine  leekt 
Bound  from  hii   parted  forelock  mul} 

hung 
Clustering,  but  mt  beneaOt  Ml  Acmldtn 

broad: 
She,  at  a  veil,  doten  to  the  slender  imM 
Her  anarlnrned  golden  tresses  wore." 
(MiitoD, '  Paradise  Lost,'  iv.  804.) 

Ver.  IS.— It  is  a  glory  to  her.  Becanso 
it  is  at  once  beautifnl  and  n<tural;  and  M 
Bengel  says,  "Will  should  follow  the 
guidance  of  nature." 

Ver.  16. — But  if  any  man  seem  to  ba 
flontentious.  St.  Paul  cuts  the  question 
short,  as  though  impatient  of  any  further 
discussion  of  a  subject  already  settled  by 
instinctive  decorum  and  by  the  oommea 
sense  of  universal  usage.  "Seem  to  ba 
contentious"  is  (like  the  Latin  videtwr) 
only  a  courteous  way  of  saying  "  it  eonten- 
Hous."  If  any  of  you  wish  to  be  disputationa 
and  qnarrelsome  about  this  minor  matter 
of  ritual,  I  must  content  myself  with  8.iying 
that  he  must  take  his  own  course  (for  a 
similar  use  of  the  euphemistio  "  seem,"  sea 
Phil.  tii.  4;  Heb.  iv.  1;  Jas.  i.  26).  Wa 
have  no  suoh  custom.  The  emphatic  "we'* 
means  the  apostles  and  the  leaders  of  the 
Church  at  Jerusalem  and  Antiocb.  Sttek 
euttom.  Not  referring  to  "  contentiousness," 
but  to  the  women  appearing  with  uncovered 
heads.  Neither  the  Churchts  «f  God.  If 
you  Corinthians  prefer  these  abnormal 
practices  in  spite  of  reason,  common  sense, 
and  my  arguments,  yon  must  stand  alone 
in  ynur  innovations  upon  universal  Christian 
practice.  But  catholic  custom  is  against 
your  "  self-opinionated  particularism." 

Vers.  17— Si.— Visereditable  irregularUlm 
at  the  Eucharist  and  the  agapm. 

Ver.  17. — Now  in  this  that  I  declare  nnta 
yon  I  praise  yon  not;  rather,  as  in  tha 
Bevised  Version,  But  in  giving  you  thti 
charge,  I  praise  you  not.  A  reference  to  tha 
"I  praise  you  of  ver.  2.  Ye  come  t^ 
gather.  As  he  advances,  bis  rebukes  be-  ' 
come  more  and  more  serious ;  for  the  pri  sent 
reproach  does  not  affect  a  fow,  but  tha 
Church  assemblv  in  general. 

Ver.  18.— First  of  aU.  The  "second" 
rebuke  is  nut  clearly  stated,  but  is  no  doubt 
meant  to  refer  to  the  abuses  in  "speaking 
with  the  tongue."  In  the  Church ;  rather, 
in  congregation,  or  assemhhj.  The  reference 
is  not  to  a  particular  buililing.  The  Lord's 
Supper  was  administered  frequently  (origin- 
ally every  day,  Acts  ii.  46),  and  often  in 
private  houses.  Divisions;  schis-ns  (eh.  i.  10, 
12).  Here,  however,  he  is  referring  to  cliquijs 
and  quarrels  at  the  love-feasts.  Partly.  I 
cannot  thiuk,  he  says,  in  a  tone  of  kiadoei^ 


»u 


TB£  FIfiST  GFISTLB  tO  THE  CORIKTHIAMB.    [ob.  u.  1— S4 


that  tliese  reports  are  mhoBy  falM.  Tketo 
must  bn  toTne  ground  for  them,  even  if  the 
facts  have  been  exaggerated. 

Ver.  19. — There  must  be  alto  heresies 
among  yon.  It  results  from  the  inevitable 
decrees  of  the  Divine  providence.  "  It  is 
impossible  but  that  offences  will  come" 
(Luke  xvii.  11).  Heretiei.  The  word  does 
not  mean  "erroneous  opinions,"  but  party 
foLctiont.  Originally  the  word  only  means 
"  a  choice,"  and  is  not  need  in  a  bad  sense ; 
but  since  the  opinionativeness  of  men  pushes 
"  a  choice  "  into  a  '*  party,"  and  since  it  is  the 
invariable  tendency  of  a  party  to  degenerate 
into  a  "  faction,"  the  word  soon  acquires  a 
bad  sense  (see  its  nse  in  Acts  y.  17 ;  xt.  5 ; 
xxir.  5,  14;  xxviii.  22;  Oal.  t.  20;  Titus 
iii.  10;  2  Pet.  ii.  1;  and  Gieseler,  'Ohnroh 
Hist.,'  i.  149).  The  mutually  railing  factions, 
which  in  their  Church  newspapers  and  else- 
where bandy  about  their  false  and  rival 
charges  of  "heresy,"  aw  illustrating  the 
virulence  of  the  very  sin  which  they  are 
professing:  to  denounce — the  sin  of  factious- 
ness. That  they  which  are  approved  may 
be  made  manifest  among  you.  Similarly 
St.  John  (1  John  ii.  19)  speaks  of  the  aberra- 
tions of  false  teachers  as  destined  to  prove 
that  they  did  not  belong  to  the  true  Church. 
Good  is  educed  out  of  seeming  evil  (Jas.  i.  3 ; 
I  Pet.  i.  6, 7).  Approved ;  standing  the  test 
{ddkiTnoi),  the  opposite  of  the  "reprobate" 
l_ad6kimoi)  of  oh.  ix.  27. 

Ter.  20. — Into  one  place.  There  were  as 
yet  no  ehnrohes.  The  Lord's  Supper  was 
held  in  private  houses.  This  is  not ;  or  per- 
haps, it  it  not  possible.  The  Lord's  Supper. 
The  fact  that  there  is  no  article  in  the 
Greek  shows  the  early  prevalence  of  this 
name  for  the  Eucharist. 

Yer.  21. — For  in  eating;  rather,  in  ytmr 
eating.  Every  one.  All  who  have  them- 
selves contributed  a  share  to  the  oommon 
meal.  li^eth  before  other  his  own  supper. 
It  is  as  if  they  liad  come  together  only  to 
eat,  not  to  purtake  of  a  holy  sacrament. 
The  abuse  rose  from  the  connection  of  the 
'  Lord's  Supper  with  the  agape,  or  love-feast, 
a  social  gathering  of  Cluistian  brothers,  to 
which  each,  as  in  the  Greek  emno^,  or  "  club- 
feasts,"  contributed  his  share.  The  abuse 
led  to  the  separation  of  the  agape  from  the 
Holy  Communion,  and  ultimately  to  the 
entire  disuse  of  the  former  at  religious 
gatherings.  One  is  hungry.  The  poor  man, 
who  has  been  nnable  to  contribute  to  the 
meal  whick  was  intended  to  be  an  exhibition 
of  Cluistian  love,  looked  on  with  grudging 
eyes  and  eraving  appetite,  while  the  rioh 
bad  more  than  enough.  Is  drunken.  "  St 
Paul  draws  the  picture  in  strong  colours, 
and  who  can  say  that  the  reality  was  leas 
■troag  f  "  (M eyerX  Calvin  says,  "  It  is  por- 
tentous that  Satan  sheold  have  aeeoHididied 


•0  mnch  in  so  short  a  tima."     Bnt  the 

remark  was,  perhaps,  dictated  by  the  wholly 
mistaken  fancy  that  the  Churoh  of  the 
apostolic  days  was  exceptionally  pure.  On 
the  contrary,  many  of  the  heathen  converts 
were  nnable  at  once  to  break  the  spell  oi 
their  old  habits,  and  few  modern  Churches 
present  a  spectacle  so  deplorable  as  that 
which  we  here  find  in  the  apostolic  Church 
of  Corinth.  It  is  quite  obvious  that  Church 
discipline  must  have  been  almost  in  abey- 
ance if  such  grave  scandals  could  exist 
uncorrected  and  apparently  nnrepreved. 

Yer.  22. — To  eat  and  to  drink  in.  The 
object  of  the  agape  was  something  higher 
than  the  mere  gratification  of  appetite. 
Though  not  a  sacrament,  it  was  an  accom- 
paniment of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  was 
itself  intended  to  be  a  symbolioal'and  sacred 
meaL  Despiseye  the  Church  of  Qodt  The 
oongregation  of  your  fellow-Christians. 
Shame ;  rather,  disgrace,  or  put  to  shame. 
Them  tiiat  have  not.  It  would  be  natural 
to  supply  "  bouses."  But  the  commentators 
found  it  difficult  to  suppose  that  any  of  the 
Corinthians  had  not  "  houses  to  eat  and  to 
drink  in."  Hence  most  commentators  give 
to  the  phrase  its  classic  sense,  in  which  "those 
who  have  "  means  the  rich,  and  "  those  who 
have  not,"  the  poor.  They  seem,  however, 
to  have  forgotten  that  slaves  at  any  rate 
could  hardly  be  said  to  have  "houses  ot 
their  own,"  and  it  is  certain  that  not  a  few 
of  the  Corinthian  Christians  were  slaves. 
I  praise  you  not.  As  in  ver.  17,  this  is  an 
instance  of  what  is  called  litotes,  a  mild 
expression,  suggesting  a  meaning  mnch 
stronger  than  the  words  themselves.  Per. 
He  is  about  to  give  bis  reason  for  thus 
strongly  blaming  ueii  irregularities. 

Ver.  23. — I  have  reoeived;  rather,  I  re- 
ceived. He  thus  refers  the  revelation  to 
some  special  time,  and  this  seems  to  point 
to  the  conclusion  that  he  is  not  referring  to 
any  account  of  the  institution  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  which  may  have  been  given  him  by 
St.  Peter  or  one  of  the  twelve,  but  to  some 
immediate  revelation  from  Christ.  The 
terms  in  which  he  describes  the  institution 
of  the  Eucharist  resemble  most  nearly  those 
of  St.  Lnke,  who  may  very  probably  have 
derived  his  information  from  St.  Paul. 
This  passage  should  be  compared  with  Matt. 
xxvi.  26— 29;  Mark  xiv.  22— 25 ;  Lnkexxii. 
19,  20.  Was  betrayed;  rather,  tsos  being 
betrayed. 

Yer.  24. — ^MThen  he  had  given  thanks. 
The  same  word  is  used  in  St.  Lnke  (eft- 
vflpiaTfiaas),  and  is  the  origin  of  the  name 
Eucharist.  St.  Mark  and  perhaps  St,  Matthew 
have  "  having  blessed  it  (fnlogesaa).  Hence 
the  Euchnrist  is  "  this  our  aaoriflce  of  jntiiM 
and  thanksgiving."  Take,  eat  Thes*  words 
are  omitted  by  all  the  bwt  wioiak.    Whish 


OH.  xt  1—34.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TH»  OOBIKTHIAKS. 


is  broken  for  yen.  The  word  **  broken  "  ia  of 
doubtful  authenticity.  Some  manuscripts 
have  "  given,"  and  one  (D)  a  milder  word 
for  "  broken,"  as  tliough  to  avoid  auy  con- 
tradiction of  John  xix.  36,  where,  however, 
the  word  is  "  shall  not  be  crushed."  Since 
the  partiuiple  is  umitted  altogether  by  k, 
A,  B,  C,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  a 
gloss,  and  accordingly  the  Eeviseii  Version 
reads,  "  which  is  for  you."  The  "  broken  " 
Is  nevertheless  Involved  in  the  "  he  brake 
it,"  which  was  a  part  of  the  ceremony  as 
originally  illustrated.  The  breaking  of  the 
bread  ought  not,  therefore,  to  be  abandoned, 
as  in  the  ease  when  "wafers"  are  used. 
This  do.  St  Luke  also  has  this  clause, 
which  is  not  found  in  St.  Mattliew  or  St. 
Mark.  The  variations  show  that  it  was  the 
main  fact  which  was  esseuLial,  not  the  exact 
words  spoken.  In  remembrance  of  me. 
The  words  may  also  be  rendered,  for  a 
memorial  of  me,  or  to  bring  me  to  your  re- 
membrance. 

Ver.  25. — When  he  had  supped  (see  Luke 
zxii.  27).  The  oup,  like  tToBeSsha-berachah, 
was  given  after  the  meal  was  ended.  The 
new  testament;  rather,  the  new  covennnt. 
The  Greek  word  diatheke  is  indeed  a  "  will," 
or  "  testament ; "  but  in  the  LXX.,  on  which 
the  Greek  of  the  apostles  was  formed,  it 
always  stands  for  bertth,  covenant.  The 
Jews  knew  nothing  of  the  practice  of 
"  making  wills  "  till  they  leamt  it  from  the 
Romans.  The  only  passage  of  the  New 
Testament  (an  expression  derived  from  this 
very  passage  through  the  Vulgate)  in  which 
Oafheke  means  a  "testament"  is  Heb.  is. 
16,  wlicre  the  writer  reverts  for  a  moment 
only  to  this  signification  of  the  word  to  in- 
troduce •  passing  illustration.  In  my  blood. 
The  cup  was  a  symbol  of  the  blood  of 
Christ,  because  the  gospel  covenant  was 
ratified  by  the  shedding  of  his  blood.  The 
Jews  had  an  absolute  horror,  at  once 
religious  and  physical,  of  tasting  blood. 
This  was  the  reason  why  the  Synod  of 
Jerusalem  forbade  even  to  the  Gentiles 
the  eating  of  "things  strangled."  If  the 
apostles  had  not  fully  understood  that  our 
Lord  was  only  using  the  ordinary  language 
of  Semitic  imagery,  and  describing  only  a 
sacramental  symbol,  the  words,  "This  is 
my  blood,"  would  have  thrilled  them  with 
honor  and  repulsion. 

Yer.  26.— Ye  do  show  fhs  lord's  death. 
The  word  literally  means,  ye  announce,  or 
proclaim,  with  reference  to  the  repetition  of 
the  actual  words  used  by  our  Lord.  It  will 
be  seen  that  St  Paul  does  not  lend  the 
smallest  sanction  t*  the  "unfathomable 
superstition "  of  a  material  transubstan- 
tiation.  Till  he  oome.  Accordingly  the 
antiquity  and  nnbroken  eontinuance  of 
this  lu^  rite  is  OM  «f  th«  aaaay  stioug 


external  evidences  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel 
hist'  >ry.  The  iiv  is  omitted  in  the  Greek,  to 
indicate  the  certainty  of  Christ's  coming. 
The  same  Greek  idiom  is  hopefully  and 
tenderly  used  in  Gal.  iv.  19. 

Ver.  27. — And  drink  this  cup.  This  ought 
to  be  rendered,  or  drink  this  cup.  It  seems 
to  be  one  of  the  extremely  few  instances  in 
which  the  translators  of  our  Authorizeil 
Version  were  led  by  bias  into  unfaithful 
rendering.  They  may  have  persuaded 
themselves  that  the  apostle  must  have 
meant  "  and ;  "  but  their  duty  as  translators 
was  to  translate  what  he  said,  not  what  they 
supposed  lilm  to  have  meant.  What  he 
meant  was  th  it  it  was  possible  to  partake 
in  a  wrong  spirit  either  of  the  bread  or  the 
oup.  King  James's  translators  thought 
that,  by  rendering  the  word  or,  they  might 
seem  to  favour  communion  in  one  kind 
only.  St  Paul's  meaning  was  that  a 
man  might  take  either  element  of  the 
sacrament  unworthily.  Unworthily,  We 
are  all  "  unworthy  " — "  unworthy  so  much 
as  to  gather  up  the  crumbs  under  Christ's 
table ; "  yet  not  one  of  us  need  eat  or  drink 
unworthily,  that  is,  in  a  careless,  irreverent, 
defiant  spirit.  Guilty  of.  He  draws  on  him- 
self the  penalty  due  to  "  oruciMng  to  him- 
self the  Son  of  God  afresh,"  by  "  putting 
him  to  an  open  shame." 

Ver.  28. — Let  a  man  examine  himself. 
The  verb  means  "  let  him  tett  his  own 
feelings ; "  put  them  to  the  proof,  to  see 
whether  they  be  sincere  or  not.  Ha  must 
"  wash  his  hands  in  iniiocency,"  and  so 
0(ime  to  God's  altar  (see  Matt.  t.  22,  23; 
2  Cor.  xiii.  5).  And  so.  Soberly,  that  is ; 
seriously,  humbly,  and  with  due  reverence. 

Ver.  29. — Unworthily.  The  word  is  not 
genuine  here,  being  repeated  from  ver.  27; 
it  is  omitted  by  n,A,  B,  O.  Eateth  and 
drinketh  damnation  to  himself;  rather, 
eateth  and  drinketh  judgment  t»  himself. 
There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  word 
"damnation"  once  had  a  much  milder 
meaning  in  English  than  that  which  it  now 
popularly  bears.  In  King  James's  time 
it  probably  did  not  of  necessity  mean  more 
than  "an  unfavourable  verdict."  Other- 
wise this  would  be  the  most  unfortunate 
mistranslation  in  the  whole  Bible.  It  has 
probably  kept  thousands,  as  it  kept  Gkethe, 
&om  iloly  Communion.  W«  see  from  ver. 
S2  that  this  "judgment"  had  a  purely 
merciful  and  disciplinary  charooter.  Not 
discerning ;  rather,  if  Ae  diioem  not,  the 
Lord's  body.  Any  one  who  approaches  the 
Lord's  Supper  in  a  spirit  of  levity  or  defiance, 
not  discriminating  between  it  and  eonunon 
food,  dravs  on  himself,  by  m  oating  and 
drinking,  a  jndgmeat  whim  is  deioed  in 
the  next  rerse. 

V«r.  8(  —Xauy  are  weak  and  siAklyuuBC 


86« 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.    [oh-  ^  1-^* 


rSt.  Fanl  directly  connects  this  general 
health  with  the  abuse  of  the  Lord's 
Supper.  It  ia  not  impossible  that  the  grave 
Intemperauce  to  which  he  alludes  in  ver.  21 
may  have  had  its  share  in  this  result;  but 
•purt  from  this,  there  is  an  undoubted  con- 
nection between  sin  and  sickness  in  some, 
tiiongh  not,  of  course,  in  all  cases  (John  r. 
14).  Many.  The  word  is  different  from  the 
preTions  word  for  "many,"  and  means  a 
larger  number— "not  a  few,"  "a  con- 
siderable number."    Sleep ;  i.e.  are  dying. 

Vers.  31,  32. — ^For  if  we  would  judge  our- 
ielves,  etc.  These  verses  are  very  unfortu- 
nately mistranslated  in  our  Authorized 
Version.  They  should  be  rendered  (literally), 
for  if  tee  discerned  (or,  disariminated)  our- 
(elvn,  im  ihould  not  be  undergoing  judgment 
(namely, of  physical  punishment);  but,  in 
Mng  judged  by  the  Lord  (by  these  temporal 
■ufferingfi),  we  are  under  training,  that  we 
wtay  not  be  condemned  with  the  world.  The 
meaning  is  that  "if  we"  (St.  Paul  hers 
IdentifiM  himself  with  the  Corinthians) 
"  were  in  the  habit  of  self-diaeernment — and 
in  this  (eZ/-discrimination  is  Involved  a  dis- 
crimination between  spiritual  and  common 
things — we  should  not  be  undergoing  this 
•ign  of  Ood's  displeasure ;  but  the  fact  that 
his  judgments  are  abroad  among  us  is 
intended  to  further  oui  moral  education, 
and  to  save  us  from  being  finally  condemned 
with  the  world."  Discernment  (dinkrisia), 
by  saving  us  from  eating  unworthily  (Ps. 

£xii.  5 ;  1  John  i.  9),  would  have  obviated 
>  necessity  for  penal  judgments  (krima)i 
knt  yet  the  krima  is  disi'ipllnary  (paideu- 
Mu&a,  «•  ue  being  tiained  m  childreiOb 


to  save  ns  from  final  doom  (kalahrima). 
Unworthy  eating,  then,  so  far  from  in- 
Tolving  necessary  or  final  "damnation,"  is 
mercifully  visited  by  God  with  temporal 
chastisement,  to  help  in  the  saving  of  oui 
souls.  "  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou 
chastenest, O Lord"  (Pa. xoiv.  IS;  Heb.  xii 
6—12). 

Ver.  33. — Wherefore.  He  now  briefly 
sums  up  the  practical  remedies  for  these 
discreditable  scenes.  My  brethren.  Intro- 
duced, as  often,  into  a  stern  passage  to  show 
that  tlie  writer  is  only  actuated  by  the  spirit 
of  love.  Tarry  one  for  another.  This  would 
prevent  the  scrambling  greediness  which  he 
has  already  condemned  in  ver.  21. 

Ver.  31. — ^And  if  any  man  hanger,  let  him 
eat  at  home.  A  reminder  of  the  laered 
character  of  the  agape  as  •  symbol  of 
Christian  .love  and  union.  Unto  condemna- 
tion ;  rather,  judgment.  In  Greek,  the  same 
word  (krima)  Is  used  which  in  ver.  29  is  so 
unhappily  rendered  "  damnation."  But 
even  "  condemnation  "is  too  strong ;  for 
that  is  equivalent  to  katakrima.  The  rest ; 
all  minor  details.  It  is  not  improbable  that 
one  of  these  details  was  the  practical  dis- 
sociation of  the  agape  from  the  Lord's 
Supper  altogether.  Certainly  the  custom  of 
uniting  the  two  seems  to  have  disappeared 
by  the  close  ot  the  first  century.  When  I 
come ;  rather,  whenever.  The  Greek  phrase 
(At  &»)  implies  uncertainty.  The  apostle's 
plans  for  visiting  Corinth  immediately  had 
been  materially  distarl)ed  by  the  unfavour- 
able tidings  M  ta  Uie  conditions  of  the 
Ohurcb. 


HOMILETICi 

Vers.  1,  %—lm{fatim  and  eommendation.  "  Be  ye  fonowers  of  me,  even  M  1  «!so 
am  of  Christ.  Now  I  praise  you,  brethren,  that  ye  remember  me  in  all  things,  and 
keep  the  ordinances,  as  I  delivered  them  to  you."    In  these  words  we  have — 

I.  The  fbinoiplb  on  which  the  ohab&otbbs  of  most  men  abe  fobued.  "  Be 
je  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ."  Men  are  imitative  beings,  and,  from 
•  law  of  their  nature,  those  whom  they  most  admire  and  with  whom  they  most 
•ssociate,  they  become  like  in  spirit  and  in  character.  The  request  of  Paul  here,  at 
first  sight,  seems  somewhat  arrogant:  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me."  No  man  has  a  right 
to  make  such  an  unqualified  claim  on  another.  Hence  Paul  puts  the  limitation,  "  Even 
as  I  also  am  of  Christ."  The  apostle  undoubtedly  refers  to  the  preceding  verses,  .n 
which  he  speaks  of  himself  as  not  seeleing  his  oum  pleasure  or  profit,  but  that  of  other*. 
This  Christ  did.  We  are  told  that  he  "  pleased  not  himself."  He  means  to  say,  "  Be 
like  me  in  this  respect,  as  I  in  this  respect  resemble  Christ."  Here  is  the  principle  that 
should  regulate  our  imitation  of  men ;  imitate  them  just  so  far  as  they  resemble  Christ. 
Ohildren  should  not  imitate  their  parents,  pupils  should  not  imitate  their  teachers, 
congregations  should  not  imitate  their  ministers,  only  so  far  as  they  resemble  Christ. 

IL   A  OOMMENDATION  OF   UEBIT  WHICH   MANY  ABE  BELUOTANT  TO  BBHOBB.      "  NoW  I 

riise  yon,  brethren,  that  ye  remember  me  in  all  things,  and  keep  the  ordinances,  ai 
delivered  them  to  you."    In  some  things,  if  not  in  all,  some  of  the  Corinthian 
Ohristi*n«  pleased  Paul,  did  what  he  considered  ri^bt— they  remembered  Um,  and 


ofc  n.  l—M.]    TEE  FIBST  EPISTLB  tO  THK  OOBINTHIAinil  tN 

pntctioally  attended  to  his  direction*.  There  was  much  In  them  with  which  ht  could 
Ind  &ult,  and  did  find  fault,  but  lo  far  as  they  did  the  proper  thing  he  praises  them. 
To  render  generously  credit  where  credit  is  due  is  the  chuacteristio  of  a  great  soul, 
but  one  which  others  hare  not.  I  take  it  to  be  a  duty  to  render  credit  where  credit 
is  due ;  but  how  seldom  is  this  attended  to  1  In  domestic  matters  how  it  is  neglected  I 
A  viife  will  go  on  loyally  and  lovingly  attending  to  tha  wants  and  wishes  of  har 
kasband,  and  perhaps  not  from  one  year  to  another  does  she  receive  from  him  one 
word  of  hearty  commendation.  So  with  scrvanU  and  masters :  the  employer, 
when  he  has  paid  the  stipulated  stipend  to  the  most  useful  of  hia  tmployet,  feels 
he  has  done  his  duty,  and  gives  not  •  word  of  commendation.  So  with  minister* 
and  their  congregations.  How  many  ministers  are  there  in  every  Church,  who  give 
the  best  fruits  of  their  cultivated  minds,  and,  by  their  sweating  brain  and  agonizing 
prayers,  produce  discourses  every  week  admirably  suited  to  serve  the  highest  interests 
of  their  congregations;  and  yet  seldom  receive  one  generous  word  of  hearty  com- 
mendation for  all  their  toils  I  Miserable  criticisms  they  will  get  in  abundance,  but 
nothing  else.  Verily,  I  believe  that  no  social  service  is  more  important,  and  at  the 
same  time  more  neglected,  than  the  yielding  of  •  gentrout  eommendalion  to  Ih*  truly 
eotmaendaijti 

Vers.  8 — 16. — Th»  man  and  th«  vmman.  "  But  I  would  have  yon  know,"  eta. 
Although  there  are  some  tilings  in  thusc  verses  that  perhaps  no  one  can  rightly 
Interpret,  and  that  may  have  been  written  as  personal  opinion  rather  than  as  Divine 
inspiration,  there  are  two  or  three  points  in  relation  to  man  and  woman  interesting  and 
noteworthy. 

L  ThERB   n   BETWEEN  THEH   A  BUBOBDtNATIOtl   Dl   HATimAL  BEtATIOKBHIP.      "  But 

I  would  have  you  know,  that  the  head  of  every  man  is  Christ ;  and  the  head  of  the 
woman  is  the  man ;  and  the  head  of  Christ  is  God."  The  principle  of  subordmation. 
It  would  seem,  prevails  throughout  the  spiritual  universe ;  one  rising  above  another  in 
regular  gradation  up  to  God  himself.  God  is  over  Christ,  Christ  is  over  man,  man  is  over 
woman.  "  For  the  man  is  not  of  the  woman;  but  the  woman  of  the  man.  Neither 
was  the  man  created  for  the  woman ;  but  the  woman  for  the  man.*  The  id  al  women 
tnd  the  ideal  men  are  here,  I  presume,  meant.  It  Is  because  the  man  Is  supposed  to 
have  more  brain  and  soul  than  the  woman  that  he  is  the  master ;  but  in  cases — and 
they  are  not  few — ^where  the  woman  is  the  greater,  the  greater  in  intellect,  heart,  and 
all  monl  nobleness,  she,  without  her  intention  or  even  wish,  will  necessarily  be  the 
hold.  In  the  Marriage  Service,  the  woman  at  the  altar  is  called  upon  solemnly  to  vow 
to  o&ey  her  husband.  I  confess  I  have  often  been  struck  at  the  incongruity  of  this, 
when  I  have  seen  a  little-chested,  small-brained  man  standing  by  the  side  of  a  woman 
with  a  majestic  brow  and  %  grand  physique,  when  sha  is  called  upon  to  vow  obedience  ta 
■achamaBi 

IL  Thebb  is  betweer  them  an  indeprndent  oblioation  in  relioious  sbbtioeb. 
"Every  man  praying  or  prophesying,  having  his  head  covered,  dishonoureth  his  head. 
But  every  woman  that  prayeth  or  prophesieth  with  her  head  uncovered  dishonoureth 
her  head,"  eto.  It  is  here  implied  that  both  the  man  and  the  woman  are  to  prophesy, 
teach,  and  pray ;  not  one  instead  of  the  ether,  but  each  independently.  However  closely 
related  the  man  and  the  wife  may  be,  however  dependent  one  is  on  the  other,  neither 
can  perform  the  spiritual  and  religious  obligations  of  the  other.  There  is  no  sharing 
of  duty  here,  no  shifting  of  personal  obligation ;  each  must  stand  alone  before  God. 

m.  These  is  a  diffebenob  betwbbh  them  in  outwabd  aspect.  There  are  two 
points  here  concerning  the  difference.  1.  A  difference  in  the  way  in  which  they  are  to 
appear  in  public  The  man  is  to  appear  with  an  uncovered  head,  the  woman  with 
a  covered  head.  "  If  the  woman  be  not  covered,  let  her  also  be  shorn :  but  if  it  be  a 
shame  for  a  woman  to  be  shorn  or  shaven,  let  her  be  covered.  For  a  man  indeed  ought 
not  to  cover  his  head."  The  woman's  head  is  to  be  covered  with  her  hair  or  a  veil,  or 
both.  Who  shall  divine  the  meaning  of  the  tenth  verse  ? — "  For  this  cause  ought  tha 
woman  to  have  power  on  her  head  because  of  the  angels."  To  me  this  is  utterly  incom- 
prehensible.  Probably  there  were  at  Corinth  women  who  shaved  off  their  hair  in  order 
to  obliterate  the  distinction  of  sex :  shameless  women.  2.  Thit  difference  ii  adven- 
titioui  rather  than  naturaL    Is  there  any  reason  in  nature  why  a  naa'a  bead  should 


368  THK  flBfrr  EPlStLE  10  THB  COBINTHIAKS.    [ett.Xl.1— 9ii 

be  ucoTared  and  •  vomaii'i  oorered ;  whjr  one  should  wear  kmg  hair  and  the  othei 
short?  No  inch  thing  leems  reasonable ;  the  uncirilized  tribes  Icnow  nothing  of  it. 
The  reason  can  only  be  traced  to  custom.  And  is  not  custom  second  natun  7  "  Doth 
not  eren  nature  itself  teach  you,  that,  if  i\  man  have  long  hair,  it  is  a  shame  unto 
him  7  "  But  original  nature  does  not  seem  t(i  teach  us  that,  but  custom  and  conventional 
propriety.  Hence  Paul  says,  "  If  any  may  ,§eem  to  be  contentious,  we  have  no  sucb 
custom ; "  by  which  he  means,  I  understand,  that,  whoever  may  contend  to  the  contrary. 
such  a  enstom — as  that  woman  should  pray  and  preach  with  uncovered  heads — was  not 
known  hj  Ffeul  in  other  Churches,  and  that  the  Church  at  Corinth  shonld  not  allow  it. 

Vers.  17 — 22, — Rdigious  institutions :  their  abuse.  "  Now  in  this  that  I  declare  onto 
you  I  praise  you  not,"  etc.  Three  practical  truths  may  be  faiily  deduced  from  ihxi 
paragraph. 

L  That  attkndakok  oh  thb  institdtiobb  of  bilioion  hat  fiotk  pkbnioious 
BATHBB  THAN  BBNEFioiAL.  "  Now  in  this  that  I  declare  unto  you  I  praise  yon  not, 
that  ye  come  together  not  for  the  better,  but  for  the  worse."  The  apostle  in  this  verse 
censures  the  Corinthians  that  they  came  together  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  were  made 
"worse"  rather  than  "better."  Men  cannot  be  made  religious;  an  irresistible  moral 
force  is  a  contradiction  in  terms,  an  impossibility  in  fact.  Hence  it  comes  to  pass  that 
the  highest  redemptive  forces  on  man  often  conduce  to  his  ruin.  The  gospel  proves 
in  the  case  of  all  hearers  either  the  "  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death." 
Pharaoh's  heart  was  hardened  under  the  ministry  of  Moses,  and  the  hearts  of  the 
men  of  Chorazin,  Bethsaida,  and  Capernaum  wen  hardened  under  the  ministry  of 
Christ. 

II.  That  assehbuho  toobtheb  fob  belioioub  fubfoses  dobs  not  necessabily 
IMPLY  UNITY  OF  souik  "  Fur  first  of  all,  when  ye  come  together  in  the  Church,  I  hear 
that  there  be  divisions  among  you ;  and  I  partly  believe  it.  For  there  must  be  also 
heresies  among  you,  that  they  which  are  approved  may  be  made  manifest  among  you." 
The  factious  and  schismatic  spirit  seems  to  have  existed  in  the  same  Church  and  even 
at  the  Lord's  table.  It  does  not  follow  that,  because  people  are  brought  together  iu 
the  same  religious  assembly  or  Church,  that  they  are  united  together  in  spirit.  Two 
people  may  sit  in  the  same  pew,  hear  the  same  discourse,  sing  the  same  hymns,  partake 
of  the  same  bread  and  wine,  and  yet  in  soul  be  as  remote  from  one  another  as  the  poles. 
No  real  spiritual  unity  can  exist  where  there  is  not  a  supreme  affection  for  the  same 
being.     Christ  is  the  only  uniting  Centre  of  souls. 

III.  That  the  tbbt  best  institutions  on  eabth  abb  often  baslt  pebybbted 
BY  MEN.  For  many  reasons  the  Lord's  Supper  may  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  best 
ordinances.  But  see  how  it  was  now  perverted.  It  was  made  the  means  of  gluttony 
and  drunkenness ;  men  used  it  as  a  common  feast.  "  When  ye  come  together  therefore 
into  one  place,  this  is  Bot  to  eat  the  Lord's  Supper.  For  in  eating  every  one  taketh 
before  other  his  own  supper :  and  one  is  hungry,  and  another  is  drunken."  Are  not  men 
constantly  perverting  Divine  institutions.  Churches,  Bibles,  the  Christian  ministry,  etc.  ? 

Vers.  23 — 84. — The  Lor^s  Bnpper.  "For  I  have  receiTed,"  ete.  These  venes  give 
an  account  of  what  is  called  the  Lord's  Supper.  This  supper  was  instituted  by  Christ 
himself  the  night  in  which  he  was  betrayed,  while  he  was  observing  the  Passover  witli 
his  disciples.  On  that  night  he  virtually  directed  the  minds  of  men  from  all  Jewish 
ritualism  and  centred  them  on  himself.  "Do  this  in  remembrance  of  me."  True 
religion  now  has  to  do  with  a  Person,  and  that  Person  is  Christ.  In  reading  the  words 
of  the  apostle  here,  there  are  four  things  which  strike  us  with  amazement. 

L  That  any  should  dodbt  the  oenuineness  of  Chbibtianity.  Here  is  an 
institution  that  was  started  the  night  previous  to  our  Haviour's  crucifixion,  which  was 
attended  to  by  tlie  Church  at  Jerusalem  after  the  day  of  Pentecost,  celebrated  by  various 
other  apostolic  Churches  as  recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  which  Paul  says 
here  he  "  received  from  the  Lord."  From  the  apostolic  age  down  to  this  hour,  through 
eighteen  long  centuries,  it  has  been  attended  to  by  all  tne  branches  of  the  true  Church. 
Since  its  origin  hundreds  of  generations  have  passed  away,  many  systems  have  risen 
and  disappeared,  nations  have  been  organized,  flourished,  and  broken  up;  but  thii 
prdlnanoe  oontinnes;  what  for?    To  commemorate  the  great  central  fact  of  the  gospel, 


OLXLl-^M.]     TUB  fIBST  BPlSTIiB  TO  THB  OOBINTHIAN&  Ml 

ria.  that  Christ  died.  Is  then  any  other  fact  1b  hUtoij  tustaiiied  by  eTldence  half  so 
pawerful  as  this  ? 

II.  That  ant  rhould  misintgrfrkt  thi  obdinanob.  Here  m  are  distinctly  told 
that  it  is  t«  "  show  the  Lord's  death."  No  language  can  more  clearly  show  that 
tt  is  purely  oommemoratiTe.  There  are  three  abuses  of  this  institution.  1.  The 
nittatory.  Some  of  the  Corinthians  thus  used  it.  They  introduced  a  loTS-feast  to 
Immediately  precede  it,  pro1>ably  because  a  Jewish  feast  preceded  its  first  celebration. 
This  led  to  gluttony  and  other  evils.  The  members  of  the  Corinthian  Church  were 
conyerts  from  heathenism,  and  they  had  been  accustomed  in  their  heathen  festivals  to 
give  way  to  gluttony  and  intemperance.  Many  of  them,  from  the  force  of  old  habits, 
were  tempted  to  use  the  Lord's  Supper  in  this  way.  2.  The  superstitious.  There  are 
some  who  believe  that,  after  the  words  of  consecration  are  pronounced  by  the  priest 
over  these  elements,  the  elements  become  literally  the  "  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord." 
This  is  traosubstantiation.  Others  who  would  not  go  thus  far  still  superstitiously  regard 
the  ordinance  as  a  mystic  medium  through  which  grace  is  poured  into  the  soul  of  &e 
recipient.  Fearful  abuse  thisl  8.  Th^formaUttic,  There  are  those  who  partake  of 
the  bread  and  wine  merely  as  a  matter  of  form  and  ceremony.  We  evangelical 
Christians  are  not  guilty  of  the  first  nor  of  the  second,  but  we  may  be  of  the  third. 
The  text  tells  us  it  is  to  "  show  "  or  to  teach j  it  is  an  educational  ordinance. 

IIL  That  amy  should  bat  thb  iNSTiTnTiOH  is  rot  pebuakent  or  its  obuoa- 
TiOH.  The  apostle  tells  us  distinctly  that  it  was  to  "  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he 
come."  When  will  that  be?  Not  just  yet.  The  human  world  seems  to  be  only 
in  its  infancy,  and  Christianity  only  just  beginning  its  work.  The  billows  of  a 
thousand  ages  may  break  on  our  shore  before  he  comes.  On  to  that  distant  point 
the  obligation  is  binding.  There  are  some  professing  Christians  who  think  themselves 
too  spiritual  to  observe  such  an  ordinance.  These  very  spiritual  ones,  to  be  consistent, 
should  avoid  all  scientific  studies,  for  science  has  to  do  with  material  forms;  its 
principles  are  all  embodied,  are  made  palpable  to  the  eye  and  ear.  They  should  also 
avoid  all  BibliaH  studies,  for  Biblical  truths  are  for  the  most  part  embodied  ia 
material  facts  and  forms.    Christ  himself  was  "flesh  and  blood." 

lY.  That  ant  acquaintkd  with  tbk  bioobapht  or  Christ  shoolb  REaLEOT  it. 
Consider :  1.  That  it  is  to  eommemorcUe  the  world's  greatest  Benefactw.  It  is  to  keep 
Christ  in  the  memory  of  man.  Here  is  a  Benefactor  that  has :  (1)  Served  the  world  in 
the  highest  way.  He  has  delivered  it  finm  ran  and  death.  f2)  Served  it  by  the  most 
unparalleled  sacrifice.  He  sacrificed  his  life  to  the  work.  (3)  Served  it  with  the  most 
disinterested  love.  2.  That  it  is  enjoined  by  tiie  world's  gnktest  BenefiustM.  He  hli»- 
stlf  haaei^oiuediti  "Dothisinremambiuioeof  ma." 


HOMILIES  BT  YABIOUS  AUTHORa 

Ytrs.  1 — 19.—Apottolic  injunction*  with  regard  to  Church  terviem.  Though  the 
Ooilnthians  deserved  blame  in  some  things,  they  were  entitled  to  praise  in  that  they 
had  generally  observed  St.  Paul's  directions.  Despite  tiieir  departure  from  certain  (A 
his  instructions,  he  could  say,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also  am  of  C^st ; " 
hf  which  he  recognized  that  they  had  discernment  enough  to  see. the  iKHrd  Jesiu 
fat  his  personal  and  official  character,  and  a  sufficient  brotherly  sympathy  to  imitate 
his  example.  His  commendation  is  hearty :  "  Ye  rememl>er  me  in  all  things,  and  keep 
Hat  ordinances,  as  I  delivered  them  to  you."  With  this  preface,  short  but  conciliatory, 
he  takes  up  his  first  topic,  viz.  the  headship  of  man  in  the  natural  and  spiritual 
Older,  established  by  Providence  and  maintaiaed  by  the  Spirit  in  the  Church.  In  hii 
writings,  natural  facts  are  ever  reappearing  in  new  and  diviner  connections,  m  if  they 
had  undergone  a  sUent  and  wonderful  trausfiguration,  and  had  been  glorified  in  light 
and  beauty.  Instinct  had  always  acknowledged  the  subordination  of  woman  to  man, 
nor,  indeed,  is  the  instinct  of  sex  conceivable  in  the  absence  of  this  element  in  its 
nature.  But  St.  Paul  is  carefiil  to  lay  his  doctrinal  foundatimi  on  the  fact  "  that 
the  head  of  every  man  is  Christ,"  assured  that  the  ultimate  strength  of  all  truA 
is  in  its  spirituality.  Be  it  a  law,  a  principle,  a  motive,  an  end,  "other  foundatiem 
tan  no  man  lay."    OiUos  nay  entertain  widely  difierant  estimates  of  the  aun,  Buy 

I.  COBINTHIAKS.  I  I 


tn  THB  FIBST  EPISTLE  1:0  tRE  COBlNtHtAN^    tai*<Ll— ^4. 

be  as  broadly  sepamted  as  M.  Benan  and  Dr.  Farrar,  and  jet  none  can  deny  that 
St.  Paul  had  this  incomparable  advantage,  namely,  a  great  centre,  from  which  he  saw 
all  objects  that  engaged  his  attention.  His  method  is  fully  brought  out  in  the  third 
verse :  the  head  of  the  man  is  Christ ;  the  bead  of  the  woman  is  the  man ;  the  head 
of  Christ  is  God — a  statement  clear,  compact,  exhaustive.  One  moment  he  is  dealing 
with  the  relationship  between  man  and  woman :  Eden  rises  to  his  view,  tiie  sleeping 
Adam  wakening  to  find  Eve  at  his  side,  "  the  woman  of  the  man,"  and  "  the  glory  of 
the  man ; "  and  the  next  moment  he  is  contemplating  the  Trinity  in  its  economic  and 
immanent  relations.  Yet  from  this  sublime  height  of  Christ's  exaltation  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  Father  there  is  no  break  when  he  descends  to  discuss  woman's  behaviour 
in  Church  assemblies.  The  principle  involved  keeps  him  on  groimd  far  above  dress 
and  decorum  as  such,  and,  indeed,  he  will  not  toucli  the  matter  at  all  until  he  has  set 
forth  the  dignity  of  its  associations.  Let  us  l>e  careful,  then,  lest  we  err  by  supposing 
that  St  Paul  looked  upon  dress  and  decorum,  in  this  instance,  as  simply  convention- 
alities based  on  whims  of  taste  and  caprices  of  opinion.  Conventionalities  they  were 
in  a  certain  sense,  but  conventionalities  to  be  respected  and  observed.  In  brie^  they 
were  customs  that  had  a  moral  meaning.  If  a  woman  appeared  in  public  unveiled, 
■he  was  deemed  immodest.  To  wear  a  veil  was  a  sign  of  womanly  delicacy,  and 
hence,  if  she  went  to  a  public  assembly  without  her  veil,  she  acted  shamelessly. 
To  be  consistent,  argues  St.  Paul,  "  let  her  also  be  shorn,"  and  so  assume  the  mark  of 
a  disreputable  woman.  A  woman  acting  in  this  way  sets  public  opinion  at  defiance ; 
and  as  public  opinion  in  many  things  is  public  conscience,  and  as  such  the  aggregated 
moral  feeling  of  a  community,  no  woman  could  do  this  thing  and  not  shock  all  right 
sensibility.  Besides,  the  veil  is  a  sign  of  subordination  and  dependence.  Befiising  to 
use  this  covering  of  the  head  was  a  mark  of  insubordination  and  independence. 
A  symbol  it  was,  but  to  cast  off  the  symbol  was  to  repudiate  the  thing  signified. 
This  was  not  all.  If  imcomely,  it  was  also  unnatural ;  "  for  her  hair  is  given  her  for 
a  covering."  The  argument  has  one  passage  (ver.  10)  which  is  confessedly  difficult 
to  understand,  but  this  does  not  detract  an  iota  from  the  general  directness  and  force. 
St.  Paul's  purpose  is  unmistakable — to  set  forth  the  order  of  God's  economy  in  tiie 
relative  positions  of  man  and  woman  to  each  other,  and  the  entire  unity  of  their 
relation  to  God  in  Christ.  Man's  authority  is  guarded  against  all  excess,  and  woman's 
dependence  is  beautified  by  delicacy,  retiringness,  and  trustful  love.  So  high  an 
estimate  is  pat  on  her  character  and  attitude,  that  even  her  personal  appearance,  as 
to  attire  and  demeanour,  is  a  matter  of  moment,  involving  the  honour  and  happinesi 
of  her  husband,  and  intimately  blended  with  the  conservatism  of  society  and  the 
influence  of  the  Church.  Nor  is  the  apostle's  manner  of  appeal  to  be  overlooked. 
A  great  truth  may  be  conveyed  to  the  mind,  while  nevertheless  the  mode  of  ita 
eommunication,  left  to  hap-hazard  impulse,  or,  forsooth,  in  downright  contempt  of  the 
mind's  laws,  may  work  an  amount  of  harm  for  which  the  truth  itself  ia  no  compensa- 
tion. Best  assured  that  so  discerning  a  man  as  St  Paul,  whose  eye  took  its  seeing 
from  sensibility  no  less  than  from  reason,  would  not  violate  manner  when  he  waa 
discussing  the  worth  of  manners.  Best  assured,  too,  that  he  would  seek  a  rtaj  &m 
basis  for  the  logic  of  his  judgment.  That  such  was  the  fact,  "  Judge  in  yourselves  " 
demonstrates.  At  the  very  moment  that  he  distinctly  recognizes  public  opinion  as 
public  conscience,  and  counsels  deference  to  its  dicta  as  divinely  authoritative,  he  yet 
addresses  human  intuitions.  "  There  ia  a  spirit  in  man,  and  the  inspiration  of  the 
Almighty  giveth  them  understanding."  No  other  truth  save  this  could  have  availed 
Elihu  when  he  came  to  the  perplexed  Job  and  his  well-meaning  but  very  mistaken 
friends,  and,  as  a  mediator,  prepared  the  way  to  close  the  controversy.  Na  other 
truth  than  the  "  spirit  in  man  and  ita  "  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  "  can  qualify 
any  man  to  mediate  where  intellectual  conflicts  interblend  with  the  moral  and 
spiritual  instincts.  Inspiration  in  its  highest  form  makes  no  war  on  inspiration 
in  its  lower  form,  since  the  inspiration  that  gives  original  truth,  and  that  openneia 
and  sympathy  which  receive  it,  are  both  from  God.  St.  Paul  preached  a  gospel  that 
commended  itself  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  he  acted  in  the 
same  frame  of  mind  when  he  treated  of  decorum  and  showed  wherein  manlineai  and 
womanliness  consisted.  Customs  and  habits  vary ;  he  goes  back  to  the  sense  of  custom 
and  halMt  permanent  in  the  sotiL    He  la  not  afraid  of  human  instincts.    Although  be 


oo.  XI,  1—34.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHUNS.  871 


knowa  how  they  miss  their  way  and  sadly  blunder  in  working  out  themielTes  through 
the  mists  and  clouds  of  the  intellect,  yet  trust  them  he  will,  nor  can  he  suffer  others 
to  disparage  their  office.  This  inward  consciousness  the  Iloly  Spirit  acknowledges, 
and  to  it  he  brings  light  and  warmth,  in  order  that  the  intuitive  judgment  may  be 
supplied  with  the  conditions  of  its  best  activity.  It  is,  indeed,  a  part  of  our  fallen 
nature,  but,  notwithstanding  that,  it  is  a  Divine  remnant,  and  only  awaits  Ood'n 
voice  to  utter  its  response.  The  dark  lumps  of  coal  when  dug  from  the  earth  give  no 
sign  of  the  sunbeams  hidden  in  them,  but,  on  being  ignited,  they  attest  their  ongin. 
Therefore,  argues  the  apostle,  "judge  in  yourselves,"  since  there  is  no  knowledj^p 
of  God  unaccompanied  by  a  knowledge  of  ourselves.  Only  let  your  judgment  be  in 
the  Lord ;  for  only  in  him  can  man  and  woman  be  seen  in  the  perfection  of  theii 
mutuality.  After  all,  then,  may  we  not  say,  in  view  of  this  argument  no  less  than 
of  all  his  methods  of  thinking,  that  St.  Paul  is  peculiar  among  the  apostles  by  his 
insight  into  the  natural  economy  of  the  universe,  the  apostle  of  nature  as  well  as  of 
grace,  because  each  was  a  portion  of  the  same  vast  scheme  of  Providence  ?  According 
to  his  view,  the  human  race  was  in  Christ  from  the  beginning,  and  Adam's  federal 
headship  took  it*  whole  meaning  from  the  pre-existence  of  Christ,  as  the  Creator 
of  man. — L. 

Vers.  )} — 34. — Special  eonsideration  of  the  Iiord's  Supper;  vses  of  telf-fudgment. 
And  what  is  St.  Paul's  mood  of  mind  now?  "I  declare  unto  you"  (command  you), 
and  "  I  praise  you  not,"  since  I  hear  of  "  divisions  "  among  yon,  and  "  I  partly  believe 
it."  "  Heresies  [sects]  must  be  among  you,"  for  in  the  present  state  of  our  nature 
there  is  no  way  to  develop  the  good  without  the  evil  manifesting  itself.  The  evil  has 
its  uses ;  the  evil  is  not  a  cause  but  an  occasion  of  good ;  the  evil  is  overruled  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  turned  to  the  advantage  of  the  Church ;  the  evil  does  not  change  its 
character  and  become  a  good,  but  is  instrumentally  employed  to  subserve  other  and 
very  different  purposes  than  itself  contemplates.  Thereby  the  genuine  advocates  of 
truth  are  made  to  appear,  and  truth  itself  is  brought  out  in  a  more  luminous  aspect. 
The  standpoint  is  that  God  is  not  only  the  Author  of  the  institutions  of  the  Church, 
but  their  Divine  Guardian.  The  institutions  are  not  left  to  themselves,  nor  are 
circumstances  outside  of  them  surrendered  to  their  own  operation,  but  God  himself 
is  in  the  workmanship  of  his  hands,  and  presides  over  all  external  things,  so  that  his 
providences  are  in  behalf  of  a  providence  which  has  a  supreme  object  and  end.  Now, 
the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  holy  sacrament,  and  St.  Paul  approaches  the  discussion  of  it  in 
a  very  marked  way.  We  understand  him  to  claim  a  direct  revelalion  from  the  Lord 
Jesus  on  this  subject,  and,  by  virtue  thereof,  to  "  declare,"  or  command,  as  he  states  in 
the  seventeenth  verse.  Truth  is  truth,  whether  mediately  or  immediately  received. 
Tet  we  do  know  that  there  are  circumstances  under  which  truth  affects  us  in  a 
manner  singularly  personal.  Only  one  such  scene  as  that  "  near  Damascus  "  is  reported 
in  the  Kew  Testament,  and  only  one  such  unique  individuality  as  that  of  St.  Paul  is 
recorded  for  our  instruction.  So  that  we  are  moving  in  the  line  of  all  the  precftdeots 
of  his  career  when  we  suppose  that  this  account  of  the  supper  was  communicated 
directly  by  the  Lord  Jesus  to  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  In  a  previous  discussion 
(ch.  z.)  he  had  referred  to  a  specific  aspect  of  the  supper  as  a  communion  or  participa- 
tion. Beyond  this  the  argument  then  in  hand  did  not  require  him  to  go.  Kow, 
however,  he  is  full  and  explicit  as  to  details — the  time  when  it  was  instituted,  the 
circumstances,  the  manner  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  formula  employed;  so  that  nothing 
might  escape  observation,  but  the  utmost  depth  and  solemnity  of  impression  be 
secured.  "  In  remembrance  of  me  "  is  the  heart  of  the  holy  ordinance — the  "  remem- 
brance "  of  the  broken  body  and  the  shed  blood — the  penalty  of  the  violated  Law 
endured,  satisfaction  offered  to  the  Lawgiver,  the  sense  of  justice  met  in  the  human 
heart,  the  love  of  God  expressing  itself  as  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  means  therewith 
provided  for  the  sense  of  God's  grace  to  be  awakened  and  developed  in  the  human  heart. 
Memoir  is  the  power  in  man  this  holy  institution  addresses.  "  In  remembrance  of 
me."  Now,  looking  at  memory  in  its  position  among  the  mental  faculties,  we  may 
perchance  get  some  light  on  the  woras  just  quoted.  Memory  is  a  very  early  and 
energetic  activity  of  the  mind.  It  begins  our  development  and  is  the  chief  stimulant 
•f  prognMiTe  developmeat.    It  is  the  spinal  column  of  the  faculties.    SensatioB,  per- 


373  THE   FIEST   EPISTLE   TO   THE   CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  xi.  1—34. 

ception,  imagination,  associative  and  suggestive  functions,  reasoning  and  conclusions 
reached,  are  all  very  intimately  identified  with  its  operations.  Memory  is  the  first  of 
the  intellectual  powers  to  attain  perfection,  as  judgment  is  the  last,  and  this  law  of 
rapid  maturity  would  seem  to  indicate,  by  its  exceptional  character,  that  memory 
sustains  a  very  near  relation  to  the  growth  of  our  moral  nature.  It  is  clear  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  adopted  the  method  of  storing  facts  in  the  minds  of  the  twelve  apostles, 
and  leaving  them  in  latency,  the  truths  in  these  facts  being  reserved  for  subsequent 
realization.  And  it  is  equally  certain  that  one  of  the  chief  offices  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as 
the  Executive  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  was  "  to  bring  all  things"  to  their  "  remem- 
brance. "  Naturally,  indeed,  a  past  was  formed  in  the  memories  of  the  twelve,  but 
it  was  made  a  spiritual  past  by  the  Divine  agency  of  the  Spirit  as  a  Remembrancer. 
Furthermore,  the  apostles  were  to  be  witnesses,  or  testifiers :  "  Ye  also  shall  bear 
witness ; "  but  the  importance  of  the  Spirit  as  a  Remembrancer  exhibits  itself  in  this, 
that,  out  of  the  miscellaneous  mass  of  facts  deposited  in  the  memories  of  the  twelve, 
a  selection  was  to  be  made,  for,  according  to  the  fourth  Gospel,  there  were  "  many  other 
things  which  Jesus  did"  that  were  not  "written,  "  while  those  "written"  were  such 
as  were  adapted  to  Christian  faith.  It  seems,  then,  that  memory  was  inspired  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  accordance  with  the  principle  contained  in  the  words,  "  These  are 
written  " — only  these — "  that  ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God ; 
and  that  believing  ye  might  have  life  through  his  Name.  "  Aside,  however,  from  the 
apostles,  is  there  not  a  principle  here  which  is  recognized  by  the  Spirit  in  all  its 
gracious  administrations?  Memory  is  ordinarily  the  sta/rting-point  in  religious  life 
when  that  life  becomes  positive  and  decided.  It  enters  largely  into  conviction  for  sin 
and  into  repentance.  Further  back  than  recollection  extends,  impressions  of  God's 
goodness  and  the  need  of  Christ  for  pardon  and  peace  were  made  on  the  soul,  and  there 
they  lay,  like  old  deposits  in  the  strata  of  the  globe,  till  the  Holy  Ghost  uncovered  them 
to  our  consciousness.  God  keeps  for  us  his  witness  in  this  faithful  register  of  the  past. 
Without  being  Platonists  on  the  subject  of  reminiscence,  or  accepting  all  that  Words- 
worth teaches  in  the  grand  'Ode  on  Intimations  of  Immortality  from  EarLy  Recollec- 
tions of  Childhood, '  we  may  well  believe  that  memory  is  the  master-organ  through 
which  grace  is  imparted  to.men.  A  simple  hymn  of  Dr.  Watts's  or  Mrs.  Barbauld's 
learned  in  childhood  ;  the  little  prayer,  "Now  I  lay  me  down  to  sleep  ;"  and  most  of 
all,  "  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  "  taught  by  a  mother's  lips ;  our  first  sight  of 
death ;  our  first  walk  in  a  graveyard  ; — come  backto  us  in  after  years,  and  suddenly 
the  hard  grip  of  the  world  on  our  hearts  is  relaxed,  and  the  "little  child  is  set  in  the 
midst"of  life'sscenes,  and  we  know  that  Jesus  has  set  it  there  for  our  restoration  to  its 
long-lost  image.  .No  wonder,  then,  that  it  should  have  pleased  the  Lord  Jesus  to 
make  the  Holy  Supper  an  institution  appealing  to  memory.  There,  in  that  upper 
room,  a  few  hours  on  earth  remaining  to  him,  the  past  three  years  with  his  disciples 
were  gathered  in  a  few  most  solemn  moments.  The  righteousness  of  his  perfect  life 
of  obedience,  all  he  had  taught  and  done  and  suffered,  had  come  into  this  final  inter- 
view, and  were  going  forward  into  his  expiatory  death.  The  motive  and  blessedness 
of  the  act  in  the  celebration  of  the  Eucharist  are  drawn  from  "  In  remembrance  of  me.  " 
Christ  in  all  his  fulness,  Christ  in  his  one  personality  as  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man, 
Christ  in  the  entire  compass  of  mediation,  is  in  this  "  me.  "  At  the  same  time,  the  act 
shows  forth  the  "Lord's  death  till  he  come,  "  and  accordingly  is  prospective.  As  a 
natural  fact,  memory  is  the  great  feeder  of  the  imagination,  and  is  ever  exciting  it 
to  picture  the  future.  Except  for  memory,  the  imagination  could  not  exist,  or,  if 
existing,  would  be  a  very  imperfect  because  torpid  faculty.  As  a  religious  organ, 
the  medium  as  we  have  seen  of  the  Spirit,  the  memory  stimulates  the  imagination  and 
qualifies  it  to  "show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come.  "  St.  Paul  mentions ^rst  the 
"remembrance"  in  connection  with  the  broken  body  and  again  with  the  blood,  and 
then  comes  the  idea  of  showing,  or  proclaiming.  Of  course,  the  supper  had  to  be  a 
memorial  before  it  could  be  an  anticipation,  but  the  order  involves  more  than  chrono- 
logical sequence.  It  is  an  inner  order  of  ideas,  audit  states,  we  think,  with  force  and 
precision  the  relativity  of  these  ideas.  If  this  analysis  be  correct,  then  the  determina- 
tive idea  in  the  institution  is  its  memorial  character  {remembrance),  and  by  this  idea  we 
are  to  judge  its  nature  and  influence.  Yet  not  alone  by  this  abstractly  viewed,  since 
memory  is  supplemented  by  imagination  and  its  vivid  sense  of  futurity.    From  this 


CH.  XI.  1—34.]    THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   TO   THE  CORINTHIANS.  373 

point  of  view  we  understand  wliy  St.  Paul  should  protest  so  strongly  against  the 
shocking  abuse  of  the  Lord 's  Supper  among  the  Corinthians.  With  this  feast,  institut- 
ed and  consecrated  by  Christ  himself,  its  purpose  being  to  bring  him  back  into  their 
midst  and  to  enable  them  to  realize  his  coming  again,  the  two  ideas  being  closely 
joined, — with  this  tender  remembrance  and  expectation  they  had  associated  sensual 
pleasures,  eating  and  drinking  to  excess,  separating  themselves  into  classes,  despising 
the  Church  of  God,  and  bringing  condemnation  upon  themselves.  What  of  Christ  was 
in  all  this?  Instead  of  memories  of  his  sacrificial  death,  instead  of  their  personal  recol- 
lections of  his  providence  and  grace  in  their  behalf,  instead  of  touching  and  humbling 
recallings  of  how  he  had  dealt  with  each  of  them,  what  utter  forgetfulness,  what  a 
closingup  of  every  avenue  of  the  past  opening  into  the  present,  and  wbataconcentra-- 
tion  in  the  animal  gratifications  of  the  hour  1  Instead  of  anticipation  and  joyous  hope, 
looking  to  the  Lord's  coming,  what  blindness  to  all  but  the  transient  festivities  of  the 
carnal  senses  I  On  this  account  (therefore)  "many  are  weak  and  sickly  among  you, 
and  many  sleep. "  The  reference  is  not  to  the  weakness  and  sickliness  that  follow  the 
violations  of  natural  laws,  nor  is  the  sleep  the  falling  as'.eep  in  Jesus;  but  a  punishment 
sent  from  God  and  executed  under  the  directive  agency  of  providence.  Just  in  propor- 
tion as  a  man  realizes  Christ  in  the  past  will  he  realize  him  in  the  future.  Just  in  the 
degree  that  he  loses  him  from  the  past  of  his  own  heart,  in  that  same  degree  will  he 
vacate  the  future  of  his  glorious  image.  The  present  is  all,  and  it  is  all  of  the  senses. 
And  when  God  arises  to  judgment,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Corinthians,  what  a  sudden 
intensity  surcharges  the  present,  the  blessedness  of  the  old  yesterdays  and  the  await- 
ing to-morrows  all  extinguished,  and  the  immediate  moments,  once  so  fugitive  and  so 
eager  to  glorify  themselves  by  larger  additions,  lingering  now  and  lengthening  in  the 
keener  consciousness  of  pain  and  remorseful  anguish  I  "  Judge  yourselves,"  O  Corin- 
thians !  Examine  your  hearts ;  return  to  your  memories  and  expectations ;  go  to  the 
cross  of  Christ  and  learn  the  lesson  of  its  self-sacrifice ;  condemn  and  punish  yourselves 
for  the  guilty  past ;  and  make  this  discipline  of  self  a  chastening  for  future  well-being. 
But  let  no  true  and  humble  soul  be  tortured  by  the  thought  of  eating  and  drinking  "  un- 
worthily, "and  thereby  incurring  "condemnation.  "  Whoever  comes  to  the  Lord's 
Supper  after  a  close  self-examination  aided  by  the  Spirit,  and  brings  to  it  a  meek  and 
trustful  mind  ;  whoever  repairs  to  it  after  he  has  communed  with  his  memories  of 
Christ's  goodness  to  him, — will  be  a  worthy  participant  in  the  sacred  rite,  and  may 
surely  expect  the  seal  of  God's  approbation.  A  Christian  child  may  understand  the 
essential  idea  and  spirit  of  the  institution.  And  yet  it  has  connections  that  transcend 
all  thought,  and  the  soul  of  every  devout  communicant  welcomes  the  mysterious  glory 
with  which  it  is  invested.     Charles  Wesley  sings  for  every  believer  when  he  says — 

"  His  presence  makes  the  feast, 
And  now  our  bosoms  feel 
The,  glory  not  to  be  expressed, 
The  joy  unspeakable."  L. 

Ver.  1.  — Imitation.  The  personal  feelings  of  the  apostle  come  out  in  these  Epistles 
to  the  Corinthians  perhaps  more  than  in  any  other  of  his  writings.  This  may  well 
have  been  because  at  Corinth  his  authority  was  questioned,  and  other  teachers  were  by 
some  exalted  as  his  rivals  or  superiors.  That  he  should  resent  such  treatment  from 
those  who  were  under  peculiar  obligations  to  him  we  can  well  understand  ;  and  it  is 
very  natural  that  he  should  be  led  all  the  more  boldly  to  vindicate  his  apostolic 
character  and  to  assert  his  apostolic  authority.  There  is  self-confidence  of  a  just  and 
warrantable  kind  in  the  admonition  and  challenge  of  this  language  :  "  Be  ye  imita- 
tors of  me.  " 

I.  The  principlb  to  which  the  apostlb  herb  appeals — imitation.  1.  It  is  a 
principle  natural  to  all  mankind.  Most  conspicuous  is  it  in  the  case  of  children  and 
young  people,  and  in  the  case  of  the  uncivilized  and  untutored,  who  cannot  easily 
acquire  knowledge  through  symbols,  but  who  learn  arts  with  great  facility  through 
imitation.  2.  Itsrangeof  operation  is  asextensive  as  the  natureof  man.  Wetrace 
it  in  exercise  in  the  bodily  life,  for  multitudes  of  acts  ai)d  of  arts  are  acquired  by  those 


374  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  zl  1—84. 

who  careMly  oopj  the  proceedings  of  others  We  trace  it  in  the  mental  life :  ways  ot 
thinking,  of  regarding  life  generally  and  one's  fellow-men  in  particular,  moral  judg- 
ments and  habits, — all  are  owing  largely  to  imitation,  3.  It  is  of  set  purpose  em^iloyed 
in  all  education ;  for  the  discipline  and  culture  of  the  young  is  alniost  dependent  upon 
the  operation  of  this  interesting  and  most  powerful  principle  of  human  nature. 

II.  The  great  and  oeneral  use  which  Christianitt  hakes  of  this  prinoipu. 
1.  In  the  Holy  Scriptures,  especially  of  the  New  Testament,  men  are  summoned  to  be 
followers,  imitators  of  God,  in  all  his  moral  perfections.  It  is  represented  that  the 
excellences  which  are  supreme  and  glorious  in  him  may  inspire  ns  with  the  desire  aiul 
resolre  to  copy  and  to  acquire  them  in  our  measure  for  ourselves.  2.  Jesus  Christ  is 
set  before  us  as  the  especial  Object  of  our  reverence,  as  the  highest  Model  for  us  to 
study  and  to  imitate.  It  is  possible  that,  through  our  reverence  lor  him  as  our  Divine 
Saviour,  we  may  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  he  is  also  our  human  Exemplar.  We  are 
summoned  to  grow  up  in  all  things  unto  him,  3,  Tet  this  grace  of  imitation  is  to  be 
ours,  through  our  response  to  the  love  of  Jeans  and  our  participation  in  the  Spirit  of 
Jesus.  It  is  not  a  mechanical,  but  a  spiritual,  intelligent,  living  process.  Wo  must 
love  with  the  love  of  admiration,  tympathy,  congeniality,  in  order  that  we  may  be 
changed  into  the  same  image. 

III.  The  special  application  Paiti.  hakes  of  this  rRtKomi.  L  Religion  permits 
us  to  study  human  moiiels  of  excellence  and  to  aim  at  conformity  with  such.  Thus 
the  anthor  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  sets  before  his  readers  illustrious  examples  of 
faith,  as  a  practical  and  powerful  principle  governing  and  inspiring  human  nature  and 
life.  And  here  Paul  requires  of  the  Corinthians  that  they  should  be  imitators  of  him. 
How  many  Christians  in  all  ages  have  been  fired  with  this  noble  ambition !  And  how 
wonderfully  has  it  proved  for  the  advantage  of  the  Church  and  of  the  world  that  it  has 
been  sol  '£.  The  limitation  set  to  this  principle:  "Even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ." 
This  was  an  acknowledgment  of  the  Lord's  supremcMsy ;  in  copying  Paul,  the  Corin- 
thians were  only  to  be  copying  Christ,  as  it  were,  at  one  remove.  3.  The  extent  to 
which  this  imitation  was  designed  to  go.  Surely  they  might,  and  we  may,  be  imitators 
of  the  apostle,  In  his  love  to  Christ,  in  his  devotion  to  Christ's  cause,  in  his  affliction 
for  Christ's  people,  in  his  obedience  to  Christ's  laws,  in  his  willingness  to  suffer  for 
Christ's  sake,  in  his  wise  forbearance  with  the  Infirmities  of  the  brethren,  and  in  hie 
overflowing  and  very  practical  brotherly  kindness  and  charity.  In  these  respect*  it  ta 
not  possible  to  follow  Paul  without  at  the  same  time  following  Christ. — ^T. 

Ver.  l—ApoiMie  authority  and  traditUmt.  In  using  language  so  imperious  to  all 
seeming  as  this  is,  St.  Paul  spake  as  an  apoitle,  i.e.  as  one  sent  and  commissioned  by 
the  Divine  Head  and  Ruler  of  the  Church.  That  he  should  use  such  language  at  all  u 
very  instructive  and  significant  to  all  wlio  read  the  Epistles  and  desire  to  receive  them 
in  the  appropriate  and  intended  spirit. 

L  Apostolic  individuality  and  AnTHOBrrr  absbrtbd,  "  That  ye  remember  we." 
What  an  assumption  is  here  of  importance  and  peculiar  authority  I  It  was  Paul's  great 
concern  that  his  converts  should  remember  Christ :  does  he  here  set  himself  up  as  ■ 
rival  of  the  Lord  7  By  no  means.  But  he  claims  to  be  the  minister,  the  ambassador 
of  Christ  to  the  Churches,  whose  woids  are  to  be  received  as  the  words  of  one  speaking 
by  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  Readers  of  the  New  Testament  are  by  such  language  reminded 
that  the  inspired  writers,  through  their  personal,  intimate,  official  relatiuu  to  Christ, 
have  a  claim  upon  tit*  respectful  attention  and  the  cordial  faith  of  those  who  profess  to 
be  Christ'!. 

II.  The  0B8EBVANCB  or  inspired  tbadttions  EKJOmD.  In  OhHstianity  there  ii  aa 
element  of  law  and  an  element  of  liberty ;  and  these  two  elements  are  in  harmony  eack 
with  the  other,  the  two  being  necessary  in  order  to  the  completeness  of  the  dispensation. 
In  some  passages  even  of  this  Epistle  stress  is  laid  upon  freedom ;  whilst  in  this  verse 
stress  ia  laid  upon  subjection.  Traditions,  communications,  of  a  religious  kind  had 
been  committed  by  the  apostle  to  these  Corinthians.  What  were  these  ?  1.  Traditions 
of  doctrine.  It  was  from  Paul's  lips  that  many  of  them  had  first  heard  the  gospel ;  to 
him  all  were  indebted  for  the  systematic  exposition  of  its  glorious  truths.  2.  Tradiiiona 
of  freeept  ami  conduct.  This  letter  is  itself  full  of  such ;  for  Paul  combined,  in  a 
remarkable  and  admirable  manner,  the  functions  of  the  teacher  of  truth  and  thoea  of 


OH.  XL  1— 34.J    THE  iflRST  EPISTLE  TO  THK  OOBINTHIANS.  »7S 

the  ethical  instrnctor.  3.  Traditions  of  diseiptine.  A»  soon  as  societies  were  formed, 
It  l)ecatne  neccssaiy  to  draw  up  and  promulgate  regulations  for  the  internal  government 
and  ordering  of  such  societies.  Thej  naturally  looked  to  inspired  apostles  for  directions 
how  to  proceed,  and  they  did  not  look  in  vain.  The  context  shows  us  how  dependent 
the  first  Churches  were  upon  apostolic  guidance  for  the  maintenanue  of  their  order  and 
the  administration  of  their  offices  and  affairs. 

IIL  Subjection  to  apostolioal  dirbctions  oommensbd.  We  gain  here  an  insight 
into  the  very  mixed  character  of  the  memhera  of  the  primitive  Churches.  Much  in  their 
conduct  is  in  this  very  Epistle  censured  with  something  like  severity ;  yet  praise  is  not 
withheld  where  praise  is  due.  There  is  a  kind  of  praise  which  is  dangerous,  which 
involves  insincerity  on  the  part  of  those  who  offer,  and  fosters  pride  on  the  part  of  those 
who  receive  it.  Yet  the  general  fault  amongst  men  and  amongst  Christians  is  unduly 
to  withhold  praise.  Such  commendation  as  this  of  the  apostle  could  not  hut  encourage 
and  stimulate  to  a  cheerful  and  resolute  ohedience  to  the  injunctions  of  apostolic  and 
Divine  authority. — T. 

Ver.  3. — 2%«  hierctrehy.  Before  entering  upon  particular  counsels  with  regard  to  the 
attire  of  the  two  sexes  respectively  in  the  Christian  assemhlies,  St.  Paul  lays  down  a 
great  general  principle,  from  which,  rather  than  from  custom  or  from  experience,  he 
deduces  the  special  dut||B  devolving  upon  the  members  of  Christ's  Church.  The  case 
upon  which  he  was  consulted,  and  upon  which  he  gave  his  advice,  has  lost  all  practical 
interest,  and  is  to  us  merely  an  antiquarian  Quriosity ;  but  the  great  principle  pro- 
pounded in  connection  with  it  holds  good  for  all  time. 

I.  The  appointed  suborpination  of  woman  to  kah.  There  is  a  sense  in  which 
there  is  equality  between  the  sexes.  In  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  male  nor  female. 
The  gospel  is  intended  for  and  is  offered  to  both  men  and  women.  Both  are  equally 
dear  to  him  who  died  for  all.  As  in  Jesus'  earthly  ministry  he  wrought  cures  and 
•xpelled  demons  for  the  relief  of  women,  and  as  he  chose  certain  women  as  his  personal 
frlsnds,  and  as  he  willingly  accepted  the  afTectionate  and  generous  ministration  of  other 
women ;  so  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  he  numbers  women  amongst  his  people,  and 
honours  them  by  prom  'ting  them  to  his  service.  There  is,  so  to  speak,  spiritual  equality. 
But  domestic  and  social  equality  is  quite  another  thing.  In  the  hout>ebold  and  in  the 
congregation  there  muot  be  subjection  and  submission.  "  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law." 
"  The  head  of  the  woman  is  the  man."  And  this  notwithstanding  that  many  men  are 
base  and  unworthy  of  their  position  and  calling ;  notwithstanding  that  many  women 
are  not  only  pure,  but  noble  and  well  fitted  for  command. 

n.  The  archetype  in  spiritual  and  heavenly  relations  to  which  this  order 
conforub.  1.  Man  is  not  supreme,  though  invested  with  a  limited  authority.  "  The 
head  of  every  man  is  Christ."  He,  the  Son  of  man,  has  the  primacy  over  this  humanity. 
In  wisdom  and  in  righteousness,  in  power  and  in  grace,  the  Lord  Jesus  is  superior  and 
supreme.  The  law  is  revealed  in  him  and  administered  l>y  him.  Every  man  im- 
morally bound  to  subjection  and  submission  to  the  Divine  Man,  And  he  is  Head 
over  ail  things  to  his  Church.  This  is  the  truth,  the  ideal,  the  purpose  of  eternal 
wisdom;  though,  alasl  often  misunderstood,  or  forgotten,  or  denied  by  men.  2.  Bveu 
in  the  Godhead  there  is  an  official  subordination  of  the  Son  to  the  Father  j  "  the  heaii 
of  Christ  is  God."  This  language  takes  us  into  the  region  of  heavenly  things,  of 
Divine  mysteries.  But  it  reveals  to  us  the  fact  that  the  universe  is  one  great  hier 
archy,  of  which  not  every  member  is  mentioned  here,  only  certain  leading  dominant 
notes  being  successively  sounded  in  the  celestial  scale.  Men  may  suppose  that  order 
and  subordination  in  human  society,  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  are  merely  expedients  fur 
peace  and  quietness.  But  it  is  not  so ;  there  is  Divine  archetype  lo  which  human 
relationships  and  affairs  conform.  Let  there  be  non-conformity  to  this,  and  there  is 
discord  breaking  in  upon  the  harmonious  minstrelsy  of  the  spiritual  un.  verse.  Let 
there  be  conformity,  and  the  sweet  concert  proves  that  earth  is  in  tune  wiih  heaven. — T. 

Yer.  7, — Man  th«  image  and  glory  of  Qod.  The  Bible  is  the  book  of  ptiradoxes ; 
and,  if  it  were  not,  it  would  not  correspond  with  the  facts  of  human  nature  and  history. 
Nowhere  do  we  find  such  an  exposure  of  human  sin  and  such  denunciations  of  human 
guilt  as  in  the  Scriptures,     And,  on  the  other  hand,  nowhere  do  we  meet  with  sue.) 


376  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,     [on.  XL  1—34. 

nuiJMtio  repreBWiUtioiui  of  man's  grandeur  and  dignity.  There  U  •  depth  la  thit 
simple  but  inspiring  language  which  we  cannot  fathom;  but  we  may  remark  some 
particulars  in  which  it  is  rerified  by  facts. 

L  Man  ib  God's  imaob  akd  olobt  in  ma  fobm  and  featubes.  This  seems  to 
be  asserted  in  this  passage.  Why  must  not  man's  head  be  veiled  when  in  the  sacred 
assembly  he  draws  near  to  the  Father  of  spirits,  the  Lord  of  the  universe  ?  Because 
"he  is  the  image  and  glory  of  God."  This  does  not  imply  that  the  Divine  Being 
possesses  a  body  as  man  does.  No  such  anthropomorphism  is  suggested  in  the  text. 
But  so  far  as  matter  can  be  moulded  into  a  form  which  shadows  forth  the  Divioe 
majesty,  it  has  been  so  fashioned  in  the  construction  of  the  human  frame  and  features. 
High  thoughts,  noble  impulses,  pure  desires,  tender  sympathy,  these — the  glory  of 
humanity — are  written  upon  the  countenance  of  man. 

II.  Ik  hib  intellectual  and  moral  endowuentb.  This  is  probably  what  is 
meant  by  the  declaration  in  Genesis  that  God  made  man  in  his  own  image.  In  his 
capacity  to  apprehend  truth,  in  his  recognition  of  moral  excellence,  in  his  power  of 
will,  man  resembles  his  Maker.  And  there  is  no  way  by  which  we  can  arrive  at 
a  knowledge  of  God  in  his  higher  attributes  other  than  by  the  aid  of  the  nature  with 
which  he  has  endowed  us,  and  which  he  has  declared  to  be  akin  to  his  own. 

III.  In  his  F08ITI0M  or  bubobdinate  bule  oveb  the  creation.  The  psalmist 
asserts  that  God  crowned  man  with  glory  and  honour,  and  set  him  over  the  works 
of  his  hands,  putting  all  things  under  his  controL  Thug  did  the  Lord  of  all  delegate  to 
his  vicegerent  an  authority  resembling  his  own. 

IV.  In  the  bbothebhood  of  Jesub  Christ.  The  assumption  of  human  nature  by 
the  eternal  Word  was  only  possible  because  man  was  originally  made  In  the  Divine 
image.  It  is  wonderful  to  find  language  so  similar  used  concerning  man  and  concerning 
the  Son  of  God,  who  is  described  as  "the  emanation  from  the  Father's  glory,  and 
the  very  image  of  his  substance."  The  Incarnation  seems  a  necessity  even  to  explain  the 
nature  of  man ;  it  casts  a  halo  of  glory  and  radiance  around  the  human  form,  the  human 
destiny.  For  the  Incarnation  was  the  condition,  not  only  of  a  Divine  manifestation,  but 
of  the  redemption  of  humanity;  and  Christ's  purpose  was  to  bring  many  sons  unto  glory. 

V.  In  hib  future  of  etebnal  blessednebb.  All  things  which  show  forth  God's 
glory  are  passing  and  perishing.  Man  alone  of  all  that  is  earthly  is  appointed  for 
immortality.  The  mirror  that  reflects  so  bright  a  light  shall  never  be  broken ;  the 
glory  which  man  receives  from  heaven  and  returns  to  heaven  shall  never  fikde. — T. 

Yer.  20.—"  The  Lord'g  Supper"  The  abuses  and  disorders  which  pterdled  in  the 
Corinthian  Church  served  as  an  occasion  for  an  apostolic  exhibition  and  inculcation  ol 
a  more  excellent  way.  Incidentally,  we  are  indebted  to  them  for  the  account  given  by 
the  apostle  of  the  original  institution,  and  for  Instructions  as  to  the  proper  observance 
of  the  ordinance.  The  designation  here  applied  to  the  distinctive  observance  of  the 
Christian  Church  is  one  of  beautiful  simplicity,  and  suggests  an  exposition  of  the 
acknowledged  nature  and  benefit  of  the  ordinance. 

I.  The  Divine  authority  of  the  Lord's  Suppeb.  1,  It  is  an  ordinance  of  Christ, 
and  its  observance  is  consequently  an  act  of  obedience  on  the  part  of  his  people.  It 
is  not  a  service  of  man's  device ;  the  Lord  himself  has  said,  "  Do  this."  2.  It  is  a 
tradition  of  apostolic  times.  Paxil  professed  to  have  "  received  from  the  Lord  that 
which  he  delivered."  The  sacrament  was  accordingly  celebrated  within  a  generation 
of  Christ's  own  lifetime,  and  has  been  celebrated  in  unbroken  continuity  from  that 
time  to  our  own.  3.  It  was  in  the  first  century  a  regular  observance  of  the  Christian 
societies.  This  is  apparent  from  the  way  in  which  it  is  mentioned  in  this  Kpistle; 
it  is  treated  as  something  actually  existing,  nlthough  in  some  cases  misunderstood  and 
abused.  And  as  Paul  writes,  "  As  oft  as  ye,"  etc.,  it  is  presumed  that  the  observance 
took  place  regularly  and  frequently. 

II.  The  doctrinal  bignificanox  of  the  Lobd's  Suppeb.  1.  It  is  a  memorial  of 
Christ,  and  especially  of  his  death.  He  himself  appointed  that  it  should  be  observed 
"  in  remembrance  of  "  himself  and  of  his  sufferings  whose  body  was  broken  and  whose 
blood  was  shed  for  his  people.  2.  It  is  a  Eucharist,  or  service  of  thanksgiving.  The 
Institutor  of  the  ordinance  "gave  thanks,"  or  "blessed,"  probably  upon  the  suggestion 
of  the  cup  of  v^hich  the  Jews  partook  during  the  Paschal  menl.    The  sacrament  is 


OH.  V.  1—34.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOBlNTHlAMa  »77 


a  reminder  of  all  the  benefits  which  we  hare  receWed  from  Gk>d,  and  eipedallj  of  the 

"  unspeakable  gift."  3.  It  is  a  aymbol  and  means  of  spiritual  nourishment.  Spiritually, 
the  communicants  eat  the  body  and  drink  the  blood  of  their  Saviour,  partaking  and 
feeding  upon  Christ  by  faith.  The  real  presence  of  the  Redeemer  is  experienced 
in  the  heart  of  the  faithful  recipient.  4.  It  is  a  bond  of  fellowship  and  brotherhood. 
Hence  called  a  communion,  or  the  communion,  as  the  appointed  means  and  manifesta- 
tion of  a  true  spiritual  unity.  The  brethren  of  the  family  are  seated  at  one  table,  they 
join  in  one  meal  or  sacred  feast,  they  eat  of  one  loaf  and  drink  of  one  cup. 

III.  Thb  spiritual  fbofit  of  the  Lobd's  Suffer.  1.  It  is  a  divinely  appdnted 
means  of  increased  and  more  vivid  fellowship  with  the  unseen  Redeemer,  who  in  this 
service  draws  near  to  those  who  draw  near  to  him.  2.  It  is  a  profession  of  faith, 
attachment,  and  loyalty,  the  admitted  and  enjoined  method  of  declaring  upon  which 
side  we  stand  in  the  moral  conflict  which  rages,  under  whose  banner  we  have  enlisted, 
and  whom  we  purpose  loyally  to  serve.  3.  It  is  a  testimony  to  the  unbelieving  world 
around.  The  death  of  Christ  is  proclaimed,  not  only  to  those  within,  but  to  those 
without.  More  effectively  than  by  words,  men  are  reminded  thkt  the  grace  of  God  and 
the  lelvation  of  Christ  have  come  very  nigh  unto  them.— T. 

Ver.  26. — 2%«  Church's  proelaination.  What  so  fitted  to  rebuke  those  who  pro&ned 
the  Supper  of  the  Lord,  what  so  fitted  to  arouse  them  to  a  sense  of  their  high  calling, 
as  a  solemn  declaration  like  this  ?  The  noisy,  greedy,  quarrelsome  gatherings  which 
seem  at  Corinth  to  have  been  associated  with  the  professed  observance  of  one  of  the 
highest  mysteries  of  the  Christian  faith,  natitfally  awakened  the  indignation  and  the 
rejn'oaches  of  the  apostle.  Recalling  them  to  a  sense  of  the  dignity  of  their  position  as 
witnesses  to  God  in  an  ignorant  and  sinful  world,  the  apostle  summons  the  Corinthian 
Christians  so  to  eat  the  bread  and  drink  the  cup  of  the  Eucharist  as  to  declare  to  all 
the  sacred  tidings  of  a  Redeemer's  death. 

L  Thu  sacrament  ib  a  commeuoration  or  ths  past.  The  Lord's  death  was  an 
admitted  fact ;  and  if  anything  was  needed  to  establish  the  historical  fact,  the  existence 
of  this  ordinance  was  sufficient  and  more  than  sufficient  for  the  purpose.  But  men 
may  forget  and  lose  sight  of  an  event  which  they  do  not  dream  of  denying.  And  it 
seemed  good  to  Divine  wisdom  that  the  crucifixion  and  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God 
should  be  held  in  everlasting  memory  by  means  of  this  simple  but  most  significant 
observance.  It  was  not  simply  as  an  historical  fact  that  the  death  of  Christ  was 
to  be  recorded,  but  as  a  Christian  doctrine.  Christ's  was  a  redeeming,  atoning,  recon- 
ciling death  ;  and  as  such  was  cherished  in  everlasting  memory  by  those  who  profited 
by  it,  who  owed  to  it  their  eternal  hopes. 

n.  This  bacrakent  is  a  proclamation  to  the  prebemt.  "  Te  set  forth,  or  proclaim, 
the  Lord's  death,"  says  the  apostle.  And  from  his  expression,  "  as  often,"  it  may 
be  inferred  that  periodically  and  frequently  the  primitive  Christians  kept  the  feast, 
remembering  and  declaring  that  "  Christ  our  Passover  is  slain  for  us."  There  is 
something  very  affecting  and  at  the  same  time  very  inspiring  in  this  representation. 
From  generation  to  generation  and  fr>  >m  age  to  age  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  body 
and  blood  publishes  salvation  to  mankind,  telling  of  him  who  tasted  death  for  every 
man,  and  in  his  cross  reconciled  the  world  unto  God.  It  is  an  aspect  of  the  Holy 
Communion  which  should  not  be  left  out  of  sight,  upon  which  great  stress  should 
be  laid;  for  some,  whom  words  may  fail  to  reach,  may  have  their  hearts  opened 
to  the  grace  and  love  of  Christ  by  witnessing  the  sileut  yet  eloquent  declaration 
concerning  the  Saviour  which  is  presented  when  the  members  of  Christ's  Church 
partake  of  the  symbols  of  their  redemiition. 

til.  This  sacrament  is  a  prbdiction  of  the  future.  "  Till  he  come  I "  Our 
Lord,  in  instituting  the  ordinance,  had  turned  the  gaze  of  his  disciples  towards  the 
future,  speaking  of  drinking  wine  new  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  here  the  eye 
of  faith  is  pointeii  on  to  the  glory  which  shall  be  reveale.l  when  he  whe  oaoM  to  di« 
shall  OOBM  to  judge,  shall  come  to  reign  I 

"And  thus  that  dark  betrayal  night, 
With  the  last  advent  we  unite 
By  one  bright  chain  of  loviug  rite, 

UntUhecome!"  t. 


37t  THE  FIBMT  fiPlSTLB  TO  THE  CORlNTHUNa    [oh.  xi.  1—34. 

Vera.  1 — 16. — Decency  in  puUic  worthip.    When  we  appear  before  Ck)d  we  ihould 

observe  the  greatest  propriety.  Externals  should  not  be  lost  sight  of,  for  they  ara 
significant.  Often  they  are  indicative  of  inward  condition.  The  apostle  had  occ  ision 
to  blame  the  women  of  Corinth  for  laying  aside  the  veil— the  m.irk  of  modesty  and 
subjection — in  public  assemblies.  Ou  the  ground  of  thi;  abolition  of  distinction  of  sex 
In  Christ,  they  claimed  equality  in  every  respect  with  men,  und  the  right  to  appear  and 
act  as  men  dil.  Whilst  women,  they  would  be  as  men.  Equality  as  believers  they 
had  a  right  to  claim,  but  they  forgot  their  "  subjection  in  point  of  order,  modesty,  aud 
leemlinesi."  When  women  leave  Ihcir  proper  sphere,  it  is  never  to  rise,  but  to  fall. 
Men-women  are  failures.     In  the  aposile's  argument  valuable  truths  are  enunciated. 

I.  He  ])bfinb8  man's  position.  1.  Man  is  the  head  of  the  woman,  (Ver.  3.)  Woman 
is  subordinate  to  man,  is  largely  dependent  upon  him.  He  is  her  natural  guide, 
defender,  supporter.  Authority  lies  with  him,  not  with  her.  "  I  suffer  not  a  woman 
to  .  .  .  usurp  authority  over  the  man  ...  for  Adam  was  first  formed,  then  Eve  " 
(1  Tim,  il.  12,  13).  Woman  is  the  "  weaker  vessel "  (1  Pet.  iii.  7).  She  is  to  be  "  in  sub- 
jection "  (ch.  xiv.  34).  This  is  after  the  Divine  order,  and  any  subversal  of  it  is  sure 
to  lead  to  injurious  results.  2,  ITie  head  of' man  is  Christ.  (Ver.  3.)  Man  is  not  a 
monarch ;  he  is  subordinate  to  the  God-.Man  as  his  Head.  Man  can  only  act  aright  as 
head  of  the  woman  when  he  recognizes  Christ  as  his  Head.  The  apostle  does  not 
mean  to  intimate  that  Christ  is  not  the  Head  of  the  woman  as  of  the  man.  He  is 
pointing  out  the  order  in  the  Divine  economy,  and  "  by  the  term  'head  'he  expressea 
the  next  immediate  relation  sustained."  Man  is  subordinate  to  Christ;  woman  is 
subordinate,  though  not  in  the  same  sense,  to  man  as  well  as  to  Christ.  To  further 
illustrate  the  Divine  order,  the  apostle  states  that:  3.  The  head  of  Christ  is  God. 
That  is,  of  Christ  the  God-Man.  There  is  nuthing  here  which  conflicts  with  the 
doctrine  of  the  divinity  of  Christ  or  of  the  equality  of  the  Son  with  the  Father. 
Bather  is  there  here  additional  evidence  of  the  former,  since  the  distinction  between 
the  position  of  man  and  woman  obtains  where  there  is  identity  of  nature.  Christ 
is  here  spoken  of  as  he  assumed  "  the  form  of  a  servant."  Christ  in  his  mediatorial 
capacity  is  lower  tlian  the  Father  (John  xiv.  28).  4.  Man  is  the  Image  and  Glory  <^ 
God.  (Ver.  7.)  Man  was  made  in  the  liltenesa  of  Goii  (Gen.  i.  26).  How  great  is  the 
dignity  of  human  nature  I  But  how  that  dignity  is  lost  when  Ood  is  blotted  out  of  a 
man  I  How  eagerly  should  fallen  creatures  seek  recovery,  that  the  blurred  image  may  be 
restored  to  its  original  beauty,  and  the  impaired  glory  made  once  more  lustrous !  Through 
the  Son  of  man,  the  ideal  Man — declared  to  be  ".the  brightness  of  his  glory  and  the 
express  image  of  his  person  " — this  may  be  effected.  The  apostle  does  not  intend  to 
convey  that  woman  is  not  in  many  respects  the  image  and  glory  of  God,  but  that  man 
is  this  "first  and  directly,  woman  subsequently  aaA  indirectly."  Man  represents  the 
authority  of  God ;  he  is  tlie  ruler,  the  head. 

II.  He  defines  woman's  position.  1.  She  is  subject  to  man  at  her  head.  She 
■prang  from  him  (ver.  8).  She  was  created  for  him  (ver.  9).  Still,  there  is  mutual 
dependence  :  "  Neither  is  th»  man  without  the  woman,  neither  the  woman  without  the 
man  "  (ver.  11).  "  In  the  Lord  " — this  is  of  Divine  appointment.  And  man  and  woman 
constitute  complete  humanity— one  supplying  what  the  other  lacks ;  and  thus  forming 
in  Christ  "  the  Bride,"  the  Church  redeemed  by  his  blood.  And  further,  although  at 
first  woman  sprang  from  man,  now  the  man  is  of  the  woman  (ver.  12;.  But  "all  things 
are  of  God  " — man  and  woman.  Mim  has  a  real  but  qualified  supremacy  ;  so  qualified 
as  to  save  woman  from  any  humiliation,  and  to  allow  her  a  position  of  peculiar  dignity 
and  beauty.  2.  She  it  the  glory  of  the  man.  (Ver.  7.)  Woman  is  not  directly  the  glory 
of  Gkxl ;  she  does  not  directly  represent  God  as  the  head  of  creation — she  rather  it 
man's  representative,  as  man  is  God's.  She  is  the  glory  of  man  directly,  of  God 
indirectly.     Man  is  the  sun,  woman  the  moon  (Gen.  xxxvii.  9). 

HI.   Hl8   CONCI.OSIONS  AR  TO   PEOPBIETT   OF  DRESS  IN  FUBUO  WORSHIP.      1.    That  man 

should  not  have  his  head  covered.  The  covering  would  indicate  subjection,  whieh,  in 
relation  to  those  joining  with  man  in  public  worship,  was  not  man's  true  condition. 
There  he  appeared  as  "  the  image  and  glory  of  God,"  representing  the  Divine  headship, 
and  to  assume  the  badge  of  subjection  would  be  to  "  diahonow  his  head."  This  may 
mean  to  disluMtour  his  own  head  by  placing  upon  it  lomeihing  unsuitablei  or  to 
dtfboow  Chri«t,  the  Head  of  man,  who  has  placed  man  in  his  pontiwi  of  honour.    We 


OH.  XI.  1—84.]    THE  FIRST  BPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTniANS.  STS 

ihould  not  usnrp  a  higher  position  thsn  God  has  appointed  for  ni;  we  should  not  tal!( 
a  lower.  Our  best  place  is  where  God  places  us.  'A.  That  woman  should  have  her  hen  ' 
covered.  The  veil  was  a  recognition  of  subordination  and  an  indication  of  modestv 
To  discard  it  was  to  claitn  man's  poiition  and  thus  to  dishonour  man,  her  head — or  to 
dishonour  her  own  head  by  depriving  it  of  a  mark  of  propriety  and  even  of  chastity. 
For  by  discarding  the  head-covering  a  woman  put  herself  in  the  class  of  the  disreputable. 
It  was  but  "a  carrying  out  of  the  principle  involved  for  a  woman  to  have  her  head  shaveil 
(vers.  5,  6),  which  was  sometimes  done  in  the  case  of  those  who  had  forleited  their 
honour,  and  became  thus  a  brand  of  infamy.  Thus  a  woman  snatching  at  the  position 
of  man  would  descend  far  below  her  own.  An  apparent  rise  is  sometimes  a  very 
real  fall.  The  apostle  enforces  his  argument  by  :  (1)  An  appeal  to  nature  (vers.  14, 
15).  Paul  evidently  thinks  that  there  is  accord  between  the  kingdom  of  nature  and 
of  grace.  Both  are  from  one  hand  and  one  mind,  and  conflicts  between  the  two  ma\ 
be  very  apparent,  but  can  never  be  reaL  Nature  gives  the  man  short  hair  and  the 
woman  long;  here  is  a  natural  distinction  which  should  be  observed,  and  which  indi- 
cates that  woman  specially  ne;  ils  the  head-covering.  Or  by  nature  the  apostle  may 
mean  what  obtains  amonfr  men  who  are  not  instructed  by  revelation.  Among  manj 
of  the  heathen  the  wearing  of  the  hair  long  by  men  was  ridiculed,  but  long  hair  for 
women  was  generally  recognized  as  appropriate.  (2)  The  presence  of  angels  in  Christian 
assemblies  (ver.  16).  Earth  looks  on,  but  heaven  also.  Woman  should  have  the  symbol 
of  power,  of  subjection  to  man,  upon  her  head,  because  any  usurpation  of  improier 
position  or  flaunting  boldness  would  be  offensive  to  these  heavenly  visitors.  (3)  Apos- 
tolic authority  (ver.  10).  Where  reasoning  fails,  authority  must  utter  her  voice.  Paul 
always  preferred  to  convince  rather  than  to  compel.  But  he  possessed  the  right  to 
determine  when  the  contentious  persevered  in  contention.  The  regulation  was  accord- 
ing to  tlie  mind  of  an  inspired  apostle,  and  was  observed  by  Churches  founded  by  him- 
self or  other  like-minded  leaders.  In  estimating  the  teaching  of  the  passage,  we  must 
discriminate  between  the  necessary  and  the  accidental,.  The  principle  is  that  women 
should  be  so  attired  as  to  indicate,  or  at  all  events  so  as  not  to  conflict  with,  their  right- 
ful position.  Amongst  those  to  whom  the  apostle  wrote,  the  veil  was  the  symbol  of 
modesty  and  subordination.  Becfiuse  women  in  Western  Churches  are  not  bo  attired, 
it  does  not  follow  that  they  are  acting  antagonistically  to  the  apostle's  precept,  though 
it  will  be  admitted  by  most  that  the  preposterous  head-gear  of  many  female  worshippers, 
in  our  own  land  calls  loudly  for  reform,  and  is  frequently  an  outrage  upon  all  propriety 
and  a  sarcasm  uj'on  womanly  modesty.  I  do  not  understand  that  the  apostle  has 
here  specially  in  view  the  praying  and  preaching  of  women  m  public  assemblies — this 
he  deals  with  further  on  in  the  Epistle  (ch.  xiv.  34,  etc.) ;  but  he  is  now  insisting  upon 
what  is  approjrriate  in  the  attire  of  woman  (and  incidentally  of  man)  on  public  occasions. 
His  primary  reference  is  to  public  worship,  and  surely  when  we  come  to  "  appear  before 
God,"  we  ought  to  be  most  specially  anxious  that  everything  about  us  shall  be  decent 
and  in  order.  Whilst  nothing  that  is  outward  can  compensate  for  absence  of  the  inward, 
that  which  is  external  ia  often  an  index  of  the  internal,  and  has  its  influenoe  upoa  the 
internaL — H. 

Vers.  17 — 7Z.—^-8ome  hindrance$  to  the  right  observance  of  the  Lor^$  Btipper.  Holy 
institutions  may  become  unholy  by  perversion.  That  which  is  bestowed  upon  us  as 
a  peculiar  blessing  may  prove  a  very  real  curse  by  misuse.  The  ordinance  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  for  our  spiritual  help  and  joy,  but  we  may  "  come  together  not  for 
the  better,  but  for  the  worse."  This  was  so  with  many  of  the  Corinthians.  They 
had  conjoined  to  the  Lord's  Supper  the  love-feast.  To  this  feast  each  brought  his 
prorinon,  the  rich  bringing  more,  so  as  to  supply  the  deficiencies  of  the  poor.  From 
thia  supply  the  bread  and  wine  required  for  the  Lord's  3u{^r  were  taken.  These 
feasts  were  the  occasions  at  which  the  evils  reprobated  by  the  apostle  occurred,  l^e 
poor  were  despised  and  neglected,  the  congregation  became  divided  into  cliques,  some 
communicants  were  hungry,  and  others  had  drunk  to  excess.  The  apostle  insists  that, 
under  such  circumstances,  it  was  impossible  to  observe  aright  the  sacred  feast  «f  the 
Lord's  Supper.     Note  some  hindrances  to  right  observance  thus  suggested. 

I.  FaiDK.  At  the  Lord's  table  all  are  equal.  Ccmventional  distinctions  disappear. 
Thar*  ia  mm  Lat4,  ami  "all  ye  are  brethren."    Anogaace  and  coiMait,  alwajra  mU  W 


380  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.     [CH.  xi.  1—34. 

place  and  intolerable,  are  most  strikingly  so  where  all  should  be  humbled  and  sub- 
dued. It  is  not  for  us  to  think  there  how  excellent  we  are,  but  how  vile,  and  to 
admire  the  amazing  grace  which  rescued  us  from  the  dominion  of  sin.  Instead  of 
despising  others  there,  we  should  rather  despise  ourselves  for  our  sins  which  cruci- 
fied Christ,  and  we  should  feel,  like  Paul,  that  we  are  "  the  chief  of  sinners.  "  It  is 
utterly  impossible  for  a  proud  heart  to  rightly  show  forth  the  death  of  him  who 
was  meek  and  lowly.     It  is  preposterous  and  absurd  to  attempt  it. 

II.  Selfishness.  How  can  the  selfish  have  communion  with  the  infinitely  unself- 
ish One  1  If  we  have  a  self-seeking,  grasping,  greedy  spirit,  what  part  can  we  have 
with  him  who  "gam  himself  for  iLs"f  How  alien  to  the  spirit  of  Christ  is  the  spirit 
of  selfishness  I     If  we  sit  with  it  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  we  sit  there  as  Judas  did. 

III.  EsTBANGEMBNT.  Christ  calls  us  ever  to  union,  and  most  specially  and  pathet- 
ically at  his  table,  where  we  eat  of  the  one  bread  (ch.  x.  17) .  To  cherish  a  spirit 
of  disunion  is  to  run  directly  counter  to  one  of  his  commands  at  the  moment  when 
we  profess  to  observe  another.  And  the  spectacle  of  estrangement  at  the  Lord's 
Supper  must  be  one  of  utmost  offensiveness  in  the  Divine  sight,  as  it  is  one  of 
greatest  scandal  in  the  eyes  of  men.  If  we  seek  to  be  one  with  Christ,  we  must  also 
seek  to  be  one  with  the  brethren.  He  is  the  Head  ;  we  are  the  members  of  his  body. 
How  utterly  incongruous  to  be  disunited  at  that  feast  which  specially  sets  forth  our 
union  with  Christ  and  with  one  another  1 

IV.  Hatkbd.  This  in  some  form  generally  accompanies  division.  But  where  is 
the  place  for  hatred  at  the  feast  of  dying  love?  God  is  love,  Christ  is  love,  and 
we  are — hatred.  How  can  two  walk  together  unless  they  are  agreed  ?  What  reason 
our  Saviour  had  to  hate  us  !  "  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men, "  crucified  by 
men  ;  and  yet  he  loved  men,  and  at  his  table  his  love  is  specially  set  forth.  How 
can  we  there  cherish  our  animosities,  for  which  we  have  such  little  cause  !  "  We 
know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  into  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren.  He 
that  Voveth  not  hishrother  abideth  in  death"  (1  John  iii.  14) .  The  Lord's  Supper  is  a 
song  of  love ;  hatred  at  it  is  a  terrible  discord. 

V.  Gluttony.  Some  of  the  Corinthians  loved  their  meat  more  than  they  loved 
their  brethren.  They  ate  greedily,  not  even  tarrying  for  others  to  arrive.  A  singu- 
lar carnality  for  so  spiritual  a  season.  Men  with  the  manners  and  unrestrained 
appetites  of  beasts  are  scarcely  fit  for  the  table  of  Christ.  Sensuality  and  spirituality 
are  at  opposite  poles.  Those  who  abandon  themselves  to  gratify  the  lower  nature 
sacrifice  the  higher.     "  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone.  " 

VI.  Deunkennbss.  It  seems  scarcely  credible  that  any  should  have  drunk  to  the 
excess  of  intoxication  at  the  love-feast  so  intimately  associated  with  the  Eucharist ; 
but  it  is  to  be  feared  that  this  was  so.  And  there  are  degrees  of  intoxication, 
so  that  the  danger  of  imitating  the  Corinthians  in  this  matter  may  not  be  so  remote 
from  some  as  they  imagine.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  semi-intoxication.  And  if  this 
sin  be  not  committed  immediately  before  the  Lord's  table  is  approached,  undue  in- 
dulgence at  all  is  surely  a  fatal  hindrance  to  right  observance.  No  drunkard  shall 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  no  drunkard,  whilst  he  cleaves  to  his  degrad- 
ing habit,  is  entitled  to  a  place  at  the  Lord's  table. 

VII.  Ibebvbrence.  There  must  have  been  vast  irreverence  in  the  Corinthians 
rebuked  by  Paul,  or  such  abuses  could  never  have  obtained  amongst  them.  There 
may  be  as  much  irreverence  in  us,  though  we  do  not  commit  the  same  sins.  Any- 
way, to  approach  the  Lord's  table  irreverently  is  to  instantly  demonstrate  our  unfit- 
ness. There  we  should  be  filled  with  godly  fear,  and  our  hearts  should  be  subdued 
to  greatest  devoutness  and  awe  as  we  marvel  over  the  justice  of  Jehovah,  the  amaz- 
ing sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  the  tender  ministry  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  whereby  we 
who  were  once  afar  off  are  brought  nigh.  — H. 

Vers.  23 — 26. — Th^e  sacred  feast.  Paul's  description  is  singularly  beautiful.  His 
information  apparently  came  directly  from  Christ  (Gal.  i.  12).  Additional  impor- 
tance attaches  to  the  observance  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  since  an  express  revelation 
was  made  to  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  The  supper  was  for  the  Gentile 
world  as  well  as  the  Jewish.  Its  institution  was  associated  ^ith  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel  throughout  the  world. 


OH.  1X1— 34.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTHlANS.  881 

I  Its  iNBTiTirriMi.  By  the  Lord  Jesus  (ver.  23).  1.  Personally.  Evidently 
important  in  his  eyes.  Specially  precious  to  us  because  instituted  personally  by  our 
Master.  Appro|irlate;  for  he  in  his  great  redemptive  work  is  set  forth.  Christ  is  "all 
ill  all"  at  his  table.  As  Christ  was  present  at  the  first  celebration,  he  should  be  looked 
for  at  every  celebration.  2.  Under  most  affecting  circumi'tances.  "  The  same  night  in 
which  he  was  betrayed;"  whilst  betrayal  was  proceeding — and  this  known  to  him.  (Ij 
He  thought  of  others  rather  than  of  himself.  Might  have  been  expected  to  think 
of  his  sufferings;  he  thought  of  our  needs.  He  had  sorrow,  but  no  selfish  sorrow. 
The  unselfishness  df  Christ  is  here  shown  in  unrivalled  beauty.  (2)  His  love  was  not 
quenched  by  treachery.  The  betrayal  by  Judas  did  not  dry  up  his  fount  of  affection. 
When  treachery  was  at  its  height,  love  was  at  its  height  also.  When  men  are  most 
anxious  to  injure  us,  we  should  be  most  anxious  to  do  them  goo<1.  ^3)  His  sacrifice 
was  not  arrested  by  hate.  The  multitude  were  hotly  against  him  wnen  he  prepared 
to  give  himself  for  them.  Outside  the  upper  room  and  inside  in  tht;  breast  of  Judas 
there  was  bitter  hate,  but  Christ  was  not  checked  in  his  purpose  for  an  instant.  He 
resolved  to  go  on  and  to  fulfil  all  that  had  been  foretold  respecting  him,  and  so  he 
quietly  and  calmly  instituted  the  supper  which  should  in  every  after  age  testify  to 
incomparable  self-sacrifice  under  all — adverse  conditions.  If  we  would  be  like  Christ, 
hostility  must  not  hinder  sacrifice. 

II.  Its  modb.  1.  Thankngivlng,  Thanksgiving  tat  the  bread  and  wine.  We 
should  not  "say  grace"  but  really  "give  thanks."  Perhaps  to  teach  us  that  our 
thanksgivings  should  ascend  for  what  the  bread  and  wine  typify.  2.  Bread,  (1) 
Symbolic  of  Clirist's  body.  Not  actually  his  body,  seeing  that  that  was  intact  and 
before  the  eyes  of  the  disciples.  If  Rome's  teaching  were  true,  the  disciples  would 
have  required  a  very  lengthy  explanation  to  enable  them  to  grasp  the  meaning. 
We  have  no  such  explanation  recorded;  we  might  have  expected  it  in  this  place, 
if  anywhere.  (2)  Broken.  Many  see  in  this  a  symbol  of  the  violent  death  of  Christ. 
But  the  better  rendering  of  ver.  24  is,  "  This  is  my  body  which  is  for  you."  Breaking 
the  bread  was,  I  rather  think,  the  mere  adoption  of  a  custom  suited  to  the  kind 
of  bread  used  at  that  time  in  Palestine.  We  read,  "  A  bone  of  him  shall  not  be  broken." 
(3)  Eaten.  Indicating  that  we  are  to  feed  upon  Christ  spiritually,  to  appropriate, 
to  assimilate,  him.  3.  Wine.  Symbolic  of  Christ's  blood  shed  for  the  remission  of 
sins.  Partaken  of  to  indicate  the  application  of  the  blood  of  Christ  to  our  hearts  and 
consciences.     The  blood  must  not  only  be  shed,  it  must  be  applied. 

III.  In  siQNiFioANOE.  1.  Remetnhranet  of  Christ,  Of  his  dying  love  specially; 
and  of  his  life,  lordship,  etc.  2.  Communion  with  Christ  und  vnth  each  other. 
(See  oh.  z.  16,  17.)  3.  A  feast.  We  feed  upon  Christ  spiritually.  As  bread  and 
wine  support  the  body,  so  he  supports  the  souL  There  is  a  physical  symbol  and 
a  spiritual  reality.  Joy  should  be  one  element  in  the  observance;  it  ii  a  feast,  not 
a  funeral.  4.  A  covenant.  We  enter  into  covenant  with  Qod  for  pardon,  peace, 
service,  and  the  covenant  is  ratified  by  the  blood  of  Christ  typified  by  wine:  "This 
cup  k  the  new  covenant  in  my  blood."  The  Hebrews  entered  into  covenant  with  God 
when  tke  blood  of  the  heifer  was  sprinkled  upon  them ;  they  bound  themselves  to 
obedience,  and  God  bound  himself  to  bestow  the  promised  blessings ;  so  when  we 
recwve  the  cup,  we  commemorate  the  covenant  which  we  have  entered  into  with  God 
through  the  shed  blood  of  Christ  and  the  covenant  which  he  has  entered  into  with  us. 
5.  Proclamation,  of  Chrisfs  death.  Christ's  death  is  the  great  central  fact  shadowed 
forth.  The  cross  is  exalted.  Not  a  new  sacrifice  offered,  but  the  old  yet  ever-new 
sacrifice  of  Calvary  commemorated  and  shown  forth.  6.  A  pledge  of  the  Lord's  second 
coming.  "  Till  he  come."  He  wiU  come,  and  it  is  not  for  us  to  say,  "  My  Lord 
delayeth  his  coming."  He  will  come  not  too  sotm  and  not  too  late.  "  Till  he  come  " 
wa  must  be  watching. 

lY.  Its  inodmbenct.  "This  do  in  remembrance  of  me."  A  dying  command. 
Some  believers  have  many  excuses  fur  not  coming  to  the  Lord's  table ;  they  do  not 
find  one  here ;  "  This  do."  Last  requests  of  loved  ones  are  held  precious :  should  not 
the  request  of  this  loved  One  be  alio  ?  In  this  command  our  welfare  is  consulted  as  in 
all  Divine  commands  laid  upon  us.  We  lose  much  if  we  refrain  from  doing  this  in 
remembnuice  of  our  Master — much  spiritual  joy,  enlightenment,  strengthening,  and 
not  a  little  usefuWess.     Tke  Ltwrd's  table  is  the  Elim  of  Christians ;  we  act  foolishly 


asa  THS  riBST  epistle  to  the  CORINTHIANa    [0&Z1.1— 34 

If  we  fail  to  embrace  opportunitias  of  resting  beneath  its  palm  trees  and  drinking  finim 
its  many  wells  of  living  water.— 'H. 

Ver.  24. — Bemembering  Ohrist.  The  Lord's  Supper  Is  very  spedaUy  a  feast  of  remeny- 
branee.  Is  there  in  it  a  suggestion  that  we  are  very  prone  to  forget  Ohrist?  This 
is,  alasl  our  tendency,  and  here  we  are  in  strange  contrast  to  our  Lor^.  He  needs 
nothing  to  keep  us  in  his  remembrance ;  he  ever  thinks  of  his  people.  In  the  institution 
of  the  Lord's  Supper  he  thinks  of  our  forgetfulness,  of  its  perils,  of  its  certain  sorrows. 
He  remembers  that  we  are  prone  not  to  remember  him.  What  should  we  remembel 
concerning  Christ  ? 

I.  His  holt  bfotlbbs  Lint.  What  •  life  that  was  I  The  greatest  and  best  ol 
human  leaders  have  been  marked  by  defects,  but  our  Leader  was  "  without  blemish." 
In  the  lives  of  heroes  there  is  always  something  which  we  should  be  glad  to  forget; 
but  there  is  nothing  in  the  life  of  Christ.  Jealousy,  hatred,  malice,  and  all  uncharitable- 
ness  could  find  in  him  "  no  fault."  Many  great  men  have  grown  small,  many  holy 
men  questionable  in  character,  many  honoured  men  dishonourable,  under  the  ruthless 
criticism  of  modem  times ;  but  not  Jesus  of  NazaretL  The  fiercest  light  has  been 
focussed  upon  his  earthly  course ;  the  brains  of  sceptic  and  of  scoffer  have  l>een  racked 
in  prolonged  endeavour  to  discover  the  flaw;  but  it  has  not  been  discovered  yet  I  The 
voices  of  all  the  centuries  cry,  "  Without  fault  I  "  "  Holy  and  undefiled  1 "  "  Separate 
from  sinners  1 "     Well  may  we  remember  that  life. 

II.  His  TEAOHma.  When  compared  with  Christ,  all  the  other  teachers  of  the  world 
seem  to  have  nothing  to  teach  upon  matters  of  high  moment.  At  best  they  guess, 
and  often  they  guess  folly.  He  teaches  with  the  authority  of  knowledge ;  all  other 
teachers  seem  hidden  in  the  valley,  imagining  what  the  landscape  may  be.  He  alone 
has  climbed  the  hill  and  beholds  what  he  speaks  about.  We  need  to  remember,  more 
than  we  are  accustomed  to  do,  the  utterances  of  the  world's  great  Teacher.  Seekers 
after  knowledge  should  be  careful  lest  after  all  they  miss  the  richest  mine  of  truth. 
Learned  scofBngs  and  atheistical  ribaldries  are  naught  but  devil-blinds  to  hide  from 
our  view  the  beautiful  form  of  truth  as  it  is  in  Christ.  In  him  "are  hid  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  "  (Ool.  iL  3).  When  God  broke  the  dread  silence 
upon  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  it  was  to  exclaim,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son :  hear 
him."  The  Holy  Ghost  was  promised  as  One  who  would  "  bring  to  remembrance " 
what  Christ  had  declared.  Through  the  Lord's  Supper,  as  a  means,  the  Divine  Spirit 
works  now  for  this  end. 

III.  His  ukacleb.  These  speak  eloquently  of  his  power.  Nature  bows  before  her 
God.  How  weak  the  mightiest  of  the  earth  are  compared  with  this  mi<{hty  One ! 
When  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  about  to  be  overwhelmed  and  shattered  and  generally 
annihilated  by  blatant  wiseacre  warriors,  with  their  sceptical  pea-shooters  and  atheistical 
popguns,  I  laugh  as  I  remember  that  it  is  the  kingdom  of  Christ  which  is  being 
assailed !  We  do  well  to  bear  in  mind  what  Christ  did  when  he  was  upon  earth,  and 
then  to  say  quietly  to  ourselves,  "  The  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  What 
he  did,  he  can  do ;  what  he  was,  he  is.  His  miracles  illustrated  his  beneficence.  They 
meant  the  supply  of  human  need,  the  binding  up  of  wounds,  the  restoration  of  the 
outcast,  the  arrest  of  sorrow,  the  wiping  away  of  tears,  the  cheer  of  lonely  hearts.  We 
must  remember  his  miracles ;  they  show  so  truly  what  the  Christ  tvat.  With  all  hii> 
omnipotence,  how  gentle  and  tender  I 

lY,  His  death.  This  was  the  graad  culmination  of  his  life ;  it  gave  to  him  the 
great  title  of  Saviour ;  to  it  the  Lord's  Supper  specially  points.  We  must  remember 
him  as  the  One  who  laid  duwn  his  life  for  us,  who  bore  our  griefs  and  carried  om 
sorrows,  who  was  wounded  for  our  trangressions  and  bruised  for  our  iniquities,  who 
died  the  just  for  the  unjust  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God.  The  Lord's  Supper  leads 
us  to  Calvary — through  the  motley  crowd,  past  the  weeping  Marys,  beyond  the  peni  tent 
thief,  to  the  central  figure  is  the  Judcean  tragedy,  and  there  we  see  salvation  I  "  Mercy 
and  truth  are  met  together;  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other"  (Ps. 
Ixxxv.  10).  Eeirembrance  of  Christ's  death  will  mean  remembrance  of  our  sinfulness. 
And  when  we  remember  that  "  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,"  we  may 
ask  ourselves  the  suggustire  questioii,  "  What  would  be  our  present  conditiim  and 
prospect  if  he  had  not  done  so? 


.11.  XI.  i— a4.J    Till!:  i'iKbX  KPISTLE  to  the  COBINTmAii&  383 

T.  Hn  REsntuBonoii  ahs  kaoKsnos.  The  Lord's  Supper  wai  for  the  rememknaM 
of  Christ  both  after  he  had  died  aad  alter  he  had  risen  from  the  dead.  We  must  not 
forget  the  dying  Christ;  but  neither  must  we  furget  the  triumphing  Christ.  The 
resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  counterpart  of  the  cross ;  one  is  not  without  the  other. 
The  Lord  died,  but  the  Lord  la  risen  indeed.  He  came  to  this  world  in  abasement ; 
he  lived  so,  he  died  so,  but  he  did  not  depart  sa  He  rose  from  the  dead,  and  ever 
liveth.  We  remember  the  dying  Christ,  but  we  remember  also  the  living  Christ, 
exalted  at  Gcd's  right  hand,  our  Advocate,  preparing  our  heavenly  home,  looking  down 
upon  us,  present  with  us  by  his  Spirit  We  remember  the  reigning  Christ,  the  One 
who  has  completed  his  glorious  redemptiv*  work,  who  has  triumphed  openly,  and 
we  remember  him  thus  "  till  he  come." 

YI.  His  kabvelloub  lovb.  Shown  in  every  Incident  and  every  instant  of  his 
eoarse.  In  his  coming ;  in  his  words,  deeds,  spirit ;  and  pre-eminently  in  his  sufferings 
and  death.    God  is  love ;  Christ  is  Qod ;  Clirist  is  love. 

VII.  HiB  FuiBOXALiTT.  Not  Only  what  he  said  and  what  be  did,  hut  what  h«  uxu. 
All  bis  acts  and  words  of  beneficence  and  love  were  only  exprestioni  0/  himself. 
They  were  but  manifestations  of  what  dwells  in  perpetual  fulness  in  his  heart. 
Remember  Mm,  "  This  do  in  remembrance  of  me."  This  is  •  dying  request.  An  w* 
eiUerving  it  t    Th»  dying  request  of  him  who  "  gave  hinrn^'  fat  us. — H. 

Vers.  2?-  -2^—Perili  at  the  Lord^i  tahU.  A  frequent  question,  "  Who  shouM  enn* 
to  the  Lord'f  table  ?  "  Many  have  come  who  ought  not  to  nave  come  as  they  wer* ;  not 
a  few  have  been  deterred  from  coming  who  were  quite  suitabla  Many  have  not 
pondered  sufficiently  the  duty  of  observing  the  Lord's  Supper;  many  have  baen 
alarmed  by  certain  expressions  contained  in  this  passage. 

L  Glance  at  thb  scene.  It  lies  in  gay,  voluptuous,  immoral  Corinth.  A  elty 
maguiAcent  externally ;  abased  and  abandoned  internally.  A  meeting  of  Christians  in 
waie  private  house,  light  amid  darkness,  truth  surrounded  by  error,  holiness  in  the 
centre  of  corruption.  The  gathering  is  for  the  love-feast  and  the  Supper  of  the  Lord. 
A  love-feast,  alas  I  in  which  love  is  largely  absent ;  a  Supper  of  the  Lord  in  which  the 
Lord  is  strangely  dishonoured.  The  light  is  dimmed,  the  truth  is  alloyed  with  error, 
the  holiness  is  defiled  by  guilt.  There  are  divisions  (ch.  i.  11, 12) ;  there  are  pride, 
selfishness,  irreverence  (vers.  21,  22) ;  there  is  even  drunkenness  (ver.  21) ;  yea,  even 
further,  the  hideous  head  of  immorality  is  raised  in  the  midst  of  this  little  Christian 
society  (ch.  v.  1).  This  Epistle  arrives  from  the  founder  of  the  Church — a  letter  smiting 
Corinthian  transgression  and  transgressors  hip  and  thigh.     Picture  the  scene  I 

II.  Glance  at  oebtain  wobds  and  their  heaninos.  1.  Damnation.  This  word  has 
so  terrified  some  that  they  have  never  been  able  to  summon  sufBcient  courage  to  obey 
th«  dying  command  of  their  Lori.  They  have  supposed  that  an  unworthy  participation 
in  the  sacred  feast  would  seal  their  doom  ana  consign  them  to  perdition  without 
remedy.  But  the  word  does  not  justify  such  a  view.  Instead  of  "damnation,"  we 
should  read,  as  in  the  Revised  Version,  "  Judgment."  And  ver.  32  explains  wlwt 
"judgment"  means:  "When  we  are  judged,  we  are  chastened  of  the  Lord,  that  w* 
shoiM  not  be  condemned  vnth  the  world."  Judgment  here  means  "  chastisement,"  and 
note  particularly  that  this  chastisement  is  sent  to  prevent  us  from  being  oondemned  with 
unbelievers.  What  follows  upon  unworthy  participation  at  the  Lord's  table,  if  w« 
are  believers,  is  not  something  to  destroy  ui,  but  something  to  prevent  us  from  being 
destroyed.  If  we  will  not  benefit  by  the  chastisement,  if  under  it  we  harden  our  hearts 
like  Israel  of  old,  then  we  shall  be  cast  away.  The  sin  of  unworthy  participation 
is  great,  and  the  correction  will  be  severe,  but  neither  is  what  some  sensitive  natures 
have  dreaded.  2.  Unworthily.  Note  that  the  apostle  speaks  of  the  unworthiness  of 
the  act,  not  the  unworthiness  of  the  person.  To  say,  "  I  am  unworthy,"  is  doubtless 
to  speak  the  truth,  but  it  is  irrelevant.  Unworthy  persons  may  participate  worthily. 
Nay,  further,  only  those  who  feel  that  they  are  unworthy  are  in  a  right  state  to  lit 
at  the  table.  The  self-righteous  are  never  "  fit."  The  supper  is  for  penitent  sinners  { 
for  such  as  Paul,  "  the  chief  of  sinners."  But  the  act  may  be  unworthy,  and  that  from 
many  causes.  Anything  that  hinders  us  from  "  discerning  the  Lord's  body  "  (ver.  29) 
will  cause  us  to  eat  and  drink  unworthily.  We  have  to  recognize  the  bread  and 
wine  as  emblems  of  that  body,  as  set  apart  to  show  this  forUi,  and  therefore  te 


384  THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,     [ok.  xl  1—34 

be  dealt  with  Bolemnly,  thoughtfully,  reverently.  We  must  enter  into  the  meaning  of 
the  feast,  and  through  the  outward  reach  the  inward  and  spiritual.  At  the  supper 
we  do  not  halt  at  the  emblems ;  we  have  fellowship  with  Christ,  we  remember  him,  we 
renew  our  vows,  we  profess  to  be  his  followers,  we  shuw  forth  his  death  "  till  he  come.' 
Now,  many  things  may  hinder  us  from  doing  this,  and  thus  cause  us  to  eat  and  drink 
unwortmiy  ;  buch  as :  (1)  Thoughtlessness,  leading  to  irreverence.  (2)  Ignorance  of 
the  meaning  of  the  ordinance.  This  may  be  very  culpable  ignorance.  (3)  Unconverted 
condition.  Quite  unfit  for  supper  because  have  not  received  what  it  sets  forth.  (4) 
Worldly  spirit.  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  We  may  be  trying,  and  thus  be 
charging  ChrUtioith  falsehood,  even  as  we  approach  his  table.  (5)  Unbrotherly  feeling. 
That  which  separates  us  from  believers  is  very  likely  to  |separate  us  from  Christ.  (6) 
Immorality.  If  we  hug  sin,  we  cannot  embrace  the  Saviour.  Such  unworthy 
participation  involves :  (1)  Guilt.  We  become  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  tlie  Lord, 
seeing  that  our  sin  is  concentrated  upon  that  observance  which  specially  sets  these 
forth.  (2)  Punishment.  "For  this  cause  many  are  weak  and  sickly  among  you, 
and  many  sleep "  (ver.  30).  Present  chastisement,  and,,  if  this  prove  inefiBcacious, 
future  and  final  punishment. 

IIL  A  REMEDY.  This  is  not  to  see  that  "  we  are  good,"  according  to  »  very  current 
expression  and  impression.  In  one  sense  we  can  never  be  "  fit."  it  is  to  examine  or 
prove  ourselves  by  (1)  appeal  to  conscience,  (2)  God's  Word,  (3)  God's  Spirit.  And 
what  we  have  to  ascertain  is  whether  we  (1)  repent  of  sin,  (2)  believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  (3)  are  seeldng  to  live  in  the  fear  and  love  of  God.  If  we  are 
right  upon  these  points,  we  need  have  no  dread  in  approaching  the  Lord's  table,  but 
rather  draw  near  in  joy  and  confidence  and  in  anticipation  of  large  spiritual  blessing. 

IV.  A  WASITENO.  Remark  that  none  are  here  told  to  absent  themselves  from  the 
Lord's  table.  Not  even  the  Corinthians  most  blamed,  an  apparent  exception  being 
the  immoral  person  (ch.  v.  1),  and  he  was  excluded  only  until  he  had  shown  repentance 
for  his  sin  (2  Cor.  ii.  7,  8).  The  reason  is  that  to  abstain  from  the  Lord's  Supper  is 
to  sin.  We  ought  to  be  "  fit,"  in  the  true  sense  of  the  expression.  There  is  only 
one  place  which  is  right  for  us,  and  that  is  at  the  table.  We  may  be  wrong  in  coming ; 
we  must  be  wrong  in  staying  away.  To  refrain  is  to  condemn  ourselves  at  once. 
"  This  do  in  remembrance  of  me  "  is  one  of  the  most  sacred  of  commands.  If  we  are 
bound  to  break  it  because  of  our  carnal  and  lost  state,  we  do  but  multiply  transgression. 
We  are  not  hound,  for  we  may  escape  from  the  condition  which  unfits  us,  and  then 
draw  near  with  boldness  and  with  hope.  There  is  a  false  humility  restraining  many  from 
coming  to  the  Lord's  Supper;  it  is  a  very  false  humility  and  averydecei)tive  humility 
— it  is  the  adding  of  anotlier  sin.  Away  from  Christ  we  are  altogether  wrong,  and 
in  escaping  from  one  sin  (coming  to  the  table  whilst  unconverted)  we  only  fall  into 
another  (disobeying  the  dying  command  of  Christ).  There  is  every  obligation  resting 
upon  us  to  repent,  believe,  and  live  to  God ;  then  we  are  fitted  to  discharge  the  other 
obligation,  "This  do  in  remembrance  of  me."  Failure  in  the  one  involves  failure 
in  the  other,  and  our  condemnation  is  increased.  There  is  no  right  plae»  for  the 
unbeliever.— H. 

Vers.  31,  32.— 27le  ehaitisement  of  lehevert.  The  apostle  has  been  speaking  of 
disorders  at  the  Lord's  table  and  of  the  Divine  judgments  which  in  Corinth  had 
followed  upon  the  profanation  of  the  sacred  feast.  He  now  pursues  the  latter  theme 
and  discourses  upon  the  afflictions  which  sometimes  fall  upon  the  people  of  God. 

I.  Its  Inflictob.  We  may  well  ask,  "  Where  do  our  troubles  come  from  ?  "  The 
chastisement  of  his  people  comes  from  fiod,  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth" 
(Heb.  xii.  6).  Ood  it  hehind  the  sorrow.  Reflect  that :  1.  He  sees  sufficient  cause  for  the 
chtutisement.  This  shows  that  there  is  sufiicient  cause.  He  never  sends  a  trouble  with- 
out a  cau»e,  and  never  without  a  sufficient  cuKtse.  We  may  not  see  the  cause,  but  he  does. 
2.  Be  might  destroy  instead  of  chastising.  There  is  m^rcy  in  the  visitation :  had  there 
been  wrath  only,  there  had  been  destruction,  not  chastisement.  3.  He  may  destroy. 
If  chastisement  does  not  bear  fruit  unto  repentance,  we  shall  be  cut  off  as  was  Israel  of 
old.  Here  is  a  solemn  warning  against  resisting  and  resenting  Divine  chastisement. 
If  we  stiffen  our  neck  and  harden  our  heart,  we  shall  be  broken  with  a  "  rod  of  iron." 
W«  «•  in  tlM  hands  of  the  Omnifotent :  let  us  beware  of  folly  and  impiety.   4.  OkmiH*§- 


oil.  XI.  1—84]    TSB  FIRST  BPISTLB  TO  THE  OOEINTHIANa  885 

ment  U  a  messctge  from  God.  We  should  listen.  We  should  learn  what  the  Lord  oui 
God  has  to  say  to  us.  We  shall  find  in  the  chastisement  a  command ;  it  is  for  us  to 
obey  that  command.    We  shall  discover  in  it  a  promise  ;  it  is  for  us  to  embrace  it. 

II.  Its  cause.  Always  sin  in  some  form  or  other.  Sia  is  the  only  possible  cause. 
God  does  not  afflict  us  "  willingly  "  or  for  his  "  pleasure,"  but  for  our  profit.  We  fall 
into  sin  and  he  whips  us  .out.  So  when  a  believer  transgresses  he  cuts  a  rod  for  his 
own  back.  Is  it  God  who  chastises  us  ?  More  trnly,  we  chastise  ourselves.  Our  sin 
puts  the  rod  into  God's  hand.  We  cry  out  when  we  have  hurt  ourselves  if  we  cry  out 
when  we  are  under  the  chastisement  of  God. 

III.  Its  bengvolenob.  It  is  sent  in  love.  It  is  a  good  gift,  not  an  evil  one.  God 
has  not  changed  in  sending  it ;  he  is  still  love.  Here  the  special  object  ot  Divine 
chastisement  is  beautifully  conveyed :  "  That  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  the 
world."  Many  think  that  their  afflictions  will  destroy  them ;  the  afflictions  are  sent 
that  they  may  not  be  destroyed.  We  feel  that  we  shall  sink  under  our  troubles,  but 
they  are  sent  tJiat  we  may  not  sink.  We  cry  out  "  Poison ! "  but  it  is  "  medicine,"  sent 
to  keep  us  from  being  poisoned.  God  troubles  his  people  now,  that  he  may  not  trouble 
them  hereafter.  He  smites  them  gently  now,  that  he  may  not  smite  them  then  with 
the  arm  of  destruction.  They  stand  near  the  precipice  and  the  rod  falls  upon  them  to 
drive  them  back.  In  heaven,  perhaps,  we  shall  bless  God  more  for  our  earthly  chastise- 
ments than  for  our  earthly  joys.  Chastisement  is  sour  to  take,  but  sweet  when  taken. 
It  is  a  nut  hard  and  rough  of  shell,  but  goodly  in  kerneL  It  is  the  love  of  God  trans- 
figured into  darkness  by  the  black  shadow  of  our  sin. 

IV.  How  WB  MAT  AVOID  THE  NECESSITY  OF  IT.  "  If  WO  would  judgc  [or,  'discem  *] 
ourselves,  we  should  not  be  judged."  If  we  dealt  with  ourselves,  there  would  be  no 
need  for  God  to  deal  with  us.  If  we  would  avoid  the  chastisement,  we  must  avoid 
the  sin.  If  the  cause  be  destroyed,  we  need  not  fear  the  effect.  If  the  Corinthians 
had  examined  themselves,  they  would  have  avoided  the  irregularities  of  which  they 
became  guilty.  They  were  careless,  un watchful,  and  so  they  fell,  and  when  they  fell 
they  opened  the  door  of  chastisement.  We  may  keep  that  door  shut  if  we  "  walk  with 
God,"  as  Enoch  did.  The  only  way  to  escape  the  rod  is  to  escape  the  necessity  of  it, 
and  that  is  to  escape  the  lin.— H. 

Ver.  3. — The  headship  of  Christ,  "  The  head  of  every  man  is  Christ."  It  may  ho  of 
the  man  as  distinct  from  the  woman  that  the  apostle  here  speaks,  but  the  truth  asserted 
is  one  in  which  all  human  bein  ;;s,  without  regard  to  sexual  or  any  other  distinctions,  are 
alike  interested.  The  relation  in  which  we  each  and  all  stand  to  Christ,  or  rather  in 
which  Christ  stands  to  us,  is  one  that  surmounts  and  absorbs  into  itself  every  other 
relationship.  As  the  vault  of  heaven  siirrounds  the  world,  and  the  atmosphere  in 
which  it  floats  envelops  everything  that  lives  and  moves  and  has  its  being  in  it ;  so 
does  the  authority  of  Christ  embrace  all  that  belongs  to  the  existence  of  every  one  of  us, 
and  from  it  we  can  never  escape.  The  supremacy  here  indicated  has  certain  distinct 
phases. 

I.  EVEBT   MAN    SEES   HIS   OWN    HUUAN  HATDBB    PBBFE0TB9    IH  ChBIST.      Manhood  is 

perfectly  represented  in  him.  Ue  is  the  Crown  and  Flower  of  our  humanity ;  its  realized 
ideal,  "  the  Man  " — ^the  complete,  consummate,  faultless  man—"  Christ  Jesus."  Not 
a  development  ii:om  the  old  stock,  but  a  new  beginning,  the  Head  of  the  "  new  creation." 
The  ideal  of  humanity,  defaced  and  destroyed  by  the  Fall,  was  restored  again  in  the 
Incarnation.  "  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy :  the  second  man  is  the  Lord  &om 
heaven  "  (ch.  xt.  47).  Adam  was  formed  in  the  image  of  God — a  sinless,  symmetrical, 
perfect  man.  But  he  lost  the  glory  of  his  first  estate,  and  became  the  father  of  a 
degenerate  humanity  that  could  never  of  itself  rise  again  to  the  original  level,  however 
long  the  stream  of  its  succeeding  generations  might  roll  on.  Christ,  the  Qod-Man,  in 
the  fulness  of  time,  appears — true,  perfect  manhood  linked  in  mysterious  union  with 
Deity,  the  "  Firstborn  among  many  brethren ; "  "  Partaker  with  the  children  of  flesh  and 
blood,"  that  he  may  "  lead  many  sons  to  glory."  We  must  look  to  him,  then,  if  we 
would  know  what  the  possibilities  of  our  nature  are,  what  we  ourselves  may  and  ought 
to  be.  It  is  curious  to  note  how  different,  as  regards  physical  form  and  feature,  an  tiie 
artistk  conceptions  one  meets  with  of  the  person  of  Jesus ;  what  various  degrees  of 
laMM  majesty  and  tender  sorrow  tliey  express.  Some  of  them,  perhaps,  exaggento  tii« 
I.  ownrimAra.  !« 


386  THE   FIRST  EPISTLfl  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,      [oh.  xi.  1—34, 

element  of  tenderness  at  the  expense  of  that  of  power.  They  none  of  them,  It  may  be, 
answer  to  our  own  ideal.  And  we  conclude  that  it  is  vain  to  think  of  representing 
upon  canvas  the  mingled  splendours — the  heavenly  lights  and  earthly  shadows — of  thM 
wondrous  face  in  which 

"  The  Qod  shone  gracious  through  the  Man. 

But  we  are  scarcely  in  danger  of  error  in  any  honest  and  intelligent  moral  conception  of 
Christ.  The  glorious  Original  appears  too  plainly  and  luminously  before  us.  "  Behold 
the  Man ! " — the  consummate  type  of  all  human  excellence.  Do  we  really  admire  and 
adore  him  ?  Do  we  admire  everything  that  we  see  in  him ;  every  separate  lineament 
and  expression  of  his  countenance  ?  Would  we  have  all  men,  specially  those  with  whom 
we  have  most  to  do,  to  be  like  him  ?  Is  it  our  desire  to  be  ourselves  fashioned  at  every 
point  exactly  after  such  a  Model  ?  This  is  involved  in  a  true  recognition  of  the  headship 
of  Christ  over  ourselves  and  every  man. 

II.  The  8PKIN0  OP  the  higher  lim  fob  evert  man  is  Christ.  However  we  may 
deal  with  the  subtle  questions  suggested  here  respecting  the  original  constitution' and 
prerogatives  of  man's  nature,  one  thing  is  plain — that  nature  now  has  no  self-recover- 
ing power  of  life  in  it.  It  has  in  it  rather  the  seeds  of  decay  and  death.  "  In  Adam 
all  die."  The  second  Adam,  the  Loid  from  heaven,  is  a  "quickening  Spirit."  In  him 
the  power  of  death  is  overmastered.  Through  him  God  pours  into  our  being  tha 
stream  of  a  new  and  nobler  life,  a  life  in  which  every  part  of  it,  both  physical  and 
spiritual,  shall  have  its  share  (John  v.  21 ;  vi.  47 — 50 ;  xi.  25,  26 ;  1  John  v.  11,  12). 
The  Fountain-head  of  a  blessed,  glorious  immortality  for  every  man  is  he.  Looking 
abroad  over  a  languishing,  dying  world,  he  says,  "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have 
life,  and  that  they  might  have  it  more  abundantly."  And  there  is  not  a  human  being 
on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  who  is  not  personally  interested  in  this  Divine  revels 
tion  of  the  Life  eternal. 

III.  The  supreme  law  for  evert  man  is  Christ.  We  are  all  necessarily  under 
law.  It  is  not  a  question  as  between  law  and  no  law  that  has  to  be  decided.  The 
question  is — What  shall  be  the  law  that  we  voluntarily  recognize  ?  What  shall  be  the 
nature  of  the  governing  force  to  which  we  yield  ourselves?  Shall  it  be  true,  righteous, 
beneficent.  Divine?  or  shall  it  be  false,  usurping,  fatal,  Satanic?  There  is  no  middle 
course.  God  would  have  us  make  our  own  free,  unfettered  choice.  Our  whole  daily 
life  is  actually  a  choice  of  servitude,  and  it  is  emphatically  our  own.  The  true  servitude 
is  the  service  of  Christ.  All  holy  law  is  summed  up  in  his  authority.  He  is  the 
proper,  rightful  Lord  of  every  human  soul.  He  demands  the  unreserved  allegiance  of 
every  man.  His  claims  are  sovereign,  absolute,  universal.  They  admit  of  no  qualifica- 
tion, and  from  them  there  is  no  escape.  As  well  think  by  the  caprice  of  your  own  will 
to  render  your  body  superior  to  the  laws  of  matter,  to  defeat  the  force  of  gravitation,  to 
escape  from  your  own  shadow,  as  think  to  shake  off  the  obligation  of  obedience  to 
Christ  when  once  you  have  heard  his  voice,  and  he  has  laid  his  royal  hand  upon  joa. 

IV.  Thk  best  and  home  of  evert  man's  soul  is  in  Christ. 

"  Oh,  where  shall  rest  be  foand, 
Best  fur  the  weary  soul  ?  " 

We  scheme  and  toll  to  surround  ourselves  with  earthly  satisfactions,  but  th»  secret  of 
a  happy  home  on  earth  is  that  the  spirit  shall  have  found  its  true  place  of  safety  and 
repose.  And  Christ  only  can  lead  us  to  this.  0  blessed  Lord  Jesus,  thou  Friend  and 
Brother  aad  Saviour  of  every  man,  bring  us  into  living  fellowship  with  thyself  I 

"  Here  would  we  end  our  quest ; 
Alone  are  found  in  thee 
The  life  of  perfect  love,  the  rest 
Of  immortality." 

T«s.  23 — 26.—"  Tk»  LortPi  Supper,"  St.  Paul  had  not  been  an  eye-witness  of  the 
■acred  incident  that  he  here  relates.  Nor  had  Jie  gained  his  knowledge  of  it  by  the 
report  of  others.  He  had  "  received  it  of  the  Lord.  At  what  time  and  in  what  way 
this  tadc  place  we  know  not-    We  may,  perhaps,  best  attribute  it  to  that  rsmarkabls 


(M.  XL  1—34,]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  iSl 

transition  period  immediately  after  his  conversion,  the  "  three  years  "  that  he  spent  in 
Arabia  and  Damascus  before  he  went  up  to  Jerusalem  and  began  his  apostolic  ministiy 
(Qal.  i.  17,  18).  We  can  well  believe  that  it  was  during  that  time  of  lonely,  siknt 
contemplation  that  the  grand  verities  of  the  gospel  massage  were  divinely  unveiled  to 
him ;  and  this  may  have  been  among  the  things  that  he  then  "  received  of  the  Lord." 
The  simplicity  of  the  way  in  which  he  describes  the  institution  of  this  sacred  rite  is  in 
perfect  harmony  with  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel  record.  One  can  only  wonder  how  ii 
can  have  been  possible  for  such  an  incident  to  be  turned,  as  it  has  been,  into  a  weapon 
at  sacerdotal  pretence  and  spiritual  oppression.  The  too  prevalent  neglect  of  the 
observance  has,  no  doubt,  to  a  great  extent  been  the  natural  and  inevitable  result  ol 
this  abuse.  The  false  or  exaggerated  use  of  anything  always  provokes  to  the  opposite 
extreme.  We  may  urge  its  claims  on  the  Christian  conscience  and  heart  by  looking 
»t  it  in  three  different  aspects — as  a  memorial,  as  a  symbol,  and  as  a  means  of  spiritual 
edification. 

I.  A  MBMOBIAU  "  This  do  in  remembrance  of  me."  "  As  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  the  cup,  ye  proclaim  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come."  Christ's  own  words  set 
it  forth  as  an  act  of  personal  remembrance,  Paul's  as  a  time-long  witness  to  the  great 
sacrifice.  Taking  the  two  together,  it  appears  as  a  memorial  of  "  Christ  and  him 
crucified  " — of  himself  in  all  the  truth  and  meaning  of  his  earthly  manifestation,  of  his 
death  as  the  issue  in  which  the  fulness  of  that  meaning  was  gathered  up  and  consum- 
\nated.  We  may  regard  this  memorial  in  its  relation  both  to  those  who  observe  it  and 
to  those  who  observe  it  not ;  as  a  method  of  keeping  the  fact  of  Christ's  self-surrender 
vividly  before  the  minds  of  those  who  believe  in  him  and  love  him,  and  as  a  testimony 
that  appeals  with  silent  eloquence  to  a  thoughtless,  careless  world.  In  this  respect  it 
resembles  other  Scripture  memorials  (Gen.  xxii.  14;  xxviii.  18,  19;  Exod.  xii.  2i — 27  ; 
Joih,  It.  20 — 24 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  12).  And  when  we  think  how  easily  things  the  most 
important  fade  away  from  our  memories  while  trifles  linger  there,  and  sacred  impressions 
are  obliterated  by  meaner  influences,  we  may  well  recognize  with  devout  thankfulness 
the  wisdom  and  love  which  ordained  such  a  mode  of  perpetuating  the  remembrance 
of  the  most  momentous  of  all  events  in  human  history,  while,  in  spite  of  all  its  per- 
versions, the  simple  fact  of  the  continuance  of  such  a  sacred  usage  of  the  Church  is  a 
proof  that  it  rests  on  a  Divine  foundation. 

n.  A  SYMBOL.  It  represents  visibly  that  which  in  the  nature  of  things  is  invisible. 
Not  merely  is  bread  a  fitting  emblem  of  the  Saviour's  body  and  wine  of  his  blood,  and 
the  breaking  of  the  one  and  the  pouring  out  of  the  other  of  the  manner  of  his  death ; 
but  the  service  itself  symbolizes  the  personal  union  of  the  soul  with  him,  the  method 
alike  of  its  origin  and  its  support.  It  bears  witness,  as  in  a  figure,  to  the  deeper 
reality  of  the  life  of  faith.  It  sets  forth,  in  the  form  of  a  significant  deed,  what  our  Lord 
set  forth  in  the  form  of  metaphorio  words  when  he  said,  "  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of 
the  Son  of  man,"  etc.  (John  vi.  53 — 58).  And  in  both  cases  "  it  is  the  Spirit  which 
quickeneth."  Mysticism  has  thrown  its  false  halo,  its  bewitching  glamour,  around 
these  Divine  words;  and  the  sacred  ordinance  that  would  otherwise  have  made  its 
simple  appeal  to  the  insight  of  the  Ctiristian  understanding  and  the  tenderness  of  the 
Christian  heart  has  become  mere  food  for  superstition.  But  there  is  no  Scripture 
warrant  whatever  for  this.  From  the  gross  materialism  of  the  Romish  "  Mass  "  to  the 
subtler  refinement  of  thought  that  regards  the  Lord's  spiritual  presence  as  being  in 
aoma  mystic  sense  inherent  in  the  bread  and  wine,  speaking  of  the  sacrament  being 
"administered,"  as  though  it  had  some  occult  virtue  in  it,  a  kind  of  spiritual  medica- 
ment conferred  by  priestly  hands,  and  "  taken  "  by  the  faithful  for  their  souls'  healing, 
— all  these  shades  of  opinion  alike  substitute  a  physical  mystery  for  a  spiritual  truth, 
and  engender  a  superstitious  faith  that  fixes  its  attention  on  the  material  emblems  and 
something  that  is  supposed  to  be  true  of  them ;  rather  than  the  intelligent  faith  that 
iiscerns  the  unseen  Saviour  through  them,  very  much  as  we  look  through  our  window 
upon  the  golden  glory  of  the  setting  sun  without  thinking  of  the  transparent  medium 
through  which  we  behold  it  (see  '  ChriBt  the  Bread  of  Life,'  J.McLeod  Campbell,  p.  21, 
et  legX 

IlL  A  MBAim  OF  arntirnAL  eoifioation.  Here  lies  the  Divine  reason  of  the  memorial 
aal  the  sjrmboL  It  is  more  than  a  "  transparent  medium "  through  which  the  soul 
mmy  gaze  upon  the  emcified  Christ ;  it  is  a  channel  of  spiritual  influence  by  means  ot 


388  THIS  FmST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xl  1—34. 

whidi  tka  louri  fellowship  with  him  may  ba  deepened  and  strengthened.  It  accom* 
plishM  thb  end,  not  by  any  magic  power  that  it  may  wield  over  as,  but  by  virtu* 
simply  of  the  influence  it  is  naturally  fitted  to  exert  on  mind  and  conscience  and  heart, 
and  by  the  grace  of  that  good  Spiiit  whose  ofiice  it  is  to  testify  of  Christ.  We  may  be 
fully  alive  to  the  dangers  that  lurk  in  the  use  of  all  symbolic  religious  rites,  the  duigei 
especially  of  attributing  to  the  sign  an  efficacy  that  lies  only  in  that  which  is  signified. 
And  we  may  see  in  this  the  reason  why  the  rites  of  Christianity  are  so  few.  But  what 
Christian  heart  can  be  insensible  to  the  high  spiritual  value  of  an  observance  such  as 
this  ?  Moreover,  the  obligation  is  pledn.  "  Do  this,"  says  our  dying  Lord,  "  in  remem- 
brance of  me."  May  not  such  an  appeal  be  expected  to  draw  forth  a  ready  response 
from  any  soul  that  has  ever  "  tasted  that  he  is  gracious  "  ?  Its  being  the  behest  of 
love  latiier  than  the  stem  requirement  of  law,  makes  it  doubly  imperative,  while  the 
simplicity  of  the  deed  it  enjoins  makes  it  doubly  efficacious  as  a  bond  of  affection  and  a 
vehicle  ot  moral  power.  We  all  know  what  a  charm  there  is  in  even  the  most  trivial 
memento  of  those  whom  we  have  loved  and  lost,  especially  if  it  be  some  object  with 
which  the  personal  memory  is  most  closely  associated  by  familiar  daily  use,  some  little 
thing  that  tender  hands  we  can  no  longer  grasp  and  a  loving  voice  that  u  now  for 
ever  still  have  bequeathed  to  us.  With  what  a  glow  of  grateful  affection  will  the  sight 
of  it  sometimes  siiffuse  our  hearts  1  How  near  does  it  bring  the  departed  to  us  agam  I 
How  closely  does  it  draw  us  into  sympathy  and  fellowship  with  their  personal  liffe ! 
And  shall  not  this  be  expected  to  be  pre-eminently  true  of  these  simple  memorials  of 
our  loving,  suffering,  dying  Lord?  The  realization  of  this,  however,  must  always 
depend  on  something  in  ourselves.  The  influence  we  receive  from  the  outward 
observance  will  depend  on  what  we  are  prepared  to  receive,  ix.  on  what  we  bring  to  it 
in  the  conditions  of  our  own  inward  thought  and  feeling.  It  will  never  of  itself  create 
right  feeling.  Come  to  it  with  a  worldly  spirit,  with  a  divided  heart — cold,  careless, 
carnal,  fnv<M0U8,  prayerless,  or  in  any  way  out  of  harmony  with  the  Divine  realities  it 
represents — and  you  can  expect  to  find  no  uplifting  and  inspiring  power  in  it.  Tou  an 
not  likely  to  "  discern  the  Lord's  body."  Christ  is  never  further  from  us  than  when 
we  desecrate  sacred  scenes  and  services  by  our  discordant  mental  and  moral  conditions. 
But  come  with  your  soul  yearning  after  him,  and  he  will  unveil  to  you  his  glory  and 
fin  you  with  the  joy  of  his  love.  "  Let  a  man  prove  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  the 
bread,  and  drink  of  the  cup." — ^W. 

Tar,  2. — Christian  ordirumeeM.  We  do  well  to  boast  of  our  freedom  In  Ohritt.  It 
is  a  sign  of  the  elevation  of  our  religion  above  others  that  it  does  not  need  to  drill 
its  votaries  by  a  constant  discipline  of  prescribed  rites,  ceremonial  shows,  and  verbal 
repetitions.  It  loves  simplicity  and  spontaneousness,  and  the  life  which  it  fosters 
needs  not  to  be  guarded  and  hedged  by  minute  regulations,  but  is  developed  in 
a  chartered  holy  liberty.  At  the  same  time,  Christianity  has  concrete  forms,  and  the 
Church  received  at  the  beginning  ordinances,  or  directions,  to  keep.  The  Apostle 
Paul  had  delivered  these  to  the  Church  at  Corinth. 

L  Neoativelt.  1.  H^ey  were  different  from  the  ordinances  of  the  old  covenant. 
The  rites  and  statutes  connected  with  animal  sacrifice,  distinctions  of  meats, 
regulations  about  dress  and  divers  washings,  were  suited  to  the  time  in  which  they 
were  instituted,  and  served  to  impress  on  the  Hebrew  mind  great  thouglits  of  Qod, 
of  sin,  and  of  righteousness,  and  to  impregnate  life  in  the  house  and  labuur  in  the 
field  with  religious  suggestions.  But  with  Jesus  Christ  a  new  era  came.  The 
restrictions  and  rites  of  tbe  ceremonial  law,  ceasing  to  be  necessary,  lost  their  obliga- 
tion. Moral  inculcations,  whether  tlirough  Moses  or  through  subsequent  prophets, 
of  course  remained,  and  were  enlarged  and  emphasized  by  the  Master  and  his  apostles. 
But  the  Church,  after  some  struggle  and  sharp  controversy,  discerned  and  asserted  her 
freedom  from  the  sacerdotal  and  ceremonial  ordinances  by  which  the  house  of  Israel 
had  been  bound,  2.  They  were  not  the  traditions  of  Jewish  rahhinism.  Our  Lord 
spoke  strongly  against  the  bondage  into  which  the  Jews  of  his  time  had  been  brought 
by  "  traditions  of  men,"  which  had  no  Divine  sanction,  but  had  acquired,  under  the 
rabbinic  and  Pharisaic  regime,  a  fictitious  authority.  Such  traditionalism  tended 
to  weaken  the  honour  due  to  the  authentic  Law,  and  its  continuance  vm  entirely 
Ofjposed  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ.     3.  Thei\  must  not  ie  confourided  with  the  traditions 


ofl.xi.1— 34.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  889 

iif  later  €lhriitian  origin,    A  tradition  which  cannot  be  traced  to  Ohrbt  or  his 

apostlea,  and  which  is  without  aupport  in  the  New  Testament,  cannot  claim  any 
countenance  from  this  text.  Alas  1  how  Christians  have  become  the  servant!  of  men 
and  (tf  prescribed  usage!  As  the  Jews  have  overlaid  and  burdened  their  religion 
with  a  huge  mass  of  Talmudic  and  Kabbalistic  traditions,  so  have  the  Greek  and 
Latin  Churches  all  but  mined  their  Christianity  by  admitting  ecclesiastical  tradition 
to  a  place  alongside  of  Holy  Writ  in  the  rule  of  faith. 

II.  Positively.  The  traditions  which  the  Corinthians  were  exhorted  to  keep 
were  the  instructions  which  the  apostle,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
had  himself  delivered  to  the  saints ;  and  they  had  authority,  not  by  coming  down 
from  remote  antiquity  and  passing  through  many  hands,  but  by  coming  directly  from 
one  whom  the  Lord  had  fitted  and  appointed  to  found  Churches,  and  to  set  their 
affairs  in  order  accordiu^  (o  his  mind  and  will.  The  directions  specially  referred  to 
here  had  regard  to  the  fellowship  of  believers  and  the  worship  rendered  in  the 
assembly  of  God.  He  had  taught  that  the  assembly  was  the  true  temple,  wherein 
the  Holy  Spirit  dwelt,  and  this  temple  was  to  be  full  of  praise.  The  believers  were 
to  come  together,  not  so  much  to  pray  for  salvation,  as  to  worship  God  their  Saviour, 
and  give  thanks  for  the  remission  of  sins  aud  the  hope  of  glory.  Then  the  teaching 
about  the  Lord's  Supper  came  in,  for  it  is  the  centre  and  crowning  act  of  Christian 
worship ;  and  this  had  been  ordained  at  Corinth  by  St.  Paul.  "  I  received  of  the  Lord 
that  which  also  I  delivered  [ordained]  to  you."  So  the  apostle,  while  commanding  the 
adherence  of  the  Corinthians  to  his  directions,  took  the  opportunity  to  give  more 
explicit  instruction,  and  correct  some  abuses  which  had  already  crept  into  the  Church. 
1.  The  separation  of  the  sexes,  which  sacerdotalism  desires,  was  to  be  ignored  in  this 
service.  Alike  during  the  time  of  praying  and  prophesying,  and  during  the 
Eucharistic  Supper,  men  and  women  were  to  mingle  together,  because  in  Jesus  Christ 
"  there  is  neither  male  nor  female."  And  yet  a  distinction  between  the  sexes,  in  the 
interest  of  purity  and  modesty,  was  to  be  duly  marked.  2.  The  precious  feast  of 
unity  and  love  ought  not  to  be  marred  by  party  spirit  or  by  selfishness  and  excess. 
Irreverence  and  greediness  might  appear  at  feasts  in  the  precincts  of  the  heathen 
temples ;  but  in  the  holy  temple  of  God  his  redeemed  should  have  discernment  of  the 
Lord's  lx)dy,and  a  grave  fraternal  remembrance  of  him.  "  Let  •  man  examine  himself, 
and  ID  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup." — F. 

Vers.  18,  19. — Words  of  mil  omen.  In  •  good  English  dictionary,  the  term 
"  schismatic  "  is  thus  explained :  "  One  who  separates  from  a  Church  from  difference 
of  opinion."  The  Bible  makes  no  reference  to  an  individual  schismatic ;  nor  does  it 
apply  the  word  "schism  "  to  separation  from  the  Church.  "  Heresy  "  is  defined  in  the 
dictionary  as  "the  taking  and  holding  of  an  opinion  contrary  to  the  usual  belief, 
especially  in  theology."  Such,  no  doubt,  is  according  to  ecclesiastical  usage ;  but  the 
Scripture  means  by  a  "heresy"  a  sect  or  faction,  not  apart  from  but  within  the  Church : 
"  Heresies  [factions]  among  you." 

I.  A  Bcaisu  18  A  BENT  IN  THE  HiDST  OF  THE  Chuboh,  marring  the  enjoyment  and 
expression  of  its  essential  unity.  If  a  piece  of  undressed  cloth  were  put  to  an  old 
garment,  a  schism  would  occur.  Not  that  the  garment  would  fall  into  two  parts, 
but  that  it  would  show  an  unseemly  rent.  A  division  of  opinion  among  the  people 
who  heaid  our  Saviour  is  called  a  schism  ;  and  the  same  word  is  used  to  denote  the 
discord  in  the  crowd  when  St.  Paul  appeared  before  the  council  at  Jerusalem.  The 
only  Church  of  all  those  to  which  St.  Paul  wrote,  which  had  schisms  within  it  of  such 
seriousness  as  to  give  him  anxiety  and  call  for  animadversion,  was  the  Church  at 
Gorioth ;  but  by  these  he  did  not  mean  the  action  of  parties  breaking  off  from  the 
primitive  Church  in  that  city,  and  forming  rival  Churches  or  separate  denominations 
They  were  parties  in  the  Church  dissenting  or  differing  from  one  another.  This  wi  i  I 
appear  the  more  clearly  if  we  mark  the  remedies  which  the  apostle  prescribed,  viz. : 
1.  To  speak  the  same  thing,  and  be  perfectly  joined  together  in  the  same  mind  and 
the  same  judgment.  To  speak  the  same  thing  was  to  exalt  the  one  great  Name  of  thi 
Lord  Jesus,  and  not  to  take  party  names,  saying,  "  I  am  of  Paul ;  I  am  of  Apollos." 
And  to  be  perfectly  joined  in  the  same  mind — the  nund  of  Christ,  and  the  sMne  judg- 
Qjent — the  judgment  <A  his  Spirit,  while  it  never  {vecluded  activity  of  inveetigitiuu 


390  THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.     L<»l  u  1— M 

and  discussion,  certainly  implied  that  the  normal  condition  of  the  Church  should  be 
one  of  concord,  and  not  one  of  countlesi  variations  and  opposing  views.  2.  To  keep 
the  Lord's  Supper  as  the  apostle  instructed  them.  The  Corinthians  were  charged  not 
to  partake  of  the  sacred  supper  as  of  a  common  meal,  lest  they  should  "come  together 
to  judgment."  They  were  to  keep  the  feast  with  reverence,  and  with  discernment  ol 
the  Lord's  body.  They  were  also  to  show  brotherly  kindness,  not  as  partisans,  biit  as 
brethren,  coming  together  and  waiting  for  one  another  at  the  festival  of  love.  3.  To 
bear  in  mind  the  doctrine  of  the  m,\  stical  body,  and,  as  members  therein,  to  have  the 
same  care  one  for  another.  To  have  schisms  or  alienations  would  be  to  separate  lim.br 
that  had  need  of  each  other,  and  so  to  vex  and  impede  the  whole  body  of  Christ.  At 
the  present  day,  wherever  paities  are  formed  in  a  particular  Church  with  hostile  feelings 
and  a  desire  to  weaken  one  another,  there  is  schism,  in  the  New  Testament  sense  of 
the  word.  And  wherever,  within  the  Church  general,  or  communion  of  saints,  there  is 
an  elevation  of  party  names,  and  a  setting  up  of  party  or  denominational  communions, 
making  the  Lord's  Supper  "their  own  supper,"  there  is  schism. 

IL   A  HEKESY  18  AH  AOGBAVATED  FOEM  OF  A  SCHISM,  AND  DEK0TE8  A  8EPABATIST  PABTT 

OB  A  SECT.  We  read  of  "  the  heresy  of  the  Sadducees  "  (Acts  v.  17),  and  "  the  heresy  of 
the  Pharisees  "  (Acts  xv.  5).  The  Christians  were  charged  with  forming  a  new  heresy 
or  sect — "  the  heresy  of  the  Nazarenes."  It  was  in  this  sense,  and  not  at  all  in  the  sense 
of  heterodoxy,  that  St.  Paul  admitted  that  he  worshipped  the  God  of  his  fathers,  "  after 
the  manner  which  they  called  heresy."  The  Jews  at  Home,  agreeing  to  hear  the 
apostle  on  the  faith  of  the  Nazarenes,  remarked,  "As  concerning  this  heresy,  we 
know  that  it  is  everywhere  spoken  against."  Thus  the  term  undoubtedly  denoted  a 
faction,  not  a  mode  of  thought  or  form  of  doctrine,  true  or  false ;  but  in  the  Church  it 
toiik  from  the  beginning  an  unfavourable  meaning.  A  heresy  was  a  faction  which 
carried  out  a  schism  to  actual  separation,  and  was  animated  in  doing  so  by  a  proi^ 
unruly  spirit.  Accordingly,  heresies  are  classed  with  variances,  strifes,  and  seditions, 
iimong  "  the  works  of  the  flesh  "  (Qal.  ▼.  20).  "  A  man  that  is  a  heretic,"  therefore, 
mians,  not  an  errorist,  hut  a  separatist.  We  do,  indeed,  read  in  2  Pet.  ii.  1  oi 
"  lieresies  of  doctrine;"  but  the  reference  is  to  the  conduct  of  introducers  of  strands 
doctrine  as  forming  a  sejarate  party.  "Many  shall  follow  their  pernicious  ways." 
We  have  seen  that  direction  was  given  for  the  prevention  of  schism.  It  was  also 
given  for  the  correction  and  removal  of  heretics.  Titus  was  instructed  to  admonish 
a  heretic  once  and  again.  If  admonition  failed,  Titus  was  to  reject  or  shun  him  as  a 
mischief-maker  among  brethren.  We  live  in  a  time  of  great  confusion.  Church  unity 
is  misunderstood ;  Church  liberty  is  abused ;  and  Church  discipline  is  relaxed — ^ia,  in 
some  quarters,  almost  obsolete.  Let  every  one  look  to  his  own  spirit  and  conduct.  As 
a  Christian,  you  are  a  Churchman.  Never  join  a  sect  or  faction.  Never  lift  the  mere 
banner  of  a  party.  Belong  to  the  Church  of  God,  which  was  born  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
on  the  day  ol  Pentecost.  For  actual  instruction  and  united  worship,  you  must  be  in 
some  one  particular  part  of  that  Church ;  abide  in  that  which  is  in  yonr  judgment  the 
best  constituted  and  administered ;  but  never  take  your  chamber  for  the  whole  house, 
or  any  particular  Church  for  the  Church  universal.  Bear  a  brotherly  heart  ani 
countenance  towards  all  who  love  the  Lord,  that,  so  far  as  your  influence  extends, 
there  may  be  no  schism  in  the  body.  Deplore  the  existence  of  splits  and  divisions  as 
an  evil ;  yet  ren. ember  that  it  evolves  some  good—  "  that  they  who  are  approved  may  be 
made  manifest  among  you."  Oh  to  be  approved  of  him  who  knows  what  spirit  we  are 
of,  and  to  be  nianiiested  as  no  heretics,  but  faithful  members  of  Christ  and  loving 
children  of  God  I— F. 

Ver.  1. — The  limitation  set  on  the/ollovnng  of  good  imh.  "  Of  me,  even  as  I  also  am 
of  Christ."  The  apostle  calls  to  the  same  personal  following,  without  the  qualification, 
in  ch.  iv.  16.  This  first  verse  of  ch.  xi.  should  be  the  cloang  verse  of  ch.  x.,  as  it  le^y 
completes  the  exhortation  which  is  there  given.  "  The  apostle  refers  to  his  own  example, 
but  only  to  lead  his  readers  up  to  Christ  as  tlie  great  example  of  One  who  '  pleased  not 
himself  (Rom.  xv.  3).  His  own  example  is  valuable  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  examp)«  of 
one  who  is  striving  to  conform  to  the  image  of  his  Lord."  Recall  David's  very  strit'ing 
expression  in  Ps.  xvi.  2,  3,  "  My  goodness  extendeth  not  to  thee  [0  Ckid];  only  U  im 
saints  that  are  in  the  earth."    We  consider — 


CH,  XL  1—34.]     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORHsTIIIANS.  891 

I,  The  imfulse  or  saintly  examples  ;  or,  expressed  in  simple  terms,  of  recognized 
goodness  in  our  fellow-men.  Distinguish  between  the  life-missions  of  talented  men 
and  of  good  men.  The  "  talented  "  may  seem  to  be  out  of  our  range,  the  "  good  "  never 
are.  The  weakest,  poorest,  humblest  among  us  may  be  "  good."  God  has  taken  care  to 
provide  the  saintly  ones  in  every  age.  He  sets  some  such  in  every  sphere  of  life.  We 
all  know  of  men  and  women  better  than  ourselves  who  act  on  and  inspire  us.  They 
exert  these  influences ;  they  persuade  us  that  (1)  goodness  is  beautiful ;  (2)  that  goodness 
is  attainable.  Then  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  all  men  and  women  who  fear  Grcd  and 
love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  culture  personal  character,  become  saintly,  and  gain  the 
power  to  witness  for  Christ  by  a  holy  example. 

II.  The  impbkfection  of  all  saintly  examples.  None  of  them  are  perfect  and 
complete.  It  is  human  to  err.  All  the  saintly  ones  fall  short  of  the  full  standard  of 
humanity  as  shown  to  us  in  Christ.  This  point  is  suggestive  of  abundant  illustration 
taken :  1.  From  Scripture.  There  is  only  one  man  mentioned  in  Scripture  who  even  seems 
to  have  been  perfect.  It  is  Enoch ;  and  we  cannot  be'  sure  concerning  him,  seeing  that 
the  repords  of  h;s  life  are  gathered  up  into  only  one  or  two  brief  sentences.  Abraham, 
Joseph,  Moses,  Elijah.  David,  etc.,  are  all  frail,  fallible  men,  whose  very  sides  of  goodness 
and  strength  are  at  times  exaggerated  so  as  to  become  evil.  2.  From  experience  and 
observation.  We  know  that  those  who  seem  to  us  most  heroic  and  saintly  are  deeply 
sensible  of  their  own  failings  and  shortcomings,  and  we  cannot  have  to  do  with  them 
long  before  finding  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  our  charity  in  relation  to  their  conduct. 
Even  the  Apostle  Paul  could  not  permit  us  to  make  himself  our  standard.  He  knew 
too  well  what  hastiness  of  temper  sometimes  overcame  him,  and  how  greatly  he  had  to 
struggle  with  the  body  of  sin.  We  can  be  followers  of  no  man,  if  he  stands  alone.  We 
can  only  follow  a  fellow-man  as  he  may  be  in  some  point  a  reflection  of  and  suggestion 
of  Christ,  the  manifested  God.  Consequently  only  Christ  can  be  our  absolute  Bxampler. 
We  can  be  followers  of  him ;  we  may  put  the  whole  force  of  our  natures  into  following 
him;  we  may  let  no  fellow-man  stand  before  him.  Show  that  the  enemies  of  Christ 
could  have  easily  gained  their  end  if  they  could  have  found  a  stain  upon  his  moral 
character,  a  word  spoken  or  a  thing  done  which  the  conscience  of  mankind  could  dis- 
tinctly recognize  as  unworthy  of  ideal  manhood.  None  such  have  ever  been  found 
during  the  nearly  nineteen  centuries  of  Christianity.  The  things  usually  made  into 
moral  charges  are  abundantly  capable  of  explanations  that  redound  to  Christ's  honour, 
or  belong  to  the  mystery  of  his  Divine  birth  and  mission.  But,  while  we  admit  that 
no  man  can  be  to  us  a  fall  exampler,  we  may  recognize  that  good  men  do  catch 
measures  of  the  goodness  of  the  Christ  whom  they  serve,  and  are  examples  for  us  so  far  as 
they  are  Christ-like.  It  is  possible  for  us  to  go  a  little  further  even  than  this,  and  admit 
a  certain  special  and  peculiar  power  upon  us  exerted  by  purely  human  examples,  which, 
by  reason  of  their  very  frailty,  tone  and  temper  and  shadow  for  us,  and  in  adaptation 
to  our  weakness,  the  over-splendour  of  the  Christly  and  Divine.  It  is  most  practically 
helpful  to  us  that  we  may  be  followers  of  such  a  brother  man  as  St.  Paul,  so  far  as  he 
follows  Christ  and  reflects  the  full  Christliness  with  a  human  tempering  suited  to  our 
feeble  sight.  Then  it  follows  that  what  St.  Paul  thus  is  to  us  we  may  be  to  others. — B.  T. 

Ver.  2. — The  Christly  traditiont.  "  Keep  the  ordinances,"  or,  as  given  in  the  mai^n, 
"  the  traditions."  St.  Paul  had  given  in  his  ministry  "  ordinances "  of  three  kinds. 
1.  Regulations  for  the  government  of  the  Church.  2.  Statements  concerning  doctrine. 
8.  Statements  concerning  historical  facts.  Illustrate  the  use  and  misuse  of  the  term 
"  traditions."  Show  that  the  traditions  of  Christ,  in  the  sense  of  the  records  preserved, 
in  memory  or  in  writing,  of  his  life,  ministry,  miracles,  death,  and  resurrection,  are  the 
basis  on  which  the  Church  is  built.  Christianity  is  not  a  revealed  religious  system,  as 
Mosaism  was.  It  is  the  revelation,  in  an  individual  man,  of  that  divinely  human  life 
which  was  God's  thought  when  God  made  man  in  his  image,  but  which  man  spoiled  by 
the  assertion  of  his  rights  of  self-will,  and  consequent  separation  of  the  Divine  from  iho 
human.  All  Christian  doctrine  rests  on  the  ideal  humanity  which  Christ  exhibited. 
All  Christian  duty  is  the  effort  to  reach  and  express  that  ideaL  So  Christianity  ii 
strictly  an  historical  religion ;  and  yet  the  historical  is  only  the  body  which  manifests  to 
UB,  and  sets  in  relation  with  us,  and  permanently  preserves  for  Us,  the  spiritual  and  the 
BysticaL     Tken  wa  ought  to  be  anxious  about  the  adequate  remembrance  of  and 


392  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa    [ch.  xi.  1— 81 

knowledge  of  the  traditions  of  Christ.  Show  how  these  are  attacked  and  defended, 
1.  They  are  the  walls  that  keep  the  city.  2.  They  are  the  body  which  manifests  th« 
life.  3.  They  are  the  material  through  which  alone  the  spiritual  <«n  be  apprehended. 
Notice  and  duly  impress  two  points.  (1)  The  fourfold  care  witl  which  the  Christly 
traditions  have  been  preserved  for  us.  (2)  The  elaborate  and  precise  way  in  which  the 
apostolic  teachings  support  the  traditions. — B.  T. 

Vers.  2 — 16. — Laws  of  order  in  Christian  ouenMiei.  The  subject  dealt  irith  in  this 
passage  is  the  appropriate  conduct  and  dress  of  the  women  in  Christian  assemblies. 
That,  however,  'was  but  a  matter  of  present  and  passing  interest,  one  standing  related 
to  the  customs  and  sentiments  of  a  particular  age.  Our  concern  is  not  with  the  details 
of  apostolic  advice,  but  with  the  principles  upon  which  St.  Paul  deals  with  a  particular 
case.  "  Every  circumstance  which  could  in  the  least  degree  cause  the  principles  of 
Christianity  to  be  perverted  or  misunderstood  by  the  heathen  world  was  of  vital 
importance  in  those  early  days  of  the  Church,  and  hence  we  find  the  apostle,  who  most 
fearlessly  taught  the  principles  of  Christian  liberty,  condemning  most  earnestly  every 
application  of  those  principles  which  might  lie  detrimental  to  the  best  interests  of  the 
Christian  faith.  To  feel  bound  to  assert  your  liberty  in  every  detail  of  social  and 
political  life  is  to  cease  to  be  free — the  very  liberty  becomes  a  bondage"  (Shore). 
"It  appears  that  the  Christian  women  at  Corinth  claimed  for  themselves  equality  with 
the  male  sex,  to  which  the  doctrine  of  Christian  freedom  and  the  removal  of  the  dis- 
tinction of  sex  in  Christ  (Gral,  iii.  28)  gave  occasion.  Christianity  had  indisputably 
done  much  for  the  emancipation  of  women,  who  in  the  East  and  among  the  Ionic 
Greeks  (it  was  otherwise  amon^  the  Dorians  and  the  Romans)  were  in  a  position  of 
unworthy  dependence.  But  this  was  done  in  a  quiet,  not  an  over-hasty  manner.  In 
Corinth,  on  the  contrary,  they  had  apparently  taken  up  the  matter  in  a  fashion  some- 
what too  animated.  The  women  overstepped  due  bounds  by  coming  forward  to  pray 
and  prophesy  in  the  assemblies  with  uncovered  head "  (De  Wette).  St.  Paul  gives 
advice  which  bears  upon  the  maintenance  of  due  order  in  the  Christian  assemblies. 
Taking  this  as  the  subject  illustrated,  we  observe  the  following  points: — 

I.  Obder  must  be  based  on  first  princiflks.  Here  on  the  designed  relationship  of 
man  and  woman.  The  new  law  of  the  equality  of  the  sexes  must  be  dealt  with  io 
a  manner  consistent  with  the  earlier  principle  of  the  natural  dependence  of  the  woman 
on  man.  "  Observe  how  the  apostle  falls  back  on  nature.  In  nothing  is  the  differenca 
greater  between  fanaticism  and  Christianity  than  in  their  treatment  of  natural  instincts 
and  affections.  Fanaticism  defies  nature.  Christianity  refines  it  and  respects  it. 
Christianity  does  not  denaturalize,  but  only  sanctifies  and  refines  according  to  the  laws 
of  nature  "  (F.  W.  Robertson). 

II,  Obder  itusT  BE  ARRANGED  BT  Chbistiak  pbudence,  which  acts  by  persuasion 
rather  than  by  force,  avoids  any  over-magnifying  of  little  differences,  and  makes  due 
allowance  for  individual  peculiarities.  Prudence  can  recognize  that  the  preservation 
of  peace  and  charity  is  of  greater  importance  than  the  securing  of  order,  and  order  may 
wait  on  charity. 

in.  Obdeb  must  be  adaftbd  to  existing  cubtous.  Ko  stiff  forms  can  be  allowed 
in  Christian  assemblies.  Social  and  national  customs  and  sentiments  have  to  be  duly 
considered.  Illustrate  from  the  necessary  differences  of  administering  the  ordinance 
of  baptism  in  different  countries,  or  from  the  diversities  of  Church  order  in  heathen 
lands  that  receive  the  gospel.  There  can  be  unity  of  principle  with  variety  of 
detail. 

IV.  Obdeb  must  bk  accepted  bt  evert  member  loyally.  This  is  the  condition 
of  working  together  in  every  kind  of  human  association.  A  man's  individuality  may 
properly  find  expression  in  the  diseuttion  of  what  shall  be  done ;  but  he  must  sink 
his  individuality  in  order  to  help  in  carrying  out  the  order  that  is  decided  on. 

V.  Obdeb  bears  directly  opon  spibitual  profit.  It  injures  to  have  the  Church's 
attention  diverted  to  forward  women.  Order  relieves  the  minds  of  the  worshippers, 
so  that  full  attention  may  be  directed  to  spiritual  things.  In  quietness,  in  rest  of  mind 
and  heart,  the  soul  finds  the  time  to  enjoy  and  to  grow.  Distracted  by  tbe  material, 
due  attention  cannot  be  given  to  the  spirit lal.  Illustrate  from  the  anxiety  with  which 
harmony,  beauty,  and  order  were  sought  and  preserved  in  the  older  Jewish  litatl 


«.  XI.  1—34.]    THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTmA.Na  393 

Amid  all  thow  foimaUtiaa  woiBbipping  mhiIb  could  be  itill,  and  In  the  gtillnew  find 
Qod.— B.T. 

Yen.  17 — 19. — 8»etaHan  ftding  within  the  Ohvreh.  "  There  be  divisions  Mnong 
you."  "  There  must  he  also  heresies  [sects]  among  you."  Distinguish  between  the 
divisions  which  lead  to  the  foimatidn  of  separate  sects,  and  the  sectarian  feeling  which 
may  disturb  the  harmony  and  the  work  of  a  particular  Church,  The  apostle  refers  not 
to  sects  dividing  the  Church  into  parts,  but  to  parties  and  party  feeling  within  ah 
individual  Church.  Such  party  feeling  tells  most  injuriously  on  spiritual  profit  and 
progress.  "  St.  Paul  must  be  understood  as  saying  that,  not  only  will  there  be  dissen- 
sion and  divisions  among  Christians,  but  that  some  of  them  will  go  their  own  way  in 
spite  of  the  instructions  both  in  doctrine  and  practice  delivered  to  them  by  Christ's 
apostles."  We  may  illustrate  the  sources  from  which  sectarian  feeling  within  the 
Church  is  likely  to  arise. 

I.  Seotabianisu  fbom  social  olabsifioation.  Christianity  assumes  the  absolute 
equality  of  all  men  before  God.  But  so  far  as  Christianity  is  an  organization,  it  is 
bound  to  recognize  and  make  due  acconnt  of  class  distinctions.  Tiiese  become  a 
constant  source  of  difficulty,  the  ground  and  occasion  of  much  offence. 

II.  Sectabianism  fbou  family  dibfutes.  Within  the  same  class  there  arise 
jealousies,  misunderstandings,  and  heart-burnings.  The  Church  is  too  often  made  the 
sphere  for  the  expression  of  such  ill  feeling. 

III.  Seotabianism  from  personal  disposition.  Such  as  that  of  Diotrephes,  "  who 
loved  to  have  the  pre-eminence."  Suspicious,  masterful,  or  conceited  men  are  the  most 
fruitful  sources  of  Church  dispute  and  division.  The  evil  man  in  Church  life  ii  the 
man  who  "  looks  only  on  his  own  things,  not  on  the  things  of  others." 

IV.  Sectabianibu  fboh  iNTELLEGTirAL  DIFFERENCES.  Such  should  ucver  occur, 
because  the  true  unity  of  a  Church  is  its  common  life  in  Christ,  and  not  its  common 
opinion  about  Christ.  The  life  must  be  always  the  same,  and  so  it  can  be  a  basis  of 
union.  Opinions  must  differ  according  to  variety  of  capacity  and  education.  Impress 
that,  if  the  causes  of  sectarianism  cannot  be  wholly  removed,  their  influence  may  be 
overruled  by  the  culture  of  high  Christian  life  and  sentiment. — B.  T. 

Ver.  23.— S(.  Paul's  claim  to  direct  revelation.  "  For  I  have  received  of  the  Lord 
that  which  also  I  delivered  unto  you."  "  The  whole  structure  of  the  passage  seems  to 
imply  that  what  follows  had  been  received  by  St.  Paul  directly  from  Christ,  and  that 
he  is  not  appealing  to  a  well-known  tradition."  "  The  method  of  communication 
(whether  in  a  trance,  or  state  of  ecstasy,  or  any  other  supernatural  manner)  does 
not  appear  to  cause  either  doubt  or  difficulty  to  those  to  whom  the  apostle  conveyed 
the  information  thus  miraculously  bestowed  on  him."  Illustrate  St.  Paul's  distinct 
claim  to  apostleship  on  the  ground  of  a  direct  call  and  revelation  from  the  Lord  Jesus. 
If  St.  Paul  bad  a  distinct  revelation  on  the  matter  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  we  must  regard 
it  as  a  divinely  instituted  ordinance  or  sacrament.  The  verses  following  our  text 
become  for  us  an  authentic  explanation,  given  by  the  risen  Christ,  concerning  his 
sacrament.  We  fix  attention  on  the  proofs  that  St.  Paul  had  received  a  direct  Divine 
revelation.    Three  points  may  be  dealt  with  in  illustration. 

L  The  beoinnino  of  his  Cubistian  life  was  a  bevelatioh.  See  the  remarkable 
vision  and  communication  on  his  approaching  Damascus. 

IL  There  webe  times  dubino  his  ufe  of  direct  revelation.  As  at  Troas ;  on 
the  journey  to  Jerusalem ;  when  in  prison ;  during  the  storm  and  shipwreck ;  and  as 
narrated  in  2.  Cor.  xii. 

IJT.  He  becognized  his  knowledoe  of  the  facts  or  Chbist's  life  as  directly 
CO.  10NICATEO.  He  had  no  personal  acquaintance  with  Christ;  he  was  not  dependent 
on  the  narratives  of  apostles  and  disciples,  save  in  part.  Christ  told  him  his  story  by 
vision  and  revelation.  And  St.  Paul  goes  even  further,  and  declares  that  the  gospel 
which  he  preached,  the  views  of  truth  and  duty  which  were  characteristic  of  him, 
he  received  from  no  man  ;  all  came  by  direct  revelation  of  the  Lwd,  A  special  interest, 
therefore,  attaches  to  the  Pauline  teachings. — B.  T. 

Ter.  26. — The  Lord^a  Supper  a  ihowing  forth.    Conddering  kowmueh  has  been  made 


394  THE  PIRSl   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xi.  1—84, 

of  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  by  the  Christian  Church  it  is  remarkable  that 
the  passage  connected  with  this  text  should  be  the  only  apostolic  teaching  we  have 
respecting  its  observance.  We  have  in  the  Gospels  the  records  of  the  incident  from 
wliioh  it  takes  its  origin,  but  though  we  should  have  expected  St.  Peter  or  St.  John  to 
give  us  complete  counsels  for  its  observance,  neither  of  them  refers  to  it.  St.  Paul  alone 
deils  « ith  it,  and  it  is  a  singular  thing  that  he  makes  no  allusion  to  it  when  writing  to 
Timothy  and  Titus,  and  seeking  to  fit  them,  and  others  through  them,  for  their  pastoral 
work.  It  even  seems  tliat,  but  for  the  accident  of  an  abuse  creeping  into  the  Corinthian 
Church,  we  should  have  been  left  entirely  without  apostolic  precedent  or  instruction 
concerning  it.  Our  text,  and  the  verses  connected  with  it,  contain  hints  of  the  way  in 
which  the  Lord's  Supper  was  then  observed ;  indications  of  the  kind  of  abuses  likely  to 
creep  in;  and  teachings  concerning  those  great  principles  which  were  to  regulate  its 
management.  We  can  clearly  see  that  it  was  then  a  meal,  not  a  service ;  a  feast,  not 
a  fast ;  a  communion,  not  an  administration ;  a  means  of  remembrance,  and  not  a 
mystical  presence.  Our  Lord  kept  the  ordinary  Passover  meal,  and  into  one  of  the 
customary  incidents  of  it  he  put  a  new  and  spiritual  significance.  Now,  see  what 
actually  occurred  in  the  early  Church.  Those  having  a  common  faith  naturally  sought 
fellowship  together.  The  Eastern  idea  of  fellowship  is  partaking  of  the  same  food 
together.  In  this  way  grow  up  the  agapce,  or  love-feasts,  and  these  seem  to  have  been 
olServed  in  all  the  Churches  that  were  founded.  These  agapm  could  easily  be  con- 
nected in  thought  with  oiu-  Lord's  last  meal  with  his  disciples,  and  on  the  closing  part 
of  them  a  special  significance  was  probably  made  to  rest.  When  Christianity  touched 
Western  life,  the  old  Eastern  agapce  naturally  dropped  away.  Feeding  together  is  not 
BO  familiar  a  sign  of  fellowship  in  the  West  as  in  the  East.  So  in  the  West  a  part  of 
the  meal  was  retained  and  became  a  sacrament,  a  service,  and  a  mystery.  St.  Paul 
helps  us  to  understand  the  special  significance  put  into  a  part  of  the  meaL  It  wai  i 
showing  forth ;  but  we  ask — 

I.  A  sHOwmo  FORTH  OF  WHAT?  1.  Of  a  foct  of  history:  the  "Lord's  death.* 
llememberthat  St.  Paul  usually  goes  on  to  the  Resurrection,  as  revealing  the  significance 
of  the  death.  The  Lord's  death  is  shown  forth  in  (I)  the  substance  of  the  sacrament — 
bread,  which  is  crushed  in  the  mill  before  it  can  become,  food  ;  wine,  which  is  trodden 
in  the  wine-press  before  it  can  become  drink ;  (2)  the  form  of  the  food  in  the  sacrament 
— ^it  is  broken,  and  poured  out.  Impress  the  importance  of  keeping  up  the  remem- 
brance of  this  fact,  (a)  as  affirming  the  actual  historical  character  of  tlie  Gospel  records ; 
(b)  as  keeping  for  the  death  of  Christ  its  central  place  in  Christian  doctrine ;  (c)  as 
renewing,  on  men's  souls,  the  special  moral  influence  of  Christ,  the  life-persuasion,  the 
"  constraining "  of  his  cross.  2.  (yo/oc<q/"/aj<A;  "Till  become."  That  is  "shown 
forth  "  in  keeping  up  the  observance,  and  in  the  manifest  fact  that  he  is  now  sensibly 
absent.  We  declare  that  the  only  president  of  the  feast  is  Christ,  as  spiritually  present. 
The  importance  of  showing  forth  this  fact  is  seen  in  its  (1)  testifying  to  the  resurrec- 
tion and  present  life  of  Christ ;  (2)  in  its  afSrming  the  foundation  of  the  Church  to  be 
faith,  not  doctrine,  or  knowledge,  or  experience  ;  and  (3)  in  its  renewing  the  Church's 
great  hope,  and  witnessing  to  the  reality  and  value  of  things  unseen,  future,  and  eternal. 

II.  A  BHOWwa  FORTH  TO  WHOM  ?  1.  To  Ood ,'  as  assuring  him  that  we  value  his 
great  Gift.  2.  To  owrselves ;  as  quickening  our  own  feeling,  remembrance,  and  spiritual 
life.  3.  To  our  fellow- Chrisliam ;  as  bidding  them  rejoice  with  us  in  the  common 
lalvation  which  we  all  share.  4.  To  the  world;  as  testifying  that  the  despised 
"  spiritual "  is  nevertheless  the  "  true  "  and  the  "  eternal."  In  conclusion,  show  the 
value  of  symbolio  helps  in  religious  life,  and  the  claim  that  rests  on  us  to  show 
forth  Christ's  death,  if  we  have  faith  in  him  and  the  hope  of  his  coming  again. — R.  T. 

Ytr.  27. — Saeramental  untporthineu.  The  special  thought  here  ii  the  •ril  ol 
looking  at  the  Lord's  Supper  as  if  it  were  a  mere  eating  and  drinking  time.  It  ii 
a  symbolic  time ;  it  is  a  spiritually  feasting  time.  It  is  a  time  wheu  the  wants  and 
demands  of  the  body  are  to  be  put  wholly  aside.  It  is  a  soul-time.  He  eats 
unworthily  who  stays  with  any  bodily  partaking  of  mere  emblems,  and  fails  to  fill 
bia  soul  with  living  bread — with  him  who  is  the  "  Bread  of  life."  The  following  point« 
are  w  simple  and  suggestive  that  they  only  need  statement : — We  eat,  at  the  sacrament, 
tmtmrthily  t  L  Whtoi  we  Mt  without  $mttMe  remembrance.    '*  The  Bon  of  man  kaew 


cm.  XL  1—34.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN!  39fi 

our  nature  far  too  well  (to  trust  us  without  such  helps).  He  knew  that  the  remem- 
brance of  his  sacrifice  would  fade  without  perpetual  repetition,  and  without  an  appeal 
to  the  senses ;  therefore  by  touch,  by  taste,  by  sight,  we  are  reminded  in  the  sacrament 
that  Christianity  is  not  a  thinj;  of  mere  feeling,  but  a  real  historical  actuality.  It 
sets  forth  Jesus  Christ  evidently  crucified  among  us"  (Robertson).  2.  When  we  eat 
without  spiritual  insight,  and  so  fail  to  recognize  the  holy  mystery  of  the  symbols. 
3.  When  we  eat  without  devout  feeling  duly  nourished  by  preparatnry  seasons  of 
quietness,  meditation,  communion,  and  prayer.  4.  When  we  eat  without  thankful 
love  clierished  for  him  who  gave  his  very  life  for  us.  5,  When  we  eat  without  holy 
resolves,  to  which  gratitude  ought  to  urge  us.  Impress  the  penalty  of  the  uuworthy 
eating.  (1)  It  is  as  if  a  man  were  really  scorning  Clirist  and  putting  him  to  shame. 
(2)  It  is  a  piece  of  deception,  for  participation  presupposes  spiritual  relations.  The 
man  who  eats  "  unworthily "  is  guilty,  that  is,  he  is  amenable  to  punishment ;  and 
spiritual  punishments,  though  they  may  creep  up  very  slowly  and  come  on  very 
silently,  are  fearful  punishments :  they  are  the  hardened  heart  that  cannot  feel,  the 
deluded  mind  that  can  perish  in  self-deceptions, — B.  T. 

Ver.  28. — Moral  fitness  for  communion.  Explain  the  Scottish  custom  of  "  fencing 
the  tables  "  at  sacramental  seasons,  that  is,  of  guarding  the  tables  from  the  approach 
of  unworthy  persons.  There  has  grown  up  round  the  expression,  "  Let  a  man  examiue 
himself,"  a  kind  of  self-searching,  as  a  Christian  duty,  which  could  hardly  have  been 
in  the  thought  of  the  apostle.  It  has  come  to  be  considered  the  right  thing  that, 
at  stated  seasons,  the  Christian  should  subject  his  whole  inner  life,  his  thoughts,  his 
views  of  truth,  his  frames  of  mind,  and  his  varied  feelings,  to  examination ;  testing 
them  by  the  most  familiar  and  admired  models  of  Christian  experience.  Many  of  us 
know  what  it  is  to  attempt  this  painful  and  difficult  work,  and  perhaps  we  know  also  the 
heavy  penalties  which  follow  the  attempt ;  the  oppressed  moods  into  which  our  souls 
get,  the  killing  outright  of  all  Christian  joy,  the  morbid  pleasure  found  in  dwelling 
on  the  evil  phases  of  our  experience,  and,  above  all,  the  subtle  self-trust  which  it 
engenders,  until  we  awake  to  find  that  we  have  been  led  away  from  simple,  childlike 
reliance  on  Christ  to  an  attempted  confidence  in  our  own  frames  and  feelings  and 
experiences.  St.  Paul  distinctly  enjoins  the  duty  of  examining  one's  self,  but  if  we 
take  his  counsel  in  connection  with  the  circumstances  and  doings  of  those  to  whom 
his  counsel  was  given,  we  shall  see  what  was  the  sphere  of  self-examination  to  which 
he  referred.  The  evils  which  the  apostle  deals  with  are  plainly  the  relics  of  the  old 
heathen  life  gaining  strength  again,  such  strength  as  to  imperil  this  most  solemn 
Christian  ordinance.  There  were  class  rivalries,  one  pressing  before  another ;  the  rich 
were  making  ostentatious  display ;  the  poor  were  grasping  at  the  best  food ;  self- 
indulgence,  gluttony,  were  so  manifest  that  few  could  realize  the  special  religious 
significance  of  the  closing  part  of  the  feast,  the  common  sharing  of  the  bread  and  wine 
of  memorial.  St.  Paul,  having  this  in  mind,  urges  that  a  man  must  examine  into  his 
morals,  his  habits,  his  conduct,  his  relationships,  and  his  duties,  and  gain  a  moral  fitness 
for  partaking  of  the  bread  and  of  the  wine  of  memorial.    We  consider — 

I.  The  mobal  life  that  is  in  harmony  with  Holy  Communion.  One  important 
element  of  the  Christian  spirit  is  sensitiveness  to  the  tone,  the  character,  the  genius, 
of  Christianity.  We  ought  not  to  have  to  ask, "  What  is  consistent  ?  "  We  should /ee^ 
what  is  becoming,  what  is  worthy  of  our  vocation.  The  cultured,  spiritually  minded 
Christian,  who  is  "  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  his  mind,"  finds  himself  resisting 
all  wrong,  disliking  all  that  is  unlovely,  shrinking  from  everything  that  is  untrue,  and 
gathering  round  him  all  that  is  kind  and  lovely  and  of  good  report.  His  life  he  seeks 
to  set  sounding  through  all  its  notes  in  full  harmony  with  the  key-note  of  the  gospel. 
But  we  should  see  that  our  moral  life  is  to  be  tested  by  Christianity  when  that 
religion  is  at  its  highest  point  of  expression,  and  that  we  find  in  the  Eucharistic  feast. 
We  must  test  ourselves  by  the  ideal  which  we  imagine  as  realized  at  the  Lord's  table. 
Then  we  say  :  1.  That  there  must  be  a  very  clearly  cut  and  marked  separation  from  the 
larger  social  evils  of  our  time.  2.  There  must  be  a  firm  stand  in  relation  to  the 
questionable  things  of  our  time,  the  things  that  seem  to  lie  on  the  border-land  between 
good  and  evil.  3.  There  is  further  required  a  wise  ordering  of  &mily  relationslii]()s, 
and  an  efficient  restraining  of  personal  habits.    Our  communion-times,  when  tiie  koly 


8M 


THE  riBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xa.  1— SL 


quiet  Is  ftround  as,  when  the  fever  and  the  bustle  of  life  an  stilled,  and  our  glorioui^ 
pure,  white  Lord  comes  so  near  to  us,  bring  out  to  yiew  the  stains  of  secret  fault, 

II.  The  KEBPONSIBILnT  OF  SECUBIKQ  THE  HABMONY  BBTWIBH  THE  HOBAL  LIFE  ANB 

Christianitt  xs  thbown  upon  the  Chbistian  himself.  The  question  of  supreme 
importance  to  us  is  this,  "  Will  we  let  the  Christ-spirit  that  is  in  us  nobly  shape  our 
whole  life  and  relationship?  Will  we  so  fill  everything  with  the  new  life  that  men 
shall  find  the  Christ-image  glowing  everywhere  from  us  7  Will  we  be  thoroughly  ia 
•ameit  to  live  the  holy  li^?"  The  old  idea  was,  win  the  soul  for  Christ,  and  let  the 
body  go — the  helpless  body  of  sin  and  death.  The  truer  idea  i<  that  we  are  to  win 
our  bodies  for  Christ,  our  whole  life-spheres  for  Christ.  And  the  burden  lies  on  ni. 
God  will  win  no  man's  body  or  life-sphere  far  him.  He  will  win  them  with  him. 
God  will  help  every  man  who  sets  himself  manfully  to  the  work.  The  lanctification 
of  a  believer  is  no  accident  and  no  miracle.  The  law  concerning  it  is  most  plain  : 
"  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  for  it  is  God  who  worketh 
in  yon  to  wiU  and  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  The  responsibility  lies  on  us  of  "  putting 
off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds,"  and  the  responsibility  lies  on  us  of  "  putting  on  the  new 
man."  The  goodness  and  graces  of  the  Christian  life  are  to  be  won ;  they  are  not  mere 
gifts.  Gentleness  of  speech  and  manner,  lowly  mindedness,  meekness  of  self-denial, 
tender  consideration  for  others,  glistening  purity  of  thought  and  heart,  strong  feitfa, 
glowing  love,  and  ardent  hope;  the  inexpressible  loveliness  of  those  who  have 
caught  the  spirit  of  Christ ;  the  charming  bloom — richer  far  than  lies  on  ripened 
fruit — that  lies  on  the  word  and  work  of  the  sanctified; — all  these  are  to  be  imm. 
We  must  want  them,  set  ourselves  in  the  way  of  them,  wrestle  and  pray  for  them, 
put  ourselves  into  closest  relations  with  Christ  so  that  they  may  be  wrought  in  ui 
by  his  Spirit.  And  communion-times  bring  all  these  claims  so  prominently  before  ui. 
Brotherhood,  holiness,  forgiveness,  charity,  mean  then  so  much ;  and  our  attainments 
Mem  so  few,  so  small,  in  the  light  of  the  ideal  Christian  life.  Let  a  man  examine 
himself;  find  his  evil  and  put  it  away;  find  what  is  lacking,  and  seek  to  gun  it,  and 
•0  attain  the  moral  fitnea*  for  iharing  in  the  Holy  Gonununion.— &  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XIL 


Ob.  in. — OH.  irv. — Oh  Spibitual  Oim, 
and  the  Danoeb  which  arose  fbou  ths 
Abcse  of  the  "  Gift  of  Tongdes." 

Vers.  1 — 11. — On  ipiritual  giftt  Al 
gitural. 

Yer.  1. — Now  oonoeming  spiritnal  gifts ; 
lather,  things  spiritual.  The  context,  how- 
ever, shows  that  St.  Paul  is  thinking  almost 
exclusively  of  the  gifts  (charismata)  of  the 
Spirit.  I  would  not  have  yon  ignorant 
(eee  ch.  x.  1).  The  Corinthians  had  doubt- 
less inquired  in  their  letter  as  to  the  views 
^  the  apostle  on  this  important  and  difS- 
onlt  Bubjeot. 

Yer.  2.— That  ye  were  Oentilea.  The 
nndoubted  reading  is,  that  when  ye  were 
Oentiles.  The  sentence  is  then  in  form  an 
mnaeoluthon ;  in  other  words,  it  is  not  gram- 
matioally  finished.  The  ancients  were 
Buob  less  particular  about  these  small 
matters  of  precision  and  symmetry  than 
the  modems;  and  writers  who  are  deeply 
moved  by  their  subject,  and  hurried  alnng 
by  the  strength  of  their  feelings,  often  fall 
into  these  unfinished  constructions  (see 
Vm.  fi  17—21 ;  zv.  2SH-27:  OaL  it  «;  S 


Tliess.   iL  S,  lAe.,  in  the  Greek).    Dumb 

idols.  This  characteristic  of  idols  (Hab.  ii. 
18 ;  Fa.  cxv.  5 ;  cxxxv.  16)  is  fixed  upon  te 
show  that  their  "  oracles  "  were  mere  falsity 
and  pretence.  We  find  an  illustration  of  the 
epithet  in  the  statue  of  Isia  at  Pompeii, 
where  the  ruined  temple  shows  the  secret 
stair  by  which  the  priest  mounted  to  the 
back  of  the  statue ;  and  the  head  of  the 
statue  (preserved  in  the  Museo  Borbonico) 
shows  the  tube  which  went  from  the  back 
of  the  head  to  the  parted  lips.  Through 
this  tube  the  priest  concealed  behind  the 
statue  spoke  the  answers  of  Isia.  Even  ai 
ye  were  led ;  rather,  howsoever  ye  might  bt 
led,  as  in  the  Revised  Yersion.  The  Greek 
phrase   shows    that,    under    the   oracular 

fuidance  of  dumb  idols,  the  Gentiles  bad 
eeh,  as  it  were,  drifted  hither  and  thither 
"  as  the  winds  listed." 

Ver.  3. — Wherefore.  Their  previous  oo«- 
dition  of  Gentile  ignorance  rendered  it 
necessary  to  instruct  them  fully  respecting 
the  nature  and  disorimination  of  the  eharistiu 
of  the  Spirit.  By  the  Spirit  of  God ;  rather 
in  the  Spirit;  i.e.  in  the  state  of  spiritual 
exaltation  and  ecstasy.  The  phrase  is  • 
Hebrew  one  te  datoribe  inspiratkm.    Taaat 


OH.  xiLl-^1.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


897 


aoonrsed.  It  may  well  seem  amaiing  that 
the  Corinthians  should  need  iustruoting  that 
such  awful  language  could  not  be  uttered 
by  any  one  speaking  "in  the  Spirit  of  God." 
It  is  evident,  however,  tliat  such  expression! 
had  been  uttered  by  persons  who  were,  or 
«eemed  to  be,  carried  away  by  the  impas- 
sioned impulse  wliioh  led  to  "  glossolaly." 
(It  is  better  to  use  this  technical  word  in 
order  to  dissipate  the  cloud  of  strange 
misconceptions  as  to  the  tiue  nature  of  this 
charism.)  So  terrible  an  outrage  on  the 
conscience  of  Christians  could  never  have 
passed  unchecked  and  unpunished,  except 
from  the  obvious  inability  of  the  young 
community  to  grapple  with  the  new  and 
perplexing  phenomena  of  an  "  inspiration  " 
which  appeared  to  destroy  the  personal 
control  of  those  possessed  by  it.  Among 
Jewish  converts  glossolaly  was  regarded 
as  a  form  of  that  wUd  mantic  "  inspiration  " 
of  which  we  find  some  traces  in  Jewish  history 
(1  Sam.  X.  10,  11;  xviii.  10;  lix.  23,  24, 
etc.),  and  which  was  alluded  to  in  the  very 
name  Nab6,  wliich  implied  a  boiling  energy. 
Among  Gentile  converts  the  glossolaly 
would  be  classed  with  the  overmastering 
influences  of  which  they  read,  or  which 
they  witnessed,  in  the  Sibyls,  the  Pythian 
priestesses,  and  the  wild  orgiastic  devotees 
of  Eastern  cults.  Tliey  would  not  like  to 
call  any  one  to  task  for  things  spoken  in  a 
condition  which  they  regarded  as  wholly 
■upernatunj.  As  to  the  speakers,  (1)  some 
of  them,  not  being  sincere,  might  have 
really  faUen  under  the  influence  of  impulses 
which  were  earthly  and  demonish,  not 
Divine ;  (2)  others,  not  duly  controlling  their 
own  genuine  impulse,  may  have  been  liable 
to  the  uncontrolled  sway  of  utterances  for 
which  they  were  at  the  moment  irrespon- 
sible; (3)  or  again,  being  incapable  of 
reasoned  expression,  they  may  have  nudibly 
expressed  vague  Gnostic  doubts  as  to  the 
identity  of  the  "  Jesus "  who  was  crucified 
and  the  Divine  Word;  or  (4)  they  may 
have  been  ent  ingled  in  Jewish  perplexities 
rising  from  Deut.  xxi.  23,  "  He  that  is 
hanged  "  (which  was  also  the  expression  ap- 
plied by  Jews  to  the  crucified)  "  is  accursed 
of  God;"  or  finally, (5)  by  snme  strange  abuse 
of  the  true  principle  expressed  by  St.  Paul  in 
2  Cor.  V.  16,  they  may  have  asserted  in  this 
fearful  form  their  emancipation  from  the 
acknowledgment  of  Jesus  "  after  the  flesli." 
Similar  phenomena — the  same  intrusions 
into  worsliip  of  downright  blasphemy  or  of 
blasphemous  familiarity — have  constantly 
recurred  at  times  of  overwhelming  spiritual 
excitement,  as  for  instance  in  tlie  adherents 
•f  Che  "everlasting  gospel"  in  the  thirteenth 
century,  and  in  various  movements  of  our 
own  day.  Ii  accursed ;  rather,  is  anathema. 
The  word  corresponds  to  the  Hebrew  aiertm,  \ 


which  means  "a  b*n,''and  "what is  devoted 
or  set  apart  by  a  b«n ;"  and  to  the  Latin  meer, 
which  means  not  only  "sacred,"  set  apart 
by  holy  couaecration,  but  also  "  devoted  to 
destruction."  No  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is 
[the]  Lord,  but  by  [in]  the  Holy  Ohost. 
It  involved  a  strong  rebuke  to  the  illaminati, 
who  professed  a  profound  spiritual  insiglit, 
to  tell  them  that  no  man  could  make  the 
simple,  humble  confession  of  the  divinity 
of  Jesus  (for  "  Lord  "  is  here  an  equivalent 
of  the  Hebrew  "  Jehovah  ")  except  by  the 
same  inspiration  as  that  which  they  s* 
terribly  abused.  There  is  a  very  similar 
passage  in  1  John  L  2 ;  bnt  there  the  "  test" 
of  the  inspiration  is  a  confession  of  the 
humanity  of  Jesus  as  against  Gnostics,  who 
treated  his  human  life  as  purely  phantasmal. 
Here  the  test  is  the  confession  of  hia  divinity 
as  against  Jews  and  Gentiles.  (For  a 
parallel  passage,  see  Matt.  xvi.  17,  "  Flesh 
nnd  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee.") 

Ver.  4. — ^Diversities.  This  word  is  used 
in  each  of  these  verses.  Gifts ;  charismata  ; 
endowments  imparted  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 
The  word  is  rendered  "  free  gift "  in  Rom.  v. 
13.  The  same  Spirit  The  gifts  of  the  Spirit 
are  not  uniform,  but  display  diversity  in 
nnity.  Just  as  the  simlight  playing  on 
diflerent  surfaces  produces  a  multiplicity  of 
gleams  and  colours,  so  the  Holy  Spirit 
manifests  his  presence  variously,  and  even 
sometimes  with  sharp  contrasts,  in  diflerent 
individualities. 

Ver.  5. — Administrations.  Different  in- 
dividuals render  diflerent  services,  and  even 
apply  the  same  gifts  in  diflerent  ways,  as 
we  see  in  Bom.  xii.  6—8.  The  same  Lord. 
Who,  as  Head  of  the  Ohurch,  directs  all 
ministries  and  assigns  all  functions. 

Ver.  6. — Operations.  Manifestatioui  of 
Divine  power.  The  same  God  which  work- 
eth  all  in  all,  God  is  the  Source  of  all  gifts 
in  all  men.  He  is  the  Sun  of  the  whole 
universe,  and  always  in  the  meridian ;  and 
from  him,  as  the  Father  of  lights,  flows 
every  good  and  perfect  gift  (Jas.  i.  17).  It 
will  be  seen  that  this  is  one  of  the  many 
passages  which  teach  with  perfect  clearness 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  in  unity.  AU 
in  all  (for  this  expression,  see  ch.  xv.  28; 
Eph.  i.  23).  There  are  very  similar  passages 
descriptive  of  the  diversity  in  unity  of  God's 
dispensations,  in  Eph.  iv.  4 — 6, 11, 12 ;  Bom. 
xu.  6— 8;  1  Pet.  iv.  10,11. 

Ver.  7.— To  profit  withal.  With  refer- 
ence, that  is,  to  the  general  profit. 

Ver.  8. — The  word  of  wisdom  .  ,  ,  the 
word  of  knowledge.  In  modern  usage, 
"  knowledge  "  is  the  learning  which  we  by 
use  and  eflbrt  acquire;  "wisdom"  is  tlie 
insight  which  gradually  dawns  upon  us 
from  thouglit  and  experienee.  In  the  lan- 
guage of  the  New  Testament,  the  distinction 


398 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  hi.  1—31 


between  the  two  words  ii  not  bo  clearly 
marked,  but "  wisdom"  seems  to  belong  more 
to  the  human  spirit,  and  "knowledge  "  to  the 
intellect  The  "  discourse  of  wisdom " 
would  be  that  which  sets  forth  the  truth  of 
the  gospel  persuasively  to  work  conversion 
(oh.ii.  6,7);  the  "  discourse  of  knowledge  " 
would  be  that  which  enters  into  the  specula- 
tive and  theoretical  elaboration  of  systematic 
theology.  The  first  miglit  find  its  illustra- 
tion in  the  '  Imitatio  Christi; '  the  second  in 
the '  Summa  Theologies.' 

Ver.  9. — To  another.  Various  attempts 
have  been  made  to  classify  the  gifts  thus 
enumerated,  ae:  1.  Intellectual.  (1)  The 
word  of  wisdom;  (2)  the  word  of  know- 
ledge. 2.  Pertaining  to  exalted  faith  (fides 
miraeuhta).  (1)  Healings ;  (2)  miracles ; 
(3)  preaching;  (4)  discrimination  of  spirits. 
3.  (1)  Tongues;  and  (2)  their  interpre- 
tation. These  attempts  are  not  very  suc- 
cessful. St.  Paul  probably  uses  the  phrases 
"  to  one  "  and  "  to  another  "  (hwif  8^  .  .  . 
irdptf  8e)  merely  foi  variety  of  style  (as  in 
Heb.  zi.  35,  fj6),  with  no  very  definite 
classification  in  view,  as  be  does  not  mention 
all  the  charisms  (see  ver.  28).  Faith.  Faith 
in  its  highest  energy,  as  a  supernatural 
power;  the  faith  that  removes  mountains 
(Matt.  xvii.  19,  20).  The  gifts  of  healing. 
Not,  that  is,  by  medical  knowledge,  but  by 
supernatural  power  (Mark  zvi.  18 ;  Acts  T. 
15,16;  Jas.  V.  14,15). 

Ter.  10. — The  working  of  miiaoles; 
literally,  acW»e  efficacy  of  powers;  such  as  "the 
signs  of  an  apostle,"  to  which  St.  Paul  him- 
self appealed  in  2  Cor.  lii.  12,  which  included 
"  wonders  and  mighty  powers"  (comp.  Bom. 
zv.  18).  Prophecy.  Not  "prediction,"  but  ele- 
vated and  inspired  discourse ;  the  power  of 
preachingto  edification.  Bisoeming  of  spirits ; 
rather,  discemings,  or  poweri  to  discriminate 
between  true  and  false  spirits.  It  was  neces- 
sary in  those  days  of  intense  enthusiasm  and 
spiritual  awakenment  to  "test  the  spirits, 
whether  they  be  of  God"  (1  John  iv.  1). 
There  were  such  things  as  "deceitful  spirits" 
which  spoke  "doctrines  of  devils  "  (1  Tim. 
iv.  1 ;  Eev.  ii.  1,  2 ;  see  oh.  xiv.  29).  Divers 
kinds  of  tongues.  There  is  no  need  for  the 
word  "  divers."  The  particular  variety  of  the 
ecstatic,  and  often  entirely  unintelligible, 
utterance  known  as  "  the  tongue  "  ditiered 
with  the  individuality  or  temperament  of  the 
speaker.  Becent  lines  of  research,  by  that 
historical  method  which  can  alone  furnish 
correct  results,  have  led  to  the  conclusion  that, 
whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  "  tongues  " 
on  tho  day  of  Pentecost  (which  is  a  sef  arate 
question),  the  "tongue"  spoken  of  (fur  the 
most  part  with  relative  disparagement)  by 
St.  Paul  as  a  charism  of  the  Spirit  was  closely 
analogous  to  that  wild,  rapt,  unconscious, 
vneontrollable  nttenuMe  which,  with  vary- 


ing details,  has  always  occurred  in  tha 
religious  movements  which  stir  the  human 
aoul  to  its  utmost  depths.  The  attempts 
to  explain  the  word  "  tongues  "  as  meaning 
"  foreign  languages,"  or  "  the  primeval  lan- 
guage," or  "poetic  and  unusual  phraseology," 
etc.,  are  baseless  and  exploded.  The  notion 
that  by  this  gift  the  early  Christians  knew 
languages  which  they  had  never  acquired, 
is  not  only  opposed  to  the  entire  analogy  of 
God's  dealings,  but  to  every  allusion  in  the 
New  Testament  (except  a  prima  facie  h\ii 
untenable  view  of  the  meaning  of  Acts  ii.  4) 
and  to  every  tradition  and  statement  of  early 
Christian  history.  The  apostles  (so  far  as 
we  have  any  record  of  their  missionary  work 
in  the  New  Testament)  had  not  the  slightest 
need  to  acquire  foreign  languages.  Since 
Palestine  was  at  this  epoch  bilingual,  they 
could  all  speak  Aramaic  and  Greek,  and 
therefore  could  address  Jews  and  Gentiles 
throughout  the  civilized  world.  Every  single 
allusion  which  St.  Paul  makes  to  this 
subject  ezcludes  the  possibility  of  the 
supposition  of  a  miracle  so  utterly  useless 
and  meaningless,  so  subversive  of  every 
psychological  consideration,  and  so  alien 
from  the  analogy  of  all  God's  methods,  as 
the  talking  in  unacquired  foreign  languages 
by  persons  who  did  not  understand  them. 
The  interpretation  of  tongues.  Sometimes, 
but  not  always  (ch.  xiv.  13),  the  speaker,  on 
relapsing  from  liis  ecstasy,  was  able  to 
express  his  outburst  of  unintelligible  soli- 
loquy in  the  form  of  reasoned  thought.  When 
he  was  unable  to  do  so,  St.  Paul  ordains 
that  another  should  convey  in  ordinary 
language  the  impressions  left  by  the  inspired 
rhapsody  (ch.  xiv.  27 — 29). 

Yer.  11.— One  and  the  selfsame  Spirit. 
The  unity  of  the  source  from  which  all  the 
charisms  flowed  ought  to  have  excluded  the 
possibility  of  a  boastful  comparison  of  gifts, 
and  all  depreciation  of  those  gifts  which, 
because  they  were  less  dazzling,  were 
deemed  inferior.  St.  Paul  afterwards  shows 
that  the  less  dazzling  might  be  infinitely 
the  more  valuable  for  purposes  of  spiritual 
edification. 

Vers,  \2~3l.— The  Ghureh  tompared  U 
a  body  and  its  members, 

Ver.  12. — As  the  body  is  one,  and  hath 
many  members.  To  this  favourite  image 
St.  Paul  reverts  several  times  (Bom.  xii. 
4,  5;  Eph.  iv.  11—16;  OoL  ii.  19).  It  ii 
probable  that  he  was  familiar  with  tha 
image  from  the  fable  of  Menenius  Agrippa, 
who  had  used  it  as  a  plea  for  civil  unity  (  Liv., 
ii.  32).  So  also  is  Christ.  Christ  and  tho 
Church  form  one  body,  of  which  Christ  is 
the  Head ;  one  Vine,  of  which  Christians  are 
the  branches  (John  xv.);  one  building,  of 
which  Christians  are  the  living  stones. 
Ver.  la — By  one  Spirit;  ttiltet,  tm  mm 


m.  in.  1-41.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


399 


BpiHt.  The  diffnsion  of  one  spirit  is  the 
ulement  of  unity,  Are  we  all  baptized  ; 
latlier,  te«  were  all  baptized.  Whether  we  be 
Jews  or  Gentiles,  whether  we  he  bond  or  free. 
Moreover,  as  these  were  natinnnl  and  social 
dififerenocs,  they  were  all  obliterated  by 
baptism,  wliioli  made  us  all  equal  members 
of  one  holy  brotherhood  (Gal.  iii.  28).  Have 
been  all  made  to  drink  into  one  Spirit.  The 
word  "into"  is  probably  spurious.  We  have 
all  been  given  to  drink  of  one  Spirit,  which 
it  as  the  outpouring  of  living  water  (Acts  x. 
45 ;  John  vii.  37). 

Ver.  15. — If  ike  foot  shall  say,  eto.  So 
Seneea  says,  "Whnt  if  the  hands  should 
wish  to  injnre  the  feet,  oi  the  eyes  the 
hands  ?  Ai  all  the  members  agree  together 
because  it  is  the  interest  of  the  whole  that 
each  should  be  kept  safe,  so  men  spare  their 
fellow-men  because  we  are  bom  for  heaven, 
and  society  caonot  be  saved  except  by  the 
love  and  protection  of  ts  elements "  ('  De 
ra,'  ii.  31).  And  Marcos  Aurelius  :  "  We 
lave  been  born  for  mutual  help,  like  the  feet, 
like  the  hands,  like  the  rows  of  upper  and 
lower  teeth.  To  act  in  opposition  to  one 
another  ii  therefore  contrary  to  nature " 
('  Enohir.,'  ii.  1).    And  Pope— 

"  What  if  the  foot,  ordained  the  dust  to  tread. 
Or  band,  to  toil,  aspired  to  be  the  head  ? 
What  if  the  heiid,  the  eye,  or  ear  repined 
To  serve  mere  engines  to  the  ruling  mind? 
Just  as  absurd  for  any  part  to  claim 
To  be  another,  in  this  general  frame,"  ete. 

Ver.  17. — If  the  whole  body  were  an  eye, 
eto.  In  the  body  there  is  between  the 
members  an  identity  of  common  interest 
and  a  perfection  of  separate  functions.  All 
are  not  equal  in  strength  and  delicacy,  but 
each  is  happy,  and  each  is  necessary  to  the 
well-being  of  all.  There  could  be  no  better 
image  of  the  ideal  relation  of  Christian*  to 
each  other  and  to  the  Church. 

Ver.  18. — As  it  hath  pleased  him.  Not 
arbitrarily,  but  In  furtherance  of  one  wise 
and  beneficent  design,  so  that  each  may  be 
honoured  and  indispensable,  and  therefore 
contented  in  its  own  sphere. 

Ver.  19. — And  if  they  were  aU  one  member, 
vhere  were  the  bodyl  The  interests  of 
the  individual  must  never  oversihadow  those 
of  the  Church.  In  the  Church,  as  in  the 
body,  the  hypertrophy  or  the  atrophy  of  any 
one  member  is  injui'ious,  not  only  to  itself, 
but  to  the  whole. 

Ver.  21. — I  have  no  need  of  thee.  A 
rebuke  to  the  pride  of  those  who  thought 
their  own  gifts  to  be  exclusively  valuable.  ' 

Ver.  22.— Are  neoessary.  This  is  the 
point  of  the  fable  of  the  belly  and  the 
members. 

Ver.  23.— Which  we  think  to  be  less 
homnmble.     The  shelter  and  ornament  of 


clothing  are  nsed  to  cover  those  parts  of  the 
body  which  ere  conventionally  regarded  as 
the  least  seemly.  The  whole  of  this  illustra- 
tion is  meant  to  show  that  rich  and  poor, 
great  and  small,  high  and  low,  gifted  and 
unsifted,  have  all  tlieir  own  separate  and 
indispensable  functions,  and  no  class  of 
Christians  can  wisely  disparage  or  forego 
the  aid  derived  from  otlier  and  different 
classes.  The  unity  of  the  members  in  cue 
body  corresponds  to  "  the  unity  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  bond  of  peace"  which  sliould  prevail 
in  the  Church. 

Ver.  25. — No  schism  in  the  body.  What 
is  exclusively  called  "  schism  "  is  not  neces- 
sarily such.  There  may  be  difference  of 
fold  in  the  one  flock.  There  may  be  no 
real  discord  or  dissension,  though  then  may 
be  varieties  of  'ecclesiastical  government. 
Unity,  as  the  whole  argument  shows,  does 
not  demand  the  existence  of  uniformity. 
That  the  members  should  have  the  same  care 
one  for  another.  Thus  the  early  believers 
"  were  of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul ;  "  and 
the  moment  that  a  complaint  arose  that  one 
of  the  weakest  and  smallest  interests  was 
neglected,  the  supposed  neglect  was  amply 
remedied  (Acts  iv.  82 ;  vi.  1 — 6). 

Ver.  26. — Whether  one  member  suffer,  all 
the  members  suffer  with  it,  eto.  St.  Chry- 
sostom  illustrates  this  verse  by  saying  that 
if  a  thorn  runs  into  the  heel,  the  whole  body 
feels  it  and  is  troubled ;  and  that,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  the  head  is  garlanded,  the 
whole  man  is  glorified, 

Ver.  27. — Te  are  the  body  of  Christ,  and 
members  in  partionlar,  Each  Church  is  a 
sort  of  microcosm  of  the  whole  Church.  St. 
Paul  does  not  mean  that  the  Corinthian 
Church  is  a  member  in  the  body  of  all  the 
Churches, but  that  each  Corinthian  Christian 
ia  a  member  of  the  Church. 

Ver.  28. — Hath  set;  rather,  appointed. 
First  apostles.  Apart  from  the  twelve  (Luke 
vl.  13)  and  Paul  and  Barnabas,  the  name 
was  in  a  lower  sense  extended  to  leading 
and  eminent  Christians,  especially  to  those 
who  had  taken  part  in  founding  or  ruling 
Churches  (Bom.  xvL  7).  Prophets.  Wise 
spiritual  preachers.  It  is  instructive  to  note 
that  St.  Paul  places  the  gifts  of  wisdom 
and  knowledge  which  these  preachers  re- 
quire above  those  which  we  are  apt  to 
regard  as  exclusively  miraculous.  The 
"  wonders  "  stood  in  a  lower,  not  in  a  higher, 
position  when  compared  with  the  ordinary 
gifts  of  grace.  Teachers,  Those  who  have 
the  minor  gifts  of  instruction  and  exposition 
(Acts  xiii.  1).  Helps.  All  the  services 
rendered  by  the  power  of  active  sympathy ; 
by  the  work  of  deacons,  sisters  of  mercy, 
etc.  (Acts  vi.  3,  1).  The  word  occurs  in 
2  Maco.  viii.  19;  Ecdns.  xL  12,  and  the 
oorresponding  verb  in  Acts  xz.  85 ;  1  Tim, 


100 


THK  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa    [cH.  xn.  1— 81 


vi.  2 :  Luke  i.  54 ;  lee  Bom.  xri.  8.    Oovem- 

ments.  Powers  of  leading  and  organization. 
Diversities  [l^iuds]  of  tongues.  Ranked  m 
last  in  value.  They  are  emotional  gifts, 
which  had  only  a  very  subordinate  part  in 
the  work  of  edification,  and  are,  therefore, 
placed  below  the  gilts  of  knowledge,of  power, 
and  of  practical  life,  which  sum  up  the 
previous  enumeration. 

Ver.  29. — Are  all  apostles  1  etc.  It  ii 
God's  providence  which  "  has  appointed 
divers  orders  in  his  Ciiurch,"  anil  has 
"ordained  and  constituted  the  services  of 
angels  and  of  men  in  a  wonderful  order." 

Ver.  31. — Covet  earnestly;  literally,  bt 
tedUnu  for,  strongly  desire.  That  which  we 
aim  at  we  usually  attain ;  and  we  should 
•im  at  that  which  really  is,  not  at  that  which 


teems,  the  most  splendid  ehmritm.  And  yet 
show  I  unto  you  a  more  excellent  way.  The 
"more  excellent  way  "is  the  way  of  love, 
which  he  sets  forth  in  the  next  ehiipter,  and 
which  lies  open  to  all  Christians  without  dis- 
tinction. The  verse  means  either,  "  And 
further  "  (besides  bidding  you  aim  at  the 
better  gifts),  "  I  show  you  one  supreme  way 
of  attaining  them ; "  or,  "  And  I  show  you 
a  still  more  eminent  way.''  I  bid  yon  desire 
the  best  gifts,  and  furtlier  show  yon  a  truly 
royal  road  (viam  maxime  vialem),  a  road  par 
excellence,  which  leads  to  their  attainment. 
The  way  of  love  would  lead  to  them,  and 
it  was  it.^elf  the  best  of  them.  "  All  the  way 
to  heaven  lies  through  heaven,  and  the  path 
to  heaven  i«  heaven." 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 31. — I%e  Christly  assemhly.  "Now  concerning  spiritual  gifts,"  ete.  All 
throughout  this  chapter  refers  to  the  Christly  assembly.  I  use  this  word  in  preference 
to  the  word  "  Church,"  for  what  are  now  called  Churches  are  not  always  assemblages 
of  genuine  Christians.  Overlooking  the  mfre  minute  parts  of  this  remarkable  chapter, 
and  taking  a  broad  glance  at  the  whole,  there  are  three  important  subjects  very  sug- 
gestive and  capable  of  amplification,  which  are  discoverable.  These  are  that  eveiy 
member  of  this  Christly  community  has  passed  thro^h  a  radical  change;  that  every 
member  has  received  special  endowments  from  Ood ;  and  that  every  member  ahould 
regard  these  endowments  as  parts  of  a  vital  whole. 

L  Every  member  of  this  Christly  community  hai  passed  through  a  banoai. 
CHANOK.  "  Now  concerning  spiritual  gifts,  brethren,  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant. 
Ye  know  that  ye  were  Gentiles,  carried  away  unto  these  dumb  idols,  even  as  ye  were 
led."  The  change  here  spoken  of,  it  is  to  be  observed,  is  a  change  from  the  spirit  ol 
the  Gentiles,  or  the  world,  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  The  most  radical  change  that  can 
take  place  in  a  man  is  a  change  in  his  predominant  disposition,  or  moral  spirit.  Such 
a  disposition  is  in  truth  man's  moral  heart.  This  change  is  here  described :  1.  Nega- 
tively. No  man  who  has  experienced  it  has  anything  irreverent  or  profane  in  his  spirit 
towards  Christ.  "  No  man  speaking  by  the  Spirit  of  God  calleth  Jesus  accursed." 
2.  Positively.  "  No  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost." 
•'  Can  say,"  not  of  course  merely  the  words,  for  all  could  easily  do  that,  but  with  the 
heart  and  life.  This  change  is  the  production  of  the  Divine  Spirit — of  "the  Holy 
Ghost."  Now,  no  man  is  a  member  of  the  true  Church  who  has  not  experienced  this 
transformation ;  who  has  not  renounced  the  spirit  of  the  world  and  come  under  the 
control  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  There  are  such  who  are  found  in  connection  with  no 
conventional  Church,  and  there  may  be  conventional  Churches  where  no  such  are  found. 
All  such,  however,  wherever  found,  belong  to  the  Church  of  the  "  Firstborn  written  in 
heaven." 

II.  Every  member  of  this  Christly  community  has  eeobived  special  indowments 
FROM  God.  "  Now  there  are  diversities  of  gifts,  but  the  same  Spirit,"  eto.  (vers.  4, 12). 
Without  pausing  to  interpret  the  meaning  of  these  endowments,  I  simply  remark  that 
they  seem  capable  of  being  divided  into  three  classes:  (1) 'Those  o(  intellect. 
"  Wisdom,"  "  knowledge,"  etc.  (2)  Those  of  "faith,"  operating  faith  in  words,  in  deeds, 
and  in  "  discernment."  (3)  Those  of  language.  "  Tongues,"  speaking  and  inter- 
preting. Now,  all  responsible  men  have  intellect  of  some  kind  and  amount.  All  men 
DAvefaith  of  some  sort.  Man  has  an  instinctive  tendency  to  believe;  hence  his  credulity 
is  proverbial.  And  he  is  necessitated  to  believe;  he  could  not  carfy  on  the  business  ol 
life  without  faith.  All  men  also  have  a  language  of  some  kind  or  other.  What,  then, 
d«  we  mean  when  we  say  that  the  endowments  here  refer  to  intellect,  hiih,  and 
language?    Simply  this,  that  the  man  who  has  come  into  possession  ef  the  Ouiitljr 


aH.xn.1— 3L]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  401 

SjMt  and  purpose,  and  is  thus  a  memlier  of  the  genuine  Church,  will  receive  (1)  a  new 
force  and  elevation  of  intellect ;  (2)  a  new  object  and  energy  of  faith ;  (3)  a  new  style 
and  emphasis  of  expression — a  new  tongue.  This  great  variety  of  endowments  reveals : 
1.  The  sovereignty  of  the  Spirit.  Why  did  he  bestow  any  at  all  ?  Still  more,  why  so 
different  to  different  men  ?  The  only  answer  is  because  it  pleased  him  so  to  do.  "  He 
worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will."  2.  The  affluence  of  the  Spirit.  All 
these  great  and  varied  spiritual  and  mental-  endowments  came  from  him.  He  is  the 
inexhaustible  Fountain,  not  only  of  all  life,  but  of  all  spiritual  endowments.  3.  The 
henevoience  of  the  Spirit.  All  these  varied  endowments  bestowed  for  what  purpose  ?  To 
"  profit  withal."  All  for  the  highest  iisefulness ;  spiritual  happiness  is  the  end  of  the 
creation.  Since  all  our  endowments  are  the  free  gifts  of  God,  there  is  no  reason  for 
those  of  the  humblest  to  be  dissatisfied,  nor  for  those  who  have  the  most  splendid  to  be 
exultant. 

III.  Every  member  should  regard  these  endowments  as  parts  of  a  vital  whole. 
The  whole  is  here  called  the  "  body  of  Christ."  As  the  soul  resides  in  the  body,  directs 
the  body,  reveals  itself  in  the  body,  so  Christ  in  the  true  Church.  "  For  as  the  body  is 
one,  and,  hath  many  members,  and  all  the  members  of  that  one  body,  being  many,  are 
one  body,  so  also  is  Christ,"  etc.  Great  is  the  variety  in  the  various  faculties,  organs, 
and  parts  of  the  human  body.  Some  are  larger  and  more  comely  than  others,  but  each, 
even  the  most  insignificant  and  uncomely,  are  equally  essential.  "  Those  members  of 
the  body,  which  seem  to  be  more  feeble,  are  necessary,"  etc.  How  preposterous  would 
it  be  for  one  vital  part  of  the  body  to  contend  with  another  for  importance  and 
supremacy  I  Yet  not  more  absurd  than  for  one  member  of  a  Church  to  contend  with 
another.  This  is  Paul's  argument  against  the  divisions  that  were  rampant  ia  the 
Corinthian  Church. 

"  What  if  the  foot,  ordained  the  dust  to  treadi 

Or  hand,  to  toil,  aspired  to  be  the  head? 

Wliat  if  the  head,  the  eye,  or  ear  repined 

To  serve  mere  engines  to  the  ruling  miadf 

Jnst  as  absurd  for  any  part  to  claim 

To  be  another,  in  this  general  frame : 

Just  as  absurd  to  mourn  the  task  or  palni^ 

The  great  directing  Hind  of  all  ordains. 

All  are  but  parts  of  one  stupendous  whole, 

WhoM  body  nature  is,  and  Ood  the  soul." 

(Pope.) 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Yen.  1—81. — Spiritual  gifts,  A  transition  occurs  here  to  a  class  of  topics  most 
important  and  interesting,  since  they  involve  the  character  and  glory  of  the  new 
dispensation.  It  was  the  special  economy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  St.  Paul  was  now 
to  consider.  All  along,  we  have  had  an  insight  into  mistakes  and  disorders,  iuto 
disputes  and  wianglings  and,  at  times,  into  shameful  vices.  A  quarter  of  a  century 
had  little  more  than  passed  since  Christ  ascended  to  the  throne  of  the  Father  as  the 
God-Man  of  the  universe,  and  the  Spirit  had  descended  as  the  promised  Paraclete. 
Yet  what  strife  and  confusion !  The  marvellous  gifts  were  strangely  misunderstood. 
Once  these  Corinthians — so  the  apostle  reminds  them — had  been  Gentiles,  "  led  away 
unto  dumb  idols,  howsoever  they  might  be  led."  But  for  them  ine  age  of  "  dumb 
idols  "  had  ended  and  the  great  dispensation  of  speech  had  opened.  No  man  sharing 
this  speech  from  heaven — "  speaking  by  the  Spirit  of  God  " — could  call  "  Jesus 
accursed;"  and  only  such  as  were  enlightened  and  directed  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
could  say  from  the  heart  of  love  and  faith  that  "  Jesus  is  the  Lord."  At  the  outset, 
this  principle  is  laid  down  as  fundamental  to  the  economy  of  gifts ;  it  is  a  Divine 
economy  i  it  is  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Ohost.  Something  was  gained  when 
this  was  made  clear.  Inspiration  was  no  wild,  spasmodic,  frantic  thing.  It  was  not 
individuality  unloosed  and  driven  into  gross  eccentricity.  Whatever  mysteries  were 
connected  with  these  manifestations,  there  was  a  grand  system  to  which  they 
appertained,  and  it  was  upheld,  applied,  administered,  by  the  Holy  Ohost.    Such, 

L  OOBINTHIAKa.  2  B 


402  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xn.  1— 3L 

then,  is  the  position  assumed,  and  it  commands  the  whole  question.  This  donei 
tbe  places  occupied  by  different  parties,  the  diversity  of  gifts,  their  number  and 
multiformity,  tbe  relativity  of  each  to  a  controlling  general  idea,  and  the  unity  sought 
as  a  final  end,  could  be  ascertained.  Naturally,  then,  diversities  of  gifts  would  he  the 
first  to  attract  attention.  Difference  between  objects  begins  our  perceptive  educa- 
tion, difference  in  our  moods  of  mind  cultivates  our  consciousness,  difference  must 
be  seen  before  the  higher  intellect  can  perform  the  processes  of  abstraction  and 
generalization.  Accordingly  St.  Paul  starts  with  "diversities  of  gifts."  It  was  not 
a  new  idea.  The  Piophet  Joel  had  it  substantially,  along  with  the  conception  of 
universality,  when  he  spoke  of  prophesyings,  of  dreams,  of  visions,  and  declared 
that  servants  and  handmaids  should  rejoice  in  the  possession  of  this  power.  Christ 
had  closed  his  earthly  revelation  of  the  Father  by  unfolding  the  manifoldness  of 
the  Spirit's  office.  Pentecost  had  made  good  the  promise,  and  had  shown  as  the 
firstfruits  of  the  harvest  the  recovery  of  the  world's  languages  to  the  service  of 
Cliristianity.  St.  Paul,  however,  handles  the  idea  in  a  way  altogether  new.  Genius 
passes  old  truths  through  its  transforming  brain,  and  they  charm  the  world  as  fresh 
and  wondrous  disclosures.  Inspiration  honours  individuality ;  nothing  treats  the 
personality  of  tbe  man  with  such  respect;  and  hence  St.  Paul's  specialization  of 
the  fact  of  diversity.  Marii;  how  he  treats  it.  Gifts  themselves,  as  relative  to  men 
who  are  their  recipients,  are  very  unlike.  Capacity  in  each  case  is  a  pre-existent 
fact  of  providence,  and  the  Spirit  consults  providence.  But  in  the  next  place,  gifti 
are  ministries,  and  the  diversities  (distributions)  are  for  various  spheres.  Functional 
work  is  of  many  kinds,  offices  have  each  its  speciality,  and,  as  earthly  industry 
must  achieve  its  results  by  division  of  labour,  so  the  economy  of  the  Holy  Grhost 
must  differentiate  one  form  of  energy  from  another.  Ministers  are  servants,  and  these 
ministries  are  serving  forces.  And  again,  the  gifts  are  represented  as  operations 
by  whose  effects,  as  incorporated  in  society,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  built  up.  "  These 
are  not  to  be  limited  to  miraculous  effects,  but  understood  commensurately  with' 
the  gifts  of  whose  working  they  are  the  results "  (Alford).  If,  in  other  passages  of 
Scripture,  the  person  of  the  Father  or  of  the  Son  is  prominently  displayed,  the 
personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  is  here 
set  forth  with  a  distinctness  and  emphasis  characteristic  of  his  relations  to  the  plan 
of  salvation.  Just  before  (ver.  3),  St.  Paul  had  declared  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  the  confession  of  Jesus  as  Lord,  and  the  name,  by  which  he  was  known 
among  men  (Jesns  of  Nazareth)  and  recognized  in  his  trial,  condemnation,  and 
crucifixion,  is  home  up  from  earth  and  glorified  in  his  exaltation.  And  here  he  is 
the  "same  Spirit"  in  the  opening  thought,  "diversities  of  gifts."  There  are  "differ- 
ences of  administrations,"  but  tbe  "  same  Lord; "  "  diversities  of  operations,"  but  the 
"same  God  that  worketh  all  in  all;"  nor  will  the  apostle  specify  the  fulness  of 
the  Spirit's  gifts  and  the  greatness  of  his  presiding  agency  over  the  Church  with- 
out conneciing  him  with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  The  mystery  of  the  Trinity 
remains.  But  the  doctrine  becomes  a  very  real  and  practical  fact,  and,  as  such, 
assimilable  in  Christian  expeiience,  when  thus  identified  with  grace  in  all  its  workings 
through  the  Cliurch.  And  so  true  is  this  that  the  very  mystery  is  essential  to 
tbe  effect  tlie  doctrine  produces,  by  forming  an  infinite  background,  against  which 
the  fact  stands  in  relief.  Under  these  circumstances,  mystery  commends  itself, 
not  simply  to  reverence,  but  to  experimental  appreciation.  Reason,  if  made  conscious 
of  its  own  instinct,  finds  a  basis  for  itself  and  a  vindication  of  its  functions  in  the 
exercise  of  faith,  and,  by  means  of  this  illumination,  reason  is  assured  that  the 
faculties  of  the  human  mind  have  their  laws  and  are  bound  in  obedience  thereunto, 
because  the  law  of  mystery  is  the  primal  law  whence  they  draw  their  life  and 
support.  No  marvel,  then,  that  the  apostle  presents  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son, 
and  God  the  Spirit  with  such  prominence  in  the  initial  stage  of  his  argument  on 
spiritual  gifts.  Most  closely  is  the  doctrine  identified  with  the  experimental  ana 
practical  truths  he  was  about  to  enforce.  From  no  lower  source  than  tbe  mystery 
of  all  mysteries  will  he  bring  the  awe,  the  sense  of  responsibility  under  trust,  and 
the  greatness  of  Church  duties  arising  from  the  diversities  of  gifts.  It  is  not  this 
or  that  gift  alone,  nor  this  or  that  office-bearer  alone,  nor  this  or  that  outwrought 
result  alone,  but  theur  union  is  one  economy  and  their  combination  in  a  totality, 


CH.  xn.  1—31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  403 

which  he  wished  to  emphasize.  Most  impressively  is  this  done  hy  presenting 
Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  as  the  one  God  of  these  diverse  gifts,  the  Trinity  itself  heing 
the  very  ground  and  source  of  the  diversification.  The  broad  scope  of  the  diversities 
in  the  Church  is  indicated  in  the  statement  that  the  "  manifestation  of  the  Spirit 
is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal."  The  character  of  the  Divine  communication 
to  "  every  man "  is  defined  by  the  word  "  manifestation,"  which  expresses  tlie 
agency  of  the  Spirit  in  these  human  instruments.  First  of  all,  the  Spirit  is  mani- 
fested to  the  man  and  then  through  the  man.  As  a  condition  precedent  to  his  office, 
the  man  has  an  experience,  and  it  consists  in  his  own  conscious  knowledge  that 
God  has  come  to  his  soul  and  imbued  it  with  the  Spirit.  Herein,  herein  only,  lies 
his  capacity  for  usefulness ;  herein  his  safeguard  against  failure.  And  the  measure 
of  the  one  manifestation  is  the  measure  of  the  other ;  for  in  the  degree  that  a  man 
feels  his  own  soul  alive  to  God  will  he  impart  vitality  to  his  ministrations.  Preacher, 
Sunday  school  teacher,  Bible  reader,  tract  distributer,  Paul  on  Mars'  Hill  or  in  the 
prison  at  Rome,  Bunyan  writing  in  gaol,  Hannah  More  at  Barleywood,  John  Pounds 
with  his  ragged  school ;  no  matter  what  the  manifestation,  as  to  where  made  and 
how  modified  by  individuality,  it  is  divinely  human  to  its  subject  before  it  is  made 
divinely  human  in  him  as  an  instrument.  Finally,  the  broad  scope  (every  man) 
and  the  quality  of  the  influence  (manifestation)  are  carried  forward  to  the  object 
and  end,  viz.  to  profit  withal.  For  the  common  advantage  these  gifts  were  bestowed ; 
the  greater  the  bestowment,  the  nearer  its  human  connections ;  and  the  more  of  a 
recipient  the  man,  the  more  of  a  man  must  he  be  in  the  outgoings  of  his  intelligence, 
love,  and  zeal  in  behalf  of  others.  "  Who  maketh  thee  to  differ  from  another  ?  and 
what  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive  ? "  Such  was  the  argument  (oh.  iv.)  to 
check  partisanship  in  the  Corinthian  Church ;  but  in  this  passage,  "  to  profit  withal " 
is  exhibited  in  its  positive  aspect  as  the  inspiration  of  motive  and  purpose  and  end 
of  all  Christian  working.  Is  it  not,  then,  remarkable  that  Christianity  approaches 
man  at  a  point  where  he  is  most  sensitive  to  self,  and  where  he  is  quickest  and 
boldest  to  assert  his  unyieldingness  to  the  claims  of  others,  and  at  this  very  point  to 
demand  of  him  "the  common  profit"?  Make  any  analysis  of  human  nature  you 
please,  pride  of  intellect  is  the  most  lordly  of  all  its  imperious  qualities.  Particularly 
in  the  case  of  fine  gifts,  men  who  are  the  possessois  of  them  are  instinctively  dis- 
posed to  assert  a  despotic  sway  over  others,  or,  if  not  that,  to  indulge  a  feeling  of 
self-gratulation  and  its  counterpart  of  self-isolation  because  of  their  superiority.  Yet 
it  is  just  here  Christianity  requires  humility  and  enforces  the  claims  of  a  most  vigorous 
sympathy.  How  this  "common  profit"  is  to  be  subserved,  St.  Paul  proceeds  to 
show  in  vers.  8 — 11.  There  is  no  large  accumulation  in  one  man,  no  fostering  of 
the  spirit  of  self-aggrandizement  no  such  exaltation  of  one  as  to  prove  a  humiliation 
to  another.  Talents  are  divided  out,  and  each  talent  bears  the  seal  of  God,  and 
comes  authenticated,  not  to  the  intellect,  but  to  the  spiritual  sense  of  a  redeemed  man- 
hood. Gh)  through  this  catalogue  as  drawn  out  by  the  apostle ;  dwell  on  the  signifi- 
cance of  each  specification ;  avail  yourself  of  the  helps  afforded  by  our  most  critical 
scholars  in  the  explication  "of  "  wisdom "  as  intuition,  of  "  knowledge  "  as  acquired 
information,  of  '^ faith"  as  transcending  its  ordinary  limits  as  the  grace  of  salvation, 
of  the  "gifts  of  healing"  as  adapted  to  various  diseases,  of  the  "  working  of  miracles  " 
as  time  and  occasion  called  for,  all  these  charisms  proceeding  from  the  same  Spirit; 
continue  the  enumeration  that  includes  "prophecy"  or  the  illumination  of  the 
mind  by  the  Spirit  and  the  exalted  activity  of  its  faculties,  after  that  the  eye  of 
watchful  judgment,  "  discerning  of  spirits,"  so  as  to  discriminate  between  genuine 
inspiration  and  its  alloys  and  counterfeits,  then  the  "  divers  kinds  of  tongues,"  and 
the  power  to  interpret  or  translate  the  unknown  language ;  and  all  these  the  works 
of  "  one  and  the  selfsame  Spirit "  that,  distributes  the  charism  to  each  one  in 
harmony  with  the  law  of  individuality,  and,  at  the  same  time,  exercises  the  Divine 
sovereignty  so  that  the  distribution  is  made  "  severaUy  as  he  will "  (Alford,  Hodge, 
Lange);  and  when  you  have  thus  expanded  your  views  to  the  dimensions  of  this 
spiritual  provision  for  the  Church  and  the  exquisite  symmetry  of  its  organism,  tell 
us  if  any  interest  possible  to  man's  present  attitude,  if  any  craving  of  true  life  in 
Its  mortal  and  immortal  relationships,  if  any  outreachings  toward  the  infinite  when 
body,  soul,  and  spirit  have  interblended  their  instincts,  and  become  one  in  tlie  heir 


404  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTmANS.    [oh.  xn.  1— 3L 

ship  of  an  eternal  inheritance,  hare  heen  left  neglected  or  meagrely  provided  for} 
To  bring  this  variety  and  unity  mo.'e  vividly  before  the  (Corinthians,  St.  Paul  employi 
a  most  apt  illustration  taken  from  the  human  body  as  an  organism.  Already  he 
had  argued  the  diversity  of  gifts  in  adaptiveness  to  the  capacities  and  wants  of  the 
Church.  Left  at  that  point,  the  argument  would  have  been  incomplete.  It  was 
needful  to  see  what  the  Church  itself  was  as  an  organization,  and  how  its  wholeness 
stood  related  to  its  individual  parts.  In  the  earlier  portion  of  the  Epistle  he  had 
combated  the  unhappy  tendency  towards  an  excessive  individualism.  Theoretic 
speculations  had  been  kept  out  of  sight,  and  practical  questions,  lying  within  imme- 
diate range  and  urgently  demanding  treatment,  had  been  scrutinized.  Was  the 
work  done  when  domestic  morals  had  been  pleaded  for,  when  social  companionships 
were  set  in  a  true  light ;  when  the  betrayals  of  a  lax  and  over-accommodating 
sympathy  in  public  intercourse  were  exposed;  when  the  corruptions  growing  out  of 
an  abuse  of  love-feasts  and  extending  to  the  Holy  Communion  had  been  faithfully 
dealt  with ;  when,  in  addition  thereunto,  he  had  expounded  the  Divine  import  and 
sacredness  of  the  Lord's  Supper?  Was  the  work  done  when  he  had  opened  the 
treasures  of  grace  and  taught  his  brethren  how  the  Divine  munificence  had  enriched 
their  souls  ?  Was  he  content  to  stop  after  delineating  the  correspondence  between 
the  bestowments  of  the  Spirit  in  his  multiformity  of  gifts,  and  the  complexity  of 
the  Church  as  the  witness  to  the  Trinity  ?  By  no  means  was  the  subject  exhausted. 
Specific  as  he  had  been — direct,  resolute,  pungent — how  much  remained  to  be  said 
(as  we  shall  see  hereafter),  to  reflect  back  on  what  had  been  said,  and  bring  out 
half-latent  meanings  of  truths  stated  which  the  argument,  in  its  direct  connections, 
did  not  exact  of  his  logic  at  the  instant!  At  this  point,  then,  he  introduces  a 
felicitous  illustration.  It  is  done  in  a  business-like  style.  Image  it  can  scarcely 
be  called,  since  it  has  ao  poetic  element  addressed  merely  to  the  aesthetic  sense, 
and  is  quite  as  much  the  product  of  the  reason  as  of  tlie  imagination.  We  have 
spoken  of  St.  Paul  as  one  who  studied  the  human  body  and  was  profoundly  interested 
in  considering  its  present  and  prospective  condition  in  the  light  of  the  Christian 
revelation.  The  illustration  here  used  extends  through  a  large  portion  of  the 
chapter,  and,  as  a  figure,  is  for  him  elaborated  with  unusual  fulness  and  painstaking. 
Evidently  it  is  not  a  creation  of  the  moment,  for  there  is  not  a  mark  of  sudden 
impulse.  Tracing  the  analogy  between  the  Church  and  the  human  body,  and  recog- 
nizing the  Spirit  of  the  earlier  creation  in  this  later  and  more  glorious  one,  the 
inspired  author  evinces  that  delight  in  similarity  of  relations  which  is  the  infallible 
sign  both  of  high  endowment  and  broad  culture,  and  he  proceeds  with  a  quiet  and 
steady  gait  till  the  ground  has  been  fully  traversed.  1,  Tke  human  tody  ia  an 
organism.  It  is  "  one,  and  hath  many  members."  By  an  organism  we  understand  "  a 
whole  consisting  of  parts  which  exist  and  work  each  for  all  and  all  for  each ;  in  other 
words,  which  are  recii)rocally  related  as  means  and  end"  (Dr.  Kling).  The  principle 
of  life  is  a  principle  of  organization,  weaving  a  form  for  itself,  shaping  that  form  to 
itself,  and  impressing  thereupon  its  own  distinctive  image.  The  principle  assumes 
various  organizations — simple  in  some,  complex  in  others — and,  in  every  case,  the 
life-power  is  the  animating  and  determinative  force.  "  So  also  is  Christ "  (ver.  12). 
In  the  Church,  which  is  his  body,  Christ  is  the  constituting  Power.  He  is  its  Life, 
and  without  him  it  is  nothing.  Through  the  Spirit  ho  maintains  those  operations 
which  impart  vitality  to  all  the  institutions  and  agencies  of  the  Church.  "By 
one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized  into  one  body  "  (ver.  13),  whether  "  Jews  or  Gentiles ; " 
such  is  the  almighty  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  begetting  vitality  and  transforming 
national  and  race  distinctions  into  its  own  likeness,  that  they  are  made  one.  This 
is  also  true  of  "  bond  or  free."  The  characteristics  of  individuality  as  to  races  and 
social  positions  remain,  but  whatever  is  incapable  of  unity  is  removed  and  the 
organism  si;bdues  to  itself  every  element  and  constituent  it  adopts.  All  are  made 
"  to  drink  into  one  Spirit."  Viewed  externally,  we  see  Jews  and  Greeks,  bond  and 
free,  with  their  peculiarities  derived  from  tlie  past  and  respected  as  the  signs  of 
Providence  in  the  ages  preparatory,  to  Christ's  advent.  A  rich,  and  picturesque 
mosaic  is  thv.s  presented  by  the  Church.  Along  with  this,  the  Church  is  also  a 
type  of  the  future  man,  from  whom  all  selfish  antagonisms  have  gone  and  over 
thorn  the  seuiimenc  of  brotherhood   is   supreme.    2.  ?%e  human  body  ha*  variou* 


OH.  xn.  1—31.1    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,  405 

correlated  parts.  "  For  the  body  is  not  one  member,  but  many  "  (ver.  14).  Each  con- 
■titutent  or  "  member "  must  be  recognized  as  something  in  itself,  as  having  an 
autonomy,  as  created  for  a  distinct  function  and  ordained  to  do  its  own  special 
work.  Not  else  could  the  body  be  worthy  of  its  place  as  the  head  of  the  physical 
world  and  represent  the  mind  of  man.  In  this  wondrous  organism,  which  may  be 
likened  to  a  community,  every  cell  is  an  independent  activity,  a  citizen  with  rights 
of  its  own  and  entitled  to  protection  against  all  hostile  influence.  The  fable  of 
Menenius  is  introduced,  and  the  classic  reader  of  our  day  is  reminded  of  Coriolanus 
as  the  representative  of  the  haughty  patricians  and  yet  more  uf  the  haughtier 
statesman,  and  of  the  fierce  contempt  felt  far  the  people.  St.  Paul  has  given  due 
prominence  to  this  idea  of  each  organ  as  performing  its  functions  and  as  essential 
to  the  whole.  If  the  unity  is  brought  about  from  within,  then  it  follows  that 
every  member  must  share  the  animating  principle.  Food  must  be  provided  for 
blood,  blood  must  nourish  the  organs,  the  organs  must  be  tributary  in  specific  ways 
to  the  organism,  or  the  organism  must  perish.  So  in  the  Church,  different  men 
are  different  organs.  Such  are  the  uumerous  offices  of  the  Huly  Ghost  as  the 
Executive  of  Father  and  Son  ;  such  are  his  relations  as  Remembrancer,  Testifier, 
Convincerj  that  there  must  needs  be  much  diversity  of  gilt;  and  hence  there  are 
gifts  of  healing,  helping,  governing,  extraordinary  faith,  and  "  divers  kinds  of 
tongues."  Light  is  distributed  in  colours,  and  colours  in  tints  and  hues,  and  tints 
and  hues  multiply  themselves  in  minute  differences.  Sound  breaks  up  in  notes. 
Form  assumes  multitudinous  shapes  and  attitudes.  The  ocean  rolls  in  restless  lines 
and  the  earth  curves  to  a  curving  sky.  "  Not  one  member,  but  many,"  and  the 
manifoldness  in  the  magnificence  of  the  universe  is  repeated,  as  far  as  may.  be,  in 
the  complexity  of  the  human  organism,  and,  in  turn,  this  exists  for  the  Church. 
But .  3.  Reciprocity  of  action  must  he  fully  maintained.  The  organs  of  the  body 
are  distinct  but  not  separate,  since  they  combine  in  one  organism  and  are  subordinate 
to  a  unitary  result.  They  are  supplied  with  blood  by  the  same  heart  and  they  are 
all  dependent  on  nerves  running  from  nervous  centres.  Spinal  cord,  medulla, 
cerebellum,  cerubrum,  are  local  in  position,  but  not  local  in  function.  Not  an 
organ,  though  independent  in  structure  and  functional  operation,  can  insulate  itself 
and  be  independent  of  the  whole.  Our  pleasures  and  pains  alike  testify  to  this  domi- 
nant mutuality.  A  beautiful  landscape  is  not  limited  to  the  retina;  a  musical 
sound  enters  the  rhythm  of  heart  and  lungs,  and  the  ear  is  only  a  fragment  of  the 
joy;  so  that  localized  sensibility,  however  intense,  becomes  generalized  feeling. 
The  special  senses  exist  for  a  sensorium.  St.  Paul  regards  the  body,  therefore, 
as  an  assemblage  or  confederation  of  organs,  and  enlarges  (vers.  15 — 26)  on  the  idea 
in  its  several  aspects.  The  section  has  been  fitly  spoken  of  as  a  "colloquy  in  a 
highly  dramatic  style."  The  body  itself  is  thoroughly  dramatic.  It  represents  and 
interprets  mind.  It  acts  the  soul.  Downward  it  may  go  and  imitate  the  beast, 
even  descend  below  the  beast.  Upward  it  may  go,  and  go  so  high  that  the  faces  of 
Moses  and  St.  Stephen  glow  with  a  light  never  on  shore  or  sea.  Now,  this  colloquy 
presents  one  member  of  the  body  arrayed  against  another  and  vainly  asserting  its 
indeiiendence.  If  a  discontented  foot  envy  the  hand,  or  the  ear  envy  the  eye,  "  is 
it  therefore  not  of  the  body,"  participating  in  its  rights,  enjoying  its  privileges, 
ennobled  by  the  organism  ?  They  are  for  the  sake  of  each  other,  so  that  "  the  eye 
cannot  say  to  the  hand,  I  have  no  need  of  thee :  nor  again  the  head  to  the  feet, 
I  iiave  no  need  of  you."  Furthermore,  ki  the  case  oi  feeble  organs,  does  the  body 
turn  vindictively  against  them  ? — ^in  the  case  of  those  less  honourable,  are  they 
despised  ?  in  the  case  of  the  uncomely  parts,  are  they  treated  with  contempt  ?  Nay, 
in  the  well-ordered  commonwealth  of  the  body,  where  the  instincts,  endowed  by 
the  Almighty  with  a  measure  of  bis  sovereignty,  retain  their  sway,  parts  tliat  are 
feeble,  less  honourable,  less  comely,  appeal  to  pity  and  sympathy  and  taste  to  be 
cheered  and  eomforted.  The  whole  glandular  system,  though  assigned  to  the  func- 
tions of  secretion  and  excretion,  is  yet  a  wonderful  provision  for  emotion,  not  only 
for  emotion  as  respects  others,  but  as  self-regarding  and  self-relieving.  A  whispered 
need  of  assii^tance  from  the  very  humblest  organ  is  heard  in  every  recess  of  the 
corporeal  structure.  Temple  it  is  even  in  ruins,  and  its  ministers,  inhabiting  dim 
vaults  and  mysterioui  crypts,  hear  the  prayer  for  compassion  and  aid,  and  hasten  t« 


406  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  xii.  1—31. 

give  sympathy  uid  assistance.  Beyond  all  this,  what  vicarioug  work  the  organs 
do  in  their  considerate  kindness  to  one  another?  No  doubt  we  are  open  to  the 
charge  of  reading  between  the  apostle's  lines  and  of  going  beyond  his  intended 
meaning.  Be  it  so ;  on  the  lines  or  between  them,  no  matter,  if  the  philosophy 
and  spirit  of  the  thought  be  observed.  St.  Paul's  inspiration  was  for  our  day  as 
well  as  his  own,  and  perhaps  it  would  not  be  very  e^ctiavagant  to  say  that  the 
Christian  scholarship  of  the  nineteenth  century  sees  depths  in  some  of  his  con- 
ceptions that  he  never  saw.  For  it  is  the  nature  of  inspiration  to  be  ever  unfolding 
its  manifoldness  of  meaning,  holding  tenaciously  to  its  original  grouud,  and  yet 
pressing  back  its  horizon  to  embrace  fresh  territory,  and  thus  making  itself  a 
specially  quickening  power  to  successive  ages.  One  thing,  however,  is  very  clear, 
namely,  St.  Paul  saw  the  analogy  between  the  Church  and  the  human  body.  By 
virtue  of  the  connection  of  its  organs,  he  takes  occasion  to  urge  on  the  Church  very 
weighty  and  solemn  duties.  Mutual  forbearance,  respect,  honour,  must  be  sacredly 
cherished.  The  organic  life  of  the  Church  makes  it  Christ's  body.  "  Ye  are  the 
body  of  Christ,  and  members  in  particular."  Tlie  main  thought  is  restated  and 
re-enforced  as  to  apostles,  prophets,  etc.  (vers.  28 — 30) ;  and  surely  nothing  has  been 
left  unsaid  which  could  convince  and  persuade  the  Corinthians  that  their  spiritual 
organization  was  not  a  thing  to  take  care  of  itself,  nor  to  be  trusted  to  hap-hazard, 
nor  to  be  surrendered  to  self-appointed  leaders.  It  was  a  life,  a  sphere,  a  disci- 
pline and  culture,  a  joy  and  blessedness,  for  alL  Were  the  wealiliest  among  them 
to  be  overlooked  as  useless?  If  there  were  poor  widows  with  only  two  mites  to 
cast  into  God's  treasury,  they  had  their  place  and  vocation.  If  there  were  little 
children,  their  looks  and  ways  told  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Were  there 
uncomely  parts?  Grace  was  strong  enough  to  do  them  abundant  honour.  One  of 
the  invaluable  blessings  of  Church  life  is  to  show  respect  and  regard  for  such  as 
society  excludes  from  its  esteem,  and  alasl  too  often  treats  with  disdain,  and 
thereby  dooms  them  to  a  fate  more  wretched  than  poverty.  In  honovuriug  them, 
the  Church  teaches  these  persons  to  honour  themselves,  and  that,  once  secured, 
improvement  outward  and  inward  is  made  far  easier.  In  brief,  wherever  anything 
was  lacking,  there  "  more  abundant  honour ''  should  be  bestowed.  And  wliy  all 
this  ?  That  none  be  neglected,  that  all  be  partakers  of  one  another's  sufferings  and 
pleasures,  and  that  the  community  be  indeed  a  communion  of  one  heart  and  mind. 
"  That  there  should  be  no  schism."  This  was  the  dread  that  hung  over  St.  Paul : 
"  schism  ; "  this  was  the  terror  that  darkened  liis  path  far  more  than  the  enemies 
and  persecutors  that  pursued  his  steps.  "  Members  should  have  the  same  care 
one  for  another."  Brotherhood  should  sanctify  individuality,  and  consummate  and 
crown  all  the  gifts  of  the  Divine  Giver.  What  a  wonder  this,  to  set  before  a  city 
like  Corinth  I  What  an  ideal  to  lift  up  in  its  resplendent  glory  in  a  period  such 
as  the  first  century  1  And  this  by  the  "  ugly  little  Jew,"  a  wandering  tent-maker, 
who  had  nothing  and  would  have  nothing  to  commend  him  to  the  carnal  philosophy 
and  popular  tastes  of  the  age,  and  who  could  only  speak  from  his  own  soul  and 
the  Spirit  in  that  soul  to  the  souls  of  men.  Yet  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  headship 
of  humanity  was  his  stay  and  strength,  and  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  were  his 
tokens  and  pledges  of  victory  for  his  cause.  He  would  have  others  share  his  assur- 
ance and  participate  with  him  in  the  infinite  blessedness.  Therefore,  lie  argues, 
"  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts,"  and  the  best  tuay  to  secure  these  hest  gifU  he  will 
proceed  at  once  to  show  them. — ^L. 

Ver.  12. — SpiritiMii  unity.  If  this  be  a  true  representation,  what  an  honour,  what 
a  happiness  it  is  to  be  a  Christian  I  It  is  to  be  joined  to  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory, 
and  to  be  associated  with  the  noblest,  the  purest,  the  best  of  mankind. 

I.  In  what  respects  Christ  and  bib  members  abb  one.  The  expression  used  by 
the  apostle  is  remarkable  ;  "  So  also  is  Christ."  He  says,  "  Christ ; "  yet  he  means 
Christ's  people ;  from  which  it  appears  that,  in  the  view  of  the  apostle,  as  in  the  view 
o?  the  Lord  himself,  all  who  are  his  are  identified  with  and  comprehended  in  his  own 
Divine  personality.  1.  This  is  a  fact  which  is  exhibited  in  various  manners  and 
especially  by  various  metaphors.  Not  only  are  Christ  and  his  people  the  Head  and 
I  he  body;  they  are  the  Vine  and  the  branches,  the  Foundation  and  the  stones,  tk« 


OH.  xn.  1—31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  ^0^ 

organism  and  the  Soul.  2.  The  union  as  spiritual  is  formed  and  sustained  by  faith. 
There  are  sacramental  symbols  of  the  union,  but  the  real  and  vital  connection  is  of 
spirit  ^th  spirit,  t.e.  s  of  faith.  As  mutual,  it  is  depicted  by  the  Lord  himself,  wh^n 
be  B^B,  "  I  in  you,  and  you  in  me."  3.  The  character  and  the  aim  of  the  Iletui 
sad  the  members  are  identical.    "  As  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world," 

n.  Ik  what  sespeots  Cbbist's  members  abb  subordikate  to  him.  1.  He  is  tlie 
CHver  of  the  life  which  his  people  have  in  common  with  him,  2.  He  is  the  Source  of 
authority,  issuing  the  commands  which  govern  their  activity.  3.  He  is  the  Centre  of 
harmony ;  they  who  are  his  revolve  around  him  as  planets  round  the  sun  ;  and  their 
orbits  resemble  one  another,  because  all  are  drawn  by  the  same  attractive  force.  4. 
He  confers  upon  them  the  glory  which  is  their  prerogative — the  moral  glory  which  is 
conferred  here  and  now,  and  the  glory  to  be  revealed  hereafter. 

nL  In  what  bbspects  Christ's  members  are  related  one  to  anotheb.  All  are 
"  one  body."  1.  Their  dependence  upon  the  one  Head  is  the  same.  The  unity  is  nut 
simply  in  the  organization  ;  it  is  in  the  life.  2.  They  are  bound  by  Christian  law  and 
drawn  by  Christian  impulse  to  mutual  affection  and  confidence.  Love  is  the  law  of 
Christian  social  life,  as  in  the  following  chapter  is  so  exquisitely  shown.  3.  They  have 
each  his  several  service  to  render  to  the  one  Master ;  the  gifts  are  alike  consecrated, 
the  ministrations  are  alike  devoted,  to  the  Divine  Lord.  4.  They  have  mutual 
ability  and  obligation  to  help.  As  in  the  body  each  member,  each  sense,  supplies 
the  other's  lack  of  service,  so  in  the  Church  it  is  not  simply  the  case  that  the 
gifted  and  the  powerful  render  help  to  others  less  favourably  endowed,  but  the  feeblest 
and  the  most  obscure  may  render  some  service  for  which  his  brethren  may  have  reason 
to  be  for  ever  grateful.  5.  In  the  blessings  conferred  by  the  Church  upon  the  world 
around,  each  may  be  said  to  supply  the  other's  deficiency ;  and  the  work  of  evangeliza- 
tion, in  which  each  performs  his  proper  part,  is  advanced  by  the  cordial  co-operation 
of  aU  whom  Providence  has  quiilified  and  grace  has  inclined  for  the  work. — T. 

Vers.  15, 16. — Contentment  i$  better  than  envy.  Where  party  spirit  is  rife,  as  it  was 
in  the  Corinthian  Church,  there  is  always  danger  of  hatred,  envying,  and  jealousy. 
The  rebuke  to  these  dispositions,  administered  by  the  apostle,  is  founded  upon  the 
deepest  principles  of  Christianity.  The  Church  is  not  a  club  which  each  member  joins 
for  his  own  advantage  and  convenience,  but  a  body  in  which  each  member  is  incor- 
porated for  mutual  co-operation  in  common  subjection  to  the  Divine  Head. 

I.  There  must  needs  be,  in  belioious  as  in  civil  societt,  different  positions 
C0BBE6F0KDINQ  TO  VARTiNa  GIFTS  AND  SERVICES.  As  the  body  needs  all  its  members, 
they  must  occupy  their  appointed  positions  for  which  they  are  severally  fitted  and  to 
which  they  are  severally  called.  It  is  so  in  the  Church  of  God ;  and,  according  to  the 
o£Bce  filled,  the  duties  performed,  will  be  the  position  occupied  in  the  regard  and  esteem 
of  men. 

II.  Those  in  infebiob  positions  should  bemember  that  inferiority  in  the 
VIEW  OF  men  IS  not  necessabilt  such  IN  THE  siOHT  OF  6oo.  That  there  f8  a  scale 
of  excellence  cannot  be  questioned,  but  that  Otoi's  graduation  agrees  with  man's  is  not 
to  be  for  a  moment  supposed.  He  judgeth  not  as  man  judgeth.  Not  always  do  those 
who  fill  most  space  in  men's  eyes  stand  first  in  the  view  of  God. 

III.  Ah  envious  spibit  is  pboduotivb  of  the  utmost  uisebt  TO  him  who 
cherishes  it.  All  painters  and  poets  who  have  dealt  with  the  subject  have  agreed 
in  depicting  envy  as  consumed  and  tortured  with  wretchedness.  The  envious  man 
cannot  enjoy  his  own  blessings  or  exercise  his  own  povfers,  for  the  sight  or  thought  of 
what  he  deems  the  choicer  blessings  or  the  rarer  powers  of  his  neighbour, 

IV.  On  the  other  hand,  a  contented  spirit  is  pboductive  of  tbub  happiness. 
When  "  the  sun  of  sweet  content "  has  risen  in  the  eyes,  the  light  is  upon  every 
feature.  A  holy  and  calm  conviction  that  his  lot  is  ordered  by  Divine  wisdom  gives 
a  deep  peace,  an  abiding  cheerfulness,  to  a  good  man's  life.  If  one  were  to  have  regard 
only  to  his  own  happiness,  he  would  do  well  to  beware  of  discontent. 

v.  It  is  to  be  bemembebed  that  an  appabentlt  lowly  service  may  be 
important  and  even  essential.  The  foot  has  not  so  complex  a  structure,  has  not 
the  8ame  adaptation  to  a  varied  service,  as  the  hand  ;  yet,  with  no  power  of  locomotion, 
the   luan  would   be  crippled  and  pitiable,  notwithstanding  the  marvellous  manual 


40S  TUK   KlltST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  zn.  1H>L 

mechanism  of  which  he  is  master.  The  eir  does  not  Afford  the  same  range  of  know- 
ledge, perhaps  not  the  same  gradation  oi  pleasure,  as  the  eye ;  b(it  the  man  who  loses 
hearing  is  shut  out  from  many  of  the  joys  and  very  much  of  the  information  whiph  this 
life  affords.  And  in  the  Church  of  Chiist,  uhat  work  has  been  done  by  the  lowly,  the 
feeble,  the  illiterate  1  and  in  huw  many  sases  do  they  put  to  shame  the  gifted  and  the 
eminent  I 

VI.  If  the  trust  be  smalibr,  the  besponsibility  wili,  be  less.  Instead  si 
looking  up  to  the  great,  the  karned,  the  eloquout,  and  .sighing  because  we  have  not 
their  gifts,  let  us  be  ><iaterul  that  we  have  not  their  account  to  render.  To  whom  much 
is  given,  of  him  will  much  be  required. — T.  . 

Ver.  21. — Respect  it  hetter  than  contempt.  In  previous  verses  the  apostle  has 
expostulated  with,  those  in  lo\yiy  stations  and  with  inferior  gifts  who  give  way  to  the 
temptation  to  repine  because  of  what  is  their  own  and  to  envy  the  higher  position  and 
the  larger  gifts  of  others.  In  this  verse  he  exemplifies  his  justice  and  impartiality, 
rebuking  thuse  who  despise  such  as  are  beneath  them  in  mental  or  spiritual  endow- 
ments. 

L  Pbidb  follows  upon  foroetfulness  of  the  Divisb  Soubce  of  all  gifts. 
The  man  who  looks  down  upon  his  fellow-Christian  virtually  boasts  of  whatever 
he  himself  has  whicli  he  deems  a  ground  of  superiority.  Now,  this  is  in  contradiction 
to  the  precepts  of  the  Bible  and  the  spirit  of  Christ.  "  What  hast  thou  that  thou 
didst  not  receive?    Who  hath  made  thee  to  differ?" 

IL  Contempt  implies  forgetfulness  of  the  rule  of  Divine  pbovidbncb.  Can 
we  say  to  a  brother,  "i  have  no  need  of  thee"?  whilst  we  remember  that  the  Head  of 
the  Church  has  stationed  him  where  he  is,  and  has  given  him  what  he  possesses?  To 
question  his  place  in  the  Clmrch,  his  function  in  the  body,  his  service  to  the  Head, 
is  to  dispute  the  wisdom  and  the  authority  of  Christ  himself. 

III.  Contempt  is  self-destructive.  It  rebounds  upon  the  bead  of  him  who  casts 
it  at  his  neighbour.  For  the  fact  is  that  we  are  members  one  of  another  in  such 
a  Sense  that  each  one's  efficiency  and  usefulness  is  to  a  large  extent  dependent  upon 
chose  of  his  brethren.  In  the  figure  used  by  the  apostle,  the  eye  and  the  head  in 
which  it  is  so  pre-eminently  and  regally  stationed,  aie  taken  as  representing  the  great 
and  notable  among  the  members  of  a  Christian  society.  And  it  is  laid  down  as  evident 
that  they  cannot  say  to  hand,  to  foot,  to  the  trunk  ami  all  the  vital  organs,  "  I  have 
00  need  of  you."  For  the  fact  is,  they  have  such  need.  The  well-known  fable  of 
Agrippa  may  be  quoted,  as  in  Shakespeare's  '  Coriolanus,'  in  illustration  and  proof  of 
the  mutual  dependence  of  all  parts  of  the  organism.  So  is  it  in  the  Church  of  God. 
The  great  controversialist,  the  great  episcopal  administrator,  the  great  Biblical  scholar, 
the  great  church  builder,  are  all  doubtless  and  undeniably  of  great  importance,  and  fill 
a  large  place  in  men's  eyes.  But- the  obscure  pastor,  the  lowly  Scripture  reader,  the 
unnoticed  lUble  woman,  the  patient  and  unrewarded  teacher  of  the  .\  oung, — these  and 
many  others  like  them  are  the  rank-and-file  of  the  army,  and  cannot  be  dispensed  with. 
To  look  down  upon  them  with  disdain  would  be  a  proof  of  folly  as  well  as  of  sinful 
self-conceit.  Happily,  the  truly  great  are  ever  foremost  to  recognize  the  value  of  the 
labours  of  the  humble,  ever  foremost  to  do  them  honour.  They  know  full  well  that 
their  own  work  would  fall  to  pieces  were  it  not  for  the  unnoticed  work  of  others  who 
may  be  less  known  to  fame. 

IV.  Mutual  bespect  is  promotive  of  spiritual  unity.  Let  there  be  murmuring 
among  the  lowly  and  disdain  Smung  the  great,  and  there  follows  at  once  a  "  schism." 
But  when  each  renders  due  honour  to  his  brother,  the  society  is  compacted,  and  is  made 
strong  for  its  united  work  and  witness  in  the  world. — T. 

Ver.  26. — Sympathy.  The  desirableness  and  preciuusnesa  of  sympathy  are  unques- 
tionable. Selfishness  is  the  curse  of  human  nature  and  human  society.  There  is  a 
tendency  towards  absorption  in  individual  interests,  pleasured,  and  sorrows,  which 
needs  to  be  counteracted.  Sympathy  is  as  natural  a  principle  as  selfishness,  though 
not  so  strong.  Christianity  tends  to  strengthen  it  for  the  conflict ;  and  in  the  new 
humanity  the  love  of  the  Saviour  awakens  and  fosters  regard  for  all  those  for  whom 
Chtiit  died. 


«B.xiLl— SL.}    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0KINTH1AN&  409 

L  Cbbut  BrusBLF  18  Tax  Divine  Foxtsdjl-^io^  of  stmpatht.  1,  Christ's  wprdsare 
the  law  of  sympathy.'  It  was  he  who  uttered  admonitiuns  which  have  been  so  potent 
to  affect  the  heart  and  ihflaence  society ;  e.g.  "  Do  unto  others,"  etc. ;  "  Love  one 
another,"  etc.  And  his  apostles' ^vords  are  his ;  e.g.  "  ^ea.T  ye  one  another's  burdeuK ;  * 
^'  Look  not  every  man,"  etc. ';  "  Rejoice  with  them,"  etc.  2.  Christ's  life  was  the  model 
of  sympathy.  Id  the  Gospels  we  behold  him  sympathizing  with  sufferers,  mourners, 
douhters,  and  inquirers,  the  ignorant  and  uncared  for,  sinners  who  repented  of  sin,  and 
others.  lie  is  still  the  High  Priest  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities.  3.  Christ's 
cross  is  the  motive  to  sympathy.  It  presents  the  Redeemer  suffering  with  and  fpr 
mankind;  and  those  who  can  say,  "He  gave  himself  for  me,"  feel  the  constraint  of 
the  cross,  the  love  of  Christ.  4.  Christ's  Spirit  is  the  power  of  sympathy — an  unseen, 
but  mighty  and  gracious  force. 

II.  The  vast  bakoe  or  Christian  btmfatht.  1.  The  whole  Church  of  the 
Hedecmer  demands  its  exercise.  Christians  are  members  of  the  one  body,  and  subject 
to  the  one  Head.  Their  mutual  relations  to  one  another  are  consequent  upon  their 
common  relations  to  their  Lord.  Heace  their  interdependence  and  sympathy.  When 
the  head  is  crowned,  the  whole  body  is  glorified ;  when  the  eyes  brighten,  all  the 
features  respond  ;  when  a  limb  aches,  the  whole  frame  is  depressed.  In  such  sympathy 
the  body  is  a  picture  of  the  Church  as  it  should  be,  and  as  it  is  just  in  proportion,  as  it  is 
pervaded  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  2.  The  whole  race  of  mankind  is  included  in  its 
scope  and  action.  Christianity  alone  can  attack  human  isolation,  and  serve  m  the 
bond  of  universal  brotherhooil.  The  wanderers  have  to  be  gathered  into  the  fold, 
and  to  this  end  they  must  first  be  pitied  and  yearned  over  and  soi^ht. 

III.  The  hanifestations  of  Christian  stmpatht.  These  are  especially:  1. 
Sympathetic  suffering  with  the  sad  and  distressed,  as  opposed  to  indifference  or 
malicious  pleasure  in  others'  misfortunes.  2,  Sympathetic  joy  in  the  advancement  and 
honours  of  others,  as  opposed  to  envy  and  jealousy.  3.  Sympathetic  action;  for 
emotion  leads  to  practical  interposition  and  help.  Aidi  gifts,  self-denying  effort,  may 
prove  the  reality  of  the  feeling  e>cpressed  in  words. 

IV.  The  advantages  and'  blessings  op  Christian  btmpatht.  1.  To  those  who 
display  it,  it  is  advantageous  as  developing  and  fostering  spiritual  qualities.  2.  To 
those  who  partake  of  it,  whose  cheerfulaess  is  augmented  and  whose  sorrows  are 
relieved.  3.  To  society  in  general,  which  ia  thus  leavened  by  Christian  spirit  and 
influence. — T. 

Ver.  27. — Body  and  members.  At  Corinth  there  was  much  of  the  spirit  of  lelf- 
assertion :  "  I,"  said  one,  "  am  for  Paul ! "  "  I,"  said  another,  "  for  Apollos !  "  "  I,"  said 
a  third,  "  for  Ce[ihas  1 "  This  was  a  selfish  partisiinship ;  and  with  it  was  conjoined  a 
disposition  on  the  part  of  many  to  magnify  their  own  gifts  and  powers  and  to  depreciate 
those  of  their  neighbours  and  fellow-members.  To  all  thi^^the  apostle  furnishes  the 
true  corrective.  Let  Christians  but  regard  themselves  in  the  true  light,  as  Christ's 
body  collectively,  and  as  individually  living  members  of  that  body,  and  then  incon- 
siderateness,  selfishness,  envy,  find  jealousy  will  flee  away. 

I.  Collectivelt,  Christians  form  the  bodt  of  Christ.  Not,  of  coarse,  the  body 
of  flesh  and  blood  which  he  assumed  and  wore ;  not  the  bread  and  wine  of  the  Eucharist, 
which  he  called  his  body  and  blood ;  but  the  human  representation  of  his  presence 
which  he  has  left  on  earth.  1.  This  assertion  cannot  be  made  of  any  one  outward, 
visible,  organic  society.  All  these,  because  composed  of  human  beings  and  consequently 
of  imperfect  and  faulty  characters,  and  because  doubtless  including  within  their 
boundaries  unspiritual  persons  and  hypocrite^  are  themselves  far  from  reaching  the 
Divine  ideal.  If  one  "  visible  "  Church  cannot  claim  to  be  the  body  of  Christ,  neither, 
for  the  same  reason,  can  any  association  of  such  communities.  They  may  be  admirable, 
and  their  existence  may  be  most  important  for  the  conservation  of  the  gospel  and  the 
evangelization  of  the  world,  but  they  are  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  body  of  Christ. 
2.  But  it  is  true  of  the  Church  as  it  exists  in  the  view  of  the  omniscient  Lord.  The 
spiritual  Church,  sometimes  called  invisible,  because  its  boundaries  cannot  be  traced 
by  human  eyes,  is  penetrated  by  Christ's  Spirit,  is  k  living  witness  to  his  mind  and 
doctrine,  and  is  ever  offering  a  service  of  obedience  to  his  will.  In  these  respects  it  ia 
the  Body,  of  which  Christ  himself  is  the  living,  inspiring,  directing  SouL 


410  TUB   FIUST   EPISTLB  TO  THE  C0R1NTU1AN8.    [oil  hi.  1—31 


n.  IimivTDUALLT,  Christians  abb  uembers  of  Ciibist.  1.  This  comes  to  paw 
through  individual  spiritual  union  with  him.  Though  each  Christian  is  indebted 
beyond  measure  to  the  teaching,  influence,  and  spirit  of  the  consecrated  society  in 
which  he  has  been  trained,  still  a  spiritual  process  must,  through  the  reception  of  the 
means  of  grace,  take  place  in  his  conscious  nature.  2.  Each  Christian  has  his  several 
functions  to  discharge  in  the  Church  and  for  the  Lord.  There  are  diversities  of  gifts 
and  consequent  diversities  of  ministries;  and  this  diversity  is  itself  a  witness  to  tha 
individual,  the  personal  nature  of  the  membership  of  every  one  in  him  who  is  the 
Source  of  all  true  blessing  and  power.  3.  All  co-operate  for  the  same  end.  That  thij 
is  so  is  evident ;  and  how  can  it  be  so,  except  jis  a  result  of  such  common  subjection  to 
the  one  Head  as  secures  the  mutual  harmonj^and  co-ordination  of  all  the  members? 
Each  U  selected  for  his  own  part  and  qualified  for  his  own  position. — T. 

Ver.  28. — "  Firit  apottles."  There  are  degrees  of  eminence,  not  only  in  the  state, 
but  in  the  Church.  In  the  hierarchy  which  Heaven  has  appointed,  the  highest  statioa 
was  occupied  by  a  class  of  men,  few  in  number,  eminent  in  qualifications,  and  honour- 
able in  office.  Their  functions  were  special,  being  in  some  particulars  incapable  of 
transmission  to  successors.  In  what  did  this  pre-eminence  consist  ?  The  answer  to 
this  question  may  serve  to  increase  the  reverence  with  which  we  receive  their  teaching 
and  submit  to  their  authority. 

I.  The  pre-eminence  of  the  apostles  is  owisq  to  the  dignity  and  majkbtt 
OF  THE  Lord  who  oaye  and  sent  them.  Christ  himself  was  sent,  and  came  forth 
from  Giod.  He  had  "all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth,"  and  he  had  consequently 
authority  to  commission  the  twelve  and  tho.-'e  associated  with  them.  There  was  an 
authority  in  his  word  sending  them  forth,  which  they  at  once  recognized  and  obeyed. 

II.  To  THE  PURPOSES  FOR  WHICH  THEY  WEBB  SENT.  Their  mission  was  to  preach 
Christ,  to  make  converts,  to  gather  those  converts  together  into  societies,  to  govern 
and  administer  the  affairs  of  the  congregations,  to  provide  instruction  in  doctrine  by 
speech  and  by  writins,  and  to  make  provision  for  the  permanent  welfare  of  the  whole 
Church.  Such  a  mission  was  in  many  respects  peculiar  and  unique ;  those  entrusted 
with  it  could  not  but  come  first  in  the  hierarchy. 

III.  To  THE  POWERS  WITH  WHICH  THEY  WERE  ENTRUSTED.  To  their  natural  gifts 
spiritual  endowments  were  added ;  and  over  and  above  these  were  the  supernatural 
possessions  and  trusts  peculiar  to  their  age,  such  as  the  gifts  of  tongues,  of  miracles,  of 
healing,  etc.  Above  all  there  was  Divine  inspiration,  displayed  in  their  supernatural 
wisdom  both  in  doctrine  and  in  government.  From  the  day  of  Pentecost  these  men 
were  entrusted  with  every  high  and  sacred  qualification  which  could  tend  to  the- 
suitable  discharge  of  the  honourable  and  responsible  duties  of  the  apostolate. 

IV.  To  THE  breadth  OF  THEIR  COMMISSION.  'I'hough  80  fow,  they  may  be  sjwd  to 
have  portioned  the  worlfl^among  them.  They  were  sent  to  neighbours  and  to  strangers, 
to  Jews  and  to  Gentiles,  to  cities  and  to  villages,  to  the  civilized  and  to  barbarians. 
To  a  commission  so  vast  and  extensive  there  attached  honour  altogether  special  and 
unrivalled. 

V.  To  THE  WONDERFUL  RESULTS  OF  THEIR  APOSTOLIC  LABOURS.  The  immediate  and 
rapid  spread  of  the  gospel  was  such  as  cuuld  not  have  been  anticipated  by  human 
wisdom,  and  such  as  has  not  been  paralleled  in  after  ages.  They  laid  the  foundations 
upon  which  the  toilers  and  builders  of  after  ages  hav^  reared  a  glorious  superstructure. 

Application.  1.  Let  hearers  of  the  gospel  consider  the  claims  upon  them  of  such 
a  message  as  that  communicated  by  ambassadors  sg  gloriously  authenticated  as  were 
the  apostles  of  the  Lord.  2.  Let  those  who  labour  for  Christ  feel  the  summons  which 
is  addressed  to  them  by  the  spirit  and  the  example  of  predecessors  so  illustrious  and 
so  efficient. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  ipiritual  gifts  of  the  Church.  I.  These  abb  very  various. 
In  the  early  Church  there  were  many  supernatural  gifts,  in  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy, 
"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  afterward,  that  I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh ; 
and  your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy,  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams, 
your  young  men  shall  see  visions"  fJoel  ii.  28),  and  of  the  more  remarkable  utterance 
of  Christ,  "  These  signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe ;  In  my  Name  shall  they  cast 


M.X1I.1— 31.]    TUE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORIMTHUNa  411 

«at  devils ;  they  ahall  speak  with  new  tongues ;  they  shall  take  np  serpents ;  and  if  they 
^rink  auy  deadly  thing,  it  shall  not  hurt  them ;  they  shall  lay  bandis  on  the  sick,  and 
they  shall  recover  "  (Mark  xvi.  17, 18).  We  have  in  this  passage  an  enumeration  ol 
some  of  these  gifts.  The  "  word  of  wisdom  * — further  disclosure  of  Divine  wisdom  to 
redemption.  The  "word  of  knowledge" — ready  utterance  of  truth  already  revealed. 
"  Faith  " — not  for  salvation,  hut  for  the  performano*  of  miracle  in  any  s|iecial  case. 
"  Gifts  of  healing  "-^restoring  the  sick  miraculously.  "  Working  of  miracles" — gen»> 
rally,  or  those  of  mora  strikiug  character.  "Prophecy" — here  probably  not  inspired 
teaching  of  matters  already  revealed,  but  the  foretelling  of  events.  "  Discerning  el 
spirits  "-^power  to  determine  between  God's  operation  and  Satan's  or  man's.  Peter's 
dealing  with  Ananias- and <Sapph1ra  furnishes  an  illustratioa.  "Kinds  of  tongues* 
— speaking  various  languages  or  in  the  "  unknown  "  spiritual  language  (ch.  xiv.  2). 
"  Interpretation  of  tongues" — interpreting  the  foregoing.  In  the  modern  Church  there 
are  many  spiritual  gifts,  though  we  do  not  spcnk  of  tliem  as  supernatural.  As  the  former 
were  fitted  for  the  needs  of  former  days,  so  the  latter  are  for  the  requirements  of  the 
present  age.  The  variety  of  the  gifts  in  each  case  is  stamped  with  Divine  wisdom  and 
is  of  large  advantage ;  for  (1)  there  are  various  positions  to  be  filled;  (2)  various  work 
has  to  be  done  ;  and  (3)  one  gift  often  supplies  the  defect  of  another. 

II.  Their  object  is  one — "  to  profit."  (Ver.  7.)  They  are  not :  (1)  Far  mere  d{$- 
play.  (2)  For  personal  aggrandizement.  Tiieyare:  (1)  For  the  welfare  of  the  Ckurck. 
(2)  For  the  welfare  of  the  individual  memherg.  (3)  For  the  welfare  of  the  world.  The 
Church  has  a  large  mission  to  those  outside  her  pale.  She  is  made  rich  very  largely 
tliat  she  may  make  them  rich.  She  is  placed  in  a  world-parish,  that  she  may  carry  the 
gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  to  all  within  the  bounds.  Iler  strengthening  and  enrich- 
ment are  for  the  world's  weal ;  her  special  endowments  fit  her  for  this  grand  enterjirisei 
(4)  For  the  glory  of  God.  This  is  the  ultimate  object.  As  the  Church's  endowments 
come  from  God,  so  should  they  return  to  him.  The  Church  is  for  itself,  is  for  the 
indiviaual,  is  for  the  world, — but  these  only  comparatively ;  supremely  and  specially 
the  Church  is  for  God.  And  all  her  gifts  and  graces  should  redound  to  the  Divine 
honour  and  glory. 

III.  Their  orioin  u  one — God.  They  should  be  used,  then:  1.  With  reverence. 
Our  qualifications  for  Chriiitian  service  as  truly  come  from  God  as  the  ancient  gifts  oi 
tongues  or  miracles.  We  feel  that  the  latter  should  have  been  used  very  reverentially ; 
not  more  so  than  the  former :  both  are  equally  of  God.  We  are  God-endowed  now  as 
truly  as  were  any  of  the  early  Christians,  and  God-endowments  should  be  used  with 
utmost  reverence.  2.  With  care.  Lest  the  good  gift  be  perverted  by  ill  use.  Our  gifts 
may  do  as  much  harm  if  wrongly  used,  as  good  if  rightly  used.  3.  With  diligence.  The 
value  of  the  earlier  gifts  we  can  easily  perceive ;  we  need  to  realize  that  modern  gifts 
are  equallj/  valuable  for  modern  tiuies.  If  we  felt  the  value  of  that  which  is  entrusted 
to  us,  we  snould  be  more  likely  to  use  it  diligently.  "  Stir  up  the  gift  of  God  which  i« 
in  thee  "(2  lim.  1.  6).  4.  With  the  thought  t/iat  they  will  have  to  be  accounted  for 
These  are  talents,  and  the  reckoning  day  will  surely  come.  The  time  is  short  in 
which  they  can  be  used.  The  need  of  their  employment  is  stupendous.  Let  nont 
suppose  that  they  are  unendowed.  "To  every  man  his  work;"  and  never  yet  was 
work  given  without  gift  for  the  work. 

IV.  Their  distribution  IS  or  ox  B — or  God.  (Ver.  11.)  The  choice  of  our  spiritual 
gifts  does  not  rest  witli  us.  What  rests  with  us  is  the  right  employment  of  those  w( 
jioasess.  To  murmur  because  we  are  not  endowed  as  others  are  is  worse  than  foolish  ; 
it  is  criminal,  for  it  impugns  the  wisdom  and  the  goodness  of  God.  Some  five-talent 
men  will  do  nothing  because  tliey  are  not  ten-talent  men.  They  mourn  and  complain 
because  of  what  they  lack,  and  certainly  they  appear  to  have  a  large  lack — of  common 
sense.  We  are  not  the  Lord ;  we  are  servants,  and  the  great  Spirit  "  divideth  to  every 
man  severally  as  he  will."  Let  us  take  our  talents  thankfully,  use  them  diligently 
and  never  wrap  them  up  in  the  napkin  of  repining  and  discontent.  Our  condition  was 
once  akin  to  that  of  the  Corinthiaus,  who  were  carried  away  unto  "  dumb  idols  "  (ver.  2). 
From  the  idolatry  of  sin  we  have  been  brought  into  the  Church  of  the  Bedeemed,  and 
made  the  worshippers  and  servants  of  the  true  God.  Abounding  gratitude  should 
leave  no  room  for  the  faintest  murmur.  In  truth  we  have  nothing  to  murmur  OTei^ 
liut  aTerytbing  to. lie  (Ifvuntly  th.'inkfiil  fi>r. 


412  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  G0BINTHIAN8.    [oh.  xn,  1— SI 

y.  Theib  tMst  IB  ONB.  They  are  tested  by  their  relation  to  Christ  (ver.  3).  Spuriouii 
gifts  niay  appear,  or  good  gifts  may  be  perverted.  In  early  days  the  test  of  utterance 
#as,  "What  aaith  it  of  Christ?"  Did  it  declare  him  to  be  anathema — accursed? 
Then  it  declared  itself  to  be  not  of  God.  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  And 
this  test  applies  to  all  spiritual  gifts  ancient  and  modem.  Unless  they  tend  to  the 
exaltation  and  honour  of  Christ,  they  are  not  what  they  profess  to  be.  If  geauine,  they 
are  under  the  control  and  administration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  he  ^who  was  sent  to 
glorify  Christ  (John  xvL  14)  will  never  aba^e  and  dishonour  him.  If  men  have  ail 
other  credentials,  yet  cast  reproach  upon  the  JSead  of  the  Churdh,  we  must  instantly 
reject  their  testimony  and  regard  them  as  charlatans.  Here  is  the  supreme  end  of 
our  spiritual  gifts — "  that  he  may  be  glorified."   "  Try  the  spirits." 

YI.  Their  contbol  and  exercise  are  one.  They  came  from  God  and  they  are  still 
In  the  hands  of  God.  They  are  very  various,  but  they  are  unified  in  the  One  who  gave 
them  and  the  One  who  directs  their  use.  "  Diversities, .  .  .  but  the  same  Spirit,  .  .  . 
the  same  Lord, .  .  .  the  same  God"  (vers.  4 — 6).  The  control  and  exercise  of  spiritual 
gifts  are  of  the  Triune  Jehovah — "  Gfod,"  "  Lord,  "  Spirit."  When  our  spiritual  gifts  are 
rightly  employed,  Ood  works  through  us.  As  we  have  the  gifts  from  God,  so  it  is  onlif 
as  we  have  Ood  with  the  gifts  that  they  can  be  rightly  and  usel'ully  employed.  We  art 
ehanntls  for  Divine  power  to  run  in.  Our  impotence  apart  from  God  is  strikingly 
shown  in  ver,  3,  "  No  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but  by  [or,  '  in ']  the  Holy 
Ghost."  We  may  use  the  words,  but  we  cannot  feel  their  power,  receive  their  truth,  or 
bear  the  effective  witness  to  Christ,  apart  from  the  Divine  Spirit.  How  ennobled  and 
inestimably  precious  do  spiritual  gifts  appear  in  this  light  1  How  careful  should  we  be 
not  to  resist  the  working  of  God  through  us  I  And  we  may  profitably  remember  that 
he  uses  the  smaller  gifts  as  well  as  the  larger;  nay,  sometimes  usea  the  former  the 
more.    The  more  dazzling  gifts  are  not  always  the  most  usefuL — H. 

Yen.  12 — 27. — The  body  of  Christ.  A  striking  figure.  Christians  are  not  separate, 
unrelated  units;  they  are  compacted  together  and  form  one  whole,  which  is  "the  body 
of  Christ."  Of  this  body  Christ  is  the  Head  (Col.  ii.  19) — the  central  controlling  and 
directing  Power,  and  each  believer  is  some  member  of  the  body.  In  this  passage  the 
apostle  is  speaking  of  the  members  of  the  body  rather  than  of  the  Head — of  Christians 
rather  than  directly  of  Christ.    Note — 

I.  The  number  and  variety  of  the  members.  This  makes  the  body  rich  and 
beautiful.  In  scenery  and  in  paintings  we  do  not  love  monotony.  A  fair  landscape 
possesses  almost  infinite  variety  of  tint  and  form ;  that  is  not  a  painting  which  is  composed 
of  one  colour,  however  brilliant.  The  Church  is  enriched  by  the  diversities  in  condition, 
age,  ability,  of  its  members.  Yet  though  one  member  differ  strikingly  from  another,  all 
are  equally  of  the  body  (ver.  15).  We  must  not  despair  because  we  are  unlike  some 
other  Christians ;  if  all  the  members  of  the  body  were  as  even  the  chief  and  most 
honom'ed  members,  the  symmetry,  usefulness,  {itid  beauty  of  the  body  would  be  greatly 
impaired  (ver.  17).  We  must  not  seek  to  occupy  a  place  for  which  we  are  not  fitted. 
We  are  admitted  to  the  body  of  Christ  by  God,  and  he  placei  us  (ver.  18).  We  must 
not  move ;  if  we  are  to  be  moved,  he  will  move  us.  To  choose  a  place  for  ourselves 
would  be  to  put  ourselves  out  of  [ilace. 

II.  The  varied  dutt.  This  explains  the  variety  of  place  and  power.  The  Church 
offers  the  utmost  variety  of  work ;  there  is  something  suitable  for  every  capacity.  A* 
in  the  body  all  parts  and  members  perform  their  special  and  appropriate  duties,  so  in 
the  Church  each  believer  has  his  appointed  task :  "  To  every  man  his  work."  Soma 
are  troubled  because  they  seem  to  be  "inferior"  members;  but  note,  an  inferior 
member  can  often  do  its  work  better  than  a  superior  member  could  do  that  umrk. 
Each  member  is  specially  adapted  to  perform  its  functions;  each  Christian  in  th« 
Church  is  specially  fitted  for  the  performance  of  his  duties.  Ifo  man  ean  JUl  your 
place  as  you  can. 

III.  The  intimate  connection.  In  the  human  body  what  vital  union  there  ta 
between  the  several  ports  1  There  should  be  a  corresponding  connection  between  the 
members  of  the  body  of  Christ.  Christians  are  not  to  be  like  grains  of  sand,  or  isolated 
trees,  or  detached  houses.  We  admit  that  our  nnion  with  Christ  should  be  real ; 
tquaily  real  should  be  our  union  with  fellow-believera.    The  anomaly  of  Christians  not 


OB.  zn.  1—81.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  413 

Bpesking  to  each  other,  of  the  rich  and  poor  being  separated  from  common  fellowship, 
18  by  this  figure  shown  to  be  monstrous.  The  member  of  the  body  which  will  have  no 
(eIlow8hip  with  other  members  is  preparing  to  be  lopped  o£f.  Our  union  with  Christ 
cannot  he  very  intimate  if  we  have  none  with  his  followers.  "  A  new  commandment 
I  give  unto  you.  That  ye  love  one  another "  (John  xiii,  34). 

IV.  Thb  common  importance.  Not  the  equal  importance.  All  are  important,  but 
not  equally  so.  But  tb.e  least  attractive  and  the;  least  demonstrative  may  be  the  most 
important.  The  heart  is  more  important  than  the  tongue.  Many  of  the  Corinthiani 
were  madly  elated  with  the  gift  of  tongues ;  but  there  is  something  greater  and  better 
than  talk.  The  lungs  are  more  important  eren  than  the  hand.  The  modest  and 
unobtrusive  are  often  of  more  value  than  those  who  ever  will  come  to  the  front.  And 
where  true  discernment  obtains  the  former  are  likely  to  receive  "  more  abundant 
honour "  (ver.  23).  Apparent  feehhuess  is  no  criterion ;  some  of  the  feeblest  saints 
have  been  the  strongest.  And  some  of  the  weakest  members  of  the  body  are  much 
more  necessary  to  its  well-being  than  the  robust  (ver.  22).  And  further,  as  it  is  an 
instinct  of  nature  to  adorn  the  less  comely  parts  of  the  body  (ver.  23),  so  in  the  Church, 
if  a  right  spirit  prevails,  the  humblest  and  least  attractive  will  receive  special  care  and 
attention.  The  sick  child  is  the  niother'a  favotirite.  All  members  are  thus  important. 
No  member  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  non-important  except  he  makes  himself  so. 
And  as  with  the  physical  body,  the  body  of  Christ  cannot  afford  to  dispense  with  the 
sernces  of  a  single  member,  however  obscure. 

Y.  The  oommdnitt  or  feeling.  (Ver.  26.)  Sympathy  should  abound  amongst 
Christians.  "  Bear  ye  one  another'.s  burdens.  Every  Christian  should  be  a  good 
Samaritan.  Imagine  one  hand  rejoicing  in  or  being  indifferent  to  the  laceration  of 
the  other.  Our  union  with  believers  should  be  so  intimate  and  real  that  when  they 
suffer  we  suffer,  that  when  they  are  blessed  we  are.  Their  health  is  our  health,  their 
strength  is  our  strength.  Christians  should  remember  that  Christ  pronounced  a  second 
commandment  as  well  as  a  first.  When  true  fellowship  is  attained  we  "  rejoice  with 
those  who  do  rejoice,  and  weep  with  those  who  weep." 

VI.  The  HABM0NI0U8  wouKiNQ.  How  beautifully  this  is  illustrated  in  the  physical 
body!  So  amongst  Christians  there  is  no  necessity  for  collision.  Contests  indicate 
faultiness  and  derangement.  If  all  did  their  appointed  work  iu  the  appointed  way, 
there  would  be  completest  harmony.  And  the  more  harmony  the  better  working. 
What  waste  of  power  has  been  caused  by  divisions  and  strife]  Note:  One  perverse 
member  may  do  much  harm.  In  machinery,  if  one  part  fails  to  perform  its  function, 
fracture  and  extensive  derangement  may  ensue.  There  should  be  no  schism  in  Christ's 
body  (ver.  25).  The  Church,  the  body  of  Christ,  has  a  vast,  complicated,  infinitely 
important  work  to  do:  how  essential  that  there  should  be  the  truest  co-operation,  the 
utmost  faithfulness  in  discharge  of  duty,  on  the  part  of  its  members! 

VII.  The  mutual  dependence.  (Ver.  21.)  Christians  are  not  independent  of  each 
other:  they  should  not  si-ek  to  be  so.  We  are  not  the  body  of  .Christ  individualhj,  but 
we  are  collectively.  We  are  not  set  to  stand  alone,  but  with  others.  We  can  help 
others  and  be  helped  ourselves.  Another's  work  may  be  needful  for  the  success  of  ours, 
ours  for  the  success  of  another's. 

VIII.  The  complementary  character.  One  supplies  just  what  the  other  lacks. 
So  that  if  all  supply  what  they  can,  the  body  becomes  perfect  in  working.  The  eye 
needs  the  ear ;  both  the  hand ;  all  the  foot. 

IX.  The  unity  amidst  diversity.  "  Many  members,  but  one  body  "  (ver.  20).  In 
the  body  there  is  the  greatest  variety,  but  the  greatest  unity ;  one  life  pervades  the  whole. 
So  with  the  Church — the  members  are  one  in  Christ,  vitally  united  to  the  one  Head, 
pervaded  by  the  one  Spirit,  joined  in  one  baptism,  sitting  at  one  Supper  of  the  LorrI, 
engaged  in  one  work,  and  going  forward  to  the  same  destiny.  There  is  the  great 
spiritual  life-principle  which  pervades  all  true  believers  and  makes  them  one. 

X.  The  VITAL  union  with  the  Head  and  subordination  to  it.  We  may  survive 
severance  firom  some  membei's  of  the  body ;  we  cannot  severance  from  the  head.  Wa 
perish  unless  we  are  vitally  joined  to  Christ.  And  as  with  the  physical  body,  the  head 
must  rule  or  all  sons  of  disorders  will  be  occasioned.  We  must  be  united  to  Christ 
as  sorvants  to  a  Master.  He  is  the  Head  of  the  body ;  we  are  the  members.  It  is  fur 
bim  to  direct,  it  is  lor  us  to  obey.    Some  seem  sorely  tempted  to  exercise  lordship  jvei 


414  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  xii.  1— 31 

Christ ;  they  we  wise  above  what  is  written.  Were  it  polite  to  give  them  the  appella* 
tion,  we  might  well  call  them  disloyal  fouls.  Disloyal,  because  insubordinate  ta 
their  Lord ;  fools,  because  they  not  only  disorganize  the  work  of  the  body  and  injure 
the  other  members,  but  ar*  in  the  surest  way  of  bringing  immeasurabia  eirila  upon 
themselvea. — H. 

Ver.  12. — 2%«  body  of  Christ.  The  analogy  the  apostle  here  uses  is  broadly  true  of 
the  whole  fellowship  of  redeemed  and  regenerate  souls — "  the  Catholic  Church  through- 
out all  the  world,"  which  acknowledges  Christ  as  its  living  Head.  It  also  applies  to 
the  Corinthian  Christians  as  a  local  society,  a  part  of  the  grand  whole.  The  principles 
on  which  the  constitution  of  the  whole  depends  are  supposed  to  be  illustrated  in  that 
of  each  particular  part.  The  comparison  of  the  Church  with  a  living  body  is  not  one 
that  we  find  in  the  teaching^  of  Christ  himself ;  but  he  employed  an  essentially  similar 
image  when  he  said  to  his  disciples,  "  I  am  the  Vine,  ye  are  the  branches  "  (John  xv.  5). 
Whether  we  take  the  figure  of  the  body  or  of  the  tree,  substantially  the  same  ideas  are 
presented.  There  is  in  each  case  an  organization  animated  by  a  mysterious  principle 
of  life.  And  the  hidden  life  is  the  cause  of  the  organization,  determines  it,  shapes  it 
"  after  its  kind."  The  life  is  the  formative  principle.  The  growth  of  the  body  or  of  the 
tree  is  not  by  addition  from  without,  but  by  development  from  within.  The  materials 
that  nourish  and  build  it  up  lie  without,  but  it  is  the  life  that  appropriates  them, 
assimilates  them,  transforms  them  into  its  own  substance,  turns  them  to  its  own  proiwr 
uses.  So  with  the  form  of  Christian  society.  We  believe  in  no  "  visible  Church " 
which  is  not  the  spuntaneous  result  of  the  free  play  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  the  minds 
and  consciences  and  hearts  of  men.  Its  beliefs,  its  worship,  its  fellowship,  its  work,  all 
have  real  worth  in  them  just  so  far  as  they  are  the  spontaneous  expression  of  the  Spirit 
that  dwells  within,  and  no  further.    Note  respecting  the  Church — 

I.  Its  unity.  As  the  body  with  its  many  members  is  one,  "  so  also  is  Christ." 
Here  is  unity  in  variety ;  variety  of  parts  with  a  principle  of  unity  underlying  them, 
flowing  through  them,  binding  them  into  one  connected  whole.  And  Christ  is  that 
uniting  power.  It  is  the  "  body  of  Christ."  The  body  that  was  "prepared"  for  him 
when  he  became  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh"  (Heb.  x.  5) — the  human  body  in  which 
the  "  fulness  of  the  Godhead  "  dwelt,  which  grew  from  infancy  to  manhood,  which  was 
crucified  and  then  transformed  in  the  imprisoning  tomb, — this  body  has  been  with- 
drawn from  the  earth.  Men  see  it  no  longer.  It  is  glorified  and  immortalized 
"  witiiin  the  veil."  But  he  has  taken  to  himself  another  body,  in  which  the  Divine 
energy  dwells,  through  which  the  Divine  beauty  reveals  itself,  which  he  is  leading  on 
gradually  to  a  perfect  manhood — "  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ." 
That  I'ody  is  his  Church.  And  just  as  the  unity  of  our  pliysical  frame  lies  in  the 
indwelling  soul  which  holds  all  its  piirts  together,  and  without  which  they  ivould  soon 
lose  thtir  organic  form  and  dissolve  into  their  primary  elements,  so  the  unity  of  the 
Church  is  the  presence  of  Christ  by  his  Spirit  in  the  whole  and  in  every  part  (ver.  13). 
The  sentient  life  pervades  every  fibre  of  our  frame.  Enthroned  in  the  centre,  it  throbs 
and  glows  in  the  remotest  part.  But  the  members  have  no  separate  and  independent 
life  in  themselves.  Let  any  one  of  them  be  severed  from  the  rest,  and  it  is  senseless, 
puwerless,  dead.  So  is  it  with  our  souls  in  relation  to  him  who  is  to  the  spiritual  body 
both  as  the  heart  and  the  head,  the  inspiring  energy,  and  the  living  bond  of  uuity. 
"  Apart  from  me  ye  can  do  nothing,"  etc.  (John  xv.  o).  Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that 
union  with  Christ  and  union  with  the  Church,  in  the  deepest  and  truest  sense,  are  one 
and  the  .-ame  thing.  The  old  dictum,  "  Out  of  the  Church  no  salvation,"  ha.s  profound 
truth  iu  it ;  but  not  as  they  imagine  who  by  the  "  Church"  mean  any  outward  orjcani- 
zation  that  is  of  human  origin  and  under  human  control.  The  papal  doctrine  asserts, 
"  Where  the  Church  is,  there  is  Christ."  We  rather  say,  "  Where  Christ  is,  there  is  the 
Church."  To  be  in  personal  fellowship  with  him  is  to  have  a  "part  and  lot"  in  it  of 
which  no  power  in  the  universe  can  ever  rob  us.  This  is  the  principle  of  unity — the 
living  Christ  dwelling  by,  his  Spirit  in  each  and  all. 

II.  The  relation  its  members  bear  to  each  other.  "The  body  is  not  one 
member,  but  many."  The  context  shows  that  the  apostle  has  not  mere  number  but 
variety  also  in  view,  variety  as  of  the  hand  and  the  foot,  the  ear  and  the  eye.  The 
telatioLi  between  Christian  men  is  spiritual,  not  formal ;  one  that  lies  in  community  of 


OH.  in.  1—31.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  4U 

thought  and  affection  and  aim,  not  in  any  kind  of  external  resemblance.  (Note  the 
difi'erence  between  a  body,  a  living  organism,  and  any  mere  itiert  mass  the  particles  of 
which  are  bound  together  simply  by  mechanical  force  or  even  by  chemical  affinity.) 
In  every  form  of  human  society  it  is  the  sense  of  individuality  combined  with  the  sense 
of  mutual  sympathy  that  constitutes  the  real  cementing  principle.  It  is  a  fellowsliip 
of  life  that  binds  men  together,  and  not  the  constraint  of  outward  circumstance.  The 
oneness  of  a  family  lies,  not  in  the  fact  that  its  members  dwell  together  under  the  same 
T^oof  or  bear  the  same  name,  but  in  the  common  sympathies  and  affections  that  grow 
out  of  their  natural  kinship.  The  oneness  of  an  army  lies  in  the  enthusiasm  of  its 
devotion  to  the  common  cause,  far  more  than  in  the  force  of  military  discipline.  The  one* 
ness  of  a  nation  is  not  the  mere  accident  of  its  coming  within  one  geographical  boundary, 
but  the  spirit  of  loyalty  and  patriotism  that  pervades  its  citizens.  So  in  the  Christian 
commonwealth,  we  cannot  be  too  careful  to  distinguish  between  its  formal  aspects  and 
associations,  and  those  relations  that  are  internal  and  spiritual  and  in  which  the  living 
and  enduring  reality  of  it  lies.  The  fact  of  men  forming  themselves  into  a  visible 
«ociety,  calling  themselves  by  the  same  name,  meeting  in  the  same  place,  consenting 
to  the  same  creed,  using  the  same  language,  joining  in  the  same  modes  of  worship, 
doing  the  same  work,  does  not  make  them  one  in  Christ.  These  are  but  the  outward 
signs  and  symbols  of  unity.  They  may  be  the  mocking  semblances  of  it.  They  have 
no  value  unless  they  represent  what  is  real  and  spiritual  and  divinely  true.  Li  this 
unity  of  spiritually  related  parts,  each  member  has  its  own  proper  place  and  function, 
and  the  beauty  and  harmony  of  the  whole  structmre  lie  in  its  faithfully  fulfilling  it 
(Eph,  iv.  16).  We  best  serve  the  interests  of  others  when  we  are  most  simply  and 
honestly  "  ourselves ; "  when  we  think  our  own  thought,  speak  our  own  word,  do  our 
own  deed ;  when  the  whole  outward  form  and  habit  of  our  Christian  life  is  just  the 
natural  outcome  of  what  is  deepest  and  truest  within  us.  Anything  that  tends  t« 
weaken  the  sense  of  individuality ;  anything  that  prumpts  us  to  play  a  part  that  is  not 
"  our  own,"  anything  that  tends  to  obliterate  natural  differences  and  reduce  all  to  one 
common  level  of  artificial  sameness, — is  altogether  evil  (vers.  17 — 19).  Some  parts  of 
tj>e  body  are  small,  hidden,  apparently  insignificant.  But  those  who  are  best  acquainted 
with  its  structure  know  well  that  they  are  not  for  that  reason  the  less  important  and 
even  essential.  Let  them  fall  out  of  their  place  or  cease  to  discharge  their  function, 
and  it  may  be  the  whole  frame  would  suffer  dislocation  or  sink  into  decay.  The  true 
Christian  spirit  will  teach  us  never  to  make  light  of  our  position,  or  the  sphere  we  fill, 
er  the  influence  it  is  given  us  to  wield.  It  will  make  us  "  content  to  fill  a  little  space," 
so  that  our  Lord  may  but  be  glorified.  And  if  true  to  the  light  that  shines  within  us, 
and  to  the  noblest  impulses  of  which  we  are  conscious,  we  only  faithfully  do  our  work 
in  lowly  allegiance  to  him  and  loving  helpfulness  towards  our  fellows,  we  ma;  find 
ill  the  end  how  true  it  is  that  "  God  hath  given  more  abundant  honour  to  that  part  that 
lacked  "(ver.  24). 

HI.  The  ends  fob  which  it  exists.  The  body  is  created  to  be  the  vehicle  and  organ 
of  the  indwelling  soul,  the  channel  through  which  its  hidden  virtues  shall  reveal  them- 
selves, the  instrument  by  means  of  which  it  may  work  out  its  nobler  purposes.  The 
Qospel  records  in  no  way  satisfy  our  curiosity  in  reference  to  the  physical  form  and 
feature  of  Jesus.  But  we  may  be  very  sure  of  this,  that  the  body  in  which  he  appeared 
nas  a  fitting  vehicle  for  the  Divine  soul  that  inhabited  it.  It  was  as  a  transparent 
medium,  through  which  the  radiance  of  the  spiritual  beauty  within  must  often  have 
streamed  forth  in  a  way  that  commanded  the  honour  and  admiration  of  men.  Let 
the  Church  be  true  to  its  high  calling,  so  shall  the  glory  of  the  indwelling  Christ  shine 
through  it  upon  the  dark  world,  drawing  all  men  to  him.  Upon  every  section  of  the 
Church,  and  every  individual  member  of  the  body,  according  to  ita  measure,  this 
responsibility  rests. — W. 

Ver.  21. — Muival  service.  These  words  indicate,  not  only  the  principles  that  ought 
to  govern  the  Church  of  Christ,  but  also  the  Divine  order  and  law  of  all  human 
Huciety.  The  New  Testament  Church,  like  the  ancient  Jewish  commonwealth,  bean 
a  representative  character.  We  have  to  regard  it,  not  only  as  a  spiritual  fellowship 
distinct  from  the  world,  united  by  a  different  bond,  ruled  by  different  lawi,  inspired 
by  a  different  spirit,  living  a  different  life,  advancing  to  a  different  destiny,  but  also 


41«  TUB  FIRST  EPISTLK  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xii.  1—31 

ks  a  fellowship  that  ia  called  to  illustrate  before  the  worM  the  Divine  idea  of  (ocial 
human  life.     Taking  this  bniader  view  of  the  passage,  observe — 

L  The  way  in  which  CaRisTiANrTT  becognizeb  social  distinctioks.    These  are 
suggested  by  the  "  eye,"  the  "  hand,"  the  "  head,"  and  the  "  feet."    The  distinctions 
that  exist  among  men  are  of  yarious  kinds — natural   and  acquired,  essential   and 
conventional.      There    are    distinctions    intellectual,    moral,    educational,    national, 
official,  circumstantial,  i  All  these'are'recoignized  in  some  way  or  other  by  the  religion 
of  Christ.     But  they  do  not  receive  from  it  precisely  the  same  recognition.    They  are 
not  recognized  by  it  to  the  same  extent.     There  are  certain  social  distinctions  that 
are  far  too  deeply  rooted  in  the  instinctive  tendencies  of  our  nature,  or  in  the  inoral 
necessity  of  things,  ever  to  be  obliterated.    If  they  could  be  levelled  in  one  age  they 
would  inevitably  rise  again  in  the  next.      If  levelled  in  a  violent  and  repressive  way, 
they  only  spring  up  afterwards  in  some  exaggerated  and  extravagant   form.     The 
French  Revolution  began  with  glorious  dreams  of  "  liberty,  fraternity,  and  equality ;  " 
it  ended  in  a  "  Reign  of  Terror  "  in  which  every  man's  hand  was  against  his  brother, 
in  a  military  despotism  that  crushed  the  hopes  and  energies  of  the  people  in  the  dust, 
in  social  separations  broader  and  deeper  than  had  been  known  before.     The  reli<;iori 
of  Christ  is  in  no  way  antagonistic  to  those  radical  and  natural  tenrlencies — it  does 
but  mould  and  regulate  them.     It  seeks  to  control,  but  not  to  crush  them,  wisely 
to  direct  the  current,  but  not  to  stay  its  course.     Revolutionary  as  it  is  in  its  purpose 
and  workings,  it  is  truly  conservative,  gradually  transfoitning  the  whole  life  of  man, 
but  demanding  no  violent  changes,  developing  the  form  of  the   nobler  future  out 
of  the  crude,  imperfect,  and  misshapen  past.     Hence  what  seems  to  some  the  strange 
silence  of  apostolic  teaching  in  reference  to  many  of  the  dark'  facts  and  phases  of  the 
social   life   of  the   world   as   then   existing — slavery,   polygamy,    military    tyranny, 
oppres-sive  laws,  etc.     The  chief  lesson  for  us  here,  however,  is  this — that  in   the 
body  politic,  the  living  frame  of  society,  each  man  according  to  his  distinction  has  his 
own  sjieoial  function  and  special  work  to  do.    There  is  the  eye — the  discerning,  per- 
ceptive, observant  power ;  the  head — the  regulative,  guiding,  governmental  power  j  the 
hand — the  operative  faculty,  the  power  that  does  tlio  finer  and  more  skilful  work  of 
the  world;  an<i  tl)e/ef< — the  part  of  the  frame  that  bears  the  heavier  burdens,  does 
the  drudgery,  endures  in  the  way  of  physical  toil  the  more  painful  pressure  of  life. 
Each  member  has  its  own  particular  work  to  do,  and  .which  another  cannot  do.    The 
eye  cannot  handle,  the  hand  cannot  see,  the  head  cannot  bear  the  heavy  burdens, 
the  feet  cannot  direct.     There  are  men  of  fine  speculative,  philosophic  thought,  but 
who  have  little  practical  capacity  j  a  nice  discernment  of  the  truth  of  things,  but  no 
power  to  eniiiody  even  their  own  ideas  in  real  and  substantial  forms.     Again,  there 
are  men  of  great  administrative  ability,  quick  for  all  the  practical  business  of  life, 
"  born  to  rule  "  or  to  manage  affairs ;  place  them  wliere  you  will  they  will  soon  assert 
their  power,  and  others  will  recognize  it  and  follow  their  leading.     While  there  are 
also  men  to  whom   physical   toil  is.  a  natural  instinctive  delight,  and  whom   the 
educational  influences  of  life  never  have  fitted  or,  perhaps,  could  fit  for  any  other 
function.     Distinctions  that  grow  thus  in  a  natural  way  out  of  radical  qualities  in 
men  Christianity  recognizes.     Also  those  that  belong  to  the   parental  and   family 
relations,  or  that  may  be  necessary  to  assert  the  majesty  of  law  (Rom.  xiii.  1— ^(i). 
But   as  to  any   further  distinctions,   any   that  rest    u^wn  a   purely   fictitious   and 
conventional  basis,   having  no  foundation  in  nature,  which  merely  feed  the  lust  of 
power  and  the  pride  of  life,  it  would  seem  to  acknowledge  none. 

IJ.    The   law   of   mutual   Dt;PENDEKCE   THAT  OOVERXS   ALL   PABT8    OF    THB    BOCfAL 

FRAME.  The  conditions  of  our  life  in  this  world  involve  us  all,  in  a  thousand  subtle 
ways,  in  the  obligation  to  serve  one  another,  and  subject  us  all,  whether  we  will' or 
not,  to  the  law  of  self-sacrifice.  All  nature,  in  its  purely  physical  aspects,  U  framed 
on  t  nis  principle. 

■*  Nothing  in  the  world  is  single, 
All  things,  by  a  law  Divine, 
In  another's  being  mingle." 

Every  form  of  physical  existence  draws  its  life  from  those  beneath  it,  and  in  Its  turn 
haii  to  surrender  its  life  to  them.  The  lower  forms  exist  for  the  higher,  the  highest 
can  never  aasert  iu  freedom  from  the  law  of  dependence  on  the  lowest.     Hn  in  \i.s 


OLXiLl— 31.]    TEE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0B1NTHIAN&  41T 

complex  system  of  human  life,  no  grade  in  the  social  scale,  no  order  of  faculty,  no 
kind  of  "  interest,"  caa  claim  exemption  from  the  common  bond.  Take  e.g.  the 
relation  that  exists  between  the  men  of  thought  and  the  men  of  action,  the  theoretical 
•nd  the  practical.  They  are  apt  to  think  and  to  speak  slightingly  of  each  other ;  the 
one  intolerant  of  being  brought  continually  to  a  merely  utilitarian  test,  the  other 
always  ready  with  the  charge  of  speculative  dreaming.  This  is  a  mistake.  God  has 
set  the  one  over  against  the  other,  "  that  the  one  without  the  other  should  not 
be  made  perfect."  "i'hoiight  without  action  is  worthless.  Yet  it  is  thought  that  rules 
the  world,  and  if  there  were  no  "  eye  "  to  guide  it  the  labour  of  the  "  hand  "  would 
soon  cease.  So  also  of  social  conditions,  The  tendency  sometimes  seen  in  those  upon 
whom  the  burdens  of  toil  aud  privation  press  most  heavily,  to  look  up  enviously, 
suspiciously,  and  even  defiantly  towards  those  who  occupy  a  higher  level,  may  be  very 
senseless ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  what  more  false  and  irrational  than  the  tone  of 
lofty  superiority  that  social  distinction  sometimes  assumes?  Can  the  head,  then, 
say  to  the  feet,  "  I  have  no  need  of  you "  ?  What  would  become  of  the  loftiest 
dignities  of  the  world  if  there  were  none  to  bear  the  heavier  burdens  and  do  the 
rougher  work  of  life?  From  what  do  the  fairest  forms  of  our  civilization  spring,  our 
comforts  and  indulgences,  and  all  the  thousand  pleasant  associations  of  our  life? 
of  what  are  they  the  fruits,  but  of  patient,  life-consuming  labour  in  field  and  fnctory 
and  mine?  All  the  bright  and  beautiful  things  of  the  world,  all  the  pride  and  glory 
of  man's  existence  in  it,  have  their  roots  more  or  less  directly  in  the  base  earth.  The 
eye  and  the  head,  with  all  their  fine  sensibility  and  lofty  faculty,  can  do  nothing 
without  the  hands  and  the  feet.  Christianity  gives  the  utmost  sanctity  and  force  to 
this  lesson.  It  is  in  the  light  of  the  incarnation,  the  sympathetic  humanity,  the  lowly 
life,  the  beneficent  ministry,  the  sacrificial  death,  of  the  Lord  Jesus  that  we  see  what 
a  wondrous  bond  of  brotherhood  it  is  that  unites  the  whole  human  family  together, 
and  that  we  learn  to  understand  the  great  law  that  God  has  formed  us  all  to  "  live  not 
unto  ourselves."  The  gospel  makes  us  more  keenly  sensible  of  our  obligations  than 
of  our  rights,  of  what  we  owe  to  others  than  of  what  they  owe  to  us.  It  inspires  us 
with  the  spirit  of  him  who  was  "  among  us  as  one  that  serveth  "  and  who  "  gave  his 
life  a  ransom  for  many." 

IIL  The  oround  on  which  wb  otjonr  to  pat  bfecial  honoub  to  our  fellow-men. 
The  Law  of  Christ  teaches  us  to  reverence  our  common  humanity  in  all  its  conditions. 
"  Honour  all  men.  Love  the  brotherhood.  Fear  God.  Honour  the  king "  (1  Pet. 
ii.  17).  These  utterances  would  seem  to  embrace  all  the  points  of  Christian  duty  in 
this  respect.  But  the  whole  drift  of  the  apostle's  teaching,  in  this  as  in  so  many  other 
places,  is  to  the  effect  that  siiecial  honour  is  due  to  the  faithful  discharge  of  personal 
responsibility.  Whatever  station  men  occupy,  whatever  function  they  perf'  rm, 
it  is  the  profitable  use  of  faculty  for  the  common  good  that  confers  upon  them  the 
noblest  distinction. 

"  Honour  and  shame  from  no  condition  rise ; 
Act  well  your  part ;  there  all  the  honour  liee." 

W, 

Yen.  1—3. — Tht  presidency  of  the  Spirit.  This  passage  does  not  direct  us  to  this 
general  topic,  but  to  one  particular  point  in  relation  to  it.  The  presidency  relates  to, 
covers,  and  hallows  every  feature  and  every  expression  of  Christian  life  and  worship 
and  fellowship.  The  whole  lire  of  the  regenerate  man  is  directly  aud  fully  within 
the  Spirit's  lead,  so  that  he  cannot  even  speak — if  he  be  a  Christian  indeed — without 
the  inspiration,  the  guidance,  the  toning,  of  the  indwelling  Holy  Ghost,  The  apostle 
ia  giving  these  Christianized  Gentiles  a  test  by  which  they  might  know  whether  they 
had  indeed  the  sealing  and  sanctifying  gift  of  the  Spirit.  They  could  tell  even  by  the 
character  of  their  utterances.  These  found  expression  for  the  cherished  feeling; 
and  iuch  was  the  natural  depravity  of  man  that  they  might  be  sure  no  man  cherished 
admiring  and  loving  thoughts  of  Christ,  and  found  expression  for  them  by  saying, 
"  Jesna  is  Lord,"  save  as  he  was  inwardly  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  If  it  be  true 
of  10  ainiple  an  expression  of  the  Christian  life  as  that,  it  is  surely  true  of  all  other 
■inwarioM.  It  is  even  the  glory  of  the  Christian  man  that  nowhere  and  in  nothing 
ia  ha  independent  The  "Great-heart  Guide"  ia  alwayi  with  lum.  He  apeaks, 
L  oOBiHTHuaa,  3  « 


418  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TUE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  zn.  1— Si. 

he  lets,  u  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  St.  Paul  is  led  to  the  impression  of  this  point 
by  the  false  notion  that  might  be  so  easily  taken  up — the  notion  that  only  great  gift* 
and  talents  are  under  the  presidency  of  the  Spirit ;  that  he  bears  no  immediate  and 
piecisfl  relation  lo  the  common  life.  The  question  of  practical  concern  for  each  one  o( 
lis  is  this — How  much  of  daily  life  can  we  recognize  as  being  in  Uod's  lead,  and  under 
the  Spirit's  presidency  ?    In  answer  we  may  say — 

I.  1'he  special  things  of  a  man's  life  ABE  IK  THE  Spirit's  lbad.  This  may  be 
opened  by  dwelling  on:  I.  The  special  thin<^s  of  personal  experience.  3.  Of  Christian 
employment  and  use  of  gifts.  3.  Of  relationship  and  opportunity.  4.  Of  tonfemon 
and  witness,  as  in  the  case  of  apostles  and  martyrs. 

II.  TBe  comkoh  and  little  things  of  a  man's  life  abb  in  the  Spibit'b  usad. 
The  "  three-fourths  of  life  which  is  made  up  of  conduct."  Our  sayings,  our  doings  in 
home  and  in  business.  Every  act  which  can  express  character  is  of  interest  to  the 
sanctifying  Spirit,  and  may  be  done,  should  be  done,  in  his  leadings  and  inspirations. 
— R.  T. 

Vers,  4 — B.^Divenity  and  sameness.  "  Although  conversion  is  identical  in  trery 
case,  yet  afterwards  there  are  spiritual  gifts  which  vary  according  to  individual 
capacity  and  character,  but  they  all  come  from  the  one  Spirit.  There  are  varieties  of 
ministration  in  which  those  spiritual  gifts  are  employed,  and  the  same  Lord  is  served 
by  these  various  ministries."  Nature  shows  us  the  diversified  forms  and  expressions 
of  the  common  life.  Science  admits  the  diversity,  and  seeks  to  recoguize  the  one  great 
principle,  the  life,  that  lies  within  them  all.  The  diversity  lies  in  the  expression  in 
our  human  spheres.    The  sameness  lies  in  the  source,  for  all  things  are  of  God. 

I.  Diversitt  in  the  Christian  Church.  There  are,*  1.  Diversities  in  endowments, 
or  "gifts."  Meyer's  division  of  the  early  Christian  gifts  is  suggestive.  (1)  Gifts 
which  have  reference  to  intellectual  power :  divided  into  (a)  the  word  of  wisdom ;  (b) 
the  word  of  knowledge.  (2)  Gifts  which  depend  upon  special  energy  of  faith :  dividBd 
into  (a)  the  faith  itself;  (6)  operating  in  deeds,  healings,  miracles ;  (c)  operating  in 
words,  as  in  prophetic  utterances ;  (d)  operating  in  distinguishing  true  and  false  spirits. 
(3)  Gifts  which  relate  to  tongues :  divided  into  (a)  speaking  with  tongues ;  (&)  inter- 
preting tongues.  2.  Diversities  in  the  service  required,  or  in  "  ministrations  "  (margin, 
ministeries),  that  is,  forms  in  which  service  may  be  rendered  to  Christ  and  his  members 
by  his  disciples.  3.  Diversities  in  the  modes  of  fulfilling  the  service,  or  in  the  ways  in 
which  individual  character  and  ability  may  find  expression  in  carrying  out  various 
Christian  duties.  If  many  Christian  men  are  engaged  in  the  same  form  of  service, 
each  one  will  impress  his  individuality  upon  his  method  of  doing  it.  No  two  workmen 
work  exactly  alike.  In  Christ's  Church  there  is  full,  free  room  for  all  kinds  of  diversity 
and  variety.  No  man's  personal  peculiarities  need  be  crushed ;  all  may  be  of  use ;  only 
each  man  must  see  to  it  that  the  expression  of  his  individuality,  and  the  use  of  hU 
gift,  do  not  become  in  any  way  a  hindrance  or  an  offence  to  his  fellow-workers. 
Diversity  is  fully  compatible  with  harmony  and  unity. 

II.  Sameness  in  the  Christian  Church.  There  is  one  seurce  of  all  Christian  gifts; 
one  president  over  the  using  of  all  Christian  gifts ;  and  one  end  to  be  served  by  the 
employment  of  all  Christian  gifts.  "  The  unity  of  the  source  is  strongly  insisted  upon, 
to  put  an  end  to  the  mutual  jealousy  of  the  Corinthians.  And  it  is  remarkable  that 
each  person  in  the  blessed  Trinity  is  introduced  to  emphasize  the  argument,  and 
in  contrary  order  (as  Estius  remarks),  in  order  to  lead  us  step  by  step  to  the  one 
Source  of  all.  First,  the  Spirit,  who  bestows  the  '  gifts '  on  the  believer.  Next,  the 
Lord,  to  whom  men  render  service  in  his  Church.  Lastly,  God  the  Father,  from  whom 
all  proceeds,  whose  are  all  the  works  which  are  done  to  him  and  in  his  name."  The 
following  points  may  be  illustrated : — There  is  sameness  (1)  in  the  distributer  of  gifts ; 
(2)  in  the  purpose  contemplated  by  the  distribution ;  (3)  in  the  grace  ready  for  those 
who  are  using  the  gifts;  (4)  and  in  the  dependence  of  erery  one  who  has  a  gift 
inwn  the  aid  and  leading  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Impress  that  the  whole  attention  of  (he 
Christian  should  be  occupied  with  the  one  motive  and  the  »ni  source  of  inspiimtion. 
All  other  motiyes  and  inspirations  can  but  fulfil — can  but  be  modes  of  operatioB  fK 
the  one  great  motive  and  inspiration,  which  is  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  In  ii% 
sealing  as  as  Christ's,  teaching  as  all  truth,  and  leading  us  in  all  duty.— R,  T. 


OH.  XII.  1—31.]    TUB   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TUE  COlilNTUlAHS.  41f 

Vera.  12 — 26. — The  law  of  order  in  the  human  body.  For  other  cases  in  which  this 
rimile  is  employed,  see  Rom.  xii.  4,  6;  Eph.  iv,  16;  r.  30;  Col.  ii.  19.  The  huiuam 
body  presents  a  very  striking  illustration  of  (1)  diversity  of  gifts,  each  membar  having 
its  own  endowment  and  use ;  (2)  unity  amid  diversity,  since  each  member  sharw  th» 
common  life;  (3)  mutual  dependence,  as  each  member  is  etiicient  for  its  paiticular  um 
pnly  with  the  aid  and  support  of  all  the  others.  "  Unity,  not  unvarying  uniformity, 
is  uie  law  of  God  in  the  world  of  grace  as  in  (liat  of  nature.  As  the  many  member* 
of  the  body  compose  an  organic  whole,  and  none  can  be  dispensed  witVi  as  needless, 
so  those  variously  gifted  by  the  Spirit  compose  a  spiritual  organic  wliole,  the  body 
of  Christf  into  which  all  are  baptized  by  the  one  Spirit."  Using  the  Jiuman  body  for 
illustration  of  the  Church  regarded  as  Christ's  body,  it  may  be  shown  that — 

I.  It  IS  A  wHoCK''E!vid9ntly< for*  it  there  was  a'plan,ian  ideaL-  It  is  a  complete 
thing.  It  has  its  appointed  parts ;  nothing  whatever  can  be  added  to  it,  and  Dotliing 
can  be  taken  from  it.  Though  it  may  be  unrealized  as  yet,  God  sees  his  Church  to  be, 
as  perfect,  a  whole. 

II.  It  IS  A  VARiETT.  The  sides  of  the  body  seem  to  match,  but  evcL  the  left  and 
the  right  have  their  special  functions.  Every  limb  and  member  and  joint  has  its 
individual  mission.  And  so  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  No  two  of  its  members  are  really 
alike,  and  each  has  his  fitted  place  and  appointed  work. 

III.  It  is  a  BET  or  relations.  No  member  having  any  powers  or  abilities  by 
itself ;  doing  its  own  particular  work  only  with  the  aid  of  all  the  other  members.  The 
whole  being  set  in  mutual  dependence  and  helpfulness. 

IV.  It  is  a  harmont.  So  long  as  each  part  and  portion  does  its  own  particular 
work  efficiently  and  welL  Schism  in  the  body  is  disease,  common  helplessness,  and  the 
beginnings  of  death. 

V.  Each  member  oak  oklt  do  its  part  bt  tirtue  of  the  common  life.  Use  our 
Lord's  illustration  from  the  vino  and  the  branches.  The  member  must  abide  in  the 
body,  and  the  branch  in  the  vine.  Apply  in  each  case  to  the  Gliristian  Church,  and 
impress  that,  in  the  body  and  in  the  Church,  there  can  be  (1)  no  unnecessary  part; 
(2)  no  idle  member ;  and  (3)  no  dishonourable  or  unhonoured  portion ;  since  each  has 
its  particular  use  for  the  good  of  the  whole. — R.  T. 

Ver.  26. — The  common  bearing  of  a  Christian  Church.  "Whether  one  member 
suffer,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it."  "  This  is  a  matter  of  the  most  ordinary  experience 
in  the  human  body.  A  pain  in  any  portion,  even  the  most  remote  from  the  seats  of 
life,  affects  the  whole.  A  glance  at  history  will  show  us  that  it  is  the  same  with  the 
body  politic.  Whatever  is  physically, 'morally,  or  spiritually  injurious  to  any  one 
portion  of  society,  or  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  is  sure  in  the  long  run  to  produce  injury, 
moral  and  spiritual  deterioration,  to  the  rest."  "  So  whatever  tends  to  exalt  the  character 
and  purify  the  aims  of  any  one  class  in  society,  is  sure  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  to 
affect  every  other.  If  the  one  thought  is  calculated  to  alarm  us  by  calling  our  attention 
to  the  infinite  mischief  which  may  be  wrought  by  one  act  of  thoughtlessness  or  selfish- 
ness, it  is  an  immense  encouragement  to  be  reminded  by  the  other  that  no  work  for 
good,  undertaken  from  unselfish  motives  and  carried  out  in  an  unselfish  spirit,  can 
possibly  be  without  effect,"  Chrysostom  says,  "  When  a  thorn  enters  the  heel,  the 
whole  body  feels  it  and  is  concerned ;  the  back  bends,  the  belly  and  thighs  contract 
themselves,  the  hands  come  forward  and  draw  out  the  thorn,  the  head  stoops,  and  the 
eyes  regard  the  affected  member  with  intense  gaze."  John  Howe  says,  "  It  is  a  most 
unnatural  thing  to  rejoice  in  the  harm  of  another.  In  the  body,  when  one  member  is 
suffering,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it.  And  to  delight  in  the  harm  of  others  is  as 
contrary  to  the  spiritual  nature  which  is  diffused  in  the  true  body  of  Christ,  as  if  the 
head  or  any  other  member  should  rejoice  that  the  band  or  foot  is  in  pun."  Two  points 
may  be  fully  treated.  1.  As  suffering  in  any  part  of  the  body  disturbs  the  whole 
frame,  exciting  sympathetic  feeling  in  the  most  distant  parts,  so  suffering,  and  even 
more  truly  sin,  in  the  lowest  and  lowliest  member  of  a  Christian  Church,  affects,  injtires, 
and.  grieves  the  whole.  Every  member  ought  to  suffer  and  sympathize  with  the 
sufferer  or  the  sinner.  2.  As  pain  elsewhere  in  the  body  is  really  a  sympathetic  effort  to 
relieve  local  pain,  so  sympathetic  pain  in  other  members  of  the  Church  finds  its  proper 
use  in  the  help  afforded,  and  relief  given  to  the  suffering  or  sinning  member,— R  T. 


410  THE  nmr  EPISTLS  to  the  (X)KX^TiliAN&    [OH.  UL  i—m. 

Tar.  27. — Pm  Church  Ohri»f»  body.  (Comp.  verg.  12,  13.)  Reeikll  our  Lord's  ova 
figure  1^  the  Tine.  The  branchei  are  the  body  through  which  the  Tine-life  finds  ita 
ezpreulon.  Compare  the  human  body  which  our  Lord  took  upon  him  in  his  incar- 
nation,'  which  was  the  means  of  showing  the  Son  of  Qoi  td  men,  and  setting  him 
In  relation  with  men,  with  the  Church  body  which  our  Lord  took  when  he  ascended 
from  this  world,  and  became  a  living  and  spiritual  Christ,  which  if  the  means  of 
•bowing  Christ  to  men  now,  and  maintaining  his  relations  with  them.  Illustrate  the 
two  following  polnta  by  the  comparisoB  of  the  human  body  with  the  Chureh  l>ody  of 
Christ  :— 

1.  Evert  fabt  or  Chbibt's  bodt  bhodu*  kakb  m  owk  niPRKssioH.  Dealing  with 
the  human  Christ,  we  show  how  every  part,  every  feature  and  phase  of  bis  earthly 
manifestation,  had  ita  own  power  and  influence.  We  are  obliged  to  separate  part  from 
fart  for  consideration.  Sometimes  we  dwell  on  his  moral  character,  or  on  bis  habits, 
or  on  his  speech,  or  on  his  actions,  or  on  bis  endurances.  Taking  his  life  piece  by 
piece,  we  find  meaning,  mission,  use,  everywhere.  And  so  with  the  Church,  as  Christ's 
body  or  earthly  manifestation  now — each  part,  each  person,  has  characteristic  place 
«Ad  influenee.  Each  must  make  its  or  bis  own  imprussion.  From  this  impraw  the 
demand  which  Christ  makes  for  loyal  service  from  each  part  of  his  Church  body ;  every 
member  must  be  a  faithful  member. 

IL  The  Church  bodt,  as  a  wholb,  must  makb  m  niFBESsion.  Besides  aaj 
precise  impression  produced  by  dwelling  on  any  phase  of  the  human  life  of  Christ,  there 
is  a  special  impression  which  the  whole  figure  of  Christ  makes  upon  us.  Illustrate  by 
the  feeling  of  Christian  people  on  seeing  Dore's  full-sized  picture  of  "  Christ  leaving  the 
prstorium."  So  the  Church  can  get  its  proper  impression  on  men  only  as  it  becomes  a 
full  unity,  the  one  catholic  and  apostolic  Church.  For  the  securing  of  the  Church 
wholeness,  and  its  presentation  to  the  world  u  Christ's  complete  h^y  on  earth,  all 
•amest  hearta  will  ever  strive  and  pray. — B.  T, 

Vers.  28 — 30. — The  order  of  offieei  <n  the  Chrttfian  Ohtmk.  '  Apostles  "  are  set  In 
the  first  place  or  rank,  because  they  were  called  to  their  office  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
himself;  they  had  immediate  personal  knowledge  of  his  life  and  character  and 
teachings ;  and  they  were  the  actual  founders  and  practical  rulers  and  referees  of  the 
Church.  Next  come  the  "  prophets,"  who  were  not  persons  merely  endowed  with 
the  power  of  foretelling  future  events,  but  persons  to  whom  direct  revelations  and 
communications  from  God  came,  and  so  were  emix>wered  to  enlighten  the  Church  upon 
the  mysteries  of  the  faith  and  upon  the  claims  of  duty.  Compare  the  older  Jewish 
prophets  as  directly  inspired  teachers.  Then  "teachers,"  regarded  as  those  with 
ordinary  powers  of  intellect,  and  the  natural  gifts  of  instructing  others,  who  educated 
and  trained  the  Church  in  Christian  doctrine.  After  that  "  miracles,"  or  the  power 
•f  working  miracles.  This  is  set  on  a  new  and  lower  range,  perhaps,  l>ecause  only 
«xercised  occasionally,  and  so  not  comparing  with  the  more  regular  and  orderly  arrange- 
ments for  the  Church's  culture.  "  Miracles  "  are  distinguished  from  "  gifts  of  healings," 
which  we  are  to  suppose  were  traceable  to  personal  power  on  nervous  systems,  of  which 
there  seem  to  be  modern  instances.  "Helps"  may  refer  to  such  minor  aervices  as 
succouring  the  needy,  tending  the  aick,  eto.  What  the  apostle  meant  by  **  govern- 
ments "  is  very  difficult  to  decide.  Stanley  thinks  that  reference  is  intended  to  the 
faculty  otherwise  known  as  "  discerning  of  spirits."  The  word  used,  however,  means 
"  guiding  the  helm  of  affairs,''  and  reference  may  be  to  those  officers  who  managed,  or 
ruled,  the  temporal  affairs  of  the  Church,  and  answered,  in  some  measure,  to  the  elders, 
or  rulers,  of  the  synagogue.  "  Tongues  "  St.  Paul  puts  last ;  for,  from  other  passages,  we 
know  that  he  did  not  greatly  value  the  mere  power  to  express  Christian  feeling  in 
ecstatic  and  incomprehensible  language,  or  in  some  foreign  and  unknown  tongue.  He 
thought  that  it  could  bear  a  very  feeble  relation  to  the  Church's  edification  unless  it 
were  properly  interpreted.  St.  Paul  constantly  urges  the  variety  of  the  gifts  entrusted 
to  the  Church,  and  the  common  honourableness  of  them  all;  but  he  as  earnestly 
impresses  upon  us  that,  from  the  human  standpoint,  and  in  view  of  the  preservation  oi 
srder  and  efficiency  in  Church  relations,  the  gifts  must  set  men  in  different  positions, 
and  bring  on  them  diffei'ent  forms  and  degrees  of  responsibility.  Three  things  may  bt 
unfoldad. 


OH.  XII.  1— 31.J    THE  FIE8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORLNTHIANBb  421 

I.  Some  gifts  necessitate  positions  of  ahthomtt.  The  man  of  gifts,  m  u 
apostle  or  as  a  rukr,  can  uiily  use  his  gilts  in  offices  of  authority.  So  now  a  man  mar 
[lave  tl  e  gift  of  organizing  or  of  managing  men,  or  the  gift  of  mastership  and  business; 
then  such  men  we  must  all  be  willing  to  set  in  the  high  places. 

II.  Other  gifts  as  truly  necessitate  positions  of  dependence.  They  are  gifti 
of  dependence  and  service.  They  can  only  be  put  to  use  in  lowly  places.  Those  baring 
them  can  only  be  faithful  in  what  men  may  call  lesser  places.  Ambition  in  meu  is 
limited  by  tlieir  gifts.  A  right  ambition  leads  a  man  to  press  for  the  position  in  which 
hu  can  use  his  gifts.  A  wrong  ambitiun  isets  a  man  upon  seeking  offices  and  positions 
for  which  he  has  no  gifts. 

TIL  Evert  man  in  the  Church  of  Christ  should  have  his  office  bt  tibtus 
OF  BIS  GIFTS,  and  NOT  OF  HIS  CLAIMS  OB  OF  HIS  AMBITIONS.  The  true  idea  of  selec- 
tion for  olTice  is  the  discovery  of  the  men  among  us  with  the  gifts  related  to  the  office. 
The  injury  of  the  Church  comes  by  the  pressing  of  men  into  offices  upon  other  than 
this  ground.  Grod  provides  the  fitted  ones ;  we  too  often  fail  to  wait  on  him  for 
the  right  men,  and  foolishly  fill  Church  offices  on  other  than  Divine  grounds.  The 
inquiry  for  each  one  to  put  to  himself  is  first  this:  "  What  are  t^e  gifts  entrusted  to 
me?"  And' then  this:  "  What  is  the  sphere  in  which  I  may  find  exercise  for  these 
gifts?  "  Tiie  most  honourable  place  that  any  man  can  occupy  is  that  which  is  precisely 
fitted  to  his  gifts,  whetl:er  to  man's  view  it  seem  to  be  lowly  or  seem  to  be  high. — ^B.  T. 

Ver.  31. — The  comparison  of  gift*  and  graces.  The  most  important  aspect  of 
religion  is  the  practical  one.  It  is  a  power  working  for  good  upon  the  whole  of  our 
human  natures,  effecting  vital  changes,  and  moulding  our  conduct  and  conversation  to 
the  pattern  of  a  new  model ;  a  Divine  power,  quickening  every  right  and  good  faculty 
our  natures  may  possess,  and  consecrating  to  God  their  exercise;  a  power  seeking  io 
crush  and  kill  all  wrong  within  us  and  about  us,  checking  every  form  of  evil  influence. 
The  great  Redeemer  takes  possession  of  our  natures  that  he  may  fit  them  to  be  his  owe 
abode.  And  no  view  of  Christ's  work  should  be  so  precious  to  us  as  that  which  repre- 
sents him,  amid  daily  scenes  and  by  daily  sanctifyings,  changing  the  desolated  mansion 
of  our  nature  into  a  palace  of  divinest  purity  and  beauty,  wherein  the  King  of  king! 
may  dwell.  This  gracious  work  may  be  represented  as  the  culture  of  the  Christian 
graces,  and  onr  text  reminds  us  how  much  more  important  for  us  are  the  graces  oi 
Christian  character  than  the  gifts  of  Christian  ability.  By  a  "gift"  we  understand 
something  which  enables  us  to  do ;  by  a  "  grace,"  something  which  enables  us  to  i«, 
A  gift  is  something,  as  it  were,  put  into  onr  hands,  that  can  be  used  by  us ;  a  grace  !• 
lome  change  effected  in  our  very  natures,  which  makes  us  unquestionably  better  men 
and  women.  We  observe  the  distinction  more  clearly  in  the  similar  words, "  talent "  and 
"  character."'  Our  text  suggests  that  graces  are  better  than  gifts — they  are  "  the  more 
excellent  way ;  "  and  even  gifts  are  worth  very  little  save  as  they  are  united  with 
graces.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  St.  Paul  should  be  the  one  to  set  graces  above  gifts ; 
since  in  personal  endowments  he  surpassed  all  the  other  apostles. 

I.  What  have  obaoes  and  gifts  in  common?  1.  They  have  a  common  Divine 
origin.  The  apostle  said  of  himself,  inclusive  of  his  great  mental  powers  and  cultivated 
capacities,  and  also  inclusive  of  his  beautiful  moral  qualities  and  high  spiritual  attain- 
ments, "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  2.  Graces  and  gifts  have  a  common 
purpose  to  effect.  Both  are  for  the  use  of  "  edifying."  That  word  is  made  from  a 
Latin  term  which  means  "  to  build  up,"  and  it  brings  before  us  the  Pauline  figure  of 
Christian  life  as  a  temple  in  course  of  construction.  We  seem  to  see  the  gathered 
stones  and  material ;  we  watch  the  toiling  workmen ;  we  discern  some  indications  of 
the  de.sign  of  the  eternal  Architect ;  and,  whether  we  be  men  of  gifts  or  men  of  graces, 
we  must  not  be  mere  lookers-on  ;  we  must  be  adding  something,  either  to  the  stability 
or  the  beauty  of  that  uprising  building.  If  we  have  gifts,  we  are  to  put  them  to  use 
in  kindly  and  wise  actions,  helping  our  brothers  to  carry  their  burdens,  or  teaching 
them  how  best  to  lay  stone  upon  stone.  If  we  have  graces,  then  we  are  enabled  to 
exercise  a  holy  infiuence  on  those  around  us,  inspiring  and  inspiriting  their  souls; 
throwing  a  Divine  fragrance,  like  that  from  the  flowers  of  paradise,  over  all  our  inter- 
course with  others ;  helping  our  fellows  to  work  more  heartily  and  bear  more  cheerily. 
3.  Graces  and  gifts  are  alike  in  this — they  both  can  grow  and  both  can  suffer  loaa.    , 


411 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTUIANa    [oil  xm.  1—13 


II.  What  hate  graces  which  oirrs  havb  not?  1.  Graces  have  power  to  oohm 
to  all  and  enrich  all.  In  any  very  large  sense  gifts  can  only  come  to  the  few.  Wt 
almost  feel  as  if  we  could  count  up  the  men  and  women  who,  in  each  department  ot 
gift,  have  risen  high  above  their  fellows.  We  have  a  special  name  for  such — we  call 
them  "  geniuses,"  and  we  know  that  real  genius  is  very  scarce.  But  we  may  all  have 
great  graces ;  they  are  like  the  beams  of  God's  sweet  sunlight,  that  fall  alike  on  the 
castle  that  crowns  the  hill  and  on  the  cluster  of  cottages  that  gathers  at  its  foot. 
2.  Graces  are  better  than  gifts,  because  they  last  for  ever.  The  things  which  we  havt 
must  one  day  drop  out  of  our  liands ;  the  dead  hand  holds  nothing.  What  we  are  in 
ourselves  we  must  be  for  ever,  we  cannot  cease  to  be  when  death  severs  the  mortal 
from  the  immortal.  3.  Graces  are  better  than  gifts,  because  they  have  the  power  of 
working  always.  Gifts  are  dependent  on  men's  wills,  and  those  wills  are  so  often 
wholly  self-ruled.  We  very  seldom  can  get  the  full  benefit  of  the  giftsof  the  gifted. 
If  a  man  be  a  gracious  soul,  he  cannot  help  working  for  his  fellow-men  and  for  Christ. 
The  glory  of  our  graces  is  just  this — they  are  either  independent  of  our  wills,  or  they 
are  simply  and  gloriously  triumphant  over  our  wills.  Be  beautiful,  be  gentle,  be 
humble,  be  true,  be  generous,  in  a  word,  be  Christ-like ;  let  only  your  soul  be  filled 
with  the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  and  you  will  become,  yuu  cannot  help  becoming,  one  of 
God's  most  constant  and  most  efficient  workers,  in  nursery  and  kitchen,  in  home  and 
friendship,  in  office  and  shop,  in  society  and  in  the  Church.  Could  we  see  deeply  into 
the  reality  of  things,  we  should  be  ready  with  one  voice  to  acknowledge  that  goodness 
is  the  true  greatness,  and  our  supreme  concern  would  be  to  become  beautiful  for  Christ. 
— B.T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XIIL 


Vers.  I — 13. — The  supremely  excellent  way 
of  Christian  love.  This  chapter  has  been 
in  all  ages  the  object  of  the  special  admirii- 
tion  of  the  Church.  Would  that  it  had 
received  in  all  ages  the  loftier  and  more 
valuable  admiration  which  would  have  been 
expressed  by  an  acceptance  of  its  lessons! 
Tertullian  says  that  it  is  uttered  "  with  all 
the  force  of  the  Spirit"  (totii  Spiritui 
viribut).  It  is  a  glorious  hymn  or  psean  in 
honour  of  Christian  love,  in  which  St.  Paul 
rises  on  the  wings  of  inspiration  to  the  most 
sunlit  heights  of  Christian  eloquence.  Like 
the  forty-fifth  psalm,  it  may  be  entitled  "  A 
Psalm  of  Love."  Valcknaer  says  that  the 
"oratorical  fignree  which  illuminate  the 
chapter  have  been  bom  spontaneously  in  an 
heroic  soul,  burning  with  the  love  of  Christ, 
and  placing  uU  things  lower  than  this  Divine 
love.  In  vers.  1—%  he  shows  the  absolute 
necessity  for  love;  in  vers.  4 — 7  its  charao- 
leristics;  in  vers.  8—12  its  eternal  perman- 
enee;  in  ver.  13  its  absolute  supremacy. 

Ter.  1.— Though  I  speak  with  the  tongnei 
of  men  and  of  angels.  The  ease  is  merely 
tuppoted.  The  tongues  of  men  are  human 
language!,  including,  perhaps,  the  peculiar 
ntt^anoe  of  ecstatic  inspiration  with  which 
he  ia  now  dealing.  It  ia,  perhaps,  with 
Kferenoe  to  this  latter  result  of  spiritual 
exnltation,  at  any  rate  in  its  purest  and 
loftiest  deTeIopment8,,that  he  adds  the  words, 
"  and  of  angeu."  It  ia  unlikely  that  he  ia 
referring  to  tbo  labbinio  notion  that  the 


angelt  only  nnderstood  Hebrew,  and  not 
Aramaic  or  other  languages.  The  worda 
are  meant  to  express  the  greatest  possible 
climax.  The  moat  supreme  powers  of  utter- 
ance, even  of  angelic  utterance — if  any  oi 
the  Corinthians  had  or  imagined  that  they 
had  attained  to  such  utterance — are  nothing 
in  comparison  with,  the  universally  possible 
attainment  of  Christian  love.  It  ia  remark- 
able that  here  again  he  placea  "  tongues," 
even  in  their  grandest  conceivable  develop- 
ment, on  the  loaett  step  in  his  climax.  And 
have  not  charity.  It  is  deeply  to  be  regretted 
that  the  translators  of  the  Anthoriied 
Version  here  introduced  fton  the  Ynlgate  a 
new  translation  for  the  saerod  word  "  love," 
which  dominates  the  whole  New  Testament 
as  its  Divine  key-note.  Greek  possesses  two 
words  for  **  love."  One  of  these,  eroi,  imply- 
ing as  it  did  the  love  which  springs  from 
sensual  passion,  was  dyed  too  deeply  in 
pagan  associalionB  to  be  capable  of  redemp- 
tion into  holier  usage.  It  is  oharacteristia 
of  the  difference  between  paganism  and 
Christianity,  that  Plato's  eulogy  in  the 
•  Symposium '  is  in  honour  of  eri*,  not  of 
anything  resembling  a^aj^  The  apostles, 
therefore,  were  compelled  to  describe  the 
ideiJ  of  the  gospel  life  by  another  word, 
which  expressed  the  love  of  esteem  and 
reverence  and  sarred  tenderness— the  word 
agape.  This  word  was  not  indeed  classieaL 
No  heathen  writer  had  used  it.  But  the 
verb  agapaS,  correspunding  to  the  Latin 
diligo,  and  being  reserved  for  this  loftiel 
kind  of  love,  suggested  at  onoe  the  8ubstaa« 


BR.  uu.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE   TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


423 


tire  agape,  which,  together  with  the  similar 
■ubst»iitive  agapeni)  (Jer.  xxzi.  3,  etc.),  Iind 
already  been  adopted  by  the  LXX.  and  by 
Fhllo  and  in  Wisd.  iii.  9.  The  word  is 
thnB,  B8  Aiohbishop  Trench  says,  "  bom  in 
the  bosom  of  revealed  religioii"  ('  New  Tes- 
tament Synonyms,'  p.  41).  The  Vulgate 
chose  eatitas  (whence  our  "charity")  to 
express  this  love  o{  reason  and  affection,  the 
dearnesB  which  reignsbetween  hum^nbuings, 
and  between  man  ami  God.  This  word,  like 
agape,  is  absolutely  unstained  with  any 
gtII  association.  If  "charity"  had  been  ex- 
dmively  used  for  agape,  no  objection  need 
have  arisen,  although  "love"  is  English 
while  "  charity  "  is  Latin.  But  it  was  an 
unmixed  evil  that,  by  the  use  of  two  different 
words  for  the  same  Greek  word,  En°;li8h 
readers  should  have  been  prevented  from 
recognizing  the  unity  of  thought  on  this 
subject  which  prevails  among  all  the  books 
of  the  New  Testament  (Matt.  xxii.  37-40; 
1  Pet.  i.  22 ;  1  John  iii.  11 ;  iv.  7,  8,  etc.). 
To  argue  that  the  w<ird  "  love"  in  English 
Is  not  unmlngled  with  unhallowed  uses  is 
absurd,  because  those  uses  of  the  word  have 
never  been  supposed  for  a  single  moment  to 
intrude  into  multitudes  of  other  paasa>;es 
where  "  love  "  is  used  to  render  agape.  Who 
has  ever  dreamed  of  objecting  on  such 
grounds  to  the  favourite  hymn  ? — 

"Faith  and  Hope  and  Love  we  ne 
Joining  hand-in-hand  agree; 
But  the  greatest  of  tiie  three 
And  the  best  is  Love." 

It  is  true  that  Lord  Bacon  admired  "the 
discretion  and  tenderness  of  the  Rhenish 
Version"  in  using  the  word  "charitie," 
"  because  of  the  indifierencies  and  sequi voca- 
tion of  the  word  [love]  with  impure  love." 
But  that  objection,  if  it  ever  existed,  has 
now  been  done  away  with  by  the  use  of 
"love"  in  suoh  a  multitude  of  other  pnre 
and  lofty  passages  of  Holy  Writ.  It  is, 
therefore,  a  great  gain  that  the  Revised 
Version  restored  tu  this  passage  the  word 
"love,"  which  hail  been  used  by  Tyndale, 
Cianmer,  and  the  Geneva  Bible.  For  in 
modern  English  usage  the  word  "  charity  " 
is  almost  confined  to  "  almsgiving,"  and  that 
of  a  kind  which  is  oftun  made  an  excuse  for 
shirking  all  real  self-denial,  and  forno<  acting 
up  to  the  true  spirit  of  love.  Christian  love 
is  always  and  infinitely  blessed,  but  the 
almsgiving  which  lias  usurped  the  name  of 
"  charity  "  often  docs  more  harm  than  good. 
I  am  become  as  Bounding  brass,  or  a  tinkling 
cymbal;  more  literally,  /  have  become 
booming  brat*,  or  clanging  cymbal  My 
"  tongues  "  without  "  love  "  become  a  mere 
diaoordant,  obtrusive,  unintelligible  dis- 
sonance. The  Greek  word  for  **  clanging  " 
(nlalaion)   is   an   ouomatoposia,    like    the 


Hebrew  name  for  cymbals,  tselltelim  (Ps. 
cl.  .>>>. 

Ver.  2. — ^Prophecy.  The  power  of  lofty 
utterance  belonged  to  Balaam  and  Caiaphas  ; 
yet  it  availed  them  nothing  without  love. 
"  Lord,  Lord,"  exclaim  the  troubled  souls  at 
the  left  hand,  "  have  we  not  prophetied  in 
thy  Name  ?  "  Yet  he  answers  them, "  I  never 
knew  you."  All  mysteries.  Though  I  can 
speak  of  the  secr^'ts  of  God  once  hidden  but 
now  revealed  (Matt.  xiii.  ]  1 ;  Rom.  xvi. 
27;  cb.  u.  7;  Eph,  iii.  3,  etc.).  And  all 
knowledge.  Insight  into  the  deeper  mean- 
ings of  Scripture,  etc.  All  faith.  Not  hen^ 
meaning  "justifying faith,"  or  "saving  faith, " 
which  can  no  more  exist  without  showing 
itself  in  works  than  light  can  exist  without 
heat ;  but  fidex  miraeiilusa,  reliance  on  the 
power  to  work  wonders.  Judas,  tor  instance, 
must  have  possessed  this  kind  of  faith,  auil 
it  was  exercised  by  "  many "  who  will  yet 
be  rejected  because  they  also  work  iniquity 
(Matt.  vii.  21 — 23).  So  that  I  oonld  remove 
mountains.  It  has  been  su^jposed  that  tliia 
must  be  a  reference  to  Matt.  xvii.  20 ;  xxi. 
21.  It  is,  however,  much  more  probable  that, 
if  St.  Paul  derived  the  words  from  our  Lord, 
they  came  to  him  by  oral  tradition.  And 
the  inference  must  in  any  case  be  precarious, 
for  the  phrase  was  so  common  among  tlie 
rabbis  that  "  remover  of  mountains  "  was 
one  of  their  admiring  titles  for  a  gretit 
teacher.  I  am  nothing.  No  expression 
oould  involve  a  more  forcible  rebuke  to 
intellectual  and  spiritual  pride. 

Ver.  3. — And  though  I  bestow  all  my 
goods  to  feed  the  poor.  The  five  words, 
"  bestow  to  feed  the  poor,"  represent  the 
one  Greek  word  psomiso,  and  after  all  do 
not  give  its  force.  It  is  derived  from 
ptSmian,  a  moutliful,  and  so  means  "give 
away  by  mouthfuls,"  i.«.  "duU  away."  It 
occurs  in  Horn.  xii.  20  for  "  feed."  Atten- 
tion to  this  verse  n  iglit  have  served  as  a 
warning  against  the  often  useless  and  some- 
times even  pernicious  doles  of  mediseval 
monasteries.  Much  of  the  "  charity "  of 
these  days  is  even  more  uncharitable  than 
this,  and  shows  the  most  complete  absence 
of  true  charity;  as  for  instance  ihe  dropping 
of  pennies  to  profes!>ional  beggars,  and  so 
putting  a  premium  on  vice  and  imposture. 
To  be  burned.  The  reading  is  extremely 
uncertain.  The  change  of  s  letter  gives 
the  reading,  Oial  I  may  glory  (Kavx^irioyuai 
for  Kav8ii(rw/j.at).  Perhaps  the  aeribes 
thought  that  "death  by  burning"  was  as 
yet  (a.d.  57)  an  unheurd-of  form  of  martyr- 
dom, though  il  became  but  too  familiar  ten 
or  twelve  years  later  in  the  Neronian  perse- 
cntion.  St.  Paul  was,  however,  probably 
referring,  not,  as  some  have  aupposed,  to 
branding,  which  would  have  been  expressed 
differently,  but  to  the  case  of  ihe  "three 


4S4 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  va.  1— IS 


children,"  in  Dan.  iil.  23,  where  the  LXX. 
has, "  They  gave  their  liodies  into  the  fire ;" 
or  to  the  various  tortures  and  deaths  by  fire 
ill  2  Mace.  vii.  At  the  burning  of  Kidley 
and  Latimer,  Dr.  Smith  chose  this  verse 
for  his  text.  Its  applicability  is  on  a  par 
-with  millions  of  other  instances  in  which 
Scripture  has  been  grossly  abused  by  em- 
pliiying  its  letter  to  murder  its  spirit,  and  by 
tiking  it  from  the  God  of  love  tu  give  it  to 
the  devil  of  religious  haired.  The  burning 
of  a  saint  was  a  singular  specimen  of  the 
Church's  "  love."  It  proflteth  me  nothing ; 
literally,  I  am  nothing  benefited.  A  con- 
sideration of  this  verse  might  have  shown 
the  Christians  of  the  early  centuries  that 
there  was  nothing  intrineically  redemptive 
in  the  martyrdom  into  which  they  often 
thrust  themselves. 

Vers.  i—l.—The  attr&vUi  oflme. 

Ver.  1.  —  Suffereth  long,  and  is  kind. 
Passively  it  endures ;  actively  it  does  good. 
It  endures  evils ;  it  confers  blessings.  En- 
yieth  not.  Its  negative  characteristics  are 
part  of  its  positive  perfection.  Envy — "one 
shape  of  many  names" — includes  malice, 
grudge,  jealousy,  pique,  wi  evil  eye,  etc., 
with  all  their  base  and  numerous  manifes- 
tations. Vannteth  not  itself.  The  meaning 
would  probably  be  most  nearly  expressed 
by  the  colloquialism,  does  not  thow  off.  It 
does  not,  for  iiistauce,  "do  its  alms  before 
men  to  be  seen  of  them  "  (Matt.  vi.  1).  The 
Latin  perperus,  which  is  from  the  same  root 
as  tliis  word,  means  "a  braggart,"  or  "swag- 
gerer." Cicero,6peaking  of  a  grand  oratorical 
display  of  bis  own  before  Pompey,  says  to 
Atticus,  "Good  heavens!  how  1  thowed 
myself  off  (^iveTrepvepevadfiLTii')  before  my  new 
heaver,  Pompeiusl"  ('Ad.  Att.,'  i.  14). 
Is  not  puffed  up.  Has  no  purse-proud  or 
inflated  arrogance.  "  Love,"  therefore,  ii 
free  from  the  characteristic  vice  of  the 
Corintlii.iu  Church  (ch.  iv.  6,  18,  19;  T.  2; 
viii.  1). 

Ver.  6.—  Doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly 
<8ee  ch.  xii.  23;  xiv.  40).  Vulgar  indecorum 
is  alien  from  love,  as  having  its  root  in 
selfishness  and  want  of  sympathy.  "  Noble 
manners"  are  ever  the  fruit  of  "noble 
minds."  "Be  courteous"  (1  Pet.  iii.  8). 
Seeketh  not  her  own.  Self-seeking  it  the 
root  of  all  evil  (ch.  x.  24,  83 ;  Phil.  ii.  4 ; 
Bom.  XV.  1,  2).  Is  not  easily  provoked. 
The  word  "  easily  "  is  here  a  gloss.  Th« 
corresponding  substantive  (paroxuimoi, 
whence  our  "  paroxysm ")  is  u^ed  of  the 
"  sharp  contention  between  Paul  and 
Barnabas  (Acts  xv.  89).  Love,  when  it  ii 
perfected,  rises  superior  to  all  temptations 
to  growing  exaaperated,  iJthough  it  may 
•ften  be  justly  indignant.  But,  as  St. 
Glirysostoni  says,  "  As  a  spark  which  falls 
into  the  sea  hurti  not  the  sea,  but  is  itself 


extinguished,  so  an  evil  thing  befalling  i 
loving  soul  will  be  extinguished  without 
disquietude."  Thinketh  no  evil;  literally, 
doth  not  reckon  (or,  impute)  th:  evil.  The 
phrase  seems  to  be  a  very  comprehensive 
one,  imphing  that  love  is  neither  sospicious, 
nor  implaealile,  nor  retentive  in  her  memory 
of  evil  done.  Love  writes  our  personal 
wrongs  in  ashes  or  in  water. 

Ver.  6. — Bejoiceth  not  in  iniquity ;  rather, 
at  unrighteoumeM.  The  rejoicing  at  sin, 
the  taking  pleasure  in  them  that  commit 
sin,  the  exultation  over  the  fall  of  others 
into  sin,  are  among  the  worst  forma  of 
malignity  (Bom.  i.  32;  2  Thesa.  ii.  12). 
The  Greeks  had  a  word,  ivixiupfKaKla,  to 
describe  "rejoicing  at  the  evil  (whether 
sin  or  misfortune)  of  others  (Piov.  zxir. 
17);  Sofeaien/rettde, "malignant  joy"(AriBt., 
'  Eth.,'  ii.  7, 15).  It  is  the  detestable  feeling 
indicated  by  the  remark  of  La  Boche- 
foucald,  "  that  there  is  something  not  alto- 
gether disagreeable  to  us  in  the  misfortunes 
of  our  best  friends."  Bejoiceth  in  the  tmth; 
rather,  tcith  the  truth.  Vhen  are  many  who 
"resist  the  truth"  (2  Tim.  iii.  8);  or  who 
"  hold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness  "  (Bom. 
i.  18);  but  love  accepts  it,  keeps  it  pure, 
exults  in  all  its  triumphs  (Acta  xi.  23; 
2  John  4). 

Ver.  7. — Beareth  all  things  (see  on  eh. 
ix.  12).  Endures  wrongs  and  evils,  and 
covers  them  with  a  beautiful  reticence. 
Thus  love  "  covereth  all  sins "  (Prov.  x. 
12;  1  Pet.  iv.  8).  Believeth  all  things. 
Takes  the  best  and  kindest  views  of  all  men 
and  all  circumstances,  as  long  as  it  is 
possible  to  do  so.  It  is  the  oppooite  to  the 
common  spirit,  which  drags  everything  in 
deteriorem  partem,  paints  it  in  the  darkest 
colours,  and  makes  the  worst  of  it.  Love 
is  entirely  alien  from  the  spirit  of  the  cynio, 
the  pessimist,  the  ecclesiastical  rival,  the 
anonymous  slanderer,  the  secret  detractor. 
Hopeth  all  things.  Christians  seem  to  have 
lost  sight  altogether  of  the  truth  that  hope 
is  something  more  than  the  result  of  > 
aanguine  temperament,  that  it  ia  a  gift 
and  a  grace.  Hope  ia  averse  to  aonmess 
and  gloom.  It  takes  annny  and  cheerful 
views  of  man,  of  the  world,  and  of  God, 
because  it  is  a  sister  of  love.  £ndureth  all 
things.  Whether  the  "  seventy  times  seven  " 
offences  of  a  brother  (Luke  xvii.  4),  or  the 
wrongs  of  patient  merit  (2  Tim.  ii.  24X  or 
the  sufiV3rings  and  self  denials  and  persern- 
tions  of  the  life  spent  in  doing  good  (2  Tim. 
ii.  10).  The  reader  need  hardly  be  reminded 
that  in  these  verses  he  has  a  picture  of  the 
life  and  character  of  Christ. 

Vera.  8—13. — The  eternal  permanentt  tf 
line. 

Ver.  8.— Hever  faileth.  The  word  "fkil- 
eth  *'  (^ktIittm)  haa  two  technical  mennings. 


IH.  xm.  1—13.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


425 


between  which  it  is  not  easy  to  decide.  I. 
It  means,  technically,  "m  never,  hissed  off 
the  stage  like  a  bad  actor,"  i.e.  it  has  its  part 
to  play  even  on  the  stage  of  eternity.  This 
is  its  meaning  in  classic  Greek.  2.  It 
means  "falls  away"  like  the  petals  of  • 
withered  flower  (as  in  Jas.  L  11 ;  comp.  Isa. 
zxviii.  4).  Here,  perhaps,  the  meaning  is 
not  technical,  but  general,  as  in  Bom.  ix.  6 
.tbud  in  the  LXX.  (Job  xxi.  43).  But  the 
reading  may  be  simply  iriirTci  (fallethj,  as 
in  M,  A,B,C.  They  shaU  fail.  This  is  not 
the  same  word  as  the  one  on  which  We  have 
been  commenting;  it  means  "shall  be 
annulled"  or  "done  away;"  and  is  the 
same  verb  as  that  rendered  in  the  next 
clauses  by  "vanish  away,"  "  be  done  away  " 
<ver.  10),  and  "put  away  "  (ver.  11).  Thus 
in  two  verges  we  hare  the  same  word 
remlered  by  four  different  phrases.  No 
doubt  the  effect  of  the  change  sounds 
beautifully  to  ears  accustomed  to  the  "old 
familiar  strain ; "  but  it  is  the  obvious  duly 
of  translators  to  represent,  not  to  improve 
upon,  the  language  of  their  author.  In  the 
Revised  Version  the  same  word  is  rightly 
kept  for  the  fonr  recurrences  of  the  verb. 
TongueB.  Special  charisms  are  enumerated 
to  show  the  transcendence  of  love.  Know- 
ledge. This  shall  be  only  annulled  in  the 
Bense  of  earthly  knowledge,  which  shall  be 
a  star  disappearing  in  the  light  of  that 
heavenly  knowledge  wliich  shall  gradually 
bmadeu  into  the  perfect  day. 

Ver.  9. — We  know  in  part.  The  ex- 
pression applies  directly  to  religious  know- 
ledge, and  should  be  a  rebuke  to  the  pre- 
tence to  infallibil.ty  and  completeuess  whiuh 
is  sometimes  usurped  by  religious  men. 

Ver.  10. — That  which  is  in  part  shall  he 
done  away.  It  will  be  lost  in  perfectness 
wbeji  we  have  at  last  attained  to  "the 
measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of 
-Christ"  (Eph.iii.  14). 

Ver.  11. — I  understood  as  a  child,  I 
thought  as  a  child;  Ifelt  ai  a  child,  Ireasoned 
a$  a  child.  But  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put 
away  childish  things ;  now  that  I  am  become 
a  man,  I  have  done  away  with  childish  things. 
No  specific  time  at  which  he  put  away 
childish  things  is  alluded  to,  but  he  means 
that  "  manhood  "  is  a  state  in  which  child- 
ishness should  have  become  impossible. 

Ver.  12. — Through  a  glass ;  rather,  through 
(oTfby  meant  of)  a  mirror.  Our  "glasses" 
were  unknown  in  that  age.  The  mirrors 
were  of  silver  or  some  polished  metal, 
.giving,  of  course,  a  far  dimmer  image  than 
"glasses"  do.  The  rabbis  said  that  "all 
the  prophets  saw  through  a  dark  mirror, 
but  Moses  through  a  bright  one."  St.  Paul 
'Cays  that  ne  human  eye  can  see  God  at  all 
-except  as  ■■  image  seen  as  it  were  behind 


the  mirror.  Darkly;  rather,  in  a  riddle. 
God  is  said  to  have  spoken  to  Moses  "  by 
means  of  riddles"  (Numb.  xii.  8;  Autho- 
rized Version, '-in dark  speeches").  Human 
language,  dealing  with  Divine  facts,  cau 
only  represent  them  indirectly,  metaphori- 
cally, enigmatically,  under  human  images, 
and  as  illustrated  by  visible  phenomena. 
God  can  only  be  represented  under  the 
phrases  of  antliropomnrphismand  anthropo- 
pathy;  and  such  phjasus  can  only  have 
a  relative,  not  an  absolute,  truth.  Then;  i.e. 
"  when  the  perfect  is  come."  Face  to  face. 
Like  the  "  mouth  to  mouth  "  of  the  Hebrew 
and  tlie  LXX.  in  Numb.  xiL  8.  This  Sa  the 
beatific  vision.  '*  We  know  that,  when  he 
sh  ill  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him ;  for  we 
shall  see  him  as  lie  is"  (I  John  iii.  2).  "Now 
we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight "  (2  Cor.  v. 
7).  Then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am 
known ;  rather,  then  sltall  I  fully  know  even 
at  also  I  was  fully  known,  viz.  when  Christ 
took  knowledge  of  me  at  my  conversion. 
Now,  we  do  not  so  much  "know"  God,  but 
"rather  are  known  of  Ood"  (comp.  ch. 
viii.  3). 

Ver.  13. — And  now.  The  "now"  is  not 
temporal  (as  opposed  to  the  "  then  "  of  the 
previous  verse),  but  logical.  It  sums  up 
the  paragraph.  Abideth.  Tliese  three 
graces  are  fundamfutal  and  permanent; 
not  transient,  like  the  eharismt,  on  which 
the  Corinthians  were  priding  themselves, 
but  which  should  all  be  "annulled." 
Faith,  hope,  charity.  It  might  be  difficult 
to  see  how  "hope"  should  be  permanent. 
But  if  the  future  state  be  progressive 
throughout  eternity  and  infinitude,  hope 
will  never  quite  be  lost  in  fruition.  Even 
"within  the  veil,"  it  will  still  remain  as 
"  ail  anchor  of  the  soul,  both  sure  and  stead- 
fast" (Heb.  vi.  19).  The  greatest  of  these 
is  charity ;  more  literally,  greater  than  these 
is  love.  St.  Paul  does  not  explain  why  love 
is  the  greates  t  and  best  of  the  three.  Various 
reasons  may  be  given.  1.  Love  is  the 
greatest,  l>ecause  it  is  the  root  of  the  other 
two;  "we  believe  only  in  that  which  we 
love ;  we  hope  only  for  that  which  we  love. 
2.  And  love  is  the  greatest  because  love  is 
for  our  neighbours ;  faith  and  hope  mainly 
for  ourselves.  3.  And  love  is  the  greatest 
because  faith  and  hope  are  human,  but  God 
is  love.  4.  And  love  is  the  greatest  because 
faith  and  hope  can  only  work  by  love,  and 
only  show  themselves  by  love.  Thus  love 
is  as  the  undivided  perfection  of  sevenfold 
light.  Faith  and  hope  are  precious  stone* 
of  one  colour,  as  a  luby  and  a  sapphire; 
but  love,  as  he  has  been  showing  na 
throughout  the  chapter,  it  a  diamond  ti 
many  faceta. 


42«  THE   FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa    [o«.  xm.  1—lS 


HOMILETICS. 

Yer.  1,— Eloquence  teithout  charity.  "  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongUM  of  men  aQ<! 
of  angels,  and  have  not  charity,  I  am  become  as  sounding  brass,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal." 
Two  introductory  truths  are  suggested  by  the  context.  1.  That  there  U  great  diversity 
in  the  taleuti  with  which  Eeavtn  has  endowed  mankind.  There  are  "diversities"  of 
gifts.  Whilst  it  is  true  that  the  apostle  refers  especially  to  miraculous  gifts,  those  very 
gifts  have  their  equivalents  amongst  men  now.  True,  we  have  Ho  miraculous  gifts  of 
tongues ;  but  we  have  great  lioguistical  scholars,  men  who  HJK  the  masters  of  many 
languages.  Though  we  have  no  miraculous  gifts  of  prophecy,  we  have  men  of  such 
a  far-sighted  sagacity  as  to  discern  the  signs  of  the  times,  and  foretell  events  destined 
to  occur  on  the  earth.  Though  we  have  not  the  miraculous  gifts  of  healing,  modern 
medical  science  invests  some  men  with  a  healing  power  in  some  respects  approaching 
the  miraculous.  In  sooth,  the  unmiraculous  endowments  of  the  present  day,  exhibited 
in  the  various  evolutions  of  art,  science,  philosophy,  are  more  than  an  adequate  com- 
pensation for  the  loss  of  the  miraculous  endowments  of  apostolic  times.  Some  men  are 
distinguished  by  one  faculty  and  some  by  another.  Some  by  the  faculty  of  creating 
thought,  some  by  the  faculty  of  combining  thought,  some  bf^  the  faculty  of  oratorically 
presenting  thought.  These  faculties  exist  in  various  degrees  of  strength ;  in  some  they 
are  dwarfish,  in  some  gigantic.  2.  That  mthout  charity  the  highest  kind  and  degree  oj 
talent  is,  of  little  worth.  Indeed,  in  this  chapter  Paul  says,  in  relation  to  the  highest 
faculties,  and  to  the  highest  services,  that  without  this  charity  man  Aimse^is  nothing : 
"  I  am  nothing."  Now,  the  text  ddrects  attention  to  one  particular  faculty,  and  tiut 
is  doqueiice.  "  Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels."  Angels  speak. 
Perhaps  Paul  had  heard  their  oratory  when  he  was  caught  up  into  heaven.  He  means, 
though  he  had  eloquence  of  the  highest  type,  without  charity,  it  would  be  utterly 
worthless.    Two  thoughts  are  suggested. 

I.  That  it  is  possible  fob  eloquencb  or  the  highest  type  to  exist  without 
CHABiTT.  Why  say, "  possible  "  ?  It  has  ever  existed  and  still  exists,  dissociated  from 
this  charity,  this  queen  of  virtues,  or  rather  this  root  of  all  moral  excellence.  1.  We 
find  it  in  party  politics.  Bead  the  party  speeches  delivered  at  the  hustings  or  in  the 
House  of  Commons.  Some  of  those  speeches  are  fashioned  after  the  highest  models  of 
oratory,  and  delivered  with  all  the  graces  of  the  art,  but  utterly  destitute  of  charity. 
They  beat  with  selfish  ambition  and  burn  with  envious  spleen.  2.  We  find  it  in  party 
theology.  Some  of  the  discourses  on  polemic  theology  are,  in  all'  the  attributes  of  true 
eloquence,  unexcelled  if  not  unmatched ;  but  how  destitute  of  charity  I  They  are  all 
•glow  with  acrimonious  zeal  for  certain  dogmas  of  the  brain.  3.  We  find  it  in  party 
Ghurchism.  During  the  month  of  May  men  appear  on  the  platform  of  EXeter  Hall 
who  have  spent  many  a  laborious  day,  or  week,  it  may  be,  in  preparing  a  speech  on 
behalf  of  some  cause,  before  whose  brilliancy  the  author  hopes  all  other  speeches  will 

Sale  their  fire.  Kead  the  most  eloquent  of  these  speeches ;  and  for  the  most  part  how 
estitute  of  charity  1  Sect  zeal  reigns  in  all.  The  Protestant  damns  the  Catholic,  the 
Evangelical  the  RitualLst,  the  Church  sneers  at  Dissent,  and  Dissent  at  the  Church,  and 
all  agree  in  consigning  pagans  and  heathen  of  every  grade  to  nethermost  perdition. 
The  spirit  of  all  the  speakers,  as  a  rule,  at  those  busy  manifestations  of  eloquence,  is, 
**  We  are  the  wise  men,  and  wisdom  will  die  with  us ;  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  the 
temple  of  the  Lord,  are  we." 

II.  That  eloquence  of  the  highest  type  without  charity  is  utterly  wobthless.  It 
is  as  "  sounding  brass,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal."  The  word  aXakiiav,  from  iAoA))  or  i\<iA^ 
a  war-cry,  properly  denotes  a  loud  cry  or  shout,  such  as  is  used  in  battle.  Whilst  the 
sound  is  anything  but  pleasant,  the  material  is  comparatively  worthless,  made  of  two 
pieces  of  common  brass.  The  idea  is  worthlessnesL  Take  the  speech  of  a  man  whose 
idea  of  eloquence  shall  excel  the  theory  of  Quintilian,  and  whose  practice  shall  excel  that 
of  Demosthenes  himself;  what  is  it  if  it  has  not  charity?  Paul  would  say,  "brass," 
giving  out  a  mere  clanking  sound.  1.  It  is  worthless  in  itself.  What  would  you  give 
for  two  little  pieces  of  brass  forming  a  cymbal?  Whatever  their  marketable  value  may 
be,  for  musictu  purposes  they  are  not  worth  a  "  penny  whistle."  What  worth  is  there 
im  ■■  organism  unleis  it  htm  life?  and  what  worth  a  there  in  lentenoea,  howevor 


«H.  xm.  1— 13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANi  427 

eloquent,  unless  they  have  charity?  There  is  no  moral  worth  in  any  act  or  word  apart 
from  charity.  In  the  siglit  of  Heaven  all  else  is  mere  rubbish.  Without  it,  I  with  all 
my  endowments,  servjcesysacritiqes,  says  Paul,  am  "  nothing."  2.  It  is  worthless  in  its 
infiuence.  The  sounds  you  get  QUt  of  the  "cymbal"  are  not  musical,  and  they  produce 
rather  wi  irritating  than  an  ins]<iring  or  calming  influence  upon  the  listener.  What 
moral  good  can  speeches  without  charity  accomplish  ?  They  may  shed  some  light 
upon  the  intellect,  correct  some  error,  but  they  have  no  power  to  win  the  soul  of  a  man. 
They  often  irritate,  but  never  soothe.  Bigoteil  partisans  are  attracted  by  the  clankings 
of  their  brass,  but  men  pass  by  them  as  by  a  Punch  and  Judy  show.  Eloquence  without 
charity  is  like  the  roar  of  a  winter's  north-easter,  irritating  and  destructive;  but 
eloquence  with  charity  is  like  the  quiet;  south-wester  in  spring,  warming  all  things  into 
life  and  touching  all  things  into  beauty. 

Vers.  2, 3. — Man-woHh.  "  Though  I  have  the  gift  of  prophecy,"  etc.  1.  The  greatest 
thing  in  the  universe  is  mind.  All  material  systems  would  lack  completeness  and 
meaning  were  there  no  mind  to  observe,  study,  and  worship  the  great  Invisible.  2. 
The  greatest  thing  in  mind  is  love.  Here  the  apostle  teaches  that  whatever  a  human 
intelligtnce  may  be,  if  it  is  destitute  of  love  it  is  notliing.  What  is  this  love  without 
which  humanity  is  nothing  ?  It  is  not  the  gregarious  sentiment  which  links  us  to  and 
gives  us  an  interest  in  our  species.  This  is  an  instinct  common  to  animnl  existence. 
We  regard  this  element  as  a  blessing,  not  a  virtue.  Nor  is  it  theological  love — the  - 
affection  which  one  has  for  his  own  faith  and  sect,  but  which  will  look  coldly  and 
hardly  on  all  besides.  This  is  a  demon  working  under  the  mask  of  an  angel.  It 
reduces  the  gospel  to  a  dogma  aud  man  to  a  bigot.  Nor  is  it  sacerdotal  love — the  love 
which  speaks  from  ecclesiastical  chairs,  consecrated  altars  and  seats  of  political 
power,  but  whispers  no  accents  of  sympathy  for  the  physical  and  social  woes  of  the 
race.  We  call  this  priestly  selfishness,  not  manly  love.  What,  then,  is  love?  We  may 
describe  it — for  we  cannot  define  it — as  a  generous  moral  sympathy  /or  the  race  spring- 
ing from  love  to  the  Creator.  This  is,  in  fact,  the  love  that  only  can  confer  real  worth 
on  humanity.     We  observe — 

I.  That  man  without  this  love  is  nothing  spiritually  in  relation  to  vature.  We  lay 
spiritually ;  for  we  assume,  of  course,  that  the  spiritual  is  the  man.  Whatever  does 
not  minister  to  this,  does  not  minister  to  him.  Nature  has  three  kinds  of  pleasure  to 
impart^the  sensuous,  the  intellectual,  and  spiritual.  The  last  is  the  highest  in  the 
scale,  and  arises  from  a  warm  and  living  sympathy  with  the  being,  character,  and 
purpose  of  the  Creator  of  all.  It  is  nature  looked  at  through  the  heart,  through  the 
self.  It  is  not  sensation,  but  inspiration;  not  philosophy,  but  poetry;  not  the  letter 
of  a  science,  but  the  spirit  of  life.  These  are  the  highest  joys  ot  nature  and  the  only 
real  joys  for  man  as  man.  To  impart  these  is  nature's  highest  function.  But  are  they 
not  confined  entirely  to  the  children  of  love  ?  As  nature  would  be  nothing  to  the  body 
of  a  man  were  his  senses  sealed  up,  and  nothing  to  the  intellect  of  a  man  whose 
reflective  faculty  was  paralyzed,  so  it  is  nothing  to  the  soul  of  a  man  who  has  not 
a  loving  heart.  To  the  sensual  nature  is  gratification,  to  the  thinker  it  ii  thtary,  to 
the  loving  it  is  heaven.  True  it  is,  then,  that  without  love  "  I  am  nothing"  in  relation 
to  the  spiritual  enjoyment  of  nature. 

IL  That  man  without  this  love  is  nothing  spiritually  in  relation  to  the  frotidencx 
TEAT  IB  OVSB  CB.  If  I  have  not  love,  I  am  nothing  to  providence.  It  ministers  no 
real  good  to  me  as  a  spiritual  existent — as  a  man.  As  the  mortally  diseased  must  say, 
"  I  am  nothing  to  the  health-giving  economy  of  nature,"  so  the  unloving  may  truly  say, 
"I  am  nothing  in  relation  to  the  spiritual  blessings  of  providence,"  But  love  in  the 
heart  makes  providence  a  minister  for  good,  and  for  good  only.  Like  the  bee,  it  tisn*- 
mutes  the  bitterest  fruit  into  honey.    "  All  things  work  together  for  good." 

Ill,  That  man  without  this  love  is  nothing  spiritually  in  relation  to  Chbibtiahitt. 
Love  alone  can  interpret  love.  Christianity  is  a  revelation  of  love,  and  none  but  the 
loving  can  rise  to  its  meaning.  Theology  is  one  thing,  Christianity  is  another,  the  one 
is  a  "  letter,"  the  other  is  a  "  spirit."  I^ve  is  the  single  eye  of  the  soul,  and  it  fills  the 
whole  body  with  the  light  of  life.  Still  more  that  which  renders  us  incapable  of 
entering  into  its  meaning  unfits  at  the  same  time  from  applying  its  provisions.  It  it  • 
system  of  great  and  precious  promises.    But  of  all  the  sons  of  the  earth  is  there  one 


42t  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  xin.  1— 13 

wbo,  noinspired  with  love,  dare  apply  a  single  promise?  They  are  for  the  children 
of  lore,  and  them  only.  Without  love,  then,  I  am  nothing  in  relation  to  Christianity, 
IV.  That  man  without  this  love  is  nothin°:  spiritually  in  relation  to  the  coMMimiTr 
OF  THB  GOOD.  There  is  a  great  social  system  in  the  universe — a  city,  »  Church, 
»  family.  There  are  myriads  of  beings  who  mingle  together  as  citizens,  fellow- 
members  of  one  Church,  a  family.  Wherever  they  exist  they  have  the  same  bond  of 
union,  the  same  condition  of  friendship,  the  same  principle  of  inspiration,  and  the  same 
standard  of  worth.  What  is  that?  In  the  great  community  of  the  good  love  is  every- 
thing. "  If  I  have  not  love,  I  am  nothing  to  this  community.  Thou  art  learned,  but 
though  thou  shouldst  speak  with  the  tojbgues  of  men  and  of  angels,^  and  have  not 
charity,  thou  art  as  sounding  brass  or  a  tinkling  cymbal."  Thou  art-  gifted ;  prophetic 
genius  Is  thine;  thou  art  conversant  with  the  arcana  of  science:  thou  liast  feith  too, 
orthodox,  vigorous,  and  earnest ;  but  though  thou  bast  the  "  gift  of  prox^hecy,"  and 
understandest  "  all  mysteries  and  all  knowledge,"  and  though  "  thou  hast  all  faith,  so 
that  thou  couldst  remove  mountains,  and  hast  not  love,  thou  art  nothing."  Thou  art 
liberal ;  but  "  though  thou  bestowest  all  thy  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  though  thou 
givest  thy  body,  to  be  burned,  and  hast  not  charity,  it  profiteth  thee  nothing." 
(Extracted  from  Eomilut,  vol.  viii.  p.  433.) 

Vers.  4 "8. — The  immortality  of  U»ve.  "Charity  never  faileth,"  etc.  AmongFt  the 
many  things  which  Paul  predicates  in~this  chapter  concerning  "  charity,"  or  love,  is  its 
permanence. 

I.  It  will  "  never  fail "  as  an  element  of  hobal  foweb.  Love  is  the  strongest  force 
in  the  soul.  1.  It  is  the  strongest  sustaining  power.  Our  present  state  is  one  of  trial 
and  sorrow.  Burdens  press  on  all,  in  all  grades  of  society.  Godly  love  is  the  best 
sustaining  power  under  all.  All  Divine  promises  are  made  to  the  loving.  2.  It  is  the 
strongest  resisting  power.  We  have  not  only  burdens  to  oppress,  but  enemies  to 
conquer  and  destroy.  If  love  preoccupies  the  soul,  temptations  are  powerless.  3.  It 
is  the  strongest  aggressive  power.  We  have  not  only  to  bear  up  with  fortitude  under 
trials,  and  to  resist  with  success  temptations,  but  we  have  battles  to  fight  and  victories 
to  win.  Love  is  at  once  the  inspiration  and  the  qualification  for  the  warfare.  There 
is  nothing  so  aggressive  in  the  moral  world  as  love.  Man  can  stand  before  anything 
sooner  than  love.     As  a  sustaining,  resisting,  aggressive  power,  love  will  "never  fail." 

II.  It  will  "  never  fail "  as  a  pbinciplb  of  social  ukity.  Deep  in  the  heart  of  man  is 
the  desire  for  union  with  his  fellow.  He  wishes  to  flow  with  the  race  as  waters  with 
the  stream.  His  ingenuity  has  been  taxed  for  ages  in  the  invention  of  schemes  for 
union.  Love  alone  can  secure  this ;  love  only  is  the  unifying  force.  We  ate  only  one 
with  those  we  love  with  the  moral  affections  of  our  nature.  But  we  can  only  love  the 
lovable.  Love  in  the  moral  empire  is  what  attraction  is  in  the  material.  Love 
"never  faileth"  as  a  principle  of  social  unity. 

IIL  It  will  "  never  fail "  as  a  boubck  of  BPiRrroAL  HAPPtKEss.  Love  is  joy.  1.  It 
expds  from  the  mind  all  elements  unfavourahle  to  happiness,  2.  It  generate*  in  ih* 
mind  cdl  the  elements  of  spiritual  Joy. 

Yen.  9, 10. — Partial  knowledge.  "  We  know  in  part."  Partial  knowledge  la  of  foor 
kinds. 

L  There  is  a  partial  knowledge  that  is  a  necessity.  The  knowledge  of  the  highest 
intelligent  creature  must  by  the  necessity  of  nature  be  partial.  What  he  knows  is  ■• 
nothing  compared  with  the  knowable,  still  less  with  the  unknowable.  "  Who  by  search- 
ing can  find  out  God  ?  " 

II.  There  is  a  partial  knowledge  that  is  a  oalaiiitt.  Our  necessary  ignorance  is  not 
a  calamity ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  a  benediction.  The  necessarily  unknown  acts  as  a 
stimulus  to  oar  intellectual  faculties.  But  our  ignorance  of  things  that  are  really 
knowable  must  be  ever  more  or  less  a  disadvantage.  Ignorance  of  true  ethics,  of 
poUCcal  economy,  agriculture,  laws  of  health,  beneficent  rules  of  conduct,  true  religion, 
entails  incalculable  injuries.  Ignorance  of  these  things  is  the  night,  the  winter,  ot 
intellect 

IIL  There  is  •  partial  knowledge  that  is  bikfuu  A  partial  knowledge  of  our  moral 
coD^tiMi,  the  claims  of  God,  the  means  of  redemption,  where  a  fiiller  knowledge  is 


BB.ZI0.1.-13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  £0  THE  (X)RINTHIANa  4Z» 

attainable,  is  a  sin.  Ignorance  of  Obrist  in  a  land  of  churches  and  Bibles,  is  a  sin,  and 
that  of  no  ordinary  heinousness.    It  is  a  calamity  to  the  heathen ;  it  is  a  crime  to  ua. 

IV.  There  is  a  partial  knowledge  that  is  beneficent.  Our  ignorance  of  our  future 
is  a  Nessing,  Were  the  whole  of  our  future  to  be  spread  out  Iwfore  us,  with  all  ita 
trials  and  sorrows,  and  all  the  circumstancM  connected  with  our  death,  Ufa  would 
become  intolerable ;  it  is  mercy  that  has  woven  the  veil  that  hides  the  future. 

OoNOLUBloi.  Our  partial  knowledge  should  make  ua  hutribk,  studious,  wndogmatie, 
devotU. 

T«r.  U.-i'A  child  in  time,  a  man  in  eternity.  "  When  I  was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a 
child,  I  understood  as  a  child,  I  thought  as  a  child :  but  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put 
away  childish  things."  From  all  the  writings  of  Paul  you  cannot  select  an  extract 
more  beautiful,  significant,  and  valuable  than  this  chapter.  It  touches  that  which  i« 
the  root  of  the  universe,  the  heart  of  Qod,  and  the  fountain  of  all  virtue  and  blessed- 
ness—^ove.  The  subject  of  the  words  under  our  notice  is  the  Christian  a  child  in  time, 
a  man  in  eternity. 

I.  This  is  the  case  in  relation  to  speech.  "  When  I  was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a  child." 
Though  the  word  "  child  "  here  properly  denotes  a  babe,  the  apostle  evidently  uses  it 
with  no  such  limitation,  for  an  infant  neither  speaks,  thinks,  nor  understands.  Ha 
denotes  by  it  the  human  being  in  the  first  stages  of  intelligence  and  voluntary  action. 
The  speech  of  a  child  is  often  marked  by  incoherence  and  unintelligibility.  It  is 
irrelevant,  disconnected,  and  broken.  So  is  the  speech  of  the  sagest  and  most  eloquent 
Christian  here  as  compared  with  his  language  in  eternity.  The  Christian's  speech  in 
eternity  will  be  characterized :  1.  By  clearness.  Our  speech  here,  like  that  of  children, 
is  often  unintelligible,  mere  jargon.  The  reason  is  that  our  conceptions  are  cloudy,  half 
formed,  and  ill  defined.  Obscurity  of  language,  either  oral  or  written,  is  the  result  of 
confusion  in  thought.  Clear  speech  requires  a  clear  head.  In  heaven  thoughts  are 
clear  and  complete  as  balls  of  radiant  crystal.  2.  By  reality.  Our  speech  here,  like 
that  of  children,  is  frequently  nothing  more  than  the  vehicle  of  mental  fantasies  and 
conjecture.  Words  only  embody  and  reveal  the  unsubstantial  dreams  of  the  mind. 
But  speech  in  eternity  is  the  organ  of  reality.  Words  there  are  things.  They  are 
truths  made  vocal.  3.  By  comprehensiveness.  How  meagre  the  vocabulary  of  a  child  t 
Our  speech  here,  like  that  of  children,  is  limited  to  a  very  small  range  of  things. 
When  it  conveys  truth,  the  truths  are  but  very  few ;  and  they  relate  to  a  mere  speck 
in  the  great  universe  of  intelligence.  Not  so  in  heaven.  The  soul  will  range  over  the 
whole  domain  of  facts,  receive  true  impressions  of  all,  and  speak  them  out.  4.  By 
sublimity.  Our  speech  here,  like  that  of  children,  is  not  of  the  most  exalted  and  soul- 
inspiring  character.  The  best  only  talk  of  the  rudiments  of  truths  which  have  become 
more  or  less  theological  platitudes.  In  heaven  speech  will  be  the  vehicle  of  the  most 
soul-inspiring  and  soul-uplifting  realities.  Every  word  will  be  electric,  every  sentence 
radiant  and  quickening  as  the  sunbeam. 

II.  This  is  the  case  in  relation  to  UNDEBBTAKDiNa.  "  I  understood  as  a  child."  The 
Christian's  understanding  here  is  like  that  of  a  child  in  several  respecU.  1.  InftMeness. 
The  child's  intellect,  like  his  body,  gets  strength  by  nutriment  and  exercise.  In  the 
first  stages  it  is  very  feeble.  It  is  incapable  of  any  great  effort.  It  is  thus  with  tha 
Christian  here.  We  say  of  such  a  man,  "  He  has  a  great  intellect."  But  in  reality  the. 
greatest  b  rery  weak.  How  little  the  effort  that  the  greatest  intellect  can  make  iti 
search  of  knowledge!  What  a  small  amount  of  truth  can  the  most  vigorous  hold 
within  his  grasp  1  In  heaven  the  understanding  will  be  strong,  unencumbered  hy 
matter,  unchecked  by  disease,  unclouded  by  sin.  It  will  grow  young  with  age  and 
strong  with  exercise.  2.  In  lensvousness.  A  child's  understanding  is  under  the  control! 
uf  the  senses.  It  judges  by  appearances ;  it  is  taken  up  with  the  forms  of  things.  Is  it 
not  so  with  the  Christian?  Ho  is  prone  to  "mind  earthly  things,"  "to  judge  after 
the  flesh."  The  theology  and  the  ritualism  even  of  the  most  spiritual  are  coloured  by 
scnsuousness.  The  hell  and  heaven  of  Christendom  are  sensuous  worlds.  3.  In  relative- 
nesi.  The  child  judges  of  all  things  by  their  relation  to  himself.  His  father  may  be 
an  anthor  thrilling  the  intellect  of  his  age,  or  a  statesman  directing  the  destinies  of  a 
nation,  but  the  child  knows  nothing  of  him  in  those  relations.  As  a  father  only  he 
knows  him.    So  with  the  nnderstandtug  of  a  Christian.    His  conceptions  of  Qod  are 


430  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  xiu.  1—13 

purely  relative — Redeemer,  Father,  Master.  Thus  only  is  he  regarded.  Of  what  he  in 
in  himself,  what  he  is  in  the  universe,  what  he  is  in  immensity,  he  understands  nothing, 
In  eternity  we  shall  "see  him  as  he  is."  4.  In  servility.  The  child  yields  his  under- 
standing up  to  others,  often  allows  it  to  be  used  as  "  clay  in  the  hands  of  a  potter."  So 
it  ii  often  with  Christians  here.  They  are  not  generally  independent  in  their  inquiries. 
They  put  themselves  in  the  hands  of  Churches  and  priests,  and  call  them  masters.  No. 
so  in  heaven.  Each  with  a  full  consciousness  of  his  individuality  will  be,  independent  in 
bis  investigations  and  conclusions. 

III.  This  is  the  case  in  relation  to  beasonino.  "  1  thought  as  a  child."  In  the 
margin  the  word  reasoned  is  put  for  "  thought."  The  child  reasons.  Logic  is  not  mere 
art,  it  is  an  instinct  in  human  nature.  How  does  the  child  reason  ?  1.  From  an  insuf- 
ficiency of  data.  Having  neither  the  power  noi-  the  opportunity  of  making  an  adequate 
observation  and  comparison,  he  draws  his  conclusions  from  [assing  impressions  and 
unfounded  conjectures.  Thus  it  is  often  with  the  Christian  here.  His  knowledge  of 
the  facts  of  God  and  the  universe  on  which  he  reasons,  is  so  limited  that  his  conclusions 
are  often  inconclusive  and  puerile.  The  grave  and  pompous  discussions  of  our  most 
learned  theologues  on  the  ways  of  God  must  appear  to  the  ear  of  an  angel  as  absurd  as 
the  prattle  of  children  on  the  affairs  of  kingdoms  does  to  us.  2.  From  the  impulse  o/ 
desire.  In  all  cases  the  wish  is  the  father  to  the  thought.  It  is  too  often  so  with 
Christians  here.  Their  likings  control  their  logic.  Not  so  in  heaven.  How  sublime 
the  difference  between  the  Christian  in  time  and  the  Christian  in  eternity  !  How  vast 
the  disparity  between  the  speech,  understanding,  and  reasoning  of  Saul,  the  little  Jewish 
boy,  and  "  Paul,  the  aged,"  the  great  theologian  and  sublime  apostle  1  This  is  only  a 
faint  type  of  the  difference  between  the  Christian  here  and  the  Christian  yonder. 

CoNCLCSioN.  This  subject  teaches:  1.  The  educational  character  vf  this  life.  The 
true  view  of  this  life  is  that  it  is  a  school  for  eternity.  Here  all  souls  are  in  a  state  of 
pupilage.  Some  are  deriving  the  true  advantages  from  the  discipline,  and  some  are  not. 
Whilst  thousands  leave  this  school  from  year  to  year  unimproved,  incorrigible,  utterly 
unfit  for  the  services  of  eternity,  worthless  to  God  and  the  universe,  others  are  being 
made  "  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  Brother  disciples,  be  reconciled 
to  this  state.  School-days  are  not  always  the  most  pleasant.  There  are  restrictions, 
disciplines,  and  studies,  more  or  less  painful.  Struggle  on  till  you  "  put  away  childish 
things,"  all  that  is  childi.sh  in  speech  and  understanding  and  reasoning.  We  shall 
leave  this  school  soon  for  the  family  mansion  and  the  grand  inheritance.  2.  The  organic 
unity  of  man  through  all  the  scenes  and.  stages  of  his  being.  Though  the  man  here  talks 
and  judges  and  reasons  very  differently  to  what  he  did  when  a  child,  he  is  nevertheless 
the  same  being.  He  is  but  the  child  more  fully  developed.  He  is  but  the  sapling 
grown  into  the  tree.  It  is  so  with  the  Christian  in  the  other  world.  He  is  the  same 
being  as  he  was  here,  he  is  but  the  child  grown  into  the  man,  freed  from  "  all  childish 
things."  Man  in  heaven  is  but  the  child  matured.  We  shall  never  be  greater  than 
men.  Whatever  is  brilliant  and  great  for  us  in  the  future  will  be  but  the  development 
of  the  germs  that  slumber  in  us  now.  3.  The  necessity  of  modesty  in  the  maintenance 
of  our  theiilogical  views.  In  the  light  of  this  subject,  how  preposterous  it  is  for  poor 
frail,  fallible  man  to  set  himself  up  as  an  authority  in  theological  matters,  to  assume 
the  priest,  the  bishop,  the  pope  1  "  I  do  not  know,"  says  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  "  what  I 
may  appear  to  the  world  ;  but  to  myself  1  seem  to  have  been  only  like  a  boy  playing 
on  the  seashore,  and  diverting  myself  by  now  and  then  finding  a  smoother  pebble 
or  a  prettier  shell  than  ordinary,  while  the  great  ocean  of  truth  lay  all  undiscovered 
before  me." 

Ter.  12. — The  body  the  dark  medium  of  spiritual  vision,  "  For  now  we  see  through 
a  glass,  darkly,"  etc.  It  needs  no  illustration  to  show  that  our  vision  of  spiritual  things 
is  very  dim.  The  cause  of  this  is  our  subject — the  medium  is  dark,  that  medium  is  the 
body.  Through  the  five  senses  we  gather  all  the  lights  that  flash  on  our  consciousness 
and  form  within  ns  ideas.    But  why  is  it  dark  ? 

I.  The  body  tends  to  materialize  the  conceptions  of  the  uind.  We  "judge  after 
the  flesh." 

II.  The  body  tends  to  swat  the  decisions  of  the  mind.  The  desires  of  the  flesh 
often  move  and  master  the  soul. 


m.  XIII.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAKS.  431 

in.  The  body  tends  to  cr,oo  the  operations  of  the  mind.  Biisiness,  sleep,  refresh- 
ment, exercise,  disease, — all  these  intcriiipt  tlie  soul.  Our  visions  of  spiritual  things 
beiusj  so  dim :  1.  None  should  iiride  themselves  in  their  knowledge.  2.  None  should 
arrogate  in/ulUhility  of  judgment.  3.  All  should  anticipate  higher  and  fuller  visions. 
Wheu  the  iiieiliuin  is  removed,  we  shall  see  "face  to  face." 

Ver.  13. — Love  the  greatest  power  in  mind,  "  And  now  abideth  faith,  hope,  charity," 
etc.  Love  is  here  brought  into  comparison  with  two  other  great  things  in  mind — faith 
and  hope. 

I.  The  CORRESPONDENCE  between  these  three.  The  words  imply :  1.  That  they  are 
!>.\\  great.  The  aposiliisptaks  of  the  "  greatest."  "  Faith"  is  a  great  thing.  It  implies 
reason,  truth,  and  the  investigation  of  evidence.  It  is  a  great  thing  in  business,  in 
science,  in  society,  as  well  as  in  religion.  "  Hope  "  is  a  great  thing,  too.  It  implies 
the  recognition  of  i^ooii,  a  desire  fur  good,  and  an  expectation  of  good.  It  makes  the 
greatest  trials  of  the  present  bearable  liy  bringing  into  the  spirit  the  blessedness  of  the 
future.  2.  That  they  are  all  permanent.  There  "  abideth  "  (iaith  and  hope.  In  virtuous 
souls  they  are  as  lasting  as  life,  as  lasting  as  mind  itself. 

II.  The  SUPERIORITY  of  one  over  the  others.  "The  greatest  of  these  is  charity." 
Why  is  it  the  greatest?  1.  It  is  a  virtue  in  itself.  There  is  no  moral  virtue  in  faith 
and  hope.  They  are,  under  certain  conditions,  necessary  states  of  mind.  But  love — 
disinterested,  godly  love — is  in  itself  a  virtue.  2.  It  is  that  quality  which  alone  gives 
virtue  to  all  other  states  of  mind.  Where  this  love  is  not,  faith  and  hope  are  morally 
worthless.  3.  It  is  that  state  of  mind  by  which  the  sovl  subordinates  the  universe  to 
itself.  The  loving  soul  alone  can  interpret  the  universe.  4.  It  is  that  state  of  mind 
which  links  the  spirit  to  all  holy  intelliyencei.  Love  is  the  attractive  power  that  binds 
all  holy  spirits  together.  5.  Ii  is  that  state  of  mind  which  includes  the  highest  faith 
and  hope.  Love  implies  the  both.  6.  It  is  tliat  state  of  mind  which  it  in  itself 
happiness.  Love  is  happiness.  We  cannot  say  so  of  either  faith  or  hope.  7.  Love 
is  the  most  God-like  state  of  the  houl.  God  is  not  faith  or  hope ;  "  God  is  love."  The 
Eternal  does  not  believe  or  anticipate,  but  he  does  love — he  i»  love.  Lore  if  the  life 
of  the  souL    It  warms  every  vein  and  beats  in  every  pulse. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1^^.— Negative  view  of  love.  Again  and  again,  in  St.  Paul'i  writings,  we 
have  an  epistle  within  the  Epistle.  Thus,  the  summation  of  practical  duties  (Rom. 
xii.),  the  argument  on  the  resurrection  (ch,  xiv.),  and  the  portraiture  of  love  in  this 
chapter.  By  this  means  we  get  a  well-defined  view  of  the  object  without  losing  its 
connections.  It  is  not  as  if  we  were  looking  at  the  Peak  of  Teneriffe  rising  out  of  the 
loneliness  of  the  sea,  but  rather  a  Mont  Blanc,  one  with  the  Alps,  and  yet  a  solitary 
form  of  majesty.  Grandeur,  as  distinct  from  beauty  and  sublimity,  requires  some 
degree  of  isolation  so  as  to  produce  an  adequate  impression.  Here,  then,  tne  apostle 
makes  a  space  lor  this  grand  delineation,  every  feature  of  which  may  be  seen  in  con- 
centrated light,  and  not  a  thing  allowed  to  distract  the  eye.  This  is  in  itself  a  call  to 
attention,  a  summons  to  the  activity  of  our  whole  nature,  and,  in  accordance  herewith, 
he  presents  something  more  than  a  mere  sketch  or  profile  of  love.  It  is  a  complete 
portrait.  The  features  are  individually  given,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  expression 
which  combines  them  in  a  most  striking  unity.  First,  then,  we  have  the  supreme  excel- 
lence of  love  in  contrast  with  the  worthlessness  of  other  gifts  unaccompanied  by  its 
presence.  Great  stress  was  laid  at  that  time  on  the  gift  of  tongues.  We  are  all 
inclined  to  set  a  high  value  on  an  exceptional  endowment  of  speech.  Eloquence  passes 
for  much  even  in  a  rude  age;  the  North  Ameiican  Indian  and  the  barbarous  tribes  of 
Asia  acknowledge  its  power,  while  cultivated  society  is  never  stinted  in  admiration 
of  its  influence.  And  the  possessor  of  it  seldom  fails  to  exaggerate  its  worth.  Stated 
roughly,  eloquent  men  appear  to  have  a  peculiar  intensity  of  consciousness  ■■  respects 
this  gift.  They  are  singularly  open  to  the  seductions  of  popular  applause,  so  mucii  lo^ 
indeed,  that  the  public  approval  which  a  scientific  man,  or  a  statesman,  or  a  military 
hero  woSId  be  unharmed  by,  is  often  ruinous  to  an  orator.    Not  the  common  air,  but 


M2  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0K1NTHIAN8.    [ch.  xm.  1— U 

the  breath  of  the  multitude,  fragrant  with  adulation,  feeds  his  lungs.  This  it  is  thai 
arterializes  his  blood  and  sends  it  hot  and  poisonous  to  his  brain.  Of  course,  these 
Corinthians  were  the  very  persons  to  overvalue  the  gift  of  tongues.  It  was  in  th« 
channel  of  their  tastes  and  traditions.  But  the  apostle  teaches  them  that  this  wonder- 
ful power  holds  a  subordinate  rank.  He  does  not  depreciate  it ;  no,  he  appreciates  it 
to  the  full:  *•  tongues  of  men"  are  associafed  with  "the  tongues  of  angels; "  and  yet, 
without  love,  the  endowment  is  as  "  sounding  bra«s,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal."  What  is 
it  but  mere  noise,  an  idln  tumult  of  the  air?  Unless  love  to  God  and  man  attend  tha 
gift,  restrain  its  selfishness,  destroy  its  vanity-making  tendency,  and  sanctify  it  to 
the  welfare  of  others,  it  is  worthless.  But  the  second  verse  enlarges  the  thoughts  On* 
may  have  the  gift  of  prophecy  and  use  his  intellect  with  amazing  skill  and  force  m  m 
to  excite  and  captivate  his  hearers,  and  this,  too,  under  the  teachings  of  revelation ;  and, 
further,  one  may  have  insight  into  Divine  secrets,  and  "  understand  all  mysteries,"  and 
have  them  at  comiinand  as  "  knowledge ; "  yet  what  is  he  without  love  ?  Can  it  be 
possible  that  this  resplendent  power  could  exist,  and  that  other  light  kindled  by  lova 
be  utterly  wantinuV  Observe,  it  is  "all"  mysteries  and  knowledge ;  the  man  explores 
every  height  and  depth,  and  he  has  the  freedom  of  the  universe.  Nay,  superadd  all 
faith,  so  that  material  nature  falls  in  homage  at  your  feet  and  the  "  mountains  "  remove 
in  obedience  to  your  will ;  but  of  what  avail  this  expenditure  of  mighty  energy,  where 
the  holiness  of  love  is  lacking?  If,  then,  the  man  endowed  with  universality  of  utter- 
ance—" tongues  of  men  and  of  angels ; "  and  if  the  prophet  with  his  clear  and  broad 
insight  into  the  counsels  of  God,  and  before  whose  eye  the  panorama  of  distant  events 
moves  as  a  spectacle  of  to-day ;  if  the  miracle-worker  who  transcends  all  natural 
capacities  and  exercises  the  delegated  power  of  Jehovah  in  producing  supernatural 
phenomena ;— if  these  men  and  their  gifts  are  compared  to  "  sounding  brass  and 
tinkling  cymbal,"  and  verily  are  "  nothing ; "  and  though  they  are  known  as  apostles, 
prophets,  miracle-workers,  hemes  of  faith,  instruments  of  the  supernatural :  if  all  these 
are  nothingness  itself  withnut  love,  can  anything  more  be  said  to  intensify  the  excel- 
lence of  love  as  a  Divine  principle  and  sentiment  and  impulse?  The  third  verse 
answers  this  question.  Charity,  almsgiving,  philanthropy,  even  self-sacrifice  at  tha 
stake,  here  come  into  view.  How  far  may  one  go  in  the  benevolent  appropriation 
of  earthly  property  and  yet  fall  beli)w  the  highest  motive?  St.  Paul  replies  that  ha 
may  "  dole  out"  all  he  owns,  do  it  gradually,  do  it  cautiously,  do  it  to  the  exhaustion 
of  his  resources,  yet  do  it  unmindful  of  that  sovereign  law  which  gathers  into  itself 
all  other  laws  and  imparts  to  them  a  virtue  that  makes  them  Divine.  Nor  is  this 
all.  One  may  have  the  philanthropic  idea  and  sensibility  so  largely  developed  as 
to  accept  martyrdom,  have  the  courage  to  face  it  unblenched,  and  to  endure  it  with 
fortitude ;  but  he  may  surrender  life  without  the  highest  love.  Love  may  be  there 
— love  of  a  truth,  love  of  a  cause,  love  of  humanity — not  necessarily  the  love,  however, 
here  under  discussion ;  and  hence,  this  distinctive  Christian  love,  which  includes  the 
Divine  and  the  human,  being  absent,  the  martyrdom  is  not  for  Christ's  sake,  and 
consequently  is  nugatory  as  to  its  Christian  character.  "  It  profiteth  me  nothing."  If, 
now,  such  a  doctrine  as  this  rested  on  a  ground  solely  ethical,  we  confess  our  inability 
to  see  how  it  could  be  accepted  as  a  trustworthy  view  of  human  nature.  Logic  in 
itself  has  no  fundamental  principle  from  which  it  can  be  deduced.  Philosophy  as  such, 
and  as  confined  to  what  it  finds  in  our  constitution,  would  be  compelled  to  reject  a  con- 
clusion so  alien  to  its  spirit.  On  the  other  hand,  the  doctrine  may  be  easily  and 
heartily  received  on  the  score  of  Christian  logic  and  philosophy.  For,  in  the  scheme 
of  Christianity,  human  nature  is  a  revelation  from  God.  It  is  the  Divine  thought  of 
this  nature  which  we  are  to  embrace,  to  cherish,  to  act  upon.  And  if  we  admit,  as  we 
ought  to  do  in  the  presence  of  such  satisfactory  evidence,  that  Gh>d  has  spoken  to  man 
of  man,  and  disclosed  to  him  "the  once  hidden  mystery  of  himself,  as  well  as  that  other 
and  infinitely  greater  "  hidden  mystery "  of  his  redeeming  purpose  in  Christ — if  we 
acknowledge  this,  then  we  cannot  impeach  the  wisdom,  the  justness,  the  stem  truth- 
fulness, of  St.  Paul's  argument.  The  argument  assumes  that  Christianity  is  of  God, 
and,  as  such,  advances  to  this  point,  namely,  Christianity  alone  gives  a  fiill  and  earn- 
plete  view  of  onr  nature.  Its  ethical  teachings,  their  reasons  and  motives  and  ends, 
are  founded  in  Christ  and  in  his  relations  to  us.  Our  relations  to  him  and  to  one 
another  are  subsequent  considerations,  and  take  their  quality  and  hearings  simply, 


CH.  xra.  1— 13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  433 

lolely,  altogether,  from  him,  the  "  Image  of  the  invisible  Ood,"  ind  the  "  Firstborn 
of  every  creature."  Inasmuch,  then,  as  the  ideal  of  our  nature  is  not  as  we  see  it  in 
and  by  our  own  unaided  consciousness,  but  in  and  by  a  consciousness  illuminated  ami 
guided  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  how  could  it  be  otherwise  than  that  new  iDtuitions  occur, 
and  that  demands  are  made  on  us  never  imagined  before  ?  On  this  foundation  St. 
Paul  stands  when  he  affirms  that  those  endowments  which  charm,  those  splendid  gifts 
that  win  enthusiastic  admiration,  even  self-sacrifice  itself  at  the  bidding  of  earth-born 
instincts,  are  nothing  without  that  love  which  is  purely  a  responsive  affection,  or,  as 
St.  John  expresses  it,  "  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us." — L. 

Vera.  4 — 7. — The  nature  •  and  tperalinn  of  love.  ,The  negative  view  having  been 
presented,  the  apostle  considers  the  nature  and  operations  of  this  love.  And  one 
characteristic  of  it,  he  puts  in  the  foreground  of  its  excellences.  It  can  suffer.  A  virtue 
that  cannot  suffer  is  hardly  a  virtue  at  all.  Certainly  it  is  not  a  virtue  that  can  lay 
the  least  claim  to  divineness.  Wedded  love,  parental  love,  philanthropic  and  patriotic 
love,  have  to  undergo  a  discipline  of  pain  and  sorrow  even  to  symbolize  the  higher 
affection  of  Divine  love.  This  holy  love,  of  which  this  chapter  is  so  laudatory,  deriven 
its  very  essence  from  the  "  Man  of  sorrows."  Short  of  realizing,  in  its  measure,  the 
agony  in  the  lonely  garden  and  the  yet  lonelier  cross,  it  dare  not,  it  cannot  stop,  since 
only  there  is  its  test  found.  A  beautiful  sBstheticism,  moral,  perchance  semi-spiritual, 
may  follow  the  lowly  Jesus  of  Nazareth  through  the  windings  of  liis  Galilean  and 
Jiidaean  journeys,  sling  reverently  to  his  person,  spread  the  palm  branches  in  his  path- 
way, and  shout  its  glad  hosannas  to  his  Niime,  and,  alter  all,  "forsook  him  and  fled" 
may  be  the  final  record  of  its  weakness.  Only  when  he  rises  to  the  sacrificial  height 
of  his  anointing  as  the  Christ  of  God's  Law  and  the  Christ  of  God's  love,  and  bears  our 
sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree— only  here,  where  Jehuvah  "  lets  the  lifted  thunder 
drop,"  can  the  human  soul  he  reconciled  first  to  its  own  disciplinary  sufferings,  and 
learn  afterwards,  by  many  conflicts  wilh  self,  to  glory  in  the  cross.  But  love  not  only 
suffers,  it  "  suffereth  long."  It  is  patient — patient  towards  others,  and,  what  is  quite 
as  important,  patient  with  itself.  And  under  all  its  sufferings,  instead  of  being  irrit- 
able, it  is  kind.  Unsanctified  suffering  is  usually  morbid.  It  broods  over  its  ills ;  it 
magnifies  its  afflictions ;  often,  indeed,  it  makes  us  misanthropic.  Sweetness  of  temper 
and  tender  outgoings  of  sympathy  are  not  the  common  results  of  painful  experiences, 
but  the  fruits  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  them.  Fortitude  may  be  shown,  and  it  may  be 
naught  but  homage  at  the  shrine  of  self.  This  love  is  of  God.  It  takes  to  its  heart 
God's  thought  of  suffering  as  chastening,  as  correction,  as  the  supreme  moral  necessit}' 
of  a  probationary  life,  through  which  we  must  pass  to  get  any  deep  knowledge  of -our- 
selves. For  it  is  never  pleasure,  but  pain,  that  holds  the  key  to  the  secret  chambers, 
where  the  latent  man  awaits  the  voice  of  God  bidding  him  arise  and  gird  himself  with 
immortal  strength.  Now,  what  effect  on  this  love  would  ensue  from  suffering  that 
had  become  habitual  and  wrought  patience  and  silent  enduringness  into  character? 
By  suppressing  a  morbid  regard  for  self  and  quickening  the  sympathies  that  give  width 
to  the  inner  life,  what  would  be  the  specific  result  on  the  relations  sustained  to  others? 
These  Corinthians,  as  we  have  frequently  noticed,  were  pulling  down  one  and  putting 
up  another,  were  thoroughgoing  partisans,  were  censorious  and  depreciatory  towards 
those  with  whom  they  were  disinclined  to  affiliate.  What  change  for  the  better  would 
love  bring  about?  St.  Paul  answers,  "Love  enviethnot."  Observe  how  quickly  he 
turns  again  to  the  negative  aspects  of  this  "  supremely  excellent  way,"  and  what  vigour 
is  imparted  to  the  argument.  At  every  step,  contrast  aids  him  by  sugs;esting  what 
love  excludes,  while  its  true  qualities  are  set  in  bolder  relief.  F^nvy  is  pain  at  tlie 
sight  of  superior  excellence  in  another,  and  is  always  a  mark  of  blinding  selfishness. 
According  to  one's  temi  erament,  it  is  displeasure  or  something  worse,  and  usuaUf 
coutaing  an  element  of  hatred. 

"  Men,  that  make 
Envy  and  crooked  malice  nourishment, 
Dare  bite  the  best." 

Of  courM  it  leads  to  strife.  It  is  a  fruitful  cause  of  schism,  and  as  schism  was  a 
terrible  btII  in  the  apost'e's  view,  he  could  not  fail  to  show  its  utter  inconsistency  with 

I.   OOKINTHTANS.  2    r 


4«4  THE   FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTHIANS.    [ca  xnu  1—13 

this  cardinal  virtue.  Along  with  this  he  says,  "Love  vaunteth  not" — a  similar  idea  to 
the  foregoing  as  to  its  had  temper,  hut  unlike  as  to  its  mood  of  exhibition.  Beferenca 
is  here  made  to  the  foolish  display  of  self-importance  after  the  manner  of  a  swaggerer 
or  braggart.  Next  comes  the  statement,  "  Is  not  puffed  up,"  not  inflated  or  swollen  by 
self-conceit;  this  is  followed  by,  "Doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly  " — is  not  uncourteous,. 
but  studies  propriety  of  manner,  and  shows  the  instinct  of  a  right  demeanour,  from 
which  all  good  breeding  proceeds.  The  art  of  behaviour  is  manifold.  It  is  amenable 
to  circunisiances  and  classes,  variable  as  to  outward  manifestations,  suiting  language 
and  other  demonstrations  to  the  claitns  of  occasion,  and,  in  all  this,  its  root-principle 
is  the  same  if  it  be  truthful  and  sincere,  since  it  loses  sight  of  self  and  ministers  to  the 
happiness  of  others.  Christian  manners  are  the  offspring  of  a  Christian  manner ;  the 
manners  are  external,  the  manner  is  internal ;  so  that  here,  as  in  all  else,  form  is  created 
by  spirit.  The  tones  of  the  voice,  the  look  of  the  eye,  the  muscular  play  of  the 
countenance,  are  not  physical  facts  only,  but  expressions  and  languages  that  have 
modulation,  accent,  emphasis,  direct  from  the  soul.  Thus  attended,  our  words  take 
on  other,  fuller,  more  inspiriting  meanings  than  those  drawn  from  the  dictionary ;  so 
that  a  man's  face,  figure,  gesture,  attitude,  give  a  personal  import  to  what  emanates 
from  his  heart.  If  one  compares  the  spiritual  expression  in  the  face  of  a  Madonna  by 
Raphael  with  the  mere  sensuous  beauty  of  the  face  as  depicted  by  antique  art,  he  sees 
at  once  that  Christianity  has  affected  art  to  such  an  extent  as  to  modify  the  laws  of 
representation.  "  Expression  is  the  vivid  image  of  the  passion  that  affects  the  mind  ; 
its  language,  and  the  portrait  of  its  situation  "  (Fuseli).  It  is  not  extravasant  to  claim 
that  Christianity  has  so  far  changed  physiological  expression  as  to  spiritualize,  and 
thereby  to  heighten,  its  quality  and  force.  But  why  limit  the  change  to  art  ?  The 
fact  is  that  Christianity  has  had  its  effect — a  very  distinctive  and  appreciable  effect — 
on  what  may  be  termed  the  physiology  of  manner,  in  the  intercourse  of  society.  We 
seldom  think  of  it.  We  rarely  number  this  among  the  myriad  advantages  Christianity 
has  brought  to  man.  Yet  the  fact  is  indisputable  that  Christianity  has  given  to  the 
human  voice  tones  of  strength  and  tenderness  never  before  known,  and  to  the  human 
eye  a  depth  of  power,  of  stillness,  of  pathos,  that,  withont  its  grace,  had  been  impossible. 
Nor  can  we  doubt  that  this  is  one  of  the  numerous  ways  it  has  adopted  to  establish  a 
closer  relation  between  mind  and  matter,  and  educate  the  lody  for  the  glory  of  the 
resurrection.  Passing  from  decorum  while  yet  retaining  the  general  idea  in  his  grasp, 
St.  Paul  now  mentions  the  unselfishness  of  love :  "  Seeketh  not  her  mvn."  If  its 
deportment  is  never  obtrusive,  but  always  becoming ;  if  it  never  uses  its  gifts  to  remind 
others  of  their  inferiority,  but  orders  its  manners  so  as  to  avoid  everything  which  might 
tend  to  inflame  envy ;  it  goes  still  further,  and  manifests  its  disinterestedness  as  the 
soul  of  the  "supremely  excellent  way."  To  pursue  its  own  honour  and  aggrandizement, 
as  if  it  had  a  sole  proprietary  interast  in  itself  and  could  only  exist  by  existing  for  its 
own  reputation,  influence,  happiness,  is  forestalled  by  its  nature  and  operations.  The 
"  all  things  "  are  not  its,  but  "  yours,"  and  "  ye,"  one  and  all,  "  are  Christ's."  So  he 
had  argued  In  the  third  chapter.  The  echo  of  the  great  truth  comes  back  again  and 
again,  and  once  more  it  is  heard  in  this  verse.  What  St.  Paul  has  just  said  of  love  as 
suffering  long,  and  as  kind,  as  not  envying  and  vaunting,  nor  conceited  and  indecorous, 
are  as  so  many  stepping-stones  to  "  seeketh  not  its  own."  Would  it  have  anything 
in  the  universe  for  itself  alone?  If  so,  the  very  thing  itself,  the  universe  itself,  would 
be  changed  into  another  thing  and  another  universe,  and  be  no  more  a  joy  and  a 
blessedness,  but  a  restraint  and  an  evil  and  a  curse.  Instead  of  a  palace,  a  prison; 
instead  of  sublime  disinterestedness,  sordidncss  and  ceaseless  descent  in  degradation ; 
instead  of  an  ideal  in  Christ,  the  idea  of  virtues  as  bare  commercial  utilities,  and  of  the 
soul  as  a  commodity  valued  by  the  market-place.  Have  anything  alone?  This  were 
loneliness  indeed.  It  were  grievous,  it  were  misery,  to  be  isolat«l  even  by  goodness 
and  greatness  from  the  heart  of  humanity.  It  is  painfiil  to  a  true  man  to  be  reminded 
of  his  superiority  at  the  expense  of  others,  and  whenever  one  welcomes  this  sort  of 
homage  and  glorifies  himself,  he  loses  truth  of  manhood.  To  thank  God  that  we  are 
"  not  as  other  men  are  "  is  sheer  Pharisaism,  and  all  such  thanksgiving  is  worship  of 
self.  Love  has  not  a  wish,  a  desire,  an  aim,  an  aspiration,  bounded  by  the  limits  of  itself; 
and  as  Jeaui  prayed,  "  That  they  all  may  be  one ;  as  thou.  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in 
thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us,"  so  is  the  prayer  of  the  soul  ia  all  its  greatest 


OH.  »m.  1—13.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORI^^TUIANS.  435 

moments,  and  when  the  cross  is  nearest  by,  that  it  may  be  one  with  others,  as  it  longs 
to  be  one  with  Christ  and  the  Father.  Every  inch  that  a  majestic  oak  goes  upward 
OT  spreads  laterally,  down  go  its  roots ;  further  and  wider  they  spread  themselves  out, 
tree  above  and  tree  below,  preserving,  each  in  its  way,  proponion  and  symmetry.  And 
eo  with  love.  Reaching  that  high  development  indicated  by  capacity  to  suffer  and 
yet  be  kind,  by  victory  over  envy  and  ostentation,  and  the  transformation  of  dail,> 
manners  into  spiritual  grace  and  beauty,  it  has  so  enlarged  itself  as  to  afford  ampl>.- 
room  even  for  the  most  generous  and  magnanimous  euiutions.  It  wants  to  be  good 
and  to  be  better,  but  where  is  the  best  t  And  as  the  years  move  on  and  the  soul  grows, 
this  thought  comes  to  be  upjiermost,  "  There  is  a  better  world  ; "  and  not  alone  in  a 
better  nature,  and  as  a  better  being,  but  in  a  bttter  world,  it  looks  for  its  perfection. 
A  world  of  love  is  its  demand.  The  negative  idea  is  still  further  unfolded  in  the  words, 
"  b  not  easily  provoked,"  or,  "  Is  not  jirovoked  "  (Revised  Version).  Much  of  peevish- 
ness, of  anger,  of  resentment,  springs  from  wounding  the  imaginary  being  whom  we 
call  by  our  name,  fondle  with  our  caresses,  and  idolize  in  our  vanity.  This  deformed 
self,  though  apparelled  in  gaudy  drapery  and  lifted  to  an  exalted  [ledestal,  is  but  too 
conscious  of  its  blemishes  and  flaws,  to  be  tolerant  of  criticism  or  amiable  under 
exposure  of  its  imperfections.  It  is  quick  to  take  umbrage.  It  is  full  of  suspicion  and 
keeulj  aiive  to  neglect,  real  or  supposed.  A  chronic  ailment,  this  self-conceit  feels  any 
fluctuation  of  circumstances  and  is  acutely  sensitive  to  wind  and  weather.  On  the 
other  hand,  love  is  not  provoked ;  its  temper  is  not  quick,  nor  are  its  words  hasty. 
How  can  it  be  otherwise,  when  it  "  thinketh  no  eviV'f  By  governing  its  thoughts, 
it  obtains  that  rare  virtue  of  iatellect  wliich  consists  in  no  small  degree  of  a  mastery 
over  associations  and  suggestions,  and  that  is  probably  the  most  si>inal  triuniph  of  iniud 
over  its  physical  connections.  "  Iinputeth  not  the  evil"  (Dr.  Kling);  " 'laketh  not 
account  of  evil"  (Kevised  Version);  and  whereas  the  "evil"  is  real  and  iiali)able,  it 
refuses  to  bear  it  in  mind,  and,  by  fixing  attention  and  keeping  it  fixed  on  the  wrong, 
to  aggravate  the  impression.  Here,  as  everywhere,  mark  the  unity  in  our  consiitution. 
One  cannot  have  a  sore  finger,  or  toothache,  or  painful  limb,  that  the  affection  is  not 
enhanced  by  directing  thought  to  it.  The  blood  is  inflamed  the  more,  and  the  nervous 
susceptibility  augmented.  So  it  is  with  the  mind.  Can  we  wonder,  then,  that  Sr. 
Paul's  insight  detected  the  relation  between  thinking  of  injury  or  injustice,  and  the 
moral  effect  on  character?  And,  finally,  as  to  these  repeated  negatives,  love  ''rejoictth 
not  in  iniquity," OT," in  unrighteousness,"  but  "rejoiceth  in  [or, 'with']  the  truth."  It 
exults  not  at  the  overthrow  and  prostration  of  others.  The  downfall  of  another,  even 
if  that  other  made  himself  a  rival,  is  no  gratification.  A  human  soul,  a  redeemed 
■pirit,  sank  in  that  fall,  and  love  cannot  rejoice  in  such  a  calamity.  "  Rejoictth  in  [or, 
'with']  the  truth."  Love  has  been  personified  all  along;  truth  is  here  personified.  Love 
approaches  moral  truth,  offers  its  congratulations,  enters  into  its  success,  shares  its  joy. 
So,  then,  St.  Paul  approaclies  the  close  of  this  paragraph  by  the  beautiful  picture  of 
love  and  truth  side  by  side,  and  hap|)y  in  the  purity  and  glory  of  their  fellowship. 
Looking  back  on  the  course  of  the  argument,  we  see  love  as  a  meek  and  gentle  sufferer, 
the  traces  of  pain  on  its  face,  yet  a  sijreet  and  holy  reconciliation  to  the  pangs  long 
borne.  We  see  kindness  imprinted  on  the  countenance.  We  discover  no  sign  of  envy, 
of  pride  and  vanity,  of  overweening  sell-regard,  and,  wherever  the  figure  moves,  its 
grace  and  charms  are  not  bluired  by  unseemly  demeanour.  Most  of  all,  its  eye  has 
au  outward  look,  as  if  offering  its  heart  to  the  service  of  others.  And  while  unpleasant 
things  occur,  and  wrongs  are  perpetrated,  it  is  not  made  angry,  nor  does  it  nurse  malice 
and  resentment,  nor  rejoice  at  tiie  retributions  that  oveitake  iniquity.  Joy,  indeed, 
it  has,  but  its  gladdest  hours  are  those  when  love  clasps  hands  with  truth,  and  wheu 
"seeketh  not  its  own"  finds  its  highest  realization  in  fellowship  with  truth.  But  the 
positive  side  of  love  must  now  be  presented.  It  "  beareth  all  things,"  that  is,  "  hides 
to  itself  and  to  others"  (Bengel),  conceals  or  covers  up  the  infirmities  of  others,  which 
envy,  pride,  malice,  would  not  expose,  but  delight  in  the  exposure.  A  virtue  is  most 
glorious  when  it  courts  silence  and  prizes  it  as  a  beatitude.  Unwitnessed  patience 
and  heroism  are  grandest  when  the  soul  asks  no  recognition,  but  abides  with  its  con- 
iciousness  alone  in  God.  In  his  four  statements  in  ver.  7  this  quiet  bearing  of  the 
imperfections  of  other  people  is  first  mentioned.  And  with  what  expressiveness  of 
diction!   "Beareth  all  things."    That  passive  streu^jth  which  bears  life's  burden  to 


i36  TU£  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIA£(S.    [ca.  xiu.  1—14 

no  radden,  still  less  aa  early,  acqiiirement.  It  U  a  slow  growth.  Time,  as  a  co-workd 
with  grace,  has  much  to  do  with  its  excellence.  Years  only  can  give  it  maturity  and 
years  full  of  providence.  Consider,  too,  what  a  oo-educatiou  of  the  body  is  implied  hen, 
what  a  subduing  of  recreant  nerves,  what  a  check  on  the  blood,  what  refusals  to  obey 
sensations,  before  one  can  learn  the  art  of  silence  as  to  the  faults  that  annoy  and  often 
T«z.  If  it  is  thus  that  Christian  character  is  rounded  off,  we  cannot  doubt  that  it  is 
»ot  attainable  except  through  a  tedious  and  protracted  experience.  But  does  this 
bearing  with  the  faults  of  others  comply  with  the  requirements  of  social  duty  f  Nay, 
says  the  apostle,  love  "  beUeveth  <M  thiitgiJ'  It  searches  for  good  qualities  in  men  who 
•re  disagreeable  and  even  repulsive,  and  whatever  its  diligent  scrutiny  can  bring  it 
light  amid  the  mass  of  infirmities  overlaying  better  traits,  yields  it  genuine  ploaaure. 
Oolour-blindness  is  not  confined  to  the  physical  eye.  Individuals  who  are  sensitive 
to  the  faults  of  others,  and  habituated  to  criticizing  them,  are  generally  more  affected 
by  nervous  annoyance  than  by  conscience,  and  it  commonly  happens  with  such  that 
they  seldom  look  for  any  redeeming  goodness.  To  estimate  the  force  of  circumstances, 
to  study  motives,  to  make  charitable  allowances,  are  alien  to  their  tastes  and  temper. 
On  the  contrary,  the  instinct  of  love  is  to  believe  that  others  are  better,  or,  at  l^st, 
may  be  better,  than  they  seem.  So  that  while  love  is  au  heroic  believer,  it  is  also  • 
wise  doubter,  and  gives  the  unhappy  idiosyncrasies  of  men  the  benefit  of  its  doubts. 
Because  of  this,  it  "  hopeth  all  things."  Bight  believing  is  an  expansive  force  in  tha 
intellect.  It  is  a  quickener  of  imagination.  It  finds  reasous  for  confidence  unknown 
to  him  who  has  the  conceit  of  scepticism,  and  cherishes  it  for  its  own  sake,  and  prides 
himself  on  it  as  a  sign  of  intellectual  acumen.  Faith  acts  on  the  emotions.  These 
two,  imagination  and  sensibility,  stimulate  hope,  that  in  turn  rises  above  the  senses 
and  comprehends,  to  some  extent,  the  mighty  forces  engaged  on  the  side  of  goodness. 
The  power  of  Ood  in  Christianity  makes  its  way  slowly  to  the  heart,  while  Satanie 
influence  is  demonstrative  to  the  eye,  Hope  is  not  left  to  itself,  but  is  taught  of  Christ, 
who,  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  looked  beyond  humiliation,  obloqu'y,  death,  to  the  glory 
waiting  to  invest  him.  So,  then,  we  may  say  that  large  views  and  large  hopes  go 
together,  and  the  grace  that  "  bclieveth  all  things  "  also  "  hopeth  all  things."  But  is 
a  great  hope  immediately  gratified?  Never;  if  it  were  it  would  lose  its  greatness. 
Hope  is  a  beautiful  education,  and  it  is  this  by  holding  back  its  fulfilment  and  thereby 
expanding  the  soul's  capacity  for  the  fullest  gratification.  Hope  must  have  time  and 
opportunity  to  develop  the  sense  of  enjoyability  in  us  before  it  bestows  the  reality. 
Each  day  of  postponement  goes  onward  to  the  day  of  realization,  which  is  thousands 
of  days  in  one.  But  it  educates  us  in  other  forms.  The  delay  of  hope  to  meet  our 
anticipations  tests  our  strength  and  patience.  Has  the  hope  a  firm  hold  on  our  souls  f 
If  so,  its  possessor  "endureth  all  ihingi,"  Through  doubt  and  darkness,  amidst 
adversity,  despite  opposing  circumstances,  love  is  persistent,  and  its  persistency  is 
the  measure  of  its  power.  When  we  reach  this  ability  to  endure,  waiting  in  serene 
patience,  submissive  to  God's  will,  content  with  to-day  for  what  it  is  in  itself,  antici- 
pAting  a  coming  Joy,  but  leaving  its  birth-hour  to  him  who  keeps  the  times  and  seasons 
for  himself, — when  we  attain  this  point  of  experience,  we  are  near  the  boundary  of 
sarthly  growth.  Passive  excellence,  such  as  that  pointed  out  by  the  word  "  endureth," 
seems  to  be  the  final  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  human  heart.  Fitly,  therefore, 
St.  Paul  finds  the  climax  of  expressions  (ver.  7)  in  "endureth  all  things."  True, 
"  beareth,"  "  believeth,"  "  hopeth,"  are  alike  relat^  to  "all  things  "  with  " endureth," 
and  yet  this  is  obviously  the  consummation  of  the  idea  pervading  the  apostle's  mind. 
Fitly  so,  we  have  said,  since  men  are  accustomed  to  regard  endurance  as  the  mark  of 
the  highest  power.  It  is  a  trained  and  balanced  power.  Budy,  soul,  and  spirit  are 
imsent  in  the  fulness  of  its  strength.  There  is  no  disquiet  in  those  sensibilities  that 
are  ever  creating  ripples  on  the  surface  of  life.  There  is  no  agitation  in  those  great 
depths  that  once  heaved  under  the  fury  of  the  storm.  Enduring  love  has  entered  into 
rest,  and  the  repose  is  God-like. — L. 

Vera.  8—13, — PerTnantnce  of  love.  Why  Is  it  that  the  numerous  objects  around  m 
•n  transient  ?  On  every  side  they  appeal  to  us,  connect  themselves  with  hope  and 
fear,  enter  into  our  business,  awaken  enterprise  and  ambition,  and  even  inspire  ardent 
love;  yet  they  are  ever  passing;  an  ay.     Now,  there  must  be  a  discipline  in  all  tllii^ 


OH.  xui.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  437 

«nd  Christianity  assures  us  what  it  means.  It  is  that  wa  may  be  trained  in  tha  nddst 
«f  evanescence  for  that  which  is  permanent.  And  this  presupposes  that  there  is  nnt 
only  an  immortal  soul  in  man,  but  that,  by  reason  of  his  present  organization  and  its 
relations,  certain  of  his  functions  and  acquirements  are  purely  temporary,  while  others 
axe  to  live  for  ever.  In  fact,  there  are  functions  and  acquirements  which  do  not  wait 
for  the  death  of  the  body.  They  fulfil  their  purpose  and  expire  long  before  age  orer- 
takea  lu.    Yet,  lays  Wordsworth — 

"Not  for  this 
Faint  I,  nor  monm  nor  murmur ;  other  gifto 
Have  followed,  for  such  loss,  I  would  believe 
Abundant  recompense." 

It  Is  in  the  spirit  of  a  true  and  noble  Christian  philosophy  that  this  great  moral  poet  of 
the  century  sees  no  cause  to  "  mourn  nor  murmur  "  because  our  nature  has  a  rejecting 
institict,  which,  as  God  ordains,  throws  off  and  leaves  behind  it  tastes  and  habits  that 
were  once  very  useful  as  well  as  precious.  Keeping  in  mind,  then,  that  this  rejecting 
instinct  is  an  organic  part  of  our  constitution  and  has  its  allotted  functions  to  discharge, 
we  can  appreciate  all  the  more  St.  Paul's  line  of  thought  in  the  closing  verses  of  this 
chapter.  "  Love  never  faihth."  Its  existence,  activity,  manifestation,  will  be  perpetuated. 
The  wonderful  spiritual  gifts  of  which  he  had  said  so  much — prophecy,  the  ability  to 
speak  with  tongues,  knowledge — these  should  cease  to  exist.  Although  they  proceeded 
from  the  Holy  Ghost  and  weie  mightily  instrumental  for  good  in  the  incipient  work  of 
the  Church,  yet,  nevertheless,  they  were  to  terminate.  Scaffoldings  were  they  all,  useful 
as  such,  subserving  most  important  ends,  but  mere  scaffoldings,  that  could  no  longer 
remain  when  the  edifice  had  been  finished.  What,  then,  is  the  ideal  of  the  Church  ? 
It  is  not  splendid  endowments,  for  they  are  doomed  to  extinction,  but  the  love  "  that 
never  faileth."  Whether  the  passing  away  of  these  gifts  refers  to  the  apostolic  age  or  to 
"  the  age  to  come,"  matters  nothing,  since  the  idea  of  their  discontinuation,  rather  than 
of  the  time  it  should  occur,  is  foremost  in  St.  Paul's  mind.  Imagine,  then,  his  concep- 
tion of  love,  when  he  could  contemplate  the  Church  as  a  vast  body  laying  off  these 
mighty  accompaniments  of  its  career,  and  yet,  so  far  from  being  weakened,  would  be 
gilded  afresh  with  a  power  more  resplendent  and  display  it  in  a  form  infinitely  more 
majestic.  Disrobed  of  these  habiliments,  its  contour  would  appear  in  the  perfection  of 
sublimity ;  its  anatomy  as  an  organism  would  be,  as  it  were,  transparent ;  the  whole 
framework,  the  various  parts,  the  ligaments  binding  them  together,  the  circulating  life- 
blood,  would  disclose  the  single  animating  principle  of  love.  Would  it  startle  the 
Corinthians  to  learn  that  even  knowledge  should  vanish  away  ?  "  We  know  in  part, 
and  we  prophesy  in  part."  All  knowledge  cannot  be  meant,  for  love  itself  includes 
much  knowledge,  and,  in  its  absence,  would  be  simply  emotional  intensity.  To  possess 
the  mere  faculty  of  knowing  would  be  worthless,  if  the  mind  could  not  retain  the 
contents  of  knowledge  and  make  them  a  portion  integrally  of  itself.  What  the  apostle 
teaches  is  that  such  knowledge  as  stands  related  to  the  present  state  and  time,  and 
grows  directly  out  of  imperfect  human  development,  and  shares  the  condition  of  all 
things  earthly,  is  short-lived  and  must  terminate.  Tongues  shall  cease,  but  the  gift  of 
sipeech  shall  not  be  lost.  And  he  explains  himself  by  saying  that  the  gifts  relating  to 
prophecy  and  tongues  were  only  partial,  were  exclusively  adapted  to  a  preliminary  state 
of  experience  and  activity,  and  completed  their  purpose  in  a  temporary  spiritual  economy. 
We  are  here  under  specific,  no  less  than  general  limitations,  and,  in  certain  directions, 
we  are  restrained  more  than  in  others.  What  the  Spirit  looks  to  is  not  knowledge 
alone,  but  to  its  moral  aspects  as  well ;  to  humility,  meekness,  self-abasement,  when  the 
intellect  is  strongest,  freest,  and  boldest ;  nor  will  he  expand  the  understandhig  and  its 
expressional  force  for  their  own  sakes,  but  develop  them  only  so  far  as  subservient  to 
an  object  higher  than  their  immediate  ends.  Partial  information,  partial  command  of 
our  mental  faculties,  partial  uses  of  even  the  wisdom  we  possess— this  is  the  law  cl 
limitation  and  restraint,  under  which  the  complex  probation  of  intellect,  sensibility, 
volition,  aspiration,  and  outward  activity,  works  out  immeasurable  results.  TherafonL 
he  argues,  we  now  know  and  prophesy  "in  part;"  at  the  best,  we  ara  firagmentary  ana 
incomplete ;  and  yet  this  imperfection  is  connected  with  a  perfect  system  and  leads  up 
to  it.  The  perfection  will  come ;  the  existing  economy  is  its  foreshadowing ;  nor  could 
knowledge  give  any  rational  account  of  itself,  nor  could  prophecy  and  tongues  ■•^^ha.te 


438  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TUE  CORINTHIANS,    [oil  xiu.  1-13. 

their  worth,  if  the  fuller  splendourB,  of  which  theae  kre  faint  escapes  of  light,  were  not 
absolute  certainties  of  the  future.  Only  when  the  "  perfect  is  come  "  shall  that  which 
is  "  in  part"  be  "done  away."  Ipstitutions  founded  in  providence  and  upheld  by  th« 
Spirit  aie  left  to  no  chance  or  accident  as  to  continuance,  decay,  extinction.  God 
comes  into  them,  abides,  departs,  according  to  the  counsel  of  his  will.  If  he  numbers 
our  days  as  living  men,  and  keeps  xjur  times  in  his  hand;  if  only  his  voice  says, 
"Return,  ye  children  of  men;" — this  is  equally  true  of  institutions.  For  the  dead  dust, 
man  maUes  a  grave ;  but  the  life  of  individuals,  institutions,  government,  society,  even 
the  Church,  is  in  God's  keeping,  and  he  alone  says,  "  Return."  How  shall  St.  Paul  set 
forth  the  relation  of  the  partial  to  the  perfect?  A  truth  lacks  something  if  it  cannot 
be  illustrateil,  and  a  teacher  is  very  defective  in  ability  when  he  cannot  find  a  resem- 
blance or  an  analogy  to  make  his  meaning  more  perspicuous  and  vivid.  Truth  and 
teacher  have  met  in  this  magnificent  chapter  on  ground  reserved,  we  may  venture  to  sav, 
for  their  special  occupancy  and  companionship.  The  great  teacher  sees  the  sublimest 
of  truths  in  a  glowing  light,  and  most  unlike  Paul  would  he  be  if  no  illustration  came 
to  baud  spontaneously.  Is  there  something  in  the  more  hallowed  moments  of  the  soul 
that  suddenly  reinstates  the  sense  of  childliood?  "When  I  was  a  child"  in  the 
heathen  city  of  Tarsus,  the  capital  of  a  Roman  province ;  the  mountains  of  Taurus  and 
the  luxuriant  plain  and  the  flowing  Cydnus  near  by  ;  the  crowded  streets  auii  oay  popu- 
lation and  excited  groups  of  talkers  pressing  on  eye  and  ear;  the  festivals  of  pauanisin  ; 
the  strange  contrasts  nf  these  with  the  life  in  his  Jewish  home;  his  training  under  the 
parental  roof;  the  daily  reminders  of  the  Law  and  the  traiiiiions  of  the  Pharisees; — 
what  thoughts  were  they  ?  Only  those  of  a  child,  understood  and  spoken  as  a  child.  No 
ordinary  child  could  he  have  been.  Providence  was  shaping  him  then  for  an  apostle, 
so  that  while  the  holy  child  Jesus  was  growing  "in  wisdom  and  stature"  amid  the 
hills  of  Nazareth  and  in  the  nursery  of  the  virgin  mother's  heart,  there  was  far  away  in 
Cilicia  a  boy  not  much  younger,  who  was  in  rearing  there,  under  very  unlike  circum- 
stances, to  be  his  chosen  apostle  to  the  Gentile  world.  Yet  the  boy  Saul  was  but  a 
child,  and  thought  and  spake  "  as  a  child."  But  is  childhood  disallowed  and  set  off  ia 
sharp  contrast  with  niauhood?  Nay ;  childhnoii  is  of  God  no  less  than  manhood  as  to 
quality  of  being.  What  is  contrasted  is  the  childishness  in  the  one  case  and  the  per- 
fected manhood  in  the  other.  So  that  we  suppose  the  apostle  to  mean  that  whatsoever 
is  initial,  immature,  provisional,  in  the  child,  has  been  put  away  to  make  room  for 
something  better.  Ttie  better  implies  the  good,  a  childish  good,  indeed,  and  yet  a  good 
from  the  hand  of  God  however,  mixed  with  earthly  imperfections.  Another  movement 
occurs  in  the  leading  thought.  Can  one  think  of  knowledge  without  an  involuntary 
recurrence  of  the  symbol  of  light  ?  The  symbol  has  quite  supplanted  the  thing  signi- 
fied, and  the  tuUghtened  man  is  more  honoured  than  the  knowing  man.  St.  Paul  pro- 
ceeds to  aay,  "  Now  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly ; "  the  revealed  Word  of  God  is 
conveyed  tons  "  in  symbols  and  words  which  but  imperfectly  express  them  "  (Hodge, 
Uelitzsch) ;  and  yet,  while  there  is  a  "  glass  "  or  mirror,  and  the  knowledge  or  vision  of 
Divine  things  is  "  darkly  "  given,  there  is  a  real  knowledge,  a  true  and  blessed  know- 
ledge, for  "  we  see."  Enough  is  made  intelligible  for  all  the  purposes  of  the  spiritual 
mind,  for  all  spiritual  uses,  in  all  spiritual  relationships  of  comprehension,  conscience, 
volition,  affection,  brotherhood ;  enough  for  probation,  responsibility,  culture,  and  life- 
time growth.  What  in  us  is  denied?  Only  curiosity,  excessive  appetencies  of  the 
faculties,  habits  of  perception  and  juilging  superinduced  in  the  intellect  by  the  sensa- 
tional jjortion  of  our  nature, — these  are  denied  their  morbid  gratification,  A  plethora 
of  evidence  is  denied  that  faith  may  have  its  sphere.  Over-strength  and  over-constraint 
of  motive  are  denied  that  the  will  maybe  lul't  free.  Violent  impulses  o(  feeling  ate 
denied  that  the  heart  may  be  intense  without  wild  and  erratic  enthusiasm,  treasuritij, 
its  life  of  peaceful  blessedness  in  unfathomable  depths  like  the  ocean,  that  keeps  itj 
mass  of  waters  in  the  vast  hollows  of  the  globe  and  uses  the  hills  and  mountains  only 
to  shape  its  shores.  On  the  other  hand,  what  is  granted  to  the  mind  in  the  revelation 
of  Divine  truth?  Such  views  of  God  in  Christ  as  the  soul  can  realize  in  its  present 
condition  and  thereby  form  the  one  master-habit  of  a  probationary  being,  viz.  How  fc  set 
Ood  in  Christ.  At  ])rcsent,  we  can  only  begin  to  see  as  by  reflection  in  a  mirror ;  and, 
as  in  the  education  of  the  senses  to  the  finer  work  of  earthly  life  the  cultivation  of  the 
eye  is  the  slowest  and  most  exacting,  the  longest,  the  most  difficult,  and  that  too  becaud« 


OH.  xni.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.  439 

the  eye  is  the  noblest  of  the  special  senses,  so  learn  we,  and  not  without  much  patient 
exertion,  and  oft-repeated  efforts  to  see  God  in  Christ  as  made  known  in  his  gospel  and 
providence  and  Holy  Spirit.  Yet  the  mirror  trains  the  eye  and  prepares  it  to  see  (ioi 
through  no  such  intervening  medium.  The  promised  vision  is  open,  full,  immediate. 
We  shall  see  him  "/ace  to  face,"  says  St.  Paul.  "  We  shall  be  like  him ;  for  we  shall 
see  him  as  he  is,"  declares  St.  John.  And  then  partial  knowledge  shall  expand  into 
perfect  knowledge,  and  we  shall  know  after  a  new  and  Divine  manner,  for  nothing  less 
than  this  is  the  assurance  :  Know  as  we  are  known.  "  Glorious  hymn  to  Christian 
love,"  as  Dr.  Farrar  calls  this  chapter,  what  shall  be  its  closing  strain  ?  "  And  now 
abideth  "  (remains  or  continues) — the  same  duration  as  compared  with  the  evanescence 
of  extraordinary  gifts  being  ascribed  to  the  three — "  and  now  abideth  faith,  hope,  love, 
these  three ;  and  the  greatest  of  these  is  love."  Who  can  doubt  it  after  reading  thig 
chapter  ?  Here  it  stands  beside  the  great  gifts  of  the  "  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels," 
and  of  the  prophetic  insight,  and  of  miracle-working,  and  of  philanthropy  and  martyr- 
dom, and,  amid  this  splendid  array,  hue  is  greatest.  In  wh^t  it  does,  it  is  greatest.  In 
what  it  is,  it  is  greatest.  Here,  finally,  it  is  grouped  with  faith  and  hope,  and  yet  the 
light  that  irradiates  its  form  and  features  from  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  a  lustre  beyond  that  of  the  other  two,  because  the  "  greatest  of  these  is  love."— L. 

Ver.  1. — "  Love."  The  word  rendered  "  charity  "  in  the  Old  Veraon,  and  "  love  "  in 
the  Bevised  Version  of  our  New  Testament,  is  not  a  classical  substantive.  It  is 
emphatically  a  Christian  term.  And  this  need  not  be  wondered  at ;  for  as  the  virtue 
itself  is  one,  if  not  created,  yet  developed  by  Christianity,  it  it  what  might  have  been 
expected  to  find  that  the  thing  gave  rise  to  the  name.  This  chapter  has  been  called 
It  psalm  of  love,  and  is  admired  both  for  its  elevated  thinking  and  its  melodious  diction, 
whilst  to  snch  as  are  imbued  with  the  true  Christian  spirit  it  is  especially  congenial  and 
delightful. 

L  Miscio:H0Bni32B  hatx  tq  bz  behoves,  Kg.t  1.  The  ose  of  the  word  "  charity  " 
it  ambiguous.  It  is  often  used  as  equivalent  to  tolerance,  as  in  the  phrase,  "  the  judg- 
ment of  charity  ; "  and  often  as  synonymous  with  "  almsgiving,"  as  in  the  sad  proverb, 
"  Cold  as  charity."  Keither  of  these  uses  meets  the  requirements  of  the  text.  2.  "  Love" 
is  also  an  ambiguous  word,  being  commonly  applied  to  the  feeling  of  attraction  and 
attachment  between  young  people  of  opposite  sexes — a  usage  which  evidently  has  no 
applicability  here. 

II.  The  natubb  of  Chbistiah  lots  hab  to  bx  kxplaihbd.  1.  It  is  between  one 
human  being  and  another.  The  question  is  not  of  reverent  love  to  God,  but  of  the 
mutual  feelings  of  those  endowed  with  the  same  spiritual  nature.  2.  It  is  a  sentiment, 
And  there  is  no  love  where  there  is  simply  a  principle  of  action,  cold  and  unimpassioned. 
3.  It  is  a  sentiment  which  governs  conduct,  restraining  men  from  injuring  or  slander- 
ing one  another,  and  impelling  them  to  mutual  assistance. 

in.  The  soubce  of  Christian  love  has  to  be  tbaoed.  L  Its  true  and  ultimate 
origin  is  in  the  nature  of  God,  who  is  love.  2.  Its  introduction  among  men  is  chiefly 
owing  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  was  the  gift  of  the  Father's  love,  whose  whole  ministry  to 
earth  was  a  revelation  of  love,  and  whose  benevolent  conduct  and  sacrificial  death  were 
the  fruit  of  love.  3.  Its  individual  power  and  social  efficacy  are  owing  to  the  presence 
and  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Not  without  significance  is  love  mentioned  first  in 
the  inventory  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  which  are  ^ese :  love,  joy,  peace,  etc. 

IV.  The  excellency  or  Christian  love  has  to  bb  exhibited.  This  Is  done  in 
this  chapter,  systematically,  m  several  ways.  1.  It  is  superior  to  the  supernatural  gifts 
generously  bestowed  upon  the  Church  in  the  first  age.  2.  It  is  the  motive  to  dispositions 
and  actions  of  the  highest  degree  of  moral  beauty.  3.  It  will  survive  all  that  is  most 
prized  by  man  as  intellectually  precious  and  desirable.  4.  It  ia  superier  erea  to  glfU,  or 
rather  gfaoea,  lo  lovely  and  admirable  as  are  fidth  and  hope.— T. 

y«r.  1.— X«M  and  kmguag*.  It  would  aeem  that,  of  all  ^fta,  the  gift  of  ipnecll,  and 
especially  that  rariety  of  it  known  as  &e  gift  of  tongues,  was  most  prised  \f  tbe 
Aiistians  of  Corinth.  PcobaUy  for  this  reason  the  apostle  puts  tUs  la  the  fore&ent, 
whek  he  compares  <^her  possessions  and  virtues  with  the  grace  of  love. 

L  b  WBAT  Tn  BurBBioBiTT  w  LOTS  ovEB  SPEECH  ODmBRS.    1.  Li  the  fMt  that 


440  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xiii.  1—13, 

the  gift  of  tongues  draws  attention  to  the  possessor  himself,  whilst  charity  goes  forth 
from  him  who  cultivates  it  to  others.  The  gift  in  question  was  one  splendid  and 
dazzlingj.  Whether  it  consisted  in  a  power  to  speak  intelligibly  in  foreign  languages, 
or  in  the  pouring  forth  of  sounds — articulate,  indeed,  but  not  corresponding  with  any 
language  known  to  the  auditors — in  either  case  it  was  a  brilliant  faculty,  drawing  all 
eyes  to  the  speaker  and  all  ears  to  his  voice.  On  the  otlier  hand,  the  affectionata 
ministrant  to  the  wants  of  his  poor  ov  aiflicted  neighbours  would  usually  go  his  way 
unnoticed  and  unadmired.  It  is  better  that  a  man  should  be  drawn  out,  as  it  were, 
from  himself,  than  that  his  attention  should  be,  because  the  attention  of  others  is, 
concentrated  upon  himself  2.  In  the  fact  that  the  grace  of  love  is  far  more  serviceable 
to  the  Church  and  to  the  world  than  the  gift  of  tongues.  There  was  a  purpose  sub- 
served by  this  gift — it  impressed  carnal  listeners,  it  was  a  proof  to  the  Church  itself  ol 
a  Bpecial  Divine  presence.  But  love  led  men  and  women  to  sympathize  with  one 
another,  to  minister  to  the  wants  of  the  needy,  to  raise  the  fallen,  to  strengthen  the 
weak,  to  nurse  the  sick,  to  comfort  the  bereaved,  to  rear  the  orphan.  Thus  its  fruits 
vindicated  its  supremacy.  '3.  In  the  fact  that  the  Lord  Jesus  loved,  but  never  spalse 
with  tongues.  4.  In  the  fact  that  the  gift  of  tongues  is  but  for  a  season,  whilst  love  ii 
Indestructible  and  eternal. 

II.  By  what  comparison  tem  bupeeiobitt  op  love  is  illustbatbd.  The  gift  with- 
out the  grace  is  likened  to  the  sounding  of  brass,  to  the  clashing  of  a  cymbal  of  bronze. 
There  is  noise,  but  it  is  vox  et  proeierea  nihil ;  there  is  no  melody  and  no  meaning. 
On  the  other  hand,  love  is  like  a  strain  of  exquisite  music  vibrating  from  the  strings, 
warbling  from  a  flute,  or  pealing  from  the  pipes  of  an  organ;  or,  better  still,  it  is  like 
the  clear  bell-like  voice  of  a  boy  in  some  cathedral  choir,  rendering  an  immortal  passage 
cf  sacred  poetry  to  an  air  sounding  like  an  echo  fi-.m  the  minstrelsy  of  Paradise.  The 
former  arrests  attention  ;  the  gong  when  struck  produces  a  shock  ;  but  the  latter  sweetly 
satisfies  the  soul,  then  soothing  and  refreshing  the  spirit's  longings  for  a  heaven-born 
strain,  and  leaving  behind  the  precious  memory  of  a  melting  cadence. — ^T. 

Ver.  2. — Love  and  knowledge.  Different  gifts  have  attractions  for  different  minds. 
To  the  Corinthians  the  charisms  of  language  seem  to  have  had  an  especial  charm  and 
valne.  It  might  be  supposed  that  those  possessions  here  mentioned — prophecy, 
unravelling  of  mysteries,  and  knowledge,  especially  of  spiritual  things — would  have 
a  deeper  interest  for  such  a  one  as  Paul.  And  that  he  did  prize  these  is  not  to  be 
questioned.  Yet  such  was  his  appreciation  of  love,  that  in  this  eulogium  of  it  he  sets  it 
above  those  half-intellectual,  half-spiritual  gifts. 

I.  These  gifts  abe  in  themselves  valuable.  There  b  nothing  here  said  to 
disparage  the  gifts.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  introduced  in  a  way  which  witnesses  to 
their  excellence.  Prophecy  is  the  speaking  forth  of  the  mind  of  God — a  function  the 
most  honourable  the  mind  can  conceive.  To  understand  and  reveal  mysteries  would 
universally  be  acknowledged  to  be  a  high  dislinction.  Knowledge  ranks  high  in  con- 
nection with  a  religion  which  addresses  man's  intelligence.  All  these  are,  so  to  speak, 
aspects  of  religion  peculiarly  congenial  to  •  thoughtful  Christian,  and  peculiarly 
advantageous  to  a  Christian  community. 

II.  But  it  is  possible  that  these  gifts  mat  be  of  no  value  to  the  possessob. 
That  is,  in  case  they  be  unaccompanied  by  love.  The  purely  intellectual  character  ii 
the  unlovely  character.  The  man  may  be  the  vehicle  of  truth,  and  yet  the  truth  may 
pass  through  him  without  affecting  his  character,  his  spiritual  position.  Who  does  not 
know  such  men — men  of  Biblical  scholarship,  sound  theology,  great  teaching  power, 
yet  loveless,  and  because  loveless  unlovely?  To  themselves  they  may  be  great  men, 
and  in  the  view  of  the  Church  ;  but  in  reality,  and  before  God,  they  are  nothing  1 

IIL  It  IB  love  which  makes  these  gifts  valuable  to  theib  possessor.  How 
needful  love  is  to  impart  a  spiritual  flavour  and  quality  to  these  great  endowments,  is. 
clear  enough,  ix.  to  every  enlightened  mind.  1.  Love  infuses  the  spirit  in  which 
they  are  to  he  used.  How  differently  the  man  of  intellect  or  of  learning  uses  his 
powers  when  hli  Boul  is  pervaded  by  the  spirit  of  brotherly  love,  every  observer  must 
have  noticed.  "  Let  all  your  things  be  done  in  charity  "  is  an  admonition  appropiiate  to 
•11,  but  especially  so  to  the  man  of  genius  or  of  ability.  2.  Love  controls  the  purpose 
tc  ,vbicb  tbey  are  to  be  implied.    Not  for  Belf-exaltation,  not  for  the  advancement  of* 


OH,  xm.  1—13.]    TUB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COIIINTIIIANS.  44] 

great  cause,  but  for  the  general  welfare,  will  love  inspire  the  great  to  consecrate  their 
talents,  according  to  the  mind  and  method  of  the  great  Master  himself. — T. 

Ver.  2. — Love  and  faith.  St.  Paul  was  so  emphatically  the  apostle  of  faith,  that 
it  is  hard  to  believe  that  he  wrote  anything  approaching  to  disparagement  of  that 
great  and  efficacious  virtue.  If  he  devoted  a  great  part  of  his  chief  Epistle — that  to  the 
Romans— to  an  exhibition  of  the  power  of  faith,  it  is  not  likely  that  here  or  anywhere 
he  should  write  one  word  which  could  cast  faith  into  the  shade.  And,  in  fact,  the 
reference  of  the  apostle  in  tliis  passage  is  not  to  faith  in  Christ  as  a  Saviour,  but  to 
that  special  faith  in  a  special  promise  which  was  the  means  of  enabling  the  possessor  to 
perform  great  marvels — in  the  figurative  language  of  Scripture,  to  remove  mountains. 

I.  This  language  is  not  in  disparagement  of  the  faith  which  works  by  lovb. 
It  is  always  taught  in  Scripture  that  faith  precedes  love ;  the  heart  must  find  Christ 
•nd  rest  in  him  and  live  from  him,  in  order  that  it  may  love  him.  Confidence  in 
a  personal  Saviour  revealed  in  liis  words  and  life,  in  his  sacrifice  and  triumph,  will 
certainly  awaken  affection,  more  or  less  ardent  according  to  the  temperament  and 
history  of  the  Individual  believer.     Strong  faith  is  fitted  to  enkindle  warm  love. 

II.  We  ABE  TAUGHT  THAT  "  GIFTS  "  ARE   NOT  ALWATS  A  SIGN  OF  PIETY.      The  faith 

which  was  so  much  admired  and  coveted  in  the  pi  imitive  Church  was  confidence  in 
a  certain  definite  promise  of  the  Lord  of  supernatural  aid  to  those  whose  pi>sition 
rendered  such  aid  expedient.  The  removal  of  mountains  is,  of  course,  a  figure  for  the 
vanquishing  of  difficulties,  and  probably  for  the  performance  of  miracles.  It  would 
seem  that  there  were  in  the  early  Churches  some  who  possessed  this  gift  who  had  not 
the  spiritual  qualifications  which  were  far  more  to  be  desired.  And  it  is  not  to  be 
denied  that  even  now  there  are  in  all  Christian  communities  men  largely  endowed  with 
gifts  of  administration,  learning,  and  eloquence,  who  yet  are  lacking  in  those  first 
qualities  of  Christian  character  which  are  a  sign  of  the  Spirit's  indwelling.  Far  more 
to  be  desired  is  simple  faith  in  the  Saviour  than  the  faith  which  removes  mountains 
and  dazzles  multitudes. 

III.  These  lessons  are  enforced  by  the  consideration  that  Paul  fobbessed 

BOTH  supernatural  GIFTS  AND   FERVENT   CHARITY,  AND   WAS  WELL    ABLE  TO  COMPARE 

THE  TWO.  Never  were  wonders,  miracles  of  moral  power,  wrought  more  manifestly, 
uiore  repeatedly,  than  in  the  ministry  of  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  If  any  had 
reason  to  boast,  he  had  more.  Tet  to  him  bis  love  to  the  Saviour,  and  his  devotion 
to  those  for  whom  that  Saviour  died,  were  of  far  more  consequence  and  value  than  all 
his  Bupematuial  gifts. 

*Love  ia  the  brightest  of  the  train. 
And  strengthens  all  the  rest" 

T. 

Ver.  8.— Love  and  almsgiving.  Of  all  the  comparisons  between  love  and  other 
qualities,  gifts,  or  practices,  this  is  the  one  which  sounds  most  strange  to  our  ears.  For 
in  our  minds  charity  and  almsgiving  are  so  closely  associated  that  it  scarcely  seems 
possible  that  they  should  be  placed  in  contrast  one  with  the  other.  Yet  so  it  is ;  and 
every  observer  of  human  nature  and  society  can  recognize  both  the  insight  and  the 
foresight  of  the  apostle  in  this  striking,  almost  startling  comparison. 

I.  ALHsaivnro  may  obioinate  in  inferior  and  unworthy  uotitxb.  The  apostle 
supposes  an  extreme  case,  viz.  that  one  should  give  away  all  his  substance  in  doles  to 
the  poor ;  and  he  gives  his  judgment  that  such  a  course  of  action  may  he  loveless,  and, 
if  loveless,  then  worthless.  For  it  may  proceed  from :  1.  Ostentation,  That  this  is 
the  explanation  of  many  of  the  handsome  and  even  munificent  gifts  of  the  wealthy, 
we  are  obliged  to  believe.  A  rich  man  sometimes  likes  his  name  to  figure  in  a 
subscription  list  for  an  amount  which  no  man  of  moderate  means  can  aflbrd.  The 
publication  of  such  a  gift  gratifies  his  vanity  and  self-importance.  His  name  may 
figure  side  by  side  with  tliat  of  a  well-known  millionaire.  2.  Custom,  A  commentator 
has  illustrated  this  passage  by  reference  to  the  crowds  of  begL:ars  who  gather  in  the 
court  of  a  great  bishop's  palace  in  Spain  or  Sicily,  to  each  of  whom  a  coin  is  given,  in 
so-called  charity.  Such  pernicious  and  indiscriminate  almsgiving  is  expected  of  those 
in  a  high  position  in  the  Church,  and  they  give  from  custom.    The  same  principle 


MS  THE  FntST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&    [oh.  zm.  1—18. 

expUiiM  probably  much  of  our  eleemosynary  bestowment.  3.  Love  of  powtr.  Aa  in 
tita  feudal  days  a  great  lord  had  his  retinue  and  his  retainers,  multitudeg  depending 
upon  his  bounty,  so  there  can  be  no  question  that  individuals  and  Churches  often  give 
nneiously  for  the  sake  of  the  hold  tbey  thus  gain  upon  the  dependent,  who  become 
fai  turn  in  many  ways  their  adherents  and  supporters. 

n.  Almsqiyino  mat  in  some  cases  be  injubious.  In  fact,  it  often  is  la  1.  To 
the  recipient.  The  wretch  who  lives  in  idleness  on  rich  men's  doles  is  degraded  in  the 
process,  and  becomes  lost  to  all  self-respect,  and  habituated  to  an  ignominious  and  base 
contentedness  with  his  position.  2.  To  society  generally.  When  it  is  known  that  the 
man  who  begs  is  as  well  supported  as  the  man  who  works,  how  can  it  be  otherwise 
than  that  demoralization  should  ensue?  The  system  of  indiscriminate  almsgiving  is 
a  wrong  to  the  industrious  poor.  3.  To  the  giver.  For  such  gifts  as  are  supposed, 
instead  of  calling  forth  the  finer  qualities  of  the  nature,  awaken  in  the  breast  of  the 
bestower  a  cynical  contempt  of  mankind. 

m.  Netebtheless,  tbue  chabitt  hat  bxfbess  itself  or  gifts.  The  man  who 
doles  away  his  substance  in  almsgiving,  and  has  all  the  while  no  charity,  is  nothing ; 
bnt  if  there  be  love,  that  love  sanctifieth  both  the  giver  and  the  gift.  For  he  who  loves 
and  gives  resembles  that  Divine  Being  whose  heart  is  ever  filled  with  love,  whose  hands 
are  ever  filled  with  gifts. — ^T. 

Ver.  Z,—Lom  and  idf-immolation.  It  would  seem  that  Paul  had  some  anticipation 
<tf  the  approaching  developments  of  Christian  society.  There  is  no  ground  for  believing 
that,  at  the  time  when  he  wrote,  any  member  of  the  Church  of  Christ  had  suffered  at 
the  stake  for  fidelity  to  principle  and  to  faith.  Such  martyrdoms  had  occurred  in 
Palestine,  when  the  enemies  of  Jehovah  had  been  triumphant  and  had  wreaked  tlieir 
vengeance  upon  the  faithful  Jews.  And  even  before  Paul's  decease,  in  Borne  itself, 
Christians  came  to  be  the  victims  of  the  infamous  Nero's  brutality,  and  perished  in  the 
flames.  Stronger  language  could  not  he  used  to  set  forth  the  superiority  of  love  to 
zeal,  fidelity,  and  devotion  than  this  of  St.  Paul:  "Though  I  give  my  body  to  be 
bnmed,  and  have  not  love,  it  profiteth  me  nothing  I " 

I.  The  beasinesb  to  die,  at  the  stake  ob  othebwise,  fob  Christ's  sake,  u  oood. 
As  the  three  Hebrew  children  were  content  to  be  cast  into  the  burning,  fiery  fiirnace, 
as  the  faithful  Jews  died  at  the  stake  nnder  the  persecution  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes, 
as  Polycarp  at  over  foiu'  score  years  of  age  gave  his  body  to  be  burned,  as  the  holy 
Perpetua  suffered  this  martyrdom  with  willing  mind,  as  in  our  own  country  at  the 
Reformation  many  suffered  in  the  fires  of  Oxford  and  Smithfield,  so  have  multitudes 
coimted  their  lives  as  not  dear  to  them  for  the  blessed  Saviour's  sake.  It  cannot  but 
be  that  such  sacrifice  of  self,  such  holy  martyrdom,  ever  has  been  and  is  acceptable  to 
Christ,  who  gave  himself  for  us.  For  he  himself  has  said,  "  Blessed  are  they  which  art 
persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake :  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

II.  The  absence  of  love  takes  awat  etek  fbom  the  yibtue  of  mabttbdoil 
There  is  a  story  of  a  Christian  of  Antioch  who,  on  his  way  to  martyrdom,  refused  to 
forgive  and  be  reconciled  to  a  brother  Christian.  Such  a  case  is  an  exact  example 
of  the  zeal  without  love  which  the  apostle  here  pronounces  worthless.  If  Christian 
charity  be  absent  where  zeal  is  present,  there  seems  reason  to  fear  that  the  motives 
which  induce  to  self-immolation  are  pride,  self-glorification,  and  an  inflexible  obstinacy. 
If  there  be  not  love  to  Christ's  people,  there  is  no  real  luve  to  Christ :  "  He  that  loveth 
God  loves  his  brother  also."  It  is  strange  to  think  that  self-delusion  may  go  so  far 
that  men  may  suffer  martyrdom  without  being  truly  Christ's.  Yet  so  it  is.  And  we 
may  be  reminded,  from  the  possibility  of  this  extreme  case,  how  readily  men 
deceive  themselves  and  suppose  that  they  are  influenced  by  truly  religious  and 
distinctly  Christian  motives,  when  all  the  while  vHf  is  the  pivot  upon  which  theii 
whole  conduct  revolves.  And  it  may  be  suggested  to  us  how  inexpressibly  essenial, 
in  the  judgment  of  our  Lord  and  his  Spirit,  is  that  grace  of  love,  the  absence  of  wiueh 
cannot  be  atoned  for  even  by  a  passage  through  the  fiery  flames  of  martyrdom.— T. 

Yen.  it  6.— Z«tw  and  our  fiUow-men,  In  this  panegyric  of  charity,  we  find,  (1) 
in  vers.  1—3,  •  statement  concerning  the  indispensableness  of  charity  to  the  Qiristian 
iharacter;  (2)  in  Ten.  3—7,  a  list  of  the  firuits  of  charity  ;  and  (3)  in  the  ren 


CM.  xni.  1—13.]    THE  PlBSt  BPlSXLfi  I'O  tfiB  CORlilTHlAi^S,  443 

of  the  chapter,  a,  declaration  of  the  eternity  of  charity.  The  second  and  third  of 
these  divisloQS  contain  a  very  pictorial  per.sonificatiou  of  this  delightful  grace;  the 
lovely  features  and  beaming  smile  of  charity  shine  upon  us,  and  win  our  hearts. 
Several  of  these  clauses  exhibit  the  effects  of  the  indwelling  of  Christian  love  upon  the 
mtercourse  of  social  life. 

I.  Love  is  long-suffebino  as  opposed  to  impatiencb.  There  is  no  possibility  of 
mixing  with  human  society  without  encountering  many  occasions  of  irritation.  Human 
nature  is  such  that  conflicts  of  disposition  and  of  habits  will  and  must  occur.  It  is  so 
in  the  family,  in  civil  life,  and  even  in  the  Church.  Hence  impatience  and  irritability 
are  among  the  most  common  of  infirmities.  And  there  is  no  more  sure  sign  of 
a  disciplined  and  morally  cultured  mind  than  a  habit  of  forbearance,  tolerance,  and 
patience.  .  But  Christianity  supplies  a  motive  and  power  of  long-suffering  which  can 
act  in  the  case  of  persons  of  every  variety  of  tciaperament  and  of  every  position  of  life. 
"  Love  suffereth  long." 

II.  Lots  is  qbaoioub  and  kind  as  ofpobed  to  malice  and  ill  will.  There  is  no 
disposition  known  to  human  nature  which  is  a  more  awful  proof  of  the  enormity  of  sin 
than  malevolence.  And  the  religion  of  the  Loril  Christ  in  nothing  more  signally 
proves  its  divinity  than  in  its  power  to  expel  this  demoniacal  spiiit  from  the  breast  of 
humanity.  In  fact,  benevolence  is  the  admitted  "note"  of  this  religion.  The  sterner 
virtues,  as  fortitude  and  justice,  were  admired  and  practised  among  the  heathen,  and 
celebrated  by  the  moralists  of  autiqui  ty.  These  and  others  were  assumed  by  Christianity, 
which  added  to  them  the  softer  grace  of  love — love  which  justifies  itself  in  deeds  of 
benignity  and  loving-kindness. 

Hi.  Love  is  opposed  to  envv  and  jealousy.  These  are  vices  which  arise  from 
discontent  with  one's  own  condition  as  compared  with  that  of  others,  and  are  justly 
deemed  among  the  meanest  and  basest  of  which  man  is  capable.  Cliristianity  proves 
its  power  of  spiritual  transformation  by  suppressing,  and  indeed  in  many  cases  by 
(Atirpating,  these  evil  passions  frum  the  heart,  and  by  teaching  and  enabling  men  to 
tejoice  in  their  neighbom-s'  prosperity. 

IV.  LOVB,  AS  OPPOSED   TO  ANGER,  IS  NOl    PROVOKED  WITH   THE   CONDUCT   OF  OTaSBS. 

This  must  not  be  pressed  too  far,  as  though  an^^er  in  itselt  were  an  evil,  as  though  there 
were  no  such  thing  as  righteous  indignation.  Christ  himselt  was  angry  with  hypijctites 
and  deceivers;  his  indignation  and  wrath  were  aroused  again  and  again.  But  the  moral 
distinction  lies  here :  to  be  provoked  with  those  who  injure  us  or  pass  a  slight  upon  our 
dignity  and  self-imporiance,  is  uncluistian,  but  it  is  not  so  to  cherish  indignation  with 
the  conduct  of  God's  wiliul  enemies. 

V.  Lots  keeps  no  account  of  svil  bendebeb.  This  trait  in  the  character  of  the 
Christian  is  very  beautiful.  It  is  customary  with  sinful  men  to  cherish  the  memory 
ui  wrongs  done  to  them,  against  a  day  of  retribution.  Love  wipes  out  the  record  of 
wrong-doing  Irom  the  memory,  and  knows  nothing  of  vindictiveness  or  ill  wilL — T. 

Vers.  4,  6. — Love  and  sdf-abnegation.  Where  there  is  sincere  Christian  love,  that 
L^race  will  not  only  affect  for  good  the  intercourse  of  human  society,  it  will  exercise 
a  most  powerful  and  bciicficial  influence  over  the  nature  of  which  it  takes  possession; 
changing  pride  into  huuiiliiy,  and  selfishness  into  self-denial.  And  this  is  not  to  be 
>\ undered  at  by  him  who  cousideis  that  for  the  Christian  the  spiritual  centre  of  gravity 
is  changed — ^is  no  longer  self,  but  Christ. 

I.  LcTE  DEBTBOTS  BOASTFULNESB.  It  "  vauuteth  uot  itsclf."  In  some  characters  more 
than  in  others  there  is  observable  a  disposition  towards  display.  There  may  be  real 
ahility,  and  yet  there  may  be  the  vanity  which  obtrudes  the  proofs  of  that  ability;  or 
there  may,  on  the  other  band,  be  an  absence  of  ability,  and  yet  the  fool  may  not  be 
able  to  conceal  his  folly,  but  must  needs  make  himself  the  laughing-jitock  of  all. 
Love  delights  not  in  the  display  of  real  power  or  the  assumption  of  what  does 
not  exist.  How  can  it?  When  We  seeks  the  good  of  others,  how  oui  it  seek  their 
lidmirAtion? 

II.  LoTX  IB  OPPOSED  TO  FBIOE.  It  "is  not  puffed  up."  The  expression  is  a  strong 
one ;  it  has  bean  rendered,  "  does  not  swell  and  swagger,^'  "  is  not  inflated  with  vanity." 
The  explanation  of  this  is  dear  enough.  The  pretentious  and  arrogant  man  has  a  mind 
tttU  of  himself,  of  thoughts  of  his  own  greatness  and  importance.    Now,  love  is  the 


Ui  Tbi;  FIRST  EPlSTLt!  TO  THE  COEINTHIAHS.     [«»•  »n.  1— la 

outflowing  of  the  heart's  affection  in  kinrlliness  and  benevolence  towards  others.  He 
who  is  always  thinking  of  the  welfare  ol  his  fellow-men  has  no  time  and  no  inciiiirti,ion 
for  thoughts  of  sell-exaltation,  aggrandizement,  and  amhifinn.  It  is  plain,  then,  how 
wholesome,  purifying,  and  sweetening  an  influence  Christianity  introduces  into  human 
society ;  and  how  much  it  tends  to  the  happiness  of  individuals,  cooling  the  ferer  ol 
restless  rivalry  and  anjbition. 

III.  LOVK    IS    INCONSISTENT    WITH    ALL    UNSEEMLINESS  OF    DEPORTMENT.      There    is 

an  indefliiiteness  about  the  language  :  "  Doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly."  Possibly 
there  is  a  special  reference  to  the  disoieditahle  scenes  which  were  to  be  witnessed  in 
the  Corinthian  congregation,  in  consequence  of  their  party  spirit,  rivalry,  and  discord. 
But  there  is  always  in  every  community  room  for  the  inculcation  of  considerateness, 
rourtesy,  self-restraint,  and  dignity.  And  thi;  apostle  points  out,  with  evident  justice, 
that  what  no  rules  or  custom  can  produce  is  the  spontaneous  and  natural  result  of  the 
operation  of  Christian  love. 

IV.  LoTX  18,  IN  A  WORD,  UNSELFISH ;  t.e.  "  seeketh  not  her  own.''  Here  is  the  broadest 
basis  of  the  new  life  of  humanity.  Love  gives,  and  does  not  grasp ;  has  an  eye  for 
others'  wants  and  sorrows,  but  turns  not  her  glance  towards  herself;  moves  among 
men  with  gracious  mien  and  open  hands. — T. 

Ten  6. — TKeJoy  of  love.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  test  of  character  more  decisive  than 
this:  in  what  is  the  chief  pLasure  of  life  placed?  Where  is  satisfaction  of  the  soul? 
Whence  does  joy  proceed  ?  If  Christianity  is  indeed  a  revolutionary  religion,  it  will 
effect  a  change  here — in  this  vital  respect.  Even  in  St.  Paul's  time,  it  appeared  that 
with  Christianity  a  new  force — the  foice  of  love — had  been  introduced  info  humanity, 
k  force  able  to  direct  human  delight  into  another  and  purer  and  nobler  channel  than 
that  in  which  it  had  been  wont  to  flow. 

I.  Joy  NO  LONGER  FLOWS  FROM  TUB  PRE8ENCB  AND  PREVALENCI  OF  UNRIGHTEOUS- 
NESS. It  seems  to  attribute  a  fiendish  spirit  to  human  beings  to  suppose  that  they  ean 
anywhere  and  at  any  time  be  foimd  to  rejoice  in  wrong-doing  and  unrighteousness. 
Yet  it  is,  alas  I  possible  for  sinful  men  to  take  a  malignant  pleasure  in  the  prevalence 
of  sin ;  for  it  is  the  proof  of  the  power  of  the  moral  forces  with  which  they  have  allied 
themselves,  of  the  victory  of  their  own  party.  The  iniquity  of  others  serves  to  support 
and  justify  their  own  iniquity.  And  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  there  are  cases  in 
which  designing  men  profit  by  deeds  of  unrighteousness,  take  the  very  wages  of  iniquity. 
Against  such  dispositions  Christian  love  must  needs  set  itself;  for  when  iniquities 
prevail,  happiness  and  hope  take  wings  and  fly  away. 

II.  Jot  flows  to  the  Christian  heart  from  thb  pboobebb  of  truth  and 
RIGHTEOUSNESS.  Truth  is  the  intellectual  side  of  righteousness,  and  rightooubntss  the 
moral  side  of  truth.  There  is,  accordingly,  a  real  antithesis  between  the  two  clauses 
of  the  text.  1.  This  joy  is  akin  to  the  joy  of  OocL.  The  Father  rejoices  over  the 
repenting  and  recovered  child,  the  Shepherd  over  ttie  restored,  once  wandering,  sheep. 
"  There  is  joy  In  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  And 
they  who  themselves  are  enjoying  peace  and  fellowship  with  a  reconciled  Uod  cannot 
but  participate  in  the  satisfaction  with  which  that  holy  Being  views  the  progress  ot 
truth  and  religion  among  men.  2.  It  is  sympathetic  with  the  gladnesi  of  the  Saviour 
in  the  accomplishment  of  his  gracious  purposes.  As  Christ  sees  of  the  travail  of  his 
soul,  he  is  satisfied ;  for  the  joy  set  before  him,  i.e.  in  the  salvation  of  men,  he  endured 
the  cross.  And  all  who  owe  salvation  to  what  Jesus  did  and  suffered  for  man  must 
needs  experience  a  thrill  of  gratiflcation  when  a  rebel  is  changed  into  a  subject  by  the 
grace  of  God,  3.  It  springs  from  the  triumph  of  that  cause  which  of  aU  on  earth  it  the 
greateit  and  most  glorious.  Every  noble  soul  finds  satisfaction  in  witnessing  the 
advance  of  truth  from  the  dim  dawn  towards  the  full  meridian  day  for  which  he, 
in  common  with  all  God's  people  in  every  age,  is  ever  toiling,  hopisg,  and  praying. — T 

Ver.  7. — Love  and  the  conduct  of  life.  We  are  bom  into,  and  we  live  In  the  midst 
oi,  a  system,  vast  and  incomprehensible.  Man  is  related  to  a  thousand  circumstances, 
and  his  moral  life  defjends  upon  the  principles  which  govern  these  relationships.  It  is 
by  a  sublime  and  spiritual  intuition,  itself  an  evidence  of  a  Divine  commission  and 
iipoatolate,  that  St.  Paul  discerns  the  truth  that  love,  when  it  takes  possession  of  the 


OL  xai.  1— 13.J   THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa  445 

Christian's  nature,  relates  him  anew  and  aright  to  "all  things,"  i.ti  to  the  whola 
•ystem  in  which  he  finds  himself,  and  of  which  indeed  he  forms  a  part. 

L  Love  "  conoealbth  all  things."  The  word  is  one  which,  perhaps,  cannot  be 
confidently  interpreted.  But  it  may  and  probably  does  mean  "  conceal  "  or  "  cover."  And 
so  rendered,  how  appropriate  is  it  in  this  place  1  What  so  characteristic  of  true  charity 
as  the  habit  of  covering  up  and  concealing  the  faults  and  infirmities  of  our  brethren  ? 
It  is  a  difiicult  exercise,  especially  to  an  acute  and  candid  mind ;  but  I)ecause  we  see 
an  error  it  is  not  necessary  to  pubhsh  it.  There  may  be  good  done  and  barm  avoided 
by  hiding  good  men's  infirmities  and  the  human  defects  which  are  to  be  foimd  even 
in  an  excellent  cause. 

IT.  Love  "  beukveth  all  thinos."  There  is  no  point  at  which  the  wisdom  of  this 
world  and  the  wisdom  which  is  of  God  come  more  violently  into  conflict  than  here. 
To  worldly  men  it  seems  the  height  of  folly  to  proceed  in  human  life  upon  the  principle 
of  believing  all  things.  This  is,  in  their  view,  credulity  which  will  make  a  man  the 
prey  of  knaves  and  impostors.  Kow,  the  words  of  the  text  must  not  be  taken  literally. 
They  commend  a  disposition  opposed  to  suspicion.  A  suspicious  man  is  wretched 
himself,  and  he  is  universally  distrusted  and  disliked.  AVhere  there  is  reason  to 
distrust  a  person,  even  charity  will  distrust.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  charity  cultivates 
that  strain  of  nobleness  in  character  which  prefers  to  think  well  of  others,  and  to  give 
credit  rather  than  to  question  and  disbelieve. 

III.  Love  "  hopeth  all  things."  Here  again  we  have  portrayed  a  feature  of  Christian 
character  which  it  needs  some  spiritual  discipline  and  culture  to  appreciate.  A  sanguine 
disposition  is  often  distrusted,  and  not  unjustly.  But  we  may  understand  that  temper 
of  mind  which  leads  us  to  hope  good  things  of  our  fellow-men,  and  to  view  with 
confident  expectation  the  progress  of  the  truth  over  their  nature. 

IV.  Love  "enduueth  all  things."  This  is  to  most  men  the  hardest  lesson  of  all. 
Many  will  cheerfully  work  from  love,  who  find  it  no  easy  matter  to  suffer  calumny, 
coldness,  hatred,  persecution,  in  a  loving  spirit  and  for  Christ's  sake.  But  we  need 
the  spirit  of  Divine  charity  to  overlook  all  the  assaults  of  men,  and  to  pray  for  those 
who  de^pitefuliy  use  us.  This  can  and  may  be  done  when  the  whole  nature  is  inspired 
with  love  to  God  and  love  to  man. — T. 

Ver.  8.—"  Love  never  faileth,"  Prophecies,  tongues,  knowledge, — these  were  all 
matters  of  immense  importance  in  the  Christian  coinrannity  at  Corinth,  whose  members 
prided  themselves  upon  tlieir  discernment,  their  intellectuality,  their  gifts.  And  they 
were  not  unimportant  in  the  view  of  that  one  of  the  apostles  whose  mind  was  both 
more  highly  endowed  by  nature,  and  more  sechilou.sly  and  effectively  ilisciplined  by 
study,  ihan  was  the  case  with  his  brethren.  But  let  these  excellent  and  beaatiful  things 
be  brought  into  comparison  with  Christian  love,  and  they  vanish  as  the  stars  of  night 
when  the  sun  arises  In  his  splendour  and  power. 

I.  The  cessation  and  tanishimo  of  intellectual  sirrs.  1.  What  they  wwra. 
They  seem  to  have  been  supernatural  gifts,  highly  prized  by  their  possessors,  and 
eagerly  coveted  by  the  members  of  the  Christian  societies  generally.  "  Prophecy  "  was 
the  faculiy  of  uttering  forth  Divine  truth.  "Tongues"  were  supernatural  utterances, 
probalily  of  various  kinds.  "Knowledge"  is  here  used  in  a  special  sense,  equivalent 
to  a  peculiar  spiritual  illumination.  Such  were  the  gifts  of  which  these  Corinthians  wer« 
wont  to  boast.  2.  Why  it  is  appointed  that  these  gifts  shall  cease,  because  they  were 
bestowed  to  serve  a  temporary  purpose,  when  the  barque  of  Christianity  had  to  be 
launched  upon  the  sea  of  human'  society,  when  Christian  doctrine  needed  a  special 
introduction  and  a  special  authentication.  There  are  certain  parts  of  a  plant  which 
serve  to  protect  it  for  a  season,  which  disa[ipear  when  the  plant  is  mature.  A  scaffold- 
ing may  be  useful  for  a  time ;  but  when  the  building  is  completed,  it  has  done  its  work, 
and  is  taken  down  and  carried  away.  So  with  these  gifts ;  good  for  a  temporal^ 
purpose,  they  may  be  dispensed  with  when  that  purpose  is  attained. 

II.  The  unfailing  life  of  love.  1.  Love  is  tiie  special  and  permanent  oharao- 
teristic  of  the  Christian  economy.  Observe  its  exemplification  in  such  clianicU  rs  as  the 
apostles  Paul  and  Julin.  And  notice  tliat  whilst  the  special  i;ifts  releired  to  have  passed 
»way,  charity  reraaii.s  the  distinctive  leaiure  of  the  Church  of  Christ  in  all  its  varying 
circumstances  and  uiiu.atratiuns.     2.  Love  is  permanent  in  the  heavenly  and  eternal 


446  THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COKINTHIANS.    [cH.  xiu.  1—13 

state.  If  faith  shall  then  become  trust  without  misgiving,  and  hope  expectation 
without  uncertainty,  love  shall  then  be  adoration  without  coldnesa,  affection  without 
interruption.  Love  shall  be  supreme,  and  the  great  Centre  of  worship  and  adoration 
shall  call  forth  all  the  affection  of  the  countless  host,  whilst  the  members  of  that  vast 
and  silorious  society  shall  find  room  for  the  infinitfi  exercise  of  this  peerless  grace. 

IlL  The  explanation  op  the  supbeiobity  and  supremaot  of  love.  1.  What 
calls  it  f 'itli  is  permanent;  there  is  no  limit  to  the  appeal  for  love  made  by  tho 
conscious  universe  ami  by  its  Lord.  2.  What  fosters  and  feeds  it  is  permanent;  there 
is  no  limit  to  the  supply  of  the  Spirit,  the  power,  the  grace,  of  God. — T. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  partial  and  the  perfect.  Christianity  is  an  intelleetnal  religion  as 
distinct  from  religions  of  ritual  and  ceremony.  It  is  propagated  and  maintained  by 
preaching  and  by  teaching.  It  encourages  inquiry,  study,  science.  And,  accordingly, 
there  is  some  danger  lest  those  who  seize  upon  this  characteristic  of  Christianity  should 
give  way  to  the  temptation  of  spiritual  pride.  It  is  well  that  the  infirmity  and 
imperfection  of  our  knowledge  should  be  brought  vividly  before  our  minds,  as  it  is 
in  this  passage.  At  the  same  time,  provision  is  made  against  discouragement  by 
an  assurance  that  the  partial  and  transitory  shall  be  succeeded  by  the  perfect  and  the 
eternal. 

L   OUB   APFBEHENSION   AND    COHUUNICATION   OF    TBUTH   D    PARTIAL.      L  This   is  a 

result  of  the  limitation  of  our  powers.  This  may  be  a  doctrine  humbling  to  human 
pride,  but  it  is  not  to  be  disputed.  It  should  be  observed  that  the  apostle  speaks 
of  him'ielf  as  well  as  of  private  Christians ;  and  from  this  we  infer  that  revelatiou  and 
inspiration  are  alike  conditioned  by  the  very  limited  powers  of  man.  2.  It  is  a  result 
of  the  limitation  of  our  opportunities.  We  can  only  know  what  is  brought  before  us ; 
we  cannot  create  truth.  It  pleases  God  that  only  glimpses  and  whisperings  of  Divine 
truth  should  be  afforded  to  us.  Our  knowledge  is  therefore  partial,  as  is  the  measure 
of  truth  which  its  Author  sets  before  us.  3.  It  is  a  result  of  the  brevity  of  our  life 
Human  life  is  short  as  compared  with  the  universe  in  which  it  is  passed,  and  which 
has  so  many  sides  of  contact  with  our  understanding.  And  if  nature  cannot  be  known 
in  all  its  fulness  by  even  the  most  diligent  student,  how  shall  revelation  be  mastered 
in  a  lifetime  ?  There  is  a  religious  side  to  every  truth  of  fact,  and  the  man  of  science, 
if  a  Christian,  need  never  be  at  a  loss  for  material  for  religious  contemplation  and 
emotion. 

II.  That  which  is  partial  is  destined  to  pebish.  It  cannot  be  meant  that  any 
truth  shall  cease  to  be  truth,  that  any  aspect  of  religion  once  justified  shall  so  change 
its  character  as  to  be  disowned.  We  have  known  Clirist,  and  such  knowledge  is  not 
transitory,  for  it  is  eternal  life.  But  special  gifts,  like  the  variety  of  prophecy  known 
in  the  primitive  Church,  served  their  purpose,  and  were  no  more.  Our  systems  of 
theology,  our  presentations  of  doctrine,  our  modes  of  homiletic,  are  adapted,  more  or  less, 
to  our  age  and  circumstances,  but  they  are  only  for  a  season.  Partial  knowledge  may 
be  useful  whilst  perfect  knowledge  is  impossible ;  but  only  then. 

III.  For  the  perfect  shall  come  to  abolish  the  partial.  The  star  shall  not 
disappear  because  lost  in  the  dense  black  cloud,  but  because  it  shall  melt  in  the 
splendour  of  the  day.  Our  prospect  is  not  one  to  inspire  melancholy ;  or  if  a  shade 
of  pensiveness  pass  over  the  soul  in  the  prospect  of  the  disappearance  of  what  is 
BO  familiar  and  so  dear,  that  pensiveness  may  well  give  way  to  content  and  hope  when 
we  look  forward  to  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed. — ^T. 

Ver.  11. — The  habe  and  th«  man.  The  half-informed  and  the  Immatnra  la  diuaoter 
are  sometimes  puffed  up  with  conceit  and  pride ;  whilst  humility  often  comes  with  a 
higher  wisdom  and  a  riper  experience.  The  Corinthians  were  crude  and  unformed ;  the 
apostle  was  enlightened  and  inspired;  yet  they  were  puffed  up  with  spiritual  ^ride, 
whilst  he  was  lowly  in  heart  and  free  from  arrogance.  Hence  this  language,  which  is 
poetry  and  piety  at  once. 

I.  The  literal  vaot  of  hxtuan  natubb  and  life.  Childhood  has  ite  own  apeech. 
Its  prattle  and  babble ;  the  babe  utters  inarticulate  noises,  the  child  speaks  words,  but 
with  indistinctness  and  with  many  mistakes.  Childhood  has  its  own  feelings,  some  of 
them  very  deep  when  inspired  by  trivial  causes ;  feelings  succeeding  one  anotlier  with 


0*.  «B.  1— la]    THE   FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  W, 

rapidity  in  striking  contrast.  Childhood  has  its  own  thoughts,  sometimes  upon  the  most 
mysterious  themes,  always  with  little  knowledge  of  the  thoughts  of  others;  thoughts 
unfounded, unjustifiable;  thoughts,  too,  which  may  be  developed  into  a  larger  and  richei 
experience.  Now,  he  who  becomes  a  man  puts  aside  these  Infantile  ways.  His  languagt: 
is  articulate,  perhaps  elegant  and  precise,  perhaps  copious  and  poetical.  His  feelings 
are  less  easily  roused,  but  they  are  deeper  and  more  lasting.  His  thoughts  range  ovei 
heaven  and  earth,  the  past  and  the  future ;  they  "  wander  through  eternity." 

II.  Thk  analoot  of  the  spmrraAL  life  based  on  this  fact.  This  the  apostle 
suggests  and  leaves  his  readers  to  work  out  in  detail.  There  is  an  obvious  resemblance 
between  the  life  of  the  individual  upon  earth  and  the  larger,  longer  life  of  the  soul. 
As  is  childhood  to  manhood,  so  is  this  present  state  of  being  to  the  immortality  beyond. 
This  being  so,  tliere  is  a  measure  of  probability  that  the  resemblance  extends  where  we 
cannot  follow  it.  This  is  the  argument  of  analogy;  alike  in  many  points,  alike 
probably  in  more.  1.  The  future  will  be  a  development  and  expansion  of  the  present. 
The  speech  and  the  feeling,  the  thoughts  and  the  judgments,  of  the  man  are  based 
upon  those  of  the  child.  They  are  not  radically  different.  Even  so  our  earthly  faith 
aud  hope  and  love,  our  earthly  consecration,  obedience,  and  praise,  are  the  germ  of  the 
experiences  and  services  of  the  heavenly  sanctuary.  Heaven  will  witness  the  manhood 
of  that  intelligent  piety,  that  devotion  of  heart  and  energy,  of  which  earth  has  witnessed 
the  infancy  and  childhood.  2.  The  future  will  immensely  transcend  the  present. 
Great  as  is  the  difference  between  the  acquirements  of  the  child  and  those  of  the  man, 
greater  will  be  that  between  the  religious  knowledge  and  experience  of  earth,  and  what 
is  reserved  for  us  hereafter.  It  is  vain  for  us  to  suppose  that  in  this  present  state  we 
can  form  any  conception  of  the  glorious  future.  We  are  now  God's  children,  and  we 
know  not  what  we  shall  l>e.    This  we  know :  "  We  shall  put  away  childish  things." — ^T. 

Ver.  12,—"  Fcuie  to  face."  He  who  looked  into  and,  as  it  seemed,  through  the  brazen 
disc  saw  a  dim  reflection  of  his  own  or  his  brother's  features,  or  a  misty  representation 
of  the  landscape.  But  he  who  sees  face  to  face  sees,  as  by  an  immediate  intuition, 
virith  nothing  to  hinder  a  perfect  knowledge  of  perception.  The  comparison  opens  up 
to  us  a  wonderful  and  most  inspiring  view  of  the  perfection  of  the  future,  the  heavenly 
state. 

I.  Tbuk  of  0T7B  KNOWLEDOE  OENEBALLT.  The  apostle  speaks  without  any  words 
limiting  the  application  of  his  statement  to  religious  realities.  Man's  pride  of  know- 
ledge, notwithstanding  his  intellectual  powers  are  limited  in  their  range  and  in  their 
efficacy.  Some  of  the  causes  of  this  limitation  we  can  see,  and  we  can  well  believe 
that  in  another  and  higher  state  they  may  be  removed.  The  senses  or  other  avenues 
of  perception  may  be  multiplied  in  number  and  intensified  in  power.  It  may  be  that 
words — which  are  the  medium  of  much  of  our  knowledge — may  be  replaced  by  symbols 
more  definite  aqd  instructive.  Our  feebleness  of  attention  and  application  may  be 
replaced  by  a  vigour  not  possible  in  this  body.  Many  things  now  known  by  inference 
may  then  be  known  by  intuition.  And  whilst  there  may  be  a  change  in  our  own 
natnral  capacities  and  faculties,  there  may  be  also  an  enlargement  of  the  material 
presented  to  our  minds.  And  the  search  after  truth  may  be  more  pure  and  disinterested 
as  well  as  more  vigorous.  We  are  all  aware  that  purity  of  heart  is  a  condition  of 
apprdiending  moral  and  spiritual  truth ;  this  condition  will  in  heaven  be  perfected,  and 
corresponding  results  may  be  expected. 

II.  Tbub  kbfsoiallt  of  what  xat  be  called  cub  belioioub  knowleooe.  1.  Of 
religious  truth.  This  we  now  know  sufficiently  for  all  practical  purposes ;  bat  we  are 
often  conscious  that  we  see  but  glimpses  and  hear  but  whispers  of  the  great  truths 
dpon  which  our  higher  life  and  deathless  hopes  depend.  The  progress  made  by  the 
child  as  he  advances  to  spiritual  maturity  is  probably  as  nothing  compared  with 
the  advance  to  be  made  by  the  Christian  when  the  veil  of  sense  and  time  fidla  off. 
The  mysteries  by  which  the  mind  has  often  been  perplexed  shall  be  revealed;  the 
harmony  of  truths  we  could  not  reconcile  shall  be  apparent ;  the  reasons  of  regulations 
w«  could  not  understand  shall  become  plain.  The  world,  ourselves,  societv,  life,  idl  are 
BOW  fiiU  of  enigmas.  Eternity  shall  provide  the  solution.  2.  Of  our  knowledge  of 
Qod  in  Christ.  We  do  know  Christ,  and,  notwithstanding  the  objections  of  ^lilo- 
mugken,  w«  hxn  a  real  thoui^  very  partial  and  inadequate  knowledge  of  God  himself; 


«48  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa      [oh.  xm.  X— la 

for  Christ  said,  "  He  who  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father  also."  There  have  been 
special  revelations  of  God  to  specially  favoured  members  of  the  human  family;  but 
hereafter,  the  vision  shall  be  open,  it  shall  be  for  all  the  purified  and  glorified.  "  Wfl 
shall  see  him  as  he  is."  "  We  shall  know  [God]  even  as  we  are  known."  Well  is  this 
called  "  the  beatific  vision : "  to  behold  and  know  him  who  is  infinite  in  nature,  eternal 
in  existence,  perfect  in  all  moral  attributes. 

III.  Tbub  also  of  oxm  knowledge  of  odb  bfibitual  kinsbisd  aho  bbethben. 
There  are  many  circumstances  which  hinder  us  from  enjoying  more  than  a  superficial 
acquaintance  with  some  of  our  nearest  kinsmen  and  our  daily  associates.  But  in  heaven 
there  shall  be  no  disguise,  no  restraint,  no  separation.  Misunderstandings  shall  vanish  ■ 
we  shall  see  "  face  to  face."  Imagination  pictures,  upon  the  suggestion  ot  this  principle, 
the  fellowship  of  pure  delight  to  be  enjoyed  with  all  "  saints,  in  "  the  assembly  and 
Church  of  the  Firstborn,  whose  names  are  written  in  heaven." — ^T. 

Ver.  12. — Now,  and  then.  Divine  knowledge  is  the  truest  riches  of  the  intellect  j 
Divine  love,  the  dearest  wealth  of  the  heart.  Love  is  greater  than  all  gifts ;  greater 
than  tongues  and  than  prophecy,  which  shall  pass  away ;  greater  even  than  knowledge, 
which  here  is  but  partial  and  progressive.  How  natural  that  St.  Paul,  whose  mind 
was  eager  for  knowledge,  and  whose  life  was  so  largely  devoted  to  communicating  it, 
should  linger  for  a  moment  and  think  of  knowl^ge  such  as  it  now  is  and  such  as  it  ii 
destined  hereafter  to  be ! 

I.  The  fabtiai.  enowledqs  of  this  fbesent  state.  "  We  see  as  through  a 
mirror,  in  an  enigma."  1.  Earth  i§  a  mirror  dimly  reflecting  GocPs  attributes.  The 
glory,  beauty,  adaptations  of  nature,  all  speak  of  God.  There  is  a  reflection,  and  the 
wisdom,  the  power,  the  goodness,  of  the  Creator  may  be  recognized.  Yet  it  is  a  dim 
reflection  ;  lightning,  tempest,  and  earthquake,  sickness,  anguish,  and  death,  perplex 
the  mind  of  the  reflective  observer.  There  is  no  complete  and  adequate  solution  here, 
2.  Life  is  a  mirror  dimly  reflecting  God's  government.  No  careful,  observant  mind  can 
fail  to  trace  an  overruling  Providence  in  human  life,  in  the  life  of  the  individual,  and 
in  the  life  of  the  nation.  Yet  the  reflection  of  a  perfectly  wise  and  righteous  govern- 
ment, it  must  be  admitted,  is  dim.  We  cannot  always  "  justify  the  ways  of  God  to 
men;"  the  heart  often  sinks  at  the  sight  of  prosperous  wickedness,  of  the  slow 
progress  made  by  truth  and  righteousness.  The  kingdom  of  God  seems  near  us ;  but 
we  ask, "  Is  it  here  ?  "  3.  Revelation  is  a  mirror  dimly  reflecting  Qod's  purposes.  There 
has  been  doubtless  a  progressive  removal  of  the  veil  which  hides  God  from  us.  Yet 
this  revelation  has  been  chiefly  for  practical  purposes.  We  look  into  revelation  to 
satisfy  our  inquiries  concerning  the  Divine  nature,  concerning  the  eternal  life,  and  there 
meets  our  view  a  dim  manifestation.    We  see,  but  we  see  "  in  an  enigma." 

II,  Why  the  future  state  is  one  of  cleabeb,  fulleb  knowledos.  1.  T?iere 
may  he  a  reason  in  ourselves.  Spiritual  childhood  will  develop  inta  manhood;  the 
imperfections  of  the  body,  the  infirmities  of  human  nature,  the  prejudices  of  the  earthly 
life,  will  disappear,  and  our  vision  will  be  purged.  2.  A  reason  in  the  character  of  our 
knowledge.  The  processes  here  and  now  are  slow,  hesitating,  inferential.  Hereafter 
it  would  seem  that  we  shall  know  by  intuition  much  which  now  we  learn  mediately 
and  with  much  liability  to  error.  3.  A  reason  in  the  manifestation  itself.  More 
material  will  'be  offered  to  our  faculties ;  clearer  light  will  beam  upon  us.  In  the 
vaster  dominion  then  accessible,  of  which  only  a  province  is  now  within  our  reach,  there 
will  open  up  to  the  glorified  as  in  a  blaze,  a  sphere  of  Divine  knowledge.  4.  A  reason 
in  the  circumstances  and  the  society  <^  heaven.  Here  opportunities  are  restricted ; 
there  they  will  be  illimitiible.  Here  fellowship  is  imperfect;  there  the  society  of 
glorified  saints  and  blessed  angels  will  be  fitted  to  stimulate  and  encourage  the  soul 
by  sympathy  with  all  Its  lofty  quests  and  aspirations.  5.  A  reaton  in  the  prolonged 
opportunity  of  eternity.  The  reflection  often  forces  itself  upon  us:  "  Art  is  long,  and 
time  is  fleeting."  There  is  no  time  for  the  dimness  to  pass  off  the  mirror  upon  which, 
as  we  gaze,  we  breathe.  Yonder  infinite  opportunity  invites  the  ardent  spirit  to 
intermeddle  with  all  knowledge ;  we  feel  that  we  can  but  lose  ourselves  in  a  prospect 
10  vast,  illimitable,  and  glorions. 

IIL  What  it  mat  be  expected  will  hebeafteb  be  olbablt  ksows.  1.  The 
past  of  our  existence  will  then  be  seen  in  due  perspective,  and  will  be  plain  to  tbf 


otL  xm.  1— 18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS  449 


mind  looking  back  upon  it.  2.  Light  shall  be  cast  upon  the  mysteries  of  eaith  an  1 
time.  What  has  been  perplexing  and  inexplicable  when  beheld  so  near  at  hand  shall  be 
dear  and  unmistakable  as  the  a|)pointment  of  Divine  wisdom  and  love,  when  looked 
down  upon  from  yonder  heights,  3.  Christ  himself  shall  be  then  seen  "as  he  is," 
BO  as  eren  his  dearest  and  most  congenial  friends  cannot  know  him  now.  "Then  face 
to  faoa,"  to  be  "  changed  into  the  name  image,  from  glory  to  glory." — T. 

Yer.  13, — "  The  greatest  of  these,"  Paul  has  often  been  called  the  apostle  of  faith, 
in  distinction  from  John,  the  apostle  of  love.  This  declaration,  therefore,  coming  from 
Paul  is  the  more  valuable.  No  doubt  what  he  saw  of  the  Corinthian  Christians,  who 
disputed  much  concerning  gifts,  natural  and  supernatural,  made  the  aposile  speciaflj' 
sensible  of  the  supreme  necessity  of  charity.  What  men  ore— their  character — ^is  of 
more  importance  than  what  they  have — their  abilities,  Paul  was  nut  the  man  to 
disparage  faith,  which  holds  so  high  a  place  in  his  writings,  nor  bo]<e,  which  was  so 
prominent  a  feature  of  his  character.  But  the  higher  the  estimation  in  which  he 
held  these  virtues,  the  loftier  was  the  position  to  which  he  raised  the  grace  of  love 
when  he  pronounced  it  the  greatest  and  the  most  enduring  of  all  virtues. 

I.  BEOAnsK  or  its  native  bottboe  Ain>  obioin,  God  cannot  exercise  &ith  or 
cherish  hope ;  but  he  not  only  has  love,  he  is  love.  Our  virtues  are  largely  creature 
virtues ;  this  is  the  great  attribute  of  the  Creator  himself. 

II.  Because  of  its  bufbeue  mamifestation  to  mankind  in  the  febsoh  and 
WOBK  OF  Chbist,  The  Lord  Jesus  brought  down  the  love  of  the  Father  to  this  world 
of  ignorance,  error,  and  sin.  He  revealed  Divine  love,  which  was  indeed  the  motive 
of  his  advent,  but  which  was  also  the  prevailing  and  undeniable  characteristic  of  his 
ministry,  and  the  secret  explanation  of  his  willing  and  sacrificial  death. 

III.  Because  it  is  the  special  law  of  the  Lobd  Jesus.  His  "  new  command- 
ment" was  this:  "Love  one  another,''  And  he  made  obedience  to  this  commandment 
the  great  test  of  disciplcship :  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples, 
if  ye  have  love  one  to  another."  What  takes  so  pre-eminent  a  place  in  the  mind  of 
the  Monarch,  what  stands  so  obviously  supreme  among  his  laws,  must  necessarily  be 
regarded  by  his  loyal  subjects  with  an  especial  reverence, 

lY.  Because  it  is  the  end  to  which  the  otheb  yiBTUisa  abe  means.  Faith  is 
not  an  end  ;  it  is  faith  in  a  Divine  Deliverer  and  in  his  promise  of  salvation ;  it  is  the 
means  towards  life  eternal.  Hope  is  not  an  end;  it  is  hope  of  final  and  eternal 
fellowship  with  God;  it  is  the  means  to  steadfastness  and  to  heaven.  But  love  is  an 
end  in  itself.  Charity  is  the  bond  of  perfectness;  beyond  this  even  Chiistianity 
cannot  carry  us.  As  the  grace  of  faith  and  the  grace  of  hope  realize  their  purpose 
when  they  produce  the  grace  of  Christian  love,  it  is  obvious  that  the  virtue  which 
is  their  final  purpose  is  greater  than  they.  And  this  conviction  is  confirmed  when 
we  consider  that,  of  all  virtues,  love  is  usually  the  mo»t  difficult  and  the  last  to  be 
acquired.  There  have  been  confessors  and  martyrs  whose  faith  wai  firm  and  whose 
hope  was  bright,  who  yet  did  not  arrive  at  the  acme  of  perfect  love.  This  is  the  test 
and  the  crown  of  spiritual  iDaturity. 

Y.  Because  of  its  supbehe  utilitt.  Society  needs  above  all  things  to  be 
penetrated  with  the  spirit  of  charity,  sympathy,  and  brotherly  kindness.  This  is  thii 
radical  cure  for  all  its  ills — this,  and  only  this.  What  gravitation  is  in  the  physical 
realm,  that  is  love  in  the  moral.  Without  it,  all  is  disorder  and  chaos ;  with  it,  all 
ii  regularity  and  beauty.  It  represses  hatred,  malice,  envy,  and  uncharitableness ; 
it  cultivates  considerateness,  pity,  gentleness,  self-denial,  and  generous  help. 

YL  Because  it  is  the  feculiab  element  or  heavenly  blebsednebs.    Disputes 
have  arisen  as  to  whether  or  not  faith  and  hope  are  found  in  heaven.    But  there  is 
ao  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  prevalence  and  eternity  of  the  graca  of  love.    For— 
"  Love  ia  heaven,  and  heaven  ia  knre  I " 

TeiiL  t--9, — L^»  without  hvt.     I.  The  afobtli  dkolabu  the  RvnnRORKSB  of 

LDS  WITHOUT  LOTE.    He  supposes  some  extreme  cases,     1,  The  acquisition  of  all 

languages  ;  the  utmost  facility  of  expression ;  the  most  splendid  eloquence.    He  does 

ot  eren  limit  to  humanity,  but  adds,  "  and  of  angels,"  to  show  that  no  aeqmaitiott  in 

I,  COBINTHIAin.  2  a 


450  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,     [ch.  xm.  1— 13 

thii  direction  at  all  meets  the  case.  The  CSorinthian  Church  was  peculiarly  proud 
of  its  "gift  of  tongues ; "  its  love  was  not  BO  couspicuous.  Our  glorying  is  often  false 
glorying.  That  which  is  most  praised  is  not  always  the  most  praiseworthy.  We  are 
apt  to  prize  most  what  we  should  prize  least.  To  talk  is  not  the  chief  thing ;  to  be 
is  far  more  important.  Talking  power  without  love  is  noise  without  music,  sounding 
brass,  clanging  cymbals.  Heavenly  language  would  lose  itp  heavenliness  without  the 
royal  grace.  2.  The  most  extensive  knowledge.  Knowledge  of  the  future,  human 
knowledge,  knowledge  of  the  secret  purposes  of  the  Most  High.  To  know  is  not 
enough.  If  the  knowledge  of  the  head  does  not  rightly  affect  the  heart  it  is  thrown 
away.  Knowledge  is  a  splendid  weapon,  but  it  is  in  dangerous  hands  if  it  is  not  in 
those  of  love.  We  may  know  Christ — know  very  much  about  his  person,  his  character, 
his  work — and  yet  not  be  his,  "  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord,  have 
we  not  prophesied  in  thy  Name  ?  .  .  .  tlien  will  1  profess  unto  them,  I  never  knew  you  * 
(Matt  vii.  22,  23).  Balaam,  Gaiaphas,  and  Judas  are  illustrations.  3.  Startling  faith. 
Judas  wrought  miracles;  but  how  less  than  nothing,  judged  by  true  standards,  was 
he  1  What  profit  if  other  mountains  be  removed  and  the  mountain  of  selfishness  be 
leftl  How  sad  to  get  so  near  the  cross  and  to  catch  nothing  of  its  spirit!  Here 
is  faith  without  the  chief  of  works,  which  alone  can  prove  its  genuineness  and  power. 
Here  is  a  faith  which  does  not  work  by  love,  and  is  u.°eless  except  for  boast  and 
display.  4.  Abounding  chanty.  The  worth  of  charity  lies  not  in  what  we  give, 
but  in  how  we  give.  The  object  for  which  the  gift  is  bestowed  does  not  determine  its 
value  s  the  motive  prompting  the  gift  does.  We  may  give  "  all  our  goods,"  and  that 
to  "feed  the  poor,"  and  yet  perform  no  virtuous  action.  We  can  give  lavishly  from 
motives  which  rob  our  charity  of  all  its  charitableness.  Men  who  give  without  love 
do  not  give ;  they  invest.  It  is  not  a  spiritual  act ;  it  is  a  commercial  speculation.  They 
invest  and  expect  a  large  return — it  may  he  of  distinction  or  applause,  or  something 
similarly  self-tending.  5.  Unlimited  selJF-surrender.  Though  the  body  be  given  to 
the  flames,  yet  all  may  be  "nothing."  A  man  may  go  to  the  stake  for  Christianity, 
and  yet  know  nothing  truly  of  Christ.  There  is  a  self-sacrifice  which  is  no  self- 
sacrifice.  Man  has  fallen  so  low  that  he  has  originated  false  and  worthless  martyrdoms. 
In  later  centuries  the  history  of  the  Church  was  blotted  by  some  who  sought 
martyrdom  from  motives  of  notoriety  and  vain-glory.  The  martjr's  crown  may  be 
sought  by  those  who  have  not  the  martyr's  spirit.  The  martyr  is  made,  not  by  the 
burning  of  the  body,  but  by  the  love  which  binds  the  truth  to  the  heart,  and  will  not 
let  it  go  at  any  cost. 

II.  Wht  it  is  that  mfb  without  lovk  IB  NOTHiNa.  1.  Nothing  can  compensate 
for  the  moral  quality.  The  motive  is  more  than  the  deed.  To  do  is  nothing  com- 
pared with  to  be.  The  internal  is  greater  than  the  external.  2.  Unless  we  have  love 
we  cannot  be  brought  near  to  God.  Ood  is  love.  Love  is  of  the  Divine  essence. 
If  we  are  destitute  of  love  we  are  destitute  of  that  which  is  most  conspicuous  in  CK)d. 
When  the  great  archangel  fell  he  fell  out  of  love.  When  we  get  power  we  d»  not  grow 
away  from  Satun,  nor  when  we  get  knowledge,  nor  when  we  do  unusual  deeds  from 
selfish  motives.  When  we  get  love  we  do.  Love  is  never  attributed  to  Satan;  "love 
is  of  Ood."  As  we  have  love,  so  far  we  are  like  God.  Satan  has  power,  knowledge, 
and  is  doubtless  willing  to  sacrifice  much  to  secure  his  own  ends ;  if  we  have  these, 
without  love,  we  tend  to  grow  into  devils.  Love  is  a  redeeming,  consecrating  quality, 
which,  pervading  deeds,  gives  to  them  a  new  and  God-like  character. — H, 

Vers.  4 — 7. — Some  characteristics  oj  love.  The  apostle  gives  a  Tery  beautiful 
description  of  some  of  the  qualities  of  love.    True  love  is — 

I.  Patient  and  dncomplainino.  It:  1.  "Suffereth  long,"  under  provocation  and 
injury.  2.  "  Is  not  easily  provoked."  Is  not  irritable — not  allied  to  anger.  3. 
"  Bearelh  all  things."  Is  willing  to  bear  burdens  that  others  may  be  free.  Bather 
hides  than  adveitises  injuries  received.  Does  not  revenge.  4.  " Endureth  all  things.' 
Neglect  and  persecution  in  a  calm  and  Christian  spirit. 

II.  Knm.  Willing  to  perform  good  offices  for  others.  Desires  to  be  useful,  obliging, 
helpful.  Is  kind  after  much  suffering  aud  ill  usage.  Is  kind  when  showing  mercy. 
Some  show  meroy  unkindly,  and  utterly  spoil  the  beauty  of  the  deed. 

m.  HuMBLK.    (Yer.  4.)    Does  not  lead  to  vaunting,  as  the  posse -sion  of  supernatutal 


OH.zm.1— la]    THE  FIB3T  EPISTLB  TO  THE  COEINTHIANa  451 

gifts  did  amongst  the  Corinthians.  Is  not  puffed  up  with  pride,  which  is  closely 
related  to  party  zeal,  as  in  those  at  Corinth  who  cried,  "  I  am  of  Paul,  and  I  of  Apollos," 
etc.    Does  not  seek  to  win  praise  or  applause. 

IV.  Unselfish.  "Seeketh  net  her  own."  Loses  sight  largely  of  self.  The 
Corinthians  cried,  "  I  ...  I ...  I,"  because  they  had  little  love.  Love  is  not  filled  with 
thoughts  of  her  own  rights;  she  thinks  rather  of  the  rights  of  others.  "  Buvieth  not." 
Is  not  jealous  of  the  endowments  of  others ;  recognizes  that  "  God  hath  set  the  members 
eVery  one  of  them  in  the  body,  as  it  hath  pleased  him  "  (oh.  xii.  18). 

v.  Decorous.  (Ver.  5.)  Keeps  within  the  bounds  of  propriety;  is  courteous. 
Absence  of  love  leads  to  gross  disorders,  u  at  the  Lord's  table  at  Corinth  (ch.  xi. 
21,  22). 

VL  Chabitablk  in  judgment.  "  Thinketh  no  evil."  Does  not  delight  to  impute 
motives.  Does  not  make  the  worst,  but  the  beat  of  things.  Does  not  gloat  over  the 
evil  done. 

Vn.  PuBB.  "  Bejoiceth  not  in  iniquity  [or, '  unrighteousness '],  but  rejoiceth  with  the 
truth"  (ver.  6).  Is  not  in  sympatliy  with  eviL  Is  not  pleased  to  see  it,  but  pained. 
When  the  truth  triumphs,  love  rt- joioes. 

VIII.  Trustful.  "Believeth  all  things"  (yer.  7).  Is  not  suspicious.  Does  not 
esteem  douht  and  distmst  the  chief  virtues.  Believes  all  that  can  with  a  good  conscience 
be  believed  to  the  credit  of  others. 

IX.  Hopeful.  "Hopeth  all  things"  (ver.  7).  Hopes  when  others  without  love 
have  ceased  to  hope ;  is  loth  to  regard  any  as  hopeless.  Hopes  for  good  rather  than 
for  bad  from  men.  Is  not  allied  to  despondency  and  despair.  Is  anchored  in  God  and 
hopes  on.     Tlius  sweetly  does  the  apostle  chant  the  praises  of  true  Christian  love. — H. 

Ver.  12. — Now — then,,  I.  Oub  present  ionobanoe.  Our  knowledge  of  Divine 
things  (for  these  are  here  chiefly  referred  to)  lesembles  that  which  we  obtain  of  natural 
objects  when  we  see  them  "  through  a  glass,"  or  rather  "  reflected  in  a  mirror."  Aad 
ancient  mirrors,  of  which  the  apostle  speaks,  were  by  no  means  so  perfect  as  modern 
ones.  Made  of  imperfectly  polished  metal,  they  gave  but  a  very  df  fective  representation 
of  objects  reflected.  The  imperfection  of  our  present  knowledge  is  thus  strikingly 
illustrated.  We  see  now  "  darkly,"  or  "  in  an  enigma,"  and  the  enigma  often  puzzles 
us  not  a  little.  Our  present  ignorance  arises  from:  1.  Imperfection  in  the  mirror. 
Though  the  Scripture  be  inspired  of  Gtod,  yet  it  reveals  plainly  only  necessary  truth. 
Other  truth  is  set  forth  in  figure  or  is  barely  hinted  at.  So  that  we  do  not  find  by  any 
means  in  God's  Word  a  solution  of  all  m>  steries.  We  see  much  in  it — we  may  see 
cM  that  we  need  to  see ;  but  it  is  still  a  book  of  mystery,  a  mirror  which  only  partially 
reflects  the  great  realities.  Then  the  mirror  is  often  blurred.  (1)  Defects  and 
errors  in  translation  if  we  read  only  in  our  mother  tongue ;  and  if  we  have  the  modern 
"  gift  of  tongues,"  it  is  often  difficult  to  determine  the  precise  meaning  of  a  word  or 
passage.  (2)  Defects  in  exposition  on  the  part  of  teachers.  Other  mirrors,  such  as 
nature  and  the  course  of  human  events,  furnish  us  with  knowledge  of  Divine  things  ; 
but  these  mirrors,  in  the  hands  of  men,  and  under  the  influences  of  evil,  have  become 
warped  and  misshapen,  consequently  the  reflections  are  more  or  less  distorted.  We 
have  further  to  reflect  that  no  mirror  could  perfectly  reflect  what  we  desire  to  know. 
2.  Impetfection  in  our  vision.  We  do  not  by  any  means  see  all  that  is  reflected. 
Now  dust  is  in  our  eyes,  and  now  tears,  and  we  see  comparatively  little.  We  have 
many  ophthalmic  disorders  which  impair  our  sight,  3.  Dimness  of  the  light  in  which 
we  live.  The  haze  of  sin  is  around  us ;  the  atmosphere  is  darkened  by  evil ;  the  beams 
of  the  Sun  of  Hi^hteuusuess  have  to  break  through  much  fog.  4.  We  move  as  we  gaze. 
Our  life  is  rapid.  We  snatch  hurried  glances  at  things  Divine.  We  do  not  see  as 
much  as  we  might  see.  Tlie  most  of  us  might  get  longer  seasons  of  quiet  contempla- 
tion if  we  would.  Not  a  few  need  to  learn  the  wisdom  of  sacrificing  the  little  for  the 
great ;  alas  I  so  many  sacrifice  the  great  for  the  little.  We  must  do  this  and  that  and 
the  other ;  and  we  never  pause  to  ask  the  question —  Why  must  wel  It  comes  to  this 
piece  of  folly — we  must  do  the  little  and  trivial ;  there  is  no  need  for  us  to  do  the  great 
and  the  all-important!  For  these  and  other  reasons  our  present  condition  is  largely 
one  of  ignorance.  Still  we  should  be  thankful  (1)  that  we  see  something ,  (2)  that 
we  can  see  enough  for  life  and  duty. 


452  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xin.  1—13 

n.  OuB  ruTUKB  knowIjEdqs.  Hereafter  things  will  be  changed.  No  longer  shall 
we  see  in  a  mirror  darkly,  but  "  face  to  face."  Our  life  will  not  then  be  a  stixdi/  of 
reflections.  Tlie  atmosphere  will  then  be  purer.  Our  vision  will  be  corrected  and  per- 
fected. Eaiihly  distractions  will  cease.  Then  remark  how  perfect  our  knowledge  will 
be.  Our  kuowi  dge  of  truth  will  he  like  Ood's  knowledge  of  us :  "  Then  shall  1  know 
even  as  also  I  am  known."  God  sees  us  through  and  through,  and  is  acquainted  with 
all  our  ways;  so  hereafter  shall  we  know  those  things  which  are  now  perplexing 
mysteries  to  us.  The  insoluble  will  then  be  solved,  the  contradictories  reconciled. 
In  our  sphere  then  we  shall  be  "  perfect  as  our  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect "  (Matt.  v. 
48).  We  si  all  know  God  more  truly ;  for  "  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  Note :  Th« 
path  of  piety  is  the  path  of  knowledge.  The  promise  of  the  solution  of  great  mysteries 
is  made  to  the  godly.  Part  of  the  torment  of  the  lost  may  consist  in  the  distraction 
occasioned  by  mysteries  which  for  them  have  no  promise  of  solution.  'J'his  is  Hie 
causn  of  not  a  little  suffering  and  sorrow  here ;  it  may  be  such  a  cause  hereafter,  and  a 
more  intense  cause.  Believers  are  sometimes  ridiculed  for  credulity,  fancifulness, 
indifference  to  "  facts."  But  believers  are  on  the  way  towards  the  very  highest  know- 
ledge and  the  completest  grasp,  in  all  their  significance,  of  the  greatest  facts  of  the 
universe.  Now  we  are  but  chiMren,  and  concerned  with  things  which,  in  comparison 
with  "  things  to  come,"  are  childish  (though  in  the  child  and  the  childish  things  there 
are  the  true  germs  of  what  in  fuller  development  belong  to  the  man  and  manly 
things) ;  hereafter  we  shall  become  men,  and  put  away  childish  things  (ver.  11). — H. 

Ver.  13. — TOe  three  gractt.     These  are  faith,  hope,  love. 

I.  Their  excellence.  1.  Faith.  Unites  us  to  Christ;  secures  onr  forgiveness, 
justification,  sanctifica'ion,  final  and  complete  redemption.  It  is  the  great  power  in  our 
present  life:  "The  jusL  slmll  live  by  faith."  2.  Hope.  Brightens  the  present  by 
brightening  the  future.  In  distress  we  have  hope  of  deliverance;  in  sickness,  of 
restoration  or  translation  to  the  painless  life ;  in  sin,  of  holiness ;  in  sorrow,  of  joy ;  in 
the  world,  of  heaven.  Without  laope,  how  could  we  live?  And  tlie  Christian's  hope  is 
the  brightest  and  most  joy-bringing  conceivable.  3.  Love.  What  a  wilderness  the 
world  would  be  without  love !  Society  would  disintegrate ;  families  would  be  wrecked ; 
nations  would  fall.  Love  is  the  salt  which  checks  the  tendencies  toward  corruption. 
And  love  in  its  highest  relation — love  to  God — elevates  and  purifies  us,  and  brings  to 
us  the  purest  delights  of  which  this  life  is  capable. 

II.  'I'heir  coxtinuancb.  "  Now  ubideth."  We  may  be  devoutly  thankful  for  this. 
Sometimes  we  are  prone  to  regret  that  what  we  call  the  "extraordinary  gifts"  of  the 
Church  have  ceased  (ver.  8) ;  but  if  instead  of  losing  these  we  had  lost  the  other*,  how 
infinitely  impoverished  we  should  have  become!  Faith,  hope,  love:  these  are  sufficient 
for  all  our  present  needs.  Miraculous  gifts  ceased  because  it  was  hest  for  them  to  cease. 
They  were  suited  to  the  infancy  of  the  Church ;  but  the  necessity  for  them  having  passed 
away,  they  have  disappeared.  The  spiritually  miraculous  gifts  of  faith,  hope,  and 
love  abide  evermore  with  the  Church  in  this  world. 

III.  Tub  cuiep  of  the  thbeb.  "  The  greatest  of  these  is  love."  1,  Longer  con- 
tinuance. Hereafter  faith  will  be  lost  in  sight  and  the  objects  of  present  hope  will  be 
attained.  Now  "  we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight "  (2  Cor.  v.  7).  "  Faith  is  the  sub- 
stance of  [or, '  assurance  of 'j  things  hoped  for  "  (Heb.  xi.  1.)  "  We  are  saved  by  hope : 
but  hope  that  is  seen  is  not  hope:  for  what  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  yet  hope  for?  " 
(Rom,  viiL  24).  As  the  special  gifts  of  prophecy,  miracles,  and  tongues  diisappeared 
when  they  would  no  longer  have  proved  of  service,  so  hope  and  faith  will  cease  when 
their  appointed  task  is  finished,  and  love  alone  will  reign  on  through  the  eTerlasting 
ages.  Confidence  in  God  will  not  cease,  of  course,  nor  die  looking  forward  to  furthei 
delights  and  Divine  blessings ;  but  these  do  not  answer  to  the  faith  and  hope  which  are 
ours  in  this  world  of  darkness.  Fidth  and  hope  mean  to  na,  now,  effort)  itniggl^ 
difficulty ;  these  things  will  "  pass  away."  2.  More  useful  to  otluri.  Faith  saves  us ; 
hope  cheers  us ;  love  sends  us  out  after  our  fellows.  The  former  are  chiefly  self-tending ; 
the  latter  is  expansive.  Still  fidth  is  the  root  of  love,  and  onr  hope  makes  us  more 
helpful,  but  love,  pre-eminently  and  most  directly,  is  concerned  in  the  welfare  of  those 
around  us.  3.  Maku  us  like  uod.  God  is  not  faith ;  God  is  not  hope :  "  God  i$  love." 
As  true  love  grows  in  us,  God  grows  in  us.  When  true  love  is  impressed  upon  us,  the 
DItIm  Image  k  le-tmpressed  (G«n.  L  26> — H. 


OS.  UL  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  453 

Vera.  1— S.— C^oWfy  puts  the  aaxptablenest  on  all  gifts  and  work*.  The  Revised  Ver- 
sion renders  "  charity  "  as  "  love."  Explain  "charity ;"  distinguish  from  "almsgiving," 
and  from  the  love  that  is  connected  with  human  relationships.  If  we  could  intelligently 
use  the  word  "  charity  "  to  express  God's  love  for  us,  we  should  be  able  to  use  it  intelli- 
giintly  of  the  love  which  we  hare,  as  Christians,  for  each  other,  and  of  the  love  that 
must  tone  and  temper  the  use  of  all  Ciiristian  gifts.  Charity  is  the  considerateness  and 
care  for  others  which  finds  expression  in  self-deaial  for  their  welfare.  Charity  is  the 
spirit  in  a  man  which  leads  him  to  put  others  before  self.  Our  Lord's  life  on  tlic  earth 
was  a  life  of  charity ;  love  for  men,  longing  for  their  highest  good,  and  rea'liness  to 
suffer,  if  by  suffering  be  could  do  them  good,  are  its  characteiistic  features.  His  charity 
is  commended  to  us.  It  has  been  said  that  the  "  English  word  'charity 'has  never 
risen  to  the  height  of  the  apostle's  argument."  At  best  it  does  but  signify  a  kindly 
interest  in,  and  forbearance  toward,  others.  It  is  far  frtim  suggesting  thn  ardent,  active, 
energetic  principle  which  the  apostle'  had  in  view.  And  though  the  English  word  "  love" 
includes  the  affection  which  springs  up  between  persons  of  different  sexes,  it  is  generally 
understood  to  denote  only  the  higher  and  nobler  forms  of  that  affection,  the  lower  being 
stigmatized  under  the  name  of  "  passion."  Chan'ty,  then,  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  ton^ 
and  motive  to  which  God  looks;  things,  actions,  are  accepted  by  him,  not  for  their  own 
sakes,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  spirit  and  character  for  which  theiy  find  expression.  The 
one  acceptable  feature  to  God,  in  all  human  action  and  relationship,  is  charity,  and  this 
the  aposCle  illustrates  by  his  panegyric  on  love. 

L  Man's  acceptance  of  oifts  and  works  AccoBDiNa  to  their  apfearancb.  "  Man 
looketh  on  the  outward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart."  Only  in  a  very 
imperfect  way  can  we  estimate  the  motives  of  otijers.  Our  attention  is  occupied  by 
incidents,  and  we  form  our  impressions  firom  the  things  actually  done.  Consequently 
our  estimates  are  always  incomplete  and  often  unworthy ;  we  misconceive  what  is  really 
great  and  what  is  really  little,  and  give  our  acceptance  and  our  praise  to  things  which 
will  not  endure  the  Divine  searching.  Of  men  who  stand  high  in  the  esteem  of  their 
fellow-men  for  their  excellent  talents  and  their  good-looking  works,  it  must  in  truth  be 
said,  "  Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  found  wanting."  "  Thy  heart  is  not  right 
in  the  sight  of  God." 

II.  God'b  accbptanoe  of  oifts  and  works  aooordino  to  the  spirit  and  the 
MOTIVE  WHICH  UNDERLIE  THE  AFPBABANCE.  That  motive  God  kuows  and  judges 
perfectly.  To  him  it  is  the  real  man.  The  appearance,  the  action,  never  deceives  him. 
Man's  .show  of  virtue  is  fitly  estimated.  Upon  God's  estimate  there  are  "  many  first 
who  shall  be  last,  and  many  last  who  shall  be  first."  To  true  hearts  it  should  come  as 
an  abounding  satisfaction  that  while  oui  fellow-men  may  misconceive  us,  GKxl  never 
does.  He  "  knoweth  us  altogether."  And  we  can  confidently  appeal  firom  the  judgment 
of  men  to  the  judgment  of  God. 

IIL  The  Christian  dutt  of  gainino  fuui  deliverance  from  the  man  standard 
OF  LIFE,  and  ufliftino  TO  THE  DiviNE  STANDABO.  Growing  likeness  to  God — which 
is  the  Chri,stian  sanctifying — should  involve  our  seeing  things  as  God  sees  them,  and 
judging  and  appraising  them  on  God's  principles  and  in  God's  ways.  Illustrate  this 
subject  by  the  apostoUc  references  to  the  gift  of  tongues ;  from  the  gift  of  prophecy ; 
from  the  apparent  fervour  often  seen  on  religious  lives  that  are  not  deeply  toned ;  from 
cases  of  mere  generosity  of  natural  disposition;  and  even  firom  cases  of  martyr-endurance 
which  may  be  mere  bravado,  and  aot,  to  the  heart-searching  Ona,  humble,  fervent  loyalty 
and  love.— B.  T. 

Vers.  4 — 8. — The  graee  tf  AaHtif.  When  we  speak  of  charity  (jkyimi)  it  is  in  th« 
sense  attached  to  the  word  in  the  New  Testament.  We  do  not  speak  of  promiscuous 
and  impulsive  almsgiving,  in  which  there  is  often  but  the  veriest  morsel  of  charity 
and  which,  in  our  condition  of  society,  is  almost  an  unmitigated  evil,  tending  as  it 
does  to  the  maintenance  of  an  indigent  and  pauperized  class.  We  do  not  speak  of  that 
kind  of  natural  affection  (c/>ot)  which  binds  men  together  with  the  ties  of  family  and 
friendship.  Charity,  as  a  grace  of  the  gospel,  is  altogether  larger  and  more  com- 
prehensive  than  these  things.  It  is  first  the  love  of  the  whole  human  race,  as  being 
the  objects  of  the  love  of  God,  our  common  Father,  and  the  redeemed  of  bis  meicy. 
T'   n  it  ia  this  spirit  of  love,  ever  seeking  for  us,  and  ever  finding  expession  in,  acts  of 


484  THE  FIRST  EPISTLIS  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.     [«l  xm.  1—13 

generoiis  kindness,  thoughtfulness,  and  good  will.  In  ita  larger,  nobler  meaning,  charity 
18  something  peculiavly  Christian  ;  something  that  springs  up  only  in  that  Bool  which 
has  felt  the  love  of  God  in  its  own  rcdeinption. 

I  Chabitt  is  thx  greatest  of  obaces  in  the  width  of  its  sphebk.  Othet 
graces  have  particular  things  with  which  they  are  more  intimately  concerned;  special 
parts  of  our  life  on  which  they  throw  the  light  of  their  charm;  special  times  in  which 
they  operate.  But  charity  covers  the  whole  life  and  relationships  of  the  Christian  ;  his 
inner  thoughts,  his' uttered  feelings,  his  conduct  and  intercourse,  the  associations  of 
the  family  and  society,  and  also  his  relations  with  the  dependent,  the  poor,  and  the 
Butfeiiiig.  Look  at  some  of  the  spheres  thus  irradiated  with  the  golden  light  of  charity. 
1.  The  sphere  of  a  brothel's  (^inioni,  "  Believeth  all  things."  Many  find  it  easy  to 
be  charitable  towards  their  brethren  in  almost  everything  except  their  opinions.  Think 
of  the  bitternesses,  separations,  and  conflicts  arising  from  differences  of  political  opinion, 
from  diifi lences  of  denominational  opinion,  from  differences  of  theological  opinion.  In 
these  matters  what  a  sad  worVlful  of  uncharity  we  have  to  mourn  over.  We  cannot, 
indeed,  with  the  utmost  stretch  of  charity,  receive  all  opinions ;  it  is  impossible  tc 
delude  ourselves  into  the  acceptance  of  all  forms  of  doctrine,  as  though  all  may  be  true 
Not  in  that  sense  does  charity  en^ible  us  to  "  believe  all  things."  Charity  is  a  grace 
exercised  concerning  persons  holding  opinions,  not  concerning  opinions  separated  firom 
the  persons  holding  them.  The  religious  questionings  which  agitate  the  hearts  of  our 
felluw-men  are  altogether  too  solemn,  the  yearnings  of  the  human  heait  everywhere 
after  the  standard  uf  righteousness,  the  pardon  of  sin,  the  peace  of  God,  and  light 
beyond  the  grave,  are  altogether  too  serions  and  anxious,  to  permit  us  to  speak  of  any 
one — of  the  Catholic,  or  the  Unitarian,  or  the  Hindoo,  or  the  Mohammedan,  or  the 
island  savage — save  in  terms  of  dee|)est  and  most  sincere  sympathy.  2.  The  sphere  of 
a  brother's  failings.  "Beareth  all  tilings."  How  ready  we  are  to  push  right  down  a 
brother  who  has  begun  to  slip!  What  strong  things  we  say  about  the  faintings  and 
errors  of  others  1  How  loudly  we  talk  about  the  imperfections  in  the  character  and 
conduct  of  others  I  How  easily  we  forget  our  own  "  beams,"  and,  with  malicious 
delight,  swell  out  the  "motes"  in  our  brothers'  eyes  I  Charity  teaches  us  to  say 
nothing  at  all  about  our  brother  if  we  cannot  say  something  good.  3.  The  sphere 
of  a  brother''s  sorrows.  "  Seeketh  not  her  own."  Perhaps  we  may  call  this  the 
principal  sphere  of  charity,  as  it  is  ceitainly  the  easiest.  There  is  so  much  of  natural 
feeling  to  help  us  in  this  case,  while  in  other  cases  our  natural  feelings  may  be  opposed 
to  our  charities.  What  a  peculiarly  earthly  and  human  sphere  of  charity  this  is  1  ,  Thens 
are  no  sufferers  lying  on  sick-beds  for  us  to  tend  in  heaven ;  no  hungry  ones  for  us 
to  feed ;  no  imprisoned  ones  for  us  to  visit ;  no  naked  ones  for  us  to  clothe.  Perhaps 
the  exercises  of  charity  in  the  midst  of  worldly  sorrows  are  intended  to  prepare  us 
for  the  yet  higher  charities  of  the  eternal  world.  Charity  finds  so  extensive  a  sphere 
for  its  present  operations  because  so  little  of  human  sorrow  is  simple,  so  often  it  is 
complicated — complicated  by  peculiarly  distressing  circumstances,  complicated  by 
.  poverty,  by  mi  utal  anguish,  etc.  For  sorrows  pure  and  simple  there  may  be  no  more 
needed  than  sympathy;  for  sorrow  complicated  with  other  kinds  of  trouble  there  is 
needed  cliarity,  which  takes  up  sympathy  into  itself,  and  goes  on  to  express  itsell 
in  generous  gifts  and  kindly  deeds.  4.  The  sphere  of  a  brother's  sins.  "  Rejoiceth  not 
in  iniquity."  If  charity  towards  a  sufiering  brother  is  the  easiest  effort,  charity 
towards  a  sinning  brother  is  the  hardest.  It  is  very  hard  to  be  charitable  towards 
one  who  has  sinned,  when  the  sin  touches  others  rather  than  ourselves.  It  is  the 
Divine  triumph  to  be  charitable  when  the  wrong  is  done  to  ourselves. 

II.  Charitt  is  the  gkeatest  of  the  obaoes  because  of  the  difficulty  with 
WHICH  IT  K  ATTAINED.  It  is  80  dlfBcult  becausc  of  the  separating  influence  of  sin. 
Sin  broke  up  the  fellowship  of  the  human  family,  and  filled  the  world  with  oi'posing 
interests.  Chajity  has  to  heal  up  these  great  wounds,  and  temper  these  opposing 
relations,  and  make  the  human  family  one  again.  Charity  cannot  be  won  by  any  of  ui 
save  as  the  issue  of  a  constant,  earnest  struggle.  Charity  is  only  the  final  result  of  a 
day-by-day  endeavour  to  think  charitably  of  others,  and  act  charitably  towards  them 
in  their  opinions,  their  failings,  their  sorrows,  and  their  sins. — U.  T. 

T«.  12. — JTm  nature  of  th»  futttre  knowledge.    "  Then  shall  I  know  even  m  aln 


OH.  xni.  1— 13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE   CORINTHIANS.  455 

I  am  known."  Better  read,  "  I  was  known,"  i.e.  known  or  apprehended  of  Christ. 
St.  Paul's  thought  appears  to  be  that  soul-culture  brings  the  true,  full  knowledge  and 
power.  A  man  knows  only  in  the  measure  of  the  progress  of  the  work  of  Divine  grace 
in  him;  and  what  we  may  call  perfect  knowledge  can  only  come  when  we  are  our- 
selves morally  perfect9d,  wholly  sanctified,  through  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Two  points  claim  consideration. 

I.  The  nature  and  limitations  of  man's  present  knowledge.  It  is  dependent 
on  our  senses.  Show  that  this  means  that  our  knowledge  is  limited  to  the  spheres 
with  which  our  senses  stand  relate  I.  Even  transcendent  and  so-called  supernatural 
things  cannot  be  conceived  until  set  under  sensible  forms  and  figures.  We  can  only 
transcend  nature  by  the  help  of  nature.  The  senses  limit  even  the  imagination.  It 
may  be  shown  that  God's  world  is  set  ready  for  just  the  creatures  lie  has  put  in  it;  and 
if  any  other  than  the  sensible  world  is  to  be  opened  to  us,  we  must  be  changed,  renewed, 
regenerated,  and  so  new  sensibilities  and  capacities  must  be  given  and  developed. 
Illustrate  that  the  world  of  science  is  the  proper  sphere  for  men  who  have  only  senses 
and  intellect.  It  is  a  vast  sphere,  a  wonderful  sphere,  but  only  a  limited  sphere ;  and 
since  researches  or  observations  within  it  are  dependent  on  the  frailty  of  the  instruments 
used,  no  absolute  truth  of  science  can  ever  be  obtained.  Illustrate  from  the  observa- 
tions of  astronomers.  No  conclusion  can  be  afiBrmed  with  absolute  certainty  because 
the  disturbing  conditions  of  the  atmosphere  can  never  be  perfectly  estimated  in  con- 
nection with  any  ezperiinent.  Then  add  to  this  frailty  of  the  senses  the  influence  of 
sin  on  man  when  his  attention  is  directed  to  moral  questions.  No  man  can  hope,  of 
himself,  to  attain  the  perfect  moral  truth.  Illustrate  from  the  sadly  mixed  systems 
of  all  the  great  classical  or  modem  moralists,  and  plead  that  the  key  to  all  truth  is 
the  vision  of  God  which  comes  with  the  soul's  conversion  and  regerjeration.  Here  on 
earth  a  man  knows  nothing  aright  until  he  knows  God,  as  manifested  in  the  person 
of  his  Son. 

II.  The  nature  and  LiKiTATiONg  OF  man's  future  knowledqe.  It  will  not  be 
imprisoned  in  sense  forms  or  figures.  It  will  come  by  soul -faculties,  of  which  our 
bodily  senses  are  but  suggestive  types.  It  will  come  out  of  new  spheres  and  new 
relations.  It  will  take  new  thought-forms.  It  will  replace  observation  by  insight, 
so  it  will  need  no  verification.  It  will  bear  relation. to  moral  character,  and  not  to 
intellectual  endowments.  It  will  be  the  apprehension  men  may  gain,  when  the 
blinding  influence  of  sin  and  self-love  are  wholly  passed  away,  and  spiritual  insight 
has  no  clouds  or  veils  to  pierce  through.  But  man's  future  knowledge,  however 
wonderful  it  may  be,  must  still  be  limited,  for  ever  it  can  but  be  the  knowledge  of  a 
created  being.  He  can  never  know  Ood,  never  know  more  than  God  may  be  pleased 
t3  reveal  of  himself  and  of  bis  ways. — R.  T. 

Ver.  13. — The  immortality  of  all  graea.  "  Now  abideth  faith,  hope,  charity,  these 
three."  The  word  "  abideth  "  is  significant,  as  applied  to  each  of  the  three  great  graces. 
While  so  much  must  "  pass  away,'  why  may  faith,  hope,  and  charity  be  said  to  abide  ? 
Because  they  are  the  dress  of  souls,  not  of  bodies.  They  are  things  belonging  to 
character,  not  merely  to  conduct.  Souls  pass  through  into  new  spheres  of  existence, 
taking  with  them  all  that  is  peculiar  to  them.  We  shall  step  into  the  eternal  world 
with  just  the  clothing  of  character — the  garments  of  feith,  love,  and  hope — which  we 
bad  put  on  our  spirit  in  our  mortal  sphere.  More  or  less  distinctly  we  all  have  an  idea 
that  faith  and  hope  are  powers  peculiar  to  our  present  moital  and  earthly  condition. 
We  think  we  shall  no  longer  need  them  when  we  have  reached  to  heaven.  We  think 
that  only  love,  charity,  will  go  with  us  there.  Tet  can  it  be  that  we  shall  ever  gut 
past  "  faith  "  ?  Is  "  sight "  anything  more  than  another  and  a  higher  form  of  "  faith  "  ? 
Shall  we  ever  lose  "  hope  "  ?  As  long  as  we  remain  creatures,  not  creators,  we  shall 
surely  have  to  believe  and  hope  and  love. 

L  The  immobtalitt  of  love.  We  may  infer  this  from  tiie  abiding  character  of 
love  in  this  life.  All  kinds  of  love  tend  to  abide ;  they  even  strive  to  increase  and 
grow.  Life  may  greatly  change  with  us,  multiplied  sorrows  may  come  to  us,  but  there 
are  some  who  love  us,  whose  love  keeps  on,  and  can  neither  change  nor  pass.  True 
mother-love  abideth.  True  wifely  love  abideth.  True  friendship- love  abideth.  Wf 
go  out  into  the  eternal  world  with  such  love  folded  like  holy  robes  about  our  spirits 


i.:6 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xit.  1—40, 


And  that  kind  of  love  which  we  call  Christian  love — charity — has  the  'same  power  ol 
abiding.  Let  it  but  be  gained  in  the  early  days  of  our  Christian  life,  and  it  will  stay 
and  grow,  widening  and  adorning  the  Christian  spirit  down  to  its  time  of  passing 
through.  If  love  thus  abides  in  Christian  life,  can  it  be  possible  that  death,  which  is 
but  the  servant  of  Christ — Christ's  hall-porter  or  gate-keeper — should  be  able  to  master 
it,  overcome  it,  and  finish  it?  But  we  may  further  argue  the  immortality  of  love 
from  every  view  of  the  heavenly  state  that  is  presented  to  us,  and  every  conception 
we  can  form  of  it.  It  is  the  place  of  union ;  the  uuiting  bond  must  be  love.  It  is  a 
home ;  the  one  sanctifying  power  in  a  home  is  love.  It  is  the  place  where  God  is  all  in 
all,  and  "  God  is  love."    Those  whom  God  teaches  to  love  he  teaches  to  love  for  ever. 

II.  The  immortalitt  of  taith.  What  is  the  proper  idea  of  faith  ?  It  is  the 
relation  in  which  we  ought  to  stand  to  things  above  us,  higher  than  we  are.  It  is  our 
"  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  As  long  as  there  ia  anybody  in  the  world  wiser  than 
ourselves,  we  shall  have  to  lelieve  what  they  say.  Get  the  very  wisest  man  that  ever 
lived  on  earth,  if  there  is  in  heaven  one  spirit  wiser  than  he,  he  will  have  to  believe — 
to  take  on  trust — what  the  wiser  spirit  may  say.  And  the  holiest  archangel  must 
believe  what  the  all-wise  God  may  say.  Change  them  as  we  may,  know  as  _we  are 
known,  grow  with  giant  strides  as  the  eternal  hours  pass  by,  still  we  can  never  overtake 
or  outgrow  God.  As  long  as  we  are  creatures  we  shall  be,  in  knowledge  as  well  as  in 
power,  below  our  Creator.  While  we  keep  our  being  we  shall  have  to  believe— we 
shall  have  to  trust.  If  we  have  the  true  spirit  wrought  in  us,  we  shall  never  want  to 
get  beyond  faitli.  For  the  creature  it  is  the  highest  blessedness  that  he  is  found  willing 
to  trust.  To  wish  to  see  is  to  rebel.  It  is  to  wish  to  be  God,  and  take  the  place  of  God. 
Enough  for  us  to  be  for  ever  the  children  of  God,  and  it  is  a  very  foolish  child  who  wants 
to  get  beyond  trust.  He  iven  is  so  beautiful,  because  we  shall  there  be  children  at  home 
for  ever;  perfected  in  faith,  in  childlike  trust,  and  safe  in  the  protection  and  the 
shtidow  of  the  eternal  Father.  We  are  learning  to  believe  by  the  experiences  of  our  human 
lives,  but  it  would  be  a  sad  thing  if  we  were  only  learning  something  which  we  should 
lose  when  we  came  to  die,  even  if  we  exchanged  it  for  something  better.  Of  this  we  may 
rest  assured,  that  in  learning  to  trust  we  are  learning  for  the  heavenly  and  immortal 
spheres. 

III.  The  immortalitt  of  hope.  In  this  life  hope  seems  to  change,  but  in  reality  it 
abides,  only  changing  its  objects.  The  old  man  hopes  quite  as  truly  as  the  yoimg  man, 
though  nut  with  the  same  passionate  intensity.  The  change  into  the  eternal  spheres  is 
more  evident  to  the  senses,  but  it  is  not  more  real,  than  the  change  from  the  boy  to  the 
man ;  surely  in  his  second,  glorified,  manhood  man  will  keep  his  power  of  hoping,  only 
setting  it  on  new  and  higher  and  eternal  things.  If  we  are  still  to  grow  in  the  eternal 
world,  we  must  have  something  ever  before  us  and  above  us  to  hope  for.  If  we  know 
that  we  may  become  wiser,  truer,  stronger,  holier  than  we  are,  we  cannot  keep  from 
hoping  that  we  may  become  such.  And  heaven  cannot  possibly  be  a  mere  stereotypjing 
of  the  sanctifyings  wrought  through  our  Christian  life  on  earth.  In  seeking,  then,  for 
faith,  hope,  and  charity,  we  are  seeking  the  heavenly  treasures,  the  things  that  are  abiding 
and  eterraL    They  are  the  "  treasure  in  the  heavens,  which  iaileth  not."— B.  T. 


1XF08ITI0N. 


GHAFTEB  XIV. 


Vers.  1 — 25. — The  gift  of  prtatihing  in- 
perior  to  tiu  gift  of  longuei. 

Ver.  1. — Follow  after  charity;  literally, 
ohoMj  punue.  The  word  is  one  of  which 
St.  Panl  ii  fond  (Rom.  ix.  30,  31 ;  xiii  13 1 
xiv.  19;  Phil.  Ui  12,  14;  1  Tim.  vi.  11, 
etc.).  And  desire;  rather, ye(  (a  xealout /or. 
But  rather  that  ye  may  prophesy ;  and  yet 
more  itrlve  after  (Ae  gift  of  taared  preaeking. 

Ver.  2. — In  an  unknown  tongue.  The 
tnte^lation  of  the  word  "  unknown  "  in 


our  Anthoriied  Venion  Is  quite  unjustifiable, 
and  shows  the  dangeiof  giving  way  to  the  biai 
of  mere  conjectures.  Probably  it  is  this  word, 
not  found  in  the  original,  whioli  has  given 
rise  to  the  perplexing,  unhistorio,  and  un- 
warranted theory  that "  the  gift  of  tongues  " 
was  a  power  of  speaking  in  foreign  languages. 
Speaketh  not  unto  men.  Because,  as  a  rule, 
no  one  understands  anything  that  he  says. 
The  word  literally  means  **  bears."  It  may, 
perhaps,  imply  that  no  special  attention  was 
given  to  those  who  gave  way  to  these  im- 
pulses of  utterance.     The  whole  of  this 


cii.  XIV.  1—40.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa 


46  r 


chapter  provet  in  a  most  stiikiiig  way  the 
close  analogy  between  "the  tongue"  and 
the  impassioned  soliloqines  of  inarticulate 
litterano  which  were  poured  forth  in  tones 
ot  thrilLng  power  among  ttfe  Moutanists, 
and  in  modern  times  among  the  Irvingites. 
In  the  spirit.  It  is  uncertain  whether  this 
means  "in  his  own  spirit,"  or  "in  the  Spirit  of 
God,"  i.e.  as  a  result  of  inspiration.  Probably 
the  former  (John  iv.  24 ;  Kom.  viii.  13,  ttc). 
Perhaps,  however,  the  two  imply  the  same 
thing.  The  spirit  is  the  one  Divine  part  of 
our  imman  being,  and  wlien  a  man  is  a  true 
Christian  his  spiiit  is  in  union  with,  is  as 
it  weie  lost  in,  the  Spirit  of  God.  St.  Paul 
recognizes  the  true  tongue — for  it  might  be 
eimulated  by  hysteria  and  even  by  mere 
physical  imposture — ag  a  result  of  ins|iira- 
tion,  that  is,  of  the  overpowering  dumiuanue 
of  thi-  human  spirit  by  a  sujiernatui  al  power. 
Nevertlieless,  he  points  out  tiie  extreme  peril 
of  yielding  to  or  self-inducing  these  emotions 
public,  or  in  leaving  them  uncoutiolled. 
Mysteries.  Secrets  revealed  possibly  to 
him,  but  unrevealed  by  this  strange  "  tongue" 
to  others. 

Ver.  3. — To  edification,  and  exhortation, 
and  comfort.  The  "to"  should  be  omitted. 
His  words  build  up  the  Christian  soul,  by 
rou-  ing  its  efforts  and  consoling  its  sorrows. 
The  "  Son  of  prophecy "  (Barnabas)  is,  as 
Stanley  points  out,  also  "  a  Son  of  consola- 
tion "  (Acts  iv.  36).  "  Support "  (jparaldesis) 
involves  "comfort,"  i.e.  strength  and  calm. 

Ver.  4.— Edifieth  himself.  When  the 
"  tongue  "  was  genuine,  and  under  due  con- 
trol (ver.  32) ;  whtn  it  avoided  tlie  physical 
and  orgiastic  manifestations  by  which  a  sort 
of  spiritual  possession  was  indicated  in  the 
ancient  oracular  sh lines;  when  the  self- 
consciousness  was  not  wholly  obliterated, — 
a  sense  of  ennobling  conviction  would  be 
prodmced  by  this  spiritual  outpouring. 
Those  who  have  experienced  the  emotion 
describe  this  very  result.  Tliey  felt  en- 
larged and  elevated — their  whole  being  was 
for  a  time  expanded — by  this  emotion.  The 
Church.  Primarily  the  body  of.  assembled 
Christians  which  he  is  addressing,  and 
through  them  tlie  Church  of  God  in  general. 

Ver.  5. — I  would  that  ye  all  spake  with 
tongues.  The languageof rcZaWuedisparage- 
ment  whioli  St.  Paul  uses  throughout  these 
chapters  may  lead  us  to  regard  this  with 
surprise.  Yet  it  is  perfectly  intelligible. 
Montanus  truly  said  that  each  human  spirit 
is  like  a  harp,  which  the  Holy  Spirit  strikes 
as  with  a  vlectrum,  and  which  yields  itself  to 
the  mighty  hand  by  which  the  chords  are 
■wept.  We  have  seen  all  along — and  history 
hM  in  various  ages  confirmed  the  impression, 
on  every  occasion  when  these  phenomena 
have  been  reprodnoed  in  seasons  of  great 
ipiritu»l  rarivol — that  tbeextemal  symptomt 


may  be  imitated  with  most  dangerous  and 
objectionable  results  both  to  the  speaker 
and  to  others.  But  when  the  expression  is 
genuine,  the  fact  tliat  the  tides  of  the  Spirit 
can  thus  sweep  through  the  narrow  channels 
of  individuality  is  in  itself  a  sign  that  the 
spirit  of  the  man  is  alive  and  nut  dead  ;  and 
thus  he  is  an  evidence  of  God's  power  both 
to  himself  and  to  others.  Those  who  have 
heard  "  the  tongue  "  have  told  me  that  its 
force,  melody,  and  penetrative  quality  pro- 
duced an  impression  not  to  be  forgotten. 
When  we  see  the  stuffed  and  stopped-np 
hearts  and  lives  of  thousands  of  frivolous 
and  worldly  money-worshippers,  we  might 
well  echo  St.  Paul's  wish.  Greater.  Not 
of  necessity  greater  absolutely  or  morally, 
but  greater  in  the  fact  of  hia  wider  and 
deeper  usefulness.  Except  he  interpret. 
From  this  we  infer  that  sometimes,  when 
the  passion  had  spent  its  force,  the  speaker 
in  the  tongue  could  give  ratioual  explaua- 
tion  of  the  thoughts  and  feelings  to  which 
he  had  given  ecstatic  ulteraiice. 

Ver.  6. — Except  I  shall  speak  to  yon  either 
by  revelation,  or  by  knowledge,  or  by  pro- 
phesying, or  by  doctrine  1  Bly  "  tongue"  will 
be  useless  to  yon  unless  I  also  speak  to  you 
of  what  I  know  by  revelation,  or  by  my 
thoughtful  isludy,  which  may  take  the  form 
of  preaching  or  of  teaching  (ch.  xii.  28). 

Ver.  7.— Even  things  without  life  giving 
sound.  Even  musical  instruments — flute 
or  harp —dead  instruments  as  they  are,  must 
be  so  played  as  to  keep  up  tbe  distinction 
of  intervals,  without  which  the  melody  is 
ruined  and  tlie  tune  is  unrecognizable. 
Much  more  is  this  the  case  with  the  human 
voice. 

"  How  sour  iweet  music  is. 
When   time  is  broke  and    no    proportion 

kept  I " 

The  indiscriminate  use  of  the  tongue  is  here 
compared  to  the  dissonance  of  jarring  and 
unmodulated  instrumental  sounds.  In  har- 
mony there  must  be  due  sequence  and  inter- 
vals of  sound. 

Ver.  8. — If  the  trumpet  give  an  nnoertain 
sound.  A  spiritual  exhortation  should  be 
like  the  "  blowing  of  a  trumpet  in  Zion ;  " 
but  if,  as  in  "  the  tongue,"  the  trumpet  only 
gave  forth  an  unintelligible  blare,  its  sounds 
were  useless. 

Ver.  9. — Words  easy  to  bo  onderstood; 
rather,  distinguishcAle  tpeeoh.  Ye  shall 
speak;  rather,  ye  thaU  be  (all  the  time) 
speaking.  Into  the  air.  Mere  pulses  of 
useless  inarticulate  breath,  spoken  ing  Blaue 
hinein.  Phiio  has  the  word  oeromutAos, 
one  who  speaks  to  the  wind. 

Ver  10. — It  may  be.  A  mere  expres- 
sion of  uncertainty  as  to  the  exact  number 
(comp.  ch.  XV.  87).  It  is  one  of  the  very 
few  instancw  wh«re  avm  tbe  vwb  which 


458 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  xiv.  1— 40. 


implies  "ehance"  is  recognized.  The  word 
"  chance  "  itself  (jvxh)  does  not  occur  in  the 
New  Testament.  So  many  kinds  of  voices. 
This  does  not  seem  to  mean  "  so  many  lan- 
guages." The  Jews  always  asserted  that 
the  languages  of  the  world  were  seventy  in 
number.  It  seems  to  mean  "classes  of 
exprLBsive  sounds."  None  of  them  is  with- 
out signification.  The  words  rendered 
"  without  signification,"  literally  mean 
dtmib.  Tho  meaning  must  eitlier  be  that 
"nothing— no  creature — is  dumb,"  or  that 
"  every  class  of  sounds  has  its  own  distinct 
meaning." 

Ver.  11. — A  barlaiian;  in  other  words, 
unintelligible,  according  to  the  definition  of 
the  word  by  Ovid — 

"  Barbaras  bio  ego  sum,  quift  non  intelUgor 
nlli." 

TJnto  me ;  rather,  in  m^  eyes. 

Ver.  12. — Even  so  ye.  A  general  form  of 
conclusion  from  the  previous  remarks.  Of 
spiritual  gifts ;  literally,  since  ye  are  zeahtt 
of  tpiritt.  That  ye  may  excel  to  the  edify- 
ing of  the  Church;  rather,  seek  them  to  the 
edifying  of  the  Church,  that  ye  may  abound. 
The  same  word  is  used  in  Matt.  v.  20 
("exceed");  eh.  viii.  8  ("are  we  the 
better"). 

Ver.  13. — Fray  that  he  may  interpret; 
either,  to  pray  <u  to  be  able  to  interpret,  or, 
pray  with  the  object  of  afterwards  interpret- 
ing. The  meaning, "  pray  to  have  the  power 
uf  interpretation  given  him,"  seems  excluded 
by  the  next  verse. 

Ver.  14. — My  understanding  is  unfruitful. 
I  am  only  aware  that  I  am  praying.  I  Lave 
no  definite  consciousness  as  to  what  I  tay. 

Ver.  15. — What  is  it  then?  A  jhrase 
like  the  Latin  quorsum  hsee  i  What  is  the 
purport  of  my  exhortations?  I  will  sing. 
This  sliows  that  the  glossolaly  sometimes 
took  the  form  of  singing.  With  the  under- 
standing also.  When  we  worship  or  sing 
we  must  indeed  "worship  in  spirit,"  but 
also  worship  and  "  sing  praises  with  under- 
standing" (Pb.  xlvii.  7;  John  iv.  24). 

Ver.  16. — That  oconpieth  the  room  of  the 
onleamed ;  that  is, "  one  in  the  position  of 
an  ordinary  worshipper,  who  has  no  spiritual 
gifts."  An  idiolet  is  a  private  person ;  one 
who  does  not  possess  the  skill  or  the  know- 
ledge which  is  immediately  in  question. 
Bay  Amen  ;  rather,  lay  the  Amen.  The  cus- 
tom of  ratifying  prayer  and  praises  with  the 
"  Amen  "  of  hearty  asspnt  and  participation 
existed  in  the  Jewish  (Dent,  xxvli.  15. 
Neh.  V.  13;  Rev.  v.  14;  Philo,  'Fragm.,' 
p.  G30)  as  well  as  in  the  Ci.rii>tinii  Church 
(Justin  Martyr, '  Apol.,' ii.  97).  Tne  sound 
of  tlje  luud  unanimous  "Amen"  of  early 
Christian  cnugre^ations  is  compared  to  the 
echo  of  distant  thimder. 


"Et    resonaturum    ferit    aethen    Tooibiu 

Amen." 
Being  the  answer  of  the  congregation,  ths 
"  Amen  "  was  regarded  as  no  less  important 
than  the  prayer  itself. 

Ver.  17. — WeU.  It  is  good  and  honour- 
able for  thee  to  utter  the  voice  of  Eucharist ; 
but  if  this  be  done  in  the  unintelligible 
tongue,  what  does  the  Church  profit?  The 
other.  The  "layman"  or  "ungifted  per- 
son." 

Ver.  18. — I  speak  with  tongues;  rather, 
with  a  tongue.  More  than  ye  all.  This 
is  exactly  what  we  should  expect  of  the 
emotional,  im^iassioned  nature  of  St.  Paul, 
who  was  so  wholly  under  the  influence  of 
the  Spirit  of  God.  But  it  is  clear  from  all 
that  he  has  been  saying  that,  while  the 
personal  and  evidential  value  of  this  gift  of 
yielding  his  wliole  being  to  the  spiritual 
impulse,  which  expressed  and  relieved  itself 
by  inarticulate  utterance,  was  such  as  to 
make  him  "thank  God"  that  he  possessed 
it,  he  must  either  have  exercised  it  only  in 
private  gatherings  or  must  have  always 
accompanied  it  by  interpretation. 

Ver.  19.— Yet  in  the  Church.  In  any 
public  assembly  of  Chriotians.  Five  words. 
No  disparagement  of  the  prominence  given 
to  glossolaly  could  be  more  emphatic. 
"  Rather  half  of  ten  of  the  edifying  sort 
than  a  thousand  times  ten  of  the  other  " 
(Besser).  That  ...  I  might  [may]  teach 
others  also.  The  word  rendered  "  teach  "  is 
rather  imtruel,  the  root  of  our  "  catechize  " 
(Luke  i.  4 ;  Bom.  ii.  8 ;  Gal.  vi.  6,  etc.). 

Ver.  20. — Be  not  children  in  understand- 
ing ;  rather,  in  your  minds.  Your  tendency 
to  overvalue  glossolaly  shows  you  to  be 
somewhat  childish.  It  is  remarkable  that 
this  is  the  only  verse  of  the  New  Testament 
in  which  the  common  Greek  word  "  mind  " 
iphren)  occurs.  Howbeit  in  malice  be  ye 
children;  better,  but  in  wickedness  be 
babes.  The  Authorized  Version  misses  the 
climax  involved  in  the  change  of  the  word. 
The  Christian  should  always  be  childlike 
(Matt.  xi.  25 ;  xix.  4),  hut  never  childish 
(ch.  xiii.  11;  Eph.  iv.  14).  Be  men;  rather, 
become  or  prove  yourselves  fuU-grown ;  liter- 
ally, perfect. 

Ver.  21.— In  the  law.  The  quotation  is 
from  Isa.  xxviii.  11,  12,  but  the  term  "  the 
Law"  was  applied  generally  to  the  Old 
Testament, as  in  John  x.  34;  xii.  34 ;  iv.  25 ; 
Bom.  iii.  19).  With  men  ot  other  tongues, 
etc.  The  application  of  this  Old  Testament 
quotation  furnishes  one  of  the  many  singu- 
lar instances  of  quotation  which  prove  that 
the  Jews  often  referred  to  the  words  without 
any  direct  reference  to  their  context  or 
oiiginal  meaning.  He  here  wishes  to  show 
that  glossolaly  had  little  or  no  value  except 
as  an  evidence  to  unbelievtru,  and  illustiatet 


OH.  xw.  1—40.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORlNTHlAKa 


151) 


thii  by  laa.  xxviii.  11,  12.  Now,  in  that 
passage  Isaiah  tells  the  drunken  priests, 
who  scornfully  -  imitated  his  style,  that, 
since  they  derided  God's  message  so  deliveied 
to  tbem,  God  would  address  them  in  a  very 
different  way  by  the  Assyrians,  whose 
language  they  did  not  understand ;  and  that 
even  to  (hit  stern  lesson,  taught  them  by 
people  of  alien  tongue,  they  would  remain 
deaf.  In  the  original,  therefore,  there  is 
not  the  least  allusion  to  any  phenomenon 
resembling  the  "  gift  of  tongues."  But  the 
mere  teords  of  a  scriptural  passage  always 
eame  to  Jews  with  all  the  foroe  of  an 
argument,  independently  of  their  primary 
meaning ;  and  it  was  enough  for  St.  Paul's 
purpose  that  in  Isaiah  the  allusion  is  to 
onintelligible  utterance,  and  to  the  fact 
that  the  teaching  which  it  was  meant  to 
convey  would  be  in  vain.  And  other  lips. 
St.  Paul  does  not  quote  the  LXX.  The 
Hebrew  has  "  with  stammerings  of  lips  and 
another  tongue  will  he  speak"  (comp. 
Deut.  xxviii.  49). 

Ver.  22. — ^Wherefore.  In  accordance  with 
this  illustration.  Not  to  them  that  believe. 
Because  their  belief  depends  on  other  and 
far  deeper  grounds.  Serveth.  This  word  is 
wrongly  supplied ;  it  should  be,  is  for  a  sign. 
Not  for  them  that  believe  not.  Because 
theie  is  nothing  necessarily  startling  in 
preaching.  It  might,  indeed,  produce  oon- 
victirn  in  the  unbelieving  (ver.  25),  but  it 


was  not  a  special  "  sign.' 


'  The  unbeliev- 


ing "  are  those  who  used  to  drop  in  at  the 
Christian  services  out  of  curiosity. 

Yer.  23. — All  speak  with  tongaes.  He 
does  not  necessarily  mean  that  all  are 
speaking  at  once ;  though,  amid  these 
strange  scenes  of  self-asserting  enthusiasm, 
even  that  was  not  wholly  impossiljle ;  but 
he  means,  "if  there  be  nothing  going  on 
except  glossolaly."  Will  they  not  say  that 
yeare  mad  t  This  has  often  been  tlie  actual 
impression  produced  by  these  phenomena 
upon  those  who  stand  aloof  from  the 
spiritual  influences  which  cause  them.  On 
the  day  of  Pentecost  the  exaltation  of  the 
discijiles  caused  mockers  to  charge  them 
with  drunken  exhilaration  (Acts  ii.  13). 

Ver.  24. — All  prophesy.  If  one  after 
another  speak  the  word  of  spiritual  exhorta- 
tion. Be  is  convinced  of  Edl,  he  is  judged 
of  all;  literally,  he  it  Jieing  convicted  by  all, 
he  i»  being  examined  by  aU ;  in  other  words, 
each  address  is  calculated  to  awaken  con- 
viction in  him  and  to  search  his'  heart. 
Thus  the  address  of  St.  Peter  pierced  the 
conicienoei  of  his  hearers,  when  the  glos- 
■olaly  even  of  Pentecost  produced  no  effect 
beyond  that  of  irreverent  wonder  (Acts  ii. 
37).  It  i(  easy  to  see  tliat  the  style  and 
method  ef  worship  in  the  assemblies  of 
Christiana  at  thia  earljr  epoch  resembled 


that  now  prevalent  among  Quakers.  The 
teaching  was  not  left  to  recognized  pastors, 
but  any  Christian  might  speak  who  had 
gifts  which  moved  him  to  address  his 
brethren.  The  externals  of  worship  are  ol 
no  eternal  signifiance,  but  are  best  left  to  ba 
moulded  by  the  requirements  of  time  and 
place,  with  refeience  to  the  teachings  of  past 
experience.  No  doubt  St.  Paul's  deprecia- 
tion of  glossolaly  led  to  its  rapid  disappear- 
ance when  it  had  done  its  work  of  being  "  a 
sigu  to  unbelievers."  But  if  ancient  modes 
of  worship  were  too  independent  of  rigid 
conditions,  modern  modes  are,  on  the  other 
hand,  too  stereotyped  and  inelastic. 

Ver.  25.— The  secrets  of  his  heart  "  The 
Word  of  God  is  quick  and  powerful,  and 
sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,  .  .  .  and 
it  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of 
the  heart"  (Ueb.  iv.  12).  Falling  down  on 
his  face.  An  Oriental  mode  of  showing 
humility  and  deep  conviction  (Isa.  zlv. 
14  ;  1  Sam.  xiz.  24).  It  does  not  furnish 
the  shadow  of  an  excuse  for  the  encourage- 
ment of  catalepsy  by  the  mechanical  excite- 
ment of  revivalism.  That  God  is  in  yon 
of  a  truth.  St.  Paul  is  probably  thinking 
both  of  Isa.  xlv.  14  and  Zech.  viii.  23,  where 
similar  phrases  are  used. 

"  Truth  jrom  his  lips  prevailed  with  double 
sway. 
And  fools,  who  eame  to  Meoff,  rtmaintd  <• 
pray." 

(Goldsmith.) 

Vers.  M—SS.—BfJes  to  cheek  tUiorderly 
self-assertion  in  Christian  assemblies. 

Ver.  26.— How  is  it  then  I  The  same 
phrase  as  in  ver.  15.  Every  one  of  you  hath 
a  psalm,  etc.  We  see  here  a  somewhat 
melancholy  picture  of  the  struggling  self- 
assertion  of  rival  claimants  to  attention.  A 
doctrine;  rather,  a  (eacMn^,  The  glossolaly 
had  probably  been  promoted  by  Syrian 
enthusiasts,  perhaps  of  the  Petrine  party ; 
the  egotism  of  oratory  and  itch  of  teaching 
now  described  (Jas.  iii.  1)  may  have  been 
developed  in  the  Apollonian  party.  Unto 
edifying.  The  object  is  moral  improvement, 
not  idle  self-display,  not  the  ostentation  of 
individual  gifts  (ch.  xii.  7,  8,  10).  To  thia 
he  recurs  again  and  again  (ch.  iii.  9 ;  ziv.  8^ 
5,  12;  2  Cor.  v.  1;  x.  8;  jd.  19;  xiii.  10; 
and  the  verb  frequently).  The  substantive, 
as  used  by  St.  Paul,  only  ooonrs  agaia  in 
Romans  (xiv.  19 ;  xv.  2),  and  in  Ephesiani 
(ii.  21,  etc.). 

Ver.  27. — And  that  by  nourse ;  rather,  and 
that  in  turn.  He  does  not  allow  more  than 
one  glosBolalist  to  speak  at  a  time^  and  not 
more  than  three  it  the  most  in  any  one 
service.  This  rule  alone  tended  to  ezting;uish 
the  disorderly  exhibition  of  "  tonguea."  T* 
control  the  passion  whioh  leads  to  K  i% 


460 


THE   FlllST   EPISTLE  IHO  TBE  CORlNTHIANa    [oh.  xit.  1— 4di 


■ooner  or  later,  to  stop  the  inamfestation — a 
result  which  St.  Paul  would  probably  have 
been  the  List  to  regret,  when  its  purpose  had 
been  accomplished 

Ver.  28.— Let  him  keep  silence.  The 
"  him  "  refers  to  the  glossolalist,  not  to  the 
interpreter.  To  himself.  In  his  private 
devotions  (as  St.  Paul  himself  seems  to  have 
done) ;  not  in  the  public  assembly. 

Ver.  29. — Two  or  three.  If  more  than 
two  or  three  preached,  the  congregation 
would  get  weary.  Let  the  other  judge  ; 
rather,  lei  the  resi  discriminate  the  value  of 
what  is  said.  "  Proiihesyitigs  "  are  not  to  be 
despised,  but  we  are  only  to  hold  fast  what 
is  good  (1  Thess.  v.  20,  21),  and  we  are  "  to 
try  the  spirits  "  (1  John  iv.  1).  St.  Paul  ii 
not  encouraging  the  Corinthians  to  the  cen- 
■oriousness  of  conceited  and  incompetent 
oriticism,  but  only  putting  thum  on  their 
guard  against  implicit  acceptance  of  all 
they  hear;  which  was  a  very  necessary 
caution  at  •  pUtoe  where  so  many  teachers 
sprang  up. 

Ver.  30. — Let  the  first  hold  his  peaoe.  It 
would  be  easy  enough  to  judge  whether  the 
revelation  vouchsafed  to  his  neighbour  was 
more  pressing  and  important  than  his  own 
address. 

Ver.  81.— Te  may  all  prophesy;  rather, 
y«  all  can ;  that  is,  "  if  yon  hav^  the  gift 
of  prophesying."  St.  Paul  has  ali'eady 
Implied  that  at  every  Bssuinbly  there  would 
be  idiolai,  unendowed  woishippuis,  who  only 
•ame  to  profit  by  the  gifts  of  others,  and 
that  "all"  are  not  prophets  (ch.  xii.  29). 
Hay  be  comforted;  rather,  may  be  exhorted 
or  cheered. 

Ver.  32. — And  the  spirits  of  the  prophets 
are  snbjeot  to  the  prophets.  Into  this  golden 
aphorism  St.  Paul  coinpresses  the  whole 
force  of  his  reasoning.  The  articles  are 
Letter  omitted:  "Spiritsof  prophets  are  under 
the  control  of  prophets."  Mantic  inspira> 
tions,  the  violent  possession  wliich  threw 
sibyls  and  priestesses  into  contortions — the 
foaming  lip  and  streaming  hair  and  glazed 
or  glaring  eye — have  no  place  iu  the  self- 
eontrolJing  dignity  of  Christian  inspiration. 
Even  Jewish  prophets,  in  the  paruxysm  of 
•motion,  might  lie  naked  on  the  gr'uud  and 
rave(l  Sam.  xix.  24);  but  the  genuine  in- 
spiration in  Cliristian  ages  never  obliteri.tes 
the  self-coneciousness  or  overpowers  the 
reason.  It  abhors  the  hysteria  and  simula- 
tion and  frenzy  which  have  sometimes 
disgraced  levivalium  and  filled  lunatic 
asylums. 

Ver.  S3. — Of  oonfosion,  The  word  is 
fendered  "  commotion "  in  Luke  xxi.  9 ; 
"  tumult,"  in  2  Cor.  vi.  5  andxii.  20.  "  Con- 
fusion" is,  as  St.  James  says  (iii.  16),  the 
result  of  envious  and  pushing  igotism. 
But  of  peace;    which   cannot  coexist  with 


inflation  and  restlossnesa.  Ai  in  aO 
Chorohes  of  the  saints.  The  clause  pro- 
bably belongs  to  this  verse,  not  to  the  follow- 
ing. It  is  a  reflection  on  the  exceptional 
turbulence  and  disorder  which  disgraced 
tiie  Corinthian  Church. 

Vers.  34,  35.—Bule$  about  O*  public 
teaching  by  women. 

Ver.  34. — Let  your  women  keep  silence  in 
the  Churches.  St.  Paul  evidently  meant 
this  to  be  a  general  rule,  and  one  which 
ought  to  be  normally  observed ;  for  he  re- 
peats it  in  1  Tim.  it  11,  12.  At  the  same 
time,  it  is  fair  to  interpret  it  as  a  rule  made 
with  special  reference  to  time  and  circum- 
stances, and  obviously  admitting  of  excep- 
tions in  both  dispensations  (Judg.  iv.  4; 
2  Kings  xxiL  14;  Neh.  vi.  14;  Luke  ii.  36; 
Acts  ii.  17;  xxi.  9),  as  is  perhaps  tacitly 
implied  in  ch.  xi.  S.  But  ...  to  be  under 
obedience  (Eph.  r.  22;  CoL  ii.  18;  Titus 
ii.  5;  1  Pet.  iii.  1).  Christianity  emanci- 
pated women,  but  did  not  place  them  on  an 
equality  with  men.  As  also  saith  the  Law 
(Gen.  iii.  16;  Numb.  xxx.  3— 12> 

Ver.  33. — Let  them  ask  their  husbands. 
Here  again  St  Paul  is  dealing  with  general 
rules. 

Vers.  86 — 40,—  Appeal  and  $ummary. 

Ver.  86. — What?  An  indignant  excla- 
mation. Came  the  word  of  God  out  from 
you  1  Are  you  the  authors  of  the  Christian 
system,  that  you  are  to  lay  down  rules  about 
it?  No  rebuke  was  too  strong  for  the 
pretensions  of  these  Corinthians.  Or  came 
it  unto  you  only  1  Is  no  one  to  be  considered 
but  yourselves?  Have  you  no  respect  for 
Christian  custom  ?  and  that  when  you 
were  by  no  means  the  first  Gentile  Church 
in  Europe  (1  Thess.  i.  8)? 

Ver.  37. — If  any  man  think  himself  to 
be  a  prophet.  Test  your  pretensions  by  the 
capacity  to  recognize  that  I  have  been 
speaking  to  you  what  Christ  approves  and 
requires  (comp.  1  John  iv.  6).  Or  spiritual. 
He  has  already  said  that -to  most  of  them 
he  could  only  speak  as  carnal  (ch.  iii  1). 

Ver.  38. — Let  him  be  ignorant.  The 
formulii  seems  to  fall  under  the  idiom  which 
refuse,  s  to  say  anything  more  about  a  subject 
("  If  I  perish,  I  perish ; "  "  What  I  have 
written,  I  have  written  ; "  "  He  that  is 
filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still,"  etc.).  The  read- 
ings vary  considerably  ("  He  is  ignored;" 
"He  has  been  ignored;"  "He  shall  be 
ignored ; "  "  Let  him  be  ignored  ").  These 
other  readings  would  be  a  statement  of 
retribution  in  kind — of  God  "sprinklin'.? 
penal  blindnesses  on  forbidden  lusts."  But 
the  readiag  of  our  translation  is  on  the 
whole  the  best  supported,  and  means  that 
to  invincible  bigotry  and  ignorant  obstinncy 
St.  Paul  will  have  no  more  to  say  (Mutt 
XV.  14;  I  Tim.  vl  8— 6). 


CH.  xiT.  1— 40.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


461 


Ver.  89. — ^Wherefore.  The  final  eon- 
elneion.  Covet  .  .  .  forbid  not.  The  power 
to  preach  is  to  be  desired ;  all  that  can  be 
said  of  glossolaly  is  that  it  is  not  to  be 
absolutely  forbidden  so  long  as  the  condi- 
tions which  St.  Paul  has  laid  down  for  its 
regulation  are  observed.  But  glossolaly  is 
Ijardly  possible  under  conditions  of  order, 
decorum,  and  selt-suppression,  and  we  are 
not  surprised  that  we  hear  no  more  of  it  in 
the  Church,  but  only  in  the  wild  excitement 
of  fanatical  sects.  The  suppression,  how- 
crer,  of  the  startling  manifestation  by  no 
means  necessarily  inrolves  any  enfeeblement 
of  the  inspiring  conviction  from  which  it 
•prang.    The  brawling  torrent  which  "  foanu 


its  madness  off"  is  lost  in  the  calm  and 
majestic  flow  of  the  deep  river. 

Ver.  40.— let  all  things.  The  "but"  of 
the  original  should  not  be  omitted.  It  if 
a  final  caution  against  the  abuse  of  the 
permission  accorded  in  the  last  clause. 
Decently;  tliat  is,  "with  decorum."  Thuf 
Milton  uaes  the  term — 

"...  and  held 
Before  his  decent  stepi  a  silver  wand." 

In  Eom.  xiii.  13  and  1  Thess.  iv.  12  it  is 
translated  "  honestly,"  i.e.  honourably.  In 
order.  Time,  proportion,  regulation,  self- 
suppression,  are  as  necessary  in  woirhip  ai 
in  "  the  muaic  of  men's  Uvea." 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1 — 28,  84—40. — Grace  and  gifts.  "  Follow  after  charity,"  etc.  Then  are 
many  separate  verses  in  this  chapter  implying  or  suggesting  thoughts  capable  of  being 
wrought  out  into  sermouic  sketches,  but  my  purpose  now  is  to  take  a  homiletical 
glance  at  the  whole.  The  following  general  propositions  will  bring  all  the  parts  into  a 
logical  connection : — 

I.  The  gbace  of  chabitt  is  superior  to  all  endowments.  I  say  "  charity,"  for  1 
prefer  the  word  to  the  word  "  love,"  which  the  New  Version  gives  as  the  substitute. 
"  Charity "  implies  the  highest  forms  of  love— compassion,  sympathy,  benevolence. 
"  Follow  after  charity,  and  desire  spiritual  gifts."  Whatever  other  endowments  you  may 
possess  or  desire,  do  not  neglect  the  cultivation  of  charity.  The  remarks  of  the  illus- 
trious F.  W.  Robertson  are  so  admirable  on  tliis  point  that  I  transcribe  them  here.  In 
showing  the  difference  between  a  grace  and  a  gilt,  he  says,  "A  grace  does  notdiifer  from 
a  gift  in  this,  that  the  former  is  from  God  and  the  latter  from  nature.  As  a  creative 
power,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  nature  ;  all  is  God's.  A  grace  is  that  which  has  in  i  t 
some  moral  quality,  whereas  a  gift  does  not  necessarily  share  in  this.  Charity  implie:- 
a  certain  character,  but  a  gift,  as  for  instance  that  of  tongues,  does  not.  A  man  may 
be  Quent,  learned,  skilful,  and  be  a  good  man;  likewise,  another  may  have  the  saii.o 
(Hjwers,  and  yet  be  a  bad  man — proud,  mean,  or  obstinate.  Now,  this  distinction  explains 
at  once  why  graces  are  preferable.  Graces  are  what  the  man  is :  but  enumerate  his 
gifts,  and  you  will  only  know  what  he  1ta>.  He  is  loving ;  he  has  eloquence,  or  medical 
skill,  or  legal  knowledge,  or  the  gift  of  acquiring  languages,  or  that  of  healing.  Yea 
only  have  to  cut  out  his  tongue  or  to  impair  his  memory,  and  the  gift  is  gone. 
But,  on  the  contrary,  you  must  destroy  his  very  being,  change  him  into  another  man, 
and  obliterate  his  identity,  before  he  ceases  to  be  a  loving  man.  Therefore  you  may 
contemplate  the  gift  separate  from  the  man,  and,  whilst  you  admire  it,  you  may  despise 
him.  As  many  a  gifted  man  is  contemptible  through  being  a  slave  to  low  vices  or  to 
his  own  high  gifts.  But  you  cannot  contemplate  the  grace  separate  from  the  man — h« 
is  lovable  or  admirable  according  as  he  has  charity,  Mth,  or  self-control.  And  hence 
the  apostle  bids  the  Corinthians  undervalue  gifts  in  comparison  with  graces.  '  Follow 
after  chaiity.'  But  as  to  gifts,  they  are  not  ourselves,  but  our  accidents,  like  property, 
ancestors,  birth,  or  position  in  the  world.  But  hence,  also,  on  the  other  hand,  arises 
the  reason  of  our  due  admiration  of  gifts : '  Desire  spiritual  gifts.'  Many  religious  persons 
go  into  the  contrary  extreme :  they  call  gifts  dangerous,  ignore  them,  sneer  at  them,  and 
say  they  are  of  the  world.  No,  says  the  apostle, '  desire '  them,  look  them  in  (he  face 
as  goods;  not  tiie  highest  goods,  but  still  desirable,  like  wealth  or  health.  Only 
remember,  you  are  not  wealthy  or  good  because  of  them.  And  remember,  other  people 
are  not  bound  to  honour  you  for  them.  Admire  a  Napoleon's  genius,  do  not  despise  it, 
but  do  not  let  your  admiration  of  that  induce  you  to  give  honour  to  the  man.  Let 
there  be  no  mere  heio-worship,  that  false  modem  spirit  which  recognises  the  force  that 
if  in  s  man  as  the  only  thing  worthy  of  homage.    The  HUbject  of  this  chapter  is,  not 


462  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  00RINTHIAN8.    [oh.  xiv.  I— 40. 

the  principle  on  which  graces  are  preferable  as  gifts,  bnt  the  principle  on  which  one  pfi 
is  preferable  to  another :  '  Bather  that  ye  may  prophesy.'  Now,  the  principle  of  this 
preference  is  very  briefly  stated.  Of  gifts,  Paul  prefers  those  which  are  useful  to  those 
that  are  showy.  The  gift  of  prophecy  was  useful  to  others,  whilst  that  of  tongues  was 
only  a  luxury  for  self.  The  principle  of  this  preference  is  stated  generally  in  the 
twelfth  Terse :  '  Even  so  ye,  forasmuch  as  ye  are  zealoua  of  spiritual  gifts,  seek  that 
ye  may  excel  to  the  edifying  of  the  Church.'" 

n.  Some  bndowubkts  abe  supebiob  to  othbbs.  In  the  fifth  verse  the  apostle  says, 
"  Greater  is  he  that  prophesieth  than  he  that  speaketh  with  tongues."  In  this  chapter 
it  is  taught  that  the  didactic  faculty  is  greater  than  the  linguistic.  Sense  is  better  than 
sound,  ideas  are  better  than  words.  Ideas  are  the  seed  of  character  and  the  soul  of 
history.  Of  all  classes  of  ideas,  religious  ideas,  ideas  in  relation  to  God,  are  the  most 
salutary  and  sublime.  A  man  may  pronounce  "  sun,"  "  universe,"  "  God,"  in  fifty 
different  languages,  and  he  is  not  necessarily  richer  in  ideas  concerning  these  than  the 
man  who  can  only  speak  them  in  his  own  vernacular.  It  often  happens  that  the  man 
who  has  the  most  aptitude  in  acquiring  languages,  and  the  most  fluency  in  pronouncing 
them,  has  the  least  capacity  either  for  attaining  or-  communicating  great  ideas.  But 
the  language  of  which  the  apostle  is  here  speaking  seems  to  have  been  of  a  very 
peculiar  sort — an  unintelligible  Tocal  utterance.  It  was,  perhaps,  the  inarticulate  voice 
of  new  and  strong  emotions — an  emotioned  language.  It  is  not  necessary  to  consider 
this  gift  as  miraculous.  We  are  so  constituted  that  when  there  rises  up  in  our  souls 
a  strong  rush  of  tender  emotions,  we  feel  utterly  incapable  to  put  them  into  words. 
Sometimes  they  choke  us.  If  expressed  at  all,  they  can  only  be  in  the  quivering  lip 
and  the  gleaming  eye  and  the  convulsive  chest.  No  stranger  or  stronger  emotions  can 
enter  a  man's  soul  than  those  which  Christianity  awakens  when  it  first  takes  possession 
of  him.  The  groans,  the  sighs,  the  rapturous  shouts,  cannot  be  interpreted.  Albeit 
they  are  a  "  gift,"  a  gift  of  a  high  type,  inasmuch  as  they  are  the  expression  of  the 
most  priceless  states  of  soul.  Such  have  been  manifested  in  all  great  revivals  of  religion. 
In  my  younger  days  I  have  heard  such  untranslatable  sounds  under  the  mighty 
sermons  of  grand  old  Welsh  preachers.  The  words  imply  that  these  "  tongues," 
unintelligible  vocal  sounds,  are  valuable.  "  I  would  that  ye  all  spake  with  tongues, 
but  rather  that  ye  prophesied."  They  are  valuable  t  1.  Because  they  are  symptomatic 
tf  a  ntw  spiritiMil  life.  You  can  talk  about  the  facts  of  history,  the  principles  of 
ittience,  and  the  doctrines  of  theology,  but  not  about  the  deepest  and  divinest  things  ot 
the  heart.  They  only  come  out  in  "  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered."  2.  Because 
in  them  the  loul  expresses  its  devotions.  "  If  I  pray  in  an  uuknown  tongue,  my  spirit 
prayeth,  but  my  understanding  is  unfruitful."  It  is  delightful  to  think  of  the  human 
soul,  generally  so  immersed  in  the  selfish  and  the  sensuous,  bathing  itself  in  the  rising 
tides  of  spiiitual  emotions.  3.  Because  by  them  the  religious  sympathy  of  the 
unbelieving  is  often  excited.  "  Wherefore  tongues  are  for  a  sign,  not  to  them  that 
believe,  but  to  them  that  believe  not."  Sounds  expressive  of  human  emotion  often 
strike  potently  on  the  heart  of  the  listener.  The  emotions  of  others,  revealed  either 
in  sounds  or  "  signs,"  groans,  sighs,  or  tears,  seldom  fail  to  strike  the  deepest  chords  in 
the  hearts  of  others.  Take  the  most  thoughtless  man  into  some  vast  congregation  in 
Wales,  when  all  the  people  are  singing  their  plaintive  hymns  in  strains  of  weird  music, 
and  he  will  not  be  long,  even  if  he  understands  not  the  language,  before  he  feels  the 
influence.  Deep  emotion  often  speaks  in  the  "  unknown  tongue.  Unsyllabled  speech 
is  often  the  mightiest.  There  are  melodies  that  carry  into  the  soul  that  which  no  wwd 
can  express. 

IIL  The  highest  endowment  is  the  abiutt  vob  sfibitdal  tbaohiks.  "  Even  so 
ye,  forasmuch  as  ye  are  zealous  of  spiritual  gifts,  seek  that  ye  may  excel  to  the  edifying 
of  the  Church."  "  I  thank  my  God,  I  speak  with  tongues  more  than  ye  all."  What  do 
I  mean  by  "  teaching "  ?  Kot  the  mere  impartatioo  oi  the  facts  ot  the  gospel,  but 
rather  the  indoctrinating  of  the  soul  with  its  primary  elements  and  spirit — taking  the 
spirit  of  the  truth  out  of  the  letter  and  transfusing  it  into  the  souk  of  men.  On  thii 
subject  the  apostle's  language  suggests  three  remarks.  1.  Uiat  the  gospel  give*  te  it$ 
genuine  disciples  intelligent  convictions  that  should  be  communicated  to  others.  Thia  !■ 
certainly  implied  in  the  words,  "Forasmuch  as  ye  are  zealous  oi  spiritual  gifts,  leek 
that  ye  may  excel  to  the  edifying  of  the  Church."    He  who  has  accepted  the  gospel  in 


<a.xiT.  1— 4a]    THE  FIRST  BPI3TLB  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa  463 

reality  becomM  initinct  with  mighty «nd  irrepressible  ideas — ideas  which  he  "cannot 
but  apeak,"  for  "  necessity  is  laid  "  upon  him  to  do  so.  They  are  given  to  him  to  com- 
municate, not  to  monopolize,  and  on  their  communication  the  spiritual  life,  growth, 
and  perfection  of  mankind  depend.  Paul  assumes  in  the  whole  of  these  verses,  not 
only  that  the  members  of  the  Corinthian  Church  ought  to  do  so,  but  that  they  did  so. 
"  How  is  it  then,  brethren  ?  when  ye  come  together,  every  one  of  you  hath  a  psalm, 
hath  a  doctrine,  hath  a  tongue,  hath  a  revelation,  hath  an  interpretation.  Let  all  things 
be  done  unto  edifying."  2.  That  these  intelligent  convktiuns  can  only  be  conveyed  to 
others  hy  intelligible  language.  "  Now,  brethren,  if  1  come  unto  you  speaking  with 
tongues,  what  shall  I  profit  you,  except  I  shall  speak  to  you  either  by  revelation,  or  by 
knowledge,  or  by  prophesying,  or  by  doctrine  ?  "  The  apostle  proceeds  to  say  that 
mere  "sound"  is  not  worth  much.  "Things  without  life,"  such  as  the  "pipe"  and 
the  "harp,"  produce  sound.  Nay,  more,  unless  the  sound  gives  out  clear  and  distinct 
ideas,  it  is  not  only  useless,  but  injurious.  "  If  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound, 
who  shall  prepare  himself  to  the  battle?"  If  in  battle  the  trumpet  does  not  sound 
clearly  the  "advauce"  or  "retreat"  when  intended,  it  is  worse  than  useless.  "So  likewise 
ye,  except  ye  utter  by  the  tongue  words  easy  to  be  understood,  how  shall  it  be  known 
what  is  spoken?  for  ye  shall  speak  into  the  air."  Whatever  might  be  the  unin- 
telligible utterances,  whether  an  unvernacular  language  or  the  unSyllabled  expressions 
of  emotion,  he  indicates  their  inadequacy  without  interpretation  to  convey  to  the  hearer 
intelligent  convictions  of  gospel  truth.  3.  That  the  use  of  a  language  which  the 
listener  cannot  understand  should  not  he  indulged  in.  (1)  Not  in  public  devotion. 
"  For  if  I  pray  in  an  unknown  tongue,  my  spirit  prayeth,  but  my  understanding  is 
anfifvdtful,"  etc.  (vers.  14 — 16).  Unintelligible  utterances  in  public  devotion  fail  to  excite 
in  the  assembly  a  spirit  of  united  worship.  "  How,"  in  such  a  case,  "  shall  he  that 
occupieth  the  room  of  the  unlearned  say  Amen  at  thy  giving  of  thanks,  seeing  he 
uuderstandeth  not  what  thou  sayest?  "  So  far  as  the  individual  himself  ia  concerned, 
it  does  not  matter  with  what  tongue  he  speaks,  or  whether  he  speaks  at  alL  "  For 
thou  verily  givest  thanks  well,  but  the  other  is  not  edifled."  (2)  Not  in  public 
ministration.  Alas  1  it  is  to  be  feared  the  language  of  many  a  sermon  is  an  "unknown 
tongue  " — to  illiterate  audiences,  many  syllabled,  strangely  compounded,  high-sounding, 
technical  language.  Such  language  gratifies  the  vanity  of  the  speaker,  but  wastes  the 
time  and  tires  the  patience  of  the  hearer.  "  I  thank  my  God,  I  speak  with  tongues 
more  than  ye  all :  yet  in  the  Church  I  had  rather  speak  five  words  with  my  under- 
stiinding,  that  by  my  voice  I  might  teach  others  also,  than  ten  thousand  words  in  an 
unknown  tongue."  The  apostle  goes  on  to  indicate  that  such  unintelligible  utterances 
m  the  Church  are:  (a)  Childish.  "Brethren,  be  not  children  in  understanding :  how- 
beit  in  malice  be  ye  children,  but  in  understanding  be  men."  They  who  prize  such 
utterances  are  infanta  in  knowledge,  (b)  Useless.  "  In  the  Law  it  ia  written.  With 
men  of  other  tonguea  and  other  lips  will  I  speak  unto  this  people."  As  if  the  apostle 
had  said,  "  Remember,  there  was  a  time  in  Jewish  history  when  unintelligible  language 
was  a  sign  sent  by  God,  but  it  proved  unavailing  so  far  as  concerned  the  conversion  of 
Israel."  (e)  Confounding.  "  If  therefore  the  whole  Church  be  come  together  into  one 
place,  and  all  speak  with  tongues,  and  there  come  in  those  that  are  unlearned,  oi 
unbelievers,  will  they  not  say  that  ye  are  mad  ?  "  (d)  To  be  of  any  service,  they  must 
be  interpreted.  "  If  there  be  no  interpreter,  let  him  keep  silence  in  the  Ohurch;  and 
let  him  speak  to  himself,  and  to  God." 

Vers.  29^33.— PauTf  idea  of  the  Christian  Ohurch  in  asumXty.  "  Let  th*  prophets 
speak  two  or  three,  and  let  the  other  judge/'  eta  From  these  words  we  may  Inte  that 
Paul  considered— 

I.  That  the  Christian  Church  in  assembly,  on  the  SAia  oooabion,  KiaHT  mA.rm 
SBVERAii  sPBAKEBa  TO  ASDBESS  THBM.  "  Let  the  prophcts  [or, '  teachers  *]  speak  two  or 
three."  "  For  ye  may  all  prophesy  one  by  one."  If  this  be  so :  1.  Should  Chriatian 
teaching  be  regarded  as  a  profession  t  It  ia  so  now :  men  are  brought  up  to  it,  trained 
for  it,  and  live  by  it,  as  architects,  lawyers,  doctors.  Surely  preaching  the  gospel  should 
no  more  be  regarded  as  a  profession  than  the  talk  of  loving  parents  to  their  children. 
2.  Is  the  Church  justified  in  confining  its  attention  to  the  mmittry  of  o«m  man  1  In 
most  modem  congregations  there  are  some  Christian  men  who,  by  natural  ability,  by 


164  THK  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [cat  jot.  1—40, 

experimental  knuwlcuge  and  inspiration,  are  far  more  qualified  to  instruct  and  OomfoTt 
the  people  thau  their  profassional  and  stated  minister.  Surely  official  preaching  has  no 
authority,  either  in  Scripture,  reason,  or  experience,  and  it  must  come  to  an  end  sooner 
or  later.  Every  Ciiristian  man  should  be  a  preacher.  Woie  the  half-hour  allotted  ia 
Church  services  for  the  sermon  to  be  occupied  by  three  or  four  Christly  men,  thought- 
ful and  reverent,  with  the  capability  of  expression  withal,  it  would  not  only  be  far  mora 
interesting,  but  more  profitably  spent  than  now. 

IE.  That  the  Christian  Church  in  assembly  might  allow  OMX  of  m  oodlt  men  TO 
RISE  AND  8PSAK  ON  THB  INSPIRATION  OF  THE  MOMENT.  "  If  anything  be  revealed  to 
another  that  sitteth  by,  let  the  first  hold  his  peace."  This  does  not  mean,  I  presume, 
that  the  one  who  is  speaking  is  to  be  interrupted,  but  that  after  he  has  delivered 
liis  message  another,  if  he  felt  truly  inspired  to  do  so,  might  rise  and  address  the 
audience.  May  it  not  be  that  under  every  discourse  there  might  be  some  one  or  more 
in  the  audience  so  divinely  excited  with  a  rush  of  holy  thought,  that  he  craves  for  an 
utterance,  not  for  his  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  others ;  and  why  should  he  not 
have  the  opportunity?  What  an  interest  such  an  event  would  add  to  •  mligioua 
service  1 ' 

III.  That  the  Christian  Church  in  assembly  should  bdbuit  the  uttebanoeb  of  iro 
TEACHERS  TO  A  DEVOUT  CRITICAL  JUDGMENT.  "  Let  the  Other  judge,"  or,  as  the  New 
Version  has  it,  "  Let  the  others  discern  [or, '  discriminate ']."  The  people  were  not  to 
accept  as  a  matter  of  course  all  that  the  prophets  or  teachers  spake  to  them ;  for  even 
were  they  inspired,  they  were  not  infallible.  They  were  to  act  as  it  is  said  the  Bereans 
did,  who  "  searched  the  Scriptures  daily  whether  those  things  were  so."  Ah  me  1  it 
congregations  were  so  to  act,  there  would-  soon  come  an  end  to  the  crudities,  the 
assumptioDS,  and  the  dogmas  of  modern  pulpits. 

IV.  That  the  Christian  Church  in  assembly  should  in  all  its  services  maintain 
OBDBB.  "  And  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to  the  prophets.  For  God  is  not 
the  author  of  confusion,  but  of  peace,  as  in  all  Churches  of  the  saints."  It  is  a  ch.irac- 
teristic  of  a  true  teacher  that,  however  full  of  inspiration,  he  can  so  master  his  impulses 
as  to  prevent  confusion.  This  should  always  be  done,  "  for  God  is  not  the  author  of 
confusion,  but  of  peace."  Notwithstanding  all  the  liberty  of  teaching,  all  the  enthu- 
siasm of  the  new  life,  where  Christianity  reigns  there  will  be  no  disorder ;  all  will  be 
{leace.  There  is  an  ordei  in  dead  mechanism,  and  there  is  order,  too,  in  the  lou  of 
ocean  and  in  the  thunderstorm.    All  that  is  Divine  is  under  law. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Van.  \—i,—Love  eontroh  zeal  in  behalf  of  spirittuil  gifti.  In  the  opening  Tctae 
we  huve  three  ideas,  viz.  love  as  a  virtue  to  be  diligently  sought  and  practised, 
spiritual  gifts  as  objects  worthy  ot  desire,  and  prophesying  as  a  gift  among  gifts  to  be 
especially  prized.  "  Bather  that  ye  may  prophesy  "  is  the  formative  thought  of  this 
chapter,  and  it  must  be  kept  in  view  by  tlie  reader,  since  it  is  explicit  or  implicit  in 
every  associated  idea.  But  this  leading  thought  is  closely  connected  with  the  twelfil. 
and  thirteenth  chapters,  and  this  also  must  be  considered  by  the  reader.  To  understand 
the  reasoning  of  the  apostle  in  the  fourteenth  chapter  and  sympathize  with  the  ferroui 
of  his  exhortation  in  the  "  rather  that  ye  may  prophesy,"  remember  that  he  is  con- 
templating prophecy  from  the  standpoint  of  love.  How  else,  forsooth,  could  he  regard 
it,  either  in  the  lo^ic  as  bearing  on  intellect,  or  in  the  appeal  as  applied  to  experience,  oi 
in  their  united  effect  on  Christian  character  ?  Prophecy,  in  the  light  here  presented, 
is  not  simply  a  revelation  ol  God's  will  and  wisdom  to  others,  but  likewise  a  revelation 
of  love  as  •  conscious  influence  pervading,  inspiring,  controlling  the  soul  of  the  prophet 
ot  teacher.  It  is  a  voice  from  God  himself  by  the  Spirit.  It  is  a  Divine  voice,  more- 
over, in  tones  and  accents  most  truly,  most  thoroughly,  human,  because  of  tender 
sympathy  with  the  needs  of  its  fellow-men  and  their  dependence  on  it  f<»  guidance, 
help,  furtherance,  in  the  salvation  of  their  souls.  One  of  the  aspects  of  love  as  the 
"  greatest "  instantly  comes  before  the  eye.  Prophecy,  in  the  case  of  the  man  so  gifted, 
is  an  organ  of  his  love,  so  that  he  teaches,  not  to  enjoy  the  activity  and  brilliance  of  his 
intelleot,  or  make  in  any  way  a  demonstrAtion  of  himself,  but  solely  to  benefit  hii 


CH.  xiT.  1—40.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  465 

fellowi.  Actuated  wholly  by  brotherly  sentiment,  he  comes  down  from  the  pedestal 
of  complacent  self-regard,  and  values  his  endowment  in  the  degree  that  he  is  able  to 
take  the  common  level,  and  thereby  instruct  and  console  his  brethren.  Why,  then, 
should  the  argument  in  this  chapter  follow  the  eulogy  on  love  so  closely  ?  One  reason 
— the  chief  reason — we  may  suppose  to  be  that  the  gift  of  "  tongues  "  was  overvalaed, 
and,  as  a  consequence,  the  capacity  to  teach  was  depreciated.  Without  disparaging 
the  "tongues"  when  rightly  used,  St.  Paul  lays  a  very  proper  stress  on  teaching,  and 
gives  it  the  preference,  on  the  ground  that  it  allows  a  fuller,  freer,  more  effective 
manifestation  of  love.  "  Now  abideth  faith,  hope,  love,  these  three ;  but  the  greatest 
ot  these  is  love."  And  so,  too,  now  abide  the  "spiritual  gifts,"  the  gifts  in  genernl, 
"  tongues"  and  "prophecy"  in  particular,  but  the  "  greates;  of  these"  is  "prophecy." 
The  parallelism  is  complete.  And  how  easily  St.  Paul  glides  from  the  chapter  on  love 
as  the  greatest  among  virtues  to  the  chapter  on  teaching  as  the  greatest  among  gifts  I 
One  would  have  supposed  that,  after  such  an  effort  of  analytic  and  descriptive  intellect 
and  its  interblending  with  emotional  outgoings,  there  would  be  a  rebound,  a  pause  for 
nature  to  recover  from  an  intense  exertion ;  but  this  is  not  apparent.  The  strong  man 
is  still  strong,  the  eye  beams  as  brightly  and  the  hand  moves  as  firmly  as  before,  and 
the  eulogist  of  love  passes  into  the  eulogist  of  prophecy  with  no  change  other  than  that 
which  the  nature  of  the  new  topic  necessitates.  The  argument  in  ver.  2  takes  an 
antithetic  form.  There  is  speaking  in  an  unknown  tongue.  The  speech  is  not  a 
communication  of  wisdom  to  others,  but  a  mysterious  activity  that  exalts  the  speaker 
above  the  ordinary  sphere  of  self-consciousness  and  is  ecstatic.  "No  man  understandeth 
him."  There  is  the  outward  hearing  on  man's  part,  but  no  inward  bearing.  God  is  the 
only  listener  who  comprehends  him;  "He  speaketh  . . .  unto  God;"  "  In  the  spirit  he 
speaketh  mysteries."  The  mysteries  are  things  "  which  are  hidden  from  the  hearers, 
and  sometimes  also  from  the  speaker  himself"  (Alford).  Was  language  a  sublimer 
function  than  we  have  comprehended?  Are  there  uses  of  expressional  power  of  whicli 
we  know  nothing?  Are  there  utterances  of  intuition  beyond  our  power  to  grasp?  Is 
there  some  one  vast  generalization  of  speech  as  interiorily  related  to  pure  reason,  under 
which,  M  fraj^mentary  forms  of  embodied  thought  and  as  representations  of  the 
functional  energies  of  the  mental  faculties,  all  the  utilities  of  speech  are  classified? 
We  cannot  tell.  1.  All  we  know  is  that  the  speaker  here  under  notice  speaks  from 
his  "spirit;"  intellect,  emotion,  the  entire  nature,  are  simultaneously  excited. 
Barriers  between  the  faculties  are  broken  down ;  speech  is  no  longer  merely  philosophic, 
or  poetic,  or  impassioned,  but  it  is  in  some  occult  way  the  articulation  of  the  spirit  in 
its  wholeness.  No  man  ever  said  anything  that  he  could  look  upon  as  the  complete 
expression  of  himself.  Before  he  utters  his  greatest  thoughts,  he  is  very  hopeful  of 
doing  full  justice  to  them ;  afterwards  he  is  half  abashed,  deplores  his  shortcoming,  and 
gtizes  with  a  feeling  somewhat  reproachful  on  the  ideal  that  retreated  afar.  Now,  in 
the  instance  St.  Paul  has  in  view,  the  speaker  is  under  the  perfected  sway  of  his  spirit, 
and  he  transcends  the  limits  of  habitual  consciousness.  2.  All  we  know  is  that  this 
exceptional  speaker  utters  "  mysteries."  And  the  "  mysteries,"  out  of  whose  deep 
solitudes  the  voice  comes,  remain  mysteries ;  neither  word  nor  tone,  neither  look  nor 
gesture,  gives  any  solution  of  the  meaning.  The  secrets  have  taken  on  sound,  but  the 
sense  is  concealed,  and  the  very  sound  is  a  deeper  silence.  And  has  not  such  silence 
its  uses?  Is  it  a  mere  image  to  the  fancy  that  Milton  gives  when  he  so  finely 
penonifies  Silence  in  paradise  as  pleased  with  the  song  of  the  "wakeful  nightingale  "  ? 
Or  when  Thomson  breathes  the  invocation:  "Come,  then,  expressive  Silence,  muse 
his  praise"?  And,  in  the  present  case,  the  sound  falls  hack  into  silence,  but, 
nevertheless,  the  "  unknown  tongue  "  is  among  "  spiritual  gifts,"  and  fills  its  sphere  in 
the  spiritual  economy  of  Christ's  universe.  What,  then,  is  the  object  of  St.  Paul's 
argument?  It  is  a  question  of  comparative  worth  that  he  discusses.  These  Corio> 
thians  are  fascinated  by  the  "  tongues,"  and,  in  their  passion  for  high  excitementa, 
have  been  led  to  exaggerate  beyond  bounds  the  ecstatic  singularity  of  the  "  unknown 
tongue."  This  unhappy  craving  for  morbid  and  tumultuous  agitation,  this  delight  in 
sensations  and  emotions,  threatened  the  decay,  ay,  the  destruction  of  spirituality.  It 
was  the  spirit  of  man,  indeed,  but  the  spirit  borrowing  the  impulses  of  the  lower  man, 
instead  of  holding  itself  aloof  from  a  depraving  alliance  with  ungovemed  blood  and 
nwTM.  The  remedy  of  the  evil  was  in  a  proper  estimate  of  the  giftf  ai  relatiT*  to 
I.  oonnrrHun.  8  ■ 


4M  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xiv.  1—40 

brotherhood  and  helpfulness  of  olhers.  Therefore,  "desire  .  .  .  rarher  that  ye  may 
prophesy."  And  wherefore  ?  That  ye  may  "  speak  unto  men  "  with  three  ends  in 
view,  namely,  edification,  exhortation,  comfort.  To  edify  ia  to  build  up  the  whole 
framework  of  Christian  character ;  to  exhort  is  to  incite  to  duty  by  timely,  appropriate, 
and  effectual  motives;  to  comfort  is  to  show  tenderness  of  fellow-feeling  and  be 
partners  of  the  cares,  burdens,  and  sorrows  of  others.  What  a  blessed  prerogative,  to 
go  forth  from  the  isolations  of  intellect  and  from  the  selfish  exdusiveness  that  our  o-.rii 
anxieties  and  sufferings  not  infrequently  bind  upon  us,  and  impart  ourselves  in  large 
sympathies  to  such  as  in  their  weakness  need  our  strength  I  "Himself;"  there  the 
benefit  lies.  Lifted  to  a  lofty  height,  borne  upward  from  one  sublimity  to  another, 
rapt  and  entranced,  it  is  still  himself  that  is  the  party  concerned.  There  may  be 
quickening  and  ennobling;  the  immense  realm  within  the  soul,  where  the  surprises  ot 
possible  cunsciousness  are  dormant,  may  suddenly  yield  their  resources  and  give  the 
soul  a  new  and  astonishing  sense  of  itself;  yet,  despite  ot  all  such  results,  it  is 
himself,  first  and  last.  But  he  "  that  prophcsieth  edifieth  the  Church."  A  community 
gets  the  benefit,  not  the  mere  man  "  himself."  Is  St.  Paul  depreciating  the  speaking 
with  tongues?  Hear  his  hearty  wish :  " I  would  that  ye  all  spake  with  tongues."  In 
perfect  consistency  with  this  testimony  to  the  worth  of  the  tongues,  he  adds  that  he 
desires  for  them  more  ardently  the  gift  of  prophecy.  Why  this  more  fervent  wish  7 
Because  the  prophet  or  teacher  is  greater  than  the  speaker  with  tongues  not  interpreted 
— greater  because  be  builds  up  and  inspirits  and  cheers  his  brethren  more  than  the 
mystical  speaker  with  "  an  unknown  tongue ; "  greater  because  "  it  is  more  blessed  to 
give  than  to  receive." — ^L. 

Vers.  6 — 13. — Argument  continued  and  illustrated.  Greater  is  the  teacher  than 
the  speaker  in  a  tongue  not  interpreted,  was  the  statement  of  the  apostle  in  the  fifth 
verse.  Supix)se,  then,  that  even  he  were  to  address  these  Corinthians  "with  tongues ; " 
would  not  the  edification  be  confined  to  himself?  There  would  be  no  exception  in  his 
case,  none  in  his  favour  as  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  and  hence  his  usefulness,  no 
matter  what  he  might  say,  would  be  at  mn  end,  for  lack  of  interpretation.  "  What 
shall  I  profit  you  ?  "  The  profit  is  only  possible  by  means  of  doctrine  and  knowledge. 
Tongues  unexplained-  convey  no  doctrine  and  knowleilge,  and  hence,  as  relative  to  the 
hearers,  are  nugatory.  For  instance,  there  are  musical  instruments,  "  pipe  or  harp," 
that  have  a  language  in  the  broad  sense  of  the  word,  and  convey  their  meanings  if 
skilfiilly  used.  The  instrument  in  the  hands  of  an  intelligent  performer,  though  in 
itself  "  without  life,"  yet  receives  life  as  it  were  from  him  who  knows  how  to  handle  it. 
A  dead  thing,  yet  his  breath  or  his  touch  imparts  a  representative  vitality  to  its  sounds, 
and  you  hear  in  those  sounds  the  sentiments  and  emotions  of  the  souL  What  a  range 
they  have,  rising  and  falling  by  turns,  exulting,  sorrowing,  shouting,  wailing  I  To 
effect  this,  there  must  be  "  a  distinction  in  the  sounds ; "  the  instrument  must  obey  its 
laws,  and  the  laws  are  dictated  by  the  art  of  music.  And  he  argues  further,  that 
a  trumpet  in  Imttle  can  give  such  discriminating  sounds  as  to  direct  the  movements  of 
soldiers.  The  commanding  officer,  though  distant,  speaks  to  the  trumpeter,  and  the 
trumpeter  conveys  the  order  through  the  trumpet.  A  thing  "  without  life,"  and  yet 
it  outreaches  the  compass  of  the  living  voice  and  is  fully  understood,  for  it  gives  no 
"  uncertain  sound."  Musical  instruments  are  interpreters.  Their  utility  exists  in  their 
intelligible  modulations.  If  it  were  otherwise,  they  would  but  confuse  and  bewilder. 
The  comparison  is  promptly  applied.  "  So  likewise  ye,"  with  all  your  admiration  for 
"tongues"  and  your  disposition  to  give  them  pre-eminence  among  the  gifts,  are 
indulging  in  a  wild  and  incoherent  display,  unless  you  "  utter  by  the  tongue  words 
easy  to  be  imderstood."  Words  are  not  sufficient ;  they  must  be  words  easj/  to  b$ 
understood.  The  capacity  of  the  hearer,  the  humblest  in  the  congregation,  must  be 
thoughtfully  regarded,  otherwise  they  are  to  him  idle  rhapsodies;  "ye  shall  speak  into 
the  air."  If  neither  "  pipe,"  nor  "  harp,"  nor  "  trumpet "  give  an  "  uncertain  sound," 
still  less  could  it  be  said  of  human  voices  (languages')  that  they  are  unintelligible. 
"Many  kinds  are  in  the  world,  and  none  of  them  without  signification."  Varieties 
exist.  The  snr£>oe  of  the  globe  is  nut  more  diversified  than  language,  and  yet,  as  tiie 
globe  is  one,  so  are  these  languages  one,  although  very  unequal  as  to  capacity  for  the 
toungtaat  of  idaia.    Bat  b  the  "tongue"  like  these  voices?    If  0'>t,  then  he  that 


ni.ziT.  1— 4a]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIAN&  467 

Bpmketh  In  this  way  is  a  barbarian ;  and  would  you  barbarians  in  your  Christian 
relations,  outside  foreigners,  you  and  your  fellow-citizens  in  the  commonwealth  oi 
Christ  shut  out  from  intelligible  communication  with  one  another?  We  can  an,  while 
reading  St.  Paul's  argument,  what  force  it  contains.  Pentecost  had  restored  what 
Babel  had  destroyed ;  the  amiiitious  tower  that  was  to  reach  so  lii^h  had  been  arrested 
by  confusion  of  tongues;  men  had  scattered  from  one  great  centre,  and  human 
centralization  had  been  stopped  in  the  evil  form  threatenc  I  Pentecost  had  enabled 
men  to  co-operate;  all  languages  could  now  be  used  as  vehicles  of  making  known  the 
gospel,  and  the  builders  could  work  together  on  the  temple  of  the  Church.  Pentecost, 
nowever,  was  here  annulled,  and  Corinth  was  making  ready  to  scatter  her  Christiau 
I'opulation,  to  alienate  them  from  community  of  impulse  and  aim,  and  changing  the 
members  of  the  Church  in  this  respect  into  barbarians  to  one  another.  "  Even  so  ye," 
declares  the  apostle,  who  are  "  zealous  of  spiritual  gifts,"  should  esteem  it  your  first 
concern  to  edify  the  Church.  "  Wherefore,"  he  adds  in  application,  let  the  speaker  in 
an  unknown  tongue  "  pray  that  he  may  interpret."  Whatever  construction  may  be 
given  this  difficult  passage,  it  is  certain  that  St.  Paul  intended  to  teach  the  Corinthians 
the  absolute  insulation  of  this  sort  of  speech,  its  essential  characteristic  as  opposed  to 
the  true  function  of  language,  and  the  complete  exclusion  of  its  possessor  from  th« 
fellowihip  of  the  outward  world. — L. 

Vera.  14 — 22^Further  enforcement  of  the  argument.  At  this  point  In  the  diieassion 
St.  Paul  refers  to  the  distinction  between  the  spirit  and  the  understanding.  Such  a  dis- 
tinction must  be  recognized  or  his  argument  has  no  basis  in  the  nature  of  the  human 
mind,  and,  if  there  be  no  foundation  in  the  laws  of  the  mind  for  this  difference  between 
Spirit  and  understanding,  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spu-it  in  the  two  forms  under 
notice  are  inconceivable.  Man  has  a  spirit — a  power  of  introversion  that  withdraws 
itself  from  the  avenues  of  outward  activity ;  acapacity  of  absorption  in  its  own  thoughts 
and  feelings  as  sulf-related  ;  a  susoeptilnlity  to  receive  Divine  influence  as  an  experience 
restricted  to  its  own  intuitions  and  making  the  man  himself  the  supreme  object.  Man, 
too,  has  an  understanding,  and  its  functions  are  to  connect  him  with  other  men.  Bu''. 
is  there  an  impassable  gulf  between  the  two  ?  Certainly  not ;  the  spirit  may  co-operate 
with  the  understanding.  Left  to  its  own  ecstatic  freedom,  the  spirit  may  soar  and  shine, 
but  the  flight  is  in  loneliness  and  the  resplendency  unwitnessed.  In  this  condition  the 
body  indicates  occult  activities  that  we  do  not  comprehend,  and  its  physiological  expres- 
sions are,  in  a  certain  sense,  "  unknown  tongues."  On  the  other  hand,  this  state  may 
be  translated  from  the  unknown  into  the  known  by  means  of  the  understanding,  and  thus 
the  latter,  which  was  previously  "  unfruitful,"  becomes  fruitful  of  thought  and  emotion 
in  others.  Prayer  and  praise  will  thus  be  mutual  to  spirit  and  understanding  in  the 
oiiginal  party.  No  longer  will  these  be  dissevered  forces,  but  coalescent  for  the  common 
good,  and  the  "unlearned"  can  intelligibly  say,  "Amen."  What  ia  worship  without 
this  true  "  Amen  "  ?  liesponse  there  must  be ;  heart  must  go  up  to  Qod  with  heart ; 
and  the  glad  "  Amen  "  will  be  the  assurance  of  this  beautiful  mutuality.  The  value  of 
this  single  word  cannot  be  measured.  What  a  history  it  has  I  Far  iKtck  in  Hebrew 
life,  when  the  psalms  gave  voice  and  sentiment  to  the  thanksgiving  of  the  nation ;  fiirther 
back  yet,  when  Israel  wandered  in  the  desert ;  in  the  land  of  promise,  in  the  lands  of 
captivity ;  heard  in  the  acknowledgment  of  chastening  and  in  the  celebrations  of  return- 
ing light  and  hope;  temple  and  synagogue,  homes  and  booths,  war  and  peace, repeating 
its  loud  echoes ;  and  descending  through  the  Christian  ages  with  a  deeper  and  more 
touching  import,  and  everywhere  an  utterance  precious  to  faith  and  sympathy,  whether 
in  lowly  kirk  or  magnificent  cathedral ; — what  a  past  this  word  preserves  1  "  True 
or  faithful,"  how  could  its  meaning  but  survive  in  the  long  struggle  of  truth  and  fidelity 
for  triumph  in  the  world  ?  And  what  honour  comes  to  it  when  Christ  himself  is  repre- 
sented in  the  Apocalypse  as  the  "  Amen,  the  faithful  and  true  Witness  "  |  No  marvel, 
then,  tiiat  St  Paul  felt  the  thrill  of  this  "  Amen  "  when  he  said  that,  though  he 
spoke  "  with  tongues  more  than  ye  all,"  yet  he  would  "  rather  speak  five  words  "  with 
hia  understanding,  and  so  teach  others,  than  "  ten  thousand  words  in  an  unknown 
tongne."  No  higher  estimate  than  this  was  ever  put  on  practical  wisdom.  The  best 
and  ptofoundest  utilitarian  is  the  man  w'lo  advocates  utility  on  this  high  ground.  St 
Paul  argued  ■•  warmly  in  behalf  of  the  "  understanding  "  because  he  ftdt  w  deeply  the 


168  THE  PIEST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  C0BINTHIAN8.    [oh.  mit.  1— 40 

glory  of  the  human  "ipirit."  Hence  the  exhortation :  "Brethren  .  ,  .  In  understand- 
ing be  men,"  and  this  manliness  is  enforced  by  an  appeal  to  Jewish  history  (Isa.  zxviii, 
11),  wherein  is  seen  the  threatened  judgment  of  Jehovah  on  those  who  despised  th« 
simplicity  and  truthfulness  of  Old  Testament  teaching.  Then  comes  the  significant 
■•  wherefore,"  followed  by  two  ideas :  (1)  the  tongues  are  a  ''sign"  from  God,  and  meant 
for  unbelievers  who  have  not  hearkened  to  his  words ;  and  (2)  prophesying  or  teaching 
was  a  sign  to  believers,  a  token  of  blessing,  an  earnest  for  the  future,  a  proof  of  God'a 
interest  in  them  ;  a  sign  in  the  one  case  of  imperuiing  evil,  in  the  other  of  good  in 
immediate  realization  and  good  in  future  store.  Would  he  not  rather  preach  a  gospel 
to  belief  than  to  unbelief?  a  gospel  to  hope  in  preference  to  apprehension?  a  gospel 
of  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,  instead  of  a  gospel  of  exceeding  great  and 
awful  threatenings  ?  "  Five  words  "  to  enlighten,  cheer,  inspire,  the  heart  of  belief  and 
love  outweighed  "  ten  thousand  "  addressed  as  a  rebuke  and  a  warning  to  men  who  had 
willed  not  to  hearken  to  God's  voice. — ^Lt 

Vers.  23 — 32. — How  a  iptctator  would  regard  the  tongues ;  the  gradou*  effectt  ^ 
prophesying  ;  interpretation  or  silence.  Suppose  that  the  whole  Church  were  to 
assemble  in  one  place  (argues  the  apostle),  and  all  "  speak  with  tongues ; '  the 
unchecked  energy  pouring  itself  forth  in  many  and  discordant  volumes,  each  speaker 
borne  away  on  the  mighty  tide  of  his  own  transport;  no  one  consiiterate  of  another; 
the  ear  scarcely  cognizant  of  the  sound  issuing  from  the  lips,  the  eye  insensible  to  the 
impression  made  on  a  beholder ; — suppose  such  a  state  of  things  occurring  in  the  Corin- 
thian Church,  and,  amid  the  disorder  and  commotion,  the  "unlearned  "  (those  unac- 
quainted with  the  meaning  of  the  exhibition)  or  the  "  unbelievers  "  (such  as  were  not 
converted  to  Christianity)  were  to  make  their  appearance  and  look  upon  the  scene; 
would  they  not  think  them  "  mad "  ?  Instantly  he  reverses  the  supposition.  The 
work  of  teaching  is  in  progress,  and  the  Church  is  receiving  the  doctrines,  duties,  conso- 
lations, of  the  gospel  in  appropriate  methods  of  instruction.  A  person,  who  is  unlearned 
or  unbelieving,  enters  the  assembly.  Ho  hears,  is  able  to  understand,  is  "  convinced  of 
all"  and  "judged  of  all."  The  word  reaches  his  inmost  consciousness,  and  he  ii 
revealed  to  himself.  Perception,  reflection,  self-scrutiny,  judgment,  conscience,  an 
aroused  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  for  the  first  time,  perchance,  he  listens  to  the  voice  <k 
his  own  instincts  in  the  articulations  of  others.  It  is  usually  through  some  mediating 
aoul  that  God  makes  us  known  to  ourselves.  In  our  darkness  the  li;4ht  is  reflected 
as  that  of  the  moon  on  the  night,  and  the  sunrise  and  the  day  follow  afterwards.  And, 
in  this  case,  the  unlearned  or  unbeliever  has  the  "  secrets  of  his  heart  made  manifest" 
The  throne  of  judgment  is  set  within ;  the  hour  is  calm  and  meditative ;  the  man  ii 
brought  to  the  bar;  and  the  ministering  servants  of  the  eternal  Judge  are  here  with 
their  testimony.  Most  of  all,  the  Divine  Agent  is  here,  of  whom  Jesus  Christ  said, 
"  He  shall  testify  of  me."  Step  by  step  the  trial  advances.  Memory  speaks  from  the 
past,  fear  speaks  of  the  future.  The  sense  of  guilt  is  awakened,  "and  so  falling  down 
on  his  face,"  overpowered  by  his  convictions,  "he  will  worship  God,  and  report  that  Gfod 
is  in  you  of  a  truth."  How  is  this  ?  In  the  one  case,  there  is  an  impression  of  madmen ; 
in  the  other,  God  is  felt  to  be  with  these  men.  In  the  former,  religion  was  an  unintel- 
ligible thing;  in  the  latter,  it  was  comprehensible.  Becall  the  power  of  the  "five 
words  "  spoken  to  the  understanding,  versus  the  "  ten  thousand  "  uttered  in  rhapsody,  and 
the  secret  is  explained.  What,  then,  is  the  practical  inference  ?  "  If,  when  you  an 
met  together,  one  is  prepared  to  sing  a  hymn  of  praise,  another  to  exercise  his  gift  of 
teaching,  another  his  gift  of  tongues,  another  to  deliver  a  revelation,  another  an  intei^ 
pretation"  (Conybeare  and  Howson) ;  shall  any  of  God's  gifts  be  suppressed  or  discarded  ? 
Room  for  all,  need  for  all,  blessings  for  all,  blessings  in  all,  exist ;  and  none  must  be 
suffered  to  tall  into  desuetude  or  cast  away  as  useless.  Let  each  have  time  and  oppor- 
tunity, subject  to  one  inflexible  condition :  "  Let  all  things  be  done  nnto  edifying." 
Edify  has  had  emphasis  after  emphasis  in  the  conduct  of  the  argument,  and  atirely  the 
Corinthians  can  be  at  no  loss  to  understand  its  meaning.  But  St.  Paul  will  particulaiiiw. 
Edification  allows  the  use  of  tongues.  Edification  requires,  however,  that  the  tonguei 
he  used  in  order  and  under  strict  propriety.  The  order  and  propriety  are  specified ;  "Ii 
there  be  any  who  speak  in  tongues,  let  not  more  than  two,  or  at  the  most  three,  speak 
(tu  the  same  assembly) ;  and  let  them  speak  in  turn ;  and  let  the  same  iuterprete; 


eH.xnr.1— 40.J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANC.  46E 

explain  the  words  of  all "  (Conybeare  and  Howson).  How  important  the  interpretei 
»as  is  obvious,  for  he  says,  "  If  there  be  no  interpret^er,"  let  him  who  speaks  in  tongues 
"keep  silence  in  the  Church."  Will  this  destroy  his  devotional  spirit?  Nay;  he  may 
still  commune  silently  with  himself  and  with  God.  Prophets  may  also  "  speak  two  or 
1  hree,"  but  edi  fication  holds  them  likewise  under  rule.  "  Let  the  others  judge."  Inspired 
teachers  were  amenable  to  the  Church  in  thu  persons  of  those  who  possessed  the  gift 
of  discernment  as  a  specialty  from  the  Holy  Ghost.  Furthermore,  edification  demands, 
that  if  the  Spirit  suddenly  and  powerfully  act  on  "  another  that  sitteth  by,"  let  the  latter 
be  heard.  "  One  by  one ; "  this  is  the  method  of  edification,  "  that  all  may  learn,  and 
all  may  be  comforted."  For  this  was  a  matter  under  each  prophet's  personal  control.  In 
him  the  "  spirit "  and  the  "  understanding  "  were  harmonious.  Consciousness  kept  its 
serene  poise.  There  could  be  no  leach  of  thought  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  the  will, 
no  passion  for  undue  excitement,  no  verging  towards  hysterical  emotion.  And  as  heart 
and  lungs  maintain  their  beautiful  relativity,  and  thus  secure  the  maximum  of  health 
and  vigour  to  the  body,  so  "spirit"  and  "understanding"  act  in  the  prophet  with  no 
jar  or  jostle,  but  in  perfect  accord.  For  the  "  spirits  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to  the 
prophets." — L. 

Vers.  33 — 40. — Concluding  views.  It  edification  was  to  be  the  rule  of  conduct  in 
everything,  it  is  plain  that  the  prophets  must  govern  themselves.  No  matter  how 
sincere  and  truthful  their  zeal,  or  how  honest  and  excellent  their  purpose,  feelings,  and 
even  the  best  feelings,  must  be  held  under  firm  restraint.  They  had  this  power,  and 
it  was  from  God ;  for  he  is  "  not  the  author  of  confusion,  but  of  peace,  as  in  all  Church  is 
of  the  saints,"  St.  Paul  directs  further  that  "  women  keep  silence  in  the  Churches." 
It  the  Corinthians  objected  to  this  injunction,  what  right  had  they  so  to  do?  Usage 
in  the  Christian  community  as  a  whole  was  to  be  observed  ;  local  peculiarities  offensive 
to  the  spirit  and  tastes  of  the  body  of  Christ  were  not  to  be  indulged.  How  could  they 
claim  exemption  from  a  rule  recognized  everywhere  ?  Were  they  the  original  Church  V 
or  did  their  position  warrant  any  exclusive  customs  at  variance  with  established  custom? 
To  enforce  this  view  and  the  argument  in  the  chapter,  he  asserts  in  the  strongest  manner 
that  he  spoke  from  Divine  inspiration.  "  No  more  direct  assertion  of  inspiration  can 
be  uttered  than  this  "  (Alford).  If  any  one  deny  this  inspiration,  no  controversy  must 
be  had  with  him.  "  Let  him  be  ignorant,"  and,  perchance,  he  may  be  self-convicted  of 
his  error.  Then  the  idea  which  has  been  so  prominent  in  his  mind  is  introduced  agai^ 
in  the  words,  "  covet  to  prophesy."  Had  he  not  made  good  its  claim  to  a  pre-eminent 
excellence  ?  By  the  concurrent  "  Amen "  of  approval  and  sympathy,  by  his  own 
special  delight  in  this  gift,  by  the  manliness  connected  with  its  exercise,  by  the  efiiect 
on  spectators,  by  the  capacity  of  self-government  which  accompanied  its  activity  and 
the  culture  given  to  volition  and  feeling,  he  exhorts  his  brethren  to  desire  fervently  this 
means  of  usefulness.  What  a  momentum  has  the  ar>^ument  acquired  before  it  comes 
to  a  close  I  Vaponrs  rise  from  large  tracts  of  territory,  float  in  the  air,  run  together, 
condense  in  clouds,  and  then  descend  in  fruitful  blessing  to  the  fields.  Far  inland 
a  stream  begins  its  flow,  gathers  rivulets  and  creeks  into  its  channel,  and,  before  it 
reaches  the  ocean,  has  drained  half  a  continent.  St.  Paul  omits  nothing  essential  to  the 
greatness  of  his  argument.  From  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  from  musical  instruments, 
from  the  "  many  kinds  of  voices  in  the  world,"  from  the  laws  of  the  human  mind  in 
respect  to  the  difference  between  "  spirit "  and  "  understanding,"  he  has  drawn  materials 
to  enlarge  and  vivify  the  presentation  of  his  doctrine.  In  other  connections  (Bom.  xii. ; 
Eph.  iv.)  we  find  him  urging  substantially  the  same  view,  pressing  on  the  conicience 
and  heart  of  the  Church  the  individuality  of  gifts,  and,  at  the  same  time,  showing  their 
worthlessness  unless  blended  in  unity.  The  most  truly  gifted,  the  most  nobly  endowed 
man,  is  portrayed  in  this  chapter  with  singular  distinctness,  and  this  man  is  the  prophet. 
Yet,  he  adds,  "  forbid  not  to  speak  with  tongues ; "  let  them  be  regulated,  not  discarded 
— a  lesson  widely  applicable  in  the  management  of  Church  affairs.  A  genuine  ortho- 
doxy is  always  tolerant,  charitable,  and  heartily  disposed  to  make  much  allowance  for 
Idiosyncrasies  in  others.  Many  persons  are  content  with  love  in  their  hearts.  Intellect 
is  left  to  itself,  But  the  really  orthodox  man  is  a  Christian  in  his  method  of  thinking, 
and  in  many  a  thing  not  to  his  liking,  ay,  repellent  to  his  tastes  and  sensibilities,  he 
maKea  a  sperf al  point  to  remember  the  "  forbid  not."    The  last  omistituent  of  a  man  t. 


470  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh,  xiv.  1— tt 

I'eel  th«  tkorouglily  subduing  gnc«  of  Gkxl  ii  the  intellect.  Orten  when  the  Anhnal 
nature  has  been  conquered,  often  when  the  coarser  struggles  of  life  are  all  oyer,  thii 
beietment  of  dogmatic  and  tryannical  intellect  remains  as  the  final  entrenchment  of 
evil.  Orthodoxy  is  an  admirable  thing.  It  is  beautiful  and  even  glorious  to  feel  the 
oneness  of  our  beliers  with  the  greatest  and  best  thinkers  of  the  Church ;  but  if  truth 
of  thought  be  exaggerated  at  the  expense  of  truth  of  feeling  and  truth  in  external 
relations,  it  ia  truth  despoiled  of  its  supreme  ohann,  and  therefore  the  wisdom  of  the 
"  forbid  not."  One  who  knows  that  he  shall  live  for  ever  must  needs  feel,  if  he  ia  a 
cultivated  man,  that  a  long  past  is  not  simply  at  his  back,  but  is  a  part  of  himself,  and  that 
the  parentage  of  much  of  the  wisest  and  best  in  his  soul  lies  in  ancient  years.  Sympathy 
with  the  past  is  a  foremost  element  in  a  charitable  intellect.  And  he  has  also  a  keen 
fellow-feeling  with  forms  of  belief  current  in  his  own  times.  The  sense  of  immortality 
widens  his  embrace  of  the  present,  and  the  "  forbid  not "  is  a  welcomed  dissuasive  when 
he  is  tempted  to  the  most  disagreeable  and  pernicious  form  of  vanity,  viz.  self-insist- 
ence. Only  one  thing  remains  for  the  apostle  to  say  on  the  topic  that  has  elicited  so 
much  wisdom  and  fervour  from  his  soul :  "  Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in 
order."  And,  doubtless,  it  commended  him  to  the  true-minrled  among  the  Corinthians 
as  it  has  done  ever  since,  that  he  should  be  so  considerate  of  behaviour.  There  is  an 
art  of  Christian  behaviour,  and  St.  Paul  would  have  us  make  a  conscience  of  it,  and  not 
leave  it  to  mere  taste  and  sentiment.  It  ia  not  a  distant  and  impracticable  ideal.  It 
is  not  the  possibility  of  a  few.  But  it  li  simply  a  cultivated  sense  of  deceni^  and  order, 
and  as  ioch  within  the  reach  of  alL — I* 

Ver.  S.—The  purposes  (^prophesying.  There  was  a  marked  difference  ot  judgment 
between  St.  Paul  and  his  Corinthian  converts  with  regard  to  the  relative  value  of  speak- 
ing with  tongues  and  of  prophesying.  The  Corinthians  were  disposed  to  set  too  high 
a  value  upon  the  more  brilliant  and  startling  gift ;  its  novelty  and  singularity  seem 
to  have  so  impressed  them  with  admiration  that,  in  comparison  with  it,  gifts  which 
appealed  to  sober  reason  sank  into  insignificance.  Paul,  however,  who  himself  spake 
with  tongues,  maintains  the  superiority  of  the  rational  and  moral  endowment  over 
that  which  surprised  the  sense  and  dazzled  the  imagination.  He  doee  this  most 
successfully  by  exhibiting  in  this  verse  the  purposes  of  prophesying. 

I.  Edifioatiow.  A  prophet  is  one  who  speaks  from  God  and  for  God,  to  his 
fellow-men.  The  prophets  of  the  old  covenant  came  before  their  fellow-countrymen 
with  messages  which  they  prefaced  by  the  declaration,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  In 
the  new  dispensation,  there  seems  to  have  been  at  first  an  order  of  prophets,  bat  in 
addition  to  these  there  were  many  who  upon  occasion  uttered  forth  the  mind  of  Ood. 
Now,  since  human  nature  is  dependent  upon  truth,  upon  spiritual  motive,  npon 
personal  influence,  for  the  realization  of  the  designs  of  the  Creator,  it  is  clear  that  a 
true  prophet  is  one  who  apprehends  those  designs,  and  seeks  their  accomplishment  by 
means  ordered  by  Divine  wisdom.  Character  and  moral  life  require  building  np,  i.e. 
upon  a  divinely  laid  foundation,  by  the  use  of  divinely  provided  material,  so  that  the 
edifice  may  assume  iorm,  proportions,  beauty,  in  consonance  with  the  idea  of  the  great 
Architect.  Hence  the  importance  given  in  the  New  Testament  to  that  element  in 
prophecy  denominated  edification.  No  individual  can  become  full  grown,  no  society 
can  be  at  once  progressive  and  secure^  where  this  department  of  ministry  is  lacking. 

XL  EzBOBTATiON.  It  must  never  be  forgotten  that  the  communication  of  knowlege 
is  not  the  whole  of  ministry ;  that  religion  is  not  altogether  a  matter  of  the  intellect ; 
that  human  life  is  not  simply  one  long  lesson,  Man  is  so  framed  that  he  la  bound  to 
action,  and  that  he  needs  inducements,  directions,  enooura;;ement,  with  a  Tlew  to  each 
action  as  shall  be  acceptable  to  his  Maker  and  Saviour.  Es|  ecially  do  the  young,  and 
conrerta  whose  principles  are  not  fully  formed,  whose  habits  are  not  yet  established, 
need  frequent  admonition.  Bt  Panl  reminds  us  that  this  also  is  part  of  the  prophetie 
office  and  ministry. 

IIL  GoNBOLATioir.  If  the  necessity  of  exhortation  follows  upon  the  eharacterlitlei 
of  human  nature,  the  necessity  of  consolation  arises  from  the  circumstances  oi  human 
life.  Stronger  than  human  philosophy,  and  tenderer,  the  consolations  of  Christiai 
prophecy  are  able  to  bind  up  all  wounds,  and  to  cheer  all  sad  and  downcMt 
boavts.— T. 


CH.  XIV.  1— 40.J    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa  471 

▼er.  16. — 27te  two  elements  in  devotion.  Beligious  exercises  have  always  consisted 
nainly  of  praise  and  prayer.  If  there  be  a  Deity,  then  from  him  we  have  received  all 
we  possess  and  enjoy,  and  to  him,  therefore,  cur  natural  feelings  and  our  reason  alika 
urge  us  to  present  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving.  And  since  we  are  altogether  dependent 
upon  his  favour  and  his  faithfulness,  we  shall  not  omit  to  offer  supplications  and 
intercessions  to  the  Giver  of  every  good  gift.  Now,  Christianity  falls  in  with  this 
natural  view  of  religious  observances,  and  raises  these  offices,  which  are  too  often 
perfunctorily  performed,  into  a  higher  atmosphere,  penetrating  and  sanctifying  them 
with  a  new  spirit. 

I.  Ih  fbayeb  and  fbaisb  there  is  an  element  of  emotion  and  cohhunion. 
Human  nature  is  so  constituted  that  it  is  capable  of  great  excitement,  and  Oriental 
nature,  as  is  well  known,  is  peculiarly  sensitive  to  impressions  and  susceptible  of 
enthusiasms  and  hallucinations.  Now,  religion,  which  con.sists  in  the  relation  and 
intercourse  of  the  soul  with  the  unseen,  has  peculiar  power  to  raise  some  natures  to  a 
high  pitch  of  excitement.  The  gesticulations,  the  self-inflicted  tortures  uf  devotees, 
the  religious  campaigns  and  wars  of  the  Easi,  are  illustrations.  Even  at  Corinth,  a 
Grecian  city,  though  largely  frequented  by  Orientals,  manifestations  of  enthusiasm 
were  common  in  the  Christian  society.  Paul  himself  was  sometimes  transported,  in  a 
trance,  into  unfamiliar  and  celestial  regions  of  experience.  He  has  not  a  wurd  to  say 
against  those  religious  exercises  which  took  place  in  "  the  spirit,"  t.e.  which  consisted 
in  highly  wrought  feeling,  in  a  consciousness  of  the  presence  of  God,  and  which 
manifested  themselves  in  the  utterance  of  musical  sounds  reducible  to  no  law  or  system, 
and  of  wprds  unfamiliar  sometimes  to  both  speaker  and  hearers,  but  evidently  an 
outpouring  of  fervent  though  vague  and  unformed  pmyers. 

II.  In    fbayeb    A$9    FBAISE    there    is    an    element     of    THOnOHT,   BEABON,    AND 

LANOQAaE.  No  dout>t  it  often  happens  that  this  element  preponderates.  Where 
psalmody  and  common  prayer  are  prepareii  beforehand,  whore  there  is  a  form  of 
devotion,  it  is  obvious  that  the  understanding  is  engaged.  Words  are  necessary  in 
order  to  clear  and  articulate  thought.  It  may  be  urged  that  there  are  higher  moods  of 
the  spirit  which  cannot  be  interpreted  by  articulate  speech.  And  this  must  be  admitted. 
Yet  the  ordinary  moods  of  the  spirit  have  chiefly  to  be  considered ;  and  of  these  we 
may  sav,  they  are  capable  of  being  formulated  in  the  conceptions  of  the  understanding, 
in  the  phraseology  of  speech.  And  thus  will  devotion  be  most  widely  diffused  and  most 
profitably  promoted,  and  Church  worship  be  rendered  most  genaridly  intelligent  and 
fervent,  and  so  most  acceptable  to  God. — T. 

Ver.  20. — Babes,  not  in  mind,  but  in  malice.  There  U  in  the  style  of  St.  Paul's 
admonitions  a  happy  mingling  of  suavity  and  severity.  A  proverb  reminds  us  that 
a  hand  of  steel  may  be  covered  by  a  glove  of  velvet.  The  apostle  will  have  no 
compromise  with  the  errors,  follies,  and  injurious  judgments  of  the  Corinthians ;  yet 
be  speaks  to  them  in  language  of  gentleness  and  persuasion,  addresses  them  as 
"  brethren,"  and  entreats  them  to  act  with  wisdom  and  considerateness. 

L  Childishness  of  judoment  and  of  conduct  is  blamable.  There  Is  all  the 
difference  in  the  world  between  childlike  conduct,  i.e,  conduct  partaking  of  the  true, 
proper,  ideal  character  of  the  child,  and  childish  conduct,  i.«.  conduct  on  the  part  oi 
men  which  resembles  the  follies  and  frivolities  of  the  infantile  age.  When  the 
Corinthians  preferred  dazzling  gifts  to  Christian  graces,  they  were  like  children  to 
whom  a  painted  sweetmeat  is  dearer  than  a  substantial  treasure.  And  such  a  disposition 
is  still  exhibited  by  those  to  whom  a  splendid  ritual,  imposing  leariung,  social  eminence, 
are  more  admirable  than  a  Christ-like  spirit,  a  gentle,  unobtrusive,  self-denying  habit. 

II.  Childlike  fbekdom  fbom  malice  and  all  vice  is  commendable.  Our  Lord 
himself  lays  it  down  as  one — indeed,  as  the  chief— condition  of  entrance  into  his 
kingdom,  that  his  disciples  should  become  as  little  children.  He  taught  this  his 
fiivourite  doctrine  both  by  word  and  by  symbols.  This  has  ever  been  a  stumbling-block 
in  the  way  of  the  vain,  the  proud,  the  self-seeking,  and  it  has  been  brought  as  a 
reproach  against  the  religion  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Yet  the  morally  cultivated  have  seen, 
in  the  condition  laid  down  by  him  who  was  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,"  a  oondition 
worthy  of  Qod  and  beneficial  to  humanity.  Alas!  in  human  society  how  much  is 
tliere  to  corrupt  th«  primitive  simplicity  of  childhood  1    Sacred  and  precious  is  the 


4Ta  THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  00BINTHIAN8.    [cblzit.I— 4a 

spiritnal  power  which  restores  the  bloom  of  spring,  the  brightness  of  mornings  tk»  devi 

of  youth. 

IIL  Maitlinebb  of  undbrbtandino  is  worthy  of  httuar  effort  and  abfibation. 
If  it  is  the  glury  of  childhood  to  act  upon  pure,  fresh,  unsophisticated  impulse,  it  is  th« 
glory  of  manhood  to  deliberate,  to  weigh  motives  and  inducements  and  authorities,  and 
to  decide  reasonably  and  justly.  Well  had  it  been  for  the  Christian  Church  had  it 
always  been  guided  by  the  counsels  of  the  thouglitl'ul  and  the  wise.  There  is  abundant 
ronm  for  a  manly  understantiing  to  show  itself  in  the  reasonings  of  the  theologian,  the 
policy  of  the  bishop,  the  appeals  of  the  preacher,  the  counsels  of  the  pastor.  And 
there  is  a  far  wider  scope  for  the  exercise  of  sanctified  manliness  of  intelligence  in  the 
varied  departments  of  human  society,  civil  as  well  as  ecclesiastical.  It  is  the  glory 
•f  Christianity  that  whilst  it  stoops  to  the  child,  it  rises  to  the  man,  and  aida  Um  to 
realize  the  intellectual  and  spiritual  prerogatives  of  manhood.— T. 

▼ate.  24,  26. — I\e  convielitm  nf  the  unbeliever.  In  estimating  the  gifts  of  intelligent 
prophecy  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  gifts  of  tongues  on  the  other,  the  apostle  tests  thwr 
respective  value  by  their  practical  utility.  It  oonld  not  be  denied  that  one  great  end 
of  the  existence  of  the  Christian  Church  waa,  as  it  still  is,  the  instruction  of  the 
ignorant  and  the  reformation  of  the  sinful.  It  is  clear  that  at  Corinth,  and  at  other 
places  where  Christian  communities  existed  in  the  first  age,  there  was  already  a 
constant  intercourse  between  the  Church  and  the  world.  Attracted  by  curiosity,  or 
driven  by  spiritual  wants  and  hopes,  the  unbelieving  heathen  and  Jews  would  some- 
times attend  the  Christian  assemblies.  This  being  so,  Paul  asks,  What  mnat  be  the 
effect  upon  such  persons,  first  of  such  an  exhibition  of  supernatural  powers  such  as  the 
Corinthians  delighted  in,  and  secondly  of  the  proclamation  of  the  truths  and  promises 
of  the  gospel  ?  His  own  answer  is  that,  whilst  the  speaking;  with  tongues  may  amaze, 
it  will  probably  be  set  down  as  ranting;  whilst  the  utterance  of  God's  Word  will 
sometimes  issue  in  the  enlightenment,  conviction,  and  salvation  of  the  sinner.  Surely 
a  sufficient  and  decisive  test  I 

I.  The  meahb  of  the  uvbeuever's  oontebsioh.  This  is  represented  aa  prophecy, 
i.e.  the  uttering  forth  by  man,  as  God's  messenger,  of  God's  mind  and  will.  And  in 
the  case  supposed  by  the  apostle,  evidently  the  declaration  concerns  the  sinful  state 
and  the  spiritual  needs  of  man,  the  merciful  purposes  of  God,  the  provision  of  pardon, 
renewal,  and  eternal  life,  through  the  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Prophecy,  so  understood, 
has  never  ceased  in  the  Church  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  His  ministers  prophesy  when 
they  give  witness  to  him,  when  they  publish  the  gospel  and  its  gracious  invitationa. 

II.  The  prooebs  of  the  nNSELiEVER's  conversion.  The  question  arises — How  does 
the  Christian  prophecy  affect  the  mind  and  heart  of  the  ignorant  and  onbelieTing 
hearer?  Acceding  to  the  representation  of  the  apostle,  the  word  evinces  its  own 
divinity  by  makins;  the  sinner  known  to  himself.  Aai  there  can  be  no  more  generally 
convincing  and  cuuolusive  evidence  of  the  authority  of  religion  than  is  afforded  by  the 
fact  that  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  reveals  man  to  himself  in  his  true  state  and 
position.  The  truths  of  the  gospel  are  the  utterances  of  him  who  formed  the  human 
heart.  The  candle  of  the  Lord  searches  even  the  dark  places  of  man's  nature,  and 
that  which  is  hidden  is  brought  forth  to  light  The  conscience-stricken  sinner  realizes 
his  guilt  and  danger,  and  his  need  of  a  Divine  Deliverer.  He  is  convinced,  examined, 
judged,  by  the  several  messages  which  penetrate  his  nature.  The  secrets  of  his  heart, 
his  iniquities,  his  sorrow  and  penitence,  his  aspirations  for  a  better  lile,  are  all  made 
manifest. 

IIL  Tbk  bebultb  ahb  sions  of  tbi  nraiLiEVKB'B  ooiimnoE.  1.  His  enmit} 
to  QoA  and  to  God's  truth  is  utterly  vanquished.  He  falls  down,  contrite  and 
submissive,  like  him  who  cried,  "  God,  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  2.  His  enmity 
Is  exchanged  for  reverence  and  worship.  Before,  he  may  have  adored  the  false  gods 
wh<nn  he  has  been  isained  to  revere ;  now  and  henceforth  there  is  for  him  bat  one 
QnA,  the  Saviour  of  all  men.  8.  He  acknowledges  the  Divine  presence  in  the  Church. 
Had  he  listened  only  to  "  tongues,"  he  would  luve  deemed  the  speakers  to  have  raved. 
But  listening  to  words  of  grace  and  truth,  the  convert  acknowledges  that  in  meeting 
God's  people  he  has  met  with  God,  and  their  assembly  has  become  to  him,  as  it  has 
become  to  moltitudei^  "tke  houie  of  God,  and  the  gate  of  heaven."— T. 


em.  u«.  1— 4a]    THE  FIBST  EFISTLK  TO  THE  OOKINTHIANS.  473 

Yflr.  83.— il  Ood,  not  o/  eon/ution,  hut  of  peace.  True  religion  teaches  w  to  lefei 
kll  qtiestions  to  the  highest  tribunal,  and  to  ask,  not  merely — What  is  agreeable  and 
expedient?  but — What  is  the  will  of  God?  At  Corinth  many  disorders  had  arisen; 
men  spake  witS  tongues  and  without  interpreters,  two  or  three  prophesied  at  the  same 
time,  women  appeared  unveiled  and  spoke  in  the  assemblies.  Now,  there  were  many 
reasons  why  such  things  should  not  be.  But  in  this  verse  St.  Paul  adduces  the 
highest  of  all  reasons.  Christians  are  the  servants  of  God,  and  God  is  the  God,  not 
of  confusion,  but  of  peace;  his  people,  therefore,  should  banish  from  their  assemblies 
all  that  conflicts  with  the  nature  and  the  ways  of  their  supreme  Lord, 

I.  That  God  is  not  the  Adthob  of  confusion,  but  of  fiaob,  u  appabbnt  fbom 
HIS  WORK  AS  A  Cbeatob.  The  more  nature  is  studied  the  more  does  it  become 
apparent  that  it  is  the  workmanship  of  an  Intelligence  proceeding  according  to  order. 
"Older  is  Heaven's  first  law."  Indeed,  men  of  science  afBrm  the  universal  presence  of 
law  through  the  whole  realm  of  nature.  By  law  they  mean  uniformity ;  and  to  those 
who  believe  in  a  Lawgiver  the  regularity  with  which  the  processes  of  nature  aro, 
conducted  is  an  evidence  of  the  working  of  mind,  and  mind  acting  in  aocotdance  with 
the  highest  reason. 

II.  And  from  hib  metuod  in  revelation.  He  who  studies  the  Scriptures  as 
a  whole  is  struck  with  this — that  they  unfold  a  plan,  nnfold  it  gradually  and  regularly, 
according  to  a  scheme  of  which  the  profound  wisdom  is  apparent,  although  not  fully 
apparent  to  a  creature-mind.  The  truth  was  revealed  first  to  a  family,  then  to  a 
nation,  then  to  a  race.  ",The  Law  was  given  by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus 
Christ"  The  Bible  is  a  marvellously  organic  whole;  iu  its  diversity  is  discernible 
a  unity  and  harmony  which  only  a  Divine  mind  could  impart. 

IIL  And  from  the  work  of  redemption.  The  whole  motive  of  the  economy  of 
grace  was  to  avert  the  confusion  which  hod  invaded,  and  threatened  to  overwhelm, 
this  sinful  humanity.  To  hush  the  mural  discord,  to  introduce  peace  on  earth, — such 
was  the  lofty  purpose  contemplated  and  fulfilled  in  the  incarnation  and  the  sacrifice 
of  the  Son  of  God. 

IV.  And  from  the  institution  of  civil  society.  It  is  observable  that  social 
and  political  life  are  in  the  New  Testament  frequently  attributed  to  God,  the  Author 
and  Giver  of  all  good.  Jesus  himself  bade  his  disciples  "render  to  Csesar  the  things 
that  are  Cassar's."  Anr]  Paul  taught  that  "  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God," 
enjoining  loyalty  and  submission  as  a  Christian  duty. 

y.  And  from  the  con&iitution  and  government  or  Christian  Chuboheb.  la 
it  credible  that  the  God  in  all  whose  ways  order  is  so  apparent,  who,  in  the  several 
spheres  accessible  to  our  observation,  proceeds  upon  methods  of  regularity,  and 
harmonizes  all  forces  to  fulfil  his  commands,  should  reverse  bis  proceduie  in  that  i«alm 
which  is  the  highest  and  noblest  of  all  ?  Is  Divine  order  to  be  confined  to  the  physical 
and  political  spheres,  and  banished  from  the  Church  ?  It  cannot  be,  and  it  is  not  so. 
Christ  appointed  and  authorized  apostles;  apostles  constituted  Chuichea,  ordained 
officers  of  various  kinds  and  grades,  and  gave  instructions  for  the  conduct  of  worship, 
of  business,  of  charity.  If  then,  there  be  confusion,  in  any  professedly  Christian 
community,  that  confusion  is  traceable,  not  to  Divine  wisdom,  but  to  human  folly. 
In  proportion  as  the  Spirit  of  Christ  lives  and  works  in  any  society,  in  that  proportion 
will  subordination,  co-operation,  peace,  and  unity  prosper  and  pieraiL— T. 

Ver.  38. — Abandonment  to  ignorance,  Paul  was  a  man  who  bumbled  himself  but 
magnified  hii  office.  For  himself,  he  was  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints ;  but  officially 
and  in  apostolic  influence  and  authority,  he  was  not  behind  the  chiefest  of  the  apostles. 
Of  course  there  were  in  the  primitive  Churches  men  who  acknowledged  neither  his 
authority  nor  the  authority  of  any  other  than  themselves.  And  when  the  apostle  gave 
utteranou  to  hif  Judgment,  it  was  with  the  knowledge  that  his  judgment  would  not  pass 
unchallenged.  There  is  something  of  indignation,  and  something  of  sarcasm  in  his 
reference  to  those  who  resisted  his  opinions  and  decisions.  And  there  is  wisdom  aa  wdl 
M  an  admirable  display  of  just  impatience  in  hia  language :  "  If  any  man  is  ignorant, 
let  bim  be  ignorant." 

L  OnBiONATEOHXU  AND  lONOBANOB  oiTKR  00  TooBTHBB.  A  little  experience 
oonTlaoea  u  tliat  thow  who  cling  the  most  tenaciously  to  their  own  opinlona,  Uieii 


iU  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xir.  1— 40 

own  habits,  are  not  always  men  of  the  soundest  judgment.  To  resist  evidence  and 
authority  is  no  sign  of  soundness  of  mind  and  power  of  intellect.  Some  are  obstinat 
because  they  are  blind  to  all  testimony  and  evidence  but  that  which  is  acceptable  to 
their  own  prejudices.  • 

II.  ThBEB   AEB   those   whom   no    evidence   oak    CONVUfOB  AND  NO  ADTHORITY  OVBB- 

AWI.  If  all  men  were  candid  and  dispassionate,  and  habituated  to  follow  the  clear 
white  light  of  reason,  human  life  and  human  society  would  be  very  difE  rent  from 
what  they  actually  are.  Our  Lord  Jesus  was  forbearing  and  patient  with  those  who 
opposed  themselves  to  him  ;  but  even  he  confi  ssed  that  there  were  those  who  loved 
darkness  rather  than  light  because  their  deeds  w/e  evil.  Toung  and  sanguine 
ministers  of  religion  often  begin  their  work  with  an  'mward  persuasion  that  they  have 
only  to  place  the  truth  fairly  and  fully  before  men,  in  order  to  their  conviction  and 
conversion.  But  experience  teaches  them  that  it  is  not  so;  that  there  if  a  moral 
obduracy  which  is  proof  against  all  efforts. 

III.  It  mat  be  wise  to  abandon  to  their  loved  ignoeanoe  those  who  wnj.  hot 
BE  enlightened.  An  affectionate  and  benevolent  mind  will  be  very  slow  to  adopt 
such  a  course.  And  it  cannot  be  adopted  without  the  hope  and  prayer  that,  when 
ordinary  and  human  methods  have  failed,  it  may  please  God  to  employ  some  methods 
unknown  to  finite  wisdom,  to  secure  the  wished-for  result.  Even  the  Creator  himselt 
seems  to  act  upon  the  principle  here  exemplified,  at  all  events  for  a  season  and 
a  purpose :  "  Ephraim  is  joined  unto  idols :  let  him  alone." 

IV.  Theeb  is  bettbb  employment  for  thb  time  of  Christian  laboueerb  than 
THE  endeavours  TO  ENLIGHTEN  THE  INVINCIBLY  IGNORANT.  There  are  the  young,  the 
ardent  inquirers  for  truth,  the  candid  and  open-minded,  the  earnest  and  prayerful, 
all  anxious  for  more  light,  for  lessons  of  truth,  couns.ls  of  wisdom,  encouragement,  and 
admonition.  In  such  directions  there  is  abundant  scope  for  effort,  with  the  confidence 
that  labour  will  not  be  in  vain.  Why  spend  years  in  tilling  the  rock  or  sowing  the 
iceberg,  when  virgin  soil  await*  the  plough  and  promises  to  reward  the  toil  of  the 
spiritual  husbandman  ? 

V.  There  is  a  probation  and  a  judgment  appointed  by  God,  to  which  scoh 
CHAEA0TBR8  MUST  NEEDS  BE  LEFT.  It  must  be  remembered  by  the  Christian  labourer 
that  he  is  not  one  of  the  governors  of  the  world.  This  refiection  will  not  harden  his 
heart  against  the  unbelieving ;  he  will  leave  such  in  the  hands  of  Oae  who  is  far  more 
wise  and  far  more  merciful  than  the  wisest  and  the  most  merciful  of  men. — ^T. 

Vers.  1 — 19. — Us^ulneiM.  I.  The  debibi  iob  spntrruAL  gifts  is  legitimate  and 
PBAISEWOBTHT.  1.  We  muit  not  rest  content  even  with  the  possession  of  love.  We 
must  seek  qualificat'cn  for  making  that  love  effective.  Inactive  love  is  both  suspicious 
and  useless.  If  we  have  a  true  love  for  men  we  shall  seek  to  be  helpful  to  them, 
especially  in  their  spiritual  life,  and  to  this  e.  I  we  shall  seek  all  possible  means  for 
conveying  to  them  the  knowledge  of  the  love  Oi  Gk)d  and  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 
Spiritual  endowments  will  aid  us  in  this.  The  miraculous  gifts  in  the  early  Church 
were  bestowed  with  this  object  in  view ;  and  so  are  modern  gifts.  2.  Sjiiritual  gifts 
are  to  be  most  earnestly  sought.  Whilst  pointing  out  abuses  to  which  gifts  in  the  early 
Church  were  liable,  Paul  nevertheless  commends  these  gifts  as  worthy  of  the  keenest 
desire,  for  if  rightly  used  they  were  productive  of  the  most  valuable  results.  So  now, 
in  every  way,  we  should  seek  qualifications  for  the  service  of  Christ  in  the  world. 
Some  of  these  must  be  natural  to  us,  but  not  a  few  may  be  acquired ;  and  by  diligence 
the  small  gift  may  be  made  great.  Prayer,  study,  earnestness,  are  channels  through 
which  spiritual  endowment  and  spiritual  power  ever  tend  to  flow.  Not  to  dedre 
spiritual  endowment  is  to  show  that  we  are  unspiritual  and  lazy.  A  master  desire 
of  our  soul  should  be  to  be  equipped  for  service.  God  can  do  this  thing  for  na.  He 
can  sharpen  the  bluntest  instrument,  and  give  strength  to  the  weakest. 

II.  What  gifts  we  should  most  earnestly  desire.  Not  (1)  the  most  hriUiant, 
(2J  the  most  remarkable,  (3)  the  most  rare,  (4)  the  most  praised,  (5)  the  most  mysterious, 
(6)  those  which  are  only  enough  to  serve  our  own  ends  and  utpply  owr  own  needs ; 
but  (7)  the  most  useful  (ver.  19).  To  win  applause  or  to  eicit«  wonder  is  but  tha 
poorest  of  poor  ends  to  attain.  We  should  long  to  effect  something  for  others.  To  lay 
out  ourselves  fcnr  ourselvee  is  not  to  serve  our  fellows  or  onr  Master  at  all.    That  which 


oa.XiT.  1—40.1    tSB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TtlE  CORINTHIANS.  ilB 

sUrtles  most  may  be  least  valuable;  that  wliich  calls  forth  most  remark  may  be  most 
barren.  The  apostle  had  to  rebuke  thu  cliildish  Corinthians  who  were  captivated  by 
the  strange  gift  of  speaking  in  foreign  languages — a  gift  most  precious  when  foreigners 
S[)eaking  these  languages  were  addressed,  but  valueless  when  they  were  absent.  Yet 
the  Corinthians,  forgetting  that  the  gift  w.is  bestowed  for  its  special  usefulness,  exercised 
the  gift  and  gloried  in  it  when  its  usefulness  was  impossible !  Here  were  selfishness 
and  pride  conjnined  to  supernatural  endowment!  What  penetrating  power  has  evil! 
It  seems  to  touch  everything,  even  the  holiest,  most  Gud-Iike  things,  that  man  touches! 
Here  is  the  touchstone  which  tries  our  w  ork — Is  it  truly  useful  f 

III.  Mauks  of  uskfctl  gifts.  1.  Plainness.  We  want  to  make  men  understand 
Divine  truths  ;  we  should  then  assuredly  use  "  great  plaim  ess  of  speech."  Our  speech 
should  be  "easy  to  be  understood"  (ver.  9).  What  a  mass  of  jueaching  and  prajing 
has  been  lost  because  it  was  too  ornate,  or  high-flown,  or  expressed  in  incomprehensible 
language!  The al>ility  to  speak  so  that  no  one  can  understand  us  is  a  gift  which  should 
be  earnestly  desired  by  fools  only.  Some  men  are  so  profound  that  they  are  quite 
unfathomable,  even  to  themselves.  They  dig  the  well  so  deep  that  they  drown 
themselves  in  it  Possibly  some  avoid  [ilainness  intentionally,  because  they  want  no  one 
to  perceive  the  poverty  of  the  portion  which  they  are  dealing  out.  They  place  nothin>i 
in  many  wrappers,  with  the  fond  expectation  that  it  may  pass  for  something  amongst 
the  ignorant  But  such  trickery  is  unworthy  of  the  servants  of  tlie  iVIost  High,  and 
would  be  called  knavery  if  it  were  practised  by  a  pedlar.  The  Romish  Church  is  greath 
censurable  for  continuing  the  use  of  Latin  in  her  services,  which  is  a  "toiiijue  unknown  " 
of  the  people.  2.  Cltarness.  No  mean  endowment  is  required  so  as  to  speak  with 
lucidity  upon  scriptural  topics.  We  need  to  think  clearly  ourselves.  Hearers  often 
do  not  understand  because  preachers  do  not.  We  may  expect  to  be  useful  according 
to  the  measure  in  which  we  make  clear  to  others  Divine  triitlis ;  and  we  must  never 
forget  how  peculiarly  pione  men  are  to  misapprehend  these.  A  clear  statement  is  like 
i  piece  of  music  played  correctly  ;  an  involvLd  and  obscure  one  is  like  music  in  which 
the  notes  are  all  jumbled  together  without  relerence  to  order  or  time.  Both  may  have 
3xactly  the  same  notes,  but  what  a  contrast!  3.  Force.  Like  the  sound  of  the 
trumpet  when  well  blown  (ver.  8).  Life  and  vigour  are  needed  in  our  utterances.  We 
must  not  weaken  the  message  which  we  deliver.  If  we  would  lead  men  heavenwards 
there  must  be  power  in  our  appeals.  Our  aim  should  be,  not  to  tickle  men,  but  to 
incite  them.  Force  may  be  quiet ;  often  is.  But  there  is  much  quietness  in  which 
there  ii  no  force.  Noise  is  not  force,  but  earnestness  and  passion  are  generally  its 
accompaniments.  4.  Certainty.  The  trumpet-blast  which  directs  must  not  waver. 
A  halting,  uncertain  testimony  is  generally  worse  than  useless.  Some  are  so  "  gift«d  " 
that  they  are  certain  of  nothing.  One  should  not  desire  such  gifts.  Notwithstanding 
all  Itwast  about  them,  they  carry  much  more  folly  than  wisdom,  and  the  devil's  band 
".s  more  manifest  in  them  than  God's.  We  have  truth — which  is  not  an  uncertain 
ihing;  one  of  the  most  precious  and  most  useful  gift*  is  •  certain  grasp  upon  that 
which  is  of  the  very  essence  of  certainty. — H. 

Vei.  16. — ^010  we  should  sing  and  pray.    I.  An  important  maitkb,  hbch  siNOiNa 

AHD  PBATEB  C0N8TITUTB   THB   CHIEF  PABTB   OF   PUBLIC  WOESHIP, 

IL  The  "  externals  "  op  binoino  and  pbateb  abb  mot  of  thb  first  ddob- 
TANCE.     1.  Music.     2.  Eloquence.     3.  Form. 

III.  The  biqht  method.  1.  With  the  spirit.  Intellectual  worship  alone  im  very 
imperfect.  It  is  cold,  formal,  not  stimulative.  Our  emotional  nature  should  take  part 
We  should  make  melody  in  the  heart,  and  should  be  deeply  stirred  in  heart  as  we 
approach  the  Deity.  To  this  end  we  must  pray  and  sing  "  with  the  Holy  Spirit ; " 
the  Holy  Ghost  must  fall  upon  our  spirits,  and  we  shall  then  become  acceptable 
worshippers  who  "  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  2.  With  the  under- 
standing. As  the  intellectual  alone  is  not  sufficient,  neither  is  the  emotional.  The 
whole  man  should  engage  in  the  acts ;  even  the  body  taking  its  subordinate  part 
Man,  being  «n  intelligent  creature,  should  worship  intelligently ;  should  realize  (1)  to 
whom  he  speaks,  (2)  what  he  utters,  (3)  what  be  is.' 

IV.  ▲  TOO  OOXHON  MITHOO.  1.  Without  realization  of  the  worshipped.  2.  With 
inattwttiOD  to  the  MUtimtnts  expressed.    3.  With  sonli  unmoved. — H. 


t7d  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.    [oh.  xit.  i— 4d 

Ver.  20. — Mind  and  Christianity.    L  Religion  n  not  mebe  sentimeiit. 

II.  Religion  demands  tub  bxercibb  op  mental  powbes. 

III.  The  moke  developed  the  mind  becomes  undeb  gbaciotts  influences,  thi 

MOBE  TOEFUL,    HAPPY,    AND  HONOURED   WILt   TUB   POSSESSOR   BECOME.      1.   Better    fitted 

to  labour  for  God's  glory.  2.  For  the  advancement  of  mankind.  3.  Will  become 
himself  more  firmly  established  in  the  truth.  (1)  The  grasp  of  revealed  truth  will  be 
more  tenacious ;  (k!)  the  conception  of  the  Divine  character  loftier ;  (3)  the  realization 
of  personal  duty  clearer  and  stronger. 

IV.  Cultivate  the  mind.  1.  Store  it.  2.  Exercise  it  vigorously.  Generally 
minds  are  wrecked  by  too  little  effort,  not  by  too  much.  3.  Discipline  it  carefully. 
4.  Keep  it  ever  under  salutary  influences.  Lest  you  become  wise  in  your  own  conceit. 
Pride  has  great  facility  for  entering  by  the  door  of  knowledge. — H. 

Vers.  23 — 25. — Conversion  prepared  for,  I.  Conversion  effected  it  means. 
i.  The  door  of  the  sanctuary  should  be  an  open  one  (ver.  23).  Restrictions  and  hin- 
drances to  attendance  should  be  swept  away.  Non-churchgoers  are  often  such  through 
the  action  of  churchgoers.  2.  Means  should  constantly  be  employed  in  Hie  sanctiiaiy. 
The  gospel  should  be  preached.  The  presence  of  "  unbelievers "  should  constantly  be 
borne  in  mind,  and  of  those  altogether  "  unlearned "  in  the  truth.  Casual  hearers 
should  not  be  forgotten;  the  bow  drawn  at  a  venture  has'  often  done  signal  execution. 

II.  Probable  means  of  oonvbesion.  1.  Order  and  propriety  in  the  sanctuary. 
The  huHding  itself  should  not  be  regarded  as  altogether  uniiupurtant.  There  are  some 
church  buildings  in  which  it  is  very  difficult  to  be  converted/  Wherever  practicable, 
a  suitable  structure  should  be  secured ;  not  bare  and  ugly,  to  repel,  nor  unduly  ornate, 
to  distract.  And  the  services  should  be  well  ordered  and  decorous,  else  some  coming 
in  may  suppose  that  we  are  "mad."  But  dulness  and  coldness  are  not  decorous. 
Vigour  and  enthusiasm  are  in  the  highest  degree  proper.  K  we  want  to  move  others 
we  must  be  moved  ourselves.  There  can  be  great  freedom  in  the  service  without  over- 
stepping bounds.  Modem  Christian  services  tend  to  be  too  stilted,  fnrnial,  frigid, 
unemotional.  2,  Church  worship.  Song  and  prayer  have  won  not  a  few  from  the 
kingdom  of  Satan.  But  the  song  service  is  sometimes  a  hindrance  to  edification ;  the 
music  attempted  is  such  as^  no  angel  could  learn,  and,  for  the  matter  of  that,  such 
as  no  angel  would  ever  want  tol  Song,  which  should  quicken,  may  freeze;  and  a 
freezing  soul  is  very  difScult  to  convert.  Sanctuary  song  should  be  united  song.  In 
heaven  the  host  sings,  not  a  selected  choir.  Prayer  should  be  earnest,  real, 
intelligible.  There  are  such  things  as  mock  prayers — prayers  without  any  praying 
in  them.  Prayers  of  words  and  time ;  nothing  in  them  except  letters  and  minutes. 
Often  too  many  of  these.  3.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel.  This,  the  pre-eminent 
means,  should  be:  (1)  Intelligible.  Not  over  the  heads  of  the  people.  (2)  Sensible. 
Not  under  their  heels.  If  the  sermon  is  despised,  the  gospel  may  be.  (3)  Direct.  "  He 
is  convinced  [or, '  reproved ']  of  all "  (ver.  24).  It  is  meant  for  him.  There  is  something 
in  the  gospel  which  suits  every  condition,  we  are  apt  to  take  the  edge  off  by  generaT 
indetinite  utterance.  (4)  Searching.  "  The  secrets  of  his  heart  are  made  manifest." 
Preachers  need  acquaintance  with  human  life ;  they  should  mix  among  men,  and  not 
live  as  recluses.  Then  under  Divine  influence  they  will  he  able  to  apply  the  gospel 
BO  searchingly  that  often  hearers  will  think  somebody  has  told  the  preacher  the  secrets 
of  their  lives.  (6)  Scriptural;  or  it  may  be  preaching,  but  not  preaching  the  gospel, 
and  no  conversion  can  be  looked  for. 

in.  Tests  or  the  suitability  of  means.  1.  What  do  the  unbelieving  and 
ignorant  think  of  the  means  employed  t  Some  will  indeed  scoff,  but  what  will  the 
common-sense  and  sincere  ones  think  7  What  ought  they  to  think  ?  2.  What  ruMs 
follow  t  What  are  the  effects  of  our  services  and  work?  We  say  no  man  caa  be 
responsible  for  results.  This,  in  one  sense,  is  a  great  truth,  and  in  another  a  oeat  lia 
Do  men  under  our  ministra,tion8  fall  down  in  contrition  and  humility,  worship  Ood,uid 
declare  that  God  is  amongst  us  of  a  truth  ?  If  they  do  not,  there  is  something  amias ; 
and  if  we  look  for  that  something  in  ourselves  and  in  our  modes  of  work,  we  aluJl 
probably  look  in  the  right  place.  We  must  not  ruin  the  usefulness  of  means  by 
regarding  them  as  anything  more  than  means.  To  rest  in  them  alone  is  suicidaL  We 
need  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.    For  this  we  should  yearn,  agonize,  pray,  as  w« 


OH.  xi¥.  1— 40.]      THE  FIBST  EPISTLE   TO   THE  GOBtNTHUNa  471 


humbly  obey  the  oommand  "not  to  forsake  the  assembl?Dg  of  ourselves  together,"  and 
to  "  preach  the  gospel." — H. 

Yen.  28—33,  40. — Decency  and  order  in  the  Church.  I.  Beflbct  upon  what  THB 
Chuboh  U.  1.  /( t(  the  "  Church  of  the  living  Ood  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  15).  In  its  worship 
It  worships  the  EternaL  It  is  the  depository  of  his  truth.  It  ii:  the  "  temple  of  God  " 
(ch.  iii.  16).  2.  It  is  th»  Church  of  Christ.  "  My  Church  "  (Mntt.  xvi.  18).  It  (1) 
bears  his  Name ;  (2)  is  the  place  of  his  preseoce  (Matt,  xviii.  20  and  xxviii.  20) ;  (3) 
redeemed  by  his  blood  (1  Pet.  i.  18,  19) ;  (4)  his  body  (ch.  xii.  27) ;  (5)  identilicd  with 
him  by  the  world ;  (6)  the  chief  means  by  which  his  Name  is  made  known  in  the 
earth  ;  (7)  it  is  light  derived  from  him  shining  in  a  dark  place.  3.  The  ahiding-plcice  of 
the  Boly  U/iost.  (Ch.  iii.  16.)  4.  The  great  instrumentality  for  the  conversion  of  the 
ungodly. 

II.  The  jufortanob  or  EVEBTTBiNa  ooitnegted  with  the  Chubch  being  as  fbge 
FBOM  FAULT  AS  POSSIBLE.  Impru]«iiety  and  disorder  in  the  Church  (1)  dishonour 
Qod ;  (2)  grieye  Christ ;  (3)  tend  to  quench  the  Spirit,  and  (4)  to  mal^e  the  Church 
powerless  for  its  mission. 

IIL  What  vast  besfonsibilitt  bests  upon  those  who  violate  thk  apostolic 
oouuAND.  (Ver.  40.)  God  is  a  God  of  peace,  but  in  this  way  he  is  made  to  appear  a  God 
of  confusion  and  disorder  (Ter.  33). — H. 

Vers.  34,  35. — Women  in  the  Church.  L  Women  hatx  a  place  n  THE  Chuboh. 
Chiistianity  exalts  wuman.  It  found  bxt  degraded;  it  ennobles  her.  In  Christ  there 
is  neither  male  nor  feiiiale  (Gal.  iii.  28). 

II.  Women  have  many  ministries  oonneoted  with  the  Chubch.  If  excluded 
from  some  p'  sitions,  how  many  are  still  open  to  woman  I  In  not  a  few  of  these  she 
is  unrivalled  by  the  other  sex.  If  woman  may  not  do  some  work,  man  cannot  do 
other.  Christianity  has  opened  to  woman  a  most  wide  sphere  of  uselulDess.  It  is 
quite  an  open  question  whether  the  Church  has  received  more  help  from  men  or  women ; 
not  a  few  would  say  from  women.  The  Church  owes  a  vast  debt  to  the  holy  women 
who  have  been  enrolled  amongst  her  adherents. 

III.  Women  abb  debabbeu  by  the  apostle  from  bfeakinq  ih  Chubob  assem- 
blies. On  the  ground  of  propriety.  Does  not  accord  with  woman's  true  position. 
This  position  indicated  in  the  Law  (Gen.  iii.  16),  and  laid  down  in  the  eleventh  chapter 
of  this  Epistle.  It  had  been  foretold,  "  Your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy  " 
(Joel  ii.  28),  and  in  Acts  xxi.  9  we  read  of  four  daughters  of  Philip  who  prophesied ; 
but  in  neither  case  is  anything  said  of  prophesying  in  public  and  mixed  assemblies. 
The  apostle  does  not  prohibit  women  from  prophesying,  but  only  from  prophesying  in 
public.  This,  according  to  his  view,  would  conflict  with  modesty  and  with  woman's 
rightful  position,  and  would  lead  to  many  evils.  It  is  an  evasion  to  discriminate  between 
women  speaking  in  Church  meetings  and  women  addressing  general  congregations.  The 
apostle's  objection  was  to  the  public  character  of  the  act,  and  when  he  is  speaking  of 
"meetings  of  the  Church  "  in  this  very  chapter,  he  ii  referring  to  gatherings  to  which 
unbelievers  had  access  (ver.  24). 

IV.  Women'b  inbtbuotion  ENOoTTBAaBD.  To  supplement  instruction  of  the  sano- 
toary,  women  may  ask  questions  at  home  of  their  husbands.  It  may  be  said — ^What 
are  those  to  do  who  have  no  husbands?  Emphasis  seems  to  rest  upon  "  their  own  " 
(Revised  Version)  rather  than  upon  "  husbands."  It  would  be  acting  in  the  spirit  of 
the  apostle's  injunction  for  the  unmarried  to  ask  their  relatives  or  personal  friends. 
There  seems  no  possible  reason  why  an  unmarried  woman  should  be  allowed  to  speak 
is  public  mixed  assemblies  whilst  a  married  woman  is  debarred,  but  rather  the  reverse. 
1.  We  hav«  here  incidentally  indicated  a  special  and  most  important  sphere  tf  woman — 
tt«  ioAM.  A  beautiful  temple  for  the  exercise  of  woman's  ministry.  Oratorical  females 
are  frequently  poor  housewives.  2.  A  tugyestion  that  husbands  should  be  wdl  furnished 
with  rdigiotu  knowledge.  The  bead  of  the  house  should  not  be  an  empty  head.  If  he 
glories  in  a  superior  position,  he  should  realize  its  responsibilities.  But  many  people 
Uke  thur  office  more  than  ita  duties.    3.  Evidence  that  women  are  not  in  the  rmgioui 

r'  r*  tohe  mere  aufoniate.    They  an  not  to  be  the  dupes  <tf  priests.    They  are  to 
k,  ask  questions,  understand.    They  are  not  to  be  kept  in  ignoranoa.    Intelligant 


478  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xiv.  1—40, 

service  U  expected  from  thom.     Highest  culture  is  as  open  to  them  as  to  men.    Then 
is  nothing  unwomanly  in  lieing  well  informed. — H. 

Ver.  3. — Christian  prophesying.  In  our  day  a  "  prophet "  i»  one  who  predicts  future 
events,  but  in  the  older  times  the  word  included  much  more  than  that.  Old  Testament 
l)ropliets  were  religious  teachers  who  revealed  the  will  of  God,  and  expounded  the 
Word  of  God.  Moses  was  a  prophet,  but  his  chief  work  was  religious  teaching.  John 
the  Baptist  was  a  propliet,  but  he  appeared  as  a  preacher  of  leptniance  and  of  righteous- 
ness. New  Testament  prophets  were  the  teachers  or  preachers  of  the  Word — men  to 
whom  God  had  given  special  insight  into  his  Divine  truth,  and  a  ha[ipy  faculty  of 
imparting  that  truth  to  others.  The  verse  now  before  us  describes  the  proper  results 
that  are  to  be  reached  by  the  prophecy,  or  ministry,  of  the  Word.  The  gift  of  pro- 
phesying, or  preacliing,  is  the  most  useful  and  most  practical  of  all  the  gifts.  Other 
gifts  direct  attention  to  the  man  who  possesses  them  ;  this  gift  makes  a  man  k  blessing 
to  others,  for  he  may  speak  to  "  edification,  and  exhortation,  and  comfort." 

L  The  pkoper  spheeb  of  the  Christian  pkophet.  Theoretically  our  paston  are 
separated  unto  the  ministry  of  the  Word ;  practically  the  office  is  very  sadly  confused, 
and  our  pastors  are  brought  into  the  most  hindering  and  injurious  contact  with  common 
worldly  things  and  inferior  Church  duties.  The  Pauline  idea  is,  that  God  has  bestowed 
a  variety  of  gifts  upon  his  Church,  and  the  true  conception  of  his  Church  is  only  realized 
when  each  man  uses  faithfully  his  own  gift  without  interfeiino;  with  the  gifts  of  others. 
The  work  of  the  Christian  pastor  is  precisely  this — by  teaching  and  preaching  to  cultivate 
the  spiritual  life  of  believers.  They  shuuld  mmrish  so  high  and  so  vigorous  a  life  and 
activity  in  the  members  of  the  Church  as  that  each  one  might  become,  in  his  place, 
a  light  of  God,  a  power  for  God ;  each  one,  in  his  own  way,  a  holy  force  bringing  in 
other  souls  to  Christ.  It  does  not  matter  what  other  work  a  pastor  may  do  well, 
whether  it  be  visiting  or  governing  or  writing,  he  is  not  faithful  to  his  call  and  to  his 
office  unless  by  preaching  he  can  speak  to  men  "unto  edification,  and  exhortation,  and 
comfort."  It  would  be  a  time  of  holiest  revival  for  the  Church  of  Christ,  if  her  ministers 
might  say,  "  For  all  other  forms  of  work,  look  you  out  men  from  amongst  you,  lull 
ol  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith,  but  we  will  give  ourselves  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord  and 
to  prayer."  If  ministers  could  be  more  truly  separated  to  their  own  proper  work,  they 
would  bring,  out  of  the  destris  of  holy  stillness  and  quiet,  the  most  heart-stiiring  views 
of  truth  and  the  noblest  spiritual  influences.  Moses  came  forth  in  power  from  the 
lonely  wilderness.  Elijah  burst  out  as  a  sudden  flash  of  Divine  fire  from  the  iirivacies 
and  hidings  of  ihe  desert.  Our  Lord  himself  had  a  scene  of  lonely  stillness  and  struggle 
on  the  threshold  of  his  ministry,  and  his  story  tells  of  nights  on  the  desolate  moimtain 
blow,  or  in  the  shady  garden  outside  the  city.  The  Christian  prophet  can  only  come 
forth  aright  into  his  sphere,  if  he  dwells  in  the  "  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  and 
abides  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty." 

IL  The  proper  influence  of  the  Christian  profhkt  within  hib  bphebx.  His 
sphere  is  the  Church.  He  is  to  be  a  spiritual  power  upon  its  members.  1'hat  ia  work 
enough  for  any  man.  To  do  it  aright  he  must  know  all  the  forms  and  influences  of 
human  sorrow  ;  he  must  understand,  and  find  the  antidote  for,  all  the  subtleties,  devices, 
and  diseases  of  temptation  and  of  evil;  he  must  win  the  power  to  sympathize  in  eveiy 
joy  that  gladdens,  and  in  every  soitow  that  clouds,  the  Christian  heart.  He  must  be 
able  keenly,  critically,  to  estimate  the  spirit  of  the  age,  "  the  signs  of  the  timea,"  the 
tone  of  social,  moral,  and  religions  life,  so  as  to  judge  aright  of  the  atmosphere  in  which 
Christian  life  has  to  be  lived.  He  must  have  a  wide  acquaintance  with  th«  history 
of  Christian  thought,  and  with  the  hooks  exerting  piesent  influence  upon  the  Christian 
mind.  He  must  be  deeply  read  in  the  mystery  and  meaning  of  God's  great  Book,  so 
that,  "  like  a  scribe  instructed  to  the  kingdom,  he  may  bring  forth  out  of  his  treasury 
things  new  and  old."  Surely  all  this  is  a  full  life-work  for  any  man.  Observe  the 
specific  terms  by  which  St.  Paul  describes  the  Christian  prophet's  influence.  1.  Edifi- 
cation— a  term  bearing  immediate  relation  to  Christian  growth.  There  is  to  be  growth, 
under  pastoral  influence,  in  knowledge,  in  character,  in  the  great  grace  of  self-denial,  iu 
control  over  the  bad  passions  and  inclinations  of  a  corrupt  nature,  and  growth  in  practici^i 
devotedness  to  all  works  of  charity.  Upbuilding  on  all  these  sides  must  be  continued, 
if  the  plan  of  the  Divine  Architect  is  to  be  seen  gaining  completion  in  Uie  temple  ol 


DM.  ziv.  1— 4a]    THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHlANa  479 


our  life.  8.  Exhortation — a  term  bearing  relation  to  Christisin  dangers,  failings,  and 
temptations.  Warnings,  revelations  of  tlie  evils  of  sin,  searching  pictures  of  tlie  commnri 
experience  of  frail  men,  calls  to  nefilcoteii  duties — these  are  "  exhortations,"  and  a  faithlul 
ministry  must  deal  largely  with  them.  It  must  reach  the  worldly  minded,  the  almost 
drunken,  the  man  whose  hands  are  stained  with  dishonest  or  iin.i;enerous  deeds,  tlie 
injurer  of  the  widow  and  the  fatherless,  the  selfish,  the  proud,  the  unforgiving.  He 
must  "  warn  all  the  wicked  from  the  error  of  their  way."  3.  Comfort — a  term  bearing 
relation  to  Chiistian  soiTOws.  The  pastor's  words  are  to  be  holy  words  of  quiet,  tender 
memories  of  past  goodnesses,  gentle  whispers  of  the  stability  of  the  God  of  Abraiiam 
and  Isaac  and  Jacob,  which  may  lift  suffering  souls  up  to  their  rest  in  the  bosom  of  the 
heavenly  Father,  and  lull  the  tired  heart  into  a  sweet  sleep  upon  the  "everlasting  arms." 
What  would  Christian  life  be  without  its  com/ortings  1  It  is  no  little  tiling  that  oui 
pastors  can  bring  balm  for  wounded  hearts;  leaves  for  the  healing  of  bruised  hearts; 
whispers  of  the  eternal  love  for  doubting  hearts ;  and  uplil'tings  for  downcast,  tear-filled 
eyes,  so  that  they  may  see  the  great  High  Priest  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our 
infirmities/'  and  "  tempted  even  as  we  we." — B.  T. 

Ver,  5. — The  Cfhurch't  edification  the  cibfeet  lought  in  the  trust  of  Christian  gifts. 
"That  the  Church  may  receive  edifying."  In  classifying  the  Christian  gifts,  talents, 
•nd  endowments,  the  first  broad  distinction  to  be  made  is  between  such  as  direct  atten- 
tion to  the  possessor,  and  such  as  give  the  possessor  a  gracious  power  of  influence  on 
others.  Gifts  which  glorify  the  man  who  has  them  are  not  to  be  despised ;  but  the 
apostle  conceived  tliat  gilts  which  take  mfen  out  of  themselves,  and  only  find  their 
exercise  in  the  help  and  blessing  of  others,  are  rather  to  be  sought.  The  man  who  can 
speak  in  ecstatic  language  or  in  an  unknown  tongue,  may  seem  to  be  supremely 
endowed,  and  men  may  be  disposed  to  envy  his  gift;  but  it  only  draws  attention  to 
him;  it  only  excites  feeling ;  it  bears  no  relation  either  to  intellectual  or  moral  culture. 
It  serves  its  ends,  and  possibly  these  are  simply  to  call  attention  to  Christian  pieaching, 
and  bring  men  into  relation  with  the  Christian  teachers.  Tlie  question  which  decides 
our  estimate  of  the  value  of  the  different  gifts  is  this — How  does  each  bear  upon  spiritual 
profit ;  upon  the  edifying  of  the  Church  ?  "  The  teacher  of  religious  truth  to  others, 
who  thereby  builds  up  the  whole  edifice  of  the  body  of  Christ,  is  a  greater  one  than  he 
who  is  himself  benefited  by  being  possessed  of  profound  but  uncommunicable  emotion." 
Opening  this  point,  we  notice^ 

I.  The  inteeest  of  thk  individual  in  thb  Chuboh.  The  Church  is  a  body  made 
np  of  units ;  but  it  is  not  a  mere  aggregation  of  units ;  every  unit  is  related  vitally  with 
every  other  unit,  and  in  mutual  helpfulness  a  common  life  is  maintained.  Schism 
eomes  when  the  interest  of  the  individual  is  centred  in  idf.  The  useless  members  of  a 
Church  ore  those  who  are  satisfied  to  get,  not  to  give.  Each  meml)er  ought  even  to 
nourish  his  own  personal  piety  with  a  view  to  aid  the  healthiness  and  t^ui  of  the 
whole  body.  Illustrate  by  the  modem  discovery  of  the  formation  of  living  beings 
from  germ-cells.  These  do  not  lie  side  by  side ;  they  divide  and  form  new  eells,  so  tliat 
every  single  cell  may  be  said  to  be  in  the  whole  creature,  interested  in  the  vitality  of 
the  whole. 

II.  The  PBOor  of  that  intebebt  in  the  devotion  and  use  of  individual  oifti. 
Gifts  are  not  personal  privileges,  signs  of  special  favour  to  individuals ;  they  ore  always 
trusts  committed  to  individual  members  of  the  Church  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  the 
whole.  A  man  only  looks  at  his  gift  aright  when,  in  the  presence  of  the  Church,  he 
says,  "  This  gift  is  for  you ;  I  hold  it  for  your  use.  Find  me  the  sphere  in  which  I 
may  serve  you  best  in  the  use  of  the  gift,"  How  sublime  the  riches  and  strength  of 
Christ's  Church  would  be  if  each  endowed  man  and  woman  would  lay  his  gifts  on 
the  altar  of  the  Church's  service  1 

III.  The  oultubb  and  proobebs  of  the  Chubch  abb  onlt  lEointXD  bt  luoa 
devotion  and  use  of  gifts.  Illustrate  by  taking  the  separate  endovnnents  and  fitting 
them  to  their  parts  of  the  Church's  ediiying.  Take:  1.  The  sesthetic  or  artistic  glK , 
show  how  it  bears  upon  the  culture  of  the  Church's  sense  of  the  btautifnl,  helping  thus 
to  worthy  conceptions  of  one  side  of  the  Divine  nature.  2.  The  musical  gift ;  showing 
how  it  bears  upon  edifying  by  the  relief  of  overoharged  feeling,  and  aids  iu  knitting  the 
Churah  together  I7  the  common  expression  of  common  emotionik    S.  The  pieaohing 


480  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  ziT.  1— 40. 

and  teaching  gift ;  wLicb  stands  related  to  mental  culture,  intellectual  edification,  i.-. 
The  literary  gift ;  which  in  these  days  becomes  the  great  defensive  agency,  by  whiclt 
the  evils  of  the  Church  are  kept  off  from  her,  so  that  she  may  duly  thriv«  and  grow. 
Others  may  be  mentioned,  or  subdivisions  of  these  may  be  taken.  Press  the  importance 
of  encouraging  in  each  member  full  loyalty  to  the  Church ;  and  show  that  this  becomes 
a  valuable  agency  in  spiritual  edification,  because  it  ensures  the  full  and  self-denying 
devotement  of  all  the  members'  [lOwers  to  the  Church's  well-being.  The  true  and  full 
upbuilding  of  a  Church  includes  many  things,  great  and  small,  and  w  there  ia  Beed  for 
the  use  of  what  we  estimate  as  lesser  and  greater  gifts. — ^B.  T. 

Vers.  7 — ^11.— Christian  intelligence  the  medium  of  Christian  growth.  TIm  point 
presented  in  these  verses  appears  to  be  that  the  Church  is  not  really  edified,  save  as  the 
teachin<;s  presented  to  it  appeal  to  the  understanding.  "Everything  for  nse,  and 
ererything  in  its  place,  is  a  rule,  the  apostle  is  saying,  that  holds  in  spiritual  gifts  and 
exercises,  as  in  everything  else.  If  you  speak  with  tongues,  let  it  not  be  as  only 
making  strange  noises,  but  let  some  one  interpret,  that  the  tongues  may  edify,  and  not 
be  sounds  without  a  meaning.  It  will  not  do  for  Christians  to  be  more  unmeaning  and 
idle  in  spiritual  gifts  than  even  things  without  life  themselves,  the  pipes,  and  harps,  and 
trumpets,  and  drums  of  music;  for  these,  when  they  give  a  sound,  give  it  with  distinc- 
tions that  have  a  meaning  and  a  power,  else  they  are  nought  to  us.  Are  voices  and 
tongues  to  be  less  intelligent  and  significant  than  tubes  of  unconscious  horn  or  metal  ?  " 
(H.  Bu-ibnell,  D.D.),  Inquire:  1.  How  far  it  is  true  that  all  influences  bearing  upon 
the  edification  of  the  Church  must  appeal  to  the  imderstanding.  So  far  as  edification 
includes  right  Tiews  of  truth  and  right  feelings  about  truth,  the  fitting  acceptance 
of  a  Divine  revelation,  and  the  worthy  expression  of  the  principles  declared  in  that 
revelation,  the  appeal  must  be  to  the  mitid.  2.  Under  what  limitations  mtut  this 
itatement  be  set.  John  Howe  ('  Works,'  vol.  ii.  p.  76)  says,  "  Nor  do  1  believe  it  can 
•ver  be  proved  that  God  never  doth  immediately  testify  his  own  special  love  to  holy 
■onls,  without  the  intervention  of  some  part  of  his  eternal  Word,  made  use  of  as  a 
present  instrument  to  that  purpose,  or  that  he  always  doth  it  in  a  way  of  methodical 
reasoning  therefrom."  Gk>d  usually  works  through  the  unHerstanding,  but  he  may  use 
infiuences  which  bear  at  once  upon  heart  and  emotion.  It  must  be  observed,  however, 
that  such  influences  are  but  of  temporary  benefit,  if  they  are  not  duly  supported  by 
intellectual  considerations  and  mentally  established  principles.  3.  Argue  from  these 
points  the  value  and  importance  of  an  adequately  educated  and  fully  cultured  ministry ; 
showing,  and  efficiently  illustrating,  the  relations  of  such  an  instructive  ministry  to  (1) 
family  piety,  (2)  liberal  apprehensions  of  revealed  truth,  (3)  iwcial  intercoune  (rf 
Christian  people,  and  (4)  sober  Christian  actiTities. — B.  T. 

Ver.  20. — TIm  Christian  Jtoth  a  child  and  a  man.  The  apostoUo  counsel  here  given 
bears  immediate  relation  to  the  exaggerated  estimate  of  the  value  of  the  "  gift  of 
tongues  "  which  prevailed  in  the  Church  at  Corinth.  "  Their  conduct  in  exalting  these 
'  tongues,' agsdnst  which  be  has  been  warning  them,  is  a  proof  that  they  are  yet  cliildren 
in  knowleilge.  They  ought  to  be  full  grown ;  the  only  thing  in  which  they  ought  to  be 
children  is  evil,  and  in  that  they  cannot  be  too  young,  too  inexperienced ;  they  should 
be  merely  '  infants.' "  There  is  a  sense  in  which  all  Christians  must  be  children.  There 
ia  a  sense  in  which  all  Christians  must  be  "men,"  "  perfect,"  "  full  grown."  To  express 
the  thought  of  the  apostle  in  a  sharply  defined  sentence — ^"Be  childlike,  but  not 
childish."  Refer  to  Bible  sentiments  alx>ut  children.  It  seems  always  impressed  with 
the  little  idea  of  evil  which  young  children  have.  Take  a  thousandfold  forms  of  human 
■in  and  transgression,  and  you  will  find  that  the  little  child  can  form  no  conception 
of  the  meanings  of  the  terms  in  which  you  express  them.  The  young  child  is  the  type 
of  simplicity  and  innocence.  But,  in  this  passage,  the  apostle.is  rather  tMnking  of  the 
friendline«a  of  children,  of  their  readiness  to  forgive ;  they  seldom  or  ever  are  found 
"  bearing  malice."  Illustrating  the  point  that  the  Christian  should  he  both  •  chiid  and 
a  man,  we  notic^- 

L  WaAT  omLD-oHAmAOTBBiBTios  BHocLD  WE  FIND  IS  X  CbbibtiaiiT  Q«org«  Mao- 
douald,  in  a  Christmas  sermon,  given  in  '  Adela  Cathcart,'  very  suggestively  says, 
**  It  is  as  if  Odd  spoke  to  saeh  m  ua  according  to  our  need  ;  My  son,  my  daughter, 


OH.  XIV.  1—46.]    tHB  ^IRSl:  fiPIStliB  tO  THE  CORIHTHIANS.  «1 

jovL  are  growing  old  and  cunning ;  yon  must  grow  •  cliild  again,  with  my  Son,  thi* 
blessed  birth-time.  You  are  growing  old  and  selfish ;  you  must  become  a  child.  Ton 
are  growing  old  and  careful ;  you  must  become  a  child.  You  are  growing  old  and 
distrustful ;  you  must  become  a  child.  You  are  growing  old,  and  petty,  and  weak,  and 
foolish;  you  must  become  a  child — ^my  child;  like  the  baby  there,  that  strong  sunrise 
of  faith  and  hope  and  love,  lying  in  his  mother's  arms  in  the  stable."  The  character- 
istics of  child-nature  which  ought  to  be  found,  nourished  into  the  fulness  of  beauty,  in 
Christian  hearts  and  lives  are  such  ai  these — each  will  prove  suggestive  of  illustration— 
(1)  receptivity;  (2)  submissiveness;  (3)  obedience;  (4)  trustfulness;  (5)  absence  of 
self-consciousness ;  (6)  hopefulness ;  (7)  simplicity ;  (8)  forgiveness.  "  If  these  things 
he  in  you  and  abound,  they  make  you  that  you  shall  neither  be  barren  nor  unfruitful 
in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (2  Pet.  i.  8). 

II.  What  manlt  ohabactebistios  should  wb  find  ni  a  Christian?  A  man 
differs  from  a  child  in  this,  that  what  he  is  he  is  by  force  of  wiU,  and  not  as  a  mere 
accident  of  his  being.  What  in  a  child  we  properly  call  innocence,  in  a  man  we  call 
viriite.  The  proper  manly  characteristics  are  such  as  (1)  self-control ;  (2)  cultured 
•iiftelligence ;  (3)  energy ;  (4)  prudence ;  (5)  charity ;  (6)  generous  estimate  of  motives ; 
(7)  self-sacrifice.  It  is  true  that  the  Christian  estimate  of  the  manly  is  not  precisely 
that  which  the  world  favours.  The  world  has  ever  chiefly  extolled  the  active  virtues, 
and  associated  the  pensive  virtues  almost  exclusively  with  womanhood.  But  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  been  presented  to  us  th«  perfect  type  of  manhood :  we  can  con- 
ceive or  wish  nothing  higher  or  more  sublime;  and  we  find  the  passive  ^nd  active 
virtues  fully  represented  and  harmoniously  blended  in  him.  The  world's  best  thought 
of  manhood  and  womanhood  meet  in  him  ;  and  so  woman  and  man  can  make  him  their 
ideal.  Nothing  can  be  sublimer  fur  a  life-aim  than  to  seek  to  be  a  child  as  Jesus  was, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  to  be  a  man  as  noble  as  Jesus  was, — B.  T. 

Ver.  20. — The  power  of  Chrietianity  on  intellect.  This  text  dinctly  encourages 
the  cultivation  of  intellect,  and  supposes  that  Christianity  will  exert  a  practical  and 
helpful  influence  on  such  cultivation. 

I.  Christianity  wiLii  help  to  make  ns  intellbctual  men.  Christianity  recog- 
nizes no  model,  ideal  man,  save  one  whose  whole  circle  of  faculties  has  been  duly 
developed,  and  certainly  that  noble  part,  the  mind.  It  presents  to  us  its  ideal  man 
in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ ;  there  we  see  what  it  proposes  to  bring  all  men  up  to, 
aud  behold,  in  the  very  beginnings  of  Christ's  life  we  read  that  "  he  t;rew  in  wisdom 
and  in  stature,"  exhibiting  a  surprising  intelligence,  which  astonished  the  great  doctors 
in  the  temple.  A  willingly  ignorant  Christian  is  an  anomaly,  a  strange  being,  an 
imperfection,  essentially  incomplete ;  he  has  not  felt,  or  he  has  resisted,  the  fiill  force 
of  the  Christly  principles  and  requirements.  1.  Christianity  comes  into  the  world  to 
restore  man  firom  his  fallen  condition.  Man's  self-willed  fall  involved  his  mind  as  well 
as  his  will,  and  the  restorative  applies  to  the  fallen  mind.  The  mind  suffered  sadly, 
lost  its  guiding  truth,  lost  its  harmonies,  lost  its  place  of  rule,  which  was  usurped  by 
the  passions  of  the  body.  2.  History  confirms  the  relation  of  Christianity  to  intellect. 
Illustrate  times  of  Wickliffe  and  Luther,  etc.  3.  The  Christian  services  and  duties  help 
the  intellect.  Other  religions  are  mostly  ceremonial,  making  only  routine  demands. 
Christian  services  are  essentially  spiritual  things,  applications  of  mind  to  God's  written 
Word,  contemplations  of  Divine  and  heavenly  realities,  ordering  of  the  thoughts  so  as  to 
fushion  them  into  prayers;  these,  and  many  other  things,  actually,  by  their  own  direct 
innuence,  storing  and  training  the  mind.  'J'he  public  Christian  worship  Is  intelligent 
Its  praises  are  expressed  in  the  words  of  cultivated  poets.  Our  Bible  is  the  utterance 
of  learning  as  well  as  of  inspiration.  Our  preaching  is  the  product  of  study  and  thought, 
and  its  appeal  is  made  to  the  understanding  as  well  as  to  the  heart.  4.  Christianity, 
with  its  revelations  and  doctrines,  provides  the  very  best  food  for  the  mind.  It  is  the 
highest  of  sciences.  It  is  the  philosophy  of  the  Infinite  and  the  Absolute — it  is  the 
science  of  God.  6.  Christianity  makes  the  cultivation  of  the  intellect  a  matter  of 
direct  counsel.  It  bids  us  "  with  all  our  getting  get  understanding,"  and  assures  us 
that  "wisdom  is  to  be  chosen  rather  than  riches."  And  the  apostle  complains  that  the 
believers  do  not  mentally  grow  as  fast  as  they  should — that  he  has  to  feed  them  with 
the  milk  of  first  principles,  when  they  ought  to  be  able  to  take  the  strong  meat 

L   COBINTHIANB.  2   I 


!82  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xiv.  1— 40 

of  the  Christian  mysteries.  If  this  be  the  relation  of  Christianity  to  mind,  then  two 
things  are  manifest.  (1)  Those  men  are  utterly  wrong  who  sneer  at  religion  as  a 
weak  thing,  and  a£Srm  that  there  is  an  antagonism  between  reason  and  revelation. 
(2)  We  are  quite  in  the  spirit  of  the  religion  which  we  profess,  when  we  do  our  utmost 
to  take  our  stand  honourably  among  the  intellectutu  men  of  our  day.  Our  Twy 
religion  helps  us  "  in  understanding  to  be  men." 

II.  Christianity  prevents  oitb  beoohino  iNTELLEornAUiT  PBonn  ken.  It  does 
so:  1.  By  announcing  mysteries  that  are  at  present  unfathomable  by  the  human 
intelligence.  2.  By  making  clear  the  distinction  between  speculation  and  knowledge. 
3.  By  settinj;  forth  prominently  its  teaching  of  man's  entire  dependence  on  the  Divine 
help.     If  we  know  anything,  we  know  it  only  as  God's  revelation  to  us. 

III.  Christianity  keeps  vb  from  beinq  only  intellectual  men.  The  mind  may 
be  cultivated  and  the  morals  neglected,  so  that  a  man  may  become  dry,  and  cold,  and 
hard,  and  unlovely.  Men  may  be  mentally  vigorous  and  morally  weak ;  intellectual 
giants,  but  slaves  to  passion.  Christianity  keeps  men  from  this  (1)  by  proiMsing  to 
harmonize  man's  whole  nature  by  beginning  with  the  regeneration  of  his  heart ;  and 
(2)  by  carefully  developing  the  character  and  the  moral  qualities.  Asking  the  love  of 
the  soul  for  God  manilested  in  Jesus,  it  quickens  and  strengthens  and  nourishes  every 
moral  good,  every  moral  power,  and  helps  a  man  to  grow  healthily  on  every  side  of 
his  nature,  so  as  to  develop  into  the  "  stature  of  the  perfect  man." — B.  T. 

Ver.  24. — Preaching  to  unbelievert.  Previously  the  apostle  had  shown  that  the 
proper  sphere  of  the  Christian  prophet  was  the  teaching  of  the  Church,  so  that  its 
members  might  be  edified,  exhorted,  and  comforted.  Now  he  intimates  that  this  b  not 
the  only  influence  exerted  by  Christian  prophesying;  it  has  its  power  also  on  the 
"  unbeliever "  and  the  "  unlearned."  In  the  early  Church  the  claims  of  worship  were 
met  by  attendance  on  the  temple  and  synagogue  services,  and  the  Christian  meetings 
were,  at  first,  simply  gatherings  for  editication  and  prayer;  so  preaching  and  teaching 
were  the  prominent  features  of  them.  Gradually  worship  and  edification  became 
united  in  the  Christian  meetings,  and  a  Christian  cult,  as  well  as  Christian  doctrine,  was 
formulated.  Then  a  greater  publicity  was  given  to  the  meetings;  unbelievers  were 
allowed  to  come  in,  and  the  preaching  came  to  bear  direct  relation  to  th»m.  We 
obierve  that — 

I.  A  FAiTHruL  HiNiBTBT  WILL  BE  A  POWER  OS  nKBiLiEVBBB.  It  may  Mem  that  a 
ministry  adapted  to  believers  is  not  suited  for  the  arresting,  convincing,  and  converting 
of  the  impenitent ;  and  this  is  made  a  complaint  against  those  who  occupy  the  pastoral 
ofiSce.  It  may  be  ailvisable  that  for  this  particular  work  a  class  of  evangelists,  oi 
missioners,  should  be  raised  up,  but  it  may  furly  be  urged  that  in  the  regular  Church 
ministry  there  should  be,  and  may  be,  a  real  converting  power.  For :  1.  Faithful  preach- 
ing it  the  exertion  of  spiritual  power;  and  this  all  must  feel  and  respond  to,  in  greater 
or  less  degree.  When  God  speaks  to  men  by  tempests,  plague,  or  famine,  every  one 
must  feel  it  more  or  less ;  all  must  hear  the  voice.  An  assembled  congregation  if  ior 
the  time  shut  in  with  God,  and  all  must  feel,  in  some  degree,  caught  by  the  power  ol 
God.  We  have  many  cases,  in  history  and  within  experience,  in  which  the  results 
have  been  much  grander  than  the  means  used  could  indicate.  Illustrate  by  the  day  oi 
Pentecost,  times  of  revival,  seasons  of  hallowed  emotion  in  Christian  services.  These  are 
times  of  spiritual  power  which  all  must  feel,  times  of  life  or  of  death  to  men.  2.  Faith- 
fvl  preaching  will  liberate  and  arouse  the  human  conscience.  The  preaching  which 
fills  believers  with  a  new  sense  of  God  will  arouse  the  conscience  of  unbelievers  to  the 
conviction  of  his  existence  and  claims.  The  preaching  that  reveals  the  deep  horror, 
the  mwal  helplessness,  and  the  final  ruin  of  the  sinner,  will  stir  the  conscience  of  all 
who  hear  it.  The  things  that  lull  the  Christian  conscience  to  sleep  are  the  very  things 
which  lull  to  sleep  the  sinner's  conscience.  Men's  "  refuges  of  lies,"  from  which  they 
have  to  be  driven,  are  much  the  same.  3.  Faithful  preaching  must  include  the  aspects  of 
truth  directly  suited  to  reach  the  unbeliever.  He  who  would  "declare  the  whole  counsel 
of  God"  must  be  often  dealing  with  the  simplest  foundation-truths.  He  ipeika  to 
many  weak,  unlearned  believers,  who  cannot  bear  "  strong  meat,"  and  so  he  must  be 
very  often  laying  down  the  groundwork  of  hope ;  and  every  wrmon  may  thus  gain  its 
helpful  adaptation  to  unbelievers.     We  have  i»  be  constantly  pre"  "tin);  such  great 


OH.XT.  1— 68.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


.48. 


fint  principle!  as  these  ;  "  All  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glury  of  God."  Goo 
is  the  Father  of  all  the  human  race.  He  finds  expression  for  his  Fatherhood  in  a 
gracious  redemption  of  his  erring  children.  The  Divine  Spirit  is  the  source  of  all  good- 
ness in  man.  Jesus  is  the  only,  but  he  is  the  all-sufficient  Saviour.  Apart,  then, 
from  those  direct  appeals  which  ministers  may  be  at  times  constrained  to  make,  their 
whole  preaching  should  prove  a  power  unto  salvation. 

IL   A   FAITHFUL   MINISTRY    WILL    EXERT   A    PARTICULAB    KIND  OF   POWER  OH   tlNBE- 

LiBVEBS.  Vers.  24, 25,  Speak  of  three  things  :  (1)  impression;  (2)  knowledge  of  self;  (;-!l 
sense  of  God.  1.  Impression.  "  He  is  convinced  of  all."  He  is  interested,  seized,  held 
to  thought,  even,  it  may  be,  against  his  will.  Tlie  trifles  that  agitated  liim  are  gone; 
hig  purpose  in  coming  is  forgotten ;  he  is  impressed,  held  by  the  loroe  of  preached  truth. 
Illustrate  by  scenes  in  the  itinerant  labours  of  George  Whitefield  or  John  Wesley. 
2.  Knowledge  of  self.  "  Secrets  of  heart  made  manifest."  Sometimes  the  minister 
seems  to  us  as  if  he  knew  all  about  us.  He  brings  to  memoiy  our  wrong-doings.  He 
reveals  to  us  our  bad  motives,  our  heart-wrongness.  We  see  the  corru;  tnesa  of  our 
inclinations  and  purposes.  We  feel  convicted  of  the  ma.ster-sin  of  ungodliness.  3.  Sense 
of  Ood.  (Ver.  25.)  The  merely  shadowy  thought  of  God  becomes  substance,  the  idea 
becomes  reality.  In  the  sanctuary  God  seems  to  come  out  of  the  dim  distance  and 
look  us  in  the  face.  God's  claims  and  relations  go  searchingly  through  our  souls. 
God's  love  and  redemption  seem  to  be  great  glories  far  up  out  of  our  reach.  The 
minister's  sense  of  God  is  borne  in  upon  us,  compelling  us  to  say,  "  God !  What  is  God 
to  me?"  So  sabbath  preaching  is  the  savour  of  life  or  of  death  to  us  all.  Under  its 
influence  are  we  being  won  to  God  ?  If  not,  what  shall  we  say  ?  0  guilty  will,  that 
decides  not  for  Christ !  0  mournful  worldliness,  that  plucks  men  back  from  the  very 
threiholdoflifel— R.  T. 

Vera.  34,  35. — Woman's  place  in  Christian  worship.  Three  pointi  may  h*  taken 
for  due  explanation  and  enforcement. 

I.  The  F^astern,  Jewish,  and  pagan  sentiment!  concerning  the  public  position  and 
relations  of  woman. 

n.  The  practical  difficulties  which  arose  when  women  were  converted  to  Christianity, 
and  became  conscious  of  personal  religious  life,  and  the  endowment  of  spiritual  gifts, 

III.  The  ways  in  which  St.  Paul's  teachings  on  this  subject  require  to  be  modified 
in  adaptat'on  to  Western  civilization,  and  the  wiser,  better  conceptions  of  woman's 
mission,  which  are  happily  characteristic  of  modern  times. — R.  T, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Vers.  1 — 58. — The  doctrine  of  the  resur- 
rection. This  chapter,  and  the  thirteenth, 
on  Christian  love,  stand  out,  even  among 
the  writings  of  St.  Paul,  as  pre-eminently 
beautiful  and  important.  No  human  words 
aver  written  have  brought  such  comfort 
to  millions  of  mourners  as  the  words  of 
this  chapter,  which  form  a  part  of  the  Burial 
Serviceof  almost  every  Christian  community. 
It  is  the  more  deeply  imprinted  on  the 
memory  of  men  because  it  comes  to  us 
in  the  most  solemn  hours  of  bereavement, 
when  we  have  most  need  of  a  living  faith. 
The  chapter  falls  into  six  sections.  1.  The 
evidence  of  Chrisf  s  resurrection  (vers.  1 — 
11).  2.  The  resurrection  of  Chrbt  is  the 
foundation  of  our  faith  in  the  general  resur- 
rection (vers.  12 — 19).  3.  Results  to  be 
deduced  &om  Christ's  resurreotiou  (vers.  20 
28).  4.  Tbe  life  of  be'aeveni  an  argument 


for  the  resurrection  (vers.  89 — 84).  S.  Ana- 
logies helpful  for  understanding  the  subject 
(vers.  35 — 49).  6.  ConoluBioii  and  exhortation 
(vers.  50—58). 

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  evidenet  o/  ihe  renir- 
reetion  of  Christ. 

Ver.  1. — Moreover.  The  Si  of  the  original 
merely  marks  the  transition  to  a  new  topic. 
The  gospel.  He  here  uses  the  word  with 
special  reference  to  the  Resurrection,  which 
ia  one  of  the  most  central  and  necessary 
doctrines  of  the  "  good  tidings,"  and  which 
always  occupied  a  prominent  place  in  St. 
Paul's  preaching  (Acts  xrii.  18;  xxiii.  6), 
as  well  as  in  that  of  all  the  apostles  (Acts  i. 
22 ;  iv.  2 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  21).  Ye  have  received ; 
rather,  ye  received.  The  "  also  "  is  emphatie. 
The  Corinthians  had  not  been  like  (Christ's 
"own,"  who  "received  him  not"  (John  L  11) 

Ver.  2. — By  which  also  ye  are  saved; 
literally,  ye  are  being  saved.  It  is  as  if  soma 
surprise  was  expressed  at  ths  necessity  fin 


481 


THB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xv.  1— 5&. 


a°;am  making  known  to  them  a  gospel 
which  (1)  he  had  preached  and  (2)  they 
also  received ;  and  (3)  in  which  they  now 
stood  fast  (Rom.  y.  2 ;  Eph.  vi.  13) ;  and  (4) 
by  means  of  which  they  were  now  in  a 
state  of  lafety,  tlicy  were  of  the  olasa  of 
$ozomenoi  (Acts  ii.  17).  If  ye  keep  in 
memory  what  I  preached  onto  yon.  The 
order,  which  is  peculiar,  is,  **  In  what  words  I 
preached  to  you,  if  ye  hold  [it]  fast." 
Possibly  the  "  in  what  discourse  "  dependi 
on  "I  make  known  to  you."  The  duty 
of  **  holding  fa*t "  what  they  had  heard  ia 
often  impressed  on  the  early  converts  (oh. 
xi.  2;  2  Cor.  tL  10;  1  Thess.  T.  21 :  Heb. 
X.  23).  T*  have  believed;  rather,  y« 
believed  f  La  ye  became  believers.  In  rain. 
The  word  may  either  mean  "  rashly," 
"  without  evidence,"  as  in  classical  Greek ; 
or  "  to  no  purpose,"  "  without  effect,"  as  in 
Bom.  ziii.  4;  Gal.  iii.  1;  iv.  11.  In  tliis 
ease  they  would  have  received  the  seed  in 
stony  places  (Matt.  xiii.  21). 

Ver.  3. — first  of  all ;  literally,  amony  the 
firet  things;  but  tliis  idiom  means  "first 
of  all."  It  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the 
New  Testament,  but  is  found  in  Gen.  xxxiii. 
2 :  2  Sam.  v.  8  (LXX.).  This  testimony 
to  the  Resurrection  is  very  remarkable, 
because :  1.  It  is  the  completest  summary. 
2.  It  refers  to  some  incidents  which  are  not 
mentioned  in  the  Gospels.  3.  It  declares  that 
the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  were 
a  subject  of  ancient  propheoy.  4.  It  shows 
the  force  of  the  evidence  on  which  the 
apostles  relied  and  the  number  of  living 
eye-witnesses  to  whom  they  could  appeal. 
5.  It  is  the  earliest  written  testimony  to 
the  Resurrection;  for  it  was  penned  within 
kwenty-flTe  yean  of  the  eyent  itselC  6.  It 
shows  that  the  evidence  for  the  Resurrection 
as  a  literal,  historical,  objective  fact,  was 
snfBcient  to  convince  the  powerful  intellect 
of  a  hostile  contemporary  observer.  7.  It 
probably  embodies,  and  became  the  model 
for,  a  part  of  the  earliest  Ureed  of  the  Church. 
For  our  sins;  literally,  on  behalf  of.  The 
passage  is  remaikable  as  the  only  one  in 
which  "on  behalf  of"  is  used  with  "sins" 
in  St.  Paul.  In  ch.  i.  13  we  are  told  that 
he  died  "  on  behalf  of  us  "  (Rom.  v.  8 ;  see 
2  Cor.  V.  21 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24).  The  expressions 
involve  the  image  of  Christ  as  a  Sin  Offering 
for  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  According  to  the 
Scriptures.  The  chief  passages  alluded  to 
are  doubtless  Isa.  liii.  5,  8;  Dan.  ix.  26; 
Ps.  xxii. ;  Zech.  xii.  10 ;  together  with 
such  typos  as  the  offering  of  Isaa>i  (Gen. 
xxii.)  and  the  Paschal  lamb,  etc.  Our 
Lord  had  taught  the  apostles  conlidently  to 
refer  to  the  Me.-siauic  interpretation  of 
the  Old  Teslament  prophecies  (Luke  xxiv. 
25,  46:  Acts  viii.  35 ;  xvii.  3 ;  xxvi.  22,  23; 
John  ii.  22;  xx.  9;  1  Pet.  i.  11). 


Ver.  4. — And  that  he  ron;  rather,  thai 
he  had  been  raised.  The  burial  was  a  singlt 
act;  the  Resurrection  is  permanent  and 
eternal  in  its  issues.  According  to  the 
Scriptures  (Pe.  xvi.  10;  Isa.  liii.  10;  Hog. 
vi.  2;  Jonah  ii.  10;  comp.  Matt,  xii,  40; 
xvi.  4 ;  Acts  ii.  31 ;  xiii.  84). 

Ver.  5. — ^Was  seen  of  Cephas  (Lnkt 
xxiv.  34),  The  appearances  to  the  women 
(John  XX.  14,  eto.)  are  omitted,  as  being 
evidential  rather  to  the  apostles  than  to 
the  world.  The  twelve  (John  xx.  19,  26). 
Some  officious  scribes  have  in  some  manu- 
scripts altered  the  word  into  "  the  eleven." 
But  "  the  twelve  "  is  here  the  designation 
of  an  ojiee,  and  great  ancient  writers  are 
always  indiffereut  to  mere  pragmatic 
accuracy  in  trifles  which  involve  nothing. 
To  witness  to  the  Besurrection  was  »  main 
function  of  «the  twelve"  (Acts  ii.  23; 
iii.  15 ;  x.  40,  etc.). 

Ver.  6. — Above  five  hundred  brethren  at 
once.  We  cannot  be  certain  whether  thii 
memorable  appearance  took  place  in  Jerusa- 
lem or  in  Galilee.  It  is,  however,  most  pro 
bable  that  this  was  the  appearance  on  the 
mountain  (Matt,  xxviii.  16,  17;  comp. 
Matt.  xxvi.  82).  Of  whom  the  greater  part 
remain  onto  this  present  This  sentence — a 
confident  contemporary  appeal  to  a  very 
large  number  of  living  witnesses,  by  one 
who  would  rather  have  died  than  lied — U 
of  the  higliest  evidential  value.  It  shows 
that  the  Besurrection  was  not  "a  thing 
done  is  a  corner  "  (Acts  xxvi.  26>  Fallen 
asleep.  The  beautiful  and  common  word 
for  death  in  the  New  Testament  (Matt,  xxvii. 
52;  John  xi.  11 ;  Acts  vii,  60,  etc.).  Hence 
the  word  "cemetery" — "  a  sleeping^lace." 

Ver.  7. — Seen  of  James,  The  "James" 
intended  is  midoubtedly  the  only  James 
then  living,  who  was  known  to  the  whole 
Christian  Church,  namely,  "the  Lord's 
brother,"  the  author  of  the  Epistle,  and  the 
Bishop  of  Jerusalem  (Gal,  ii.  9 ;  Acts  xv. 
13 ;  xxi.  18).  James  the  son  of  Zebedee  had 
by  this  time  been  martyred,  and  James  the 
son  of  AlphffiUB  was  never  much  more  than 
a  name  to  the  Church  in  general.  There  is 
no  mention  of  this  appearance  in  the  Gospel ; 
but  in  the  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews  was  a 
curious  legend  (preserved  in  St.  Jerome, 
'  De  Virr.  lUust.,'  ii.)  that  James  had  made 
a  vow  that  he  would  neither  eat  nor  drink 
till  he  had  seen  Jesus  risen  from  the  dead, 
and  that  Jesus,  appearing  to  him,  said, 
"  My  brother,  eat  thy  bread,  for  the  Son  of 
man  is  risen  from  the  dead."  The  truth  of 
the  appearance  is  strongly  supported  by 
the  fact  thut  James,  like  the  rest  of  the 
Lord's  "brothers,"  "did  not  believe"  in 
Christ  before  the  Crucifixion,  whereas  aftet 
the  Besurrection  we  find  liim  and  the  rest  ol 
"the  Lord's  brothers"  ardently  convinced 


n.  XV.  1— 68.J    THE  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN& 


48& 


cjohn  ili.  8— S ;  Aoti  i.  14 ;  tz.  5.  eto.).  Of 
all  the  apostles  (Acts  i.  3;  Luke  xzir. 
50).  James  the  Lord's  brother  was  only 
aa  apostle  in  the  wider  sense  of  the  word. 

Yer.  8. — He  was  seen  of  me  also.  The 
reference  undoubtedly  is  to  the  vision  on  the 
road  to  Damascus  (Acts  ix.  5;  xxii.  14; 
xxvi.  16).  As  of  one  born  out  of  due  time ; 
literally,  as  to  the  abortive-iorn.  The  word 
iiM-ans  "  the  untimely  fruit  of  a  woman,"  a 
c'liild  born  out  of  the  due  time  or  natural 
course ;  and  hence  "  diminutive"  and 
"weakly."  The  Gre«k  ektrama  is  repre- 
!.ented  by  the  Latin  ahortivui.  St.  Paul, 
when  he  remembered  the  lateness  of  his 
"onversion,  and  his  past  persecution  of  the 
saints,  regards  himself  at  standing  in  this 
relation  to  the  twelve. 

Ver.  9. — 7or.  This  and  the  next  rerse 
are  an  explanation  of  the  strong  and  strange 
term  which  he  had  applied  to  himself.  The 
least  of  the  apostles.  In  St.  Paul  there  was 
a  true  and  most  deep  hu nility,  but  no  mock 
modesty.  He  knew  the  special  gifts  which 
he  had  received  from  God.  He  was  well 
aware  that  to  him  had  been  entrusted  the 
ti  u  talents  rather  than  the  one  talent.  He 
uould  appeal  to  far  vaster  results  than  had 
been  achieved  by  the  work  of  any  other 
npnstle.  He  knew  his  own  importance  as 
"  a  clioseu  vessel,"  a  special  instrument  in 
(7od's  hands  to  work  out  exciptional  results. 
But  in  himself  he  always  felt,  and  did  not 
ishrink  from  confessing,  that  he  was  "no- 
thing "  (2  Cor.  xii.  11).  The  notion  that  he 
here  alludes  to  the  meaning  of  his  own  name 
{Paulus,  connected  with  navpos,  ijmvpos, 
equivalent  to  "  little ")  is  very  unlikely. 
In  Epb.  iii.  8  he  goes  further,  and  calls 
himself  "  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints," 
though  even  there  he  claims  to  have  been 
the  special  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  Because 
I  persecuted  the  Church  of  Ood.  This  was 
the  one  sin  for  which,  though  he  knew  that 
God  had  forgiven  him  (1  Tim.  L  13),  yet 
he  could  never  quite  forgive  himself  (Gal. 
L  13).  In  my  'Life  of  St.  Paul'  I  have 
shown  from  the  language  used,  that  this 
persecution  was  probably  more  deadly  than 
has  been  usually  supposed,  involving  not 
only  torture,  but  actual  bloodshed  (Acts  viii, 
4;  iz.  1),  besides  the  martyrdom  of  St. 
Stephen.  We  can  imagine  how  such  deeds 
and  such  scenes  would,  even  after  forgive- 
ness, lie  like  sparki  of  fire  in  a  sensitiTe 
conscience. 

"  Saints,  did  I  say?  with  yonr  remembered 
faces; 
Dear  men  and  women  whom  I  sought 
and  slew? 
Oh,  when  I  ateet  yon  in  the  heavenly 
places, 
How  will  I  weep  to  Stephen  and  to 
you!" 


Ver  10.— By  the  grace  of  Ood  I  un  'wkat 
I  am,  And  therefore  he  was  "in  nothing 
behind  the  very  chiefest  apostles."  How. 
ever  humbly  he  thought  of  himself.  It  would 
have  been  mere  unfaithfulness  to  disparage 
his  own  work  (2  Our.  UL  5,  6).  I  laboured 
more  abundantly  than  they  all.  Beoausa 
God  wrought  eCfeotually  in  him  (Gal.  it. 
8).  The  word  used  for  "labour"  irapliea 
the  extreme  of  toil  (Matt.  vi.  28  :  Phil.  ii. 
16),  eto.  But  the  grace  of  Clod.  ■*  It  is  God 
thatworketh  in  you"  (Phil.  ii.  13;  Matt. 
X.20:  Col.  i.  29). 

Ver.  11.— Whether  it  Were  I  «r  they; 
namely,  who  preached  this  gospel  to  you. 
It  is  not  his  immediate  object  to  maintain 
his  independent  apostolic  claims,  but  only 
to  appeal  to  the  fact  of  the  Resurrection 
which  was  preached  by  all  the  apostles 
alike.  So.  In  accordance  with  the  testi- 
mony just  given  (vers.  4 — 8).  We  preach. 
There  are  in  the  New  Testament  two  words 
for  "preaching."  One  is  often  rendered 
"  prophesy,"  and  refers  to  spiritual  instruc- 
tion and  exhortation.  The  other,  which  is 
used  here,  is  "we  proclaim,"  or  "herald" 
(kerutso),  and  refers  to  the  statement  of  the 
facts  of  the  gospel — Christ  crucified  and 
risen  (ch.  ii.  2 ;  Acts  iv.  2 ;  viiL  S).  Besides 
these,  there  is  the  one  word  for  "  to  preach 
the  gospel,"  or  "  evangelize." 

Vers.  12— 19.— TOe  retmreelion  of  Christ 
i$  the  basis  of  our  faith  in  Oi»  general  reswr- 
rection. 

Yer.  12.— K'ow  if  Christ  he  preached  that 
he  rose  from  the  dead.  St.  Paul  sees  that  if 
One  has  risen  from  the  dead,  the  fact  of 
that  miracle,  taken  in  connection  with  the 
rest  of  the  gospel,  furnishes  Christians  with 
a  suflBoient  proof  that  they  shall  rise.  "For," 
he  had  already  said  to  the  Thessalonians, 
"if  we  believe  that  Jesus  dieii  and  rose 
again,  even  so  them  also  which  sleep  in 
Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him  "  (see  the 
same  argument  in  Bom.  viii.  11).  That 
there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead.  These 
deniers  of  the  resurrection  are  usually 
called  "  the  Corinthian  Saddueees."  After 
the  state  of  social  and  moral  laxity  of  which 
we  have  been  reading,  we  can  scarcely  be 
inrprised  at  the  existence  of  any  disorder 
or  anomaSy  in  the  Church  of  Corinth.  Yet 
it  comes  with  something  of  a  shock  on  our 
paralyzed  sense  of  astonishment  to  read  that 
some  of  these  Christians  actually  denied 
a  resurrection !  The  fact  at  once  proves  two 
remarkable  truths,  namely,  (1)  that  the 
early  Christian  Church  had  none  of  the 
ideal  purity  of  doctrine  which  is  sometimes 
ecclesiastically  attributed  to  it;  and  (2) 
that  there  was  in  the  Imsom  of  that  Church 
a  wide  and  most  forbearing  tolerance.  We 
have  no  dutato  enable  us  to  determine  what 
were  the  influencea  whioh  led  tc  the  denitd 


186 


THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   TO  THE  (X)RINTHIAN8.    [oh.  XT.  1—68 


of  the  resurrection.  1.  They  ean  hardly 
lave  been  Jewish.  Tlie  mass  of  Jews  at 
this  time  shared  the  views  of  tlie  Pbari- 
eees,  who  strongly  luaiDtained  the  resurrec- 
tion (Acts  xxiii.  6).  If  they  were  Jews  at 
all,  they  could  only  have  been  Sadducees  or 
Essenes.  But  (1)  the  Sadducees  were  a  small, 
wealthy,  and  mainly  pnlitical  sect,  who  had 
no  religious  influence,  and  can  certainly 
have  had  no  representatives  at  Coriuth ; 
and  (2)  the  Etsenet,  though  they  had  con- 
siderable influence  in  Asia,  do  not  seem  to 
have  established  themselves  in  Greece,  nor 
are  we  aware  that  they  were  hostile  to  the 
doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  2.  Probably, 
then,  they  were  Gentiles.  If  so,  they  may 
have  been  (1)  either  Epicureans,  who  dis- 
believed in  a  future  life  altogether ;  or  (2) 
Stoiet,  who  held  that  tlie  future  life  was 
only  an  impersonal  absorption  into  the 
Divine.  Both  tliese  schools  of  philosophers 
"jeered"  at  the  very  notion  of  a  budily 
resurrection  (Acts  xvii.  82).  In  2  Tim.  iL 
18  we  read  of  some,  like  Hymeneeufi  and 
Philetni,  who  erred,  saying  "  that  the  resur- 
rection was  past  already."  These  teachers 
were  incipient  Gnnstius,  who  spiritualized 
the  resurrection,  or  rather  said  that  the 
term  was  mdy  applicable  to  the  rising  from 
the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of  righteousness. 
The  Corinthian  doubters  seem  from  the 
arguments  which  St.  Paul  addresses  to  them, 
to  have  been  ra(her  troubled  with  material 
doubts  which  they  may  have  inherited  from 
their  Gentile  training. 

Yer.  13. — Then  is  Christ  not  risen.  If  the 
possibility  of  a  resurieotion  be  generically 
denied,  it  cannot  in  any  instance  be  true. 
Yet  you  admit  as  Christians  that  Christ 
rose  I  and  his  resurrection  "has  begotten 
us  again  to  a  lively  hope "  (1  Pet.  L  3 ;  see 
2  Cor.  It.  14 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  14 ;  John  xiv.  19). 

Ver.  14. — Vain.  You  accepted  our  pro- 
clamation (kenigmd),  yet  it  would  be  utterly 
void  if  its  central  testimony  was  false.  The 
word  translated  "  then  "  has  a  sort  of  ironic 
force — "  after  all,"  or  "  it  seems."  The  whole 
argument  is  at  once  an  argumentum  od 
hominem  and  u  reductio  ad  iibsurdum.  Tour 
faith  is  also  vain.  Fur  it  would  be  faith  in 
a  crucified  man,  not  in  the  risen  Clirist. 

Ver.  15. — We  are  found.  The  word 
means,  "  we  are  proved  to  be,"  convicted  of 
being  false  witnesses.  False  witnesses  of 
God ;  i.e.  concerning  God.  St.  Paul  does  not 
shrink  from  the  issue.  It  is  not  one — it 
could  not  be  one — between  truth  and  mil- 
take,  but  between  truth  and  /aleelwod.  We 
have  testified  of  Qud  that  he  raised  up  Christ ; 
rather,  the  Christ.  "  This  Jesus  hath  God 
rni.°ed  up,  whereoi  we  all  are  witnesses" 
(Acts  ii,  32;  iv.  86;  xiii.  30). 

Ver.  16. — Thii  verse  is  a  repetition  of 
nr.  13,  to  emphasize  the  argument  that  the 


Christian  faith  in  the  Besurrection  lesti 
not  on  philosophio  theory,  but  on«n  his- 
toric fact. 

Ver.  17. — Vain;  rather,  fruttrale.  The 
word  used  (mataia)  is  different  from  th« 
word  used  (kene)  in  ver  14.  Ye  are  yet  in 
your  sins.  Because  a  dead  Redeemer  could 
be  no  Redeemer.  Christ's  resurrection  is 
the  pledge  of  his  Divine  power.  He  was 
"raised  for  our  justification"  (Rom.  iv. 
25).  It  is  only  "as  a  Prince  and  Saviour" 
that  "  God  hath  exalted  him  to  give  repent- 
ance and  forgiveness  of  sins  "  (Acts  r.  SI : 
Bom.  V.  10). 

Ver.  18. — ^Which  are  fallen  asleep  in  Christ. 
Christians  whose  bodies  have  sunk  into  the 
sleep  of  death.  Are  perished.  A  nution 
which  he  feels  that  Christians  must  reject 
M  utterly  impossible.  All  that  goodness, 
fikith,  tenderness,  love,  have  not  been  dis- 
solved to  nothing. 

Ver.  19. — If  in  this  life  only  ve  have  hope 
in  Christ.  The  word  to  which  " in  Christ" 
should  be  joined  is  uncertain ;  the  order  of 
the  original  is,  "If  in  this  life  in  Christ 
we  have  hoped  only."  The  "  only  "  seems 
therefore  to  qualify  the  whole  sentence :  "  Ii 
we  have  merely  hoped  in  Christ,  and  that 
only  in  this  life."  We  are  of  all  men  most 
miserable;  literally,  we  are  more  pitiable 
than  all  men.  The  remark  only  has  an 
absolute  bearing  when  Christians  really  are 
sufierin^  from  persecutions,  as  tliey  did  in 
SL  Paul's  day  (2  Cor.  i.  5;  2  Tim.  iii.  12). 
But  to  some  extent  all  Christians  have  to 
bear  their  cross,  and  if  all  that  they  give 
up  and  suffer  is  sacrificed  to  a  delusion,  they 
deserve  most  pity  in  one  sense,  because  they 
have  been  most  conspicuously  befooled.  In 
atiother  sense  they  are  still  the  happiest  of 
men ;  for  their  delusion,  judged  by  its  fruits, 
is  more  blessed  than  the  dreary  blank 
which  is  the  only  alternative. 

Vers.  20—2S.—Besultstobt  deduced  from 
ike  fact  of  Christ's  rentrrection. 

Ver.  20. — But  now.  Since  the  snpposi- 
tion  that  Christ  has  not  risen  involves  so 
many  suppositions  which  you  will  rightly 
reject  as  absurd,  we  may  assume  the  eternal 
fact  that  Christ  has  been  raised.  And 
become  the  fiistfruits  of  them  that  slept. 
As  the  wave  sheaf  (Lev.  xxiii.  10),  which 
was  the  firstfruits  of  the  harvest,  is  also 
a  pledge  of  the  harvest,  so  Christ  is  the 
flrstfi'uits  and  pledge  of  the  resurrection  of 
all  mankind. 

Ver.  21. — By  man  came  death  (see  Bom.  v. 
12,17;  vi.  21,  23). 

Yer.  22.— As  in  Adam  all  die.  Ail  of  us 
partake  of  Adam's  nature,  and  are  therefore 
liable  to  the  death  which  that  nature  in- 
curred as  the  law  and  condition  of  its 
humanity.  In  Christ  shall  all  he  made  alive. 
It  is  St.  Paul's  invariable  habit  to  isolati 


OH.IV.  1— 58.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


487 


his  immedi»te  subject ;  to  think  and  to 
treat  of  one  topic  at  a  time.  He  is  not  here 
thinking  direotly  and  immediately  of  the 
lesuneotion  in  general.  In  this  verse, 
writing  to  Christians  who  are  "  in  Christ," 
he  is  only  thinking  and  speaking  of  the 
resaneotion  of  those  who  are  "  in  Christ." 
That  any  can  be  nominally  "  in  Christ,"  yet 
not  really  so,  is  a  fact  which  is  not  at 
present  under  his  cognizance;  still  less  is 
he  thinking  of  tho  wurld  in  general.  In 
other  words,  he  is  here  dealing  with  "  the 
resurrection  of  life"  alone,  and  not  also 
with  the"  resurrection  of  judgment"  (Joliu 
T.  26 — 29).  Still,  as  far  as  his  words  alone 
are  concerned,  it  is  so  impossible  to  uuder- 
stand  the  phrase, "  shall  all  be  made  alive," 
of  a  resurrection  to  endless  torments,  that 
his  language  at  least  suggeiU  the  conclusion 
that  "the  principle  which  has  come  to 
actuality  in  Christ  is  of  sufficient  entrsy  to 
quicken' aZ2  men  for  the  resurrection  to  the 
blessed  life"(BLiur,  «Life  of  St.  Paul,'  ii. 
219). 

Ver.  23. — In  his  cwti  order.  The  word 
in  classic  Greek  means  "  a  cohort."  Here 
it  must  either  mean  "  i  ank  "  or  be  used  as 
i(i  St.  Clement  ('Ad.  Cor.,'  i.  37),  in  the 
a-nse  of  "  order  of  succession."  They  that 
ire  Christ's.  "The  dead  in  Christ"  (1 
Ihess.  17.  16).  At  his  coming.  The  word 
here  used  for  ths  second  Advent  is  Paroufia, 
which  means  literally,  pretence.  It  is  im- 
plied (apparently)  both  here  and  in  1  Thess. 
IV.  15 — 17;  Eev.  xx.  5,  that  there  shall  be 
an  interval — how  long  or  how  short  we  do 
not  know — between  this  resurrection  of  the 
just  and  the  final  resurrection.  But  all 
the  details  are  left  dim  and  vague. 

Ver.  24.— The  end.  That  "end  of  all 
things,"  beyond  which  the  vision  of  Chris- 
tian eschatology  does  not  look.  When  he 
shall  have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God. 
The  "  kingdom  "  delivered  up  is  not  that  of 
the  coequal  Godhead,  but  the  mediatorial 
kingdom.  The  Divine  kingdom  "shuU 
have  no  end"  (Luke  i.  33,  etc.),  and  "shall 
not  pass  away"  (Dan.  vii.  13).  But  tlie 
mediatorial  kingdom  shall  end  in  completion 
when  the  redemptive  act  has  acliieved  its 
final  end.  When  he  shall  have  put  down ; 
rather,  thatt  have  annulled  or  aholishsd. 
All  mie.  Because  then  "the  kingdoms  of 
the  world"  shall  all  "have  become  the 
kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ" 
(Bev.  xi.  15). 

Ver.  25. — ^He  must  reign.  He  must  reign 
in  his  mediatorial  kingdom  as  the  God-Man. 
He  hath  put.  The  "he"  probably  means 
Christ  himself  (comp.  Ps.  ii.  9 ;  Heb.  x.  13), 
though  it  makes  no  real  difference  in  the 
seaae  if  we  understand  it  of  God,  as  in  Ps. 
ox.  1. 

Ver.  86. — The  last  enemy  that  shall  be 


destroyed  is  death.  This  rendering  might 
imply  that  other  enemies  should  still  exist, 
tliough  Death  sliould  be  the  last  who  wouhl 
be  destroyed.  The  original  is  more  forcible, 
and  implies,  "Lnst  of  enemies  doomed  ti 
annulment  is  Death ; "  or,  as  in  Tyndale's 
version,  "  Lastly,  Death  tho  enemy  shall  be 
destroyed;"  or,  as  in  the  Kheraish  Version, 
"  And  at  the  last.  Death  the  enemy  seal  be 
distried."  The  present,  "  is  lieing atinulle  I," 
is  the  prssena  futurascens,  or  the  pr  sent  of 
which  the  accomplishment  is  regarded  us 
already  begun  an.l  continuing  by  an  inevit- 
able law.  Death  and  Hades  and  the 
devil,  "who  hath  the  power  of  death,"  ntv 
all  doomed  to  abolition  (2  Tim.  L  10;  Heb. 
ii.  14 ;  Eev.  xx.  14). 

Ver.  27.  -  But  when  he  saith.  The  "  he  " 
refers  to  God.  This  indirect  method  of 
quotation  is  common  in  the  rabbis.  The 
reference  is  to  Ps.  viii.  7  (LXX  ),  and  tlio 
words,  i.pnkeii  of  man  in  general,  are  here 
Messianically  transferred  to  the  federal 
Head  of  humanity,  the  ideal  and  perfect 
God-Man,  Jesua  Christ.  (For  tlie  fuller 
explanation  of  the  matter,  see  Heb.  ii.  5 — 
10.)  He  is  excepted,  which  did  put  all  things 
under  him.  So  our  Lord  says,  "  All  things 
are  delivered  unto  me  of  my  Father  "  (Matt. 
xi.  7).  The  universal  dominion  of  Christ  is 
also  insisted  on  in  Eph.  i.  20—22;  1  Pet.  iii. 
22. 

Ver.  28. — Then  shall  the  Son  also  himself 
be  subject,  etc  Tlie  words  can  only  be  taken 
as  they  stand.  The  attempts  to  explain 
them  have  usually  been  nothing  but  in- 
genious methods  of  explaining  them  away. 
Of  these  the  one  usually  adopted  by  the 
Fathers  is  the  limitation  of  the  stat  ment 
to  Christ's  human  nature  (John  v.  2(3,  27, 
30)  and  mediatorial  kingdom,  just  as  we 
find  in  oh.  xi.  3,  "  The  head  of  Christ  is 
God."  We  can  easily  "  darken  counsel  by 
words  without  knowledge"  in  dealing  with 
this  subject,  and  bide  an  absolute  ignorance 
under  a  semblanre  of  knowledge ;  but  any- 
thing and  everything  which  we  can  say  in 
"explanation  "  of  this  self-subjection  of  the 
Son  to  the  Father  is  simply  involved  in  the 
words  which  follow.  That  God  may  be  all 
in  alL  "All  things  in  all  things"  or  "all 
things  in  all  men."  The  words  involve 
a  complete  and  absolute  supremacy.  It  is 
quite  an  easy  matter  for  commentators  to 
say  that  the  scope  of  the  words  "  must  be 
confined  to  believers,"  if  they  chose  to  make 
"  all "  mean  "  some."  Such  methods  oftei 
lead  to  an  irreligious  religionism  and  a 
heterodox  orthodoxy.  The  reader  will  find 
the  same  phrase  Iti  Col.  iii.  11.  I  confine 
myself  to  the  comment  of  the  profound  and 
saintly  Bengel:  "There  is  implied  some- 
thing  new,  but  also  supreme  and  eternal 
All  things,  and  therefore  all  men,  without 


188 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C01UNTHIAN3.    [ch.  xv.  1—58. 


my  InterruptioB,  no  created  thing  claimtng 
•  place,  no  enemy  oieating  opposition,  shall 
be  subordinated  to  the  Son,  the  Son  to  the 
Father.  All  things  shall  say,  '  God  is  all 
thing!  to  me.'  This  is  the  eonsnmmation ; 
ihii  the  end  and  summit.  Furthei  than 
this  not  even  an  apostle  can  go." 

Vers.  29 — 34. — Arguments  from  the  prao- 
tieei  and  Uvea  of  Christiatu.  The  tliree 
arguments  used  in  these  verses  are :  If  there 
be  no  resurrection :  1.  Why  do  some  of  you 
get  yourselves  baptized  on  behalf  of  your 
dead  friends?  2.  Wliy  do  we  face  lives  of 
daily  perU?  S.  How  would  it  be  otlierwise 
possible  to  resist  Epicurean  views  of  life  7 

Ver.  29. — Else  what  shall  they  do  which 
are  baptized  for  the  dead,  etc.  ?  This  clause 
can  have  but  one  meaning,  and  that  iti 
obviouB  one,  namely,  that,  among  the  many 
itrange  opinions  and  practices  which  then 
prevailed,  was  one  which  was  entirely  un- 
warranted— ^but  which  St.  Paul  does  not 
here  stop  to  examine— of  persons  getting 
themselves  baptized  as  it  were  by  proxy  for 
ethers  who  had  died.  Doubtless  some  of 
the  deaths  alluded  to  in  ch.  zi.  30  had 
happened  to  persons  who  had  been  cut  off 
before  they  were  actually  baptized;  and 
their  friends  had  as  it  were  gone  tlirough 
the  rite  in  their  Head,  in  the  hope  of 
extending  to  them  some  of  its  benefits. 
It  is  argued  that  St.  Paul  could  not 
poesibly  mention  such  a  practice  without 
reprobation ;  but  that  is  an  a  priori  assump- 
tion not  warranted  by  St.  Paul's  methods 
(seech,  x.  8;  xi.  6).  He  always  conHnes 
his  attention  to  the  question  immediately 
before  him,  and  his  present  object  is  merely 
to  urge  a  passing  argumentum  ad  hominem. 
There  is  nothing  at  all  surprising  in  the 
existence  of  such  an  abuse  in  the  medley  of 
wild  opinions  and  wild  practices  observable 
In  this  disorganized  Church.  It  acconls  with 
the  known  tendency  of  later  times  to  post- 
pone baptism,  as  a  rite  which  was  supposed 
to  work  as  a  charm.  We  also  find  that  the 
actual  pr.ictice  of  baplism  on  behalf  of  the 
dend  lingered  on  amung  Cerinthiani 
(Epiph.,  'Hser.,'  xxviii.  7)  and  Marcionites 
(TertuUian,  'De  Eesurrect.,'  48;  'Adv.  Marc.,' 
T.  lU).  TertuUian  accepts  the  words  in 
their  obvious  sense  in  his  '  De  Prnscr.  Heer.,' 
48,  hut  accepts  the  absurdity  of  "  the  dead  " 
meaning  "  the  body  "  ("  pro  mortuis  tingui 
est  pro  eorporibus  tingui")  in  his  book 
against  Marcion  (v.  10).  St.  Chrysostom 
tells  08  further  that  the  proxy  who  was  to 
be  baptized  used  to  be  concealed  under  the 
bier  of  the  dead  man,  who  was  supposed  to 
answer  in  his  name  that  he  desired  to  be 
baptized.  How  perfectly  natural  the  custom 
was  may  be  seen  from  the  fact  that  among 
the  Jews  also  a  man  dying  under  cere- 
monial pollution  waa  cleansed  by  proxy. 


The  "  interpretations  "  of  this  Terse  are  M 
numerous  that  it  is  not  even  possible  t« 
give  a  oatalogae  of  thom.  Many  of  them 
ere  not  worth  recording,  and  are  only  worth 
alluding  to  at  all  as  specimens  of  the  wilful 
bias  which  goes  to  Scripture,  not  to  seek 
truth,  but  to  support  tradition.  They  are 
mostly  futile  and  fantastic,  because  they 
pervert  the  plain  meaning  of  the  plain 
words.  It  is  a  waste  of  time  and  space  to 
give  perpetuity  to  baseless  fancies.  Such 
are  the  notioni  that  "  for  the  dead "  can 
mean  "for  our  mortal  bodies"  (Chrysostom) ; 
or  "for  those  about  to  die  "  (Estius,  Calvin, 
etc.) ;  or  "  over  (the  sepnlohres  of)  the  dead  " 
(Lutiier) ;  or  "  to  supply  the  vacancies  left 
by  the  dead"  (Le  Clero,  etc.).  Equally 
unwarrantable  are  the  "explanations"  (?) 
which  make  those  who  are  being  "  baptized  " 
mean  those  who  are  "  passing  through  a 
baptism  of  suffering"  (I).  Not  a  single 
argument  which  is  worth  a  moment's  con- 
sideration can  be  urged  in  favour  of  any  one 
of  these,  or  scores  of  similar  views.  If  we 
are  to  get  rid  of  everything  that  is  surprising 
on  the  ground  that  it  is  "  immensely  im- 
probable," we  may  as  well  discard  Scripture 
at  once,  and  reconstruct  early  Christian 
history  ont  of  our  own  consciousness.  It 
has  been  very  nsual  to  represent  it  as  we 
think  that  it  ought  to  have  been,  and  not 
as  it  was.  The  disuse  of  this  vicarious 
baptism  among  orthodox  Christians  may 
have  been  due  to  the  discouragement  of  it 
by  St.  Paul  when  he  went  to  Corinth,  and 
"  set  in  order "  varions  erroneous  cnstoma 
(oh.  xi.  34). 

Ver.  30. — Why  stand  we  in  Jeopardy  every 
hour  ?  The  verb  means  "  Why  do  we  incur 
peril?"  The  best  comment  on  it  will  be 
found  in  2  Cor.  xi.  26.  Cicero  says  ('  Tusc 
Disp.,'  i.  15)  that  "  no  one  would  be  so  mad 
as  to  live  in  labour  and  perils  if  our  instinc- 
tive anticipation  of  future  life  were  taken 
away." 

Ver.  81. — I  protest  The  particle  of  adju- 
ration here  used  (fif)  is  found  nowhere 
else  in  the  New  Testament.  By  youx  re- 
joicing, This  is  an  erroueons  translation. 
The  words  mean  "by  my  glorying  in  you." 
6t.  Paul's  one  subject  of  earthly  glory,  his 
"  hope,  and  joy,  and  crown  of  rejoicing,"  waa 
the  conversion  of  Churches  (Kom.  xv.  16, 
17).  In  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  His  boasting 
was  not  a  worldly  boasting,  but  waa  sancti- 
fied by  its  reference  to  the  work  of  Christ. 

1  die  daily.  St.  Paul  «  died  daily  "  a  double 
death— the  ever-dei  peuing  death  unto  "in 
and  unto  the  world ;  and  the  daily  death 
of  sufferings  borne  for  Christ's  fake  (see 

2  Cor.  iv.  10,  11).  It  is  the  latter  to  which 
he  here  alludes.  "  Fur  thy  sake  are  we 
killed  all  the  day  long"  (Bom.  viii.  36). 

Ver.    82 — After  the   manner    of 


OB.r».l— «8.]    THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAUa 


489 


The  phraae  ii  a  qnaliflcation  of  tho  stroDg 
metaphor,  "I  fought  with  beaets."  It  ia 
equivalent  to  "hamanly.  speaking."  Thia 
is  Chrysostom's  view.  It  ia  the  most 
reasonable,  and  aocoids  with  the  nse  of  the 
phrase  in  Bom.  iiL  5;  Gal.  iii.  15.  Meyer, 
Lowever,  explains  it  to  mean  "  with  mere 
human  motives."  I  have  fought  with  beasts. 
Not  literally,  for  in  that  case  lie  would 
have  menliongd  it  in  2  C!or.  xL  as  one  of  his 
deadliest  perils,  and  it  must  have  been 
recorded  by  St.  Luke  in  his  full  account  of 
St.  Paul's  life  at  Ephesus.  A  Roman 
citizen  was  legally  exempt  from  this  mode 
of  punishment.  The  word  piiints  to  some 
epecialperilincurred  in  resisting  the  hostility 
of  the  worshippers  of  Artemis  (Auts  xx.  lH), 
but  not  to  the  tumult  in  the  theatre,  which 
did  not  happen  till  after  this  letter  was 
despatched  (ch.  xvi.  8,  9).  The  metaphor 
is  not  uncommon.  Thus  in  2  Tim.  iv.  17 
St.  Paul  alludes  to  Nero  (probably)  as  "  the 
lion."  David  often  compares  his  enemies 
to  wild  beasts  (Ps.  xxii.  21,  etc.).  When 
his  jailor  informed  Agrippa  of  the  death  of 
Tiberius,  he  did  so  in  the  words,  "  The  lion 
is  dead."  St.  Ignatius  writes  of  the  ten 
soldiers  who  were  conducting  him  to  Bome 
as  "ten  leopards."  Epimenides,  in  the 
line  quoted  by  Sf.  Paul  in  Titus  i.  12,  spoke 
of  the  Cretans  as  "  evil  wild  beasts,"  and 
the  pseudo-HeraclituB  gives  this  same  un- 
complimentary title  to  these  very  Ephesians. 
Let  ns  eat  and  drink ;  for  to-morrow  we  die. 
Perhaps  the  "if  the  dead  are  not  raised  " 
belongs  to  this  clause.  He  means  that 
such  an  Epicurean  maxim,  if  never  excusable, 
would  at  least  be  natural,  if  men  could  only 
look  to  life  in  the  present.  The  sentinject 
is  found  on  the  lips  of  the  despairing  and  the 
sensuiil  alike  in  Isa.  xxii.  13,  and  in  the 
writings  of  the  heathen  (Horace, '  Od.,'  i.  4, 13 
— 17,  eto.).  St.  Paul  would  be  all  the  more 
-familiar  with  it  because  it  formed  the 
infamous  epitaph  of  a  statue  of  SarJanapalus, 
which  lie  must  have  often  seen  in  his  boy- 
hood at  Anchiale,  near  Tarsus.  It  repre- 
sented the  debased  king  as  snapping  his 
fingers,  and  using  almost  these  vejy  words. 
It  is  strange  thiit  similar  passages  should 
be  found  even  in  tlie  Talmud.  Shemuel 
said  to  Eav  Yihudah,  "Seize  and  eat, 
seize  and  drink;  for  the  world  is  like  a 
wedding  feast  (soon  over)  "  ('  Eirnvin,'  foL 
54,  1). 

Ver.  33. — Be  not  deceived.  Do  not  be  led 
astray  by  such  specious  maxims.  They 
can  only  arise  from  that  too  great  familiarity 
with  the  heathen  against  which  I  have 
already  put  you  on  your  guard.  Evil  ocm- 
mnnications  corrnpt  good  manners.  An 
iambic  line  from  the  'Thais'  of  Menander,  and 

Serbaps  taken  by  Menander  from  a  play  of 
Saripides.    More  kccurately  it  means  "  evil 


associations  corrnpt  excellent  morals." 
According  to  the  best  reading  (xptiirrik,  not 
Xpio-fl'),  St.  Paul  does  not  quote  it  as  an 
iambic,  and  in  itself  it  does  not  offer  the 
least  shadow  of  proof  that  St.  Paul  was 
familiar  with  classic  literature.  It  is  just 
such  a  line  as  he  might  have  seen  carved 
on  the  Hermie  of  any  Greek  town,  or  pre- 
served in  any  chrestomathy  or  gnomology 
which  may  have  chanced  to  pass  through 
his  hands.  His  other  classio  quotations 
(from  Epimenides,  Titus  i.  12 ;  and  Aratusor 
Cleaiithcs,  Acts  xvii.  28)  are  of  the  same 
com  mon  and  proverbial  character.  It  is  very 
nnlikely  that  he  would  have  deliberately 
quoted  from  the  immoral  play  of  a  corrupt 
comedian  like  Menander.  (For  the  Mnti- 
mtut,  see  2  Tim.  ii.  16 — 18.) 

Ver.  34. — Awake  to  righteonsneBs.  The 
word  rendered  "awake"  means  "awake  at 
once  from  a  drunken  sleep."  This  verb  does 
not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament. 
The  word  rendered  "awake  "  in  Eph.  v.  14 
an  I  Rom.  xiii.  11  is  a  different  one.  The 
metiiphor,  however,  occurs  in  the  simple  verb 
in  1  Thess.  v.  6,  8 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  5 ;  1  Pet.  ?.  8, 
etc.  The  word  rendered  "to  righteousness" 
is  literally  an  adverb,  righteously.  It  may 
mean  "  as  is  fit."  And  sin  not.  Here  the 
present  tense,  "be  not  sinning,"  is  oon- 
trasted  with  the  instantaneous  aorist, 
"  awake."  Have  not  the  knowledge.  TIm 
original  is  stronger,  "  have  an  ignoranosb" 
'J'hey  have  not  a  vacuum  of  nescience^  but  a 
plenuum  of  ignorance.  I  speak  this  to  yonr 
shame  ;  rather,  I  am  ipeahing  to  shame  you. 
The  object  of  all  I  am  saying  is  to  exoit* 
your  shame — not,  as  in  some  previous  in* 
stances,  "  to  spare  yon." 

Vers.  85— 49.— Jlfaterfal  t^/eeffeiM  m^ 
iwered. 

Ver.  35. — Bat  some  man  will  say.  Tht 
objection  is  that  of  some  philosophical 
materialist.  The  resurrection  of  the  body 
was  a  UifGculty  alike  to  Sadilucees  and 
Gentiles.  St.  Paul  meets  this  diffirulty  by 
natural  analogies,  which  are  intended  to 
show  that  the  resurrection-body,  though 
identical  with  the  mortal  body  so  far  as  the 
preservation  of  personal  identity  is  concerned, 
is  yet  a  glorified  body,  so  that  the  objections 
urged  on  the  .ground  that  it  is  impossible 
to  preserve  the  same  material  particles  which 
have  passed  into  dust,  are  beside  the 
mark.  St.  Paul  gives  no  sanction  to  the 
coarse  physical  conceptions  of  the  resurreo- 
tion  which  described  the  human  being  as 
rising  (to  use  the  words  of  the  Christian 
poet  Prudentius)  "with  every  tooth  and 
every  nail."  How  are  the  dead  raised  np  1 
This  question  is  one  which,  of  course,  admit* 
uf  no  answer.  And  with  what  body  do  they 
oome  J  literally,  with  what  hind  of  body  ?  St. 
Paul,  while  be  only  answers  the  question 


190 


THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xt.  1—58 


Indireetly  and  by  annlogy,  implies  that  the 
reBurrection-body  is  the  same  body,  not  so 
much  by  way  of  material  identity  as  of  glori- 
Bed  individuality. 

Vei.  36. — Thou  fooL  The  expression  b 
too  Btrong,  and  it  \a  unfortunate  that  in 
English  it  seems  to  run  contrary  to  the 
distinct  censure  of  such  language  by  our 
Lord.  But  here  the  Greek  word  is  aphron, 
"  O  anieasonable  1 "  (the  nominative  is  used 
for  the  vocative)  ;  Vulgate,  insipiens ; 
WioklifTe,  "  unwise  man."  It  is  merely  a 
reproach  for  neglecting  to  exercise  the  un- 
derstanding. The  word  "  fool  ! "  (more)  for- 
biilden  by  our  L<ird  (Matt,  v.' 22)  has  quite 
a  different  meaning,  and  implies  quite  a 
different  tone.  It  involves  moral  depravity 
or  obstinacy  (Matt.  vii.  26 ;  xxiii.  17,  etc.). 
The  milder  ajihrm  ia  used  in  2  Cor.  xi.  16, 
19;  xiL  11  ;  Eph.  t.  17;  and  by  our  Lord 
himself.  That  which  thou  sowest.  The 
"  thou "  ia  emphatic.  It  mertly  means 
"  Even  the  analogy  of  human  sowing  oup;ht 
to  remove  thy  difSculty."  The  growth  of  the 
seed  shows  that  there  may  be  personal 
identity  under  a  complete  change  of  material 
conditions.  Is  not  quickened,  except  it  die. 
The  mataphor  is  used  by  our  Lonl  (Jolm  xii. 
24,  "Except  a  grain  of  wheat  fall  into  the 
earth  and  die,  it  abideth  by  itself  alone; 
but  if  it  die,  it  beareth  much  fruit ").  It  is 
also  found  in  the  Tulmud. 

Ver.  37.— Not  that  body  that  shall  he. 
This  deep  remark  should  have  checked  tlie 
idly  and  offensively  materialistic  form  in 
which  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  is 
often  taught.  But  bare  grain.  Wickliffe, 
"a  naked  come."  In  this  passage,  almost 
alone  in  all  his  Epistles,  St.  Paul,  who  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  at  all  a  close  observer 
of  external  plienomena,usesmetnphor8  drawn 
from  natural  life.  His  usual  metaphors  are 
chiefly  architectural  and  agoiiistia— deiived, 
that  is,  from  buildings  and  games.  That 
he  was  not  a  student  of  nature  arose,  no 
doubt,  partly  from  his  Semitic  cast  of  mind, 
but  chiefly  from  his  being  short-sighted,  and 
from  his  having  spent  most  of  his  early  life 
in  large  cities.  It  may  ohance;  if  it  to 
happen  (see  note  on  ch.  xiv.  10).  The 
English  word  "chance"  occurs  but  four 
times  in  the  whole  Bible  (1  Sam.  vi.  9; 
Ecclea  ix.  11).  In  LuIm  x.  31  the  words 
rendered  "  by  chance  "  mean  rather  "  by  co- 
inoidenoe." 

Ver.  88.— But  Ood  giveth  It  a  body.  The 
material  body  of  each  living  organism 
results  from  those  laws  of  assimilation  which 
God  has  made  a  part  of  His  secret  of  life. 
They  are  not  the  life,  only  the  instrument 
and  expression  and  manifestation  of  the 
life.  The  " life"  is  the  individual  identity. 
The  life  of  Hamlet  is  not  in  Its  essence  the 
physical  life  of  "the  machine  which  is  to 


him  Hamlet,"  but  the  spiritual  lif«  which  is 
linked  on  earth  to  that  perpetual  flux  of 
material  particles  which  we  call  the  body, 
but  is  independent  of  those  particles.  As  it 
hath  pleased  him;  literally,  as  lie  willed. 
And  in  the  word  "  as  "  lies  the  scope  for  all 
tlienries  about  the  part  played  by  what  are 
called  "  natural  laws."  Their  action  is  a 
part  of  God's  will.  To  every  seed  his  own 
body.  Each  of  the  seeds  sown  is  provided 
with  a  body  of  its  own,  which  is  not  identical 
with  the  seed,  but  results  from  the  germ  of 
life  in  the  seed. 

Ver.  3'J.— All  flesh  is  not  the  same  flesh. 
In  other  words,  animal  organisms  differ  from 
each  other,  just  as  do  the  vegetable.  Another 
.  .  .  of  beasts.  "  The  germinal  power  of 
the  plant  transmutes  the  fixed  air  and  the 
elementary  base  of  water  into  grass  or  leaves, 
and  on  these  the  organic  principle  in  the 
ox  or  the  elephant  exercises  an  alchemy  still 
more  stupendous.  As  the  unseen  agency 
weaves  its  magic  eddies,  the  foliage  be^mes 
indifferently  the  bone  nnd  its  marrow,  the 
pulpy  brain  and  the  solid  ivory.  That  wliich 
you  see  is  blood,  is  flesli,  is  itself  the  work, 
or  shall  Isay  the  translucence of  tiie invisible 
energy  which  soon  surrenders  or  abandons 
them  to  inferior  powers  (for  there  is  no 
pause  nor  ch:ism  in  the  activities  of  nature) 
which  repeat  a  similar  metamorphosis  ac- 
cording to  their  kind:  these  are  not  fancies, 
conjectures,  or  even  hypotheses,  but  facts" 
(Uoleridge, '  Aids  to  KeMiction  '). 

Ver.  40. — There  are  also  celestial  bodies, 
and  bodies  terrestrial.  The  words  are  often 
misunderstood.  The  "  celestial  bodies  "  are 
not  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  of  the  next 
verse — for  that  would  be  a  false  antithesis  to 
"  bodies  terrestrial " — but  bodies  (or  organ- 
isms) which  belong  to  heavenly  beings,  such 
as  the  resurrection-body  of  our  Lord  and  of 
glorified  saints,  or  even  in  some  sens*  of 
angels  (Malt.  xxii.  30). 

Ver.  41. — There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun. 
"  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the 
sun  "  (Matt.  xiii.  43).  The  point  of  the 
illustration  is  the  difference  between  the 
earthly  and  the  resurrection  body ;  not 
the  supposed  differences  between  the  saints 
themselves  in  glory.  This  is  not  a  question 
under  consideration,  and  St.  Paul,  as  we 
have  seen,  is  not  in  the  habit  of  mixing  up 
half  a  dozen  different  questions  in  the  same 
immediate  argument.  8t.  Augustine  says  o( 
the  saints,  "Their  splendour  is  unequal;  their 
heaven  is  one."  This  may  be  very  true,  but 
to  deduce  it  from  this  verse  is  to  press  into 
the  argument  an  illustration  used  for  another 
purpose.  TertuUian's  comment  is  very  un- 
happy. Ho  makes  "men"  mean  servants 
of  God  ;  «  beasts,"  Gentiles ;  "  birds," 
martyrs ;  "  fishes,"  those  who  have  been  ban- 
tized;  the  "sun,"  Christ;  the  " moon,"  ttae 


OH.XT.  1— 68.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COlUM'illAaa, 


401 


Church,  eta  One  star  difFereth  from  another 
•tar  in  glory.  All  the  righteous  Bhall  shine 
as  "  the  brightness  of  the  firmament  and  , . . 
•8  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever"  (Dan.  zii.  3), 
and  their  future  bodies  shall  differ  from 
their  present,  as  one  star  differs  from  another, 

Yer.  42.  —So  also  is  the  resurrection  of  tht 
tead.  In  like  manner  the  dead,  when  raised, 
shall  have  bmlies  which  dilfer  from  their 
body  of  humiliation  (Phil.  iii.  21).  It  is 
sown  in  corruption.  "  Dust  thou  art,  and 
unto  dust  shalt  thou  return  "  (Gen.  iii.  19). 
It  is  raised  in  incorruption.  The  word  means 
strictly,  "incorruptibility."  The  resurreo- 
tion-body  will  not  be  subjected  to  earthly 
conditions  (Luke  zx.  35,  3ti). 

Ver.  43.  —It  is  sown  in  dishononr.  "  The 
awful  and  intolerable  indignity  of  dust  to 
dust."  In  glory.  "  Though  ye  have  lien 
among  the  pots,  yet  shall  ye  be  as  the 
wings  of  a  dove,  that  is  covered  with 
silver  wings,  and  her  feathers  like  goM" 
(1*8.  Ixviii.  13).  The  expression  shows  that, 
tliroughnut,  St.  Paul  is  thinking  exclu- 
sively of  the  resurrection  of  the  saints. 

Ver.  44. — A  natural  body.  The  adjective 
Is  the  word  ^uxik6v,  which  is  so  difficult  to 
translate;  it  means  a  body  only  animated 
by  the  psyche,  or  natural  life.  The  word  is 
sometimes  in  our  Authorized  Version 
rendered  "  carnal."  A  spiritual  body.  The 
app  irent  contradiction  in  terms  is  inevit- 
able. The  thing  meant  is  a  body  which  is 
not  under  the  sway  of  corporeal  desires  or 
of  intellectual  and  passionate  impulses,  but 
is  wholly  dominated  by  the  Spirit,  and 
therefore  has  no  desire  or  capacity  to  fulfil 
the  lusts  of  the  fiesh.  There  is.  The  hotter 
supported  reading  (n,  A,  B,  C,  D,  F,  G),  is, 
if  there  is  a  natural  hody,  etc.  The  exist- 
ence of  the  one  is  no  more  impossible  than 
the  existence  of  the  other. 

Ver.  45. — The  first  man  Adam  was  made 
a  living  soul  (Gen.  ii.  7).  The  last  Adam. 
A  rabbinic  eX'  re.^ssiou  also  for  the  Messiah. 
A  quickening  Spirit.  "  The  Son  quickenei  h 
whom  he  will"  (John  v.  21;  comp.  vi.  23). 
The  best  comment  on  the  expres.-ion  will 
be  found  in  Rom.  viii.  2,  U.  Christ  is  "a 
quickening,"  i.e.  a  lifi-giving,  "Spirit," 
here  mainly  in  the  sense  that  we  shall  only 
be  raised  by  "  the  pi)wer  of  his  resurrec- 
tion" (Joliu  V.  24,  25),  but  also  in  the 
sense  tint  his  Spiiit  dwelleth  in  us,  and  is 
our  true  l.ife. 

Ver.  46. — That  was  not  first  which  is 
spiritual.  The  impeiTect  prtccdes  the 
pt-rlect. 

Ver.  47.— Earthy.  Made  of  "  the  du.st  of 
the  ground  "  (Gen.  ii.  7).  Is  the  Lord  from 
heaven.  Tlie  words  "  the  Lord  "  are  a  gloss, 
not  found  in  K,  B,  0,  D,  E,  F,  G.  The 
verse  remarkably  resembles  John  ilL  31,  and 
piobably  oral  remiuisoeuces  of  our  Lord's 


discourses  were  oorrent  among  th«  apo- 
stles long  before  the  Gospels  were  written. 
TertuUian  attrihutes  tho  iusertioa  ol 
**  the  Lord  "  to  Maroion. 

Yer.  48. — ^As  is  the  earthy,  eta.  Mea 
nsemble  their  first  parent  Adam;  Chru> 
tians,  their  spiritual  Bedeemer,  Christ 
(Phil.  iii.  20,  21). 

Yer.  49. — We  shall  also  bear  the  imagt  of 
the  heavenly  (fur  the  fact,  see  Rom.  riiL 
29 ;  1  John  iii.  2).  For  "  we  shall  bear," 
the  best  manuscripts  (n.  A,  C,  D,  B,  F,  O, 
etc.)  read  "  Let  us  bear."  Our  reading  is, 
however,  supported  by  B,  and  this  is  just 
one  of  the  cases  in  which  manuscript  evi- 
dence (or  as  it  is  called  "  <liplomatio  evi- 
dence") has  a  minimum  value,  and  other 
evidence  (paradiplomatic)  is  decisive.  For 
(1)  the  pronunciation  of  the  indicative  and 
subjunctive  at  that  time  was  almost  identical, 
beoause  in  conversation  the  vowels  seem  to 
have  been  much  slurred;  and  (2)  there 
was  a  universal  tendency  to  substitute 
hortative  for  direct  forms,  with  a  view  to 
edification  (as  in  ch.  xiv.  15 ;  liom.  vi.  2,  8 ; 
2  Cor.  V.  II,  etc.).  Here  the  exhurtatioa 
would  ruin  the  texture  of  the  argument. 

Yen.  00 — 58. — Conelusion  and  exhorkt- 
ft'on. 

Yer.  50. — Now  this  I  say.  This  subs  np 
my  meaning.  Flesh  and  blood.  Our  morta) 
nature  and  human  organism ;  our  "  earthly 
house  of  this  tabernacle  "  (2  Cor.  r.  I ;  Luke 
XX.  35).  Inherit  inoorruption.  A  body 
liable  to  corruption,  with  all  its  loathly 
accompaniments,  cannot  enter  into  the 
"inheritance  incorruptible,  and  undefiled, 
and  that  fadeth  not  away  "  (1  Pei  i.  4). 

Ver.  51. — I  show  you  a  mystery.  I  make 
known  to  you  a  truth  now  made  known  to 
me  by  revelation.  We  shall  not  all  sleep, 
but  we  shall  all  be  changed.  There  is  a 
great  diversity  of  readings  in  this  verse, 
noticed  even  by  St  Jerome  and  St.  Angus- 
tine.  St.  Jerome  says  that  all  the  Latin 
manuscripts  liad  "we  shall  all  rise,"  and 
that  the  Greek  manuscripts  wavered  between 
"  we  shall  all  sleep"  and  "  we  shall  not  all 
sleep."  Some  Greek  manuscripts  had  "  we 
shall  all  rise,  but  we  shall  not  all  be 
changed."  This  reading  cannot  be  right, 
fur  it  contradicts  the  next  verse.  Tliere  is 
little  doubt  that  the  reading  of  the  Autho- 
rized version  is  right.  It  accounts  for 
all  the  variations.  They  arose  from  a 
desire  to  shelter  St.  Paul  from  an  apparent 
mistake,  since  he  and  his  readers  did  all 
sleep.  But  (1)  St.  Paul  may  have  written 
under  that  conception  of  the  imminence  of 
Christ's  |)ersoual  return  which  he  expresses 
in  1  Tliess.  iv.  15 — 17,  where  he  evidently 
imagines  that  the  majority  of  those  to  whom 
he  was  writing  would  be  of  those  who 
would  be  "  all ve^  and  remain  nnto  the  cominf 


4M 


TSB  FIB8T  BMStLfi  tO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    \ai.xw.l—B» 


of  the  Lord ; "  or  (2)  even  if  he  no  longer 
entertained  that  expectation,  the  "  we  "  may 
naturally  apply  to  the  continuity  of  the 
Christian  Church.  For  in  2  Cor.  iv.  14  he 
uses  "^  OS "  of  those  who  shall  die  and  be 
raised.  The  universal  expectation  of  the 
immediate  return  of  Christ  in  the  first 
century  rose  (1)  from  their  non-apprehension 
of  the  tmth  that  the  close  of  the  old  dis- 
pensation idoa  the  "  coming  "  to  which  our 
Lord  had  primarily  referred  in  his  great 
cschatological  discourse  (Matt.  xxiv.  34),  and 
(2)  from  the  fact  that  watchfulness  wag 
intended  to  be  the  attitude  of  the  Church, 
and  the  day  and  hour  of  Christ's  coming 
were  kept  absolutely  unrevealed  (Matt.  xxiv. 
36;  XXV.  13). 

Yer.  52. — The  tmmpet  (hall  lonnd.  The 
Lord,  he  says,  in  1  Thess.  iT.  16,  "  shall  de- 
scend from  heaven  with  . . .  the  voice  of  the 
archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God."  The 
tmmpet  is,  of  course,  only  a  natural  symbol. 
It  is  also  found  in  rabbinic  writers,  and  is 
the  Old  Testament  (Zech.  ix.  14),  as  well  as 
in  Bev.  xi.  15.  We  shall  be  changed.  The 
dead  shall  be  changed  by  resurrection,  the 
living  by  transition,  into  a  glorified  body. 
St.  Paul,  dealing  with  the  essence  of  the 
question  as  it  bore  on  the  difficulties  of  his 
readers,  says  nothing  here  (1)  of  those  who 
will  arise  to  judgment,  or  (2)  of  any 
intermediate  condition.  As  to  the  former 
question,  he  scarcely  ever  alludes  to  it  with 
any  definiteness,  but  seems  with  deliberate 
choice  to  contemplate  the  final  and  absolute 
triumph  of  good  (Bom.  viii.  19 — ^23 ;  xi.  30 — 
36).  To  the  intermediate  state  he  does  not  here 
allude.  He  is  here  only  speaking  of  death 
and  glorious  resurrection.  In  2  Cor.  v.  1 — 4 
he  says  all  that  he  has  to  say  on  this  latter 
question.  It  was  not  prominent  in  the 
minds  of  the  early  Christians,  who,  as 
Calvin  says,  were  awaiting  the  return  of 
Christ  "  from  hour  to  hour." 

Yer.  53. — This  mortal  must  put  on  immor- 
tality. When  we  are  "clothed  upon"  by 
our  "  house  from  heaven,"  and  have  put  off 
"  this  tabernacle,"  in  which  we  groan  being 
burdened,  then  "  mortality  will  be  swallowed 
up  of  life "  (2  Cor.  v.  8,  4,  where  we  also 
find  the  metaphor  of  a  robe  of  immortality, 
mixed  np  with  the  metaphor  of  a  building). 

Yer.  51. — Death  is  swallowed  up  in 
victory.  A  free  citation  from  the  Hebrew 
of  Isa,  XXV.  8.  The  words  "  into  victory  " 
are  the  LXX.  rendering  in  other  passages 
(Amod  i.  11;  viii.  8)  for  the  Hebrew  la- 
neUaeh,  for  ever.  The  metaphor,  "  is  swal- 
lowed np,"  implying  "  the  Bwallowing  of 
the  all-swallower,"  is  found  in  the  zabbi* 
(comp.  Heb.  ii.  14,  15). 

Yer.  55. — 0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  t 
A.  triumphantly  fervid  exclamation  of  the 
apostle,  loosely  cited  finm    Ho*.  ziiL  14. 


The  apostles  and  evangelisti,  not  holding 
the  slavish  and  snperstitioas  fetish-worship 
of  the  dead  letter,  often  regard  it  m  snfS- 
oient  to  give  the  general  sense  of  the 
passages  to  which  they  refer.  0  grave, . 
where  is  thy  victory  1  In  the  best-attested 
reading  (  ,  A,  B,  0,  D,  E,  F,  G),  "  death  " 
is  repeated,  and  in  the  l)e>t  manuscripts  this 
clause  precedes  the  last.  But  if  the  reading, 
"O  Hades,"  were  correct,  our  translators, 
since  they  held  it  here  impossible  in  accord- 
ance with  their  views  to  render  it  by  "  hell," 
ought  to  have  taken  wat^ning,  and  seen 
the  pemicions  inapplicability  of  that  render- 
ing in  other  places  where  they  have  used  it 
to  express  this  same  Greek  word.  Here 
"Hades"  has  probably  been  introduced 
Into  the  Greek  text  from  the  LXX.,  which 
uses  it  for  the  Shed  of  the  original. 

Yer.  56. — The  sting  of  death  is  sin. 
Because  death  is  the  wages  of  sin  (Bom.  vl. 
23).  Death  is  represented  as  a  venomous 
serpent.  The  strength  of  sin  is  the  Law. 
The  best  comment  on  this  expression  is  to 
be  found  in  the  Epistle  to  thQ  Bomans ;  see 
especially  Bom.  iv.  15;  vii.  10 — 12.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  this  passing  allusion 
to  a  distinct  doctrine  does  not  seem,  at  first 
sight,  to  harmonize  with  the  glorious  unity 
ef  the  snbjeot.  No  one  can  read  it  without 
a  slight  sense  of  jar,  because,  it  seems  to 
introduce  the  element  of  dogmatic  contro- 
versy. But  this  sense  of  incongruity  is 
removed  when  we  remember  how  intensely 
St.  Paul  felt  that  man  is  confronted  witb 
the  horror  of  a  broken  Law,  which  at  once 
reminds  him  of  a  Being  infinitely  holy,  and 
of  his  own  self-condemnation  (Bom.  vii. ; 
2  Cor.  iii).  It  is  the  sense  that  the  Law  in 
its  deathful  aspect  is  annulled,  and  the 
sinful  soul  delivered,  which  prompts  the  out- 
burst of  the  next  verse. 

Ver.  57. — ^Thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth 
US  the  victory.  The  victory  consists  in  the 
defeat  of  death  by  the  Besurrection,  and  the 
forgiveness  of  sin  through  Christ's  atone- 
ment, and  the  nailing  to  his  cross  of  the 
torn  and  abrogated  Law  which  made  us 
slaves  to  sin  and  death  (Col.  ii.  14).  "  In 
all  these  things  we  are  more  than  con- 
querors through  him  that  loved  us"  (Bom. 
viii.  37).  Through  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Who,  by  fulfilling  the  Law,  has  robbed  it  of 
its  condemning  power  (Bom.  viii.  1),  and 
by  his  death  "  hath  destroyed  him  that  had 
the  power  of  death,  that  is  the  devil"  (Heb. 
ii.  14. 15). 

Yer.  58.— Therefore.  Seeing  that  yon 
ought  not  to  despair,  but  to  share  in  thii 
confidence  of  triumph.  Steadfast.  Firmly 
fixed  in  your  own  conviction  (Col.  i.  23;  2 
John  9).  TJnmoveable.  By  others  (Eph. 
iv.  14).  Ahonnding  in  the  work  of  the  lord. 
Doing    diligently  and    ungrudgingly  th« 


OH.XT.  1— 68.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORlNTHIAKS. 


4»t 


work  of  your  lives,  which  is  his  work.  That 
your  labour  is  not  in  vain.  The  thought  of 
the  verae  is  the  same  as  that  of  Gal.  vi.  9, 
"  And  let  ns  not  be  weary  In  well  doing  ; 
for  in  dne  season  w«  shall  reap,  if  we  faint 
not." 

Some  ^neral  facta  are  yery  observable  in 
this  glorions  chapter.  1,  One  is  that  St. 
Paul  does  not  meet  doubt  by  angry  denun- 
ciation, or  by  crushing  it  with  the  iron 
mace  of  impatient  authority.  What  would 
now  be  thought  of  Christiana  who  denied 
the  resurrection  7  Doubtless  they  were  not 
mere  speculative  deniers  of  the  resurrec- 
tion, like  HymeniBus  and  Philetus  (2  Tim. 
ii.  17),  but  recent  Gentile  converts,  who 
could  not  get  over  their  pagan  difficulties. 
Yet  St.  Paul  meets  them  by  personal 
appeals,  by  helpful  analogies,  by  lofty  reason- 
ing, by  the  glowing  force  of  inspiring  con- 
victions. Instead  of  taking  refuge — more 
ecclesiaitieo — ^in  anathema  and  ezcommuni- 
eation,  he  meets  error  by  the  counter-presen- 
tation of  ennobling  truth.  2  Another  note- 
worthy fact  is  that  St.  Paul's  hope  of  the 
nsurrection  rests,  like  all  his  theology,  on 
the  thought  that  the  life  of  the  Christian  is 
a  life  "in  Christ."  3.  A  third  is  his 
superiority  to  false  analogies — like  those 
of  the  butterfly  and  the  phoenix — which 
sufficed  many  ancient  reasoners.  Even 
Oturistiui  writan  like  St  Clement  of  Borne 


oontinued  to  appeal  to  the  phoaniz  as  a  proof 
of  the  resurrection.  The  greatest  ancient 
thinkers — like  Tacitus — believed  in  the 
existence  of  that  fabulous  bird,  and  even  in 
the  genuineness  of  a  specimen  of  it  which 
had  been  exliibited  at  Borne.  Was  there  no 
"  grace  of  superintendency  "  at  work  whioli 
prevented  the  eacred  writers  from  adopting 
the  universal  error  of  their  day?  Had  St. 
Paul  appealed  to  the  phoenix,  centuries  of 
Christian  writers  would  have  continued  to 
maintain  the  existence  of  that  creature ;  and 
science,  laughing  the  belief  to  scorn,  would 
(most  unjustly)  have  made  any  allusion  to 
it  a  proof  of  mental  weakness,  and  of  the 
falsity  of  the  doctrine  which  it  was  suppose! 
to  prove,  i.  A  fourth  point  to  be  observed 
is  the  wisdom  with  which  St  Paul  holds 
himself  aloof  from  speculative  &ncies.  Ha 
does  not,  like  Plato,  appeal  to  the  doctrine  of 
"  remin  iscence  "  (anamnesis),  or  of  unfulfilled 
ideas.  He  does  not,  like  Kant,  build  any  argu- 
ment on  man's  failure  to  obey  "  the  categori- 
cal imperative  "  of  duty.  He  points  to  the 
sinless  Man — to  the  fulfilled  idea  of  Christ 
His  argument,  which  all  could  understand, 
is  summed  up  in  the  words,  "  Ye  are  Christ's, 
and  Christ  is  risen."  Your  resurrection 
from  the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of  lighteons- 
ness  is  a  pledge  of  your  participation  in 
Christ's  TMnrrectiott  mm  tut  grave. 


HOMILETIC& 

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  apogtolie  gospel,    "  Moreover,  Itrethren ,"  eta.    On  all  kandi  we 

bear  persons  talk  about  the  "  simple  gospel."  And  it  appears  to  us  that,  in  the  majority 
of  cases,  the  expression  means  nothing  more  than  a  few  crude  notions  which  the  speaker 
has  received,  or  possibly  formed,  abiaut  the  gospel.  Some  men's  "simple  gospel" 
is  an  offence  to  reason,  a  dishonour  to  Ood,  and  a  curse  to  Christianity.  The  passage 
under  review  presents  to  ns  Paul's  "  simple  gospeL"  And  let  ns  look  at  Christianity  as 
here  indicated.    We  observe — 

L  That  Chbibtianitt  i8  based  xtton  histobicai.  vaots.  It  is  not  founded  upon 
human  reason — upon  any  of  its  primitive  axioms  or  logical  conclusions.  It  is  not 
founded  upon  human  imagination ;  it  is  neither  an  ingenious  hypothesia  to  account  for 
any  phenomena,  nor  a  poetic  myth  to  adumbrate  any  truth.  It  is  based  on  facts. 
1.  These  facts  are  pereorial.  They  are  connected  with  a  person,  and  that  person  is  not 
Socrates,  Plato,  nor  Csesar,  but  one  whom  Paul  calls  Christ.  It  ia  founded  upon  the 
personal  history  of  one,  and  but  one,  individual,  and  that  is  Christ  2.  These  facts  are 
few.  He  "  died,"  he  was  "  buried,"  and  he  "  rose."  These  facts  are  compendious  facts ; 
they  imply  many  more,  and  may  be  reduced  even  to  less.  •  The  resurrection  of  Christ 
involves  the  whole ;  and  in  the  subsequent  verses  of  this  chapter,  Paul  uses  it  as  such. 
8.  These  facts  are  tueU  attested.  After  his  resurrection,  Paul  tells  us  here  tliat  he 
"waa  aeen  of  Cephas,"  of  "the  twelve,"  then  of  "five  hundred,"  and  then  of  "me 
ilso."    No  facts  on  record  are  better  attested  than  these. 

n.  That  Chbistiaottt  is  designed  fob  the  behotal  of  bvu..  Why  did  thesa 
facts  take  place?  What  is  the  aim  of  the  whole?  He  "died  for  our  aina."  The 
great  end  of  Christianity  is  to  "  put  away  sin "  from  the  world,  to  put  it  away  from 
the  hearts,  literature,  institutions,  customs,  and  governments  of  mankind.  Let  sin  be 
put  away,  and  all  evil  is  put  away ;  natural  evil  is  but  the  effect  of  moral.  Philo- 
iophically,  there  ia  no  system  on  earth  suited  to  destroy  man's  sinful  disposition  and 


t94  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0EINTHIAN8.    [ch.  xt.  1—58 


to  charge  his  heart  but  Christianity,  and  historically  nothing  else  has  ever  done  it. 
Let  the  fact  ring  louder  and  louder  through  the  world,  that  the  grand  end  of  Chris- 
tianity is  not  the  formation  of  creeds,  however  correct,  nor  the  organization  of  societies, 
however  scriptural ;  but  it  is  to  "  put  away  sin." 

III.  That  Christianitt  is  to  be  pbbachbd  with  this  desigs.  "  By  which  also 
ye  are  saved,  if  ye  keep  in  memory  [hold  fast]  what  I  preached  unto  you,"  etc.  Paul 
preached  that  they  might  be  saved,  but  they  could  only  be  saved  as  they  renounced 
and  hated  sin.  The  passage  suo:gests  three  ideas  in  relation  to  Paul's  preaching  with, 
this  view.  1.  He  preached  Christianity  convincingly.  He  says,  "  The  gospel  which  1 
preached  unto  you,  which  also  ye . . .  received."  They  believed  his  gospel ;  then  he  must 
have  convinced  them  by  arguments.  Christianity  in  preachine;  is  to  be  commended 
"  to  every  man's  conscience."  2.  He  preached  Ciiristianity  scrfpturally.  He  showed 
those  facts  in  the  light  of  the  Scriptures,  "according  to  the  Scriptures."  3.  He 
preached  Christianity  humhly.  The  expression  "  born  out  of  due  time "  evidently 
indicates  his  humility ;  and  then  in  the  next  verse  he  says,  "  For  I  am  the  least  of  the 
apostles,  that  am  not  meet  to'  be  called  an  apostle,"  etc.  We  thank  God  for  such 
a  sjstem  as  this — a  system  built  not  on  propositions,  hut  on  facts,  personal,  few  in 
number,  but  well  attested.  Such  facts  are  most  palpable  and  attractive ;  a  system 
which  cures  the  evils  of  the  moral  world  by  taking  away  its  sins.  Let  it  be  preached, 
as  Paul  preached  it — convincingly,  scripturally,  and  humbly. 

Vers.  12—19. — Terrible  eondusions  resulting  from  the  denial  of  two  great  gospel 
fact*.  "  Now  if  Christ  be  preached  that  he  rose  from  the  dead,  how  say  some  among 
you  that  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead  ?  But  if  there  be  no  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  then  is  Christ  not  risen :  and  if  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  our  preaching  vain, 
and  your  faith  is  also  vain.  Yea,  and  we  are  found  false  witnesses  of  God ;  because 
we  have  testified  of  God  that  he  raised  up  Christ:  whom  he  raised  not  up,  if  so  be  that 
the  dead  rise  not.  For  if  the  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not  Christ  raised :  and  if  Christ 
be  not  raised,  your  faith  is  vain  ;  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins.  Then  they  also  which  are 
fallen  asleep  in  Christ  are  perished.  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ,  we 
are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  In  this  paragraph  the  apostle  refers  to  two  great 
hcta  fundamental  to  Christianity,  and  peculiar  to  it  as  a  system  of  religion.  The  one 
is  the  general  resurrection  irom  the  dead,  and  the  other  is  the  resurrection  of  Christ 
himself.  In  onier  to  make  clear  Paul's  process  of  reasoning  here,  I  see  no  better  way 
than  to  exhibit  the  conclusions  which  he  draws  from  the  denial  of  these  facts. 

L  Conclusions  resulting  from  the  denial  of  the  oenebal  besubbection  of  the  dkad. 
These  conclusions  are  threefold.  1.  77ie  non-resvrrection  of  Christ.  "If  there  is  no 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  then  is  Christ  not  risen."  If  you  can  demonstrate  the 
impossibility  of  men  coming  to  life  again  after  they  have  been  buried,  then  you  prove, 
of  course,'  that  Christ  has  not  risen.  What  is  true  of  the  whole  is  true  of  all  the 
parts.  If  no  man  can  rise  from  the  dead,  then  Christ  is  still  numbered  amongst  the 
dead.  There  were  evidently  men  in  the  Church  at  Corinth  who,  like  the  Sadducees, 
denied  the  doctrine  of  a  future  resurrection.  Hence  Paul  informs  them  that  doing 
so  is  tantamount  to  the  denial  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead,  which  fact  he 
had  proclaimed  amongst  them.  2.  Z%at  departed  Christians  are  no  more.  "Then 
they  also  which  are  falleo  asleep  in  Christ  are  perished."  They  also,  as  well  as  others. 
If  dead  men  do  not  rise,  then  our  fellow-disciples  who  have  departed  this  life,  and 
who  believed  in  a  risen  Christ,  are  no  more.  Those  thousands  who  from  the  day  of 
Pentecost  accepted  Christ,  lived  according  to  his  teaching,  and  who  quitted  this  world, 
have  perished.  Can  you  believe  it?  Are  they  quenched  in  eternal  midnight?  3.  That 
there  is  no  more  pitiable  condition  in  this  life  than  that  of  Christians.  "If  in  this  life 
only  we  have  hope  in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  How  many  things 
are  implied  in  this  language  I  It  is  implied  that  there  are  men  in  a  pitiable  condition 
on  this  earth ;  it  is  implied  that  the  pitiable  condition  exists  in  different  degrees ;  it  is 
implied  that  the  degrees  of  pitiableness  are  regulated  by  hope.  Man  is  always  hoping ; 
man  is  always,  therefore,  enduring  one  of  the  greatest  elements  of  suffering,  vii,  dis- 
appointment. It  is  implied  that  the  hope  of  a  Christian,  if  false,  will  make  him  of  all 
men  the  most  to  be  pitied.  (For  an  amplification  of  these  points,  see  Homilitt,  toL  xL 
p.  61.)    Of  course  it  is  not  intended  to  teach  that,  apart  from  the  reiunection  of  Ohiiit« 


OH.  XT.  1—68.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  496 

man  hu  no  evidence  of  •  future  state,  nor  thnt,  on  the  supposition  that  there  la  nc 
future  life,  the  practice  of  virtue  is  not  to  lie  preferred  to  that  of  vice.  It  is  implied 
that  the  higher  the  object  of  our  hope,  and  the  more  of  tlie  soul  that  goes  into  it,  the 
more  overwhelmingly  crushing  will  be  the  disappointment.  The  man  who  has  thrown 
bis  whole  soul  into  Christianity,  and  who  reaches  a  point  where  he  is  convinced  of  it< 
imposture,  is  at  that  raoinent  "  of  all  men  the  most  miserable." 

IL  Conclusions  resulting  from  the  denial  of  Christ's  besubbeotion  fboh  thx  dkad. 
There  are  three  conclusions  here  resulting  from  the  denial  of  this  fact.  1.  T%at 
apostolic  Christianity  is  vain.  "If  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  ie  our  preaching  vain, 
and  your  faith  is  also  vain."  It  is  vain,  void,  an  empty  phantom,  a  worthless 
fiction.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  was  th(^  foundation  stone  in  the  temple  of  Paul's 
teaching.  Take  that  stone  away,  then  it  falls  and  becomes  worthless  rubbish.  But 
not  only  is  preaching  vain,  and  your  faith  vain,  we  ourselves  are  "  false  witnesMa." 
We  are  impostors.  Can  you  believe  this?  What  motives  have  we  to  impose? 
The  supposition  either  that  they  taught  falsehood,  thnt  the  disciples  believed  false- 
hood, or  that  they  were  "  false  witnesses,"  is  eternally  inadmissible.  Hence  Christ  did 
rise  from  the  dead.  2.  That  the  faith  of  the  disciples  was  vain.  "  Your  faith  is 
also  Tun."  What  a  wreck  of  faith  is  involved  in  the  denial  of  Christ's  resurrection  I 
Then  (1)  faith  in  the  credibility  of  historic  testimony  is  vain.  On  what  stronger  his- 
torical testimony  can  any  fact  rest  tlian  that  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ?  Then 
(2)  faith  in  the  accuracy  of  phihsophic  deduction  is  vain.  The  rapid  progress  of 
Christianity  in  the  Bouian  empire  in  its  first  stages,  and  its  subsequent  influence 
throughout  the  world,  reveal  a  mass  of  phenomena  which  you  cannot  account  for  if 
you  deny  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  Then  (3)  faith  in  the  moral  value  of  character 
is  vain.  Did  a  nobler  character  than  Christ's  ever  exist  ?  And  yet  if  he  rose  not,  then 
is  he  an  impostor.  Then  (4)  faith  in  the  righteous  government  of  Ood  is  vain.  If  a 
being  so  transcendently  excellent  as  Christ  is  to  be  crushed  for  ever  in  the  grave, 
where  is  the  justice  of  Heaven  ?  Verily,  if  our  faith  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  vain, 
of  what  worth  is  any  faith  ?  3.  That  the  followers  of  Christ  are  still  in  their  sins. 
It  is  here  implied  that  faith  in  Christ  can  alone  take  men  out  of  their  sins.  This  is  a 
fact  grounded  on  history,  consciousness,  and  the  gospel.  But  the  Christians  at  Corinth 
were  conscious  that  they  had  got  out  of  their  sins,  to  a  certain  degree  at  least.  "  Such 
were  seme  of  you ;  but  ye  are  washed,"  etc.  Consciousness  the  highest  ultimate  argument, 
protested  against  Paul's  hypothesis  that  they  were  still  in  their  sins ;  hence  it  goes 
to  verify  the  fact  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ. 

Yen.  20—23. — The  resurrection  of  Christ.  "  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead, 
and  become  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept.  For  since  by  man  came  death,  by  man 
came  also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  For  as  in  Adam  all  He,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all 
be  made  alive.  But  every  man  in  his  own  order :  Christ  the  firstfruits ;  afterward  they 
that  are  Christ's  at  his  coming."  These  verses  lead  us  to  contemplate  the  resurrection 
ol  Christ  as  an  established  fact,  as  a  significant  fact,  and  as  an  influential  fact. 

I.  An  established  fact.  Paul  asserts  this  fact  with  a  spirit  of  triumphant  certitude. 
This  fact  is  established :  1.  On  the  testimony  of  the  most  competent  witnesses.  A  com- 
petent witness  is  one  who  has  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  facts  whereof  he  affirms, 
and  such  an  invincible  love  for  truth  as  would  render  it  utterly  impossible  for  him  to 
misrepresent  them.  The  apostles  were  witnesses  of  this  type.  2.  On  the  very  existence 
of  Christendom.  What  gave  birth  to  that  domain  amongst  the  peoj^esof  the  race  called 
Christendom?  The  gospel;  and  the  truth  of  the  gospel  rests  on  the  resurrection  of 
Christ.  3.  On  the  consciousness  of  genuine  disciples.  Such  consciousness  attests  that 
they  are  "  not  in  then:  sins,"  that  they  have  got  more  or  less  free  from  their  thraldom 
and  dominion,  and  they  feel  that  this  deliverance  came  from  the  gospel. 

IL  A  bionh'ICAST  fact.  "  Now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first- 
fnits  of  them  that  slept."  The  reference  here  is  to  the  "  firstfruits "  of  the  harvest 
which  were  offered  by  the  priests  unto  the  Lord  (see  Lev.  zxiii.  12 — 19).  Those 
firstfruits  were  both  an  earnest  and  a  sample  of  th?  full  harvest  at  hand.  Hence  Christ's 
resurrection  was  regarded :  1.  As  a  pledge  of  the  resurrection  of  those  who  were  dead. 
As  he  rose  so  will  ul  rise.  2.  As  a  pattern  of  the  resurrection  of  those  who  were  dead. 
The  fdieaf  waved  before  the  Lord  was  a  specimen  or  sample  of  what  remained  in  the 


»«  THK  FIB8T  EFISTLB  TO  THK  OORINTHIANS.    [OL  xt.  1-£8. 

field  to  be  gathered  ia.    "Oar  Tile  bodiei  ehkll  1w  fiuhioDed  «nd  made  like  unto  Ui 

glorious  body." 

III.  Ah  QUiiUKNTiAL  FACT.  "  For  since  by  man  came  death,  by  man  came  also  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead.  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  eren  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive." 
Ifetween  the  influence  of  Adam  and  that  of  Christ  on  the  race,  there  is  a  retemblance 
and  a  contrast.  1.  A  resembkmee.  The  resemblance  is  in  its  ewteniibilUy.  Though 
Adam's  influence  upon  the  race  may  be  more  extensive  at  present  than  that  of  Christ, 
it  is  not  more  extensible.  It  has  in  it  the  power  of  extending  over  the  whole  race  down 
through  all  times,  and  it  will  so  do.  ,  2.  A  contrast.  The  influence  of  the  one  is 
destructive  ;  the  influence  of  the  other,  quickening.  "As  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ 
shall  all  be  made  alive."  If  by  death  liere  bodily  death  is  meant,  then  the  idea  is  that 
Christ  will  quicken  to  life  all  that  have  died.  But  what  does  it  mean  to  be  in  Adam 
and  in  Christ  ?  There  is,  at  any  rate,  one  sense  which  we  can  understand  in  which  we 
are  in  them ;  that  is,  in  the  sense  of  character.  Without  figure  all  men  live  in  the 
characters  of  others — children  live  in  the  character  of  their  parents,  pupils  in  their 
masters,  the  present  generation  in  the  preceding.  The  characters  of  the  men  of  past 
ages  constitute  the  moral  atmosphere  of  existing  men.  In  Adam's  character,  the 
character  of  telfishne$s,  carnality,  unbelief,  all  nnregenerate  men  live  to-day;  his  prin- 
ciples pulsate  in  all  hearts.  In  the  character  of  Christ,  in  his  $el/-$acrificing  love,  spotleu 
purity,  and  holy  reverence,  all  the  godly  lire  to-day.  Now,  those  who  live  in  the 
character  of  Adam  must  die,  not  merely  in  the  sense  of  the  dissolution  of  the  soul  from 
the  body,  but  in  the  more  awful  sense  of  the  dissolution  of  the  soul  from  Q-od ;  whereas 
those  who  live  in  the  character  of  Christ  live  by  a  vital  connection  with  the  eternal 
Fountain  of  all  life.  The  influence  of  Adam's  character  on  the  race  is  destructive ;  that 
of  Christ's  is  quickening  and  reiturative.  "  All  shall  be  made  alive."  Shall  there  be  a 
universal  lestoration? 

Yert.  24 — ^28. — Christ  resigning  \i»  administration.  "  Then  oometh  the  end,"  etc. 
By  the  "  end  "  here,  1  presimie,  is  to  be  meant  the  redemptive  reign  of  Christ.  It  means 
that  when  Christ,  in  the  exercise  of  his  mediatorial  government,  has  subjugated  all  the 
powers  of  moral  evil,  he  will  deliver  up  his  commission  to  God,  who  will  then  be 
acknowledged  as  the  absolute  Buler  of  alL  The  following  are  some  of  the  truths  that 
the  passage  suggests : — 

I.  That  the  ooternheht  or  oub  wobld  n  adkhhbtebid  bt  Christ.  The  New 
Testament  is  full  of  the  doctrine  that  Christ  reigns  over  our  world.  This  doctrine 
explains  several  otherwise  inexplicable  things  in  the  history  of  man.  1.  The  perpetuation 
of  the  human  race  o»  the  earth.  Death  was  threatened  on  Adam  the  same  day  on 
which  he  should  sin.  He  sinned,  and  died  not  that  day,  but  lived  for  centuries,  and 
became  the  father  of  an  immense  and  ever-multiplying  family.  And  why?  The 
Biblical  doctrine  uf  mediation  is  the  only  principle  that  explains  it.  2.  The  coexistence 
of  sin  and  happiness  in  the  same  individual.  Under  the  government  of  absolute 
righteousness,  we  should  antecedently  expect  that  such  an  association  would  never  exist. 
We  is  told  that  there  are  perfect  happiness  in  heaven,  and  we  can  understand  it,  because 
perfect  holiness  are  there.  But  here  there  is  sin  and  happiness,  comparative  holiness  and 
great  Bu£fering.  The  mediative  government  is  the  only  principle  that  explains  this. 
3.  The  offer  of  pardon  and  the  application  of  remedial  influences  to  the  condemned  and 
corrupt.  Under  a  righteous  government  how  is  this  to  be  explained?  It  is  explicable 
only  on  the  ground  that  "  he  is  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,"  etc. 

II.  That  Christ  conducts  the  government  of  our  world  in  obdeb  to  put  down 
ALL  HUMAN  EVILS.  There  are  two  classes  of  evil  referred  to  here.  1.  Moral.  "  AH 
rule,  all  authority  and  power."  Siiful  principles  are  the  moral  potentates  of  this  world. 
Christ's  government  is  to  put  them  down  from  governments.  Churches,  books,  hearts, 
etc.  2.  Physical.  "  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  ia  death."  Death  is  the 
totality  of  physical  evils.    Christ  will  destroy  this. 

III.  That  when  these  evils  are  entirely  put  down,  Chbibt  will  besior  bis  ASmns- 
TBATioH  INTO  THE  HANDS  OF  THE  EVEULASTiNO  Fatheb.  The  time  will  ooiue  wheo 
moral  evil  shall  be  entirely  exterminated  from  the  earth,  and  when  death  ahall  be 
swallowed  up  in  victory,  Christ,  having  finished  the  work  tliat  «u  gJTen  Um  to  da 
— ^nUsoffio*.    'Than oometh  tho  tad." 


OB.  X*.  1—58.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0EINTHIAN8.  497 

IV.  Thkt  when  Christ  shall  have  resigned  his  administration,  God  "  will  bb  all  a 
kUu"  What  does  this  mean?  1.  He  will  treat  all  men  after  this  on  the  ground  of 
their  own  moral  merits.  From  the  Fall  up  to  this  period,  he  had  treated  them  on  the 
ground  of  Christ's  mediation.;  hut  now,  the  mediation  removed,  each  man  shall  reap  the 
**  fruit  of  his  own  doings."  2.  All  men  after  this  will  subjectively  realize  the  absolute 
One  as  they  have  never  before.  The  atmosphere  of  their  nature  purified,  he  shall  appear 
within  them  as  the  central  orb,  making  the  finite  manifest  and  glorious  in  the  conscious 
light  of  the  Infinite. 

Ver.  29. — The  Chwch-world,  "  Else  what  shall  they  do  which  are  baptized  for  the 
deaid,  if  the  dead  rise  not  at  all?"  etc.  There  is  a  Church-world — •  world  inside, 
the  general  world  of  mankind,  and  in  many  respects  distinct  from  it ;  a  community  of 
men  whose  principles,  spirit,  aim,  character,  and  destiny  distinguish  them  from  every 
other  class  of  human  society.  They  are  called  a  "chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a 
holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people."  They  are  united  to  each  other  as  stones  in  one  building, 
as  branches  in  one  root,  as  members  in  one  body.  The  text  presents  this  Church-world 
to  us  in  three  aspects. 

I,  Ab  thinkud  bt  death.  The  text  speaks  of  those  who  are  "baptized  for  the  dead." 
Death  was  in  the  Church  in  the  days  of  the  apostle,  and  it  has  been  ever  since.  The 
great  law  of  mortality  which  extends  over  men  in  general  enters  this  realm  and  operates 
here.  The  spiritual  intelligence,  the  moral  virtues,  the  godly  devotions,  and  the 
social  usefulness  of  this  Church-realm  constitute  no  barrier  to  the  entrance  of  death. 
There  is,  however,  great  difference  between  the  aspects  and  effects  of  death  as  he  appears 
and  works  in  the  world  .of  mankind.  1.  He  appears  in  the  Church-world  as  the  mes- 
tenger  of  mercy ;  outside,  as  the  officer  of  justice.  Outside  he  appears  to  men  as  the 
stern  officer  of  insulted  justice,  to  drag  the  criminal  to  retribution;  here  as  the 
messenger  of  heavenly  mercy,  to  snap  the  chains  of  the  prisoner,  to  terminate  the  trials 
of  the  afflicted,  and  to  introduce  the  disciples  of  Christ  to  the  joys  of  immortality.  2. 
He  leaves  behind  in  the  Church-world  consolation  for  the  survivors,  but  outside  unmi- 
tigated somnv.  What  have  the  widow  of  the  wicked  husband,  the  child  of  the 
ungodly  parent,  to  console  their  bereavement  ?  Nothing.  Death  leaves  the  social  wound.s 
he  has  created  in  the  outside  world  to  bleed  and  rankle  without  any  balm.  Not  so  in 
this  Church- world:  here  is  abundant  consolation.  "  Sorrow  not  as  those  that  are  without 
hope." 

II.  As  BEPLENiSHBO  BT  ooNTEBSioH.  "  What  shall  they  do  which  are  baptized  for 
the  dead?"  This  is  confessedly  an  obscure  expression,  and  has  given  rise  to  many  and 
conflicting  interpretations.  Some  say  that  Paul  refers  to  an  old  custom  in  the  Church 
of  vicarious  baptism,  that  is,  baptizing  survivors  for  those  who  had  died  without  having 
received  the  ordinance  of  baptism ;  others,  that  the  word  "  baptism  "  is  to  be  taken  in  the 
metaphorical  sense  in  which  our  Saviour  sometimes  employed  it,  as  representing  over- 
whelming sufferings  (Matt.  x.  20;  Mark  x.  39) ;  and  that  Paul  meant  to  say,  "  Why 
should  men  be  baptized  with  such  sufferings,  if  there  be  no  resurrection  of  the  dead  ?  " 
Others  say  that  the  baptism  spoken  of  is  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit,  and  refers  to 
conversion  of  the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  There  are  many  other  opinions,  but  this 
is  not  the  place  for  critical  inquiries.  I  accept  the  last-mentioned  idea,  namely,  eon- 
version.  By  those  who  are  "  baptized  for  the  dead "  I  understand  those  who,  from 
pagan  darkness,  were  converted  by  the  gospel  and  were  admitted  into  the  visible 
Church,  there  to  fill  up  the  place  of  those  who,  by  martyrdom  or  otherwise,  had  been 
called  away  by  death.  The  new  convert  then  took  the  place  of  the  departed  saint. 
Thus  conversions  in  the  Ohrtrck  replenish  the  losses  caused  by  death.  No  sooner  is  one 
Christian  removed  from  his  station  than  another  is  raised  up  by  God  to  supply  the  loss. 
Since  the  apostolic  day,  what  myriads  of  able  preachers,  evangelists,  theologians, 
reformers,  and  distinguished  saints  have  passed  away  I  StiU  the  Church  goes  on,  and 
their  places  are  all  occupied.  As  Joshua  succeeded  Moses;  Elisha,  Elijdi;  Eleazar, 
Aaron;  so  one  man  is  ever  raised  up  in  the  Church  to  take  the  place  of  another.  This 
succesBion :  1.  Afforda  a  lesson  to  us  for  humility.  The  man  of  most  brilliant  talents, 
distingniahed  position,  and  extensive  usefulness  in  the  Ohurch  has  nothing  whereof  to 
flatter  Umself;  however  important  he  may  be,  the  Church  can  do  vrithout  him.  Whaa 
h»  fiklla,  othen  are  ready  ta  step  into  his  place,  having  beta  baptiiad  iiur  tba  dead.    8. 

LooramoAiu.  S  e 


498  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xt.  1—64 


Affords  a  lesson  to  us  for  encowagement.  God's  redemptive  plan  will  go  on,  whatever 
happens  to  individual  agents.  "  He  has  buried  his  workmen,"  says  Charles  Wesley, 
"  but  carries  on  his  work."  Let  us  learn  to  trust  God  rather  than  his  most  distinguished 
servants.    The  treasure  is  only  in  "  earthen  vessels  " — vessels  that  must  crumble. 

III.  As  LIVING  IN  HOPE.  "  What  shall  they  do  which  are  baptized  for  the  dead,  if 
the  dead  rise  not  at  all?"  This  language  implies  that  the  hope  of  •  future  atate, 
of  •  resurrection,  was  a  vital  thing  in  the  experience  of  the  Church,  and  so  it  has  ever 
been,  so  it  is,  and  so  it  ever  will  be.  The  Church  lives  in  hope.  It  reckons  "  that  the 
sufferings  of  the  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glories  that  shall 
be."  It  is  "waiting  for  the  adoption;"  it  b  looking  "for  the  blessed  appearing." 
We  must  not  mistake  Paul's  meaning,  however.  He  does  not  mean  to  say  that  the 
religion  of  Christ  is  of  no  service  to  men  if  tliere  be  no  future  state.  Let  us  answer  his 
two  questions — the  what  and  the  why.  1.  What  shall  they  do  ?  We  venture  to  reply, 
not  renounce  religion,  but  continue  faithful  for  ever.  Should  there  be  no  future,  CliiJs- 
tian  virtue  is  good.  You  will  lose  nothing  by  it  should  you  be  annihilated ;  in  that  case 
you  will  not  feel  the  disapijointment,  but  you  will  gain  immensely  by  it,  even  in  the 
present  life.  "  Godliness  is  profital>le  unto  all  things."  2.  Why  are  they,  then,  baptized  ? 
We  answer,  because  the  claims  of  religion  are  independent  of  the  future  state.  Were 
there  no  heaven,  no  hell,  we  should  be  bound  to  be  truthful,  honest,  benevolent,  Gud- 
lo^g. 

Vers.  30,  31. — Daily  dying.  "Why  stand  we,"  etc,  ?  The  apostles,  In  their  efforts 
to  extcnii  the  gospel,  endured  great  afflictions  and  involved  themselves  in  terrific  perils, 
and  if  there  be  no  future  life,  Paul  asks,  why  should  they  have  done  so?  "  Why  stand 
we  in  jeopardy  every  hour?"  Why  should  we  thus  "die  daily"?  But  there  is  a 
daily  dying  in  the  case  of  every  man. 

I.  There  is  »  daily  dying  that  is  inevitabls  to  humanity.  1,  There  is  »  daily 
dying  of  our  corporeal  frame.  In  each  human  body  the  seed  of  death  is  implanted,  the 
law  of  mortality  is  at  work.  The  water  does  not  more  naturally  roll  to  the  ocean  than 
the  human  fiame  runs  every  moment  to  dissolution.  Life  streams  from  us  at  every 
pore.  Tliis  fact  should  teach  us:  (1)  That  worldly-mindedness  is  an  infraction  of 
reason.  What  a  monstrous  absurdity  it  is  to  set  our  supreme  affections  upon  objects 
from  which  we  are  departing  every  moment.  As  the  ship  of  the  emigrant  in  full 
sail  is  lieariug  him  every  moment  further  and  further  from  his  native  shore,  so  destiny 
is  bearing  every  man  further  and  further  from  his  connection  with  this  earth.  No 
anchor  can  stop  this  ship  of  destiny.  (2)  That  sorrow  for  the  departed  should  be 
moderated.  Why  indulge  in  grief  for  those  who  are  gone?  Their  departure  was 
in  obedience  to  the  resistless  law  of  their  nature^  and  that  same  law  is  duly  bearing  us 
whither  they  are  gone.  (3)  That  Christianity  ia  an  invaluable  boon  to  mortals.  It 
does  two  things ;  it  teaches  us  that  there  ii  a  future  world  of  blessedness,  and  point!  us 
the  way  by  which  that  blessed  world  is  reached.  2.  There  is  a  daily  dying  of  our 
social  world.  We  live  not  only  with  others,  but  by  them.  Without  society  we  might 
exist,  but  live  we  could  not.  Oiu:  contemporaries  are  the  objects  of  our  sympathies,  the 
subjects  of  our  conscious  life ;  they  engage  our  thoughts,  they  affect  our  hearts,  they 
originate  our  motives,  they  stimulate  our  conduct,  and  all  this  is  much  of  our  life.  But 
this  social  world  in  which  we  live,  and  by  which  we  live,  is  dying  daily.  The  social  cir- 
cumstances which  feed  our  life  are  changing  every  day.  The  thoughts,  the  love,  the 
grief,  the  anger,  the  fear,  the  hopes,  which  were  once  elements  of  life  to  us,  have  passed 
away  liecause  tiie  objects  of  them  have  gone.  3.  There  is  a  daily  dying  of  our  mental 
motivity.  The  motives  that  influence  us  to  action  are  elements  of  life,  and  they  are 
constantly  dying.  For  example,  the  leading  purpose  that  a  man  has  is,  for  the  time, 
one  of  his  strongest  motives  of  action,  but  the  leading  purpose  of  every  man  is  a  dying 
thing.  It  is  dead  as  a  motive  both  when  it  is  frustrated,  as  is  constantly  the  case,  and 
also  when  it  is  fully  realized.  A  realized  purpose  has  lost  its  motivity.  Thus  we  die 
daily  in  mind. 

II.  There  is  a  daily  dying  that  is  oftioiial  to  humanity.  This  optional  death  is  of 
two  kinds,  the  criminal  and  the  virtuous.  1.  There  is  the  criminal.  There  are  noble 
thlnps  in  man  that  are  dying  daily,  for  which  he  is  responsible.  In  the  depraved  soul, 
sensibility  of  eonscience,  generosity  of  impulse,  elasticity  of  intellect,  freedom  of  thought^ 


MtXT,  1— 58.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  499 

■pirituality  of  feeling — these,  that  constitute  the  highest  life  of  man,  die  daily  in 
the  corrupt  soul.  The  sinner  is  constantly  murdering  these,  and  their  blood  cries  to 
Heaven  for  vengeance.  "  To  be  carnally  minded  is  death."  2.  There  is  the  virtuous. 
There  are  certain  tilings  that  men  should  and  ought  to  crucify — sulfljlmess,  sensuality, 
love  of  the  world,  etc.  The  highest  life  of  man  is  a  daily  dying  to  all  that  is  mean, 
false,  mercenary,  unspiritual,  and  uuchaiitable.  The  apostle  felt  this  when  lie  saiil, 
"  I,"  that  is,  my  carnal  self,  "  am  crucified  with  Christ ;  "  aevertheless,  "  /,"  that  is, 
my  spiritual  self,  "  live,"  etc. 

Vera.  32,  33.— Beasts  at  Ephesus,  "  If  after  the  manner  of  men,"  etc.  The  words 
lead  us  to  consider  four  subjects. 

I.  A  LOW  JUDGMENT  of  humaD  nature.  "  Beasts  at  Ephesus."  There  is  no  good 
reason  for  supposing  that  Paul  meant  literally  beasts.  By  wild  beasts  he  means  men 
gross  and  savage  in  wickedness.  Paul  was  not  alone  in  classirying  such  men  with 
irrational  brutes.  John  the  Baptist  called  some  of  his  hearers  "  vipers,"  and  the  great 
Preacher  compared  some  such  men  to  swine.  The  Bible  speaks  of  wicked  men  in  two 
stages  lower  than  humanity.  1.  The  sensual.  The  sensual  state  is  a  state  where  the 
lenses  rule  the  souL  Are  not  the  mass  of  men  in  this  state  ?  2.  The  devilish.  Men 
have  the  power  of  getting  lower  than  the  beasts.  By  the  faculty  of  imagination 
they  can  kindle  their  passions  into  a  diabolical  heat,  and  by  bringing  the  elements  ol 
nature  into  new  coinbi nations  they  can  generate  and  nourish  unnatural  appetites. 

II.  A  FIEBCE  STBtJGOLE  for  human  nature.  "I  have  fought  with  wild  beasts  at 
Ephesus."  Like  all  the  apostles  of  truth,  Paul  fought  with  men  for  men.  1.  The 
battle  was  inevitable  to  his  mission.  He  was  the  messenger  of  truths  which  struck 
directly  against  their  prejudices,  habits,  greed,  etc.  2.  The  battle  was  most  benevolent 
on  his  part.  Love,  not  anger,  was  its  inspiration.  He  fought /or  them  by  fighting 
against  their  prejudices  and  their  sins.  3.  The  battle  was  most  unequal  in  dream- 
itomeet.  Numbers,  authority,  wealth,  and  influence  were  all  arrayed  against  one.  A 
penniless  foreigner  fought  against  the  whole  city.  In  moral  battles  numbers  are  an 
inferior  consideration.     One  man  in  truth  may  conquer  a  n  ;tion  In  error. 

III.  A  GREAT  PROBLEM  for  human  nature.  "What  advantageth  it  me?*  On  the 
assumption  that  there  is  no  future  life,  what  advantageth  it  all  this  struggle  for  truth  ? 
The  apostle  does  not  say  either  that  there  would  be  an  advantage  in  a  godly  struggle 
for  truth,  were  there  no  future  life,  nor  that  such  a  struggle  was  to  be  conducted  with 
A  view  of  advantage.  He  puts  the  question,  and  leaves  it  to  be  answered.  Our  answer 
will  be :  1.  That  on  the  assumption  that  there  is  no  future  life,  godliness  will  b>f  if 
physical  advantage  to  man.  The  habits  of  life  promoted  by  Christianity  are  conducive 
to  bodily  health  and  longevity.  2.  That  on  the  assumption  that  there  is  no  future  lite, 
godliness  will  be  of  mental  advantage  to  man.  It  generates  sentiments,  starts  trains  of 
thought,  etc.,  which  yield  to  the  mind  a  happiness  which  nothing  else  on  earth  can 
afford.  3.  That  on  the  assumption  that  there  is  no  future  life,  godliness  will  be  of  social 
advantage  to  mau.  Christianity  has  proved  itself  to  be  infinitely  the  best  system  for 
promoting  the  peace  of  families,  the  order  of  society,  the  prosperity  of  nations. 

IV.  A  SOLEMN  TBNDENOT  of  humau  nature.  "  Be  not  deceived :  evil  communications 
[company]  corrupt  good  manners."  Man  is  a  social  being;  he  lives  in  and  by  society. 
Observe :  1.  There  is  "  evil  company "  in  the  social  world.  There  are  those  who  are 
drawn  together  in  fellowship  simply  on  the  ground  of  evil  doctrines,  dispositions,  plans, 
purposes,  pleasures,  etc.  2.  There  is  an  instinct  in  "  evil  company  "  to  corrupt.  Evil 
is  a  self-propagating  power.  Those  who  have  yielded  to  temptations  become  the 
tempters  of  others.  3.  There  is  a  tuseeptibility  in  most  to  be  corrupted.  Hence  the 
exhortation,  "  Be  not  deceived."  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise ;  be 
that  is  the  companion  of  the  fool  is  foolish."  Feltham  well  says, "  One  rotten  apple  will 
Infect  the  store ;  the  putrid  grape  c:)rrupts  the  whole  sound  cluster.  If  I  have  found  any 
good  companions,  I  will  cherish  them  as  the  choicest  of  men,  or  as  angels  which  ar« 
sent  as  guardians  to  me.  If  I  have  any  bad  ones,  I  will  study  to  loM  them,  lest  by 
keeping  them  I  lose  myself  in  the  end." 

Ter.  84. — Moral  resurrection.    "  Awake  to  righteonmess,"  etc.    Obaerre — 

L  Tki  oohditiov  fbom  which  hah  is  summoned.    It  is  representad  by  a  "  ilwp.* 


600  THB  riBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.zt.1— Sa 

What  Ib  tbis  moral  sleep?  There  are  three  points  of  resemblance  in  this  condition  that 
warrant  the  figure.  1.  Insensibility.  How  insensible  is  man  in  sleep  I  He  has  lost  all 
consciousness.  The  great  world  of  life  is  shut  out  from  him.  So  it  is  with  the  moral 
sleeper.  There  is  a  world  of  realities  round  the  sinner,  of  the  most  grand  and  solema 
description.  Tet  he  is  dead  to  all.  He  is  not  conscious  of  his  spiritual  being.  He  doei 
not  feel  that  he  has  a  souL  2.  Fktitiousness.  If  the  mind  of  the  natural  sleeper  act, 
it  is  in  a  world  of  pictures.  Objects  flit  before  it  that  have  no  real  existence.  The  life 
of  the  moral  sleeper  is  highly  fictitious ;  it  is  a  life  of  dreams ;  it  is  a  great  lie.  i, 
Transitoriness.  Sleep  is  not  a  permanent  state.  It  has  its  seasons.  And  so  it  is  in 
relation  to  the  soul.  There  is  a  dark  spiritual  night  Iffooding  over  the  moral  deeper, 
but  there  is  a  spiritual  morning  for  every  moral  sleeper  to  awake  in. 

II.  Tbb  btatb  into  whiob  wi  abk  BUUMONESk  "Awake  to  righteousness,"  or 
"  wake  up  righteously." 

III.  The  voice  by  which  wb  abk  summoned.  TUs  may  be  regarded  as  God's  voice 
to  man  in  all  times  and  in  all  lands.  Wake  uptotJie  right.  To  the  right  in  politics, 
commerce,  religion,  and  in  all  departments  of  life.  Kealize  the  right,  embody  Uie 
right.    TIm  crime  and  curse  of  humanity  is  that  it  is  gone  fixnn  the  right. 

Vers.  85 — 44. — Z%«  resurrection-lody.  "With  what  body  do  they  come?"  The 
question  which  Paul  puts  into  the  mouth  of  the  ancient  sceptic  assumes  the  fact  of 
a  general  resurrection  of  mankind.  And  why  should  we  not  assume  this  fact?  "  Why 
should  it  bethought  a  thing  incredible  with  you  that  Ood  should  raise  the  dead?" 
Incredible  1  Has  not  he  who  has  engaged  to  do  it  all-su£Scient  power?  Scepticism 
parades  the  difficulties  connected  with  the  work  of  the  resurrection.  Let  them  ba 
a  million  times  more  than  the  fancy  of  the  infidel  can  figure  to  himself,  will  they 
amount  to  anything  as  an  argument  against  its  accomplishment?  Nay,  the  difficulty 
of  a  work  should  always  he  estimated  by  the  ca^poMty  of  the  agent  engaged  to  perform 
it.  What  is  impossible  for  one  being  to  perform,  can  be  achieved  by  another  with  the 
greatest  facility.  Where  Omnipotence  is  the  agent,  the  talk  about  difficulties  ia 
manifestly  absurd.  What  would  bafBe  and  overmaster  the  combined  power  of  all 
created  existences,  Almightiness  can  effect  by  a  single  fiat,  **  Is  there  anything  too 
hard  for  the  Lord?"  Incredible!  Changes  are  constantly  going  on  in  the  creation 
bearing  some  resemblance  to  the  event.  Spring  is  a  resurrection  of  buried  life. 
Unnumbered  graves,  some  that  have  been  sealed  for  centuries,  are  opened  every  hour 
by  the  warm  touch  of  the  vernal  ray.  Incredible  1  It  meets  the  universal  longings  of 
the  human  heart.  The  cry  of  all  generations  is  this :  "  We  would  not  be  unclothed, 
but  clothed  upon,  that  mortality  might  be  swallowed  up  in  life."  The  world's  heart 
waits  "  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  the  body."  Incredible  1  It  la 
unmistakably  stated  in  that  gospel  which  has  been  demonstrated  Divine.  To  the 
question,  "  If  a  man  die  shall  he  live  again  ?  "  we  have  in  the  Bible  replies  the  most 
varied,  expressive,  and  full.  The  subject  of  the  general  resurrection  is  a  very  extensive 
one;  it  has  many  branches,  and  touches  a  vast  variety  of  truth.  In  the  light  of 
the  apostle's  statements,  1  infer  the  following  answers  to  this  question : — 

L  With  a  body  not  idektical  with  that  which  descended  to  the  gbate.  "  Thou 
fool,  that  which  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened,  except  it  die,"  etc.  Not  a  few  of  the 
advocates  of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  have  exposed  it  to  the  ridicule  of  the  sceptic 
and  the  contempt  of  the  philosopher  by  representing  the  resurrection-body  as  the 
literal  re-organization  of  the  buried  dust.  To  work  upon  the  passions  of  the  unreflecting 
and  the  vulgar,  the  sensuous  poem  and  the  declamatory  pulpit  have  given  representa- 
tions of  the  resurrei  tion  most  extravagant  in  their  materiality  and  their  grossness.  The 
]>articles  of  the  buried  body,  which  through  the  course  of  centiuries  have  undergone 
innumerable  transi'ormalions,  and  been  separated  from  each  other  wide  as  the  poles 
asunder,  are  described  as  coming  together  in  the  last  day  to  take  the  very  same  place 
in  that  very  same  body  as  was  conveyed  to  the  grave.  In  poetry  we  have  an  example 
In  such  lines  aa  Blair's — 

"Now  monnmento  prove  faithftil  to  their  trust, 

And  render  back  their  long  committed  dun; 
Now  charnel»  rattle,  scattered  limbs,  and  all 
The  various  bones,  obsequious  to  the  call, 


«R.rr.  1— fig.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  601 

Belf-inoTe<l,  adranco :  the  distant  head,  the  feet 
Dreadful  to  view,  see,  through  the  dusky  aky 
Fragments  of  bodies  in  confusion  fly ; 
To  distant  regions  jonrneying  there  to  claim 
Deserted  members  and  complete  the  frame." 

Science,  of  oonrse,  langhs  all  this  to  scorn.  It  tells  us  how  the  human  body,  as  to  the 
particles  that  compose  it,  is  in  a  state  of  perpetual  flux ;  that  portions  of  it  are  streaming 
off  every  moment  from  every  pore ;  that  at  the  end  of  seven  years  not  one  atom  shall  be 
fonnd  in  the  body  which  was  there  in  the  beginning,  and  that  at  the  end  of  seventy  years 
a  man  will  have  had  no  less  than  ten  different  bodies.  It  tells  us  how  that  no  sooner 
is  the  body  dead,  than  the  various  particles  begin  to  liberate  themselves  from  each 
other,  and  in  the  course  of  time  mix  themselves  up  as  parts  of  other  existences ;  how 
they  form  the  grass  npon  which  the  cattle  browse,  flow  in  the  stream,  and  become  the 
fruit  and  flesKon  which  their  children  live.  So  that,  in  the  course  of  ages,  the  same 
particles  might  have  formed  the  frames  of  a  thousand  different  men.  It  tells  us, 
moreover,  that  millions  of  men  have  had  no  graves.  In  some  of  the  Oriental  nations 
the  dead  are  not  buried,  but  burned,  and  in  the  process  of  combustion  the  greater 
portions  of  the  body  pass  into  invisible  gases,  and  are  lost  in  the  immensity  of  the 
atmosphere,  while  the  handful  of  ashes  that  remain  are  buine  away  on  the  four  winds 
of  heaven.  Now,  it  is  our  happiness  to  know  that  not  on  this  point,  any  more  tlian  on 
any  other,  does  the  Bible  teach  what  true  science  repudiates.  "That  which  thou 
sowest,  thou  Bowest  not  that  body  that  shall  be."  There  is  a  difTereace  between  the 
dead  seed  sown,  and  the  living  plant  that  springs  from  it.  Tou  drop  into  the  earth 
a  bare  grain,  and  what  comes  up?  Not  a  bare  grain,  but  a  green  stalk,  which  grows, 
perhaps,  to  a  tree  with  many  branches,  rich  foliage,  lovely  blossoms,  and  delicious  fruits. 
There  is  not  a  particle  on  that  tree  of  the  bare  grain  that  you  buried.  It  will  be  thus 
with  the  resurrection-body;  it  will  not  be  the  bare  grain  that  was  put  into  the  earth, 
but  something  else,  that  will  come  up.  The  resurrection-body  will  be  no  more  identical 
with  the  buried  one  than  the  majestic  tree  of  the  forest  is  the  same  in  particle  or  bulk 
as  the  acorn  from  which  it  sprang.  "With  what  body  do  they  come?"  The  spostie 
enables  us  to  reply  further — 

IL  With  a  body  that  will  have  bohb  organic  coniteotion  with  that  wmoH  was 
OEFOSITED  nj  THE  DUST.  The  plant,  though  very  dissimilar  to  the  bare  grain,  has  a  vital 
connection  with  it.  It  grows  out  of  it,  and  is  of  the  same  order ;  there  is  an  unbroken 
continuity.  If  the  resurrection  of  the  body  from  the  grave  means  anything,  it  must 
mean  that  something  from  the  old  body  comes  up  and  takes  a  fresh  form.  What  else 
is  meant  by  such  expressions  as  this :  "  All  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of 
the  Son  of  man  and  come  forth  "?  It  is  true  that  this  connection  between  the  buiieA 
and  the  raised  body  is  far  more  inexplicable  than  the  connection  between  the  buried 
grain  and  the  up-growing  plant,  or  between  the  chrysalis  and  the  moth.  In  neither  of 
these  cases  is  life  really  extinct;  death  is  only  apparent  There  is  an  unbroken 
continuity  traceable  from  the  smaUest  seed  to  the  mightiest  tree,  from  the  embryo  in 
the  shell  to  the  monarch  of  the  air.  But  no  continuity  is  trticeable  between  the  raised 
and  the  buried  man ;  there  seems  an  awful  break.  Still  it  exists.  Whatever  theories 
are  accepted  as  satisfactory,  we  hold  to  the  scriptural  fact  that  the  new  body  will 
have  an  organic  eonnection  with  the  old;  otherwise,  the  resurrection  of  the  badj  is 
nothing  \)nt  a  pure  fiction.  Further,  in  answer  to  the  sceptic's  question,  "  With  wnat 
body  &  they  come?"  the  apostle's  language  enables  us  to  give  another  reply. 

III.  With  a  body  which  God  in  his  sovebeiontt  will  bestow.  "  God  raveth  it  a 
body  as  it  hath  jueased  him."  1.  That  God  clothes  life.  "  To  every  seed  Us  g«n 
body."  There  is  no  doubt  that  in  the  imivene  there  is  life  unclothed  by  matter.  It 
mar  be  so  with  the  angels :  it  is  so,  I  trow,  with  God  himself.  It  is  true  we  know 
nothiiiff  of  life  only  bf  its  clothing.  Arotmd  us  there  may  be  immeasurable  oceans  at 
naked  Ufe,  bat  we  only  know  something  of  the  embodied.  No  sdence  has  yet  toM  us 
what  life  is.  2.  That  God  clothes  life  with  the  fittest  body.  "  All  flesh  is  not  the  same 
flesh.*  Lift  has  boundless  varieties,  but  God  gives  to  each  its  fitting  body.  FmI 
points  to  the  lift  of  "  beasts,"  and  "  fish,"  and  '<  birds ;"  to  eadi  he  has  {^ven  bodies. 
The  hare  and  the  elephant,  tiie  wren  and  the  eagle,  the  ndnaow  and  the  leviathian,  all 
bave  bodies  fitted  to  the  peculiarities  of  their  distinctive  lif&    3,  That  Ood  dethM  lift 


50a  THK  FIBST  EPISTLE,  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  xt.  1— 6a 

koeordlng  to  his  own  ploasura.  "  Giveth  it  a  body  as  it  has  pleased  him."  He  chose  th« 
form,  the  hue,  the  gait  of  each  life.  Our  resurrection-body  will  be  as  it  "  hath  pleased 
him."  Tlien  it  will  be  beautiful,  for  be  is  the  God  of  all  taste,  the  Fountain  of  all 
beauty,  the  Standard  of  all  aesthetics.  Then  it  will  be  useful,  for  he  is  the  God  of 
benevolence.  Exquisitely  suited  to  our  present  sphere  are  the  bodies  through  which  he 
streams  into  us  the  most  exquisite  sensations,  and  through  which  we  convey  and  work 
out  the  best  things  within  us.  It  will  be  glorious.  "  There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun, 
and  another  glory  of  the  moon,  and  another  glory  of  the  stars  : "  so  also  with  the  resur- 
rection of  the  just.    Once  more^  to  the  question  of  the  sceptic  the  apostle  answers — 

IV.  With  a  body  that  shall  bb  a  vast  impbovement  dpon  the  old  one.  "  It  ii 
sown  in  corruption."  Between  the  buried  body  and  the  resurrection-body  we  have  • 
seiies  of  antitheses,  showing  the  vast  superiority  of  the  one  to  the  other.  1.  The  one  is 
corruptible,  the  other  is  incorruptible.  "  It  is  sown  in  corruption ;  it  is  raised  in  incor- 
ruption."  Our  present  frames  are  frail  and  dying.  The  resurrection-body  will  be 
incorruptible ;  it  will  be  deathless  as  the  immortal  spirit  itself.  2.  The  one  is  degraded ; 
the  other  is  glorious.  Our  present  corporeal  system  is  dishonoured,  but  it  is  raised  in 
glory.  How  great  the  difference  between  the  corrupting  seed  and  the  stately  plant 
and  full-blown  flower !  3.  The  one  is  weak,  and  the  other  is  powerful.  How  feeble  ia 
our  present  body  I  It  is  not  like  the  oak  that  can  stand  the  storms  of  centuries,  but  like 
the  firail  flower  that  withers  in  an  hour.  It  is  raised  in  power — power  that  shall  never 
fatigue  with  labour  or  wear  out  by  time.  4.  The  one  is  natural ;  the  other  is  spiritual. 
The  present  body  is  called  a  "  natural  body,"  probably  because  it  is  more  the  organ  of 
the  animal  than  the  spiritual ;  and  the  future  body  the  spiritual,  because  it  will  be  tha 
organ  of  the  intelligent  and  immortal  mind.  Man  has  in  him  two  principles  of  life — 
the  animal,  which  connects  him  with  the  material  and  local,  and  the  rational,  which 
connects  him  with  the  spiritual  and  the  infinite.  The  body  of  the  one  falls  at  death, 
and  will  be  required  no  more ;  the  perfected  body  of  the  other  will  be  taken  up  at  the 
resurrection,  and  will  be  continued  for  ever.  What  is  death  to  him  who  has  this  hope  ? 
Not  the  king  of  terrors,  but  tha  angel  ol  immortality  bearing  to  him  the  passport  of  an 
evar-blessed  future. 

Ver.  36. — Man :  his  birth,  death,  and  resttrreetion.  "  Thou  fool,  that  which  thou 
sowest  is  not  quickened,  except  it  die."  I  shall  take  the  verse  as  suggesting  three  great 
facts  in  man's  existence. 

I.  Man's  BiBTH.  The  text  suggests — I  do  not  say  it  was  intended  to  teach — that  man's 
birth  is  a  sowing  of  his  existence  in  the  earth.  The  sowing  of  the  grain  of  which  the 
apostle  speaks  is  not,  I  think,  so  analogous  to  the  burial  of  his  body  as  to  the  birth  of 
bis  existence.  The  sowing  of  the  grain  takes  place  before  its  death.  It  dies  after  it  is 
sown.  But  in  the  burial  of  the  body  the  man  has  previously  died.  Birth,  and  not  burial, 
then,  must  be  considered  as  sown.  Man,  at  birth,  is  sown  into  the  earth  like  seed,  in 
two  respects,  (1)  The  seed  existed  before  it  was  sown ;  man  existed  before  he  was 
bom.  (2)  The  seed  required  sowing  in  order  for  its  development.  Man  required  birth 
into  this  world  in  order  for  the  development  of  his  powers.  What  the  soil  is  to  tlje  seed 
the  external  universe  is  to  the  soul — the  developing  agent.  As  a  seed,  however,  man 
differs  from  all  other  germinant  existences  on  this  earth  in  several  respects.  1.  Be  has 
•  self-formative  power.  The  germs  of  all  other  life  run  into  forms  by  the  neces.sity  of 
their  nature.  The  grain  has  no  power  of  determining  what  shape  it  shall  take  in  its 
growth ;  man  has.  Man  has  the  power  of  determining  whether  he  shall  grow  into  a 
beast,  A  fiend,  or  an  angd.  2.  He  has  boundless  possibilities.  All  other  germinant  exist- 
ences on  earth  exhaust  themselves  in  their  growth.  The  time  comes  when  they  reach 
their  culmination  and  decay  sets  in.  Not  so  with  man.  He  is  a  seed  that  shall  grow 
for  ever.  At  birth,  then,  we  are  sown  into  this  world — immortal  seeds  we  idl  are  wU«Ji 
the  hand  of  the  great  Husbandman  scatters  over  the  earth. 

II.  Mar's  death.  His  death  is  here  represented  as  a  reduction  of  the  body  to  earth, 
not  the  reduction  of  himself^  "  That  which  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened,  except  it 
di«,"  In  the  grain  it  is  not  the  germ,  but  the  husk,  the  shell,  which  dies.  Tha 
wrappage  of  the  germ  was  made  to  rot.  Nothing  was  necessary  to  the  development 
of  the  life  which  it  contained.  The  human  body  is  the  mere  sheU  and  wrappage  of  tha 
man.    It  wu  made  to  die.    Death  is  an  essential  element  in  tiie  constitution  of  tha 


OH.  XT.  1—58.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  603 

world.  It  la  in  all  material  existences.  It  has  been  said  that  one-seventh  of  our 
earth's  crust  k  comprised  of  limestone,  and  limestone  contains  the  sepulchres  of 
departed  existences.  We  feed  on  death,  and  by  our  own  death  become  food  for  future 
existences.  The  husk  is  not  the  germ,  the  body  is  not  the  man.  It  is  his  house  that 
must  crumble,  it  is  his  garment  that  must  wear  cut. 

III.  Man's  bbsubbbction.  What  is  his  resurrection  ?  A  springing-up  of  his  being 
from  the  earth.  After  the  death  of  the  grain  there  is  a  resurroction  of  the  seed  that 
comes  forth  into  new  forms  of  life  and  beauty.  It  is  not  the  husk  that  rises,  but  the 
germ.  After  the  burial  of  the  body  the  man  comes  forth  into  new  life.  The  body  rots, 
the  num  rises.  Whether  Paul  refers  here  to  the  resurrection  of  the  body  from  the  grave 
or  not,  one  thing  is  clear,  that  at  djeath  there  is  a  real  resurrection  of  the  soul.  As 
when  the  husks  of  the  seed  rot  in  the  earth  the  seed  itself  is  quickened,  so  when  the 
body  falls  into  the  dust  the  soul  springs  forth  into  new  life — a  life  of  woe  or  bliss,  accord- 
ing to  iti  moral  character.  There  is  a  resurrection,  a  standing-up  of  every  soul  at 
death.  "  The  dust  returns  to  dust,  the  soul  to  God  who  gave  it."  Will  the  body  itself 
rise  from  the  grave  after  it  has  gone  to  dust  ?  It  may,  and  we  see  some  evidence 
to  enable  us  to  cherish  the  cheering  hope.  Whether  this  be  a  delusion  or  not,  one 
thing  is  certain — the  soul  rises  up  at  the  fall  of  the  body  to  its  dust,  and  this  is  a  most 
real  and  soj^mn  resurrection.  We  "know  that  when  the  earthly  house  of  this  our 
tabernacle  is  dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God  above,  a  house  not  made  with  hands, 
eternal  in  tha  neavens." 

Ver.  41. — Diversity  in  the  heavenly  inhabitant$,  "  One  star  differeth  from  another  star 
in  glory."  The  idea  of  Paul  unquestionably  is  that  there  is  as  great  a  variety  amongst 
redeemed  men  in  the  celestial  world  as  there  is  in  the  orbs  of  heaven,  that  saint  differs 
from  sunt  as  star  fl:om  star  in  the  midnight  vault.  We  offer  three  remarks  on  this 
subject    Such  a  variety  is — 

L  A  FACT  WELL  SDSTAiNBDw  1.  It  ii  Sustained  by  all  analogy.  Variety  reigns 
through  every  part  of  nature,  not  only  in  celestial,  but  in  terrestrial  spheres.  No  two 
objects  are  exactly  alike.  This  variety  reveals  the  illimitable  inventiveness  of  the 
Divine  mind,  and  gives  to  the  universe  its  eternal  freshness  and  transporting  charms. 
2.  It  meets  the  irMnctive  love  for  the  new  in  human  souls.  AU  souls  loathe  monotony 
and  crave  for  the  fresh.  A  dead  uniformity  would  crush  out  its  life.  3.  It  agrees 
with  the  varieties  found  amongst  men  here.  No  two  minds  are  alike  here.  They  differ 
in  the  kind  and  measure  of  faculty,  differ  in  the  educational  processes  through  which 
they  have  passed,  differ  in  the  positions  which  they  occupy  in  relation  to  all  objective 
truths  and  realities.  Is  it  conceivable  that  all  these  varieties  can  be  lost  in  the  higher 
world,  that  all  souls  will  run  into  a  common  mould  ?  4.  It  accords  with  the  general 
teaching  of  the  Scriptures.  Paul  speaks  of  the  temple  of  the  good  as  composed  of  gold, 
silver,  and  precious  stones.  Christ  refers  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  as  sustaining  the 
most  honourable  positions  at  the  heavenly  feast.  Ay,  ay,  there  must  be  varieties  there. 
There  are  the  speculative  in  mind  and  the  practical,  the  imaginative  and  the  logical,  the 
intuitive  and  the  philosophical ;  there  are  those  who  have  been  advancing  in  intelligence 
and  power  for  millenniums,  and  those  who  have  just  commenced  their  heavenly  studies, 
with  those  of  every  intervening  stage.    Such  a  variety  ii^— 

II.  EassNYiAL  TO  SOCIAL  BLESSEDNESS.  Suppose  a  Society,  all  of  whose  members 
shall  be  exactly  alike  in  temperament,  in  experience,  in  attainments,  in  articles  of 
faith,  in  modes  of  thought,  and  in  forms  of  expression.  Could  there  in  such  a  circle  be 
any  social  enjoyment  ?  What  one  thought,  all  thought ;  what  one  felt,  all  felt :  why, 
such  a  state  of  things  would  be  incompatible,  not  only  with  social  enjoyment,  but 
with  sodal  life.  The  monotony  would  become  intolerable.  The  utmost  variety  in 
specuIatiTe  thought  is  compatible  with  unity  of  heart;  and  the  larger  variety  m 
spiritual  temperament  and  conception  in  any  circle — ^where  all  hearts  are  one — the 
higher  the  social  enjoyment.  Most  unwise,  most  unrighteous,  most  impious,  have  been 
the  attempts  of  ecclesiastics  to  force  on  all  men  the  same  system  of  thought  and  form 
of  worship.    Such  a  variety  is — 

IIL  OoNBiSTiiNT  WITH  THK  HiQBEST  imiTT.  "  One  stst  dlffereth  team  another  star 
in  glory.*    1.  Whatever  variety  in  the  stars,  they  have  one  centre.    Some  larger,  some 

"  ir,  soBe  dimmer,  some  brighter,  some  moving  mwe  quickly,  and  soma  mor« 


504  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa    [ch.  xt.  1—58 


slowly,  yet  all  move  round  the  same  central  orb:  so  with  sainted  scuIb.  Whatever 
their  diversities,  they  revolve  round  one  great  centre — God.  God  in  nature  and  God  in 
Christ.  2.  Whatever  variety  in  the  stars,  they  are  controlled  by  one  law.  Attraction 
moves  all,  regulates  all,  keeps  each  in  its  place  and  siieed.  One  law,  the  law  of  love, 
rules  all  sainted  souls  above,  however  illimitable  their  varieties.  3.  Whatever  variety 
in  the  stars,  they  fulfil  one  mission.  They  all  catch  the  light  from  the  central  orb,  and 
flash  their  borrowed  radiance  abroad  through  all  their  spheres.  So  with  louli  abovei 
They  are  all  the  recipients  and  reflectors  of  Divine  light  and  love. 

Ver.  45. —  The  two  Adami.  "The  first  man," etc.  A  specification  of  some  of  tha 
points  between  the  two  Adams  of  resemblances  and  of  dissimilarity  will  suggest  a  Una 
of  spiritual  thought  at  once  interesting,  instructive,  and  practical. 

L  The  rbsemblancb.  1.  The  existence  of  each  rose  not  in  the  ordinary  eowse  of 
nature.  Neither  came  by  the  ordinary  laws  of  human  generation.  The  first  was 
formed  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  derived  his  spirit  from  the  breath  of  God.  The 
second  was  conceived  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost.  The  pedigne  of  each  is  unparalleled  in  the 
history  of  the  race.  2.  The  existeuce  of  each  commenced  free  from  the  sliyhtfst  taint 
of  sin.  The  first  was  created  in  the  imnge  of  God  ;  all  his  faculties  were  well  balanced 
and  free  from  all  bias  to  wrong.  The  laiter  was  "harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from 
sinners."  3.  The  existence  of  each  had  a  naiure  ca/iai/e  ^<emptai!ion.  Temptability 
is  an  attribute  of  all  created  intelligences.  Where  tin  re  is  no  power  to  go  wrong  there 
is  no  virtue  in  keeping  right.  The  first  Adam  was  tempted,  and  he  was  conquered ;  the 
second  was  tempted,  and  he  triumphed.  4.  The  character  of  each  exerts  a  momentou* 
influence  upon  the  whole  race.  The  character  of  the  first  generated  a  mural  atmosphere 
in  which  myriads  of  his  posterity  were  born  and  brought  up — an  atmospliere  of  sensuality, 
ambition,  selfishness,  unbelief,  etc.  The  character  of  the  second  generated  a  moral 
atmosphere  into  whicli  his  true  disci[iles  enter  by  lailh  in  him — an  atmosphere  that  ia 
morally  salubrious,  snnny,  and  invigorating.  He  who  lives  in  tne  first  atmosphere 
is  still  in  Adam  and  is  earthly.  He  who  lives  in  the  second  atmosphere  is  Christly 
and  is  spiritual. 

II.  The  dissimilaritt.  1.  The  one  had  a  sublimer  connection  with  God  than  the 
other.  Adam  at  first  was.  a  Divine  man,  the  otfspriug,  representative,  and  steward  of 
God.  The  second  was  God-Man.  God  was  in  him  in  a  special  sense,  unfolding  truths, 
working  miracles,  and  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself.  He  was  God  "  manifested 
in  the  flesh."  The  one  yielded  to  the  devil ;  the  other  conquered  him.  The  first  gave 
way  to  the  tempter;  the  second  stood  against  him,  resisted  him,  and  bruised  his  head. 
2.  The  one  possessed  a  higher  type  of  moral  excellence  than  the  other.  The  character 
of  the  first  was  innocence,  not  holiness.  Holiness  implies  intelligence,  convictions, 
efforts,  habits,  etc.  This  had  not  Adam  ;  hence  he  gave  way  to  the  first  and  simplest 
temptation.  This  holiness  Christ  had  in  the  sublimest  degree;  and  he  triumphed 
over  principalities  and  powers  of  evil,  and  made  a  "  show  of  them  openly."  S.  The 
influence  of  the  one  upon  the  race  has  been  infinitely  pemieioui,  wat  of  the  other 
infinitely  beneficent.  The  first  planted  that  upas,  whose  pestiferous  branches  haTe 
spread  over  all  the  men  that  have  been  and  that  are,  and  whose  poisonous  fruit 
all  have  tasted  and  been  injured.  The  nther  planted  that  tree  of  life,  which  is  growing 
day  by  day,  and  is  destined  to  grow  until  its  branches,  bearing  fruit  for  the  healing  of 
the  nations,  shall  spread  over  the  world  and  give  life  to  all.  4.  The  moral  influeuce 
of  the  one  is  destined  to  decrease,  of  the  other  to  increase.  Thoogh  the  moral  influence 
of  the  first  Adam  has  been  universal  and  imperial  for  ages,  and  is  so  still,  it  is  destined 
to  contract  in  its  dimensions  and  to  weaken  in  its  power.  The  influence  of  the  second, 
on  the  contrary,  is  to  widen  its  sphere  and  increase  its  power,  until  it  shall  encompass 
the  wide  world,  and  strike  the  highest  moral  inspirations  into  all  souls.  ■'  Wiere  sin 
ibounded,  grace  will  much  more  abound."  The  kingdoms  of  our  God  shall  becoma 
the  kingdoms  of  his  Christ,  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever. 

Vers.  46 — 49. — Tht  two  grand  types  of  character,  "  Howbeit  that  was  not,*  ate. 
The  words  show — 

L  That  man  has  set  before  him  two  moral  ihaoes  ob  ttfks  of  characteb  -tha 
"earthy  "and  the  "heavenly,"    These  two  are  essentially  distinct  in  the  spring  and 


a.s?.l— 6&]    THE  nBST  EFISTLB  TO  THE  (X)BINTHIAN&  605 

ipherM  cf  their  activities.  1.  The  one  is  urmuyua,  the  other  tpMtudl.  The  earthly 
man  is  material,  partially  developed,  and  gross.  (1)  In  his  views  of  happiness. 
All  his  pleasures  are  of  a  sensuous  order.  (2)  In  his  views  of  wealth.  He  knows  of  no 
man  that  is  rich  but  he  who  possesses  worldly  property.  (3)  In  his  views  of  dignity. 
The  only  honourable  man  to  him  is  he  who  occupies  the  highest  worldly  position,  and 
who  moves  in  the  mera  pageantry  that  dazzles  the  sensual  eye.  He  is,  m  one  word, 
a  man  of  the  flesh.  He  sees  only  the  fleshly,  appreciates  only  the  fleshly,  enjoys  only 
the  fleshly.  On  the  contrary,  the  other  is  Bpirituai.  He  lives  behind  the  visible 
phenomena,  realizes  the  spiritual,  tho  eternal.  To  him  the  invisible  is  the  only  reality, 
moral  excellence  the  only  wealth  and  dignity.  Though  in  the  world,  he  is  not  of  the 
world.  He  has  his  citizenship  in  heaven.  2.  The  one  is  practically  selfish,  the  other  is 
benevolent.  The  earthly  man  is  controlled  in  everything  by  a  regard  to  his  own 
pleasures  and  aggrandizements.  Self  is  the  centre  and  the  circumference  of  all  his 
activities,  at  once  the  lord  of  his  faculties  and  the  god  of  his  worship.  All  outside  of 
himself— even  the  imiverse  itself — he  values  so  far  and  no  farther  than  as  it  serves 
him.  On  the  contrary,  the  heavenly  man  is  l)enevolent.  The  social  element  within 
him  controls  the  egotistic ;  his  personal  feelings  are  submerged  in  the  ever-rising  seas  of 
sympathy  with  humanity  and  God.  Like  Christ,  he  "  pleases  not  himself,"  and,  like 
Paul,  he  would  be  "  accursed  "  to  help  others.  3.  The  one  is  practically  atheistic,  the 
other  is  godly.  The  earthly  man  sees  nothing  but  natural  law,  order,  etc.  "  God  is  not 
in  ail  his  thoughts."  The  universe  to  him  is  only  an  eternal  or  a  self-prodaced  and 
self-regulating  machine,  a  house  that  either  has  never  had  a  builder  or  whose  builder 
has  deserted  it.  The  other — ^the  heavenly  man — sees  God  in  all ;  like  the  psalmist, 
gets  him  before  him ;  like  Saoch,  walks  ever  with  him.  Such  are  the  two  images  or 
types  of  character  that  are  set  before  every  man. 

II.  That  man  does  beab  the  ome,  he  should  beab  thx  otheb.  Account  for  it  how 
you  like,  every  man,  in  the  fiist  stages  of  his  life,  bears  the  image  of  the  " earthy." 
He  is  sensual,  selfish,  godless.  This  fact,  which  is  too  obvious  to  need  or  even  to 
justify  illustration,  is  at  once  the  crime  and  the  calamity  of  the  race.  But  whilst  we 
do  bear  this  image  at  first,  we  should  strive  to  Ijear  the  other.  "  We  shall  also  "  (or  as 
Dr.  Davidson  rraders  it,  "let  as  also")  "bear  th«  image  of  the  heavenly."  Let  us 
do  it:  1,  Because  it  is  right.  This  heavenly  image,  embodying  all  virtue,  realizes 
the  soul's  highest  ideal  of  excellence.  It  is  just  that  for  which  we  unconsciously 
hunger,  and  for  which  we  shall  hunger  for  ever  unless  we  get  it.  2.  Because  it  is 
practicable.  (1)  We  have  the  model  in  its  most  imitable  form.  Christ  is  the  model. 
He  was  pre-eminently  spiritual,  benevolent,  godly ;  and  never  was  there  a  character 
more  imitable  than  Christ's — the  most  admircile,  the  most  transparent,  and  the  most 
utKhangeable.  We  can  never  imitate  a  character  that  we  cannut  understand,  admire, 
and  find  always  the  same.  Christ  was  all  this.  (2)  We  have  the  means  in  the  most 
e£fective  forms.  The  gospel  reveals  the  model,  supplies  the  motives,  and  pledges  the 
spiritual  influences  of  heaven.  3.  Because  it  is  urgent.  To  do  this  is  the  grand 
mission  of  life.  Unless  the  work  is  fulfilled,  our  existence  becomes  a  failure  and  a 
curse.  To  pass  from  the  "  earthy  "  to  the  "  heavenly,"  is  to  pass  from  darkness  to  light, 
from  sin  to  holiness,  from  Satan  to  God,  from  Pandemonium  to  Paradise. 

Conclusion.  Here  is  a  test  of  character.  Conventional  evangelism  concludes  that 
all  who  adopt  certain  tenets,  join  certain  sects,  and  attend  to  certain  religious  ordinances 
are  of  the  heavenly  type  and  fold.  A  tremendous  mistake  is  this !  Without  uncharit- 
ableness,  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  vast  majority  of  what  are  called  Churches  bear 
the  image  of  the  earthly ;  they  are  selfish,  sensuous,  and  practically  godless.  Here 
also  is  a  guide  for  preachers.  Unless  you  get  men  from  the  earthly  to  the  heavoaly  type 
of  life,  wliat  boots  your  sermons,  with  all  their  ratiocination  and  rhetoric  ?  Qet  tiieir 
■ouls  out  of  the  earthly  into  the  heavenly,  and  in  the  heavenly  go  on  h")M'"g  ip  • 
•haraoter  saited  to  the  higher  hierarchies  of  being, 

*  8o  build  we  up  the  being  that  we  arSk 
Thai  drinkiag  in  the  soul  of  tliingt. 
If*  sliaU  be  wise  perforce :  and  wliile  inspired 
I^  elioice,  and  oonsoious  that  the  will  is  fn»t 
unswerving  shall  we  move,  as  if  Impelled 
By  stilet  neoessity— along  th«  fath 


606  THE  FIRST  EPIS'lliB  TO  THE  COBINTHIAKB.     [ctl  rr.  1— «fi 

Of  order  and  of  good.    Whato'er  we  seat 

Whate'er  we  feel,  by  agency  direct 

Or  indirect,  stiall  tend  to  feed  and  nniM 

Our  faculties,  slinll  fix  in  calmer  seats 

Of  moral  strength,  and  raise  to  loftier  beightt 

Of  love  Divine,  our  intellectual  lonL" 

(Wordiwoftt.) 

Vers.  60-^64. — Corporeal  transformation.  "Now  thii  I  say,  brethren,  that  flesh 
and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  Ghxl ;  neither  doth  corruptiou  inherit  incor- 
ruption.  Behold,  I  show  you  a  mastery ;  We  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shaU  all  be 
changed,  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump :  for  the  trumpet 
shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed.  For 
this  corruptible  must  put  on  inoorruption,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality, 
Su  when  this  coiruptible  shall  have  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  shall  have  put 
on  immortality,  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying  that  is  written,  Death  ii 
swallowed  up  in  victory."  Paul  here  Bpeaks  of  a  bodily  transformation  that  is  indifh 
pensable,  certain,  instantaneous,  and  glorious. 

I.  Here  is  a  transformation  that  is  indibfinbable.  "  This  I  say,  brethren,  that 
flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  Ood."  Its  indispensability  is  not  for 
this  state  of  things,  but  for  the  state  of  bliss  in  the  celestial  world.  "  Flesh  and  blood," 
of  course,  means  our  mortal  nature.  "  Cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  Gtxl,''  the  heavenly 
world.  He  does  not  say  why  it  cannot — whether  the  state  of  the  atmosphere,  or  the 
means  of  subsistence,  or  the  force  of  gravitation,  or  the  forms  and  means  of  vision,  or 
the  conditions  of  receiving  and  communicating  knowledge,  or  the  nature  of  the  services 
required.  He  does  not  go  into  reasons,  but  boldly  states  the  fact  that  it  could  not  be. 
"  i^'lesh  and  blood  "  can  no  more  exist  yonder,  than  the  tenants  of  the  ocean  can  exist 
on  the  sun-burnt  hills.  In  such  corporeal  transformations  there  is  nothing  extraordinary, 
for  naturalists  point  us  to  spheres  of  existence  where  they  are  u  regular  as  the  laws 
of  nature. 

II.  Here  is  a  transformation  that  is  oebtaih.  "  Behold,  I  show  you  a  mystery."  The 
word  "  mystery  "  here  does  not  point  to  the  unknowable,  but  to  the  hitherto  imknown. 
What  the  apostle  means  is — 1  state  to  you  as  a  fact  that  which  has  not  hitherto  been 
fully  known,  viz.  that  "  we  shall  all  be  changed."  "  We  shall  not  all  sleep."  Had  Paul 
an  idea  either  that  he  himself  would  escape  death,  or  that  the  resurrection-day  was  just 
at  hand  ?  If  he  had,  he  here  shows  himself,  as  in  some  other  places,  not  infallible,  but 
otherwise ;  for  he  did  die,  and  at  that  period  the  resurrection-Klay  was  far  away  in  the 
abysses  of  the  future.  His  words,  however,  clearly  teach :  1.  That  some  would  be 
living  when  the  day  dawned.  "  As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah,  so  shall  it  be  in  the  days 
of  the  Son  of  man ;  they  ate,  they  drank,"  etc.  2.  That  both  those  who  were  living  in 
the  earth  and  sleeping  in  the  dust  would  undergo  corporeal  transformation.  "  We  i^all 
all  be  changed." 

1X1.  Here  is  a  transformation  that  is  instantansocb.  "In  a  moment,  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye,"  that  is,  in  the  shortest  conceivable  period.  At  a  moment  when 
the  living  population  least  expects  it,  the  blast  of  the  "  trumpet "  shall  be  heard,  and 
the  transformation  be  effected.  "The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the 
night,"  etc 

lY.  Here  is  a  transformation  that  is  qlobious.  "  For  this  corruptible  must  put  on 
incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must  pit  on  immortality."  The  transformation  is  from 
mortality  to  immortality,  from  the  dying  to  the  undying ;  "  death  will  be  swallowed  up 
in  victory."  "  The  idea,"  says  one, "  may  be  taken  of  a  whirlpool  or  maelstrom  that 
absorbs  i^l  that  comes  near  it."  The  sense  is,  he  would  remove  or  abolish  death  for  ever 
from  numkind. 

Yer.  63. — JJitmind  etcehangtngthe  mortal  for  the  immorM.  "And  thit  mortal  mnit 
put  on  immortality,"  etc.  Paul  uses  this  language  in  relation  to  the  lody.  What  he 
means,  I  presume,  is  that  the  mortal  shall  be  exchanged  for  the  immortaC  To  put  on 
"immortality"  upon  mortality  Ib  scarcely  conceivable.  But  the  receiving  of  the 
immortal  instead  of  the  mortal  is  what  we  can  appreciate,  and  what  we  may  well 
liesire.    When  the  apostle  calls  upon  us  elsewhere  to  put  on  the  "  new  man,"  h«  meani 


dS.  tv.  1— fi8.]     Tflfi  FIRST  BPlStLfi  TO  THB  CORIKTHIANS.  60» 

exchange  the  "  old  man  "  for  the  new — the  old  moral  character  for  the  new  and  Ohristly 
character.  It  may  be  both  lawful,  I  think,  and  perhaps  useful  to  use  the  words  iu 
another  sense  than  that  in  which  Paul  employs  them.  We  may  apply  them  not  to  tha 
material  part  of  human  nature,  but  to  the  mental  and  moral.  And  because  such  an 
application  may  prove  suggestive  of  practical  thoughts,  we  shall  now  view  them  in  this 
light.  There  is  much  iu  the  human  mind,  in  its  ideas,  principles  of  action,  character, 
etc.,  that  is  essentially  mortal,  aud  that  must  sooner  or  later  be  exchanged  for  the 
immortaL     We  observe,  then — 

I.  That  what  is  mortal  in  its  system  or  THonoHT  must  be  exchanged  for  the 
immortal.  All  errors  of  judgment  are  mortal ;  they  are  perishable,  and  sooner  or  later 
must  perish.  And  what  system  of  human  thought  is  not  intermixed  with  id^as  not 
true  to  fact  ?  1.  Look  at  systems  of  philosophy.  Many  old  systems  of  philosophy 
have  already  died  out,  because  of  the  errors  that  were  found  in  them ;  and  existing 
systems,  because  they  are  often  contradictory  one  to  another,  reveal  their  errabiiity,  and 
consequently  must  iiie.  What  is  changing  is  mortal  All  schools  of  psychologicftl 
science,  the  sensational,  the  idealistic,  the  mystic,  and  the  eclectic,  are  shifting  as  the 
clouds.  It  will  not,  it  must  not  be  always  so ;  the  mortal  must  "  put  on  "  the  immortal, 
the  true  must  take  the  place  of  the  lalse  in  the  realm  of  thought.  2.  Look  at  systems 
of  theology.  How  contradictory  one  toward  another  in  many  things  are  most  of  the 
systems  of  theology  now  prevalent!  And  what  is  worse,  how  coutradictory  are  they  to 
some  of  the  most  vital  things  embodied  in  the  life  and  teachings  of  Jesus  as  recorded 
by  the  four  evangelists!  Many  of  tlie  old  systems  have  died.  Some  arc  dying  now, 
aud  all  will  sooner  or  later  die ;  for  they  are  rotten  with  error.  The  mortal  must  "  put 
on"  the  immortal.    Human  souls  will  one  day  have  the  "  truth  as  it  is  iu  JeaiUb" 

"Our  little  systems  have  their  day; 
They  have  their  day,  and  pass  away." 

n.  That  what  la  mortal  in  the  elements  of  hdman  chabaoteb  mnst  be  exebangad 
for  the  immortaL  Analyze  the  character  of  unrenewed  men — alas  I  the  vast  majority, 
not  only  of  the  human  race,  but  even  of  professing  Christians — and  you  will  find  monil 
principles  that  must  die  out  if  there  be  a  God  of  justice  and  benevolence  in  the  universe. 
Such  principles,  for  example,  as  avarice,  envy,  pride,  malice,  ambition,  and  selfishness, 
which  is  in  truth  the  root  of  all  evil.  The  human  mind  was  never  formed  to  bo 
inspired,  or  indeed  to  be  influenced  in  any  measure  by  these.  The  iact  that  they  are 
antagonistic  to  the  moral  constitution  of  the  human  soul,  to  the  character  of  the  Maker 
and  Manager  of  the  universe,  and  to  the  order'  and  well-being  of  all,  show  that  they 
must  sooner  or  later  die  out  of  existence.  I  have  the  hope  that  human  so'ds  will  one 
day  put  off  this  mortal  and  "  put  on  "  the  immortal — "  Righteousness,  joy,  and  peace 
in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  etc.    "  Marvel  nut  that  I  say  unto  you.  Ye  must  be  born  again." 

III.  That  what  is  mortal  in  the  institutions  or  human  life  must  be  exchanged 
for  the  immortal.  1.  Our  political  institutions  are  mortal.  Human  governments  are 
constantly  dying.  They  spring  up  and  flourish  for  a  certain  time,  and  then  are  swept 
from  the  earth.  The  unwisdom  in  their  method  of  management,  the  unrighteousness 
of  some  of  their  laws,  the  avarice,  the  tyranny,  and  haughtiness  of  those  in  power,  and 
their  constant  fattening  upon  the  over-taxed  millions,  give  mortality  to  governments. 
Man  will  one  day  put  oil'  these  mortal  governments  and  put  on  the  immortal,  the 
government  of  common  sense,  common  justice,  common  benevolence.  Men  are  craving 
not  for  the  aristocratic  or  democratic,  but  for  the  tneocratio,  the  reign  of  God, 
which  is  the  reign  of  honesty  and  love.  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  will  one  day 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,"  etc.  2.  Our  ecdesiastical  institutions  are  mortal. 
Whether  they  are  Papal,  Episcopal,  Wesleyan,  or  Congregational,  they  are  more  or  less 
mixed  with  error  and  must  die.  The  great  "  cloud  of  witnesses,"  the  Church  of  the 
Firstborn,  reached  their  blessed  destiny  before  churches  or  chapels  existed.  "  QoA  is 
a  Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  Indeed, 
whatever  institutions,  political,  ecclesiastical,  or  social,  that  have  in  them  a  mixture  of 
error,  unwisdom,  and  injiistice,  must  be  exchanged  for  the  immortal,  namely,  a  "  king- 
dom  that  cannot  be  mored." 

lY.  That  what  is  mortal  in  the  typos  of  human  oreatnkss  must  be  exchanged  for 
tha  ImmortaL    Ii  all  men  there  is,  in  m  :ire  or  less  intensity,  a  thirst  for  gTMtUii,  bat 


sod  THE  FIBST  EPISTLB  TO  TnJii  OOKlNTHIANS.    ton- xv.  i— 66 

thdr  ideas  or  types  of  greatness  widely  differ.  Some  see  the  highest  greatness  in  the 
nuUionaire,  some  in  the  triumphant  conqueror,  some  in  the  man  with  a  crown  on  his 
head,  some  in  the  fools  who  boast  of  their  ancestry  and  their  high-sounding  titles. 
But  such  types  of  greatness  as  these  are  utterly  false.  They  agree  neither  with  reason 
nor  the  conscience  of  humanity.  Because  they  are  false  they  are  mortal,  and  they  will 
have  to  he  exchanged  for  the  immortal.  The  time  will  come  when  men  will  regard 
Christ  as  the  only  true  type  of  greatness.  They  will  give  him  the  "  Name  ahove  every 
name."  In  iA  things  in  their  daily  life  and  conversation,  he  will  have  the  pre- 
eminence. 

C)oNOLC8ioH.  What  a  glorious  change  awaits  humanity  1  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the 
resurrection  of  the  body,  an  event  which  is  confessedly  mysterious :  it  may  be  far,  far 
distant,  and  this  we  have  no  power  to  hasten  or  impede.  But  there  is  a  more  glorious 
resurrection — a  resurrection  of  the  human  soul  from  the  false,  the  unrighteous,  the 
impure,  to  the  true,  the  right  and  the  holy — a  resurrection,  thank  God,  taking  place 
every  i^y  in  the  world,  and  a  resurrection  which  all  men  may  either  hasten  or  impede 
— their  duty  the  former,  their  crime  the  latter.  "Awake  to  righteousness  and 
sin  not." 

Tera.  66 — 67. — Death  in  idea.  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  ating  ?"  eto.  These  words, 
which  are  a  shout  of  victory  evoked  by  what  has  preceded,  suggest  to  us  the  populai 
and  the  Christian  ideas  of  death.    Notice — 

L  The  pofulab  ioba.  The  language  implies  that  the  bulk  of  the  race  view  death  not 
as  the  writer  did ;  that  the  idea  to  them  had  a  "  sting  "  a  "  victory,"  and  a  connection 
with  felt  guilt.  1.  The  popular  idea  has  a  sting.  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  " 
Tlids  is  a  vivid  personification  of  the  last  enemy.  The  world  sedulously  shuts  up  its 
heart  against  the  idea ;  but  there  is  not  an  individual  into  wliose  bosom  it  does  not  force 
its  way  at  times,  and  like  a  serpent  it  stints.  There  is  no  idea  that  stings  an  ungodly 
man  like  the  idea  of  death.  2.  The  popular  idea  has  a  victory.  It  not  only  stings 
like  a  serpent,  but  crushes  like  a  conqueror.  I  speak  not  of  the  victory  which  death 
obtains  over  the  body,  but  1  speak  of  a  more  crushing  "  victory  "  than  this — a  victory 
over  the  soul.  Wheuever  the  idea  takes  possession  of  a  worldly  mind,  it  is  a  victor  ; 
the  soul  is  prostrated,  the  man  is  unmanned.  3.  The  popular  idea  has  a/eZ<  connection 
with  tin.  "  The  sting  of  death  is  sin ;  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  Law."  The  siimer's 
sense  of  guilt  will  be  according  to  bis  knowledge  of  Law,  and  the  terror  of  death  will  be 
according  to  his  sense  of  guilt.  It  is  felt  guilt  that  gives  a  "  sting  "  and  "  victory  "  to 
the  idea  of  dying.  All  t^t  is  horrific  in  the  idea  starts  from  a  sin-stricken  conscience. 
Such,  then,  is  the  popular  idea  of  death.  Wherever,  whether  in  Christian  or  heathen 
lands,  in  ancient  or  modem  times,  Christianity  is  not  received  in  its  moral  ugnificance 
and  spirit,  you  find  it. 

IL  TiK  Cheistian  idea.  1.  The  idea  has  neither  "  sting  "  nor  "  victory."  "  0  death, 
where  is  thy  stmg?  O  grave,  where  is  thy  victory?"  By  implication  they  once 
existed,  but  they  are  gone.  2.  The  Christian  idea  has,  instead  of  "sting"  and 
"  victory,"  raptwe  and  triumph.  "  Thanks  be  to  Glod,  which  giveth  us  the  victory." 
The  victor  has  become  the  victim ;  the  anguish  of  the  sling  has  given  place  to  the 
ecstasy  of  the  song.  8.  The  Christian  idea  comes  to  man  through  one  medium.  The 
old  terrific  and  popular  idea  of  death  has  given  way  to  a  bright  and  a  glorious  one, 
"  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  How  does  Christ  give  this  idea  ?  By  awakening  in 
the  loul  a  new  spiritual  life.  But  how  does  a  new  spiritual  life  do  this  ?  Because  it 
involves  the  following  things: — (1)  A  stronger  sympathy  with  the  Ood  of  our  destiny 
than  with  amy  other  being.  Where  there  is  a  moral  oneness  with  that  Ood  in 
"  whose  hand  our  breath  is,"  there  never  can  be  any  dread  of  death.  But  a  dread  of 
Ood  must  give  a  dread  of  death.  (2)  A  stronger  sympathy  with  the  spiritual  than 
with  th»  material.  Much  of  the  fearfulness  of  death  springs  from  the  idea  of  separa- 
tion from  tiie  dear  objects  of  our  attachment.  Wherever,  therefore,  the  supreme  attach- 
ments are  on  the  material,  the  idea  of  death  must  be  distressing  on  account  of  the 
separation  it  involves ;  but  where  the  most  sympathy  is  with  the  unseen  and  the  etcnal, 
death  will  be  regard^  not  as  severing  connections,  but  as  uniting  them  in  doMt 
fellowship.  (3)  A  stronger  sympathy  with  the  future  world  than  with  the  present. 
Where  the  previuling  sympathiM  at  the  soul  are  with  the  Divine,  spiritual,  and  the  fatote^ 


oa.  XT.  1—58.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.  50i) 

the  idea  of  death  will  be  bright  and  jubilant.  This  threefold  sympathy,  then,  it 
essential  in  the  nature  of  things  to  the  existi:nce  of  this  felicitous  and  triumphant  idea 
of  death. 

Ver.  58. — The  work  of  tvorki.  "Therefore,  my  beloved  brethren,  be  ye  Btpati- 
fast,  unmuvable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  ye  know  thai 
your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord."  "  Therefore."  This  is  the  practical  conclusion 
of  the  sublime  argument  which  Paul  had  conducted  on  the  resurrection,  in  the  prucedinfj; 
verses.  All  true  ilocirines  lead  to  practice.  "  Therefore  " — ^because  death  is  not  your 
end,  because  you  are  to  live  body  anil  soul  in  a  future  state — "  be  ye  steadfast." 

I.  The  work  of  soul-restoration  is  sPEClALIiT  Divine.  It  is  "  the  work  of  the  Lord." 
Ihe  work  of  the  Lord  is  illimitable.  The  universe  is  his  handiwork,  and  all  its 
movements  are  his  operations.  Providence  is  his  work.  But  the  "  work  "  referred  to 
in  the  text,  viz.  the  spiriiual  restoration  of  mankind,  is  in  a  special  sense  his.  It  is 
his  great  work.  Isaiah  speaks  of  it  as  a  creation  that  will  eclipse  in  glory  tlie  material 
universe.  Jesus  always  sjiokc  of  it  as  the  great  work.  1.  Think  of  the  preparation  for 
tliis  work.  Four  thousand  years  were  occupied,  involving  a  long  series  of  sacrifices,  priests, 
seers,  miracles,  as  preliminary.  'Z.  Think  of  the  sacrifices  made  to  accomplish  this 
work.  Christ  came  into  this  world,  and  the  Incarnate  liied,  suffered,  and  iiiml  here, 
etc.  3.  Think  of  the  unctasing  agency  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  order  to  effeet  this  work, 
lie  is  always  striving  with  men  from  age  to  age  and  in  all  lands.  4.  Think  of  the 
wonderful  results  of  this  work.  Millions  of  lost  souls  redeeuii^d  to  the  knowledge, 
image,  fellowship,  and  service  of  Almighty  God.  What  is  the  value  of  one  soul  ? 
What  is  the  influence  that  one  soul  can  exert  on  the  universe?  This,  then,  may 
emphatically  be  called  the  "  work  of  the  Lord."  It  is  the  field  which  he — the  great 
Husbandman — has  been  cultivating.  He  will  make  it  one  day  his  choicest  garden. 
It  is  the  temple  which  he — the  great  Architect — has  been  building ;  it  will  excel  in 
glory  all  former  structures.  It  is  the  "new  creation"  which  he  is  accomplishing;  beiore 
it  will  pale  into  dimness  all  other  productions. 

II.  The  work  of  soul-restoration  demands  the  most  eabnebt  efforts  or  HANKmn. 
"Steadfest,  unmovable."  There  are  some  works  of  the  Lord  in  which  we  cannot 
engage.  We  cannot  help  to  control  the  ocean,  guide  the  stars,  or  even  create  a  blade 
ot  grass,  but  here  we  are  "labourers  together  with  him."  1.  Our  labour  must  be 
invincible.  The  two  words,  "steadfast "  and  "  unmovable,"  express  this.  So  many  are 
the  impulses  within,  so  many  are  the  forces  without,  opposing  the  work,  that  nothing 
but  an  invincible  determination  can  carry  us  through.  We  must  have  a  purpose  strong 
enough  to  bend  and  subordinate  everything  to  itself,  "  This  one  thing  I  do,"  says 
Paul.  2.  Our  latx>ur  must  be  abounding,  "  Always  abounding."  The  spirit  of  this 
work  should  reign  in  us,  everywhere  and  at  all  times.  As  the  parental  element 
inspires  the  mother,  and  mingles  with  all  her  domestic  arrangements  and  pleasures,  so 
this  spirit  must  inspire  us  and  mingle  with  all  our  imdertakings.  It  should  sweeten 
our  daily  toil  and  breathe  into  our  recreations  and  amusements.  The  distinction 
between  the  secular  and  the  spiritual  is  a  theological  fiction.  Religion  in  a  man  is 
either  everywhere  or  nowhere,  everything  or  nothing.  Labotir  and  business,  as  well  as 
the  gospel,  are  means  of  grace.  As  the  life  of  the  plant  requires  the  tempest  to  bend 
its  fibres,  as  well  as  the  calm  to  yield  it  repose,  so  the  religious  life  requires  for  its 
development  the  rough  element  of  worldly  business  as  well  as  the  smoother  influences 
of  spiritual  devotion. 

III.  The  work  of  soul-restoration  kubt  inbvitably  succeed.  "Forasmuch  as  ye 
know  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord."  There  are  two  kinds  of  vain 
labour.  1.  That  which  aims  at  a  worthless  end.  Therefore,  if  it  succeeds,  it  is  useless. 
2.  That  which  is  directed  to  a  good  end,  but  eon  never  realize  it,  simply  because  it  is 
too  indeterminate  and  feeble.  But  here  is  a  work  that  must  succeed.  Every  true 
thought,  every  earnest  prayer,  every  godly  deed,  carry  in  themselves  success.  As  all 
the  elements  and  forces  of  this  world  go  to  build  up  a  new  stratum  around  the  globe's 
surface,  for  geologists  of  coming  ages  to  study,  so  all  that  I  do  and  think  and  say 
in  the  work  of  the  Lord  goes  to  give  blessedness  to  my  being.  Inasmuch,  therefore, 
u  you  cannot  fail  in  this  work,  labour. 

IV.  The  voik  of  t>oul-rcbturation  will  fdllt  bealizk  its  buooim  IB  THS  FDTUU 


510  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIiNa    Loh.  XT.  1— fi3 

WORLD.  "  Therefore,"  says  Paul,  "  were  tbis  life  our  all,  our  spiritual  labour  might  bt 
considered  vain."  What  boots  our  striving  after  knowledge,  our  efforts  to  build  up  a 
noble  character,  if  the  grave  be  our  end  ?  But  there  is  a  future,  and  in  it  there  is  a  full 
reward.  All  the  waters  of  holy  thought  and  effort  we  now  receivs  into  our  being  go 
to  make  a  well  within  us  that  shall  spring  up  to  everlasting  lif& 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  ATTTHOSa 

Vers.  1 — t. — ItitrodiuHon,  "  Moreover  "  indicates  »  change  of  "lubject.  "  Declare 
unto  you,"  or  remind  you,  is  lomewhat  emphatic.  What  St.  Paul  brings  to  memory 
are  certain  fundamental  ideas  which  he  does  not  hesitate  to  call  "  the  gospel,"  the  glad 
tidings  of  God  to  the  world.  It  was  the  same  gospel  he  bad  preached  unto  them,  the 
same  they  had  accepted,  the  same  in  which  they  stood.  By  it  these  Corinthians  were 
saved,  present  and  future,  if  they  adhered  to  their  faith,  unless  indeed  their  faith  was 
"in  vain."  Was  this  faith  a  vain  thing?  Was  it  possible  that  it  was  an  illusion Y 
How  could  this  be  when  they  had  embraced  it,  stood  in  it,  felt  its  power  to  save,  and 
rejoiced  in  its  blessedness  ?  The  power  of  this  gospel  lay  in  these  facts,  viz. :  Clirist 
had  died,  had  been  buried,  had  been  raised  from  the  grave ;  and  these  had  occurred  for 
a  special  purpose  and  agreeably  to  pre-announcement  of  Divine  revelation.  What  was 
the  specific  object  of  Christ's  death?  He  died  "for  our  sins."  In  this  he  was  the 
Christ  of  God,  the  Messiah,  the  Anointed,  the  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  who,  as  "the 
righteous  Servant  of  the  Father,"  was  ordained  to  "  bear  their  iniquities."  It  was  not, 
then,  a  common  death.  It  was  not  a  death  brought  about  as  to  its  main  end  by  the 
disappointment  of  his  nation  because  he  had  refused  to  be  a  secular  king.  It  was  not 
the  death  of  a  martyr.  Worldly  influences,  earthly  agencies,  Satanic  power,  appear  in 
the  immediate  and  circumstantial  connections  of  his  crucifixion.  His  arrest  was  an  act 
of  human  violence ;  his  trial  was  twofold,  Jewish  and  Roman ;  his  execution  was  Roman; 
and  yet  all  this  array  of  man's  hate  and  skill  and  successfiil  wickedness  passes  out  of 
sight,  and  is  lost  in  a  view  infinitely  higher.  Judas  could  not  have  betrayed  him, 
(aiaphas  and  the  Sanhedrim  could  not  have  condemned  him,  Pilate  could  not  have 
given  him  over  to  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  unless  Christ  himself  had  permitted  them 
to  control  the  manner  and  incidents  of  his  death,  llie  death  itself,  as  to  its  motive, 
spirit,  and  aim,  occupies  the  whole  mind  of  the  apostle.  Man  and  man's  instrumental 
relation  to  it  fade  from  view,  and  it  is  with  him  a  vicarious,  expiatory,  propitiating 
death,  deriving  its  reason,  character,  and  value  from  a  single  consideration — a  death /or 
vur  sins.  On  no  other  basis  could  he  regaiil  the  gospel  as  glad  tidings.  And  how  had 
the  knowledge  of  this  as  a  doctrinal  reality  come  to  him  ?  Ele  had  "  received"  it  fi»m 
Christ  himself,  who  had  appeared  personally  to  him  at  midday.  The  historical  facts  of 
his  death,  burial,  and  resurrection  had  been  known  to  him ;  for  Saul  of  Tarsus  could 
not  have  been  ignorant  of  these  things  as  events  involving  the  nation.  Mysteriously, 
too,  he  had  felt  their  impression  in  vague  ideas,  in  vaguer  fears ;  out  of  unconscious 
depths,  sounds  had  throbbed  as  strange  pulsations  on  the  inner  ear ;  and  so  sharp  had 
been  the  call  to  thought  and  reflection,  as  for  the  Lord  Jesus  to  remind  him  on  the  way 
to  Damascus  that  he  had  been  kicking  against  the  goads  which  had  pierced  his  con- 
science. His  conversion  was  sudden  and  marvellous.  Sudden  and  marvelloas  It  could 
aot  have  been  but  for  the  long  and  acute  goading  that  had  opened  his  heart  to  the  hand 
of  the  Divine  Healer.  Yet  this  preparatory  work  of  conviction  was  all  within  himself, 
under  the  Spirit's  agency.  What  he  knew  of  Christ's  death  was  not  from  the  historical 
fact  aJone,  but  from  the  doctrinal  truth  couched  in  the  fact,  and  this  saving  truth  he 
had  received.  It  was  a  revelation  to  his  soul,  a  direct  and  assuring  manifestation  from 
the  Lord  Jesus.  To  be  an  apostle,  he  neeiied  this  immediate  communication  from 
heaven,  this  peculiar  intensifying  of  conviction  and  conversion.  Means  and  methods 
suited  to  others  were  not  adapted  to  his  case.  Notorious  as  he  had  been  In  the 
championship  of  the  national  Church — the  forlorn  hope  of  Sadduceeism  and  Pharisaism, 
the  young  hero  whose  fanatical  strength  was  adequate  to  replenish  the  wasting  and  well- 
nigh  exhausted  forces  of  the  Sanhedrim — it  was  not  for  him  to  go  over  to  Christ  in  some 
quiet  way  by  meditation,  by  laborious  inquest  of  soul,  by  those  high  resolves  wltich 
often  have  their  birth  from  the  womb  of  solitude.    No;  he  must  be  signally  converted, 


OB.XT.  1— 58.J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0BINTUIAN8.  611 

for  Ua  own  sake  and  for  the  mke  of  others.  The  change  was  a  momentous  affair  in 
the  history  of  the  Jewish  Church  no  less  than  the  Christian  Church,  aad,  accordingly, 
he  speaks  of  himself  as  having  "  received  "  the  grace  of  God  in  an  exceptional  manner. 
But  were  human  means  disowned  ?  Was  naturalness  set  at  nought  or  even  depreciated  ? 
Not  so ;  what  he  "  received  "  was  altogether  in  unison  with  the  true  creed  of  Israel  as 
contained  in  the  records  of  her  national  faith.  "  According  to  the  Scriptures,"  argues 
he,  was  the  truth  of  Christ's  death  which  I  "received."  Above  the  effulgence  that 
flashed  from  the  Syrian  noon  upon  his  eye,  there  was  another  light,  and  it  spread  all 
over  Pentateuch,  Psalms,  prophecies.  What,  indeed,  Gamaliel  stood  for,  but  was  not ; 
what  Sadducee  and  Pharisee  ideally  meant,  but  utterly  failed  to  make  real ;  what  priest 
and  scribe  had  been  designed  to  represent,  but  had  hidden  under  carnal  observances; 
what  temple  and  sacrifices  had  been  set  apart  to  commemorate  and  prefigure,  but  had 
obliterated  in  sign  and  symbol ; — all  these  were  now  illumined.  "  According  to  the 
Scriptures,"  which  he  had  learned  when  a  boy  in  Tarsus,  and  had  come  to  Jerusalem 
that  he  might  enlarge  and  perfect  his  knowledge  of  these  holy  writings;  "according 
to  the  Scriptures,"  which  St.  Stephen  had  expounded  before  the  Sanhedrim  when  the 
shadow  of  death  retreated  before  the  glory  descending  upon  the  youthful  saint  from  the 
"  Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God;"  "according  to  the  Scriptarea"  that 
Ananias  had  explained  to  him  at  Damascus,  when  "  there  fell  from  his  eyes  as  it  had 
been  scales,"  and,  in  no  long  time,  the  inner  eyesight  was  made  clear  and  strong.  Thus 
it  was  that  providence  in  the  past  became  proviitence  in  the  present,  the  Holy  Ghost 
alike  in  each,  and  Tarsus,  Jerusalem,  and  Damascus  brought,  though  seemingly  so  wide 
apart,  into  the  unity  of  his  soul's  development.  Verily,  a  wondrous  scheme  of  personal 
history,  recognizing  home  and  parents,  life  in  "no  mean  city,"  life  in  the  metropolis 
that  was  venerated  as  the  glory  of  the  elect  nation,  life  in  the  leadership  of  an  assault 
on  the  young  Church,  and  for  ever  memorable  in  her  annals  because  of  the  crown  of 
martyrdom  then  first  won ;  a  marvellous  interweaving  of  the  natural  and  supernatural 
as  warp  and  woof  in  one  and  the  same  fabric.  Back  to  the  original  promise  spoken  in 
Eden  that  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head ;  back  to  the  early 
institution  of  sacrifice,  and  thence  on  to  the  oro;anization  of  the  Divine  idea  in  a  most 
solemn  and  august  ceremonial  that  allowed  no  day  to  escape  its  impressive  symboliza- 
tion ;  all  through  penitential  psalms  and  instructive  prophecies.    The  great  doctrine  was 

E resent  everywhere  that  "without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission,"  that  "he 
ath  borne  our  griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows,"  and  that  "  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the 
iniquity  of  us  all."  No  emaciating  criticism  here ;  no  destructive  iotelleot ;  no  disposi- 
tion inclining  St.  Paul  to  obscure  Christ  in  the  shadow  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  mini- 
mize his  figure  to  the  smallest  dimensions  consistent  with  any  faith  at  all.  No  guch  taste 
and  temper  had  this  man,  fresh  from  the  schools  and  master  of  the  theology  of  his  times. 
Nor  is  it  other  than  one  of  his  very  marked  peculiarities,  that  he  so  frequently  cites  his 
thorough  and  familiar  acquaintance  with  the  Scriptures,  and  that  from  first  to  last  in 
his  Epistles,  he  is  quite  as  much  a  commentator  of  the  Old  ai  an  exponent  of  the  New. 
The  two  grand  hemispheres  of  religious  thought  formed  one  globe  in  him.  From,  the 
ane  to  the  other,  he  passed  with  unobstructed  step.  Over  the  immense  domain,  divided 
and  cut  up  to  so  many  other  minds,  adverse  or  even  hostile  sections  to  not  a  few  honest 
souls ;  over  all  this  stretch  of  diversified  territory,  there  was  to  St.  Paul  the  very  per- 
fection of  unity.  His  footsteps  never  missed  their  pathway ;  his  eye  never  lost  a  land- 
mark. For  him,  Christ  was  in  Eden,  in  Abraham,  Moses,  David,  Isaiah,  Hosea ;  and 
the  Old  Testament  was  what  it  was  and  all  it  was  because  Christ  was  in  every  one  of  its 
doctrines  and  institutions.  The  present  Christ  to  him — the  Christ  of  Damascus,  and 
Arabia,  and  Jerusalem,  and  Athens,  and  Ephesus,  and  Corinth — was  the  Christ  of  the 
past,  and  be  was  this  because  he  was  the  "  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world."  Is  it  likely,  then,  that  we  shall  find  too  much  of  Christ,  and  especially  as  it 
respects  the  legal  bearings  of  his  death,  in  the  Old  Testament?  Clearly  St.  Paul  did 
not  think  so.  "  According  to  the  Scriptures  "  was  prefatory,  and  essentially  so,  to  thf 
logic,  sentiment,  fervour,  of  the  grand  argument  he  was  about  to  n),ake.  What  was  this 
argument  to  be  ?  A  defence — the  defence— oi  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
human  body.  Observe  now  that  the  historical  fact  of  the  Lord's  resurrection  was 
not  in  debate.  No  one  of  the  Corinthians  denied  or  even  doubted  that  What,  then, 
ma  in  ooutroveray  7  This  it  was,  viz. :  Did  the  doctrine  invdlved  in  the  Lord's  rising  from 


612  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa    [oh.  XT.  I— 68 

the  dead  apply  to  all?  Was  there  to  l)e  •  general  resnrraction ?  From  this  point  ol 
view,  we  see  why  in  the  present  case  he  laid  such  stress  on  his  dying  for  our  sina.  It 
was  not  death  aa  an  ordinary  termination  of  life,  but  death  considered  in  this  exclu- 
sive instance  as  an  atoning  death,  as  a  vicarious  and  expiatory  offering,  as  a  complett 
and  perfect  satisfaction  to  law  and  justice.  It  is  this  death  that  stands  so  closely  related 
to  his  resurrection,  and  through  it  to  our  resurrection.  Taking  merely  an  ethical  Tiew 
ot  the  matter,  and  confining  ourselves  to  what  Jesus  of  Nazareth  taught,  and  to  the 
example  of  mural  excellence  he  set  before  men,  we  can  see  no  reason  why  he  should 
have  risen.  He  added  nothing  to  morality,  nothing  to  example,  nothing  to  a  high  and 
self-sacrificing  manhood,  by  returning  to  life  and  reappearing  at  sundry  times  to  his 
disciples  during  the  tbtty  days.  On  the  other  hand,  looking  at  his  death  as  penal — 
"  for  our  sins " — we  can  understand  why,  if  he  was  "  delivered  for  our  offences,"  he 
should  be  "  raised  aaiin  for  our  justification."  Without  the  resurrection,  we  could  not 
be  assured  whether  he  died  simply  and  solely  as  a  good  man,  the  best  of  men,  or  as  the 
Hon  of  God  to  -jxpinto  our  sins.  If,  indeed,  law  and  justice  have  been  satisfied  by  the 
sacrifice,  let  them  express  in  an  authoritative  and  sovereign  manner,  clear  of  all  liability 
to  misapprehension,  and  assuring  to  the  most  eager  solicitude,  that  the  penalty  has  been 
pMid  and  a  full  paidoii  for  guilt  in  man  made  possible.  Precisely  this  was  accomplished 
by  Christ's  resurrection,  and  thus  the  scars  of  Calvary,  preserved  upon  his  person,  wer« 
shown  to  the  disciples  as  the  signs  of  victory  over  "hell  and  death."  He  rose,  further- 
more, on  "  the  third  day."  Though  it  was  not  Christ's  habit  to  fix  times  and  seasoni, 
yet  he  was  careful  to  beitle  the  day  of  his  resurrection.  Again  and  again  he  announced 
the  date  of  the  event.  Friends,  in  their  overwhelming  dismay,  forgot  it,  or  if  some 
remembered  it,  as  the  two  who  journeyed  to  Emmaus,  it  was  clouded  1^  grief  and 
distrust.  Foes  remembered  it  and  provided  a  guard  for  the  sepulchre,  and  his  foes 
were  the  first  to  know  that  he  had  risen,  and  that,  too,  from  their  own  soldiers.  There 
was  no  ethical  reason  for  him  to  rise  on  the  third  day  or  on  any  other  day,  but,  viewing 
his  death  as  I'eual,  it«  piiri»sc  instantly  answered  when  he  died,  we  can  see  congruity 
between  the  two  facts,  "  the  third  day  "  being  his  own  appointment  and  a  proof  that  he 
liiid  died,  not  as  a  mere  man,  but  as  the  eternal  Son  of  God.  St.  Paul  repeats,  "according 
tu  the  Scriptures,"  i.e.  Christ's  resurrection  had  been  foretold.  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave 
iny  soul  in  liell,  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption"  (Ps.  xvi. 
LO).  Christ's  death,  burial,  and  resurrection  hold  together,  and  their  congruity  is 
determined  by  the  fact  that  "the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  and  with 
his  stripes  we  are  healed,"  To  these  truths  the  apostle  gave  prominence  in  the  open- 
ing of  his  argument.  Logically,  they  had  to  assume  that  commanding  position,  and 
emotionally  they  could  have  no  other.  And  therefore,  "  first  of  all,"  he  delivered 
these  doctrines.  They  took  precedence  of  all  else  ;  they  were  the  data  for  everything 
iti  Christianity ;  they  were  "  the  gospel."  So  that  if  he  was  about  to  dwell  on  a  topic 
which  should  evoke  his  power  to  the  utmost,  nor  leave  a  faculty  of  his  mind  disengaged 
nor  a  sensibility  unmoved,  he  would  "  first  of  all,"  as  he  had  done  in  his  preaching, 
rest  his  whole  cause  on  Christ  dying  and  rising  as  the  Redeemer  of  the  human  race.— L. 

Vers.  6 — 11.— Apostolic  testimony  to  Okritfs  resurrection,  and  testimony  oj  vXhen. 
A  prominent  feature  of  Christ's  plan  was  to  train  the  apostles  to  be  his  witnesses. 
Conceive  what  this  involved :  on  their  part,  a  discipline  of  the  senses  as  inlets  of  the 
mind,  close  and  patient  attention,  constant  revisals  of  imjo'essions,  contentedness  under 
mystery,  boldness  of  statement,  heroism  in  adhering  to  testimony.  Along  with  these 
qualities,  an  experience  of  the  truth  in  Christ  as  a  transforming  power  was  to  impart  a 
peculiar  character  to  all  they  affirmed,  so  that  Christ  Jesua,  living,  dying,  risen,  exalted, 
>ilorified,  was  to  be  seen  in  them  as  well  as  through  them.  On  the  part  of  Christ,  what 
condescension  and  sympathy,  what  painstaking,  what  persistent  efforts,  were  necessary 
to  make  these  nide  Galileans  competent  to  the  duties  ot  testifiers!  "Te  also  shall 
bear  witness,  because  ye  have  been  with  me  from  the  beginning."  To  be  m^smigers 
was  not  enough ;  thqr  were  to  be  witnesses  also,  for  the  "  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon 
you :  and  ye  shall  be  witnesses  onto  me  both  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judiea,  and  in 
Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth."  These  men  felt  that  they  were 
Christ's  chosen  witnesses,  and  that  their  testimony  was  the  chief  agency  employed  by 
the  Spirit  to  save  tha  work.    It  was  natural,  chen,  for  St.  Paul  to  begin  Us  argument 


01.  St.  1— te.]    Tfifi  FIRST  EI>ISTLB  $0  T'AE  GOItINTdIAN&  tlS 


OB  the  remrrection  of  the  hody  by  callins  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  risen  Christ 
"  was  Been  of  Cephas,  then  of  the  twelve.  For  the  space  of  forty  days  he  maiii  Tested 
himself  at  intervals  to  their  senses,  and  during  this  intermediate  period — a  special  dis 
pensation  to  the  disciples,  differing  widely  from  all  that  went  before  or  came  after — their 
education  as  witnesses,  and  particularly  as  witnesses  of  his  resurrection,  was  carried  on  to 
the  verge  of  completeness  at  Pentecost.  In  fact,  Pentecost  was  the  forty  days  consum- 
mated. And  was  this  great  training  merely  in  the  historical  fact  that  he  had  risen  ? 
Forty  days  were  not  needed  for  this.  Twenty-four  hours  after  he  had  reappeared,  all 
the  twelve,  except  St.  Thomas,  were  firm  believers  of  the  fact.  But  they  were  to  feel 
the  connection  between  his  resurrection  and  death  as  spiritual  truths  of  the  highest 
moment,  truths  of  the  Divine  government,  truths  of  holy  sentiment,  and  thus  fitted  for 
the  full  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Grhost  at  Pentecost.  "  Did  not  our  heart  burn  within 
US,  while  he  talked  with  us  by  the  way,  and  while  he  opened  to  us  the  Scriptures?" 
The  heart,  the  baming  heart,  the  heart  of  saving  faith, — ^this  is  the  distinctive  type  of 
experience  now,  and,/or  the  first  time.  Christian  emotion  as  to  its  essential  quality  is 
brought  into  notice.  St.  Paul  enumerates  the  witnesses :  St.  Peter,  the  twelve,  the  five 
hundred  brethren,  St.  James ;  and  adds,  "  all  the  apostles."  Then  he  mentions  himself : 
"  Last  of  all,  he  was  seen  of  me  also,  as  of  one  bom  out  of  due  time."  Could  he  spea< 
of  this  in  the  way  simply  of  historical  summation?  Not  he;  memory  was  too  active, 
feeling  too  acute,  humility  and  gratitude  too  profound,  for  a  bare  logicEd  statement.  In 
an  instant,  the  devout  soul  hastens  to  acknowledge  what  it  never  lost  an  opportunity  of 
expressing — its  sense  of  God's  mercy  in  calling  him,  a  persecutor  of  the  Church  of  God, 
to  the  apostleship.  "  By  the  grace  of  God  " — words  often  abused  since  he  used  thein, 
but  most  sacred  and  glorious  as  he  uttered  them—"  by  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I 
am."  That  grace  had  not  been  bestowed  in  vain ;  nor  does  he  hesitate  to  say  that  he 
had  "laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all,"  and  then  "/"  sinks  out  of  sight,  and  it 
is  all  of  grace.  Notice  the  stages  of  the  idea :  bom  untimely ;  least  of  the  apostles 
because  he  was  guilty  of  persecution ;  the  only  man  among  them  who  stood  against  this 
dark  background,  but  the  light  in  the  foreground  is  the  more  resplendent  for  that ;  not 
ashamed  to  confess  his  utter  unworthiness  in  order  to  magnify  the  grace  of  God,  and 
this  grace  deserving  the  entire  honour  of  the  more  abundant  labour.  What  an  insight 
into  the  man!  If,  as  we  suppose,  the  hours  when  this  chapter  was  written  were 
extraordinary  even  in  his  wonderful  mental  history ;  if  there  was  a  fuller  and  closer 
interblending  of  his  faculties  than  he  had  ever  experienced ;  if  human  knowledge  and 
culture  then  brought  to  inspiration  their  largest  and  richest  tribute,  and  if  inspiration 
brought  to  them  its  mightiest  quickening ; — what  could  be  more  striking  than  the  fact 
that  in  this  very  period  of  exaltation,  when  intellect  was  in  the  splendid  array  both  of 
its  endowments  and  acquisitions,  and  when  the  power  of  speech  had  suddenly  possessed 
itself  of  new  facilities  of  expression,  he  cannot  proceed  without  pausing  to  bow  his  heart 
in  adoration  before  the  Ged  of  grace  1  Uppermost,  indeed,  was  the  thought  of  him  who 
had  "  died  for  our  sins,"  and  the  gbry  of  Christ  risen  as  personal  to  him  and  his  apostle- 
ship was  the  grace  shown  to  him  as  a  persecutor  of  the  Church  of  God.  And  we  who 
read  his  glowing  words,  what  finer  privilege  can  the  unfoldings  of  the  human  soul  in 
literature  give  us,  what  privilege  so  fine  as  this  in  which  the  apostle  of  the  Gentilevi, 
rising  above  the  levels  of  all  common  experience,  speaks  from  a  height  which  would  be 
the  abode  of  silence  save  that  humility  would  offer  its  homage  to  the  grace  of  Christ  1 
The  nobility  of  the  man  displays  itself  here ;  for,  though  labouring  "  more  abundantly 
than  they  all,"  yet  he  claims  no  more  than  to  be  one  of  the  witnessing  company  of  the 
apostles.  After  all,  it  is  not  the  individual  testimony  of  St.  Peter,  St.  James,  St.  Paul, 
but  the  concurrent  and  united  evidence,  that  is  the  important  fact.  Years  intervened 
between  the  forty  days  and  the  scene  on  the  road  to  Damascus,  and  he  comes  with  his 
later  testimony  to  Join  the  group  of  the  earlier  witnesses.  "  Whether  it  were  I  or 
they  " — ^we  are  all  agreed  as  to  the  appearance  of  the  risen  Lord—"  so  we  preach,  and 
so  y«  believed."— Ifc 

T<n.  12 — 8i.—DeHg{nff  th«  ruurreeHon/rom  ihe  dead,  and  what  ike  denial  {nvcHpes. 

Som*  d  these  Corinthian  Christians  denied  that  there  would  be  a  literal  resurrection. 

Tbaj  understood  little  or  nothing  of  the  idea  of  the  body,  of  its  uses  intellectually  and 

monlly  regarded,  and  of  its  partnership  with  the  soul  in  all  that  oonoamed  pressu) 

I.  ooBimraiAxa.  2  h 


614  THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  tO  THE  CORINTHIANS.     |;oh.xv.  1— 58 

probation  and  future  reward.    What  had  Grecian  philosophy  taught  them?    That  th« 
body  was  the  seat  of  eviL    What  had  Grecian  art  tai^ht  them?    To  admire  the  body 
for  sensuous  purposes  as  a  grati&cation  to  sesthetio  tastes.    And  what  had  idolatrous 
worships  shown  them?      The  body  degraded  to  the  lowest  vileness.     Yet,  indeed, 
Christianity  had  assured  them  that  the  body  was  "  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and, 
no  doubt,  St.  Paul  in  his  former  preaching  had  instructed  them  in  the  sanctity  of  the 
body,  "  according  to  the  Scriptures.'    But  here  they  were  explaining  away  the  doctrine, 
and  entirely  unaware  of  what  they  were  doing.     "  It  was  not  materialism,  but  •■ 
ultra-spiritualism,  which  led  the  Corinthians  into  error"  (F.  W.  Kobertson^     "  Fasci- 
nated, perhaps,  by  its  plausible  appearance  of  spirituality,  glad  to  get  rid  oi  lae  ofTence 
of  a  carnal  and  material  immortality,  and  fain  to  take  refuge  in  the  more  ruflned  idea 
of  the  soul's  recovered  independence  of  the  body  here,  and  its  entire  emancipation  from 
the  body  hereafter"  (Dr.  Candlish).     Whatever  the  influences  at  work  upon  iheir 
minda,  the  results  were  obvious  to  St.  Paul.    And  to  convince  them  of  what  •  fittal 
error  they  had  fallen  into  if  their  disbelief  were  logically  carried  out  into  its  con- 
sequences, he  proceeds  to  inquire  of  them  how  it  was  that  Christ  could  be  preached 
among  them  as  One  risen  from  the  dead,  if  there  were  no  general  resurrection.     What 
consistency  was  there  in  believing  that  the  Lord  of  humanity  had  risen.  Lord  of  its 
body  no  less  than  of  its  sold,  and  yet  this  humanity  in  the]  race  must  be  dislocated, 
body  and  soul  sundered  for  ever,  and  soul  alone  be  the  survivor  of  death  ?    This  is  the 
starting-point,  Christ  the  Representative,  the  federal  Head,  the  Image  of  humanity 
as  well  as  the  Image  of  God.    If  there  be  no  general  resurrection,  "then  is  Christ  not 
risen."    The  argument  is  from  a  broad,  universal  principle  to  a  particular  case  under 
that  principle,  the  former  being  the  resurnction  of  man,  and  the  latter  that  of  the 
Son  of  man.    By  legitimate  inference,  therefore,  supposing  there  were  no  resurrection 
for  man,  Christ  was  still  "in  his  grave.    "  Christ  not  risen  I"    What  follows?    Apo- 
stolic "  preachtns;  is  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also  vain."    This  is  pressing  the  matter 
home  with  startling  energy.    But  how  cuuld  the  logical  consequence  be  otherwise? 
Christ  Jesus,  Son  of  God,  had  assumed  man's  physical  nature,  had  been  born  of  a 
woman,  had  eaten  and  drunk  and  grown  like  other  men,  had  conformed  to  the  laws 
of  human  corporeity,  had  been  "  made  under  the  Jaw  "  of  providence,  and  taken  all 
its  requirements  upon  himself;  and  hence,  if  "made  like  unto  his  brethren,"  he  rose 
from  the  dead  just  as  he  had  been  incarnated,  under  the  general  law  of  humanity. 
From  the  beginning  to  the  end,  no  break  occurred  in  his  career ;   it  vxu  human 
throughout,  and  just  as  human  when  he  rose  from  the  grave  as  when  bom  of  the 
Virgin  Mary.    To  be  sure,  a  glory  beyond  the  human  was  in  him  and  around  him — ^the 
glory  of  the  eternal  Sonship — but  the  human  was  never  lost  or  swallowed  up,  never 
even  obscured,  by  the  mysterious  awe  of  the  Divine  investing  him.    In  this  view 
of  the  matter,  Christ  rose  because  he  was  a  man  among  men,  and  by  virtue  of  a  law 
which  found  in  him  its  highest  manifestation,  just  as  all  other  laws  of  humanity  had 
realized  in  him  their  sublimest  expression.    But  what  of  our  preaching  as  apostles? 
If  he  has  not  risen  (risen  he  cannot  be  unless  there  is  a  general  resurrection),  then 
"we  are  found  false  witnesses  of  God."    Nothing  else  hnt  false  witneesei,  "becausa 
we  have  testified  of  God  that  he  raised  up  Christ :  whom  he  raised  not  up,  if  so  be 
that  the  dead  rise  not."    Deluded  men  we  cannot  he;  victims  of  excited  and  over- 
wrought senses  ;  innocent  enthusiasts ; — all  this  is  impossible ;  and  we  are  downright 
deceivers.    Is  this  credible?    Go  back  and  read  the  roll  of  testifiers:  St  Peter  and 
the  twelve,  the  outstanding  fact  of  their  testimony  lieing  Jesus  and  the  resurrection; 
then  the  five  hundred  brethren,  next  St.  James,  and  I  myself.    Can  you  Corinthians 
believe  a  thing  as  absurd  as  this,  that  we  are  all  false  witnesses  ?    So  much  for 
apostolical  preaching.    He  had  put  their  preaching  as  apostles  and  the  faith  of  these 
Corinthians  in  the  same  category ;  they  were  each  "  vain,"*  that  is,  "  empty,  groundless, 
unreal "  (Eling).    Now,  then,  he  urges  that  if  there  be  no  resiurection,  "  Christ  is  not 
raised."    If  Christ  be  not  risen,  what  object  has  your  faith  ?    To  believe  in  his  atoning 
death,  yon  must  believe  in  the  necessary  sequel  and  counterpart  of  that  death,  his 
resurrection,  since  the  two  facts  are  inseparably  united.    Admit  his  death,  deny  htt 
resurrection, and  "ye  are  yet  in  yonr  sins."    Is  this  credible?    On  the  hypothesis 
of  no  literal  resurrection,  three  things  up  to  this  point  of  the  argument  have  been  mada 
•tear,  tIb.   Christ's  death  was  in  vain,  apostolic  preaching  of  Christ  omcified  was  ia 


CH.  XT.  1—68.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  61C 

vafai,  and  Christian  feith  was  in  vain.  What  •  new  Ecclesiasteii  la  here  I  "  Yanitj 
of  vanitieg,  all  ia  vanity."  But  was  this  all?  If  a  denial  of  man's  resurrection 
necessitated  the  rejection  of  Christ's  resurrection ;  if  the  loss  of  his  resurrection  swept 
away  his  atonement,  seeing  that  there  was  no  proof  of  its  validity,  and  hence  no 
assurance  of  pardon  and  peace;  if  the  nullification  of  the  atonement  destroyed  the 
value  of  preaching  and  the  worth  of  believing; — could  there  be  any  addition  to  the 
amount  and  quality  of  these  dreadful  consequences?  Yes  ;  the  train  of  evils  following 
this  new  doctrine  of  no  resurrection  was  lengthened  out  still  further;  for  "they  alsn 
which  are  fallen  asleep  in  Christ  are  perished."  All  departed  Christians  are  lost. 
There  is  no  heaven  for  them,  and  the  touching  words,  "  fallen  asleep  in  Jesus,"  are 
mocking  rhetoric.  Again,  the  thought  recurs — Was  this  credible  t  Another  vanity 
must  be  superadded  :  affection  for  the  departed,  the  tenderest  and  holiest  of  all  human 
feelings,  that  which  perfects  the  love  unable  to  obtain  its  complete  growth  while  the 
object  lived  to  the  eyes  and  was  clasped  in  the  arms  ;  this  most  beautiful  and  nub!e 
affection  is  idle  sentimentality,  for  they  have  "  perished."  At  this  point  something 
more  than  lo>;ical  reasoning  is  involved.  The  deepest  instinct  of  the  soul  in  its  human 
relationships  is  in  issue.  Is  this  instinct  a  cheat,  a  falsehood  ?  We,  the  apostles  ami 
the  five  hundred  brethren,  are  not  the  only  "  false  witnesses,"  but  your  nature,  the  very 
core  of  your  nature,  is  a  deceit  and  mockery.  You  have  lost  your  Christ  and  his 
apostles,  lost  your  faith,  lost  your  friends.  Nothing  precious  is  left ;  you  dare  not 
trust  your  firmest  instincts.  "Most  miserable  1"  Could  there  be  a  greater  torture? 
"  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  The 
hope  of  being  with  him  hereafter,  of  seeing  and  enjoying  him,  of  becoming  more  and 
more  like  him, — this  is  our  heaven  of  anticipation  ;  the  crown  is  "  a  crown  of  righteous- 
ness ; "  the  eternal  reward  is  nearer  and  fuller  communion  with  him.  But  this  hope 
is  all  vain.  Himself  uncrowned,  himself  left  to  the  dishonour  of  the  grave,  what  can 
ChriHt  be  to  you  and  what  relief  aftord  you — you  of  all  men  most  wretched?  Other 
men  resign  themselves  to  their  dreams  of  earthly  joys,  seek  the  pleasures  of  sense 
and  find  them,  fall  down  and  worship  Satan  and  get  their  kingdoms  of  power  and 
wealth  and  passion.  These  you  have  denied  yourselves  and  put  far  from  your  pursuits. 
Heaven  has  been  enough  for  you.  But  lo  1  this  heaven  is  a  vain  hope,  a  fieeting 
creature  of  fancy,  and  you  are  the  victims  of  a  supreme  folly,  the  lowest  on  earth  in 
hopeless  misery.  This  mournful  picture  is  not  allowed  to  detain  the  eye,  for  St.  Paul 
immediately  says  (ver.  20),  "  Now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first- 
fruits  of  them  that  slept."  There  is  the  fact  of  his  resuirection ;  there  is  also  the 
doctrinal  import  of  the  truth  with  respect  to  believers ;  so  that  after  showing  the 
absurdity  of  the  opposite  view,  be  now  lays  down  a  positive  assertion  in  conformity  with 
the  first  stage  of  his  argument.  Christ  has  risen,  but  in  what  character  and  relation  ? 
The  answer  is,  "  The  Firstfruits  of  thi  m  that  slept."  A  vast  harvest  is  in  the  future, 
and  he  is  the  Firstfruits.  Was  not  the  first  sheaf  a  specimen  of  the  matured  field, 
a  thank  offering  to  the  God  of  providence,  a  pledge  of  the  full  ingathering  ?  In  all 
things  he  was  to  have  "  pre-eminence,"  and  consequently  in  this,  that  he  was  "  the 
first  begotten  of  the  dead."  Previous  resurrections  had  occurred,  but  in  no  sense  were 
they  "  firstfruits,"  since  no  representative  or  mediatorial  character  appertained  to  them, 
nor  did  they  involve  the  idea  of  a  Divine  covenant  The  significance  of  Christ's 
return  to  life  is  that,  having  been  "  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much 
more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  hy  his  life!'  The  specialty  of  his  vicarious 
sacrifice  gives  specialty  to  his  resurrection,  which  is  the  beginning  of  his  exaltation 
to  be  a  I^nce  and  a  Saviour,  "  for  to  give  repentance  to  Israel,  and  forgiveness  of  sins." 
And  in  this,  humanity  appears  historically  no  less  than  prospectively :  "  Since  by  man 
came  death,  by  man  came  also  the  resmrrection  of  the  dead."  It  is,  in  each  instance, 
a  race-fact  he  is  contemplating,  and  he  sees  the  race  as  existing  in  the  natural  headship 
of  Adam  and  in  the  spiritual  headship  of  Christ.  "  As  in  Adam  all  die  "  a  natural 
death,  "  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive  " — ^restored  to  existence  as  it  consists 
in  the  union  of  soul  and  body.  Further  on,  St.  Paul  specializes  the  difference  between 
Adam  and  Christ ;  here  and  in  the  context,  it  is  the  similarity  of  attitude  towards 
the  human  family  which  he  presents.  To  see  the  unlikeness,  we  must  first  see  the 
resemblance,  and,  accordingly,  he  institutes  a  parallel  between  the  two,  Adam  and 
Christ,  as  preparatory  t«  the  divergence  which  he  introduces  when  discussing  otliei 


51«  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&    [oh.  XT.  1—68 


aspeotB  of  the  resurrection.  The  union  of  body  and  soul,  by  which  human  lutara 
id  constitute  1,  belongs  in  itself  to  the  natural  order  of  the  universe,  and  therefore  offeri 
■  common  pliitfuim  on  which  Adivm  anil  Christ  alike  stand,  the  one  as  causing  death, 
the  other  as  the  restorer  of  life  forfeited.  St.  Paul  never  loses  sight  of  nature  and 
natural  ordi-r.  Evurything  that  he  says  of  Christianity  either  asserts  or  implies 
sometliiiig  I'Hi  k  of  Christianity.  If,  as  often  happens,  he  describes  it  as  a  scheme  of 
restoration,  t/wre  is  always  an  original  system,  vast  in  reach  and  compass,  to  which 
it  is  subordinate.  And  if,  as  frequently  occurs,  he  is  showing  that  "  where  sin 
abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound,"  reference  is  still  had  to  a  primary  or  normal 
condition  as  having  been  transcended  by  substituting  a  higher  for  a  lower  form  of  life. 
In  congruity  with  this  habitual  method  of  thought,  fundamental  to  all  his  other  habits 
of  mind,  and  without  which  he  could  not  have  been  the  thinker  he  was,  he  traces  here 
the  resemblance  of  Adam  and  Christ  in  their  respective  headships  of  the  human  family. 
But  has  Christ  such  an  identificatiun  with  our  r-tce  as  to  put  his  resurrection,  time  and 
circumstances  considered,  on  a  level  with  our  rising  from  the  dead?  No;  he  stands 
alone.  "  Every  man  in  his  own  order."  There  is  an  order,  a  rank,  a  succession,  and 
the  headship  of  Christ  is  attested  as  before  in  the  figure  of  the  "  flrstfruits."  "After- 
ward they  that  are  Christ's  at  his  coming;"  the  long  interval  between  the  first  and 
second  coming  of  Christ  illustrating  his  majesty  as  the  risen  Lord,  and  ripening  a 
harvest  worthy  of  him  as  the  "flrstfruits."  If,  then,  the  ages  are  to  witness  the 
success  of  his  power  as  "  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,"  and  if  the  final  demonstration  of  his 
glory  as  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  his  Fatlier  be  reserved  for  the  resurrection  of  his 
saints  and  its  attendant  events,  this  result  must  be  of  the  nature  of  a  consummation. 
Viewed  as  a  system  within  a  system,  it  must  be  limited  by  conditions,  must  have 
instruments  and  agencies,  must  have  various  adjustments  of  means  to  ends,  and  the 
ends  in  turn  accommodated  to  ulterior  purposes,  ail  which  go  forward  to  an  era  ol 
grandeur.  A  perpetual  scheme  of  this  kind  is  inconceivable.  It  involves  the  trial 
of  certain  definite  and  clearly  announced  princi|jles,  the  co-working  of  Gkxi  and  man, 
the  test-operation  of  peculiar  motives  and  sentiments ;  in  brief,  the  idea  of  probation 
in  the  most  educative  and  august  shape  it  could  assume.  Are  we  the  only  learners 
in  this  school?  Worlds  have  brotherhood  as  well  as  men,  and  the  network,  too 
delicate  for  any  eye  to  see  all  the  filaments  even  here,  is  spread  over  spaces  unmeasured 
by  the  visible  firmament.  It  is  a  mediatorial  economy  under  which  we  live,  nor  can 
any  reader  of  the  New  Testament  doubt  that  the  universe  is  affected  in  some  way, 
though  the  manner  and  extent  are  mysteries,  by  this  mediatorial  rule.  Inasmuch, 
then,  as  it  is  mediatorial,  this  system  carmot  be  permanent,  and  hence  "  every  man 
in  his  own  order  "  presents  the  conception  of  a  successional  development,  which  must, 
at  some  period,  reach  its  crisis  and  pass  away.  "  Then  cometh  the  end,  when  he  shall 
have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father ;  when  he  shall  have  put  down 
all  nils  and  all  authority  and  power."  What  is  it  that  shall  terminate?  The  previous 
verses  (20^23)  throw  some  light  on  this  subject.  Humanity  is  represented  therein 
as  to  its  contrasted  forms,  and  these  forms  are  Adam  and  Christ.  Contrast  is  our 
chief  mode  of  knowing  objects  in  this  world,  and  we  are  unceasingly  dependent  on  its 
activity.  It  is  a  mark,  however,  of  the  weakness  of  our  faculties  and  the  limited 
sphere  in  which  they  are  confined.  Now,  these  contrasted  forms  of  humanity  as 
embodied  in  Adam  and  Christ  shall  vanish  away,  because  they  belong  to  our  knowing 
"in  part"  and  are  only  disciplinary  for  that  "which  is  perfect."  All  the  conflict 
between  our  nature  in  Adam  and  our  nature  in  Christ  having  ended,  and  its  con- 
nections with  preternatural  agents  having  come  to  a  close,  and  that  close  triumphant 
on  the  side  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  every  sign  of  this  sort  of  rvle,  authority,  and  power, 
shall  disappear  from  the  universe.  We  may  venture  to  suggest  that  some  Unt  of 
this  is  given  in  the  forty  days.  The  posthumous  life  of  the  risen  Christ  has  dropped 
off  the  outward  mark»  of  its  former  rule,  authority  and  power.  No  discussions  are 
held  with  scribes  and  Pharisees ;  no  snares  are  laid  to  entangle  him ;  no  repelling  on 
his  part  the  charges  of  sabbath-breaking,  confederation  with  Beelzebub,  and  blasphemy 
in  claiming  to  be  the  Son  of  God ;  but  the  battle  has  closed,  and  the  Victor  fresh  from 
the  grave  is  victor  over  Sanhedrim  and  Herod  and  Pilate,  and  henceforth  the  Holy 
Spirit  orders  the  struggle  between  the  forces  of  good  and  eviL  But  on  a  far  wider 
arena,  and  with  an  infinitely  grander  display  of  majesty,  wiU  the  Lord  Jesua  Christ 


»  XT.  1—68.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  ill 

Mnuummate  hia  victory  over  earth  and  hell  when  lie  resigns  to  God  the  Father  hu 
delegated  Bovereignty  as  the  Midiator.  As  in  the  forty  days  no  winds  and  waters 
were  to  be  stilled,  no  demoni  ic  crossed  his  i  ath  to  call  forth  his  power,  no  exertion 
made  in  the  exercise  of  authority  and  rule  over  those  inimical  to  his  divinity,  but 
conflict  was  swallowed  up  in  conquest;  so  now,  the  end  having  been  attained  of 
mediatorial  government  and  all  opposition  put  down,  wliat  befits  him  so  royally 
as  to  resume  the  ancient  characteristics  of  his  Sonship  as  the  second  Person  in  the 
holy  Trinity  and  take  the  glory  of  eternal  ages  back,  long  ago  resigned,  ti  his  bosom  '! 
Does  this  require  that  his  humanity  shall  be  laid  aside  ?  By  no  means.  Turn  again 
to  the  forty  days.  Humanity  then  manifested  in  him  a  semi-glorified  state.  Over 
time  and  space  he  was  conqueror,  nor  was  be  amenable  to  any  law  of  flesh  and  bloal, 
but  enjoyed  the  immunities  of  a  "spiritual  body."  Yet,  uotwitlistanding,  he  was 
most  human,  and  in  his  voice  the  old  tones  were  tenderer  and  sweeter,  so  th^it  Mary 
knew  him  when  he  spoke  ber  name,  and  in  his  manner  there  was  a  more  pjccious 
condeacension,  wliich  St.  Thomas  felt  when  ho  exclaimed,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God." 
The  human  body  as  it  goes  downward  towards  the  brutes  loses  its  native  properties 
as  the  companion  of  the  soul.  The  human  body  as  it  goes  upward  towards  Ghxi 
increases  its  capacity  to  enshrine  amd  show  forth  the  spirit.  What  limit  exists  to 
this  capacity,  we  know  not.  But  we  may  well  believe  tliat  Christ's  humanity,  though 
the  Mediatorship  cease  to  exist,  will  be  associated  for  ever  with  his  Sunship.  And 
under  wimt  conmtions  shall  this  termination  of  the  Mediatorship  occur  ?  When  the 
"  last  enemy  shall  be  destroyed."  And  that  enemy  is  death.  This  closes  the  protracted 
warfare.  It  began  with  his  victory  over  the  grave,  it  ends  with  his  triumph  over 
all  giaves.  "  Death  itself  there  dies."  By  the  subjection  of  the  Son  to  the  Father, 
we  understand,  then,  that  it  is  the  incarnate  Son  who  is  thus  subordinated,  and  that 
this  interferes  in  no  way  with  the  human  relation  sustained  to  his  people.  Less  than 
Son  of  man  he  can  never  be,  any  more  than  less  than  Son  of  God.  But  just  as  his 
lend-glorified  state  during  the  forty  days  endeared  him  all  the  more  to  the  disciples, 
and  that  too  while  they  ielt  him  removed  from  the  old  forms  of  social  contact,  so  this 
last  and  most  resplendent  display  of  Christ's  Godhead  will  elevate  the  humanity 
of  his  saints  into  a  fuller  assimilation  to  hiuiself.  The  new  distance  will  be  only  a 
new  nearness,  for  God  shall  be  "  all  in  all."  The  next  verse  (ver.  29)  introduces  an  abrupt 
change :  "  Else  ['  since '  or, '  again "]  what  shall  they  do  which  are  baptized  for  the  dead, 
if  the  dead  rise  not  at  all  ? "  Various  interpretations  have  been  put  on  this  obscure 
passage,  none  of  them  free  from  difficulties.  "  Posthumous  baptism  by  proxy,"  or  the 
baptism  of  a  living  person  for  a  friend  who  had  died  unbaptized  ;  baptism  in  the  sense 
of  "  being  immersed  in  sufferings ; "  or,  again,  as  signifying  "  a  vicarious  occupancy  of  the 
position  once  filled  by  a  deceased  person ; "  or,  once  more,  as  applied  to  all  believers, — 
are  the  leading  explanations  offered.  Whatever  the  meaning  is  of  being  "  baptized  for 
the  dead" — ^whether  it  was  a  superstitious  custom  which  Iiad  sprung  up  in  the  Churoh 
and  was  condemned  by  the  apostle,  or,  the  ordinary  and  proper  use  of  this  sacrament — 
it  if  not  necessary  for  us  to  determine  in  order  to  see  its  connection  with  the  argument 
In  any  view  of  the  matter,  baptism  was  an  unmeaning  thing,  if  there  were  no  resurrec- 
tion. Solemnise  it  as  they  might,  practise  it  with  reference  to  the  afieetionate  memories 
of  the  dead,  administer  the  holy  rite  altogether  with  respect  to  the  living,  but,  never- 
thdess,  the  living  and  the  dead  were  in  the  same  category,  nnleaa  there  were  a 
resurrection.  Why  are  we  risking  so  much  by  our  baptism  as  a  profeuion  of  Christian 
faith  ?  Why  this  useless  and  irrational  "  jeopardy  "  ?  Plainly  enough,  jeopardy  has  a 
Divine  meaning  for  the  living— a  meaning,  too,  that  every  grave  illustrates  and  enforces, 
If  baptism  ia  a  sacrament — and,  unquestionably,  we  do  well  to  incur  the  risks,  pro- 
vided there  be  a  general  resurrection.  But  the  dead  body,  what  of  that  ?  And  the 
living  body,  what  of  this  ?  1  write  to  you,  Corinthians,  of  no  disembodied  ezistenee. 
I  write  of  no  immortality  of  spirit  as  spirit.  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  that.  Baptiam 
has  nothing  to  do  with  that ;  our  memory  of  the  dead  is  no  abstract  memory  of  their 
soala,  bat  of  body  and  spirit  as  forming  their  human  nature.  And  now,  if  baption 
recognise  the  union  of  body  and  siiirit,  and  symbolize  the  redeemed  sanctity  of  each, 
there  is  good  reason  for  jeopardy ;  otherwise  none  at  all.  Bv  his  lovo  for  this  Ginioh, 
by  his  joy  in  its  membera,  he  protests  that  his  own  jeopardy  is  so  great  m  to  wurant 
ibe  statemen<(  "I  die  dtdly."    Outward  circumstances  beset  him  wiUi  so  many  feiila 


518  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIAN&    [oh.  xt.  1— » 

and  the  inward  pressure  was  so  heavy  and  constant,  as  that  he  saffered  like  a  dying 
man,  day  by  day.  To  particularize ;  if  (metaphorically)  he  had  "  fought  with  boistl 
at  Ephesus,"  what  advantage  was  it  if  the  dead  rise  not?  Was  he  facing  all  these 
terrible  risks,  hour  by  hour,  to  |ireach  a  gospel  that  left  Christ  imprisoned  in  the 
sealed  grave  of  the  Sanliediini,  and  that  it  was  vain  to  preach  and  vain  to  believe,  and 
that  made  baptism  a  nullity  ?  Was  it  for  this  that  he  underwent  so  much  distress? 
"  Let  us  eat  and  drink."  If  the  body  has  no  part  or  lot  in  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  has 
no  future,  let  us  make  the  most  of  its  enjoyments  in  the  present  life,  "  To-morrow  we 
die."  No  punishment  can  be  inflicted  on  the  body  hereafter,  since  it  has  no  hereafter ; 
"  Let  us  eat  and  drink."  And  yet  beware ;  deception  is  always  possible,  and  deception 
is  certain  in  this  instance.  "  Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners;"  so  that  poet 
and  apostle,  Menander  and  St.  Paul,  are  at  one  as  it  respects  association  and  intercourse, 
and  their  efiftcts  on  practical  life.  Then  follows  the  warm  exhortation;  "Awake  to 
righteousness  " — "  an  exclamation  full  of  apostolic  majesty  "  (Bengel) — "  and  sin  not" 
Such  views  as  he  had  condemned  came  from  a  want  of  the  knowledge  of  God.  More 
than  this,  it  was  humiliating  that  such  errors  were  found  among  the  Corinthians. 
"  I  speak  this  to  yonr  ihame"  The  argument,  as  conducted  to  its  present  point,  has 
included  a  number  of  particulars,  each  luminous  in  itself,  each  reflecting  light  on  the 
general  course  of  the  idea  foremost  in  his  mind ;  and  from  the  wide  range,  reaching  to 
the  end  of  the  mediatorial  kingdom,  he  returns  to  himself  as  daily  dying  for  the  sake 
of  these  truths.  On  the  other  side,  what  is  the  landing-place  ?  It  is,  in  Epicurean 
morality  and  practice,  the  deception  and  corruption  and  shame  of  "Let  us  eat  and 
drink;  for  to-morrow  we  die."  And  as  he  comes  back  from  this  extensive  circuit 
of  thuught,  convictions  far  more  profound  than  earthly  logic,  and  emotions  deeper  than 
earthly  love,  press  themselves  into  utterance  while  he  reminds  these  Corinthians  how 
far  astray  they  had  gone,  "  not  knowing  the  Scriptures  nor  the  power  of  Gh>d." — L. 

Vers.  35 — 50. — Obfedioni  to  tlie  resurrection ;  replies  thereto ;  condusloru  involved. 
How  far  has  St.  Paul  come  on  the  path  he  has  been  treading?  Beginning  with  the 
"  many  infallible  proofs "  of  the  forty  days,  and  adding  the  appearance  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  to  him,  he  had  convicted  those  of  an  absurdity  who  denied  a  general  resurrection. 
On  various  grounds,  the  view  they  held  was  incredible.  The  moral  consequences  of 
their  belief  were  set  forth.  True  logic  and  pure  morality  condemned  their  departure 
from  that  "righteousness"  which  only  exists  by  virtue  of  "the  knowledge  of  God." 
If  the  one  class  of  thinkers  whom  he  had  answered  had  etherealized  a  fundamental, 
historic  fact  into  a  sheer  fiction,  so  that  a  great  truth  was  utterly  lost,  another  class 
of  thinkers  stood  arrayed  against  the  doctrine  itself,  and  refused  its  acceptance  on  the 
score  of  its  unreasonableness.  Nature,  they  claimed,  was  on  their  side.  Nothing  that 
died  lived  again.  The  whole  economy  of  the  material  world  was  opposed  to  it.  A 
grave  was  a  grave  for  ever.  Heaven  and  earth  bore  witness  that  death  was  death,  and 
could  never  be  other  than  death.  Now,  the  body  is  a  part  of  the  physical  kingdom, 
and,  as  such,  has  well-known  properties,  and  is  subject  to  certain  laws.  Well,  he  will 
discuss  it  on  their  ground.  In  the  previous  branch  of  the  argument,  the  l«sJB  was 
"  according  to  the  Scriptures,''  and  he  had  constant  occasion  to  say,  Christ,  Christ  Jesus, 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  Christ  as  the  Firstfruits,  Christ  in  contrast  with  Adam,  Christ 
as  Mediator,  Christ  as  the  second  Person  in  the  Trinity.  But  there  is  a  change,  a 
noteworthy  change,  now,  and  for  some  verses  Christ  is  not  named.  According  to  nature, 
or  by  analogy,  the  argument  has  to  proceed  if  the  objectors  are  met.  The  new  stand- 
point Is  promptly  taken,  and  St.  Paul  and  the  philosophical  critics  are  face  to  &ce. 
WTio  are  these  that  have  gathered  before  the  eye  of  his  imagination  in  that  hnmble 
room  in  Ephesus,  the  proud  and  lordly  city,  whose  commerce  connected  it  with  every 
land,  and  whose  wealth  was  the  wonder  and  envy  of  the  world?  Near  by  was  the 
magnificent  temple  of  Artemis,  renowned  over  lonii  and  far  beyond,  safe  tx)0  in  its 
venown,  since  no  art  of  man  could  surpass  its  pillars  of  Parian  marble,  its  doors  of 
cypress-wood,  its  roof  of  cedar  restiug  on  columns  of  jasper,  and  the  great  master-pieces 
of  painting  and  sculpture  by  which  it  had  been  enriched.  Likely  enough,  one  who 
ciiuld  quote  from  Menander,  Aratas,  and  Epimenides,  knew  something  of  Anacrcon, 
riiales,  Heraclitus,  and  others  associated  with  Ionia  and  Ephesus.  Would  not  some 
of  theae  illustrious  thinkers  rise  belon  his  vision  when  he  began  to  meditate  on  th« 


OK.  XV.  1—53.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIAN&  611 

questions  growing  ont  of  the  relations  between  soul  and  body,  questions  on  which  Greek 
intellect  had  expended  its  subtlest  power  of  investigation?  And  would  not  that 
memorable  day  in  Athens  flash  back  upon  him  from  Mara'  Hill,  when  he  confronted  the 
philosophers  with  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection,  some  mocking,  others  saying,  "  W« 
will  hear  thee  again  of  this  matter"?  Howerer  this  may  have  been,  it  is  certain  that 
St.  Paul  understood  perfectly  the  objections  made  by  Greek  philosophy  to  the  resurrec- 
tion, as  to  the  "  how"  and  "  with  what  body  " — the  general  and  the  specific  bases  of 
Greek  hostility  to  the  doctrine  so  near  his  heart.  To  answer  the  two  interrogatories— 
"  how  ?"  and  "  with  what  body  ?  " — is  the  work  now  in  hand.  St.  Paul  had  just  closed 
an  appeal  by  the  sharp  cry  of  "  Awake  to  righteousness,"  as  if  intent  on  arousing  ths 
Church  from  stupor.  Now,  however,  he  begins  with  " Thou  fool,"  or  rather,  "Fool' 
expressing  no  harshness,  but  simply  the  want  of  wisdom.  The  analogy  is  stated  at 
oqob:  "That  which  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened,  except  it  die' — ^reminding  one  of 
similar  words  spoken  by  the  Lord  Jesus  (John  xii.  24).  The  seed  you  sow  has  to  die^ 
to  pass  into  decay  and  dissolution,  its  component  parts  separated,  before  the  germ  can 
disengage  its  life  and  begin  to  sprout.  Like  that  seed,  your  body  dies.  Like  that^ 
your  body  by  dying  enters  on  a  condition  preparatory  to  living.  If  life  thus  proceed! 
from  dissolution,  the  general  question  "  how  "  is  met  by  the  liljeness  between  the  decay 
of  the  seed  and  the  body.  The  body  of  the  seed  dies,  but  it  has  a  principle  of  life 
which  springs  thereby  into  active  exisfence.  Then,  the  contrast  having  been  first 
presented  belween  deatli  and  life,  he  advances  to  the  second  point :  "  With  what  body 
do  they  come?"  Not  the  old  body ;  nothing  can  be  clearer  than  that,  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  former  body  supplies  the  conditions  for  the  process  of  deliverance  from  decay, 
and  institutes  the  work  of  quickening.  And  what  is  the  issue  of  the  new  process  ?  It 
is  a  new  body,  for  "  thou  sowest  not  that  body  that  shall  be ; "  if  thou  didst,  what 
reality  would  be  in  the  sowing ;  what  foundation  for  the  hope  of  the  husbandman ;  what 
work  for  the  providential  agency  of  nature?  On  the  supposition  of  the  same  body  in 
the  seed-grain  dying  and  growing,  the  resemblance  would  be  to  sleep  rather  than  death, 
and,  consequently  tlie  analogy  as  here  used  would  break  down  at  the  start.  Hence  the 
statement  so  essential  to  the  parallelism;  "thou  sowest  not"  the  future  body,  but  a 
body  for  transformation.  It  Is  "bare  grain  "which  is  put  into  the  ground.  This  is 
your  work  as  a  husbandman ;  but  God  is  there  to  perfnrm  his  part,  and  "  God  giveth  it 
a  body  as  it  bath  plensed  him."  Admitting  that  God  gives  the  new  body  according  to 
his  pleasure,  does  it  follow  that  this  act  is  arbitrary  because  it  is  sovereign  ?  Is  nature 
set  aside  ?  Are  tlie  former  laws  that  made  that  seed  the  kind  of  seed  it  was,  over- 
thrown under  the  sod  ?  Is  it  death  to  the  economy  <  if  prodnction,  or  is  it  production  for 
reproduction ?  And  he  ausMcrs,  God  giveth  "  to  every  seed  his  own  body."  On  the 
one  hand,  the  continuity  of  nature  is  presirved,  the  particular  character  of  the  seed  is 
not  lost ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  new  growth  is  something  unlike  that  which  dies, 
for  Ood  has  given  it  a  differ  nt  body.  Similarity  and  contrast  are  both  maintained. 
Is  the  identity  destroyed?  Ifay,  Is  there  a  distinction  between  the  body  that  dies 
and  the  body  that  lives?  Tea.  Identification  must  not  conflict  with  dissimilarity; 
dissimilarity  must  not  antagonize  identification.  Been  in  this  light,  the  change  is  one 
of  form.  Before  death,  there  was  body  living ;  in  death,  body  decayed  and  resolved  into 
its  elements ;  after  death,  body  reconstructed.  The  Entity  lies  in  the  fact  of  tody ; 
the  difference  in  the  substance,  properties,  and  form  of  body.  If  so,  what  is  there 
incredible  in  the  resurrection?  By  analogy,  it  is  a  possible  event.  Nature  authenti- 
cates a  principle  which  may  find  application  to  the  human  body ;  and  if  you  ask,  "  With 
what  body  do  they  come  ?  "  the  reply  is  that  it  will  be  a  new  body,  one  of  a  higher  form, 
one  from  him  who  "  giveth  to  every  seed  bis  own  bi>dy."  Observe,  then,  the  fact  of  the 
resurrection  is  not  rested  on  analogy.  The  use  of  the  analogical  argument  here  is  not 
for  that  purpose.  Christ's  resurrection  establishes  the  fact  of  a  general  resurrection. 
But  this  having  been  assured,  analogy  is  employed  to  show  the  consonance  thereof 
with  reason,  by  pointing  out  a  correspondence  between  it  and  the  germination  of  seed. 
And  how  beautiful  as  well  as  tnithlul  is  this  use  of  natnrel  Enlightened  from  anothei 
source,  even  by  the  Spirit  of  Gud,  St.  I'aul  is  in  a  position  to  see  the  God  of  nature 
as  the  God  of  the  resurrection.  He  goes  to  nature  and  asks,  "Save  you  anything  like 
thisf  And  she  points  him  to  the  growing  harvest,  a  few  months  ago  bare  grain,"  and 
says,  "  So  thall  thy  liead  live ! "    Our  heavenly  Father  has  not  been  content  to  give  na 


{90  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xv.  1—58 

great  facts  alone,  but  has  supradded  images,  analogies,  illustrations ;  and  the  grandei 
the  truth,  the  more  clear  and  copious  its  kindred  associations.  That  sense  of  corre- 
siwndence  which  exists  in  us  all,  and  is  a  mainstay  of  our  convictions,  is  continually 
addressed  by  him,  and  by  thousands  of  ties  he  bindii  together  his  Word  and  his  works. 
Inspired  teachers  exhibit  their  wisdom  in  the  way  they  read  and  interpret  nature. 
Scripture  is  uot  written  for  minds  shut  up  in  themselves,  the  order  and  grace  of  the 
universe  hidden  from  them.  Sensational  consciousness  is  just  as  much  a  part  of 
religion  as  spiritual  consciousness,  and,  accordingly,  an  eminent  teacher  like  St.  Paul 
honours  his  ofiSce  by  appealing  to  nature.  He  wrote  for  the  senses  no  less  than  for  the 
spirit,  and  hence  we  find  him  (ver.  39)  widening  the  scope  of  analogy.  And  whither 
shall  he  tend  ?  What  is  the  objective  point  aimed  at  ?  The  identity  of  the  resurrection- 
body  with  the  dust  and  ashes  of  the  grave — is  that  the  goal  of  his  thought  ?  Nay 
and  yea.  Look  on  the  gross  side  of  identification,  on  the  interminable  disputes  about 
bones  and  material  particles,  and  the  answer  is  nay.  Look  on  the  higher  and  far  tmer 
side  of  iden  I  itic^'tiop,  and  the  answer  is  yea.  As  to  the  first,  had  the  advocates  of  the 
dost  and  ashes  theory  existed  in  his  day,  he  would  perhaps  have  said,  "Fooll"  Happily 
for  us,  we  know  tiiat  identity  as  applied  to  the  body  means  the  persistent  adhesion  to  the 
same  idea  in  the  plan  and  purpose  of  organization,  so  that  while  the  particles  of  matter 
in  the  corporeal  atnictnTe  are  ever  coming  and  going,  and  are  as  short-lived  as  the 
ephemera  of  a  summer  day,  such  is  the  law  of  constancy  beneath  this  variation  that 
identity  is  no  wise  distiubed.  St.  Paul  first  takes  up  diversity  of  animal  organittiu. 
To  show  that  the  question  is  not  about  the  retention  and  revivification  of  former  oon- 
itititents  of  the  lody,  but  a  question  solely  of  lody  and  its  eapacHy  to  assume  such  a 
I'orm  as  God  might  he  pleased  to  give,  he  states, "  All  fiesh  is  not  the  same  flesh,"  Men, 
beasts,  fishes,  birds,  differ  in  flesh.  It  is  all  flesh,  but  very  unlike.  What  then  ?  If 
body  be  capable  of  such  variety  In  bodies,  if  you  have  such  an  interval  as  appears 
between  man  and  bird,  what  limit  will  you  put  on  body  as  to  organization  ?  Creative 
power  is  manifested  in  matter  as  matter ;  creative  power  makes  its  most  wonderful 
manifestation  in  the  coimtless  shapes  and  adaptations  of  matter.  And,  accordingly,  St. 
Paul's  meaning  is  that  you  cannot  argue  from  the  structure  and  particles  of  the  body  here 
to  the  organization  of  a  spiritual  corporeity.  But  you  can  believe  in  new  and  higher 
forms,  since  "  all  flesh  is  not  the  same  flesh,"  How  far,  then,  has  the  argument  pro- 
gressed? To  this  landing-place:  body  here,  body  hereafter,  body  capable  of  a  nobler 
type  of  existence.  But  he  proceeds  to  nsa  another  illustration.  Hitherto  he  hu  been 
mundane  in  his  view;  now  he  enters  on  the  upper  realm.  Celestial  bodies,  bodies 
terrestial,  exist  in  the  universe,  and  do  they  present  contrasts  on  a  far  broader  scale 
than  those  we  see  in  the  flesh  of  men  and  other  animals?  Ay;  the  diversity  now  is 
one  of  glory.  Celestial  and  terrestrial  bodies  share  different  degrees  of  glory.  The  sun 
is  a  sun  in  its  glory,  and  its  splendour  is  its  own.  Moon  and  stars  have  their  glory,  and 
by  this  unequal  distribution  of  radiance  they  impress  us  when  we  gaze  on  the  firma- 
ment. Just  here,  then,  the  movement  of  the  apostle's  mind  takes  a  sudden  spring.  It 
bounds  afar,  and  it  is  no  longer  form,  no  longer  seed  and  harvest,  nor  animal  organisms, 
but  it  is  the  t^lendour  of  form  that  •bsorbs  his  contemplation.  Long  ago  the  royal 
psalmist  had  poured  forth  his  wonder  and  adoration  in  the  nineteenth  psalm,  that 
sublime  hymn  which  chants  "the  glory  of  God"  in  the  firmament  and  keepe  the 
throbbing  pulses  of  the  human  heart  in  the  rhythm  of  the  universe.  And  now — ^the 
eye  dilated  and  the  resplendency  fiill  upon  it — hearken  to  the  instant  utterance :  "  So 
also  is  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,"  "  Sown  in  corruption  " — earth  and  its  earthliness ; 
"  it  is  raised  in  incorruption  "—earth  and  its  earthliness  left  in  the  grave.  "  Sown 
in  dishonour" — its  humiliations  all  upon  it,  and  demanding  speedy  removal  from  right 
and  commitment  to  darkness  lest  It  be  loathsome;  "it  is  ndsed  in  glory,"  and  bmn 
a  likeness  to  him  whose  "  countenance  was  as  the  mn  aUneth  in  his  strengUL"  "  Sown 
in  weakness  " — always  in  a  state  of  infirmity  and  as  a  corpse,  "  powerless  and  unable 
tc  resist  corruption"  (Bloomfield);  "it  is  raised  in  power,"  and  made  capable  of' 
receiving  plenitude  of  enerCT  from  the  will  of  the  spirit  and  answering  M  possible  uses 
of  mind.  "  Sown  a  natnr«Jbody  " — as  in  life  so  in  death,  a  part  of  ue  material  order, 
ind  subjected  to  ita  conditions,  and  never  able  to  eecap*  Its  limitations,  so  "  natural " 
I  tiat  this  very  apostle^ "  caught  w  to  the  third  heaven,"  had  to  suffer  "  a  thorn  ia  the 
flush  '  that  he  might  not  bs  "exalted  above  measure,"—^  it  is  laiseA  a  spiritaal  body," 


DttXT.  1— 58.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  52J 

»nd,  if  once  a  body  that  represented  the  soul,  now  a  body  that  is  in  perfect  sympathy 
with  spirit  as  the  highest  organ  in  man  for  communion  with  God.  The  last  antithesis 
is  80  important  as  to  demaLd  restatement :  "There  is  a  natural  body,  and  there  is  a 
spiritual  body."  Notice  that  the  term  "  body  "  as  used  here  derives  its  import  as  to 
its  character  or  quality,  not  from  anything  in  itself,  but  from  its  subsidiary  relations, 
in  the  one  case  being  "  natural,"  "  psychical,"  as  connecteii  with  the  soul,  and,  in  th« 
other,  as  contradistinguished  from  the  "  psychical "  or  "  soul-body,"  rf presented  as  the 
"  spiritual  body."  What  does  the  clear  discrimination  made  by  the  apostle  between 
the  two  forms  of  body  require  of  us?  A  primary  recognition  of  the  difference  betvreen 
soul  and  spirit  as  determinative  of  the  difference  between  the  body  natural  and  the  body 
spiritual.  Without  entering  into  metaphysics,  we  may  remark  that  the  soul  is  tiiat  form 
of  mind  which  connects  man  with  the  senses  and  the  outer  world  of  the  senses,  while  the 
spirit  is  that  form  of  mind  which  connects  man  with  unseen  and  eternal  objects.  If  tliis 
distinction  were  not  real — a  distinction  that  often  develops  in  the  feeling  of  most  pain- 
ful contrariety — how  si  all  we  explain  our  consciousness;  how  understand  the  amnzing 
inconsistencies  into  which  we  fall;  how  give  any  account  of  moods  and  transidons, 
reactions,  and  rebounds  ?  The  fact  of  difference  is  plain  to  every  student-thinker :  the 
nature  of  it  is  difficult,  perhaps  impossible  to  make  obvious  in  language.  Is  there  not  a 
[loetry  that  finds  access  to  the  innermost  life,  and  a  poetry  that  goes  no  further  than 
the  external  intellect  and  its  correlated  sensibilities  ?  And  of  painting,  sculpture,  music, 
eloquence,  are  there  not  everywhere  two  vividly  marked  divisions,  so  that  while  the  one 
kind  is  very  palpable  to  the  soul,  the  other  is  felt  rather  than  known,  and  works  by  hints 
and  intimations  more  than  by  communications  actually  defined?  Still  more  as  to 
persons:  who  has  not  known  some  individuals  that  always  called  forth  by  their 
presence  the  best  within  him  ?  whereas  there  were  others  whose  tones  and  looks  were 
solicitations  to  evil  ?  Only  a  few  consciously  note  these  experiences,  and  still  fewer 
analyze  them,  but  assuredly  they  are  facts  of  life,  and  life  would  be  barren  of  its  most 
advantageous  suggestions,  were  it  otherwise.  Now,  it  is  this  difference  between  loul 
and  spirit  which  St.  Paul  employs  to  give  the  contrast  in  the  verse:  "There  is  a 
natural  body,  and  there  is  a  spiritual  body."  In  this  world,  the  body  is  so  orgnnized 
as  to  correspond  to  the  soul ;  in  the  resurrection,  the  new  corporeity  will  represent  the 
spirit  Would  you  see  how  a  great  Christian  thinker  weaves  into  one  pattern  thoughts 
from  nature  and  from  Scripture?  Ver.  45  presents  St.  Paul  in  these  words:  "  Jt  is 
written."  Nature,  though  prolific  of  types,  shadows,  parables,  cannot  long  detain  him, 
and  now  he  returns  to  the  Mosaic  account  of  the  creation  in  the  first  and  second 
chapters  of  Genesis.  "  Adam  was  made  a  living  soul"  (ch.  ii.  7).  Animal  he  was  in 
corporeal  or^^anizHtion,  placed  at  the  head  of  the  animal  kingdom,  sovereign  over  all 
creatures  and  things,  and,  moreover,  much  else,  for  he  was  the  image  of  God  in  his 
reason,  intelligence,  and  moral  nature.  He  had  a  soul  in  him,  and,  it  was  God's  breath. 
It  was  therefore  God-like.  It  was  a  capacity  for  whatever  was  good  about  him,  and  for 
whatever  was  best  above  him,  in  the  order  of  creation  to  which  humanity  belonged.  But 
he  was  put  on  trial,  and  he  failed ;  his  capacity  sank  instead  of  rising ;  it  narrowe  1  and 
shrank  within  the  body,  and  then  and  there  ended  the  possibility  of  the  "  living  soul " 
having  as  such  a  Divine  history  of  progress  and  perfect  development.  We  are 
leaving  St.  Paul,  however,  who  remarks,  in  juxtapt^^ition  to  the  statement  touching 
Adam, "  the  first  man,"  that  "  the  last  Adam  was  made  a  quickening  [life-giving] 
spirit."  How  intimately  associated  in  his  mind  were  the  two,  Adam  and  Christ,  is  seen 
in  the  fact  that  he  is  the  only  Biblical  writer  who  calls  Christ  by  the  name  of  Adam  ; 
while,  at  the  same  time  that  they  stand  in  such  close  connection  with  humanity,  the 
contrast  between  them  is  forcibly  given.  What  Adam  was  is  expressed  in  "  living 
soul  "as  the  starting-point  or  initiation  of  human  nature,  the  designation  expressing  the 
predominant  aspects  of  his  earthly  position  and  his  candidacy  as  a  being  In  God's  imagt 
for  a  much  loftier  development.  By  the  "  life-giving  spirit,"  we  understand  Christ  in 
the  power  and  glory  of  his  resurrection,  when  "  he  I^  captivity  captive,  and  gave  gifts 
unto  men,"  chief  of  which  was  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  "natural"  precedes  the 
"  spiritual ; "  and  what  a  philosophy  of  the  universe  opens  in  this  lingle  idea  I  The 
natuial  in  law  and  government,  ttie  "  do  this  and  live,"  the  special  rule  and  the  special 
teat,  the  appeal  to  the  lensea  and  the  sense-intellect,  and  the  primal  guardianship  at 
eonadence  hj  mean*  of  fear  over  moral  interests — the  natntal  in  aociu  relations— the 


522  THB  FIEST  BPISTLB  TO  THE  OOBINTfflANa     [oh.  xt.  1— Sa 

aatural  in  the  motives  to  obedience  and  the  uses  of  God's  grace  and  the  offering  of  worship 
— must  lead  the  way,  since  by  no  other  method  apparent  to  ns  could  humanity  attain 
its  high  destiny,  "  Afterward  that  which  is  spiritual."  First  the  natural,  afterward 
the  spiritual, — this  is  the  order  in  everything  that  concerns  man.  Every  one  of  his 
attributes,  such  as  perception,  reasoning,  voUtion,  faith,  love,  obeys  this  paramount 
law ;  and  the  miracle  of  life  is,  whenever  the  Divine  plan  is  carried  out,  that  man  it 
seen,  as  Milton  describes  the  lion  in  Eden,  extricating  himself  from  earthly  entangle- 
ments and  winning  his  freedom.  St.  Paul  multiplies  the  forms  of  this  idea.  "Of  the 
earth,  earthy,"  was  Adam ;  "  the  second  man  is  of  heaven; "  and  as  we  bear  here  "  the 
image  of  the  earthy  "  in  body  and  sonl,  so  shall  we  bear  "  the  image  of  the  heavenly." 
Slowly  the  likeness  of  Adam  fades  even  now  under  the  fashioning  hand  of  God. 
Natural  law  is  made  subservient  to  spiritual  law,  so  that  while  the  senses  decay  and  the 
other  animal  functions  abate  more  or  less,  the  diviner  sensibilities  acquire  the  vitality 
thus  disengaged  and  expand  with  new  vigour.  Providence  co-operates  with  grace. 
And  thus,  line  after  line,  lineament  after  lineament,  disappearing  from  the  "  hving 
soul,"  and  also  from  the  lower  functions  of  the  body,  there  comes  ont  in  its  stead  "  the 
image  of  the  heavenly."  Our  growing  years,  if  we  are  consecraieu  to  God,  are  all  on 
the  side  of  Christ,  and  are  all  helpers  and  auxiliaries  to  prepare  us  for  the  fulness  of 
spiritual  life  in  a  spiritual  body. — L, 

Vers.  51—58. — Concluding  argument  and  exhortation.  If  "flesh  and  blood"  is 
"  corruption,"  and  cannot  i  nherit  "  incorruption,"  what  then  ?  Educate  the  present  body 
to  the  offices  of  the  mind ;  let  every  function  do  its  legitimate  work,  and  every  organ  be 
faithful  to  the  organism ;  refine,  beautify,  ennoble  it  by  all  natural  and  providential 
agencies ;  it  is,  nevertheless,  "  flesh  and  blood,"  and  inherits  "  corruption."  No  such 
corporeal  structure  could  go  to  heaven  unchanged.  The  earthly  body  of  Jesus  Christ, 
which  was  fully  adequate  to  the  pre-resurrection  state  of  humiliation,  sorrow,  death,  and 
fitted  him  to  show  forth  the  Father,  had  yet  to  be  changed  by  the  resurrection  before  he, 
though  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled,"  could  ascend  to  the  dominion  of  the  universe.  I^ 
then,  our  "  flesh  and  blood  "  be  so  debased  by  its  mortality,  by  its  animal  connections,  by 
its  habits  and  functions,  "  Behold,  I  show  you  a  mystery,"  a  truth  once  concealed  but  now 
revealed  by  the  Spirit,  that  those  who  are  alive  when  Gbrist  comes  at  the  last  day  "  shall 
all  be  changed."  No  graves  shall  open  to  receive  and  then  restore  them.  Land  and  sea 
shall  give  up  their  dead,  and,  simultaneously  therewith,  the  living  shall  be  instantly 
transformed,  rising  out  of  their  mortality  and  corruption  into  immortality  and  incor- 
ruption. What  a  scene  here  for  picturesque  description  1  But  the  apostle  was  too  wise 
and  reverent  to  indulge  his  ima>!ination.  The  sublimity  gathered  no  images  about  itself. 
Words  for  its  splendid  conceptions  were  not  asked,  nor  were  poetic  transports  suffered 
to  obtrude  on  the  awful  glory  of  the  hour.  Yet  there  was  speech,  yet  there  was  rapture, 
and  the  utterance  and  the  feeling  paitook  in  full  measure  of  the  grandeur  of  the 
occasion.  It  was  not  the  voice  of  imagination  and  its  emotions,  but  the  voice  of  pur« 
and  devout  passion  that  exclaimed,  "U  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  0  grave,  where  ia 
thy  victory  ?  "  The  battle  has  been  fought,  the  victory  won ;  and  the  victory  is  most 
glorious  in  this,  that  it  is  the  gift  to  God  to  us,  and  a  gift "  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  For  what  would  a  deliverance  from  mortality  and  debasement  be  to  a  Christian 
if  won  by  his  own  aim,  and  what  would  heaven  be  if  it  were  an  outgrowth  and  final 
efflorescence  of  earthly  culture  and  progress ?  "  Through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : "  this 
is  the  joy  of  the  iriumph,  and  this  the  heart  of  heaven.  And  "  therefore  "  follows  with 
the  exhortation  to  his  beloved  brethren  to  be  constant,  enduring,  abundant  in  the  Lord's 
work,  since  they  were  well  assured  that  their  devotion  to  this  labour,  with  its  burdens, 
cares,  and  sacrifices,  could  not  be  "  in  vain  in  the  Lord."  It  is  a  "  there/ore,"  indeed, 
and  such  a  one  as  he  had  never  had  an  opportunity  to  use  before,  nor  would  ever  find 
just  such  an  occasion  to  repeat.  The  thnnksgiving,  the  tender  appeal,  the  entire  out- 
burst, stands  alune  among  all  those  efi'usions  with  which  his  grandest  hours  are 
imperishably  associated.  It  has  happened  again  and  again  that  in  some  grave  crisis  (A 
a  nation,  or  when  the  fortunes  of  the  human  family  seemed  to  be  touching  an  epochal 
period,  there  has  been  some  Demosthenes  or  Burke  to  plead  for  the  hope  of  a  better 
future  for  the  state ;  or  some  Savonarola,  Luther,  Knox,  Milton,  to  lilt  up  a  prophetic 
voice  in  behalf  of  the  Church.    But  it  fell  to  the  lot  of  St  Fttnl  to  write  the  fifteenth 


0H.XT.l-«8.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAN&  623 

chapter  of  the  Fint  Corinthians,  to  make  an  argument  proof  against  every  assault,  to  set 
furtk  the  argument  with  such  force  and  in  such  amplitude  as  to  bring  nature  from  the 
vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms  about  us  and  from  the  remote  lici^^Iits  of  the  firmament, 
BO  M  to  put  her  testimony  in  alliance  with  his  logic  in  favour  of  thu  most  ])reciou8  of  all 
truths,  the  doctrine  of  a  perfected  and  immortal  humanity  in  the  L(ird  Jesus  Christ. 
Nor  can  it  be  irreverent  in  us  to  borrow  the  language  of  his  own  exultmt  faith  and  say, 
"  Thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth  "  to  Christianity  the  "  victory  "  over  materialism 
and  false  spiritualism.  Body  is  the  meeting-ground  of  matter  and  n.ind;  they  have 
met,  they  have  united  ;  they  separate  to  meet  again  in  a  nearer  and  hulier  fellowship, 
and  they  meet  to  be  together  for  ever.  Soul  is  spirit  in  its  rudimentary  life,  in  the 
childhood  of  thought  and  beauty  and  affectiDn,  in  a  state  of  trial  and  disci[iline,  but  its 
instincts,  greater  incomparably  than  its  abilities,  show  their  proplietic  outreachings 
towards  the  infinite  and  eternal.  So  far  as  our  dim  reason  can  perceive,  n  fully  developed 
spirit  could  not  exist  in  a  mortal  body,  nor  a  soul  exist  in  an  immortal  body.  Soul  and 
body,  each  "natural"  for --this  life;  spirit  and  a  "spiritual  body  "  for  the  kingdom  of 
Qoi."    «  Thanks  be  to  God."— L. 

Vers.  1 — 68. — The  expoiition  and  de/eno$o/th«  rumrection.  This  chapter  stands, 
as  it  were,  by  itself  in  the  Epistle,  and  indeed  in  the  Scripture.  The  Gospels  relate  the 
fact  of  our  Saviour's  rising  from  the  dead ;  but  St.  Paul  in  this  passage,  remarkable 
alike  for  closeness  of  reasoning,  for  fervour  of  eloquence,  and  for  elevation  of  S[iiritual  treat- 
ment, writes  as  the  theologian  of  the  resurrection.  In  opposition  to  false  teachers  who 
bad  arisen  in  the  Corinthian  Church,  the  apostle  maintains  the  fact  of  Christ's  resur- 
rection to  be  the  basis  of  Christian  faith,  practice,  and  hope ;  and  especially  deduces 
from  the  historical  event  the  expectation  of  a  glorious  immortality,  then  and  ever  the 
lx>ssession  of  the  Church,  and  destined  to  be  the  possession  of  humanity. 

I.  Thk  fact  or  Christ's  eesurbbotion  is  proved  and  preached.  (Vers.  1 — 11.) 
This  is  here  exhibited  as :  1.  The  substance  of  Christian  preaching.  2.  The  fulfilment 
of  Old  Testament  preiiictions.  3.  Verified  by  the  witness  of  the  apostles  and  of  five 
hundred  brethren.  4.  Attested  by  Paul  himsell  6.  Believed  and  prolessed  by  the 
whole  Church  of  the  Redeemer. 

II  Infbebncbs  from  this  fact.  (Vers.  12 — 28.)  1.  Destructive  inferencei,  (Vers. 
12-— 19.)  The  resurrection  of  Jesus  is  represented  as  conflicting  with  and  altogether 
overthrowing  the  belief  inculcated  by  false  teachers,  that  the  dead  rise  not.  2.  Oon- 
ttructive  inferences.  (Vers.  20 — 28.)  The  Lord  Christ,  as  a  risen  Saviour  and  King,  is 
represented  as  the  Firstfruits  of  the  spiritual  harvest,  and  as  the  supreme  Governor  and 
Controller  of  the  uiiiverse. 

III,  Confirmations  of  thk  doctrine  of  the  obnbbal  bebubbection  fboh  ths 
DEAD.  (Vers.  29 — 49.)  1.  Christian  practice,  and  especially  the  endurance  of  opposi- 
tion, persecution,  and  martyrdom,  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  the  power  of  a  belief  in 
worlds  to  come.  Nothing  is  more  evident  than  that  the  apostle  himself,  and  many  of  the 
early  Christians,  came  under  the  influence  of  this  new  and  mighty  power,  making  of 
them  nothing  short  of  new  men.  2.  Natural  analogies  support  the  doctrine  of  the 
resurrection.  Especially  the  analogy  of  the  seed  sown  from  which  vegetable  life  takes 
its  rise,  and  to  which  the  harvest  of  fruit  is  traceable.  The  manifest  order  subsisting 
in  nature,  and  the  progressive  revelation  of  God  himself,  are  in  harmony  with  the 
Christian's  hope. 

IV,  The  globious  prospects  of  Christ's  peoplk.  (Vers,  50 — 57,)  1.  The  mystery 
told.  The  inheritance  of  incorruptible  and  immortal  blessedness.  2.  Tht  triumph/ore- 
told.  Man's  worst  foes,  sin  and  death,  shall  be  vanquished,  and  that  by  the  might 
of  the  Divine  Conqueror,  Christ, 

V,  Consequent  exhortation  to  steadfastness.  (Ver.  58.)  Agunst  apathy  on 
the  one  hand,  and  enthusiasm  on  the  othei'  hand,  Christians  are  warned.  Labour  is  not 
in  vain,  for  its  fruits  shall  be  reaped  in  eternity.  Steadfastness  and  diligence  are  tlie 
appropriate  attitude  and  habit  of  those  who,  believing  that  their  Lord  has  risen,  them- 
■elves  look  forward  to  the  Divine,  immortal  life  of  heaven. — T. 

Yen.  1 — 4, — The  apottolie  doctrine.  It  is  interesting  and  valoable  to  have  In  thee* 
worda  from  St.  Paul's  own  pen  a  confirmation  of  the  statements  Of  the  insidred  historian, 


524  THE  E'iUST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    foH.  Xj.  1—68 

St.  Luke,  regarding  the  preaching  by  which  the  first  moral  victories  of  Ghriitianlty  wer« 
achieved. 

L  Tub  substance  of  afobtolio  DooTBim.  Paul  disclaims  any  pretension  to  a 
ministry  of  human  learning  or  wisdom ;  he  here  as  everywhere  relies  upon  the  /acts 
which  form  the  substance  of  his  preaching  and  teaching.  1.  The  apostles  proclaimed 
the  deatli  and  burial  of  their  Lord.  These,  indeed,  were  unquestioned  historical  facts, 
yet  they  lay  at  the  basis  of  all  their  subsequent  teaching,  alike  of  doctrine,  of  promise' 
and  of  precept.  2.  In  conjunction  with  this  they  preached  the  resurrection  of  Christ! 
Whilst  none  denied  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  had  been  crudfied,  there  were  many  who 
received  the  proclamation  of  his  resurrection  with  incredulity  and  ridicule.  But,  how- 
ever .their  preaching  might  be  received,  the  apostles  never  wavered  in  their  declaration 
that  their  Lord  had  risen  from  the  grave.  3.  These  events  were  represented  as  a  fulfil- 
ment of  Old  Testament  prophecy;  what  had  happened  was  "according  to  the  Scriptures." 
To  the  Jews  such  a  representation  would  appeal  with  peculiar  power ;  and  the  Gentiles 
would  recognize  in  it  the  unity  of  the  dispensations  of  God.  4.  The  purpose  of  these 
events  was  represented  as  being  the  pardon  and  abolition  of  the  sins  of  those  who 
believed.  The  explanation  of  this  "  mystery  "  was  a  matter  of  inspired  doctrine;  but 
the  fact  was  published  abroad  to  all  who  would  hear  the  Word. 

II.  Thk  bbceftion  of  apostolic  doctrinb.  1.  In  the  case  of  tnie  converts,  this 
was  not  vain,  unreasonable,  frivolous.  There  are  those  who  are  ready  to  receive  every 
new  doctrine ;  and  some  such  professed  adherence  to  Christianity  without  any  sufficient 
acquaintance  with  the  truth,  without,  examining  its  credentials,  without  counting  the 
cost  of  their  decision.  But  sincere  Christians  act  reasonably  and  deliberately  in  their 
acceptance  of  the  Word  of  life.  2.  True  converts  were  stable  in  their  faith.  Such  is 
the  teaching  of  this  passage:  "Wherein  ye  stand;"  "Ye  hold  it  fast."  Deliberate 
acceptance  and  adhesion  may  be  expected  to  be  followed  by  tenacious  retention  of  the 
truth.  Stability  in  foith  and  godliness  is  the  condition  of  the  enjoyment  of  true 
blessing. 

UI.  Thb  ultimatk  Am  and  result  of  apostolic  doctbinis.  No  reader  of  the 
New  Testament  can  suppose  that  the  first  preachers  of  the  gospel  intended  simply  to 
convey  information.  Theirs  was  a  moral,  a  spiritual  aim ;  they  sought  the  salvation  of 
their  feUow-men — their  deliverance  from  the  cuise,  the  bondage,  the  love  of  sin.  Why 
was  St.  Paul  so  anxious  that  his  hearers  and  his  readers  should  receive  and  retain  his 
teaching?  It  was  because  in  his  heart  there  glowed  the  flame  of  benevolence,  because 
he  desired  above  all  things  that  his  fellow-creatures  should  be  rescued  firom  the  bondage 
of  sin,  and  should  rejoice  in  the  liberty  ol  the  sous  of  God,  and  because  he  believed  that 
this  blessed  result  could  be  brought  about  only  by  their  cordial  reception  of  the  gospel 
which  it  was  his  privilege  and  joy  to  preach.— T. 

Ver.  6. — "  Some  are  fdHea  adeep."  Sleep  is  •  metaphor  for  death,  which  has  been 
employed  by  the  heathen  poets,  and  by  the  rabbinical  writers,  as  well  as  by  the  inspired 
penmen  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  But  Christianity  has  given  to  the  figure  an 
especial  sanction  and  an  especial  appropriateness. 

L  OOB  LOBD  nruHKT.T  HAS  SET  THE  EXAMPLE  OF  DESIONATINO  DEATH  AS  8UEKP,      In 

speaking  of  Jairus's  daughter,  he  said,  "The  maiden  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth;"  and 
of  Lazams  he  said,  "  Our  friend  Lazarus  sleepeth."  As  on  both  tiiese  occasions  he  was 
misunderstood,  it  would  seem  that  the  usage  was  not  a  fEmilliar  one.  But  as  he  spake, 
it  was  natural  and  right  that  his  disciples  also  should  speak. 

IL  Death  io  the  Chbistian  is  sleep,  fob  it  comes  at  the  close  of  the  dat*! 
TOiib  "After  life's  fitful  fever  he  sleeps  well,"  is  language  which  Shakespeare  usee 
with  leferenoe  to  the  murdered  Duncan.  But  how  &r  more  appropriate  is  such  language 
when  used  with  reference  to  those  who  have  served  God  faithfully  and  diligently  during 
many  years,  and  who  rest  from  their  labours  1  "  David,  after  he  had  served  his  own 
generation,  fell  <m  sleep; "  and  the  expression  is  one  suitable  in  applioatioB  to  arei} 
tnw  wxmA  at  the  Dinne  Lord. 

*  How  blest  the  righteous  when  he  ^eal 
When  sinks  a  weary  soul  to  rest, 
Bow  mildly  beam  the  closing  eyes  I 
~    r  gently  heaves  the  expiring  breast  t* 


6ti.  XT.  1— 68.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TUG  COBINTUIANti.  £U 

tn.  Death  to  tbk  Christian  n  bleep,  fob  it  is  tuk  libebation  of  the  bfibii 
TROll  CABTH  AND  ITS  COMMUNION  WITH  HKAVBN.  The  body  of  the  slave  or  of  the  exile 
fnay  be  still  and  silent  in  slumber,  and  the  spirit  may  in  the  visious  of  tlie  niglit  wander 
to  the  congenial  scenes  of  home,  and  may  imigine  the  rerjewnl  of  brukeu  ties  and  the 
resumption  of  suspended  joys.  And  in  this  sleep  is  the  emblem  of  that  death  through 
vhich  Ciirist's  people,  absent  from  the  body,  are  present  with  the  Lord.  Ou  earth  and 
in  the  life  of  the  body,  during  the  walk  of  faith,  it  sometimes  seems  that  the  beloved 
Saviour  is  far  away,  and  that  eternal  joys  are  imaginary  and  remote.  But  when  the 
frame  sinks  into  the  slumber  of  dissolution,  the  spirit  wings  its  flight  to  the  land  where 
Jesus  is,  and  where  are  pleasures  for  evermore. 

IV.  DbATH  TO  THE  ChBIBTIAH  18  BLESP,  BBOAUSE  IT  IB  FOLLOWED  BY  THE  SLOBIOU.' 

AND  KTEBLASTma  AWAKENDfo.  "  An  eternal  sleep"  is  the  expression  of  the  heathen 
poets,  not  of  the  Christian  teacher.  On  the  contrary,  the  whole  argument  of  thia 
chapter  is  to  banish  such  a  notion,  and  to  substitute  for  it  one  far  more  bright  and 
blessed  and  far  mure  true.  Even  the  ancient  prophet  foretold  that  many  of  those  who 
sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake  to  everlasting  life.  And  we  know  that 
"  Christ  hath  been  raised  from  the  dead,  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  are  asleep."  It 
shall  be  an  awaking  which  shall  fill  die  saints  with  surprise  and  satisfaction  _  and 
infinite  joy,  and  which  shall  be  a  new  and  marvellous  revelation  of  the  love  and  life  of 
Qod  to  natures  purided  and  glorified. — ^T. 

Vers.  9, 10.— Humility  and  itHf-asttrtion.  No  writer  is  more  given  to  paradox  than 
the  Apostle  PauL  An  eager,  impulsive  nature  b  wont  to  realize  vividly  every  side  of 
truth  that  is  presented,  and  seems  consequently  to  fall  into  inconsistencies.  But  such 
a  nature  is  usually  remarkably  sincere  and  trustworthy.  Such  was  the  case  with  the 
apostle,  and  no  candid  reader  can  doubt  that  the  language  of  the  text  represents  the 
real  facts  of  the  case. 

L  An  abbebtion  of  pebsonaIi  huuilitt.  1.  Paul  occupied  a  singular  position 
among  the  apostles,  inasmuch  as  he  had  not,  like  the  others,  been  privileged  to  enjoy 
the  Bodety  of  the  Divine  Lord  during  his  earthly  ministry,  but  had  been  called  by 
Christ  long  after  the  Ascension.  2.  Paul  took  shame  to  himself  because  he  had  per- 
secuted the  Church  of  God,  which  had  buen  constituted  through  the  labours  and  zeal  of 
the  other  apostles  and  their  colleagues.  On  these  two  grounds  he  deemed  himself  the 
least  of  the  apostles,  and  even  unworthy  of  the  apostolic  name.  Such  humility  is  rare ; 
it  secures  the  approval  of  him  who  regards  the  lowly  and  raises  them  up,  who  exalts  the 
humble  and  meek ;  it  commends  itself  to  the  Master  who  requires  a  childlike  spirit  as  a 
condition  of  entrance  into  the  kingdom,  and  who  prononnces  a  blessing  upon  the  meek. 

IL  A  olaik  of  official  eionenob.  1.  The  apostolic  ofiSce  and  dignity  are  attributed 
to  the  free  favour  of  the  Giver  of  all.  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  This 
was  in  accordance  with  Paul's  own  teaching  that  "  Ood  hath  set  some  tn  the  Church, 
first  apostles."  An  honour  like  this,  functions  Buch  ai  it  involved,  authority  such  as 
was  connected  with  it,  could  come  only  from  GKkL  It  is  well  for  every  servant  of 
Chriat  to  accustom  himself  deliberately  and  constantly  to  trace  np  his  possessions  and 
his  trust  to  the  Divine  Lord  and  Author  of  blessing.  2.  Paul  acknowledged  that  the 
gifts  bestowed  upon  him  had  been  diligently  and  faithfully  employed.  Grace  had  been 
given,  and  grace  had  been  found  not  vain  or  void.  That  is  to  say,  opportunities, 
advantages,  endowments,  had  all  been  used  in  such  a  manner  as  that  they  had  been 
continued  and  increased.  Growing  years  had  brought  enlarged  powers  and  enlarged 
usefdlneaa  and  influence.  3.  Paul  claimed  pre-eminence  in  labour.  His  calling,  as  the 
apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  involved  long  journeys,  many  hardships  and  privations  and 
perils.  His  ardent  temperament,  his  burning  love  to  his  Lord,  his  grateful  and  con- 
secrated disposition,  led  him  to  undertake  and  to  perform  more  than  had  been  under- 
taken and  performed  by  others.  It  was  a  necessity  alike  of  his  position  and  of  his 
temperament.  Yet  it  is  observable  that  he  no  sooner  churned  to  be  first  in  toil, 
than  he  reminded  himself  that  what  he  did  was  not  his  doing,  but  the  fruit  of  God's 
grace  towards  him.  If  humility  passes  into  self-«8sertioii,  self-assertion  letuins  to 
buittility.p->T. 

Tai  17<— ut  Mfo  firilth.    It  «rften  happens  thst  men  accept  certain  netiona  irithoBt 


526  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xt.  1— Sft 

realizing  what  they  involve.  So  it  Beems  to  have  been  with  those  Corinthian  Ghiistiani 
who  lent  too  willing  an  ear  to  the  false  teachers  who  denied  the  resurrection  of  the  dead. 
The  apostle  was  justified  in  pointing  out  to  such  that  their  surrender  of  this  great 
doctrine  and  revelation  involved  virtually  the  denial  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and 
that  this  involved  the  denial  of  some  of  their  most  cherished  beliefs  and  hopes.  What 
the  Lord  Christ  was  to  them  he  was  because  he  was  tlie  risen  and  triumphant  Saviour. 
To  take  away  their  faith  in  such  a  Saviour  was  to  render  their  faith  vain. 
I.  Faith  in  Chbist's  Deitt  labqelt  bests  upon  tee  fact  of  his  BEsnBBionoN. 

1.  If  Jesus  had  not  risen  fi:om  the  dead,  his  own  recorded  predictions  would  have  been 
falsified.  On  several  occasions  he  had  foretold  that  his  violent  death  should  be  followed 
on  the  third  day  by  his  resurrection.  Had  this  not  taken  place,  his  word  would  have 
been  discredited,  and  all  confidence  in  his  Deity  would  naturally  have  been  destroyed. 

2.  If  Jesus  had  not  risen  from  the  dead,  he  would  have  been  proved  inferior  to  death. 
The  argument  of  the  apostle  was  a  very  powerful  and  effective  argument — that,  being 
not  only  David's  Son,  but  David's  Lord,  it  was  not  possible  that  he  should  be  holdeu 
by  death,  that  his  body  should  see  corruption.  But  had  he  remained  in  the  grave,  a 
very  different  Impression  concerning  his  nature  would  necessarily  have  been  produced 
upon  the  minds  of  his  disciples,  and  the  world  could  never  have  been  convinced  of  his 
Messiahship  and  divinity. 

IL  Faith  in  Chbibt  ab  a  Bavioub  bests  upon  the  tact  of  his  besubbeotion.  1. 
This  appears  in  the  customary  publication  of  the  gospel  by  theins^pired  apostles.  They 
preached  that  Jesus  was  "raised  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  unto 
Israel,  and  remission  of  sins."  2.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  token  of  the  acceptance 
by  the  Father  of  that  redemptive  work  of  Christ  whereby  forgiveness  is  secured  to  those 
who  believe.  And  it  is  the  condition  of  the  exercise  of  those  mediatorial  functions 
which  are  still  discharged  in  the  court  of  heaven,  the  presence  of  God.  3.  The  resur- 
rection is  a  spiritual  power  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  believe  it,  a  power  of  newness 
of  mind,  of  holiness,  of  life  immortal  They  who  die  with  Christ  unto  sin,  and  are 
crucified  with  him  unto  the  world,  risen  with  Christ,  live  in  his  heavenly  and 
resurrection  life. 

III.  Faith  in  Chbibt  ab  the  FissTFRniTS  or  the  oenebal  besubbeotion  bests 
OPON  HIS  BiBiNG  FBOU  THE  TOMB.  There  is  observablo  a  marvellous  contrast  between 
the  hopelessness  of  the  heathen  and  the  confidence  of  Christians  in  the  prospect  of 
death.  To  those  who  believe  the  gospel,  the  victory  of  Immanuel  over  death  and  the 
grave  is  the  pltdge  of  the  final  triumph  of  the  good,  is  their  consolation  when  they  are 
bereaved  of  their  Christian  kindred  and  associates,  is  their  confidence  and  inspiration 
in  the  prospect  of  their  own  departure  to  be  with  Christ. — ^T. 

Yer.   20. — X^  /trst/rmt$  of  li/i.     There  is  a  perceptible  change  in  the  tone  of 

ihe  apostle's  writing  just  at  this  point.  He  has  been  reasoning  upon  the  supposition, 
adopted  by  some  even  among  the  Corinthians,  that  the  dead  rise  not,  and  showing 
that,  if  such  is  the  case,  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  fable,  and  the  faith  of  Christians 
vain  and  their  hopes  baseless.  This  course  he  has  taken  to  show  to  his  readers  the 
awful  consequences  of  the  false  doctrine  introduced  among  them.  But  he  suddenly 
breaks  off,  and  commences  in  another  strain.  After  all,  the  supposition  discussed 
is  incredible.  For  as  a  matter  of  fact,  of  history,  of  certainty,  Christ  hu  risen  from 
the  dead,  and  in  doing  so  he  has  become  the  Firstftuits  of  them  that  slept. 

I.  Chbist'b  eesubeection  PRECEDES  THAT  OF  HIS  PEOPLE.  The  doctrine  of  the  future 
life,  obscure  in  the  earlier  periods  of  revelation,  was  made  known  with  growing  clear- 
ness as  ages  passed  on.  But  it  was  Christ  who  "  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light 
through  the  gospel."  Not  only  by  his  explicit  teaching,  but  by  his  own  victory  over  the 
grave,  did  our  Saviour  bring  to  mankind  an  assurance  of  eternal  life.  And,  in  point 
of  time,  he  led  the  way  for  his  faithful  followers  and  friends. 

II.  Chbist'b  besuebection  is  uvidencb  of  the  Divinb  and  QtricKENiNO  foweb 
WHICH  sHAUi  BAI8B  HIS  PEOPLE  AFTBE  HIM.  The  presence  of  a  Divine  power  of  life 
was  manifest  when,  on  the  third  day,  the  Lord  of  glory  rose  victorious  from  the  tomb, 
!f  before  it  was  doubtful  whether  in  the  universe  there  resided  such  a  life-giving  energy 
such  doubt  was  now  dispelled.  The  same  Divine  might  which  raised  the  Leader  can  raise 
the  followei-s  too.    The  sun  which  has  ripened  the  sheaf  which  is  presented  as  the 


on.  XT.  1-«8.1    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANa  627 

firitfrolts  of  the  harvest  has  warmth  and  vital  geniality  to  mature  the  crop  that  clothei 
the  Tastest  plain  ;  and  the  Spirit  of  life  which  quickened  the  crucified  One  will  nuse 
up  us  also  to  be  glorified  with  him. 

in.    ChKIST's   resurrection    is    unto    the    BAMB    BLBBBEDmSBS    OF    LIF»    WHICH    IS 

APPOINTED  FOR  HIS  PEOPLE.  Our  Lord  did  not  rise  to  renew  the  humiliation  and  the 
sufferings  of  this  earthly  existence;  he  rose  a  Conqueror  to  live  and  reign  in  glory. 
And  the  purpose  of  infinite  grace  is  that,  where  the  Master  is,  there  also  shall  his 
disciples  and  servants  be.  We  may  share  his  weakness  and  his  woe,  but  we  shall 
share  also  his  might  and  his  blessedness ;  we  may  bear  his  cross,  but  we  shall  also  wear 
his  crown. 

IV.     CHKISX'i    BESURBECTION    18    THE     EARNEST    OF    HIS    PEOPLE'S    IMHOBTAL    LITE. 

"Death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him."  And  those  for  whom  he  both  died  and  rose 
again  live  in  him  and  live  for  ever.  "  There  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  "  They 
go  no  more  out."  It  is  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord  and  Husbandman  when  the  firstfhdts 
are  brought  into  the  temple  and  offered  upon  the  altar.  But  the  glory  of  that  day 
shall  be  yet  greater  when  the  harvest  shall  be  completed,  and  when  the  ganur  of 
God  shall  be  filled  with  the  rich  spiritual  produce  of  the  earth. — ^T. 

Ver.  25. — The  reign  of  the  Redeemer.  Even  in  his  earthly  humiliation,  Christ  was 
a  King.  Once  the  devil  offered  him  the  kingdoms  of  the  world ;  once  the  people 
would  have  taken  him  by  force  and  have  made  him  their  King.  Such_  secmar 
dominion  he  sought  not,  neither  would  accept.  Yet  he  entered  Jerusalem  in  royal 
state ;  before  Pilate  he  confessed  himself  a  King ;  and  over  his  cross  it  was  written, 
"  This  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  King  of  the  Jews."  Little  notion  had  men  during 
his  ministry  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  that  dominion  which  sliould  one  day  be  his. 
Yet  the  apostles  came  to  understand  that  not  only  the  prophetic  and  the  priestly,  but 
also  the  kingly  dignity  and  office,  were  appointed  for  him  whose  gospel  they  pro- 
claimed. 

I.  Christ's  biort  to  beion.  This  is  grounded  upon :  1.  His  Divine  nature  and 
authority.  2.  His  moral  right  and  qualifications.  3.  His  definite  appointment  by  the 
Father.    4.  His  mediatorial  sufferings  and  sacrifice. 

II.  The  subjects  or  Christ's  kingdom.  They  are  spiritual  and  willing  subjects.  He 
cares  nothing  for  a  pretended  loyalty  or  a  merely  outward  obedience.  His  aim  is  to 
gain  a  dominion  over  human  hearts,  and  thence  to  rule  human  society, 

III.  The  foes  whom  Christ's  beion  subdues.  These  he  is  to  put  under  his  feet.  They 
may  be  enumerated:  1.  Ignorance.  2.  Error.  3.  Superstition.  4.  Irreligiousness 
and  worldliness.    5.  Vice,  crime,  and  sin.    6.  All  false  and  corrupt  religions. 

IV.  The  MEANS  bt  which  Christ's  beion  is  advanced  and  his  foes  subdued.  1. 
The  weapons  are  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  the  exhibition  of  the  righteousness  and  love 
of  God.  2.  The  agency  is  that  of  believing,  sympathizing,  and  consecrated  natures. 
The  kingdom  comes  by  the  labours  and  the  courage  and  enterprise  of  the  spiritual 
subjects.    3.  The  power  is  that  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God. 

V.  The  febiod  of  Christ's  beion.  1.  It  commenced  at  onr  Lord's  ascennon,  when 
he  was  "  raised  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,"  "  from  henceforth  expecting,"  etc.  2.  It 
has  been  constantly  advancing,  the  kingdom  has  been  extending  its  boundaries,  and 
the  number  of  the  subjects  has  been  multiplying.  3.  It  will  not  terminate  until 
victory  shall  have  been  gained  over  every  foe.  "  Thy  throne  is  for  ever  and  ever." 
Only  when  all  opposition  is  vanquished,  shall  the  Son  himself  yield  the  dominion,  and 
Qod  shall  be  all  and  in  all.— T. 

Ter.  83. — Evil  annpcmf/.  This  is  one  of  several  instances  in  which  inspired  writers 
have  incorporated  in  their  own  compositions  the  language  of  current  literature.  The 
adoption  of  a  line  from  Menander  is  a  witness  to  the  harmony  between  human  reason 
and  Divine  revelation.  From  whatsoever  source  proceeding,  truth  and  justice,  wisdom 
and  prudence,  possess  a  Divine  authority.  We  are  encouraged  to  use  the  wisdom  of 
so-called  "  profane  "  writers  even  in  enforcing  spiritual  truth. 

L  Infidelity  and  immobalitt  abe  often  associated.  It  would  be  nnjnat  t» 
charge  all  unbelievers  with  vice ;  but  there  is  no  injustice  in  pointing  out  that  the 
■attual  tendency  of  infidelity  is  both  to  shake  the  foundations  of  virtue  and  to  snap  th< 


628  THE  FIRST  EPISTLSJ  TO  THE  COElNTfilANSu    [oh.  xt.  1—6* 

restraints  upon  vice.  If  there  be  no  rigliteous  God,  no  moral  law,  no  fatnre  retribution, 
all  sanctions  to  virtue  and  uprightness  of  heart  and  conduct  are  removed,  except  such 
as  are  imposed  by  civil  society.  Where  external  penalties  are  removed,  or  where  they 
can  be  evaded,  it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  that  the  bulk  of  men  will  deny  themselves, 
check  their  appetites  and  passions,  and  practise  the  difficult  virtues  of  justice,  chastity, 
and  benevolence.  And  it  cannot  be  concealed  that  in  most  cases  the  prevalence  of 
infidelity  opens  the  flood-gates  of  all  iniquity.  The  Corinthian  false  teachers  seem  to 
have  taught  that,  the  body  being  perishable,  sing  of  the  flesh  are  immaterial  and 
unimportant,  and  thus  to  have  given  countenance  to  the  maxim  of  Epicnieaniim,  "  Let 
118  eat  and  drink ;  for  to-morrow  we  die." 

IL  Infidelitt  and  imuobalitt  abe  coNTAOions  AirD  ooBBUFTDra.  By  appealing 
to  what  is  base  and  selfish  in  human  nature,  the  champions  of  error  and  lelf-indulgenoe 
lead  especially  the  young  who  come  under  their  influence  away  from  the  stem  steep 
road  of  virtue  into  "  the  primrose  path  of  dalliance."  None  are  more  contemptible 
than  those  blasphemers  and  voluptuaries  who,  having  grown  grey  in  the  service  of 
Satan,  make  it  their  aim  to  corrupt  and  debauch  the  young  and  inexperienced.  By 
gasting  aspersions  upon  religion,  by  insinuating  doubts,  by  representing  the  pleasures 
of  sin,  and,  above  all,  by  an  example  of  irreligion,  profanity,  and  vice,  tuoh  person* 
make  themselves  a  moral  plague  and  pestilence  in  human  society. 

IIL  Inixdelitt  akd  iumobality  should  thesefobe  be  discottntenahoks  Airs 
ESCHEWED.  For  the  sake  of  our  own  welfare,  for  the  sake  of  the  family,  the  Church, 
and  society,  it  is  needful  that  we  should  be  upon  our  guard  against  those  evil 
associations  which  have  a  tendency  to  corrupt  even  good  manners  and  morals.  And, 
on  the  other  hand,  those  whose  influence  has  been  exerted  against  the  cause  of  virtue 
and  religiou  may  well  be  reminded  that  they  cannot  perish  ainiie,  that  their  example 
will  probably  be  injurious  and  even  ruinous  to  others ;  so  that  if  there  remain  in  them 
any  spark  of  pity  and  unselfishness,  they  may  well  be  entreated  to  immediate  and 
sincere  repentance,  for  the  sake  of  others  as  well  as  of  themselves. — T. 

Yen.  36 — 38. — Death  and  quickening.  Although  the  apostle  deems  himself  to 
have  established  the  fact  of  the  resurreciion  of  the  dead,  by  proving  the  resurrection 
of  the  Saviour,  and  by  showing  that  the  resurrection  of  Christ's  people  is  a  consequence 
of  their  Lord's  resurrection,  he  is  quite  sensible  of  the  difficulties  attaching  to  this 
belief.  These  are  difficulties  which  all  have  felt,  and  with  which  many  sincere 
believers  find  themselves  often  confronted.  Believing  the  fact,  we  know  not  how  to 
render  it  to  our  own  minds ;  the  manner  of  the  fact  is  inconceivable,  or  at  all  events 
unimaginable.  The  apostle  endeavours  to  assist  us  in  the  effort  either  to  overcome 
the  difficulty  or  reasonably  to  acquiesce  in  its  partial  continuance.  He  makes  use  ot 
natural  analogies.  The  world  is  full  of  mysteries;  and  we  may  trace  some  mysteries 
which  are  common  to  nature  and  to  revelation. 

L  The  Cbeatob,  who  appoints  the  death  or  the  seed  as  pbepabatobt  to  the 

LIFE  of  the  plant,  HAT  APPOINT  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  EABTHLT  BODT  AS  THE  PBEPABA- 

TION  FOB  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODY.  1'he  analogy  IS  sometimes  misunderstood, 
and  it  is  supposed  that,  according  to  Paul,  the  dead  body  of  the  man  is  really  the 
seed  of  the  resurrection-body.  This  is  not  the  case.  But  the  apostle  is  evidently 
reasoning  as  did  our  Lord  when  he  said,  "  Except  a  com  of  wheat,"  etc  The  death 
of  the  seed  followed  by  the  life  of  the  plant  is  a  figure  of  the  death  of  the  Saviour 
followed  by  the  prevalence  of  his  doctrine,  and  the  vast  extent  of  his  personal, 
mediatorial  influence.  And  so  here,  we  are  reminded  that  God's  ways  are  not  as 
our  ways,  that  it  pleases  him  to  bring  life  out  of  death,  and  that  he  is  able  to  make 
death  the  step  towards  a  new  and  higher  life. 
IL  Tbb  Cbeatob,  who  sites  to  evz:rt  seed  a  bodt  of  its  owh,  oah  fbotidb  the 

OLOBinSD  8FIBIT  WITH  A  VESTUBE  AS  SUITABLE  TO  THE  HIQHEB  STATE  AS  CUB  BABTHLY 

OBGANIBH  IS  SUITABLE  TO  THE  PBESENT  LIFE.  There  IS  a  great  disparity  between  the 
grain  of  com  and  the  plant  of  wheat  when  green  in  spring  or  golden  in  harvest-time ; 
a  greater  disparity  still  between  the  acorn  and  the  giant  oak  of  the  forest.  One  seed 
gives  life  to  a  fragrant,  radiant,  delicate  flower;  another  to  a  rich  and  lasdooa  ihiit: 
MBOthar  to  a  lordly  tree.  One  seed  is  more  adapted  to  a  temperate  climate^  anotlker 
totht  tnfioa;  out  giowa  best  upon  the  mountain  slope,  another  ia  ttw  ikdttnd  vala 


o&ZT.f-Sa]    THE  FIRST  EFISTLK  TO  THE  OOBINTHIANa  62S< 

Th*  reionrees  of  Omniscience  and  Omnipotence  are  strikingly  apparent  in  the 
prodigality,  diversity,  and  adaptation  of  vegetable  life.  Such  considerations  are 
a  rebuke  to  our  incredulity,  which  arises  from  an  undue  conceit  of  our  own  wisdom, 
and  a  lack  of  just  humility.  We  may  ask,  "  How  are  the  dead  raised?  and  with  what 
body  do  they  come?"  AH  nature  supplies  the  answer,  inasmuch  as  it  tells  us  that 
\he  Creator  and  Lord  of  all  is  never  at  a  loss  fur  means  to  execute  his  purposes  and 
to  fulfil  his  promises.  When  the  time  comes  for  this  body  to  be  laid  aside,  to  be  taken 
down,  there  shall  be  provided  for  the  glorified  and  happy  spirit  "  a  bouse  not  made 
with  handg,  eternal  in  the  heavens." — ^T. 

Ver.  45. — "  TOs  last  Adam."  The  apostle  has  supported  the  Christian  belief  in  the 
resurrection  by  adducing  natural  analogies,  and  these  will  always  possess  a  certain 
measure  of  force  for  intelligent  and  reflective  minds.  But  it  is  observable  that  he 
returns  to  what  ia  the  strongest  ground  of  belief  in  the  future  life  and  all  which  it 
Involves,  viz.  the  personal  relation  of  the  Christian  to  his  Divine  and  mighty  Lord. 
The  fovmdation  of  our  hope  is  in  the  assurance  of  our  Saviour,  "  Because  I  Uve,  ye 
shall  live  also." 

I.  The  desiqnation  of  Cebist:  thb  last  Adam.  This,  though  a  rabbinical 
expression  applied  to  the  Messiah,  has  a  truly  Christinn  signification.  1.  It  implies 
our  Lord's  true  humanity ;  he  was  a  descenrlant  of  our  first  parents,  and  he  was  the 
Son  of  man.  2.  It  implies  his  federal  headship,  his  representative  character,  and  his 
peculiar  authority.  There  is  a  new  humanity  created  afresh  for  the  glory  of  Crod ; 
and  of  this  the  Lord  Christ  is  the  one  rightful  Ruler  and  Head. 

n.  Tbb  descriftioh  of  Chbist:  a  life-gitino  Spirit.  1.  This  is  In  contrast 
with  the  description  of  the  first  Adam,  "a  living  soul,"  so  called  in  the  book  of 
Genesis.  From  our  progenitor  we  have  inherited  the  body  and  the  animal  and 
rational  nature  for  which  that  body  is  a  suitable  vehicle.  2.  This  is  indicative  of  the 
prerogative  of  Christ  to  impart  a  new  and  higher  spiritual  life  to  humanity.  We 
receive  from  him  by  the  bestowal  of  his  Spirit  a  nobler  being,  a  being  which  allies  us 
.  to  God,  and  which  fits  us  for  the  occupations  and  the  joys  of  heaven.  "In  him  was 
life."  He  did  not  however  possess  life  only  to  retain  it  as  his  own,  but  in  order  to  share 
it  with  his  people.  "  I,"  said  he,  "  am  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and  that  they 
might  have  it  more  abundantly."  3.  This  is  explanatory  of  the  revelation  of 
resurrection  and  immortality.  The  nature  wa  inherit  from  Adam  fits  us  for  earth; 
the  nature  which  we  receive  from  Christ  fits  us  for  heaven.  Adam  is  "  the  earthy," 
and  they  who  dwell  on  earth  share  his  earthy  being  and  life;  Christ  is  "  the  heavenly," 
and  they  who  are  made  in  his  likeness  and  who  share  his  character  and  spirit  are 
qualified  for  celestial  and  eternal  joys. — T. 

Ver.  49.—"  2%e  image  of  the  heavenly."  According  to  the  reading  of  the  original 
which  is  adopted,  this  passage  bears  an  indicative  or  an  imperative  meaning.  If 
imperative,  tlien  it  is  an  admonition  to  cultivate  and  perfect  in  our  character  and  life, 
even  now  upon  earth,  the  moral  and  spiritual  image  of  the  IKvine  Lord.  If  indicative 
and  future,  then  it  is  an  assertion  that,  in  the  coming  time,  the  time  of  celestial  glory, 
Christians  shall  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly. 

I.  Whose  juaqm  is  this?  The  answer  to  this  question  cannot  be  doubtful.  The 
neavenly  One,  whose  image  Christiana  are  to  reflect,  can  be  none  other  than  the 
Divine  Lord  himselt  There  is  a  measure  in  which  this  resemblance  is  attained  even 
upon  earth,  and  many  admonitions  are  addressed  to  Christians,  to  cultivate  moral 
resemblance  to  their  great  and  glorious  Head.  But  in  the  future  state  hindrances  to 
assimilation  shall  be  removed;  and  "we  shall  be  like  him;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he 
is  "  (1  John  iii.  2).  As  St.  Paul  expresses  it  elsewhere,  we  shall  be  "  changed  into  the  same 
image."  So  that  the  apostles  agree  as  to  wliat  shall  constitute  the  peculiar  privilege 
and  glory  of  the  comin;4  state  of  felicity. 

II.  In  what  does  this  imase  oonsibtY  1.  It  ia  a  spiritual  likeness,  oonsisdng 
not  in  the  similarity  of  form  or  feature,  but  in  that  of  cbuacter,  of  moral  life.  2.  It 
is  a  likeness  in  true  holiness.  God's  holy  Child  or  Servant,  Jesus,  is  the  model  (rf  all 
parity  and  perfection,  and  to  be  like  Christ  is  to  be  holy  even  as  he  is  holy.  3.  It 
torre  .ponds  to  Gkxi's  original  intention  as  to  what  man  ihould  be,     lie  at  first  created 

I.  COBIHTllIANa.  2  N 


630  TFK  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTIIIANS.    [oh.xt.  1— 5a 

man  In  his  own  image ;  and  although  that  image  wu  marred  by  sin,  grace  reatorej 
It ;  and  the  great  Father  and  Loid  of  all  beholds  hii  original  conception  realized  in  the 
regenerated  and  glorified  humanity. 

III.  By  whom  is  this  image  participated?  1.  Properly  speaking,  it  will  be 
apjiarent  in  all  those  who  by  Divinu  grace  are  brought  upon  earth  to  the  enjoyment 
of  Christian  character  and  privilege,  and  who  arc  led  safely  home  to  glory.  It  is  the 
family  likeness  by  which  the  sp  ritual  children  are  identified.  2.  There  is  a  wider 
sense  in  which  all  the  holy  intelligences  who  people  heaven  may  be  considered  as 
bearing  this  ima^e.  There  are  tliose  who  have  not  borne  the  image  of  the  earthly, 
who  from  their  creation  have  been  citizens  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  in  whom  appear 
the  spiritual  lineaments  which  are  the  mark  of  a  Divine  parentage  and  the  earnest  ot 
a  blessed  immortality. 

Application.  That  this  image  may  be  borne  in  all  its  brightness  and  beauty 
hereafter  and  above,  its  first  rudiments  must  be  traced  here.  The  life  of  faith, 
obedience,  and  aspiration  is  the  divinely  appointed  preparation  for  the  glories  and 
felicities  of  heaven.  And  no  religion  is  of  worth  which  does  not  form  and  cherish  the 
SI  iritual  likeness  which  akme  can  qualify  for  the  employments  and  the  society  of 
heaven. — T.. 

Vers.  64 — 67. — The  victory  of  immortality.  In  this,  as  in  some  other  passages  of 
St.  Paul's  writings,  logic  breaks  into  rhetoric,  prose  into  poetry,  reasoning  into  fervid 
exclamation.  Anxious  to  convince,  the  apostle  was  nevertheless  of  a  teLiiperament 
too  fervid  to  be  restrained  within  the  boundaries  of  argument.  And  when  his  soul  was 
lifted  up  above  the  level  of  human  thought,  when  inspiration  carried  him  into  the  third 
heaven,  then  he  could  no  longer  discourse ;  but  discourse  kindled  into  song.  If  there  is 
any  passage  in  his  writings  titted  to  fan  the  burning  fire  of  feeling  into  the  fiame  ot 
enthusiasm,  it  is  the  sublime  argument  by  which  he  seeks  to  give  definiteness,  pointy 
certainty,  and  attractiveness  to  the  life  to  come. 

I.  The  gubat  change  to  bb  expekiekced.  Our  earthly  state  is  characterized  by 
corruptibility  and  immortality.  That  this  is  so  is  indeed  a  rebuke  to  human  vanity, 
yet  it  is  upquestionable.  An  apostle  terms  our  earthly  vesture,  "this  body  of  our 
humiliation,"  and  the  designation  is  just.  We  live  a  dying  life,  carrying  within  us  the 
seeds  of  our  mortality.  Vast  and  wonderful  to  contemplate  is  the  change  which  shall 
take  place  in  the  passage  from  time  to  eternity.  Incorruption  and  immortality  shall 
be  the  vesture  of  the  saved  and  glorified.  The  apostle,  bearing  about  in  his  body  the 
marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  must  have  anticipated  with  joy  the  promised  release  from 
earthly  infirmities  and  sufferings,  from  all  the  troubles  to  which  tiie  burden  of  the  body 
exposes  the  servant  of  Christ. 

II.  Thb  obeat  tictory  to  be  won.  According  to  the  view  of  St.  Paul,  there  are 
three  great  enemies  with  whom  the  Christian  has  to  contend,  and  conflict  with  whom 
mars  the  happiness  and  breaUs  the  peace  ol'  this  earthly  condition.  They  are  the  Law, 
sin,  and  death.  Sin  is  the  j^oad  with  which  death  makes  a  thrust  at  the  Christian 
soldier,  and  it  is  the  Law  which  makes  sin  so  sharp,  powerful,  and  formidable  a  weapon. 
Over  all  these  the  glorified  Christian  has  obtained  a  victory,  in  the  might  and  by  the  grace 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Anticipating  the  conquest,  the  Christian,  even  here  and  now, 
rejoices  in  the  assured  defeat  and  discomfiture  of  his  formidable  foes.  He  seems  already 
to  drag  them  in  triumph  at  his  chariot-wheels,  already  to  be  more  than  conqueror 
through  Christ  who  loved  him. 

III.  The  great  thanksgiving  to  be  celebbated.  1.  The  Source  and  Author  of 
victory  is  God  himself.  No  power  but  his  could  have  defeated  foes  so  mighty,  so 
malicious  and  so  crafty.  2.  The  Mediator  of  victory  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  first 
conquered  for  us,  and  then  conquers  in  and  with  us.  His  crucifixion,  followed  by  hil 
resurrection,  gave  the  death-blow  to  our  enemy.  This  conviction  may  well  give  ui 
courage  in  carrying  on  the  spiritual  war,  and  in  looking  forward  to  ibi  Lwoa  with  oon- 

fideuM  and  hope. 

"Hell  and  thy  sins  resist  thy  coarse, 
Bnt  hell  and  sin  are  vanquished  foea  > 
Thr  Jesus  nailed  them  to  the  cross, 
lad  sang  the  trinmpb  when  ha  roM.' 


CE.XT.  1— 58.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  631 

Vew.  1 — 8. — The  gospel  which  Paul  preached.  I.  It  was  a  received,  kot  an  origi- 
SATED,  GOSPEL.  "  Fop  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all  that  which  I  also  received  "  (\  er. 
3).  He  tells  us  that  lie  received  it  by  "the  revelation  of  Jivsns  Christ"  (Gal.  i.  12). 
He  had  the  more  confidence  in  it  that  it  was  not  of  himself,  and  we  have  also.  It  ciinie 
from  the  very  central  Source  of  all.  Paul's  gospel  of  Clirist  came /rem  Cliiist.  Si  me 
preachers  of  the  gospel  are  so  able  that  they  feel  bound  to  originate.  They  tliruw  a  new 
light  upon  the  truth  instoa<?  of  the  old  light.  They  preach,  as  they  consider,  a  inai^ni- 
ficent  gospel,  but  it  is  unfortunately  "  of  man,'*  and  thus  wonlilc-<s.  Man  can  do  ninny 
things,  but  he  cannot  make  a  gospel.  When  he  tries  he  advertises  his  folly.  Wiih 
Paul,  we  should  get  as  near  as  we  can  to  the  fountain-head — the  streams  are  apt  to  become 
contaminated. 

II.  'i  wo  CONSPICUOUS  FEATURES.  1.  The  atoning  death  of  Christ.  Paul  preached 
constantly,  untiringly,  supremely,  the  atonement  (see  his  strong  expression,  ch.  ii.  2). 
He  laid  greatest  emphasis  upon  the  death  of  Chiist.  The  life  was  beautiful,  full  o( 
teaching-;  but  in  the  death  was  the  propitiation  for  sin.  He  died  for  our  sins ;  our 
sins  were  so  great  that  they  required  his  death  I  "  He  bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body 
on  the  tree."  And  the  death  of  Christ  did  not  come  suddenly  upon  the  world.  It 
was  "  according  to  the  Scriptures : "  foretold  by  the  prophets,  as,  for  example,  by 
Isaiah  in  the  fifty-third  chapter  of  his  book.  He  had  no  sins  of  his  own  to  die  for; 
he  died  for  ours.  He  "  gave  himself'  for  us.  2.  2%«  resurrection  of  Christ.  This 
was  the  demonstration  of  the  efficacy  of  his  death,  a  proof  that  he  conquered  and  was 
not  conquered.  The  real  triumph  achieved  in  his  death  was  manifested  by  his 
resurrection.  A  pledge  of  our  resurrection  through  him.  A  token  of  his  acceptance 
by  God.  (1)  The  apostle  laid  stress  upon  the  fact  that  Christ  died.  It  was  no  swoon. 
A  real  death,  and  then  a  real  resurrection.  He  "  died  "  and  "  was  buried  "  (ver.  4). 
He  rose  "  the  third  day,"  so  that  for  a  day  and  part  of  two  others  he  was  in  the 
sepulchre.  Some  afterwards  denied  the  actual  death  of  Christ,  and  thus  made  void 
his  resurrection.  The  apostle  here  anticipates  their  attack.  (2)  That  his  resurrection 
accorded  with  prophecy.  It  was  "  accordmg  to  the  Scriptures'  (see  Ps.  xvi.  10).  (3) 
That  his  resurrection  was  well  attested  by  witnesses.  Paul  does  not  give  here  all  tlie 
appearances  of  Ciirist  after  his  death,  bat  a  selection,  (a)  Appearance  to  Peter  (Luke 
xxiv.  34).  (6)  To  the  twelve.  Called  by  the  familiar  name  "  the  twelve,"  though  Judas 
was  gone  (Luke  sxiv.  33 — 36).  (c)  To  five  hundred  brethren.  Possibly  in  Galilee, 
where  intimation  of  his  appearing  had  been  given,  and  may  have  been  widely  known, 
occasioning  a  large  gathering  of  his  followers  (Matt.  xxvi.  32  and  xxviii.  10,  16), 
(d)  To  James.  Probably  James  who  presided  over  the  Church  at  Jerusalem.  («)  All  the 
apostles  (John  xx.  26  or  Acts  i.  4).  (/)  To  St.  Paul.  As  of  one  bom  out  of  due  time.  The 
lest  of  the  apostles.  A  grand  array  of  evidence,  and  yet  not  alL  The  writer  and  speaker 
could  bear  personal  testimony.  Most  of  the  five  hundred  were  alive  and  could  be 
interrogated.  Others  had  "  fallen  asleep  "  in  hope  of  a  glorious  resurrection  through  him 
who  had  appeared  to  them  after  his  own  death  and  burial. 

IIL  Results,  1.  Men  received  it.  (Ver,  1,)  It  arrested  their  attention.  It  convinced 
their  judgment.  It  moved  their  heart.  It  was  adapted  to  human  want.  It  glorified 
ordinary  Ufe,  2,  Men  were  saved  by  it.  (Ver,  2.)  It  was  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation.  Conscience  was  satisfied.  Life  was  purified  and  ennobled.  Christ  was 
followed.  God  was  feared  and  served  and  loved.  Death  lost  its  terror,  "  After  death  " 
was  paradise.  3.  Men  stood  in  this  gospel.  (Ver.  1.)  As  long  as  they  held  to  it  they 
stood,  and  having  done  all,  stood.  Through  it  came  a  power  which  was  "  able  to  keep 
them  from  falling."  Have  we  received  this  gospel  ?  Do  we  stand  in  it  ?  Are  we  saved 
through  it  ?  We  need  "  hold  it  fast "  (ver.  2,  New  Version)— jfrip  it  and  keep  gripping 
it,  A  mere  assent  will  lead  to  "  letting  it  slip."  It  baa  no  power  to  save  unless  we 
hold  it  and  it  holds  us. — H. 

Ven.  9, 10, — Traits  t/  Christian  greatnem.  I.  Hoiiebtt,  How  faithfully  Paul 
speaks  of  himself!  How  candidly  he  acknowledges  the  circumstances  connected  with 
his  apostleship!  Yet  he  had  the  greatest  reason  to  magnify  his  authority  to  the 
Corinthians.  They  were  ready,  many  of  them,  to  twist  anything  to  his  disadvantage. 
But  he  is  not  moved  by  this.  To  him  the  end  does  not  justify  the  means ;  he  must 
hav*  "means"  perfectly  unquestionable.    His  candour  and  truthfulnew  are  striking. 


632  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  XT.  1— fiE 

He  !■  a  man  of  transparent  honesty,  as  every  Christian  man  should  he.     WheUiei 
honesty  be  the  best  policy  or  not,  it  is  the  only  Christian  policy. 

II.  Contrition.  As  a  man  becomes  spiritually  great,  he  has  keener  regret  for  old 
delinquencies.  Paul  cannot  forgive  himself  fur  persecuting  the  Church  of  Christ. 
That  act  becomes  more  glaring  in  its  sinfulness  the  nearer  be  draws  to  the  "  Light  of 
the  world."  Little  saints — ^little  sins.  No  sin  is  little  except  to  the  purblind.  The 
Uiore  I  erfect  our  acceptance  before  God,  the  more  perfect  our  condemnation  of  ourselves. 

III.  Boldness.  I'aul  does  not  shrink  from  testimony  or  deed.  People  may  call 
him  "  a  turncoat,"  but  not  now  being  a  child,  he  has  put  away  the  childish  thing  of  being 
appalled  by  epithets — epithets  which,  in  his  present  condition,  can  really  mean  only 
praise,  whatever  ihey  may  be  intended  to  mean.  A  man  who  has  true  and  high  "feai 
of  God"  has  little  fear  of  man.  The  truly  great  in  Christian  life  are  afraid  only  of 
being  afraid  to  witness  for  Christ.     Christian  courage  is  a  fine  quality. 

IV.  Diligence.  Ti.e  truly  gieat  Chri.-tian  is  a  hard  worker.  He  must  do  some- 
thing for  his  Lord,  whatever  his  circumstances.  If  he  he  stretched  on  a  sick-bed  ha 
will  toil  there,  in  conversation  or  prayer,  or  in  repressing  anything  that  may  dishonoui 
Christ,  such  as  irritability,  repiniug,  etc.  Many  professors  can  believe  anyihing  and 
do  nothing.  A  ton  of  their  piety  would  be  dear  at  the  cost  of  a  bad  farthing.  There 
are  some  microscopic  saints,  who  ever  want  "to  be  fed,"  but  all  their  feeding  seems  to 
come  to  nothing.  Instead  of  being  "  labourers  in  the  vineyard,"  they  are  only  pickers 
of  the  grapes.  The  great  Paul  was  a  great  worker ;  he  "  laboured  more  abundantly  than 
they  all."  If  we  would  be  great  we  must  be  diligent.  "  The  hand  of  the  diligent 
msketh  rich  "  (Prov.  x.  4). 

V.  LoTE.  This  is  very  apparent  in  Paul's  case.  His  heart  is  going  Ck)d-WBrd  with 
the  perming  of  every  word.  His  contrition  was  related  to  his  love.  He  felt  that  he  had 
been  forgiven  much,  and  so  he  loved  much.  Love  to  God  made  him  diligent,  and  per- 
hapt!  in  no  one  was  love  to  man  more  strikingly  exemplified  than  in  this  apostle.  As 
we  grow  great  we  grow  in  love,  because,  as  we  grow  spiritually  great,  we  grow  like  God, 
and  God  is  love,  ir  our  religion  does  not  mellow  and  soften  us  and  extend  om 
symjiathies,  we  have  got  hold  of  the  wrong  religion. 

VI.  Humility.  We  cannot  be  great  unless  we  are  little.  To  go  up  we  must  go 
down.  The  true  Christian  is  one  who  has  become  a  "little  child."  Paul  ascribes 
everything  to  God's  grace,  nothing  to  himself.  This  was  a  very  true  and  accurate 
division;  it  represenled  things  as  they  really  were.  The  great  Christian  sees  things 
as  they  are ;  the  little  Christian,  as  they  are  not,  hut  as  he  would  like  tliem  to  be. 
The  little  Christian  thinks  himself  to  be  a  great  Christian,  and  the  great  Christian 
thinks  himself  to  be  a  little  one.  As  we  rise,  God  seems  greater  and  greater,  and 
we  little  and  still  more  little,  imtll  at  last  be  becomes  "all  in  all"  and  we  become 
"  nothing."  There  is  a  gn  nter  gap  between  God  and  Gabriel  in  Gabriel's  thought  than 
between  Ch)d  and  Judas  in  Judas's  thought.  We  cannot  boast  of  our  salvation,  foi 
God  haa  laved  us;  nor  of  our  works,  for  his  grace  has  wrought  them  through  us. — ^H. 

Vers.  12 — 19. — Did  Christ  ri$et  L  A  gbeat  question.  Everything  connected 
with  "  after  death  "  is  of  high  interest  to  us,  but  this,  whether  the  professed  Messiah 
and  Saviour  burst  the  bands  of  death  or  was  held  captive  by  them,  is  of  the  very 
highest  moment,  Christ  rested  his  claims  upon  his  resurrection ;  if  it  failed,  they  failed. 
His  rising  from  the  tomb  was  the  demonstration  of  his  Divine  Sonship  (Rom.  i  4). 
His  witnesses  were  to  be  witnesses  of  his  resurrection,  as  of  an  all-important  event 
(Acts  L  22).  His  resurrection  was  the  seal  of  the  power  of  Calvary.  It  gave  authority 
to  all  his  teaching.    It  corroborated  the  antecedent  miracles. 

II.  A  DiBFUTEO  QUESTION.  Disputed  from  the  first,  when  the  absurd  rnmonr  was 
spread  that  his  disciples  had  stolen  his  body  away  in  the  night,  and  that  men  sound 
asleep  had  witnessed  the  depredation  I  Around  this  central  point  of  Christian  &ith 
have  surged  floods  of  controversy.  It  was  and  is  natural  that  the  citadel  of  C^is- 
tianity  riiould  be  fiercely  attacked.  Every  concdvabln  supposition  has  been  made  t« 
explain  away  the  evidence.  But  this  remains,  that  greater  miracles  have  to  be  takea 
for  granted  by  deniers  than  by  believers.  Otir  faith  need  not  be  shaken  one  whit  by 
the  onslaught ;  the  truest  and  best  things  In  the  world  have  ever  been  the  favourite 
targets  of  the  devil  and  his  archera. 


3H,  XT.  1—58.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa  633 

m.  A  TiTAii  QUESTION.  With  the  aniwer  Christianity  stands  or  falls.  This  the 
apostle  willingly  admits.  Kote  what  amongst  other  things  is  involved  in  the  denial  of 
the  resurrection  of  Christ.  1,  The  falsity  of  the  witnesses.  (I)  Yet  everything  these, 
witnesses  say  and  do  has  the  savour  of  sincerity.  They  live  lives  of  humility,  purity, 
unselfishness ;  and  in  support  of  the  asserted  fact  of  the  resurrection  are  willing  to  die. 
Yet  if  they  know  their  statement  to  be  false,  they  had  nothing  to  gain,  but  everything 
to  lose,  by  making  it.  (2)  They  must  have  been  false,  not  deceived.  The  circum- 
stances nf  Christ's  repeated  appearances,  as  narrated  by  the  evangelists,  render  it 
inconceivable  that  the  witnesses  should  have  been  victims  of  illnsion  or  impisture. 
(3)  False  witnesses  of  God.  Their  sin  was  directly  against  the  Eternal.  They 
blasphemously  asserted  that  he  had  done  what  they  knew  he  had  not.  (4)  Their 
condition  was  most  deplorable ;  Ter.  19,  "  If  we  have  only  hoped  in  Christ  in  this  life, 
we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  For  we  have  said  it  is  not  hope  of  Christ's 
resurrection  that  we  possess,  but  our  solemn  testimony  in  God's  sight  has  been  that 
we  were  personal  witnetset  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  Our  claim  has  been,  not  ho-pe, 
bat  certainty.  Now,  if  we  only  have  the  former  whilst  we  have  professed  to  possess  the 
latter,  how  great  is  our  criminality  I  how  miserable  iaour  condition!  how  dread  mnst  be 
our  future  1  We  have  been  guilty  of  the  basest  misrepresentation  in  a  matter  of  the 
highest  moment.  Other  interpretations  of  ver.  19  seem  to  involve,  what  most  Christians 
will  strenuously  deny,  that  if  Christianity  he  a  delusion,  the  condition  of  the  believer 
in  the  present  life  is  more  miserable  than  that  of  the  unbeliever.  2,  All  preaching  of 
the  gospel  is  vain.  Instead  of  the  proclamation  of  the  truth,  it  becomes  the  dissemina- 
tion of  a  lie.  It  is  empty,  unreal,  has  no  basis.  The  gospel  so  rests  upon  Christ's 
resurrection  that,  when  one  succumbs,  the  other  must  share  the  same  fate.  3.  Faith  it 
vain.  It  must  be  useless  to  trust  to  one  whose  word  has  already  failed.  To  build  our 
hopes  upon  one  whose  most  solemn  assertion  has  fallen  to  the  ground  would  be  nothing 
but  sheer  madness.  The  "  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  indeed,  disappears,  and  we  have  left,  as 
the  object  of  our  faith,  only  one  like  to  ourselves.  4.  Living  believers  are  unsaved. 
Christ,  we  read,  "  was  raised  for  our  justification  "  (Rom.  iv,  25) ;  but  if  he  did  not  rise, 
we  are  not  justified.  In  penalty  and  power  sin  still  attaches  itself  to  us.  And  yet  we 
feel  that  the  burden  has  gone  and  that  the  power  is  broken  I  How  can  these  things 
be  ?  5.  The  dead  in  Christ  are  perished.  Kot  annihilated,  but  before  Ood  without  a 
Mediator  t  God  and  the  future,  remain  if  Christ  did  not  rise,  but  those  who  have  fallen 
asleep  in  Christ,  believing  on  him,  have  found  in  him  no  help,  have  found  through  him 
no  pardon.  With  all  their  sins  upon  them,  they  have  entered  into  the  presence  of  their 
Maker  and  Judge.  What  a  relief  to  turn  to  the  confident  utterance  of  Paul,  "But 
now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead  "  (ver,  20)  1  How  thankful  should  we  be.for  the  clear, 
satisfactory,  conclusive  evidence  of  Christ's  resurrection  which  we  possess  1  And  careful 
should  we  be  not  to  hold  loosely,  or  to  deny,  some  doctrine  which  may  seem  of 
comparatively  small  importance,  because  we  cannot  undeistand  it  fully  or  because  it 
conflicts  with  our  prejudices.  Much  more  may  be  involved  than  we  think  of.  Some 
of  the  Corinthians  denied  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  but  appear  to  have  been  willing 
and  desirous  to  accept  the  rest  of  the  gospel  revelation.  They,  perhaps,  did  not  see  how 
the  single  denial  destroyed  the  whole  fabric.  But  Paul  shows  that  if  the  resurrection 
of  the  body  be  denied,  the  resurrection  of  Christ  must  be,  and  that  this  involves  the 
destruction  of  the  claims  of  Christ  as  the  Messiah  and  Saviour  and  the  entire  overthrow 
of  the  gospel,— H, 

Vers,  20—28,^1^  resurrection.  I  In  cause,  Christ— the  second  Adam. 
Through  the  first  Adam,  death ;  through  the  second  Adam,  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead,  We_  see  how  much  depends  upon  Christ,  how  much  upon  his  resurrection, 
ITirough  him  we  expect  to  rise ;  but  if  he  did  not  rise,  how  can  we  rise  through  him? 
"  But  now  is  Christ  risen,"  and  so  our  prospect  is  unclouded.  He  has  passed  "through 
the  grave  to  make  a  way  for  u».  He  found  the  bonds  of  death  strong ;  we  shall  find  them 
brolcen.  He  hves,  and  through  him  we  shall  live  also.  He  has  conquered  the  mtn 
whilst  in  our  nature,  and  now  holds  it  as  conquered  for  us  to  pass  through, 

II.  Its  UNI  VERSALiTT.  "  As  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made 
alive."  At'am  was  the  first  head  and  representative  of  the  human  race;  he  fell,  and 
oie  of  the  consequences  of  his  fall  was  the  grave  for  all  men.    Christ  was  the  aecond 


•M  THB  FIBST  £PISTLB  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.    [oh.  xr.  1—68 

Head  and  Bepresentetive,  and  through  him  comes  to  all  the  race  deliverance  from  tht 
gran.  In  neither  haa  the  personal,  responsible  act  of  men,  apart  from  their  represen- 
tatiTe  heads,  a  place.  The  disadvantage  through  Adam  and  the  advantage  through 
CihriBt  come  to  all  men,  apart  from  their  choice  or  desert.  But  this  only  applies  to 
physical  death  and  the  recovery  from  that  death,  Persoual  sin  and  personal  repentance 
and  fifdth  have  issues  unaffected  by  the  general  headship  of  Adam  and  Christ.  The 
just  and  the  unjust  die  through  Adam ;  the  just  and  the  unjust  rise  through  Christ :  but 
they  do  not  rise  to  the  same  future.  What  follows  upon  persoaal  traasgression  and 
impenitence  will  be  borne  in  the  body  delivered  from  death ;  and,  similarly,  that  which 
followB  upon  personal  repentance  and  belief  in  Christ. 

III.  Its  osdeb.  1.  Ghrist.  First,  as  the  cause.  He  ia  "the  Firstfruita" — the 
earliett  and  the  most  costly  and  the  most  precious  of  the  harvest.  And  idso  the  pledge 
of  the  general  harvest.  He  is  the  Firstfruits  presented  and  accepted,  and  we  who  are 
in  him  shall  be  accepted  also,  for  we  shall  be  "  like  him."  2.  The  saved.  "  They  that 
are  Christ's.''  This  is  after  the  resurrection  of  Christ ;  how  long  after  we  are  not  told. 
But  it  will  be  "at  his  coming."  In  his  first  advent  we  have  redemption;  in  his 
second  advent,  resurrection.  "  The  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a 
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God :  and  the  dead  in 
Christ  shall  rise  first "  (1  Thess.  iv.  16).  3.  I%e  rest  of  mankind.  "  Then  cometh  the 
end" — the  end  of  the  resurrection — the  rising  of  those  that  remain,  as  well  as  the  end 
of  the  dispensation.  The  lost  have  the  place  of  least  honour.  They  were  "  first "  in 
many  things  in  life,  but  now  they  are  "  last." 

IV.  Its  mode.  1.  By  the  sound  of  a  trumpet.  ( Ver.  62 ;  see  Matt.  zziv.  31.)  The 
dead  shall  hear,  for  the  summons  shall  be  of  Ck)d.  Those  who  stopped  their  ears  on 
earth  will  not  then  be  able.  "  The  hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the 
graves  shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth ;  they  that  have  done  good,  unto  the 
resurrection  of  life ;  and  they  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the  resuiTection  of  damnation  " 
(John  T.  28,  29).  2.  Sudden.  This  seems  to  be  suggested  by  ver.  52,  The  change 
of  the  living  will  be  sudden ;  the  change  of  the  dead  also.  Men  generally  die  slewly ; 
they  will  be  raised  from  the  dead  instantly.  The  dead  have  been  long  in  gathering 
— ^how  many  centuries  have  passed,  how  many  more,  perhaps,  to  come  I — but  probably 
in  "  the  twinkling  of  an  eye "  will  they  i>e  delivered  from  death.  This  strikingly 
illustrates  Christ's  power  over  the  grave— how  completely  he  has  conquered,  and  holds 
in  subjection,  death. 

Y.  Its  viotobt.  It  will  be  a  triumph.  It  will  show  forth  the  victorious  might  of 
Christ.  He  triumphed  in  his  own  resurrection ;  that  triumph  will  be  consummated 
in  the  completion  of  the  resurrection,  when  all,  of  every  race  and  colour,  are  ndsed  by 
his  power. 

YI,  Its  oonooiotants.  The  following  seem  here  to  be  closely  connected  with  the 
final  resurrection : — 1.  The  universal  victory  of  Christ.  He  shall  conquer,  and  conquer 
all  that  now  oppose  him.  "  All  rule,  all  authority  and  power,"  must  fall  before  him. 
All  enemies  shall  presently  be  under  his  feet.  The  powers  of  evil  now  seem  great  and 
strong,  the  kingdom  of  righteousness  comparatively  small  and  feeble ;  but  at  that  day 
Christ  will  be  King,  and  to  him  "  every  knee  shall  bow."  2,  The  destruction  of  death. 
The  destroyer  shall  be  destroyed.  The  shock  of  the  great  resurrection  will  be  too 
much  for  hia  kingdom.  The  death-bonds  long  since  broken  by  Christ  shall  then 
be  burnt.  Man's  mortality  shall  cease  for  ever.  Death  shall  die  and  know  no 
resurrection.  3,  The  delivering  up  of  the  kingdom  by  Christ  to  the  Father.  Christ,  as 
Mediator  and  Administrator  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  will  then  have  completed  his 
special  work,  and  the  direct  rule  of  God  as  Ood  will  be  reinaugurated.  Christ  will  still 
remain  as  God-Man,  the  Head  of  his  own  people,  and  as  one  in  the  '~^odhead  will 
participate  in  the  Divine  reign.  4.  The  subjection  of  the  Son  to  the  Father.  As  he 
was  before  his  mediatorial  work  began.  One  with  the  Father  ("  I  and  my  Father  are 
uae ")  in  nature,  but  voluntarily  subordinate  as  a  son  to  a  father.  The  Son  as  sncl 
will  not  be  conspicuous  in  rule  as  now,  but  Qod  will  be  "all  in  all."  The  united 
Ucity  will  reign  as  one,  and  in  the  Deity  the  Son  is  subordinate  in  position  to  the 
Fathw.— H. 

Yers.  29 — 34. — Some  things  that  follow  upon  the  denial  of  th$  reiurrection.    L  Tm 


OH.XT,  1— 68.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANS.  635 

roLLT  OF  SELF-DENIAL  AND  suFFBBiNO  FOB  CHRISTIANITY.  These  must  be  branded  ai 
imbecile ;  yet  they  have  ever  seemed  most  sublime.  But  if  there  be  no  resurrection 
(the  resurrection  of  the  body  being  vital  to  the  gospel  and  all  its  hopes,  as  Paul  has 
shown  in  preceding  verses  of  this  chapter),  the  argument  for  such  conduct  fails.  Why 
Older  one's  life  for  a  future  which  will  never  be  realized?  Why  suffer  for  a  lie  as 
though  it  were  a  truth?  There  were  some  who  had  been  "baptized  for  the  dead" — 
an  obscure  expression,  but  probably  meaning  baptized  to  take  the  place  of  those  who 
had  suffered  martyrdom.  Why  should  these  court  so  stern  a  fate  if  Christianity  were 
•  deception?  The  apostle  had  "fought  with  beasts  at  Ephesus" — probably  figurative, 
to  express  his  contest  with  beastliku  men.  He  "  died  daily  "  in  his  faithfulness  to 
his  commission  as  a  preacher  of — what  t  Ah  1  upon  the  what  depended  everything. 
According  to  the  answer,  Paul  was  an  utter  fool  or  a  marvellously  heroic  saint.  If  there 
was  no  resurrection,  and  jl  therefore  the  gospel  fell  to  the  ground,  he  was  undoubtedly 
the  former. 

II.  The  BEMOTAti  OF  RESTRAINTS  FROM  iNDnLQENCB  AND  VICE.  The  denial  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  resurrection  involved  the  denial  of  the  gospel,  and  with  this  perished 
the  hope  of  salvation.  Christians  thus  became  as  men  of  this  world,  having  no  bright 
hope  of  the  hereafter.  Consequently  the  check  upon  natural  appetite  was  removed. 
Common  sense  would  seem  to  favour  a  life  of  Epicurean  pleasure.  If  there  be  no  hope 
concerning  the  world  to  come,  let  us  make  the  best  of  the  world  that  now  is :  "  Let  us  eat 
and  drink ;  for  to-morrow  we  die."  "  Soul,  thou  hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years : 
take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  And  be  merry."  The  apostle  is  not  supposing  that  tlj^re  is 
no  future  existence.  By  "  the  resurrection  "  in  this  chapter  he  means  the  resurrection 
of  the  body,  but  he  shows  that  with  the  rejection  of  this  doctrine  Christianity  is 
destroyed,  and  here  he  is  showing  that  if  Christianity  be  destroyed  the  incentives  to 
a  pure  and  virtuouB  life  are  removed.  His  thought  seems  to  be  that,  apart  from 
Christianiiy,  there  is  nothing  in  the  world  which  will  constrain  men  generally  to  live 
great  and  noble  and  self-denying  lives.  And  this  is  a  matter  for  our  most  serious 
reflection.  If  Christianity  be  done  away  with,  what  ia  there  which  will  restrain  men 
from  indulgence  and  vice?  No  other  religion  can  compete  with  Christianity;  if  it 
falk,  all  reli^on  is  doomed.  Can  philosophy  do  the  practical  work  required  ?  Alas  I 
it  is  possible  to  be  a  very  excellent  philosopher  and  a  very  poor  moralist.  Will 
general  education  restrain  men?  It  will,  when  cleverness  and  goodness  mean  the 
same_  thin";,  but  not  before  I  Will  art  and  refinement  effect  what  ia  needed  ?  The 
palmiest  days  of  art  have  been  the  days  of  most  glaring  obscenity,  and  refinement  has 
shown  over  and  over  again  how  easily  it  allies  itself  with  brutal  lust.  If  Christianity 
falls,  the  prevailing  doctrine  amon^  men  must  be,  "  let  ua  eat  and  drink ;  for  to- 
morrow we  die." 

III.  Cabbfcllt  should  we  guard  against  embraoiho  this  fatal  opinion.  We 
may  find  diflSoulty  in  believing  the  doctrine ;  we  shall  find  disaster  in  rejecting  it.  1. 
The  apostle  notiaei  one  thing  very  likely  to  lead  ui  astray.  "  Evil  communications  [or* 
•evil  company 'J  corrupt  good  manners  "—a  line  borrowed  from  the  Greek  poet  Menan- 
der.  *  Can  a  man  touch  pitch  and  not  be  defiled  ?  "  Many  mix  amongst  the  ungodly, 
confident  in  strength,  kiS /all.  We  need  remember  that,  in  our  present  state,  we  are 
more  easily  influenced  towards  the  wrong  than  the  right.  Our  minds  are  not  equally 
poised.  There  is  already  a  bias.  Strange  that  those  who  we  so  bold  to  venture  into 
the  atmosphere  of  moral  evil  shun  that  of  physical  evil  A  professing  Christian  will 
company  with  an  arrant  xmbeliever,  but  iw)t  with  a  man  suffering  from  small-pox  2 
Bin  must  not  be  yielded  to.  (Ver.  34.)  Those  who  live  in  mn  easily  persuade  them- 
selves of  the  truth  of  anything  which  they  would  like  to  be  true.  Ajr  denial  of  the 
resuRection  leads  to  sin,  so  sin  leads  to  the  denial  of  the  resurrection.  Sin  blinds  the 
intellect  as  well  as  corrupts  the  heart.  3.  1/  we  have  been  at  aU  betrayed,  we  should  at 
mee  seek  to  recover  our  position.  "  Awake  to  righteousness,"  or, "  awake  up  righteously  " 
We  are  more  than  half  asleep  if  we  deny  that  for  which  there  is  abundant  evidence 
We  need  to  rub  onr  eyes  or  to  ask  the  great  Physician  to  touch  them.     «  Awake  "  or 

be  sober. '  The  condition  of  those  who  deny  the  resurrection  ia  one  of  carnal 
intoxication.  In  denial  onr  &ces  are  towards  evil;  in  assent  and  reception  we  turn 
towards  nghteousness.  "Righteousness"  in  the  world  depends,  according  to  the 
apostle,  upon  the  reception  of  this  doctrine,  bqpause  with  it  stands  or  falls  Christianity 


636  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEIKTfllANS.    [oh.  xv.  1— 6a 


•tself.  4.  Dental  involves  ignorance  of  God,  (Ver.  34.)  To  the  Saddut-ees,  who  denied 
the  resurrection,  Christ  said,  "  Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  Scriptures,  nor  the  power  oi 
God"  (Matt.  xxii.  29).  Men  say,  God  cannot  do  this  thing;  but  with  him  "all 
things  are  possible."  True  knowledge  of  God  marvellously  helps  our  faith.  We 
doubt  and  question,  not  because  we  know  so  much,  but  because  we  know  so  little. 
The  Corinthians  boasted  much  of  thehr  kaowled|{e{  here  Paul  charges  them  with  groaa 
ignorance. — ^H. 

Vers.  35 — 41. — 3%«  resurreelion  ofth»  lody.  This  doctrine  has  presented  the  greatest 
difficulties  to  many  minds.    Here  faith  has  frequently  found  one  of  its  severest  tests. 

L  But  wb  ought  not  to  bb  staggered  by  any  fact  which  re  the  subject  o» 
DiviNB  revelation.  God  will  assuredly  justify  himself  and  fulfil  all  his  promises. 
Though  we  do  not  see  how  he  will  do  so,  he  does.  He  sits  higher  than  we  do.  When 
Ezekiel  was  asked, "  Can  these  bones  live?  "  he  did  not  reply, "  It  is  utterly  [reposterous 
•nd  absurd,"  but  "0  Lord  God,  thou  knowest;"  and  when  God  asseitid  that  they 
could  and  should,  Ezekiel  obediently  prophesied  upon  and  unto  them  (Kzck.  xxxvii.  3). 
Our  Lord's  words  should  ever  ring  in  our  ean^  "With  God  all  things  are  possible  "  (Matt; 
six.  26). 

IL  CONSIDBB  THB  IMPEBFECTIOH  OF  OUB  PRESENT  KNOWLBDGB.      HoW  very  little  We 

know  I  Our  knowledge  is  extremely  super/icial ;  we  know  no  one  thing  thoroughly. 
Our  knowledge  is  extensive  in  this  sense,  that  we  know  a  very  little  about  a  great 
many  things.  How  ignorant  we  are  of  the  nature  of  matter,  spirit,  life !  How  unfit 
to  dogmatize  I  yet  how  ever  ready  to  do  so  I  Like  children,  we  say,  "  It  can't  be ; " 
•nd  we  speak  with  infinite  confidence  because  we  cannot  understand  how  it  can  be. 
The  theory  cannot  h»  made  up  out  of  our  superficial  information.  The  mountain  won't 
go  into  our  bucket  t 

IIL  The  limitation  or  oub  taculties.  Our  powers  are  very  great  viewed  in  one 
aspect,  very  little  indeed  viewed  in  another.  As  long  as  we  possess  only  our  present 
fikculties  we  shall  do  well  to  guard  against  the  flippant  use  of  "  impossible." 

IV.   How  SOME  DIFFICULTIKS  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  BESURUECTION  OF   THE  BODY  MAT 

BB  EEMOVED.  We  have  two  indicated  in  this  passage.  1.  How  can  the  dad  livet  If 
our  bodies  die,  are  placed  in  the  grave,  dissolve,  mix  up  with  surrounding  earth,  is  it 
not  incredible  that  they  should  live  again?  "How  can  these  things  be?"  The 
apostle  has  a  very  pertinent  retort.  He  directs  the  objector  to  a  very  familiar  operation 
and  result.  Seed  is  sown  in  the  ground,  a  living  plant  springs  up.  The  seed  placed 
in  the  ground  apparently  perishes.  As  placed  in  the  earth  it  is  seen  above  it  no  more. 
Much  of  its  substance  decays  and  unites  with  the  ground  in  which.it  lies.  And  yet 
there  is  the  plant  of  the  same  nature,  and  called  by  the  tame  name.  There  is  here 
death  and  then  hfe.  In  fact,  only  as  the  seed  is  sown,  only  as  it  seems  utterly  to  perish, 
decompose,  and  be  hopelessly  lost — only  thus  is  the  beautiful  result  attained.  So  the 
ieath  of  this  body  may  be  necessary  (speaking  after  the  manner  of  men)  to  the  beauty 
and  glory  of  the  resurrection-body.  That  which  seems  to  be  k  difficulty  may  be  an 
tsseniial  link  in  the  chain — essential,  that  is,  unless  a  special  miracle  is  wrought,  as  may 
tie  in  the  case  of  those  alive  at  the  coming  of  Christ  (ver.  52).  They  will  be  "  changed" 
suddenly — we  know  not  how,  through  what  process.  Christ's  body,  which  saw  no 
corruption,  was  evidently  changed.  Paul  does  not  assert  that  sowing  seed  and  its  result 
are  parallel  in  all  points  to  the  death  and  resurrection  of  the  body.  He  uses  it  as  a 
helpful  illustration.  If  our  experience  did  not  cover  the  sowing  of  the  seed  and  the 
npspringing  of  the  plant,  perhaps  our  faith  would  be  as  greatly  tried,  if  we  were  called 
upon  to  believe  in  its  possibility,  as  we  are  now  in  the  case  of  the  resurrect)  n  of  the 
body.  2.  "  With  what  body  do  they  come  f  "  One  common  form  of  this  diliiculty  is— 
how  la  it  possible  for  ui  to  have  at  the  resurrection  the  same  particles  in  our  body 
which  we  now  have  ?  Apart  from  the  dissipation  of  these  particles  in  tlie  earth  or  sea, 
they  may  actually  lelong  to  the  bodies  of  a  great  many  different  people  I  Amoni^st 
cannibals,  for  example.  And  amongst  civilized  people  as  well;  for  animals  and  plants 
receive  in  various  ways  larticles  which  once  helped  to  constitute  human  bodies,  and 
these  animals  and  vegetables  being  eaten,  the  particles  in  question  beconw  constituents 
of  other  human  bodies.  Huw  can  thisa|i]>arently  iDsujierable  difficulty  be  met?  Simply 
by  saying  that  it  is  a  diihculty  originated  by  the  objector,  tad  has  uo  basis  ia  Divios 


.ZT.l— fiS.]     THB  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


637 


revelation.  We  are  not  told  that  the  earthly  body  and  the  resurrection-body  shall 
consist  of  the  same  particles.  In  fact,  the  apostle  seems  expressly  to  combat  such  a 
notion ;  for  he  says,  "  Thou  sowest  not  that  body  which  shall  be  "  (ver.  37),  and  in  ver.  50, 
'•riesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."  But  then,  If  not  the  mme 
particles,  what  partiples?  what  form?  The  apostle  meets  this  by  reference  to  the 
Divine  power  as  now  seen  in  creation :  "  All  flesh  is  not  the  same  flesh."  There  are 
celestial  bodies— the  organisms  of  angels— bodies,  yet  greatly  differing  from  the  terrestrial 
bodies.  The  light  of  the  "  lamps  of  the  firmament "  greatly  varies  in  glory  and  beauty. 
So  there  will  be  great  contrast  between  the  body  now  and  then.^  God  by  what  he  has 
done  shows  wLat  he  can  do,  and  so  this  part  of  the  difiBculty  vanishes.  But  the  greater 
part  remains.  If  the  resurrection-body  has  not  the  same  particles  now  possessed,  how 
can  it  be  the  same,  and  how  can  there  be  any  fitness  in  speaking  of  the  resurrection  of 
the  body  ?  Our  experience  supplies  a  sufficient  answer.  Sameness  of  particles  is  not 
essential  to  identity.  The  particles  in  our  present  body  are  in  constant  flux.  At  no  two 
moments  do  we  possess  precisely  the  same :  we  are  always  throwing  off  some  and  taking 
on  others ;  and,  separated  only  by  the  interval  of  a  few  years,  science  leads  us  to  conclude 
that  the  body  has  lost  all  the  old  particles  and  is  constituted  entirely  of  fresh  ones.  Yet 
bodily  identity  does  not  disappear.  The  resurrection-body  will  be  identified  with  our 
present  body.  As  with  the  seed,  to  each  a  "  body  of  its  owni "  (ver.  38).  Identity  is  in 
this  life  a  great  mystery  to  us ;  we  cannot  tell  now  what  is  necessary  to  it.  But  there  is 
nothing  in  our  partial  knowledge  of  it  which  should  lead  us  to  doubt  the  doctrine  of  the 
resurrection  of  the  Ijody.  With  larger  knowledge  apparent  difficulties  doubtless  would 
disappear.  The  resurrection-body  will  be  very  different  to  the  present  whilst  identified 
with  it.  God  will  give  a  body  as  it  shall  please  him  (ver.  38).  Note :  It  is  no  mark  of 
wisdom  to  deny  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  The  inspired  apostle  addresses  the  denier 
as  "Thou  fooL"  Many  priding  themselvei  in  wisdom  tnmble  into  the  monuw  of 
folly.-H. 

Ver.  40. — The  two  glories.  The  apostle  appears  to  be  referring  to  the  differences 
between  the  organisms — the  spiritual  bodies — of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven  and  the 
bodies  of  human  beings  on  earth.  But  in  a  wider  sense  we  may  understand  his  state- 
ment that  "  the  glory  of  the  celestial  is  one,  and  the  glory  of  the  terrestrial  is  another." 
The  glory  of  things  belonging  to  a  fallen  world  is  one ;  the  glory  belonging  to  things  of 
an  unfallen  world  is  another.  The  things  of  man  fallen  contrasted  with  the  things  of 
the  God-Man  unfallen.    The  natural  as  opposed  to  the  spiritual. 

L  The  olobt  of  things  tbbrbstrial.  1.  Slight.  Showy,  but  delusive.  Money, 
human  learning,  earthly  power,  worldly  pleasures, — ^these  are  attractive,  but  the  glory 
of  the  best  of  tliem  is  small.  Innumerable  testimonies  have  been  borne  to  this  fact, 
difficult  for  those  to  credit  who  are  captivated  by  the  gaudiness  which  they  mistake  for 
glory.  2.  Marred,  When  we  speak  of  earthly  things  we  think  of  them  in  their 
highest  perfection ;  our  conception  is  apt  to  be  ideal.  Experimentally  we  find  that  the 
natural  glory  is  greatly  marred.  8.  Uncertain,  The  flame  flickers  and  darkness  is 
threatened.  Much  depends  upon  our  health,  surroundings,  position,  as  to  whether 
things  terrestrial  have  glory  in  relation  to  ourselves.  Changes  are  often  sudden  and 
complete,  and  that  which  erewhile  we  pronounced  glorious  becomes  simply  detestable. 
That  which  pleases  us  to-day  may  disgust  us  to-morrow.  Alas  I  with  things  terrestrial 
there  is  no  improvement  upon  intimate  acquaintance.  4.  Brief.  At  best  the  glory 
is  short-lived.  The  sun  soon  goes  down.  When  most  needed  the  glory  often  dis- 
appears. 6.  Unsatisfying.  Something  more  glorious  is  ever  craved  for.  The  more 
glorious  may  be  expected  from  that  which  is  of  the  earth,  and  when  not  found  in  it, 
uie  disappointment  is  often  bitter.    Earthly  things  have  a  firework  glory. 

II.  The  olobt  or  things  celgbtiaIi.  1.  Oreat,  Solid  and  substantial,  not  flashy. 
This  is  natural,  for  they  ate  of  God.  In  their  glory  there  is  more  of  substance  than  of 
shadow.  2.  Not  fluetttaiing.  They  are  fixed  stars,  not  meteors.  There  is  in  them 
certainty.  They  are  stable.  8.  Increasing.  In  our  experience.  We  discover  &ed> 
glory  ever.  In  things  terrestrial  we  soon  come  to  the  end  of  the  tether;  in  things 
celestial  we  never  do.  We  ever  find  more  to  excite  our  wondpr  and  to  cause  us  delight. 
4.  Eternai,  The  glory  abides  undimmed,  and  shall  blaze  forth  for  ever.  We  are  immortal, 
nril  as  long  as  we  endure  shall  the  glory  of  those  celestral  truths  which  Christ  reveali 


538  THI  FmST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  OOBINTHIAN&    [oil  xt.  l--fi8 

to  OB.    8.  Ehiitfyiug.  The  ciy  of  the  sotiI  is  responded  to.  There  la  no  disappointment 
The  feeling  of  unsupplied  want  vanishes.    At  last  the  soul  is  at  rest. 

III.  Things  celestial  hat  be  secured  in  the  life  tebbestrial.  Christ  brings 
them  to  us  here.  The  "  strait  gate "  admits  us  to  them.  The  Holy  Spirit  reveals 
them.    In  Christian  worship  and  work  we  hegin  to  enjoy  them. 

IV.  The  bblatxve  glory  should  influence  our  choice.  When  we  may  have  th« 
better,  it  is  folly  to  choose  the  worse.  We  may  have  both  if  we  will  not  be  absorbed 
unduly  by  the  inferior.  But  amidst  the  glory  of  the  terrestrial  we  have  to  choose  the 
glory  of  the  celestial,  and  to  place  it  first.  This  is  the  better  part.  Moses  is  a  splendid 
example  of  wise  choice,  and  Abraham,  and  Paul,  who  counted  all  terrestrial  things  but 
loss  that  he  might  secure  the  celestial. — H. 

Vers.  42 — 53. — The  reswmction-hody.  Limited  to  resurrection-body  of  redeemed, 
for  we  know  not  what  will  be  that  of  the  lost.  Of  the  former  in  our  present  state  we 
can  know  comparatively  little.  Still  some  valuable  and  cheering  truths  respecting  it 
are  revealed. 

L  It  will  bk  :  1.  Jncorruptihle.  Onr  body  now  is  corruptible,  tending  towardi 
decay  and  dissolution,  bearing  the  marks  of  injury,  disease,  age.  It  Incomes  more 
corruptible  at  death.  But  the  resurrection-body  will  have  no  such  tendencies,  be 
subject  to  no  such  influences.  2.  Olorious.  Onr  present  body  is  a  body  of  dishonour. 
The  marks  of  the  curse  of  sin  are  upon  it.  In  the  grave  it  becomes  very  inglorious. 
Paul  calls  it  "  our  vile  body"  (Phil.  iii.  21).  The  resurrection-body  will  be  in  striking 
contrast — ^a  body  of  glory  and  beauty,  like  unto  the  glorious  body  of  the  Son  of  man. 
3.  Strong.  Now  our  body  is  weak,  subject  to  enervating  sickness,  and  when  "sown" 
as  a  corpse  is  the  very  perfection  of  weakness.  But  the  resurrection-body  will  possess 
fulness  of  strength,  abundant  energy,  never-diminishing  vitality,  i.  Spiritual,  Our 
present  body  is  dominated  by  the  animal  soul ;  it  is  fitted  for  life  in  the  lower  world ;  it 
is  an  organism  of  flesh  and  blood  (ver.  50);  it  is  "of  the  earth,  earthy."  It  is  a  "natural" 
body.  But  the  resurrection-body  will  be  "  spiritual,''  moulded  by  the  Spirit,  an  organism 
adapted  to  the  higher  and  spiritual  life. 

II.  Though  bo  diffebent  fboh,  it  is  identified  with,  oub  fbebsnt  body.  It  is 
a  new  body  and  yet  identified  with  the  old.  Not  the  same  particles  or  form,  yet  ow 
body.  Note  the  apostolic  expression :  "  It  is  loum  ;  ...  it  is  raised."  Much  mystery 
is  here.  But  perhaps  the  seed  developing  into  a  living  plant  conveys  as  much  of  the 
truth  as  we  are  capable  of  comprehending. 

III.  We  beceive  it  thbouoh  the  second  Adam,  Chbist.  Through  the  first  Adam 
we  have  our  present  body,  and,  through  his  sin  and  our  own,  not  a  few  of  its  imperfec- 
tions. The  first  Adam  was  a  "  living  soul,"  endowed  with  an  animal  soul,  the  living 
principle  of  the  body.  His  body  was  adapted  for  the  lower  life^for  a  life  on  earth.  He 
was  "  of  the  earth,  earthy."  But  the  second  Adam  is  a  life-giving  Spirit.  If  we  are  in 
him,  he  quickens  our  mortal  body  into  glorious  immortality.  Through  him  we 
receive  the  spiritual  body  suited  for  the  higher  life.  Contrasted  with  Christ,  the 
characteristic  of  the  first  Adam  is  animal  life, — the  characteristic  of  Christ  is  spiritual 
life.  We  inherit  from  Adam  what  he  had  and  was.  So  also  we  inherit  from  Christ 
what  he  had  and  was.  The  difference  between  the  first  Adam  and  the  second  causes 
the  difference  between  our  body  now  and  our  body  at  the  resurrection. 

IV.  CiBouusTANOEB  ATTENDANT  UPON  ITS  BiiSTOWAL.  It  will  be  assumed  suddenly 
at  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  "  The  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be 
raised  incorruptible  "  (ver.  52).  The  living  will  be  "  changed  "  "  in  the  twinkling  of  an 
eye  "  (see  1  Thess.  iv.  16).  No  slow  process,  as  in  the  development  of  the  present  body, 
Wot  suddenly  we  shall  be  "  clothed  upon." 

V.  We  should  be  intensely  obatbful  fob  thib  olobioub  gift.  This  poor  body 
we  may  be  glad  to  lose.  Certainly  its  imperfections.  But  what  a  life  may  we  antici- 
pate when  we  are  "clothed  upon  with  our  house  which  is  from  heaven")  To  be  free 
from  weakness,  weariness,  pain,  decay,  must  of  all  from  carnal  cravings  and  fleshly 
lusts ;  to  have  abounding  energy,  perfect  health,  pure  desires,  and  great  and  completed 
powen ;— what  service  and  pleasure  we  shall  be  capable  of  1  This  is  "  of  the  Loid."  Ii 
M  OUT  LerdT  When  we  die  shall  we  die  in  "  Christ "  ?  Can  we  humbly  lay  claim  to  this 
great  gift  as  tme,  though  imperfect,  servants  of  the  Master  ?— H. 


OB.  XT.  1—68.]    Tflll  WEST  EPISTLE  "iO  THE  OOEINTHIANS.  M9 

Vers.  64 — 67. —  Victory  on  the  last  battle-field.    I.  We  havb  many  battles  to  hoht, 

BUT  TUB  ONK  MOST  DBEADED  IS  THE   LAST THE  CONTEST   WITH   DEATH.      Life  is  a  SerieS 

of  contests.  The  battles  of  childhood  are  by  no  means  insignificant,  and  they  are  many. 
In  every  succeeding  stage  of  life  contests  continue.  Life  is  a  chaugiiig  but  unbroken 
fight  The  final  contest  is  usually  the  most  feared.  Then  generally  (1)  the  body  is 
very  weak ;  (2)  in  much  pain  ;  (3)  thoughts  of  separation  from  loved  ones  and  familiar 
scenes  rack  the  mind ;  (4)  lifu-opportunities  are  seen  to  be  at  an  end ;  (6)  a  sense  of 
loneliness  is  experienced ;  (6)  we  stand  upon  the  margin  of  another  world  ;  (7)  the  time 
fur  rendering  up  the  life-account  is  nigh ;  (8)  we  approach  our  final  destiny ;  (9)  we  meet 
God. 

II.  Imfobtance  or  the  issvx,  1.  If  we  do  not  triumph.  It  is  an  evidence  that  we 
are  still  under  the  dominion  of  sin.  Death  is  of  sin  (Bom.  t,  12),  and  if  death  is  not 
conquered,  sin  is  not.  "The  sting  of  death  is  sin"  (ver.  56).  Death  conquers  only 
because  sin  conquers.  If  sin  be  slAin,  death  will  be  powerless.  2.  If  we  are  "  in  sin," 
we  are  "  without  Christ."  3.  If  we  are  without  Clmst,  we  are  without  a  Bedeemer. 
4.  If  we  Bie  without  a  Redeemer,  we  perish.  The  death-contest  is  a  great  tut  of  our 
condition. 

III.  The  oebtain  tbiumph  or  the  child  or  Qos.  1.  Asserted.  "  I  will  ransom 
them  from  the  power  of  the  grave ;  I  will  redeem  them  from  death :  0  death,  I  will  be 
thy  plagues ;  0  grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruction  "  (Hosea  xiii.  14).  That  which  is  so 
dreaded  by  many  should  not  be  feared  by  the  believer.  He  has  a  Divine  promise  of 
victory.  2.  Explained,  (1)  The  triumph  comes  "through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
It  is  not  to  be  achieved  by  our  prowess.  We  have  no  strength  for  the  conflict;  our 
sufficiency  is  of  him.  Like  Mary,  we  shall  meet  Christ  at  the  sepulchre.  Through  him 
we  shall  conquer.  Well  may  we  offer  heartfelt  thanks  to  God  (ver.  57),  for  "  Qod  so 
loved  the  world,"  etc.-  (2)  He  satisfied  the  demands  of  the  Law.  "  Sin  is  of  the  Law ; " 
the  Law  condemns.  Christ  passed  under  the  Law  for  us — bore  the  penalties  of  the  broken 
Law ;  so  tliat  those  in  him  are  brought  from  under  the  Law.  "  There  is  therefore  now  no 
condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Bom.  viii.  1).  "  The  sting  of  death  is 
sin ;  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  Law ; "  but  we  are  not  under  the  Law  if  we  are  in 
Christ.  "  Forasmuch  then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  him- 
self likewise  took  part  of  the  same ;  that  through  death  he  might  destroy  him  that  had 
the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil ;  and  deliver  them  who  thruugh  fear  of  death  were 
all  flieir  lifetime  subject  to  bondage  "  (Heb.  ii.  14,  15).  (3)  He  has  risen  from  the 
grave.  The  power  of  his  redemption  is  thus  confirmed.  His  dominion  over  death  is 
demonstrated.  3.  Exulted  in.  Before  the  battle  begins,  the  child  of  God  may  rejoice 
in  coming  victory.  And  well  may  he  do  so,  for  this  wiU  at  the  same  time  illustrate  his 
faith  in  his  Bedeemer  and  brighten  all  his  earthly  course.  That  which  was  dreaded  as 
a  disastrous  defeat  is  rejoiced  in  as  a  glorious  and  all-important  victory.  4.  Often 
illustrated.  Christian  biography  is  rich  in  death-triumphs.  Thomas  Rutherford  in  the 
last  fight  ezcleumed,  "  He  has  indeed  been  a  precious  Christ  to  me ;  and  now  I  feel  him 
to  be  my  Bock,  my  Strength,  my  Best,  my  Hope,  my  Joy,  my  All  in  all."  When  Paul 
heard  the  bugle-call  to  the  last  of  his  many  battles,  he  cried,  "  I  am  now  readj  to  be 
oSiered  up,"  etc. 

IV.  An  aboument  roB  the  uhsatbo.  Victory  on  the  last  battle-field  comes  alot)e 
through  Christ.  Without  him  our  life  will  doie  in  disaster  and  ruin.  Suddenly  the 
conflict  may  come  upon  ua. — H. 

Ver.  58. — Preparation,  for  the  death-triwnph.  The  apostle  has  been  speaking  of 
the  believer's  triumph  in  the  final  contest  with  death.  This  is  assured,  for  it  is  "  througli 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  57),  who  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-daj-,  and  for  ever ; "  but, 
though  assured,  it  needs  to  be  prepared  for.  Salvation  is  of  (Jhrist,  yet  we  have  to  "work 
out  our  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling ; "  and  "  they  that  endure  to  the  end 
shall  be  saved."  So  we  need  to  make  constant  preparation  for  the  last  battle,  that 
when  it  comes  we  may  be  ready  and  may  be  found  clad  in  "  the  whole  armour  of  God." 

L  The  apostle  urges  believers  to  abide  in  thp  faith.  1.  We  must  be  "  in  the 
faith."  Only  thus  can  we  anticipate  triumph.  Unless  we  know  Christ  we  shaU  not 
know  the  death-victory.  If  we  are  not  in  the  faith,  death  will  triumph  over  us  and 
the  marks  of  death's  triumph  we  shall  bear  in  all  our  future.   2.  We  must  it  tteadfast 


MO  THE  FIB8T  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOBmTHIAKS.    [oa.  XT.  1—68 

in  thefaifh,  Not  halting  between  two  opinions — of  one  mind  to-day  and  of  anothei 
to-morrow.  We  must  choose  decisively  and  be  faithful  to  our  choice.  "  Unstable  ai 
water,  thou  shalt  not  excel."  That  soldier  is  not  worth  much  who  has  much  loyalty 
to-day  and  none  to-morrow.  Vacillation  in  Divine  things  is  a  poor  preparation  for 
death.  We  must  be  steadfast  (1)  to  Christ  personally  ;  (2)  to  his  doctrine — 
InclacUng  doctrine  of  resurrection,  which  Paul  has  specially  in  mind  ;  (3)  to  holy 
living.  8.  We  must  he  unmovable  in  the  faith,  TSoi  turning  aside  ourselves,  nor 
allowing  others  to  turn  us.  Enemies  will  try  to  turn  us — our  great  enemy  pre- 
eminently. But  we  must  be  like  limpets  on  the  rock,  which  cling  the  more  tenaciously 
the  more  we  seek  to  dislodge  them.  Tet  with  these  little  creatures  a  sudden  blow 
will  generally  remove  them.  8o  we  must  "  watch."  In  such  an  hour  as  we  thini;  not 
the  fierce  temptation  may  come.  We  must  hold  to  Christ  and  pray  Christ  to  hold 
to  us.    He  is  able  to  keep  us  from  falling. 

n.  Thb  afostlk  nBOBs  believers  to  be  DiLiaENT  IN  THE  Lord's  service.  1.  W« 
ihouild  engage  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Some  may  think  they  bad  better  concentrate 
their  thoughts  altogether  upon  themselves ;  woo  delightful  frames  of  mind ;  listen 
much  to  some  captivating  preacher ;  "  sit  and  sing  themselves  away  to  everlasting 
bliss."  Spiritual  selfishness  is  a  poor  preparation  for  the  last  fight.  Many  Christians 
pamper  themselves  and  become  hopeless  spiritual  invalids.  We  must  cultivate  personal 
piety,  but  we  may  do  this  largely  by  rolnist  Christian  work.  We  need  exercife.  The 
spiritual  sedentary  life  is  prolific  of  spiritual  ills.  A  Church  of  do-nothings  is  always 
a  hospital  full  of  sick  and  complaining  folks.  Besides,  the  need  of  service  is  great,  and 
the  Master  calls.  2.  We  should  abound  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  We  should  not  do  as 
little  as  we  can  for  Christ,  but  as  much.  How  he  "  abounded  "  in  work  for  us !  It  is 
the  man  who  abounds  in  his  work  who  is  most  fit  to  leave  it ;  the  diligent  servant 
is  the  one  most  ready  to  meet  his  Lord.  If  we  wish  to  be  victorious  over  death  by- 
and-by,  we  had  need  to  be  victorious  over  sloth  and  self-seeking  and  indulgence  now. 
8.  We  should  always  abound  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Our  work  is  not  to  be  by  fits 
and  starts ;  our  consecration  must  be  life-consecration.  Always  on  the  same  side, 
always  serving  the  same  Master.  4.  We  have  much  e/ncouragement  ever  to  abound  in 
the  work  oftM  J^ord.  "  Our  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord."  (1)  We  may  know 
this :  (o)  By  promiiie,  "My  word  shall  not  return  unto  me  void."  (6)  By  reason.  The 
gospel,  according  to  our  judgment,  meets  the  needs  of  men,  and  is  likely  to  be  accepted 
by  not  a  few.  (c)  By  experience.  Our  own,  perhaps ;  past  work  speaks  in  its  results. 
The  experiences  of  others ;  what  vast  effects  have  followed  upon  devoted  service  1  (2)  It 
is  not  in  vain;  for:  (a)  It  plea.ses  God.  The  true  servant  is  never  unsuccesiful.  He  is 
always  successful  in  pleasing  his  Master!  (b)  It  has  its  effect  upon  those  immediately 
concerned.  We  say  in  natural  things  every  cause  produces  its  appropriate  effect :  so 
In  spiritual.  The  result  that  we  desired  may  not  follow,  but  there  has  been  an  effect, 
as  we  shall  perceive  hereafter,  (c)  It  blesses  ourselves.  Few  things  are  likely  to  do 
us  so  much  good,  (d)  It  will  assuredly  bring  its  reward.  But  our  labour  must  always 
be  "  in  the  Lord  " — ^in  his  Name,  in  dependence  upon  his  power,  in  prayer  for  his  help, 
in  dtsirc  for  his  glory. — H. 

Ver.  1. — The  large  use  of  the  term  "gospel."  The  general  meaning  of  the  term 
"  gospel "  is  "  good  news,"  "  glad  tidings."  It  is  "  God's  spel,"  or  "  word."  All  that  is 
connected  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  properly  be  called  good  news,  and  the  word 
"  gospel "  may  be  thmight  of  as  including  it  all.  There  is,  indeed,  a  tendency  to  limit  the 
term  to  a  portion  only  of  our  Redeemer's  work,  which  needs  to  be  resisted.  The  gospel 
is  treated  as  if  it  were  only  the  message  of  our  Lord's  sacrificial  death.  But  that  is, 
evidently,  not  the  matter  that  is  at  all  in  the  mind  of  the  apostle  when  he  wrote  to 
the  Corinthians  of  the  "gospel  which  be  preached  unto  tliem."  He  was  thinking  oi 
the  "gospel  of  the  resurrection,"  and  of  those  truths  which  rest  upon  the  risen  rather 
than  upon  the  dying  He(l(  enicr.  We  plead,  therefore,  for  a  full  comprehensive  applica- 
tion of  the  term  "  gosjiel,"  as  including — 

I.  'J'UE  G08PKL  OF  THE  Incaknation.  The  "  good  news  "  that  God  is  willing  to  take 
opon  himself  our  human  nature ;  to  become  a  man  among  men ;  and  to  show  to  ui 
that  humanity  is  not  hopelessly  dopravcd,  but  is  still  within  reach  of  the  redemptivs 
power  of  God.     The  "good  uews"  that  God's  love  is  no  mere  sentiment,  but  a  holy 


OH.  XT.  1—68.1    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CCR1NTHIAN8.  641 


pity  leading  him  to  make  effort  and  sacrifice  in  accomplishing  the  purposes  which  lov« 
can  fashion. 

II.  Thx  gospel  of  the  miracles.  The  "  good  news,"  thu.s  illustrated  for  us  is  that 
there  b  no  ill  from  which  humanity  suffers,  no  bitter  and  terrible  and  seemingly 
hopeless  consequence  of  sin,  which  Divine  love  and  power  cannot  reach.  Even  death 
itself,  man's  last  enemy,  is  well  within  God's  control.  And  the  "good  news"  that 
God,  in  his  gracious  Fatherhood,  is  as  mightily  and  wonderfully  caring  for  us  every  day, 
as  Jesus  was  caring  for  sick  sufferers  and  imperilled  disciples  and  bereaved  friends. 

III.  The  gospel  of  the  holt  life.  The  "  good  news  "  that  a  man  has  actually 
lived  here  upon  the  earth  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners."  And 
that  he  will  not  only  show  us  how  to  live  as  he  did,  but  will  give  us  the  grace  for  so 
living.  He  left  us  the  "  example  that  we  should  follow  his  steps,"  but  he  gave  us  also 
to  be  partakers  of  that  Divine  nature  in  which  alone  the  following  of  we  example 
becomes  possible. 

rV.  The  gospel  of  tee  baobifiok.  The  "  good  news  "  that  our  sins  have  beeq^  borne 
for  ns;  acceptable  sacrifice  for  them  has  been  offered.  The  demands  of'^mfinite 
righteousness  have  been  adequately  met.  The  hindrances  to  reconciliation  have  been 
effectually  removed.  And  men  now  have  "  peace  with  Qod  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord." 

v.  TuE  GOSPEL  OF  THE  Eesurbeotion,  The  "  good  news  "  that  God  has  signified 
his  full  acceptance  of  his  Son.  The  "  good  news  "  that  he  who  died  for  our  sins  lives 
to  carry  out  his  purpose  of  grace  in  our  hearts.  The  "  good  news  "  that  Christ  "  had 
risen  again  in  order  to  communicate  to  us  that  new  and  Divine  life  whereby  our  own 
resurrection  should  be  assured — a  life  which  should  make  the  human  body,  though  laid 
in  the  grave,  a  seed  from  whence,  in  Gtod's  own  good  time,  a  new  aud  more  glorious 
body  should  arise."  It  is  the  gospel  in  this  large  and  inclusive  sense  which  has  to  be 
preached  to  men,  and  not  a  doctrine  formulated  by  men  respecting  one  part  only  of  the 
"  good  news  of  God."  They  only  preach  the  true  gospel  who  can  say  with  the  apostle, 
"  I  have  not  shunned  to  declare  unto  yon  the  whoh  counsel  of  Ood." — B.  T, 

Ver.  2.— Salvation  a  present  procest^  Precisely  rendered,  the  first  sentence  of  this 
verse  would  read,  "  By  which  also  ye  are  being  saved."  St.  Paul  applies,  in  his  writings, 
the  best  corrective  to  the  imperfect,  and  indeed  false,  notion  that  human  redemption  is  a 
thing  completed,  a  thing  done  outside  of  and  separate  from  men,  a  something  which 
they  are  to  receive  as  if  it  were  a  mere  gift  provided  for  them  apart  from  their  own 
exertions.  St.  Paul  clearly  saw  that  redemption  is  a  moral  work  ;  its  proper  sphere  is 
a  man's  mind  and  heart  and  life.  It  is  a  process,  and  it  has  to  be  carried  on  right 
through  a  man's  earthly  history.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  it  may  be  said  that  we 
are  saved,  but  there  is  a  much  truer  and  deeper  sense  in  which  it  may  be  said  that 
we  are  being  saved.  One  of  the  most  striking  expressions  of  the  Pauline  idea  of  salvation 
as  a  present  process,  carried  on  within  us,  is  found  in  Rom.  v.  10:  "  For  if  when  we 
were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being 
reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life."  Some  adequate  notion  of  the  Pauline  thousht 
of  salvation  may  be  obtained  by  dwelling  on  the  following  three  representations:— 

L  The  beoinnino  of  salvation  is  the  beception  of  the  oospbl.  Observe  how 
ttie  Christian  teachers  first  demanded  faith  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
That  IS  the  beginning.  We  must  accept  of  Jesus  as  the  Sent  of  God,  the  Son  of  God' 
and  the  Saviour  from  sin.  That  beginning  may  be  (1)  intellectual,— a  persuasion,  upon 
due  evidence,  that  Chnst  is  the  Saviour ;  or  it  may  be  (2)  emotional,-a  constraint  of 
love  to  him  who  condescended,  bore,  and  suffered  so  much  for  us,  and  whose  personal 
history  1.  such  a  fascination.  Here  is  the  initial  stage,  "Dost  thou  believe  th^  Jesus 
IS  the  Son  of  God  ?  You  cannot  be  on  the  Christian  platform  at  all  unless  you  can 
give  to  that  question  a  simple  and  hearty  affirmative.  But  this  is  only  a  beginnine 
ifnZwi^  fjf  T?  T^  l-''''^*T  "  ***■ .  '^^^^"'  """*  ^  "dvanie  to  spirituli 
ma    S  to  W^'  ***  *''*  individual  and  the  IndividMl 

fi,.t*2??JS^?"  «'  s^^*™"  M  WATOiHo  IN  the  Gosptt.  It  U  apprchendina 
that  the  Loid  Jwua  Christ  has,  by  the  perfection  of  his  obedience  and  t£e  buH 
merit  of  his  saoriflce,  made  a  new  standing-ground  before  Ood  for  us.    T^tC^^ 


64a  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh  xt.  1—58 

sents  us.  That  he  wins  a  place  before  God,  and  a  relation  with  God,  for  us.  That  Lis 
personal  rights  are  not  exchisively  personal,  but  are  rights  which  he  shares  with  us,  or 
allows  us  to  share  with  him,  and  we  are  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  In  the  presence 
of  law  claim,  we  stand  as  "justified."  In  the  presence  of  QocCs  claim  to  perfect 
obedience,  we  stand,  in  Christ,  as  righteous.  In  the  anticipations  of  a  judgment  day, 
we  stand  as  alieady  acquitted;  for  us  "there  is  now  no  condemnation." 

III.  The  fbocebs  of  saltation  is  oiviko  the  oosfel  fbee  room  to  wobk  in  hind, 
AKB  HEABT,  AND  RELATIONS,  AND  LIFE.  The  gospel  being  conceived,  not  primarily  as 
a  set  of  principles,  and  duties,  and  counsels,  but  primarily  as  the  spiritual  and  abiding 
preseace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  us,  using  truths,  principles,  experiences,  duties, 
thoughts,  and  counsels,  as  need  be,  for  the  carrying  on  of  his  gracious  work  of  moral 
perfecting.  "  This  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification ; "  and  we  lose  the 
holiest  interest  in  that  sanctification  when  we  fail  to  realize  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
is  now  actually  present  with  us,  carrying  on  and  presiding  over  this  work.  We  are 
leing  saved ;  and  the  exceeding  solemnity  of  our  common  everyday  life  lies  in  this — 
Christ  is  in  it,  working  at  our  salvation.  The  apostle  therefore  urges  upon  us  that  we 
must  hold  in  quick  and  living  memory  the  gospel  of  the  present,  working  Saviour — 
risen  that  he  might  carry  on  to  its  full  completion  his  redemptive  work — and  that  to 
believe  in  vain  is  to  profess  belief,  but  give  the  faith  no  power  to  opea  our  wul  and 
life  to  the  redeeminga  of  the  risen,  living,  and  ever-present  Saviour.^R.  T. 

Ver.  8. — Lealh  /or  tint.  "  How  tbat  Christ  died  for  onr  sins."  Here  history  is 
bound  np  with  theology.  The  historical  feet  is  that  Christ  died.  More  carefully  con- 
sidered, the  historical  fact  is  that  he  died  for  no  sins  of  his  own,  but  was  put  to  death 
by  the  malice  and  sin  of  bitter  enemies.  The  theological  fact  which  is  bound  up  with 
the  historical  fact  is  that  in  some  sense— mysterious,  spiritual,  mystical,  but  neverthe- 
less most  real  and  most  true — be  died  for  sin,  in  respect  of  sin,  in  gracious  Divine 
relations  to  the  pardon  and  removal  of  sin.  It  will  be  necessary  to  discuss  fully  the 
conceptions  that  are  possible  under  this  term  for — ^for  sin.  Our  preference  for  either 
one  of  the  conceptions  will  depend  on  the  school  of  theology  to  which  we  belong.  For 
may  mean  in  place  of,  or  in  respect  of,  or  on  (Mount  of,  or  with  a  view  to  the  removal 
of.  Scripture  teachings  should  be  appealed  to  to  fix  what  is  the  proper  and  precise 
meaning.  The  following  may  be  consulted : — Old  Testament :  Gen.  xxii. ;  Deut.  ix.  24 
— ^26 ;  f  s.  xxii. ;  Isa.  liii. ;  Zech.  xiL  10.  New  Testament :  Matt.  xx.  28 ;  Mark  x.  46 ; 
Eom.  V.  8—10 ;  ch.  L  18 ;  T.  7 ;  viii.  11 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14, 15 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6 ;  1  Pet.  L  19. 
The  subject  may  be  fully  treated  under  three  headings,  and,  as  it  should  be  a  scriptural 
rather  than  a  theological  study,  the  statement  of  the  headings  should  suffice. 

I.  Old  Testament  anticipations  of  the  dooibine  of  death  fob  wba, 

II.  OuB  Lobd'b  own  teaohinos  bespectino  his  death  fob  bins. 

III.  Apostolic  views  conoebnino  the  death  fob  ema. 

If  the  Scripture  passages  be  fully  and  fairly  considered,  it  will  be  felt  that  the 
commonly  accepted  theological  notions  of  our  Lord's  atonement  for  nn,  need  to  be 
broadened  and  widened,  and  made  inclusive  of  various  possible  relations.  No  one  aspect 
of  the  death  for  sins  need  be  conceived  of  as  antagonistic  to  another.  In  the  many- 
sidedness  of  the  relation  lies  the  depth  and  the  glory  of  the  tmth. — ^R.  T. 

Vers.  4,  6. — VeritahU  death  and  verit(Me  reiurreetion.  Men  in  all  ages  bave  recog- 
nized that  the  truth  of  Christianity  depends  upon  the  historical  verity  of  our  Lord's 
resurrection  from  the  dead.  Consequently,  attacks  of  various  kinds  nave  been  made 
upon  the  fact.  It  has  always  been  felt  tnikt  this  was  the  key  of  the  Christian  position. 
We  may  summarize  the  attacks  thus :  1.  Men  denied  the  reality  of  our  Lord's  death. 
2.  Then  they  argued  that  the  only  resurrection  possible  to  man  la  a  spiritual  regene- 
ration and  conversion.  S.  By-and-by  men  said  that  the  resurrection  was  no  fifUit,  only 
a  myth  that  grew  up,  fashioned  by  the  wishes  of  a  credulous  band  of  disciples.  4.  And 
then  the  scientific  people  thought  to  bury  the  old  truth  for  ever  out  of  iMch,  by 
declaring  that  the  resurrection  of  bodily  forms  which  have  once  decayed  ia  dmply 
impossible ;  all  decaying  matter  goes  to  the  formation  of  fresh  life,  and  tiie  bodies  of 
dead  men  really  become,  over  and  over  again,  constituents  of  the  bodies  of  living  men. 
But  the  question  which  conceiug  us  first  of  all  is  not — How  can  these  thinga  b«T  but— 


OL  ST.  1—68.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBIKTHIAKa  643 

It  (ftere  tujicient  evidence  and  proof  t  The  matter  may  be  beyond  present  explication, 
but  it  is  not  therefore  untrue,  nor  can  we  be  justified  in  refusing  to  accept  an  adequately 
sustained  historical  fact,  because  the  fact  is  surrounded  with  scientific  and  moral 
difiSculties.  True  science  bids  us  accept  without  questioning  every  well-ascertained 
fact.  Now,  the  verses  before  us  declare  two  facts :  (1)  Christ  really  died ;  (2)  Christ 
really  rose  from. the  dead.    We  affirm  that  we  have — 

L  Adequate  PBOor  of  the  real  death.  Illustrate :  1.  The  nature  of  the  death, 
from  ruptured  heart.  2.  The  testing  spear-thrust.  3.  The  distinct  attestation  of  the 
Bom/an  centurion,  and  subsidiary  testimony  of  the  Boman  soldiers,  who  did  not  break 
our  Lord's  legs.    4.  The  actual  burial  in  the  tomb. 

n.  Adequate  proof  of  the  real  besubreotion.  1.  Scripture  antecedent  oases 
show  the  possibility  of  resurrection  from  the  dead.  Our  Lord's  resurrection  does  not 
stand  alone.  2,  The  yarious  appearances  of  our  Lord.  3.  Hie  special  manifestation  to 
St.  FauL— B.  T. 

Ver.  20. — "Christ  the  Firstfruiti."  In  the  pravioui  verses  the  apostle  has  folly 
illustrated  this  point,  that  the  consequences  of  rejecting  the  truth  of  the  resurrection 
are  altogether  more  serious  than  any  that  can  conceivably  attend  belief.  If  Christ  be 
not  risen,  then  our  faith  is  vain,  preaching  is  vain,  even  the  apostles  are  false  witnesses, 
the  dead  in  Christ  have  perishedj-and  we  are  yet  in  the  misery  and  the  peril  of  our 
sins.  Our  text  is  the  revulsion  from  such  an  awful  picture.  It  cannot  be  so.  It  must 
be  true  that  "  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  Firstfruits  of  them  that 
slept."  In  speaking  here  of  firstfruits,  the  apostle  takes  the  general,  rather  than  the 
special  Old  Testament,  idea  of  them,  though  the  fact  of  his  writing  at  the  time  of  the 
Passover  no  doubt  suggested  the  figure. 

L  Firstfruits  show  the  possibilitt  of  harvest.  So  Christ,  as  a  human  being, 
showed  the  possibilty  of  resurrection.  Imagiiie  that  the  fields  had  never  waved  with 
harvest,  and  that  in  this  spring-time  the  seeds  were  first  sown.  How  men  would  watch 
for  the  result  1  Some  stalks  may  be  ripened  early  in  the  sheltered  warm  comer.  It  is 
enough  to  rest  our  hearts :  we  know  there  can  be  golden  grain  waving  over  all  the 
field.  So  the  grave-field  is  sown  with  the  living  seeds ;  and  Christ  is  a  seed  sown 
among  them.  Lo !  long  before  the  others,  one  single  blade  appears.  And  the  one  says, 
"  Wait  patiently  awhile."  Man  can.  rise.  One  day  the  grave-fields  of  earth  will  be  rich 
with  the  golden  harvests  of  the  resurrection-life.  This  firstfruit  comes  to  tell  ns  that 
it  eon  be  so. 

XL  FiBSTFRUiTB  ASSURE  OF  THE  CERTAiHTT  OF  HARVEST.  8o  Christ,  88  the  lepre- 
sentative  human  Being,  assures  the  certainty  of  resurrection.  Take  a  handful  of  seed* 
— say  a  handful  of  seemingly  dead  seeds  from  a  mummy-case.  Try  if  they  have  life 
by  placing  one  of  the.m  in  the  soil.  If  oae  Uves,  all  will  live.  It  is  a  firstfruit 
which  pledges  a  harvest.  So  it  is  with  Christ.  The  relation  in  which  he  stands  to 
men  makes  him  the  test  of  their  resurrection.  "  If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again  7  " 
Who  shall  answer  that  question  ?  Is  there  a  living  and  undying  germ  in  that  body 
which  we  bury  out  of  our  sight?  Try.  Take  one  and  let  it  be  representative.  Take 
the  Man  Christ  Jesus.  Describe  his  burial,  and  the  glory  of  the  Easter  morning  when 
he  rose.  But  on  what  grounds  do  we  af&rm  that  what  is  true  of  one  will  be  true  of 
all  the  others?  It  may  be  urged  that  one  instance  often  suffices  to  establish  a  law. 
But,  further,  Gkd's  Word  declares  that  Christ  occupied  a  special  place  in  relation  to  num. 
He  was  constituted  his  Bepresentative.  The  human  race  has  two  heads,  Adam  and 
Christ.  One  covers  the  race  for  death,  and  one  for  life— the  eternal  life.  Did  all  die  in 
Adam  ?  Then,  verily,  all  shall  be  made  alive  in  Christ.  And  certainty  is  added  to 
ban  possibility,  and  death  has  lost  its  great  terror. 

m.  Firstfruits  unfold  the  ohabaoter  of  the  habtest.  So  Christ,  as  the 
model  Christian,  declares  the  character  of  the  resurrection.  Christ  bore  relation  to  the 
whole  world ;  he  is  representative  Man.  But  he  bore  a  special  relation  to  his  own 
people ;  he  is  the  representative  Christian,  Therefore  we  have  two  things  in  his  resur- 
rection :  (1)  the  bare  fact ;  (2)  the  glorious  character  of  the  fact.  Firstfruits  show  the 
character  of  coming  harvest.  Illustrate  by  our  thoughts  and  feais  as  we  see  the  first- 
fruits  thin,  blighted,  speckled ;  or  standing  well,  clean,  strong,  and  full.  What  hope, 
'*—   Is  than  in  Christ's  resurrection,  regarding  him  as  the  Firstfruits  from  the  dead? 


544  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIANa    [CH.  it.  1— 6S 

What  will  our  coming  life  be  if  it  is  like  his  during  the  forty  days  he  tarried  with 
us?  1.  Christ's  forty  days  showed  that  the  new  life  will  be  beyond  the  limiting  con- 
ditions of  humanity.  It  will  be  to  our  old  life  as  flower  to  seed.  2.  Christ's  forty 
days  showed  the  new  life  will  have  the  old  recognitions  and  the  old  sympathies.  Jesus 
was  in  feeling  the  same.  3.  Christ's  forty  days  showed  the  new  life  to  be  a  deathless 
and  eternal  life.  This  is  the  truth  of  the  ascension.  Once  out  of  the  death-grasp, 
death  is  done  away.  Impress  (1)  the  importance  of  all  moral  seed-sowings,  as  directly 
bearing  on  the  resurrection-life;  (2)  the  duty  of  fixing  firmly  our  oneness  to  Clirist, 
our  Representative  and  Head ;  (3)  the  joy  oi  cherishing  a  good  hop*  of  the  great; 
awaking.— B.  T. 

Vers.  21 — 23,45.-7^  two  Adam*.  In  introducing  this  subject,  Mt  forth,  explain, 
and  illustrate  the  distinctions  between  the  relations  in  which  man  stands  to  God  as  an 
individnal,  as  bound  together  in  the  membership  of  a  community  or  nationality,  or  as 
a  specially  constituted  race.  In  all  matters  of  government  and  order  God  is  pleased  to 
deal  directly  with  the  individual,  but  mediately  and  representatively  with  families, 
with  citizens,  and  with  races.  In  these  cases  some  individual  stands  before  God,  to 
deal  with  him  in  behalf  ot  those  he  represents,  and  the  results  of  his  dealing  affect  all 
those  in  whose  name  he  goes  forth,  illustrate  by -the  sentiment  that  was  cherished  in 
tribes.  The  whole  tribe  was  carried,  as  it  were,  by  the  sheikh,  or  chief,  and  affected,  for 
good  or  evil,  by  his  action.  Or  illustrate  by  the  notion  of  a  champion,  as  found  in 
Boman  history.  He  stands  for  the  army,  and  by  his  conduct  carries  defeat  or  victory 
for  them  all.  Similarly  the  ambassador,  or  plenipotentiary,  pledges  the  nation  to  the 
peace  or  settlement  which  he  makes  in  its  name,  and  every  individual  really  makes 
the  peace  in  him  whom  the  nation  sends  forth  to  stand  for  them.  Upon  this  familiar 
fact  and  truth  the  idea  of  the  two  Adams  is  baseil.  We  must  remember  that  men  may 
be  classified  in  various  ways — physically,  locally,  intellectually,  morally,  or  spiritually, 
and  under  each  classification  men  can  act  both  directly  and  by  representation.  As  a 
spiritual  race  of  beings,  man  has  had,  at  different  times,  two  race-heads,  the  first  and 
the  second  Adam. 

L  The  first  Adam  beoabdgd  ab  a  bace-hbad,  ob  befresentatitb.  Show  how 
the  race  is  bound  up  in  him.  Whether  or  not  he  be  the  actual  race-father,  this  is 
certain,  "God  has  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  to  dwell  upon  the  earth,"  and  the 
blood  is  Adam's,  the  type  is  Adam's,  the  whole  bodily  and  mental  functions  are 
precisely  Adam's,  and  God  is  pleased  to  deal  with  the  race  through  this  Adam,  making 
him  the  race's  test-man,  and  laying  the  race  under  the  burdens  that  were  laid  upon 
him.  If  we  force  the  idea  of  our  individuality  into  an  undue  strength,  we  shall  resist 
the  idea  that  any  man  can  carry  us  with  him  so  as  to  win  for  us  blessing  or  woe ;  but 
if  we  duly  estimate  the  solidarity  of  the  human  race,  and  what  this  involves  for  the 
good  of  the  race,  we  shall  be  willing  to  accept  the  idea,  and  the  consequences,  of  this 
mediation  or  representation.  The  standing  of  humanity  before  God  is  settled  by  tht 
standing  of  Adam,  'i'he  disabilities  of  humanity  come  as  the  disabilities  of  Adam,  the 
oonsequences  of  his  failure.  Jt  may  even  be  that  what  we  call  death,  as  distinguished 
from  simple  cAan^eandpoMtn^,  is  due  to  Adam's  fall.  And  our  very  character  may  be 
said  to  be  deteriorated  through  Adam's  triumphant  wilfulness.  We  do  not  say  that 
our  relations  with  the  first  Adam  are  limited  to  these  representative  ones,  but  we  do 
say  that  these  are  the  prominent  relations,  and  those  which  enable  ua  to  apprehend  the 
similar  relations  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  Thb  bboond  Adah  beoabdbd  as  a  Baob-Head,  or  Bbfrebentativb.  Observe  that 
the  first  Adam  was  directly  horn  of  Ood,  not  of  any  previous  human  being ;  and  so,  we 
are  taught,  was  the  Lord  Jesus,  though  bis  full  kinship  with  our  humanity  is  brought 
home  to  us  by  his  having  a  human  mother.  He,  then,  is  a  fitting  new  Race-Head,  and 
God  is  pleased  to  deal  with  him  in  our  name,  and  his  dealings  with  him  cover,  carry, 
and  include  us,  as  those  for  whom  he  stands.  Work  out :  1.  How  Christ  stood  for  us 
aa  penitent  sinners,  and  won  for  us  full  pardon.  2.  How  Christ  presented,  in  our  name, 
penect  obedience,  and  won  for  us  full  acceptance.  3.  How  Christ  asked  for  us  life  eternal, 
and  gained  the  unspeakable  gift.  He  is  himself  the  type  and  the  model  of  the  new 
human  race,  the  race  that  hates  sin,  and  loves  righteousness,  and  seeks  God ;  and  every 
one  of  ui  who  makea  Ohritt  stand  for  him  thereby  pledges  himself  that  he  will  |pvt 


on.xv.1— 68.J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TH£  COIllNTaiANS.  646 

himself  no  rest  until  he  la  in  ererything  just  what  Christ  represents  him  to  be. 
And  BO  "  to  CSirist  shall  all  be  made  alive."— B.  T. 

Ver.  26. — Jfon'i  last  enemy.  For  each  individual  death  is  the  last  enemy,  in  the 
senRe  of  being  the  worst,  the  one  unconquerable  enemy ;  and  it  is  the  last  in  time,  so 
far  as  time  concerns  our  earthly  sphere.  The  apostle's  thought  is,  that  he  who  has 
proved  himself  able  to  mate  and  master  death,  by  his  own  resurrection,  must  be  able  to 
master  sin,  all  the  evils  which  sin  brings,  and  all  the  lesser  consequences  of  sin's  reign. 
Christ's  miracles  of  raising  the  dead,  as  well  as  his  own  resuriection,  confirm  his  power 
to  mate  and  master  man's  greatest  enemy.  Scripture  teaches  us  to  regard  our  Lord's 
resurrection  as  a  final  and  irremediable  conquest  of  death  for  us  and  on  our  behalf 
(see  Acts  ii.  24 ;  vers.  21,  55,  56 ;  Eph.  iv.  8 ;  2  Tim.  i.  10 ;  Heb.  iL  14 ;  Rev.  L  18). 
By  that  resurrection  he  abolishes  death,  and  gains  the  mastery  over  all  that  death 
symbolizes  to  us. 

L  Christ  is  the  Conqubbob  of  death  itself.    It  was  no  design  of  Christ's  to 
destroy  death  altogether,  and  pluck  from  it  its  commission  to  the  human  race.    He  left 
it  still  to  bite,  but  took  away  its  sting,  its  hopelessness,  and  its  relation  to  human  sin. 
We  shall  die  though  Christ  has  conquered  death;  but  death  has  now  become  tho 
messenger  of  our  Saviour,  who  would  call  us  to  himself,  not  the  foe  who  drags  us  down 
to  our  doom.    Even  while  this  may  be  said,  It  must  be  admitted^  that  death  keeps 
a  bitter  enemy,  dreaded  still  by  men,  even  Christian  men.    We  are  impressed  with  the 
certainty  of  its  coming.    "  There  is  no  discharge  from  that  war."    The  exceptions  have 
been  so  few,  and  they  have  been  made  on  such  distinct  grounds,  that  none  of  us  can 
hold  one  moment's  hope  that  we  shall  escape  it.     There  is  the  humbling  power  of  an 
irresistible  destiny  hanging  over  us  all.    And  the  certainty  Is  blended  with  a  most 
painful  uncertainty  as  to  the  time  or  mode  of  its  appearing  for  us.    Death  may  be 
lurking  in  every  journey.    Morning,  noon,  and  night  it  chooses  for  its  visits.    It  "  reaps 
the  bearded  grain,"  and  the  scythe  sweeps  down  also  "  the  flowers  that  grow  between." 
Death  can  aho  put  on  repulsive  and  hideous  forms.    It  can  come  as  accident,  as  loath- 
some disease,  as  plague.    And  the  separations  it  makes  from  loves  and  friendships  add 
greatly  to  the  bitterness  with  which  we  think  of  it.     No  wonder  that  so  many  of  us  are ' 
"  all  our  hfetime  in  bondage,  through  fear  of  death."    Then  he  who  would  he  the  Saviour 
of  men  must  do  something  to  deliver  men  from  the  power  and  fear  of  death.    He  must 
deliver  men  from  that  part  of  death  which  has  come  as  a  consequence  of  sin.    In  our 
human  nature  he  submitted  to  death,  when  it  grasped  him  in  its  most  dreadful  forms ; 
but  when  he  was  &irly  in  its  grasp,  he  lifted  up  his  power — as  Samson,  when  he 
awoke,  snapped  asunder  the  cords  that  bound  him — ^he  broke  asunder  the  bars  and 
gates ;  he  "  led  captivity  captive ; "  and  rose,  showing  us  our  foe  conquered,  his  arrows 
broken,  his  sting  gone.    Looked  at  now  from  Christ's  point  of  view,  the  aspects  of 
death  are  all  changed.    It  is  still  "  certain,"  but  only  because  the  Father  wants  all  his 
children  gathered  ^ely  home.  It  is  still  "  uncertain,"  hut  only  because  such  uncertainty 
is  an  important  part  of  the  Father's  training.    It  puts  on  "  repulsive  forms,"  hut  only 
because  Christian  love  needs  severe  testings.    It  involves  "  separations,"  hut  earthly 
separations  are  necessary  to  perfect  the  unities  of  heaven,  whence  they  go  no  more  out 
for  ever.    So,  for  the  Christian,  death  is  already  virtually  destroyed. 

IL  Chbist  is  thb  Conquebob  of  that  which  death  btmbolizes  to  va.  Scripture 
personifies  death,  and  makes  it  the  embodiment  of  all  human  ills.  "  Sin,  when  it  is 
finished,  bringeth  forth  death,"  some  kind  of  death.  All  trouble  is  a  little  death ;  al' 
disease  is  a  little  death.  These  things  are  symbolized  in  physical  death.  1.  Death 
is  our  ideal  of  loneliness.  It  is  our  great  lonely  time.  Our  best  beloved  must  stand 
back  from  the  gate  while  we  go  through  alone.  There  are  many  lonely  times  in  the 
course  of  our  lives.  Times  when  friends  forsake ;  times  of  doubt ;  times  of  griel 
But  Cilirist,  in  mastering  death,  the  height  of  loneliness,  mastered  all  lesser  phases  of 
it  for  ns.  He  is  with  as  to  death,  and  we  know  that  we  can  he  nowhere  alone— he 
is  with  us.  2.  Death  is  the  ideal  of  all  bad,  untoward  circumstances.  We  think 
Of  It  as  the  sad  time,  when  all  things  seem  to  be  against  us.  But  life  is  full  of  such 
times.  Still,  our  Lord  is  the  Master  of  all  circumstances,  and  however  wild  and 
wanton  the  storms  of  life  may  seem,  he  holds  the  helm,  and  will  bring  us  thnnigh 
to  tlM  desired  hmven.  3.  Death  is  the  great  sorrow,  the  ideal  of  all  toirom,  Bnt 
I,  oommoAm  8  K 


64«  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANB.    [oh.  xv.  1— 5& 

to  him  who  rose  from  the  dead  it  is  given  to  wipe  the  tear  from  every  eye,  to  quiet 
every  heaving  heiirt,  and  shed  ahroad  the  "  peace  that  passeth  understanding."  Pot 
the  disciples  of  Christ  death — the  bitter,  stinging  thing  death — is  gone ;  and  there 
is  nothing  whatever  left  now  in  the  world  that  can  be  overwhelming.  Christ  con- 
quered all  our  foes  when  he  conquered  death. — R.  T. 

Yer.  28. — Tht  close  of  the  Mediatoi'i  mittion.  This  is  •  passage  of  almost  extreme 
difficulty,  because  fitting  into  a  general  scheme  of  the  universe  which  we  find  it  very 
difficult  to  understand,  and  because  dealing  with  a  future  so  transcendent  and  sublime 
as  to  be  beyond  the  grasp  of  our  imagination.  Treated  theologically,  and  fitteil  into 
any  redemptive  scheme,  as  drawn  out  by  human  intellect,  the  passage  is  a  perplexity. 
Treated  meditatively,  and  for  the  sake  of  its  spiritual  suggestions,  we  may  be  guided 
by  the  following  brief  passage  from  P.  W.  Robertson,  which  seems  to  be  a  key  to 
unlock  the  apostle's  high  imaginings : — "  The  mediatorial  kingdom  of  Christ  shall  be 
superseded  by  an  immediate  one ;  therefore  the  present  form  in  which  God  has  revealed 
himself  is  only  temporary.  When  the  object  of  the  present  kingdom  of  Christ  has 
been  attained  in  the  conquest  of  evil,  there  will  be  no  longer  need  of  a  mediator.  Then 
Gh>d  will  be  known  immediately.  We  shall  know  him,  when  the  mediatorial  has 
merged  in  the  immediatorial,  in  a  way  more  high,  more  intimate,  more  sublime,  than 
even  through  Christ."  "  Tiiere  rises  before  the  prophetic  vision  of  St.  Paul  the  final 
triumph  of  Christ  over  all  evil,  over  all  power,  and  the  Son  giving  up  to  the  Father  the 
kingdom  of  this  world,  which  in  his  humauity  he  conquered  for  the  Father  as  well  as 
for  himself.  Christ,  laying  the  spoils  of  a  conquered  world  at  the  foot  of  the  throne  of 
the  Father,  shows,  by  that  supreme  act  of  seir-sacrifice,  that  in  his  office  as  Redeemer  he 
came,  not  to  do  his  own  will,  but  the  will  of  the  Father."  In  dealing  with  a  passage 
which  seems  to  concern  the  sublime  and  my.sterious  relations  of  the  Divine  Trinity, 
our  spirit  cannot  be  too  serious  and  devout  and  reverent ;  yet  we  may  humbly  try  to 
understand  what  God  has  been  pleased  so  graciously  to  reveaL  Probably  the  point  of 
the  apostle  in  this  passage  cannot  be  apprehended  until  we  can  see  that  the  distinctione 
of  the  Trinity  are,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  revelational,  and  made  known  to  as  as 
a  part  of  God's  gracious  and  redemptive  purpose.  The  apostle  does  not  bring  us  into 
tiie  presence  of  what  neither  he  nor  we  could  mentally  grasp,  the  eternal  constitution 
and  distinctions  of  the  Divine  nature. 

L  The  bevelation  of  the  Son  is  temfobabt.  That  is,  of  the  Son  regarded  as  the 
mediatorial  and  redemptive  Agent.  There  is  a  doctrine  of  the  eternal  Son^ipof  Christ, 
but  with  it  this  passage  does  not  deal.  God  may  employ  on  his  mission  a  servant  or 
»  Son.  In  either  case  the  mission  is  defined  in  character  and  limited  in  time.  What- 
ever Jesus,  as  the  Son  of  God,  came  to  earth  to  do,  it  was  a  precise  mission,  having  a 
temporary  character.  It  had  two  stages.  1.  One  of  earthly  manifestation.  We  know 
how  that  was  limited  to  a  few  years,  and  at  its  close  he  passed,  accepted,  into  heaven. 
2,  One  of  spiritual  influence.  Within  that  we  live,  but  it  is  no  more  abiding  than  the 
other,  and  our  text  describes  its  close. 

n.  'Sfa  BETELATION  OF  THE  HoLT  GhOST  IS  DEPENDENT  OR  THAT  OF  THE  SoN,  AITD 

IS  ALSO  TEHFORABT.  He  is  the  redemptive  Agent  who  follows  up  and  applies  the  work 
of  Christ ;  and  is  only  needed  while  the  redemptive  work  has  to  be  done.  Here,  again, 
no  reference  is  intended  to  the  sublime  operations  of  God  of  •  spiritual  kind  apart  from 
those  exerted  in  the  redemption  of  man. 

in.  The  point  of  the  pbesent  bevelation  of  God  to  ub  n  thb  bxcovibt  of  mar's 
WILL  and  heabt  to  God.  It  is  a  moral  purpose  that  is  sought.  The  recovery  first 
of  the  man  himself,  and  then  of  his  surroundings.  This  is  fully  argued  in  the  passage 
from  which  the  text  is  taken,  and  in  Rom.  viii. 

lY.  When  the  bedemftive  design  is  fdllt  aocomflibhbd,  thk  mkdiatobial 
OFFIOB  HAT  0EA8K.  But  it  Only  ceases  because  the  end  it  sought  is  reached,  the 
mission  is  fulfilled,  and  the  mediatorial  office  can  be  lost  in  the  glory  of  the  relation- 
ships into  which  it  will  have  brought  man,  and  all  human  relations,  "  When  the  last 
hindrance,  the  last  enemy,  is  removed,  which  prevents  the  entire  entrance  of  Qod  into 
the  loal,  we  shall  see  him  face  to  face,  know  him  even  as  we  are  known,  awaka  up 
wtiaOwi  in  his  likeness,  and  be  transformed  into  pore  recipients  of  the  Divina  idorT. 
TlMt  wlD  lie  the  lesurwetion."— B.  T.  r  r  •«  , 


OH.  XT.  1— 68.J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  00BINTHIAN8.  641 

Vers.  29 — 32. — Baptism/or  the  dead.  The  apostle  evidently  alludes  to  some  custoic 
ol  the  early  Church,  or  some  sentiment  that  prevailed  concerning  a  custom  which  has 
not  come  down  to  us.  "  The  only  tenable  interpretation  of  the  passage  is  that  there 
existed  amongst  some  of  the  Christians  at  Corinth  a  practice  of  baptizing  a  living  person 
in  the  stead  of  some  convert  who  had  died  before  that  sacrament  had  been  administered 
to  him.  Such  a  practice  existed  amongst  the  Marcionites  in  the  second  century,  and 
still  earlier  amongst  a  sect  called  the  Corinthians.  The  idea  evidently  was  that  what- 
ever benefit  flowed  from  baptism  might  be  thus  vicariously  secured  for  the  deceaseil 
Christian,"  It  was  plainly  what  we  should  call  a  superstitious  custom,  and  we  are  not 
to  understand  that  St.  Paul  gives  it  his  sanction — ^he  only  recalls  the  fact  of  the  custom, 
and  uses  it  fur  the  purpose  of  his  argument.  F,  W..Robertson  objects  to  the  association 
of  such  a  custom  with  St.  Paul's  argument,  saying, "  There  is  an  immense  improbability 
that  Paul  could  have  sustained  a  superstition  so  abject,  even  by  an  allusion.  He  couKI 
not  have  spoken  of  it  without  anger."  It  may  be  that  the  apostle  simply  refers  to  the 
baptism  of  trial  and  suffering  through  which  the  disciples  had  to  go,  which  often 
involved  even  death.  A  very  needless  enduring  of  suffering  and  death  if  there  was 
no  resurrection-life  beyond.  This  is  certainly  more  in  harmony  with  the  other  argu- 
ments adduced  in  the  chapter.  Not  only  have  those  who  are  fallen  asleep  in  Christ 
perished,  if  there  be  no  resurrection,  but  they  very  needlessly  endured  suffering  and 
trial.  The  underlying  idea  evidently  is,  that  Christians  are  baptized  into  a  life  which 
is  full  of  peril,  trial,  persecution,  and  martyrdom.  They  must  look  in  the  face,  and 
fully  accept,  the  possibility  of  death  to  seal  their  faithfulness.  But  how  absurd  it 
would  be  to  voluntarily  accept  such  a  burdened  and  suffering  life,  if  this  life  were  all ! 
Surely,  then,  the  heathen  were  far  wiser  who  said,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink ;  for  to-morrow 
we  die."  Why  should  the  apostle  be  in  "jeopardy  every  hour"?  why  ihould  he  die 
daily  ?  save  that  he  held  fast  the  sure  hope  of  being  made  partaker  of  his  Lord's  resur- 
rection, if  he  was  made  partaker  of  his  sufTeriDgs.  This  point  may  be  more  fully 
opened  and  illustrated  by  dwelling  on  three  separate  thoughts. 

I.  Baptism  into  Christ  is  baftisu  into  suffekino.  It  may  be  shown  (1)  that  this 
was  the  fact  in  apostolic  days ;  (2)  it  has  been  the  fact  in  every  Christian  age,  sometimes 
more  and  sometimes  less  manifestly ;  and  (3)  though  it  may  take  on  milder  forms,  it 
is  still  as  true  as  ever  that  "  they  who  will  live  godly  must  suffer  persecution,"  and 
"  through  much  tribulation  we  must  enter  the  kingdom."  It  may  be  argued  that  there 
is  even  a  necessity  for  this,  if  the  exclusive  demands  of  the  Christian  profession  are 
estimated  in  view  of  the  antagonistic  claims  of  the  world,  in  which  Christian  profession 
Buds  a  sphere. 

II.  Baptism  into  sufpebino  mat  bb  even  unto  death.  Of  this  God  keeps  illustra- 
tioa  for  every  a<re.  There  are  no  martyr  ages.  Men  die  for  Christ  by  overwork,  by 
exposure,  by  peril,  nowadays,  as  truly  as  when  our  fathers  burned  at  stakes  and  died 
in  prisons,  'i'hti  Mariyns,  and  Williamses,  and  Browns,  and  Pattisons,  are  the  proois 
that  still  baptism  into  Christ  may  mean  baptism  unto  death. 

III.  Suffering  mat  be  bobnb,  and  death  mat  be  endubed,  thbough  faith  in 
THE  BESUBBBCTiiN.  There  is  a  sufiScient  sustaining  motive.  Without  a  clear  and  full 
belief  in  the  life  beyond,  men  may  well  say  that  Oliristians  are  mad  to  put  themselves 
under  snch  painful  limitations  and  endure  such  accumulated  suffering.  "  If  the  future 
wre  no  Christian  doctrine,  then  the  whole  apostolic  life — nay,  the  whole  Christian  life — 
were  a  monstrous  and  senseless  folly.  Grant  an  immortality,  and  it  all  has  meaning ; 
lieny  it,  and  it  was  In  Paul  a  gratuitous  folly."  Impress  what  baptbm  into  Christ 
[iledges  for  us  now.  Show  what  forms  of  trial  and  suffering  it  may  involve  for  us  now. 
And  urge  what  a  sublime  light  of  meaning  on  present  trial  is  shed  from  the  Christian 
revelation  of  the  resurrection-life,  with  Chnst. — B.  T. 

Ver.  33. — "  EvU  eommunicatiotu."  This  sentence  is  taken  from  a  work  by  Menander 
and  may  be  regarded  as  an  indication  of  St.  Paul's  acquaintance  with  classical  literature! 
Too  much,  however,  must  not  be  made  of  this,  because  so  sharply  defined  a  sentence 
might  very  well  have  become  a  common  proverb,  and  the  apostle  may  only  have 
known  it  in  this  form.  As  a  proverb  it  was  designed  to  embody  the  truth  that  evil 
words  are  dangerous.  The  constant  repetition  of  an  immoral  maxim  may  lead  to 
immoral  life.    "  Words  that  seem  harmless,  because  they  float  lightly  like  thistledown. 


648  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    [OE.  XT.  1—68. 


may  bew  In  them  •  Bccd  of  evil  which  may  take  root  and  bring  forth  evil  fruit* 
The  apostle  used  it  in  reference  to  the  mischieTons  moral  influence  of  those  who  deny 
the  resurrection.  It  was,  to  the  apostle's  view,  positively  immoral  to  assert  that  the 
resurrection  is  only  spiritual ;  that  sin  belongs  only  to  the  body,  and  so  will  pass  away 
with  its  death.    Dealing  with  the  proverb  in  its  more  general  applications,  we  note— 

I.  Man  oannot  avoid  gontaot  with  etil  hen.  We  must  meet  them  in  business, 
and  in  all  the  various  forms  of  life-association ;  and  we  cannot  keep  ourselves  firee 
from  their  contaminaling  influence.  We  are  like  transplanted  trees ;  the  bad  atmosphere 
for  us  is  all  around  us,  and  the  question  is  whether  our  vitality  is  strong  enough  to 
thrive  even  under  the  liad  influence.  Illustration  of  this  point  ia  very  abundant  and 
ready  to  hand.    It  applies  to  evil  thought  as  well  as  evil  life, 

IL  Mas  hat  avoid  F£Igndbbif  with  evil  men.  We  can  put  firm  limitations  on 
the  character  of  our  relationships.  Much  of  the  practical  wisdom  in  ordering  our  life 
is  shown  in  doing  so, 

III.  Man  hat  be  fbesebved  fbom  the  inflttenoe  of  evil  hen.  Mainly  in 
three  ways.  1,  By  due  watching  and  care,  2.  By  adequate  culture  of  the  spiritual 
life  into  vigour  and  strength,  3.  By  cherished  dependence  upon  the  guardings  of 
Divine  grace,    A  man  may  he  in  the  world,  and  not  of  it. 

IV.  Mam  hat  be  a  cobbgctive  foweb  on  evil  hen.  Man  may  stand  in  three 
relations  to  evil.  1.  He  may  yield  to  it.  2.  He  may  stand  aloof  from  it.  8,  He 
may  master  it.  The  last  is  at  once  the  relation  that  is  safe ;  and  the  relation  to  which 
the  Christian  man  is  called,  and  for  which  he  is  endowed. — B,  T. 

Vers,  39 — 44, — Enlarged  conceptions  of  the  term  "  body."  The  general  idea  of  "  body  " 
is  a  material  form  so  set  in  relation  to  a  material  world,  by  its  senses  and  sensibilities, 
that  a  spiritual  being  using  such  form,  or  body,  can  dwell  in  the  material  world.  Then 
tWe  can  be  all  sorts  of  bodies,  according  to  the  relation  which  has  to  be  borne  in  this 
material  world,  or  the  relation  which  has  to  be  lx>rne  in  other  worlds  which  we  may 
call  material  or  spiritual.  We  only  suggest  points  of  thought,  scarcely  venturing 
to  set  them  in  order  for  public  homily  or  sermon.  1.  Within  our  present  earth- 
iphere  the  term  "  txidy  "  is  comprehensive.  The  apostle  speaks  of  bodies  of  bird,  fish, 
beast,  men, — in  all  cases  the  body  being  determined  by  the  relation  to  the  material 
world  which  is  desired ;  but  we  can  properly  speak  of  distinct  body,  or  form.  In  relation 
to  intellectually  moral  or  spiritual  life.  These  are  within  the  bodily  form,  but  can 
be  conceived  as  distinct  from  it,  2.  There  is  no  necessary  reason  for  limiting  the 
term  "  body  "  to  our  earthly  sphere.  Wherever  any  spirit  is,  if  it  desires  relation  with 
any  form  of  created  existence,  it  must  have  a  form,  a  body,  for  the  purposes  of  that 
relation.  The  various  conceptions  we  may  have  of  body  beyond  our  earth-sphere  need 
careful  study.  It  may  further  be  shown  how  the  diversities  of  body,  and  bodily 
capacity,  help  us  to  understand  the  possibility  of  difierent  degrees  of  glory,  and  yet 
in  each  case  a  fulness  of  glory.  Happiness  is  here  varied  and  limited  by  capacity.  It 
must  be  thus  varied  and  limited  anywhere.  How  the  term  "  spiritual "  can  be  applied 
to  body  we  may  he  helped  to  apprehend  by  three  things:  (1)  the  angelophanies  of 
the  Old  Testament ;  (2)  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  Ood ;  (3)  the  forty  days  wbiah 
OUT  Lord  spent  in  the  resurrection-body, — ^B.  T. 

Ver«.  65 — 57. — Death's  sting  and  strength.  Death,  as  being  the  worst,  is  regarded 
as  the  representative  of  all  human  woes.  Give  the  common  and  familiar  sentiments 
about  death,  its  sadness,  its  bitterness,  its  hopelessness,  its  terrible  forms,  its  lasting 
separations,  which  prevail  amongst  men  and  even  among  Christians,  And  yet,  what 
:s  death,  but  the  soul  putting  aside  on  the  shelf  the  tool  which  it  has  long  used,  but 
now  has  done  with,  because  its  work  is  finished?  Still,  philosophize  as  we  may  ;  get 
up  on  ■  high  Christian  platform  as  we  ought ;  win  the  keen  spiritual  insight  if  we 
will;  the  fact  remains  that  death  has  its  sting,  and  we  all  feel  it  and  live  in  the  feai 
of  It, 

L  What  is  this  snsa  ?  It  is  the  conscience  of  sin ;  the  fear  of  our  Jnct  deserts ; 
the  coninction  that  due  avengements  of  wrong-doing  must  come  in  the  life  beyond. 

IL  What  u  the  btbemoth  of  this  stinq?  It  is  the  revealed  Law  of  God,  whldh, 
m  are  sure,  has  Its  sanctiona.    It  must  take  cognicanca  of  oar  sin.    Its  punishmaats 


m.  xn.  1—24.]    TUB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 


649 


cannot  have  earthly  limitations.  Show  that  the  redemption  In  Chiist  Jesus  pluckd 
death's  sting  away,  because  it  quiets  and  satisfies  the  Law,  and  forgires  aad  lemorea  (he 
ttH.— B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVt 


Yen.  1—18. — Direction!  and  arranga- 
merits. 

Ver.  1. — Now  ooncermng  the  oolleotion 
for  the  saints.  "  The  eaints  "  are  here  the 
poor  Christians  at  Jerusalem  (Rom.  XT.  26). 
The  subject  weighed  much  on  St.  Paul's 
mind.  First,  there  was  real  need  for  their 
charity,  for  at  Jerusalem  there  was  as  sharp 
a  contrast  between  the  lots  of  the  rich  and 
poor  as  there  is  in  London,  and  the  "  poor 
saints,"  being  the  poorest  of  the  poor  (Jas. 
ii.  5),  must  have  often  been  in  deep  dis- 
tress. Not  many  years  befoie  this  time,  in 
the  famine  of  Claudius,  (Acta  zi.  27 — 30), 
Queen  Helena  of  Adiabene  had  kept  the 
paupers  of  Jerusalem  alive  by  importing 
cargoes  of  dried  grapes  and  figs.  Besides 
the  periodical  famines,  the  political  troubles 
of  Judiea  had  recently  increased  the  general 
distress.  Secondly,  the  tender  heart  of  St. 
Paul  waa  keenly  alive  to  this  distress. 
Thirdly,  it  was  tiie  only  way  in  which  the 
Gentile  Churches  could  show  their  gratitude 
to  the  mother  Church.  Lastly,  the  Apostle 
St.  Paul  bad  solemnly  promised  the  apontles 
at  Jerusalem  that  he  would  remember  the 
poor  (GaL  ii.  10).  Hence  he  frequently 
alludes  to  this  collection  (2  Cor.  viii.,  iz. ; 
Bom.  XV.  26;  Acts  xxiv.  17,  etc.).  The  enthu- 
siastic communism  of  the  earliest  Christian 
society  in  Jerusalem  had  soon  ceased, 
being,  as  all  experience  proves,  an  impossible 
experiment  under  the  conditions  which 
regulate  all  human  life,  and  it  may  have 
aggravated  the  chronic  distress.  As  I  have 
given  order;  rather,  a»  I  arranged.  To  the 
Churches  of  Oalatia.  Not  in  his  extant 
letter  to  the  Galatians,  but  either  in  a  visit 
three  years  before  this  time  (Acta  xviii.  28), 
or  by  letter.  It  appears  from  2  Cor.  viii.  10 
that  St.  Paul  had  already  asked  for  the  con- 
tributions of  the  Corinthians.  "  To  the  Co- 
rinthians he  proposes  the  example  of  the 
Galatians;  to  the  Macedonians  the  example 
of  the  Corinthians ;  to  the  Romans  that  of 
the  Macedonians  and  Corinthians.  Great 
is  the  power  of  example  "  (Bengel).  Even 
so  do  ye.  The  aorist  implies  that  they 
should  do  it  at  once. 

Ver.  2.— Upon  the  first  day  of  the  week. 
mi  verse  can  hardly  be  said  to  imply  any 
leligiona  observanoe  of  the  Sunday,  which 
rests  rather  on  Acts  xx.  7 ;  Rev.  i.  10 ;  John 
XX.  19,  28.  Lay  by  him  in  store.  The 
Greek  phrase  Implies  that  (be  laying  up 


was  done  at  home,  bat  when  the  moneT  was 
Booumulated,  if  was  doubtless  brought  to  the 
assembly  and  banded  over  to  the  presbyters. 
As  God  hath  prospered  him ;  rather,  lehal- 
loever  he  ha$  been  prospered  in ;  i.e.  all  that 
his  prosperity  may  permit.  That  there  be 
no  gatherings  when  I  eome;  ratlier,  that, 
when  I  come,  there  may  fhen  be  no  collections. 
When  he  came  he  did  not  wish  his  attention 
to  be  absorbed  in  serving  tables. 

Ver.  3. — Whomsoever  ye  shall  approve  hy 
yonr  letters,  them  will  I  send.  It  is  difficult 
to  see  why  the  translators  rendered  the 
clause  thus,  unless  they  disliked  to  face 
the  certainty  that  the  apostle  must  have 
written  many  letters  which  are  no  longer 
extant.  The  true  rendering  is.  Whomsoever 
ye  approve,  these  I  will  send  with  letters. 
The  letters  would  be  letters  of  introduction 
or  commendation  (Acts  xviii.  27 ;  Rom.  xvL 
1 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  1)  to  the  apostles  at  Jerusalem. 
Yonr  liberali^;  literally,  yorur  grace  or 
favour;  Le.  the  token  of  your  voluntary 
affection. 

Ver.  4.— If  it  be  meet  that  I  go  also. 
Unless  the  collection  were  a  substantial 
proof  of  the  generosity  of  the  Gentile 
Churches,  it  would  be  hardly  worth  while 
i&itoy)  for  St.  Paul  to  go  too.  With  ms.  St. 
Paul  wonld  not  take  this  money  himself. 
His  "religious"  enemies  were  many,  bitter, 
and  nnscrupulons,  and  he  would  give  them 
no  possibility  of  a  handle  against  him.  He 
makes  such  arrangements  as  should  place 
him  above  suspicion  (2  Oor.  viii.  20).  It 
turned  out  that  the  subscription  wa»  an 
adequate  one,  and  St.  Paul  accompanied  the 
Corinthian  delegates  (Rom.  xv.  25;  Acts 
XX.  4).  The  thought  that  they  might  visit 
Jerusalem  and  see  some  of  the  twelve  would 
act  as  an  incentive  to  the  Corinthians. 

Ver.  5. — When  I  shall  pass  through  Ilaoe- 
donia;  rather,  when  I  have  passed  through 
Macedonia.  For  I  do  pass  through  Mace- 
donia ;  rather,  for  I  mean  to  pass  through 
Macedonia.  We  learn  from  2  Oor.  i.  15, 16, 
that  it  bad  been  St.  Paul's  intention  to  sail 
from  Ephesns  to  Corinth,  thenoe,  after  a 
brief  stay,  to  proceed  to  Macedonia,  and  on 
bis  return  to  come  again  for  a  longer  stay 
at  Corinth  on  his  way  to  Judiaa.  He  had 
in  an  Epistle,  now  lost  (see  eh.  t.  9), 
announced  to  them  this  intention.  He 
changed  his  plan  beoanse,  in  the  piesent 
disgraceful  state  qf  disorganization  into 
which  the  Church  had  fallen,  be  felt  that 
he   oould   not   Tisit  them  without  being 


660 


THE  FIBST  EPI8TLB  TO  THE  OORINTHIANa    [oh.  xvi.  1—24. 


mmpelled  to  eseioiBe  a  Bereiity  which,  he 
hoped,  might  be  obviated  by  vrinng  to  them 
and  delaying  his  intended  viait.  Nothing 
bnt  hia  oinal  delicacy  and  desire  to  spare 
them  prevented  him  from  stating  all  this 
more  fully  (2  Cor.  i.  23 ;  ii.  1)  Mietaking 
the  kindness  of  his  purpose,  the  Corinthians 
accused  him  of  levity.  He  defends  himself 
bom  this  charge  in  the  Second  Epistle,  and 
he  carried  out  Ae  plan  which  he  here 
announces  (2  Ccnr.  ii  13;  viiL  1;  Iz.  2,  4; 
sii  14 ;  ziiL  1). 

Ver.  6. — ^Tea,  and  winter  with  yon.  This 
he  did  (Acts  xz.  3 — 6).  That  ye  may  bring 
me  on  my  journey.  The  "  ye  "  is  emphatic. 
The  acceptance  of  this  favour  at  their  hands 
was  a  proof  of  affection.  It  was  the  onstom 
bi  ancient  days  to  accompany  a  departing 
guest  for  a  short  distance  (Bom.  zv.  24; 
Act*  XT,  8;  xvii  15).  Whithersoever  I  go. 
St.  Paul  well  knew  that  some  uncertainty 
must  attach  to  his  plans.  As  it  was,  he 
bad  to  change  his  plan  at  the  last  moment 
He  had  meant  to  sail  from  Corinth,  but, 
owing  to  a  plot  to  assassinate  him,  he  was 
obliged  to  go  overland  round  by  Mace- 
donia (Aota  zz.  8). 

Ver.  7. — For  I  will  not  see  you  now  by 
the  way ;  rather,  I  do  not  imth  to  pay  you  a 
emrsory  visit  now,  as  I  had  originally  meant 
to  do.  If  the  Lord  permit.  The  Christians 
made  a  rule  of  adding  these  phrases  in  sign 
of  dependence  upon  God  (ch.  iv.  19 ;  Acts 
xviii.  1 ;  Jas.  iv.  15 ;  Heb.  vi.  3). 

Ver.  8. — I  will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  Pen- 
tecost. It  is  possible  that  this  intention  was 
frustrated  by  the  riot  stirred  up  by  the  silver- 
smiths (Acts  ziz.  23  —41  J.  But,  in  any  case, 
he  stayed  at  Ephesus  nearly  as  long  as  he 
intended,  for  the  riot  only  occurred  when  he 
was  already  preparing  to  leave  (Acts  ziz. 
21,  22). 

Ver.  9. — ^A  great  door  and  effectual.  A 
wide  and  promising  opportunity  for  winning 
souls  to  God.  The  metaphor  of  "  a  door," 
perhaps  suggested  by  our  Lord  himself,  was 
oommon  among  Christians  (2  Cor.  ii  12; 
Col.  iv.  3 ;  Acts  ziv.  27 ;  Bev.  iii;  8).  Hany 
adversaries  (Acts  ziz.  1,  8,  9, 19,  20). 

Ter.  10. — Nowif  limotheusoome.  St.  Paul 
had  already  sent  on  Timothy  (ch.  iv.  17), 
with  Erastus  (Acts  zix.  22),  to  go  to  Corinth 
by  way  of  Macedonia,  and  prepare  for  his 
visit  But  possibly  he  had  countermanded 
these  directions  when  he  postponed  his  own 
visit  In  the  uncertainties  of  ancient  travel- 
ling, be  could  not  be  certain  whether  his 
counter-order  would  reacli  Timothy  or  not 
It  appears  to  have  done  so,  for  nothing  is 
•aid  of  any  visit  of  Timotliy  to  Corinth,  and 
St  Paul  sent  Titus.  Without  fear.  Timothy 
must  at  this  time  have  been  very  young  (1 
Tim.  iv.  12)  As  a  mere  substitute  for  St 
Paul's  personal  vi^it,  he  would  be  unaccept- 


able. In  every  allusion  to  him  we  And 
traces  of  a  somewhat  timid  and  sensitivt 
disposition  (1  Tim.  v.  21—23;  2  Tim.  i 
6—8,  etc.).  He  may  well,  therefore,  have 
shrunk  from  the  thought  of  meeting  the 
haughty  suphisten  and  disputatious  paiti- 
saus  of  Corinth.  As  I  also  do.  "  As  •  son 
with  the  father,  he  hath  served  with  me  in 
the  gospel "  (PhiL  u.  22).  St  Paul  felt  for 
Timothy  a  deeper  personal  tenderness  than 
for  any  of  his  other  friends,  and  the  oom- 
panioiiship  of  this  gentle  and  devoted  youth 
was  one  of  the  chief  comforts  of  his  mission- 
ary labour. 

Ver.  11. — Let  no  man  thereforr  despise 
him.  His  youth  and  modesty  seemed  to 
invite  a  contempt  which  was  cmly  toe  con- 
sonant with  the  character  of  the  Oirinthians. 
I  look  for  him  with  the  brethren.  There  waf 
a  reason  for  adding  this.  The  Oorinthiant 
would  see  that  any  unkindness  or  eontempt 
shown  towards  Timothy  would  at  once  be 
reported  to  St.  PauL  Who  "  the  brethren  " 
are  is  not  mentioned,  for  in  Acts  zix.  22  we 
are  only  told  that  Timothy  was  accompanied 
by  Erastus.  Perhaps  8t  Paul  means  vrith 
the  brethren  who  conveyed  this  letter  (see 
ver.  12),  and  who,  as  he  supposed,  would 
meet  with  Timothy  at  Connth,  or  fall  in 
with  him  on  their  return  to  meet  St  Paol  in 
Macedonia.  One  of  these  brethren  mnst 
have  been  Titus  (2  Cor.  ii  18 ;  vii.  6,  7),  and 
there  were  two  others. 

Ver.  12. — As  touching  our  brother  Apollos ; 
rather,  but  as  touching  ApoUos,  the  brother. 
It  seems  clear  from  this  that  the  Corinthians, 
in  their  letter,  had  requested  that  this 
eloquent  and  favourite  teacher  might  be 
sent  to  them.  I  greaUy  desired  him  to  eome 
unto  yon;  rather,  I  besought  him  much. 
There  were  at  Corinth  persons  malignant 
enough  to  have  suggested  that  Paul  had 
refused  their  request;  that  he  would  not 
■end  Apollos  to  them  ont  ef  jealonay  e( 
ApoUos's  superior  oratory,  and  of  the  party 
which  assumed  his  name.  St  Paul  antici- 
pated this  sneer.  His  nature  was  much 
too  noble  to  feel  the  least  jealousy.  Both 
he  and  ApoUns  here  show  themselves  in 
the  purest  light.  His  will ;  literally,  there 
wa*  not  wUl.  The  word  "will"  most  fre- 
quently means  "the  will  of  Ood"  but  if 
that  had  been  the  meaning  here,  the  word 
would  have  had  the  article.  It  is  used  of 
human  will  in  ch.  vii.  87  ;  Eph.  ii.  3 ;  2  Pet 
i.  21.  Here  it  means  that  Apollos  had 
decided  not  to  come  at  present,  obviously 
because  his  name  had  been  abused  for 
purposes  of  party  l■a^■tion  (eh.  iii.  5).  This 
was  all  the  more  uoble  on  his  jart  because 
he  seems  to  have  been  a  special  friend  of 
Titus  (Titus  iii.  13).  St.  Paul  would  gladly 
liuve  sent  liis  t^vo  ablest  and  most  enorgelio 
disciples  to  this  dittracted  Church.    When 


,171.1—24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOBINTHIANa 


8U 


kt  fdkall  lum  aonvenlent  time;  rather, 
fiiAen  a  good  opportunity  offen  itself  to  him. 
Whether  Apollos  ever  revisited  Corinth  or 
not  we  do  not  know. 

Ver.  13.— Watch,  etc.  The  brief  impetaoni 
imperatives  show  a  sudden  burst  of  emotion 
■8  he  draws  to  a  close.  The  next  clause 
seems  like  an  after-thought.  Wr  .ohfulnesa 
(1  TbesB.  V.  6;  1  Fet.  T.  8;  Bev.  lii.  2 ;  xvi. 
15),  steadfastness  (FhiL  i  27),  and  strength 
(Eph.  Ti  10;  CoL  L  11:  2  Tim.  ii.  1),  and 
love  (eh.  xiiL ;  1  Pet  iv.  8,  etc.)  were  fre- 
quent snbjeotB  of  Christian  exhortation.  The 
verb  which  expresses  Christian  manlineas 
("  Flay  the  men  I ")  ooonn  here  onljr.  It 
is  found  in  the  LXX.  of  Josh.  L  6.  They 
needed,  as  Chrysostom  says,  all  these  exhorta^ 
tions,  for  they  were,  in  Christian  matters, 
drowsy,  nnstable,  effeminate,  and  factious. 

Ver.  14. — ^Let  all  youi  things  be  done  with 
charity;  rather,  as  in  the  Bevised  Version, 
Let  cU  that  ye  do  be  done  in  love.  This  is 
equivalent  to  the  "Above  all  things,  have 
ferrent  love  among  yourselves,"  of  1  Pet 
ir.8. 

Ter.  If.— Te  know  the  honse  of  St> 
phanas.  This  paragraph  seems  to  have 
been  written  lest  the  Ourinthiana  should  be 
angry  with  Stephanas,  Fortunatus,  and 
AchaicuB— who,  perhaps,  were  slaves  of  the 
household  of  Chloe — ^for  having  carried  to 
BL  Paul  their  ill  report  (ch.  L  11).  The 
flrstfrnitB  of  Aohaia  For  which  reason  St. 
Paul  had  baptized  Stephanas  and  his  house 
(pk.  i  16).  In  Bom,  xvi.  5  Epsenetui  is  called 
"the  fii'stfruits  of  Achaia,"  but  there  the 
leading  ought  to  be,  of  Asia.  Have  addicted 
themselves ;  rather,  mey  set  themselwi. 

Ver.  16. — That  ye  submit  yourselves  unto 
■noh.  Slaves  though  they  may  be  in  earthly 
tank,  recognize  their  Cliristian  authority  as 
good  men  and  women  (see  Eph.  v. '21; 
1  Tim.  V.  17).  The  verb  used  for  "  submit 
yourselves,"  or,  "set  yourselves  under,"  i* 
the  same  as  in  the  previous  verse. 

Ver.  17. — Of  the  coming;  ratha^  at  the 
presence  of.  They  were  now  with  St.  Paul 
in  Ephesua.  Fortunatus.  A  Christian  of 
this  name  also  carried  the  letter  of  St. 
Clement  to  Corinth.  That  which  was  lack- 
ing on  your  part.  This  sounds  like  a 
reproach  in  the  Authorized  Version,  but  is 
quite  the  reverse.  It  should  be  rendered, 
Oie  void  caused  by  your  absence.  The  same 
word  occurs  in  2  Cor.  viii  13,  14;  ix.  12; 
xi.  9,  etc.  The  nearest  parallel  to  tiis  usage 
here  is  FhiL  ii.  80. 

Ver.  18.— Ky  spirit  and  yours.  They 
refreshed  my  spirit  by  telling  me  all  about 
yon,  sad  though  much  of  the  news  was ;  and 
^oiirs  by  this  renewal  of  our  mutual  inter- 
course (cpmp.  2. Cor.  vii.  18)b 

Vers.  19 — 24. — Silutationi  and  autograph 
conclusion. 


Vet,  19.— The  Churches  of  Asia,  Piooob- 
snlar  Asia.  There  was  a  constant  inteik 
change  of  voyages  between  the  western 
coast  of  Asia  and  Corinth.  Aqnila  and 
Friscilla.  This  admirable  Christian  husband 
and  wife  had  no  small  share  in  founding 
the  Churches  both  of  Corinth  and  Ephesua. 
Being  St.  Paul's  partners  in  trade,  he  spent 
much  time  witli  them.  (For  all  that  is  known 
of  them,  see  Acta  xviii.  1, 2, 26;  Bom.  xvi  8^ 
6.)  Prisoilla.  Most  of  the  uncials  have  tlie 
shorter  form,  Prisca.  In  some  manuscripta 
(D,  E,  F,  G)  and  versions  (e.g.  the  Vulgate) 
we  And  the  addition,  "  with  whom  alsol  ant 
lodging."  The  Chnroh  that  is  is  their  honsa. 
The  time  for  large  common  ehurohea  for 
public  worship  had  not  yet  arrived.  Heno^ 
when  the  Christian  community  numbered 
more  than  could  meet  in  one  place,  the 
congregations  were  held  in  separate  housee 
(Rom.  xvi  4, 19:  Acts  ii  46;  Col.  It.  15; 
Fhllem.  2). 

Ver.  20.— All  the  brethren.  The  Epheslan 
Church  Id  general.  With  an  holy  kiss.  The 
kiss  of  peace  is  mentioned  in  Bom.  xvL  16; 
2  Cor.  xiii  12 ;  I  Pet  v.  14.  It  was  a  sign 
of  the  reconciliation  of  all  dissensions.  But 
the  abuse  of  the  practice  and  the  hideone 
heathen  calumnies  which  it  helped  to  pe^ 
petuate,  led  to  its  aliolition.  In  tlie  Boman 
Church  a  shadow  of  it  still  remains  in  the 
cnstom  of  the  congregation  kissing  the  pam 
after  the  priest  has  kissed  it  The  cnstom 
BtUl  continues  in  the  Christot  vosoreu  tt 
Easter  Day  in  the  Greek  Churoli,  when^ 

<*SeeI  the  bearded  faces  kiss  each  other  t 
Every  Russian  Christian  loves  his  brotlUB 
Serf  or  noble,  each  to-day  may  claim 
Friendly  kiss  in  that  all  friendly  Name," 

Ver.  21  .—With  mine  own  hand.  Eveiy 
one  of  St  Paul's  Epistles,  except  that  te 
the  Galatiaos  (vi.  11),  seems  to  have  been 
written  by  an  amanmenais.  The  blaze  of 
light  in  the  vision  on  the  road  to  Damascni 
seems  to  have  left  him  with  acute  and 
permanent  ophihalmia  as  his  "thorn  in  the 
flesh;"  and  this  would  naturally  disincline 
him  to  the  physical  labour  of  writing. 
When  he  diJ  writu,  his  letters  seem  to  have 
been  large  and  straggling  (Gal.  vi.  11)^ 
But  this  was  an  age  iu  which  documenta 
were  frequently  falsified  by  designing 
persons,  and  this  seems  to  have  happened 
to  St.  Paul  after  he  had  written  his  very 
first  extant  letter.  After  warning  the 
Thessalonians  not  to  be  frightened  "by 
epistle  as  from  us"  {2  These,  ii.  2),  he  add^ 
at  ttie  close  of  the  letter,  that  henceforth  he 
intends  to  authenticate  every  letter  by  an 
autograph  salutation  (2  Thess.  iii.  17 ;  C!oL 
iv.  18;  Rom.  xvi  22).  To  this  bad  and 
dangerouB  practice  of  forgery  is  due  the 
energetic  appeal  of  £ev    xxii.  18,  19.    A 


ssa 


THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xvi.  1— 24. 


ibnllnT  appeal  to  copyiits,  couched  in  the 
most  eolemn  langaage,  is  found  in  Irenreus 
('  0pp.,'  L  821,  edit.  Stieren),  and  at  the  end 
of  Ruflnus's  piok>gue  to  his  translation  of 
Origen's  'De  Principiis.' 

Yer.  22. — If  any  man  love  not,  eto.  This 
eentence  (as  in  Col.  iv.  18 ;  Eph.  vi.  21)  is 
part  of  the  autograph  salutation.  The  verb 
here  used  for  "love"  (philo)  was  perhaps 
suggested  by  the  word  for  "kiss"  ^philema). 
The  word  generally  need  for  "love  of  God" 
is  agapa  (Eph.  vi.  24),  which  implies  less 
warmth,  but  deeper  reverence.  But  this 
passage  ia  full  of  emotion.  Let  him  be 
Anathema.  The  word  only  occurs  elsewhere 
in  Acts  ziL  8 ;  xxiii.  11 ;  Bom.  iz.  8 ;  Oal.  i. 
8,  9  (oomp.  Matt.  zzvi.  74,  "to  curse"). 
It  18  the  equivalent  of  the  Hebrew  eherem, 
a  ban  (Lev.  zxvii.  29;  Josh.  vi.  17,  etc.). 
I  cannot  pretend  to  understand  what  St. 
Paul  means  by  it,  onless  it  be  ">  Let  personal 
love  to  Christ  be  the  essential  of  Christian 
fellowship,  and  let  him  who  has  it  not 
be  regarded  as  apart  front  the  Chwreh" 
Commentators  call  it  "an  imprecation,"  or 
"  malediction,"  and  say  that  it  means  "  Let 
him  be  devoted  to  God's  wrath  and  judg- 
ment." That  language  is,  indeed,  very  like 
the  language  of  religions  hatred  and 
religious  usurpation  in  all  ages,  but  it  is  the 
rery  antithesis  to  the  general  tone  of  the 
apostle,  ijf  this  were  the  meaning,  it  would 
seem  to  resemble  the  very  spirit  which 
Christ  himself  severely  rebuked  as  the 
Elijah-spirit,  not  the  Christ-spirit.  But 
I  do  not  believe  that,  even  in  a  passing 
outburst  of  strong  emotion,  St.  Paul  had 
any  such  meaning.  For  (1)  the  Jews  used 
eherem,  not  only  of  the  severer  form  of  ex- 
eommunioation  (shem  atha),  but  even  of  the 
milder  and  by  no  means  severe  temporarf 


form  (nidat)';  and  (2)  it  cannot  be  mori 
severe  than  "  handing  over  to  Satan  "  (eh. 
T.  5;  1  Tim.  i.  20),  which  was  merciful  in 
its  purpose.  Maran-atha ;  two  words,  tht 
Lord  Cometh;  like  the  Jewish  them  atha, 
"  the  Name  cometh,"  or,  "  the  Lord  comes." 
It  seems  to  be  an  appeal  to  the  judgment 
of  (.Jhrist,  and  may  possibly  have  been  an 
allusion  to  Mai.  iv.  6,  the  words  with  which 
the  Old  Testament  ends  (see  Jude  14,  15). 

Ver.  23. — The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesui; 
Christ  be  with  yon.  This  is  a  gnoritma,  oi 
"badge  of  confidence,"  which,  in  one  oi 
other  of  its  forms,  is  found  at  the  end  of  all 
St.  Paul's  Epistles.  Here  it  ia  the  same  as 
in  1  Thess.  v.  28.  «  With  you  aU  "  is  added 
in  2  Thess.  iii.  18;  Bom.  zvi.  24;  Phil.  iv. 
23.  In  Galatians  and  Philemon  we  have 
"  witli  your  spirit."  In  the  pastoral  Epistlei.' 
and  Colussiaus,  "Peace  be  with  you."  Id 
Epli.  vi.  24  it  is  confined  to  those  "who 
love  the  Lord  Jesus  in  sincerity."  In  2  Cor. 
ziii.  14  alone  we  have  the  full  "apostolic 
benediction." 

Ver.  24.— My  love  be  with  yon  all  is 
Christ  Jesus.  Added  as  a  last  proof  that,  it 
he  has  written  in  severity,  he  has  also 
written  in  love.  Amen.  Perhaps  genuine. 
though  omitted  by  B,  F,  G. 

The  suptrscription  to  the  Epistle,  rightly 
omiltud  in  the  Revised  Version,  does  not 
possess  the  smallest  authority,  and  is 
absolutely  erroneous.  It  contains  two 
positive  misstatements,  which  show  with 
what  utter  carelessness  these  super  ;criptions 
were  written  in  the  later  manuscripts.  The 
Epistle  was  not  written  from  Philippi  (a 
mero  mistaken  inference  from  oh.  xvi.  5), 
but  from  Ephesus  (ch.  ztL  8),  and  wsfl  not 
oouveyed  by  Timotheuiu 


HOMILBTICB, 

Vers.  1—4, — (^ristian  philanthropy.  "  Now  concerning  the  collection  for  the 
mints,"  eto.  At  the  outset  three  truths  are  suggested.  1.  That  in  tJie  highest  theo- 
logical discussion-  the  urgency  of  practical  benevolence  should  never  be  overlooked. 
Immediately  sfter  the  apostle  bad  passed  through  the  discussion  on  the  doctrine  of 
the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  he  says,  "  Now  concerning  the  collection."  Practical 
benevolence  Is  for  many  reasons  more  important  than  the  grandest  theological  doctrine ; 
it  is  doctrine  demonstrated,  ezemplified,  and  reduced  to  utility ;  it  is  the  blossom  run 
into  fruit,  2.  That  the  grandest  institutions  are  likely  to  break  down  in  a  world  oj 
depravity.  The  young  Church  at  Jerusalem  adopted  the  principle  of  Christian  socialism. 
As  many  as  were  possessors  of  land  or  houses  sold  them,  and  brought  the  prices  of 
those  sold  "  and  laid  them  down  at  the  apostles'  feet,"  and  distribution  was  made  to 
every  man  according  as  he  had  need.  A  magnificent  social  system  this,  a  system 
suited  to  bind  all  classes  and  races  of  men  into  the  unity  of  a  loving  brotherhood. 
But  the  swelling  tide  of  human  depravity  soon  bears  it  away ;  for  here  we  find  Paul 
urging  a  collection  for  the  poor  Christians  at  Jerusalem,  many  of  whom  were  shut 
up  in  prison,  and  those  of  them  who  were  released  reduced  to  abject  destitution, — Whence 
tM  colleotloii.    How  many  magnificent  schemes  £ar  <h«  vocld'a  |pMd  an  owstantly 


OH.  zn.  1—24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIAXa  553 

l%at  the  practical 

iuine  element.    Here 

,  and  that  object 

wai  "suffering  sainta  at  Jerusalem."  These  people  lived  widely  asunder,  and  were 
separattd  by  many  striking  peculiarities,  but  here  they  meet  together.  This  is  the 
Divine  principle  that  will  one  day  dfaw  all  men  together  in  Christ.  Our  subject  is 
Christian  philanthropy,  and  here  wo  have — 

I.  Its  claims  ZEALonsLT  advocated.  "Now  concerning  the  collection."  faal 
was  the  advocate,  and  his  advocacy  glows  with  zeal.  We  find  that  in  this  matter 
he  proposes  the  Galatians  as  an  example  to  the  Corinthians,  the  Corinthians  an  example 
to  Hie  Macedonians,  and  both  as  an  example  to  the  Romans  (2  Cor  ix.  2;  Rom.  xv.  26). 
Were  it  not  for  the  earnest  advocacy  of  Christly  men,  the  probability  is  that  the 
Divine  element  of  pure  aud  practical  social  sympathy  would  btcome  extinct  It  Is  the 
living  ministry  of  the  gospel  that  keeps  it  alive,  and  in  this  it  fulfils  the  grandest  of 
•11  missions.  -«        r 

II.  Its  opebations  wisely  dibeoted.  Paul  directed:  1.  2wa<  the  contribution* 
lAouJd  be  personal.  "Let  every  one  of  you  lay  by  him  in  store."  No  one  was 
exempted,  however  poor;  the  widow's  mite  was  acceptable.  If  no  coin,  then  give 
service.  2.  ITiat  the  contributions  should  be  systematic.  "  Upon  the  first  day  of  the 
week."  Begin  the  week  with  deeds  of  practical  benevolence.  3.  That  the  contributions 
should  he  religious.  "As  God  hath  prospered  him."  This  was  the  principle  to  rule  the 
amount.  Were  this  principle  acted  upon,  some  of  the  men  who  subscribe  their  ten 
thousand  pounds,  and  who  are  lauded  the  world  over  as  philanlhr.)pists,  would  be  found 
to  be  churls  after  all,  and  those  who  subscribed  their  few  shillings' would  appear  as 
princes  in  the  domain  of  practical  charity.  But,  alas!  how  men  reverse  this  principle  I 
The  more  they  have  the  less  they  give. 

III.  Its  coNTBiBUTiONS  HONBSTLT  DiSTBiBUTKD.  "  And  when  I  come,  whomsoever 
ye  shall  approve  by  your  letters,  them  will  I  send  to  bring  your  liberality  unto 
Jerusalem.  And  if  it  be  meet  that  I  go  also,  they  shall  go  with  me."  It  is  your  duty 
to  see  that  what  yon  have  subscribed  shall  be  honestly  distributed,  and  for  this 
purpose,  send  men  as  your  almoners,  and  if  it  seems  necessary  to  secure  the  honest 
distribution,  I  will  go  with  them.  How  sadly  is  this  duty  frequently  neglected  I  Bow 
much  money  given  for  charitable  purposes  is  dishonestly  used  and  misappropriated 
every  year  I 

Vers.  &—9.—OocPs  mill  the  rub,  and  spiritual  usefulness  the  end  of  ^ft.  "  Now  I 
will  come  unto  you  when  I  shall  pass  through  Macedonia,"  etc.  Two  remarks  are 
suggested. 

I.  God's  will  should  be  the  bulb  of  life.  "  But  I  trust  to  tarry  s  while  with 
yon,  if  the  Lord  permit."  The  text  tells  us  that  Paul  had  made  a  plan  to  visit  the 
Corinthians,  to  "  tarry  a  while  "  with  them,  and  to  spend  the  winter  with  them,  after 
he  had  passed  through  Macedonia,  and  tarrying  at  Ephesus  until  the  Pentecost ;  but  see, 
he  rests  this  plan  (no  doubt  dear  to  his  heart)  on  the  Lord's  will — "  if  the  Lord  permit." 
J.  There  is  a  belief  imiiliei  here.  The  great  truth  implied  in  this  expression  of  Paul's 
is  that  God  is  in  the  history  of  individual  man.  He  is  not  merely  in  the  great  material 
universe,  in  angelic  hierarchies,  in  human  empires,  communities,  Churches,  families,  but 
in  the  individual  man  himself.  He  is  not  too  absorbed  in  the  vast  for  this,  not  too 
great  for  this.  Paul  believed  that  God  was  interested  in  him  personally,  and  that  he 
arranged  for  him  personally.  There  is  something  sublime,  bracing,  and  ennobling  in 
the  thought  that  Gk)d  knows  me,  cares  for  me,  arranges  for  me.  2.  There  is  an 
acquiescence  implied  here.  "Jf  the  Lord  permit."  This  means,  "I  have  no  will  of 
my  own."  As  if  he  had  said  personally,  "  Consulting  merely  my  own  will,  I  should  like 
to  winter  with  you,  my  Corinthian  Mends,  but  I  subordinate  my  will  to  the  will 
of  my  God.  I  feel  myself  in  his  hands,  and  am  ready  to  act  in  everything  according  to 
hb  arrangements." 

IL  SpiBITnAL  USEFULNESS  SHOULD  BE  THE    AIM  Of  LCT.     "But    I    will    tutj    at 

Ephesus  imtil  Pentecost  For  a  great  door  and  effectual  Is  opened  unto  me,  and  there  an 
many  adversaries."  Three  remarks  are  here  suggested.  1.  That  wherever  the  gospel 
signally  tritmtphs,  great  opposition  may  be  anticipated.    Paul  was  now  st  Ephe«u% 


654  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    foH.  rvL  1— 24 

where  he  had  laboured  for  a  considerable  time,  and  with  such  si<aial  success  that  a  deep 
and  widespread  opposition  was  excited,  even  to  passion  (see  Acts  xix.  9 — 20).  It  has 
ever  been  so:  wherever  there  has  b^n  a  great  revivtu  of  religion  there  has  been 
unusual  opposition.  The  latent  enmity  of  the  serpent  is  ever  roused  by  the  dissemina- 
tion of  spiritual  liu;ht.  Christ  kindled  a  fire  upon  the  earth.  2.  That  opposition  to  the 
gospel  often  affords  specially  favourable  opportunities  for  the  labour  of  the  evangelist. 
"  For  a  great  door  and  effectual  is  opened  unto  me,  and  there  are  many  adversaries." 
Beligious  excitement  is  ever  more  favourable  to  the  spread  of  religion  than  religious 
monotony.  You  stand  a  better  chance  of  converting  an  earnest  sceptic  than  a  traditional 
religionist.  Excitement  opens  a  "door."  3.  That  the  true  evangelist  will  be  stimulated 
in  his  labours  rather  thaii  discouraged  by  opposition.  Instead  of  quitting  Ephosus, 
where  there  were  so  many  adversaries,  Paul  says,  "I  will  tarry  at  Ephisus  until 
Pentecost."  Little  souls  are  dismayed  by  di£Sculties,  great  souls  are  roused  to  action 
by  them.  Difiiculties  awaken  their  courage,  stimulate  their  activities,  and  marshal 
their  {acuities  for  battle. 

Ver*.  10 — 12. —  Wholesome  teaching  for  the  older  ministers.  '  Now  if  Timotheus 
come,  see  that  he  may  be  with  you,"  etc.  Taking  these  verses  as  the  foundation  for  an 
address  to  the  senior  ministers  of  the  gospel,  we  say  to  them — 

I.  Show  a  tender  BEaASD  fob  the  interests  of  youno  ministers.  "  Now  il 
Timotheus  come,  see  that  he  may  be  with  you  without  fear :  for  he  vvorlioth  the  work 
of  the  Lord,  as  I  also  do."  Timothy  was  young  in  years  and  in  the  faith  as  well ; 
a  man,  too,  perhaps  of  delicate  frame  and  nervous  temperament,  and  probably  not 
distinguished  by  any  great  gift,  natural  or  attained.  In  Corinth  there  were  men  of 
philosophic  fame,  brilliant  genius,  and  oratoric  force.  lie  would  perhaps  feel  somewhat 
abashed  in  the  presence  of  such;  hence  the  considerate  counsel  which  Paul  addresses 
to  the  Corinthians  to  treat  him  kindly,  not  to  "  despise  him,"  nor  in  any  way  to  dispirit 
him.  Alas !  it  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  for  elder  ministers  to  disparage  the  younger 
ones,  and  often  treat  them  with  disrespect,  and  even  rudeness. 

II.  Rise  superior  to  all  uinisterial  jealousies.  If  Paul  had  been  capable  of 
feeling  jealousy  towards  any  brother  minister,  it  would  have  been  towards  ApoUos.  He 
seems  to  have  been  a  man  of  distinguished  ability  and  splendid  eloquence.  Moreover, 
he  was  very  popular  in  Corinth,  greatly  admired  and  extolled  by  not  a  few,  perhaps 
more  popular  even  than  Paul  himself,  the  head  of  one  of  the  factions  of  the  Church 
against  which  Paul  had  been  contending.  Had  he  been  jealous,  Paul  would  have  kept 
him  out  of  Corinth  as  long  as  he  could,  and  have  treated  him  as  a  rival,  instead  of  which 
he  says,  "  A«  touching  our  brother  Apollos,  I  greatly  desired  him  to  come  unto  you  with 
the  brethren."  Jealousy  amongst  ministers  of  the  gospel,  though  a  most  antichristian 
sentiment,  is  not  a  very  uncommon  thing ;  nay,  it  is  rife,  and  shows  itself  often  io 
detracting  innuendoes  and  symbolic  looks  and  shrugs. 

IIL  Be  not  disfleabed  a  inferior  brethren  aoquiescb  not  Df  toub  DEsisEa. 
Both  the  Christian  experience  and  ministerial  ability  of  ApoUos  were  inferior  to  that  oi 
Paul.  Notwithstanding  this, he  did  not  comply  with  Pauls  request :  nor  did  Paul  seem 
displeased.  "  His  will  was  not  at  all  to  come  at  this  time :  but  he  will  come  when  he  shall 
have  convenient  time,"  If  Paul  had  no  authority  to  enforce  his  wishes  on  his  brethren, 
how  arrogant  it  seems  for  any  uninspired  minister  to  attempt  itl  The  only  authority 
which  one  genuine  minister  has  oyer  another  ia  the  authority  of  superior  intelligence, 
experience,  and  moral  force. 

Vers,  13, 14. — The  demands  of  ChriBtianity  on  its  adherents.  "  Watch  ye,  stand  fast 
In  the  faith,"  etc.     Here  are  certain  demands  which  Christianity  makes  on  all  men. 

1.  A  demand  for  vigilance.  "  Watch  ye."  A  military  meta|)hor  this,  derived  from 
the  duty  of  those  who  are  stationed  to  guard  a  camp  or  to  observe  the  motions  ot 
an  enemy.  There  were  many  evils,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  Cormthian  Church— dissen- 
sions, heresies,  inchastities,  intemperances,  etc.  Hence  the  necessity  of  watchfulness. 
But  where  do  not  evils  abound  ?  Hosts  surround  ua  all,  hence,  •?  Watch  ye."  "  Watch 
and  pray,"  says  Christ 

n.  A  demand  for  btabilitt.  « Stand  tast  in  the  faith,"  Do  not  be  vacillating, 
wavering,  «•  teased  about  hf  every  wind  of  doctrine."    Strike  the  roots  of  your  fiuth 


<ia.ZTi.l-M.]    Tfi£  fIBSI  EFISTLB  10  THE  COfimTHIAN&  66S 

deep  into  the  soil  of  eternal  realities.     Firmness  Is  no  more  obstinate  than  the  stony 
rock  is  the  deep-rooted  oak. 

IIL  A  demand  for  hakunebs.  "  Quit  you  like  men."  Be  courageous,  invincible, 
well  equipped,  manly.  Be  an  ideal  man ;  you  can  be  nothing  liigher  than  this,  nothing 
greater.  There  are  great  philosophirs,  great  poets,  great  statesmen,  great  orators,  great 
warriors,  who  are  snuUl  men,  if  men  at  all,  leagues  away  from  the  ideal.  A  great 
functionary  i»  ofUn  a  very  tmaXl  man.    "  Qait  you  like  men."    Be  heroes  in  the  strife. 

HflrO  in 

IV.  A  demand  for  chabity.  "  Let  all  your  things  be  done  with  charity"  or  love. 
Man's  life  consists  of  many  acts,  many  "  things  done."  Activity  is  at  once  the  law  and 
the  necesMty  of  his  nature.  He  ouly  really  lives  as  he  acts ;  inactivity  is  death.  But 
whilst  the  acts  of  men  are  numerous  and  varied,  the  animating  and  controlling  spirit 
should  be  one,  and  that  spirit  is  love. 

Vers.  16—18. — Our  duty  io  the  truly  use/id.  "  I  beseech  you,  brethren,"  etc.  The 
subject  of  these  verses  is  our  duty  to  the  truly  useful,  and — 

L  Fob  the  tbult  useful  we  should  ohebisb  the  highest  rebfeot.  There  are 
three  useful  persons  that  Paul  mentions  here.  "  Stephanas."  He  was  one  of  Paul's 
first  converts  of  Achaia ;  he  and  his  house  were  baptized  by  Paul,  and  he  and  his  family 
were  "  addicted  "  to  the  ministries  of  lova  "  Fortunatus  and  Achaicus  "  are  also  men- 
tioned here.  To  these  three  personages  Paul  calls  the  special  attention  of  the  Corinthians, 
and  that  because  they  were  useful.  They  had  all  ministered  to  Paul.  The  latter  had 
supplied  to  him  what  the  Corinthians  had  neglected,  and  they  refreshed  both  his  spirit 
»ni  theirs;  hence  for  this  he  says,  "Acknowledge  ye  them  that  are  such."  The  truly 
tuefid  are  the  truly  honourable.  A  man  is  to  he  honoured,  not  because  of  his  ancestry, 
his  ofBce,  his  wealth,  but  because  of  what  he  is  morally,  and  what  he  does  generously 
in  the  way  ot  helping  the  race.    The  philanthropist  is  the  true  prince, 

U.  With  the  tbult  useful  we  should  heabtilt  oo-operate.  "  That  ye  submit 
yourselves  unto  such,  and  to  every  one  that  helpeth  with  us,  and  laboureth."  1. 
Co-operate  with  useful  men.  2.  In  your  co-operation  let  them  take  the  had.  They 
have  proved  themselves  worthy  of  your  co-operation. 

Vers.  19,  20,  23,  24. — Salutations.  "  The  Churches  of  Asia  salute  you,"  eta  On 
these  salutations  we  cannot  do  better  than  transcribe  the  remarks  of  F.  W.  Robertson : — 
"  We  make  a  remark  respecting  salutations  generally.  This  Epistle  has  many,  but  they 
are  not  so  numerous  as  in  that  to  the  Romans.  In  both  of  them  individuals  are 
mentioned  by  name.  It  was  no  mere  general  assurance  of  attachment  he  gave  them, 
but  one  of  his  personal  knowledge  and  affection. 

"L  St.  Paul's  febsonal  coksidgbations  webe  not  lost  m  oenebal  phu^n- 
THBOPT,  That  because  he  entertained  regard  for  the  Churches,  and  for  bodies  of  men, 
he  did  not  on  this  account  ignore  the  individuals  composing  them.  It  is  common 
enough  to  profess  great  interest  and  zeal  for  humanity  whilst  there  is  indifference  all  the 
time  about  individual  men.  It  is  common  enough  to  he  zealous  about  a  cause,  about 
some  scheme  of  social  good,  and  yet  to  be  careless  respecting  individual  welfare.  But 
St.  Paul's  love  was  from  Christ's  own  Spirit.  It  was  love  to  the  Church  generally,  and, 
besides,  it  was  love  to  Aquila  and  Priscilla.  And  is  not  this,  too,  the  nature  of  God's  love, 
who  provides  for  the  universe,  and  yet  spends  an  infinity  of  care  on  the  fibre  of  a  leaf  ? 

"  IL  The  value  of  the  courtesies  of  life.  .  There  are  many  minds  which  are 
indifferent  to  such  things,  and  fancy  themselves  above  them.  It  is  a  profound  remark 
of  Prescott's  that '  liberty  is  dependent  upon  forms.'  Did  not  the  solemn,  slow  change 
in  the  English  constitution,  and  our  freedom  from  violent  submersions,  arise  from  the 
almost  superstitious  way  in  which  precedent  has  been  consulted  in  the  manner  of  every 
change  1  But  what  is  of  more  importance  to  remember  is,  that  love  is  dependent  upon 
forms,  courtesy  of  etiquette  guards  and  protects  courtesy  of  heart.  How  many  hearts 
have  been  lost  irrecoverably  I  and  how  many  averted  eyes  and  cold  looks  hare  been 
gained  from  what  seemed  perhaps  but  a  trifling  negligence  of  forms  I" 

Vers.  21, 22. — A  negative  crime  ana  apotitittpmiehnent,    "  If  any  num  Ion  not,  * 

etc    The  words  contain  two  thmgs. 


656  THE  FJRSl  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.    foH.  XTt  1— 24 

L  A  NEGATIVE  CRIME.  "  If  auy  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesua  ChriBt,"  eto.  Wt 
make  three  remarks  on  this  state  of  miud  in  relation  to  Christ.  1.  It  ia  unreaaonable. 
There  is  everything  in  him  to  call  out  the  highest  love.  There  are  three  kinds  ol 
love  to  which  we  are  su-coptible,  and  which  are  incumbent  on  us — gratitude,  esteem, 
and  benevolence.  The  first  requires  a  manifestation  of  kindness ;  the  second,  of  moral 
excellence ;  the  third,  a  purpose  for  the  common  good.  Christ  manifests  all  these, 
and  therefore  deserves  our  highest  love.  2.  It  is  ascertainable.  We  can  soon 
ascertain  whether  we  love  Christ  or  not.  There  are  infallible  criteria.  For  example, 
the  chief  object  of  love  will  always  be  (1)  the  engrossing  subject  of  thought ;  (2)  the 
attractive  theme  of  conversation  ;  (3)  the  source  of  the  greatest  delight  in  pleasing ; 
(4)  the  most  transformative  power  of  character ;  and  (5)  the  most  identified  with  our 
conscious  life.  3.  It  is  deplorable.  This  love  is  the  only  true  regulative  power 
of  the  soul.  Where  this  is  not,  all  the  powers  of  our  nature  are  misemployed,  and 
all  is  confusion. 

IL  A  FOSinvK  ruBiSHMENT.  "  Let  him  be  Anathema  Maran-atha."  These  words 
intimate  two  thinge  concerning  the  punishment.  1.  Its  nature,  "Let  him  be 
Anathema."  The  word  expresses  some  terrible  amount  of  sufTering.  It  is  one  of 
Paul's  strong  words  to  express  a  terrible  evil.  Excommunication  firom  all  that  ia 
pure  and  good  and  happy  is  undoubtedly  involved.  The  soul  cut  off  from  Christ, 
its  Centre,  Boot,  Fountain,  Life,  is  utterly  destroyed.  2.  Its  certainty,  "  Maran-atha," 
which  means,  "The  Lord  will  come."  This  word  is  probably  introduced  by  Paul 
in  order  to  convey  the  certainty  of  the  destruction  of  those  who  "  love  not  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Paul  bad  written  the  other  part  of  this  letter  by  an  amanuensis, 
but  to  write  these  terrible  words  he  takes  up  the  pen  himself.  "  The  salutation  of 
me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand."  He  felt  the  utmost  recoil  of  heart  for  those  who 
"  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  and  had  the  most  overwhelming  idea  of  the  misery 
to  which  such  will  be  exposed.  Men  are  accursed,  not  merely  because  they  hate 
Christ,  rebel  against  his  authority,  and  profane  his  ordinances,  but  because  they 
do  not  love  him. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBSl 

Ten.  1—6. — Charitf/ ;  itt  tyttematic  mode  of  exercise.  If  these  Corinthians  shared 
the  thoughts  and  emotions  of  St.  Paul  on  love,  on  the  uses  of  gifts,  and  on  the 
resurrection,  they  were  well  prepared  to  have  practical  duties  urged  on  their  immediate 
attention.  At  that  time  "the  collection  for  the  saints"  was  a  very  important 
matter.  These  saints  were  poor  disciples  in  Jerusalem,  who  needed  foreign  help, 
the  Church  in  that  city  being  unable,  because  of  impoverishment,  to  render  them 
adequate  assistance.  Furthermore,  it  was  important  as  a  means  of  spiritual  discipline. 
Giving  to  others,  and  especially  to  the  housfhold  of  faith,  is  an  acknowledgment  of 
God  in  Christ,  a  testimony  to  brotherhood,  and  an  active  co-operation  with  providence, 
the  last  being  a  duty  we  are  particularly  liable  to  forget.  The  religion  of  providence, 
the  sense  of  Christ  in  providence,  and  the  sentiments  thereby  inspired,  in  a  weak 
influence  in  many  professing  Christians,  and  it  is  certainly  very  desirable  that  we 
should  have  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  on  this  subject.  Apart  from  these  reasons  for 
"  the  collection  for  the  saints,"  the  evidential  value  of  the  act  appears  in  this,  that 
in  about  a  quarter  of  a  century  a  Christian  community  had  grown  up  in  the  Soman 
empire,  had  spread  over  much  of  its  territory,  and  had  the  means  and  the  heart  to 
aid  poorer  brethren.  Nur  must  we  fail  to  notice  that  Jerusalem  was  an  object  of 
much  interest  to  Qalatia  and  Corinth.  The  days  of  adversity  were  gathering  upon 
her,  but  she  was  Jerusalem,  and  to  uo  one  more  of  a  Jerusalem  than  to  St.  Paul. 
His  zeal  in  her  behalf  won  upon  the  sympathies  of  the  Gentiles,  and  they  were  ready 
to  join  him  in  this  work  of  the  Lord.  Observe,  then,  that  he  enters  into  no  argument 
to  prove  the  obligation  of  charity.  This  is  presupposed  to  exist.  The  sentiment,  too, 
is  alive,  the  impulse  is  awake  and  operative.  He  makes  no  doubt  of  their  readinesi 
to  co-operate  with  him.  What  he  wishes  to  do  is  to  organize  the  sentiment  and 
impulse.  Habits  are  the  safeguards  of  good  inclinations,  habits  are  the  most  cot- 
lervattM  of  fMOii^  and  habits,  after  having  been  made  by  vm,  get  the  masteiy  and 


«LXTLl— ^4.]    T&E  FIBST  fiPISTLB  tO  THk  COttlNTHIAN&  Ut 

mako  ui.    Habits  are  as  necessary  for  Ghnrches  as  for  individuals,  and.  therefore, 

he  will  have  these  Corinthians  to  do  this  work  methodically.     "As  I  have  given 

order  to  the  Churches  of  Galatia,  even  to  do  ye."     Notice  the  apostolic  method. 

It  required  a  fixed  time — "  the  first  day  of  the  week,"  the  Lord's  day.    Would  not  the 

day  cultivate  and  hallow  the  feeling?    Are  the  associations  of  a  given  time  for  a  given 

task  unworthy  of  consideration  ?    The  heavens  and  the  earth  are  obedient  to  periodicity, 

the  human  body  is  an  organism  of  periodicity,  the  sabbath  is  an  institution  of 

periodicity,  and  benevolence  cannot  be  a  habit  in  the  best  import  of  the  term  unless 

it  have  stated  periods  of  activity.    Therefore,  "the  first  day  of  the  week."    It  was 

to  bo  done  by  "  every  one."    It  was  to  be  done  individually  and  privately — "lay  by 

him  in  store."    And,  again,  it  was  to  be  performed  with  reference  to  accumulation, 

set  apart,  added  to,  kept  in  store.    Finally,  there  was  to  be  an  examination  of  their 

daily  business ;  intelligence  was  to  be  exercised,  prudence  and  piety  were  to  go  hand 

in  hand,  and  this  was  to  be  done  in  a  religious  spirit — "  as  God  hath  prospered  him." 

Now,  this  looks  as  if  St.  Paul  had  given  much  thought  to  this  matter.    It  was  charity, 

not  as  mere  charity,  nor  as  a  spasmodic  impulse,  nor  as  a  thing  of  imposing  occasions, 

but  charity  organized  and  habitual,  regular  as  the  sabbath,  incorporated  into  the 

sanctity  of  the  (fey,  a  product  of  the  week's  review,  a  commemoration  of  Ckid's  good 

ness  in  prospering  their  business ;  it  was  this  sort  of  charity  he  directed  them  to 

practice.    They  practised  many  virtues  in  this  one  virtue.    Too  much  of  benevolent 

^ving  involves  nothing  beyond  our  sympathies  and  the  wants  of  others.    It  is  an 

education  of  the  hand,  the  purse,  the  soul.    But  what  of  the  spirit's  higher  culture  ? 

What  of  the  calling  into  play  the  spiritual  nature  that  was  going  forward  to  robe 

itself  in  a  spiritual  habiliment  at  the  resurrection?    The  essence  of  this  lay  in  the 

thought  of  God  as  prospering  the  man  for  the  sake  of  others  as  well  as  for  his  own 

sake.    Business,  then,  was  not  simply  personal,  it  was  relative  also,  and  charity,  no 

less  than  utility,  entered  into  it  as  a  component.    What,  now,  is  St.  Paul's  idea 

of  making  money  ?    It  is  acquiring  the  means  of  your  own  support  and  of  contributing 

to  the  relief  of  those  in  want.    It  is  making  wisdom  and  openness  of  heart  and 

fraternity  of  sentiment,  while  making  money.    It  is  making  the  religion  of  brotherhood 

while  making  money.    If  the  Corinthians  would  adhere  to  this  plan,  there  would  be 

no  need  of  collections  when  he  came,  as  the  work  would  have  been  done  already. 

Was  not  this  one  way  of  being  steady,  unmoved,  "  always  abounding  in  the  work  of 

the  Lord,"  and  would  it  not  prove  by  its  self-action  that  it  was  not  "  in  vain  in  the 

Lord?"    And  was  it  not  one  way,  and  a  great  way,  of  demonstrating  that  there  was 

a  business  in  religion  as  well  as  a  religion  in  business  ?    Throughout  his  statement 

of  the  matter,  you  see  the  apostle's  large-raindedness.    The  cheerful  giver  is  portrayed, 

the  man  who  naturalizes  and  domesticates  charity;  nothing  is  said  of  tithes  and 

tithing ;  it  is  Christianity  and  Gentile  Christianity  alone  that  is  in  view,  and,  instead 

of  Jerusalem  being  a  centre  of  power  or  metropolitan  80verei>tnty,  Corinth  and  Galatia 

are  sources  or  head-springs  of  blessing  to  her.    What  a  stride  forward  Ibis,  in  the 

evangelization  of  the  world  1    We  may  know  that  the  end  draweth  nigh,  when  the 

money  of  the  world — the  stronghold  of  sin  and  Satan — is  recovered  for  Christ.    St. 

Paul  had  faith  in  the  sentiment  of  these  Corinthians.    Disorderly  as  were  some  oF  their 

practices,  shameful  indeed,  loose  as  was  their  Church  disci  filine,  erroneous  certain  o! 

their  tenets,  yet,  despite  of  all,  they  had  the  root  of  the  matter  in  the  willing  mind 

of  love,  so  that  when  he  visited  them,  he  would  have  nothing  more  to  do  than  to 

accredit  their  messengers  and  commend  them  to  the  Church  in  Jerusalem,      Come 

to  them  he  would ;  and,  if  the  collection  were  liberal,  he  might  deem  it  advisable 

to  accompany  their  messengers  to  Jerusalem.     And  what  a  spectacle  it  suggests  at 

this  distance  to  us,  who  can  recall  the  old-time  enmity  between  Jew  and  Gentilr, 

and.  have  the  offset  in  a  scene  as  beautiful  as  that  presented  by  a  delegation  bum 

Corinth,  bearing  its  gifts  to  a  suffering-  and  down-trodden  people  1 — L. 

Vers.  6 — IB.— St.  Paul  and  his  pwpotet ;  hit  friends ;  earneai  exhortation.  If  th« 
apostle  were  before  us  in  his  Epistles  as  an  inspired  man  of  genius  only,  whose  intellect 
teemed  with  great  thoughts,  and  whose  heart  was  absorbed  in  supplying  fervency  tc 
ihflas  thoughU,  his  hold  upon  us  would  be  weakened.  The  man  has  nothing  about 
Um  of  th«  intelleetualist.    Amoog  the  varieties  of  mind  and  ch»iacter  that  have 


56»  THE  riBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTUiA^&    [pu.  xn.  l—2i, 

arisen  from  time  to  time  in  the  development  of  humanity,  turn  for  a  moment  to  the 
ideal  of  an  apostle,  and  tell  us  if  the  conception  of  such  a  person  is  not  something 
unprecedented,  an  idea  altogether  original  with  Christianity.  A  new  and  most 
marvellous  form  of  a  public  man — not  a  representative  man,  not  a  typical  man,  in  no 
sense  either  the  one  or  the  other,  since  the  man  antedated  the  Church  and  had  no 
continuation  in  tbe  Church  after  its  opening  century.  Take  your  ideals  of  philosopher, 
poet,  military  chieftain,  statesman,  ruler,  and  tell  us  what  resemblance  these  bear 
to  the  character  St.  Paul  sustained  and  the  office  he  filled.  Or  take  the  worthiest 
dignitaries  of  the  Church,  and  follow  the  procession  as  it  moves,  now  in  splendour 
and  then  in  gloom,  from  the  hills  of  Borne,  over  the  Alps,  through  the  forests  of 
Germany,  by  the  Bhine  and  the  Bhone,  over  England,  Scotland,  and  America,  and 
see  how  they  compare  with  him  who  fought  with  beasts  at  Ephesus  and  died  daily. 
Quite  as  remarkable  aa  the  conception  of  this  ideal  was  its  realization  in  St.  Paul 
from  his  conversion  to  his  death.  Look  at  the  matter  in  another  connection.  What 
is  the  final  test  of  greatness  viewed  in  relation  to  society  ?  Is  it  not  the  ease  and 
freedom  of  access  to  the  common  heart  of  humanity,  the  magical  power  to  create 
sympathy  and  fellowship,  the  Qod-like  capacity  to  pass  through  the  shallow  feelings 
of  admiration  and  conventional  honour— often  more  of  a  tribute  to  our  own  vanity  than 
to  the  worth  of  others — and  to  gain  entrance  to  the  depths  of  truthful  affection  ? 
Beyond  doubt,  this  was  St.  Paul's  greatness.  Just  from  an  argument,  that  must 
have  put  an  extraordinary  pressure  even  on  his  great  abilities,  and  which  was  wel  I 
calculated,  as  all  intellectual  men  know,  to  make  him  insensible,  or  at  least  indifferent, 
at  the  moment  to  the  details  of  life,  he  is  not  forgetful  of  his  brethren,  but  hopes 
to  pass  the  winter  in  their  midst.  "  A  flying  visit "  (by  the  way)  will  not  satisfy 
his  love.  But,  for  the  present,  he  must  "  tarry  at  Ephesua."  Why  he  woold  stay 
in  this  city,  he  states— "a  great  and  effectual  door  is  opened  unto  me;"  the  field 
of  usefulness  is  large  and  promises  vast  results.  Stay  he  would,  moreover,  because 
"  there  are  many  adversaries."  Adversaries  were  the  men  to  convert ;  if  not  that,  to 
silence ;  but,  any  way,  he  will  not  desert  a  post  of  duty  to  gratify  his  desire  to  see  the 
Corinthian  brethren.  If  the  Lord  will  permit,  he  will  refresh  himself  among  them, 
but,  for  a  time,  he  wiU  face  the  worshippers  of  Diana  and  bear  the  brunt  of  persecutiou! 
Then  he  thinks  of  the  young  Timotheus.  If  he  visit  you  according  to  his  expectation, 
be  thoughtful  of  his  youth,  be  specially  considerate  of  his  modesty,  and  see  that  his 
stay  among  you  is  "without  fear,"  disturbed  by  none  of  your  rivalries  and  factions. 
Honour  him  for  his  work's  sake,  for  "  he  worketh  the  work  of  the  Lord,  as  I  also  du." 
"Let  no  man  therefore  despise  him;"  on  the  contrary,  "send  liim  on  withum 
annoyance,  with  good  understanding,  and  kindly  affection,"  that  he  and  his  travuUin. 
companions  may  come  unto  me.  Again,  some  of  the  partisans  at  Corinth  mi"li' 
suspect  him  of  jealousy  as  to  Apollos.  The  name  of  the  eloquent  and  holy  man  hn<i 
become  a  watchword  of  strife.  Lest  they  should  do  St.  Paul  this  dishonour,  he  tell- 
them  of  the  affectionate  relations  between  them ;  nor  will  he  say  my  brother,  but  "  our 
brother  Apollos,"  whom  he  wishes  "  greatly  "  to  visit  the  Church  at  Corinth.  But  see ! 
One  of  those  sudden  changes  which  originate  in  the  soul,  wliich  pass  fcom  the  sou; 
into  the  nerves,  and  from  the  nerves  into  the  muscles — one  of  those  quick  escapes  from 
memory  and  stored-up  emotion — occurs,  and  what  an  intenser  expression  settles  in  tlit- 
muscles  about  the  eyes,  and  in  the  eyes  themselves  I  There  is  a  break  in  the  thought. 
Two  verses  intervene  before  the  main  idea  is  resumed.  And  it  cuuld  hardly  have  been 
otherwise.  It  is  nature  to  the  life;  it  is  St.  Paul  in  the  very  soul  of  his  temperameni 
It  was  scarcely  possible  for  the  apostle  to  mention  Apollos  without  being  reminded  di 
the  unhappy  divisions  at  Corinth,  for  we  can  neither  think  nor  feel  except  by  means 
of  association  and  suggestion.  Each  faculty,  each  sensibility,  is  an  individual  centre  u: 
ihese  activities.  No  wonder,  then,  that  there  is  an  abrupt  transition,  all  the  more  true 
to  the  laws  of  mind  because  abrupt.  "Watch  ye."  Ahl  if  there  had  been  Christian 
watchfulness  in  the  Corinthian  Church,  what  criminations,  what  reproaches,  what 
humiliations,  had  been  averted  I  To  be  a  man,  one  must  be  apprehensive  of  the  dangers 
ever  lurking  in  ambush ;  must  have  the  sentinel  spirit  and  habit,  and  must  exert  it 
every  moment.  "  Stand  fast  in  the  faith."  Occasional  watching  will  not  do ;  stead&st- 
:ies8  must  go  along  with  watchfulness,  and  fortify  you  against  the  wiliest  aaaanlt. 
"  Quit  you  like  men."    No  manhood  can  live  without  courage ;  be  manful    ITightlns  ii 


o«.xn.l— 24.]    THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANi  681 

yonr  nfety,  trasiness,  profession;  fight  like  men,  fight  on,  fight  to  the  end.  "Be 
strong,"  or  as  it  is  in  I5pb.  iii.  16,  "  Strengtheneei  with  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  Inner 
man."  But  fight  how  ?  There  are  many  sorts  of  fighting — ^business  fighting,  profes- 
sional fighting,  legislative  fighting,  alas  I  even  Church  fighting.  And  there  they  are, 
each  class  of  fighters  with  his  particular  weapons  and  his  code  of  warfare.  Only  in  this 
are  they  all  alike,  viz.  the  fighter  gets  the  help  of  the  animal  sonl.  Beastly  fighting 
he  abhors ;  the  fighting  which  bnngs  hot  blood  and  excited  nerves  and  quick  breathing 
into  service,  he  admires,  encourages,  and  depends  upon  for  victory.  Not  so  is  St.  Paul's 
view.  "  Let  all  your  things  be  done  with  charity  " — love,  and,  after  his  grand  discourse 
on  "lore,"  an  kUusion  is  enough.  To  have  a  gentlemanly  intellect  in  our  fighting  is  a 
rare  thing  and  •  great  thing,  but  to  have  a  loving  intellect  in  fighting  for  what  we  believe- 
to  be  tnith  is  much  rarer  and  infinitely  greater.  Christian  fighting  ia  a  very  unusual 
excellence.  From,  this  emotional  digression,  he  returns  to  "  the  house  of  Stephanas." 
This  &mily  were  "  the  firstfruits  of  Achaia."  How  he  likes  the  figure  I  St.  Paul  had 
baptized  this  household.  They  have  "addicted  themselves  to  the  ministry  of  the 
sunt!."  What  the  precise  ministry  was,  we  know  not,  but  we  know  that  it  was 
a  kfaid,  beauti^l,  noble  sei-vice,  for  it  was  rendered  to  the  "  saints."  Think  of  the 
manifold  ministries  that  Christianity  set  a-going.  It  is  Anno  Domini,  say,  57.  Chris- 
tianity has  in  its  Churches  men  of  the  generation  that  saw  Christ  die,  that  beheld  him 
risen,  that  witnessed  Pentecost.  Jerusalem,  though  approaching  her  overthrow,  still 
shows  the  temple  where  he  taught,  the  spot  where  he  was  crucified,  and  the  grave  where 
he  was  buried.  In  this  short  space  of  time,  what  numerous  workers  have  entered  on 
careers  of  beneficence  1  From  the  apostles  downward  through  all  grades  of  kind  and 
loving  agencies,  .mark  the  variety,  the  difiiision,  the  heterogeneous  civilizations,  the 
unity,  the  accordant  response,  the  consecration,  pervading  these  Christian  ministries. 
Mark  it,  we  say ;  fw  it  is  a  solitary  phenomenon,  up  to  this  time,  in  haman  annals. 
Mark  it,  we  repeat ;  for  all  the  antagonistic  forces  of  the  world  are  in  league  to  crush  it, 
and  they  are  reinforced  and  augmented  by  Satanic  power.  Take  a  single  specimen,  the 
household  of  Stephanas.  Ko  information  is  given  as  to  his  social  poutlon,  no  mention 
made  of  the  sphere  or  spheres  of  usefulness  filled.  Enough  to  know,  it  was  a  "  ministry  " 
and  a  blessed  one,  since  it  was  "  a  ministry  to  the  saints."  Yet  we  may  picture  that 
Corinthian  home  in  the  midst  of  a  mongrel  and  licentious  population,  keeping  alive  the 
fervour  of  its  love  and  the  purity  of  its  private  heart,  watching,  standing  fast  in  the  fiaith, 
courageous  and  strong,  and  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  We  may  be  sure  that 
the  poor,  the  sick,  the  infirm,  were  duly  cared  for  and  helped,  and  that  the  home  itself 
was  devoted  to  hospitality.  Now,  says  the  apostle,  "  submit  yourselvei  onto  such." 
There  are  two  kinds  of  submission — one  to  authority,  the  other  to  influence.  We  need 
both.  We  need  law,  we  need  grace.  Law  and  grace  are  coexisting  constituents  in 
modem  civilization  so  far  as  Christianity  has  permeated,  and,  in  our  times,  influence  has 
assumed  a  very  significant  relation  to  government  and  society.  We  are  governed 
mnch  more  by  influence  than  authority.  St.  Paul  urges  that  Stephanas  and  his  house- 
hold be  respected  and  honoured,  their  wishes  consulted,  their  judgments  followed. 
And  not  only  they,  but  "  every  one  that  helpeth  with  us  and  laboureth."  Stephanas, 
Fortunatus,  and  Achaicus  had  come  firom  Corinth  and  visited  St.  Paul  at  Ephesus,  and' 
"they  have  refreshed  my  spirit  and  yours."  They  had  been  sent  as  representatives  of 
the  Corinthian  Chuich.  The  comfort  and  cheer  were  mutual ;  let  them  be  acknowledo'ed 
(valued,  recognized)  for  these  good  ofiBces.  Wise  instruction  this;  to  be  influenced 
by  excdlence  in  others,  and  mbmU  onx  minds  to  such  a  gracious  power,  is  the  strongest 
of  all  evidences  that  we  are  on  the  path  of  culture  and  piety.  For  it  has  pleased  God 
our  Father,  not  only  to  reveal  himself  in  Jesus  our  Lord,  but  he  manifests  himself  also 
in  those  who  are  Christ's.  Discipleship  is  a  revelation  and  an  inspiration.  All  the 
ministrisa  are  of  God.  They  are  his  presence,  his  helpfulness,  his  glory,  among  the 
habitations  of  men.  And  whether  it  be  the  "  ministering  spirits  sent  forth  to  minister 
for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation,"  or  the  lowly  ministrations  that  fall  in  the 
silent  dew  and  breathe  in  the  bidden  violet,  they  are  alike  &om  him  who  "  worketh 
■11  in  all."— L. 

▼•n.  19— 24.— CToriniF  words.    The  salutations  follow :  first,  from  the  Ghui«hea  of 
▲da;  than  from  Aqnila  and  Priscilla,  honoured  names  in  the  OhnrchM;  again  £om 


560  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBlilTHIAAls.    lo^x^l-^i 

the  Eiihesian  brethren.    Let  them  renew  their  fellowship  and  pledge  their  lore  again 
"  with  a  holy  kiss."    The  work  of  the  amanuensis  over,  St.  Paul  adds  the  salutation 
from  himsell  vitli  his  own  hand,  "  The  salutation  of  roe  Paul."    And  the  words  follow, 
"  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  Anathema,"  let  him  become 
accurst  d ;  "  Maran-atha,"  the  Lord  comes.     Between  the  greeting  "  of  me  Paul "  and 
"  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you,"  followed  immediately  with  "  my 
love  be  with  you  all  in  Christ  Jesus.    Amen,"  this  utterance  of  intense  feeling  occurs. 
What  his  tone  of  mind  was,  we  understand  fully  from  the  chapter,  which  expresses 
confidence-,  hope,  and  brotherly  afiection.     What  his  emotions  were  at  the  instant,  we 
know  from  the  salutation  which  precedes  and  the  benediction  which  succeeds  the 
Anathema  Maran-atha.     The  warning  is  terrible,  but  it  is  one  of  love  and  tenderness. 
Had  he  been  less  conscious  ot  the  obligation  to  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  less  sensible 
of  its  immeasurable  worth  to  the  soul,  less  aware  of  the  stupendous  folly  and  guilt  of 
rejecting  it ;  or  if  the  profound  sense  of  that  love  had  not  been  present  in  the  full  blaze 
of  his  own  consciousness ; — then,  perad venture,  words  less  stern  and  denunciatory  might  ■ 
have  been  used.    As  it  is,  he  speaks  from  the  same  high  level  of  love  to  God  and  man, 
and  the  sentence  of  condemnation  has  its  preface  in  a  greeting  and  its  sequel  in  a 
benediction.     So  closes  this  wonderful  Epistle,     Writing  under  the  zenith  of  his  years, 
if  we  rate  those  j'cars  by  the  chronology  of  his  preaching  and  pen,  St.  Paul  comes  before 
us  In  its  successive  pages  as  one  whose  temperament,  nervous  vigour,  observation,  culture, 
experience,  had  been  so  far  co-oidinated  and  interblended  as  to  fit  him,  in  an  eminent 
degree,  to  give  birth  to  this  production.    Never  did  a  human  soul  exhibit  its  individu- 
ality more  perfectly  through  all  its  organs  of  expression.    Those  organs  are  varied  in 
every  man.    'I'hey  were  singularly  diversified  in  the  apostle.     He  cannot  reason  long 
without  waking  other  forces  of  utterance.    Imagination,  in  its  form  of  relativity  rather 
than  its  creative  quality,  is  stirred  into  activity.    Most  of  all,  impassioned  emotion  is 
qtiickly  evoked.    And,  in  this  Epistle,  the  transitions  from  one  topic  to  another,  and  from 
one  aspect  of  a  tt'pic  to  its  contrast,  are  vivid  tokens  of  his  superabundant  energy.    Much 
is  left  without  minute  elaboration.    Hints  are  given  that  might  be  expanded  into  essays 
and  disquisitions.    But  he  was  not  writing  these  ;  he  was  writing  apostolic  letters,  and 
"  first  and  last  and  midst "  he  adhered  to  his  plan  and  method.    Judging  from  his 
recorded  speeches,  he  is  quite  as  much  or  more  of  a  speaker  when  writing  than  when 
addressing  a  multitude.    The  spirit  in  him  is  often  imi>etuous  and  finds  it  easy  work  to 
loose  itself  from  restraints.    Keenly  conscious  of  himself,  still  more  keenly  conscious  of 
Divine  truth  in  himself,  his  personality  is  as  nearly  merged  in  his  apostleship  as  we 
can  conceive  possible,  and  hence  it  is  Paul,  the  servant  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
has  the  pre-eminence  in  all  the  manifestations  of  his  genius  and  character.    This  Epistle, 
a  manual  of  Church  order,  an  epitome  of  cardinal  principles  adapted  to  the  ever-changing 
externality  of  Church  life,  presents  many  a  germ-idea  for  future  development.    Not  one 
of  his  Epistles  bears  so  directly  on  certain  questions  of  the  day.    If  we  study  tho  human 
body  from  the  Pauline  point  of  view,  we  shall  be  rid  very  soon  of  those  dangerous 
teachings  which  some  of  our  physiologists  are  pressing  on  popular  acceptance.    If  we 
follow  St.  Paul,  we  shall  know  more  of  the  human  soul  than  most  of  our  philosophical 
systems  teach  us.    There  are  no  "  wandering  mazes "  here  in  which  men  are  "  lost," 
but  over  every  realm  he  traverses,  light  gathers  as  he  advances,  and  the  splendoiu- always 
hangs  its  noon  where  the  radiance  is  most  wanted.   Christ  is  the  Power  of  Ood  and  the 
Wisdom  of  God.    Christ  is  therefore  his  Power  and  Wisdom,  wherever  the  duties  of  the 
apostleship  have  to  be  discharged  and  its  sorrows  have  to  be  endured.    The  day  has  not 
come  for  this  Epistle  to  be  fully  understood  and  appreciated.     Science  has  many  years 
of  apprenticeship  to  serve  before  it  can  reach  the  plane  of  thought  on  which  St.  Paul 
stood.    And  our  Christian  thinkers  have  much  to  learn  before  cvilture  and  piety  can 
open  to  them  the  hidden  treasures  of  this  Epistle.    Aa  true  Biblical  criticism  advance?, 
the  profundity  of  this  letter  to  ttie  Corinthiaus  grows  more  apparent,  and  we  feel  in  oui 
(lily,  as  was  never  felt  before,  the  amazing  compass  of  its  power.    Here  are  ideas  which 
wait  on  time  and  have  giveu  as  yet  scarcely  more  than  a  fragment  of  themselves  to  oui 
foremost  scholars.    Here  are  latent  inspirations  that  will  one  day  astound  the  world. 
Nothing  that  he  wrote  has  a  better-grounded  assurance  of  a  great  future,  and  when  that 
future  shall  come,  the  world  will  have  a  far  juster  sense  of  Its  indebtedness  to  St  Paul 
as  a  grand  teacher. — L. 


oti.  ivt  i— 24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  6ttl 


"Vers.  1 — i.— Church  gifts.  There  are  few  interests  in  human  life  which  can  ba 
srpaiated  from  the  consiilcration  of  money.  Money  is  the  first  necessity  of  goTem- 
nients,  and  it  is  the  sinews  of  war.  In  business,  in  professional  life,  in  industrial 
pui suits,  peouuiary  considurations  are  prominent,  perhaps  paramount.  It  is  no  other- 
wise in  religion;  and,  however  some  superfine  Christians  may  object  to  associating 
anyihiiig  so  base  as  money  with  what  is  the  loftiest  of  human  interests,  no  way  has 
been  found  of  excluding  money  matters  from  the  Church  of  Christ.  Indeed,  as  Chris- 
tianity claims  to  affect  and  to  control  all  that  is  human,  there  seems  no  possibility  of 
excluiling  anything  so  important  as  money  from  its  range. 

I.  The  purposeb  to  which  Chckoh  gifts  should  be  devoted.  The  contributions 
gathered  in  Achaia,  Macedonia,  and  other  places,  at  the  instance  of  the  apostle,  were 
for  the  poor  Christians  of  Jewish  race  at  Jerusalem.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
all  the  methods  and  practices  of  the  primitive  Churches  were  unexceptionable.  We 
have  to  deal  with  aims,  with  impulses  and  principles,  not  with  details  of  method  and 
administration.  And  we  cannot  question  that  the  relief  of  the  poor,  and  especially  of 
the  Christian  poor,  is  a  lawful  and  becoming  means  of  displaying  practical  brotherly 
love.  Wisdom,  .discrimination,  ought  indeed  to  be  exercised,  but  for  the  diraotipn 
and  not  for  the  extinction  of  liberality. 

n.  Tbb  method  in  which  Church  coiiiTBiBnTiONS  should  be  hade.  From  this 
passage,  containing  principles  of  apostolic  authority,  we  learn  that  such  setting  apart 
of  our  substance  to  benevolent  and  ecclesiastical  purposes  should  be:  1.  Periodical. 
Some  have,  indeed,  held  that  the  words  of  the  apostle  especially  sanction  the  devotion 
of  money  as  an  observance  peculiarly  appropriate  to  the  Lord's  day.  In  any  case, 
regularity  is  enjoined.  2.  In  proporticn  to  means.  There  is  both  common  sense  and 
Christian  feeling  in  the  apostle's  direction  as  to  the  measure  of  liberality.  The  poor 
man  gives  of  bis  poverty,  and  the  rich  man  of  his  wealth ;  whatever  is  consecrated 
being  regarded  as  an  acknowledgment  that  all  is  from  God.  3.  In  preparation  and 
accumulation.  To  avoid  a  sudden  levy  or  collection  upon  the  apostle's  arrival,  he 
recommends  that  each  shall  lay  by  him  in  store,  so  that  the  product  may  be  ready  to 
hand  when  the  day  comes  that  it  is  wanted. 

III.  The  WAT  IN  which  Church  gifts  should  be  appropriated  and  administered. 
Paul  showed  his  wonted  wisdom  in  -  the  arrangements  he  suggested.  1.  Personal 
ministration  should  be  employed.  Everything,  especially  everything  connected  with 
money,  should  be  open  and  above-board.  The  givers  choose  the  bearers  of  the  gift. 
2.  The  manner  of  apportionment  should  be  altogether  above  any  possibility  of  guspidon. 
Of  such  precautions  Paul  has  set  us  an  admirable  and  excellent  example. — ^T. 

Yer.  9. — ITie  open  door  and  many  adversarUi.  Ephesus  evidently  had,  as  a  Mena 
of  labour,  many  attractions  for  the  ardent  and  fearless  spirit  of  the  Apostle  Paul.  Its 
vast  population,  its  devotion  to  idolatry,  the  excitability  of  its  inhabitants,  all  rendered 
It  a  congenial  field  for  such  a  worker.  And  the  opposition  he  encountered  and  the 
danger  he  braved,  it  is  plain  from  the  narrative,  made  him  feel  the  city  all  the  mon 
to  be  an  honourable  and  attractive  post  for  a  bold  and  faithful  soldier  of  Jesui 
Christ. 

I.  The  oppobtunitt  of  sbbvice  for  Christ  represented  in  this  fioubatiti 
LANGUAGE.  A  door  offers  the  means  of  admittance  to  a  house,  and  an  open  door 
invites  approach  and  entrance.  In  Scripture  a  door  is  often  used  to  express  the 
opportunity  to  do  God's  will  and  advance  his  cause.  So  here,  the  apostle  represents 
by  this  figurative  language  the  summons  which  Proviilence  addressed  to  him  to  evan- 
gelize this  great  city  of  Asia  Minor.  The  citizens  and  visitors  were  numerous,  the 
idolatry  and  vice  which  prevailed  were  flagrant,  human  sorrows  and  difficulties  and 
temptations  abounded ;  so  thai,  there  was  abundant  room  for  evangelistic  and  pastoral 
labour.  Further,  there  seems  to  have  been  in  some  quarters  a  remarkable  and  gratify- 
ing readiness  to  hear  the  gospel  of  Christ. 

IL  The  hinubahoiib  to  service  fob  Christ  hebe  alluded  to.  1.  Observe  from 
what  quarters  it  came.  The  narrative  in  the  Book  of  the  Acts  makes  tt  evident  that 
opposition  to  Christian  preaching  arose  from  both  Jews  and  Gentiles.  On  different 
grounds  sinful  men  oppose  the  truth.  It  always  has  been  so.  It  was  so  in  the  timt 
of  our  Lord,  and  the  disciple,  the  servant,  must  not  expect  or  desire  to  be  abova  Ua 

L  CORINTHIANS  2  0 


562  THJi  FmST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  xn.  1—24 

Master.  2.  Observe  what  forms  it  took.  Slander  »nd  secret  misrepresentation  wai 
one  way  in  which  adversaries  sought  to  hinder  the  truth.  And  another  was  open 
hostility  and  violence.  This  we  know  to  have  been  put  in  motion  at  Ephesus  against 
thd  apostle.  The  ignorant  and  impassioned  mob  was  stirred  up  to  oppose  the  work 
of  Paul ;  in  this  sense,  at  all  events,  he  fought  with  beasts  at  Ephesus. 

ni.  The  coupatibilitt  of  obeat  offobtumities  and  many  ADVERSABiKa.  It  is 
rertainly  a  paradoxical  statement.  Yet  reflection  will  show  that  there  is  no  real 
inconsistency.  1.  Hindrances,  calumnies,  serve  to  draw  attention  to  any  cause,  and 
the  gospel  is  sure  to  profit  by  anything  which  leads  men  to  inquire  into  it.  2.  These 
obstacles  serve  to  test  the  quality  of  the  labourers,  and  to  bring  out  courage  and 
resolution  and  patience  wher*  such  qualities  are  required.  8.  They  always  answer  a 
valuable  purpose  in  testing  the  sincerity  of  the  converts.  Times  of  persecution  are 
times  of  testing. 

IT.  The  ATTSAonoN  this  oohbinatioh  had  iob  the;  apostlb.  L  It  called  forth 
and  employed  his  many  and  remarkable  powers.  2.  It  enabled  him  to  realize  hia 
fellowship  with  his  Master.    3.  It  promised  great  results  of  spiritual  good. 

Afflioation.  1.  Enter  in,  Christian  labonien,  at  every  open  door  I  2.  Be  fearless 
of  adversaries  t — ^T. 

Yer.  18. — The  word  of  amimand  to  {HirtBtian  toldiera,  Now  and  again  m  meet 
with  passages  in  the  New  Testament  which  remind  us  that  Christianity  does  not  lose 
sight  of  the  sterner  virtues.  Certainly  our  religion  has  brought  the  softer  and  more 
amiable  virtues  into  honour  and  prominence ;  but  we  should  make  a  mistake  did  we 
suppose  that  for  the  severer  excellences  of  character  it  finds  no  place, 

I.  I'HE  Chbibtian  life  IS  A  SCENE  OP  WABFABE.  It  is  an  Opportunity  for  bearing 
witness  to  the  grace  of  God,  an  opportunity  for  faithful  and  diligent  service.  But  this 
is  not  all.  Who  can,  in  any  station  of  life,  sincerely  endeavour  to  live  as  a  Christian, 
without  finding  out  that  life  is  a  campaign,  a  scene  of  discipline,  of  conflict?  Surely 
the  language  of  the  New  Testament  in  which  we  are  addressed  aa  soldiers  of  the  cross, 
ii  not  mere  poetry,  the  utterance  of  imagination  I 

II.  The  foeb  weoh  the  Chbistian  is  called  to  XKcouitTEB  abb  gmiTUAL.  As 
the  apostle  expresses  it  elsewhere, "  We  wrestle  not  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  with 
principalities  and  powers,"  etc.  Whether  at  Corinth  or  at  Ephesus,  or  in  modern 
London,  or  far  away  beyond  the  seas,  he  who  ia  bent  upon  doing  the  will  of  God  must 
needs  make  up  his  mind  to  face  the  adversary.  Many  are  the  forms  assumed  by  the 
foe  of  souls,  many  his  devices,  great  his  craft  and  power.  In  his  temptation,  oui 
Divine  Lord  and  Leader,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  himself  faced  the  enemy,  anri 
withstood  his  repeated  and  various  assaults. 

m.  Our  position  of  danreb  calls  fob  thb  exeboibe  of  the  boldhsb-liee  viBTnt  .'- 
OF  COURAGE  AND  ENDUBANCE.  1.  Watch/ulneM ;  lest  the  soldier  be  surprised  at  bis 
post,  and  fall  a  victim  to  his  foe.  What  stress  our  Lord  and  his  apostles  have  laid 
upon  this  attitude  of  vigilance  I.  If  we  know  onrselves,  our  weakness,  our  liability  to 
sin ;  if  we  know  the  resources  of  our  enemies — we  shall  feel  the  necessity  of  watching, 
est  we  enter  into  temptation.  2.  Bteadfcutaess  in  the  faith ;  lest  we  be  tossed  to  and 
fro  by  our  iniiecisioti  and  vacillation.  Persecution  and  prosperity  are  alike  in  this, 
that  they  expose  us  to  this  danger.  8.  Manlinesi  is,  no  doubt,  in  contrast  to  the  spirit 
of  efftiiiinacy  and  sloth.  "  Quit  you  like  men  1 "  is  the  ringing  battle-cry  of  one  whose 
own  life  illustrated  the  precept.  4.  Strength  is  needed  in  such  a  combat,  in  which 
only  the  weapons  of  warfare  which  are  not  carnal  are  mighty  through  God  to  the 
puUiog  down  of  the  strongholds. 

IV.  Divine  obace  aloke  can  equip  and  uphold  the  goLDiEits  ni  thib  holt  wab. 
This  great  truth  is  always,  when  not  expressed,  in  the  background,  when  admonitions 
to  vigilance  and  courage  are  addressed  to  Christians.  It  is  not  tn  bs  supposed  that  in 
our  own  strength  we  can  comply  with  requirements  so  stringent  ;■:  '  conduct  a  warfare 
•o  perilous.  But "  if  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  Tiie  warfare  is  not  ours, 
but  God's,  and  hia  are  the  weapons  and  Lis  the  might,  am  aa  his  is  the  glory  of  the 
viotoiy.— T. 

Jm.  14— Xow  a  prineipU  9f  action.    We  may  regard  lora  m  b  wntiment.    It  k 


OH.  XTl  1— 24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0BINTHIAN8.  669 

Buch ;  and  yet  its  place  in  the  economy  of  human  nature  and  life  is  not  fully  described 
when  thus  much  is  said.  For  it  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  practical  principles  of 
our  heing.  Human  love  can  effect  great  things.  And  Divine  love  is  the  motive  which 
{Jod  himself  has  appointed  for  the  renewal  and  salvation  of  our  humanity.  And  this 
same  emotion  hecomes  in  Christian  society  an  elevating,  purifying,  regulating,  and 
transforming  power.     It  is  thus  that  it  is  regarded  in  the  text. 

I.  The  model  of  the  life  of  love  ib  to  be  found  in  the  life  of  Christ.  Who 
that  reads  the  incomparable  story  of  our  Lord's  earthly  ministry  can  be  insensible 
to  this  fact,  which  distinguishes  that  ministry  from,  and  raises  it  above,  every  other 
life  and  work  this  world  has  witnessed?  Love  gleamed  from  his  countenance,  spoke 
in  his  tones,  flowed  from  his  presence,  wrought  by  his  hands.  And  love  led  him  to 
his  cross. 

IL  Thk  authobitt  fob  the  life  of  love  is  to  be  found  in  tee  wobds  of 
Chbist.  Again  and  again  did  the  Saviour  enjoin  upon  his  disciples  the  virtue  of 
brotherly  love.  It  was  his  new  commandment.  It  was  his  test  of  discipleship.  Love 
to  Qod  and  love  to  man  constituted,  according  to  him,  the  sum  of  obedience,  righteous- 
ness, religion, 

III.  The  untvebsal  affuoation  of  this  pbinciple.  It  is  too  common  to  regard 
Christian  charity  as  a  grace  to  be  displayed  in  certain  relations  and  upon  certaiu 
occasions.  But  this  is  not  the  New  Testament  idea.  Love  is  to  govern  the  whole  lifi', 
and  is  to  permeate  the  Christian  society.  There  is  no  limitation  in  the  language  uf 
the  text :  "  Let  all  that  ye  do  be  done  in  love  1 "  It  is  a  lofty  motive,  a  far-reaching 
principle.  The  precept  is  doubtless  one  not  easy  of  application  so  general.  Tet 
nothing  less  than  its  universal  adoption  and  prevuence  can  satisfy  the  Lord  of  the 
kingdom. 

IV.  The  advantages  ACOBUtNa  to  the  Chubch  fbom  the  adoption  of  this 
PBmoiFLE.  How  different  is  the  selfish  principle  adopted  by  the  unchristian  world, 
is  at  once  apparent.  This  is  a  new,  an  antagonistic  principle,  yet,  in  its  pvoper 
influence,  the  principle  which  is  to  pacify  strife,  to  harmonize  conflicting  interests,  to 
breathe  new  life  into  human  society.  "  All  ye  are  brethren  "  was  the  Master's  explicit 
declaration  concerning  the  members  of  his  Church.  "  See  how  these  Christians  love 
one  another  I "  was  the  exclamation  of  a  surprised  and  admiring  world. 

v.  The  impbebsion  pboduced  upon  the  wobld  by  the  fbaotioal  embodiuent 
OF  this  fbinoiple.  The  world  is  doubtless  impressed  by  the  novelty,  the  beauty, 
the  celestial  dignity,  Of  Christian  doctrine.  Yet  the  expression  of  that  doctrine  in  the 
life  of  brotherly  love  is  more  effective ;  and  the  realization  of  Christ's  idea,  the  fulfil- 
ment of  Christ's  law,  will  do  more  than  all  preaching  to  convince  the  world  of  the 
Divine  mistnon  of  the  Christ.— T. 

Yen.  16, 16. — Service  and  honour.  As  the  family  that  had  first  In  Achaia  received 
the  gospel,  Stephanas  and  his  household  were  regarded  by  the  apostle  with  peculiar 
interest  and  affection.  The  manner  in  which  they  are  introduced  in  this  passage  is 
highly  instructive  and  suggestive. 

I.  Thk  vocation  to  spibitual  hinistbt.  1.  Its  first  condition  Is  rincere  personal 
adhesion  to  Christianity.  Stephanas  and  his  household  were  converted,  baptized, 
and  well  instructed  in  the  Christian  faith.  It  was  when  they  had  become  penetrated 
with  the  Spirit  of  Christ  that  they  were  impelled  to  holy  and  devoted  service.  We 
cannot  expect  men  and  women  to  become  unselfish  labourers  for  the  welfare  of  theii 
fellow-men,  until  they  have  come  under  the  new  and  Divine  motive  and  power.  2. 
Christian  ministries  are  of  many  and  very  various  kinds.  These  vary  with  the 
capacity  and  opportunity  of  the  labourers,  and  the  necessities  of  those  whose  welfare 
is  sought.  Too  limited  a  view  of  ministry  is  frequently  taken;  the  fact  is,  that  what- 
ever service  men  render  to  their  fellow-men,  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  is  a  Christian 
ministry.  Not  only  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  hut  the  instruction  of  the  young, 
the  nnrsing  and  healing  of  the  sick,  the  showing  of  kindness  and  hospitality,  the 
supporting  with  generosity  of  benevolent  undertakings,  all  fall  into  this  class.  8. 
Services  of  such  kinds  involve  both  labour  and  co-operation.  His  people  find  a  pleasure 
is  offering  to  Christ,  their  Lord,  that  which  costs  them  something.  And  they  delight 
to  help  one  another ;  some  leading  aad  others  following,  but  all  setting  before  tb  an 


564  TUB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [oh.  in.  1—24. 


the  same  end,  and  toiling  in  the  same  spirit.  4.  Ministering  "  unto  the  saints  "  is  an 
especial  form  of  acceptable  service.  Prom  the  beginning  Churches  have  cared  for 
tlieir  widows,  and  for  their  poor  and  aged  members.  The  household  of  faith  has  a 
peculiar  claim  upon  the  sympathy  and  affection  and  liberal  support  of  the  Saviour'i 
friends. 

II.  The  honoub  and  subjection  ddb  to  those  engaged  in  spibitual  ministby. 

1.  They  should  be  treated  with  especial  regard  and  gratitude.  Paul  himself  honoured 
tliu  good  Stephanas  and  his  like-minded  wife  and  household,  and  he  reminded  the 
Cuiinthians  that  a  family  among  themselves  so  distinguished  in  the  annals  of  the 
Church,  and  so  dear  to  the  apostle's  heart,  should  be  esteemed  highly  in  love  for  their 
work's  sake.  2,  They  had  a  claim  upon  such  as  were  in  a  position  to  render  them 
help  in  the  good  cause.  Doubtless  it  was  the  case  at  Corinth,  as  elsewhere,  that 
the  burden  was  too  readily  left  upon  the  shoulders  of  those  disposed  to  bear  it.  But 
this  ought  not  to  be.  "  When  one  man  is  seen  working  hard  for  Christ,  his  neighbour 
should  put  to  himself  the  question, "  Can  I  help  my  brother,  relieve  him  of  some  pressure, 
or  render  his  labour  more  effective?"  3.  Submission  is,  in  many  cases,  a  duty  in 
Christian  Churches.  There  are  those  whom  we  should  be  ready  not  only  io  work  with 
but  to  work  under, — T. 

Ver.  18. — Spiritual  refreshment.  The  three  honoured  members  of  the  Christian 
society  at  Corinth  who  came  to  Ephesus,  came  ofScially  as  a  deputation  to  consult  the 
inspired  apostle  upon  matters  of  faith  an'd  practice.  But  their  visit  was  not  simply 
official ;  for  all  three  were  personally  attached  to  Paul,  and  their  sentiments  of 
affection  were  reciprocated  by  the  fervent  nature  of  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  whose 
largeness  of  heart  was  even  more  conspicuous  than  his  keenness  of  intellect.  The 
grateful  language  in  which  Paul  acknowledges  the  beneSt  he  liad  received  from 
intercourse  with  his  visitors,  is  suggestive  of  thought  regarding  the  refreshment  of 
spirit  which  is  one  happy  result  of  Christian  associations. 

I.  The  need  all  sometimes  feel  of  spiritual  refreshment.  1.  Work  may  be 
burdensome,  and  even  oppressive,  and  may  weigh  down  the  soul  as  well  as  the  body. 

2.  'i'rials,  desertion  of  friends,  disapi  ointment  in  fellow-labourers,  etc.,  may  distress  the 
suul  and  dispose  to  melancholy.  3.  Living  much  alone  and  in  one's  own  occupations 
is  wearisome  to  the  spirit ;  the  energies  flag ;  the  quality  of  work  suffers ;  gloom  takes 
possession  of  the  life.  These  and  many  other  causes  render  it  most  desirable  that  the 
thirsting,  fainting  spirit  should  be  reanimated  by  some  suitable  influences. 

IL  The  appointed  agents  of  spiritual  befreshment.  Letters  and  books  are 
precious,  but  in  the  case  before  ns  they  are  inadequate.  Living  companionship,  the 
society  of  those  like-minded  with  ourselves,  flone  can  meet  the  requirements  of  tht 
case.  Not  only  so;  sympathizing  friends  have  a  peculiar  power  of  restoring  the 
equilibrium  of  the  soul.  Sympathy  was  what  Paul  sought  and  valued.  It  is  hard 
to  do  even  work  for  Christ  without  the  smUe  and  word  of  encouragement  which  our 
brethren  in  the  Lord  are  able  to  give  us. 

III.  The  heanb  or  BFHtirnAL  befbeshment.  The  presence  of  Christian  friends 
is  much ;  but  their  conversation,  the  opening  of  their  hearts,  the  inquiry  concerning 
our  labours,  successes,  and  failures, — these  are  all-  much  to  be  desired.  Not  only  the 
communication  of  knowledge  and  advice  from  our  superiors,  but  the  friendly  conversa- 
tion of  our  equals,  and  even  the  sympathy  and  heart-revelation  of  those  in  some 
respects  beneath  us,  may  prove  truly  recruiting  to  our  energies  and  restorative  to  our 
■pirita. 

IV.  The  BE8ULT8  OF  BPiBiTUAL  BEFBEBHUENT.  1.  Depression  givos  placo  to  cheer- 
fulness.  2.  Weariness  gives  place  to  vigour.  3.  Sluggishness  gives  place  to  vivacity. 
4.  Despondency  gives  place  to  hope.  6.  InefBciency  gives  place  to  successful  labour. 
6.  Doubt  gives  place  to  living  confidence.  In  all  is  seen  the  operation  of  that  Spirit 
of  grace  who  does  not  disdain  to  work  in  and  through  the  lowliest  of  Christ's  idnoect 
disciples  and  friends. — ^T. 

Vers.  19,  20. — Ghrittian  grtetingt.  In  St.  Panl'a  Epistles  personal  messages  ooou 
in  juxtaposition  with  doctrinal  statements  and  arguments  and  moral  counsels.  Thdr 
occurrence  makes  as  feel  the  true  humanity  of  this  method  of  religious  communication  i 


3H.  XTI.  1— 24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  BKi 

we  gain  an  insight  into  tte  heart,  not  of  the  apostle  alone,  but  of  his  fellow-lahouren 
and  friends.  And  we  canmit  but  admire  the  evident  power  of  Christianity  to  hallow 
and  ennoble,  to  refine  and  bless,  the  relations  subsisting  among  friends. 

L  From  whom,  and  to  whom,  abb  tiibsb  obeetinos?  1.  Individuals  are  named, 
Of  Aquila  and  Priscilla  we  know  that  they  were  regarded  by  Paul  as  his  doar  friends 
and  trusty  fellow-labourers.  Wherever  they  went  they  carried  the  gospel,  they  formed 
a  circle  of  Christian  friends,  they  provided  a  home  for  workers  and  a  gathering-place 
for  worshippers.  2.  Households  join  in  the  greetings.  'I'his  is  evidently  the  case, 
whether  we  regard  the  expression  "Church  in  the  house"  as  applying  to  the  Christian 
fiimily  and  their  dependents  and  guests,  or  to  a  party  wont  to  assemble  in  a  certain 
house  for  mutual  edification  and  common  worship.  3.  Churches  send  salutations. 
The  Christian  congregations  of  Asia  Minor  were  linked  together  in  bonds  of  mutual 
confidence  and  affection,  and  expressed  their  feelings  by  the  medium  of  the  apostolical 
letter.  This  practice  authorizes  communications  between  Churches  and  groups  of 
Chnrcheg,  as  promotive  of  brotherly  love. 

II.  Of  what  kind  ?  1.  They  are  fraternal.  In  the  salutation  those  who  send  the 
messages  are  termed  brethren.  Not  as  fellow-professors  of  one  faith,  but  as  members 
of  one  family,  did  these  primitive  Chiistians  exchange  their  greetings  and  good  wishes 
and  prayers,  2.  Cordial  and  affectionate.  Salutations  are  often  matters  of  form,  and 
are  then  cold  and  all  but  meaningless.  The  holy  kiss,  which  was  the  custom  in  those 
primitive  communities,  was  a  sign  of  the  warmth  and  sincerity  of  the  good  feeling 
which  prevailed.  3.  Mutual;  for  they  were  admonished  to  greet  one  another.  "All 
ye,"  Christ  had  said,  "  are  brethren ; "  and  we  see  how  true  an  attempt  was  made  to 
comply  with  his  commands,  and  to  realize  his  descriptions. 

III.  Vpos  what  basis?  Not  upon  the  basis  of  mere  courtesy,  or  of  common 
interests  or  expediency,  but  upon  a  specially  Christian  basis;  the  greeting  was  "in 
the  Lord."  By  this  we  must  understand  :  1.  In  fulfilment  of  the  Ijord's  command,  who 
had  80  often  and  emphatically  enjoined  the  cherishing  and  manifestation  of  brotherly 
love.  2.  In  imitation  of  the  Lord's  conduct,  who  himself,  in  all  his  communications 
with  his  friends,  had  been  wont  to  display  that  love  which  he  desired  to  witness  among 
his  followers.  3.  Under  the  influence  of  his  Spirit,  whose  presence  and  gracious 
operations  make  themselves  felt  by  the  diffusion  of  courtesy,  good  will,  and  kind- 
ness.—T. 

Ver.  22. — The  tUnenee  <^  love  to  OhHit.  There  are  those  who,  not  baring  known 
Christ,  have  had  no  opportunity  of  loving  him.  But  of  all  who  have  heard  and  read 
of  Christ,  we  may  say  that  the  one  test  of  their  character  and  their  position  lies  in 
their  feeling  with  regard  ^to  him,  with  all  which  that  feeling  involves.  The  apostle's 
warm  heart  could  tolerate  no  indifference,  no  neutrality,  here.  The  Lord  Jesus  must 
be  not  only  respected,  but  loved.  And  not  to  love  him  proves  that  the  nature  is 
insensible  to  all  that  is  good  and  Divine — involves  its  own  condemnation  and  cnrse 
and  miseiy. 

I.  The  absence  of  love  to  Cheist.  Where  there  is  no  love  to  the  Lord  Jeans  there 
appears  to  be ;  1.  A  want  of  appreciation  of  his  perfect  moral  character.  If  Jesus  be 
known  by  a  holy  and  sympathetic  nature,  he  will  appear  to  such  a  nature  "  the  chief 
among  ten  thousand,  the  altogether  lovely."  Who  can  gaze  upon  the  sinless  and  pure, 
the  just  and  kind,  the  meek  and  patient  Jesus,  and  be  unaffected  by  the  spectacle  ? 
Only  those  for  whom  moral  excellence  and  beauty  have  no  charms.  2.  A  deep  sensi- 
bility to  his  infinite  compassion,  For  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  Saviour's 
disposition  and  ministry,  and  especially  his  sacrifice,  have  a  personal  relation  to 
ourselves.  It  was  for  us  men  and  our  salvation  that  he  lived  a  life  of  poverty  and 
contempt,  that  he  deigned  to  die  a  death  of  agony  and  shame.  To  withhold  the  heart's 
best  love  from  One  who  endured  the  cross  for  us  argues  a  callousness  of  nature  beneath 
the  level  of  common  humanity.  3,  A  base  ingratitude  for  all  he  has  done  and  is  doing 
on  our  behalf.  Even  those  who  are  indiffereut  to  the  Lord  Jesus  owe  him  a  vast  debt 
for  the  benefits  which,  by  bis  mediation,  he  has  conferred  upon  the  human  race,  and 
for  the  forbearance  with  which  they  have  individually  been  treated.  If  ingratitude 
to  earthly  friends  and  benefactors  be  base,  how  shall  the  heinousneas  be  described  d 
Ingratitude  to  the  Son  of  man  ? 


666  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COEINTHIANS.     [<».  m.  1—24 


XL  The  cubse  and  condbmnatioh  dtvolted  in  dtdiffbrbnce  towabdb  Chkmt.  1 
We  can  trace  this  in  the  moral  degradation  which  such  insensibility  occasions.  Not 
to  love  the  worthiest  and  the  best  is  to  debase  onr  nature.  Character  is  largely  moulded 
by  love ;  and  they  who  turn  away  from  the  love  of  Immanuel  choose  death.  2.  The 
condemnation  of  concience  is  inevitable.  Its  voice  may  be  stifled  for  a  season,  bat 
it  will  be  heard,  and  that  voice  must  needs  utter  a  censure  of  no  feeble  or  ambiguous 
kind.  The  judge  is  within,  and  cannot  be  escaped ;  that  judge  will  charge  the  sinner 
with  hating  him  who  was  and  is  supremely  worthy  to  be  loved,  and  the  accusation 
is  self-evidencing  and  brings  its  curse.  3.  The  judgment  of  the  Lord  may  taiTy, 
but  it  will  surely  come.  The  Lord  himself  is  at  hand,  to  deliver  those  who  love 
him,  but  to  execute  a  righteous  sentence  upon  the  nnbelieving,  the  unloving,  the 
onspirituaL— T. 

Vers.  1—4:. — Coiuxming  the  collection.  L  Thk  necessitt  of  erviNa.  1.  JFVw 
maintenance  of  pMic  tvorship  in  our  own  community.  Churches  should  aim  at  self- 
support.  Assuredly  there  should  be  no  tmwillingness  to  give  where  we  ourselves  reap 
the  advantage.  And  often  the  return,  being  spiritual,  infinitely  exceeds  all  that  we 
part  with.  2.  For  varioui  works  which  have  /or  their  object  the  dissemination  of  the 
truth  or  the  rdief  of  the  needy.  Gospel  at  home  is  good,  but  we  must  see  that  the 
gospel  is  sent  abroad.  There  are  many  societies  aiming  to  reach  the  heathen  in  this  laud 
and  In  other  lands ;  ready  support  should  be  rendered.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  etc. 
(Matt,  xxviii.  19).  Belief  of  the  destitute  is  a  bounden  duty  of  the  Christian.  Here  w« 
have  a  beautiful  example.  The  apostle  is  no  doubt  referring  to  the  distressed  believers 
in  Jerusalem  and  Judsa  (Bom.  xv,  26).  The  largely  Gentile  Church  is  incited  to  aid 
the  lately  Jewish.  This  will  form  a  new  bond,  and  do  the  double  work  of  relieving 
suffering  and  breaking  down  prejudice.  Our  charity  should  know  no  limits  but  the  limits 
of  need  and  ability.  3.  For  givers  individually.  Christians  who  do  not  ^ve  do  not 
grow.  The  cultivation  of  charity  is  the  cultivation,  not  of  one  grace,  but  of  many.  It 
is  usual  to  plead  the  needs  of  others ;  ourpersonai  need  of  giving  is  a  strong  argument. 
Farting  with  some  ballast  prospers  our  voyage,  and,  instead  of  imperilling  our  safety, 
increases  it.  Bight  giving  is  great  gaining.  We  cannot  be  like  Christ  unless  we  give. 
He  "  gave  himself  for  us."  4.  For  the  Church.  That  Church  which  is  not  a  ^ving 
Church  will  not  be  a  prospering  Church.  A  spirit  of  charity  in  a  religious  community 
exerdses  a  gracious  influence  upon  everything  that  that  community  attempts,  and  ic 
ever  prompting  fresh  efibrts.  Church  charity  should  be  wid&  There  is  such  a  thing  as 
Church  selfishness.  A  Church  may  bestow  too  much  thought  upon  itself,  ffigh 
shutting-in  walla  are  not  good  for  gardens.  6.  For  the  glory  of  Chd.  Giving  manifests 
the  power  of  the  Christian  faith.  It  is  a  very  powerful  testimony  in  the  eyes  of  the 
world.  The  world  is  apt  to  scofT  at  profession,  even  at  worship ;  but  this  practical 
outcome  often  startles,  and  has  sometimes  staggered,  the  world.  It  is  a  great  instru- 
ment of  conversion.  Moreover,  every  gift  should  be  a  direct  offering  to  God.  We 
must  see  in  the  hand  of  the  needy  the  treasury  of  the  Lord.  The  Master  often  mts  over 
against  that  treasury. 

IL  Thi  Aroeroua  BneoisnoxB.  1.  Betting  apart  each  toeek.  This  la  very  con- 
venient for  many.  It  also  etmutt  frequent  and  regular  giving.  Further,  and  what 
is  of  fitf  more  importance  than  is  generally  thought,  it  faeSi&tes  our  knowing  how 
iimkA  we  give.  Those  who  do  not  know  how  much  they  give  think  they  give  three 
time*  a*  much  as  they  really  do.  Perhaps  the  most  certam  way  to  increase  our  giving 
would  be  to  keep  a  strict  account  of  how  little  we  give  I  Setting  apart  each  week 
would  provide  us  with  a  store  from  which  we  could  draw  as  necessity  arose.  We  are 
ready  for  the  collection  in  the  sanctuary  when  we  have  first  made  the  collection  in 
the  home.  2.  On  the  first  day  of  the  week.  How  appropriate  a  time  I  Aaaociated 
with  so  many  hallowed  memories,  and  pre-eminently  with  the  eompletioik  by  hit 
resurrection  of  Christ s  great  gift  to  us.  His  charity  should  be  the  inspirer  of  ooia.  A 
beautiful  act  for  a  holy  day.  How  could  we  refuse  to  give  then,  or  how  could  we 
^ve  grudgingly  t  3.  The  amount  of  gift  to  be  determined  by  the  measure  of  prosperity. 
AU  gffts  are  not  expected  to  be  of  the  same  value.  "  She  hath  done  what  she  could  * 
waa  the  Master's  gracious  expression  of  approval.  Note :  Onr  prosperity  is  of  Qod. 
&  gives  that  we  may  give.    If  we  take  all  to  onrselves,  we  are  robbers,  not  Uhriitiana 


atXTLl— 24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COBINTHIAN&  66t 

And  in  w  far  as  we  do  not  give  what  we  know  be  would  have  us  to,  we  are  defmudm 
of  Qod.  He  trutU  ua  with  so  much :  let  ua  see  that  we  do  not  abuse  the  tnub 
Stewards  are  we,  not  proprietors.  Ghrist's  commendation  of  the  widow's  two  mites  is 
•bused  by  some  welUto-do  folks;  they  always  aim  to  give  that  amount.  Alas!  when 
the  chill  of  adversity  comes  to  many  men  it  kills  at  once  all  offerings  to  the  Lord-« 
ntrenchmeat  "  begins  at  the  house  of  God  " — aud  when  prosperity  comes  they  give  but 
the  old  sum,  which  in  the  altered  circumstances  is  a  beggarly  and  disgraceful  offering. 

4.  AU  to  give.  AU  have  received.  The  widow  gave  "  all  her  living."  None  are  too 
poor  to  give  something.  Every  Christian  should  be  a  giving  Christian ;  it  is  a  part  of 
his  Christianity.  The  gift  of  a  Church  is  specially  valuable  when  it  is  a  gift  of  all  its 
members.  And  right  giving  is  such  a  joy,  that  when  the  most  destitute  part  with 
something  for  Christ's  sake  they  do  not  lose  wm>,  but  gain.    When  we  give  we  get 

5.  CKving  u  to  be  voluntary.  It  is  to  be  giving.  The  apostle  does  not  propose  to 
make  an  assessment.  The  matter  is  left  between  the  individual  and  his  God.  Giving 
ia  valuable  only  as  it  springs  from  the  heart.  Where  compulsion  (and  there  are  many 
sorts)  begins,  there  charity  ends.  The  beauty  of  Christ's  offering  was  that  it  was 
▼oluntary.    No  man  took  his  life  from  him ;  he  laid  it  down  of  himself. 

UL  Gifts  should  be  oasefullt  administered.  Charity  is  greatly  checked  if 
nupicion  arises  that  gifts  do  not  reach  their  intended  destination.  The  apostle  uses 
great  care  here.  He  arranges  that  those  who  give  should  elect  custodians  of  their  gifts, 
who  might  bear  the  offering  to  Judsaa.  The  loose  way  in  which  some  Churches 
manage  their  finances  tends  to  lessen  liberality.  A  Church  should  keep  iti  account* 
more  carefully  than  a  bank  I  The  administration  of  a  Church's  gifts  is  no  mean  work. 
The  apostle  offers  to  take  part  in  it,  if  this  shall  seem  well.  Not  alone — lest  some 
should  take  opportunity  to  slander :  ministers  cannot  be  too  careful  in  money  matters. 
But  with  others  he  is  willing  even  to  journey  to  Jerusalem. — H. 

Vers.  6 — 9.— Words  to  those  who  travel.  I.  We  should  always  be  on  oub  Masteb's 
BUSINESS.  This  we  may  be  if  we  are  engaged  in  "  secular  "  affiiirs.  Every  part  of  life 
Is  to  be  consecrated  to  God.  A  Christian  is  a  Christian  always,  and  a  servant  always. 
Everything  may  be  consecrated.  Whether  we  eat  or  drink,  or  whatever  we  do,  we  may 
do  all  to  the  glory  of  GK>d.  Secular  engagements  become  truly  sacred  if  in  them  (1) 
we  act  Justly ;  (2)  seek  to  please  God ;  (3)  avoid  injury  to  our  fellows ;  (4)  endeavour  to 
display  a  Christian  spirit.  To  do  this  as  we  travel,  we  should  (1)  preserve  a  prayerful 
frame  of  mind ;  (2)  watch  vigilantly  for  temptations.  These  are  often  very  numerous 
ftnd  strong  when  we  are  away  from  our  usual  surroundings,  and  not  amongst  those  who 
know  us.  We  shoiid  embrace  every  opportunity  of  doing  good.  Not  only  to  men  in 
things  temporal,  but  also  in  things  spiritual.  At  last  it  will  seem  marvellous  to  some 
that  their  "  charity  "  and  "  love  "  extended  only  to  men's  lower  needs. 

IL  Oub  movements  should  be  ordered  of  the  Lobd.  1.  In  secular  affairs  we 
ehould  seek  the  mind  of  the  Lord,  He  who  can  help  us  in  the  great  can  help  us  in  the 
small.  There  is  nothing  too  insignificant  to  pray  over.  2.  In  sacred  affairs  we  need 
ever  say,  "If  the  Lord  permit."  "D.V."ona  bill  amounts  to  little;  we  need  it  engraved 
on  the  heart.  3.  Those  who,  evangdizing,  pass  from  place  to  place  vrill  do  well  to  study 
the  conduct  t^  their  apostolic  prototype.  (1)  He  did  not  think  a  difficult  post  meant  k 
post  to  be  abandoned  as  speedily  as  possible.  Some  are  all  for  running  away.  They 
are  ever  "  seeking  rest,"  but  they  are  ever  "  finding  none."  There  is  no  "  rest "  out  of 
the  path  of  duty.  (2)  He  was  not  overwhelmed  by  a  little  opposition,  nor  by  much. 
Many  adversaries  being  there  was  a  reason  why  he  should  be  there.  Where  the  enemy 
is  strongest,  there  the  loyal  soldiery  should  be  strongest.  (3)  He  read  in  an  open  door 
the  mind  of  the  Lord  directing  him  to  remain.  He  did  not  read  this  in  (a)  comfort,  (i) 
applause,  (e)  remuneration,  (d)  predilection.  Some  communities  have  attempted  to 
stereotype  the  mind  of  the  Lord  in  a  three  years' pastorate ;  this  looks  more  like  the 
mind  of  man  than  the  mind  of  the  Lord.  Some  divines  can  only  hear  certain  "  calls ' 
of  the  Lord ;  it  is  to  be  feared  that  these  "calls"  are,  after  all,  nothing  more  than  the 
echoes  of  their  own  voices. — H, 

Vers.  13, 14. — A  fivefold  exhortation.    This  the  Corinthians  needed.    It  fitly  oomet 
near  the  conclusion  of  the  Epistle,  summarizing  much  that  has  g  ne  beforei    The 


6G8  THJS  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0EINTHIAN8.    loB.  xtl  1—24. 

Corinthians  tended  towards  false  security,  reliance  npon  gifts  and  teachers ;  M  ths 
apo»tle  saj's,  "Watch  ye."  They  were  wavering  in  adhesion  to  the  gospel  which 
Paul  preached ;  so  he  says,  "  Stand  fast  in  the  faith."  They  were  but  "  babes  "  (ch. 
iii.  1) ;  so  the  apostle  incites  them  to  seek  more  of  the  qualities  of  manhood:  "Quit 
you  like  men."  They  were  enfeebled  by  false  doctrine,  Church  {abuses,  irregularity  of 
Biiritual  life;  so  he  says,  "  Bu  strong."  They  were  more  remarkable  for  jealousy, 
rivalry,  contempt,  pride,  than  for  the  pre-eminent  Christian  grace  ;  so  Paul  says,  "  Let 
all  that  ye  do  be  done  in  love."  Coriuthian  perils  are  our  perils.  Corinthian  failures 
may  be  our  failures — perhaps  aret     Let  ns  heed  the  apostolic  exhortation  to— 

L  Watcbfdlness.  1.  Against  dangeri  from  without.  False  teachers,  bad  examples, 
unholy  influences,  Satanic  attacks.  We  who  are  of  the  day  should' be  awake.  2. 
Against  danger  from  within.  We  often  tempt  ourselves,  often  deceive  ourselves,  often 
injure  ourselves.  Our  greatest  enemy  is  within,  not  without.  It  is  the  traitor  in  the 
camp  who  does  the  mischief.  3.  For  opportunities  of  usefulness.  Our  day  is  short. 
Soon  the  final  account  must  be  rendered.  We  have  many  opportunities,  but  they 
never  wait  for  us.  We  must  watch  for  them,  and  catch  them  as  they  come.  Oppor- 
timities  have  no  resurrection.  4.  For  the  coming  of  Christ.  The  Master  himself 
enjoined  this :  "  What  1  say  unto  you  I  say  unto  all,  Watch  "  (IVIark  xiii.  37). 

II.  Steadfastness.  We  have  to  aftjWe  in  the  faith.  lie  that "  endureth  to  the  end  " 
shall  be  saved..  Lack  of  steadfajtuess  (1)  hinders  our  spiritual  growth ;  (2)  mars  our 
usefulness ;  (3)  imperils  our  salvation ;  (4)  is  a  stumbling-block  to  others ;  (5)  a  great 
ofifence  to  Christ ;  (6)  spoils  our  spiritual  joys. 

III.  Manlikess.  Christians  should  be  robust.  They  are  not  always  to  be  children 
in  the  faith.  They  need  a  manly  temper,  (I)  to  contend  with  difficulties  ;  (2)  to  bear 
up  under  opposition;  (3)  to  endure  temjiorary  defeat.  Christians  should  be  bold  and 
fearless.  Every  Christian  should  be  a  courageous  Christian,  'i'lie  service  in  which  we 
are  ens;aged  is  grand  beyond  conception — the  issues  how  momentous  I  "  Quit  yoa  like 
men  I" 

IV.  Steekoth.  Does  it  seem  strange  that  we  are  commanded  to  be  strong  ?  Bome 
will  say  we  can  only  bo  what  we  are,  and  it  is  worse  than  futile  to  say  to  a  weak  man, 
"  Be  strong."  But  Paul  said,  "  When  I  am  weak  then  am  I  strong."  When  we  are 
bidden  to  be  strong,  then  we  often  feel  most  our  weakness;  but  then  we  go  to  the 
Strong  for  strength.  The  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  can  give  to  ns  a  lionlike  might. 
As  to  means :  if  we  would  be  strong  we  must  (1)  abound  in  prayer  (2)  and  in  work 
— using  all  the  strength  we  have;  (3)  avoid  evil  influences — not  be  more  than  duty 
calls  us  in  pestilential  worldly  atmospheres  ;  (4)  seek  solid  knowledge  of  things  Divine ; 
(6)  strive  against  sin. 

V.  LovB.  Love  should  rule  all  our  thoughts,  purposes,  words,  and  acts.  We  are 
nothing  if  we  are  without  love  (ch.  xiii.).  This  is  the  key  to  the  preceding  exhor- 
tations. If  we  have  a  real  living  love  towards  God  and  man,  it  will  become  easy 
to  live  in  watchfulness;  we  shall  not  want  to  relinquish  our  faith;  our  Christian 
manliness  will  rapidly  develop ;  and  we  shall  be  strong,  for  we  shall  be  like  Ood. 
"Qoi  is  loT«i"  LoTC  U  salt;  it  will  preserve  from  corruption  our  whole  ■piritoal 
life.— H. 

Ver.  16. — Ministering  to  the  saints.  1,  A  tibt  keedful  wobk.  Many  of  Qod'i 
children  are  poor  children.  The  sainta  who  presently  shall  inherit  all  things,  at  present 
•ften  lack  the  necessaries  of  life.  Not  a  |few  of  God's  choicest  servants  are  afflicted, 
and  need  sympathy  and  aid.  Persecution  for  the  faith  should  be  counteracted  as  far 
•I  possible  by  careful  ministration.  In  early  days  imprisoned  saints  were  spcciaUy 
cared  for  by  those  at  liberty,  "  Remember  those  who  are  in  bonds."  In  modern  forms 
of  persecution  aid  is  equally  needful.  Many  need  to  be  "  taken  by  the  hand."  "  Ai 
we  have  therefore  opportunity,  let  ni  do  good  unto  all  men,  especially  unto  them  who 
are  of  the  household  of  faith  "  (GaL  vt  10). 

n,  A  YiKT  BONOUBABLB  AND  BEAnTiFnL  WOBK,  Angel-Uke :  they  are  "  ministering 
spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  "  (Heb,  L  141 
(&rist-like :  "  The  Son  o(  man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister  "  (Matt. 
XX.  28),  At  last  the  Lord  will  say,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the 
leaet  oil  these  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me  "  (Matt,  xxv.  40),    Many  do  Mt 


c*.  XTi.  i— 24.]    TilJS  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTUIANS^  6^ 

rightly  estimate  this  "  high  calling."  True  love  for  the  brethren  (a  sign  of  our  salvation, 
1  John  iii.  14)  will  make  us  diligent  in  this  service. 

III.  A  WORK  WHICH  CAN  BE  EXEBciBED  IN  MAKT  WATS.  Thus  Suited  to  the  abilities 
and  opportunities  of  a  large,  number.  Many  are  idle  in  our  Churches  because  they  can 
find  nothing  to  do.  Let  them  look  in  this  direction.  Visiting  the  sick,  condoling  with 
the  bereaved,  relieving  the  destitute,  cheering  the  depressed,  securing  rest  for  the  over- 
worked, guiding  the  perplexed,  encouraging  despondent  workers,  (ministers,'  sabbath- 
school  teachers,  etc.), — how  many  might  find  a  suitable  sphere  in  such  holy  ministries 
as  these  I 

IV.  A  WORK  WHICH    MERITS  EECOONITION  ON  THE  PART  OF  THE  GhUROH.      Those  who 

engage  actively  in  such  service  as  this  should  be :  1.  Highly  esteemed.  It  is  no  slight 
service  which  they  render.  They  do  much  to  elevate  the  tone  of  the  Church ;  much 
to  preserve  it  in  peace  and  content ;  much  to  stimulate  its  zeal.  2.  Encouraged.  The 
work  is  trying.  Those  who  seek  to  encourage  others  often  need  very  much  encourage- 
ment themselves.  3.  Aided.  This  is  probably  what  the  apostle  means  by  "  Submit 
yourselves  unto  such."  "  As  they  serve  you,  do  you  serve  them."  Above  all,  no 
obstacles  should  be  put  in  their  way. 

V.  A    WORK    VERT    BENEFICIAL   TO   THOSE  WHO    ENOAOB    W   IT.      "They   who    Water 

others  shall  themselves  be  watered."  Here  when  we  give  we  take.  We  grow  rich  by 
bestowing.  Christians  stagnate  because  they  think  of  themselves.  Saints  take  so 
much  care  of  themselves  that  they  become  spiritual  invalids.  We  may  "  sit  under  " 
our  own  ministry  with  great  profit.  A  sure  way  of  getting  to  heaven  is  resolving  that 
some  one  else  shall  get  there.  Labours  for  others  make  us  blind  to  our  own  troubles. 
If  our  ears  are  filled  with  the  cries  of  the  needy,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  hear  the  croak- 
ings  of  sceptics  or  the  evil  prognostications  of  Satan,  True  ministering  to  the  sainta 
is  truest  ministry  to  ourselves. — H. 

Ter.  22. — Thou  who  do  not  love  Christ.  L  Thxbb  are  such.  Alas  I  how  many] 
Not  those  who  have  never  heard  of  him,  but  those  who  have  heard  much  of  him — those 
before  whom  the  great  revelation  of  Christ  has  been  spread  out.  Not  those  who  have 
been  brought  up  under  sceptical  influences,  but  those  who'have  been  trained  in  Christian 
homes.  How  many  of  those  to  whom  Christ  has  been  made  known  as  fully  as  he  can 
be  to  any  who  have  not  received  him,  yet  do  not  love  him  I  This  is  (1)  strange,  (2) 
saddening,  (3)  explicable  only  upon  belief  in  the  extreme  virulence  of  sin, 

II.  Thb  heinousness  of  their  8m.  Consider:  1.  Christ  is  altogether  lovely  and 
lovable.      There  is  nothing  in  him  to  check  love,  but  everything  to  encourage  it. 

2.  He  has  never  done  the  slightest  evil  to  any  man.  3.  He  has  relinquished  heaven 
for  men.  4.  He  has  humbled  himself  to  assume  human  nature  for  men.  6.  He  has 
lived  for  men.  6.  He  has  died  for  men.  7.  He  is  willing  to  redeem  men  from  all 
things  evil,  and  to  ensure  to  them  all  things  good.  Not  to  love  such  a  Being  as  this  is 
the  chief  of  crimes.  No  tale  of  guilt  could  be  sterner,  It  is  a  fearful  revelation  of  the 
"  carnal  heart,"  which  is  enmity  against  Ood  and  Christ,  instead  of  love. 

III.  Their  DOOM.  They  are  "anathema" — accursed.  Their  crime  merits  completest 
condemnation.  1/  they  can  he  guilty  of  this,  they  can  le  guilty  of  anything.  Their 
sentence  is  "  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord ; "  their  h(Hne,  with 
"  the  devil  and  his  angels."  Their  choice  ia  to  be  accursed.  They  choose  the  curse 
rather  than  the  blessing  which  Christ  waits  to  bestow.  They  choose  the  curse  rather 
than  the  One  who  alone  can  deliver  them  from  it.  They  are  now  accursed ;  their 
present  condition  Is  this  condition^  and  their  future  condition  will  be  this  unless  they 
"  turn  to  the  Lord." 

IV.  A  solemn  question — Do  we  mv»  Christ?  1,  Not — ^Do  we  admire  him  T  He 
is  admired  even  hj  atheists,    2.  Not — Do  we  abstain  from  hostility  towards  him? 

3.  Not — Do  we  take  his  name  upon  our  lips,  observe  his  day,  meet  with  his  people  ? 

4.  Not  even — Do  we  work  for  him  ?  5.  But— Has  he  touched  out  heart  ?  Do  we  love 
him  f  Christ  is  the  great  test  applied  to  human  heart*.  The  issue  reveals  eondilion, 
character,  prospect. — H. 

Yen.  1,  tf—7Ju  law  of  Ohrisiian  fiving.  It  If  Interesting  to  note  that  one  ef  the 
lot  and  nuMt  natural  ezprMsloiu  of  the  Ohriitian  spirit  waa  a  oonsiderati  m  of 


670  THE  FIRST  KFISTLK  TO  THE  COKINXHIANS.    [oh.  xvl  1— 24. 

tlic  needi  of  thf  pooler  members  of  the  Ohurch,  and  a  readinesa  to  share  what  good 
things  vere  possessed  with  them.  Of  this  spirit  Barnabas  is  presented  to  us  ■• 
offering  the  hi<;hc8t  example  (Acts  iw,  36).  His  thought  and  feeling  in  this  matter 
had  very  probably  influenced  his  companion  St.  Paul.  We  can  well  understand  that 
the  Jewish  Christians,  dwelling  in  the  holy  city,  would  be  placed  imder  great 
disabilities.  Many  of  them  were  very  poor ;  their  opinions  would  prevent  their 
obtaining  the  ordinary  charities;  perhaps  they  found  it  even  difficult  to  secure 
lamnnerative  labour ;  and,  when  times  of  famine  and  distress  came,  they  would  be  the 
first  to  BufTer.  When  Christianity  was  proclaimed  freely  to  the  Gentiles,  there  was 
this  grave  danger  to  face ;  the  separation  between  Jew  and  Geniile  might  be  kepi 
ap  within  Christianity,  and  the  conception  of  one  Church— 4ne  flock  under  one 
Shepherd — might  fail  to  be  realited.  To  correct  this  tendency,  St.  Paul  sought  to  keep 
up  the  sympathy  of  the  newer  Gentile  with  the  older  Jewish  Church,  and  guided  the 
expression  of  such  sympathy,  letting  it  take  the  form  of  collections  and  money  gifts. 
In  the  passage  now  before  us  the  principles  upon  which  Christian  giving  should  be 
regulated  are  indicated.    They  concern— 

I.  The  claim  of  all  to  a  shabb  nr  Christian  gifts.  Nothing  that  a  man 
possesses  is  his  own.  Money,  talents,  position,  influence,— all  are  Divine  gifts  and 
trusts;  none  are  sent  for  the  man's  sake  alone  who  receives  them.  lie  is  only  mada 
an  agent  for  ministering  God's  good  gifts  to  others.  The  whole  Church  has  its  claim 
to  share  in  whatever  good  things  any  of  its  members  possesses.  It  should  be  impossible 
to  find,  among  Christians,  an  unrelieved  sufferer,  or  a  helpless,  poverty-stricken  beggar. 
We  must  distinguish  between  charity  and  the  meeting  of  the  family  claims  of  our 
brethren  in  the  Lord.  It  is  not  charity,  it  is  duty,  it  is  faithfulness,  that  leads  u» 
to  share  what  is  entrusted  to  us  with  those  who  share  in  the  same  salvation,  and  who 
have  the  same  "  good  hope  through  grace."  We  do  not  speak  of  charity  among 
brothers  and  sisters  of  the  same  family,  and  the  right  view  of  Christian  giving  is  taken 
only  when  the  Christian  Church  is  regarded  as  a  family. 

U,  The  need  for  preparation  bt  previous  stobino.  The  claims  upon  us  only 
como  at  times,  but  they  do  come  at  times  in  forms  quite  beyond  our  meeting,  if  we 
have  made  no  preparations.  And  there  is  the  further  danger  that  when,  through 
circumstances  of  distress,  our  feelings  are  unusually  moved,  we  act  from  impulse,  not 
from  principle.  So  St.  Paul  urges  that  the  separation  of  shares  for  the  needy  brethren 
be  made  regularly,  as  a  matter  of  duty ;  that  a  proportion  of  all  our  acquisitions  be 
regularly  set  aside  and  stored  up  for  due  occasions,  and  that  so  we  keep  our  brethren 
and  their  needs  constantly  in  mind. 

III.  The  time  most  suitable  fob  such  btorino.  "First Jay  of  the  week."  The 
Lord's  day.  The  memorial  day  of  the  Lord's  resurrection ;  which,  we  cannot  doubt, 
had  become  the  Christian  day  for  worship.  When  minds  were  directed  more  especially 
to  Christian  privileges  and  duties,  the  separations  and  storings  would  be  more  liberally 
done,  and  would  be  made  acts  of  worship.  It  seems  probable  that  the  amounts  thua 
regularly  laid  by  were  not  stored  privately,  but  made  offerings  at  public  worship,  and 
stored  by  the  treasurers, 

IV.  The  rule  that  regulates  the  amount  btobed.  Many  have  argued  for  a 
tenth,  but  it  was  not  in  St,  Paul's  way  to  fix  any  limitations  upon  the  free  expression 
of  Christian  feeling.  He  does  not  mean  to  suggest  any  proportion  by  his  law,  "  As 
God  hath  prospered  him."  lieally  he  means,  "Let  your  separation  for  others  be 
according  to  your  sense  of  God's  goodness  to  you."  And  this  he  suggests  because, 
while  the  due  provision  for  the  poor  is  of  grave  importance,  it  is  even  more  important 


the  culture  of  the  true  Christian  spirit.    "  The  liberal  soul  is  made  fat,"'— R.  T, 


Ver.  3,— The  rrJaiions  of  Oentile  to  Jewish  Churcha.  Apart  from  the  historical 
Interest  of  this  subject,  which  was  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  anxiety  to  the  apostle,  it 
may  be  studied  as  illustrating  for  every  age  the  principles  on  which  older  and  younger 
Churches,  richer  and  poorer  Churches,  can  he  brought  into  practical  union  and  fellow- 
shin.    Then  the  topic  for  consideration  hecomes  this — How  can  the  idea  of  the 


«■.  xif.  l—U.]    TUK  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0R1NTUIAN8.  671 

Ohriitian  brotherhood  be  applied  to  Churches?  Ai  introductory  it  may  be  well  to 
flhow,  concerning  the  duty  of  brotherliness,  (I)  its  ground ;  (2)  its  character ;  (3)  its 
examples ;  (4)  its  natural  forms  of  expression.  These  may  be  treated  in  connection 
with  the  personal  and  individual  relationships  of  life,  and  also  in  connection  with  the 
social  and  Church  relationships.  Then  in  practical  detail,  varying  according  to  the 
sentiment*  and  associations  of  the  Christian  bodies  to  which  we  may  belong,  we  may 
aonsider — 

I.  Bbothsbuness  ab  expressed  to  equal  GBTmoaxB,  In  this  case  the  brotherliness 
will  take  such  forms  as :  1.  Fellowship  in  worshjp.  2.  Mutual  aid  in  enterprise  and 
work.  3.  Due  watchfulness  of  each  other's  honour  and  spiritual  health.  4.  Anxious 
repression  of  all  jealousies  of.eaclkotlierV^uccesses.  5.  Manifestations  of  sympathy  in 
times  of  Church  depression  or  sorrow.  Among  equal  Churches  there  is  little  oppor- 
tunity for  the  charity  of  material  help. 

II.  Brotherliness  expressed  to  inferior  or  dependent  Churcubb.  Besides 
those  already  dealt  with,  there  should  be  these  further  expre^isions.  1.  Careful  con- 
servation Of  the  rights  of  the  dependent  Church.  2.  Iteadiness  to  give  material  and 
moral  help,  as  occasion  demands.  3.  Avoidance  of  sutierior  airs  or  assumption!  of 
authority.  4.  Use  of  all  opportunities  that  may  be  ofiered  for  the  manifestation  of 
•ympatby.  While  it  is  true  that  times  of  calamity  find  Bjiecial  occasions  for  brother- 
liness, it  is  also  true  that  those  in  any  way  cleiiendent  on  us  would  not  have  us  wait  for 
the  trial-times.  True  Christian  brotherhooil  wants  to  find  utterance  for  itself  every 
day,  and  to  fill  all  the  ordinary  associations  of  life  with  its  helpful  spirit. — R.  T. 

Ver.  9. — 7%e  mitsion  of  our  hindrances.  "  There  are  many  adversaries."  In  lifia  we 
always  find  that  the  "open  door"  and  the  "many  hinderers"  go  together.  Very 
seldom  can  we  have  the  one  without  the  other.  For  the  use  of  the  term  "door  "  as  a 
figure  for  "  Opportunity,"  see  Acts  xiv.  27 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  12 ;  Col,  iv.  3.  For  the  narrative 
vhich  illustrates  the  expression  here  used,  see  Acts  xix.  19,  20.  Of  hindrances  affecting 
St.  Paul,  we  may  think  of  (1)  his  owi^  frail  health  ;  (2)  the  difficulties  and  dangers  of 
travelling ;  (3)  the  wilfulness  sometimes  Shown  by  his  travelling  companions ;  (4)  the 
sudden  and  unexpected  claims  of  the  Churches  altering  his  plans;  (6)  the  persistent 
and  watohfUl  opposition  of  his  Jenrish  enemies ;  and  we  may  even  add  (6)  the  some- 
times strange  and  trying  limitations  put  by  the  guiding  Spirit,  as  in  Acta  xvi.  6,  7. 
That  which  was  so  evidently  true  of  St.  Paul  is  the  common  e:r-perience  of  Ood's  ser- 
vants;  and  we  must  accept  the  conditions,  and  win  virtue  out  of  the  very  limitations. 

I,  God's  providence  is  ever  MASma  open  doors  fob  ns.  This  is  true  in  educational 
life,  and  in  business  life.  Every  man  sooner  or  later  gets  his  turn  and  opportunity. 
But  we  observe  how  true  it  is  l>oth  of  personal  Christian  life  and  of  Church  life.  6od 
sets  before  us  open  doors,  shows  us  spheres  of  service  which  we  may  occupy.  And 
such  we  enter  upon  with  great  hopes  and  expectations,  assuming  that  if  Providence  has 
80  manifestly  opened  the  door,  the  path  within  must  be  straight  and  plain  and  eaay. 
This  we  find  is  not  always  true ;  for — 

II.  Qod'b  pbotidbnoe  is  also  iter  making  aiNDBAHOBS.  1.  Often  health  fkils  at 
the  moment  of  opportunity.  2.  Sometimes  the  will  to  do  it  &des  when  the  opportunity 
for  doing  appears.  3.  Events  as  providential  seem  to  block  the  path  just  inside  the 
open  door.  4.  The  work  involves  labour  which  seriously  taxes  energy  and  faith.  5.  Too 
oh  en  we  faint  and  fail,  and  prove  the  greatest  hinderers  of  our  work.  We  most  fiilly 
accept  the  fact  that,  here  on  earth,  Q6&  has  put  open  doors  and  hindrances  togeth«r, 
that  the  combination  might  nurture  and  develop  the  noblest  qualities  ia  hii  Hivaata. 
-P^  T. 

Ver.  14.— 2%e  limitation  of  Me  rabusler  virtveB.  "  Let  all  your  things  be  lom  with 
charity.*  The  oonneotion  in  which  this  sentence  stands  suggests  the  topie.  The 
apostle  had  been  calling  the  Christians  at  Corinth  to  manliness,  strong  ana  vigorau 
motion,  watohfulness,  and  firm  holding  Of  the  fidth.  He  knew  well  how  rmdily  firmiMM 
could  become  stubbornness,  and  strength  roughness.  The  strong  may  forget  the  rights 
of  the  weaker  brethren,  and  the  manfly  may  fail  to  realize  that  full  manliness  which 
includea  womanly  tenderness  and  gentleness.  Therefore,  in  an  all-suL'^extive  sentence, 
he  wyi,  "Temper  the  whole  •!  your  relatmnii  »iili  charity,  heavenly  Uivina  charity,'' 


672  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.       [oh.  xit.  1— 2i 

which '>  hopcth  all  things,  endareth  all  things,  and  thinketh  no  evil."  Chrysostom'i 
note  on  these  verses  brings  out  a  somewhat  diflerent  association.  It  is  as  follows: — 
"  Now  in  saying  these  things,  he  seems,  indeed,  to  advise ;  but  he  is  reprimanding  them 
as  indolent.  Wherefore  he  saith,  Watch,  as  though  they  slept ;  stand,  as  though  they 
were  roclsing  to  and  fro ;  quit  you  like  men,  as  though  they  were  playing  the  coward ; 
let  cUl  your  things  be  done  vrith  charity,  as  though  they  were  in  dissensions.  And  the 
first  caution  refers  to  the  deceivers,  viz.  watch,  stand;  the  next  to  those  who  plot 
against  us,  quit  you  like  men;  the  third  to  those  who  make  parties  and  endeavour  to 
distract,  let  all  your  things  be  done  with  charity,  which  thing  is  the  bond  of  perfect- 
ness,  and  the  root  and  fountain  of  all  blessings."  In  the  teaching  both  of  our  Lord 
and  of  his  apostles,  the  passive  and  gentle  praces  were  so  constantly  commended  that 
the  enemies  of  Christianity  might  t-asily,  and  with  some  show  of  reason,  say  that  it  was 
a  weak,  unmanly  thing,  with  yielding  and  patiently  enduring  and  quietly  waiting,  as 
its  chief  and  characteristic  virtues,  'i'herefore  St.  Paul  makes  so  much  of  his  point, 
that  Christianity  was  the  only  force  that  could  really  and  harmoniously  culture  the 
full  manhood.  Only  this  is  true — the  supreme  grace  of  Christianity  is  fewe,  charity, 
and  it  must  tone  and  qualify  and  direct  all  other  graces,  all  exprebiona  of  character 
in  action.    Consider — 

I.  The  tkndenoy  or  huian  hatukb  to  oorritpt  kvebythino.  All  the  good  things 
men  may  possess  or  attain  are  in  constant  peril  of  running  over  into  extremes  and 
exaggerations.  Observe  two  points.  1.  A  man's  strong  side  becomes  inspired  by  selfr 
will,  and  spoiled.  2.  Some  sides  are  unduly  cultured  by  expression,  and  the  whole 
character  is  put  out  of  harmony  and  fair  balance.  Self-reliance,  which  has  a  small 
place  in  every  good  character,  becomes  corrupted  into  self-conceit;  and  so  of  other 
features  of  character. 

II.  How  FAR  18  THIS  HtJMAN-HATtTRE   rOROB  KEPT  IN   THE   REOENERATK?      It   might 

seem  that  St.  Paul's  counsel  only  suited  the  worldly,  and  was  hardly  needed  by  the 
Christian.  But  we  have  to  accept  the  fact,  which  both  observation  and  experience 
attest,  that  the  renewal  of  the  principle  on  which  our  life  is  conducted  does  not  involve 
an  immediate  deliverance  from  the  ordinary  deteriorating  influences  which  affect  men. 
Christian  men's  very  graces  may  become  so  exaggerated  as  to  be  really  vices.  Strong- 
willed  men  may  "  love  to  have  the  pre-eminence,''  and  be  masterful  and  inconsiderata 
The  Christian  Ufe  in  a  man  ought  to  hold  the  evil  tendency  in  strong  bonds,  but  w4 
cannot  get  free  from  the  evil  influence  while  we  dwell  in  a  body  and  are  surrounded 
by  earthly  scenes. 

III.  How  DOES  THK  Ohbibtiar  SPIRIT  AFFECT  THIS  EVIL  ?  Apply  especially  to  the 
robuster  virtues.  Manliness  is  liable  to  become  masterfulness.  Those  whs  can  watch 
eome  to  despise  the  weak  ones  who  must  sleep.  The  strong  try  to  force  the  frail  to  go 
at  their  pace,  and  easily  quarrel  with  them  when  they  cannot  Now,  the  Christian 
^ilrlt  proposes  one  effective  triump%«ver  all  these  eyils.  'i'one  all  your  life  and  rela- 
ttona  with  charity,  which  is,  as  treated  in  the  New  Testament,  precisely  (its — consider- 
ation for  othtfrt  rather  than  idf.  All  the  evil  comes  out  of  thinking  of  and  glorifying 
■elf,  and  the  conquest  surely  comes  by  thinking  of  and  glorifying  others :  getting  the 
mind  of  Christ,  who  "  pleased  not  himself." — R.  T. 

Ver.  16.— T*«  natural  right  of  priority.  "  The  firstfrnits  of  Achaia."  We  need 
not  think  of  the  household  of  Stephanas  as  being  actually  the  first  converts  St.  Paul 
made  in  the  Peloponnesus,  as  apparently  another  person  is  spoken  of  in  the  same  terms 
in  Rom.  xvL  5 :  "  Salute  my  well-beloved  Epasnetus,  who  is  the  firstfruits  of  Achaia 
unto  Christ."  The  meaning  need  only  be  that  the  household  of  Stephanas  was  among 
those  brought  to  Christ  at  St.  Panl's  first  missionary  visit.  The  apostle  had  an  affec- 
tionate regard  for  his  first  converts  in  new  spheres,  as  may  be  illustrated  in  the  case  of 
Lydia  at  Philippi.  The  Interest  we  always  feel  in  first  things  can  be  illustrated  by 
way  of  introduction.  1.  Firstborn  children.  2.  First  forms  of  enterprise.  3.  First- 
fruits  of  our  labour,  etc.  Natural  feeling  gives  all  first  things  vrominence ;  and  the 
Old  Testament  history  and  religion  rested  on  the  recognition  of  the  rights  of  the  first- 
born and  the  interest  of  first  things.  They  are  the  key  to  the  life ;  the  strong  impress 
of  the  character.  They  are  like  the  first  proofs  of  an  engraving ;  every  line  is  sharply 
defined  in  them.    They  may  become  the  reproach  of  our  weaker  after-doings,  for  liiey 


,  XTLl— 24.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  673 


■how  what  we  did  actually  attain  once,  and  prove  that  we  couW,  through  life,  have 
done  better,  It  ie,  however,  the  hope  and  promise  of  first  things  on  wbich  we  now 
propose  to  dwell. 

I.  FiBST  THIKOB  ARE  DONE  WITH  INTENSE  FEELING.  Illustrate  (tom  the  youth 
beginning  business  life ;  the  man  entering  on  a  new  undertaking ;  the  missionary  going 
forth  to  his  new  sphere,  etc.  Men  brace  themselves  up  to  deal  with  new  things. 
They  have  no  experience  to  tell  them  what  amount  of  strength  the  new  work  will 
demand,  so  they  are  likely  to  put  too  much  into  it.  A  vague  but  arousing  wonder 
clings  all  about  new  things,  and  imagination  makes  them  bigger  and  better  than  they 
are.  At  first  we  fail  to  estimate  difficulties,  qualifications,  hindrances ;  we  start  out 
like  Israel,  and  expect  to  reach  our  Canaan  quickly :  so  all  our  hearts  go  out  into  our 
first  things.  And  happily  life  is  full  of  them,  esiiecially  early  life,  and  they  exert 
a  most  gracious  influence  on  nt,  for  they  again  and  again  lift  us  out  of  ourselves  and 
above  ourselves. 

II.  First  things  have  a  natural  pre-eminence.  Of  this  the  position  and  rights 
of  the  firstborn  sons  are  but  the  illustration.  First  things  are  felt  to  have  a  repre- 
sentative character ;  they  are  the  natural  leaders  of  aU  that  come  after  them — the 
specimenB  and  examples  of  their  sort.  In  all  the  spheres  of  life  we  give  prominence  to 
beginnings.  When  a  servant  comes  to  a  new  situation,  the  master  or  mistress  watch 
the  first  actions  to  see  "  how  they  will  frame."  When  a  convert  joins  a  Church,  the 
pastor  give  prominence  to  the  first  forms  in  which  Church  responsibilities  are  met. 
Turning  their  thoughts  back  to  their  hopeful  "  first  rtiings,"  the  apostle  reproaches  his 
converts  thus:  "Ye  did  run  well;  who  did  hinder  you?" 

III.  First  thinqs  have  promise  fob  the  following  things.  As  firstfruits  have 
for  harvest.  The  harvest  need  not  be  worse  than  the  specimen  firstfruits,  but  it  may 
be  much  better.  A  man's  fii'st  work  need  not  be  his  maximum  standard,  but  it  ought 
to  be  his  minimum  standard.  A  first  result  may  tell  of  power,  and  power  always  holds 
the  promise  of  what  culture  can  make  it.  Or,  applying  the  point  in  relation  to  our 
text,  cue  convert  made  in  a  new  sphere  of  Christian  labour  holds  the  promise  of  a 
great  ingathering;  as  we  find  at  first  one  star  in  the  darkening  evening  sky,  which  is 
the  "  glorious  prospect  of  millions  more." 

IV.  First  things  keep  prominent  place  in  otm  hemobt.  Illustrate  our  first 
school ;  first  steps  in  business  life;  first  love ;  first  communion ;  first  con  vert,  to  Christ 
by  our  influence ;  first  sickness ;  first  success  in  life,  etc.  The  most  treasured  things 
in  our  memory  are  these  first  things  of  life ;  and,  as  such,  their  moral  mission  is  (1)  to 
aid  us  in  the  review  of  life,  by  fixing  attention  upon  points ;  (2)  to  remind  us  that  the 
n>irit  of  energy  in  which  we  take  things  up  is  the  spirit  in  which  we  should  carry  them 
through ;  and  (3)  to  siiow  us  that  we  need  the  Divine  help  for  "  (latient  continuance 
in-  well-doing,"  as  much  as  we  remember  we  needed  it  for  our  anxious  beginnings.— R.  T. 

Ver.  19.-7^  Church  in  the  house.  This  expression  is  used  concerning  Aquila  and 
Friscilla,  who  had  been  the  apostle's  friends  at  Corinth  (Acts  xviii.  1—3).  A  similar 
reference  is  found  in  Uora.  xvi.  3 — 5 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  19.  At  the  time  of  St  Paul's 
writing  this  Epistle,  Aquila  and  Friscilla  were  with  the  apostle  at  Ephesus,  and  it  is 
probable  that  they  opened  their  house  or  lodging  as  a  place  of  worship  for  the  Christian 
foreigners  or  strangers  who  happened  to  be  visiting  Ephesus.  Some,-bowever,  think 
that  St,  Paul  uses  the  term  "  Church  "  as  equivalent  to  that  of  "  family,"  or  household, 
probably  including  servants,  children,  and  workpeople  connected  with  their  business. 
The  word  "  ChurcO  "  appears  to  have  lieen  used  with  some  variety  of  meaning,  the 
associations  of  the  term  only  gradually  becoming  settled  into  those  with  which  we  are 
familiar.  The  first  suggestion  of  the  word  is  a  gathering  or  assembly.  But  this 
implied  some  purpose  or  design  for  which  people  met  together.  It  might  be  a  family 
object,  or  a  political,  or  a  social,  or  a  religious  object.  Any  assembly  called  for  a  pur- 
pose could  be  properly  spoken  of  as  a  *'  Church."  We  know  that  it  was  applied  to  the 
political  meetings  of  the  Greeks ;  and  it  may  also  have  been  used  for  the  synagogue 
meetings  of  the  Jews,  for  these  must  be  the  "  Church  "  to  which  our  Lord  referred, 
when  he  required  his  disciples  to  tell  theu-  disputes,  or  injuries  from  their  fellows,  t* 
the  *  Church."  We  need  to  be  on  our  guard  against  forcing  words  to  l>ear  their  modem 
•oclewastical  meaninp  when  we  find  tnem  employed  in  the  New  TaatamRnt.    The 


674  THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,    [ch.  iTt  1-^24 

■imple  historical  fact  is  that  persons  lent  their  rooms  or  their  houses  for  the  Christian 
congregations  to  worship  in,  and  so  the  term  "  Church  "  is  first  used  for  the  Christian 
friends  wlio  met  for  worship  in  any  place.  It  subsequently  became  used  for  (I)  th« 
building  in  which  the  friends  met ;  and  (2)  for  the  entire  body  of  persons  who  thought 
alike  and  worshipped  alike.  The  "  Church  "  became  the  "  body  of  Christ."  In  tha 
treatment  of  this  subject  we  only  give  suggeslive  lines  along  which  thought  and 
illustration  may  run,  because  the  associations  of  different  Christian  bodies  with  the 
term  "  Church  "  now  differ  so  greatly  that  detailed  treatment  would  involve  the  intro- 
duction of  disputable  points. 

I.  Thb  simplest  conception  or  a  Chdbch.  It  is  a  meeting  or  assembly.  Ai  such 
it  can  only  be  applied  to  an  organized  body  or  to  a  material  building  by  a  figurative 
use  of  the  term.  No  ideas  of  size,  quantity,  or  number  seem  necessary  to  its  realization. 
Two  or  three  agreeing  to  meet  for  worship- or  work  may  properly  be  called  a  Church. 

IL  Its  close  association  with  a  home.  The  "  Chnrch  in  the  house  "  is  here  spoken 
of.  It  is  interesti^  to  note  the  historical  fact  that  the  Christian  assemblies  first 
sanctified  homes,  'fhty  did  not  need  at  first  to  find  any  architectural  expression,  or  to 
fix  architectuisl  associations,  or  to  use  architectural  aids.  Home  life  found  a  suffident 
spbere. 

IlL  Itb  furdaiibiital  featubes.  Beally  only  this — family  religion  extended  to 
embrace  the  family  friends.  However  the  growth  of  the  Church  may  have  overshaded 
its  first  idea,  we  must  admit  that  it  began  with  family  worship,  and  developed  on  the 
lines  of  household  religious  requirements,  not  presuming  at  first  to  affect  either  the 
synagogue  or  the  temple  demands.  This  family  origin  of  the  Christian  Church  needs 
to  be  more  fuUy  studied. 

rV.  The  lines  or  m  fbobabli  DEVBU>nu»T.  These  were  fixed  by  (1)  increase  oi 
Dsmbers ;  (2)  growth  of  wealth,  bringing  with  it  artistic  sentiment  and  desires ;  (3) 
securing  of  freedom  from  persecution,  and  admission  of  citizen  rights  and  liberties ; 
(4)  rise  of  a  distinction  between  priesthood  and  Inity,  and  the  consequent  development 
of  a  ritual  in  which  the  distinct  priesthood  could  he  employed.  Impress  in  what  sense 
the  older  idea  of  a  "  Chnrch  in  the  house  "  can  even  now  be  maintained.— R.  T. 

Ver.  22.—Th«  Christian  anathema.  "  Let  him  be  Anathema  Maran-atha."  These 
words  have  no  very  evident  ccomection.  Anathema  means  "  accursed."  Jfaran-atAa 
appears  to  mean,  "  The  Lord  is  at  hand."  It  can  only  be  regarded  as  an  exclamation. 
On  it  see  the  Expository  portion  of  the  Commentary.  "  Anathema  is  the  Greek  tem 
representing  the  Hebrew  cherem,  or  devoted  to  destruction,  and  indicates  the  excom> 
municatiou  practised  in  the  Christian  Church.  The  early  Christians  exercised  discipline 
in  offending  members  in  lesser  or  greater  forms.  The  greater  is  called  Anathema, 
They  regarded  themselves  as  distinctly  warranted  in  cutting  off  members  from  theii 
body  by  our  Lord's  words  (Matt,  xviii.  17) ;  and  in  using  fur  such  excision  the  term 
'  Anathema,'  they  appealed  to  Paul's  employment  of  the  word  in  Gal.  i.  8.  They  regarded 
the  anathema  as  cutting  off  a  man  from  the  way  of  salvation ;  so  that  unless  he  received 
the  grace  of  repentance  he  would  certainly  perish.  The  word  is  uniformly  used  in  the 
Septuagint  Version  as  the  equivalent  of  cherem ;  and  it  seems  reasonable  to  suppose 
(hat  where  it  occurs  in  the  New  Testament  Scriptures  it  is  to  be  understood  in  the 
deeper  sense  as  relating  to  the  spiritual  condition,  and  not  merely  to  exclusion  from 
Church  privileges."  Mudem  anathematizing  is  chiefly  illustrated  by  the  acts  of  ib» 
Roman  Catholic  Church ;  the  sentiment  of  modern  life  is  unfavourable  to  the  exercise 
of  Church  discipline  in  any  of  the  Protestant  communities. 

I.  The  parties  St.  Paul  addressed.  The  Church  at  Corinth  ;  regarded  as  a  oom- 
pany  who  made  profession  of  love  to  Christ,  and  pledged  themselves  to  live  in  accord- 
ance with  Christ's  will  and  example.  Those  who  did  not  love  Christ,  or  foiled  to 
realize  the  Christly  spirit  and  purity,  were  not  merely  inconsistent — they  were  unfaith- 
ful and  unworthy ;  they  were  even  exerting  a  mischievous  influence,  ••  do  dead  fliea 
in  pots  of  ointment, 

II.  Tub  condition  in  which  bomb  professed  uehbebs  hiqht  bx  rouim.  A  eondittoa 
involving  hypocrisy,  the  sin  against  which  our  Lord  spoke  most  severely.  So  impo^ 
■ible  of  rectifying  and  correcting,  because  so  often  connected  with  self-deception.  Snow 
how  such  •  condition  can  be  tested  and  discovered.    The  great  test  is  the  life,  tha 


^li.xvLl— S!4.J    'I'HK  FlltST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  CORINTUlANa  67« 

fjractical  conduct.  The  man  who  has  lost  the  ruling  motive  of  the  "constraining  Iotb 
of  Christ,"  will  soon  tone  his  conduct  and  relalions  with  mere  self-pleasing,  and  there 
will  be  hrst  the  plcasural)le,  then  the  questionable,  and  only  too  poisibly  theae  will 
iead  on  to  the  immoral,  as  in  the  case  referred  to  at  Corinth. 

111.  The  treatment  which  unworthy  members  should  keceivk.  Not  excision,  m 
«  were  act  of  jud;^ment ;  this  man  can  have  no  right  to  do  to  his  fuUows.  Bui  excisioa 
M  a  matter  of  tender  regard  for  the  soul  of  the  sinner;  and  as  a  discijjline  designed  to 
effect  his  rfstoration.  Fiual  removal  from  Christian  fellowship  no  Cliristian  Church 
has  power  to  ai  range.  Temporary  lemoval  may  be  the  best  and  most  hopeful  meani 
jof  arousing  conscience  and  securing  penitence.  St.  Paul  gives  minute  directions  in 
8  Thcss.  iii.  14,  15,  "Note  that  man,  and  have  no  company  with  him,  that  he  may 
Iw  ashnnu'd.  Yot  cunnt  him  not  u  »n  enemy,  but  admonish  him  as  a  ljruLh«r  "  ^f»» 
•]ai>2Cor.  ii.S-7j.-tt.'il 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 

TO 

THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   OP 

PAUL  THE  APOSTLE  TO   THE  CORINTHIANS. 


CIIAPTEB  L 


9 


To  feel,  to  be,  and  to  deeir*  m« 

Exemplary   Gratitude    and    Precious 

Confidence 
The  importance  of  Spiritual  Unity  ... 
The  World's  Greatest  Blessing  and  iU 
Greatest  Evil    ...  ...  m« 

Two  Classes  of  Gospel  Hearers         ... 
Philosophy  and  the  Gospel ... 
Christianity  viewed  in  Three  Aspects 
God    destroying    the    Conventionally 
Great  by  the  Conventionally  Con- 
temptible ... 
The  Union  of  the  Genuine  Disciple 
with  his  Master  ...  ..•      14 

8t  Paul  and  the  Apostleship  •••      15 

Divisions  iu  the  Church      16,  24,  33,  42,  55 
How  St.  Paul  regarded  tlje  Preaching 


10 
10 

11 
12 
13 
IS 


13 


of  the  Gospel 
*■  Called  to  be  Saints  "         m. 
Enrichment  in  Christ         ... 
"The  Fellowship  of  his  Son" 
The  Mission  to  preach         ... 
The  Doctrine  of  the  Cruss  ... 
Glorying  in  the  Lord  ... 

Christian  Salutation 
Christian  Salutation  and  Hehraio     ... 
The  Approach  to  Rebuke    ...  ... 

The  Preaching  of  the  Cross 
The  Humble  Status  of  the  Church  ... 
What  Christ  is  to  the  Believer 
Thanksgiving   on   Account    of    their 

Gifts    ...  •••  •■. 


16 
.      17 

.  18 
■  19 
.  20 
20,26 
.  21 
22,29 
.       53 


23 
26 
27 
28 

31 


THRMS  rAO« 

The  Faithfulness  of  God    m            .^  32 

Man's  Wisdom  and  God's  m<            m.  35 

Christ  tlie  Power  of£lod    ...            m.  38 

Salvation  all  of  God            ...            m.  39 

The  Testimony  of  Christ    ...            •..  41 

"  Christ  Crucified "             ...            ^  43 

The  Patience  of  Hope        ...            m.  45 

Sacred  Partnership              ...            m.  47 

Wisdom  and  Foolishness    ,„           m.  48 

Apostolic  Preaching           ...            m.  49 

All  SufiSciency  in  Christ    ...            ...  50 

Paul's  Claim  to  Ajibstlesliip              ...  51 
What  the  Church  is,  and  what  the 

Church  ought  to  be         ...            ...  52 

The  Father  and  the  Lord   ...            ...  53 

.  Gifts  are  Signs  of  Grace      ...            ...  54 

'  Christ  coming,  and  Christ  here         ...  54 

Tlie  Spirit  of  Faction          ...            ...  55 

The  Unique  Belation  of  Christ  to  the 

Church              ...            ...            ...  56 

Paul's  Commission  from  Christ         ...  56 
The  World's  Foolishness,  and  God's 

Wisdom            ...           ...           ...  87 

Intellectual  Power  and  Moral  Power : 
which  does  God  chiefly  honour  and 

use?    ...            ...            ...            ...  58 

Wliat  Christ  is  to  the  Heart  that  wel- 
comes him         ...            ...            ...  S8 

CHAPTER  IL 

A  Faithful  Picture  of  a  True  Gospel 

Preacher            ...            „.           ...  M 


INDEX. 


TBI^UE  PAGE 

The  Gospel:  its  Description,  Freschen, 

and  Hearers      ...  ...  •■•  62 

Spiritual  Ignorance  the  Cause  of  Im- 
mense Evil  and  the  Occasion  of  Im> 

mense  Good       ...  ...  ...  63 

The  Gospel  School  ...  ...  63 

How  St.  Paul  preached  the  Gospel  ...  64 

Contents  of  the  Berelation...  •..  6S 

Natural  Man  and  Spiritual  Man  66,  91 

None  but  Christ  Crucified  ...  m.  67 

Spiritual  Power    ...  .m  m.  68 

The  Divine  Mystery  ...  ...  69 

"The  Lord  of  Glory"         69 

The  Revelation  of  Things  Unseen  and 

U'-iicCtrd  ...  ...  ...  70 

'The  Mind  of  Christ"       71 

Pauline  Preaching  ,m  ...  71 

True  Wisdom       ...  m.  73,84 

Paul  the  Model  Preacher  m.  m.  73 

Spiritual  Wisdom...  ...  m.  76 

The  Holy  Spirit  as  the  Bereakr      ...  78 

The  Wisilom  of  God  in  a  Mystery    ...  79 

The  Bevelation  of  the  Things  of  Ood  80 

The  Judging  Faculty         ...  ...  81 

The  Great  Theme  ...  ...  83 

The  Subject  of  the  Pauline  Ministry  85 
Personal     Weakness    and    Spiritual 

Strength        ^  ...  ...  ...  86 

Who  are  the  Perfect?         ...  ...  87 

What  would  have  prevented  Christ's 

Crucifixion        ...         ^  ...  ...  88 

The  Surprising  Freshness  of  the  New 

Dispensation     ...  ...  »  89 

Speech  in  the  Power  of  the  Spirit    ...  80 


CHAPTEB  in. 

Befloctions  for  Churchea    mt           •••  96 

God  a  Husbandman            ...            m.  96 

The  True  Foundation  of  Character  ...  97 

Humanity  the  Temple  of  God          ...  98 

Worldly  Wisdom                  98 

A  Call  to  the  Utmost  Expansivencss 

in  Religious  Sympathy  ...           ...  99 

Spiritual  Condition  of  the  Corinthian 

Partisans  characterized   ...            m.  100 

St.  Paul's  View  of  the  Ministry        m.  101 

Workmen  and  their  Works...            «.  102 

Believers  as  the  Temple  of  God       „,  103 

Spiritual  Hubbandry  and  Growth     ...  105 

God's  Fellow-Workera       ...           ...  105 

The  One  Foundation          m.            106,  122 


THE^tl  E  PAai 

The  Test  of  Fire 107,123 

"  The  Temple  of  God"       ...    107,  113,  118 

"All  Things  are  yours" 108 

Carnal  Christians...            ...  ...  109 

Man's  Work  and  God's       ...  110,  127 

The  Great  Foundation       ...  ...  Ill 

Christian  Work  and  its  Testing  ...  112 

The  Believer's  Possessions...  114,  125 

Ciiristian  Teachers  and  their  Work ...  IIS 
Tlie  Foundation  and  the  Saperstruo- 

ture     ...            ...            ...  ...  117 

The  Way  to  Wisdom          ...  ...  119 

The  Christian's  Heritage    ...  ...  119 

"God's  Husbandry"          ...  m.  121 

Tlie  New  Testament  Temple  ...  124 

The  Carnal  Mind ...           ...  ».  126 

Foundations  and  Buildings  m.  127 

Final  Testings  of  our  Life- Work  ,„  128 

The  Church  a  Temple         ...  ».  130 

The  Cure  for  the  Party  Spirit  •»  191 

OHAPTEB  rV. 

A  True   and   a    False   Estimate  tf 

Genuine  Ministers  of  the  Gospel  ...  137 

Apostolic  Treatment  of  Vanity  ...  138 
Man  an  Object  of  Angelio  Obserra- 

tion     ...           ...           ...  ...  139 

Paul's   Treatment   of  Self-Cono«ited 

Teachers           ...           ...  ...  1S9 

Spiritual  Paternity  ...  140, 153 

Six  Subjects  worth  Beflection  ...  141 

Ministers  as  Stewards         ...  142, 159 

A  Vivid  Contrast ...           ».  m.  143 

Warnings  of  Tendemesa     ...  m.  144 

Spiritual  Stewardship         ...  ...  145 

Judgment,  Human  and  Divine  146, 150 

All  is  of  Grace     ...           ...  ...  147 

A  Spectacle          ...           ».  m.  147 

Children,  Tutors,  and  Fathers  m.  148 

The  Power  of  the  Kingdom  n.  149 

» Ministers  of  Christ "        ^  150,  154 

Our  Indebtedness  to  God   m»  ...  151 

Irony  in  Beligion               ...  ...  152 

The  Best  and  Most  Useful  ofiien  the 

Most  A£31cted  ...           ...  m.  152 

Against  Self-Conceit          ...  m.  154 

The  Father  and  his  Childrea  m.  153 

Fiiithful  Stewardship         ...  ,„  157 

Not  in  Word,  but  in  Power...  ...  158 

The  Kingdom  is  Power      ...  ...  158 

A  Threefold  Judgment  of  the  CI  ristian 

Teacher             ^            „.  m.  161 


INDEX. 


THEHi  rxan 
DifferenceB  according  to   Grace   re- 
ceived...          ...            ...            ..•  161 

Suffering  for  Others  a  Proof  of  Interest 

in  their  Welfare              162 

ImitaturB  of  Men  ,M           »•           •••  163 

Speech  and  Power              ..i           •••  161 

Adaptation  the  Teacher's  Power      •••  165 

CHAPTER  V. 

The  Socially  Immoral  in  Churolies  ...     169 
The  True  Church  a  Feast  ...  ...     170' 

Excision  of  a  Flagrant  Offender  from 

the  Church        171 

Siipiilementary  Views  and   Explana- 
tions   ...  ...  •••  •••    173 

Impurity  in  the  Church      ...  •••    174 

"Absent  in   Body,    liut   Present   in 

Spirit"  176 

"Purge  out  ihe  Old  Leaven"  ...     1T6 

»  Chvist  our  Passover"        ...    177,  180,  184 
The  Cliristian  Festival        ...  ...     178 

The  Limits  of  Fellowship  ...  ...     178 

Church  Discipline  ...  179, 182 

UtBverse  with  the  Ungodly  ...     181 

The  Christian  Life  a  Paschal  Feast  ...     183 
The  Intercourse  of  Christians  with  the 

World 18* 

The  Passover  and  the  Lord's  Supper       185 
Eight      Feeling       towards      Erring 
Brethren  ...  ...  ...     186 

The  very  Sufferings  of  Cliristian  Sin- 
ners may  be  overruled  unto  Sancti- 
fying ...  ...  •••  •••     188 

The  Lesson  of  the  Leaven  ...  ...    188 

The  Christian  Church  as  Unleavened     189 
Christian  Fellowship  a  Passover  Feast    190 
Keeping  the  Christian  Feast  of  the 
Unleavened      ...  ...  .•■    191 

The    Christian   Law  of   Association 
with  Evil  •■•  M.  •••    191 

CHAPTER  VL 

The  Ideal  Church  a  Tribunal  m.    195 

Genuine  Reformation  ...  ...     196 

Christianity  in  Relation  in  the  Body...     197 
Civil  Relations  and  Church  Member- 
ship;   Litigation  before    Heathen 
Gourta...  ...  ..•  •••    198 

The  Human  Body  and  its  Relation  to 
Cliriit...  ...  •»  •••    ^^ 


THFIMR  rAOl 

Litigntion ;   or.  How  shall  Cliristians 
Ectlle    their    Differences  and    Dis- 
putes? ...  ...  ...  202 

Past,  Present,  and  Future  ...  m.  20  '■ 

The  Sanctity  of  tiie  U  lily 201 

Christ  and  his  People  lue  One  .m  205 

A  Purchased  Possession     ...  ...  205 

"Glorify  Go.l" 20f! 

Cliristians  and  the  Law  Courts         ...  207 

Our  Inheritance  in  Peril     ...  ...  208 

The  Lawful  and  the  Expedient        209,  221 

Duties  to  the  Body  „,  ...  210 

On  Going  to  Law  ...  ...  211 

Before  and  After:  Two  Pioturee      ...  212 

Abuse  of  Christian  Liberty  ««  212 

Free,  and  yet  not  Free        ...  ...  214 

Divine  Ownership  ...  „.  215 

Great  Sinners  saved  ...  ...  216 

The  Relations  of  Christians  to  Palilio 

Law    ...  ...  ...  ...  218 

The  .Inrlgmont  of  the  Saints  m.  219 

IiiliPi-iting  llio  liingdojn      ...  ...  219 

Reciilliiig  (  race  received    ...  m.  220 

What  we  were  and  what  we  are       ...  221 

The  Temple-Body  and  its  Sanctity  ...  222 

The  Christian  has  no  Personal  Rights  223 


CHAPTER  vn. 

Paul's  Conception  of  Marriage  ...    229 

Abide  in  Christliness,  whatever  the 
Condition  in  Life  ...  ...    230 

Personal  Christianity  for    the  Bond 
and  the  Free     ...  ...  ...    232 

Views  concerning  Marriage :  the  In- 
stitution in  itself  and  in  Relation  to 
Circumstances,     Obligations,     and 
Duties...  ...  ...  ...    233 

Mixed  Marriages  ...  ...  ...    235 

Apostolic  Counsels  fpr  the  Times,  and 
General  Principles  applied  now  •■ 
before ...  ...  •••  •*•    236- 

Christianity  and  Marriage  ...  ...    238 

Distinct  Gifts        ...  ...  ...    239 

Earthly  Relationsliips    sanctified    to 
Heavenly  Uses  ...  ...  ...    249 

Obedience  is  Everything    ...  ...    241 

Freedom  and  Bondage        ...  ...    242 

"The  Time  is  Short"         ...    243,253,261 
Celi1}acy  and  Marriage       ...  243,  288 

Marriage :  its  Nature  and  Duties     ...    245 
Christianity  and  Slaves      ...  m.    24( 


INDEX. 


THKm  rAOX 

Duties  of  Parents  to  Children  M  to 

Marriage            ...            ...  ...  247 

Divorce;  Mixed  Marriages...  ...  249 

Christianity  and  the  Relations  of  Life  251 

Concerning  Virgins  and  Widows  ...  252 

Quietness  of  Spirit              ...  ...  255 

Free  from  Cares    ...            ...  ...  256 

Advice  on  Details  of  Christian  Con- 
duct   ...            ...            ...  ...  258 

The  Marriage  Tie...            ...  ...  259 

Clirislian  BaptisiA                ...  ...  259 

Abiding  as  called                 ...  ...  259 

Hiligion  and  Businesi        ...  ...  2G0 

The  Passing  World             m.  m.  2C2 


CHAPTER  VUL 


A  Twofold  Knowledge 
Aspects  of  Responsibility 
Strength  and  Weakness 

and  Love  ... 

Knowledge  and  Lore 


•M           —    266 
266 

Enowlcdge 

2G8 

270,  280,  281 


lutimaoy  between  Ood  knd  Man      ...  270 

The  Unity  of  God  m  ...  271 

Cliristiau  Liberty ...  m«  •••  272 

The  Brother's  Cltim  »•  i..  273 

■' Sin  againsi  Christ"  ...  ...  273 

The    Two    Guides— Knowledge    and 

Love    ...  ...  ...  ...  274 

"  One  God  .  .  .  One  Lord"  ...  275 

Tlie  Great  Argument  for  Abstinence  276 

On  the  Eating  of  Saciifices  offered  to  ' 

Idols:  Liberty  and  Expediency  ...  277 
Knowing  God,  and  being  known  of 

God 282 

Not  Gods,  but  God  ...  ...  283 

Our  Dealings  with  Weak  Brethren  ...  284 

The  Law  of  Chri»tian  Self-Restraint...  285 

CHAPTER  IX. 

The  Leading  Characteristics  of  a  truly 

Great  Gospel  Minister    ...  ...  291 

Jloral   Identification  with    Others   a 

Qualification  of  the  Evangel         ...  293 

The  Christian  Race  ...    294,  802,  310 

Hell  after  Preaching  ...  ...  294 

How  St.  Paul  regarded  his  Apostle- 
ship  and  its  Rights         ...  ...  295 

Reasons  for  this  Sejf-Denial  ...  297 

Stlf-Denial    urged    in  View   of   the 

Heavenly  Crown  ...  ...  297 


THEMB  PAGl 

Signs  of  Apostleship           m  299,  307 

Rights  asserted  and  foregone  ...    300 

The  Obligation  of  Preaching  ...    300 
Ministerial  Pliancy  and  Adaptation...    301 

"An  Incorruptible  Crown"  ...    302 

The  Support  of  the  Ministry  303,  307,  318 


Compulsory  Gospel  Preaching 

Soul-Saving          ...            ...  ... 

Spiritual  Athletics             ...  ... 

The  Principle  of  Accommoilation  ... 

"  By  all  Means  save  Some  "  ■«. 

Running  and  Fighting       ...  ,„ 

A  Good  Servant  of  Jesus  Christ  ... 

The  Rights  of  Apostleship ...  ... 

St.  Paul  an  Exception        ...  ... 

Under  the  Law  and  without    Law, 

both  to  be  One  for  Christ  ... 

The  Laws  of  the  Christian  Race  ... 
The  Relartion  of  Personal  Consistency 

to  Public  Labours  _• 


304,  311 
...    304 


CHAPTER  X. 


The  Ages  ...  m.  m. 

The  Christian  Feast  .••  ... 

Gospel  Casuistry ...  ...  ... 

Subject  continued;  Arguments  from 
the  Old  Testament ;  Warning 
against  False  Security    ... 

Argument  further  enforced  j  Fellow- 
ship  with  Christ  by  Means  of  the 
Communion  ;  Idolatrous  Feasts  a 
Communion  with  Demons  ;  Law, 
Expediency,  Conscience  ...  ... 

"  That  Spiritual  Rook "      ...  ... 

"Our  Examples"...  „•  ... 

Tempting  Christ  ...  .m  ••. 

"  Neither  murmur  ye "       ...  ... 

The  Danger  of  Self-Confidence         ... 

Temptation  ...  ...  ... 

The  Judgment  of  tlie  Wise  „. 

Communion  ...  ...  ... 

Expedience  and  Edification  ... 

Unselfishness        ...  ...  ... 

The  Aim  of  the  Christian's  Life        ... 

Benevolence  ...  ...  ... 

Old  Testament  Pictures      ...  ... 

The  Hour  of  Temptation    ...  ... 

Wariness  in  Christi  an  Walk  ... 

The  Great  Proprietor  ...  m. 

The  Great  Rule  of  Life       ...  ... 

Ancient  Types      ...  ... 


306 
309 
312 
314 
815 
816 
318 

319 

320 


M.  sai 


826 
328 
329 


330 


332 
336 
337 
338 
338 
310 
340 
341 
342 
343 
343 
344 
345 
345 
347 
348 
349 
350 
351 


INDEX. 


TBin 

rAoi 

THEKI 

FAOl 

Euting  and  Drinking  to  the  Glory  of 

Spiritual  Unity 

... 

406 

God     

352 

Contentment  is  better  than  Envy 

40T 

Meat  and  Drink  for  God's  People     ... 

354 

Respect  is  better  than  Contempt 

... 

4oa 

Baptism  unto  Mosea            ...            „. 

355 

Sympathy              

... 

408 

The  Spiritual  Meat  and  Drink 

356 

Body  and  Members             ... 

... 

409 

Ensamples  from  the  Wilderness-Life 

356 

■'First  Apostles"... 

... 

410 

Self-Security  is  Insecurity ... 

357 

The  Spiritual  Gifts  of  the  Churoh 

... 

410 

The  Commonness  of  our  Temptation 

358 

The  Body  of  Christ 

41S 

!,414 

The  Communion  of  Souls  in  Christ  ... 

359 

Mutual  Service      ...            ... 

••• 

415 

Tlie  Primary  Law  of  Christian  Associ- 

The Presidency  of  the  Spirit 

■•■ 

417 

ation    ...            ... 

SCO 

Diversity  and  Sameness 

... 

418 

\11  for  God  will  be  all  for  Man 

360 

The  Law  of   Order  in  the  Human 

Body  ... 

... 

419 

CHAPTEE  XL 

The  Common  Bearing  of  a  Christian 

Churoh 

... 

419 

Imitation  and  Commendation            •«. 

3C6 

The  Church  Christ's  Body  ... 

•  •• 

420 

The  Mail  and  the  Woman  ... 

367 

The  Order  of  Offices  in  the  Christian 

Religious  Institutions :  their  Abuse 

368 

Church 

•  a. 

420 

"The  Lord's  Supper"        ...368,376 

,386 

The  Comparison  of  Gifts  and  Graces 

421 

Apostolic  Injunctions  with  regard  to 

Church  Services 
Special   Consideration   of  the  Lord's 

869 

CHAPTER  XIII 

Supper;  Uses  of  Self-Judgment    ... 

371 

Eloquence  without  Charity 

M« 

426 

Imitation 

373 

Man-Worth           

••• 

427 

Apostolic  Authority  and  Traditions... 

374 

The  Immortality  of  Love    ... 

•  •• 

428 

Tiie  Hierarcliy      ...            ...            ... 

-375 

Partial  Knowledge              ... 

*•. 

428 

Man  the  Image  and  Glory  of  God    ... 

375 

A  Child  in  Time,  a  Man  in  Eternity 

429 

The  Church's  Proclamation 

377 

The    Body    the    Dark    Medium 

of 

Decency  in  Public  Worship 

378 

Spiritual  Vision 

•  *• 

430 

Soiue  Hindrances  to  the  Right  Obser- 

Love  the  Greatest  Power  in  Mind 

•  •• 

431 

Tanoe  of  the  Lord's  Supper 

379 

Negative  View  of  Love 

■  *• 

431 

The  S>acred  Feast ... 

380 

Tliu  Natare  and  Operation  of  Love 

433 

Remembering  Christ 

382 

Permanence  of  Love           ... 

•  •• 

436 

Perils  at  the  Lord's  Table  ... 

3S3 

"Love" 

•a. 

439 

The  Chastisement  of  Believers 

384 

Love  and  Language            ... 

... 

439 

The  Headship  of  Christ      ... 

385 

Love  and  Knowledge          ... 

... 

440 

Christian  Ordinances          ...            ... 

388 

Love  and  Faith _  ...            .., 

••• 

441 

Words  of  Evil  Omen 

389 

Love  and  Almsgiving 

*•. 

441 

"The  Limitation  set  on  the  Following 

Love  and  Self-immolation  ... 

••• 

442 

of  Good  Men     ... 

390 

Love  and  our  Fellow-Men  ... 

>•■ 

442 

'The  Christly  Traditions      ... 

391 

Love  and  Self- Abnegation  ... 

... 

443 

Laws  of  Order  in  Christian  Assemblies 

392 

The  Joy  of  Love  ... 

•  a. 

444 

Sectarian  Feeling  within  the  Church 

393 

Love  and  the  Conduct  of  Life 

... 

444 

St.  Paul's  Claim  to  Direct  Revelation 

393 

"  Love  never  faileth  " 

•  •. 

445 

The  Lord's  Supper  a  Showing  Forth 

393 

The  Partial  and  the  Perfect 

••a 

446 

Sacramental  Unworthiness ... 

394 

The  Babe  and  the  Man       ... 

•  •• 

446 

Moral  Fitness  for  Communion          ... 

395 

"Face  to  Face"   ...            ... 

..• 

447 

Now,  and  Tden     ...            ... 

448 

451 

CHAPTER   xn. 

"  The  Greatest  of  these  "    ... 

... 

449 

Life  without  Love               ... 

••■ 

449 

The  Christly  Assembly       ...            ... 

400 

Some  Characteristics  of  Love 

•■a 

450 

Spiritual  Gifts 

401 

The  Three  Graces 

••. 

452 

INDEX. 


IHEm  TAGS 

Charity  puts  the  Aoceptableness  on  all 

Gifts  and  Works             ...           ...  453 

The  Grace  of  Charity         453 

The  Nature  of  the  Future  Knowledge  454 

The  Immortality  of  all  Graces         •»  4S5 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Gnee  and  Gifts    ...           ...           ...  461 

Paul's  Idea  of  the  Christian  Church 

in  Assembly     ...           ...           ...  463 

Love    controls   Zeal    in    Behalf    of 

Spiritual  Gift?      ...  464 

Argument  continued  and  illustrated  466 

Further  Enforcement  of  the  Argument  467 
How  a  Spectator  would  regard  the 
Tongues;   the  Gracious  EiTects  of 
Prophesying;      Interpretation      ot 

■ilence               ...            ,m            —*  468 

Concluding  Views              ...           »•  469 

The  Purposes  of  Prophesying           •«•  470 

The  Two  Elements  in  Devotion       m«  471 

Babes,  not  in  Mind,  but  in  Malice  ...  471 

The  Conviction  of  tie  Unbeliever    ...  472 

A  God,  not  of  Confusion,  but  of  Peace  473 

Abandonment  to  Ignorance              ...  473 

Usefulness            ...           ...           •..  471 

How  we  should  Sing  and  Pray        »..  475 

Miud  and  Christianity       ...           m.  476 

Conversion  prepared  for     ...           ...  476 

Decency  and  Order  in  the  Church    ...  477 

Women  in  the  Church       ...           ...  477 

Christian  Prophesying        ...            ...  478 

The  Church's  Edification  the  Object 
■ought  in  the  Trust  of  Christian 

GifU 479 

Christian  Intelligence  the  Medium  of 

Christian  Growth             ...            ...  480 

The  Christian  both  a  Child  and  a 

Man    ...            ...            ...            ...  480 

The  Power  of  Christianity  on  Intellect  481 

Preaching  to  Unbelievers  ...           ...  482 

Woman's  Place  in  Christian  Worship  483 

CHAPTER  XV. 

ne  Apostolic  Gospel        ...  493, 631 

Terrible  Conclusions  resulting   from 
the  Denial  of  Two  Great  Gospel 

FacU 494 

The  Resurrection  of  Christ                ...  495 

Christ  resigning  his  Administration ...  496 

The  Church- World              ...            ...  497 


THFTIIE  VAGt 

Daily  Dying          ...             m*            m*  493 
Beasts  at  Eplicsus              «••            —  499 
Moral  Resurrection             m*            ...  499 
The  Resurrection-Body            ...    500,  538 
Man :  his  Birth,  Death,  and  Resurrec- 
tion    ...           ...           ...           ...  502 

Diversity  in  the  Heavenly  Inhabitants  503 

The  Two  Adams 501,  544 

The  Two  Grand  Types  of  Character...  504 

Corporeal  Transformation  ...            ...  SOS 

The  Miud  exchanging  the  Mortal  for 

the  Immortal    ...            »•            —  508 

Death  in  Idea      ...           m*           m*  503 

The  Work  of  Works           m           m.  509 

Introduction         ...           ...           ...  '  510 

Apostolic     Testimony     to     Christ's 
Resurrection,    and    Testimony    of 

Others              ...  513 

Denying  the  Resurrection  of  the  Dead, 

and  what  the  Denial  involves       ...  ftlS 
Objections     to     the     Resurrection; 
Replies   thereto:    Conclusions   in- 
volved              ...           ...           ...  SIS 

Concluding  Argument  and  Exhorta- 
tion                  ...           ...           ...  529 

The  Exposition  and  Defence  of  the 

Resurrection     ...            tm            ..•  523 

The  Apostolic  Doctrine      m*            •••  523 

"  Some  are  fallen  Asleep"  ...            m.  524 

Humility  and  Self -Assertion            m.  52S 

A  Yain  Faith       ...            ...            m.  523 

The  Firstfruits  of  Life        ...            •..  526 

The  Reign  of  the  Redeemer              m.  527 

Evil  Company      ...           mt           .»  527 

Death  and  Quickening       .m           w.  528 

"The  Last  Adam"             ...            m.  529 

•'  The  Image  of  the  Heavenly "        m.  529 

The  Victory  of  Immortality              m.  530 

Traits  of  Christian  Greatness           m.  531 

Did  Christ  Rise?...            .m            m.  532 

The  Resuirec'tioa                ...            ...  533 

Some  Things  that  follow  the  Denial 

of  the  Resurrection         ...           ...  534 

The  Resurrection  of  the  Body          ...  536 

The  Two  Glories  ...           ...           ...  537 

Victory  on  the  Last  Battle-Field      ...  539 

Preparation  for  the  Death-Triumph ...  539 

The  Large  Use  of  the  Term  "  Gospel "  540 

Salvation  a  Present  Process              ...  511 

Death  for  Sins      ...            ...            ...  542 

Veritable      Death      ftnd      Veritable 

Resurrection      ...            „,            ,w  S43 


mDEX. 


vU 


raun  rAQi 

"Christ  the  FirgtfiuitB"    ...            .„  643 

Man's  Last  Enemy              ...            ...  545 

The  Close  of  the  Mediator's  Mission  546 

Baptism  for  the  Dead         ...            ...  547 

" Evil  Communioatious "    ...            ...  547 

Enlarged  Conoeptions  of  the  Term 

"Body"            648 

Death's  Sting  and  Strength              Mt  M8 


CHAPTER  XVL 

Christian  Philanthnipy        ..  ...    552 

God's  Will  the    Rule,  and  Spiritnal 

Usefulness  the  End  of  Life  ...    553 

Wholeuome   Teaching  for  the  Older 

Hinistera  ...  ...  ...    554 

The  Demand*  of  Christian  ity  on  it* 

Adherents         ...  ...  ...    554 

Our  Duty  to  the  Truly  Useful  ...     555 

Salutations  ...  ...  ...     555 

A  Negative  Crime   and    a    Positive 

Punishment      ...  ...  ...    555 

Charity ;    its    Systematic    Mode    of 

Exercise  ...  ...  ...    556 

Bi    Paul    and    hi*    Purposes  ;    his 

rriend* :  Ramast  Bzhortatio«      ^    667 


THSM*  rACB 

Closing  Word*     m           im           Mt  659 

Church  Gifts        ^  661 

The  Open  Door  and  Many   Adveiw 

saries      ...           ...           661 

The  Word  of  Command  to  Christian 

Soldiers            ...           ...            ...  562 

Love  a  Principle  of  Action               m.  562 

Service  and  Honour           ,.,           m>  563 

Spiritual  Refreshment        .m           ...  564 

Christian  Greetings            ...            ...  564 

The  Absence  of  Love  to  Christ         ...  565 

Concerning  the  Collection  ...           m.  566 

Words  to  those  who  travel ...            m.  567 

A  Fivefold  Exhortation      ...            ,«  567 

Ministering  to  the  Saints   ...            ...  568 

Those  who  do  not  love  Christ          ...  569 

The  Law  of  Christian  Giving  ...  669 
The  Relation*  of  Gentile  to  Jewi*h 

Churches           ...           ...            ...  670 

The  Mission  of  oar  Hindrance*  ...  671 
The    Limitation    of    the     Robnster 

Virtues                671 

The  Natural  Right  of  Priority         m.  S72 

The  Church  in  the  Hoose  ...           «•  S78 

The  Christian  Anathema  ^i           <m  674 


i  |!''i'"  '"■    I  >„M 


J,&« 


:<iMJir 


Mi 


II 


