ἂν». Ἂς 
SE oe 


Potato ae 
BEAN te og 


ἐς ἐν we 


~~ 
Wet on Pee 


oN 


mS 


ae KS 


x ἘΞ Berens 


BBL A A ἃς 
no oS aan heat te 


2 


Oh anaes 


eae aoe 
pee a 


RE 


«x 
ἿΝ 


SON 
SERS 


ae th 


~ 


‘Chis book belongs to 


ἧς 


LIBRARY OF THE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY 
PRINCETON. N. J. 


PRESENTED BY 


- 


Mr. Hoel Lawrence tcQueen 


LiL = LeU 


[ΒΦ 1965 1896 
Bible. N.T. Greek. 1896. 
The Englishman's Greek New 
Testament 


THE ENGLISHMAN'S 
GREEK NEW TESTAMENT: 


GIVING oN 
ἌΝ 


“Ny 


THE GREEK TEXT OF srtpHENs 1550, 


¥ , 
NG fi 
> ae | 


- 
Ὃς 


I 


WITH 


THE VARIOUS READINGS OF THE EDITIONS OF ELZEVIR 1624, 
GRIESBACH, LACHMANN, TISCHENDORF, TREGELLES, 
ALFORD, AND WORDSWORTH: 


TOGETHER WITH 


AN INTERLINEAR LITERAL TRANSLATION, 
AND 


THE AUTHORISED VERSION OF 1611. 
Ἡ ἀλήθεια ἐλευθερώσει buds.—JOHN viii. 32. 
Multz terricolis lingue, celestibus una 
Chiro Cnition. 


LONDON: 
SAMUEL BAGSTER AND SONS, LIMITED, 
15 PATERNOSTER ROW. 


ENT EOD CF LON: 


Tuts work is intended to help the devout English reader of the New 
Testament, who may, with a little knowledge of Greek, desire to reier to 
the actual words used by the Spirit of God. 

It has not been framed to teach people Greek, though doubtless it may 
be used towards that end. It is believed that there are many, who, having 
learnt a little of that language in their early days, in after years feel a 
desire to read the Greek Testament, but find that their intermediate occu- 
pations (in which this language was in no way used by them) have caused 
them to forget the little they once knew. 

Certain it is that there is a growing desire among Christians to refer for 
themselves to the Greek Testament. We are well aware that some would 
endeavour to discourage all such reference, thinking that all who are not 
Greek scholars ought to be satisfied with the excellent translations of the 
New Testament already in existence. But had all persons thought so, we 
should never have had the valuable ‘‘ ENGLISHMAN’S GREEK CONCORD- 
ANCE,” and other useful works of this class, especially adapted for the 
help of those seeking to learn from the word itself rather than from the 
Commentary. 

It may be true that a little knowledge is a dangerous thing ; yet let our 
object be not to stamp out the little, but to give the means to use it to 
profit, and, it may be, to increase it. A Christian needs the grace and 
help of God to read his English Testament profitably : the same grace and 
help will prevent his using in any other way the present work. 

We should much deprecate any one making a wrong use of the Greek 
Testament through our means. It is of course intended for private study, 
and not to be flourished before the young and inexperienced. Nothing 
can be more unseemly than for the unskilful to be always correcting 
everyoody with their literal translations and various readings, distressing 
simple souls rather than seeking that which tends to godly edifying. We 
have remarkable instances of our Lord and His apostles using the words 
of the Septuagint where it is certainly not an exact translation of the 
original Hebrew ; yet where the translation gave the true sense it was 
used unreservedly, and used as scripture: an example surely worthy of all 
to follow. 


iv INTRODUCTION. 


Still, who will venture to deny that an intelligent Christian ought to 
have his literal translation and various readings for his own study of the 
word? Certain it is that there are many who know how to make a good 
use of every scrap of real information touching the words of their God; 
and we believe that many will know how to appreciate the present endea- 
vour to aid them in their study of His word. 

That a good translation of the New Testament does not fully satisfy 
many, is not surprising ; for, in the first place, there are several modern 
translations of the New Testament, all supposed to be improvements on 
the Authorised Version, and all purporting to be true and more or less 
literal translations: yet these when compared together are found to differ 
materially; some in the translation itself, and some because of a different 
Greek text having been used. 

Besides this, there are certain points of interest which no translation 
has ever pretended to give. Take, for instance, the word ‘master ;’ there 
are six different Greek words translated ‘master’ in the Authorised 
Version, all with different shades of meaning. Other translations have 
reduced the number, still all perhaps represent different words by ‘master,’ 
and there is nothing to shew what the word is in the original. The word 
‘judgment’ represents eight different Greek words in the Authorised 
Version, and so of many others. Of particles, ‘but’ represents twelve 
different words ; ‘by,’ eleven ; ‘for,’ eighteen ; ‘in,’ fifteen ; ‘of,’ thirteen; 
and ‘on,’ nine. 

We do not mean of course that the same Greek word can in all places be 
translated by the same English word; but the word actually translated, 
in any place, can here be seen at a glance ; and those who are able can refer 
to their lexicons for the use and meaning of any word in question. 

We give the Greek Text, with an interlinear translation as literal as 
may be to be useful; and in the margin the venerable Authorised Version, 
divided into paragraphs to correspond to the Greek text. 

This work also gives in its notes not only the various readings of six 
different editors of the Greek Testament, but also these variations in Hng- 
lish whenever the sense is affected thereby, but without attempting to give 
in every case all the minute shades of meaning which a Greek scholar 
will attach to them. Many of these variations may be thought to 
be of no great importance, descending even to the different spelling 
of the same word; but from this they rise to variations of the greatest 
importance. All are of interest, because they concern the word of 
God, and all are here made available to the English reader—a result 
which we believe has never been attempted in any similar work. 


INTRODUCTION. Υ 


Thus we have endeavoured to furnish the English student with all he 
may require both as to the text of the New Testament, and possibly all 
he requires for its word-for-word translation. Interpretation we have 
endeavoured to avoid. 


We proceed to lay before our readers the detail of our work. 


I.—THE GREEK TEXT. 


We have taken the Greek Text of Stephens 1550, which is the common 
text in this country ; but as the edition of Elzevir 1624 is the one often 
called the Received Text, or Textus Receptus, because of the words, 
Se RGXEUI 3 τος πο: ab omnibus receptum,” occurring in the preface (though 
this edition, as is manifest by its date, was not used for our English trans- 
lation of 1611), we give the readings of this Elzevir edition in the notes, 
and mark them E. It is the text commonly reprinted on the Continent. 
In the main they are one and the same, and either of them may be re- 
ferred to as the Textus Receptus. 

There are a number of minute variations between the editors with which 
we have not thought it well to trouble the reader in such a work as the 
present ; indeed some of the editors have not kept strictly to one form 
of ecceniuation, &c., for the same word in every instance. Thus we hav2 
not noticed the variation of θλίψις with θλῖψις ; στῦλος With στύλος ; κρίμα 
and κρῖμα ; ζῶον and ζῷον ; Μωυσῆς and Mwioje ; Ησαῦ and Ἡσαῦ, ἕο. 
So again in the division of words. We have not recorded such variations 
as οὐκέτι and οὖν ἔτι ; εἴ τις and εἴτις ; εἴγε and εἴ γε; μήποτε and μή ποτε, 
&c. In all these cases we have followed the majority of modern editors. 

With them we have also added the final ν to the third person singular 
and plural in σι ; third singular in ¢; in datives plural in σι, &c. For 
οὕτω we have given ot7we, and αὐτοῦ where some have αὑτοῦ. 


Of each of the editors referred to we must say a few words. 

1. GrizspacH.—About a hundred and fifty years had elapsed after the 
Elzevir edition of 1624 before Griesbach brought out his Greek Testament. 
During that time an enormous amount of evidence had been collected and 
was available for judging of the true text. The line adopted by Griesbach 
was to classify the Greek manuscripts into three families, and then deal 
with each family as one witness. These were the Alexandrine, the 
Western, and the Byzantine. Thestandard of the Alexandrine text he con- 
ceived to be that given by Origen. In this family he placed the ancient 


vi INTRODUCTION. 

copies A B,C; L of the Gospels ; the Egyptian and some lesser versions. 
The Western recension would be represented by D of the Gospels and Acts, 
by those that contained a Latin as well as Greek text ; the Old Latin and 
Vulgate, and quotations in the Latin Fathers. The byzantine embraced the 
great mass of other manuscripts, the Versions, and the Greek Fathers. To 
this last family Griesbach did not attach so much importance as to the 
other two. Where two of these families agreed in a reading, that decided the 
text with him. Griesbach does not seem to have carried out his rule very 
rigidly, for the common text must be considered to have leant most to his 
Byzantine family, which he thought least of; yet he appears to have had 
a sort of preference for the common text in cases of doubt and difficulty, 
which prevented so many alterations being made from it as otherwise 
would have been the case. We have nothing here to say as to Griesbach’s 
rules of classifying the copies ; (it is certain that editors who have suc- 
ceeded him have not put the copies A and B in the same family ;) we are 
merely relating his plan of action. ‘‘ His industry,” says Scrivener, ‘‘ his 
moderation..... his logical acuteness and keen intellectual perception 
fall to the lot of few; and though they may have helped to lead him into 
error, and have even kept him from retracing his steps, yet on the whole 
they are worthily exercised in the good cause of promoting a knowledge 
of God’s truth.” 

Griesbach, in his larger editions, encumbered his text with different 
readings, marking them as more or less probable; but in 1805 he published 
a smaller edition (representing his final judgment on all points) without 
any of these gradations in his text. It is from this later edition we 
have taken his readings. 

2. LACHMANN.—This editor, having little respect for the common text, 
set to work to form a text independent of that, right or wrong. He 
started with the theory of ancient evidence only, thus sweeping away many 
copies and much evidence, because they dated below his fixed period. 
He did not seek to discover the ‘‘ original” text in name so much as to 
recover the text as it was in the fowrth century. He did not actually 
restrict himself to evidence of or before the fourth century, or he would 
have had but little in any shape; but his theory being ‘ancient docu- 
ments only’ he often had but four Greek copies, in some places three, and in 
some two, and in parts of the Revelation but one. Old Latin copies and 
Fathers he added to his scanty stock of evidence. Lachmann being at first 
misunderstood was severely criticised, but since his work has been better 
understood he has always held a place among the principal editors of 
the Greek Testament. Scrivener describes him as ‘‘ earnest, single- 


INTRODUCTION. Vil 


hearted, and a true scholar, both in spirit and accomplishment.” Of his 
owr work he said, ‘‘ I may be allowed to hope that my object, undertaken 
with diligence and with confidence of Divine aid, and brought to a com- 
pletion to the best of my ability, will be approved by posterity from the 
utility being known, more than has been the case from this age.’”’* 

3. TISCHENDORF.—We presume this editor aimed at giving (not as 
Lachmann, the text of any early date, but) the original text as far as he 
could discover it. His plan was this: ‘ The text is only to be sought 
from ancient evidence, and especially from Greek MSS, but without neg- 
lecting the testimonies of Versions and Fathers. Thus the whole confor- 
mation of the text should proceed from the evidences themselves, and not 
from what is called the received edition.”* He further differed from 
Lachmann in receiving evidence as late as the ninth century, though 
naturally placing more importance upon those copies which were the more 
ancient. He has published eight editions. We copy of course from his 
last. His long and unremitting labours as a Biblical critic are too well 
known and appreciated to need any commendation from us. 

4, TREGELLES.—This editor says he purposed ‘‘to give the text on the 
authority of the oldest MSS and Versions, and the aid of the earlier cita- 
tions, so as to present, as far as possible, the text commonly received in 
the fourth century.” It will be seen that this almost exactly agrees in 
words with what Lachmann proposed to do ; yet from what Tregelles says 
elsewhere, we suppose he aimed to give the original text, but that he 
judged the best way to arrive at this was to go back to the text of the 
fourth century. Except a few cursive copies, he confined his attention to 
ancient evidence. For about thirty years this critic industriously worked 
at his New Testament, and in collating manuscripts for it, and ceased 
not his labours until physically laid aside. 

5. ALForp.—‘‘ The text which I have adopted,” says this editor, ‘‘ has 
been constructed by following, in all ordinary cases, the united or prepon- 
derating evidence of the most ancient authorities: in cases where the 
most ancient authorities do not agree nor preponderate, taking into ac- 
count later evidence ; and in cases where the weight of diplomatic testi- 
mony is interfered with by adventitious circumstances (such as parallelism 
or the like), applying those principles of criticism which appear to furnish 
sound criteria of a spurious or genuine reading. The object of course is, 
in each case, where evidence is divided, to mount up, if possible, to the 
original reading from which all the variations sprung: in other words to 


* Tregelles’s Account of the Printed Text. 


viii INTRODUCTION. 


discover some word or some arrangement which shall account for the varia- 
tions, but for which none of the variations will account.”* There have 
been several editions of Alford’s Greek Testament. We give the dates 
of each volume from which our collation has been taken. 

6. WorpswortTH.—‘‘ The text of the present edition,” says this editor, 
“fis not a reprint of that hitherto received in any impression of the 
New Testament. The editor has endeavoured to avail himself of the 
collations of manuscripts which have been supplied by others, and to offer 
to the reader the result at which he has arrived after an examination of 
those collations..... He feels it his duty to state, that he has not 
deviated so far from the text commonly received, as has been done in some 
recent editions. Indeed he cannot disguise his belief that a superintend- 
ing Providence has ever been watching over the text of the New Testa- 
ment, and guiding the Church of Christ, as the guardian and keeper of 
Holy Writ, in the discharge of her duty.”+ 


It will thus be seen that each of the editors took up more or less a 
different line. Lachmann was the first to cast wholly aside the commonly 
received text, and Bishop Wordsworth has taken it up again, believing 
that God overruled its formation in His good providence. 

Though these editors had each his own plan, in some places, all came 
to one conclusion, pointing out that the common Greek text (from 
which in the main our venerable Authorised Version was translated) ought 
to be abandoned for the one they give. We consider that in such cases 
our readers will be safe in taking their united verdict. Where the editors 
differ, it is not for us to offer any opinion. We are not forming a Greek 
text: had we done so, it would have been simply our own individual judg- 
ment, with little or no weight; but we have sought to give our readers 
unversed in such matters the best guide we could. We know of nothing 
better for such than to be directed to the united judgment of those who 
have conscientiously laboured in this particular field. 


* Alford’s Greek Testament, vol. i., ch. vi. sec. i., 18. We should have 
been glad to give, as here, what each of the editors said of his system in 
his own words (and we have done so as far as we could), but we could not 
transcribe whole pages. Alford says of Tischendorf and Tregelles, “ If 
Tischendorf has run into a fault on the side of speculative hypotheses as to 
the origin of readings found in those MSS, it must be confessed that Tre- 
gelles has sometimes erred on the (certainly, far safer) side of scrupulous 
adherence to the mere literal evidence of the ancient MSS.” 

t Preface to New Testament, vol. i., Ὁ. xiii. 


INTRODUCTION. 1x 


One further remark seems needed, namely, that the date at which the 
editors did their work must be remembered ; for further and important 
evidence (for example the Codex Sinaiticus*) has been discovered since the 
time of Lachmann. If he and Griesbach had had the same evidence as 
Tischendorf, Tregelles, Alford and Wordsworth, their readings might have 
coincided more frequently with those of later editors. 

In recording the various readings of the editors we have omitted those 
which we judged to be errors, though not pointed out by themselves. 


As to the form of the Greek text a few words are needed. 

1. PARAGRAPHS.—We were disappointed in finding nothing like autho- 
rity for where a paragraph ought to be. Ancient manuscripts were no 
help: they have few or no paragraphs. The editors all differed, each making 
paragraphs according to his own judgment. We were therefore obliged, 
after referring to the best examples, to form paragraphs for ourselves. We 
are anxious that our readers should remember that the paragraphs have 
no authority, which they might have had if the ancient manuscripts had 
agreed in the placing of them. 

2. PARENTHESES.—Most of the editors have placed here and there 
parentheses in their Greek texts. These we have disregarded, seeing that 
there are no such things in the early Greek copies. We have placed them 
in the English where we deemed them necessary to preserve the sense, but 
not being in the Greek they also have no authority. 

3. INVERTED CommMas.—Some editors mark with inverted commas the 
words that are spoken, and others in a similar way mark the quotations 
from the Old Testament. But in some places it is doubtful where these 
quotations close, and it was thought best to omit them. These also, 
being absent from the ancient Greek copies, have no authority. 

4, Pornts.—There is no authority anywhere for the punctuation. There 
are few or no points in the ancient copies, and editors naturally differ in 
their system of pointing. We have been obliged to punctuate for ourselves 
as we judged best. We have not attempted to note the difference in the 
punctuation of the various editors, except in places where it materially 
alters the sense. 

5. CAPITALS.—The only remark needed here is in reference to the 
names of God, of Christ, and of the Holy Spirit. The greatest difficulty 
ig touching the word ‘Spirit.’ In some places it is very difficult to say 


* Tregelles had not this codex when he brought out the Gospels: he first 
mentions it in John xxi. 


Χ INTRODUCTION. 


whether the Holy Spirit as a person or the spirit of the Christian is re- 
ferred to (see Rom. viii. 9); and if sometimes a small letter and sometimes 
a capital had been placed to the word πνεῦμα, in the Greek, persons would 
naturally have concluded that the question was thus indisputably settled. 
It was therefore judged best to put a small 7 everywhere. In the English 
we have been obliged to put a capital S when the Holy Spirit was referred 
to and so have retained it wherever we thought this was the case; but in 
some places it is really doubtful, and becomes a question for the spiritual 
judgment of the reader. The Greek will not help in the difficulty, because 
in the earliest copies every letter was a capital. In the other names we 
have followed the usage of modern editors ; putting in the Greek a capital 
tu Jesus but a small letter for Christ, and a small letter for Lord and for 
God. 

6. VreRsEs.—In a few places it is doubtful where the verses should com- 
mence. In these cases we have followed Bruder’s ‘‘ Greek Concordance,” 
though that work does not in all cases agree with itself. 


II.—THE INTERLINEAR TRANSLATION. 


Very few words will suffice for this. No new translation has been aimed 
at, but rather a selection from the best translations already existing. 

1. The plan adopted can soon be explained. The Greek words have 
always been kept in their right order, and where the interlinear English 
would not make sense in the same order, the words have been numbered to 
shew how they must be read. Thus, ‘‘ And ‘related ®to *them 2also !those 
3who ‘had 5seen [010] (Luke viii. 86) are numbered so as to read ‘‘ And 
those also who had seen [it] related to them.” 

To prevent this numbering, and transposition in reading, being increased 
unnecessarily, a few words are often made into a phrase. This has been 
done at the commencement of each sentence, where needed, two or more 
words being joined with a low hyphen. Thus, instead of 


᾿Ἐγένετο. δὲ. 


᾿Εγένετο δὲ 
And it came to pass. 


7It *came *to pass ‘and 

The words in brackets [ ] are what have been added in the English 

to complete the sense where there is no word in the Greek to correspond 
to the words added. 

Where a Greek word occurs which the English idiom requires should 

not be translated, the word stands alone with no English word under it : 

as Or, ‘that,’ in Mark xii. 7; and οὐ in verse 14, where there are two 


we have printed 


INTRODUCTION. xi 


negatives, which, if both were translated, would in English destroy 
one another; and so of μή, where it simply marks the sentence as a 
question. 

In a few places we have been obliged to put a double translation, mostly 
because of the double negatives used in the Greek, where they do not 
immediately follow one another, and so could not be translated by such 
strengthened expressions as ‘not at all,’ ‘in no wise,’ &c. In such cases 
we have placed a literal translation below the one required in English. 
Thus— 

οὐδέν. 
(it, nothing) 

2. As to points of grammar we shall trouble the reader with but few 
remarks. 

The Aorist. This tense of the Greek verb has been at all times the 
most difficult to deal with, being translated, in the Authorised Version 
(and by others), sometimes by the present, sometimes by the past, some- 
times by the futwre, and sometimes by the perfect. Grammarians say that, 
in the main, it is the indefinite past, and we have endeavoured, as far as 
may be, to keep it to this, avoiding, except in a few places, the trans- 
lation of it asa perfect. We all know what stress is often laid—and rightly 
so—upon the word ‘have.’ IfI say, ‘he has cleansed me,’ it is more than 
saying ‘he cleansed me.’ The former expression indicates the perfect, and 
implies a continuance of the act, or its effects, to the present time; 
whereas the latter speaks of an act at some time in the past, without any- 
thing being implied as to its continuance. 

For this reason it appeared unadvisable to translate the aorist as the 
perfect, except in a few places where the true sense would otherwise have 
been destroyed. It is true that the English idiom requires it elsewhere, 
but it was thought best to sacrifice the English for the sake of preserving 
the above distinction. An extreme case will illustrate this point. In 
1 Corinthians vy. 9 occurs the word ἔγραψα, “1 wrote ;’ and in verse 11 the 
same word precisely—‘I wrote ;’ but the Authorised Version (and others) 
put for the latter ‘I have written.’ It is there accompanied with the word 
‘now’—‘now I have written.’ This is needed for good English ; but we 
have sacrificed the English and put ‘I wrote’ in both places, but have put 
a comma after the word ‘now’ to make it read not quite so harshly. We 
were encouraged to preserve this uniformity by the fact of the Authorised 
Version being in proximity, which will make all plain in the instances 
where this uncouthness occurs. 

In a few places we have translated the aorist as a present where the 


xil INTRODUCTION. 


sense demanded it. As, for instance, ἔγνω, in 2 Timothy ii. 19: ‘‘The 
Lord knows those that are his,” instead of ‘‘ the Lord knew,” &c. 

The Imperfect. This is mostly translated as ‘I was writing,’ or ‘I 
wrote.’ But there are a few places where this tense is said to have a 
different meaning. This will be best illustrated by the much-disputed pas- 
sage in Romans ix. 3: ‘‘For J cowld wish that myself were accursed from 
Christ for my brethren.” Here the word for ‘I could wish’ is in the im- 
perfect. If the learned were agreed as to a translation we should have 
kept to the same, but while some translate ‘I could wish,’ as a conditional 
present, others give ‘I could have wished’ as a conditional past. We have 
thought it best to keep the sense of the simple imperfect as referred by 
Winer to this passage. ‘‘ J felt a wish, and should do so still, could it be 
gratified. .... (a conditional clause being understood).” We have put 
“1 was wishing.” 

The Perfect. This we have kept as uniform as we could, implying an 
act perfected, but continuing to the present in itself or its conse- 
quences. In a few places we have translated it as a present: as in 
Matthew xii. 47, in the sense of ‘they have stood and still are standing.’ 

The Subjunctive. In this mood perhaps we have deviated further from 
ordinary practice than in any other, but we have endeavoured, as far as 
practicable, to keep it distinct from both the English imperative and the 
Greek future. Thus in Romans xiii. 9 for οὐ φονεύσεις (future indicative) 
we have, ‘thou shalt not commit murder ;’ but in James ii. 11, for μὴ 
φονεύσῃς (aorist subjunctive) ‘thou mayest not commit murder.’ 

Tue Pronouns. At times it is important to know whether the pro- 
nouns are emphatic or not. ἐγὼ γράφω and γράφω are both ‘I write;’ but 
where the ἐγώ is put in the Greek, it makes the pronoun emphatic. This 
however is somewhat due to the writer’s style, and in John’s Gospel and 
Epistles, it has been judged that, from his peculiar style of composi- 
tion, he puts in the pronouns where emphasis is not always intended. 
John ix. 27 gives a good example of the same verb with and with- 
out the pronoun in the Greek: ‘‘Why again do ye wish to hear? do ye 
also wish to become his disciples ?” 

Comrounp Worps. It was found impracticable to translate these 
uniformly throughout. For instance, if γνῶσις be translated ‘ knowledge,’ 
it might be thought that ἐπίγνωσις should be ‘full knowledge,’ &c. ; but 
on referring to a Concordance it will be seen that the latter word cannot 
be intensified in all places, and then to translate it by ‘knowledge’ in 
some places, and ‘ full knowledge’ in others looks too much like interpre- 
tation. We have therefore translated both words by ‘knowledge.’ In 


INTRODUCTION. xii 


the few places however where one of each of such words occurs in the 
same sentence, some distinction was imperative. 


III.—Tue Notes. 


The references to the notes are marked thus in the text *avrov"; the 
mark ' shewing how far the variation extends. In a few places a note 
occurs within a note. If words are to be omitted or transposed by some 
editors but not by others, these latter may want to alter a word in the 
sentence. In such cases one tick shews the termination of the inner note. 
Phas’? ΦΈΡ ΟΣ: bg, oo WANE | See notes ¥ and * Matthew v. 44. 

This mark — iad for omit; and + for add; but in some places all the 
editors do not actually omit, some putting the word in brackets as doubtful. 
In that case it is put thus, ‘‘— αὐτοῦ [L]TTr’ ; which means that Lachmann 
marks the word as doubtful, and Tischendorf and Tregelles omit it. In 
some cases, a// mark a word as doubtful, and then it could be put either 
thus, δὲ [LTTr], or [δὲ] LTTr; we have adopted the latter plan. In some 
places the editors mark part of a word as doubtful, mostly in compound 
words. See for instance [ἐκ]διώξουσιν read by TrA in Luke xi. 49. 

It will be seen by this that the marks [ ] applied to the Greek or the 
editors in the notes always refer to readings which the editors point out 
as doubtful. They must not be confounded with the same marks in the 
English text and notes, which always point out that there is no corres- 
ponding word in the Greek. 

In some places where a word is added by the editors, another English 
word is added in the note to shew the connection of the new word. Thus 
in Luke xv. 2, the word ‘both’ is added; but it falls between the words 
‘the’ and ‘Pharisees,’ therefore it is put thus in the note ‘‘+ re both 
(the) LTTrA” to shew that it must be read ‘both the Pharisees.’ Slight 
variations in the use of the parenthesis occur in the course of the 
work, but we trust the meaning intended will in all cases be plain to the 
student. 

Where long pieces are to be omitted they are marked in the text where 
they commence and where they end, but in the notes the first word or 


two only and the last are named with..... between. Thus in Luke 
ix. 55, note * stands, ?— καὶ εἶπεν (verse 55). . . . σῶσαι (verse 56) LTTrA; 
—oyap..... σῶσαια. The four editors omit the whole twenty words; 


but G omits only the last twelve. In Luke xxiv. 10, note ‘ is thus, ' + ἡ 
the [...], implying that some word must be added. 


χὶν INTRODUCTION. 


We have endeavoured to make the notes as plain as possible for the 
English reader. One point still needs to be explained. For instance, in 
Luke vii. 22 occur the words ‘‘and “answering ‘Jesus said ;” but a note 
omits the word ‘Jesus,’ and then it must be read (as stated in the note) 
‘and answering he 5814. This is because the word εἶπεν (as already ex- 
plained) stands for both ‘he said,’ and ‘said.’ Also in verse 27 occur the 
words ἐγὼ ἀποστέλλω, ‘I send,’ but a note omits the word ἐγὼ, ‘I,’ and then 
ἀποστέλλω is to be read ‘I send,’ but without emphasis on the ‘1.’ 


IV.—THE MonrEy AND MEASURES OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 


1. Monry. It was deemed better not to attempt to translate the 
sums of money named in the New Testament, as we have no corresponding 
pieces to those then in use. We have therefore used the Greek words un- 
translated, and give a list of them here. It is not without interest and in- 
struction to know the approximate value of money and the extent of 
the measures used. For instance, in Revelation vi. 6 we read of “ἃ 
measure of wheat for a penny” in the Authorised Version; but this 
leaves the reader in doubt as to how far it speaks of scarcity and dearness. 
We want at least to know the value of the ‘penny,’ and the capacity of the 
‘measure.’ 

The following lists, it is hoped, will be useful ; but approximate values 
only can now be arrived at. 


APPROXIMATE 
GREEK. AUTHORISED VERSION. IN THIS WORK. ae ; 
£58. One ats 
λεπτόν mite lepton 0 0 0 0.375 
κοδράντης farthing kodrantes 0' 00" δῦ 
ἀσσάριον farthing assarion 0 “O'* Ors 
δηνάριον penny denarius D) #0 Pye 
δραχμή piece of silver drachma 0° 0" 7 9) 
δίδραχμον tribute money didrachma 0 1 8.2 
orarno piece of money stater a li! 
μνάα pound mina ΘΟ jt 
τάλαντον talent talent 193 15 0 0 
ἀργύριον piece of silver. This is the common word for silver and 


money, as U’argent in French. In different places it would represent 
wholly different coins. 


INTRODUCTION. ΧΥ͂ 


2. MEASURES OF CAPACITY. 


GREEK. AUTHORISED VERSION. IN THIS WORK. APPROXIMATE, 
Gallon. Pint. 
ξέστης pot (liquid measure) vessels* 0 1 
χοῖνιξ measure (dry ,, ) cheenix 0 2 
“μόδιος bushel (dry ,; } Corn measure* 2 0 
σάτον measure (dry », } seah 2 i 
Baroc measure (liquid ,, } bath if 4 
METONTNG firkin (liquid ,, } metretes 8 + 
κόρος measure (dry ,, ) cor 64 1 


It is judged that those marked * are referred to as measures independent 
of their capacity: such as ‘‘ washing of vessels,” &c. 


3. Lona Muasure. Here the names already in use were near enough to 


be retained. 
Feet. Inches. 


πῆχυς cubit cubit 1 6 to 9 


ὀργυιά fathom fathom 6 0 
στάδιον furlong furlong 606 9 
μίλιον mile mile 4854 0 
ὁδὸς σαββάτου sabbath day’s journey 6 furlongs 


In conclusion, we desire to render thanks to Almighty God who has enabled 
us to complete what has been a work of some years. For the various readings 
reference has been made to the originals. This alone was a work of labour. 
When we commenced our work Tischendorf and Tregelles had not finished 
their editions (though during its progress Tischendorf, Tregelles, and 
Alford have all passed from the scene of their labours) ; and each part 
had to be collated as it appeared, and some of the other editors, as far as 
we know, had never been collated before. To those who have so kindly 
given their aid we return our thanks and acknowledgments: may the 
Lord reward them. 

Though the work has been laborious, it has been full of interest, and 
we trust to some profit. If our God will vouchsafe to use our humble 
_ endeavour to aid to a more careful study of His word, and to a clearer 
knowledge of His truth, our desire will be obtained ; and to Him be all 
_ the praise andthe glory. Amen. 


Lonpon, 1877. 


LIST OF SIGNS AND EDITIONS USED. 


E Elzevir, 1624. 

G Griesbach, 1805. 

L Lachmann, 1842-1850. 

T Tischendorf, Eighth Edition, 1865-1872. 

Tr Tregelles, 1857-1872. 

A Alford, vol. i. 1868 ; vol. ii. 1871 ; vol. iii. 1865 ; vol. iv. 1862, 1870. 

W Wordsworth, 1870. 

+ signifies an addition. 

- »» ἢ omission. 

[ ] », in the interlinear translation, that there is no Greek word 
corresponding to the English. 

[ ] signifies in the notes that an editor marks the reading as doubtful. 

ΕΣ how far the variation in the Greek text extends. 

Text. Rec. refers to both Stephens 1550 and E. 


THIRD EDITION. 


This differs from the Second Edition only in a few places where the 
translation has been made more uniform, 1896. 


ΠΟ CAA 


THE *ACCORDING ἼΟ. “MATTHEW ‘HOLY 
BIBAOS γενέσεως ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, υἱοῦ ὑΔαβίδ," υἱοῦ 
BOOK of (the] generation of Jesus Christ, son of David, son 


᾿Αβραάμ. 


of Abraham, 


2 ᾿Αβραὰμ ἐγέννησεν τὸν ’loaan ᾿Ισαὰκ.δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν 


Abraham begat Isaac ; and Isaac begat 
Ἰακώβ᾽ ᾿Ιακὼβ.δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Ιϑύδαν καὶ τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς 
Jacob ; and Jacob begat Judas and 7brethren 
αὐτοῦ: 3 ᾿Ιοὐδας. δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν Φαρὲς καὶ τὸν Zapa ἐκ 
this ; and Judas begat Phares and Zara of 
τῆς Θαμάρ'’ Φαρὲς. δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Εσρώμ: ᾿Ἐσρὼμ. δὲ 
Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom ; and Esrom 


ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Αράμ' 4’Apay.de ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Αμιναδάβ'" 
begat am; and Aram begat Aminadab ; 
Αμιναδαβ! δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν Naacowy’ Naaocowy.cé ἐγέννη- 
and Aminadab begat Naasson ; and Naasson be- 
σεν τὸν Σαλμών' 5 Σαλμὼν.δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν Bool" ἐκ τῆς 
gat Salmon ; and Salmon begat Booz of 
‘Paya’ “Βοὺξζ! δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν © QBH6" ἐκ τῆς Ῥούθ᾽ “Ωβὴδἱ!' 
BRachab ; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth ; 2Obed 
δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν lecoat’ 6 ᾿Ιεσσαὶ.δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν "AaBid" 
‘and begat Jesse ; and Jesse begat David 
τὸν βασιλέα. ὕΔαβιὲὶδ᾽ δὲ [ὁ βασιλεὺς" ἐγέννησεν τὸν ΕΣολο- 
the king. And David the king begat Solo- 
μῶντα! ἐκ τῆς τοῦ Οὐρίου: 7 Σολομὼν. δὲ ἐγέν- 


mon of the (one who had been wife] of Urias; and Solomon be- 


νησεν τὸν Ῥοβοάμ: ‘PoBodp δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Αβιά" ᾿Αβιὰ 


gat Roboam ; and Roboam begat Abia; 7Abia 
δὲ ἐγέννησεν Tiv™ Aca" 8’ Acd' δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Ιωσαφάτ' 
land begat Asa; and Asa begat Josaphat ; 


? ‘ 4 ‘ , ’ 4 , ‘ 
Ἰωσαφὰτ.δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν Ιωράμ᾽ ᾿Ιωρὰμ δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν 


and Josaphat begat Joram ; and Joram begat 
POZiay’ 9 Ὀζίας". δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Ιωάθαμ᾽ ᾿Ιωάθαμ.δὲ 
Ozias ; and Ozias begat Joatham ; and Joatham 


ἐγέννησεν τὸν “Ayal: Αχαζ.δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν * Εζεκίαν"" 
begat Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias ; 


10 "Ἐζεκίας" δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν Μανασσῆ: Μανασσῆς δὲ ἐγέν- 


and Ezekias begat Manasses ; and Manasses be- 
vnoey τὸν “᾿Αμών"" ™Apuwr' δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν lwoiar"' 
gat Amon ; and Amon begat Josias ; 
11 “Iwoiac'.6& ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Ιεχονίαν καὶ τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς 
and Josias begat Jechonias and *pbrethren 
αὐτοῦ, ἐπὶ τῆς μετοικεσίας Βαβυλῶνος. 12 Μετὰ. δὲ 
*his, at(thetime] of the carryingaway οἵ Babylon. And after 


MATOAION AVION EYALPEAION. | 


7GLAD *TIDINGS. 


THE book of the gei- 
eration of Jesus Christ, 
the son of David, the 
zon of Abraham, 


2 Abraham begat 
Isaac ; and Isaac be- 
gat Jacob; and Jacob 
begat Judas and his 
brethren ; 3 and Judas 
begat Phares and Zara 
of Thamar; and Pha- 
res begat Esrom; and 
Esrom begat Aram; 
4 and Aram begat A- 
minadab; and Ami- 
nadab begat Naasson ; 
and Naasson begat 
Salmon ; 5 and Salmon 
begat Booz of Rachab; 
and Booz begat Obed 
of Ruth; and Obed 
begat Jesse; 6 and 
Jesse begat David the 
king; and David the 
king begat Solomon 
of her that had been 
the wife of Urias; 
7 and Solomon begat 
Roboam ; and Roboam 
begat Abia; and Abia 
begat Asa; 8and Asa 
begat Josaphat; and 
Josaphat begat Jo- 
ram; and Joram begat 
Ozias; 9 and Ozias 
begat Joatham; and 
Joatham begat A- 
chaz; and Achaz be- 
gat Ezekias ; 10 and 
Ezekias begat Manas- 
ses; and Manasses be- 
gat Amon; and Amon 
begat Josias; 11 and 
Josias begat Jechonias 
and his brethren,about 
the time they were 
carried away to Ba- 
bylon: 12 and after 


a Εὐαγγέλιον κατὰ Μαθθαῖον (Maré. Gw) Gutrw ; [Evay.] κατὰ Μαθθ. a; κατα Μαθθ. 1. 


Ὁ Δαυϊδ Gw; Δανεὶδ LTTrA. 
{--- ὃ βασιλεὺς LTTra. 

1 ᾽Οζείας LTTrA,. 

5 Ἰωσείας ἱτττὰ. 


ς ᾿Αμειναδάβ A. 
8 ΞΣολομῶνα GTTrAW. 
©’Eexeiav 1.. ι᾿Ἑζεκείας L. 


4 Boos LTr; Βοὲς Ta 
h’Agad LTTrA, 
m’Awws LTTra. 


© Ιωβὴδ LTTra. 
1 ’OGecav LTTra. 
π᾿Ιωσείαν LTTrA. 


B 


2 
they were brought to 
Babylon, Jechonias 


begat Salathiel; and 
Salathiel begat Zoro- 
babel; 13 and Zoroba- 
bel begat Abiud ; and 
Abiud begat Eliakim ; 
and Eliakim begat A- 
zor ; 14 and Azor begat 
Sadoc; andSadoc begat 
Achim; and Achim be- 
gat Eliud; 15and Eliud 
begat Eleazar; and 
Eleazar begat Mat- 
than; and Matthan 
begat Jacob; 16 and 
Jacob begat Joseph 
the husband of Mary, 
of whom was born 
Jesus, who is called 
Christ. 


17 So all the gene- 
rations from Abraham 
to David are fourteen 

enerations ; and from 

avid until the carry- 
ing away into Babyton 
are fourteen genera- 
tions; and from the 
carrying away into 
Babylon unto Christ 
are fourteen genera- 
tions, 


18 Now the birth of 
Jesus Christ was on 
this wise: When as his 
mother Mary was es- 
poused to Joseph, be- 
fore they came ἴο- 
gether, she was found 
with child of the Hol 
Ghost. 19 Then Josep: 
her husband, being a 
cust man, and not wil- 
ling to make her a 
public example, was 
minded to put her 
away privily. 20 But 
while he thought on 
these things, behold, 
the angel of the Lord 
appeared unto him in 
a dream, saying, Jo- 
seph, thou son of 
David, fear not to 
take unto thee Mary 
thy wife: for that 
which is conceived in 
her is of the Holy 
Ghost. 21 And she 
shall bring forth a 
son, and thou shalt 
call his name JESUS: 
for he shall save his 
people from their sins, 
22 Now all this was 
done, that it might be 
fulfilled which was 
ΓΕΘ θα of the Lord by 
the prophet, saying, 
23 Behold, a virgin 
shall be with child, 
and shall bring forth 


a son, and they shall 


4 γεννᾷ begets A. 
GLTTraAW 
LTTraw. 


* — yap for LTT:[ A]. 


MATOAIOS., I, 


THY μετοικεσίαν Βαβυλῶνος, ‘lexovac “ἐγέννησεν! τὸν Σαλα- 
the carryingaway of Babylon, Jechonias begat Sala- 


Or: Σαλαθιὴλ. δὲ “ἐγέννησεν! τὸν ZopoBaBer 18 Ζοροβά- 


thiel ; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel ; *Zoroba- 
Bed δὲ “ἐγέννησεν! τὸν ᾿Αβιούδ' ᾿Αβιοὺδ. δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν 
bel ‘tand begat Abiud ; and Abiud begat 
᾿Ελιακείμ' ᾿Ἑλιακεὶμ.δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Αζώρ' 14 ᾿Αζὼρ δὲ 
Eliakim ; and Eliakim begat Azor ; and Azor 
ἐγέννησεν τὸν Σαδώκ' Σαδὼκ. δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Αχείμ᾽ ᾿Αχειμ 
begat Sadoc ; and Sadoc begat Achim; 7Achim 


δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Ελιούδ' 15 ᾿Ελιοὺδ. δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν Ἔλεά- 
‘and begat Eliud; and Eliud begat Elea- 
Zap’ ᾿Ἐλεάξζαρ.δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν "Ματθάν"" τΜατθὰν" δὲ ἐγέν- 
Matthan ; and Matthan be- 


Zar; and Hleazar begat 
vnoey τὸν Ἰακώβ'΄ 16 ᾿Ιακὼβ δὲ ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Ιωσὴφ τὸν 
gat Jacob ; and Jacob begat Joseph the 


ἄνδρα Μαρίας, ἐξ ἧς ἐγεννήθη ᾿Ιησοῦς ὁ λεγόμενος χριστός. 


husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ. 
17 Πᾶσαι οὖν αἱ γενεαὶ ἀπὸ ᾿Αβραὰμ ἕως "Δαβιδ' 


So all the generations from Abraham to David [were] 


γενεαὶ δεκατέσσαρες" καὶ ἀπὸ *AaBid" Ewe τῆς μετοικεσίας 
*generations ‘fourteen; and from David until the carrying away 


Βαβυλῶνος, γενεαὶ δεκατέσσαρες" Kai ἀπὸ τῆς μετοικεσίας 
of Babylon, “generations ‘fourteen ; and from the carrying away 


Βαβυλῶνος Ewe τοῦ χριστοῦ, γενεαὶ δεκατέσσαρες. 
of Babylon to the Christ, *generations ‘fourteen. 


18 Τοῦ δὲ "Τησοῦ" χριστοῦ ἡ γέννησις" οὕτως ἦν. Μνη- 


Now of Jesus rist the birth thus was, *Having 
στευθείσης τ γὰρ" τῆς. μητὶ ὁς. αὐτοῦ Mcplag τῷ lwond, πρὶν.ἢ 
Speen Τρούσούῃοᾷ ‘for his “mother *Mary to Joseph, efore 
συνελθεῖν αὐτοὺς εὑρέθη ἐν γαστρὶ ἔχουσα ἐκ πνεύματος 


*came Stogether 'they she wasfound to be with ohild of (the] *Spirit 
ἁγίου. 19 Ἰωσὴφ.δὲ ὁ. ἀνὴρ.αὐτῆς, δίκαιος ὦν, καὶ μὴ θέλων 
ἸΉΟΪγΥ. But Joseph herhusband, righteous *being,and not willing 


αὐτὴν *rapadeyparioat," ἐβουλήθη YAaOpa" ἀπολῦσαι αὐτήν. 
to put 7away = her. 


her to expose publicly, purposed secretly 
~ ‘ ~ ’ ’ ” , 
0 ταῦτα.δὲ αὐτοῦ. ἐνθυμηθέντος, ἰδού, ἄγγελος κυρίου 
And Sthese*things ‘when*he*had*pondered, behold, anangel of [{}9} Lord 


kar’ ὄναρ ἐφάνη αὐτῷ, λέγων, ᾿Ιωσήφ, υἱὸς *AaBid," μὴ 
in adream appeared tohim, saying, Joseph, son of David, “not 
Paine ~ Η͂ " ω“ 9 Δ A 2 
φοβηθῇς παραλαβεῖν Μαριὰμ τὴν. γυναϊκά.σου" τὸ.γὰρ ἐν 
‘fear totaketo[thee] Mary thy wife, for that which in 
᾽ ~ ‘ > ’ , ’ e ΄ 9] ἐξ δὲ cr 
αὐτῇ γεννηθὲν ἐκ πνευματος ἐστιν αγιου. Τεξεται. vLOoY, 
her is begotten of (Sthe]°Spirit “is “Holy. Andsheshall bring forth ason, 
καὶ καλέσεις τὸ.Ὀνομα.αὐτοῦ "Inoovy' αὐτὸς. γὰρ σώσει τὸν 
and thou shalt call his name Jesus ; for he shall save 


λαὸν αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ τῶν.ἁμαρτιῶν αὐτῶν. 22 Ῥοῦτο.δὲ ὅλον 
‘people ‘his from their sins. Now this all 
, ε ~ a « θὲ « A 1 Sell /, 

γέγονεν, ἵνα πληρωθ τὸ πθέλι. ume ἴτοις, mene 
or 


led that which wasspoken by the 
~ « , 

διὰ τοῦ προφήτου, λέγοντος, 23 ᾿Ιδοὸ ἡ παρθένος ἐν 

through the prophet, saying, Behold, the virgin ‘with 


αστρὶ ἕξει καὶ τέξεται υἱόν, Kai καλέσουσιν τὸ ὄνομα 
child 4shall?be, and shall bring forth ason, and they shall call *name 


came to pass, that might be ful 


5 Aavié GW; Aaveld LTTrA. " --- Ἰησοῦ Tr. * γένεσις 


τ Μαθθάν LTTra. i 
YAd@pq 1. * — τοῦ (read |the]) 


χα δειγματίσαι LTTrA. 


1.1]: MATTHEW. 3 


ee , ἐξῆν» ΄ ἢ ,, call his name Emma- 
αὐτου ἐπι οῦηλ; O ἔστιν μεθερμηνευόμενον, Μεθ μῶν λαοὶ, which being in- 


this mmanuel, which is, being interpreted, f *With us  terpreted is, God with 
"ὁ" θεός. 24 ὑΔιεγερθεὶς".δὲ “ὁ" ᾿Ιωσὴφ ἀπὸ τοῦ ὕπνου, érroi-_BS. 24 Then Joseph be- 
'God. Andhaving*been*aroused ‘Joseph from the sleep, didetes Space SLOMASTeep 


A alec . 5 rf did as the angel of the 
noev we προσέταξεν αὐτῷ ὁ ἄγγελος κυρίου" καὶ παρέλαβεν Hers aid biddee bin, 

as had ordered him the ee δ: [[86] Lord, “πὸ ἘΠ etophien) site 25 and tear 
τὴν.γυναϊκα.αὐτοῦ, 25 Kai ovK.éyivwoKey αὐτὴν ἕως ov her not till she had 


Ἐν τς fot : brought forth her 
his wife, aod knew not her until Gicet Mae ea Temiihe 


ἔτεκεν “ro! υἱὸν “αὐτῆς τὸν mpwrdroKoy"" Kai ἐκάλεσεν called his name JE- 


she brought forth *son "her the firstborn ; and hecalisd SUS. 
τὸ ὑνομα.αὐτοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦν. 
his namo Jesus. 


Q ἸΤοῦ.δὲ᾿ Ἰησοῦ γεννηθέντος ἐν Βηθλεὲμ τῆς ᾿Ιουδαίας, 
Now Jesus having been born in Bethlehem of Judza, 
eas > Σ iS Ε ΟΡ a Mer 5 = 11. Now when Jesus 
EV ἡμέραις Hpowdov TOU βασιλέως, ἰδού, μάγοι απο ανατολῶν wasborn in Bethlehem 
in {the]days of Herou the king, behold, magi from(the] east ὍΣ νον μος aie i 
παρεγένοντο εἰς Lepocd\vpa, 2 λέγοντες, Ποῦ ἐστιν ὁ τεχ- hold, there came wise 
arrived at erusalem, saying, Where is he who has men from the east to 
: ᾿ aD ͵ ” ἢ Ay τάττον Geta, Jerusalem, 2 saying, 
θεὶξ βασιλεὺς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων; εἴδομεν yap αὐτοῦ τὸν ἀστέρα Whereishethat isborn 
been born King of the Jews? for we saw his star King of the Jews? for 
? ~ 9 ~ . oo» ~ wae ᾽ , we have seen his star 
ἐν TY ἀνατολῇ, καὶ ἤλθομεν προσκυνῆσαι αὐτῷ. 3 ᾿Ακούσας in the cast, and are 
in the east, and arecome todohomage tohim., ‘Having *heard come to worship him, 
5 ft , ι x ll ὲ , 6; \ ~ ε aN 3 When Herod t oeking 
δὲ Ἡρώδης ὁ βασιλεὺς! ἐταράχθη, καὶ πᾶσα ἹἹεροσόλυμα jad μοιταὰ these things 
‘but ?Herod “the *king hewastroubled,and all erusalem he was troubled, and 
= - 1 ᾽ ~ , all J 1 ith 
per αὐτοῦ" 4 καὶ συναγαγὼν πάντας τοὺς ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ him.’ 4d@And whon he 
with him, And having gatheredtogether all the chief priests and had gathered all the 
~ im ae θά a ie yoo ~ .,, chief priests and 
γραάμματεις του λαοῦ, ἐπυνθάνετο TAP αὐτων, TOV O χριστὸς scribes of the people 
scribes of the people, he inquired of them wherethe Christ together, he demanded 


γεννᾶται. 5 Οἱ. δὲ Selrov' αὐτῷ, Ἔν Βηθλεὲμ τῆς ᾿Ιουδαίας. Oia bo born, 5 And 
shouldbeborn. Andthey said tohim, In _ Bethlehem of Juda: they said unto him, In 


οὕτως. γὰρ γέγραπται διὰ τοῦ προφήτου, 6 Kai od Βηθλεέμ, pe beae aie 
for thus it has been written by the prophet, And thou, Bethlehem, by the prophet, 6 And 
γῆ ᾿Ιούδα, οὐδαμῶς ἐλαχίστη εἶ ἐν τοῖς ἡγεμόσιν ᾿Ιούδα᾽ ἐκ thou Bethlehem, inthe 


land of Juda, in no wise least artamong the governors of Juda, 7out tend Laue sri 


σοῦ γὰρ ἐξελεύσεται ἡγούμενος, ὕστις ποιμανεῖ τὸν. λαόν. μου Princes of Juda: for 


%of*thee‘for shall goforth a leader, who shallshepherd my people oe sot ehre se shall 
’ 


τὸν ᾿Ισραήλ. 7 Τότε Ἡρώδης "λάθρα! καλέσας τοὺς μάγους, mule my people Tarnel. 
Israel Then Herod, “secretly 'having called the magi, amcor a a 
ἠκρίβωσεν παρ᾽ αὐτῶν τὸν χρόνον τοῦ φαινομένου ἀστέρος" wise men, inguired of 


i) P 2 : 1 them diligently what 
peared ΠΟΟΌΓΑΎΘΙΝ of Hien, the ime ofthe eppesring ΠΕΣ tine fHastacanpeared. 
8 καὶ πέμψας αὐτοὺς εἰς Βηθλεὲμ εἶπεν, Πορευθέντες 'άκρι- 8 And he sent them to 

Απα having sent them to Bethlehem, hesaid, Having gone, accu- Hethleheiny eat its 
βῶς ἐξετάσατε! περὶ τοῦ παιδίου" ἐπὰν. δὲ εὕρητε, gently for the young 
rately inquire for the littlechild; and when ye shall have found [him] child; and when ye 


> r , “ Br ALS ‘ 7 > ~ have found him, brin 
ἀπαγγείλατε μοι, ὕπως κἀγὼ ἐλθὼν προσκυνήσω αὑτῷ. me word again, that t 
bring word back tome, that also havyingcome maydohomage tohim, may comeand worship 
einvel pate o? ~ , ᾽ , : 1 »9 + ε himalso. 9 When they 

9 Οἱιδὲ ἀκούσαντες τοῦ βασιλέως ἐπορεύθησαν" Kai ἰδού, ὁ had heard the king, 
Απᾶ they having heard the king, went away; and behold,the they departed; and, 
᾽ ΠΕΣ ΤᾺ > <a? x ~ > , ὦ ᾽ ’ lo, thestar, which they 
ἀστήρ, ov εἶδον ἐν τῇ ἀνατολῇ, προῆγεν αὐτοὺς ἕως ἐλθὼν saw in the east, wont 
star, which theysawin the east, went before them, untilhavingcome before them, till it 
κ᾿ 1 eG - σ᾿ 4 δὶ 10 ἐδό ΕΣ sete came and stood over 
€0T)) eTavVW OU nV TO σπαιοιον. t OVTEC. € TOV αστερα, where the young child 
it stood over where was the littlechild. Andhayvingseen the star, was. 10 wien they saw 
, ᾿ , the star, t joiced 
ἐχάρησαν χαρὰν μεγάλην σφόδρα᾽ 11 καὶ ἐλθόντες εἰς with exceeding great 
they rejoiced [with] joy ?great ‘exceedingly. And haying come into joy. 11 And when they 


*—oL. > ἐγερθεὶς having risen LTTrA. ¢—oT. 4d — τὸν (read a son) LTTra. 
© — αὐτῆς τὸν πρωτότοκον LITrA. £6 βασιλεὺς Ἡρώδης LTTra. Β εἶπαντ. 4 λάθρᾳι, 
leferaga ε ἀκριβῶς LTTrA. Κ ἐστάθη LTTra. 


4 


were come into the 
house, they saw the 
young child with Mary 
nis mother, and fell 
down, and worshipped 
him: and when they 
had opened their trea- 
sures, they presented 
anto him gifts; gold 
aud frankincenge, an 
myrrh. 12 And being 
warned of God in a 
dream that they 
should not return to 
Herod, they departed 
into their own coun- 
try another way. 


13 And when they 
were departed, behold, 
the angel of the Lord 
appearcth to Joseph in 
a dream, saying, Arise, 
and take the young 
child and his mother, 
and fice into Egypt, 
and be thou there until 
I bring thee word: for 
Herod will seek the 
poung child to destroy 

im. 14 When hearose, 
he took the young 
child and his mother 
by night, and departed 
into Egypt: 15 and was 
there until the death 
of Herod: that it might 
be fulfilled which was 
spoken of the Lord by 
the prophet, saying, 
Out of Egypt have I 
called my son. 16 Then 
Herod, when he saw 
that he was mocked of 
the wise men, was ex- 
ceeding wroth, and 
sent forth, and slew 
all the children that 
were in Bethlehem, 
and in all the coasts 
thereof, from two 
years old and under, 
according to the time 
which he had diligent- 
ly inquired of the wise 
men. 17 Then was ful- 
filled that which was 
spoken by Jeremy the 
Prephets saying, 15 In 

ama was there a voice 
heard, lamentation, 
and weeping, and great 
mourning, Rachel 
weeping for her chil- 
dren, and would not 
be coniforted, because 
they are not. 


19 But when Herod 
was dead, behold, an 
angel of the Lord ap- 
penreth in a dream 
to Joseph in Egypt, 
20 saying, Arise, and 
take the young child 
and his mother, and go 


MATOATIOYXS. 11. 
4 r des)? 1 = " ‘ δί ‘ , ~ A > ~ 
THY οἰκίαν, ‘Ebpov’ τὸ παιδίον μετὰ Μαρίας τῆς. μητρὸς. αὐτοῦ, 
the house, they Τοππᾷ the littlechild with Mary his mother, 
καὶ πεσόντες προσεκύνησαν αὐτῷ καὶ ἀνοίξαντες τοὺς 
and having fallendown did homage tohim: and having opened 
θησαυροὺς αὐτῶν προσήνεγκαν αὐτῷ δῶρα, χρυσὸν καὶ 
*treasures ‘their they offered tohim gifts; gold and 
? 


λίβανον Kai σμύρναν. 12 Kai χρηματισθέντες κατ 
frankincense and myrrh. And having been divinely instructed in 


ὄναρ μὴ ἀνακάμψαι πρὸς Ἡρώδην, δι ἄλλης ὁδοῦ 
adream not to revurn to Herod, by another way 
ἀνεχώρησαν εἰς τὴν.χώραν αὐτῶν. 
they withdrew into their own country. 

13 ᾿Αναχωρησάντων.δὲ αὐτῶν, ἰδού, ἄγγελος κυρίου 


Now *having *withdrawn ‘they, behold, anangel of[the) Lord 
“gaiverar κατ᾽ ὄναρ" τῷ ᾿Ιωσήφ, λέγων, Eyepelc παράλαβε 
appears in adream to Joseph, saying, Having risen take with[thee] 
τὸ παιδίον Kai τὴν. μητέρα.αὐτοῦ, Kai φεῦγε εἰς Αἴγυπτον, 
the little child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, 
καὶ ἴσθι ἐκεῖ ἕως ἂν εἴπω σοί" μέλλει γὰρ Ἡρώδης ζητεῖν τὸ 
and be there until 1 588}}] 611 thee; Sis¢about for “Herod to seek the 
παιδίον, τοῦ ἀπολέσαι αὐτό. 14 Ὁ δὲ ἐγερθεὶς παρέλαβεν 
little child, to destroy him. Ὁ Andhe having risen took with [him_ 
τὸ παιδίον καὶ τὴν. μητέρα.αὐτοῦ νυκτός, Kai ἀνεχώρησεν εἰς 
the littlechild and his mother by night, and withdrew into 
Αἴγυπτον, 15 καὶ ἦν ἐκεῖ ἕως τῆς τελευτῆς Ἡρώδου" 
gypt, and was there until the death of Herod: 
~ 4 a θὲ « " ἢ ™ II » ὃ 4 ~ 
πληρωθ τὸ ῥηθὲν ὑπὸ "τοῦ" κυρίου διὰ τοῦ 
might be fulfilled that which wasspoken by the Lord through the 
΄ , ? ᾽ ᾿ ? ’ ΟἿ “ΡΨ 
προφήτου, λέγοντος, EE Αἰγύπτου ἐκάλεσα τὸνουἱϊόν.μου. 
prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son. 
16 Τότε Ἡρώδης, ἰδὼν ὅτι ἐνεπαίχθη ὑπὸ τῶν μάγων, 
Then Herod, having seen that he wasmocked by the magi, 
ἐθυμώθη λίαν, καὶ ἀποστείλας ἀνεῖλεν πάντας τοὺς 
was enraged greatly, and having sent he put to death all the 
παῖδας τοὺς ἐν Βηθλεὲμ καὶ ἐν πᾶσιν τοῖς ὁρίοις. αὐτῆς, ἀπὸ 
boys that [{were}in Bethlehem and in all its borders, from 
διετοῦς Kai κατωτέρω, κατὰ τὸν χρόνον ὃν ἠκρί(ω- 
two years old and under, according to the time which hehadaccurately 
~ , « " 
σεν παρὰ τῶν μάγων. 17 Τότε ἐπληρώθη τὸ ῥηθὲν 
inquired from the magi. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken 
οὑπὸ! Ἱερεμίου τοῦ προφήτου, λέγοντος, 18 Φωνὴ ἐν ‘Papa 
by Jeremias the prophet, saying, Avoice in Rama 
~ ‘ , « ‘ 
ἠκούσθη, Ῥθρῆνος καὶ" κλαυθμὸς καὶ ὀδυρμὸς πολύς, “Payijr 
was heard, lamentation and weeping and *mourning ‘great, Rachel 
κλαίουσα τὰ τέκνα.αὐτῆς, καὶ οὐκ “ἤθελεν! παρακληθῆναι, 
weeping [for] her children, and *not ‘would be comforted, 
OTe οὐκ.εἰσίν. 
because they are not. 


19 TeXeuvrnoayroc.dé τοῦ gos ἰδού, ἄγγελος κυρίου 
But *having “died ‘Herod, behold, an angel of [the] Lord 


‘kar’ ὄναρ φαίνεται! τῷ ᾿Ιωσὴφ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ, 20 λέγων, ’Eyep- 


ἵνα 
that 


» 


in adream appears to Joseph in gypt, saying, Having 

‘ A U ‘ ‘ , ~ ‘ ’ 
θεὶς παράλαβε τὸ παιδίον καὶ τὴν. μητέρα. αὐτοῦ, Kai πορεύου 
risen take with [thee] the little child and his mother, and go 


Ι εἶδον they saw GLTTrAW. 
n — τοῦ (read [the]) LTTraw. 
τ φαίνεται κατ᾽ ὄναρ LTTrA. 


φαίνεται Tr. 
4 ηθέλησεν 1.. 


m κατ᾽ ὄναρ ἐφάνη in a dream appeared L; κατ᾽ ὄναρ 
© διὰ through LTTraW. P — @pyvos καὶ LTTra- 


ΠῚ ΤΙῚ: MATTHEW. 


εἰς γὴν ‘lopand* τεθνήκασιν.γὰρ οἱ ζητοῦντες τὴν 
into(the]land of Israel: for they have died who were ee the 


τοῦ παιδίου. 21 Ὁ δὲ ἐγερθεὶς παρέλαβεν τὸ παιδίον Kai 


Ἂν 


of the little child. And he havingrisen took with (him)the little child and 
τὴν. μητέρα.αὐτοῦ, καὶ "ἦλθεν! εἰς ee ‘Io, oot 22 ἀκούσας 
his mother, and came into([theJland of Israel eying. Sheard 


ιδὲ ὅτι ᾿Αρχέλαος βασιλεύει ἐπὶ" τῆς Ἰουδαίας ἀντὶ “Ἡρώδου 
‘butthat Archelaus reigns over Juda insteadof Herod 


τοῦ.πατρὸς αὐτοῦ," ἐφοβήθη ἐκεῖ ἀπελθεῖν" ᾿χρηματισ- 
his father, he was afraid there to go; “having “been “divinely 


θεὶς δὲ κατ᾽ ὄναρ, ἀνεχώρησεν εἰς τὰ μέρη τῆς Γαλιλαίας, 


‘instructed 'and in adream, he withdrew into the parts of Galilee : 
28 καὶ ἐλθὼν κατῴκησεν εἰς πόλιν λεγομένην “Ναζαρέτ'" 
and having come he dwelt in acity called Nazareth ; 
ὅπως πληρωθῇ τὸ ῥηθὲν διὰ τῶν προφητῶν, Ore 
so that should be fulfilled that which was spokenthroughthe prophets, that 
Ναζωραῖος κληθήσεται. 
a Nazarean shall he be called 


3 Ἐν.δὲ ταῖς. ἡμέραις.ἐκείναις παραγίνεται ᾿Ιωάννης ὁ 
Now in those a3 comes John the 


βϑαπτιστής, κηρύσσων ἐν TH ἐρήμῳ Tij¢ Lovdaiag, 2*cai' λέγων, 
Baptist, Beoslatming in the wilderness of Judza, and ED 


Μετανοεῖτε" ἤγγικεν.γὰρ ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν. 3 Οὗτος. γάρ 


Repent, pores drawn near ae kingdom of the heavens. For this 
ἐστιν ὁ ῥηθεὶς Υὑπὸ" Ἡσαΐου τοῦ προφήτου, λέγοντος Η 
is hewho ἘΣ {πότ of by Esaias the prophet, saying, 


Φωνὴ βοῶντος ἐν τῷ ἐρήμῳ, τοιμάσατε τὴν ὁδὸν κυ- 
The] voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the ey, of [the] 


ρίου᾽ εὐθείας ποιεῖτε τὰς.τρίβους. αὐτοῦ. 4 Αὐτὸς. .δὲ ὁ ᾿Ιωάννης 
Lord, Εἰσεικεν make his paths, And *himself ‘John 


εἶχεν τὸ ἔνδυμα.αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ τριχῶν καμήλου, καὶ ζώνην dep- 


bad his raiment of hair ofacamel, and a girdle oe 
ματίνην περὶ τὴν. ὀσφὺν. αὐτοῦ" ἡ.δὲ τροφὴ Ταὐτοῦ ἦν!" ἀκρίδες 
leather about his loins, andthe food ofhim was locusts 
καὶ μέλι ἄγριον. 
and *honey ‘wild. 
5 Tore ἐξεπορεύετο eels Bue ‘Te 2 Le καὶ πᾶσα ἡ 
Then went out rusalem, and all 


lovdaia καὶ πᾶσα ἡ peli Spadite τοῦ lo 
Judea, and all the ΞΕΒΣΆ ΞΟ around the 

ζοντο" ἐν τῷ lopdavy” 
tized in the Jordan 


δάνου" 6 καὶ ἐβαπτί- 
ordan, and were bap- 


ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, ἐξομολογούμενοι τὰς ἁμαρ- 
by him, confessing sins 


τίας αὐτῶν. 7 ᾿Ιδὼν.δὲ πολλοὺς τῶν Φαρισαίων καὶ Σαδδου- 
‘their Baghaving seen many ofthe Pharisees and Saddu- 


καίων ἐρχομένους ἐπὶ τὸ. βάπτισμα.“αὐτοῦ, εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, 
cees coming to his eens he said tothem, 


Γεννήματα ἐχιδνῶν, Tic ὑπέδειξεν ὑμῖν φυγεῖν ἀπὸ τῆς ped- 
ΟἸΈΡΕΙΝΕ: of vipers, who forewarned you toflee from the com- 


λούσης ὀργῆς; 8 ποιήσατε οὖν “napa οὺὑς ἀξίους" τῆς μετα- 
ing wrath? Produce therefore its worthy of repent- 


γνοίας" 9 καὶ μὴ.δόξητε λέγειν ἐν ἑαυτοῖς, Πατέρα ἔχομεν 
ance: and think not tosay within yourselves[*For] *father ‘we “have 


5 εἰσῆλθεν entered L1Tra. 
αὐτοῦ ᾿Ἡρώδον LTTrA. 
τὴν αὐτοῦ UITrA. 


w ar LTTrw. * — καὶ Li[Tr]a. 
baptism) LT[Tral. 


a + [πάντες all L. b ποταμῷ river LTTrA. 
d καρπὸν ἄξιον fruit worthy GLTTraw. 


ὃ 


into the land of Israel: 
for they are dead which 
sought the young 
child’s life. 21 And he 
arose, and took the 
young child and his 
mother, and came in- 
to the land of Israel. 
22 But when he heard 
that Archelaus did 
reign in Juda in the 
room of his father He- 
rod, he was afraid to 
go thither: notwith- 
standing, being warn- 
ed of God in a dream, 
he turned aside into 
the parts of Galilee: 
23and he came and 
dwelt ina city called 
Nazareth: that it 
might be fuifilled 
which was spoken by 
the prophets, He shall 
be called a Nazarene, 


111. In those days 
came John the Baptist, 
preaching in the wil- 
derness of Judwa,2and 
saying, Repent ye: for 
the kingdom of heaven 
is at hand. 3 For this 
is he that was spoken 
of by the prophet E- 
sais, saying, The voice 
of one crying in the 
wilderness, Prepare 

e the way of the 

ord, make his paths 
straight. 4And the 
same John had his rai- 
ment of camel’s hair, 
and a leathern girdle 
about his loins; and 
his meat was locusts 
and wild honey. 


5 Then went out to 
him Jerusalem, and 
all Judza, and all the 
region round about 
Jordan, 6 and were 
baptized of him in Jor- 
dan, confessing their 
sins. 7 But when he 
saw many of the Pha- 
risees and Sadducees 
come to his baptism. 
he said unto them, O 
generation of vipers, 
who hath warned you 
to flee from the wrath 
to come? 8 Briug forth 
therefore fruits meet 
for repentance: 9 and 
think not to say within 
yourselves, We have 
Abraham to our fa- 


t — ἐπὶ (read τῆς ον. over Judza) τ tra]. 


Υ τοῦ πατρὸς 


Υ διὰ through LTTraw. 


ς — αὐτοῦ (read the 


6 

ther: for I say unto 
you, that God is able 
of these stones to raise 
up children unto Abra- 
ham. 10 And now also 
the axe is laid unto 
the root of the trees: 
therefore every tree 
which bringeth not 
forth good fruit is 
hewn down, and cast 
into the fire. 11 I in- 
deed baptize you with 
water unto repent- 
ance: but he that 
cometh after me is 
mightier than I, whose 
shoes I am not worthy 
to bear: he shall bap- 
tize you with the Holy 
Ghost, and with fire: 
12 whose fan is in 
his hand, and he will 
throughly purge his 
floor, and gather his 
wheat into the garner; 
but he will burn up 
the chaff with un- 
quenchable fire. 


13 Then cometh Je- 
sus from Galilee to 
Jorden unto John, to 
be baptized of him. 
14 But John forbad 
him, saving, I have 
need to be baptized of 
thee, and comest thou 
to me? 15 And Jesus 
answering said unto 
him, Suffer it to be so 
now: for thus it be- 
cometh us to fulfil all 
righteousness. Then 
he suffered him. 16 And 
Jesus, when he was 
baptized, went up 
straightway out of the 
water: and, lo, the 
heavens were opened 
unto him, and he saw 
the Spirit of God de- 
scending like a dove, 
and lighting upon him: 
17 and lo a voice from 
heaven, saying, This 
is my beloved Son, in 
whom I am _ well 
pleased, 


IV. Then was Jesus 
led up of the Spirit in- 
to the wilderness to be 
tempted of the devil. 
2 And when he had 
fasted forty days and 
forty nights, he we : «f- 
terward an hungred, 


MATOAIOS. 11, LV. 


τὸν ABpadu’ λέγω.γὰρ ὑμῖν, ὅτι δύναται ὁ θεὸς ἐκ τῶν λίθων 
Abraham: forIsay toyou,that able is God from *stones 
τούτων ἐγεῖραι τέκνα τῷ Αβραάμ. 10 ἤδη.δὲ “καὶ! ἡ ἀξίνη 
‘these toraiseupchildren to Abraham. Butalready-also the axe 
πρὸς τὴν ῥίζαν τῶν δένδρων κεῖται: πᾶν οὖν δένδρον μὴ 
to the root ofthe trees isapplied:7every ‘therefore tree ποῦ 


ποιοῦν καρπὸν καλὸν ἐκκόπτεται Kai εἰς vp βάλλεται. 


TU 
producing “fruit Ἰροοῦᾶ iscutdown and into!{the] ἘΠ is cast, 


11 ᾿Εγὼ μὲν [βαπτίζω ὑμᾶς" ἐν ὕδατι εἰς peradvorav’ ὁ. δὲ 
I indeed baptize you with water to repentance; but he who 
ὀπίσω μου ἐρχόμενος ἰσχυρότερός μου ἐστίν, οὗ οὐκ εἰμὶ 
after me [is] coming mightier thanI is, of whom Iam not 
ἱκανὸς ra ὑποδήματα βαστάσαι" αὐτὸς ὑμᾶς βαπτίσει ἐν 
fit the sandals to bear: he ou ‘will *baptize with [the} 
πνεύματι ἁγίῳ Kai πυρί. 1206 τὸ πτύον ἐν τῇ χειρὶ 
3Spirit ‘Holy and with fire. Of whom the winnowing fan [is] in *hand 
αὐτοῦ, καὶ διακαθαριεῖ τὴν.λωνα αὐτοῦ, καὶ συνάξει 
this, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and will gather 
~ ~ ᾽ \ . 
τὸν σῖτον αὐτοῦ εἰς THY ἀποθήκην,ξ τὸ.δὲ ἄχυρον κατακαύσει 
his wheat into the granary, butthe chaff he will burn up 
πυρὶ ἀσβέστῳ. 
with fire unquenchable, 
18 Τότε παραγίνεται ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἀπὸ τῆς Γαλιλαίας ἐπὶ τὸν 


Then comes Jesus from Galilee to the 
Ἰορδάνην πρὸς τὸν Ἰωάννην, τοῦ βαπτισθῆναι ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 
Jordan to John, to be baptized by him, 


14 ὁ δὲ "᾿ῬΤωάννης" διεκώλυεν αὐτόν, λέγων, 
But John was hindering him, saying, 
« a ~ ~ 7 ᾿ » , ? ‘ 
ὑπὸ σοῦ βαπτισθῆναι, Kai od ἔρχῃ πρός με; 15 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς 
by thee tobebaptized, and*thou‘comest to me? *Answering 
δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν 'πρὸς αὐτόν, Αφες ἄρτι: οὕτως.γὰρ 
‘but 7Jesus said to him, Suffer [it] now; for thus 
πρέπον ἐστὶν ἡμῖν πληρῶσαι πᾶσαν δικαιοσύνην. Τότε 
becoming itis to us to fulfil all righteousness. Then 
ἀφίησιν αὐτόν. 163Kai βαπτισθεὶς) ὁ᾿Ἰησοῦς ἀνέβη 
he suffers him. And having been baptized Jesus went up 
εὐθὺς! ἀπὸ τοῦ ὕδατος, καὶ ἰδού, ἰἀνεῴχθησαν" αὐτῷ" οἱ 
immediately from the water: and behold, were opened tohim the 
οὐρανοί, καὶ εἶδεν "τὸ! πνεῦμα Prov" θεοῦ καταβαῖνον ὡσεὶ 
heavens, and hesaw_ the Spirit of God descending as 
, p Sy 2 , ? ? ᾽ , Set Ud ‘ 
περιστεράν, Ῥκαὶ! ἐρχόμενον ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν. 17 καὶ ἰδού, φωνὴ 
a dove, and coming upon him: and lo, a voice 
ix τῶν οὐρανῶν, λέγουσα, Οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ.υἱόξς.ιμου ὁ aya- 
out of the heavens, saying, This is my Son the be- 
πητός, ἐν ᾧ εὐδόκησα". 
loved, in whom [have found delight. 
4 Τότε τὸ" Inoove ἀνήχθη εἰς τὴν ἔρημον ὑπὸ τοῦ πνεύ- 
Then Jesus wasledup into the wilderness by the Spi- 


ματος, πειρασθῆναι ὑπὸ τοῦ διαβόλου. 2 καὶ νηστεύσας 


devil. 


‘Bye χρεί αν ἔχω 


need ‘have 


rit to be tempted by the And having fasted 
ἡμέρας "τεσσαράκοντα" καὶ ‘vixrag τεσσαράκοντα," ὕστερον 
days forty and “nights forty, afterwards 


——————————————— 2 6 ΞΞ ΞΕΞΕΞΘΞΞΘΘΞΘΕ: 
ἐ-- καὶ LTTrAW. Ἁὑμᾶς βαπτίζω LrTrw. & + αὐτοῦ (read his granary) Ltrw. ἢ --- Ἰωάννης 


(read he was hindering) L1|TrA]w. Ἢ ν ' 
tl ἠνεῴχθησαν L, ™ — αὐτῷ [1|}τ. 5 — τὸ (read[the]) {||} °— rod TA]. P— καὶ LT 


a ηὐδόκησα T 


F—OA. 


iavre L. 1 βαπτισθεὶς δὲ LITrAW. * εὐθὺς ἀνέβη LITrW. 
{tra} 


* τεσσεράκοντα TTrA. * τεσσεράκοντα νύκτας T; νύκτας τεσσέρ. Tra. 


Iv. MATTHEW. 


? , . 6 ‘ v > ~ I] ct , w > 
ἐπείνασεν. 3 καὶ προσελθὼν αὐτῷ" ὁ πειράζων elaev™, Et 
he hungered., And havingcome tohim the tempter said, If 
υἱὸς εἶ roveov, εἰπὲ ἵνα οἱ.λίθοι.οὗτοι ἄρτοι γένωνται. 
7Son 'thou*art of God, speak that these stones “loaves ‘may *become, 
6 4A ? ‘ , ? > ᾽ » , 
4 Ὁ δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν, Γέγραπται, Οὐκ ἐπ᾽ ἄρτῳ μόνῳ 
Buthe answering said, Ithasbeenwritten, Not by brea alone 
ζήσεται “ἄνθρωπος, ἀλλ᾽ Yéri'| παντὶ ῥήματι ἐκπορευομένῳ διὰ 
shall 1ἴν8 ‘man, but by every word going out through 


στόματος θεοῦ. ὃ Τότε παραλαμβάνει αὐτὸν ὁ διάβολος εἰς 
{the]mouth of God. Then ®takes *him ‘the “devil to 


THY ἁγίαν πόλιν, Kai *tornow' αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὸ πτερύγιον τοῦ 


the holy city, and sets him upon the edge of the 
ἱεροῦ, 6 καὶ "λέγει! αὐτῷ, Ei υἱὸς el τοῦ θεοῦ, βάλε σεαυ- 
temple, and says tohim, If *Son?thonu art of God, cast thy- 
τὸν κάτω: γέγραπται.γάρ, Ὅτι τοῖς.ἀγγέλοις.αὐτοῦ ἐν- 
self down : for it has been written, To his angels he 
τελεῖται περὶ σοῦ, καὶ ἐπὶ χειρῶν ἀροῦσίν σε. 


will give charge concerning thee, and in([their] hands shall they bear thee, 


μήποτε προσκόψῃς πρὸς λίθον τὸν.πόδα.σου. 7 Ἔφη αὐτῷ 
lest thou strike against a stone thy foot. "Said *to*him 


ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Πάλιν γέγραπται, Οὐκ.ἐκπειράσεις κύριον τὸν 
1Jesus, Again it hasbeen written, Thoushalt not tempt [the] Lord 


θεόν cov. ὃ Πάλιν παραλαμβάνει αὐτὸν ὁ διάβολος εἰς 


Ξ4οα ‘thy. Again *takes ‘him ‘the devil to 
» «- ‘ , ‘ ΄ 3 ~ , ‘ 
ὄρος ὑψηλὸν λίαν, καὶ δείκνυσιν αὐτῷ πάσας τὰς βασι- 
amountain “high ‘exceedingly, and shews tohim all the king- 


λείας τοῦ κόσμου Kai τὴν.δόξαν. αὐτῶν, 9 Kai éyer' αὐτῷ, 


doms ofthe world and their glory, and says tohim, 
‘Taira πάντα σοι! δώσω, ἐὰν πεσὼν προσκυνήσῃς 
*These*things ‘all tothee willIgive if fallingdown thou wilt worship 
μοι. 10 Τότε λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, “Yraye’, σατανᾶ" 
me, Then says *to*him Jesus, Get thee away, Satan ; 
pe γραπται γάρ; Κύριον τὸν θεόν.σου προσκυνήσεις. καὶ 
for it has been written, [The] Lord thy God shalt thou worship, and 


αὐτῷ μόνῳ λατρεύσεις. 11 Τότε ἀφίησιν αὐτὸν ὁ διάβολος" 
him alone shalt thonserve, Then “leaves “him ‘the “devil, 
καὶ ἰδού, ἄγγελοι προσῆλθον Kai διηκόνουν αὐτῷ. 
and behold, angels came and ministered tohim. 
12 ᾿Ακούσας.δὲ “ὁ Τησοῦς" bri ᾿Ιωάννης παρεδόθη, ἀν- 
But *having *heard + Jesus that John was delivered up, he 
ἐχώρησεν εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν. 18 καὶ καταλιπὼν τὴν Ναζαρέτ," 
withdrew into Galilee : and having left Nazareth, 
3 ‘ ’ > ‘ I 4 , 
ἐλθὼν κατῴκησεν εἰς ΞΚαπερναοὺμ' τὴν i seca τη; 
havingcome hedwelt at Capernaum, which [is] on the sea-side, 
ἐν ὁρίοις Ζαβουλὼν καὶ Νεφθαλείμ, 14 iva oles 
in[the]borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim, that might be ed 
TO ῥηθὲν διὰ Ἡσαΐου τοῦ προφήτου, λέγοντος, 15 Γῆ 
that which wasspoken by Εἰβεΐα the prophet, saying, Land 
Ζαβουλὼν καὶ γῆ Νεφθαλείμ, ὁδὸν θαλάσσης πέραν τοῦ 
of Zabulon, and land of Nephthalim, way  of{[the)sea, beyond the 
Ἰορδάνου, Ῥαλιλαία τῶν ἐθνῶν, 16 ὁ λαὸς ὁ καθήμενος 
Jordan; Galilee of the nations, the people which was sitting 


7 


3 And when thetempt- 
er came to him, he 
said, If thou be the 
Son of God, command 
that these stones be 
made bread. 4 But he 
answered and said, It 
is written, Man shall 
not live by bread alone, 
but by every word that 
proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God. 5 Then 
the devil taketh him 
up into the holy city, 
and setteth him on a 
pinnacle of the temple, 
6 and saith unto him, 
If thou be the Son 
of God, cast thyself 
down: for it is written, 
He shall give his 
angels charge con- 
cerning thee: and in 
their hands they shall 
bear thee up, lest at 
any time thou dash 
thy foot against a 
stone. 7 Jesus said 
unto him, It is writter 
again, Thou shalt not 
tempt the Lord thy 
God. 8 Again, the deyil 
taketh him up into an 
exceeding high moun- 
tain, and sheweth him 
all the kingdoms of 
the world, and the 
glory of them; 9 and 
saith unto him, All 
these things will I give 
thee, if thou wilt fall 
down and worship me, 
10 Then saith Jesus 
unto him, Get thee 
hence, Satan: for it is 
written, Thou shalt 
worship the Lord thy 
God, and him only 
shalt thou serve, 
ll Then the devil 
leaveth him, and, be- 
hold, angels came and 
ministered unto him. 


12 Now when Jesus 
had heard that John 
was cast into prison, 
he departed into Gali- 
lee; 13 and leaving 
Nazareth, he came and 
dwelt in Capernaum, 
which is upon the sea 
coast, in the borders 
of Zapulon and Neph- 
thalim: 14 that it 
might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by 
Esaias the prophet, 
saying, 15 The land of 
Zabulon, and the land 
of Nephthalim, by the 
way of the sea, beyond 
Jordan, Galilee of the 
Gentiles; 16 the peo- 
ple which sat in dark- 


Y—av7T@ TTrA. * - αὐτῷ tohim LITrAW. *+ ὃ LTTrAW. Yév LTrA. * ἔστησεν set LTTrA. 


8 εἶπεν Said L. b εἶπεν said LTTrA. © ταῦτά σοι πάντα TTrA. 


d + ὀπίσω pov behind 


me G[L]w. “ --- ὁ Ἰησοῦς TrrAW { Ναζαρὰθ NazarathL; NaGape@ w; Ναζαρὰ Nazara Trra, 
n ρ 


Ξξ Καφαρναοὺμ. LTTrAW. 


8 


ness saw great light; 
and to them which sat 
in the region and 
shadow of death, light 
is sprung up. 17 From 
that time Jesus began 
to preach, and to say, 
Repent: for the king- 
dom of heaven is at 
band. 


18 And Jesus, walk- 
ing by the sea of Gali- 
jee, saw two brethren, 
Simon called Peter, 
and Andrew his bro- 
ther, casting a net 
into the sea: for they 
were fishers. 19 And 
he saith unto them, 
Follow me, and 1 will 
make you fishers of 
men, 20 And the 
straightway left their 
nets, and followed 
him. 21 And going on 
from thence, he saw 
other two brethren, 
James the son of Zebe- 
dee, and John his 
brother, in aship with 
Zebedees their father, 
mending their nets; 
and he called them. 
22 And they immedi- 
ately left the ship and 
their father, and fol- 
lowed him. 


23 And Jesus went 
about all Galilee, 
teaching in their syn- 
agogues, and preach- 
ing the gospel of the 
kingdom, and healing 
all manner of sickness 
and all manner of 
disease among the peo- 
ple. 24 And his fame 
went dea tree ὮΝ: 
Syria: and Bey 
brought unto hin all 
sick people that were 
taken with divers 
diseases and torments, 
and those which were 
possessed with devils, 
and those which were 
lunatic, and those 
that had the palsy ; 
and he healed them, 
25 And there followed 
him great multitudes 
of people from Galilee, 
and from Decapolis, 
and from Jerusalem 
and from Judea, and 
Jrom veyond Jordan, 

V. And seeing the 
multitudes, he went 
up into a mountain: 
and when he was set, 
his disciples came un- 
to him: 2 and he 


Ὁ σκοτίᾳ φῶς εἶδεν LTrA ; σκότει φῶς εἶδεν TW. 
16 ᾿Ιησοῦς ὅλῃ τῇ Γαλιλαίᾳ L; 
ὁ Τησοῦς ὅλην τὴν Γαλιλαίαν W. 


Jesus L. 
TIA; 


IV; ¥; 


καθημένοις ἐν 


ΜΑΤΘΑΙ͂ΟΣ. 
εἶδε 


> h , ~ sil , ‘ ~ 
Ey σκότει φῶς" péya, καὶ τοῖς 


in darkness hasseen a7light ‘great, and tothose which were —- in [the] 
χώρᾳ καὶ σκιᾷ θανάτου, φῶς ἀνέτειλεν αὐτοῖς. 17 ᾿Απὸ 
country and shadow of death, light has sprung up tothem. From 


τότε ἤρξατο ὁ Ἰησοῦς κηρύσσειν καὶ λέγειν, Μετανοεῖτε" 
that time began Jesus to proclaim and to say, Repent ; 


ἤγγικεν.γὰρ ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν. 
for has drawn near meh kingdom ofthe heavens. 
18 Περιπατῶν.δὲ 16 ᾿Τησοῦς" παρὰ τὴν θάλασσαν τῆς Γαλι- 
And *walking ‘Jesus by the sea of Gali- 
λαίας εἶδεν δύο ἀδελφούς, Σίμωνα τὸν λεγόμενον Πέτρον, καὶ 
lee hesaw two brothers, Simon who is called Peter, and 


᾿Ανδρέαν τὸν ἀδελφὸν. αὐτοῦ, βάλλοντας ἀμφίβληστρον εἰς 
Andrew his brother, casting a large net into 


τὴν θάλασσαν" ἢσαν.γὰρ ἁλιεῖς. 19 Kai λέγει αὐτοῖς," Δεῦτε 
the sea, for they were fishers: and hesays tothem, Come 
> ΄ ‘A t « ~ (3 ~ > ’, ε 

ὀπίσω μου, καὶ ποιήσω ὑμᾶς ἁλιεῖς ἀνθρώπων. 20 Οἱ. δὲ 
of men. 


after me, and Iwillmake you fishers And they 
εὐθέως ἀφέντες τὰ δίκτυα ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῷ. 21 Kai 
immediately having left the nets, followed him. And 


προβὰς ἐκεῖθεν, elder ἄλλους δύο ἀδελφούς, Τάκωβον τὸν 
having gone on thence, hesaw other two _ brothers, James the[son} 
“Γ΄, , ν᾽ ΄ ν ? ΗΠ ? ~ ? ~ ΄ 
τοῦ Ζεβεδαίου καὶ ᾿Ιωάννην τὸν. ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ, ἔν τῷ πλοίῳ 
of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the — ship 


μετὰ Ζεβεδαίου τοῦ.πατρὸς. αὐτῶν. καταρτίζοντας τὰ δίκτυα 
with Zebedee their father, mending *nets 


αὐτῶν" καὶ ἐκάλεσεν αὐτούς. 22 οἱ δὲ εὐθέως ἀφέντες τὸ 
‘their, and hecalled them ; and they immediately having left the 


πλοῖον Kai τὸν.πατέρα.αὐτῶν ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῷ. 
ship and their father followed him. 


23 Kai περιῆγεν ὕλην τὴν Γαλιλαίαν ὁ Ἰησοῦς," διδάσκων 
And *went*about ‘all >Galilee ‘Jesus, teaching 


ἐν Taic. συναγωγαῖς. αὐτῶν, καὶ κηρύσσων τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τῆς 
in their synagogues, and proclaiming, the glad tidings of the 


βασιλείας, καὶ θεραπεύων πᾶσαν νόσον Kai πᾶσαν μαλακίαν 
kingdom, and healing every disease and every bodily weakness 


> ~ nae ~ εὐ... \ > ~ > ef A 
ἐν τῷ haw. 24 καὶ ἀπῆλθεν ἡ ἀκοὴ αὐτοῦ εἰς ὅλην THY Συ- 
among the people. And wentout the fame of him into all Sy- 


piav’ Kai προσήνεγκαν αὐτῷ πάντας τοὺς κακῶς ἔχοντας, 
ria. And they brought tohim all who were ill, 


ποικίλαις νόσοις καὶ βασάνοις συνεχομένους, ™cai! δαιμονιζο- 
by various diseases and torments oppressed, and possessed by 


μένους, καὶ σεληνιαζομένους, καὶ παραλυτικούς" καὶ ἐθερά- 


demons, and lunatics, and Dar alytics ; and he 

πευσεν αὐτούς. 25 καὶ ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῷ ὄχλοι πολλοὶ ἀπὸ 

healed them. And *followed *him 7erowds ‘great from 

τῆς Γαλιλαίας καὶ Δεκαπόλεως καὶ Ἱεροσολύμων καὶ Ἰουδαίας 
Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judea 

καὶ πέραν τοῦ ᾿Ιορδάνου. 

and Deyene the Jordan, 


5 ᾿Ιδὼν. δὲ τοὺς ὄχλους, ἀνέβη εἰς τὸ ὄρος᾽ καὶ καθίσαν - 
But seeing the crowds, he went up into the mountain; and *having δας 


τὸς αὐτοῦ, "προσῆλθον" οαὐτῷ" οἱ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ. 2 Kai avoi- 
“down ‘the, came to him his disciples. And having 


‘— ὃ Ἰησοῦς GLTTraAW. * + [ὁ Ἰησοῦς] 
[ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς] tr (— ὃ ᾿Ιησοῦς TA) ἐν ὅλῃ τῇ Ταλιλαΐέᾳ 
τὰ --- καὶ ιττὰ. ππροσῆλθαν TTr. ο --- αὐτῷ L, 


Υ. MATTHEW. 


tag τὸ στόμα.αὐτου ἐδίδασκεν αὐτούς, λέγων, 3 Μακάριοι οἱ 
opened his mouth he taught them, saying, Blessed [are] the 


πτωχοὶ TY πνεύματι" ὅτι αὐτῶν ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεία THY οὐρανῶν. 


poor in spirit ; for theirs is the kingdom ofthe heavens. 
4 νμακάριοι ot πενθοῦντες" ὅτι αὐτοὶ παρακληθήσονται. 
Blessed they who mourn ; for they shall be comforted. 


ὃ μακάριοι οἱ πραεῖς" ὅτι αὐτοὶ κληρονομήσουσιν τὴν γῆν." 
Blessed the meek; for they shall inherit the earth. 


6 μακάριοι οἱ πεινῶντες καὶ διψῶντες τὴν δικαιοσύνην" ὅτι 
Blessed they who hunger and thirst after righteousness ; for 


αὐτοὶ χορτασθήσονται. ἢ μακάριοι ot ἐλεήμονες" OTL αὐτοὶ 
they shall be filled. Blessed the merciful; for they 


ἐλεηθήσονται. 8 μακάριοι ot καθαροὶ τῇ Kapdig’ ὅτι αὐτοὶ τὸν 
shall find mercy. Blessed the pure in heart; for they 


θεὸν ὄψονται. 9 μακάριοι οἱ εἰρηνοποιοί" ὅτι «αὐτοὶ! υἱοὶ θεοῦ 


SGod ‘shall see. Blessed the peacemakers; for they sonsofGod 
κληθήσονται. 10 μακάριοι οἱ δεδιωγμένοι ἕνεκεν δικαιο- 
shall be called. Blessed they who have been persecuted on accountof right- 


σύνης" ὅτι αὐτῶν ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν. 11 μακάριοί 
eousness;for theirs is the kingdom ofthe heavens. Blessed 
ἐστε, ὅταν ὀνειδίσωσιν ὑμᾶς Kai διώξωσιν, καὶ εἴπωσιν πᾶν 
are ye when theyshallreproach you, and shall persecute, and 5181] say every 
πονηρὸν ‘pia καθ᾽ ὑμῶν "ψευδόμενοι," ἕνεκεν ἐμοῦ. 12 yai- 
wicked word agaiust you, lying, onaccountof me. Re- 
PETE καὶ ἀγαλλιᾶσθε, ὅτι ὁ. μισθὸς ὑμῶν πολὺς ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς" 
joice and exult, for yourreward [15] great in the heavens; 
οὕτως. γὰρ ἐδίωξαν τοὺς προφήτας τοὺς πρὸ ὑμῶν. 
forthus they persecuted the prophets who[were] before you. 
13 Ὑμεὶς ἐστε τὸ ἅλας τῆς γῆς" ἐὰν.δὲ τὸ ἅλας μωρανθῇ, 
Ye are the salt ofthe earth: butif the sait become tasteless, 
ἐν τίνι ἁλισθήσεται; εἰς οὐδὲν ἰσχύει ἔτι, εἰ. μὴ *BAN- 
with what shallit besalted? for nothing hasitstrength anylonger, but to be 
θῆναι" ἔξω, Yai! καταπατεῖσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων. 14 Ὑμεῖς 
cast out, and tobetrampledupon by men, Ye 
ἐστε TO φῶς τοῦ κόσμου" οὐ-δύναται πόλις κρυβῆναι ἐπάνω 
are the lightofthe world, Scannot 1a *city be hid on 
ὄρους κειμένη" 15 οὐδὲ Kaiovow λύχνον καὶ τιθέασιν αὐτὸν 
& mountain situated, Nor dothey light alamp and put it 
ὑπὸ τὸν μόδιον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ τὴν λυχνίαν, Kai Ἀάμπει πᾶσιν τοῖς 
under ἐπ ΘΟΥΤῚ measure, but upon the lampstand; and itshines forall who 
ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ. 16 οὕτως λαμψάτω τὸ φῶς ὑμῶν ἔμπροσθεν 
[8416] in the house, Thus let shine your light before 
τῶν ἀνθρώπων. ὕπως ἴδωσιν ὑμῶν τὰ καλὰ ἔργα, Kai δοξά- 
men, so that they may see your good works, and may 
σωσιν τὸν. πατέρα.ὑμῶν τὸν ἔν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς. 
glorify your Father who[isjin the heavens. 
17 Μὴ.νομίσητε Ort ἦλθον καταλῦσαι τὸν νόμον ἢ τοὺς προ- 
Think not that Icame toabolish the law or the pro- 
, -- > Ὁ “ ? x ~ > \ ‘ 
φήτας" οὐκ.-ἦλθον καταλῦσαι, ἀλλὰ πληρῶσαι. 18 ἀμὴν.γὰρ 
phets: T came not to abolish, but to fulfil. For verily 
λέγω ὑμῖν, ἕως. ἂν παρέλθῃ ὁ οὐρανὸς Kai ἡ γῆ. ἰῶτα ἕν ἢ 
Isuy toyou, Until shallpassawaythe heaven andthe earth, “iota ‘one or 
pia κεραία ov. παρέλθῃ ἀπὸ τοῦ νόμου, ἕως. ἂν πάντα 
one tittle innowiseshallpassawayfrom the law until all 


9 


opened his mouth, and 
taught them, saying, 
3 Blessed are the poor 
in spirit: for theirs is 
the kingdom of hea- 
ven. 4 Blessed are 
they that mourn: for 
they shall be comfort- 
ed. 5 Blessed ave the 
meek: for they shail 
inherit the earth. 
6 Blessed are they 
which do hunger and 
thirst after righteous- 
ness: for they shali 
be filled. 7 Blessed are 
the merciful : for they 
shall obtain mercy. 
8 Blessed are the pure 
in heart: for they 
shall see God. 9 Bless- 
ed are the peacc- 
makers : fer they shali 
be called the children 
of God. 10 Blessed are 
they which are per- 
secuted for righteous- 
ness’ sake: for theirs 
is the kingdom of 
heaven. 11 Blessed are 
ye, when men shall 
revile you, and perse- 
cute you, and shall say 
all manner of eyii 
against you falsely, 
for my sake. 12 Re- 
joice, and be exceeding 
glad: for great is your 
reward in heaven: for 
so persecuted they the 
prophets which were 
before yuu. 

13 Ye are the salt of 
the earth: but if the 
salt have lost his sa- 
your, wherewith shall 
it be salted? it is 
thenceforth good for 
nothing, but to be cast 
out, and to be trodden 
under foot of men. 
i4 Ye are the light of 
the world. A city that 
is set on an hill cannot 
be hid. 15 Neither do 
men light a candle, 
and put it under a 
bushel, but on a can- 
dlestick; and it giveth 
light unto all that are 
in the house. 16 Let 
your light so shine be- 
fore men, that they 
may see your good 
works, and_ glorify 
your Father which is 
in heaven. 

17 Think not that I 
am come to destroy 
the law, or the pro- 
phets: 1am not come 
to destroy, but to ful- 
fil. 18 For verily Isay 
unto you, Till heaven 
and earth pass, one joi 
or one tittle shall in 
no wise pass from the 
law. tillall be fulfilled, 
19 Whosoever there- 


P Verses 4, 5, transposed LTTr. 
τ —ponua (read [thing ]) Lrrra. 
¥ — καὶ LTTrA. 


5. — Ψευδόμενοι L. 


4 — αὐτοὶ (read κληθή. they shall be called) [L}a[rra]. 
τ βληθὲν having been cast LTTra. 


10 


fore shall break one 
of these least com- 
mandments, and shall 
teach men so, he shall 
be called the least in 
the kingdom of hea- 
ven: but whosoever 
shall do and teach 
them, the same shall 
be called great in the 
kingdom of heaven. 
20 For [ say unto you, 
That except your 
righteousness shall 
exceed the righteous- 
ness of the scribes and 
Pharisees, ye shall in 
no case enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. 

21 Ye have heard 
that it was said by 
them of old time, 
Thou shalt not kill; 
and whosoever shall 
kill shall be in dan- 
ger of the judgment: 
22 but I say unto you, 
That whosoever is 
angry with his brother 
without a cause shall 
be in danger of the 
judgment: and who- 
soever shall say to his 
brother, Raca, shall be 
in danger of the coun- 
cil: but whosoever 
shall say, Thou fool, 
shall be in danger of 
hell fire. 23 Therefore 
if thou bring thy gift 
to the altar, and there 
rememberest that thy 
brother hath ought 
against thee; 24 leave 
there thy gift before 
the altar, and go thy 
way; first be recon- 
ciled to thy brother, 
and then come and 
offer ay gift. 25 Agree 
with thine adversary 
quickly, whiles thou 
art in the way with 
him ; lest at any time 
the adversary deliver 
thee to the judge, and 
the judge deliver thee 
to the officer, and thou 
be cast into prison. 
26 Verily I say unto 
thee, Thou shalt by 
no means come out 
thence, till thou hast 


paid the uttermost 
farthing. 
27 Ye have heard 


that it was said by 
them of old time, Thou 
shalt not commit adul- 
tery: 28 but I say 
unto you, That whoso- 
ever looketh on a 
woman to lust after 
her hath committed 
adultery with her al- 
ready in his heart. 
29 Andif thy right eye 
offend thee, pluck it 
out, and cast tt from 


MATOATIOS. 


γένηται. 19 ὃς. ἐὰν οὖν λύσῃ 
come to pass. 


Vv. 


μίαν TOY£vTOh@v.rovTwY τῶν 
Whoever thenshallbreak one of thesecommandments the 


’ / ‘ ’ [2 ‘4 ᾽ , ? , 

ἐλαχίστων, καὶ διδάξῃ οὕτως τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, ἐλάχιστος Ky- 
least, and shallteach 780 ‘men, least shall 

θήσεται ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τῶν οὐρανῶν" ὃς.δ᾽ ἂν ποιήσῃ καὶ 

be called in the kingdom ofthe heavens; but whoever shall practise and 
διδάξῃ, οὗτος μέγας κληθήσεται ἐν τῷ βασιλείᾳ τῶν 

shall teach [them], this({one] great shall becalled in the kingdom ofthe 

οὐρανῶν. 20 λέγω.γὰρ ὑμῖν, ὅτι ἐὰν. μὴ περισσεύσῃ “yn δικαιο- 


heavens. ForIsay toyou, That unless shall abound *right- 
σύνη ὑμῶν" πλεῖον τῶν γραμματέων Kai Φαρισαίων, οὐ.μὴ 
eousness ‘your above[that] οὗ Π8 scribes and Pharisees, inno wise 


εἰσέλθητε εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τῶν οὐρανῶν. 
shall yeenter into the kingdom ofthe heavens. 
21 Ἤκούσατε ori*ippéOy' τοῖς ἀρχαίοις, Οὐ-φονεύσεις" 
Ye have heard that it was βαϊα to the ancients, Thou shalt not commit murder, 
ὃς. διἂν φονεύσῃ, ἔνοχος ἔσται τῇ κρίσει. 22 jes 
but whoever shallcommit murder, liable shall be to the judgment. ut I 
λέγω ὑμῖν, Orr πᾶς ὁ ὀργιζόμενος τῷ.ἀδελφῴῷ.αὐτοῦ γεἰκῆ! 


say ἴογοι, Thatevery one who is angry with his brother _ lightly, 
ἔνοχος ἔσται τῇ κρίσει’ ὃς.δ᾽ ἂν εἴπῳ τῷ.ἀδελφῷ. αὐτοῦ, 
liable shallbe tothe judgment: but whoever shalisay to his brother, 


Paka," ἔνοχος ἔσται τῷ συνεδρίῳ: ὃς.δ᾽ ἂν εἴπῃ, Μωρέ, 
Raca, liable shallbe tothe Sanhedrim: but whoever shallsay, Fool, 
ἔνοχος ἔσται εἰς τὴν γέενναν τοῦ πυρός. ῶ8 Ἐὰν οὖν προσ- 
liable shalibe to the Gehenna of fire. If therefore thou 
φέρῃς τὸ δῶρόν σου ἐπὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον, κἀκεῖ μνησθῇς 
shalt offer thy gift at the altar, and there shalt remember 
ὅτι ὁ.ἀδελφύς. σου ἔχει τὶ κατὰ σοῦ, 24 ἄφες ἐκεῖ τὸ δῶρόν 
that thy brother has something against thee, “leave there gift 
σου ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου, Kai ὕπαγε, πρῶτον διαλ- 
‘thy before the altar, and go away, first be 
λάγηθι τῷ.ἀδελφῷ.σου, καὶ τότε ἐλθὼν πρόσφερε τὸ δῶρόν 
reconciled to thy brother, and then having come offer *9ift 
σου. 20 Ἴσθι εὐνοῶν τῷ.ἀντιδίκῳ σου ταχύ, ἕως. ὅτου εἴ 
"thy. Be agreeing with thineadverse party quickly, whilst thou art 
δὲν τῇ ὁδῷ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ," μήποτέ σε παραδῷ ὁ ἀντίδικος τῷ 
in the way with him, lest ‘thee “deliver ‘the *adverse“party to the 
κριτῇ, καὶ ὁ Kpirng ὕσε παραϊῷ! τῷ ὑπηρέτῃ, Kai εἰς φυλακὴν 
judge, andthe judge thee deliver tothe officer, andinto prison 
βληθήσῳῃ. 26 ἀμὴν λέγω σοι, οὐ-μὴ ἐξέλθῃς ἐκεῖθεν, 
thou be cast. Verily Isay to thee, Innowise shalt thoucome out thence, 
ἕως.ἂν ἀποδῷς τὸν ἔσχατον κοδράντην. 
until thou pay the last kodrantes. 
27 Hrovoare ὕτι *éppeOn! “τοῖς ἀρχαίοις," 
Ye have heard that itwassaid tothe ancients, Thou shalt not commit 
σεις" WW ἐγὼ δὲ λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι πᾶς ὁ βλέπων γυναῖκα πρὸς 
adultery: butI say toyou, thatevery one that looksupon a woman to 
τὸ ἐπιθυμῆσαι αὐτῆς," ἤδη ἐμοίχευσεν αὐτὴν ἐν τῷ 
lust after her, already has committed adultery with her in 
καρδίᾳ abrov." 29 εἰ. δὲ ὁ. ὀφθαλμός.σου ὁ δεξιὸς σκανδαλίζει 
*heart “his. But if thine eye, the right, cause *to *offend 
σε, ἔξελε αὐτὸν καὶ Bare ἀπὸ σοῦ" συμφέρει.γάρ σοι ἵνα 


Οὐ-μοιχεύ- 


W ὑμῶν ἡ δικαιοσύνη TA. 
αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ LTTrAW. 


LIrAW ; — αὐτῆς 1. 


‘thee, pluckout it and cast(it]from thee: foritisprofitable for thee that 
x ἐῤῥήθη LTrAW. Υ --Οθὶ: εἰκῆ ur[ tra ]. i ῥαχάτ. 5 μετ᾽ 
Ὁ — σε παραδῷ LI[Tr]. © — τοῖς ἀρχαίοις GLTTrAW. 4 αὐτὴν 


© ἑαυτοῦ L. 


Vv. MATTHEW. 


ἀπόληται ἕν τῶν. μελῶν.σου, καὶ μὴ ὅλον TO.cHpa.cov βληθῇ 
should perish one οὗ (ΠΥ members, and not *whole 1thy *body _—ibe cast 
> , ‘ a .€ , ‘ ἂν , » 
εἰς γέενναν. 80 καὶ εἰ ἡ.δεξιά.σου χεὶρ σκανδαλίζει σε, ἔκκοψον 
into Gehenna, And if thyright hand cause*to%offend’thee, cut off 
αὐτὴν καὶ βάλε ἀπὸ σοῦ" συμφέρει.γάρ σοι iva ἀπόληται 
it and cast[{it]from thee: for itis profitable for thee that should perish 
ἕν τῶν. μελῶν σου, Kai μὴ ὅλον τὸ. σῶμά. σου ᾿[βληθῇ εἰς γέενναν." 
one of thy members, andnot?whole ‘thy ῬοΟαΥ δ οαβῦ into Gehenna. 
31 8 Ἐῤῥέθη! δέ, "ὅτι! ὃς ἂν ἀπολύσῃ τὴν.γυναϊκα.αὐτοῦ, 
It was said also that whoever shall put away his wife, 
δότω αὐτῇ ἀποστάσιον. 82 ἐγὼ.δὲ λέγω ὑμῖν, Ore Oe ἂν 
let him give toher a letter of divorce: but I say toyou, that whoever 
ἀπολύσῃ! τὴν. γυναϊκα.αὐτοῦ, παρεκτὸς λόγου πορνείας, πρφιεῖ 
shall put away his wife, except onaccount of fornication, causes 
αὐτὴν Ἐμοιχᾶσθαι"" καὶ ἰὸς. ἐὰν" ἀπολελυμένην pal al lk’ 
her tocommit adultery; and whoever her who has been put away shallmarry, 
μοιχᾶται. 
commits adultery. 
33 Πάλιν ἠκούσατε, ore ξἐῤῥέθη" τοῖς ἀρχαίοις, Οὐκ. ἐπιορ- 
Again, ye have heard that it wassaidtothe ancients, ‘Thoushalt not 
ἀποδώσεις.δὲ τῷ κυρίῳ τοὺς ὅρκους.σου" 84 ἐγὼ 
1 


κήσεις, 
thine oaths. 


forswear thyself, but thoushaltrender tothe Lord 
δὲ λέγω ὑμῖν μὴ ὀμόσαι ὅλως, μήτε ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, ὅτι θρόνος 
*but say to you not toswear αὖ all, neither by the heaven, because [the] throne 
ἐστὶν τοῦ θεοῦ" 35 μήτε ἐν τῇ ὅτι ὑποπόδιόν ἐστιν τῶν 


τῇ γῇ: ι 
it is 


it is of God; nor by theearth, because [the] footstool 
ποδῶν.αὐτοῦ" μήτε εἰς Ιεροσόλυμα, ὅτι πόλις ἐστὶν τοῦ 
of his feet : nor by Jerusalem, because(the}] city itis ofthe 


μεγάλου βασιλέως" 36 μήτε ἐν τῇ. κεφαλῇ. σου ὀμόσῃς, ὅτι 
great King. Neither by thy head shalt thou swear, because 
ov.dvvaca μίαν τρίχα λευκὴν "ἢ μέλαιναν ποιῆσαι." 37 ϑἔστω" 
thouartnotable one hair white or black to make. “Let *be 
δὲ ὁ.λόγος. ὑμῶν, vai vai, od οὔ: τὸ.δὲ περισσὸν τούτων ἐκ 
‘but *your *word, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: but what[is] more than these from 
TOU πονηροῦ ἐστιν. 
evil is, 
38 Ἡκούσατε ὅτι βἐῤῥέθη," ᾿Οφθαλμὸν ἀντὶ ὀφθαλμοῦ, Kai 
Yehaveheard that it was said, Eye for eye, and 
ὀδόντα ἀντὶ ὀδόντος" 39 ἐγὼ.δὲ λέγω ὑμῖν μὴ ἀντιστῆναι τῷ 
tooth for tooth ; butI say toyou ποὺ to resist 
~, 2 > 0 ps , 2% || \ ὃ ΄ q , Ι 
πονηρῷ" ἀλλ᾽ ὅστις σε Ῥῥαπίσει ἐπὶ" τὴν.δεξιάν σου σιαγόνα, 


evil; but whosoever thee shallstrike on thy right cheek, 
στρέψον αὐτῷ καὶ τὴν GAnv’ 40 καὶ τῷ θέλοντί σοι κρι- 
turn tohim also the other; and tohim who would with thee go 


θῆναι καὶ τὸν.χιτῶνά.σου λαβεῖν, ἄφες αὐτῷ καὶ τὸ ἱμάτιον" 

η ᾽ 

tolaw and thy tunic take, yield tohim 8150 [ΠΥ] cloak; 

4l καὶ ὅστις σε ἀγγαρεύσει μίλιον ἕν, ὕπαγε μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ δύο. 
and whosoever thee wilicompeltogo *mile ‘one, go with him _ two. 

42 τῷ αἰτοῦντί σε τδίδου"" καὶ τὺν.θέλοντα ἀπὸ σοῦ “δανεί- 

Tohimwho asksof thee give; and himthat wishes from thee ἴο bor- 

σασθαι μὴ-ἀποστραφῷς. 

ΤΟΥ thou shalt not turn away from. 


f εἰς γέενναν ἀπέλθῃ into Gehenna go away LTTrA. 
1 πᾶς ὃ ἀπολύων every one that puts away LTTra. 
™yayuynocashas married L, " ποιῆσαι ἣ μέλαιναν LITrA. 
strikes upon LTTrA. 
5 δανίσασθαι 1. 


& ἐῤῥήθη LTraw. 
ΚΕ μοιχευθῆναι LITrA. 
οἔσται Shall be La. 
4 σιαγόνα σου LTrA ; — gov (read the right cheek) τ. 


1] 


thee: for it is profit- 
able for thee that one 
of thy members should 
perish, and not that 
thy whole body should 
be cast into hell. 
30 And if thy right 
hand offend thee, cut 
it off, and cast it from 
thee : for it is profit- 
able for thee that one 
of thy members should 
perish, and not thatthy 
whole body should be 
cast into hell. 

31 It hath been said, 
Whosoever shall put 
away his wife, let him 
give her a writing of 
divorcement: 32 but I 
Say unto you, That 
whosoever shall put 
away his wife, saving 
for the cause of forni- 
cation, causeth her to 
commit adultery: and 
whosoever shall marry 
her that is divorced 
committeth adultery. 

33 Again, ye have 
heard that it hath 
been said by them of 
old time, ou shalt 
not forswear thyself, 
but shalt perform unto 
the Lord thine oaths: 
34 but I say unto you, 
Sweur not at all; nei- 
ther by heaven; for it 
is God’s throne: 35 nor 
by the earth; for it is 
his footstool: neither 
by Jerusalem ; for it is 
the city of the great 
King. 36 Neither shalt 
thou swear by thy 
head, because thou 
canst not make one 
hair white or black. 
37 But let your commn- 
nication be, Yea, yea; 
Nay, nay: for what- 
soever is more than 
these cometh of evil. 

38 Ye have heard 
that it hath been said, 
An eye for an eye, and 
a tooth for a tooth: 
39 but I say unto you, 
That ye resist not 
evil: but whosoever 
shall smite thee on 
thy right cheek, turn 
to him the other also. 
40 And if ay man will 
sue thee at the law, 
and take away thy 
coat, let him have thy 
cloke also. 41 And 
whosoever shall com- 
pel thee to go a mile, 
go with him twain. 
42 Give to him that 
asketh thee, and from 
him that would bor- 


h — ὅτι LTTrA. 

19 he who 1.. 
ε ΄ὕ » 

P ῥαπίζει εἰς 
τ δός LTTrA. 


12 


row of thee turn not 
thou away. 

43 Ye have heard 
that it hath been said, 
Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour, and hate 
thine enemy. 44 But 
I say unto you, Love 
your enemies, bless 
them that curse you, 
do good to them that 
hate you, and pray for 
them which despite- 
fully use you, and per- 
secute you; 45 that ye 
may be the children of 
your Father which is 
in heaven: for he mak- 
eth his sun to rise on 
the evil and on the 
good, and sendethrain 
on the just and on the 
unjust. 46For if ye 
love them which love 
you, what reward have 
ye? do not even the 
publicans the same? 
47 And if ye salute 
your brethren only, 
what do ye more than 
others? do noteventhe 
publicansso? 48 Be ye 
therefore perfect, even 
as your Father which 
is in heaven is perfect. 


VI. Take heed that 
ye do not your alms be- 
tore men, to be seen of 
them: otherwise ye 
have no reward of your 
Father which isin hea- 
ven, 2 Therefore when 
thou doest thine alms, 
do not sound a trum- 
pet before thee, as the 
hypocrites do in the 
synagogues and in the 
streets, that they may 
have glory of men. 
Verily I say unto you, 
They have their re- 
ward, 3 But when 
thou doest alms, let 
not thy left hand know 
what thy right hand 
doeth: 4 that thine 
alms may be insecret : 
and thy Father which 
seeth in secret him- 
self shall reward thee 
openly. 


5 And when thou 
prayest, thoushalt not 
be as the hypocrites 
are: for they love to 
pray standing in the 
synagogues and in the 
corners of the streets, 


t ἐῤῥήθη LTrAW. 


% — ἐπηρεαζόντων ὑμᾶς καὶ LTTrA, 


the same LTTraw. 


© δικαιοσύνην righteousness GLITrAW. 
‘— ἐν τῷ φανερῷ LITrAW. 


LTTrA, 
be as LTTra. 


MAT #6 A FO >: V, VE 
43 ᾿Ηκούσατε ore ᾿ἐῤῥέθη," ᾿Αγαπήσεις τὸν. πλησίον σου, καὶ 
Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour and 
, 4 ? ΄ ? ‘ " , Cc ~ ? ~ ‘ 
μισήσεις τὸν. ἐχθρόν.σου" μά ἐγὼ δὲ λέγω ὑμῖν, ᾿Αγαπᾶτε τοὺς 
hate thine enemy. utI say toyou, Love 
ἐχθροὺς ὑμῶν, "εὐλογεῖτε τοὺς καταρωμένους ὑμᾶς, καλῶς 
7enemies ‘your, bless those who curse you, “well 
ποιεῖτε “rove μισοῦντας ὑμᾶς,"" καὶ προσεύχεσθε ὑπὲρ τῶν 
*do tothose who hate you,* and pray fer those whe 
Σἐπηρεαζόντων ὑμᾶς καὶ" διωκόντων ὑμᾶς" 45 ὕπως γένησθε 
despitefully use you and _ persecute you; so that ye may be 
υἱοὶ τοῦ.πατρὸς. ὑμῶν τοῦ ἐν οὐρανοῖς" ὅτι τὸν ἥλιον.αὐτοῦ 
sons of your Father who(isJin[{the]heavens: for his sun 
> , 2 A A Ni? , ‘ , ? ‘ , 
ἀνατέλλει ἐπὶ πονηροὺς Kai ἀγαθούς. καὶ βρέχει ἐπὶ δικαίους 
he causes torise on evil and good, and sends rain on just 
καὶ ἀδίκους. 46 ἐὰν.γὰρ ἀγαπήσητε τοὺς ἀγαπῶντας ὑμᾶς, 


and unjust. For if ye love those who love you, 
τίνα μισθὸν ἔχετε; οὐχὶ καὶ οἱ τελῶναι YrO αὐτὸ! ποιοῦσιν ; 
what reward haveye? “ποῦ “also*the ‘tax °gatherers’the “same ‘do? 
47 καὶ ἐὰν ἀσπάσησθε τοὺς. ἀδελφοὺς ὑμῶν μόνον, TL περισ- 


and if 

\ ~ ; ? ‘ ‘ € L xr ~ lla . iH ~ HG 8 ” θ 
σον TOLELTE, OUXL Καὶ οἱ “τελωναι “οὕτως ποιοῦσιν: ἐἑσεσῦε 
nary doye? 7Not 3150 Π|ὸ *tax®gatherers 780 ‘do? Sshall *be 
οὖν ὑμεῖς τέλειοι, ὥσπερ" ὁ πατὴρ.ὑμῶν “ὁ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς" 


ye salute your brethren only, what extraordi- 


*therefore'ye perfect, even as your Father who([is]in the heavens 
τέλειός ἐστιν. 
perfect is. = 
6 Προσέχετε! τὴν.“ἐλεημοσύνην" ὑμῶν μὴ ποιεῖν ἔμπροσθεν 
Beware your alms not todo before 


τῶν ἀνθρώπων, πρὸς.τὸ.θεαθῆναι αὐτοῖς" εἰ. δὲ. μήγε, μισθὸν 
men, -  inordertobeseen bythem: otherwise reward 
OUK.EXETE παρὰ τῷ πατρὶ ὑμῶν τῷ ἐν ‘roic' οὐρανοῖς. 2 bray 
ye have ποῦ with your Father who[is]in the heavens. When 
οὖν ποιῇς ἐλεημοσύνην, μὴ.σαλπίσῃς ἔμπροσθέν σου, 
therefore thou doest alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, 
ὥσπερ οἱ ὑποκριταὶ ποιοῦσιν ἐν Taig συναγωγαῖς Kai ἐν ταῖς 
as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the 

cr τε ~ « 4 ~ ? , A ᾽ ‘ , 
ῥύμαις, ὅτως δοξασθῶσιν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων" ἀμὴν λέγω 


streets, that they may have glory from men. Verily I say 
ὑμῖν, ἀπέχουσιν τὸν. μισθὸν.αὐτῶν. 3 σοῦ.δὲ ποιοῦντος ἐλεη- 
toyou, they have their reward. But thou doing 
μοσύνην, μὴ-γνώτω y-apLoTEpd.cov Ti ποιεῖ ἡ.δεξιά.σου, 
alms, et not*know ‘thy *left “hand what does thy right hand, 
4 ὕπως δὴ cov ἡ.-ἐλεημοσύνη" ἐν τῷ κρυπτῷ" Kai ὁ-πατήρ.σου 
sothat *may *be ‘thine “alms in secret: and thy Father 


ὁ βλέπων ἐν τῷ κρυπτῷ "αὐτὸς" ἀποδώσει σοι ἱἐν.τῷ. φανερῷ." 


who _ sees in secret himself shall render to thee openly. 
5 Kai bray *rpocetyy, οὐκισῃ  worep' οἱ ὑποκριταί, 
And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites, 


ὅτι φιλοῦσιν ἐν ταῖς συναγωγαῖς Kai ἐν Taig γωνίαις τῶν 
for μον love in the synagogues and in the corners of the 


. μισοῦντας ὑμᾶς LTTrA. τοῖς μισοῦσιν ὑμᾶς GW. 

Υ οὕτως SOLTrA. * ἐθνικοὶ nations GLTTrAW ἃ τὸ αὐτὸ, 
© ὃ οὐράνιος the heavenly yrtra. 4 + δὲ but TL]. 
f—qoisT. 6&1 σοῦ ἐλεημοσύνη ἣ τ. ἃ -- αὐτὸς 

Κ προσεύχησθε, οὐκ ἔσεσθε ὡς Ye pray, ye shall not 


Υ.-ΟΟἰ εὐλογεῖτε. 


Ὁ ὡς aS ΠΤΊΤΑ. 


Vi. 


πλατειῶν ἑστῶτες προσεύχεσθαι, ὕπως 


MATTHEW. 


lav" φανῶσιν τοῖς 


streets standing to pray, sothat they may appear 
ἀνθρώποις" ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, Pore! ἀπέχουσιν τὸν μισθὸν 
to men. ὙΕΤῸΣ Isay to sans that — have “reward 


αὐτῶν. Ὁ σὺ.δὲ, ὅταν προσεύχῃ, εἴσελθε εἰς τὸ. "ταμιεϊόν᾽ -σου, 
ἘΠ Ποῖσ. But enon; when thou prayest, enter into ys chamber, 


καὶ κλείσας τὴν.θύραν.σου, πρόσευξαι τῷ.πατρί.σου τῷ ἐν 
and having shut thy door, pray tothy Father who Geld in 
τῷ κρυπτῷ καὶ ὁ-πατήρισου ὁ βλέπων ἐν τῷ κρυπτῷ ἀπο- 
secret ; and thy Father who — sees in secret will 
δώσει σοι “ἐν.τῷ φανερῷ". 7 ἹΙροσευχόμενοι.δὲ μὴ.Ῥβαττολο- 
render to thee openly. But when ye Brey; do not use vain 


ynonre," ὥσπερ οἱ ἐθνικοί" 


δοκοῦσιν.γὰρ ὅτι ἐν τῇ πολυλογίᾳ 
repetitions, as the heathens: 


for they think that in “much ‘speaking 


αὐτῶν εἰσακουσθήσονται. ὃ μὴ οὖν ὁμοιωθῆτε αὐτοῖς" 
‘their Bey) shall be heard. “Not “therefore ‘be like to them: 
oldev.yap ὁ. “warn. ὑμῶν ὧν χρείαν "ἔχετε πρὸ τοῦ ὑμᾶς 


for *knows oar Father of what things “need * ave before ze 


αἰτῆσαι αὐτόν. 9 οὕτως οὖν προσεύχεσθε ὑμεῖς" Πάτερ.ἡμῶν 
ask him. Thus therefore pray ye: Our Father 


ὁ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς, ἁγιασθήτω τὸ.ὄνομά.σου" 10 “ἐλθέτω! 
who[artjin the heavens, sanctified be thy name; let come 


n-Bacirsia.cov" γενηθήτω τὺ.θέλημά.σου, ὡς ἐν οὐρανῷ, καὶ 
thy kingdom; let be done thy will as in heaven, [sojalso 


ἐπὶ ττῆς" γῆς" 11 τὸν.ἄρτον.ἡμῶν τὸν ἐπιούσιον δὸς ἡμῖν σή- 


upon the earth; our bread the needed give us to- 
Hepoyv’ 12 καὶ ἄφες ἡμῖν τὰ. ὀφειληματα.ἡμῶν, ὡς Kai ἡμεῖς 
day; and forgive us our ie as also we 


"ἀφίεμεν" τοῖς. ὀφειλέταις. ἡμῶν" 18 καὶ μὴ.εἰσενέγκῃς ἡμᾶς εἰς 
forgive our debtors ; ; And lead not us into 


πειρασμόν, ἀλλὰ ῥῦσαι ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ τοῦ πονηροῦ. ‘OTL σοῦ ἐστιν 
Semupesbion; but deliver us aac evil. For thine is 


ἡ βασιλεία καὶ ἡ δύναμις καὶ ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. ἀμήν." 
ἘΣ kingdom andthe power and ie glory to the see en. 


14’Edv.yap ἀφῆτε τοῖς ἀνθρώποις τὰ-παραπτώματα.αὐτῶν, 
Forif ye ΤΟΣΕΊΣΘ men their offences, 


ἀφήσει Kai ὑμῖν ὁ πατὴ ὑμῶν ὁ οὐράνιος" 15 ἐὰν.δὲ μὴ 


®forgive ὅδῖξο 7you tyour *Father “the *heavenly. butif “not 
ἀφῆτε τοῖς ἀνθρώποις "τὰ παραπτώματα. αὐτῶν," οὐδὲ ὁ 
‘ye *forgive 


men their offences; neither 
πατὴρ ὑμῶν ἀφήσει τὰ. Stee rane ματα ὑμῶν. 
ΞΕΔΙΠΟΙ *your ‘wi ἔσοιτο your o 


16 Ὅταν.δὲ vnorevnre, μὴ.γίνεσθε ᾿ὥσπερ' οἱ ὑποκριταὶ 
And when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, 


σκυθρωποί: ἀφανίζουσιν.γὰρ τὰ-πρόσωπα.“ αὐτῶν," 
downcast in countenance; for they disfigure their aces 
ὕπως φανῶσιν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις νηστεύοντες᾽ ἀμὴν λέγω 
ae that they may ΠΡΡΘΒΕ to men fasting. Verily I had 


ὑμῖν, XOre" ἀπέχουσιν τὸν. μισθὸὺν.αὐτῶν. 17 σὺ.δὲ νηστεύων 
to you, that Hey have their reward. But thou, Saab, 


ἄλειψαί σου τὴν κεφαλήν, καὶ τὸ-πρόσωπόν.σου νίψαι" 18 ὅπως 


19 
that they may be seen 
of men. Verily I say 


unto you, They tate 
their reward. 6 But 
thou, when thon pray- 
est, enter into thy 
closet, and when thou 
hast shut thy door, 
pray to thy Father 
which is in secret ; and 
thy Father which seeth 
in secret shall reward 
thee openly. 7 But 
when ye pray, use 
not vain repetitions, 
as the heathen do: 
for they think that 
they shall be heard for 
their much speaking. 
8 Be not ye therefore 
like unto them: for 
your Father knoweth 
what things ye have 
need of, before ye ask 
him. 9 After thisman- 
ner therefore pray ye: 
Our Father which art 
in heaven, Hallowed 
be thy name. 107Tny 
kingdom come. Thy 
will be done in earth, 
as it tis in heaven. 
11 Give us this day our 
daily bread. 12 And 
forgive us our debts, 
as we forgive our debt- 
ors. 13 And lead us 
not into temptation, 
but deliver us from 
evil: For thine is the 
kingdom, and the pow- 
er, and the glory, for 
ever. Amen. 14 For 
if ye forgive men their 
trespasses, your hea- 
venly Father will also 
forgive you: 15 but if 
ye forgive not men 
their trespasses, nei- 
ther will your Father 
forgive your tres- 
passes. 


16 Moreover when ye 
fast, be not, asthe hy- 
pocrites, of asad coun- 
tenance: for they dis- 
figure their faces, that 
they may appear unto 
men to fast. Verily I 
say unto you, The 
have their rewar 
17 But thou, when thou 
fastest, anoint thine 


anoint thy head, and 2thy "face lwash, so that head, and wash thy 
y θ ᾿ face; 18that thou ap- 

μὴ-φανῇς τοῖς ἀνθρώποις νηστεύων," ἀλλὰ τῷ πατρί pear not unto men to 
thou mayest not appear to men fasting, but to ?Father fast, but unto thy Fa- 
!_ G@vLTTrAW. ™—6reLTTrA. πταμεῖόν τα, °—év τῷ φανερῷ LTTrA. P βατταλογήσητε TA. 


“ἐλθάτω τ. '—THSLTTrAW. 5 ἀφήκαμεν have forgiven LITA. 
GLITrAW. “— τὰ παραπ. αὐτῶν τ. YosLTTrA., ἡ ἑαυτῶν L. * — ὅτι LTTrA. 


t— ὅτι σοῦ to end of verse 


Υ νησ. τοῖς ἀνθρώ. L. 


14 


ther which is in secret: 
andthy Father, which 
seeth in secret, shall 
reward thee openly. 


19 Lay not up for 
yourselves treasures 
upon earth, where 
moth and rust doth 
corrupt, and where 
thieves break through 
and steal: 20 but lay 
up for yourselves trea- 
sures in heaven, where 
neither moth nor rust 
doth corrupt, and 
where thieves do not 
break through nor 
steal: 21 for where 
your treasure is, there 
will your heart be al- 
so. 22 Thelight of the 
body is the eye: if 
therefore thine eye be 
single, thy whole body 
shall be full of light. 
23 But if thine eye be 
evil, thy whole body 
shall be full of dark- 
ness. If therefore the 
light that is in thee be 
darkness, how great is 
that darkness ! 


24 No man can serve 
two masters: for ei- 
ther he will hate the 
one, and love the other; 
or else he will hold to 
the one, and despise 
the other. Ye cannot 
serve God and mam- 
mon. 25 Therefore I 
say unto you, Take no 
thought for your life, 
what ye shall eat, or 
what ye shall drink; 
nor yet for your body, 
what ye shall put on. 
Is not the life more 
than meat, and the 
body than raiment? 
26 Behold the fowls of 
the air: for they sow 
oot, neither do they 
reap, nor gather into 
barns; yet your hea- 
venly Father feedeth 
them, Are ye not much 
better than they? 
27 Which of you by tak- 
ing thought can add 
one cubit unto his sta- 
ture? 28 And why take 
ye thought for rai- 
ment? Consider the 
lilies of the field, how 
they grow; they toil 
not, neither do they 
spin: 29 and yet I say 
unto you, That even 
Solomon in all his 
glory was not arrayed 
like one οὔ these. 
30 Wherefore, if God 
so clothe the grass of 
the field, w hich to day 


z κρυφαίῳ LITrA. 8 - ἐν τῷ 5 φανερῷ aurtraw. ὃ gov thy urrra. 
ἐφθαλμός! σου ἁπλοῦς LTA. 


— οὖν 7. 
- τί πίητε τ. 


Γἡ δὸ 


kavé 


MAM 6 A WO VI. 
σου τῷ ἐν τῷ "κρυπτῷ" καὶ ὁ-πατήρισου ὁ βλέπων ἐν τῷ 
‘thy who [is] in secret ; and thy Father who 5668 in 
*KpUTTP ἀποδώσει σοι δὲἐν.τῷ.φανερῷ." 

secret wili render to thee openly. 
19 Μὴ.θησαυρίζετε ὑμῖν θησαυροὺς ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ὕπου 
Treasure not up for ΠΟΠΣΕΘΙΥΕΕ treasures upon the earth, where 
σὴς καὶ βρῶσις ἀφανίζει, καὶ ὕπου κλέπται PRUE ne 0 καὶ 


moth and rust spoil, and where thieves dig through and 
, ΄ Η ἘΠ ~ 
κλέπτουσιν" 20 Onoavpizere.dé ὑμῖν θησαυροὺς ἐν οὐρανῷ, 
steal: but treasure up foryourselves treasures in Beavct 


ὕπου οὔτε σὴς οὔτε βρῶσις ἀφανίζει, Kai ὅπου κλέπται οὐ.δι- 


where neither moth nor rust spoils and where thieves do not 
ορύσσουσιν οὐδὲ κλέπτουσιν. 21 ὕπου.γάρ ἐστιν ὁ θησαυρὸς 
dig ΟΠΕΟΘΒῈ nor steal: for ep 3is *treasure 
"ὑμῶν, " ἐκεῖ ἔσται “καὶ ἡ καρδία "ὑμῶν." 22 ‘O λύχνος τοῦ 
pene there willbe also “heart your. The lamp of the 
σώματός ἐστιν ὁ ὀφθαλμός ἐὰν cody" ὁ ὀφθαλμός. σου 
body is the eyes if therefore thine eye 
ἁπλοῦς 1," ὅλον Tb.cHpd.cov φωτεινὸν ἔσται" 23 ἐὰν.δὲ ὁ 
single be, *whole ὍΝ body light will be. But if 
ὀφθαλμός. σου πονηρὸς Ys ὅλον τὸ. σῶμά.σου σκοτεινὸν ἔσται. 
thine eye evil be, whole by, body. dark willbe. 
εἰ οὖν τὸ φῶς τὸ ἐν σοὶ σκότος ἐστίν, τὸ σκότος πόσον; 


If therefore the light that{is]in thee darkness the darkness how great 

24 Οὐδεὶς δύναται δυσὶ κυρίοις δουλεύειν᾽ ἢ.γὰρ τὸν ἕνα 
Noone is able two lords toserve: foreither the one 
ἢ ἑνὸς ἀνθέξεται, Kai 
he willlove; or[thejone he will hold to, and 


τοῦ ἑτέρου κατα ρον σε: οὐ-δύνασθε θεῷ δουλεύειν καὶ ἐμαμ- 
the baie he will despise. Yearenotable “God ‘to7serve and mam- 


μωνᾷ." 25 διὰ τοῦτο λέγω ὑμῖν, μὴ.μεριμνᾶτε τῇ.Ψυχῃῇ ὑμῶν, 


mon. Becauseof this Isay toyou, be not careful as to 7 life, 
τί φάγητε "Kai! πίητε!" μηδὲ τῷ.σώματι ὑμῶν, 
what yeshouldeat and wee yeshoulddrink; nor as to your body 


τί ἐνδύσησθε. οὐχὶ ἡ ψυχὴ πλεῖόν ἐστιν τῆς τροφῆς καὶ 
what gosheuldipatox: “Not * te ‘life 5more ‘is thanthe food and 


τὸ σῶμα τοῦ ἐνδύματος; 26 ἐμβλέψατε εἰς τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ 
the body thanthe raiment? Look at the birds οἵ the 


οὐρανοῦ, ὅτι οὐ.σπείρουσιν, οὐδὲ θερίζουσιν, οὐδὲ συνάγουσιν 


is, 


μισήσει, καὶ τὸν ἕτερον ἀγαπήσει" 
be gallate, and the other 


= ,ὔ 
ὅτι 


heaven, that το βουνοῦ; nor do JeR reap, nor do oESs Backes 
, 

εἰς ἀποθήκας, καὶ ὁ-πατὴρ. ὑμῶν ὁ οὐράνιος peers αὐτά" οὐχ 

into granaries, and your Father the sel otf them: not 


μᾶλλον διαφέρετε αὐτῶν; 27 τίς. δὲ ἐξ ὑμῶν μερι- 


v ete 


“much ‘are better than ὅπ But which outof you by ΕΙΠΕ 
μνῶν δύναται προσθεῖναι ἐπὶ τὴν.ἡλικίαν. αὐτοῦ πῆχυν ἕνα; 
careful is able to add to his stature 7eubit ‘one? 


28 καὶ περὶ ἐνδύματος τί μεριμνᾶτε; καταμάθετε τὰ κρίνα 


and about raiment why are ye careful ? observe the lilies 
τοῦ ἀγροῦ, πῶς KabEdver! οὐ.ἱκοπιᾷ" οὐδὲ ππνήθει"" 20 λέ- 
of the field, how theygrow: is Agr plea το, nor dothey spin: πὶ} 


γω δὲ ὑμῖν, ὅτι οὐδὲ Σολομὼν ἐν πάσῃ τῃ.δόξῃ. αὐτοῦ περιε- 
say ‘but τς as that noteven Solomon in all his glory was 


βάλετο we ἕν τούτων. 80 εἰ. δὲ τὸν χόρτον τοῦ ἀγροῦ, σήμερον 
οἱούμοα, as one of these. But if the vgrass of the Held, *to Sday 


c— καὶ 1, 44+ gov thy τὰ Lie 
& μαμωνᾷ, GLTTrAW. hy or LTr; — καὶ τὶ 


dvovow LTTrA. ἱκοπιῶσιν LT; κοπιοῦσιν TrA. πὶ νήθουσιν LITrA. 


MATTHEW. 


ὄντα, καὶ αὔριον eis κλίβανον βαλλόμενον, ὁ θεὸς οὕτως 
twhich is and to-morrow into anoven is cast, God ἐμὰ 
ἀμφιέννυσιν, οὐ πολλῷ μᾶλλον ὑμᾶς, ὀλιγόπιστοι; 31 μὴ 

arrays, [willhe] not much rather you, Ofyeloflittlefaith? “not 

4 U , , a ΄ , 

οὖν μεριμνήσητε, λέγοντες, Τί φάγωμεν, ἢ τί πίωμεν, 
dis rtd Ob careful, saying, What shall weeat? or what shall wedrink? 
A , , , \ ~ ed n2 
ἢ. τί Tep.Barwpeba ; 32 πάντα.γὰρ ταῦτα τὰ ἔθνη "ἔπι- 
or with what shall we be clothed? Forall thesethingsthe nations seek 
ζητεῖ" οἷδεν γὰρ ὁςπατὴριὑμῶν ὁ οὐράνιος ὅτι χρῴζετε 
after. For knows your Father the heavenly that ye have need 


τούτων ἁπάντων" 33 ζητεῖτε.δὲ πρῶτον στὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ 
οὗ *these*things ‘all But seek ye _ first the kingdom 


θεοῦ καὶ τὴν.δικαιοσύνην" αὐτοῦ, καὶ ταῦτα πάντα προσ- 
of God and his righteousness, and *these *things ‘all shail 
τεθήσεται ὑμῖν. 34 μὴ οὖν Ῥμεριμνήσητεϊ εἰς τὴν αὔριον" 
be added to you. *Not *therefore be careful for the morrow: 
7-yap αὔριον μεριμνήσει “τὰ" τἑαυτῆς." ἀρκετὸν τῇ 
for the morrow 8 becarefulabout the(things] ofitself. Sufficient to the 
ἡμέρᾳ ἡ κακία αὐτῆς. 
day (is]the evil of it. 
7 Μὴ. κρίνετε, iva μὴ.κριθῆτε" 2 ἐν γὰρ κρίματι κρίνετε, 
Judgenot, that yebenotjudged: *with *what ‘for judgment ye judgs, 
κριθήσεσθε' καὶ ἐν ᾧ μέτρῳ μετρεῖτε, "ἀντιμετρηθήσεται" 
ye shall be judged; and with what measure Ὑ9 τηϑίθ, itshall be measured again 
ὑμῖν. 8 Τί. δὲ βλέπεις τὸ κάρφος τὸ ἐν τῷ ὀφθαλμῷ τοῦ 
toyou. Butwhy lookestthouonthe mote that([is]in the eye 
ἀδελφοῦ. σου, τὴν.δὲ ἐν τῷῃςσῷ ὀφθαλμῷ δοκὸν οὐ-κατανοεῖς ; 
of thy brother, Ῥπὺ the ?in “thine [town] ‘eye *beam perceivest not? 
4% πῶς ἐρεῖς τῷ. ἀδελφῷ.σου, “Agec ἐκβάλω τὸ 
Or how wilt thousay ἴο thy brother, Suffer (that] I may cast out the 
, t > ‘ fl ~ 9 ~ Φ ‘ ἰδ , «- ὃ A ? ~ 
κάρφος ἱἀπὸ" τοῦ.ὀφθαλμοῦ.σου" καὶ ἰδού, ἡ δοκὸς ἐν τῷ 
mote from thine eye: and behold, the beam [is]in 
ὀφθαλμῷ.σου; 5 ὑποκριτά, ἔκβαλε πρῶτον τὴν δοκὸν ἐκ 
thine [own] eye! hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of 
Tov.0¢0apov.cov," Kai τότε διαβλέψεις ἐκβαλεῖν τὸ κάρφος 
thine [own] eye, and then thouwiltseeclearly tocastout the mote 
ἐκ τοῦ ὀφθαλμοῦ τοῦ.ἀδελφοῦ.σου. 
out of the eye of thy brother. 
6 Μὴ-.δῶτε TO ἅγιον τοῖς κυσίν" μηδὲ βάλητε τοὺς 
Give not that νυ ΐο ἢ [15] holy tothe dogs, nor cast 
μαργαρίτας ὑμῶν ἔμπροσθεν τῶν χοίρων, μήποτε ὕκατα- 
2pearls ‘your before the swine, lest they should 


Vi VIL. 


πατήσωσιν" αὐτοὺς ἐν τοῖς. ποσὶν.αὐτῶν, καὶ στραφέντες 
trampleupon them with their feet, and having turned 
ῥήξωσιν ὑμᾶς. 
they rend you. 
7 Αἰτεῖτε, καὶ δοθήσεται wiv’ ζητεῖτε, καὶ εὑρήσετε" 
Ask, and itshall be given to you: seek, and ye shall find: 


, ‘ ᾽ ΄ Ci an 8 - ᾿ « ὦ" λ , 
κρούετε, καὶ ἀνοιγήσεται ὑμῖν. ὃ πᾶς.γὰρ ὁ αἰτῶν λαμβάνει, 


knock, and itshall beopened toyou. Forevyeryone that asks receives, 
‘ ε ~ , A ~ 
καὶ ὁ ζητῶν εὑρίσκει, καὶ τῷ κρούοντι τἀνοιγήσεται." 
and hethat seeks finds, and tohimthat knocks it shall be opened. 


15 


is, and to morrow is 
cast into the oven, shall 
he not much more 
clothe you, O ye of lit- 
tle faith? 31 Therefore 
take no thought, say- 
ing, What shall we 
eat? or, What shall we 
drink ? or, Wherewith- 
al shall we be clothed? 
32 (For after all these 
things do the Gentiles 
seek:) for your hea- 
venly Father knoweth 
that ye have need 
of all these things. 
33 But seek ye first the 
kingdom of God, and 
his righteousness ; and 
ali these things shall 
be added unto you. 
34 Take therefore no 
thought for the mor- 
row: for the morrow 
shall take thought for 
the things of itself. 
Sufficient unto the day 
is the evil thereof. 


VII. Judge not, that 
ye be not judged. 
2 For with what judg- 
ment ye judge, yeshall 
be judged: and with 
what measure ye mete, 
it shall be measured to 
‘he again, 3 And why 

eholdest thou the 
mote that is in thy 
brother’s eye, but con- 
siderest not the beam 
that is in thine own 
eye? 4 Or how wilt 
thou say to thy bro- 
ther, Let me pull out 
the mote out of thine 
eye; and, behold, a 
beam is in thine own 
eye? 5 Thou hypocrite, 
first cast out the beam 
out of thine own eye; 
and then shalt thou 
see clearly to cast out 
the mote ont of thy 
brother’s eye. 


6 Give not that which 
is holy unto the dogs, 
neither cast ye your 
pearls before swine, 
lest they trample them 
under their feet, and 
turn again and rend 
you. 


7 Ask, and it shall be 
given you; seek, and 
ye shall find; knock, 
and it shall be opened 
unto you: 8 for every 
one that asketh receiv- 
eth; and ‘he that seek- 
eth findeth; and to 
him that knocketh it 
shall be opened. 9 Or 


π ἐπιζητοῦσιν LTTrA. 


ο τὴν δικαιοσύνην καὶ τὴν βασιλειαν 1, ; --- τοῦ θεοῦ (read its right- 


eousness) LT[4] Ρ μεριμνήσετε E. --- τὰ (omit the [things] of) trrraw. ταὐτῆς A. " μετρηθή- 


τ ἐκ out of urtr. 
τ καταπατήσουσιν they shall trample upon rttra. 


σεται it shall be measured Gurtraw. 
LUTra. 


᾿ ἐκ τοῦ ὀφθαλμοῦ σου τὴν δοκόν 
* ἀνοίγεται it is opened Ltr. 


10 


what man is there of 
you, whom if his son 
ask bread, will he give 
him astone? 10 Orif 
he ask a fish, will he 
give him a serpent? 
ll If ye then, Peis 
evil, know how to give 
good gifts unto your 
children, how much 
more shill your Father 
whichis in heaven give 
good things to them 
that ask him? 


12 Yherefore all 
things whatsoever ye 
would that men should 
do to you, do ye even 
so to them: for this 
is the law aud the pro- 
phets. 


i3 Enter ye in at 
the strait gate: for 
wide is the gate, and 
broad is the way, that 
leadeth to destruction, 
and many there be 
which go in thereat: 
14 because strait zs the 
gate, and narrow 18 the 
way, which leadeth un- 
to life, and few there 
be that find it. 

15 Beware of false 
prophets, which come 
to you in sheep's cloth- 
ing, but inwardly they 
are ravening wolves. 
16 Ye shall know them 
by their fruits. Do 
men gather grapes of 
thorns, or figs of 
thistles? 17 Even so 
every good tree bring- 
eth forth good fruit ; 
but a corrupt tree 
bringeth forth evil 
fruit. 18 A good tree 
cannot bring forth evil 
fruit, neither canacor- 
rupt tree bring forth 
good fruit. 19 Every 
tree that bringeth not 
forth good fruit is 
uewn down, and cast 
into the fire, 20 Where- 
fore by their fruits ye 
shall know them. 


21 Not every one 
that saith unto me, 
Lord, Lord, shall enter 
into the kingdom of 
heaven; but he that 
doeth the will of my 


MPASIIOVA 1 OS: VII. 

9 ἢ τίς Yéorw' ἐξ ὑμῶν ἄνθρωπος, ὃν *éav' *airnoy" ὁ υἱὸς 
Or what “is*there *of ἔγοι *man who if ‘4should‘task son 

αὐτοῦ ἄρτον, μὴ λίθον ἐπιδώσει αὐτῷ; 10 “Kai ἐὰν ἰχθὺν 
*his bread, astone willhegive him? and if a fish 
αἰτήσῃ," μὴ ὄφιν ἐπιδώσει αὐτῷ; 11 εἰ οὖν ὑμεῖς πονηροὶ 


heshouldask, aserpent willhegive him? If therefore ye, “evil 
ὄντες οἴδατε δόματα ἀγαθὰ διδόναιτοϊς.τέκνοις. ὑμῶν, πόσῳ 
‘being, know [how] “gifts *good to give to your children, how much 
μᾶλλον ὁ-πατὴρ.ὑμῶν ὁ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς δώσει ἀγαθὰ 
more your Father who[is]in the heavens will give good things 
τοῖς αἰτοῦσιν αὐτόν; 
to them that ask him? 
12 Πάντα οὖν ὕσα.“ἂν" θέλητε ἵνα ποιῶσιν ὑμῖν ot 


Allthings therefore whatever yedesire that “should*do *to*you 

ἄνθρωποι, οὕτως Kai ὑμεῖς ποιεῖτε αὐτοῖς" οὗτος. γάρ ἐστιν ὁ 

‘men, so also “ye ‘do to them: for this is the 
νόμος καὶ οἱ προφῆται. 

law andthe prophets, 

18 “Εἰσέλθετε" διὰ τῆς στενῆς πύλης" OTe πλατεῖα “ἡ πύλη" 

Enterin through the narrow gate; for wide the gate 

kai εὐρύχωρος ἡ ὁδὸς ἡ ἀπάγουσα εἰς THY ἀπώλειαν, καὶ 


and broad the way that leads to destruction, and 
πολλοί εἰσιν οἱ εἰσερχόμενοι δι᾿ αὐτῆς" 14 fore στενὴ 87 
many are they who enter through it: for narrow the 


πύλη" Kai τεθλιμμένη ἡ ὁδὸς ἡ ἀπάγουσα εἰς τὴν ζωήν, Kai 


gate and straitened the way that leads to life, and 
ὀλίγοι εἰσὶν οἱ εὑρίσκοντες αὐτήν. 
few are they who find it. 
15 Προσέχετε." δὲ" ἀπὸ τῶν ψευδοπροφητῶν, οἵτινες ἔρχονται 
But beware of the false prophets, who come 


πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἐν ἐνδύμασιν προβάτων, ἔσωθεν.δὲ εἰσιν λύκοι ἅρ- 
to you in raiment of sheep, but within are 7wolves ‘ra- 
παγες. 16 ἀπὸ τῶν.καρπῶν αὐτῶν ἐπιγνώσεσθε αὐτούς" μήτι 
pacious. By their fruits ye shall know them, 
συλλέγουσιν ἀπὸ ἀκανθῶν ἱσταφυλὴν " ἢ ἀπὸ τριβόλων σῦκα; 
Do they gather from thorns abunchofgrapes, or from _ thistles figs? 
17 οὕτως πᾶν δένδρον ἀγαθὸν καρποὺς καλοὺς ποιεῖ" 70.68 
So every tree *good “fruits %good produces, but the 
σαπρὸν δένδρον καρποὺς πονηροὺς ποιεῖ. 18 οὐ«-δύναται 
corrupt tree *fruits ‘bad produces. “Cannot 
δένδρον ἀγαθὸν καρποὺς πονηροὺς ἱποιεῖν," οὐδὲ δένδρον σα- 


a “tree good Sfruits Sevil produce, nor  a“tree ‘cor- 
πρὸν καρποὺς καλοὺς ἱποιεῖν." 19 πᾶν" δένδρον μὴ ποιοῦν 
rupt “fruits *good *produce. Every tree not producing 


καρπὸν καλὸν ἐκκόπτεται καὶ εἰς πῦρ βάλλεται. 20 Ἰάραγε" 
“fruit 1y00d iscut down and into fire is cast. Then surely 
"ard! τῶν. καρπῶν. αὐτῶν ἐπιγνώσεσθε αὐτούς. 

by their fruits ye shall know them. 

210i πᾶς ὁ λέγων μοι, Κύριε, κύριε, εἰσελεύσεται εἰς 

Not every one who says tome, Lord, Lord, shallenter into 

τὴν βασιλείαν τῶν οὐρανῶν" ἀλλ᾽ ὁ ποιῶν τὸ θέλημα τοῦ 
the kingdom ofthe heavens, but he who does the will 


Υ — ἐστιν Ltr [A]. 
also a fish shall ask LiTra. 
& [ἡ πύλη) LT. h 


k + [οὖν͵ now L. 


! dpa ye Ltr. 


® αἰτήσει Shall ask Lrtra. 
c >. da ’ , ae « ΄ 

ἐὰν τ. ἃ εἰσέλθατε ττττὰ. ἡ πύλη LT]. 
— δὲ but xr [tra]. 1 σταφυλὰς grapes LTTra. 
™ εκ L. 


* — ἐὰν LYTrA. Ὁ ἣ καὶ ἰχθὺν αἰτήσει or 
ἴ 7¢ how Gurr. 
J ἐνεγκεῖν bear 7. 


MATTHE W. 


ἐν " οὐρανοῖς. 22 πολλοὶ ἐροῦσίν μοι ἐν 
Many willsay tome in 


VII, VIII. 


πατρόξσς μου TOV 
of my Father who[is] in [the] heavens. 


ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ, Κύριε, κύριε, ob τῷ. σῷ ὀνόματι “προεφη- 
that day, ord, Lord, *not *through*thy 7name did *we 
τεύσαμεν," Kai τῷ.σῷ ὀνόματι δαιμόνια ἐξεβάλομεν, καὶ 
“prophesy, and through thy name demons cast out, and 

τῷ σῷ ὀνόματι δυνάμεις πολλὰς ἐποιήσαμεν; 23 Kai 
through thy name works %of*power *many perform ? And 


τότε ὁμολογήσω αὐτοῖς, ὅτι οὐδέποτε ἔγνων ὑμᾶς" ἀποχωρεῖτε 
then willI confess to them, Never knewI you: depart ye 
ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ, οἱ ἐργαζόμενοι τὴν ἀνομίαν. 
from me, who wor lawlessness. 
24 Πᾶς οὖν boric ἀκούει μου τοὺς λόγους Provrouc," 
Every one therefore whosoever hears *my swords these, 
καὶ ποιεῖ αὐτούς, ὁμοιώσω αὐτὸν" ἀνδρὶ φρονίμῳ, ὅστις φκοδό- 
and does them, Iwillliken him toa’man’prudent, who built 
μησεν *riv-oikiav.avrov" ἐπὶ τὴν πέτραν" 25 Kai κατέβη ἡ 


his house upon the rock: and camedown the 
βροχὴ καὶ ἦλθον" ot ποταμοὶ Kai ἔπνευσαν οἱ ἄνεμοι, καὶ 
rain, and came the streams, and blew the winds, and 


ἱπροσέπεσον!" τῇ.οἰκίᾳ.ἐκείνῃ, καὶ οὐκ. ἔπεσεν᾽ τεθεμελίωτο.γὰρ 


fell upon that house, and itfellnot; forit had been founded 
ἐπὶ THY πέτραν. 26 καὶ πᾶς ὁ ἀκούων μου τοὺς λόγους 
upon the rock. and everyone who hears “my ’words 


τούτους Kai μὴ-ποιῶν αὐτούς, ὁμοιωθήσεται ἀνδρὶ μωρῳ, 
these and does notdo them, he shall be likened toa*man ‘foolish, 
ὅστις wKoddunoery τὴν.οἰκίαν. αὐτοῦ" ἐπὶ THY ἄμμον" 27 Kai 
who built his house upon the sand: and 
κατέβη ἡ βροχὴ Kai ἦλθον οἱ ποταμοὶ Kai ἔπνευσαν οἱ 
came down the rain, and came the streams, and blew the 
ἄνεμοι, Kai προσέκοψαν τῇ.οἰκίᾳ.ἐκείνῃ, καὶ ἔπεσεν, καὶ ἣν 
winds, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and was 
ἡ πτῶσις αὐτῆς μεγάλη. 
‘the fall 308 *it great. 
28 Kai ἐγένετο ὅτε “συνετέλεσεν! ὁ ᾿[ησοῦς τοὺς λόγους 
And itcametopass when “had “finished + Jesus Swords 
΄ γ ΄ « ” 7 x ~ ~ ᾽ ~ - 
τούτους ἐξεπλήσσοντο οἱ ὄχλοι ἐπὶ τῇ.διδαχῃ.αὐτοῦ" 29 ἣν 


“these astonished were the crowds at his teaching: “he *was 
γὰρ διδάσκων αὐτοὺς ὡς ἐξουσίαν ἔχων, καὶ οὐχ ὡς οἱ 
for teaching them as “authority ‘having, and not as the 
γραμματεῖς". 

scribes. 


8 ΣΚαταβάντι.δὲ αὐτῷ! ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄρους, ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῷ 
And when *had*come*down *he from the mountain, “followed *him 


ὄχλοι πολλοί" 2 καὶ ἰδού, λεπρὸς τέλθὼν" προσεκύνει αὐτῷ, 


“crowds ‘great. And behold, aleper having come id homage tohim, 
λέγων, Κύριε, ἐὰν θέλῃς, δύνασαί pe καθαρίσαι. 3 Kai 
saying, Lord, if thou wilt thouartable me _  tocleanse. And 
ἐκτείνας τὴν. χεῖρα ἥψατο αὐτοῦ "ὁ Ἰησοῦς," λέγων, 
having stretched out [his]hand “touched “him Jesus, saying, 


Θέλω, καθαρίσθητι. Kai εὐθέως ἐκαθαρίσθη! αὐτοῦ ἡ λέπρα. 
I wil), bethoucieansed, Andimmediately was cleansed his leprosy. 


17 


Father which is in 
heaven, 22 Many will 
say to me in that day, 
Lord, Lord, have we 
not prophesied in thy 
name? and in thy 
name have cast out 
devils? and in thy 
name done many won- 
derful works? 23 And 
then will I profess un- 
to them, I never knew 
you: depart from me, 
ye that work iniquity. 


214 Therefore whoso- 
ever heareth these say- 
ings of mine, and 
doeth them, I will 
liken him unio a wise 
man, which built his 
house upon a rock: 
25 and the rain descen- 
ded, and the floods 
came, and the winds 
blew, and beat upon 
that house; and it fell 
not: for it was founded 
upon a rock. 26 And 
every one that heareth 
these sayings of mine, 
and doeth them not, 
shall be likened unto 
a foolish man, which 
built his house npon 
the sand: 27 and the 
rain descended, and 
the floods came, and 
the winds blew, and 
beat upon that house; 
and it fell: and great 
was the fall of it, 


28 And it came to 
pass, when Jesus had 
ended these sayings, 
the people were aston- 
ished at his doctrine: 
29 for he taught them 
as one having au- 
thority, and not as the 
scribes. 


VIII. When he 
come down from the 
mountain, great mul- 
titudes followed him. 
2 And, behold, there 
came a leper and wor- 
shipped him, saying, 
Lord, ifthou wilt, thou 
canst make nie ciean. 
3 And Jesus put forth 
his hand, and touched 
him, saying, I will; be 
thou clean. And im- 
mediately his leprosy 
was cleansed. 4 And 


1+ τοῖς the LTTrA. ° ἐπροφητεύσαμεν LTTrA. Ρ [τούτους LTr. 4 ὁμοιωθήσεται he shall be 


likened Lrtr. τ αὐτοῦ τὴν οἰκίαν LETra. 5 ἦλθαν Tr. 
ἔπεσαν TIrA. αὐτοῦ THY οἰκίαν LTTrA. “ ἐτέλεσεν LITrA. 
LTTrA; + καὶ οἱ Φαρισαῖοι and the Pharisees L. 
αὐτοῦ Tr. 
LTTra. 


2 προσελθὼν having come to [him] trtraw. 
Ὁ ἐκαθερίσθη τ. 


τ προσέπαισαν struck ἀρ αϊηβῦτ,; προσ- 
x + αὐτῶν (read their scribes} 
Y καὶ καταβάντος αὐτοῦ τι; καταβάντος δὲ 
2 — ὃ᾽ Ἰησοῦς (read he touched) 


Cc 


18 


Jesus saith unto him, 
See thou tell no man; 
but go thy way, shew 
thyself to the priest, 
and offer the gift that 
Moses commanded, for 
a testimonyunto them. 


5 And when Jesus 
was entered into Ca- 
pernanum, there came 
unto him a centurion, 
beseeching him, 6 and 
saying, Lord, my ser- 
vant lieth at home sick 
of the palsy,grievously 
tormented. 7And Jesus 
saith unto him, I will 
come and heal him. 
8 The centurion an- 
swered and said, Lord, 
I am not worthy that 
thou shouldest come 
under my roof: but 
speak the word only, 
and my servant shall 
be healed. 9 For Iam 
aman under authority, 
having soldiers under 
me: and I say to this 
man, Go, and he goeth; 
and to another, Come, 
and he cometh; and 
to my servant, Do 
this, and he doeth iz. 
10 When Jesus heard 
it, he marvelled, and 
said to them that fol- 
lowed, Verily I say 
unto you, I have not 
found so great faith, 
no, not in Israel. 
11 And I say unto you, 
That many shall come 
from the east and west, 
andshall sit down with 
Abraham, and Isaac, 
and Jacob, in the king- 
dom of heaven. 12 But 
the children of the 
kingdom shall be cast 
out into outer dark- 
ness: there shall be 
weeping and gnashing 
of teeth. 13 And Jesus 
said unto the centu- 
rion, Go thy way; and 
as thou hast believed, 
90 be it done unto thee. 
And his servant was 
healed in the selfsame 
hour. 


14 And when Jesus 
was come into Peter's 
house, he saw his wife’s 
mother laid, and sick 
of a fever. 15 And he 


MATOATOX. VAL. 
4 Kai λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, Ὅρα μηδενὶ εἴπῃς" “ἀλλ᾽ ὕπαγε, 
And says *to*him 1 Jesus, See noone thoutell; but go 
σεαυτὸν δεῖξον τῷ ἱερεῖ, καὶ προσένεγκε! τὸ δῶρον ὃ προσ- 
thyself shew to the priest, and offer the gift which 7or- 
ἐταἕεν "Μωσῆς," εἰς μαρτύριον αὐτοῖς. 
dered Moses for atestimony to them. 

5 ΓΕἰσελθόντι". δὲ ἐτῷ Τησοῦ" εἰς "Καπερναούμ," προσῆλθεν 
And “having “entered ‘Jesus into Capernaum, 7came 
αὐτῷ ἱἑκατόνταρχος"! παρακαλῶν αὐτὸν 6 Kai λέγων, Κύριε, 
*toShim ἴδ centurion, beseeching him and saying, Lord, 

« - , > ~ Ses, , ~ 
ὁ.παῖς. μου βέβληται ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ παραλυτικός, δεινῶς βασα- 
my servant is laid in the house paralytic, grievously tor- 
γιζόμενος. 7 "Καὶ! λέγει αὐτῷ ᾿ὸὁ Ἰησοῦς," ᾿Εγὼ ἐλθὼν θερα- 
mented. And ?says *to*him ‘Jesus, I having come will 
πεύσω αὐτόν. 8 ™Kai ἀποκριθεὶς! ὁ ἱἑκατόνταρχος" ἔφη, Κύριε, 
heal him, And *answering ‘the centurion said, Lord, 
οὐκ. εἰμὶ ἱκανὸς ἵνα μου ὑπὸ τὴν στέγην εἰσέλθῃς" ἀλλὰ μόνον 
ITamnot worthy that *my ‘under roof thoushouldest come, but only 
εἰπὲ "λόγον," καὶ ἰαθήσεται ὁ-.παῖς μου. 9 καὶ. γὰρ ἐγὼ ἄν- 
speak a word, and shallbehealed my servant. For also I a 
θρωπός εἰμι ὑπὸ ἐξουσίαν", ἔχων ὑπ᾽ ἐμαυτὸν στρατιώτας" 
man am under authority, having under myself soldiers ; 

Ω , ’, , ‘ ΄ \ ” m” 
καὶ λέγω τούτῳ, Πορεύθητι, καὶ πορεύεται" καὶ ἄλλῳ, Epxov, 
and Isay tothis [one], Go, and he goes; and toanother, Come, 
καὶ ἔρχεται" καὶ τῷ.δούλῳ.μου, ἸΤοίησον τοῦτο, Kai ποιεῖ. 
and hecomes; and tomy bondman, Do this, and he does [it]. 
10 ᾿Ακούσας.δὲ ὁ Τησοῦς ἐθαύμασεν, καὶ εἶπεν τοῖς ἀκολου- 
And having *heard ‘Jesus wondered, and said tothose follow- 
θοῦσινῬ, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, “οὐδὲ ἐν τῷ Ἰσραὴλ τοσαύτην 


ing, Verily Isay toyou, Noteven in Israel so great 
πίστιν! εὗρον. 11 λέγω.δὲ ὑμῖν, ὅτι πολλοὶ ἀπὸ ἀνατολῶν 
faith have I found. ButIsay toyou,that many from east 


καὶ δυσμῶν ἥξουσιν, καὶ ἀνακλιθήσονται μετὰ ᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ 
and west shallcome, and shallrecline[attable] with Abraham and 
᾿Ισαὰκ καὶ ᾿Ιακὼβ ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τῶν οὐρανῶν" 12 οἱ. δὲ υἱοὶ 
Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom ofthe heavens; but the sons 
~ , r2 δὰ Or iT] > 4 , a. 3 , ar cs ~ 
τῆς βασιλείας τἐκβληθήσονται! εἰς TO σκότος τὸ ἐξώτερον᾽" ἐκεῖ 
ofthe kingdom shall be cast out into the darkness the outer: there 
ἔσται ὁ κλαυθμὸς καὶ ὁ βρυγμὸς τῶν ὀδόντων. 18 Kai εἶπεν 
shallbe the weeping andthe gnashing ofthe teeth. And 3said 
ὁ Ἰησοῦς τῷ “ἑκατοντάρχῳ,"! Ὕπαγε, ἱκαὶ" ὡς ἐπίστευσας 


‘Jesus tothe centurion, 0, and as _ thouhast believed 
γενηθήτω σοι. Kai ἰάθη ὁ-.παῖς. "αὐτοῦ! “ty τῇ ὥρᾳ 

be it to thee. And washealed his servant in 7hour 
ἐκείνῃ." 
‘that. 

14 Kai ἐλθὼν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν Πέτρου, εἶδεν 


And *having *come 1Jesus to the house of Peter, saw 


τὴν.πενθερὰν αὐτοῦ βεβλημένην καὶ πυρέσσουσαν, 15 καὶ 
his wife’s mother lai and in a fever; and 


OLTTrAW. 
from that hour 1 


ς ἀλλὰ EGLTTrA. 4 προσένεγκον LITrAW. ὁ Μωῦσῆς LITrAW. ἴ εἰσελθόντος LTTrA. Β αὐτῷ 
he ΟὟ; αὐτοῦ he Lrtra. 
1— 6 Ἰησοῦς (read he says) τα tra. 
© 4+ τασσόμενος placed L. 
with no one so great faith in Israel uora. 
t — καὶ LT[Tr]A,  -- αὐτοῦ (read the servant) rt]. 


h Καφαρναοὺμ LTTrAW.  ‘éxatovtapxnsT. * —xaiut[tr]a. 
™ ἀποκριθεὶς δὲ LTTr, 5 λόγῳ by a word GLTtraw. 
P+ αὐτῷ him. ἃ παρ᾽ οὐδενὶ τοσαύτην πίστιν ἐν τῷ ᾿Ισραὴλ 
τ ἐξελεύσονται shall go forth τ. 5 ἑκατοντάρχῃ 
* ἀπὸ τῆς ὥρας ἐκείνης 


i 
L 


ΥΠ1|. 


ἥψατο τὴς χειρὸς- αὐτῆς, 
he touched her hand, 


ἠγέρθη Kai διηκόνει *adroic.' 
she arose and ministered to them. 


16’ ΟΨίας. δὲ a peel προσήνεγκαν αὐτῷ δαιμονιζομένους 
And evening being come, they brousns to him queneesed git *demous 


πολλούς" Kai ἐξέβαλεν τὰ πνεύματα λόγῳ Kui πάντας τοὺς 


MATTHEW. 


Kat ene αὐτὴν ὁ πυρετός 
and ‘her ‘the “fever; 


καὶ 
and 


many, and hecast out the _ spirits byaword, and all who 
κακῶς ἔχοντας ἐθεράπευσεν" 17 Owe πλὴη oy TO 
“ill were he healed : So that might bef ed that which 


ῥηθὲν διὰ Ἡσαΐου τοῦ προφήτου, λέγοντος, Αὐτὸς τὰς 


was spoken by" Esaias the prophet; saying, Himself the 
ἀσθενείας ἡμῶν ἔλαβεν, Kai τὰς νόσους ἐβάστασεν. 
infirmities ofus took, and the diseases bore. 

18 ᾿Ιδὼν.δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς πολλοὺς ὄχλους" περὶ αὐτόν, ἐκέ- 


Jesus crowds around him, he com- 


19 καὶ προσελθὼν εἷς 
And having come to J one 


And “seeing great 
λευσεν ἀπελθεῖν εἰς τὸ πέραν. 
manded todepart to the other side. 


γραμματεὺς εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Διδάσκαλε, ἀκολουθήσω σοι ὕπου.ἐὰν 
ascribe said tohim, Teacher, I will follow thee whithersoever 


ἀπέρχῃ. 20 Kai λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ Inoovc, Αἱ ἀλώπεκες φωλεοὺς 
prom raayesi go, And “says Sto *him 1Jesus, ‘The foxes “holes 


ee καὶ τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ κατασκηνώσεις, ὁ.δὲ υἱὸς 
have, andthe birds ofthe heaven nests, but the Son 


τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ovK-éxEL ποῦ THY κεφαλὴν κλίνῃ. 21"ETEpOC 
of man hasnot where the head he may lay. “Another 


δὲ τῶν. μαθητῶν.Σαὐτοῦ" εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Κύριε, ἐπίτρεψόν μοι 


*and of his disciples said to him, Lord, allow me 
πρῶτον ἀπελθεῖν καὶ θάψαι τὸν. es «μου. 92 Ὁ. δὲ. "᾿ Ἰησοῦς" 
first to go and bury my fat But Jesus 
δεῖπεν" αὐτῷ, ᾿Ακολούθει μοι, Kai ἄφες Tobe νεκροὺς θάψαι 

said to him, Follow me, and leave’ the dead to bury 
τοὺς ἑαυτῶν νεκρούς. 

their own dead. 

23 Kai ἐμβάντι αὐτῷ εἰς “τὸ" πλοῖον, ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῷ 


And *having*entered ‘he into the Sfollowed *him 


οἱ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ. 24 Kai ἰδού, σεισμὸς μέγας ἐγένετο ἐν τῇ 
his 7disciples. And lo, a *tempest roreae arose in the 


θαλάσσῃ. ὥστε τὸ πλοῖον καλύπτεσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν κυμάτων" 
see sothat the ship was covered ΕΝ the Waves; 


αὐτὸς.δὲ ἐκάθευδεν. 25 καὶ προσελθόντες foi μαθηταὶ" "αὐτοῦ" 
but Βα was sleeping: And havingcometo[him]the disciples of him 


ἤγειραν αὐτόν, λέγοντες, Κύριε, σῶσον ‘ypac," ἀπολλύμεθα. 
awoke him, saying, Lord, save us; we perish, 

26 Kai λέγει αὐτοῖς, Ti δειλοί tore, ὀλιγόπιστοι; Τότε 

And hesays ἴο ἔμθῃι, Why fearful are 79, O [ye] of little faith? Then, 


ἐγερθεὶς ἐπετίμησεν τοῖς ἀνέμοις καὶ TY θαλάσσῃ, καὶ ἐγένετο 
haying arisen he rebuked the winds and the sea, 


γαλήνη μεγάλη. 21 οἱ. δὲ ἄνθρωποι ἐθαύμασαν, λέγοντες, 
a *calm eee And the men wondered, saying, 


ship, 


oni ἐστιν οὗτος, Ort βκαὶ" οἱ ἄνεμοι Kai ἡ θάλασσα 
What kind{ofman] is this, that even the winds and the sea 
ὑπακούουσιν avT@;' 

obey him? 


αὐτῷ to him “Ttraw. Y ὄχλον ἃ crowd L. 
(read he said) τ. > λέγει says LITrAW. 
© — αὐτοῦ GLTTrAW. ἴ --- ἡμᾶς LTTrAW. 


¢ — τὸ (read a ship) Ltra. 
 —— καὶ L. 


and therewas J! 


z - αὐτοῦ (read the disciples)uttr. 5 --- Ἰησοῦς 
4d — οἱ μαθηταὶ {τ|έ | TT. 
h αὐτῷ ὑπακούουσιν 1ΤΊΤΑ. 


19 


touched her hand, and 
the fever left her: and 
she arose, and min- 
istered unto them. 


16 When theeven was 
come, they brought un- 
to him many that were 
possessed with devils: 
and he cast out the 
spirits with his word, 
and healed all that 
were sick: 17 that it 

might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by 
Esaias the prophet, 
saying, Himself took 
our infirmities, and 
bare our sicknesses. 


18 Now when Jesus 
saw great multitudes 
about him, he gave 
commandment to de- 
part unto the other 
side. 19 And a certain 
scribe came, and said 
unto him, Master, I 
will follow thee whi- 
thersoever thou goest. 
20 And Jesus saith un- 
to him, The foxes have 
holes, and the birds of 
the air have nests; but 
the Son of man hath 
not where to lay his 
head. 21 And another 
of his disciples said 
unto him, Lord, suffer 
me first to goand bury 
my father. 22 But Je- 
sus said unto him, 
Follow me; and let the 
dead bury their dead. 


23 And when he was 
entered into a ship, his 
disciples followed him, 
24 And, behold, there 
arose a great tempest 
in the sea, insomuch 
that the ship was co- 
vered with the waves: 
but he was asleep. 
25 And his disciples 
came to him, and 
awoke him, saying, 
Lord, save us: we per- 
ish. 26 And he saith 
unto them, Why are 
e fearful, O ye of 
little faith? Then he 
arose, and rebuked the 
winds and the sea; and 
there was a great calm. 
27 But the men mar- 
velled, saying, What 
manner of man is this, 
that even the winds 
and the sea obey him! 


20 


28 And when he was 
come to the other side 
into the country of the 
Gergesenes, there met 
him two possessed with 
devils, coming out of 
the tombs, exceeding 
fierce, so that no man 
might pass by that 
hay: 29 rate behold, 
they cried out, saying, 
What have we to do 
with thee, Jesus, thou 
Son of God? art thou 
come hither to torment 
us before the time? 
30 And there was a 
good way off from 
them an herd of many 
swine feeding. 31 So 
the devils besought 
him, saying, If thou 
east us out, suffer us 
to go away into the 
herd of swine, 32 And 
he said unto them, Go. 
And when they were 
come out, they went 
into the herd of swine: 
and, behold, the whole 
herd of swine ran 
violently down a steep 
piace into the sea, and 
perished in the waters. 
33 And they that kept 
them fled, and went 
their ways into the 
city, and told every 
thing, and what was 
befallen to the pos- 
sessed of the devils. 
84 And, behold, the 
whole city came out 
to meet Jesus: and 
when they saw him, 
they besought him that 
he would depart out of 
their coasts. 


IX. And he entered 
into a ship, and passed 
over, and came into his 
own city. 2 And, be- 
hold, they brought to 
him a man sick of the 
palsy, lying on a bed: 
and Jesus seeing their 
faith said unto the 
sick of the palsy, Son, 
be of good cheer; thy 
sins be forgiven thee. 
3 And, behold, certain 
of the scribes said 
within themselves, 
This man blasphem- 
eth. 4 And Jesus know- 
ing their thoughts 
said, Wherefore think 
ye evil in your hearts? 
6 For whether is easier, 
to say, Τὴν sins be for- 


1 ἐλθόντος αὐτοῦ LTTr. 
mM ἀπόστειλον ἡμᾶς BEN US GLTTrA. 
χοίρους the swine Gurrtr. 
v — τὸ (read a ship) τι ΑἹ]. 
Y σον αἱ ἁμαρτίαι LTTrA. 


Siva 1,. 
forgiven LTtr. 
"— ὑμεῖς LTTrA. 


MAT@OAIOS. Vili, (X. 

28 Kai ᾿ἐλθόντι αὐτῷ" εἰς τὸ πέραν εἰς THY χώραν τῶν 
And when7had“come *he to the otherside to the country ofthe 
sLepreonuays ὑπήντησαν αὐτῷ δύο δαιμονιζόμενοι ἐκ τῶν 
rgesenes, Smet Shim ‘two *possessed *by “demons outof the 
μνημείων ἐξερχόμενοι, χαλεποὶ λίαν, ὥστε μὴ ἰσχύειν τινὰ 
tombs coming, “violent ‘very, sothat not *was*able ‘any “one 
παρελθεῖν διὰ τῆς. ὁδοῦ.ἐκείνης" 29 καὶ ἰδού, ἔκραξαν λέγοντες, 


to pass by that way. And lo, theycriedout, saying, 
Ti ἡμῖν καὶ cot, ᾿Τησοῦ," υἱὲ τοῦ θεοῦ; ἦλθες ὧδε πρὸ 


What tous and tothee, Jesus, Son of God? art thou come here before [the } 


~ / « ~ τ 4 ? ? >? ~ ? la 

καιροῦ βασανίσαι ἡμᾶς; 30°Hy.dé μακρὰν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν ἀγέλη 

time to torment us? Nowthere was faroff from them ἃ herd 

, ~ La « A , 4 

χοίρων πολλῶν βοσκομένη. 31 οἱ. δὲ δαίμονες παρεκάλουν 
of ?swine ‘many feeding ; And the demons besought 
αὐτόν, λέγοντες, Εἰ ἐκβάλλεις ἡμᾶς, "᾿ἐπίτρεψον ἡμῖν ἀπελθεῖν" 

him, saying, If thoucastout us, allow us to go away 
εἰς τὴν ἀγέλην τῶν χοίρων. 32 Kai εἶπεν αὐτοῖς", Ὑπάγετε. 
into the herd ofthe swine. And hesaid to them, Go. 
Οἱ δὲ ἐξελθόντες “ἀπῆλθον! εἰς ὑτὴν ἀγέλην τῶν χοίρων" 
And they having gone out wentaway into the herd ofthe swine: 


καὶ ἰδού, ὥρμησεν πᾶσα ἡ ἀγέλη “τῶν χοίρων" κατὰ τοῦ 
and behold, ‘rushed ‘all the “herd ‘ofthe “swine down the 
κρημνοῦ sic τὴν θάλασσαν, καὶ ἀπέθανον ἐν τοῖς ὕδασιν. 
steep into the sea, and died in the waters. 
33 οἱ δὲ βόσκοντες ἔφυγον, Kai ἀπελθόντες εἰς τὴν πόλιν 
But those who fed [them] fled, and having goneaway into the city 


ἀπήγγειλαν πάντα, καὶ τὰ τῶν. δαιμονιζομένων. 
related everything, and the [events] concerning those possessed by demons. 
34 καὶ ἰδού, πᾶσα ἡ πόλις ἐξῆλθεν εἰς τσυνάντησιν" "τῷ! Inoov" 
And lo, all the city wentout to meet Jesus; 
καὶ ἰδόντες αὐτόν, παρεκάλεσαν ‘orrwe! ἀπὸ 
and seeing him, they besought [him] that from 
τῶν ὁρίων. αὐτῶν. 
their borders. 


μεταβῇ 
he would depart 


9 Kai ἐμβὰς εἰς "τὸ! πλοῖον διεπέρασεν Kai ἦλθεν εἰς 

And havingentered into the ship he passed over’ and came _ ἴο 

τὴν. ἰδίαν πόλιν. 2 Kai ἰδού, “ προσέφερον" αὐτῷ παραλυτικὸν 
his own city. And lo, they brought to him a paralytic 


ἐπὶ κλίνης βεβλημένον" Kai ἰδὼν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς τὴν.πίστιν. αὐτῶν 


on ἃ bed lying; and “seeing ‘Jesus their faith 
εἶπεν τῷ TapaduTiKp, θάρσει, τέκνον, “ἀφέωνταί! 
said tothe paralytic, Be of good courage, child; *have*been °forgiven 


Yoorai.apapriat.cov." 3 Kai ἰδού, τινὲς τῶν γραμματέων τεΐπον" 
®thee 1thy *sins. And lo, some ofthe scribes said 
ἐν ἑαυτοῖς, Οὗτος PrAaognpei. 4 Kai "ἰδὼν" ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς rac 
in themselves, This[man} blasphemes. And “perceiving 1 Jesus 
ἐνθυμήσεις. αὐτῶν, εἶπεν. Ἵνα.τί! οὑμεῖο! ἐνθυμεῖσθε πονηρὰ 
their thoughts, said, Why "ye ‘think evil 
ἐν ταῖς καρδίαις. ὑμῶν; 5 τί.γάρ ἐστιν εὐκοπώτερον, εἰπεῖν, 
in your hearts ? For which is easier, to say, 


k Τερασηνῷν L; Ταδαρηνῶν Gadarenes rrra. 
a + [ὃ ᾿Τησοῦς Jesus 1,. 
4 — τῶν χοίρων GLTT:{ a]. 


| — Ἰησοῦ Gurtra. 
ο ἀπῆλθαν LTr. P τοὺς 
τ ὑπάντησιν LITr. 5 τοῦ 1. 

Ἢ προσφέρουσιν they bring x. x ἀφίενταί are 
* εἶπαν Lir. * εἰδὼς knowing trr. » ‘Ivari ΟΥ̓. 


ΙΧ. MeAsT FT HE Wwe 
VAgéwyrat! ὅσοι" αἱ ἁμαρτίαι" 7 εἰπεῖν, Eyerpar' καὶ 
Ξῆ:2υ8 *been ΠΡΟΣ σα Sthee [? thy] eee or tosay, Arise and 


περιπάτει; 0 ἵνα.δὲ εἰδῆτε Ore ἐξουσίαν ἔχει ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ av- 
walk? But that yemay know that authority has the Son of 


θρώπου ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ἀφιέναι ἁμαρτίας" τότε λέγει τῷ παρα-- 
man on the earth to τοπεῖνο sins: then ney to the at 


λυτικῷ, ¥ Ἐγερθεὶς" ἀρόν σου τὴν κλίνην, καὶ ὕπαγε εἰς τὸν 


lytic, Having arisen, takeup thy bed, and go to 

- ’ Α ? " ? ~ ᾽ ~ 
οἶκόν σου. 7 Kai ἐγερθεὶς ἀπῆλθεν εἰς τὸν.οἶκον αὐτοῦ. 
7house ‘thy. And having arisen he went away to his house. 


8 ἰδόντες δὲ οἱ ὄχλοι "ἐθαύμασαν," καὶ ἐδόξασαν τὸν θεόν, 


And*having*seen ‘the *crowds wondered, δια glorified God, 
τὸν δόντα ἐξουσίαν τοιαύτην τοῖς ἀνθρώποις. 
who gave peouhority: ‘such to men. 
9 Kai παράγων ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἐκεῖθεν εἶδεν ἄνθρωπον καθήμενον 
And “passing Jesus thence saw aman sitting 


ἐπὶ τὸ τελώνιον, ‘MarOaior' λεγόμενον, καὶ λέγει αὐτῷ, ᾿Ακο- 
at the tax-office, “Matthew ‘called, and says tohim, Fol- 


λούθει μοι. Kai ἀναστὰς *jKodotOnoev' arp. 10 Kai ἐγένετο 
low me, And having arisen he followed him. And it came to pass 


ἰαὐτοῦ ἀνακειμένου" ἐν ry οἰκίᾳ, ™xai' ἰδού, πολλοὶ τελῶναι 
αὖ his reclining [αὖ [8016] in the houses that behold, many tax-gatherers 


καὶ ἁμαρτωλοὶ ἐλθόντες συνανέκειντο τῷ Ἰησοῦ καὶ 


and sinners having come were reclining [at table] with Jesus and 
τοῖς.μαθηταῖς.αὐτοῦ. 11 καὶ ἰδόντες οἱ Φαρισαῖοι "εἶπον" 
his disciples. And having seen[it] the Pharisees said 


τοῖς. μαθηταῖς.αὐτοῦ, “Διατί" μετὰ τῶν τελωνῶν καὶ ἁμαρ- 
to his disciples, Why with the tax-gatherers and sin- 
τωλῶν ἐσθίει ὁ- διδάσκαλος ὑμῶν; 12 Ὃ δὲ Ῥ Ἰησοῦς" ἀκούσας 
ners eats your teacher ? But Jesus having heard 
εἶπεν αὐτοῖς," Οὐ χρείαν ἔχουσι» οἱ ἰσχύοντες ἰατροῦ, 
hesaid tothem, “Νοὺ ‘need °have ‘they *who *are*strong ΦΕΡΕ ΙΙαα 


"ἀλλ᾽ οἱ κακῶς ἔχοντες. 18 πορευθέντες δὲ μάθετε τί ἐστιν, 
but they who ill are. But having gone ΘΓ what 


s"EXeov'" θέλω, καὶ οὐ θυσίαν" οὐ 
Mercy I desire, and not sacrifice: *not 
tard’! ἁμαρτωλοὺς "εἰς μετάνοιαν." 

{ones}, but sinners to repentance. 

14 Tore προσέρχονται αὐτῷ οἱ μαθηταὶ ᾿Ιωάννου, λέγοντες, 
Then come near to him the disciples of John, saying, 

eg ἡμεῖς. καὶ οἱ eh νηστεύομεν “πολλά, οἱ. δὲ. μαθη- 
we *%and*the ®Pharisees do fast much, but 7disci- 


Tai.cov οὐ-νηστεύουσιν; 15 Kai εἶπεν αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Μὴ 
ples *thy fast not? And *said *to*them 1 Jesus, 


δύνανται οἱ υἱοὶ τοῦ νυμφῶνος πενθεῖν ἐφ᾽ ὅσον μετ᾽ αὐτῶν 
Can the sons of the bridechamber mourn while with them 
ἐστιν ὁ νυμφίος ; ἐλεύσονται δὲ ἡμέραι ὅταν ἀπαρθῇ 
is the bri oom? *will*come ‘but 7days when willhave been taken away 
ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν ὁ ν apes Kai τότε νηστεύσουσιν. 16 οὐδεὶς.δὲ 
from them the bridegroom, and then they will fast. But no one 
ἐπιβάλλει ἐπίβλημα ῥάκους ΡΖ χ ἐπὶ ἱματίῳ.παλαιῷ᾽" 


15, 
γὰρ᾽ ἦλθον καλέσαι δικαίους, 


for *I%came _ to call righteous 


21 


given thee; or to sary, 
Arise, and walk? 6 But 
that yemay know that 
the Son of man hath 
power on earth to for- 
give sins, (then saith 
he to the sick of the 
palsy,) Arise, take up 
thy bed, and go unto 
thine house. 7 And he 
arose, and devarted to 
his house. 8 But when 
the multitudes saw it, 
they marvelled, and 
glorified God which 
had given such power 
unto men. 


9 And as Jesus passed 
forth from thence, he 
saw a man, named 
Matthew, sitting at 
the receipt of custom : 
and he saith untohim, 
Follow me. And be 
arose, and followed 
him, 10 And it came 
to pass, as Jesus sat at 
meat in the house, be- 
hold, many publicans 
and sinners came and 
sat down with him and 
his disciples. 11 And 
when the Pharisees 
saw it, they said unto 
his disciples, Why eat- 
eth your Master with 
publicans and sinners? 
12 But when Jesus 
heard that, he said un- 
to them, They that be 
whole need not a phy- 
sician, but they that 
are sick. 13 But go ye 
and learn what that 
meaneth, I will have 
merey, and not sacri- 
fice : for 1am not come 
to call the righteous, 
but sinners to repent- 
ance. 


14 Then came to him 
the disciples of John 
saying, Why ἘΣ τὶ 
the Pharisees fast oft, 
but thy disciples fast 
not? 15 And Jesussaid 
unto them, Can the 
children of the bride- 
chamber mourn, as 
long as the bridegroom 
is with them? but the 
days will come, when 
the bridegroom shall 
be taken from them, 
and then shall they 
fast. 16 No man put- 
teth a piece of new 
cloth unto an old gar- 


puts a piece of ?cloth ‘unfulled on anold garment: ment, for that which 

4 ἀφίενταί: are forgiven Lrtr. & gov (read thy sins) Gurtraw. f ἐγεῖρε LTTrAW. ΑΕ ἔγειρε 
arise LTr. » ἐφοβήθησαν were afraid Lrtra. +‘ Μαθθαῖον τιτττα. * ἠκολούθει 1. | ἀνακει- 
μένου αὐτοῦ L. ™—kaiT. B® ἔλεγον LTTr. ° διὰ TéLTra, P — Ἰησοῦς ut[trja. ἃ — αὐτοῖς 
{πττὰ. 'dAAaLTr. 5 Ἔλεος τττὰ. ἀλλὰ TTrAW. Y — εἰς μετάνοιαν GLTTrAW. 7 Διὰ 
τίιπτα.  -- πολλά LT. 


ba) 


22 


is put into fill it up 
taketh from the gar- 
ment, and the rent is 
made worse. 17 Neither 
do men put new wine 
into old bottles: else 
the bottles break, and 
the wine runneth out, 
and the bottles perish: 
but they put new wine 
into new bottles, and 
both are preserved. 


18 While he spake 
these things unto 
them, behold, there 
came 2 certain ruler, 
and worshipped him, 
saying, My daughter 
is even now dead: but 
come and lay thy hand 
upon her, and she shall 
live. 19 And Jesus a- 
rose, and _ followed 
him, and so did his 
disciples. 


20 And, behold, a 
woman, which was 
diseased with an issue 
of blood twelve years, 
came behind him, and 
touched the hem of his 
garment: 21 for she 
said within herself, If 
I may but touch his 
garment, I shall be 
whole. 22 But Jesus 
turned him about, and 
when he saw her, he 
said, Daughter, be of 
good comfort; thy 
faith hath made thee 
whole. And the wo- 
man was made whole 
from that hour. . 


23 And when Jesus 
came into the ruler’s 
house, and saw the 
minstrels and the peo- 
ple making a noise, 
24 he said unto them, 
Give place: for the 
maid is not dead, but 
sleepeth. And _ they 
laughed him to scorn. 
25 But when the people 
were put forth, he 
went in, and took her 
by the hand, and the 
maid arose. 26 And 
the fame hereof went 
abroad into all that 
land. 


27 And when Jesus 
departed thence, two 
hlind men followed 
him, crying, and say- 
ing, Tou Son of Da- 
vid, have mercy on us. 
28 And when he was 
come into the house, 
the blind men came to 
him: and Josus saith 


MATOAIO®S. 1X 
αἴρει γὰρ τὸ πλήρωμα αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἱματίου, καὶ χεῖρον 
Stakes Saway ‘for 3105 “filling *up from the garment, and a worse 
, , > A / a , > > ‘ 
σχίσμα γίνεται. 17 οὐδὲ βάλλουσιν oivoy νέον εἰς ἀσκοὺς 
rent _ takes place. Nor φαΐ they 2wine ‘new into “skins 
παλαιούς" εἰ δὲ. μήγε ῥήγνυνται οἱ ἀσκοί, Kai ὁ οἶνος ἐκχεῖται, 
old, otherwise “*are*burst ‘the *skins, and the wine is poured out, 
καὶ οἱ ἀσκοὶ ἡἀπολοῦνται"" ἀλλὰ βάλλουσιν oivoy νέον εἰς 
andthe skins ΜΠ bedestroyed; but they put 2wine ‘new into 
ἀσκοὺς" καινούς, Kai δἀμφότερα! συντηροῦνται. 
*skins mew, and both are preserved together. 
18 Ταῦτα αὐτοῦ.λαλοῦντος αὐτοῖς, ἰδού, ἄρχων" “ἐλθὼν" 
5These “things 'as*he*is*speaking tothem, behold, aruler havingcome 
προσεκύνει αὐτῷ, λέγων, “Ὅτι! ἡ:θυγάτηρ: μου ἄρτι ἐτελεύ- 
didhomage tohim, saying, My daughter just now has 
- > s ? ‘ ? ΄ \ oui gs he (eae 3 τὸν ‘ 
τησεν᾽ ἀλλὰ ἐλθὼν ἐπίθες τὴν.χεϊρά.σου ἐπ᾽ αὐτήν, καὶ 
died; but havingcome lay thy hand upon her, and 
72 Ἂ ? 4 «2, ~ e > 40 ΗΠ > ~ 
ζήσεται. 19 καὶ ἐγερθεὶξρ 0 Inoove “ἠκολούθησεν" αὐτῷ 
she shall live. And having arisen Jesus followed him, 
καὶ οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ. 
and his disciples. 
20 Kai ἰδού, γυνὴ αἱμοῤῥοοῦσα δώδεκα ἔτη, προσελ- 
And behold, a woman having hada ἤπχ οὗ blood twelve years, having 


θοῦσα ὄπισθεν ἥψατο τοῦ κρασπέδου τοῦ ἱματίου.αὐτοῦ. 
come behind touched’ the border of his garment, 


21 ἔλεγεν. γὰρ ἐν ἑαυτῇ, Edy μόνον ἅψωμαι τοῦ ἱματίου 
For she said within herself, Lf only I shall touch 27arment 
αὐτοῦ σωθήσομαι. 22 Ὁ δὲ. ΓΙησοῦς" ξἐπιστραφεὶς" καὶ idwy 
this I shall be cured. But Jesus having turned and having seen 
αὐτὴν εἶπεν, Θάρσει, θύγατερ' ἡ.πίστις.σου σέσωκέν σε. 


her 868 βαϊᾶ, Beof good courage, daughter; thy faith hathcured thea 
ι , ε \ \ ~ 
καὶ ἐσώθη ἢ γυνὴ ἀπὸ τῆς.ὥρας ἐκείνης. 
Απᾶ *was*cured ‘the ?woman from that hour. 
23 Καὶ ἐλθὼν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν τοῦ ἄρχοντος, 
And “having *come 1Jesus into the house of the ruler, 
‘ ’ ‘ A ? A ‘ A » ᾿ 
καὶ ἰδὼν τοὺς αὐλητὰς καὶ τὸν ὄχλον θορυβούμενον, 


and having seen the crowd 


24 "λέγει αὐτοῖς," ᾿Αναχωρεῖτε᾽ οὐ yap ἀπέθανεν τὸ κοράσιον, 


flute-players and the making a tumult, 


says to them, Withdraw, ‘not ‘for ‘is®%dead the “damsel, 
ἀλλὰ καθεύδει. Kai κατεγέλων αὐτοῦ. 25 ὅτειδὲ ἐξεβλήθη 


but And they laughed at him. But when “had *been *put Sout 


ὁ ὄχλος, εἰσελθὼν ἐκράτησεν τῆς.χειρὸς. αὐτῆς, Kai ἠγέρθη 
‘the “οτονγᾶ, having entered he took hold of her hand, and “arose 


τὸ κοράσιον. 26 Kai ἐξῆλθεν ἡ φήμη.αὕτη εἰς ὕλην τὴν 


sleeps. 


*the 7damsel. And ‘went ‘out ‘this ?report into all 
γῆν ἐκείνην. 
land ‘that. 


27 Kai παράγοντι ἐκεῖθεν τῷ Ἰησοῦ, ἠκολούθησαν Sadr! 


And “?passing “on ‘thence 1 Jesus, "followed *him 
δύο τυφλοί, κράζοντες καὶ λέγοντες, Ἔλέησον ἡμᾶς, Ευὶὲ 
δέννο ‘“blind[’men], crying and saying, Havepity on us, Son 


Δαβίδ." 28 ἐλθόντι.δὲ εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν, Ἱπροσῆλθον" αὐτῷ οἱ 
of David. Andhaving come ittto the house, came to him the 


Υ ἀπόλλυνται are destroyed Ltr. 


τ olvov νέον εἰς ἀσκοὺς βάλλουσιν L. ® ἀμφότεροι 


Θυττγαν,, » + εἷς (read acertainruler) @Ltr. ° προσελθὼν having come to [him] 1; εἰσελθὼν 


having entered Taw. 


δ GAeyev Said LTTra. 


ἃ. ὅτι τ. “ ἠκολούθει τττὰ. £—’Iyoovs τ. 


& στραφεὶς LTTrA. 
i (io? wee kasd ‘5 Β aoe x ἐδ 
- αὐτῷ L[Ttr]. * vids Δαυείδ nrtra; υἱὲ Δαυΐδ aw. 


! προσῆλθαν LTr. 


΄ 


PA, X. MATTHEW. 
τυφλοί, Kai λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, Torevere ὅτι δύναμαι 
blind [men],and says *to*them Jesus, Believe ye that I am able 
™rovro ποιῆσαι; Λέγουσιν αὐτῷ, Nat, κύριε. 29 Τότε ἥψατο 
this to do? They say tohim, Yea, Lord. Then he touched 
τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν.αὐτῶν, λέγων, Κατὰ τὴν.πίστιν. ὑμῶν γενη- 
their eyes, saying, According to your faith be 
θήτω ὑμῖν. 30 Kai "ἀνεῴχθησαν" αὐτῶν οἱ ὀφθαλμοί" Kai 
it to you. And were opened their eyes; and 
02 fy Π > ~ ἘΣ ~ λέ « ~ δ Η͂ 
ἐνεβριμήσατο" αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, λέγων, Opare μηδεὶς γινω- 


4strictly “charged “*them tJesus, saying, See το ὁπ "Net 
σκέτω. 81 Οἱ. δὲ ἐξελθόντες διεφή ισαν αὐτὸν ἐν ὕλῃ TH 
know [it]. But they having ΒῸΠΘ οὐ made*known ‘him in all 

ἢ ἐκείνῃ. 
7Jand ‘that. 


82 Αὐτῶν.δὲ ἐξερχομένων, ἰδού, προσήνεγκαν αὐτῷ Pay- 
Andasthey were going out, behold, they brought to him a 
θρωπον" κωφὸν δαιμονιζόμενον. 88 Kai ἐκβληθέντος 
man dumb, possessed by a demon, And “having *been ‘cast Sout 
τοῦ δαιμονίου, ἐχάλησεν ὁ κωφός" Kai ἐθαύμασαν οἱ ὄχλοι, 
the ?demon, ®spake Tthe "dumb. And “wondered ‘the crowds, 
λέγοντες, FOr! οὐδέποτε ἐφάνη οὕτως ἐν τῷ Ισραήλ.. 84 Oe 
saying, Never wasitseen thus in Israel. But the 
Φαρισαῖοι ἔλεγον, Ev τῷ ἄρχοντι τῶν δαιμονίων ἐκβάλλει 


Pharisees said, By the prince of the demons he casts out 
τὰ δαιμόνια, 
the demons, 


35 Kai περιῆγεν 0 Ἰησοῦς τὰς πόλεις πάσας Kai τὰς κώμας, 
And ?went *about 1Jesus ‘the “cities *all and the villages, 
διδάσκων ἐν ταῖς.συναγωγαῖς. αὐτῶν, καὶ κηρύσσων τὸ εὐαγ- 
teaching in their synagogues, and proclaiming the glad 
γέλιον τῆς βασιλείας, καὶ θεραπεύων πᾶσαν νόσον Kai πᾶσαν 
tidings ofthe kingdom, and healing every disease and every 
μαλακίαν tv τῷ λαῷ." 36 ἰδὼν. δὲ τοὺς ὄχλους ἐ- 
bodily weakness among the people. And βαυΐηδ seen the crowds he was 
σπλαγχνίσθη περὶ αὐτῶν, ὅτι ἦσαν 5ἐκλελυμένοι" καὶ 
moved with compassion for them, because they were wearied and 
ἱἐῤῥιμμένοι! "ὡσεὶ" πρόβατα μὴ ἔχοντα ποιμένα. 87 τότε λέγει 
cast away as sheep not having a shepherd. Then hesays 
Toic-uanraic.avrov, Ὃ μὲν θερισμὸς πολύς, οἱ.δὲ ἐργάται 
to his disciples, The *indeed ‘harvest [is] great, but the workmen 
ὀλίγοι" 88 δεήθητε οὖν τοῦ κυρίου τοῦ θερισμοῦ, ὕπως 


fare] few; supplicate therefore the Lord ofthe harvest, that 
ἐκβάλῃ ἐργάτας εἰς τὸν.θερισμὸν. αὐτοῦ. 
he may send out workmen into his harvest, 
‘ ’ ‘ 7 ‘ ? ~ 
10 Kai προσκαλεσάμενος τοὺς δώδεκα μαθητὰς αὐτοῦ, 
An having called to [him] “twelve disciples This 
ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ἐξουσίαν πνευμάτων ἀκαθάρτων, ὥστε 
he gave to them authority over “spirits ‘unclean, so as 
ἐκβάλλειν αὐτά, καὶ θεραπεύειν πᾶσαν νόσον Kai πᾶσαν 
tocastout them, and to heal every disease δ) Δ every 
μαλακίαν. 
bodily weakness. 


Τῶν. δὲ δώδεκα ἀποστόλων τὰ ὀνόματά ἐστιν ταῦτα; 
Now ofthe twelve apostles the names are these : 


23 


unto them, Believe ye 
that I am able to do 
this? They said un- 
to him, Yea, Lord. 
29 Then touched he 
their eyes, saying, Ac- 
cording to your faith 
be it unto you. 30 And 
their eyes were opened; 
and Jesus _ straitly 
charged them, saying, 
See ἡ no man know 
it. 31 But they, when 
they were departed, 
spread abroad his 
fame in all that coun- 
try. 


32 As they went ont, 
behold, they brought 
to him a dumb man 
possessed with a devil. 
33 And when the devil 
was cast out, the dumb 
spake: and the multi- 
tudes marvelled, say- 
ing, It was never se 
seen in Israel. 34 But 
the Pharisees said, He 
casteth out devils 
through the prince of 
the devils. 


35 And Jesus went 
about all the cities and 
villages, teaching in 
their synagogues, and 
preaching the gospel of 
the kingdom, and 
healing every sickness 
and every disease 
among the _ people. 
36 But when he saw 
the multitudes, he was 
moved with compas- 
sion on them, because 
they fainted, and were 
scattered abroad, as 
sheep having no shep- 
herd. 37 Then saith he 
unto his disciples, The 
harvest truly zs plen- 
teous, but the labour- 
ers are few: 28 pray 
ye therefore the Lord 
of the harvest, that he 
will send forth labour- 
ers into his harvest, 


X. And when he had 
ealled unto him his 
twelve disciples, he 
gave them power a- 
gainst unclean spirits, 
to cast them out, and 
to heal all manner of 
sickness and all man- 
ner of disease. 2 Now 
the names of the twelve 
apostles are these; The 


™ πριῆσαι τοῦτο L. 
L[tra]. 4 — ὅτι GLTTraw. 


' — ἐν τῷ λαῷ GLTTraW. 
* ρεριμμένοι L3 ἐριμμένοι τττα. 


V ὡς Tr. 


> Ui > , ” 
Ὁ ἠνεῳχθῆσαν Ltrs. ° ἐνεβριμήθη LTT-A. P — ἄνθρωπον (read [one]) 
= ἐσκυλμένοι harassed GLTT: AW 


first, Simon, who is 
called Peter, and 


Andrew his brother; 
James the son of Zeb- 
edee, and John his 
brother ; 3 Philip, and 
Bartholomew; Tho- 
mas, and Matthew the 
publican; James the 
son of Alphzeus, and 
Lebbseus, whose sur- 
name was Thaddeus; 
4 Simon the Canaanite, 


and Judas Iscariot. 
who also _ betrayed 
him. 


5 These twelve Jesus 
sent forth, and com- 
manded them, saying, 
Go not into the way of 
the Gentiles, and into 
anu city of the Sama- 
ritams enter ye not: 
6 but go rather to the 
lost sheep of the house 
of Israel. 7 And as ye 
go, preach, saying, The 
kingdom of heaven is 
at hand. 8 Heal the 
sick, cleanse the lepers, 
raise the dead, cast out 
devils: freely ye have 
received, freely give. 
9 Provide neither gold, 
nor silver, nor brass in 
your purses, 10 nor 
scrip for your jour- 
ney, neither two coats, 
neither shoes, nor yet 
staves: for the work- 
man is worthy of his 
meat. 11 And into 
whatsoever city or 
town ye shall enter, 
inquire who in it is 
worthy; and there a- 
bide till ye go thence. 
12 And when ye come 
into an house, salute 
it® 138 And if the house 
be worthy, let your 
peace come upon it: 
butifit be not worthy, 
let your peace return 
to you. 14 And whoso- 
ever shall not receive 
you, nor hear your 
words, when ye depart 
out of that house or 
city, shake off the dust 
of your feet. 15 Verily 
I say unto you, It 
sha] be more tolerable 
for the land of Sodom 
and Gomorrha in the 
day of judgment, than 
for that city. 16 Be- 
hold, I send you forth 


WY + καὶ and br. 


τ Μαθθαῖος LTTrA. 


ΜΑΤΘΆΤΟΣ. Χ. 
πρῶτος Σίμων ὁ λεγόμενος Πέτρος, καὶ ᾿Ανδρέας ὁ ἀδελφὸς 
first Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew “brother 
αὐτοῦ: Ἰάκωβος ὁ τοῦ Ζεβεδαίου, καὶ ᾿Ιωάννης ὁ ἀδελφὸς 
*his ; James the[son] of Zebedee, and John “brother 
αὐτοῦ" 8 Φίλιππος, Kai Βαρθολομαῖος" Θωμᾶς, καὶ *Mar@aioc' 
this; Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew 
ὁ τελώνης Ιάκωβος ὁ τοῦ ᾿Αλφαίου, καὶ ᾿Λεββαῖος 6 
the tax-gatherer; James the [son] of Alpheus, and Lebbeus whe 
ἐπικληθεὶς Θαδδαῖος" 4 Σίμων ὁ *Kavaviryce,' καὶ ᾿Ιούδας 
wassurnamed Thaddeus; Simon the Cananite, and Judas 
*Tokapwryc,' ὁ Kai παραδοὺς αὐτόν. 
Iscariote, who also delivered up him. 
- ’ 4 , ? , oR) ~ ," 
5 'Γούτους τοὺς δώδεκα ἀπέστειλεν ὁ Inoovc, παραγγείλας 
These twelve “sent “forth Jesus, having charged 
> ~ , > CDr 3 ~ ere) t \ ᾽ 
αὐτοῖς, λέγων, Eig ὁδὸν ἐθνῶν μὴ.ἀπέλθητε, καὶ εἰς 
them, saying, Into[the] way oftheGentiles go not off, and into 
πόλιν “Σαμαρειτῶν" μὴ εἰσέλθητε. 6 πορεύεσθε.δὲ μᾶλλον 
acity of [the] Samaritans enter not; but go rather 
4 A 2 A ? , wy” ? , 
πρὸς τὰ πρόβατα Ta ἀπολωλότα οἴκου ᾿Ισραήῆλ. 7 πο- 
to the sheep the lost of [the] house of Israel. *Go- 
, A ΄ ͵ oe » « , 
PEVOPMLEVOL δὲ Κηρύυσσετε, λέγοντες, Ort NY YlKEV 1) βασιλεία 
ing ‘and proclaim, saying, Has drawn near the kingdom 
τῶν οὐρανῶν. 8 ἀσθενοῦντας θεραπεύετε, “λεπροὺς καθαρί- 
of the heavens. Sick heal, lepers cleanse, 
ζετε, νεκροὺς ἐγείρετε," δαιμόνια ἐκβάλλετε. δωρεὰν ἐλάβετε, 
dead raise, demons cast out: gratuitously ye received, 


δωρεὰν δότε. 9 Μὴ-κτήσησθε χρυσόν, μηδὲ ἄργυρον, μηδὲ, 
gratuitously impart. Provide not gold, nor silver, nor 
χαλκὸν εἰς τὰς.ζώνας. ὑμῶν, 10 μὴ πήραν εἰς ὁδόν, μηδὲ 


money in your belts, nor provision-bag for [the] way, nor 


δύο χιτῶνας, μηδὲ ὑποδήματα, μηδὲ “ῥάβδον"" aEoc-yap ὁ 


two tunics, nor sandals, nor a staff: for worthy the 
? , ~ ~ ? ~ f2 Τ > a ION ’ a 
ἐργάτης τῆς.τροφῆς. αὐτοῦ 'ἐστιν." 11 Εἰς.ἣν.δ᾽ ἂν πόλιν ἢ 
workman of his food is. And into whatever city or 
κώμην εἰσέλθητε, ἐξετάσατε τίς ἐν αὐτῇ ἄξιός ἐστιν κἀκεῖ 
village ye enter, inquire who in it worthy is, and there 


είνατε, Ewe.dy ἐξέλθητε. 12 εἰσερχόμενοι.δὲ εἰς THY οἰκίαν 
μ ἢ Ui] ρ ? ᾽ 


remain until ye go forth. But entering into the house, 
ἀσπάσασθε αὐτήν. 13 καὶ ἐὰν μὲν ἡ οἰκία ἀξία, ξἐχλθέτω" 
salute it: and if indeed “be ‘the “house worthy, let come 


ἡ.εἰρήνη.ὑμῶν ἐπ᾽ αὐτήν" tav.d& μὴ. ἡ ἀξία, ἡ-εἰρήνη. ὑμῶν 
your peace upon it; but if it be not worthy, *your *peace 
πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἐπιστραφήτω. 14 καὶ ὃς." ἐὰν" μὴ.δέξηται ὑμᾶς, 
5to ®you et “return. And whoever will not receive you, 
μηδὲ ἀκούσῃ τοὺς. λόγους. ὑμῶν, LEpyomevoe'TIC οἰκίας ἢ τῆς 
nor will hear your words, going forth of[that] house or 
πόλεως ἐκείνης, ἐκτινάξατε τὸν κονιορτὸν ἔτῶν. ποδῶν ὑμῶν. 
“city ‘that, shake off the dust of your feet. 
15 ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ἀνεκτότερον ἔσται Σοδόμων 
Verily Isay toyou, More tolerable it shall be for[the]land of Sodom 
‘| »γ:ε 2 ε , , ASS ~ x ? , ? ᾿ 
καὶ 'Γομόῤῥων" ἐν ἡμέρᾳ κρίσεως, ἢ τῷ. πόλει. ἐκείνῃ. 10 1δού, 
and οἵ Gomorrha in day ofjudgment, than for that city. Lo, 


Υ — Λεββαῖος ὁ ἐπικληθεὶς LTr; — ὃ ErtKAnGels @ad- 


datos TA. * Kavavatos Cananzean trtra. * + 6 the EGLTAW. ἢ ᾿Ισκαριὼθ L. © Σαμαριτῶν τ. 
p bap 


4 νεκροὺς ἐγείρετε, λεπροὺς καθαρίζετε GLTTrAW. 
8 ἐλθάτω τττ. 


LITA. 
Τομόῤῥας Tra. 


ὁ ῥάβδους staves w. 


f — ἐστιν (read [is }) 
1+ ἔξω Out LITA. 


h ἂν LTTrA. k + ἐκ (read from your feet) Lz. 


X. Me ACR PEt i W. 


τς ἀποστέλλω ὑμᾶς ὡς πρόβατα tv μέσῳ λύκων" γίνεσθε 
send forth you as sheep in [the] midst of wolves: beye 
φρόνιμοι we οἱ περιστεραί. 


οὖν ὄφεις, καὶ ἀκέραιοι ὡς αἱ 
asthe serpents, doves. 


therefore prudent and harmless as the 
17 προσέχετε.δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων᾽ παραδώσουσιν.γὰρ ὑμᾶς 
But beware of men; for they willdeliver you 
εἰς συνέδρια, Kai ἐν Talc.cvvaywyaic.avTay μαστιγώσουσιν 
to sanhedrims, and in their synagogues they wili scourge 
« κυ ἡ ‘ ? ‘ ε ’ i ‘ ~ ? UJ 
ὑμᾶς" 18 Kai ἐπὶ ἡγεμόνας δὲ Kai βασιλεῖς ἀχθήσεσθε 
you: and before governors also and kings yeshall be brought 
ἕνεκεν ἐμοῦ, εἰς μαρτύριον αὐτοῖς Kai τοῖς ἔθνεσιν. 
ΟΠ account οὗ me, for atestimony tothem and tothe nations. 
19 brav.dé ἱπαραδιδῶσιν! ὑμᾶς, μὴ-.μεριμνήσητε πῶς ἢ τί 
But when _‘ they deliver up you, be not careful how or what 


λαλήσητε’ "᾿δοθήσεται.γὰρ ὑμῖν ἐν ἐκείνῃ TY ὥρᾳ τί "λαλή- 


yeshouldspeak: for it shall be sive you in that hour what yeshall 
cere! 20 οὐ.γὰρ Bee ἐστε ot λαλοῦντες, ἀλλὰ τὸ πνεῦμα 
speak : for = ?are they who speak, but the Spirit 
τοῦ. πατρὸς ὑμῶν τὸ λαλοῦν ἐν ὑμῖν. 21 Tapadwoedé 
of your Father which speaks in you. But *will “deliver *up 


ἀδελφὸς ἀδελφὸν εἰς θάνατον, καὶ πατὴρ TEKVOY' Kai ἐπανα- 
‘brother brother to death; and father child: and 2will 


στήσονται τέκνα ἐπὶ γονεῖς, Kai θανατώσουσιν αὐτούς. 
“rise *up ‘children against parents, and will put to death them. 
22 καὶ ἔσεσθε μισούμενοι ὑπὸ πάντων διὰ τὸ.ὄνομά.μου" 
And yewillbe hated by all on account of my name; 
0.0 ὑπομείνας sic τέλος; οὗτος σωθήσεται. 23 ὅταν δὲ 
buthethat endures to [the] end, he shall be saved. But when 
διώκωσιν ὑμᾶς ἐν τῇ.πόλει.ταύτῃ, ὑπο τος εἰς στὴν. ἄλλην" "Ρ 


ἘΠΟΥ persecute you in this CIty, flee to another: 
ἀμὴν.γὰρ λέγω ὑμῖν, οὐ-μὴ τελέσητε τὰς πόλεις 


for verily Isay toyou, Innowise will ye have completed the cities 
«γοῦ" Ισραὴλ ἕως τἂν" Oy ὁ vide τοῦ ἀνθρώπου. 24 Οὐκ 
of Israel until becomethe Son of man. *Not 
ἔστιν ἐπα Π τὴς ὑπὲρ τὸν διδάσκαλον, οὐδὲ δοῦλος ὑπὲρ 
is a7disciple above the teacher, nor abondman above 
τὸν. κύριον.αὐτοῦ. 25 ἀρκετὸν τῷ μαθητῇ iva γένηται we 
his lord. Sufficient for the ἐς that hebecome as 


« ὃ δά ᾽ ~ aS « 6 a e c 7 ? ~ 2 s~; 
0.0l ἀσκαλος.αὐτοῦ, Kat O ὁουλος ὡς O-KUPLOC-AUTOV. El τον 


25 


as sheep in the midst 
of wolves : be ye there- 
fore wise as serpents, 
and harmless as doves. 
17 But beware of men: 
for they will deliver 
you up to the councils, 
and they will scourge 
you in their syna- 
gogues; 18 ἃ πα yeshall 
be brought before go- 


-vernors and kings for 


my sake, for a testi- 
mony against them 
and the Gentiles. 
19 But when they de- 
liver you up, take no 
thought how or what 
ye shall speak: for it 
shall be given you in 
that same hour what 
ye shali speak. 20 For 
it is not ye that speak, 
but the Spirit of 

Father which speaketh 
in you. 2] And the 
brother shall deliver 
up the brother todeath, 
and the father the 
child: and the chil- 
dren shall rise up a- 
gainst their parents, 
and cause them to be 
put to death. 22 And 
ye shall be hated of all 
men for my name’s 
sake: but he that en- 
dureth to the end shall 
be saved. 23 But when 
they persecute you iz 
this city, tlee ye into 
another: for verily I 
say unto you, Ye shall 
not have gone over the 
cities of Israel, till the 
Son of man be conie, 
24 The disciple is not 
above Ais master, nor 
the servant above his 
lord. 25 It is enough 
for the disciple that he 
be as his master, and 
the servant as his lord. 
If they have called the 
master of the house 
Beelzebub, how much 
more shall they call 


his teacher, and the bondman as his lord. τέ *the chem of pis honsetiold? 

, ’ , ~ 26 Fear them not there- 
οἰκοδεσπότην! Βεελζεβοὺλ ἐκάλεσαν, πόσῳ μᾶλλον fore: for there is no- 
*master of *the 7house ®Beelzebul *they *called, howmuch more thing covered, that 
wes > tl ν΄ ».1} Ἐπ’ ς \ x ~ > , shall not be revealed; 
τοὺς οἰκιακοὺς" αὐτοῦ; 26 Μὴ οὖν φοβηθῆτε αὐτούς and hid, that shall not 
those of his household? 3Not *therefore 'ye*shouldfear them; be known. 27 What I 
τι > , i k ; 

οὐδὲν.γάρ ἐστιν κεκαλυμμένον ὃ οὐκ.ἀποκαλυφθήσεται" Hoe yak ce light: 
for nothing is covered which shall not be uncovered, and what ye hear in 
~ the ear, that preach 


καὶ κρυπτὸν ὃ οὐ-.γνωσθήσεται. 27 ὃ λέγω ὑμῖν ἐν τῇ 
and hidden which shall not be known. What Itell you in the 


σκοτίᾳ εἴπατε ἐν τῷ φωτί: Kai ὃ εἰς TO οὖς ἀκούετε KN- 
darkness presk in the light; and what in the ear yehear  pro- 


ὑξἕατε ἐπὶ τῶν δωμάτων. 28 Kai “μὴ φοβηθῆτε, ἀπὸ 
μ μὴ. φοβηθῆ 
claim upon the housetops. And yeshould not fear because of 


ye upon the housetops. 
28 And fear not them 


1 παραδῶσιν they shall have delivered Uri. ™ [δοθή. yap ὑμῖν ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ὥρᾳ τί aay. JL. 


5 λαλήσητε ye should speak TTrA. © > τὴν ἑτέραν the next GLTTr. 


P + κἂν ἐν τῇ ἑτέρᾳ (κἂν 


ἐκ ταύτης 6) διώκωσιν ὑμᾶς, φεύγετε εἰς τὴν ἄλλην and ifi in the next (and if from this) they 


persecute you, flee to another a{t]. τ ἄντΑ. 


λεσαν they have surnamed GLTTraw. 


4 - τοῦ LTra. 


Ξτῷ “οἰκοδεσπότῃ ἘΣ 
Υ τοῖς οἰκιακοῖς L. 7 μὴ φοβεῖσθε fear ye not GLTTrw 


t ἐπεκά- 


20 


which kill the body, 
but are not able to kill 
the soul: but rather 
fear him which is able 
to destroy both soul 
and body in hell 
29 Are not two spar- 
rows sold for a farth- 
ing? and one of them 
shall not fall on the 
ground without your 
Father. 30 But the 
very hairs of your 
head are all numbered. 
31 Fear ye not there- 
fore, ye are of more 
yalue than many spar- 
rows. 32 Whosoever 
therefore shall con- 
fess me before men, 
him will I confess also 
before my Father 
which is in heaven. 
33 But whosoever shall 
deny me before men, 
him will I also deny 
before my Father 
which is in heaven. 
34 Think not that Iam 
come to send peace on 
earth: I came not to 
send peace, but a 
sword. 35 For I am 
come to set aman at 
variance against his 
father, and the daugh- 
ter against her mother, 
and the daughter in 
law against her mother 
inlaw. 36 Andaman’s 
foes shall be they of 
his own _ household. 
37 He that loveth fa- 
ther or mother more 
than me is not worthy 
of me: and he that 
loveth son or daughter 
more than me is not 
worthy of me. 38 And 
he that taketh not his 
cross, and followeth 
after me, is not worthy 
of me, 39 He that find- 
eth his life shall lose it: 
and he that loseth his 
life for my sake shall 
find it. 40 He that re- 
eeiveth you receiveth 
me, and he that re- 
eeiveth me receiveth 
him that sent me, 
41 He that receiveth a 
prophet in the name 
of a prophet shall re- 
eeive a prophet’s re- 
ward; and he that 
receiveth a righteous 
man in the name 
of a rightcous man 
shall receive a right- 
eous man’s reward, 
42 And whosoever 
shall give to drink un- 
to one of these little 
ones a cup of cold 


X ἀποκτενόντων G; 
b + τοῖς the r[TrJa. 
& ἂν LTr. 


fear ye LTTrA. 
Γλήμψεται LTTrA. 


MATOATIOZX. xX. 


τῶν “ἀποκτεινόντων" τὸ σῶμα, τὴν.δὲ ψυχὴν μὴ.δυναμένων 


those who kill the body, butthe 508] are not able 
ἀποκτεῖναι" φοβήθητε. "δὲ μᾶλλον τὸν δυνάμενον *kai' 
to kill; but ye should fear rather him who is able both 


ψυχὴν καὶ σῶμα ἀπολέσαι ἐν γεέννῃ. 29 οὐχὶ δύο στρουθία 
soul and body todestroy in QGehenna. 7Not “two ‘sparrows 
ἀσσαρίου πωλεῖται; Kai ἕν ἐξ αὐτῶν οὐ.πεσεῖται ἐπὶ τὴν 
ΘΕΟΣ 7an ®assarion ‘are*sold? and one of them _ shallnotfall to the 
γῆν ἄνευ τοῦ.πατρὸς. ὑμῶν" 30 ὑμῶν. δὲ Kai αἱ τρίχες τῆς 


ground without your Father. But of youeventhe hairs of the 
κεφαλῆς πᾶσαι ἠριθμημέναι εἰσίν. 31 Li οὖν "φοβηθῆτε" " 
head all numbered are, *Not *therefore 'ye "should *fear; 


πολλῶν στρουθίων διαφέρετε ὑμεῖς. 32 Πᾶς οὖν ὅσ- 
than many sparrows better are ye. Every one therefore whoso- 
τις ὁμολογήσει ἐν ἐμοὶ ἔμπροσθεν τῶν ἀνθρώπων, ὁμολογήσω 
ever shall confess me before men, ill *confess 
κἀγὼ ἐν αὐτῷ ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ.πατρός.μου τοῦ ἐν ὃ οὐρανοῖς. 
7also'l him before my Father who[is]in[{the] heavens. 


33 a cy μὴ Π ᾽ »Ἅ ΄ » ~ > , 
ὁστις.- ἂν" ἀρνήῆσηται με ἔμπροσθεν τῶν ἀνθρώπων, 
But whosoever shalldeny me before men, 
ἀρνήσομαι Sabroy κἀγὼ" ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ.πατρός.μου τοῦ ἐν 
3.711] *deny Shim also *I before my Father who [is] in 
© οὐρανοῖς. 34 EE σῆτε ὅτι ἦλθον βαλεῖν εἰρήνην ἐπὶ 
[the] heavens. Think not that Icame toplace peace on 
τὴν γῆν" οὐκ.ἦλθον βαλεῖν εἰρήνην, ἀλλὰ μάχαιραν. 35 ἦλθον 


the earth: Icamenot toplace peace, but a sword. 31 °came 
γὰρ διχάσαι ἄνθρωπον κατὰ τοῦ-πατρὸς αὐτοῦ, καὶ θυγα- 
for to set at variance aman against his father, and a daugh- 
τέρα κατὰ τῆς.μητρὸς.αὐτῆς, Kai νύμφην κατὰ τῆς πεν- 


er mother, and a daughter-in-law against *mother- 


οἱ οἰκιακοὶ 
{shall be] *household 


φιλῶν πατέρα ἢ μητέρα ὑπὲρ ἐμὲ οὐκ. ἔστιν 


ter 
θερᾶς αὐτῆς" 36 καὶ ἐχθροὶ τοῦ.ἀνθρώπου 
in-law ‘ther. And enemies of the man 

αὐτοῦ. 87 Ὁ 


against 


this. He that loves father or mother above me is not 
pov ἄξιος" καὶ ὁ φιλῶν υἱὸν ἢ θυγατέρα ὑπὲρ ἐμὲ οὐκ 
ofme worthy; and hethat loves son or daughter above me “ποὺ 


ἔστιν μου ἄξιος" 88 Kai ὃς οὐνλαμβάνει τὸν. σταυρὸν. αὐτοῦ 
tis of me worthy. Andhethat takes not his cross 


καὶ ἀκολουθεῖ ὀπίσω μου οὐκ ἔστιν μου ἄξιος. 89 ὁ εὑρὼν 


and follows after me ?not ‘is of meworthy. He that hasfound 
τὴν. Ψυχὴν. αὐτοῦ ἀπολέσει αὐτήν καὶ ὁ ἀπολέσας τὴν 
his life shall lose it; and hethat has lost 


ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ ἕνεκεν ἐμοῦ εὑρήσει αὐτήν. 40 Ὃ δεχόμενος 


31116 his onaccountof me shallfind it. Hethat receives 
ὑμᾶς ἐμὲ δέχεται" καὶ ὁ ἐμὲ δεχόμενος δέχεται τὸν ἀπο- 
you me receives; andhethatme receives receives himwho sent 
στείλαντά pe. 41 ὁ δεχόμενος προφήτην εἰς ὄνομα προ- 

me. Hethat receives aprophet in([the] name ofa 

U 4 U f , ell ‘ ε , 
ἤτου μισθὸν προφήτου λήψεται καὶ ὁ δεχόμενος 
prophet [the] reward ofaprophet shallreceive; andhethat receives 
δίκαιον sic ὄνομα δικαίου μισθὸν δικαίου 


arighteous[man]Jin [the] name ofa righteous [man] the reward of a righteous 


τλήψεται." 42 καὶ ὃς.Ξἐὰν" ποτίσῃ ἕνα τῶν μικρῶν 
[πλ8}}} shall receive. And whoever shall givetodrinkto one little *ones 


t[xai]L. 5 φοβεῖσθε 


ἀποκτεννόντων LTTrA. Y φοβεῖσθε fear ye ΤΑ. 
e + τοῖς the UTr]a. 


ο δὲ ττὰ. 4 κἀγὼ αὐτὸν LTTrA. 


X, XI. MATTHEW. 
τούτων ποτήριον ψυχροῦ μόνον εἰς ὄνομα μαθητοῦ, 
of *these & cup ofcold [water] only in [the] name ofa disciple, 


tc ~ ? x ? Z "ἢ x ? =~ 
ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, οὐ-μὴ ἀπολέσῃ τὸν μισθὸν. αὐτοῦ. 


verily Isay ἴο you, in nowise shall he lose his reward, 
11 Kai ἐγένετο ὅτε ἐτέλεσεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς διατάσσων τοῖς 
And it came to eae when 7had“finished ‘*Jesus commanding 


δώδεκα μαθηταῖς αὐτοῦ, μετέβη ἐκεῖθεν τοῦ διδάσκειν καὶ 
*twelve “ilizeiples ‘his, hedeparted thence to teach and 


κηρύσσειν ἐν ταῖς.πόλεσιν.αὐτῶν. 
to preach in their cities. 


2 ὋὉ.δὲ. Ἰωάννης ἀκούσας ἐν τῷ δεσμωτηρίῳ τὰ ἔργα τοῦ 
Now John having heard in the prison the works of the 


χριστοῦ, πέμψας dbo" τῶν. μαθητῶν αὐτοῦ, 3 εἶπεν αὐτῷ, 
Christ, having sent two of his disciples, said tohim, 


Σὺ εἶ ὁ ἐρχόμενος, ἢ ἕτερον προσδοκῶμεν; 4 Kai ἀποκρι- 
Artthouthe coming [one], or another are weto look for? And 7ansvwer- 


θεὶς ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, ἸΠορευθέντες a Le είλατε Iwavy 
ing 1Jesus said to them,” Having gone to John 


ἃ ἀκούετε καὶ βλέπετε 5 τυ χροὶ ἀναβλέπουσιν, ‘kai 


what yehear and see: receive sight, and 
χωλοὶ περιπατοῦσιν᾽ λεπροὶ ee Keai! κωφοὶ 
lame walk; lepers are cleansed, and deaf 
ἀκούουσιν" ἱνεκροὶ ἐγείρονται, ‘kai πτωχοὶ εὐαγγελίζονται" 
hear ; ~ dead are raised, and poor are evangglzed- 


6 καὶ μακάριός ἐστιν, ὃς. “ἐὰν! μὴ.σκανδαλισθῇ ἐν ἐμοί. 
And blessed is, whoever shall not be offended in me. 


7 Τούτων δὲ πορευομένων ἤρξατο ὁ Ἰησοῦς λέγειν τοῖς 
But as these were going "began 1 Jesus tosay tothe 


ὄχλοις περὶ Ἰωάννου, Ti πἐξήλθετε" εἰς τὴν ἔρημον 
crowds concerning John, What wentyeout into the wilderness 
θεάσασθαι; κάλαμον ὑπὸ ἀνέμου σαλευόμενον ; ὃ ἀλλὰ 
to look at? a reed by [the] wind shaken? But 
τί "ἐξήλθετε", ἰδεῖν ; ἄνθρωπον ἐν μαλακοῖς τμσκίρεου UES 


what went ye out to mg 8. man in soft garments 


μένον; ἰδού, οἱ τὰ μαλακὰ φοροῦντες ἐν τοῖς οἴκοις 
rayed? Behold, those who the soft igaxments wear in the houses 


τῶν βασιλέων Peiciv'' 9 ἀλλὰ τί MéEHAGeTE' «ἰδεῖν; προ- 
of kings are. But what went ze out tosee? a pro- 


φήτην ;' vat, λέγω ὑμῖν, Kai περισσότερον προφήτου" 


phet ἢ Yea, Isay toyou, and[one] moreexcellent than a prophet. 
10 οὗτος. "γάρ" ἐστιν περὶ οὗ γέγραπται, ᾿1δού, "ἐγὼ! 
For this is [he] concerning whom it has been written, Behold, I 


ἀποστέλλω τὸν. ἀγγελόν.μου πρὸ προσώπου.σου, ‘dc! Kara- 

send my messenger before thy face, who shall 
σκευάσει τὴν ὁδόν.σου ἔμπροσθέν σου 11 ee λέγω ὑμῖν, 
prepare thy way before thee. erily Isay toyou, 


οὐκ-ἐγήγερται ἐν γεννητοῖς γυναικῶν μείζων ᾿Ιωάγνου 
there has not risen among [those] born of women agreater than John 


τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ ὁ δὲ μικρότερος ἔν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τῶν 
the Baptist. But he that [15] less in the Kagious of the 


οὐρανῶν μείζων “αὐτοῦ ἐστιν." 12 ἀπὸ.δὲ τῶν ἡμερῶν Ἰωάννου 
heavens greater thanhe is, Butfrom the days of John 


27 
water only in the name 
of a disciple, verily I 
say unto you, he shall 
in no wise lose his re- 
ward. 


ΧΙ, And it came to 
pass, when Jesus had 
made an end of com- 
Manding his twelve 
disciples, he departed 
thence to teach and to 
preach in their cities, 


2 Now when John had 
heard in the prison the 
works of Christ, he 
sent two of his disci- 
ples, 3 and said unto 
him, Art thou he that 
should come, or do we 
look for another? 4 Je- 
sus answered and said 
unto them, Go and 
shew John again those 
things which ye do 


hear and see: ὃ the 
blind receive their 
sight, and the lame 


walk, the lepers are 
cleansed, and the deaf 
hear, the dead are 
raised up, and the poor 
have the gospel preach- 
ed to them. 6 And 
blessed is he, whosoever 
shall not be offended 
in me, 


7 And as they de- 
parted, Jesus hegan to 
say unto the multi- 
tudes concerning John, 
What went ye out into 
the wilderness to see? 
A reed shaken with 
the wind? 8 But what 
went ye out for to see? 
A man clothed in soft 
raiment ? behold, they 
that wear soft clothing 
are in kings’ houses, 
9 But what went ye 
out for to see? A pro- 
phet? yea, I say unto 
you, and more thana 
PEOpH et 10 For this is 

, of whom itis writ- 
ten, Behold, I send my 
messenger before thy 
face, which shall pre- 
pare thy way before 
thee. 11 Verily I say 
unto you, Among them 
that are born of wo- 
men there hath not 
risen a greater than 
John the Baptist : not- 
withstanding he that 
is least in the kingdom 

of heaven is greater 
than he. 12 And from 
the days of John the 


Ὀ Ter by (his disciples) LTTraw. 

0 ἐξήλθατε LTTrA. 

[are]) τ} 
— γάρ for Τ{{1τᾺ]. 


ἱ [καὶ] Ltr. Κ [καὶ] L. 


* [eyo] τ. 


1+ καὶ and [L|TTra. 
ο — ἱματίοις (read [garments] )[L]TTra. 
4ᾳ προφήτην ἰδεῖν ; (read But why went ye out? to see a prophet? Ta. 
* καὶ (read and he shall prepare) L. 


™ ἄν 
Ρ — εἰσίν (read 


τ ἐστὶν αὐτοῦ A. 


28 

Baptist until now the 
kingdom of heaven 
suffereth violence, and 
the violent take it by 
force. 13 For all the 
prophets and the law 
prophesied until John. 
14 And if ye will re- 
ceive it, this is Elias, 
which was forto come. 
15 He that hath ears to 
hear, let him hear. 
16 But whereuntoshall 
Iliken this generation? 
It is like unto children 
sitting in the markets. 
and calling unto their 
fellows, 17 and saying, 
We have piped unto 
you, and ye have not 
danced; we have 
mourned unto you, 
and ye have not la- 
mented. 18 For John 
came neither eating 
nor drinking, and the 
say, He hath a devil. 
19 The Son of man 
came eating and drink- 
ing, and they say, Be- 
hold a man glutton- 
ous, and a winebibber, 
a friend of publicans 
and sinners, But wis- 
dom is justified of her 
children. 


20 Then began he to 
upbraid the cities 
wherein most of his 
mighty works were 
done, because they re- 
pented not: 21 Woe 
unto thee, Chorazin! 
woe unto thee, Beth- 
saida! forif the mighty 
works, which were 
done in you, had been 
done in Tyre and Si- 
don, they would have 
repented long ago in 
sackcloth and ashes. 
22 But | say unto you, 
It shall be more tcler- 
ablefor TyreandSidon 
at the day of judg- 
ment, than for you, 
23 And thou, Caper- 
naum, which art ex- 
alted unto heaven, 
shalt be brought down 
to hell: for if the 
mighty works, which 
have been done in 
thee, had been done in 
Sodom, it would have 
remained until this 
day. 24 But I say unto 
you, That it shall be 
more tolerable for the 
land of Sodom in the 
day of judgment, than 
for thee. 


ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΣ. 


τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ ἕως ἄρτι, ἡ βασιλεία τῶν 
the Baptist until now, the kingdom of the 
ζεται, καὶ βιασταὶ ἁρπάζουσιν αὐτήν. 18 πάντες. γὰρ οἱ 
violence, and(the] violent seize it. For all the 
προφῆται καὶ ὁ νόμος ἕως ᾿Ιωάννου “rpoegnrevoay'' 14 καὶ 
prophets andthe law until “John ‘prophesied. And 
εἰ θέλετε δέξασθαι, αὐτός ἐστιν *HXtac' ὁ μέλλων ἔρχεσθαι. 
ifye are willing toreceive [10], he is Elias who is about to come. 
15 ὁ ἔχων ὦτα Τἀκούειν," ἀκουέτω. 16 Τίνι.δὲ ὁμοιώσω 
He that has ears to hear, let him hear, But to what shallI liken 
τὴν. γενεὰν ταύτην ; ὁμοία ἐστὶν “παιδαρίοις! δὲν ἀγοραῖς 
this generation ? like ᾿Ξ tolittle children in[the] markets 
καθημένοις." Kai προσφωνοῦσιν τοῖς. ἑταίροις. αὐτῶν, 17 Kai 
sitting, and calling to their companions, and 
λέγουσιν," Ηὐλήσαμεν ὑμῖν, καὶ obk.woxnoacb: ἐθρηνήσαμεν 
saying, Wepiped toyou, and yedid not dance; we mourned 
εὑμῖν," καὶ οὐκ.ἐκόψασθε. 18 HAGEv-ydp lwavyne μήτε ἐσθίων 
toyou, and γα did not wail. For 7came ‘John neither eating 
Ul , ‘ , , » κε « ΕΝ 
μήτε πίνων, καὶ λέγουσιν, Δαιμόνιον ἔχει. 19 ἦλθεν ὁ υἱὸς 


x, 
βιά- 


is taken by 


οὐρανῶν 
heavens 


nor drinking, and _ they say, Ademon he has. *Came 'the 7Sop 
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐσθίων καὶ πίνων, Kai λέγουσιν, ᾿Ιδού, 

Sof *man eating and drinking, and they say, Behold, 
ἄνθρωπος φάγος καὶ οἰνοπότης, τελωνῶν φίλος καὶ 


ὃ. man a glutton and ἃ wine bibber, of tax-gatherers afriend and 


ἁμαρτωλῶν. καὶ ἐδικαιώθη ἡ copia ἀπὸ τῶν. ἁτέκνων! αὐτῆς. 
of sinners. And *was*justified ‘wisdom by *children ther. 
20 Tore ἤρξατο ὀνειδίζειν τὰς πόλεις ἐν αἷς ἐγένοντο 
Then hebegan toreproach the cities in which had taken place 
αἱ πλεῖσται δυνάμεις.αὐτοῦ, ὅτι ovb-perevdnoay. 21 Οὐαί 
the most of his works of power, because they repented not. Woe 
σοι, “Χοραζίν"" οὐαί σοι, [Βηθσαϊδάν"" ὅτι εἰ ἐν Τύρῳ καὶ 
ἴο thee, Chorazin ! woe tothee,  SBethsaida! for if in Tyre and 
Σιδῶνι ἐγένοντο at δυνάμεις αἱ ἐνόμεναι ἐν ὑμῖν, 
Sidon had taken place the works of power which have taken place in you, 
πάλαι ἂν iv σάκκῳ καὶ σποδῷ μετενόησαν. 22 πλὴν λέγω 
long ago in sackcloth and ashes they had repented. But Τ say 
ὑμῖν, Tipp Kai Σιδῶνι ἀνεκτότερον ἔσται ἐν ἡμέρᾳ κρίσεως 
toyou, ForTyre and Sidon moretolerableshallitbein day of judgment 
ἢ ὑμῖν. 98 Kai ob, ΞΚαπερναούμ," | ἕως ‘rod! οὐρανοῦ 
than for you. And thou, Capernaum, who to the heaven 


Κὑὐψωθεῖσα,) ἕως ddov ἱκαταβιβασθήσῃ" ὅτι εἰ ἐν Σοδό- 


hast been lifted up, to ades shalt be brought down: for if in Sod- 
pou ™Méyevovro' αἱ δυνάμεις αἱ. "γενόμεναι ἐν σοί," 
om had taken place the works of power which have taken place in thee, 


ervay''_dy μέχρι Tijc-onpepov. 24 πλὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, Ore 
adremained until to-day. But Isay toyou, that 
yy Σοδόμων ἀνεκτότερον ἔσται ἐν ἡμέρᾳ κρίσεως 
for [the] land of Sodom moretolerable  shallit be in day of judgment 
Ἢ σοί: 
than for thee. 


» 
οξ 
it 


Ἢ ἐπροφήτευσαν LTTrA. ! ν 
5 καθημένοις ἐν ἀγορᾷ (market) L; καθημένοις ἐν ταῖς ἀγοραῖς Tira. 


* παιδίοις GLITrAW. 
Ὁ ἃ προσφωνοῦντα τοῖς 


x Ἡλείας T. Υ — ἀκούειν T[ Tra. 


ἑταίροις Who calling to the companions (ἑτέροις read calling to the others Trr) ( + [avrav] 


their A) λέγουσιν say LTTrA. 
& Kadapvaovpe LTTrAW. 
shalt thou be lifted up? Urtra; ὑψώθης w. 
=" ἐγενήθησαν LITA. 


σαϊδά LTr. 


©— ὑμῖν Litra, 4 ἔργων works Tir. “ Χοραζείν Trra. { Byé- 
hy LTTraA, 7W. i — τοῦ LTTrA. K ὑψωθήσῃ ; 
1 καταβήσῃ thou shalt descend tra. 


ἢ ev σοὶ γενόμεναι L. © ἔμεινεν LITrA, 


ax Py XI. MATTHEW. 
25 Ἔν ἐκείνῳ τῷ καιρῷ ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἶπεν, Eéojio- 
At that time answering Jesus said, 
λογοῦμαί σοι, πάτερ, κύριε τοῦ οὐρανοῦ Kai THE γῆς, OTL 
praise thee, OFather, Lord ofthe heaven and the earth, that 
Pazéxouwac' ταῦτα ἀπὸ σοφῶν καὶ συνετῶν, καὶ ἀπεκάλυψας 
thou didst hide thesethings from wise and prudent, and ἀϊαξὺ reveal 
αὐτὰ νηπίοις. 26 vai, ὁ πατήρ, ὅτι οὕτως “ἐγένετο εὐδοκία" 
them to babes. Yea, Father, for thus it was well-pleasing 
ἔμπροσθέν cov. 27 Πάντα μοι παρεδόθη ὑπὸ τοῦ.πατρός.μου" 
before thee. All things to me were delivered by my Father. 
καὶ οὐδεὶς ἐπιγινώσκει TOY υἱὸν εἰμὴ ὁ πατήρ᾽ οὐδὲ τὸν 


And noone knows the Son except the Father; nor the 
πατέρα τις ἐπιγινώσκει εἰ μὴ ὁ υἱός, καὶ ᾧ ἐὰν 
Father ?7any%one ‘doesknow except the Son, and he ἴο whomsoever 


βούληται ὁ υἱὸς ἀποκαλύψαι. 28 Δεῦτε πρός με, πάντες 


Smay *will ‘the 7Son toreveal [him]. Come to me, all 
οἱ κοπιῶντες Kai πεφορτισμένοι, κἀγὼ ἀναπαύσω ὑμᾶς. 
ye that labour and are burdened, andI_ will give *rest you. 


» ᾿ , pk: ~ x , ? Eb ped ~ e 
29 ἄρατε τὸν. ζυγόν.μου ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς, καὶ μάθετε ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ, ὅτι 
Take my yoke ὌΡΟΣ you, and learn from me, for 
τπρᾷός! εἰμι καὶ ταπεινὸς τῇ.καρδίᾳ᾽ καὶ εὑρήσετε ἀνάπαυσιν 
meek Iamand lowly inheart; and ye shall find rest 


ταῖς. ψυχαῖς ὑμῶν. 30 ὁ.γὰρ.ζυγός.μου χρηστὸς καὶ τὸ φορτίον 


to your souls, For my yoke easy and “burden 
ov ἐλαφρόν ἐστιν. 
my light is. 
12 Ἔν ἐκείνῳ τῷ καιρῷ ἐπορεύθη ὁ Ἰησοῦς τοῖς "σάββασιν" 
Αὐ that time went Jesus onthe Sabbath 
διὰ τῶν σπορίμων᾽ οἱ.δὲ μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ ἐπείνασαν, Kai 
through ἴμῃβ6 corn-fields; and his disciples were hungry, and 
ἤρξαντο τίλλειν στάχυας Kai ἐσθίειν. 2 οἱ.δὲ Φαρισαῖοι 
began to pluck [the] ears and  toeat. But the Pharisees 


ἰδόντες ‘elroy αὐτῷ, ᾿Ἰδού, οἱ.μαθηταί.σου ποιοῦσιν ὃ 


havingseen said tohim, Behold, thy disciples are doing what 
οὐκ. ἔξεστιν ποιεῖν ἐν σαββάτῳ. 3 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Οὐκ 
it is not lawful todo on _ sabbath. Buthe said tothem, “Not 
ἀνέγνωτε τί ἐποίησεν VAaBid,' ὅτε ἐπείνασεν “αὐτὸς καὶ 
"ye ‘haveread what 7did David, when hehungered himself and 


οἱ per αὐτοῦ; 4 πῶς εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὸν οἶκον τοῦ θεοῦ, Kai 
those with him? How heentered into the house of God, and 
τοὺς ἄρτους τῆς προθέσεως Ξἔφαγεν," Τοὺς" οὐκ ἐξὸν ἦν 
the loaves ofthe presentation he ate, which “not *lawful tit*was 
αὐτῷ φαγεῖν, οὐδὲ τοῖς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ, εἰ μὴ τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν μόνοις ; 
forhim toeat, nor forthosewith him, but forthe priests only ? 
ὃ Ἢ οὐκ. ἀνέγνωτε ἔν τῷ νόμῳ, ὅτι τοῖς σάββασιν οἱ ἱερεῖς 
Or haveyenotread in the law, that onthe sabbaths the priests 
ἐν Tp ἱερῷ τὸ σάββατον βεβηλοῦσιν, Kai ἀναίτιοί εἰσιν ; 
in the temple the sabbath profane, and guiltless are ? 
6 λέγω.δὲ ὑμῖν, ὅτι τοῦ ἱεροῦ μείζων" ἐστὶν ὧδε. 7 εἰ δὲ 
But Isay to you, that *than*the*temple'a“greater is here, But if 
ἐγνώκειτε τί ἐστιν, *EXcov! θέλω καὶ ov θυσίαν, οὐκ ἂν 
yehad known what is, Mercy MIdesire and not sacrifice, “ποῖ 


Ῥέκρυψας LITrA. “εὐδοκία ἐγένετο LT. 
ἡ Δαυείδ LTTrA ; Δαύιδ Gw. 
LTTrAW 


τ πραῦς LTTrA. 
* — αὐτὸς GLTTrAW. 


χα ἔφαγον Lr. 
a”EAeos LTTra. : 


σαββάτοις L. 
Υ ὃ LTTrA. 


29 


25 At that time Je- 
sus answered and said, 


I | thank thee, O Fa- 


ther, Lord of heaven 
and earth, because 
thou hast hid these 
things from the wise 
and prudent, and hast 
revealed them unio 
babes. 26 Even so, Fa- 
ther: for soit seemed 
good in thy sight. 
27 All things are de- 
livered unto me of my 
Father: and no man 
knoweth the Son, but 
the Father; neither 
kmnoweth any man the 
Father, save the Son, 
and he to whomsoever 
the Son will reveal 
him. 28 Come unto 
me, all ye that labour 
and are heavy laden, 
and I will give you 
rest, 29 Take my yoke 
upon you, and learn of 
me; for I am meek and 
lowly in heart: and ye 
shall find rest unto 
your souls. 30 For my 
yoke is easy, and my 
burden is light. 


XII, At that time 
Jesus went on the 
sabbath day through 
the corn; and his disci- 
ples were an hungred, 
and began to pluck the 
ears of corn, and to 
eat. 2 But when the 
Pharisees saw ἐέ, they 
said unto him, Behold, 
thy disciples do that 
which is not lawful to 
do upon the sabbath 
day. 3 But he said un- 
to them, Have ye not 
read what David did, 
when he was an hun- 
gred, and they that 
were with him; 4 how 
he entered into the 
house of God, and did 
eat the shewbread, 
which was not lawiul 
for him to eat, neither 
for them which were 
with him, but only for 
the priests? 5 Or have 
ye not read in the law, 
how that on the sab- 
bath days the priests 
in the temple profane 
the sabbath, and are 
blameless? 6 But I say 
unto you, That in this 
place is ome greater 
than the temple. 7 But 
if ye had known what 
this meaneth, I will 
have mercy, and not 
sacrifice, ye would not 


τ εἶπαν LTTrA. 
: μεῖζόν 


30 
have condemned the 
guiltless. 8 For the 


Son of man is Lord 
even of the sabbath 
flay. 


9 And when he was 
departed thence, he 
went into their syna- 
gogue : 10 and, behold, 
there was a man which 
had his hand withered. 
And they asked him, 
saying, Is it lawful to 
heal on the sabbath 
days? that they might 
accuse him. 11 And he 
said unto them, What 
man shall there be 
among you, that shall 
have one sheep, and if 
it fall into a pit on 
the sabbath day, will 
he not lay hold on it, 
and lift it out? 12 How 
much then is a man 
better than a sheep? 
Wherefore it is lawful 
to do well on the sab- 
bath days. 13 Then 
saith he to the man, 
Stretch forth thine 
hand. And he stretch- 
edit forth; and it was 
restored whole, like as 
the other. 


14 Then the Pharisees 
went out, and held a 
council against him, 
how they might de- 
stroy him, 15 But 
when Jesus knew τῇ, 
he withdrew himself 
from thence: and 
great multitudes fol- 
lowed him, and he 
healed them all; 16 and 
charged them _ that 
they should not make 
him known: 17 that 
it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by 
Esaias the prophet, 
saying, 18 Behold my 
servant, whom I have 
chosen; my beloved, in 
whom my soul is well 
pleased: [ will put my 
spirit upon him, and 
he shall shew judg- 
ment to the Gentiles. 
19 He shall not strive, 
nor cry; neither shall 
any man hear his voice 
in the streets. 20 A 
bruised reed shall he 
not break, and smok- 
ing flax shall he not 
quench, till he send 
forth judgment unto 
victory. 21 And in his 
name shall the Gen- 
tiles trust. 


b — καὶ GLTTrAW. 
raises [10] up L. 


k ἐξελθόντες δὰ οἱ Φαρισαῖοι συμβούλιον ἔλαβον κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ LTTrW. 
™ ἵνα that LTTrA. 
4 — ev (read [on ]) GLrtraw. 


many) LI[TrA }. 
σεν TTr, 


MATOATOX®S. XIT. 


κατεδικάσατε τοὺς ἀναιτίους" 8 κύριος. γάρ ἐστιν "Kai! τοῦ 
tye had condemned the guiltless. For Lord Sig ‘also 7of *the 
σαββάτου ὁ υἱὸς Tov.avOpwrov. 
‘sabbath the son of man. 
9 Kai μεταβὰς ἐκεῖθεν, ἦλθεν εἰς τὴν.συναγωγὴν. αὐτῶν. 
And having departed thence, hewent into their synagogue. 
10 καὶ ἰδού, ἄνθρωπος “ἦν τὴν" χεῖρα ἔχων ξηράν" Kai 
And behold, aman there was *the “hand ‘having withered. And 
, » ’ , , >” ~ td 
ἐπηρώτησαν αὐτόν, λέγοντες, Εϊ ἔξεστιν τοῖς σάββασιν 
they asked him, saying, Isit lawful onthe  sabbaths 
ἀθεραπεύειν ;' ἵνα κατηγορήσωσιν αὐτοῦ. 11 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, 
to heal? that they might accuse him. But he said to them, 
Tic fora! ἐξ ὑμῶν ἄνθρωπος, ὃς ἕξει πρόβατον ἕν, 
What *shall*there*be%of Syou man, whoshallhave sheep ‘one, 
καὶ ἐὰν ἐμπέσῃ τοῦτο τοῖς σάββασιν εἰς βόθυνον, οὐχὶ 
and if "fall ‘this on the sabbaths into apit, willnot 
, ? A 4 f2 ~ ell , , » 
κρατήσει AUTO καὶ ἐγερεῖ 5 12 πόσῳ οὖν διαφέρει ἄν- 
lay hold of it and will raise [it] up? How much then is *better ‘a 
θρωπος προβάτου; wore ἔξεστιν τοῖς. σάββασιν! καλῶς 
*man thanasheep? Sothat itislawful on the sabbaths Swell 
~ , , ~ > θ , » h A ~ ’ 
ποιεῖν. 18 Tore λέγει τῷ-ἀνθρώπῳ, ᾿ἕκτεινον “τὴν χεῖρα 


*to *do. Then he says to the man, Stretch out *hand 

cov." Kai ἐξέτεινεν, καὶ ἰἀποκατεστάθη! ὑγιὴς we ἡ 

"thy. And he stretched [it] out, and it was restored sound as the 
ἄλλη. 

other. 


14 ΚοΟὶ.δὲ Φαρισαῖοι συμβούλιον ἔλαβον Kar’ αὐτοῦ ἐξελ- 
But the Pharisees 5a Scouncil *held against “him ‘having 
θόντες." ὕπως αὐτὸν ἀπολέσωσιν. 15 Ὁ .δὲ. Ἰησοῦς γνοὺς 
Ξβοπο οαῦ how him they might destroy. But Jesus having known 
? ’ ᾽ τθ " Δ τ λ 4θ ? ~ 1” Xr Π λλ ΄ 
AVEXWPN TEV ἐκεισεν καὶ NKOAOUVOQHOAY AUT Οχλοι πο ol, 
withdrew thence, and followed him crowds ‘great, 


καὶ ἐθεράπευσεν αὐτοὺς πάντας" 16 Kai ἐπετίμησεν αὐτοῖς 
and he healed them all, and strictlycharged them 
iva μὴ φανερὸν αὐτὸν ποιήσωσιν: 17 "ὅπως" πλη- 
that ®not ‘publicly’known "μὰ ‘they “should *make. So that might 
ρωθῇ τὸ ῥηθὲν διὰ Ἡσαΐου τοῦ προφήτου, λέγοντος, 
be fulfilled that which wasspokenby JHsaias the prophet, saying, 
18 ᾿Ιδοὺ ὁ-παΐῖςμου ὃν "ypérioa,' ὁ. ἀγαπητός. μου “εἰς 
in 


Behold myservant whom I have chosen, iny beloved 
ὃν" Ρεῤὐδόκησεν' =nabuyn-pov' θήσω τὸ.πνεῦμά.μου ἐπ᾽ 
whom *has *found °delight ‘my “soul. I will put my Spirit upon 


αὐτόν, καὶ κρίσιν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν ἀπαγγελεῖ" 19 οὐκ.ἐρίσει 
him, and judgment tothe nations heshalldeclare. He shall not strive 
οὐδὲ κραυγάσει, οὐδὲ ἀκούσει τις ἐν Taig πλατείαις τὴν 
nor ery out, nor shall*hear ‘any *one in the streets 
φωνὴν.αὐτοῦ. 20 κάλαμον συντετριμμένον οὐ.κατεάξει, καὶ 
his voice. A "reed ‘bruised he shall not break, and 
΄ , ’ , «“ μὴ ᾽ , 
λίνον τυφόμενον οὐ.σβέσει, ἕως.ἂν ἐκβάλῃ 
"flax tgmoking heshallnot quench, until he bring forth*unto*victory ‘the 


κρίσιν. 21 καὶ “ἐνὶ τῷ.ὀνόματι.αὐτοῦ ἔθνη ἐλπιοῦσιν. 
*judgment. And in hisname [the] nations shall hope. 


© — ἦν τὴν LTTrA. 
8 σαββάτοις L. 


ς-- ἔσται τια. [ἐγείρει he 
i ἀπεκατεσταθὴ LTTrAW. 

1 —6yAoe (read πολλοι 
ο ἐν ᾧ Tr; — εἰς LA. P ηὐδόκη 


4 θεραπεῦσαι; T. 
Ὁ gov τὴν χεῖρα LTTrA. 


Ὁ ἡρέτισα Tr. 


εἰς νῖκος τὴν 


β 


| 
| 


ΧΙΙ. MATTHEW. 
22 Tore προσηνέχθη! αὐτῷ *dapormopevoc, 


Then was brought tohim _ one possessed by a demon, 
καὶ κωφός" καὶ ἐθεράπευσεν αὐτόν, ὥστε τὸν ἱτυφλὸν Kai! 
and dumb, and he healed him, so that the blind and 


κωφὸν "καὶ" λαλεῖν καὶ βλέπειν. 23 καὶ ἐξίσταντο πάντες 
dumb both spake and = saw. And ‘were amazed tall 


ot ὄχλοι καὶ ἔλεγον, Μήτι οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ υἱὸς *AaBid;' 
*the*crowds and said, ?This 7is the son of David? 
24 Οἱ. δὲ Φαρισαῖοι ἀκούσαντες εἶπον, Οὗτος οὐκ.ἐκβάλλει 
But the Pharisees having heard said, This [man] casts not out 
‘ , 2 a ? > 4 » ~ ΄ 
τὰ δαιμόνια εἰ μὴ ἐν τῷ Βεελζεβοὺλ ἄρχοντι τῶν δαιμονίων. 
the demons except by Beelzebul prince of the demons. 
25 Eidwe.dé τὸ Ἰησοῦς" τὰς.ἐνθυμήσεις. αὐτῶν εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, 
But *knowing 1 Jesus their thoughts hesaid to them, 
Πᾶσα βασιλεία μερισθεῖσα καθ᾽ ἑαυτῆς ἐρημοῦται: καὶ 
Every kingdom divided against itself is brought todesolation, and 
πᾶσα πόλις ἢ οἰκία μερισθεῖσα Kal’ ἑαυτῆς οὐ-σταθήσεται. 
every city or house divided against itself will not stand 
26 καὶ εἰ ὁ σατανᾶς τὸν σατανᾶν ἐκβάλλει, ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὸν ἐμε- 
And if Satan Satan Xcasts 70ut, against himself he was 
, ~ , t , > ~ ‘ > 9 \ 
ρίσθη᾽ πῶς οὖν σταθήσεται ἡ. βασιλεία.αὐτοῦ ; 27 Kai εἰ ἐγὼ 
divided. How then willstand his kingdom? And if 
ἐν Βεελζεβοὺλ ἐκβάλλω τὰ δαιμόνια, oi-vioLdpey ἐν τίνι 
by Beelzeoul cast out the demons, your sons by whom 
ἐκβάλλουσιν; διὰ τοῦτο αὐτοὶ ὑμῶν ἔσονται κριταί." 
ἄο they cast out? onaccount of this they of you shall be judges. 
28 εἰ. δὲ ἐγὼ ty πνεύματι θεοῦ" ἐκβάλλω τὰ δαιμόνια, ἄρα 
Butif I by[the) Spirit of God castout the demons, then 
» ? 2 « ~ « , ~ ~ n ~ , ΄ 
ἔφθασεν ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ. 29 ἢ πῶς δύναταί 


τυφλὸς 
ae 


hascome upon you the kingdom of God. Or how [5 able 
τις εἰσελθεῖν εἰς THY οἰκίαν τοῦ ἰσχυροῦ καὶ τὰ σκεύη 
anyone toenter into the house ofthe strong [man] and ?¢o00ds 


αὐτοῦ "διαρπάσαι," ἐὰν.μὴ πρῶτον δήσῃ τὸν ἰσχυρόν; 
‘his to plunder, unless first hebind the strong [man]? 
καὶ τότε τὴν.οἰκίαν. αὐτοῦ ὑδιαρπάσει." 80 ὁ μὴ.ὧν μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ 
and then his house he will plunder. Hewho isnot with me 
kar ἐμοῦ ἐστιν καὶ ὁ μηὴς.συνάγων per ἐμοῦ σκορπίζει. 
against me is ; andhewho gathersnot with me scatters. 
91 Διὰ τοῦτο λέγω ὑμῖν, Πᾶσα ἁμαρτία καὶ βλασφημία 
Because of this Isay toyou, Every sin and blasphemy 
ἀφεθήσεται" τοῖς ἀνθρώποις" ἡ-.δὲ τοῦ.πνεύματος βλασ- 
shall be forgiven to men; but the “concerning *the*Spirit ‘blas- 
, 3. ? Or d ~ ? θ ’ ll 32 νὰ 6 2, ll ” 
φημία οὐκ-αφεθήσεται “τοῖς ἀνθρώποις. καὶ Ὁς-αν΄ εἰπῇ 
phemy 8881] ποῦ beforgiven to men. And whoever speaks 
λόγον κατὰ τοῦ υἱοῦ Tov ἀνθρώπου, ἀφεθήσεται αὐτῷ" 
aword against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; 
ὃς. δ᾽ ἂν εἴπῃ κατὰ Tov πνεύματος τοῦ ἁγίου, fovK.age- 
but whoever speaks against the Spirit the Holy, it shall not 
θήσεται! αὐτῷ, οὔτε ἐν τούτῳ τῷ αἰῶνι οὔτε ἔν τῷ μέλλον- 
ὍΘ forgiven him, neitherin this age nor in the coming 


τι. 33 Ἢ ποιήσατε τὸ δένδρον καλὸν καὶ τὸν καρπὸν 
{one}. Hither make the tree good and *fruit 


τ᾿ προσήνεγκαν they brought L. 
LITrA. νυ — καὶ LTTrA. " Δαυΐδ aw ; Δαυείδ LTTrA. 
ἔσονται ὑμῶν LITrA. 2 ἐν πνεύματι θεοῦ ἐγὼ GLTTrAW. 
Ὁ ἁρπάσει he will seize upon 1,; διαρπάσῃ he might plunder T. 
4 — ois ἀνθρώποις LTTr[A]. “ ἐὰν LTTTAW 


5 δαιμονιζόμενον τυφλὸν καὶ κωφόν L. 
χα — δ᾿ Ἰησοῦς LITrA. 
ἃ ἁρπάσαι to seize UPON LTITrA. 

e+ eed | to you A. 
f od μὴ ἀφεθῇ in nowise shall it be 


al 

22 Then was brought 
unto him one possessed 
with a devil, blind, 
and dumb: and he 
healed him, insomuch 
that the blind and 
dumb both spake and 
saw. 23 And all the 
people were amazed, 
and said, Is not this 
the Son of David? 
24 But when the Phari- 
sees heard it, they said, 
This fellow doth not 
east out devils, but by 
Beelzebub the prince 
of the devils. 25 And 
Jesus knew their 
thoughts, and_ said 
unto them, Every 
kingdom divided a- 
gainst itself is brought 
to desolation; and 
eve city or honse 
divided against itself 
shall not stand: 26 and 
if Satan cast out Satan, 
he is divided against 
himself; how shall 
then his kingdom 
stand? 27 And if I by 
Beelzebub cast out 
devils, by whom do 
your children cast 
them out? therefore 
they shall be your 
judges, 28 But if I cast 
out devils by the Spirit 
of God, then the king- 
dom of God is come 
unto you. 29 Or else 
how can one enter into 
a strong man’s house 
and spoil his goods, 
except he first bind the 
strong man? and then 
he will spoil his house. 
30 He that is not with 
me is against me; and 
he that gathereth not 
with me _ scattereth 
abroad, 31 Wherefore 
I say unto you, Ail 
manner of sin and 
blasphemy shall be 
forgiven unto men: 
but the blasphemy 
against the Holy Ghost 
shall not be forgiven 
unto men. 32 And 
whosoever speaketh 
a word against the 
Son of man, it shal) 
be forgiven him: but 
whosoever speaketh a- 
gainst the Holy Ghost, 
it shall not be for- 
given him, neither in 
this world, neither in 
the world to come, 
33 Hither make the 
tree good, and his fruit 


* τυφλὸν καὶ 
J κριται 


orgiven L. 


32 


good; or else make 
the tree corrupt, and 
his frnit corrupt : for 
the tree is known by 
Ais fruit. 34 O gene- 
ration of vipers, how 
can ye, being evil, 
speak good things? 
for out of the abun- 
dance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh. 35 A 
good man out of the 
good treasure of the 
heart bringeth forth 
good things: and an 
evil man out of the 
evil treasure bringeth 
forth evil things. 
36 But I say unto you, 
That every idle word 
that men shall speak, 
they shail giveaccount 
thereof in the day of 
judgment. 37 For by 
thy words thou shalt 
be justified, and by 
thy words thou shalt 
be condemned. 


38 Then certain of 
the scribes and of the 
Pharisees answered, 
saying, Master, we 
would see a sign from 
thee. 39 But he an- 
swered and said unto 
them, An eviland a- 
dulterons generation 
seeketh after a sign; 
and there shall nosign 
be given to it, but the 
sign of the prophet 
Jonas: 40 foras Jonas 
was three days and 
three nights in the 
whale’s belly ; so shall 
the Son of man be 
three days and three 
nights in the heart of 
the earth. 41 The men 
of Nineveh shall rise 
in judgment with this 
generation, and shall 
condemn it: because 
they repented at the 
preaching of Jonas; 
and, behold, a greater 
than Jonas is here. 
42 The queen of the 
south shall rise up in 
the judgment with 
this generation, and 
shall condemn it: for 
she came from the ut- 
termost parts of the 
earth to hear the 
wisdom of Solomon; 
and, behold, a greater 
than Solomon 18 here. 
43 When the unclean 
spirit is gone out of 
a man, he walketh 
through dry places, 
seeking rest, and find- 
eth none, 44 Then he 
saith, I will return 


3 — τῆς καρδίας GLTTrAW. 


shall speak TTra. 


MATOATO®. XII, 


αὐτοῦ καλόν, ἢ ποιήσατε τὸ δένδρον σαπρον καὶ τὸν καρπὸν 


sits good, or make the tree corrupt and “fruit 
αὐτοῦ σαπρόν: Ex.yap τοῦ καρποῦ τὸ δένδρον γινώσκεται. 
‘its corrupt: fortrom the fruit the tree is known. 


34 Γεννήματα ἐχιδνῶν, πῶς δύνασθε ἀγαθὰ λαλεῖν, πονηροὶ 


Offspring of vipers, how areyeablegood thingstospeak, *wicked 
ὄντες; ἐκιγὰρ τοῦ περισσεύματος τῆς καρδίας τὸ στόμα 
‘being? foroutof the abundance ofthe heart the mouth 
λαλεῖ. 35 ὁ ἀγαθὸς ἄνθρωπος ἐκ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ θησαυροῦ 
speaks, The good man out of the good creasure 


βτῆς καρδίας" ἐκβάλλει τὰ" ἀγαθά: Kai ὁ πονηρὺὶς ἄνθρω- 
ofthe heart puts forth the goodthings; andthe wicked man 
᾽ ~ ~ “-Σ ΄ ΄ , 4 
πος ἐκ τοῦ πονηροῦ θησαυροῦ ἐκβάλλει πονηρά. 36 λέγω. δὲ 
outof the wicked treasure puts forth wicked things. But I say 
ὑμῖν, OTe πᾶν ῥῆμα ἀργὸν Otay! Ἐλαλήσωσιν" οἱ ἄνθρωποι, 
toyou, that every *word ‘idle whatsoever *may “speak ‘men, 
ἀποδώσουσιν περὶ αὐτοῦ λόγον ἐν ἡμέρᾳ κρίσεως. 37 ἐκ 


they shallrender of it an account in day of judgment. 2By 

yao τῶν.λόγων.σου δικαιωθήσῃ, καὶ ἐκ τῶν.λόγων σου 

‘for thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words 
καταδικασθήσῃ. 


thou shalt be condemned. 
38 Tore ἀπεκρίθησάν' τινες τῶν γραμματέων "καὶ Papt- 
Then answered some of the scribes and  Phari- 
σαίων," λέγοντες, Διδάσκαλε, θέλομεν ἀπὸ σοῦ σημεῖον ἰδεῖν. 
sees, saying, Teacher, we wish from thee asign ἴο 560, 
39 Ὁ.δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Teved πονηρὰ καὶ μοι- 


But he answering said to them, Ageneration wicked and _ adui- 
χαλὶς σημεῖον ἐπιζητεῖ" Kai σημεῖον οὐ.δοθήσεται αὐτῇ, 
terous a sign seeks for, and a sign shall mot be given’ ‘toit, 


᾽ A A ~ > . ~ ~ ΤᾺ [2 >? ~ 
εἰ. μὴ TO σημεῖον ᾿Ιωνᾶ τοῦ προφήτου. 40 ὥσπερ.γὰρ ἦν lwrac 
except the sign of Jonas the _— prophet. Forevenas was Jonas 
ἐν τῇ κοιλίᾳ TOU κήτους τρεῖς ἡμέρας Kai τρεῖς νύκτας, οὕτως 
in the belly of the great fish three days and three nights, thus 
ἔσται ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἔν TY καρδίᾳ τῆς γῆς τρεῖς 
shall be the Son of man in the heart ofthe earth three 
t , ‘ ~ 4 » ὃ n ~ i ? 
ἡμέρας καὶ τρεῖς νύκτας. 41 Avodpsg "Nevevirat" ἀναστήσονται 

days and three nights. Men Ninevites shall stand up 
ἐν TH κρίσει μετὰ τῆς.γενεᾶς. ταύτης, Kai κατακρινοῦσιν αὐτήν" 


in the judgment with this generation, and _ shall condemn it; 
ὅτι μετενόησαν εἰς τὸ κήρυγμα Ἰωνᾶ" Kai ἰδού, πλεῖον 
for theyrepented at the proclamation of Jonas; and behold, more 


? bd <7 ‘ , ? , ? ~ , 

Iwva ὧδε. 42 βασίλισσα νότου ἐγερθήσεται ἐν τῇ κρίσει 
than Jonas here. A queen of[the]south shallriseup in the judgment 
μετὰ τῆς.γενεᾶς.ταύτης, Kai κατακρινεῖ αὐτήν" ὅτι ἦλθεν 
with this generation, and shall condemn it; for she came 
ἐκ τῶν περάτων τῆς γῆς ἀκοῦσαι τὴν σοφίαν “Σολομῶντος " 
from the ends ofthe earth tohear the wisdom of Solomon ; 
καὶ ἰδού, πλεῖον Σολομῶντος" ὧδε. 48 Ὅταν.δὲ τὸ ἀκάθαρτον 
and behold, more than Solomon here. But when the unclean 

~ 3 , ’ ‘ ~ > , , ᾽ ? , 

πνεῦμα ἐξέλθῃ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, διέρχεται δι ἀνύδρων 

spirit is gone out from the man, he goes through waterless 
τόπων, ζητοῦν ἀνάπαυσιν, καὶ οὐχ.εὑρίσκει. 44 τότε λέγει, 
places, secking rest, and finds not [1]. Then he says, 
i — ἐὰν (read which) LTtTra. 
m— καὶ Φαρισαίων L. 


h— τὰ Lorw. 


κ λαλήσουσιν 
1+. avrw® Dim LTTrA. 


0 Νινενεῖται TTrA. 


ο Σολομῶνος GLTTrAaw. 


MILSXIII. MATTHEW. 


4ΦἘπιστρέψω εἰς Tov.olkéy_pov,' ὅθεν ἐξῆλθον" καὶ ἐλθὸν 
Iwillreturn to my house, whence Icame out. And having come 
εὑρίσκει σχολάζοντα," σεσαρωμένον καὶ κεκοσμημένον. 45 τότε 
he finds [it] unoccupied, swept and adorned. Then 
πορεύεται kai παραλαμβάνει μεθ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ ἑπτὰ ἕτερα πνεύματα 
he goes and takes with himself seven other spirits 
πονηρότερα ἑαυτοῦ, Kai εἰσελθόντα κατοικεῖ ἐκεῖ" καὶ γίνεται 
more wicked than himself and enteringin they dwell there; and “becomes 
τὰ ἔσχατα τοῦ.ἀνθρώπου ἐκείνου χείρονα τῶν πρώτων. οὕτως 
1the last Sof *that *man worse thanthe first. Thus 
ἔσται Kai τῇ.γενεᾷ. ταύτῃ TY πονηρᾷ. 
itshallbe also to this generation the wicked. 
46 "Ἔτι. δὲ! αὐτοῦ λαλοῦντος τοῖς ὄχλοις, ἰδού, ἡ μήτηρ 
But while yet he was speaking tothe crowds, behold, [his] mother 
‘ e ἐδ λ ‘A t > ~ll ε , ΜΝ ζ ~ > ~ X 
καὶ οἱ.ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ" εἱστήκεισαν ἔξω, ζητοῦντες αὐτῷ λα- 
and his brethren were standing without, seeking “*to*him ‘to 
λῆσαι. “47 elrev.dé τις αὐτῷ, Ἰδού. ἡ-.μήτηρ-σου καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοί 
2speak. Then said one tohim, Behold, thy mother and 2brethren 
σου ἔξω ἑστήκασιν, ζητοῦντές σοι λαλῆσαι." 48 Ὁ δὲ ἀπο- 
‘thy without are standing, seeking *to*thee ‘to7speak. But he an- 
κριθεὶς εἶπεν τῷ εἰπόντι" αὐτῷ, Tic ἐστιν ἡ-μήτηρομου ; 
swering said tohim who spoke tohim, Who is my mother? 
καὶ τίνες εἰσὶν οἱ. ἀδελφοί.μου; 49 Kai ἐκτείνας τὴν χεῖρα 
and who are my brethren? And stretching out an 


x > ol > A 4 A ? ~ κε ᾽ ’ ς 7 \ 
αὐτοῦ" ἐπὶ τοὺς.μαθητὰς αὐτοῦ εἶπεν, ᾿Ιδού, 1)-unTnp-pov καὶ 


this to his disciples hesaid, Behold, my mother and 
οἱ.ἀδελφοί.μου. 50 ὕστις. γὰρ ἂν Yroujoy' τὸ θέλημα τοῦ 
my brethren. For whosoever shalldo the will 


πατρός.μουτοῦ ἐν οὐρανοῖς, αὐτός μου ἀδελφὸς καὶ 
of my Father who [is] in[the] heavens, he = τον brother and 
ἀδελφὴ Kai μήτηρ ἐστίν. 
sister and mother is. 
13 Ἔν. 7δὲϊ! τῇ ἡμέρᾳ.ἐκενῃ ἐξελθὼν — 0 Inooiie "ἀπὸ" 
And in that day *having *gone *forth Jesus from 
τῆς οἰκίας ἐκάθητο παρὰ τὴν θάλασσαν" 2xai συνήχθησαν 


the by the 
x 3. τεῷ ” aN VN , er a8 ? b Mit ~ ? 
Tpoc αὐτὸν OXAOL πολλοί, WOTE αὐτὸν εἰς “τὸ πλοῖον ἐμ- 
to him crowds ‘great, sothat he into the ship having 
, ~ ‘ ~ 5 m” ? ‘ ‘ ? A e , 
Bavra καθῆσθαι, καὶ πᾶς ὁ ὄχλος ἐπὶ TOY αἰγιαλὸν ELoTHKEL. 
entered satdown, and all the crowd on the shore stood, 
3 καὶ ἐλάλησεν αὐτοῖς πολλὰ ἐν παραβολαῖς, λέγων, ‘Idod, 
And hespoke tothem many things in parables, saying, Behold, 
ἐξῆλθεν ὁ σπείρων Tov σπείρειν. 4 καὶ ἐν. τῷ. σπείρειν. αὐτὸν 
went*out ‘the 7sower to sow. And as he sowed 
ἃ μὲν ἔπεσεν παρὰ τὴν ὁδόν, Kai “ἦλθεν τὰ πετεινὰ “καὶ 
some fell by the way, and ‘came ‘the “birds and 
κατέφαγεν αὐτά. 5 ἄλλα δὲ ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ Ta πετρώδη, ὕπου 
devoured them. Andsome fell upon the rocky places, where 
οὐκ.εἶχεν γῆν πολλήν, Kai εὐθέως ἐξανέτειλεν διὰ τὸ μὴ 
theyhadnot earth ‘much, andimmediately sprangup because of not 
μ᾿ ’ 8 ΓΦ - , ‘ > / 2 ΄ 
ἔχειν βάθος γῆς 6 ἡλίου.δὲ ἀνατείλαντος ἐκαυματίσθη, 
having depth ofearth; and([the]sun havingrisen they werescorched, 


house sat down sea. And were gathered together 


33 


into my house from 
whence I came out; 
and when he is come, 
he findeth τὲ empty, 
swept, and garnished. 
45 Then goeth he, and 
taketh with himself 
seven other _ spirits 
more wicked than him- 
self, and they enter in 
and dwell there: and 
the last state of that 
man is worse than the 
first. Even so shall it 
be also unto this wick- 
ed generation. 


46 While he yet 
talked to the people 
behold, his mother and 
his brethren stood 
without, desiring to 
speak with him. 
47 Then one said un- 
to him, Behold, thy 
mother and thy bre- 
thren stand without, 
desiring to speak with 
thee. 48 But he an- 
swered and said unto 
him that toldhim, Who 
is my mother? and 
who are my brethren ? 


a 49 And he stretched 


forth his hand toward 
his disciples, and said, 
Behold my mother and 
my brethren! 50 For 
whosoever shali do the 
will of my Father 
which is in heaven, the 
same is my brother, 
and sister, and mo- 
ther. 


XIII. The same day 
went Jesus out of the 
house, and sat by the 
sea side. 2 And great 
multitudes were gath- 
ered together unto 
him, so that he went 
into a ship, and sat; 
and the whole multi- 
tude stood on theshore. 
3 And he spake many 
things unto them in 
parables, saying, Be- 
hold, a sower went 
forth to sow; 4 and 
when he sowed, some 
seeds fell by the way 
side, and the fowls 
came and devoured 
them up: 5some fell 
upon stony places, 
where they had not 
much earth: and forth- 
with they sprung up, 
because they had no 
deepness of earth: 
6 and when the sun 
was up, they were 
scorched ; and because 


4 εἰς τὸν οἶκόν μου ἐπιστρέψω LTTrA. τ - καὶ and [L]r. 
"verse 47in{ |T. “ λέγοντι LTTra. 
and LTTrA. 

ship) LTTra, 


© ἦλθον Lir; ἐλθόντα having come A. 4— καὶ Α. 


s — δὲ but Lrtra. 
x — αὐτοῦ (read [his] hand) τ. 

2éx out of LT; — ἀπὸ (read ἐξελ. having gone out of)Tr. 
e+msL 


t [αὐτοῦ] L. 
Υ ποιῇ ἃ. 1-- δὲ 
Ὁ -- τὸ (read a 


D 


94 


they had no root, they 
withered away. 7 And 
some fell among 
thorns ; and thethorns 
sprung up, and choked 
them : 8 but other fell 
into good ground, and 
brought forth fruit, 
some an hundredfold, 
some sixtyfold, some 
thirtyfold. 9 Who hath 
ears to hear, let him 
hear. 


10 And the disciples 
came, and said unto 
him, Why = speakest 
thou unto them in pa- 
rables ? 11] He answered 
andsaid unto them, Be- 
cause it is given unto 
you to know the myste- 
ries of the kingdom of 
heaven, but to them 
it is not given. 12 For 
whosoever hath, tohim 
shall be given, and he 
shall have more abun- 
dance: but whosoever 
hath not, from him 
shall be taken away 
even that he hath. 
13 Therefore speak I 
to them in parables: 
because they seeing 
see not; and hearing 
they hear not, neither 
do they understand. 
14 And in them is ful 


filled the prophecy of 


Hsaias, which saith, By 
hearing ye shall hear, 
and shall not under- 
stand ; and seeing ye 
shall see, and shall not 
perceive: 15 for this 
people’s heart is waxed 
gross, and their ears 
are dull of hearing, 
and their eyes they 
have closed; lest at any 
time they should see 
with their eyes, and 
hear with their ears, 
and should understand 
with their heart, and 
should be converted, 
andIshouldheal them. 
16 But blessed ave your 
eyes, for they see: and 
our ears, for the 
ar. 17 For verily 
say unto you, That 
many prophets and 
righteous men have de- 
sired to see those things 
which ye see, and have 
not seen them; and to 
hear those things which 
ye hear, and have not 
eard them. 


18 Hear ye therefore 
the parable of the 
sower. 19 When any 
one heareth the word 
of the kingdom, and 


 €mveéav Ὑ. 
‘ διὰ τί LTrA. 
their ears) L. 
"— yap for T. 


8. — ἀκούειν T[Tr]a. 
1 — αὐτοῖς T. 
ο ἰάσομαι 1 shall heal trtra. 


ΜΑΙ Θ᾽ AYO) Ss: X FE 
καὶ διὰ τὸ.μὴ.ἔχειν ῥίζαν ἐξηράνθη. 7 ἄλλα.δὲ ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ 
and becauseof not having root were driedup. Andsome fell upon 
τὰς ἀκάνθας, καὶ ἀνέβησαν ai ἄκανθαι καὶ ᾿ἀπέπνιξαν'" αὐτά. 
the thorns, and “grew*up ‘the *thorns and choked them. 
8 ἀλλα.δὲ ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ THY γῆν τὴν καλήν, Kai ἐδίδου καρπόν, 

Andsome fell upon the ground the good, and yielded uit, 
ὃ μὲν ἑκατόν, ὃ. δὲ ἑξήκοντα, 6.0 τριάκοντα. 9 ὁ ἔχων 
one ahundred, another sixty, another thirty. Hethat has 
ὦτα βἀκούειν! ἀκουέτω. 
ears to hear Jet him hear. 
10 Kai προσελθόντες οἱ μαθηταὶν ἱεῖπον" αὐτῷ, ‘Acari! 
And *having *come *to[*him] the *disciples said tohim, Why 
ἐν παραβολαῖς λαλεῖς αὐτοῖς; 11 ὋὉ.δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν 


in parables  speakest thou to them? Andhe answering said 
ἰαὐτοῖς, “Ore ὑμῖν δέδοται γνῶναι τὰ μυστήρια τῆς 
tothem, Becausetoyou it has been given to know the mysteries of the 


βασιλείας τῶν.οὐρανῶν, ἐκείνοις. δὲ  ov.dédoTa. 12 boric 


kingdom of the heavens, but to them ithas not been given. Whosoever 
γὰρ ἔχει, δοθήσεται αὐτῷ, καὶ περισσευθήσεται. ὕστις.δὲ 
for has, *shall *be °given ‘to*him, and he shall bein abundance; but whosoever 
οὐκ.ἔχει, Kai ὃ ἔχει ἀρθήσεται az’ αὐτοῦ. 18 διὰ τοῦτο 
has not, even whathehasshall be takenawayfrom him. Because of this 
ἐν παραβολαῖς αὐτοῖς λαλῶ, ὅτι βλέποντες οὐ. βλέπουσιν, 


in parables to them I speak, because seeing they see not, 
καὶ ἀκούοντες οὐκ.ἀκούουσιν, οὐδὲ συνιοῦσιν. 14 Kai ava- 
and hearing they hear not, nor do they understand. And is \ 


λ ~ m2 7 \I ? ~ ς ΄ ‘H eo « λέ 
πληροῦται er αὑτοῖς ἢ προφητεία Hoatov, ἢ λέγουσα, 
*filled °up ‘in *them the prophecy of Esaias, which says, 
"Akoy ἀκούσετε, καὶ οὐ-μὴ.συνῆτε' καὶ βλέποντες βλέ- 
Inhearing yeshallhear, ἃ in no wise understand ; and seeing ye shall 
Were, καὶ οὐ-μὴ. δῆτε. 15 ἐπαχύνθη:γὰρ ἡ καρδία ποῦ 
see, and inno wise perceive: for Shas "grown "fat *the heart 
λαοῦ.τούτου, Kai τοῖς ὠσὶν" βαρέως ἤκουσαν, Kai τοὺς 
“of *this *people, and withthe ears heavily they have heard, and 
ὀφθαλμοὺς.αὐτῶν ékapyvoay' μήποτε tdwow τοῖς ὀφ- 
their eyes they have closed ; lest they should see with the 
θαλμοῖς, Kai τοῖς ὠσὶν ἀκούσωσιν, Kai καρδίᾳ συν- 
eyes, and with the ears they should hear,and with the heart they should 
Gow, καὶ ἐπιστρέψωσιν καὶ οἰάσωμαι" αὐτούς. 160 Ὑμῶν. δὲ 
understand, and should beconverted and I should heal them. But of you 
μακάριοι οἱ ὀφθαλμοί, ὅτι βλέπουσιν" Kai τὰ ὦτα Ῥὑμῶν," 
blessed [are] the eyes, because they see ; andthe ears of you, 
ὅτι «ἀκούει." 17 ἀμὴν.“γὰρ" λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι πολλοὶ προφῆται 
because they hear. or verily Isay toyou,that many prophets 
καὶ δίκαιοι ἐπεθύμησαν ἰδεῖν ἃ βλέπετε, καὶ οὐκ "εἶδον" " 
and righteous[men] desired to see what ye see, and ποὺ ‘saw; 
καὶ ἀκοῦσαι ἃ ἀκούετε, καὶ οὐκ-ἤκουσαν. 
and tohear what yehear, and heard not. 


“18 Ὑμεῖς οὖν ἀκούσατε τὴν παραβολὴν τοῦ ἱ'σπείροντος"" 


“Ye *therefore ‘hear the parable of the sower. 
19 Παντὸς.ἀκούοντος τὸν λόγον τῆς βασιλείας Kai μὴ 
When any one hears the word ofthe kingdom and not [it} 


h + avrov (read his disciples) L. ‘ εἶπαν TTrA. 
» + [αὐτῶν] (read 


m — én’ (read αὐτοῖς in them) GLTTrAW. 
ᾳ ἀκούουσιν Litrh, 


Ρ — ὑμῶν L[Tra]. 


5 εἶδαν LTr 3 ἴδαν T. ἴ σπείραντος LTTrA. 


XIII. 


συνιέντος, 
understands, 


ἐν rp-Kapdig.avrou' οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ παρὰ τὴν ὁδὸν σπαρείς. 
in his heart. This is hewho by the way was sown. 
20 Ὁ. δὲ ἐπὶ τὰ πετρώδη σπαρείς, οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ τὸν λόγον 
And he whouponthe rocky places was sown, this is hewhothe word 
ἀκούων καὶ εὐθὺς μετὰ χαρᾶς λαμβάνων αὐτόν' 21 οὐκ 

hears and immediately with joy receives it; *no 
ἔχει δὲ ῥίζαν ἐν ἑαυτῷ, ἀλλὰ πρόσκαιρός tor’ γενομένης. δὲ 


MA PT EW. 


ρχεται ὁ πονηρὸς καὶ ἁρπάζει τὸ ἐσπαρμένον 
comes ‘the ?wicked Sone and catchesaway thatwhich was sown 


7has'but root in himself, but temporary is; but *having ‘risen 
θλίψεως ἢ διωγμοῦ διὰ τὸν λόγον, εὐθὺς σκαν- 
ltribulation or persecution on account of the word, immediately he is 


δαλίζεται. 22 Ὁ.δὲ εἰς τὰς ἀκάνθας σπαρείς, οὗτός ἐστιν 
offended. And he whoamong the thorns was sown, his is 

ὁ τὸν λόγον ἀκούων, Kai ἡ μέριμνα τοῦ.αἰῶνος. "τούτου" 
he whothe word hears, and the care of this life 
καὶ ἡ ἀπάτη τοῦ πλούτου συμπνίγει" τὸν λόγον, Kai ἄκαρπος 
and the deceit of riches choke the word, and unfruitful 
γίνεται. 38 ὋὉ.δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν “γῆν τὴν καλὴν" σπαρείς, οὗτός 
it becomes, But he who on the ground the good was sown, this 
ἐστιν ὁ τὸν λόγον ἀκούων Kai Yovvwwy'' ὃς δὴ Kap- 

is hewho the word hears and understands; who indeed brings 
ποφορεῖ, Kai ποιεῖ τὸ! μὲν ἑκατόν, %0' dé ἑξήκοντα, ὁ" δὲ 
forth fruit, and produces one ahundred, another sixty, another 
τριάκοντα. 

thirty. 

24 “Αλλην παραβολὴν παρέθηκεν αὐτοῖς, λέγων, ‘Quow- 


Another parable put he before them, saying, °has’become 


θη ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν ἀνθρώπῳ “σπείροντι" καλὸν 

Slike ‘the *kingdom “of*the *heavens to a man sowing good 
σπέρμα ἐν τῷ.ἀγρῷ.αὐτοῦ" 2 ἐν.δὲ. τῷ καθεύδειν τοὺς ἀνθρώ- 
seed in is field ; but while “slept the men 
πους ἦλθεν αὐτοῦ ὁ ἐχθρὸς Kai Ῥἔσπειρεν᾽ ζιζάνια ἀνὰ μέσον 
came his enemy and sowed darnel in [the] midst 


τοῦ σίτου, καὶ ἀπῆλθεν. 26 Ore.dé ἐβλάστησεν ὁ χόρτος, 
ofthe wheat, and went away. And when “sprouted 1the “blade, 

καὶ καρπὸν ἐποίησεν, τότε ἐφάνη Kai τὰ ζιζάνια. 27 προσελ- 
and fruit produced, then appeared alsothe darnel. *Having “come 


θόντες δὲ οἱ δοῦλοι τοῦ οἰκοδεσπότου εἶπον αὐτῷ, Κύριε, 
*to [Shim] ‘and the bondmen of the master of the house said ἴο hin, Sir, 


οὐχὶ καλὸν σπέρμα “ἔσπειρας! ἐν τῷ σῷ ἀγρῷ; πόθεν οὖν 
Snot *good Sseed ‘didst*thou *sow in thy field? whence then 
ἔχει “τὰ! ζιζάνια; 28 ‘O08 ἔφη αὐτοῖς, ᾿Εχθρὸς ἄνθρωπος 
hasit the darnel? Andhesaid tothem, *an*enemy 1a *man 

τοῦτο ἐποίησεν. οἱ. δὲ “δοῦλοι! ‘elroy αὐτῷ," Θέλεις οὖν 
*this Sdid. Andthe bondmen said tohim, Wilt thou then 


ἀπελθόντες συλλέξωμεν αὐτά; 29 Ὁ δὲ ξἔφη," Οὔ" 

[that] having gone forth we should gather them? But he said, No; 

μήποτε συλλέγοντες τὰ ζιζάνια, ἐκριζώσητε ἅμα αὐτοῖς τὸν 

lest gathering the darnel, yeshoulduproot with them the 

σῖτον. 80 ἄφετε συναυξάνεσθαι ἀμφότερα "μέχρι" τοῦ θερισμοῦ" 
wheat. Suffer togrow together both until the harvest; 


30 
understandeth ἐξ not, 
then cometh the wick- 
ed one. and catcheth 
away that which was 
sown in his heart, 
This is he which re- 
ceived seed by the way 
side. 20 But he that 
received the seed into 
stony places, the same 
is he that heareth the 
word, and anon with 
joy receiveth it ; 21 yet 
hath he not root in 
himself, but dureth for 
a while: for when 
tribulation or pcrse- 
eution ariseth because 
of the word, by and by 
he is offended. 22 He 
also that received seed 
among the thorns is 
he that heareth the 
word ; and the care of 
this world, and the 
deceitfulness of riches, 
choke the word, and 
he becometh unfruit- 
ful. 23 But he that 
received seed into the 
good ground is he that 
beareth the word, 
and understandeth it; 
which also  beareth 
fruit, and bringeth 
forth, some an hun- 
dredfold, some sixty, 
some thirty. 


24 Another parable 
put he forth unto 
them, saying, The 
kingdom of heaven is 
likened unto a man 
which sowed good seed 
in his field: 25 but 
while men slept, his 
enemy cameandsowed 
tares among the wheat, 
and went his way. 
26 But when the blade 
was sprung up, and 
brought forth fruit, 
then appeared the 
tares also. 27 So the 
servants of the house- 
holder came and said 
unto him, Sir, didst 
not thousow good seed 
in thy field? from 
whence then hath it 
tares? 28 Hesaid unto 
them, An enemy hath 
done this. The ser- 
vants said unto him, 
Wilt thou then that we 
go and gather them 
up? 29 But he said, 
Nay; lest while ye ga- 
ther up the tares, ye 
root up also the wheat 
withthem. 30 Let both 
grow together until 
the harvest: and in 


¥ — τούτον (read of iife) LTTra. τ συνπνίγει TA. 
L&tr. 20 LT. * σπείραντι [who] sowed Litra. 
© ξσπειρες Tr. d — τα GLTTrAW. 


ow say to him Ltra ; λέγουσιν αὐτῷ 1. & φησιν says LTTrA, 


x καλὴν γὴν LTTrA. 
Ὁ ἐπέσπειρεν Sowed Over LTTra. 
¢ — δοῦλοι (read ot δὲ and they) Δ. 
Β ἕως until LTrA. 


J συνιείς 


£ αὐτῷ A€you- 


36 


the time of harvest I 
will say to the reapers, 
Gather ye together 
first thetares, and bind 
them in bundles to 
burn them: but gather 
the wheat into my 
barn. 


31 Another parable 
put he forth unto 
them, saying, The 
kingdom of heaven is 
like to a grain of 
mustard seed, which 
aman took, and sowed 
in his field: 32 which 
indeed is the least of 
all seeds: but when it 
is grown, it is the 
greatest among herbs, 
and becometh a tree, 
so that the birds of 
the air come and lodge 
im the branches there- 
of, 


33 Another parable 

ake he unto them ; 
‘the kingdom of hea- 
ven is like unto leaven, 
which a woman took, 
and hid in three mea- 
sures of meal, till the 
whole was leavened. 


34 All these things 
spake Jesus unto the 
multitude in parables ; 
and without a parable 

ake he not unto 
them : 35 that it might 
be fulfilled which was 
spoken by the prophet, 
saying, 1 will open my 
mouth in parables ; 1 
willutter things which 
have been kept secret 
from the foundation 
of the world. 


36 Then Jesus sent 
the multitude away, 
and went into the 
bouse: and his dis- 
ciples came unto him, 
saying, Declare unto 
us the parable of the 
tares of the field. 
37 He answered and 
said unto them, He 
that soweth the good 
seed is the Son of man ; 
38 the fieldis the world; 
the good seed are the 
children of the king- 
dom ; but the tares are 
the children of the 
wicked one; 39 the 
enemy that sowed 
them is the devil; the 
harvest is the end of 


1 — τῷ GLTITrAW. 
nothing LTTrA. ® + 
9 προσῆλθαν LTr. 


τ διασάφησον explain Ltr. 


MATOAIOX®X. ΧΗ]. 


καὶ ἐν ἱτῷ! καιρῷ τοῦ θερισμοῦ ἐρῶ τοῖς θερισταῖς, Συλ- 
and in the time ofthe harvest Iwillsay tothe harvest men, Ga- 


λέξατε πρῶτον τὰ ζιζάνια, καὶ dnoare αὐτὰ eic! δέσμας 


ther first the darnel, and bind them into bundles 
πρὸς.τὸ. κατακαῦσαι αὐτά: τὸν.δὲ σῖτον *cuvayayere' εἰς τὴν 
to burn them; butthe wheat bring together into 
ἀποθήκην.μου. 
my granary. 
91 Ἄλλην παραβολὴν παρεθηκεν αὐτοῖς, λέγων, Ὁμοία 
Another parable put he before them, saying, ike 


ἐστὶν ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν κόκκῳ σινάπεως, ὃν λα- 
15 the kingdom ofthe heayens toa grain of mustard, whichhaying 
βὼν ἄνθρωπος ἔσπειρεν ἐν τῷ. ἀγρῷ. αὐτοῦ" 82 ὃ μικρότερον 
taken, aman sowed in his field ; which less 
μέν ἐστιν πάντων τῶν σπερμάτων, ὕταν.δὲ αὐξηθῇ 
indeed is than all the seeds, but when it be grown, 
μεῖζον τῶν λαχάνων ἐστίν, Kai γίνεται δένδρον, ὥστε 


greater than the herbs is, and becomes a tree, so that 
ἐλθεῖν τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ ἱκατασκηνοῦν" ἐν τοῖς 
come the _ birds ofthe heaven and roost in the 
κλάδοις αὐτοῦ. 
branches _ of it. 

33 Ἄλλην παραβολὴν ἐλάλησεν αὐτοῖς, Ὁμοία ἐστὶν ἡ 

Another parable spoke he tothem, ike is the 

βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν ζύμῃ, ἣν λαβοῦσα γυνὴ ἐνέκρυψεν 
kingdom ofthe heavens to leaven, which having taken, a woman d 


᾽ ? ’ ΄ ͵ὔ « - > , a 
εἰς ἀλεύρου σάτα τρία, ἕως. οὗ ἐζυμώθη Odor. 
in *of*meal *seabs ‘three, until *was*leavened ‘all. 
34 Ταῦτα πάντα ἐλάλησεν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς ἐν παραβολαῖς τοῖς 
?These “things ‘all spoke Jesus in parables to the 
ὄχλοις, Kai χωρὶς παραβολῆς Modx" ἐλάλει αὐτοῖς" 36 ὅπως 
crowds, and without a parable Snot *he*spoke to them; so that 
~ A « A 4 ~ ,’ n ia 
πληρωθῇ τὸ ῥηθὲν διὰ τοῦ προφήτου", λέγοντος, 
might be fulfilled that which wasspoken by the prophet, saying, 
᾿Ανοίξω ἐν παραβολαῖς πὸ, στόμα μολι, ἐρεύξομαι κεκρυμμένα 
I willopen in parables my mouth: willutter things hidden 
ἀπὸ καταβολῆς “κόσμου." 
from [the] foundation of [the] world. 
36 Τότε ἀφεὶς τοὺς ὄχλους, ἦλθεν εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν 
Then having dismissed the crowds, “went “into *the ‘house 
P6 ᾿Ιησοῦς"" καὶ προσῆλθον! αὐτῷ οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ, λέγοντες, 
‘Jesus; and came to him his disciples, saying, 
τῷράσον! ἡμῖν τὴν παραβολὴν τῶν ζιζανίων τοῦ ἀγροῦ. 
Expound ἴοῦβ the parable of the darnel of the eld, 
37 Ὁ δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν "αὐτοῖς, ‘O σπείρων τὸ καλὸν 


Andhe answering said tothem, Hewho sows the good 
σπέρμα ἐστὶν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου" 38 ὁ.δὲ ἀγρός ἐστιν ὁ 
seed is the Son of man ; andthe field is the 


κόσμος τὸ.δὲ καλὸν σπέρμα, οὗτοί εἰσιν οἱ υἱοὶ τῆς βασιλείας" 
world; andthe good seed, these are the sons ofthe kingdom; 

τὰ δὲ ζιζάνιά εἰσιν οἱ υἱοὶ τοῦ πονηροῦ" 39 ὁ. δὲ ἐχθρὸς 
butthe darnel are the sons ofthe evil [one]; andthe enemy 
6 σπείρας αὐτά torw" ὁ διάβολος" 0.08 θερισμὸς συν- 
who sowed them is the devil ; andthe harvest [the] com- 


J— eis (read[in]) [tr]A. * συνάγετε LIr. | κατασκηνοῖν LTTrA. ™ovder 


‘Houiov Isaiah τ. ° —Kdopov LTTrA. Ρ ---ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς (read he went) irtra. 


®—avrois LITrA. ἴ ἐστιν ὁ σπείρας αὐτὰ L. 


ΧΙΠ. MATTHE W. 

τέλεια τοῦ" αἰῶνός tor οἱ δὲ θερισταὶ ἄγγελοί εἰσιν. 

penon of the age is, and the harvest men angels are, 

40 ὥσπερ οὖν συλλέγεται τὰ ζιζάνια, καὶ πυρὶ ἕκατα- 
As therefore is gathered the darnel, and infire is con- 

καίεται," οὕτως ἔσται ἐν TY συντελείᾳ τοῦ. αἰῶνος. “τούτου." 

sumed, thus itshallbe in the completion of this age. 


41 ἀποστελεῖ ὁ υἱὸς 
55}811 ®send 7forth ‘the 7Son 
Kai συλλέξουσιν ἐκ τῆς βασιλείας.αὐτοῦ πάντα Ta σκάνδαλα 
and they shall gather out of his kingdom all the offences 
Kai τοὺς ποιοῦντας τὴν ἀνομίαν, 42 καὶ βαλοῦσιν αὐτοὺς 
and those who practise place a and theyshallcast them 


εἰς τὴν κάμινον τοῦ πυρός" ἐκεῖ ἔσται ὁ κλαυθμὸς καὶ ὁ 
into the furnace ofthe fire: there shallbe the weeping andthe 


βρυγμὸς τῶν ὀδόντων. 48 τότε οἱ δίκαιοι ἐκλάμψουσιν ὡς 
g ofthe teeth. Then the rigHicous shall shine forth as 


τοῦ ἀνθρώπου τοὺς ἀγγέλους αὐτοῦ, 
305 *man is angels, 


ὁ ἥλιος ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τοῦ.πατρὸς αὐτῶν. ‘O ἔχων dra 
the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Hethat has ears 
ἀκούειν! ἀκουέτω. 
tohear let him hear. 
44 Πάλιν! ὁμοία ἐστὶν ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν θησαυρῷ 
Again like is the kingdom ofthe heavens to treasure 
, a « ‘ 
κεκρυμμένῳ ἐν τῷ ἀγρῷ, ὃν εὑρὼν ἄνθρωπος ἔκρυψεν, 
“ἢ in the field, which es “found ‘a *man hid, 
Kai ἀπὸ τῆς χαρᾶς αὐτοῦ ὑπάγει Kai "πάντα ὕσα ἔχει 


and for the joy of it goes and all things as many as hehas 


πωλεῖ," καὶ ἀγοράζει τὸν. ἀγρὸν ἐκεῖνον. 
he aie and ΠΕ τ. field. 


45 Πάλιν ὁμοία ἐστὶν ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν ἀνθρώπῳ 
Again like is pe Senos ofthe heavens ate 


ἐμπόρῳ, ζητοῦντι καλοὺς βοπχορι αι 46 Oc εὑρὼν" ἕνα 
amerchant, seeking beautiful pearls who Bens found one 


πολύτιμον μαργαρίτην, ἀπεχθὼν" πέπρακεν πάντα doa 
very precious pearl, aN ELE gone away hassold all things asmanyas 


εἶχεν, Kai ἠγόρασεν αὐτόν. 
he had, and bought it. 


47 ἸΤάλιν ὁμοία ἐστὶν ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν σαγήνῃ 
Again ike is ie kingdom ofthe heavens toa dragnet 
βληθείσῃ εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν, Kai ἐκ παντὸς γένους συναγα- 
cast into the sea, and of every kind gathering 
γούσῃ' 48 ἣν bre ἐπληρώθη ἀναβιβάσαντες" “ἐπὶ τὸν 
together ; which when it was filled having drawn up on the 
2 , ‘a θί EX Ay X ‘ 2 eZ ~ ll 
αἰγιαλόν, καὶϊ καθίσαντες συνέλεξαν τὰ καλὰ εἰς “ἀγγεῖα, 
are, and having sat down es gathered the ag into _ vessels, 


τὰ.δὲ σαπρὰ ἔξω ἔβαλον. 49 οὕτως ἔσται ἐν τῇ συντελείᾳ 
andthe corrupt “out ‘they “cast. Thus shallit be in the completion 


τοῦ αἰῶνος" ἐξελεύσονται οἱ ἄγγελοι, καὶ ἀφοριοῦσιν τοὺς 
ofthe age: %shall*go*out ‘the “angels, and shallseparate the 


πονηροὺς ἐκ μέσου τῶν δικαίων, 50 Kai Badovow αὐτοὺς 
wicked from [the]midst of the Hghteous; and = shall cast them 


εἰς τὴν κάμινον τοῦ πυρός" ἐκεῖ ἔσται ὁ κλαυθμὸς καὶ ὁ 
into the furnace ofthe fire: there shallbe the wailing and the 


βρυγμὸς τῶν ὀδόντων. 
Snashing of the teeth. 


37 


the world; and the 
reapers are ‘the angels. 
40 As therefore the 
tares are gathered and 
burned in the fire ; so 
shall it be in the end 
of this world. 4] The 
Son of man shall send 
forth his angels, and 
they shall gather out 
of his kingdom all 
things that offend, and 
them which do in- 
iquity ; 42 and shall 
cast them into a fur- 
nace of fire : thereshall 
be wailing and gnash- 
ing of teeth. 43 Then 
shall the righteous 
shine forth as the sun 
in the kingdom of 
their Father. Who 
hath ears to hear, let 
him hear. 


44 Again, the king- 
dom of heaven is like 
unto treasure hid ina 
field; the which when 
8. man hath found, he 
hideth, and for joy 
thereof goeth and 
selleth all that he 
hath, and bnyeth that 
field. 


45 Again, the king- 
dom of heaven is like 
unto a merchant man, 
seeking goodly pearls : 
46 who, when he had 
found one pearl of 
great price, went and 
sold all that he had, 
and bought it. 


47 Again, the king- 
dom of heaven is like 
unto a net, that was 
cast into the sea, and 
gathered of every kind: 
48 which, when it was 
full, they drew to 
shore, and sat down, 
and gathered the good 
into vessels, but cast 
the bad away. 49 So 
shall it be at the end 
of the world: the an- 
gels shall come forth, 
and sever the wicked 
from among the just, 
50 and shall cast them 
into the furnace of 
fire: there shall be 
wailing and gnashing 
of teeth. 


* — τοῦ (read of[the])LrTra. τ΄ καίεται 15 burned GTra. *— τούτου (read the age) LTTr[ A]. 


Υ - ἀκούειν [L]t[tr]a. --- πάλιν [τιτττὰ. ἅ πωλεῖ πάντα ὅσα ἔχει LTTrA. 
© ἄγγη τττΑ. 


&+avurnvitL[A]. ἁ καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν αἰγιαλὸν L; ἐπὶ τὸν αἰγιαλὸν [καὶ] a. 


Ὁ εὑρὼν δὲ GLTTrA. 


98 


51 Jesus saith unto 
them, Have ye under- 
stood all these things? 
They say unto him, 
Yea, Lord. 52 Then 
said he unto them, 
Therefore every scribe 
which is instructed un- 
to the kingdom of 
heaven is like unto a 
man that is an house- 
holder, which bringeth 
forth out of his trea- 
sure things new and 
old. 


53 And it came to 
ass, that when Jesus 
d finished these 
parables, he departed 
thence. 54 And when 
he was come into his 
own country,he taught 
them in their syna- 
gogue, insomuch that 
they were astonished, 
and said, Whence hath 
this man this wisdom, 
and these mighty 
works? 55 Is not this 
the carpenter’s son? 
is not his mother 
called Mary? and his 
brethren, James, and 
Joses, and Simon, and 
Judas? 56 and his sis- 
ters, are they not all 
with us? Whence then 
hath this man all these 
things? 57 And they 
were offended in him. 
But Jesus said unto 
them, A prophet is not 
without honour, save 
in his own country, 
and in his own house, 
58 And he did not many 
mighty works there 
because of their un- 
belief. 


XIV. At that time 
Herod the tetrarch 
heard of the fame of 
Jesus, 2 and said unto 
his servants, This is 
John the Baptist; he 
is risen from the dead; 
and therefore mighty 
works do shew forth 
themselves in him. 
3 For Herod had laid 
hold on John, and 
bound him, and put 
him in prison for 
Herodias’ 
brother Philip’s wife. 
4¥or John said unto 
him, It is not lawful 
for thee to have her. 
5 And when he would 
have put him to death, 


MATOATOS. 


51 SAéyer αὐτοῖς O'Incove,' Συνήκατε ταῦτα πάντα; 
"Says “to *them ‘Jesus, Have yeunderstood *these*things ‘all? 

Λέγουσιν αὐτῷ, Nai, "κύριε." 52 ‘O.6é 'εῖπεν! αὐτοῖς, Διὰ 
They say tohim, Yea, Lord. Andhe - said to them, Because of 
τοῦτο πᾶς γραμματεὺς μαθητευθεὶς Ksic τὴν βασιλείαν" τῶν 
this every scribe discipled into the kingdom of the 
3 ~ e , ? ? ΓΑ ’ , eo ? , 
οὐρανῶν ὅμοιός ἐστιν ἀνθρώπῳ οἰκοδεσπότῃ, ὅστις ἐκβάλλει 
heavens “like 118 toaman amasterofahouse, who puts forth 
ἐκ τοῦ.θησαυροῦ.αὐτοῦ καινὰ καὶ παλαιά. 


XIII, XiiVe 


out of his treasure {things} new and old. 
53 Kai ἐγένετο ὅτε ἐτέλεσεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς τὰς παραβολὰς 
And it came to pass when *had “finished ‘Jesus “parables 
ταύτας, μετῆρεν ἐκεῖθεν 54 καὶ ἐλθὼν εἰς τὴν πατρίδα 
these, he withdrew thence; and having come into Scountry 


αὐτοῦ, ἐδίδασκεν αὐτοὺς ἐν τῇ.συναγωγῇ αὐτῶν, ὥστε ἱἐκπλήτ- 
"his(?own]),he taught them in their synagogue, so that were 
τεσθαι! αὐτοὺς καὶ λέγειν, ἸΤόθεν τούτῳ ἡ-σοφία.αὕτη καὶ 
“astonished ‘they Ἀπ 5814, Whence tothis [man] this wisdom and 

αἱ δυνάμεις; 55 οὐχ οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ τοῦ τέκτονος υἱός; 
the works of power? “not *this lis ‘the®of’the *carpenter son? [Is] 
m ᾽ ‘Il € , > ~ λέ Μ ’ ‘ ς 10: λ ‘ ᾽ὔ .« 
οὐχὶ" ἡ-μητηρ-αὐτοῦ λέγεται Μαριάμ, καὶ οἱ. ἀδελφοὶ. αὐτοῦ 

ποῦ his mother called Mary, and his brethren 
Ἰάκωβος Kai "Ιωσῆς" καὶ Σίμων καὶ ᾿Ιούδας; 56 καὶ ai 

James and Joses and Simon and Judas? and 
ἀδελφαὶ. αὐτοῦ οὐχὶ πᾶσαι πρὸς ἡμᾶς εἰσιν; πόθεν οὖν τούτῳ 
*his *sisters 2not Sall ‘with “us ‘are? whence then to this 

~ G ‘ ? ΄ὔ ? ? fob h} 

ταῦτα πάντα; 57 Kai ἐσκανδαλίξοντο ἐν αὐτῷ. Ὁ δὲ 
(man]*these*things ‘all? And they were offended ἴῃ him. But 
Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Οὐκ ἔστιν προφήτης ἄτιμος εἰ μὴ 
Jesus said tothem, “ποῦ “is ‘a “prophet without honour except 


ἐν τῇ".πατρίδι.Ῥαὐτοῦ" καὶ ἐν τῇ οἰκί ψεα ποῦς 58 Καὶ οὐκ 
And *‘not 


in his [own] country and in 
ἐποίησεν ἐκεῖ δυνάμεις πολλὰς διὰ τὴν.ἀπιστίαν. αὐτῶν. 
of their unbelief, 


"he “did there *works*of*power ‘many because 


14 Ἔν ἐκείνῳ τῷ καιρῷ ἤκουσεν “Hpwdn¢g ὁ “τετράρχης 
Αὐ that time heard Herod the tetrarch 


THY ἀκοὴν ᾿Ιησοῦ, 2 καὶ εἶπεν τοῖς παισὶν.αὐτοῦ, Οὗτός ἐστιν 
the fame _ of Jesus, and said to his servants, This is 


᾿Ιωάννης ὁ βαπτιστήῆς" αὐτὸς ἠγέρθη ἀπὸ τῶν νεκρῶν, καὶ 


is [own] house, 


John the Baptist: he igsrisen from the dead, and 
διὰ τοῦτο at δυνάμεις ἐνεργοῦσιν ἐν αὐτῷ. 3 Ὁ yap 
because of this the works of power operate in him. For 


Ἡρώδης κρατήσας τὸν ᾿Ιωάννην ἔδησεν ταὐτὸν" καὶ "ἔθετο 


LTTrAW. 
read [his]) urTra. 


Herod having seized John bound him and put 
) ἐν φυλακῇ, διὰ “ ἰβωδιάδα τὴν γυναῖκα 'Φιλίππου! 
sake, his (him) ἱπὶ prison, onaccount of Herodias the wife *Philip 
τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ αὐτοῦ. 4 ἔλεγεν.γὰρ αὐτῷ O’Iwavyne," Οὐκ 
of *his “brother. For ?said to *him ‘John, ΤΝ οὐ 
ἔξεστίν σοι ἔχειν αὐτήν. 5 Καὶ θέλων αὐτὸν ἀποκτεῖναι, 
*it°is lawful for thee to have her. And wishing *him ‘to 7 kill, 
& — Λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ "Ingots LT TrA. Ἀ--ι κύριε LTTrA. i λέγει says L. Κ ἐν τῇ 
βασιλείᾳ in the kingdom 1,; τῇ βασιλείᾳ to the kingdom ΟΥτττα. ! ἐκπλήσσεσθαι 
™ οὐχ LTTrA. 2 Ἰωσὴφ Joseph trtra. ° + ἰδίᾳ own T. Ρ — αὐτοῦ 
4 τετραάρχης T. τ — ἀντὸν 1. "ἐν τῇ (-- τῇ τ) φνλακῇ 
ἀπέθετο in the prison put [him] aside ὐττὰ. τς Φιλίππου [T]a. τὸ (--- ὁ ἢ 


᾿Ιωάννης αὐτῷ LT 


ALLY. MATTHEW. 
ἐφοβήθη τὸν ὄχλον, Orr ὡς προφήτην αὐτὸν εἶχον. 
he feared the multitude, because as a prophet him _— they held. 


6 "γενεσίων.δὲ ἀγομένων" τοῦ Ἡρώδου, ὠρχήσατο ἡ θυγάτηρ 
But a birthday being celebrated of Herod, ‘danced ‘the *daughter 
τῆς Ἡρωδιάδος ἐν τῷ μέσῳ, καὶ ἤρεσεν τῷ Howdy 7 ὅθεν 
Sof *Herodias in the midst, and pleased Herod ; Whereupon 
ro ε , 2 ~ ~ Q x20) 1 see 8 Ἡ δὲ 
μεθ᾽ ὅρκου ὡμολόγησεν αὐτῇ δοῦναι 0-*éay" αἰτήσηται. «δὲ 
with oath hepromised toher togive whateversheshouldask. Βαΐ5ῃ8 
προβιβασθεῖσα ὑπὸ Tic-unTpdc.adTijc, Δός por, φησίν, ὧδε 
being urged on by her mother, Give me, shesays, here 
ἐπὶ πίνακι τὴν κεφαλὴν Ἰωάννου τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ. 8 Kai 


upon adish the head of John the Baptist. And 
γέλυπήθη" ὁ βασιλεύς: dra.2dé' τοὺς ὅρκους Kai τοὺς 

2was*grieved the king; but onaccountof the oaths and those who 
συνανακειμένους ἐκέλευσεν δοθῆναι: 10 καὶ πέμψας 


reclined with [him at table] he commanded [it] to be given. And haying sent 
ἀπεκεφάλισεν "τὸν" Ἰωάννην ἐν τῇ φυλακῇ. 11 καὶ ἠνέχθη 
he beheaded John in the prison. And *was*brought 
ἡ. κεφαλὴ αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ πίνακι, καὶ ἐδόθη τῷ κορασίῳ᾽ καὶ ἤν- 
his *head on adish, and was giventothe damsel, and 586 
εγκεν τῇ.μητρὶ αὐτῆς. 12 καὶ προσελθόντες οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ 
brought [it] to her mother, And having come his disciples 
ἦραν τὸ Ῥσῶμα, καὶ ἔθαψαν “αὐτό"" καὶ ἐλθόντες ἀπήγγειλαν 
took the body, and _ buried it; and having come told 
τῷ Ἰησοῦ. 18 ‘kai ἀκούσας" ὁ Inoote ἀνεχώρησεν ἐκεῖθεν 
[it] to Jesus. And *having *heard Jesus withdrew thence 
ἐν πλοίῳ εἰς ἔρημον τόπον κατ᾽ ἰδίαν. 


by to a desert place apart. 
Kai ἀκούσαντες ot ὄχλοι ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῷ “πεζῃ" 
And having heard [ofit) the crowds followed him _ ΟἹ foot 
ἀπὸ τῶν πόλεων. 14 Kai ἐξελθὼν [ὁ Ἰησοῦς!" εἶδεν πολὺν 
from the cities. And having gone out Jesus saw great 
ὄχλον, καὶ ἐσπλαγχνίσθη ἐπ᾿ βαὐτούς," καὶ ἐθεράπευσεν 


Δ οΥουγά, and was moved with compassion towards them, and healed 


‘ Ty 2) 2. ἢ ? ~ =~? , \ , bh ~ It 
Tovc.appworove.avTay. 15’Owiac.oé γενομένης "προσῆλθον" 
their infirm, Andevening having come came 
αὐτῷ οἱ. μαθηταὶ ᾿αὐτοῦ,! λέγοντες, "Epnpoc ἐστιν ὁ τόπος, 
to him his disciples, saying, Desert is the place, 
καὶ ἡ ὥρα dn παρῆλθεν"" amddvooyv! τοὺς ὄχλους, ἵνα 
and the time already is gone by: dismiss the crowds, that 
ἀπελθόντες εἰς τὰς κώμας ἀγυράσωσιν ἑαυτοῖς βρώματα. 
having gone into the villages theymay buy for themselves meat. 
16 Ὁ. δὲ π᾿ Ἰησοῦς" εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Οὐ χρείαν ἔχουσιν ἀπελθεῖν" 
But Jesus said tothem, *No *need ‘they “have to go away: 
a7 ? ~ « - - « x , ? ~ ? ΝΜ 
δότε αὐτοῖς ὑμεῖς φαγεῖν. 17 Οἱ. δὲ λέγουσιν αὐτῷ, Οὐκ.ἔχομεν 
give *to*them “ye to eat. But they say tohim, We have not 
ὧδε εἰ μὴ πέντε ἄρτους καὶ δύο ἰχθύας. 18 Ο.δὲ εἶπεν, Φέρετέ 


here except five loaves and two fishes. Andhe said, Bring 
a? ‘ To \ 7 ‘ » 7 

μοι "αὐτοὺς ὧδε." 19 Καὶ κελεύσας τοὺς ὄχλους ἀνα- 

“to*me ‘them here. And having commanded the crowds  tore- 


AOA 2D Opava ἢ I Dyegy} ll : ὴ ἐ a 
κλιθῆναι ἐπὶ στοὺς χόρτους," Ῥκαὶ λαβὼν τοὺς πέντε ἄρτους 
cline on the grass, and havingtaken the five loaves 


39 


he feared the multi- 


tude, because they 
counted him as a pro- 
phet. 6 But when 


Herod’s birthday was 
kept, the daughter of 
Herodias danced be- 
fore them, and pleased 
Herod. 7 Whereupon he 
promised with an oath 
to give her whatsoever 
she would ask. 8 And 
she, being before in- 
structed of her mother, 
said, Give me here 
John Baptist’s head 
inacharger. 9 And the 
king was sorry: never- 
theless for the oath’s 
sake, and them which 
sat with him at meat, 
he commanded tt to be 
given jer. 10 And he 
sent, and beheaded 
John in the prison. 
11 And his head was 
brought in a charger, 
and given to the dam- 
sel: and she brought 
τ to her mother. 
12 And his disciples 
came, and took up the 
body, and buried it, 
and went and told 
Jesus, 13 When Jesus 
heard of it, he departed 
thence by ship into a 
desert place apart. 


And when the people 
had heard thereag/, they 
followed him on foot 
out of the cities, 14 And 
Jesus went forth, and 
saw a great multitude, 
and was moved with 


compassion toward 
them, and he healed 
their sick, 15 And 


when it was evening, 
his disciples came to 
him, saying, This is a 
desert place, and the 
time is now past; send 
the multitude away, 
that they may go into 
the villages, and buy 
themselves victuals. 
16 But Jesus said unto 
them, They need not 
depart; give ye them 
to eat. 17 And they 
say unto him, We 
have here but five 
loaves, and two fishes. 
18 Hesaid, Bring them 
hither to me. 19 And 
he commanded the 
multitude to sit down 
on the grass, and took 
the five loaves, and the 


π γενεσίοις δὲ γενομένοις LTTrA. *GyLTrA. Y λυπηθεὶς being grievedurtra. *— δὲ but 


© αὐτόν him Trra. 


®— ov LTTra. ὃ πτῶμα corpse LTTr. τόν 
& αὑτοις GLTTrAW. 


f — ὃ Ἰησοῦς (read he saw) LTTra. 
Κ παρῆλθεν ἤδη τ. 
© τοῦ χόρτου LT Tr. 


LTTrA. 
ε πεζοὶ T. 
1 — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) Lrtra. 
™ — ᾿ξῃσοῦς (read he said) τ. 5 ὧδε αὐτούς LTTrA. 


ἃ ἀκούσας δὲ LITA. 
" προσῆλθαν LTr, 


1+ οὖν therefore T[A]. 


P — καὶ GLTTraAW. 


40 


two fishes, and looking 
up to heaven, he bless- 
ed, and brake, andgave 
the loaves to his dis- 
ciples, and the disci- 
ples to the multitude. 
20 And they did all 
eat, and were filled: 
and they took up of 
the fragments that re- 
mained twelve baskets 
full, 21 And they that 
had eaten were about 
five thousand men, 
beside women and 
children. 


22 And straightway 
Jesus constrained his 
disciples to gst into a 
ship, and to go before 
him unto the other 
side, while he sent 
the multitudes away. 
23 And when he had 
sent the multitudes 
away, he went up into 
8. mountain apart to 
pray: and when the 
evening was come, he 
was there alone, 24 But 
the ship was now in 
the midst of the sea, 
tossed with waves: 
for the wind was con- 
trary. 25 And in the 
fourth watch of the 
night Jesus went unto 
them, walking on the 
sea. 26 And when the 
disciples saw him 
walking on the sea, 
they were troubled, 
saying, It is a spirit; 
and they cried out for 
fear. 27 But straight- 
way Jesus spake unto 
them, saying, Be of 
good cheer; it is [; 
be not afraid. 28 And 
Peter answered him 
and said, Lord, if it be 
thou, bid me come un- 
to thee on the water, 
29 And he said, Come, 
And when Peter was 
come down out of the 
ship, he walked on the 
water, to go to Jesus. 
30 But when he saw 
the wind boisterous 
he was afruid; and 
beginning to sink, he 


cried, saying, Lord, 
save me, 31 And 
immediately Jesus 


stretched forth his 
hand, and caught him, 
and said unto him, © 


4 ηὐλόγησεν LTrA. 


he compelled) Gurtraw. 
x σταδίους πολλοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς ἀπεῖχεν Many stadia from the land was dis- 


Υ ἦλθεν LYTr. 
b οἱ δὲ μαθηταὶ ἰδόντες αὐτὸν 1, ; ἰδόντες δὲ αὐτὸν T. 
© ὁ Ἰησοῦς αὐτοῖς 1,; --- ὁ ΤἸησοῦς τ; αὐτοῖς [ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς) a. 
& ἐλθεῖν πρός σε LTTrA. ; 


ship) tr. 
tant Tr. 
LTTrA. 

4 εὐθὺς LITr. 
εἶπεν αὐτῷ 1.. 
k — ἰσχυρὸν τ. 


ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΣ. XIV. 
καὶ τοὺς δύο ἰχθύας, ἀναβλέψας εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν «εὐλόγησεν "" 
and the two fishes, having lookedupto the eaven he blessed ; 
καὶ κλάσας ἔδωκεν τοῖς μαθηταῖς τοὺς ἄρτους, οἱ. δὲ pa- 
and having broken hegave tothe disciples the loaves, andthe dis- 
θηταὶ τοῖς ὄχλοις. 20 καὶ ἔφαγον πάντες Kai ἐχορτάσθησαν" 
ciples to the crowds. An “ate ‘all and were satisfied ; 


καὶ ἦραν τὸ περισσεῦον τῶν κλασμάτων, δώδεκα 

and they took up that which wasoverandabove of the fragments, twelve 
κοφίνους πλήρεις. 21 οἱ. δὲ ἐσθίοντες ἦσαν ἄνδρες ὡσεὶ 

hand-baskets full. And those who ate were men about 


πεντακισχίλιοι, χωρὶς γυναικῶν Kai παιδίων." 
five thousand, besides women and children. 
22 Kai "εὐθεως" ἠνάγκασεν ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς" τοὺς. μαθητὰς. "αὐτοῦ" 
Andimmediately *compelled 1 Jesus his disciples 
ἐμβῆναι εἰς Yr! πλοῖον καὶ προάγειν αὐτὸν εἰς τὸ πέραν, 
toenter into the ship and to go before him _ to the other side, 
a - ? , Π W” ‘ ? ΄, A 
Ewe.ov ἀπολύσῃ τοὺς ὄχλους. 23 καὶ ἀπολύσας τοὺς 
until Β6 should have dismissed the crowds. And having dismissed the 
» > , 2 A w” > Iw ‘4 ? , 
ὄχλους ἀνέβη εἰς τὸ ὄρος κατ᾽ diay προσεύξασθαι. ᾿Οψί- 
crowds he wentupinto the mountain apart to pray. *Even- 
\ , ΄ 5 ᾽ - VON ~ " x7: 
ac δὲ γενομένης μόνος ἦν ἐκεῖ. 2470.02 πλοῖον ἤδη “μέσον 
ing*and beingcome alone he wasthere, Butthe ship uowin[the}midst 


τῆς θαλάσσης ἦν," βασανιζόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν κυμάτων" ἢν γὰρ 
of the sea was, tossed by the waves, ‘was ‘for 
ἐναντίος ὁ ἄνεμος. 25 Terapryde φυλακῇ τῆς νυκτὸς 
Scontrary “the *wind. But in [the] fourth watch ofthe night 


YarndOev' πρὸς αὐτοὺς τὸ ᾿Τησοῦς,! περιπατῶν ἐπὶ "τῆς θαλάσ- 
2went “to *them 1Jesus, walking on the sea. 
σης." 26 “Kai ἰδόντες αὐτὸν ot μαθηταὶ" ἐπὶ “τὴν θάλασσαν" 

And “seeing ‘him ‘the “disciples on the sea 
περιπατοῦντα ἐταράχθησαν, λέγοντες, Ὅτι φάντασμά ἐστιν" 
walking were troubled, saying, An apparition itis: 
καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ φόβου ἔκραξαν. 27 “εὐθέως".δὲ ἐλάλησεν “αὐ- 
“to 


and through fear they cried out. But immediately “spoke 
τοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς," λέγων, Θαρσεῖτε, ἐγώ.εἰμι, μὴ φοβεῖσθε. 
*them + Jesus, saying, Be of good courage, Iam {he}, fear not. 


28 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς δὲ fair ὁ ἹΤέτρος εἶπεν," Κύριε, εἰ σὺ εἴ, 
And answering him Peter said, Lord, if itbethou, 


κέλευσόν με ἔπρός σε ἐλθεῖν" ἐπὶ τὰ ὕδατα. 29 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν, 


bid me “to ‘thee *to?come upon the waters. And he said, 
Ἔλθε. Καὶ καταβὰς ἀπὸ τοῦ πλοίου "δ' Πέτρος περιεπά- 
Come. And having descendedfrom the ship Peter walk- 


τησεν ἐπὶ τὰ ὕδατα, ᾿ἐλθεῖν" πρὸς τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν. 30 βλέπων. δὲ 
Jesus. But seeing 


ed upon the waters, to go to 

τὸν ἄνεμον "ἰσχυρὸν ἐφοβήθη, καὶ ἀρξάμενος καταπον- 
the wind strong he wasaffrighted, and beginning to 
τίζεσθαι ἔκραξεν, λέγων, Κύριε, σῶσόν pe. 31 Εὐθέως. δὲ 
sink he cried out, saying, Lord, save me. And immediately 


THY χεῖρα ἐπελάβετο αὐτοῦ, Kai λέγει 

Jesus having stretchedout the hand took hold of him, and says 

τ παιδίων καὶ γυναικῶν L. 4 — εὐθέως τ. t — ὁ Ἰησοῦς (read 
v¥ — αὐτοῦ (ead the disciples) arrraw. w — τὸ (reada 


cc? ~ ? , 
0 Ἰησοῦς εκτείνας 


2 — 6 Ἰησοὺς (read he went) ΟἸΤΥΓΑΎΝ. ἃ rv θάλασσαν 
ς τῆς θαλάσσης LTTra, 
fo Πέτρος 


h — oOLTora, {kat ἦλθεν and he weit 2, 


XIV, XV. MATTHEW. 
αὐτῷ, ‘Odtyomare, εἰς τί ἐδίστασας; 32 Kai Ἰἐμβάντων'" 
to him, O [thou] of little faith, why didst thou doubt? And *having “entered 
αὐτῶν εἰς τὸ πλοῖον ἐκόπασεν ὁ ἄνεμος" 33 οἱ. δὲ ἐν τῷ 
‘they into the ship Zceased ‘the 7wind. Andthose in the 
πλοίῳ ᾿πἐλθόντες" προσεκύνησαν αὐτῷ, λέγοντες, ᾿Αληθῶς 
ship having come worshipped him, saying, Truly 
θεοῦ υἱὸς εἶ. 
508 ?God ‘Son thou art! 
34 Kui διαπεράσαντες ἦλθον “sic! τὴν γῆν" ῬΓεννησαρέτ." 
And having passed over theycame to the land of Gennesaret. 
Bd καὶ ἐπιγνόντες αὐτὸν οἱ ἄνδρες τοῦ.τόπου.ἐκείνου ἀπέ- 
And havingrecognized him the men of that place sent 
στειλαν εἰς ὕλην τὴν.περίχωρον ἐκείνην, καὶ προσήνεγκαν αὐτῷ 
to all that country round, and brought to him 
πάντας τοὺς κακῶς ἔχοντας" 36 καὶ παρεκάλουν αὐτὸν iva 


411 those who were ill; and besought him that 

μόνον ἅψωνται τοῦ κρασπέδου τοῦ ἱματίου.αὐτοῦ καὶ 

only they might touch the border of his garment ; and 
ὅσοι ἥψαντο διεσώθησαν. 


8,5 many as touched were cured. 


15 Tore προσέρχονται τῷ Ἰησοῦ “οἱ! ἀπὸ ἹἹεροσολύμων 
Then come to Jesus the *from 5 Jerusalem 
r. oe i Φ Tare λέ 238A Al es Oy 4 
γραμματεῖς καὶ Φαρισαῖοι," λέγοντες, tari οἱ μαθηταί 
scribes 7and *Pharisees, saying, Why $disciples 
σου παραβαίνουσιν τὴν παράδοσιν τῶν πρεσβυτέρων; οὐ 
*thy ltransgress the tradition of the elders? “not 
γὰρ νίπτονται τὰς. χεῖρας. "αὐτῶν" ὅταν ἄρτον ἐσθίωσιν. 8 Ὃ δὲ 
for *they *wash their hands when bread they eat. But he 
ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, "Διατί" Kai ὑμεῖς παραβαίνετε τὴν 
answering said tothem, Why “also ye itransgress the 
2 ‘A ~ ~ ‘ ‘ , « ~ ε AY 
ἐντολὴν τοῦ θεοῦ διὰ τὴν.παράδοσιν.ὑμῶν; 4 ὋὉ yap 
commandment of Godon account of your tradition ? For 
θεὸς "ἐνετείλατο, λέγων, Τίμα τὸν.πατέρα. “σου Kai τὴν 


God commanded, saying, Honour thy father and 
pynrépa’ καὶ Ὃ κακολογῶν πατέρα ἢ μητέρα, θανάτῳ τε- 
mother; and, He who speaksevilof father or mother, bydeath let 


λευτάτω. 5 ὑμεῖς.δὲ λέγετε, “Oc.dy εἴπῃ τῷ πατρὶ ἢ TH 


him die. But ye say, Whoever = shall say to father or 
μητρί, Δῶρον, ὃ. ἐὰν ἐξ ἐμοῦ ὠφεληθῇς, =e 
mother, [It is] agift whatever by me thou mightestbe profited—: and 


οὐ.μὴ Yryunoy" τὸν. πατέρα.αὐτοῦ τὴ τὴν. μητέρα.αὐτοῦ"" 
in no wise honour his father or his mother : 


6 καὶ ἠκυρώσατε τὴν ἐντολὴν" τοῦύθεοῦ διὰ τὴν παρά- 
and yemade void the commandment of God on account of ra- 


doow ὑμῶν. 7 Ὕποκριταί, καλῶς προεφήτευσεν! περὶ ὑμῶν 
dition ‘your. Hypocrites! well prophesied concerning you 


Ἡσαΐας, λέγων, 8 “Εγγίζει μοι! b.Aadc.obroc 4r@ στόματι 


Esaias, Saying, Draws near tome this people with *mouth 
αὐτῶν, καὶ" τοῖς. χείλεσίν pe Tig’ ἡ.δὲ καρδία. αὐτῶν πόῤῥω 
‘their, and withthelips me ᾿ἰὺ βοπμοπσβ; but their heart far 


‘avaBavrwy having gone up LTtraA. [ἃ — ἐλθόντες TLA]. 
Gennesaret) tTrr. Ρ Tevnoapéd Lw. ᾳ — ov LTTr. 
ὁ διὰ τίτττα. τ — αὐτῶν (read the hands) [tr]. 
{thy]) curtraw. χ — καὶ LTT Α]. 
μητέρα αὐτοῦ [A]. 
LTTra. ς --᾽ Εγγίζει μοι GLTTrA. 


0 ἐπὶ TTr. 
τ Φαρισαῖοι καὶ γραμματεῖς TTr. 
Y εἶπεν said Ltr. 
Υ τιμήσει Will he honour τὰ. 
8 τὸν λόγον the word Ltr; τὸν νόμον the law Ta. 
d — τῷ στόματι αὐτῶν Kal GLTTrA. 


4i 
thou of little faith, 
wherefore didst thou 
doubt? 32 And when 
they were come into 
the ship, the wind 
ceased. 33 Then they 
that were in the ship 
came and worshipped 
him, saying, Ofa truth 
thou art the Son of 
God. 


34 And when they 
were gone over, they 
came into the land of 
Gennesaret. 35 And 
when the men of that 
place had knowledge 
of him, they sent out 
into all that eountry 
round about, and 
brought unto him all 
that were diseased ; 
36 and besought him 
that they might only 
touch the hem of his 
garment: andasmany 
as touched were made 
perfectly whole. 


XV. Then came to 
Jesus scribes and 
Pharisees, which were 
of Jerusalem, saying, 
2 Why do thy disciples 
transgress the tradi- 
tion of the elders? for 
they wash not their 
hands whea they eat 
bread. 3 But he an- 
swered and said unto 
them, Why do ye also 
transgress the com- 
mandment of God by 
your tradition? 4 For 
God commanded, say- 
ing, Honour thy father 
and mother: and, He 
that curseth father or 
mother, let him die 
the death. 5 But ye 
say, Whosoever shall 
say to his father or his 
mother, Jt is a gift, 
by whatsoever thou 
mightest be profited 
by me; 6and honour 
not his father or his 
mother, he shall be 
free. Thus have ye 
made the command- 
ment of God of none 
effect by your tradi- 
tion. 7 Ye hypocrites, 
well did Esaias pro- 
phesy of you, saying, 
8 This people draweth 
nigh unto me with 
their mouth, and 
honoureth me with 
their lips; but their 
heart is far from me. 


o+ εἰς (read at 
w — gov (read 


7 — 7 τὴν 
Ὁ ἐπροφήτευσεν 


42 


9 But in vain they do 
worship me, teaching 
for doctrines the com- 
mandments of men. 
10 And he called the 
multitude, and said 
unto them, Hear, and 
understand: 11 not 
that which goeth into 
the mouth defileth a 
man; but that which 
cometh out of the 
mouth, this defileth a 
man. 


12 Then came his dis- 
ciples, and said unto 
him, Knowest thou 
that the Pharisees were 
offended, after they 
heard this saying? 
13 But he answered 
and said, Every plant, 
which my heavenly 
Father hath not plant- 
ed, shall be rooted up. 
14 Let them alone: 
they be blind leaders 
of the blind. And if 
the blind lead the 
blind, both shall fall 
into the ditch. 15 Then 
answered Peter and 
said unto him, Declare 
unto us this parable. 
16 And Jesus said, Are 
ye also yet without 
understanding? 17 Do 
not ye yet understand, 
that whatsoever enter- 
eth in at the mouth 
goeth into the belly, 
and is cast out into 
the draught? 18 But 
those things which 
proceed out of the 
mouth come _ forth 
from the heart; and 
they defile the man. 
19 For out of the heart 
proceed evil thoughts, 
murders, adulteries, 
fornications, _ thefts, 
false witness, blasphe- 
mies: 20 these are the 
things which defile a 
man: but to eat with 
unwashen hands de- 
fileth not a man, 


21 Then Jesus went 
thence, and departed 
into the coasts of Tyre 
and Sidon. 22 And, 
behold, a woman of 
Canaan came out of 
the same coasts, and 
cried unto him, say- 
ing, Have mercy on 
me, O Lord, thou son 
of David; my daugh- 
ter is grievously vexed 
witb a devil. 23 But 
he answered her not a 
word, And his disci- 


© — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) Lra. 
® — ταύτην (read the parable) rma]. 
l ἔκραζεν Ltr; ἔκραξεν T. 


WAST OA TOS. 
ἀπέχει am’ ἐμοῦ. 9 
isaway from me: {as} 


διδασκαλίας ἐντάλματα TIED 10 Καὶ προσκαλεσάμενος 
teachings injunctions of men. And having called to [him] 


11 οὐ 


ποῦ 


κοινοῖ τὸν ἄνθρωπον" 
defiles the man ; 


στόματος, τοῦτο κοινοῖ 
mouth, this defiles 


XV. 


’ A , / ᾽ 
pence σέβονταί με, διδάσκοντες 
αὖ ἴῃ vain they worship me, teaching 


καὶ συνίετε. 
and understand ! 


4 wn” ᾽ ~ ᾽ 2 
τὸν ὄχλον εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, ᾿Ακούετε 
the crowd he said to them, Hear 

TO εἰσερχόμενον εἰς TO στόμα 
that which enters into the mouth 
ἀλλὰ τὸ ἐκπορευόμενον ἐκ τοῦ 
but that which goes forth out of the 


τὸν ἄνθρωπον. 
the man. 

12 Τότε προσελθόντες _ot-wadnraiabrov! fefrov'" αὐτῷ, 
Then having come to [him] his disciples said to him, 


Oldac Ort ot Φαρισαῖοι ἀκούσαντες τὸν λόγον ἐσκανδαλί- 
Knowestthouthat the Pharisees having heard the saying were of- 


σθησαν; 13 ὁ.δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν, Πᾶσα φυτεία ἣν οὐκ 
fended ? Buthe answering said, Every plant which Snot 
ἐφύτευσεν ὁ πατήριμου ὁ.οὐράνιος, ἐκριζωθήσεται. 14 ἄφετε 
Shas planted ‘my 7Father *the*heavenly, shall be rootedup. Leave 
αὐτούς" δὸδηγοί εἰσιν τυφλοὶ! τυφλῶν" τυφλὸς δὲ τυφλὸν 
them ; *leaders ‘they are *blind of blind; “blind ‘and blind 
ἐὰν ὁδηγῦ; ἀμφότεροι εἰς βόθυνον πεσοῦνται. 15 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ 
3: ‘lead, oth into apit will fall. And answering 
ὁ Πέτρος εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Φράσον ἡμῖν τὴν.παραβολὴν."ταύτην.ἵ 
Peter said tohim, Expound tous this parable. 
16 ‘0.6&? Inootc' εἶπεν,᾿Ακμὴν καὶ ὑμεῖς ἀσύνετοί ἐστε; 
But Jesus said, “Still also e ‘without Sunderstanding ‘are? 
17 Εοὔύπω! νοεῖτε Ore πᾶν τὸ εἰσπορευόμενον εἰς τὸ 
Ξηοὺ “γοῦ ‘perceive *ye that everything which enters into the 
, ? A / ~ ‘ ᾽ , ~ ? , 
στόμα εἰς THY κοιλίαν χωρεῖ, Kai εἰς αφεδρῶνα ἐκβάλλεται; 
mouth into the belly goes, and into[the] draught is cast forth? 


18 ᾿τὰ-δὲ ἐκπορευόμενα ἐκ τοῦ στόματος ἐκ τῆς 
But the things which go forth out of the mouth out of the 


καρδίας ἐξέρχεται, κἀκεῖνα κοινοῖ τὸν ἄνθρωπον. 19 ἐκ.γὰρ 
heart come forth, andthese defile the man. For out of 
τῆς καρδίας ἐξέρχονται διαλογισμοὶ πονηροί, φόνοι, μοιχεῖαι, 
the heart come forth *reasonings evil, murders, adulteries, 
πορνεῖαι, κλοπαί, ψευδομαρτυρίαι. βλασφημίαι. 20 ταῦτά 


fornications, thefts, false-witnessings, blasphemies. These things 
ἐστιν τὰ κοινοῦντα τὸν ἄνθρωπον᾽ τὸ δὲ ἀνίπτοις 
are they which defile the man; but the with “unwashed 


χερσὶν φαγεῖν οὐ.κοινοὶ τὸν ἄνθρωπον. 
*hands ‘eating defiles ποὺ the man, 


21 Kai ἐξελθὼν ἐκεῖθεν ὁ ᾿Γησοῦς ἀνεχώρησεν εἰς τὰ μέρη 


And going forth thence Jesus withdrew to the parts 
Τύρου καὶ Σιδῶνος. 22 καὶ ἰδού, γυνὴ Χαναναία απὸ 
of Tyre and Sidon; and behold, a*woman ‘Cananran from 


τῶν ὁρίων. ἐκείνων ἐξελθοῦσα ἱἐκραύ "πα χύτῷ,! λέ 
-ὁρίων. ραύυγασεν" αύτῳ," λέγουσα, 
those borders having come out cried to him, saying, 
"EXénody με, κύριε, "υἱὲ Δαβίδ"! ἡ.θυγάτηριμου κακῶς δαι- 
Have pity on me, Lord, Son of David; my daughter miserably is pos- 
μονίζεται. 23 Ὁ δὲ οὐκ.απεκρίθη αὐτῇ λόγον. καὶ προσ- 
sessed by a demon. But he answered*not ‘her aword. And having 


' λέγουσιν say LTTrA. € τυφλοί εἰσιν ὁδηγοὶ LTr. 
᾿ i — "Ingots (read he said)urtra. ἔ οὐ not urtr. 
™ —@vTO LTTrA. δ υἱὲ Aavid GW; υἱὸς Δαυείδ LrTra. 


xy. MATTHEW 
eAOovrec οἱ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ “ἠρώτων, αὐτόν, λέγοντες, 
come to [ato his disciples asked him, saying, 


᾿Απόλυσον αὐτήν, ὅτι κράζει ὄπισθεν ἡμῶν" 24 ὋὉ δὲ ἀποκρι- 
Dismiss her, for she cries after us. But he answer- 


θεὶς εἶπεν, Οὐκ.ἀπεστάλην εἰ. μὴ εἰς τὰ πρόβατα τὰ ἀπολωλότα 


ing said, Iwas not sent except to the sheep the lost 
οἴκου ‘lopand. 25 ‘H.dé ἐλθοῦσα προσεκύνει αὐτῷ, 
of [the] house of Israel. But she havingcome didhomage to him, 


λέγουσα, Κύριε, βοήθει por. 26 ὋὉ.δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν, Οὐκ 


saying, Lord, help mel But he anewering said, Not 


ΡῬἔστιν καλὸν! λαβεῖν τὸν ἄρτον τῶν τέκνων, Kai βαλεῖν 
it 15. good totake the bread ofthe children, and _ tocast [it] 


τοῖς κυναρίοις. 27 ‘H.dé εἶπεν, Nat, κύριε" καὶ. γὰρ τὰ κυν ἄρτα 
tothe little dogs. Butshe said, Yea, Lord: foreven the little dogs 


ἐσθιει ἀπὸ τῶν ψιχίων τῶν πιπτόντων ἀπὸ τῆς τραπέζης 
eat of the crumbs which fall from the table 


τῶν.κυριων.αὐτῶν. 28 Tore ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτῇ, 
of their masters, Then answering Jesus said to her, 


Ὦ γύναι, μεγάλη cov ἡ πίστις" γενηθήτω σοι ὡς θέλεις. 


O woman, ae [15] thy faith : be it to thee as thou desirest. 
Kai ἰάθη ἡ.θυγάτηρ.αὐτῆς ἀπὸ τῆς.ὥρας ἐκείνης. 
And was healed her daughter from that hour, 


29 Kai μεταβὰς ἐκεῖθεν ὁ Inoove ἦλθεν παρὰ τὴν θάλασ- 
And having departed thence Jesus came towards the sea 


σαν τῆς Γαλιλαίας" καὶ ἀναβὰς εἰς τὸ ὄρος ἐκάθητο 
of Galilee ; and having gone up into the mountain he was sitting 


ἐκεῖ. 30 καὶ προσῆλθον αὐτῷ ὄχλοι πολλοί, ἔχοντες μεθ᾽ 


there. And came tohim *crowds ‘great, Gee απ with 


ἑαυτῶν χωλούς, τυφλούς, κωφούς. κυλλούς, καὶ ἑτέρους πολ- 
them lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and “others ‘many, 


λούς, καὶ “ἔῤῥιψαν! αὐτοὺς παρὰ τοὺς πόδας ττοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ"" 
and they cast down them at the feet of Jesus, 


kai ἐθεράπευσεν αὐτούς: 31 ὥστε "τοὺς ἔχλους" θαυμάσαι, 


and he healed them ; sothat the erowds wondered, 
βλέποντας κωφοὺς λαλοῦντας, κυλλοὺς ὑγιεῖς, " χωλοὺς περι- 
seeing dumb speaking, maimed sound, lame walk- 


πατοῦντας, καὶ eM DU βλέποντας καὶ "ἐδόξασαν" τὸν θεὸν 
d 


ing, and bliin seeing ; and they glorified the’ God 
Ἰσραήλ. 32 Ο.δὲ. Ἰησοῦς προσκαλεσάμενος τοὺς μαθητὰς 
of Israel. But Jesus having calledto [him] disciples 


αὐτοῦ εἶπεν, Σπλαγχνίζομαι ἐπὶ τὸν ὄχλον, Or. ἤδη 


‘ier poe Iam moved withcompassion towardsthe crowd, because already 
"ἡμέρας" τρεῖς τι οσμένουσίν μοι, καὶ οὐκιἔχουσιν τί φάγω- 
days ‘three theycontinue withme,and havenot what eee may 


σιν" καὶ ἀπολῦσαι αὐτοὺς νήστεις οὐ.θέλω, μήποτε ἐκλυθῶσιν 
eat; and tosendaway them fasting Iamnotwilling, lest they faint 


ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ. 33 Kai λέγουσιν αὐτῷ οἱ. μαθηταὶ χαὐτοῦ," Πόθεν 

He the way. And say *to ®him this disciples, Whence 
ἡμῖν ἔν ἐρημίᾳ ἄρτοι τοσοῦτοι ὥστε χορτάσαι ὄχλον τοσοῦτον ; 

tous in adesert loaves so many as to aetieey acrowd so great? 


34 Kai λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Πόσους a ἄρτους ἔχετε; Οἱ. δὲ 
And *says “to *them ‘Jesus, Howmany loaves haveye? Andthey 


εἶπον, Ἕπτά, καὶ ὀλίγα ἰχθύδια. 85 Kai Τἐκέλευσεν τοῖς 


48 
ples came and be- 
sought him, saying, 


Send her away; for she 
crieth after us. 24 But 
he answered and said, 
I am not sent but unto 
the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel. 25 Then 
came she and worship- 
ped him, saying, Lord, 
help me. 26 But he 
answered and said, It 
is not meet to take the 
children’s bread, and 
to cast it to "dogs. 
27 And she said, Truth, 
Lord : yet the dogs eat 
of the crumbs which 
fall from their mas- 
ters’ table. 28 Then 
Jesus answered and 
said unto her, O wo- 
man, great is thy faith: 
be it unto thee even as 
thou wilt. And her 
daughter was made 
whole from that very 
hour, 


29 And Jesus depart- 
ed from thence, and 
came nigh unto the sea 
of Galilee; and went 
up into a mountain, 
and sat down there, 
30 And great multi- 
tudes came unto him, 
having with them those 
that were lame, blind. 
dumb, maimed, and 
many others, and cast 
them down at Jesus’ 
feet; and he healed 
them: 31 insomuch that 
the multitude wonder- 
ed, when they saw the 
dumb to speak, the 
maimed to be whole, 
the lame to walk, and 
the blind to see: and 
they glorified the God 
of IsraeL 32 Then 
Jesus called his disci- 
ples unio him, and said, 
I have compassion on 
the multitude, because 
they continue with me 
now three days, and 
have nothing to eat: 
and I will not send 
them away fasting, 
lest they faint in the 
way. 33 And his dis- 
ciples say unto him, 
Whence should we 
have so much bread in 
the wilderness, as to 
fill so great a multi- 
tude? ὁ: And Jesus 
saith unto them, How 
many loaves have ye? 
And they said, Seven, 
and a few little fishes, 
35 And he commanded 


said, Seven, and afew small fishes. And hecommanded the the multitude to sit 
ο ηρώτουν LTTra. Ρ ἔξεστιν it is allowed LTA. 4 ἔριψαν τε τ αὐτοῦ of him xTtrA. 5 τὸν 
ὄχλον the crowd Ta. ἴ + καὶ and urtra. ἡ ἐδόξαζον τ. “' ἡμέραι GLITrAW. * — αὐτοῦ 


(read the disciples) [u}a{trJa. 


Υ παραγγείλας τῷ ὄχλῳ having commanded the crowd Lrrr. 


φᾷ 


down on the ground, 
36 And he took the 
seven loaves and the 
fishes,and gave thanks, 
and brake them, and 
gave to his disciples, 
and the disciples to the 
multitude. 37 And 
they did all eat, and 
were filled: and they 
took up of the broken 
meat that was left 
seven baskets full. 
38 And they that did 
eat were four thousand 
men, beside women 
and children. 39 And 
he sent away the mul- 
titude, and took ship, 
and came into the 
coasts of Magdala. 


XVI. The Pharisees 
also with the Saddu- 
cees came, and tempt- 
ing desired him that 
he would shew them a 
sign from heaven. 
2 He answered and 
said unto them, When 
it is evening, ye say, 
Lt will be fair weather: 
for the sky is red, 
3 And in the morning, 
It will be foul weather 
to day: for the sky is 
red and lowring. O ye 
hypocrites, ye can dis- 
cern the face of the 
sky ; but can ye not 
discern the signs of the 
times? 4 A wicked and 
adulterous generation 
seeketh after a sign; 
and there shall no sign 
be given unto it, but 
thesign of the prophet 
Jonas, And he left 
them, and departed. 

5 And when his dis- 
ciples were come to the 
other side, they had 
forgotten to take 
bread. 6 Then Jesus 
said unto them, Take 
heed and beware of 
the leaven of the Pha- 
risees and of the Sad- 
ducees. 7 And they 
reasoned among them- 
selves, saying, Jt is be- 
cause we have taken 
no bread. 8 Which 
when Jesus perceived, 
he said unto them, O 
ye of little faith, why 
reason ye among your- 
selves, because ye have 
brought no bread? 
9 Do ye not yet under- 
stand, neither remem- 
ber the five loaves of 


MATOAIOS. XV; 5 


» ἢ > ~ ᾽ ‘ ‘ nee 6 Z ‘ aN 4 Π 4 c A 
ὄχλοις! ἀναπεσεῖν ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν" 36 καὶ λαβὼν!" τοὺς ἑπτὰ 
crowds to recline on the ground; and havingtaken the seven 
ἄρτους καὶ τοὺς ἰχθύας," εὐχαριστήσας ἔκλασεν καὶ ἔδωκεν" 


loaves and the fishes, having given thanks he broke and gave 
τοῖς.μαθηταῖς."αὐτοῦ," οἱ. δὲ μαθηταὶ τῷ ὄχλῳ." 37 Kai 
to his disciples, andthe disciples tothe crowd. And 
ἔφαγον πάντες, καὶ ἐχορτάσθησαν Kai “ἦραν τὸ περισ- 
1 


2ate all, and weresatisfied; and they tookup that which was over 


σεῦον τῶν κλασμάτων" ἑπτὰ σπυρίδας πλήρεις: 98 οἱ.δὲ 
andabove ofthe fragments seven baskets 1: and they who 


ἐσθίοντες ἦσαν τετρακισχίλιοι ἄνδρες, χωρὶς 'γυναικῶν καὶ 


ate were four thousand men, besides women and 
παιδίων." 39 Kai ἀπολύσας τοὺς ὄχλους FivéBy' εἰς τὸ 
children. And having dismissed the crowds he entered into the 


πλοῖον, καὶ ἦλθεν εἰς τὰ ὅρια "Maydada.' 


ship, and came to the borders of Magdala. 
16 Kai προσελθόντες ot Φαρισαῖοι καὶ Σαδδουκαῖοι 
And havingcometo([him]the Pharisees and Sadducees 
πειράζοντες ἐπηρώτησαν" αὐτὸν σημεῖον ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ 
tempting [him] asked him asign outof the heaven 
ἐπιδεῖξαι αὐτοῖς. 2 6.02 ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, * Oviag 
to shew them. But he answering said tothem, Evening 
γενομένης λέγετε, Evdta: πυῤΡῥάξει. γὰρ ὁ οὐρανός. 3 καὶ 
having come yesay, Fine weather; for *is ‘re ‘the heaven. And 


πρωΐ, Σήμερον xepwy' πυῤῥάζει.γὰρ στυγνάζων ὁ οὐρανός. 
atmorning, ‘lo-day astorm; for 518 *red Slowering ‘the “heaven. 
ιὑποκριταί. τὸ μὲν πρόσωπον τοῦ οὐρανοῦ γινώσκετ 
Hypocrites! the ‘indeed 1face 20f *the *heaven ye know [how] 
διακρίνειν, τὰ.δὲ σημεῖα τῶν καιρῶν οὐ-.-δύνασθε:" 4 γενεὰ 
to discern, but the signs ofthe times ye cannot ! A generatior 
πονηρὰ καὶ μοιχαλὶς σημεῖον ἐπιζητεῖ" καὶ σημεῖον οὐ.δοθή- 
wicked and aduterous asign seeks, and asign shall not be 
σεται αὐτῇ, εἰμὴ τὸ σημεῖον ᾿Ιωνᾶ “τοῦ προφήτου." Kai 
given toit, except the sign of Jonas’ the prophet. And 


καταλιπὼν αὐτοὺς. ἀπῆλθεν. 
leaving them he went away. 


5 Kai ἐλθόντες οἱ. μαθηταὶ. "αὐτοῦ" εἰς τὸ πέραν ἐπελάθοντο 


And *having* come *his *disciples to the otherside they forgot 
ἄρτους λαβεῖν. 6 ὁ.δὲ. Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Opare καὶ προσ- 
“loaves ‘to “take. And Jesus said to them, See and be- 


, ᾽ 4 ~ ’ὔ ~ 7 ‘A , « 4 
ἔχετε ἀπὸ τῆς ζύμης τῶν Φαρισαίων καὶ Σαδδουκαίων. 7 Οἱ.δὲ 
ware of the leaven ofthe Pharisees and Sadducees, And they 


διελογίζοντο ἐν ἑαυτοῖς, λέγοντες, Ὅτι ἄρτους οὐκ ἐλά- 


reasoned among themselves, saying, Because loaves “not 1we 
βομεν. ὃ Ρνοὺς δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν οαὐτοῖς, Ti δια- 
“took. And having known [this] Jesus said tothem, Why  rea- 
λογίζεσθε ἐν ἑαυτοῖς; ὀλιγόπιστοι, ὅτι ἄρτους οὐκ 
son ye among yourselves, O([yeJof little faith, because loaves “not 
PéhaBere;' 9. οὔπω.νοεῖτε, οὐδὲ μνημονεύετε τοὺς πέντε 
tye 7took? Do ye not yet perceive, nor remember the five 


* ἔλαβεν he took urrr. 


[uJaftr Ja. 
i ἐπηρώτων 1. 
and 1,. 

GLTTra, 


4 τοῖς ὄχλοις to the crowds Trra. 

παιδίων καὶ γυναικῶν τ. 

k’OWias ... 

™ — χρῦ προφήτου LTTrA. 
P ἔχατε yo have L. 


® + καὶ and LT. © — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) 


Ὁ ἐδίδου Trr. 
ὁ τὸ περισσεῦον τῶν κλασμάτων ἦραν LTTrA. 
& ἀνέβη he went up @tTraw. h Μαγαδάν Magadan Lrtra. 
. to end of verse 8 [TA]. 1— ὑποκριταί UTTrA; + Kat 


Ὁ — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) nrtra,. ο — αὐτοῖς 


XVI. MATTHEW. 


ἄρτους τῶν πεντακισχιλίων, Kai πόσους κοφίνους ἐλάβετε; 
loaves of the five thousand, and how many hand-baskets ye took [up]? 


10 οὐδὲ τοὺς ἑπτὰ ἄρτους THY τετρακισχιλίων, καὶ πόσας 


nor the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many 
q ΄, Π > , ~ ? ~ ev > ‘ 
σπυρίδας" ἐλάβετε, 11 πῶς ov-vosire ὕτι οὐ περὶ 
baskets yetook [up]? How perceive ye not that not concerning 


τἄρτου" εἶπον ὑμῖν "προσέχειν" ἀπὸ τῆς ζύμης τῶν Φαρισαίων 
bread Ispoke toyou ἔο beware of the leaven ofthe Pharisees 
καὶ Σαδδουκαίων; 12 Τότε συνῆκαν ὅτι οὐκ.εἶπεν προσέχειν 
and Sadducees ? Then they understood that hesaidnot to beware 
ard τῆς ζύμης 'τοῦ ἄρτου." YadX" ἀπὸ τῆς διδαχῆς τῶν 
of the leaven of bread, but of the teaching of the 


Φαρισαίων καὶ Σαδδουκαίων. ὲ 
Pharisees and Sadducees. 

13 ᾿Ελθὼν. δὲ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἰς τὰ μέρη Καισαρείας τῆς 
And “having *come 1Jesus into the parts of Cesarea 
Φιλίππου ἠρώτα τοὺς: μαθὴτ ἀξ ai Ov, λέγων, Τίνα *pe 
Philippi he questioned is disciples, saying, Whom ‘*me 


λέγουσιν οἱ. ἄνθρωποι εἶναι τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου; 14 Οἱ. δὲ 
*do *pronounce =men ®to}°be δέ *Son Τοῦ "man? And they 
*elzov," Ot_piv ᾿Ιωάννην τὸν βαπτιστήν' Τἄάλλοι" δὲ “HXiav'! 
said, Some John the Baptist ; and others Elias ; 
e δὲ c ’ nx e ~ —~ , > ~ a 
érepor.cée Ἱερεμίαν, ἢ Eva τῶν προφητῶν. 15 Λέγει αὐτοῖς, 
Δα others Jeremias, or one ofthe prophets. He says to them, 
‘Ypsic.dé riva pe λέγετε εἶναι; 16 Β᾽Αποκριθεὶς. δὲ" Σί- 
ut ye whom *me ‘do *ye *pronounce to be? And answering Si- 
μων Πέτρος εἶπεν, Σὺ εἶ ὁ yousrdc, ὁ vide τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ 
mon Peter said, Thou art the ist, the Son of God the 
ζῶντος. 17 “Καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς" ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Μακάριος 


living. And answering Jesus said to him, Blessed 
el, Σίμων *Bap Ἰωνᾶ," ὅτι σὰρξ καὶ αἷμα οὐκ.ἀπεκάλυψέν 
art thou, Simon Bar-Jonas, for flesh and blood revealed [it] not 
AX’ c ΄ ε > e ~ Il > ~ > ‘ δὲ 
σοι, α ὁ-πατήρ.μου ὁ ἐν “τοῖο! οὐρανοῖς. 18 Κάγω.δὲε 


to thee, but the And I also 
la .“ ‘ > , δὶς 9 ‘ ~ , 2 
σοι λέγω, OTe ov el Πέτρος, καὶ ἐπὶ ταύτῃ TY πέτρᾳ οἰκοδο- 
tothee say, Thatthouart Peter, and on this rock Twill 
τιον μου τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, καὶ πύλαι ἅδου οὐ.κατισχύσουσιν 
uild my assembly, and gates of hades shall not prevail against 
αὐτῆς. 19 καὶ! δώσω σοὶ τὰς βκλεῖς" τῆς βασιλείας τῶν 
it. And I will give to thee the keys ofthe kingdom οἵ the 
> AA te +a ho Il ΄ TATA ~ ~ »” δ ὃ , 
OUpaVwY" Kal Ὁ."εᾶν δήσῃς ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ἔσται δεδεμένον 
heavens: and whatever thoumayest bindon the earth,shallbe bound 
ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς" καὶ ὃ ἐὰν! λύσῃς ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ἔσται 
in the heavens; and whatever thoumayestloose on the earth, shallbe 
λελυμένον ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς. 20 Τότε διεστείλατο" τοῖς μαθη- 
ΞΕ 


my Father who [is] in heavens. 


loosed in the heavens. Then charged he ‘dis- 
ταῖς ἰἸαὐύτοῦ! ἵνα μηδενὶ εἴπωσιν ὅτι αὐτός ἐστιν ™ Ἰησοῦς" 
ciples ‘*his that tonoone they should say that he is Jesus 
ὁ χριστός. 
the Christ. 


45 


the five thousand, and 
how many baskets ye 
took up? 10 Neither 
the seven loaves of the 
four thousand, and 
how many baskets ye 
took up? 11 How is 
it that ye do not un- 
derstand that I spake 
it not to you concern- 
ing bread, that ye 
should beware of the 
leaven of the Pharisees 
and of the Sadducees? 
12 Then understood 
they how that he bade 
them not beware of 
the leaven of bread, 
but of the doctrine of 
the Pharisees and of 
the Sadducees. 


13 When Jesus came 
into thecoasts of Cz- 
sarea Philippi,he asked 
his disciples, saying, 
Whom do mensay that 
I the Son of man am? 
14 And they said, Some 
say that thouart John 
the Baptist: some, E- 
lias ; and others. Jere- 
mias, or one of the 
prophets. 15 He saith 
unto them, But whom 
say ye that I am? 
16 And Simon Peter 
answered and said, 
Thou art the Christ, 
the Son of the living 
God. 17 And Jesus 
answered and said un- 
to him, Blessed art 
thou, Simon Bar-jona: 
for flesh and blood 
hath not revealed tt 
unto thee, but my 
Father which is in 
heaven. 18 And I say 
also unto thee, That 
thou art Peter, and 
upon this rock I will 
build my church; and 
the gates of hell shall 
not prevail against it. 
19 And I will give un- 
to thee the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven: 
and whatsoever thou 
shalt bind on earth 
shall be bound in hea- 
ven: and whatsoever 
thou shalt loose on 
earth shall be loosed 
in heaven. 20 Then 
charged he his disci- 
ples that they should 
tell no man that he 
was Jesus the Christ, 


9 σφυρίδας L. 
beware LTTra. 
Pharisees and Sadducees τ. 
- Ἡλείαν τ΄. 


τ ἄρτων loaves LTTraw. 

Υ ἀλλὰ TTrAW. * — me [{{]τττὰ. 
a + [6 Ἰησοῦς] Jesus (sa aes Ὁ καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς W. 
ἃ Βαριωνᾶ 11. 5 -- τοῖς (read [[86]} ττι}].  -- καὶ τ[Α]. 

fay tr. Κ ἐπετίμησεν he earnestly charged L. 
m — Ἰησοῦς GLTTrAW. 


® ; (the question ends at you) προσέχετε δὲ but 
τ τῶν ἄρτων of the loaves Lira ; τῶν Φαρισαίων καὶ Σαδδουκαίων of the 
χ εἶπαν LTTr. 

© ἀποκριθεὶς δὲ LTTrA. 
6 κλεῖδας LTTrA. 
'!— αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) tTTra. 


YouL. 


Β @y LTrA. 


40 


21 From that time 
forth began Jesus to 
shew unto his disciples, 
how that he must go 
unto Jerusalem, and 
suffer many things of 
the elders and chief 
ae andscribes, and 

killed, and be raised 
again the third day. 
22 Then Peter took 
him, and began to re- 
buke him, saying, Be 
it far from thee, Lord: 
this shall not be unto 
thee. 23 But heturned, 
and said unto Peter, 
Get thee behind me, 
Satan: thou art an 
offence unto me: for 
thou savourest not the 
things that be of God, 
but those that be of 
men. 24 Then said 
Jesus unto his disci- 
ples, If any man will 
come after me, let him 
deny himself, and take 
uphiscross, and follow 
me. 25 For whosoever 
will save his life shall 
lose it : and whosoever 
will lose his life for 
my sake shall find it. 
26 For what is a man 
profited, if he shall 
gain the whole world, 
and lose his own soul? 
or what shall a man 
five in exchange for 

is soul? 27 For the 
Son of man shall come 
in the glory of his 
Father with his angels; 
and then he shall re- 
ward every man ac- 
cording to his works, 
28 Verily I say unto 
you, There be some 
standing here, which 
shall not taste of 
death, till they see the 
Son of man coming in 
his kingdom. 


XVII. And after six 
days Jesus taketh 
Peter,James, and John 
his brother, and bring- 
eth them up into an 
high mountain apart, 
2 and was transfigured 
before them: and his 
face did shine as the 
sun, and his raiment 


n—oL[tr]a. 


LYUTra. 


° εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα ἀπελθεῖν LITA. 
λέγων τ, ; λέγει αὐτῷ ἐπιτιμὼν says to him rebuking [him] a. 
‘ ὠφεληθήσεται shall be profited trtra. 


MATOAIOS. XVI, XVII. 


21 ᾿Απὸ τότε ἤρξατο "ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς δεικνύειν τοῖς μαθηταῖς 


From that time began Jesus to shew to disciples 
αὐτοῦ, Ore δεῖ αὐτὸν “ἀπελθεῖν εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα," καὶ 
this that itisnecessary for him togoaway to Jerusalem, and 


πολλὰ παθεῖν ἀπὸ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων Kai ἀρχιερέων Kai 
many things ὕο ΒΟΥ froma the elders and chief priests and 
γραμματέων, καὶ ἀποκτανθῆναι, καὶ τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ ἐγερθῆναι. 
scribes, and to be killed, and the third day tobe raised. 
22 καὶ προσλαβόμενος αὐτὸν ὁ Πέτρος Ῥῆἤρξατο" "ἐπιτιμᾷν 
And *having “taken Sto (*him] *him ‘Peter began to rebuke 
αὐτῷ, λέγων." Ἵλεώς σοι, κύριε: οὐ-μὴ ἔσται σοι 
him, saying, [God be] favourable to thee, Lord: in no wise shallbe to thee 
~ ε κ᾿ \ ~ ΄ inn ey 
τοῦτο. ῶ8 Ὁ. δὲ στραφεὶς εἶπεν τῷ Πέτρῳ, Ὕπαγε ὀπίσω pov, 
this. But he having turned said to Peter, Get behind me, 
σατανᾶ, σκάνδαλόν ἵμου et" ὅτι οὐ-φρονεῖς τὰ 
Satan : an offence to me thouart, for thy thoughts arenot of the things 
τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀλλὰ τὰ τῶν ἀνθρώπων. 24 Τότε ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν 
of God, but the things of men. Then Jesus said 
τοὶς.μαθηταῖς αὐτοῦ, Et τις θέλει ὀπίσω μου ἐλθεῖν, ἀπαρ- 
to his disciples, If any one desires after me tocome, et 
νησάσθω ἑαυτόν,καὶ ἀράτω τὸν.σταυρὸν. αὐτοῦ, Kai ἀκο- 
himdeny himself, and let himtake up his cross, and let 
λουθείτω μοι. 2ὅ ὃς. γὰρ."ἂν! θέλῃ τὴν-Ψυχὴν. αὐτοῦ σῶσαι, 
him follow me. For whoever may desire his life to save, 
ἀπολέσει αὐτήν ὃς.δ᾽ ἂν ἀπολέσῃ τὴν. Ψυχὴν.αὐτοῦ ἕνεκεν 
shall lose it; but whoever may lose his life on account of 
? ~ € , ? U ‘e , ‘ t > ~ I ” θ »" 
ἐμοῦ, εὑρήσει αὐτήν" 26 τί.γὰρ ᾿ὠφελεῖται" ἄνθρωπος, ἐὰν 
me, 8841} find it. For what is “profited 1a 7man, if 
τὸν κόσμον ὅλον κερδήσῃ, τὴν.δὲ. ψυχὴν.αὐτοῦ ζημιωθῇ; ἢ 
the world ‘whole ΒΘ Β'δΐῃ, and his soul lose? or 
τί δώσει ἄνθρωπος ἀντάλλαγμα τῆς.Ψψυχῆς. αὐτοῦ; 27 pédr- 
what will*give ‘a {as]an exchange for his soul? or Sis 
λει-.γὰρ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ.ἀνθρώπου ἔρχεσθαι ἐν τῇ δόξῃ τοῦ πατρὸς 
Sabout ‘the *Son Sof *man tocome in the glory ’Father 
αὐτοῦ μετὰ τῶν. ἀγγέλων. αὐτοῦ" Kai τότε ἀποδώσει ἑκάστῳ 


tof *his with his angels ; and then hewillrender to each 
4 A ~ > ~ ζ ) ‘ , « ~ v Di=y, 
κατὰ τὴν.πρᾶξιν.αὐτοῦ. 28 ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, εἰσίν 
according to his doing. Verily Isay toyou, There are 


τινες “τῶν ὧδε ἑστηκότων," οἵτινες οὐ.μὴ γεύσωνται θανάτου 


some of those here standing who innowise shalltaste of death 
ἕως ἂν ἴδωσιν τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐρχόμενον ἐν τῷ 
until they have seen the Son of man coming 


βασιλείᾳ. αὐτοῦ. 
his kingdom. 
17 Kai μεθ᾽ ἡμέρας ἐξ παραλαμβάνει ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς τὸν Πέτρον 
And after “days ‘six ‘takes *with (“him)] sJesus Peter 
kai ᾿Ιάκωβον καὶ ᾿Ιωάννην τὸν. ἀδελφὸν. αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἀναφέρει 
and James and hn his brother, and brings up 


Jo 
αὐτοὺς εἰς ὄρος ὑψηλὸν κατ᾽ ἰδίαν. καὶ μετεμορφώθη 


them into a*mountain ‘high apart. And he was transfigured 
ἔμπροσθεν αὐτῶν, καὶ ἔλαμψεν τὸ. πρόσωπον. αὐτοῦ ὡς ὁ ἥλιος; 
before them, and “shone *his *face asthe sun, 


Ῥ — ἤρξατο A. 4 αὐτῷ ἐπιτιμᾶν 
rel ἐμοῦ Lira. ® ἐὰν 
Υ ὅτι that LT. W τῶν ὧδε ἑστώτων 


Gurtra ; ὧδε εἐστῶτες W. 


XVII. MATTHEW. 


Ta.Otiparia.adrov ἐγένετο λευκὰ ὡς TO φῶς. 3 Kai ἰδού, τώφ- 
and his garments became white as the light; and behold, ‘*ap- 
θησαν" αὐτοῖς ΥΜωσῆς" cai? HXiac,' “μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ συλλαλοῦντες." 
peared ‘to*them ‘Moses 7and “Elias ‘with “him "talking. 
4 ἀποκριθεὶς.δὲ ὁ Πέτρος εἶπεν τῷ Ἰησοῦ, Κύριε. καλόν ἐστιν 
And answering Peter said to Jesus, Lord, good it is 
ἡμᾶς ὧδε εἶναι" εἰ θέλεις, ποιήσωμεν"! ὧδε τρεῖς σκηνάς, 
forus here tobe. If thouwilt, let us make here three tabernacles: 
σοὶ μίαν, καὶ “Μωσῇ! μίαν, καὶ ἁμίαν ᾿Ἡλίᾳ." 5 "Ere αὐτοῦ 
forthee one, and for Moses one, and one forElias. Whileyet he 
λαλοῦντος, ἰδού, νεφέλη φωτεινὴ"! ἐπεσκίασεν αὐτούς" Kai 
was speaking, behold, a*cloud *bright overshadowed them: and 
ἰδού, φωνὴ ἐκ τῆς νεφέλης, λέγουσα, Οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ.υἱός. μου 
lo, a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my Son 
ς 2 ᾿ ? Le fF? , ell 2g ? a τ, , Ι \ 
ὁ ἀγαπητὸς, ἕν ᾧ εὐδόκησα αὐτοῦ ἀκούετε." 6 Καὶ 
the _ beloved, in whom I havefounddelight: *him ‘hear *ye, And 
ἀκούσαντες ot μαθηταὶ *éxecor' ἐπὶ πρόσωπον.αὐτῶν, Kai 
hearing [it] the disciples fell upon their face, and 
ἐφοβήθησαν σφόδρα. 7 Kai Ἱπροσελθὼών" ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἥψατο! 
were terrified greatly. And having come to [them] Jesus touched 


αὐτῶν, ‘kai εἶπεν, ᾿Εγέρθητε, καὶ μὴ-.φοβεῖσθε. 8 Ἑπάραντες 
them, and said, ise up, and be not terrified, 7Having *lifted*up 
δὲ τοὺς. ὀφθαλμοὺς. αὐτῶν οὐδένα εἶδον εἰ μὴ τὸν Ἰησοῦν 
‘and their eyes “no tone ‘they 7saw except Jesus 
μόνον. 

alone, 


9 Kai καταβαινόντων αὐτῶν "ἀπὸ" τοῦ ὄρους ἐνετείλατο 
And as*were*descending ‘they from the mountain “charged 


? ~ Grp ~ , . ” 1, τεῦ ε πῶ ξ 
αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, λέγων, Μηδενὶ εἴπητε τὸ ὅραμα, ἕως.οὗ ὁ 


*them 1Jesus, saying, To noone tell the vision, until the 
υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐκ νεκρῶν "ἀναστῇ." 10 Καὶ ἐπη- 
Son of man from among [the] dead be risen. And 7ask- 


pwrnoay αὐτὸν οἱ. μαθηταὶ "αὐτοῦ," λέγοντες. Τί οὖν ot yoap- 
ed *him this *disciples, saying, Why then *the “scribes 


ματεῖς λέγουσιν ὅτι ῬἩλίαν" δεῖ ἐλθεῖν πρῶτον; 11 Ὁ δὲ 
1 


say that Elias must come first ἢ And 

ΦΙησοῦς! ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν ταὐτοῖς," “Ἡλίας" μὲν ἔρχεται 
Jesus answering said to them, Elias indeed comes 

ὑπρῶτον" Kai ἀποκαταστήσει πάντα 12 λέγω δὲ ὑμῖν Ore 

first and shall restore all things. But Isay to you that 

"Ἡλίας" ἤδη ἦλθεν, καὶ οὐκ.ἐπέγνωσαν αὐτόν, adr"! ἐποίη- 

Elias already iscome, and they knew not hin, but did 


σαν ἐν αὐτῷ ὅσα ἠθέλησαν" οὕτως Kai ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
to him whatever they desired. Thus alsothe Son of man 
μέλλει πάσχειν ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν. 13 Tore συνῆκαν ot μαθηταὶ ὅτι 
isabout tosutfer from them. Then understood the disciples that 
περὶ ᾿Ιωάννου τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς. 
concerning John the Baptist he spoke to them. 
14 Kai ἐλθόντων “αὐτῶν! πρὸς τὸν ὄχλον προσῆλθεν 
And *having *come 1they to the crowd °came 


x ὥφθη LTTrA. Υ Μωῦσῆς LTTraw. z ᾿Ηλείας τ. 
αὐτοῦ LTTr. ὃ ποιήσω I will make τὰ. ¢ Mwicet LTTraA; Mwiog w. 
μίαν LTTrA. © φωτὸς of light α. Γηὐδόκησα Ltr. 


LTTrA. ' προσῆλθεν came to LTTr. ι 
1—katLT. ™éx@LTtraw. 4% ἐγερθῇ be raised Lrtra. 
LTTr. P‘HAciayT. 8 -- lnaode Cread he said) LrTra, τ — αὐτοῖς LTTr[a]. 


"-- πρῶτον LITTrA, YaAAaTrA, Ὁ — αὐτῶν LTTrA. 


& ἀκούετε αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 


47 


was white as the light, 
3 And, behold, there 
appeared unto them 
Moses and Elias talk- 
ing with him. 4 Then 
answered Peter, and 
said unto Jesus, Lord, 
it is good for us to be 
here: if thou wilt, let 
us make here three 
tabernacles; one for 
thee, and one for Mo- 
ses, and one for Elias. 
5 While he yet spake, 
behold, a bright cloud 
overshadowed them: 
and behold a voice out 
ot the cloud, which 
said, This is my be- 
loved Son, in whom I 
am well pleased ; hear 
ye him. 6 And when 
the disciples heard it, 
they fell on their face, 
and were sore afraid. 
7 And Jesus came and 
touched them, and 
said, Arise, and be not 
afraid. 8 And when 
they had lifted up 
their eyes, they saw no 
man, save Jesus only. 


9 And as they came 
down from the moun- 
tain, Jesus charged 
them, saying, Tell the 
vision to no man, until 
the Son of man be 
risen again from the 
dead. 10 And his dis- 
ciples asked him, say- 
ing, Why then say the 
scribes that Elias must 
first come? 11 And Je- 
sus answered and said 
unto them, Hlias truly 
shall first come, and 
restore all _ things, 
12 But I say unto you, 
Thai Elias is come al- 
ready, and they knew 
him not, but have done 
unto him whatsoever 
they listed. Likewise 
shall also the Son of 
man suffer of them, 
13 Then the -disciples 
understood that he 
spake unto them of 
John the Baptist. 


14 And when the 
were come tothe mul- 
titude, there came to 


2 συλλαλοῦντες (συνλαλ. Τὴ) μετ᾽ 


4 “HAig Ἠλείᾳ τ) 


Β ἔπεσαν 


Κ καὶ ἁψάμενος and touching Lr; καὶ ἥψατο Tr. 
° — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) 


8 Ἡλείώας τ΄ 


48 


him a certain man, 
kneeling down to him, 
and saying, 15 Lord, 
have mercy on my son: 
for he is lunatick, and 
sore vexed: for oft- 
times he falleth into 
the fire, and oft into 
the water. 16 And 1 
brought him to thy 
disciples, and they 
could not cure him. 
17 Then Jesus answer- 
ed and said, O faith- 
less and _ perverse 
generation, how long 
shall I be with you? 
how long shall I suffer 
you? bring him hither 
to me. 18 And Jesus 
rebuked the devil; and 
he departed out of 
him: and the child 
was cured from that 
very hour. 19 Then 
came the disciples to 
Jesus apart, and said, 
Why could not we cast 
him out? 20 And Jesus 
said unto them, Be- 
cause of your unbelief : 
for verily I say unto 
you, If ye have faith 
asa grain of mustard 
seed, ye shall say unto 
this mountain, Re- 
move hence to yonder 
place; and it shall 
remove ; and nothing 
shall be impossible 
unto you. 21 Howbeit 
this kind goeth not 
out but by prayer and 
fasting. 


22 And while they 
abode in Galilee, Jesus 
said unto them, The 
Son of man shall be 
betrayed into the 
hands of men: 23 and 
they shall kill him, 
and the third day he 


shall be raised again. | 


And they were exceed- 
ing sorry. 


24 And when they 
were come to Caper- 
naum, they that re- 
ceived tribute money 
came to Peter, and 
said, Doth not your 
master pay tribute? 
25 He saith, Yes. And 
when he was come into 
the house, Jesus pre- 
vented him, saying, 
What thinkest thou, 
Simon? of whom do 
the kings of the earth 
take custom or tribute? 
of their own children, 
or of strangers? 26 Pe- 


MATOAIOX®S&. ΧΙ, 
αὐτῷ ἄνθρωπος γονυπετῶν "αὐτῷ," 15 καὶ λέγων, Κύριε, 
*to®him ‘a*man Ἐπρο]ηρ downto him, and saying, Lord, 
ἐλέησόν μου τὸν υἱόν, OTe σεληνιάζεται καὶ ἡκακῶς πάσχει" " 
have pity on my son, for heislunatic and miserably suffers: 
πολλάκις.γὰρ πίπτει sic TO πῦρ, Kai πολλάκις εἰς TO ὕδωρ. 

for often he falls into the fire, and often into the water, 
16 καὶ προσήνεγκα αὐτὸν τοῖς. μαθηταῖς. σου, Kai οὐκ.ἠδυνή- 


And I brought him to thy disciples, and they were not 
θησαν αὐτὸν θεραπεῦσαι. 17 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς. δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς sizer, 
able him to heal. And answering Jesus said, 
Ὦ γενεὰ ἄπιστος Kai διεστραμμένη, ἕως πότε *Eoopar 


O generation unbelieving and perverted, until when shall I be 


μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν" ἕως πότε ἀνέξομαι ὑμῶν ; PéspETe μοι αὐτὸν ὧδε. 
with you? until whenshalllbear with you? ring tome him here, 
"3 ΄ ᾽ “") Ἐν ΤΣ ~ \ 29~ > ? > ~ ‘ 
18 Kai ἐπετίμησεν αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, καὶ ἐξῆλθεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τὸ 
And “rebuked Shim Jesus, and wentout from him the 
δαιμόνιον, Kai ἐθεραπεύθη ὁ παῖς ἀπὸ τῆς.ὥρας ἐκείνης. 
demon, and washealed the boy from that hour. 
19 Τότε προσελθόντες οἱ μαθηταὶ τῷ Ἰησοῦ Kar ἰδίαν εἶπον, 
Then “having *come ‘the “disciples to Jesus apart said, 
"Acari! ἡμεῖς οὐκ.-ἠδυνήθημεν ἐκβαλεῖν αὐτό; 20 Ὁ. δὲ Ῥ᾽ Ἰησοῦς" 
Why “we were “notable tocast out him? And Jesus 
“εἶπεν! αὐτοῖς, Διὰ τὴν ἀπιστίαν" ὑμῶν. ἀμὴν.γὰρ λέγω 


said to them, Because of *unbelief ‘your. For verily I say 
ὑμῖν, ἐὰν ἔχητε πίστιν ὡς κόκκον σινάπεως, ἐρεῖτε TY ὄρει 


toyou, If yehave faith as agrain of mustard, yeshallsay “mountain 
τούτῳ, “Μετάβηθι ἐντεῦθεν" ἐκεῖ, καὶ μεταβήσεται" καὶ οὐδὲν 
to “this, Remove hence thither, and it shallremove; and nothing 
ἀδυνατήσει ὑμῖν. 21 ἰτοῦτο.δὲ. τὸ. γένος οὐκ.ἐκπορεύεται 
shall be impossible to you. But this kind goes not out 
εἰ μὴ ἐν προσευχῇ καὶ νηστείᾳ." 
except by prayer and fasting. 
22 δ᾿ Αναστρεφομένων".δὲ αὐτῶν ἐν τῇ Γαλιλαίᾳ, εἶπεν αὐτοῖς 
And while “were “abiding ‘they in Galilee, *said *to*them 
ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Μέλλει ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου παραδίδοσθαι εἰς 
Jesus, *is about *the °Son 7of “man to be delivered up into 
χεῖρας ἀνθρώπων, 23 Kai ἀποκτενοῦσιν αὐτόν, Kai τῇ τρίτῳ 
{the} hands of men, and they will kill him; and the thir 
ἡμέρᾳ "ἐγερθήσεται." Kai ἐλυπήθησαν σφόδρα. 
day he shall be raised up. And they were grieved greatly. 
24 ᾿Ελθόντων.δὲ αὐτῶν εἰς ἹΚαπερναοὺμ'᾽ προσῆλθον οἱ 
And*having*come ‘they to Capernaum ®came ‘those “why 
Ta δίδραχμα λαμβάνοντες τῷ Πέτρῳ Kai ‘sizror,' Ὁ διδάσ-- 
*the °didrachmas *received to Peter and said, *Teach- 
καλος ὑμῶν οὐ.τελεῖ ἱτὰ" δίδραχμα; 25 Λέγει, Nat. Kai 
er ‘your does he not pay the didrachmas? He says, Yes. And 
™ore εἰσῆλθεν! εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν προέφθασεν αὐτὸν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, 
when heentered into the house “anticipated Shim *Jesus, 
λέγων, Τί σοι.δοκεῖ, Σίμων ; ot βασιλεῖς τῆς γῆς ἀπὸ τίνων 
saying, What thinkestthou, Simon? The kings ofthe earth from - whom 
λαμβάνουσιν τέλη ἢ κῆνσον; ἀπὸ τῶν.υἱῶν. αὐτῶν, ἢ ἀπὸ 
do they receive customor tribute? from their sons, or from 


* αὐτόν GLTTrAW. 
b — Ἰησοῦς LTTrA. 


ἔνθεν LITA, f 
5 ἀναστήσεται he shall rise again x. 


% μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν ἔσομαι LITrA. ἃ διὰ τί LTTrAW. 
ἃ δλιγοπιστίαν little faith στιὰ, ὃ Μετάβα 
ε Συστρεφομένων Were abiding together trrr. 
ἱ Καφαρναοὺμ Lar-aw. Κὶ εἶπαν τττὰ. 1 -- τὰ 1. 


Υ κακῶς ἔχει is ill Lor. 
¢ λέγει he Says LTTra. 
— verse 21 1[ Tra]. 


™ εἰσελθόντα eutering LT; ἐλθόντα having come Tra. 


Vind px VIII. MATTHE W. 

τῶν ἀλλοτρίων ; 26 "Λέγει αὐτῷ" “ὁ Πέτρος," ᾿Απὸ τῶν ἀλ- 
the strangers? "says *to*him Peter, From the stran- 
λοτρίων. “Epn αὐτῷ ὁ Ιησοῦς, Ῥ΄Αραγεὶ ἐλεύθεροί εἰσιν οἱ 
gers. 2said *to*him 4Jesus, Then indeed _ free are the 


υἱοί. 27 ἵνα.δὲ pyAccavdadiowper' αὐτούς, πορευθεὶς εἰς 
sons, But that we may not offend them, having gone ‘to 


τὴν! θάλασσαν βάλε ἄγκιστρον, Kai τὸν ἀναβάντα πρῶτον 


the sea cast a hook, and the *%coming *up first 
ἰχθὺν ἄρον' καὶ ἀνοίξας  1d.ordpa.abrov εὑρήσεις στα- 
fish take, and having opened its mouth thou shalt find a sta- 


τῆρα᾽ ἐκεῖνον λαβὼν δὸς αὐτοῖς ἀντὶ ἐμοῦ Kai σοῦ. 
ter; that havingtaken give tothem for me and thee, 
? ? / ~ 5 [2 Ι ΛΘ c θ ‘ ~ a ~ 
18 Ἐν ἐκείνῃ TY "ὥρᾳ" προσῆλθον οἱ μαθηταὶ τῷ [Ιησοῦ, 
In that hour came the disciples to Jesus, 
λέγοντες, Tic ἄρα μείζων ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τῶν οὐ- 
saying, Whothen([*the]“greater ‘is in the kingdom ofthe hea- 
ρανῶν; 2 Kai προσκαλεσάμενος ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦςϊ παιδίον, ἔστησεν 
vens ? And *having *called *to [°him} 1Jesus alittlechild, he set 
αὐτὸ ἐν μέσῳ.αὐτῶν, 8 καὶ εἶπεν, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ἐὰν. μὴ 
it in their midst, and said, Verily Isay toyou, Unless 
στραφῆτε καὶ γένησθεὡς τὰ παιδία, οὐ.μὴ εἰσέλθητε εἰς 
yeareconvertedand become as thelittlechildren, inno wise shall yeenter into 


τὴν βασιλείαν τῶν οὐρανῶν. 4 boTig οὖν "ταπεινώσῃ" 
the Kingdom ofthe heavens. Whosoever therefore will humble 


ἑαυτὸν we τὸ.παιδίον.τοῦτο, οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ μείζων ἐν TY βασι- 
himself as this little child, he is the greater in the king- 
Asia τῶν οὐρανῶν. 5 καὶ ὃς. “ἐὰν! δέξηται “παιδίον τοιοῦτον 
dom ofthe heavens; and whoever will receive #little*child such 
ἐγ" ἐπὶ τῷ. ὀνόματί. μου, ἐμὲ δέχεται" 6 0¢.0 ἂν σκανδαλίσῃ 
0:6 in my name, 2me ‘receives. But whoever shall cause “ἴο offend 
ἕνα τῶν. μικρῶν. τούτων τῶν πιστευόντων εἰς ἐμέ, συμφέρει 


‘one of *these *little Sones who believe in me, it is profitable 
αὐτῷ ἵνα κρεμασθῇ μύλος ὀνικὸς γέπὶ! τὸν 
for him that should be hung “8 °millstone ‘turned 7by °an ass ‘upon 


τρύχηλοι, αὐτοῦ; καὶ καταποντισθῇ ἐν τῷ πελάγει τῆς θαλάσ- 
“his *neck, and he be sunk in the depth ofthe 568. 
σης. 7 Οὐαὶ τῷ κόσμῳ ἀπὸ τῶν σκανδάλων: ἀνάγκη.γάρ 
Woe tothe world because of the offences ! For necessary 
z2 1 ? ~ 4 , in ‘ ᾽ . as 12 , a2 4 ll 
cori! ἐλθεῖν τὰ σκάνδαλα, πλὴν οὐαὶ τῷ.ἀνθρώπῳ."ἐκείνῳ 
itis “‘to*come'’the offences, yet woe to that man 
7? X 7, Ἢ ᾽ " «- ,  -ν: , 
δι οὗ τὸ σκάνδαλον ἔρχεται. ὃ Εἰ. δὲ ἡ.χείρισου ἢ ὁ-πούς.σου 
by whom the offence comes | Andif thyhand or _ thy foot 
σκανδαλίζει σε, ἔκκοψον Ῥαὐτὰ" καὶ βάλε ἀπὸ σοῦ: καλόν 
cause *to*%offend'thee, cut off them and cast [them]from thee; good 
σοι ἐστὶν εἰσελθεῖν sic τὴν ζωὴν “χωλὸν ἢ κυλλόν,! ἢ 
for thee itis toenter into life lame or maimed, {rather]than 
a7 ~ na UA , a” ~ > 4 ~ A a> 7 
δύο χεῖρας ἢ δύο πόδας ἔχοντα βληθῆναι εἰς τὸ πῦρ τὸ αἰώνιον. 
two ds ortwo feet having tobecast intothe fire the eternal. 
9 καὶ εἰ ὁἙὀφθαλμός.σου σκανδαλίζει σε, ἔξελε αὐτὸν Kai βάλε 
And if thine eye cause*to*offend'thee,pluckeut it and cast 
ἀπὸ σοῦ: καλόν σοι ἐστὶν μονόφθαλμον εἰς τὴν ζωὴν 
[1Ὁ} from thee; good forthee itis one-eyed into ife 


49 


ter saith unto him, Of 
strangers. Jesus saith 
unto him, Then are the 
children free. 27 Not- 
withstanding, lest we 
should offend them 
go thou to the sea, an 

east an hook, and take 
up the fish that first 
cometh up; and when 
thou hast opened his 
mouth, thou shalt tind 
a pice of money : that 
take, and give unto 
them for me and thee, 


XVIII. At the same 
time came the disci- 

les unto Jesus, say- 
ing, Whois thegreatest 
in the kingdom of 
heayen? 2 And Jesus 
called a little child 
unto him, and set him 
in the midst of them, 
3 and said, Verily Isay 
unto you, Except ye 
be converted, and be- 
come as little children, 
ye shall not enter into 
the kingdom of hea- 
ven. 4 Whosoever 
therefore shall humble 
himself as this little 
child, the same is 
greatest in the king- 
dom of heaven. 5 And 
whoso shall receive 
one such little child in 
rap Beet OT 
6 But whoso shall of 
fend one of these little 
ones which believe in 
mne, it were better for 
him that a millstone 
were hanged about his 
neck, and that he were 
drowned in the depth 
of the sea. 7 Woe unto 
the world because of 
offences! for it must 
needs be that offences 
come; but woe to 
that man by whom 
the offence cometh! 
8 Wherefore if thy 
hand or thy foot of- 
fend thee, cut them 
off, and cast them from 
thee: it is better for 
thee to enter into life 
halt or maimed, rather 
than having two hands 
or two feet to be cast 
into everlasting fire. 
9 And if thine eye of- 
fend thee, pluck it 
out, and cast zt from 
thee: it is better for 
thee to enter into life 
with one eye, rather 


Ὁ εἰπόντος δέ and having said Lrrr. ° — 6 Πέτρος LTTra. 
δαλίζωμεν τ. τ — τὴν (read [[8}9]} LtTraw. 5 ἡμέρᾳ day L. 
’ ταπεινώσει LITTAW. “Gy Ltr. * ὃν παιδίον τοιοῦτον ( ---ν Τ) LTTrA. 
εἰς tO A. z— ἐστιν (read [it is]) LTrA. 


it (and cast [it]) Lrtra. © κυλλὸν ἢ χωλόν LT. 


ΡΑρα ye TrA. 


3 — ἐκείνῳ (read to the man) LTtr. 


4 σκαν- 
t— δ᾽ Ἰησοῦς ΤΊτΑ. 
Υ περὶ about LTTr; 
Ὁ αὐτὸν 


5 


50 


than having two eyes 
to be cast into hell 
fire. 10 Take heed that 
ye despise not one of 
these little ones; for 
I say unto you, That 
in heaven their angels 
do always behold the 
face of my Father 
which is in heaven. 
11 For the Son of man 
is come to save that 
which was lost. 12 How 
think ye? if a man 
have an _ hundred 
sheep, and oneof them 
be gone astray, doth 
he not leave the ninet; 
and nine, and goet 
into the mountains, 
andseeketh that which 
is gone astray? 13 And 
if so be that he find it, 
verily I say unto you, 
he rejoiceth more of 
that sheep, than of the 
ninety and nine which 
went not astray. 
14 Even so it is not 
the will of your Fa- 
ther which is in hea- 
ven, that one of these 
little ones should 
perish. 


15 Moreover if thy 
brother shall trespass 
against thee, go and 
tell him his fault be- 
tween thee and him 
alone : if he shall hear 
thee, thou hast gained 
thy brother. 16 But if 
he will not hear thee, 
then take with thee one 
or two more, that in 
the mouth of two or 
three witnesses every 
word may be estab- 
lished. 17 And if he 
shall neglect to hear 
them, tell ἠέ unto the 
church: but if he neg- 
lect to hear the church, 
let him be unto thee 
asan heathen manand 
a publican. 18 Verily 
I say unto you, What- 
soever yeshall bind on 
earth shall be bound 
in heaven: and what- 
soever ye shall loose 
onearthshall be loosed 
in heaven. 19 Again I 
say unto you, That if 
two of you shall agree 
on earth as touching 
any thing that they 
shall ask, it shall be 
done for them of my 
Father which is in 


4 ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ in the heaven [t]a. 


he not leave) LTr. 
i μου My Ltr. 


τ -α τῷ LI[TrJA. 


συμφωνήσουσιν ἐξ ὑμῶν of you 8 


k ἐν LTTr. 
σοῦ L; μετὰ σεαυτοῦ With thyself τ΄. 


ΜΑΤΘΆΤΟΣ 
εἰσελθεῖν, ἢ δύο ὀφθαλμοὺς ἔχοντα βληθῆναι εἰς τὴν 
to enter, [rather] than two eyes having tobe cast into the 
γέενναν τοῦ πυρός. 10 Ὁρᾶτε μὴ-.καταφρονήσητε ἑνὸς τῶν 
Gehenna ofthe fire. ee ye despise not one 
ικρῶν.τούτων᾽ λέγω. γὰρ ὑμῖν, ὅτι οἱ. ἄγγελοι. αὐτῶν “ἐν 
of these little ones, forI say toyou, that their angels in [(the} 
οὐρανοῖς" διὰ. παντὸς βλέπουσιν τὸ πρόσωπον τοῦ.πατρός. μου 


XVIII. 


d 


heavens continually behold the face of my Father 
τοῦ ἐν οὐρανοῖς. 11 “ἦλθεν.γὰρ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
who [15] in [the] heavens, For iscome the Son of man 
σῶσαι τὸ ἀπολωλός." 12 Ti ὑμῖν.δοκεῖ ; ἐὰν γένηταί 


to save that which has been lost. What think ye? If there should be 


τινι ἀνθρώπῳ ἑκατὸν πρόβατα, καὶ πλανηθῇ ν ἐξ αὐτῶν, 
to any man ahundred sheep, and be gone astray oneof them, 
οὐχὶ “ἀφεὶς! τὰ ξἐννενηκονταεννέα"! ἐπὶ τὰ ὄρη 
{does he] not, having left the ninety-nine on the mountains, 
h πορευθεὶς ζητῖ τὸ πλανώμενον; 13 Kai ἐὰν γένηται 
having gone seek that which is gone astray? and if it should be 
εὑρεῖν αὐτό, ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι χαίρει ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ μᾶλλον 
that he find it, verily Isay to you, that herejoicesover it more 
ἢ ἐπὶ τοῖς ξἐννενηκονταεννέα! τοῖς μὴ-πεπλανημένοις. 14 ov- 
thanover the ninety-nine which have not gone astray. So 
τως οὐκ.ἔστιν θέλημα ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ πατρὸς 'ὑμῶν" τοῦ 
ἰῦ 15 ποῦ [the] will before ?Father ‘your who [is] 
ἐν οὐρανοῖς, ἵνα ἀπόληται keic! τῶν. μικρῶν. τούτων. 
in [the] heavens, that shouldperish one of these little ones. 
15 ᾿Εὰν.δὲ ἁμαρτήσῃ ἱ'εἰς σὲ! ὁ ἀδελφός. σου, ὕπαγε ™cai' 


But if 3gin “against *thee ‘thy “brother, go and 
ἔλεγξον αὐτὸν μεταξὺ cov καὶ αὐτοῦ μόνου. ἐάν σου ἀκούσῃ, 
reprove him tween thee and him alone. If thee he willhear, 


ἐκέρδησας τὸν. ἀδελφόν. σου" 16 ἐὰν.δὲ μὴ.ἀκούσῃ, παράλαβε 
thou hast gained thy brother. But if he will not hear, take 
n 4A ~tl » « a δύ ο τ > 4 , δύ ’ 
μετὰ σοῦ" ἔτι ἕνα ἢ δύο, ἵνα ἐπὶ στόματος δύο μαρτύρων 
with thee besides one or two, thatupon(the) mouth oftwo witnesses 
ἢ τριῶν σταθῇ πᾶν ῥῆμα. 17 ἐὰν.δὲ παρακούσῃ αὐτῶν, 
or of three may stand every word. But if he fail to listento them, 
Ρεἰπὲ! τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ" ἐὰν.δὲ καὶ τῆς ἐκκλησίας παρακούσῳ, 
tell [it] to the assembly. Andif also the assembly he fail to listen to, 
» oe « ’ 4 4 « , ,’ A , 
ἔστω σοι ὥσπερ ὁ ἐθνικὸς Kai ὁ τελώνης. 18 ᾿Αμὴν λέγω 
lethimbetothee as the heathen and the taxgatherer. Verily Isay 
cw e ee || , ‘ ~ ~ ” , ᾽ μὰ 
ὑμῖν, ὕσα. “ἐὰν! δήσητε ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ἔσται δεδεμένα ἐν ττῷ" 
to you, Whatsoever yeshall bind on the earth, shallbe bound in the 
οὐρανῷ: Kai boaidy λύσητε ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ἔσται λελυμένα 


ἐπι 
heaven; and whatsoever yeshall loose on the earth, shallbe loosed 


ἐν ττῷ" οὐρανῷ. 19 "Πάλιν! λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι ἐὰν δύο 'ὑμῶν 


in the heaven. Again Isay toyou, that if two ofyou 
συμφωνήσωσιν" ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς περὶ παντὸς πράγματος οὗ ἐὰν 
may agree on the earthconcerning any matter whatever 


αἰτήσωνται, γενήσεται αὐτοῖς παρὰ τοῦ.πατρός.μου τοῦ 
they 8841] ask, it shall be done tothem from my Father who [is] 


© — verse 11 Lrtr[ a]. 

& ἐνενήκοντα ἐννέα, LTTr; ἐνενηκονταεννέα. W. 

1 — εἰς σὲ LOA]. 

2 th ; 2° + μετὰ σοῦ L. 

® ἀμὴν bas τις πάλιν ἀμὴν Tra. 
agree TTrA. 


f ἀφήσει (read will 
h + «xatand Ltr. 
m— καὶ GLTTrA. n— μετὰ 
P εἰπὸν T. 4 ἂν Lora. 

: συμφωνήσωσιν ἐξ ὑμῶν τ," 


XVIII. MATTHEW. 
ἐν οὐρανοῖς. 20 οὗ.γάρ εἰσιν δύο ἢ τρεῖς συνηγμένοι εἰς 
in [the] heavens, For where are two or three gathered togetherunto 
τὸ ἐμὸν ὄνομα, ἐκεῖ εἰμὶ ἐν ἐσῳ αὐτῶν. 
my name, there 8111 in(the] midst of them. 
21 Τότε προσελθὼν "αὐτῷ ὁ Πέτρος εἶπεν," Κύριε, ποσάκις 


Then havingcome tohim Peter said, Lord, how often 
ἁμαρτήσει εἰς ἐμὲ ὁ. ἀδελφός.μου Kai ἀφήσω αὐτῷ; Ewe 
shall*sin ‘against ὅτωθ my 7brother and Iforgive him? until 


4 lf , > ~ t=) ~ ? , a ε ’ 
ἑπτάκις; 22 Λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, OV.AEyw σοι ἕως ἑπτάκις, 
seven times? Says sto*him ‘Jesus, I say not to thee untilseven times, 
"adX’! Ewe ἑβδομηκοντάκις ἑπτά. 23 Διὰ τοῦτο ὡμοιώθη 
but until seventy times seven, Because of this Shas “become ®like 
« , ~ > ~ ? , ~ nn ᾽ , 
ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν ἀνθρώπῳ βασιλεῖ, ὃς ἠθέλησεν 
+the *kingdom ὅοὗ “6 ‘heavens to 8 man aking, who would 
~ Xx , A lands ὃ ’΄ ᾽ ~ ? ¢ , 4 > ~ 
συνᾶραι.λόγον μετὰ τῶν. δούλων. αὐτοῦ. 24 ἀρξαμένου.δὲ αὐτοῦ 
take account with his bondmen. And *having *begun *he 
συναίρειν, “προσηνέχθη" “αὐτῷ εἷς! ὀφειλέτης μυρίων 
to reckon, there was brought tohim one debtor of ten thousand 


ταλάντων. 25 μὴ.ἔχοντος.δὲ αὐτοῦ ἀποδοῦναι, ἐ- 
talents. ut ποῦ *having the to pay, 3com- 


κέλευσεν αὐτὸν ὁ. κύριος Ταὐτοῦ" πραθῆναι, καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα 
manded *him his “lord to be sold, and 2wife 


ΓΞ ἘΠ . ‘ , ‘ , a a 7 Ι ᾿ ᾽ > 
αὐτου" καὶ TA τέκνα, Καὶ TAVTaA OCA ELYEV, καὶ αἀποῦο- 


[wherewith] 


this and the children, and all asmuchas hehad, and payment to 
θῆναι. 26 πεσὼν οὖν ὁ δοῦλος" προσεκύνει αὐτῷ, 
be made. Having fallen down thereforethe bondman didhomage tohim, 


λέγων, “Κύριε,! μακροθύμησον ἐπ᾽ “ἐμοί." καὶ πάντα ὅσοι 


saying, Lord, have patience with me, and Sall *to thee 
ἀποδώσω." 27 σπλαγχνισθεὶς. δὲ ὁ κύριος τοῦ δούλου 
Ἢ *will Spay. Andhaving been moved with compassion the lord *pondman 
ixeivov' ἀπέλυσεν αὐτόν, καὶ τὸ δάνειον ἀφῆκεν αὐτῷ. 
‘of *that released him, and “the ‘loan lforgave him. 
28 ᾿Εξελθὼν. δὲ ὁ. δοῦλος.Ξἐκεῖνος" ebpey ἕνα THY συνδούλων 
But having gone out that bondman found one Sfellow *bondmen 


αὐτοῦ, ὃς ὥφειλεν αὐτῷ ἑκατὸν δηνάρια. καὶ κρατήσας αὐτὸν 
‘of 7his, who owed him ahundred denarii, and havingseized him 

ἔπνιγεν, λέγων, ᾿Απόδος ἅμοι" 16 τι! ὀφείλεις. 29 πε- 
hethrottled [him], saying, Pay me what thou owest. "Having *fallen 


‘ ὖ « , , ~ k > Α , γ “} 
σὼν οὖν ὡὁ.σύὐνδουλος. αὐτοῦ "εἰς τοὺς.πόδας. αὐτοῦ" παρε- 


7down “therefore ‘his *fellow *bondman at his feet be- 
κάλει αὐτόν, λέγων, Μακροθύμησον ἐπ᾽ ἱἐμοί," καὶ ™rayra' 
sought him, saying, Have patience with me, and all 
ἀποδώσω σοι. 80 Ὁ. δὲ οὐκ.ἤθελεν, "ἀλλὰ! ἀπελθὼν ἔβαλεν 
I will pay thee. Buthe vould not, but having gone _ he cast 
es ᾽ , .“ οὐδ > ~ , ? , 
αὐτὸν εἰς φυλακήν, ἕως. οὗ" ἀποδῷ το ὀφειλόμενον. 
him into prison, until heshould pay thatwhich was owing. 
31 ἰδόντες POE οἱ σύνδουλοι. αὐτοῦ" τὰ «“γενόμενα" 
*Haying ‘seen ‘but 215 ΞἔθΠον Ῥοπάτηθη what things had taken place, 
ἐλ UA θ ἠδ rs αν , , ~ , r ? ~ Τ 
ἐλυπήθησαν σφόδρα" καὶ ἐλθόντες διεσάφησαν τῷ.κυρίῳ. αὐτῶν 
were grieved greatly, andhavinggone narrated to their lord 


51 


heaven. 20 For where 
two or thre@are gath- 
ered together in my 
name, there am 1 in 
the midst of them, 


21 Then came Peter 
tohim, and said, Lord, 
how oft shall my bro- 
ther sin against me 
andI forgive him? ti 
seven times? 22 Jesus 
saith unto him, I sa 
not unto thee, Until 
seven times: but, 
Until seventy times 
seven. 23 Therefore is 
the kingdom of hea- 
ven likened unto a 
certain king, which 
would take account of 
his servants. 24 And 
when he had begun 
to reckon, one was 
brought unto him, 
which owed him ten 
thousand talents. 25 
But forasmuch as he 
had not to pay, his 
lord commanded him 
to be sold, and his 
wife, and children, and 
all that he had, and 
payment to be made. 
26 The servant there- 
fore fell down,andwor- 
shipped him, saying, 
Lord, have patience 
with me, and I wiil 
pay thee all. 27 Then 
the lord of that ser- 
vant was moved with 
compassion, and loosed 
him, and forgave him 
the debt. 28 But the 
same servant went 
out, and found one of 
his fellowservants, 
which owed him an 
hundred pence: and 
he laid hands on him, 
and took him by the 
throat, saying, Pay 
me that thou owest. 
29 And his fellowser- 
vant fell down at his 
feet, and besought 
him, saying, Have 
patience with me, and 
I will pay thee all. 
30 And he would not: 
but went and cast him 
into prison, till he 
should pay the debt, 
31 So when his fellow- 
servants saw what was 
done, they were very 
sorry, and came and 
told unto their lord all 


ἃ ὃ Ilérpos εἶπεν αὐτῷ LTTrA. Y ἀλλὰ LTrA. ¥ προσήχθη was conducted LTra. 5 els αὐτῷ T. 


J — αὐτοῦ (read [his] lord) Trra. 
> + ἐκεῖνος (read that bondman) τ. “ — Κύριε urTra. 
LTTra. i — ἐκείνου (read of the bondman) L. 
b— μοι LTTraw. ἰ εἴ rif anything Gurtraw. 

LTrA. ™—dyra[L}ttrAW. 5 ἀλλ᾽ EG. 5 — οὗ LTTra. 
δουλοι L; οὖν οἱ σύνδουλοι αὐτοῦ TTrA. 


: — αὐτοῦ (read [his] wife) 7[ Α1. 


a ἐμέ Tr. 


a ἔχει he has Ltr. 
Xx 


ε ἀποδώσω σοι ([σοὶ] A) 

& — ἐκεῖνος (read the bondman) t. 
k — εἰς τοὺς πόδας αὐτοῦ GLTTr[A]. 
P οὖν (therefore) αὐτοῦ οἱ σύν- 
4 γινόμενα Were taking place T. 


1 ἐμε 


¥ ἑαυτῶν LITrA 


52 


that was done, 32 Then 
his lord, after that he 
had called him, said 
unto him, O thou wick- 
ed servant, I forgave 
thee all that debt, be- 
cause thou desiredst 
me: 33 shouldest not 
thou also have had 
compassion on thy fel- 
lowservant, even as I 
had pity on thee? 
34 And his lord was 
wroth, and delivered 
him to the tormentors, 
till he should pay all 
that was due unto 
him. 35 So likewise 
shall my heavenly 
Father do also unto 
you, if ye from your 
hearts forgive ποῦ 
every one his brother 
their trespasses. 


XIX. And it came 
to pass, that when 
Jesus ad finished 
these sayings, he de- 
parted from Galilee, 
and came into the 
coasts of Judma be- 
yond Jordan; 2 and 

eat multitudes fol- 
owed him; and he 
healed them there, 


8 The Pharisees also 
came unto him, tempt- 
ing him, and saying 
unto him, Is it lawful 
for a man to put away 
his wife for every 
cause? 4 And he an- 
swered and said unto 
them, Have ye not 
read, that he which 
made them at the be- 
ginning made them 
male andfemale, 5and 
said, For this cause 
shall a man leave fa- 
ther and mother, and 
shall cleave to his wife: 
and they twain shall 
be one flesh? 6 Where- 
fore they are no more 
twain, but one flesh, 
What therefore God 
hath joined together, 
let not man put asun- 
der. 7 They say unto 
him, Why did Moses 
then command to give 
a writing of divorce- 
ment, and to put her 
away? 8 Hesaithunto 
them, Moses because of 
the hardness of your 
hearts suffered you to 
put away your wives: 
but from the begin- 
ning it was not so. 


MATOATIOS. XVIII, XIX. 
πάντα τὰ γενόμενα. 32 Τότε προσκαλεσάμενος αὐτὸν ὁ 
all that had taken place, Then having ‘called to ["him] *him 


κὐριος.αὐτοῦ λέγει αὐτῷ, Δοῦλε πονηρέ, πᾶσαν τὴν ὀφειλὴν 


this 7lord says tohim, *Bondman ‘wicked, all 7debt 
ἐκείνην ἀφῆκά σοι, ἐπεὶ παρεκάλεσάς pe’ 33 οὐκ.ἔδει καὶ 
‘that I forgave thee, since thou besoughtest me; did it not behove 7also 


σὲ ἐλεῆσαι τὸν. σύνδουλόν.σου, we "καὶ ἐγώ! σε ἠλέησα; 
1thee tohave pitied thy fellow bondman, as also I thee had pitied? 


34 καὶ ὀργισθεὶς ὁ.κύὐριος. αὐτοῦ παρέδωκεν αὐτὸν τοῖς βασανι- 

And being angry his lord deliveredup him tothe  tormen- 
σταῖς: ἕως. "οὗ" ἀποδῷ πᾶν τὸ ὀφειλόμενον αὐτῷ." 86 Οὕτως 
tors, until heshouldpay ali that was owing to him. Thus 
Kai ὁ-πατήριμου ὁ “ἐπουράνιος! ποιήσει ὑμῖν ἐὰν.μὴ ἀφῆτε 


also myFather' the heavenly willdo toyou unless ye forgive 
ἕκαστος τῷ.ἀδελφῷ.αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ τῶν.καρδιῶν ὑμῶν “τὰ παρα- 
each his brother from your hearts 20f- 
πτώματα αὐτῶν." 
fences ‘their. 
19 Kai ἐγένετο Ore ἐτέλεσεν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς τοὺς λόγους 


And it came to pass when “had “finished 1Jesus Swords 
τούτους, μετῆρεν ἀπὸ ὑτῆς" Γαλιλαίας, καὶ ἦλθεν εἰς τὰ ὅρια 


“these, he withdrew from Galilee, and came to the borders 
~ 2 / Ud -»ἦ ’ Rage? , ᾽ ~ 
τῆς Ἰουδαίας πέραν τοῦ Lopdavov. 2 Kai ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῷ 
of Judwa beyond the Jordan: and “followed *him 


” 4 A Φ , ᾽ A) ~ 
ὄχλοι πολλοί, καὶ ἐθεράπευσεν αὐτοὺς ἐκεῖ. 
crowds ‘great, and _ he healed them there. 


3 Kai προσῆλθον αὐτῷ τοὶ" Φαρισαῖοι πειράζοντες αὐτόν, 


d 5came *to*him ‘the *Pharisees tempting him, 
καὶ λέγοντες "αὐτῷ," Εἰ ἔξεστιν Ῥἀάνθρώπῳ" ἀπολῦσαι τὴν 
and saying tohim, Isit lawful for a man to put away 
γυναϊκα.αὐτοῦ κατὰ πᾶσαν αἰτίαν; 4 ὋὉ.δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν 

his wife for every cause? But he answering said 
c ᾽ ~ ll > ? A .« « d , ll ? ᾽ ᾽ 
αὑτοῖς," Οὐκιἀνξέγνωτε ort ὁ “ποιήσας ἀπ ἀρ- 
to them, Have ye not read that hewho made  [them)from [the] begin- 


χῆς ἄρσεν καὶ θῆλυ ἐποίησεν αὐτούς, 5 καὶ εἶπεν, ““Ἕνεκεν!" 
ning male and female made them, and said, On account of 
τούτου καταλείψει ἄνθρωπος τὸν πατέρα Kai τὴν μητέρα, Kai 
this 3shall ‘leave 1a 4*man father and mother, and 

{ Φ' tl ~ ‘ > ~ ‘ » « ΄ 3 
προσκολληθήσεται" τῇ. γυναικὶ αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἔσονται οἱ δύο εἰς 
shall be joined to his wife, and ‘shall *be ‘the *two °for 

᾿ς , es ? Ud ᾽ ‘ , > ‘ 4 , τι 
σάρκα μίαν; 6 ὥστε οὐκέτι εἰσὶν δύο, ἀλλὰ σὰρξ pia’ ὃ 
Tflesh ‘one? Sothatnolonger arethey two, but “flesh ‘one. What 
οὖν ὁ θεὸς συνέζευξεν, ἄνθρωπος μὴ χωριζέτω. 7 Λέγουσιν 
therefore God united together, sman let “not separate. They say 
αὐτῷ, Ti οὖν ΒΜωσῆς" ἐνετείλατο δοῦναι βιβλίον ἀπο- 
το him, Why then *Moses 1didcommand to give a bill of di- 
στασίου, kai ἀπολῦσαι "αὐτήν 3" 8 Λέγει αὐτοῖς, Ὅτι SMwone' 
vorce, and toputaway her? He says to them, Moses 
πρὸς τὴν.σκληροκαρδίαν ὑμῶν ἐπέτρεψεν ὑμῖν ἀπολῦσαι 
in view of your hard-heartedness allowe you to put away 


® κἀγώ LTTrA. 


X — τὰ παραπτώματα αὐτῶν GLTTrA. 
Ὁ — ἀνθρώπῳ (read one’s wife) LTA. 
f κολληθήσεται LTTrAW. 


LTTrA. 


τὰς. γυναῖκας ὑμῶν" ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς δὲ οὐ.γέγονεν οὕτως. 
your wives; from([the] beginning however it was not thus, 
t— οὗ L. ¥ — αὐτῷ LTra. π᾿ οὐράνιος LTTr ; [ἐπ])ουράνιος A. 


Υ — τῆς E. *— οἱ LTrA. 
© — αὐτοῖς LTTrA. 
& Mwivons LTTrAw. 


® — αὐτῷ LITrA. 
d κτίσας created Tr. ὁ Ἕνεκα 
h — αὐτήν LTTr. 


MATTHEW. 


δοἂν ἀπολύσῃ τὴν.γυναῖκα.αὐτοῦ 
whoever shall put away his wife 
. 2 ~ δι. 7m 4 
Kai yopncy ἄλλην, μοιχᾶται: καὶ 
and shall marry another, commits adultery; and 


10 Aéyovow 
Say 


XIX. 

9 λέγω δὲ ὑμῖν, ‘Ore! 
AndIsay toyou, that 
Keil Ἰμὴ ἐπὶ πορνείᾳ," 
᾽ 
if not for fornication, 

ὁ ἀπολελυμένην γαμήσας μοιχᾶται." 
he who *her [*that *is] "put ἔδυσαν ‘marries commits adultery. 


αὐτῷ οἱ. μαθηταὶ "αὐτοῦ," Ei οὕτως ἐστὶν ἡ atria τοῦ ἀνθρώ- 
*to*him this 7disciples, If thus is the case ofthe man 


που μετὰ THC γυναικός, οὐ-συμφέρει γαμῆσαι. 11 Ὁ. .δὲ εἶπεν 
with the wife, it is not profitable to marry. But he said 
> ~ > , ~ A , ο ~ " 2 ? 
αὐτοῖς, Οὐ πάντες χωροῦσιν roy_éyor-rovroy," ἀλλ 
tothem, Not all receive this word, but [those] 
οἷς δέδοται. 12 εἰσὶν.γὰρ εὐνοῦχοι οἵτινες ἐξ κοιλίας 
towhnomithasbeen given; forthere are eunuchs who from([the] womb 
μητρὸς ἐγεννήθησαν οὕτως, Kai εἰσιν εὐνοῦχοι οἵτινες 
of [their] mother were born thus, and thereare eunuchs who 
εὐνουχίσθησαν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων, Kai εἰσιν εὐνοῦχοι οἵτινες 
were made eunuchs by men, and thereare eunuchs who 
εὐνούχισαν ἑαυτοὺς διὰ τὴν βασιλείαν τῶν οὐρανῶν. 
made eunuchs of themselves forthesakeofthe kingdom ofthe heavens. 
ὁ δυνάμενος χωρεῖν σγχωρείτω. 
He who is able to receive [it] let him receive [it]. 
18 Τότε Ῥπροσηνέχθη! αὐτῷ παιδία, ἵνα τὰς χεῖρας 
Then were brought tohim littlechildren, that [his] hands 
ἐπιθῇ αὐτοῖς, Kai προσεύξηται' οἱ δὲ μαθηταὶ ἐπετίμησαν 
che might lay onthem, and mightpray; butthe disciples rebuked 
αὐτοῖς" 14 ὁ δὲ. Ἰησοῦς εἴπεν!, “Agere τὰ παιδία, Kai μὴ 
them. But Jesus said, Suffer the littlechildren, and *not 
κωλύετε αὐτὰ ἐλθεῖν πρός Ter! τῶν YOR τοιούτων ἐστὶν ἡ 
‘do forbid them tocome to me; or of such is the 
βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν. 15 Kai ἐπιθεὶς "αὐτοῖς rac χεῖρας" 
kingdom ofthe heavens. And having laid uponthem [his] hands 
ἐπορεύθη ἐκεῖθεν. 
he departed thence. 
16 Kai ἰδού, εἷς προσελθὼν ἱεῖπεν αὐτῷ," Διδάσκαλε 
And behold, one having come to [him] said ἴο him, 2Teacher 
vZ θέ " , 2 A , vu w2 Π ᾿ a>” 
ἀγαθέ," ri ἀγαθὸν ποιήσω ἵνα “ἔχω" ζωὴν αἰώνιον ; 
Ἰροοῦ, what good [thing] shallI do that I may have life eternal? 
17 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Τί pe λέγεις ἀγαθόν; οὐδεὶς ἀγαθὸς 


Andhe said tohim, Why me callestthou good? no one [is] good 
εἰμὴ €ic, ὁ θεός." εἰ δὲ θέλεις Τεἰσελθεῖν εἰς τὴν ζωήν," 
except one, God. But if thou desirest toenter into life, 


“τήρησον" τὰς ἐντολάς. 18 "λέγει avrg," Ποίας; ἢ Ὁ. δὲ In- 
ead the commandments. He says tohim, Which? And Je- 
σοῦς εἶπεν, Τό, οὐ-φονεύσεις" οὐ-μοιχεύσεις" 
sus said, Thou shalt not commit murder; Thou shalt not commit adultery; 
οὐ-κλέψεις" οὐ.Ψευδομαρτυρήσεις. 19 τίμα τὸν πατέρα 
Thou shalt not steal; Thou 1t not bear false witness; Honour ?father 
“σου! καὶ τὴν μητέρα" καὶ ἀγαπήσεις τὸν. πλησίον.σου ὡς 
‘thy and mother; and Thou shalt love thy neighbour as 


i — ὅτι LTra. k — εἰ GLTTraw. 
nication L. τῇ — καὶ ὃ ἀπολελυμένην γαμήσας μοιχᾶται TT]. 
disciples) 7A]. ο [τοῦτον] 1. Ρ προσηνέχθησαν LTTrA. 
5 τὰς χεῖρας αὐτοῖς LTTrA. ἵ αὐτῷ εἶπεν LTTrA. Y— ἀγαθέ LTTrA. 


53 
9 And I say unto you, 
Whosoever shall put 
away his wife, except 
it be for fornication, 
and shall marry ap- 
other, committeth a- 
dultery: and whoso 
marrieth her which is 
put away doth commit 
adultery. 10 His dis- 
ciples say unto him, If 
the case of the man be 
80 with his wife, it is 
not good to marry. 
11 But he said unto 
them, All men cannot 
receive this saying, 
save they to whom it 
is given. 12 For there 
are some _ eunuchs, 
which were so born 
from their mother’s 
womb: and there are 
some eunuchs, which 
were made eunuchs 
of men: and there be 
eunuchs, which have 
made themselves eu- 
nuchs for the kingdom 
of heaven’s sake. He 
that is able to receive 
tt, let him receive tt. 


13 Then were there 
brought unto him 
little children, that he 
should put jis hands 
on them, and pray: and 
the disciples rebuked 
them. 14 But Jesus 
said, Suffer little chil- 
dren, and forbid them 
not, to come unto me: 
for of such is the 
kingdom of heaven, 
15 And he laid his 
hands on them, and 
departed thence. 


16 And, behold, one 
came and said unto 
him, Good Master, 
what good thing shall 
I do, that I may have 
eternal life? 17 And 
he said unto him, Why 
callest thou me good? 
there iz none good but 
one, that is, God: but 
if thou wilt enter into 
life, keep the com- 
mandments. 18 He 
saith unto him, Which? 
Jesus said, Thou shalt 
do no murder, Thou 
shalt not commit a- 
dultery Thou shalt not 
steal, Thou shalt not 
bear false witness, 
19 Honour thy father 
and thy mother: and, 
Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself, 


1 παρεκτὸς λόγου πορνείας except for cause of for- 
2 — αὐτοῦ (read the 
4 + αὐτοῖς to them T. 

Md σχῶ LTTrA. 


τ ἐμέτ. 
χ Τί 


με ἐρωτᾷς περὶ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ ; εἷς ἐστιν ὁ ἀγαθός Why askest thou me concerning the good? 


One is good (+ δθεός God W) GLTTraw. 


5 ἔφη αὐτῷ he said to him L; — λέγει αὐτῷ τ. ὃ + φησίν he saysT. 


Υ εἰς THY ζωὴν εἰσελθεῖν LTTrAW. 


2 τήρει LTrA. 
ς — gov GLTTrAW. 


54 


20 The young man 
saith unto him, All 
these things have I 
kept from my youth 
up: what lack I yet? 
21 Jesus said unto a 
If thou wilt be perfect, 
go and sell that thou 
hast, and give to the 

oor, and thou shalt 

ave treasure in hea- 
ven: and come and 
follow me. 22 But 
when the young man 
heard that saying, he 
went away sorrowful: 
for he had great pos- 
sessions. 


23 Then said Jesus 
unto his disciples, 
Verily I say unto you, 
That a rich man shall 
hardly enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. 
24 And again I say 
unto you, It is easier 
for a camel to go 
through the eye of a 
needle, than for a rich 
man to enter into 
the kingdom of God. 
25 When his disciples 
heard it, they were 
exceedingly amazed, 
saying, Who then can 
besaved? 26 But Jesus 
beheld them, and said 
unto them, With men 
this is impossible ; but 
with God all things 
are possible. 


27 Then answered 
Peter and said unto 
him, Behold, we have 
forsaken all, and fol- 
lowed thee ; what shall 
we have therefore? 
28 And Jesus said unto 
them, Verily I say 
unto you, That ye 
which have followed 
me, in the regenera- 
tion when the Son of 
man shall sit in the 
throne of his glory, 
ye also shall sit upon 
twelve thrones, judg- 
ing the twelve tribes 
of Israel. 29 And 
every one that hath 
forsaken houses, or 
brethren, or sisters, 
or father, or mother, 
or wife, or children, or 
lands, for my name’s 
sake, shall receive an 
hundredfold, and shall 


ἃ ταῦτα πάντα LTr. 


b+ τοῖς to the LTra. 
(read this word) La, 


GTTrA. 
LITA. 
GLTTrawW. 


P + εἰσελθεῖν to enter L[ Tr]. 
* — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) aLrrraw. 
W παλινγενεσίᾳ T. 
® — ἢ γυναῖκα LTTrA, 
5) πολλαπλασίονα λήμψεται Many times more shall receive Lrrra. 


ΜΑΤΘΑΙΟΣ. XIX. 
σεαυτόν. 20 Λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ νεανίσκος, Πάντα ταῦτα" 
thyself. “Says ‘°to®him ‘the *young *man, All these 


εἐφυλαξάμην" ἐκ νεότητός. μου"" τί ἔτι ὑστερῶ; 21 &" Egy αὐτῷ 
have I kept from myyouth, whatyet lackI? 7Said *to*him 


«>? ~ > , , ida , , ‘ 
ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Et θέλεις τέλειος εἶναι, ὕπαγε πώλησόν σου τὰ 
1Jesus, If thou desirest perfect to be, go sell thy 


ὑπάρχοντα καὶ δὸς ἢ πτωχοῖς, Kai ἕξεις θησαυρὸν ἐν 
property and give ἴο [86] poor, and thou shalt have treasure in 


οὐρανῷ: καὶ δεῦρο ἀκολούθει μοι. 22 ᾿Ακούσας.δὲ ὁ νεανίσκος 


heaven; and come follow me. But*having*heard the young *man 
kroy λόγον" |! ἀπῆλθεν λυπούμενος, ἦν.γὰρ.ἔχων κτήματα 
the word went away grieved, for he had *possessions 
πολλά. 
‘many. 
23 Ὁ δὲ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἶπεν τοῖς. μαθηταῖς. αὐτοῦ, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω 
And Jesus said to his disciples, Verily Isay 


ὑμῖν, ὕτι δυσκόλως πλούσιος" εἰσελεύσεται εἰς τὴν βασι- 
to you, that withdifficulty arich man shallenter into the king- 
λείαν τῶν οὐρανῶν. 24 πάλιν.δὲ λέγω ὑμῖν, " εὐκοπώτερόν ἐστιν 
dom ofthe heavens. Andagain I say toyou, easier is it 
κάμηλον διὰ τρυπήματος ῥαφίδος “οδιελθεῖν,! ἢ πλού- 
acamel through [the] eye of a needle to pass, than arich 
σιον P εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν “τοῦ θεοῦ! τεἰσελθεῖν." 25 ᾿Ακούσαντες 
man into the kingdom of God ἴο enter. Having “heard 
δὲ οἱ. μαθηταὶ."αὐτοῦ" ἐξεπλήσσοντο σφόδρα, λέγοντες, 
‘and [this] his disciples were astonished exceedingly, saying, 

Tic ἄρα δύναται σωθῆναι; 26 Ἐμβλέψας. δὲ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς 
Who then isable to be saved? But looking on [them] Jesus 

εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Παρὰ ἀνθρώποις τοῦτο ἀδύνατόν ἐστιν, παρὰ. δὲ 
said tothem, With men this impossible is, but with 


θεῷ 'ἱπάντα δυνατά!" "ἐστιν." 
God alithings possible are. 


27 Τότε ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ Πέτρος εἶπεν αὐτῷ, ᾿Ιδού, ἡμεῖς agn- 
we left 


Then Peter said tohim, Lo, 
kapey πάντα καὶ ἠκολουθήσαμέν corr τί ἄρα ἔσται ἡμῖν; 
allthings and followed thee; what then shall be to us? 
28 Ὁ δὲ. Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι ὑμεῖς οἱ 
And Jesus said tothem, Verily Isay toyou, that ye who 
> θη , ᾽ ~ Ww ar / ll a / 
ἀκολουθήσαντές μοι; ἐν τῇ “παλιγγενεσίᾳ." ὅταν καθίσῃ 
have followed me, in the regeneration, when shall sit down 
« εκ ~ > ᾿ ? s , , ? ~ , 
ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐπὶ θρόνου δόξης. αὐτοῦ, καθίσεσθε 


answering 


the Son of man upon [the] throne of his glory, Sshall ‘sit 
καὶ "ὑμεῖς" ἐπὶ δώδεκα θρόνους, κρίνοντες τὰς δώδεκα φυλὰς 
2also ye on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes 
τοῦ Ἰσραήλ. 29 καὶ πᾶς Υὸς" ἀφῆκεν *oikiac, ἢ! ἀδελφούς, 
of Israel, And every one who hasleft houses, or brothers, 
ἢ ἀδελφάς, ἢ πατέρα, ἢ μητέρα, "ἢ γυναῖκα," ἢ τέκνα, ἢ 
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or 


ἀγρούς, «ἕνεκεν! τοῦ. "ὀνόματός. μου," *éxarovramAaciova 
nds, for the sake of my name, a hundredfold 

© ἐφύλαξα LTTrA. f — ἐκ νεότητός μου LITA. Ε λέγει says L, 

i οὐρανοῖς [the] heavens Tra. k — τὸν λόγον T. +. [rovrov} 

™ πλούσιος ὀνσκόλως LTTrA. ἃ - OrethatT. © εἰσελθεῖν to enter 

4 τῶν οὐρανῶν of the heavens Lrtra. τ --- εἰσελθεῖν 

D ‘ δυνατὰ πάντα τ΄. Y — ἐστιν (read [are ]) 

χα αὐτοὶ yourselves Tir. Y ὅστις LITrAW. 1 — οἰκίας ἢ TTrA. 

b + ἢ οἰκίας or houses rrra. © ἕνεκα T. da ἐμοῦ ὀνόματός τ. 


ΜᾺ ΤΙ Γ: 
90 πολλοὶ δὲ 


XIX, XX. 


? iT ‘ ‘ a7 r 7 
λήψεται," καὶ ζωὴν αἰώνιον κληρονομήσει. 


shall receive, and life eternal shall inherit ; but many 
ἔσονται πρῶτοι ἔσχατοι; καὶ ἔσχατοι πρῶτοι. 90 μοί 10 
2shall *be first last, and last first. For “like 


ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν ἀνθρώπῳ οἰκοδεσπότῃ, ὅστις 
*ig ‘the *kingdom *of*the ®heavens toaman a master Οὗ 8 house, who 
ἐξῆλθεν ἅμα mpwt μισθώσασθαι ἐργάτας εἰς τὸν ἀμπελῶνα 
went out with[the] morning to hire workmen for ?vineyard 
αὐτοῦ. 2 συμφωνήσας.δὲ μετὰ τῶν ἐργατῶν ἐκ Onvapiov τὴν 
this, And having agreed with the workmen for adenarius the 
ἡμέραν, ἀπέστειλεν αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸν. ἀμπελῶνα. αὐτοῦ. 3 Kai 
day, he sent them into is vineyard. And 
ἐξελθὼν περὶ fryv'" τρίτην ὥραν, εἶδεν ἄλλους ἑστῶτας 
having gone out about the third hour, hesaw others standing 
ἐν ἀγορᾷ ἀργούς" 4 ἕκἀκείνοις" εἶπεν, Ὑπάγετε καὶ 
in the marketplace idle; andtothem he said, Go also 
c ~ > A ? ~ Α mn ova ’ , c ~ 
ὑμεῖς εἰς τὸν ἀμπελῶνα, καὶ ὃ. ἐὰν δίκαιον δώσω ὑμῖν. 


ye into the vineyard, and whatevermaybe just Iwillgive you. 
5 οἱ. δὲ ἀπῆλθον. Πάλινῃ ἐξελθὼν περὶ ἕκτην καὶ 
And they went. Again having gone out about [the] sixth and 


1) , ἯἩ “" ? ΄ e , Ν \ ‘ « , 
ἐννάτην" ὥραν, ἐποίησεν ὡσαύτως. 6 Περὶ.δὲ τὴν ἑνδεκάτην 


ninth hour, he did likewise. And about the eleventh 
κὥραν" ἐξελθὼν εὗρεν ἄλλους ἑστῶτας ἀργούς," καὶ λέγει 
hour having ΡΌΩ6 out hefound others standing idle, and says 


αὐτοῖς, Τί ὧδε ἑστήκατε ὕλην THY ἡμέραν ἀργοί; 7 λέγουσιν 
tothem, Why here standye all the day idle? They say 
? ~ ν ? ‘ « ~ ? , , > ~ tyr , 
αὐτῷ, “Oru οὐδεὶς ἡμᾶς ἐμισθώσατο. λέγει αὐτοῖς, Ὑπάγετε 
tohim, Because no one "has “hired. He says to them, Go 
© ant ~ > A ? ~ mo ‘ mo vA , [4 
καὶ ὑμεῖς εἰς τὸν ἀμπελῶνα," "καὶ ὃ. ἐὰν δίκαιον λή- 
also ye into the vineyard, and whatever maybe just yeshall 
ψεσθε." 8 ᾿Οψίας.δὲ γενομένης λέγει ὁ κύριος τοῦ ἀμπελῶνος 
receive. Butevening beingcome ‘says ‘the “lord *of‘*the ‘vineyard 
τῷ ἐπιτρόπῳ.αὐτοῦ, Κάλεσον τοὺς ἐργάτας, Kai ἀπόδος “αὐ- 
to his steward, Call the workmen, and pay them 
τοῖς" τὸν μισθόν, ἀρξάμενος ἀπὸ τῶν ἐσχάτων ἕως τῶν 
(their) hire, beginning from the last unto the 
’ 9 p \ ἐλθ ’ ll e ‘ \ « ὃ , 
πρώτων. καὶ éAUVOVTEC οι περι THY EVOEKATHV 
first. And “haying *come ‘those [hired] “about *the °eleventh 
ὥραν ἔλαβον ava δηνάριον. 10 “ἐλθόντες.δὲ" οἱ πρῶτοι 
Shour they received each a denarius. And *having *come'the “first 


ἐνόμισαν ὕτι Τπλείονα λήψονται" καὶ ἔλαβον "καὶ αὐτοὶ 


they thought that more they wouldreceive, and they received also themselves 

2 A , U , A 2 , Α “ὦ 
ἀνὰ δηνάριον." 11 λαβόντες. δὲ ἐγόγγυζον κατὰ τοῦ 
each a denarius. And having received [it] they murmured against the 


οἰκοδεσπότου, 12 λέγοντες, “Ὅτι! οὗτοι οἱ ἔσχατοι μίαν 


master of the house, saying, These last one 
ὥραν ἐποίησαν, καὶ ἴσους ἡμῖν αὐτοὺς" ἐποίησας, τοῖς 


hour haveworked, and ‘equal ‘to7’us ‘them ‘thou *hast *made, who 


B = , Ss , ~ « , ‘ 4 ᾿ Ww « 

αστάσασιν τὸ βάρος τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τὸν καύσωνα." 18 6.62 
have borne the burden ofthe day and the heat. But he 

ἀποκριθεὶς *elrev ἑνὶ αὐτῶν," Ἑταῖρε, οὐκ. ἀδικῶ ce’ οὐχὶ 
answering said toone of them, Friend, I donot wrongthee. “Not 


δὲ 
inherit everlasting 
life. 30 But many 
that are first shall be 
last ; and the last sha/i 
be first. XX. For the 
kingdom of heaven is 
like unto a man thatis 
an householder, which 
went out early in the 
morning to hire la- 
bourers into his vine- 
yard. 2 And when he 
had agreed with the 
labourers for a 
a day, he sent them 
into his vineyard 
3 And he went out 
about the third hour, 
and saw others stand- 
ing idle in the market- 
place, 4 and said unto 
them ; Go ye also into 
the vineyard, and 
whatsoever is right 1 
will give you. 
they went their way. 
5 Again he went out 
about the sixth and 
ninth hour, and did 
likewise. 6 And about 
the eleventh hour he 
went out, and found 
others standing idle, 
and saith unto them, 
Why stand ye here 
all the day idle? 7 They 
say unto him, Because 
no man hath hired us. 
He saith unto them, 
Go ye also into the 
vineyard ; and what- 
soever is right, that 
shall ye receive. 8 So 
when even was come, 
the lord of the vine- 
yard saith unto his 
steward, Call the la- 
bourers, and give them 
their hire, beginning 
from the last unto the 
first. 9 And when 
they came that were 
hired about the e- 
leventh hour, they re- 
ceived every man a 
penny. 10 But when 
the first came, they 
supposed that they 
should have received 
more; and they like- 
wise received every 
mana penny. 11 And 
when they had receiv- 
ed it, they murmured 
against the goodman 
of the house, 12 say- 
ing, These last have 
wrought but one hour, 
and thou hast made 
them equal unto us, 
which have borne the 
burden and heat of the 
day. 13 But he an- 
swered one of them, 
and said, Friend, I do 
thee no wrong: didst 


£— τὴν (read [the]) GLTTrAW. 8 καὶ ἐκείνοις TA. 
LTTrAW. Κ --ὥραν 1τττὰ. |!— ἀργούς GLTTrA. 
ὃ ἐὰν ἡ δίκαιον λήψεσθε LTTrA. 9 --- αὐτοῖς T[TrA]. 
F πλεῖον λήμψονται LTrA; πλείονα λήμψονται T. 


*— ὅτι 004]. "αὐτοὺς ἡμῖν LT. * ; (read hast thou made, ὅτ. ?) L. 


P ἐλθόντες δὲ L. 


h + δὲ and (again) TTra. 
τὰ + [μου] my (vineyard) L. 


i ἐνάτην 
1 — Kat 
9 καὶ ἐλθόντες TrA. 


5 τὸ ([τὸ] A) ava δηνάριον καὶ αὐτοί TTrA. 


X ἑνὶ αὐτῶν εἶπεν T. 


56 


not thou agree with 
me for a penny? 
14 Take that thine is, 
and go thy way: I will 
give unto this last, 
even as unto thee. 15 Is 
it not lawful for me 
to do what 1 will with 
mine own? Is thine 
eye evil, because I am 
good? 16 So the last 
shall be first, and the 
first last: for many be 
called, but few chosen. 


17 And Jesus going 
up to Jerusalem took 
the twelve disciples 
apart in the way, and 
said unto them, 18 Be- 
hold, we go up to Je- 
rusalem ; and the Son 
of man shall be be- 
trayed unto the chief 
priests and unto the 
scribes, and they shall 
condemn him to death, 
19 and shall deliver 
him to the Gentiles to 
mock, and to scourge, 
and to crucify him: 
and the third day he 
shall rise again. 


20 Then came to him 
the mother of Zebe- 
dee’s children with her 
sons, worshipping him, 
and desiring a certain 
thing of him. 21 And 
he said unto her, What 
wilt thou? She saith 
unto him, Grant that 
these my two sons may 
sit, the one on thy 
right hand, and the 
other on the left, in 
thy kingdom. 22 But 
Jesus answered and 
said, Ye know not 
what ye ask. Are ye 
able to drink of the 
cup that I shall drink 
of, and to be baptized 
with the baptism that 
Τ am baptized with? 
They say unto him, We 
are able. 23 And he 
saith unto them, Ye 
shall drink indeed of 
my cup, and be bap- 
tized with the baptism 
that I am _ baptized 
with: but to sit on 
my right hand, and on 


ΜΑΊΘΑΤΙΟΣ. 


δηναρίου συνεφώνησάς οι; 
7for °a *denarius ‘didst *thou *, apne ®with e? 


XX. 


14 ἄρον τὸ σὸν καὶ 
Take thineown and 


ὕπαγε. θέλω.) δὲ! τούτῳ τῷ ἐαχάγῳ δοῦναι ὡς καὶ σοί 1 τὴ! 
50. But I will to this give as also tothee: or 
οὐκ.ἔξεστίν μοι *woujoa ὃ OA! ἐν τοῖς ἐμοῖς; Pei! 


isitnotlawfulforme todo what Iwill in that which [15] mine? 


ὁ.ὀφθαλμός.σου πονηρός ἐστιν ὅτι ἐγὼ ἀγαθός Eas 16 οὕτως 
hine =e *evil tis because igond am? Thus 


ἔσονται οἱ ἔσχατοι πρῶτοι, καὶ οἱ πρῶτοι ἔσχατοι" “πολλοὶ γάρ 


shall Ὀ6 the last first, andthe first last: for many 
εἰσιν κλητοί, ὀλίγοι.δὲ ἐκλεκτοί." 
are called, but few chosen. 
17 Kai ἀναβαίνων ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἰς ‘Te ἐροσόλυμα παρ λα εεν 
And “going *up 1 Jesus erusalem 


τοὺς δώδεκα μαθητὰς" Kar ἰδίαν τ Ty ὁδῷ, καὶ! dee αὐτοῖς, 
the twelve disciples apart in the way, and said tothem, 


18 ᾿Ιδού, ἀναβαίνομεν εἰς ἹΙεροσόλυμα, Kai ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ avOpw- 
Behold, we goup to Jerusalem, andthe Son of man 


που παραδοθήσεται τοῖς ἀρχιερεῦσιν καὶ γραμματεῦσιν, καὶ 
will be delivered up tothe chief priests and scribes, and 


κατακρινοῦσιν αὐτὸν ᾿θανάτῳ," 19 καὶ παραδώσουσιν αὐτὸν 
they willcondemn him to death, and they willdeliverup him 


τοῖς ἔθνεσιν εἰς TO ἐμπαῖξαι καὶ μαστιγῶσαι καὶ σταυρῶσαι" 
tothe Gentiles to mock and to scourge and tocrucify ; 


καὶ TY τρίτ᾽ ἡμέρῳ ξἀναστήσεται." 
and the thir he will rise geet. 


20 Tore aes αὐτῷ ἡ μήτηρ τῶν υἱῶν Ζεβεδαίου μετὰ 
Then came to him the mother ofthe sons of Zebedee with 


τῶν υἱῶν. αὐτῆς, προσκυνοῦσα καὶ αἰτοῦσά τι Ἀπαρ᾽" αὐτοῦ. 
her sons, doing, homage and asking something from him. 


21 6.08 εἶπεν αὐτῇ, Ti θέλεις; λέγει αὐτῷ, Εἰπὲ ἵνα 
Andhe said toher, What ἀοβὺ ὕποι desire? Shesaystohim, Say that 


καθίσωσιν ἰοὗτοι! οἱ δύο υἱοί μου εἷς ἐκ δεξιῶν. σου" καὶ εἷς 


may °sit 1these Stwo *sons “my one on thyrighthand and one 
ἐξ εὐωνύμων! ἐν τῇ. βασιλείᾳ. σου. 22 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ ὁ 
on [thy] left in thy xingdon. But answering 


δύνασθε πιεῖν τὸ 
Are ye able to drink the 


? ~ > a” 
Ιησοῦς εἶπεν, Οὐκιοἴδατε τί αἰτεῖσθε. 
Jesus said, Ye know not what ye ask for. 


ποτήριον ὃ ἐγὼ μέλλω πίνειν, "Kai τὸ βάπτισμα ὃ ἐχώ 
cup which I am about to drink, and *the Saran Twhich 


βαπείξομαι βαπτισθῆναι ;" Λέγουσιν αὐτῷ, Δυνά- 
m ‘°baptized [*!with] ‘to *be “baptized [*with]? ney) ἜΝ 


μεθα. 38 "Καὶ" λέγει αὐτοῖς, Τὸ μὲν ποτήριόν μου 
able. And hesays tothem, “Indeed 3cup my ye shall drink, 


οκαὶ τὸ βάπτισμα ὃ eyes βαπτίζομαι βαπτισθήσεσθε"" 
and the baptism which am baptized [with] ye shall be baptized 


τὸ.δὲ καθίσαι ἐκ δεξιῶν.μου καὶ ἐξ εὐωνύμων.Ῥμου" οὐκ 


πίεσθε, 


my left, is not mine Cwith) ; but to sit on my right hand and on my left "not 
to give, but ἐξ shall be τ ‘ , εις ~ 
given to themfor whom ἐστιν ἐμὸν δοῦναι, ἀλλ᾽ οἷς ἡτοίμασται ὑπὸ τοῦ 
it is prepared of my +is mine toOgive, but[tothose] forwhom it has been prepared by 
y—éebutw. *— ἢ LTr[A]. 5 ὃ θέλω ποιῆσαι LTTrA. Ὁ ἢ or EGLITrAW. “ — πολλοὶ ya, 
εἰσιν κλητοί, pate δὲ ἐκλεκτοί T[TrA]. ἃ — μαθητὰς TTr. © καὶ ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ LITrA. εἰς 
θάνατον T. ἐγερθήσεται he shall be raised tira. ἢ ἀπ᾽τττα. ἐ[οῦτοι) 1. Κὶ -- σον 


(read ({thy] right ae) LT. 
ὃ ἐγὼ βαπτίζομαι, βαπτισθῆναι GLTTrA. 
βαπτίζομαι βαπτισθήσεσθε QLITrA. 


(is not mine) Ta. 


14 σου thy (left) aLrrraw. m™— καὶ τὸ βάπτισμα, 
2 — καὶ LTTrA. — και τὸ βάπτισμα ὃ ἐγὼ 
Ρ — μου (read [my] left) 1 LTTrA. 4 + τοῦτο this 


tohim, Weare 


XX, XXI. MATTHEW. 

πατρός. μου. 24 "Καὶ ἀκούσαντες" οἱ δέκα ἠγανάκτησαν 
my Father. And having heard [this] the ten were indignant 

περὶ τῶν δύο ἀδελφῶν. 2 0.62’ Ἰησοῦς προσκαλεσάμενος 

about the two _ brothers. But Jesus having called ?to [him] 


αὐτοὺς εἶπεν, Οἴδατε ὅτι οἱ ἄρχοντες τῶν ἐθνῶν κατακυριεύου- 
*them said, Yeknowthatthe rulers ofthenations exercise lordship 


ow αὐτῶν, Kai ot μεγάλοι κατεξουσιάζουσιν αὐτῶν. 26 οὐχ 


over them, and the great ones exercise authority over them. Not 
οὕτως "δὲ! ἱέσται' ἐν ὑμῖν" ἀλλ᾽ ὃς. “ξὰν! θέλῃ πἐν 


thus however shallitbe among you; but whoever would among 


ὑμῖν" μέγας γενέσθαι, “ἔστω! ὑμῶν διάκονος" 27 Kai ὃς. "ἐὰν" 


you great become, let him be your servant ; and whoever 
θέλῃ ἐν ὑμῖν εἶναι πρῶτος, *éorw' ὑμῶν δοῦλος" 28 ὥσπερ 


wouldamong you-—ibe first, lethimbe your bondman; even as 


ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου οὐκ. ἦλθεν διακονηθῆναι, ἀλλὰ διακονῆ- 


the Son of man came not to be served, but to serve, 
οἷ - A 4A ? ~~ [2 2 ‘ ~ 
σαι καὶ δοῦναι τὴν.Ψψυχὴν.αὐτοῦ λύτρον ἀντὶ πολλῶν. 
and to give his life a@ransom for many. 


29 Kai ἐκπορευομένων αὐτῶν ἀπὸ "Ἱεριχὼ" ἠκολούθησεν 


And as*were*going*out ‘they from Jericho “followed 
αὐτῷ ὄχλος πολύς. 30 Kai ἰδού, δύο TvprAoi καθήμενοι 
5him ‘'a*crowd great. And behold, two blind [men] sitting 


παρὰ τὴν ὁδόν, ἀκούσαντες ὅτι Ἰησοῦς παράγει ἔκραξαν, 
beside the way, havingheard that Jesus is passing by cried out, 
λέγοντες, ” Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς, κύριε," "υἱὸς" Δαβίδ." 31 Ὁ.δὲ ὄχλος 
saying, Havepityon us, Lord, Son of David. But the crowd 
ἐπετίμησεν αὐτοῖς iva σιωπήσωσιν. οἱ. δὲ μεῖζον “ἔκρα- 
rebuked them that theyshouldbesilent. But they the more cried 
Zor," λέγοντες, PEXénooy ἡμᾶς, κύριε," "υἱὸς" 4AaPid!. 32 Kai 
out, saying, Have pity on us, Lord, Son of David. And 
στὰς ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἐφώνησεν αὐτούς, καὶ εἶπεν, Ti θέλετε 


having stopped, Jesus called them, and said, What doyedesire 
Ββ ποιήσω ὑμῖν ; 88 Aéyovow αὐτῷ, Κύριε, iva Ῥἀνοιχθῶσιν" 
Ishould do toyou? They say tohim, Lord, that *may*be*opened 


ἡμῶν οἱ ὀφθαλμοί." 84 Σπλαγχνισθεὶς.δὲ ὁ Ιησοῦς ἥψατο 
‘our “eyes. And moved with compassion Jesus touched 
τῶν ξὀφθαλμῶν! αὐτῶν. καὶ εὐθέως ἀνέβλεψαν αὐτῶν οἱ 
their eyes ; and immediately *received “sight ‘their 
ὀφθαλμοί," καὶ ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῷ. 
eyes, and they followed him. 
4A > 
921 Kai ore ἤγγισαν εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα καὶ ἦλθον εἰς Βηθ- 
And when they drew near to erusalem and came to Beth- 
φαγῆ ™apoc' τὸ ὄρος τῶν ἐλαιῶν, τότε "ὁ" Τησοῦς ἀπέστειλεν 
phage towards the mount of Olives, then Jesus sent 
~ A , A 
δύο μαθητάς, 2 λέγων αὐτοῖς, “ἸΠορεύθητεϊ! εἰς τὴν κώμην τὴν 
two disciples, saying tothem, Go into the village, that 
~ LA 
Parévayre' ὑμῶν, καὶ “εὐθέως" εὑρήσετε ὄνον δεδεμένην, Kai 
opposite . you, andimmediately ye will find anass tied, and 
~ ~ , , 
πῶλον per αὐτῆς. λύσαντες "ayayeré! μοι. 3 Kai ἐάν 
acolt with her; havingloosed[them] bring [them]tome. And if 


57 


Father, 24 And when 
the ten heard it, they 
were moved with in- 
dignation against the 
two brethren. 25 But 
Jesus called them unto 
him, andsaid, Ye know 
that the princes of the 
Gentiles exercise dc- 
minion over them, and 
they that are great ex- 
ercise authority upon 
them. 26 But it shall 
not beso among you: 
but whosoever will be 
great among you, let 
him be your minister ; 
27 and whosoever will 
be chief among you, 
let him be your ser- 
vant: 28 even as the 
Son of man came not 
to be ministered unto, 
but to minister, and to 
give his life a ransom 
for many. 

29 And as they de- 
parted from Jericho, a 
great multitude fol- 
lowed him, 30 And, 
behold, two blind men 
sitting by the way 
side, when they heard 
that Jesus passed by, 
cried out, saying, 
Have mercy on us, O 
Lord, thou son of Da- 
vid. 31 And the mul- 
titude rebuked them, 
because they should 
hold their peace: but 
they greg the more, 
saying, Have merc 
on us, O Lord, thou aed 
of David. 32 And Je- 
sus stood still, and call- 
ed them, and said 
What will ye that t 
shall do unto you? 
33 They say unto him, 
Lord, that our eyes 
may be opened. 34 So 
Jesus had compassion 
on them, and touched 
their eyes: and im- 
mediately their eyes 
received sight, and 
they followed him. 


XXI. And when they 
drew nigh unto Jeru- 
salem, and were come 
to Bethphage, unto the 
mount of Olives, then 
sent Jesus two disci- 
ples, 2 saying unto 
them, Go into the vil- 
lage over against you, 
and straightway ye 
shall find an ass tied, 
and a colt with her: 
loose them, and bring 
them unto me, 3 And 


t ἐστὶν is it Ltr. Y ἂν LTr. 
z ἔσται he shall be {τττ. 


8 — δὲ GLTTrA. 

Υ ἂν LITrA. 

ς νἱὲ LT. 

& + [ἵνα] that La. 
! — αὐτῶν ot ὀφθαλμοί LTTrA. 

Ρ κατέναντι LTTr. 9 εὐθὺς τ. 


τ ἀκούσαντες δὲ ΤΑ. 
£ ἔσται he shall be ώΤΊτΑ. 
ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς LTrA; — κύριε τ. 
{Κύριε, ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς 1 ΤΊτΑ. 

ἡ k ὀμμάτων LTTrA. 


ἡμῶν LTTrA. 
2— oT. © Πορεύεσθε LITra. 


8 Ἱερειχὼ 1. 
4d Δαυΐδ Gw; Δανείδ LTTrA. 
1 ἀνοιγῶσιν LITrA. 


π ὑμῶν of you A. 
b Κύριε, 
© ἔκραξαν LTTrA. 

1 οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ 


™ εἰς tO LTTrA 


ra ἄγετέ LTrA. 


58 


if any man say ought 
unto you, ye shall say, 
The Lord hath need of 
them; and straight- 
way he willsend them. 
4 All this was done, 
that it might be ful- 
filled which was spo- 
ken by the prophet, 
saying, 5 Tell ye the 
daughter of Sion, 
Behold, thy King com- 
eth unto thee, meek, 
and sitting upon an 
ass, and a colt the foal 
of an ass. 6 And the 
disciples went, and did 
as Jesus commanded 
them, 7 and brought 
the ass, and the colt, 
and put on them their 
clothes, and they set 
him thereon. 8 Anda 
very great multitude 
spread their garments 
in the way ; others cut 
down branches from 
the trees, and strawed 
themin the way. 9 And 
the multitudes that 
went before, and that 
followed, cried, say- 
ing, Hosanna to the 
son of David: Blessed 
ts he that cometh in 
the name of the Lord; 
Hosanna in the high- 
est. 10 And when he 
was come into Jerusa- 
lem, all the city was 
moved, saying, Who is 
this? 11 And the mul- 
titude said, This is 
Jesus the prophet of 
Nazareth of Galilee. 


12 And Jesus went 
into the temple of God, 
and cast out all them 
that sold and bought 
in the temple, and 
overthrew the tables 
of the money changers, 
and the seats of them 
that sold doves, 13 and 
said unto them, It is 
written, My house 
shall be called the 
house of prayer; but 
ye have made it a den 
of thieves. 14 And the 
blind and the lame 
came to him in the 
temple; and he healed 
them. 15 And when 
the chief priests and 
scribes saw the won- 


MATOAIOZX. XX. 


τις ὑμῖν εἴπῃ τι, ἐρεῖτε, Ὅτι ὁ κύριος αὐτῶν χρείαν 
anyone toyou say anything, yeshallsay, The Lord “οὔ *them eed 
ἔχει" "εὐθέως" δὲ ‘amooredei' αὐτούς. 4 Tovro.dé "ὅλον" γέ- 
thas, Andimmediately he willsend them. But this all came 
yovey iva πληρωθῇ τὸ ῥηθὲν διὰ τοῦ προφήτου, 
to pass that might be fulfilled thatwhich wasspoken by the prophet, 
λέγοντος, 5 Εἴπατε τῇ θυγατρὶ Σιών, ᾿Ιδού, ὁ.βασιλεύς σου 
saying, Say tothe daughter of Sion, Behold, thy king 
» , » v ΜΙ 2 ‘ 2 Δ᾽ ΟΝ apy ~ 
ἔρχεταί σοι, πραῦς ‘Kai! ἐπιβεβηκὼς ἐπὶ ὄνον καὶ * πῶλον 
comes tothee, meek and mounted on anass and acolt [the} 
or « , , A « ΄ ‘ , 
υἱὸν ὑποζυγίου. 6 Πορευθέντες. δὲ οἱ μαθηταί, καὶ ποιήσαν- 
foal of a beast of burden. And “having *gone ‘the *disciples, and having 
τες καθὼς "προσέταξεν" αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, 7 ἤγαγον τὴν 
done as 7ordered them 1Jesus, they brought the 
ὄνον Kai τὸν πῶλον, Kai ἐπέθηκαν Yiravw' αὐτῶν τὰ ἱμάτια 
ass and the colt, and put upon them *carments 
καὐτῶν;," καὶ ξἐπεκάθισεν" ἐπάνω αὐτῶν. 8 ὁ.δὲ πλεῖστος 
their, and he sat on them. And the greater part [of the} 
” ” £ ~ ac 7 ba “ ε ~ » cy Ἢ 
ὄχλος ἔστρωσαν ἑαυτῶν τὰ ἱμάτια ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ, ἄλλοιιδεῥ. ἔκοπ- 
crowd  strewed their garments on the way, and others were cutting 
τον κλάδους ἀπὸ τῶν δένδρων καὶ Ῥέἐστρώννυον" ἐν 
down branches ἔσο the trees and were strewing [them]on the 
ὁδῷ. 9 οἱ. δὲ ὄχλοι οἱ προάγοντες" Kai οἱ ἀκολουθοῦντες 
way. And the crowds those going before and those following 
ἔκραζον, λέγοντες, ΩὩσαννὰ τῷ vig *AaBid-' εὐλογημένος 
were crying out, saying, Hosanna tothe Son of David; blessed 
ὁ ἐρχόμενος ἐν ὀνόματι κυρίου: ‘Qoavva éy τοὶς 

[be]hewho comes ἴῃ [086] name of[the] Lord. Hosanna in the 
ὑψίστοις. 10 Kai εἰσελθόντος αὐτοῦ εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα ἐσείσθη 
highest. And as he entered into Jerusalem ‘was ‘moved 
πᾶσα ἡ πόλις, λέγουσα, Tic ἐστιν οὗτος; 11 Οἱ. δὲ ὄχλοι 


1411 2.860 “city, saying, Who is this ? Andthe crowds 
ἔλεγον, Οὗτός ἐστιν “Ἰησοῦς ὁ προφήτης, Ἱ ὁ ἀπὸ ἵΝα- 
sald, This is Jesus the prophet, hewho[is]from WNa- 
Zapir" τῆς Γαλιλαίας. 
zareth of Galilee. 


12 Kai εἰσῆλθεν δὸ" ᾿Ιησοῦς εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν "τοῦ θεοῦ," Kai 
And entered ‘Jesus into the temple of God, and 

’ , ’ A ~ ‘ > , ~ 
ἐξέβαλεν πάντας τοὺς πωλοῦντας Kai ἀγοράζοντας ty τῷ 
cast out all those selling and buying in the 
ἱερῷ, καὶ τὰς τραπέζας τῶν κολλυβιστῶν κατέστρεψεν, Kai 
temple, and the tables of the money changers heoverthrew, and 
τὰς καθέδρας τῶν πωλούντων τὰς περιστεράς. 13 Kai λέγει 


the seats of those selling the doves. And he says 
αὐτοῖς, Γέγραπται, ‘O.oixoc.uou οἶκος προσευχῆς κληθή- 
tothem, It has been written, My house ahouse of prayer shall be 


cera’ ὑμεῖς.δὲ αὐτὸν ἱἐποιήσατε' σπήλαιον λῃστῶν. 14 Kai 
called ; ut ye it have made a den of robbers, And 


προσῆλθον αὐτῷ τυφλοὶ Kai χωλοὶ ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ, Kai ἐθεράπευ- 


*came Sto%him ‘blind ?and “lame in the temple, and e healed 
σεν αὐτούς. 15 ᾿Ιδόντες.δὲ οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ οἱ γραμματεῖς 
them, But "seeing "the ?chief*priests ‘and *the ®scribes 


® εὐθὺς TTr. 
LTTrA. 
they set [him] £. 
LITrA. 
θεοῦ LTr. 


t ἀποστέλλει he sends a. 
x συνέταξεν did direct LTra. 


* ὁ προφήτης ᾿Ιησοῦς LTTra. 
i ποιεῖτε Make LITraA. 


"—OAov LTTrA. Y—xata. W - érion 

» -“ > 4 
Υ ἐπ᾽ LITrA. *—avr@y[L]rtraA. 5 ἐπεκάθισαν 
Ὁ ἔστρωσαν Strewed T. ¢ + avrovhimuttra. 4 Δαυΐδ aw; Aaveid 


f Ναζαρὲθ ELTTrAW. ξ — oO LTTrA. h — τοῦ 


ΧΧΙ. MATTHEW. 


τὰ θαυμάσια ἃ ἐποίησεν, καὶ τοὺς παῖδας Ἐκράζοντας ἐν τῷ 
the wonders whichhe wrought, and the _ children crying in the 
ἱερῷ. Kai λέγοντας, Ὡσαννὰ τῷ υἱῷ 'AaBid," ἠγανάκτησαν, 
temple,and saying, Hosanna tothe Son of David, they were indignant, 
16 καὶ ™elzov' αὐτῷ, ᾿Ακσύεις τί οὗτοι λέγουσιν; Ὁ δὲ Iy- 


and said to him, Hearest thou what these say? And Je- 
σοῦς λέγει αὐτοῖς, Nai’ οὐδέποτε ἀνέγνωτε, Ὅτι tk στόμα- 
5113 says tothem, Yea; “never ‘did *ye read, Out of[the} mouth 
τος νηπίων Kai θηλαζόντων κατηρτίσω alvov; 17 Kai 
of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise? And 


‘ > " Iy~ » ~ , 2 ΄ Η 
καταλιπὼν αὐτοὺς ἐξῆλθεν ἔξω τῆς πόλεως εἰς Βηθανίαν, καὶ 
having left them he went outof the city to Bethany, and 
ηὐλίσθη ἐκεῖ. 
passed the night there. 
18 "Πρωΐας".δὲ οἐπανάγων" εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἐπείνασεν, 
Now early inthe morning coming back into the city he hungered, 
19 καὶ ἰδὼν συκῆν μίαν ἐπὶ τῆς ὁδοῦ, ἦλθεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτήν, Kai 


and seeing *fig-tree ‘one by the way, hecame to it, and 
7 OA τ ? > αὐ > κι ᾽, , \ , 3 τὰν 
οὐδὲν εὗρεν ἐν αὐτῇ εἰ μὴ φύλλα μόνον" καὶ λέγει αὐτῇ, 
nothing found on it except leaves only. And hesays to it, 


Ῥ Μηκέτι ἐκ σοῦ καρπὸς γένηται εἰς rov.aidiva. Kai ἐξηράνθη 
Nevermore of thee fruit let there be for ever. And ‘dried °up 
~ « ~ ΠΥ « a2 , 
παραχρῆμα ἡ συκῆ. 20 Καὶ ἰδόντες οἱ μαθηταὶ ἐθαύμασαν, 

‘immediately *the*fig-tree. And seeing [it] the disciples wondered, 

, ~ ~ ? , € ~ ? ‘ 
λέγοντες, Πῶς mepex pine ἐξηράνθη ἡ συκῆ; 21 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς 
saying, How immediately isdriedup the fig-tree! ? Answering 
δὲ ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ἐὰν ἔχητε πίστιν, 


‘and Jesus said tothem, Verily, Isay toyou, If yehave faith, 
καὶ μὴ.διακριθῆτε, οὐ μόνον τὸ τῆς συκῆς ποιήσετε, 
and donot doubt, not only  the[miracleJofthe fig-tree shall ye do, 


2 AY n ~ mn ’ » » \ U 
ἀλλὰ κἂν τῷ.ὔρει.τούτῳ εἴπητε, Αρθητι καὶ βλήθητι 
but even if to this τηουπΐβ ἢ γ8 should say, ΒΘ thou taken away and be thoucast 
εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν, γενήσεται" 22 καὶ πάντα ὕσα.“ἂν! 
into the sea, it shall come to pass, And all things whatsoever 
αἰτήσητε ἐν τῇ προσευχῷ, πιστεύοντες, τλήψεσθε." 
ye may ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive. 
23 Kai "ἐλθόντι.αὐτῷ! εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν προσῆλθον αὐτῷ 
And onhiscoming intothe temple there cameup to him, [when] 
διδάσκοντι οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς Kai ot πρεσβύτεροι τοῦ λαοῦ, λέγον- 


teaching, the chief priests and the elders of the people, Bay- 
τες, Ἐν ποίᾳ ἐξουσίᾳ ταῦτα ποιεῖς ; καὶ τίς σοι ἔδωκεν τὴν 
ing, By what authority these things doest thou? and whotothee gave 


ἐξουσίαν.ταύτην; 24 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.:δὲ" 6’Incove εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, 
this authority ? And answering Jesus said tothem, 
᾿Ερωτήσω ὑμᾶς κἀγὼ λόγον ἕνα, ὃν ἐὰν εἴπητέ μοι, κἀγὼ 
7Will‘task ‘you ‘I?also 7thing ‘one, which if yetell me, ILalso 
ὑμῖν ἐρῶ ἐν ποίᾳ ἐξουσίᾳ ταῦτα ποιῶ. 25 τὸ βάπτισμα 
to you willsay by what authority thesethings I do. The baptism 
vy? ΄ , - > > ~ A ? ? 6 ’ 5 
Ιωάννου πόθεν ἦν; ἐξ οὐρανοῦ, ἢ ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ; 
of John, whence wasit? from heaven, or from men ? 
Οἱ. δὲ διελογίζοντο ὕπαρ" ἑαυτοῖς, λέγοντες, “Edy εἴπω- 
And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If weshould 
μεν, EE οὐρανοῦ, ἐρεῖ ἡμῖν, “Διατί! οὖν οὐκ.ἐπιστεύσατε 
say, From heaven, he will say to us, Why then did ye not believe 
Κ + τοὺς (read who were) LTTrA. 1 Δαυΐδ Gw: Δανείδ LTTrA. 


® Tpwt TIr. ° ἐπαναγαγὼν LTA. P + Ov tia]. 4 ἐὰν Tr. 
βἀλθόντος αὐτοῦ LTTr. ἢ -- δὲ Δα 1, ¥ + τὸ that LTTra. 


W ἐν among LTr. 


59 


derful things that he 
did, and the children 
crying in the temple, 
and saying, Hosanna 
to the Son of David; 
they were sore dis- 
pleased, 16 and said 
unto him, Hearest thou 
what these say? And 
Jesus saith unto them, 
Yea; have ye never 
read, Out of the mouth 
of babes and suck- 
lings thou hast per- 
fected praise? 17 And 
he left them, and went 
out of the city into 
Bethany ; and he lodg- 
ed there. 


18 Now in the morn- 
ing as he returned into 
the city, he hungered. 
19 And when he saw a 
fig tree in the way, he 
came to it, and found 
nothing thereon, but 
leaves only, and said 
unto it, Let no fruit 
grow on thee hence- 
forward for ever. And 
presently the fig tree 
withered away. 20 And 
when the disciples saw 
it, they marvelled, say- 
ing, How soon is the 
fig tree witheredaway! 
21 Jesus answered and 
said unto them, Verily 
I say unto you, If ye 
have faith, and doubt 
not, ye shall not only 
do this which is done 
to the fig tree, but also 
if ye shall say unto 
this mountain, Bethou 
removed, and be thon 
cast into the sea; it 
shall be done. 22 And 
all things, whatsoever 

e shall ask in prayer, 
lieving, ye shall re- 
ceive. 

23 And when he was 
come into the temple 
the chief priests and 
the elders of the peo- 
ple came unto him as 
he was teaching, and 
said, By what autho- 
rity doest thou these 
things? and who gave 
thee this authority? 
24 And Jesus answered 
and said unto them, [ 
also will ask you one 
thing, which if ye tell 
me, 1 in like wise will 
tellyou by what autho- 
rity I do these things. 
25 The baptism of 
Jobn, whence was it? 
from heaven, or of 
men? And they rea- 
soned with themselves, 
saying, If we shall 
say, From heaven; he 
will say unto us, Why 
did ye not then be- 


τὸ εἶπαν LTTrA. 
τ λήμψεσθε LTTrA. 
x διὰ τί LTTrA. 


60 


lieve him? 26 But if 
we shall say, Of men; 
we fear the people ; for 
all hold John as a pro- 
phet. 27 And they an- 
swered Jesus, and said, 
We cannot tell, And 
he said unto them, 
Neither tell I you by 
what authority I do 
these things. 28 But 
what think ye? A cer- 
tain man had two 
sons; and he came to 
the first, and said, 
Son, go work to day in 
my vineyard. 29 He 
answered and said, I 
will not: but after- 
ward he repented, and 
went, 30 And he came 
to the second, and 
said likewise. And he 
answered and said, I 
go, sir: and went not. 
81 Whether of them 
twain did the will of 
his father? They say 
unto him, The first, 
Jesus saith unto them, 
Verily I say unto you, 
That the publicans 
and the harlots go into 
the kingdom of God 
before you. 32 For 
John came unto you 
in the way of right- 
eousness, and ye be- 
lieved him not: but 
the publicans and the 
harlots believed him: 
and ye, when ye had 
seen it, repented not 
afterward, that ye 
might believe him, 


33 Hear another pa- 
rable: There was a 
certain householder, 
which planted a vine- 
yard, and hedged it 
round about, and dig- 
ged a winepress in it, 
and built a tower, and 
let it out to husband- 
men, and went into a 
far country: 34 and 
when the time of the 
fruit drew near, he 
sent his servants to 
the husbandmen, that 
they might receive the 
fruits of it. 35 And 
the husbandmen took 
his servants, and beat 
one, and killed an- 
other, and stoned an- 
other. 36 Again, he 
sent other servants 
more than the first: 
and they did unto 


MATOATOXS. ΧΧῚ 
αὐτῷ; 26 ἐὰν.δὲ εἴπωμεν, Ἔξ ἀνθρώπων, φοβούμεθα τὸν 


him? but if weshouldsay, From men, we fear the 
ὄχλον πάντες. γὰρ "ἔχουσιν τὸν ᾿Ιωάννην we προφήτην." 
multitude ; for all hold John as anophet 
27 Kai ἀποκριθέντες τῷ Ἰησοῦ "εἶπον." Odx.oidapev. "Ἔφη 
And answering Jesus they said, We know not. 3Said 
αὐτοῖς καὶ αὐτός, Οὐδὲ ἐγὼ λέγω ὑμῖν ἐν ποίᾳ ἐξουσίᾳ 
*to®them “also ‘he, Neither tell you by what authority 


ταῦτα ποιῶ. 28 Τί δὲ ὑμῖν. δοκεῖ; ἄνθρωπος" εἶχεν ὕτέκνα 


these things I do. But what think ye ? aman had ?children 
δύο," “καὶ! προσελθὼν τῷ πρώτῳ εἶπεν, Τέκνον, ὕπαγε 
ame, and havingcome tothe first he said, Child, go 


σήμερον ἐργάζου ἐν τῷ.ἀμπελῶνί μου." 29 Ὁ.δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς 
to-day work in my vineyard. Andhe answering 


εἶπεν, Οὐ.θέλω" ὕστερον. “δὲ" μεταμεληθεὶς ἀπῆλθεν. 80 Καὶ 
said, Iwillnot; butafterwards having nepented he went. And 


προσελθὼν" τῷ βδευτέρῳ! εἶπεν ὡσαύτως. 0.0: ἀποκριθεὶς 
having come tothe second hesaid likewise. Andhe answering 


> ’ , ‘ > 
εἶπεν, ye κύριε" Kai οὐκ. ἀπῆλθεν. 31 Tic ἐκ τῶν δύο ἐποίη- 
said, [60], sir, and went not. Which of the two did 


σεν τὸ θελήμα τοῦ πατρός; Λέγουσιν "αὐτῷ," *O πρῶτος." 
the i ofthe father? They τοῦ to chiuy, The first. 


Λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι οἱ τελῶναι Kai 
ἜΣΣΕ 510 *them wate Werily, I Bay to you, that the tax-gatherers and 


ai πόρναι προάγουσιν ὑμᾶς εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ. 
the harlots go before you into the kingdom of-God, 


32 ἦλθεν. γὰρ "πρὸς ὑ ὑμᾶς Ἰωάννης" ἐν ὁδῷ δικαιοσύνης, 
Sto 


For 7came *you 1John in [the] a of righteousness, 


καὶ οὐκιἐπιστεύσατε αὐτῷ, οἱ. δὲ τελῶναι καὶ αἱ πόρναι 
and γο did not believe him, but the tax-gatherers and the harlots 


ἐπίστευσαν αὐτῷ" ὑμεῖς.δὲ ἰδόντες ἰού. “μετεμελήθητε t ὕστερον 
i 


believed him; but ye having seen dnotrepent afterwards 
TOU πιστεῦσαι αὐτῷ. 
to believe him. 
33 “A\Any παραβολὴν ἀκούσατε. ᾿Ανθρωπ' moc ™rig!§ ἦν 
Another merable hear. certain there was 


οἰκοδεσπότης, ὕστις ἐφύτευσεν ἀμπελῶνα, καὶ φραγμὸν αὐτῷ 
a master of ἃ house, who planted avineyard, and ‘a °fence sit 


περιέθηκεν, καὶ ὥρυξεν ἐν αὐτῷ ληνόν, καὶ gKodd angey 
cee “about, and dug in ὃ Winepress, and built 


πύργον, καὶ "ἐξέδοτο" αὐτὸν Ὑεωργοῖς; καὶ ἀπεδήμησεν. 
Saver and let out it usbandmen, and left the οϑαηῖσσε 


94 ὅτε.δὲ ἤγγισεν ὁ καιρὸς τῶν καρπῶν, ἀπέστειλεν τοὺς 
And when drew near the season οὗ the fruits, he sent 


δούλους. αὐτοῦ πρὸς τοὺς ἐξωργῦνο λαβεῖν τοὺς καρποὺς αὐτοῦ. 
his bondmen to the husbandmen to receive his fruits. 


35 καὶ λαβόντες οἱ thse we τοὺς. δούλους αὐτοῦ, ὃν.μὲν 
And *having *taken ‘the *husb his bondmen, one 


ἔδειραν, ὃν.δὲ ἀπέκτειναν, ὃν.δὲ ἐλιθοβόλησαν. 86 πάλιν 
they Hit andanother they killed, and another they stoned. Again 


ἀπέστειλεν ἄλλους δούλους πλείονας THY πρώτων, καὶ ἐποίη- 
he sent other bondmen more thanthe first, and they 


y ὡς προφήτην ἔ; ἔχουσιν τὸν ᾿Ιωάννην LTTrA. 


vo τέκνα L. 


προσελθὼν δὲ LTTrA. 
afterwards [obeyed] LTr. 
repent) Ltr; οὐ[δὲ] A. 


telmavT. 5 -Ὁ τις (reada certain mal) L. 


© — καὶ T. — pov (read the vineyard) TTrA. — δὲ but [x]r. 
& ἑτέρῳ — GTAW. h — αὐτῷ LTTrA. i ὃ ὕστερος he who 
 "lwavens πρὸς ὑμᾶς LITrA. ' οὐδὲ (read did neither 


τὰ — ig GI TTrAW. n ἐξέδετο TA. 


MATTHEW. 


37 ὕστερον.δὲ ἀπέστειλεν πρὸς αὐτοὺς 
And at last he sent to them 


᾿Εντραπήσονται τὸνουϊόν.μου. 
They will have respect for my son. 


38 Οἱ. δὲ γεωργοὶ ἰδόντες τὸν υἱὸν εἶπον ἐν ἑαντοῖς, Οὗτός 
But the husbandmen seeing the son said among themselves, This 
ἐστιν ὁ κληρονόμος᾽ δεῦτε, ἀποκτείνωμεν αὐτόν, Kai “κατά- 
is the heir ; come, let us kill him, and gain pos- 
σχωμεν! τὴν.κληρονομίαν.αὐτοῦ. 39 Kai λαβόντες αὐτὸν 
session of his inheritance. And havingtaken him 

ἐξέβαλον ἔξω τοῦ ἀμπελῶνος καὶ ἀπέκτειναν. 40 ὅταν οὖν 

they cast(him]outof the vineyard and killed {him}. Whentherefore 
ἔλθῃ ὁ κύριος τοῦ ἀμπελῶνος, TL ποιήσει τοῖς γεωργοῖς 

shallcomethe lord ofthe vineyard, what will hedo Shusbandmen 


ἐκείνοις ; 41 Aéyovow αὐτῷ, Κακοὺς κακῶς ἀπολέσει 
1to “those ? They say tohim, Evil (men)! miserably he will destroy 


αὐτούς, καὶ τὸν ἀμπελῶνα Péxddocerar' ἄλλοις γεωργοῖς, 
them, and the vineyard he will let ont toother husbandmen, 
οἵτινες ἀποδώσουσιν αὐτῷ τοὺς καρποὺς ἐν τοῖς.καιροϊς. αὐτῶν. 
who willrender tohim the fruits in their seasons, 
42 Λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, Οὐδέποτε.ἀνέγνωτε ἐν ταῖς ypa- 
7Says “to *them 1Jesus, Did ye never read in the = scrip- 
paic, Λίθον ὃν ἀπεδοκίμασαν οἱ οἰκοδομοῦντες, οὗτος 
tures, [The] stone which “rejected those “who Sbuild, this 
ἐγενήθη sic κεφαλὴν γωνίας" παρὰ κυρίου ἐγένετο αὕτη, 
is become head of[the]corner: from [the] Lord was this, 
καὶ ἔστιν θαυμαστὴ ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖς ἡμῶν; 43 Διὰ τοῦτο λέγω 


XXI, XXII. 

σαν αὐτοῖς ὡσαύτως. 

did tothem in like manner. 

τὸν. υἱὸν. αὐτοῦ, λέγων, 
his son, saying, 


and itis wonderful in our eyes? Because of this Isay 
ὑμῖν, ὅτι ἀρθήσεται ag’ ὑμῶν ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ 
ἴο you, that *shall *be *taken ‘from ou the kingdom of God, and 


δοθήσεται ἔθνει ποιοῦντι τοὺς καρποὺς αὐτῆς. 44 “καὶ 
it shall be given ἴο ἃ παύΐϊοῃ producing the fruits of it, And 
ὁ πεσὼν ἐπὶ τὸν.λίθον.τοῦτον συνθλασθήσεται᾽ ἐφ᾽ ὃν.δ᾽ ἂν 
he who falls on this stone shall be broken; butonwhomsoever 
πέσῃ, λικμήσει αὐτόν." 45 τΚαὶ ἀκούσαντες" οἱ 
it shall fall it will grind to powder him. And Thearing ‘the 
ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ ot Φαρισαῖοι τὰς.παραβολὰς. αὐτοῦ ἔγνωσαν 
*chief *priests *and *the ‘Pharisees his parables knew 
ὅτι περὶ αὐτῶν λέγει. 46 Kai ζητοῦντες αὐτὸν κρατῆσαι, 
that about them he speaks, And seeking him to lay hold of, 
ἐφοβήθησαν τοὺς ὄχλους, "ἐπειδὴ" ‘we' προφήτην αὐτὸν εἶχον. 
they feared the crowds, because as a prophet him they held. 
22 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς πάλιν εἶπεν "αὐτοῖς ἐν παρα- 
And answering Jesus again spoke tothem in para- 
βολαῖς." λέγων,  Ὡμοιώθη ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν 
bles, saying, ‘°Has “become *like'the *kingdom “of‘the ‘heavens 
ἀνθρώπῳ βασιλεῖ, ὅστις ἐποίησεν γάμους TH-vig.aiTod 
to a man a king, who made 8 wedding feast for his son: 
3 kai ἀπέστειλεν rovcdovrAovc.avTrov καλέσαι τοὺς κεκλη- 
and sent his bondmen to call those who had been 
μένους εἰς τοὺς γάμους, καὶ οὐκ.ἤθελον ἐλθεῖν. 4 Πάλιν 
invited to the wedding feast, and they wouldnot come. Again 


ἀπέστειλεν ἄλλους δούλους, λέγων, Εἴπατε τοῖς κεκλη- 
he sent other bondmen, saying, Say to those who had been 


ο σχῶμεν let us possess LTTrA. P ἐκδώσεται GLTTrAW. 


Sev. 5 ἐπεὶ Tira. teisforLrrra. ἐν παραβολαῖς αὐτοῖς LTTrA. 


4 --- verse 44 [L]T. 


δὶ 


them likewise, 37 But 
last of all he sent inte 
them his son, saying, 
They will reverence 
myson, 28 But when 
the husbandmen saw 
the son, they said a- 
mong themselves, This 
is the heir ; come, let 
us kill him, and let us 
seize on his inherit- 
ance. 39 And they 
caught him, and cast 
him out of the vine- 
yard, and slew him. 
40 When the lord 
therefore of the vine- 

ard cometh, what will 

e do unto those hus- 
bandmen? 41 They say 
unto him, He will mi- 
serably destroy those 
Wicked men, and will 
let out his vineyard 
unto other husband- 
men, which shall ren- 
der him the fruits in 
their seasons, 42 Jesus 
saith unto them, Did 
ye never read in the 
scriptures, The stone 
which the builders 
rejected, the same is 
become the head of 
the corner : this is the 
Lord’s doing, and it is 
marvellous in our eyes? 
43 Therefore say I unto 
you, The kingdom of 
God shall be taken 
from you, and given 
to a nation bringing 
forth the fruits there- 
of. 44 And whosoever 
shall fail on this stone 
shall be broken: but 
on whomsoever it shall 
fall, it will grind him 
to powder. 45 And 
when the chief priests 
and Pharisees had 
heard his parables, 
they perceived that he 
spake of them, 46 But 
when they sought to 
lay hands on him, they 
feared the multitude, 
because they took him 
for a prophet. 


XXII. And Jesus 
answered and spake 
unto them again by pa- 
rables, and said, 2 The 
kingdom of heaven is 
like unto a certain 
King, which made a 
marriage for his son, 
3 and sent forth his 
servants to call them 
that were bidden to 
the wedding : ana they 
would not come. 4 A- 
gain, he sent forth 
other servants, say- 
ing, Tell them which 
are bidden, Behold, I 


τ ἀκούσαντες 


62 


have prepared my din- 
ner: my oxen and my 
fatlings are killed, and 
all things are ready: 
come unto the mar- 
riage. 5 But they 
made light of it, and 
went their ways, one 
to his farm, another 
to his merchandise: 
6 and the remnant 
took his servants, and 
entreated them spite- 
fully, and slew t 

7 But when the king 
heard thereof, he was 
wroth: and he sent 
forth his armies, and 
destroyed those mur- 
derers, and burned up 
their city. 8 Then saith 
he to his servants, The 
wedding is ready, but 
they which were bid- 
den were not worthy. 
9 Go ye therefore into 
the highways, and as 
many as ye shall find, 
bid to the marriage. 
10 So those servants 
went out into the 
highways, and gather- 
ed together all as many 
as they found, both 
bad and good: and the 
wedding was furnish- 
ed with guests, 11 And 
when the king came in 
to see the guests, he 
saw there a man which 
had not on a wedding 
garment: 12 and he 
saith unto him, Friend, 
how camest thou in 
hither not having 
a wedding garment? 
And he was speechless, 
13 Then said the king 
to the servants, Bind 
him hand and foot, and 
take him away, and 
cast him into outer 
darkness; there shall 
be weeping and gnash- 
ing of teeth. 14 For 
many are called, but 
few are chosen. 


15 Then went the 
Pharisees, and took 
counsel how they 
might entangle him in 
his talk. 16 And they 
sent out unto him their 
disciples with the He- 
rodians, saying, Mas- 
ter, we know that thou 
art true, and teachest 
the way of God in 
truth, neither carest 


MATOAIOZ. XXII, 


μένοις, ‘idov, τὸ ἀριστόν.μου "ἡτοίμασα," οἱ ταῦὔροί. μου καὶ 


invited, Behold, my dinner I prepared, my oxen and 
τὰ σιτιστὰ τεθυμένα, Kai πάντα ἕτοιμα᾽ δεῦτε εἰς τοὺς 
the fatted beasts are killed, and all things[are) ready ; come to the 


’ « ὃ A 2 ON , > ~ xs Ι τ > 4 
γάμους. 5 Orde ἀμελήσαντες ἀπῆλθον, *o!_pwév εἰς τὸν 
wedding feast. But they being negligent of [it] went away, one to 
10 , ’ὔ yA" δὲ Z > il A ᾽ , > Lod € δὲ λ . 
toLloVv αγρον, O. εἰς τὴν-ἐεμπορίιανο.αύυτου. θ οἱ. OLTTOL 
hisown field, and another to his commerce. And the rest, 
κρατήσαντες τοὺς.δούλους. αὐτοῦ ὕβρισαν Kai ἀπέκτειναν. 
having laid hold of his bondmen, insulted and illed [them], 
7 "᾿Ακούσας. δὲ ὁ βασιλεὺς" ὠργίσθη. καὶ πέμψας τὰ 
And having heard [it] the king was wroth, and having sent 
στρατεὐματα.αὐτοῦ ἀπώλεσεν τοὺς.φονεῖς.ἐκείνους, Kai τὴν 
his forces he destroyed those murderers, and 
πόλιν.αὐτῶν ἐνέπρησεν ὃ Tore λέγει τοῖς.δούλοις. αὐτοῦ, Ὃ 
their city he burnt. Then he says to his bondmen, The 
ἐν γάμος ἕτοιμός ἐστιν, οἱ. δὲ κεκλημένοι οὐκιἦσαν 
Ξ]ηἀθο ‘wedding “feast ®ready “15, but those who hadbeeninvited werenot 
Ἂν > 4 4 , ~ « ~ ‘ 
ἄξιοι. 9 πορεύεσθε οὖν ἐπὶ τὰς διεξόδους τῶν ὁδῶν, Kai 


worthy ; Go therefore into the thoroughfares of the highways, and 
.« b La || [2 , > 4 , \ 
ὕσους "ἂν" εὕρητε, καλέσατε εἰς τοὺς γάμους. 10 Kai 
asManyas_ ye Shall find, invite to the wedding feast. And 


ἐξελθόντες oidovAoL.éxésivoreic τὰς ὁδοὺς συνήγαγον πάντας 
%having*gone "οτιῦ ‘those *bondmen into ὕπο highways broughttogether all 


ὅσους εὗρον, πονηρούς TE Kai ἀγαθούς" Kai ἐπλήσθη ὁ 
asmanyastheyfound, evil *both and good; and “became *full 'the 
γάμος" ἀνακειμένων. 11 εἰσελθὼν. δὲ ὁ βασιλεὺς θεάσα- 


“wedding “feast of guests. And*coming‘*in‘the king to see 


σθαι τοὺς ἀνακειμένους εἶδεν ἐκεῖ ἄνθρωπον οὐκ ἐνδεδυμένον 


the guests beheld there aman not clothed 
» , \ , > οῖ ἢ - ~ 
ἔνδυμα ἀἁμου" 12 καὶ λέγει αὐτῷ, ᾿Βταῖρε, πῶς 
with a garment of [the] wedding feast ; and hesays tohim, Friend, how 
> ~ ἣν sy 4. ΄ « } 
εἰσῆλθες ὧδε μὴ ἔχων & ‘ua άμου; Ο.δὲ 


didst thouenter here not having ἃ κε... ὐσπῦ of [the] wedding feast? But he 
ἐφιμώθη. 18 τότε δεῖπεν ὁ βασιλεὺς! τοῖς διακόνοις, Δήσαν- 
was speechless. Then said the king tothe servants, Having 
τες αὐτοῦ πόδας Kai χεῖρας “ἄρατε αὐτὸν καὶ ἐκβάλετε f 
bound his feet and hands takeaway him and _ castout [him] 
εἰς TO σκότος τὸ ἐξώτερον' ἐκεῖ ἔσται ὁ κλαυθμὸς Kai ὁ 
into the darkness the outer : there shallbe the weeping and the 
βρυγμὸς τῶν ὀδόντων. 14 πολλοὶ.γάρ εἰσιν κλητοί, ὀλίγοι. δὲ 
gnashing of the teeth. For many are called, but few 
ἐκλεκτοί. 
chosen. 
15 Τότε πορευθέντες οἱ Φαρισαῖοι συμβούλιον ἔλαβον ὅπως 
Then having gone the Pharisees “counsel ‘took how 
> ‘ ΄ ᾽ , ‘ ? ‘ ᾽ ~ 
αὐτὸν παγιδεύσωσιν ἐν λόγῳ. 16 Kai ἀποστέλλουσιν αὐτῷ 
him they mightensnare in discourse, And they send to him 
τοὺς. μαθητὰς. αὐτῶν μετὰ TOY ἸΗΒΟ δχμαιν, ἐλέγοντες,"! Διδά- 
their disciples with the erodians, saying, Teacher, 
σκαλε, οἴδαμεν OTL ἀληθὴς εἶ, Kai τὴν ὁδὸν τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν ἀληθείᾳ 
we know that true thouart,and the way of Godin truth 


* ἡτοίμακα I have prepared LTTra. 
* ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ἀκούσας L; ὃ δὲ βασιλεὺς TTrA; καὶ ἀκούσας ὁ Bac. W. 
© νυμφὼν bridechamber T. 
' + αὐτὸν bim LTTra. 


® ἐπὶ LITrA, 
Ὁ ἐὰν LTTrAW. 
© — ἄρατε αὐτὸν καὶ LTTrA. 


χα ὃς LTTrA. Υ ὃς LTTrA. 


4 ὃ βασιλεὺς εἶπεν LTTrA. 
& λέγοντας LTTr. 


XXII. 
διδάσκεις, Kai οὐ μέλει 
teachest, for *not ‘thou “lookest 


εἰς πρόσωπον ἀνθρώπων" 17 *eiré! οὖν ἡμῖν, τί σοι 
on [the] appearance of men ; tell therefore us, what “thou 


δοκεῖ; ἔξεστιν δοῦναι κῆνσον Καίσαρι ἢ οὔ ; 18 Γνοὺς.δὲ 
‘thinkest? 15 1Ὁ lawful togive tribute toCzsar ornot? But ne 


ὁ Ἰησοῦς τὴν-.πονηρίαν.αὐτῶν εἶπεν, Τί pe πειράζετε, ὑπο- 


ΜΑΤΤΗΒΥ͂. 


σοι περὶ οὐδενός, οὐ.γὰρ 


βλέπεις 
and there 15 caretothee about noone, 


Jesus their wickedness said, Whyme doyetempt, hypo- 
κριταί; 19 ἐπιδείξατέ μοι τὸ νόμισμα τοῦ κήνσου. Οἱ δὲ 
crites? Shew me the coin of the tribute. And they 


προσήνεγκαν αὐτῷ δηνάριον. 20 καὶ λέγει adroic', Τίνος 


presented tohim 8. denarius, And hesays tothem, Whose [is] 
ἡ-εἰκὼν. αὕτη Kai ἡ ἐπιγραφή: 21 Λέγουσιν kair@,' Καίσαρος. 
this image and the inscription? They say to him, Ceesar’s. 


Τότε λέγει αὐτοῖς, ᾿Απόδοτε οὖν τὰ Καίσαρος Καίσαρι, 


Then he says ἴο them, Render thenthethings of Cxsar to Cxsar, 


καὶ τὰ Tov OEov τῷ θεῷ. 22 Kai ἀκούσαντες ἐθαύμασαν" 
and the things of God to God. And having heard they wondered; 


καὶ ἀφέντες αὐτὸν ἀπῆλθον." 
and leaving him went away. 


23 Ἔν ἐκεί ἢ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ προσῆλθον αὐτῷ Σαδδουκαῖοι, ™oi 
tha 


On came to him Sadducees, who 


λέγοντες μὴ. ΡΟΣ ie καὶ ἐπηρώτησαν αὐτόν, 24 λέ- 
say here is not a resurrection, and they questioned him, say- 


yovrec, Διδάσκαλε, "Μωσῆς" εἶπεν, Ἐάν τις ἀποθάνῃ μὴ 
ing, Teacher, Moses said, 1 Buy one shoulddie not 


ἔχων τέκνα, 5 ἐπιγαμβρεύσει ὁ. αὐελί δε, αὐτοῦ τὴν γυναῖκα 
having children, 3shall CmaEEY, brother *wife 


αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἀναστήσει σπέρμα τῷ. ἀδελφῷ. αὐτοῦ. 35 Ἥσαν δὲ 
®his, and shallraiseup seed to his brother. Now there were 


παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ἑπτὰ ἀδελφοί, Kai ὁ πρῶτος Ῥγαμήσας" ἐτελεύτη- 


with us seven brothers; andthe first having married died, 
σεν, Kai μὴ ἔχων σπέρμα ΠΡ ΠΕΣ τὴν.γυναϊκα. αὐτοῦ τῷ 
and not having seed left his wife 


ἀδελφῷ.αὐτοῦ. 26 ὁμοίως καὶ ὁ δεύτερος, Kai ὁ τρίτος; 


to his brother. In like manner also the second, and the third, 
ἕως τῶν ἑπτά. 27 ὕστερον.δὲ πάντων ἀπέθανεν “καὶ! ἡ γυνή. 
unto the seven, And last of all died also the woman. 
28 ἐν τῇ τοὖν ἀναστάσει! τίνος τῶν ἑπτὰ ἔσται γυνή; 


3In *the ‘therefore resurrection of which of the seven shallshe be wife? 


πάντες.γὰρ ἔσχον αὐτήν. 29 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἶπεν 
for all had her. And answering Jesus said 
> ~ ~ ΟἿ > , 4 , 
αὐτοῖς. ΠΠλανᾶσθε, μὴ εἰδότες τὰς γραφάς, μηδὲ THY δύναμιν 
to them, Ye err, not uo the scriptures, nor the power 


τοῦ θεοῦ. 30 ἐν.γὰρ τῇ ἀναστάσει οὔτε γαμοῦσιν οὔτε 
of God. Forin the _ resurrection neither do they Tate nor 


“exyapiZovrat,| ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἄγγελοι ‘rou *Oeoull ἐν * οὐρανῷ 
are eigen in marriage, but as angels of God in heaven 


εἰσιν. 31 περὶ. δὲ τῆς ἀναστάσεως THY νεκρῶν, οὐκ-ἀνέγνωτε 

they are, But concerning the resurrection ofthe dead, have ye not read 
x x = ~ , > ’ ? 

TO ῥηθὲν ὑμῖν ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ, λέγοντος, 32 ᾿Εγώ εἰμι 

that which wasspokentoyou by God, saying, 1 am 


63 


thou for any man: for 
thou regardest not the 
person of men, 17 Tell 
us therefore, What 
thinkest thou? Is it 
lawful to give tribute 
unto Cesar, or not? 
18 But Jesus perceived 
their wickedness, and 
said, Why tempt ye 
me, ye hypocrites? 
19 Shew me the tribute 
money. And _ they 
brought unto him a 
penny. 20 And he 
saith untothem, Whose 
is this image and su- 
perscription? 21 They 
say unto him, Cesar’s. 
Then saith he unto 
them, Render therefore 
unto Cesar the things 
which are Czssar’s; 
and unto God the 
things that are God’s. 
22 When_ they had 
heard these words, 
they marvelled, and 
left him, and went 
their way. 


23 The same day 
came to him the Sad- 
ducees, which say that 
there is no resurrec- 
tion, and asked him, 
24 saying, Master, Mo- 
ses said, If a man die, 
having no children, 
his brother shal] marry 
his wife, and raise up 
seed unto his brother. 
25 Now there were with 
us seven brethren: and 
the first, when he had 
married a wife, de- 
ceased, and, having no 
issue, left his wife unto 
his brother: 26 like- 
wise the second also, 
and the third, unto the 
seventh. 27 And last 
of all the woman died 
also. 28 Therefore in 
the resurrection whose 
wife shall she be of the 
seven? for they all 
had her. 29 Jesus an- 
swered and said unto 
them, Ye do err, not 
knowing the scrip- 
tures, nor the power of 
God. 30 For in the 
resurrection they nei- 
ther marry, nor are 
given in marriage, but 
are as the angels of 
God in heaven. 31 But 
as touching the resur- 
rection of the dead, 
have ye not read that 
which wasspoken unto 
you by God, saying, 
321 am the God of 


Ἀ εἰπὸν 1. i + ὃ Ἰησοῦς Jesus (says) LT. 
m — oi (read saying) LITrA. n Μωῦσῆς LTTrAW. 
4 — καὶ T[Tr]a. r ἀναστάσει οὖν LTTrA. 
7 — θεοῦ LTr[ A]. * + 7o@ the LITra. 


k— αὐτῷ D T[A]. 


5 γαμίζονται LTTrA. 


ο + ἵνα tnat L. 


| ἀπῆλθαν LITA. 
Ὁ γήμας LTTra. 
— Tov LTTra 


64 


Abraham, and the God 
of Isaac, and the God 
of Jacob? God is not 
the God of the dead, 
but of the living. 
33 And when the mul- 
titude heard this, they 
were astonished at his 
doctrine. 


34 But when the 
Pharisees had heard 
that he had put the 
Sadducees to silence 
they were gathered 
together. 35 Then one 
of them, which was a 
lawyer, asked him a 
question, tempting 
him, and_ saying, 
36 Master, which 1% 
the great command- 
ment in the law? 
37 Jesus said unto him, 
Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God with all 
thy heart, and with all 
thy soul, and with all 
thy mind. 38 This is 
the first and great com- 
mandment. 39 And the 
second is like unto it, 
Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself. 
40 On these two com- 
mandments hang all 
the law and the pro- 
phets. 


41 While the Pha- 
risees were gathered 
together, Jesus asked 
them, 42 saying, What 
think ye of Christ? 
whose son is he? They 
say unto him, Zhe Son 
of David. 43 Hesaith 
unto them, How then 
doth David in spirit 
call him Lord, saying, 
44 The LORD said unto 
my Lord, Sit thou on 
my right hand, till I 
make thine enemies 
thy footstool? 45 If 
David then call him 
Lord, how is he his 
son? 46 And no man 
was able to answer 
him a word, neither 
durst any man from 
that day forth ask 
him any more ques- 
tions. 


XXIII. Thenspake 
Jesus tothe multitude, 
and to his disciples, 
2saying, The scribes 
and the Pharisees sit 
in Moses’ seat: 3 all 
therefore whatsoever 
they bid you observe, 


x — ὁ θεὸς (read he is not) T. 
ἔφη αὐτῷ G; ὁ δὲ ἔφη αὐτῷ LTTrA; ἔφη αὐτῷ ᾿Ιησοῦς W. 
4 — δὲ and T. 
ΒΕ καλεῖ αὐτὸν κύριον LTrA ; καλεῖ κύριον αὐτὸν T. 
i $roxdtw under (thy feet) LrTra. Κ ἀποκριθῆναι αὐτῷ LTTrA. 


πρώτη LTTrAW. 
LTTrA. 


MATOAIOS XXII, XXII 
ὁ θεὸς ᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ ὁ θεὸς ᾿Ισαὰκ καὶ ὁ θεὸς Ἰακώβ; οὐκ 


the God of Abraham and the God ofIsaac and the God of Jacob? *Not 
ἔστιν τὸ θεὸς" YOedc" νεκρῶν, ἀλλὰ ζώντων. 33 Kai ἀκού- 
318 1God God of[the]dead, but of [the] living. And having 


σαντες ot ὄχλοι ἐξεπλήσσοντο ἐπὶ τῇ.διδαχῇ αὐτοῦ. 
heard, the crowds were astonished at his teaching. 


94 Οἱ δὲ Φαρισαῖοι ἀκούσαντες ὅτι ἐφίμωσεν τοὺς Σαὸ- 
But the Pharisees, having heard that he had silenced the Sad- 
δουκαίους, συνήχθησαν ἐπὶ. τὸ. αὐτό, 35 καὶ ἐπηρώτησεν 
ducees, were gathered together, and °questioned [?°him] 
εἷς ἐξ αὐτῶν γνομικός, πειράζων αὐτόν, τκαὶ λέγων," 
tone*of “them “4 Sdoctor Sof 7the Slaw, tempting him, and saying, 
36 Διδάσκαλε, ποία ἐντολὴ μεγάλη ἐν τῷ HaLD: 
Teacher, which ‘commandment [15 *the] *great in the Ww? 
37 “0.02 Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτῷ," ᾿Αγαπήσεις κύριον τὸν θεόν 
And Jesus said tohim, Thou shalt love[the] Lord ®*God 
? ὅλ b “Ἱ} δί ΑΓ - - ~ ἣν 1. 
σου ἐν ὕλῃ ὑτῇ" καρδίᾳ σου, καὶ ἐν ὅλῃ τῷς.Ψυχῇ.σου, καὶ ἐν 
‘thy with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with 
ὕλῃ TH-dvavoig.cov. 88 αὕτη ἐστν “πρώτη Kai μεγάλη" 
all thy mind. This is [the] first and great 
ἐντολῆ. 39 devrépa-*dé! ὁμοία αὐτῷ, ᾿Αγαπήσεις τὸν 
commandment. And [the] second [158] like it, Thou shalt love 
πλησίον.σου we σεαυτόν. 40 ἐν ταύταις ταῖς δυσὶν ἐντολαῖς 
thy neighbour as_ thyself. On _ these two commandments 
ὅλος ὁ νόμος “καὶ οἱ προφῆται κρέμανται." 
all the law and the prophets hang. 
41 Συνηγμένων δὲ τῶν Φαρισαίων ἐπηρώτησεν 
But *having *been “assembled *together ‘the Pharisees *questioned 
αὐτοὺς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, 42 λέγων, Ti ὑμῖν δοκεῖ περὶ τοῦ χριστοῦ; 
®them 7Jesus, saying, What “ye ‘thinkconcerning the Christ? 
τίνος υἱός ἐστιν; Aéyovow αὐτῷ, Τοῦ. Δαβίδ." 43 Λέγει 


of whom ’son ‘is *he? They say tohim, Of David. He says 
-? ~ ~ ἦ f ἰδ! ? , [1 , Bi a® ~ hh 
avroic, Πῶς οὖν ἰΔαβὶδ' ἐν πνεύματι κύριον αὐτὸν καλεῖ: 

tothem, How then 7David “ἴῃ “spirit 7Lord Shim ‘does Scall? 


λέγων, 44 Εἶπεν "δ" κύριος τ ευρίρ μοῦ: Κάθου ἐκ δεξιῶν. μου 
saying, 3Said ‘the *Lord to my Lord, Sit on my right hand 
ἕως ἂν θῶ τοὺς. ἐχθρούς σου ἵὑποπόδιον' rév-rodwy.cov. 


until I placa thine enemies [845] a footstool for thy feet. 
45 Ei οὖν [᾿Δαβὶδ'᾽ καλεῖ αὐτὸν κύριον, πῶς υἱὸς αὐτοῦ 
If therefore David calls him Lord, how his son 


ἐστιν; 46 Kai οὐδεὶς ἐδύνατο Ἑαὐτῷ ἀποκριθῆναι! λόγον, 


is he? And noone wasable him to answer a word, 
οὐδὲ ἐτόλμησεν τις ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνης τῆς ἡμέρας ἐπερωτῆσαι αὐτὸν 

ΠΟΥ͂ dared anyone from that day to question him 
οὐκέτι. 


any more (lit, no more). 
23 Τότε ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἐλάλησεν τοῖς ὄχλοις Kai τοῖς. μαθηταῖς 
Then Jesus spoke tothe crowds and to *disciples 
αὐτοῦ, 2 λέγων, "Ei τῆς Μωσέως" καθέδρας ἐκάθισαν ot 
this, saying, On the of *Moses ‘seat have sat down the 
γραμματεῖς καὶ ot Φαρισαῖοι: 8 πάντα οὖν 00a." ay" εἴπω- 
scribes and the Pharisees ; allthings therefore whatever they may 


ao δὲ ᾿Ιησοῦς 
cH μεγάλη καὶ 

f Δαυΐδ aw ; Δαυείδ 
h — ὁ (read [the]) Lrtra. 

| Μωῦσέως LTTTAW. ™ ἐὰν TW. 


Υ — θεὸς LTr[A]. 2 — Kal λέγων LTTr. 
SU Se ee 
© κρέμαται καὶ οἱ mpopyTar LTTrAW. 


XXIII. MATTHEW. 
σιν ὑμῖν "τηρεῖν," στηρειτε καὶ ποιεῖτε" " κατὰ.δὲ τὰ.ἔργα.αὐτῶν 
tell you tokeep, keep and do. But after their works 


μὴ-ποιεῖτε" λέγουσιν.γὰρ Kai οὐ.ποιοῦσιν. 4 δεσμεύουσιν Ῥγὰρ" 
do not ; for they say and do not. ?They *bind ‘for 
φορτία βαρέα “καὶ δυσβάστακτα," Kai ἐπιτιθέασιν ἐπὶ τοὺς 
burdens heavy and hard to bear, and lay [them] on the 
»Ὦἦ ~~ > ’ a Τ ~ ‘ DN e eit ᾽ , 
wpovg τῶν ἀνθρώπων" ττῷ δὲ δακτύλῳ.αὑτῶν" οὐ.θέλουσιν 
shoulders of men, but with their own finger they will not 
κινῆσαι αὐτά. 5 πάντα.δὲ τὰ. ἔργα αὐτῶν ποιοῦσιν πρὸς τὸ 
move them. And all their works they do to 
θεαθῆναι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις. πλατύνουσιν “δὲ; τὰ φυλακτήρια 
be seen by men, 2They*make*broad ‘and *phylacterice 
αὐτῶν, καὶ μεγαλύνουσιν τὰ κράσπεδα τῶν ἱματίων αὐτῶν" 
Stheir, and enlarge the borders of their garments, 
6 φιλοῦσίν ‘re! τὴν πρωτοκλισίαν ἐν τοῖς δείπνοις, Kai τὰς 
love tand the first place in the suppers, and the 
πρωτοκαθεδρίας ἐν ταῖς συναγωγαῖς, 7 Kai τοὺς ἀσπασμοὺς ἐν 
first seats in the synagogues, and the salutations in 
ταῖς ἀγοραῖς, καὶ καλεῖσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων “ῥαββί, paBBi"' 
themarket-places,and to be called by men Rabbi, Rabbi. 
8 ὑμεῖς. δὲ μὴ.κληθηῆτε ῥαββί"" εἴς.γάρ ἐστιν ὑμῶν ὁ TKaOnynTNE, | 


But ες ‘be’notcalled Rabbi; for one is your leader, 
τὸ χριστός"" πάντες.δὲ ὑμεῖς ἀδελφοί ἐστε. 9 Kai πατέρα μὴ 


the Christ, and all ye brethren are. And ‘father *not 

καλέσητε ὑμῶν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς᾽ εἷς.γάρ ἐστιν δὺ. πατὴρ.ὑμῶν," 
‘call ‘your[*any‘onejon the earth; forone is your father, 

b t 


ὁ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς." 10 μηδὲ κληθῆτε καθηγηταί" “εἷς. γὰρ 


who [is] in the heavens. Neither be called leaders ; for one 
ὑμῶν ἐστιν ὁ καθηγητής," ὁ χριστός. 11 ὁ. δὲ μείζων ὑμῶν 
“your tis leader, the Christ. But the greater of you 


ἔσται ὑμῶν διάκονος. 12 ὕστις.δὲ ὑψώσει ἑαυτὸν ταπεινωθή - 
shallbe your servant, And whosoever willexalt himself shall be 


σεται Kai ὕστις ταπεινώσει ἑαυτὸν ὑψωθήσεται. 
humbied; and whosoever willhumble himseif shall be exalted. 


13 a4) “Οὐαὶ.“δὲ! ὑμῖν, γραμματεῖς καὶ Φαρισαῖοι, ὑποκριταί, 


But woe toyou, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, 
OTL κατεσθίετε τὰς οἰκίας τῶν χηρῶν, καὶ προφάσει μακρὰ 
for yedeyour the houses of widows, and as a pretext αὖ *great *length 


προσευχόμενοι" διὰ τοῦτο λήψεσθε περισσότερον κρίμα." 
‘praying. Becauseof this yeshall receive more abundant judgment. 
14 a3) Ovaif ὑμῖν, γραμματεῖς καὶ Φαρισαῖοι, ὑποκριταί, Ore 
Woe toyou, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for 
κλείετε τὴν βασιλείαν τῶν οὐρανῶν ἔμπροσθεν τῶν ἀνθρώπων" 
yeshutup the kingdom ofthe heavens before men ; 
ὑμεῖς. γὰρ οὐκ.εἰσέρχεσθε, οὐδὲ τοὺς εἰσερχομένους ἀφίετε 
for ye do not enter, noreyenthosewho areentering doyesuffer 
εἰσελθεῖν. 15 Οὐαὶ ὑμῖν, γραμματεῖς καὶ Φαρισαῖοι, ὑποκριταί, 
to enter. Woe toyou, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, 
ὅτι περιάγετε THY θάλασσαν Kai τὴν ξηρὰν ποιῆσαι ἕνα 
for yegoabout the sea and the ry [land] tomake one 


65 


that observe and do; 
but do not ye after 
their works : for they 
say, and do not. + For 
they bind heavy bur- 
dens and grievous to 
be borne, and lay them 
on men’s shoulders; 
but they themselves 
will not move them 
with one of their fin- 
gers. 5 But all their 
works they do for to 
be seen of men: they 
make broad their phy- 
lacteries, and enlarge 
the borders of their 
garments, 6 and love 
the uppermost rooms 
at feasts, and the chief 
seats in the syna- 
gogues, 7 and greet- 
ings in the markets, 
and to be called of 
men, Rabbi, Rabbi. 
8 But be not ye called 
Rabbi: for one is your 
Master, even Christ ; 
and all ye are breth- 
ren. 9 And call no 
man your father upon 
the earth: for one is 
your Father, which is 
in heaven. 10 Neither 
be ye called masters: 
for one is your Master, 
even Christ. 11 But he 
that is greatest among 
you shall be your ser- 
vant. 12 And whoso- 
ever shall exalt him- 
self shall be abased ; 
and hethatshall hum- 
ble himself shall be 
exalted. 


13 But woe untoyou, 
scribes and Pharisees, 
hypocrites! for yeshut 
up the kingdom of 
heaven against men: 
for ye neither go in 
yourselves, neither suf- 
fer ye them that are 
entering to go in. 
14 Woe unto you, 
scribes and Pharisees, 
hypocrites! for ye de- 
your widows’ houses, 
and for a pretence 
make long prayer: 
therefore ye shall re- 
ceive the greater dam- 
nation. 15 Woe unto 
you, scribes and Pha- 
risees, hypocrites! for 
ye compass sea and 
land to make one pros- 


0 — τηρεῖν LTTrA. Ρ δὲ but Lrtra. 
τακτα 1 Tra. 
8 yap for LTTrA. τ — τῶν ἱματίων αὐτῶν LTTrA. Υ δὲ Lttra. 
ῥαββὶ [paBBi] a. * ῥαββεί τ. Υ διδάσκαλος teacher LTTraW. 
ὑμῶν ὁ πατὴρ LTTr. ὃ ὁ οὐράνιος the heavenly ΙΤΊΤΑ. 
4 Verse13 placed aster 14 Ἑ; — verse 13 LTTra. 


ο ποιήσατε Kal τηρεῖτε LTTrA. 


e — δὲ but £. 


4ᾳ — καὶ δυσβάσ- 


τ αὐτοὶ δὲ τῷ δακτύλῳ αὐτῶν but they themselves with their finger Litra. 
ὗ ν paBBi LTr; ῥαββείτ; 
:-- ὁ χριστός ΟἸΤΎΓΑΥ.- 
© ὅτι καθηγητὴς ὑμῶν ἐστὶν εἷς LTTA. 
f+ δὲ but (woe) ELTTrA. 


F 


66 


elyte, and when he is 
made, ye make him 
twofold more the child 
of hell than your- 
selves. 16 Woe unto 
you, ye blind guides, 
which say, Whosoever 
shall swear by the tem- 
ple, it is nothing ; but 
whosoever shall swear 
by the gold of the tem- 
ple, he is a debtor! 
17 Ye fools and blind: 
for whether is greater, 
the gold, or the temple 
that sanctifieth the 
gold? 18 And, Who- 
soever shall swear by 
the altar, it is nothing; 
but whosoever swear- 
eth by the gift that is 
upon it, he is galley: 
19 Ye fools and blind: 
for whether is greater, 
the gift, or the altar 
that sanctifieth the 
gift? 20 Whoso there- 
fore shall swear by the 
altar, sweareth by it, 
and by all things there- 
on. 21 And whoso shall 
swear by the temple, 
sweareth by it, and 
by him that dwelleth 
therein. 22 And he that 
shall swear by heaven, 
aweareth by the throne 
of God, and by him 
that sitteth thereon. 

Woe unto you, 
scribes and Pharisees, 
hypocrites! for ye pay 
tithe of mint and anise 
and cummin, and have 
omitted the weightier 
matters of the law, 
judgment, mercy, and 
faith: these ought ye 
to have done, and not 
to leave the other un- 
done. 24 Ye blind 
guides, which strain at 
a goat, and swallow a 
camel, 25 Woe unto 
you, scribes and Pha- 
risees, hypocrites! for 
ye make clean the out- 
side of the cup and of 
the platter, but within 
they are full of ex- 
tortion and _ excess, 
26 Thou blind Pha- 
risee, cleanse first that 
which is within the cup 
and platter, that the 
outside of them may 
be clean also. 27 Woe 
unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! 
for ye are like unto 
whited sepulchres, 
which indeed appear 
beautifuloutward, but 
are within full of dead 
men’s bones, and of all 


δ᾽ τί L. 


" ὁμοιάζετε LTr. 


h μεῖζον L. 
τι κατοικήσαντι dwelt in GTraw. 
to leave aside LrTra. 
* ἀδικίας unrighteousness ow. 


MATOALOS. XXIII. 
προσήλυτον, Kai ὕταν ἕνηται, ποιεῖτε αὐτὸν υἱὸν γε- 
proselyte, and when he has become [50], yemake him asonofGe- 


ἐννης διπλότερον 
henna twofold more than yourselves. Woe toyou, “guides ‘blind, who 
λέγοντες, “Oc.dv ὀμόσῃ ἐν τῷ ναῷ, οὐδέν ἐστιν' ὃς. δ᾽ ἂν 
Bay, Whoever shall swear by the temple,nothing itis; but whoever 
ὀμόσῃ ἐν TP χρυσῷ τοῦ ναοῦ, ὀφείλει. 17 μωροὶ καὶ Cees 
shallswear by the gold of the temple, is a debtor. Fools and blind, 


Bric'-yap Ὀμείζων" ἐστίν, ὁ χρυσός, ἢ ὁ ναὸς ὁ ἁγιάζων!" 


for which greater lis, the gold, or the temple which sanctifies 

‘ ’ é 18 , Ὃ k2 cy Ι ? , ? ~ , 
τὸν χρυσον; και, Ος-“εαν' ὁμοσῃ ἕν τῷ θυσιαστηρίῳ, 
the gold? And, Whoever shallswear by the altar, 


οὐδέν tori" ὃς. δ᾽ ἂν ὀμόσῃ ἐν τῷ δώρῳ τῷ 
nothing itis; butwhoevershallswearby the gift 
ὀφείλει. 19 ἱμωροὶ καὶ! τυφλοί, τί γὰρ μεῖζον, τὸ δῶρον, 
is a debtor. Fools and blind, for which [18] greater, the gift, 

n A , A «ε , ‘ ~ « ᾽ ’ 

ἢ τὸ θυσιαστήριον τὸ ἁγιάζον τὸ δῶρον ; 206 οὖν ὀμόσας 


ἐπάνω αὐτοῦ, 
that [is] upon it, 


or the altar which sanctifies the gift? He*that'therefore swears 
ἐν τῷ θυσιαστηρίῳ ὀμνύει ἐν αὐτῷ καὶ ἐν πᾶσιν τοῖς ἐπάνω 
by the altar swears by it and by allthingsthat[are] upon 


αὐτοῦ" 21 Kai ὁ ὀμόσας ἐν τῷ ναῷ ὀμνύει ἐν αὐτῷ καὶ ἐν 
it. Andhethat swears by the temple swears by it and by 
τῷ "κατοικοῦντι! αὐτόν" 22 Kai ὁ ὀμόσας ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ 
himwho  dwellsin it. And hethat swears by the heaven 
ὀμνύει ἐν τῷ θρόνῳ τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ ἐν τῷ καθημένῳ ἐπάνω 
swears by the throne of God and by him who sits upon 
αὐτοῦ. 23 Οὐαὶ ὑμῖν, γραμματεῖς Kai Φαρισαῖοι, ὑποκριταί, Ort 
it. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for 


ἀποδεκατοῦτε TO ἡδύοσμον Kai TO ἄνηθον Kai τὸ κύμινον, Kai 
yepay tithesof the min and the anise and the cummin, and 


ἀφήκατε τὰ βαρύτερα τοῦ νόμου, τὴν κρίσιν καὶ "τὸν 
ye have left aside the weightier [matters] of the law, judgment, and 
ἔλεον" καὶ τὴν πίστιν' ταῦτα ἔδει ποιῆσαι, κἀκεῖνα μὴ 
merey and faith: these itbehoved{you] todo, andthose not 
Ράἀφιέναι."" 24 ὁδηγοὶ τυφλοί, “οἱ! διυλίζοντες τὸν κώνωπα, 
tobe leaving aside. Guides ‘blind, who filter out the gnat, 
τὴν.δὲ κάμηλον καταπίνοντες. 25 Οὐαὶ ὑμῖν, γραμματεῖς Kai 
but the camel swallow. Woe toyou, scribes and 


~ « / « , δον ~ , 
Φαρισαῖοι, ὑποκριταί, ὅτι καθαρίζετε τὸ ἔξωθεν τοῦ ποτηρίου 


Pharisees, hypocrites, for yecleanse the outside of the cup 
καὶ τῆς παροψίδος, ἔσωθεν. δὲ γέμουσιν "ἐξ! ἁρπαγῆς καὶ 
and of the dish, but within they arefull of plunder and 


βἀκρασίας." 26 Φ i λέ θά ῷ ὁ ἐντὸ 

ρασίας. αρισαῖε τυφλε, καθάρισον πρῶτον τὸ ἐντὸς 
incontinence. *Pharisee ‘blind, cleanse first the inside 
τοῦ ποτηρίου ‘kai τῆς παροψίδος," ἵνα γένηται Kai τὸ ἐκτὸς 
ofthe cup and of the dish, that “may 7become *also *the *outside 
Wig. ell , ? V OAS Se ~ \ ~ 

αὐτῶν" καθαρόν. 27 Οὐαὶ ὑμῖν, γραμματεῖς καὶ Φαρισαῖοι, 
*of “them clean. Woe toyou, scribes and Pharisees, 

ὑποκριταί, ὅτι “παρομοιάζετε! rapoig κεκονιαμένοις, οἵτινες 
hypocrites, for ye are like 4sepulchres ‘whited, which 
ἔξωθεν μὲν φαίνονται ὡραῖοι, ἔσωθεν.δὲ γέμουσιν ὀστέων 
outwardly indeed appear beautiful, but within are full of bones 


‘ayidoas sanctified nrtra, ‘Gyurrra. | — μωροὶ καὶ [L]rtra. 
Ὁ 70 ἔλεος LTTrA- o + δὲ but GLTraw. Ρ ἀφεῖναι 

«- . . » 
4 — ot (read filtering οαῦ.. .. swallowing) τὰ. r—ef u[trh 


t — καὶ τῆς παροψίδος TA. Υ αὐτοῦ of it LrTra. 


᾿ 
᾿ 


ὑμῶν. 16 Οὐαὶ ὑμῖν, ὁδηγοὶ τυφλοί, ot 


| 


| 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


XXIII. MATTHEW. 


γεκρῶν καὶ πάσης ἀκαθαρσίας. 28 οὕτως Kai ὑμεῖς ἔξωθεν 
of [the] dead and ofall uncleanness. Thus also ye outwardly 
μὲν φαίνεσθε τοῖς ἀνθρώποις δίκαιοι, ἔσωθεν. δὲ “μεστοί ἐστε" 
indeed appear to men righteous, but within full are 
ὑποκρίσεως Kai ἀνομίας. 29 Οὐαὶ ὑμῖν, γραμματεῖς καὶ Φα- 
of hypocrisy and lawlessness. Woe toyou, scribes and Pha- 
ρισαῖοι, ὑποκριταί, ὅτι οἰκοδομεῖτε τοὺς τάφους τῶν προφητῶν, 

risees, hypocrites, for ye build the sepulchres ofthe prophets, 
καὶ κοσμεῖτε τὰ μνημεῖα τῶν δικαίων, 30 καὶ λέγετε, Et γἦῆμεν" 
and adorn the tombs ofthe righteous, and yesay, If wehadbeen 
ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις τῶν.πατέρων.ἡμῶν, οὐκ.ἂν. ἦμεν" *Kowwwvoi 
in the days of our fathers we would not havebeen partakers 

αὐτῶν" ἐν τῷ αἵματι τῶν προφητῶν. 31 ὥστε μαρτυρεῖτε 
with them in the blood ofthe prophets. So that ye bear witness 

ἑαυτοῖς, ὅτι υἱοί ἐστε τῶν φονευσάντων τοὺς προφήτας" 
to yourselves, that sons yeare of those who murdered the prophets ; 
32 καὶ ὑμεῖς πληρώσατε τὸ μέτρον τῶν.πατέρων ὑμῶν. 33 ὄφεις, 


and ye, fillyeup the measure of your fathers, Serpents, 
γεννήματα ἐχιδνῶν, πῶς φύγητε ἀπὸ τῆς κρίσεως τῆς γε- 
offspring of vipers, how shall ye escape from the judgment of Ge- 


évync; 34 Διὰ τοῦτο, ἰδού, ἐγὼ ἀποστέλλω πρὸς ὑμᾶς προ- 
henna? 


Because of this, behold, I send to you pro- 
φήτας Kai σοφοὺς καὶ γραμματεῖς" "καὶ" ἐξ αὐτῶν ἀπο- 
phets and wise [men] and scribes ; and [some] of them ye will 


KTEVEITE καὶ σταυρώσετε. καὶ ἐξ αὐτῶν μαστιγώσετε ἐν ταῖς 


kill and crucify, and(somejof them yewillscourge in 
συναγωγαῖς. ὑμῶν, καὶ διώξετε ἀπὸ πόλεως εἰς πόλιν᾽" 
your synagogues, and will persecute from city to city 3 


35 ὅπως ἔλθῃ ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς πᾶν αἷμα δίκαιον éxyvvdpevor" 
so that shouldcome upon you 481] [the] *blood ‘righteous poured out 
ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ἀπὸ “τοῦ! αἵματος “ABEX τοῦ δικαίου, ἕως τοῦ 
upon the earth from the blood of Abel the righteous, to the 
αἵματος Ζαχαρίου υἱοῦ Βαραχίου, ὃν ἐφονεύσατε μεταξὺ τοῦ 

blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye murdered between the 
ναοῦ καὶ τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου. 36 ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, “ ἥξει 
temple and the altar. Verily Isay to you, *shall come 
ταῦτα πάντα! ἐπὶ τὴν.γενεὰν.ταύτην. 37 Ἱερουσαλήμ, 
*these*things ‘tall upon this generation. Jerusalem, 
Ἱερουσαλήμ, ἡ ἀποκτείνουσα τοὺς προφήτας Kai λιθοβολοῦσα 
Jerusalem, who killest the prophets and stonest 
τοὺς ἀπεσταλμένους πρὸς αὐτήν, ποσάκις ἠθέλησα ἐπισυν- 
thosewho have been sent to her, how often wouldI have gath- 
ἀγαγεῖν Td.Tékva.cov, ὃν.τρόπον [ἐπισυνάγει ὄρνις" τὰ 
eredtogether thy children, inthe way “*gathers*together ‘a *hen 
νοσσία δἑαυτῆς" ὑπὸ τὰς πτέρυγας", καὶ οὐκ.ἠθελήσατε; 
her brood under [her] wings, and ye would not ! 
38 ἰδού, ἀφίεται ὑμῖν ὁ. οἶκος. ὑμῶν ἱἔρημος." 39 λέγω.γὰρ 
Behold, isleft toyou your house desolate ; for I say 
Ce ὦ ? , » 2 > ἊΝ « n » > 
ὑμῖν, Ov.pn pe ἴδητε ἀπ’ ἄρτι Ewe.dy εἴπητε, Evdoyn- 
to you, Inno wise me shallyesee henceforth until ye say, Bless- 
EVOC ὁ ἐρχόμενος ἐν ὀνόματι κυρίου. 
ed [is] he who comes in[the] name of [the] Lord. 


67 


uncleanness, 28 Even 
so ye also outwardly 
appear righteous unto 
men, but within yeare 
full of hypocrisy and 
iniquity. 29 Woe unto 
you, scribes and Pha- 
risees, hypocrites! be- 
cause ye build the 
tombs of the prophets, 
and garnish the sepul- 
chres of the righteous, 
30 and say, If we had 
been in the days of our 
fathers, we would not 
have been partakers 
with them in the 
blood of the prophets. 
31 Wherefore ye be 
witnesses unto your- 
selves, that ye are the 
children of them which 
killed the prophets. 
32 Fill ye up then the 
measure of your fa- 
thers. 33 Ye serpents, 
ye generation of vi- 
pers, how can ye escape 
the damnation of hell ? 
34 Wherefore, behold, 
I send unto you pro- 
phets, and wise men, 
and scribes: and some 
of them ye shall kill 
and crucify ; and some 
of them shall ye 
scourge in your syna- 
gogues, and persecute 
them from city to city: 
35 that upon you may 
come all the righteous 
blood shed upon the 
earth, from the blood 
of righteous Abel unto 
the blood of Zacharias 
son Οὗ Barachias, 
whom yeslew between 
the temple and the 
altar. 36 Verily I say 
unto you, All these 
things shall come upon 
this generation. 370 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
thou that killest the 
prophets, and stonest 
them which are sent 
unto thee, how often 
would I have gathered 
thy children together, 
even asa hen gathereth 
her chickens under her 
wings, and ye would 
not! 38 Behold, your 
house is left unto you 
desolate. 39 ForI say 
unto you, Ye shall not 
see me henceforth, till 
ye shall say, Blessed 2s 
he that cometh in the 
name of the Lord. 


x ἐστε μεστοὶ LTTrA. Υ ἤμεθα GLTTrAW. 
Ὁ ἐκχυννόμενον LTTrA. ©—Tovw. 4 + ὅτι that G[a]w. 
ἐπισυνάγει LITrA. ὃ αὐτῆς TL Tr]AW ; — ἑαυτῆς (read [her]) i. 
1 — ἔρημος L. 


2 αὐτῶν κοινωνοὶ LTrA. 
© πάντα ταῦτα LTrA. 
h + [αὐτῆς] her (wings) L. 


& — καὶ LTTrA. 
[ὄρνις 


68 


XXIV. And Jesus 
went out, and departed 
from the temple: and 
his disciples came to 
him for to shew him 
the buildings of the 
temple. 2 And Jesus 
said unto them, See ye 
not all these things? 
verily Lsay unto you, 
There shall not be left 
here one stone upon 
another, that shall not 
be thrown down. 3 And 
as he sat upon the 
mount of Olives, the 
disciples came unto 
him privately, saying, 
Tell us, when shall 
these things be? and 
what shall be the sign 
of thy coming, and of 
the end of the world? 
4 And Jesus answered 
and said unto them, 
Take heed that no man 
deceive you. 5 For 
many shall comeinmy 
name, saying, I am 
Christ; and shall de- 
ceivemany. 6 And ye 
shall hear of wars and 
rumours of wars: see 
that ye be not trou- 
bled: for all these 
things must come to 
pass, but the end is not 
yet. 7 For nation shall 
rise against nation, 
and kingdom against 
kingdom: and there 
shall be famines, and 
pestilences, and earth- 
quakes, in divers 
places. 8 All these are 
the beginning of sor- 
rows. 9 Then shall 
they deliver you up to 
be afflicted, and shall 
kill you: and ye shall 
be-hated of all nations 
for my name’s sake. 
10 And then shall 
many be offended, and 
shall betray one an- 
other, and shall hate 
one another. 11 And 
many false prophets 
shall rise, and shall 
deceive many. 12 And 
because iniquity shall 
abound, the love of 
many shall wax cold. 
13 But he that shall 
endure unto the end, 
the same shall be 
saved. 14 And this 
gospel of the kingdom 
shall be preached in 
all the world for a 
witness unto all na- 
tions; and then shall 
theend come. 15 When 
ye therefore sliall see 
the abomination of 
desolation, spoken of 
by Daniel the prophet, 
stand in the holy place, 


k ἀπὸ (ἐκ Out of L) τοῦ ἱεροῦ ἐπορεύετο LTTrA. 
™ ταῦτα πάντα LTTrA. 


4— πάντα LTT: A). 


MATOAIO®X. XXIV. 
924 Kai ἐξελθὼν ὁ Ἰησοῦς ξἐπορεύετο ἀπὸ τοῦ ἱεροῦ," Kai 
And going forth Jesus went away from the temple, and 
προσῆλθον οἱ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ ἐπιδεῖξαι αὐτῷ τὰς οἰκοδομὰς 
‘Seame*to [Phim] this “disciples to point out tohim the buildings 
τοῦ ἱεροῦ. 2 ὁ. δὲ. "Ἰησοῦς" εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Οὐ. βλέπετε πάντα 
of the temple. But Jesus said to them, See ye not all 
ταῦτα ;" ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, οὐ-μὴ ἀφεθῇ ὧδε λίθος ἐπὶ λίθον 
these things? Verily Isay to you, not atallshallbe left here stone upon stone 


ὃς οὐ-"μὴ" καταλυθήσεται. 3 Καθημένου.δὲ αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τοῦ 
which shall not be thrown down. And as*was *sitting “he upon the 


ὄρους τῶν ἐλαιῶν προσῆλθον αὐτῷ οἱ μαθηταὶ" κατ᾽ (ἰδίαν, é- 


mount of Olives came *to Shim ‘the *disciples apart, sey- 
yovrec, Εἰπὲ ἡμῖν, πότε ταῦτα ἔσται; Kai τί τὸ σημεῖον 
ing, Tell us, when*these*things'shallbe? and what[is]the sign 


τῆς. σῆς παρουσίας Kai Prijc' συντελείας τοῦ αἰῶνος ; 4 Kai 
of thy coming and ofthe completion ofthe age? And 


ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Βλέπετε, μή τις ὑμᾶς 
answering Jesus said tothem, Take heed, lest anyone “you 


πλανήσῃ. 5 πολλοὶ.γὰρ ἐλεύσονται ἐπὶ τῷ.ὀνόματί. μου," λέ- 


1mislead., For many will come in my name, 
yourec, ᾿Εγώ εἰμι ὁ χριστός' καὶ πολλοὺς πλανήσουσιν. 
saying, I am the Christ; and many they will mislead. 


6G Μελλήσετε.δὲ ἀκούειν πολέμους Kai ἀκοὰς πολέμων. ὁρᾶτε, 
But ye shall beabout to hear of wars and rumours of wars. See, 


μὴ.θροεῖσθε" δεῖ. γὰρ ἡπάντα! γενέσθαι" ἀλλ᾽ οὔπω 
be not disturbed ; for itis necessary all[these]things totakeplace, but not yet 
ἐστὶν τὸ τέλος. 7 ᾿Εγερθήσεται.γὰρ ἔθνος "ἐπὶ" ἔθνος, καὶ 
is the end. Yor *shall*rise*up ‘nation against nation. and 
βασιλεία ἐπὶ ἔσονται λιμοὶ “καὶ λοιμοὶ" 
kingdom against and there shall be famines and pestilences 
καὶ σεισμοὶ κατὰ τόπους. ὃ πάντα.δὲ ταῦτα ἀρχὴ ὠδί- 
and earthquakes in [different] places. But all these[areJabeginning of 


νων. 9 Τότε παραδώσουσιν ὑμᾶς εἰς θλίψιν, Kai ἀποκτενοῦσιν 
throes. Then willthey deliverup you to tribulation, and will kill 


ὑμᾶς" καὶ ἔσεσθε μισούμενοι ὑπὸ πάντων ἱτῶν" ἐθνῶν διὰ 
you; and ye willbe hated by all the nations on account of 


, ΄ ‘ , , , 4 
τὸ Ὀνομά.μου. 10 καὶ τότε σκανδαλισθήσονται πολλοί, καὶ 
my name. And then will be offended many, and 


᾽ U ’ ‘ , ? ΄ ‘ 
ἀλλήλους παραδώσουσιν Kai μισήσουσιν ἀλλήλους" 11 καὶ 
one another they will deliver up and will hate one another ; and 


πολλοὶ ψευδοπροφῆται ἐγερθήσονται, καὶ πλανήσουσιν πολ- 
many false prophets will arise, and will misiead 


Nove? 12 καὶ διὰ τὸ.πληθυνθῆναι τὴν ἀνομίαν, ψυγήσεται 


βασιλείαν" καὶ 
kingdom ; 


many ; and because shallhave been multiplied lawlessness,°will “grow ‘cold 
ἡ ἀγάπη τῶν πολλῶν 13 ὁ.δὲ ὑπομείνας εἰς τέλος, 
‘the “love “of*the ‘many; but he who endures to[the} end 


οὗτος σωθήσεται. 14 καὶ κηρυχθήσεται τοῦτο.τὸ.εὐαγγέλιον 

he shall besaved. And thereshallbe proclaimed these glad tidings 
τῆς βασιλείας ἐν ὕλῃ TH οἰκού eer, εἰς μαρτύριον πᾶσιν τοῖς 
ofthe kingdom in all the habitableearth, for atestimony toall the 
” τ ‘ , o 4 , «“ > ” 4 
ἔθνεσιν" καὶ τότε ἥξει τὸ τέλος. 15“Oray οὖν ἴδητε τὸ 
nations; and then shallcome the end. When therefore yeshallsce the 
βδέλυγμα τῆς ἐρημώσεως, τὸ ῥηθὲν διὰ Δανιὴλ τοῦ προ- 
abomination of desolation, which wasspokenof by Daniel the pro- 

! ἀποκριθεὶς answering (he said) LTTra. 
© + [αὐτοῦ] of him 1,. P — τῆς LTTrA. 
S— καὶ λοιμοί LTTrA. t— τῶν &. 


ae μὴ GLTTrAW. 
Nem Ds 


XXIV. 


φήτου, “ἑστὸς 
phet, 


τω" 


derstand), 

» 

ὄρη" 
mountains ; 


MATTHE W. 
"gy τόπῳ ἁγίῳ: ὁ 
standing in{the] “place ‘holy (he who let him un- 
16 τότε ot ἐν τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ φευγέτωσαν *izi" τὰ 
then those in Judea let them fice to the 
17 ὁ ἐπὶ τοῦ δώματος μὴ.“καταβαινέτω" ἄραί *ru' 
he on the housetop lethimnotcomedown totakeanything 
ἐκ τῆς. οἰκίας. αὐτοῦ" 18 Kai ὁ ἐν τῷ ἀγρῷ μὴ.ἐπιστρεψάτω 
out of his house ; and he in the field let him not return 
ὀπίσω ἄραι “τὰ ἱμάτια" αὐτοῦ. 19 ταῖς ἐν.γαστρὶ.ἐ- 


ἀναγινώσκων “yoei- 


reads 


οὐαὶ. δὲ 


back to take "garments ‘his. But woe to those that are with 
χούσαις Kai ταῖς θηλαζούσαις ἐν ἐκείναις ταῖς ἡμέραις. 
child and to those that give suck in those days. 


20 προσεύχεσθε.δὲ ἵνα μὴ.γένηται ἡ.φυγὴ. ὑμῶν χειμῶνος, μηδὲ 
And pray that “may *not*be ‘your “flight inwinter, nor 


béy'! σαββάτῳ. 21 ΓἜσται.γὰρ τότε θλίψις μεγάλη, ota “οὐ 


on sabbath : for there shall be then *tribulation ‘great suchas ποῦ 
γέγονεν" ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς κόσμου ἕως τοῦ νῦν, οὐδ᾽ οὐ.μὴ 
"has been from{[the] beginning of[the] world until now, 20, nor ever 


γένηται. 22 καὶ εἰμὴ ἐκολοβώθησαν αἱοἡμέραι.ἐκεῖναι, οὐκ 
shall be ; and unless *had *been *shortened ‘those *days, Snot 
ἂν.ἐσώθη πᾶσα caps διὰ.δὲ τοὺς ἐκλεκτοὺς 
®there’would havebeensaved any flesh, but on account οὔ the elect 
κολοβωθήσονται ainpésparéxeivar, 23 Tore ἐάν τις ὑμῖν 
5584] *be *shortened 1those “days. Then if anyone toyou 
εἴπῃ, Ἰδού, ὧδε ὁ χριστός, ἢ ὧδε, μὴ. “πιστεύσητε." 24’ EyEo- 
say, Behold, here{is]the Christ, or here, believe [it] not. 2There +will 


θήσονται yap Ψευδόχριστοι Kai ψευδοπροφῆται, καὶ δώσουσιν 
“arise or false Christs and false prophets, and will give 


σημεῖα μεγάλα καὶ τέρατα, ὥστε Ἑπλανῆσαι", εἰ δυνατόν, Kai 


“signs great and wonders, so as to mislead, if possible, even 
τοὺς ἐκλεκτούς. 25 ἰδού, προείρηκα ὑμῖν. 96 ἐὰν οὖν εἴπωσιν 
the eleci. Lo, Ihave foretold[it] toyou. if therefore they say 


ἐν 
Behold, [he is} in 


«- ~ > , > ~ ? 7 ᾽ ΄ ι >] , δ ) , 
ὑμῖν, Ἰδού, ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ ἐστίν, μὴ.ἐξέλθητε" ᾿Ιδού, 
toyou, LGehold, in the wilderness he is, go not forth: 
τοῖς ταμείοις, μὴ.πιστεύσητε. 27 ὥσπερ.γὰο ἡ ἀστραπὴ ἐξέρ-- 
the chambers, believe [it] not. For as the lightning comes 
χεται ἀπὸ ἀνατολῶν καὶ φαίνεται ἕως δυσμῶν, οὕτως 
forth from([the} east and appears asfaras[the] west, ΞΟ 
ἔσται 'καὶϊ ἡ παρουσία τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου. 28 ὅπου.δ γὰρ! 
shallbe aiso the coming ofthe Son of man. For wherever 
ἐὰν ἡ TO πτῶμα, ἐκεῖ συναχθήσονται οἱ ἀετοί. 29 Ev- 
maybethe carcase, there will be gathered together the eagles. *Immedi- 
θέως δὲ μετὰ τὴν θλίψιν TOvapEepGr-éxeivwy ὁ ἥλιος σκοτι- 


69 


(whosoreadeth, let him 
understand:) 16 then 
let them which be in 
Judza flee into the 
mountains : 17 let him 
which is on the house- 
top not come down to 
take any thing out of 
his house: 18 neither 
let him which is in 
the field return back 
to take his clothes. 
19 And woe unto them 
that are with child, 
and to them that give 
suck in those days! 
20 But pray ye that 
your flight be not in 
the winter, neither on 
the sabbath day: 21 for 
then shall be great 
tribulation, such as 
was not since the be- 
ginning of the world 
to this time, no, nor 
ever shall be. 22 And 
except those days 
should be shortened, 
there should no flesh 
be saved: but for the 
elect’s sake those days 
shall be shortened. 
23 Then if any man 
shall say unto you, Lo, 
here ὦ Christ, or there; 
believe ποῦ. 24 For 
there shall arise false 
Christs, and false pro- 
phets, and shall shew 
great signs and won- 
ders; insomuch that, 
if it were possible, they 
shall deceive the very 
elect. 25 Behold, I 
have told you before. 
26 Wherefore if thev 
shall say unto you, 
Behold, he is in the 
desert; go not forth: 
behold, He is in the 
secret chambers; be- 
lieve zt not. 27 Foras 
the lightning cometh 
out of the east, and 
shineth even unto the 
west ; soshall also the 
coming of the Son of 
man be. 28 For where- 
soever the carcase is, 
there will the eagles 
be gathered together. 
29 Immediately after 
the tribulation of 
those days shall the 
sun be darkened, ana 
the moon. shall not 
give her light, and the 
stars shall fall from 
heaven, and the powers 
of the heavens shall be 
shaken: 30 and then 
shall appear the sign 
of the Son of man in 
heaven: and then shall 


ately but after the tribulation of those days the 5} shall be 
σθήσεται, Kai ἡ σελήνη οὐ-δώσει τὸ.φέγγος.αὐτῆς, Kai οἱ 
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the 
ἀστέρες πεσοῦνται "ἀπὸ" τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, Kui ai δυνάμεις τῶν 
stars shall fall from the heaven, and the powers. ofthe 
οὐρανῶν σαλευθήσονται. 30 καὶ τότε φανήσεται τὸ σημεῖον 
heavens shall be shaken, And then shallappear the sign 
Tov υἱοῦ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐν ‘ry οὐρανῷ Kai *rére' κό- 
of the Son of man in the heaven ; and then shall 
Υ ἑστὼς EG. W νοείτω ; does he understand ? Tr. χ εἰς LTr. 


* τὰ the things GLTTraw. 

> ΄ ΄ 
ἐγένετο Τ. ἃ πιστεύετε L. 
f— καὶ LTTrAW. 


® τὸ ἱμάτιον garment Lrrr. 


6— γὰρ forLrtra. © ἐκ out of τ. 


b — ἐν GLTTrAW. 
© πλανηθῆναι T; πλανᾶσθαι (read so that will be misled) tr. 
i —7@ LITrA. 


Υ καταβάτω LTTr. 
» 
© ovK 


k — τότε T. 


70 


all the tribes of the 
earth mourn, and they 
shall see the Son of 
man coming in the 
clouds of heaven with 
power and great glory. 
31 And he shall send 
his angels with a great 
sound of a trumpet, 
and they shall gather 
together his elect from 
the four winds, from 
one end of heaven to 
the other. 32 Now learn 
a parable of the fig 
cree; When his branch 
is yet tender, and put- 
teth forth leaves, ye 
Imow that summer 7s 
nigh: 33 so likewise 
ye, when ye shall see 
all these things, know 
that it is near, even at 
the doors. 34 Verily I 
say unto you, This 
generation shall not 
pass, till all these 
things be fulfilled. 
35 Heaven and earth 
shall pass away, but 
my words shall not 
pass away. 36 But of 
that day and hour 
knoweth no man, no, 
not the angels of hea- 
ven, but my Father 
only. 37 But as the 
days of Noe were, so 
shall also the coming 
of the Son of man be. 
38 For as in the days 
that were before the 
flood they were eating 
and drinking, marry- 
ingand giving in mar- 
riage, until the day 
that Noe entered into 
the ark, 39 and knew 
not until the flood 
came, and took them 
all away ; soshall also 
the coming of the Son 
of man be. 40 Then 
shall twobe inthe field; 
the one shall be taken, 
and the other left. 
41 Two women shall be 
grinding at the mill; 
the one shall be taken, 
and the other left. 
42 Watch therefore: 
for ye know not what 
hour your Lord doth 
come. 43 But know 
this, that if the good- 
man of the house had 


MATOATOX. XXIV. 


Ψψονται πᾶσαι at φυλαὶ τῆς γῆς, Kai ὄψονται τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ 
wail all the tribes ofthe land, and they shallsee the Son 
ἀνθρώπου, ἐρχόμενον ἐπὶ τῶν νεφελῶν τοῦ οὐρανοῦ μετὰ Ov- 
of man, coming on the clouds of heaven with 
vapewc καὶ δόξης πολλῆς. 81 Kai ἀποστελεῖ τοὺς ἀγγέλους 
power and *glory lereat. And heshallsend “angels 
αὐτοῦ μετὰ σάλπιγγος φωνῆς" μεγάλης, καὶ ἐπισυνάξουσιν 
this with *of*a*trumpet sound great, andtheyshall gather together 
Tovc.txrEKkTovdc.avTou ἐκ τῶν τεσσάρων ἀνέμων, ἀπ᾿ ἄκρων 
his elect from the four winds, from[the]extremities 
οὐρανῶν ἕως ἄκρων αὐτῶν. 82 ᾿Απὸ.δὲ τῆς συκῆς 
of(the]heavens to [the]extremities of them. Butfrom the fig-tree 
μάθετε τὴν TapaBoAny’ ὕταν ἤδη ὁ.κλάδος. αὐτῆς γένηται 
learn the parable : When already its branch is become 
ἁπαλός, καὶ τὰ φύλλα πἐκφύῃ,! γινώσκετε OTe ἐγγὺς τὸ 
tender, and the leaves it puts forth, ye know that near [is] the 
θέρος" 33 οὕτως καὶ ὑμεῖς, ὅταν ἴδητε “πάντα ταῦτα," 
summer, Thus also _ ye, when ye see all these things, 
γινώσκετε ὅτι ἐγγύς ἐστιν ἐπὶ θύραις. 84 ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν,» 
know that near itis, at{the] doors. Verily Isay to you, 
οὐ.μὴ παρέλθῃ ἡ.-.γενεὰ.αὕτη ἕως.ἂν πάντα ταῦτα 
In no wise willhave passed away this generation until all these things 
γένηται. 35 Ὁ οὐρανὸς καὶ ἡ γῆ “παρελεύσονται, " 
shall have taken place. The heaven and the earth shall pass away, 
οἱ. δὲ. λόγοι.μου ov. παρέλθωσιν. 36 Περὶ δὲ τῆς ἡμέρας 
but my words’ inno wise shall pass away. But concerning 2day 
ἐκείνης καὶ ‘rijc ὥρας οὐδεὶς οἶδεν, οὐδὲ οἱ ἄγγελοι τῶν 


m 


‘that and _ the hour noone knows, noteven the angels of the 
οὐρανῶν, " εἰ. μὴ ὁ ἡρἁμουὶ μό 37“Q Oe! αἱ ἡμέ 
» ἢ εἰςμὴ ὁ-πατὴρ.-' μου" μόνος. σπερ- αἱ ἡμέραι 
heavens, but my Father only. But as the days 


τοῦ.Νῶε, οὕτως ἔσται “καὶ! ἡ παρουσία τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ avOpw- 
of Noe, so shall be also the coming ofthe Son of 
8 x Π ‘ at ? ~ «ς , y z ~ 4 lt 

που. 38 *worep' yao ἦσαν ἐν ταῖς ἡμεραιςῦ *raic πρὸ 


man. 345 ‘for they werein the days which [were] before 
τοῦ κατακλυσμοῦ, τρώγοντες Kai πίνοντες, γαμοῦντες καὶ 
the flood, eating and drinking, marrying and 


*ixyapiZovrec," ἄχρι ἧς. ἡμέρας εἰσῆλθεν Νῶε εἰς TY κιβωτόν, 
giving in marriage, until theday when “entered ‘Noe into the ark, 


39 καὶ οὐκ.ἔγνωσαν, ἕως ἦλθεν ὁ κατακλυσμὸς Kai ἦρεν 


and they knew not till “*came ‘the “flood and took away 
ἅπαντας, οὕτως ἔσταιϑκαὶ" ἡ παρουσία τοῦ υἱοῦ Tov ἀνθρώπου. 


coming ofthe Son of man, 


all; thus shallbe also the 
40 Tore “δύο ἔσονται"! ἐν τῷ ayop “ὁ" εἴς παραλαμβάνεται, 


Then ὕσο willbe in the field, the one is taken, 
καὶ 46" εἴς ἀφίεται. 41 δύο ἀλήθουσαι ἐν τῷ “μύλωνι"" μία 
and the one is left; two[women] grinding at the mill, one 


παραλαμβάνεται, καὶ pia ἀφίεται. 42 Τρηγορεῖτε οὖν, Ore 
is taken, and one is left. Watch therefore, for 

> ” , f°" iT] « , « ~ » Ξ > ~ 
ovK.oldare ποίᾳ ‘wow P-SUCLAG πων, ἔρχεται" 43 ἐκεῖνο. δὲ 
ye know not inwhat hour your Lor comes, But this 


! — φωνῆς (read a great trumpet) T. 


ο ταῦτα πάντα TTr. 


5. οὐδὲ ὁ vids nor the son LT. 


Ww — xat LTTrA. 


® — ταῖς πρὸ (read of the flood) a. 


© ἔσονται δύο LT. 


m + τῶν the Tr. π ἐκφυῇ are put forth Ltra. 
Ρ + ὅτι that “rr. 4 παρελεύσεται GLITrA. τ--- τῆς GLTTrA. 
t — μον (read the Father) Gurtr[a]. ὑ yap for (as) Ltr. 
¥ + ἐκείναις (read those days) L[tr} 


χα ὡς ΔΒ LTA; ὡς SO Tr. 
b — καὶ τ,ττὰ, 


ἃ γαμίσκοντες 1,; γαμίζοντες Ὑ. 


4 — 9 LITra. © μύλῳ LTTrA. Γ ἡμέρᾳ day LiTra. 


XXIV, ΧΧΥ. MATTHEW. 
γινώσκετε, ὅτι εἰ ὕδει ὁ οἰκοδεσπότης ποίᾳ φυλα 
know, that if Shad 7known ‘the *master Sof*the house in what watch 


ὁ κλέπτης ἔρχεται, ἐγρηγόρησεν.ἂν, Kai οὐκ ἂν.εἴασεν ἔδιο- 
the thief po he would have watched, and not have suffered *to *be 


py γῆναι! ryvoikiav.abrov. 44 διὰ τοῦτο καὶ ὑμεῖς γίνεσθε 
CS this “house. Wherefore also 2ye 108 


ἕτοιμοι" ὅτι ἡ δὥρᾳ οὐ.δοκεῖτε! ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἔρχεται. 
ready, for in what hour ye think not the Son of man comes, 


45 Tic a = ἐστὶν ὁ πιστὸς δοῦλος Kai φρόνιμος, ὃν κατέ- 
Who the is the faithful bondman and prudent, whom “has 


στησεν ὁ. εὐριοςϑαύταοὶ ἐπὶ τῆς."θεραπείας". αὐτοῦ, τοῦ Ἰδιδόναι" 
*set this 7lord over his household, to give 


αὐτοῖς τὴν τροφὴν ἐν καιρῷ; 46 μακάριος 0-CovAoC-éKEivoc, ὃν 
tothem the food in season? Blessed that bondman, whom 


ἐλθὼν ὁ κύριος: αὐτοῦ εὑρήσει Ξπ-ποιοῦντα οὕτως." 47 ᾿Αμὴν 
shaving ‘come his *lord will find doing thus. co 


λέγ ω ὑμῖν, ὅτι ἐπὶ πᾶσιν τοῖς. ὑπάρχουσιν. αὐτοῦ καταστήσει 


I sey to you, that over all his property he will set 
αὐτόν. 48 ᾿ΕἘὰν δὲ εἴπῃ ὁ κακὸς δοῦλος "ἐκεῖνος" ἐν τῇ 
him. But if *should ESy, evil Spondman =! that in 


καρδίᾳ. αὐτοῦ, Χρονίζει “ὁ. κύριός. μου" Ρέλθεῖν," 49 καὶ ἄρξηται 
his heart, *Delays my 7lord to come, and shonld begin 


τύπτειν τοὺς συνδούλους, τἐσθίειν" δὲ Kai "πίνειν! μετὰ τῶν 
ἴο beat [his] fellow-bondmen, and to eat and to drink with the 


μεθυόντων, 50 ἥξει ὁ κύριος τοῦ.δούλου ἐκείνου ἐν ἡμέρᾳ 
en, ®Swill’7come'the 7lord Sof *that *bondman in aday 


7 οὐ-προσδοκᾷ, Kai ἐν ὥρᾳ οὐ.γινώσκει, 51 καὶ 
and 


in which he does not oe and in anhour which he knows not, 


διχοτομήσει αὐτόν, καὶ τὸ. “μέρδε. αὐτοῦ μετὰ τῶν ὑποκριτῶν 
will cut 3two ‘him, and is portion with the hypocrites 
θήσει: ἐκεῖ ἔσται ὁ κλαυθμὸς Kai ὁ βρυγμὸς τῶν ὀδόντων. 


will appoint: there will be the weeping andthe gnashing ofthe teeth. 


25 Tore ὁμοιωθήσεται ἡ βασιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν δέκα 
Then °will 7be Smade *like 'the *kingdom “%of*the ‘heavens [to] ten 


παρθένοις, αἵτινες λαβοῦσαι τὰς.λαμπάδας "αὑτῶν" ἐξῆλθον 


virgins, who having taken their dane went forth 
εἰς "ἀπάντησιν" τοῦ νυμφίου. 2 πέντε.δὲ “hoay ἐξ αὐτῶν" 
to meet the free And five Swere ‘of them 
χφρόνιμοι," καὶ Yai" πέντε *ywpai.' 3 "αἵτινες μωραί, λα- 
prudent, and five ae They who[were] foolish, hay- 
βοῦσαι τὰς Χαμ σε α. Ὲ ἑαυτῶν," οὐκιἔλαβον μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῶν 
ing taken eir lamps, did not take with themselves 
ἔλαιον᾽ 4 aid? φρόνιμοι ἔλαβον ἔλαιον ἐν τοῖς ἀγγείοις 
oil; butthe prudent took oil in ?vessels 
“αὑτῶν" μετὰ τῶν. λαμπάδων. δαὑτῶν." 5 χρονίζοντος.δὲ τοῦ 
their with their lamps, But *tarrying lthe 
νυμφίου, ἐνύσταξαν πᾶσαι καὶ ἐκάθευδον. 6 μέσης. δὲ 
?bridegroom, they 7became*drowsy ‘all and slept. But in [the] middle 
νυκτὸς moa γέγονεν, ᾿Ιδού, ὁ νυμφίος "ἔρχεται," a 


of [the] night 
8 διορυχθῆναι TTr. 
K οἰκετείας LTTrA. 
evil bondman) τ. 
bondmen) LITrAW. 
τ ἑαυτῶν LTrA; αὐτῶν TW. 
LTtra. ¥ — ai EGLTTrAW. 
Who tr; αἱ γὰρ for the Ta. 
vessels) LTTrA. 


a‘cry ‘there ?was, Behold, the bridegroom 


ἃ ov δοκεῖτε ὥρᾳ LITrA. 
! δοῦναι GLTTrA. ™ οὕτως ποιοῦντα, LTTrA. 
ο μου ὃ κύριος LTTrA. Ρ — ἐλθεῖν LITr. 

τ Eoin | should eat GLTTraw. 
M ὑπάντησιν LTTrA. 
φρόνιμοι prudent ᾿ΤΊΤΑ. 
b αὑτῶν Gw; αὐτῶν LTrA ; — ἑαυτῶν T. 

4 ἑαυτῶν LT; αὐτῶν Tra. “ — ἔρχεται ‘LTA. 


comes, 


71 


5 known in what watcb 


the thief would come, 
he would have watch- 
ed, and would not have 
suffered his house to be 
broken up. 44 There- 
fore be ye also ready : 
for in such an hour az 
ye think not the Son 
of mancometh. 45 Who 
then is a faithful and 
wise servant, whom 
his lord hath made 
ruler over his house- 
hold, to give them 
meat in due season? 
46 Blessed is that ser- 
vant, whom his lord 
when he cometh shall 
find so doing. 47 Verily 
I say unto you, That 
he shall make him 
ruler over all hisgoods. 
48 But and if that evil 
servant shall say in 
his heart, My lord 
delayeth his coming; 
49 and shall begin to 
smite his fellowser- 
vants, and to eat and 
drink with the drunk- 
en; 50 the lord of thas 
servant shall come in 
a day when he looketh 
not for him, and in av 
hour that he is not 
aware of, 5] and shall 
cut him asunder, and 
appoint Aim his por- 
tion with the hypo- 
erites: there shall be 
weeping and gnashing 
of teeth. 


XXY. Then shall the 
kingdom of heaven be 
likened unto ten vir- 
gins, which took their 
lamps, and went forth 
to meet the bride- 
groom. 2 And five of 
them were wise, and 
five were _ foolish. 
3 They that were fool- 
ish took their lamps, 
and took no oil with 
them: 4 but the wise 
took oil in their ves- 
sels with their lamps, 
5 While the _ bride- 
groom tarried, they 
all slumbered and 
slept. 6 And at mid- 
night there was a cry 
made, Behold, the 
Ὁ bridegroom cometh; 


1_ Σ;αὐτοῦ (read [his]) Lrtra. 
n — ἐκεῖνος (read the 
4 + αὐτοῦ his (fellow 
8 " πίνῃ should drink @LTTraw. 
w ἐξ αὐτῶν ἦσαν LTTra. 
5 ai δὲ but the L; at yap for those 
© — αὑτῶν (read the 


* μωραὶ foolish 


72 


go ye out to meet him. 
7 Then all those vir- 
gins arose, and trim- 
med their lamps. 8 And 
the foolish said unto 
the wise, Give us of 
your oil ; for our lamps 
are gone out. 9 But 
the wise answered, say- 
ing, Not so; lest there 
be not enough for us 
and you: but go ye 
rather to them that 
sell, and buy for your- 
selves. 10 And while 
they went to buy, the 
bridegroom came ; and 
they that were ready 
went in with him to 
the marriage : and the 
door was shut. 11 Af- 
terward came also the 
other virgins, saying, 
Lord, Lord, open to 
us. 12 But he answer- 
ed and said, Verily I 
say unto you, 1 know 
you not. 13 Watch 
therefore, for ye know 
neither the day nor the 
hour wherein the Son 
of man cometh. 


14 For the kingdom 
of heaven is as a man 
travelling into a far 
country, who called 
his own servants, and 
delivered unto them 
hisgoods, 15 Andunto 
one he gave five ta- 
lents, to another two, 
and to another one; 
to every man accord- 
ing to his several abi- 
lity ; and straightway 
took his journey. 
16 Then he that had 
received the five ta- 
lents went and traded 
with the same, and 
made them other five 
talents. 17 And like- 
wise he that had re- 
ceived two, he also 
gained other’ two. 
18 But he that had re- 
ceived one went and 
digged in the earth, 
and hid his lord’s 
money. 19 Aftera long 
time the lord of those 
servants cometh, and 
reckoneth with them. 
20 And so he that had 
received five talents 
came and_ brought 
other five talents, say- 
ing, Lord, thou deliv- 
eredst unto me five 


MATOATOS. XXYV,. 
χεσθὲε εἰς. ἀπάντησιν ἱαὐτοῦ." 7 Tore ἠγέρθησαν πᾶσαι ai 
forth to meet him, Then arose all 
παρθένοι.ἐκεῖναι, Kai ἐκόσμησαν τὰς.λαμπάδας δαὑτῶν." 8 αἱ.δὲ 

those virgins, and trimmed their lamps. Andthe 
μωραὶ ταῖς φρονίμοις *sizrov," Δότε ἡμῖν ἐκ τοῦ ἐλαίου. ὑμῶν, 
foolish tothe prudent said, Give us of your oil, 
Ore αἱιλαμπάδες.ἡμῶν σβέννυνται. 9 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν. δὲ αἱ 
ΤΟΥ our lamps are going out. But “answered ‘the 
φρόνιμοι, λέγουσαι, Μήποτε ἰοὐκ' ἀρκέσῃ ἡμῖν καὶ ὑμῖν" 
“prudent, saying, [No,] lest Snot ‘it *maysuifice forus and you: 
, 4 ~ A ‘ ~ ? 
πορεύεσθε. "δὲ" μᾶλλον πρὸς τοὺς πωλοῦντας, Kai ἀγοράσατε 
but go rather to those who sell, and buy 
ἑαυταῖς. 10 ἀπερχομένων.δὲ αὐτῶν ἀγοράσαι, ἦλθεν ὁ 
for yourselves. But as *went “away ‘they to buy, %came ‘the 
΄ὔ τ ‘ € a 7 ~ ᾽ Ψ ~ > A 7, 
νυμφίος" καὶ at ἕτοιμοι εἰσῆλθον per αὐτοῦ εἰς τοὺς γά- 
“bridegroom, and those ready wentin with him to the wedding 
μους, καὶ ἐκλείσθη ἡ θύρα. 11 ὕστερον.δὲ ἔρχονται ἱκαὶ" ai 


feast, and ὅνγαβ "βῃπιῦ ‘the ?door. And afterwards come also the 
λοιπαὶ παρθένοι, λέγουσαι, Κύριε, κύριε, ἄνοιξον ἡμῖν. 12 Ὁ. δὲ 
other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he 


ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, οὐκιοἷδα ὑμᾶς. 18 Ton- 
amswering 5816, Verily Isay to you, I do ποῦ know you. Watch 
γορεῖτε οὖν, Ort οὐκιοίδατε τὴν ἡμέραν οὐδὲ THY ὥραν Tv 
therefore, for ye do not know the day nor the hour in 
ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἔρχεται." 
which the Son of man comes. 
Uy » ~ , 
14 “Ὥσπερ.γὰρ ἄνθρωπος ἀποδημῶν ἐκάλεσεν τοὺς ἰδίους 
For [it is] as [if] aman leaving the country called his own 
δούλους, Kai παρέδωκεν αὐτοῖς τὰ. ὑπάρχοντα.αὐτοῦ. 15 Kai 


bondmen, and delivered to them his property. And 
ᾧ-μὲν ἔδωκεν πέντε τάλαντα, ᾧ-δὲ δύο, woe ἕν, 
toone he gaye five talents, and to another two, and toanother one, 
ἑκάστῳ κατὰ τὴν ἰδίαν δύναμιν' καὶ "ἀπεδήμησεν εὐθέως. 


to each according to his respective ability ; 


16 πορευθεὶς" dé" ὁ τὰ πέντε τάλαντα λαβὼν PEipyacaro" 
And “having *gone 'hewhothe five talents received trafficked 


ἐν αὐτοῖς, καὶ «ἐποίησεν" ἄλλα πέντεττάλαντα." 17 ὡσαύτως 


and left the country immediately. 


with them, and made other five talents. In like manner 
Ska! ὁ τὰ δύο ἐκέρδησεν ‘kai αὐτὸς! ἄλλα δύο. 
also he who[received] the two Seained 24.150 the other two. 
18 6.6 τὸ ἕν λαβὼν ἀπελθὼν woviey Viv τῇ yy," καὶ 


Buthe who the one received having goneaway dug in the earth, and 


χἀπέκρυψεν" τὸ ἀργύριον τοῦ. κυρίου.αὐτοῦ. 19 Μετὰ. δὲ χρόνον 
hid the money of his lord. Andafter atime 
πολὺν! ἔρχεται ὁ κύριος τῶν δούλων ἐκείνων, καὶ συναίρει 
llong comes the lord of those bondmen, and takes 
tuer αὐτῶν λόγον." 20 Kai προσελθὼν ὁ τὰ πέντε τά- 
*with “%them ‘account. And *having *come 'he who the five ta- 


Lavra λαβὼν, προσήνεγκεν ἄλλα πέντε τάλαντα, λέγων, 
lents received, brought to [him] other five talents, saying, 


f αὐτοῦ (read [him]) Ta. 
k — δὲ but GLTTraW. 


Β ἑαυτῶν LTTrA. © εἶπαν TTrA. 1 ov μὴ not at all Lrraw. 


1— καὶ z[tr]. m — ἐν ἡ ὃ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπον ἔρχεται GLTTrA. 
N ρ 


᾿ ἀπεδήμησεν. εὐθέως πορευθεὶς left the country. Immediately having gone τ. 9 — δὲ ἃπα 


[1,7 Ὁ [Tr]. 
[{71. 
χ ἔκρυψεν LTTrA. 


P ἠργάσατο TA. 
t— καὶ αὐτὸς LTT A]. 


4 ἐκέρδησεν gained LTr. t — τάλαντα LTr[ A]. *— καὶ 
Υ + τάλαντον talent L. w γῆν [the] earth Trra, 
< ; : ay aon 
Υ πολὺν χρόνον LITrA. 2 λόγον μετ᾽ αὑτῶν LTTraA. 

xP μ 


ΧΧΥ: MATTHEW. 

Κύριε, πέντε τάλαντά por παρέδωκας. ἴδε, ἄλλα πέντε 
Lord, five talents tome thou didst deliver; behold, other five 
*radavra" ἐκέρδησα em’ αὐτοῖς." 21 [Ἔφη.“δὲ" αὐτῷ ὁ κύριος 

talents have 1 gained besides them. And *gaid *to him “lord 
7 ~ Go ~ 2 51 ‘ Ld ? . > ΄ 5 
αὐτοῦ, Et, δοῦλε ἀγαθὲ καὶ more, ἐπὶ ὀλίγα ἧς 
this, Well! bondman good and faithful, cover afew things thou wast 
πιστός, ἐπὶ πολλῶν GE καταστήσω" εἴσελθε εἰς τὴν χαρὰν 
faithful, ΟΥ̓́Θ᾽ manythingsthee willI set: enter into the joy 
~ , 5 NO ι ἀδὲ! A e ΕΞ x é , , 
τοῦ κυρίου.σου. 22 ΤΙροσελθων.“δὲ καὶ 0 τὰ δύο τα- 
of thy lord. And having come to[him] “also "he who the two ta- 
λαντα λαβὼν" εἶπεν, Κύριε, δύο τάλαντά μοι παρέδωκας" 
lents received said, Lord, two talents to me thou didst deliver; 
ide, ἄλλα δύο τάλαντα ἐκέρδησα %éx’ αὐτοῖς. 23 “Edn 
behold, other two talents havel gained besides them. *Said 
αὐτῷ ὁ κύριος αὐτοῦ, Εὖ, δοῦλε ἀγαθὲ καὶ πιστέ, ἐπὶ 
*to Shim his *Lord, Well! bondman good and faithful, over 
ὀλίγα ἧς πιστός, ἐπὶ πολλῶν σε καταστήσω᾽ εἴσελθε 
a few things thou wast faithful, over manythingsthee willI set: enter 


εἰς τὴν χαρὰν ToU-Kupiov.cov. 24 Προσελθὼν. δὲ Kai ὁ 
into the joy of thy Lord. And having come to [him] “also ‘he who 
A ot , 7 ‘ “ , μι uv \ 
τὸ ἕν τάλαντον εἰληφὼς εἶπεν, Κύριε, ἔγνων σε ori σκληρὸς 
theone _ talent hadreceived said, Lord, Ikmew thee that ‘hard 

εἶ ἄνθρωπος, θερίζων ὕπου οὐκ.ἔσπειρας, καὶ συνάγων 
‘thou*art *a°man, reaping where thoudidstnotsow, and gathering 
ὅθεν οὐ.διεσκόρπισας" 25 καὶ φοβηθείς, ἀπελθὼν ἔκρυψα 
whence thou didst not scatter, and beingafraid, having goneaway I hid 
τὸ τἀλαντόν.σου ἐν τῇ γῇ ἴδε, ἔχεις τὸ σόν. 236 ᾿Απο- 
thy talent in the earth; behold, thou hast thine own. *An- 
κριθεὶς δὲ ὁ.κύὐριος. αὐτοῦ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, ᾿Πονηρὲ δοῦλε" καὶ 
swering ‘and “his *Lord said tohim, Wicked “*bondman ‘and 
ὀκνηρέ, ἤδεις ὅτι βερίζω ὕπου οὐκ.ἔσπειρα, καὶ συνάγω ὅθεν 
*slothtul, thou knewestthat [reap where Isowed not, and gather whence 
> 2 , 5 £6 5 κι Π x ~ ἢ 46 1.9 ,ὔ ΓΝ 
οὐ.διεσκόρπισα ; 27 ἔδει οὖν σε" βαλεῖν "τὸ. ἀργύριόν μου 
Iscattered ποῦ; itbehoved “therefore ‘thee to put my money 
τοῖς ἱτραπεζίταις" καὶ ἐλθὼν ἐγὼ ἐκομισάμην.ἂν τὸ.ἐμὸν σὺν 
to the moneychangers, and coming [ should have received mine own with 
τόκῳ. 2 ἄρατε οὖν aw αὐτοῦ τὸ τάλαντον, καὶδότε τῷ 
interest. Take thereforefrom him the talent, andgive[it]tohim who 
ἔχοντι τὰ δέκα τάλαντα. 29 Τῷ.γὰρ ἔχοντι παντὶ δοθή- 
has the ten talents. For*who has ‘toevery one 5841] 
σεται, καὶ περισσευθήσεται" "ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ" μὴ.ἔχοντος, Kai 
be given, and [he] shall be inabundance; *from*but ἴση ΠΟ has not, even 
ὃ ἔχει ἀρθήσεται aw αὐτοῦ. 30 Kai τὸν ἀχρεῖον δοῦλον 
that which he has shallbetaken from him. And the useless bondman 
ἰἐκβάλλετεϊ εἰς τὸ σκότος TO ἐξώτερον᾽" ἐκεῖ ἔσται ὁ κλαυθμὸς 
castye οαὖὐ into the darkness the outer: there shallbethe weeping 
καὶ ὃ βρυγμὸς τῶν ὀδόντων. 
and the gnashing ofthe teeth. 
31“Oray.dé ἔλθῃ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐν τῇ.δόξῃ.αὐτοῦ, 
But when *comes 'the Son “of *man in his glory, 
Kai πάντες οἱ Miryroe! ἄγγελοι μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ, τότε καθίσει ἐπὶ 
and all the holy angels with him, then willhesit upon[the] 


ς-- δὲ and GLrtraw. 
f Δοῦλε πονηρὲ L. 
k τοῦ δὲ but of him who urtra. 


5 [τάλαντα] tr. ὃ --- ἐπ᾿ αὐτοῖς LTTr. 
βὼν (read [received]) υὐτττὰ. 
1 τραπεζείταις T. 
GLTTra. 


8 σε οὖν TTrA. 


ἃ §éand τ΄. 


1 ἐκβάλετε GLTTrAW. 


73 


talents: behold, [have 
gained beside them five 
talents more. 21 His 
lord said unto him, 
Well done, thou good 
and faithful servant: 
thou hast been faith. 
ful over a few things, 
I will make thee ruler 
over many things: en- 
ter thou into the joy 
of thy lord. 22 He 
also that had received 
two talents came and 
said, Lord, thou deliv- 
eredst unto me two 
talents: behold, [have 
gained two other ta- 
lents beside them. 
23 His lord said unto 
nim, Well done, good 
and faithful servant ; 
thou hast been faith- 
ful over a few things, 
I will make thee ruler 
over many things: 
enterthou into the joy 
of thy lord. 24 Then 
he which had received 
the one talent came 
and said, Lord, I knew 
thee that thou art an 
hard man, reaping 
where thou hast not 
sown, and gathering 
where thou hast not 
strawed: 25 and I was 
afraid, and went and 
nid thy talent in the 
earth: lo, there thou 
hast that is thine. 
26 His lord auswered 
and said unto him, 
Thou wicked ind sloth- 
fulservant,thou knew- 
est that I reap where 
I sowed not, and ga- 
ther where I have not 
strawed: 27 ~thou 
oughtest therefore to 
have put my money td 
the exchangers, and 
then at my coming I 
should have received 
mine own with usury. 
28 Take therefore the 
talent from him, and 
give zt unto him which 
hath ten talents. 
29 For unto every one 
that hath shall be 
given, and he shall 
have abundance: but 
from him that hath not 
shall be taken away 
even that which he 
hath. 30 And cast ye the 
unprofitable servant 
into outer darkness: 
there shall be weeping 
and gnashing of teeth. 

31 When the Son of 
man shall come in his 
glory, and all the holy 
angels with him, then 
shall he sit upon the 


e — j,a- 
h τὰ ἀργύριά τ. 
m— aytor 


74 


throne of his glory: 
32 and before him shall 
be gathered all na- 
tions: and he shall 
separate them one 
from another, as a 
shepherd divideth his 
sheep from the goats: 
33 and he shall set the 
sheep on his right 
hand, but the goats on 
the left. 34 Then shall 
the King say unto 
them on his right 
hand, Come, ye blessed 
of my Father, inherit 
the kingdom prepared 
for you from the foun- 
dation of the world: 
35 for I was an hun- 
ered, and ye gaye me 
meat: I was thirsty, 
and ye gave me drink: 
fwas a stranger, and 
ye took mein: 36na- 
keed, and ye clothed 
me: I was sick, and ye 
visited me: I was in 
prison, and ye came 
untome. 37 Thenshall 
the righteous answer 
him, saying, Lord, 
when saw we thee an 
hungred, and _ fed 
thee? or thirsty, and 
gave thee drink? 
38 When saw we thee 
ἢ, stranger, and took 
thee in? or naked, and 
clothed thee? 39 Or 
when saw we thee sick, 
or in prison, and came 
unto thee? 40 And 
the King shall answer 
and say unto them, 
Verily 1 say unto you, 
inasmuch as ye have 
done it unto one of 
the least of these my 
brethren, ye have done 
at unto me. 41 Then 
shall he say also unto 
them on the left hand, 
Depart from me, ye 
cursed, into everlast- 
ing fire, prepared for 
the devil and his an- 
gels: 42 for I was an 
hungred, and ye gave 
me no meat: I was 
thirsty, and ye gave 
me no drink : 43 I was 
a stranger, and ye took 
me not in: naked,and 
ye clothed me not: 
sick, and in prison, and 
ye visited me not. 
44 Then shall they 
also answer him, say- 
ing, Lord, when saw 
we thee an hungred, 
or athirst, or a stran- 
ger, or naked, or sick 
or in prison, and di 

not minister unto 
thee? 45 Then shall he 
answer them, saying, 
Verily I say unto you, 


MATOAIO®S., XXV. 


θρόνου δόξης αὐτοῦ, 32 καὶ συναχθήσεται" ἔμπροσθεν αὐτοῦ 
throne of his glory, and shall be gathered before him 
πάντα τὰ ἔθνη, Kai Padopuet" αὐτοὺς ἀπ᾽ ἀλλήλων, ὥσπερ ὁ 
all the nations, and hewillseparate them from one another, as the 
ποιμὴν ἀφορίζει τὰ πρόβατα ἀπὸ τῶν ἐρίφων, 33 καὶ στήσει 
shepherd separates the sheep from the goats ; and he will set 
A 4 , ? ~ > “ 4 4a? ΄ > ? 4 
τὰ μὲν πρόβατα ἐκ δεξιῶν αὐτοῦ, τὰ.δὲ ἐρίφια ἐξ εὐωνύμων. 
the sheep on#right*hand ‘his, butthe goats on[his] left. 
34 Tore ἐρεῖ ὁ βασιλεὺς τοῖς ἐκ δεξιῶν αὐτοῦ, Δεῦτε, ot 
Then *will*say‘the king to those on “right “hand "his, Come, the 
εὐλογημένοι τοῦ.πατρός. μου, κληρονομήσατε THY ἡτοιμασμένην 
blessed of my Father, inherit the *prepared 
c ~ , ? x ~ , ? ΄ ΄ 
ὑμῖν βασιλείαν ἀπὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου. 35 ἐπείνασα.γάρ, 
3for*you ‘kingdom from[the] foundation of([the] world. For I hungered, 
kai ἐδώκατέ μοι φαγεῖν᾽ ἐδίψησα, καὶ ἐποτίσατε με’ ἕένος 
and yegave me _  toeat; Ithirsted, and yegave *to*drink ‘me; astranger 
ἤμην, Kai συνηγάγετέ pe’ 86 γυμνός, καὶ περιεβάλετέ με: ἠσθέ- 
Iwas, and yetook“in ‘me; naked, and yeclothed me; I was 
Cy 2 , , haw δὰ Poo ” ‘ PHO ll ’ 
νησα, καὶ ἐπεσκέψασθέ με" ἐν φυλακῇ ἤμην, καὶ Ῥἤλθετε! πρός 
sick, and ye visited me; in prison lwas, and yecame to 
37 Té ? On ? ~ « δί λέ Κύ 
με. OTE απόοκρι NOOVTAL αὐτῷ οι ἰκΚαίιοι, EYOVTEC, υριξ, 


me. Then will answer him therighteous, saying, Lord, 

, A » iT} ~ CV , na ~ ‘ 
πότε σὲ “εἴδομεν" πεινῶντα, καὶ ἐθρέψαμεν; ἢ διψῶντα, καὶ 
when “thee ‘saw*we hungering, and fed [thee]? or thirsting, and 


ἐποτίσαμεν; 38 πότε.δέ σε εἴδομεν ξένον, καὶ συνηγάγομεν ; 
gave(thee]todrink? and when “thee 'saw *we astranger,and took [thee] in? 


ἢ γυμνόν, καὶ περιεβάλομεν ; 39 πότε.δέ σε εἴδομεν ᾿ἀσθεγῆ," 


or naked, and clothed [thee] ? And when “thee ‘saw *we sick, 
ἢ ἔν φυλακῇ, καὶ ἤλθομεν πρός σε; 40 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ 
or in prison, and came to thee? And answering the 


βασιλεὺς ἐρεῖ αὐτοῖς, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ἐφ᾽ ὅσον ἐποιήσατε 
king willsaytothem, Verily Isay toyou, Jnasmuchas yedid [itl 
ἑνὶ τούτων ~rHy.adehp@yv.pou' τῶν ἐλαχίστων, ἐμοὶ ἐποιή- 
to one of these my brethren the least, to me ye 
care. 41 Τότε ἐρεῖ καὶ τοῖς ἐξ εὐωνύμων, Πορεύεσθε ἀπ᾽ 
did [10]. Then will he say also to those on [the] left, Go from 
ἐμοῦ, ‘ot κατηραμένοι, εἰς TO πῦρ TO αἰώνιον, τὸ ἡτοιμα- 
me, the cursed, into the fire the eternal, which has been 

2 ~ , ‘ ~ ᾽ , ᾽ “Ὁ ? / , 
σμένον τῷ διαβόλῳ καὶ τοῖς.ἀγγέλοις αὐτοῦ. 42 ἐπείνασα. γάρ. 
prepared forthe devil and his angels. For I hungered, 
Kai ovK.€0MKaTé μοι φαγεῖν" ἐδίψησα, καὶ οὐκ-ἐποτίσατε με" 
and yegavenot tome toeat; Ithirsted, and yegave *not *to*drink'me; 
43 Eévoc ἤμην, καὶ οὐ-συνηγάγετέ pe γυμνός, καὶ οὐ-περιεβά- 
astranger 1 was, and yetook*not*in *me; naked, and ye did not 
λετέ με’ ἀσθενής, καὶ ἐν φυλακῇ, Kai οὐκ.ἐπεσκέψασθέ με. 
clothe me ; sick, and in prison, and ye did not visit me, 
44 Tore ἀποκριθήσονται αὐτῷ" καὶ αὐτοί, λέγοντες, Κύριε, 
Then will *answer Shim “also ‘they, saying, Lord, 
, ” ~ n ~ n , n , be! 
πότε σὲ εἴδομεν πεινῶντα, ἢ διψῶντα, ἢ ἕένον, ἢ γυμνόν, ἢ 
when “thee 'saw*we hungering, or thirsting, orastranger,or naked, or 
ἀσθενῆ, ἢ ἐν φυλακῇ, καὶ οὐ.διηκονήσαμέν oor; 45 Τότε ἀπο- 
sick, or ἱπὀ prison, and did not minister tothee? Then will 

΄ ᾽ ~ , ᾽ \ , « ~ 7,7 « ? ? 

κριθήσεται αὐτοῖς. λέγων, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ἐφ᾽ ὅσον οὐκ. ἐποι- 
he answer them, saying, Verily LIsay to you,Inasmuchas ye did not 


Ὁ συναχθήσονται LITA. 


LITra, 


*|rov ἀδελφῶν pov] L. 


Ρἤλθατε LTTrA. «εἴδαμεν Tr. * ἀσθενοῦντα 


© ἀφορίσει T. 
ἱ ν — αὐτῷ GLTTrAW. 


t‘— oT. 


ONYX ΧΥῚ. MATTHE W. 


ἤσατε ἑνὶ τούτων τῶν ἐλαχίστων, οὐδὲ ἐμοὶ ἐποιήσατε. 46 Kai 
{it] to one of these the least, neithertome didye {it}. And 


ἀπελεύσονται οὗτοι εἰς κόλασιν aiwyioy’ οἱ.δὲ δίκαιοι εἰς ζωὴν 
7shall°go*away ‘these intopunishment eternal, butthe righteous into life 


αἰώνιον. 
eternal, 
26 Καὶ ἐγένετο bre ἐτέλεσεν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς πάντας τοὺς 
And it came to pass when *had “finished 1 Jesus all 
λόγους.τούτους, εἶπεν τοῖς. μαθηταϊς.αὐτοῦ, 2 Οἴδατε ὅτι μετὰ 
these sayings he said to his disciples, Ye know that after 
δύο ἡμέρας τὸ πάσχα γίνεται, Kai ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
two days the passover takesplace, and the Son of man 


CDEC εἰς τὸ σταυρωθῆναι. 8 Τότε συνήχθησαν οἱ 
is delivered up to be crucified. Then were gathered together the 


ἀρχιερεῖς “καὶ ot γραμματεῖς" καὶ οἱ πρεσβύτεροι τοῦ λαοῦ 
chief priests and the scribes and the elders of the people 
2 ‘ > ‘ ~ > , ~ , Zs ‘ 
εἰς THY αὐλὴν τοῦ ἀρχιερέως τοῦ λεγομένου Καϊάφα, 4 Kai 
to the court ofthe Πρ priest who was called Caiaphas, and 
συνεβουλεύσαντο iva τὸν Ἰησοῦν *kparnowow δόλῳ." 
took counsel together in order that Jesus they might seize by guile, 
καὶ ἀποκτείνωσιν. 5 ἔλεγον.δέ, Μὴ ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ, ἵνα μὴ 
and kill {him}; but they said, Notduring the feast, that *not 
θόρυβος γένηται ἐν τῷ haw. 
“a*tumult ‘there *be among the people. 
6 Tov.dé. Inood γενομένου ἐν Βηθανίᾳ ἐν οἰκίᾳ Σίμωνος 
Now Jesus being in Bethany in[the] house of Simon 
~ ~ ~ > ~ ‘ ? , , 
τοῦ λεπροῦ, 7 προσῆλθεν αὐτῷ νὴ ΥΤἀλάβαστρον μύρου 
the leper, came “to *him *a “woman, an alabaster flask of ointment 
ἔχουσα" *Bapuripov,' Kai κατέχεεν ἐπὶ "τὴν. κεφαλὴν. αὐτοῦ 


having, very precious, and poured [it] on his head 

2 , 2 , A c ‘ b ? "ἢ > + 

ἀνακειμένου. 8 ἰδόντες. δὲ οἱ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ! ἠγανάκ- 
as he reclined [at table]. But seeing [it] his disciples became 


, > ,t > ’ iid c ᾽ , ΤΠ A we 
τησαν, λέγοντες, Εἰς τί ἡ ἀπώλεια. αὕτη ; 9 “ἠδύνατο". γὰρ τοῦτο 
indignant, saying, For what this waste? for *could ‘this 
ἀτὸ μύρον᾽ πραθῆναι πολλοῦ, καὶ δοθῆναι “ πτωχοῖς. 
ointment have been sold formuch, and have been given to [the] poor, 
10 Γνοὺς δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Τί κόπους παρέχετε 

But knowing [this] Jesus said tothem, Why trouble doye cause 
τῇ γυναικί; ἔργον.γὰρ καλὸν εἰργάσατο! εἰς ἐμέ. 11 πάν- 
tothe woman? fora*?work ‘good she wrought towards me. 2Al- 
TOTE γὰρ τοὺς πτωχοὺς ἔχετε μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῶν, ἐμὲ.δὲ οὐ πάντοτε 


ways ‘for the poor ye have with you, but me not always 
ἔχετε. 12 βαλοῦσα.γὰρ αὕτη τὸς μύρον. τοῦτο ἐπὶ τοῦ 
ye have, For *in *pouring ‘this [7woman] this ointment on 
σώματός μου πρὸς τὸ.ἐνταφιάσαι.με ἐποίησεν. 18 ἀμὴν λέγω 
my body for my burying she did [it]. Verily Isay 
ὑμῖν, ὅπου.ἐὰν κηρυχθῇ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον. τοῦτο ἐν ὅλῳ 
to you, Wheresoever shall be proclaimed these glad tidings in all 


ἐποίησεν αὕτη, εἰς 


τῷ κόσμῳ, λαληθήσεται καὶ ὃ 
3414 1this woman], for 


the world, shall bespoken of alsothat which 
μνημόσυνον αὐτῆς. 


a memorial of her, 


75 
Inasmuch as ye did 2 
not to one of the least 
of these, ye did it not 
to me. 46 And these 
shall go away into 
everlasting punish- 
ment: but the right- 
eous into life eternal, 


XXVI. And it came 
to pass, when Jesus 
had finished all these 
sayings, he said unto 
his disciples, 2 Ye know 
that after two days is 
the feast of the pass- 
over, and the Son of 
man is betrayed to be 
crucified. 3 Then as- 
sembled together the 
chief priests, and the 
scribes, and the elders 
of the people, unto the 
palace of the high 
priest, who was called 
Caiaphas, 4 and con- 
sulted that they might 
take Jesus by subtilty, 
and kill him. 5 But 
they said, Not on the 
feast day, lest there be 
an uproar among the 


people. 


6 Now when Jesus 
was in Bethany, in 
the house of Simon the 
leper, 7 there came 
unto him a woman 
haying an alabaster 
box of very precious 
ointment, and poured 
it on his head, as he 
sat at meat. 8 But 
when his disciples saw 
it, they had indigna- 
tion, saying, To what 
purpose is this waste? 
9 for this ointment 
might have been sold 
for much, and given to 
the poor. 10 When Je- 
sus understood it, he 
said unto them, Why 
trouble ye the woman? 
for she hath wrought 
a good work upon me. 
11 For yehave the poor 
always with you; but 
me ye have not al- 
ways. 12 For in that 
she hath poured this 
ointment on my body, 
she did it for my buriaL 
13 Verily I say unto 
you, Wheresoever this 
gospel shall be preach- 
ed in the whole world, 
there shall also this, 
that this woman hath 
done, be told for a 
memorial of her. 


¥ — καὶ ol γραμματεῖς LTTrA, x δόλῳ κρατήσωσιν GLTTrAW. 
μύρου LTTr. 2 πολυτίμου LT. 8 τῆς κεφαλῆς LT Tr. 
LTTrA, ς ἐδύνατο TA. ἃ — τὸ μύρον GLITrAW. 
1 ἠργάσατο T. 


Υ ἔχουσα ἀλάβαστρον 
Ὁ — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) 
ε + τοῖς (read to the poor) Lw. 


76 


14 Then one of the 
twelve, called Judas 
Iscariot, went unto 
thechief priests, 15 and 
said wnto them, What 
will ye give me, and I 
will deliver him unto 
you? And they cove- 
nanted with him for 
thirty pieces of silver. 
16 And from that 
time he sought oppor- 
tunity to betray him. 


17 Now the first day 
of the feast of un- 
leavened bread the 
disciples came to Je- 
sus, saying unto him, 
Where wilt thou that 
we prepare for thee 
to eat the passover? 
18 And he said, Go into 
the city to such a man, 
and say unto him, The 
Master saith, My time 
is at hand; [ will keep 
the passover at thy 
house with my disci- 
ples. 19 And the dis- 
ciples did as Jesus had 
appointed them; and 
they made ready the 
passoyver. 


20 Now when the 
even was come, he 
sat down with the 
twelve. 21 Andas they 
did eat, he said, Verily 
I say unto you, that 
one of you shall be- 
tray me. 22 And they 
were exceeding sor- 
rowful, and began 
every one of them to 
say unto him, Lord, is 
it I? 23 And he an- 
swered and said, He 
that dippeth his hand 
with me in the dish, 
the same shall betray 
me, 24 The Son of man 
goeth as it is written 
of him: but woe unto 
that man by whom the 
Son of man is betray- 
ed! it had been good 
for that man if he 
had not been born. 
25 Then Judas, which 
betrayed him, answer- 
ed and said, Master, is 
it 12 He said unto 
him, Thou hast said. 


26 And as they were 
eating, Jesus took 
bread, and blessed τέ, 
and brake tt, and gave 
it to the disciples, and 
said, Take, eat ; this is 
my body. 27 And he 
took the cup, and gave 
thanks, and gave zt to 
them, saying, Drink 


5 καὶ ἐγὼ τ. 
one LTTra. 
having given LrTr. 


h — αὐτῷ LITrAW. 
᾿ χὴν χεῖρα ἐν τῷ τρυβλίῳ LTDA. 


MATOATOX. XXVI. 


14 Τότε πορευθεὶς εἷς τῶν δώδεκα, ὁ λεγόμενος ᾿Τούδας 
Then haying '*gone ‘one “of “the *twelve, who “was ‘called ®%Judas 
? , x 4 > ~ 5 , , , 
Ισκαριώτης, πρὸς τοὺς ἀρχιερεῖς, 15 εἶπεν, Τί θέλετε μοι 
*Iscariote, to the chief priests, said, What are ye willing *me 
δοῦναι, Skayw' ὑμῖν παραδώσω αὐτόν; Οἱ. δὲ ἔστησαν αὐτῷ 
‘to*give, andI toyou willdeliverup him? And they appointed to him 
τριάκοντα ἀργύρια. 106 καὶ ἀπὸ τότε ἐζήτει εὐκαιρίαν 
thirty pieces of silver. And from that time he sought an opportunity 
ἵνα αὐτὸν παραδῳ. 
that him he might deliver up. 


17 Τῇ.δὲ πρώτρ τῶν ἀζύμων προσῆλθον οἱ μαθη- 


Now onthe first [day] of unleavened [bread] came 86 disci- 
pee NE ey (aye : τ ᾿ 
ταὶ τῷ Ἰησοῦ, λέγοντες "αὐτῷ," ἸΤοῦ θέλεις ἑτοιμάσωμεν 
ples to Jesus, saying tohim, Where wilt thou [that] weshould prepare 
σοι φαγεῖν τὸ πάσχα; 18 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν, Ὑπάγετε εἰς τὴν 
for thee toeat the passover? And he © said, Go into the 
, A cy ~ κ » ᾽ ~ « , , 
πόλιν πρὸς τὸν. δεῖνα, Kai εἴπατε αὐτῷ, Ὃ διδάσκαλος λέγει, 
city unto suchaone, and say tohim, The teacher says, 
ὋὉ καιρός.μου ἐγγύς tori’ πρὸς σὲ ποιῶ τὸ πάσχα μετὰ 


My time *near with thee I willkgap the passover with 


τῶν. μαθητῶν. μου. 19 Kai ἐποίησαν ot μαθηταὶ we συνέταξεν 
my disciples.” And sdid ‘the *disciples *as directed 
αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, καὶ ἡτοίμασαν τὸ πάσχα. 
κε ἴον 5Jesus, and prepared the passover. 
20 ᾿Οψίας.δὲ γενομένης ἀνέκειτο 
Andevening being come hereclined[attable] with 


is; 


μετὰ τῶν OwdeKa'. 

the twelve. 

21 καὶ ἐσθιόντων. αὐτῶν εἶπεν, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι εἷς ἐξ 
And asthey wereeating hesaid, Verily Isay toyou, that one of 

«ς ~ QA ‘ , , »Ἤ 

ὑμῶν παραδώσει με. 22 Καὶ λυπούμενοι σφόδρα ἤρξαντο 


you will deliver up me. And _ being grieved exceedingly they began 
λέγειν αὐτῷ "ἕκαστος αὐτῶν," Μήτι ἐγώ εἶμι, κύριε; 238 Ὁ δὲ 
tosay to him, each of them, “I 4am([he], Lord? But he 


ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν, Ὁ ἐμβάψας μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ iv τῷ τρυβλίῳ 


answering said, Hewho dipped with me in the dish 


\ ~ Π] τι i NF D4 « 4 ea See. 6 , 
ΤΏ» χειρα, οὗτος μὲ TANDAOWOEL. at O ἐν VLOG TOU ανθρω- 


[his] hand, he me will deliver up. The *indeed *Son “of “man 
που ὑπάγει, καθὼς γέγραπται περὶ αὐτοῦ, οὐαὶ.δὲ τῷ 
goes, as it has been written concerning him, but woe 


avOporwpixsivy Ov οὗ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου παραδίδοται" 
to that man by whomthe Son of man is delivered up ; 
καλὸν ἦν αὐτῷ εἰ οὐκ.ἐγεννήθη ὁ. ἄνθρωπος. ἐκεῖνος. 
good wereit forhim if *had *not *been “born that *man. 
25 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ ᾿Ιούδας ὁ παραδιδοὺς αὐτὸν εἶπε», Μήτι 
And answering Judas, who was delivering up him, said, 
ἐγώ εἰμι, πιῥαββί;" Λέγει αὐτῷ, Σὺ εἶπας. 
ἜἼ ‘am (he), Rabbi? Hesays to him, Thou hast said. 
26 ᾿Εσθιόντων.δὲ. αὐτῶν, λαβὼν ὁ Ἰησοῦς "τὸν" ἄρτον, 
And as they were eating, "having “taken ‘Jesus the bread, 
. ᾽ , 5 »Ό cv ‘ 2010 Il ~ 0 ~ p ΜΠ 
καὶ εὐλογήσας, ἔκλασεν καὶ “εδίδου" τοῖς μαθηταῖς, Prat 
and having blessed, broke and gave tothe disciples, and 
~ , 2 ~ A ~ , ‘ 
εἶπεν, Λάβετε, φάγετε" τοῦτό ἐστιν τὸ σῶμά.μου. 27 Καὶ 
said, Take, eat ; this is my body. And 
λαβὼν «τὸ ποτήριον, "καὶ! εὐχαριστήσας, ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς, 
having taken the cup, and haying given thanks, he gave [it] to them, 


i + μαθητῶν disciples LT. k εἷς ἕκυστος each 
™ ῥαββεί τ. π --- τὸν τι]. ο δοὺς 


Ρ — καὶ LTTr. 9 — τὸ (read a cup) TTrA. r — καὶ i[Tr]. 


ΧΧΥΙ. MATTHEW. 


λέγων, Πίετε ἐξ αὐτοῦ πάντες" 28 rovro-yap ἐστιν τὸ αἷμά. μου, 
saying, *Drink*of “it 141], For this is my blood, 
ee oly ΤΠ ΉΣΩΣ . eee NN ay WE , No? 
ro! τῆς καινῆς" διαθήκης, TO περὶ πολλῶν “ἐκχυνόμενον" εἰς 
that of the new covenant, which for many is poured out for 
ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν. 29 λέγω. δὲ ὑμῖν, "ὅτι! οὐ. μὴ πίω ἀπ’ 
remission οἵ sins. ButIsay toyou, that notatall will I drink hence- 
ἄρτι ἐκ τούτου TOU γεννήματος" τῆς ἀμπέλου, ἕως τῆς ἡμέρας 
forth of {815 fruit ofthe vine, until "day 
ἐκείνης ὅταν αὐτὸ πίνω μεθ’ ὑμῶν καινὸν ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τοῦ 
Mthat when it Idrink with you new inthe kingdom 
, ‘ ε ’ ? ~ > A ” ~ 
πατρός.μου. 30 Kai ὑμνήσαντες ἐξῆλθον εἰς τὸ ὄρος τῶν 
of my father. And having sung ahymn they went out to the mount 
ἐλαιῶν. 31 τότε λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Πάντες ὑμεῖς σκανδα- 
All 


of Olives. Then ?says *to*them 1Jesus, ye will be 
λισθήσεσθε ἐν ἐμοὺ ἐν τῇ.νυκτὶ. ταύτῃ. γέγραπται γάρ, 


offended this night. 
Πατάξω τὸν ποιμένα, καὶ ᾿διασκορπισθήσεται τὰ πρόβατα 


in me during For it has been written, 


Iwillsmite the shepherd, and willbescattered abroad the sheep 
τῆς ποίμνης. 82. μετὰ.δὲ τὸ. ἐγερθῆναί με προάξω ὑμᾶς 
of the flock ; but after my being raised Iwillgobefore you 


sic THY Γαλιλαίαν. 88 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ ὁ Πέτρος εἶπεν αὐτῷ, 


into Galilee. And answering Peter said tohim, 
Εἰ δκαὶ! πάντες σκανδαλισθήσονται ἐν σοί, ἐγὼ οὐδέποτε 
ἘΕ even all will be offended in thee, I neyer 


σκανδαλισθήσομαι. 34 Ἔφη αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς,᾿᾿Αμὴν λέγω σοι, 


will be offended. 2Said *to *him 1Jesus, Verily Isay tothee, 
ὅτι ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ νυκτί, πρὶν ἀλέκτορα φωνῆσαι, τρὶς 
that during this night, before [the] cock crows, thrice 
ἀπαρνήσῃ με. 85 Λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ Πέτρος, Κἂν δέῃ με 


thou wiltdeny me. Peter, Evenif it were needful for me 


1 1 > ~ ? 7 > of, « ,ὔ b ‘ 
σὺν σοὶ ἀποθανεῖν, οὐ.μὴῆ σε ἀπαρνήσομαι. Opoiwc® καὶ 


Says *to*him 


with thee to die, in nowise thee will IT deny. Likewise also 
πάντες οἱ μαθηταὶ εἶπον. 
all the disciples said. 
36 Tore ἔρχεται per αὐτῶν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἰς χωρίον λεγόμενον 
Then comes with them Jesus to a place called 
“Γεθσημανῆ," καὶ λέγει τοῖς μαθηταῖς", Καθίσατε αὐτοῦ, ἕως. οὗ“ 
Gethsemane, andhesaystothe disciples, Sit here, until 
ἀπελθὼν ἱπροσεύξωμαι ἐκεῖ." 87 Kai παραλαβὼν τὸν 
having goneaway [5881] ΥΩ yonder. And having taken with (him] 


Πέτρον καὶ τοὺς δύο υἱοὺς Ζεβεδαίου, ἤρξατο λυπεῖσθαι καὶ 
Peter and the two sons οἵ Zebedee, he began to besorrowful and 
ἀδημονεῖν. 88 τότε λέγει abroic’, ἹΤερίλυπός ἐστιν ἡ-ψυχή.μου 

deeply depressed. Then hesays tothem, Verysorrowful is my soul 

, , ee ~ ? ~ " 

ἕως θανάτου" μείνατε ὧδε καὶ γρηγορεῖτε μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ. 39 Kai 
evento death; remain here and watch with me. And 
hrooshOwy!' μικρὸν ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ πρόσωπον αὐτοῦ προσευχό- 


having goneforward alittle hefell upon his face pray- 
μενος, καὶ λέγων, Warep.ipov,' εἰ δυνατόν ἐστιν "παρελθέτω" 
ing, and saying, my Father, if possible it is let pass 


am’ ἐμοῦ τὸ.ποτήριον.τοῦτο᾽ πλὴν οὐχ ὡς ἐγὼ θέλω, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς 
from me this cup ; nevertheless not as I will, but as 


τ τὸ LITrA. ν — καινῆς TIA]. 
ματος LITrAW. 2 διασκορπισθήσονται LITA. 

(likewise) w. ¢ Τεθσημανεῖ utraw ; Γεθσημανεί τ. 
f ἐκεῖ προσεύξωμαι LTTrA. 8 + ὃ Ἰησοῦς Jesus (Says) w. 
towards [them] rrr. i — pov my T1[Tr]. k παρελθάτω LITrA. 


© ἐκχυννόμενον LTTrA. 


xX — ὅτι LTTrA. 
a — καὶ GLTTrAW. 

d + αὐτοῦ of him t. 
4 προσελθὼν having come 


Loar d 

4d 
yeall of it; 28 for this 
is my blood of the 
new testament, which 
is shed for many for 
the remission of sins. 
29 But I say untoyou, 
I will not drink hence- 
forth of this fruit of 
the vine, until that 
day when I drink 
it new with you in 
my Father’s kingdom. 
30 And when they 
had sung an hymn, 
they went out into 
the mount of Olives. 
31 Then saith Jesus 
unto them, Allyeshall 
be offended becanse of 
me this night: for it 
is written, I wilismite 
the shepherd, and the 
sheep of the flock shall 
be scattered abroad. 
32 But after Iam risen 
again, I will go before 
youinto Galilee. 33 Pe- 
ter answered and said 
unto him, Though all 
men shall be offended 
because of thee, yet 
will I never be offend- 
ed. 34 Jesus said unto 
him, Verily I say unto 
thee, That this night, 
before the cock crow, 
thou shalt deny ime 
thrice. 35 Peter said 
unto him, Though 1 
should die with thee, 
yet will I not deny 
thee. Likewise also 
said all the disciples. 


36 Then cometh Je- 
sus with them unto 
a place called Geth- 
semane, and saithunto 
the disciples, Sit ye 
here, while [ go and 
pray yonder. 37 And 
he took with him Pe- 
ter and the two sons 
of Zebedee, and began 
to be sorrowful and 
very heavy. 38 Then 
saith he unto them, 
My soul is exceeding 
sorrowfnl, even unto 
death: tarry ye here, 
and watch with me. 
39 And he wenta little 
farther, and fell on 
his faee, and prayed, 
saying, O my Father, 
if it be possible, let 
this cup pass from me: 
nevertheless not as I 
will, but as thou wilt. 


Σ yev7- 
Ὁ - 6€and 
e+ ἂν τι 


78 


40 And he cometh unto 
the disciples, and find- 
eth them asleep, and 
saith unto Peter, What, 
could ye not watch 
with me one hour? 
41 Watch and pray, 
that ye enter not into 
temptation : the spirit , 
indeed is willing, but 
the flesh is weak. 42 He 
went away again the 
second time, and pray- 
ed, saying, O my Fa- 
ther, if this cup may 
not pass away from 
me, except I drink it, 
thy will be done. 
43 And he came and 
found them asleep 
again: for their eyes 
were heavy. 44 And 
he left them, and went 
away again, and pray- 
ed the third time, say- 
ing the same words. 
45 Then cometh he to 
his disciples, and saith 
unto them, Sleep on 
now, and take your 
rest: behold, the hour 
is at hand, and the 
Son of man is betrayed 
into the hands of sin- 
ners. 46 Rise, let us 
be going: behold, he 
is at hand that doth 
betray me. 


47 And while he yet 
spake, lo, Judas, one 
of the twelve, came, 
and with him a great 
multitude with swords 
and staves, from the 
chief priests and elders 
of the people. 48 Now 
he that betrayed him 
gave them a sign, say- 
ing, Whomsoever I 
shall kiss, that same 
is he: hold him fast. 
49 And forthwith he 
came to Jesus, and 
said, Hail, master; 
and kissed him. 50 And 
Jesus said unto him, 
Friend, wherefore art 
thou come? Then came 


they, and laid hands 
on Jesus, and took 
him, 51] And, behold, 
one of them which 
were with Jesus 


stretched out his hand, 
and drew his sword, 
and struck a servant 
of the high priest’s, 

and smote off his ear. 


MATOATOX. XXVI. 
σύ. 40 Kai ἔρχεται πρὸς τοὺς μαθητὰς Kai εὑρίσκει αὐτοὺς 
thou. And hecomes_ to the disciples and finds them 


καθεύδοντας, καὶ λέγει τῷ Πέτρῳ, Οὕτως οὐκ.ἰσχύσατε μίαν 
sleeping, and sae) to Peter, Thus were Be notable one 


το γρηγορῆσαι per eS 41 ὙΡΉΝΟΡΕΙΤΕ καὶ προσεύχεσθε, 


to watch with me? Watch and pray, 


iva μὴ εἰσέλθητε εἰς πειρασμόν. TO μὲν πνεῦμα πρόθυμον, 
that yeenternot into temptation: the “indeed ‘spirit [is] ready, 


08. σὰρξ ἀσθενής. 42 Πάλιν ἐκ.δευτέρου ἀπελθὼν προσ- 
but the flesh weak. Again asecond time having gone away oe 


nvéaro, λέγων, Πάτερ.μου, εἰ οὐ.δύναται τοῦτο ἱτὸ ποτήριον" 


prayed, saying, my Father, if Scannot this 2cup 
OI ΡΣ ΣΡ “2. \ 
παρελθεῖν am ἐμοῦ" ἐὰν. μὴ αὐτὸ πίω, γενηθήτω τὸ θέλημά 
pass from me unless 3it ‘I?*drink, ‘be 7done Swill 


σου. 48 Kai ἐλθὼν "εὑρίσκει αὐτοὺς πάλιν" καθεύδοντας, 


“thy. And having come he finds them again sleeping, 
ἦσαν.γὰρ αὐτῶν. οἱ. ὀφθαλμοὶ βεβαρημεῖοι; 44 Καὶ ἀφεὶς 
for *were their *eyes heavy. And leaving 


αὐτούς, οἀπελθὼν πάλιν" προσηύξατο Péx.rpirov,' τὸν αὐτὸν 


them, having goneaway again he prayed athirdtime, the *%same 
λόγον simwyt, 45 τότε ἔρχεται πρὸς τοὺς.μαθητ ac-adrov,' 
wees says. Then he comes to his disciples 


5 UD, \ A 2 U re 
καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, Καθεύδετε “τὸ λοιπὸν Kai ἀναπαύεσθε 
and ΒΥ to them, Bea) on now and take your rest; 


ἰδού, ἤγγικεν ἡ ὥρα, καὶ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου παραδίδο- 
lo, *has*drawn near ‘the *hour, and the Son of man is delivered 
Ta εἰς χεῖρας ἁμαρτωλῶν. 46 ἐγείρεσθε, ἄγωμεν" 
up ἰπύο [the] hands of sinners. Rise up, let us go ; 

ἤγγικεν ὁ παραδιδούς με. 

*has “drawn *near *he who is delivering up me. 
47 Kai ἔτι αὐτουῦ.λαλοῦντος, ἰδού, ᾿Ιούδας εἷς τῶν δώδεκα 
And *yet '‘as*he*isspeaking behold, Judas, one of the twelve, 


ἦλθεν, Kai μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ὄχλος πολὺς μετὰ μαχαιρῶν Kai ξύλων, 
came, and with him a“crowd ‘great with swords and staves, 


> , 
ἰδού, 
behold, 


ἀπὸ τῶν ἀρχιερέων Kai πρεσβυτέρων τοῦ λαοῦ. 48 6.0é 
from the _ chief priests and elders of the people. And he who 
παραδιδοὺς αὐτὸν ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς σημεῖον, λέγων, Ὃν ἂν! 


was delivering up him them a sign, saying, Whomsoever 


φιλήσω, αὐτὸς tori’ κρατήσατε αὐτόν. 49 Kai εὐθέως 
I shall kiss, he itis: seize him. And immediately 


προσελθὼν τῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ εἶπεν, Χαῖρε, “ῥαββί," καὶ κατεφίλησεν 
having come up to Jesus hesaid, Hail, Rabbi, and ardently kissed 


gave 


αὐτόν. 50 ὁ.δὲ. Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ἑταῖρε, ἐφ᾽ σῷ" 
him. But Jesus said to him, Friend, for what [purpose] 
πάρει; Τότε προσελθόντες ἐπέβαλον τὰς χεῖρας ἐπὶ 


art thoucome? Then Bev come to 185. they laid hands on 


τὸν Ἰησοῦν, καὶ ἐκράτησαν αὐτόν. 51 Kai ἰδού, εἷς τῶν 


Jesus, and seized him. And behold, one of those 
μετὰ Ἰησοῦ, ἐκτείνας τὴν χεῖρα ἀπέσπασεν τὴν μάχαι- 
with Jesus, having stretched out Chis] hand drew *sword 


ραν αὐτοῦ, καὶ πατάξας τὸν δοῦλον τοῦ ἀρχιερέως ἀφεῖλεν 
*his, and = smiting the bondman of the high priest took off 


1 — τὸ ποτήριον LTTrA. 


found them Lrtra. 
again T, 
νυ ῥαββεί τ. 


τ -- αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) Lrtra. 
W ὃ GLTTrAW. 


— am ἐμοῦ [L]TTrA. 


ἢ πάλιν εὗρεν αὐτοὺς again he 
ο AS ΕἸΣ LTTrA. ἢ 


Ρ-- ἐκ τρίτου [LJ A. 9 + πάλιν 
oA 
— τὸ [mrJa. t ἀὰν TA. 


XXVI. MATTE We. 


αὐτοῦ τὸ ὠτίον. 52 τότε λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, ᾿Απόστρεψόν 


his ear. Then ?says *to *him 1 Jesus, Return 
ἄσου τὴν μάχαιραν" εἰς τὸν. τόπον. αὐτῆς πάντες.γὰρ οἱ λα- 

thy sword to its place ; for all who 
βόντες μάχαιραν ἐν Tish 2 ἀπολοῦνται. 53 ἢ do- 
take [the] sword by [the] swor shall perish, Or think- 
κεῖς = Ore οὐ-δύναμαι τἄρτι! παρακαλέσαι τὸν.πατέρα.μου, 


est thou that Iam not able to call upon my Father, 


\ 7 a b x ΄ il cx li ὃ ’, ὃ dy ~ ll ? Ξ 
και παραστήσει μοι TTAELOUG 7) WOEKaA EVYEWVUC ay 
and he will furnish to me more than twelve legions of 


now 


Ll ~ ~ ε AF φῇ “ 
γέλων; 54 πῶς οὖν πληρωθῶσιν αἱ γραφαὶ ὅτι οὕτως 
angels? How then should be fulfilled the scriptures that thus 
δεῖ γενέσθαι; 
it must be? 


55 Ἔν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ὥρᾳ εἶπεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς τοῖς ὄχλοις, Ὥς ἐπὶ 
In that hour said Jesus tothe crowds, As against 
λῳστὴν “ἐξήλθετε μετὰ μαχαιρῶν καὶ ξύλων συλλαβεῖν με: 
arobber areyecomeout with swords and staves to take me? 
θ᾽ ἡ , f. 4 « ~ ἢ} 62 θ , διδά ? ΗΝ: 01} 
καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἱπρὸς ὑμᾶς" βἐκαθεζόμην διδάσκων ἕν τῷ ἱερῷ, 
Daily with you I sat teaching in the temple, 
‘ > ? δ, , ~ δ ef, , ev 
καὶ ovK.éxpatrnoaré με. 56 τοῦτο.δὲ ὅλον γέγονεν wa πλη- 
and yedidnotseize me, But this all iscometopass that may 
ρωθῶσιν αἱ γραφαὶ τῶν προφητῶν. Τότε οἱ μαθηταὶ" πάντες 
fulfilled the scriptures of the prophets. Then the disciples all 
ἀφέντες αὐτὸν ἔφυγον. 
forsaking him fled. 
57 Οἱ. δὲ κρατήσαντες τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ἀπήγαγον πρὸς Kai- 
But they who had seized Jesus led[him> away to Cai- 
ἄφαν τὸν ἀρχιερέα, ὅπου οἱ γραμματεῖς Kai οἱ πρεσβύτεροι 
aphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders 
συνήχθησαν. 58 Ὁ. .δὲ.Πέτρος ἠκολούθει αὐτῷ ᾿ἀπὸ" μακρό- 
were gathered together. And Peter followed him from afar 
θεν, ἕως τῆς αὐλῆς TOU ἀρχιερέως" καὶ εἰσελθὼν ἔσω ἐκάθητο 
eventothe court ofthe high priest; and havingentered within he sat 
pera τῶν ὑπηρετῶν ἰδεῖν τὸ τέλος. 59 Οἱ.δὲ ἀρχιερεῖς "καὶ ot 
with the officers tosee the end. And the chief priests and the 
πρεσβύτεροι" Kai τὸ Gime Opie ὅλον ἐζήτουν ψευδομαρτυρίαν 
elders and the 7sanhedrim ‘whole sought false evidence 
κατὰ τοῦ Ἰησοῦ, ὕπως ἰαὐτὸν θανατώσωσιν, 60 Kai οὐχ 
against Jesus, so that him they might putto death, and “ποῦ 
= . m pill AAG A 6 4 λθό ll On?, 
εὗρον Και TTOAAWYV ev ομαρτυρων προσξε οντων οὐχ 
lfound any]: even many false witnesses having come forward “not 
, H 
εὗρον." 61 ὕστερον.δὲ προσελθόντες δύο Ῥψευδομάρτυρες" 
‘they *found [any]. But at lasthavingcomeforwardtwo false witnesses 
εἶπον, Οὗτος ἔφη, Δύναμαι καταλῦσαι τὸν ναὸν τοῦ θεοῦ, 
said, This (man]said, I am able todestroy the temple of God, 
καὶ διὰ τριῶν ἡμερῶν “οἰκοδομῆσαι αὐτόν." 62 Kai ἀναστὰς 
and in three days to build it. And having stood up 
ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Οὐδὲν ἀποκρίνῃ; τί οὗτοί σου 
the high priest said tohim, Nothing answerest thou? What “these ‘thee 


79 


52 Then said Jesus un- 
to him, Put up again 
thy sword into his 
place: for all they that 
take the sword shall 
perish with the sword. 
53 Thinkest thou that 
Icannot now pray to 
my Father, and he 
shall presently give 
me more than twelve 
legions of angels? 
54 But how then shall 
the scriptures be ful- 
piled, that thus it must 
e 


59 In that same hour 
said Jesus to the mul- 
titudes, Are ye come 
out as against a thief 
withswordsand staves 
for totakeme? Isat 
daily with you teach- 
ing in the temple, and 
ye laid no hold on me. 
56 But all this was 
done, that the scrip- 
tures of the prophets 
might be fuliilled. 
Then all the disciples 
forsook him, and fled. 


57 And they that had 
laid hold on Jesus led 
him away to Caiaphas 
the high priest, where 
the scribes and the 
elders were assembled, 
58 But Peter followed 
him afar off unto the 
high priest’s palace, 
and went in, and sat 
with the servants, to 
see the end. 59 Now 
the chief priests, and 
elders, and all the 
council, sought false 
witness against Jesus, 
to put him to death; 
60 but found none: 
yea, thoughmany false 
witnesses came, yet 
found they none. At 
the last came two false 
witnesses, 61 and said, 
This fellow said, I am 
able to destroy the 
temple of God, and to 
build it in three days. 
62 And the high priest 
arose, and said unto 
him, Answerest thou 
nothing? what is it 
which these witness 
against thee? 63 But 


x τὴν μάχαιράν σου LTTrA. Υ μαχαίρῃ LTTrA. τ --- ἄρτι TTr. 
Ὁ πλείω LTTrA. © — ἢ (read [than]) relma d λεγιώνων T. 
ὑμᾶς T[Tr JA. 
4 + αὐτοῦ of him | L]. i — ἀπὸ T. 
θανατώσουσιν LTTrA ; θανατώσωσιν αὐτὸν W.- 
ψευδομαρτύρων LTTra. ο — οὐχ εὗρον @[L]TTra. 
οἰκοδομῆσαι T; — αὐτὸν TrA. 


m— καὶ GLT'Tr. 


© ἐξήλθατε LTTrA. 
; yet δ τα θ᾽ sends ates ; 
& ἐκαθεζόμην ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ διδάσκων L; ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ ἐκαθεζόμην διδάσκων TIrA. 
ἃ K — καὶ οἱ πρεσβύτεροι LITA. 


Ρ — Ψευδομάρτυρες TTrA. 


a+ ἄρτι DOW TTr. 
f — πρὸς 


! αὐτὸν 
π προσελθόντων 
4 αὐτὸν 


80 


Jesus held his peace. 
And the high priest 
answered and said un- 
to him, 1 adjure thee 
by the living God, that 
thou tell us whether 
thou be the Christ, the 
Son of God. 64 Jesus 
saith unto him, Thou 
hast said: nevertheless 
Τ say unto you, Here- 
after shall ye see the 
Son of man sitting on 
the right hand of 
power, and coming in 
the clouds of heaven. 
65 Then the high priest 
rent his clothes, say- 
ing, He hath spoken 
blasphemy ; what fur- 
ther need have we of 
witnesses? behold,now 
ye have heard his blas- 
phemy. 66 What think 
ye? They answered 
and said, He is guilty 
of death. 67 Then did 
they spit in his face, 
and buffeted him ; and 
others smote him with 
the palms of their 
hands, 68 saying, Pro- 
phesy unto us, thou 
Christ, Who is he that 
smote thee? 


69 Now Peter sat 
without in the palace: 
aud a damsel came 
anto him, saying, Thou 
also wast with Jesus 
of Galilee. 70 But he 
denied before them all, 
saying, I know not 
what thou _§ sayest. 
71 And when he was 
gone out into the 
porch, another maid 
saw him, and said unto 
them that were there, 
This fellow was also 
with Jesus of WNa- 
zareth. 72 And again 
he denied with an oath, 
Ido not know the man, 
73 And after a while 
came unto him they 
that stood by, and 
said to Peter, Surely 
thou also art one 
of them; for thy 
speech bewrayeth thee. 
74 Then began he to 
curse and to swear, 
saying, Ll know not the 
man. And immedi- 
ately the cock crew. 
75 And Peter remem- 


MATOAIOX®&. XXVI. 


καταμαρτυροῦσιν ; 63 Ὁ δὲ. Ἰησοῦς ἐσιώπα. καὶ "ἀποκριθεὶς" ὁ 
180 “witness *against ? But Jesus wassilent. And answering the 
ἀρχιερεὺς εἶπεν αὐτῷ, ἙΕξορκίζω σε κατὰ τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ ζῶντος, 
highpriest said tohim, JLadjure thee by °God ‘the “living, 
ev c ~ » ? 4 Ly « , c cA ~ ~ , 
ἵνα ἡμῖν εἴπῃς. εἰ σὺ εἶ ὁ χριστός. ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ. G4 Λέγει 
that us thoutell if thouartthe Christ, the Son of God. 2Says 
? exp AYE) ~ Ay ie \ , « - ? 2) ν » 
αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Σὺ εἶπας. πλὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ἀπ᾽ ἄρτι ὄψεσθε 
‘to*him ‘Jesus, Thou hastsaid. Moreover I say to you, Henceforth yeshallsee 
τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώποιι καθήμενον ἐκ δεξιῶν τῆς δυνάμεως Kai 
the Son of man sitting at([the]right hand of power, amd 
ἐρχόμενον ἐπὶ τῶν νεφελῶν TOU οὐρανοῦ. 65 Τότε ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς 
coming on the clouds of heaven. Then the high priest 
διέῤῥηξεν τὰ ἱμάτια.αὐτοῦ, λέγων, “Ὅτι! ἐβλασφήμησεν" τί 
rent his garments, saying, He has blasphemed ; why 
ἔτι χρείαν ἔχομεν μαρτύρων; ἴδε, νῦν ἠκούσατε τὴν βλασ- 
anymore “need *have*we of witnesses? lo, now yehaveheard the blas- 


~ 


φημίαν Yabrov.' 66 τί ὑ μαι BOREL Οἱ.δὲ ἀποκριθέντες εἶπον, 
phemy of him. What doyethink? Andthey answering said, 


Ἀγ. ’ ’ , , ᾽ , > A , 
Evoyoc θανάτου ἐστίν. 67 Tore ἐνέπτυσαν εἰς τὸ πρόσωπον 


Deserving οὗ death heis. Then theyspat in “face 
αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐκολάφισαν αὐτόν, οἱ. δὲ νέἐῤῥάπισαν," 

‘his, and buffeted him, and some struck [him] with the palm of the 
68 λέγοντες, Προφήτευσον ἡμῖν, χριστέ, τίς ἐστιν ὁ 
hand, saying, Prophesy tous, Christ, Who is _ he that 
παίσας GE; 
struck thee? 


69 Ὁ.δὲ. Πέτρος “ἔξω ἐκάθητο! ἐν τῇ αὐλῇ, Kai προσῆλθεν 
But Peter “*without*was *sitting in the court, and “came 
αὐτῷ μία.παιδίσκη, λέγουσα, Kai od ἦσθα μετὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ τοῦ 
*to°him 1a *maid, saying, Andthou wast with Jesus the 
Γαλιλαίου. 70 Ὃ.δὲ ἠρνήσατο ἔμπροσθεν Υ͂ πάντων, λέγων, Οὐκ 
Galilwan. But he denied before all, saying, “Not 
olda τί λέγεις. 71 ᾿Εξελθόντα.δὲ *adbrov' sic τὸν πυλῶνα 
11 *know what thou sayest. And*having*gone*out ‘he into the porch 
εἶδεν αὐτὸν ἄλλη, καὶ λέγει *roic' ἐκεῖ, "Kai! οὗτος 


‘saw him ‘another (*maidj],and says tothose there, And _ this[man} 
ἣν pera Ἰησοῦ τοῦ Ναζωραίου. 72 Kai πάλιν ἠρνήσατο 
was with Jesus the Nazarzan. And again he denied 


μεθ᾽} ὅρκου, Ὅτι οὐκ.οἷδα τὸν ἄνθρωπον. 73 Μετὰ μικρὺν. δὲ 
with δὴ οδίῃ, I know not the man, After a little also 
, « € ~ = ~ , ? ~ 
προσελθόντες οἱ ἕἑστῶτες εἶπον τῷ Πέτρῳ, ᾿Αληθῶς 
Shaving Scome 7to[®him] 'those*who “stood*by said to Peter, Truly 
καὶ σὺ ἐξ αὐτῶν εἶ" καὶ. γὰρ ἡ-λαλιά.σου δῆλόν GE ποιεῖ. 
also thou of them art, foreven thy speech “manifest *thee ‘makes. 
74 Tore ἤρξατο SkaravabepariZe" καὶ ὀμνύειν, “Ore οὐκ.οἶδα 
Then he began to curse and to swear, I know not 
τὸν ἄνθρωπον. Kai “εὐθέως! ἀλέκτωρ ἐφώνησεν. 75 καὶ 
the man, And immediately a cock crew. And 
ἐμνήσθη ὁ Πέτρος τοῦ ῥήματος ἱτοῦ" ᾿Ιησοῦ εἰρηκότος Sabri', 


bered the word of “remembered Peter the word of Jesus, who had said to him, 
Jesus, which said unto ¢ ἢ "7 ~ ἢ > ΄ ᾿ see 
him, Before the cock Ort TOW ἀλέκτορα φωνῆησαι, τρις απαρνησῃ με Kat 
crow, thou shalt deny Before [the] cock crow, thrice thou wiltdeny me. And 
me thrice. And he ? O ‘ » » r ~ 
went out, and wept ἐξελθὼν ἔξω ἔκλαυσεν πικρῶς. 
bitterly. having gone out ihe wept bitterly. 

5.- ἀποκριθεὶς Tr. ἱ -- ὅτι τττὰ. Y—avrod[L]TTrA. δ ἐράπισαν LTTrA. ἃ ἐκάθητο 
ἔξω LTTrA. Y - αὐτῶν θη 6. 58 -- αὐτὸν [1|] ττ. ι αὐτοῖς tothem aw. ὃ --- καὶ Τ. 
ὁ μετὰ ἱττιὰ. 8 καταθεματίζειν GLITrAW. ε εὐθὺς Tr. ἴ --- τοῦ LTTrA. ὃ --- αὐτῷ [L]rrra. 


XXVII. MATTHEW. 
27 Ilpwiac.cé γενομένης, συμβούλιον ἔλαβον πάντες ot 


And morning being come, *2counsel Mtook tall the 
ἀρχιερεῖς Kai ot πρεσβύτεροι τοῦ λαοῦ κατὰ τοῦ Ἰησοῦ, 
*chief ‘priests *and *the 7elders ®of ®the }°people against Jesus, 
ὥστε θανατῶσαι αὐτόν" 2 καὶ δήσαντες αὐτὸν ἀπήγα- 
80 that they might put todeath him; andhaving bound him they led 
- ἐδωκ Ἰαὐτὸν! ἘΠ iw" Πιλάτῳ" = 
yov και παρὲ ωκαν “AUTOV οντιῳ ι ατῳ TH 
away [him] and _ delivered up him to Pontius Pilate the 
ἡγεμόνι. 
governor. 
8 Τότε ἰδὼν 


Ἰούδας ὁ ᾿-ἰπαραδιδοὺς" αὐτὸν ὅτι κατ- 
Then ‘having 7seen 


1Judas *who ‘delivered °up ‘him that he was 
, + ‘ n ? , I ‘ ’, ? , 
ἐκρίθη, IUD ΕΣ ἀπέστρεψεν" τὰ τριάκοντα ἀργύ- 
condemned, ving regretted [it] returned the thirty pieces of 
pia τοῖς ἀρχιερεῦσιν Kai “στοῖς" πρεσβυτέροις, 4 λέγων. 
silver tothe chiefpriests and the elders, paying, 
Ἥμαρτον παραδοὺς αἷμα Ῥἀθῶον". Οἱ. δὲ εἶπον, Τί 
Isinned delivering up *blood ‘guiltless, Butthey said, What[is that] 
πρὸς Nuac; σὺ Wwe. 5 Καὶ ῥίψας τὰ ἀργύρια 
ἴο us? thou wilt see [to it]. And having cast down the pieces of silver 
r2 ~ “}} ? , A ? ‘ 2 7 « " 
ἐν τῷ ναῷ" ἀνεχώρησεν,καὶ ἀπελθὼν ἀπήγξατο. 6 Οἱ.δὲ 
in the temple he withdrew, and havinggoneaway hangedhimself. Amd the 
᾽ ~ , > , 5 li ? Ν = ~ 
ἀρχιερεῖς λαβόντες τὰ ἀργύρια "εἶπον," Οὐκ.ἔξεστιν βαλεῖν 
chief priests having taken the piecesofsilver said, It is not lawful to put 
αὐτὰ εἰς τὸν κορβανᾶν, ἐπεὶ τιμὴ αἵματός ἐστιν. 7 Συμ- 
them into the treasury, since [the] price of blood it is. *Coun- 
βούλιον δὲ λαβόντες, ἠγόρασαν ἐξ αὐτῶν τὸν ἀγρὸν τοῦ 
861 tand *having ‘taken, they bought with them the field ofthe 
κεραμέως, eic ταφὴν τοῖς ξένοις. 8 διὸ ἐκλήθη ὁ 
potter, for a burying ground for strangers. Wherefore “was ‘called 
ἀγρὸς.ἐκεῖνος ἀγρὸς αἵματος ἕως τῆς-σήμερον. Q τότε 
ithat 3561 Field of blood to this day. Then 
> , A « δὶ A? , ~ ΄, , 
ἐπληρώθη τὸ ῥηθὲν διὰ ᾿Τερεμίου τοῦ προφήτου, λέγον- 
was fulfilled that which wasspoken by Jeremias the prophet, say- 
τος, Kai ἔλαβον τὰ τριάκοντα ἀργύρια, THY τιμὴν τοῦ 
ing, And Itook the thirty pieces ofsilver, the price of him who 
τετιμημένου, ὃν ἐτιμήσαντο ἀπὸ υἱῶν ᾿Ισραήλ, 10 καὶ 


was set a price on, whom they “set 78 *price °on ‘of [(*the] “sons ‘of*Israel, and 
ἔδωκαν αὐτὰ εἰς τὸν ἀγρὸν τοῦ κεραμέως, καθὰ συνέταξέν 
gave them for the field ofthe potter, according as “directed 
οι κύριος. 
*me [16] *Lord. 
11 Ὁ. δὲ. Ἰησοῦς 'ἔστη" ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ ἡγεμόνος" καὶ ἐπηρώ- 
But Jesus stood before the governor; and *ques- 
τησὲν αὐτὸν ὁ ἡγεμών, λέγων, Σὺ εἶ ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν 
tioned ‘him ‘the “governor, saying, ἽΤΒΟα ‘art the king of the 
Ἰουδαίων; Ὁ. δὲ. Ἰησοῦς ἔφη "αὐτῷ," Σὺ λέγεις. 12 Kai 
Jews? And Jesus said tohim, Thou sayest. And 


ἐν. τῷ.κατηγορεῖσθαι αὐτὸν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀρχιερέων Kai *r@v" πρεσ- 
when *was “accused the by the chief priests and the el- 

βυτέρων, οὐδὲν ἀπεκρίνατο. 18 τότε λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ "Πιλάτος," 

ders, nothing he answered. Then ?says *to*him Pilate, 


1 


XXVIII. When the 
morning was come, all 
the chief priests and 
elders of the people 
took counsel against 
Jesus to put him to 
death: 2 and when 
they had bound him, 
they led him away, 


io 4) 


and delivered him to 
Pontius Pilate the 
governor. 


3 Then Judas, which 
had betrayed him, 
when he saw that he 
was condemned, re- 

mted himself, and 

rought again the 
thirty pieces of silver 
to the chief priests and 
elders, 4 saying, I have 
sinned in that I have 
betrayed the innocent 
blood. And they said, 
What is that tous? see 
thou fothat, 5 And he 
cast down the pieces 
of silver in the temple, 
and departed, and 
went and hanged him- 
self. 6 And the chief 
priests took the silver 
pieces, and said, It is 
not lawful for to put 
them intothe treasury, 
because it is the price 
of blood. 7 And they 
took counsel, and 
bought with them the 
potter’s field, to bury 
strangersin. 8 Where- 
fore that field was 
ealled, The field of 
blood, unto this day. 
9 Then was fulfilled 
that which was spoken 
by Jeremy the prophet, 
saying, And they took 
the thirty pieces of 
silver, the price of him 
that was valued, whom 
they of the children of 
Israel did value; l0and 
gave them for tie pot- 
ter’s field, as the Lora 
appointed me. 


11 And Jesus sicod 
before the governor: 
and the governor asked 
him, saying, Art thou 
the king of the Jews? 
And Jesus said unto 
him, Thou gayest. 
12 And when he was 
accused of the chief 
priests and elders, 
he answered nothing. 
13 Then said Pilate 
unto him, MHearest 


1 — αὐτὸν LTTrA. 
Ὁ ἔστρεψεν TTrA, © — τοῖς LTTrA. 
into the temple rrr. 5 εἶπαν LT Tr. 
« ἸΠιλᾶτος Ltr; Πειλᾶτος Tt. 


k — [lovriw Ttr. | Πειλάτῳ τ. 
P ἀθῷον LTA. 


t ἐστάθη LTTrA. 


™ παραδοὺς had delivered up Ltr. 
4 ὄψῃ LTTrA. 
° — αὐτῷ T. 


Τ εἰς τὸν ναὸν 
τ — τῶν TA]. 


G 


82 


thou not how many 
things they witness 
against thee? 14 And 
he answered him to 
never a word; inso- 
much that the gover- 
nor marvelled greatly. 


15 Now at that feast 
the governor was wont 
to Zelease unto the 
people a prisoner, 
whom they would. 
16 And they had thena 
notable prisoner, call- 
ed Barabbas. 17 There- 
fore when they were 
gathered together, Pi- 
late said unto them, 
Whom will ye that 
I release unto you? 
Barabbas, or esus 
which is called Christ ? 
18 For he knew that 
for envy they had de- 
livered him. 19 When 
he was set down on 
the judgment seat, his 
wife sent unto him, 
saying, Have thou 
nothing to do with 
that just man: for I 
have suffered many 
things this day in a 
dream because of him. 
20 But the chief priests 
and elders persuaded 
the multitude that 
they should ask Barab- 
bas, and destroy Jesus. 
21 The governor an- 
swered and said unto 
them, Whether of the 
twain will ye that I 
release unto you? They 
gid, Barabbas. 22 Pi- 
late saith unto them, 
What shall I do then 
with Jesus which is 
called Christ ? They all 
say unto him, Let him 
be crucified. 23 And the 
governor said, Why, 
what evil hath he 
done? But they cried 
out the more, saying, 
Let him be crucified. 
24 When Pilate saw 
that he could prevail 
nothing, but that 
rather a tumult was 
made, he took water, 
and washed Ais hands 
before the multitude, 
saying, I am innocent 
of the blood of this 
just person: see ye to 
tt, 25 Then answered 
all the people, and 
said, His blood be on 
us, and on our chil- 
dren. 26 Then released 
he Barabbas' unto 
them: and when he 
had scourged Jesus, he 
delivered him to be 
crucified. 


MATOATOX. 


Οὐκ.ἀκούεις πόσα σοῦ 
Hearest thou not how many things ‘thee 


XXVII. 


καταμαρτυροῦσιν; 14 Kai 
‘they *witness *against ἢ And 


οὐκ.ἀπεκρίθη αὐτῷ πρὸς οὐδὲ ἕν ῥῆμα, ὥστε θαυμάζειν τὸν 
he did not answer him to even one word, sothat “wondered ‘the 
ἡγεμόνα λίαν. 
*governor exceedingly. 
15 Κατὰ. δὲ ἑορτὴν εἰώθει ὁ ἡγεμὼν ἀπολύειν ἕνα 
Now at [the] feast *was*accustomed'the*governor torelease one 
τῷ ὄχλῳ δέσμιον, ὃν ἤθελον. 16 εἶχον.δὲ τότε δέσ- 
53[ο ὅπ *multitude ‘prisoner, whom they wished. And they had then a?pri- 
μιον ἐπίσημον, λεχύμεμον Βαραββᾶν. 17 συνηγμένων 
soner ‘notable, caNed Barabbas. Being ‘gathered *together 


οὖν αὐτῶν εἶπεν αὐτοῖς ὁ ΥΠιλάτος," Τίνα θέλετε ἀπο-᾿ 
"therefore ‘they ‘said δίο *them *Pilate, Whom willye[that] I 


λύσω ὑμῖν; Βαραββᾶν, ἢ ᾿Ιησοῦν τὸν λεγόμενον χριστόν ; 
release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus who is called Christ ? 


18 poe dp ὅτι διὰ φθόνον παρέδωκαν αὐτόν. 19 Καθη- 
or he knew that through envy they deliveredup him. 7As ‘was 
, 


> ~ ? ‘ Lad (2 2 “ bY > A € 
ἕνου δὲ αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τοῦ βήματος ἀπέστειλεν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἡ 


sitting ‘but *he on the judgment seat 3sent to Shim 
γυνὴ αὐτοῦ, λέγουσα, Μηδὲν σοι καὶ τῷ δικαίῳ 
his *wife, saying, [Let there be] nothing between thee and ighteous 
ἐκείνῳ" πολλὰ.γὰρ ἔπαθον σήμερον Kar ὄναρ δι 


‘that [man]; for many things 1 βυοστοᾶ to-day in a dream because of 
αὐτόν. 20 Oi.d2 ἀρχιερεῖς Kai οἱ πρεσβύτεροι ἔπεισαν τοὺς 
him. But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the 

n” “ bal 2 a ~ Y ᾽ ~ ? 
ὄχλους ἵνα αἰτήσωνται τὸν Βαραββᾶν, τὸν.δὲ. Ἰησοῦν ἀπολ- 
crowds that they should beg for Barabbas, and 7Jesus 1should 


Ld ᾽ « « ‘ 7 ᾽ ~ ’ , 
ἐσωσιν. 21 ἀποκριθεὶς.δὲ ὁ ἡγεμὼν εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Τίνα θέλετε 
7destroy. And answering 'the*governor said. tothem, Which will ye 
ἀπὸ τῶν δύο ἀπολύσω ὑμῖν; Οἱ. δὲ τεῖπον", "Βαραββᾶν. 
of the two([that] Irelease toyou? Andthey said, Barabbas, 
22 Λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ ΥΠιλάτος," Ti οὖν ποιήσω ᾿ἸΙησοῦν, τὸν 
*Says *to “them ‘Pilate, What then shallIdo with Jesus, who 
λεγόμενον Χρισπῦ»); Λέγουσιν Ῥαὐτῷ" πάντες, Σταυρωθήτω. 
is called it? They *say *to *him tall, Let [him] be crucified. 
23 Ὁ.δὲ “ἡγεμὼν! ἔφη, Ti γὰρ κακὸν ἐποίησεν ; Οἱ. δὲ 


1671] 


Andthe governor’ said, What *then didhe commit? But they 
περισσῶς ἔκραζον, λέγοντες, Σταυρωθήτω. 24 ᾿Ιδὼν.δὲ ὁ 
the more cried out, saying, Let [him] be crucified. And “seeing 


ΥΠιλάτος" ὅτι οὐδὲν ὠφελεῖ, ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον θόρυβος γίνεται, 


Pilate that nothing it availed, but rather atumult [15 arising, 

‘ .“ ? 4 A ~ d > , " ἫΝ» 
λαβὼν ὕδωρ ἀπενίψατο τὰς χεῖρας “ἀπέναντι' τοῦ ὄχλου, 
having taken water he washed [his] hands before the crowd, 


λέγων, “᾿Αθῶός" εἰμι ἀπὸ τοῦ αἵματος ἱτοῦ.δικαίου.τούτου"" 

saying, Guiltless Iam of the blood of this righteous ([man,_ 

ὑμεῖς ὄψεσθε. 25 Καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς πᾶς ὁ λαὸς εἶπεν, Τὸ 
Θ will see [to it]. And ‘answering ‘all *the*people_ said, 

ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ.τέκνα.ἡμῶν. 26 Tore ἀπέλυ- 

us and on our children, Then he re- 

τὸν.δὲ Ἰησοῦν φραγελλώσας 
but *Jesus *having *scourged 


δέ 

αἴπα αὐτὸν 
is blood [be]on 

? ~ 4 ~ A 

αὐτοῖς τὸν Βαραββᾶν 

leased ἕο them Barabbas ; 
παρέδωκεν ἵνα σταυρωθῇ. 

he delivered up (him) that he might be crucified. 


σεν 


Υ Πιλᾶτος utr; Πειλᾶτος 1. 
© — ἡγεμὼν (ead and he said) ΤΊτΑ. 


b — αὐτῷ LTTrA. 
ἴ τούτου [Tow 


® εἶπαν TTr. a + τὸν TTr. 
4 κατέναντι LTr. © ἀθῷός LTA. 


δικαίου} L; — τοῦ δικαίου (read of this [{man]) T[Tr]A. 


ΧΧΥΙΙ. MATTHEW. 


27 Tore οἱ στρατιῶται τοῦ ἡγεμόνος, παραλαβόντες 


Then the soldiers ofthe governor, having taken with [them] 
τὸν Ἰησοῦν εἰς τὸ πραιτώριον, συνήγαγον ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν ὅλην 
Jesus to the prsxtorium, gathered against him all 


THY σπεῖραν᾽ 28 Kai ξἐκδύσαντες" αὐτὸν "περιέθηκαν αὐτῷ 
the band ; and havingstripped him they put round him 
χλαμύδα κοκκίνην" 29 καὶ πλέξαντες στέφανον ἐξ ἀκανθῶν 
a 7cloak ‘scarlet ; And having platted acrown of thorns 
ἐπέθηκαν ἐπὶ ἱτὴν.κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ, καὶ κάλαμον kimi τὴν 
they put [it] on his head, and 8. reed in 
δεξιὰν! αὐτοῦ" Kai γονυπετήσαντες ἔμπροσθεν αὐτοῦ ἱένέ- 
7right Ββεαμᾶ *his; and bowing the knees before him they 
παιζον! αὐτῷ, λέγοντες, Χαῖρε, πὸ βασιλεὺς" τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων᾽ 
mocked him, saying, Hail, king ofthe Jews! 
80 καὶ ἐμπτύσαντες εἰς αὐτὸν ἔλαβον τὸν κάλαμον Kai ἔτυπ- 
μ ς εις 
And havingspit upon him they took the reed and struck 


τον εἰς τὴν.κεφαλὴν.αὐτοῦ. 31 Kai bre ἐνέπαιξαν αὐτῷ 
{him] on is head. And when they had mocked him 


"ἐξέδυσαν" αὐτὸν τὴν χλαμύδα, “καὶ! ἐνέδυσαν αὐτὸν τὰ 


they took off him the cloak, and they put on him 
ἱμάτια.αὐτοῦ" Kai ἀπήγαγον αὐτὸν εἰς τὸ σταυρῶσαι. 
hisown garments; and led“*away ‘him to crucify. 


82 ᾿Ἐξερχόμενοι δὲ εὗρον ἄνθρωπον Κυρηναῖον, ὀνόματι 
And going forth theyfound aman a enran, by name 
Σίμωνα: τοῦτον ἠγγάρευσαν ἵνα ἄρῃ τὸν.σταυρὸν αὐτοῦ. 
Simon; him they compelled that he might carry his cross, 
33 Kai ἐλθόντες εἰς τόπον λεγόμενον ῬΓολγοθᾶ," «ὅς" ἐστιν 
And having come to ἃ place called Golgotha, which is 
eyaHev oe κρανίου τόπος," 84 ἔδωκαν αὐγῷ "πιεῖν" ὄξος" 
called 308. 5a “skull ‘place, they gave him todrink vinegar 
μετὰ χολῆς μεμιγμένον᾽ Kai eh Tees οὐκ. “ἤθελεν!" "πιεῖν." 


with = gall mingled ; and havingtasted he would not drink, 
35 Σταυρώσαντες.δὲ αὐτὸν διεμερίσαντο τὰ.ἱμάτια.αὐτοῦ, 
And having crucified him they divided his garments, 
π βάλλοντες" KAjpov’ ἵνα πληρωθῇ τὸ ῥηθὲν ὑπὸ 
casting a lot; that might be fulfilled that which wasspoken by 
τοῦ προφήτου, Διεμερίσαντο Ta.iparid.wov ἑαυτοῖς, καὶ 
the prophet, They divided my garments among themselves, and 
ἐπὶ τὸν. ἱματισμόν.μου ἔβαλον κλῆρον." 36 Kai καθήμενοι 
for my vesture they cast ἃ lot. And sitting down 
? [4 > 4 ? ~ ‘ ? , ? id ~ 
ἐτήρουν αὐτὸν ἐκεῖ. 37 Καὶ ἐπέθηκαν ἐπάνω τῆς 


they kept guard over him there. And they put up over 


κεφαλῆς. αὐτοῦ τὴν.αἰτίαν.αὐτοῦ γεγραμμένην, Οὗτός ἐστιν 
his head his accusation written : This is 


? ~ « ‘ ~ ? / , ~ 4 
Ιησοῦς ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων. 38 Tore cravpovyTa σὺν 
Jesus the king of the Jews, Then arecrucified with 


αὐτῷ δύο λῃσταί, εἷς ἐκ δεξιῶν καὶ εἷς ἐξ εὐωνύμων. 
him two robbers, one at [the] right handand one at [the] left. 
39 Οἱ: δὲ παραπορευόμενοι ἐβλασφήμουν αὐτόν, κινοῦντες 


But those passing by railed at him, shaking 
τὰς. κεφαλὰς. αὐτῶν, 40 καὶ λέγοντες, Ὃ καταλύων τὸν ναὸν 
their heads, and saying, ‘Thou who destroyest the temple 


& ἐνδύσαντες having clothed L, 
κεφαλῆς TTrA. Κ ἐν τῇ δεξιᾷ LITra. 
2 ἐκδύσαντες having taken off τ. ο — καὶ τ. 
™ κρανίου τόπος λεγόμενος LTTrA. - πεῖν T. 
ἐθέλησεν Α. Ww βαλόντες having cast LTA. 


1 ἐνέπαιξαν T. 


τ οἶῖνον wine LTTr. 


Β χλαμύδα κοκκίνην περιέθηκαν αὐτῷ LTTrA. 
m βασιλεῦ O Κίπρ Ltr. 
P Τολγοθά Tr. 


83 


27 Then the soldiers 
of the governor took 
Jesus into the common 
hall, and gathered un- 
to him the whole band 
of soldiers. 28 And 
they stripped him, and 
put on him a scarlet 
robe. 29 And when 
they had platted a 
crown of thorns, they 
put z upon his head, 
and a reed in his right 
hand: and they bowed 
the knee before him, 
and mocked him, say- 
ing, Hail, King of the 
Jews! 30 And they 
spit upon him, and 
took the reed, and 
smote him on the head. 
31 And after that they 
had mocked him, they 
took the robe off from 
him, and put his own 
raiment on him, and 
led him away to cru- 
cify him. 

32 And as they came 
out, they found a 
man of Cyrene, Simon 
by name: him they 
compelled to bear his 
cross. 33 And when 
they were come unto 
a place called Gol- 
gotha, that is to say, 
a jee of a skull, 
34 They gave him vin- 
egar to drink mingled 
with gall: and when 
he had tasted thereof, 
he would not drink. 
35 And they crucified 
him, and parted his 
garments, casting lots: 
that it might be ful- 
filled which was spo- 
ken by the prophet, 
They parted my gar- 
ments among them, 
and upon my vesture 
did they cast lots. 
36 And sitting down 
they watched him 
there; 37 and set up 
over his head his accu- 
sation written, THIS 
IS JESUS THE 
KING OF THB 
JEWS. 38 Then were 
there two thieves cru- 
cified with him, one 
on the right hand, and 
another on the left. 


39 And they that 
passed by reviled him, 
wagging their heads, 
40 and saying, Thou 
that destroyest the 


temple, and buildest 


4 6 GLTTraW. 
τ ἠθέλησεν LTTr; 


x — ἵνα πληρωθῇ to end of verse ΟἸσττα. 


84 

it in three days, save 
thyself. If thou be 
the Son of God, come 
down from the cross. 
41 Likewise also the 
chief priests mocking 
him, with the scribes 
and elders, said, 42 He 
saved others; himself 
he cannot save. If he 
be the King of Israel, 
let him now come 
down from the cross, 
and we will believe 
him, 43 He trusted in 
God; let him deliver 
him now, if he will 
have him: for he said, 
I am the Son of God. 
44 The thieves also, 
which were crucified 
with him, cast the 
same in his teeth. 


45 Now from the 
sixth hour there was 
darkness over all the 
Jand unto the ninth 
hour. 46 And about 
the ninth hour Jesus 
cried with a loud voice, 
saying, ELI, ELI, 
LAMA SABACHTHA- 
NI? that isto say, My 
God, my God, why 
hast thou forsaken 
me? 47 Some of them 
that stood there, when 
they heard that, said, 
‘his man calleth for 
Elias. 48 Andstraight- 
way one of them ran, 
und took a spunge, and 
filled it with vinegar, 
and put tt on a reed, 
and gave him to drink. 
49 The rest said, Let 
be, let us see whether 
Elias will come to save 
him, 


50 Jesus, when he 
had cried again with a 
lond voice, yielded up 
the ghost, 51 And, be- 
hold, the veil of the 
temple was rent in 
twain from the top to 
the bottom; and the 
earth did quake, and 
the rocks rent; 52 and 
the graves were open- 
ed; and many bodies 
of the saints which 


MATOATOS. XXVIL. 
καὶ ἐν τρισὶν ἡμέραις οἰκοδομῶν, σῶσον σεαυτόν. εἰ υἱὸς 
and in three days buildest [it], save thyself. Tf son 


Yel τοῦ θεοῦ," 5 κατάβηθι ἀπὸ τοῦ σταυροῦ. 41 Ὁμοίως 
thouart of God, descend from the cross. *In “like *manner 
"δὲ καὶ ot ἀρχιερεῖς ἐμπαίζοντες μετὰ τῶν γραμματέων καὶ 
tand also the chief priests, mocking, with the scribes and 
πρεσβυτέρων ἔλεγον, 42 ΓΛλλους ἔσωσεν, ἑαυτὸν οὐ.δύναται 
elders, said, Others he saved, himself he isnot able 
σῶσαι. ei βασιλεὺς open ἐστιν, καταβάτω νῦν ἀπὸ τοῦ 
to save, Tf king ofIsrael heis, let him descend now from the 
σταυροῦ, καὶ “πιστεύσομεν! δαὐτῷ." 48 πέποιθεν ἐπὶ “τὸν θεόν" | 
cross, and we will believe him, He trusted on God: 
ῥυσάσθω νῦν fabréy," εἰ θέλει αὐτόν. εἶπεν.γάρ, Ὅτι θεοῦ 
lethimdeliver*now ‘him, if he will [have] him. For he said, “Of*God 
εἶμι υἱός. 44 Τὸ. δ᾽ αὐτὸ καὶ οἱ λῃσταὶ ot Soveravow/éy- 
*I?am *Son. And[{with]thesamethingalsothe robbers who were crucified to- 
uh 


rec! ἢ αὐτῷ ὠνείδιζον Ἰαὐτῷ." 
gether with him reproached him. 
45 ᾿Απὸ δὲ ἕκτης ὥρας σκότος ἐγένετο ἐπὶ πᾶσαν τὴν 


Now from *sixth [the] hour darkness all the 
~ e “ k2 , «I 46 4 δὲ ‘ 12 , "“ 
γῆν ewe ὥρας “evvarnc TEPL.OE τὴν ἐννάτην ὥραν 
land until[the] 7hour ‘ninth ; and about the ninth hour 
™aveBdonoey" ὁ Ἰησοῦς φωνῇ μεγάλῃ, λέγων, "HX, ’HXi,' 
2cried *out 1Jesus ‘with*a7voice ‘loud, saying, Eli, Eli, 
apa" Ρσαβαχθανί ;" τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν, Θεέ.μου, θεέ. μου, Uvari' με 
lama sabachthani ? that is, My God, my God, why me 
ἐγκατέλιπες; 47 Τινὲς. δὲ τῶν ἐκεῖ τέστώτων" ἀκού- 
hast thou forsaken ? And some of those who there weré standing having 
σαντες; ἔλεγον, Ὅτι “Ἡλίαν! φωνεῖ οὗτος. 48 Kai εὐθέως 
heard, said, *Elias Zcalls “this (*man], And immediately 
δραμὼν εἷς ἐξ αὐτῶν καὶ λαβὼν σπόγγον, πλήσας.τε 
“having ®run'‘one 292.5Ὁ “them and _ taken a sponge, and filled [it] 
ὔξους καὶ περιθεὶς καλάμῳ, ἐπότιζεν αὐτόν" 49 οἱ δὲ 
with vinegar and put[it]on areed, gave*to“drink *him. But the 
λοιποὶ *éXeyor," “Adec, ἴδωμεν εἰ ἔρχεται “HXiac! σώσων 


was over 


rest said, Let be; let us see comes Elias to save 
αὐτόν. 
him. 
50 Ὁ δὲ. Ἰησοῦς πάλιν κράξας φωνῇ μεγάλῃ ἀφῆκεν 
And Jesus again having cried witha7voice ‘loud yielded up 


τὸ πνεῦμα. 51 Kai ἰδού, τὸ καταπέτασμα τοῦ ναοῦ ἐσχίσθη 
{his} spirit. And behold, the veil ofthetemple was rent 
πες δύο! χἀπὸ! ἄνωθεν ἕως κάτω. Kai ἡ γῆ ἐσείσθη, Kai 
into two from top to bottom; and the earth was shaken, and 
ε ~ > ‘ 
ai πέτραι ἐσχίσθησαν, 52 καὶ τὰ μνημεῖα ἀνεῴχθησαν. Kai 
the roc were rent, and the tombs were opened, and 
πολλὰ σώματα τῶν κεκοιμημένων ἁγίων ᾿πἠγέρθη," 53 Kai 


slept arose, 53 and many bodies ofthe “fallen *asleep 1gaints arose, and 

Υ θεοῦ εἶ L. z+ καὶ and LT. 8 [δὲ] καὶ TrA; — δὲ καὶ [L]T. Ὁ — εἰ Trra. 
© πιστεύομεν We believe τ,; πιστεύσωμεν let us believe T. ἃ ἐπ᾽’ αὐτόν on him Tir; ἐπ᾽ 
αὐτῷ W. ετῴ θεῷ!τ. f — αὐτόν [τι]. & συνσταυρωθέντες LTTrA. h + σὺν 
with (him) urrra. i αὐτόν GLTTrAW. k ἐνάτης LITrA. ἐνάτην LTTrA. τὰ ἐβόησεν 
cried Tr. π Ἡλὶ ἡλὶ LA; ᾿Ηλεὶ ἡλεὶ τ. © λημὰ τι ; λεμὰ ΤΊτΑ. P σαβακθανίτ,; 
σαβαχθανεί TTr. 4 ἵνα τί A. τ ἑστηκότων TTr. 5 Ἡλείαν T. * εἶπαν Ltr. 
v “Haeias T. ν᾿ εἰς δύο placed after κάτω TTrA. Xan’ τι; -- ἀπὸ 1. γα ἠγέρθησαν 


LTTrA. 


ΧΙΧΥΤΙ: MATTHEW. 
ἐξελθόντες ἐκ τῶν μνημείων μετὰ τὴν.ἔγερσιν. αὐτοῦ, εἰσῆλ- 
having gone forth out οὗ the tombs after his arising, entered 
Gov εἰς τὴν ἁγίαν πόλιν καὶ ἐνεφανίσθησαν πολλοῖς. 
into the holy city and appeared to many. 
54 ‘0.08 *éxarévrapyoc" καὶ οἱ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ τηροῦντες 
But the centurion andthey who with him kept guard over 


τὸν Ἰησοῦν, ἰδόντες τὸν σεισμὸν Kai τὰ δγεγνόμενα,, 
Jesus, having seen the earthquake and the things that took place, 


ἐφοβήθησαν σφόδρα, λέγοντες, ᾿Αληθῶς θεοῦ υἱὸς! ἣν οὗτος. 


feared greatly, saying, Truly 7God’s *Son ?was ‘this. 
55 Ἦσαν.δὲ ἐκεῖ γυναῖκες πολλαὶ ἀπὸ μακρόθεν θεωροῦ- 
And there were there *women ‘many from afar off looking 


σαι, αἵτινες ἠκολούθησαν τῷ Ἰησοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς Γαλιλαίας δια- 


on, who followed Jesus from Galilee min- 
κονοῦσαι αὐτῷ, 56 ἐν αἷς ἦν Μαρία ἡ Maydadnr7, καὶ 
istering to him, among whom was Mary the Magdalene, and 


Μαρία ἡ τοῦ ᾿Ιακώβου καὶ “Ἰωσῆ" 
Mary the 70f SJames ‘and ‘*Joses 
υἱῶν Ζεβεδαίου. 
sons of Zebedee. 
57 ᾿Οψίας.δὲ γενομένης ἦλθεν ἄνθρωπος πλούσιος ἀπὸ 
And evening beingcome *came 4a Sman 2rich from 
Δ᾽ Αριμαθαίας,! τοὔνομα ᾿Ιωσήφ, ὃς Kai αὐτὸς Stuabnrevoer’ 
Arimathea, by name Joseph, who also himself was discipled 
τῷ Inoov. 58 οὗτος προσελθὼν τῷ Πιλάτῳ" yrncaro τὸ σῶμα 
to Jesus, He having gone to Pilate begged the body 
τοῦ Ἰησοῦ. τότε ὁ ΞΠιλάτος! ἐκέλευσεν ἀποδοθῆναι "τὸ σῶμα. 
of Jesus, Then Pilate commanded tobegivenup the body. 
59 καὶ λαβὼν τὸ σῶμα δ᾽ Ἰωσὴφ ἐνετύλιξεν αὐτὸ ' σινδόνι 
Andhavingtakenthe body Joseph wrapped it ina7linen*cloth 
καθαρᾷ, 60 καὶ ἔθηκεν αὐτὸ ἐν τῷ .καινῷ.αὐτοῦ μνημείῳ ὃ 
‘clean, and placed it in his new tomb which 
ἐλατόμησεν ἐν Ty πέτρᾳ Kai προσκυλίσας Δλίθον μέγαν 
hehadhewn in the rock ; and having rolled a*stone ‘great 
krp θύρᾳ τοῦ μνημείου ἀπῆλθεν. G1 iv.dé ἐκεῖ ‘Magia 
tothe door ofthe tomb went away. And there was there Mary 
ἡ Μαγδαληνὴ καὶ ἡ ἄλλη Μαρία, καθήμεναι ἀπέναντι τοῦ 


μήτηρ, καὶ ἡ μήτηρ τῶν 


mother, and the mother of the 


the Magdalene andthe other Mary, sitting opposite the 
τάφου. 
sepulchre, 
62 Τῇ.δὲ ἐπαύριον, ἥτις ἐστὶν μετὰ τὴν παρασκευήν. 
Now onthe morrow, which is after the preparation, 
συνήχθησαν οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς Kai οἱ Φαρισαῖοι ποὸς ™I- 
were gathered together the chief priests and the Pharisees to Pi- 
λάτον," 63 λέγοντες, Κύρι, ἐμνήσθημεν ὅὕτι ἐκεῖνος 


late, saying, Sir, we have called to mind that that 


ε , = ” ~ Π - δὶν» 2 , , 
ὁ πλάνος εἶπεν ἔτι ζῶν, Mera τρεῖς ἡμέρας ἐγείρομαι. 64 κέ- 
deceiver said whilst living, After three days I arise. Com- 
λευσον οὖν ἀσφαλισθῆναι τὸν τάφον ἕως τῆς τρίτης ἡμέρας" 

mand therefore to be secured the sepulchreuntil the third day, 
μήποτε ἐλθόντες οἱ. μαθηταὶ. "αὐτοῦ" ° dcll κλέ ὑτόν 
-μαθηταὶ."αὐτοῦ" °vuKcroc! κλεψωσιν auroy, 

lest 3coming ‘his *disciples by night steal?away ‘him, 


86 


came out of the graves 
after his resurrection, 
and went into the holy 
city, and appeared 
unto many. 


54 Now when the 
centurion, and they 
that were with him, 
watching Jesus, saw 
the earthquake, and 
those things that were 
done, they feared 
greatly, saying, Truly 
this was the Son of 
God. 


55 And many women 
were there beholding 
afar off, which foi- 
lowed Jesus from Ga- 
lilee, ministering unto 
him : 56 among which 
was Mary Magdalene, 
and Mary the mother 
of James and Joses. 
and the mother of 
Zebedee’s children, 


57 When the even 
was come, there camé 
arich man of Arima- 
thea, named Joseph, 
who also himself was 
Jesus’ disciple: 58 he 
went to Pilate, and 
begged the body of Je- 
sus. Then Pilate com- 
manded the body to be 
delivered. 59 And when 
Joseph had taken the 
body, he wrapped it in 
a clean linen cioth, 
60 and laid it in his 
own new tomb, which 
he had hewn out in 
therock: and he rolled 
a great stone to the 
door of the sepulchre, 
and departed. 61 And 
there was Mary Mag- 
dalene, and the other 
Mary, sitting over a- 
gainst the sepulchre. 


62 Now the next day, 
that followed the day 
of the preparation, the 
chief priests and Pha- 
risees came together 
unto Pilate, 63 saying, 
Sir, we remember that 
that deceiver said, 
while he was yet alive, 
After three days i will 
Tise again. 64 Com- 
Mand therefore that 
the sepuichre be made 
sure until the third 
day, lest his disciples 
come by night, and 
steal him away, and 


8 γινόμενα were taking place LTTra. 


: ἑκατοντάρχης T. 
© ἐμαθητεύθη LTTr. 


Joseph T. 4 ᾿Αριμαθείας W. 
Πειλᾶτος T. h — τὸ σῶμα (read [it]) T[ Tr]. 
over (the door) L. 1 Μαριὰμ. τ. πὶ ἸΤιλᾶτον LTr; Πειλᾶτον T. 
disciples) T. © — νυκτὸς GLTTrA. 


> vids θεοῦ LTrA. 
f Πειλάτῳ T. 
i+ ἐν ἴῃ (a linen cloth) tra. 
1 — αὐτοῦ (read the 


ς Ἰωσὴφ 
8 Πιλᾶτος Ltr; 
k τ ἐπὶ 


86 


say unto the people, 
ἘΣ is risen from the 
dead: so the last error 
shall be worse than 
the first. 65 Pilate 
said unto them, Ye 
havea watch: go your 
way, make it as sure 
as yecan. 66So they 
went, and made the 
sepulchre sure, sealing 
the stone, and setting 
a watch. 


XXVIII. In theend 
of the sabbath, as it 
began to dawn toward 
the first day of the 
week, came Mary Mag- 
dalene and the other 
Mary to see the sepul- 
chre. 


2 And, behold, there 
was a great earth- 
quake: for the angel 
of the Lord descended 
from heaven, and came 
and rolled back the 
stone from the door, 
and sat upon it. 3 His 
countenance was like 
lightning, and his rai- 
ment white as snow: 
4and for fear of him 
the keepers did shake 
and became as dead 
men. 5 And theangel 
answered and said un- 
to the women, Fear 
not ye: for I know 
that ye seek Jesus, 
which was crucified. 
6 He is not here: for 
he is risen, as he said. 
Come, see the place 
where the Lord lay. 
7 And go quickly, and 
tell his disciples that 
he is risen from the 
dead ; and, behold, he 
gocth before you into 
Galilee ; there shall ye 
see him: lo, I have 
told you. 8 And they 
departed quickly from 
the sepulchre with 
fear and great joy; 
and did run to bring 
his disciples word. 
9 And as they went to 
tell his disciples, be- 
hold, Jesus met them 
saying, All hail. And 
they came and held 
him by the _ feet, 


MATOATOYS. 
‘ » ~ ~ , “ ᾽ 4 ~ ~ \ ” 
kai εἴπωσιν τῷ λαῷ, ᾿Ηγέρθη ἀπὸ τῶν νεκρῶν᾽ καὶ ἔσται 
and say tothe people, Heisrisen from the dead; and ‘shall be 


ἡ ἐσχάτη πλάνη χείρων τῆς πρώτης. 65”Edn?dé! αὐτοῖς 
‘the “last “deception worse thanthe first. And ?said “to *them 


ὁ “Πιλάτος," "Ἔχετε κουστωδίαν᾽ ὑπάγετε ἀσφαλίσασθε we 


XXVII, XXVIII. 


Pilate, Ye have a guard: Go make [it as] secure ag 
οἴδατε. 66 Οἱ. δὲ πορευθέντες ἠσφαλίσαντο τὸν τάφον 
ye know [how]. Andthey having gone made *secure ‘the *sepulchre 


σφραγίσαντες τὸν λίθον, μετὰ τῆς κουστωδίας. 
7sealing "the *stone, “with ‘the ‘guard. 
28 ὈψΨὲ δὲ σαββάτων, τῇ. ἐπιφωσκούσῃ εἰς ίαν 
Now late onSabbath, as it was getting dusk toward [the] first [day} 
σαββάτων, ἦλθεν *Mapia" ἡ Μαγδαληνὴ καὶ ἡ ἄλλη Μαρία 
of [the] week, came Mary the Magdalene and the other Mary 
θεωρῆσαι τὸν τάφον. 


to see the sepulchre. 
2 Kai ἰδού, σεισμὸς EYERETO μέγας" ἄγγελος: γὰρ κυρίου 
And behold, 384 ὅθασύμαιδκο 'there*was‘*great; for an angel ΟΥ[ὑΠ6] Lord 


καταβὰς ἐξ οὐρανοῦ, " προσελθὼν ἀπεκύλισεν τὸν λίθον 
having descended out of heaven, haying come rolledaway the stone 
tZ a ~ U ll ΓΕ ia ? , ? ~ x A an ee δ Π 
ἀπὸ τῆς θύρας," καὶ ἐκάθητο ἐπάνω αὐτοῦ. 3 ἦν.δὲ ἡ Yidéa 
from the door, and was sitting upon it. And*was look 
αὐτοῦ we ἀστραπή, Kai τὸ.ἔνδυμα.αὐτοῦ λευκὸν Ywoei χιών. 
‘his as lightning, and his raiment white as snow. 
4 ἀπὸ.δὲ τοῦ φόβου αὐτοῦ ἐσείσθησαν οἱ τηροῦντες, Kai *éyé~ 
Andfrom the fear ofhim ‘trembled ‘those*keeping*guard,and  be- 
vost! i Ἶ θεὶς.δὲ ὁ ἄγγελος el ic 
vovrTo ὡσεὶ! νεκροί. 5 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ ὁ ἄγγελος εἶπεν ταῖς 
came as dead [men]. But “answering ‘the “angel said tothe 
, ‘ ~ « ~ 4 a ? ~ \ ’ 
γυναιξίν, Μὴ.φοβεῖσθε ὑμεῖς" olda-yap ore ᾿Τησοῦν τὸν ἐσταυ- 
women, ear not ye; for I know that Jesus who hasbeen 
, ~ ’ aH” aa e ᾽ , , ‘ 

ρωμένον ζητεῖτε. 6 οὐκιἔστιν ὧδε ἠγέρθη γάρ, καθὼς εἶπεν. 
crucified ye seek. Heisnot here, for he is risen, as he said. 
δεῦτε ἴδετε τὸν τόπον ὕπου ἔκειτο YO κύριος." 7 καὶ ταχὺ 
Come see the place where *was*lying ‘the *Lord. And *quickly 
πορευθεῖσαι εἴπατε τοῖς. μαθηταῖς αὐτοῦ, ὅτι ἠγέρθη ἀπὸ τῶν 
going Bay to his disciples, that heisrisenfrom the 
~ ‘ ᾽ ’ , « ~ ᾽ A ,ὔ ~ 
νεκρῶν" Kai ἰδού, προάγει ὑμᾶς εἰς τὴν Ῥαλιλαίαν" ἐκεῖ 
dead ; and behold, he goes before you into Galilee ; there 
αὐτὸν ὄψεσθε. ἰδού, εἶπον ὑμῖν. 8 Kai ’ἐξελθοῦσαι! ταχὺ 
him yeshallsee. Lo, Ihavetold you. And having gone out quickly 
ἀπὸ τοῦ μνημείου μετὰ φόβου καὶ χαρᾶς μεγάλης, ἔδραμον 
from the tomb with fear and oy great, they ran 
ἀπαγγεῖλαι τοῖς. μαθηταῖς. αὐτοῦ. 9 "ὡς. δὲ ἐπορεύοντο 
to tell [1] to his disciples. But as they were going 
ἀπαγγεῖλαι τοῖς.μαθηταϊς. αὐτοῦ," καὶ ἰδού, δ)" Ἰησοῦς “ἀπὴν- 
totell [it] to his disciples, ?also ‘behold, Jesus met 

’ ~ , la ε 4 ~ ? , 
Tnoevll αὐταῖς, λέγων, Χαίρετε. Αἱ. δὲ προσελθοῦσαι ἐκρά- 
them, saying, Hail! Andthey having come to [him] seized 
τησαν αὐτοῦ τοὺς πόδας, Kai προσεκύνησαν αὐτῷ. 10 τότε 


and worshipped him. hold of his feet, and worshipped him, Then 
10 Then said Jesus un- , ᾽ - «>? ~ ἢ ~ pe ? , 
tothem, Benot afraid: λέγει αὐταῖς ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, Μὴ.φοβεῖσθε' ὑπάγετε, ἀπαγχγεθλιατα 
go tell my brethren *says *to ‘them 1Jesus, ear not: Qo, 

pP—deand Guttraw. 4 Πιλᾶτος Liar; Πειλᾶτος τ. * Μαριὰμ T. * καὶ and TTr, 
‘ — ἀπὸ τῆς θύρας LTTrA. veidéaTIr. ws LTTrA. x ἐγενήθησαν ὡς LTTrA. 57 -- ὁ 
κύριος (read le was lying) t[Tra]. τ᾿ ἀπελθοῦσαι having departed TTrA. ® — ὡς δὲ 


ἐπορεύοντο ἀπαγγεῖλαι τοῖς μαθηταῖς αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 


b—omTa. © ὑπήντησεν TIr. 


ΧΧΥΠΙ. MATTHEW. 


τοῖς. ἀδελφοῖς. μου ἵνα ἀπέλθωσιν εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν, κἀκεῖ" pe 
my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there me 
ὄψονται. 
shall they see. 


11 Πορευομένων.δὲ αὐτῶν, ἰδού, τινὲς τῆς κουστωδίας ἐλ- 
And as *were *going ‘they, lo, some of the guard hay- 
θόντες εἰς τὴν πόλιν "ἀπήγγειλαν" τοῖς ἀρχιερεῦσιν ἅπαντα 
ing gone into the city reported tothe chief priests all things 


τὰ γενόμενα. 12 καὶ συναχθέντες τὰ τῶν πρεσ- 
that were done, And having been gathered together with the el- 


Burépwy, συμβούλιόν.τε λαβόντες, a 
ders, 


ἀργύρια ἱκανὰ ἔδωκαν 
and counsel having taken, oney much they gave 


τοῖς στρατιώταις, 13 λέγοντες, Εἴπατε ὕτι οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ 
to the soldiers, saying, Say that his disciples 
5 ? , ” Ἐπ τ Ἐν he, , ὦ ᾿ 
νυκτὸς ἐλθόντες ἔκλεψαν αὐτὸν ἡμῶν κοιμωμένων" 14 καὶ 
by night havingcome βέοϊθ hin, we being asleep. And 
ἐὰν ἀκουσθῇ τοῦτο ᾿ἐπὶ! τοῦ ἡγεμόνος, ἡμεῖς πείσομεν ξαὐτὸν" 
if *be*heard ‘this by the governor, we willpersuade him 
‘ c ~ ? , , «ε 4 , ‘ 
καὶ ὑμᾶς ἀμερίμνους ποιήσομεν. 15 Οἱ δὲ λαβόντες τὰ 
and you ‘free *from ‘care ‘will ἼἸΏ8ΕΘ6. And they having taken the 


ἀργύρια ἐποίησαν we ἐδιδάχθησαν. καὶ ᾿διεφημίσθη" ὁ λόγος 1818 
did 


money as they were taught. And “is*spread®abroad report 


οὗτος παρὰ Ἰουδαίοις μέχρι τῆς σήμερον". 
‘this among([the) Jews until the present. 


16 Οἱ. δὲ ἕνδεκα μαθηταὶ ἐπορεύθησαν εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν, 
Butthe eleven disciples went into Galilee, 


εἰς τὸ ὄρος οὗ ἐτάξατο αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς. 17 καὶ ἰδόντες 
to the mountain whither appointed *them 1 Jesus, And seeing 


αὐτὸν προσεκύνησαν *aiT@'' οἱ δὲ ἐδίστασαν. 18 Kai προσ- 


him they worshipped him: butsome doubted. And having 
ελθὼν ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἐλάλησεν αὐτοῖς, λέγων, ᾿Εδόθη μοι 
cometo[them] Jesus spoke to them, saying, *Has*been given *to’me 


πᾶσα ἐξουσία ἐν οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐπὶ! γῆς. 19 πορευθέντες Mody" 
tall authority in heaven and on earth. Going therefore 
μαθητεύσατε πάντα τὰ ἔθνη, "βαπτίζοντες! αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸ 
disciple all the nations, baptizing them to the 
ὄνομα τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ καὶ τοῦ Αγ ον πνεύματος, 
mame ofthe Father and ofthe Son and of the oly Spirit ; 


20 διδάσκοντες αὐτοὺς τηρεῖν πάντα ὕσα ἐνετειλάμην 
teaching them toobserve allthings whatsoever I commanded 


ὑμῖν καὶ ἰδού, ἐγὼ μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν εἰμι πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας ἕως τῆς 


you. And lo, 1 with you am all the days until the 
συντελείας τοῦ αἰῶνος. ° Apny.' P 
completion ofthe age. Amen, 

4 καὶ ἐκεῖ τ. © ἀνήγγειλαν announced τ. ἴ ὑπὸ LTr. 


b ἀφημίσθη is spoken of T. i + ἡμέρας day LTra. 
τι --- οὖν e[u]r[Tr]A. 5 βαπτίσαντες having baptized Tr. 
Μαθθαῖον according to Matthew tra. 


o— ᾿Αμήν GLTTrA. 


87 


that they go into Ga- 
lilee, and there shali 
they see me. 


1l Now when the 
were going, behold, 
some of the watch 
came into the city, 
and shewed unto the 
chief priests all the 
things that were done. 
12 And when they were 
assembled with the 
elders, and had taken 
counsel, they gave 
large money unto the 
soldiers, 13 saying, 
Say ye, His disciples 
came by night, and 
stole him away while 
we-slept. 14 And if 
this come tothe gover- 
nor’s ears, we will per- 
suade him, and secure 
you. 15 So they took 
the money, and did as 
they were taught : and 
is saying is com- 
monly reported among 
the Jews until this 


day. 


16 Then the eleven 
disciples went away 
into Galilee, into 8 
mountain where Jesus 
had appointed them, 
17 And when they saw 
him, they worshipped 
him : but some doubt- 
ed. 18 And Jesuscams 
and spake unto them, 
saying, All power is 
given unto me in hea- 
venand inearth, 1960 
yetherefore, and teach 
all nations, baptizing 
them in the name of 
the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost: 20 teaching 
them to observe ali 
things whatsoever L 
have commanded you: 
and, lo, lam with you 
alway, even unto the 
end of the world 
Amen, 


& — αὐτὸν (read [him]) t[tr}. 
k — αὐτῷ LITrA. 


1 4 τῆς the στὰ. 
P + κατὰ 


"ΤΟ 


THE *ACCORDING ΤΟ 


THE beginning of 
the gospel of Jesus 
Christ, the Son of God ; 
2 as it is written in 
the prophets, Behold, 
I send my messenger 
before thy face, which 
shall prepare thy way 
before thee. 3 The 
voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Pre- 

are ye the way of the 
Nae make his paths 
straight. 


4 John did baptize 
in the wilderness, and 
preach the baptism of 
repentance for the re- 
mission of sins. 5 And 
there went out unto 
him all the land of 
Judwa, and they of 
Jerusalem, and were 
all paptized of him in 
the river of Jordan, 
confessing their sins. 
6 And John was cloth- 
ed with camel’s hair, 
and with a girdle of a 
skin about his loins; 
and he did eat locusts 
and wild honey ; 7 and 
preached,saying, There 
cometh one mightier 
than I after me, the 
latchet of whose shoes 
tT am not worthy to 
stoop down and un- 
loose. 8 I indeed have 
baptized you with 
water: but he shall 
baptize you with the 
Holy Ghost. 


9 Andit came to pass 
in those days, that Je- 
sus came from Naza- 
reth of Galilee, and 
was baptized of John 
in Jordan. 10 And 
straightway coming 
up out of the water, 
he saw the heavens 
opened, and the Spirit 
like a dove descending 
upon him : 1] and there 
came a voice from 


5 EvayyéAvov κατὰ Μάρκον GLTrAW ; κατὰ Μάρκον T. 
© καθὼς according as TTr. 


@LTTraAw. 


Trra. h — καὶ 


» 
AG 


oan 


ΞΘ > na» -“ἦ΄ν ΄ - 
ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ ᾿Ιορδάνῃ ποταμῷ TIrA. 


KATA ΜΑΡΚΟΝ AIION EYATTEAION.' 


SMARK ‘HOLY ?GLAD *TIDINGS. 


ἌΡΧΗ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ. ϑυϊοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ" " 
BEGINNING ofthe gladtidings of Jesus rist, Son of God; 
2°we! γέγραπται ἐν τοῖς προφήταις," ᾿1δού, ἐγὼ" ἀποστέλλω 

as ithas been writtenin the prophets, Behold, 1 send 
τὸν. ἄγγελόν.μου πρὸ ποοσώπου.σου, ὃς κατασκευάσει τὴν 


my messenger before thy face, who _ shall prepare 
ὁδόν. σου ἔμπροσθεν σου ἃ Φωνὴ βοῶντος ἐν TH ἐρήμῳ, 
thy way before thee, (The] voice of one crying in the wilderness, 


Ἑτοιμάσατε τὴν ὁδὸν κυρίου, 
Prepare the way of{[the} Lord, 
αὐτοῦ. 
this. 


4 ᾿Εγένετο ᾿Ιωάννης ὃ βαπτίζων ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ, "καὶ" κηρύσ- 


εὐθείας ποιεῖτε τὰς τρίβους 
straight make “paths 


2Came 1John baptizing in the wilderness, and proclaim- 

σων ββάπτισμα μετανοίας εἰς ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν. 6 καὶ 

ing [the] baptism of repentance for remission of sins. And 

ἐξεπορεύετο πρὸς αὐτὸν πᾶσα ἡ ᾿Ιουδαία χώρα, Kai ot “Tepo~ 

went out to him all the 70f*Judea ‘country, and they of Je- 

σολυμῖται," Ἑκαὶ ἐβαπτίζοντο πάντες! ἱὲν τῷ lopdavy ποταμῷ 
rusalem, and were *baptized tall in the *Jordan ‘river 


ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ." ἐξομολογούμενοι τὰς. ἁμαρτίας. αὐτῶν. 6 "ἦν δὲ! 
by him, confessing their sins. And ?was 
VTwavyne ἐνδεδυμένος τρίχας ἫΝ ὶ ζώ δ ίνὴν 
ης ἐνδεδυμένος τρίχας καμήλου, καὶ ζώνην δερματίνην 
+John clothed in hair ofacamel, anda girdle of leather 
περὶ τὴν. ὀσφὺν αὐτοῦ. Kai “ἐσθίων" ἀκρίδας Kai μέλι ἄγριον. 
about his loins, and eating locusts and “honey ‘wild. 
7 Kai ἐκήρυσσεν, λέγων, Ἔρχεται ὁ ἰσχυρότερός μου ὀπίσω 
And heproclaimed, saying, Hecomes ὙὙΠῸ [15] mightier thanI after 
μου, οὗ οὐκοεἰμὶ ἱκανὸς κύψας λῦσαι τὸν ἱμάντα 
me, of whom Iam not fit having stooped down toloose the thong 
~ € id ? ~ ? ‘ p é Il Σ ΄ «ε ~ q2 II er 
τῶν. ὑποδημάτων.αὐτοῦ. ὃ ἐγὼ Pyev! ἐβάπτισα ὑμᾶς "ἐν" ὕδατι, 
of his sandals, I indeed baptized you with water, 
αὐτὸς.δὲ βαπτίσει ὑμᾶς tv" πνεύματι ἁγίῳ. 
but he will baptize you with[the) “Spirit ‘Holy. 
9 "Καὶ! ἐγένετο ἐν ἐκείναις ταῖς ἡμέραις ἦλθεν ᾿Ιησοῦς 
And itcametopassin those days ([that]}*came ‘Jesus 
ἀπὸ ‘Nalapér" τῆς Vadt\aiag, καὶ ἐβαπτίσθη “ὑπὸ ᾿Ιωάν- 
from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized by John 
vou εἰς τὸν ᾿Ιορδάνην." 10 καὶ “edOéwe' ἀναβαίνων "ἀπὸ" τοῦ 
in the Jordan, And immediately goingup from the 
ὕδατος, εἶδεν σχιζομένους τοὺς οὐρανούς, Kai τὸ πνεῦμα 


water, hesaw parting asunder {86 heavens, and the Spirit 
γὡὼσεὶ" περιστερὰν καταβαῖνον én’! αὐτόν" 11 καὶ φωνὴ ""ἐγένε-- 
as a dove descending upon him, And a voice came 


Ὁ — υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ τὶ; — τοῦ LTra. 
4 τῷ (— τῷ [Tr]aw) Ἡσαΐᾳ τῷ προφήτῃ Isaiah the prophet 
(read ἀποσ. I send) mtra. f — ἕμπροσθέν cov GLTTrAW. ξΕ - ὁ 
i εεροσολυμεῖται Ὑ. Κ πάντες, καὶ ἐβαπτίζοντο GLTTrA. 
ἴὰ καὶ ἣν LITrA. δ + ὃ TTrA. © ἔσθων TTrA. 


P — pév(L]ttra. 4 — ἐν (read ὕδατι with water) T[tr]aA. *— ἐν (read πνεύματι with [the} 


Spirit) [vrrja. s 
" εὐθὺς TTrA. 


(read [came ]) 1. 


χα ἐκ out of LTTraA. 


[καὶ] L. τ Ναζαρὲθ ETrw. Υ εἰς τὸν ᾿Ιορδάνην ὑπὸ ᾿Ιωάννου LYTrA. 


Υ ὡς GLTTrAW. 2 εἰς OM LTTrA. aa — ἐγένετο 


if MARK. 

To" ἐκ τῶν οὐρανῶν, Σὺ εἶ ὁ υἱός.μου ὁ ἀγαπητός, ἐν gl 
out οὗ the heavens, Thou art mySon the beloved, in whom 
εὐδόκησα. 


I have found delight. 
12 Kai “εὐθὺς τὸ πνεῦμα αὐτὸν ἐκβάλλει εἰς τὴν ἔρη- 
And immediatelythe Spirit 7him ‘drives out into the wilder- 
pov. 18 καὶ ἦν “ἐκεῖ! ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ “ἡμέρας τεσσαράκοντα, 
ness. And he was there in the wilderness “7days forty, 
πειραζόμενος ὑπὸ τοῦ σατανᾶ, Kai ἦν μετὰ τῶν θηρίων" καὶ 
tempted by Satan, and was with the beasts; and 
οἱ ἄγγελοι διηκόνουν αὐτῷ. τ 
the angels ministered tohim. 
14 “Μετὰ. δὲϊ! τὸ παραδοθῆναι τὸν ᾿Ιωάννην ἦλθεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς 
Andafter *was *delivered*up + John came Jesus 
εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν, κηρύσσων τὸ εὐαγγέλιον δτῆς βασιλείας" 
into Galilee, proclaiming the gladtidings of the kingdom 
~ ~ h ay , ye U ς , ed 
τοῦ θεοῦ, 15 καὶ λέγων, Ὅτι πεπλήρωται ὁ καιρός, καὶ ἤγ- 
of God, and saying, Has *been °fulfilled 'the “time, and has 
γικεν ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ" μετανοεῖτε, καὶ πιστεύετξ ἐν τῷ 
drawnnearthe kingdom of God; repent, and believe in the 
εὐαγγελίῳ. 16 ἱΠεριπατῶν.δὲ" παρὰ τὴν θάλασσαν τῆς Γαλι- 
glad tidings. And walking by the sea of Ga- 
λαΐας εἶδεν Σίμωνα καὶ ᾿Ανδρέαν τὸν ἀδελφὸν Καὐτοῦ" ἰβάλ- 
lilee hesaw Simon and Andrew the _ brother of him cast- 
λοντας! πἀμφίβληστρον" ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ: ἦσαν.γὰρ "ἁλιεῖς" 
ing a large net in the sen 3 for they were fishers. 
17 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Δεῦτε ὀπίσω μου, Kai ποιήσω 
And “said “to *them 1 Jesus, Come after me, and I will make 
ὑμᾶς γενέσθαι πἁλιεῖς! ἀνθρώπων. 18 Kai “εὐθέως" ἀφέντες 
you tobecome fishers of men. And immediately having left 
τὰ.δίκτυα.-»αὐτῶν! ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῷ. 19 Kai προβὰς 
“their nets they followed him. And having gone on 
ἐκεῖθεν" ὀλίγον εἶδεν ᾿Ιάκωβον τὸ τοῦ Ζεβεδαίου, Kai 


thence alittle hesaw James the [son] of Zebedee, and 
Ἰωάννην τὸν. ἀδελφὸν. αὐτοῦ, καὶ αὐτοὺς ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ 
John his brother, and these f[were]in the ship 


καταρτίζοντας τὰ δίκτυα. 20 καὶ τεὐθέως" ἐκάλεσεν αὐτούς" 
mending the nets. And immediately he called them ; 
καὶ ἀφέντες τὸν πατέρα.αὐτῶν LeBedaiov ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ μετὰ 
and having left their father Zebedee in the ship with 
τῶν μισθωτῶν, ἀπῆλθον ὀπίσω αὐτοῦ. 
the hired servants, they wentaway after him. 
21 Kai εἰσπορεύονται εἰς "Καπερναούμ'" καὶ ᾿εὐθέως" τοῖς 
And they go into Capernaum ; and immediately on the 
σάββασιν "εἰσελθὼν" “εὶς τὴν συναγωγὴν ἐδίδασκεν." 22 καὶ 
sabbaths havingentered into the synagogue he taught. And 
? , 2 Α “ - ? ~ ΜΝ ‘ Ὁ’, > A 
ἐξεπλήσσοντο ἐπὶ τῇ.διδαχῃ.αὐτοῦ" ἠν.γὰρ διδάσκων αὐτοὺς 
they wereastonished at his teaching: for he was teaching them 
ὡς ἐξουσίαν ἔχων, καὶ οὐχ ὡς οἱ γραμματεῖς". 23 Καὶ jy 
as “authority ‘having, and not as the scribes. And there was 


8g 


heaven. saying, Thot 
art my beloved Son, 
in whom I am wel! 
pleased. 


12 And immediately 
the spirit driveth him 
into the wilderness. 
13 And he was there in 
the wilderness forty 
days, tempted of Sa- 
tan ; and was with the 
wild beasts; and the 
angels ministered unto 
him, 


14 Now after that 
John was putin prison, 
Jesus came into Gali- 
lee, preaching the gos- 
pel of the kingdom of 
God, 15 and saying, 
The time is fulfilled, 
and the kingdom of 
God is at hand: repent 
ye, and believe the 
gospel. 16 Now as he 
walked by the sea of 
Galilee, he saw Simon 
and Andrew his bro- 
ther casting a net into 
the sea: for they were 
fishers, 17 And Jesus 
said unto them. Come 
ye after me, and i will 
make you to become 
fishers of men. 18 And 
straightway they for- 
sook their nets, and 
followed him, 19 And 
when he had gone a 
little farther thence, 
he saw James the son 
of Zebedee, and_Johr 
his brother, who also 
were in theship mend- 
ing their nets. 20 And 
straightway he called 
them: and they left 
their father Zebedee 
in the ship with the 
hired servants, and 
went after him. 


21 And they went 
into Capernaum ; and 
straightway on the 
sabbath day he entered 
into the synagogue, 
and taught. 22 And 
they were astonished 
at his doctrine: for he 
taught them as one 
that had authority, 
and not as the scribes. 
23 And there was in 


ἃ — ἐκεῖ GLTTrAW. 
8 — τῆς βασιλείας [L]TTrA. 


Ὁ σοὶ thee LTTra. © εὐθέως LW. 
ἡμέρας τεσσε. Α. f καὶ μετὰ LTA. 
‘Kat παράγων and passing On LTTrA. 
φιβάλλοντας casting around GLTTraw. 
° εὐθὺς τ. Ρ — αὐτῶν (read the nets) LTT:{ ΑἹ. 
5. Καφαρναούμ. LTTrAW. εὐθὺς Ὁ. v — εἰσελθὼν T[Tr]A. 
TA; -- τὴν Ε. x + [αὐτῶν] (read their scribes) x. 


© τεσσεράκοντα ἡμέρας TTr ; 

h — καὶ λέγων Τὶ — Kala. 
Κ τοῦ Σίμωνος of Simon L; Ξίμωνος TrrAw. 
m— ἀμφίβληστρον (read fa net]) Trra. 
4 — ἐκεῖθεν [L]TTrA. 


| ἀμ- 
D ἁλέεῖς TA. 
τ εὐθὺς TTrA. 


w ἐδίδασκεν εἰς τὴν συναγωγήν 
¥ + εὐθὺς immediately Ta. 


90 


their synagogue aman 
with an unclean spirit; 
and he cried out, 
24 saying, Let us 
alone; what have we 
to do with thee, thou 
Jesus of Nazareth? 
art thou come to de- 
stroy us? I know thee 
who thouart, the Holy 
One of God. 25 And 
Jesus rebuked hi 

saying,Hold thy peace, 
and come out of him, 
26 And when the un- 
clean spirit had torn 
him, and cried with 
a loud voice, he came 
out of him. 27 And 
they were all amazed, 
insomuch that they 
questioned among 
themselves, saying, 
What thing is this? 
what new doctrine is 
this? for with au- 
thority commandeth 
he even the unclean 
spirits, and they do 
obey him, 28 And im- 
mediately his fame 
spread abroad through- 
out all the region 
round about Galilee. 


29 And forthwith, 
when they were come 
out of the synagogue, 
they entered into the 
house of Simon and 
Andrew, with James 
and John. 30 But Si- 
mon’s wife’s mother 
lay sick of a fever, and 
anon they tell him of 
her. 31 d he came 
and took her by the 
hand, and lifted her 
up; and immediately 
the fever left her, and 
she ministered unto 
them. 32 And at even, 
when the sun did set, 
they brought unto 
him all that were dis- 
eased, and them that 
were possessed with 
devils. 33 And all the 
city was gathered to- 
gether at the door. 
34 And he healed many 
that were sick of di- 
vers diseases, and cast 
out many devils; and 
suffered not the devils 
to speak, because they 
knew him. 


35 And in the morn- 
ing, rising up a great 
while before day, he 
went out, and departed 


MAPKOX&. 1. 


ἐν τῇ.συναγωγῇ.αὐτῶν ἄνθρωπος ἐν πνεύματι. ἀκαθάρτῳ, καὶ 

in their synagogue aman with an unclean spirit, and 
, / « ~ ‘ x. ~ 

ἀνέκραξεν, 24 λέγων, Ἔα," τί ἡμῖν καὶ σοί, ᾿Τησοῦ Ναζαρηνέ; 


he cried out, saying, Ah! what tous andtothee,Jesus, Nazarene? 
ἦλθ > rv , € ~ 5 a id , Π , « wv 
ἦλθες ἀπολέσαι ἡμᾶς; “oida' σε τίς él, ὁ ἅγιος 


art thou come todestroy us? I know thee whothouart,the Holy [One} 


τοῦ θεοῦ. 25 Kai ἐπετίμησεν αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς, λέγων," Φιμώ- 
of God. And rebuked Shim Jesus, saying, Be 
θητι, καὶ ἔξελθε ἐξ αὐτοῦ. 26 Kai σπαράξαν 
silent, and come forth out of him. And *having *thrown ‘into ®convulsions 
αὐτὸν τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἀκάθαρτον, Kai “κράξαν' φωνῇ μεγάλῳ, 
Thim ‘the ?spirit “the ‘unclean, and havingcried witha*voice ‘loud, 
ἐξῆλθεν “ἐξ! αὐτοῦ. 27 καὶ ἐθαμβήθησαν “πάντες,! ὥστε 
came forth outof him. And ?were*astonished tall, so that 
foulnreiv'' Bzxodc! Βαὐτούς." λέγοντας, Ti ἐστιν τοῦτο; 
they questioned together among themselves, saying, What is this? 
‘Tic ἡ διδαχὴ ἡ καινὴ αὕτη, ὅτι" κατ᾽ ἐξουσίαν Kai τοῖς πνεύ- 
what *teaching new ‘this, that with authority even the spirits 
. ~ ve \ ~ 
μασιν "τοῖς ἀκαθάρτοις ἐπιτάσσει, Kai ὑπακούουσιν αὐτῷ; 
the unclean he commands, and they obey him } 
28 ΕἘ ξῆλθεν.δὲϊ! ἡ ἀκοὴ αὐτοῦ ‘edOdc' ™ εἰς ὕλην τὴν περί- 
Απᾶ went οαὖ the fame ofhim immediately in all the “7around 
χωρον τῆς Γαλιλαίας. 
*country Galilee. 
29 Kai "εὐθέως" ἐκ τῆς συναγωγῆς “ἐξελθόντες ἦλθον" 
And immediately out of the synagogue having gone forth they came 
εἰς THY οἰκίαν Σίμωνος καὶ ᾿Ανδρέου, μετὰ Ἰακώβον καὶ Ἰωάν- 
into the house ofSimon and Andrew, with James and John, 
νου. 80 7.08 πενθερὰ Σίμωνος κατέκειτο πυρέσσουσα' Kai 
And the mother-in-law of Simon was lying in a fever. And 
Ρεύθεως" λέγουσιν αὐτῷ περὶ αὐτῆς. 81 καὶ προσελθὼν 
immediately they speak tohim about her. And having come to [her] 
ἤγειρεν αὐτήν, κρατήσας τῆς.χειρὸς. αὐτῆς" Kai ἀφῆκεν 
he raised up her, having taken her hand. And Sleft 
? A « 4 r ? , ll A , > ~ ’ ΄ 
αὐτὴν ὁ πυρετὸς "εὐθέως," καὶ διηκόνει αὐτοῖς. 32 Οψίας 
*her ‘the “fever immediately, and she ministered to them. *Hvening 
, oe ΒΞ" iT] « oe μ᾿ A ? A 
δὲ γενομένης, Ore "ἔδυ ὁ ἥλιος, ἔφερον πρὸς αὐτὸν 
tand being come, when went down the sun, they brought to i 
πάντας τοὺς κακῶς ἔχοντας καὶ τοὺς δαιμονιζομένους" 33 καὶ 
811 who ill were and those possessed by demons ; and 
t «ς 5X a , , ΄ I A 4 0 , 4 
ἡ πόλις ὕλη ἐπισυνηγμένη ἦν! πρὸς THY θύραν. 3 
the city ‘whole ‘gathered *together *was at the door. 
ἐθεράπευσεν πολλοὺς κακῶς.ἔχοντας ποικίλαις νόσοις, 
he healed many that were ill of various diseases, 
δαιμόνια πολλὰ ἐξέβαλεν, καὶ οὐκ.ἤφιεν λαλεῖν τὰ δαιμόνια, 
?demons ‘many hecast out, and suffered not *to*speak’*the *demons, 
ὅτι ἤδεισαν αὐτόν. 
because they knew him. 
35 Kai πρωϊ Yévyvyor'.diay 
And very early while yet night 


καὶ 
And 


Kal 
and 


ἀναστὰς ἐξῆλθεν καὶ 
having risen up he went out and 


« —”°Ea LTTrA. 
from L. 
LTraWw. 


he came LTr. 
* ἔδυσεν LTrA. 


ὁ ἅπαντες ΤΊΤΑ. 
i διδαχὴ καινή a new teaching Lrtra. 
τῷ + πανταχοῦ everywhere T[Tr]A. 
P εὐθὺς LITA. 

t ἦν ὅλη ἡ πόλις ἐπισυνηγμένη LTTrA. 


© φωνῆσαν TIrA. 4 ar’ 

Ε — πρὸς T. h αὑτούς Ἑ : ἑαυτοὺς 

k καὶ ἐξῆλθεν LTTrA. 1 [εὐθὺς Tr. 

2 εὐθὺς LTTrA. ο ἐξελθὼν ἦλθεν having gone forth 

4 — αὐτῆς (read [her] hand) i[rrJa. ® — εὐθέως TTr. 
Vv ἔννυχα LTTrA. 


5 οἵδαμέν we know T. 


Ὁ — λέγων T. 
£ συνζητεῖν LITrA. 


I, iL. MARK. 

ἀπῆλθεν εἰς ἔρημον τόπον, “κἀκεῖ! προσηύχετο. 86 καὶ 
departed into “desert ‘aplace, and there was praying. And 
x δί " ᾽ a y «} Σί ‘ « ᾽ > Ὡς 37 ‘ 
κατεδίωξαν" αὐτὸν Υὸ" Σίμων καὶ οἱ per αὐτοῦ καὶ 


went 7after Shim 1Simon ?and*those *with ‘him ; and 


Ξεὑρόντες αὐτόν" λέγουσιν αὐτῷ, Ὅτι πάντες λζητοῦσίν σε." 
havingfound him they say tohim, All seek thee. 
38 Kai λέγει αὐτοῖς," Αγωμενῦ" εἰς τὰς ἐχομένας κωμοπόλεις, 
And ἢ 5808 tothem, Letusgo into the neighbouring country towns, 
ἵνα “κἀκεῖ" κηρύξω" εἰς τοῦτο yap “ἐξελήλυθα." 39 Kai 
that there also I may preach;*for “this ‘because have I come forth. And 
env" κηρύσσων fy ταῖς.συναγωγαῖς" αὐτῶν εἰς ὅλην τὴν Γαλι- 
he was preaching in their synagogues in all Ga- 
Aaiay, καὶ τὰ δαιμόνια ἐκβάλλων. 
lilee, and the demons _ casting out. 
40 Kai ἐλ: πρὸς αὐτὸν λεπρός, παρακαλῶν αὐτὸν βκαὶ 
And comes to ‘him ‘a leper, beseeching him and 
γονυπετῶν αὐτόν," "καὶ! λέγων αὐτῷ, Ὅτι ἐὰν θέλῃς δύνασαί 
kneeling downto him, and saying to him, Tf thou wilt thouart able 
pe καθαρίσαι. 41 ἴῸ δὲ. Ἰησοῦς") σπλαγχνισθείς, ἐκ- 
me ἴο cleanse, And Jesus being moved with compassion, having 
τείνας τὴν χεῖρα ἥψατο αὐτοῦ," καὶ λέγει Ἰαὐτῷ," 
stretched out [his] hand he touched him, and says to him, 
Θέλω, καθαρίσθητι. 42 Kai πείπόντος. αὐτοῦ," "εὐθέως" ἀπῆλ- 
I will, be thou cleansed. And hehavingspoken, immediately depart- 
θεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἡ λέπρα, Kai ϑἐκαθαρίσθη." 48 Kai ἐμβριμησά- 
7) ρα, 
ed from him ᾧῃθ6 ἸΘΡΥΌΒΥ, and he was cleansed. And having strictly 
μενος αὐτῷ, Ῥεὐύθέως" ἐξέβαλεν αὐτόν, 44 Kai λέγει αὐτῷ, 
charged him, immediately hesentaway him, And says tohim, 
Ὅρα μηδενὶ Iundév' εἴπῃς "ἀλλ᾽" ὕπαγε, σεαυτὸν δεῖξον 
Θ tonoone anything thouspeak; but go, thyself shew 
(lit. nothing) 


τῷ ἱερεῖ, καὶ προσένεγκε περὶ τοῦ.καθαρισμοῦ σου ἃ προσ- 
to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing what or- 
ἐταξεν "Μωσῆς," εἰς μαρτύριον αὐτοῖς. 45 'Ο.δὲ ἐξελθὼν 


dered 1Moses, for atestimony to them. But he having gone out 
» ’ 4 ‘ ,ὔ A , 72 
ἤρξατο κηρύσσειν πολλὰ καὶ διαφημίζειν τὸν λόγον, ὥστε 


began to proclaim [it] much andtospreadabroad the matter, sothat 
μηκέτι αὐτὸν δύνασθαι 'φανερῶς εἰς πόλιν" εἰσελθεῖν" 
nolonger he was able openly into[the] city to enter ; 


Yan’! ἔξω τὲν! ἐρήμοις τόποις "ἦν," Kai ἤρχοντο πρὸς αὐτὸν 


but without in _ desert places was, and theycame to him 
Mravray obey. | 
from every quarter. 
2 Kai *zahwy εἰσῆλθεν!" εἰς Καπερναοὺμ! dv ἡμερῶν, 


And again heentered into Capernaum after [some] days, 
δακαὶ! ἠκούσθη ὅτι “δεῖς οἴκόν" ἐστιν" 2 καὶ "εὐθέως" συνή- 
and it washeard that in [the] house heis; andimmediately were 
χθησαν πολλοί, ὥστε μηκέτι.χωρεῖν μηδὲ τὰ 
gathered together many, so that there was no longer any room not even 


91 


into a solitary place, 
and there prayed. 
36 And Simon and they 
that were with him 
followed after him. 
37 And when they had 
found him, they said 
unto him, All men seek 
for thee. 38 And he 
said unto them, Let us 
go into the next towns, 
that I may preach 
there also: for there- 
fore came I forth. 
39 And he preached 
in their synagogues 
throughout all Gali- 
lee, and cast out devils. 

40 And there came a 
leper to him, beseech- 
ing him, and kneeling 
down to him, and say- 
ing unto him, If thou 
wilt, thou canst make 
me clean. 41 And Je- 
sus, moved with com- 
passion, put forth his 
hand, and _ touched 
him, and saith unto 
him, I will; be thou 
clean. 42 And as soon 
as he had spoken, im- 
mediately the leprosy 
departed from him, 
and he was cleansed. 
43 And he straitly 
charged him, and 
forthwith sent him 
away; 44 and saith 
unto him, See thou say 
nothing to any man: 
but go thy way, shew 
thyself to the priest, 
and offer for thy 
cleansing those things 
which Moses com- 
inanded, for a testi- 
mony unto them. 
45 But he went out, 
and began to publish 
it much, and to blaze 
abroad the matter, in- 
somuch that Jesus 
could no more openly 
enter into the city, but 
was without in desert 
places : and they came 
to him from every 
quarter. 


11. And again he 
entered into Caperna- 
um, after some days; 
and it was noised that 
he was in the house, 
2 And = straightway 
Many were gathered 
together, insomuch 
that there wasno room 
to receive them, no, 
not so much as about 


χ κατεδίωξεντ. 7 --ὁ T[Tr]a. 
Ὁ. + ἀλλαχοῦ elsewhere ΤΊΤΑ. 


W καὶ ἐκεῖ L. 


5 σεζητοῦσιν LW. © καὶ ἐκεῖ GW. 


TTrA. 6 ἦλθεν he went Trr. f eis Tas συναγωγὰς GLTTrAW. 
αὐτόν L[TrA]; — αὐτόν T. h — καὶ T[A]. i kat and LTTr. 

1 — αὐτῷ T. τὰ — εἰπόντος αὐτοῦ LTTr. 2 εὐθὺς ΤΊΤΑ. 

LTTra. 4 -- μηδὲν L[tTr]. τ ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. * Μωῦσῆς LTTraw. 
τ ἀλλὰ LTrA. πα ἐπ᾽ ΤΊΤΑ. xa [ἦν] L. γ8 πάντοθεν LTTrAW. 


εἰσελθὼν πάλιν he having entered again ΤΊΓΑ. 
[L]tTra 68 ἐν οἴκῳ LTTr. da — εὐθέως [LTr]T. 


* εὗρον αὐτὸν καὶ found him and rrra. 
4 ἐξῆλθον I came forth 


8 — καὶ γονυπετῶν 


Χ αὐτοῦ ἥψατο LTTrA. 
© ἐκαθερίσθη TA. 

t εἰς πόλιν φανερῶς T. 
15 εἰσῆλθεν πάλιν LW ; 
855. Καφαρναοὺμ. LTTraW. 


Ρ εὐθὺς 


ba — καὶ 


99 
the door: and he 
preached the word 


untothem. 3 And they 
come unto him, bring- 
ing one sick of the 
palsy, which was borne 
of four. 4 And when 
they could not come 
nigh unto him for the 
press, they uncovered 
the roof where he was : 
aud when they had 
broken it up, they let 
down the bed wherein 
the sick of the palsy 
lay. 5 When Jesus saw 
their faith, he said 
unto the sick of the 
palsy, Son, thy sins be 
torgiven thee. 6 But 
there were certain of 
the scribes _ sitting 
there, andreasoning in 
their hearts, 7 Why 
doth this man thus 
speak blasphemies? 
who can forgive sins 
but God only? & And 
immediately when Je- 
sus perceived in his 
spirit that they so 
reasoned within them- 
selves, he said unto 
them, Why reason ye 
these things in your 
hearts? 9 Whether is 
it easier to say to the 
sick of the palsy, Z’hy 
sins be forgiven thee ; 
or to say, Arise, and 
take up thy bed, and 
walk? 10 But that ye 
may know that the 
Son of man hath power 
on earth to forgive 
sins, (he saith to the 
sick of the palsy,) 
11 I say unto thee, 
Arise, and take up thy 
bed, and go thy way 
into thine house. 
12 And immediately 
he arose, took up the 
ped, and went forth 
before them all ; inso- 
much that they were 
all amazed, and glori- 
fied God, saying, We 
never saw it on this 
fashion. 


13 And he went forth 
again by the sea side ; 
and all the multitude 
resorted unto him, 
and he taught them. 
14 And as he passed 


MAPKOXS. II. 

πρὸς τὴν θύραν" Kai ἐλάλει αὐτοῖς τὸν λόγον. 3 Kai ἔρχονται 

at the door; andhespoke tothem the word. And they come 

ἐπρὸς αὐτόν, παραλυτικὸν φέροντες," αἰρόμενον ὑπὸ τεσσάρων. 
to him, *a*paralytic ‘bringing, borne by four. 

4 καὶ μὴ δυνάμενοι frpoceyyioa' arp διὰ τὸν ὄχλον, 
And ποῦ being able tocomenear tohim onaccountofthe crowd, 
ἀπεστέγασαν τὴν στέγην ὕπου ἦν, Kai ἐξορύξαντες χα- 
they uncovered the roof where he was, and having broken up [it] they 
λῶσιν τὸν ExpadBBarov' 2g ᾧ" ὁ παραλυτικὸς κατέκειτο. 
let down the couch on which the paralytic was lying. 
5 'idwydé! ὁ Inoove τὴν.πίστιν.αὐτῶν λέγει τῷ παραλυτικῷ, 


And “seeing 1Jesus their faith says tothe paralytic, 
Τέκνον, "ἀφέωνταί" ἴσοι at-apapria.cov." 6’ Hoavoe τινες 


Child, “have *been *forgiven ‘thee thy sins. But there were some 


τῶν γραμματέων ἐκεῖ καθήμενοι, Kai διαλογιζόμενοι ἐν ταῖς 
of the scribes “there tsitting, and reasoning in 
καρδίαις. αὐτῶν, 7 Τί οὗτος οὕτως λαλεῖ "βλασφημίας"; 
their hearts, Why “this (*man]*thus ‘does *speak blasphemies? 

τίς δύναται ἀφιέναι ἁμαρτίας, εἰ. μὴ εἷς, ὁ θεός; ὃ Καὶ 
who isable ἴο forgive sins, except one, [thatis] God? And 
"εὐθέως" ἐπιγνοὺς ὁ Τησοῦς τῷ.πνεύματι. αὐτοῦ ὅτι CovTwe! P 
immediately “knowing 1Jesus in bis spirit that thus 
διαλογίζονται ἐν ἑαυτοῖς, “εῖπεν" αὐτοῖς, Ti ταῦτα δια- 
they are reasoning within themselves, said tothem, Why thesethings rea- 
λογίζεσθε ἐν ταὶς. καρδίαις.ὑμῶν; 9. τί ἐστιν εὐκοπώτερον, 
i which is easier, 


son ye in your hearts ? 

᾽ - ~ λ = ~ τ᾽ , Al s tl c « , 
εἰπεῖν τῷ παραλύυτικῳ, AgewyTat σοι αι ἁμαρτίαι; 
tosay tothe paralytic, SHave *been *forgiven Sthee [‘thy] “sins, 


ἢ εἰπεῖ», *’Eyeoa, Yai! dody ὕσου τὸν κράββατον" καὶ 
or tosay, Arise, and takeup thy couch and 
x id lve er τιν ae ~ as ᾽ a , » « an ~ 
περιπάτει"; 10 ἵνα.δὲ εἰδῆτε ὅτι ἐξουσίαν ἔχει ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ 
walk? but that yemay know that Sauthority *has *the*Son 
ἀνθρώπου ἀφιέναι ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς" ἁμαρτίας. λέγει τῷ παρα- 
Sof *man toforgive on the earth sins,— he says tothe _— ppara- 
λυτικῷ, 11 Σοὶ λέγω, τἔγειραι," “kai! ἄρον τὸν SkpaBBarov' 
lytic, To thee I say, arise, and take up couch 
ane 7 \ ΡΨ, 5) ἊΣ 2 , b.?, μ τ Sil 
σου καὶ ὕπαγε εἰς τὸν. οἴκόν.σου. 12 Kai ἠγέρθη "εὐθέως, καὶ 


ΠΥ and go to thy house, And he arose immediately, and 
ἄρας τὸν SkpaBBaroy' ἐξῆλθεν “ἐναντίον! πάντων, 
having taken up the couch went forth before all, 


vr δ, 0 bs Ay ‘ ὃ faz ‘ θ , ay ¢ ll 

ὥστε ἐξίστασθαι πάντας, Kal δοξάζειν τὸν θεὸν, “λεγοντας, 
so that *were “amazed 1411, and glorified God, saying, 

Ὅτι “δοὐδέποτε οὕτως" Meidoner.! 
Never thus did we see [10]. 

18 Kai ἐξῆλθεν πάλιν ξ' παρὰ" τὴν θάλασσαν, Kai πᾶς ὁ 

And he went forth again by the sea, and all the 

u » ‘4 > , ‘ φ , ᾽ [4 ‘ 

ὄχλος ἤρχετο πρὸς αὐτόν, Kai ἐδίδασκεν αὐτούς. 14 Kai 

crowd came to him, and he taught them. And 


© πρὸς αὐτὸν φέροντες παραλυτικὸν LTr ; φέροντες πρὸς αὐτὸν παραλυτικὸν TA. 
ἐνέγκαι to bring near T. 
‘ ἀφίενταί are forgiven LTTr. 
m; βλασφημεῖ" (read Why does this [man] thus speak? he blasphemes.) LrTra. 
° — οὕτως L. 
’Adievrat ave forgiven LTTr. 


LTTrA. 


¥ — xatG[Tr]Aw. 
GLTTrw. 
“ — déyovras[L]a. 


1 ἔγειρε GLTTrAW. 


f tpoo- 
& κράβαττον LTTrAW. h ὅπου Where LTTra. i καὶ ἰδὼν T. 
᾿σου ai ἁμαρτίαι GTTrA; σοι ai ἁμαρτίαι [σου] L. 
Ὁ εὐθὺς 
P + αὐτοὶ they (are reasoning) G| ἃ |w. ἃ λέγει SAYS TTrA. 
8 gov thy (sins) Grr:aw. Ἔγειρε GLIW; ᾿Εγείρου Tra. 
χ ὕπαγε LOT. YY ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ἀφιέναι 
b καὶ εὐθὺς TTrA. © ἔμπροσθεν. 

88 εἰς to T. 


W χὸν κράβαττόν σου LITrAW. 
Pp Ν 
ἃ --- καὶ G[L]rTraw. 


£8 οὕτως οὐδέποτε TTYA. fa εἴδαμεν LTT ra. 


MARK. 


παράγων εἶδεν ®Agviv' τὸν τοῦ ᾿Αλφαίου καθήμενον ἐπὶ τὸ 
passing on hesaw Levi the [son] of Alphzeus sitting at the 


τελώνιον, καὶ λέγει αὐτῷ, ᾿Ακολούθει por. Kai ἀναστὰς 
tax office, and says tohim, Follow me, And having arisen 


2 , > ~ ‘ i2 “ {| ? Ἵ - θ ᾽ 
ἠκολούθησεν αὐτῷ. 15 Καὶ ᾿ἐγένετοῖ "ἐν.τῷ -κατακεῖσθαι.αὐ- 
he followed him. And it came to pass as he reclined 


TOV ἐν τῇ-.οἰκίᾳ. αὐτοῦ, Kai πολλοὶ τελῶναι καὶ ἁμαρτω- 
{at table] in his house, that many tax-gatherers and sin- 
doi συνανέκειντο τῷ Ἰησοῦ καὶ τοῖς.μαθηταῖς.αὐτοῦ" 
ners were reclining [at table] with Jesus and his disciples ; 
ἦἧσαν.γὰρ πολλοί, καὶ Ἰἠκολούθησαν" αὐτῷ. 16 καὶ ™ot" yoap- 
ΤΟΥ ΤΏΘΥ were many, and _ they followed hin, And the scribes 
ματεῖς "καὶ οἱ Φαρισαῖοι," “ ἰδόντες Ῥαὐτὸν ἐσθίοντα" pera 
and the Pharisees, having seen him eating with 
TOY “τελωνῶν Kai ἁμαρτωλῶν," ἔλεγον τοῖς. μαθηταῖς. αὐτοῦ, 


Hie 


k 


the tax-gatherers and sinners, said to his disciples, 

rr Ζ" « Γ ~ 5 δὶ - ‘ c AD Ι > 01 t ‘ 
Ti OTL μετα των "τελωνὼν και αμάρτω; ων" EOULEL “και 

Why [15 107 that with the tax-gatherers and sinners heeats and 
΄ Π ‘ > , ὦ ~ , > ~ ? , 

πίνει:" 17 Kai ἀκούσας ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς λέγει αὐτοῖς, Οὐ χρείαν 

drinks ὃ And *having Sheard 1Jesus says tothem, *Not ‘need 

ἔχουσιν οἱ ἰσχύοντες ἰατροῦ. ἀλλ᾽ οἱ κακῶς ἔχον- 
“have ‘they *who “are *strong of a physician, but they who 11 are. 

TEC. οὐκ.ἦλθον καλέσαι δικαίους, ἀλλὰ ἁμαρτωλοὺς VYeic 

Icame not to call righteous [ones], but sinners to 
μετάνοιαν." 
repentance. 


18 Kai ἦσαν οἱ μαθηταὶ Ἰωάννου καὶ τοὶ τῶν Φαρισαίων" 
And '°were ‘the “disciples Sof*John ‘and*those7o0f*the *Pharisees 
νηστεύοντες" καὶ ἔοχονται Kai λέγουσιν αὐτῷ, “Διατί! ot μαθη- 
fasting ; and theycome and say tohim, Why “86 “disci- 
ταὶ ᾿Ιωάννου καὶ οἱ τῶν Φαρισαίων νηστεύουσιν, ot δὲ coi 
ples ‘*of*John °and’those*%of*the ‘*°Pharisees fast, but thy 
‘ ? ,ὔ ‘ > ~ ἘΠ 2, ~ \ 
μαθηταὶ οὐ.-νηστεύουσιν ; 19 Kai εἶπεν αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Μὴ 
disciples fast not? And *said “to *them ‘Jesus, 
δύνανται οἱ υἱοὶ τοῦ νυμφῶνος. tv. ὁ νυμφίος μετ᾽ αὐτῶν 
Can the sons of the bridechamber, while the bridegroom with them 
ἐστιν, νηστεύειν ; ὕσον.χρόνον *uEO ἑαυτῶν ἔχουσιν TOY 
is, fast? as long as with them they have the 
, | ? 7 U ὃ 5) ? , Niece , 
φίον,." οὐ-δύνανται νηστεύειν" 20 ἐλεύσονται.δὲ ἡμέραι 
groom, they arenotable to fast. But will come days 
ἀπαρθῇ ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν ὁ νυμφίος, καὶ τότε νη- 
will have been taken away ἔσο them the bridegroom, and then they 
στεύσουσιν ἐν ἐκείναις ταῖς ἡμέραις." 21 kai" οὐδεὶς ἐπίβλημα 
will fast in those days. And noone a piece 
ΘΑ i “ ἃΣ ΕΒ: Wiens ef ΐ λ pile ἰ δὲ γ 
ρακοὺς ayvagov ἐπιρράπτει σι ἐιματιῳ.πα. αιῳ"" ει. ἐ-μῆ; 
of cloth ‘unfulled sews on an old garment ; otherwise, 
αἴρει τὸ πλήρωμαϑβ *abrod' τὸ καινὸν τοῦ παλαιοῦ, Kai 
"takes away *the “filling *up Sof Sit “new fromthe old, and 


νὺυμ- 
bride- 


ὕταν 
when 


93 


by, he saw Levi the 
son of Alpheeus sitting 
at the receipt of cus- 
tom, and said unto 
him, Follow me. And 
he arose and followed 
him, 15 And it came 
to pass, that, as Jesus 
sat at meat in his 
house, many publicans 
and sinners sat also 
together with Jesus 
and his disciples: for 
there were many, and 
they followed him. 
16 And when the 
scribes and Pharisees 
saw him eat with pub- 
licans and _ sinners, 
they said unto his dis- 
ciples, How is it that 
he eateth and drinketh 
with publicans and 
sinuers? 17 When Je- 
sus heard it, he saith 
unto them, They that 
are whole have no 
need of the physician, 
but they that are sick: 
I came not to call the 
righteous, but sinners 
to repentance. 


18 And the disciples 
of John and of the 
Pharisees used to fast: 
and they come and say 
unto him, Why do the 
disciples of John and 
of the Pharisees fast, 
but thy disciples fast 
not? 19 And Jesus 
said unto them, Can 
the children of the 
bridechamber fast, 
while the bridegroom 
is with them? as long 
as they have the bride- 
groom with them, they 
cannot fast. 20 But 
the days will come, 
when the bridegroom 
shall be taken away 
from them, and then 
shall they fast in those 
days. 21 No man also 
seweth a piece of new 
cloth on an old gar- 
ment: else the new 
piece that filled it up 
taketh away from the 
old, and the rent is 


n Aevety TA. γίνεται it comes to pass TTrA. k — ἐν τῷ T[Tr]. 
were following TTra. m — οὗ Τὶ 
also [L]rtr. P ὅτι ἐσθίει τ, ; ὅτι ἤσθιεν that he was eating TTr. 
τελωνῶν LTTA. r— Τί 1tra. 
¥ — εἰς μετάνοιαν GLTTrAW. 

Υ + μαθηταὶ (ot the) disciples TTra. 
8 ἐκείνῃ TH ἡμέρᾳ that day GLTTrAW. 
TTrA. © ἱμάτιον παλαιόν LYTrA. 
ha — -αὗτοῦ [Tr ]A. 


Ὁ — καὶ GLTTrAW. 
f+ ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ from it a. 


Ὁ τῶν Φαρισαίων of the Pharisees Trr. 


5 ἁμαρτωλῶν Kal τῶν τελωνῶν LTr. 
* οἱ Φαρισαῖοι the Pharisees GLTTraw. 


1 ηκολούθουν they 
° + Kat 
9 ἁμαρτωλῶν Kat 
τ [καὶ πίνει} τι. 
x Διὰ τί LTrA. 


2 ἔχουσιν τὸν νυμφίον μετ᾽ αὐτῶν (μεθ᾽ ἑαντῶν L) LTTrA. 
© ράκκους L, 


ἃ ἐπιράπτει 
& + ἀπ᾽ from tr. 


94 


made worse. 22 And 
no man putteth new 
wine into old bottles: 
else the new wine doth 
burst the bottles, and 
the wine is spilled, and 
the bottles will be 
marred : but new wine 
inust be put into new 
bottles. 


23 And it came to 
pass, that he went 
through the corn fields 
on the sabbath day; 
and his disciples began, 
as they went, to pluck 
the ears of corn. 
24 And the Pharisees 
said unto him, Behold, 
why do they on the 
sabbath day that 
which is not lawful? 
25 And he said unto 
them, Have ye never 
read what David did, 
when he had need, and 
was an hungred, he, 
and they that were 
with him? 26 How 
he went into the house 
of God in the days of 
Abiathar the high 
priest, and did eat the 
shewbread, which is 
not lawful to eat but 
for the priests, and 
gave also to them 
which were with him? 
27 And he said unto 
them, The sabbath was 
made for man, and 
not man for the sab- 
bath : 28 therefore the 
Son of man is Lord also 
of the sabbath. 


III. And he entered 
again into the syna- 
gogue; and there was 
a man there which had 
a withered hand. 2 And 
they watched him, 
whether he would heal 
him on the sabbath 
day ; that they might 
accuse him. 3 And he 
saith unto the man 
which had the wither- 
ed hand, Stand forth. 
4 And he saith unto 
them, Is it lawful to 
do good on thesabbath 
days, or to do evil? to 
save life, or to kill? 
But they held their 
peace. 5 And when he 
had looked round a- 
bout on them with 
anger, being grieved 


i ῥήξει will burst Lrtra. 
ana 


the skins TTra. 


πορεύεσθαι (διαπορεύεσθαι LTr) LTTrA. 
® — αὐτὸς [L]TTr. 

Ἢ — τοῦ LTTrAW. 

5 — hv (read [was)]) L[Tr]. 
“ κατηγορήσουσιν they shall accuse Ltr. 


ᾳ — ἐν LTTrA. 
ν [πῶς] Tra. 


[the ]) t[Tr]a. 


πεύει he heals τ΄. 


τὴν ξηρὰν χεῖρα ἔχοντι T. 


MAPKOS. Il, III. 
χεῖρον σχίσμα γίνεται. 22 Kai οὐδεὶς βάλλει οἶνον νέον εἰς 
“worse ‘arent takes place. And noone puts “wine ‘new into 
? 5 “ Aa ᾽ δὲ , 14 , ll « κ « , rT] 4 ᾽ 
ἀσκοὺς παλαιούς" εἰ. δὲ. μή, pyooet ὃ οἶνος *0 νέος" τοὺς ace 
“skins told; otherwise, *bursts 'the*wine "new the skins, 

΄ Ae τ 12 ~ \ « 2 ay) ~ ell τὰ, 4 
KOUC, καὶ ὁ οἷνος “ἐκχεῖται καὶ OL ἀσκοὶ ἀπολοῦνται ἀλλὰ 
andthe wine is poured out, and the skins will be destroyed; but 


οἶνον νέον εἰς ἀσκοὺς καινοὺς βλητέον." 
2wine 'new δἰπίο ὅβκὶηβ ‘new is to be put. 


23 Kai ἐγένετο "παραπορεύεσθαι.αὐτὸν ἐν τοῖς caBBacw' 


And it came to pass that he went on the sabbath 
διὰ τῶν σπορίμων, Kai σἤρξαντο οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ" Ρὸδὸν 
’ 0 
through the corn-fields, and *began this disciples (their) way 


ποιεῖν᾽ τίλλοντες τοὺς στάχυας. 24 Kai ot Φαρισαῖοι ἔλεγον 
to make, plucking the ears. And the Pharisees said 


αὐτῷ, “Ide, τί ποιοῦσιν «ἐν! τοῖς σάββασιν ὃ ὀοὐκ.ἔξεστιν; 
to him, Behold, why do they on the sabbath that which is not lawful? 


25 Kai ταὐτὸς" "ἔλεγεν" αὐτοῖς, Οὐδέποτε ἀνέγνωτε Ti ἐποίη- 


And he said to them, Never ‘did #ye read what *did 
σεν ‘AaBid," ὅτε χρείαν ἔσχεν Kai ἐπείνασεν, αὐτὸς Kai οἱ 
1David, when need hehad and _hungered, he and those 


per αὐτοῦ; 26 πῶς!" εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὸν ol v θεοῦ ἐπὶ 
: ce! εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὸν οἶκον τοῦ θεοῦ ἐπὶ 

with him? how heentered into the house of God in 
᾿Αβιάθαρ ὕτοῦ" ἀρχιερέως, καὶ τοὺς ἄρτους τῆς 

(the days of] Abiathar the high priest, and _ the loaves of the 
προθέσεως ἔφαγεν, ode οὐκ.ἔξεστιν φαγεῖν εἰ. μὴ “τοῖς ἱερεῦ - 


presentation ate, which it is not lawful toeat except forthe priests, 

σιν," καὶ ἔδωκεν καὶ τοῖς σὺν αὐτῷ οὖσιν; 27 Καὶ ἔλεγεν 

and gave eventothosewhowith him were? And _ hesaid 

? ~ 4 fy " \ ” b , > « 

αὐτοῖς, Τὸ σάββατον διὰ τὸν ἄνθρωπον ἐγένετο, Youx ὃ 

tothem, The sabbath οἱ account of man was made, not 

» 4 4 ’ ivf ’ ’ > ε 
ἄνθρωπος διὰ τὸ σάββατον. 28 ὥστε κύριός ἐστιν ὁ 

man on account of the sabbath : so then Lord is the 


υἱὸς Tov ἀνθρώπου Kai τοῦ σαββάτου. 
Son of man also ofthe sabbath. 
3 Kai εἰσῆλθεν πάλιν εἰς ττὴν" συναγωγήν, καὶ "ἦν" ἐκεῖ 


And heentered again into the synagogue, and there was there 
ἄνθρωπος ἐξηραμμένην ἔχων τὴν χεῖρα, +2 Kai ὕπαρ- 
ὃ man “withered *having [*his] Shand, and they 

, Ul ? 4 I ¢ ~ , d θ ll > 4 
ernoovv' αὐτὸν εἰ“ τοῖς σάββασιν θεραπεύσει" αὐτόν, 


were watching him whetheronthe sabbath he will heal him, 


wa  *karnyoonowow" αὐτοῦ. 3 καὶ λέγει τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ 
in order that they might accuse him. And he says tothe man 
τῷ "ἐξηραμμένην ἔχοντι τὴν χεῖρα," Ξ΄ Ἐγειραι" εἰς τὸ 
“had 


who %withered 7the hand, Arise [and come] into the 


μέσον. 4 Kai λέγει αὐτοῖς, "Ἔξεστιν τοῖς σάββασιν *ayabo- 
midst. And he says tothem, Isitlawful onthe  sabbaths to do 
ποιῆσαι," ἢ κακοποιῆσαι; ψυχὴν σῶσαι, ἢ ἀποκτεῖναι ; Οἱ. δὲ 
good, or to do evil? 3life ‘to “save, or to kill? But they 
᾽ , ‘ ΄ ’ 4 » ~ ia 
ἐσιώπων. 5 καὶ περιβλεψάμενος αὐτοὺς per’ ὀργῆς, *®ouvd- 
were silent, And having looked aroundon them with anger, being 
k — ὃ νέος LTTrA. 1 ἀπόλλυται καὶ οἱ ἀσκοὶ is destroyed 
τὰ — ἀλλὰ... βλητέον T[Tr]A. π αὐτὸν ἐν τοῖς σάββασιν παρα- 
ο οἱ μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ ἤρξαντο LTTrA. Ρ ὁδοποιεῖν 1,. 
*Adyechesays LTTr. ¢* AaveéS yTtra; Δαυϊδ Gw. 
χ τοὺς ἱερεῖς T. ¥+ καὶ and Trra. * — τὴν (read 
παρετηροῦντο!. © +evon(the)t, 4@epa- 
[τὴν χεῖρα ἔχοντι ξηράν LTrA ; 
18 συνλυπούμενος TA. 


S"Eyepe GLTTrA. Β ἀγαθὸν ποιῆσαι T. 


ΠῚ. MARK. 
λυπούμενος" ἐπὶ τῇ πωρώσει τῆς.καρδίας. αὐτῶν, λέγει τῷ 
grieved at the hardness of their heart, he says to the 
ἀνθρώπῳ, “Exrevoy τὴν χεῖρά ἔσου." Kai ἐξέτεινεν, καὶ 
man, Stretch out thy hand. And hestretched out [it], and 

Ἰἀποκατεστάθη" ἡ.χεὶρ.αὐτοῦ ὑγιὴς ὡς ἡ ἄλλη." 6 Kai ἐξελ- 

Swas *restored *his *hand sound asthe other. And having 
θόντες οἱ Φαρισαῖοι "εὐθέως" μετὰ τῶν Ηρωδιανῶν συμβούλιον 
gone outthe Pharisees immediately with the Herodians ?counsel 
οἐποίουν" Kar αὐτοῦ, ὕπως αὐτὸν ἀπολέσωσιν. 

*took against him, how him they might destroy. 

7 Kai ὁ Ἰησοῦς Ῥἀνεχώρησεν μετὰ τῶν.μαθητῶν. αὐτοῦ" Imooc' 


And Jesus withdrew with his disciples to 
τὴν θάλασσαν: καὶ πολὺ πλῆθος ἀπὸ τῆς Γαλιλαίας 
the sea; and #great ‘a multitude from Galilee 


τἠκολούθησαν" "αὐτῷ," καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς Ἰουδαίας, 8 Kai ἀπὸ ‘Ie- 
followed him, and from Judea, and from Je- 
ροσολύμων, καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿Ιδουμαίας, καὶ πέραν Tov ᾿Τορδάνου" 
rusalem, and from Idumea, and beyond the Jordan; 
καὶ ‘ot! περὶ Τύρον καὶ Σιδῶνα, πλῆθος πολύ, "ἀκούσαντες" 
and they around Tyre and Sidon, a7*multitude’great, having heard 
doa "ἐποίει" ἦλθον πρὸς αὐτόν. 9 καὶ εἶπεν τοῖς. μαθη- 
how much he was doing came to him, And hespoke to his dis- 
ταϊς.αὐτοῦ, ἵνα πλοιάριον προσκαρτερῇ αὐτῷὐρ διὰ τὸν 
ciples, that asmallship might waitupon him, on account of the 
ὄχλον, ἵνα μὴ.θλίβωσιν αὐτόν. 10 πολλοὺς. γὰρ ἐθερά-- 
crowd, that they might not press upon him. For many he 


πευσεν, ὥστε ἐπιπίπτειν αὐτῷ, ἵνα αὐτοῦ ἅψωνται, ὅσοι 
healed, sothat they beset him, that him they mighttouch, asmany as 


εἶχον μάστιγας" 11 καὶ τὰ πνεύματα τὰ ἀκάθαρτα, ὅταν αὐτὸν 
had scourges ; andthe spirits the unclean, when him 


~ ” Ι ’ 
*ewper, προσέπιπτεν" αὐτῷ, Kai γἔκραζεν". λέγοντα," Ὅτι σὺ 


they beheld, felldown before him, and cried, saying, Thou 
εἶ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ. 12 Kai πολλὰ ἐπετίμα αὐτοῖς, ἵνα μὴ 
art the Son of God. And much herebuked them, so that *not 
"αὐτὸν ὑσηερὺνν Ὁποιήσωσιν" “. 

δηΐτα anifest ‘they ?should “make. 

13 Kai ἀναβαίνει εἰς τὸ ὄρος, Kai προσκαλεῖται ovc 


And hegoesup into the mountain, and calls to 
» ᾽ La x 2 ~ ‘ ? , ‘ ? , 
ἤθελεν αὐτός" Kai ἀπῆλθον πρὸς αὐτόν. 14 καὶ ἐποίησεν 


{him] whom 


7would ‘he; and they went to him. And he appointed 

δώδεκα ἵνα wow ετ᾽ αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἵνα ἀποστέλλῃ αὐτοὺ 
μ ᾽ 4] 

twelve thattheymightbewith him, and that hemightsend them 


κηρύσσειν, 15 καὶ ἔχειν ἐξουσίαν ἀθεραπεύειν τὰς νόσους Kai! 


to preach, and to have authority to heal diseases and 
ἐκβάλλειν τὰ δαιμόνια. 16 “καὶ ἐπέθηκεν frp Σίμωνι ὄνομα! 
to cast out demons, And he added to Simon [the] name 
Πέτρον" 17 καὶ ᾿Ιάκωβον τὸν τοῦ Ζεβεδαίου, καὶ Iwavyny 

Peter ; and James the [son] of Zebedee, and Jobn 

᾿Ὶ ᾽ A ~? , ΑΥ 9 2 ? ~ >? , 
τὸν ἀδελφὸν τοῦ Ἰακώβου" Kai ἐπέθηκεν αὐτοῖς ὀνόματα 
the brother of James ; and headded tothem[the] names 


k — gov (read [thy]) hand q[trJa. | ἀπεκατεστάθη GLTTrAW. 
GLTTrAw. 2 εὐθὺς TTrA. ο éroingav T; ἐδίδουν gave TrA. 
ἀνεχώρησεν GLITrA. 4 εἰς GLT. 
Ιουδαίας τ. 5.- αὐτῷ [τπ|τττὰ. t — οἱ [L]rtr[a]. 

» ποιεῖ he is doing Tra. x ἐθεώρουν, προσέπιπτον LTTrAW. 
ovTes T. *dhavepoy αὐτὸν GW. ὃ ποιῶσιν TTTA. 
ecause they had known him to be the Christ L. 4 — θεραπεύειν 

© + καὶ ἐποίησεν τοὺς δώδεκα, and he appointed the twelve τ. 


98 
for the hardness of 
their hearts, he saith 
unto the man, Stretch 
forththine hand. And 
he stretched it out: 
and his hand was re- 
stored whole as the 
other. § And the 
Pharisees went forth, 
and straightway took 
counsel with the He- 
rodians against him, 
how they might de- 
stroy him. 


7 But Jesus with- 
drew himself with his 
disciples to the sea: 
and a great multitude 
from Galilee followed 
him, and from Judea, 
8 and from Jerusalem, 
and from Idum#a, and 
from beyond Jordan; 
and they about Tyre 
and Sidon, a great 
multitude, when they 
had heard what great 
things he did, came 
unto him. 9 And he 
spake to his disciples, 
that a small ship 
should wait on him 
because of the multi- 
tude, lest they should 
throng him, 10 For 
he had healed many ; 
insomuch that they 
pressed upon him for 
to touch him, as many 
as had plagues. 11 And 
unclean spirits, wher 
they saw him, feli 
down before him, and 
cried, saying, Thou ari 
the Son of God. 12 And 
he straitly charged 
them that they should 
not make him known. 


13 And he goeth up 
into a mountain, and 
calleth untohim whom 
he would: and they 
cameuntohim. 14 And 
he ordained twelve, 
that they should be 
with him, and that he 
might send them forth 
to preach, 15 and to 
have power to heal 
sicknesses, and to cast 
out devils: 16 and Si- 
mon he surnamed Pe- 
ter ; 17 and James the 
son of Zebedee, and 
John the brother of 
James; and he sur- 
nmamed them Boan- 


τὰ — ὑγιὴς ws ἡ ἄλλη 


Ρ μετὰ τῶν μαθητῶν αὐτοῦ 
τ ἠκολούθησεν LTrA; ἠκολούθησαν placed after 
Υ ἀκούοντες hearing LTtra. 
Υ ἔκραζον LTTraW. 
© + [ὅτι ἤδεισαν τὸν χριστὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι 


z λέ- 


τὰς νόσους καὶ TTrA, 


[ὄνομα τῷ Σίμωνι TTra. 


9 


erges, which is, The 
sons of thunder: 18 and 
Andrew, and Philip, 
and Bartholomew, and 
Matthew,and Thomas, 
and James the son of 
Alpheus, and Thad- 
dwus, and Simon the 
Canaanite, 19 and Ju- 
das Iscariot, which 
also betrayed him : 


O 


And they went into 
an house, 20 And the 
multitude cometh to- 
gether again, so that 
they could not so 
much as eat bread. 
21 And when _his 
friends heard of it, 
they went out to lay 
hold on him: for they 
said, He is beside him- 
self. 22 And thescribes 
which came down 
from Jerusalem said, 
He hath Beelzebub, 
and by the prince of 
the devils casteth he 
out devils. 23 And he 
called them unto him, 
and said unto them in 
parables, How can Sa- 
tan cast out Satan? 
24 And if a kingdom 
be divided against 
itself, that kingdom 
cannot stand, 25 And 
if a housa be divided 
against itself, that 
house cannot stand. 
26 And if Satan rise 
up against himself, 
and be divided, he can- 
not stand, but hath an 
end. 27 No man can 
enter into a stron 
man’s house, and spoi 
his goods, except he 
will first bind the 
strong man ; and then 
he will spoil his house. 
28 Verily I say unto 
you, All sins shall be 


forgiven unto the sons 
of men, and blas- 
phemies wherewith 


soever they shall blas- 
pheme : 29 but he that 
shall blaspheme 

ainst the Holy Ghost 

ath never forgive- 
ness, but is in danger 
of eternal damnation: 
30 because they said, 
He hath an unclean 
spirit. 


a Φ 


MAPKOXS. 


SBoavepyéc," ὕ ἐστιν υἱοὶ βροντῆς 18 καὶ ᾿Ανδρέαν, καὶ 
Boanerges, which is Sons of thunder ; and Andrew, and 


Φίλιππον, καὶ Βαρθολομαῖον, καὶ *MarGaior," καὶ Θωμᾶν, 


Iii. 


Philip, and artholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, 
καὶ Ἰάκωβον τὸν τοῦ ᾿Αλφαίου, καὶ Θαδδαῖον, καὶ Σίμωνα 
and James the [son] of Alpheus, and Thaddwus, and Simon 


τὸν iKavavirny," 19 καὶ ᾿Ιούδαν ® Ioxapwrny,' ὃς καὶ παρέ- 


the Cananite, and Judas Iscariote, who also deliver- 
δωκεν αὐτόν. 
ed up him, 


ὄχλος, 
and Scomes*together ‘again ἴα “crowd, 
“ \ δύ θ ? ‘ n ΄ a4 ~ ‘ ’ , 
ὥστε μὴ. -ὁυνασθαι.αὑὐτοὺς."μητεῖ ἄρτον φαγεῖν. 21 καὶ ἀκού- 
so that they are not able so much as Sbread 'to “eat. And having 
σαντες οἱ map αὐτοῦ ἐξῆλθον κρατῆσαι αὐτόν' 
heard [of 10] those belonging to him went out to lay hold of him; 
2 4 ev vr ᾿ e ~ « ? x 
ἔλεγον.γάρ, Ore ἐξέστη. 22 Kai οἱ γραμματεῖς ot ἀπὸ 
for they said, He is beside himself. And the scribes who from 
Ἱεροσολύμων καταβάντες ἔλεγον, Ὅτι Βεελζεβοὺλ ἔχει καὶ 
Jerusalem came down said, Beelzebul hehas; and 
ov ᾽ ~ a” ~ , ? ’ AJ 2 
Ort ἐν τῷ ἄρχοντι τῶν δαιμονίων ἐκβάλλει τὰ δαιμόνια. 
By the prince οἵ the demons he casts out the demons. 
23 Kai προσκαλεσάμενος αὐτοὺς ἐν παραβολαῖς ἔλεγεν 
And having calledto [him] them in parables he said 
? ~ ~ , ~ ~ ᾽ , ‘ 
αὐτοῖς, Πῶς δύναται σατανᾶς σατανᾶν ἐκβάλλειν ; 24 καὶ 
tothem, How can Satan 3Satan ‘cast *out? and 
>A’ , ine ε \ ~ ? ’ ~ t 
ἐὰν βασιλεία ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὴν μερισθῇ, οὐ.-δύναται σταθῆναι ἡ 
if akingdom against itself bedivided, 515 “ποῦ 3016 “ἴο 7stand 
, ’ , ; ESS Sarr 24? € A ~ ore 
Baoirsiaexeivyn’ 25 καὶ ἐὰν οἰκία ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὴν μερισθῇ, od 
‘that “kingdom : and if ahouse against itself be divided, *not 
δύναται" Ῥσταθῆναι ἡ.οἰκία.ἐκείνη"" 26 καὶ εἰ ὁ σατανᾶς ἀνέστη 
318 54 0156 ‘to stand ‘that house: and if Satan  hasrisen up 
2,2 ε ᾿Ὶ 4 , , Π > U r ~ Π ᾽ ‘ 
ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὸν “καὶ μεμέρισται," οὐ.δύναται ᾿σταθῆναι," ἀλλὰ 
against himself and has been divided, he is not able to stand, but 
la » >) 5 t ’ δύ i) ‘ ll Vv A , ~ > ~ 
τέλος EX Ele 27 OU-OUVQATAL.OUVOELC τὰ σκευὴ TOV toxupov, 
anend has, No one in any wiseisable the goods ofthe strong man, 
εἰσελθὼν εἰς τὴν. οἰκίαν" αὐτοῦ, διαρπάσαι, ἐὰν. μὴ πρῶτον 
having entered into his house, to plunder, unless first 
τὸν ἰσχυρὸν δήσῃ, καὶ τότε τὴν.οἰκίαν. αὐτοῦ διαρπάσει. 28 a- 
the strongman hebind, and then his house he will plunder. Ve- 
μὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι πάντα ἀφεθήσεται “τὰ ἁμαρτήματα τοῖς 
rily 1587 toyou,that all “shall*be‘forgiven 'the “sins to the 
υἱοῖς τῶν ἀνθρώπων," Kai* βλασφημίαι Υὕσας" Ξἂν! βλασ- 
sons of men, and blasphemies whatsoever they shall 
U τὰ >” , ᾽ \ ~ \ 
ημήσωσιν: 29 ὃς. δ᾽ ἂν βλασφημήσῃ εἰς τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ 
have blasphomed; but whosoever shall blaspheme against the Spirit the 
ἅγιον, οὐκ.ἔχει ἄφεσιν εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα, "ἀλλ᾽! ἔνοχός ϑέστιν" 
oly, has not forgiveness to eternity, but “liable “to tis 
αἰωνίου “κρίσεως "" 80 bre ἔλεγον, Πνεῦμα.ἀκάθαρτον ἔχει. 
eternal judgment ; because they said, An unclean spirit he has. 


Kai ‘zoxovrat' εἰς οἶκον" 20 καὶ συνέρχεται πάλιν ™ 
And theycome to ἃ ΠΟΙ: 


8 βοανηργές LTTra. 
1 ἔρχεται he comes T. 
will not be able Trra. 
τ στῆναι TTrA. 
οἰκίαν τοῦ ἰσχυροῦ εἰσελθὼν τὰ σκεύη TTY. 
x + αἱ the @LTTraW. 

© ἁμαρτήματος Sin (read guilty of eternal sin) LYTra. 


LTTrAW. 
divided, and T. 


QGLTTraAW. 
shall be 1. 


h Μαθθαῖον LTTra. i Kavavatov Cananivan LTTrAW. * Ἰσκαριώθ 
m+ 6the(crowd) LtrA. "prde LIrAW. 0 ov δυνήσεται 
P ἡ οἰκία ἐκείνη σταθῆναι (στῆναι TrA) LPVrA. 4 ἐμερίσθη, καὶ he is 
5.- ἀλλ᾽ but TTra. t οὐδεὶς δύναται GLTYW. ' εἰς τὴν 
W τοῖς υἱοῖς τῶν ἀνθρώπων τὰ ἁμαρτήματα 


Υ ὅσα LTTrA. 1 ἐὰν Tra. ἀλλὰ LTTrA. ὃ ἔσται 


ny IV. 


31 ΦἜρχονται.οὖν" 


MARK. 
ἐοἱ ἀδελφοὶ Kai ἡ-μήτηρ.αὐτοῦ," Kai 
Then come [815] brethren and his mother, and 
ἔξω ἑστῶτες! ἀπέστειλαν πρὸς αὐτόν, Spwvovrtec' αὐτόν. 
Ξιγι μοῦ ‘4standing sent to him, calling him, 
82 καὶ ἐκάθητο Βῦχλος περὶ αὐτόν" ἱεῖπον.δὲ" αὐτῷ, ᾿Ιδού, 


And sat 1a *crowd around him: and they saidtohim, Behold, 
ἡ-μήτηρ.σου Kai ot.adedgoi.cov* gw ζητοῦσίν σε. 33 Kai 
thy mother and thy brethren without seek thee. And 
Ἰἀάπεκρίθη αὐτοῖς, λέγων," Tic ἐστιν 1)-unrnp-_wou "ἢ" οἱ aded- 
he answered them, saying, Who is my mother or 2breth- 
φοί "μου"; 34 Kai περιβλεψάμενος οκύκλῳ τοὺς περὶ 


ren ‘my? And having looked around on “ἴῃ “ἃ °circuit ‘those 7who around 


αὐτὸν" καθημένους, λέγει, P’1de," ἡ. μήτηρ.μουν Kai οἱ ἀδελφοί 


him were sitting, hesays, Behold, my mother and 2brethren 
μου" 35 ὃς. “γὰρ".ἂν ποιήσῃ τὸ θέλ μα! τοῦ θεοῦ, οὗτος ἀδελ- 
my: for whoever shalldo the wi of God, he *pro- 


φός pov καὶ ἀδελφή “μου" καὶ μήτηρ ἐστίν. 
ther ‘my and my sister and mother is, 
4 Kai πάλιν ἤρξατο διδάσκειν παρὰ τὴν θάλασσαν και 
And again hebegan  toteach by the sea, And 
t , θ Π 5 ? x » λ ,v dd Π “ ? \ w2 
συν) XIN προς αὐτον οχλος “πὸ UC, WOTE AUTOYV ἐμ- 
was gathered together to him a7’crowd ‘great, sothat he having 
βάντα εἰς τὸ πλοῖον" καθῆσθαι ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ, Kai πᾶς ὁ 
entered intothe ship sat in the sea, and all the 
» X A A Oar 2 ι ~ ~ x Π ν γΔ7 
ὄχλος πρὸς τὴν θάλασσαν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς thy." 2 Kai ἐδίδασκεν 
crowd close to the sea, on the land was. And he tanght 
> 4 ? ~ , ‘ > ~ 9. ~ 
αὐτοὺς ἐν παραβολαῖς πολλά, καὶ ἔλεγεν αὐτοῖς ἐν τῇ δι- 
them in parables many things, and said tothem in “*teach- 
δαχῃῇ. αὐτοῦ, 8. ᾿Ακούετε" ἰδού, ἐξῆλθεν ὁ σπείρων Yrov' σπεῖραι" 
ing this, Hearken: behold, went out the sower to sow. 
4 καὶ ἐγένετο ἐν.τῷ. σπείρειν, ὃ.μὲν ἔπεσεν παρὰ τὴν ὁδόν, 


And it came to pass as he sowed, one fell by the way, 
καὶ ἦλθεν τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ" Kai κατέφαγεν αὐτό. 
and came the birds ofthe heaven and devoured its 
5 "ἄλλο.δὲ"! ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ τὸ πετρῶδες, ἢ ὅπου οὐκ.εἶχεν γῆν 


Andanother fell the rocky place, 


πολλήν" καὶ “εὐθέως" ἐξανέτειλεν, 
*much, 


upon where ithadnot “earth 


διὰ τὸ.μὴ.ἔχειν βάθος" 
and immediately itsprangup, because of not having depth 
γῆς 6 “ἡλίου.δὲ ἀνατείλαντος" *ixavparicOn,' καὶ διὰ 
ofearth; and[the]sun having arisen it was scorched, and because of 
τὸ. μὴ.ἔχειν ῥίζαν ἐξηράνθη. 7 Kai ἄλλο ἔπεσεν εἰς & rac" 
not baying root it witheredaway. And another fell among the 
ἀκάνθας" Kai ἀνέβησαν at ἄκανθαι, καὶ συνέπνιξαν αὐτό, καὶ 
thorns, and *grew*up ‘the *thorns, and choked it, and 
καρπὸν ovK-tdwkey. ὃ καὶ **G\Xo' ἔπεσεν εἰς τὴν γῆν τὴν 
fruit it yielded not. And another fell into the ground the 


4 καὶ ἔρχονται LTrAW 3 Kal ἔρχεται T. 
ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἡ μήτηρ αὐτοῦ A. ἧ στήκοντες TTA. 
ὄχλος LTTrAW. i καὶ λέγουσιν and they say LTTraw. 
and thy sisters Lt[ a]w. 
and Ltr. Ὁ — μου [tr]a. ο τοὺς περὶ αὐτὸν κύκλῳ LTTr. 
for τα [tr]a. τ τὰ θελήματα (read the things God wills) a. 
t συνάγεται is gathered together LTTraw. 
TIrW) πλοῖον ἐμβάντα LTTrw. x ἦσαν were TTrA. 
GLTTrAW. 8 καὶ ἄλλο LTTrA. Ὁ + «at and [LTrJa. 
©8 καὶ ὅτε ἀνέτειλεν ὃ ἥλιος and when the sun was risen LTTrA. 
Were scorched rr. 88 — τὰς G. ha ἄλλα Others TA. 


ἡ πλεῖστος very great TTrAW. 
Υ — τοῦ LI[Tr]a. 
© εὐθὺς LTTrA. 


97 


31 There came then 
his brethren and his 
mother, and, stand- 
ing without, sent unto 

im, cailing him. 
32 And the multitude 
sat about him, and 
they said unto him, 
Behold, thy mother 
and thy brethren with- 
out seek for thee. 
33 And he answered 
them, saying, Who is 
my mother, or my 
brethren? 34 And he 
looked round about on 
them which sat about 
him, and said, Behold 
my mother and my 
brethren ! 35 For who- 
soever shall do the 
will of God, the same 
is my brother, and my 
sister, and mother. 


IV. And he began 
agnin to teach by the 
sea Side : and there was 
gathered unto him a 
great multitude, so 
that he entered intoa 
ship, and sat in the 
sea; and the whole 
multitude was by the 
sea on theland. 2 And 
he taught them many 
things by parables, and 
said nnto them in his 
doctrine, 3 Hearken; 
Behold, there went 
out a sower to sow: 
4 and it came to pass, 
as he sowed, some fell 
by the way side, and 
the fowls of the air 
came and devoured it 
up. 5 And some fell on 
stony ground, where 
it had not much earth ; 
and immediately it 
sprang up, because it 
had no depth of earth: 
6 but when the sun 
was up, it was scorch- 
ed ; and because it had 
no root, it withered a- 
way. 7 And some fell 
among thorns, and the 
thorns grew up, and 
choked it, and it yield- 
ed no fruit. 8 And 
other fell on good 
ground, and did yield 


© ἡ μήτηρ αὐτοῦ kal οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ GLTTrW ; οἱ 
& καλοῦντες LTTrA. 

E+ καὶ ai (— αἱ w) ἀδελφαί σου 
| ἀποκριθεὶς αὐτοῖς λέγει anSwering them he says Tira. 
P Ἰδοὺ L. 


h Ὁ ΞΡ ς 
περὶ αὑτὸν 


™ καὶ 

4 - yap 
5- μον My LTTrA. 
W εἰς τὸ (— TO 

2 — τοῦ οὐρανοῦ 
da + τῆς L. 


fa ἐκαυματίσθησαν they 


H 


98 


fruit that sprang up 
and increased; and 
brought forth, some 
thirty, andsome sixty, 
and some an hundred. 
9 And he said unto 
them, He that hath 
ears to hear, let him 
hear. 10 And when he 
was alone, they that 
were about him with 
the twelve asked of 
him the parable, 
11 And he said unto 
them, Unto you it is 
given to know the mys- 
tery of the kingdom of 
God: but unto them 
that are without, all 
these things are done 
in parables: 12 that 


seeing they may see, 7 


and not perceive ; and 
hearing they may hear, 
and not understand ; 
lest at any time they 
should be converted, 
and their sins should 
be forgiven them. 
13 And he said unto 
them, Know ye not 
this parable? and how 
then will ye know all 
parables ? 14 Thesower 
soweth the word. 
15 And these are they 
by the way side, where 
the word is sown ; but 
when they have heard, 
Satan cometh immedi- 
ately, and taketh away 
the word that was 
sown in their hearts. 
16 And these are they 
likewise which are 
sown on stony ground ; 
who, when they have 
heard the word, imme- 
diately receive it with 
gladness ; 17 and have 
no root in themselves, 
and so endure but for 
a time: afterward, 
when affliction or per- 
secution ariseth for 
the word’s sake, im- 
mediately they are of- 
fended. 18 And these 
are they which are 
sown among thorns; 
such as hear the word, 
19 and thecares of this 
world, and the deceit- 
fulness of riches, and 
the lusts of other 
things entering in, 
choke the word, and it 
becometh unfruitful. 
20 And these are they 
which are sown on 
good ground ; such as 


i αὐξανόμενον LTTrAW. 


ἃ καὶ ὅτε LTTrA, 
the parables TTra. 


ἁμαρτήματα. (read [their sins]) [L]rtra. 
in them TrA. ’ * ὁμοίως εἰσὶν 7. 
Ὁ ἀκούσαντες heard ΤΊτΑ. 


those Trra. 


ΜΑΡΚΟΣ. IV. 


ἐδίδου καρπὸν ἀναβαίνοντα καὶ ἰαὐξάνοντα," καὶ 
yielded fruit, growing up and _ increasing, and 
τριάκοντα, καὶ Key! ἑξήκοντα, καὶ *éy" ἑκατόν. 
thirty, and one sixty, and one a hundred. 
9 Kai ἔλεγεν ἰαὐτοῖς," Ὁ ἔχων" ὦτα ἀκούειν ἀκουέτω. 
And hesaid tothem, Hethat has ears tohear let him hear. 
10 "Ὅτε. δὲ! ἐγένετο ὁκαταμόνας," Ῥἠρώτησαν" αὐτὸν οἱ 
And when he was alone, Tasked ®him ‘those “about 
αὐτὸν σὺν τοῖς δώδεκα «τὴν παραβολήν." 11 καὶ ἔλεγεν 
%him ‘with *the “twelve [as to] the parable, 
᾽ - ye ~ γδέδ ~ ‘ a ll ~ , 
αὐτοῖς, Ὑμῖν "δέδοται γνῶναι τὸ μυστήριον! τῆς βασιλείας 
tothem, ΤῸ you hasbeengiven toknow the mystery ofthe kingdom 
τοῦ θεοῦ" ἐκείνοις. δὲ τοῖς ἔξω, ἐν παραβολαῖς "τὰ". πάντα 
of God: but to those who are without, in parables all things 
νεται. 12 ἵνα βλέποντες βλέπωσιν, καὶ μὴ ἴδωσιν καὶ 
that seeing they may see, and not perceive; and 
ἀκούοντες ἀκούωσιν, καὶ μὴ συνιῶσιν" μήποτε ἐπιστρέψω- 
hearing they may hear, and not understand, lest theyshould be con- 
‘ ? ~ ? πὰ t A) J ΄ " 4 
σιν, καὶ ἀφεθῇ αὑτοῖς τὰ ἁμαρτήματα." 18 Καὶ 
verted, and "should “be *forgiven “them [their] *sins. And 
λέγει αὐτοῖς, Οὐκ.οἴδατε τὴν.παραβολὴν.ταύτην; καὶ πῶς 
he says tothem, Perceive ye not this parable ? and how 
, A A , « , A , 
πάσας Tac παραβολὰς γνώσεσθε; 14 ὁ σπείρων τὸν λόγον 
all the parables will ye know? The sower the word 
σπείρει. 15 οὗτοι.δέ εἰσιν ot παρὰ τὴν ὁδόν, ὅπου σπείρεται 
sows. Andthese are they by the way, where is sown 
ὁ λόγος, Kai ὅταν ἀκούσωσιν, “εὐθέως! ἔρχεται ὁ σατανᾶς 
the word, and when they hear, immediately comes Satan 
καὶ αἴρει τὸν λόγον τὸν ἐσπαρμένον Yéy ταῖς. καρδίαις. αὐ-- 
and takesaway the word that hasbeensown in their hearts. 
τῶν." 16 καὶ οὗτοί ΞΣεἰσιν ὁμοίως" οἱ ἐπὶ τὰ πετρώδη 
And these are ἴῃ like manner they who upon the rocky places 
σπειρόμενοι, οἵ, ὅταν ἀκούσωσιν τὸν λόγον, γεὐθέως" μετὰ 


, κ᾿ 
καλήν" καὶ 
good, and 
ἔφερεν Ἐὲν" 
bore one 


are done, 


are sown, who, when they hear the word, immediately with 
χαρᾶς λαμβάνουσιν αὐτόν, 17 καὶ οὐκ.ἔχουσιν ῥίζαν ἐν ἑαυ- 
joy receive it, and have not root in them- 


~ > A ’ , > , , n 
τοῖς, ἀλλὰ πρόσκαιροί εἰσιν εἶτα γενομένης θλίψεως ἢ 
selves, but temporary are ; then having arisen tribulation or 
διωγμοῦ διὰ τὸν λόγον, γεύθεως! σκανδαλίζονται. 18 καὶ 
persecution onaccountofthe word, immediately they are offended. And 
*ovrot εἰσιν οἱ εἰς! τὰς ἀκάνθας σπειρόμενοι, οὗτοί 

these are they who among the thorns are sown, these 
εἰσιν οἱ τὸν λόγον Ῥάκούοντες, 19 Kai αἱ μέριμναι τοῦ 

are they who the word hear, and the cares 

αἰῶνος. “τούτου! καὶ ἡ ἀπάτη Tot πλούτου Kai αἱ περὶ 
of this life and the deceit of riches and the of 
τὰ λοιπὰ ἐπιθυμίαι εἰσπορευόμεναι “ovprviyovow" τὸν λόγον, 
®other*things ‘desires entering in choke the word, 
καὶ ἄκαρπος γίνεται. 20 καὶ “οὗτοί! εἰσιν οἱ ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν 
and unfruitful it becomes. And _ these are they who upon the ground 


κ εἷς a; εἰς απο τὰ. |!—avrots G@LTTrAW. ™ ὃς ἔχει LTTrAW. 
ο κατὰ μόνας LTTr. P ἠρώτων LTrA ; ἠρώτουν T. 4 τὰς παραβολάς 

τ — γνῶναι LTTrA ; τὸ μυστήριον δέδοται TTrA. 5.-- τὰ 1. t— τὰ 
VY εὐθὺς TIrA. ἐν αὐτοῖς in them τ; εἰς αὐτούς 
Υ εὐθὺς LTTrA. 5 ἄλλοι Others GLTTraw. 5 ἐπὶ about Τὶ 
¢ — τούτου this @LTTra. 4 συνπνίγουσιν TA. 


IS pena 
9 εκεινοί 


TEDL | 


=" And he said \\ 


τ 


τὴν καλὴν σπαρέντες, 
the good have been sown, 


παραδέχονται, 
receive 


MARK. 


οἵτινες ἀκούουσιν τὸν λόγον Kai 
such as hear the word and 
καὶ καρποφοροῦσιν, fév" τριάκοντα, Kai ἴὲν" 
{it],and bring forth fruit, one thirty, and one 
ἑξήκοντα, καὶ ἴὲν" ἑκατόν. 21 Kai ἔλεγεν αὐτοῖς, Myre "ὁ 
- sixty, and one a hundred. And hesaid tothem, *The 
λύχνος ἔρχεται" ἵνα ὑπὸ τὸν μόδιον τεθῇ ἢ ὑπὸ τὴν 
5]Δ ΤΡ comes that under the corn measure it may be put or under the 
κλίνην ; οὐχ ἵνα ἐπὶ THY λυχνίαν ᾿ἐπιτεθῇ"; 22 od-yap 
couch? [1510] not that upon the lampstand it may be put? for not 
ἐστίν ἔτι' κρυπτόν, 1d" ἐὰνμὴ  ™ φανερωθῇ" οὐδὲ 
2is anything hidden, unless it should be made manifest, nor 
ἐγένετο ἀπόκρυφον, ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα "εἰς φανερὸν ἔλθῃ." 
has*taken ‘place ‘a *secret *thing, but that to light it should come. 
23 εἴτις ἔχει ὦτα ἀκούειν, ἀκουέτω. 24 Kai ἔλεγεν αὐτοῖς, 
Ifanyone has ears tohear, let him hear. And hesaid tothem, 
Βλέπετε τί ἀκούετε. tv ᾧ μέτρῳ μετρεῖτε μετρηθήσεται 
Take heed what yehear: with what measure ye mete it shall be measured 
ὑμῖν, “καὶ προστεθήσεται ὑμῖν" Proic ἀκούουσιν." 25 d¢-yap Yay 
toyou, and *shall*be’added 'to*you *who *hear ; for whoever 
ἔχῃ! δοθήσεται αὐτῷ" Kai ὃς οὐκ.-ἔχει,καὶ ὃ ἔχει 
may have, *shall*be °given 'to7him;and hewho has ποῦ, even that whichhehas 
ἀρθήσεται ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 
shall be taken from him. 
26 Kai ἔλεγεν, Οὕτως ἐστὶν 1) βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ, we Téav" 
And he βαϊᾷ, Thus is the kingdom of God, as if 
» , 4 ’ > ‘ ~ ~ ‘ , 
ἄνθρωπος Bary τὸν σπόρον ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, 27 Kai καθεύδῃ 
& man should cast the seed upon the earth, and should sleep 
καὶ ἐγείρηται νύκτα καὶ ἡμέραν, Kai ὁ σπόρος "βλαστάνῃ! 
and Tise night and day, andthe seed should sprout 
καὶ μηκύνηται we οὐκιοῖδεν αὐτός" 28 αὐτομάτη ᾿'γὰρ' ἡ γῆ 
and ὍΘ lengthened how *knows*not ‘the; ?of sitself ‘for the earth 


καρποφορεῖ, πρῶτον χόρτον, “εἶτα' στάχυν, Yéira' “πλήρη 
brings forth fruit, first 


a blade, then 81 687, then full 

~ ll > ~ ’ - 29 e δὲ x ὃ ~il « , 
σῖτον" ἐν τῷ στάχυϊ. ὕταν.δὲ “παραδῷ! ὁ καρπός, 

corn in the ear. And when Soffers*itself *the “fruit, 


TehOéwc' ἀποστέλλει τὸ δρέπανον, ὅτι παρέστηκεν ὁ θερισμός. 
immediately he sends the sickle, for hascome the harvest. 
30 Kai ἔλεγεν, “Τίνι! ὁμοιώσωμεν τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ; 
And hesaid, Towhat shallweliken the kingdom of God? 
ἢ ἔν "ποίᾳ παραβολῇ παραβάλωμεν αὐτήν 3} 31 we ὑκόκκῳ! 
or with what parable shall we compare it? As toa grain 
σινάπεως, oc, ὅταν σπαρῇ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, “μικρότερος" 
of mustard, which, when it has been sownupon the earth, less 
πάντων τῶν σπερμάτων "ἐστὶν!" “τῶν 


ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς" 32 καὶ 
thanall the seeds is which [are]upon the earth, and 
ὅταν σπαρῇ, ἀναβαίνει, καὶ γίνεται ἱπάντων τῶν λαχάνων 


when it has been sown, it grows ΠΡ, and becomes *than %all *the ®herbs 


μείζων" καὶ ποιεῖ κλάδους μεγάλους, ὥστε δύνασθαι ὑπὸ 
‘greater, and produces *branches 1great, sothat ‘are 7able ‘under 


99 


hear the word, and 
receive it, and pring 
forth fruit, some 
thirtyfold, some sixty, 
and some an hundred, 
21 And he said unto 
them, Is a _ candle 
brought to be put un- 
der a bushel, or under 
a bed? and not to be 
set on a candlestick? 
22 for there is nothing 
hid, which shall not be 
manifested; neither 
was any thing kept 
secret, but that it 
should come abroad. 
23 If any man have 
ears to hear, let him 
hear. 24 And hesaid 
unto them, Take heed 
what ye hear: with 
what measure ye mete, 
it shall be measured 
to you: and unto you 
that hear shall more 
be given. 25 For he 
that hath, to himshall 
be given: and he that 
hath not, from him 
shall be taken even 
that which he hath. 


26 And he said, So is 
the kingdom of God, 
as if aman should cast 
seed into the ground; 
27 and should sleep, 
andrise night and day, 
and the seed should 
spring and grow up, 
he knoweth not how. 
28 For the earth bring- 
eth forth fruit of her- 
self; first the blade, 
then the ear, after that 
the full corn in the 
ear. 29 But when the 
fruit is brought forth, 
immediately he put- 
teth in the sickle, be- 
cause the harvest is 
come. 


30 And he said, 
Whereunto shall we 
liken the kingdom of 
God? or with what 
comparison shall we 
compare it? 31 It wz 
like a grain of mus- 
tard seed, which, when 
it is sown in the earth, 
is less than all the 
seeds that be in the 
earth: 32 but when it 
is sown, it groweth up. 
and becometh greater 
than all herbs, and 
shooteth out great 
branches ; so that the 


f ey in TTr. 8 + ὅτι that Ta. 
(read it is not) [i Jrr[a]. 
ο--- καὶ προσ. ὑμῖν G. 


h ἔρχεται ὃ λύχνος LTTra. 
1_ ὃ ττττγα. m + ἵνα that LT[a]. 
P — τοῖς ἀκούουσιν GLTTTA. 
5 βλαστᾷ LTTrA. ἴ -- γὰρ ᾿τττὰ. εἶτεν τ. 
Υ εὐθὺς TTrA, 2 Πῶς how ΤΊτΑ. 
represent it? LTTra. 


Ὁ κόκκον a grain GLTraW, 
— ἐστὶν LTTra. 


8 [τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς] L. 


i τεθῆ LTTrAW. 
2 ἔλθῃ εἰς φανερόν TTrA. 

4 ἔχει has LTTra. 

τ πλήρης σῖτος LITrA. 

2 τίνι αὐτὴν παραβολῇ θῶμεν what parable shall we 

© μικρότερον ὃν being less LTTra. 

f μείζων (μεῖζον T) πάντων τῶν λαχάνων LTTrA. 


k— τι 


¥ — ἐὰντττα. 
τ παραδοῖ LTTrA. 


100 


fowls of the air may 
lodge under the sha- 
dow of it. 33 And with 
many such parables 
spake he the word unto 
them, as they were 
able to hear tt. 34 But 
without a parable 
sprake he not unto 
them : and when they 
were alone, he ex- 
unded all things to 
is disciples. 


35 And the same day, 
when the even was 
come, he saith unto 
them, Let us pass over 
unto the other side. 
36 And when they had 
sent away the multi- 
tude, they took him 
even as he was in the 
ship. And there were 
also with him other 
little ships. 37 And 
there arose a great 
storm of wind, and 
the waves beat into 
the ship, so that it was 
now full. 38 And he 
was in the hinder part 
of the ship, asleep on 
a pillow: and_ they 
awake him, and say 
unto him, Master, 
carest thou not that 
weperish? 39 Andhe 
arose, and rebuked the 
wind, and said unto 
the sea, Peace, be still. 
And the wind ceased, 
and there was a great 
calm. 40 And he said 
unto them, Why are 

e so fearful? how is 
t that ye have no 
faith? 41 And they 
feared exceedingly, 
and said one to an- 
other, What manner 
of man is this, that 
even the wind and the 
sea obey him? 


Vv. And they came 
over unto the other 
side of the sea, into 
the country of the Ga- 
darenes. 2 And when 
he was come out of 
the ship, immediately 
there met him out 
of the tombs a man 
with an unclean spirit, 
3 who had his dwelling 
among the tombs; and 
noman could bindhim, 
no, not with chains: 


ἐδύναντο Lir. 
ships GLTTra. 1 


Ὗ ὑπήντησεν LITr. 
LTTrA. 


ἦσαν τ. 
τὸ πλοῖον already was filled the ship υὐτυὰ. 
©; οὕπω “not *yet Ltr. 
Lrtr; Γεργεσηνῶν Gergesenes A. 
X μνήμασιν (— v GW) GLTTrAW. 
4 + οὐκέτι any longer (lt. no longer) LTTraw. 


ΜΑΡΚΟΣ. IV, V. 
\ ~ Η͂ - ~ 
τὴν σκιὰν αὐτοῦ τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ κατασκηνοῦν. 
“the “shadow “οἵ *it the birds of the heaven to roost. 


33 Kai τοιαύταις παραβολαῖς πολλαῖς ἐλάλει αὐτοῖς τὸν 
And with ?such 3parables *many hespoke tothem the 
, . ᾽ 4 ~ 
λόγον, καθὼς ἠδύναντο! ἀκούειν, 84 χωρὶς.δὲ παραβολῆς 
word, as they were able _ to hear, but without a parable 
οὐκ.ἐλάλει αὐτοῖς" Kar ἰδίαν. δὲ "τοῖς. μαθηταῖς.αὐτοῦ" ἐπέλυεν 
spoke he not to them; and apart to his disciples he explained 
πάντα. 
all things. 


35 Kai λέγει αὐτοῖς ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ, ὀψίας γενομένης, 


And hesays tothem on that day, evening being come, 

, ‘ 4 
Διέλθωμεν εἰς τὸ πέραν. 36 Kai ἀφέντες τὸν ὄχλον, 
Let us pass over to the other side. And having dismissed the crowd, 
παραλαμβάνουσιν αὐτὸν ὡς ἦν ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ᾽ καὶ ἄλλα 
they take with (them] him as he was in the ship; also *other 
ἰδὲ! Ἐπλοιάρια" Ἰἰἦν! per’ αὐτοῦ. 87 καὶ γίνεται λαῖλαψ 
*but smallships were with him. And comes a *storm 


™dvéwou μεγάλη," "τὰ.δὲ" κύματα ἐπέβαλλεν εἰς τὸ πλοῖον, 


3of *wind ‘violent, andthe waves beat into the ship, 
ὥστε °abTo ἤδη γεμίζεσθαι." 88 καὶ ἦν αὐτὸς Ῥέπὶ! τῇ πρύ- 
sothat it already was filled. And?was *he on the stern 
μνῃ ἐπὶ TO προσκεφάλαιον καθεύδων Kai “διεγείρουσιν" 

on the cushion sleeping. And they arouse 

᾽ , ‘ a ? ~ , ? , e 
αὐτόν, καὶ λέγουσιν αὐτῷ, Διδάσκαλε, οὐ-μέλει σοι ὅτι 
him, and say to him, Teacher, is it no concern to thee that 
ἀπολλύμεθα; 39 Kai διεγερθεὶς ἐπετίμησεν τῷ ἀνέμῳ, 
we perish? And having been aroused herebuked the wind, 


καὶ εἶπεν τῇ θαλάσσῃ, Σιώπα; πεφίμωσο. Kai ἐκόπασεν ὁ 
and said tothe sea, Silence, be quiet. And 361 ‘the 
ἄνεμος, Kai ἐγένετο γαλήνη μεγάλη. 40 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, 
wind, and there was a ?calm 1preat. And hesaid to them, 
Ti δειλοί ἐστε τοὕτως ; πῶς οὐκ' ἔχετε πίστιν; 41 Kai ἐφο- 
Why fearful are ye thus? How ὅποὺ *have*ye faith? And = they 
βήθησαν φόβον μέγαν, καὶ ἔλεγον πρὸς.ἀλλήλους, Tic 
feared (with) Ἥρα ‘great, and _ said one to another, Who 
ἄρα οὗτός ἐστιν, ὅτι Kai ὁ ἄνεμος Kai ἡ θάλασσα "ὑπακούου- 
then “this 1is, thateventhe wind and the sea obey 
ow avre'; 

him? 

5 Kai ἦλθον εἰς τὸ πέραν τῆς θαλάσσης, εἰς τὴν χώραν 

And they came to the other side of the sea, to the country 
τῶν ᾿Γαδαρηνῶν." 2 καὶ "ἐξελθόντι.αὐτῷ! ἐκ τοῦ πλοίου, 
of the Gadarenes. And on his having gone forth out of the ship, 


Vo), , iT] wZ 4 ll > ~ 2 ~ , » θ 
εὐθεως" Yarnyrnoerv" αὑτῷ ἐκ τῶν μνημείων ἄνθρωπος 


immediately met him out of the tombs aman 
ἐν πνεύματι.ἀκαθάρτῳ, 3 ὃς τὴν κατοίκησιν εἶχεν ἐν τοῖς 
with an unclean spirit, who [his] dwelling had in the 


χμνημείοις"" καὶ Yovre! τἁλύσεσιν" * οὐδεὶς Ῥήδύνατο" αὐτὸν 


tombs ; and not evén with chains anyone was able him 
(lit. no one) 
h τοῖς ἰδίοις μαθηταῖς to his own disciplestTa. ἰ -- déutr[a]. * πλοῖα 


τὰ μεγάλη ἀνέμου LITrA. ἃ καὶ τὰ LITra. © ἤδη γεμίζεσθαι 
PéviNGLTTrAW. 4 ἐγείρουσιν they awake TTra. 
5" αὐτῷ ὑπακούει T ; ὑπακούει αὐτῷ Tra. * Γερασηνῶν Gerasenes 
u ἐξελθόντος αὐτοῦ LTTr. Y -- εὐθέως L; εὐθὺς T[Tr]A. 
Υ οὐδὲ LTTrAW. * ἁλύσει with a chain 
Ὁ ἐδύνατο LTTrA. 


VW. MARK. 


δῆσαι, 4 διὰ τὸ αὐτὸν πολλάκις πέδαις Kai ἁλύσεσιν Oe- 
to bind, becausethat he often with fetters and chains had 
δέσθαι, καὶ διεσπᾶσθαι ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τὰς ἁλύσεις, καὶ 
been bound, and “had ‘been Storn Sasunder7by ®him 1the 2chains, and 
τὰς πέδας συντετρίφθαι, Kai οὐδεὶς “αὐτὸν ἴσχυεν" δαμάσαι" 
the fetters had been shattered, and noone him wasable_ tosubdue. 
5 καὶ διαπαντὸς" νυκτὸς καὶ ἡμέρας ἐν τοῖς “ὔρεσιν καὶ ἐν 

And continually night and day in the mountains ana in 
τοῖς μνήμασιν ἦν κράζων καὶ κατακόπτων ἑαυτὸν λίθοις. 
the tombs he was crying and cutting himself with stones, 
6 ΓΙιδὼν.δὲ! τὸν Ἰησοῦν ἀπὸ μακρόθεν, ἔδραμεν καὶ προσ- 
And haying seen Jesus from afar, he ran and did 

, 4 ? ~ ll 7 A "εἶ ~ aN ἢ ct tas > ‘ 
εκυνησεν BavTw, 7 καὶ κράξας φων}) μεγάλῃ "εἶπεν," Tt epot 
homage to him, and crying witha*voice *loud he said, What to me 
Kai σοί, ᾿Ιησοῦ, υἱὲ τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ ὑψίστου; ὁρκίζω σε τὸν 


andtothee, Jesus, Son of God the Most High? Jadjure thee 
θεόν, μή pe βασανίσῃς. ὃ ἔλεγεν.γὰρ αὐτῷ, "Ἐξελθε, τὸ 
by God, “ποῦ “me torment, For he wassaying tohim, Come forth, the 


a ν zi , 2 ~ 2 ’ \ 2 ΄ 
πνεῦμα τὸ ἀκάθαρτον, ἐκ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου. 9 Καὶ ἐπηρώτα 


Bpirit the unclean, out of the man, And he asked 
αὐτόν, Τί ἰἷἥσοι.-ὄνομα!; Kai "ἀπεκρίθη, λέγων," ᾿Λεγεὼν" 
him, Ὑγμαῦ [15] thy name? And heanswered, saying, Legion 


7 , m 
ὀνομά.μοι. 
my name 


ὅτι πολλοί ἐσμεν. 10 Kai παρεκάλει αὐτὸν 
[15], because many ὍΘ 879. And Π6 besought him 


πολλά, ἵνα μὴ "αὐτοὺς" ἀποστείλῃ ἔξω τῆς χώρας. 11 iyv.6¢ 
much, that not them he wouldsend out of the country. Nowthere was 

ἐκεῖ πρὸς Pra ὄρη" ἀγέλη χοίρων μεγάλη βοσκομένη" 12 Kai 

there just αὖ themountainsa“herd 3508 ‘swine ‘great feeding ; and 

παρεκάλεσαν αὐτὸν Ῥπάντες οἱ δαίμονες," λέγοντες, Lae 
“besought Shim tall *the *demons, saying, end 

‘3 ~ 2 ᾿ ΄, ε ᾽ > 4 Cpe, κ 

ἡμᾶς εἰς τοὺς χοίρους, ἵνα εἰς αὐτοὺς εἰσέλθωμεν. 13 Kai 


us into the swine, that into them we may enter. And 
ἐπέτρεψεν αὐτοῖς “εὐθέως ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς.}Ἱ καὶ ἐξελθόντα τὰ 
Zallowed *them *immediately 1 Jesus. And having gone out the 
πνεύματα τὰ ἀκάθαρτα εἰσῆλθον εἰς τοὺς χοίρους" καὶ ὥρμησεν 

spirits the unclean entered into the swine, and rushed 
ἡ ἀγέλη κατὰ τοῦ κρημνοῦ εἰς THY θάλασσαν τῆσαν δὲ" 
‘the “herd down the steep into the sea, (now they were 


ὡς δισχίλιοι: καὶ ἐπνίγοντο ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ. 14 "Οἱ δὲ" 
about two thousand), and they were choked in the sea. And those who 
βόσκοντες trove χοίρους" ἔφυγον, καὶ “ἀνήγγειλαν εἰς τὴν 
fed the swine fied, and announced [it] to the 
aN ‘ > 4 > , 4 WeEnO ll [ὃ ~ / 2 ;Ἃ 
πολιν και εἰς τους ayoouc. Kat “εξηλσον'" toély τι ἐστιν TO 
city and to the country. And they went out tosee what itis that 
γεγονός" 15 καὶ ἔρχονται πρὸς τὸν Inoovy, καὶ θεωροῦσιν 
has been done. And theycome to Jesus, and see 
τὸν δαιμονιζόμενον καθήμενον *Kaill ἱματισμένον Kai σωφρο- 
the possessed by demons sitting and clothed and of sound 
νοῦντα, τὸν ἐσχηκότα τὸν TAeyewva' καὶ ἐφοβήθησαν. 16 Kai 
mind, him whohad the legion: and they were afraid. And 


102 


4 because that he had 
been often bound with 
fetters and chains, and 
the chains had been 
plucked asunder by 
him, and the fetters 
broken in pieces : nei- 
ther could any man 
tame him. 5 And al- 
ways, night and day, 
he was in the moun- 
tains, and in the 
tombs, crying, and 
cutting himself with 
stones. 6 But when he 
saw Jesus afar off, he 
ran and worshipped 
him, 7 and cried with 
a loud voice, and said, 
What have I to do 
with thee, Jesus, thou 
Son of the most high 
God? I adjure thee 
by God, that thou tor- 
ment menot,. 8 For he 
said unto him, Come 
out of the man, thou 
unclean spirit. 9 And 
he asked him, What 
is thy name? And he 
answered, saying, My 
name 7 Legion: for 
we aremany. 10 And 
he besought him much 
that he would not send 
them away out of the 
country. 11 Now there 
was there nigh unto 
the mountains a great 
herd of swine feeding. 
12 And all the devils 
besought him, saying, 
Send us into the swine, 
that we may enter into 
them. 13 And forth- 
with Jesus gave them 
leave. And theunclean 
spirits went out, and 
entered into the swine: 
and the herd ran vio- 
lently down a steep 
place into the sea, 
(they were about two 
thousand ;) and were 
choked in the sea. 
14 And they that fed 
the swine fled, and 
told it in the city, and 
in the country. And 
they went out to see 
what it was that was 
done. 15 And they 
come to Jesus, and see 
him that was possessed 
with the devil, and 
had the legion, sitting, 
and clothed, and in 
his right mind: and 
they were afraid. 
16 And they that saw 


Cloxvey avTOVLTTrAW. ἃ διὰ παντὸς AL: “ μνήμασιν (---ν GW) καὶ ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσιν GLTTrAW. 


ἔ καὶ ἰδὼν TTrA. 8 αὐτόν Α. 
αὐτῷ he says to him Guirtraw. 

° τῷ ὄρει the mountain GLTTraw. 
besought) τττὰ. 

5 καὶ οἱ LITA. 
they went LTTrAW 


h λέγει he says LTTraw. 
1 Λεγιὼν LTTrA. 


4 — εὐθέως ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς (read he allowed) [L]rtr[a]. 
τ αὐτοὺς them GLTTrAw. ἀ 


x — καὶ LTTrA. Y λεγιῶνα LTTrA 


i ὄνομά σοι LTTrA. 
m+ ἐστιν is L. 

P — πάντες GW[L]; — πάντες οἱ δαίμονες (read they 

r— ἧσαν δὲ Oates 

ἡ ἀπήγγειλαν told GLTTraw. w ἦλθον 


K λέγει 
2 αὐτὰ TTr. 


102 


it told them how it 
befell to him that was 
possessed with the de- 
vil, and also concern- 
ing the swine. 17 An 
they began to pray 
him to depart out of 
their coasts. 18 And 
when he wascome into 
the ship, he that had 
been possessed with 
the devil prayed him 
that he might be with 
him. 19 Howbeit Jesus 
suffered him not, but 
saith unto him, Go 
home to thy friends, 
and tell them how 
great things the Lord 
hath done for thee, 
and hath had com- 
passion on thee. 20 And 
he departed, and began 
to publish in Decapolis 
how great things Jesus 
had done for him: and 
all men did marvel. 


21 And when Jesus 
was passed over again 
by ship unto the other 
side, much people ga- 
tbered unto him: and 
he was nigh unto the 
sea, 22 And, behold, 
there cometh one of 
the rulers of the syna- 
gogue, Jairus by name; 
and when he saw him, 
he fell at his feet, 
23 and besought him 
greatly, saying, My 
little daughter lieth 
at the point of death: 
1 pray thee, come and 
lay thy hands on her, 
that she may be heal- 
ed; and she shall live, 
24 And Jesus went 
with him; and much 
people followed him, 
and thronged him. 
25 And a certain wo- 
man, which had an 
issue of blood twelve 
years, 26 and had suf- 
fered many things of 
many physicians, and 
had spent all that she 
had, and was nothing 
bettered, but rather 
grew worse, 27 when 
she had heard of Jesus, 
came in the press be- 
hind, and touched his 
garment. 28 For she 
said, If I may touch 
but his clothes, I shall 
be whole. 29 And 


5 μονιζομένῳ, καὶ 


ΜΑΡΚΟΣ. ¥. 


διηγήσαντο αὐτοῖς οἱ ἰδόντες, πῶς ἐγένετο τῷ δαι- 
Srelated Τ7ίο ®them 'those *who *had ‘seen [*it] μουν it happened tohim pos- 


περὶ τῶν χοίρων. 17 Kai ἤρξαντο παρα- 


sessed by demons, and concerning the swine. And they began to be- 
καλεῖν αὐτὸν ἀπελθεῖν ἀπὸ τῶν.ὁρίων.αὐτῶν. 18 Καὶ 
seech him to depart from their borders. And 


tiuBavroc' αὐτοῦ εἰς τὸ πλοῖον, παρεκάλει αὐτὸν ὁ 


“having “entered ‘he into the ship, *besought ®him the *who 
δαιμονισθείς, ἵνα μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ." 19 δὸ δὲ! 
3had *been δροββθεβϑᾶ Sby 7demons that he might be with him. But 


ΦἸησοῦς" οὐκ.ἀφῆκεν αὐτόν, ἀλλὰ λέγει αὐτῷ, Ὕπαγε εἰς τὸν 
Jesus did not suffer him, but says to him, Go to 
οἴκόν.σου πρὸς τοὺς.σούς, καὶ ἀνάγγειλον" αὐτοῖς doa ὅσοι 
thy house to  thineown, and announce  tothem howmuch forthee 
{3 ΄ \| f2 , Ι ‘ ἦλέὲ , ‘ 2 ~ ᾿ 
ὁ κύριος" 'εἐποίησεν," καὶ ἡλεξησεν σε. 20 Καὶ ἀπῆλθεν Kat 
the Lord did, and pitied thee. And he departed and 
ἤρξατο κηρύσσειν ἔν τῇ Δεκαπόλει, Coa ἐποίησεν αὐτῷ ὁ 
began toproclaim in Decapolis, how much *had *done *for ®him 
"Inoovc’ Kai πάντες ἐθαύμαζον. 
‘Jesus; and all wondered. 
21 Kai διαπεράσαντος τοῦ Ιησοῦ ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ 
And “having “passed *over ‘Jesus in 6 ship 
τὸ πέραν," συνήχθη ὄχλος πολὺς ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν, καὶ ἦν 
the other side, *was *gathered ‘a “crowd great to him, and he was 
παρὰ τὴν θάλασσαν. 22 Kai δἰδού," ἔρχεται εἷς THY ἀρχι- 
by the sea. And behold, comes. one of the rulers of 
συναγώγων, ὀνόματι ᾿Ἰάειρος, Kai ἰδὼν αὐτόν, πίπτει πρὸς 
the synagogue, by name Jairus, and seeing him, falls at 
τοὺς.πόδας. αὐτοῦ" 23 καὶ ἱπαρεκάλει! αὐτὸν πολλά, λέγων, 


ἃ 


ἐπάλιν εἰς 
again to 


his feet ; and he besought him much, saying, 
er A 4 , > , μὴ tf ? ‘ 
Ort τὸ.θυγατριόν.μου ἐσχάτως. ἔχει" ἵνα ἐλθὼν 


My little daughter is at the last extremity, [I pray] that having come 

ἐπιθῆς αὐτῇ τὰς χεῖρας," ‘owe! σωθῇ καὶ 
thou wouldest lay on her [thy] hands, so that she may be cured, and 
πιζήσεται.! 24 Kai ἀπῆλθεν per αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἠκολούθει αὐτῷ 


she shall live. And he departed with him, and *followed Shim 
ὄχλος πολύς, Kai συνέθλιβον αὐτόν. 25 Kai γυνή "ric 
la*crowd *great, and pressed on him, And a “woman 'certain 


οὖσα ἐν ῥύσει αἵματος %rn δώδεκα," 26 καὶ πολλὰ παθοῦσα 
being with aflux of blood “years ‘twelve, and much having suffered 
ὑπὸ πολλῶν ἰατρῶν, καὶ δαπανήσασα τὰ.παρ᾽ Ῥέαυτῆς" 
under many physicians, and having spent “her “means 
’ ‘4 A > ~ ᾽ A ~ > A ~ 
πάντα, Kai μηδὲν ὠφεληθεῖσα ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον εἰς τὸ. χεῖρον 
tall, and in no way having benefited but rather sto “worse 
ἐλθοῦσα, 27 ἀκούσασα 4 περὶ τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ, ἐλθοῦσα ἐν 
thaving 7come, having heard concerning Jesus, having come in 
~ » «“ -ε ΄ > ~. » ΄ 
τῷ ὄχλῳ ὄπισθεν, ἥψατο τοῦ ἱματίου.αὐτοῦ" 28 ἔλεγεν γάρ, 
the crowd behind, touched his garment ; for she Le 
Ὅτι "kay τῶν ἱματίων.αὐτοῦ ἅψωμαι." σωθήσομαι. 29 Kai 
1f but his garments I shall touch, I shali be cured. And 


ee ee 8800060606060 


2 ἐμβαίνοντος [was] entering LTTrAW. 
ς — Ἰησοῦς (read he did not suffer) G[u]rtraw. 
f πεποίηκεν has done GLTTraw. 


σοι TTraA. 


i παρακαλεῖ he beseeches Tira. 
m ζήσῃ may live LTTrA. 
2 + τὰ the things T[A]. 


ἃ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἢ LITrAW. b καὶ and GLTTraw. 

4 ἀπάγγειλον tell Lrtraw. © ὃ κύριός 
& εἰς τὸ πέραν πάλιν T. h — ἰδού [L]rTra. 
ι ἵνα in order that στιὰ. 


k ras χεῖρας αὐτῇ LITrA. 
Ρ αὐτῆς GLTrAW. 


0 — τις LTTr[A]. ο δώδεκα ἔτη T. 
τ ἐὰν ἅψωμαι κἂν τῶν ἱματίων αὐτοῦ ΤΑ. 


V2 MARK. 


Ξεῤθέως! ἐξηράνθη ἡ πηγὴ τοῦ.αἱματος. αὐτῆς, καὶ ἔγνω 
immediately was dried up the fountain of her blood, and she knew 
τῷ σώματι ὅτι ἴαται ἀπὸ τῆς μάστιγος. 80 καὶ vOéwc’ 
infher] body thatshe washealed from the scourge. And immediately 
ὁ Ἰησοῦς, ἐπιγνοὺς ἐν ἑαυτῷ τὴν ἐξ αὐτοῦ δύναμιν 

Jesus, knowing in himself [that] the *out “οἵ *him 1power 
ἐξελθοῦσαν, ἐπιστραφεὶς ἐν τῷ ὄχλῳ; ἔλεγεν, Tic pov ἥψατο 
had gone forth, having turned in the crowd, said, Who of me touched 
τῶν ἱματίων ; 31 Kai ἔλεγον αὐτῷ οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ, Βλέπεις 
the garments? And 3said *to *him his “disciples, Thou seest 
τὸν ὄχλον συνθλίβοντά σε, καὶ λέγεις, Τίς μου ἥψατο; 
the crowd pressing on thee, and sayestthou, Who me _ touched? 


82 Kai περιεβλέπετο ἰδεῖν τὴν τοῦτο ποιήσασαν. 33 7-0é 
And he looked round tosee her who this had done. But the 


γυνὴ φοβηθεῖσα Kai τρέμουσα, εἰδυῖα ὃ γέγονεν ἐπ᾽" 
woman beingfrightened and trembling, knowing what had been done upon 
αὐτῇ, ἦλθεν καὶ προσέπεσεν αὐτῷ, Kai εἶπεν αὐτῷ πᾶσαν 
her, came and felldown before him, and told him all 
THY ἀλήθειαν. 34 0.68" εἶπεν αὐτῇ, YOvyarep," ἡ.πίστις. σου 
the truth. Andhe said _ toher, Daughter, thy faith 
σέσωκέν σε" ὕπαγε εἰς εἰρήνην, Kai ἴσθι ὑγιὴς ἀπὸ τῆς μάστι- 
hascured thee; go in peace, and be sound from "scourge 
γός cov. 35 “Eri αὐτοῦ.λαλοῦντος, ἔρχονται ἀπὸ τοῦ a 
1thy. [While] yet he is speaking, they come from the 
συναγώγου, λέγοντες, Ὅτι ἡ-θυγάτηρ.σου ἀπέθανεν᾽ τί ἔτι 
the synagogue’s [house], saying, Thy daughter isdead; whystill 
σκύλλεις τὸν διδάσκαλον ; 36 Ὁ δὲ. Ἰησοῦς “εὐθέως! γἀκού- 
troublest thou the teacher? But Jesus immediately, having 
σας! τὸν λόγον λαλούμενον λέγει TH ἀρχισυναγώγῳ, Μὴ 
heard the word spoken, says to the ruler of the synagogue, 7Not 
φοβοῦ" μόνον πίστευε. 37 Kai οὐκιἀφῆκεν οὐδένα ταὐτῷ" 
‘fear ; only believe. And he suffered no one him 


a On ll ᾽ \ b , ais, , ee) , 
συνακολουθῆσαι," εἰ μὴ Ὁ Πέτρον καὶ ᾿Ιάκωβον καὶ ᾿Ιωάννην 
to accompany, except Peter and James and John 


τὸν ἀδελφὺν ᾿Ιακώβου. 38 Kai “ἔρχεται εἰς τὸν οἶκον τοῦ 


l= 
er of 


the brother of James. And hecomes to the house ofthe 
ἀρχισυναγώγου. Kai θεωρεῖ θόρυβον, 4 κλαίοντας καὶ 
ruler of the synagogue, and he beholds atumult, [people] weeping and 


ἀλαλάζοντας πολλά. 39 καὶ εἰσελθὼν λέγει αὐτοῖς, Τί 
wailing greatly. And having entered hesays tothem, Why 


θορυβεῖσθε καὶ κλαίετε; τὸ παιδίον οὐκ.ἀπέθανεν, ἀλλὰ 


make yea tumult and weep? the child is not dead, but 
καθεύδει. 40 Kai κατεγέλων αὐτοῦ. °6'.6 ἐκβαλὼν 'ἅπαν- 
sleeps. And they laughedat him. But he having put out all, 


tac, παραλαμβάνει τὸν πατέρα τοῦ παιδίου Kai τὴν 

takes with (him) tke father ofthe child and the 
μητέρα καὶ τοὺς per’ αὐτοῦ, καὶ εἰσπορεύεται ὕπου ἦν τὸ 
mother and those with him, and enters in where *was ‘the 
παιδίον Ξἀνακείμενον." 41 Kai κρατήσας τῆς χειρὸς τοῦ 
Ξ0 818 lying. And having taken the hand of the 
παιδίου, λέγει αὐτῇ, Ταλιθά, *kovpu"" ὅ ἐστιν μεθερμηνευό- 
child, hesays toher, Talitha, koumi; which is, being inter- 


5 εὐθὺς TTrA. 
χα -- εὐθέως [L]rtr/ ΑἹ. Υ παρακούσας having disregarded Trra. 
TTrA. ἃ ἀκολουθῆσαι to follow x. b + τὸν TTrA. 

ἃ + καὶ and GLTTraw. © αὐτὸς LITr. f πάντας GLTTrAW 
ἃ κούμ τ; κοῦμ TrA. 


108 
straightway the foun- 
tain of her blood was 
dried up ; and she felt 
in her body that she 
was healed of that 
plague. 30 And Jesus, 
immediately knowing 
in himself that virtue 
had gone ont of him, 
turned him about in 
the press, and said, 
Who touched my 
clothes? 31 And his 
disciplessaiduntohim, 
Thou seest the multi- 
tude thronging thee, 
and sayest thou, Who 
touched me? 32 And 
he looked round about 
to see her that had 
done this thing, 33 But 
the woman fearing 
and trembling, know- 
ing what was done in 
her, came and fell 
down before him, and 
told him all the truth. 
34 And he said unto 
her, Daughter, thy 
faith hath made thee 
whole; go in peace, 
and be whole of thy 
plague, 35 While he 
yet spake, there came 
from the ruler of the 
synagogue’s house cer- 
tain which said, Thy 
daughter is dead: why 
troublest thou the 
Master any further? 
36 As soon as Jesus 
heard the word that 
was spoken, he saith 
unto the ruler of the 
synagogue, Be ποῦ 
afraid, only believe. 
37 And he suffered no 
man to follow him, 
save Peter, and James, 
and John the brother 
of James. 38 And he 
cometh to the house of 
the ruler of the syna- 
gogue, and seeth the 
tumult,and them that 
wept and wailed great- 
ly. 39 And when he 
was come in, he saith 
unto them, Why make 
ye this ado, and weep? 
the damsel is not dead, 
but sleepeth. 40 And 
they laughed him to 
scorn. But when he 
had put them all out, 
he taketh the father 
and the mother of the 
damsel, and them that 
were with him, and 
entereth in where the 
damsel was lying. 
41 And he took the 
damsel by the hand, 
and said unto her, 
Talitha cumi; which 
is, being interpret- 


t — ἐπ᾽ (read to her) [L]1Tra. ἡ + Ἰησοῦς Jesus tL. 


* Θυγάτηρ LTra. 


2 μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ with him 
ς ἔρχονται they come LTTraw. 
& — ἀνακείμενον G[L]TTra. 


104 

ed, Damsel, I say 
unto thee, arise. 
{2 And  straightway 


the damsel arose, and 
walked; for she was 
of the age of twelve 
years, And they were 
astonished with a 
great astonishment. 
18 And he charged 
them straitly that no 
man should know it; 
and commanded that 
something should be 
given her to eat. 


VI. And he went 
out from thence, and 
came into his own 
country ; and his disci- 
ples follow him. 2 And 
when the sabbath day 
was come, he began to 
teach in the syna- 
gogue: and many 
hearing him were as- 
tonished, saying, From 
whence hath this man 
these things? and what 
wisdom is this which 
is given unto him, that 
even such mighty 
works are wrought by 
his hands? 3 Is not 
this the carpenter, the 
son of Mary, the bro- 
ther of James, and 
Joses, and of Juda, and 
Simon? and are not 
his sisters here with 
us? And they wereof- 
fended at him. 4 But 
Jesus said unto them, 
A prophet is not with- 
out honour, but in his 
own country, and a- 
mong his own kin, and 
in his ΟὟ house. 
5 And he could there 
do no mighty work, 
save that he lInid his 
hands upon a few sick 
folk, and healed them. 
6 And he marvelled 
because of their un- 
belief. And he went 
round abont the vil- 
lages, teaching. 


7 And he called unto 
him the twelve, and 
began to send them 
forth by twoand two; 
and gave them power 
over unclean spirits; 
8 and commanded 
them that they should 
take nothing for their 
journey, save a staff 
only; no scrip, no 
bread, no money in 
their purse: 9 but be 
shod withsandals ; and 


MAPKOS. Ve 


“2 . ‘ > , i 
usvov, Τὸ κοράσιον, σοὶ λέγω, ᾿ἔγειραι.} 42 Kai "εὐθέως 


preted, Damsel, tothee Isay, arise. And immediately 

ἀνέστη τὸ κοράσιον Kai περιεπάτει, ἦν. γὰρ ἐτῶν δώδεκα. 
arose the amsel and walked, forshewas“years ‘twelve (old). 

καὶ ἐξέστησαν ἐκστάσει μεγάλῃ. 48 καὶ διεστείλατο 


And they were amazed with amazement ‘great. And hecharged 
αὐτοῖς πολλὰ ἵνα μηδεὶς πιγνῷ" τοῦτο᾽ καὶ εἶπεν 
them much that noone shouldknow this; and hesaid [that some- 
δοθῆναι αὐτῇ φαγεῖν. 
thing]should be given toher το eat, 
6 Kai ἐξῆλθεν ἐκεῖθεν, καὶ "Pev' εἰς rHY-warpida.adrov 
And he went out thence, and came _ into his [own] country ; 
καὶ ἀκολουθοῦσιν αὐτῷ οἱ.μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ: 2 Kai γενομένου 
and 3follow *him ‘his *disciples. And “being ?come 
σαββάτου ἤρξατο %v τῇ συναγωγῷ διδάσκειν" καὶ Ῥ πολλοὶ 
1sabbath he began in the synagogue to teach ; and many 
ἀκούοντες ἐξεπλήσσοντο, λέγοντες, Τόθεν τούτῳ ταῦτα; 
hearing were astonished, saying, Whence to this [man] these things? 
καὶ τίς ἡ σοφία ἡ δοθεῖσα "αὐτῷ," ὅτι" καὶ δυνάμεις 
and what the wisdom that has been given tohim, that even *works*of *power 
τοιαῦται διὰ τῶν χειρ πεπητοῦ "γίνονται ;' 8 οὐχ οὗτός ἐστιν 


Ἰβπο ἢ. by his hands are done? not “this ‘is 
ὁ τέκτων, ὁ υἱὸς ‘Mapiac, “ἀδελφὸς. δὲ" Tasman καὶ “Two 
the carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James and  Joses 


καὶ ᾿Ιούδα καὶ Σίμωνος ; καὶ οὐκ.εἰσὶν αἱ. ἀδελφαὶ αὐτοῦ ὧδε 
and Judas and Simon? and are not his sisters here 
πρὸς ἡμᾶς ; Kai ἐσκανδαλίζοντο ἐν αὐτῷ. 4 "ἔλεγεν δὲ!" αὐτοῖς 
with us? And they were offended in him. But ’said *to *them 
ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, Ὅτι οὐκ ἔστιν προφήτης ἄτιμος, εἰμὴ ἐν τῇ 
’ Jesus, ®Not 718 5a,%prophet without honour, except in 
πατρίδι. αὑτοῦ" καὶ ἐν τοῖς *ovyyevéow' " καὶ ἐν τῇ 
his [own] country and among [his] kinsmen and in 
a? b « “4| » \ > Cc , Π ? ~ d ? , δύ 
οἰκίᾳ. αὐτοῦ". ὃ Καὶ οὐκ ἠδύνατο! ἐκεῖ οὐδεμίαν υναμιν 
his [own] house. And he was “able “there ‘notany work of power 
ποιῆσαι," εἰ.μὴ ὀλίγοις ἀῤῥώστοις ἐπιθεὶς τὰς χεῖρας 
to do, except ona few infirm having laid [his] han 
, , ‘ e2 , tl ὃ A δὴ Ψ , γ᾽ 
ἐθεράπευσεν. 6 καὶ ξἐθαύμαζεν ιὰ τὴν.ἀπιστίαν. αὐ - 
he healed [them]. And he wondered because of their unbelief. 
τῶν" Kai περιῆγεν τὰς κώμας κύκλῳ διδάσκων. 
And he went about the villages inacireuit teaching. 
7 Kai προσκαλεῖται τοὺς δώδεκα, καὶ ἤρξατο αὐτοὺς 
And he calls to (him] the twelve, and began them 
᾽ t , , , 207 ? me 2. , ~ ΄ 
ἀποστέλλειν δύο.δύο, καὶ ἐδίδου αὐτοῖς ἐξουσίαν τῶν πνευμά- 
tosend forth twoandtwo,and gave tothem authority overthe spirits 
των τῶν ἀκαθάρτων᾽ 8 καὶ παρήγγειλεν αὐτοῖς wa μηδὲν 
the unclean ; and he charged them that nothing 
aiowow εἰς ὁδόν, εἰμὴ ῥάβδον μόνον" μὴ ἱπήραν, 
they should take for [the] way, except ἃ staff only; no provision bag, 
μὴ ἄρτον," μὴ εἰς τὴν ζώνην χαλκόν" 9 δάλλ᾽" ὑποδεδεμένους 
nor bread, nor in the _ belt money ; but be shod 


i ἔγειρε GLTTrAW. 


n ἔρχεται comes TTrAW. 


to this [man] rrr, 
ἀδελφὸς LTTrAW. 
ἑαυτοῦ T, 
© ἐδύνατο TTrA. 
πήραν TTrA. 


1 συγγενεῦσιν ΤΊ, 


k εὐθὺς ΤΊτΑ. 1+ εὐθὺς immediately T[Tr]a. ™ yvot LTTrA. 

ο διδάσκειν ἐν TH συναγωγῇ TTr. P + οἱ the Τ[Α]. 4 τούτῳ 
τ-- ὅτι GLTTrAW. 5 γινόμεναι Tr. t + τῆς TTra. Υ καὶ 
» Ἰωσῆτος LITrA. χ καὶ ἔλεγεν and “said LITra. Υ αὐτοῦ LTrAW ; 
a + αὐτοῦ his (kinsmen) [L]?TTra. Ὁ αὐτοῦ LTTrAW. 
4 ποιῆσαι οὐδεμίαν δύναμιν LTTrA, © ἐθαύμασεν T. f ἄρτον, μὴ 


€ ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. 


vers MARK. 
σανδάλια" Kai μὴ.Βἐνδύσησθε" δύο χιτῶνας. 10 Kai ἔλεγεν 
with sandals; and put not on two tunics. And he said 


αὐτοῖς, “Ὅπου. ἐὰν) εἰσέλθητε εἰς οἰκίαν, ἐκεῖ μένετε Ewe ἂν 
to them, Wherever yeenter into ahouse, there remain until 

ἐξελθητε ἐκεῖθεν. 11 καὶ *dooudy μὴ.δέξωνται" ὑμᾶς, μηδὲ 
se go out thence, And asmanyas willnotreceive you, nor 


ἀκούσωσιν ὑμῶν, ἐκπορευόμενοι ἐκεῖθεν, ἐκτινάξατε τὸν χοῦν 
hear en; depen as: thence, shake off the dust 


τὸν ὑποκάτω τῶν. ποδῶν ὑμῶν, εἰς μαρτύριον αὐτοῖς. ἰἀμὴν 
which Cis] under your feet, for atestimony to them. Nerily 


λέγω ὑμῖν, ἀνεκτότερον ἔσται Σοδόμοις ἢ Γομόῤῥοις ἐν ἡμέρᾳ 
Isay to you, more tolerable it shallbe forSodom or Gomorrha in 


κρίσεως, ἢ τῇ. πόλει. ἐκείνῃ." 12 Kai ἐξελθόντες miehovo- 
of judgment ἘΔ for that city. And having gone out they pro- 
cov' ἵνα “peravonowory.' 13 καὶ δαιμόνια πολλὰ ἐξέβαλλον, 


φὐεθτις ΠΟΤΕ imen] should repent. And 7demons ‘many they cast out, 
καὶ ἤλειφον ἐλαίῳ πολλοὺς ἀῤῥώστους Kai ἐθεράπευον. 


and anointed with oil many infirm and healed {them]. 
14 Kai ἤκουσεν ὁ βασιλεὺς Ἡρώδηο; φανερὸν. γὰρ 
And ‘heard “*the sking erod [of him}, for public 


ἐγένετο τὸ. Ὀνομα.αὐτοῦ, Kai “ἔλεγεν, Ὅτι ᾿Ιωάννης ὁ βαπ- 


became his name, and  hesaid, John the Bap- 
τίζων Pir νεκρῶν ἠγέρθη," καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἐνεργοῦ- 
tist from among [the] dead is risen, and because of this Sope- 
ow αἱ δυνάμεις ἐν αὐτῷ. 15 Αλλοιῖ ἔλεγον, Ὅτι ᾿Ἡλίας" 


rate ‘the*works*of*powerin him. said, 


ἐστίν: ἄλλοι.δὲ ἔλεγον, ἡ 
itis; and others said, 
προφητῶν. 16 ᾿Ακούσας.δὲ 
prophets. But having heard 
byw ἀπεκεφάλισα ᾿Ιωάννην, 
“beheaded 1John, 
γὲκ νεκρῶν. 
from among [the] dead. 


Others Elias 
‘Ort 7 popnrnc ἐστίν," τὴ we εἷς τῶν 
prophet it is, or as one ofthe 

ὁ Ἡρώδης Yetzer," ¥"Or' ὃν 
Herod said, ?=Whom 
οὗτός “ἐστιν' αὐτὸς" ἠγέρθη 
he it is. He is risen 
17 Αὐτὸς.γὰρ ὁ Ἡρώδης ἀποστείλας 

For *himself erod having sent 


ἐκράτησεν τὸν Ἰωάννην, καὶ ἔδησεν αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ" φυλακῇ; 
seized John, and bound him in the prison, 


διὰ “Howdiada τὴν γυναῖκα Φιλίππου τοῦ.ἀδελφοῦ. αὐτοῦ, 
on account of erodias the wife of er nY his brother, 


ὅτι αὐτὴν ἐγάμησεν. 18 ἔλεγεν.γὰρ ὁ Lowe τῷ Howdy, 
because her he had married. For *said >John to Herod, 


Ὅτι οὐκιἔξεστίν σοι ἔχειν τὴν γυναῖκα τοῦ.ἀδελφοῦ.σου. 
It is not lawful for thee to have the wife of thy brother. 


19 Ἡ.δὲ Ηρωδιὰς ἐνεῖχεν αὐτῷ, καὶ "ἤθελεν! αὐτὸν ἀπο- 
But Herodias held it ageinse Bie; and wished Shim ‘to 


κτεῖναι" καὶ οὐκιἠδύνατο. 20 ὁ γὰρ. Ἡρώδης stole τὸν 


ΞΚ11, and was not able: for Herod feared 
Ἰωάννην, εἰδὼς αὐτὸν ἄνδρα δίκαιον καὶ ἅγιον, καὶ 
John, Sean him [to be] a man just and holy, and 


συνετήρει avTov' Kai ἀκούσας αὐτοῦ, πολλὰ ézroist,' καὶ 


105 


not put on two coats. 
10 And he said unto 
them, In what place 
soever ye enter into 
an house, there abide 
till ye depart from 
that place. 11 And 
whosoever shall not 
receive you, nor hear 
you, when ye depart 
thence, shake off the 
dust under your feet 
for a testimony a- 
gainstthem. Verily1 
say unto you, It shall 
be more tolerable for 
Sodom and Gomorrha 
in the day of judg- 
ment, than for that 
city. 12 And they 
went out, and preached 
that men should re- 
pent. 13 And they 
cast out many devils 
and anointed with oi 
many that were sick, 
and healed them, 


14 And king Herod 
heard of him; (for his 
name was spread a-~ 
broad :) and he said, 
That John the Baptist 
was risen from thc 
dead, and therefore 
mighty works do shew 
forth themselves in 
him. 15 Others said. 
That itis Elias, And 
others said, That it is 
a prophet, or as one of 
the prophets. 16 But 
when Herod heard 
thereof, he said, It is 
John, whom I behead- 
ed: he is risen from 
the dead. 17 For Heroa 
himself had sent forth 
and laid hold upon 
John, and bound him 
in prison for Herodias’ 
sake, his brother Phi- 
lip’s wife: for he had 
married her. 18 For 
John had said untc 
Herod, It is not law- 
ful for thee to have 
thy brother’s wife. 
19 Therefore Herodias 
had a quarrel against 
him, and would have 
killed him; but she 
could not : 20 for Herod 
feared John, knowing 
that he was a just man 
and an holy, and ob- 
served him ; and when 
he heard him, he did 


kept "safe thim ; and having heard him, manythings did, and many things, and 
» ἐνδύσασθαι E. i ἂν LTr. K ἐὰν for ἂν τι ; ὃς ἂν τόπος μὴ δέξηται whatsoever place 
will not receive TTra, 1— ἀμὴν λέγω .... τῇ πόλει , ἐκείνῃ G[L]tTra. m ἐκήρυξαν ΤΊτΑ. 


2 μετανοῶσιν LTTrA. 
νεκρῶν ἀνέστη A. 

Y ἔλεγεν TTrA, 

* — τῇ GLTTraw. 


° ἔλεγον they said L. 

a+ ééalso LTTraw. τ ἩἩλείας T. 
-- Ὅτε LTTrA. χ- ἐστιν" αὐτὸς Ο[ττττὰ. 
a ἐζήτει Sought L. 


P ἐγήγερται (has risen) ἐκ νεκρῶν LITr; ἐκ 
5. — ἐστίν [L]}rTra. 
Υ — ἐκ νεκρῶν T[Tr]A. 
Ὁ ἠπόρει was at a loss [about] τ. 


τ ἣ GLITraw. 


106 


heard him _ gladly. 
21 And when a con- 
venient day was come, 
that Herod on his 
birthday made a sup- 
per to his lords, high 
captains, and _ chief 
estates of Galilee; 
22. and when the daugh 
ter of the said Herodias 
came in, and danced, 
asd pleased Herod and 
them that sat with 
him, the king saidunto 
the damsel, Ask of me 
whatsoever thou wilt, 
and I will give it thee. 
23 And hesware unto 
her, Whatsoever thou 
shalt ask of me, 1 will 
give it thee, unto the 
half of my kingdom. 
24 Andshe went forth, 
and said unto her mo- 
ther, What shall 1 451 ὃ 
And she said, The head 
of John the Baptist. 
25 And she came in 
straightway with 
haste unto the king, 
and asked, saying, I 
will that thou give me 
by and by in acharger 
the head of John the 
Baptist. 26 And the 
king was exceeding 
sorry ; yet for his oath’s 
sake, and for their 
sakes which sat with 
him, he would not re- 
ject her. 27 And im- 
mediately the king 
sent an executioner, 
and commanded his 
head to be brought: 
and he went and be- 
headed him in the 
prison, 28 and brought 
his head in a charger, 
and gaveit to the dam- 
sel: and the damsel 
gave it to her mother. 
29 And when his disci- 
ples heard of it, they 
came and took up his 
corpse, and laid it in 
a tomb. 


30 And the apostles 
gathered themselves 
together unto Jesus, 
and told him all things, 
both what they had 
done, and what they 
had taught. 31 And he 
said unto them, Come 
ye yourselves apart 


MAPKOS. γι. 
DOE ᾽ ~ » 4 , « , ᾽ ΄ eo 
ηδεως αὐτοῦ ἤκουεν. 21 Kai γενομένης ἡμέρας. εὐκαίρου, “ὅτε" 
gladly him heard. And ‘being °come ‘an opportune “day, when 
Ἡρώδης τοῖς.γενεσίοις.αὐτοῦ δεῖπνον “ἐποίει! τοῖς μεγιστᾶσιν 
Herod on his birthday a supper made to *great *men 
αὐτοῦ καὶ τοῖς χιλιάρχοις Kai τοῖς πρώτοις τῆς Γαλιλαίας, 
‘his and to the chief captains and tothe first [men] of Galilee ; 
22 Kai εἰσελθούσης τῆς θυγατρὸς αὐτῆς τῆς Ἡρωδιάδος, καὶ 


and Shaving’come*in'*the daughter “of Sherself Herodias, and 
ὀρχησαμένης, “καὶ ἀρεσάσης" τῷ ‘Howdy καὶ τοῖς cuvava- 


having danced, and pleased Herod and those reclining 
κειμένοις, [εἶπεν ὁ βασιλεὺς" τῷ κορασίῳ, Αἴτησόν με 
{at table] with [him], “said *the “king tothe damsel, Ask me 


ΓΝ) κι θέ 4 ’ γι 5) ‘ » ᾽ - ( 

δ ἐὰν θέλῃς, καὶ δώσω σοί: 23 καὶ ὦμοσεν αὐτῇ, Ὅτι 
whatever thou wilt, and I willgive to thee. And heswore toher, 

δ ἐὰν μὲ αἰτήσῃς, δώσω σοί, ἕως ἡμίσους τῆς βασιλείας 
Whatever me thou mayestask, I will give thee, to half of *kingdom 
μου. 24 «Ἢ δὲ! ἐξελθοῦσα εἶπεν τῇ.μητρὶ αὐτῆς, Ti ®airn- 
‘my. And she having goneout said to her mother, What shallI 


σομαι:" Ἣ.δὲ εἶπεν, Τὴν κεφαλὴν ᾿Ιωάννου τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ." 
ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptist. 


25 Kai εἰσελθοῦσα "εὐθέως" μετὰ σπουδῆς πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα, 
And haying entered immediately with haste to the king, 
ἠτήσατο, λέγουσα, Θέλω iva wor δῷς ἐξ.αὐτῆς" ἐπὶ πίνακι 
she asked, saying, I desire that tome thou give atonce upon a dish 

4 ‘ ? ’ ~ ~ 4 ch 
τὴν κε αλτω, Ἰωάννου τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ. 26 Καὶ περίλυπος 
the ead of John the Baptist. And ‘very ®sorrowful 
γενόμενος ὁ βασιλεύς. διὰ τοὺς ὕρκους Kai τοὺς 
{(*while] *made '‘'the “king, on account of the oaths and those who 
πσυνανακειμένους" οὐκ. ἠθέλ παὐτὴν ἀθετῆ " 27 καὶ 
μ ο᾽ οὐκ. ἠθέλησεν αὐτὴν ἀθετῆσαι. καὶ 
reclined [at table] with [him], would not ther reject. And 
σεῤθεως" ἀποστείλας ὁ βασιλεὺς Ῥσπεκουλάτωρα" ἐπέταξεν 
immediately “having “sent 'the *king a guardsman ordered 
φἐνεχθῆναι" rHy-KEepadiy.avrov™. 28 86.62" ἀπελθὼν ἀπεκε- 
to be brought his head. And he having gone be- 
φάλισεν αὐτὸν ty τῇ φυλακῇ, Kai ἤνεγκεν τὴν.κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ 
headed him in the prison, and _ brought his head 
ἐπὶ πίνακι, καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτὴν τῷ κορασίῳ" Kai TO κοράσιον 
upon adish, and gave it tothe damsel, and the amsel 
ἔδωκεν αὐτὴν τῇ. μητρὶ. αὐτῆς. 29 Kai ἀκούσαντες οἱ μαθηταὶ 
gave it to her mother. And _ having heard [it] ?disciples 
αὐτοῦ ‘i\Oor," καὶ ἦραν τὸ.πτῶμα.αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἔθηκαν ®avrd" 


this came, and took up his corpse, and laid it 
ἐν τῷ" μνημείῳ. 
in the tomb. 
30 Kai συνάγονται οἱ ἀπόστολοι πρὸς τὸν Ἰησοῦν, Kai 


to and 
ἀπήγγειλαν αὐτῷ πάντα, “καὶ ὅσα ἐποίησαν καὶ "ὅσα! 
they related tohim allthings, both what they haddone and what 


ἐδίδαξαν. 31 καὶ γεῖπεν" αὐτοῖς, Δεῦτε ὑμεῖς αὐτοὶ 
they had taught. And hesaid tothem, Come ye _ yourselves 


And #are*gathered Stogether*the ?apostles Jesus, 


COTeL. 


i βαπτίζοντος TTrA. 
[at table] Trra. 


ᾳ ἐνέγκαι [him] to bring TTra, 
gone he beheaded) urtra. 
W — καὶ LTTrAW. 


EGLTTraw. 


4 ἐποίησεν LITrA. 
λεὺς εἶπεν and the king said rTra. 


ε ἤρεσεν She pleased titra. ἴ εἶπεν δὲ ὁ βασιλεὺς L; ὁ δὲ βασι- 

Ε καὶ and τττὰ. h αἰτήσωμαι Should I ask nrrraw. 

Κ εὐθὺς LTTrA. ἐξαυτῆς Sais μοι LTTrA. ™ ἀνακειμένους reclined 

Ὁ ἀθετῆσαι αὐτήν TTrA. ὁ εὐθὺς TTrA. P σπεκουλάτορα LTTrAW, 

r + [ἐπὶ mevaxc| on a dish L. 5 καὶ (read and having 

τ ἦλθαν Trra. ἃ αὐτὸν him τ. υ-- τῷ (read a tomb) 
% — ὅσα T. Υ λέγει he says TTraw. 


ΥἹ. MARK. 


Kar ἰδίαν εἰς ἔρημον τόπον, καὶ Τἀάναπαύΐεσθε" ὀλίγον. Ἦσαν 

apart into “desert ‘aplace, and rest a little. 7Were 
οἱ ἐρχόμενοι καὶ οἱ ὑπάγοντες πολλοί, Kai οὐδὲ φαγεῖν 
*‘and*those ‘going many, and noteven to eat 

*yvkaipovy." 32 καὶ ἀπῆλθον sic ἔρημον τόπον τῷ 
had they opportunity. And they went away into “desert ‘aplace by the 
πλοίῳ" κατ᾽ ἰδίαν. 33 Kai εἶδον αὐτοὺς ὑπάγοντας “οἱ ὄχλοι," 


ὰρ 
for *those *coming 


ship apart. And "saw *them Sgoing 1the *crowds, 
καὶ ἐπέγνωσαν" "αὐτὸν" πολλοί, καὶ πεζῇ ἀπὸ πασῶν τῶν 
“and recognized Shim 7many, and on foot from all the 


πόλεων συνέδραμον ἐκεῖ, ‘kai προῆλθον αὐτούς," βκαὶ συνῆλ- 


cities rantogether there, and went before them, and came to- 
θον πρὸς αὐτόν." 84 καὶ ἐξελθὼν "εῖδεν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς" πολὺν 
gether to him. And having gone out saw 1 Jesus *great 
ὄχλον, καὶ ἐσπλαγχνίσθη ἐπ᾿ ἰαὐτοῖς,! ὅτι ἦσαν 


Sacrowd,and was moved with compassion towards them, because they were 


e , \ » , A \ 9 zg ὃ δά ? ‘ 
we πρόβατα μὴ ἔχοντα ποιμένα᾽ Kai ἤρξατο διδάσκειν αὐτοὺς 


as sheep not having ashepherd. And hebegan to teach them 
πολλά. 8 Kai ἤδη ὥρας.πολλῆς γενομένης," προσεὰ- 
many things. And already alatehour [it] being, com- 


θόντες Ἰαὐτῷ" οἱ. μαθηταὶ ταὐτοῦ" "λέγουσιν." Ὅτι ἔρημός ἐστιν 
. ? . 


ing to him his disciples say, Desert is 

« , ‘ » “ fe 4 2 ’ ? 4 e 

ὁ τόπος, Kai ἤδη ὥρα.πολλή" 36 ἀπόλυσον αὐτούς, ἵνα 
the place, and already [it is] a late hour; dismiss them, that 


ἀπελθόντες εἰς τοὺς κύκλῳ ἀγροὺς Kai κώμας, ἀγοράσωσιν 


having gone ‘to *the ‘in 28 %circuit country and villages, they may buy 
ἑαυτοῖς °aprouc’' τί γὰρ! φάγωσιν “οὐκ. ἔχουσιν." 
for themselves bread; “something ‘for to eat they have not. 


37 ὋὉ δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Δότε αὐτοῖς ὑμεῖς φαγεῖν. 
Buthe answering said tothem, Give *to*them ‘ye to eat. 
Kai λέγουσιν αὐτῷ, ᾿Απελθόντες ἀγοράσωμεν διακοσίων 
And theysay ἴο him, Having gone shall we buy two hundred 
δηναρίων" ἄρτους, καὶ "δῶμεν" αὐτοῖς φαγεῖν ; 38 ὋὉ δὲ λέγει 
denarii of bread, and give them to eat? And he says 
αὐτοῖς, Πόσους ἄρτους ἔχετε ; ὑπάγετε ἱκαὶ" ἴδετε. Kai γνόν- 
tothem, Howmany loaves have ye? go and 566, And having 
τες λέγουσινγῦ, Πέντε, καὶ δύο ἰχθύας. 89 Kai ἐπέταξεν αὐτοῖς 
Known they say, Five, and two fishes. And heordered. them 
‘avakNivat" πάντας συμπόσια.συμπόσια ἐπὶ τῷ χλωρῷ χόρτῳ. 

to make “recline ‘all by companies on the green grass. 
40 καὶ *avérecoy' πρασιαὶ. πρασιαί, Yava' ἑκατὸν καὶ ἀνὰ" 

And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds and by 
πεντήκοντα. 41 καὶ λαβὼν τοὺς πέντε ἄρτους Kai τοὺς δύο 
fifties. And haying taken the five loaves and the two 
ἰχθύας, ἀναβλέψας εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν εὐλόγησεν Kai κατέκλα- 
fishes, hayinglookedup to the heaven he blessed and broke 
σεν τοὺς ἄρτους, καὶ ἐδίδου τοῖς.μαθηταῖς.“ αὐτοῦ" ἵνα “zrapa- 
the loaves, and gave to his disciples that they might 


107 
into a desert placs, and 
rest a while; for there 
were many comingand 
going, and they had 
no leisure so much as 
to eat. 32 And they 
departed into a desert 
place by ship privately. 
33 And the people saw 
them departing, and 
many knew him, and 
ran atoot thither out 
of all cities, and out- 
went them, and came 
together unto him. 
34 And Jesus, when he 
came out, saw much 
people, and was moved 
with compassion to- 
ward them, because 
they were as sheep not 
having a shepherd: 
and he began to teach 
them many things, 
35 And when the day 
was now far spent, his 
disciples came unto 
him, and said, This is 
a desert place, and now 
the time zs far passed : 
36 send them away, 
that they may go into 
the country round 
about, and into the 
villages,and buy them- 
selves bread: for they 
have nothing to eat. 
37 He answered and 
said unto them, Give 
ye them toeat. And 
they say unto him, 
Shall we go and buy 
two hundred penny- 
worth of bread, and 
give them toeat? 38He 
saith unto them, How 
many loaves have ye? 
go and see. And when 
they knew, they say, 
Five, and two fishes. 
39 And he commanded 
them to make all sit 
down by companies 
upon the green grass, 
40 And they sat down 
in ranks, by hundreds 
and by fifties. 41 And 
when he had taken the 
five loaves and the two 
fishes, he looked up to 
heaven, and blessed, 
and brake the loaves, 
and gave them to his 
disciples to set before 


 ἀναπαύσασθε TIrA. δ εὐκαίρουν LTTrA. 
ὄχλοι (read they saw) GLTTraW. 4 ἔγνωσαν knew Ltr. 
f — καὶ προῆλθον αὐτούς G. & — καὶ συνῆλθον πρὸς αὐτόν GLTTrAW. 
he saw) GTTraw; [ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς] εἶδεν τ,. i αὐτούς LTTrA. 
μι [αὐτοῦ] L. π ἔλεγον Said TTra. ° — ἄρτους [{{]τττὰ. 
ἔχουσιν (read buy for themselves something to eat) [L]rrra. 
5 δώσομεν Shall we give LtrA; δώσωμεν τ. t — καὶ [L]TTrA. 
¥ ἀνακλιθῆναι 1. 1 ἀνέπεσαν TTrA. Y κατὰ LTTrA. 
88. παρατιθῶσιν TA. 


b ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ εἰς ἔρημον τόπον L. 
© αὐτοὺς them τ; -- αὐτὸν GLTra. 


Κ γινομένης 1. 

Ρ — γὰρ [τι |TTrA. 
τ δηναρίων διακοσίων GLTTrAW. 
v + [αὐτῷ] ἴο him x, 
28 — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) TTra, 


c=" ob. 


h — 6 Ἰησοῦς (read 
1 — αὐτῷ τ. 
4 — οὐκ 


108 


them; and the two 
fishes divided he a- 
mong them all, 42 And 
they did all eat, and 
were filled. 43 And 
they took up twelve 
baskets full of the 
fragments, and of the 
fishes. 44 And they 
that did eat of the 
loaves were about five 
thousand men. 45 And 
straightway he con- 
strained his disciples 
to get into the ship, 
and to go to the other 
side before unto Beth- 
saida, while he sent a- 
way the people. 46 And 
when he had sent them 
away, he departed into 
ἃ mountain to pray. 
47 And when even was 
zome, the ship was in 
the midst of the sea, 
and he alone on the 
land. 48 And he saw 
them toiling in row- 
ing; for the wind was 
contrary unto them: 
and about the fourth 
watch of the night he 
cometh unto them, 
walking upon the sea, 
and would have passed 
by them. 49 But when 
they saw him walking 
upon the sea, they sup- 
posed it had been a 
spirit, and cried out: 
30 for they all saw 
him, and were trou- 
bled. And immedi- 
ately he talked with 
them, and saith unto 
them, Be of good cheer: 
itis 1; be not afraid. 
51 And he went up 
unto them into the 
ship; and the wind 
ceased: and they were 
sore amazed in them- 
selves beyond measure, 
and wondered, 52 For 
they considered not 
the miracle of the 
loaves: for their heart 
was hardened, 


53 And when they 
had passed over, they 
came into the land of 
Gennesaret, and drew 
to the shore. 54 And 
when they were come 
out of the _ ship, 
straightway they knew 
him, 55 and ran 
through that whole 
region round about, 
and began to carry 
about in beds those 


ΜΆΡΚΟΣ. 
θῶσιν" αὐτοῖς" καὶ τοὺς δύο ἰχθύας ἐμέρισεν πᾶσιν" 42 
set before them. And the two fishes he divided among all. 
ἔφαγον πάντες, Kai ἐχορτάσθησαν" 43 καὶ ἦραν ὕκλασμά- 
Zate tall, and were satisfied. And they took up of frag- 
των" δώδεκα “copivouc' ἁπλήρεις," καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν ἰχθύων. 44 Kai 
ments twelve hand-baskets full, and of the fishes. And 


Vi. 


και 
And 


ἦσαν οἱ φαγόντες τοὺς ἄρτους “ὡσεὶ πεντακισχίλιοι 

Twere ‘those μοῦ ate "οὗ ‘the loaves about five thousand 

ἄνδρες. 45 Kai ‘ebOéwe! ἠνάγκασεν τοὺς. μαθητὰς. αὐτοῦ 
men. And immediately he compelled his disciples 


ἐμβῆναι εἰς τὸ πλοῖον, καὶ προάγειν εἰς TO πέραν πρὸς Βηθ- 
toenter intothe ship, and to go before to the otherside to Beth- 
σαϊδάν. ἕως αὐτὸς βἐἀπολύσῃ᾽ τὸν ὄχλον. 46 καὶ ἀποταξάμενος 
saida, until he should dismiss the crowd. And having taken leave of 
αὐτοῖς, ἀπῆλθεν εἰς τὸ ὄρος προσεύξασθαι. 47 Kai ὀψίας 
them, he departed into the mountain to pray. And evening 
γενομένης, ἦν τὸ πλοῖον ἐν μέσῳ τῆς θαλάσσης, καὶ αὐτὸς 
being come, *was'the “ship in themidst of the . sea, and he 
μόνος ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. 48 Kai *eldev' αὐτοὺς βασανιζομένους 
alone upon the land, And he saw them labouring 
ἐν τῷ ἐλαύνειν, ἣν.γὰρ ὁ ἄνεμος ἐναντίος αὐτοῖς" ἱκαὶ" περὶ 
in the rowing, for *was ‘the *wind contrary tothem; and about 
τετάρτην φυλακὴν τῆς νυκτὸς ἔρχεται πρὸς αὐτούς, περιπα- 
{the] fourth watch ofthe night hecomes_ to them, walk- 
τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης, καὶ ἤθελεν παρελθεῖν αὐτούς. 49 οἱ. δὲ 
ing on the sea, and would havepassedby them. But they, 
ἰδόντες αὐτὸν "περιπατοῦντα ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης," ἔδοξαν l 
seeing him walking on the sea, thought [it] 
φάντασμα ""ῖναι,; καὶ ἀνέκραξαν. 50 πάντες. γὰρ αὐτὸν 
381) apparition ‘tobe, and cried out: for all *him 
πεῖδον,"! καὶ ἐταράχθησαν. Kai εὐθέως" ἐλάλησεν μετ᾽ αὐτῶν, 


‘saw, and were troubled. And immediately he spoke with them, 
καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, Θαρσεῖτε" ἐγώ εἰμι, μὴ-φοβεῖσθε. 
and says to them, Be of goodcourage: [ am [he]; fear not. 


51 Kai ἀνέβη πρὸς αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸ πλοῖον, Kai ἐκόπασεν ὁ 
And hewentup to them ἰηΐο the ship, and 3161. ‘the 
ἄνεμος" καὶ λίαν ΡῬὲκ. περισσοῦ! ἐν ἑαυτοῖς ἐξίσταντο, 
2wind, Andexceedingly beyond measure in themselves they were amazed, 
Yai ἐθαύμαζον"" 52 οὐ.γὰρ.συνῆκαν ἐπὶ τοῖς ἄρτοις" "ἦν. γὰρ" 
and wondered ; for they understood not by the loaves, for “was 
8) capdia.avTay" πεπωρωμένη. 
‘their *heart hardened, 
53 Kai διαπεράσαντες ᾿ἦλθον ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν" “Γενησαρέτ," 
And haying passed over theycame to the nd of Gennesaret, 
καὶ προσωρμίσθησαν. 54 καὶ ἐξελθόντων. αὐτῶν ἐκ τοῦ 
and drew to shore, And on their coming out of the 
/ ᾽ , , ’ 
πλοίου, [εὐθέως! ἐπιγνόντες αὐτόν“, 55 “περιδραμόντες" 
ship, immediately having recognized him, running through 
/ A , ᾽ , ‘ ~ , 
ὅλην τὴν rEpixwoor'txeiyyny ἤρξαντο ἐπὶ τοῖς δκραββάτοις" 
811 that country around they began on couches 


b κλάσματα A. 


Z ἀπολύει dismisses LTTra. 
1+ ὅτι that τ. 
P [ἐκ περισσοῦ] Tr. 


ξεριπουοῦντα τ. 
ὃ δὲ εὐθὺς τ΄. 


5 αὐτῶν ἡ καρδία LTTrAW. 
ἄνδρες τοῦ τόπου ἐκείνου ] the men of that place 1,. 
Υ χώραν (omit around) rrra. 


© κοφίνων TA. 


6..-- ὡσεὶ GLITrAW. εὐθὺς TTrA. 
h ἰδὼν seeing ΟΤΤΤΓᾺ. i— καὶ LTTrA. k ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης 

m ἐστιν it is 1. ἢ εἶδαν TTr. ο καὶ εὐθὺς LTrA ; 
4 --οΟ καὶ ἐθαύμαζον [L] τττΑ. τ ἀλλ᾽ ἦν but was TTr. 
ἰ Υ Τεννησαρὲτ LITrAW. w+ [οἱ 
x περιέδραμον they ran through rrr. 
® κραβάττοις LTTrAW. 


d πληρώματα TTrA. 


ἴ ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν ἦλθον εἰς Ὑ, 


* + καὶ and TTr, 


VI, VII. MARK. 
τοὺς κακῶς. ἔχοντας περιφέρειν, ὅπου ἤκουον ὅτι 
those that were ill to carry about, where they were hearing that 


c ~\l > ‘4 « dz " ᾽ 7 ? , a e 

ἐκεῖ! ἐστιν. 56 καὶ ὕπου “ἂν" εἰσεπορεύετο εἰς κώμας ἢ 

there he was. And wherever heentered into villages or 
(lit. he is.) 


πόλεις ἢ ° ἀγρούς, ἐν ταῖς ἀγοραῖς [ἐτίθουν! τοὺς ἀσθενοῦν- 

cities or elds, in the marketplaces they laid thosewho were sick, 

rac, καὶ παρεκάλουν αὐτὸν ἵνα κἂν τοῦ κρασπέδου τοῦ 
and ought him that ifonly the border 


ἱματίου.αὐτοῦ ἅψωνται: καὶ boo ἂν ξἥπτοντο! αὐτοῦ 


ofhis garment they might touch; and as many as touched him 
ἐσώζοντο. 
were healed. 

7 Kai συνάγονται πρὸς αὐτὸν οἱ Φαρισαῖοι καί τινες 


And are gathered together to him the Pharisees and some 
~ , 2 7 ᾽ ie ’ , ᾽ , 
τῶν γραμματέων, ἐλθόντες ἀπὸ Ἱεροσολύμων" 2 Kai ἰδόντες 
ofthe scribes, having come from Jerusalem ; and having seen 
τινὰς τῶν.μαθητῶν.αὐτοῦ κοιναῖς χερσίν, ἱτοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν! 
some of his disciples with defiled hands, that is 
ἀνίπτοις, ξἐσθίοντας" ldprovc, πἐμέμψαντο"" 8 οἱ. γὰρ Pagi- 
unwashed, eating bread, they found fault; forthe Phari- 
σαῖοι καὶ πάντες οἱ ᾿Τουδαῖοι, ἐὰν.μὴ "πυγμῇ" νίψωνται τὰς 
sees and all the Jews, unless with the fist they wash the 
χεῖρας, οὐκ.ἐσθίουσιν, κρατοῦντες THY παράδοσιν τῶν πρεσ- 
hands, eat not, holding the tradition of the el- 
Buréipwr 4 καὶ οἀπὸ" ἀγορᾶς, ἐὰν.μὴ βαπτίσωνται 
ders ; and {on coming] from the market, unless they washthemselves 
οὐκ. ἐσθίουσιν: καὶ ἄλλα πολλά ἐστιν ἃ παρέλαβον 
they eat ποῦ ; and 7other *things ‘many there are which they received 
κρατεῖν, βαπτισμοὺς ποτηρίων Kai ξεστῶν καὶ χαλκίων Prat 


to hold, washings of cups and vessels and brazenutensils and 
κλινῶν" 5 “ἔπειτα! ἐπερωτῶσιν αὐτὸν ot Φαρισαῖοι καὶ οἱ 
couches : then question him the Pharisees and the 
γραμματεῖς, "Διατί" ϑοὶ. μαθηταί.σου οὐ-περιπατοῦσιν" κατὰ 
scribes, Why sthy *disciples lwalk “not according to 


τὴν παράδοσιν τῶν πρεσβυτέρων, ἀλλὰ 'ἀνίπτοις" χερσὶν 
the tradition of the elders, but withunwashed hands 


ἐσθίουσιν τὸν ἄρτον ; 6 Ὁ.δὲ ᾿ἀποκριθεὶς" εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, ¥ Ort" 


eat bread? Buthe answering said tothem, 
καλῶς “προεφήτευσεν' Ἡσαΐας περὶ ὑμῶν τῶν ὑποκριτῶν, 
Well prophesied Esaias concerning you, hypocrites, 
ὡς ΠΡΈΠΩΝ Υ τρῦτος ὁ λαὸς"! τοῖς χείλεσίν pe τιμᾷ, 
it 


as been written, This 
¢ \ ΄ 2. ~ ere ? , ? 72 ~ 
ἡ.δὲ καρδία.αὐτῶν πόῤῥω ἀπέχει ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ. 7 


lips me honour, 


μάτην δὲ σέβον- 


people with the 


but their heart far isaway from me. ut in vain they wor- 
, , , ? , ? ’ 
ταί με, διδάσκοντες διδασκαλίας ἐντάλματα ἀνθρώπων. 
ship me, teaching [85] teachings injunctions of men. 


8 ᾿Αφέντες."γὰρ' τὴν ἐντολὴν τοῦ θεοῦ, κρατεῖτε τὴν Tapa- 

For, leaving the commandment of God, yehold_ the tra- 
δοσιν τῶν ἀνθρώπων, Ῥβαπτισμοὺς ἕεστῶν Kai ποτηρίων, Kai 
dition of men, washings of vessels and cups, and 


ς — ἐκεῖ LT[Tr]. ἃ ἐὰν τ. e + eis into [L]rtra. 
h + ὅτι that Trr. i τουτέστιν LA. Κ ἐσθίουσιν they eat TIr. 
πὶ — ἐμέμψαντο (read verses 3 and 4in parenthesis) GLTTraAW. 
Ῥ--- καὶ κλινῶντ. SxKatiandLttra. ‘éia7¢LTra, 
t κοιναῖς with defiled GLTTrAW. " -- ἀποκριθεὶς TTrA. 
LTTrA,. y+ ὅτι Τ. τ Ὁ λαὺς οὗτος L. 8.- yap for ατττὰ. 
ποιεῖτε T[TrA]. 


f ἐτίθεσαν TTrA. 


2 πυκνὰ Often T. 
5 οὐ περιπατοῦσιν οἱ μαθηταί σον TTrA, 

w — Ὅτι [1|Τ{ΤτᾺ]. 
b — βαπτισμοὺς .... 


109 


that were sick, where 
they heard he was, 
56 And whithersoever 
he entered, into yil- 
lages, or cities, or 
country, they laid the 
sick in the streets, and 
besought him that 
they might touch if it 
were but the border of 
his garment: and as 
many as touched him 
were made whole. 


VII, Then came to- 
gether unto him the 
Pharisees, and certain 
of the scribes, whieh 
came from Jerusalem. 
2 And when they saw 
some of his disciples 
eat bread with defiled, 
that is to say, with 
unwashen, hands, they 
found fault. 3 For the 
Pharisees, and all the 
Jews, except they wash 
their hands oft, eat 
not, holding the tra- 
dition of the elders. 
4 And when they come 
from the market, ex- 
cept they wash, they 
eat not. d many 
other things there be, 
which they have re- 
ceived to hold, as the 
washing of cups, and 
pots, brasen vessels, 
and of tables. 5 Then 
the Pharisees and 
scribes asked him, Why 
walk not thy disciples 
according to the tra- 
dition of the elders, 
but eat bread with un- 
washen hands? 6 He 
answered and said un- 
to them, Well hath 
Esaias prophesied of 

ou hypocrites, as it 
is written, This people 
honoureth me with 
their lips, but their 
heart is far from me. 
7 Howbeit in vain do 
they worship me, 
teaching for doctrines 
the commandments of 
men. 8 For laying 
aside the command- 
ment of God, ye hold 
the tradition of men, 
as the washing of pots 
and cups: and many 


& ἥψαντο LTTr. 
1+ τοὺς LTTrA. 
ο ἀπ᾽ LTrA. 


x ἐπροφήτευσεν 


110 


other such like things 
yedo. 9 And he said 
unto them, Full well 
ye reject the com- 
mandment of God, 
that ye may keep your 
own tradition. 10 For 
Moses said, Honour 
thy father and thy 
mother; and, Whoso 
curseth father or mo- 
ther, let him die the 
death: 11 but yesay, 
If a man shall say to 
his father or mother, 
It is Corban, that is to 
say, a gift, by whatso- 
ever thou mightest be 
profited by me; he 
shall be free. 12 And 
ye suffer him no more 
to do ought for his fa- 
ther or his mother; 
13 making the word of 
God of none effect 
through your tradi- 
tion, which ye have 
delivered: and many 
such like things do ye. 
14 And when he had 
called all the people 
unto him, he said unto 
them, Hearken unto 
me every one of 
you, aud understand : 
15 there is nothing 
from without a man, 
that entering into him 
can defile him: but 
the things which come 
out of him, those are 
they that defile the 
man. 161f any man 
have ears to hear, let 
him hear. 17 And when 
he was entered into 
the house from the 
people, his disciples 
asked him concernin; 

the parable. 18 An 

he saith unto them, 
Are ye so without un- 
derstanding also? Do 
ye not perceive, that 
whatsoever thing from 
without entereth into 
the man, ἐξ cannot 
defile him; 19 because 
it entereth not into 
his heart, but into the 
belly, and goeth out 


into the draught, 
purging all meats? 
20 d he said, That 


which cometh out of 
the man, that defileth 
the man. 2] For from 
within, out of the 
heart of men, proceed 
evil thoughts, adul- 
teries, fornications, 
murders, 22 thefts, 
covetousness, wicked- 


© Mwvons LITraW. 
LTTrA. 


2 + τὸν the (house) 


ΒΕ ἀκούσατέ LTTrA. 
ἐκπορευόμενα from the man go Ουύττατα. 


ΜΑΡΚΟΣ. ΜΙ. 


ἄλλα παρόμοια τοιαῦτα πολλὰ ποιεῖτε.! 9 Καὶ ἔλεγεν 
*other *like (®things] *such many ye do. And he said 
αὐτοῖς, Καλῶς ἀθετεῖτε τὴν ἐντολὴν τοῦ θεοῦ, ἵνα τὴν 
to them, Well do ye set aside the commandment of God, that 
παράδοσιν. ὑμῶν τηρήσητε. 10 “Μωσῆς".γὰρ εἶπεν, Τίμα 
your tradition ye may observe. For Moses said, Honour 
τὸν. πατέρα.σου Kai τὴν. μητέρα.σου" καί, Ὁ κακολογῶν πατέρα 
thy father and thy mother ; and, Hewhospeaksevilof father 

nA , ig fe € ~ Ὧν , ? \ m” 

ἢ μητέρα θανάτῳ τελευτάτω. 11 Ὑμεῖς ξ λέγετε, ᾿Εὰν εἴπῃ 
or mother by death let him die. ut ye say, If say 
ἄνθρωπος τῷ πατρὶ ἢ τῇ μητρί, Κορβᾶν, ὃ ἐστιν, δῶρον, 

ta *man to father or mother, [It is] a corban, (that is, a gift,) 
ὃ. ἐὰν ἐξ ἐμοῦ ὠφεληθῇς" 12 ἀκαὶ" οὐκέτι ἀφίετε 
whatever from me thou mightest be profited by :— and no longer ye suffer 
αὐτὸν οὐδὲν ποιῆσαι τῷ-.πατρὶ. “αὐτοῦ! ἢ τῇ. μητρὶ “αὐτοῦ," 
him anything to do for his father or his mother, 
(lit. nothing) 
> ~ κ , ~ ~ ~ , « ~ 
18 ἀκυροῦντες τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ τῇ. παραδόσει. ὑμῶν 


making void the word of God by your tradition which 
TAapeOWKATE’ καὶ παρόμοια τοιαῦτα πολλὰ ποιεῖτε. 
ye have delivered; and “like (*things}] “such ‘many ye do. 


14 Kai προσκαλεσάμενος ἵἥπάντα! τὸν ὄχλον, ἔλεγεν αὐτοῖς, 
And having called to [him] all the crowd, hesaid to them, 
8’ Axoveré! μου πάντες, καὶ "συνίετε." 15 οὐδέν ἐστιν ἔξω- 
Hear ye me, all, and understand: Nothing there is from with- 
θεν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου εἰσπορευόμενον εἰς αὐτόν, ὃ δύναται 
out the man entering into him, which is able 
Ἰαὐτὸν κοινῶσαι"" ἀλλὰ τὰ Κἐκπορευόμενα ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ," 
him to defile ; but the things which go out from him, 
Ἰἐκεῖνά" ἐστιν τὰ κοινοῦντατὸν ἄνθρωπον. 16™E τις 
those are thethingswhich defile the man. If anyone 
ἔχει ὦτα ἀκούειν, ἀκουέτω." 17 Kai ὅτε εἰσῆλθεν εἰς " οἶκον 
have ears  tohear, let him hear, And when hewent into a house 
ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄχλου, ἐπηρώτων αὐτὸν οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ “περὶ τῆς 
from the crowd, Sasked *him this disciples concerning the 


παραβολῆς." 18 καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, Οὕτως Kai ὑμεῖς ἀσύνε- 
parable. And hesays tothem, ‘Thus “also *ye *®without ®un- 
τοί ἐστε; οὐ-νοεῖτε OTL πᾶν τὸ ἔξωθεν εἰσπο- 


derstanding ‘are? Perceive ye not that everything which from without 


ρευόμενον εἰς τὸν ἄνθρωπον οὐ-δύναται αὐτὸν κοινῶσαι ; 
ters into the man is not able him to defile ? 


19 ὅτι οὐκ.εἰσπορεύεται αὐτοῦ εἰς τὴν καρδίαν, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς THY 
because it enters not tof Shim ‘into 7the “heart, but into the 
κοιλίαν" καὶ εἰς τὸν ἀφεδρῶνα ἐκπορεύεται, ῬΡκαθαρίζον" πάντα 
belly, and into the draught goes out, purifying all 
τὰ βρώματα. 20 [Ἐλεγεν.δέ, Ὅτι τὸ ἐκ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
the food. And he said, That which out of the man 
ἐκπορευόμενον, ἐκεῖνο κοινοῖ τὸν ἄνθρωπον. 21 ἔσωθεν. γὰρ 


en- 


goes forth, that defiles the man. For from within 
’ ~ A ~ ν᾽ , c A « ‘ ? 
ἐκ τῆς καρδίας τῶν ἀνθρώπων ot διαλογισμοὶ οἱ κακοὶ ἐκ- 
out of the heart of men “reasonings ‘evil go 
, q ~ ~ ΄ 99 dh ΠῚ i 
πορεύονται; μοιχειαι, TOOVELAL, φόνοι, awe KAOTAL, TWAEOV 
forth, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetous 


f πάλιν again 

k ἐκ TOU ἀνθρώπον 
m — verse 16 T['Tra ]. 
P καθαρίζων LTTrA. 


d — καὶ LTTr[ Aj. © — αὐτοῦ (read [his]) Lrtra. 
h σύνετε LYTrA. i κοινῶσαι αὐτόν T. 
1 — ἐκεῖνά T[Tr]. 


τ 9 τὴν παραβολὴν the parable Lrtra. 


4 πορνεῖαι, κλοπαί, φόνοι, μοιχεῖαι TTrA. 


Vil. MARK. 

εξίαι, πονηρίαι, δόλος, ἀσέλγεια, ὀφθαλμὸς πονηρός, 

desires, wickednesses, guile, licentiousness, an eye wicked, 

βλασφημία, ὑπερηφανία, ἀφροσύνη: 23 πάντα ταῦτα τὰ 
blasp’ ama Bane hebiees; folly: all these 


πονηρὰ ἔσωθεν ἐκπορεύεται, καὶ κοινοῖ TOY ἄνθρωπον. 

evils from within go forth, and defile the man, 

24 "Kai ἐκεῖθεν! dvacrdc ἠ͵ ἀπῆλθεν εἰς τὰ "μεθόρια" 

And thence havingrisenug he went away into the borders 

Τύρου ‘kai Σιδῶνος". καὶ εἰσελθὼν εἰς τὴν!" οἰκίαν, οὐδένα 
of Tyre and _ Sidon; and havingenteredinto the house, no one 
w70edev' γνῶναι, Kai οὐκ. “ἠδυνήθη" λαθεῖν. 25 Yaxovoaca 
he wished to know [10], διὰ  hecould not be hid. Bean Sheard 


yap! γυνὴ περὶ αὐτοῦ, ἧς εἶχεν τὸ.θυγάτριον. αὐτῆς πνεῦμα 
for 7a*woman about him, of whom‘had ‘ther “little “daughter 8 spirit 


ἀκάθαρτον, Τέἐλθοῦσα" προσέπεσεν πρὸς τοὺς.πόδας αὐτοῦ" 
unclean, ees come fell at his feet, 

26 5ἦν.δὲ ἡ γυνὴ" Ἑλληνίς, ὈΣυροφοίνισσα! τῷ γένει" καὶ 
com Swas'the*woman a Greek, Syrophenician by race), and 

ἠρώτα αὐτὸν ἵνα τὸ δαιμόνιον “ἐκβάλλῃ! ἐκ τῆς θυγατρὸς 

asked him that the demon heshould cast forth out of ?daughter 


αὐτῆς. 27 40.08 Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν" αὐτῇ, Αφες πρῶτον χορτασ- 
ther, But Jesus said toher, Suffer first to be satis- 


θῆναι τὰ Téxva’ οὐ.γὰρ “καλόν ἐστιν" λαβεῖν τὸν ἄρτον τῶν 


fied the children; fornot good is it totake the bread of the 
τέκνων, καὶ [βαλεῖν τοὶς κυναρίοις." 28 ‘H.dé ἀπεκρίθη καὶ 
children, and cast Cit] to the dogs. But she answered and 


λέγει αὐτῷ, Nai, κύριε: KxaiSyap" τὰ κυνάρια ὑποκάτω τῆς 
says tohim, Yea, Lord; foreven the little dogs under the 


’ h2 , 
τραπέζης "ἐσθίει" ἀπὸ τῶν ψιχίων τῶν παιδίων. 29 Kai εἶπεν 
table eat of the crumbs ofthe children. And he said 


αὐτῇ, Διὰ τοῦτον τὸν λόγον ὕπαγε ἐξελήλυθεν ἱτὸ δαι- 

ἴο ety Because of this word go; has gone forth the de- 
Ι" > ~ 2 ‘ 

μόνιον ἐκ τῆς.θυγατρός.σου." 80 Καὶ ἀπελθοῦσα εἰς τὸν 


mon out of thy daughter. 


οἶκον. αὐτῆς, εὗρεν ἔτὸ δαιμόνιον ἐξεληλυθός, καὶ τὴν Ovya- 


And having gone away to 


ΠΕΣ ἬΟΠΕΟΣ shefound the demon hadgoneforth, and the daugh- 
τέρα βεβλημένην ἐπὶ τῆς κλίνης." 
on the bed. 
31 Kai aly ἐξελθὼν ἐκ τῶν ὁρίων Τύρου ἱκαὶ Σιδῶνος, 
And again Pavans, departed from the borders of Tyre and Sidore 
ἦλθεν" ππρὸς" τὴν θάλασσαν τῆς Γαλιλαίας, ava μέσον 


he came to the sea of Galilee, through [the] midst 
τῶν ὁρίων Δεκαπόλεως. 82 καὶ φέρουσιν αὐτῷ κωφὸν " 


ofthe borders of eee And they bring tohim a deaf man 
CuoyiAdAoy," καὶ παρακαλοῦσιν αὐτὸν ἵνα ἐπιθῇ 
who spoke with difficulty, and they beseech him that he rng lay 


αὐτῷ 


τὴν χεῖρε 33 καὶ ἀπολαβόμενος αὐτὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ 
on him [his} hand. 


And having taken away him from the 


111 


ness, deceit, lascivi- 
ousness, an evil eye, 
blasphemy, pride, fool- 
ishness: 23 all these 
evil things come from 
within, and defile the 
man. 


24 And from thence 
he arose, and went 
into the borders of 
Tyre and Sidon, and 
entered into an house, 
and would have no 
man know it: but 
he could not be hid 
25 For a certain wo- 
man, whose young 
daughter had an un- 
clean spirit, heard of 
him, and came and fell 
at his feet: 26 the wo- 
man was a Greek, a 
Syrophenician by na- 
tion ; and she besought 
him that he would 
east forth the devil 
out of her daughter. 
27 But Jesus said unto 
her, Let the children 
first be filled: for it 
is not meet to take 
the children’s bread, 
and to cast it unto the 
dogs. 28 And she an- 
swered and said unto 
him, Yes, Lord: yet 
the dogs under the 
table eat of the child- 
ren’scrumbs, 29 And 
he said unto her, For 
this saying go thy 
way ; the devil is gone 
out of thy daughter, 
30 And when she wag 
come to her house, she 
found the devil gone 
out, and her daughter 
laid upon the bed. 


31 And again, depart- 
ing from the coasts of 
Tyre and Sidon, he 
came unto the sea οἵ 
Galilee, through the 
midst of the coasts of 
Decapolis. 32 And they 
bring unto him one 
that was deaf, and had 
an impediment in his 
speech ; and they be 
seech him to put his 
handupon him, 33 And 
he took him aside from 
the multitude, and 


τ Ἐκεῖθεν δὲ TA. t — καὶ Σιδῶνος TA. 


W ἠθέλησεν T. x ἠδυνάσθη T. 
ΤΊΤΑ. 2 εἰσελθοῦσα having comein T. 
οινίκισσα G; Συροφοινίκισσα LTW ,; Spa Φοινίκισσα Tra. 
ἔλεγεν and he said urtra. ἐστιν ᾿καλὸν LTTrA. 
for [L]tTr. Β ἐσθίουσιν LITraw. 


5 ὅρια LTTr. 


Σιδῶνος he came through Sidon urtra. ™ eis unto GLTTrA. 


5 μογγιλάλον Tr. 


1 ἐκ τῆς θυγατρός σου τὸ δαιμόνιον TA. 
(the child) βεβλημένον ἐπὶ τὴν κλίνην καὶ τὸ δαιμόνιον ἐξεληλυθός LTTrA. 


¥ — τὴν (read a house) LTTraW. 
Υ ἀλλ᾽ εὐθὺς ἀκούσασα but immediately having heard 
5 ἡ δὲ γυνὴ ἣν LTA; ἡ γυνὴ δὲ ἦν Tr. 

8 ἐκβάλῃ GLTTrAW. 
f τοῖς κυναρίοις βαλεῖν Tira. & — γὰρ 


b Supa 
4 κα. 


Κ 70 παιδέοι 
1 ἦλθεν διὸ 
n + καὶ and LTTr. 


112 


put his fingers into his 
ears, and he spit, and 
touched his tongue; 
34 and looking up to 
heaven, he sighed, 
and saith unto him, 
Ephphatha, that is, 
Be opened. 35 And 
straightway his ears 
were opened, and the 
string of his tongue 
was loosed, and he 
spake plain. 36 And he 
charged them _ that 
they should tell no 
man: but the more he 
charged them, 80 much 
the more a great deal 
they published it; 
37 and were beyond 
measure astonished, 
saying, He hath done 

things well: he 
maketh both the deaf 
to hear, and the dumb 
to speak. 


VIII. In those days 
the multitude being 
very great, and having 
nothing to eat, Jesus 
called his disciples 
unto him, and saith 
unto them, 2 I have 
compassion on the 
multitude, because 
they have now been 
with me three days, 
and have nothing to 
eat: 3 and if I send 
them away fasting to 
their own houses, they 
will faint by the way: 
for divers of them 
came from far, 4 And 
his disciples answered 
him, From whence can 
8. man satisfy these 
men with bread here 
in the _ wilderness ? 
5 And he asked them, 
How many loaves have 

e? And they said, 

ven, 6 And he com- 
manded the people to 
sit down on the 

ound: and he took 
he seven loaves, and 
ave thanks, and 
rake, and gave to his 
disciples to set before 
them; and they did 
set them before the 
people. 7 And they 
ad a few small fishes: 
and he blessed, and 
commanded to set 


MA PIK. O¢. VII, VIII. 
ὄχλου κατ᾽ ἰδίαν. ἔβαλεν τοὺς. δακτύλους.Ραὐτοῦ" εἰς τὰ ὦτα 
crowd apart, he put his fingers to 7earg 


αὐτοῦ, καὶ πτύσας ἥψατο τῆς γλώσσης αὐτοῦ, 34 καὶ ava- 
this, and having spit he touched his tongue, and having 
βλέψας εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν ἐστέναξεν, καὶ λέγει αὐτῷ, ᾿Εφφαθά, 
looked up to the heaven he groaned, and says tohim, LEphphatha, 
ὅ ἐστιν, Διανοίχθητι. 85 Kai “εὐθέως" "διηνοίχθησαν" αὐτοῦ 
that is, Be opened. And immediately were opened his 
αἱ ἀκοαί, καὶ " ἐλύθη ὁ δεσμὸς τῆς. γλώσσης.αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐλάλει 
ears, and was loosed the band of his tongue, and he spoke 
ὀρθῶς. 86 καὶ διεστείλατο αὐτοῖς wa μηδενὶ ᾿εἴπωσιν"" 
rightly. And he charged them that noone they should tell, 
a δὲ Vv ᾽ A il ? ~ ὃ ἐλλ w ἀλλ , 
OOOV.0E αὐτὸς AUTOLC OLEOTE €T0, μαλλον περισσότερον 
But as τη πο 85 he them charged, exceeding more abundantly 
ἐκήρυσσον. 37 καὶ ὑπερπερισσῶς ἐξεπλήσσοντο, λέγοντες, 
they proclaimed [it]: and above measure they wereastonished, saying, 
Καλῶς πάντα πεποίηκεν" καὶ τοὺς κωφοὺς ποιεῖ ἀκούειν, 


®Well ‘all ‘things *he *has*done: both the deaf he makes to hear, 
καὶ Στοὺς" ἀλάλους λαλεῖν. 
and the dumb tospeak, 
my ? ? ΄ » « , y 5A Π μὲ mn » 
Ev ἐκείναις.ταῖς μέραις παμπολλου ὄχλου ὄντος, 
In those days very great [the] crowd being, 
καὶ μὴ ἐχόντων τί φάγωσιν, προσκαλεσάμενος τὸ Ἴη- 
and ποῦ having what they mayeat, “having “called *to [*him] Jo 


σοῦς" τοὺς. μαθητὰς."αὐτοῦ" λέγει αὐτοῖς,  Σπλαγχνίζομαι 
sus his disciples he says to them, Iam moved with compassion 
ἐπὶ τὸν ὄχλον: ὅτι ἤδη Ῥὴμέρας" τρεῖς προσμένουσίν “μοι," 
on the crowd, becausealready “days ‘three theycontinue with me 
καὶ οὐκ. ἔχουσιν τί φάγωσιν᾽ ὃ καὶ ἐὰν ἀπολύσω αὐτοὺς 
and have not what they may eat ; and if Ishallsendaway them 
ἀ ήστεις" εἰς οἴκον.αὐτῶν, ἐκλυθήσονται ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ" “τινὲς. γὰρ" 
fasting to their home, they willfaint in the way; for some 
> ~ f , Pass '" ‘ ? iO ? ~ ε 
αὐτῶν ἱ μακρόθεν δἥκασιν." 4 Καὶ ἀπεκρίθησαν αὐτῷ οἱ μαθη- 
ofthem fromafar 8:16 come, And answered *him *disci- 
rai αὐτοῦ, "Πόθεν τούτους δυνήσεται τις ὧδε χορτάσαι 
ples ‘his, Whence ‘these ‘shall*be*able 7anyone *here to satisfy 
ἄρτων ἐπ’ ἐρημίας ; 5 Kai ἐπηρώτα" αὐτούς, Πόσους ἔχετε 
with bread ina desert? Aud he asked them, Howmany *have*ye 
ἄρτους ; Οἱ.δὲ Κεῖπον," Ἕπτά. 6 Kai ἱπαρήγγειλεν" τῷ ὄχλῳ 
‘loaves? Andthey said, Seven. And he ordered the crowd 
ἀναπεσεῖν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς Kai λαβὼν τοὺς ἑπτὰ ἄρτους, 
to recline on the ground. And havingtaken the seven loaves, 
πιεὐχαριστήσας ἔκλασεν Kai ἐδίδου τοῖς. μαθηταῖς. αὐτοῦ, ἵνα 
having given thanks he broke and gave to his disciples, that 
ππαραθῶσιν" καὶ παρέθηκαν τῷ ὄχλῳ. 7 καὶ 
they might set before[them]. And they set [it] before the crowd. And 
οεῖχον" ἰχθύδια ὀλίγα" καὶ Ῥὰ εὐλογήσας “"εἶῖπεν παρα- 
they had small fishes afew; and having blessed he desired *to*be *set 


P — αὐτοῦ (read [his] fingers) T. 
*+ εὐθὺς immediately 1. 
τ + αὐτοὶ they Lrtra. 


gous GLTTrAW. 
LUTr]A. 


Pa - ταῦτα these L. 


® — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) TTr. 
4 νήστις T. 
& ἥκουσι EW ; εἰσίν are A. 
γέλλει he orders LTtTra. 


᾿ 


ᾳ — εἩὐθέως [L]TTrA. τ ἠνοίγησαν LTTrA. 

t λέγωσιν TTrA. v¥ — αὐτὸς (read he chee LTTrAW. 
xX — τοὺς TTrA. Υ πάλιν πολλοῦ again great LrTrA. *%*—o'In- 
Ὁ ἡμέραι GLTTrAW. © — μοι 
f + ἀπὸ from (afar) TTrA. 

h + ὅτι TTrA. i ρώτα TTrA. k εἶπαν TIrA. | παραγ- 
m + [καὶ] and L. 1 παρατιθῶσιν TTrA. ° εἶχαν LTTrA. 
98 elev παρατεθῆναι καὶ αὐτὰ L; αὐτὰ εἶπεν και ταῦτα παρατιθέναι Tr; 


© καίτινες ANd ΒΟΙῺΘ LTTrA. 


αὐτὰ παρέθηκεν he set these before [them] Ta. 


VIII. MARK. 
θεῖναι καὶ αὐτά." 8 τἔφαγον.δὲ! καὶ ἐχορτάσθησαν. καὶ 
*before [(7them] also *these. And they ate and were satisfied. And 


ἦραν περισσεύματα κλασμάτων ἑπτὰ "σπυρίδας." 9 ἦσαν δὲ 
they took up%over *and above ‘of*fragments seven _ baskets. And *were 


tot φαγόντες" we τετρακισχίλιοι Kai ἀπέλυσεν αὐτούς. 
‘those2who“had‘eaten about fourthousand; and hesent*away ‘them. 

10 Kai "εὐθέως" ἐμβὰς" εἰς τὸ πλοῖον μετὰ τῶν μαθητῶν 

Andimmediately having enteredintothe ship with *disciples 


αὐτοῦ, ἦλθεν εἰς τὰ μέρη Δαλμανουθά. 11 Kai ἐξῆλθον οἱ 
this, hecame into the parts of Dalmanutha. And *went ‘out ‘the 


Φαρισαῖοι καὶ ἤρξαντο συζητεῖν" αὐτῷ, ζητοῦντες παρ᾽ 


Pharisees and began to dispute with him, seeking from 
αὐτοῦ σημεῖον ἀπὸ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ. πειράζοντες αὐτόν. 12 Kai 
him asign from the heaven, tempting him, And 
ἀναστενάξας τῷ.πνεύματι.αὐτοῦ λέγει, Ti ἡ.γενεὰ. αὕτη 
having groaned in his spirit he says, Why “this *generation 
Yonpsiov ἐπιζητεῖ ;' ἀμὴν λέγω τὑμῖν,, εἰ δοθήσεται τῇ 
“a sign ‘seeks ὃ erily Isay toyou, If there shall be given 
~ , ~ 4 ? ‘ ? , a2 A 

γενεᾷ. ταύτῃ σημεῖον. 13 Kai ἀφεὶς αὐτούς, "ἐμβὰς 
tothis generation 8, ΒΡ, And having left them, having entered 


tr " b ᾽ A λ ~ Il ? AAG ? A , 
παλιν “ELC τὸ πλοιον ATNAVEVY εἰς TO περᾶν. 
again into the ship he went away to the other side. 
14 Kai ἐπελάθοντο λαβεῖν ἄρτους, καὶ εἰμὴ Eva ἄρτον 
And they forgot to take oaves, and except one loaf 
? ? c ~ " ~ ΄ a 9 , 
οὐκ. εἶχον μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῶν ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ. 15 καὶ διεστέλλετο 
they had ποὺ [any] with them in the © ship. And  hecharged 
? ~ λέ e ~ c , ? ‘ ~ ιν ~ , 
αὐτοῖς, λέγων, Ὁρᾶτε, “ βλέπετε ἀπὸ τῆς ζύμης τῶν Φαρισαίων 
them, saying, See, take heed of the leaven ofthe Pharisees 
καὶ τῆς ζύμης Ἡρώδου. 16 Kai διελογίζοντο πρὸς ἀλλήλους, 


andofthe leaven of Herod. And they reasoned with one another, 


ἀλέγοντες,; Ὅτι ἄρτους οὐκ “ἔχομεν." 17 Kai γνοὺς 
saying, Because loaves “not ‘we “have. And knowing [10] 
(ὁ Ἰησοῦς" λέγει αὐτοῖς, Ti διαλογίζεσθε ὅτι ἄρτους οὐκ 
Jesus says tothem, Why reason ye because loaves not 
ἔχετε; οὔπω.νοεϊτε οὐδὲ συνίετε; Sere! πεπωρωμένην 
ἢ μενη 


γα ατϑῦ Do ye not yet perceive nor understand? Yet hardened 

a” 4 S7 ec ~ > 4 » ? , 
ἔχετε τὴν.καρδίαν. ὑμῶν ; 18 ὀφθαλμοὺς ἔχοντες οὐ.βλέπετε ; 
have ye your heart? Eyes having, do ye not see? 
καὶ ὦτα ἔχοντες οὐκιἀκούετε; Kai οὐ-μνημονεύετε; 19 Ore 
and ears having, doyenothear? and 0 γΥθ8 not remember? 
τοὺς πέντε ἄρτους ἔκλασα εἰς τοὺς πεντακισχιλίους, ἢ πόσους 


the five loaves Ibroke to the five thousand, how many 
κοφίνους 'πλήρεις κλασμάτων" ἤρατε; Λέγουσιν αὐτῷ, 
hand-baskets offragments took ye up? Theysay’ tohim, 


Δώδεκα. 20 “Ore*d?" τοὺς éxra! εἰς τοὺς τετρακισχιλίους, 
Twelve. And when the seven to _ the four thousand, 
, , , ’,΄ » 6 m « A 
πόσων σπυρίδων πληρώματα κλασμάτων ἤρατε; MOLE 
of ΒΟΥ many baskets [the] fillings of fragments took yeup? Andthey 
elroy," Ἕπτά. 21 Kai ἔλεγεν αὐτοῖς, "Πῶς" ot" συνίετε; 
said, Seven. And hesaid tothem, How “ποῦ ‘do *ye understand? 


When J' 


113 


them also before them. 
8 So Ee did eat, and 
were ed: and they 
took up of the broken 
meat that was left 
seven baskets. 9 And 
they that had eaten 
were about four thou- 
sand: and he sent 
them away. 

10 And straightway 
he entered into a ship 
with his disciples, and 
came into the parts of 
Dalmanutha, 11 And 
the Pharisees came 
forth, and began to 
question with him, 
seeking of him a sign 
from heaven, tempting 
him, 12 And he sighed 
deeply in his spirit, 
and saith, Why doth 
this generation seek 
after asign? verily 1 
say unto you, There 
shall no sign be given 
unto this generation. 
13 And he left them, 
and entering into the 
ship again departed to 
the other side, 

14 Now the disciples 
had forgotten to take 
bread, neither had 
they in the ship with 
them more than one 
loaf, 15 And he charged 
them, saying, Take 
heed, beware of the 
leaven of the Phari- 
sees, and @f the leayen 
of Herod. 16 And they 
reasoned among them- 
selves, saying, 7ὲ w 
because we have no 
bread. 17 And when 
Jesus knew it, he saith 
untothem, Why reason 
ye, because ye have no 
bread? perceive ye not 
yet, neither under- 
stand? have ye your 
heart yet hardened? 
18 Having eyes, see ye 
not? and haying ears, 
hear ye not? and do 

@ not remember? 
19 When I brake the 
five loaves among five 
thousand, how many 
baskets full of frag- 
ments took ye up? 
They say unto him, 
Twelve, 20 And when 
the seven among four 
thousand, how many 
baskets full of frag- 
ments took ye up? 
And they said, Seven, 
21 And he said unto 
them, How is it that 
ye donot understand? 


τ καὶ ἔφαγον LTTr. 5 σφυρίδας L. 
τ εὐθὺς LTTrA. W + [αὐτὸς] hex. 
3 πάλιν ἐμβὰς LTTrA. 
embarked) Ta. ¢ + [καὶ] and x. 
£ — ὁ Ἰησοῦς (read he says) T[Tr]a. 
Lrtraw. Κ [δὲ] Tra; καὶ Τ. 
αὐτῷ and they say to him a. 


* συνζητεῖν LTTrA. 


ad — λέγοντες LTTrA. 
Ε — ἔτι LTTrA. 
1 [ἄρτους] loaves x. 
n — ἸΙῶς ΤΑ. 


h4+ καὶ τ. 


τ — οἱ φαγόντες (read and they were) T[Trja. 
Υ ζητεῖ σημεῖον LTTrA. 
Ὁ — τὸ LTrw; [εἰς πλοῖον] Tr; --- εἰς τὸ πλοῖον (read ἐμβὰς having 
© ἔχουσιν they have LTra. 
1 κλασμάτων πλήρεις 
™ καὶ λέγουσιν T; καὶ λέγουσιν 
ο οὔπω not yet LTTra. 


: [ὑμῖν] A. 


Ι 


114 


22 And he cometh to 
Bethsaida; and they 
bring a blind manunto 
him, and besought him 
totouch him. 23 And 
he took the blind man 
by the hand, and led 
him out of the town; 
and when he had spit 
on his eyes, and put 
his hands upon him, 
he asked him if he saw 
ought. 24 And he look- 
ed up, and said, I see 
men as trees, walking. 
25 After that he put 
his hands again upon 
his eyes, and made 
him look up: and he 
was restored, and 
saw every man clearly. 
26 And he sent him 
away to his house, 
saying, Neither go 
into the town, nor tell 
i to any in the town. 


27 And Jesus went 
out, and his disciples, 
into the towns of 
Ceresarea Philippi : and 
by the way he asked 
his disciples, saying 
unto them, Whom do 
men say that I am? 
28 And they answered, 
John the Baptist: but 
some say, Elias; and 
others, One of the pro- 
phets. 29 And he saith 
unto them, But whom 
say ye that I am? 
And Peter answereth 
and saith unto him, 
Thou art the Christ. 
30 And he charged 
them that they should 
tell no man of him. 
31 And he began to 
teach them, that the 
Son of man must suffer 
many things, and be 
rejected of the elders, 
and ofthe chief priests, 
and scribes, and be 
killed, and after three 
days riseagain. 32 And 
he spake that ethos 
openly. And Peter 
took him, and began 


P ἔρχονται they come LTTrA. 
8 ὡς δένδρα G. 
W ἀπεκατεστάθη L 3 ἀπεκατέστη ΤΊτΑ. 


beholdest a. 


all things LYTraw. 
© εἶπαν spake TA. 
i Ore εἷς LTTrA. 
* εἴπωσιν L. 


k ἐπηρώτα αὐτούς asked them LItra. 


ο ὑπὸ by LTTrAw. 


ΜΑΡΚΟΣ. VII. 


22 Kai Pépyerac' εἰς Βηθσαϊδάν" καὶ φέρουσιν αὐτῷ τυφλόν, 


And hecomes to  Bethsaida; and they bring tohim a blind 
καὶ παρακαλοῦσιν αὐτὸν ἵνα αὐτοῦ ἅψηται. 23 Kai 
{man], and beseech him that him he might touch. And 


ἐπιλαβόμενος τῆς χειρὸς τοῦ τυφλοῦ «ἐξήγαγεν" αὐτὸν 
taking hold of the hand ofthe blind [man] he led forth him 


ἔξω τῆς κώμης, Kai πτύσας εἰς τὰ. ὄμματα.αὐτοῦ, ἐπιθεὶς 


out ofthe village, and haying spit upon is eyes, having laid 
‘ ~ ? ~ 3, ’ ᾽ 4 ” r , ll ‘ 
τὰς χεῖρας αὐτῷ ἐπηρώτα αὐτὸν εἴ τι τβλέπει." 24 καὶ 
[his] hands uponhim heasked him if anything he beholds. And 


ἀναβλέψας ἔλεγεν, Βλέπω τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, "ὅτι ὡς δένδρα 
having looked up hesaid, Ibehold the men, for as trees 
ὁρῶ! περιπατοῦντας. 25 Εἶτα πάλιν ᾿ἐπέθηκεν' τὰς 
I see [them] walking. Then again he laid [his] 
χεῖρας ἐπὶ τοὺς. ὀφθαλμοὺς.αὐτοῦ, Kai “ἐποίησεν αὐτὸν ava- 
hands upon his eyes, and made him look 
βλέψαι." Kai “ἀποκατεστάθη," καὶ "ἐνέβλεψεν" ὑτηλαυγῶς" 
up. And he was restored, and looked 7on clearly 


zu Ι Amity bh? SC) 7. ὅς " ᾽ ~ 
ἅπαντας. 26 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν αὐτὸν εἰς "τὸν." οἴκον. αὐτοῦ, 
811 (men). And he sent him‘ to his house, 
λέγων, "Μηδὲ! εἰς τὴν κώμην εἰσέλθῃς, “μηδὲ εἴπῃς 
saying, Neither into the village mayest thouenter, nor mayest tell [10] 
τινὶ ἐν τῇ κώμῃ." 
to any one in the village. 
. 99N ©? ~ ‘ t 4 ? ~ ᾽ ᾿ , 
27 Kai ἐξῆλθεν ὁ Τησοῦς καὶ οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ εἰς τὰς κώ- 
Απᾶ *went?forth ‘Jesus and his disciples into the vil- 
pas Καισαρείας τῆς Φιλίππου" Kai ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ ἐπηρώτα 
ages of Cmsarea Philippi. And by the way he was questioning 
rovc.abnrac.avrov, λέγων “adbroic," Τίνα με λέγουσιν ot 
his disciples, saying tothem, Whom “me 'do *pronounce 
ἄνθρωποι εἶναι; 28 Οἱ. δὲ ἐἀπεκρίθησαν" !, ἐἸωάννην τὸν βαπ- 
2men to be? And they answered, John the Bap- 
τιστήν᾽ καὶ ἄλλοι Ἡλίαν." ἄλλοι.δὲ ‘eva! τῶν.προφητῶν. 
tist ; and others, Elias ; but others, one of the prophets. 
29 Kai αὐτὸς λέγει αὐτοῖς,! “Ypeic.dé τίνα pe λέγετε 
And he says to them, But ye, whom ‘me ‘do *ye *pronounce 
εἶναι; ᾿Αποκριθεὶς ™Oé" ὁ Πέτρος λέγει αὐτῷ, Σὺ.εἶ ὁ χριστός. 
to be? *Answering ‘and Peter says tohim, Thouart the Christ. 
30 Kai ἐπετίμησεν αὐτοῖς ἵνα μηδενὶ "λέγωσιν" περὶ 
And he strictly charged them that noone they should tell concerning 


αὐτοῦ. 81 Kai ἤρξατο διδάσκειν αὐτοὺς ore δεῖ τὸν 


him. And hebegan toteach them that it is necessary for the 
υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου πολλὰ παθεῖν, καὶ ἀποδοκιμασθῆναι 
Son of man many things tosuffer, and to be rejected 


οἀπὸ" τῶν πρεσβυτέρων καὶ P*dpytepéwy Kai Ῥεγραμματέων, Kat 
of the elders and chief priests and 68, and 


ἀποκτανθῆναι, Kai μετὰ τρεῖς ἡμέρας ἀναστῆναι" 32 καὶ 
to be killed, and after three days torise [again]. And 
a¢ ἐλ 4 , , ‘A , qa. ὕ 4 

παῤῥησίᾳ τὸν λόγον ἐλάλει. Καὶ Προσλα Omevoc αὐτὸν 


openly the word he spoke. “having *taken Sto [him] ‘him 


4 ἐξήνεγκεν he brought forth Trra. τ βλέπεις thou 
t ἔθηκεν ΤτΑ. Vv διέβλεψεν he saw distinctly Trra. 


x ἐνέβλεπεν LTTrA. Υ SnAavyas T. : ἅπαντα 
®—qyGLITrAW. ὃ μὴ Ποῦ Τ. ©—pyde.... κώμῃ Tt. 4% [αὐτοῖς] Tr. 
f + αὐτῷ λέγοντες to him saying LTTrA. & 4+ ὅτι TA. δ ᾿Ἡλείαν T. 


14+ καὶ and Lb. m — δὲ LTTrA. 


pa + τῶν of the GLTTraw. 98 ὁ Πέτρος αὐτὸν LITrA. 


VEIT, IX. MARK. 
ὁ Πέτρος! ieee ἐπιτιμᾷν αὐτῷ. 33 008 ἐπιστραφεὶς καὶ 


Peter began torebuke him. But he, turning and 
ἰδὼν τοὺς. μαθητὰς αὐτοῦ, ἐπετίμησεν ττῷ" Πέτρῳ, "λέγων," 
seeing his disciples, rebuked Peter, saying, 
Ὕπαγε ὀπίσω pov, σατανᾶ" ὅτι οὐ-φρονεῖς τὰ 

Get behind me, Satan, for thy thoughts are not of the things 
τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀλλὰ τὰ τῶν ἀνθρώπων. 


of God, but the things of men. 


34 Kai προσκαλεσάμενος τὸν ὄχλον σὺν τοῖς μαθηταῖς 
And haying called to [him] the crowd with ?disciples 


αὐτοῦ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, “Oortc! θέλει ὀπίσω μου "ἐλθεῖν." ἀπαρ- 
his hesaid tothem, Whosoever desires after me tocome, let 


νησάσθω ἑαυτόν, Kai ἀράτω καὶ 
him deny himself, and let him take up and 
ἀκολουθείτω μοι. 88 ὃς. γὰρ." ἂν" τὴν. Ψυχὴν.αὐτοῦ 
let him follow me. For whoever may desire his life 

~ ᾽ , ? , ~ τι NY NK x ? , ll ν ‘ y 4 ? ~ ii 
σῶσαι, ἀπολέσει αὐτήν O¢.0 ἂν “ἀπολέσῃ! τὴν ψυχὴν. αὐτοῦ 


τὸν. σταυρὸν αὐτοῦ, 


ν᾿ his cross, 
θέλῃ 


to save, shall lose it, but whoever may lose his life 
ἕνεκεν ἐμοῦ καὶ τοῦ Ges tae τρὗῦτος" σώσει αὐτήν. 
on account of τὸ and of the tidings, he shall save it. 


36 ri.yap "ὠφελήσει! Ῥἄνθρωπον “ἐὰν κερδήσῃ τὸν κόσμον 
. For what shall it profit ὃ. man if he gain the *world 


ὅλον καὶ “ζημιωθῇ! τὴν. ψυχὴν Bae 37 “ἢ τί δώσει 


whole and lose or what shall ἘΣ 


ἄνθρωπος" ἀντάλλαγμα ἐξ εσόν, αὐτοῦ ; 88 ὃς. γὰρ.' ἂν" 
1a “man [245] an exchange for his soul? For whoever 


ἐπαισχυνθῇ με καὶ τοὺς ἐμοὺς λόγους ἐν τῇ.γενεᾷ. ταύτῃ 
a, have been ashamed of me and my words ἴθ this generation 


οιχαλίδι Kai ἁμαρτωλῷ, Kai ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου exuic- 
is adulterous and sinful, also the Son of man will be 


χυνθήσεται αὐτόν, ὅταν ἔλθῃ ἐν τῇ δόξῃ τοῦ.πατρὸς αὐτοῦ 


ashamed of him when heshallcome in ie glory of his Father 
μετὰ τῶν ἀγγέλων τῶν ἁγίων. Q Kai ἔλεγεν αὐτοῖς, ᾿Αμὴν 
with the angels the HER And hesaid tothem, Verily 


λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι εἰσὶν τινὲς Stroy ὧδε" ἑστηκότων, οἵτινες 
Isay toyou, That thereare some of those here standing, who 
οὐ-μὴ γεύσωνται θανάτου Ewe.dy ἴδωσιν τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ 


in no wise shalltaste oofdeath until theysee the kingdom 
θεοῦ ἐληλυθυῖαν ἐν δυνάμει. 
οἔ Θοᾶ havingcome in power. 
2 Ee Ἀμεθ᾽" ἡμέρας ἕξ παραλαμβάνει ὁ Ἰησοῦς τὸν 
after “days ‘six “takes °with ([*him] *Jesus 


Πέτρον, καὶ ἱτὸν" ᾿Ιάκωβον καὶ "τὸν" ᾿Ιωάννην, καὶ ἀναφέρει 


Peter and James and John, and brings up 
αὐτοὺς εἰς ὄρος ὑψηλὸν κατ᾽ ἰδίαν μόνους" Kai μετεμορ-- 
them intoa *mountain ee apart alone. And - was nes 
pee ἔμπροσθεν αὐτῶν, 8 καὶ rdiparia.abrov ‘éyévero' 
before them ; and his garments became 
στίλβοντα, λευκὰ λίαν "ὡς χιών," oia γναφεὺς ἐπὶ τὴ 


shining, white exceedingly as snow, suchas a fuller on 


3 καὶ λέγει and says TTra. 

W ἐὰν TTrA. τ ἀπολέσει Shall lose TTra. 

* ὠφελεῖ does it profit Ta. 

4 ζημιωθῆναι to lose Ta. 

[ἐὰν ταττα. 8 ὧδε τῶν TIA. 
— ὡς χιών ΤΊΤΑ. 


τ — τῷ LTTrA. 
follow GTTrAW. 

— οὗτος GLTTraW. 
σαι ἴο gain TA. 
τί γὰρ [δώσει ἄνθρωπος A. 
χ- χὸν Θττα. ἐγένοντο LTrAW. 


t Et τις If any one Ltr. 
Υ ἑαυτοῦ ψυχὴν GIrw. 
Ὁ + τὸν the (man) Lrr[a]w. 
9 τί γὰρ Sot ἄνθρωπος (read for what, &e. ) TTr ; 
Β μετὰ LTIrA. 


115 


to rebuke him. 33 But 
when he had turned 
about and looked on 
his disciples, he re- 
buked Peter, saying, 
Get thee behind me, 
Satan: for thou sa- 
vourest not the things 
that be of God, but 
the things that be of 
men. 


34 And when he had 
called the people unto 
him with his disciples 
also, hesaid untothem, 
Whosoever will come 
after me, let him deny 
himself, and take up 
his cross, and follow 
me, 35 For whosoever 
will save his life shall 
lose it ; but whosoever 
shall lose his life for 
my sake and the gos- 
pel’s, the same shall 
save it. 36 For what 
shall it profit a man, 
if he shall gain the 
whole world, and lose 
his own soul? 37 Or 
what shall a man give 
in exchange for his 
soul? 38 Whosoever 
therefore shall be a- 
shamed of me and of 
my words in this a- 
dulterous and sinful 
generation; of him 
also shall the Son of 
man be ashamed, when 
he cometh in the glory 
of his Father with the 
holy angels. IX. And 
he said unto them, 
Verily I say unto you, 
That there be some of 
them that stand here, 
which shall not taste 
of death, till they have 
seen the kingdom of 
God come with power. 


2 And after six days 
Jesus taketh with him 
Peter, and James, and 
John, and  leadeth 
them up into an high 
mountain apart by 
themselves: and he 
was transfigured be- 
fore them. 3 And his 
raiment became shin- 
ing, exceeding white 
as snow ; so as no ful- 
e ler on earth can white 


¥ ἀκολουθεῖν to 
© κερδη- 


1— τὸν Ww. 


110 


them. 4 And there 
appeared unto them 
Elias with Moses: and 
they were talking with 
Jesus, 5 And Peter 
answered and said to 
Jesus, Master, it is 

good for us to be here: 
arta let us make three 
tabernacles; one for 
thee, and one for Mo- 
ses, and one for Elias, 
6 For he wist not what 
to say ; for they were 
sore afraid. 7 And 
there was a cloud that 
overshadowed them: 
and a voice came out 
of the clond, saying, 
This is my beloved 
Son: hear him. 8 And 
suddenly, when they 
had looked round a- 
bout, they saw no man 
any more, save Jesus 
only with themselves. 
9 And as they came 
down from the moun- 
tain, he charged them 
that they should tell 
no man what things 
they had seen, till the 
Son of man were risen 
from thedead, 10 And 
they kept that saying 
with themselves, ques- 
tioning one with an- 
other what the rising 
from the dead should 
mean. 11 And they 
asked him, saying, 
Why say the scribes 
that Elias must first 
come? 12 And he an- 
swered and told them, 
Elias verily cometh 
first, and restoreth all 
things ; and how itis 
written of the Son of 
man, that he must 
suffer many things, 
and be set at nought. 
13 But I say unto you, 
That Elias is indeed 
come, and they have 
done unto him what- 
soever they listed, as 
it is written of him. 


14 And when he 
came to Ais disciples, 
he saw a great multi- 
tude about them, and 
the scribes questionin 
with them. 15 An 
straightway all the 
people, when they be- 
held him, were greatly 
amazed, and running 


MAPKO%X&. IX. 


γῆς οὐ-δύναται" λευκᾶναι. 4 καὶ ὥφθη αὐτοῖς * HXtag! σὺν 
earth is ποῦ able to whiten. And ‘appeared *to*them ‘Elias *with 


PMwoei,' καὶ ἦσαν Iovd\Aadovytec! τῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ. 5 καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς 
3Moses, andtheywere talking with Jesus. And answering 


ὁ Tlérpog λέγει τῷ Ἰησοῦ, “PaBPi," καλόν ἐστιν ἡμᾶς ὧδε 

1Peter says to Jesus, Rabbi, good itis forus here 
εἶναι καὶ ποιήσωμεν “σκηνὰς τρεῖς.! σοὶ μίαν, καὶ PMw- 
tobe; and letusmake “7tabernacles ‘three, forthee one, and for Mo- 
σεῖ! μίαν, καὶ ᾿Ηλίᾳ! ΜΕΝ. 6 οὐ. -γὰρῳ gos τί λαλήσῃ" 
For ew not what he should gay, 


568 one, and for Elias 
τῇσαν.γὰρ ἔκφοβοι." 7 καὶ ἐγένετο νεφέλη ἐπισκιάζουσα 
for they were greatly afraid. And therecame acloud overshadowing 


abroic’ καὶ τἦλθεν! φωνὴ ἐκ τῆς νεφέλης, λέγουσα," Οὗτός 
them; and there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This 
ἐστιν ὁ.υἱός. μου ὁ ἀγαπητός" ταὐτοῦ ἀκούετε." 8 Kai ἐξάπινα 
is my Son the beloved: Shim ‘hear 7ye. And suddenly 
περιβλεψάμενοι οὐκέτι.οὐδένα εἶδον, "ἀλλὰ" τὸν Ἰησοῦν 
having looked around no longer any one they saw, but Jesus 


μόνον μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῶν. 9 ῬΚαταβαινόντων. δὲ" αὐτῶν “ἀπὸ" τοῦ 
alone with themselves. And as *were *descending ‘they from the 


ὄρους διεστείλατο αὐτοῖς iva puroent ἀδιηγήσωνται ἃ εἶς 
mountain he charged them that tonoone they should relate what they 
doy," εἰ μὴ ὅταν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐκ νεκρῶν 
had geen except when the Son of man from among [the] dead 

ἀναστῇ. 10 καὶ τὸν λόγον ἐκράτησαν πρὸς ἑαυτούς, ἐσυζη- 


be risen, And that saying they kept among themselves, ques- 
τοῦντες" τί ἐστιν τὸ ἐκ γεκρῶν ἀναστῆναι. 
tioning what is the 7from “among [86] ‘dead trising. 


11 Kai ἐπηρώτων αὐτόν, λέγοντες, [Ὅτι" λέγουσιν ξ ot γραμ- 


And _ they asked him, saying, That 3say ‘the 7scribes 
ατεῖς ὅτι "Ἡλίαν! δεῖ ἐλθεῖν πρῶτον ; 12 Ὁ δὲ ἱάποκριθείς 
? 

that Elias must come first ? Andhe answering 

εἶπεν" αὐτοῖς, ΕἩλίας" ἱμὲν! ἐλθὼν πρῶτον, ᾿π᾿ἀποκαθιστᾷ" 
said tothem, Elias indeed having come first, restores 

πάντα" καὶ πῶς γέγραπται ἐπὶ τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ avOpwrou™ 
allthings; and how ithas been written of the Son of man 

ἵνα πολλὰ πάθῃ καὶ EovderwOg.! 18 ἀλλὰ λέγω 

that many things he should suffer and be set at nought: but 188 


ὑμῖν, Ore καὶ ΕἩλίας" ἐλήλυθεν, καὶ ἐποίησαν αὐτῷ bea 
᾽ ς ᾽ 


to you, that also Elias hascome, and _ they did tohim whatever 
pa ᾽ Ud iT] ‘ , ? , ? ἐς 

ἠθέλησαν," καθὼς γέγραπται ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν. 

they desired, as it has been written of him. 


14 Kai é\Owv" πρὸς τοὺς μαθητὰς "elder! ὄχλον πολὺν 


And having come to the disciples hesaw a*crowd ‘great 
περὶ αὐτούς, καὶ γραμματεῖς δδσυζητοῦντας" “avroic.' 1 καὶ 
around them, and scribes disenssing with them. And 
γαρεῤθέως"! πᾶς ὁ ὄχλος “"ἰδὼν! αὐτὸν ᾿οἐξεθαμβήθη," Kai 


immediately all the crowd seeing him were greatly amazed, and 


n + οὕτως thus TTrA. 


τ Ῥαββεί TA. 


GTTraW. 


4 ἃ εἶδον διηγήσωνται LITrA. 


5 τρεῖς σκηνάς LTTrA. 
τ ἔκφοβοι γὰρ ἐγένοντο for they became greatly afraid LTTrA. 


οἩλείας τ P Mwioet LTW; Μωυσῇ Tra. 9 συνλαλοῦντες T. 
τ Ἡλείᾳ T. ’ ἀποκριθῇ, he should answer TTrA. 


* ἐγένετο τ J— λέγουσα 


ἀκούετε αὐτοῦ LTTTA. 5 εἰμὴ τ. 5 καὶ καταβαινόντων LTTr. © ἐκ L. 
e συνζητοῦντες LTTrA. f es τι wherefore Lw. Ε - οἱ 
Φαρισαῖοι καὶ the Pharisees and [u}r. b “HAgiav T. ἢ said τινα. κ λείας T. 


— μὲν T[Tr]. 


they saw Trr. 
τὸ ἰδόντες LTTrA. 


™ ἀποκαθιστάνει LTTrA. 

08 ἐξουδενηθῇ (; A) LTrA; ἐξουθενωθῇ 1. 

88 συνζητοῦντας LTTrA. 
x8 ἐξεθαμβήθησαν LTTrA. 


na; (read and héw has it been written, &c.) LT. 
pa ἤθελον ΤΊτΑ. 45 ἐλθόντες TTr. ra εἶδον 
ta πρὸς αὐτούς With them Tr. “8 εὐθὺς TTra. 


1. MAR K. 

προστρέχοντες ἠσπάζοντο αὐτόν. 16 καὶ ἐπηρώτησεν ἵτοὺς 
running to [him] saluted him. And heasked the 

γραμματεῖς," Τί τσυζητεῖτε" πρὸς "αὐτούς: 17 Kai %azo- 
scribes, What discuss ye with them ? And an- 


κριθεὶς" εἷς ἐκ τοῦ ὄχλου “εἶπεν," Διδάσκαλε, ἤνεγκα τὸν υἱόν 
swering oneoutof the crowd said, Teacher, I brought ?son 
, ” ~ » x 1 ,u dX. 4 ΣΝ 
μου πρὸς σε, ἔχοντα πνεῦμα ἄλαλον. 18 καὶ ὕπου.“ἄν" αὐτὸν 
my to thee, having a’spirit ‘*dumb; and wheresoever him 
καταλάβῃ ῥήσσει “αὐτόν"" Kai a Ῥίξει; καὶ τρίζει τοὺς 
it seizes it dashes*down ‘thim; and hefoams, and gnashes 
ὀδόντας.αὐτοῦ," καὶ Enpaiverav καὶ Selrov' τοῖς μαθηταῖς 
his teeth, and iswitheringaway. And I spoke to ?disciples 
σου ἵνα αὐτὸ ἐκβάλωσιν, καὶ ovKicyvoav. 19 ὋὉ.δὲ ἀπο- 
1thy that it they might cast out, and they had not power. But he an- 
κριθεὶς "Ξαὐτῷ" éyer, Q γενεὰ ἄπιστος, ἕως πότε πρὸς ὑμᾶς 
swering him says, O ?generation'unbelieving! until when with you 
ἔσομαι; ἕως πότε ἀνέξομαι ὑμῶν; φέρετε αὐτὸν πρός με. 
shallI be? until when 58111 bear with you? Bring him to me, 
20 Kai ἤνεγκαν αὐτὸν πρὸς αὐτόν" καὶ ἰδὼν αὐτὸν ἰεὐθέως 


And they brought him to him. Andseeing him immediately 
τὸ πνεῦμα! ἐσπάραξεν" αὐτόν, καὶ πεσὼν ἐπὶ τῆς 
the spirit threw 7into convulsions ‘him, and haying fallenupon the 


~ ? 7 > / δον ’ 4 / ? ~ 
γῆς ἐκυλίετο ἀφρίζων. 21 Kai ἐπηρώτησεν rov.marepa.avTov, 
earth herolled foaming. And he asked his father, 
Πόσο όνος ἐστὶν ὡς τοῦτο γέγονεν αὐτῷ; Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν 
G c ς V4 t ? 
How long atime isit that this has been withhim? Andhe said, 


᾿Παιδιόθεν. 22 καὶ πολλάκις ™adroy καὶ εἰς πῦρ" ἔβαλεν καὶ 
From childhood. And often him bothinto fire itcast and 
εἰς ὕδατα, ἵνα ἀπολέσῃ αὐτόν" "ἀλλ᾽" εἴ τι “δύνασαι." 


into waters, that it might destroy him: but 


βθθησον ἡμῖν, σπλαγχνισθεὶς ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς. BS Ὁ.δὲ. Ἰη- 
[ἴο 40), help us, being moved with pity on us. = And Je- 
σοῦς εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Τὸ εἰ οδύνασαι"! Priorevoa,' πάντα δυνατὰ 


if anything thou art able 


sus said to him, If thouartable tobelieve, allthings are possible 
τῷ πιστεύοντι. 24 «Καὶ τεὐθέως" «οάξας ὁ πατὴρ τοῦ 
ἴο him that believes. And immediately crying out the father of the 


παιδίου "μετὰ δακρύων! ἔλεγεν, Πιστεύω, ᾿Κύριε," βοήθει 
little child with tears said, I believe, Lord, help 
~ 2 , ? ‘ " « ~ e ? , Vv 
pov.ry.amioriag. 25 ᾿Ιδὼν.δὲ ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς ὅτι ἐπισυντρέχει 
mine unbelief. But *seeing 1Jesus that *was *running *together 
ὄχλος, ἐπετίμησεν τῷ πνεύματι τῷ ἀκαθάρτῳ, λέγων αὐτῷ. 
la*crowd, rebuked the spirit the unclean, saying toit, 
To ὑπνεῦμα τὸ ἄλαλον καὶ κωφόν," ἐγώ ὅσοι ἐπιτάσσω," ἔξελθε 
Spirit dumb and deaf, I thee command, come 
LE" αὐτοῦ, καὶ μηκέτι εἰσέλθῃς εἰς αὐτόν. 26 Kai *xpa- 
outof him, and πὸ more mayestthouenterinto him. And having 
Ear," καὶ πολλὰ "Ξσπαράξαν" Ὀδαὐτόν," ἐξῆλθεν" καὶ 
criedout,and *much ‘thrown “into °convulsions “him, it came out; and 
ἐγένετο ὡσεὶ νεκρός, ὥστε “" πολλοὺς λέγειν ὅτι ἀπέθανεν. 


117 
to him saluted him, 
16 And he asked the 
scribes, What question 
ye with them? 17 And 
one of the multitude 
answered and _ said, 
Master, I have brought 
unto thee my _ son, 
which hath a dumb 
spirit; 18 and where- 
soever he taketh him, 
he teareth him: and 
he foameth, and gnash- 
eth with his teeth, and 
pineth away: and I 
spake to thy disciples 
that they should cast 
him out; and they 
could not. 19 He an- 
swereth him, and saith, 
O faithless generation, 
how long shall I be 
with you? how long 
shall I suffer you? 
bring him unto me. 
20 And they brought 
him unto him: and 
when he saw him, 
straightway the spirit 
tare him; and he fell 
on the ground, and 
wallowed foaming. 
21 And he asked his 
father, How long is it 
ago since this came 
unto him? And he 
said, Ofachild. 22 And 
ofttimes it hath cast 
him into the fire, and 
into the waters, to 
destroy him: but if 
thou canst do any 
thing, have compas- 
sion on us, and help 
us. 23 Jesus said unto 
him, If thou canst be- 
lieve, all things are 
possible to him that 
believeth, 24 And 
straightway the father 
of the child cried out, 
and said with tears, 
Lord, I believe; help 
thou mine unbelief. 
25 When Jesus saw 
that the people came 
running together, he 
rebuked the foul 
spirit, saying unto 
him, Thou dumb and 
deaf spirit, I charge 
thee, come out of him, 
and enter no more 
into him. 26 And the 
spirit cried, and rent 
him sore, and came 
out of him: and he 
was as one dead; in- 
somuch that many 
said, He is dead. 


he became asif dead, so that many said that he was dead. 

Υ αὐτούς them GLTTra. 2 συνζητεῖτε LTTrA. 5 αὑτούς Ἐ. ὃ ἀπεκρίθη αὐτῷ answered 
him rtra. ¢ — εἶπεν LTTrA. 4 ἐὰν LTTrA. 8 — αὐτόν (read [him)) T. f — αὐτοῦ 
(read [his] teeth) [L]rrra. & εἶπα TTrA. h αὐτοῖς them @LTTraW. i τὸ πνεῦμα εὐθὺς 
{τττὰ. Κ συνεσπάραξεν LT. 1+ ἐκ since LTTrAW. τἱ καὶ εἰς πῦρ αὐτὸν TA. ™ ἀλλὰ T. 
ο δύνῃ LITrA. Ρ — πιστεῦσαι TTr[A]. ᾳ --- καὶ [L]T[ tra. τ εὐθὺς TIrA. 5-- μετὰ 


vy + ὁ the (crowd) T. 
78 ἀπ᾽ from L. 
ca + τοὺς the LTTrA. 


t — Κύριε GLTTrAW. 
x ἐπιτάσσω σοι TTrA. 
ba — αὐτόν G[L]rtra. 


δακρύων LITrA. 
πνεῦμα LTTrA. 
GLTTraw. 


28 κράξας GLTTrAW. 


W ἄλαλον Kat κωφὸν 
aa σπαράξας 


118 


27 But Jesus took him 
by the hand, and lifted 
him up; and he arose. 


28 And when he was 
come into the house, 
his disciples asked him 
privately, Why could 
not we cast him out? 
29 And he said unto 
them, This kind can 
come forth by nothing, 
but by prayer and 
fasting. 


30 And they depart- 
ed thence, and passed 
through Galilee; and 
he would not that any 
man should know it. 
31 For he taught his 
disciples, and said unto 
them, The Son of man 
is delivered into the 
hands of men, and 
they shall kill him; 
and after that he is 
Killed, he shall rise 
the third day. 32 But 
they understood not 
that saying, and were 
afraid to ask him. 


33 And he came to 
Capernaum: and being 
in the house he asked 
them, What was it 
that ye disputed a- 
mong yourselves by 
the way? 34 But they 
held their peace: for 
by the way they had 
disputed among them- 
selves, who should be 
the greatest. 35 And 
he sat down, and called 
the twelve, and saith 
unto them, [fany man 
desire to he first, the 
same shall be last of 
all, and servant of all. 
86 And he took achild, 
and set him in the 
midst of them: and 
when he had taken 
him in his arms, 
he said unto them, 
37 Whosoever 5881] 
receive one of such 
children in my name, 
receiveth me: and 
whosoever shall re- 
ceive me, receiveth not 
me, but him that sent 
me. 38 And John an- 
swered him, saying, 
Master, we saw one 
casting out devils in 
thy name, and he fol- 
loweth not us: and 


ΜΑΡΚΟΣ. TEX, 
27 ὁ.δὲ Ἰησοῦς κρατήσας tabrov τῆς χειρός" ἤγειρεν αὐτόν, 
But Jesus, havingtaken him bythe hand, raised*up ‘him, 
καὶ ἀνέστη. 
and he arose. 
$28 Kai “εἰσελθόντα.αὐτὸν" εἰς οἴκον οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ 


And when he was entered into a house his disciples 
f2 , ? 4 >? ὃ , Il sO ll € ~ ᾽ > ΄ 
ἐπηρώτων αὐτὸν κατ -LOLAY, τι ἡμεῖς οὐκ-ἠδυνή- 
asked him apart, Because [of what] *we 1were not 


θημεν ἐκβαλεῖν αὐτό; 29 Kai εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Τοῦτο τὸ γένος 
able to cast out it? And hesaid tothem, This kind 
? > \ , ? IN) ~ > ee! ~h . , Ι 
ἐν οὐδενὶ δύναται ἐξελθεῖν εἰ μὴ ἐν προσευχῇ "καὶ νηστείᾳ. 
by nothing can go out except by prayer and fasting. 
30 Kai ἐκεῖθεν! ἐξελθόντες ἔπαρεπορεύοντο" διὰ τῆς 
And from thence having gone forth they went through 
Γαλιλαίας" καὶ οὐκ.ἤθελεν ἵνα τις γνῷ" 31 ἐδίδασ- 
Galilee ; and he would not that anyone should know [it]; he *was*teach- 
κεν yao τοὺς. μαθητὰς. αὐτοῦ, Kai ἔλεγεν αὐτοῖς, Ὅτι ὁ υἱὸς 
ing “for his disciples, and said to them, The Son 
Tov ἀνθρώπου παραδίδοται εἰς χεῖρας ἀνθρώπων, καὶ 


of man is delivered into [the} hands of men, and 
ἀποκτενοῦσιν αὐτόν: καὶ ἀποκτανθείς, "ry τρίπῃ ἡμέρᾳ" 
they will kill him; and having been killed, on the thir day 


ἀναστήσεται. 823 Οἱ δὲ ἠγνόουν τὸ ῥῆμα, Kai ἐφοβοῦντο 
he will arise. But they understood not the saying, and were afraid 
αὐτὸν ἐπερωτῆσαι. 
Shim to “ask. 
33 Kai "ἦλθεν" εἰς “Καπερναούμ"" καὶ ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ γενόμενος 
And hecame to Capernaum ; and in “the *house ‘being 


ἐπηρώτα αὐτούς, Ti ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ Ῥπρὸς ἑαυτοὺς" διελογίζεσθε; 


he asked them, Whatin the way among yourselves were ye discussing ? 
34 Οἱ. δὲ ἐσιώπων" πρὸς ἀλλήλους γὰρ διελέχθησαν “ἔν 
But they were silent; *with ὍΠ6 ‘another ‘for they had beendiscussing by 
τῇ ὁδῷ," τίς εἰζων. 385 καὶ καθίσας ἐφώνησεν τοὺς 
the way, who([was] greater. And sitting down hecalled the 
δώδεκα, καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, Ei τις θέλει πρῶτος εἶναι, ἔσται 
twelve, andhesays tothem, If anyonedesires “first ‘to *be, heshall be 
΄ » \ , , ‘ ‘ 
πάντων ἔσχατος Kai πάντων διάκονος. 36 Kai λαβὼν 
308 3411 Mast and “of 5811 4servant. And having taken 
παιδίον ἔστησεν αὐτὸ ἐν μέσῳ. αὐτῶν" καὶ ἐναγκαλισάμενος 
alittlechild he set it in theirmidst; and having taken*in[*his]‘*armas 
? AY t > ~ a“ ri ll a ~ 3 , δί ll 
αὐτὸ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, 87 Ος. "ἐὰν ἕν τῶν “τοιούτων παιδίων 
Mit he said to them, Whoever one of such little children 
δέξηται ἐπὶ τῷ.ὀνόματί. μου, ἐμὲ δέχεται: Kai ὃς. "ἐὰν" ἐμὲ 
shall receive in my name, me receives ; and whoever me 
ἰδέξηται," οὐκ ἐμὲ δέχεται, ἀλλὰ τὸν ἀποστείλαντά με. 
shall receive, ποῦ mes receives, but him who sent me, 
38 "᾿Απεκρίθη. δὲ" αὐτῷ "ὁ" lwavyng*Aéywr,' Διδάσκαλε, εἴδομέν 
And “βηβυσοσθᾶ “him 1 John saying, Teacher, we saw 
Tiwa* Tp-dvopari.cou ἐκβάλλοντα δαιμόνια, γὸς οὐκ.ἀκολουθεῖ 
someone ἴῃ thy name casting out demons, who _ follows not 


4 τῆς χειρὸς αὐτοῦ his hand rrr. 
8. Ὃ τι wherefore Lw. 
™ μετὰ τρεῖς ἡμέρας after three days LTTra. 


LTTrA. 
! yvot LTTrA. 


ο en ΡΘΟΥΝ, LTTraw. 
5 παιδίων τούτων Of these little children 1. 
[δὲ] τ, ; ἔφη spoke (to him) Trra. 


8 εἰσελθόντος αὐτοῦ τι. ἴ κατ᾽ ἰδίαν ἐπηρώτων αὐτόν 
i Κἀκεῖθεν LTTrA. " ἐπορεύοντο ur. 
n ἦλθον they came ΠΤΤτὰ. 
P —- πρὸς ἑαυτοὺς LTTrA. 4 [ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ] L. τ Gy LITrA. 
τ δέχηται should receive TTraA. ἃ ἀπεκρίθη 
W — λέγων T. * + ev ELTTrAW. 


h — καὶ νηστείᾳ TA]. 


v — 6 GLW. 


¥Y — ὃς οὐκ ἀκολουθεῖ ἡμῖν G. 


ΙΧ. MARK. 


e ~ ° Η͂ ‘4 1 3 ’ὕ ll J , atl > ? ~ « ~ it 
ἡμῖν." καὶ τἐκωλύσαμεν! αὐτόν, "ὅτι οὐκ. ἀκολουθεῖ ἡμῖν. 
us, and we forbade him, because he follows not us, 


39 Ὁ δὲ. Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν, Μὴ.κωλύετε αὐτόν᾽ οὐδεὶς. γάρ ἐστιν 


But Jesus said, Forbid not him ; fornoone there is 
ὃς ποιήσει δύναμιν ἐπὶ τῷ ὀνόματί.μου, Kai δυνήσεται 
who shalldo awork οἵ power in my name, and be able 


ταχὺ κακολογῆσαί με. 40 ὃς. γὰρ οὐκι.ἔστιν καθ᾽ ὑμῶν," ὑπὲρ 
readily to speak evil of me; forhe who isnot against you, for 
νὑμῶν" ἐστιν. 41 d¢-yao.dy ποτίσῳ ὑμᾶς ποτήριον 
you is. For whoever may give *to *drink ‘you a cup 
ὕδατος ἐν °r@'dvépari-spou,' ὅτι χριστοῦ ἐστε, ἀμὴν λέγω 
of water in my name, because *Christ’s ‘ye are, verily I say 
ὑμῖν, “οὐμμὴ ἀπολέσῃ" τὸν. μισθὸν. αὐτοῦ. 42 Kai ὃς. ἂν 


to you, in no wise should he lose his reward. And whoever 
σκανδαλίσῃ ἕνα τῶν μικρῶν & ray "πιστευόντων εἰς 
may cause *to “offend 'one 7of *the ‘little Sones who believe in 


ἐμέ," καλόν ἐστιν αὐτῷ μᾶλλον εἰ περίκειται ‘iPoc_pvdrLKoc! 
me, good itis for him rather if is put a millstone 
περὶ τὸν.τράχηλον.αὐτοῦ, καὶ βέβληται εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν. 
about his neck, and he has been cast into the sea. 

43 Kai ἐὰν "σκανδαλίζῃ! σε ἡ.χείρισου, ἀπόκοψον αὐτήν" 
And if *should*cause‘to ζοξοπα thee ‘thy “hand, cut off it: 
καλόν ἴσοι ἐστὶν! κυλλὸν πείς τὴν ζωὴν εἰσελθεῖν," 
good forthee itis maimed into life to enter, 
ἢ τὰς δύο χεῖρας ἔχοντα ἀπελθεῖν εἰς THY γέενναν, εἰς τὸ 
than the two hands having togoaway into the Gehenna, into the 
re 4A » = 44 n® c x or > — > \ ~ 4 
πῦρ TO ἄσβεστον, ὕπου ὁ.σκώληξ. αὐτῶν οὐ.τελευτᾷ, καὶ 
fire the unquenchable, where their worm dies not, and 

τὸ πῦρ οὐ.σβέ " 45 καὶ ἐὰν ὁ-πού cavdanriZ 
Ὁ οὐ.σβέννυται. καὶ ἐὰν ὁ πούς σου σκανδαλίζῃ 
the fire is not quenched. And if thy foot should cause *to *offend 
? , > , ; Xr , Oo ΡΣ I 2 XO. ~ > a ‘ 
σε, ἀπόκοψον avrov’ Kaddy°Péorw oor" εἰσελθεῖν εἰς τὴν 


{rather] 


‘thee, cut off it: good itis forthee toenter into 
ζωὴν χωλόν, ἢ τοὺς δύο πόδας ἔχοντα βληθῆναι εἰς 
life lame, [rather]than the two feet haying to be cast into 
τὴν γέενναν, “εἰς τὸ πῦρ TO ἄσβεστον," 46 ὅπου ὁ σκώληξ 
the Gehenna, intothe fire the unquenchable, where ?worm 
αὐτῶν οὐ.τελευτᾷ, καὶ τὸ πῦρ οὐ.σβέννυται." 47 Kai ἐὰν ὁ 
‘their dies not, and the fire is not quenched. And if 
og¢0adpoc.cov σκανδαλίζῃ σε, ἔκβαλε αὐτόν καλόν 
thine eye should cause “to “offend ‘thee, cast out it: good 


ὅσοι ἐστὶν" μονόφθαλμον εἰσελθεῖν εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ 


forthee itis with one eye toenter into the kingdom 
~ » ~ 2 ‘ id 
θεοῦ, ἢ δύο ὀφθαλμοὺς ἔχοντα βληθῆναι εἰς τὴν YEEV- 
of God, [rather] than two eyes having tobecast into the hen- 
vav ‘rou πυρός," 48 ὅπου ὁ. σκώληξ αὐτῶν οὐ.τελευτᾷ, καὶ TO 
na of fire, where their worm dies not, and the 
πῦρ οὐ.σβέννυται. 49 Πᾶς γὰρ πυρὶ ἁλισθήσεται, "καὶ 
fire is not quenched. For everyone with fire shall be salted, and 
πᾶσα θυσία ἁλὶ adwbyoera.! 50 καλὸν τὸ ‘ddac,! 
sacrifice with salt shall be salted. Good [is] the salt, 


every 

= ἐκωλύομεν TTrA. 
not following usT. ὃ ἡμῶν us ETTrAW. 
© + ὅτι that [L]rtra. f ἀπολέσει shall he lose irr. 
Lata]. ἃ πίστιν ἐχόντων have faith a; — εἰς ἐμέ T. 
an ass LTTrA. Ἐ σκανδαλίσῃ τ. Ι ἐστίν σε LTTrA. 
n — verse 44 Τ{ττ]. o+ [yap] forL. Ρ ἐστίν σε LITrAW. 
[{Ἱτττ[Α]. τ — verse 46 Τ|ττ]. 5 σέἐστιν ΤΊΤΑ. 
πᾶσα θυσία ἁλὶ ἁλισθήσεται T[Tr]. νυ GAa T. 


¢ — τῷ @LTTrAW. 


t — τοῦ πυρός LTTrA. 


119 


we forbad him, be- 
cause he followeth not 
us. 39 But Jesus said, 
Forbid him not: for 
there is no man which 
shall do a miracle in 
my mame, that can 
lightly speak evil of 
me. 40 For he that 
is not against us is 
on our part. 41 For 
whosoever shall give 
you acup of water to 
drink in my name, 
because ye belong to 
Christ, verily I say 
unto you, he shall not 
losehis reward. 42 And 
whosoever shall offend 
one of these little ones 
that believe in me, it 
is better for him that 
8. millstone were hang- 
ed about his neck, and 
he were cast into the 
sea. 43 And if thy 
hand offend thee, cut 
it off: it is better for 
thee to enter into life 
maimed, than having 
two hands to go into 
hell, into the fire that 
never shall be quench- 
ed: 44 where their 
worm dieth not, and 
the fire is not quench- 
ed. 45 And if thy foot 
offend thee, cut it off: 
it is better for thee to 
enter halt into life, 
than having two feet 
to be cast into hell, 
into the fire that never 
shall be quenched: 
46 where their worm 
dieth not, and the 
fire is not quenched. 
47 And if thine eye 
offend thee, pluck it 
out: it is better for 
thee to enter into the 
kingdom of God with 
one eye, than haying 
two eyes to be cast 
into hell fire : 48 where 
their worm dieth not, 
and the fire is not 
quenched. 49 For every 
one shall besalted with 
fire, and every sacrifice 
shall be salted with 
salt. 50 Salt ὦ good: 


5 [ὅτε οὐκ ἀκολουθεῖ ἡμῖν] Tr; ὅτι οὐκ ἠκολούθει ἡμῖν because he was 
4 — μου (read [my]) GLTra. 
& + τούτων (read of these little ones) 
i μύλος ὀνικὸς, millstone turned by 

τὸ εἰσελθεῖν εἰς THY ζωὴν LTTrAW. 

ᾳ --- εἰς τὸ πῦρ τὸ ἄσβεστον 


α-- καὶ 


120 


but if the salt have 
lost his saltness, where- 
with will ye season it ? 
Have salt in your- 
selves, and have peace 
one with another. 


X. And he arose 
from thence, and com- 
eth into the coasts of 
Judza by the farther 
side of Jordan: and 
the people resort unto 
him again ; and, as he 
was wont, he taught 
them again. 2 And the 
Pharisees came to him, 
and asked him, Is it 
lawful for a man to 
put away his wife? 
tempting him. 3 And 
he answered and said 
unto them, What did 
Moses command you? 
4 And they said, Moses 
suffered to write a bill 
of divorcement, and to 
put her away. ὃ And 
Jesus answered and 
said unto them, For the 
hardness of your heart 
he wrote you this pre- 
cept. 6 But from the 
beginning of the cre- 
ation God made them 
maleand female. 7 For 
this cause shall a man 
leave his father and 
mother, and cleave to 
his wife; 8 and they 
twain shall be one 
flesh: so then they are 
no more twain, but 
one flesh. 9 What 
therefore. God hath 
joined together, let 
not man put asunder, 
10 And in the house 
his disciples asked him 
again of the same 
matter, 11 And he 
saith unto them, Who- 
soever shall put away 
his wife, and marry 
another, committeth 
adultery against her, 
12 And if a woman 
shall put away her 
husband, and be mar- 
ried to another, she 
committeth adultery. 


13 And they brought 
young children tohim, 
that he should touch 
them: and his disci- 
ples rebuked those that 
brought them. 14 But 
when Jesus saw it, he 
was much displeased, 
and said unto them, 
Suffer the little child- 
ren to come unto me, 


MAPKO2X&. IX, 
ἐὰν.δὲ τὸ ἅλας" ἄναλον γένηται, ἐν τίνι αὐτὸ ἀρτύσετε; 
butif the salt saltless an comes with what it ‘ye season f 


ἔχετε ἐν ἑαυτοῖς "ἅλας," καὶ εἰρηνεύετε ἐν ἀλλήλεμαι 
Have in yourselves _ salt, and beat ῬΟΒΟΘ with one another. 


10 YKarkeidev! ἀναστὰς ἔρχεται εἰς τὰ ὕρια τῆς Ιουδαίας, 
Andthence risingup hecomes into the borders of Judaa, - 


διὰ τοῦ! πέραν τοῦ lopdavov' Kai "συμπορεύονται! πάλιν 
by the otherside of the Jordan. And come together again 


ὄχλοι πρὸς αὐτόν, καὶ ὡς εἰώθει πάλιν ἐδίδασκεν 


crowds to him, and as he had beenaccustomed again he taught 
αὐτούς. 2 Kai προσελθόντες boi! Φαρισαῖοι Ξἐπηρώτησαν" 
them. And coming to [him] the Pharisees asked 

αὐτὸν εἰ ἔξεστιν ἀνδρὶ γυναῖκα ἀπολῦσαι, πειράζοντες 


if it is lawful fora eee a wife tempting 


αὐτόν. 3 0.68 ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Ti ὑμῖν ἐνετείλατο 
him, Buthe answering said to ow What Ries 1did 7command 


IMwoje;' 4 Οἱ. δὲ ξεῖπον," (Mwone ἐπέτρεψεν" βιβλίον ἀπο- 
nC; ης ρ 
*Moses ? And they said, Moses , allowed a bill of di- 


στασίου γράψαι, καὶ ἀπολῦσαι. 5 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ" Ιησοῦς 
vorce to write, and to put away. And answering Jesus 


εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Πρὸς τὴν.σκληροκαρδίαν. ὑμῶν ἔγραψεν ὑμῖν 
said tothem, In view of your hardheartedness he wrote for you 
τὴν. ἐντολὴν.ταύτην" 6 ἀπὸ.δὲ ἀρχῆς κτίσεως ἄρσεν καὶ 

this commandment ; but from [the] beginning of creation male and 
θῆλυ ἐποίησεν αὐτοὺς "ὸ Oedc." 7 ἕνεκεν τούτου καταλείψει 


him to put away, 


female *?made them God. On account of this shall *leave 
ἄνθρωπος τὸν. πατέρα. αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν μητέρα, ἱκαὶ προσκολ- 
la “man his father and mother, and shall be 


ληθήσεται" Πρὸ τὴν. γυναῖκα" αὐτοῦ, 8 καὶ ἔσονται οἱ δύο 
yet his wife, and “shall *be ‘the *two 


εἰς σάρκα μίαν" ὥστε οὐκέτι εἰσὶν δύο, ἀλλὰ μία σάρξ. 9 ὃ 
ΒΟΥ "flesh ‘one; sothatnolonger arethey two, but one flesh, What 


οὖν ὁθεὸς συνέζευξεν, ἄνθρωπος be, «χωριζέτω. 10 Kai ἱὲν 
therefore God united together, Sman t not separate. And in 


τῇ οἰκίᾳ" πάλιν οἱ. μαθηταὶ “αὐτοῦ! περὶ "τοῦ. αὐτοῦ" “ἐπη- 


the house again his disciples concerning the same thing 
, Π ᾽ , ‘ , ? ~ - Ῥὲ sll > , 
ρώτησαν" αὐτὸν. 11 καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, OcPéay' ἀπολύσῃ 
asked him. And hesays tothem, Whoever should put away 
τὴν. γυναϊκα.αὐτοῦ καὶ γαπή σῇ ἄλλην, μοιχᾶται ἐπ᾽ 
his wife and should marry another, commits adultery against 


αὐτήν. 12 καὶ ἐὰν «γυνὴ ἀπολύσῃ" τὸν. ἄνδρα.αὐτῆς "kai" 


her. And if a woman should put away her husband and 
δγαμηθῇ ἄλλῳ, μοιχᾶται. 
be married to another, she commits adultery. 
18 Kai προσέφερον αὐτῷ παιδία, ἵνα ἅψηται αὐτῶν" 
And they brought to him little PRB that hemighttouch them, 


προσφέρουσιν. 14 ἰδὼν.δὲ 


οἱ.δὲ μαθηταὶ ἐπετίμων τοῖς 
mouse them. But oan seen [it] 


But the disciples rebuked those who 


ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἠγανάκτησεν, καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Αφετε τὰ παιδία 
Jesus wasindignant, and said tothem, Suffer the little children 


¥ ἅλα T. 
b — οἱ GLTraW. 


ναῖκα T. 
18 LTTrA. 
away ΤΊΤΑ. 


* ἅλα LTTrA. 
© ἐπηρώτων were asking LTTrA. 

f ἐπέτρεψεν Μωῦσῆς LTTrA; Μωῦσῆς ἐπέτ. We 
made them) {u}rrr[a]. 
1 εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν LYTrA. 
5 ἐπηρώτων were aaking’t TA. 
¥ — καὶ ΤΊτΑ. 


Y καὶ ἐκεῖθεν LTTrAW. Z καὶ aud LIrTra. 


ἃ συνπορεύονται TA. 
4 Μωῦσῆς LITrAW. © εἶπαν LTTrA, 
8 ὃ δὲ but Trra. h — ὃ θεός (read he 
i— καὶ προσκολχηθησεται πὸ Κ τῇ γυναικὶ L ; --- πρὸς τὴν 
— αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) [uirfa]. π τούτον 
PayLTTrA. 4 αὐτὴ ἀπολύσασα she putting 


* γαμήσῃ ἄλλον should marry another Lrtra. 


X. MARK. 


ἔρχεσθαι πρός με, ‘kai! μὴ.κωλύετε αὐτά: τῶν.γὰρ.τοιούτων 
to come ‘to me, and donothinder them; for of such 
ἐστὶν ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ; 15 ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὃς."ἐὰν" 
is the kingdom of God. Verily Isay toyou, Whoever 
μὴ.δέξηται τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ we παιδίον, οὐ.μὴ 
shall not receive the kingdom of God _ as a little child, in no wise 
? , > ? , ‘ > , 
εἰσέλθῃ εἰς αὐτήν. 16 Καὶ ἐναγκαλισά ενος αὐτά, 
shall enter into it. And haying taken *in ἜΕΙΣ arms ‘them, 
τιθεὶς τὰς χεῖρας ἐπ᾽ αὐτὰ Ξηὐλόγει αὐτά." 
having laid [his] hands on them  heblessed them. 
17 Kai ἐκπορευομένου. αὐτοῦ εἰς ὁδόν, προσδραμὼν εἷς Kai 
And as he went forth into [the] way, “running“up ‘one and 


γονυπετήσας αὐτὸν ἐπηρώτα αὐτόν, Διδάσκαλε ἀγαθέ, τί 


kneeling downto him asked him, ?Teacher igood, what 
» ev 4 te , « 42 ~ 

ποιήσω ἵνα ζωὴν αἰώνιον κληρονομήσω; 18 Ὁ. δὲ. Τησοῦς 

shallIdo that life eternal I may inherit ? But Jesus 


εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ti pe λέγεις ἀγαθόν; οὐδεὶς 
said tohim, Why mecallest thou good? No one [15] good except 
εἷς, ὁ θεός. 19 τὰς ἐντολὰς οἶδας. ΥΜη.μοιχεύσῃς" 
one, God The commandments thou knowest: Thon shouldest not commit 
μὴ-φονεύσῃς"" μὴ-κλέψῃς" 
adultery ; thou shouldest not commit murder; thou shouldest not steal; thou 
μὴ-Ψευδομαρτυρήσῃς μὴ-ἀποστερήσῃς" τίμα τὸν 
shouldest not bear false witness; thou shouldest not defraud; honour 
πατέρα.σου καὶ τὴν μητέρα. 20 ὋὉ δὲ "ἀποκριθεὶς" ὕϑεῖπεν" 
thy father and mother. And he answering said 
αὐτῷ, Διδάσκαλε, “ταῦτα πάντα" “ἐφυλαξάμην ἐκ νεότητός 
to him, Teacher, *these lall have I ore from spare 
pov. 21 Ὁ.δὲ. Ἰησοῦς ἐμβλέψας αὐτῷ ἠγάπησεν αὐτόν, Kai 
m And Jesus looking; upon him loved him, and 
εἶπεν at, Ἕν ὅσοι" ὑστερεῖ᾽ ὕπαγε, ὅσα ἔχεις πώλη- 
snid to him, Onething to thee is lacking : go, asmuchas thou hast sell 
σον καὶ δὸς froic! πτωχοῖς, Kai ἕξεις θησαυρὸν ἐν 
and give tothe poor, and thou shalt have treasure δι 


οὐρανῷ" καὶ δεῦρο, ἀκολούθει μοι, Ξάρας τὸν σταυρόν." 22 Ὁ. ὃ 
heaven ; and come, follow me, taking up the cross. But he, 


στυγνάσας ἐπὶ τῷ λόγῳ ἀπῆλθεν λυπούμενος" ἦν.γὰρ.ἔχων 
peing sad at the word, went away Enea for he had 


κτήματα πολλά. 23 Kai περιβλεψάμενος ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς λέγει τοῖς 


ΞΡοΞξθββίουβ ‘many. And __ looking around Jesus says 


μαθηταίες αὐτοῦ, Πῶς δυσκόλως οἱ τὰ χρήματα ἔχοντες εἰς 
pis ἘΠ ΕΡΣΡΙ6Ά, How difficultly those riches ‘having into 


τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ εἰσελεύσονται. 24 Οἱ. δὲ μαθηταὶ ἐθαμ- 


ἀγαθὸς εἰ μὴ 


121 


gud forbid them not: 
for of such is the king- 
dom of God, 15 Verily 
I say unto you, Who- 
soever shall not receive 
the kingdom of Godas 
a little child, he shall 
not enter therein. 
16 And he took them 
up in his arms, put 
his hands upon them, 
and blessed them. 


17 And when he was 
gone forth into the 
way, there came one 
running, and kneeled 
to him, and asked him, 
Good Master, what 
shall I do that I may 
inherit eternal life? 
18 And Jesus said unto 
him, Why callest thou 
me good? there is none 
good but one, that is, 
God. 19 Thou knowest 
the commandments, 
Do not commit adul- 
tery, Do not kill, Do 
not steal, Do not bear 
false witness, Defraud 
not, Honour thy father 
and mother, 20 And he 
answered and said 
unto him, Master, all 
these have I observ- 
ed from my youth. 
21 Then Jesus behold- 
ing him loved him, 
and said unto him, 
One thing thou lack- 
est: go thy way, sell 
whatsoever thou hast, 
and give to the poor, 
and thou shalt have 
treasure in heaven: 
and come, take up the 
cross, and follow me. 
22 And he was sad at 
that saying, and went 
away grieved: for he 
had great possessions. 
23 And Jesus looked 
round about, and saith 
unto his disciples, How 
hardly shall they that 
have riches enter into 
the kingdom of God! 


the kingdom of God shall Bulge | ; Aa ue diseiples were = 24 And the disciples 
βοῦντο ἐπὶ τοῖς.λόγοις. αὐτοῦ. Ὁ. δὲ. Ἰησοῦς πάλιν ἀποκριθεὶς were astonished at his 
tonished at his words. And Jesus again answering Words. But Jesus an- 
h su 5 swereth again, and 

λέγει αὐτοῖς, "Τέκνα," πῶς δύσκολόν ἐστιν τοὺς πεποιθότας saith untothem, Child- 
says to la Children, how difficult itis [for]thosewho trust ren, how hard is it for 
apne > A ’ = them that trust in 
ἐπὶ roic! χρήμασιν" εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ εἰσελθεῖν. riches to enter into 
in riches into the kingdom cf God to mies the kingdom of God! 
25 δ ΕΞ ι 29 It is easier for a 
ὅ εὐκοπώτερόν ἐστιν κάμηλον διὰ ἱτῆς" Tope tae 'ἰτῆς" camel to go through 

Easier itis [for] acamel through the of the the eye of a needle, 

— καὶ GTTrAWw. ἡ ἂν LTTrA. ἡ + κατευλόγει fe ἜΞΞ.: [them] TTra. α εὐλόγει 


αὐτά he blesses them Lw ; — ηὐλόγει αὐτά TTrA. 
τ + gov thy (mother) Lr. 5 — ἀποκριθεὶς T. 
ἃ ἐφύλαξα L. ¢oetheeTa. f— τοῖς LTrAW. 
— τοὺς πεποιθότας ἐπὶ τοῖς χρήμασιν τ. k — τοῖς LTrAW. 
neato) LTrw. 


> ἔφη TIra. 


& — ἄρας τὸν σταυρόν L]TTr. 
— τῆς (read an eye of a 


Υ Μὴ dovevons, μὴ μοιχεύσῃς L. 


© πάντα ταυτα L. 
h rexvia L. 


122 


than for a rich man 
to enter into the king- 
dom of God. +26 And 
they were astonished 
out of measure, saying 
among themselves, 
Who then can be saved? 
27 And Jesus looking 
upon them saith, With 
men tt ts impossible, 
but not with God: for 
with God all things 
are possible, 28 Then 
Peter began to say 
unto him, Lo, we have 
left all, and have fol- 
lowed thee. 29 And 
Jesus answered and 
said, Verily I say unto 
you, There is no man 
that hath left house, 
or brethren, or sisters, 
or father, or mother, 
or wife, or children, 
or lands, for my sake, 
and the gospel’s, 30 but 
he shall receive an 
hundredfold now in 
this time, houses, and 
brethren, and sisters, 
and mothers, and 
children, and lands, 
with persecutions; and 
in the world to come 
eternal life. 31 But 
many that are first 
shall be last ; and the 
last first. 


32 And they were in 
the way going up to 
Jerusalem ; and Jesus 
went before them: and 
they were amazed ; and 
as they followed, they 
were afraid. And he 
took again the twelve, 
and began to tell them 
what things should 
happen unto him, 
33 saying, Behold, we 
go up to Jerusalem ; 
and the Son-of man 
shall be delivered unto 
the chief priests, and 
unto the scribes ; and 
they shall condemn 
him to death, and shall 
deliver him to the 
Gentiles : 34 and they 
shall mock him, and 
shall scourge him, and 
shall spit upon him, 
and shall kill him: 
and the third day he 
shall rise again. 


35 And James and 
John, the sons of Ze- 
bedee, come unto him, 


ΜΑΡΚΟΣ. Χ. 


ῥαφίδος "“"εἰσελθεῖν," ἢ πλούσιον εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ 
needle to pass, than(for] arichmaninto the kingdom of God 
εἰσελθεῖν. 26 Οἱ. δὲ περισσῶς ἐξεπλήσσοντο, λέγοντες πρὸς 
to enter. And they exceedingly were astonished, saying among 
ἑαυτούς, Kai ric δύναται σωθῆναι; 27 ᾿Εμβλέψας."δὲ" αὐτοῖς 
themselves, And who 15 8016 ἴο Ὀ6 saved? But looking on them 
ὁ Ἰησοῦς λέγει, Παρὰ ἀνθρώποις 5 ἀδύνατον, ἀλλ᾽ ov παρὰ 
Jesus says, With men {it is] impossible, but not with 
Pre θεῷ" πάντα.γὰρ δυνατά «ἐστιν! παρὰ τῷ θεῷ. 28 *Kai' 


God; forallthings possible are with God. And 
Ea » ss , , Π ? ~ 3 , € ~ ? , , 
ἤρξατο "ὁ Πέτρος λέγειν" αὐτῷ, ᾿Ιδού, ἡμεῖς ἀφήκαμεν πάντα, 
~began Peter tosay tohim, Lo, we left all, 


καὶ ᾿ἠκολουθήσαμέν" σοι. 29 "᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς εἶπεν," 
and followed thee. But answering Jesus said, 
> A , « - ᾽ , ? coy 2 ~ Seek ι ? , 
᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, οὐδείς ἐστιν ὃς ἀφῆκεν οἰκίαν, ἢ ἀδελφούς, 
Verily Isay toyou, Noone thereis who has Ἰοὺ house, or brothers, 
ἢ ἀδελφάς, “ἢ πατέρα, ἢ μητέρα," “ἢ γυναῖκα," ἢ τέκνα, ἢ 
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or 
? ’ « ? ~ \ ~ ’ / rh} 1 , 
ἀγρούς, ἕνεκεν ἐμοῦ καὶ Υ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, 30 ἐὰν. μὴ.λάβ 
lands, Του thesakeofme and ofthe glad tidings, that shall not receive 


ἑκατονταπλασίονα νῦν ἐν τῷ.καιρῷ.τούτῳ, οἰκίας Kai ἀδελ- 
a hundredfold now in this time: houses and bro- 


φοὺς καὶ ἀδελφὰς καὶ *unrépac' Kai τέκνα Kai ἀγρούς, μετὰ 
thers and sisters and mothers and children and lands, with 
διωγμῶν, Kai ἐν τῷ αἰῶνι τῷ.ἐρχομένῳ ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 31 πολ- 
persecutions,and in the age that iscoming 118 eternaL *Many 
λοὶ δὲ ἔσονται πρῶτοι ἔσχατοι, Kai “οἱ! ἔσχατοι πρῶτοι. 


*but “shall be first last, and the last first. 
32 “Hoav.dé ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ ἀναβαίνοντες εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα" Kai 
And they were ἴῃ the way going up to Jerusalem, and 
ἦν προάγων αὐτοὺς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, καὶ ἐθαμβοῦντο, Kai! 


“was going *on *before “them 1Jesus, and they were astonished, and 
> ~ ? ~ \ ‘ , , 
ἀκολουθοῦντες ἐφοβοῦντο. καὶ παραλαβὼν πάλιν τοὺς 


following were afraid. And having taken to [him] again the 
δώδεκα, ἤρξατο αὐτοῖς λέγειν τὰ μέλλοντα αὐτῷ 


twelve, he began them to tell the things which were about *to*him 
συμβαίνειν: 33 Ὅτι, ἰδού, ἀναβαίνομεν εἰς Ιεροσόλυμα, καὶ 
το *happen : Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and 
ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπον παραδοθήσεται τοῖς ἀρχιερεῦσιν Kai 
the Son of man will be delivered up tothe chief priests and 
“roic' γραμματεῦσιν, καὶ κατακρινοῦσιν αὐτὸν θανάτῳ, Kai 
to the scribes, and they will condemn him to death, and 


παραδώσουσιν αὐτὸν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν, 34 Kai ἐμπαίξουσιν αὐτῷ, 
will deliver up him tothe Gentiles. And they willmock him, 
dkai μαστιγώσουσιν αὐτόν, Kai ἐμπτύσουσιν αὐτῷ," Kai ἀπο- 
and will scourge him, and _ will spit upon him, and will 
κτενοῦσιν αὐτόν" καὶ fry τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ" ἀναστήσεται. 
kill hin ; and on the third day he will rise again, 
35 Kai προσπορεύονται αὐτῷ ᾿Ιάκωβος καὶ ᾿Ιωάννης Soi 
An come up to him James and John, the 


τὰ διελθεῖν EGLTTrAW. 
ᾳ --- ἐστιν (read [are)) ταν. 
have followed LTTraw. 
Jesus said (— ἀποκ. 
¥ + ἕνεκεν for the sake G[u]rrraw. 
ς — τοῖς L. 
ὁ — αὐτόν (read {him)) [L]1[ tr). 


and those ΤΊΣ. 


n — δὲ but TTra. ὁ + [τοῦτο] this [is] L. Ρ — τῷ TTrAW. 
τ — καὶ GLTTrAW. 5 λέγειν ὁ Πέτρος ΤΑ. t ηκολουθήκαμέν 

ν ἀποκριθεὶς (omit but) ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν GLI w ; ἔφη ὁ Ἰησοῦς 

Ὑ ἢ μητέρα, ἢ πατέρα LTTrA. xX — 7 γυναῖκα LTTrA. 
2 μητέρα mother Ltr. * — οἱ GLw. > οἱ δὲ 

καὶ ἐμπτύσουσιν αὐτῷ, καὶ μαστιγώσουσιν αὐτὸν LTTrA. 

f μετὰ τρεῖς ἡμέρας after three days LTTrA. ἕξ --- οἱ Α. 


δὲ) TA. 


x: MARK. 
υἱοὶ Ζεβεδαίου, λέγοντες", Διδάσκαλε, θέλομεν ἵνα ὃ. ἐὰν 
sons of Zebedee, saying, Teacher, we desire that whatever 


αἰτήσωμεν ' ποιήσῃς ἡμῖν. 86 Ὁ. δὲ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Τί θέλετε 
we may ask thou wouldest do for us. And he said tothem, What doyedesire 


Κποιῆσαί pe ὑμῖν ; 87 Οἱ.δὲ ἰεῖπον" αὐτῷ, Δὸς ἡμῖν, iva εἷς 


2to%do ‘me for you? And they said tohim, Give tous, that one 
mix δεξιῶν. σου" Kai sic ἃ ἐξ οεὐἰωνύμων" cov! καθίσωμεν ἐν 
at thy right hand and one at thy left hand Wemaysit in 


Οὐκιοΐδατε τί 
Ye know not what 


Sy 


τῇ-δόξῃ.σου. 38 Ὁ δὲ. Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, 
thy glory. But Jesus said tothem, 
αἰτεῖσθε. δύνασθε πιεῖν τὸ ποτήριον ὃ ἐγὼ πίνω, “καὶ! τὸ 
yeask. Are ye able todrink the cup which I drink, and ‘the 
βάπτισμα ὃ ἐγὼ βαπτίζομαι, βαπτισθῆναι; 
*baptism Twhich ®*I 
39 Οἱ. δὲ τεῖπον! αὐτῷ, Δυνάμεθα. Ὁ.δὲ. Τησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, 
Andthey said tohim, Weare able. But Jesus said tothem, 
Τὸ "μὲν! ποτήριον ὃ ἐγὼ πίνω, πίεσθε καὶ τὸ βάπτισμα 
The7indeed ‘cup which I drink, yeshall drink; and the baptism 
ὃ ἐγὼ βαπτίζομαι, βαπτισθήσεσθε" 40 τὸ. δὲ καθί- 
which 1 am baptized [with], ye shall be baptized [with] ; but to sit 
σαι ἐκ δεξιῶν.μου “καὶ! ἐξ εὐωνύμων ἱμου" οὐκ.ἔστιν ἐμὸν 
at my right hand and at my left hand is not mine 
δοῦναι, ἀλλ᾽ οἷς ἡτοίμασται. 41 Καὶ ἀκούσαν- 
togive, but [to those] for whom it has been prepared. And having 
TEC ot δέκα ἤρξαντο ἀγανακτεῖν περὶ ᾿Ιακώβου καὶ 
heard [this] the ten began to be indignant about James and 
Ἰωάννου. 42 τὸ. δὲ Τησοῦς προσκαλεσάμενος αὐτοὺς" λέγει 
John. But Jesus - having called to [him] ‘them says 


αὐτοῖς, Οἴδατε ὅτι οἱ δοκοῦντες ἄρχειν τῶν ἐθνῶν 
tothem, Yeknow that those who are accounted toruleover the nations 


κατακυριεύουσιν αὐτῶν᾽ Kai οἱ. μεγάλοι.αὐτῶν κατεξουσιάζου- 
exercise lordshipover them; and their great ones exercise authority 


ow αὐτῶν. 48 οὐχ οὕτως δὲ Yéorar' ἐν vpiv’ ἀλλ᾽ 
over them; not tkus however shall it be among you; but 
a x? 4 ll θέ y ’ θ , Π] > « - » pa z , 
ὃς. ΞΣἐὰν! θέλῃ YysvecOar μέγας" ἐν ὑμῖν, ἔσται Τδιάκονος 
whoever desires to become great among you, shall be 2servant 
ὑμῶν." 44 καὶ bc.2dv' θέλῃ Pdpdy' “γενέσθαι! πρῶτος, ἔσται 
lyour ; and whoever desires of you to become first, shall be 
, ~ ‘ A « ea ~ » , ? Tt 
πάντων δοῦλος" 45 καὶ. γὰρ ὁ vide τοῦ ἀνθρώπου οὐκ.ἦλθεν 
305 5411 *bondman. For even the Son of man came not 
διακονηθῆναι, ἀλλὰ διακονῆσαι, καὶ δοῦναι τὴν.Ψυχὴν.αὐτοῦ 
to be served, but to serve, and to give his life 
λύτρον ἀντὶ πολλῶν. 
aTransom for many. 
46 Kai “ἔρχονται! εἰς “Ἱεριχώ"" καὶ ἐκπορευομένου. αὐτοῦ 
And theycome to Jericho ; and as he was going out 
ἀπὸ “Ἱεριχώ,! καὶ τῶν.μαθητῶν.αὐτοῦ, Kai ὄχλου ἱκανοῦ, 


from Jericho, and his disciples, and a*crowd ‘large, 
vide Τιμαίου Βαρτίμαιος 86" τυφλὸς ** ἐκάθητο παρὰ τὴν 
ason οὗ Timzus, Bartimeus the the 


°am '°baptized [**with], ‘to *be Sbaptized [*with] 2g 


123 
saying, Master, we 
would that thou 


shouldest do for us 
whatsoever we shall 
desire. 36 And he said 
unto them, What 
would ye that I should 
do for you? 37 They 
said unto him, Grant 
unto us that we may 
sit, one on thy right 
hand, and the other on 
thy left hand, in thy 
glory. 38 But Jesus 
said unto them Ye 
know not what ye 
ask: can ye drink of 
the eup that I drink 
of? and be baptized 
with the baptism that 
I am baptized with? 
39 And they said unto 
him, Wecan. And Je- 
sus said unto them, 
Ye shall indeed drink 
of the cup that I drink 
of ; and with the bap- 
tism that I am bap- 
tized withal shall ye 
be baptized: 40 but to 
sit on my right hand 
and on my left hand 
is not mine to give; 
but it shall be given to 
them for whom it is 
prepared. 41 And when 
the ten heard it, they 
began to be much dis- 
pleased with James 
and John. 42 But Jesus 
called them ito him, 
and saith unto them, 
Ye know that they 
which are accountea 
to rule over the Gen- 
tiles exercise lordship 
over them; and their 
great ones exercise 
authority upon them. 
43 But so shall it not 
be among you: but 
whosoever will he 
great among _ you, 
shall be your minister: 
44 and whosoever of 
you will be the chief- 
est, shall be servant 
of all. 45 For even the 
Son of man came not 
to be ministered unto 
but to minister, and 
to give his life a ran- 
som for many. 


46 And they came 
to Jericho: and as he 
went out of Jericho 
with his disciples and 
a great number of peo- 
ple, blind Bartimeus, 
the son of Timzus, sat 
by the highway side 
begging. 47 And when 


blind [man], wassitting beside 


i + ge thee LTTrAW. 
™ gov ἐκ δεξιῶν TTrA. 
left hand) [n]rtra. 
eft hand) GLTTraw. 


h + αὐτῷ to him [L]rtra. 
ποιήσω Tt. | εἶπαν LTTrA. 
P — gov (read [thy] 

t — pov (read [my] 
W ἐστιν it is LTTra. x ἂν LTTr. 
5 ἐὰν Gtra. » ἐν ὑμῖν among you L. 
£ + ὃ the (son) LTTrAw. 


2 + gov thy T. 
4 ἢ OY LTTrA. 


Υ μέγας γενέσθαι TTr. 
© εἶναι to be Ltr. 
8 —. ὃ (reada blind [man)) trtra. 


τ εἶπαν LTTrA. 
Υ καὶ προσκαλεσάμενος αὐτοὺς ὃ ᾿Ιησοῦς LTTra. 
2 ὑμῶν διάκονος GLTTrAW. 
4 ἔρχεται he comes L. 


Κ ποιήσω I should do utr; pe 


ο ἀριστερῶν TTrA. 
Ss — μὲν TTrA. 


© Ἱερειχώ T. 


ha + προσαίτης a beggar Tira. 


124 


he heard that it was 
Jesus of Nazareth, he 
began to cry out, and 
say, Jesus, thou Son 
of David, have mercy 
on me. 48 And many 
charged him that he 
should hold his peace : 
but he cried the more 
a great deal, Thou Son 
of David, have mercy 
onme, 49 And Jesus 
stood still, and com- 
manded him to be 
called. And they call 
the blind man, saying 
unto him, Be of good 
comfort, rise; he 
calleth thee. 50 And 
he, casting away his 
garment, rose, and 
came to Jesus. 51 And 
Jesus answered and 
said unto him, What 
wilt thou that Ishould 
do unto thee? ‘The 
blind man said unto 
him, Lord, that I 
might receive my 
sight. 52 And Jesus 
said unto him, Go thy 
way; thy faith hath 
made thee whole. And 
immediately he receiv- 
ed his sight, and fol- 
lowed Jesusin theway. 


XI. And when they 
came nigh to Jerusa- 
lem, unto Bethphage 
and Bethany, at the 
mount of Olives, he 
sendeth forth two of 
his disciples, 2 and 
saith unto them, Go 
for way into the vil- 
age over against you: 
and as soon as ye be 
entered into it, ye 
shall find a colt tied, 
whereon never man 
sat; loose him, and 
bring him. 3 And if 
any man say unto you, 
Why do ye this? sa 
ye that the Lord hat 
need of him; and 
straightway he will 
send him hither. 4 And 
they went their way, 
and found the colt tied 
by the door without in 
a place where two ways 
met; and they loose 
him, 5 And certain of 
them that stood there 
said unto them, What 
do ye, loosing the colt ? 
6 And they said unto 
them even «as Jesus had 
commanded : and they 


MAPKOS. xX, ΧΕ 


ὁδὸν ἱπροσαιτῶν." 47 καὶ ἀκούσας ὅτι Ἰησοῦς ὁ ‘Nalwpaide! 
way, begging. And having heard that Jesus the Nazarman 

> » ἕ ae i λέ lO c. oom io," ’ - 
ἐστιν, Ὥρξατο κράζειν καὶ λέγειν, υἱὸς" πιΔαβίδ," ᾽Τησοῦν 


it was, he began tocry out and tosay, Son of David, Jesus, 
(Ut. it is) 

? , ’ (ά ~ , 
ἐλέησόν με. 48 Kai ἐπετίμων αὐτῷ πολλοὶ ἵνα σιωπήσῃ" 


have pity on me. And #rebuked “him ‘many that heshouldbesilent; 
ὁ. δὲ πολλῷ μᾶλλον ἔκραζεν, Υἱὲ ™AaPid," ἐλέησόν pe. 
but he much more criedout, Son of David, have pity on me. 
49 Καὶ στὰς ὁ Ἰησοῦς "εῖπεν αὐτὸν φωνηθῆναι"" καὶ 
And *having *stopped ‘Jesus askedfor him to be called, And 
φωνοῦσιν τὸν τυφλόν, λέγοντες αὐτῷ, Θάρσει" 
they call the blind saying tohim, Be of good courage; 
σἔγειραι," φωνεῖ σε. 50 Ὁ.δὲ ἀποβαλὼν τὸ ἱμάτιον.αὐτοῦ, 
rise up, he calls thee. And he casting away his garment, 
Pavaorac' ἦλθεν πρὸς τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν" 51 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς “λέγει 
havingrisenuphecame _ to Jesus, And answering *says 
αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς,. Τί τθέλεις ποιήσω σοί :" Ὃ.δὲ τυφλὸς 
3to *him ‘Jesus, What dost thou desire Ishoulddotothee? Andthe blind 
εἶπεν αὐτῷ, “PaBBovi," ἵνα ἀναβλέψω. 52 ‘0.08In- 
{man] said ἴο him, Rabboni, that I may receive sight. And Je- 
σοῦς εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ὕπαγε" ἡ.πίστις.σου σέσωκέν oe. Kai 
sus said tohim, Go, thy faith - has healed thee, And 
ἰεὐθέως! ἀνέβλεψεν, καὶ ἠκολούθει "τῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ" ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ. 
immediately he received sight, and followed Jesus in the way. 
11 Kai bre ἐγγίζουσιν εἰς “Ἰερουσαλήμ," “εἰς Βηθφαγὴ 
And when they drew near to Jerusalem, to Bethphage 


καὶ Βηθανίαν," πρὸς τὸ ὄρος τῶν ᾿Ελαιῶν, Τἀποστέλλει! δύο 


(man], 


and Bethany, towards the mount of Olives, he sends two 
τῶν.μαθητῶν αὐτοῦ, 2 καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, Ὑπάγετε εἰς τὴν 
of his disciples, and says tothem, Go into the 


κώμην τὴν.κατέναντι ὑμῶν" Kai Τεὐθέως!" εἰσπορευόμενοι εἰς 
village, that opposite you, and immediately entering into 
? \ Ri NF Or ὃ ὃ , 2) τὰ ᾽ ND as , b 
αὐτὴν εὑρήσετε πῶλον δεδεμένον, ἐφ’ ὃν οὐδεὶς ἀνθρώπων 
it ye willfind acolt tied, upon which no one of men 
΄ Ἵ Gite , > 4 ! d > , Π Wir de ec ow 
κεκάθικεν" “λύσαντες αὐτὸν" “ἀγάγετε." 3 Kai ἐάν τις ὑμῖν 
has gat: having loosed it lead {it], And if anyone to you 
εἴπῃ, Ti ποιεῖτε τοῦτο ; εἴπατε, “Ὅτι" ὁ κύριος αὐτοῦ χρείαν 
say, Why doye this ? say, The Lord “of *it need 
ἔχει: καὶ [εὐθέως" αὐτὸν Βἀποστελεῖ" ἃ ὧδε. 4 δ᾽ Απῆλθον. δέ," 
thas, andimmediately it he willsend hither, And they departed, 
καὶ εὗρον "τὸν" πῶλον δεδεμένον πρὸς τὴν" θύραν ἔξω ἐπὶ 
and found the colt tied at the door without, by 
τοῦ ἀμφόδου, καὶ λύουσιν αὐτόν. 5 καί τινες τῶν ἐκεῖ ἑστη- 
the cross way, and they loose it. And some of those there stand- 
κότων ἔλεγον αὐτοῖς, Ti ποιεῖτε λύοντες τὸν πῶλον; 6 Οἱ δὲ 
ing said tothem, Whatareyedoing loosing the colt? And they 
™<izov" αὐτοῖς καθὼς "ἐνετείλατο" ὁ Ἰησοῦς Kai ἀφῆκαν 
said to them as 7commanded Jesus. And they allowed 


i — προσαιτῶν TTrA. 
2 εἶπεν, φωνήσατε αὐτόν said, call ye him rrra. 


leaped up LTTraw. 


εῬαββουνί GLITrAW. 
χα καὶ εἰς Βηθανίαν LT. 


no one yet) Ltr. 
bring Trra. 


(read a door) Tra. 


e —°Or LTTrA. 
bh + πάλιν back Τττ. 


k Ναζαρηνός LTTrA. 1Yté wrrr. τὰ Δαυείδ LTTrA; Δαυΐδ aw. 

ὁ ἔγειρε GLTTrAW. Ρ ἀναπηδήσας having 

4 αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἶπεν Jesus said to him TTra. * σοι θέλεις ποιήσω ; T. 

t εὐθὺς TTrA. Υ αὐτῷ him GLTTrAW. W Ἱεροσόλυμα LTTrAW. 

Σ ἀπέστειλεν he sent 1. 5 εὐθὺς TTra. a + οὔπω not yet (read 

Ὁ + οὔπω τ. © λύσατε αὐτὸν καὶ loose it and Lrtra. 4 φέρετε 

f εὐθὺς LTTrA. & ἀποστέλλει he sends GLrTraw. 

ia καὶ ἀπῆλθον LTTrA, ka — σὸν (read a colt) GLTraw. la — χὴν 
ma εἶπαν T. na εἶπεν said LYTrA. 


XI. MARK. 
αὐτούς. 7 και σἤγαγον" τὸν πῶλον πρὸς τὸν Inoody καὶ 
them. And they led the colt to Jesus, And 


Ρἐπέβαλον" αὐτῷ τὰ ἱμάτια.αὐτῶν, Kai ἐκάθισεν ἐπ᾽ «“αὐτῷ"" 

they cast upon it their garments, and  hesat on it; 
8 τπολλοὶ.δὲ!" τὰ ἱμάτια.αὐτῶν ἔστρωσαν εἰς THY ὁδόν" Go1-dé 
and many their garments strewed on the way, and others 

3 10. i tv ὩΣ i ? ~ VOE ὃ lw Seat , 

στοιβά ας EKOTTTOV EK τῶν OVEVONWY, Kat ἐἑστρωννυον 
branches were cutting down from the trees, and were strewing 
εἰς τὴν ὁδόν." 9 καὶ οἱ προάγοντες Kai οἱ ἀκολουθοῦν- 
{themJon the way. And those going before and those follow- 


» x , Π « Le yr , « 

τες ἔκραζον, “λέγοντες, Ὥσαννά: εὐλογημένος ὁ 
ing were crying out, saying, Hosanna ! blessed [be] he who 
ἐρχόμενος ἐν ὀνόματι κυρίου. 10 εὐλογημένη ἡ ἐρχο- 
comes in [the] mame of (the) Lord. Blessed [be]the com- 
μένη βασιλεία Yiv ὀνόματι κυρίου" τοῦ.πατρὸς. ἡμῶν 

ing kingdom ‘in [*the] "name ὅο [3.86] ?°Lord 1of 7our *father 
7AaBid"" ‘Qoarvva ἐν τοῖς ὑψίστοις. 11 Kai εἰσῆλθεν εἰς 
*Darid. Hosanna in the highest ! And “entered “into 


Ἱεροσόλυμα *0’Inoove καὶ" εἰς τὸ ἱερόν" Kai περιβλεψάμενος 


*Jerusalem 1Jesus and into the temple; and havinglooked round on 
πάντα, "ὀψίας" ἤδη οὔσης τῆς ὥρας, ἐξῆλθεν εἰς Βηθανίαν 
all things, ate already being the hour, he went out to Bethany 
pera τῶν δώδεκα. 
with the twelve. 


12 Kai ry ἐπαύριον ἐξελθόντων αὐτῶν ἀπὸ Βηθανίας, 
Andonthe morrow “having *gone‘*out ‘they from Bethany, 
ἐπείνασεν. 18 καὶ ἰδὼν συκῆν “ μακρόθεν ἔχουσαν φύλλα, 
he hungered. And seeing a fig-tree afar off having leaves, 
¥ 2 » d « Ud Il > ? we " aN) ‘ ? ? 
ἦλθεν εἰ ἄρα “εὑρήσει τι! ἐν αὐτῇ Kai ἐλθὼν ἐπ 
he went if perhaps he will find anything on it. And having come to 
αὐτήν, οὐδὲν εὗρεν εἰ μὴ φύλλα" ἰοὐ.γὰρ.ἦν καιρὸς" σύκων. 
it, nothing he foundexcept leaves, forit was not[the]season of figs. 
14 καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς δὸ ᾿Τησοῦς" εἶπεν αὐτῇ, Μηκέτι *éx σοῦ εἰς 
And answering 1 Jesus said toit, Nomore of thee for 
τὸν aidva' ipndeic! καρπὸν φάγοι. Kai ἤκουον οἱ μαθηταὶ 
ever “any °one ‘fruit ‘let*eat. And “heard ?disciples 
(lit. no one) 


> ~ ‘ » 2 t , A, 
αὐτοῦ. 15 Kai ἔρχονται εἰς ἹἹεροσόλυμα 
this. And theycome to Jerusalem ; 
Ko Ἰησοῦς" εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν ἤρξατο ἐκβάλλειν τοὺς πωλοῦντας 

1Jesus into the temple hebegan tocastout those selling 
kai! ἀγοράζοντας ἔν τῷ ἱερῷ: Kai τὰς τραπέζας τῶν κολλυ- 
and buying in the temple, and the tables ofthe money 
βιστῶν καὶ τὰς καθέδρας τῶν πωλούντων τὰς περιστερὰς 
changers and the seats of those selling the doves 
κατέστρεψεν. 16 καὶ οὐκ.ἤφιεν iva τις διενέγκῃ σκεῦος 
he overthrew, and suffered not that anyone should carry a vessel 
διὰ τοῦ ἱεροῦ. 17 καὶ ἐδίδασκεν, λέγων" Yadroic," Οὐ 
through the temple. And he taught, saying tothem, 7Not 


ἢ " 3 ‘ 
καὶ εἰσελθὼν 
and having “entered 


125 
let them go. 7 And 
they brought the colt 


to Jesus, and cast their 
garments on him; 
and he sat upon him. 
8 And many spread 
their garments in the 
way: and others cut 
down branches off the 
trees, and strawed 
them in the way. 9 And 
they that went before, 
and they that fol- 
lowed, cried, saying, 
Hosanna; Blessed is 
he that cometh in the 
name of the Lord: 
10 blessed be the king- 
dom of our father 
David, that cometh in 
the name of the Lord: 
Hosanna in the high- 
est. 11 And Jesus en- 
tered into Jerusalem, 
and into the temple: 
and when he had look- 
ed round about upon 
all things, and now 
the eventide was come, 
he went out unto Beth- 
any with the twelve, 


12 And on the mor- 
row, when they were 
come from Bethany, 
he was hungry : 13 and 
seeing a fig tree afar 
off having leaves, he 
came, if haply he 
might find any thing 
thereon : and when he 
came to it, he found 
nothing but leaves; 
for the time of figs 
was not yet. 14 And 
Jesus answered and 
said unto it, No man 
eat fruit of thee here- 
after for ever. And 
his disciples heard it. 
15 And they come to 
Jerusalem : and Jesus 
went into the temple, 
and began to cast ont 
them that sold and 
bought in the temple, 
and overthrew the 
tables of the money- 
changers, and theseats 
of them that sold 
doves; 16 and would 
not suffer that any 
man should carry any 
vessel through the 
temple. 17 And he 
taught, saying unto 


ο φέρουσιν they bring TTra. 
τ καὶ πολλοὶ TTrA, 8 στιβάδας LITrA. 
Y ἀγρῶν fields TTra. 
Υ — ἐν ὀνόματι κυρίου GLTTrAW. z Δανείδ LTTrA; Δαυΐδ aw. 
entered) LTTra. bope tT. ¢ + ἀπὸ from LTTraw. 


5 


only t. f ov yap ἦν ὃ καιρὸς τι; ὃ yap καιρὸς οὐκ ἦν TTrA. 
GLITrAW. Leis τὸν αἰῶνα ἐκ σοῦ LTTrA. i οὐδεὶς E. 


1+ τοὺς these LTTraw. τὰ καὶ ἔλεγεν and said TTra. 


P ἐπιβάλλουσιν they cast upon GLTTraWw. 


4 αὐτόν LTTrA. 


τ κόψαντες having cut [them] down rtra. 
τ — καὶ ἐστρώννυον εἰς THY OOOv TTrA. τ 


— λέγοντες [L]TTrA. 


Ἰησοῦς Kai (read he 
4 +. εὑρήσει LTTrAW. 
& — δ᾽ Ἰησοῦς (read he said 
k — ὁ Ἰησοῦς GLTTrAWw. 

2 — αὐτοῖς [L]A. 


e+ [μόνα 


120 


them, Is it ποὺ writ- 
ten, My house shall 
be called of all nations 
the house of prayer? 
but ye have made ita 
den of thieves. 18 And 
the scribes and chief 
priests heard it, and 
sought how they might 
destroy him: for they 
feared him, because all 
the people was asto- 
nished at his doctrine. 
19 And when even was 
come, he went out of 
the city. 


20 And in the morn- 
ing, as they passed by, 
they saw the fig tree 
dried up from the 
roots. 21 And Peter 
calling to remem- 
brance saith untohim, 
Master, behold, the 
fig tree which thou 
eursedst is withered 
away. 22 And Jesus 
answering saith unto 
them, Have faith in 
God. 23 For verily I 
say unto you, That 
whosoever shall say 
unto this mountain, 
Be thou removed, and 
be thou cast into the 
sea; and shall not 
doubt in his heart, but 
shall believe that those 
things which he saith 
shall come to pass ; he 
shall have whatsoever 
he saith. 24 Therefore 
I say unto you, What 
thingssoever ye desire, 
when ye pray, believe 
that ye receive them, 
and yeshall have them. 
25 And when ye stand 
praying, forgive, if ye 
have ought against 
any : that your Father 
also which is in heaven 
may forgive you your 
trespasses. 26 But if 
ye do not forgive, nei- 
ther will your Father 
which is in heaven for- 
give your trespasses, 


27 And they come 
again to Jerusalem: 
and as he was walking 
in the temple, there 
come to him the chief 
priests, and the scribes, 
and the elders, 28 and 
say unto him, By what 
authority doest thou 
these things ? and who 
gave thee this au- 
thority to do these 
things? 29 And Jesus 


ο-- Ὅτε 1. 


τ ἀπολέσωσιν they might destroy ΙΤΤΓΑΎ. 

ν ὅταν TTr. 

5. + ὁ GLTTrAW. 
{-- ὃ ἐὰν εἴπῃ ΤῊ ΑἹ]. 

i ἀλάβετε ye received Lrtra. 

n ἔλεγον they said ΤΎτα. 


σοντο T. 
:Ῥαββεί PA. 
© λαλεῖ LTTrA. 
LTTra. 
™ — τοῖς LA. 


P πεποιήκατε have made TTrA. 


ΜΑΡΚΟΣ. ΧΙ. 


, ͵ , ~ , 
γέγραπται, οὍτι" ὁ.οἴκός. μου οἶκος προσευχῆς κληθήσεται 
thas 7it been written, My house ahouse of prayer shall be called 


πᾶσιν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν ; ὑμεῖς.δὲ Ρέποιήσατε! αὐτὸν σπήλαιον 
forall the nations? but ye made it a den 
~ A » c ~ . “. 
λῃστῶν. 18 Kai ἤκουσαν οἱ «γραμματεῖς καὶ οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς," 
of robbers. And ‘heard [*it] *the *scribes 3and “the Schief °priests, 
καὶ ἐζήτουν πῶς αὐτὸν 'aroXEoovaw"' ἐφοβοῦντο. γὰρ "αὐτόν, 
and they sought how him _ theyshall destroy; for they feared him, 
te ~ ll « » λ v ? λ , iT] ? ‘ ~ ~ ? ~ 
ore mac" ὁ ὄχλος γἐξεπλήσσετο! ἐπὶ τῇ.διδαχῃ.αὐτοῦ. 


because all the crowd were astonished at his teaching. 

19 Kai ὅτε! ὀψὲ ἐγένετο “ἐξεπορεύετο! ἔξω τῆς πόλεως. 
And when evening came he went forth outof the city. 
20 Kai ἵὕπρωϊ παραπορευόμενοι" εἶδον τὴν συκῆν 


And in the morning passing by 
, € ~ ‘ ‘ , 
ἐξηραμμενην ἐκ ῥιζῶν. 21 καὶ ἀναμνησθεὶς ὁ Πέτρος 
ied up from [the] roots. And *having “remembered ‘+Peter 
λέγει αὐτῷ, *PaBBi," ide, ἡ συκῆ ἣν κατηράσω ἐξήρανται. 
says to him, Rabbi, see, the fig-tree which thoucursedst 15 dried up. 
22 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς "Ιησοῦς λέγει αὐτοῖς, Ἔχετε πίστιν θεοῦ. 
And answering 1Jesus says tothem, Have faith in God. 
23 ἀμὴν. Ῥγὰρ' λέγω ὑμῖν, OTe ὃς ἂν εἴπῃ τῷ.ὔρει.τούτῳ, 
For verily Isay toyou, that whoever shallsay to this mountain, 
"AoOnre καὶ βλήθητι εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν, Kai μὴ.δια- 
Be thou taken away and be thou cast inte the sea, and shall not 
κριθῇ ἐν τῇ.καρδίᾳ.αὐτοῦ, ἀλλὰ “πιστεύσῃ! ὅτι 4a" Eyer! 
doubt in his heart, but shall believe that what hesays 
, a ” ? ~ fx aE ” ll A ~ ’ 

γίνεται ἔσται αὐτῷ ‘diay εἴπῃ." 24 διὰ τοῦτο λέγω 
takes place, there shall be to him whatever he shallsay. For thisreason I say 
ὑμῖν, Πάντα ὕσα.βἂν" "προσευχόμενοι" αἰτεῖσθε, πιστεύετε 


they saw the  fig-tree 


to you, All things whatsoever praying ye ask, believe 
ore ἱλαμβάνετε." καὶ ἔσται ὑμῖν. 25 Καὶ ὅταν "στήκητε! 
that ye receive, and [they] shall be to you. And when ye may stand 
προσευχόμενοι, ἀφίετε εἴτι ἔχετε κατά τινος ἵνα καὶ 
praying, forgive if anything ye have against anyone, that also 
ὁ-πατὴρ.ὑμῶν ὁ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς ἀφῇ ὑμῖν τὰ παρα- 
your Father who[is]in the heavens mayforgive you 2of- 


πτώματα ὑμῶν. 26 ἱεὶ δὲ ὑμεῖς οὐκ.ἀφίετε, οὐδὲ ὁ. πατὴρ. ὑμῶν 


fences your. Butif ye forgive not, neither your Father 
ὁ ἐν τοῖς! οὐρανοῖς ἀφήσει τὰ-παραπτώματα ὑμῷν." 
who[is]in the heavens will forgive your offences. 


27 Kai ἔρχονται πάλιν εἰς ἹἹεροσόλυμα: καὶ ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ 
And theycome again to Jerusalem. And in the temple 
περιπατοῦντος. αὐτοῦ ἔρχονται πρὸς αὐτὸν οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ 
as he is walking come to him ᾧ86 chief priests and 
οἱ γραμματεῖς καὶ ot πρεσβύτεροι, 28 Kai "λέγουσιν" αὐτῷ, 
the scribes and the elders, and they say to him, 
Ἔν ποίᾳ ἐξουσίᾳ ταῦτα ποιεῖς ; “Kat! τίς σοι Ρᾶγὴν ἐξουσίαν 
By what authority these things doest thou? and who thee 7authority 
ταύτην ἔδωκεν," ἵνα ταῦτα ποιῇς; 239 Ὁ δὲ Τησοὺῦς 
*this gave, that these things thou shouldst do? And Jesus 


4 ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ οἱ γραμματεῖς LTTrAW. 

trasyapforallrtra,  ἐξεπλήσ- 

Y παραπορευόμενοι πρωΐ LITrA. 

© πιστεύῃ TA. 46 what Trra. 

8— ἂν LTTrAW. ἊἈ προσεύχεσθε καὶ ye pray and 

k στήκετε ye Stand LTTrA. | !—verse 26 TT» 
oayorTa. P® ἔδωκεν τὴν ἐξουσίαν ταύτην LTr. 


5 [αὐτόν] L. 
χ ἐξεπορεύοντο they went forth Ltr. 
b — yap for LI[Tr]A. 


ae XIT. MARK. 

ν ΜΠ > ~ ? 7 8 « ~ ? ‘ Π a , 
ἀποκριθεὶς" εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, ᾿Επερωτήσω “ὑμᾶς κἀγὼ" ἕνα λόγον, 
answering said to them, 7Will 2ask *you ‘Ialso one thing, 

καὶ ἀποκρίθητέ μοι, καὶ ἐρῶ ὑμῖν ἐν ποίᾳ ἐξουσίᾳ ταῦτα 

and answer me, andIwilltell you by what authority these things 
~ \ , t? , 4, ? ~ > An 2 
ποιῶ. 80 Td βάπτισμα *'Iwavvov ἐξ οὐρανοῦ ἦν ἢ ἐξ 

I do: The baptism of John from heaven wasit or from 

ἀνθρώπων ; ἀποκρίθητέ μοι. 31 Kai "ἐλογίζοντο" πρὸς ἑαυ- 


men? answer me. And theyreasoned with them- 
τούς, λέγοντες, Edy εἴπωμεν, Ἔξ οὐρανοῦ, ἐρεῖ, τ Διατί" 
selves, saying, If weshouldsay, From heaven, hewillsay, Why 


χρῦν" οὐκ ἐπιστεύσατε αὐτῷ; 82 YadX ἐὰν" εἴπωμεν, Ἔξ 


then did ye not believe him? but if we should say, From 
ἀνθρώπων, ἐφοβοῦντο τὸν Nady’ ἐὥἅπαντες" γὰρ εἶχον τὸν 
men,— they feared the people; for all held 


Ἰωάννην "ὅτι ὄντως" προφήτης ἦν. 88 Kai ἀποκριθέντες ὕλε- 


John that indeed a prophet he was. And answering they 

~? Ὁ ᾽ we ‘ Cc ct? ~ > ‘ ll [A 
γουσιν τῷ Ἰησοῦ," Οὐκ.οἴδαμεν. Kai “ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἀποκριθεὶς" λέγει 
say to Jesus, Weknownot. And Jesus answering says 
αὐτοῖς, Οὐδὲ ἐγὼ λέγω ὑμῖν ἐν ποίᾳ ἐξουσίᾳ ταῦτα ποιῶ. 
to them, Neither “I 181 you by what authority these things I do. 


12 Kai ἤρξατο αὐτοῖς ἐν παραβολαῖς “λέγειν." ᾿Αμπελῶνα 


And he began tothem in parables to say, *A *vineyard 


| ΄ . 7 
οἐφύτευσεν ἄνθρωπος," καὶ περιέθηκεν φραγμόν; καὶ ὥρυξεν 
lanted 1a *man, and placed about [it] a fence, and dug 


ὑπολήνιον, Kai wKoddpnoey πύργον, Kai [ἐξέδοτο αὐτὸν 


8ι wine-vat, and built a tower, and let out it 
γεωργοῖς, Kai ἀπεδήμησεν. 2 Kai ἀπέοτειλεν πρὸς τοὺς 
tohusbandmen, and left the country. And he sent to the 
γεωργοὺς τῷ καιρῷ δοῦλον, ἵνα παρὰ τῶν γεωργῶν 
husbandmen atthe season 84. bondman, that from the husbandmen 
λάβῃ ἀπὸ Erov καρποῦ" τοῦ ἀμπελῶνος᾽ 8 "οὶ.δὲ" λα- 
he might receive from the fruit ofthe vineyard. But they having 
βόντες αὐτὸν ἔδειραν, καὶ ἀπέστειλαν κενόν. 4 Kai πάλιν 
taken 7him ‘beat, and sent [himjaway empty. And again 


ἀπέστειλεν πρὸς αὐτοὺς ἄλλον δοῦλον" κἀκεῖνον ἱλιθοβολή- 
he sent to them another bondman, and him having 
σαντες! ᾿ἐκεφαλαίωσαν," καὶ ἀπέστειλαν ἠτιμωμένον." 
stoned they struck on the head, and sent [him] away having insulted [him]. 
5 καὶ Ἰπάλιν! ἄλλον ἀπέστειλεν" κἀκεῖνον ἀπέκτειναν Kai 
And = again another he sent, and him they killed ; also 
πολλοὺς ἄλλους, "τοὺς! μὲν δέροντες, Ὡτοὺς" δὲ "ἀποκτείνον- 
many others, some ‘beating, and others killing. 
i Ge ong vw. pack! Ge 1 2 ener pe 
TEC. ἔτι Cody" ἕνα Puidy ἔχων, ἀγαπητὸν “αυτοῦ, 
Yet therefore Ὅπο “son ‘having ®beloved *his 5own, 
‘ Y iy 
ἀπέστειλεν ™xai' αὐτὸν “Ξπρὸς αὐτοὺς ἔσχατον," λέγων, Ὅτι 
he sent also him to them last, saying, 


ἐντραπήσονται τὸνουἱόν. μου. 7 ἐκεῖνοι.δὲ οἱ γεωργοὶ ᾿Ξεἶπον 
They will have respect for myson. But those husbandmen said 


¥ — ἀποκριθεὶς TTrA. 
LTTraW. ¥ διελογίζοντο LTTrAW. w Διὰ ti LTrA. *— οὖν LTrAW. 
should we say) LTTrAw. 2 πάντες L. 8 ὄντως ὅτι TTrA. 
¢ [ἀποκριθεὶς] 0 Ἰησοῦς L; — ἀποκριθεὶς TTrA. d λαλεῖν LTTrA. 
féééSero TA. 8 τῶν καρπῶν the fruits Trra. δ καὶ and LTTra. 
) ἐκεφαλίωσαν τ. k ητίμησαν insulted τττ ; ἠἡτίμασαν TA. 
LITrA. 2 ἀποκτέννοντες GLTTTA. ο — οὖν [L]TTrA. 
4 — αὑτοῦ LTTrA; αὐτοῦ W. ra καὶ [L]TTrA. 
ἑαντοὺς εἶπαν TTra ; εἶπαν πρὸς ἑαυτοὺς L. 


5 κἀγὼ ὑμᾶς L; --- κἀγὼ (read ἐπερ. I will ask) rrra. 


127 


answered and said un- 
to them, I will also 
ask of you one ques- 
tion, and answer me, 
and I will tell you by 
what authority I do 
these things. 30 The 
baptism of John, was 
it from heaven, or of 
men? answer me. 
31 And they reasoned 
with themselves, say- 
ing, If we shall say, 
From heaven ; he will 
say, Why then did 
ye not believe him? 
32 But if we shall say, 
Of men; they feared 
the people : for all men 
counted John, that he 
was a prophet indeed. 
33 And they answered 
and said unto Jesus, 
Wecannottell, And 
Jesus answering saith 
unto them, Neither do 
I tell you by what 
authority I do these 
things. 


XII. And he began 
to speak unto them by 
parables. A certain 
man planted a vine- 
yard, and set an hedge 
about it, and digged u 
place for the winefat, 
and built a tower, and 
let it out to husband- 
men, and went into a 
farcountry. 2 And at 
the season he sent to 
the husbandmen a ser- 
vant, that he might 
receive from the hus- 
bandmen of the fruit 
of the vineyard. 3 And 
they caught him, and 
beat him, and sent him 
away empty. 4 And 
again he sent unto 
them another servant; 
and at him they cast 
stones, and wounded 
him in the head, and 
sent him away shame- 
fully handled. 5 And 
again he sent another ; 
and him they killed, 
and many others; 
beating some, and kill- 
ing some. 6 Having 

et therefore one son, 

is wellbeloved, he 
sent him also last unto 
them, saying, They 
will reverence my son. 
7 But those husband- 
men said among them- 


SSS ow 
Υ ἀλλὰ (read but 


> τῷ Ἰησοῦ λέγουσιν TTrA. 

© ἄνθρωπος ἐφύτευσεν T. 

i — λιθοβολήσαντες LTTrA. 

1 — πάλιν GLTTrA. 
Ρ ἔχων υἱὸν L; εἶχεν υἱὸν TTrA. 
58 ἔσχατον πρὸς αὐτούς LTTrA. 


πὸ οὺς 


ta πρὸς 


128 


selves, This is the heir ; 
come, let us kill him, 
and the inheritance 
shall be ours. 8 And 
they took him, and 
killed Aim, and cast 
him out of the vine- 
yard. 9 What shall 
therefore the lord of 
the vineyard do? he 
will come and destroy 
the husbandmen, and 
will give the vineyard 
unto others. 10 And 
have ye not read this 
scripture; The stone 
which the builders re- 
jected is become the 
head of the corner: 
11 this was the Lord’s 
doing, and it is mar- 
vellous in our eyes? 
12 And they sought to 
lay hold on him, but 
feared the people: for 
they knew that he had 
spoken the parable a- 
gainst them : and they 
left him, and went 
their way. 


13 And they send 
unto him certain of 
the Pharisees and of 
the Herodians, tocatch 

i in his words. 
14 And when they 
were come, they say 
unto him, Master, we 
know that thou art 
true, and carest for no 
man: for thou regard- 
est not the person of 
men, but teachest the 
way of God in truth: 
Is it lawful to give 
tribute to Crsar, or 
not? 15 Shall we give, 
or shall we not give? 
But he, knowing their 
hypocrisy, said unto 
them, Why tempt ye 
me? bring mea penny, 
that I may see it. 
16 And they brought 
it. And he saith unto 
them, Whose is this 
image and superscrip- 
tion? And they said 
unto him, Czxsar’s. 
17 And Jesus answer- 
ing said unto them, 
Render to Cresar the 
things that are Ce- 
sar’s, and to God the 
things that are God’s. 
And they marvelled at 
him. 


18 Then come unto 
him the Sadducees, 
which say there is no 
resurrection ; and they 
asked him, saying, 


ΜΑΡΚΟΣ. ΧΩ. 


πρὸς ἑαυτούς, Ὅτι οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ κληρονόμος᾽ δεῦτε, ἀπο- 
among themselves, This is the heir : come, let us 


κτείνωμεν αὐτόν, Kai ἡμῶν ἔσται ἡ κληρονομία. ὃ καὶ λαβόντες 


kill him, and ours willbethe inheritance. And having taken 
Υ͂ ᾽ ν᾿ ᾽ “ Π νι γῳ Xr Ww wy ~ ? ~ 
αὐτὸν ἀπέκτειναν, καὶ ἐξέβαλον ἔξω τοῦ ἀμπελῶνος. 


they killed [him], and cast forth [him] outside the vineyard. 


9 τί τοὖν" ποιήσει ὁ κύριος τοῦ ἀμπελῶνος; ἐλεύσεται Kai 
What therefore willdo the lord ofthe vineyard? He will come and 


ἀπολέσει τοὺς γεωργούς, Kai δώσει τὸν ἀμπελῶνα ἄλλοις. 


him 


will destroy the husbandmen, and willgive the vineyard to others. 
10 Οὐδὲ τὴν- γραφὴν. ταύτην ἀνέγνωτε; Λίθον ὃν 
ΞΝοῦ *even Sthis “scripture ‘did *ye read? [The] stone which 
ἀπεδοκίμασαν οἱ οἰκοδομοῦντες, οὗτος ἐγενήθη εἰς κεφαλὴν 
*rejected 1those *who %puild, this is become head 
γωνίας. 11] παρὰ κυρίου ἐγένετο αὕτη, καὶ ἔστιν θαυ- 
of [the] corner : from [the] Lord was this, and itis won- 


ΩΨ ? ~ € ~ ‘ ’ , ᾽ 4 ~ 
μαστὴ ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖς. ἡμῶν. 12 Kai ἐζήτουν αὐτὸν κρατῆσαι, 
derful in our eyes. And they sought him _ tolayholdof, 
καὶ ἐφοβήθησαν τὸν ὄχλον. ἔγνωσαν.γὰρ OTL πρὸς αὐτοὺς 
and they feared the crowd; for they knew that against them 
τὴν παραβολὴν εἶπεν" καὶ ἀφέντες αὐτὸν ἀπῆλθον. 
the parable he speaks. And leaving him they went away. 

18 Kai ἀποστέλλουσιν πρὸς αὐτόν τινας τῶν Φαρισαίων 

And they send to him some of the Pharisees 

καὶ TOY pagan τ ἵνα αὐτὸν ἀγρεύσωσιν λόγῳ. 14 Yoi.dé" 
and of the erodians, that him they mightcatchindiscourse. And they 
ἐλθόντες λέγουσιν αὐτῷ, Διδάσκαλε, οἴδαμεν ὅτι ἀληθὴς εἶ, 
havingcome 887 tohim, Teacher, we know that true thouart, 
καὶ οὐ μέλει σοι περὶ οὐδενός" ob-yap βλέπεις εἰς 
and thereiscare tothee about noone; for “not ‘thou *lookest on [the] 
πρόσωπον ἀνθρώπων, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀληθείας τὴν ὁδὸν τοῦ θεοῦ 
appearance of men, but with truth the way of God 
διδάσκεις. τέξεστιν *kivooy Καίσαρι δοῦναι! ἢ οὔ; 15 δῶμεν 
teachest : Isitlawful tribute toCzesar togive οὖ ποὺ Should wegive 
ba! \ ~ « " b id ‘ Π] ᾽ ~ ῇ € , t 
ἢ μηὴςδῶμεν ; Ο.δὲ ϑείϊδὼς"! αὐτῶν.τὴν. ὑπόκρισιν εἶπεν 
or should we not give? Buthe knowing their hypocrisy said 
αὐτοῖς, Ti με πειράζετε ; φέρετέ μοι δηνάριον ἵνα ἴδω. 
tothem, Why me doyetempt? Bring me adenarius that I may 566 [1{]. 
16 Οἱ. δὲ ἤνεγκαν. Kai λέγει αὐτοῖς, Τίνος ἡ εἰκὼν αὕτη Kai 

And they brought[it]. And he says to them, Whose([is] this image and 
ἡ ἐπιγραφή; “Οἱ. δὲ" “eizov' αὐτῷ, Καίσαρος. 17 “Καὶ 
the inscription? And they said to him, Cresar’s, And 
ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς εἶπεν fabroic," δ᾽ Απόδοτε τὰ Kai- 
?amswering ‘Jesus said to them, Render the things of Ce- 
σαρος" Καίσαρι, καὶ τὰ τοῦ θεοῦ τῷ θεῷ. Kai δἐθαύμασαν" 
sar to Cwsar, andthethings ofGod toGod. And they wondered . 
ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ. 
at him. 

18 Kai ἔρχονται Σαδδουκαῖοι πρὸς αὐτόν, οἵτινες λέγουσιν 

And come 1Sadducees to him, who say 
ἀνάστασιν po-eivac καὶ ἱἐπηρώτησαν"! αὐτόν, λέγοντες. 
a resurrection there is not. And they questioned him, saying, 


v ἀπέκτειναν αὐτόν TTrA. 


they say) LTTrA. 


Ὁ ἰδὼν having known T. 
ῖ & Τὰ Καίσαρος ἀπόδοτε ΤΊτΑ. 
i ἐπηρώτων LITrA. 


f_ αὐτοῖς A. 
wondered 1. 


x — οὖν TA. Υ καὶ and (read 
= + εἰπὲ οὖν ἡμῖν tell us therefore L. 8 δοῦναι κῆνσον Καίσαρι LTr. 
ς fot δὲ] 1,. 4 εἶπαν LTTrA. e ὃ δὲ and (Jesus) Lrrra. 
h ἐθαύμαζον LTrA; ἐξεθαύμαζον greatly 


w + αὐτὸν him LTTraw. 


ΧΙ]. MARK. 


19 Διδάσκαλε, Μωσῆς" ἔγραψεν ἡμῖν, ὅτι ἐάν τινος aded- 
Teacher, Moses wrote forus, that if of anyone a bro- 
φὸς ἀποθάνῳ καὶ καταλίπῃ γυναῖκα καὶ ἱτέκνα μὴ.ἀφῇ." 
ther shoulddie and leave behind a wife and children leave not, 
ἵνα λάβῃ ὁἋὁκἀδελφὸς. αὐτοῦ τὴν γυναῖκα "αὐτοῦ" καὶ 
that *should *take this “brother the wife of him and 
ἐξαναστήσῃ σπέρμα τῷ-.ἀδελφῷ. αὐτοῦ. 20 ἑπτὰ " ἀδελφοὶ 
raise up seed to his brother. Seven brethren 
ἦσαν καὶ ὁ πρῶτος ἔλαβεν γυναῖκα, Kai ἀποθνήσκων 
there were; and the first took a wife, and dying 
>, > ~ , ‘ c , > ’ A 
ovK-agnKey σπέρμα" 21 καὶ ὁ δεύτερος ἔλαβεν αὐτήν, Kai 
left no seed ; and the second took her, and 
ἀπέθανεν, “καὶ οὐδὲ αὐτὸς ἀφῆκεν! σπέρμα᾽ Kai ὁ τρίτος 
died, and neither he left seed ; and the third 
ὡσαύτως" 22 καὶ Ῥέλαβον adryny' ot ἑπτά, “καὶ! οὐκ. ἀφῆκαν 
likewise. And 3took *her ‘the 7seven, and left no 
σπέρμα. τἐσχάτη" πάντων "ἀπέθανεν καὶ ἡ γυνή." 23 evry 
seed. Last of all died also the woman. In the 
‘ody! ἀναστάσει, ὅταν ἀναστῶσιν, τίνος αὐτῶν ἔσται 
*therefore ‘resurrection, when they shall arise, of which of them shallshe be 
γυνή ; ol-yap ἑπτὰ ἔσχον αὐτὴν γυναῖκα. 24 “Καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς 
wife? forthe seven had her as wife. And answering 
ΔΌΣ ~ 5 ? ~ ll ? ‘ ~ ~ κι ΣΝ 2 
ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς," Οὐ διὰ.τοῦτο πλανᾶσθε, μὴ εἰδότες 
‘Jesus said tothem, *Not “therefore 1do*yeerr, not knowing 
τὰς γραφὰς μηδὲ THY δύναμιν τοῦ θεοῦ; 25 ὅταν.γὰρ ἐκ 
the scriptures nor the power of God? For when fromamong 
νεκρῶν ἀναστῶσιν, οὔτε γαμοῦσιν οὔτε *yapioKxoyTat,' 
[[86] dead they rise, neither dothey marry nor are given in marriage, 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰσὶν ὡς ἄγγελοι Τοὶ" ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς. 26 περὶ. δὲ 
but are as angels who [are] in the heavens. But concerning 
τῶν νεκρῶν, Ore ἐγείρονται, οὐκιἀνέγνωτε ἐν τῇ βίβλῳ 
the dead, that they rise, have ye not read in the book 
*Mwotwe," ἐπὶ "τῆς" βάτου, *we' εἶπεν αὐτῷ ὁθεός, 
of Moses, {in the part] on the bush, how ?spoke *to*him ‘God, 
λέγων, Eyw ὁ θεὸς ᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ °6' θεὸς ᾿Ισαὰκ καὶ “ὁ" 
saying, I [am]the God of Abraham and the God ofIsaac and the 
θεὸς Ἰακώβ; 27 Οὐκ.ἔστιν “ὁ" θεὸς νεκρῶν, ἀλλὰ “θεὸς! 
God of Jacob? Heisnot the God of[the]dead, but God 
ζώντων" “ὑμεῖς οὖν" πολὺ πλανᾶσθε. 28 Kai προσελθὼν 
of [the] living. e therefore greatly err. And ®having ®°come7up 
εἷς TOY γραμματέων, ἀκούσας αὐτῶν ἰσυζητούντων," δεἰδὼς" 


129 


19 Master, Moses wrote 
unto us, If a man’s 
brother die, and leave 
his wife behind jim, 
and leave no children, 
that his brother should 
take his wife, and raise 
up seed unto his bro- 
ther. 20 Now there 
were seven brethren: 
and the first took a 
wife, and dying left 
no seed. 21 And the 
second took her, and 
died, neither left he 
any seed: and the third 
likewise. 22 And the 
seven had her, and left 
no seed : last of all the 
woman died also, 23 In 
the resurrection there- 
fore, when they shall 
rise, whose wife shall 
she be of them? for 
the seven had her to 
wife. 24 And Jesus 
answering said unto 
them, Do ye not there- 
fore err, because ye 
know not the seri 

tures, neither the 
power of God? 25 For 
when they shall rise 
from the dead, they 
neither marry, nor are 
giveninmarriage ; but 
areas theangels which 
are in heaven. 26 And 
as touching the dead, 
that they rise: have 
ye not read in the book 
of Moses, how in the 
bush God spake unto 
him, saying, I am the 
God of Abraham, and 
the God of Isaac, and 
the God of Jacob? 
27 He is not the God 
of the dead, but the 
God of the living: ye 
therefore do greatly 
err. 28 And one of the 
scribes came, and hay- 
ing heard them rea- 
soning together, and 
perceiving that he had 
answered them well, 
asked him, Which is 
the first command- 
ment of all? 29 And 


1one7o0f*the ‘scribes, having heard them reasoning together, perceiving Jesus answered him, 
e wh 9 ~ , , i 2 ΄ 2: Ty 7) Bas " The first of all the 
Ore καλῶς "adroig ἀπεκρίθη. ἐπηρώτησεν αὑτόν, Iota ἐστὶν» commandments ἴδ, 
that well them he answered, questioned him, Which is Hear, O Israel; The 
izowrTn πασῶν ἐντολή! : 29 **O.dé/Incove ἀπεκρίθη" 
{the] first 2of “all ‘commandment ὃ And Jesus answered 
Bairp," Ὅτι πρώτη "πασῶν τῶν ἐντολῶν," ἔλκουε, 
him, (The] first of all the commandments [is], Hear, 
κ Μωῦσῆς LITrAW. 1 μὴ ἀφῇ τέκνον leave no child Ta. τὰ - αὐτοῦ TTrA. "+ οὖν 


therefore EW. ο μὴ καταλιπὼν having left behind no Trra. 
4 — καὶ TTrA. τ ἔσχατον LITrA. 
γ-- ὅταν ἀναστῶσιν [1,7ττ. 
LTTrAW. Υ — ot GLT[Tr]w. 2 Μωῦσέως LITrAW. 
© — 9 LTrAW. 4 — θεὸς GLTTrAW. 

£ συνζητούντων LTTrA. g ἰδὼν having seen LTTr. 
πάντων ἐντολή GLW ; ἐντολὴ πρώτη πάντων TTrA. 
π{[τύ]Ὰ. 
(read [The] first is) rrra. 


P — ἔλαβον αὐτὴν [u}rtra. 
5 Kal ἢ γυνὴ ἀπέθανεν LTTrA. 
© ἔφη αὐτοῖς ὃ Ἰησοῦς Jesus said to them ΤΊτΑ. 
5 τοῦ GLTTrAW. 
ε — ὑμεῖς οὖν (7ead πλαν. ye err) T[Tr]A. 
h ἀπεκρίθη αὐτοῖς TTrA. i πρώ 
ka ἀπεκρίθη δ᾽ Ἰησοῦς TTrA. 
ma πάντων ἐντολή GW; πάντων [ἐντολή ἐστιν] commandment of allis L; ἐστίν 


t — οὖν TTrA. 
x γαμίζονται 
Ὁ πῶς TTra. 


ltr, 
la — αὐτῷ 


K 


180 


Lord our God is one 
Lord: 30 and thou 
shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thy heart, 
and with all thy soul, 
and with all thy mind, 
and with all thy 
strength: this is the 
first commandment. 
31 And the second is 
like, namely this, Thou 
shalt love thy neigh- 
pour as thyself. There 
is none other com- 
mandment greater 
than these. 32 And 
the scribe said unto 
him, Well, Master, 
thou hast said the 
truth : for there is one 
God ; and there is none 
other but he: 33 and 
to love him with all 
the heart, and with 
all the understanding, 
and with all the soul, 
and with all the 
strength, and to love 
his neighbour as him- 
self, is more than all 
whole burnt offerings 
and sacrifices. 34 And 
when Jesus saw that 
he answered discreet- 
ly, he said unto him, 
Thou art not far from 
the kingdom of God. 
And no man after that 
durst ask him any 
question. 


35 And Jesus an- 
swered and said, while 
he taught in the tem- 
ple, How say the 
scribes that Christ is 
the Son of David? 
36 For David himself 
said by the Holy Ghost, 
The LORD said to my 
Lord, Sit thou on my 
right hand, till I make 
thine enemies’ thy 
footstool, 37 David 
therefore himself call- 
eth him Lord; and 
whence is he then his 
son? And the com- 
mon people heard him 
gladly. 


38 And he said unto 
them in his doctrine, 
Beware of the scribes, 
which love to go in 
long clothing, and love 


MAPKO¥*%. 
’ ε nN « ~ , 7 ᾽ , κι 
κύριος ὁ.θεὸς. ἡμῶν κύριος εἷς ἐστίν. 80 καὶ 
{the} Lord our God SLord one 185. And 
ἀγαπήσεις κύριον τὸν.θεόν.σου ἐξ ὕλης τῆς.καρδίας.σου 
thou shalt love [the] Lord thy God with all thy heart 
καὶ ἐξ ὕλης rhe-wuxijc-cov καὶ ἐξ ὅλης τῆς.διανοίας.σου 
and with all thy soul and with all thy mind 
καὶ ἐξ ὕλης τῆς.ἰσχύος.σου. "αὕτη πρώτη ἐντολή." 
and with all thy strength. This [isthe] first commandment, 
31 οκαὶ! δευτέρα Popoia'' «αὕτη," ᾿Αγαπήσεις τὸν πλη- 
And [the] second like [1018] this: Thou shalt love *neigh- 


σίον σου we σεαυτόν. Μείζων τούτων ἄλλη ἐντολὴ 
bour ‘thy as _ thyself. Greater thanthese another commandment 


οὐκ.ἔστιν. 32 Kai εἶπεν αὐτῷ ὁ γραμματεύς, Καλῶς, διδάσ- 
there is not. And #said *to *him 'the *scribe, Right, teach- 


λ 2 2 ἐλ θ ΄, 5 r ti ll « a ? ry ΄ ll \ 
καλε, ἐπ ἀληθείας τΤτεῖπας ὅτι εἷς ἐστιν "θεός," καὶ 
er, according to truth thou hast said that “one 718 1God, and 
7 ” » A > ~ ‘ 4 ? ~ ? ‘ ? 
οὐκ ἔστιν ἄλλος πλὴν αὐτοῦ. 33 Kai τὸ ἀγαπᾷν αὐτὸν ἐξ 
there is ποῦ another besides him: and to love him with 
ὅλης τῆς καρδίας Kai ἐξ ὕλης τῆς συνέσεως ‘kai ἐξ ὕλης 
all the heart and with all the understanding andwith all 
τῆς ψυχῆς" καὶ ἐξ ὕλης τῆς ἰσχύος, καὶ τὸ ἀγαπᾷν 

the soul and with all the strength, and to love [one’s] 


τὸν πλησίον ὡς ἑαυτόν, "πλεῖόν" ἐστιν πάντων TOY ὁλοκαυ- 
neighbour as_ oneself, 2more lis thanall the burnt 


τωμάτων καὶ ὕτῶν" θυσιῶν. 34 Kai ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἰδὼν *abror' 


XIL. 
Ἰσραήλ: 


Israel : 


offerings and the _ sacrifices. And Jesus seeing him 
ὅτι νουνεχῶς ἀπεκρίθη, εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Οὐ μακρὰν εἶ 
that intelligently he answered, said tohim, Not far art thou 


ἀπὸ τῆς βασιλείας τοῦ θεοῦ. Kai οὐδεὶς.οὐκέτι ἐτόλμα αὐτὸν 
from the kingdom of God. And nooneanymore dared *him 
ἐπερωτῆσαι. 
*to *question. 

35 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς ἔλεγεν, διδάσκων ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ, 


And answering 1 Jesus said, teaching in the temple, 
Πῶς λέγουσιν οἱ γραμματεῖς ὅτι ὁ χριστὸς υἱός γέστιν AaBid"; 
How say the scribes that the ist son ‘is of David? 


36 αὐτὸς *yap" *AaBid! Yetrev" ἐν ὁτῷ" πνεύματι “τῷ" ἁγίῳ, 
himself ‘+for David said by the Spirit the oly, 
ἀπεῖπεν" ¢o! κύριος τῷ.κυρίῳ. μου, [Κάθου" ἐκ δεξιῶν. μου Ewe.ayv 
*Said "the *Lord to my Lord, Sit at myrighthand until 
θῶ τοὺς.ἐχθρούς. σοὺ ξβὑποπόδιον" τῶν. ποδῶν.σου. 37 Αὐτὸς 
Iplace thineenemies [as] a footstool for thy feet. *Himself 
δοῦν" *AaBid' λέγει αὐτὸν κύριον. Kai πόθεν ἰυϊὸς. αὐτοῦ 
’therefore ‘David ca him ord, and whence his son 
? ell Sit ‘ ” » ᾽ τ RNY. 
ἐστιν ; Καὶ ὁ πολὺς ὄχλος ἤκουεν αὐτοῦ ἡδέως. 
is he? Andthe great crowd heard him _=_ gladly. 
38 Kai Ἐἔλεγεν αὐτοῖς ἐν τῇ.διδαχῃ-αὐτοῦ,, Βλέπετε ἀπὸ 
And hesaid tothem in his teaching, Take heed of 


TOY γραμματέων, τῶν θελόντων ἐν στολαῖς περιπατεῖν, καὶ 
the scribes, who like in robes to walk about, and 


2 — αὕτη πρώτη ἐντολή TA. 


it) Ltr. τ εἶπες T. 


’ περισσότερόν abundantly more rrr. 
ἐστιν TTrA; ἐστιν Aaveid L; ἐστιν Δαυΐδ Gw. 
Ὁ λέγει Says W. Ἢ 

Ε ὑποκάτω (read beneath thy feet) a. 
k ἐν τῇ διδαχῇ αὐτοῦ ἔλεγεν TTrA. 


Δαυὶδ ον. 
{κάθισον TrA. 
ἰός TTrA. 


Ρ --- ὁμοία TA. 4 αὐτῇ (read [is] like 
5 — θεός (read he is one) @LTTrAW.  * — καὶ ἐξ ὅλης τῆς ψυχῆς [L]T. 
Ὑ — τῶν GLTrAW. * [αὐτὸν] Tr. Υ Aaveié 

2 — yap [L]i[Tr]a. ® Δανεὶδ LTTrA; 
4 λέγει Says G@Tr. ¢— ὁ (read [the]) LTra. 
h — οὗν [L]TTr. i αὐτοῦ ἐστιν 


ο — καὶ [L)TTrA. 


c— τῷ GW. 


ΧΉΣΧΤΙ. MARK. 


ἀσπασμοὺς ἐν ταῖς ἀγοραῖς 39 Kai πρωτοκαθεδρίας ἐν ταῖς 

salutations in the market-places and first seats in the 

συναγωγαῖς Kai πρωτοκλισίας ἐν τοῖς δείπνοις" 40 οἱ ἱκατεσ- 

synagogues and first places at the suppers; who de- 

θίοντες" τὰς οἰκίας τῶν χηρῶν, καὶ προφάσει ακρὰ 

your the houses of widows, and asa pretext “αὖ *great ‘length 
προσευχόμενοι" οὗτοι λήψονται" περισσότερον κρίμα. 
pray. These shall receive more abundant judgment. 

41 Καὶ καθίσας 0 Ἰησοῦς" °karévaytt' τοῦ γαζοφυλα- 

And *having *sat "ἄονσῃι 1 Jesus opposite the treasury, 

κίου ἐθεώρει πῶς ὁ ὄχλος βάλλει χαλκὸν εἰς τὸ γαζοφυλά- 


hesaw how the crowd cast money into the treasury ; 
κιον᾽ καὶ πολλοὶ πλούσιοι ἔβαλλον πολλά. 42 Kai ἐλθοῦσα 
and many Tich were casting [in] much. And ‘having °come 


χήρα πτωχὴ ἔβαλεν λεπτὰ δύο, 0 ἐστιν κοδράντης. 
Swidow poor cast [in] 7lepta ‘two, which is a kodrantes. 
43 καὶ προσκαλεσάμενος τοὺς. μαθητὰς αὐτοῦ Ῥλέγει" αὐτοῖς, 
And  havingcalledto [him] his disciples he says to them, 
᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, Ore ἡ χήρα αὕτη ἡ πτωχὴ πλεῖον πάντων 
Verily Isay toyou, that this widow 1poor more than all 
IBEBAnkev' τῶν τβαλόντων᾽ εἰς τὸ γαζοφυλάκιον. 44 πάν- 
hascast [in]ofthose casting into the treasury. 7All 


pia 


one 


τες γὰρ ἐκ τοῦ περισσεύοντος αὐτοῖς ἔβαλον: αὕτη.δὲ 
for out of that which wasabounding ἴο them east [in], but she 
ἐκ τῆς. ὑστερήσεως. αὐτῆς πάντα boa εἶχεν ἔβαλεν, 


out of her destitution 3411 *as*much Sas "she*had ‘east [in], 


ὅλον τὸν. βίον.αὐτῆς. 
10whole °her "livelihood. 

13 Kai ἐκπορευομένου.αὐτοῦ ἐκ τοῦ ἱεροῦ λέγει αὐτῷ 
And as he was going forth outof the temple ‘says ‘to “him 
Ts ~ 6 ~ > ~ A δά x wr \ λίθ \ 
εἷς " τῶν. μαθητῶν.αὑτοῦυ, Διδάσκαλε, t0&, ποταποὶ λίθοι καὶ 
tone ?of *his *disciples, Teacher, see, what stones and 
’ ? ὃ ΄ 9 K ‘ ts ? ~ > νὰ θ aT] ff ? ~ 
TOTATAL OLKOOOMAL. at Ὃ Inoove ATTOKPLUELC ELTTEV auTwW, 
what buildings ! And Jesus answering said to him, 
Βλέπεις ταύτας τὰς μεγάλας οἰκοδομάς; ovd-un ἀφεθῇ ἡ 
Seest thou these great buildings ? not at all shall be left 
λίθος ἐπὶ “λίθῳ ὃς οὐ-μὴ.καταλυθῇ. 3 Kai καθημένου 
stone upon stone which shall not be thrown down. And as ?was*sitting 
αὐτοῦ εἰς τὸ ὄρος τῶν ᾿Ελαιῶν κατέναντι τοῦ ἱεροῦ, “ἐπηρώ- 
the upon the mount of Olives opposite the temple, ask- 
των" αὐτὸν κατ -idiay “Πέτρος καὶ ᾿Ιάκωβος καὶ ᾿Τωάννης καὶ 


ed *him l0apart Peter “and “James ‘and 5John ‘and 
᾿Ανδρέας, 4 YEizé' ἡμῖν πότε ταῦτα ἔσται; Kai τί τὸ 
7Andrew, Tell us when “these things 'shallbe? and what the 


σημεῖον Oravy μέλῃ ὅπάντα ταῦτα συντελεῖσθαι" ; 
sign when ‘should *be ®about ‘all these *things to be accomplished? 


5 Ο.δὲ. Ἰησοῦς ἀποκριθεὶς" Padroic ἤρξατο λέγειν," Βλέπετε 
And Jesus answering to them began tosay, Take heed 


ἡ τις ὑμᾶς πλανήσῃ. 6 πολλοὶ.“ γὰρ"! ἐλεύσονται ἐπὶ τῷ 
“) μ Ώ γάρ ῳ 


est anyone *you ‘mislead. For many will come in 

> , , ’ iif ? 7 > ‘ ‘ ’ 

ὀνόματί. μου, λέγοντες, Ort "ὦ εἰμι’ καὶ πολλοὺς πλαγνή- 
my name, saying, am [he], and many they will 


131 


salutations in the 
market-places, 39 and 
the chief seats in the 
synagogues, and the 
uppermost rooms at 
feasts: 40 which de- 
vour widows’ houses, 
and for a pretence 
make long prayers: 
these shall _ receive 
greater damnation. 

41 And Jesus sat 
over against the trea- 
sury, and beheld how 
the people cast money 
into the treasury: 
and many that were 
Tich cast in much. 
42 And there came a 
certain poor widow, 
and she threw in two 
mites, which make a 


farthing. 43 And he 
called unto him his 
disciples, and saith 


unto them, Verily I 
say unto you, That 
this poor widow hath 
east more in, than all 
they which have cast 
into the treasury: 
44 for all they did cast 
in of their abundance; 
but she of her want 
did cast in all that 
she had, even all her 
living. 


XIII, And as he 
went out of the tem- 
ple, one of his disci- 
ples saith unto him, 
Master, see what man- 
ner of stones and what 
buildings are here! 
2 And Jesus answer- 
ing said unto him, 
Seest thou these great 
buildings? there shall 
not be left one stone 
upon another, that 
shall not be thrown 
down. 3 And as he 
sat upon the mount 
of Olives over against 
the temple, Peter and 
James and John and 
Andrew asked him 
privately, 4 Tell us, 
when shall these 
things be? and what 
shall be the sign when 
all these things shall 
be fulfilled? 5 And Je- 
sus answering them 
began to say, Take 
heed lest any man de- 
ceive you: 6 for many 
shallcome inmyname, 
saying, I am Christ; 
and shall _ deceive 
many. 7 And when 
ye shall hear of wars 


τὰ λήμψονται LTTrA. 
ᾳ ἔβαλεν did cast [in] ur. 
u + ὧδε here Ltr. 


! κατέσθοντες TrA. 
P εἶπεν he said GLTTr. 
* ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ Ιησοῦς L; -- ἀποκριθεὶς TTrA. 
TTrA, *%+0T. 5 εἰπὸν ΤΊΤΑ. 


τττα.  -- ἀποκριθεὶς ΤΊτΑ. Ὁ ἤρξατο λέγειν αὐτοῖς LTTrA. 


= — δ Ἰησοῦς [L]1TrAa. 

τ᾿ βαλλόντων LTTrAW. 
Υ λέθον TTr. 
2 ταῦτα πάντα συντελεῖσθαι τ,; ταῦτα συντελεῖσθαι πάντα 
ς — yap for ΤΑ. 


ο ἀπέναντι Tr. 
8 + ἐκ of Tr[A]. 
* ἐπηρώτα 


192 


and rumours of wars, 
be ye not troubled: 
for such things must 
needs be; but the end 
shall not be yet. 8 For 
nation shall rise a- 

inst nation, and 

ngdom against king- 
dom: and there shall 
be earthquakes in di- 
vers places, and there 
shall be famines and 
troubles: these are 
the beginnings of sor- 
rows. 9 But take heed 
toyourselves : for they 
shall deliver you up 
to councils ; and in the 
synagogues ye shall be 
beaten: and ye shall 
be brought before ru- 
lers and kings for my 
sake, for a testimony 
against them. 10 And 
the gospel must first 
be published among all 
nations. 11 But when 
they shall lead you, 
and deliver you up, 
take no thought be- 
forehand what ye 
shall speak, neither do 
ye premeditate: but 
whatsoever shall be 
given youin that hour, 
that speak ye: for it 
is not ye that speak, 
but the Holy Ghost. 
12 Now the brother 
shall betray the bro- 
ther to death, and the 
father the son; and 
children shall rise up 
against their parents, 
and shall cause them 
to be put to death. 
13 And ye shall be 
hated of all men for 
my name’s sake: but 
he that shall endure 
unto the end, the 
same shall be’ saved. 
14 But when ye shall 
see the abomination of 
desolation, spoken of 
by Daniel the prophet, 
standing where _ it 
ought not, (et him 
that readeth under- 
stand,) then let them 
that be in Judza flee 
to the mountains: 
15 and let him that is 
on the housetop not 
godowninto the house, 
neither enter therein, 
to take any thing out 
of his house: 16 and 
let him that is in the 
field not turn back 
again for to take up 
his garment. 17 But 
woe to them that are 


MAPKO%. XIII. 


σουσιν. 7 ὕταν.δὲ δἀκούσητε! πολέμους Kai ἀκοὰς πολέμων, 


mislead. But when ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, 
es ede δεῖ ἐγὰρ' γενέσθαι" ἀλλ᾽ οὕπω τὸ 
e not disturbed ; it *must *needs ‘for come to pass, but “ποὺ *yet [518] ‘the 


τέλος. 8 ᾿Ἐγερθήσεται.γὰρ ἔθνος ‘éi' ἔθνος καὶ βασιλεία 
3end. For *shall*rise*up ‘nation against nation and kingdom 


ἐπὶ βασιλείαν" καὶ! ἔσονται σεισμοὶ κατὰ.τόπους, "καὶ" 
against kingdom; and there shall be earthquakes in different places, and 


ἔσονται λιμοὶ ‘kai ταραχαί." ἀρχαὶ! ὠδίνων ταῦτα. 
there shall be famines and _ troubles. Beginnings of throes [are] these. 
9 Βλέπετε.δὲ ὑμεῖς ἑαυτούς. παραδώσουσιν. yap" ὑμᾶς εἰς 


But take heed ye you to 
, ὃ 4 ’ quae , ©  τΥ Ἐς ΄ 
συνέδρια καὶ εἰς συναγωγὰς" δαρήσεσθε, καὶ ἐπὶ ἡγεμόνων 
sanhedrims and to synagogues: ye will be beaten, and before governors 
Kai βασιλέων σταθήσεσθε ἕνεκεν.ἐμοῦ, εἰς μαρτύριον αὐτοῖς" 
and kings ye will be brought formysake, for atestimony to them; 
10 καὶ εἰς πάντα τὰ ἔθνη ™OEi πρῶτον" κηρυχθῆναι τὸ 
and to all the nations must first be proclaimed the 
εὐαγγέλιον. 11 "ὅταν.δὲ"! οἀγάγωσιν! ὑμᾶς παραδιδόντες, 
glad tidings. But whenever they may lead away you delivering [you] up, 
μὴ-προμεριμνᾶτε τί λαλήσητε, Ῥμηδὲ μελετᾶτε" " 
be not careful beforehand what yeshouldsay, nor meditate [your reply]; 
ἀλλ᾽ O4éay" δοθῇ ὑμῖν ἐν ἐκείνῃ. τῇ.ὥρᾳ, τοῦτο λαλεῖτε" 


to yourselves; for they will deliver up 


but whatever maybegiven toyou in that hour, that speak ; 
ov.yap ἐστε ὑμεῖς οἱ λαλοῦντες, ἀλλὰ τὸ πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον. 
for ποὺ *are ‘ye they who _ speak, but the Spirit the Holy. 


12 τπαραδώσει.δὲϊ! ἀδελφὸς ἀδελφὸν εἰς θάνατον, καὶ πατὴρ 
And *will *deliver *up *brother brother to death, and father 
τέκνον" καὶ ἐπαναστήσονται τέκνα ἐπὶ γονεῖς, καὶ θανατώ- 
child ; and will rise *up children against parents, and will put to 
σουσιν αὐτούς" 18 καὶ ἔσεσθε μισούμενοι ὑπὸ πάντων διὰ 
death them. And ye will be hated by all onaccount of 
ro-6vopa.pov' 0.08 ὑπομείνας εἰς τέλος, οὗτος σωθήσε- 
my name; but he who endures to [the] end, he shall be 
ται. 14 Ὅταν.δὲ ἴδητε τὸ βδέλυγμα τῆς ἐρημώσεως "τὸ 
saved. But when yesee the abomination ofthe desolation which 
ε " « 4 \ ~ , I tg . ἥν ε ᾽ δ 
ῥηθὲν ὑπὸ Δανιὴλ τοῦ προφήτου," 'ἱεστὸς᾽ ὕπου οὐ.δεὶ 
was spoken οὗ by Daniel the prophet, standing where it should not 
ὁ ἀναγινώσκων νοείτω" τότε οἱ ἐν τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ φευ- 
(he who reads let him understand), then those in Judwza let 
yérwoay εἰς τὰ ὄρη: 15 ὁ Oe" ἐπὶ τοῦ δώματος μὴ κατα- 
them flee to themountains, 346 'and upon the housetop “ποὺ ‘let *him 
, w ; 4 > / ll A x ᾽ , II YA » HH] ’ 
Barw sic THY οἰκίαν," μηδὲ *eloehOéTw' Yapat τι ἐκ 
come down into the house, nor goin to take any thing out of 
τῆς. οἰκίας. αὐτοῦ" 16 καὶ ὁ εἰς τὸν ἀγρὸν τῶν! μὴ.ἐπιστρεψάτω 
his house ; andhethatin the field is let him not return 
εἰς τὰ ὀπίσω ἄραι τὸ ἱμάτιον.αὐτοῦ. 17 οὐαὶ. δὲ ταῖς 
to the things behind to take his garment. But woe to those that 


ἐν. γαστρὶ. ἐχούσαις καὶ ταῖς θηλαζούσαις ἐν ἐκείναις ταῖς 

are with child and to those that give suck in those 

Mort Tet τὰ πως AE ee ee A eee 
e€—yapt[tr]a. [ἐπ᾽ Ta. ὃ — καὶ ΤΊτΑ. h — καὶ T[Tr]A. 


4 ἀκούετε ye hear of Tr 
i— καὶ ταραχαί LTTr[ A]. 
2 καὶ ὅταν and when LTTra. 

τ καὶ παραδώσει LTTrA. 
t ἑστὼς EG; ἑστηκὸς L; ἑστηκότα ΤΊτΑ. 


LTTrA. 
ᾳ ἄν L. 


χ εἰσελθάτω LTTr. 


k ἀρχὴ abeginning yttr. Ἢ -- γὰρ for t[tr]a. πὸ πρῶτον δεῖ 
ὁ ἄγωσιν GLTTrAW. Ρ --- μηδὲ μελετᾶτε [1|]τπττί Α]. 
5.-- τὸ (lee ὑπὸ Δανιὴλ τοῦ προφήτου G[L]TTra. 

v — δὲ χ{{{τι]. ν--- εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν [L]T. 


Υ τι ἄραι Tra. z— ὧν (read [18]} LTTr. 


XIII. MARK. 
ἡμέραις. 18 προσεύχεσθε.δὲ ἵνα μὴ.γένηται "ἡ φυγὴ ὑμῶν" 
days ! And pray that “may “ποῦ *be your *flight 
~ μὴ A Cy , ? ~ 7, “ 
χειμῶνος. 19 ἔσονται- γὰρ αἱτήμεραι ἐκεῖναι θλίψις, οἵα 
in winter; for *shall °be [‘in] those *days tribulation, such as 
ov.yéyovey τοιαύτη ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς κτίσεως δῆς" ἔκτισεν ὁ 
has ποῦ been thelike from(the] beginning οὗ creation which 2created 
θεὸς ἕως τοῦ νῦν, Kai ob_un γένηται. 20 Kai εἰμὴ “κύριος 
*God until now, and notatall shall be; and unless [the] Lord 
ἐκολόβωσεν! τὰς ἡμέρας, οὐκ.ἂν. ἐσώθη πᾶσα caps" 
had shortened the days, there would ποῦ havebeensaved any flesh; 
ἀλλὰ διὰ τοὺς ἐκλεκτοὺς ode ἐξελέξατο. ἐκολόβωσεν τὰς 
but onaccount of the elect whom hechose, hehasshortened the 
ἡμέρας. 21 Καὶ τότε ἐάν τις ὑμῖν εἴπῃ, “Ἰδού, ὧδε. ὁ 
days. And then if anyonetoyou say, Behold, here [is]the 
, en!] ἐδ ae eee g \ «ἢ 5 ἢ 22 ? On 
Χριστος, 1) tOOU, EKEL, μὴ-πιστευσήτε. », ἐγερ σονται 
Christ, or Behold, there, ye shall not believe [it]. “There *will *arise 
ao" ἵψ δό yp ὃ ~ i δώ Ι - 
ρ ευ οχοιστοι Kat €U οπροφηται, και θϑὐωσουσιν σημεια 
for false ists and false prophets, and will give signs 
καὶ τέρατα, πρὸς τὸ ἀποπλανᾷν εἰ δυνατὸν "καὶ" τοὺς ἐκλεκ- 
and wonders, to deceive if possible even the elect. 
, « ~ cy , A 17 1 7, tc συ , 
τούς. 23 ὑεῖ δε βλέπετε" ἰδού, oes wide ὑμῖν πάντα. 
ut*ye ‘take heed: lo, I have foretold to you all things, 
24 ™ANX'! ἐν ἐκείναις ταῖς ἡμέραις, μετὰ τὴν. θλίψιν ἐκείνην, 
But in those days, after that tribulation, 
« Jd 7 ‘ « 7 ? , X , 
ὁ ἥλιος σκοτισθήσεται, Kai ἡ σελήνη ov.dWoR τὸ φέγγος 
the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give “light 
αὐτῆς, 25 καὶ οἱ ἀστέρες "τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἔσονται ἐκπίπτοντες." 
ther ; and the stars ofthe heaven shall be falling out, 
καὶ ai δυνάμεις αἱ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς σαλευθήσονται. 
and the powers which [are] ἢ the heavens shall be shaken ; 
26 καὶ τότε ὄψονται τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐρχόμενον ἐν 


h 


and then shalltheysee the Son of man coming in 
νεφέλαις μετὰ δυνάμεως “πολλῆς Kai δόξης." 27 Kai τότε 
clouds with 2power great and glory; and then 
ἀποστελεῖ Tovc.ayyéAoucPavrov,' καὶ ἐπισυνάξει τοὺς 
he will send his angels, and will gather together 


ἐκλεκτοὺς αὐτοῦ! ἐκ τῶν τεσσάρων ἀνέμων, ἀπ᾽ ἄκρου 
his elect from the four winds, from [the] extremity 
ἕως ἄκρου οὐρανοῦ. 28 ᾿Απὸ.δὲ τῆς συκῆς μάθετε 
of earth to [the] extremity of heaven. But from the fig-tree learn 
‘4 4 = ev r > ~ ἠδ « γ᾿ i] t 4 , 
THY παραβολήν" ὅταν ταὐτῆς ἤδη ὁ κλάδος" ἁπαλὸς γένη- 
the parable: when of it already the branch tender is be- 
ται, καὶ "ἐκφυῇ! ra φύλλα, ἱγινώσκετε! bri ἐγγὺς τὸ θέρος 
come, and it puts forth the leaves, yeknow that near the summer 
ἐστίν. 29 οὕτως Kai ὑμεῖς, ὅταν “ταῦτα ἴδητε" γινόμενα, 
is. So also ye, when these things yesee coming to pass, 
, au lA ? ? ‘ , ? bY , cn 
γινώσκετε Ore ἐγγύς ἐστιν ἐπὶ θύραις. 80 ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, 
know that near itis, at [the] doors. Verily Isay to you, 
OTL οὐ.μὴ παρέλθῃ ἡ. γενεὰ. αὕτη, μέχρις οὗ πάντα 
that in no wise will have passed away this generation, until all 


133 


with child, and to 
them that give suckin 
those days! 18 And 
pray ye that your 
flight be not in the 
winter. 19 Forin those 
days shall be affliction, 
such as was not from 
the beginning of the 
creation which God 
created unto this 
time, neither shall be. 
20 And except that the 
Lord had shortened 
those days, no flesh 
should be saved: bu- 
for the elect’s sake. 
whom he hath chosen, 
he hath shortened the 
days. 21 And then if 
any man shall say to 
you, Lo, here zs Christ ; 
or, lo, he is there ; be- 
lieve him not: 22 for 
false Christs and false 
prophets shall rise, 
and shall shew signs 
and wonders, to se- 
duce, if it were pos- 
sible, even the elect. 
23 But take ye heed: 
behold, I have foretold 
you all things, 24 But 
in those days, after 
that tribulation, the 
sun shall be darkened, 
and the moon shall 
not give her light, 
25 and the stars of 
heaven shall fall, and 
the powers that are 
in heaven shall be 
shaken. 26 And then 
shall they see the Son 
of man coming in 
the clouds with great 
power and _ glory. 
27 And then shail he 
send his angels, and 
shall gather together 
his elect from the four 
winds, from the utter- 
most part of the earth 
to the uttermost part 
of heaven. 28 Now 
learn a parable of the 
fig tree; When her 
branch is yet tender, 
and putteth forth 
leaves, ye know that 
summer is near: 29 so 
ye in like manner, 
when ye shall see these 
things come to pass, 
know that it is nigh, 
even at the dvors. 
30 Verily I say unto 
you, that this gene- 
ration shall not pass, 
till all these things be 


ἡ φυγὴ ὑμῶν (read it may not be) urtra. Ὁ ἣν LItr. 
ἃ ἴδε ΤΊΤΑ. ε-- ἢ TA. {ἴδε LTTrA. 
Β δὲ and T, i— ψευδόχριστοι καὶ A. 
Ἰ-- ἰδού [{Πτττὰ. τὰ ᾿Αλλὰ LTTrA. 
δόξης πολλῆς L. Ρ --- αὐτοῦ (read the angels) [u]rrra. 
τ ἤδη ὁ κλάδος αὐτῆς LTr. 5 5 ἐκφύῃ EGT. 
ταυτα LTTr. ¥ TavTa πᾶντα ΤΊΤΑ. 


ς ἐκολόβωσεν κύριος τ. 

& μὴ πιστεύετε believe [it] not euTTraw. 
j ποιήσουσιν will work Ta. 
0 ἔσονται ἐκ TOV οὐρανοῦ πίπτοντες LTTrA. 
4 — αὐτοῦ (read the elect) TTrra. 
: γινώσκεται it is known A. 


— καὶ T[Tr]a. 


ο καὶ 


ἃ ἔδητε 


134 


done, 31 Heaven and 
earth shall pass away : 
but my words shall 
not pass away. 32 But 
of that day and that 
hour knoweth no man, 
no, not the angels 
which are in heaven, 
neither the Son, but 
the Father. 33 Takeye 
heed, watch and pray: 
for ye know not when 
the time is. 34 For the 
Son of man is as aman 
taking a far journey, 
who left his house, and 
gave authority to his 
servants, and to every 
man his work, and 
commanded the por- 
terto watch. 35 Watch 
ye therefore: for ye 
know not when the 
master of the house 
cometh, at even, or at 
midnight, or at the 
cockcrowing, or in the 
morning : 36 lest com- 
ing suddenly he find 
you sleeping. 37 And 
what I say unto you I 
say unto all, Watch. 


XIV. After two days 
was the feast of the 
assover, and of un- 
eavened bread: and 
the chief priests and 
the scribes sought how 
they might take him 
by craft, and put him 
todeath. 2 But they 
said, Not on the feast 
day, lest there be an 
uproar of the people. 


3 And being in Beth- 
any in the house of 
Simon the leper, as he 
sat at meat, there came 
@ woman having an 
alabaster box of oint- 
ment οἵ spikenard 
very precious ; and she 
brake the box, and 
poured it on his head, 
4 And there were some 
that had indignation 
within themselves, 
and said, Why was 
this waste of the oint- 
ment made? 5 for it 
might have been sold 
for more than three 
hundred pence, and 
have been given to the 
poor. And they mur- 
mured against her. 
6 And Jesus said, Let 
her alone; why trou- 
ble ye her? she hath 


ΜΆΡΚΟΣ. XIII, XIV. 
ταῦτα" ἐνηται. 31 ὁ οὐρανὸς καὶ ἡ γῆ Ymape- 
these things shall have taken place. The heaven and the earth shall 


λεύσονται"" οἱ. δὲ. λόγοι. μου οὐ.“ μὴ" Υπαρέλθωσιν." 32 ἸΤερὶ. δὲ 
pass away, but my words innowise shallpassaway. But concerning 
τῆς ἡμέρας.ἐκείνης *Kai τῆς ὥρας, οὐδεὶς οἶδεν, οὐδὲ "οἱ Ay- 
that day and the hour, noone knows, noteventhe an- 
Π b ell ? ? ~ WANN Ce Se > ι £ ΄ , 
yerou' You! ἐν οὐρανῷ, οὐδὲ ὁ υἱός, εἰ.-μὴ ὁ πατήρ. 33 Βλέπετε, 
gels those in heaven, northe Son, but the Father. Take heed, 
ἀγρυπνεῖτε “καὶ προσεύχεσθε," obx.oidare.yao πότε ὁ καιρός 
watch and pray ; for ye know not whenthe time 
ἐστιν. 34 ὡς ἄνθρωπος ἀπόδημος ἀφεὶς τὴν οἰκίαν 
is} as aman going out of the country, leaving “house 
αὐτοῦ, καὶ δοὺς τοῖς.δούλοις αὐτοῦ τὴν ἐξουσίαν, καὶ" ἑκάστῳ 
this, and giving to his bondmen the authority, and toeachone 
τὸ ἔργον.αὐτοῦ, καὶ τῷ θυρωρῷ ἐνετείλατο ἵνα ypnyooy. 
his work, and *the *door-keeper ‘commanded that he should watch. 
35 γρηγορεῖτε οὖν" οὐκ.οἴδατε.γὰρ πότε ὁ.κύριος τῆς οἰκίας 
Watch therefore, for ye know not when the master of the house 


ἔρχεται, “ὀψέ, ἢ ἱμεσονυκτίου," ἢ ἀλεκτοροφωνίας, ἢ πρωΐ: 


comes: atevening,or at midnight, or atcock-crowing, or morning; 
36 μὴ ἐλθὼν ἐξαίφνης εὕρῃ ὑμᾶς καθεύδοντας. 37 δὰ" δὲ 
lest coming suddenly he should find you sleeping. And what 
ὑμῖν λέγω, πᾶσιν λέγω, Τρηγορεῖτε. 
toyou Isay, toall Isay, Watch. 
ἋΣ A 4 , \ Ay » Ay , 
14 "Hyd τὸ πάσχα καὶ τὰ ἄζυμα μετὰ δύο 


Now it was the passover and the [feast of] unleavened bread after two 
ἡμέρας" Kai ἐζήτουν οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς Kai οἱ γραμματεῖς πῶς 
days. And ’were ®seeking ‘the *chief*priests *and *the scribes how 
αὐτὸν ἐν δόλῳ κρατήσαντες ἀποκτείνωσιν" 2 ἔλεγον "δέ," 
him by guile gettingholdof they might kill(him). 7*They °said ‘but, 
Μὴ ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ, μήποτε ἰθύόρυβος ἔσται! τοῦ λαοῦ. 
Not in the feast, lest a tumult there shall be of the people. 
3 Kai ὄντος αὐτοῦ ἐν Βηθανίᾳ, ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ Σίμωνος τοῦ 
And *being the in Bethany, in the house ofSimon the 
λεπροῦ, κατακειμένου.αὐτοῦ, ἦλθεν γυνὴ ἔχουσα ἀλά- 
leper, as he reclined {at table], *came ‘a*woman having an ala- 


βαστρον μύρου νάρδου πιστικῆς πολυτελοῦς" ‘kai! συν- 
baster flask of ointment of *nard ‘pure of great price ; and having 


τρίψασα ‘76! ἀλάβαστρον, κατέχεεν αὐτοῦ “xara! τῆς 
broken the alabaster flask, she poured [it] “*his ton 
κεφαλῆς. 4 ἦσαν.δέὲ τινες ἀγανακτοῦντες πρὸς ἑαυτούς, “Kai 
head. And *were ‘some indignant within themselves, and 
λέγοντες," Eig τί ἡ ἀπώλεια αὕτη τοῦ μύρου γέγονεν ; 
saying, For what *this *waste “of *the Sointment *has been made? 
5 ἠδύνατο.γὰρ τοῦτο ° πραθῆναι ἐπάνω τριακοσίων 
for it was possible [for] this tohave beensold forabove three hundred 
δηναρίων," καὶ δοθῆναι τοῖς πτωχοῖς" Kai “ἐνεβριμῶντο" 


W παρελεύσεται GW. 


an angel a. 
either Trra. 
θόρυβος TTrA. 
LYTra,. 
τριακοσίων LTTrAW. 


k — καὶ TA. 
" — καὶ λέγοντες T[Tr]A. 


denarii, and tohave been given tothe poor. And they murmured 
? ~ « 1? ~ » ? U , ᾽ “ , 
αὐτῇ. 6 Ο.δὲ. Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν, Agere αὑτὴν" τί αὐτῷ κοπους 
at her. But Jesus said, Let alone ‘her; whytoher trouble 
_ *— pH Tra. Υ παρελεύσονται TIrA. 7 ἣ OY GLTTrAW. δ ἄγγελος 
b — οἱ TTrA. © — καὶ προσεύχεσθε LT[Tr]A. 4—xatLitra,, .6.- ἢ 
μεσονύκτιον TTrA. & ὃ LTTrA. h yap for LTTrA. i ἔσται 


l τὸν LEW 3 τὴν TrA, m — κατὰ (read αὐτοῦ on his) 
° + τὸ μύρον Ointment GLTTraW. P δηναρίων 
4 ἐνεβριμοῦντο T. 


XIV. MARK. 


παρεχετε; καλὸν ἔργον "εἰργάσατο" “εἰς ἐμέ." 7 πάντοτε.γὰρ 
do yecause? agood work she wrought towards me. For always 
τοὺς πτωχοὺς ἔχετε μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῶν, καὶ ὅταν θέλητε δύνασθε 
the poor yehave with you, and whenever ye desire ye are able 
ἰαὐτοὺς" eb-moujoar ἐμὲ.δὲ ob πάντοτε ἔχετε. 8 ὃ Yeiyer'! 
*them lto?do good; butme not always yehave. What could 
“arn, ἐποίησεν. προέλαβεν μυρίσαι “μου.τὸ.σῶμα" εἰς 

1886, she did. She came beforehand to anoint my body for 
τὸν ἐνταφιασμόν. 9 ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὕπου. ἂν _KnovyOy 
the burial. Verily Isay toyou, Wheresoever shall beproclaimed 
τὸ εὐαγγέλιον “τοῦτο! εἰς ὅλον τὸν κόσμον, Kai ὃ ἐποίησεν 

this glad tidings in ?whole'the world, also what *has *done 

αὕτη λαληθήσεται εἰς μνημόσυνον αὐτῆς. 


‘this [?woman] shall be spoken of for ἃ memorial of her. 


10 Kai °6"Ioddac 6" Φ᾿Ισκαριώτης," 1 εἷς τῶν δώδεκα, 
And Judas the Iscariote, one ofthe twelve, 
ἀπῆλθεν πρὸς τοὺς ἀρχιερεῖς, ἵνα “παραδῷ advror' 
went away to the chief priests, that hemightdeliverup him 
αὐτοῖς. 11 Οἱ. δὲ ἀκούσαντες ἐχάρησαν, Kai ἐπηγγείλαντο 
tothem. Andthey having heard rejoiced, and promised 


καὶ ἐζήτει πῶς [εὐκαίρως αὐτὸν 


αὐτῷ ἀργύριον δοῦναι" 
And hesought how ‘conveniently ‘him 


shim oney 1to *give, 
παραδῷ." 
"he *might ‘deliver “ἪΡ. 
12 Kai τῇ πρώτῃ ἡμέρᾳ τῶν ἀζύμων, ὅτε τὸ πάσχα 
And on the first day of unleavened [bread], when the passover 
ἔθυον, λέγουσιν αὐτῷ οἱ.μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ, Τοῦ θέλεις 


theykilled, “say ‘*to*him "his ?disciples, Where desirest thou [that] 
ἀπελθόντες ἑτοιμάσωμεν ἵνα φάγῃς τὸ πάσχα; 18 Kai 
going we should prepare that thou mayest eat the passover ? And 


ἀποστέλλει δύο τῶν. μαθητῶν. αὐτοῦ, καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, Ὑπάγετε 
he sends forth two of his disciples, and says tothem, Go 

εἰς THY πόλιν" καὶ ἀπαντήσει ὑμῖν ἄνθρωπος κεράμιον ὕδατος 
into the city, and *will*meet ‘you la "man apitcher of water 
βαστάζων: ἀκολουθήσατε αὐτῷ, 14 καὶ O7ov-Sédy' εἰσέλθῃ, 


carrying ; follow him; and wherever he may enter, 
εἴπατε τῷ οἰκοδεσπότῃ, Ὅτι ὁ διδάσκαλος λέγει, Ποῦ 
say to the master of the house, The teacher says, Where 


? x , h 
ἐστιν τὸ κατάλυμα 


ὕπου τὸ πάσχα μετὰ τῶν.μαθητῶν.μου 
is the guest-chamber 


where the passover with my disciples 

φάγω; 15 καὶ αὐτὸς ὑμῖν δείξει ἱἀνώγεον" μέγα ἐστρω- 
I may eat? and he Syou ‘will *shew an upper room large, fur- 
μένον ξἕτοιμον." let! ἑτοιμάσατε ἡμῖν. 16 Kai ἐξῆλθον ot 


nished ready. There prepare for us. And went away 
δ Τὴ ᾽ ὌΠ Vie ? \ , ‘ = " 
μαθηταὶ. "αὐτοῦ," καὶ ἦλθον εἰς τὴν πόλιν, καὶ εὗρον καθὼς 
his disciples, and came into the city, and found as 


εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Kai ἡτοίμασαν τὸ πάσχα. 17 Kai ὀψίας 
he had said tothem, and they prepared the passover. And evening 
γενομένης ἔρχεται μετὰ τῶν δώδεκα. 18 Kai ἀνακειμένων 
being come hecomes with the twelve. And as *were *reclining 


τ ἠργάσατοτ. 5 ἐν ἐμοί tO Me ΟἸΤΤΓΑΥ. 
GLTTraW. * — αὕτη (read εἶχεν she could) [u]Jt[Tr]a. 
and (verily) [L]ttra. Z ἐὰν TA. 
LTTraw. © Ἰσκαριώθ TA. d + 6 the TTrA. 
{αὐτὸν εὐκαίρως παραδοῖ LITrA; αὐτὸν εὐκ. παραδῷ W. 
guest-chamber) [xn ]rtra. 1 ἀνάγαιον GLTTrAW. 
there ττὰ ; κἀκεῖ T. m — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) [Tr]. 


& ἂν {πτὰ. 


t αὐτοῖς LTrA ; — αὐτοὺς T. 

* τὸ σῶμά μου LTr. 
85. — τοῦτο (read the glad tidings) [1 ]rtra. 
© παραδοῖ αὐτὸν L; αὐτὸν παραδοῖ ΤΊτΑ. 


k [ἕτοιμον L. 


135 


wrought a good work 
onme. 7 For ye have 
the poor with you 
always, and whenso- 
ever ye will ye may do 
them good: but me 
ye have not always. 
8 She hath done what 
she could: she is come 
aforehand to anoint 
my body to the bury- 
ing. 9 Verily I say 
unto you, Wheresoever 
this gospel shall be 
preached throughout 
the whole world, this 
also thatshe hath done 
shall be spoken of for 
ὃ. Memorial of her. 


10 And Judas Isca- 
riot, one of the twelve, 
went unto the chief 
priests, to betray him 
unto them. 11 And 
when they heard it, 
they were glad, and 
promised to give him 
money. And hesought 
how he might con- 
veniently betray him. 


12 And the first da 
of unleavened bread, 
when they killed the 
passover, his disciples 
said unto him, Where 
wilt thou that we go 
and prepare that thou 
mayest eat the pass- 
over? 13 And he send- 
eth forth two of his 
disciples, and saith 
unto them, Go ye into 
the city, and there 
shall meet you a man 
bearing a pitcher of 
water: follow him. 
14 And wheresoever 
he shall go in, say ye 
to the goodman of the 
house, The Master 
saith, Wheres is the 
guestchamber, where 
I shall eat the pass- 
over with my disciples? 
15 And he will shew 
youa large upper room 
furnished and pre- 


pared: there make 
ready for us. 16 And 
his disciples went 


forth, and came into 
the city, and found as 
he had said unto them: 
and they made ready 
the passover. 17 And 
in theevening he com- 
eth with the twelve. 
18 And as they satand 
did eat, Jesus said, 


bh + μον (read my 
lat ἐκεῖ and 


190 


Verily I say unto you, 
One of you which eat- 
eth with me shall be- 
tray me. 19 And the 

began to be sorro 
and to say unto him 
one by one, Js it 1? 
and another said, 78 
it 1? 20 And he an- 
swered and said unto 
them, Jt is one of the 
twelve, that dippeth 
with me in the dish. 
21 The Son of man in- 
deed goeth, as it is 
written of him: but 
woe to that man by 
whom the Son of man 
is betrayed! good were 
it for that man if he 
had never been born. 


22 And as they did 
eat, Jesus took bread, 
and blessed, and brake 
it, and gave to them, 
and said, Take, eat: 
thisismy body. 23 And 
he took the cup, and 
when he had given 
thanks, he gave tt to 
them: and they all 
drank of it. 24 And 
he said unto them, 
This is my blood of 
the new testament, 
which is shed _ for 
many. 25 Verily I say 
unto you, I will drink 
nomore of the fruit of 
the vine, until that 
day that I drink it 
new in the kingdom 
of God. 


26 And when they 
had sung an hymn, 
they went out into 
the mount of Olives. 
27 And Jesus saith 
unto them, All ye 
shall be offended ‘be- 
cause of me this night: 
for it is written, I will 
smite the shepherd, 
and the sheep shall be 
scattered, 28 But after 
that I am risen, I will 
go before you into 
Galilee. 29 But Peter 
said unto him, Al- 
though all shall be 
offended, yet will not 
1, 30 And Jesus saith 
unto him, Verily I say 
unto thee, That this 


MAPKOX&. XI1y. 

αὐτῶν καὶ ἐσθιόντων "πεῖπεν ὁ ᾿Ι[ησοῦς," ᾿Αμὴν λέγω 

(tat Stable] *they and wereeating “said Jesus, Verily Isay 

ὑμῖν, ore εἷς ἐξ ὑμῶν παραδώσει με, ὁ ἐσθίων per ἐμοῦ. 
to you, that one of you _ will deliver up me, who is eating with me. 

19 901.68" ἤρξαντο λυπεῖσθαι, Kai λέγειν αὐτῷ, εἷς Ῥκαθ᾽ εἷς, 


And they began to be grieved, and tosay tohim, one by one, 
Μή τι ἐγώ ; «Καὶ ἄλλος, Μή τι ἐγώ ;" 20 Ὁ δὲ ᾿ἀπο- 
{Is it] 1? And another, {Is it] 1? But he an- 
κριθεὶς" εἶπεν αὐτοῖς. Εἴς "ἐκὶ τῶν δώδεκα, ὁ ἐμβαπτό- 
swering said tothem, [Τὺ 158] one of the twelve, who is dip- 
7 AP. ~ t ᾽ ‘A a’ , v « ea ~ ?» , 
μενος μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ εἰς τὸ τρυβλίον. 21 ὁ μὲν υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
ping with me _ in the dish. The Sindeed *Son 3o0f Sman 
ὑπάγει, καθὺς γέγραπται περὶ αὐτοῦ" οὐαὶ. δὲ τῷ 
+z0e8, as it has been written concerning him; but woe 


« er ~ ? , ΄ . 
ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπον παραδίδοται 


2 , ? , ? 
avOpwrwixeivy dv οὗ 
of man is delivered up ; 


to that man by whom the Son 
\ w,,, ll > x > ᾽ ? , eg ~ 
καλὸν Way αὐτῷ εἰ οὐκ.ἐγεννήθη ὁ. ἄνθρωπος ἐκεῖνος. 


good wereit for him if “had *not *been Sborn ‘that *man. 
22 Kai ἐσθιόντων.αὐτῶν, λαβὼν τὸ ᾿Ιησοῦς" ἄρτον, 
And as they were eating, *having “taken 1 Jesus a loaf, 


εὐλογήσας ἐκλασεν, καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς. καὶ εἶπεν, Λάβετε, 
having blessed hebrake, ἅτ gave tothem, and = said, Take, 
Yoayere’" τοῦτό ἐστιν τσ ὉΠ ΠΟ, 23 Καὶ λαβὼν τὸ" 
eat 3 this is my body And having taken the 
ποτήριον, εὐχαριστήσας ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς" Kai ἔπιον ἐξ αὐτοῦ 
cup, having given thanks he gave tothem, andthey*drank*of ‘it 
πάντες" 24 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Τοῦτό ἐστιν τὸ. αἵμά.μου τὸ" 


tall. And hesaid tothem, ‘This is my blood that 
τῇ b ~ tl ὃ θ , , ς ry λλ ~ ? , Π 

1¢ "καινῆς" διαθῆηκης, τὸ “περὶ πολλῶν εκχυνομέγον. 
of the new covenant, which for many is poured out. 
25 ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι οὐκέτι οὐ-μὴ πίω ἐκ τοῦ 


Verily Isay ὕο you, that not any more in any wise willI drink of the 
ἀγεννήματος" τῆς ἀμπέλου, ἕως τῆς. ἡμέρας. ἐκείνης ὅταν αὐτὸ 
fruit of the vine, until that day when it 


πίνω καινὸν ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ. 
Idrink new in the kingdom of God. 
26 Kai ὑμνήσαντες ἐξῆλθον εἰς τὸ ὄρος τῶν ᾿Ἐλαιῶν. 
And having sung ἃ hymn they went out to the mount of Olives. 


27 καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Ὅτι πάντες σκανδαλισθήσεσθε 
And *says *to *them 1Jesus, All ye will be offended 


ety ἐμοὶ" fy ryvuKrirabry’' ὕτι γέγραπται, Πατάξω τὸν 
in me in this night ; for it has been written, I will smite the 


ποιμένα, καὶ ἔδιασκορπισθήσεται τὰ πρόβατα." 28 ᾿Αλλὰ 


shepherd, and _ will be scattered abroad the sheep. But 
pera τὸὺ.ἐγερθῆναί.με. προάξω ὑμᾶς εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν. 
after my arising, I will go before you into Galilee. 


29 Ὁ δὲ Πέτρος ἔφη αὐτῷ, Kai εἰ! πάντες σκανδαλισθήσονται 
ρ ῆ ῳ 1) ᾽ 


But Peter said tohim, Evenif all shall be offended, 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ae 30 Kai λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, analy λέγω σοι, 
yet not LI. And %says *to*him ‘Jesus, 6 


rily [587 to thee, 


0 6 ᾿Τησοῦς εἶπεν TA. 
ἄλλος, My τι ἐγώ ; TTr. 
t + rv χεῖρα the hand 1. 

Υ — φάγετε GLTTrAW. 

ς ὑπὲρ πολλῶν ἐκχυννόμενον L; ἐκχυννόμενον ὑπὲρ πολλῶν τῦτα. 
© — ἐν ἐμοὶ TTrA. 
τὰ πρόβατα L; τὰ πρόβατα διασκορπισθήσονται TTrA. 


fu] τ{τι]ᾶ. 
Ὁ — καινῆς TTrA. 
ματος TTrAW. 


ο — Oi δὲ (read ἤρξαντο they began) τὰ. Ρ κατὰ ΤΑ. 4 -- καὶ 
τ--- ἀποκριθεὶς LTTrA. 8 ἐκ (read τῶν of the) T[Tr]. 
v + ὅτι for T[TrJA. w — ἦν (Letra. x — ὁ Ἰησοῦς 
1 — τὸ (read a cup) LTTrA. & — τὸ [L]TA. 
4 γενή- 
- ἐν τῇ νυκτὶ ταύτῃ [L]ttraW. 8 διασκορπισθήσονται 
h Ec καὶ Tra. 


χτν: MARK. 
ore’ σήμερον Jévy τῇ νυκτὶ ταυτῃ,! πρὶν ἢ δὶς ἀλέκτορα 
that to-day in this night, before pri twice [the] cock 


φωνῆσαι, τρὶς *arapynoy με." 31 Ὁ δὲ ἱἐκ. περισσοῦ ἔλεγεν 
crow, thrice thou wilt deny me, But he eueleumantly? *said 


μᾶλλον," "Edy με δέῃ!" συναποθανεῖν σοι, οὐ.μή σε 
the *more, If it were nee for me to die with thee, in no wise thee 


πἀπαρνήσομαι. Ὡσαύτως. δὲ καὶ πάντες ἔλεγον. 
will I deny. Andinlike manneralso “all “they ‘spake, 


32 Kai ἔρχονται εἰς χωρίον °ob τὸ" ὄνομα ῬΓεθσημανῆ"" 
And theycome to aplace οὗ whichthe name Cis] Geths nee 


καὶ λέγει τοῖς.μαθηταῖς. αὐτοῦ, Καθίσατε ὧδε, ἕως προσεύξω- 


and he says to his disciples, Sit here, while I shall 
μαι. 33 te παραλα Paver τὸν Πέτρον καὶ Irov" ᾿ΙΓάκωβον 
pray. he t: Peter and James 


καὶ ἜΡΟΝ τμεθ᾽ satire." Kai ἤρξατο ἐκθαμβεῖσθαι καὶ 
and John with him ; and he began to be greatly amazed and 


ἀδημονεῖν. 84 καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, ἸΠερίλυπός ἐστιν ἡ-ψυχή-μου 
deeply depressed. And hesays tothem, Verysorrowful is my soul 

ἕως θανάτου" μείνατε ὧδε καὶ γρηγορεῖτε. 35 Kai ὅπροελ- 
evento death; remain here and watch. And haying Bone 


θὼν" μικρὸν ἱἔπεσεν" ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, Kai προσηύχετο ἵνα, εἰ 
forward a little hefell upon ee earth, and prayed that, if 


δυνατόν ἐστιν, παρέλθῃ ax’ αὐτοῦ ἡ ὥρα. 86 Kai ἔλεγεν, 
possible it ἘΠ aight pass from him the hour, And hesaid, 


᾿Αββᾶ, ὁ πατήρ, πάντα δυνατά cou παρένεγκε τὸ ποτή- 
Abba, Hakher; all things [are] Bonsitle to thee; take away 2cup 


ριον Yar’ ἐμοῦ τοῦτο" ἀλλ᾽ οὐ τί ἐγὼ θέλω, ἀλλὰ τί σύ. 
Ξέγοα *me ‘this; but notwhat Ζ will, but what thou. 


37 Kai ἔρχεται καὶ εὑρίσκει αὐτοὺς καθεύδοντας" καὶ λέγει τῷ 


And hecomes and finds them sleeping. And he says 
Πέτρῳ, Σίμων, καθεύδεις; οὐκιἴσχυσας μίαν ὥραν γρη- 
to Peter, Simon, sleepest thou? wast thou not able one hour 


γορῆσαι; 38 γρηγορεῖτε καὶ προσεύχεσθε, ἵνα μὴ πεἰσέλθητε! 
watch ? Watch and pray, that ye enter not 


εἰς πειρασμόν. τὸ μὲν πνεῦμα πρόθυμον, ἡ.δὲ σὰρξ 
into temptation. The 7indeed ‘spirit ready, but the flesh 


ἀσθενής. 39 Kai πάλιν ἀπελθὼν προσηύξατο, τὸν αὐτὸν 
weak. And again having goneaway heprayed, “the *same 
λόγον εἰπών. 40 Kai τὑποστρέψας᾽ εὗρεν αὐτοὺς Yraduy' 
“thing ‘saying. And having returned hefound them again 
καθεύδοντας" ἦσαν.γὰρ *ot.6¢0adpoi.aiTay' "βεβαρημένοι," 
sleeping, for *were 1their eyes heavy ; 
7ὃ θαὐτῷ ἀποκριθῶσιν." 41 Καὶ ἔ 
καὶ eet ed τί αὐυτῷῳ απόκρι ωσιν. αι EPXETAL 
and mney ewnot what *him ‘they “should *answer. And he comes 


τὸ τρίτον, καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, Καθεύδετε “τὸ" λοιπὸν καὶ 


[15] 


the third time, and says to them, Sleep on now and 
? 7 > , Zz « “ = ? ’, ΄, 
ἀναπαύεσθες. ἀπέχει ἦλθεν ἡ wpa ἰδού, παραδίδοται 
take Or rest. It is enough; has come the hour; lo, Sis *delivered 7up 


ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου εἰς τὰς χεῖρας τῶν ἁμαρτωλῶν. 42 ἐγεί- 
‘the *Son Sof*man into the hands of sinners, Rise, 


ρεσθε, ἄγωμεν᾽ ἰδού, ὁ παραδιδούς μὲ “ἤγγικεν." 
let us go; behold, he who isdelivering up me has drawn near, 


i+ σὺ thouGLtTrraw. Jj ταύτῃ τῇ νυκτὶ LTTrA. 
ἐλάλει LTTrA. τῷ δέῃ μεῖττ. ἅ ἀπαρνήσωμαι T. 
GLITrAW. τ μετ᾽ αὑτοῦ LITrA. 5 προσελθὼν Tr. 
*@AOnTeTA. 1 πάλιν ἐλθὼν again coming La ; ἐλθὼν Tr. 
MOLT. 5 καταβαρυνόμενοι ΤΊΤΑΥ. » ἀποκριθῶσιν αὐτῷ LITrAW. 


οὗ τ, 
ἵ ἔπιπτεν ΤΑ. 


Χ με ἀπαρνήσῃ LTTraw. 
P Τεθσημανεῖ LITrAW. 
Y τοῦτο ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ LTTraw. 
Υ --- πάλιν LTrA. 
©—70 LTrAW. 


id7 
day, even in this niznt 
before the cock crow 
twice, thou shalt deny 
me thrice. 31 But he 
spake the more vehe- 
mently, If I should die 
with thee, I will not 
deny thee in any wise. 
Likewise also said 
they all. 


32 And they came to 
a place which was 
named Gethsemane: 
and he saith to his 
disciples, Sit ye here, 
while I shall pray. 
33 And he taketh with 
him Peter and Jaines 
and John, and began 
to be sore amazed, 
and to be very heavy ; 
34 and saith unto 
them, My soul is ex- 
ceeding sorrowful un- 
to death: tarry ye here, 
and watch. 35 And he 
went forward a little, 
and fell on the ground, 
and prayed that, if it 
were possible, the hour 
might pass from him, 
36 And he said, Abba, 
Father, all things are 
possible unto thee; 
take away this cup 
from me: nevertheless 
not what I will, but 
what thou wilt. 37 And 
he cometh, and find- 
eth them = sleeping, 
and saith unto Peter 
Simon, sleepest thou? 
couldest not thou 
watch one hour? 
38 Watch ye and pray, 
lest ye enter into temp- 
tation. The spirit 
truly is ready, but the 
flesh is weak. 39 And 
again he went away, 
and prayed, and spake 
the same words. 40 And 
when he returned, he 
found them asleep a- 
gain, (for their eyes 
were heavy,) neither 
wist they what to an- 
swer him. 41 And he 
cometh the third time, 
and saith unto them, 
Sleep on now, and 
take your rest: it is 
enough, the hour is 
come ; behold, the Son 
of manis betrayed into 
the hands of sinners. 
42 Rise up, let us go; 
lo, he that betrayeth 
me is at hand. 


| ἐκπερισσῶς 
4 — τὸν 


: αὐτῶν οἱ ὀφθαλ- 
ἀ γγισενῖ. 


198 


43 And immediately, 
while ~he yet spake, 
cometh Judas, one of 
the twelve, and with 
him a great multi- 
tude with swords and 
staves, from the chief 
priests and the scribes 
and the elders. 44 And 
he that betrayed him 
had given them a 
token, saying, Whom- 
soever I shall kiss, that 
same is he; take him, 
and lead him away 
safely. 45 And as soon 
as he was come, he 
gooth straightway to 
him, andsaith, Master, 
master; and kissed 
him, 46 And they laid 
their hands on him, 
and took him. 47 And 
one of them that stood 
by drew a sword, and 
smote a servant of the 
high priest, and cut off 
hisear. 48 And Jesus 
answered and_ said 
unto them, Are ye 
come out, as against 
a thief, with swords 
and with staves to take 
me? 49 I was daily 
with you in the tem- 
ple teaching, and ye 
took me not: but the 
seriptures must be ful- 
filled. 50 And they all 
forsook him, and fled. 
51 And there followed 
him a certain young 
man, having a linen 
cloth cast about his 
naked body; and the 
young men laid hold 
on him : 52 and he left 
the linen cloth, and 
fied from them naked. 


53 And they led Je- 
sus away to the high 
priest: and with him 
were assembled all the 
chief priests and the 
elders and the scribes. 
54 And Peter followed 
him afar off, even into 
the palace of the high 
priest : and hesat with 
the servants, and 
warmed himself at the 
fire. 55 And the chief 
priests and all the 
council sought for wit- 


MA BK Os. XIV. 


43 Kai “εὐθέως" ἔτι αὐτοῦ.λαλοῦντος παραγίνεται £ Τού- 
And immediately *yet ‘as *he “15 speaking, comes up Ju- 


6ac®, εἷς *Ov' τῶν δώδεκα, καὶ per αὐτοῦ ὄχλος ἱπολὺς! 


das, "one ‘being ofthe twelve, and with him  a*crowd ‘great, 
μετὰ μαχαιρῶν καὶ ξύλων, παρὰ τῶν ἀρχιερέων Kai τῶν 
with swords and staves, from the _ chiefpriests and _ the 
, \ k ~ 1] , 44 ὃ ὃ , δὲ ε 
γοαμματεων και “Των T PEO, UTEPWY. EOWKELOE ο 
scribes and the elders. Now “had ®given 'he who 
‘ ? \ ] ’ ll > - , - n 
παραδιδοὺς αὐτὸν ‘ovaonpoy' αὐτοῖς, λέγων, Ὃν ἂν 
°was *delivering °up δῃΐτη a sign tothem, saying, Whomsoever 


φιλήσω αὐτός ἐστιν κρατήσατε αὐτόν, Kai π᾿ἀπαγάγετε" 
Ishallkiss *he lis ; seize him, and lead [him] away 
ἀσφαλῶς. 45 Kai ἐλθών, “εὐθέως" προσελθὼν αὐτῷ λέγει, 
safely. And being come, immediately comingup to him he says, 
™PaBBi, papi" καὶ κατεφίλησεν αὐτόν. 46 Οἱ.δὲ οσἐπέβαλον" 
Rabbi, Rabbi; and ardently kissed him. And they laid 
Pén’ αὐτὸν τὰς χεῖρας αὐτῶν," καὶ ἐκράτησαν αὐτόν. 47 Eic.dé 
upon him “7hands ‘their, and seized him. But “one 
Aric! TOY παρεστηκότων σπασάμενος THY μάχαιραν 
1a 2certain of those standing by, haying drawn the sword 
ἔπαισεν τὸν δοῦλον τοῦ ἀρχιερέως καὶ ἀφεῖλεν αὐτοῦ τὸ 
struck the bondman ofthe highpriest and _ took off his 
τὠτίον." 48 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Ὥς ἐπὶ 
ear. And answering 1Jesus said tothem, As against 
λῃστὴν "ἐξήλθετε" μετὰ μαχαιρῶν καὶ ξύλων συλλαβεῖν με; 
arobber areyecome out with swords and staves totake me? 
49 καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἤμην πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ διδάσκων, Kai 
Daily Iwas with you in the temple teaching, and 
οὐκ ἐκρατήσατέ με’ ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα πληρωθῶσιν αἱ γραφαί. 
ye did not seize me: _ but [1ὖ 15] ὑπαῦ *may *be ‘fulfilled *the *scriptures. 
50 Kai ἀφέντες αὐτὸν ἱπάντες ἔφυγον." 51 Kai "εἷς τις 
And leaving him all fled. And one a certain 
νεανίσκος" YnKodovbe' αὐτῷ, περιβεβλημένος σινδόνα ἐπὶ 
young man was following him, having cast a linen cloth about 
υμνοῦ" καὶ κρατοῦσιν αὐτὸν “οἱ νεανίσκοι" 52 ὁ.δὲ 
[118] naked [body]; and 4seize Shim ‘the “young “men, but he, 
καταλιπὼν τὴν σινδόνα γυμνὺς ἔφυγεν "ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν." 
leaving behind the linen cloth, *naked fled from them. 
58 Kai ἀπήγαγον τὸν Ἰησοῦν πρὸς τὸν ἀρχιερέα" καὶ 
And they led away Jesus to the high priest. And 
συνέρχονται Ταὐτῷ᾽ πάντες οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς Kai οἱ “πρεσβύτεροι 
there come together to him all the chief priests and the elders 
‘ € eal (| 54 K ‘ ἡ Πέ ? 4 0 ? Xx ees 
και OL γραμματεις. αι OLLETPOC απὸ μάακρο V NKOAOU 
and the scribes, And Peter from afar off fol- 
θησεν αὐτῷ ἕως ἔσω εἰς τὴν αὐλὴν τοῦ ἀρχιερέως" καὶ ἦν 
lowed him asfaraswithinto the court ofthe ΒΙρἪ ρυϊθδῦ; and he was 
“cuykalnpevoc' μετὰ THY ὑπηρετῶν, Kai θερμαινόμενος πρὸς 
sitting with the officers, and warming himself at 
76! φῶς. 55 Οἱ.δὲ ἀρχιερεῖς Kai ὅλον τὸ συνέδριον ἐζήτουν 
the fire. And the chief priests and “whole 'the sanhedrim sought 
(lit. light). 


ὃ εὐθὺς LTTrA. 
i — πολὺς [L]TTrA. 


ῥαββεί 1; ῥαββεί [ῥαββεί) a. 
ut: 


9 — τις LTrAW. 


Tra. 
ἃ νεανίσκος TLS LTr. 


¥ — οἱ νεανίσκοι (read they seize) LTTrA. 
2 γραμματεῖς Kal οἱ πρεσβύτεροι L. 


f+ o LTraw. 


& + ὃ ᾿Ισκαριώτης Iscariote La[Tr]a. h — ὧν LTTr[ A]. 

1 σύνσημον 1. ™ ἀπάγετε LTTrA. 2 “PaBBé Ltr ; 

° ἐπέβαλαν 1. Ρ τὰς χεῖρας ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν 1,; τὰς χεῖρας αὐτῷ 

τ ὠτάριον LTTrA. 5 ἐξήλθατε LTTrAW. ἵΦδἔφυγον πάντες TTrA. 

¥ συνηκολούθει was following with Lrtra; ἠκολούθησεν followed w. 

x — an’ αὐτῶν [L]TTr. Υ — αὐτῷ τ. 
b— χὸ Ἑ. 


k — τῶν 1. 


ἃ συνκαθήμενος T. 


ΧΙΥ. MARK. 


κατὰ τοῦ Inoov μαρτυρίαν, εἰς τὸ θανατῶσαι αὐτόν" Kai οὐχ 
against Jesus testimony, to put to death him, and ποῦ 
ἀεὕρισκον 56 πολλοὶ.γὰρ ἐψευδομαρτύρουν Kar αὐτοῦ, 
‘did find [any]. For many bore false testimony against him, 


καὶ ἴσαι ai μαρτυρίαι οὐκ.ἦσαν. 57 καί τινες ἀναστάντες 
and alike their testimonies were ποῦ, And some having risen up 


ἐψευδομαρτύρουν κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ, λέγοντες, ὅ8 Ὅτι ἡμεῖς ἠκούσα- 


bore false testimony against him, saying, We heard 
μεν αὐτοῦ λέγοντος, Ὅτι ἐγὼ καταλύσω τὸν.ναὸν. τοῦτον TOY 
him saying, I will destroy this temple the 


χειροποίητον, Kai διὰ τριῶν ἡμερῶν ἄλλον ἀχειροποίητον 
1016] made with hands, and in three days another notmade withhands 
οἰκοδομήσω. 59 Kai οὐδὲ οὕτως ἴση ἦν ἡ-μαρτυρία.αὐτῶν. 
I will build. And neither thus. alike was their testimony. 
60 Kai ἀναστὰῤξῤΛ ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς εἰς *70' μέσον ἐπηρώτησεν 
And ‘*having stood δὰ} ‘the “high *priest in the midst questioned 
τὸν Ἰησοῦν, λέγων, Οὐκ ἀποκρίνῃ οὐδέν; τί οὗτοί σου 
Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? What ?these ‘thee 
καταμαρτυροῦσιν ; 61 Ὁ.δὲ ἐσιώπα, καὶ ἰοὐδὲν ἀπεκρίνατο." 
testify “against ? But he was silent, and nothing answered. 
Πάλιν ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς ἐπηρώτα αὐτόν, καὶ λέγει αὐτῷ, Σὺ 
Again the high priest was questioning him, and says tohim, *Thou 
εἶ ὁ χριστός, ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ εὐλογητοῦ; 62 ‘O.dé. Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν, 
lart the Christ, the Son ofthe blessed? And Jesus said, 
> , : ‘ Ἢ ‘ ey ~ > , , 

Ἐγώ εἰμι. καὶ ὄψεσθε τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου δκαθήμενον 
1 am. And ye shall see the Son of man sitting 
ἐκ δεξιῶν" τῆς δυνάμεως, καὶ ἐρχόμενον μετὰ τῶν νεφελῶν 
at [the] right hand of power, and coming with the clouds 
τοῦ οὐρανοῦ. 63'O.dé ἀρχιερεὺς διαῤῥήξας τοὺς. χιτῶνας. αὐτοῦ 

of the heaven. Andthe high priest having rent his garments 
λέγει, Τί ἔτι χρείαν ἔχομεν μαρτύρων ; 64 ἠκούσατε *rij¢ 
says, Whatany more need have we of witnesses? Ye heard the 
βλασφημίας"" τί ὑμῖν φαίνεται; Ot.d& πάντες κατέκριναν 
blasphemy : what ?to*you ‘appears? And they all condemned 
avrov'teivar ἔνοχον" θανάτου. 65 Kai ἤρξἕαντό τινες ἐμπτύειν 


him tobe deserving of death. And began ‘some to spit upon 
αὐτῷ, καὶ περικαλύπτειν “ro.rodcwrov.abTov,' Kai κολα- 
him, and to cover up his face, and to buf- 
φίξειν αὐτόν, καὶ λέγειν αὐτῷ, ΠΠροφήτευσον᾽ καὶ οἱ ὑπηρέται 
et him, and tosay tohim, Prophesy ; and the officers 
ῥαπίσμασιν αὐτὸν πἔβαλλον." 


with the palm of the hand *him 4struck. 
66 Kai ὄντος τοῦ Πέτρου πὲν τῇ αὐλῇ κάτω," ἔρχεται μία 
And *being Peter in the court below, comes one 
τῶν παιδισκῶν τοῦ ἀρχιερέως, 67 Kai ἰδοῦσα τὸν Πέτρον 
of the maids of the high priest, and = seeing Peter 
θερμαινόμενον, ἐμβλέψασα αὐτῷ λέγει. Kai od μετὰ Tov 
warming himself, having lookedat him says, And thou “with “the 
Ναζαρηνοῦ “Ἰησοῦ ἦσθα." 68 ‘0.dé ἠρνήσατο, λέγων, POLK! 
*Nazarene 5Jesus wast. But he denied, saying, ΞΝοῦ 
olda “οὐδὲ" ἐπίσταμαι ττί σὺ" λέγεις. Καὶ ἐξῆλθεν ἔξω 
ἍΤ *know noreven understand what thou sayest. And he went forth out 


d ηὕρισκον LTrA. e — τὸ (read [the]) GLTTraw. 
δεξιῶν καθήμενον GLITrAW. h τὴν βλασφημίαν L. 
πρόσωπον ΤΊτΑ. 
ἐν τῇ αὐλῇ TTrA. 
nor LTTraw. 


ο ἦσθα τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ LTTrA. 
τ σὺ τί LTTrA. 


f οὐκ ἀπεκρίνατο οὐδεν TTr. 
1 ἔνοχον εἶναι TTrA. 

m ἔβαλον w ; ἔλαβον (read received him with buffets) Lrtra. 

P οὔτε neither (know I) LT?ra. 


139 
ness against Jesus to 
put him todeath ; and 
found none. 56 For 
many bare false wit- 
ness against him, but 
their witness agreed 
not together. 57 And 
there: arose certain, 
and bare false witness 
against him, saying, 
58 We heard him say, 
I will destroy this 
temple that is made 
with hands, and with- 
in three days I will 
build another made 
without hands. 59 But 
neither so did their 
witness agree together. 
60 And the high priest 
stood up in the midst, 
and asked Jesus, say- 
ing, Answerest thou 
nothing ? what is it 
which these witness 
against thee? 61 But 
he held his peace, and 
answered nothing. A- 
gain the high priest 
asked him, and said 
unto him, Art thou 
the Christ, the Son of 
the Blessed? 62 And 
Jesus said, lam: and 
ye shall see the Son of 
man sitting on the 
right hand of power, 
and coming in the 
clouds of heaven. 
63 Then the high priest 
rent his clothes, and 
saith, What need we 
any further witnesses? 
64 Ye have heard 
the blasphemy: what 
think ye? And they 
all condemned him to 
be guilty of death. 
65 And some began to 
spit on him, and to 
cover his face, and to 
buffet him, and to say 
unto him, Prophesy : 
and the servants did 
strike him with the 
palms of their hands. 


66 And as Peter was 
beneath in the palace, 
there cometh one of 
the maids of the high 
priest: 67 and when 
shesaw Peter warming 
himself, she looked up- 
on him, and said, And 
thou also wast with 
Jesus of Nazareth. 
68 But he denied, say- 
ing, I know not, nei- 
ther understand I 
what thousayest. And 
he went out into the 


Ξ ἐκ 
k > a“ x 

αὐτοῦ TO 
2 κάτω 
οὔτε 


140 
porch; and the cock 
crew. 69 And a maid 


saw him again, and 
began to say to them 
that stood by, This is 
one of them. 70 And 
he denied it again. 
And a little ‘ after, 
they that stood by said 
again to Peter, Surely 
thou art one of them: 
for thou art a Gali- 
lwan, and thy speech 
agreeth thereto. 71 But 
he began to curse and 
to swear, saying, I 
know not this man 
of whom ye _ speak. 
72 And the second time 
the cock crew. And 
Peter called to mind 
the word that Jesus 
said unto him, Before 
the cock crow twice, 
thou shalt deny me 
thrice. And when he 
thought thereon, he 
wept. 


XV. And straight- 
way in the morning 
the chief priests held 
a consultation with 
the elders and scribes 
and the whole council, 
and bound Jesus, and 
carried him away, 
and delivered him to 
Pilate. 2And Pilate 
asked him, Art thou 
the king of the Jews ? 
And he answering said 
unto him, Thou sayest 
vi. 3And the chief 
priests accused him 
of many things: but 
he answered nothing. 
4 And Pilate asked 
him again, saying, An- 
swerest thou nothing ? 
behold how many 
things they witness a- 
gainst thee. 5 But 
Jesus yet answered 
nothing ; so that Pi- 
late marvelled. 6Now 
at that feast he re- 
leased unto them one 
prisoner, whomsoever 
they desired. 7 And 
there was one named 
Barabbas, which lay 
bound with them that 
had made insurrection 
with him, who had 
committed murder in 
theinsurrection, 8 And 
the multitude crying 
aloud began to desire 
him to do as he had 
ever done unto them, 


MAPKO¥X. XIV, XV 
εἰς TO προαύλιον" "καὶ ἀλέκτωρ ἐφώνησεν." 69 Kai ἡ παιδίσκη 
into the porch, and a cock crew. And the maid 


~ ‘ ΄ ~ ‘ e 
ἰδοῦσα αὐτὸν ἱπάλιν ἤρξατο" λέγειν τοῖς “παρεστηκόσιν. Ὅτι 
standing by, 


seeing him again began to say to those 

οὗτος ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐστιν. 70 ὋὉ.δὲ πάλιν ἠρνεῖτο. Καὶ μετὰ 

This [016] Ὁ *them lis. Andhe again denied. And after 

μικρὸν πάλιν οἱ παρεστῶτες ἔλεγον τῷ Πέτρῳ, ᾿Αληθῶς 

a little again those’ standing by said to Peter, Truly 
ἐξ αὐτῶν εἶ: καὶ.γὰρ Γαλιλαῖος ei, “καὶ ἡ λαλιά 

from among them thou art, for both a Galilean thouart, and 2speech 


σου ὁμοιάζει." 71 Ὃ.δὲ ἤρξατο ἀναθεματίζειν καὶ “ὀμνύειν ." 
1thy agrees. But he began to curse and to swear, 


“Ort οὐκ.οῖδα τὸν. ἄνθρωπον. τοῦτον ὃν λέγετε. 72 Ka’ 
I know not this man whom ye speak of, And 

éx.deuTépou ἀλέκτωρ ἐφώνησεν. Kai ἀνεμνήσθη ὁ Πέτρος *rot 

the second time ἃ cock crew. And *remembered ‘Peter the 


ῥήματος οὗ" εἶπεν αὐτῷ 6’Inoove, Ὅτι πρὶν ἀλέκτορα 
word that said %to *him 1 Jesus, Before (the] cock 
~ ‘ ΄ὔ ΄ ‘ > ‘ 
"φωνῆσαι δὶς" ἀπαρνήσῃ pe τρίς"" καὶ ἐπιβαλὼν 
crow twice thou wilt deny me thrice; and haying thought thereon 
ἔκλαιεν. 
he wept. 


15 Kai “εὐθέως" ἐπὶ τὸ" πρωΐ συμβούλιον ἐποιήσαντες" 

And immediately in the morning °a ’counsel *having °formed 

οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς μετὰ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων 
‘the *chief *priests with the elders 

ὅλον τὸ συνέδριον, δήσαντες τὸν Ἰησοῦν ἀπήνεγκαν Kai 

’whole ‘the sanhedrim, having bound Jesus carried [him] away and 

παρέδωκαν Srp! "Πιλάτῳ." 2 καὶ ἐπηρώτησεν αὐτὸν ὁ 


καὶ γραμματέων καὶ 
and scribes and 


delivered up [him] to Pilate. And 7questioned shim 
ἸΠιλάτος.. Σὺ εἶ ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν “lovdaiwy; ‘O88 ἀπο- 
Pilate, 5Thou ‘art the King of the Jews? And he an- 


κριθεὶς Ἰεῖπεν αὐτῷ," Σὺ λέγεις. 3 Kai κατηγόρουν αὐτοῦ οἱ 
said tohim, Thou sayest. And ‘were °accusing “him ‘the 


swering 

ἀρχιερεῖς πολλά" 4 ὁ δὲ ᾿ἸΠιλάτος" πάλιν ξξπηρώτησεν»" αὐτόν, 
“chief “priests urgently. And Pilate again questioned him, 
Néywry,' Οὐκ ἀποκρίνῃ οὐδέν ; OE, πόσα σου 


saying, Auswerest thou nothing? See, of how many things ‘thee 
™cearapaptupovowy.' 5 Ὁ.δὲ Ἰησοῦς οὐκέτι.οὐδὲν ἀπεκρίθη, 
‘they *witness “ἀρ αἰπύ, But Jesus ποῦ any more any thing answered, 
wore θαυμάζειν τὸν "Πιλάτον." 6 Κατὰ. δὲ ἑορτὴν ἀπέλυεν 
so that *wondered Pilate. Now at [the] feast he released 

? ~ « , οἱ ᾽᾿ ~ ll i x δὲ ς λὶ , 
avuTotc Eva δέσμιον, OVTED YTOVVTO. 7 QV. ο ξγο- 
tothem one prisoner, whomsoever they asked. And there was the [one] call- 
μενος BapaBBac pera τῶν Ῥσυστασιαστῶν" δεδεμένος, 
ed Barabbas with the associates in insurrection bound, 
οἵτινες ἐν τῇ στάσει φόνον πεποιήκεισαν. 8 Kai ἀναβοήσας"! 

who in the insurrection murder had committed. And crying out 
ὁ ὄχλος καθὼς "ἀεὶ" ἐποίει αὐτοῖς 
the crowd as always hedid tothem, 


a” 


ἤρξατο αἰτεῖσθαι 


gan to beg [him to do} 


5" [καὶ ἀλέκτωρ angle 
* — καὶ ἡ λαλιά σου ὁμοιάζει LTTrA. 
* τὸ ῥῆμα ὡς LTTrA ; TO ῥήμα ὃ W. 
d — ἐπὶ τὸ (read mpwit early) LTTr[A]. 


© εὐθὺς TTrA, 

& — τῷ LTTra. 

κ ἐπηρώτα ΤΊτΑ. 
ὁ Ov παρῃτοῦντο T. 


τήρξατο πάλιν Τ; --- πάλιν A. Υ παρεστῶσιν ΤΊτΑ. 

X ὀμνύναι GLITrAW. Υ + εὐθὺς immediately ΠΤ τ. 

2 δὶς φωνῆσαι LTrA. b χρίς με ἀπαρνήσῃ LTA, 

6 ἑτοιμάσαντες τ.  £ 4+ τῶν the T, 

) αὐτῷ λέγει to him says ΤΊτα. 

2 Πειλᾶτον 7. 
τ --- ἀεὶ τ. 


L. 


‘ Πειλᾶτος 2. 
™ κατηγοροῦσιν they accuse LTTrA. 
4 ἀναβὰς coming up LTTrA. 


h Ἰ]ειλάτῳ 1. 
1 — λέγων 1. 
P στασιαστων LTTrA. 


XV. MAREK. 


9 ὁ.δὲ "Πιλάτος" ἀπεκρίθη αὐτοῖς, λέγων, Θέλετε ἀπολύσω 
But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye I should release 

ὑμῖν τὸν βασιλέα τῶν “lovdaiwy; 10’Eyivwoxev-yap ὅτι διὰ 
toyou the King of the Jews? for he knew that through 
φθόνον παραδεδώκεισαν αὐτὸν ot ἀρχιερεῖς. 11 οἱ. δὲ ἀρχ- 
envy *had ‘delivered 7up Shim ‘the chief “priests. But the chief 
lspeic ἀνέσεισαν τὸν ὄχλον ἵνα μᾶλλον τὸν Βαραββᾶν 

priests stirred up the crowd that rather Barabbas 
ἀπολύσῃ αὐτοῖς᾽ 12 ὁ δὲ "Πιλάτος" ἱἀποκριθεὶς πάλιν" 
he might release to them, And Pilate answering again 
Yelzev' αὐτοῖς, Ti οὖν Oédere'! ποιήσω χὸν λέγετε" 
said tothem, What then willye Ishould do[tohim] whom ye call 
Υ βασιλέα τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων ; 18 Οἱ. δὲ πάλιν Exoazay,” Σταύρω- 


King ofthe Jews? But they again cried out Cruci- 
cov αὐτόν. 14 Ὁ δὲ. "Πιλάτος! ps αὐτοῖς. Ti yap “κακὸν 
fy him. And Pilate ἃ tothem, What *then ‘evil 


ἐποίησεν! ; Οἱ.δὲ Ῥπερισσοτέρως" “ἔκραξαν," Σταύρωσον av- 
didhecommit? Βαὺ 6 7 much more cried out, Crucify him. 
τόν. 15 Ὁ. δὲ. "Πιλάτος! βουλόμενος τῷ ὄχλῳ τὸ 
And Pilate, desiring to *the °crowd *that *which [*was] 
ἱκανὸν ποιῆσαι," ἀπέλυσεν αὐτοῖς τὸν Βαραββᾶν'" Kai παρέ- 
Ssatisfactory ‘to *do, released tothem Barabbas, and de- 
δωκεν τὸν Ἰησοῦν, φραγελλώσας, ἵνα σταυρωθῇ. 
livered up Jesus, having scourged [him], that he might be crucified. 
16 01.68 στρατιῶται ἀπήγαγον αὐτὸν ἔσω τῆς αὐλῆς, © 
And the soldiers led away him within the court, which 
ἐστιν πραιτώριον, καὶ “συγκαλοῦσιν' ὕλην τὴν σπεῖραν" 
is [the] pretorium, and they call together ?whole ‘the band, 
17 καὶ ftvdtovow' αὐτὸν πορφύραν, καὶ περιτιθέασιν αὐτῷ 
And they Ρεΐ οἱ him purple, and plaeed on him 


πλέξαντες ἀκάνθινον στέφανον, 18 καὶ ἤρξαντο ἀσπάζε- 
having platted [it] “thorny 1a crown, and they began to sa- 


σθαι αὐτόν, Χαῖρε, ξβασιλεῦ" τῶν lovdaiwy 19 καὶ ἔτυπτον 
lute him, Hail, King of the Jews! And they struck 


αὐτοῦ τὴν κεφαλὴν καλάμῳ, Kai ἐνέπτυον αὐτῷ, Kai τιθέντες 
his ead with areed, and spaton him, and bending 


τὰ γόνατα προσεκύνουν αὐτῷ, 20 Kai bre ἐνέπαιξαν αὐτῷ, 
the kmees did homage to him, And when they hadmocked him, 


ἐξέδυσαν αὐτὸν τὴν πορφύραν, Kai ἐνέδυσαν αὐτὸν τὰ 
they took off him the purple, and put on him 


δὲ μάτια.τὰ ἴδια" καὶ ἐξάγουσιν! αὐτὸν wa "σταυρώσωσιν" 


his own garments; and they lead?out ‘him that they may crucify 
Ἰαὐτόν." 21 καὶ ἀγγαρεύουσιν παράγοντά τινα Σίμωνα Kv- 
him. And they compel 2passing *by ‘one, Simon a Cy- 


~ ? , m ? ? II > ~ ‘ , ΕΣ ΄ > \ 
ρηναῖον, ἐρχόμενον az’! ἀγροῦ, τὸν πατέρα ᾿Αλεξάνδρου Kai 


renian, coming from afield, the father of Alexander and 
Ῥούφου, va ἄρῃ τὸνοσταυρὸν αὐτοῦ. 

Rufus, that he might carry his cross. 

22 Kai φέρουσιν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ "Γολγοθᾶ" τόπον, ὕ ἐστιν 


And they bring him to 
μεθερμηνευόμενον, κρανίου τόπος. 


3Golgotha ‘a*place, which is 
23 Kai ἐδίδουν αὐτῷ 


being interpreted, ?of 7a ‘skull ‘place. And they gave him 
8 Πειλᾶτος T. t πάλιν ἀποκριθεὶς LTTrA. ἔλεγεν TTrA. 
λέγετε Ltr. ¥ + τὸν the LTTraw. z + λέγοντες Saying L. 


Ὁ περισσῶς GLTTrAW. 
f ἐνδιδύσκουσιν LTTrA. 
‘ ἄγουσιν they lead L. 


™ ἀπὸ LTr. 


ς ἔκραζον L. 4 πριῆσαι τὸ ἱκανὸν τῷ ὄχλῳ T. 
c ia > ~ 
& ὃ βασιλεὺς GAW. h ἱμάτια αὐτοῦ L; 


2 τὸν Γολγοθᾶν T; Τολγοθᾶν A ; [τὸν] ToAyo8a Tr. 


w [θέλετε] Tr. 


k σταυρώσουσιν they shall crucify Lrtra. 


14] 


9 But Pilate answered 
them, saying, Will ye 
that I release unto you 
the King of the Jews? 
10 For he knew that 
the chief priests had 
delivered him for en- 
vy. 11 But the chief 
priests moved the peo- 
ple, that he should ra- 
ther release Barabbas 
unto them. 12 And 
Pilate answered and 
said again unto them, 
What will ye then that 
I shall do unto him 
whom yecall the King 
of the Jews? 13 And 
they cried out again, 
Crucify him. 14 Then 
Pilate said unto them, 
Why, what evil hath 
he done? And they 
eried out the more 
exceedingly, Crucify 
him. 15 And so Pilate, 
willing to content the 
people, released Barab- 
bas unto them, and 
delivered Jesus, when 
he had scourged him, 
to be crucified. 


16 And the soldiers 
led him away into the 
hall, called Preto- 
rium; and they call 
together the whole 
band. 17 And they 
clothed him with pur- 
ple, and platted a 
crown of thorns, and 
put it about his head, 
18 and began to salute 
him, Hail, King of the 
Jews! 19 And they 
smote him on the 
nee ee a reed, and 

spit upon him, 
and bowing their 
knees worshipped him. 
20 And when they had 
mocked him, they took 
off the purple from 
him, and put his own 
clothes on him, and led 
him out to crucify 
him. 21 And they 
compel one Simon a 
Cyrenian, who passed 
by, coming out of the 
country, the father of 
Alexander and Rufus, 
to bear his cross. 


22 And they bring 
him unto the place Gol- 
gotha, which is, being 
interpreted, The place 
of a skull. 23 And they 
gave him to drink wine 


x — ὃν 


8 ἐποίησεν κακόν TITA. 


ε συνκαλοῦσιν τ. 


"» « ΄ > Le] 
ἴδια ἱμάτια αὑτοῦ τ. 


1 — αὐτόν 1. 


142 


mingled with myrrh: 
but he received ἐΐ not. 
24 And when they had 
crucified him, they 
parted his garments, 
casting lots upon 
them, whatevery man 
should take. 25 And 
it was the third hour, 
and they crucified him, 
26 And the superscrip- 
tion of his accusa- 
tion was written over, 
THE KING OF THE 
JEWS. 27 And with 
him they crucify two 
thieves ; the one on his 
right hand, and the 
other on his left. 
28 And the scripture 
was fulfilled, which 
saith, And he was 
numbered with the 
transgressors. 29 And 
they that passed by 
railed on him, wag- 
ging their heads, and 
saying, Ah, thou that 
destroyest the temple, 


and buildest i in 
three days, 30 save 
thyself, and come 


down from the cross. 
31 Likewise also the 
chief priests mocking 
said among themselves 
with the scribes, He 
saved others ; himself 
he cannot save. 32 Let 
Christ the King of Is- 
rael descend now from 
the cross, that wemay 
see and believe. And 
they that were cruci- 
fied with him reviled 
him. 33 And when 
the sixth hour was 
come, there was dark- 
ness over the whole 
land until the ninth 
hour. 34 And at the 
ninth hour Jesus cried 
with a loud voice, say- 
ing, ELOI, ELOI, LA- 
MA SABAOHTHANI? 
which is, being inter- 
peeled: My God, my 

od, why hast thou 
forsaken me? 35 And 
some of them that 
stood by, when they 
heard it, said, Be- 
hold, he calleth Elias. 
36 And one ran and 
filled a spunge full of 
vinegar, and put it on 
a reed, and gave him 
to drink, saying, Let 
alone ; let us see whe- 
ther Elias will come 
to take him down. 


ΜΑΡΚΟΣ. 4 XV. 
ὁπιεῖν' ἐσμυρνισμένον οἶνον" Ῥὸ.δὲ" οὐκ. ἔλαβεν. 24 Kai 
to drink *medicated “with ‘myrrh ‘wine; buthe did not take [it]. And 


, ‘ , ~ 
Ioravpwoayrec αὐτὸν" "deuepiZov" τὰ ἱμάτια.αὐτοῦ, βάλλον- 


having crucified him they divided his garments, cast- 
~ ? ᾽ ᾽ , / / ” ς τ 
τες κλῆρον ἐπ᾽ αὐτά, τίς τί ἄρῃ. 25 ἦν.δὲ 
ing a lot on them, who [and] what{[each]}shouldtake. Andit was[the] 


ὥρα τρίτη, Kai ἐσταύρωσαν αὐτόν. 26 Kai ἦν ἡ ἐπιγραφὴ 
“hour ‘third, and _ they crucified him. And *was ‘the *inscription 
~ > ΄ ~ 4 ~ ΄ 
τῆς αἰτίας. αὐτοῦ ἐπιγεγραμμένη, Ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων. 
Sof “18 Saccusation written up, The King of the Jews. 
27 Kai σὺν αὐτῷ σταυροῦσιν δύο λῃστάς, Eva ἐκ δεξιῶν 
And with him they crucify two robbers, one at [the] right hand 
soe ~ ‘ 
καὶ ἕνα ἐξ εὐωνύμων αὐτοῦ. 28 "καὶ ἐπληρώθη ἡ γραφὴ 
and one at [the] left of him. And was fulfilled the scripture 
«ε , ‘ A ? , ? / «ς 
ἢ λέγουσα, Καὶ μετὰ ἀνόμων ἐλογίσθη." 29 Καὶ οἱ 
which says, And with [the] lawless he was reckoned. And those 
παραπορευόμενοι ἐβλασφήμουν αὐτών, κινοῦντες τὰς κεφαλὰς 
passing by railed at him, shaking “heads 
> ~ A ‘ λέ t ΦῸ 9 ll « , A a ‘ v2 
αὐτῶν, καὶ λέγοντες, ‘Ova," ὁ.καταλύων τὸν ναὸν Kal “ἐν 
their, and saying, Aha, thou who destroyest the temple and in 
τρισὶν ἡμέραις οἰκοδομῶν, 30 σῶσον σεαυτόν, “καὶ κατάβα" 
three days buildest [it], save thyself, and descend 
? A ~ ~ ε ,ὔ 4 ‘ > ~ ‘ 
ἀπὸ τοῦ σταυροῦ. 31 Ὁμοίως." δὲ" Kai οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς, ἐμπαί- 
from the cross. d in like manner also the chief priests, mock- 
ζοντες πρὸς ἀλλήλους μετὰ τῶν γραμματέων, ἔλεγον, Αλλοὺυς 
ing among one another with the scribes, said, Others 


ἔσωσεν, ἑαυτὸν οὐ.δύναται σῶσαι. 82 ὁ χριστὸς ὁ βασιλεὺς 
hesaved, himself heis notable to save. The Christ the King 


y ~ II ai nr ΄ ~ ᾽ 4 ~ ~ i » 
τοῦ" ᾿Ισραὴλ καταβάτω νῦν ἀπὸ τοῦ σταυροῦ, ἵνα ἴδωμεν 


of Israel! let him descend now from the cross, that we may see 
καὶ πιστεύσωμενξ. Kai οἱ ovvecravpwpevor® αὐτῷ ὠνείδιζον 
and believe. Andtheywho were crucified with him _ reproached 


αὐτόν. 88 ὑΓενομένης. δὲ" ὥρας ἕκτης, σκότος ἐγένετο ED 
him. And *being *come ['the)*hour “sixth, darkness came over 


ὅλην THY γῆν, ἕως ὥρας “ἐννάτης"" 84 καὶ τῇ “ὥρᾳ τῇ 


all the land, until [the] *hour ‘ninth ; and atthe hour the 
évvary' ἐβόησεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς φωνῇ μεγάλῳ, °Aéywr,' ΓΕλωΐ, 
ninth 2cried ‘Jesus witha“voice ‘loud, saying, Eloi, 


"Edwi,! ἐλαμμᾶ" *eaBayOari;' 6 ἐστιν μεθερμηνευόμενον, 
Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is being interpreted, 
Ὁ. θεός.μου, ὁ.θεός. μου, εἰς.τί tue ἐγκατέλιπες" ; 35 Kai τινὲς 
My God, My God, why me hast thou forsaken? And some 
τῶν Ἐπαρεστηκότων" ἀκούσαντες ἔλεγον, ᾿ Ἰδού." ™HXiav'! 
of those standing by having heard said, Lo, Elias 
φωνεῖ. 86 Δραμὼν.δὲ “sich cai! γεμίσας σπόγγον ὄξους, 
he calls, And “having “run tone and filled asponge with vinegar, 
περιθεὶς = P*re' καλάμῳ ἐπότιζεν αὐτόν, λέγων, ἴΑφετε, 
*having*put[*it]°on ‘and areed gave7*to“drink ‘him, saying, Let be, 
ἴδωμεν εἰ ἔρχεται α΄ Ἡλίας᾽ καθελεῖν αὐτόν. 
letussee if “comes  _‘Hlias to takedown him. 


ο — πιεῖν TIrA. 


him and TTra. r 


Υ οἰκοδομῶν τρισὶν ἡμέραις LTTrA. 


Υ — τοῦ LTTr. 

Ὁ καὶ 

f"EAwt ἑλωΐ LTA. 
K παρεστώτων T. 
LTTrA. 


γενομένης LTTrA. 


P és δὲ who however TTr. 4 σταυροῦσιν αὐτόν, καὶ they crucify 
διαμερίζονται they divide GLTTraw. 8 — verse 28 T[Tr]A. t Ova τ. 
W καταβὰς descending LTTra. x — δὲ and GLTTraw. 
z+ αὐτῷ him L. 4 + σὺν with (vead crucified along with) Lr. 

© ἐνάτης LTTrA. 4 ἐνάτῃ ὥρᾳ LITrA. © — λέγων TTra. 
 λεμὰ LY; Aaa TrAW. h σαβαχθανεί TTr. i ἐγκατέλιπές με LTTrA. 
1"Tde ΤΊτΑ. τι λείαν T. ἅτις TTrA. 98 — καὶ 1{ττ]. 18 — τε 


8 “HAedas T. 


XV, XVI. MAR K. 
37 ὋὉ.δὲ. Ἰησοῦς ageic ῤ φωνὴν μεγάλην ἐξέπνευσεν. 
And Jesus having uttered a cry "loud expired. 


38 kai τὸ καταπέτασμα τοῦ ναοῦ ἐσχίσθη εἰς δύο, "ἀπὸ" ἄνω- 
And the veil of the temple wasrent into two, from top 
θεν Ewe κάτω. 89 ᾿Ιδὼν.δὲ ὁ κεντυρίων ὁ παρεστηκὼς 
to bottom. And*having*seen ‘the *centurion *who *stood *by 
ἐξ ἐναντίας αὐτοῦ ὅτι οὕτως "κράξας" ἐξέπνευσεν. εἶπεν, 
Sopposite Thim that thus havingeriedout he expired, said, 
᾿Αληθῶς ᾿ὁ.ἄνθρωπος. οὗτος" υἱὸς ἦν θεοῦ. 40 Ἢσαν.δὲ καὶ 
Truly this man 2Son twas of God. And there were also 
γυναῖκες ἀπὸ μακρόθεν θεωροῦσαι, ἔν αἷς ἦν" καὶ Μαρία 
women from afar off looking on, among whom was also Mary 
ἡ Μαγδαληνή, καὶ Μαρία τὴ" "τοῦ" ᾿Ιακώβου τοῦ μικροῦ Kai 
the Magdalene, and Mary the of James ‘the ‘less ‘and 
YIwon' μήτηρ, καὶ Sarto 41 ai *kai' ὅτε ἦν ἐν τῇ Γαλι- 
ἢ" μήτηρ, μη, : 
7of *Joses ‘mother, and Salome; who also when hewas in Gali- 
λαίᾳ ἠκολούθουν αὐτῷ Kai διηκόνουν αὐτῷ, Kai ἄλλαι πολλαὶ 


lee followed him and ministered tohim, and others ‘many 
αἱ συναναβᾶσαι αὐτῷ εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα. 
who came ΠΡ with him to erusalem. 
42 Kai ἤδη ὀψίας γενομένης, ἐπεὶ ἦν παρασκευή, 
And already evening beingcome, since it was [the] preparation, 
ὅ ἐστιν “zpoodBBaroy,' 43 θἦλθεν! Ἰωσὴφ ὁ ἀπὸ 
that is [(theday] before sabbath, came Joseph who[was] from 


εὐσχήμων βουλευτής, ὃς Kai αὐτὸς ἦν προσ- 
counsellor, who also himself was wait- 


᾿Αριμαθαίας, 
Arimathea, [an] honourable 
δεχόμενος τὴν βασιλείαν Tov θεοῦ: τολμήσας εἰσῆλθεν πρὸς" 
ing for the kingdom of God, having boldness he went in to 
ἀπΠιλάτον" καὶ ἠτήσατο τὸ σῶμα τοῦ Inood. 44 ὁ.δὲ.“Πιλάτος 


Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. And Pilate 
ἐθαύμασεν" εἰ ἤδη τέθνηκεν: καὶ προσκαλεσάμενος τὸν 
wondered if already he were dead; and having called to {him] the 


κεντυρίωνα ἐπηρώτησεν αὐτὸν εἰ 'πάλαι! ἀπέθανεν: 45 καὶ 
centurion he questioned him if long he had died. And 
γνοὺς ἀπὸ τοῦ κεντυρίωνος ἐδωρήσατο τὸ ἐσῶμα" τῷ 
having known [it] from the centurion he granted the body 
? ,ὔ \ ᾽ , , h MII ‘ 
Iwonp. 46 καὶ ἀγοράσας σινδόνα, "καὶ καθελὼν 
to Joseph, And having bought a linen cloth, and having taken down 
αὐτὸδ ἐνείλησεν τῇ σινδόνι, καὶ ἱκατέθηκεν᾽ αὐτὸν ἐν 
‘him he wrapped [him] in the linen cloth, and laid him in 
Κμνημείῳ, ὃ ἦν λελατομημένον ἐκ πέτρας" καὶ προσ- 
atomb, which was cut out of arock, and roll- 
εκύλισεν λίθον ἐπὶ τὴν θύραν τοῦ μνημείου. 47 ἡ.δὲ. Μαρία ἡ 
ed astone to the door ofthe tomb. And Mary the 
Μαγδαληνὴ καὶ Μαρία ᾿Ἱωσῆ)! ἐθεώρουν ποῦ ᾿τίθεται." 
Magdalene and Mary [mother] of Joses saw where he is laid. 
16 Kai διαγενομένου τοῦ σαββάτου, Μαρία ἡ Μαγδαληνὴ 
And “*being‘*past ‘the “sabbath, Mary the Magdalene 
καὶ Μαρία ἡ "τοῦ" Ἰακώβου καὶ Σαλώμη ἠγόρασαν 
and Mary the [mother] of James and Salome bought 
? , ε ? ~ >? [2 ? , ‘ ΄ ΕΞ 
ἀρώματα, ἵνα ἐλθοῦσαι ἀλείψωσιν αὐτόν. 2 καὶ λίαν πρωὶ 


143 


37 And Jesus cried 
with a loud voice, and 
gave up the ghost. 
38 And the veil of the 
temple was rent in 
twain from the top to 
the bottom. 39 And 
when the centurion, 
which stood over a- 
gainst him, saw that 
he so cried out, and 
gave up the ghost, he 
said, Truly this man 
was the Son of God. 
40 There were also wo- 
men looking on afar 
off : among whom was 
Mary Magdalene, and 
Mary the mother of 
James the less and of 
Joses, and Salome: 
41 (who also, when he 
was in Galilee, fol- 
lowed him, and minis- 
tered unto him;) and 
many other women 
which came up with 
him unto Jerusalem. 

42 And now when 
the even was come, 
because it was the 
preparation, that is, 
the day before the 
sabbath, 43 Joseph of 
Arimathwa, an ho- 
nourable counsellor, 
which also waited for 
the kingdom of God, 
came, and went in 
boldly unto Pilate, and 
craved the body of Je- 
sus. 44 And Pilate 
marvelled if he were 
already dead: and 
calling unto him the 
centurion, he asked 
him whether he had 
been any while dead. 
45 And when he knew 
it of the centurion, he 
gave the body to Jo- 
seph. 46 And he 
bought fine linen, and 
took him down, and 
wrapped him in the 
linen, and laid him in 
a sepulchre which was 
hewn out of arock, and 
rolled a stone unto the 
door of the sepulchre. 
47 And Mary Magda- 
lene and Mary the mo- 
ther of Joses beheld 
where he was laid. 


XVI. And when the 
sabbath was past, Ma- 
Ty Magdalene, and 
Mary the mother of 
James, and Salome, 
had bought sweet 
spices, that they might 
come and anoint him. 
2 And very early in 
the morning the first 


aromatics, that havingcome they might anoint him. And very early day of the week, they 
Tan’ LirA. 8 -- κράξας Ὑ{ττ|Δ. οὗτος 0 ἄνθρωπος LTTrA. " — ἦν (read [was]) T[TrA]. 
© [ἢ] Tr. x χοροῦ LTTrA. Υ Ἰωσῆτος LITrA. 2 --- καὶ LI[Tr]. 8 πρὸς σάββατον LTr. 


> ἐλθὼν having come LTTraw. © + τὸν TTr. 4 Πειλᾶτον T. 
{ἤδη already Ltr. 8 mr@pacorpse LTTra. » — καὶ LTTrAW. 
1 Ἰωσῆτος LTTrA. m τέθειται he has been laid LTTra. 


__ © Πειλᾶτος ἐθαύμαζεν T. 
i ἔθηκεν LTr. 
2 — τοῦ T[Tr]. 


k μνήματι T. 


144 


came unto the sepul- 
chre at the rising of 
the sun. 3 And they 
said among them- 
selves, Who shall roll 
us away the stone 
from the door of the 
sepulchre ? 4 And 
when they looked, 
they saw that the 
stone was rolled a- 
way: for it was very 
great, 5 And entering 
into the sepulchre, 
they saw a young man 
sitting on the right 
side, clothed in a long 
white garment; and 
they were aftrighted, 
6 And he saith unto 
them, Be not aftright- 
ed: Ye seek Jesus of 
Nazareth, which was 
orucified : he is risen ; 
he is not here: behold 
the place where they 
laid him. 7 But go 
your way, tell his dis- 
ciples and Peter that 
he goeth before you 
into Galilee: there 
shall ye see him, as he 
said unto you. 8 And 
they went out quick- 
ly, and fied from the 
sepuichre; for they 
trembled and were a- 
mazed: neither said 
they anything to any 
man; for they were 
afraid. 


9 Now when Jesus 
was risen early the 
first day of the week, 
he appeared first to 
Mary Magdalene, out 
of whom he had cast 
seven devils. 10 And 
she went and told 
them that had been 
with him, as the 
mourned and wept. 
11 And they, when 
they had heard that 
he was alive, and had 
been seen of her, be- 
lieved not. 12 After 
that he appeared in 
another form unto 
two of them, as they 
walked, and wentinto 
the country. 13 And 
they went and told it 
unto the residue : nei- 
ther believed they 
them. 14 Afterward 
he appeared unto the 
eleven as they sat at 
meat, and upbraided 
them with their unbe- 
lief and hardness of 
heart, because they be- 
lieved not them which 
had seen him after he 
was risen. 15 And he 


ο μιᾷ τῶν LTr; τῇ μιᾷ τῶν T. 
® ἐλθοῦσαι having gone A. 
Υ + κατὰ Μάρκον according to Mark tr; [εὐαγγέλιον] κατὰ Μάρκον glad 


® — οὐδὲν L, 


tidings according to Mark a. 
4 + δὲ and (afterwards) rr. 


MAPKOX&. XVI, 
ογῆς μιᾶς' σαββάτων ἔρχονται ἐπὶ τὸ Ῥμνημεῖον," avarei- 
onthe first[day] of the week theycome to the tomb, Shaving 


λαντος τοῦ ἡλίου. 3 καὶ ἔλεγον πρὸς ἑαυτάς, Tic ἀποκυλίσει 
“risen Ithe ?sun. And they said among themselves, Who will roll away 
ἡμῖν τὸν λίθον “ἐκ τῆς θύρας τοῦ μνημείου ; 4 Kai ἀνα- 
forus the stone outof the door ofthe tomb? And having 
βλέψασαι θεωροῦσιν Ore τἀποκεκύλισται"! ὁ λίθος" ἦν.γὰρ 


looked up they see that has been rolled away the stone: for it was 
, , ‘ 8 ᾽ λθ ~ ll ? A ~ 

μέγας σφόδρα. 5 καὶ "εἰσελθοῦσαι" εἰς τὸ μνημεῖον, εἶδον 

“great very. And having entered into the tomb, they saw 


νεανίσκον καθήμενον ἐν τοῖς δεξιοῖς, περιβεβλημένον στολὴν 


a young man sitting on the right, clothed with a *robe 
λευκήν: καὶ ἐξεθαμβήθησαν. 6 0.0 λέγει αὐταῖς, Μὴ 
ἀγγῖθ, and they were greatly amazed, Buthe says tothem, “7Not 


ϑ ~ ? ~ ~ ‘ 4 ‘ > 
ἐκθαμβεῖσθε. ᾿Ιησοῦν ζητεῖτε τὸν Ναζαρηνὸν τὸν éorav- 
‘be amazed, sJesus tye *seek the Nazarene, who has been 
, ? , ᾽ cA a ” « , « » 
ρωμένον" ἠγέρθη, οὐκ.ἔστιν ὧδε' ἴδε ὁ τόπος ὕπου ἔθηκαν 
crucified. He isrisen, heisnot here; behold the place where they laid 
> fhe) Κἀλλ᾽ « , » - - ? ~ 4 ~ 
αὐτόν" 7 ὑπάγετε, εἴπατε τοῖὶς.μαθηταῖς.αὐτοῦ Kai τῷ 
him, But go, say to his disciples and 
Πέτρῳ, ὅτι προάγει ὑμᾶς εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν" ἐκεῖ αὐτὸν 
to Peter, that hegoesbefore you into Galilee ; there him 
ὄψεσθε, καθὼς εἶπεν ὑμῖν. 8 Kai ἐξελθοῦσαι ταχὺ" 
shall ye see, as he said to you, And having gone out quickly 
ἔφυγον ἀπὸ τοῦ μνημείου: εἶχεν. “δὲ αὐτὰς τρόμος Kai 
they fled from the tomb. And *porsessed *them ‘trembling ?and 
"» A " ἠδ Ν Χ ὑδὲ Il i ? ~ , y 
ἔκστασις" Kai οὐδενὶ Σοὐδὲν εἶπον, ἐφοβοῦντο. γάρ. 
Samazement, and tonoone anything they spoke, for they were afraid, 
(Ut. nothing) ‘ 
’ ay » - ᾽ ΄ - 
0 Τ᾿ Αναστὰς.δὲ πρωῦῖ πρώτ σαββάτου ἐφάνη πρῶ- 
Now having risen early [the] first [day] of the week he appeared first 
τον Μαρίᾳ τῇ Μαγδαληνῇ, δἀφ᾽" ἧς ἐκβεβλήκει ἑπτὰ δαιμό- 
to Mary the Magdalene, from whom hehadcast out seven demons, 
vic. 10 ἐκείνην πορευθεῖσα ἀπήγγειλεν τοῖς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ γε- 
She having gone told {it]tothosewho with him had 
VOMEVOLC, πενθοῦσιν καὶ κλαίουσιν. 11 κἀκεῖνοι ἀκούσαντες 
been, {who were] grieving and weeping. And they having heard 
ὅτι ζῇ καὶ ἐθεάθη ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς ἠπίστησαν. 12 Μετὰ. δὲ 
that heis aliveand has been seen by _iher disbelieved [it]. And after 
ταῦτα δυσὶν ἐξ αὐτῶν περιπατοῦσιν ἐφανερώθη ἐν τα ον 
these things totwo of them 88 ΠΟΥ walked he was manifested in another 
μορφῇ, πορενομένοις εἰς ἀγρόν. 13 κἀκεῖνοι ἀπελθόντες ἀπ- 
orm, going into [the] country ; and they having gone 
΄ ~ “ὦ ? , ? , on ς 
ἡγγειλαν τοῖς λοιποῖς" οὐδὲ ἐκείνοις ἐπίστευσαν. 14 Ὕστερον 
told [it] tothe rest; neither them did they believe, Afterwards 
ἀνακειμένοις αὐτοῖς τοῖς ἕνδεκα ἐφανερώθη, καὶ ὠνεί- 
as “reclined [*at“table]*they tothe eleven he was manifested, and re- 
δισεν τὴν. ἀπιστίαν.αὐτῶν Kai σκληροκαρδίαν, ὅτι τοῖς 
proached their unbelief and hardness of heart, because *those °who 
θεασαμένοις αὐτὸν ἐγηγερμένον ἅ οὐκ.ἐπίστευσαν. 15 Kai εἶπεν 
*had seen ®him "arisen ‘they *believed “not. And he said 
αὐτοῖς, ἸΤορευθέντες εἰς τὸν κόσμον ἅπαντα κηρύξατε τὸ εὐαγ- 
tothem, Having gone into*the “world all proclaim the glad 


τ ἀνακεκύλισται TTrA, 
W yap for LTTr. 


4 ἀπὸ from LTr. 


P μνῆμα T. 
Y — ταχὺ GLTTrAW. 


τ ἀλλὰ LTTrA. 


© — verses 9 to 20 T[A]. ἃ παρ᾽ LIr. » + δὲ and (she) L 
4 + ex νεκρῶν from among [the] dead L. 


FE: LUKE. 
γέλιον πάσῃ TY κτίσει. 16 ὁ πιστεύσας Kai βαπτισθεὶς σωθήσε-- 
tidings toall thecreation. Hethat believes and is baptized shall be 


ται" ὁ-δὲ ἀπιστήσας κατακριθήσεται. 17 σημεῖα.δὲ τοῖς 
saved, andhethat disbelieves shall be condemned. Augvsiens 5those *that 


πιστεύσασιν “ταῦτα παρακολουθήσει". ἐν τῷ.ὀνόματί. μου δαι- 


*believe ‘these “shall *follow : in my name de- 
μόνια ἐκβαλοῦσιν᾽" γλώσσαις λαλήσουσιν ἱκαιναῖς"" 
mons they shall cast out; with *tongues *they ‘shall *speak ‘new; 
18 8 ὄφεις ἀροῦσιν᾽ κἂν θανάσιμόν τι πίωσιν οὐ.μὴ 

serpents they 5 take up ; and if Bg ss 1anything they drinkin no wise 


αὐτοὺς "βλάψει" ἐπὶ ἀῤῥώστους χεῖρας ἐπιθήσουσιν, καὶ 


them shallit injure; ὍΡΟΙ [the] infirm 
καλῶς ἕξουσιν. 
*well ‘they *shall *be. 
19‘O μὲν οὖν μετὰ τὸ λαλῆσαι αὐτοῖς ξἀνελή- 


toc! 
The indeed *therefore oe after i spree tothem was taken 


φθη" εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν, Kai ἐκάθισεν ἐκ δεξιῶν τοῦ θεοῦ" 
up into the heaven, and sat at (the) right hand of God. 


20 ἐκεῖνοι.δὲ ἐξελθόντες ἐκήρυξαν πανταχοῦ, τοῦ κυρίου συνερ- 
And they nenine gone forth preached everywhere, the Lord working 


γοῦντος, Kai τὸν λόγον βεβαιοῦντος διὰ τῶν ἐπακολουθούν- 
with [them],and the word confirming by the 7foliowing *upon 


των σημείων. ᾿᾿Αμήν." 


*hands ‘they *shall‘lay, and drink 


145 


said unto them, Go ye 
into allthe world, and 
preach the gospel to 
every creature. 16 He 
that believeth and is 
baptized shall be saved; 
but he that believeth 
not shall be damned. 
17 And these signs 
shall follow them that 
believe ; In my name 
shall they cast out de- 
vils ; they shall speak 
with new tongues ; 

18 they shall take up 
serpents; and if they 
any deadly 
thing, it shall not hurt 
them; they shall lay 
hands on the sick, and 
they shall recover. 


19 So then after the 
Lord had spoken unto 
them, he was received 
up into heaven, and 
sat on the right hand 
of God. 20 And they 
went forth, and 
preached every where, 
the Lord working with 
them, and confirming 
the word with signs 
following. Amen. 


[10] ‘signs. Amen. 
™TO κατὰ Μάρκον εὐαγγέλιον." 
The *‘according*to *Mark ‘glad *tidings. 
EEO KATA AOYKAN ATION ΕΥ̓ΑΓΓΈΛΙΟΝ." 
THE “ACCORDING *TO ®LUKE *HOLY 7GLAD *TIDINGS. 


EMEIAHIIEP πολλοὶ ἐπεχείρησαν ἀνατάξασθαι διήγησιν 
FORASMUCH AS many took in hand to draw up a narration 


περὶ τῶν πεπληροφορημένων ἐν ἡμῖν πραγμά- 
concerning the *which *have *been ‘fully ®believed 7 ear ea pt ‘mat- 


των, καθὼς παρέδοσαν ἡμῖν οἱ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς 
ters, as they delivered ἄβατον } tous, they *from [*the] Sbeginning 


αὐτόπται καὶ ὑπηρέται Sena τοῦ λόγου, 3 ἔδοξεν 
ous: Wauliesete 7and ‘attendants *having*been of the Word, it seemed good 


κἀμοί, παρηκολουθηκότι ἄνωθεν πᾶσιν ἀκριβῶς, κα- 
also to me, having been UE from the first withall ES Bocurataty: with 


θεξῆς σοι γράψαι, κράτιστε Θεόφιλε, 4 ἵνα ἐπιγνῷς 
method ἴο thee to write, most excellent Theophilus, that thou mightest know 


περὶ ὧν κατηχήθης λόγων τὴν ἀσφάλειαν. 
*coneerning ’which *thou mwa instructed *of[*the]*things‘the certainty. 


5 ’Eyévero ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις Ἡρώδου rod! Beane THC 


There was in the aye of Herod the 
Ἰουδαίας ἱερεύς τις ὀνόματι Ζαχαρίας, ἐξ ve, μερίας 
of Judea a gee *certain, by name Zacharias, of [the] course 


᾿Αβιά: καὶ “ἡ.γυνὴ αὐτοῦ" ἐκ τῶν θυγατέρων ᾿Ααρών, καὶ τὸ 
of Abia, and his wife of the daughters of Aaron, and 


FORASMUCH as 
many have taken in 
hand to set forth in 
order a declaration of 
those things which are 
most surely believed 
among us, 2 even as 
they delivered them 
unto us, which from 
the beginning were 
eyewitnesses, and min- 
isters of the word; 
3 it seemed good to me 
also, having had per- 
fect understanding of 
all things from the 
very first, to write 
unto thee in order, 
most excellent Theo- 


philus, 4 that thon 
mightest know the 
certainty of those 


things, wherein thou 
hast been instructed. 
5 THERE was in the 
days of Herod, the 
king of Judea, a cer- 
tain priest named 


6 παρακολουθήσει ταῦτα τι; ἀκολουθήσει ταῦτα Tr. 
χερσὶν: and in the hands ee h βλάψη should it injure @LTraW. 

δ ἀνελήμφθη LTrA. -- ᾿Αμήν EGLTraW. 
Κατὰ Μάρκον Tr; πύξγγάλεον κατὰ Μάρκον [4]. 

8 Εὐαγγέλιον ((Evay. ] A) κατὰ Λουκᾶν GLTrAW ; 
© γυνὴ αὐτῷ LTTra. 


κατὰ Λουκᾶν τ. 


f _ καιναῖς Tr. 


8 + Kal ἐν ταῖς 


i+ Ἰησοῦς Jesus Ltr, 
τὰ — To κατὰ Μάρκον εὐαγγέλιον EGLTW ; 


b — τοῦ Trr[a} 
L 


140 


Zacharias, of the course 
of Abia: and his wife 
was of the daughters 
of Aaron, and her 
name was Elisabeth. 
6 And they were both 
righteous before God, 
walking in all the 
commandments and 
ordinances of the Lord 
blameless. 7 And they 
had no child, because 
that Elisabeth was 
barren, and they both 
were now wellstricken 
in years. 8 And it 
came to pass, that 
while he executed the 
priest’s office before 
God in the order of his 
course, 9 according to 
the custom of the 
priest’s office, his lot 
was to burn incense 
when he went into the 
temple of the Lord. 
10 And the whole mul- 
titude of the people 
were praying without 
at the time of incense. 
11 And there appeared 
unto him an angel of 
the Lord standing on 
the right side of the 
altar of incense. 12 And 
when Zacharias saw 
him, he was troubled, 
and fear fell upon him, 
13 But the angel said 
unto him, Fear not, 
Zacharias: for thy 
prayer is heard; and 
thy wife Elisabeth 
shall bear thee a son, 
and thou shalt call his 
name John. 14 And 
thou shalt have joy 
and gladness; and 
many shall rejoice at 
his birth. 15 For he 
shall be great in the 
sight of the Lord, and 
shall drink neither 
wine nor strong drink ; 
and he shall be filled 
with the Holy Ghost, 
even from his mother’s 
womb. 16 And many 
of the children of Is- 
raecl shall he turn to 
the Lord their God. 
17 And he shall go be- 
fore him in the spirit 
and power of Elias, to 
turn the hearts of the 
fathers tothechildren, 
and the disobedient to 
the wisdom of the just; 
to make ready a people 
prepared for the Lord. 
18 And Zacharias said 
unto the angel, Where- 
by shall 1 know this ὃ 
for I am an old man, 
and my wife well 
stricken in years. 
19 And the angel an- 
swering said unto him, 


AO MT KYA. 1 


ὄνομα.αὐτῆς ᾿Ελισάβετ. 6 ἦσαν.δὲ δίκαιοι ἀμφότεροι Δἐνώ - 
her name Elizabeth. And they were just *both be- 


mov" τοῦ θεοῦ. πορευόμενοι ἐν πάσαις ταῖς ἐντολαῖς καὶ 


fore God, walking in all the commandments and 
δικαιώμασιν τοῦ κυρίου ἄμεμπτοι. 7 καὶ οὐκιἦν αὐτοῖς 
ordinances of the Lord blameless. And there was not to them 


τέκνον, καθότι “ἡ ᾿Ελισάβετ hy στεῖρα, καὶ ἀμφότεροι προ- 
achild, inasmuch as Elizabeth was barren, and both ad- 
βεβηκότες ἐν ταῖς.ἡμέραις. αὐτῶν ἦσαν. 8& ‘Eyévero.dé ἐν 
vanced in their days were. And it came to pass in 

τῷ. ἱερατεύειν.αὐτὸν ἐν TH τάξει τῆς.ἐφημερίας. αὐτοῦ ἔναντι 


fulfilling his priestly service in the order of his course before 
τοῦ θεοῦ, 9 κατὰ τὸ ἔθος τῆς ἱερατείας, ἔλαχεν 
God, according to the custom of the priestly service, it fell to him by lot 


τοῦ θυμιᾶσαι εἰσελθὼν εἰς TOY ναὺν τοῦ κυρίου" 10 Kai 


to burn incense, having entered into the temple of the Lord. And 
πᾶν τὸ πλῆθος frov λαοῦ ἢν! προσευχόμενον ἔξω τῷ WoO 
all the multitude of the people were praying without at the hour 
τοῦ θυμιάματος. 11 ὥφθη δὲ αὐτῷ ἄγγελος κυρίου, é- 


of incense. And “appeared to *him ‘an “angel Sof [*the] Lord, stand- 


στὼς ἐκ δεξιῶν τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου τοῦ θυμιάματος" 12 καὶ 
ing at [the] right of the altar of incense. and 
? , r, 7, 2 , \ ΄ ? , ? > ? , 
ἐταράχθη Ζαχαρίας ἰδών, καὶ φόβος ἐπέπεσεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν. 
“was troubled 'Zacharias “seeing (*him],and fear fell upon him. 
13 Εἶπεν».δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸν ὁ ἄγγελος, Μὴ φοβοῦ, Ζαχαρία" 
But ὅβαϊα *to Shim ‘the “angel, Fear not, Zacharias, 
διότι εἰσηκούσθη ἡ.δέησίς.σου. Kai ἡ.γυνή.σου ᾽᾿Ἐλισάβετ yev- 
because has been heard thy supplication, and thy wife Elizabeth shall 
νήσει υἱόν Gol, καὶ καλέσεις τὸ.ὄνομα.αὐτοῦ ® Τωάννην." 
bear ason to thee, and thou shalt call his name John. 

14 καὶ ἔσται χαρά σοι καὶ ἀγαλλίασις, Kai πολλοὶ ἐπὶ τῇ 
And heshallbe joy totheeand  exultation, and many at 
πγεννήσει" αὐτοῦ χαρήσονται. 16 ἔσται.γὰρ μέγας ἐνώπιον 

his birth shall rejoice. For he shallbe great before 
irov'' κυρίου" καὶ oivoy καὶ σίκερα ov.) wig, Kat 
the Lord; and wine and strong drink in no wise shall he drink, and 
πνεύματος ἀγίου πλησθήσεται ἔτι ἐκ κοιλίας μητρὸς 
with [the] *Spirit *Holy he shall be filled even from [the] womb ‘mother 
αὐτοῦ. 16 καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν υἱῶν ᾿Ισραὴλ ἐπιστρέψει ἐπὶ 
‘of *his. And many ofthe sons. of Israel shallheturn to [the] 
κύριον τὸν.θεὸν.αὐτῶν. 17 Kai αὐτὸς προελεύσεται ἐνώπιον 
Lord their God. And he shall go forth before 
᾽ »ν}γ ΄, Pp ὃ ’ kt , "2 , , 
αὐτοῦ ἕν πνεύματι καὶ δυνάμει “Ἡλίου, ἐπιστρέψαι καρδίας 
him in{the] spirit and power of Elias, to turn hearts 
πατέρων ἐπὶ τέκνα, καὶ ἀπειθεῖς tv φρονήσει δδι- 
of fathers to children, and [the] disobedient to[the] wisdom οὔ [the] 
καίων, ἑτοιμάσαι κυρίῳ λαὸν κατεσκευασμένον. 18 Kai 
righteous, to make ready for(the] Lord a people prepared. And 
εἶπεν Ζαχαρίας πρὸς τὸν ἄγγελον, Κατὰ τί γνώσομαι τοῦτο; 
“said ‘Zacharias to the angel, By what shallI know this? 
ἐγὼ.γάρ εἰμι πρεσβύτης, Kai 1: γυνή" μοι προβεβηκυῖα ἐν ταῖς 
for I am anoldman, and my wife advanced in 
19 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ ἄγγελος εἶπεν αὐτῷ, 


ἡμέραις.αὐτῆς. 
And ‘answering ‘the angel said to him, 


her days. 


ἃ ἐναντίον TTrA. 
eae’ 
& ᾿Ιωάνην Tr. 


h γενέσει GLITrAW. 


f Fv τοῦ λαοῦ GLTTrAW. 


εὴἣν ἡ (-- ἡ 1{τὸ}} ᾿Ελισάβετ LTTrA. 
k Ηλεία 1. 


i — τοῦ (read [the]) er[tr]w. 


I. LUKE. 


[ἘΠῚ εἰμι Γαβριὴλ ὁ παρεστηκὼς ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ" 
am Gabriel, who stand before God, and 


ee λαλῆσαι πρός σε, καὶ εὐαγγελίσασθαίς σοι 
I was sent to speak to thee, and toannounce “glad *tidings *to *thee 


ταῦτα. 20Kaiidov, ἔσῃ σιωπῶν Kai μὴ δυνάμενος λαλῆσαι 
1these ; “and lo, thoushalt be silent and not able to speak 

ἄχρι ἧς.-ἡμέρας γένηται ταῦτα ἀνθ᾽ ὧν οὐκ.ἐπίστευσας 
till the day in which shall take place these things, because thou didst not believe 


τοῖς.λόγοις.μου, οἵτινες πληρωθήσονται εἰς τὸν-καιρὸν. αὐτῶν. 
my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season. 


21 Kai ἦν ὁ λαὸς προσδοκῶν τὸν Ζαχαρίαν" Kai ἐθαύμαζον ἐν 
And*were'the*people expecting Zacharias, and they wondered at 


τῷ χρονίζειν.αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ ναῷ. 22 ἐξελθὼν.δὲ ovK!Hddvaro! 


καὶ 


his delaying in the temple. But havingeomeout he was not able 
λαλῆσαι αὐτοῖς" καὶ ἐπέγνωσαν ὅτι ὀπτασίαν ἑώρακεν ἐν 
tospeak tothem, and they recognized that a vision he has seen in 
τῷ ναῷ" καὶ αὐτὸς ἢν διανεύων αὐτοῖς, καὶ διέμενεν κωφός. 
the temple. And he was making signs tothem, and continued dumb. 
29 καὶ ἐγένετο we ἐπλήσθησαν at ἡμέραι τῆς λειτουργίας 


And it came to Ne when were fulfilled the days “service 


αὐτοῦ ἀπῆλθεν εἰς TOV-oikov.avrov. 
“of “his he departed to his house. 
24 Mera.dé ταύτας τὰς ἡμέρας συνέλαβεν ᾿Ελισάβετ ἡ 
Now after these τὰς *conceived Elizabeth 
γυνὴ. αὐτοῦ, καὶ περιέκρυβεν ἑαυτὴν “μῆνας πέντε, λέγουσα, 
*his “wife, and hi herself *months ‘five, saying, 
25 Ὅτι οὕτως μοι πεποίηκεν ™O' κύριος ty ἡμέραις αἷς 
Thus tome has done the Lord in([the] days in which 


ἀφελεῖν "τὸ" ὀνειδός μου ἐν ἀνθρώποις. 
my reproach ao men, 


ἐπεῖδεν 
he looked pice [me] to take away 
26 Ἔν. δὲ τῷ μηνὶ τῷ ἕκτῳ ἀπεστάλη ὁ ἄγγελος Γαβριὴλ 


Andin the month the sixth was sent the angel Gabriel 
%70' τοῦ θεοῦ εἰς πόλιν τῆς Γαλιλαίας, y ὄνομα PNa- 


by God to acity of Galilee, whose name [was] Na- 
ζαρέτ," 27 πρὸς παρθένον Ἱμεμνηστευμένην" ἀνδρὶ ᾧ ὄνομα 


zareth, to a virgin betrothed toa man whose name 


᾿Ιωσήφ, ἐξ οἴκου τΔαβίδ'" καὶ τὸ ὄνομα τῆς παρθένου 
[was] Joseph, of[the] house of David, and the name ofthe virgin 


Μαριάμ. 28 καὶ εἰσελθὼν “ὁ ἄγγελος" πρὸς αὐτὴν * εἶπεν, 
{was] Mary. And ee 1the “angel to her said, 


Χαῖρε, κεχαριτωμένη" ὁ κύριος μετὰ σοῦ, “εὐλογημένη 
Hail, [thou] favoured one! the Lord [is] with thee, blessed [art] 
σὺ ἐν γυναιξίν." 29 Ἡ δὲ “idotca' “διεταράχθη ἐπὶ 
thou amongst women. But she seeing [him] wastroubled at 
τῷ.λόγῳ αὐτοῦ," καὶ διελογίζετο ποταπὸς εἴη ὁ ἀσπασμὸς 


his word, and was reasoning of what kind might be *salutation 
οὗτος. 80 Kai εἶπεν ὁ ἄγγελος αὐτῇ, Μὴ.φοβοῦ, OLIN 
1this. And said ‘the angel toher, Fear not, Mary, 


εὕρες.γὰρ χάριν παρὰ τῷ Oem’ 31 Kai ἰδού, YovdAnby! 


for thou hast found favour with God ; and lo, thoushalt conceive 


ἐν γαστρὶ καὶ τέξῃ υἱόν, καὶ καλέσεις τὸ.-Ὀνομα.αὐτοῦ 
in [thy] womb and bring ἘΠῚ ason, and thou shalt call his name 


1 ἐδύνατο LTTrA. — ὁ (read [the]) urrr[a}. — τὸ Tr[a]. 
P Ναζαρέθ Lrw. 4 ἐμνηστευμένην LTTr. 
τ{τι]Δ. ὁ ὁ ἄγγελος the angel Τ. 


GTTra χα ἐπὶ τῷ λόγῳ διεταράχθη GTTrA. Υ συλλήμψῃ LTTrA. 


τ ΠΈΣ ΝῸ LITA ; Δαυΐδ cw. 
y— εὐλογημένη σὺ ἐν γυναιξίν τίττ]Α. 


147 


I am Gaoriel, that 
stand in the presence 
of God; and am sent 
to speak unto thee, 
and to shew thee these 
glad tidings. 20 And, 
behold, thou shalt be 
dumb, and not able to 
speak, until the day 
that these things shall 
be performed, because 
thou believest not my 
words, which shall be 
fulfilled in their sea- 
son. 2] And the people 
waited for Zacharias, 
and marvelled that he 
tarried so long in the 
temple. 22 And when 
he came out, he could 
not speak unto them: 
and they verceiyed 
that he had seen a 
vision in the temple: 
for he beckoned unto 
them, and remained 
speechless, 23 And it 
came to pass, that, as 
soon as the days of his 
Ininistration were ac- 
complished, he depart- 
ed to his own house. 


24 And after those 
days his wife Elisabeth 
conceived, and hid her- 
self five months, say- 
ing, 25 Thus hath the 
Lord dealt with me 
in the days wherein he 
looked on me, to take 
away my reproach a- 
mong men, 


26 And in the sixth 
month the angel Ga- 
briel was sent from 
God unto a city of 
Galilee, named Naza- 
reth, 27 to a virgin 
espoused to ἃ man 
whose name was Jo- 
seph, of the house of 
Dayid; and the vir- 
gin’s name was Mary. 
28 And the angel came 
in unto her, and said, 
Hail, thou that art 
highly favoured, the 
Lord is with thee: 
blessed art thou a- 
mong women. 29 And 
when she saw him, she 
was troubled at his 
saying, and cast in her 
mind what manner of 
salutation this should 
be. 30 And the angel 
said unto her, Fear 
not, Mary: for thou 
hast found favour 
with God. 3] And, be- 
hold, thou shalt con- 
ceive in thy womb, 
and bring forth a son, 
andshalt call his name 


© ἀπὸ from TTra. 
5. — ὃ ἄγγελος 
w — ἰδοῦσα 


148 


JESUS. 32 He shall 
be great, and shall be 
ealled the Son of the 
Highest : and the Lord 
God shall give unto 
him the throne of his 
father David: 33 and 
he shall reign over the 
house of Jacob for 
ever ; and of his king- 
dom there shall be no 
end. 34 Then said 
Mary unto the angel, 
How shall this be, see- 
ing I know nota man? 
35 And the angel an- 
swered and said unto 
her, The Holy Ghost 
shall come upon thee, 
and the power of the 
Highest shall over- 
shadow thee: therefore 
also that holy thing 
which shall be born of 
thee shall be called the 
Son of God. 36 And, 
behold, thy cousin 
Elisabeth, she hath 
also conceived a son 
in her old age: and 
this is the sixth month 
with her, who was 
called barren. 37 For 
with God nothing shall 
be impossible. 38 And 
Mary said, Behold the 
handmaid of the Lord ; 
be it unto me accord- 
ing to thy word. And 
the angel departed 
from her. 


39 And Mary arose 
in those days, and went 
into the hill country 
with haste, into acity 
of Juda ; 40 and enter- 
ed into the house of 
Zacharias, and saluted 
Elisabeth. 41 And it 
came to pass, that, 
when Elisabeth heard 
the salutation of Mary, 
the babe leaped in her 
womb; and Elisabeth 
was filled with the 
Holy Ghost: 42 and 
she spake out with a 
loud voice, and said, 
Blessed art thou a- 
mong women, and 
blessed ὦ the fruit of 
thy womb. 43 And 
whence 18 this to me, 
that the mother of my 
Lord should come to 
me? 44 For, lo, assoon 
as the voice of thy 
salutation sounded in 
mine ears, the babe 
leaped in my womb for 
joy. 45 And blessed ¢s 
she that believed: for 
there shall be a perfor- 
mance of those things 
which were told her 
from the Lord. 


® Δανείδ ytTra ; Δαυΐδ ΟΥ̓. 
4 γήρει GLTTrAW. 
& κραυγῇ With a *ery Tira. 


ev Tr. 
LTTrA. 


ΛΟΥΚΑΣ. 1. 

Ἰησοῦν. 32 οὗτος ἔσται μέγας, καὶ υἱὸς ὑψίστου κληθήσε- 
Jesus, He shallbe great, and Son of [the] Highest shall he be 
ται καὶ δώσει αὐτῷ κύριος ὁ θεὸς τὸν θρόνον Δαβὶδ" 
called ; and ‘shall *give *him [*the] 7Lord %God the throne of David 


ce 4 ? ~ 4 ’ 2 \ a 2 ‘ > 
τοῦ-.πατρὸς. αὐτοῦ, 33 Kai βασιλεύσει ἐπὶ τὸν οἶκον ᾿Ιακὼβ εἰς 
his father ; and he shallreign over the house bf Jacob to 


‘A I~ ν᾿ Lond , > ~ ? » , 
τοὺς αἰῶνας, καὶ τῆς.βασιλείας.αὐτοῦ οὐκιἔσται τέλος. 


the ages, and of his kingdom there shall not be an end. 
34 Εἶπεν.δὲ Μαριὰμ πρὸς τὸν ἄγγελον, Πῶς ἔσται τοῦτο ἐπεὶ 
But ?said ‘Mary to the angel, How shall *be ‘this since 


» ? , δ 59 4 εἰν > » 
ἄνδρα οὐ.γινώσκω ; 35 Καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς ὁ ἄγγελος εἶπεν αὐτῇ; 
aman  Iknow not? And answering the angel said to her, 


Πνεῦμα ἅγιον ἐπελεύσεται ἐπὶ σέ, καὶ δύναμις ὑψίστου 


(The] 7Spirit *Holy shallcome upon thee, and power of([the] Highest 
ἐπισκιάσει σοι’ διὸ καὶ τὸ γεννώμενον" ἅγιον κληθή- 


shall overshadow thee; wherefore also the Sporn *holy *thing shall be 
σεται υἱὸς θεοῦ. 36 καὶ ἰδού, ᾿Ελισάβετ ἡ ovyyevic'_cov καὶ 


called Son of God. And lo, Elizabeth thy kinswoman ‘also 
αὐτὴ “συνειληφυῖα" υἱὸν ἐν γήρᾳ" αὐτῆς" Kai οὗτος ὴν 
1she has conceived ason in her old age, and this [the] month 
ἕκτος ἐστὶν αὐτῇ τῇ καλουμένῃ στείρᾳ" 37 ὅτι οὐκ ἀδυνα- 
lsixth is toher who[{was] called barren ; for not *shall *be 
τήσει παρὰ “τῷ θεῷ! πᾶν ῥῆμα. 88 Εἶπεν.δὲ Μαριάμ, 
‘impossible °with 7God  =s ‘any =*thing. And?said ? Σ 
(lit. every) 


4 a fn ΄ 
κατα το.ρημας.σου. 


᾽ , € ’ , , , 
Idov, ἡ δούλη κυρίου γένοιτό μοι 
thy word. 


Behold, the bondmaid of(the] Lord; beit to me according to 
Kai ἀπῆλθεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς ὁ ἄγγελος. 
And departed from her the angel. 

39 ᾿Αναστᾶσα.δὲ se atin ἐν ταῖς. ἡμέραις ταύταις ἐπορεύθη 

And ’rising *up Mary in those days went 

> \ ‘ ‘ ~ ? , ? Ud ‘ 
εἰς τὴν ὀρεινὴν μετὰ σπουδῆς, εἰς πόλιν Ἰούδα, 40 καὶ 
into the hill-country with haste, to acity of Judah, and 


>, _w 2 4 / gw £9. id A ? , 
εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὸν olkoy Ζαχαρίου καὶ ἠσπάσατο τὴν ᾿Ελισάβετ. 
entered into the house of Zacharias and saluted Elizabeth. 


41 καὶ ἐγένετο ὡς ἤκουσεν ')’EXuoaBer τὸν ἀσπασμὸν τῆς 
Anditcametopassas “heard ‘Blizabeth the salutation 
Μαρίας," ἐσκίρτησεν τὸ ἐρέφος ἐν τῇ.κοιλίᾳ αὐτῆς" καὶ ἐπλήσθη 
of Mary, Sleaped ‘the be in her womb ; and 7was "filled 
πνεύματος ἁγίου ἡ EdtoaBer, 42 καὶ ἀνεφώνησεν ἐφωνῇ" 
“with (°the] Spirit °Holy 1Hlizabeth, and criedout witha *voice 
μεγάλῃ καὶ εἶπεν, Εὐλογημένη σὺ ἐν γυναιξίν, καὶ εὐλο- 
*Joud and said, Blessed {art] thou among women, and bless- 
γημένος ὁ καρπὸς τῆς. κοιλίας. σου. 43 καὶ πόθεν μοι τοῦτο, 
ed the fruit of thy womb. And whence tome this, 
w » « ΄ ~ , , h lle id 4 4 
iva ἔλθῃ ἡ μήτηρ oe ον cs pe'; 44 ἰδοὺ. γάρ, 
that should come the mother of my Lor me? For lo, 
ὡς ἐγένετο ἡ φωνὴ TOV-doTacpov.cov εἰς τὰ.ὦτά. μου ἐσκίρ- 
as came the voice of thy salutation into mine ears, leap- 
τησεν Sty ἀγαλλιάσει τὸ βρέφος" ἐν τῷῇ.κοιλίᾳ. μου. 45 καὶ 
in 


ed in exultation the babe my womb ; and 
μακαρία ἡ πιστεύσασα, ὅτι ἔσται τελείωσις τοῖς 
blessed [15] she who believed, for there shall be a fulfilment to the things 
λελαλημένοις αὐτῇ παρὰ κυρίου. 
spoken toher from [the] Lord. 
» + [ἐκ cov] of thee 1,. Ὁ ovyyevis LTW. © guvetAn- 


f τὸν ἀσπασμὸν τῆς Μαρίας ἡ ᾿Ελισάβετ 
1 τὸ βρέφος ἐν ἀγαλλιάσει Gw. 


© τοῦ θεοῦ TTrA. 
h ἐμέ. 


i. LUKE. 
46 Kai εἶπεν Μαριάμ, Meyadive ἡ-ψυχή.μου τὸν κύριον, 
And αεαϊα Mary, *Magnifies 1my *soul the Lord, 


47 καὶ ἠγαλλίασεν τὸ.πνεύμά.μου ἐπὶ TP θεῷ τῷ-.σωτῆρί. μου" 
in God 


and *exulted tmy “spirit my Saviour. 
48 ὅτι ἐπέβλεψεν ἐπὶ τὴν ταπείνωσιν τῆς.δούλης. αὐτοῦ" ἰδοὺ 
For helooked upon the humiliation of his bondmaid ; lo 


γάρ, ἀπὸ τοῦ.νῦν μακαριοῦσίν.με πᾶσαι αἱ γενεαί. 49 ὅτι 
for, from henceforth *will ‘count *me *blessed ‘all *generations, For 


ἐποίησέν μοι ‘yusyadsia' ὁ δυνατός, καὶ ἅγιον τὸ ὄνομα 
*has ®done *to Ἴη8 ®great *things ‘the *mighty*one,and holy [is] 7name 
αὐτοῦ" 50 καὶ τὸ.ἔλεος. αὐτοῦ εἰς γενεὰς γενεῶν, τοῖς 


this ; and 

᾿ ee ? , ΄ ? , ᾽ ΠΣ. 

φοβουμένοις αὐτόν. 51 ἐποίησεν κράτος ἐν βραχίονι αὐτοῦ 
fearing him, He wrought strength with his arm, 


διεσκόρπισεν ὑπερηφάνους διανοίᾳ 
he scattered [the] haughty in [the] thought 


52 καθεῖλεν δυνάστας ἀπὸ θρόνων, καὶ ὕψωσεν 
He put down = rulers from thrones, and exalted [the] 


53 πεινῶντας ἐνέπλησεν ἀγαθῶν, καὶ πλουτοῦντας 
{the] hungry he filled with good things, and [the] rich 


ἐξαπέστειλεν κενούς. δά ἀντελάβετο ᾿Ισραὴλ παιδὸς αὐτοῦ, 
he sentaway empty. He helped Israel servant this, 


μνησθῆναι ἐλέους, 55 καθὼς ἐλάλησεν πρὸς τοὺς 
{in order] toremember mercy, according as he spoke to 
πατέρας ἡμῶν, τῷ ᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ τῷ σπέρματι.αὐτοῦ “εἰς τὸν 
our fathers, to Abraham and to his seed for 
αἰῶνα." δ6 Ἔμεινεν.δὲ Μαριὰμ σὺν αὐτῇ "ὡσεὶ" μῆνας τρεῖς; 


his mercy [15] to generations of generations to those 


καρδίας. αὐτῶν. 
of their heart. 


ταπεινούς. 
lowly : 


ever, And?abode ‘Mary with her about *months ‘three, 
Kai ὑπέστρεψεν εἰς τὸν. οἶκον. αὐτῆς. 
and returned to her house. 


57 ΤῊ .δὲ Ἐλισάβετ ἐπλήσθη ὁ χρόνος τοῦ.τεκεῖν. αὐτήν. 
Now to Elizabeth was fulfilled the time thatsheshould bring forth, 


Kai ἐγέννησεν υἱόν" 58 Kai ἤκουσαν οἱ περίοικοι Kai οἱ ovy- 


and 5Βῃ8 θθΘ ason. And ‘heard ‘the “neighbours and 7kins- 
γενεῖς αὐτῆς ὅτι ἐμεγάλυνεν κύριος τὸ. ἔλεος. αὐτοῦ μετ᾽ 
folk *her that *was “magnifying ['the] *Lord his mercy with 


αὐτῆς; καὶ συνέχαιρον αὐτῇ. 59 Kai 


ἐγένετο ἐν τῇ “ὀγδὸ 
her, and they rejoiced with her. 


And itcameto pass on the eighth 
« , I AG. ~ 4 δί 5, ‘ ? aN 7 A 
ἡμέρᾳ ον περιτεμεῖν TO παιδίον᾽ καὶ ἑκάλουν αὑτὸ 
day they came to circumcise the little child, and were calling it 
ἐπὶ τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ-πατρὸς αὐτοῦ Ζαχαρίαν. 60 καὶ ἀπο- 
after the name of his father Zacharias, And “an- 
κριθεῖσα ἡ. μητηρ.αὐτοῦ εἶπεν, Οὐχί, ἀλλὰ κληθήσεται P'Iway- 
swering "his *mother said, No; but heshall be called John, 
νης." ΟἹ Kai %elzrov' πρὸς αὐτήν, Ὅτι οὐδείς ἐστιν τὲν 
And {δον βαϊᾶὰ to her, Noone is among the 
συγγενείᾳ" σου ὃς καλεῖται τῷ. ὀνόματι. τούτῳ. 62 ’Evévevoy 
linsfolk of thee who is called by this name. “They “made *signs 
δὲ τῷ πατρὶ αὐτοῦ τὸτί ἂν.θέλοι καλεῖσθαι "αὐτόν." 
land to his father {as to] what he might wish *to*be*called “him. 
63 καὶ αἰτήσας πινακίδιον ἔγραψεν, λέγων, PIwavyne' 
And having asked for ἃ writing tablet he wrote, saying, John 
τ a t-All % ? κα αἰ 7 , ? , A 
ἐστὶν τὸ" ὄνομα. αὐτοῦ" καὶ ἐθαύμασαν πάντες. θ4 ᾿Ανεῴχθη. δὲ 
is his name. And they *wondered ‘all. And was opened 
Κ μεγάλα LTTr. | καὶ γενεὰς and generations TTrA. 
9 ἡμέρᾳ τῇ ὀγδόῃ LTTrA. »Ῥ᾽ Ἰωάνης τ. 83 εἶπαν τῦτ. 
the kinsfolk Lrtra. 5 αὐτό it LTFrA. τ — τὸ Tx[al. 


τὰ ἕως αἰῶνος G. 
τ ἐκ τῆς συγγενείας from among 


149 


46 And Mary said, 
My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, 47 and my 
spirit hath rejoiced in 
God my Saviour. 48 For 
he hath regarded the 
low estate of his hand- 
maiden: for, behold. 
from henceforth ali 
generations shall cali 
mne blessed. 49 For he 
that is mighty hath 


done to me_ great 
things ; and holy 18 his 
name, 50 And his 


mercy 7s on them that 
fear him from genera- 
tion to generation. 
51 He hath shewed 
strength with his arm; 
he hath scattered the 
proud in the imagina- 
tion of their hearts. 
52 He hath put down 
the mighty from their 
seats,and exalted them 
of low degree. 53 He 
hath filled the hungry 
with good things; and 
the rich he hath sent 
empty away. 54 He 
hath holpen his ser- 
vant Israel, in remem- 
brance of Ais mercy; 
55 as he spake to our 
fathers, to Abraham, 
and to his seed for 
ever. 56 And Mary a- 
bode with her about 
three months, and re- 
turned to her own 
house. 


57 Now Elisabeth’s 
full time came that she 
should be delivered; 
and she brought forth 
a son. 58 And her 
neighbours and her 
cousins heard how the 
Lord haé shewed great 
mercy upon her ; and 
they rejoiced with her. 
59 And it came to pass, 
that on the eighth day 
they came to circum- 
cise the child ; and they 
called him Zacharias, 
after the name of his 
father. 60 And his 
mother answered and 
said, Not so; but he 
shall be called John. 


τῇ 61 And they said unto 


her, There is none of 
thy kindred that is 
ealled by this name. 
62 And they madesigns 
to his father, how he 
would have him called. 
63 And heasked for a 
writing table, and 
wrote, saying, His 
name is John. And 
they marvelled all 
64 And his mouth was 
opened immediately, 


π ὡς LTTr. 


180 

and his tongue loosed, 
and he spake, and 
praised God. 65 And 
fear came on all that 
dwelt round about 
them: and all these 
sayings were noised 
abroad throughout all 
the hill country of Ju- 
dwa. 66 And all they 
that heard them laid 
them up in their hearts, 
saying, What manner 
of child shall this be! 
And the hand of the 
Lord was with him. 


67 And his father 
Zacharias was filled 
with the Holy Ghost, 
and prophesied, say- 
ing, 68 Blessed be the 
Lord God of Israel ; 
for he hath visited and 
redeemed his people, 
69 and hath raised up 
an horn of salvation 
for us in the house of 
his servant David; 
70 as he spake by the 
mouth of his holy pro- 
phets, which have been 
since the world began: 
71 that we should be 
saved from our ene- 
mies, and from the 
hand of all that hate 
us ; 72 to perform the 
mercy promised to our 
fathers, and toremem- 
ber his holy covenant; 
73 the oath which he 
gware to our father 
Abraham, 74 that he 
would grant unto us, 
that we being deliver- 
ed out of the hand of 
our enemies might 
serve him without 
fear, 75 in holiness and 
righteousness before 
him, all the days of our 
life. 76 And thou, child, 
shalt be called the pro- 
phet of the Highest : 
for thou shalt go before 
the face of the Lord 
to prepare his ways; 
77 to give knowledge 
of salvation unto his 
people by theremission 
of their sins,78 through 
the tender mercy of 
our God ; whereby the 
dayspring from on 
high hath visited us, 
79 to give light to them 
that sit in darkness 
and in the shadow of 
death, to guide our feet 


w + yap (read For also) LITrA. 
« Δανεὶδ LTTrA ; Aavid aw. 
4 — ἡμῶν (read of [our] enemies) [L]tTrA. 


{+ δὲ also rrra. 


AOQYKAS. 
τὸ. στόμα.αὐτοῦ παραχρῆμα Kai ἡ.γλῶσσα.αὐτοῦ, 
his mouth immediately and his tongue 
ἐλάλει εὐλογῶν τὸν θεόν. 65 Kai ἐγένετο 
he spoke, blessing God. And *came 

τοὺς περιοικοῦντας αὐτούς" Kai ἐν OAH TH 


᾿ 
καὶ 
(loosed), and 
’ ‘ , , 
ἐπὶ πάντας φόβος 
Supon “all ‘fear 


ὀρεινῇ τῆς 


those who dwelt around them; and in *whole ‘the hill-country 
Ἰουδαίας διελαλεῖτο πάντα τὰ ῥήματα ταῦτα" 66 καὶ 
of Judwa *were *being Stalked 7of ‘all these *things, And 


ἔθεντο πάντες οἱ ἀκούσαντες ἐν τῇ.καρδίᾳ.αὐτῶν, λέ- 
‘laid (Sthem]*up ‘all *who *heard in their heart, say- 
yovrec, Ti ἄρα τὸ.παιδίον τοῦτο ἔσται; Kai χεὶρ 
ing, What then ‘this *little “child ‘will 7be? And [the] hand 
κυρίου vy μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 
of [the] Lord was with him. 
67 Kai Ζαχαρίας ὁ-πατὴρ.αὐτοῦ ἐπλήσθη πνεύματος 
And Zacharias his father was filled with [the] ?Spirit 
« 7 \x U ll , ᾽ A U « 
ἁγίου, Kai Σπροεφήτευσεν,. λέγων, 68 Εὐλογητὸς κύριος ὁ 
‘Holy, and prophesied, saying, Blessed be [the] Lord the 
θεὸς τοῦ Ἰσραήλ, ὅτι ἐπεσκέψατο Kai ἐποίησεν λύτρωσιν 
God of Israel, because he looked upon and wrought redemption 


τῷῴ.λαῷ.αὐτοῦ" 69 καὶ ἤγειρεν κέρας σωτηρίας ἡμῖν ἐν ὑτῷ" 


for his people, and raisedup ahorn ofsalvation forus in the 
οἴκῳ *AaBid! τοῦ! παιδὸς. αὐτοῦ" 70 καθὼς ἐλάλησεν διὰ 
house of David his servant ; according as hespoke by [the] 


b Ὁ ΠΡ ᾽ I~ 
TWY'_aAT -αἰῶνος 


προφητῶν αὐτοῦ" 
5since “time 7began 


στόματος τῶν ἁγίων 
mouth 7holy prophets lof *his ; 
71 σωτηρίαν ἐξ ἐχθρῶν.ἡμῶν καὶ ἐκ χειρὸς πάντων 
salvation from our enemies and from{[the] hand of all 
τῶν μισούντων ἡμᾶς" 72 ποιῆσαι ἔλεος μετὰ τῶν πατέρων 
those who hate us; to fulfil mercy with *fathers 
ἡμῶν, καὶ μνησθῆναι διαθήκης ἁγίας αὐτοῦ, 73 ὅρκον ὃν 
our, and toremember “covenant “holy this, {the} oath which 
ὦμοσεν πρὸς ᾿Αβραὰμ τὸν.πατέρα.-ἡμῶν, Tov δοῦναι ἡμῖν 
heswore to Abraham our father, to give us [that] 
74 ἀφόβως ἐκ χειρὸς “τῶν" ἐχθρῶν. ἡμῶν" ῥυσθέντας, 
without fear out of [the] hand of our enemies being saved, 
λατρεύειν αὐτῷ 75 ἐν ὁσιότητι καὶ δικαιοσύνῃ ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ 
weshouldserve him in holiness and righteousness before him 
΄ ‘ « , ee.” ~ tl af ~ 6 K ‘ +f δί 
πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας “τῆς.ζωῆς" ἡμῶν. 7 αἱ σὺ", παιδίον, 
all the days of our life. And thou, little child, 
προφήτης ὑψίστου κληθήσῃ" προπορεύσῃ.γὰρ πρὸ 
prophet of([the] Highest shalt becalled; forthoushalt go before [the] 
προσώπου κυρίου ἑτοιμάσαι ὁδοὺς. αὐτοῦ" 77 τοῦ δοῦναι 
face of [the] Lord to prepare his ways ; to give 
γνῶσιν σωτηρίας TP.\ap-avrov ἐν ἀφέσει ἁμαρτιῶν.αὐτῶν, 
knowledge of salvation to his people in remission of their sins, 
78 διὰ σπλάγχνα ἐλέους θεοῦ. ἡμῶν, ἐν οἷς ἐπεσκέψατο 
through [the] bowels of compassion of our God, in which has visited 
ἡμᾶς ἀνατολὴ ἐξ ὕψους, 79 ἐπιφᾶναι τοῖς ἐν σκότει 
us [the] day-spring from on high, to shine upon those 7in “darkness 
καὶ σκιᾷ θανάτου καθημένοις" τοῦ κατευθῦναι τοὺς 
“and °in (*the] “shadow “of *death ‘sitting ; to direct 


χ ἐπροφήτευσεν LTTrA. Υ — τῷ (read [the]) Lrrra. 
8 — τοῦ LTTrA. Ὁ — τῶν TTrA. ¢ — τῶν LTTrA. 
© — τῆς ζωῆς (read all our days) GLTTraw. 


Wil. LUKE. 


πόδας. ἡμῶν εἰς ὁδὸν εἰρήνης. 80 Τὸ. δὲ παιδίον ηὔξανεν 
our feet into (the] way of peace. And the little child grew 
. ~ ‘ ~ , er 
καὶ ἐκραταιοῦτο πνεύματι. Kai ἣν ἐν ταῖς ἐρήμοις Ewe 
and was strengthened in spirit ; and he was in the deserts until [the] 
ἡμέρας ἀναδείξεως. αὐτοῦ πρὸς τὸν ᾿Ισραήλ. 
day of his shewing to Israel. 
Q ‘Eyévero.dé ἐν ταῖς. ἡμέραις. ἐκείναις ἐξῆλθεν δόγμα 
And it came to pass in those days went *out ‘a 7decree 
παρὰ Καίσαρος Αὐγούστου, ἀπογράφεσθαι πᾶσαν τὴν 


from Ceesar Augustus, that should be registered all the 
oikoupervny' 2 αὕτη. 5ὴ" ἀπογραφὴ “xowrn ἐγένετο" ἡγε- 
habitable world ; this registration first took place when 


μονεύοντος τῆς Συρίας ‘Kupnviov.' 3 καὶ ἐπορεύοντο πάντες 


2was °governor *of Syria ?*Cyrenius. And went 1411 
ἀπογράφεσθαι, ἕκαστος εἰς τὴν. ξἰδίαν" .πόλιν. 4 ᾿Ανέβη.δὲ καὶ 
to be registered, each to his own city: and *went ‘up ?also 


Ἰωσὴφ ἀπὸ τῆς Γαλιλαίας ἐκ πόλεως ᾿ἱΝαζαρέτ' εἰς τὴν 
1Joseph from Galilee out of [the] city Nazareth to 


Ἰουδαίαν, εἰς πόλιν ™AaBid' ἥτις καλεῖται Βηθλεέμ, διὰ 


Judea, to acity of Dayid which iscalled Bethlehem, because 
ro.clvat.avroy ἐξ οἴκου Kai πατριᾶς Δαβίδ," 5 πάπο- 
of his being of [the] house and family of David, to re- 


γράψασθαι" σὺν Μαριὰμ τῇ “μεμνηστευμένῃ" αὐτῷ Pyvvarki,' 


gister himself with Mary who was betrothed to him as wife, 
οὔσῃ ἐγκύῳ. 6 ᾿Εγένετο.δὲ ἐν τῷ εἶναι.αὐτοὺς 
she being great with child. Anditcametopass in the[time] they were 
ἐκεῖ ἐπλήσθησαν ai ἡμέραι τοῦ.τεκεῖν. αὐτήν 7 καὶ ἔτε- 
there *were*fulfilled ‘the *days for her bringing forth, and she brought 
κεν τὸν υἱὸν. αὐτῆς TOV πρωτότοκον, Kai ἐσπαργάνωσεν 
forth her son the first-born, and wrapped 7in“*swaddling ‘clothes 
αὐτόν, καὶ ἀνέκλινεν αὐτὸν ἐν “τῇ φάτνῃ, διότι οὐκιἦν 
thim, and laid him in the manger, because there was not 


αὐτοῖς τόπος ἐν τῷ καταλύματι. 
forthem aplace in the inn. 
8 Kai ποιμένες ἦσαν ἔν τῇ χώρᾳ τῇ αὐτῇ, ἀγραυλοῦντες 
And shepherds were in the ?country lsame, lodging in the fields 
καὶ φυλάσσοντες φυλακὰς τῆς νυκτὸς ἐπὶ τὴν.ποίμνην. αὐτῶν. 


and keeping watch by night over their flock ; 
9 καὶ Tidod,' ἄγγελος κυρίου ἐπέστη αὐτοῖς, Kai δόξα 
and behold, anangel of[the] Lord stood Σ them, and [the] glory 


/ cd 4 ’ 4 τὰ ’, ’ 
κυρίου περιέλαμψεν αὐτούς" καὶ ἐφοβήθησαν φόβον 
of [the] Lord shone around them, and they feared [with] *fear 


μέγαν. 10 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς ὁ ἄγγελος, M1j.doBeiabe ἰδοὺ 


Ἰσγοϑδῦ. And ‘said *to*them'the “angel. Fear not ; 2behold 
γάρ, εὐαγγελίζομαι ὑμῖν χαρὰν μεγάλην, ἥτις ἔσται 
or, JIannounce glad tidings to you [of] *joy lereat, which shall be 


παντὶ τῷ Aa’ 11 ὅτι ἐτέχθη ὑμῖν σήμερον σωτήρ. ὕς ἐστιν 
toall the people; for wasborn toyou to-day aSaviour, who is 
χριστὸξὶ κύριος, ἐν πόλει "Δαβίδ." 12 καὶ τοῦτο ὑμῖν 
᾽ 
hrist [the] Lord, ἴῃ [086] city of David. And this [is] to you 
TO onpéiov’ εὑρήσετε βρέφος ἐσπαργανωμένον, * ἵκεί- 
the sign: ye shall find ababe wrapped in swaddling clothes, ly- 


151 


into the way of peace. 
80 And the child grew, 
and waxed strong in 
spirit, and was in the 
deserts till the day of 
his shewing unto Is- 
rael, 


II. And it came to 
pass in those days, that 
there went out a de- 
eree from Cesar Au- 
gustus, that all the 
world should be taxed. 
2 (And this taxing was 
first made when Cyre- 
nius was governor of 
Syria.) 3 And all went 
to be taxed, every one 
into his own city. 
4 And Joseph also went 
up from Galilee, out 
of the city of Naza- 
reth, into Judzxa, unto 
the city of David, 
which is called Beth- 
lehem; (because he 
was of the house and 
lineage of David:) 
5 to be taxed with 
Mary his espoused 
wife, being great with 
child. 6 And soit was, 
that, while they were 
there, the days were 
accomplished that she 
should be delivered. 
7 And she brought 
forth her firsthorr son, 
and wrapped him in 
swaddling clothes, and 
laid him in a manger; 
because there was no 
room for them in the 
inn. 


8 And there were in 
the same country shep- 
herds abiding in the 
field, keeping watch 
over their flock by 
night. 9 And, lo, the 
angel of the Lord came 
upon them, and the 
glory of the Lordshone 
round about them: 
and they were sore a- 
fraid. 10 And the an- 
gel said unto them, 
Fear not : for, behold, 
I bring you good ti- 
dings of great joy, 
which shall be to all 
people. 11 For unts 
you is born this day 
in the city of David 
a Saviour, which is 
Christ the Lord. 12 And 
this shall be a sign un- 
to you; Ye shall find 
the babe wrapped in 
swaddling clothes, 
lying in a manger. 


@—7LTTra. » ἐγένετο πρώτη T. 
1 Ναζαρὰθ L; Ναζαρὲθ Tw. m Δανεὶδ LTTrA; Δαυὶδ Gw. 
© ἐμνηστευμένῃ LTTrA. Ρ  -- γυναικί LTTrA. 
T[Tra]}. 5 Δαυείδ LTTrA; Δαυΐδ Gw. 


i Κυρίνου Cyrenus tL. 


t+ καὶ and [u]tra. 


4 — τῇ (read a manger) LTTra. 
Υ — κείμενον T. 


k ἑαυτοῦ (read his city) LTTr. 


n ἀπογράφεσθαι L. 
— ἰδού 


152 

13 And suddenly there 
was with the angel 
& multitude of the 
heavenly host prais- 
ing God, and saying, 
14 Glory to God in the 
highest, and on earth 
peace, good will to- 
wardmen. 15 And it 
came to pass, as the 
angels were gone away 
from them into hea- 
ven, the shepherds said 
one to another, Let us 
now go even unto 
Bethlehem, and see 
this thing which is 
come to pass, which 
the Lord hath made 
known untous. 16 And 
they came with haste, 
and found Mary, and 
Joseph, and the babe 
lying in @ manger, 
17 And when they had 
seen it, they made 
known abroad the say- 
ing which was told 
them concerning this 
child. 18 And all they 
that heard it wondered 
at those things which 
were told them by the 
shepherds. 19 But Mary 
kept all these things, 
and pondered them in 
her heart. 20 And the 
shepherds returned, 
glorifying and prais- 
ing God for all the 
things that they had 
heard and seen, as it 
was told unto them. 


21 And when eight 
days were accomplish- 
ed for the circumcising 
of the child, his name 
was called JESUS, 
which was so named 
of the angel before he 
was conceived in the 
womb. 


22 And when the 
days of her purifica- 
tion according to the 
law of Moses were 
accomplished, they 
brought him to Jeru- 
salem, to present him 
to the Lord ; 23 (as it 
is written in the law 
of the Lord, Every 
male that openeth the 
womb shall be called 
holy to the Lord ;) 
24 and to offer a sacri- 
fice according to that 


AOYKA®. Il. 
μενον" ἐν τῇ" φάτνῃ. 18 Kai ἐξαίφνης ἐγένετο σὺν τῷ 
ing in the manger. An suddenly there was with the 


> ἐλ. ~ ~ x > , Π] > ΄ εἶ , 
ἀγγέλῳ πλῆθος στρατιᾶς *ovpaviov," αἰνούντων τὸν θεόν, 


angel multitude of [the] *host “heavenly, praising God 

A , , ? « , ~ A > 4 ~ 
καὶ λεγόντων, 14 Δόξα ἐν ὑψίστοις θεῷ, καὶ ἐπὶ γῆς 
and saying, Glory in [the] highest toGod, and on earth 


’ ’ > > , y ᾽ ’, ll ‘4 ’ , e ᾽ _ 
εἰρήνη, ἔν ἀνθρώποις Yebdoria." 15 Kai ἐγένετο, we ἀπῆλ- 
peace, in men good pleasure. And it came to pass, as “depart- 
θον an’ αὐτῶν εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν ot ἄγγελοι, “Kai ot ἄνθοωποι" 
ed ‘from ‘them ‘into’the “heaven ‘the “angels, that the men 
ot ποιμένες δεῖπον" πρὸς ἀλλήλους, Διέλθωμεν δὴ Ewe 
the shepherds said to one another, Let us go through indeed asfaras 
Βηθλεέμ, καὶ ἴδωμεν τὸ ῤῥῆμα.τοῦτο τὸ γεγονὸς δ’3: τὸ 
Bethlehem, and let us see this thing that has come to pass which the 

, ᾽ , ΓΝ δ᾽ ᾿ bz Ι , \ 
κύριος ἐγνώρισεν ἡμῖν. 16 Kai δήλθον! σπεύσαντες καὶ 
Lord madeknown tous. And they came having hasted and 
cZ ~ fl , ‘ Ν \ ? UZ ‘ A ’ ΄, 
ἀνεῦρον" τήν.τε. Μαριὰμ καὶ τὸν ᾽᾿Τωσήφ, καὶ τὸ βρέφος κεί- 


found both Mary and Joseph, and the babe ly- 

é 9 oa 17. (06 δὲ ἐδ 5 a 

μενον ev τῇ φάτνῃ. ἰδόντες.δὲ ιεγνώρισαν 
ing in the manger, And having seen, they made known abroad 
περὶ τοῦ ῥήματος τοῦ λαληθέντος αὐτοῖς περὶ τοῦ 


concerning the saying which had beon told them concerning 


παιδίου.τούτου. 18 καὶ πάντες οἱ ἀκούσαντες ἐθαύμασαν 
this little child. And all who heard wondered 


περὶ τῶν λαληθέντων ὑπὸ τῶν ποιμένων πρὸς 
concorning the things which had been spoken by the _ shepherds to 
αὐτούς. 19 ἡ.δὲ. "Μαριὰμ" πάντα συνετήρει τὰ. ῥήματα.ταῦτα, 


them. But Mary 3411 ‘kept these sayings, 
ἰσυμβάλλουσα" ἐν τῇ.καρδίᾳ. αὐτῆς. 20 καὶ δἐπέστρεψαν" 
pondering (them) in her heart. And Sreturned 


ot ποιμένες, δοξάζοντες καὶ αἰνοῦντες τὸν θεὸν ἐπὶ πᾶσιν 


‘the “shepherds, glorifying and praising God _ for all things 
οἷς ἤκουσαν καὶ “eldor," καθὼς ἐλαλήθη πρὸς αὐτούς. 
which they had heardand _ seen, as it was said to them, 


21 Kai ore ἐπλήσθησαν ἡμέραι ὀκτὼ τοῦ περιτεμεῖν ἱτὸ 
And when were fulfilled days ‘eight forthe circumcising the 
παιδίον," καὶ ἐκλήθη τὸ.Ὀνομα.αὐτοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦς, τὸ κλη- 
little child, swas “called *his *name Jesus, which fhe] was 
θὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀγγέλου πρὸ τοῦ συλληφθῆναι! αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ 
called by the angel before 2was ‘conceived the in the 
κοιλίᾳ. 
womb. 
22 Kai bre ἐπλήσθησαν ai ἡμέραι τοῦ.καθαρισμοῦ.᾿ αὐτῶν" 
And when were fulfilled the days for their purification 
κατὰ τὸν νόμον Μωσέως," ἀνήγαγον αὐτὸν εἰς Ἱεροσύ- 
according to the law of Moses, they brought him to erusa- 


λυμα παραστῆσαι τῷ κυρίῳ, 23 καθὼς γέγραπται ἐν" 


lem to present tothe Lord, as it has been written in [the] 
νόμῳ κυρίου, Ὅτι πᾶν ἄρσεν διανοῖγον μήτραν ἅγιον 
law of{[the] Lord, That every male opening awomb ‘holy 
τῷ κυρίῳ κληθήσεται: 24 καὶ τοῦ δοῦναι θυσίαν κατὰ 


5to *the "Lord ‘shall *be “called ; and to offer a sacrifice according to 


Ww — τῇ (read ὃ. manger) GLTTrAW. 


pleasure Lrtra. 
5 ἀνεῦραν TTr. 
λουσα Ἱ. 
LITra. 


d ἐγνώρισαν they made known Ltr. 
& ὑπέστρεψαν GLTTrAW. _ 
| αὐτῆς (read her purification) ΒΕ. 


Υ εὐδοκίας of good 
® ἐλάλουν T. Ὁ ἦλθαν Trra. 
ὁ Μαρία LTTra. f συνβάλ- 
κ συλλημφθῆναι 
n+ τῷ the i. 


x οὐρανοῦ of heaven Tr. 
2 — καὶ οἱ ἄνθρωποι [L]t[TrA]. 


i αὐτόν him GLTTraAW. 
™ Mwioews LTTrAW. 


h (Sov T. 


TY. LUKE. 


τὸ εἰρημένον ty 9. νό κυρίου, Zevyoc τρυγόνων 
that which has been said in [the] law of[the] Lord, Apair of turtle doves 
ἢ δύο Ῥνεοσσοὺς" περιστερῶν. 
or two young of pigeons. τ 
25 Καὶ ἰδού, «ἦν ἄνθρωπος! ἐν Ἱερουσαλὴμ ᾧ ὄνομα 
And behold, there was aman in Jerusalem whose name 


Συμεών, καὶ ὁ.ἄνθρωπος.οὗτος δίκαιος καὶ εὐλαβής, 


{was] Simeon; and this man (was) just and pious, 
προσδεχόμενος παράκλησιν τοῦ ᾿Ισραήλ, καὶ πνεῦμα 
waiting 208. the consolation of Israel, and [the] pei 


τἅγιον ἦν" ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν" 26 καὶ ἦν αὐτῷ κεχρηματισμένον ὑπὸ 
*Holy was upon him. And it was to him divinelycommunicated by 


TOU πνεύματος τοῦ ἁγίου μὴ. ἰδεῖν θάνατον πρὶν 5ῃ}} 
the Spirit the oly that he should not see death before 


ἴδῃ τὸν χριστὸν κυρίου. 27 Kai ἦλθεν ἐν τῷ πνεύματι 
he should see the i of Ethel Lord. And hecame in the Spirit 


sic τὸ ἱερόν" Kai ἐν τῷ εἰσαγαγεῖν τοὺς ae τὸ παιδίον "In- 
intothetempie; and when*brought*in ‘the arents the little child Je- 


σοῦν, τοῦ.ποιῆσαιιαὐτοὺς κατὰ τὸ εἰθισμένον 
sus, that they might do paccoriting “to °what ®had ἀξ εἰς κουξίοπιασν 


τοῦ νόμου περὶ αὐτοῦ, 8 καὶ αὐτὸς ἐδέξατο αὐτὸ εἰς τὰς ἀγκά- 
®py°the αν ΟΣ him, he also received him into "arms, 


λας αὐτοῦ," καὶ εὐλόγησεν τὸν θεόν, καὶ εἶπεν, 29 Νῦν ἀπολύεις 


*his, and blessed God, and Baus Now thou lettest go 
τὸν δούλόν σου, δέσποτα, κατὰ τὸ ῥῆμά.σου, ἐν εἰρήνφ᾽ 
thy bondman, O Master, accordingto thy word, in peace ; 
80 ὅτι εἶδον οἱ-ὀφθαλμοί.μου τὸς σωτήριόν.σου, 31 ὃ 
for *have “seen 1mine sere thy salvation, which 
ἡτοίμασας κατὰ πρόσωπον πάντων τῶν λαῶν" 82 φῶς 
thou hast prepared before [the] face of all the peoples ; a light 
εἰς ἀποκάλυψιν ἐθνῶν καὶ δόξαν λαοῦ.σου ᾿Ισραήλ. 


for revelation of [the] Gentiles and glory of thy people IsraeL 


33 Kai ἦν "*VIwond' καὶ ἡ-.μήτηρ. "αὐτοῦ" θαυμάζοντες ἐπὶ 


And Swere ‘Joseph and Shis *mother wondering at 

τοῖς λαλουμένοις περὶ αὐτοῦ. 84 καὶ εὐλόγησεν 
the things which werespoken concerning him. And “blessed 
αὐτοὺς Συμεών, καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς Μαριὰμ τὴν. μητέρα αὐτοῦ, 
*them 1Simeon, and said to Mary his mother, 
᾿Ιδού, οὗτος κεῖται εἰς πτῶσιν καὶ ἀνάστασιν πολλῶν 


Lo, this [child] isset for[the} fall of many 


ἐν τῷ Ισραήλ, καὶ εἰς σημεῖον ἀντιλεγόμενον᾽ 3d Kai σοῦ "δὲ" 
in Israel, andfor asign apolem against ; (and of thee also 


αὐτῆς τὴν ψυχὴν διελεύσεται ῥομφαία" ὕπως ἂν.ἀποκαλυ- 
®thy ΘΟ] *shall +go Sthrough 'a sword ;) so that may be re- 


and rising up 


φθῶσιν ἐκ πολλῶν καρδιῶν διαλογισμοί. 
vealed of many hearts [the] reasonings. 
36 Kai ἦν “Avva προφῆτις, θυγάτηρ Φανουήλ, ἐκ 


And there was Anna a prophetess, dang hte of Phanuel, of [the] 
φυλῆς Aono’ αὕτη προβεβηκυῖα ἐν ἡμέραις πολλαῖς, ζήσασα 


tribe of Asher, she wasadvanced in “days many, having lived 
Yérn μετὰ ἀνδρὸς" ἑπτὰ ἀπὸ τῆς.“παρθενίας" αὐτῆς, 37 καὶ 
?yeara *with ‘a “husband ‘seven from her virginity, and 


ae τῷ the LT Tr, 
37 ἄν τ; ἂν Tr. 
father GTTrA. 
ἔτη LITr. 


P νοσσοὺς TA. 9 ἄνθρωπος Av Τ. 
t— αὐτοῦ | (read {his] arms) [LJ7/Traj. τ δι, 
— αὐτοῦ (read [his] mother) e@tra. 
: ΣΡ A. 


x [δὲ] Ltr. 


158 


which is said in the 
law of the Lord, A pair 
of turtledoves, or two 
young pigeons. 


25 And, behold, there 
was a man in Jerusa- 
lem, whose name was 
Simeon; and the same 
man was just and de- 
yout, waiting for the 
consolation of Israel: 
and the Holy Ghost 
wasupon him, 26 And 
it was revealed unto 
him by the Holy Ghost, 
that he should not see 
death, before he had 
seen the Lord’s Christ. 
27 And he came by the 
Spirit into the temple: 
and when the parents 
brought in the child 
Jesus, to do for him 
after the custom of the 
law, 28 then took he 
him up in hisarms, and 
blessed God, and said, 
29 Lord, now lettest 
thou thy servant de- 
part in peace, accord- 
ing to thy word : 30 for 
mine eyes havé seen 
thy salvation, 31 which 
thou hast prepared be- 
fore the face of all 
people; 32 a light to 
lighten the Gentiles, 
and the glory of thy 
people Israel. 33 And 
Joseph and his mother 
marvelled at those 
things which were 
spoken of him. 34 And 
Simeon blessed them, 
and said unto Mary his 
mother, Behold, this 
child is set for the fall 
and rising again of 
many in Israel ; and 
for a sign which shall 
be spoken against ; 
35 (yea, a sword shall 
pierce through thy 
own soul also,) that 
the thoughts of many 
hearts may be re- 
vealed. 


36 And there was one 
Anna, a _prophetess, 
the daughter of Pha- 
nuel, of the tribe of 
Aser: she was cf a 
great age, and had 
lived with an husband 
seven years from her 
virginity ; 37 and she 


τ ἦν ἅγιον GLTTrAW. 
Υ ὁ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ his 
Υ μετὰ ἀνδρὸς 


154 


wasa widow of about 
fourscore and four 
years, which departed 
not from the temple, 
but served God with 
fastings and prayers 
night and day. 38 And 
she coming in that in- 
stant gave thanks like- 
wise unto the Lord, 
and spake of him to 
all them that looked 
for redemption in Je- 
rusalem, 


39 And when they 
had performed all 
things according to 
the law of the Lord, 
they returned into 
Galilee, to their own 
city Nazareth. 40 And 
the child grew, and 
waxed strong in spirit, 
filed with wisdom: 
and the grace of God 
was upon him. 


41 Now his parents 
went to Jerusalem 
every year at the feast 
of the passover. 42 And 
when he was twelve 
years old, they went 
up to Jerusalem after 
the custom of the feast. 
43 And when they had 
fulfilled the days, as 
they returned, the 
child Jesus tarried be- 
hind in Jerusalem; 
and Joseph and his 
mother knew not ofit. 
44 But they, supposing 
him to have been in 
the company, went a 
day’s journey; and 
they sought him a- 
mong their kinsfolk 
and acquaintance, 
45 And when they 
found him not, they 
turned back again to 
Jerusalem, seeking 
him. 46 Anditcameto 
pass, that after three 
days they found him 
in the temple, sitting 
in the midst of the 
doctors, both hearing 
them, and asking them 
questions. 47 And all 
that heard him were 
astonished at his un- 
derstanding and an- 
swers. 48 And when 
they saw him, they 
were amazed: and his 
mother said unto him, 
Son, why hast thou 


thus dealt with us? 


Ὁ αὐτὴ herself TTrA. 
— αὕτη (read ἀνθωμολ. she gave praise) LITrA. 


[inj) urtr[A]. 
LTTrAW. 
up LTTra. 


parents knew it not LITra. 
(read [hirn ]) @[uJrtra. 


0 Ναζαρέθ TTraw. 
 — εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα I Tra. 


AOYKAS. 11. 

ἤρα “ὡς; ἐτῶν ὀγδοηκοντατεσσάρων, ἣ οὐκ 
{was] a widow “about *years of *eighty-four, 5Swho "not 
ἀφίστατο ‘ard τοῦ ἱεροῦ, νηστείαις Kai δεήσεσιν λατρεύουσα 
®departed from the temple, withfastings and supplications serving 
νύκτα καὶ ἡμέραν: 88 καὶ αὕτη" αὐτῇ.τῇ ὥρᾳ ἐπιστᾶσα 


b αὕτη ll 
she 


night and day ; and she at the same hour coming up 
ἀνθωμολογεῖτο τῷ ἱκυρίῳ," Kai EXdrde περὶ αὐτοῦ πᾶσιν 
gave praise tothe Lord, and spoke concerning him to all 


~ , , ? Il « ,’ 
τοῖς προσδεχομένοις λύτρωσιν ξέν" ἱΙερουσαλήμ. 
those waiting for redemption in Jerusalem. 
899 Kai ὡς ἐτέλεσαν "ζψπανταὶ τὰ κατὰ τὸν νόμον 
And when they hadcompleted all things accordingtothe law 
, κι , Ι 3 \ , > 1 ΝΕ ΄ 
κυρίου, "ὑπέστρεψαν" εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν, εἰς "τὴν" πόλιν 
of [the] Lord they returned to Galilee, to Scity 


Mayray' "NaZapér.' 40 Τὸ.δὲ παιδίον ηὔξανεν καὶ ἐκρα- 
‘their [*own], Nazareth. And the little child grew, and became 
ταιοῦτο “πνεύματι, πληρούμενον Ῥσοφίας, Kat χάρις 


strong in spirit, being filled with wisdom, and[the] grace 
θεοῦ ἦν ἐπ᾽ αὐτό. 
of God was upon him, 
41 Kai ἐπορεύοντο οἱ. γονεῖς. αὐτοῦ Kar ἔτος εἰς Ἱερουσαλὴμ 
And swent ‘his *parents yearly to Jerusalem 
τῇ ἑορτῇ τοῦ πάσχα. 42 Kai ὅτε ἐγένετο ἐτῶν δώδεκα, 
at the feast of the passover. And when he was *years [3014] ‘twelve, 
«ἀναβάντων" αὐτῶν τεὶς Ιεροσόλυμα! κατὰ τὸ ἔθος τῆς 
Shaving gone 7up *they to erusalem according to the custom ofthe 
ἑορτῆς, 43 καὶ τελειωσάντων τὰς ἡμέρας, ἐν-τῷ. ὑποστρέφειν 
as ζτούπσηθα 


feast, and having completed the days, 
αὐτοὺς ὑπέμεινεν *Inoovc' ὁ παῖς ἐν ‘lepovcadnp, Kai 
‘they ‘remained behind *Jesus “the *child in Jerusalem, and 


τοὐκ. ἔγνω ᾿Τωσὴφ καὶ ἡ-.μήτηρ.αὐτοῦ"" 44 νομίσαντες.δὲ αὐτὸν 
5knew [510] ποῦ ‘Joseph*and “his *mother ; but supposing him 
γὲν τῇ συνοδίᾳ εἶναι" ἦλθον ἡμέρας ὁδόν, Kai ἀνεζήτουν 
in the company tobe they went aday’s journey, and sought 
αὐτὸν ἐν τοῖς συγγενέσιν καὶ “ἐν! ruic γνωστοῖς" 45 Kai 
him among the relations and among the acquaintances: and 
μὴ εὑρόντες "αὐτὸν" ὑπέστρεψαν εἰς ἹἱἹερουσαλήμ, ἡζητοῦντες" 
not having found him they returned to Jerusalem, seeking 


αὐτόν. 46 Καὶ ἐγένετο "p20" ἡμέρας τρεῖς εὗρον αὐτὸν ἐν 


him. And itcametopass after “days ‘three theyfound him in 
τῷ ἱερῷ, καθεζόμενον ἐν ἐσῳ τῶν διδασκάλων, καὶ ἀκού- 
the temple, sitting in [the] midst of the teachers, both hear- 


ovra αὐτῶν καὶ ἐπερωτῶντα αὐτούς. 47 ἐξίσταντο.δὲ πάντες 
And ®were Samazed ‘all 


ing them and questioning them. 
ol ἀκούοντες αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τῇ συνέσει καὶ ταῖς ἀποκρίσεσιν 
*those “hearing *him αὖ [his] understanding and 7answers 


αὐτοῦ. 48 Kai ἰδόντες αὐτὸν ἐξεπλάγησαν" καὶ “πρὸς αὐτὸν 


‘his. And = seeing him they were astonished: and to him 
ἡ-μήτηρ.αὐτοῦ εἶπεν, Τέκνον, τί ἐποίησας ἡμῖν οὕτως; 
his mother said, Child, why hast thou done tous thus? 
© ἕως up to LYTrA. 4d ἀπὸ (read left not) Trra. © αὐτὴ W; 
f θεῷ (read to God) urtra. 8 — ev (read 
Ὁ πάντα 1ττ. ἱ -- τὰ Ὑ. k ἐπέστρεψαν T. 1--- τὴν LTTrA. ™ ἑαυτῶν 
ρ 


Ρ σοφίᾳ TrA. ἃ ἀναβαινόντων going 
τ οὐκ ἔγνωσαν οἱ γονεῖς αὐτοῦ his 

ν —éyGLTTrAW. * -- αὐτόν 
8 εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτὸν 


ο — πνεύματι LTTrA. 
5 [Ἰησοῦς] A. 
v εἶναι ἐν τῇ συνοδίᾳ LTTrA. 
Υ ἀναζητοῦντες LTTrA. % μετὰ TTrA. 


ἢ μήτηρ αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 


ΠΗΉΠ. LUKE. 


> , c , > ? , 3 ~ , ‘ 
ἰδού, ὁ. πατήρισου Kayw ὀδυνώμενοι ἐζητοῦμεν σε. 49 Καὶ 
behold, thy father and I distressed were seeking thee. And 
εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, Ti ὅτι ἐζητεῖτε με; οὐκδειτε ὅτι 
hesaid to them, Why [isit]that ye wereseeking me? knew ye not that 
ἐν τοῖς τοῦ.πατρός.ιμου δεῖ εἶναί pe; 50 Καὶ αὐτοὶ 
in the(affairs] of my Father it behoves *to “be ‘me? And _ they 
? ~ ᾿ tw τι ? / ? ~ \ , 
od.cvvijkay τὸ ῥῆμα ὃ ἐλάλησεν αὐτοῖς. 51 Kai κατέβη 
understood not the word which hespoke tothem. And he went down 
per αὐτῶν καὶ ἦλθεν εἰς Ναζαρέτ" καὶ ἦν ὑποτασσόμενος 
with them and came to Nazareth, and he was subject 


αὐτοῖς. καὶ ἡ. μήτηρ.αὐτοῦ διετήρει “πάντα τὰ ῥήματα" “ταῦτα" 


tothem. And his mother kept all » these things 
ἐν τῇ. καρδίᾳ. αὐτῆς. 52 καὶ Ἰησοῦς προέκοπτεν “ 'σοφίᾳ καὶ 
in her heart. And Jesus advanced in wisdom and 
ἡλικίᾳ," Kai χάριτι παρὰ θεῷ Kai ἀνθρώποις. 
stature, and infavour with God and men. 
> » 4 , ~ ε ΄, a 
3 Ἔν ἔτει δὲ πεντεκαιδεκάτῳ τῆς ἡγεμονίας Τιβερίου 
2In ‘year ‘now [*the] “fifteenth of the government of Tiberius 
Καίσαρος, ἡγεμονεύοντος ἸΤοντίου 5!Πιλάτου" τῆς ᾿Τουδαίας; 
Cesar, Sbeing*governor Pontius ?Pilate of Judea, 
καὶ "τετραρχοῦντος" τῆς Γαλιλαίας Ἡρώδου, Φιλίππου.δὲ τοῦ 
and “being “tetrarch *of 5Galilee ‘Herod, and Philip 
ἀδελφοῦ.αὐτοῦ "reroapyovrroc' τῆς ᾿Ιτουραίας καὶ Toaywri- 
his brother being tetrarch of Iturea and “of *Tracho- 
τιδος χώρας, καὶ Λυσανίου τῆς Αβιληνῆς "τετραρχοῦντος." 
nitis ['the]?region, and Lysanias 20f*Abilene ‘being *tetrarch, 
2 iia’ ἀρχιερέων “Avva καὶ Καϊάφα," ἐγένετο ῥῆμα 
in [the] high-priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, came [the] word 
θεοῦ ἐπὶ PIwavyny' τὸν ™rod' Ζαχαρίου υἱὸν ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ" 
of God upon John the “of °Zacharias ‘son in the wilderness. 
3 καὶ ἦλθεν εἰς πᾶσαν "τὴν" περίχωρον τοῦ ᾿Ιορδάνου. 
And he went into all the country around the Jordan, 
κηρύσσων βάπτισμα μετανοίας εἰς ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν" 
proclaiming [{Π0] baptism of repentance for remission of sins ; 
4 ὡς γέγραπται ἐν βίβλῳ λόγων Ἡσαΐου τοῦ 
as ithas been written in [the] book of{the) words of Esaias the 
προφήτου, “λέγοντος," Φωνὴ βοῶντος ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ, 
prophet, saying, [The] voice ofonecrying in the wilderness, 
Ἑτοιμάσατε τὴν ὁδὸν κυρίου εὐθείας ποιεῖτε τὰς τρίβους 
Prepare the way of [the] Lord; ?straight ‘make *paths 
αὐτοῦ. 5 πᾶσα φάραγξ πληρωθήσεται, Kai πᾶν ὄρος Kai 
Shis. Every ravine shall be filed up, and every mountain and 
βουνὸς ταπεινωθήσεται: καὶ ἔσται τὰ σκολιὰ εἰς 
fill shall be madelow; and ‘shall Sbecome ‘the “crooked [*places] into 
Ρεὐθεῖαν," καὶ αἱ τραχεῖαι εἰς ὁδοὺς λείας" 6 καὶ ὄψεται 
astraight [path], and the rough into*ways ‘smooth; and *shall *see 
πᾶσα σὰρξ τὸ σωτήριον τοῦ θεοῦ. 7 Ἔλεγεν οὖν τοῖς 
tall ?flesh the salvation of God. He said therefore to the 
ἐκπορευομένοις ὄχλοις βαπτισθῆναι ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, Γεννήματα 
2coming “out ‘crowds tobe baptized by him, Offspring 
ἐχιδνῶν, τίς ὑπέδειξεν ὑμῖν φυγεῖν ἀπὸ τῆς μελλούσης ὀργῆς: 
of vipers, who forewarned you toflee from the coming wrath? 


ς τὰ ῥήματα πάντα L. 
(wisdom). f ἡλικίᾳ καὶ σοφίᾳ Tr. 8 ΠΠειλάτου T. 
ἀρχιερέως GLTTrAW. Καΐφα L. ᾿Ἰωάνην Tr. 

every country around) Ltra. © — λέγοντος LTTrA. 


Ὁ Ναζαρέθ TTraw. 


d — ταῦτα these [1Π]1[Α1. 
» τετρααρχοῦντος T. 
m— Tov GLTTraAW. 

Ρ εὐθείας straight [paths] Lrtra. 


155 


behold, thy father and 
I have sought thee sor- 
rowing. 49 And he said 
unto them, How is it 
that ye sought me? 
wist ye not that I 
must be about my Fa- 
ther’s business? 50 And 
they understood not 
the saying which he 
spake unto’ them. 
51 And he went down 
with them, and came 
to Nazareth, and was 
subject unto them: 
but his mother kept 
all these sayings in 
her heart. 52 And Je- 
sus increased in wis- 
dom and stature, and 
in favour with God 
and man. 


III. Now in the fif- 
teenth year of the 
reign of Tiberius Ce- 
sar, Pontius Pilate 
being governor of Ju- 
dza,and Herod being 
tetrarch of Galilee, 
and his brother Philip 
tetrarch of Itureaand 
of the region of Tra- 
chonitis, and Lysanias 
the tetrarch of Abi- 
lene, 2 Annas and Cai- 
aphas being the high 
priests, the word of 
God came unto Johr 
the son of Zacharias in 
the wilderness. 3 And 
he came into all the 
country about Jordan, 
preaching the baptism 
of repentance for the 
remission of sins ; 4 as 
it is written in the 
book of the words of 
Esaias the prophet, 
saying, The voice of 
one crying in the wil- 
derness, Prepare yethe 
way of the Lord, make 
his paths straight. 
5 Every valley shall be 
filled, andevery moun- 
tain and hill shall be 
brought low ; and the 
crooked shall be made 
straight, andtherough 
ways shall be made 
smooth ; 6 andall flesh 
shall see the salvation 
of God. 7 Then said he 
to the multitude that 
came forth to be bap- 
tized of him, O gene- 
ration of vipers, who 
hath warned you to 
flee from the wrath to 
come? 8 Bring forth 
therefore fruits wor- 
thy of repentance, and 
begin not tosay within 
yourselves, We have 
Abraham to our fae 


e+ ἐν τῇ in 
1 ἐπὶ 
1 — τὴν (read 


156 


ther: for I say unto 
you, That God is able 
of these stones to raise 
upchildren unto Abra- 
ham, 9 And now also 
the axe is laid unto 
the root of the trees: 
every tree therefore 
which bringeth not 
forth good fruit is 
hewn down, and cast 
into the fire. 10 And 
the people asked him, 
saying, What shall we 
do then? 11 He an- 
swereth and saith unto 
them, He that hath 
two coats, let him im- 
part to him that hath 
none; and hethat hath 
meat, let him do like- 
wise. 12 Then came 
also publicans to be 
baptized, and said unto 
him, Master, what 
shall we do? 13 And 
he said unto them, 
Exact no more than 
that which is appoint- 
ed you. 14 And the 
soldiers likewise de- 
manded of him, say- 
ing, And what shall 
we do? And he said 
antothem, Do violence 
to no man, neither ac- 
cuse any falsely ; and 
be content with your 
wages. 


15 And as the people 
were in expectation, 
and all men mused in 
their hearts of John, 
whether he were the 
Christ, or not ; 16 John 
answered, saying unto 
them all, I indeed bap- 
tize you with water; 
but one mightier than 
I cometh, the latchet 
of whose shoes I am 
not worthy to unloose: 
he shall baptize you 
with the Holy Ghost 
and with fire : 17 whose 
fan ts in his hand, and 
he will throughly 
purge his floor, and 
will gather the wheat 
into his garner; but 
the chaff he will burn 
with fire unquench- 
able. 18 And many 
other things in his ex- 
hortation preached he 
unto the people. 19 But 
Herod the tetrarch, 
being reproved by him 
for Herodias his bro- 
ther Philip’s wife, and 
tor all the _ evils 
which Herod had done, 
20 added yet this above 
all, that he shut up 
John in prison. 


AOY KAS. Ill. 

οὗν καρποὺς ἀξίους τῆς μετανοίας" καὶ μὴ 
therefore fruits worthy of repentance; and not 
ἄρξησθε λέγειν ἐν ἑαυτοῖς, Πατέρα ἔχομεν τὸν ᾿Αβραάμ:' 

begin tosay in yourselves, [(*For] "ἔα ‘we “have *Abraham, 
λέγω.γὰρ ὑμῖν, ore δύναται ὁ θεὸς ἐκ τῶν.λίθων. τούτων 
for I say to you, that is ‘able *God from these stones 
) ~ , ~? , » 4 «ε J ΓΑ ‘ A 
ἐγεῖραι τέκνα τῷ Αβραάμ. 9 ἤδη.δὲ Kai ἡ ἀξίνη πρὸς τὴν 
to raise up children to Abraham, Butalready alsothe axe to the 


ῥίζαν τῶν δένδρων κεῖται: πᾶν οὖν δένδρον μὴ ποιοῦν 
root ofthe trees is applied:7every*therefore tree not producing 


καρπὸν τκαλὸν" ἐκκόπτεται Kai εἰς πῦρ βάλλεται. 10 Καὶ 


8 ποιήσατε 
Prodace 


2fruit 1z00d ds cut down and into [the] fire is cast. And 
ἐπηρώτων αὐτὸν οἱ ὄχλοι, λέγοντες, Τί οὖν "ποιήσομεν! ; 
Sasked *him ‘the%crowds, saying, What then shall we do? 


11 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ ἱλέγει! αὐτοῖς, Ὁ ἔχων δύο χιτῶνας μετα- 


And answering hesays tothem, Hethat has two tunics let him 
δότω τῷ μὴ-ἔχοντι καὶ ὁ ἔχων βρώματα ὁμοίως 
impart tohim that has not ; and he that has victuals ‘likewise 

ποιείτω. 12 “HdOov.di καὶ τελῶναι βαπτισθῆναι, Kai 
‘et *him *do. And%came also ‘tax-gatherers to be baptized, and 
Yelzrov' πρὸς αὐτόν, Διδάσκαλε, τί "ποιήσομεν"; 13 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν 
they said to him, Teacher, what shall we do? Andhe said 
πρὸς αὐτούς, Μηδὲν πλέον παρὰ τὸ διατεταγμένον 
to them, *Nothing *more “beyond *that‘which 715 *appointed 


ὑμῖν πράσσετε. 14’Exnpwrwy.dé αὐτὸν καὶ στρατευόμενοι, 
ϑο 'ὅγοὰ ‘exact. And asked him alsothose who weresoldiers, 
, τη ΟΣ ene , lle as Χο eee 
λέγοντες, “Καὶ ἡμεῖς τί 7romoopey'; Kai εἶπεν ρον αὐτοὺς, 
saying, And we what shall we do? And he said to) them, 
Μηδένα διασείσητε Yundé συκοφαντήσητε, Kai ἀρκεῖσθε τοῖς 
*No %one ?oppress nor accuse falsely, and be satisfied 
ὀψωνίοις. ὑμῶν. 
with your wages. 
15 Προσδοκῶντος.δὲ τοῦ λαοῦ, καὶ διαλογιζομένων πάν- 
But as*were*in δοχρϑούαύί οι ὅπ ἤρϑορὶθ, and “were *reasoning tall 
των ἐν ταῖς.καρδίαις. αὐτῶν περὶ τοῦ "Ἰωάννου, μήποτε 
in their hearts concerning John, whether or not 
αὐτὸς εἴη ὁ χριστός;, 16 ἀπεκρίνατο "ὁ ᾿Ιωάννης ἅπασιν, 
he might Ὀ6 ὑπὸ Christ, answered ‘John all, 
λέγων," γὼ μὲν ὕδατι βαπτίζω vuac’ ἔρχεται.δὲ ὁ 
saying, 1. indeed with water baptize you, but he comes who[is] 
ἰσχυρότερός μου, οὗ οὐκ.εἰμὶ ἱκανὸς λῦσαι τὸν ἱμάντα τῶν 
mightier than I, of whom I am not fit toloose the thong 
ὑποδημάτων. αὐτοῦ" αὐτὸς ὑμᾶς βαπτίσει ἐν πνεύματι 
of his sandals ; he Syou ‘will *baptize with[the] Spirit 
ἁγίῳ καὶ πυρί: 17 οὗ τὸ πτύον ἐν τῇ. χειρὶ αὐτοῦ, 
*Holy and with fire; of whom the winnowing fan{is] in his hand, 


‘kai διακαθαριεῖ! τὴν.χλωνα.αὐτοῦ, καὶ “συνάξει! τὸν 
and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and willgather the 
σῖτον εἰς τὴν.ἀποθήκην.αὐτοῦ, τὸ. δὲ ἄχυρον κατακαύσει 
wheat into his granary, but the chaff he will burn 


πυρὶ ἀσβέστῳ. 18 Πολλὰ 


ἐν. οὖν καὶ ἕτερα παρακαλῶν 
with fire unquenchable. SMany 


herefore ‘and other things exhorting 


5 ποιήσωμεν Should we do Lrrraw. 
“ τί ποιήσομεν (ποιήσωμεν Should we do TAW) καὶ ἡμεῖς LTTrA. 
¥ μηδένα DO one 7, ἃ 
b + εἰς μετάνοιαν to repentance 1,. 


τ [καλὸν 1. 
LTTr. 
LTrA. 
Ἰωάννης T. 


τ ἔλεγεν he said LrTrA. ᾧὑὉῦΓ εἶπαν 
* αὐτοῖς to them 
26 Ιωάνης ἅπασιν λέγων Tr; λέγων πᾶσιν ὃ 
¢ διακαθᾶραι to thoroughly purge τ. 


« "Iwavov Tr. 


2 συναγαγεῖν to gather T. 


ΠῚ. LUKE. 


εὐηγγελίζετο τὸν λαόν. 19 Ὁ δὲ. Ἡρώδης ὁ ὅτε- 

he announced the glad tidings to ale people. But Herod the te 
τράρχης" ἐλεγχόμενος ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ περὶ Ἡρωδιάδος τῆς 
trarch being reproved by him concerning Herodias 
γυναικὸς Φιλίππου! rov.adekpov.abrov, καὶ περὶ πάντων 

wife of Philip his LANE: and concerning all 
ὧν ἐποίησεν πονηρῶν ὁ Ἡρώδης, 20 προσέθηκεν ἑκαὶἱ" 
3which ‘had *done [the] “evils *Herod, added me 
τοῦτο ἐπὶ πᾶσιν "καὶ" κατέκλεισεν τὸν *Iwavyny' ἐν ἔτῃ" 
this to all that he shut up John in the 
φυλακῷ. 

prison. 


21 ᾿ἘΕγένετο. δὲ 


ἐν τῷ. βαπτισθῆναι ἅπαντα τὸν λαόν, καὶ 
Now it came to pass *having ®been *baptized 


tall 2the *people, and 


Ἰησοῦ βαπτισθέντος καὶ προσευχομένου, ἀνεῳχθῆναι τὸν 
Jesus having been baptized and praying, as*opened ‘the 


οὐρανόν, 22 καὶ καταβῆναι TO πνεῦμα TO yee σωματικῷ 
*heaven, and descended the Spirit the oly aes odey 


εἴδει ‘woei' περιστερὰν ἐπ᾿ αὐτόν, καὶ φωνὴν ἐξ οὐρανοῦ 
form as a dove upon him, and avoice outof heaven 


γενέσθαι, λέγουσαν," Σὺ εἴ ὁ.υἱός.μου ὁ ἀγαπητός, ἐν σοὶ 
came, saying, Thou art mySon the beloved, in thee 
πῃὐδόκησα." 
I have found delight. 
23 Kai αὐτὸς ἦν °0' ᾿Ιησοῦς Ῥὼὡσεὶ ἐτῶν 
And eons. 3was 1Jesus about *years [?°old) 


ἀρχόμενος," 


τριάκοντα 
*thirty 
Wy, we ἐνομίζετο, υἱὸς" Iwond, τοῦ HXi," 


157 

21 Now when 411 the 

ple were baptized 
it came to pass, thaz 
Jesus also being bap- 
tized, and praying, the 
heaven was opened, 
22 and the Holy Ghost 
descended in a bodily 
shape like a dove upon 
him, and a voice came 
from heaven, which 
said, Thou art my be- 
loved Son; in tee I 
am well pleased. 

23 And Jesus him- 
self began to be about 
thirty years of age, be- 
ing (as was supposed) 
the son of Joseph, 
which was the son of 
Heli, 24 which was the 
son of Matthat, which 
was the son of Levi, 
which was the son of 
Melchi, which was the 
son of Janna, which 
was the son of Joseph, 
25 which was the son 
of Mattathias, which 
was the son of Amos, 
which was the son of 
Naum, which was the 
son of Esli, which was 
the son of Nagge, 
26 which was the son 
of Maath, which was 
the son of Mattathias, 
which was the son of 
Semei, which was the 
son of Joseph, which 


“beginning (‘to 5056], being, as was supposed, son of Joseph, of Eli, was the son of Juda, 
24 τοῦ *MarOdr," τοῦ tAevt," τοῦ Μελχί," τοῦ “Ἰαννά,, τοῦ 77 which was the son 
of Matthat, of Levi, : of Melchi, ; of J: pee theson of Rhesa, which 
Ἰωσήφ, 25 τοῦ "Ματταθίου," rov Apwc, τοῦ Ναούμ, τοῦ Ἐσλί," ποτ τς ΩΣ 
of Joseph, of Mattathias, of Amos, of Naoum, of ae son of Salatbiel which 
Tov Nayyai, 26 τοῦ Μαάθ, τοῦ Ματταθίου, τοῦ *Zepei," τοῦ ee ΠΡ on of ere 
of Naggai, of Maath, of Mattathias, of Semei, Melchi, which was the 
Ἰωσήφ," rou’ lovda," 27 Tov“ Iwavva," τοῦ Ῥησά, τοῦ Zopo- son of Addi, which was 
of Joseph, of J ada of Joannes, of Rhesa, of Zoro- theapn of Cocane, which 
βάβελ, τοῦ Σαλαθιήλ. τοῦ *Nnpi," 28 τοῦ Medi," τοῦ ©” Αδδί," dam, which was the 
babel of Salathiel, of Neri, of Melchi, 08 Addi, 20% of; Het 2 yehien 
τοῦ Kwoap, τοῦ ® EXpwoap," τοῦ ae. 29 rov®* Iwon,' τοῦ EXt- which was the son of 
of Cosam, of Elmodam, of Joses, of Eli- Eliezer, which was the 

=p : ca son of Jorim, which 

ἐζερ, τοῦ Tw aah τοῦ **MazOar," τοῦ *Asvi,' 30 τοῦ Συμεών, was thesonof Matthat, 
ezer, oreim of Matthat, of Levi, of Simeon, Which was the son of 
aos -: ka? la Levi, 30 which was 
TOU Τούδα, τοῦ Ἰωσήφ. τοῦ ** Ἰωνάν," τοῦ Ελιακείμ, 31 τοῦ '*Meé- the βοὴ of Simeon, 
of Juda, of Joseph, of Jonan, of Eliakim, of Me- which was the son of 
apne i ms ae: ae Juda, which was the 
Aga," ™ rot Μαϊνάν," τοῦ Ματταθά, τοῦ ™*Nabdy," τοῦ °*Aa- son of Joseph, which 
leas, of Menna, of Mattatha, of Nathan, of Da- waa ihe son οἱ J opal 
whic was the son ὁ 

Be: ' 32 τοῦ Tecoat, τοῦ P* Ωβήδ." τοῦ «Ξ“Βοόζ," rov™Zadpwrv," Biakim, 31 which was 
of Jesse, of Obed, of Booz, of Salmon,  theson of Melea, which 

© τετραάρχης τ — Φιλίππου (read of his) Gurtraw. 8 [καὶ] L. bh — καὶ T[A]. 


1 ἸΙωάνην ge 
ο —O6TTraA. 
τ Ἡλεί Trra. 


— τῇ LTTra. 1@ ὡς LTTrA. m— λέγουσαν LITra. 
Ρ ἀρχόμενος ὡσεὶ ἐτῶν τριάκοντα TTr. 
5 Μαθθάθ τ. t Aevei TTrA. 

X Μαθθαθίου Tr. Σ Ἔσλεί TTrA. τ᾿ Σεμεείν TTra, 

© Ἰωανάν ΧτΤΊτΑ. ἀ Νηρεί τττα. “5 "Added TTrA. 

LTTrA. ha Ma6@a0 T; Μαθθάτ Tra. ia Aevet TTrA. 

ma τοῦ Μεννά [L]TTrA. na Ναθάμ. T. oa Δανείδ LTTrA; Δαυΐδ GW. 

LTTra. 98 Bods LTTra. re Sada τ. 


Y MeAxet TTrA. 


a τῶσχι Josech Trra 
fe ἐπι: ἄμ, LTTrA. 
ka Ἰωνάμ, TTrA. 


= εὐδόκησα LITrA. 


9 ὧν vids ws ἐνομίζετο LTTrA. 


© Ἰανναί LTTrA. 
Ὁ Ἰωδά TTra. 
84 Ἰησοῦ Jesus 
la MeAea TTr. 
P38 Ἰωβήδ Jobed 


158 


was the son of Menan, 
which was the son of 
Mattatha, which was 
the son of Nathan, 
which was the son of 
David, 32 which was 
the son of Jesse, which 
was the son of Obed, 
which was the son of 
Booz, which was the 
son of Salmon, which 
was thesonof Naasson, 
33 which was the son 
of Aminadab, which 
was the son of Aram, 
which was the son of 
Esrom, which was the 
son of Phares, which 
was the son of Juda, 
34 which was theson of 
Jacob, which was the 
son of Isaac, which was 
the son of Abraham, 
which was the son of 
Thara, which was the 
son of Nachor, 35 which 
was the son of Saruch, 
which was the son of 
Ragau, which was the 
son of Phalec, which 
was the son of Heber. 
which was the son of 
Sala, 36 which was the 
son of Caiman, which 
was theson of Arphax- 
ad, which was the son 
of Sem, which was the 
son of Noe, which was 
the son of lLamech, 
37 which was the son of 
Mathusala, which was 
the son of Enoch, which 
was the son of Jared, 
which was the son of 
Maleleel, which was 
the son of Cainan, 
38 which was the son of 
Enos, which was the 
son of Seth, which was 
the son of Adam, which 
was the son of God. 


IV. And Jesus being 
full of the Holy Ghost 
returned from Jordan 
and was led by the 
Spirit into the wilder- 
ness, 2 being forty days 
tempted of the devil. 
And in those days he 
did eat nothing: and 
when they wereended, 
he afterward hunger- 
ed. 3 And the devil 
said unto him, If thou 
be the Son of God, com- 
mand this stone that 
it be made bread. 
4 And Jesus answered 
him, saying, It is writ- 
ten, That man shall 
not live by bread alone, 
but by every word of 


5»᾿Αμειναδάβ A. 
GLITrAwWw. 


% εἶπεν δὲ LTTrA. 
ῥήματι θεοῦ I[Tr]A. 
ἃ ἂν LITA. 
εἶπεν αὐτῷ τ. 


χ Ἕβερ Tra. 
© πλήρης πνεύμ. ἁγίου LTTrA. 
h πρὸς αὐτὸν ὃ ᾿Ιησοῦς LTTrA. 


° ἐμοῦ LITrAW. 
LA , ΄ - 

τ — ὕπαγε ὀπίσω μου, σατανᾶ G[L]TTrA. 

τὸν θεόν σου προσκυνήσεις LTr. 


ΛΟΥΚΑΣ. III, IV. 
τοῦ Ναασσών, 33 τοῦ "Αμιναδάβ," τοῦ "Αράμ," τοῦ "᾿Εσρώμ,! 
of Naasson, of Aminadab, of Aram, of Esrom, 
τοῦ Φαρές, τοῦ Ἰούδα, 34 τοῦ Ἰακώβ, τοῦ ᾿Ισαάκ, τοῦ ᾿Αβραάμ, 
of Phares, of Juda, of Jacob, of Isaac, of Abraham, 
τοῦ Θάρα, τοῦ Ναχώρ, 88 τοῦ *Zapovyx," τοῦ Ῥαγαῦ, τοῦ Φαλέκ, 
of Terah, of Nachor, of Saruch, of Ragau, of Phalek, 
τοῦ *"EBep," τοῦ Lata, 36 τοῦ ’Kaivar," τοῦ ᾿Αρφαξάδ, τοῦ 
of Eber, of Sala, of Cainan, of Arphaxad, 
Σήμ, τοῦ Νῶε, τοῦ Λάμεχ, 37 τοῦ Μαθουσάλα, τοῦ Ἐνώχ, 
of Sem, of Noe, of Lamech, of Mathusala, of Enoch, 
τοῦ * Taped, τοῦ "Μαλελεήλ," τοῦ Kaivay,' 88 τοῦ ᾿Ενώς, 
of Jared, of Maleleel, of Cainan, of Enos, 
τοῦ Σήθ, Tow’ Adam, τοῦ θεοῦ. 
of Seth, of Adam, of God. 
? “- δὲ ς ᾽, . € , Xr ¢ ll A [2 ? ‘ 
4 ᾿Ιησοῦς. πνεύματος ἁγίου πλήρης" ὑπέστρεψεν ἀπὸ 
And Jesus, of [ὍΠ6] *Spirit ‘Holy full, returned from 
τοῦ Ἰορδάνου: καὶ ἤγετο ἐν τῷ πνεύματι “sic THY ἔρημον" 


the Jordan, and wasled by the Spirit into the wilderness 
2 ἡμέρας ἐτεσσαράκοντα," πειραζόμενος ὑπὸ τοῦ διαβόλου 
days forty, being tempted by the devil; 


καὶ οὐκ ἔφαγεν οὐδὲν ἐν ταῖς.ἡμέραις ἐκείναις, καὶ συντελεσ- 


and he ate nothing in those days, and *being 
θεισῶν αὐτῶν ἰ'ὕστερον" ἐπείνασεν. 3 kai εἶπεν" αὐτῷ ὁ 
Sended ‘they afterwards he hungered. And said ‘to ‘Shim ‘the 
διάβολος, Ei υἱὸξ εἶ τοῦ θεοῦ, εἰπὲ τῷ.λίθῳ.τούτῳ ἵνα 

*devil, If Son thou art of God, speak to this stone that 


γένηται ἄρτος. 4 Kai ἀπεκρίθη " Τησοῦς πρὸς αὐτόν," ἱλέγων," 

it become bread. And ?answered ‘Jesus to him, saying, 
Γέγραπται, Ὅτι οὐκ ἐπ᾽ ἄρτῳ μόνῳ ζήσεται ὁ ἄνθρωπος, 

It has been written, That not on bread alone _ shall “live Iman, 

k ? > 9 4 ‘ εἰν ~ Il r 5 ᾽ ‘ ’ A 1s 

ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ παντὶ ῥήματι θεοῦ." 5 Kai ἀναγαγὼν αὐτὸν ἰὸ 


but ΟἹ every word of God. And #leading*up “ἴω ‘the 
διάβολος" πεὶς ὄρος ὑψηλὸν!" ἔδειξεν αὐτῷ πάσας τὰς βασι- 
*devil intoa?mountain "high shewed him all the king- 


λείας τῆς οἰκουμένης ἔν στιγμῇ χρόνου" 6 Kai εἶπεν αὐτῷ 
doms of the habitable world in ἃ moment of time. And %said ‘to ®him 


ὁ διάβολος, Σοὶ δώσω τὴν .ἐξουσίαν.ταύτην ἅπασαν καὶ 


‘the ?devil, To thee will I give “this Sauthority tall and 
\ ly oR eae 2 \ δὲ ᾿ τ =| t 
τὴν. δόξαν. αὐτῶν" ὅτι ἐμοὶ παραδέδοται, καὶ ᾧ."ἐὰν" θέλω 


for to me it has been delivered, and towhomsoever I wish 
δίδωμι αὐτήν: 7 σὺ οὖν ἐὰν προσκυνήσῃς ἐνώπιόν LoD, ' 
I give it. Thou therefore if thou wilt worship before me, 
ἔσται σου Pravra." ὃ Kai ἀποκριθεὶς “αὐτῷ εἶπεν ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς," 
3shall*be °thine 181] μη Ρ8. And answering him “said 1 Jesus, 
ΓὝπαγε ὀπίσω μου, σατανᾶ" γέγραπται.""γάρ," "ᾳΠροσκυνή- 
Get thee behind me, Satan ; for it has been written, Thou shalt wor- 
σεις κύριον τὸν. θεόν.σου,} καὶ αὐτῷ μόνῳ λατρεύσεις. 
ship [the] Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve, 
9 "Καὶ ἤγαγεν" αὐτὸν εἰς ‘lepovoadnp, καὶ ἔστησεν “"αὐτὸν" 
And  heled him to erusalem, and set him 
υ᾿Αδμείν, τοῦ ᾿Αρνεί of Admin, of Arni, TA. ‘’Eopwv EL. δ" Σερούχ 
Υ Καϊνάμ TA. 1 Ἰάρεθι,; Ἰάρετ Ὑ. * Μελελεήλτ. ὃ Καϊνάμ Υ. 
“ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ τττὰ. “τεσσεράκοντα ΤττΑ. ἴ-- ὕστερον LTTrA. 
i — λέγων ΤΊτΑ. k — ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ παντὶ 
! — ὃ διάβολος (read he shewed) ΤΊ τα. ™ — εἰς ὄρος ὑψηλὸν [L]TTrA. 
Ρ πᾶσα allGLITrAW. 4 [Ὁ] A; εἶπεν αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς L; ὁ Ἰησοῦς 
88 — γάρ for GLTTrAW. ἴδ κύριον 
wa — αὐτὸν (read [him]) [TrJa. 


their glory ; 


va nyayev δὲ TTra. 


ΤΥ: LUKE. 
ἐπὶ τὸ πτερύγιον τοῦ ἱεροῦ, Kai εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Εἰ *0' υἱὸς εἶ 
upon the edge of the temple, and said tohim, If the Son thou art 


Tov θεοῦ, βάλε σεαυτὸν ἐντεῦθεν κάτω. 10 γέγραπται.γάρ, 
of God, cast thyself “hence ‘down ; for it has been written, 


"Ort τοῖς. ἀγγέλοις.αὐτοῦ ἐντελεῖται περὶ σοῦ, τοῦ δια- 
That to his angels he will give charge concerning thee, to 
φυλάξαι σε" 11 καὶ Ore ἐπὶ χειρῶν ἀροῦσίν σε, μήποτε 
keep thee; and that in [their] hands shalltheybear thee, lest 

προσκόψῃς πρὸς λίθον τὸν. πόδα.σου. 12 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν 


thou strike against a stone thy foot. And answering “said 
« ~ » ? , ’ 
αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Ὅτι εἴρηται, Οὐκ.ἐκπειράσεις κύριον 
*to *him 1 Jesus, It has been said, Thou shalt not tempt [the] Lord 


τὸν. θεόν.σου. 18 Kai συντελέσας πάντα πειρασμὸν ὁ διά- 
thy God. And having finished every temptation the de- 


βολος ἀπέστη ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀχρι καιροῦ. 
vil departed from him for a time. 
14 Kai ὑπέστρεψεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἐν τῇ δυνάμει τοῦ πνεύματος 
And returned ‘Jesus in the power of the Spirit 
2 \ , ‘ (3 ? ~ θ᾽ ὅλ ~ 
εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν. καὶ φήμη ἐξῆλθεν καθ᾽ ὅλης τῆς περι- 
to Galilee ; and arumour wentout into *whole ‘the country 
χώρου περὶ αὐτοῦ. 15 καὶ αὐτὸς ἐδίδασκεν ἐν ταῖς συν- 
around concerning him. and he taught in *syn- 
aywyaic αὐτῶν, δοξαζόμενος ὑπὸ πάντων. 16 καὶ ἦλθεν εἰς 
agogues ‘their, being glorified by all, And hecame to 
τὴν" Ναζαρέτ," οὗ ἦν "τεθραμμένος" καὶ εἰσῆλθεν κατὰ 
Nazareth, where hewas' brought up; and he entered according to 
τὸ.εἰωθὸς. αὐτῷ ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῶν σαββάτων εἰς THY συναγωγήν, 
his custom onthe day ofthe sabbaths into the synagogue, 
Kai ἀνέστη ἀναγνῶναι. 17 καὶ ἐπεδόθη αὐτῷ βιβλίον 
and stood up to read. And there was given tohim [the] book 
“Hoatov τοῦ προφήτου." καὶ “ἀναπτύξας" τὸ βιβλίον εὗρεν 
of Esaias the prophet, and havingunrolled the book he found 
frov' τόπον οὗ ἢν γεγραμμένον, 18 Πνεῦμα κυρίου 
the place where it was written, {The} Spirit of [the] Lord [is] 
ἐπ᾿ ἐμέ, οὗ. “ἕνεκεν! ἔχρισεν μὲ ἰεὐαγγελίζεσθαι" 
upon me, onaccount of which he anointed me to announce the glad tidings 
πτωχοῖς, ἀπέσταλκέν pe δἰάσασθαι τοὺς συντετριμμένους 
ἴο [[Π6] poor, he has sent me to heal the broken 
τὴν καρδίαν," κηρύξαι αἰχμαλώτοις ἄφεσιν Kai τυφλοῖς 
ἴπ heart, to proclaim tocaptives deliverance and to [the] blind 
ἀνάβλεψιν, ἀποστεῖλαι τεθραυσμένους ἐν ἀφέσει" 19 κηρύ- 


recovery of sight, to send forth [the] crushed indeliverance, to pro- 
Ea ἐνιαυτὸν κυρίου δεκτόν. 20 Kai πτύξας τὸ 
claim [the] “year “*of{*the]*Lord ‘acceptable. And having rolled up the 
βιβλίον, ἀποδοὺς τῷ ὑπηρέτῃ ἐκάθισεν, καὶ πάντων 
book, having delivered [it] to the attendant hesatdown, and “of #all 
δὲν τῇ συναγωγῇ οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ ἦσαν" ἀτενίζοντες αὐτῷ. 
Sin ‘the ‘synagogue ‘the “eyes were fixed upon him. 


21 ᾿Ηρξατο.δὲ λέγειν πρὸς αὐτούς, Ὅτι σήμερον πεπλήρωται 
And he began ἴο 58} to them, To-day is fulfilled 

ἡ-γραφὴ-αὕτη ἐν τοῖς. ὠσὶν. ὑμῶν. 22 Kai πάντες ἐμαρτύρουν 

this scripture in your ears. And all bore witness 


159 


God. 5 And the devil, 
taking him up into an 
high mountain,shewed 
unto him all the king- 
doms of the world in 
ἃ moment of time. 
6 And the devil said 
unto him, All this 
power will I give thee, 
and the glory of them 

for that is delivered 
unto me; andto whom: 
soever I will I give it. 
7 Lf thou therefore wilt 
worship me, all shal] 
be thine. 8 And Jesus 
answered and said un 

to him, Get thee be 

hind me, Satan: for it 
is written, Thou shalt 
worship the Lord thy 
God, and him only 
shalt thouserve, 9 And 
he brought him to Je- 
rusalem, and set hin 
on a pinnacle of the 
temple, and said unto 
him, If thou be theSon 
of God, cast thyself 
down from hence: 
10 for it is written, He 
shall give his angels 
charge over thee, to 
keep thee: 11 and in 
their hands they shall 
bear thee up, lest at 
any time thou dash thy 
foot against a stone. 
12 And Jesus answer- 
ing said unto him, It 
is said, Thou shalt not 
tempt the Lord thy 
God. 13 And when the 
devil had ended all the 
temptation, he depart- 
ed from him for a 
season. 


14 And Jesus return- 
ed in the power of the 
Spirit into Galilee: 
and there went outa 
fame of him through 
all the region round 
about. 15 And he 
taught in their syna- 
gogues, being glorified 
of all. 16 And hecame 
to Nazareth, where he 
had been brought up: 
and, as his custom 
was, he went into the 
synagogue on the sab- 
bath day, and stood up 
for to read. 17 And 
there was delivered 
unto him the book of 
the prophet Ksaias. 
And when he had 
opened the book, he 
found the place where 
it was written, 18 The 
Spirit of the Lord is 
upon me, because he 
hath anointed me to 
preach the gospel to 


xX —. ὃ GLTTrAW. Υ — τὴν LITrA. 
μένος 1. Ὁ τοῦ προφήτου Ἡσαΐου LTTrA. 
© εἵνεκεν GLTTrAW. 
τὴν καρδίαν G[L|rTra. 
ἦσαν TTra. 


Γεὐαγγελίσασθαι GLTTrAW. 


: Ναζαρέθ Ἢ ; Nagapa Nazara 1. 
© avotéas having opened rr. 


8 ἀνατεθραμ.- 
4 τὸν T. 


Ε — ἰάσασθαι τοὺς συντετριμμένους 

2 A a “> ὮΝ Ξ cis 3 a a 

h ἐν συναγωγῇ ἦσαν οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ τ, ; οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ ἐν συναγω 
™ Y' μ Τῇ yn 


16U 

the poor ; he hath sent 
me to heal the broken- 
hearted, to preach de- 
liverance to the cap- 
tives, and recovering 
of sight to the blind, 
to set at liberty them 
that are bruised, 19 to 
preach the acceptable 
year of the Lord. 
20 And he closed the 
book, and he gave it 
again to the minister, 
andsat down. And the 
eyes of all them that 
were in the synagogue 
were fastened on him, 
21 And he began to say 
unto them, This day is 
this scripture fulfilled 
in your ears. 22 And 
all bare him witness, 
and wondered at the 
gracious words which 
proceeded out of his 
mouth. And they said, 
Is not this Joseph’s 
son? 23 And he said 
unto them, Ye will 
surely say unto me 
this. proverb, Phy- 
sician, heal thyself: 
whatsoever we have 
heard done in Caper- 
naum, do also here in 
thy country. 24 And he 
said, Verily 1 say unto 
you, No prophet is 
accepted in his own 
country. 25 But I tell 
you of a truth, many 
widows were in Israel 
in the days of Elias, 
when the heaven was 
shut up three years 
and six months, when 


great famine was 
throughout all the 
land; 26 but unto 


none of them was Elias 
sent, save unto Sa- 
repta, a city of Sidon, 
unto a woman that 
was a widow. 27 And 
many lepers were in 
Israel in the time of 
Eliseus the prophet ; 
and none of them was 
cleansed, saving Na- 
aman the Syrian. 
28 And all they in the 
synagogue, when they 
heard these things, 
were filled with wrath, 
29 and rose up, and 
thrust him out of the 
city, and led him unto 
the brow of the hill 
whereon their city was 
built, that they might 
cast him down head- 
long. 30 But he pass- 
ing through the midst 
of them went his way, 


31 And came down 


i οὐχὶ LTTrA. 


2 Καφαρναούμ, LTTrAW. 

t Σάρεφθα w. 
LY) τοῦ προφήτου LTTrA. 

& στε SO aS GLTTrA. 


® ‘HAgas T. 


αὐτῶν TTrA. 


AOY KAS. IVi 
? ~ int) ΄ 4 » ‘ ~ , ~ id ~ 
αὐτῷ, καὶ ἐθαύμαζον ἐπὶ τοῖς λόγοις τῆς χάριτος τοῖς ἐκπορευο- 
tohim, and wondered at the words of grace which pro- 
, - ~ ν᾿ Η 
μένοις ἐκ τοῦ.στόματος αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἔλεγον, Ἰοὐχ' Κοὗῦτός ἐστιν 
ceeded outof his mouth ; and they said, 7Not Sthis lis 
« ee ᾽ 4 if ? os if. 
16! υἱὸς Ἰωσήφ"; 23 Kai εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, Πάντως ἐρεῖτέ 


the son of Joseph? And hesaid_ to them, Surely ye will say 

μοι τὴν.παραβολὴν. ταύτην, ᾿Ιατρέ, θεράπευσον σεαυτόν" 

to me this parable, Physician, heal thyself ; 
ὅσα 


3 ΄ ~ ΄ 
ἠκούσαμεν γενόμενα ᾿ὲν τῇ" "Καπερναούμ," ποίησον 
whatsoever wehaveheard being done in Capernaum, do 
4 ᾿ ~ ’ ‘ « ~ 
καὶ ὧδε ἐν τῇ. πατρίδι.σου. 24 Εἶπεν. δέ, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι 
also here in thine [own] country. But he said, Verily Isay to you, that 
? ‘ ’ ~ ‘ ~ > 
οὐδεὶς προφήτης δεκτός ἐστιν ἐν τῇ.πατρίδι. αὐτοῦ." 25 ἐπ 
no prophet acceptable is in his [own] country. 2In 
? Ll « ~ ~ ~ 
ἀληθειας. δὲ λέγω ὑμῖν, Ῥ πολλαὶ χῆραι ἦσαν ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις 
but truth Isay to you, Many widows were in the days 
« / ~? , « A ΝΜ 
“Ἡλίου ἐν τῷ Ἰσραήλ, ὅτε ἐκλείσθη ὁ οὐρανὸς "ἐπὶ ἔτη 
of Elias in Israel, when *was ‘shut Sup *the *heaven for “years 
, πὰ ~ e « ? , a ‘ ~ ‘ 
τρία καὶ μῆνας ἕξ, ὡς ἐγένετο λιμὸς μέγας ἐπὶ πᾶσαν τὴν 
three and “months ‘six, when there was a*famine ‘great upon all the 
nv, 26 καὶ πρὸς οὐδεμί ὑτῶν ἐπέμφθη "Ἡλίας" εἰ. μὴ εἰ 
γῆν, ρὸς οὐδεμίαν αὐτῶν ἐπέμφθη "Ἡλίας" εἰ. μὴ εἰς 
land, and to none of them was sent Elias except to 
tSaperra' τῆς Σιδῶνος," πρὸς γυναῖκα χήραν. 27 καὶ πολλοὶ 
Sarepta of Sidonia, to a*woman ‘widow. And many 
λεπροὶ ἦσαν “ἐπὶ ᾿Ἑλισσαίου τοῦ προφήτου ἐν τῷ ᾿Ισραήλ," 
lepers were inthetime of Elisha the prophet in Israel, 
καὶ οὐδεὶς αὐτῶν ἐκαθαρίσθη εἰ. μὴ *Neguav' ὁ Σύρος. 28 Kai 
and none ofthem wascleansed except Naaman the Syrian. And 
ἐπλήσθησαν πάντες θυμοῦ ἐν τῇ συναγωγῇ, ἀκούοντες 
5were “filled lall ‘with *indignation *in *the *synagogue, hearing 
ταῦτα. 29 καὶ ἀναστάντες ἐξέβαλον αὐτὸν ἔξω τῆς 
these things ; and havingrisen vp they cast him out of [the] 
πόλεως, Kai ἤγαγον αὐτὸν Ewe Υὑτῆς" ὀφρύος τοῦ ὄρους ἐφ᾽ 


city, and led him unto the row of the mountain upon 
οὗ ἡ-.πόλις. αὐτῶν ῳκοδόμητο," "εἰς τὸ" κατακρημνίσαι 
which their city had been built, for to throw “down “headlong 


αὐτόν: 80 αὐτὸς.δὲ διελθὼν διὰ μέσου αὐτῶν ἐπορεύετο. 
*him ; but he passing through[the] midst of them went away. 
31 Kai κατῆλθεν εἰς Καπερναοὺμ"! πόλιν τῆς Γαλιλαίας" 
And he went down to Capernaum a city of Galilee, 
καὶ ἦν διδάσκων αὐτοὺς ἐν τοῖς σάββασιν. 32 καὶ ἐξεπλήσ- 
and was teaching them oon the  sabbaths. And they were as- 
σοντο ἐπὶ τῇ.διδαχῇ αὐτοῦ, ὅτι ἐν ἐξουσίᾳ ἦν ὁ-λόγος αὐτοῦ. 
tonished at his teaching, for with authority was his word. 
33 Kai ἐν τῇ συναγωγῇ ἢν ἄνθρωπος ἔχων πνεῦμα δαιμονίου 
And in the synagogue was & man having aspirit of a demon 
ἀκαθάρτου, καὶ ἀνέκραξεν φωνῇ μεγάλῳ, 34 "héywy,' "Ea, 
unclean ; and hecried out witha*voice ‘loud, saying, Ah! 
/ « - Ν (νη) ~ [4 L$ ? , « ~ 
τί ἡμῖν καὶ σοί, ᾿Ιησοῦ Ναζαρηνε ; ἦλθες ἀπολέσαι ἡμᾶς ; 
what tous andtothee, Jesus, Nazarene? Art thoucome to destroy us? 
oldd σε τίς εἶ, ὁ ἅγιος τοῦ θεοῦ. 8ὅ Καὶ ἐπετίμησεν 
I know thee who ὕμπου αὐὖ, the Holy [One] of God. And ?rebuked 


k yids ἐστιν ᾿Ιωσὴφ οὗτος TA. 1 [ὁ] tr. ™ αἰς GLTr; εἰς THY TA. 
ogavrov T. P+ ὅτι μβαῦ τ. «4 Ἡλείου τ.  -- ἐπὶ LTr[A]. 

v Σιδωνίας LITrA. δ ἐν τῷ ᾿Ισραὴλ ἐπὶ ᾿Ελισαίου (Ἑλισαίουν 
τ Ναιμὰν LYTrA. ¥— τῆς (read a brow) GTTrAW. 5 ῳκοδόμητο 
b Καφαρναοὺμ, LTTrAW. ς — λέγων T[Tr]A. 


ΤΥ. LUBE. 
αὐτῷ ὁ᾽ Ἰησοῦς, λέγων, Φιμώθητι, καὶ ἔξελθε 488E" αὐτοῦ. 
shim Jesus, saying, Hold thy peace, and come forth outof him. 
Καὶ ῥίψαν αὐτὸν τὸ δαιμόνιον εἰς “τὸ! μέσον ἐξῆλθεν 
And*having*thrown μα ‘the 7demon into the midst came out 
ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, μηδὲν βλάψα: αὐτόν. 36 καὶ ἐγένετο θάμβος 
from him, in ποίῃϊπρ having hurt him. And *came ‘astonishment 
ΡΟ , . , a ? ΄ ͵ , 
ἐπὶ πάντας, καὶ συνελάλοιν πρὸς ἀλλήλους, λέγοντες, Tic 
upon all, and they spoke to one another, saying, What 
ὁ λόγος οὗτος, ὅτι ἐν ἐξουσίᾳ Kai δυνάμει ἐπιτάσσει τοῖς 
word [is] this, that withauthority and power hecommands the 
> U U ‘ yf \ 2 ΄ 
ἀκαθάρτοις πνεύμασιν, καὶ ἐξέρχονται ; 37 Καὶ ἐξεπορεύετο 
unclean spirits, and they come out ? And went *out 
ἦχος περὶ αὐτοῦ εἰς πάντα τόπον τῆς περιχώρου. 
1a?rumour concerning him into every place of the country around. 
38 ᾿Αναστὰς δὲ fix τῆς συναγωγῆς εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν 
And rising up outof the synagogue heentered into the house 


Σίμωνος" δὴ" πενθερὰ δὲ τοῦ Σίμωνος ἦν συνεχομένη 
of Simon. ?The *mother-in-law ‘and of Simon was _ oppressed with 
πυρετῷ μεγάλῳ" καὶ ἠρώτησαν αὐτὸν περὶ αὐτῆς. 39 Kai 
a *fever great ; and they asked him for her. And 
ἐπιστὰς ἐπάνω αὐτῆς ἐπετίμησεν τῷ πυρετῷ, καὶ ἀφῆκεν αὐτήν" 
standing over her he rebuked the _ fever, and it left her ; 
παραχρῆμα.δὲ ἀναστᾶσα διηκόνει αὐτοῖς. 
and immediately arising she served them. 

40 Δύνοντος.δὲ τοῦ ἡλίου πάντες Ooo εἶχον 


And at the going down of the all as manyas had [persons] 
ἀσθενοῦντας νόσοις ποικίλαις ἤγαγον αὐτοὺς πρὸς αὐτόν" 


sun 


sick with *diseases ‘various brought them to him, 
0.6 ἑνὶ ἑκάστῳ αὐτῶν τὰς χεῖρας "ἐπιθεὶς" ᾿ἐθεράπευ- 
and he *on ‘one Seach ‘of *them Shands ‘*having “laid healed 


σεν" αὐτούς" 41 Βἐξήρχετο" δὲ καὶ δαιμόνια ἀπὸ πολλῶν, 
them ; and *went out ‘also ‘demons from many, 
J ΄ Il ‘ , “ : Τὴ 5 ll ε ea ~ 
κράζοντα! Kai λέγοντα, Ὅτι od εἶ πιὸ χριστὸς" ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ 
cryingout 84:14 saying, Thou art the Christ the Son 
θεοῦ. Kai ἐπιτιμῶν οὐκιεἴα αὐτὰ λαλεῖν ort ζδεισαν 
of God. And rebuking ΒΘ suffered ποῦ them tospeak because they knew 
τὸν χριστὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι. 
“the °Christ *him to *be. 
42 Τενομένης. δὲ ἡμέρας 


ἐξελθὼν ἐπορεύθη εἰς ἔρημον 
᾿Απᾶ ’being “come ‘day 


having goneout hewent into a desert 
τόπον, Kai οἱ ὄχλοι "ἐζήτουν" αὐτόν, Kai ἦλθον ἕως αὐτοῦ 
place, and the crowds sought him, and came upto him 

καὶ κατεῖχον αὐτὸν τοῦ.μὴ-πορεύεσθαι an αὐτῶν. 43 6.08 


and were detaining him that he might not go from them, But he 

εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, Ὅτι καὶ ταῖς ἑτέραις πόλεσιν evay- 
said to them, Also tothe other cities *to ‘announce 
ελίσασθαί ομε.δεῖ! τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ Ort 
he "glad *tidings ‘it 7behoves*me, the kingdom of God; because 


Peic'! τοῦτο “ἀπέσταλμαι." 
for this have I been sent forth. 
συναγωγαῖς" τῆς "Γαλιλαίας." 
synagogues of Galilee. 


44 Kai ἦν κηρύσσων τὲν ταῖς 
And he was preaching in the 


161 


to Capernaum, a city 
of Galilee, and taught 
them on the sabbath 
days. 32 And they 
were astonished at his 
doctrine : for his word 
was with power. 
33 And in the syna- 
gogue there wasaman, 
which had a spirit of 
an unclean devil, and 
cried out with a loud 
yoice, 34 saying, Let 
us alone; what have 
we to do with thee, 
thou Jesus of Naza- 
reth? art thoucome to 
destroy us? i know 
thee who thou art; 
the Holy One of God. 
35 And Jesus rebuked 
him, saying, Hold thy 
peace, and come out of 
him. And when the 
devil had thrown him 
in the midst, he came 
out of him, and hurt 
him not. 36 And they 
were all amazed, and 
spake among them- 
selves, saying, What a 
word ¢s this! for with 
authority and power 
he commandeth the 
unclean spirits, and 
they comeout. 37 And 
the fame of him went 
out into every place of 
the country round 
about. 


38 And he arose out 
ot the synagogue, and 
entered into Simon’s 
house. And Simon’s 
wife’s mother was ta- 
ken with a great fever; 
and they besought him 
for her. 39 And he 
stood over her, and re- 
buked the fever; and 
it left her: and imme- 
diately she arose and 
ministered unto them. 

40 Now when thesun 
was setting, all they 
that had any sick with 
divers diseases brought 
them unto him; and 
he laid his hands on 
every one of them, and 
healed them. 41 And 
devils also came out of 
many, crying out, and 
saying, Thou art Christ 
the Son of God. And 
he rebuking them suf- 
fered them not to 
speak : for they knew 
that be was Christ. 

42 And when it was 
day, he departed and 
went into a desert 
place: and the people 
sought him, and came 
unto him, and stayed 


ε — τὸ α. f ἀπὸ from Trra. 
Β ἐπιτιθεὶς laying LTTrA. i ἐθεράπενεν TIrA. Κ ἐξήρχοντο τ. 

™ --- ὃ χριστὸς GLTTrA. 0 ἐπεζήτουν sought after GLITraw. ο δεῖ 
4 ἀπεστάλην I was sent forth Lrtra. τ εἰς τὰς συναγωγὰς ΤΊτΑ. 


ἃ ἀπ᾽ from {τττὰ. 


pe L. 
8 Ιουδαίας of Judea A. 


& — (read [the]) GLTTraw. 


! κραυγάζοντα LT. 
Ρ ἐπὶ LTTrA. 


Μ 


162 


him, that he should 
not depart from them. 
43 And he said unto 
them, I must preach 
the kingdom of God 
to other cities also: 
for therefore am I 
sent. 44 And he preach- 
ed in the synagogues 
of Galilee. 


Vv. And it came to 
pass, that, as the 
ple pressed upon him 
to hear the word of 
God, he stood by the 
lake of Gennesaret, 
2 and saw two ships 
standing by the lake: 
but the fishermen were 
gone out of them, and 
were washing ‘their 
nets. 3 And he enter- 
ed into one of the ships, 
which was Simon’s, 
and prayed him that 
he would thrust out a 
little from the land. 
And he sat down, and 
taught the people out 
of the ship. 4 Now 
when he had left 
speaking, he said unto 
Simon, Launch out in- 
to the deep, and let 
down your nets for a 
draught. 5 And Simon 
answering said unto 
him, Master, we have 
toiled all the night, 
and have taken no- 
thing: nevertheless at 
thy word I will let 
down the net. 6 And 
when they had this 
done, they inclosed a 
great multitude of 
fishes: and their net 
brake, 7 And they 
beckoned unto ther 
partners, which were 
in the other ship, that 
they should come and 
help them. And they 
came, and filled both 
the ships, so that they 
began tosink. 8 When 
Simon Peter saw itt, 
he fell down at Jesus’ 
knees, saying, Depart 
from me; for I am a 
sinful man, O Lord. 
9 For he was asto- 
nished, and all that 
were with him, at the 
draught of the fishes 
which they had taken: 
10and so was also 
James, and John, the 


AOY KAS. Υ. 
5 ᾿Εγένετο. δὲ ἐν τῷ τὸν ὄχλον ἐπικεῖσθαι αὐτῷ 
And it came to pass during the [time] the crowd pressed on him 


‘rou! ἀκούειν τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ, Kai αὐτὸς ἦν ἑστὼς παρὰ 
tohear the word of God, that he was standing by 


THY al Tevynoapér’ 2 καὶ Yeldev' δύο “πλοῖα! ἑστῶτα 
a 


the ke of Gennesaret : and hesaw two ships standing 
A aN , 4 ἱ.- δὲ χὰλ ~ ii ¥g / 2 2 ? “ἢ 
παρὰ τὴν λίμνην ol. ἁλιεῖς" Τἀποβάντες ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν 
by the lake, but the fishermen having gone out from them 
Ξἀπέπλυναν" ra δίκτυα. 8 euBdc.dé εἰς ἕν τῶν πλοίων 
washed the nets. And having entered into one ofthe ships 
ὃ ἦν "τοῦ" Σίμωνος, ἠρώτησεν αὐτὸν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς ἐπαναγα- 
which was Simon’s, he asked him from the land to put 
εἴ λί 4 b A θί ΜΠ ςἐδίδ ? ~ Xx , Π ᾿ 
γ tY O. tyov Kat κασισας EOLOAOKEV EK τοῦ πλοιοῦυ τοῦς 
off alittle; and havingsatdown hetaught from the ship the 


ὄχλους. 4 Ὡς.δὲ ἐπαύσατο λαλῶν εἶπεν πρὸς τὸν Σίμωνα, 


crowds. And when heceased speaking hesaid to Simon, 

> / 2 A / 4 / A , € ~ > 

Eaaveyage εἰς TO βάθος Kai χαλάσατε τὰ.δίκτυα.ὑμῶν εἰς 
Put o into the deep and let down your nets for 


ἄγραν. 5 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς 46" Σίμων εἶπεν Cait," Ἐπιστάτα, 
8 haul. And answering Simon said tohim, Master, 


δι ὕλης frig! νυκτὸς κοπιάσαντες οὐδὲν ἐλάβομεν" 
through whole ‘the night having laboured, nothing have we taken, 


ἐπὶ. δὲ τῷ ῥήματίσου χαλάσω &ro δίκτυον." 6 Kai τοῦτο 
but at thy word I will let down the net. And this 


ποιήσαντες συνέκλεισαν δἰχθύων πλῆθος" πολύ" ἰδιεῤῥήγνυτο" 


having done theyenclosed οἱ fishes 8. 5:01 ‘great; ‘Swas 7breaking 
δὲ τὸ δίκτυον! αὐτῶν. 7 Kai κατένευσαν τοῖς μετόχοις 
Sand "net *their. And they beckoned tothe partners 


Κτοῖς" ἐν τῷ ἑτέρῳ πλοίῳ, τοῦ.ἐλθόντας συλλαβέσθαι αὐτοῖς" 
those in the other ship, that coming they should help them; 
καὶ Ἰῆλθον," καὶ ἔπλησαν ἀμφότερα τὰ πλοῖα, ὥστε βυθίζε- 
and they came, and filled both the ships, sothat *were*sink- 
σθαιαὐτά. ὃ idwv.oé Σίμων Πέτρος προσέπεσεν τοῖς γόνασιν 
ing ‘they. And*haying*seen'Simon Peter fell at the knees 
χοῦ! Ἰησοῦ, λέγων, Ἔξελθε ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ, ὅτι ἀνὴρ ἁμαρτωλός 
of Jesus, saying, Depart from me, for aman a sinner 
εἰμι, κύριε. 9 Θάμβος.γὰρ περιέσχεν αὐτὸν καὶ πάντας τοὺς 


amI, Lord. For astonishment laidholdon him = and all those 
σὺν αὐτῷ, ἐπὶ τῇ ἄγρᾳ τῶν ἰχθύων "ἢ" συνέλαβον" 
with him, at the haul of the’ fishes which they had taken; 


ν 2 ΄ ‘ ο᾽ ΄ ll « ‘ ὃ 4 
καὶ ᾿Ιάκωβον καὶ °lwarvyny,' υἱοὺς ZeBedaiov, 
and in like manner also James and John, sons of Zebedee, 
ot ἦσαν κοινωνοὶ τῷ Σίμωνι. Kai εἶπεν πρὸς τὸν Σίμωνα 
who were partners with Simon. And “said to *Simon 
Ρὸ" Ἰησοῦς, Μὴ.φοβοῦ: ἀπὸ τοῦ.νῦν ἀνθρώπους ἔσ 

1 Jesus, Fear not ; from henceforth men thou shalt be 
ζωγρῶν. 11 Kai καταγαγόντες τὰ πλοῖα ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν, ἀφέντες 


10 ὁμοίως. δὲ 


sons of Zebedee, which capturing. And haying brought the ships to nd, leaving 
were partners with Si- ge 2 , ear 

mon, And Jesus said %47ravra' ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῷ. 

unto Simon, Fear not ; all they followed him. 

ἢ καὶ 8150 Tra, ἡ ἴδεν T. ’ πλοιάρια Small ships ΤΑ. χ ἁλεεῖς τ΄. Yan’ αὐτῶν 
ἀποβάντες TTrA. Φἔἧἔ-ἔπλυνον Were washing LTra ; ἔπλυναν T. ® — τοῦ LTTrA. > Ka- 
θίσας δὲ TA. © ἐν (in) τῷ πλοίῳ ἐδίδασκεν T ; ἐκ TOU πλοίου ἐδίδασκεν A. ἀ-- ὃ ΤΊτΑ. 
ὁ -- αὐτῷ Tt.  -- τῆς (read a whole night) Lrtra. & τὰ δίκτυα the nets τττ. δ πλῆθος 


ἰχθύων GTTrAW. 
breaking) TTra. 
° Ἰωάνην Tr. 


P—o [tr ]A. 


1 διερήγνυτο L ; διερήσσετο TTrA. 
k — τοῖς [L]rTra. 1 ἦλθαν 1. 
4 πάντα LTTr. 


i τὰ δίκτυα nets (read διερ. were 
™ — τοῦ LTTrAW. Ὁ ὧν Tr. 


LUKE. 


12 Καὶ ἐγένετο év.r@elvar αὐτὸν ἐν μιᾷ τῶν πόλεων, 
And itcametopass as *was the in one ofthe cities, 

‘ > , ? \ ἊΣ , .Γ ΄ 2 ‘ Ι . ? ~ ‘ 
καὶ ἰδού, ἀνὴρ πλήρης λέπρας" "καὶ ἰδὼν" τὸν Ἰησοῦν, πεσὼν 
that behold, a man full ofleprosy, and seeing Jesus, falling 
> ‘ , ? "2 ? ~ , > eal 7A “ 
ἐπὶ πρόσωπον ἐδεήθη αὐτοῦ, λέγων, Κύριε, ἐὰν θέλῃς 
upon [his} face he besought him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt 

δύνασαί pe καθαρίσαι. 18 Kai ἐκτείνας τὴν χεῖρα 
thou art able me_ to cleanse. And having stretched out [his] hand 
ἥψατο αὐτοῦ, "εἰπών." Θέλω, καθαρίσθητι. Kai εὐθέως ἡ 
he touched him, saying, I will; be thou cleansed. And immediately the 
λέπρα ἀπῆλθεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 14 καὶ αὐτὸς παρήγγειλεν αὐτῷ 
leprosy departed from him. And he char; him 
‘ ? ee ᾽ A > ‘ ~ 4 ~ « ~ ‘ 
μηδενὶ εἰπεῖν. ἀλλὰ ἀπελθὼν δεῖξον σεαυτὸν τῷ ἱερεῖ, Kai 
noone totell; but having gone shew thyself tothe priest, and 
προσένεγκε περὶ τοῦ.καθαρισμοῦ.σου, καθὼς προσέταξεν ‘Mw- 
offer for thy cleansing, as ?ordered ?Mo- 


v 


~ Π > , ? ~ 15 A , δὲ ~ « 
σῆς," εἰς μαρτύριον αὕτοις. ιἠρχετοδὲ μᾶλλον ὁ 
ses, for a testimony to them. But was spread abroad still more the 
λόγος περὶ αὐτοῦ" Kai συνήρχοντο ὄχλοι πολλοὶ ἀκούειν, 
report concerning him; and *were*coming 7crowds ‘great to hear, 


καὶ θεραπεύεσθαι ὑπ᾿ αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ τῶν.ἀσθενειῶν. αὐτῶν" 
and to be healed by him from their infirmities. 
16 αὐτὸς. δὲ ἦν ὑποχωρῶν ἐν ταῖς ἐρήμοις καὶ προσευχό- 
Buthe was retiring in the deserts and pray- 
μενος. 
ing. 
17 Kai ἐγένετο ἐν μιᾷ τῶν ἡμερῶν Kai αὐτὸς ἦν διδάσ- 
And it came to passon one of the days that he was_ teach- 
κων, καὶ ἦσαν καθήμενοι ¥ Φαρισαῖοι καὶ νομοδιδάσκαλοι, 
ing, andtherewere sitting by Pharisees and teachers of the law, 
ot ἦσαν "ἐληλυθότες" ἐκ πάσης κώμης τῆς Γαλιλαίας καὶ 
who were come out of every village of Galilee and 
? , ae ΄ - " Ul / τ 2 
Ιουδαίας καὶ Ιερουσαλήμ και δύναμις Kuplov ἣν εἰς 
of Judea and οἵ Jerusalem: and power of [the] Lord was [there] for 
τὸ ἰᾶσθαι Ταὐτούς." 18 καὶ ἰδού, ἄνδρες φέροντες ἐπὶ κλίνης 
to heal them. And behold, men carrying upon acouch 
ἄνθρωπον ὃς ἦν παραλελυμένος, καὶ ἐζήτουν αὐτὸν εἰσενεγ- 
&man who was paralysed, and theysought *him 1to *bring 
κεῖν Kai θεῖναι 7 ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ" 19 καὶ μὴ εὑρόντες "διὰ" 
in and toplace [him] before him. And not having found by 
ποίας εἰσενέγκωσιν αὐτὸν διὰ τὸν ὄχλον, ἀναβάντες 
what way they shouldbringin him onaccount of the crowd, going up 
ἐπὶ τὸ δῶμα, διὰ τῶν κεράμων καθῆκαν αὐτὸν σὺν τῷ 
on the housetop, through the tiles they letdown him with the 
, 2 ‘ , Ν “7 ~ oF; ‘ ᾿ 
κλινιδίῳ εἰς τὸ μέσον ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ Ἰησοῦ. 20 καὶ ἰδὼν τὴν 
little couch into the midst before Jesus. And seeing 
πίστιν.αὐτῶν εἶπεν Yair@,' “AvOowre, ἀφέωνταί σοι 
their faith he said to him, Man, Shave *been *forgiven “thee 
αἱ. ἁμαρτίαι.σου. 21 Καὶ ἤρξαντο διαλογίζεσθαι οἱ γραμματεῖς 
thy ?sins. And began to reason the scribes 
καὶ οἱ Φαρισαῖοι, λέγοντες, Tic ἐστιν οὗτος ὃς λαλεῖ βλασ- 
and the Pharisees, saying, Who is this who speaks blas- 
dnpiac; τίς δύναται “ἀφιέναι ἁμαρτίας," εἰμὴ μόνος ὁ θεός : 
phemies? who [15 8016 to forgive sins, except alone 1God? 
τ ἰδὼν δὲ τ΄. 5 λέγων LTr. * Mwiions LTTrAW. 
x συνεληλυθότες come toyether L. 
him a, 2 — διὰ GLTTraW. Ὁ — αὐτῷ GLTTrA. 


¥ — ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 
Υ αὐτόν him (read was for his healing) ΤΑ. 
ς ἁμαρτίας ἀφεῖναι LITA. 


108 
from henceforth thou 
shalt catch men. 


11 And when they had 
brought their ships to 
land, they forsook all, 
and followed him. 

12 And it came to 
pass, when he was in 
a certain city, behold 
a man full of leprosy: 
who seeing Jesus fell 
on his face, and be- 
sought him, saying, 
Lord, if thou wilt, 
thou canst make me 
clean. 13 And he put 
forth Ais hand, and 
touched him, saying, 
I will: be thou clean. 
And immediately the 
leprosy departed from 
him. 14 And hecharg- 
ed him to tell no man: 
but go, and shew thy- 
self to the priest, and 


offer for thy cleansing, 
according as Moses 


commanded, for a tes- 
timony unto them. 
15 But so much the 
more went there a 
fame abroad of him: 
and great multitudes 
came together to hear, 
and to be healed by him 
of their infirmities. 
16 And he withdrew 
himself into the wil- 
derness, and prayed. 


17 And it came to 
pass on a certain day, 
as he was teaching, 
that there were Pha- 
risees and doctors of 
the law sitting by, 
which were come out 
of every town of Ga- 
lilee, and Juda, and 
Jerusalem: and the 
power of the Lord was 
present to heal them. 
18 And, behold, men 
brought in a bed a 
man which was taken 
with a palsy: and they 
sought means to bring 
him in, and to lay him 
before him. 19 And 
when they could not 
find by what way they 
might bring him in 
because of the multi- 
tude, they went upon 
the housetop, and let 
him down through the 
tiling with his couch 
into the midst before 
Jesus. 20 And when he 
saw their faith, he said 
unto him, Man, thy 
sins are forgiven thee. 
21 And the scribes and 
the Pharisees began to 
reason, saying, Who is 
this which speaketh 
blasphemies? Whocan 
forgive sins, but God 
alone? 22 But when 


w+ οἱ the L. 


z+ αὐτὸν 


104 


Jesus perceived their 
thoughts, he answer- 
ing said unto them, 
What reason ye in 
your hearts? 23 Whe- 
ther is easier, to say, 
Thy sins be forgiven 
thee ; or to say, Rise 
up and walk? 24 But 
that ye may know that 
the Son of man hath 
power upon earth to 
forgive sins, (he said 
unto the sick of the 
alsy,) I say unto thee, 

rise, and take up thy 
couch, and go into 
thine house. 25 And 
immediately he rose up 
before them, and took 
up that whereon he 
lay, and departed to 
his own house, glorify- 
ing God. 26 And they 
were all amazed, and 
they glorified God, and 
were filled with fear, 
saying, We have seen 
strange things to day. 


27 And after these » 


things he went forth, 
and saw a publican, 
named Levi, sitting at 
the receipt of custom : 
and he said unto him, 
Follow me. 28 And he 
left all, rose up, and 
followed him. 29 And 
Levi made hima great 
feast in his own house : 

and there was a great 
company of publicans 
and of others that 
sat down with them. 
30 But their scribes 
and Pharisees mur- 
mured against his dis- 
ciples, saying, Why do 
ye eat and drink with 
publicans and sinners? 
31 And Jesus answer- 
ing said unto them, 
They that are whole 
need not a physician ; 
but they that are sick. 
32 I came not to call 
the righteous, but sin- 
ners to repentance. 
33 And they said unto 
him, Why do the dis- 
ciples of John fast 


Vv, 


ἀπο- 
an- 


αρδίαις 


hearts 


‘peated σοι 
Have been cones thee 


AOYKA%&. 


22 ᾿Ἐπιγνοὺς.δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς τοὺς.διαλογισμοὺς. αὐτῶν 
But owing 1 Jesus their ΣΘΒΒΟΒΤΩΡΕ 


κριθεὶς" εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, Τί διαλογίζεσθε ἐπ ταῖς κ 
Aan 5 said to them, Why _ reason ye 


ὑμῶν; 23 τί ἐστιν εὐκοπώτερον, εἰπεῖν, 
oeuee which is easier, to say, 


αἱ. ἁμαρτίαι.σου, ἢ εἰπεῖν, “Εγειραι"! καὶ περιπάτει ; 24 ἵνα.δὲ 
thy sins, or tosay, Arise and walk? But that 


εἰδῆτε Ore [ἐξουσίαν ἔχει ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐπὶ τῆς 
yemay knowthat authority has the Son of man on the 
γῆς ἀφιέναι ἁμαρτίας, εἶπεν τῷ ἡπαραλελυμένῳ," Σοὶ λέγω, 
earth to forgive sins, hesaid to the paralysed, To thee I say, 


heverpat," καὶ ἄρας τὸκλινίδιόν.σου πορεύου εἰς TOY οἶκόν 
Arise, and havingtakenup thy little couch go to *house 


σου. 25 Kai παραχρῆμα ἀναστὰς ἐνώπιον αὐτῶν, ἄρας 
thy. And immediately havingstoodup before them, having taken up 
> 


ἐφ᾽ ἰῷ" κατέκειτο, ἀπῆλθεν εἰς Toy-olkov.abrou, δοξάζων 
{that]on which he was lying, he departed to his house, glorifying 


τὸν θεόν. 26 Kai ἔκστασις ἔλαβεν ἅπαντας, Kai ἐδόξαζον 
God. And amazement seized all, and they glorified 


τὸν θεόν, καὶ ἐπλήσθησαν φόβου, λέγοντες, Ὅτι εἴδομεν 
God, and were filled with fear, saying, We have seen 

παράδοξα σήμερον. 

strange things to-day. 


27 Kai μετὰ ταῦτα 
And after thesethings he went forth, and 


ὀνόματι IAeviv,' καθήμενον ἐπὶ τὸ τελώνιον, καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, 
by name Levi, sitting at the taxoffice, and said e him, 


Ἀκολούθει μοι. 28 Kai καταλιπὼν ἅπαντα," ἀναστὰς 'jKo- 


d 


ἐξῆλθεν, Kai ἐθεάσατο τελώνην, 
saw a tenes 


Follow me, And having left all, having arisen he fol- 
λούθησεν" αὐτῷ. 29 Kai ἐποίησεν δοχὴν μεγάλην mo 
lowed him. And 2made ‘entertainment *a *great 
“Agvic' αὐτῷ ἐν τῇ.οἰκίᾳ αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἦν ὄχλος ὅτελω- 


‘Levi forhim in his house, and therewas a*multitude “of *tax- 


νῶν πολύς" καὶ ἄλλων οἱ ἦσαν per αὐτῶν κατακείμενοι. 
gatherers ‘great and others who were with them pe 


30 Kai ἐγόγγυζον οἱ. Ῥγραμματεῖς.αὐτῶν Kai ot Φαρι- 


[αὖ ah And murmured their scribes and the Phari- 
σαῖοι" yd τοὺς. μαθητὰς. αὐτοῦ, λέγοντες, Διατί" μετὰ 
sees his disciples, saying, Why with 


Seen eet Skat ἁμαρτωλῶν" ἐσθίετε καὶ πίνετε; 81 Kai ἀπο- 
tax-gatherers and sinners doyeeat and drink? And an- 


κριθεὶς ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, Οὐ χρείαν ἔχουσιν οἱ 

Ses Jesus said to them, No need have they who 
ὑγιαίνοντες ἰατροῦ. ‘adr’ οἱ κακῶς ἔχοντες. 82 οὐκ 
ΒΥΘ ἴῃ health of a physician, but they who ill are. SNot 
ἐλήλυθα καλέσαι δικαίους, ἀλλὰ ἁμαρτωλοὺς εἰς μετά- 


I*havecome to call righteous [ones], but sinners to repent- 
νοιαν. 33 Οἱ δὲ "εῖπον" πρὸς αὐτόν, “Διατί! οἱ μαθηταὶ 
ance, Andthey said to him, Why #?the “disciples 


4 — ἀποκριθεὶς L[Tr]. 


ὁ [Ἔγειρε GLTTrAW. fo vids τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐξουσίαν ἔχει TIrA. 


8 παραλυτικῷ paralytic L. h ἔγειρε GLITrAW. 16 TTrA. J Aevety A; Aevety TTr. 

k πάντα LYTrA. ! ηκολούθει LTTrA. —o GLTTrAW. 0 Aevets A; Aeveis TTr. 

° πολὺς τελωνῶν LTTrA. Ρ Φαρισαῖοι και ot γραμματεῖς αὐτῶν (Lavrov) Tr) LItrAW. 4 Διὰ 
TOLTrA. τ + tov the @LTTraw. ® — καὶ ἁμαρτωλῶν A. τ᾿ ἀλλὰ LTTrA. κ'ὶ εἶπαν 
LTTrA. W Aca τί L[ Tr]; — Διατί ΤΑ. 


ΨΥΙ. LUKE. 

τ᾿ Τωάννου" νηστεύουσιν πυκνα καὶ δεήσεις ποιοῦνται, ὁ- 
*of >John ‘fast often and supplications make, in like 

μοίως Kai οἱ τῶν Φαρισαίων, οἱ. δὲ σοὶ ἐσθίουσιν καὶ 

manner also those of the Pharisees, but those of thee eat and 


34 Ὁ.δὲ Υ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, Μὴ δύνασθε τοὺς 
drink ? Andhe - said to them, Areyeable “the 
υἱοὺς τοῦ νυμφῶνος, ev.p ὁ νυμφίος per αὐτῶν ἐστιν 
*sons "οὐ the *bridechamber ὁ 116 ‘'the?*bridegroom™with ‘them 13ig 
ποιῆσαι *ynorevey ; 385 ἐλεύσονται.δὲ ἡμέραι “kai! ὅταν 
‘to make ®to *fast ἢ But will come days "also when 
ἀπαρθῇ ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν ὁ νυμφίος, τότε νηστεύσουσιν ἐν 
shall be taken away from them the bridegroom, then they will fast in 
ἐκείναις ταῖς ἡμέραις. 36 Ελεγεν.δὲ καὶ παραβολὴν πρὸς 
those days. And he spoke also a parable to 
αὐτούς. Ὅτι οὐδεὶς ἐπίβλημα ὃ ἱματίου καινοῦ “ ἐπιβάλλει ἐπὶ 
them, Noone apiece ofa*garment ‘new puts on 
ἱμάτιον παλαιόν" εἰ δὲ μήγε καὶ τὸ καινὸν “σχίζει, Kai 
*garment ‘an old, otherwise both the new herends, and 
τῷ παλαιῷ “οὐ-συμφωνεῖ" ἐπίβλημα τὸ ἀπὸ τοῦ 
withthe old does not agree [the] piece which [15] from the 
καινοῦ. 37 καὶ οὐδεὶς βάλλει οἶνον νέον εἰς ἀσκοὺς παλαιούς" 


πίνουσιν ; 


new. And noone _ puts 2wine ‘new into “skins 1old, 

> A , csv « ud Il ‘ ? , 4 ᾽ A 
εἰ δὲ. μήγε ῥήξει 80 νέος olvoc' τοὺς ἀσκούς, καὶ αὐτὸς 
otherwise ‘*will®burst'the “new “wine the skins, and it 


ἐκχυθήσεται, καὶ οἱ ἀσκοὶ ἀπολοῦνται. 38 ἀλλὰ οἶνον νέον 
will be poured out, and the skins will be destroyed; but 7wine ‘new 


Pay ne . f hea Ane 5 i 
εἰς ἀσκοὺς καινοὺς βλητέον, "καὶ ἀμφότεροι συντηροῦνται. 


into *skins Inew isto be put, and both are preserved together. 
39 καὶ οὐδεὶς πιὼν παλαιὸν Ἰεὐθέως" θέλει νέον" 
And noone having drunk old [wine] immediately desires new; 


λέγει.γάρ, Ὁ παλαιὸς *ypnorérepdc! ἐστιν. 
for he says, The old “better 115. 
6 Ἐγένετο.δδυ-᾽ ἐν σαββάτ ἰδευτεροπρώτῳ" διαπο- 


Anditcametopass on ‘sabbath (['the] 2second “first ®passed 
, 6 , 4 ὃ A m ~ ll 7 A ‘ »Ἅ [- 
ρεύεσθαι αὐτὸν διὰ "τῶν" σπορίμων" καὶ ἔτιλλον οἱ 


She through the and “were *plucking 


μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ "robe στάχυας, καὶ ἤσθιον, ψώχοντες 
this *disciples the ears, and wereeating, rubbing [them] 


ταῖς χερσίνο, 2 τινὲς.δὲ τῶν Φαρισαίων εἶπον Padroic,' Ti 


along corn fields ; 


inthe hands. But some ofthe Pharisees said tothem, Why 
στ. a > » ~ ? iH ~ , ‘ 
ποιεῖτε ὃ οὐκ-ιἕξεστιν “ποιεῖν tv" τοῖς σάββασιν; 8 Kai 
doye that whichitisnotlawful todo on _ the sabbaths ? And 


ἀποκριθεὶς "πρὸς αὐτοὺς εἶπεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς," Οὐδὲ τοῦτο ἀνέγνωτε, 
answering to them “said ‘Jesus, Noteven this did ye read, 
ὃ ἐποίησεν "Δαβίδ," ‘ordre! ἐπείνασεν αὐτὸς καὶ οἱ 

that which 2614 1David, when hehungered, himself and those who 
μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ Yovrec'; 4 ᾿ὡς" εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὸν οἶκον τοῦ θεοῦ, 
with him were ? how heentered into the house of God, 
Kai τοὺς ἄρτους τῆς προθέσεως “Ξξἔλαβεν, καὶ! ἔφαγεν, Kai 
and the loaves ofthe presentation took, and ate, and 


165 


often, aud make pray- 
ers, and likewise tre 
disciples of the Phari- 
sees ; but thine eat and 
drink? 34 And he said 
unto them, Can ye 
make the children of 
the bridechamber fast, 
while the bridegroom 
is with them? 35 But 
the days will come, 
when the bridegroom 
shall be taken away 
from them, and then 
shall they fast in those 
days. 36-And hespake 
also a parable unto 
them ; Noman putteth 
a piece of a new gar- 
ment upon an old; if 
otherwise, then both 
the new maketh arent, 
and the piece that was 
taken out of the new 
agreeth not with the 
old. 37 And no man 
putteth new wine into 
old bottles; else the 
new wine will burst 
the bottles, and be 
spilled, and the bottles 
shall perish. 38 But 
new wine must be put 
into new bottles; and 
both are preserved. 
39 No man also hay- 
ing drunk old wine 
straightway desireth 
new : for he saith, The 
old is better. 


VI, And it came to 
pass on the second 
sabbath after the first, 
that he went through 
the corn fields ; and his 
discipies plucked the 
ears of corn, and did 
eat, rubbing them in 
their hands. 2 And 
certuin of the Phari- 
sees said unto them, 
Why do ye that which 
is not lawful to do on 
the sabbath days? 
3 And Jesus answer- 
ing them said, Have 
ye not read so much 
as this, what David 
did, when himself was 
an hungred, and they 
which were with him; 
4 how he went into 
the house of God, and 
did take and eat the 
shewbread, and gave 


*"Iwavov Tr. ¥ - Ingots(And)JesusTIra.  νηστεῦσαι TTra. 
from (a garment) [L]Ttra. 
will rend Lrtra. © οὐ συμφωνήσει Will not agree Lrtra. 
© νέος LTTrAW. ὃ — καὶ ἀμφότεροι συντηροῦνται T[Tr]A. 
good Trra, ἰ --- δευτεροπρώτῳ [τ||τ| 4}.  --- τῶν τΎτὰ. 

° + [αὐτῶν] of them L. P — αὐτοῖς [L]rtra. 
τ ὃ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς L; ὁ Ἰησοῦς πρὸς αὐτοὺς εἶπεν T. 
τ Ore Lir. ¥ — ὄντες Ltr. W πῶς L; [ὡς] Tr. 


ὁ + σχίσας having rent (read puts [it]) Trra. 

_ f+ τὸ the Tira, 
1 — εὐθέως TTrA. 
Ὁ καὶ ἤσθιον τοὺς στάχυας TrA. 
4 — ἐν τ; — ποιεῖν ἐν (read τοῖς on the) Ltra. 
5 Δαυΐδ aw ; Δαυείδ LTTra. 
x8 λαβὼν having taken LTra. 


b + ἀπὸ 

4 σχίσει he 
ἕ ὃ οἶνος 

Κ χρηστός 


8 [καὶ] L. 


166 


also to them that 
were with him; which 
it is not lawful to eat 
but for the priests 
alone? 5 And he said 
unto them, That the 
Son of man is Lord 
also of the sabbath. 


6 And it came to 
pass also on another 
sabbath, that he en- 
tered into the syna- 
gogue and taught: and 
there was a man whose 
right hand was with- 
ered. 7 And thescribes 
and Pharisees watched 
him, whether he would 
heal on the sabbath 
day ; that they might 
find an accusation a- 
gainst him. 8 But he 
knew their thoughts, 
and said to the man 
which had the with- 
ered hund, Rise up, 
and stand forth in 
the midst. And he 
arose and stood forth. 
9 Then said Jesus unto 
them, I will ask you 
one thing; Is it law- 

on the sabbath 
days to do good, or to 
do evil? to save life, 
or to destroy it? 10 And 
looking round about 
upon them all, he said 
unto the man, Stretch 
forth thy hand. And 
he didso: andhis hand 
was-restored whole as 
theother. 11 And they 
were filled with mad- 
ness; and communed 
one with another what 
they might do to Jesus. 


12 And it came to 
pass in those days, that 

6 went out into a 
mountain to pray, and 
continued all night in 
prayer toGod. 13 And 
when it was day, he 
called unto hin his dis- 
ciples: and of them he 
chose twelve, whom 
also he named apo- 
stles; 14 Simon, (whom 
he also named Peter,) 
and Andrew his bro- 
‘her, James and John, 
Philip and Bartholo- 
mew, 15 Matthew and 
[homas, James the son 


A OLYAR PAYS: Viz 
ἔδωκεν Yeai' τοῖς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ, οὺς οὐκ. ἔξεστιν φαγεῖν εἰ. μὴ 
gave also to those with him, which itis not lawful toeat except 


μόνους τοὺς ἱερεῖς ; 5 Kai ἔλεγεν αὐτοῖς, ““Οτι" κύριός ἐστιν 
Sonly ‘the “priests? And hesaid to them, SLord ‘is 
ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου Kai τοῦ σαββάτου. 

‘the 7Son Sof*man alsoofthe sabbath. 
6 ‘Eyévero.dé καὶ" ἐν ἑτέρῳ σαββάτῳ εἰσελθεῖν αὐτὸν 


Anditcametopass also on another sabbath “entered the 
εἰς THY συναγωγὴν Kai διδάσκειν καὶ ἦν έκεϊ ἄνθρωπος," 
into the synagogue and taught ; and there was there aman, 


καὶ ἡ-χεὶριαὐτοῦ ἡ δεξιὰ ἦν ἕηρά. 7 “παρετήρουν" δὲ δαὐτὸν" 


and his hand the right was withered. And ‘were 7watching “him 

οἱ γραμματεῖς καὶ οἱ Φαρισαῖοι, εἰ ἐν τῷ σαββάτῳ *OEpa- 
1the 4scribes Sand‘*the *Pharisees, whetheron the sabbath he will 
πεύσει,) iva εὕρωσιν ‘karnyopiay' αὐτοῦ. 8 αὐτὸς δὲ 


heal, that they might find an accusation against him. But he 
70 ‘ δ ᾽ ~ £g A ll ~ h ? , Il ~ 
oe τοὺς. διαλογισμοὺς. αὐτῶν, ξκαὶ εἶπεν! τῷ "ἀνθρώπῳ" τῷ 


knew their reasonings, and said tothe man who 
ξηρὰν ἔχοντι τὴν χεῖρα, ᾿"Ἐγειραι," καὶ στῆθι εἰς τὸ μέσον. 
3withered ‘had *the hand, Arise, and stand in the midst. 
ΚὉ δὲ! ἀναστὰς ἔστη. 9 Εἶπεν Ἰοὖν" ὁ Τησοῦς πρὸς αὐτούς, 
And he having risen up stood. “Said ‘then *Jesus to them, 
πὐ περωτήσω" ὑμᾶς, "τί' ἔξεστιν “τοῖς σάββασιν" ἀγαθο- 
I will ask you, whether itislawful onthe sabbaths to do 


ποιῆσαι ἢ κακοποιῆσαι; ψυχὴν σῶσαι ἢ Ῥάπολέσαι" 10 Kai 
good or to do evil? 3116. ‘to*savyeor to destroy? And 


περιβλεψάμενος πάντας αὐτοὺς εἶπεν “τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ," 


having looked around on all them hesaid tothe man, 
ἜἝἜκτεινον τὴν.χεῖρά.σου. ‘O.d& ἐποίησεν τοὕτως"" Kai "ἀπο- 
Stretch out thy hand. And he did 80, and 3was 


κατεστάθη! ἡ χεὶρ.αὐτοῦ 'ὑγιὴς" τὼς ἡ ἄλλη." 11 αὐτοὶ.δὲ 
“restored *his hand sound as the other. But they 
ἐπλήσθησαν ἀνοίας, καὶ διελάλουν πρὸς ἀλλήλους τί 
were filled with madness, and consulted with oneanother(as to] what 
ἂν “ποιήσειαν! τῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ. 
they should do to Jesus. 
12 ᾿Εγένετο.δὲ ἐν ταῖς. ἡμέραις. ταύταις τἐξῆλθεν" εἰς τὸ 
And it came to pass in those days he went out into the 
ὄρος προσεύξασθαι" Kai ἦν διανυκτερεύων ἐν τῇ προσευχῇ 


mountain to pray, and he was spending the night in prayer 
τοῦ θεοῦ. 13 Kai Ore ἐγένετο ἡμέρα προσεφώνησεν τοὺς 
of God. And when it became day he called to {him} 


μαθητὰς. αὐτοῦ" καὶ ἐκλεξάμενος am’ αὐτῶν δώδεκα, ov¢ καὶ 
his disciples, and chose out from them twelve, whom also 


> , ? , , τι ‘ > , , 
ἀποστόλους ὠνόμασεν, 14 Σίμωνα ὃν Kai ὠνόμασεν Πέτρον 


?apostles *he named : Simon whom also he named Peter 
kai ᾿Ανδρέαν τὸν. ἀδελφὸν. αὐτοῦ, γ5Τάκωβον καὶ τ" Ἰωάννην," 
and Andrew his brother, James and John, 


γ8 Φίλιππον καὶ Βαρθολομαῖον, 15 7" δ! Ματθαῖον" καὶ Θωμᾶν, 
Philip and Bartholomew, Matthew and Thomas, 


Υ — καὶ LTrA. 
LTTrAW. 
8 εἶπεν δὲ TTrA. 


κτεῖναι to kill aw. 
GLTTrA. 


2 [ὅτι] Tr. 

4 — αὐτὸν LYTrAW. 
b ἀνδρὶ Man TTrA. 
τὴ ᾿Επερωτῶ I ask TTra. 


L t — ὑγιὴς GLTTrAW. 
αὐτὸν he went out TTrA. 


® — καὶ LYTr[A]. > ἄνθρωπος ἐκεῖ TTrA. © παρετηροῦντο 
© θεραπεύει he heals Lrtra. f κατηγορεῖν to accuse TTrA. 
ἱ Ἔγειρε GLTTrAW. k«atLTTrA [δὲ and Lrtr. 

π εἰ if LTTra. ο τῷ σαββάτῳ on the sabbath Lrtra. P ἀπο- 
4 αὐτῷ to him @irtraw. ¥ — οὕτως GTTrAW. 5 ἀπεκατεστάθη 
¥— ὡς ἡ ἄλλη [L]a[trJa. Υ ποιήσαιεν LTTrA. τ ἐξελθεῖν 
y® + καὶ and LITrA. 28 ᾿Ιωάνην Tr. 885 Ma@@atov LTTrA. 


Vr. LUKE. 
Ἰάκωβον τὸν _—s row!’ AX Αλφαίου καὶ Σίμωνα τὸν καλού- 
James the [son] of Alpheus and Simon who [was] call- 
τον Ζηλωτήν, 16 © Ἰούδαν Ἰακώβου, καὶ ᾿Ιούδαν 
Zealot, Judas [brother] of James, and Judas 


ᾧ Ioxapwrny," ὃς “καὶ! ἐγένετο προδότης᾽ 17 καὶ καταβὰς 
Iscariote, who also became [the] trayer. And descending 


ετ αὐτῶν ἔστη ἐπὶ τόπου πεδινοῦ, καὶ ὄχλος f μαθητῶν 
with them hestood on 8. Ῥ'δοθϑ ‘level, and acrowd of disciples 


αὐτοῦ kai πλῆθος πολὺ τοῦ λαοῦ ἀπὸ πάσης τῆς Ἰουδαίας 
"his and a *multitude ἢ ee ofthe people from all Judza 


καὶ Ἱερουσαλὴμ καὶ τῆς παραλίου Τύρου καὶ Σιδῶνος, ot 
and Jerusalem and the seacoast of maby and Sidon, who 


ἦλθον ἀκοῦσαι αὐτοῦ, Kai ἰαθῆναι ἀπὸ τῶν.νόσων. αὐτῶν, 


came to hear him, and tobehealed of their diseases, 
18 καὶ ot δὀχλούμενοι" δὑπὸ" πνευμάτων ἀκαθάρτων, ἱκαὶ" 
and those beset by 2spirits Aunclean, and 


ἐθεραπεύοντο. 19 καὶ πᾶς ὁ ὄχλος Ἐἐζήτει" ἅπτεσθαι αὐτοῦ" 
uy were healed. And all the crowd sought to touch him; 


ὅτι δύναμις παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐξήρχετο Kai ἰᾶτο πάντας. 
for power from him went out and healed all. 


20 Kai αὐτὸς ἐπάρας τοὺς.ὀφθαλμοὺς αὐτοῦ εἰς τοὺς μαθη- 
And he lifting up his eyes nba 3disci- 


Tac αὐτοῦ ἔλεγεν, Μακάριοι οἱ πτωχοί, ὅτι ὑμετέρα ἐστὶν 
ples ‘*+his said, Blessed ase the poor, for yours is 


ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ. 21 μακάριοι οἱ πεινῶντες νῦν, ὅτι 
the kingdom of God. Blessed [ye] who hunger now, for 


χορτασθήσεσθε. μακάριοι οἱ κλαίοντες νῦν, OTL γελάσετε. 
ye shall be filled. Blessed (ye] who meer now, for yeshall laugh 


22 μακάριοί ἐστε bray μισήσωσιν ὑμᾶς οἱ ἄνθρωποι, καὶ ὅταν 


Blessed are ye when “shall*hate *you 1men, and when 
ἀφορίσωσιν ὑμᾶς, καὶ ὀνειδίσωσιν, καὶ ἐκβάλωσιν τὸ 
they shall cut 70ff ‘you, and 5881] reproach [you], and cast out 


ὄνομα.ὑμῶν we πονηρόν, ‘évexa! τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου" 


your name as wicked, on accountof the Son of man: 
23 ™yaipere! ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἥμερα καὶ σκιρτήσατε" τᾷ ας ὁ 
rejoice in that and leap for joy; for 
μισθὸς ὑμῶν πολὺς ἐν τῷ Susie κατὰ "ravra' yap 


in the heaven, according *to*these things *for 


24 Πλὴν οὐαὶ 


yourreward [ς15] great 
ἐποίουν τοῖς προφήταις οἱ.πατέρες. αὐτῶν. 


did sto *the prophets ‘their *fathers. But woe 
ὑμῖν τοῖς πλουσίοις, Ore ἀπέχετε τὴν.παράκλησιν ὑμῶν. 
toyou the rich, for ye are receiving your consolation. 


25 οὐαὶ ὑμῖν ot ἐμπεπλησμένοι, Ori πεινάσετε. 
Woe to you who have been filled, for ye shall hunger. 
«ε λ ~ ~ a ul ‘ ’ ς ἦν > ‘ q « ~ tl 
οἱ γελῶντες νῦν, ὅτι πενθήσετε Kai κλαύσετε. 26 οὐαὶ "ὑμῖν 
who laugh now, for yeshall mourn and weep. Woe toyou 


ὅταν καλῶς τὑμᾶς εἴπωσιν" "πάντες" οἱ ἄνθρωποι κατὰ 
when well of you speak all Geo seconde sto 


"ravra' yap ἐποίουν τοῖς ψευδοπροφήταις οἱ.πατέρες.αὐτῶν. 
“these Sthinges ‘for did Sto*the *false *prophets their *fathers, 


27 “AXNN’! ὑμῖν λέγω τοῖς ἀκούουσιν, ᾿Αγαπᾶτε τοὺς ἐχθροὺς 
But toyou Isay who hear, Love *enemies 


οὐαὶ Ῥὑμῖν" 
Woe toyou 


4+ καὶ διὰ T, b= τὸν τοῦ TTrA. 5 + xatand LTTra. 
La[trJa. f+ πολὺς ieee Te 8 ἐνοχλούμενοι TTrA. 
and they) Lrtra. K ἐζήτουν TTra. | ἕνεκεν L. 
same things LTTrA. ° + νῦν now T[Tr]A. P — ὑμῖν ΤΊτΑ. 
τ εἴπωσιν ὑμᾶς τ. - πάντες α. τ ᾿Αλλὰ LTTrAW. 


4 Ἰσκαριώθ τπττὰ. 
h ἀπὸ GLTTraW. 
ἃ χάρητε GLTTraw, 


167 
of Alphzeus, and Simon 
called Zelotes, 16 and 
Judas the brother of 
James, and Judas Is- 
eariot, which also was 
the traitor. 17 And he 
came down with them, 
and stood in the plain, 
and the company of 
his disciples, and a 
great multitude of peo- 
ple out of all Judga 
and Jerusalem, and 
from the sea coast of 
Tyre and Sidon, which 
came to hear him, and 
to be healed of their 
diseases; 18 and they 
that were vexed with 
unclean spirits: and 
they were healed. 
19 And the whole mul- 
titude sought to touch 

for there went 
virtue out of him, and 
healed them all. 


20 And he lifted up 
his eyes on his disci- 
166, and said, Blessed 
e@ ye poor: for yours 

is the kingdom of God. 
21 Blessed are ye that 
hunger now: for ye 
shall be filled. Blessed 
are ye that weep now: 
for ye shall laugh. 
22 Blessed are ye, when 
men shall hate you, 
and when they shall 
separate you from their 
company, and shall re- 
proach you, and cast 
out your name as evil, 
for the Son of man’s 
sake. 23 Rejoice yein 
that day, and leap for 
joy : for, behold, your 
reward 18 great in hea- 
ven: for in the like 
manner did their fa- 
thers unto the pro- 
phets. 24 But woe unto 
you that arerich! for 
ye have received your 
consolation. 25 Woe 
unto you that are 
full! for ye _ shall 
hunger. Woeunto you 
that laughnow! for ye 
shall mourn and weep. 
26 Woe unto you, when 
all men shall speak 
well of you! for so 
did their fathers to the 
false prophets. 27 But 
I say unto you which 
hear, Love your ene- 
mies, do good to 
them which hate you, 
28 bless them that 


ε -- καὶ 
i_ kat (omit 
n τὰ αὐτὰ the 
ᾳ -- ὑμῖν GLITTAW. 


168 


curse you, and pray 
for them which de- 
spitefully use you. 
29 And unto him that 
smiteth thee on the 
one cheek offer also the 
other; and him that 
taketh away thy cloke 
forbid not to take thy 
coat also. 30 Give to 
every man that asketh 
of thee; and of him 
that taketh away thy 
goods ask them not 
again. 31 And as ye 
would that men should 
do to you, do ye alsoto 
them likewise. 32 For 
if ye love them which 
love you, what thank 
have ye? for sinners 
also love those that 
love them. 33 And if 
ye do good to them 
which do good to you, 
what thank have ye? 
for sinnersalso doeven 
the same. 34 And if 
ye lend to them of 
whom ye hope to re- 
ceive, What thank have 
ye? for sinners also 
lend to sinners, to re- 
eeive as much again. 
35 But love ye your 
enemies, and do good, 
and lend, hoping for 
nothing again; and 
your reward shall be 
great, and ye shall be 
the children of the 
Highest : for heis kind 
unto the unthankful 
and tothe evil. 36 Be 
ye therefore merciful, 
as your Father also is 
merciful. 37 Judge not, 
and ye shall not be 
judged : condemn not, 
and ye shall not be 
condemned : forgive, 
and ye shall be for- 
given: 38 give, and 
it shall be _ given 
unto you; good mea- 
sure, pressed down, 
and shaken together, 
and running over, 
shall men give into 
your bosom. For with 
the same measure that 
mete withal it shall 

@ measured to you 


AOY KAS. Wi: 
€ ~ Be ~ ~ ~ « - > ~ 
ὑμῶν, καλῶς ποιεῖτε τοῖς μισοῦσιν ὑμᾶς, 28 εὐλογεῖτε 
‘your, “well 3do tothose who hate you, bless 


Tove καταρωμένους ὑμῖν," Kai προσεύχεσθε τὑπὲρ' τῶν 
those who curse you, and pray for those who 
ἐπηρεαζόντων ὑμᾶς. 29 τῷ τύπτοντί σε Yéri' τὴν σιαγόνα, 
despitefully use you. Tohimwho strikes thee on _ the cheek, 
πάρεχε καὶ THY ἄλλην: Kai ἀπὸ τοῦ αἴροντός σου τὸ 
offer also the other ; and from him who takesaway thy 
ἱμάτιον, Kai τὸν χιτῶνα μὴ.κωλύσῃς. 30 παντὶ Oe Te" 
cloak, also the tunic do not forbid. *To *every *one ‘and who 
αἰτοῦντί σε, δίδου: Kai ἀπὸ τοῦ αἴροντος τὰ σά, 

asks thee, give; and from him who takes away what [15] thine, 


μὴ.ἀπαίτει. 31 καὶ καθὼς θέλετε ἵνα ποιῶσιν ὑμῖν οἱ 
ask [it] not back ; and according as ye desire that *should *do *to °you 


ἄνθρωποι, “Kai ὑμεῖς" ποιεῖτε αὐτοῖς ὁμοίως. 32 καὶ εἰ 
‘men, also “ye *do tothem in like manner, And if 
ἀγαπᾶτε τοὺς ἀγαπῶντας ὑμᾶς, ποία ὑμῖν χάρις ἐστίν; 


γ8 love those who love you, what ‘to you ‘thank “is *it? 
Kai.yap οἱ ἁμαρτωλοὶ τοὺς ἀγαπῶντας αὐτοὺς ἀγαπῶσιν. 
for even sinners “those *who “love *them Nove. 
33 καὶ ἢ ἐὰν ἀγαθοποιῆτε τοὺς ἀγαθοποιοῦντας ὑμᾶς, 
And if ye do good to those who do good to you, 


, Cc ow Cc » ? LT ν αὶ sl εὖ Je \ \ ? \ 
ποιὰ υὑμιν “χάρις ἔστιν 5 καὶ yap” Ot ἁμαρτωλοὶ TO avuTO 


what 7to*you ‘thank isit? even ‘for sinners “the “same 
~ ς ‘ 25 e 16 Π > > 2 , 
ποιοῦσιν. 84 καὶ ἐὰν “δανείζητε παρ᾽ ὧν ἐλπίζετε 
18ο. And if yelend [0 8056] from whom ye hope 


Γἀπολαβεῖν," ποία ὑμῖν χάρις ἐστίν; καὶ ἐγὰρ" hot! ἁμαρτωλοὶ 
to receive, what*to“you ‘thank isit? “even ‘for sinners 
ἁμαρτωλοῖς daveiZovow,' iva ἀπολάβωσιν τὰ "ἶσα." 35 πλὴν 
“to “sinners Mend, that they may receive the like. But 
ἀγαπᾶτε τοὺς ἐχθροὺς ὑμῶν, καὶ ἀγαθοποιεῖτε, καὶ ἰδανείζετε! 
love your enemies, and do good, and lend, 
mundey" πἀπελπίζοντες"" καὶ ἔσται ὁ. μισθὸς ὑμῶν πολύς", 

*nothing ‘hoping *foragain; and *shall*be ‘your 7reward great, 
καὶ ἔσεσθε υἱοὶ Prov" ὑψίστου bri αὐτὸς χρηστός ἐστιν ἐπὶ 
and yeshallbe sons ofthe Highest; for he Ξροοῦ ΠῚ to 
τοὺς ἀχαρίστους καὶ πονηρούς. 36 γίνεσθε «“οὖν" οἰκτίρμονες, 
the unthankful and _ wicked. Be ye therefore compassionate, 
καθὼς "καὶ" ὁ-πατὴρ.ὑμῶν οἰκτίρμων ἐστίν. 37 Kai μὴ. κρίνετε, 
as also your father *compassionate ‘is. And judge not, 
‘kai οὐ". μὴ κριθῆτε' * pap-waraducaZere, καὶ οὐ.μὴ KaTa- 
that in no wise ye be judged ; condemn not, that inno wise yebe 


δικασθῆτε. ἀπολύετε, Kai ἀπολυθήσεσθε' 88 δίδοτε, καὶ 
condemned. Release, and ye shall be released. Give, and 


, « ~ , , , va Sil 
δοθήσεται ὑμῖν, μέτρον καλόν πεπιεσμένον ““καὶ" σεσαλευ- 


it shall be given to you, *measure *good, pressed down and shaken to- 

μένον “ai! **iepexyuvopevoy' δώσουσιν εἰς τὸν κόλπον 

gether and running over shall they give into *bosom 

ὑμῶν: “rp γὰρ αὐτῷ μέτρῳ w' μετρεῖτε, ἀντιμε- 

tyour: ‘with ‘the “for same measure with which yemete, it shall be 

Y ὑμᾶς GLTTrA. W — καὶ GLTTrAW. χ περὶ TA. Υ εἰς T. τ [δὲ τῷ]; -- δὲ τῷ Τὶ; 
[δὲ] τῷ τι. 5 [καὶ ὑμεῖς] 1. ὃ + γὰρ (read for if ye 4150) ΤΣ. “ ἐστὶν χάρις . 4 — γὰρ 1. 
© δανείσητε 1,; δανίσητε τ; δανείζετε Tra. λαβεῖν Τῦτα, 8 --- γὰρ Τ{[Ὑτ]Α. h — οὗ LTTrA. 
ἱ δανίζουσιν τ. *ioattaw. ἰδανίζετεπ. ™pnddvat. δ ἀφελπίζοντες 1. 5 + [ἐν 
τοῖς οὐρανοῖς] in the heavens L. Ρ — τοῦ (read of [the]) GLitraw. 4 — οὖν LTTrA. 
¥ — καὶ [{]1{ττ]. 5 ἵνα (read that ye be not judged) z. t+ καὶ and ΤΑ. v8 — καὶ 


LTTrA. 


W8 ὑπερεκχυννόμενον LTTrA. 


χα ᾧ yap μέτρῳ LTTr. 


LUKE. 
παραβολὴν αὐτοῖς, Μήτι 


Vi. 


τρηθήσεται ὑμῖν. 39 Hizevde? 


measured again to you. And he spoke a parable to them, 
δύναται ae τυφλὸν ὁδηγεῖν ; οὐχὶ ἀμφότεροι εἰς 
“ποῦ Sboth *into 


Is *able blind [*man] a blind Goan} to lead? 
βόθυνον *zrecovvrat'; 40 οὐκ ἔστιν μαθητὴς ὑ ὑπὲρ τὸν διδάσκα- 


5a Spit lwill fall? ‘not “15 acme above the teacher 
λον Ξαὐτοῦ"" κατηρτισμένος. δὲ πᾶς ἔσται ὡς ὁ διδάσκαλος 
of him; but *perfected every *one shall be as “teacher 


αὐτοῦ. 41 τίδὲ βλέπεις τὸ κάρφος τὸ ἐν τῷ ὀφθαλμῷ 


this, But why lookest thou onthe mote that [is] in τ eye 


τοῦ.ἀδελφοῦ.σου, τὴν.δὲ δοκὸν THY ἐν τῷ.ἰδίῳ ὀφθαλμῷ 
of thy brother, but the beam  that{is] in thine own eye 


ov-caravoeic; 42 Ῥὴ" πῶς δύνασαι λέγειν τῷ. ἀδελφῷ.σου, 


perceivest not? or how artthouable tosay to thy brother, 
᾿Αδελφέ, ἄφες ἐκβάλω τὸ κάρφος τὸ ἐν τῷ ὀφθαλμῷ 
Brother, suffer [πτὰ Imaycastoutthe mote that [151] in eye 


σου, αὐτὸς τὴν ἐν τῷ. ὀφθαλμῷ.σου δοκὸν od βλέπων ; ὑπο- 
ns thyself the ἢ *thine Dowd Feye ‘beam not seeing? BO 


κριτά, ἔκβαλε πρῶτον τὴν δοκὸν ἐκ τοῦ.ὀφθαλμοῦ.σου, Kai 
crite, cast out first the beam out of thine [own] eye, and 


τότε διαβλέψεις “ἐκβαλεῖν, τὸ κάρφος τὸ ἐν τῷ ὀφθαλμῷ 
then thou wiltseeclearly tocast out the mote ἐμαδύ[5] ἴῃ the eye 


τοῦ.ἀδελφοῦ.σου!. 43 οὐ.γάρ ἐστιν δένδρον καλὸν ποιοῦν 
of thy brother. For ποὺ ‘there “is *a *tree Sgood producing 


καρπὸν σαπρόν᾽ οὐδὲ" δένδρον σαπρὸν ποιοῦν καρπὸν καλόν" 


*fruit ‘corrupt; nor a*tree ‘corrupt producing fruit *good ; 
44 ἕκαστον.γὰρ δένδρον ἐκ τοῦ. ἰδίου καρποῦ γινώσκεται" ob-yap 
for each tree by itsown fruit is 5h for not 


ἐξ ἀκανθῶν συλλέγουσιν σῦκα, οὐδὲ ἐκ βάτου ἵτρυγῶσιν 
from thorns do ἀπ gather figs, nor from abramble gather they 


σταφυλήν." 45 ὁ ἀγαθὸς ἄνθρωπος ἐκ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ θησαυροῦ 


a bunch of grapes. The good man out of the good treasure 
τῆς. καρδίας Ξαὐτοῦ" προφέρει τὸ ἀγαθόν᾽ καὶ ὁ πονη- 
of his heart brings forth that which[is] good; andthe wick- 
poc havOpwroc' ἐκ τοῦ πονηροῦ θησαυροῦ τῆς καρδίας 
man outof the wicked treasure of *heart 
αὐτοῦ" προφέρει τὸ πονηρόν ἐκ.γὰρ "τοῦ" περισσεύ- 
*his hy as forth that which [is] wicked; foroutof the abun- 


ματος ἱτῆς" καρδίας λαλεῖ τὸ. στόμα. αὐτοῦ." 46 Τί δὲ με 
dance ofthe heart a "his “mouth. And pty me 


καλεῖτε Κύριε, κύριε, καὶ οὐ-ποιεῖτε ἃ λέγω; 47 πᾶς ὁ ép- 
doyecall Lord, Lord, and donot what Isay? Every one who 
χόμενος πρός με Kai ἀκούων μου.τῶν. λόγων καὶ ποιῶν αὐτούς, 
iscoming to me and hearing my words and doing them, 
ὑποδείξω ὑμῖν τίνι ἐστὶν ὕμοιος. 48 ὅμοιός ἐστιν ἀνθρώπῳ 
Iwillshew you ἴο whom he is like. Like heis toaman 
οἰκοδομοῦντι οἰκίαν, ὃς ἔσκαψεν καὶ ἐβάθυνεν, καὶ ἔθηκεν 
building Co who dug and deepened, and laid 
θεμέλιον ἐπὶ τὴν πέτραν᾽ "πλημμύρας" δὲ γενομένης τς 
afoundationon the rock; and a flood LS come Sbur: 


ῥηξεν" ὁ ποταμὸς τῇ- οἰκίᾳ. ἐκείνῃ; καὶ οὐκιἴσχυσεν πεν 
“upon ‘the ?stream that house, and could not shake 


169 


again. 39 And he spake 
a parable unto them, 
Can the blind lead the 
blind? shall they not 
both fall into the 
ditch? 40 The disciple 
is not above his mas- 
ter: but every one 
that is perfect shall be 
as his master. 41 And 
why beholdest thou 
the mote that is inthy 
brother’s eye, bui per- 
ceivest not the beam 
that is in thine own 
eye? 42 Hither how 
canst thou say to thy 
brother, Brother, let 
me pull out the mote 
that is in thine eye, 
when thou thyself be- 
holdest not the beam 
that is in thine own 
eye? Thou hypocrite, 
cast out first the beam 
out of thine own eye, 
and then shalt thou 
see clearly to pull out 
the mote that is in thy 
brother’s eye. 43 For 
a good tree bringeth 
not forthcorrupt fruit; 
neither doth a corrupt 
tree bring forth good 
fruit, 44 For cvery 
tree is known by his 
own fruit. For of 
thorns men do not 
gather figs, nor ofa 
bramble bush gather 
they grapes. 45 A good 
man out of the good 
treasure of his heart 
bringeth forth that 
which is good; and an 
evil man out of the 
evil treasure of his 
heart bringeth forth 
that which is evil: for 
of the abundance of 
the heart his mouth 
speaketh. 46 And why 
call ye me, Lord, Lord, 
and do not the things 
which I say? 47 Who- 
soever cometh to me, 
and heareth my say- 
ings, and doeth ieee 
I will shew you to 
whom heis like: 48 he 
is like a man which 
built an house, and 
digged deep, and laid 
the foundation on a 
rock: and when the 
flood arose, the stream 
beat vehemently upon 
that house, and could 
not shake it: for it 


Υ + καὶ also LTTrA. : ἐμπεσοῦνται LTTrA. — αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 
ς — ἐκβαλεῖν TA. d + ἐκβαλεῖν to cast out TA. 
τρυγῶσιν ΤΎΤΑ. 8 --- αὐτοῦ (read [his] heart) T. 
τῆς καρδίας αὐτοῦ [τ ἸτττΑ. k — χοῦ LITra. 


στόμα αὐτοῦ λαλεῖ L. 2 πλημμύρης ΤΊτΛ. - desdenes TTr. 


e ai πάλιν again [L]1[T ns 
— ἄνθρωπος [L]TTrA. 
— τῆς (read of [the]) LTtra. 


Ὁ — ἢ T[Tr]A. 

‘ σταφυλὴν 
= θησαυροῦ 
2 τὸ 


170 


was founded upon a 
rock. 49 But he that 
heareth, and doeth not, 
is like a man that 
without a foundation 
built an house upon 
the earth; against 
which the stream did 
beat vehemently, and 
immediately it fell; 
and the ruin of that 
house was great. 


VII. Now when he 
had ended all his say- 
ings in the audience 
of the people, he en- 
tcred into Capernaum. 
2 And a certain cen- 
turion’s servant, who 
was dear unto him, 
was sick, and ready to 
div. 3 And when he 
heard of Jesus, he sent 
unto him the elders of 
the Jews, beseeching 
him that he would 
core and heal his ser- 
vant, 4 And when they 
eame to Jesus, they 
besought him instant- 
ly, saying, That he 
was worthy for whom 
he should do this: 5 for 
ne loveth our nation, 
and he hath built us 
a synagogue. 6 Then 
Jesus went with them. 
And when he was now 
not far from the house, 
the centurion sent 
friends to him, saying 
unto him, Lord, trouble 
not thyself: for I am 
not worthy that thou 
shouldest enter under 
my roof : 7 wherefore 
neither thought I my- 
self worthy to come 
into thee: but say in 
« word, and my ser- 
vant shall be healed, 
3 For I alsoam a man 
set under authority, 
naving under me sol- 
liers, and I say unto 
one, Go, and he goeth; 
and to another, Come, 
and he cometh; and to 
my servant, Do this, 
and he doeth?/. 9 When 
Jesus heard these 
things, he marvelled 
at him, and turned 
him about, and said 


unto the people that Κα 


followed him, I say 


AOYKAS. VI, VII. 


αὐτήν" Ῥτεθεμελίωτο.γὰρ ἐπὶ τὴν πέτραν." 49 6.68 ἀκούσας 
it, forit had been founded upon the _ rock. Buthewho heard 
καὶ μὴ-ποιήσας ὅμοιός ἐστιν ἀνθρώπῳ “οἰκοδομήσαντι' οἰκίαν 
and did not like lis to a man having built a house 
ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν χωρὶς θεμελίου" τπροσέῤῥηξεν" ὁ ποτα- 
on the earth without a foundation; on which Sburst the *stream, 
μός, καὶ "εὐθέως ἔπεσεν," Kai ἐγένετο τὸ ῥῆγμα τῆς οἰκίας 
and immediately it fell, and ‘was ‘the ruin 308 Shouse 
ἐκείνης μέγα. 
*that great. 
7 Ἐπεὶ. δὲ ἐπλήρωσεν πάντα τὰ ῥἡματα.αὐτοῦ εἰς τὰς 
And when he had completed all his words in the 
ἀκοὰς τοῦ λαοῦ εἰσῆλθεν εἰς "Καπερναούμ." 2 ‘Exarovrapyou 
ears ofthe people heentered into Capernaum. *Of °a 7centurion 
δὲ τινος δοῦλος κακῶς ἔχων ἤμελλεν τελευτᾷν, ὃς ἦν 
‘and ‘certain 56 θῬοπᾶάτηδη ill Speing was about to die, who was 
αὐτῷ ἔντιμος. 8 ἀκούσας.δὲ περὶ τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ ἀπέστειλεν πρὸς 
by him honoured. And having heard about Jesus he sent te) 
αὐτὸν πρεσβυτέρους τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, ἐρωτῶν αὐτὸν ὅπως 
him elders of the Jews, begging him that 
ἐλθὼν διασώσῃ τὸν. δοῦλον αὐτοῦ. 4 οἱ. δὲ παραγενόμενοι 
having come he might cure his bondman, Andthey having come 
πρὸς τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ‘rapeKxadovy' αὐτὸν σπουδαίως, λέγοντες, 
to Jesus besought him diligently, saying, 


a » , > {Ὁ w , ll ~ Ρ ᾽ ~ A ‘ 
Ort ἄξιός ἐστιν wp παρέξει! rovTo’ 5 ἀγαπᾷ.γὰρ τὸ 
that *worthy *he 7is to whom he shall grant this, for he loves 
ἔθνος.ἡμῶν καὶ τὴν συναγωγὴν αὐτὸς wKoddunoev ἡμῖν. 
our nation and the synagogue he built for us. 


6 Ὁ. δὲ Ἰησοῦς ἐπορεύετο σὺν αὐτοῖς ἤδη.δὲ αὐτοῦ οὐ μακρὰν 
And Jesus went with them; butalready he “not “far 
2 ’ Χ ᾽ ΡΠ ~ > 4 wn” y A ? 4 ll 2 « 
ἀπέχοντος "ἀπὸ" τῆς οἰκίας, ἔπεμψεν ὑπρὸς αὐτὸν" τὸ ἑκατόν- 
‘being distant from the house, $sent *to Shim ‘the 7cen- 
rapxoc φίλους," λέγων "αὐτῷ," Κύριε, μὴ-σκύλλου" οὐ 
turion friends, saying tohim, Lord, trouble not [thyself], *not 
yap beiue ἱκανὸς" iva “ὑπὸ τὴν.-στέγην.μου! εἰσέλθῃς" 
for *I%am worthy that under my roof thou shouldest come ; 
7 διὸ οὐδὲ ἐμαυτὸν ἠξίωσα πρός ce ἐλθεῖν: ἀλλὰ 
wherefore neither myself countedI worthy “to “ὕπο ‘to 7come; but 
? 4 , aN d? θη li « ~ ‘ a ? ‘ 2 
εἰπὲ λόγῳ, καὶ “ἰαθήσεται ὁ-παΐςιμου. ὃ καὶ. γὰρ ἔγω ἄν- 
say bya word, and shall be healed my servant. For also 1 a 
θρωπός εἰμι ὑπὸ ἐξουσίαν τασσόμενος, ἔχων ὑπ᾽ ἐμαυτὸν." 
man am under authority appointed, having under myself 
στρατιώτας, Kai λέγω τούτῳ Πορεύθητι, καὶ πορεύεται" 
soldiers, and Isay  tothis [one] Go, and he goes ; 
\ ” a” A ΑΝ, ‘ ~ 4 ͵ 
καὶ ἄλλῳ, "Ἔρχου, καὶ ἔρχεται" καὶ τῷ.δούλῳ. μου, Ποίησον 
and toanother, Come, and hecomes; and tomy bondman, Do 
τοῦτο, Kai ποιεῖ. 9 ᾿Ακούσας.δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἐθαύ- 
this, and he does [it]. And having heard these things Jesus won- 
ασεν αὐτόν' καὶ στραφεὶς τῷ ἀκολουθοῦντι αὐτῷ ὄχλῳ 


deredat him; and turning tothe *following Shim ‘crowd 


P διὰ τὸ καλῶς οἰκοδομεῖσθαι (οἰκοδομῆσθαι τ) αὐτήν because it was well built TTra. 


4 οἰκοδομοῦντι building L. 
τ Ἐπειδὴ after that LrTra. 


together rrra. 


τ παρέξῃ he should grant Lrrra. 
* φίλους ὁ ἑκατόνταρχος ( 


x ‘ ΄ 
ὕπο τὴν OTEYHV ν. 


τ προσέρηξεν TTr. 5. εὐθὺς συνέπεσεν immediately it fell 
ἃ Καφαρναούμ. LTTrAW. * ἠρώτων asked 7. 

x — ἀπὸ (read τῆς from the) T. Υ — πρὸς αὐτὸν τ. 
ἑκατοντάρχης T)TIrA. ἃ -- αὐτῷ Τ.  YixavdseimeTTrA. “μον 
4 ἰαθήτω let be healed rrra. 


VII. LUKE. 


εἶπεν, Λέγω ὑμῖν, οὐδὲ ἐν τῷ Ἰσραὴλ τοσαύτην πίστιν εὗρον. 

said, Isay to you, noteven in Israel so great faith did I find. 

10 Kai ὑποστρέψαντες “οἱ πεμφθέντες εἰς τὸν οἴκον᾽ εὗρον 
And βανίπρ returned ‘those 2sent to the house found 


τὸν ἰἀσθενοῦντα" δοῦλον ὑγιαίνοντα. 
188 sick bondman in good health. 


11 Kai ἐγένετο ἔν &ry' ἑξῆς 
And it cametopasson the next [day] 
καλουμένην Naty, καὶ συνεπορεύοντο αὐτῷ οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ 
called Nain, and went with him his *disciples 
ἰϊκανοὶ" καὶ ὄχλος πολύς. 12 ὡς δὲ ἤγγισεν τῇ πύλῳ τῆς 
tmany and a*crowd ‘great. And as he drew near tothe gate of the 
aN \ ἰδ ’ > / k θ ’ ll 1 ey = 
πόλεως καὶ ἰδού, ἐξεκομίζετο τεθνηκώς," υἱὸς μονο 
city 24150 ‘behold, was being carried out(one] who haddied, an?son ‘only 
γενὴς" τῇ. μητρὶ. αὐτοῦ, καὶ αὕτη ἦν" χήρα᾽ Kui ὄχλος τῆς 


h ? LZ il ᾽ 5X 
ETTODEVETO εἰς πολιν 
he went into acity 


to his mother, and = she was a widow, and a*crowd *of*the 

πόλεως ἱκανὸὲξ ἃ σὺν αὐτῷ. 13 Kai ἰδὼν αὐτὴν ὁ κύριος 
Scity ‘considerable[was]with her. And seeing her the Lord 

ἐσπλαγχνίσθη ἐπ᾽ ϑαὐτῷῇ' καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῇ, Διὴ.κλαῖε. 
was moved with compassion on her ἃ said to her, Weep not, 


14 Kai προσελθὼν ἥψατο τῆς σοροῦ οἱ. δὲ βαστάζοντες 


And coming up hetouched the bier, and those bearing [1] 
ἔστησαν᾽ καὶ εἶπεν, Νεανίσκε, σοὶ λέγω, ἐγέρθητι. 15 Καὶ 
stopped. And hesaid, Young man, to thee I say, ise. And 


ἀνεκάθισεν ὁ νεκρὸς Kai ἤρξατο λαλεῖν" Kai ἔδωκεν αὐτὸν τῇ 
Ξβεῦ ἪΡ ‘the *dead and began tospeak, and he gave him 


μητρὶ. αὐτοῦ. 16 ἔλαβεν.δὲ φόβος Ῥἅπαντας," καὶ ἐδόξαζον 
to his mother. And ?seized ‘fear all, and they glorified 


τὸν θεόν, λέγοντες, Ὅτι προφήτης μέγας YWynyeora ἐν 


God, saying, A?prophet ‘great hasrisenup amongst 
ἡμῖν, καὶ Ὅτι ἐπεσκέψατο ὁ θεὸς τὸν.λαὸν.αὐτοῦ. 17 Kai 
us; and ΞῊ 545 “visited *God his people. And 


ἐξῆλθεν ὁ-λόγος.οὗτος ἐν ὕλῃ τῇ Ἰουδαίᾳ περὶ αὐτοῦ, καὶ 
went out this report in all Judza concerning him, and 


τὲν" πάσῃ τῇ περιχώρῳ. 


in all the country around. 
18 Kai ἀπήγγειλαν "Ἰωάννῃ" οἱ μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ περὶ 
And *brought*word ἕο 7John 3015 “disciples concerning 


πάντων τούτων. 19 καὶ προσκαλεσάμενος δύο τινὰς τῶν 
all these things. And having called to [him] *two?certain 


μαθητῶν.αὐτοῦ oO’ lwavyne" ἔπεμψεν πρὸς τὸν Ἰησοῦν," 


of his disciples John sent [them] to Jesus, 

, 5 « » ~ 
λέγων, Σὺ.εἶ ὁ ἐρχόμενος ἢ τἄλλον" προσδοκῶμεν; ; 
saying, Artthou the coming [016] or another are we to look for? 


20 Παραγενόμενοι.δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸν οἱ ἄνδρες "εἶπον," ΥἹωάν- 
And haying come to him the men said, John 
νης! ὁ βαπτιστὴς ἀπέσταλκεν ἡμᾶς πρός σε, λέγων, Σὺ εἶ 
the Baptist has sent us to thee, saying, Art thou 
ὁ ἐρχόμενος ἢ ἄλλον a Lae 21 Ἔν "αὐτῷ" "δὲ" 
the coming [016] or another are we to look for? 2In *the “same ‘and 


TY ὥρᾳ ἐθεράπευσεν πολλοὺς ἀπὸ νόσων Kai μαστίγων Kai 
hour he healed many of diseases and  scourges and 


171 


unto you, I have not 
found so great faith, 
no, not in Israel, 
10 And they that were 
sent, returning to the 
house, found the ser- 
vant whole that had 
been sick. 


11 And it came to 
pass the day after, that 
he went into a city 
called Nain; and many 
of his disciples went 
with him, and much 
people. 12 Now when 
he came nigh to the 
gate of the city, be- 
hold, there was a dead 
man carried out, the 
only son of hismother, 
and she was a widow: 
and much people of 
the city was with her. 
13 And when the Lord 
saw her, he had com- 
passion on her, and 
said unto her, Weep 
not. 14 And he came 
and touched the bier: 
and they that bare 
him stood still. And 
he said, Young man, 
I say unto thee, Arise. 
15 And he that was 
dead sat up, and began 
to speak. And he de- 
livered him to his mo- 
ther. 16 And there 
came a fear onall: and 
they glorified God, 
saying, That a great 
prophet is risen up 
among us; and, That 
God hath visited his 
people. 17 And this 
rumour of him went 
forth throughout all 
Judwa, and through- 
out all the region 
round about, 


18 And the disciples 
of John shewed him 
of all these things. 
19 And John calling 
unto him two of his 
disciples sent them to 
Jesus, saying, Art thou 
he that should come? 
or look we for an- 
other? 20 When the 
men were come unto 
him, they said, John 
Baptist hath sent us 
unto thee, saying, Art 
thou he that should 
come? or look we 
for another? 21 And 
in that same hour 
he cured many of 
their infirmities and 
plagues, and of evil 


f — ἀσθενοῦντα LTTr[A]. 
| μονογενὴς vids TTrA. 
P πάντας GTrA. 
τ Ἰωάνης Tr. 

τ ἐκείνῃ that τττὰ. 


_ © εἰς τὸν οἶκον οἱ πεμφθέντες LTTY. 
1—ixavot[L]tr[a]. ἃ [τεθνηκὼς L. 
was EGT[TrA]. ° αὐτὴν T. 
5 Ἰωάννει T; “Iwaver Tr. 


χα εἶπαν LTTrA. ¥ Ἰωάνης Tr. a — δὲ LTTrA. 


8 τῷ Tr. 

™ αὐτὴ W ; — ἦν EGW. 
4 ἠγέρθη is risen LTTra. 

Y τὸν κύριον the Lord rrra. 


h ἐπορεύθη T. 
no ἣν 
τ--- ἐν [L]T[Tr]A. 

τ ἕτερον Tr. 


172 


spirits; and unto many 
that were blind he gave 
sight. 22 Then Jesus 
answering said unto 
them, Go your way, 
and tell John what 
things ye have seen 
and heard; how that 
the blind see, the lame 
walk, the lepers are 
cleansed, the deaf hear, 
the dead are raised, to 
the poor the gospel 
is preached, 23 And 
blessed is he, whoso- 
ever shall not be of- 
fended in me. 


24 And when the 
messengers of John 
were departed, he 


began to speak unto 
the people concerning 
John, What went ye 
out into the wilderness 
for to see? A reed 
shaken with the wind? 
25 But what went ye 
out for to see? A man 
clothed in soft rai- 
ment? Behold, they 
which are gorgeously 
apparelled, and live 
delicately,are in kings’ 
courts. 26 But what 
went ye out for tosee? 
A prophet? Yea, I 
say unto you, and 
much more than a 
prophet. 27 This is he, 
of whom it is written, 
Behold, I send my 
iessenger before thy 
face, which shall pre- 
pare thy way before 
thee. 28 For I say 
unto you, Among those 
that are born of women 
there is not a greater 
prophet than John the 
Baptist: but he that is 
jeast in the kingdom 
of God is greater than 
he. 29 And all the 
people that heard him, 
and the publicans, jus- 
tified God, being bap- 
tized with the baptism 
of John, 30 But the 
Pharisees and lawyers 
rejected the counsel of 
God against them- 
selves, being not bap- 
tized of him, 31 And 
the Lord said, Where- 
unto then shall I liken 
the men of this gene- 
ration? and to what 
are they like? 32 They 
are like unto children 
sitting in the market- 
place, and calling one 
to another, and say- 


A OF YAK PAP: VIL. 

, ~ : Noi λλοῖο 2 4 best 

πνευμάτων πονήρων, και τυφ Otc πολλοις ἐχαρίσατο TO 
2spirits 1671], and ἕο “blind ‘many he granted 


βλέπειν. 22 καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς “ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Πορευθέν- 
to see. And “answering 1 Jesus said to them, Having 
τες ἀπαγγείλατε Ἰωάννῃ! ἃ εἴδετε καὶ ἠκούσατε: “ὅτι! 
gone relate to John what yehayeseen and heard ; that 
‘ ? , 4 we s ,ὔ 
τυφλοὶ ἀναβλέπουσιν, χωλοὶ περιπατοῦσιν, λεπροὶ καθαρίζον- 
blind receive sight, lame walk, lepers are cleansed, 
TAL, κωφοὶ ἀκούουσιν, νεκροὶ ἐγείρονται, πτωχοὶ εὐαγγελίζονται" 


deaf hear, dead are raised, poor are evangelized ; 
23 Kai μακάριός ἐστιν ὃς.ἐὰν μὴ.σκανδαλισθῇ ἐν ἐμοί. 
and blessed is whoever shall not be offended in me. 


24 ᾿Απελθόντων. δὲ τῶν ἀγγέλων ᾿ΓΙωάννου" ἤρξατο λέγειν 
And *having*departed ‘the *messengers Sof ‘John he began to speak 
πρὸς τοὺς ὄχλους περὶ ᾿Ιωάννου," Τί δέξεληλύθατε" εἰς 
to the crowds concerning John: What have ye gone out into 
THY ἔρημον θεάσασθαι; κάλαμον ὑπὸ ἀνέμου σαλευό- 
the wilderness to look at? a reed * by [the] wind shaken ? 
μενον; 25 ἀλλὰ τί SeEekndvOare! ἰδεῖν ; ἄνθρωπον ἐν μαλα- 
But what have yegone ont 0 see? aman in soft 
κοῖς ἱματίοις ἠμφιεσμένον; ἰδού, ot ἐν ἱματισμῷ ἐνδόξῳ 
clothing arrayed? Behold, theywho in clothing ‘splendid 
‘ ~ « , 9. - la > , ? Ay , 
καὶ τρυφῇ ὑπάρχοντες ἐν τοῖς βασιλείοις εἰσίν. 26 ἀλλὰ τί 
and inluxury areliving 7in “the “palaces are. But what 
δἐξεληλύθατε" ἰδεῖν; προφήτην; vai, λέγω ὑμῖν, καὶ 
have ye goneout tosee? τὸ prophet ὃ Yea, Isay toyou, and [016] 
περισσότερον προφήτου. 27 οὗτός ἐστιν περὶ οὗ γέ- 
more excellent than a prophet. This is he concerning whom it has 
γραπται, ᾿Ιδού, *éyw' ἀποστέλλω TOv.dyyédOv_pov πρὸ 
been written, Behold, 1 send my messenger before 
προσώπου.σου, ὃς κατασκευάσει TI)V.000Y.c0v ἔμπροσθέν σου. 
thy face, who _ shall prepare thy way before thee. 
28 Λέγω ‘yao! ὑμῖν, μείζων ἐν γεννητοῖς γυναικῶν 
2T3say ‘for toyou, °a greater *among[*those] “born *of women 
Κπροφήτης" ᾿Ιωάννου" ἱτοῦ βαπτιστοῦ" οὐδείς ἐστιν" 0.08 
prophet than John’ the Baptist noone is; buthethat(is} 
μικρότερος ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ μείζων αὐτοῦ ἐστιν. 29 Καὶ 
1655 in the kingdom of God greater thanhe is. And 
πᾶς ὁ λαὸς ἀκούσας καὶ ot τελῶναι ἐδικαίωσαν τὸν θεόν, 
all the people having heard and the tax-gatherers justified God, 
βαπτισθέντες τὸ βάπτισμα ᾿ΓΙωάννου"" 30 οἱ. δὲ Φα- 
having been baptized[with] the baptism of John ; but the Pha- 
ρισαῖοι καὶ ot νομικοὺ τὴν βουλὴν τοῦ θεοῦ ἠθέτησαν 
risees and the doctors of the law the counsel of God κοῦ aside 
᾽ ε , ‘ θέ « ? ? ~ 931 m t SA « 
εἰς EaUTOUC, μη βαπτισ EVTEC UT αὐτου. εἰπεν.ὁξ 0 
as to themselves, not having been baptized by him. And “said the 
κύριος,! Tar οὖν ὁμοιώσω τοὺς ἀνθρώπους τῆς γενεᾶς 
“Lord, To what therefore shallI liken the men of *gencration 
ταύτης; Kai τίνι εἰσὶν ὅμοιοι; 32 ὕμοιοί εἰσιν παιδίοις 
‘this ? and to what are they like? Like are they tolittle children 
τοῖς ἐν. ἀγορᾷ καθημένοις, Kai προσφωνοῦσιν ἀλλήλοις 
in a market-place sitting, and calling one to another 


b — 70 LTTrAW. 
© — ὅτι L[ Tr]. 
I send) Lrtra. 


Γ᾿ Ιωάνου τι. 


4 ᾿Ιωάννει T; ᾿Ιωάνει Tr. 
» a , 

h — ἐγὼ (read ἀποστ. 

| — τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ TTrA. 


© — 6 Ἰησοῦς (read he said) [u)rtra. 
8 ἐξήλθατε went ye out LTr. 


i — γὰρ Pra. k — προφήτης Ltr]. 


™ — εἶπεν δὲ ὁ κύριος GLTTrAW. 


VII. LUKE. 

ΠῚ \ , iT) ᾽ ΄ c ~ ‘ ? > , θ -Ξ ἐθ J 
Kai λέγουσιν, Ἡὐλήσαμεν ὑμῖν, καὶ οὐκ. ὠρχήσασθε" ἐθρη 
and saying, We piped toyou, and ye did not dance; we 

U ~ ‘ > , 
νήσαμεν οὑμῖν," καὶ οὐκ. ἐκλαύσατε. 33 ἐλήλυθεν.γὰρ PIwavyne! 
mourned toyou, and ye did not weep. For *has °come 1John 

ὁ βαπτιστὴς “μήτε! τἄρτον ἐσθίων" Sunre' tolvoy πίνων," 


the *Baptist neither bread leating nor 2wine ‘drinking, 
‘ a” « e ~ > , 

Kai λέγετε, SESE ἔχει. 34 ἐλήλυθεν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 

and yesay, Ademon he has. 5Has ®come ‘the 7Son of *man 


? / ‘4 , a7 , ? , » if ‘ 
ἐσθίων Kai πίνων, καὶ λέγετε, ᾿Ιδού, ἄνθρωπος φάγος Kai 
eating and drinking, and yesay, Behold, aman aglutton and 
οἰνοπότης, “τελωνῶν φίλος" καὶ ἁμαρτωλῶν. 35 Kai ἐδι- 
a wine-bibber, of tax-gatherers 8 ἔσο μα and of sinners ; and 7was 
, ’ὔ ᾿ ~ ~ , 
καιώθη ἡ σοφία ἀπὸ “τῶν.τέκνων. αὐτῆς πάντων." 
5] υβύ1ῆθα 4wisdom by [17 *children 1411, 
36 Ἠρώτα.δέ τις αὐτὸν τῶν Φαρισαίων ἵνα ga μετ 
᾿Απᾷ δββκοᾶ 'one Shim 7of*the ‘*Pharisees that he should eat with 
αὐτοῦ" καὶ εἰσελθὼν εἰς “τὴν οἰκίαν" τοῦ Φαρισαίου Yave- 
him. And having enteredinto the house ofthe P he re- 
κλίθη." 37 Καὶ ἰδού, γυνὴ *év τῷ πόλει ἥτις ἦν" 
clined [αὖ table]; and behold, awoman in the _ city who was 
ἁμαρτωλός, "ἐπιγνοῦσα ὅτι ἀνάκειται" ἐν 

a sinner, having known that he had reclined [at table] in the 
τοῦ Papicaiov, κομίσασα ἀλάβαστρον μύρου, 38 Kai στᾶσα 
ofthe Pharisee, having taken an alabaster flask of ointment, and standing 

΄ ~ , il ΄ » ΄ 
“παρὰ τοὺς. πόδας. αὐτοῦ ὀπίσω" κλαίουσα, “ἤρξατο βρέχειν 
at his feet behind weeping, began to bedew 
τοὺς. πόδας αὐτοῦ τοῖς. δάκρυσιν," καὶ ταῖς θριξὶν τῆς κεφαλῆς 
his feet with tears, and with the hairs of *head 
αὐτῆς “ἐξέμασσεν," καὶ κατεφίλει τοὺς.πόδας αὐτοῦ, 
ther she was wiping [them], and was ardently kissing his feet, 

‘ BJA ~ 7 2 ‘ Ὧι ε ~ 
καὶ ἤλειφεν τῷ μύρῳ. 39 ἰδὼν. δὲ ὁ Φαρισαῖος 
and was anointing [them] withthe ointment. But havingseen,the Pharisee 
ὁ καλέσας αὐτὸν εἶπεν ἐν ἑαυτῷ, λέγων, Οὗτος εἰ 
who invited him spoke within himself, saying, This [person] if 

ἦν προφήτης, ἐγίνωσκεν.ἂν τίς Kai ποταπὴ ἡ } 
he were aprophet, would have known who and what the woman [is] 
ἥτις ἅπτεται αὐτοῦ, ὅτι ἁμαρτωλός ἐστιν. 40 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς 
who touches him, ἔοῦ a sinner she is. And 7answering 
ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτόν, Σίμων, ἔχω σοί τι εἰπεῖν. 

1Jesus said to him, Simon, Ihave to thee something to say. 
‘O.6¢ ίφησιν, Διδάσκαλε, εἰπέ." 41 Δύο ἐχρεωφειλέται! ἦσαν 
Andhe says, Teacher, say [it]. Two debtors there were 
MOaveory' ti ὁ εἷς ὥφειλεν δηνάρια πεντακόσια, 6.68 
toa*creditor ‘certain; theone owed %denarii ‘five *hundred, and the 


οἰκίᾳ 
house 


173 


ing, We have piped 
unto ρα: and ye have 
not danced; we have 
mourned to you, and 
ye have not wept. 
33 For John the Bap- 
tist came neither eat- 
ing bread nor drinking 
wine ; and ye say, He 
hath a devil. 34 The 
Son of man is come 
eating and drinking; 
and ye say, Behold a 
gluttonous man, and a 
Wwinebibber, a friend 
of publicans and sin- 
ners! 35 But wisdom 
is justified of all her 
children. 


36 And one of the 
Pharisees desired him 
that he would eat with 
him. And he went 
into the Pharisee’s 
house, and sat down 
to meat. 37 And, be- 
hold, a woman in 
the city, which was a 
sinner, when she knew 
that Jesus sat at meat 
in the Pharisce’s house, 
brought an alabaster 
box of ointment, 
38 and stood at his 
feet behind him weep- 
ing, and began to wash 
his feet with tears, and 
did wipe them with the 
hairs of her head, and 
kissed his feet, and 
anointed them with 
the ointment. 39 Now 
when the Pharisee 
which had bidden him 
saw zt, he spake within 
himself, saying, This 
man, if he were a pro- 
phet, would have 
Known who and what 
manner of woman this 
is that toucheth him: 
for she is a sinner. 
40 And Jesus answer- 
ing said unto him, 
Simon, I have some- 
what to say unto thee. 
And he saith, Master, 
sayon. 41 There wasa 
certain creditor which 
had two debtors: the 
one owed five hundred 


uw , stolen ΠΗ ies Ξ pence, and the other 
ἕτερος πεντήκοντα. 42 μὴ. ἐχόντων δὲ" αὐτῶν ἅπο- fifty. 42 And when 
other fifty. But “not *having 1they [wherewith] to they had nothing to 


δοῦναι ἀμφοτέροις ἐχαρίσατο" ric οὖν αὐτῶν, *eizé," πλεῖον 
pay, both he forgave: whichthereforeofthem, say, ‘most 

ἰαὐτὸν ἀγαπήσει"; 48 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς δὲ" πιὸ! Σίμων εἶπεν, Ὑπο- 
Shim ‘will 7love? And “answering 1Simon said, I 


pay, he frankly for- 
gave them both. Tell 
me therefore, which of 
them will love him 
most? 43 Simon an- 
swered and said, Isup- 


2 λέγοντες TTrA. ο — ὑμῖν τττ. ? Ἰωάνης Tr. 
ἐσθίων ἄρτοντ. SpndeT. * πένων οἶνον LTTrA. 
τῶν τέκνων αὐτῆς LTrA. χ τὸν οἶκον LTTrA. Υ κατεκλίθη LTTrA. 
LTTra. a+ καὶ and LTTraw. > κατάκειται LTTrA. 
GLTTra. ἃ trois δάκρυσιν ἤρξατο βρέχειν τοὺς πόδας αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 
δάσκαλε, εἰπέ, φησίν Trra. & χρεοφειλέται LTTrA. ἢ δανιστῇ T. 
Κ΄ εἰπέ ττττί Α]. | ἀγαπήσει αὐτόν LTTrA. m — 9 T[Tr]. 


4 μὴ ποῦ ΤΑ. 


τ φίλος τελωνῶν QLTTrAW. 


τ ἔσθων ἄρτον LTrA ; 
W πάντων 
τ ἥτις ἦν ἐν τῇ πόλει 


¢ ὀπίσω παρὰ τοὺς πόδας αὐτοῦ 
? ΄ 
ε ἐξέμαξεν 1. 


TAL 
i — δὲ [L]tTra. 


174 


se that he, to whom 

e forgave most. And 
hesaid unto him, Thou 
hast rightly judged. 
44 And he turned to 
the woman, and said 
unto Simon, Seest thou 
this woman? 1 entered 
into thine house, thou 
gavest me no waterfor 
my feet: but she hath 
washed my feet with 
tears, and wiped them 
with the hairs of her 
head. 45 Thou gavest 
me no kiss: but this 
woman since the time 
I came in hath not 
ceased to kiss my feet. 
46 My head with oil 
thou didst not anoint: 
but this woman hath 
anointed my feet with 
ointment, 47 Where- 
fore I say unto thee, 
Her sins, which are 
many, are forgiven ; 
for she loved much: 
but to whom little is 
forgiven, the same lov- 
eth little. 48 And he 
said unto her, Thy sins 
are forgiven. 49 And 
they that sat at meat 
with him began to say 
within themselves, 
Who is this that for- 
giveth sins also? 
50 And he said to the 
woman, ‘Thy faith 
hath saved thee; go in 
peace. 


VIII. And it came 
to pass afterward, that 
he went throughout 
every city and village, 

eaching and shew- 

g the glad tidings of 
the kingdom of God: 
and the twelve were 
with him, 2 and cer- 
tain women, which 
had been healed of evil 
spirits and infirmities, 

ary called Magda- 
lene, out of whom went 
seven devils, 3 and 
Joanna the wife of 
Chuza Herod’s stew- 
ard, and Susanna, and 
many others, which 
ministered unto him 
of their substance. 

4 And when much 
people were gathered 
together, and were 
come to him out of 
every city, he spake by 
aparable: 5 A sower 
went out to sow his 
seed: and as he sowed, 
some fell by the way 
side; and it was trod- 
den down, and the 


A ΟΝ KA.2: VII, VILE 
λαμβάνω ὅτι τὸ πλεῖον ἐχαρίσατο. Ὁ «δὲ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, 
take it that(he]towhomthe more heforgave. Andhe said to him, 
Ὀρθῶς ἔκρινας. 44 Kai στραφεὶς πρὸς τὴν γυναῖκα, τῷ 


Rightly thou hast judged. And having turned to the woman, 
Σίμωνι ἔφη, Βλέπεις ταύτην τὴν γυναῖκα; εἰσῆλθόν σου εἰς 
to Simon hesaid, Seest thou _ this woman? Ientered *thy ‘into 
A 2 γῇ vO n2 ‘ 4 ’ ll > » Ὁ 2 
τὴν οἰκίαν, ὕδωρ "ἐπὶ τοὺς.πόδας. μου! οὐκ.ἔδωκας" αὕτη. δὲ 
house, water for my feet thou gavest not, but she 
~ ὃ », » , 4 ἠδ A ~ A oO ~ 
τοῖς δάκρυσιν ἔβρεξέν μου τοὺς πόδας, καὶ ταῖς θριξὶν ripe 
with tears bedewed my feet, and with the hairs 


κεφαλῆς" αὐτῆς ἐξέμαξεν. 45 φίλημά μοι οὐκ ἔδωκας" 


head of *her wiped [them]. A kiss tome thou gavest not, 
αὕτη.δὲ ἀφ’ te εἰσῆλθον οὐ.Ῥδιέλιπεν! καταφιλοῦσά 
butshe from which [time] [camein ceased not ardently kissing 

“μου τοὺς πόδας." 46 ἐλαίῳ τὴν.κεφαλήν.μον οὐκ.ἤλειψας" 
my feet. With oil my head thou didst not anoint, 

2 A ,’ » ΄ r 4 , Π - ΄ 

αὕτη.δεὲλ μύρῳ ἤλειψέν μου τοὺς πόδας." 47 οὗ.χάριν 
but she with ointment anointed my feet. For which cause 
λέγω σοι, ἀφέωνται δ"αἱ.ἁμαρτίαι.αὐτῆς" αἱ πολλαί, ὅτι 
Isay to thee, forgiven have been her “sins many ; for 
ἠγάπησεν πολύ dé ὀλίγον ἀφίεται ὀλίγον ἀγαπᾷ. 
she loved much; buttowhom little is forgiven little he loves, 
48 Πῖπεν.δὲ αὐτῇ, ᾿Αφέωνταί σου αἱ ἁμαρτίαι. 49 Kai 


And he said to her, Forgiven have been thy sins. And 
ἤρξαντο ot συνανακείμενοι λέγειν ἐν ἑαυτοῖς, Tic "οὗτός 
began those reclining with [him] tosay withinthemselves, Who ?this 
ἐστιν" ὃς καὶ ἁμαρτίας ἀφίησιν ; 50 Elmev.dé πρὸς τὴν γυ- 

lis whoeven sins lforgives ? But hesaid to the wo- 


ναῖκα, Ἣ.πίστις.σου céowkéy σε" πορεύου εἰς εἰρήνην. 


man, Thy faith has saved thee; go in _—~peace. 
8 Καὶ ἐγένετο ἐν.τῷ.καθεξῆς καὶ airoc διώδευεν 
And it came to pass afterwards that he journeyed through 
κατὰ.πόλιν Kai κώμην, κηρύσσων καὶ εὐαγγελιζό-- 
city by city and village by village, preaching and announcing the glad 
μενος τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ" Kai οἱ δώδεκα σὺν αὐτῷ, 


tidings, the of God, 
2 καὶ γυναϊκές τινες at ἧσαν» TED Ep TEU HEYA ἀπὸ πνευμάτων 
and “women ‘certain who had been cure from ‘spirits 
~ ‘ ? ~ / « La ’ 
πονηρῶν καὶ ἀσθενειῶν, Μαρία ἡ καλουμένη Μαγδαληνή, 
twicked and infirmities, Mary who iscalled Magdalene, 
ap’ ἧς δαιμόνια ἑπτὰ ἐξεληλύθει, 3 καὶ VIwavva' γυνὴ 
from whom ?demons_ ‘seven had gone out; and Joanna wife 
XovZa ἐπιτρόπου Ἡρώδου, καὶ Σουσάννα, καὶ ἕτεραι wodXai, 
of Chuza asteward of Herod; and Susanna, and “others ‘many, 
αἵτινες διηκόνουν ταὐτῷ" “ἀπὸ! τῶν.ὑπαρχόντων αὐταῖς. 
who wereministering to him of their property. 


4 Συνιόντος.δὲ ὄχλου πολλοῦ, καὶ τῶν κατὰ.πόλιν ἐπι- 
And ‘assembling 'a “crowd “great, and those who from eachcity were 
πορευομένων πρὸς αὐτόν, εἶπεν διὰ παραβολῆς. 5 ᾿Εξῆλθεν 
coming to him, he spoke by a parable, *Went *out 
ὁ σπείρων τοῦ σπεῖραι τὸν.σπόρον. αὐτοῦ" καὶ ἐν.τῷ.σπείρειν 
‘the *sower to sow his seed ; and as *sowed 
αὐτὸν ὃ. μὲν ἔπεσεν παρὰ THY ὁδόν, καὶ κατεπατήθη, Kai τὰ 
*he some fell by the way, and it wastrampledupon, and the 


kingdom and the twelve [were] with him, 


0 μου ἐπὶ TOUS πόδας T; μοι ἐπὶ πόδας TA. 
P διέλειπεν T. 
t ἐστιν οὗτος L. 


GLTTraw. 
αἱ ἁμαρτίαι LT. 


ο — τῆς κεφαλῆς (read with her hairs) 
¥ τοὺς πόδας μον GLTrA. 5 αὐτῇ (αὐτῆς T) 


4 τοὺς πόδας μουν 1,. 4 : 
Wavrots to them Tira. * ἐκ out of LrTra. 


VY Ἰωάνα Tr. 


Vill. LUKE. 


πετεινὰ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ κατέφαγεν αὐτό. 6 Kai ἕτερον Τἔπεσεν" 
birds ofthe heaven devoured it. And other fell 


ἐπὶ τὴν πέτραν, καὶ φυὲν ἐξηράνθη, διὰ τὸ μὴ. ἔχειν 
upon 6 _ rock, and having sprung up it withered, because it had not 
ἰκμάδα. 7 καὶ ἕτερον ἔπεσεν ἐν μέσῳ τῶν ἀκανθῶν, Kai 
moisture ; and other fell in [the] midst ofthe thorns, and 
τσυμφυεῖσαι' αἱ ἄκανθαι ἀπέπνιξαν αὐτό. 8 καὶ ἕτερον 
haying sprung up together the thorns choked it; and other 
ἔπεσεν “ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν τὴν ἀγαθήν, καὶ φυὲν ἐποίησεν 
7611 upon the ground the good, and having sprung up produced 


καρπὸν ἑκατονταπλασίονα. Ταῦτα λέγων ἐφώνει, Ὃ ἔχων 
fruit a hundredfold. These things saying hecried, He that has 


ὦτα ἀκούειν ἀκουέτω. 9 Ἐπηρώτων.δὲ αὐτὸν οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ, 
ears tohear let him hear. And %asked *hi this *disciples, 
Ὀλέγοντες,; Tic “εἴη ἡ-παραβολὴ αὕτη! ; 10 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν, 
saying, What may be this parable ? And he said, 

Ὑμῖν δέδοται γνῶναι τὰ μυστήρια τῆς βασιλείας τοῦ 
Toyou ithasbeengiven toknow the mysteries of the kingdom 
θεοῦ: τοῖς.δὲ λοιποῖς ἐν παραβολαῖς, iva βλέποντες μὴ 
of God, but to the rest in parables, that seeing Snot 


βλέπωσιν, Kai ἀκούοντες μὴ-συνιῶσιν. 11 ἜἜστιν.δὲ 
‘they *may see, and hearing they may not understand. Now “is 


.“ « , « , ? ‘ £ , ~ we « ΠῚ 
αὕτη ἡ παραβολή" ὁ σπόρος ἐστὶν ὁ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ" 12 οἱ δὲ 
*this ‘the *parable: The seed is the word of God: andthose 
παρὰ τὴν ὁδὸν εἰσὶν οἱ Δἀκούοντες," εἶτα ἔρχεται ὁ διά- 

by the way are those who hear ; then comes the de- 
Bodog καὶ αἴρει τὸν λόγον ἀπὸ τῆς.καρδίας. αὐτῶν, iva_uy 
vil and takesaway the word from their heart, lest 
πιστεύσαντες σωθῶσιν. 18 οἱ. δὲ ἐπὶ “τῆς πέτρας," οἱ 
having believed they should be saved. Andthose upon the rock, those who 
ὅταν ἀκούσωσιν, μετὰ χαρᾶς δέχονται τὸν λόγον, Kai οὗτοι 
when they hear, with joy receive the word, and _ these 
ῥίζαν οὐκ.ἔχουσιν, οἱ πρὸς καιρὸν πιστεύουσιν, Kai ἐν καιρῷ 
85. root have not, who for a time believe, and in time 
πειρασμοῦ ἀφίστανται. 14 τὸ δὲ εἰς τὰς ἀκάνθας πεσόν, 

of trial fall away. Andthat whichinto the thorns fell, 


οὗτοί εἰσιν οἱ ἀκούσαντες, καὶ ὑπὸ μεριμνῶν Kai πλούτου 
these are they who having heard, and under cares and riches 


kai ἡδονῶν τοῦ βίου πορευόμενοι ἰσυμπνίγονται," Kai οὐ 


and pleasures of life moving along are choked, and *not 
~ Η " ? ~ ~ - ΄ ? 

τελεσφοροῦσιν. 15 τὸ.δὲ ἐν καλῇ γῇ, οὗτοί εἰσιν 

1ᾷο bring to perfection. And that in the good ground, these are 


οἵτινες ἐν καρδίᾳ καλῇ καὶ ἀγαθῇ ἀκούσαντες τὸν λόγον 
they who in aheart right and good having heard the word 
κατέχουσιν, καὶ καρποφοροῦσιν ἐν ὑπομονῷ. 16 Οὐδεὶς.δὲ 
Keep {it], and bring forthfruit with endurance. And no one 
λύχνον ἅψας καλύπτει αὐτὸν σκεύει, ἢ ὑποκάτω κλίνης 
alamp having lighted covers it withavessel,or under a couch 

τίθησιν. ard" ἐπὶ λυχνίας δΒἐπιτίθησιν! ἵνα οἱ 
puts [it], but on alamp-stand puts [10], that they who 
εἰσπορευόμενοι βλέπωσιν TO φῶς. 17 οὐ.γά ἐστιν 
enter in may see the light. For not [anything] is 

ov φανερὸν γενήσεται οὐδὲ ἀπόκρυφον ὃ 
which *not *manifest '‘'shall*become; nor secret which 


κρυπτὸν ὃ 
hidden 


Υ κατέπεσεν fell down Trra. = συνφνεῖσαι 1. 
LTTr[A ]. © αὕτη εἴη ἡ παραβολή T. 
συνπνίγονται ΤΑ. 5 ἀλλὰ τι. 


ἃ ἀκούσαντες heard τττ. 
h χίθησιν LTTraA. 


8 εἰς into GLTTrAW. 


175 


fowls of the air de- 
voured it. 6 Andsome 
fell upon a rock; and 
8.5 soonas it wassprung 
up, it withered away, 
because it lacked mois- 
ture. 7 And some fell 
among thorns; and the 
thorns sprang up with 
it, and choked it. 8 And 
other fell on good 
ground, and sprang 
up, and bare fruit 
an hundredfold. And 
when he had said these 
things, he cried, He 
that hath ears to hear 
let him hear. 9 And 
his disciples asked 
him, saying, What 
might this parable be? 
10 And he said, Unto 
you itis given to know 
the mysteries of the 
kingdom of God: but 
to others in parables; 
that seeing they might 
not see, and hearing 
they might not under- 
stand. 11 Now the pa- 
rable is this: The seed 
is the word of God. 
12 Those by the way 
side are they that hear; 
then cometh the devil, 
and taketh away the 
word out of their 
hearts, lest they should 
believe and be saved. 
13 They on the rock 
are they, which, when 
they hear, receive the 
word with joy; and 
these have no root, 
which for a while be- 
lieve, and in time of 
temptation fall away. 
14 And that which fell 
among thorns are they, 
which, when they have 
heard, go forth, and 
are choked with cares 
and riches and plea- 
sures of this life, and 
bring no fruit to per- 
fection. 15 But that 
on the good ground are 
they, which in an ho- 
nest and good heart, 
having heard the word, 
Keep it, and bring forth 
fruit with patience. 
16 No man, when he 
hath lighted a candle, 
covereth it with a ves- 
sel, or putteth ἐξ under 
a bed; but setteth iton 
a candlestick, thatthey 
which enter in may see 
the light. 17 For no- 
thing is secret, that 
shall not be made 


Ὁ — λέγοντες 
© τὴν πέτραν T. 


176 


manifest; neither any 
thing hid, that shall 
not be knownand come 
abroad. 18 Take heed 
therefore how ye hear: 
for whosoever hath, to 
him shall be given; 
and whosoever hath 
not, from him shall be 
taken even that which 
he seemeth to have. 


19 Then came to him 
his mother and his 
brethren, and could 
not come at him for 
the press. 20 And it 
was told him by cer- 
tain which said, Thy 
mother and thy breth- 
ren stand without, de- 
siring to 566 thee, 
21 And he answered 
and said unto them, 
My mother and my 
brethren are these 
which hear the word of 
God, and do it. 


22 Now it came to 
pass on a certain day, 
that he went into a 
ship with his disciples: 
and he said unto them, 
Let us go over unto 
the other side of the 
lake. And they launch- 
ed forth. 23 But as 
they sailed he fell a- 
sleep: and there came 
down a storm of wind 
on the lake; and they 
were filled with water, 
and were in jeopardy. 
24 And they came to 
him, and awoke him, 
saying, Master, mas- 
ter, we perish. Then 
he arose, and rebuked 
the wind and the rag- 
ing of the water: and 
they ceased, and there 
was a calm, 25 And 
he said unto them, 
Where is your faith? 
And they being afraid 
wondered, saying one 
to another, What man- 
ner of man is this! for 
he commandeth even 
the winds and water, 
and they obey him. 


26 And theyarrived at 
the country of the Ga- 
darenes, which is over 
against Galilee. 27 And 
when he went forth to 
land, there met him 
out of the city a cer- 
tain man, which had 


AOYKAX®. VIII, 


᾿οὐ-γνωσθήσεται! Kai εἰς φανερὸν ἔλθῃ. 18 βλέπετε οὖν 


shall not be known and to light come. Take heed therefore 
πῶς ἀκούετε: ὃς γὰρ. ἂν! ἔχῃ, δοθήσεται αὐτῷ" καὶ 
how ye hear ; for whoever may have, *shall *be *given 'to*him; and 
ὃς. ἂν" μὴ.ἔχῃ, καὶ ὃ δοκεῖ ἔχειν ἀρθήσεται ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 


whoever may not have,even what he seems tohave shall betaken from him, 
19 πΠαρεγένοντο" .δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἡ μήτηρ" Kai οἱ ἀδελ- 
And came to him [his] mother and *breth- 
poi αὐτοῦ, Kai οὐκ.ἠδύναντο συντυχεῖν αὐτῷ διὰ τὸν 


ren lhis, and were not able to get to him because of the 
ὄχλον. 20 °Kai ἀπηγγέλη" αὐτῷ, Ῥλεγόντων," 4 Ἢ. μήτηρ.σου 
crowd. And _ it was told him, saying, Thy mother 
καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοί.σου ἑστήκασιν ἔξω, ἰδεῖν oe θέλοντες." 
and thy brethren are standing without, *to*see *thee ‘wishing. 
21 ‘O.0& ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν “πρὸς αὐτούς," Μήτηρ.μου᾽ καὶ 
Andhe answering said to them, My mother and 


καὶ 
and 


ἀδελφοί. μου οὗτοί εἰσιν οἱ τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ ἀκούοντες 
my brethren “those ‘are who the word of God are hearing 
ποιοῦντες Γαὐτόν." 
doing it. 
22 "Kai ἐγένετο" ἐν μιᾷ τῶν ἡμερῶν Kai αὐτὸς ἐνέβη 
And itcametopass on one ofthe days that he entered 
εἰς πλοῖον Kai οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ, καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, 


into aship, and his disciples, and he said to them, 
Διέλθωμε; εἰς τὸ πέραν τῆς λίμνης" Kai ἀνήχθησαν. 
Let us pass over to the other side of the lake; and they put off. 


καὶ 
and 


κατέβη λαῖλαψ 


, ~ , a 
23 πλεόντων.δὲ αὐτῶν ἀφύπνωσεν 
came down astorm 


And as they sailed he fell asleep ; 
ἀνέμου εἰς THY λίμνην, Kai συνεπληροῦντο, καὶ ἐκινδύνευον. 
of wind on the lake, and they were being filled, and were in danger. 


24 προσελθόντες. δὲ διήγειραν αὐτόν, λέγοντες, Ἐπιστάτα, 
And having come to [him]they aroused him, saying, Master, 


ἐπιστάτα, ἀπολλύμεθα. ‘O.0e YéyeoOeic' ἐπετίμησεν τῷ 
Master, we are perishing. Andhe having arisen rebuked the 
ἀνέμῳ καὶ τῷ κλύδωνι τοῦ VdaTog' Kai ἐπαύσαντο, Kai ἐγένετο 
wind andthe raging ofthe water; and they ceased, and there was 
γαλήνη. 25 εἶπεν. δὲ αὐτοῖς. Ποῦ “ἐστιν! ἡ.πίστις ὑμῶν ; 
a calm. And he said tothem, Where is your faith ? 
Φοβηθέντες.δὲ ἐθαύμασαν, λέγοντες πρὸς ἀλλήλους, Tic ἄρα 
And being afraid they wondered, saying to one another, Who then 
οὗτός ἐστιν, OTL καὶ τοῖς ἀνέμοις ἐπιτάσσει Kai τῷ ὕδατι, 
“this lis, that even the winds hecommands and the water, 
καὶ ὑπακούουσιν αὐτῷ; 
and they obey him ? 
26 Kai κατέπλευσαν sic τὴν χώραν τῶν ΥΓαδαρηνῶν," 
And they sailed down to the ‘country of the Gadarenes, 


ἥτις ἐστὶν ᾿ἀντιπέραν" τῆς Γαλιλαίας. 27 ἐξελθόντι. δὲ. αὐτῷ 


which ἰδ over against Galilee. And on his having gone forth 
ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν ὑπήντησεν "αὐτῷ! ἀνήρ τις ἐκ τῆς πόλεως, 
upon the land *met Shim ‘a *man?certain out of the city, 


i ov μὴ γνωσθῇ in any wise should not be known Lrtra. 


m Ilapeyévero ITr. 
4 + ore TT. 
w δὲ 


(read [him]) Τ{1τᾺ]. 


τ θέλοντές σε Tr. 
ερθεὶς having been aroused Ttr. 
GeraSenes Ltra ; Γεργεσηνῶν Gergesenes Τὶ 


k ἂν yap TTrA. ! ἐὰν L. 
P — λεγόντων LTTr[A]. 

Υ ἐγένετο δὲ LTTrA. 
Υ Τερασηνῶν 
®&— αὐτῷ 


+ αὐτοῦ his T. ° ἀπηγγέλη δὲ LTTrA. 
8 auTots L. t αὐτόν GLTTrA. 
x — ἐστιν (read [is]) LITrAWw. 

- ἀντιπέρα LIrAW ; ἀντίπερα 7. 


VIII. LUKE. 


ὑὸς εἶχεν" δαιμόνια “ἐκ χρύνων ἱκανῶν. καὶ ἱμάτιον οὐκ 
who had demons for a long time, and a Seement 2=not 


ἐνεδιδύσκετο," καὶ ἔν οἰκίᾳ οὐκ ἔμενεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τοῖς μνήμασιν. 
“was wearing, and in a house didnotabide, but in the tombs. 


28 ἰδὼν.δὲ τὸν ᾿Τησοῦν “καὶ! ἀνακράξας προσέπεσεν αὐτῷ, 
But having seen Jesus and having, cried out hefelldown before him, 


καὶ φωνῇ μεγάλῃ εἶπεν, Τί ἐμοὶ καὶ coi, ᾿Ιησοῦ, υἱὲ τοῦ 
and witha*vyoice ‘loud said, What to me cond tothee, Jesus, Son 


θεοῦ τοῦ ὑψίστου; δέομαί σου Mes Bacavicye. 
ofGod the Most High? I heseech of thee ἘΝ ‘thou *mayest *torment. 


29 “Παρήγγελλεν". γὰρ τῷ πνεύματι τῷ ἀκαθάρτῳ ἐξελθεῖν 


For he was charging the spirit the unclean to come out 
ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου" πολλοῖς.γὰρ χρόνοις συνηρπάκει αὐτόν. 
from the man. For many times it had seized him ; 


καὶ fdeopetro,' ἁλύσεσιν καὶ πέδαις φυλασσόμενος, Kai ἔδιαῤ- 
and he was bound, with chains and fetters being kept, and  break- 


ῥήσσων" τὰ δεσμὰ ἠλαύνετο ὑπὸ τοῦ "δαίμονος" εἰς τὰς 
ing the bonds he wasdriven by the demon into the 


ἐρήμους. 30 ἐπηρώτησεν. δὲ αὐτὸν ὁ Ἰησοῦς, 'λέγων," Τί σοι 
deserts. And ?asked Shim Jesus, saying, What *thy 


Κἐστὶν ὄνομα" : ὋὉ.δὲ εἶπεν, Aeyewy" ὅτι δαιμόνια πολλὰ 
lis name? Andhe said, Legion, ee demons many 


εἰσῆλθεν" εἰς αὐτόν. 31 καὶ παρεκάλει" αὐτὸν iva μὴ ἐπι- 
had entered into him, And he besought him that "ποῦ 'he*would 


, ? ~ ? \ » ᾽ - 
τάξῃ αὐτοῖς εἰς τὴν ἄβυσσον ἀπελθεῖν. 82 ἦν. δὲ ἐκεῖ 
command them into the abyss to go away. Now there was there 


ἀγέλη χοίρων ἱκανῶν Bookopévwry' ἐν τῷ Ope’ Kai Ῥπαρε- 
aherd οὗ *swine ‘many feeding in the mountain, and they be- 
κάλουν" αὐτὸν iva ἐπιτρέψῃ αὐτοῖς εἰς ἐκείνους εἰσελθεῖν. 


sought him that he would allow them into those to enter ; 

. > , ? ~ ? , A 4 a , ? A a 
καὶ ἐπέτρεψεν αὐτοῖς. 33 ἐξελθόντα.δὲ τὰ δαιμόνια ἀπὸ τοῦ 
and heallowed them. And Having, gone outthe demons from the 


ἀνθρώπου “εἰσῆλθεν! εἰς τοὺς χοίοους᾽ Kai ὥρμησεν ἡ ἀγέλη 
man they entered into the swine, and “rushed ‘the *herd 


κατὰ TOU κρημνοῦ εἰς τὴν λίμνην, Kai ἀπεπνίγη. 84 ἰδόντες. δὲ 


down the steep into the lake, and were choked. And having ®seen 
ot  BdcKovrEc TO τγεγενημένον" ἔφυγον, Kai Sa7red- 
1those*who “fed [*them] what had taken place fled, and having 


καὶ 


εἰς τοὺς ἀγρούς. 
and 


to the country. 
τἦλθον" πρὸς τὸν 
came to 


οὗ 


θόντες! ἀπήγγειλαν εἰς τὴν πόλιν 


gone away related {it] to the city 
35 ἐξῆλθον. δὲ ἰδεῖν τὸ γεγονός" καὶ 
And they went out to see what had taken place, and 


Ἰησοῦν, καὶ ‘eipov' καθήμενον τὸν ἄνθρωπον ἀφ᾽ τὰ 


Jesus, and found seated the man from whom the 
δαιμόνια "ἐξεληλύθει," ἱματισμένον Kai σωφρονοῦντα. ee 
demons had gone out, clothed and of sound mind, 


τοὺς πόδας τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ. Kai ἐφοβήθησαν. 36 ἀΤ ἢ γειλα ΔΩ: 
the feet of Jesus. And they were afraid. And ‘related 

αὐτοῖς “καὶ οἱ ἰδόντες πῶς ἐσώθη ὁ δαι- 

®tce°them also ‘those *who “δα *seen [*it] how was healed he who had been pos- 


> ἔχων having T. 


put onagarment Trr. ἃ -- καὶ Lrtra. 


177 
devils long time, and 
ware no clothes, nei- 


ther abode in any 
house, but in the 
tombs. 28 When he 


saw Jesus, he cried out, 
and fell down before 
him, and with a loud 
voice said, What have 
Ito do with thee, Jesus, 
thou Son of God most 
high? I beseech thee, 
torment me not. 29(For 
he had commanded 
the unclean spirit to 
come out of the man. 
For oftentimes it had 
caught him: and he 
was kept bound with 
chains and in fetters; 
and he brake the bands, 
and was driven of the 
devil into the wilder- 
ness.) 30 And Jesus 
asked him, saying, 
What is thy name? 
And he said, Legion: 
because many devils 
were entered into him. 
31 And they besought 
him that he would not 
command them to go 
out into the deep. 
32 And there was there 
an herd of many swine 
feeding on the moun- 
tain: and they be- 
sought him that he 
would suffer them to 
enter into them, And 
he suffered them. 
33 Then went the de- 
vils out of the man, 
and entered into the 
swine: and the herd 
ran violently down a 
steep place into the 
lake, and were choked. 
34 When they that fed 
them saw what was 
done, they fled, and 
went and told ἐξέ in the 
city and in the coun- 
try. 35 Then they went 
out to see what was 
done; and came to Je- 
sus, and found the 
man, out of whom the 
devils were departed, 
sitting at the feet of 
Jesus, clothed, and in 
his right mind: and 
they were _ afraid. 
36 They also which saw 
ἐξ told them by what 
means he that was 
possessed of the devils 


© Kat χρόνῳ ἱκανῷ οὐκ ἐνεδύσατο ἱμάτιον and fora cone time did not 
© Παρήγγειλε he charged ΕΘ. 


ReCEGHECUETO Tor 


8 διαρήσσων LTTrA. 5 δαιμονίου LITra. | — λέγων L. Κ ὄνομα ἐστίν LTT. ! Λεγιών 
TTr. τὸ εἰσῆλθεν δαιμόνια πολλὰ LT. παρεκάλουν ἸΠΟΥ͂ besought LTTrA. ° βοσ- 
κομένη 1. παρεκάλεσαν LITrA. 4 εἰσῆλθον LTTrAW. ἵ γεγονὸς GLITrAW. 5 --- ἀπελ 


θόντες GLTTrAW. ἢ ἦλθαν Tr. “ εὗραν τ᾽. * ἐξῆλθεν went out T. 


χ--- καὶ LTT:[4]. 


Ν 


178 


was healed. 37 Then 
the whole multitude of 
the country of the Ga- 
darenes round about 
besought him to depart 
from them; for they 
were taken with great 
fear: and he went up 
into the ship, and re- 
turned back again, 
38 Now the man out of 
whom the devils were 
departed besought him 
that he might be with 
him: but Jesus sent 
him away, saying, 
39 Return tothine own 
house, and shew how 
great things God hath 
done unto thee. And 
he went his way, and 
published throughout 
the whole city how 
great things Jesus had 
done unto him, 


40 And it came to 
pass, that, when Jesus 
was returned, the peo- 
ple gladly received 
him: for they were all 
waiting for him. 
41 And, behold, there 
came a man named 
Jairus, and he was a 
ruler of thesynagogue: 
and he fell down at 
Jesus’ feet, and be- 
sought him that he 
would come into his 
house: 42 for he had 
one only daughter, 
about twelve years of 
age, and she lay a dy- 
ing. But as he went 
the people thronged 
him, 43 And a wo- 
man having an issue 
of blood twelve years, 
which had spent all 
her living upon phy- 
sicians, neither could 
be healed of any, 
44 came behind him, 
and touched the bor- 
der of his garment: 
and immediately her 
issue of blood stanch- 
ed. 45 And Jesus said, 
Who touched me? 
When all denied, Peter 
and they that were 
with him said, Master, 
the multitude throng 
thee and press thee, 
and sayest thou, Who 
touched me? 46 And 
Jesus said, Somebody 
hath touched me: for I 
perceive that virtue is 
gone out of me. 47 And 


Υ ἠρώτησεν LTra. 


(πα a ship) LTTra. 
σοι ἐποίησεν LITrA. 
i καὶ ἐγένετο ἐν τῷ πορεύεσθαι αὐτὸν and it came to pass as he proceeded t. 
1+ αὐτῆς her i. 
Tis ὁ ἁψάμενός μου ; T[TrA}. 


GLTTrAW. 


AOYKAXS. VIIL 
37 Kai Υὐρώτησαν" αὐτὸν ἅπαν τὸ πλῆθος τῆς 
And asked him all the multitude of the 
περιχώρου τῶν *Tadapnver" ἀπελθεῖν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν, ὅτι O68 
country aroundofthe Gadarenes todepart from them, for with*fear 
aN , = > A δὲ é 3 > all ~ 
μεγάλῳ συνείχοντο᾽ αὐτὸς. μβὰς εἰς τὸ" πλοῖον 
‘great they were possessed. Andhe having entered into the ship 
€ ~ 
ὑπέστρεψεν. 88 ἐδέετο! δὲ αὐτοῦ ὁ ἀνὴρ ἀφ᾽ οὗ ἐξελη- 
returned. And *was *°begging **him ‘the 7man “from*whom ‘had 
λύθει τὰ δαιμόνια εἶναι σὺν αὐτῷ. ἀπέλυσεν.δὲ αὐτὸν 


μονισθείς. 
sessed by demons. 


®Ssone “the *demons tobe [taken] with him. But *sent*away “him 
©? ~ j « ‘ , ~ 
“ὁ Ἰησοῦς." λέγων, 39 Ὑπόστρεφε εἰς τὸν.οἴκόν.σου καὶ διηγοῦ 
1 Jesus, saying, Return to thy house and relate 

ad 


a ? , , {| ε , " > ~ > of \ 
doa “ἐποίησεν cou ὁθεός.. Kai ἀπῆλθεν, καθ᾽ ὅλην τὴν 
all that *has*done *for ®thee ‘God. And he departed, through*whole ‘the 
πόλιν κηρύσσων ὅσα ἐποίησεν αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς. 
city proclaiming all that 7had *done “for *him 1 Jesus. 
40 “Ἐγένετο δὲ ἐν" τῷ ὑποστρέψαι! rov’Inoovy ἀπ- 
7Tt came *to ®pass ‘and ‘on ®returning 7Jesus, gladly 
εδέξατο αὐτὸν ὁ ὄχλος. ἦσαν.γὰρ πάντες προσδοκῶντες 
received him the crowd, for they were all looking for 
αὐτόν. 41 Kai ἰδού, ἦλθεν ἀνὴρ ᾧ ὄνομα ἸἨἸάειρος: Kai 
him. And behold, came *a*man whose name [was] Jairus, and 
βαὐτὸς" ἄρχων τῆς συναγωγῆς ὑπῆρχεν, καὶ πεσὼν παρὰ 
he aruler ofthe synagogue was, and having fallen at 
‘ , h ~\? ~ , py ey > ~ > " 
τοὺς πόδας τοῦ" Ἰησοῦ παρεκάλει αὐτὸν εἰσελθεῖν εἰς τὸν 
the feet of Jesus he besought him to come to 
? πὰ « , A ΩΣ > ~ ς ? ~ 
οἷκον.αὐτοῦ" 42 ὅτι θυγάτηρ μονογενὴς ἦν αὐτῷ ὡς ἐτῶν 
his house, because *daughter ‘an7only was tohim, about *years 
δώδεκα, καὶ αὕτη ἀπέθνησκεν. ᾿Ἐν.δὲ τῷ ὑπάγειν αὐτὸν" 
[3014] ‘twelve, and she was dying. And as 7went the 
« wn , ? , ‘ \ ᾿ ? er 
οἱ ὄχλοι συνέπνιγον αὐτόν. 48 Kai γυνὴ οὖσα ἐν ρύσει 
the crowds thronged him. And awoman being with a flux 
αἵματος ἀπὸ ἐτῶν δώδεκα, ἥτις *eic ἰατροὺς" προσαναλώσασα 
of blood since *years ‘twelve, who on physicians having spent 
ὅλ 4 , ] ? ” m+ II ᾽ ᾿ ~ 
ὅλον τὸν βίον οὐκ ἴσχυσεν π'ὑπ᾽"! οὐδενὸς θεραπευθῆναι, 
2whole 3living [her] could by no one be cured, 
44 προσελθοῦσα ὔπισθεν ἥψατο τοῦ κρασπέδου τοῦ ἱματίου 
aving come behind touched the border of “garment 
αὐτοῦ, Kai παραχρῆμα torn ἡ ῥύσις τοῦ.αἵματος. αὐτῆς. 
this, and immediately stopped the flux of her blood. 
45 καὶ εἶπεν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, Tic ὁ ἁψάμενός μου; ᾿Αρνου- 
And said ‘Jesus, Who[isit] that was touching me? SDeny- 
μένων δὲ πάντων, εἶπεν ὁ Πέτρος καὶ ot “per αὐτοῦ," Ἔπι- 
ing land = “all, ®said *Peter ‘and *those’with “him, Mas- 
, cw , , a , ΠῚ ‘ , 
στάτα, οἱ ὄχλοι συνέχουσίν σε καὶ ἀποθλίβουσιν, "Kai λέγεις, 
ter, the crowds throng thee and press, and sayest thou, 
Tic ὁ ἁψάμενός pov;" 46 Ὁ δὲ. Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν, “Haro 
Who [is it] that was touching me? And Jesus said, *Touched 


μου Tic’ éyw.yap ἔ dvr Ρἐξελθοῦσαν" ἀπ᾽ 
| τίς ἐγω.γὰρ ἔγνων ὕναμιν ελθοῦσαν' ἀπ 
*me ‘someone, ΤΌΓΙ knew [that] power went out from 

? Τερασηνῶν Gerasenes LTrA ; Γεργεσηνῶν Gergesenes T. 8 - τὸ 


© — 6 Ἰησοῦς (read he sent) [L]rTra. 
Sovros thisttr. ἢ — τοῦ 7[Tr]. 

* ἰατροῖς 

© ~~ καὶ λέγεις, 


Ὁ ἐδεεῖτο L; ἐδεῖτο TrA. 
e’Ey δὲ τι. ᾧὑποστρέφειν T. 


™ ἀπ᾿ LTTrA. π σὺν αὐτῷ GLTTrA. 
Ρ ἐξεληλυθυῖαν had gone out TTra. 


VIII, IX. LUKE. 
ἐμοῦ. 47 ᾿Ιδοῦσα.δὲ ἡ γυνὴ ὅτι ovbK-éhabeyv, τρέμουσα ἦλ- 
me, And “seeing ‘the 7woman that she was nothid, trembling she 


θεν, καὶ προσπεσοῦσα αὐτῷ, δι ἣν αἰτίαν ἥψατο 
came, and havingfallendownbefore him, for what cause she touched 


αὐτοῦ ἀπήγγειλεν αὐτῷ ἐνώπιον παντὸς τοῦ λαοῦ, Kai ὡς 


him she declared to him before all the people, and how 
ἰάθη παραχρῆμα. 48 0.0& εἶπεν αὐτῇ,  Oapoe,' 

she was healed immediately. Andhe said toher, Be of good courage, 

θύγατερ," ἡ.πίστις. σου σέσωκέν σε πορεύου εἰς εἰρήνην. 
daughter, thy faith has cured thee: go in peace, 
» > ~ ~ »ν ΄ τ A Il “« ? ’ 

49 "Ἐτι. αὐτοῦ.λαλοῦντος ἔρχεταί τις παρὰ" τοῦ ἀρχισυναγώ- 

As yet he was speaking comes one from the ruler of the syna- 


you, λέγων ταὐτῷ," Ὅτι τέθνηκεν ἡ.θυγάτηρ.σου᾽ “μὴ" σκύλλε 
gogue, saying ἴο Βίπη, Has *died ‘thy *daughter; ‘not ‘*trouble 


τὸν διδάσκαλον. 50 Ὁ.δὲ. Ἰησοῦς ἀκούσας ἀπεκρίθη αὐτῷ, 


the teacher. But Jesus having heard answered him, 
χλέγων, Μηὴ.φοβοῦ: μόνον πίστευε." καὶ σωθήσεται. 
saying, Fear not; only believe, and she shall be restored. 


51 Εἰσελθὼν" δὲ εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν οὐκ.ἀφῆκεν εἰσελθεῖν "οὐδένα" 
And having entered into the house he did not suffer *to*go*in ‘any 0Π6 
(lit. Do one) 
> \ , \ b’ , ar 2 , Π ‘ A , 
εἰ μὴ Πέτρον καὶ ῬΤάκωβον καὶ ᾿Ιωάννην," καὶ τὸν πατερα 
except Peter and James and John, and the father 
τῆς παιδὸς Kai τὴν μητέρα. 52 ἔκλαιον. δὲ πάντες καὶ 
of the child and {88 mother. Andthey were*weeping ‘all and 
? , ? 7, c A A / e c ? il ? / 
EKOTTOVTO AUTHYV. 0.08 εἶπεν, Μὴ..κλαίετε ουκ -«ἀπέθαγεν, 
bewailing her. But he = said, Weep not ; she is not dead, 
ἀλλὰ καθεύδει. 58 Kai κατεγέλων αὐτοῦ, εἰδότες Ore ἀπέ- 
but sleeps. And they laughed at him, knowing that she was 
θανεν. 54 αὐτὸς δὲ ἐκβαλὼν ἔξω πάντας, καὶ κρατήσας 
dead, But he having put out all, and having taken hold 


THC-XELOC αὐτῆς, ἐφώνησεν, λέγων, Ἢ παῖς, “ἐγείρου." 55 Kai 
d 


of her hand, cried, saying, Child, arise. And 
ἐπέστρεψεν τὸ. πνεῦμα.αὐτῆς, καὶ ἀνέστη παραχρῆμα: καὶ 
sreturned ther “spirit, and she arose immediately; and 
διέταξεν αὐτῇ δοθῆναι φαγεῖν. ὅθ καὶ 
he directed [that] ‘to Sher [‘something] *should *be “είσεπ to eat. And 


ἐξέστησαν ol.yoveic.avTijc’ 0.0& παρήγγειλεν αὐτοῖς μηδενὶ 
ΞΎΤΘΥΘ *amazed ‘her *parents; and he charged them tonoone 
εἰπεῖν τὸ γεγονός. 
to tell what had happened. 
9 ἰΣυγκαλεσάμενος" δὲ τοὺς δώδεκα Suabnrac αὐτοῦ" ἔδωκεν 
And having called together the twelve disciples ofhim hegave 
αὐτοῖς δύναμιν καὶ ἐξουσίαν ἐπὶ πάντα τὰ δαιμόνια, Kai 
to them power and authority over all the demons, and 
νόσους θεραπεύειν" 2 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν αὐτοὺς κηρύσσειν τὴν 
diseases to heal, and sent them toproclaim the 


βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ ἰᾶσθαι "rove ἀσθενοῦντας." ὃ καὶ 
kingdom of God, and _ to heal those being sick. And 


εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς. Μηδὲν αἴρετε εἰς τὴν ὁδόν᾽ μήτε paBdoue,' 


179 


when the woman saw 
that she was not hid, 
she came trembling, 
and falling down 
before him, she de- 
clared unto him be- 
fore all the people for 
What cause she had 
touched him, and how 
she was healed imme- 
diately. 48 And he 
said unto her, Daugh- 
ter,be of good comfort: 
thy faith hath made 
thee whole; goin peace, 
49 While he yet spake, 
there cometh one from 
the ruler of the syna- 
gogue’s house, saying 
to him, Thy daughter 
is dead; trouble not 
the Master. 50 But 
when Jesus heard it, 
he answered him, say- 
ing, Fear not: believe 
only, and she shall be 
made whole. 51 And 
when he came into the 
house, he suffered no 
man to go in, save 
Peter, and James, and 
John, and the father 
and the mother of the 
maiden. 52 And all 
wept,and bewailed her: 
but he said, Weep not; 
she is not dead, but 
sleepeth. 53 And they 
laughed him to scorn, 
knowing that she was 
dead. 54 And he put 
them all out, and took 
her by the hand, and 
called, saying, Maid, 
arise. 55 And her spi- 
rit came again, and she 
arose straightway:and 
he commanded to give 
her meat. 56 And her 
parents were astonish- 
ed: but he charged 
them that they should 
tell no man what was 
done. 


IX. Then he called 
his twelve disciples 
together, and gave 
them power and autho- 
ri over all devils, 
and to cure diseases, 
2 And he sent them to 
preach the kingdom of 
God, and to heal the 
sick. 3 And he said 
unto them, Take no- 


J thing for your journey, 
he said to them, Nothing take for the way; neither staves, neither staves, nor 
4 — αὐτῷ LTTrA. ¥ — Θάρσει LTTra. 35 θυγάτηρ Tr. t ἀπὸ 1,. ¥ — αὐτῷ {{τὸ]. 


© μηκέτι no longer LTTr. 
gone GLTTrw. 8 τινὰ σὺν αὐτῷ aDy One with him trtra. 
Ἰάκωβον GLTTrAW. ς ov yap (read for she is not dead) LTra. 
KQULTTrA. €ye.pe LTrA. ἔΞυνκαλεσάμενος τ. 
ἀσθενεῖς the sick L{tr]; — τοὺς ἀσθενοῦντας TA. 


χ — λέγων LITr[A]. 


Υ πίστευσον TTra. 


- ἐλθὼν having 


Ὁ Ἰωάννην (Ἰωάνην ττ) καὶ 
d — ἐκβαλὼν ἔξω πάντας 
8 — μαθητὰς αὐτοῦ GTTrAW. 
i ῥάβδον staff GLTTra. 


Β τοὺς 


180 


scrip, neither bread, 
neither money; neither 
have two coats apiece. 
4 And whatsoever 
house ye enter into, 
iuere abide, and thence 
depart. 5 And whoso- 
ever will not receive 
you, when ye go out 
of that city, shake off 
the very dust from 
your feet for a testi- 
mony against them. 
6 And they departed, 
and went through the 
towns, preaching the 
gospel, and healing 
every where. 


7 Now Herod the 
tetrarch heard of all 
that was done by him: 
and he was perplexed, 
because that it was 
said of some, that John 
was risen from the 
dead; 8 and of some, 
that Elias had appear- 
ed; and of others, that 
one of the old pro- 
phets was risen again. 
9 And Herod said,John 
have I beheaded : but 
who is this, of whom 
1 hear such things? 
And he desired to see 
him. 


10 And the apostles, 
when they were re- 
turned, told him all 
that they had done. 
And he took them, and 
went aside privately 
into a desert place 
belonging to the 
city called Bethsaida, 
11 And the people, 
when they knew tt, 
followed him: and he 
received them, and 
spake unto them of 
the kingdom of God, 
and healed them that 
had need of healing. 
12 And when the day 
began to wear away, 
then came the twelve, 
and said unto him, 
Send the multitude a- 
way, that they may 
go into the towns 
and country round a- 
bout, and lodge, and 
get victuals: for we 
are here in a desert 
place. 13 But he said 
unto them, Give ye 
them to eat. And they 
said, We have no more 
but five loaves and 


AOE KAS. ΙΧ. 
μήτε πήραν, μήτε ἄρτον, μήτε ἀργύριον, μήτε "ἀνὰ" δύο 
nor provisionbag, nor bread, nor money, nor each two 


χιτῶνας ἔχειν. 4 καὶ εἰς ἣν.ἂν οἰκίαν εἰσέλθητε, ἐκεῖ μένετε, 
tunics to have. And into whatever house ye may enter, there remain, 
καὶ ἐκεῖθεν ἐξέρχεσθε. 5 καὶ boo ἂν μὴ δέξωνται" ὑμᾶς, 
and thence go forth. And as many as may not receive you, 
? , ? ~ 
ἐξερχόμενοι ἀπὸ τῆς.πόλεως ἐκείνης “kai! τὸν κονιορτὸν ἀπὸ 
going forth from that city even the dust from 
τῶν. ποδὼν ὑμῶν "ἀποτινάξατε," εἰς μαρτύριον ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς. 
your feet shake off, for atestimony against them. 
> , 72 
6 Ἐξερχόμενοι. δὲ διήρχοντο κατὰ τὰς κώμας, εὐαγγελιζό- 
And going forth they passed through the villages, announcing the 
μενοι καὶ θεραπεύοντες πανταχοῦ. 
glad tidings and healing everywhere. 
7 “Heovoev.dé Ἡρώδης ὁ °rerpapyxne' 
And‘heard °of ‘Herod “the “*tetrarch 
Pur’ αὐτοῦ" πάντα Kai διηπόρει, 
Uby 12him ®all, and was perplexed, because 
τίνων, Ὅτι ΦἸωάννης" τἐγήγερται! ἐκ νεκρῶν" 
some, John has been raised from among [the] dead; 
8 ὑπό τινων δέ, “Ore "Ἡλίας! ἐφάνη: ἄλλων δέ, Ὅτι 
by some also, that Elias had appeared; by others also, that 
προφήτης ‘eic! τῶν ἀρχαίων ἀνέστη. 9 Καὶ εἶπεν" Yo! 
a prophet one ofthe ancients had arisen. And said 
« , = 
Ἡρώδης, Ἰωάννην" ἐγὼ ἀπεκεφάλισα" τίς.δὲ ἐστιν οὗτος 
*Herod, John [ beheaded, but who [18 this 
-τ yz Vil ᾽ ’, ~ δ...» , ᾽ - ? , 
οὗ Yéyw' ἀκούω τοιαῦτα; Kai ἐζήτει ἰδεῖν αὐτόν. 
hear suchthings? And he soughttosee him. 
10 Kai ὑποστρέψαντες ot ἀπόστολοι διηγήσαντο αὐτῷ 
And ὅμανΐπρ ‘returned ‘the apostles related to him 
doa ἐποίησαν: καὶ παραλαβὼν αὐτοὺς ὑπεχώρησεν 
whatsoever they haddone. And having taken them he retired 
? ἰδί > 1 , »ν , , " oe , 
κατ᾽ ἰδίαν εἰς *romov ἔρημον πόλεως καλουμένης" Βηθσαϊδά. 
apart into a*place ‘desert ofacity called Bethsaida. 
11 οἱ. δὲ ὄχλοι γνόντες ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῷ" Kai "δεξά- 
But the crowds having known [it] followed him ; and having 
μενος" αὐτοὺς ἐλάλει αὐτοῖς περὶ τῆς βασιλείας τοῦ θεοῦ, 
received them δ βροῖβ tothem concerning the kingdom of God, 
καὶ rove χρείαν ἔχοντας θεραπείας ἰᾶτο. 12 Ἡ.δὲ ἡμέρα 
and those need *having of healing he cured. But the day 
ἤρξατο κλίνειν᾽ mpocehOdyrec.dé ot δώδεκα εἶπον αὐτῷ, ᾿Από- 
began to decline, and having come the twelve said tohim, Dis- 
λυσον τὸν ὄχλον, iva ParehOdyTec! εἰς τὰς κύκλῳ κώμας Kal 
miss the crowd, that haying gone into the “around ‘villages and 
rove! ἀγροὺς καταλύσωσιν, καὶ εὕρωσιν ἐπισιτισμόν᾽ ὅτι ὧδε 
the country they may Ἰοᾶρθ, and may find provisions ; for here 
’ ? , la ? , 4 ? / , ᾽ ~ 
ἐν ἐρήμῳ τόπῳ ἐσμέν. 13 Εἶπεν.δὲ πρὸς αὐτούς, Δότε αὐτοῖς 
in Ξἀοβοσῦ ‘a place we are. But he said ἴο them, Give *to*them 
ἀὑμεῖς φαγεῖν." Οἱ. δὲ “εἶπον," Odx.siciv ἡμῖν πλεῖον ἢ 
lye to eat. But they said, There are not to us more than 


Ta γινόμενα 
7the ®things *being *°done 
διὰ τὸ λέγεσθαι ὑπό 
it wassaid by 


περὶ 
concerning whom 1 


k [ἀνὰ] Tra. 


ὑμεῖς LTA, 


1 δέχωνται LTTrA. 
Ρ — - ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ [LITTrA. 

t σις some One ΤΑ; τὶς Tr. 
Y — ἐγὼ (read ἀκούω 1 hear) 7[ tr]. 
μενος having gladly received brtra. 
ὁ εἶπαν LTTrA. 


τὰ -- xai[{L|fra.  ἀποτινάσσετε ΤΑ. 
4 Ἰωάνης Tr. τ ἠγέρθη was raised Ltr. 
v εἶπεν δὲ LTTrA. Ὑ — ὃ GLTTrAW. 
t πόλιν καλουμένην a city called rrra. 
b πορευθέντες GLTTrA. © — τοὺς T[Tr]A. 


© reTpadpxns Τ. 
3 ἔηλείας τ: 

x Ἰωάνην Tr. 

ἃ ἀποδεξά- 
4 φαγεῖν 


ΤΣ. LUKE. 


f. , ᾿ » ll A 6% ᾽ θύ Π rh ΄ ll θέ c ~ 
πέντε ἄρτοι" καὶ Sdvo ἰχθύες," εἰ-μητι' πορευθεντες ἡμεῖς 
five loaves and two fishes, unless indeed having gone we 
? , , ’΄ A 4 ~ ’ Tt 
ἀγοράσωμεν εἰς πάντα τὸν. λαὺν.τοῦτον βρώματα. 14 Ἤσαν 
should buy for all this people victuals ; *they *were 
ivap" ὡσεὶ ἄνδρες πεντακισχίλιοι. Εἶπεν.δὲ πρὸς τοὺς μαθητὰς 
for about *men five *thousand. Buthesaid to disciples 
αὐτοῦ, Κατακλίνατε αὐτοὺς κλισίας * ava πεντήκοντα. 15 Kai 
this, Make *recline ‘them incompanies by fifties. And 
ἐποίησαν οὕτως, καὶ Ἰἀνέκλιναν! ἅπαντας. 16 Λαβὼν. δὲ 
they did 50, and made ?recline 1411, And having taken 
\ , ” 4 A Ul ᾽ , ? 72 ? 4 
τοὺς πέντε ἄρτους καὶ τοὺς δύο ἰχθύας, ἀναβλέψας εἰς τὸν 
the five loaves and the two fishes, havinglookedup to the 
οὐρανὸν εὐλόγησεν αὐτοὺς Kai κατέκλασεν, Kai ἐδίδου τοῖς 
heaven he blessed them and broke, and gave tothe 
4) ~ m “ Il ~ » A » τ ‘ 9 
μαθηταῖς παρατιθέναι" τῷ ὄχλῳ. 17 καὶ ἔφαγον καὶ ἐχορ- 


disciples to set before the crowd. And theyate and were 
τάσθησαν πάντες" Kai ἤρθη τὸ περισσεῦσαν αὐτοῖς 
?satisfied tall; and wastaken up that which wasover and above to them 
κλασμάτων κόφινοι δώδεκα. 


of fragments *hand “baskets ‘twelve. 
18 Καὶ ἐγένετο ἐντῷ εἶναι αὐτὸν προσευχόμενον "kaTa- 
And itcametopass as *was *he praying a- 
όνας," συνῆσαν αὐτῷ οἱ μαθηταί᾽ Kai ἐπηρώτησεν αὐτούς, 
one, Swere*with ‘him ‘the “disciples, and he questioned them, 
λέγων, Τίνα pe “λέγουσιν οἱ ὄχλοι! εἶναι; 19 Οἱ. δὲ ἀπο- 


saying, Whom °me ‘do*pronounce *the “crowds to be? And they an- 

, Π] > ν. " A 4 © » 4 
κριθέντες Ῥεῖπον." VIwavyny' τὸν βαπτιστήν᾽ adXo1.0& 
swering said, John the Baptist ; and others, 


Ἡλίαν" ἄλλοι.δέ, ὅτι προφήτης τις THY ἀρχαίων ἀνέστη. 
Elias ; and others, that “prophet ‘some ofthe ancients has arisen. 
20 Εἶπεν.δὲ αὐτοῖς, Ὑ μεῖς.δὲ τίνα pe λέγετε 
And he said to them, But ye whom *me ‘do ye 
Σ᾽᾿Αποκριθεὶς. δὲ ὁ ἸΤέτρος" εἶπεν, Tov χριστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ. 21 Ὁ δὲ 


εἶναι; 
ronounce to be? 


And answering Peter said, The Christ of God. And he 
ἐπιτιμήσας αὐτοῖς παρήγγειλεν μηδενὶ 'εἰπεῖν τοῦτο, 
strictly enjoining them charged [them] to no one totell this, 
22 εἰπών, Ὅτι δεῖ τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου πολλὰ 
saying, It is necessary for the Son ofman many things 
παθεῖν, καὶ ἀποδοκιμασθῆναι ἀπὸ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων καὶ ἀρχ- 
to suffer, and to be rejected by the elders and chief 
ἱερέων Kai γραμματέων, Kai amoKxravOijva, Kai τῇ τρίτῃ 
priests and scribes, and to be killed, and the third 


ἡμέρᾳ "ἐγερθῆναι." 25 ΓἜλεγεν.δὲ πρὸς πάντας, Ei τις θέλει 


day to be raised. And he said to all, If any one desires 
ὀπίσω pov “ἐλθεῖν, ἀπαρνησάσθω" ἑαυτόν, καὶ ἀράτω 

after me to come, let him deny himself, and let him take up 

τὸν. σταυρὸν.αὐτοῦ “καθ᾽ ἡμέραν,! καὶ ἀκολουθείτω μοι. 

his cross daily, and let him follow me ; 

24 ὃς.γὰρ. "ἂν" θέλῃ τὴν. Ψυχὴν. αὐτοῦ σῶσαι, ἀπολέσει ad- 

for whoever may desire his life to save, shall lose it ; 


, ist IK > , x A ? τοτὲ e 2 nd = 

THY’ ὃς. δ᾽ ἂν ἀπολέσῃ τὴν.ψυχὴν.αὐτοῦ ἕνεκεν ἐμοῦ, οὗτος 
but whoever may lose his life onaccountof me, he 

ἄρτοι πέντετ. 8 ixOves δύο GLTTrAW. Β μή τι LTrA. 
about fifty each) [Ltr]a. | κατέκλιναν TTr. ™ παραθεῖναι TTrA. 
© οἱ ὄχλοι λέγουσιν TIrA. Ρ εἶπαν LTTrA. 4 Ἰωάνην Tr. 
ἀποκριθεὶς τττΑ. ἔ λέγειν GLTTrA. ¥ ἀναστῆναι to arise LA. 
GLTTra. x— καθ᾽ ἡμέραν L. Υ ἐὰν T. 


i δὲ and τ. 


τ "Ηλείαν 1. 
π ἔρχεσθαι, ἀρνησάσθω 


181 


two fishes; except we 
should go and buy 
meat for all this peo- 
ple. 14 For they were 
about five thousand 
men. And he said τὸ 
his disciples, Make 
them sit down by fif- 
ties in a company. 
15 And they did so, and 
made them 411] sit 
down. 16 Then he took 
the five loaves and the 
two fishes, and looking 
up to heaven, he bless- 
ed them, and brake, 
and gave to the disci- 
ples to set before the 
multitude. 17 And 
they did eat, and were 
all filled: and there 
was taken up of frag- 
ments that remained to 
them twelve baskets. 


18 And it came te 
pass, as he was alone 
praying, his disciples 
were with him: and he 
asked them, saying, 
Whom say the people 
that I am? 19 They 
answering said, John 
the Baptist; but some 
say, Elias; and others 
say, that one of the 
old prophets is risen 
again. 20 He said 
unto them, But whom 
say ye that I am? 
Peter answering said, 
The Christ of God. 
21 And he straitly 
charged them, and 
commanded them to 
tell no man that thing; 
22 saying, The Son of 
man must suffer many 
things, and be rejected 
of the elders and chief 
priests and _ scribes, 
and be slain, and be 
raised the third day. 
23 And he said to them 
all, If any man will 
come after me, let him 
deny himself, and take 
up his cross daily, and 
follow me. 24 For 
whosoever will save 
his life shall lose it: 
but whosoever will lose 
his life for my sake, 
the same shall save it. 


k 4 ὡσεὶ (read 
0 κατὰ μόνας LTTr. 
s Πέτρος δὲ 


182 


25 For what is a man 
advantaged, if he gain 
the whole world, and 
lose himself, or be cast 
away? 26 For whoso- 
ever shall be ashamed 
ofme and of my words, 
of him shall the Son of 
man beashamed, when 
he shall come in his 
own glory, and tn his 
Father’s, and of the 
holy angels. 27 But I 
tell you of a truth, 
there be some standing 
here, which shall not 
taste of death, till 
they see the kingdom 
of God. 


28 And it came to 
pass about an eight 
days after these say- 
ings, he took Peter and 
John and James, and 
went up into a moun- 
tain to pray. 29 And 
as he prayed, the fa- 
shion of his counte- 
nance was altered, and 
his raiment was white 
and glistering. 30 And, 
behold, there talked 
with him two men, 
which were Moses and 
Elias: 21 who appeared 
in glory, and spake of 
his decease which he 
should accomplish at 
Jerusalem. 32 But 
Peter and they that 
were with him were 
heavy with sleep: and 
when they were awake, 
they saw his glory, and 
the two men that stood 
with him. 33 And it 
came to pass, as they 
departed from him, 
Peter said unto Jesus, 
Master, it is good for 
us to be here: and let 
us make three taber- 
nacles; one for thee, 
and one for Moses, and 
one for Elias: not 
knowing what hesaid. 
34 While he thus spake, 
there came a cloud, 
and overshadowed 
them: and they feared 
as they entered into 
the cloud. 35 And 


AOYKAZ%. ΙΧ. 


σώσει αὐτήν. 25 τί.γὰρ ὠφελεῖται ἄνθρωπος, κερδήσας 
shall save it. For what is *profited 1a4?man, having gained 
x , « ε ᾿ " ᾽ , n F; 
τὸν κόσμον ὕλον, ἑαυτὸν. δὃὲὰὲ ἀπολέσας ἢ ζημιωϑείς ; 
the world ‘whole, but himself having destroyed or suffered the loss of ? 
τι ‘ μ᾽ ? ne ‘ 4 ? ἥδ ’ 
26 ὃς.γὰρ.ἂν ἐπαισχυνθῇ με καὶ τοὺς ἐμοὺς λόγους, 
For whoever may have been ashamed of me and my words, 


τοῦτον ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐπαισχυνθήσεται ὅταν ἔλθῃ 
him the Son of man will be ashamed of when heshallcome 


ἐν τῇ δόξῃ αὐτοῦ καὶ Tov πατρὸς Kai τῶν ἁγίων ἀγγέλων. 

in the glory of himself and ofthe Father and ofthe holy angels. 

27 Λέγω.δὲ ὑμῖν ἀληθῶς, εἰσίν τινες τῶν *Hde! “ἑστηκό- 
ButIsay toyou ofatruth, there are some of those here stand- 
Il a ᾽ ib , Il , oe μὴ » 

των. οι οὐυ-μῆ γεύυσονται θανάτου EWC.AV ἴδωσιν 


ing whoinnowise shall taste of death until they shall have seen 
τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ. 
the kingdom of God. 


28 ᾿Ἐγένετο.δὲ μετὰ τοὺς. λόγους τούτους ὡσεὶ ἡμέραι ὀκτὼ 
Anditcameto pass after these words about “days ‘eight 
“καὶ! παραλαβὼν “τὸν! Πέτρον καὶ “Ιωάννην" καὶ ᾿Ιάκωβον 
that having taken Peter and John and James 
᾽ , 2 " ” , ‘ ? , 
ἀνέβη εἰς τὸ ὄρος προσεύξασθαι. 29 καὶ ἐγένετο 
he went up into the mountain to pray. And it came to pass 
ἐν.τῷ.προσεύχεσθαι αὐτὸν τὸ εἶδος τοῦ.προσώπου.αὐτοῦ 
as *prayed the the appearance of his face 
ἕτερον, Kai ὁ ἱματισμὸς. αὐτοῦ λευκὸς ἐξαστράπτων. 
{became] altered, and his clothing white effulgent. 
‘ ? , ” , , ᾽ ~ o - 
30 Καὶ ἰδού, ἄνδρες δύο συνελάλουν αὐτῷ, οἵτινες ἦσαν 
And behold, *men ‘two talked with him, who were 


Μωσῆς! καὶ ®HXiac! 31 οἱ ὀφθέντες ἐν δόξῃ ἔλεγον" τὴν 


Moses and Elias, who appearing in glory spoke of 
ἔξοδον.αὐτοῦ ἣν ‘éuedXev" πληροῦν ἐν Ἱερουσαλήμ. 
his departure which he wasabout to accomplish in Jerusalem. 


32 ὁ δὲ Πέτρος καὶ ot σὺν αὐτῷ ἦσαν βεβαρημένοι ὕπνῳ. 
But Peter and those with him were oppressed with sleep - 
διαγρηγορήσαντες.δὲ Keldov" τὴν.δόξαν.αὐτοῦ, καὶ τοὺς δύο 
and having awoke fully they saw his glory, and the two 
ἄνδρας τοὺς συνεστῶτας αὐτῷ. 88 καὶ ἐγένετο ἐγιτῷ.δια- 
men who ύοοῦᾶ with him. And it came to pass as “de- 
χωρίζεσθαι αὐτοὺς am αὐτοῦ, εἶπεν ὁ Πέτρος πρὸς τὸν 
parted these from him, *said ‘Peter to 
Inoovy, Επιστάτα, καλόν ἐστιν ἡμᾶς ὧδε εἶναι" καὶ ποιήσωμεν 
Jesus, Master, good itis forus here tobe; and let us make 
σκηνὰς τρεῖς, μίαν σοί, καὶ ‘Mwoei μίαν," καὶ μίαν 
2tabernacles ‘three, one forthee, and for Moses one, and one 
™Hyia," μὴ εἰδὼς ὃ λέγει. 84 ταῦτα.δὲ αὐτοῦ.λέγοντος 
for Elias, not knowing what heissaying. But these things as he was saying 
Ἵν , . ἢ} ΄, Π ᾽ as) 20 ὲ Ϊ᾽ ad 
ἐγένετο νεφέλη καὶ "ἐπεσκίασεν! αὐτούς" ἐφοβήθησαν δὲ ἐν.τῷ 
“came a*cloud and overshadowed them, and they feared as 
οξκείνους εἰσελθεῖν" εἰς τὴν νεφέλην. 35 Kai φωνὴ ἐγένετο ἐκ 


there came a voice out those entered into the’ cloud: and avoice came outof 
of the cloud, saying, ~ , , ἥσε 2 ? εἴ αὖ . p2Z αι ἢ 
This is my beloved Τῆς νεφέλης, λέγουσα, Οὗτος ἔστιν οαυἱός.μου ὁ Ῥαγαπητὸς 
Son: hear him. 36 And the cloud, saying, This is my Son the beloved ; 

2 αὐτοῦ TTrA Ὁ ἑστώτων GLTTAW. > γεύσωνται Should taste GLTTrAw. © [καὶ] L. 
¢ — τὸν GLTTrAW. © Ἰωάνην Tr. f Mwiioys LTTrAw. & “HAcias τ΄. h + [δὲ] and x. 
' ἥμελλεν 1. Χ εἶδαν τι. ι μίαν Μωσεῖα; μίαν Mwioet LTTrAW. m ᾿Ηλείᾳ T. 


L ; 
5 ἐπεσκίαζεν TTrA. 


© εἰσελθεῖν αὐτοὺς they entered Trra. P ἐκλελεγμένος Chosen ΤΊτΑ. 


IX. LUKE. 


? ~ 3 [4 . ‘ ? ~ Ud A 1 c , 
αὐτοῦ ἀκούετε. 36 Kai év.rp γενέσθαι τὴν φωνὴν εὑρέθη 
shim = thear *ye. And as occurred the voice *was “found 
96!’ Ἰησοῦς μόνος. Kai αὐτοὶ ἐσίγησαν, kai οὐδενὶ ἀπήγγειλαν 

l1Jesus alone: and they weresilent, and tonoone they told 
ἐκείναις ταῖς ἡμέραις οὐδὲν ὧν ἑωράκασιν." 

those days anything of what they had seen. 

37 ‘Eyévero.dé "ἐνὶ τῇ ἑξῆς ἡμέρᾳ, κατελθόντων. αὐτῶν 

And itcame to pass on the next day, on their having come down 
ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄρους, συνήντησεν αὐτῷ ὄχλος πολύς. 38 Καὶ 
from the mountain, *met Shim ‘a*crowd “great. And 
ἰδού, ἀνὴρ ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄχλου ἀνεβόησεν," λέγων, Διδάσκαλε, 
behold, aman from the crowd cried out, saying, Teacher, 
δέομαί σου "ἐπίβλεψον! ἐπὶ τὸν.υἱόν.μου, ὅτι μονογενής 
I beseech thee look upon my son, for an only child 
πέστίν pou! 89 καὶ ἰδού, πνεῦμα λαμβάνει αὐτὸν Kai ἐξ- 

heis tome: and behold, aspirit takes him and sud- 
αἰφνης κράζει, Kai σπαράσσει αὐτὸν μετὰ ἀφροῦ, 
denly hecries out, and it throwsinto‘convulsions *him with foaming, 
καὶ μόγις ἀποχωρεῖ ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, συντρίβον αὐτόν. 40 Kai 
and with difficulty departs from him, bruising him, And 
ἐδεήθην πον; ΠΕ τ ΟΣ τ ἵνα “ἐκβάλλωσιν᾽ αὐτό, καὶ οὐκ 
I besought thy disciples that they might cast out it, and *not 
ἠδυνήθησαν. 41 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν. ᾿ γενεὰ 
‘they *were able. And ?answering Jesus said, O generation 
ἄπιστος Kai διεστραμμένη, ἕως πότε ἔσομαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς καὶ 
unbelieving and perverted, until when shallIlbe with you and 

? , « ~ 3 , y vO ‘A Cx F. Ι 492 "E δὲ 
ἀνέξομαι υμων: προσαγαγε WOE TOYV.ULOV.COU. TLOE 
bear with you? Bring hither thy son. But *yet 
προσερχομένου.αὐτοῦ ἔῤῥηξεν αὐτὸν τὸ δαιμόνιον καὶ συν- 
las *he >was coming near *dashedSdown *him ‘the *demon and threw 
εσπάραξεν" ἐπετίμησεν.δ ὁ Ἰησοῦς τῷ πνεύματι τῷ 
{him] intoconvulsions. And *rebuked 1Jesus the spirit the 
ἀκαθάρτῳ, καὶ ἰάσατο τὸν παῖδα, καὶ ἀπέδωκεν αὐτὸν τῷ 

unclean, and healed the child, and _ gave back him to 
πατρὶ αὐτοῦ. 48 ἐξεπλήσσοντο.δὲ πάντες ἐπὶ τῇ μεγαλειότητι 

his father, And *were astonished ‘all at the Majesty 
τοῦ θεοῦ. 
of God. 
Πάντων.δὲ θαυμαζόντων ἐπὶ πᾶσιν οἷς ἐποίησεν" “ὁ Ἰη- 
And [845] 81 were wondering at all which 2did Je- 
σοῦς," εἶπεν πρὸς Tovc.uabnrac.adrov, 44 Θέσθε ὑμεῖς εἰς τὰ 
sus, he said to his disciples, Lay *by ‘ye into 
ae ε ~ Sy , , Εν. x CAN ~ ? ΄ 2 
ὦτα. ὑμῶν τοὺς.λόγους. τούτους" ὁ.γὰρουϊὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου μὲλ- 


5 
ἐν 
in 


your ears these words: For the Son of man is a- 
λει παραδίδοσθαι εἰς χεῖρας ἀνθρώπων. 45 Οἱ. δὲ ἠγνόουν 
bout to be delivered up into(the] hands of men. But they understood not 


τὸ ῤῥῆμα.τοῦτο, Kai ἦν παρακεκαλυμμένον am αὐτῶν ἵνα 
this saying, and it was veiled from them that 
μὴ-αἴσθωνται αὐτό Kai ἐφοβοῦντο “épwrijca' αὐτὸν 
they should not perceive it. And they feared to ask him 
περὶ τοῦ ῥήματος τούτου. 46 Εἰσῆλθεν. δὲ διαλογισμὸς ἐν 
concerning "saying this. But *came‘*up ‘a reasoning among 
? ~ , / n » / ? ~ « ,ὺ ~ c? A ll 
αὐτοῖς, τό, τίς ἂν εἴη μείζων αὐτῶν. 47 ὁ.δὲ Ἰησοῦς ἰδὼν 
them, this, who might be greatest of them. And Jesus having seen 


ᾳ — ὃ LTTrAW. τ ἑώρακαν TTrA. s — ἐν T[Tr|a. 
@iTrAW. ἥἴ μοι ἐστιν LTTrTAW. 1 ἐκβάλωσιν GLITrAW. 
GLTTra. 8 -- ὃ Ἰησοῦς (read ἐποίει he was doing) ΤΊτΑ. 


t ἐβόησεν LTTrA. 
Υ Tov υἱόν σον ὧδε GW. 
Ὁ ἐπερωτήσαι L. 


188 


when the voice was 
past, Jesus was found 
alone. And they kept 
it close, and told no 
man in those days any 
of those things which 
they had seen. 


37 And it came to 
pass, that on the next 
day, when they were 
come down from the 
hill, much people met 
him, 38 And, behold, 
a man of the company 
cried out, saying, Mas- 
ter, I beseech thee, look 
upon my son: for he 
is mine only child. 
59 And, lo, a spirit 
taketh him, and he 
suddenly crieth out; 
andit teareth him that 
he foameth again, and 
bruising him hardly 
departeth from him. 
40 And I besought thy 
disciples to cast him 
out; and they could 
not. 41 And Jesus 
answering said, O 
faithless and perverse 
generation, how long 
shall I be with you, 
and suffer you? Bring 
thy son hither. 42 And 
as he was yet a com- 
ing, the devil threw 
him down, and tare 
him. And Jesus re- 
buked the unclean 
spirit, and healed the 
child, and delivered 
him again to his fa- 
ther. 43 And they 
were all amazed at 
the mighty power of 
God. 


But while they won- 
dered every one at all 
things which Jesus did, 
he said unto his disci- 
ples, 44 Let these say- 
ings sink down into 
your ears: for the Son 
of man shall be de- 
livered into the hands 
of men. 45 But they 
understood not this 
saying, and it was hid 
from them, that they 
perceived it not: and 
they feared to ask him 
of that saying. 46 Then 
there arose a reasoning 
among them, which of 
them should be great- 
est. 47 And Jesus, per- 
ceiving the thought of 


Vv ἐπιβλέψαι 

: ἐποίει 
? Ν 

© εἰδὼς T. 


184 


their heart, took a 
ebild, and set him by 
him, 48 and said unto 
them, Whosoever shall 
receive this child in 
my name receiveth 
me: and whosoever 
shall receive me re- 
ceiveth him that sent 
me: for he that is least 
among you all, the 
same shall be great. 
49 And John ar.swered 
and said, Master, we 
saw one casting out 
devils in thy name; 
and we forbad him, 
because he followeth 
not with us. 50 And 
Jesus said unto him, 
Forbid him not: for 
he that is not against 
us is for us. 


51 And it came to 
pass, when the time 
was come that he 
should be received up, 
he stedfastly set his 
face to go to Jerusa- 
lem, 52 and sent mes- 
sengers before his face: 
and they went, and 
entered into a village 
of the Samaritans, to 
make ready for him. 
53 And they did not 
receive him, because 
his face was as though 
he would go to Jeru- 
salem. 54 And when 
his disciples James 
and John saw this, 
they said, Lord, wilt 
thouthat we command 
fire to come down 
from heaven, and con- 
sume them, even as 
Elias did? 55 But he 
turned, and rebuked 
them, and said, Ye 
know not what man- 
ner of spirit ye are of, 
56 For the Son of man 
is not come to destroy 
men’s lives, but tosave 
them. And they went 
to another village. 


57 And it came to 
pass, that, asthey went 
in the way, a certain 
man said unto him, 
Lord, I will follow 
thee whithersoever 
thou goest. 58 And Je- 


AO YK AS. IX. 
τὸν διαλογισμὸν τῆς.καρδίας. αὐτῶν, ἐπιλαβόμενος “παιδίου" 
the reasoning of their heart, having taken hold of a little child 


ἔστησεν αὐτὸ παρ᾽ ἑαυτῷ, 48 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Ὃς.“ἐὰν" 
he set it by him, and = said to them, Whoever 


δέξηται τοῦτο τὸ παιδίον ἐπὶ τῷ.ὀνόματί. μου, ἐμὲ δέχεται" 


shall receive this little child in my name, me_ receives ; 
4 oe f2\ " 2 ft , 4 ? , , 

καὶ Oc-féav' ἐμὲ δέξηται, δέχεται τὸν ἀποστείλαντά με. 

and whoever me _ shall receive, receives him who sent me, 


0.yap μικρότερος ἐν πᾶσιν ὑμῖν ὑπάρχων οὗτος Sorat 
For he who less Samong ‘all *you lis he sha}l be 
μέγας. 49 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ *o'lwavync' εἶπεν, ᾿Επιστάτα, 
great. And answering John said, Master, 


wy” , 2... «ὦ ~ 3 , , ? , k 38 Π , Ὁ 
εἴδομέν τινα ἐπὶ τῷ. ὀνόματί. σον ἐκβάλλοντα *ra' δαιμόνια 
we saw some one in thy name casting out the demons, 
kai ἐκωλύσαμεν αὐτόν, ὅτι οὐκ. ἀκολουθεῖ μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν 50 'Kai 


and we forbade him, because hefollowsnot with us. And 
εἶπεν" πρὸς αὐτὸν ™o"’Inoovc, Μὴ.κωλύετε᾽' ὃς. γὰρ οὐκ 
3gaid sto *him 4Jesus, Forbid not; for whosoever “not 
» ? n,* ~ iT] « n,* ~ Π] ? 
ἔστιν καθ᾽ "ἡμῶν," ὑπὲρ "ἡμῶν" ἐστιν. 

‘is against us, for us is. 

51 ’Eyévero.dt ἐνιτῷ.συμπληροῦσθαι τὰς ἡμέρας τῆς 


And it came to pass when were being fulfilled the days of the 
οἀναλήψεως" αὐτοῦ, καὶ αὐτὸς TO.7pdcwrovPabrov' “ἐστή- 
receiving him up, that he his face sted- 


ιξεν' τοῦ πορεύεσθαι εἰς “Iepovcadnp. 52 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν 
fastly set to go to erusalem, And he sent 


ἀγγέλους πρὸ προσώπου αὐτοῦ. Kai πορευθέντες εἰσῆλθον 
messengers before ?face this. And having gone they entered 


? r ’ἅ ~ ΤΙ τ « , ᾽ ~~ 5 ‘ ? 
εἰς κώμην Σαμαρειτῶν," ὥστε ἑτοιμάσαι αὐτῷ. δ8 καὶ οὐκ 


into avillage οὗ Samaritans, 580 85 tomake ready for him. And *not 
ἐδέξαντο αὐτόν, Ort τὸ.πρόσωπον.αὐτοῦ ἣν πορευό- 
‘they *didreceive him, because his face was [as] gOo- 


μενον εἰς Ἱερουσαλήμ. 54 ἰδόντες. δὲ οἱ. μαθηταὶ. "αὐτοῦ! 


ing to Jerusalem, And seeing [it] his disciples 
᾿Ιάκωβος καὶ ᾿ΙΤωάννης" Velzrov,' Κύριε, θέλεις εἴπω- 
James and John said, Lord, wilt thou[that] we should 
μεν πῦρ καταβῆναι “ἀπὸ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, καὶ ἀναλῶσαι αὐτούς, 
call fire tocomedown from the heaven, and consume them, 
Yoo καὶ Ἡλίας ἐποίησεν" ; 55 Στραφεὶς.δὲ ἐπετίμησεν αὐτοῖς, 
as also. Elias did? But turning herebuked them, 
"kai εἶπεν, Οὐκ.οἴδατε οἵου πνεύματός ἐστε ὑμεῖς" SG τὸ. γὰρ 
and said, Ye know ποὺ of what spirit Yare = "ye. For the 
υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου οὐκιἦλθεν ψυχὰς ἀνθρώπων ἀπολέσαι, 
Son of man did not come [the] lives of men to destroy, 
2 s ~ rT] Δ. ’ > Blue , 
ἀλλὰ σῶσαι." Kai ἐπορεύθησαν εἰς ἑτέραν κώμην. 
but tosave. And they went to another village. 
57’ Eyévero.6é' πορευομένων αὐτῶν ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ εἶπεν τις 
Anditcametopass 88 they were going in the way “said ‘some “one 
A ? , ΕΣ , « b n iT] > , c 4 t 
πρὸς αὐτόν, ᾿Ακολουθήσω σοι ὕπου "ἂν" ἀπέρχῃ, “κύριε. 
to him, I willfollow thee wherever thoumayestgo, Lord. 


4 παιδίον Tra. 
« — τὰ LITrAW. 
LTTrA. 


—oyap... 


ε av Le 
1 εἶπεν δὲ LTTrA. 
P [avrov] LTrA. 
* — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) 1[trA | 
¥ — ὡς καὶ Ἡλίας ἐποίησεν TTr[A]. 

σῶσαι G. 


Β ἐστιν iS LTTrA. h — otra. i’Iwavys Tr. 
m— ὁ Τ[Α]. 0 ὑμῶν you @LTTra. ° ἀναλήμψεως 
4 ἐστήρισεν TTrA. τ πόλιν Σαμαριτῶν a city of Samaritans Ὁ. 

τ Ἰωάνης Tr. “ εἶπαν ὙΤΓΑ. x ex Out of L, 
2 — καὶ εἶπεν (verse 55) .... σῶσαι (verse 56) LTTrA ; 
Ὁ ἐὰν LTrA. © — κύριε LTTr[A]. 


fay T, 


* Kat and rtra. 


IX, X. LUKE. 


58 Kai εἶπεν αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, At ἀλώπεκες φωλεοὺς ἔχουσιν, 
And 7said ὅἴο *him Jesus, The foxes holes have, 
καὶ τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ κατασκηνώσεις" ὁ.δὲ υἱὸς τοῦ 

and the birds ofthe heaven nests ; but the Son 

ἀνθρώπου οὐκιἔχει ποῦ THY κεφαλὴν κλίνῃ. 59 Εἶπεν. δὲ 
of man has not where the head he may lay. And hesaid 

πρὸς ἕτερον, ᾿Ακολούθει por. Ὁ .δὲ εἶπεν, Κύριε," ἐπίτρεψόν 
to another, Follow me. Buthe said, Lord, allow 


μοι ἐἀπελθόντι πρῶτον" θάψαι τὸν.πατέρα.μου. 60 Εἶπεν. δὲ 
me going away first to bury my father. But *said 


> ~ fs ᾽ ~ It a 4 A / A ε ~ 
αὐτῷ [ὁ Ἰησοῦς, ΓΑφες τοὺς νεκροὺς θάψαι τοὺς ἑαυτῶν 
30 *him iJesus, Leave the dead to bury their own 


νεκρούς" σὺ.δὲ ἀπελθὼν διάγγελλε τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ. 
dead; but thou going forth declare the kingdom of God. 


61 Εἶπεν.δὲ καὶ ἕτερος, ᾿Ακολουθήσω σοι, κύριε' πρῶτον. δὲ 
And?said “also ‘another, Iwillfollow thee, Lord, but first 


ἐπίτρεψόν μοι ἀποτάξασθαι τοῖς εἰς τὸν. οἵκόν. μου. 62 Εἶπεν. δὲ 


allow me totake leave of those at my house, But ?said 
ἐπρὸς αὐτὸν ὁ Ἰησοῦς." Οὐδεὶς Βέἐπιβαλὼν!" τὴν.χεῖρα. λαὐτοῦ" 
510 *him 1Jesus, No one having laid his hand 
ἐπ᾿ ἄροτρον, καὶ βλέπων εἰς τὰ ὀπίσω, εὔθετός ἐστιν 
upon [the] plough, and looking on thethings behind, *fit tis 
Κεἰὶς τὴν βασιλείαν" τοῦ θεοῦ. 
for the kingdom of God. 


‘ δὲ ~ 2 La « , ] by | ε,,.1 ε 
10 Mera.dé ταῦτα ἀνέδειξεν ὁ κύριος ἱκαὶ" ἑτέρους ἐβδο- 
Now after these things “appointed ‘the *Lord ‘also ‘others “seven- 
pnKovra™, καὶ ἀπέστειλεν αὐτοὺς ἀνὰ.δύο πρὸ προσώπου 
ty, and sent them twoand two before *face 
αὐτοῦ, εἰς πᾶσαν πόλιν Kai τόπον οὗ "ἔμελλεν" αὐτὸς 
this, into every city and place where he was about himself 
ἔρχεσθαι. Ἔλεγεν οὖν" πρὸς αὐτούς, Ὃ μὲν θερισμὸς 


to come, He said therefore to them, The indeed ‘harvest [is] 
πολύς. οἱ. δὲ ἐργάται ὀλίγοι: δεήθητε οὖν τοῦ κυρίου 
great, but the workmen [are] few. Supplicate therefore the Lord 
Tov θερισμοῦ, Owe Ῥέκβάλλῃ ἐργάτας! εἰς τὸν θερισμὸν 
ofthe harvest, that he may send out workmen into “harvest 
αὐτοῦ. 3 ‘Yrayere’ ἰδού, “ἐγὼ" ἀποστέλλω ὑμᾶς we ἄρνας ἐν 
this. Go; lo, I send forth you as lambs in 


μέσῳ λύκων. 4 μὴ βαστάζετε "βαλάντιον" μὴ πήραν 

{{86] midst of wolves. Neither carry purse nor provision bag 
4undé" ὑποδήματα᾽ ‘kai! μηδένα κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ἀσπάσησθε. 
nor sandals, and noone on the way salute. 
5 Etc-ijv.0 ἂν τοἰκίαν εἰσέρχησθε," πρῶτον λέγετε, Εἰρήνη τῷ 
Andinto whatever house ye may enter, first say, Peace 
οἴκῳ.τούτῳ. 6 Kai ἐὰν "μὲν" ἐκεῖ *vloc εἰρήνης, Τέπανα- 
to this house. And if indeed be there ason of peace, sshall 
παύσεται" ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν ἡ εἰρήνη. ὑμῶν" εἰ δὲ μήγε, ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς 
*rest Supon Sit lyour “peace ; butif notso, to you 
> ah > > ~ A ~ D2 ὧν; , 27 θί I ‘ 
ἀνακάμψει. ἐν αὐτῇ δὲ τῇ οἰκίᾳ μένετε, Ξἐσθίοντες" Kai 
it shall return. 7In *the *same ‘and house abide, eating and 


4 — Κύριε T. 
᾿Ιησοῦς (read he said) [u)rtra. 
ifavrov] Tr. * τῇ βασιλείᾳ LTTrA. 
° δὲ and (he said) Lrtra. 
arog. I send forth) τ τὰ. τ᾿ βαλλάντιον LTTrAW. 
οἰκίαν TTrA ; οἰκίαν εἰσέλθητε τι. 
παήσεται Τ. 2 ἔσθοντες LTTrA. 


1 [καὶ] Tra. m + [δύο] two L. 


5 μὴ TTrA. 
w — μὲν GLTTrAW. 


© πρῶτον ἀπελθεῖν first to go away L; πρῶτον ἀπελθόντι TTr. 
& δ᾽ Ἰησοῦς πρὸς αὐτόν LTr; — πρὸς αὐτὸν A. 


P ἐκβάλῃ ἐργάτας GLW ; ἐργάτας ἐκβάλῃ TIrA. 
t— καὶ 1. 


x + ὁ the (son) Ε. 


186 


sus said unto him, 
Foxes have holes, and 
birds of the air Aave 
nests ; but the Son of 
man hath not where to 
lay his head. 59 And 
he said unto another, 
Follow me. But he 
said, Lord, suffer me 
first to go and bury 
my father. 60 Jesus 
said unto him, Let the 
dead bury their dead: 
but go thou and preach 
the kingdom of God. 
61 And another also 
said, Lord, I will fol- 
low thee; but let me 
first go bid them fare- 
well,which are at home 
at my house. 62 And 
Jesus said unto him, 
No man, having put 
his hand to the plough, 
and looking back, is fit 
for the kingdom of 
God. 


X. After these things 
the Lord appointed 
other seventy also, and 
sent them twoand two 
before his face into 
every city and place, 
whither he himself 
would come. 2 There- 
fore said he unto them, 
The harvest truly ὦ 
great, but the labour- 
ers are few: pray ye 
therefore the Lord of 
the harvest, that he 
would send forth la- 
bourers into his har- 
vest. 3 Go your ways: 
behold, I send you 
forth as lambs among 
wolves. 4 Carry nei- 
ther purse, nor scrip, 
nor shoes: and salute 
no man by the way. 
5 And into whatsoever 
house ye enter, first 
say, Peace be to this 
house. 6 And if the 
son of peace be there, 
your peace shall rest 
upon it: if not, it shalle 
turn to you again. 
7 And in the same 
house remain, eating 
and drinking such 
things as they give: for 
the labourer is worthy 


f—6 
h ἐπιβάλλων L. 
n ἤμελλεν LTTrAW. 
a — ἐγὼ (read 

¥ εἰσέλθητε 
Y ἐπανα- 


180 


of his hire. Go not 
from house to house. 
8 And into whatsoever 
city ye enter, and the 
receive you, eat suc 
things as are set be- 
fore you: 9 and heal 
the sick that are there- 
in, and say unto them, 
The kingdom of God 
is come nigh unto you, 
10 But into whatsoever 
city ye enter, and they 
receive you not, go 
your ways out into the 
streets of the same, 
and say, 11 Even the 
very dust of your city, 
which cleaveth on us, 
we do wips off against 
you: notwithstanding 
be ye sure of this, that 
the kingdom of God is 
come nigh unto you, 
12 But I say unto you, 
that it shall be more 
tolerable in that day 
for Sodom, than for 
that city. 13 Woeunto 
thee, Chorazin! woe 
unto thee, Bethsaida ! 
for ifthe mighty works 
had been done in Tyre 
and Sidon, which have 
been done in you, they 
had a great while ago 
repented, sitting in 
sackcloth and ashes, 
14 But it shall be more 
tolerable for Tyre and 
Sidon at the judg- 
ment, than for you. 
15 And thou, Caperna- 
um, which art exalted 
to heaven, shalt be 
thrust down to hell. 
16 He that heareth 
yon heareth me; and 

e that despiseth you 
despiseth me; and he 
that despiseth me de- 
spiseth him that sent 
me. 


17 And the seventy 
returned again with 
joy, saying, Lord, even 
the devils are subject 
unto us through thy 
name. 18 And he said 
unto them, [ beheld 

*Satan as lightning 
fall from heaven. 
19 Behold, I give unto 
you power to tread on 
serpents and scorpions, 
and over all the power 
of the enemy: and 
nothing shall by any 
means hurt you. 


&® — - ἐστιν (read [is]) LTTrA. 
πόδας to the feet (-[ἡμῶν] ofus A) LITrA. 
5 Xopaciv EGLW ; Χοραζείν rrr, 
1 μὴ LTTrA. 


ναούμ, LTTrAW. 
° + τοῦ the Tra. 


A OY KK AS. X. 
πίνοντες Ta map αὐτῶν' akwc.yap ὁ ἐργάτης 
drinking the things [supplied] by them ; for worthy *the “workman 
τοῦ.μισθοῦ. αὐτοῦ Stor." μὴ Bera αι τε ἐξ οἰκίας εἰς οἰκίαν. 

of *his Shire lis. move not from house to _ house, 
8 καὶ εἰς ἣν."δ᾽".ἂν πόλιν εἰσέρχησθε, καὶ δέχωνται ὑμᾶς, 
And into whatever 8150 ‘city yemayenter, and theyreccive you, 
ἐσθίετε τὰ παρατιθέμενα ὑμῖν, 9 Kai θεραπεύετε τοὺς ἐν 
eat the things set before you, and heal the 7in 

> “ 9. ~ ‘ , ? ~ a” Dyigi Pe ~ « 
αὐτῇ ἀσθενεῖς, καὶ λέγετε αὐτοῖς, “Ἤγγικεν ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς ἡ βασι- 


it ‘sick, and say to them, Hasdrawnnearto you the king- 
λεία τοῦ θεοῦ. 10 εἰς. ἣν.δ᾽ ἂν πόλιν “εἰσέρχησθε," Kai μὴ 
dom of God. But into whatever city yemayenter, and “not 


δέχωνται ὑμᾶς, ἐξελθόντες εἰς τὰς.πλατείας. αὐτῆς, εἴπατε, 
‘they “ἄο receive you, having goncout into its streets, say, 


11 Kai τὸν κονιορτὸν τὸν κολληθέντα ἡμῖν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως 


Even the dust which clung to us out of city 
ὑμῶν ἃ ἀπομασσόμεθα ὑμῖν: πλὴν τοῦτο γινώσκετε, ὅτι 
1your we wipe off against you; yet this know, that 


ἤγγικεν “ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς" ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ. 12 λέγω."δὲ! ὑμῖν, 
has drawnnear to you the kingdom of God. And I say to you, 
ὅτι Σοδόμοις ἐν τῇ-ἡμέρᾳ.ἐκείνῃ ἀνεκτότερον ἔσται ἢ τῇ 
that forSodom in that day more tolerable it shall be than 
πόλει.ἐκείνῃ. 13 Οὐαί σοι, ΞΧωραζίν," οὐαί σοι, Βηθσαϊδά" 
for that city. Woe tothee, Chorazin! woe tothee, Bethsaida! 
a 2 ? Lie \ ~ h2 , ΠῚ ε » € 
ὅτι εἰ ἐν Τύρῳ καὶ Σιδῶνι "ἐγένοντο" ai δυνάμεις ai 
for if in Tyre and _ Sidon had taken place the works of power which 
γενόμεναι ἐν ὑμῖν, πάλαι ἂν ἐν σάκκῳ καὶ σποδῷ 
have been taking place in you, long ago in sackcloth and ashes 


i ΄ ll , \ , \ ~ ? 
καθήμεναι! μετενόησαν. 14 πλὴν Τύρῳ καὶ Σιδῶνι ἀνεκ- 
sitting they had repented. But for Tyre and Sidon more 


τότερον ἔσται ἐν τῇ κρίσει ἢ ὑμῖν. 15 Kai σύ, ἘΚαπερ- 


tolerable willit be in the judgment than for you. And thou, Caper- 
vaovp," ἰὴ! ἕως τοῦ! οὐρανοῦ πὑψωθεῖσα," ἕως ° ἅδου 
naum, who to the heaven hast been liftedup, to hades 
, « ? , € ~ ? “ ᾽ , ~ ‘ 
καταβιβασθήσῃ. 16 Ὃ ἀκούων ὑμῶν ἐμοῦ ἀκούει" καὶ 
thou shalt be brought down. Hethat hears you me ‘hears, and 
c ᾽ ~ « ~ ? a « \ ? ‘ > ~ ? ~ ‘ 
ὁ ἀθετῶν ὑμᾶς ἐμὲ ἀθετεῖ ὁ δὲ ἐμὲ ἀθετῶν ἀθετεὶ τὸν 
he that rejects you *me ‘rejects, and hethat?me ‘rejects rejects him 


ἀποστείλαντά με. 
who sent me, 
17 Ὑπέστρεψαν.δὲ ot ἑβδομήκοντα μετὰ χαρᾶς, λέγοντες, 
And *returned ‘the “seventy wit. joy, saying, 
Κύριε, καὶ τὰ δαιμόνια ὑποτάσσεται ἡμῖν ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί 
Lord, even the demons are subject tous through “name 
Al > ~ ? ’ A ~ e ? A 
σου. 18 Εἶπεν.δὲ αὐτοῖς, ᾿Εθεώρουν τὸν σατανᾶν ὡς ἀστραπὴν 
thy. And he said to them, I beheld Satan as lightning 
? ~ > ~ , 19 ἰὃ , Wid I « ~ 4 ἐξ , 
ἐκ TOU ovpavou TECOVTaA. toou, LOWML ὑμιν τὴν ἑξουσιᾶαν 
out of the heaven falling. Lo, I give you the authority 
τοῦ πατεῖν ἐπάνω ὄφεων Kai σκορπίων, Kai ἐπὶ πᾶσαν τὴν 
and upon all the 


totread upon serpents and scorpions, 
δύναμιν τοῦ ἐχθροῦ Kai οὐδὲν ὑμᾶς οὐ.μὴ τἀδικήσῃ." 
power of the enemy, and nothing you inanywise_ shall injure, 


(lit. in no wise) IRE 

b — δ᾽ also utr. ς εἰσέλθητε LTTrA. d + εἰς τοὺς 

6- ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς GLTTrA. f— δὲ and Gi saw: 

1 καθήμενοι LTTrA, k Kadap- 

; wilt thou be lifted up? Lrrra. 
τ ἀδικήσει ELTTrA, 


h ἐγενήθησαν LTITrA. 
™—rov LITr. ἡ ὑψωθήσῃ 
P+ [δύο] ὕνγο 1. 4 δέδωκα I have given rrra. 


X. LUKE. 


\ ? 7 \ , oe x , c ~ « , 
20 πλὴν ἐν τούτῳ μὴ.χαίρετε, OTL τὰ πνεύματα ὑμῖν ὑποτάσ- 


Yet in this rejoice not, that the spirits toyou are sub- 
σεται χαίρετε.δὲ "μᾶλλον" ὅτι τὰ. ὀνόματα. ὑμῶν ᾿ἐγράφη" 
jected, but rejoice rather that your names are written 
? ~ > ~ ? > ~ ~ 4 ? ’ Vv ~ 
ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς. 21 Ἔν αὐτῇ.τῇ ὥρᾳ ἠγαλλιάσατο τῷ 
in the heavens. In thesame hour *rejoiced 3in *the 

[4 Ww xs ? ~ " ‘ ? ~ ΄, ’ 
πνεύματι" *0 ᾿Ιησοῦς," καὶ εἶπεν, ᾿Εξομολογοῦμαί σοι, πάτερ, 

5Spirit 1 Jesus, and said, I praise thee, O Father, 
κύριε τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ τῆς γῆς, Or. ἀπέκρυψας ταῦτα ἀπὸ 
Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou didst hide these things from 


σοφῶν καὶ συνετῶν, καὶ ἀπεκάλυψας αὐτὰ νηπίοις" ναί, ὁ πα- 

wise and prudent, and didstreveal them tobabes: yea, Fa- 
τήρ, ὅτι οὕτως Yéyévero εὐδοκία" ἔμπροσθέν cov. 22 “Καὶ 
ther, for thus was it well pleasing before thee. And 

στραφεὶς πρὸς τοὺς μαθητὰς εἶπεν, Πάντα “παρεδόθη por' 
having turned to the disciples hesaid, All things were delivered to me 
ὑπὸ τοῦ.πατρός. μου" Kai οὐδεὶς γινώσκει τίς ἐστιν ὁ υἱὸς εἰ μὴ 


by my Father, and noone knows who is_ the Son except 
ὁ πατήρ, Kai τίς ἐστιν ὁ πατήρ, εἰμὴ ὁ vidc, Kai w.Péay'! 
the Father, and who 185 the Father, excepttheSon, and hetowhomsoever 


βούληται ὁ υἱὸς ἀποκαλύψαι. 23 Kai στραφεὶς πρὸς 


2may ‘will 'the 7Son to reveal (him). And having turned to 

‘ ‘ 3» Ins , « ? \ 
τοὺς μαθητὰς Kar ἰδίαν εἶπεν, Μακάριοι οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ 
the disciples apart he said, Blessed [are] the eyes 
ot βλέποντες ἃ βλέπετε. 24 λέγω.γὰρ ὑμῖν, ὅτι πολλοὶ 
which see what yesee, ForIsay toyou, that many 
προφῆται Kai βασιλεῖς ἠθέλησαν ἰδεῖν ἃ ὑμεῖς βλέπετε, 
prophets and kings desired tosee what ye see, 


καὶ ovk-eidov"' καὶ ἀκοῦσαι ἃ ἀκούετε, Kai οὐκ.ἤκουσαν. 
and saw not; and tohear what yehear, and heard not. 


25 Kai ἰδού, νομικός τις ἀνέστη, ἐκπειράζων 
And behold, a *doctor *of *the ®law ‘certain stood up, tempting 
αὐτόν, kai" λέγων, Διδάσκαλε, τί ποιήσας ζωὴν αἰώνιον 
him, and saying, Teacher, Swhat having 7done life eternal 
κληρονομήσω ; 26 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτόν, Ἔν τῷ νόμῳ τί 
shall I inherit ἢ And he said to him, In the law what 
γέγραπται; πῶς ἀναγινώσκεις ; 27 ὋὉ δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν, 
has been written? how readest thou? Andhe answering said, 
᾿Αγαπήσεις κύριον τὸν.θεόν.σου ἐξ ὕλης “τῆς" καρδίας 
Thou shalt love [the] Lord thy God with all "heart 
ΑἹ f2 « -“ ~ ee! .“ - > 7 
σου καὶ [ἐξ ὅλης τῆς. Ψψυχῆς.σου καὶ ἐξ ὕλης τῆς.ἰσχύος σου 
thy and with ail thy soul and with all thy strength 
καὶ 82& ὕλης τῆς.διανοίας". σου" Kai τὸν.πλησίον.σου ὡς σεαυ- 


and with all thy mind ; and thy neighbour as thy- 
τόν. 28 Eimey.de αὐτῷ, Ὀρθῶς ἀπεκρίθης. τοῦτο ποίει, 
self. And hesaid tohim, Rightly thou hast answered: this do, 

καὶ ζήσῃ. 29 Ὁ δὲ θέλων *dikarody' ἑαυτὸν εἶπεν πρὸς 


and thou shalt live. Buthe desiring tojustify himself said to 
τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν, Kai τίς ἐστίν μου πλησίον ; 80 Ὑπολαβὼν δὲ" 
Jesus, And who ἰδ my neighbour? And taking [it] up 
e2 ~ 5 » , , ? we ‘ 
ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἶπεν, Ἄρθροσος τις κατέβαινεν ἀπὸ Ἱἱερουσαλὴμ 
Jesus said, A‘*man ‘certain wasgoingdown from Jerusalem 


187 


20 Notwithstandingin 
this rejoice not, that 
the spirits are subject 
unto you; but rather 
rejoice, because your 
names are written in 
heayen. 21 In that 
hour Jesus rejoiced in 
spirit, andsaid, [thank 
thee, O Father, Lord 
of heaven and earth, 
that thou hast hid 
these things from the 
wise and prudent, and 
hast revealed them un- 
to babes: even so, Fa- 
ther ; for so it seemed 
good in thy sight, 
22 All things are de- 
livered to me of my 
Father: and no man 
knoweth who the Son 
is, but the Father; and 
who the Father is, but 
the Son, and he to 
whom the Son will re- 
veal him. 23 And he 
turned him unto his 
disciples, and said pri- 
vately, Blessed are the 
eyes which see the 
things that ye see: 
24 for I tell you, that 
many prophets and 
kings have desired tc 
see those things which 
ye see, and have not 
seen them; and to 
hear those things 
which ye hear, and 
have not heard them. 


25 And, behold, a 
certain lawyer stood 
up, and tempted him, 
saying, Master, what 
shall I do to inherit 
eternal life? 26 He 
said unto him, What 
is written in the iaw? 
how readest thou? 
27 And he answering 
said, Thou shalt love 
the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, and with 
all thy soul, and with 
all thy strength, and 
with all thy mind; and 
thy neighbour as thy- 
self. 28 And he said 
unto him, Thou hast 
answered right: this 
do, and thou shalt live, 
29 But he, willing to 
justify himself, said 
unto Jesus, And who 
is my _ neighbour? 
30 And Jesus answer- 
ing said, Acertainman 
went down from Jern- 
salem to Jericho, and 


® — μᾶλλον GLTTrAW. 
¥ + τῷ ἁγίῳ the Holy urtra. 
ἐγένετο LtrA. 5 -- καὶ στραφεὶς πρὸς τοὺς μαθητὰς εἶπεν EGTr[ A]. 
Ὁ ἂν ἵπτὰ. © (ay T; εἶδαν TrA. 4 — καὶ T[Tr]a. © [τῆς] Tr. 
καὶ ἐν ὅλῃ τῇ ἰσχύϊ LTTr. & ἐν ὅλῃ TH διανοίᾳ LTTr. a 


h δικαιῶσαι LTTrA. 


t ἐνγέγραπται have been inscribed T; ἐγγέ. TrA. ¥ + ἐν in (the) T. 
x — ὁ Ἰησοῦς (read nyad. he rejoiced) trtra. 
5 μοι παρεδόθη GLITrAW. 


{ἐν ὅλῃ τῇ ψυχῇ σον 


Υ εὐδοκία 


i— δὲ δια τ. 


188 


fell among thieves, 
which stripped him 
of his raiment, and 
wounded him, and de- 


arted, leaving him 
lf dead. 31 And by 
chance there came 


down a certain priest 
that way: and when he 
saw him, he passed by 
on the other side. 
32 And likewise a Le- 
vite, when he was at 
the place, came and 
looked on him, and 
passed by on the other 
side. 33 But a cer- 
tain Samaritan, as he 
journeyed, came where 
he was: and when he 
saw him, he had com- 
passion on him, 34 and 
went to him,and bound 
up his wounds, pour- 
ing in oil and wine, 
and set him on his 
own beast,and brought 
him to an inn, and 
took care of him. 
3% And on the mor- 
row when he departed, 
he took out two pence, 
and gave them to the 
host, and said unto 
him, Take care of him; 
and whatsoever thou 
spendest more, when I 
come again, I will re- 
pay thee. 36 Which 
now of these three, 
thinkest thou, was 
neighbour unto him 
that fell among the 
thieves? 37 And he 
said, He that shewed 
mercy on him. Then 
said Jesus unto him, 
Go, and do thon like- 
wise. 


38 Now it came to 
pass, as they went, that 
he entered into a cer- 
sain village: and a 
-ertain Woman named 
Martha received him 
nto her house, 39 And 
she had a sister called 
Mary, which also sat 
at Jesus’ feet, and 
heard his word. 40 But 
Martha was cumbered 
about much serving, 
and came to him, and 
3aid, Lord, dost thou 
not care that my sis- 
ter hath left me to 
serve alone? bid her 


AOYKAX. X: 


εἰς “Ιεριχώ." καὶ λῃσταῖς περιέπεσεν, οἱ Kai ἐκδύσαντες 
to Jericho, and robbers ‘fell 7among, who both haying stripped 
αὐτὸν καὶ πληγὰς ἐπιθέντες ἀπῆλθον, ἀφέντες ἡμιθανῆ 
him and wounds having inflicted went away, leaving [him], half dead 
ἰτυγχάνοντα." 31 κατὰ συγκυρίαν δὲ ἱερεύς τις κατ- 
being. 2By a *coincidence ‘now °a ‘priest Scertain went 
, ? ~ te ~?) , ‘ , ‘ ? 4 ᾽ ~ 
ἐβαινεν ἐν τῇ. ὁδῷ.ἐκείνῃ, καὶ ἰδὼν αὐτὸν ἀντιπαρὴλ- 
down in that road, and having seen him he passed by on the op- 
θεν" 32 ὁμοίως.δὲ καὶ ᾿Λευΐτης," "γενόμενος" κατὰ τὸν 
posite side; and in like manner also a Levite, being at the 
τόπον, ἐλθὼν καὶ ἰδὼν ° ἀντιπαρῆλθεν. 898 ΡΣα- 
spot, having come and having seen passed by on the oppositeside. “ΔΑ *Sa- 
μαρείτης" δὲ τις ὁδεύων ἦλθεν κατ᾽ αὐτόν. καὶ ἰδὼν 
maritan but “certain journeying came _ to him, and haying seen 
«αὐτὸν! ἐσπλαγχνίσθη 384Kai προσελθὼν κατέδησεν τὰ 
him was moved with compassion, and having approached bound up 
τραὐματα.αὐτοῦ, ἐπιχέων ἔλαιον καὶ οἷνον᾽ "ἐπιβιβάσας δὲ" 


his wounds, pouring on oil and wine; and having put 
αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὸ ἴδιον κτῆνος ἤγαγεν αὐτὸν εἰς “πανδοχεῖον," Kai 
him on his own beast brought him to an inn, and 


ἐπεμελήθη αὐτοῦ. 35 καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν αὔριον ἐξελθών," ἐκβαλὼν 
took care of him. And on the morrow goingforth, taking out 
δύο δηνάρια ἔδωκεν τῷ “πανδοχεῖ," καὶ εἶπεν “αὐτῷ," 
two denarii he gave[them]tothe innkeeper, and = said to him, 
᾿Ἐπιμελήθητι αὐτοῦ" καὶ ὅ.τιἂν προσδαπανήσῃς, ἐγὼ ἐν 
Take care of him, and whatsoever thou mayest expend more, I on 


τῷ ἐπανέρχεσθαί.με ἀποδώσω σοι. 36 Tic "οὖν" τούτων 
my coming back willrepay thee. Which therefore of these 


τῶν τριῶν ὕδοκεῖ σοι πλησίον" γεγονέναι τοῦ ἐμπεσόντος 
three seems ἰὸ thee *neighbour ‘to have “been of him who fell 
εἰς τοὺς λῃστάς; 37 ὋὉ δὲ εἶπεν, ὋὉ ποιήσας τὸ ἔλεος 
among the robbers ? Andhe said, Hewho shewed compassion 
per αὐτοῦ. Εἶπεν τοὖῦν! αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, Πορεύου, καὶ 
towards him. Said *therefore “to °him 1 Jesus, Go 7and 


σὺ ποίει ὁμοίως. 


‘thou do likewise. 
38 * Eyévero.dé.év' τῷ.πορεύεσθαι αὐτοὺς "cat! αὐτὸς εἰσῆλ-- 
And itcame to pass as *proceeded they that he enter- 
θεν εἰς κώμην τινά γυνὴ.δε τις ὀνόματι Μάρθα ὑπ- 
ed into a “village ‘certain; anda*woman'certain byname Martha το- 
εδέξατο αὐτὸν εἰς “τὸν. οἶκον". αὐτῆς." 39 Kai πάθεν ἀδελφὴ 
ceived him into her house. And ehad  asister 


καλουμένη “Μαρία,! ἣ καὶ ἱπαρακαθίσασα" δπαρὰ! τοὺς πόδας 


called Mary, whoalso having sat down at the feet 
hrov Ἰησοῦ ἤκουεν τὸν.λόγον.αὐτοῦ. 40 ἡ. δὲ Μάρθα 
of Jesus was listening to his word. But Martha 


περιεσπᾶτο περὶ πολλὴν διακονίαν" ἐπιστᾶσα.δὲ εἶπεν, Κύριε, 
was distracted about much service ; and coming up she said, Lord, 
᾽ ἐλ. « « 10. λ , , i la Ἰ 
οὐ.μέλει σοι Ore ἡ. ἀδελφή.μου μόνην με ἱκατέλιπεν" δια- 
is it no concern to thee that my sister Salone 7me *left to 


Κ᾿ Ἱερειχώ 8. 
him L. 


δοκεῖ σοι GITrAW. 
© τὴν οἰκίαν 1. 
TTra. 


1 — τυγχάνοντα LTTr[ A]. 
P Σαμαρίτης 1. 
τς ἐξελθών Lrtr[A]. 


4 --- αὐτῆς (read the house) 
8 πρὸς against TTra. 


τὰ Λενείτης TIrA. ™—-yevouevosTr. ° + αὐτὸν 
ᾳ — αὐτὸν [L]}t[Tr]a. τ καὶ ἐπιβιβάσας τι. 5 πανδοκίον 1. 
Υ πανδοκεῖ τ. ΝΜ --- αὐτῷ [τ]ττι[ 4]. *— οὖν [χ]π{τὸ͵]Δ. Υ πλησίον 
» δὲ ‘and (Jesus) GLITrA. "Ἔν δὲ And as Tr. Ὁ [καὶ] Lrr. 

© Μαριάμ. 1. f παρακαθεσθεῖσα 


Tr]. 
Β χοῦ κυρίου of the Lord trtraw. 1 κατέλειπεν TrA. 


X, XI. 


KOVELY ; 
serve? 


LUKE. 


Κεἰίπὲ" οὖν αὐτῷ iva μοι συναντιλάβηται. 41 Απο- 
Speak therefore her that me she may help. 3An- 


κριθεὶς δὲ εἶπεν αὐτῇ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς," Μάρθα, Μάρθα, μεριμνᾷς 
swering ‘but *said ‘*to °her ?Jesus, me ebe, ei thou art careful 


καὶ Ἀτυρβάζῃ" περὶ πολλά: 42 ἑνὸς.δὲ ἐστιν χρεία" pola 


and Broun ett about many things; but oe one there is sueeds 
202" τὴν ἀγαθὴν μερίδα ἐξελέξατο, re Wes αιρεθήσεται 
ed ᾽ 

᾿ᾳηᾷ the good part chose, which not be taker 
οἀπ᾽ὶ αὐτῆς. 
from her. 

11 Καὶ ἐγένετο ἐντῷ.εἶῖναι αὐτὸν tv τόπῳ τινὶ προσ- 

And it came to πῖον as *was ‘he in = piace ceria pray- 

εὐχόμενον, ὡς ἐπαύσατο, εἶπέν τις τῶν. μαθητῶν. αὐτοῦ πρὸς 


ing, when he ceased, said one of his disciples to 
αὐτόν, Κύριε, δίδαξον ἡμᾶς προσεύχεσθαι, καθὼς Kai P lway- 
him, Lord, teach us to pray, as also John 


νης" ἐδίδαξεν τοὺς. μαθητὰς αὐτοῦ. 2 Ἐϊπεν. δὲ αὐτοῖς, Ὅταν 
taught his disciples, And he said tothem, When 


προσεύχησθε λέγετε, Πάτερ “ἡμῶν ὁ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς," 


ye pray say, Father tour, who[art]in the heavens, 
o“r, "5 “ἢ ὁ iY 
ἁγιασθήτω τὸ. ὄνομά.σου" τἐλθέτω" "ἡ. βασιλεία.σου"" γενηθήτω 
sanctified be thy name ; let come thy Sbigdom; let be done 


τὸ. oe σου," εἰ ἐν οὐρανῷ, καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς." 8 τὸν 


er in heaven, [50] also por the earth. 
ἄρτον αηῶν τὸν ἐπιούσιον δίδου ἡμῖν τὸ. καθ᾽ ἡμέραν 4 καὶ 


Our bread the needed give us ea ; an 
ἄφες ἡμῖν τὰς ἁμαρτίας.ἡμῶν, καὶ. γὰρ αὐτοὶ ἀφίεμεν" 
forgive us our sins, for also *ourselves ‘we forgive 


παντὶ ὀφείλοντι ἡμῖν" καὶ μὴ. εἰσενέγκῃς ἡμᾶς εἰς πειρασμόν, 
every one indebted tous; and lead not us into temptation, 


χἀλλὰ ῥῦσαι ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ τοῦ πονηροῦ." 5 Kai εἶπεν πρὸς 
but deliver us from evil. And hesaid ἴο 


αὐτούς, Tic ἐξ ὑμῶν ἕξει φίλον, Kai πορεύσεται πρὸς 
them, Who auicne you shall have afriend, and shall go to 


αὐτὸν μεσονυκτίον, Kai Yeixy' αὐτῷ, Φίλε, χρῆσόν μοι τρεῖς 
him at midnight, and say to him, Friend, lend me three 


ἄρτους, 6 ἐπειδὴ φίλος μου παρεγένετο ἐξ ὁδοῦ πρός με, 


loaves, since a friend of mine is come off ajourney to me, 


καὶ οὐκἔχω ὃ παραθήσω αὐτῷ" 7 κἀκεῖνος ἔσωθεν 
and I have not what I shall set before him; andhe from within 


ἀποκριθεὶς εἴπῃ, My jib: κόπους πάρεχε: ἤδη θύρα 
answering shouldsay, *Not “trouble anes already the door 


κέκλεισται, καὶ τὰ-παιδία. μου μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ εἰς τὴν κοίτην εἰσίν" 


has been shut, and my children with me in bed are; 3 
οὐ-δύναμαι ἀναστὰς δοῦναί σοι. 8 Λέγω ὑμῖν, εἰ καὶ οὐ 
I cannot rise gy to give to thee. Isay toyou, if even*not 
δώσει αὐτῷ ἀναστάς, διὰ τὸ. εἴναι ταὐτοῦ φίλον," 
*he *will give to him, havingrisen up, because of[his] being his friend, 
διάγε τὴν."ἀναίδειαν' αὐτοῦ ἐγερθεὶς δώσει αὐτῷ 

Kid because of his SPOT ΡΟ συν having risen he will give him 
dowry xoyte. 9 aye ὑμῖν λέγω, Αἰτεῖτε, καὶ δοθήσεται 
as many as he needs. AndI toyou say, Ask, and it shall begiven 


Κ εἰπὸν T. 16 eupies the Lord T. 
ο — aw [L]t[Tra]. P "Iwarys Tr. 
" σου ἡ βασιλεία G. t — γενηθήτω τὸ θέλημά. gov GTTrA. 
γῆς G[L]rtra. ka ἀφίομεν LTTrA. 
¥ ἐρεῖ L. : φίλον αὐτοῦ TTrA. 


™ θορυβάζῃ agitated LTTrA. 


a ὁ ΣΩ͂Ν τ. 


4 — ἡμῶν ὃ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς GTTra. 


189 


therefore that she help 
me, 41 And Jesus an- 
swered and said unto 
her, Martha, Martha, 
thou art careful and 
tronbled about many 
things: 42 but one 
thing is needfal: and 
Mary hath chosen that 
good part, which shall 
not be taken away 
from her. 


XI. And it came to 
pass, that, as he was 
praying in a certain 
place, when he ceased, 
one of his disciples said 
unto him, Lord, teach 
us to pray, as John also 
taught his disciples. 
2 And he said unto 
them, When ye pray, 
say, Our Father which 
art in heaven, Hallow- 


d ed be thy name. Thy 


Kingdom come. Thy 
will be done, as in 
heaven, so in earth. 
3 Give us day by day 
our daily bread. 4 And 
forgive us our sins; for 
we also forgive every 
one that is indebted to 
us. And lead us rot 
into temptation; but 
deliver us from eyil. 
5 And he said unto 
them, Which of yon 
shall have a friend, and 
shall go unto him at 
midnight, andsay unto 
him, Friend, lend me 
three loaves; 6 fora 
friend of mine in his 
journey is come to me, 
and I have nothing to 
set before him? 7 And 
he from within shall 
answer and say, Trou- 
ble me not: the door is 
now shut, and my chil- 
dren are with me in 
bed; I cannot rise and 
givethee. 8 I say unto 
you, Though he will 
not rise and give him, 
because he is his friend, 
yet because of his im- 
portunity he wil: rise 
and give him as many 
as he needeth. 9 And I 
say unto you, Ask, and 
it shall be given you; 


3  ΄ π΄  -΄ - 


π γὰρ for T; [δὲ] a. 
τ ἐλθάτω TTr. 


-- ὡς ἐν οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς 
— ἀλλὰ ῥῦσαι ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ τοῦ πονηροῦ GTTrA. 


190 


seek, and ye shall find; 
knock, and it shall 
be opened unto you. 
10 For every one that 
asketh receiveth ; and 
he that seeketh find- 
eth ; and to him that 
knocketh it shall be 
opened. 11 If a son 
shall ask bread of any 
of you that is a father, 
will he give him a 
stone? or if he ask a 
fish, will he for a fish 
give him a serpent ? 
12 Or if he shall ask an 
egg, will he offer him a 
scorpion? 13 If yethen, 
being evil, know how 
to give good gifts unto 
your children: how 
much more shall your 
heavenly Father give 
the Holy Spirit to them 
that ask him ? 


14 And he was cast- 
ing out a devil, and it 
was dumb. And it 
came to pass, when the 
devil was gone out, 
the dumb spake; and 
the people wondered. 
15 But some of them 
said, He casteth out 
devils through Beelze- 
bub the chief of the 
devils. 16 And others, 
tempting him, sought 
of him asign from hea- 
ven. 17 But he, know- 
ing their thoughts, said 
unto them, Every king- 
dom divided against 
itself is brought to 
desolation; and a house 
divided against a house 
falleth. 18 If Satan 
also be divided against 
himself, how shall his 
kingdom stand? be- 
cauge ye say that I cast 
out devils through 
Beelzebub. 19 Andif I 
by Beelzebub cast out 
devils, by whom do 
your sons cast them 
ried ? therefore shall 

Θ our judges. 

20 Bat if I with She 
ΚΣ of God cast out 
devils, no doubt the 
kingdom of God is 
come upon you. 
21 When a strong man 
armed keepeth his 
palace, his goods arein 
peace: 22 but when a 
stronger than he sha! 


Ὁ ἀνοιχθήσεται TA. 
Piglet 
f αὐτῷ ἐπιδώσει TTA. 


ἀγαθὰ GLTTrAW. 


βληθέντος having been cast out L. 
οὐρανοῦ ἐζήτουν παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ LITrAW. 
- οὗ 1. 

αὐτοὶ κριταὶ ὑμῶν ἔσονται Tr. 


ἑαυτὴν T. 


} to you; 


ΧΙ, 
"ἀνοιγήσεται" ὑμῖν. 
it shall be opened to you. 
ὁ ζητῶν εὑρίσκει" και 
receives ; and he that seeks ds ; and 


τῷ κρούοντι “ἀνοιγήσεται." 11 τίνα.δὲ ἃ ὑμῶν τὸν 
tohim that knocks it will be creas And which of you who [is] 


πατέρα αἰτήσει ὁ υἱὸς ἄρτον, μὴ λίθον ἐπιδώσει αὐτῷ; 
a father shall 5451 “for ‘the 7son _ bread, astone will he yive to him? 


esi" καὶ ἰχθύν, μὴ ἀντὶ ἰχθύος ὄφιν [ἐπιδώσει αὐτῷ"; 12 ἢ 


AOYKAZX. 


ὑμῖν" ζητεῖτε, καὶ εὑρήσετε" 
seek, and ye shall find; 


ὁ αἰτῶν λαμβάνει: Kai 


κρούετε, καὶ 
Le and 
10 πᾶς.γὰρ 
For every one that asks 


if also a fish, instead of afish aserpent will he give to him? or 
καὶ βἐὰν' Βαίτήσῃ" wor, μὴ ἐπιδώσει αὐτῷ σκορπίον; 13 εἰ 
also if he should ask an eee; will he give tohim a scorpion? If 


οὖν ὑμεῖς πονηροὶ ὑπάρχοντες οἴδατε ἀγαθὰ δόματα! 
therefore ye, evil ‘being, know hore!) geod gifts 
ἐξ 


διδόναι τοῖς.τέκνοιςὑμῶν, πόσῳ μᾶλλον ὁ πατὴρ" ὁ 
toigive to your children, how much more the Father who([is]of 


οὐρανοῦ δώσει πνεῦμα ἅ wy τοῖς αἰτοῦσιν αὐτόν; 


heaven will give [086] *Spirit oly to those that ask him? 
14 Kai ἦν ἐκβάλλων δαιμόνιον, ‘kai αὐτὸ ἦν" κωφόν" 
And he was casting out a demon, and it was dumb; 


τοῦ.δαιμονίου ἐξελθόντος," ἐλάλησεν ὁ κωφός" 
having gone out, “spoke ‘the 7dumb. 


ἐξ αὐτῶν "elroy," Ἔν 
of them said, By 
ἐκβάλλει τὰ δαιμόνια. 
he casts out the demons, 


ἐξ 


ἐγένετο. δὲ 
and it game to pass on the demon 


καὶ ἐθαύμασαν ot ὄχλοι. 15 τινὲς.δὲ 
And “wondered ‘the *crowds. But some 


Βεελζεβοὺλ 5 ἄρχοντι τῶν δαιμονίων 
Beelzebul prince of the demons 


16 Ἕτεροι.δὲ πειράζοντες σημεῖον ὕπαρ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐζήτουν 


And others, tempting, a sign from him _ were seeking from 
οὐρανοῦ." 17 Αὐτὸς.δὲ εἰδὼς «αὐτῶν τὰ διανοήματα! εἶπεν 
heaven, But he knowing their thoughts said 
αὐτοῖς, Πᾶσα βασιλεία "tp ἑαυτὴν διαμερισθεῖσα" ἐρη- 
tothem, Every kingdom “against “itself 1divided is brought to 
povra’ καὶ οἶκος ἐπὶ οἶκον πίπτει. 18 εἰ.δὲ καὶ ὁ σατανᾶς 

desolation; and a house against ἃ house falls. And if also Satan 


ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὸν διεμερίσθη, πῶς σταθήσεται ἡ.βασιλεία.αὐτοῦ ; 
against himself _ be divided, how shall stand his kingdom ? 


ὅτι λέγετε, ἐν Βεελζεβοὺλ ἐκβάλλειν.με τὰ δαιμόνια. 19 εἰ.δὲ 
Becanse yesay, by Beelzebul I cast out the demons. And if 


ἐγὼ ἐν Βεελζεβοὺλ ἐκβάλλω τὰ δαιμόνια, "οὶ" υἱοὶ. ὑμῶν ἐν 
by Beelzebul castout the demons, yours sons by 


τίνι ἐκβάλλουσιν; διὰ τοῦτο ‘kpirai ὑμῶν αὐτοὶ ἔσον- 
whom do they cast out? onaccountof this judges ofyou they shall 


ται." 20 εἰιδὲ éy δακτύλῳ θεοῦ "ἐκβάλλω τὰ δαιμόνια, 
be. But if by (the] ΠΆΒΕΣ οἵ God Icastout the demons, 


ἄρα ἔφθασεν ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ. 21 bray ὁ 
then iscome upon you the kingdom of God. When the 


ἰσχυρὸς καθωπλισμένος φυλάσσῃ τὴν. ἑαυτοῦ.αὐλήν, ἐν 
ἘΡΣΟΣΕ fman) Pe armed may, keep his own dwelling, in 


εἰρήνῃ ἐστὶν τὰ. ὑπάρχοντα.αὐτοῦ" 22 ἐπὰν. δὲ “o' ἰσχυρό- 
peace are his goods ; but assoonas the stronger 


© ἀνοιχθήσεται LTAW. ἃ 4 ἐξ LTTraW. e ἢ OF GLTTrAW. 

& — ἐὰν TTx[A]. h αἰτήσει he shall ask errra. i δόματα 

k + ὑμῶν (read your father) x. ' [καὶ αὐτὸ ἣν] Tra. 

δι εἶπαν TrA. ° + τῷ the LTTraw. 

4 τὰ διανοήματα αὐτῶν L. r διαμερισθεῖσα ἐφ᾽ 

t αὐτοὶ ὑμῶν κριταὶ ἔσονται LA} αὐτοὶ κριταὶ ἔσονται ὑμῶν τ ; 
¥ + [ἐγὼ] Tr. — ὁ (read a stronger) Lrrra. 


ΧΙ. LUKE. 


τερος αὐτοῦ ἐπελθὼν νικήσῃ αὐτόν, τὴν πανοπλίαν 
than he coming upon [him] shall overcome him, *panoply 
αὐτοῦ αἴρει ἐφ᾽ ἢ ἐπεποίθει, Kai τὰ σκύλα.αὐτοῦ δια- 
‘his hetakesaway in which he had trusted, and his spoils he 
δίδωσιν. 23 ὁ μὴ. ὧν μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ Kar ἐμοῦ ἐστιν Kai ὁ 
divides. He thatisnot with me against me is, and he that 
μὴ-.συνάγων μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ σκορπίζει. 24 Ὅταν τὸ ἀκάθαρτον 
gathers not with me scatters. When the unclean 
“« ? , ? 4 ~ ? ’ , 3 > , 
πνεῦμα ἐξέλθῃ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, διέρχεται δ ἀνύδρων 
spirit is gone out from the man, he goes through waterless 
τόπων, ζητοῦν ἀνάπαυσιν" Kai μὴ εὑρίσκον “λέγει, ὝὙπο- 
places, seeking rest ; and not finding [any] hesays, Iwill 
στρέψω εἰς τὸν. οἴκόν.μου ὅθεν ἐξῆλθον: 25 Kai ἐλθὸν 
return to my house whence I came out. And having come 


εὑρίσκει σεσαρωμένον Kai κεκοσμημένον. 26 τότε πορεύεται 
he finds [it] swept and adorned. Then he goes 


καὶ παραλαμβάνειγἑπτὰ ἕτερα πνεύματα πονηρότερα ἑαυτοῦ," 
and takes seven other spirits more wicked than himself, 


καὶ εἰσελθόντα κατοικεῖ ixéi’ Kai γίνεται Ta ἔσχατα τοῦ 
and having entered they dwell there; and becomes the last 


ἀνθρώπου ἐκείνου χείρονα τῶν πρώτων. 27 ᾿Εγένετο. δὲ 


Ξτη81) lof that worse thanthe first. And it came to pass 
ἐν Τῷ λέγει αὐτὸν ταῦτα, ἐπάρασά τις ᾿γυνὴ φωνὴν!" 
as *spoke the these things, ‘liftmmg *up certain 'a *woman [her] voice 


ἐκ τοῦ ὄχλου εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Μακαρία ἡ κοιλία ἡ βαστάσασά 


from the crowd said tohim, Blessed the womb that bore 
σε, Kal αστοὶ ovc ἐθήλασας. 28 Αὐτὸς.δὲ εἶπεν, *Mev- 
thee, δπᾶ [the] breasts which thou didst suck. Buthe said, Yea 
οὔνγε' μακάριοι οἱ ἀκούοντες τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ 
rather blessed they who hear the word of God and 
φυλάσσοντες “abrov." 

keep it. 


29 Τῶν.δὲ ὄχλων ἐπαθροιζομένων ἤρξατο λέγειν, ‘H γενεὰ 
But the crowds being throngedtogether he began tosay, “generation 
αὕτη “ πονηρά tori σημεῖον “ἐπιζητεῖ,,) Kai σημεῖον ov 
this “wicked is; a sign it seeks after, and asign not 
δοθήσεται αὐτῇ, εἰμὴ τὸ σημεῖον ᾿Ιωνᾶ “τοῦ προφήτου." 
1shall be given toit except the sign of Jonas the prophet, 
‘ A ? , ? ~ f ~ ~ s+ Π iA 
30 καθὼς. γὰρ ἐγένετο ᾿Ιωνᾶς ‘onpeiov τοῖς Νινευΐταις," οὕτως 
For as was Jonas asign tothe Ninevites, thus 
ἔσται Kai ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου τῷ γενεᾷ ταύτῃ. 31 Βασίλισσα 
shall be also the Son of man to this generation. A queen 
νότου ἐγερθήσεται ἐν τῇ κρίσει μετὰ τῶν ἀνδρῶν τῆς 
οὗ [[{895] κου! shallriseup in the judgment with the men 
γενεᾶς. ταύτης, Kai κατακρινεῖ αὐτούς" Ori ἦλθεν ἐκ τῶν 
of this generation, and shallcondemn them; for shecame from the 
περάτων THC γῆς ἀκοῦσαι THY σοφίαν ΞΣολομῶντος," καὶ ἰδού, 
ends oftheearth tohear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, 
πλεῖον Σολομῶντος" ὧδε. 32 ἄνδρες ἘΝινευϊ ἀναστήσονται 
more than Solomon here, Men of Nineveh _  shallstandup 
ἐν τῇ κρίσει μετὰ τῆς.γενεᾶς. ταύτης, καὶ κατακρινοῦσιν αὐτήν" 
in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it, 


x+4[. τότε] then L. YJ ἕτερα πνεύματα πονηρότερα ἑαυτοῦ ἑπτά TTrA. 
4 μενοῦν TIr; μὲν οὖνΑ. Ὁ -- αὐτόν (read [it]) GLTTra. 
4 ξῃτεῖ it seeks TTra. ε — τοῦ προφήτου GLTTTA. 
σημεῖον TTrA. & Σολομῶνος GLTTrAW. 
Nevevetrac T. 


191 


come upon him, and 
overcome him, he tak- 
eth from him all his 
armour wherein he 
trusted, and divideth 
his spoils. 23 He that 
is not with me is 
against me: and he 
that gathereth not 
with me _ scattereth. 
24 When the unclean 
spirit is gone out of 
& man, he walketh 
through dry places, 
seeking rest; and find- 
ing none, he saith, I 
will return unto my 
house whence I came 
out. 25 And when he 
cometh, he findeth it 
swept and garnished. 
26 Then goeth he, and 
taketh to him seven 
other spirits more 
wicked than himself; 
and they enter in, and 
dwell there: and the 
last state of that man 
is worse than the first. 
27 And it came to pass, 
as he spake _ these 
things, a certain wo- 
man of the company 
lifted up her voice, and 
said unto him, Blessed 
is the womb that bare 
thee, and the paps 
which thou hast suck- 
ed. 28 But he said, 
Yea rather, blessed are 
they that hear the 
word of God, and keep 
it. 


29 And when the 
people were gather- 
ed thick together, he 
began to say, This 
is an evil generation: 
they seek a sign; and 
there shall no sign be 
given it, but the sign 
of Jonas the prophet. 
30 For as Jonas was a 
sign unto the Nine- 
vites, so shall also the 
Son of man be to this 
generation. 31 The 
queen of the south 
shall rise up in the 
judgment with the 
men of this generation, 
and condemn them: 
for she came from the 
utmost parts of the 
earth to hear the wis- 
dom of Solomon; and, 
behold, a greater than 
Solomon is here, 32 The 
men of Nineve shall 
rise up in the judgment 
with this generation, 
and shall condemn it: 
for they repented at 


2 φωνὴν γυνὴ LTA. 


© + γενεὰ a generation LTTrA. 
f τοῖς Νινενείταις (Νινευΐταις Tra) 
h Νινενὴ A; Nuvevirac Ninevites Ltrw; 


192 


the preaching of Jo- 
nas; and, behold, a 
greater than Jonas 1s 
here. 33 Noman, when 
he hath lighted a can- 
dle, putteth ἐξ in a 
secret place, neither 
under a bushel, but on 
a candlestick, that 
they which come in 
may see the light. 
34 The light of the 
body is the eye: there- 
fore when thine eye is 
single, thy whole body 
also is full of light ; 
but when thine eye is 
evil, thy body also ts 
full of darkness. 
35 Take heed there- 
fore that the light 
which is in thee be not 
darkness. 36 If thy 
whole body therefore 
be full of light, having 
no part dark, the whole 
shall be full of light, 
as when the bright 
shining of a candle 
doth, give thee light. 


37 And as he spake, 
a certain Pharisee be- 
sought him to dine 
with him : and he went 
in, and sat down to 
meat. 38 And when 
the Pharisee saw it, he 
marvelled that he had 
not first washed before 
dinner. 39 And the 
Lord said unto him, 
Now do ye Pharisees 
make clean the outside 
of the cup and the 
platter; but your in- 
ward part ds full of ra- 
vening and _ wicked- 
ness. 40 Ye fools, did 
not he that made that 
which is without make 
that which is within 
also? 41 But rather 
give alms of such 
things as ye have; and, 
behold, all things are 
clean untoyou. 42 But 
woe unto you, Phari- 
sees! for ye tithe mint 
and rue and all man- 
ner of herbs, and pass 
over judgment and the 
love of God: these 
ought ye to have done, 
and not to leave the 
other undone. 43 Woe 
unto you, Pharisees ! 
for ye love the upper- 
most seats in the syna- 
gogues, and greetings 
in the markets. 44 Woe 
unto you, scribes and 


AOYKA®. ΧΕ, 


ὅτι μετενόησαν εἰς τὸ iL dee Ἰωνᾶ. καὶ ἰδού, πλεῖον 
because they repented at the proclamation of Jonas; and behold, more 
? ~ τ 7 OA i 4 
Iwva ὧδε. 33 Οὐδεὶς. δὲ! λύχνον ἅψας εἰς Ἐκρυπτὸν!" 
than Jonas here. But no one alamp having lit *in *secret 
τίθησιν, οὐδὲ ὑπὸ τὸν μόδιον, ἀλλ᾽" ἐπὶ τὴν λυχνίαν, 
sets 7it, nor under the corn-measure, but upon the lampstand, 
ev « oY U « 
ἵνα οἱ εἰσπορευόμενοι τὸ ᾿ιφέγγος" βλέπωσιν. 84 ὁ λύχνος 
that they who enter in the light may see, The lamp 
τοῦ σώματός ἐστιν ὁ ὀφθαλμός". ὅταν Coby" ὁ. ὀφθαλμός. σου 
ofthe body is the eye: when therefore thine eye 
€ ~ , ‘ ‘ ~ , 4 . ᾿ 
ἁπλοῦς ἡ, Ῥκαὶ" ὅλον τὸ. σῶμά.σου φωτεινόν ἐστιν ἐπὰν.δὲ 
Zsingle ‘be, also *whole thy body light is; but when 
ει ~ ΄, 
πονηρὸς ἢ, καὶ τὸσῶμά.σου σκοτεινόν. 85 σκόπει οὖν 
evil it be, also thy body [is] dark. See therefore 
pal TO φῶς τὸ ἐν Goi σκότος ἐστίν. 86 εἰ οὖν τὸ σῶμά 
est the light that [15]715 thee *darkness 15. If therefore Sbody 
f A ‘ , 
gov ὅλον φωτεινόν, μὴ ἔχον “τὶ μέρος" σκοτεινόν, ἔσται 
‘thy *whole [is] light, not having any part dark, it shall be 
φωτεινὸν ὕλον, ὡς ὅταν ὁ λύχνος τῇ. ἀστραπῇ φωτίζῃ σε. 
light 1411, as when the lamp with [its]brightness may light thee. 
37 Ἔν. δὲ τῷ.λαλῆσαι "Ὁ ‘Snpwra' αὐτὸν Φαρισαῖός ἵτις" 
Now as ?was “speaking [*he] asked him 1a %Pharisee certain 
ὕπως ἀριστήσῃ παρ᾽ αὐτῷ: εἰσελθὼν δὲ ἀνέπεσεν. 
that he woulddine with him: and having entered he reclined himself. 
38 6.0 Φαρισαῖος ἰδὼν ἐθαύμασεν ὅτι οὐ πρῶτον ἐβαπτίσθη 
Butthe Pharisee seeing [it] wondered that not first he washed 
πρὺ τοῦ ἀρίστου. 39 εἶπεν.δὲ ὁ κύριος πρὸς αὐτόν, Νῦν ὑμεῖς 
before the dinner. But said the Lord to him, Now _ ye 


οἱ Φαρισαῖοι τὸ ἔξωθεν τοῦ ποτηρίου καὶ τοῦ πίνακος καθαρίζετε, 
Pharisees the outsideofthe cup andofthe dish ye cleanse, 


70.08 ἔσωθεν ὑμῶν γέμει ἁρπαγῆς Kai πονηρίας. 40 ἄφρονες, 
Ῥαὺ the inside οἵ you isfull of plunder and wickedness. Fools, 
οὐχ ὁ ποιήσας τὸ ἔξωθεν Kai τὸ ἔσωθεν ἐποίησεν : 
[14] not ΒΘ who made the outside also the inside make ? 
41 πλὴν τὰ. ἐνόντα δότε ἐλεημοσύνην, καὶ ἰδού, 
But [of] the things which are within give alms, and lo, 
πάντα καθαρὰ ὑμῖν ἐστιν. 42 YadX'' οὐαὶ ὑμῖν τοῖς Φαρισαίοις, 
allthings clean toyou are. But woe to you Pharisees, 


OTe ἀποδεκατοῦτε TO ἡδύοσμον Kai TO πήγανον Kai πᾶν 
for yepaytithesof the mint and the rue and every 


, , ~ ~ 
λάχανον, Kai παρέρχεσθε τὴν κρίσιν Kai τὴν ἀγάπην τοῦ θεοῦ" 
herb, and pass by the judgment and the love of God. 
ταῦτα ἔδει ποιῆσαι, κἀκεῖνα μὴ "ἀφιέναι." 
These things it behoved [you] to do, and those not to be leaving aside. 
48 οὐαὶ ὑμῖν τοῖς Φαρισαίοις, ὅτι ἀγαπᾶτε THY πρωτοκαθεδρίαν 
Woe to you Pharisees, for yelove the first seat 
ἐν ταῖς συναγωγαῖς καὶ τοὺς ἀσπασμοὺς ἐν ταῖς ἀγοραῖς. 
in the synagogues and_ the salutations in the wmarket-places. 
44 οὐαὶ ὑμῖν, "γραμματεῖς καὶ Φαρισαῖοι, ὑποκριταί," ὅτι ἐστὲ 


Pharisees, hypocrites! Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for yeare 
i — δὲ but Trra. Κ κρυπτὴν secret place EGLTTrAW. 1 ἀλλὰ EW. ™ φῶς LTrA. 

» + gov (read thine eye) LrTra. ° — οὖν LTTrA. Ρ — καὶ L. 9 μέρος τι ([τι} A) 
r + αὐτὸν he L. 5 ἐρωτᾷ aSkKS LTA} ἐρώτα Tr. t — τις TTra. v ἀλλὰ τ. 


LTrA, 
w + δὲ now [L]tr. 


δείπνοις} and the first places at the suppers L. 


κριταί G[LJTTrA. 


χα παρεῖναι to pass by LTTrA. Υ + [καὶ τὰς πρωτοκλισίας ἐν τοῖς 


2 — γραμματεῖς καὶ Φαρισαῖοι ὑπο- 


XI, XII. LUKE. 
ὡς τὰ μνημεῖα τὰ ἄδηλα, Kai οἱ ἄνθρωποι "οἱ" περιπατοῦντες 
as the *tombs lunseen, and the men who walk 


ἐπάνω οὐκ.οἴδασιν. 45 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς. δέ τις τῶν γομι- 
over [them] do not know [it]. And answering one of the doctors of the 


κῶνλέγει αὐτῷ, Διδάσκαλε, ταῦτα λέγων καὶ ἡμᾶς ὑβρίζεις. 
law says tohim, Teacher, thesethings saying “also *us thou insultest. 


46 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν, Kai ὑμῖν τοῖς νομικοῖς οὐαί, ὅτι φορτίζετε 


Andhe said, Also ἴο you the doctors of the law woe, for ye burden 
τοὺς ἀνθρώπους φορτία δυσβάστακτα, καὶ αὐτοὶ evi 
men {with] burdens heavy tobear, and yourselves with one 


τῶν.δακτύλων ὑμῶν οὐ-προσψαύετε τοῖς φορτίοις. 47 οὐαὶ 
of your fingers do not touch the burdens. Woe 
ὑμῖν, ὅτι οἰκοδομεῖτε τὰ μνημεῖα τῶν προφητῶν, "οὶ δὲ πα- 
to you, for ye build the tombs _ of the prophets, and 7fa- 
τέρες ὑμῶν ἀπέκτειναν αὐτούς. 48 ἄρα “μαρτυρεῖτε" καὶ 
thers tyour killed them. Hence yebear witness and 
συνευδοκεῖτε τοῖς ἔργοις τῶν.πατέρων. ὑμῶν" OTL αὐτοὶ μὲν 
consent tothe works of your fathers ; for they indeed 
ἀπέκτειναν αὐτούς, ὑμεῖς.δὲ οἰκοδομεῖτε αὐτῶν τὰ μνημεῖα." 
killed them, and ye build their tombs. 
‘A ~~ ‘ c / ~ ~ ? ~ 2 
49 διὰ τοῦτο Kai ἡ σοφία τοῦ θεοῦ εἶπεν, ᾿Αποστελῶ εἰς 
Because οὗ this also the wisdom of God said, Iwillsend to 
αὐτοὺς προφήτας Kai ἀποστόλους. Kat ἐξ αὐτῶν ἀποκτε- 
them prophets and apostles, and{some]jof them they will 
νοῦσιν καὶ ξἐκδιώξουσιν"" 50 ἵνα ἐκζητηθῇ τὸ αἷμα πάντων 
ἘΠῚ and drive out, that may berequired the blood ofall 
τῶν προφητῶν fro éexvvopevoy' ἀπὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου 
the prophets poured out from [the] foundation of [the] world, 
2 4a ~ ~ , > + gz ~ II wv » a £ “ῃΗ 
ἀπὸ τῆς.γενεᾶς.ταύτης, 51 ἀπὸ δτοῦ" αἵματος “APEX ἕως row 
of this generation, from the blood of Abel to the 
αἵματος Zaxapiov τοῦ ἀπολομένου μεταξὺ τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου 
blood of Zacharias, who perished between the altar 
καὶ τοῦ οἴκου" ναί, λέγω ὑμῖν, ἐκζητηθήσεται ἀπὸ τῆς γενεᾶς 
and the house; yea, [580 toyou, itshall be required οἵ *generation 
ταύτης. 52 Οὐαὶ ὑμῖν τοῖς νομικοῖς, ὅτι ἤρατε τὴν 
1this, Woe toyou the doctors of the law, for yetookaway the 
κλεῖδα THE γνώσεως" αὐτοὶ οὐκ.βεἰσήλθετε," καὶ τοὺς εἰσερ- 
ΚΟΥ of knowledge; yourselves did not enter, and those who were 
χομένους ἐκωλύσατε. 53 'Λέγοντος.δὲ αὐτοῦ ταῦτα πρὸς 
entering ye hindered. And as*was*%saying ‘he thesethings to 
αὐτοὺς" ἤρξαντο ot γραμματεῖς καὶ οἱ Φαρισαῖοι δεινῶς ἐν- 
them began the scribes and the Pharisees urgently topress 
ἔχειν, καὶ ἀποστοματίζειν αὐτὸν περὶ πλειόνων, 54 ἐνε- 
upon [him], and to make “speak ‘him about many things; watch- 
δρεύοντες ἑαὐτὸν" ἱκαὶ! ™Cnrovyrec' θηρεῦσαί τι ἐκ τοῦ 
ing him and seeking tocatch something out of 
στόματος αὐτοῦ "ἵνα κατηγορήσωσιν αὐτοῦ." 
mouth that they might accuse him. 
12 Ev oie ἐπισυναχθεισῶν τῶν μυριάδων τοῦ 
During which [things] being gathered together the myriads of the 


ὄχλου, ὥστε καταπατεῖν ἀλλήλους, ἤρξατο λέγειν πρὸς τοὺς 
crowd, soas totrample upon oneanother, he began tosay to 


193 


for ye are as graves 
which appear not, and 
the men that walk over 
them are not aware of 
them. 45 Then answer- 
ed one of the lawyers, 
and said unto him, 
Master, thus saying 
thou reproachest us 
also. 46 And he said, 
Woe unto you also, ye 
lawyers! for ye lade 
men with burdens grie- 
vous to be borne, and 
ye yourselves touch not 
the burdens with one 
of your fingers. 47 Woe 
unto you! for ye build 
the sepulchres of the 
prophets, and your 
fathers killed them, 
48 Truly ye bear wit- 
ness that ye allow 
the deeds of your fa- 
thers: for they indeed 
killed them, and ye 
build their sepulchres. 
49 Therefore also said 
the wisdom of God, I 
will send them pro- 
phets and apostles, and 
some of them they shall 
slay and _ persecute: 
50 That the blood of 
all the prophets, which 
was shed from the 
foundation of the 
world, may be required 
of this generation; 
51 from the blood of 
Abel unto the blood 
of Zacharias, which 
perished between the 
altar and the temple: 
verily I say unto you, 
It shall be required of 
this generation. 52 Woe 
unto you, lawyers! for 
ze hayetaken away the 
ey of knowledge: ye 
entered not in your- 
selves, and them that 
were entering in ye 
hindered. 53 Andas he 
said these things unto 
them, the scribes and 
the Pharisees began to 
urge him vehemently, 
and to provoke him to 
speak of many things: 
54 laying wait for 
him, and seeking to 
catch something out of 
his mouth, that they 
might accuse him. 


XII. In the mean 
time, when there were 
gathered together an 
innumerable multi- 
tude of people, inso- 
much that they trode 
one upen another, he 
began to say unto his 


Ὁ Kal οἱ Τ. 


5 — ot (read περιτ. walking) L[A]w. 
e [ἐκ]διώξουσιν Tra. 


TTrA. 4 — αὐτῶν τὰ μνημεῖα [LITTrA. 
x > , 5 

τὸ ἐκκεχυμένον Which has been poured out Tr. 

GLTTrA. 


!— καὶ GLTTraw. m — ζητοῦντες T[Tr]A- 


© μάρτυρές ἐστε Withesses ye are 
fro ἐκχυννόμενον LTA ; 
8 — τοῦ (7ead [the]) Lrrra. 
i Κἀκεῖθεν ἐξελθόντος αὐτοῦ and as he went out thence ΤΊΤΑ. 

0 — ἵνα κατηγορήσωσιν αὐτοῦ T[Tr]A. 


b εἰσήλθατε 
k > ΄ 
--- avTov Τ. 


Oo 


194 


disciples first of all, 
Beware ye of the lea- 
ven of the Pharisees, 
which is hypocrisy. 
2 For there is nothing 
covered, that shall not 
be revealed ; neither 
hid, that shall not be 
known. 3 Therefore 
whatsoever ye have 
spoken in darkness 
shall be heard in the 
light ; and that which 
ye have spoken in the 
ear in closets shall be 
proclaimed upon the 
housetops. 4 And I say 
unto you my friends, 
Be not afraid of them 
that kill the body, and 
after that have no 
more that they can do. 
5 But I will forewarn 
you whom ye shall 
fear : Fear him, which 
after he hath killed 
hath power to cast into 
hell; yea, I say unto 
you, Fear him. 6 Are 
not five sparrows sold 
for two farthings, and 
not one of them is for- 
gotten before God? 
7 But even the very 
hairs of your head are 
all numbered. Fear not 
therefore: ye are of 
more value than many 
sparrows. 8 Also I say 
unto you, Whosoever 
shall confess me before 
men, him shall the Son 
of man also confess be- 
fore the angels of God: 
9 but he that denieth 
me before men shall be 
denied before the an- 
gels of God. 10 And 
whosoever shall speak 
a word against the Son 
of man, it shall be for- 
given him: but unto 
him that blasphemeth 
against the Holy Ghost 
it shall not be for- 
given. 11 And when 
they bring you unto 
the synagogues, and 
unto magistrates, and 
powers, take ye no 
thought how or what 
thing ye shall answer, 
or what ye shall say: 
12 for the Holy Ghost 
shall teach you in the 
same hour what ye 
ought to say. 


13 And one of the 
company said unto 
him, Master, speak to 


AOY KAS. XII. 


μαθητὰς. αὐτοῦ πρῶτον, Προσέχετε ἑαυτοῖς ἀπὸ τῆς ζύμης 
his disciples first, Take heed toyourselves of the leaven 
τῶν Φαρισαίων, ἥτις ἐστὶν ὑπόκρισις. 2 οὐδὲν. δὲ συγκεκαλυμ- 
ofthe Pharisees, which is hypocrisy ; but nothing 2covered 
évoy ἐστὶν ὃ οὐκιἀποκαλυφθήσεται, Kai κρυπτὸν ὃ οὐ 
p lis which shall not be uncovered, nor hidden which 7not 
νωσθήσεται. 8 ἀνθ᾿ ὧν boa ἐν τῇ σκοτίᾳ εἴπατε, iv τῷ 
shall be known ; wherefore whatever in the darkness yesaid, in the 
wri acovoOnoera’ καὶ ὃ πρὸς τὸ οὖς ἔλαλήσατε ἐν τοῖς 
light shallbeheard; πᾶ what in the ear ye spoke in 
ταμείοις, κηρυχθήσεται ἐπὶ τῶν δωμάτων. 4 Λέγω.δὲ ὑμῖν 
chambers, shall be proclaimed upon the housetops. But I say to you, 
~ ΄ \ -Ὁ ᾽ \ ~ 2 , 
Toic-girowc_wov, Μὴ.φοβηθῆτε ἀπὸ τῶν Ῥἀποκτεινόντων! 
my friends, Ye should notfear because of those who kill 
τὸ σῶμα, Kai μετὰ ταῦτα μηὴ.-ἐχόντων “περισσότερόν" τι 


the body, and after these things are not able anything more 

ποιῆσαι. 5 ὑποδείξω.δὲ ὑμῖν τίνα φοβηθῆτε φοβήθητε 
to do. But I will shew you whom jyeshould fear: Fear 
τὸν pera τὸ ἀποκτεῖναι τἐξουσίαν ἔχοντα" ἐμβαλεῖν εἰς τὴν 


him who after having killed, has tocast into the 


, / , Φ ~ ~ 4 > ‘ , 
γέενναν" vai, λέγω ὑμῖν, τοῦτον φοβήθητε. 6 Οὐχὶ πέντε 
gehenna; yea, Isay toyou, “him fear. "Not “five 
στρουθία "πωλεῖται! ἀσσαρίων δύο; Kai ἕν ἐξ αὐτῶν οὐκ 
“sparrows are sold for 2assaria ‘two? and one of them “ποῦ 
ἔστιν ἐπιλελησμένον ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ" 7 ἀλλὰ καὶ αἱ τρίχες 
lis forgotten before God. Buteven the hairs 
τῆς.κεφαλῆς. ὑμῶν πᾶσαι ἠρίθμηνται. μὴ "οὖν! φοβεῖσθε" 
of your head 2all "have been numbered. *Not “therefore fear, 
πολλῶν στρουθίων διαφέρετε. ὃ Λέγω.δὲ ὑμῖν, Πᾶς ὃς ἂν 


authority 


thanmany sparrows ye are better. But I say to you, Hvery one whoever 
ὁμολογήσῃ ἐν ἐμοὶ ἔμπροσθεν τῶν ἀνθρώπων, Kai ὁ υἱὸς TOU 
may confess me before men, also the Son 


ἀνθρώπου ὁμολογήσει ἐν αὐτῷ ἔμπροσθεν τῶν ἀγγέλων τοῦ 
him 


of man will confess before the angels 
θεοῦ: 9 6.68 ἀρνησάμενός μὲ “ἐνώπιον τῶν ἀνθρώπων 
of God; but he that has denied me before men 


ἀπαρνηθήσεται ἐνώπιον τῶν ἀγγέλων τοῦ θεοῦ. 10 καὶ πᾶς 
will be denied before the angels of God; and every one 

ὃς ἐρεῖ λόγον εἰς τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, ἀφεθήσεται 
who shall say ἃ word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven 
αὐτῷ" τῷ. δὲ εἰς τὸ ἅγιον πνεῦμα βλασφημήσαντι 

him; buttohimwho against the Holy Spirit has blasphemed 


? ’ , « ‘ w , Π] « ~ , . 4 
obK-ageOnoera. 11 dray.de προσφέρωσιν" ὑμᾶς ἐπὶ τὰς 
it will not be forgiven. But when they bring you before the 


συναγωγὰς καὶ τὰς ἀρχὰς Kai τὰς ἐξουσίας, "μὴ-μεριμνᾶτεϊ 


synagogues and the rulers and the authorities, be not careful 

πῶς Yi) τί! ἀπολογήσησθε, ἢ τί εἴπητε᾽ 12 τὸ.γὰρ 
how or what yeshall reply in defence, or what ye should say ; for the 
ἅγιον πνεῦμα διδάξει ὑμᾶς ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ ὥρᾳ ἃ δεῖ 

Holy Spirit willteach you in thatsame hour what it behoves [you] 
εἰπεῖν. 

to say. 


13 Elvev.dg τις ταὐτῷ ἐκ τοῦ ὄχλου," Διδάσκαλε, εἰπὲ τῷ 
And ?said ‘one tohim from the crowd, Teacher, speak 


P ἀποκτενόντων G; 


® πωλοῦνται TTA, 


μεριμνήσητε ye Should not be careful rrr. 


τ ἔχοντα ἐξουσίαν LTTrA. 
ἡ εἰσφέρωσιν TTrA. χ μὴ 
> ΄- > ~ 
τ εκ TOU OXAOU αὐτῷ T. 


4 περισσόν L. 
Υ ἔμπροσθεν L. 
Υ [ἢ τῇ Tra. 


ἀποκτεννόντων LTTrA. 
t — οὖν [L]rtra. 


ΧΙ LUKE. 
ἀδελφῷ.μου μερίσασθαι per ἐμοῦ τὴν κληρονομίαν. 14 Ὁ δὲ 


tomybrother todivide with me _ the inheritance. But he 
εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ανθρωπε, Tic με κατέστησεν "δικαστὴν" ἢ μερισ- 
said ἴο him, Man, who*me ‘appointed a judge or a di- 


τὴν ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς; 15 Εἶπεν.δὲ πρὸς αὐτούς, Ὁρᾶτε καὶ φυλάσ- 


vider over you? And he said to them, See and keep your- 

σεσθε ἀπὸ ὕτῆς" πλεονεξίας" Ore οὐκ ἐν τῷ περισσεύειν 

selves from covetousness ; for not in the abundance 
Ti ἡ ζωὴ .αὐτοῦ ἐστιν ἐκ τῶν ὑπαρχόντων .“αὐτοῦ." 

‘to®anyone “his ?°life Sis ‘of *that which *he ®possesses. 

16 Εἴἶπεν.δὲ παραβολὴν πρὸς αὐτούς, λέγων, ᾿Ανθρώπου 
And he spoke a parable to them, saying, 3Of *a “man 

τινὸς πλουσίου ἀεῤφόρησεν" » χώρα 17 καὶ 


‘certain ®rich Sprought *forth ‘°abundantly ‘the *ground. And 
διελογίζετο ἐν ἑαυτῷ, λέγων, Ti ποιήσω, ὅτι οὐκιἔχω τ 


he was reasoning within himself, saying, What shallI do, for I have not 


ποῦ συνάξω τοὺς. καρπούς. μου ; 18 καὶ εἶπεν, Τοῦτο ποιήσω" 
where 1 shalllay up my fruits ? and hesaid, This willI do: 

καθελῶ μου τὰς ἀποθήκας, καὶ μείζονας οἰκοδομήσω, Kai 

I will take away my granaries, and_ greater will build, and 

συνάξω ἐκεῖ πάντα “τὰ.γενήματά" ἵμου" καὶ τὰ.ἀγαθά.μου, 
willlay up there all my produce and my good things, 
ἔχεις πολλὰ ἀγαθὰ 


19 καὶ ἐρῶ τῇ.Ψψυχῇ.μου, Ψυχή, 
and I will say to my soul, Soul, thouhast many good things 


κείμενα εἰς ἔτη πολλά: ἀναπαύου, φάγε, πίε, εὐφραίνου. 
laid by for *years ‘many; take thy rest, eat, drink, be merry, 
20 εἶπεν.δὲ αὐτῷ ὁ θεός, Ε΄ Αφρων," ταύτῃ τῇ νυκτὶ τὴν ψυχήν 
But *said*to*him ‘God, Fool, this night “soul 
haratrovow" ἀπὸ σοῦ" ἃ δὲ ἡτοίμασας τίγι 
they require of thee; and what Sthou ’didst *prepare 'to 7whom 
ἔσται: 21 οὕτως ὁ θησαυρίζων ἑαυτῷ, καὶ μὴ εἰς 
Sshall *he? Thus [is] he who treasuresup for himself, and not toward 
θεὸν πλουτῶν. 22 Ἐϊπεν.δὲ πρὸς τοὺς. μαθητὰς. "αὐτοῦ," Διὰ 


σου 
thy 


God is rich. Andhe said to his disciples, Because of 
τοῦτο ἰὑμῖν λέγω," μὴ-μεριμνᾶτε τῇ.Ψυχῇ. "ὑμῶν" τί φάγητε, 
this toyou I say, Be not careful astoyourlife what yeshouldeat, 


μηδὲ τῷ σώματι" τί ἐνδύσησθε. 28 17° ψυχὴ πλεῖόν ἐστιν 
ΠΟΥ͂ astothe body what yeshould puton. The life more is 
τῆς τροφῆς, Kai TO σῶμα τοῦ ἐνδύματος. 24 Karavonoare 
than the food, andthe body thanthe raiment. Consider 
τοὺς κόρακας, Ort Ῥοὐ! σπείρουσιν Iovde! θερίζουσιν, οἷς 
the ravens, for *not 1they "sow nor reap, to which 
οὐκιἔστιν ταμεῖον οὐδὲ ἀποθήκη, Kai ὁ θεὸς τρέφει αὐτούς" 
there isnot storehouse nor granary, and God feeds them, 
, ~ - ~ , ~ ~ / ‘ 4 
πόσῳ μᾶλλον ὑμεῖς Ὑ τ τῶν πετεινῶν ; 25 τίς. δὲ ἐξ 
How much more “ye ‘arebetter thanthe birds? And who of 


ὑμῶν "μεριμνῶν" δύναται "προσθεῖναι ἐπὶ τὴν. ἡλικίαν. αὐτοῦ" 
you [by] being careful is able to add to his stature 
πῆχυν teva"; 26 εἰ οὖν VYodbre! ἐλάχιστον δύνασθε, 


ἴ0Π6 ἢ least ye are able [todo], 


τί περὶ τῶν λοιπῶν μεριμνᾶτε; 27 Karavonoare τὰ κρίνα, 
why about the rest are ye careful? Consider the lilies, 


=cubit If therefore not even [the] 


195 


my brother, that he 
divide the inheritance 
with me. 14 And he 
said unto him, Man, 
who made me a judge 
or a divider over you? 
15 And he said unto 
them, Take heed, and 
beware of covetous- 
ness : for a man’s life 
consisteth not in the 
abundance of the 
things which he pos- 


sesseth. 16 And he 
spake a parable unto 
them, saying, The 


ground of a certain 
rich man brought forth 
plentifully : 17 and he 
thought within him- 
self, saying, What shall 
do, because I have no 
room where to bestow 
my fruits? 18 And he 
said, This will I do: I 
will pull down my 
barns, and build great- 
er; and there will I be- 
stow all my fruitsand 
my goods. 19 And I 
will say to my soul, 
Soul, thou hast much 
goods laid up for many 
years ; take thine ease, 
eat, drink, and be mer- 
ry. 20 But God said 
unto him, Thou fool, 
this night thy soul 
shall be required of 
thee : then whose shall 
those things be, which 
thou hast provided? 
21 So 8 he that layeth 
up treasure for him- 
self, and is not rich 
toward God. 22 And he 
said unto his disciples, 
Therefore I say unto 
you, Take no thought 
for your life, what ye 
shall eat; neither for 
the body, what ye shall 
puton. 23 The life is 
more than meat, and 
the body is more than 
raiment. 24 Consider 
the ravens: for they 
neither sow nor reap ; 
which neither have 
storehouse nor barn; 
and God feedeth them: 
how much more are 
ye better than the 
fowls? 25 And which 
of you with taking 
thought can add to 
his stature one cubit ? 
26 If ye then be not 
able to do that thing 
which is least, why 
take ye thought for the 
rest? 27 Consider the 
lilies how they grow: 


8 κριτὴν LITrA. %mdoysallLTTraw. “ αὐτῷ LTTrA,. 
τὸν σῖτον the wheat τσ. ἴ --- μου τι[Α]. 8 ἄφρον Gw. 
“oh 1. lAéyw ὑμῖν Tra, ἃ — ὑμῶν (read as to the life) Lrrra. 
body) Lt. °+ [yap] (read for the) tra. Ρ οὔτε neither Ta. 
" ἐπὶ τὴν ἡλικίαν αὐτοῦ προσθεῖναι A. τ — ἕνα (read a cubit) T[tr]a. 


d ηὐφόρησεν L. 
ἃ αἰτοῦσιν TrA. 


© τὰ γεννήματα Ἑ; 
igv7@T. *[av- 


a + [ὑμῶν] (read your 
4 οὔτε TA. 


τ [μεριμνῶν A. 
¥ οὐδὲ LTTrA. 


196 


they toil not, they spin 
not ; and yet I say unto 
you, that Solomon in 
all his glory was not 
arrayed like one of 
these. 28 If then God 
so clothe the grass, 
which is to day in the 
field, and to morrow is 
cast into the oven; how 
much more will he 
clothe you, O ye of lit- 
tlefaith? 29 And seek 
not ye what ye shall 
eat, or what ye shall 
drink, neither be ye of 
doubtful mind. 30 For 
all these things do the 
nations of the world 
seek after: and your 
Father knoweth that 
ye have need of these 
things. 31 Butrather 
seek ye the kingdom of 
God ; and all these 
things shall be added 
unto you. 32 Fear not, 
little flock; for it is 
your Father’s good 
pleasure to give you 
the kingdom. 33 Sell 
that ye have, and give 
alms; provide your- 
selves bags which wax 
not old, a treasure in 
the heavens that fail- 
eth not, where no 
thief approacheth, nei- 
ther moth corrupteth. 
34 For where your trea- 
sure is, there will your 
heart be also. 35 Let 
your loins be girded 
about, and your lights 
burning; 36 and ye 
yourselves like unto 
men that wait for their 
lord, when he will re- 
turn from the wed- 
ding; that when he 
cometh and _ knock- 
eth, they may open 
unto himimmediately, 
37 Blessed are those 
servants, whom the 
lord when he cometh 
shall find watching: 
verily I say unto you, 
that he shall gird him- 
self, and make them to 
sit down to meat, and 
will come forth and 
serve them. 38 Andif 
he shall come in the se- 
cond watch, or come in 
the third watch, and 
find them so, blessed 
are those’ servants. 
39 And this know, that 
if the goodman of the 
house had known what 
hour the thief would 


A-O ¥-K: A:S. 
πῶς "αὐξάνει" 
how they grow ; 

οὐδὲ Σολομὼν ἐν πάσῃ ry-dd&y.abrov περιεβάλετο we ἕν 
Noteven Solomon in all his glory was clothed as one 
τούτων. 28 εἰ δὲ Yrov χόρτον ἐν τῷ ἀγρῷ σήμερον ὄντα," καὶ 
of these. Butif the grass “in‘*the ‘field ‘to-day ‘'which “is, and 
αὔριον εἰς κλίβανον βαλλόμενον, ὁ θεὸς οὕτως ᾿ἀμφιέννυσιν," 
to-morrow into an oven is cast, God thus arrays, 
, ~ « ~ ᾽ , ‘ c ~ \ ~ 
πόσῳ μᾶλλον ὑμᾶς, ὀλιγόπιστοι; 29 Kai ὑμεῖς μὴ ζητεῖτε 
how much rather you, O[ye] of little faith? And ye seek ye not 
/ a a ll , ΄ A A 7 ry ~ 
τί φάγητε" ἢ" τί πίητε, καὶ μὴ.μετεωρέζεσθε. 30 ταῦτα 
what ye may eat or what ye may drink, and be not in anxiety; *these *things 
γὰρ πάντα τὰ ἔθνη τοῦ κόσμου θἐπιζητεῖ"" ὑμῶν.δὲ ὁ πατὴρ 
for all the nations of the world seek after ; and your Father 


τ « , ,ὔ \ ~ \ ΄ 
οἷδεν Ore χρῴζετε τούτων. 31 πλὴν ζητεῖτε τὴν βασιλείαν 
knows that ye have need of these things. But seekye the kingdom 


“τοῦ θεοῦ," καὶ ταῦτα “πάντα! προστεθήσεται ὑμῖν. 32 μὴ 
of God, and these “things ‘all shall be added to you. Not 


φοβοῦ, TO μικρὸν ποίμνιον᾽ ὅτι εὐδόκησεν ὁ. πατὴρ.ὑμῶν 
fear, little flock, for *took *delight lyour *Father 


δοῦναι ὑμῖν τὴν βασιλείαν. 88 πωλήσατε τὰ. ὑπάρχοντα ὑμῶν, 


XII. 


ὑμῖν,5 
to you, 


οὐδὲ νήθει"" λέγω. δὲ 


οὐ-κοπιᾷ, 
nor dothey spin; but I say 


they labour not, 


in giving you the’ kingdom. Sell your possessions, 
καὶ δότε ἐλεημοσύνην. ποιήσατε ἑαυτοῖς “βαλάντια" μὴ 
and give alms ; make to yourselves purses not 


παλαιούμενα, θησαυρὸν ἀνέκλειπτον ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς, ὕπου 
growing old, a treasure unfailing in the heavens, where 
Δ) ᾽ ? / ? \ ΄ a , ? 
κλέπτης οὐκ.ἐγγίζει, οὐδὲ σὴς διαφθείρει" 84 ὅπου.γάρ ἐστιν 
thief doesnotdrawnear, nor moth destroy. For where is 
ὁ.θησαυρὸς ὑμῶν, ἐκεῖ Kai 7)-Kapdla.vpey ἔσται. 35” "Ἔστωσαν 
your treasure, there also your heart will be. Let be 
{4 ~ 4 , Π] , ‘ € λύ , 5 ‘ 
υμῶν αἱ OOPVEC περιεζωσμέναι καὶ οἱ λύχνοι καιόμενοι" 36 καὶ 
your loins girded about and lamps burning; and 
ὑμεῖς ὅμοιοι ἀνθρώποις προσδεχομένοις τὸν. κύριον ἑαυτῶν, 
ye like to men waiting for their lord, 
πότε ξἀναλύσει" ἐκ τῶν γάμων, ἵνα ἐλθόντος καὶ Kpov- 
whenever he shall return from the wedding feasts, that having come and having 
σαντος, εὐθέως ἀνοίξωσιν αὐτῷ. 37 μακάριοι οἱ δοῦλοι 
knocked, immediately they may open to him. Blessed *bondmen 
ἐκεῖνοι odc ἐλθὼν ὁ κύριος εὑρήσει γρηγοροῦντας. ἀμὴν 
*those whom coming the Lord shall find watching. Verily 
λέγω ὑμῖν, Ore περιζώσεται Kai ἀνακλινεῖ αὐτούς; Kai 
Isay toyou, that he will gird himself and will make ?recline ‘them, and 
παρελθὼν διακονήσει αὐτοῖς. 88 xaitdy ἔλθῃ ἐν τῇ δευτέρᾳ 


coming up willserve them. And if hecome in the second 
DN ~ st} 2 ~ ΄ Ἃ ~ ἔλθ Ν᾿ « Lu 
φυλακῇ, Kai" ἐν τῇ τρίτῃ φυλακῇ ἔλθῃ, καὶ EVP οὕτως, 
watch, and in the thir watch hecome, and find (them) thus, 
μακάριοί εἰσιν ‘ot δοῦλοι ἐκεῖνοι." 39 τοῦτο.δὲ γινώσκετε, ὅτι 
blessed are 2bondmen ‘those. But this know, that 
εἰ 7δει ὁ οἰκοδεσπότης ποίᾳ ὥρᾳ ὁ κλέπτης ἔρχεται, 


if “had 7known 'the *master*of‘*the*housein what hourthe thief is coming, 


ΟΥ̓ οὔτε νήθει οὔτε ὑφαίνει they neither spin nor weave TA. 
ἀγρῷ τὸν χόρτον ὄντα σήμερον TA ; τὸν χόρτον σήμερον ἐν ἀγρῷ ὄντα LTr. 
® καὶ and TTr, 
ἃ — πάντα [L]TTrA. 
he may return LTtra. 


ἀμφιέζει TTrA. 
LTTra. 


x + [orc] that L. y ev 
“ ἀμφιάζει τι; 

b ἐπιζητοῦσιν TTrA. ς αὐτοῦ (read his kingdom) 
6 βαλλάντια LTTrAW. f αἱ ὀσφύες ὑμῶν L. & ἀναλύσῃ 
h κἂν ἐν τῇ δευτέρᾳ, κἂν and if in the second and if rtra. 


* [ot δοῦλοι] ἐκεῖνοι TrA ; — οἱ δοῦλοι ἐκεῖνοι (read are they) T. 


LUKE. 
καὶ οὐκ. ἂν «ἀφῆκεν "διορυγῆναι" 
and would not have suffered to be dug through 


γίνεσθε ἕτοιμοι" Ort 
be ye ready ; for 


XI]. 
Keyonyopnoev 


he would have watched, 


τὸν. οἶκον. αὐτοῦ. 40 καὶ ὑμεῖς "οὖν" 
his house, And ye __ therefore 


ὥρᾳ οὐ. δοκεῖτε, ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἔρχεται. 41 Εἶπεν. δὲ 
in the hour ye think not, the Son of man comes, And *said 


οαὐτῷ" ὁ Πέτρος, Κύριε, “dase ἡμᾶθ τὴν.παραβολὴν.ταύτην 
5to *him oe ord, this barable 


λέγεις, ἢ Kal πρὸς πάντας; 49 ΡΕΐπεν.δὲ" ὁ κύριος, Tic 
ΕΡΘΒΈΒΕΙ, thou, or also to all? Andsaid the Lord, Who 


ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ πιστὸς οἰκονόμος “καὶ! φρόνιμος, ὃν καταστήσει 
then is the faithful steward and prudent, whom “will *set 


ὁ κύριος ἐπὶ τῆς.θεραπείας. αὐτοῦ, ττοῦ" διδόναι ἐν καιρῷ "τὸ" 


ἄν, 


‘the Lord over his household, togive in season’ the 
σιτομέτριον; 43 μακάριος 0.dovdoc-éKeivoc ὃ» ἐλθὼν 
measure of corn? Blessed that bondman whom “haying *come 


ὁ.κύριος. αὐτοῦ εὑρήσει ποιοῦντα οὕτως. 44 ἀληθῶς λέγω ὑμῖν, 
‘his *Lord will find doing thus. Of a truth I say to you 


OTL ἐπὶ πᾶσιν τοῖς. ὑπάρχουσιν. αὐτοῦ καταστήσει αὐτόν. 
that over all his possessions he will set him. 


45 ᾿Εὰν.δὲ εἴπῃ ὁ.δοῦλος.ἐκεῖνος ἐν τῇ. καρδίᾳ: αὐτοῦ, Χρο- 
But if enol eey *that *bondman in his heart, ‘De- 


νίζει ὁ.κὐριός.μου ἔρχεσθαι: καὶ ἄρξηται τύπτειν τοὺς 
lays my *Lord to come, and should begin to beat the 


παῖδας Kai τὰς παιδίσκας, ἐσθίειν.τε καὶ πίνειν καὶ με- 
men-servants and the pald-servanta, andtoeat and todrink and tobe 


θύσκεσθαι: 46 ἥξει ὁ κύριος τοῦ.δούλου.ἐκείνου ἐν ἡμέρᾳ 
drunken, Swill’come ‘the 7Lord Sof *that -pondman in aday 


οὐ-προσδοκᾷ, Kai ἐν Woe ἢ καὶ 
in which he does ποῦ expect, and in anhour which ΚΞ and 


διχοτο ομήσει αὐτόν, καὶ τὸ. μέρος.αὐτοῦ μετὰ τῶν ἀπίστων 
willcut7in*two ‘him, and his portion with the unbelievers 


θήσει. 47 ἐκεῖνος.δὲ ὁ δοῦλος ὁ γνοὺς τὸ θέλημα τοῦ 
will appoint. But that bondman who knew the will 


κυρίου. "ἑαυτοῦ," Kai μὴ.ἑτοιμάσας ‘unde’ ποιήσας πρὸς 
of his Lord, and prepared not nor did according to 


τὸ θέλημα.αὐτοῦ, δαρήσεται πολλάς" 48 ὁ δὲ μὴ 
his will, shall be beaten with many (stripes}; buthe who *not 


γνούς, ποιήσας.δὲ ἄξια πληγῶν, δαρήσεται ὀλίγας. 
knew, and did [things] worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few. 


παντὶ δὲ ᾧ ἐδόθη πολύ, πολὺ ζητηθήσεται παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ" 
And everyone to whom was given much, much will be required from him; 


καὶ ᾧ παρέθεντο πολύ, περισσότερον αἰτήσουσιν αὐτόν. 
and to whom wascommitted much, the more will ἜΠΟΣ, ask οὐ him. 


49 Πῦρ ἦλθον βαλεῖν "είς" τὴν γῆν, καὶ τί θέλω εἰ ἤδη 
Fire Icame tocast into the earth, and what willl if already 


ἀνήφθη; 50 βάπτισμα.δὲ ἔχω βαπτισθῆναι, καὶ πῶς συν- 


ινώσκει, 
ows not, 


197 


come, he would have 
watched, and not have 
suffered his house to be 
broken through. 40 Be 
ye therefore ready al- 
so : for the Sonof man 
cometh at an hour 
when ye think not. 
41 Then Peter said un- 
to him, Lord, speakest 
thou this parabie unto 
us, or even to all? 
42’ And the Lord said, 
Who then is that faith- 
ful and wise steward, 
whom Ais lord shall 
make ruler over his 
household, to give them 
their portion of meat 
in due season? 43 Bless- 
ed is that servant, 
whom his lord when he 
cometh shall find so 
doing. 44 Of atruthI 
say unto you, that he 
will make him ruler 
over all that he hath, 
45 But and if that ser- 
vant say in his heart, 
My lord delayeth his 
coming; and shall be- 
gin to beat the menser- 
vants and maidens, and 
to eat and drink, and 
to bedrunken; 46 the 
lord of that servant 
will come in a day 
when he looketh not 
for him, and at an hour 
when he is not aware, 
and willcut himinsun- 
der, and will appoint 
him his portion with 
the unbelievers, 47 And 
that servant, which 
knew his lord’s will, 
and prepared not him- 
self, neither did accord- 
ing to his wiil, shall be 
beaten with many 
stripes. 48 But he that 
knew not, and did com- 
mit things worthy of 
stripes, shall be beat- 
en with few stripes. 
For unto whomsoever 
much is given, of him 
shall be much requir- 
ed: and to whom men 
have committed much, 
of kim they wiil ask 
themore, 49 Tam come 
to send fire on the 
earth; and what will 
I, if it be already kin- 
dled? 50 But I have a 
baptism to be baptized 
with; and how am I 
straitened till it be 


it be kindled? Buta baptism I have to be baptized ἘΠ], and how amI accomplished! 51 Sup- 
ἔχομαι ἕως. Σοῦ τελεσθῇ. 51 δοκεῖτε ὅτι εἰρήνην Tape eC ares lip ΟΣ 
straitened until it be accomplished! Think ye that peace T tell you, Nay; puta 
γενόμην δοῦναι ἐν τῇ γῇ; οὐχί, λέγω ὑμῖν, GAN ἢ ther division: 52 for 
came togive in the earth? No, Isay toyou, but rather 

— ἐγρηγόρησεν ἄν, και (read he would not have suffered) 1. 1 — ἂν Tra. m διορυ- 
ΡΝ Τα. na -- οὖν LITra. ο — αὐτῷ Ltr[A]. P καὶ εἶπεν TTra. 46 the Lrtra: 
καὶ o and the w. - τοῦ L[Tra]. ee τὸ (read a measure of corn) Tra. τ αὐτοῦ 
LTTrA. τ OYT. 5 ἐπὶ upcn LTTraw. τ ὅτου LTTrAW 


198 


from henceforth there 
shall be five in one 
house divided, three 
against two, and two 
against three. 53 The 
father shall be divided 
against the son, and 
the son against the 
father ; the mother a- 
gainst "the daughter, 
and the daughter a- 
gainst the mother ; the 
mother in law against 
her daughter in law, 
and the daughter in 
law against her mother 
in law. 


54 And he said also 
to the people, When ye 
see a cloud rise out of 
the west, straightway 
ye say, There cometh a 
shower; and so it is, 
55 And when ye see 
the south wind blow, 
ye say, There will be 
heat ; and it cometh to 
pass. 56 Y e hypocrites, 
ye can discern the face 
of the sky and of the 
earth; but how is it 
that ye do not discern 
this time? 57 Yea, and 
why even of yourselves 
judge ye not what is 
right? 58 When thou 
goest with thine adver- 
sary to the magistrate, 
as thou art in the way, 
give diligence that 
thon mayest be deli- 
vered from him; lest he 
hale thee to the judge, 
and the judge deliver 
thee to the officer, and 
the officer cast thee in- 
to prison. 59 I tell thee, 
thou shalt not depart 
thence, till thou hast 
paid the very last mite. 


XIII. There were 
present at that season 
some that told him of 
the Galileans, whose 
blood Pilate had min- 
gled with their sacri- 
fices. 2 And Jesus 
answering said unto 
them, Suppose ye that 
these Gualilwans were 
sinners above all the 
Galilzans, because 
they suffered such 
things? 3 1 tell you, 
Nay: but, except ye 
repent, ye shall all 
likewise perish. 4 Or 


y ἑνὶ οἴκῳ LTTrA. 


ALO YKEAS:: XII, XIII. 


διαμερισμόν. 52 ἔσονται.γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν πέντε ἐν Yoikw 
division ; for there willbe from henceforth five in “house 


ἑνὶ" διαμεμερισμένοι, τρεῖς ἐπὶ δυσὶν καὶ δύο ἐπὶ τρισίν. 
Jone divided, three against two and two against three. 


53 διαμερισθήσεται! πατὴρ “ἐφ᾽! υἱῷ, καὶ υἱὸς ἐπὶ πατρί: 


2Will “be *divided father against son, and son against father ; 
μήτηρ ἐπὶ Ovyarpi," καὶ θυγάτηρ ἐπὶ “μητρί " πενθερὰ 
mother against daughter, and daughter against mother; mother-in-law 
ἐπὶ τὴν νύμφην “αὐτῆς, καὶ νύμφη ἐπὶ τὴν 
against *daughter-in-law ‘her, and daughter-in-law against 
πενθερὰν “αὐτῆς." 
?mother-in-law ‘her. 


δά "Ἐλεγεν.δὲ καὶ τοῖς ὄχλοις, Ὅταν ἴδητε ἱτὴν" νεφέλην 
ἈΑπᾶ he said also tothe crowds, When yesce_ the cloud 


ἀνατέλλουσαν δἀαπὸ" δυσμῶν, εὐθέως λέγετε, " Ὄμβρος 
rising up from ΕἸΣῚ west, SEELEY ye say, A shower 


ἔρχεται" καὶ γίνεται οὕτως. 55 καὶ ὅταν νότον πνέοντα, 
is coming; and it happens 80. And when a south wind [is] blowing, 


λέγετε, Ὅτι καύσων ἔσται: καὶ γίνεται. 56 ὑποκριταί, τὸ 
ye aay, Heat there will be; and it happens. Hypocrites, the 


πρόσωπον τῆς γῆς Kai τοῦ οὐρανοῦ οἴδατε δοκιμάζειν" 
appearance ofthe earth and οὗ the heaven ye know [how] to ieee: 


τὸν. δὲ καιρὸν. τοῦτον πῶς ἰοὐ.δοκιμάζετε" . 57 τί.δὲ καὶ ἀφ᾽ 
but this time how do ye not discern? And why even of 


ἑαυτῶν ov.Kpivere τὸ δίκαιον; 58 ὡς. γὰρ ὑπάγεις μετὰ 
yourselves judge ye not what[is] right? For as thou goest with 
τοῦ.ἀντιδίκου.σου ἐπ᾿ ἄρχοντα, ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ δὸς ἐργασίαν 
thine adverse party before amagistrate, in the way give diligence 
ἀπηλλάχθαι ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ" μήποτε κατασύρῃ σε πρὸς 
ὕο ὍΘ βοὺ free from him, lest he ταὶ drag away thee to 
τὸ» κριτήν, καὶ ὁ κριτής σε Ἐπαραδῷ" τῷ πράκτορι, Kai 
the judge, and the judge thee shoul eae tothe officer, and 
ὁ πράκτωρ σε ἰβάλλῳ" εἰς φυλακήν. 59 λέγω σοι, οὐ-μὴ 


the officer thee should cast into prison. if aay to thee, In no wise 
ἐξέλθῃς ἐκεῖθεν ἕως. ποὺ" καὶ τὸ ἔσχατον λεπτὸν 

shalt thou come out thence until even the last lepton 
ἀποδῷς. 


thou shalt have paid, 
18 Παρῆσαν.δέ τινες ἐν αὐτῷ.τῷ καιρῷ ἀπαγγέλλοντες 


And were “present 'some at the same time telling 


4 Tartuv DTT 4 Ι κΦ,,ι.ζ 
αὐτῷ περὶ τῶν Tart αἰων, ὧν τὸ αἷμα tAATOC™ ἐμιξὲν 
him about’ the Galileans, of whom the blood Pilate mingled 


μετὰ τῶν θυσιῶν. αὐτῶν. 2 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς ° ὁ Ἰησοῦς" εἶπεν 
with their sacrifices. And ΔῈ ΤοσΙΩς Jesus said 


αὐτοῖς, Δοκεῖτε Ore οἱ. Γαλιλαῖοι. οὗτοι ἁμαρτωλοὶ παρὰ πάν- 
tothem, Think ye that these Galileans sinners beyond all 


τας τοὺς Γαλιλαίους ἐγένοντο, ὅτι Ῥτοιαῦτα' πεπόνθασιν; 


the Galileans were, because such things Yeh have suffered? 
3 οὐχί, λέγω ὑμῖν" ἀλλ᾽ ἐὰν μὴ “μετανοῆτε," πάντες τὡσαύ- 
No, Isay toyou; but if ye repent not, all 7in *like 


* tprow διαμερισθήσονται" (read three will be pia ) LTTra. 


ἃ ἐπὶ ES b ᾿ θυγατέρα LITrA. “μητέραν; τὴν μητέρα LTrA. d — αὐτῆς τ. — αὐτῆς 
TTra. — τὴν (read a cloud) Lrtr[a]. Β ἐπὶ at T. h + ὅτι that[L}rtra. ἰ οὐκ οἴδατε 
ΤΟΙΣ a know ye not to discern? tr. * παραδώσει shall deliver LTTrA. 1 βάλῃ GW ; 


βαλεῖ shall cast LTTra. 
P ταῦτα these things TTr. 


(L]rtTra. 


m — of TTr. » ἸΤειλᾶτος T. 


— ὃ Ἰησοῦς (read he said) 
4 μετανοήσητε L. 


ἡ ὁμοίως LTTrA. 


XIII. LUKE. 
τως" ἀπολεῖσθε. 4 ἢ ἐκεῖνοι οἱ "δέκα.καὶ. ὀκτὼ" ἐφ᾽ ovd¢ 
4manner ‘ye shall perish. Or those eighteen on whom 


ἔπεσεν ὁ πύργος ἐν TH Σιλωὰμ καὶ ἀπέκτεινεν αὐτούς, δοκεῖτε 
fell the tower in Siloam and killed them, think ye 
Ore tovrou ὀφειλέται ἐγένοντο παρὰ πάντας * ἀνθρώπους 
that these debtors were beyond all men 
τοὺς κατοικοῦντας έν" ‘Tepovoadnp; 5 οὐχί, λέγω ὑμῖν" 
who dwelt in Jerusalem ? No, Isay toyou; 
ἐὰν p*peravonre,' πάντες Youowwc' ἀπολεῖσθε. 
if ye repent not, all *in *like*manner ‘ye shall perish. 
> yy Ὧν , 5 ΄ A ~ rey 
6 "Ἐλεγεν.δὲ ταύτην τὴν παραβολήν. Συκῆν εἶχεν τις 
And he spoke this parable : 5A Sfig-tree *had 'a*certain 
τὲν τῷ ἀμπελῶνι. αὐτοῦ πεφυτευμένην᾽" καὶ ἦχθεν “καρπὸν 


ἀλλ᾽ 
but 


(?man] in his vineyard planted ; and he came fruit 
ζητῶν" ἐν αὐτῇ Kai οὐχ εὗρεν. 7 εἶπεν. δὲ πρὸς τὸν ἀμ- 
seeking on it and didnot find{any]. Andhesaid to the vine- 
πελουργόν, ᾿Ιδού, τρία ἔτη" ἔρχομαι ζητῶν καρπὸν ἐν τῇ 
dresser, Behold, three years I come seeking fruit on 
συκῇ ταύτῃ Kai οὐχ-εὑρίσκω: ἔκκοψον “ αὐτήν" “ivari' καὶ 
this fig-tree and donot find [any]: cut "down Lit, why even 
τὴν γῆν καταργεῖ ; 8 ὁ. δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς λέγει αὐτῷ, 


the ground does it render useless? Βαΐῦ ΒΘ to him, 
Κύριε, ἄφες αὐτὴν καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἔτος, ἕως ὅτου σκάψω περὶ 
Sir, let?alone ‘it also this year, until I shall dig about 


αὐτὴν καὶ βάλω *kompiay! 9 κἂν μὲν ποιήσῃ ἱκαρπόν" 


answering says 


it and put manure, and if indeed itshouldbear frnit—; 
> , ᾽ ‘ , 1 > , 7 ΄ 
εἰ δὲ μήγε, εἰς.τὸ μέλλον" ἐκκόψεις αὐτήν. 
butif not, hereafter thou shalt cut *down it. 


10 Ἦν.δὲ διδάσκων ἐν μιᾷ τῶν συναγωγῶν ἐν τοῖς σάβ- 
And Π6 was teaching in one ofthe synagogues on the sab- 
Baow 11 καὶ ἰδού, γυνὴ δϑἦν᾽ πνεῦμα ἔχουσα ἀσθενείας 
baths. And behold, a woman there was “a “spirit ‘having of infirmity 
ἔτη "δέκα καὶ ὀκτώ," καὶ ἦν "συγκύπτουσα᾽ καὶ p).dvvapern 
?years ‘eighteen, and she was benttogether and unable 
ἀνακύψαι εἰς.τὸ παντελές. 12 ἰδὼν.δὲ αὐτὴν ὁ Ἰησοῦς 
300 *lift Sup “herself ‘wholly. And seeing her Jesus 
προσεφώνησεν καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῇ, Γύναι, ἀπολέλυσαι ἷ 
called to [her] and said toher, Woman, thou hast been loosed from 


199 


those eighteen, upon 
whom the tower in 
Siloam fell, and slew 
them, think ye that 
they were sinners a- 
bove all men that 
dwelt in Jerusalem? 
5 I tell you, Nay: but, 
except ye repent, ye 
shall 41) likewise 
perish, 


6 He spake also this 
parable; A certain man 
had a fig tree planted 
in his vineyard; and he 
came and sought fruit 
thereon, and found 
none. 7 Then said he 
unto the dresser of 
his vineyard, Behold, 
these three years I 
come seeking fruit on 
this fig tree, and find 
none: cut it down; 
why cumbereth it the 
ground? 8 And he an- 
swering said unto him, 
Lord, let it alone this 
year also, till I shall 
dig about it, and dung 
it: 9 and if it bear 
fruit, well: and if not, 
then after that thou 
shalt cut it down. 


10 And he was teach- 
ing in one of the syna- 
gogues on the sabbath. 
11 And, behold, there 
was a woman which 
had a spirit of infirmi- 
ty eighteen years, and 
was bowed together, 
and could in no wise 
lift up herself. 12 And 
when Jesus saw her, 
he called her to him, 
and said unto her, Wo- 
man, thou art loosed 
from thine infirmity. 


τῆς.ἀσθενείας.σοῦ. 13 Kai ἐπέθηκεν αὐτῇ τὰς χεῖρας" 13 And he laid his 
thine infirmity. And  helaid upon her [his] hands, hands aT anie oka 
καὶ παραχρῆμα "ἀνωρθώθη, καὶ ἐδόξαζεν τὸν θεόν. made straight, and 
and immediately she was made straight, and glorified God. glorified God. 14 And 
5 δ ee 5 7 Ξ a > the ruler of the syna- 

14 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ ὁ ἀρχισυνάγωγος, ἀγανακτῶν ὅτι  gogue answered with 
But ‘answering ‘the 7ruler “of *the °synagogue, indignant because indignation, because 

τς , > , τ a = = 1 that Jesus had healed 
τῷ σαββάτῳ ἐθεράπευσεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς; ἔλεγεν τῷ ὄχλῳ, on the Sabbath day, 
onthe sabbath healed 1 Jesus, said tothe crowd, 4nd said unto the peo- 
Cis wy, > a = > , . 2. mv ple, There are six days 

“EE Ἡμέραι ELOLY, ἐν ALC δεὶ ἐργάζεσθαι ἐν “Ταῦὺ- in which men ought to 
Six days there are, in whichit behoves[men] to work; in these work: in them there- 
Ι x > , θ ἜΞΩ ἢ ι rie! US ~ fore come and be 
rac! οὖν ἐρχόμενοι θεραπεύεσθε, καὶ μὴ TY ἡμέρᾳ TOV healed, and noi on the 
therefore coming be healed, and notonthe “day sabbath day. 15 The 

5 δέκα [καὶ] ὀκτὼ LTrA; δεκαοκτὼ τ. ‘avroitheyurtra. *° + rodstheLTtTra.  —ev 


(read [in]) tra. x μετανοήσητε LITrA. Υ ὡσαύτως TTrA. 
ἀμπελῶνι αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 4 ζητῶν καρπὸν GLTTrAW. 
© + οὖν therefore (cut)L. ‘4ivatiLTraA. © κόπρια EGLTTrAW. 

εἰ δὲ μήγε (read bear fruit hereafter; but if not) Trra, 8 — ἦν LrTra. 
i+amofromut. ΚΕ ἀνορθώθη ττττ. |! + ὅτι that Ta, 


ν᾿ : πεφυτευμένην ἐν τῷ 
> ἀφ᾽ οὗ since (three years) Tira. 
f καρπὸν εἰς TO μέλλον" 


h συνκύπτουσα T. 


Mm αὐταῖς them LTTrA. 


200 


Lord then answered 
him, and said, 

hypocrite, doth not 
each one of you on the 
sabbath loose his ox or 
his ass from the stall, 
and lead him away to 
watering? 16 And 
ought not this woman, 
being a daughter of 
Abraham, whom Satan 
hath bound, lo, these 
eighteen years, be 
loosed from this bond 
on the sabbath day ? 
17 And when he had 
said these things, all 
his adversaries were 
ashamed : and all the 
people rejoiced for all 
the glorious things 
that were done by him. 


18 Then said he, Unto 
what is the kingdom 
of God like? and 
whereunto shall I re- 
sembleit? 19 It is like 
a grain of mustard 
seed, which a man 
took, and cast into his 
garden ; and it grew, 
and waxed a great tree; 
and the fowls of the air 
lodged in the branches 
of it. 20 And again he 
said, Whereunto shall 
T liken the kingdom of 
God? 21 It is like lea- 
ven, which a woman 
took and hid in three 
measures of meal, till 
the whole was lea- 
vened. 


22 And he went 
through the cities and 
villages, teaching, and 
journeying toward Je- 
rusalem, 23 Then said 
one unto him, Lord, 
are there few that be 
saved? And he said 
unto them, 24 Strive to 
enter in at the strait 
gate: for many, I say 
unto you, will seek to 
enter in, and shall not 
be able. 25 When once 
the master of the house 
is risen up, and hath 
shut to the door, and 
ye begin to stand with- 
out, and to knock at 
the door, saying, Lord, 
Lord, open unto us; 
and he shall answer 
and say unto you, I 
know you not whence 
yeare: 26 then shall 
ye begin to say, We 

ave eaten and drunk 
in thy presence, and 
thou hast taught in 


© δὲ but LTTrA. 


® — μέγα [L)T[TrA]. 
GLYTrA. 


AOYKASX. itl 
σαββάτου. 15 ᾿Απεκρίθη dv" αὐτῷ ὁ κύριος, και εἶπεν, 
tgabbath. *Answered ‘therefore *him *the *Lord, and said, 
PY ποκριτά," ἕκαστος ὑμῶν τῷ σαββάτῳ οὐκ.λύει τὸν 
Hypocrite, eachone ofyou onthe sabbath does he not loose 
βοῦν.αὐτοῦ ἢ τὸν ὄνον ἀπὸ τῆς φάτνης, καὶ ἀπαγαγὼν 
his ox or ass from the manger, and having led [it] away 
ποτίζει; 16 ταύτην .δὲ θυγατέρα ᾿Αβραὰμ οὖσαν, 
give [it] drink ? And this [woman], 7a °daughter *of "Abraham ‘*being, 
ἣν ἔδησεν ὁ σατανᾶς, ἰδού, δέκα.καὶ. ὀκτὼ ἔτη, οὐκ ἔδει 
whom “has *bound 1Satan, lo, eighteen years, ought [she] not 
λυθῆναι ἀπὸ τοῦ.δεσμοῦ.τούτου TH ἡμέρᾳ τοῦ σαββάτου ; 
to be loosed from this bond on the “day sabbath ? 
17 Καὶ ταῦτα λέγοντος.αὐτοῦ κατῃσχύνοντο πάντες οἱ 
And “these >things ‘on *his βαυγίηρ Twere “ashamed ®all who 
ἀντικείμενοι αὐτῷ Kai πᾶς ὁ ὄχλος ἔχαιρεν ἐπὶ πᾶσιν 
were opposed tohim; and all the crowd wererejoicing at all 
τοῖς ἐνδόξοις τοῖς γινομένοις ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 
the glorious things which were being done by him. 
18 Ἔλεγεν 94δέ,! Τίνι ὁμοία ἐστὶν ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ ; 
*He *said ‘and, To what “like lis the kingdom of God? 


καὶ τίνι ὁμοιώσω αὐτήν; 19 ὁμοία ἐστὶν κόκκῳ σινάπεως, 
and to what shall I liken it? Like itis toa grain of mustard, 
Tov! λαβὼν ἄνθρωπος ἔβαλ ἰς κῆ ἑ ve i 

0 c ἔβαλεν εἰς κῆπον ἑαυτοῦ" Kai 


which “having *taken ‘a 7man cast into ?garden this ; and 
nvEnoer καὶ ἐγένετο εἰς δένδρον "μέγα," Kai τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ 
itgrew and came into ἃ *tree *great, and the birds ofthe 
οὐρανοῦ κατεσκήνωσεν ἐν τοῖς.κλάδοις αὐτοῦ. 20 ‘Kai! πάλιν 
heaven roosted in its branches. And again 
/ « , ‘ ΄ ~ ~ c , 
εἶπεν, Τίνι ὁμοιώσω τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ: 21 ὁμοία 
he said, To what shallI liken the kingdom of God? Like 
ἐστὶν ζύμῃ, ἣν λαβοῦσα γυνὴ γἐνέκρυψεν" εἰς ἀλεύρου 
itis toleaven, which “having *taken*?a*woman hid in “of *meal 
σάτα τρία, ἕως.οὗ ἐζυμώθη ὅλον. 
“seahs ‘three, until *was “leavened ‘all. 
22 Kai διεπορεύετο κατὰ πόλεις καὶ κώμας διδάσκων, καὶ 
And he went through by cities and villages teaching, and 
πορείαν ποιούμενος εἰς “᾿Ιερουσαλήμ." 23 εἶπεν.δέ τις αὐτῷ, 
ΞΡΓΟΡΎΘΒΒ lmaking towards Jerusalem. And said one to him, 
Κύριε, εἰ ὀλίγοι ot σωζόμενοι ; ‘O08 εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, 
Lord, {are] *few ‘those *being “saved? Buthe said to them, 
24 ᾿Αγωνίζεσθε εἰσελθεῖν διὰ τῆς στενῆς πύλης" ὅτι 
Strive with earnestness to enter ἴῃ through the narrow gate ; for 
, “ « ~ , > ~ ‘ 9, > , 
πολλοί, λέγω ὑμῖν, ζητήσουσιν εἰσελθεῖν, καὶ οὐκ. ἰσχύσουσιν. 
many, Isay to you, will seek toenterin, and will not be able. 
25 ἀφ᾽ οὗ.ἂν ἐγερθῇ ὁ οἰκοδεσπότης, καὶ ἀπο- 
From the time °shall το Srisen °up ‘the *master Sof *the Shouse, and 5841] 
κλείσῃ τὴν θύραν, καὶ ἄρξησθε ἔξω ἑστάναι Kai κρούειν τὴν 
hayeshut the door, and ye begin without tostand and toknockat the 
θύραν, λέγοντες, Κύριε, Yedpre," ἄνοιξον ἡμῖν" καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς 
door, saying, Lord, Lord, open tous; and he answering 
ἐρεῖ ὑμῖν, Οὐκ οἷδα ὑμᾶς πόθεν ἐστέ. 26 τότε ἄρξεσθε 
willsay toyou, Idonotknow you whence ye are. Then will ye begin 
λέγειν, ᾿Εφάγομεν ἐνώπιόν.σου καὶ ἐπίομεν, καὶ ἐν ταῖς 
to say, e ate in thy presence and drank, and in 


P Ὕποκριταί hypocrites LITraw. 
t— καὶ W. Y ἔκρυψεν TTra. 


4 οὖν therefore TTra. TOE, 
ν Ἱεροσόλυμα T. x θύρας door 


Υ — κύριε [L]TTrA. 


MAT XIV. LUKE. 


πλατείαις.ἡμῶν ἐδίδαξας. 27 καὶ ἐρεῖ, Λέγω ὑμῖν, οὐκ 
our streets thou didst teach. And he willsay, Itell you, *Not 
οἶδα τὑμᾶς! πόθεν ἐστέ’ ἀπόστητε ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ πάντες 
*I?doknow you whence yeare; depart from me, all [79] 
*ot! ἐργάται rjc! ἀδικίας. 28 ἐκεῖ ἔσται ὁ κλαυθμὸς Kai 
the workers of unrighteousness. There shallbethe weeping and 
ὁ βρυγμὸς τῶν ὀδόντων, bray “ὔψησθε" ᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ ᾿Ισαὰκ 
the gnashing ofthe teeth, when ye see Abraham and Isaac 
kai ᾿Ιακὼβ καὶ πάντας τοὺς προφήτας ἐν TH βασιλείᾳ τοῦ 
and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom 
θεοῦ, ὑμᾶς.δὲ ἐκβαλλομένους ἔξω. 29 καὶ ἥξουσιν ἀπὸ 
of God, but yourselves being cast out. And they shall come from 
ἀνατολῶν καὶ δυσμῶν, καὶ ἀπὸ" βοῤῥᾶ Kai νότου, kai ava- 


east and west, and from north and south, and _ shall 
κλιθήσονται ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ. 30 καὶ ἰδού, εἰσὶν 
recline in the kingdom of God, And io, there are 


ἔσχατοι οἱ ἔσονται πρῶτοι, Kai εἰσιν πρῶτοι οἱ ἔσονται 


last who shall be first, and thereare first who shall be 
ἔσχατοι. 
last. 
31 ᾿Εν.αὐτῇ τῇ “ἡμέρᾳ ἱπροσῆλθόν" τινες Φαρισαῖοι, 
On the same day cameto [him] certain Pharisees, 


λέγοντες αὐτῷ, Ἔξελθε καὶ πορεύου ἐντεῦθεν, ὕτι ᾿Ηρώδης 


saying tohim, Goout and _ proceed hence, for Herod 
θέλει σε ἀποκτεῖναι. 32 Kai εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Πορευθέντες 
desires “thee 1to “kill. And hegsaid tothem, Having gone 
» ~ > ’ ’ 2 ,ὔ ? ΄ ’ ‘ Set YZ 
εἴπατε τῇ.ἀλώπεκι.ταύτῃ, ᾿Ιδού, ἐκβάλλω δαιμόνια καὶ ἰάσεις 
Bay to that fox, Lo, I cast out demons and _ cures 
ξἐπιτελῶ" σήμερον καὶ αὔριον, Kai τῇ τρίτῃ" τελειοῦμαι. 
I complete to-day and to-morrow, and the third (day] I am perfected ; 
~ A ‘ ~ > , 
33 πλὴν δεῖ με σήμερον καὶ αὔριον Kai TY ἐχομένῃ 
but it behoves me _ to-day and to-morrow and the [day] following 


προφήτην ἀπολέσθαι ἔξω 


πορεύεσθαι: Ore οὐκ. ἐνδέχεται 
a prophet toperish outof 


to proceed ; for it is not possible [for] 
“Ἱερουσαλήμ. 84 Ἱερουσαλήμ, “Iepovcadnp, ἡ ἀποκτείνουσα 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who killest 
τοὺς προφήτας, Kai λιθοβολοῦσα τοὺς ἀπεσταλμένους πρὸς 
the prophets, and stonest those who have been sent to 
αὐτήν, ποσάκις ἠθέλησα ἐπισυνάξαι τὰ.τέκνα.σου, ὃν-τρόπον 
her, how often wouldI havegathered thy children, in the way 
ἱόρνις" kryy' ἑαυτῆς Ἱνοσσιὰν" ὑπὸ τὰς πτέρυγας, 
ahen [gathers] her brood under [her] wings, 
καὶ οὐκ.ἠθελήσατε. 35 ἰδού, ἀφίεται ὑμῖν ὁ.οἶκος ὑμῶν ™éon- 
and ye would not. Behold, isleft toyou your house de- 
Dduny δὲ λέγω! ὑμῖν. οὔτι! odb-un P ΙΝ ΡΟ 
μος αμὴν ξ éyw υμιν, οτι ου-μὴ με LOnTE EWC.*aV 
solate; *verily'and Isay toyou, that notatall me shallyesee until 
"Ey," Sore! εἴπητε, Εὐλογημένος ὁ ἐρχόμενος ἐν ὀνό- 
it come when ΥὙ6 580, Blessed [15] hewho comes in [the] name 
ματι κυρίου. 
of [the] Lord. 
14 Καὶ ἐγένετο 


And it came to pass on 


ell 


ἐν τῷ.ἐλθεῖν.αὐτὸν εἰς οἶκόν τινος THY 
his having gone intoa house of one of the 


201 


our streets. 27 But he 
shall say, I tell you, 1 
know you not whence 
ye are; depart from 
me, all ye workers of 
iniquity. 28 There shall 
be weeping and gnash- 
ing of teeth, when ye 
shallsee Abraham, and 
Isaac, and Jacob, and 
all the prophets, in the 
kingdom of God, and 
you yourselves thrust 
out. 29 And they shall 
come from the vast, 
and from the west, 
and from the north, 
and from the south, 
and shall sit down in 
the kingdom of God. 
30 And, behold, there 
are last which shall be 
first, and there are first 
which shall be last. 


31 The same day 
there came certain of 
the Pharisees, saying 
unto him, Get thee out, 
and depart hence: for 
Herod will kill thee. 
32 And he said unto 
them, Go ye, and tell 
that fox, Behold, I cast 
out devils, and I do 
cures to day and to 
morrow, and the third 
day 1 shall be per- 
fected. 33 Nevertheless 
I must walk to day, 
and to morrow, and 
the day following: for 
it cannot be that a 
prophet perish out of 
Jerusalem, 34 O Je- 
rusalem, Jerusalem, 
which killest the pro- 

hets, andstonest them 
hat are sent unto thee; 
how often would [have 
gathered thy children 
together, as a hen doth 
gather her brood un- 
der her wings, and ye 
would not! 35 Behold, 
your house is left unte 
you desolate: and veri- 
ly I say unto you, Ye 
shall not see me, untii 
the time come when ye 
shall say, Blessed zs he 
that cometh in the 
name of the Lord, 


XIV, And it cameto 
pass, as he went into 
the house of one of the 


2 — ὑμᾶς [L]tra. 8 — οἱ ΤΊΤΑ. b — τῆς LTTrA. 
4—¢70[L]t[tra]. “ὥρᾳ hourta. ‘apoondA@dy TrrA. & ἀποτελῶ LTTrA. 
dayl. 1dpmé τ. Κ χὰ Τι. ἱνροσσίατ. ™— ἔρημος GLTTraW. 
λέγω τ. ο -- ὅτι [τ]1τ[Α]. Ρ ἴδητέ με LTTrA. ᾳ --- ἂν ΤΊΤΑ. 


come LT[Tra]. 5 [ὅτε] Tra. 


ὁ ὄψεσθε ye shall see ΤΊτ. 


» + [ἡμέρᾳ] 
= λέγω δὲ QLTrAW ; 
τ ἥξει it shal! 


202 


chief Pharisees to eat 
bread on the sabbath 
day, that they watched 
him. 2 And, behold, 
there was a certain 
man before him which 
had the dropsy. 3 And 
Jesus answering spake 
unto the lawyers and 
Pharisees, saying, Is 
it lawful to heal on the 
sabbath day? 4 And 
they held their peace. 
And he took him, and 
healed him, and let 
him go; 5 and an- 
swered them, saying, 
Which of you shall 
have aD ass or an Ox 
fallen into a pit, and 
will not straightway 
pull him out on the 
sabbath day? 6 And 
they could not answer 
him again to these 
things. 


7 And he put forth a 
parable to those which 
were bidden, when he 
marked how they chose 
out the chief rooms ; 
saying unto them, 
8 When thou art bid- 
den of any man to a 
wedding, sit not down 
in the highest room ; 
lest a more honourable 
man than thou be bid- 
den of him; 9 and he 
that bade thee and him 
come and say to thee, 
Give this man place; 
and thou begin with 
shame to take the low- 
estroom, 10 But when 
thou art bidden, go and 
sit down in the lowest 
room; that when he 
that bade thee cometh, 
he may say unto thee, 
Friend, go up higher: 
then shalt thou have 
worship in the presence 
of them that sit at meat 
with thee. 11 For who- 
soever exaltcth him- 
self shall be abased; 
and he that humbleth 
himself shall be ex- 
alted. 


12 Then said he also 
to him that bade him, 
When thou makest a 
dinner or a supper, 
eall not thy friends, 
nor thy brethren, nei- 
ther thy kinsmen, nor 


ION KASS. XIV. 


2 ~ / ’ - » ‘ - 
ἀρχόντων 'τῶν'" Φαρισαίων σαββάτῳ φαγεῖν ἄρτον, καὶ αὐτοὶ 
rulers of the Pharisees onasabbath toeat bread, that they 
- ’ὔὕ ‘ ’ » , 
ἦσαν παρατηρούμενοι αὐτόν. 2 Kai ἰδού, ἄνθρωπός τις 
were watching him. And behold, a7*man ‘certain 
΄ c A » ? “ \ 2 ‘ ec? ~ 
ἣν ὑδρωπικὸς ἔμπροσθεν αὐτοῦ. 8 καὶ ἀποκριθεὶς 0 Ἰησοῦς 
there was dropsical before him. And answering Jesus 
BS 5 Ν \ \ , νὰ, " wil 
εἶπεν πρὸς τοὺς νομικοὺξς καὶ Φαρισαίους, λέγων," Υ Εἰ 
spoke to the doctors of the law and to[the] Pharisees, saying, 
ἔξεστιν τῷ σαββάτῳ “θεραπεύειν Υ; 4 Οἱ. δὲ ἡσύχασαν. 
15 it lawful onthe sabbath to heal ? But they were silent. 
καὶ ἐπιλαβόμενος ἰάσατο αὐτόν, καὶ ἀπέλυσεν. ὅ καὶ 
And taking hold [of him]he healed him, and let (him) go. And 
Ξἀποκριθεὶς" *rpoc αὐτοὺς εἶπεν," Τίνος ὑμῶν Ydvoc' ἢ βοῦς 
answering to them hesaid, Of which of you *an “ass *or °an %ox 
εἰς φρέαρ ἐἐμπεσεῖται," καὶ οὐκ εὐθέως ἀνασπάσει αὐτὸν 
Sinto °a pit Ishall 7fall, and “ποὺ *immediately ‘he ?willpullup him 
d2,, 1! ell , ~ ΄ Η θ Κ \ ? » ᾽ 
ἐν" &rg! ἡμέρᾳ τοῦ σαββάτου; αἱ οὐκιΐσχυσαν ἀνταπο- 
on the “day *sabbath ? And they were not able to re- 
κριθῆναι ἰαὐτῷ" πρὸς ταῦτα. 
ply tohim as to these things. 
7 "Ἐλεγεν.δὲ πρὸς τοὺς κεκλημένους παραβολήν, ἐπέχων 
Απᾶ he spoke to those who were invited aparable, remarking 
πῶς τὰς πρωτοκλισίας ἐξελέγοντο, λέγων πρὸς αὐτούς, 
how the first places they were choosing out, saying to them, 
8 Ὅταν κληθῇς ὑπό τινος εἰς γάμους, μὴ-κατακλιθῇς 
When thou art invited by anyone to wedding feasts, do not recline 
εἰς THY πρωτοκλισίαν, μήποτε ἐντιμότερός σου ῃικεκλη- 
in the first place, lest amore honourable thanthou may have 
μένος vm αὐτοῦ, θϑκαὶ ἐλθὼν ὁ σὲ Kai αὐτὸν καλέσας 
been invited by him, and havingcomehewhotheeand him invited 
ἐρεῖ σοι, Δὸς τούτῳ τόπον' καὶ τότε ἄρξῃ Sper 
shall say to thee, Give *to *this*one ‘place, and then thou begin with 
αἰσχύνης τὸν ἔσχατον τόπον κατέχειν. 10 ἀλλ᾽’ ὕταν κλη- 
shame the last place to take. But when thou art 
θῇς, πορευθεὶς Βἀνάπεσον" εἰς τὸν ἔσχατον τόπον" ἵνα 
invited, having gone recline in the last place, that 
ὅταν ἔλθῃ ὁ κεκληκώς σε, ‘etry! σοι, Φίλε, προσ- 
when he may come who has invited thee, he may say tothee, Friend, come 
ανάβηθι ἀνώτερον; τότε ἔσται σοι δόξα ἐνώπιον " τῶν 
up higher. Then shall be to thee glory _ before those who 


συνανακειμένων σοί. 11 ὅτι πᾶς ὁ ὑψῶν ἑαυτὸν ταπεινω- 


recline [at table] with thee ; for everyone that exalts himself shall be 

θήσεται καὶ ὁ ταπεινῶν ἑαυτὸν ὑψωθήσεται. 

humbled, and hethat humbles himself shall be exalted. 
12"Edeyev.dé καὶ τῷ κεκληκότι αὐτόν, Ὅταν ποιῇς 


᾿Απᾶ he said also tohimwho hadinvited him, When thou makest 


ἄριστον ἢ δεῖπνον, μὴ. φώνει τοὺς. φίλους. σου μηδὲ τοὺς ἀδεὰ- 
adinner or asupper, call not thy friends nor *breth- 


φούς σου μηδὲ τοὺς.συγγενεῖς.σου μηδὲ γείτονας πλουσίους" 


thy rich neighbours; ren ‘thy nor thy kinsfolk nor *neighbours 1rich, 
lest they also bid thee, A oe nt ᾽ dang Ι Re UB ἢ vo 
again, and a recom- μήποτε καὶ αὐτοὶ “σε ἀντικαλέσωσιν, καὶ γένηταί "σοι 
pence be made thee. lest also they thee should invite in return, and “be*made ‘thee 
τ [τῶν] A. ¥ [λέγων] L. w — Εἰ TTra. X θεραπεῦσαι LTTrA. ¥Y + 7 ov or not 
[uL]rtra. % — ἀποκριθεὶς LTr[ A]. ἃ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς L. b υἱὸς ἃ SON LTTrAW. 
A > ~ Lal » »“ 
5 πεσεῖται LITrA. %— ἐν (read τῇ onthe)[Ljtr. “ -- τῇ 1. f — αὐτῷ ΤΊτΑ. & μετὰ 
LTTraw. h ἀνάπεσαι G3 ἀνάπεσε LTTrAW. i ἐρεῖ he will say TTr. k + πάντων all 
LTTrA. ! ἀντικαλέσωσίν oe LITrA. πὶ ἀνταπόδομά σοι TTrA. 


XIV. Ὁ ΚΕ. 


ἀνταπόδομα." 18 ἀλλ᾽ bray ποιῇς δοχήν, κάλει πτωχούς; 


4a ΖΘΟΟΠΙΡΘΙΒΘ ; but when thou makest a feast, call poor, 
ΠῚ 2 ΄ I ’ x Lise 14 \ , » = 
ἀναπήρους," χωλοῦς, τυφλοὺς καὶ μακάριος £07) 
crippled, lame, blind; and blessed thou shalt be; 
ὅτι οὐκ.ἔχουσιν ἀνταποδοῦναί σοι’ ἀνταποδοθήσεται 


for they have not [wherewith] to recompense thee; *it *shall*be 5recompensed 
ογάρ' σοι ἐν TH ἀναστάσει τῶν δικαίων. 
lfor thee in the resurrection ofthe just. 


15 ᾿Ακούσας.δε τις τῶν συνανακειμένων ταῦ- 

And °having !heard 'one 7of *those “reclining [at *table] 7with ["him] these 
τα εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Μακάριος oc! φάγεται ἄρτον ἐν τῇ 
things said tohim, Blessed [he] who 5141] eat bread in the 
βασιλείᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ. 16 Ὁ δὲ εἴπεν αὐτῷ, ᾿Ανθρωπός τις 
kingdom of God. But he said tohim, A ?man certain 
ἐποίησεν! δεῖπνον "μέγα" Kai ἐκάλεσεν πολλούς" 17 καὶ ἀπέ- 

made a*supper ‘great, and _ invited many. And he 


στειλεν τὸν.δοῦλον. αὐτοῦ τῇ ὥρᾳ τοῦ δείπνου εἰπεῖν τοῖς 
sent his bondman atthe hour ofthe supper to saytothose who 


κεκλημένοις, Ἔρχεσθε, ore ἤδη ἕτοιμά Stor ἱπάντα." 18 Kai 
had been invited, Come, for now “ready is 1411. And 
ἤρξαντο ἀπὸ μιᾶς ὑπαραιτεῖσθαι πάντες." ἡ ὁ πρῶ- 
2began “with *one (®consent] *to7excuse*themselves ‘all. The first 
τος εἶπεν αὐτῷ, ᾿Αγρὺν ἠγόρασα, Kai Ξἔχω avayKny' 
said tohim, “ἃ *field ‘I ἂν *bought, and Ihave need 
γἐξελθεῖν καὶ" ἰδεῖν αὐτόν: ἐρωτῶ σε ἔχε μὲ παρῃτημένον. 


togoout and ἴο 5686 it ; Ipray thee hold me excused, 
19 καὶ ἕτερος εἶπεν, Ζεύγη βοῶν ἠγόρασα πέντε, καὶ 
And another αϊᾶ, SPairs °of7oxen *I *have “bought ‘five, and 


πορεύομαι δοκιμάσαι αὐτά: ἐρωτῶ σε ἔχε μὲ παρῃτημένον. 


Igo to prove them ; I pray thee hold me excused, 
20 καὶ ἕτερος εἶπεν, Γυναῖκα ἔγημα, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο 
And another said, A wife Ihave married, and because of this 


> a7 ? 6 ~ \ , ε - ΕΣ - Π 
οὐ.δύναμαι ἐλθεῖν. 21 καὶ παραγενόμενος ὑ-δοῦλος. ἐκεῖνος 
Iamunable tocome. And having come that bondman 
ἀπήγγειλεν τῷ-κυρίῳ.αὐτοῦ ταῦτα. Τότε ὀργισθεὶς ὁ otko- 
reported to his lord these things. Then beingangry the master 
δεσπότης εἶπεν τῷ. δοὐλῳ αὐτοῦ, "Ἐξελθε ταχέως εἰς τὰς 
οὗ thehouse said to his bondman, Go out quickly into the 


πλατείας καὶ ῥύμας τῆς πόλεως, καὶ τοὺς πτωχοὺς καὶ *ava- 


streets and lanes of the city, and the poor and crip- 
πήρους! καὶ χωλοὺς καὶ τυφλοὺς" εἰσάγαγε ὧδε. 22 Kai εἶπεν 
ple and lame and blind bring in here. And = said 
ὁ δοῦλος, Κύριε, γέγονεν “ὡς! ἐπέταἕας, καὶ ἔτι 
the bondman, Sir, ithasbeendone as thou didst command, and still 
τόπος ἐστίν. 23 Kai εἶπεν ὁ κύριος πρὸς τὸν δοῦλον, 
room there is. And said the lord to the bondman, 


ν ? ‘ bY J \ , \ ? ΄ 2 ~ 
Ἔξελθε εἰς τὰς ὁδοὺς Kai φραγμούς, καὶ ἀνάγκασον εἰσελθεῖν, 
Goout into the ways and hedges, and compel to come in, 
ov θ ~ d c ἡ , ll , ‘ « ~ a > ‘ ~ 
iva γεμισθῇ “ὁ.οἴκός. μου." 24 λέγω.γὰρ ὑμῖν, ὅτι οὐδεὶς τῶν 
that maybe filled my house; forI say to you, that not one 


ἀνδρῶν ἐκείνων TOY κεκλημένων γεύσεταί μου τοῦ δείπνου. 
ot those men who have been invited shall taste of my supper. 


ο δέ but τ. P ὅστις Whosoever ΤΊΤΑ. 
τ μέγαν L. 5 εἰσιν are T. t — πάντα (read [8}17} [L]r[Tra]. 
LTTrA. Ww + [kat] and τ. χα ἀνάγκην ἔχω L. 
2 — ἐκεῖνος (read the bondman) ΤΊτὰ. 4 ἀναπείρους LTra. 
LTTra. ¢ ὃ which Trra. 4 μου ὃ οἶκος TTrA. 


Ὁ ἀναπείρους LTrA. 


203 


13 But when thou mak- 
est a feast, call the 
poor, the maimed, the 
lame, the blind: l4anc 
thou shalt be blessed ; 
for they cannot recom- 
pense thee: for thou 
shalt be recompensed 
at the resurrection of 
the just. 


15 And when one of 
them that sat at meat 
with him heard these 
things, he said unto 
him, Blessed 15 he that 
shall eat bread in the 
kingdom of God. 
16 Then said he unto 
him, A certain man 
made a great supper, 
and bade many: 17 and 
sent his servant .at 
supper time to say to 
them that were bidden, 
Come ; for all things 
arenowready. 18 And 
they all with one con- 
sent began to make 


excuse. The first said 
unto him, [ have 
bought a piece of 


ground, and [ must 
needs go and see it: 
I pray thee have me 
excused, 19 And ano- 
ther said, I have 
bought five yoke of 
oxen, and I go to prove 
them: I pray thee have 
me excused. 20 And 
another said, I have 
married a wife, and 
therefore I cannot 
come, 21 So that ser- 
yant came, and shewed 
his lord these things. 
Then the master of th« 
house being angry said 
to his servant, Go out 
quickly into thestreets 
and lanes of the city, 
and bring in hither the 
poor, and the maimed, 
and the halt, and the 
blind. 22 And the ser- 
vant said, Lord, it is 
done as thou hast com- 
manded, and yet there 
is room. 23 And the 
lord said unto the ser- 
vant, Go out into the 
highways and hedges, 
and compel them to 
come in, that my house 
may be filled. 24 For 
I say unto you, That 
none of those men 
which were bidden 
shall taste of my 
supper. 


4 ἐποίει TTrA. 


νυ πάντες παραιτεῖσθαι 
Υ ἐξελθὼν having gone out TTra. 
Ὁ τυφλοὺς καὶ χωλοὺς 


204 


25 And there went 
great multitudes with 
him: and he turned, 
and said unto them, 
26 If any man come 
to me, and hate not his 
father, and mother, 
and wife, and children, 
and brethren, and sis- 
ters, yea, and his own 
life also, he cannot be 
my disciple. 27 And 
whosoever doth not 
bear his cross, and 
come after me, cannot 
be my disciple. 28 For 
which of you, intend- 
ing to build a tower, 
sitteth not down first, 
and counteth the cost, 
whether he have suffi- 
cient to finish it? 
29 Lest haply, after he 
hath laid the founda- 
tion, and is not able to 
finish it, all that be- 
hold it begin to mock 
him, 30 saying, i 
man began to build, 
and was not able to 
finish. 31 Or what king, 
going to make war a- 
gainst another king, 
sitteth not down first, 
and consulteth whe- 
ther he be able with 
ten thousand to meet 
him that cometh a- 
gainst him with twen- 
ty thousand? 32 Or 
else, while the other 
is yet a great way off, 
he sendeth an ambas- 
sage, and desireth con- 
ditions of peace. 33S0 
likewise, whosoever he 
be of you that forsak- 
ethnotall that he hath, 
he cannot be my disci- 
ple. 34 Salt 18 good: 
but if the salt have 
lost his savour, where- 
with shall it be sea- 
soned? 35 It is neither 
fit for the land, nor 
yet for the dunghill ; 
but men cast it out. 
He that hath ears to 
hear, let him hear, 


XY. Then drew near 
unto him all the pub- 
licans and sinners for 
tohearhim, 2 And the 
Pharisees and scribes 
murmured, saying, 


ΔΟΎΚΑΣ. XIV, XV. 


25 Συνεπορεύοντο.δὲ αὐτῷ ὄχλοι πολλοί: Kai στραφεὶς 
And ὅνγουα ‘going *with Shim ἤογοναθ ‘great; and having turned 
εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, 26 Et τις ἔρχεται πρός με, Kai οὐ-μισεὶ 
Π6 βεϊδ to them, If anyone comes to me, and hates not 
rov.martpa-éavrou' καὶ τὴν μητέρα Kai THY γυναῖκα Kai τὰ 
his father and mother and wife and 
τέκνα καὶ τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς Kai τὰς ἀδελφάς, ἔτι.Βδὲ! Kai τὴν 
children and brothers and sisters, and besides also 
ἑαυτοῦ. ψυχήν, ov-dbvarai ™wov.wabnrnc εἷναι"" 27 cai! ὅστις 
his own life, he cannot my disciple be; and whosoever 
οὐ.βαστάζει τὸν σταυρὸν. "αὐτοῦ," καὶ ἔρχεται ὀπίσω μου, 


carries not his cross, and comes after me, 
ov_dvvaTrai 'μου εἴναι" μαθητής. 28 τίς. γὰρ ἐξ ὑμῶν -θέλων 

cannot my be disciple. For which of you desiring 
πύργον οἰκοδομῆσαι, οὐχὶ πρῶτον καθίσας ψηφίζει τὴν 
a tower to build, *not first ‘having *sat *down “counts the 
δαπάνην, εἰ ἔχει ™ra! ππρὸς" ἀπαρτισμόν; 29 ἵνα μήποτε 

cost, if he has the [means] for [its] completion? that lest 


θέντος αὐτοῦ θεμέλιον καὶ μὴ ἰσχύοντος ἐκτελέσαι, πάντες 
having laid ofit afoundationand ποῦ being able to finish, all 
ot θεωροῦντες ἄρξωνται “paige αὐτῷ," 80 λέγοντες, Ὅτι 
who see [10] should begin tomockat him, saying, 
οὗτος ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἤρξατο οἰκοδομεῖν, καὶ οὐκ. ἴσχυσεν ἐκτελέσαι. 
This man began to build, and was not able to finish. 
851 Ἢ τίς βασιλεὺς πορευόμενος PoupBadreiy ἑτέρῳ βασι- 
Or what king proceeding toengage with another i 
λεῖ! εἰς πόλεμον οὐχὶ καθίσας πρῶτον βουλεύεται" 
in war Snot thaving *sat*down ‘first Stakes “counsel 
εἰ δυνατός ἐστιν ἐν δέκα χιλιάσιν ᾿ἀπαντῆσαι" τῷ μετὰ 
whether able heis with ten thousand to meet him with 
” λ τὸ ? f ? ΕΣ ? , 9 2 / » 
εἴκοσι χιλιάδων ἐρχομένῳ ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν; 32 εἰ δὲ μήγε, ἔτι 
twenty thousand whocomes against him? Butif not, “still 
Sabrov πόῤῥω" ὄντος, πρεσβείαν ἀποστείλας ἐρωτᾷ τὰ 
the *far “off “being, an embassy having sent heasks the[terms] 
πρὸς εἰρήνην. 88 οὕτως οὖν πᾶς ἐξ ὑμῶν ὃς οὐκ ἀπο- 
for peace, Thus therefore everyone of you {ὙΠῸ “ποὺ ‘does take 
τάσσεται πᾶσιν τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ ὑπάρχουσιν, obdvvarai ἵμου 


leave of all that he himself possesses, cannot “my 
elvat" μαθητής. 84 καλὸν τὸ “ἅλας"" édy.dt* τὸ "ἅλας" 
"be disciple, Good [is] the salt, butif the salt 
μωρανθῇ ἐν τίνι ἀρτυθήσεται; 35 οὔτε εἰς γῆν οὔτε 
become tasteless with what shall it be seasoned ? Neither for land nor 
εἰς κοπρίαν εὔθετόν ἐστιν ἔξω βάλλουσιν αὐτός. ‘O ἔχων 
for manure fit isit: ‘out ‘they *cast Σύ, Hethat has 


ὦτα Yaxovew' ἀκουέτω. 
ears tohear let him hear. 
15 ἯἮσαν.δὲ τἐγγίζοντες αὐτῷ" πάντες ot τελῶναι Kai 
And were drawing near to him all the tax-gatherers and 
οἱ ἁμαρτωλοὶ ἀκούειν αὐτοῦ" 2 Kai διεγόγγυζον οἱ" Φαρισαῖοι 
the sinners to hear him ; and murmured the Pharisees 


f αὐτοῦ LTTYrA. 
LTA. 


counsel T. 
therefore T[Tr]A. 
LITraw. 


1 εἶναί μου TTrA. 
avira ἐμπαίζειν LUTrA. 
τ ὑπαντῆσαι LYTrAW. 


i— καὶ τ. k ἑαυτοῦ 

π εἰς tO GLTTrAW. 
4 βουλεύσεται will take 
τ εἶναί μου LYTr. v + οὖν 
Y—<axovewT. 5 αὐτῷ ἐγγίζοντες 


& ΤΕ ΤΤᾺ. h εἶναί μου μαθητής TTrA. 

m — τὰ (read [the means ]) GTTra. 
P ἑτέρῳ βασιλεῖ συμβαλεῖν LITrA. 
5 πόῤῥω αὐτοῦ W. 


Ww ἅλα T. x + «ai also LTTrA. 


a + ce both (the) σιγὰ. 


ΧΥ͂. LUKE. 
καὶ οἱ γραμματεῖς, λέγοντες, Ὅτι οὗτος ἁμαρτωλοὺς 
and the scribes, saying, This [man] sinners 
προσδέχεται Kai συνεσθίει αὐτοῖς. 3 Εἶπεν.δὲ πρὸς αὐτοὺς 
receives and eats with them, And he spoke to them 
τὴν-παραβολὴν.ταύτην, λέγων, 4 Tic ἄνθρωπος ἐξ ὑμῶν 
this parable, saying, What man of you 


ἔχων ἑκατὸν πρόβατα, καὶ Ῥάπολέσας" “ἕν ἐξ αὐτῶν," οὐ 
having a hundred sheep, and having lost one of them, =not 


καταλείπει τὰ δἐννενηκονταεννέα" ἐν TY ΕΠ καὶ πορεύεται 


leaves the ninety nine in the wilderness and goes 
? ‘ Y ? , e er ? , ‘ « ‘ 
ἐπὶ τὸ ἀπολωλός, Ewe εὕρῃ αὐτό; ὅ καὶ εὕρων 
after that which has been lost, until he find it? And having found [it] 


τὴ , ? . 4 a e ε a ΄ θ ‘ ἐλθ ‘ 
ἐπιτίθησιν ἐπὶ τοὺς. μους. ἑαυτοῦ!" χαίρων, 6 καὶ ων 

he lays [it] on his shoulders rejoicing, and having come 
εἰς τὸν οἶκον ἰσυγκαλεῖ! τοὺς φίλους καὶ τοὺς γείτονας, λέ- 
to the house he calls together friends and neighbours, say- 
γων αὐτοῖς, SLuvyxapyré" μοι, ὅτι εὗρον τὸ.πρόβατόν. μου 
ing tothem, Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep 

" ? , , cow e “ s h* ? ~ 
TO ἀπολωλός. 7 λέγω ὑμῖν, OTL οὕτως χαρὰ "ἔσται ἐν TH 
that —_— was lost. Isay toyou, that thus joy shallbe in the 
οὐρανῷ! ἐπὶ Evi ἁμαρτωλῷ μετανοοῦντι, ἢ ἐπὶ ἐννενη- 


heaven over one sinner repenting, (more) thanover ninety 
κονταεννέα" δικαίοις, οἵτινες ov χρείαν, ἔχουσιν μετανοίας. 
nine righteous ones, who 7?no eed *have of repentance, 


8 Ἢ τίς γυνὴ δραχμὰς ἔχουσα δέκα, ἐὰν ἀπολέσῃ δραχμὴν 
Or what woman “drachmas ‘having “ten, if sheshouldlose *drachma 
iav, οὐχὶ.ἅπτει λύχνον Kai σαροῖ THY οἰκίαν Kai ζητεῖ ἐπι- 
one, lights not alamp and sweeps the house and seeks  care- 
μελῶς ἕως ὅτου" εὕρῃ; 9 καὶ εὑροῦσα ἰσυγκαλεῖται! 
fully until she find [it]? and having found [it] she calls together 
τὰς φίλας καὶ "τὰς" γείτονας, λέγουσα, S2vyxapyré' μοι, Ore 
friends and neighbours, saying, Rejoice with me, for 
εὗρον τὴν δραχμὴν ἣν ἀπώλεσα. 10 οὕτως, λέγω ὑμῖν, 
Lhavefound the drachma which T lost. Thus, Isay to you, 
ἰχαρὰ γίνεται" ἐνώπιον τῶν ἀγγέλων τοῦ θεοῦ ἐπὶ ἑνὶ ἁμαρ- 


joy there is before the angels of God over one sin- 
TWP μετανοοῦντι. 
ner repenting. 
11 Εἴπεν.δέ, "AvOow7dce τις εἶχεν δύο υἱούς" 12 Kai εἶπεν 
And he said, A’man ‘certain had two sons; and said 


ὁ νεώτερος αὐτῶν τῷ-.πατρί, Πάτερ, δός por τὸ ἐπιβάλ- 

the younger ofthem to([his]father, Father, give tome that *fall- 

λον μέρος τῆς οὐσίας. ™kai" διεῖλεν αὐτοῖς τὸν βίον. 

ing [*to *me] 'portion of the property. And he divided tothem the living. 

13 καὶ per οὐ πολλὰς ἡμέρας συναγαγὼν "ἅπαντα" 
And after ποῦ many days having gathered together all 

ὁ νεώτερος υἱὸς ἀπεδήμησεν εἰς χώραν μακράν, καὶ ἐκεῖ 


the younger 50D wentaway into a*country ‘distant, and there 
διεσκόρπισεν THv-ovciay.aiTov, ζῶν ἀσώτως. 14 δαπανή- 
wasted his property, living dissolutely. *Having 
σαντος δὲ αὐτοῦ πάντα ἐγένετο λιμὸς “ἰσχυρὸς Kara 
‘spent ‘but 286 all there arose a*famine ‘violent throughout 
τὴν. χώραν ἐκείνην, Kai αὐτὸς ἤρξατο ὑστερεῖσθαι. 15 καὶ 
that country, and he began to be in want. And 


206 


This man receiveth 
sinners, and eateth 
with them. 3 And he 
spake this parable 
unto them, saying, 
4 What man of you, 
having an hundred 
sheep, if he lose one of 
them, doth not leave 
the ninety and nine in 
the wilderness, and go 
after that which is lost, 
until he find it? ὃ And 
when he hath found itt, 
he layeth it on his 
shoulders, rejoicing. 
6 And when he cometh 
home, he calleth toge- 
ther his friends and 
neighbours, saying un- 
to them, Rejoice with 
me ; for I have found 
my sheep which was 
lost. 7 I say unto you, 
that likewise joy shall 
be in heaven over one 
sinner that repenteth, 
more than over ninety 
and nine just persons, 
which need no repent- 
ance. 8 Hither what 
woman haying ten 
pieces of silver, if she 
lose one piece, doth not 
light a candle, and 
sweep the house, and 
seek diligently till 
she findit? 9 And when 
she hath found zt, she 
calleth her friends and 
her neighbours toge- 
ther, saying, Rejoice 
with me; for I have 
found the piece which 
Thad lost. 10 Likewise, 
I say unto you, there 
is joy in the presence of 
the angels of God, over 
oe sinner that repent- 
eth. 


11 And he said, A 
certain man had two 
sons: 12 and the 
younger of them said 
to his father, Father, 
give me the portion of 
goods that falleth to 
me. And he divided 
unto them Ais living, 
13 And not many days 
after the younger son 
gathered all together, 
and took his journey 
into a far country, and 
there wasted his sub- 
stance with riotous 
living. 14 And when 
he had spent all, there 
arose a mighty famine 
in that land; and he 
began to be in want. 
15 And he went and 


> ἀπολέσῃ should he lose tr. 
TIraA. ἔσυνκαλεῖ 1. 
1 γίνεται χαρὰ TTrA. 


ς ἐξ αὐτῶν ἕν ττταΑ. 
Β συνχάρητέ 1. 


h ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ ἔσται TA. 
™ ὃ δὲ LTrA. 


2 πάντα LTrA. 


ἃ ἐνενήκοντα ἐννέα LTTr. 
‘ i οὗ Tr. 
° ἰσχυρὰ LTTrAW. 


© αὐτοῦ 
k — τὰς LTTrA. 


200 


joined himself to a 
citizen of that country; 
and he sent him into 
his fields to feed swine. 
16 And he would fain 
have filled his belly 
with the husks that the 
swine did eat: and no 
man gave unto him. 
17 And when he came 
to himself, he said, 
How many hired ser- 
vants of my father’s 
have bread enough and 
to spare, and I perish 
with hunger ! 18 I will 
arise and go to my 
father, and will say 
unto him, Father, Γ 
have sinned against 
heaven, and _ before 
thee, 19 and am no 
more worthy to be 
called thy son: make 
me as one of thy hired 
servants. 20 And he 
arose, and came to his 
father. But when he 
was yet a great way 
off, his father saw him, 
and had compassion, 
and ran, and fell on his 
neck, and kissed him. 
21 And the son said un- 
to him, Father, I have 
sinned against heaven 
and in thy sight, and 
am no more worthy to 
be called thy son, 
32 But the father said 
to his servants, Bring 
forth the best robe, and 
put ἐξ on him; and put 
8 ring on his hand, 
and shoes on his feet: 
23 and bring hither 
the fatted calf, and 
Kill it; and let us eat, 
and be merry: 24 for 
this my son was dead, 
and is alive again ; he 
was lost, and is found. 
And they began to be 
merry. 25 Now his 
elder son was in the 
field: and as he came 
and drew nigh to the 
house, he heard musick 
and dancing. 26 And 
he called one of the 
servants, and asked 
what these things 
meant. 27 And hesaid 
unto him, Thy brother 
is come; and thy father 
hath killed the fatted 
calf, because he hath 


XV 
ἑνὶ τῶν πολιτῶν τῆς. χώρας ἐκείνης" 
of that country, 

χοίρους. 


swine. 


AOYKAS. 
πορευθεὶς ἐκολλήθη 


having gone he joined himself to one of the citizens 
kai ἔπεμψεν αὐτὸν sic τοὺς. ἀγροὺς αὐτοῦ βόσκειν 
and ΒΘ sent him into his fields to feed 
10 καὶ ἐπεθύμει γεμίσαι τὴν.κοιλίαν.αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ τῶν κερατίων 
And he was longing to fill his belly from the husks 


τ LA « - 4 ? ‘ ,} / > ~ ? 

ὧν ἤσθιον οἱ xoipo Kai οὐδεὶς ἐδίδου αὐτῷ. 17 Εἰς 
which *were*eating'the *swine; and noone gave tohim. “To 
ἑαυτὸν δὲ ἐλθὼν Ρεῖπεν,; Πόσοι μίσθιοι τοῦ πατρός 
‘himself *but*having*come he said, How many hired servants Sfather 


μου Ἁ«περισσεύουσιν" ἄρτων, ἐγὼ. δὲ λιμῷ " ἀπόλλυμαι; 


‘of ἼΩΥ have abundance of bread, andI with famine am perishing? 
18 ἀναστὰς πορεύσομαι πρὸς τὸν.πατέρα.μου, Kai ἐρῶ 
Having risen up ‘I willgo to my father, and I will say 


αὐτῷ, Πάτερ, ἥμαρτον εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ ἐνώπιόν σου" 
tohim, Father, Ihave sinned against heaven and _. before thee ; 
19 ‘kai! οὐκέτι εἰμὶ ἄξιος κληθῆναι υἱός.σου" ποίησόν με ὡς 
and nolonger amI worthy tobecalled thy son: make me 88 
ἕνα THY μισθίων. σου. 20 καὶ ἀναστὰς ἦλθεν πρὸς τὸν πα- 
one of thy hired servants. And havingrisenup he went’ to *fa- 
τέρα ἑαυτοῦ." Ετι.δὲ αὐτοῦ μακρὰν ἀπέχοντος εἶδεν αὐτὸν 
ther this, But yet ‘he “far Sbeing distant “saw *him 
ὁ-πατὴρ.αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐσπλαγχνίσθη, καὶ δραμὼν ἐπέπεσεν 
this *father and was moved with compassion, and running fell 


ἐπὶ τὸν. τράχηλον.αὐτοῦ Kai κατεφίλησεν αὐτόν. 21 εἶπεν.δὲ 
And *said 


upon his neck and ardently kissed him, 

Ww ᾽ ~ « Qf ll , oe > A ? A ΡΨ - 
αὐτῷ ὁ υἱὸς, Πάτερ, ἥμαρτον εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ ἐνώ- 

*to®him ‘the *son, Father, I have sinned against heaven and be- 


’ Χ ΜΙ > , > ‘ » rv On cee: 99 ἘΠ 
πιόν σου, *kat' οὐκέτι εἰμὶ ἄξιος κληθῆναι υἱός. σου. ἴπεν 
fore thee, and nolongeramI worthy tobecalled thy δβοῃ. 7Said 
δὲ ὁ πατὴρ πρὸς τοὺς.δούλους. αὐτοῦ, ¥ ᾿Εξενέγκατε "τὴν!" 
‘but the father to his bondmen, Bring out the 

A A ’ ‘ > LZ ? , 4 ΄ ’ 
στολὴν τὴν πρώτην καὶ ἐνδύσατε αὐτόν, καὶ δότε δακτύλιον 
robe the best and clothe him, and give aring 
εἰς τὴν. χεϊρα-.αὐτοῦ Kai ὑποδήματα εἰς τοὺς πόδας" 28 Kai 
for his hand and sandals for the feet ; and 
“eveyKkavrec' Tov μόσχον τὸν σιτευτὸν θύσατε, Kai φαγόντες 

having brought the 3264] fattened Kill [it],and eating 
εὐφρανθῶμεν' 24 Ort οὗτος ὁ.υἱός.μου νεκρὸς ἦν, καὶ ἀνέζη- 
let us be merry: for this my son dead ‘was, and is alive 
sev’ kai ἀπολωλὼς ἦν," καὶ εὑρέθη. Kai ἤρξαντο εὐ- 
again; and lost iwas, and _ is found. And they began to 

, τ " « cA ? ~ « , > ? ~ 
φραίνεσθαι. 2ὅ Ην.δὲ ὁ.υἱὸς αὐτοῦ ὁ πρεσβύτερος ἐν ἀγρῷ" 
be merry. And *was ‘his 7son = tthe “elder in a field; 
καὶ ὡς ἐρχόμενος ἤγγισεν τῇ οἰκίᾳ ἤκουσεν συμφωνίας 
and as coming (up) he drew near tothe house he heard music 
καὶ χορῶν" 26 Kai προσκαλεσάμενος ἕνα τῶν.παίδων "αὐτοῦ," 
and dancing. And having called near one of his servants, 
ἐπυνθάνετο τί εἴη ταῦτα. 27 ὁ.δὲ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ὅτι 
he inquired what might be these things. Andhe said tohim, 


ὁ ἀδελφός.σου Hee Kai ἔθυσεν ὁ-πατήρισου τὸν μόσχον τὸν 


Thy brother iscome, and *killed ‘thy *father the "calf 
P ἔφη T. 4 περισσεύονται TrA. r + ὧδε here ara. * + ὧδε here LT. t— καὶ 
GLTTrAW. Y αὐτοῦ LTTr. W ὃ vlos αὐτῷ A. χ — καὶ LITA. y + Ταχὺ Quickly 
L[Tr]a. 2 — τὴν (read a robe) Lrtra. ἃ φέρετε bring TTra. Ὁ ἣν ἀπολωλὼς LITrA ; 


ἀπολ. ἣν W. 


© — αὐτοῦ (read the servants) EGLTTrAW. 


a+ ἂν [L]m[a]. 


ΧΥΖΧΥΙ. LUKE. 


, ew c , ? 4 > , 
σιτευτόν, ὅτι ὑγιαίνοντα αὐτὸν ἀπέλαβεν. 


28 Ὠργίσθη 
lfattened, because safeand well “him ‘he 7received. 


?7He*was *angry 


δὲ καὶ οὐκ.ἤθελεν εἰσελθεῖν. ὁ “οὖν" πατὴρ αὐτοῦ 
*but and was not willing togoin. 7The ‘therefore father of him 
ἐξελθὼν παρεκάλει αὐτόν. 29 0.0& ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν τῷ.πα- 


hayinggone besought him. But he answering said to *fa- 
rol’, ᾿Ιδού, τοσαῦτα ἔτη δουλεύω σοι καὶ οὐδέποτε ἐντολήν 
ther[‘his], Lo, somany years Iserve thee and never *commandment 
σου παρῆλθον, καὶ ἐμοὶ οὐδέποτε ἔδωκας ἔριφον ἵνα μετὰ 
*thy ‘transgressed 7I, andtome never didstthougive akid that with 
~ , 7 ~ Ως ᾿ « er - 
τῶν.φίλων.μου εὐφρανθῶ" 30 ὅτε-δὲ ὁιυἱός.σου οὗτος 
my friends I might make merry ; but when “thy *son this 
ὁ καταφαγών cov τὸν βίον μετὰ ὃ πορνῶν ἦλθεν, ἔθυσας 
who devoured thy living with harlots came, thou didst kill 
αὐτῷ τὸν Ἐμόσχον τὸν σιτευτόν." 31 6.02 εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Τέκνον, 


for him the 7ealf 1fattened. Buthe said tohim, Child, 
ov πάντοτε μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ εἶ, καὶ πάντα Ta ἐμὰ σά ἐστιν. 
thou always with me art, and all that [is] mine *thine ‘tis. 

92 εὐφρανθῆναι.δὲ καὶ χαρῆναι ἔδει, ὅτι ὁ. ἀδελφός. σου 


rejoice was becoming, because ΤΥ *brother 


Keai' ἀπολωλὼς My," καὶ 
and *lost Iwas, and 


But to make merry and 
οὗτος νεκρὸς ἦν, καὶ ‘aveCnoer™' 
1this 5dead ‘*was, and is alive again ; 
εὑρέθη. 
is found. 


16 Ἔλεγεν.δὲ καὶ πρὸς τοὺς. μαθητὰς.“αὐτοῦ," "Ανθρωπός 


Andhesaid also to his disciples, A *man 
TIC ἦν πλούσιος, ὃς εἶχεν οἰκονόμον" Kai οὗτος διε- 
‘certain ‘there®was rich, who had a steward, and he was 


βλήθη αὐτῷ we διασκορπίζων τὰ. ὑπάρχοντα.αὐτοῦ. 2 Kai 
accused tohim as wasting his goods. And 
φωνήσας αὐτὸν εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ti τοῦτο ἀκούω περὶ 

having called him he said tohim, What [is] this Ihear concerning 
σοῦ; ἀπόδος τὸν λόγον τῆς.οἰκονομίας. σου" οὐ.γὰρ. δυνήσῃ" 


thee ? render the account of thy stewardship ; for thou canst not 
ἔτι οἰκονομεῖν. 3 ἘΠπεν.δὃὲ ἐν ἑαυτῷ ὁ οἰκονόμος, 
any longer be steward. And said *within *himself ‘the “steward, 


Ti ποιήσω, ὅτι ὁ.κύριός. μου ἀφαιρεῖται THY οἰκονομίαν ἀπ᾽ 
What shallI ἄο, for my lord is taking away the stewardship from 
ἐμοῦ; σκάπτειν οὐκ.ἰσχύω, ἐπαιτεῖν αἰσχύνομαι. 4 ἔγνων 
me? To dig Tam unable; to beg I am ashamed. I know 
Ti ποιήσω, ἵνα, ὅταν μετασταθῶ ° τῆς οἰκονο- 
what I willdo, that, when I shall have been removed [from] the steward- 
μίας, δέξωνταί με εἰς τοὺς.οἴκους.»αὐτῶν." 5 Kai προσ- 
ship, they may receive me into their houses. And call- 
καλεσάμενος Eva ἕκαστον THY IypEwHerteTHy! τοῦ κυρίου 
ing to {him] 7one teach _— of the debtors Slord 
ἑαυτοῦ ἔλεγεν τῷ πρώτῳ, Πόσον ὀφείλεις τῷ κυρίῳο.μου ; 
1of 7his hesaid tothe first, How much owest thou to my lord? 
6 Ὁ-.δὲ εἶπεν, Ἑκατὸν βάτους ἐλαίου. 'Kai' εἶπεν αὐτῷ, 
Andhe said, A hundred baths of oil. And he said tohim, 
Δέξαι σου "τὸ γράμμα" καὶ καθίσας ταχέως γράψον πεντή- 
Take thy bill and sitting down quickly write fifty. 


207 


received him safe and 
sound. 28 And he was 
angry, and would not 
goin: therefore came 
his father out, and in- 
treated him. 29 And 
he answering said to 
his father, Lo, these 
many years do I serve 
thee, neither trans- 
gressed I at any time 
thy commandment: 
and yet thou never 
gavest me a kid, thatI 
might make merry 
with my friends: 
30 but as soon as this 
thy son was come, 
which hath devoured 
thy living with har- 
lots, thou hast killed 
for him the fatted calf. 
31 And he said unto 
him, Son, thou art ever 
with me, and all that 
I haveis thine. 32 It 
was meet that we 
should make merry, 
and be glad: for this 
thy brother was dead, 
and is alive again ; and 
was lost, and is found, 


XVI. And he said 
also unto his disciples, 
There was a certain 
rich man, which had a 
steward; and thesame 
was accused unto him 
that he had wasted his 
goods. 2 And he called 
him, and said unto 
him, How is it that I 
hear this of thee? give 
an account of thy 
stewardship ; for thou 
mayest be no longer 
steward. 3 Then the 
steward said within 
himself, What shall 1 
do? for my lord taketh 
away from me the 
stewardship : I cannot 
dig; to beg I am 
ashamed. 41 am re- 
solved whatto do, that, 
when 1 am put out of 
the stewardship, they 
may receive me into 
their houses. 5 So he 
called every one of his 
lord’s debtorsunto him, 
and said unto the first, 
How much owest thou 
unto my lord? 6 And 
he said, An hundred 
measures of oil, And 
hesaid unto him, Take 
thy bill, and sit down 
quickly, and write 
fifty. 7 Then said he 


e δὲ but Lrtra. f+ αὐτοῦ his Ltra. & + τῶν the στὰ. 
1 ἔζησεν is alive TTrA. k— καὶ 1. 
τι --- αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) Trra. 2 δύνῃ TIrA. 


TTrA. 4 χρεοφειλετῶν LTTrA. τ ὃ δὲ LTTrA. 


h σιτευτὸν μόσχον ΤΊτΑ. 
Ἰ-- ἣν (read ἀπολωλὼς had been lost) LTTra. 
° + ἐκ from [L]TTrA. 
5 τὰ γράμματα bills LTTrA. 


Ρ ἑαυτῶ: 


208 


to another, And Low 
much owest thou? And 
he said, An hundred 
measures of wheat. 
And he said unto him, 
Take thy bill, and 
write fourscore. 8And 
the lord commended 
the unjust steward, 
because he had done 
wisely: for the child- 
ren of this world are in 
their generation wiser 
than the children of 
light. 9 And I say un- 
to you, Make to your- 
selves friends of the 
mammon of unright- 
eousness ; that, when 
ye fail, they may re- 
ceive you into ever- 
lasting habitations. 
10 He that is faithful 
in that which is least 
is faithful also in 
much: and he that is 
unjust in the least is 
unjust also in much. 
11 If therefore ye have 
not been faithful in 
the unrighteous mam- 
mon, who will commit 
to your trust the true 
riches? 12 And if ye 
have not been faithful 
in that which is ano- 
ther man’s, who shall 
give you that which is 
your own? 13 No ser- 
vant can serve two 
masters: for either he 
will hate the one, and 
love the other; or else 
he will hold to the one, 
and despise the other. 
Ye cannot serve God 
and mammon. 


14 And the Pharisees 
also, who were cove- 
tous, heard all, these 
things: and they de- 
rided him. 15 And he 
said unto them, Ye are 
they which justify 
yourselves before men; 
but God knoweth your 
hearts: for that which 
is highly esteemed a- 
mong men is abomina- 
tion in the sight of 
God. 16 The law and 
the prophets were until 
John: since that time 
the kingdom of God is 
preached, and every 
man presseth into it. 
17 And it is easier for 
heaven and earth to 
pags, than one tittle of 
the law tofail. 18 Who- 
soever putteth away 
his wife, and marrieth 
another, committeth 


t — καὶ LTTrA. 


τ ἐκλίπῃ it shall fail urtra. 


ὑμῖν "τι. 8 — καὶ 


ΛΟΥΚΑΣ. XVI. 


7 Ἔπειτα ἑτέρῳ εἶπεν, Σὺ. δὲ πόσον ὀφείλεις ; 
Then toanother he said, Andthou how much owest thou? 
ὋὉ.δὲ εἶπεν, Ἑκατὸν κόρους σίτου. ‘Kai' λέγει αὐτῷ, Δέξαι 
Andhe said, A hundred cors of wheat. And hesays tohim, ‘Take 
σου “To γράμμα" καὶ γράψον ὀγδοήκοντα. 8 Kai étmyvecey 
thy bill and eighty. And praised 
ὁ κύριος TOY οἰκονόμον τῆς ἀδικίας ὅτι φρονίμως ἐποίη- 
‘the “lord the “steward ‘unrighteous because prudently he had 
dev’ OTL οἱ υἱοὶ τοῦ.αἰῶνος.τούτου φρονιμώτεροι ὑπὲρ τοὺς 
done. For the sons of this age ®Smore ’prudent "than *°the 
υἱοὺς τοῦ φωτὸς εἰς τὴν γενεὰν τὴν.ἑαυτῶν εἰσιν. 9 aes 
l°sons of }*the “light 7in ‘generation “their*own ‘are. And I 
ὑμῖν λέγω, “Ποιήσατε ἑαυτοῖς" φίλους ἐκ τοῦ μαμωνᾶ τῆς 


κοντα. 


write 


toyou say, Make to yourselves friends by the mammon 
ἀδικίας, ἵνα ὕταν Ξἐκλίπητε! δέξωνται ὑμᾶς εἰς τὰς 
of unrighteousness, that when ye fail they may receive you into the 
αἰωνίους σκηνάς. 10 Ὁ πιστὸς ἐν ἐλαχίστῳ καὶ 
eternal dwellings. He that [is] faithful in [the] least also 
ἐν πολλῷ πιστός tor’ Kai ὁ ἔν ἐλαχίστῳ ἄδικος 
in much faithful is; and he that in [the] least [is] unrighteous 


11 εἰ οὖν ἐν τῷ ἀδίκῳ 


καὶ ἐν πολλῷ ἄδικός ἐστιν. 
If therefore in the unrighteous 


also in much unrighteous is. 
μαμωνᾷ πιστοὶ οὐκ.ἐγένεσθε, TO ἀληθινὸν τίς ὑμῖν πιστεύσει; 
mammon faithful ye have not been, the true who to you will entrust? 
12 καὶ εἰ ἐν τῷ ἀλλοτρίῳ πιστοὶ οὐκ.ἐγένεσθε, τὸ 
And if in that which [18] another’s faithful ye have not been, 
« ’ ΄ z.. ~ ὃ » ell ἠδ ‘ DAW δύ ὃ ‘ 
ὑμέτερον τίς τυμῖν δώσει: 13 Οὐδεὶς οἰκέτης δύναται δυσὶ 
yourown who toyou will give? No servant isable two 
κυρίοις δουλεύειν: ἢ.γὰρ τὸν Eva μισήσει, Kai τὸν ἕτερον 
lords to serve, for either the one hewillhate, and the other 
ἀγαπήσει; ἢ ἑνὸς ἀνθέξεται, καὶ τοῦ ἑτέρου καταφρονήσει. 
he willlove; or one hewillholdto, and the other he will despise. 


οὐ.δύνασθε θεῷ δουλεύειν Kai μαμωνᾷ. 
Yeareunable οα '‘to*serve and mammon. 


14 "Ηκουον.δὲ ταῦτα πάντα "καὶϊ οἱ Φαρισαῖοι, φιλάρ- 

And ‘*heard *these *things ‘all also the Pharisees, 2covet- 

γυροι ὑπάρχοντες, καὶ ἐξεμυκτήριζον αὐτόν. 15 καὶ εἶπεν 

ous ‘being, and they derided him. And he said 

avroic, Myers tore οἱ δδικαιοῦντες ἑαυτοὺς ἐνώπιον τῶν 
to them, e are they who justify themselves before 


? ’ « 4 , ‘ , « ~ {1 A > 
ἀνθρώπων, ὁ.δὲ.θεὸς γινώσκει τὰς. καρδίας. ὑμῶν" OTL τὸ ἐν 


men, but God knows your hearts ; for that “among 
ἀνθρώποις ὑψηλὸν βδέλυγμα ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ Ῥέστιν." 

>men "highly *thought*of anabomination before God is. 
16 Ὁ νόμος Kai ot προφῆται “we! ΦῬΙωάννου"" ἀπὸ 

The law and the prophets [were] until John: from 
τότε ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ εὐαγγελίζεται, Kai πᾶς εἰς 


that time the kingdom of God is announced, and everyone *into 


᾽ 4 , > ΄’ is Δ ᾿Ὶ > ‘ , 
αὐτὴν βιάζεται. 17 Ἑὐκοπώτερον.δέ ἐστιν τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ 
310 forces. But easier itis [for] the heaven and 
τὴν γῆν παρελθεῖν, ἢ τοῦ νόμου μίαν κεραίαν πεσεῖν. 
the earth topassaway, than ofthe law one tittle to fail. 
18 Πᾶς 6 ἀπολύων τὴν.γυναϊκα.αὐτοῦ Kai γαμῶν ἑτέραν 
Everyone who puts away his wife and marries another 


υ τὰ γράμματα bills LTTra. Y καὶ ἐγὼ TTrA. W ἑαυτοῖς ποιήσατετΑ. 
Υ + [αὐτῶν] (read their eternal dwellings) L. * δώσει 


TIr[A]. 8 -- ἐστιν (read [is]) GLITrAW. ὃ μέχρι TMA. 4 ᾿Ιωάνου Tr, 


XVI. LUKE. 

μοιχεύει" καὶ “πᾶς ὁ ἀπολελυμένην ἀπὸ ἀνδρὸς 
commits adultery; and everyone who “her“put‘*away ‘from °a “husband 
γαμῶν μοιχεύει. 


marries commits adultery. 
19 Γἀνθρωπος.δέ τις 
Now *a®man ‘certain ‘there 7was 
’ ‘ ,΄ > , aS , ~ 
πορφύραν καὶ βύσσον, εὐφραινόμενος καθ᾽ ἡμέραν λαμπρῶς. 


ἦν πλούσιος, και ἐνεδιδύσκετο 
5rich, and he was clothed in 


purple and fine linen, making good cheer daily in splendour, 
20 πτωχὸς.δέ τις ἴἦν᾽ ὀνόματι Λάζαρος, δὸς" ἐβέβλητο 
Anda r*man ‘certain there was, by name Lazarus, who was laid 


πρὸς τὸν.πυλῶνα.αὐτοῦ jAKwpévoc,' 21 Kai ἐπιθυμῶν χορ- 

at his porch being full of sores, and desiring to be 
τασθῆναι ἀπὸ 'τῶν ψιχίων τῶν" πιπτόντων ἀπὸ τῆς τραπέζης 
satisfied from the crumbs which fell from the table 
τοῦ πλουσίου: ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ κύνες ἐρχόμενοι ᾿ἀπέλειχον" τὰ 
of the rich man; but even the dogs coming licked 


ἕλκη.αὐτοῦ. 22 ἐγένετοιδὲδἑ ἀποθανεῖν τὸν πτωχόν, Kai 
his sores. And it eame to pass *died ‘the *poor *man, and 


ἀπενεχθῆναι αὐτὸν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀγγέλων εἰς τὸν κόλπον ἱτοῦ" 
*was “σδυυϊθα γα ‘the by the angels into the bosom 


"ABoadw ἀπέθανεν.δὲ καὶ ὁ πλούσιος, Kai ἐτάφη. 23 Kai ἐν 


of Abraham. And died also the richman, and wasburied. And in 
τῷ ἅδῃ ἐπάρας τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς. αὐτοῦ, ὑπάρχων ἐν Ba- 


the hades haying lifted up his eyes, being in tor- 


σάνοις, ὁρᾷ “τὸν ᾿Αβραὰμ ἀπὸ.μακρόθεν, καὶ Λάζαρον ἐν 


ments, hesees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in 
τοῖς.κόλποις.αὐτοῦ" 24 καὶ αὐτὸς φωνήσας εἶπεν, ἱϊάτερ 
his bosom, And he erying out said, Father 


με, καὶ πέμψον Λάζαρον, iva βάψῃ 


send Lazarus, that he may dip 


Αβραάμ, ἐλέησόν 
Abraham, have compassion on me, and 
τὸ ἄκρον τοῦ.δακτύλου. αὐτοῦ ὕδατος, Kai καταψύξῃ τὴν γλῶσ- 
the tip of his finger in water, and cool “tongue 
σάν μου ὅτι ὀδυνῶμαι ἐν τῇ-φλογὶ ταύτῃ. 25 Ἐϊπεν δὲ 
‘my; for I am suffering in this flame. But *said 
Αβραάμ, Τέκνον, μνήσθητι ore ἀπέλαβες ποὺ Tra 
‘Abraham, Child, recollect that *didst *fully *receive 
ayaba.cov ἐν τῇ.ζωῇ.σου, καὶ Λάζαρος ὁμοίως 
thy good things in thy lifetime, and Lazarus likewise 
νῦν.δὲ οὔδε' παρακαλεῖται, σὺ.δὲ ὀδυνᾶσαι. 
But πο he is comforted, and thou art suffering. 
πᾶσιν τούτοις, μεταξὺ ἡμῶν Kai ὑμῶν χάσμα 
all thesethings, between us and you ὦ chasm 
ται, omwe ot θέλοντες διαβῆναι “ἐντεῦθεν! πρὸς ὑμᾶς 
fixed, sothat they who desire to pass hence to you 
μὴ.-δύνωνται, μηδὲ τοὶ! ἐκεῖθεν πρὸς ἡμᾶς διαπερῶσιν. 
are unable, nor “they *thence *to “us *can *pass 
27 Εἶπεν.δέ, "Epwrd "οὖν ae, πάτερ, wa πέμψῃς 
And hesaid, I beseech “then ‘thee, father, that thou wouldest seud 


αὐτὸν εἰς τὸν οἶκον τοῦ.πατρός.μου, 28 ἔχω.γὰρ πέντε ἀδελ- 


τὰ.κακά" 
evil things. 
26 καὶ Péri! 

And besides 
μέγα ἐστήρικ- 


great has been 


209 


adultery : and whoso- 
ever marrieth her that 
is put away from her 
husband committeth a- 
dultery. 


19 There was a cer- 
tain rich man, which 
was clothed in purple 
and fine linen, and 
fared sumptuously 
every day: 20and there 
Was a certain beggar 
named Lazarus, which 
was laid at his gate, 
full of sores, 21 and de- 
siring to be fed with 
the crumbs which fell 
from the rich man’s 
table: moreover the 
dogs came and licked 
his sores. 22 And it 
came to pass, that the 
beggar died, and was 
earried by the angels 
into Abraham’s bosom: 
the rich manaiso died, 
and was buried; 23 and 
in hell he lift up his 
eyes, being intorments, 
and seeth Abraham 
afar off, and Lazarusin 
his bosom. 24 And he 
cried and said, Father 
Abraham, have mercy 
on me, and send Laza- 
rus, that he may dip 
the tip of his finger iz 
water, and cool my 
tongue; for I am tor- 
mented in this fame. 
25 But Abraham said, 
Son, remember that 
thou in thy lifetime 
receivedst thy good 
things, and likewise 
Lazarus evil things: 
but now he is comtort- 
ed, and thou art tor- 
mented. 26 And beside 
allthis, between usand 
you there isa great gulf 
fixed: so that they 
which would pass from 
hence to you cannot; 
neither can they pass 
to us, that would come 
from thence. 27 Then 
he said, I pray thee 
therefore, father, that 
thou wouldest send 
him to my father’s 


him to the house of my father, forIhave five bro- house: 28 for I have 
/ ες εἰ , χουν τῶν “ ι \ >, five brethren; that he 
govc’ OTwe διαμαρτύρηται αὐτοῖς, Wa μὴ καὶ αὕτοι may testify unto them, 
thers, so that he may earnestly testify tothem, that “not also ‘they lest they also come in- 
© — πᾶς LTTrA. f — Fy [L]tTra. & — ὃς [L]}rTra. 4 εἱλκωμένος LTTrAW. 


1 — ψιχίων τῶν (read τῶν that which) [L]ra ; [τῶν Ψιχίων] τῶν Tr. 
1_ ov GLTTrAW 18-- τὸν LTTrA. 
ο ὧδε here (read παρακ. he ig comforted) LTTraw. P ἐν before τ. 
© — ov (read διαπ. can they pass) L[a]. 8 ge οὖν LTrAW. 


Κ ἐπέλειχον LTTrA. 


π — gv (read ἀπέλαβες thou didst fully receive) GTTra. 


ᾳ ἔνθεν GLTTrAW. 


iz 


210 


to this place of tor- 
ment. 29 Abraham 
saith unto him, They 
have Moses and the 
prophets ; let them 
hear them, 30 And he 
said, Nay, father Abra- 
ham : but if one went 
unto them from the 
dead, they will repent. 
31 And he said unto 
him, If they hear not 
Moses and the pro- 
phets, neither will they 
be persuaded, though 
one rose from the dead, 


XVII. Then said he 
unto the disciples, It is 
impossible but that of- 
fences will come: but 
woe unto him, through 
whom theycome! 2 It 
were better for him 
that a millstone were 
hanged about his neck, 
and he cast into the 
sea, than that he should 
offend one of these lit- 
tle ones. 3 Take heed 
to yourselves: If thy 
brother trespass a- 
gainst thee, rebuke 
him; and if he repent, 
forgive him. 4 And if 
he trespass against thee 
seven times in a day, 
and seven times in a 
day turn again to thee, 
saying, I repent; thou 
shalt forgive him. 


5 And the apostles 
said unto the Lord, In- 
erease our faith. 6 And 
the Lordsaid, If ye had 
faith as a grain of mus- 
tard seed, ye might say 
unto this sycamine 
tree, Be thou plucked 
up by the root, and be 
thou planted in the sea; 
and it should obey you. 
7 But which of you, 
having a servant plow- 
ing or feeding cattle, 
will say unto him by 
and by, when he is 
come from the field, Go 
and sit down to meat? 
8 And will not rather 
say unto him, Make 
ready wherewith I may 
sup, and gird thyself, 
and serve me, till I 
have eaten and drunk- 


t + δὲ (read but Abraham) trtraw. 


σέως LTTrAW. 


» τὰ σκάνδαλα μὴ ἐλθεῖν TTrA. 
© τῶν μικρῶν τούτων ἕνα TTrA. 


LTTrA. 


" ἁμαρτήσῃ LTTrAW. 
™ εἰπταν LTTrA. 
" Ev0éws παρελθὼν (read Having come immediately recline) Lrtra. 


LITraw. 


AOYKAY. XVI, XVII. 


ἔλθωσιν εἰς Tov-roToY.rovTOY τῆς βασάνου" 29 réyett ᾿αὐτῷ" 
‘™maycome to this place of torment. "Says *to*him 


᾿Αβραάμ, Ἔχουσιν “Μωσέα' καὶ τοὺς προφήτας" ἀκουσάτωσαν 
‘Abraham, ‘They have Moses and the prophets : let them hear 
αὐτῶν. 30 Ο.δὲ εἶπεν, Οὐχί, πάτερ ᾿Αβραάμ' ἀλλ᾽ ἐάν τις 


them. But he said, No, father Abraham, but if one 
ἀπὸ νεκρῶν πορευθῇ πρὸς αὐτούς, μετανοήσουσιν. 
from {the} dead should go to them, they will repent. 


31 Εἰἶπεν.δὲ αὐτῷ, Ei *Mwotwe' καὶ τῶν προφητῶν οὐκ 


Andhe said tohim, If Moses and the prophets “not 
ἀκούουσιν, Youd: ἐάν τις ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀναστῇ πεισθή- 
‘they “hear, noteven if one from{[the] dead should rise will they 
σονται. 
be persuaded. 


17 Εἶπεν.δὲ πρὸς τοὺς pabnrac,® ᾿Ανένδεκτόν ἐστιν "τοῦ" 


Απᾶ he said to the disciples, Impossible it is that 
"μὴ.ἐλθεῖν τὰ σκάνδαλα"" “οὐαὶ. δὲ" δι οὗ ἔρχεται. 
?should *not *come ‘offences, but woe [to him] by whom they come, 


περίκειται περὶ 


2 λυσιτελεῖ αὐτῷ εἰ d ὕλο ὀνικὸο" 
ς 
is put about 


It is profitable for him if a millstone turned by an ass 
τὸν.τράχηλον.αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἔῤῥιπται εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν, ἢ ἵνα 
his neck, and eiscast into the sea, than that 
‘iva τῶν.μικρῶν.τούτων." 3 προσέχετε 
tone 7of “these “little *ones. Take heed 
« - 7A f NII « ΄ ? SII « ἐδ λ , ? 
ἑαυτοῖς. ἐὰν ἰδὲ! a ἀρτῃ Beic σὲ" ο.ἀδελφός. σου, ἔπι- 
to yourselves: andif %should *sin ‘against °thee ‘thy *brother, re- 
τίμησον avT@ καὶ ἐὰν μετανοήσῃ, ἄφες αὐτῷ. 4 Kai ἐὰν 
buke him ; and if heshouldrepent, forgive him. And if 
ἑπτάκις τῆς ἡμέρας "ἁμάρτῃ! εἰς σέ, καὶ ἷ ἑπτάκις "τῆς 
seven times in the day he should sin against thee, and seven times in the 
ἡμέρας" ἐπιστρέψῃ ᾿ἐπὶ σέ," λέγων, Meravod, ἀφήσεις 
day shouldreturn to thee, saying, Irepent, thou shalt forgive 
αὐτῷ. 
him. 
5 Kai “eizoyv' οἱ ἀπόστολοι τῷ κυρίῳ, Πρόσθες ἡμῖν 
And said the apostles to the Lord, Give more “to “us 
πίστιν. 6 Εἶπεν.δὲ ὁ κύριος, Et "εἴχετε! πίστιν, ὡς κόκκον 
faith. But *said ‘the *Lord, If yehad faith, as agrain 
σινάπεως, ἐλέγετε. ἂν τῇ.συκαμίνῳ.ταύτῃ, ᾿Ἐκριζώθητι, καὶ 
of mustard, ye might say to this sycamine tree, Be thou rooted up, and 
υτεύθητι ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ" Kai ὑπήκουσεν ἂν ὑμῖν. 7 Τίς. δὲ 
be thou planted in the sea, and it would obey you. But which 
8! ὑμῶν δοῦλον ἔχων ἀροτριῶντα ἢ ποιμαίνοντα, ὃς 
of you 7a *bondman *haying ploughing or shepherding, who 
εἰσελθόντι ἐκ τοῦ ἀγροῦ ἐρεῖ " “εὐθέως, Παρελθὼν!" 
{tohim}] comein out of the field willsay immediately, Having come 
Ws 8 ἀλλ᾽ οὐχὶ. ἐρεῖ αὐτῷ, ἙἙτοίμασον τί 


Tavarecat' ; 
recline [at table]? but willhe not say to him, Prepare what 


δειπνήσω, καὶ περιζωσάμενος διακόνει μοι, ἕως φάγω Kai 


σκανδαλίσῃ 
he should cause °to ‘offend 


Imay sup on, and girding thyself about serve me, while LTeat and 
Υ-- αὐτῷ T{TraA]. “ Μωῦσέα LTtTraw. * Mwi- 
Υ οὐδ᾽ LTra. z+ αὐτοῦ (read his disciples) LrTraw. 4— τοῦ E, 


4 λίθος μυλικὸς a millstone 
& -- εἰς σὲ LTTrA. 
!— ἐπὶ σέο ; πρός σε 
P αὐτῷ to him [L]rrra. 
¢ ΄ 
τ ἀνάπεσε LTTrAW. 


© πλὴν ovat yet woe Ltr. 
f — δὲ and {τττὰ. 
k — τῆς ἡμέρας LTTrA. 


i + [ἐὰν] if L. 
ο [ἐξ] Tr. 


Ὁ ἔχετε ye have TTrA. 


XVII. LUKE. 
πίω: καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα ἄγεσαι καὶ πίεσαι σὺ; 9 Μὴ 
drink; and after these things “shalt*eat “δὰ ‘drink ‘thou? 
βχάριν ἔχει" τῷ.δούλῳ. "ἐκείνῳ, ὅτι ἐποίησεν τὰ δδιατα- 
Is he thankful to that bondman because he did the things com- 
μ“ Ἣν ~ ~ id ‘ « ~ iid 
χθέντα "αὐτῷ"; Yov.doxd.' 10 οὕτως Kai ὑμεῖς, ὅταν 
manded him ? I judge not. Thus also ye, when 
, 7, Ay ὃ θέ ε ~ λέ x40 ll ὃ a 
TTOL]ONTE TAVTA.TA OLATAX EVTA ὑμιν. EYETE, TL COV 
ye may have done 411 things commanded you, say, 7Bond- 
λοι ἀχρεῖοί éopev’ Yoru! ὃ ὠφείλομεν ποιῆσαι πεποιή- 
men ‘unprofitable are we, for thatwhich wewerebound todo we have 
καμεν. 
done. 
\ ~ sy ΠῚ ΡΝ ἘΣ ι 
11 Καὶ ἐγένετο ἐν τῷ.πορεύεσθαι."αὐτὸν' εἰς Ἱερουσαλὴμ 


And it came to pass in his gcing up to Jerusalem 


καὶ αὐτὸς διήρχετο διὰ μέσου" Σαμαρείας" καὶ Γαλι- 
that he passed through([the] midst of Samaria and Gali- 
λαίας. 12 καὶ εἰσερχομένου. αὐτοῦ εἴς τινα κώμην “ἀπήντησαν" 
lee, And on his entering into acertain village 4met 
‘air! δέκα λεπροὶ ἄνδρες, ot ἔστησαν πόῤῥωθεν" 13 Kai 
Shim” ten leprous  %men, who stood afar off. And 
ls x \ , ? ~ , Σ wed 
αὐτοὶ ἦραν φωνὴν λέγοντες, Ἰησοῦ, ἐπιστάτα, ἐλεη- 
they liftedup[their] voice saying, Jesus, Master, have compas- 
σον ἡμᾶς. 14 Kai ἰδὼν εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Πορευθέντες 
sion on us, And seeing [them] hesaid to them, Haying gone 
ἐπιδείξατε ἑαυτοὺς τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν. Καὶ ἐγένετο ἐν τῷ ὑπά- 
shew yourselves to the priests. And it came to pass in Ξ35ο- 
? / τ A ? ~ al eo 
yew αὐτοὺς ἐκαθαρίσθησαν. 15 εἷς. δὲ ἐξ αὐτῶν, ἰδὼν ὅτι 
ing 1their they were cleansed. Andone of them, seeing that 
ἰάθη, ὑπέστρεψεν, μετὰ φωνῆς μεγάλης δοξάζων τὸν 
he was healed, turned back, with a 7voice loud glorifying 
θεόν" 16 καὶ ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ πρόσωπον παρὰ τοὺς πόδας αὐτοῦ, 
God, and fell on [his] face at his feet, 
εὐχαριστῶν αὐτῷ᾽ καὶ αὐτὸς ἢν EEO Te, 17 ἀποκριθεὶς 
giving thanks tohim: and he was. a Samaritan. 2Answering 
δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν, Οὐχὶ" ot δέκα ἐκαθαρίσθησαν ; ot.8dé'' 
and Jesus said, “Not “the ‘ten 1were cleansed ἢ but “the 
ἐννέα ποῦ; 18 οὐχ εὑρέθησαν ὑποστρέψαντες δοῦναι 
*nine ‘where [416]2 Were there not found [any] returning to give 
δόξαν τῷ θεῷ εἰ μὴ ὁ.ἀλλογενὴς οὗτος ; 19 Kai εἶπεν αὐτῷ, 
glory to God except this stranger? And hesaid to him, 
᾿Αναστὰς πορεύου" ἡ.πίστις σου σέσωκέν σε. 
Having risen up goforth; thy faith has cured thee. 
20 ᾿Επερωτηθεὶς. δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν Φαρισαίων, πότε ἔρχεται ἡ 
And having been asked by the Pharisees, when is coming the 
βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀπεκρίθη αὐτοῖς καὶ εἶπεν, Οὐκ. ἔρχεται 
kingdom of God, he answered them and _ said, 5Comes ποῦ ‘the 
ασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ μετὰ παρατηρήσεως" 21 οὐδὲ ἐροῦσιν, 
*kingdom 305 *God with observation ; nor shall they say, 
᾿Ιδοὺ ὧδε, ἢ "ἰδοὺ! ἐκεῖ" ἰδοὺ.γάρ, ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ ἐντὸς 


Lo here, or Lo there; forlo, the kingdom of God in the midst 
ὑμῶν ἐστίν. 22 Εϊπεν. δὲ πρὸς rove pabyrac,' ᾿Ελεύσονται 
ofyou is. And he said _ to the disciples, *Will Scome 


211 


en; and afterward thou 
shalt eat and drink? 
9 Doth he thank that 
servant because he did 
the things that were 
commanded him? I 
trow not. 10So likewise 
ye, when ye shall have 
done all those things 
which are commanded 
you, say, We are un- 
profitable servants: we 
have done that which 
was our duty to do. 


11 And it came to 
pass, as he went to Je- 
rusalem, that he passed 
through the midst of 
Samaria and Galilee. 
12 And as he entered 
into,a certain village, 
there met him ten men 
that were lepers, which 
stood afar off: 13 and 
they lifted up their 
voices, and said, Jesus, 
Master, have mercy on 
us. 14 And when hesaw 
them, he said unto 
them, Go shew your- 
selves unto the priests. 
And it came to pass, 
that, as they went, 
they were cleansed. 
15 And one of them, 
when he saw that he 
was healed, turned 
back, and with a loud 
voice glorified God, 
16 and fell down on 
his face at his feet, giv- 
ing him thanks: and 
he was a Samaritan. 
17 And Jesus answer- 
ing said, Were there 
not ten cleansed? but 
where are the nine? 
18 There are not found 
that returned to give 
glory to God, save this 
stranger. 19 And he 
said unto him, Arise, 
go thy way: thy faith 
hath made thee whole. 

20 And when he was 
demanded of the Pha- 
risees, when the king- 
dom of God should 
come, he answered 
them and said, The 
kingdom of God com- 
eth not with observa- 
tion: 21 neither shall 
they say, Lo here! or, 
lo there! for, behold, 
the kingdom of God is 
within you. 22 And he 
said unto the disciples, 
The days will come, 


t — ἐκείνῳ (read the bondman) trtra. 
χ- ὅτιτ. Y — ὅτι LTTrAW. 

Ὁ Σαμαρίας τ. © ὑπήντησαν T. 
g — δὲ but LT[Tr]. bh — ἰδοὺ Ta. 


5 ἔχει χάριν LTTra. 
“ — οὐ δοκῶ [L]}rtra. 
Titra]. ἃ μέσον LTTrA. 
° Σαμαρίτης Ὁ. f οὐχ LTr. 
disciples) L. 


,— αὐτῷ ΟἸΤΊΤΑΥ. 


: --- αὐτὸν (read in the going up) 
4 — αὐτῷ (read [him |) τ Tra]. 


i + αὐτοῦ (read his 


212 


when ye shall desire to 
see one of the days of 
the Son of man, and ye 
shall not see it, 23 And 
they shall say to you, 
See here; or, see there: 
go not after them, nor 
follow them. 24 For as 
the lightning, that 
lighteneth out of the 
one part under hea- 
yen, shineth unto the 
other part under hea- 
ven;:so shall also the 
Son of man be in his 
day. 25 But first must 
he suffer many things, 
and be rejected of this 
generation. 26 And as 
it was in the days of 
Noe, so shall it be also 
in the days of the Son 
of man, 27 They did 
eat, they drank, they 
married wives, they 
were given in marriage, 
until the day that Noe 
entered into the ark, 
and the flood came, and 
destroyed them all. 
28 Likewise also as it 
was in the days of Lot: 
they did eat, they 
drank, they bought, 
they sold, they plant- 
ed, they builded; 29 but 
the same day that Lot 
went out of Sodom it 
rained fire and brim- 
stone from heaven, and 
destroyed them all. 
30 Even thus shall it 
be in the day when the 
Son of man is revealed. 
31 In that day, he 
which shall be upon the 
housetop, and his stuff 
in the house, let him 
not come down to take 
it away: and he that is 
in the field, let him 
likewise not return 
back. 32 Remember 
Lot’s wife. 33 Whoso- 
ever shall seek to save 
his life shall lose it; 
and’ whosoever shall 
lose his life shall pre- 
serveit. 34 I tell you, in 
that night there shall 
be two men in one bed; 
the one shall be taken, 
and the other shall be 
left. 35 Two women 
shall be grinding to- 
gether ; the one shall 
be taken, and the other 


AOYKAs XVII. 
ἡμέραι, ὅτε ἐπιθυμήσετε μίαν τῶν ἡμερῶν τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ ἀν- 
‘days, when yewilldesire one of the days ofthe Son of 


θρώπου ἰδεῖν, καὶ οὐκιὄψεσθε. 25 καὶ ἐροῦσιν ὑμῖν, ᾿Ιδοὺ 
man to see, and shall not see [it]. And they willsay toyou, Lo 


Κῶδε, ἢ ἰδοὺ ἐκεῖ." μὴ. ἀπέλθητε μηδὲ διώξητε. 24 ὥσπερ.γὰρ 


here, or Τὸ there; go not forth nor follow. For as 
ἡ ἀστραπὴ ‘)' ἀστράπτουσα ἐκ τῆς myx! οὐρανὸν 
the lightning which lightens from the {oneend] under heaven 


᾽ \ ε , ? A Aa e ” n WS 
εἰς TV υπ οὐρανὸν AUTEL, OUTWC ἔσται “Και O 


to the f{otherend] under heaven shines, thus willbe also the 
υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου “ἐν τῇ. ἡμέρᾳ.αὐτοῦ." 25 πρῶτον. δὲ δεῖ 
Son of man in his day. But first it behoves 


αὐτὸν πολλὰ παθεῖν, καὶ ἀποδοκιμασθῆναι ἀπὸ τῆς γενεᾶς 
him many things ἴο suffer, and to be rejected of 2eveneration 
ταύτης. 26 καὶ καθὼς ἐγένετο ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις Prov Νῶε, 
‘this. And as it came to pass in the days of Noe, 
οὕτως ἔσται Kai ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις Irov' υἱοῦ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου. 
thus shallit be also in the days of the Son of man, 
27 ἤσθιον, ἔπινον, ἐγάμουν, τἐξεγα- 
They were eating, they were drinking, they were marrying, they were being 
piZovro,' ἄχρι ἣς ἡμέρας εἰσῆλθεν Νῶε εἰς τὴν κιβωτόν, 
given in marriage, until the day entered ‘Noe into the ark, 
VF θ € . τ» aN sf I! « , 
καὶ ἦλθεν ὁ κατακλυσμὸς καὶ ἀπώλεσεν "ἅπαντας." 28 ὁμοίως 


and came the flood and destroyed 411, ὅΤῃ *like*manner 
‘kai ὡς" ἐγένετο ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις Λώτ' ἤσθιον, ἔπι- 
‘and as itcameto pass in the days of Lot; they wereeating, they were 
γον, ἠγόραζον, ἐπώλουν, ἐφύτευον, φκοδό- 


drinking, they were buying, they were selling, they were planting, they were 
μουν 29 ἡ.δὲ ἡμέρᾳ ἐξῆλθεν Λὼτ ἀπὸ Σοδόμων ἔβρεξεν 
building ; but onthe day *went*out *Lot from Sodom it rained 
πῦρ καὶ θεῖον ἀπ᾽ οὐρανοῦ καὶ ἀπώλεσεν Sdzavrac:' 30 κα- 
fire and sulphur from heaven and _ destroyed all. In 
τὰ “ταῦτα! ἔσται ᾧἢ. ἡμέρᾳ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἀποκαλύπ- 
this way shallit be in the day the Son of man is revealed, 
τεται. 31 ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρῃ ὃς ἔσται ἐπὶ τοῦ δώματος, Kai 
In that day [he] whoshallbe on the  housetop, and 
TU.OKEUN-AUTOU ἐν TH οἰκίᾳ, μὴ.καταβάτω ἄραι αὐτά’ 
his goods in the house, let him not come down to take away them, 
καὶ ὁ ἐν ὕτῷ! ἀγρῷ ὁμοίως μὴ.ἐπιστρεψάτω sig τὰ ὀπίσω. 
and he in the field likewise lethimnotreturn to thethings behind. 
32 μνημονεύετε τῆς γυναικὸς Λώτ. 33 ὃς. ἐὰν ζητήσῃ τὴν 
Remember the wife of Lot. Whoever may seek 
ψυχὴν. αὐτοῦ "σῶσαι," ἀπολέσει αὐτήν" καὶ O¢Yéav' *azrohéoy' 
his life tosave, shall lose it ; and whoever may lose 
παὐτήν," ζωογονήσει αὐτήν. 34 λέγω ὑμῖν, ταύτῃ Ty νυκτὶ. 


κ ἐκεῖ, ἢ (--- ἢ TTr) ἰδοὺ ὧδε τατὰ. 

° — ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ αὐτοῦ L. 
8 πάντας LTrA. 
τὰ αὐτὰ in the same way TTrA. 


G[L]TTrAW. 
LTTrA, 


TTrA, Σ av Tra, 
© — 6 GLTTrAW. 


4 παραλημφθήσεται LTTrA, 


it, shall preserve it, Isay toyou, In that night 
ἔσονται δύο ἐπὶ κλίνης "μιᾶς" £6" εἷς “παραληφθήσε- 
there shall be two[men]upon “bed one ; the one shall be ta- 
ται," καὶ ὁ ἕτερος ἀφεθήσεται. 35 “δύο ἔσονται ἀλή- 
ken, andthe other shall be left. Two[(women] shallbe  grind- 
1— ἡ T[TrA]. ™ ὑπὸ τὸν under the LTTra. ἃ — και 


P -- τοῦ GLTTrAW. %— τοῦ RE. τ ἐγαμίζοντο 

τ καθὼς according as TTrA. ἡ ταὐτὰ in the same way GLW ; 

w — τῷ (read a field) rrra. χ περιποιήσασθαι to gain 

a— αὐτήν (read [it]){u}rrra. ὃ [μιᾶς] χὰ 
© ἔσονται δύο LTTrA. 


2 ἀπολέσει Shall lose τ΄. 


XVII, XVIII. LUKE. 
cil 


θουσαι ἐπὶ τὸ. αὐτό" ' pia Ξπαραληφθήσεται," Kai ἡ 
ing together ; one shall be taken, and the 
a 
5 


Ξ ἑτέρα 
other 
eOnsera.' 37 Kai ἀποκριθέντες λέγουσιν αὐτῷ, Tod, 
ll be left. And answering they say tohim, Where, 
, A « i ? ~ .“ 4 ~ 2 ~ j 6 ΄ 
κύριε; Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Ὅπου τὸ σῶμα ἐκεῖ ῥἡσυναχθή- 
Lord? Andhe said tothem, Where the body [is] there will be gathered 
σονται οἱ ἀετοί." 
together the eagles. 
18 “EXeyev.dé ‘cai παραβολὴν αὐτοῖς πρὸς.τὸ δεῖν 
And he spoke also a parable to them to the purport that it behoves 


πάντοτε προσεύχεσθαι, | καὶ μὴ "πἐκκακεῖν,, 2 λέγων, 
"always 5to *pray [(‘them] and not to faint, saying, 
Κριτῆς rig ἦν ἔν τινι πόλει, τὸν θεὸν μὴ φοβούμενος 
A *judge ‘certain there was in certain ‘a city, God not fearing 
καὶ ἄνθρωπον μὴ ἐντρεπόμενος. 3 χήρα. δὲ" ἦν ἐν τῇ 
and man not respecting. Anda widow there was in 
TOAELEKELVY, καὶ ἤρχετο πρὸς αὐτόν, λέγουσα, 'Exdixnody 
that city, and she wascoming to him, saying, Avenge 


μὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ.ἀντιδίκου.μου. 4 Kai οὐκ.»ἠθέλησεν᾽ ἐπὶ χρόνον᾽ 
me of mine adverse party. And he would not for atime; 


μετὰ.Ῥδὲ ταῦτα' εἶπεν ἐν ἑαυτῷ, Εἰ καὶ τὸν θεὸν οὐ.φοβοῦμαι 


but afterwards hesaid within himself, If even God I fear not 
“καὶ ἄνθρωπον οὐκ' ἐντρέπομαι: 5 διά.γε τὸ παρέχειν μοι 
and man “not respect, yet because Scauses *me 


κόπον τὴν.χήραν.ταύτην ἐκδικήσω αὐτήν, ἵνα.μὴ εἰς.τέλος 
®trouble this *widow I willavenge her, lest perpetually 
> , J ’΄ 4A c ’ὔ ? LA , 
ἐρχομένη ὑπωπιάζῃ με. 6 Εἶπεν.δὲ ὁ κύριος, ᾿Ακούσατε τί 
coming she harass me, And said the Lord, Hear what 
0 κριτὴς τῆς ἀδικίας λέγει" 7 ὁ.δὲ θεὸς οὐ. μὴ ποιήσει" τὴν 
the *judge ‘unrighteous says. And*God not ‘shallexecute the 
ἐκδίκησιν τῶν. ἐκλεκτῶν.αὐτοῦ τῶν βοώντων “πρὸς αὐτὸν" 
avenging of his elect who cry to him 
ἡμέρας Kai νυκτός, καὶ μακροθυμῶν" ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς; ὃ λέγω 
day and night, and [is] being patient over them? I say 
ὑμῖν, ὅτι ποιήσει τὴν ἐκδίκησιν αὐτῶν tv.raye. πλὴν 
to you, that he willexecute the avenging of them speedily. Nevertheless 
ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐλθὼν ἄρα εὑρήσει τὴν πίστιν 
the Son of man having come “indeed ‘will *he find faith 
2 ‘ ~ ~ 
ἐπι THC γῆς: 
on the earth? 
9 Εἶπεν.δὲ Yeai' πρός τινας τοὺς πεποιθότας ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῖς 
And he spoke also to some who trusted in themselves 


ὅτι εἰσὶν δίκαιοι Kai ἐξουθενοῦντας τοὺς λοιποὺς τὴν Tapa- 
that they are righteous and despised the rest 7para- 


ολὴν ταύτην. 10 ΓΑνθρωποι δύο ἀνέβησαν εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν 
Q 1) ερ 


ble this: 7Men two wentup into the temple 
ay ow ci τ - . ΕἾ (ἢ , «ε 
προσεύξασθαι" “ὸ" εἷς Φαρισαῖος καὶ ὁ ἕτερος τελώνης. 1] ὁ 
to pray ; the one aPharisee andthe other atax-gatherer. The 


Φαρισαῖος σταθεὶς “πρὸς ἑαυτὸν ταῦτα! προσηύχετο, O θεός, 
Pharisee standing, with himself thus was praying, God, 


218 


left. 35 Two menshall 
be in the field; the one 
shall be taken, and the 
other left. 37 And they 
answered and said un- 
to him, Where, Lord? 
And he said unto them. 
Wheresoever the body 
2s, thither will the 
eagles be gathered to- 
gether. 


XVIII. And he spake 
a parable unto them 
to this end, that men 
ought always to pray, 
andnottofaint; 2 say- 
ing, There was inacity 
8 judge, which feared 
not God, neither re- 
garded man: 3 and 
there was a widow in 
that city; and she came 
unto him, saying, A- 
venge me of mine 
adversary. 4 And 
he would not for a 
while: but afterward 
he said within himself, 
Though I fear not God, 
nor regard man; 5 yet 
because this widow 
troubleth me, I will a- 
venge her, lest by her 
continual coming she 
weary me. 6 And the 
Lord said, Hear what 
the unjust judge saith. 
7 And shall not God 
avenge his own elect, 
which cry day and 
night untohim,though 
he bear longwith them? 
8 I tell you that he will 
avenge them speedily. 
Nevertheless when the 
Son of man cometh, 
shall he find faith on 
the earth ? 


9 And he spake this 
parable unto certain 
which trusted in them- 
selves that they were 
righteous, and despised 
others: 10 Two men 
went up into the tem- 
ple to pray ; the onea 
Pharisee, and the other 
apublican. 11 The Pha- 
risee stood and prayed 
thus with elf, 
God, I thank thee, that 


f+ 7 the EGLI([Tr]a- & παραλημφθήσεται LTTrA. Β ἡ δὲ TTrA. 


i + verse 36, Δύο 


ἔσονται ἐν τῷ ἀγρῷ᾽ ὃ els παραληφθήσεται, Kal ὁ ἕτερος ἀφεθήσεται, Two [men] shall be in the 


field: the one shall be taken, and the other left £. 
καὶ οἱ ἀετοὶ ἐπισυναχθήσονται TIrA. κ-- καὶ LT[Tra]. 
™ ἐγκακεῖν LITAW 3 ἐνκακεῖν Τ. n + τις certain E. 
4 οὐδὲ ἄνθρωπον Mor Man LTTr, ποιήσῃ LTTrA. 

LTTra. τζκαὶ] L. * — 6 LTrA. 


5 αὐτῷ TTA. 


ο ἤθελεν LTTrAW. τ , 
t μακροθυμεῖ is patient 
χα ταῦτα pos ἑαυτὸν Tr; — πρὸς ἑαυτὸν T. 


j συναχθήσονται [καὶ also] ot ἀετοί, ; 
1+ αὐτοὺς them LTTraw. 


Ρ ταῦτα δὲ TrA. 


214 


I am not as other men 
are, extortioners, un- 
just, adulterers, or 
even as this publican. 
12 I fast twice in the 
week, I give tithes of 
all that I possess. 
13 And the publican, 
standing afar off, 
would not lift up so 
much as his eyes unto 
heaven, but smote up- 
on his breast, saying, 
God be merciful to me 
asinner. 14 [tell you, 
this man went down to 
his house justified ra- 
ther than the other: 
for every one that 
exalteth himself shall 
be abased; and he 
that humbleth him- 
self shall be exalted. 


15 And they brought 
unto him also infants, 
that he would touch 
them: but when Ais 
disciples saw it, they 
rebuked them. 16 But 
Jesus called them unto 
him, and said, Suffer 
little children to come 
unto me, and forbid 
them not: for of such 
is the kingdom of God. 
17 Verily I say unto 
you, Whosoever shall 
ποῦ receive the king- 
dom of God asa little 
child shall in no wise 
enter therein. 


18 And acertain ruler 
asked him, saying, 
Good Master, what 
shall I do to inherit 
eternal life? 19 And 
Jesus said unto him, 
Why callest thou me 
good? none i good, 
save one, that is, God. 
20 Thou knowest the 
commandments, Do 
Dot commit adultery, 
Do not kill, Do not 
steal, Do not bear false 
witness, Honour thy 
father and thy mother. 
21 And he said, All 
these have I kept from 
my youthup. 22 Now 
when Jesus heard these 
things, he said unto 
him, Yet lackest thou 
one thing: sell all that 
chou hast, and distri- 
bute unto the or 
snd thou shalt have 
treasure in heaven: 


MOY Ke AS. XVIII. 
εὐχαριστῶ σοι ὅτι οὐκ.εἰμὶ ὥσπερ" οἱ λοιποὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων, 
I thank thee that Iam not as the _ rest of men, 
ἅρπαγες. ἄδικοι, μοιχοί, ἢ Kai ὡς οὗτος ὁ τελώνης. 12 νη- 
rapacious, unrighteous, adulterers, ΟΥ̓ even 85 this *ax-gatherer. I 
στεύω dic τοῦ σαββάτου, Ξἀποδεκατῶ, πάντα ὅσα κτῶμαι. 
fast twice in the week, I tithe all things as many as I gain. 


18 "Καὶ ὁ! τελώνης μακρόθεν ἑστὼς οὐκ ἤθελεν οὐδὲ τοὺς 
And the tax-gatherer afaroffi standing would noteven the 
ὀφθαλμοὺς "sic τὸν οὐρανὸν ἐπᾶραι!" ἀλλ᾽ ἔτυπτεν “εἰς" τὸ 
eyes to the heaven  liftup, but was striking upon 
ornoc-tabrov,' λέγων, Ὁ θεός, ἱλάσθητί μοι τῷ ἁμαρτωλῷ. 
his breast, Saying, God, be propitious to me the sinner, 


14 Λέγω ὑμῖν, 5 κατέβη οὗτος δεδικαιωμένος εἰς τὸν οἶκον 
7house 


Isay toyou, Went down this one justified to 
αὐτοῦ ' ἐκεῖνος." ὅτι πᾶς ὁ ὑψῶν ἑαυτὸν ταπεινω- 
this ratherthan that. For everyone that exalts ~ himself shall be 
θήσεται. 80.08 ταπεινῶν ἑαυτὸν ὑψωθήσεται. 
humbled; andhethat humbles himself shall be exalted. 


15 Προσέφερον δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ τὰ βρέφη, ἵνα αὐτῶν ἅπτη- 
And they brought itohim also the babes, that them he might 
ται ἰδόντες. δὲ οἱ μαθηταὶ éreripnoar' αὐτοῖς. 16 ὁ δὲ 
touch ; but havingseen [it] the disciples rebuked them. But 
Ἰησοῦς προσκαλεσάμενος αὐτὰ εἶπεν," "Αφετε τὰ παιδία 
Jesus having called “to him]'them = said, Suffer the littlechildren 
ἔρχεσθαι πρός με, Kai μὴ-κωλύετε αὐτά" τῶν.γὰρ.τοιούτων 
and donotforbid them; for of such 


to come to me, 
ἐστὶν ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ. 17 Ἐπὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὃς. ξἐὰν" μὴ 
is the kingdom of God. erily Isay toyou, Whoever “not 


δέξηται τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ ὡς παιδίον οὐ.μὴ εἰσέλθῃ 
‘shallreceive the kingdom of God as a little child in no wise shall enter 
εἰς αὐτήν. 
into it. 
18 Καὶ ἐπηρώτησέν τις αὐτὸν ἄρχων, λέγων, Διδάσκαλε 
And “asked la 2certain *him Sruler, saying, Teacher 
ἀγαθέ, τί ποιήσας ζωὴν αἰώνιον κληρονομήσω ; 19 Εἶπεν 
1g00d, ὅνβαῦ ‘Shaving ‘done life eternal shall I inherit? "Said 
δὲ αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Ti pe λέγεις ἀγαθόν ; οὐδεὶς ἀγαθὸς 
*but *to Shim 2Jesus, Why mecallestthou good? No one [is] good 
εἰ μὴ εἷς, ἰδ" θεός. race ἐντολὰς οἶδας" Μὴ μοι- 
except one, God. The commandments thou knowest : Thou shouldest not 
4 Α , - ‘A , e 
χευσῃς μη-«-φονεῦσῃς μὴ-κλέψῃς 
commit adultery ; thou shouldest not commit murder ; thou shouldest not steal ; 
μὴ-Ψευδομαρτυρήσῳς" τίμα τὸν. πατέρα.σου καὶ τὴν 
thou shouldest not bear false witness ; honour thy father and 


pnrépa.oov.' 21 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν, Ταῦτα πάντα "ἐφυλαξάμην" ἐκ 


thy mother. Andhe said, 7These ‘all havel kept from 
, ’ Oo ll 2 , A p ~ il CF τε =< 
νεότητός “μου. 22 ᾿Ακούσας.δὲ Pravra' ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἶπεν 
?youth my. And haying heard these things Jesus said 
αὐτῷ, Ἔτι ἕν σοι λείπει: πάντα ὕσα ἔχεις πώλη- 
tohim, Yet onething totheeislacking; all as much as thou hast sell, 
σον, καὶ 4διάδος" πτωχοῖς, καὶ ἕξεις θησαυρὸν ἐν τοὐ- 


and distribute ἕο [{Π6] ΡΟΟΥ, andthoushalthave treasure in hea- 


Υ ws Ltr. 
ἃ ἑαυτοῦ TrA. 
Ἐ ἐπετίμων LTTrA. 
Κ ἄν LTTrA. 


® — ταῦτα LTTrA. 


2 ἀποδεκατεύω T. 
e + [ὅτι] that L. 


1_ OTA. 


5 ὃ δὲτ. ὃ ἐπᾶραι εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν TTrA. © — εἰς LTTr[A]. 
ἔ παρ᾽ ἐκεῖνον LTrA ; ἢ γὰρ ἐκεῖνος GTW. ΞΕ καὶ δ1,. 
i προσεκαλέσατο αὐτὰ λέγων called them to [him] saying Trra. 
m — gov thy LTraw. Ὁ ἐφύλαξα LTTrA. ο — μον T[Tr]a. 


ᾳ δὸς give L. τ οὐρανοῖς Τ; τοῖς οὐρανοῖς the heavens LTrA. 


XVIII. LUKE. 


5" καὶ δεῦρο ἀκολούθ 98 Ὁ δὲ ἀκούσα Ξ 
ρανῳ και ευρο ακολοῦσει μοι. -0& ακοῦυσας TavTa 
ven, and come follow me. But he having heard these things 
περίλυπος "ἐγένετο" ἦν. γὰρ πλούσιος σφόδρα. 24 ᾿Ιδὼν δὲ 
very sorrowful became, for he was ?rich lyery. But *seeing 
αὐτὸν ὁ Ἰησοῦς ᾿περίλυπον γενόμενον᾽ εἶπεν, Τῶς δυσκό- 
Shim 1Jegus ‘very ‘sorrowful *haying “become said, How diffi- 


Awe οἱ τὰ χρήματα ἔχοντες "εἰσελεύσονται εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν 

eultly those “riches ‘having shall enter into the kingdom 

τοῦ θεοῦ." 25 Ἑὐκοπώτερον. γάρ ἐστιν κάμηλον διὰ “τρυμαλιᾶς 
of God. For easier it is a@camel through an eye 


ῥαφίδος" "εἰσελθεῖν" ἢ πλούσιον εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ 
of a needle toenter than arichman into the kingdom of God 


εἰσελθεῖν. 26 ΤΕΪπον". δὲ οἱ ἀκούσαντες, Kai τίς δύναται 


to enter. And said those who heard, 2Then ‘who is able 
σωθῆναι; 237 Ὃ δὲ εἶπεν, Ta ἀδύνατα παρὰ ἀνθρώποις 
to be saved? But he said, Thethings impossible with men 
δυνατά *zoTiww παρὰ τῷ θεῷ." 28 Ἐπεν. δὲ *0' Πέτρος, ᾿Ιδού, 
?possible are with God. And *said Peter, Lo, 
ἡμεῖς “adnxapev πάντα καὶ" ἠκολουθήσαμέν σοι. 29 ὯὉ δὲ 

we left all and followed thee, And he 


εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, ᾿Αμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, “ὅτι! οὐδείς ἐστιν ὃς ἀφῆκεν 
C, Ap 7) 


said tothem, Verily Isay toyou, That noone thereis who has left 
οἰκίαν “ἣ γονεῖς ἢ ἀδελφοὺς ἢ γυναῖκα" ἢ τέκνα “ἕνεκεν 
house or parents or brethren or wife or children for the sake of 
τῆς βασιλείας τοῦ θεοῦ, 30 ὃς ἰοὐϊ μὴ ξἀπολάβῃ! πολ- 
the kingdom of God, who shall not receive mani- 
λαπλασίονα ἐν τῷ καιρῷ. τούτῳ, Kai ἐν τῷ αἰῶνι τῷ ἐρχομένῳ 
fold more in this time, and in the’ age that is coming 
ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 

life eternal. 


31 Παραλαβὼν .δὲ τοὺς δώδεκα εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, 
And having taken to [him] the twelve hesaid to them, 
᾿Ιδού, ἀναβαίνομεν εἰς “IeoocdAvupa,' καὶ τελεσθήσεται 
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and “shall *be accomplished 
πάντα τὰ γεγραμμένα διὰ τῶν προφητῶν τῷ υἱῷ τοῦ 
1811 *things which have been written by the prophets about the Son 
ἀνθρώπου. 82 παραδοθήσεται. γὰρ τοῖς ἔθνεσιν, καὶ ἐμπαι- 


of man; for he will be delivered up tothe Gentiles, and will be 
χθήσεται καὶ ὑβρισθήσεται καὶ ἐμπτυσθήσεται. 88 καὶ pa- 
mocked and will beinsulted and will be spit upon. And having 


,΄, 2 ~ > , ‘ ~ ε , ~ , 
στιγώσαντες ἀποκτενοῦσιν αὐτόν᾽ καὶ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῷ τρίτῃ 
scourged they will kill him ; and on the lise "third 
ἀναστήσεται. 34 Kai αὐτοὶ οὐδὲν τούτων συνῆκαν, Kai 
he will rise again. And they nothing of these things understood, and 
ἦν τὸ ῥῆμα τοῦτο κεκρυμμένον ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν, Kai ovK-éyivwoKoY 
Ξ3.γχὰκ8 ‘this *saying hid from them, and _ they knew not 
τὰ λεγόμεγα. 
that which was said. 
35 ᾿Εγένετο.δὲ ἐντῷ.ἐγγίζειν αὐτὸν εἰς "Ιεριχώ," τυφλός 
And it came to pass as he drew near to Jericho, 54 blind 
τις ἐκάθητο παρὰ τὴν ὁδὸν προσαιτῶν." 36 ἀκούσας 
(man]?certain sat beside the way begging. *Having “heard 


216 


and come, follow me 
23 And when he heard 
this, he was very sor- 
rowtul: for he was very 
rich. 24 And when Je- 
sus saw that he was 
very sorrowful, hesaid, 
How hardly shall they 
that have riches enter 
into the kingdom of 
God! 25 For it is easier 
for a camel to go 
through a needle’s eye, 
than for a rich man to 
enter into the kingdom 
of God. 26 And they 
that heard ἐξ said, 
Who then ean be 
saved? 27 And hesaid, 
The things which are 
impossible with men 
are possible with God. 
28 Then Peter said, Lo. 
we have left all, and 
followed thee.- 29 And 
he said unto them, 
Verily I say unto you, 
There is no man that 
hath left house, or pa- 
rents, or brethren, or 
wife, or children, for 
the kingdom of God’s 
sake, 30 who shall not 
receive manifold more 
in this present time, 
and in the world to 
come life everlasting. 


31 Then he took unto 
him the twelve, and 
said unto them, Be- 
hold, we go up to Jeru- 
salem, and all things 
that are written by 
the prophets concern- 
ing the Son of man 
shall be accomplished, 
32 For he shall be de- 
livered unto the Gen- 
tiles, and shall be 
mocked, and spitefully 
entreated, and spitted 
on: 33 and they shall 
scourge him, and put 
him to death: and the 
third day he shall rise 
again. 34 And they un- 
derstood none of these 
things: and this saying 
was hid from them, 
neither knew they the 
things which were spo- 

nD. 


35 And it came to 
pass, that as he was 
come nigh unto Je- 
richo, a certain blind 
man sat by the way 
side begging: 36 and 


t — περίλυπον γενόμενον T[Tr]A. 
ρεύονται TTrA. ¥ τρήματος βελόνης LTTrA. x διελθεῖν to pass L. 
τῷ (— τῷ L[Tr]) θεῷ ἐστίν LTTrA. 8.- 6 τία]ν. 
LPTrA. © — ὅτι T. ἃ ἢ γυναῖκα ἢ ἀδελφοὺς ἢ γονεῖς TA. 
βλάβη τ. Ἀ Ἱερουσαλήμ Tira. ἰ Ἱερειχώτ. * ἐπαιτῶν LTTrA. 


5 ἐγενήθη τττὰ. 


τ εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ εἰσπο- 
Υ εἶπαν T. 
Ὁ ἀφέντες τὰ ἴδια having left our ewn 
© εἵνεκεν T. 


2 παρὰ 


f οὐχὶ TA. 


216 


hearing the multitude 
pass by, he asked what 
it meant. 37 And they 
told him, that Jesus of 
Nazareth passeth by. 
38 And he cried, say- 
ing, Jesus, thou Son of 
David, have mercy on 
me. 39 Andthey which 
went before rebuked 
him, that he should 
hold his peace: but he 
cried somuch themore, 
Thou Son of David, 
have merey on me. 
40 And Jesus stood, and 
commanded him to be 
brought unto him: and 
when he was come 
near, he asked him, 
41 saying, What wilt 
thou that I shall doun- 
to thee? And he said, 
Lord, that I may re- 
ceive my sight. 42 And 
Jesus said unto him, 
Receive thy sight: thy 
faith hath saved thee. 
43 And immediately 
he received his sight, 
and followed him, glo- 
rifying God: and all 
the people, when they 
saw it, gave praise un- 
to God. 


XIX. And Jesus 
entered and _ pass- 
ed through Jericho, 
2 And, behold, there 
was a man named Zac- 
chseus, which was the 
chief among the publi- 
cans, and he was rich. 
3 And he sought to see 
Jesus who he was; and 
could not for the press, 
because he was little of 
stature. 4 And he ran 
before, and climbed up 
into a sycomore tree 
to see him: for he was 
topass that way. 5 And 
when Jesus came to 
the place, he looked up, 
and saw him, and said 
unto him, Zacchzus, 
make haste, and come 
down; for to day 1 
must abide at thy 
house. 6 And he made 
haste, and came down, 
and received him joy- 
fally. 7 And when they 
saw it, they all mur- 
mured, saying, That he 
Was gone to be guest 
with a man that is a 
sinner. 8 And Zacchz- 
us stood, and said un- 
to the Lord; Behold, 
Lord, the half of my 
goods I give to the 


AOYKAX, XVIII, XIX. 


δὲ ὄχλου διαπορευομένου ἐπυνθάνετο ri! εἴη τοῦτο. 
land acrowd passing along he asked what ?might*be ‘this, 


> , A ? ~ ? ~ « ~ , 
37 ἀπήγγειλαν. δὲ αὐτῷ, Ore [ησοῦς o Ναζωραῖος παρέρχεται. 
And they told him, Jesus the Nazarman is passing by. 
38 Kai ἐβόησεν λέγων, ‘Inoov, υἱὲ ™AaBid,' ἐλέησόν με. 
And hecalled out saying, Jesus, Son of David, have pity on me, 
39 Kai οἱ προάγοντες ἐπετίμων αὐτῷ ἵνα πσιωπήσῃ"" 
And those going before rebuked him that he should be silent, 
αὐτὸς.δὲ πολλῷ μᾶλλον ἔκραζεν, Yié ™AaBid," ἐλέησόν με. 


but he much more cried out, Son of David, have pity on me. 
40 Σταθεὶς.-δὃὲ  °0' Ἰησοῦς ἐκέλευσεν αὐτὸν ἀχθῆναι πρὸς 

And “having ᾿βύορρϑα ‘Jesus commanded him tobebrought to 

? , Ξ 7 , > wy , ? , , 
αὐτὸν ἐγγίσαντος.δὲ αὐτοῦ ἐπηρώτησεν αὐτόν, 41 Ρλέ- 

him. Andhavingdrawnnear he asked him, say- 
γων, Ti σοι θέλεις ποιήσω; ‘0.68 εἶπεν, Κύριε, ἵνα 
ing, What °to ’thee ‘desirest *thou *I*shall®do? Andhe said, Lord, that 


ἀναβλέψω. 42 Kai ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν αὐτῷ, ᾿Ανάβλεψον" 
I may receive sight. And Jesus said tohim, Receive sight: 


ἡ-.πίστις.σου σέσωκέν σε. 43 Kai παραχρῆμα ἀνέβλεψεν, 
thy faith hath healed thee. And immediately he received sight, 


καὶ ἠκολούθει αὐτῷ, δοξάζων τὸν θεόν: Kai πᾶς ὁ λαὸς 


and followed him, glorifying God. And _ all the people 
ἰδὼν ἔδωκεν αἶνον τῷ θεῷ. 

having seen [it} gave praise to God. 
19 Kai εἰσελθὼν διήρχετο τὴν “Ἱεριχώ"" 2 καὶ ἰδού, 


And having entered he passed through Jericho. And behold, 
ἀνὴρ ὀνόματι καλούμενος Ζακχαῖος, καὶ αὐτὸς ἦν ἀρχι- 
aman by name called Zacchssus, and he was a chief 
τελώνης, καὶ τοῦτος ἦν" πλούσιος" 8 καὶ ἐζήτει ἰδεῖν τὸν 
tax-gatherer, and he was rich. And he was seeking tosee 
Ἰησοῦν τίς ἐστιν, Kai οὐκιἠδύνατο ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄχλου, OTL τῇ 
Jesus— who heis: and hewasnotable for the crowd, because 
« , A ‘ ‘ 8 ” ? , 
ἡλικίᾳ μικρὸς ἦν. 4 καὶ προδραμὼν * ἔμπροσθεν ἀνέβη 
in stature small he was. And having run forward before, he went up 
ἐπὶ ‘oukopwoaiay,' va ἴδῃ αὐτόν" ore ‘du! ἐκείνης 
into ὃ. sycomore, that he might see him, for by that [way] 
» , ‘ e = ᾽ ‘ A , > 
ἤμελλεν διέρχεσθαι. 5 καὶ we ἦλθεν ἐπὶ τὸν τόπον, ava- 
he was about to pass. And as hecame to the place, look- 
βλέψας ὁ Ἰησοῦς “eldev αὐτόν, καὶ! εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτόν, 
him, and said to him, 


ing up Jesus saw 

Ζακχαῖε, σπεύσας κατάβηθι' σήμερον.γὰρ ἐν τῷ.οἴκῳ.σου 

Zeacchreus, making haste come down, for to-day in thy house 
δεῖ με μεῖναι. 6 Kai σπεύσας κατέβη καὶ ὑπεδέξατο 


it behoveth me to remain, And making haste hecamedown and __i received 


αὐτὸν χαίρων. 7 καὶ ἰδόντες χἅπαντες"! διεγόγγυζον, 
him rejoicing. And having seen [it] all murmured, 

λέγοντες, Ὅτι παρὰ ἁμαρτωλῷ ἀνδρὶ εἰσῆλθεν καταλῦσαι. 
saying, With a sinful man hehasentered to lodge. 


8 Σταθεὶς.δὲ Φακχαῖος εἶπεν πρὸς τὸν κύριον, ᾿Ιδού, τὰ 
But standing Zacchawus said to the Lord, Lo, the 


Yypion' ττῶν. ὑπαρχόντων. μου,᾽ κύριε, "δίδωμι τοῖς πτωχοῖς" 


poor; and if I have half of my possessions, Lord, I give tothe poor, 

1 + [av] τε. τι Δαυΐδ aw; Δαυείδ LTTrA. π σιγήσῃ LTTrA. © [ὁ] Tr. 
P — λέγων T[Tr]A. 4 Ἱερειχώ τ. τ αὐτὸς (— ἦν [w]trA) LTrA ; --- οὗτος T. 5 + εἰς 
τὸ to the (read ἔμπρ. front,) TA]. τ συκομορέαν EGTTrAW ; συκομωρέαν L. y— ov 


GLITrAW. 


* μου TOV ὑπαρχόντων TTrA. 


w — εἶδεν αὐτόν, καὶ TTr[A]. 


x πάντες LTTrAW. Υ ἡμίσεα L; ἡμίσειά TTA. 


5 τοῖς πτωχοῖς δίδωμι TTA. 


XIX. LUKE. 


καὶ εἴ τινός τι ἐσυκοφάντησα, ἀποδίδωμι τετρα- 
and if of anyone anything I took by false accusation, 1 return four- 
πλοῦν. 9 Εἶπεν. δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸν ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Ὅτι σήμερον σωτηρία 
fold. And ’said “ἴο *him 1Jesus, To-day salvation 
τῷ. οἴκῳ. τούτῳ ἐγένετο, καθότι Kai αὐτὸς υἱὸς ᾿Αβραάμ 
to this house iscome, inasmuch as also he ason of Abraham 
bear"! 10 ἦλθεν.γὰρ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ζητῆσαι Kai σῶσαι 
is: for °came ‘the 7Son 3of *man toseek and tosave 
τὸ ἀπολωλός. 
that which has been lost. 
11 ᾿Ακουόντων.δὲ αὐτῶν ταῦτα, προσθεὶς εἶπεν παρα- 
But as were *hearing ‘they thesethings, adding hespoke a para- 
4 4 Sy %9, ‘ c ? \ = c ann I 3 ‘ ὃ ~ 
Bodny, διὰ TO eyyuc αὐτὸν εἰναι Ιερουσ np, καὶ OOKELY 
ble, because Snear the 2was erusalem, and *thought 
αὐτοὺς ὅτι παραχρῆμα μέλλει ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ ἀνα- 
ΠΟΥ that immediately was about the kingdom of God tobe 
φαίνεσθαι: 12 εἶπεν οὖν, ᾿Ανθρωπός τις εὐγενὴς ἐπορεύθη 
manifested. He said therefore, A“man ‘certain high born proceeded 
εἰς χώραν μακράν, λαβεῖν ἑαυτῷ βασιλείαν καὶ ὑποστρέψαι. 
to a “country ‘distant, toreceive forhimself akingdom and to return. 
13 καλέσας.δὲ δέκα δούλους. ἑαυτοῦ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς δέκα μνᾶς, 
And having called ten of his bondmen he gave tothem ten minas, 
kai εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, Πραγματεύσασθε “ἕως" ἔρχομαι. 
and said to them, Trade until I come. 
14 Οἱ. δὲ. πολῖται. αὐτοῦ ἐμίσουν αὐτόν, καὶ ἀπέστειλαν πρεσ- 
But his citizens hated him and sent an em- 
βείαν ὀπίσω αὐτοῦ, λέγοντες, Οὐ.θέλομεν τοῦτον 
bassy after him, saying, We are unwilling [for] this {man} 
βασιλεῦσαι ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς. 15 Καὶ ἐγένετο ἐν τῷ ἐπανελθεῖν 
to reign over us. And itcametopass on *coming *back ‘again 
αὐτὸν λαβόντα τὴν βασιλείαν, καὶ εἶπεν φωνηθῆναι αὐτῷ 
‘his having received the kingdom, that he directed tobecalled to him 
τοὺς δούλους τούτους οἷς “ἔδωκεν τὸ ἀργύριον, ἵνα 
these bondmen to whom hegave_ the money, inorder that 
fyyg' δδτίς τί διεπραγματεύσατο." 16 παρεγένετο.δὲ ὁ 
he might know what each had gained by trading. Andcameup the 
πρῶτος, λέγων, Κύριε, ἡ-μνᾶ.σου "προσειργάσατο δέκα" μνᾶς. 
first, saying, Lord, thy mina has produced ten winas. 
17 Kai εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Εὖ, ἀγαθὲ dovhe’ Ore ἐν ἐλαχίστῳ 
And hesaid tohim, Well! good bondman; because in a very little 
πιστὸς ἐγένου, ἴσθι ἐξουσίαν ἔχων ἐπάνω δέκα πόλεων. 
faithful thou wast, be thou 7authority “having over ten cities. 
18 Kai ἦλθεν ὁ δεύτερος, λέγων, ἘΚύριε, ἡ-μνᾶ.σου" 
And came the _ second, saying, Lord, thy mina 
, ~ ~ A \ , \ Ay es 3 » il 
πέντε μνᾶς. 19 Εἶπεν.δὲ καὶ τούτῳ, Kai σὺ ‘yiwou ἐπάνω 
five minas. And he said also to thisone, And?thou ‘be over 
πέντε πόλεων. 20 Kai™ ἕτερος ἦλθεν, λέγων, Κύριε, ἰδοὺ ἡ 
five cities. And another came, saying, Lord, behold 
pva.cov, ἣν εἶχον ἀποκειμένην ἐν σουδαρίῳ᾽ 21 ἐφοβούμην 
thy mina, which I kept laid up in a handkerchief. 2] feared 
γάρ σε, ὅτι ἄνθρωπος αὐστηρὸς εἴ" αἴρεις ὃ 
for thee, because & Man harsh thou art; thou takest up what 


ἐποίησεν 
has made 


217 


taken any thing from 
any man by false accu- 
sation, I restore him 
fourfold. 9 And Jesus 
said unto him, This 
day is salvation come 
to this house, forso- 
much as he also is a 
son of Abraham, 10 For 
the Son of man is come 
to seek and tosave that 
which was lost. 


11 And as they heard 
these things, he added 
and spake x parable, 
because he was nigh to 
Jerusalem, and _ be- 
cause they thought 
that the kingdom of 
God should imme- 
diately appear. 12 He 
said therefore, A cer- 
tain nobleman went 
into a far coun to 
receive for hi a 
kingdom, and to re- 
turn. 13 And he called 
his ten servants, and 
delivered them ten 
pounds, and said unto 
them, Occupy till I 
come. 14 But his citi- 
zens hated him, and 
sent a message after 
him, saying, We will 
not have this man to 
reign overus. 15 And 
it came to pass, that 
when he was returned, 
having received the 
kingdom, then he com- 
manded these servants 
to be called unto him, 
to whom he had given 
the money, that he 
might know how much 
every man had gained 
by trading. 16 Then 
came the first, saying, 
Lord, thy pound hath 
gained ten pounds. 
17 And he said unto 
him, Well, thou good 
servant: because thou 
hast been faithful in a 
very little, have thou 
authority over ten 
cities. 18 And the 
second came, saying, 
Lord, thy pound hath 
gained five pounds. 
19 And he said likewise 
to him, Be thou also 
over five cities. 20 And 
another came, saying, 
Lord, behold, here is 
thy pound, which I 
have kept laid up ina 
napkin: 21 for 1 fear- 
ed thee, because thou 
art an austere man: 
thou takest up that 


° — ἐστιν (read [is]) T. 
d ἐν @ LTTrA. e δεδώκει he had given Lrtra. 
what they had gained by trading Tra. 
well done trrra. k ἡ μνᾶ σου, κύριε, TTTA. 
other) Lrtra. 


f yvow LTTrA. 


| ἐπάνω γίνου TA. 


h δέκα προσηργάσατο (προσειρ. Tr) LTTrA. 


© εἶναι αὐτὸν Ἱερουσαλὴμ. τι ; εἶναι Ἱερουσαλὴμ αὐτὸν TTrA. 
8 τί διεπραγματεύσαντα 


i εὖγε 
m + 6 the (ἕτερος 


218 


thou layedst not down, 
and reapest that thou 
didst not sow. 22 And 
he saith unto him, Out 
of thine own mouth 
will I judge thee, thou 
wicked servant. Thou 
kmewest that I was an 
austere man, taking 
up that I laid not 
down, and reaping 
that I did not sow: 
23 wherefore then gav- 
est not thou my money 
into the bank, that at 
my coming I might 
have required mine 
own with usury? 
24 And he said unto 
them that stood by, 
Take from him the 
pound, and give it to 
him that hath ten 
pounds. 25 (And the 

said unto him, Lord, 
he hath ten pounds.) 
26 For I say unto you, 
That unto every one 
which hath shall be 
given; and from him 
that hath not, even 
that he hath shall be 
taken away from him, 
27 But those mine ene- 
mies, which would not 
that I should reign 
over them, bring 
hither, and slay them 
before me. 


28 And when he had 
thus spoken, he went 
before, ascending up 
to Jerusalem. 29 And 
it came to pass, when 
he was come nigh to 
Bethphage and Beth- 
any, at the mount 
called the mount of 
Olives, he sent two of 
his disciples, 30 say- 
ing, Go ye into the 
village over against 
you ; in the which at 
your entering ye shall 
find a colt tied, where- 
on yet never man sat: 
loose him, and bring 
him hither. 31 And if 
any man ask you, Why 
do ye loose him? thus 
shall ye say unto him, 
Because the Lord hath 
need of him. 32 And 
they that were sent 
went their way, and 
found even as he had 
said unto them. 33 And 
as they were loosing 
the colt, the owners 
thereofsaid unto them, 
Why loose ye the colt? 
34 And they said, The 
Lord hath need of him, 
35 And they brought 
him to Jesus: and they 


AO Yeks AUS: XIX. 
οὐκ.ἔθηκας καὶ θερίζες ὃ οὐκ.ἔσπειρας. 22 Λέγει 
thou didst not lay down and thou reapest what thou didst ποὺ sow. *He “says 


"él αὐτῷ, ᾿Εκ τοῦ.στόματός.σο ry 
@, ᾿στόματός.σονυ κρινῶ 


σε, πονηρὲ δοῦ- 
‘but tohim, Out οὗ thy mouth 


I willjudge thee, wicked bond- 


re. ἤδεις ὅτι ἐγὼ ἄνθρωπος αὐστηρός εἰμι, αἴρων ὃ 
man: thou knewest that I 7a *man Sharsh lam, taking up what 
οὐκ. ἔθ᾽ καὶ θερίζ ὃ οὐκ-ἔ 23 καὶ διατί! 

= Κα και ερι ων 0 οὐυκ-ἐσπειρα. και ιατι 


I did not lay down and why 
᾽ ἐδ Ρ. A ? UJ , il 2 ‘ q \ Π , r . 3 ‘ti 
οὐκ.ἔδωκας Ῥτὸ. ἀργύριόν. μου" ἐπὶ Ἱτὴν" τράπεζαν, "kai ἐγὼ 
didst thou not give my money to the bank, that 01 
ἐλθὼν σὺν τόκ ἂν. ἔπραξα αὐτό"; 24 Καὶ τοῖς παρε- 
coming with interest might haverequired it? And tothose stand- 
στῶσιν εἶπεν, lee ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τὴν μνᾶν, καὶ δότε τῷ 
ing by he said, ake from him the mina, and give[it]tohim who 
τὰς δέκα μνᾶς ἔχοντι. 25 Kai ‘eizoy' αὐτῷ, Κύριε, ἔχει 


reaping what I did not sow! and 


the ten minas has. (And they said to hin, Lord, he has 
δέκα μνᾶς. 26 Λέγω. γὰρ" ὑμῖν, ὅτι παντὶ τῷ ἔχοντι δο- 
ten minas.) For I say to you, that toeveryone who has _ shallbe 


»»ἤἍ ᾿Ξ S NA ~ ee \ tt ” 2 Le 
θήσεται" ἀπὸ.δὲ τοῦ μη-ἔχοντος, καὶ 0 ἔχει ἀρθήσεται 


given; but from him who has not, even that which he has shall be taken 
Yam αὐτοῦ." 27 Πλὴν τοὺς. ἐχθρούς. μου "ἐκείνους" τοὺς 
from him. Moreover “mine “enemies those who 
\ ΄ ’ ~ ᾽ ᾽ ? , ? ΄ - 
μὴ-.θελήσαντάς pe βασιλεῦσαι ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς, ἀγάγετε ὧδε 
were unwilling [ΠΟ] me to reign over them, bring here 
καὶ κατασφάξατε ἃ ἔμπροσθέν pov. 
and slay (them) before me. 
28 Kai εἰπὼν ταῦτα ἐπορεύετο ἔμπροσθεν, ἀναβαίνων 
And having said these things he went on before, going up 
εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα: 29 Καὶ ἐγένετο ὡς ἤγγισεν εἰς Βηθ- 
to Jerusalem, And itcametopass as hedrewnear to  Beth- 


φαγὴ Kai*BnOaviay," πρὸς τὸ ὄρος τὸ καλούμενον ἐλαιῶν, 
phage and Bethany, towards the mount called of Olives, 


ἀπέστειλεν δύο THY_pabnravadrov," 80 eixwy," Ὑπάγετε εἰς 


he sent two of his disciples, saying, Go into 
τὴν κατέναντι κώμην. ἐν y εἰσπορευόμενοι εὑρήσετε 
the Zopposite [you] ‘village, in which entering ye will find 


~ [2 ? ? τι ah Se | , ? , ? ’ A 
πῶλον δεδεμένον, ἐφ’ ὃν οὐδεὶς πώποτε ἀνθρώπων ἐκάθισεν 

a colt tied, on which noone “*ever*yet ‘of 7men sat: 
“λύσαντες αὐτὸν ἀγάγετε. 31 Kai ἐάν τις ὑμᾶς ἐρωτᾷ, 
having loosed it bring [10]. And if anyone ou task, 
ἀλιατί! λύετε; οὕτως ἐρεῖτε “αὐτῷ, “Ore ὁ κύριος 

Why doyeloose[it]? thus shallyesay tohim, Because the Lord 


> ~ , » 2 ’ A « ᾽ , 
αὐτοῦ χρείαν ἔχει. 82 ᾿Απελθόντες.δὲ ol ἀπεσταλμένοι 
Sof*it “need ‘has. And having departed those who had been sent 


εὗρον καθὼς εἶπεν αὐτοῖς. 33 λυόντων.δὲ. αὐτῶν τὸν πῶλον 

found 8485 hehadsaid to them. And ontheir loosing the colt 
[εἴπον" ot κύριοι αὐτοῦ πρὸς αὐτούς, Τί λύετε TOY πῶλον; 

5said ‘the*masters “of *it to them, Why looseye the colt? 
34 Οἱ. δὲ felrov,'&'O κύριος αὐτοῦ χρείαν ἔχει. 35 Kai ἤγαγον 
And they βαϊᾶ, The Lord “*of*it “need ‘has. And they led 
αὐτὸν πρὸς τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν᾽ καὶ *émippiparrec! ἱἑαυτῶν" τὰ ἱμά- 
it to Jesus ; and having cast their gar- 


o — δὲ but TtTra. 
LTTrAW. 


π — ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ [L]vTa. 
τοῦ (read the disciples) T[Tr]a. 
f εἶπαν LITrA. 


(i) rtr[a]. 


τ κἀγὼ LYTrA. 


ο διὰ τί LTrA. P μου τὸ ἀργύριον LTTrA. 4ᾳ --- τὴν (read a bank) 
5 αὐτὸ ἔπραξα LITrA. ἵ εἶπαν LTTrA. Υ͂ — yap for [u]r[trJa. 
x τούτους these TTra. Y - αὐτοὺς them TTrA.  Βηθανιά a. * — av- 
Ὁ λέγων Ltr. © + xatand Tira. dua 7¢LTrA. “ — αὐτῷ 


& + ὅτι because LTTrA. 4» ἐπιρίψαντες LITrA. + αὐτῶν LTTrA. 


ΧΙΧ. 


? 4 


Tia ἐπὶ τὸν πῶλον, ἐπεβίβασαν 
ments on the _ colt, they put 7on [Pit] 


μένου.δὲ αὐτοῦ ὑπεστρώννυον τὰ ἱμάτια."αὐτῶν" ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ. 

Andashe went they were strewing their garments in the way. 
? ΄ " ? ~ » A ~ , τ» 

37 ᾿Εγγίζοντος.δὲ αὐτοῦ ἤδη πρὸς τῇ καταβάσει τοῦ ὄρους 

And as he drew near already at the descent of the mount 

τῶν ἐλαιῶν ἤρξαντο ἅπαν τὸ πλῆθος τῶν μαθητῶν χαίρον- 


LUKE. 


τὸν Ἰησοῦν. 86 zropevo- 
‘Jesus, 


of Oli¥es began all the multitude ofthe disciples, rejoic- 

τες αἰνεῖν τὸν Osby φωνῇ μεγάλῃ περὶ ἱπασῶν᾽ ὧν 
ing, to praise God witha7voice ‘loud for all Swhich 
εἶδον δυνάμεων, 88 λέγοντες, Εὐλογημένος ὁ 
*they "had ®seen ['the] *works *of “power, saying, Blessed the 
πὲρχόμενος" βασιλεὺς ἐν ὀνόματι κυρίου: "εἰρήνη ἐν 
2coming ‘king in [the] name of [the] Lord. Peace in 


? ΑἹ \ , ? ε , , me , 
οὐρανῷ" καὶ δόξα ἔν ὑψίστοις. 89 Kai τινες τῶν Φαρισαίων 
heaven and glory in[the] highest. And some ofthe Pharisees 
ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄχλου elroy! πρὸς αὐτόν, Διδάσκαλε, ἐπιτίμησον 
from the crowd said to him, Teacher, rebuke 
τοῖς.μαθηταῖς.σου. 40 Kai ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν Padroic,' Λέγω 

thy disciples. And answering hesaid tothem, I say 
Ch tes qs Il 2A - r , i « ri 8 ΄.- Π 
υμιν, OTL’ ἕαν οὗτοι “σιωπησωσιν᾽ OL ισοι κεκράξονται. 
toyou, that if these should be silent the stones will ery out. 
41 Kai we ἤγγισεν, ἰδὼν τὴν πόλιν ἔκλαυσεν ἐπ᾽ ᾿αὐτῇ," 

And as hedrew near, seeing the city he wept over it, 
42 λέγων, Ὅτι εἰ ἔγνως καὶ σύ, ὕκαί.γε' ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ 


saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, even at least in Sday 
ὕσου" ταύτῃ, τὰ πρὸς εἰρήνην σου" νῦν.δὲ ἐκρύβη ἀπὸ 
*thy ‘this, the ὑβίηρβ for *peace 1thy: but now they are hid from 


? ~ ο ee er ¢ , ? \ \ \ 

ὀφθαλμῶν.σου" 43 ὅτι ἥξουσιν ἡμέραι ἐπὶ σὲ καὶ ὕπεριβα- 
thine eyes ; for *shall?come ‘days upon thee that ‘shall *cast 

λοῦσιν" οἱ-ἐχθροί.σου χάρακά σοι, καὶ περικυκλώσουσίν σε 

Sabout ‘thine *enemies 7a Srampart Sthee, and shallclosearound thee 

kai συνέξουσίν σε πάντοθεν, 44 καὶ ἐδαφιοῦσίν 

and keep in thee on every side, and shall level *with *the *ground 


σε καὶ τὰ.τέκνα.σου EV σοί, Kai οὐκιἀφήσουσιν *év σοὶ λίθον 
‘thee and thychildren in thee, and _ shall not leave in thee a stone 


, ’ ~ ~ 
ἐπὶ λίθῳ" ἀνθ᾽ ὧν οὐκιἔγνως τὸν καιρὸν τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς 
upon ἃ stone, because thou knewest not the season of 7visitation 


σου. 
thy. 


45 Kai εἰσελθὼν εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν ἤρξατο ἐκβάλλειν τοὺς 
And having entered into the temple hebegan tocastout those 


πωλοῦντας δὲν αὐτῷ καὶ ἀγοράζοντας." 46 λέγων αὐτοῖς, 


selling in it and buying, saying tothem, 
Γέγραπται, ὃ Ὁ. οἴκός. μου οἶκος προσευχῆς “ἐστίν"" ὑμεῖς. δὲ 
It has been written, My house ahouse of prayer is ; but ye 


αὐτὸν ἐποιήσατε σπήλαιον λῃστῶν. 47 Kai ἦν διδάσκων 
it have made a den of robbers. And he was teaching 


τὸ καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ" οἱ. δὲ ἀρχιερεῖς Kai οἱ γραμματεῖς 
day by day in the temple; and the chief priests and the scribes 


τὰ — ἀρχόμενος T. 
ᾳ [ore] Tr. 


Κ ἑαυτῶν Tr. |! πάντων LTr. 
nore 
LTTrA. Ρ — αὐτοῖς T[Tr]A. 
5 κράξουσιν TTA. t αὐτήν LTTrAW. 
χα [cov] LTrA. Υ παρεμβαλοῦσιν shall place near T. 
LTTrA. & — ἐν αὐτῷ Kal ἀγοράζοντας TTrA. 
© — ἐστίν TIra. 


2 ἐν οὐρανῷ εἰρήνη TTrA. 
τ σιωπήσουσιν shall be silent Lrtra. 
Y καίγε GT ; — καί γε [L]Tr[a]. 
λίθον ἐπὶ λίθον (λίθῳ L) ἐν σοί 
b+ ὅτιτ,; + καὶ ἔσται and shall be TTra. 


219 


cast their garments 
upon the colt, and they 
set Jesus thereon. 
36 And as he went, 
they spread their 
clothes in the way. 
37 And when he was 
come nigh, even now 
at the descent of the 
mount of Olives, the 
whole multitude of the 
disciples began to re- 
joice and praise God 
with a loud voice for 
all the mighty works 
that they had seen; 
38 saying, Blessed be 
the King that cometh 
in the name of the 
Lord: peace in hea- 
ven, and glory in the 
highest. 39 And some 
of the Pharisees from 
among the multitude 
said unto him, Master, 
rebuke thy disciples. 
40 And he answered 
and said unto them, I 
tell you that, if these 
should hold their 
peace,the stones would 
immediately cry out. 
41 And when he was 
come near, he beheld 
the city, and wept over 
it, 42 saying, If thou 
hadst known, even 
thou, at least in this 
thy day, the things 
which belong unto thy 
peace! but now they 
are hid from thine 
eyes. 43 For the days 
shall come upon thee, 
that thine enemies 
shall cast a trench 
about thee, and com- 
pass thee round, and 
keep thee in on every 
side, 44 and shall lay 
thee even with the 
ground, and thy chil- 
dren within thee ; and 
they shall not leave in 
thee one stone upon 
another; because thou 
knewest not the time 
of thy visitation. 


45 And he went into 
the temple, and began 
to cast out them that 
sold therein, and them 
that bought; 46 saying 
unto them, Tt is writ- 
ten, My house is the 
house of prayer: but ye 
have made it a den of 
thieves. 47 And he 
taught daily in the 
temple. But the chief 
priests and the scribes 


ο εἶπαν 


Ὁ — gov LTr[A]. 


220 


and the chief of the 
people sought to de- 
stroy him, 48 and could 
not find what they 
might do: for all the 
people were very at- 
tentive to hear him. 


XX. And it came to 
pass, that on one of 
those days,as he taught 
the people in the tem- 
ple, and preached the 
gospel, the chief priests 
and the scribes came 
upon him with the el- 
ders, 2 and spake unto 
him, saying, Tell us, 
by what authority do- 
est thou these things ? 
or who is he that gave 
thee this authority? 
3 And he answered and 
said unto them, I will 
also ask you one thing; 
and answer me: 4 The 
baptism of John, was 
it from heaven, or of 
men? 5 And they rea- 
soned with themselves, 
saying, If weshall say, 
From heaven; he will 
say, Why then believ- 
ed ye him not? 6 But 
and if we say, Of men; 
all the people will 
stone us: for they be 
persuaded that John 
was a prophet. 7 And 
they answered, that 
they could not tell 
whence i¢ was. 8 And 
Jesus said unto them, 
Neither tell I you by 
what authority I do 
these things. 


9 Then began he to 
speak to the people 
this parable; A certain 
man planted a vine- 
yard, and let it forth 
to husbandmen, and 
went into a far coun- 
try for a long time. 
10 And at the season 
he sent a servant to 
the husbandmen, that 
they should give him 
of the fruit of the 
vineyard: but the hus- 
bandmen beat him, 
and sent him away 
empty. 11 And again 
he sent another ser- 
vant: and they beat 
him also, and entreat- 
ed him shamefully, 
and sent him away 
empty. 12 And again 
he sent a third: and 


AOY KAS. XIX, Ry 


ἐζήτουν αὐτὸν ἀπολέσαι, καὶ ot πρῶτοι τοῦ λαοῦ" 48 Kai 
“were "seeking **him *to '°destroy, ‘andthe “first ‘ofthe Speorle, and 
οὐχ.δεὕρισκον" τὸ τί ποιήσωσιν, ὁ.λαὸς. γὰρ ἅπας “ἐξεκρέματο" 
found not what they might do, for 7the *people ‘all were *hanging7on 
αὐτοῦ ἀκούων. 
®him ‘listening. 
20 Καὶ ἐγένετο ἐν μιᾷ τῶν.ἡμερῶν "ἐκείνων," διδάσκον- 
And it came to pass on one of those days, as 7was Steach- 
τος αὐτοῦ τὸν λαὸν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ καὶ εὐαγγελιζομένου, 
ing ‘the the people in the temple and announcing the glad tidings, 
ἐπέστησαν οἱ ϑἀρχιερεῖς" Kai οἱ γραμματεῖς σὺν τοῖς πρεσβυ- 
came up the chief priests and the scribes with the elders 
τέροις, 2 καὶ Βεῖπον" ἱπρὸς αὐτόν, λέ " ΚΕἐπὲ"! ἡμῖν ἐ 
ole, poc αὐτόν, λέγοντες, ἱπὲ" ἡμῖν ἐν 
and spoke to him, saying, Tell us by 
ποίᾳ ἐξουσίᾳ ταῦτα ποιεῖς, ἢ τίς ἐστιν ὁ δούς σοι τὴν 
what authority these things thon doest, or who itis who gave to thee 
? , , ? ‘ SA A ᾽ [2 Im 
ἐξουσίαν. ταύτην ; 3 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς. δὲ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, ‘Epw- 
this authority? And answering hesaid to them, Will 
, ε ~ > ‘ 1“ iH , \ » , Ξ mk , 
THOW ὑμᾶς Kayw ‘eva λόγον, καὶ εἴπατξ μοι" 4'TO βάπτισμα 


“ask you 4I?also one thing, and {61 me, The baptism 
™’Twavvou' ἐξ οὐρανοῦ ἦν ἢ ἐξ ἀνθρώπων; 5 Οἱ δὲ 
of John from heaven wasit or from men? And they 


οσυνελογίσαντο"! πρὸς ἑαυτούς, λέγοντες, Ὅτι ἐὰν εἴπωμεν 
Teasoned among themselves, saying, If weshould say 
"EE ᾽ ~ 2D) ores, ? 2 , 2.Ὲ ταν 
OUPpaVOU, ερει Διατι OUV” OUK-ETTLOTEVOATE αὐτῳ: 
From heaven, hewillsay Why then did ye not believe him ? 
6 ἐὰν. δὲ εἴπωμεν “EE ἀνθρώπων, “πᾶς ὁ λαὸς!" καταλιθάσει 
But if we should say From men, all the people will stone 
ἡμᾶς" πεπεισμένος. γάρ.ἐστιν  “lwavyny' προφήτην εἶναι. 
us; for they are persuaded [that] John 2a *prophet ‘was. 
7 Kai ἀπεκρίθησαν μὴ.εἰδέναι πόθεν. ὃ καὶ ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν 
And they answered they knew ποῦ whence. And Jesus said 
αὐτοῖς, Οὐδὲ ἐγὼ λέγω ὑμῖν ἐν ποίᾳ ἐξουσίᾳ ταῦτα ποιῶ. 
tothem, Neither *I ‘tell you by what authority these things I do. 
9” Ἤρξατο δὲ “πρὸς τὸν λαὸν λέγειν" τὴν.παραβολὴν.ταύτην" 
Andhebegan ἴο the people tospeak this parable : 
w"AvOowmdc ὅτις! ἐφύτευσεν ἀμπελῶνα," καὶ γἐξέδοτο" αὐτὸν 
A *man toertain planted avineyard, and _ let out it 
γεωργοῖς, Kai ἀπεδήμησεν χρόνους ἱκανούς. 10 καὶ ξέν" 
to husbandmen, and left the σοῦ} fora long time. And in [the] 
καιρῷ ἀπέστειλεν πρὸς τοὺς γεωργοὺς δοῦλον, ἵνα ἀπὸ τοῦ 


season he sent to the husbandmen a bondman, that from the 
καρποῦ τοῦ ἀμπελῶνος “δῶσιν! αὐτῷ" οἱ. δὲ γεωργοὶ 
fruit ofthe vineyard they might give tohim; but the husbandmen 


Sgipayrec αὐτὸν ἐξαπέστειλαν" κενόν. 11 καὶ προσέθετο 
having beat him sent [him]away empty. And 86 added 
ὀπέμψαι Erepov' δοῦλον. ol.0& κἀκεῖνον δείραντες Kai ἀτι- 


another bondman; but they “4180 *him *having beat and  dis- 


ἐξαπέστειλαν κενόν. 12 καὶ προσέθετο “πέμψαι 
And he added to send 


to send 


μάσαντες 
honoured [him] sent[him]away empty. 


d ηὕρισκον Ltr. 
riests TA. 


P + ἡμῖν to us L. 


Υ λέγειν πρὺς τὸν λαὸν L. 


Σ ἐξέδετο TA. 
LTTrA. 


h εἶπαν TTrA. 
— ἕνα (read [one]) urtra, 


, 2 -- ἐν (read καιρῷ at [the] season Lrtra. 
Ὁ ἐξαπέστειλαν αὐτὸν δείραντες TA. 


ε ἐξεκρέμετο τ. Γ- ἐκείνων (read one of the days) LTTrA. δ ἱερεῖς 
i λέγοντες πρὸς αὐτὸν LT; — λέγοντες TrA. * Εἰπὸν TTra. 

m+ τὸ Τὶ 2 ’Twavov Tr. ° συνελογίζοντο L. 
9 Διὰ τί ELTrA. *—ovdv[L]TTrA. %0AadsamasTIrA. *’Iwayny Tr. 
W ᾿Αμπελῶνα ἐφύτευσεν ἄνθρωπος L. χ--- σις GLTTrAW. 
a δώσουσιν they shall give 


© ἕτερον πέμψαι LTTrA. 4 τρίτον πέμψαι LTTrA. 


ΧΧ. LUKE. 
τρίτον" οἱ. δὲ “καὶ τοῦτον" τραῦμα είσαντες ἐξέβαλον. 
athird; and they ‘also 7him ‘having 7wounded cast [him] out. 


18 εἶπεν.δὲ ὁ κύριος τοῦ ἀμπελῶνος, Ti ποιήσω; πέμψω 
Andgaid the lord ofthe vineyard, What shallIdo? I will send 
rov.vidv_pov τὸν ἀγαπητόν᾽ ἴσως τοῦτον fidéyrec' évrpa- 
my son the beloved ; perhaps him having seen they will 
anoovra. 14 ᾿Ιδόντες.δὲ αὐτὸν οἱ ely οὶ ἐδιελογίζοντο" 
respect. But having seen him the husban n reasoned 
move "ἑαυτούς," λέγοντες, Οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ κληρονόμος" ᾿δεῦτε" 


among themselves, saying, This is the heir; come 
ἀποκτείνωμεν αὐτόν, ἵνα ἡμῶν γένηται ἡ κληρονομία. 
let us kill him, that ‘ours *may*become'the “inheritance. 


15 Kai ἐκβαλόντες αὐτὸν ἔξω τοῦ ἀμπελῶνος ἀπέκτειναν. 
And having οαβῦ ἔοσίῃ him outside the vineyard they killed 
Ti οὖν ποιήσει αὐτοῖς ὁ κύριος τοῦ ἀμπελῶνος ; 

(him). Whattherefore willdo tothem the lord _ of the vineyard ? 


16 ἐλεύσεται Kai ἀπολέσει τοὺς. γεωργοὺς τούτους, Kai δώσει 
Hewillcome and will destroy these husbandmen, and will give 


τὸν ἀμπελῶνα ἄλλοις. "᾿Ακούσαντες. δὲ" lefzrov," Μὴ 
the vineyard to others. And having heard [it] they said, *Not 


ἔνοιτο. 17 Ὁ δὲ ἐμβλέψας αὐτοῖς εἶπεν, Τί οὖν ἐστιν τὸ 
may “ἰῦ be! But he looking at them said, Whatthen is *that 


γεγραμμένον τοῦτο, Λίθον ὃν ἀπεδοκίμασαν οἱ 
Shas *been °written ‘this, [The] stone which “rejected ‘they *that 


οἰκοδομοῦντες; οὗτος ἐγενήθη εἰς i ig γωνίας; 18 Πᾶς 


*puild, this is become ead of [the] corner? Everyone 
« ‘ ᾽ ? ~ 4 , ‘ a 2. ,.,κνΆῃἡ Ww ὭΣ» 
ὁ πεσὼν ἐπ᾽ ἐκεῖνον τὸν λίθον συνθλασθήσεται' ἐφ᾽ ὃν δ΄ ἂν 


that falls on that stone will be broken, buton whomsoever 
πέσῃ λικμήσει αὐτόν. 19 Καὶ πέζήητησαν" οἱ 
it may fall it will grind *to*powder ‘him. And 7sought ‘the 


"ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ οἱ γραμματεῖς" ἐπιβαλεῖν ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν τὰς χεῖρας 
4chief *priests‘and ἴθ “scribes to lay 70on *him hands 
ἐν αὐτῇ.τῇ.ὥρᾳ, Kai ἐφοβήθησαν τὸν λαόν ἔγνωσαν. γὰρ OTL 
in that hour, and theyfeared the people; forthey knew that 
πρὸς αὐτοὺς 5 τὴν.παραβολὴν ταύτην εἶπεν." 
against them this parable he speaks, 
20 Καὶ παρατηρήσαντες ἀπέστειλαν Ῥέγκαθέτους," ὑπο- 
And having watched [him] they sent secret agents, feign- 
κρινομένους ἑαυτοὺς δικαίους εἶναι, ἵνα ἐπιλάβωνται 
ing themselves “righteous ‘to*be, that they might take hold 
αὐτοῦ “λόγου," τεἰς τὶ παραδοῦναι αὐτὸν τῇ ἀρχῇ Kai 
of him in discourse, to the[end] to deliver up him tothe power and 
τῇ ἐξουσίᾳ τοῦ ἡγεμόνος. 21 Kai ἐπηρώτησαν αὐτόν, λέγον- 
to the authority of the governor. And they questioned him, say- 
4 » eo ? ~ , 3 a , A 
τες, Διδάσκαλε, οἴδαμεν ὅτι ὀρθῶς λέγεις Kai διδάσκεις, καὶ 
ing, Teacher, we know that rightly thou sayest and teachest, and 
ob. AapBavec πρόσωπον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀληθείας τὴν ὁδὸν 
acceptest ποῦ [any man’s] person, but with truth the way 
Tov θεοῦ διδάσκεις. 22 ἔξεστιν "ἡμῖν! Καίσαρι ΠΩΣ δοῦναι 
of God _ teachest : isitlawful forus “*to*Cmsar “tribute ‘to?give 
ἢ οὔ ; 23 Κατανοήσας.δὲ αὐτῶν τὴν πανουργίαν εἶπεν πρὸς 
or not? But perceiving their craftiness he said to 


f — ἰδόντες LTTr[A]. & διελογίσαντο L. 
k οἱ δὲ ἀκούσαντες L. | εἶπαν ττττὰ. 

© εἶπεν τὴν παραβολὴν ταύτην LTTrA. 
¥ ὥστε SO aS LTTrA. 5 ἡμᾶς TITA. 


© κἀκεῖνον L. 
i — δεῦτε LTTrA. 
Kal οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς LTTrA. 
(read of his discourse) Tr. 


221 


they wounded him also, 
and cast him out. 
13 Then said the lord 
of the vineyard, What 
shall I do? I willsend 
my beloved son: it may 
be they will reverence 
him when they see 
him, 14 But when the 
husbandmen saw him, 
they reasoned among 
themselves, saying, 
This is the heir: come, 
let us kill him, that 
the inheritance may be 
ours. 15So they cast 
him out of the vine- 
yard, and killed him. 
What therefore shall 
the lord of the vine- 
yard do unto them? 
16 He shall come and 
destroy these husband- 
men, and shall give 
the vineyard to others. 
And when they heard 
it, they said, God for- 
bid. 17 And he beheld 
them, and said, What 
is this then that is 
written, ‘The stone 
which the builders re- 
jected, the same is be- 
come the head of the 
corner? 18 Whosoever 
shall fall upon that 
stone shall be broken; 
but on whomsoever 
it shall fall, it will 
grind him to powder. 
19 And the chief priests 
and the scribes the 
same hour sought to 
luy hands on him; and 
they feared the people: 
for they perceived that 
he had spoken this pa- 
rable against them. 


20 And they watched 
him, and sent forth 
spies, which should 
feign themselves just 
men, that they might 
take hold of his words, 
that so they might de- 
liver him unto the 
power and authori- 
ty of the governor. 
21 And they asked 
him, saying, Master, 
we know that thou 
sayest and teachest 
rightly, neither ac- 
ceptest thou the per- 
son of any, but teach- 
est the way of God 
truly: 22 is it lawful 
for us to give tribute 
unto Crsar, or no? 
23 But he perceived 
their craftiness, and 
said unto them, Why 


ἃ ἀλλήλους One another Trra. 
> va 

τὰ ἐζήτουν L. 

Ρ ἐνκαθέτους τ. 


2 γραμματεῖς 
4 λόγον 


222 


tempt ye me? 24 Shew 
me a penny. Whose 
image and superscrip- 
tion hath it? They 
answered and _ said, 
Cwsar’s. 25 And he 
said unto them, Ren- 
der therefore unto 
Czesar the things which 
be Csesar’s, and unto 
God the gay berm 
be God’s. 26 And they 
could not take hold of 
his words before the 
people: and they mar- 
yelled at his answer, 
and held their peace. 


27 Then came to him 
certain of the Saddu- 
cees, which deny that 
there is any resurrec- 
tion; and they asked 
him, 28 saying, Mas- 
ter, Moses wrote unto 
us, If any man’s bro- 
ther die, having a 
wife, and he die with- 
out children, that his 
brother should take 
his wife, and raise up 
seed unto his brother. 
29 There were there- 
fore seven brethren: 
and the first took a 
wife, and died with- 
out children, 30 And 
the second took her 
to wife, and he died 
childless. 31 And the 
third took her; and in 
like manner the seven 
also: and they left no 
children, and_ died. 
32 Last of all the 
woman died 8150. 
33 Therefore in the re- 
surrection whose wife 
of them is she? for 
seven had her to wife. 
34 And Jesus answer- 
ing saiduntothem,The 
children of this world 
marry, and are given 
in marriage: 35 but 
they which shall beac- 
counted worthy to ob- 
tain that world, and 
the resurrection from 
the dead, neither 
marry, nor are given 
in marriage: 36 neither 
can they die any more: 
for they are equal unto 
the angels; and are the 
children of God, being 
the children of the 
resurrection. 37 Now 
that the dead are rais- 
ed, even Moses shewed 
at the bush, when he 


iN OFYEK AGS. XX. 

αὐτούς, "Τί pe πειράζετε! ; 24 γ"ἐπιδείξατε" μοι dnvapiov'™ 

them, Why me do ye tempt? Shew me a denarius : 

7, » ᾽ , ir) , 5 x’ , Ul δι C4 Π 

τίνος ἔχει εἰκόνα καὶ ἐπιγραφήν ; “᾿Αποκριθέντες".δὲ γεῖπον, 

whose “88 *it timage 7and “inscription? And answering they said, 
Καίσαρος. 25 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν Ξαὐτοῖς," “᾿Απόδοτε τοίνυν τὰ 


Ceesar’s. Andhe said tothem, Render therefore the things 
Καίσαρος ὃ" Καίσαρι, cai τὰ τοῦ θεοῦ τῷ θεῷ. 26 Kai 
of Cassar to Cesar, and the things of God to God. And 


οὐκιἴσχυσαν ἐπιλαβέσθαι “αὐτοῦ! ῥήματος ἐναντίον τοῦ 
they were ποὺ able totake hold of his speech before the 
λαοῦ: καὶ θαυμάσαντες ἐπὶ τῷῇ-ἀποκρίσει.αὐτοῦ ἐσίγησαν. 
people; and wondering at his answer they were silent, 


27 Προσελθόντες. δὲ τινες τῶν Σαδδουκαίων, οἱ “ἀντι- 
And having come to [him] some of the Sadducees, who deny 


λέ ΤΙ ᾽ »ἍἭ A 7 , ? ΄ “ 
ἐγοντες! ἀνάστασιν μὴ εἶναι, ἐπηρώτησαν αὐτόν, 28 λέγον- 


34. resurrection ‘there 215, they questioned him, say- 
rec, Διδάσκαλε, “Μωσῆς" ἔγραψεν ἡμῖν, ἐάν τινος ἀδελφὸς 
ing, Teacher, Moses wrote tous, If anyone’s_ brother 
ἀποθάνῃ ἔχων γυναῖκα, Kai οὗτος ἄτεκνος ἀποθάνῃ," ἵνα 
should die having a wife, and he childless should die, that 


λάβῃ ὁ.ἀδελφὸς αὐτοῦ THY γυναῖκα καὶ ἐξαναστήσῃ σπέρμα 
3should*take δῖ *brother the wife and shouldraiseup _ see 
τῷ ἀδελφῷ. αὐτοῦ. 29 ἑπτὰ οὖν ἀδελφοὶ ἦσαν' Kai ὁ πρῶτος 

to his brother. 4Seven *then °brethren 'there*were;andthe first 

λαβὼν γυναῖκα ἀπέθανεν ἄτεκνος" 30 καὶ ἐἔέλαβεν" ὁ 
having taken a wife died childless ; and $took ‘the 
δεύτερος "τὴν γυναῖκα, καὶ οὗτος ἀπέθανεν ἄτεκνος" 31 καὶ 
Ξεθοομᾶ the woman, and_ he died childless ; and 
ὁ τρίτος ἔλαβεν αὐτήν," ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ οἱ ἑπτὰ " ov-Kar- 
the third took her ; and likewise also the seven did not 


, μ ‘ ᾽ θ Ὁ 9 .“ 1p \ , Il m2 Ἑ 
ἐλιπον TEKVA, καὶ απεῦσανον 3 ὕστερον € παντων απε- 
leave children, and died ; 2last land of all died 


θανεν καὶ ἡ γυνή. 33 "ἐν. τῇ.οὖν ἀναστάσει τίνος αὐτῶν 
also the woman. Therefore in the resurrection of which of them 


ίνεται γυνή; ol-yap ἑπτὰ ἔσχον αὐτὴν γυναῖκα. 34 Kai 


does she become wife? for the seven had her as wife. And 
οἀποκριθεὶς" εἶπεν αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Οἱ υἱοὶ τοῦ.αἰῶνος.τούτου 
answering “said “to *them ‘Jesus, The sons of this age 


ell 


γαμοῦσιν καὶ ΡῬἐκγαμίσκονται"" 35 οἱ. δὲ καταξιωθέντες τοῦ 


marry and are given in marriage ; but those accounted worthy 
αἰῶνος.ἐκείνου τυχεῖν καὶ τῆς ἀναστάσεως τῆς ἐκ 
“that tage 1to “obtain and the resurrection which [15] fromamong 
νεκρῶν οὔτε γαμοῦσιν οὔτε “ἐκγαμίσκονται"" 36 τοὔτε" 
{the} dead neither marry nor are given in marriage; 2neither 
γὰρ ἀποθανεῖν ἔτι δύνανται. ἰσάγγελοι.γάρ εἰσιν, καὶ 
for ®die Sany 7more *they*can; for equaltoangels they are, and 


υἱοί εἰσιν "τοῦ" θεοῦ, τῆς ἀναστάσεως viol ὄντες. 87 “Ort.dé 


sons are of God, *of*the ‘resurrection “sons *being. But that 
ἐγείρονται ot νεκροί, καὶ “Μωσῆς" ἐμήνυσεν ἐπὶ τῆς 
areraised the dead, even Moses shewed [inthe part] on the 


ithe *bush,“when'he “are raised usthe'_idead, | Nevers) Ἐπ hoses 7s ΘΕΒΉΘΥΘΟ. eee 
w+ [οἱ δὲ ἔδειξαν. καὶ εἶπεν) and 


t — Ti we πειράζετε TTrA. 
And he said L. 

@ Τοίνυν ἀπόδοτε TTrs. 
(read who say there is not (μὴ) a resurrection) tr. 
& — ἔλαβεν TTra. ῃ 


they shewed [10]. 
αὐτούς TTrA. 


LTTrA. 
τως likewise L. 


LITrA, 


, k + καὶ even E. 
2 ἡ γυνὴ οὖν ἐν τῇ the woman therefore in the TA. 
9 γαμίζονται LTTr ; γαμίσκονται A. 


νυ δείξατέ GLTTrAW. 

x οἱ (read and they 8814) τ. 0 εἶπαν TTrA. 
b + τῷ Tr. © τοῦ (read [his]) a. 

© Mwvons LTTrAW. 

h — τὴν γυναῖκα, καὶ οὗτος ἀπέθανεν ἄτεκνος TIrA. ἰ + [ὡσαύ- 

1— δὲ πάντων LTTrA. ™ καὶ ἡ γυνὴ ἀπέθανεν ΤΎτΑ. 

ο --- ἀποκριθεὶς LITA. Ρ γαμίσκονται 

τ οὐδὲ LTrA. 5.- τοῦ TTrA. 


2 πρὸς 
ἃ λέγοντες 
f 4 should be 


XX, XXI.- LUKE. 


βάτου, ὡς λέγει κύριον τὸν θεὸν ᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ 'τὸν" θεὸν 
bush, whenhecalled(the] Lord the God of Abraham and the God 


Ἰσαὰκ καὶ trov' θεὸν Ἰακώβ' 88 θεὸς.δὲ οὐκ.ἔστιν νεκρῶν, 
ofIsaac and the God of Jacob; but God heisnot of [the] dead, 


ἀλλὰ ζώντων. πάντες.γὰρ αὐτῷ ζῶσιν. 39 ᾿Αποκριθέν- 
but of [the] living ; for all for him live. 7Answering 


rec δὲ τινες τῶν γραμματέων ὕεῖπον, Διδάσκαλε, καλῶς 


‘and some of the scribes said, Teacher, well 
εἶπας. 40 Οὐκέτε “δὲ! ἐτόλμων ἐπερωτᾷν αὐτὸν 
him 


thou hast spoken. 7Not any *more ‘and did they dare to ask 


οὐδέν. 
anything. 
(it. nothing. ) 
41 Εἶπεν.δὲ πρὸς αὐτούς, Πῶς λέγουσιν τὸν χριστὸν γυϊὸν 
᾿Απᾶ πη said to them, How dotheysay the Christ Son 
*AaBid! εἴναι! ; 42 *xai αὐτὸς" *AaBid" λέγει νὐ βίβλῳ 
3of*David ‘is? and “himself ‘David says in([the) book 


bYadpor, Εἶπεν “ὁ" κύριος τῷ.κυρίῳ.μου, Κάθου ἐκ δεξιῶν. μου, 


of Psalms, “Said “the 2hord to my Lord, Sit onmy right hand, 
48 ἕωςἂν θῶ τοὺς.ἐχθρούς.σον ὑποπόδιον τῶν. ποδῶν. σου. 
until I place thine enemies τ a footstool for shy feet. 


44 *AaBid" οὖν 4kdpioy αὐτὸν" καλεῖ, Kai πῶς “υἱὸς αὐτοῦ" 
David therefore *Lord 7him 164115, and how his son 


ἐστιν; 
is he? 


45 ᾿Ακούοντος δὲ παντὸς τοῦ 
And as were listening all the 


αὐτοῦ," 46 Προσέχετε ἀπὸ τῶν 


λαοῦ εἶπεν ἴ 


τοῖς μαθηταῖς 
people he said 


to *disciples 
γραμματέων τῶν θελόντων 


This, eware of the scribes who like 
περιπατεῖν ἐν στολαῖς, καὶ φιλούντων ἀσπασμοὺς ἐν ταῖς 
to walk in robes, and love salutations in the 


ἀγοραῖς καὶ πρωτοκαθεδρίας ἐ ἐν ταῖς συναγωγαῖς καὶ πρω- 
market-places and first seats in the synagogues and first 


τοκλισίας ἐν τοῖς δείπνοις" 47 ¥ot κατεσθίουσιν! τὰς οἰκίας 


places in the suppers ; who devour the houses 
TOY χηρῶν, καὶ προφάσει μακρὰ Βπροσεύχονται." οὗτοι 
of widows, and asa pretext at perene ‘length pray. These 


'λήψονται" 


shall receive 


21 ᾿Αναβλέψας.δὲ εἶδεν τοὺς βάλλοντας ἔτὰ.δῶρα. αὐτῶν 


περισσότερον κρίμα. 
more abundant judgment. 


223 


calleth the Lord the 
God of Abraham, and 
the God of Isaac, and 
the God of Jacob. 
38 For he is not a 
God of the dead, but 
of the living: for all 
live unto him, 39 Then 
certain of the scribes 
answering said, Mas- 
ter, thou hast well 
said. 40 And after 
that they durst not 
ask him any question 
at ail. 


41 And he said unto 
them, How say they 
that Christ is David’s 
son? 42 And David 
himself saith in the 
book of Psalms, The 
LORD said unto my 
Lord, Sit thou on my 
right hand, 43 till Γ 
make thine enemies 
thy footstool. 44 Da- 
vid therefore calleth 
him Lord, how is he 
then his son ? 


45 Then in the audi- 
ence of all the people 
he said unto his disci- 
ples, 46 Beware of the 
scribes, which desire 
to walk in long robes, 
and love greetings in 
the markets, and the 
highest seats in the 
synagogues, and the 
chief rooms at feasts ; 
47 which devour wi- 
dows’ houses, and for 
a shew make long 
prayers: the same 
shall receive greater 
damnation. 


XXI. And he look- 


2 4 
: aot haying rocked up saw ae ae Sp gifts ed up, and saw the 
εἰς τὸ γαζοφυλάκιον" πλουσίους" 2 εἶδεν.δὲ ἱκαί τινα" rich men casting their 
Sinto *the 7treasury 1rich, and hesaw also a certain ie ἐπι en ee 
χήραν πενιχρὰν βάλλουσαν ἐκεῖ δύο λεπτά"" 8 καὶ εἶπεν, also a certain poor wi- 
2widow 1poor caene therein two a And he said, dow eae pnliher 
᾿Αληθῶς λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι ἡ χήρα "ὴ are αὕτη! “πλεῖον. he said, Of a truth 
Ofatruth Isay toyou, that “widow 2poor this more 1 say unto you, that 
this poor widow hzth 
πάντων ἔβαλεν: 4 Ῥἅπαντες". γὰρ οὗτοι ἐκ τοῦ περισ- cast in more than they 
than all cast in; for all these out of that which was all: 4 for all these have 
ὃ , of their abundance 
σεύοντος αὐτοῖς ἔβαλον sic τὰ δῶρα “τοῦ θεοῦ," αὕτη. δὲ cast in unto the offer- 
abounding ἴο them cast into the gifts of God; but she ings of God: but she 
° — τὸν LTTrA. " εἶπαν LITra. ἘῸΝ for TTra. Υ εἶναι Δανεὶδ vidv Ta. 
1 Δαυὶδ Gw ; Δανεὶδ LTTrA. 5 αὐτὸς yap for “himself T. Ὁ +. τῶν the L. 9.-- ὁ 


(read [086}} ura. 4 αὐτὸν κύριον TrA. “ αὐτοῦ υἱός TTrA. 
TTr ; πρὸς αὐτούς to them a. 8 οἱ κατεσθίοντες those devouring ΤΩ 
praying L, i λήμψονται. LTTrA. 
τινα L; τινα [καὶ] a; -- καὶ τττ. 

Ρ ἐρέτας L. ᾳ — τοῦ θεοῦ T[Tr]A. 


ἴῺ λεπτὰ δύο Tr. 


K εἰς τὸ γαζοφυλάκιον τὰ δῶρα αὐτῶν TTra. 
π αὕτη ἡ πτωχὴ LTr. 


f — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) 


h SAE A 
καί! 
© πλείω LTA. 


224 


of her penury hath 
cast in all the living 
that she had. 


5 And as some spake 
of the temple, how it 
was adorned with 
goodly stones and 
gifts, he said, 6 As 
jor these things which 
ye behold, the days 
willcome, in the which 
there shall not be left 
one stone upon an- 
other, that shall not 
be thrown down. 
7 And they asked him, 
saying, ter, but 
when shall these things 
be? and what sign 
will there be when 
these things shall come 
to pass? 8 And hesaid, 
Take heed that ye 
be not deceived: for 
many shall come in 
my name, saying, I am 

rist; and the time 
draweth near: go ye 
not therefore after 
them, But when ye 
shall hear of wars and 
commotions, be not 
terrified: for these 
things must first come 
to pass; but the end [8 
not byand by. 10 Then 
said he unto them, 
Nation shall rise a- 
gainst nation, and 
kingdom against king- 
dom: 1 and great 
earthquakes shall be 
in divers places, and 
famines, and _pesti- 
lences; and fearful 
sights and great signs 
shall there be from 
heaven. 12 But before 
all these, they shall 
lay their hands on you, 
and persecute you, de- 
livering you up to the 
synagogues, and into 
prisons, being brought 
before kings andrulers 
for my name’s sake, 
13 And it shall turn to 
you for a testimony. 
14 Settle 7 therefore 
in your hearts, not to 
meditate before what 

ye shall answer: 15 for 

willgive youa mouth 
and wisdom, which all 
your adversaries shall 
not be able to gainsay 
nor resist. 16 And ye 
shall be betrayed both 
by parents, and breth- 


AOYKAZX. XXI. 


ἐκ τοῦ ὑστερήματος αὐτῆς ἅπαντα! τὸν βίον ὃν εἶχεν 
out of her poverty all the livelihood which she had 
ἔβαλεν. 


did cast. 
5 Kai τινων λεγόντων περὶ τοῦ ἱεροῦ, Ort λίθοις καλοῖς 
And assome were speaking about the temple, that with “stones ‘goodly 
καὶ "ἀναθήμασιν" κεκόσμηται, εἶπεν, 6 Ταῦτα ἃ θεω- 
and consecrated gifts it was adorned, he said, [As to] these things which ye are 
εἴτε, ἐλεύσονται ἡμέραι ἐν αἷς οὐκ. ἀφεθήσεται λίθος ἐπὶ 
eholding, *will come ‘days in which shall not be left stone upon 
λίθῳ " ὃς ov-KaradvOjcera. 7 ᾿Επηρώτησαν.δὲ αὐτόν, λέ- 
stone which shall not be thrown down. And they asked him, = say- 


yovrec, Διδάσκαλε, πότε ody ταῦτα ἔσται; Kai TL TO 
ing, Teacher, when then “these *things ‘willbe? and what the 


σημεῖον ὅταν μέλλῃ ταῦτα γίνεσθαι; 8 ‘Ode εἶπεν, 
sign when “are *about ‘these 7things to take place? Andhe - said, 
Βλέπετε μὴ.πλανηθῆτε᾽' πολλοὶ. γὰρ ἐλεύσονται ἐπὶ τῷ 
Take heed ye be not led astray ; for many will come in 
ὀνόματί.μου, λέγοντες, Ὅτι" ἐγώ εἰμι’ Kai, Ὁ καιρὸς ἤγ- 


my name, saying, I am [he]; and, The time is 

4 wos i] ~ ? / ? ~ oO « \ 

LKEV. μὴ “ody! πορευθῆτε ὀπίσω αὐτῶν. 9 ὕταν.δὲ 
rawn near. *Not *therefore go *ye after them. And when 
ἀκούσητε πολέμους Kai ἀκαταστασίας, pares Osi 
ye shall hear of wars and commotions, e not terrified; *must 
ao "ταῦτα γενέσθαι! πρῶτον, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ εὐθέως τὸ 
for “these *things take place first, but not immediately [is] the 


αὐτοῖς, ᾿Εγερθήσεται ἔθνος "ἐπὶ" 
2331 “rise *up ‘nation against 


τέλος. 10 Τότε ἔλεγεν 
end. Then he was saying to them, 
ἔθνος, καὶ βασιλεία ἐπὶ βασιλείαν: 11 σεισμοί.τε μεγάλοι 
nation, and kingdom against kingdom; also earthquakes ‘great 
ξκατὰ τόπους καὶ "λιμοὶ Kai λοιμοὶ) ἔσονται, Ὀφόβη- 
in differeut places and famines and pestilences shall there be, “fearful 
τρά! τε Kai “σημεῖα ἀπ᾽ οὐρανοῦ" μεγάλα ἔσται. 12 Πρὸ 
Ssights'and and “signs “from *heaven tereat shallthere be. *Before 
δὲ τούτων ἁπάντων" ἐπιβαλοῦσιν ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς τὰς χεῖρας 
‘put “these °things 3411 they willlay upon you *hands 
αὐτῶν. Kai διώξουσιν, παραδιδόντες εἰς © συναγωγὰς καὶ 
‘their, and will persecute [you], delivering up to synagogues and 
φυλακάς, ἀγομένους" ἐπὶ βασιλεῖς καὶ ἡγεμόνας. ἕνεκεν 
prisons, bringing [you]before kings and governors, onaccount of 
τοῦ.ὀνόματός.μου. 18 ἀποβήσεται.βδὲ" ὑμῖν εἰς μαρτύριον" 
my name ; but it shallturn out toyou for a testimony. 
14 "θέσθε! οὖν ‘sig τὰς καρδίας" ὑμῶν μὴ προμελετᾷν ἀπο- 
Settle therefore in your hearts not to premeditate to make 
λογηθῆναι: 15 ἐγὼ.γὰρ δώσω ὑμῖν στόμα Kai σοφίαν, [ 
a defence ; forI will give you amouth and wisdom, which 
οὐ-δυνήσονται Ἐἀντειπεῖν Ἰοὐδὲ' ἀντιστῆναι" ὩΞπάντες" οἱ 
5581] ὁποῦ 706 ®able *to ‘°reply *'to ‘*nor 13t09 |resist tall “those 
ἀντικείμενοι ὑμῖν. 16 παραδοθήσεσθε.δὲ Kai ὑπὸ γονέων καὶ 
“opposing *you. But ye will be delivered upeven by parents and 


τ πάντα LTr. 
χ γενέσθαι ταῦτα A. 
Ὁ φόβηθρά LTrA. 


f ἀπαγομένους leading [you] away TTra. 
k ἀντιστῆναι οὐδὲ ἀντειπεῖν τ, ; ἀντιστῆναι ἣ ἀντειπεῖν ([ἢ avrecm. ) Tr) TTrA. 
Mm ἀπᾶαντες TTrA. . 


καρδίαις LTTrA. 
17 or Ο. 


5 ἀναθέμασιν LT. 


¥— ὅτι []}7{ττὰ]}. — οὗν LTTra. 
2 Kal κατὰ τόπους TTrA. 8 λοιμοὶ καὶ λιμοὶ LTrA. 

d πάντων GLTTrAW. e + τὰς the TT:[A]. 
& — δὲ but 1[TrA]. h θέτε LTTrA. i ἐν ταῖς 


t + ὧδε here L. 
Y ἐπ᾽ LYTrA. 
© am’ οὐρανοῦ σημεῖα L. 


ΧΧΙ, ; LUKE. 


ἀδελφῶν καὶ συγγενῶν καὶ φίλων, καὶ θανατώσουσιν 


brethren and relations and friends, and they will put to death [some] 
gto 17 καὶ ἔσεσθε μισούμενοι ὑπὸ πάντων διὰ 
fromamong you, and ye will be hated by all because of 


‘ Ν , ‘ ‘ ? ~ ~ « ~ ? 1 ? ΄ 
τὸ.Ὀνομά.μου. 18 καὶ "ΒΞ ἐκ τῆς.κεφαλῆς. ὑμῶν οὐ-μὴ ἀπό- 
my name. And ahair of your head inno wise may 
ληται. 19 ἐν τῇ. ὑπομονῇ ὑμῶν "κτήσασθε" τὰς ψυχὰς ὑμῶν. 
perish. By your patient endurance gain your souls. 
20 Ὅταν. δὲ ἴδητε κυκλουμένην ὑπὸ στρατοπέδων στὴν" Ἵερου - 
But when yesee “being “encircled ‘with Sarmies Jeru- 
σαλήμ, τότε γνῶτε ὅτι ἤγγικεν ἡ ἐρήμωσις αὐτῆς. 21 τότε 
salem then know that has drawn near her desolation. Then 
οἱ ἐν τῇ Ἰουδαίᾳ φευγέτωσαν εἰς τὰ Opn’ καὶ οἱ ἐν 
those in Judza let them flee to the mountains; and those in 
μέσῳ.αὐτῆς ἐκχωρείτωσαν" Kai οἱ ἐν ταῖς χώραις μὴ εἰσερχέ- 
her midst let them depart out, and those in the countries “not ‘let “them 
σθωσαν εἰς αὐτήν. 22 ὅτι ἡμέραι ἐκδικήσεως αὗταί εἰσιν, τοῦ 
enter into her; for days ofavenging these are, 
Ρπληρωθῆναι" πάντα τὰ γεγραμμένα. 23 οὐαὶ “δὲ ταῖς 
that may be accomplished all things that have been written. But woe to those 
ἐν γαστρὶ ἐχούσαις καὶ ταῖς θηλαζούσαις ἐν ἐκείναις ταῖς ἡμέ- 
with child and tothose givingsuck in those days, 
pag’ ἔσται.γὰρ ἀνάγκη μεγάλη ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς Kai ὀργὴ Te" 
for there shall be ?distress ‘great upon the land and wrath among 
τῷ.λαῷ. τούτῳ. 24 Kai πεσοῦνται στόματι "μαχαίρας." καὶ 
this people. And they shall fall by (the] mouth of [the] sword, and 


αἰχμαλωτισθήσονται εἰς travra τὰ ἔθνη"" καὶ ἹἹερουσαλὴμ 
shall be led captive into all the nations; and Jerusalem 


ἔσται πατουμένη ὑπὸ ἐθνῶν ἄχρι" * πληρωθῶσιν 
shall be trodden down by (the) nations until be fulfilled [the] 
καιροὶ ἐθνῶν. 25 Kai Ξἔσται" σημεῖα ἐν ἡλίῳ καὶ σελήνῳ 
times οὔ [the] nations, And thereshallbe signs in sun and moon 
καὶ ἄστροις, Kai ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς συνοχὴ ἐθνῶν ἐν ἀπορίᾳ, 
and stars, and upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity, 
γἠχούσης" θαλάσσης καὶ σάλου, 26 ἀποψυχόντων ἀνθρώ- 
roaring of [the] sea and rolling surge, *fainting *at *heart ‘men 
πων ἀπὸ φόβου Kai προσδοκίας τῶν ἐπερχομένων τῇ 
from fear and expectation οἵ ὑπαὺ which is coming on the 
οἰκουμένῃ. atyap δυνάμεις τῶν οὐρανῶν σαλευθήσονται. 
habitable earth; for the powers of the heavens shall be shaken, 
27 καὶ τότε ὄψονται τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐρχόμενον ἐν 
And then shallthey see the Son of man coming in 
νεφέλῃ μετὰ δυνάμεως καὶ δόξης πολλῆς. 28 ᾿Αρχομένων. δὲ 
acloud with power and *glory ‘great. But *beginning 
τούτων γίνεσθαι ἀνακύψατε καὶ ἐπάρατε τὰς κεφαλὰς 


1these *things to come to pass look up and lift up *heads 

e ~ Μ , ? , «- 7 ’ « ~ ‘ Ὧν 
ὑμῶν διότι ἐγγίζει ἡ.ἀπολύτρωσις. ὑμῶν. 29 Καὶ εἶπεν 
tyour, beeause draws near your redemption. And he spoke 


παραβολὴν αὐτοῖς, Ἴδετε τὴν συκῆν καὶ πάντα τὰ δένδρα. 
& parable tothem: Behold the fig-tree and all the trees: 


30 ὅταν προβάλωσιν ἤδη, βλέποντες ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτῶν 


225 


ren, and kinsfolks, and 
friends; and some of 
you shall they cause 
to be put to death. 
17 ‘md ye shall be 
ha* ἃ of all men for 
my name’ssake, 18 But 
there shall not an hair 
of your head perish. 
19 In your patience 
possess ye your souls. 
20 And when ye shall 
see Jerusalem com- 
passed with armies, 
then know that the de- 
solation thereof is 
nigh. 21 Then letthem 
which are in Judga 
flee to the mountains ; 
and let them whichare 
in the midst of it de- 
part out; and let not 
them that are in the 
countries enter there- 
into, 22 For these be 
the days of vengeance, 
that all things which 
are written may be 
fulfilled. 23 But woe 
unto them that are 
with child, and to 
them that give suck, 
in those days! for there 
shall be great distress 
in the land, and wrath 
upon this __ people. 
24 And they shall fall 
by the edge of the 
sword, and shall be 
led away captive into 
all nations : and Jeru- 
salem shall be trodden 
down of the Gentiles, 
until the times of the 
Gentiles be fulfilled. 
25 And there shall be 
signs in the sun, and 
in the moon, and in 
the stars; and upon 
the earth distress of 
nations, with per- 
plexity ; the sea and 
the waves roaring; 
26 men’s hearts failing 
them for fear, and for 
looking after those 
things which are com- 
ing on the earth: for 
the powers of heaven 
shall beshaken. 27 And 
then shall they see the 
Son of man coming in 
a cloud with power and 
great glory. 28 And 
when these things be- 
gin to come to pass, 
then look up, and 
lift up your heads ; 
for your redemption 
draweth nigh. 29 And 
he spake to them a pa- 
rable; Behold the fig 
tree, and all the trees; 
30 when they now 
shoot forth, ye see and 


when “*they *sprout ‘already, looking {on them] of yourselves 
Ἐ κτήσεσθε ye Shall gain Ltra. ο — τὴν LTTrA. P πλησθῆναι GLTTrAW. a — δὲ 
but irra. r — ἐν (read to this people) GLTTraw. 5. μαχαίρης TTr. τ τὰ ἔθνη 


πάντα LTTrA. π οὗ LTTrA. 


τ ἔσονται LTTrA. 
sound GLTTrA. 


Υ ἄχρις L. 


Υ ἤχους at [the] 


Q 


226 


know of your own 
selves that summer is 
now nigh at hand. 
31 Soiikewise ye, when 
ye see these things 
come to pass, know ye 
that the kingdom of 
God is nigh st hand. 
82 Verily 1 say unto 
you, This generation 


shall not pass away, 
till all be fulfillea, 
33 Heaven and earth 
pass away: but 
my words not 
pass away. 34 And 
take heed to your- 
selves, lest at any time 
Sharged with surfcit- 
wi 
ing, and drunkenness, 
and cares of this life, 
and so that day come 
upon you unawares. 
35 For as-a snare shall 
it come on all them 
that dwell on the face 
of the whole earth. 
$6 Watch ye therefore, 
and pray always, that 
ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape all 
these things that shall 
come to pass, and to 
stand before the Son 
of man. 


37 And in the day 
time he was teaching 
in the temple; and at 
night he went out, and 
abode in the mount 
that is called the mount 
of Olives. 38 And all 
the people came early 
in the morning to him 
in the temple, for to 
hear him. 


XXIL Now the feast 


2 And the chief priests 
and scribes sought 
how they might Kill 
him ; for they feared 
the "people. 3 Then 
entered Satan into Ju- 
das surnamed Iscariot, 
being of the number 
of thetwelve. 4 And 
he went his way, and 
communed wi the 
chief priests and cap- 
tains, how he might 
betray him untothem, 
5 And they were glad, 
and covenanted to 
give him money. 
6 And he promised, 


AO FE A's. XXI, XXII. 


γινώσκετε ὅτι ἤδη ἐγγὺς τὸ θέρος ἐστίν. 81 οὕτως Kai ὑμεῖς 
yeknow that already near the antes is. So also ce 


ὅταν ἴδητε ταῦτα γινόμενα γινώσκετε ὅτι ἐγγύς ἐστιν ἡ 
when ye 566 πεσε τε οτος know that 6 is the 
βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ. 32 ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι odu7 παρ- 
Kingdom of God. Verily — to you, that in no wise will have 
ἔλθῃ ἡ.γενεὰ αὕτη ἕως.ἂν πάντα γένηται. 33 ὁ 
ah soos until all a The 


οὐρανὸς καὶ ἡ γὴ παρελεύσονται. οἱ. δὲ λόγοι.μου οὐ. μὴ 
heaven and the earth shall pass away, but ΤΗΝ words inno wise 


"παρέλθωσιν." 34 Tloovéyere.d& ἑαυτοῖς, μήποτε "βαρουνθῶ- 
may pass awsy. But take heed to yourscives, lest be laden 
ow ὑμῶν ai καρδίαι" ἐν κραιπάλῳ καὶ μέθῃ καὶ μερίμναις 
your hearts with — and es and cares 
βιωτικαῖς, καὶ “αἰφνίδιος ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς ἐπιστῇ! ἡ ἡμέρα ἐκείνη" 
of ees and suddenly upon you should come that day ; 
35 ὡς. “παγὶς. γὰρ ἐπελεύσεται" ἐπὶ πάντας τοὺς καθημένους 
for as 8 snare shallitcome upon all those sitting 
ἐπὶ πρόσωπον πάσης THC γῆς. 86 ἀγρυπνεῖτε “οὖν" ἐν 
upon the face ofall the Watch therefore at 
παντὶ καιρῷ δεόμενοι, ἵνα Αρῶς ὠξνωθῆε' ἐκφυγεῖν ταῦ- 
every season praying, that ye may be accounted worthy to ἔξει: *these 


τα πάντα τὰ μέλλοντα γίνεσθαι. καὶ σταθῆναι ἔμπρο- 
Sthings ‘all which areabout tocometopass, and tostand before 


σθεν τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ ἀνθοώπου. 
3 
the Son of man. 


37 Ἦν δὲ τὰς ἡμέρας tiv τῷ ἱερῷ διδάσκων" τὰς. δὲ. νύκτας 
And he was by day in the — teaching, and by night 


ἐξερχόμενος ηὐλίζετο εἰς τὸ ὄρος τὸ καλούμενον ἐλαιῶν" 
going out he lodged on = mount called ἀπ ς 


88 καὶ πᾶς ὁ λαὸς ὥρθριζεν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ 
and all the a came sactj he tie morning to him in 


ἱερῷ ἀκούειν αὐτοῦ. 
temple to hear him. 


22 Ἤγγιζεν.δὲ ἡ ἑορτὴ τῶν. ἀζύμων ἡ 
And drew near the feast — τες which [is] 


2 καὶ ἐζήτουν ἱερεῖς καὶ οἱ γραμματεῖς 
passover ; and 7were Sseeking the ee ae *and ‘the YP πα κατα 


τὸ πῶς ἀνέλωσιν αὐτόν" ἐφοβοῦντο.γὰρ τὸν τοί. 
as to how they might put *to “death — for — feared the people 


3 Εἰσῆλθεν.δὲ Βὸ" σατανᾶς εἰς Ἰούδαν τὸν ἐπικαλούμενον" 


λεγομένη 


πάσχα" 


And #entered 1Satan into Judas who is surnamed 
Ἰσκαριώτην, ὄντα ἐκ τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ τῶν δώδεκα" 4 καὶ ἀπελ- 
Iscariote, being of the num aes twelve. And having gone 


θὼν συνελάλησεν τοῖς ἀρχιερεῦσιν * καὶ ἰτοῖς! στρατηγοῖς 
away he spoke with the chief — and captains 


τὸ πῶς “αὐτὸν παραδῷ αὐτοῖς." ὅ καὶ > loathe Kai 


* παρελεύσονται Shall pass away LTTra. 


ὑμῶν LTr. 


a yore €vov 15 


© αἰφνίδιος ἐπι ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς L; ἐπι ἐφ᾽ 
carte gigi τα yap (read that ae ἀν snare: for i chan 
f Seance ye may prevail TTra. 

ed TTra. 
= αὐτοῖς x wepebe αὐτόν LTTrA. 


as to how him he might abe up to them. And they rejoiced, and 
συνέθεντο — ἀργύριον δοῦναι" 6 "καὶ ἐξωμολόγησεν," καὶ 
agreed *money 1to give. And he wat f= and 

a βαρηθῶσιν GLTTrawW. ὃ αἱ καρδίαι 

ὑμᾶς αἰφνίδιος τττα. ἃ παγίς" 


come in) ee 

& διδάσκων ἐν τῷ 

ners καὶ τοῖς γραμματεῦσιν and the ets ΝΜ 
— καὶ oie same (read he sought) L. 


« δὲ but (watch) 
h— ὃ GLITraW. 
1 — τοῖς Pra. 


XXII. LUKE. 


ἐζήτει εὐκαιρίαν τοῦ παραδοῦναι αὐτὸν “αὐτοῖς ἄτερ 


sought opportunity to deliver up him to them sodas from [the] 
ὄχλου." 
crowd. 
7 Ἦλθεν.δὲ ἡ ἡμέρα τῶν.ἀζύμων Ρέγνῦ" ἔδει 
Andcame the day of unleayened [bread] in which was needful 


θύεσθαι τὸ πάσχα. 8 Kai ἀπέστειλεν Πέτρον καὶ ᾿Ἰωάννην, 
to be killed the passover. And he sent Peter and John, 


εἰπών, Πορευθέντες ἑτοιμάσατε ἡμῖν τὸ πάσχα, ἵνα φάγω- 


saying, Having gone prepare forus the passover, that we may 
ν. 9 Οἱ δὲ τεῖπον" αὐτῷ, Ποῦ θέλεις erotpaowper* ; 
eat [it]. Butthey said tohim, Where willest thon we should prepare? 


10 Ὁ.δὲ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, ᾿Ιδού, εἰσελθόντων. ὑμῶν εἰς THY πόλιν 
Andhe said tothem, Lo, onyourhavingentered into the city 
συναντήσει ὑμὶν ἄνθρωπος κεράμιον ὕδατος βαστάζων" ἀκο- 
*will*meet ‘you ta apitcher of water carrying; fol- 
λουθήσατε αὐτῷ εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν ‘od’ εἰσπορεύεται. 11 καὶ 
low him into the house where he enters ; and 
ἐρεῖτε τῷ οἰκοδεσπότῃ τῆς οἰκίας, Λέγει σοι ὁ διδάσ- 
yes say to the master of the house, *Says *to *thee*the ~teach- 
καλος, Ποῦ ἐστιν τὸ κατάλυμα ὅπου τὸ πάσχα μετὰ τῶν 


er, Where is the guest-chamber where the passover with 
μαθητῶν.μου φάγω; 12 Κἀκεῖνος ὑμῖν δείξει ᾿ἀνώγεον" 
my disciples I may eat? d he you ‘will*shew ‘upper ‘room 


μέγα ἐστρωμένον" ἐκεῖ ἑτοιμάσατε. 13 ᾿Απελθόντες.δὲ εὗρον 
*a°large furnished: there prepare. And having gone they found 
καθὼς “εΐρηκεν" αὐτοῖς" καὶ ἡτοίμασαν τὸ πάσχα. 

85 he had said tothem; and they prepared the passover. 

14 Kai ὅτε ἐγένετο ἡ ὥρα ἀνέπεσεν, καὶ οἱ "δώδεκα" 

And when was come the hour he reclined [attable],andthe twelve 

ἀπόστολοι σὺν αὐτῷ. 15 καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, ᾿Ἐπιθυμίᾳ 
apostles with him. And hesaid to them, With desire 
ἐπεθύμησα τοῦτο τὸ πάσχα φαγεῖν μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν πρὸ τοῦ.με.πα- 

I desired this Passover toeat with you before I suf- 
θεῖν. 16 λέγω.γὰρ ὑμῖν, ὅτι Τοὐκέτ΄ οὐμὴ φάγω “ἐξ 
fer. ForIsay toyou, that ‘any *more ‘not 7at*all will I eat of 
ΕΝ ἘΠ ἘΠ Ἢ (lit. no more) < 
αὐτοῦ" ἕως. ὅτου πληρωθῇ ἐν τῷ βασιλείᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ. 17 Kai 

it until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God. And 
δεξάμενος ® ποτήριον, εὐχαριστήσας εἶπεν, Λάβετε τοῦτο, 
having received δι cup, having given thanks he said, Take this, 
καὶ διαμερίσατε ϑὲαυτοῖς" 18 λέγω.γὰρ ὑμῖν, Sore’ οὐ. 


1 


μὴ 


and divide [it] among yourselves. ForIsay toyou, that notatall 
πίω 4 ἀπὸ τοῦ "γεννήματος" τῆς ἀμπέλου ἕως. ὅτου" ἡ 
will I drink of the fruit of the vine until the 


βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ ἔλθῃ. 19 Kai λαβὼν ἄρτον, εὐχαριστή- 
kingdom of God be come. And having taken a loaf, having given 


σας ἔκλασεν, καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς, λέγων, Τοῦτό ἐστιν τὸ σῶμά 
thanks hebroke, and gave tothem, saying, This is *body 
μου, τὸ ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν διδόμενον" τοῦτο ποιεῖτε Belg’ τὴν ἐμὴν 
my, which for you is given : this do in the 7of *me 
> , ht ’ ‘ 4 , " ‘ A ~ 

ἀνάμνησιν. 20 "Ὡσαύτως καὶ τὸ zrornptoyv" μετὰ τὸ.δειπνήῆ- 


227 


and sought opportu 
nity to betray him 
unto them in the ab- 
sence of the multitude. 


7 Then came the day 
of unleavened bread, 
when the passover 
must be killed. 8 And 
he sent Peter andJohn, 
saying, Go and pre- 
pare us the passover, 
that wemay eat. 9 And 
they said unto him, 
Where wilt thou that 
we prepare? 10 And 
he said unto them, Be- 
hold, when ye are en- 
tered into the city, 
there shall a man meet 
you, bearing a pitcher 
of water; follow him 
into the house where 
he entereth in. 11 And 
ye shall say unto the 
good man of the house, 
The Master saith unto 
thee, Where is the 

stchamber, where 

shall eat the pass- 
over with my disci- 
ples? 12 And he shall 
shew you a large up- 
per room furnished: 
there make ready. 
13 And they went, and 
found as he had said 
unto them: and they 
made ready the pass- 
over. 


14 And when the 
hour was come, he sat 
down, and the twelve 
apostles with him. 
15 And he said unto 
them, With desire I 
have desired to eat 
this passover with you 
before I suffer: 16 for 
I say unto you, I will 
not any more eat 
thereof, until it be 
fulfilled in the king- 
dom of God. 17 And 
he took the cup, and 
gave thanks, and said, 
Take this, and divide 
it among yourselves: 
18 for I say unto you, 
I will not drink of the 
fruit of the vine, until 
the kingdom of God 
shall come. 19 And he 


.took bread, and gave 


thanks, and brake it, 
and gave ag them, 
saying, is is my 
body which is given 
for you: this do in re- 
membrance of me. 
20 Likewise also the 


1remembrance. In like manner also the cup after havingsupped, cup after supper, say- 

ο ἄτερ ὄχλου αὐτοῖς LTTrA. Ῥ -- ἐν (τεαᾶ ἢ in which) Tra. 4 Ἰωάνην Tr. τ εἶπαν 
LTTrA. 5 - [σοι] ΤΟΥ ἔπ66 ᾿. ἴ εἰς ἣν ἴπ which Lttra. Ὁ ἀνάγαιον ΟἸΤΎΤΑΥ. “ εἰρήκει 
LITrA. 1 — δώδεκα LTTrA. Υ —ovxére[LTr]A. * αὐτὸ it LTTra. a + 7o the (cup) L. 


© — ὅτι TrA. 
B [εἰς] a. 


Ὁ εἰς ἑαυτούς LTTTA. 


LTTrAw. f οὗ Tra. Β καὶ TO ποτήριον ὡσαύτως TTTA. 


4 + ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν henceforth T[tTrA]. 


ε γενήματος 


228 


ing, This cup 15 the 
new testament in my 
blood, which is shed 
for you. 21 But, be- 
hold, the hand of him 
that betrayeth me iw 
with me on the table. 
22 And truly the Son 
of man goeth, as it 
was determined: but 
woe unto that man by 
whom he is betrayed ! 
23 And they began to 
inquire among them- 
selves, which of them 
it was that should do 
this thing. 


24 And there was 
also a strife among 
them, which of them 
should be accounted 
the greatest. 25 And 
he said unto them, 
The kings of the Gen- 
tiles exercise lordship 
over them; and they 
that exercise authority 
upon them are called 
benefactors. 26 But ye 
shall not be so: but he 
that is greatest among 
you, let him be as the 
younger; and he that 
is chief, as he that 
doth serve. 27 For 
whether is greater, he 
that sitteth at meat, 
or he that serveth? 
is not he that sitteth 
at meat? but I am 
among you as he that 
serveth. 28 Ye are 
they which have con- 
tinued with me in my 
temptations, 29 And 
I appoint unto you a 
Kingdom, as my Fa- 
ther hath appointed 
unto me; 30 that ye 
may eat and drink at 
my table in my king- 
dom, and sit on thrones 
judging the twelve 
tribes of Israel. 


31 And the Lord said, 
Simon, Simon, behold, 
Satan hath desired to 
have you, that he may 
sift you as wheat: 
32 but I have prayed 
for thee, that thy faith 
fail not: and when 
thou art converted, 
strengthen thy breth- 
ren. 33 And he said 
unto him, Lord, I am 
ready to go with thee, 
both into prison, and 
to death. 34 And he 
said, I tell thee, Peter, 


AOYKA®. 


σαι, λέγων, Τοῦτο τὸ ποτήριον ἡ καινὴ διαθήκη ἔν τῷ 
saying, This cup [15] the new covenant in 
ε ΄ cy « « ~ i2 , HT] νι , ΄ 
αἱματί.μου, τὸ ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν ἱἐκχυνόμενον." 21 Πλὴν ἰδού, 
my blood, which for you is poured out. Moreover, behold, 
ἡ χεὶρ τοῦ παραδιδόντος pe μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ ἐπὶ τῆς τραπέζης. 
the hand ofhim  deliveringup me(is)with me on _ the table ; 
22 Kkai ὁ.μὲν.υἱὸς" τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἱπορεύεται κατὰ 
and indeed the Son of man goes according as 
wpiopevoyv’' πλὴν οὐαὶ τῷ. ἀνθρώπῳ. ἐκείνῳ δι’ οὗ παρα- 
it has been determined, but woe to that man by whom he is de- 
δίδοται. 23 Kai αὐτοὶ ἤρξαντο συζητεῖν! πρὸς ἑαυτούς, 
livered up. And _ they began to question together among themselves, 
τό, Tic ἄρα εἴη ἐξ αὐτῶν ὁ τοῦτο μέλλων πράσσειν. 
this, who then it might beof them who this was about to do. 
24 'Eyévero.dé καὶ φιλονεικία ἐν αὐτοῖς, τό, τίς αὐτῶν 
And there was also astrife among them, this, which of them 


δοκεῖ εἶναι μείζων. 25 ὁ.δὲ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Oi βασιλεῖς 
is thought to be [the] greater. Andhe said to them, The kings 


τῶν ἐθνῶν κυριεύουσιν αὐτῶν, Kai ot ἐξουσιάζοντες 
of the nations rule over them, and those exercising authority over 
αὐτῶν εὐεργέται καλοῦνται. 26 ὑμεῖς: δὲ οὐχ οὕτως" ἀλλ᾽ 
them τγυνθ]]-ἀοοῦβ are called. utye not thus (shallbe); but 
ὁ μείζων ἐν ὑμῖν "γενέσθω! ὡς ὁ νεώτερος" Kai ὁ 
the greater among you lethim be as the younger, and he that 
ἡγούμενος ὡς ὁ διακονῶν. 27 τίς γὰρ μείζων, ὁ 
leads as hethat serves. For which [18] greater, he that 
ἀνακείμενος ὁ διακονῶν; οὐχὶ ὁ ἀνακείμε- 
reclines {at table] or he that serves? [18] not he that reclines 
νος ; Ἐγὼ -ὃς sims ἐν = ow ὑμῶν" ὡς ὁ διακονῶν. 
(at table]? ut I am in(the) midst ofyou ashethat serves. 
28 ‘Ypeic.o& tore οἱ διαμεμενηκότες per ἐμοῦ ἐν τοῖς 


XXII. 


TO 


ut ye are they who have continued with me in 
~ > ‘ ΄ « - ‘ , , 
πειρασμοῖς.μου" 29 κἀγὼ διατίθεμαι ὑμῖν, καθὼς διέθετό 
my temptations, And I appoint to you, as %appointed 
μοι ὁ-πατήρ.μου, βασιλείαν, 30 ἵνα Ῥέσθίητε! καὶ πίνητε 
*to®’me ‘my “father, a kingdom, that yemayeat and may drink 
ἐπὶ τῆς.τραπέζης. μου ἐν τῷ. ββασιλείᾳο.μου, Kai “καθίσησθε" ἐπὶ 
εὖ my table in my kingdom, and may sit on 
θρόνων, κρίνοντες τὰς δώδεκα φυλὰς τοῦ ᾿Ισραήλ. 
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 


31 "Eizev.dé ὁ κύριος, Σίμων, Σίμων, ἰδού, ὁ σατανᾶς 


And ὅβαϊα ‘the *Lord, Simon, Simon, lo, Satan 
ἐξῃτήσατο ὑμᾶς, Tov σινιάσαι ὡς τὸν σῖτον" 82 ἐγὼ 
demanded tohave you, forthe sifting [you] as wheat ; I 


5 2 ’ ‘ ~ er ‘ s2 nN , Il « , a ‘ [2 
δὲ ἐδεήθην περὶ σοῦ, ἵνα μὴ."ἐκλείπῃ" ἡ.πίστις.σου" καὶ σύ 


*but besought for thee, that may not fai thy faith ; and 7thou 
ποτε ἐπιστρέψας ἱστήριξον" τοὺς.ἀδελφούς.σου. 33 Ὁ δὲ 
‘when hast turned back confirm thy brethren. And he 


εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Κύριε, μετὰ σοῦ ἕτοιμός εἰμι καὶ εἰς φυλακὴν καὶ 
said tohim, Lord, with thee ready Iam both to prison and 


εἰς θάνατον πορεύεσθαι. 34 ὋὉ δὲ εἶπεν, Λέγω σοι, Πέτρε, 
to death to go. Andhe said, Itell thee, Peter, 


' ἐκχυννόμενον LTTrA. 


Ὦ συνζητεῖν LTTrA. 


| καθίσεσθε ye shall sit GLW; καθήσεσθε ye shall sit TTr; κάθησθε a. 
5 ἐκλίπῃ LITrA. 


κύριος T[Tr]A. 


* ὅτι (for) ὁ υἱὸς μὲν TTrA. 


| κατὰ τὸ ὡρισμένον πορεύεται LTTrA. 
n Η 
γινέσθω TTra. 


ο ἐν μέσῳ ὑμῶν εἰμι TTrA. P ἔσθητε LTTrA. 
τ — ἘΠπεν δὲ 0 
ἵ στήρισον LTTrA. 


XXIE 
οὐ. "μὴ" φωνήσει σήμερον 
in no wise shallcrow to-day [the] 
νήσῃ ἡμὴ! εἰδέναι με." 
deny knowing me. 
35 Kai εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, “Ore ἀπέστειλα ὑμᾶς ἄτερ *Badar- 
And hesaid tothem, When I sent you without purse 
τίου καὶ πήρας Kai ὑποδημάτων, μή τινος ὑστερήσατε: 
and provision bag and sandals, anything did ye lack? 
Οἱ.δὲ "elroy," -Oddevdc.' 86 “Εἶπεν οὖν αὐτοῖς, ᾿Αλλὰ 
And they said, Nothing. He said therefore tothem, *However 
νῦν ὁ ἔχων βαλάντιον" ἀράτω. ὁμοίως καὶ πήραν" 
*now he whe has & purse let him take [it], in like manner also provision bag; 
καὶ ὁ μὴ.ἔχων πωλησάτω τὸ ἱμάτιον.αὐτοῦ Kai ἀγορασάτω 
andhewho hasnot [one] let him sell his garment and buy 
μάχαιραν" 37 λέγω.γὰρ ὑμῖν, ὅτι “Ere! τοῦτο TO γεγραμμένον 
a sword; forIsay toyou, that yet this that has been written 
δεῖ τελεσθῆναι ἐν ἐμοί, ἱτὸ" Kai μετὰ ἀνόμων ἐλογίσθη" 
must beaccomplished in me, And with [the] lawless he was reckoned: 
kaiSyap' "τὰ περὶ ἐμοῦ τέλος ἔχει. 38 Oi.dé δεῖπον," 


LUKE. 


ἀλέκτωρ “πρὶν.ἢ" τρὶς *amap- 
cock before that thrice thou wilt 


foralso thethings concerning me anend have. Andthey said, 
Κύριε, ἰδού, μάχαιραι ὧδε δύο. ὋὉ.δὲ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, 
Lord, behold, ‘swords ‘here([*are)*two. Andhe said tothem, 
Ἵκανόν ἐστιν. 
ΞΕ ΟΡ ?it 5315. 


99 Καὶ ἐξελθὼν ἐπορεύθη κατὰ τὸ ἔθος εἰς τὸ ὄρος 
And goingforth hewent according to custom to the mount 
τῶν ἐλαιῶν: ἠκολούθησαν.δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ." 
of Olives, and followed him 8150 his disciples, 
ἐπὶ τοῦ τύπου εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Προσεύχεσθε 
at the place hesaid ἴο them, Pray 
μὴ.εἰσελθεῖν εἰς πειρασμόν. 41 Kai αὐτὸς ἀπεσπάσθη ἀπ᾽ 
ποῦ ἴο ΘΟ into temptation. And he was withdrawn from 
αὐτῶν ὡσεὶ λίθου βολήν, καὶ O&ic.rad-yovura προσηύχετο, 
them about astone’s throw, and falling on 1 knees he prayed, 
42 λέγων, Πάτερ, εἰ βούλει ὕξπαρενεγκεῖν" ἱτὸ ποτήριον 
saying, Father, if thouart willing’ to take away 7cup 
τοῦτο" am ἐμοῦ: πλὴν μὴ τὸ.θέλημά.μου, ἀλλὰ τὸ. σὸν ™yéE- 
‘this from me—; but not my will, but thine be 
νέσθω." 43 ""Ωφθη.δὲ αὐτῷ ἄγγελος Par’! οὐρανοῦ ἐνισχύων 
done. And appeared tohim anangel from heaven strengthening 


αὐτόν. 44 Kai γενόμενος ἐν ἀγωνίᾳ ἐκτενέστερον προσηύχετο. 


40 γενόμενος. δὲ 
And having arrived 


him, And being in conflict moreintently he prayed, 
Péyévero.dé 0!.idpwe.advTov ὡσεὶ θρόμβοι αἵματος “κατα- 
And became his sweat as great drops of blood falling 
Batvoyrec' ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν." 45 Καὶ ἀναστὰς ἀπὸ τῆς 
down to the earth. And haying risen up from 


προσευχῆς; ἐλθὼν πρὸς τοὺς μαθητὰς" εὗρεν "αὐτοὺς κοιμω- 
prayer, coming ἴο the disciples hefound them sleep- 


229 


the cock shall not 
crow this day, before 
that thou shalt thrice 
deny that thou know- 
est me. 


35 And he said unto 
them, When I sent you 
without purse, and 
scrip, and shoes, lacked 
ye any thing? And 


they said, Nothing. 
36 en said he unto 
them, But now, he 


that hath a purse, let 
him take it, and like- 
wise his scrip: and he 
that hath no sword, 
let him sell his gar- 
ment, and buy one. 
37 For I say unto you, 
that this that is writ- 
ten must yet be ac- 
complished in me, And 
he was reckoned a- 
mong the transgres- 
sors: for the things 
concerning me have 
an end. 38 And they 
said, Lord, behold, 
here are two swords. 
And hesaid untothem, 
It is enough. 


39 And he caine out, 
and went, as he was 
wont, to the mount of 
Olives; and his disci- 
ples also followed him, 
40 And when he was 
at the place, he said 
unto them, Pray that 
ye enter not into temp- 
tation. 41 And he was 
withdrawn from them 
about a stone’s cast, 
and kneeled down, 
and prayed, 42 saying, 
Father, if thou be 
willing, remove this 
cup from me: neyer- 
theless not my will, 
but thine, be done. 
43 And there appeared 
an angel unto him 
from heaven, strength- 
ening him. 44 And 
being in an agony he 
prayed more earnestly: 
and his sweat was as 
it were great drops of 
blood falling down to 
the ground. 45 And 
when he rose up from 
prayer, and was come 
to his disciples, he 
found them sleeping 


νυ — μὴ (read shall not crow) Trra, Ἢ ἕως until Lrtra. 


εἰδέναι LTr. Υ [μὴ] A. » βαλλαντίου LTTraw. ἃ ebray LTTrA. 
ς 6 δὲ εἶπεν but he said T; εἶπεν δὲ Tr. d βαλλάντιον LTTrAW. 
& [yap] Ltr. h τὸ that (concerning me has an end) rtra. 


ciples) TTra. 

ὯΔ γινέσθω TTrAW. 
ὃ ({o] a) TA. 
αὐτοὺς TTra. 


kK παρενέγκαι τ; παρένεγκε take away LTr. 
π verses 43, 44 in [ | L. 
4 καταβαίνοντος τα. 


ε-- ἔτι LTTrA. 
i — αὐτοῦ (read the dis- 
1 τοῦτο τὸ ποτήριον TTrA. 
ο ἀπὸ τοῦ from the Lrr. 
τ + αὐτοῦ (read his disciples) Ε. 


* με ἀπαρνήσῃ 
Ὁ Οὐθενός Τύτα. 
f ore L. 


Ρ καὶ ἐγένετο 
5 κοιμωμένους 


230 


for sorrow, 46 and said 
unto them, Why sleep 
ye? rise and pray, lest 
ye enter into temp- 
tation. 


47 And while he yet 
spake, behold a multi- 
tude, and he that was 
called Judas, one of 
the twelve, went be- 
fore them, and drew 
near unto Jesus to 
kisshim, 48 But Jesus 
said unto him, Judas, 
betrayest thou the Son 
of man with a kiss? 
49 When they which 
were about him saw 
what would follow, 
they said unto him, 
Lord, shall we smite 
with the sword? 50 And 
one of them smote the 
servant of the high 
priest, and cut off his 
right ear. 51 And Je- 
sus answered and said, 
Suffer ye thus far. 
And he touched his 
ear, and healed him. 
52 Then Jesus said 
unto the chief priests, 
and captains of the 
temple, and the elders, 
which were come to 
him, Be ye come out, 
as against a thief, with 
swords and staves? 
53 When I was daily 
with you in the tem- 
ple, ye stretched forth 
no hands against me: 
but this is your hour, 
and the power of dark- 
ness. 


54 Then took they 
him, and led Aim, and 
brought him into the 
high priest’s house. 
And Peter followed 
afar off. 55 And when 
they had kindled a fire 
in the midst of the 
hall, and were set 
down together, Peter 
sat down among them, 
56 But a certain maid 
beheld him as he sat 
by the fire, and earn- 
estly looked upon him, 
and said, This man was 
also with him. 57 And 
he denied him, saying, 
Woman, I know him 
not. 58 And after a 
little while another 
saw him, and said, 


AOY KAS. XXII. 


, " J ‘ ~ , 4 > ~ , , 
μένους" ἀπὸ τῆς λύπης, 46 Kai εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Ti καθεύδετε ; 
ing from grief, and hesaid tothem, Why sleep ye? 
ἀναστάντες προσεύχεσθε, ἵνα μὴ. εἰσέλθητε εἰς πειρασμόν. 
Having risen up pray, that ye may notenter into temptation. 

47 "Ἔτι. "δὲ" αὐτοῦ λαλοῦντος, ἰδοὺ ὄχλος, Kai ὁ λεγό- 

And‘yet ‘as *he *was speaking, behold acrowd, andhewho was 
μενος Ἰούδας, εἷς τῶν δώδεκα, προήρχετο “αὐτῶν," καὶ 
called Judas, one ofthe twelve, was going before them, and 


» ~? ~ ~ ᾽ , x* a? ~ | = 
ἤγγισεν tp Ἰησοῦ φιλῆσαι αὐτόν. 48 τὸ δὲ. Inoovc' εἶπεν 
drew near to Jesus tokiss him. But Jesus said 
> ~ > , , ‘ er ~ ? , / 
αὐτῷ, ᾿Ιούδα, φιλήματι τὸν υἱὸν Tov ἀνθρώπου παραδίδως ; 
tohim, Judas, withakiss the Son ofman  deliverest thou up? 
49 ᾿Ιδόντες.δὲ οἱ περὶ αὐτὸν τὸ ἐσόμενον γτγεΐπον" 
And ‘seeing 'those?around πὰ what wasabouttohappen said 
“avrg, Κύριε. εἰ πατάξομεν ἐν μαχαίρᾳ"; 50 Kai ἐπά- 
to him, Lord, shall we smite with [the] sword? And ®smote 
ταξεν εἷς τις ἐξ αὐτῶν "roy δοῦλον τοῦ ἀρχιερέως," Kat 
°one'a*certain*of *them the bondman ofthe high priest, and 
ἀφεῖλεν “αὐτοῦ τὸ οὖς" τὸ δεξιόν. 51 ἀποκριθεὶς. δὲ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς 
took off his 7ear right. And answering Jesus 
ῖ ᾽ ~ a , K 4 « ΄ ~ > , d > “Ἢ 
εἶπεν, Ἐᾶτε ἕως.τούτου. Καὶ ἁψάμενος τοῦ ὠτίου δαὐτοῦ 
said, Suffer thus far. And having touched the ear of him 
ἰάσατο αὐτόν. 52 Εϊπεν.δὲ “ὁ Ἰησοῦς πρὸς τοὺς παρα- 
he healed him. And said Jesus to those who were 
γενομένους fin’! αὐτὸν ἀρχιερεῖς Kai στρατηγοὺς τοῦ ἱεροῦ 


come against him, chief priests and captains of the temple 
καὶ πρεσβυτέρους, Ὥς ἐπὶ λῃστὴν δΒἐξεληλύθατε! μετὰ 
and elders, As against arobber have ye come out with 


μαχαιρῶν καὶ ξύλων ; 53 Kal ἡμέραν ὄντος.μου μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν 
swords and staves? Daily when Iwas with you 
2 ~ et ~ ᾽ γ ΄ BY ~ 72 39 ae. h2 a] 
ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ οὐκ.ἐξετείνατε τὰς χεῖρας ἐπ ἐμέ. "ἀλλ 
in the temple ye stretched not out [your] hands against me; but 
αὕτη Ἰὑμῶν ἐστιν" ἡ ὥρα, καὶ ἡ ἐξουσία τοῦ σκότους. 
this *your lis hour, andthe power of darkness. 
54 Συλλαβόντες.δὲ αὐτὸν ἤγαγον, καὶ εἰσήγαγον 
And having seized him they led [him away], and led 
k ch I > l \ ῖ ll ~ ᾽ , ie ς δὲ Tlé ἘΣ X 40 
AUTOV" εἰς “τὸν Οοἰκον TOV ἀρχιερεως O_OE-LLETPOC Ἠἠκολοῦσει 
him into the house ofthe high priest. And Peter was following 
, πὶ ἡ , Ι ΔΑ “ ᾽ , ~ ? ~ 
μακρόθεν. 55 πἁψάντων «δὲ πῦρ ἐν μέσῳ τῆς αὐλῆς, 
afar off. And having kindled a fire in [the] midst of the court, 
καὶ “ovyxabicavtwr" αὐτῶν" ἐκάθητο ὁ Tlétpoc Ῥὲν. μέσῳ!" 
and *having *sat*down ‘together ‘they Tsat *Peter among 
αὐτῶν. 56 ἰδοῦσα.δὲ αὐτὸν παιδίσκη τις καθήμενον πρὸς 
them. And ‘having °seen “him ‘a*maid “*certain sitting by 
TO φῶς, καὶ ἀτενίσασα αὐτῷ, εἶπεν, Καὶ οὗτος σὺν 
the light, and having looked intently on him, said, And this one with 
αὐτῷ ἦν. 57 ‘0.68 ἠρνήσατο "αὐτόν," λέγων, Γύναι, οὐκ 
him was. But he denied him, saying, Woman, “ποῦ 
οἷδα αὐτόν." 58 Kai μετὰ βραχὺ ἕτερος ἰδὼν αὐτὸν ἔφη, 
11 ?do know him. And after alittle another seeing him _ said, 


vy — 6€ and LTTraw. 


ΣΙ τς αὐτῷ TTrA. 

4 — αὐτοῦ TTrA. 
i ἐστὶν ὑμῶν LITrA. 
TTrA. 
P μέσος TTrA. 


5 μαχαίρῃ TIA. 
© —o LTTrA. 


2 περικαθισάντων, having sat around L; συνκαθισάντων T. 
4 — αὐτὸν LTr[A]. 


W αὐτούς GLTTrAW. x Ἰησοῦς δὲ TTrA. Υ εἶπαν LTTrA. 
b τοῦ ἀρχιερέως τὸν δοῦλον TTrA. © τὸ οὖς αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 
f πρὸς 1. Β ἐξήλθατε came ye out Ltr. Β ἀλλὰ Tra. 
k — αὐτὸν (read [bim]) trtra. [τὴν οἰκίαν TTrA. ™ περιαψάντων 
° — αὐτῶν LTTrA. 
τ οὐκ οἷδα αὐτόν, γύναι TTYA. 


XXII, XXIII. LUKE. 


Kai od ἐξ αὐτῶν el. Ὁ.δὲ Πέτρος "εἶπεν, [Λνθρωπε, οὐκ εἰμί. 
And thou of them art, But Peter said, Man, Tam not. 
59 Kai διαστάσης ὡσεὶ ὥρας μιᾶς; ἄλλος τις διϊσχυρίζετο, 
And havingelapsed about *hour ‘one, “οὔβεσ *a*certain strongly affirmed, 
λέγων, Ἔπ᾽ ἀληθείας καὶ οὗτος per αὐτοῦ hy" καὶ.γὰρ Γαλι- 
saying, In truth also thisone with him was; i 
λαῖός ἐστιν. 60 Εἶπεν.δὲ ὁ Πέτρος, “AvOpw7e, οὐκ.οἶδα 


τὰ 


ο 


lean he is. And *said Peter, an, I know not what 
λέγεις. Kai παραχρῆμα; ἔτι λαλοῦντος. αὐτοῦ, ἐφώνησεν 
thou sayest. And immediately, yet ‘as he was speaking, Screw 


to! ἀλέκτωρ᾽ 6] καὶ στραφεὶς ὁ κύριος ἐνέβλεψεν τῷ Πέτρῳ᾽ 
*the cock. And having turned, the Lord looked at Peter ; 

kai ὑπεμνήσθη ὁ Πέτρος τοῦ λόγου τοῦ κυρίου, we εἶπεν αὐτῷ, 
and *remembered *Peter the word ofthe Lord, how hesaid to him, 


Ὅτι piv ἀλέκτορα φωνῆσαι ᾿ ἀπαρνήσῃ με τρίς. 62 Kai 
Before {the} cock crow thou wilt deny me thrice. And 
ἐξελθὼν ἔξω “ὁ Πέτρος" ἔκλαυσεν πικρῶς. 


Peter 
63 Kai ot ἄνδρες ot συνέχοντες “τὸν Ἰησοῦν ἐνέπαιζον 


having gone forth outside wept bitterly. 


And the men who were holding Jesus mocked 
αὐτῷ, δέροντες Θά καὶ περικαλύψαντες αὐτὸν γἔτυπτον 
him, beating [him]; and havingcoveredup him _ they were striking 


αὐτοῦ τὸ πρόσωπον, καὶ" ἐπηρώτων αὐτόν," λέγοντες, Ipo- 

his face, and were asking him, saying, Pro- 

Ul , > « , ~ ‘ .“ ‘ 
φήτευσον, τίς ἐστιν ὁ παίσας σε; 65 Καὶ ἕτερα πολλὰ 
phesy, who isit that struck thee? And ?other “things *many 
βλασφημοῦντες ἔλεγον εἰς αὐτόν. 

blasphemously they said to him. 

66 Kai we ἐγένετο ἡμέρα συνήχθη τὸ πρεσβυτέριον 

And when it became day were gathered together the elderhood 

τοῦ λαοῦ, ἀρχιερεῖς.τε Kai γραμματεῖς, καὶ "ἀνήγαγον" αὐτὸν 
of the people, both chief priests and scribes, and they led him 


εἰς τὸ συνέδριον Ῥἑαυτῶν," λέγοντες, 67 Ei od εἶ ὁ χριστός, 
into *sanhedrim 


‘their, saying, If thou art the Christ, 
c > iT] t ~ = 4 > ~ ? ‘ e ~ » > ‘ 
εἰπὲ" ἡμῖν. Εϊπεν.δὲ αὐτοῖς, Ἐὰν ὑμῖν εἴπω, οὐ.μὴ 
tell us, And he said to them, If you Ishould tell, not at all 
πιστεύσητε᾽ 68 ἐὰν.δὲ ἀκαὶ" ἐρωτήσω, οὐ-μὴ ἀποκρι- 


would ye believe; and if also Ishould ask [you], not at all would ye 
θῆτέ “μοι, ἢ ἀπολύσητε." 69 ἀπὸ.τοῦ.νῦν ‘ ἔσται ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ 
answer me, ΠΟΙ͂ let [16] go. Henceforth shall be the Son 


ἀνθρώπου καθήμενος ἐκ δεξιῶν τῆς δυνάμεως τοῦ θεοῦ. 
of man sitting at (the) righthand ofthe power of God, 


70 8Elroyv'.d& πάντες, Σὺ οὖν εἶ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ; Ὁ .δὲ 
And they ?said tall, Thou then art the Son of God? And he 


πρὸς αὐτοὺς ἔφη, Ὑ μεῖς λέγετε, ὅτι ἐγώ εἰμι. 71 Οἱ.δὲ Βεῖπον," 
to them said, Ye say, that am. Andthey said, 
Ti 


ἔτι ἰχρείαν ἔχομεν μαρτυρίας" ; αὐτοὶ.γὰρ ἠκούσαμεν 


Whatany more need havewe οἵ witness? for ourselves have heard 
ἀπὸ τοῦ.στόματος αὐτοῦ. 
from his [own] mouth. 
93 Kai ἀναστὰν ἅπαν τὸ πλῆθος αὐτῶν ᾿ἤχαχεν" 
And havingrisenup all the multitude of them 1 


5 ἔφη TTrA. τ--- ὃ (read [[Π6} GLTrraw. 
(read he wept) attr[a]. 1 αὐτὸν him LTtra. 
2 — αὐτὸν TTrA. 5 ἀπήγαγον they led away TTrA. 
4 — καὶ LTTrA. ε — μοι ἢ ἀπολύσητε T[TrA]. 


Ἀ εἶπαν LITrA. i ἔχομεν μαρτυρίας χρείαν TTrA. = * ἤγαγον GLTTrAW. 


foralso a Gali- fe 


Y σήμερον to-day TTra. 
Υ — ἔτυπτον αὐτοῦ τὸ πρόσωπον, καὶ [L]TTrA. 
Ὁ αὐτῶν TTrAW. 
f+ δὲ however ΠΤΎΤΑ. 


231 


Thou art also of them. 
And Peter said, Man, 
I am not. 59 And a- 
bout the space of one 
hour after another 
confidently affirmed, 
saying, Of a truth this 
also was with 
him: for he is a Gali- 
lean. 60 And Peter 
said, Man, I know not 
what thousayest. And 
immediately, while he 
yet spake, the cock 
crew. 61 And the Lord 
turned, and looked 
upon Peter, And Peter 
remembered the word 
of the Lord, how he 
had said unto him, 
Before the cock crow, 
thou shalt deny me 
thrice. 62 And Peter 
went out, and wept 
bitterly. 


63 And the men that 
heidJesus mocked him, 
and smote him. 64 And 
when they had blind- 
folded him,they struck 
him on the face, and 
asked him, saying, 
Prophesy, who is it 
that smote thee ? 
65 And many other 
things blasphemously 
spake they against 
him, 


66 And as soon as it 
was day, the elders of 
the people and the 
chief priests and the 
scribes came together, 
and led him into their 
council, saying, 67 Art 
thou the ist ? tell 
us. And he said unto 
them, If I tell you ye 
will not believe: 68and 
if I also ask you, ye 
will not answer me, 
nor let me go. 69 Here- 
after shall the Son of 
man sit on the right 
hand of the power of 
God. 70 Then said 
they all, Art thou then 
the Son of God? And 
he said unto them, Ye 
say that lam. 71 And 
they said, What need 
we any further wit- 
ness? for we ourselves 
have heard of his own 
mouth. 


XXIII. And the 
whole multitude of 
them arose, and led 


π — ὁ Πέτρος 


ς εἰπὸν TTra. 
& εἶπαν TTrA. 


232 


him unto Pilate. 2And 
they began to accuse 
him, saying, We found 
this "yellow perverting 
the nation, and for- 
bidding to give tribute 
to Cesar, saying that 
he himself is Christ a 
King. 3 And Pilate 
asked him, saying, Art 
thou the King of the 
Jews ? And he answer- 
ed him and said, Thou 
sayest it, 4 Then said 
Pilate to the chief 
priests and vo the peo- 
ple, I find uo fault in 
this man. 5 And they 
were the more fierce, 
saying, He stirreth up 
the people, teaching 
throughout all Jewry, 
beginning from Ga- 
lilee to this place. 
6 When Pilate heard 
of Galilee, he asked 
whether the man were 
a Galilean. 7 And as 
soon as he knew that 
he belonged unto He- 
rod’s jurisdiction, he 
sent him to Herod, 
who himself also was 
at Jerusalem at that 
time. 8 And when 
Herod saw Jesus, he 
was exceeding glad: 
for he was desirous to 
see him of ἃ long 
season, because he had 
heard many things of 
him; and he hoped to 
have seen some mi- 
racle done by him. 
9 Then he questioned 
with him in many 
words; but he answer- 
edhim nothing. 10 And 
the chief priests and 
scribes stood and ve- 
hemently accused him. 
11 And Herod with his 
men of war set him at 
nought, and mocked 
him,and arrayed him 
in a gorgeous robe, 
and sent him again to 
Pilate. 12 And the 
same day Pilate and 
Herod were made 
friends together: for 
before they were at en- 
mity between them- 
selves, 


13 And Pilate, when 
he had called together 
the chief priests aud 
the rulers and the peo- 
Ye’ 14 said unto them, 

e have brought this 


Ἂ OVYAKGATS: 
αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὸν ἸΠιλάτον." 2 ἤρξαντο.δὲ κατηγορεῖν αὐτοῦ, 
him to Pilate. And they began to accuse him, 


λέγοντες, Tovroy ™evpopev' διαστρέφοντα τὸ ἔθνος", Kai 
saying, This man) we found perverting the wit and 


κωλύοντα “Καίσαρι φόρους" διδόναι, λέγοντα ἑαυτὸν χριστὸν 
forbidding “ἴο ῦεββασ “tribute ‘to *give, saying himself “Christ 


βασιλέα εἶναι. 3 Ὁ. δὲ. “Πιλάτος" τἐπηρώτησεν" αὐτόν, λέγων, 


XXIII. 


?a *king 115. And Pilate questioned him, saying, 
Σὺ εἶ ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων ; Ὁ. δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς αὐτῷ 
?Thou tart the king of the Jews? Andhe answering him 


ἔφη, Σὺ λέγεις. 4°O.6éALiAaroc" εἶπεν πρὸς τοὺς ἀρχιερεῖς 
said, Thou sayest. And Pilate said to the chief priests 
καὶ τοὺς ὄχλους, Οὐδὲν εὑρίσκω αἴτιον ἐν τῷ. ἀνθρώπῳ. τούτῳ. 
and the crowds, Nothing findI  blamable in this man, 
5 Οἱιδὲ ἐπίσχυον, λέγοντες, Ὅτι ἀνασείει τὸν λαόν, διδάσ- 
But they were insisting, saying, He stirs up the penis; teach- 
κων καθ᾽ ὕλης τῆς ᾿Ιουδαίας, " ἀρξάμενος ἀπὸ τῆς Γαλι- 
ing Ehroug out *whole ‘the of Judza, beginning from Gali- 
λαίας ἕως ὧδε. 6 “Πιλάτος".δὲ ἀκούσας 'Γαλιλαίαν!" 
lee even to here. But Pilate having heard Galilee (mamed } 
ἐπηρώτησεν εἰ ὁ ἄνθρωπος Ραλιλαῖός ἐ ἐστιν" 7 καὶ ἐπι- 
asked whether the man a*Galilean ‘7is; and baring, 
γνοὺς ὅτι ἐκ τῆς ἐξουσίας Ἡρώδου ἐστίν, ἀνέπεμψεν αὐτὸν 
known that from the jurisdiction of Herod heis, he sent “up *him 
πρὸς τυ Ἡρώδην, ὄντα καὶ αὐτὸν ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐν ταύταις 
Herod, *being “also ‘he at Jerusalem in those 
ταῖς Lipari 8 ὁ. δὲ. Ἡρώδης ἰδὼν τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ἐχάρη λίαν" 
days. And Herod seeing Jesus rejoiced greatly, 


υθέλων ἐξιἱκανοῦ! ἰδεῖν αὐτόν, διὰ τὸ ἀκούειν 
for long to see him, _ because of iene 


ἦν.γὰρ 
for he was wishing 


χπολλὰ" περὶ αὐτοῦ: καὶ ἤλπιζέν τι σημεῖον ἰδεῖν ὑπ᾽ 
many thingsconcerning him; andhe washopingsome sign tosee “by 


αὐτοῦ γινόμενον. 9 ἐπηρώτα.δὲ αὐτὸν ἐν λόγοις ἱκανοῖς" 
“him ‘done. And he questioned him in *words 1many, 


αὐτὸς.δὲ οὐδὲν ἀπεκρίνατο αὐτῷ. 10 εἱστήκεισαν.δὲ οἱ ἀρχ- 
but Βα nothing answered him. And “had ®stood 'the ?chief 


ιερεῖς καὶ οἱ γραμματεῖς, εὐτόνως κατηγοροῦντες αὐτοῦ. 
Spriests ‘and *the ®scribes, wierd, accusing him. 


11 ἐξουθενήσας.δὃὲ αὐτὸν δ᾽ Hodeng σὺν τοῖς στρατεύμασιν 

And *having “set °at nought *him erod with ?troops 

αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐμπαίξας, περιβαλὼν ταὐτὸν" ἐσθῆτα λαμ- 
this, and having mocked [him], having put on him “apparel ‘splen- 


πρὰν ἀνέπεμψεν αὐτὸν τῷ "Πιλάτῳ." 12 ἐγένοντο.δὲ φίλοι 
did he sent back ‘*him to Pilate. And became friends 


ὕ.τε."]ΠΙιλάτος καὶ ὁ Ἡρώδης" ἐν αὐτῇ.τῇ ἡμέρᾳ per ἀλλήλων" 
both Pilate and Herod on thatsame day with one another; 

προὐπῆρχον.γὰρ ἐν ἔχθρᾳ ὄντες πρὸς ςἑαυτούς." 

for before they were at enmity between themselves. 


13 «“«Πιλάτος".δὲ abe γκαχευ meee τοὺς ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ τοὺς 
And Pilate having called together the chief priests and the 


ἄρχοντας καὶ τὸν λαόν, 14 εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, Προσηνέγκατέ 
rulers and the people, said to them, Ye brought 


l MieeNaror, πὶ. 
Καίσαρι Τ1ἼτΑ. 
even TtTr[a]. 
wishing LTTrA. 
5 Πειλάτῳ T. 


™ εὕραμεν ὙΤΤΑ. 
Ρ + καὶ and [L)rtr[a ]. 
t— Ταλιλαίαν τ[4]- 
* — πολλὰ TTra. 
υ Ἣρώδης καὶ ὃ Πιλάτος (Med. 1) TTrA. 


n+ ἡμῶν (read our nation) LTTr[A]W. © φόρους 
4 Πειλᾶτος T. τ ἠρώτησεν TTrA. 5+ Kat 

Ἢ ἐξ ἱκανῶν χρόνων θέλων many times 
--- αὐτὸν (τ᾽εαὰ [him]) [L]t[Tr]a. 
CavrTovsTTrA. 4ovvKadcoamevos T- 


v + τὸν L. 
Σ + καὶ also τ. 


XXIII. LUKE. 


μοι τὸν.ἄνθρωπον.τοῦτον, ὡς ἀποστρέφοντα τὸν λαόν" Kai 
to me this man, as turning away the people; and 
ἰδού, ἐγὼ ἐνώπιον ὑμῶν ἀνακρίνας “οὐδὲν᾽ εὗρον ἐν τῷ 
behold, I before you having examined [him] *nothing ‘found in 
ἀνθρώπῳ.τούτῳ αἴτιον ὧν κατηγορεῖτε 
this man blamable [as to the things] of which ye bring accusation 
᾽ > ~. ? ? rare , 3 f ? , ‘ « ~ ‘ 
κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ" 15 ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ Ηρώδης" ἰἀνέπεμψα.γὰρ ὑμᾶς πρὸς 
against him ; nor even Herod, for I sent 7up tyou to 
αὐτόν," καὶ ἰδού, οὐδὲν ἄξιον θανάτου ἐστὶν πεπραγμένον 
him, and lo, nothing worthy of death is done 
αὐτῷ. 16 παιδεύσας οὖν αὐτὸν ἀπολύσω. 178 Ανάγκην 
by him. Ηδυΐηρ ?chastised'*therefore him I will release {him}, “Necessity 
δὲ εἶχεν ἀπολύειν αὐτοῖς κατὰ ἑορτὴν ἕνα." 18 *ave- 


Inow“he“had torelease tothem at [the] feast one. *they 
κραξαν" δὲ Ἐπαμπληθεί," λέγοντες, Aloe τοῦτον, ἀπόλυ- 
Ξογιοᾶ *out*but ina mass, saying, Away with this [man], *re- 
σον δὲ ἡμῖν τὸν Βαραββᾶν" 19 ὕστις ἦν διὰ στάσιν 


lease ᾿δηᾷᾶ tous Barabbas ; who was onaccount of *insurrection 


τινὰ γενομένην iv τῇ πόλει Kai φόνον βεβλημένος εἰς 
a “certain made in the city and murder cast into 
φυλακήν." 20 Πάλιν οὖν" ὁ "ΠΠΙλάτος" προσεφώνησεν", 
prison. Again therefore Pilate called to {them], 
θέλων ἀπολῦσαι τὸν Ἰησοῦν. 21 οἱ. δὲ ἐπεφώνουν, λέγοντες, 
wishing to release Jesus. 3ut they werecryingout, saying, 
ΡῬΣταύρωσον, craipwoor' αὐτόν. 22 Ὃ.δὲ τρίτον εἶπεν 

Crucify, crucify i Andhe athird [time] said 
πρὸς αὐτούς, Ti yap κακὸν ἐποίησεν οὗτος: οὐδὲν 
to them, What then ‘evil did “commit ‘this [*man]? No 
αἴτιον θανάτου εὗρον ἐν αὐτῷ παιδεύσας οὖν αὐτὸν 
cause of death foundI in him. Having *chastised'therefore him 
? [4 © 4 ? , ~ / ? , 
ἀπολύσω. 23 Οἱ. δὲ ἐπέκειντο φωναῖς μεγάλαις, αἰτού- 
[ will release [him]. Βαὺ ΠΟΥ were urgent with?voices ‘loud, asking 
μενοι αὐτὸν σταυρωθῆναι: Kai κατίσχυον at φωναὶ αὐτῶν 
for him to be crucified. And prevailed the voices of them 
“καὶ τῶν ἀρχιερέων." 24 τὉ δὲ" "Taro! ἐπέκρινεν γενέσθαι 


and of the chief priests. And Pilate adjudged “to *be *done 
τὸ. αἴτημα.αὐτῶν. 25 ἀπέλυσεν.δὲ δαὐτοῖς" τὸν διὰ 
‘their request. And he released tothem him who onaccount of 
’ ι , rv , 2 t A ll X ’ a 
στάσιν Kai φόνον βεβλημένον εἰς ‘rHv' φυλακήν, ὃν 
insurrection and murder had beencast into the prison, whom 


yrovyvro’ τὸν.δὲ. Ἰησοῦν παρέδωκεν τῷ. θεληματι.αὐτῶν. 
they asked for ; but Jesus he delivered up to their will. 
26 Kai we ἀπήγαγον αὐτόν, ἐπιλαβόμενοι YZinwrdc 
And as they led “away ‘him, having laid hold on “Simon 
τινος Κυρηναίου “τοῦ ἐρχομένου" “ἀπ᾽. ἀγροῦ, ἐπέθηκαν 
‘a “οουύαϊπ a Cyrenian coming from afield, they put upon 
? ~ 4 A , » ~? ~ ? , 
αὐτῷ τὸν σταυρὸν φέρειν ὄπισθεν τοῦ Ἰησοῦ. 27 ᾿Ηκολούθει 
him the cross to bear [it] behind Jesus. *Were *following 
δὲ αὐτῷ πολὺ πλῆθος τοῦ λαοῦ Kai γυναικῶν, ai Yrai' 
‘and him agreat multitude of the people and ofwomen, who also 


© οὐθὲν TTr. 
& — verse 17 [L]tTr[a]. 
ἐν τῇ φυλακῇ TTrA. 
P Σταύρου σταύρου LTTraA. 
G[L]TTraw. τ — τὴν LTTrA. 
‘amo L. 7 — καὶ LTTrA. 


Κ πανπληθεί τ. 


Β ἀνέκραγον ΤΊΤΑ. 
n ΤΠειλᾶτος T. 


τὰ δὲ however LTTrA. 
4 — καὶ τῶν ἀρχιερέων [L]T[TrA]. 


Τ᾿ καὶ LTTrA. 
a 4 a > ΄ 
νυ Σίμωνά τινα Κυρηναῖον ἐρχόμενον LITra. 


233 


man unto me, as one 
that perverteth the 
people: and, behold, I, 
having examined him 
before you, have found 
no fault in this man 
touching those things 
whereof ye accuse him: 
15 no, nor yet Herod: 
for Isent you to him; 
and, lo, nothing wor- 
thy of death is done 
unto him. 16 I wil! 
therefore chastise him, 
and release him. 
17 (For of necessity he 
must release one unto 
them at the feast. 
18 And they cried out 
all at once, saying, A- 
way with this man, 
and release unto us 
Barabbas: 19 (who for 
acertain sedition made 
in the city, and for 
murder, was cast in- 
to prison.) 20 Pilate 
therefore, willing to 
release Jesus, spake a- 
gain tothem. 21 But 
they cried, saying, Cru- 
cify him, crucify him. 
22 And he said unto 
them the third time, 
Why, what evil hath 
he done? I have found 
no cause of death in 
him : [ will therefore 
chastise him, and let 
him go. 23 And they 
were instant with loud 
voices, requiring that 
he might be crucified. 
And the voices of them 
and of the chief priests 
prevailed. 24 And Pi- 
late gavesentence that 
it should be as they 
required. 25 And he 
released unto them 
him that for sedition 
and murder was cast 
into prison, whom they 
had desired; but he 
delivered Jesus totheir 
will, 


26 And as they led 
him away, they laid 
hold upon one Simon, 
a Cyrenian, coming 
out of the country, and 
on him they laid the 
cross, that he might 
bear it after Jesus. 
27 And there followed 
him a great company 
of people, and of wo- 
men, which also be- 


{ ἀνέπεμψεν yap αὐτὸν πρὸς ἡμᾶς for he sent him back to us 1. 
1 βληθεὶς ([BAn Geis] A) 


© + αὐτοῖς them 1x. 
S — auTo.s 
YOu ἂν. 


294 


wailed and lamented 
him. 28 But Jesus turn- 
ing unto them said, 
Daughters of Jerusa- 
lem, weep not for me, 
but weep for your- 
selves, and for your 
children. 29 For, be- 
hold, the days are 
coming, in the which 
they shall say, Blessed 
are the barren, and 
the wombs that never 
bare, and the paps 
which never gavesuck. 
30 Then shall they be- 
gin tosay tothe moun- 
tains, Fall on us ; and 
to the hills, Cover us. 
31 For if they do these 
things in a green tree, 
what shall be done in 
the dry ? 32 And there 
were also two other, 
malefactors, led with 
him to be put to death. 
33 And when they were 
come to the place, 
which is called Cal- 
vary, there they cru- 
cified him, and the 
malefactors, one on 
the right hand, and 
the other on the left. 
34 Then said Jesus, 
Father, forgive them; 
for they know not 
what they do. And 
they parted his rai- 
ment, and cast lots, 
35 And the people stood 
beholding. And the 
rulers also with them 
derided him, saying, 
He saved others; let 
him gave himself, if 
he be Christ, the cho- 
sen of God. 36 And 
the soldiers also mock- 
ed him, coming to 
him, and offering him 
vinegar, 37 and saying, 
If thou be the king of 
the Jews, save thyself. 
38 And a superscrip- 
tion also was written 
over him in letters of 
Greek, and Latin, and 
Hebrew, ‘THIS IS 
THE KING OF THE 
JEWS 


39 And one of the 
malefactors which 
were hanged railed on 
him, saying, If thou 


A OWA Avs. XXII1. 


ἐκόπτοντο καὶ ἐθρήνουν αὐτόν. 28 στραφεὶς δὲ πρὸς αὐτὰς 
ere bewailing and lamenting him. And ΤΌΣΟΙ, to them 
"Ἰησοῦς sizer, Θυγατέρες Ἱερουσαλήμ, μὴ. «κλαίετε ἐπ᾿ ἐμέ, 


Jesus said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, 


πλὴν ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὰς κλαίετε καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ.τέκνα.ὑμῶν" 29 ὅτι ἰδού, 
but *for *yourselves ‘weep and ΤῸ  yourchildren: for lo, 


ἔρχονται ἡμέραι ἐν αἷς ἐροῦσιν, Maxapia ai στεῖραι 
arecoming days in which they willsay, Blessed f[are]the barren 
καὶ " κοιλίαι at οὐκ. ἐγέννησαν καὶ μαστοὶ ot ϑοὐκ. ἐθήλασαν." 
and OMS, which did not bear and breasts which gave not ance 


30 τότε ἄρξονται λέγειν τοῖς ὄρεσιν, “Πέσετε! ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς" 
Then Hai they begin tosay tothe mountains, Fall ins us ; 


καὶ τοῖς βουνοῖς, Καλύψατε ἡμᾶς. 81 ὅτι εἰ ἐν “rp ὑγρῷ 
and to the hills, Cover us: for if in the green 


ξύλῳ ταῦτα ποιοῦσιν, ἐν τῷ ξηρῷ τί γένηται; 92 Ἤγοντο 
tree thesethings they ἄο, inthe dry what may take place? *Were “led 


δὲ καὶ ἕτεροι δύο κακοῦργοι σὺν αὐτῷ ἀναιρεθῆναι. 33 Kai 
*and also Ζούμου. ‘two malefactors with him to be put to death. And 


ὅτε “ἀπῆλθον" ἐπὶ τὸν τόπον τὸν καλούμενον κρανίον ἐκεῖ 


when theycame ἢ _ the place called aSkull there 
ἐσταύρωσαν αὐτόν, Kai τοὺς κακούργους, ὃν. μὲν ἐκ δεξιῶν 
they crucified him, and the malefactors, theone on [the] right 
ὃν. δὲ ἐξ ἀριστερῶν. 34 [ὁ.δὲ Ἰησοῦς ἔλεγεν, Πάτερ, ἄφες 
and one on [the} left. And Jesus said, Father, forgive 
αὐτοῖς" οὐ-γὰρ.οἴδασιν τί ποιοῦσιν." Διαμεριζόμενοι.δὲ τὰ 
shen, for they know not what _ they do. And eee 


ἱμάτια.αὐτοῦ ἔβαλον βκλῆρον." 35 καὶ εἱστήκει ὁ λαὸς θεω- 


his garments theycast a lot. And *stood ‘the ge behold- 
ρῶν" = υκτήριζον. δὲ πκαὶ! ot a doxovres ἰσὺν αὐτοῖς" ' λέγον- 
ing, *were °deriding “also ‘the lers with them, say- 


TE *A\Xov ἔσωσεν, σωσάτω ἑαυτόν εἰ οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ χριστὸ 
> 


ing, Others hesaved, let himsave himself if this is the Christ 
κὸ τοῦ θεοῦ! ἐκλεκτός. 36 ' Ἑνέπαιζον".δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ οἱ orpa- 
the “of ?God ‘chosen. And mocked him also the sol- 


TLWTAL, προσερχύμενοι Mai! ὀξος προσ ἔἐροντες αὐτῷ, 37 καὶ 


diers, coming near and “vinegar ‘offering “him, and 
ΕΝ πΕ} σὺ εἴ ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, σῶσον σεαυ- 
ἌΣ If ml art the king of the Jews, save aby 
τόν. ἯἮν.δὲ καὶ ἐπιγραφὴ "γεγραμμένη! ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ 
as en there was also an inscription written over him 
Ἕλλ Ῥ : ‘E " 
Ργράμμασιν ηνικοῖς καὶ ὡμαϊκοῖς καὶ patkotc, 
in letters Greek and atin and Hebrew : 
αρὗτός ἐστιν ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων." 
This is the king of the Jews. 
39 Εἷς.δὲ τῶν κρεμασθέντων κακούργων εβλασφήμεε 


Now one of the ?who *had *been Pango, Serpe a railed at 
αὐτόν, "λέγων," *Et od el ὁ χριστός,; σῶσον σεαυτὸν καὶ 


be Christ, save thyself him, saying, If thou art ue Christ, save thyself and 
d . 40 But th ~ 
other liatiawering xe. Ἡμᾶς, +40 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς. δὲ ὁ ἕτερος ᾿ἐπετίμα αὐτῷ, λέγων," 
buked him, saying, us. But answering the other rebuked him, Saying, 
¥— 0 TTrA. 4+ aithe tra. ὃ οὐκ ἔθρεψαν nourished not Lrtra. ς Πέσατε TTra. 
a ἡ {τφ]. Tr: 6 ἦλθον LTrA ἴ [ὁ δὲ .... ποιοῦσιν] 1». 8 κλήρους lots TA. h — καὶ LT. 
— σὺν αὐτοῖς {π]ττνα. k τοῦ θεοῦ 6 TA. | ἐνέπαιξαν TA. τὰ — καὶ [L]rTra. 
ἃ [Et] L. 9 ἐπιγεγραμμένη irr]; — γεγραμμένη TA. P — γράμμασιν .... EBpaixots 
[uJrrr[a} 4 ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν "lovbaiwy.obros (Lobros] π᾿) LYTrA. r— λέγων τ{ττ]ὰ. 


5 Οὐχὶ σὺ εἶ 6 χριστός ; Art not thou the Christ? TTra. 


him said Trra. 


τ ἐπιτιμῶν αὐτῷ ἔφη rebuking 


XXIII. LUKE. 


Οὐδὲ φοβῃ σὺ τὸν θεόν, Ore ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ κρίματι cl; 
?Not even ‘dost *fear *thou God, (thou]that under the same judgment art? 
41 καὶ ἡμεῖς μὲν δικαίως" ἄξια.γὰρ ὧν ἐπράξαμεν 

And we indeed justly; for *a*due “recompense Sof ’what “we *did 
arrohapBavoper™ οὗτος. δὲ οὐδὲν ἄτοπον ἔπραξεν. 42 Καὶ 
1we “receive ; but this [man]?nothing “amiss did. And 
ἔλεγεν ‘rep! Ιησοῦ, Μνήσθητί μου, “κύριε, ὅταν ἔλθῃς ἐν 
he said to Jesus, Remember me, Lord, when thoucomest in 
τῇ.βασιλείᾳ.σου. 48 Kai εἶπεν αὐτῷ "ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς," ᾿Αμὴν YrAEyw 
thy kingdom, And ?*said *to*him 1Jesus, Verily Isay 
sou, σήμερον per ἐμῦ ἔσῃ ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ. 
tothee, To-day with me thou shalt be in Paradise, 
44 τῊν. δὲ! ὡσεὶ ὥρα ἕκτη, καὶ σκότος ἐγένετο ἐφ᾽ ὕλην 
And it was about(the]*hour'sixth, and darkness came _ over ?7whole 
THY γῆν ἕως ὥρας δἐννάτης"" 45 ὕκαὶ ἐσκοτίσθη ὁ ἥλιος," 


4the land until [the] *hour ninth; and “was*darkened'the sun; 
“καὶ ἐσχίσθη! τὸ καταπέτασμα τοῦ ναοῦ péoov’ 46 καὶ 
and ὅὄνγαβ rent ‘the 2veil Sof “the *temple in [the] midst. And 


wry μεγάλῃ ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν, Πάτερ, εἰς χεῖράς 


loud Jesus said, Father, into “hands 


φωνήσας 


having cried witha *voice 


σου παραθήσομαι" τὸ.πνεῦμά μου. “Καὶ ταῦτα' εἰπὼν 
‘thy I will commit my spirit. And these things having said 
avs ? ‘ 4 .« fic , ] x , 
ἐξέπνευσεν. 47 ᾿Ιδὼν. δὲ ὁ [ἑκατόνταρχος τὸ γενόμενον 


he expired. Now*having‘seen'the centurion that which took place 
ξέἐδόξασεν" τὸν θεόν, λέγων, Ὄντως ὁ.ἄνθρωπος. οὗτος δίκαιος 
glorified God, saying, Indeed this man just 
ἦν. 48 Kai πάντες ot Ῥσυμπαραγενόμενοι" ὄχλοι ἐπὶ THY 
was. And all the *who *were *come °together ‘crowds to 
θεωρίαν.ταύτην, Ἰθεωροῦντεος" τὰ γενόμενα, τύπτοντες 
this sight, seeing the things which took place, beating 
ks ~ ll s , « ’ ε ΄ ‘ , 
ἑαυτῶν" τὰ στήθη ὑπέστρεφον. 49 εἱστήκεισαν.δὲ πάντες 
their breasts returned, And ®stood tall 
οἱ = yyworoi ἰαὐτοῦ" ™ μακρόθεν, καὶ γυναῖκες αἱ "ovy- 
*those*who *knew Shim afar off, also women who fol- 
ακολουθήσασαι" αὐτῷ ἀπὸ τῆς Γαλιλαίας, ὁρῶσαι ταῦτα. 
lowed with him from Galilee, beholding these things. 
50 Kai ἰδού, ἀνὴρ ὀνόματι ᾿Ιωσήφ, βουλευτὴς ὑπάρχων, 
And behold,a τη byname Joseph, a counsellor being, 
ο ἀνὴρ ἀγαθὸς καὶ δίκαιος. 51 οὗτος οὐκ.-ἢν.Ῥσυγκατατεθειμένος" 
aman good and just, (he had not assented 
τῇ βουλῇ καὶ τῇ πράξει αὐτῶν, ἀπὸ ᾿Αριμαθαίας πόλεως 
tothe counsel and the deed ofthem,) from Arimathza a city 
τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, ὃς. “καὶ προσεδέχετο τκαὶ αὐτὸς" τὴν βασι- 
of the Jews, and who *was *waiting *for*also *himself the  king- 
λείαν τοῦ θεοῦ. 52 οὗτος προσελθὼν τῷ "Πιλάτῳ ῃτήσατο τὸ 
dom of God, he having gone to Pilate begged the 
σῶμα τοῦ Ἰησοῦ. δ8 καὶ καθελὼν αὐτὸ" ἐνετύλιξεν αὐτὸ 
body 


290 


Dost not thou fear 
God, seeing thou art 
in the same condem- 
nation? 41] and we in- 
deed justly; for we 
receive the due reward 
of our deeds: but this 
man hathdone nothing 
amiss. 42 And he said 
unto Jesus, Lord, re- 
member me when thou 
comest into thy king- 
dom, 43 And Jesus 
said unto him, Verily 
I say unto thee, To 
day shalt thou be with 
me in paradise. 


44 And it was about 
the sixth hour, and 
there was a darkness 
over all the earth until 
the ninth hour. 45 And 
the sun was darkened, 
and the veil of the 
temple was rent in the 
midst. 46 And when 
Jesus had cried with 
a loud voice, he said, 
Father, into thy hands 
I commend my spirit: 
and having said thus, 
he gave up the ghost. 
47 Now when the cen- 
turion saw what was 
done, he glorified God, 
saying, Certainly this 
was a righteous man, 
48 And all the people 
that came together to 
that sight, beholding 
the things which were 
done, smote their 
breasts, and returned. 
49 And all his ac- 
quaintance, and the 
women that followed 
him from _ Galilee, 
stood afar off, behold- 
ing these things, 


50 And, behold, there 
was a man named 
ph a counseller ; 
and he was agood man, 
and a just: 651 (the 
same had not consent- 
ed to the counsel and 
deed of them ;) he was 
of Arimathmwja, a city 
of the Jews : who also 
himself waited for 
the kingdom of God. 
52 This man went unto 
Pilate, and begged the 
body of Jesus. 53 And 
he took it down, and 
wrapped it in linen, 


of Jesus, And having taken ?down (it he wrapped it 
¥ — τῷ (read he said, Jesus, remember) Trra. 

(read he said) T[tr]aA. Y σοι λέγω ΤΊτΑ. 
® ἐνάτης LTTrA. 
© ἐσχίσθη δὲ. 4% παρατίθεμαι 1 commit Lrtraw. 
ἑκατοντάρχης TTr. 8 ἐδόξαζεν τττὰ. δ συνπαραγενόμενοι ΤΑ. 
ΒΘΘῺ LTTra. k — ἑαυτῶν (read the breasts) TTrA. ! αὐτῷ LTTrA. 
2 συνακολουθοῦσαι TTrA. ° + καὶ and T. 
4 — καὶ and LTTrA. τ — καὶ αὐτὸς LTTrA. 
LYTrA. 


5 Πειλάτῳ T. 


w — κύριε [L]TTra. 
τ καὶ ἣν ἤδη ([ἤδη] Tra) and it was now Lrtra. 
b τοῦ ἡλίον ἐκλιπόντος (darkness came) from the sun failing τ. 
€ καὶ τοῦτο and this L; τοῦτο δὲ TTra. 
i θεωρήσαντες having 


x — ὁ Ἰησοῦς 


m + ἀπὸ from LT, 


P συνκατατιθέμενος τ; συνκατατεθειμένος A. 


t — αὐτὸ (read [it]) 


290 


and laid it in a sepul- 
chre that was hewn in 
stone, wherein never 
man before was laid. 
54 And that day was 
the preparation, and 
the sabbath drew on. 


55 And the women 
also, which came with 
him from Galilee, fol- 
lowed after, and be- 
held thesepulchre, and 
how his body was laid. 
56 And they returned, 
and prepared spices 
and ointments; and 
rested the sabbath 
day according’ to 
the commandment. 
XXIV. Now upon the 
first day of the week, 
very early in the morn- 
ing, they came unto 
the sepulchre, bring- 
ing the spices which 
they had prepared, and 
certain others with 
them. 2 And they 
found the stone rolled 
away from the sepul- 
chre. 3 And they en- 
tered in, and found 
not the body of the 
Lord Jesus. 4 And it 
came to pass, as they 
were much perplexed 
thereabout, behold, 
two men stood by 
them in shining gar- 
ments: 5andas they 
were afraid, and bowed 
down their faces to the 
earth, they said unto 
them, Why seek ye the 
living among the dead? 
6 He is not here, but is 
risen: remember how 
he spake unto you 
when he was yet in 
Galilee, 7 saying, The 
Son of man must be 
delivered into the 
hands of sinful men, 
and be crucified, and 
the third day rise a- 
gain. 8 And they re- 
membered his words, 
9 and returned from 
the sepulchre, and told 
ail these things unto 
the eleven, and to all 
the rest. 10 It was 
Mary Magdalene, and 
Joanna, and Mary the 
mother of James, and 
other women that were 
with them, which told 
these things unto the 
apostles. 11 And their 


AOYKAS. XXIII, XXIV. 
σινδόνι Kai ἔθηκεν Yadbro" ἐν μνήματι λαξευτῷ, οὗ 
ἴῃ 8. linen cloth and placed it in atomb hewninarock, in which 

> 5 w,? os ᾽ sll , a\1€ , τ x 
οὐκ ἦν “οὐδέπω.οὐδεὶς" κείμενος. 54 καὶ ἥμερα ἣν ὅπαρα- 
3was ‘no “one ever yet laid. And “day ‘it 7was re- 
σκευή," καὶ σάββατον ἐπέφωσκεν. 


paration, and Sabbath Was coming on. 
55 Κατακολουθήσασαι.δὲ Yai! * γυναῖκες, αἵτινες ἦσαν 
And “having ‘followed 34.180 women, who were 
συνεληλυθυῖαι δαὐτῷ" ἐκ τῆς Γαλιλαίας", ἐθεάσαντο τὸ 
come with him  outof Galilee, saw the 

~ ‘ e ? ld 4 ~~ > ~ « , 

μνημεῖον, καὶ ὡς ἐτέθη TO.cHpa.adTov. 56 ὑποστρέψασαι δὲ 
tomb, and how was laid his body. And having returned 


ἡτοίμασαν ἀρώματα Kai μύρα. Kai τὸ-μὲν σάββατον ἡσύχα- 
they prepared aromatics δη ointments, and on the sabbath remained 
σαν κατὰ τὴν ἐντολήν. 94 τῇ.δὲ μιᾷ τῶν σαβ- 
quiet, according to the commandment. But on the first [day] of the week 
βάτων ὄρθρου.“ βαθέος" “ἦλθον ἐπὶ τὸ μνῆμα," φέρουσαι ἃ 
at early dawn they came to the tomb, bringing *which 
ἡτοίμασαν ἀρώματα, “καί τινες σὺν αὐταῖς." 2 Ἐὕῦ- 
Ξ0Π6γ *had Sprepared ‘aromatics, and some(others]with them. They 


ρον δὲ τὸν λίθον ἀποκεκυλισμένον ἀπὸ τοῦ μνημείου, 8 ‘rai 
3found'and the stone rolled away from the tomb ; and 


εἰσελθοῦσαι" odby.eipoy τὸ σῶμα τοῦ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ. 4 Kai 
having entered they found not the body ofthe Lord Jesus, And 

ἐγένετο étv.rpSdvarropeicba' αὐτὰς περὶ τούτου, καὶ ἰδού, 
it came to pass as *were “perplexed ‘they about this, that behold, 
δύο ἄνδρες" ἐπέστησαν αὐταῖς ἐν icOnoeow ἀστραπτούσαις." 


two men stood by them in “garments ‘shining. 
5 ἐμφόβων δὲ γενομένων αὐτῶν καί κλινουσῶν "τὸ πρόσω- 
And filled *with *fear ?becoming they and bowing the face 


πον" εἰς τὴν γῆν, ἱεῖπον" πρὸς αὐτάς, Ti ζητεῖτε τὸν ζῶντα 
to the earth, theysaid to them, Why seekye the living 
pera τῶν νεκρῶν ; 6 ovKéoT ὧδε, ™AAX' ἠγέρθη" μνήσθητε 
with the dead ? Heisnot here, but is risen: remember 
we ἐλάλησεν ὑμῖν, ἔτι ὧν ἐν τῇ Γαλιλαίᾳ, 7 λέγων, Ore 
how he spoke to you, yet being in Galilee, saying, 
δεῖ τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου" παραδοθῆναι εἰς χεῖρας 


It behoveth the Son of man to be delivered up into hands 
ἀνθρώπων ἁμαρτωλῶν, καὶ σταυρωθῆναι, καὶ τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ 
of 7men 1sinful, and tobecrucified, and the thir day 


ἀναστῆναι. ὃ Kai ἐμνήσθησαν τῶν.ῥημάτων.αὐτοῦ" 9 καὶ 
to arise. And they remembered his words ; and 
ὑποστρέψασαι ἀπὸ TOU μνημείου ἀπήγγειλαν “ταῦτα πάντα" 
having returned from the tomb they related *these*things ‘all 
τοῖς ἕνδεκα καὶ πᾶσιν τοῖς λοιποῖς. 10 Ρήσαν.δὲ"! ἡ Μαγδαληνὴ 
tothe eleven and toall the rest. Now it was ?Magdalene 
Μαρία καὶ VIwavva' cai Μαρία τ ᾿ΙΤακώβου, καὶ ai λοιπαὶ σὺν 


‘Mary and Joanna and Mary of James, andthe rest with 
αὐταῖς. "αἱ ἔλεγον πρὸς τοὺς ἀποστόλους ταῦτα. 11 Kai 
them, who told to the apostles these things. And 


τ αὐτὸν him Lrtra. 


Σ — καὶ LTTrAW. 
© βαθέως LTTYAW. 
θοῦσαι δὲ LTT: A. 


shining raiment LTTra. 
2 Tov υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ὅτι δεῖ TIrA. 
r + ἡ the [...| LTTr[A]w. 


8 ἀπορεῖσθαι LTTrA. 


W οὐδεὶς οὐδέπω T; οὐδεὶς οὔπω LTrA. χ παρασκευῆς ΙΤΊτΑ. 

+ αἱ the Ltr. ® — αὐτῷ T[Tr]A. > + αὐτῷ him Ta. 
4 ἐπὶ τὸ μνῆμα ἦλθον 1. © — kai Tes σὺν αὐταῖς LTTrA. f εἰσελ- 
h ἄνδρες δύο GLTTrAW. i ἐσθῆτι ἀστραπτούσῃ 
| εἶπαν LTTrA. m ἀλλὰ TTrA. 


k τὰ πρόσωπα the faces TTr. 
Ρ [ἦσαν dé] Tra. 4 Ἰωάνα Tr. 


° πάντα ταῦτα 1. 
Ss — at LTTr[A]. 


XXIV. LUKE. 
ἐφάνησαν ἐνώπιον αὐτῶν ὡσεὶ λῆρος τὰἀςῤήματα 'αὐτῶν," 
appeared “before Sthem ‘like 7idle *talk words their, 


kai ἠπίστουν αὐταῖς. 12 "ὁ.δὲ Πέτρος ἀναστὰς ἔδραμεν 
and they disbelieved them. But Peter having risen up Tan 
ἐπὶ τὸ μνημεῖον, καὶ παρακύψας βλέπει τὰ ὀθόνια 
to the tomb, and having stooped down hesees_ the linen clothes 
"eeiweva μόνα" καὶ ἀπῆλθεν πρὸς.Σἑαυτὸν' θαυμάζων τὸ 


lying alone, and went away home wondering at that which 
γεγονός." 
had come to pass. 
13 Kai ἰδού, δύο ἐξ αὐτῶν Υἦσαν πορευόμενοι ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ 
And lo, two of them were going on same ‘the 
ἡμέρᾳ" εἰς κώμην ἀπέχουσαν σταδίους ἑξήκοντα ἀπὸ ἹἹερου- 
day to avillage being distant furlongs sixty from Jeru- 


σαλήμ, y ὄνομα Ἐμμαούρ" 14 καὶ αὐτοὶ ὡμίλουν πρὸς 
salem, whose name [is] Emmaus; and they wereconversing with 
ἀλλήλους περὶ πάντων τῶν συμβεβηκότων τούτων. 15 Kai 
one another about all which *had ®taken *place ‘these things. And 
ἐγένετο év.Tw-opideiv.adrove καὶ ἐσυζητεῖν," καὶ αὐτὸς "ὁ" 
it came to pass as they conversed and reasoned, that “himself 
>? ~ ? / , > ν e e ? ‘ 
Ιησοῦς ἐγγίσας συνεπορεύετο adroic’ 16 οἱ.δὲ ὀφθαλμοὶ 
1Jesus havingdrawnnear went with them ; but the eyes 
αὐτῶν ἐκρατοῦντο τοῦ μὴ ἐπιγνῶναι αὐτόν. 17 Εἶπεν. δὲ 
of them were holden [so 88] not to know him. And he said 
x > , ΄ « , < ? , \ 
πρὸς αὐτούς, Τίνες οἱ λόγοι οὗτοι ode ἀντιβάλλετε πρὸς 
to them, What words [are] these which ye exchange with 
ἀλλήλους περιπατοῦντες, Kai ἐστε σκυθρωποί ;' 
one another as ye walk, and are downcast in countenance ? 
18 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ “ὁ" gic’, & ὄνομα! Κλεόπας, εἶπεν πρὸς 
And answering the one, whose name [was] Cleopas, said to 
αὐτόν,. Σὺ μόνος παροικεῖς fév' ‘Iepoveadyp, Kai οὐκ.ἔγνως 
him, *Thou “alone ‘sojournest in Jerusalem, and hast not known 
τὰ γενόμενα iv αὐτῇ ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ταύταις ; 
the things which are come to pass in it in these days ? 
19 Kai εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Ποῖα; Οἱ-δὲ %eizov' αὐτῷ, Ta 
And he said tothem, Whatthings? Andthey said tohim, Thethings 
περὶ Ἰησοῦ τοῦ "Nafwpaiov,' ὃς ἐγένετο ἀνὴρ προφήτης, 
concerning Jesus the Nazarwan, who was &Mman a prophet, 
δυνατὸς ἐν ἔργῳ Kai‘ λόγῳ ἐναντίον τοῦ θεοῦ Kai παντὸς τοῦ 
mighty in deed διὰ word before God and all the 
λαοῦ: 20 ὕπως.τε ἔπαρέδωκαν αὐτὸν" ot ἀρχιερεῖς Kai οἱ 
people; andhow ‘delivered *up ®him ‘the ?chief *priests *and 
ἄρχοντες ἡμῶν εἰς κρίμα θανάτου, καὶ ἐσταύρωσαν αὐτόν" 
our ‘rulers to judgment ofdesath, and crucified him. 
21 ἡμεῖς. δὲ ἠλπίζομεν Ori αὐτός ἐστιν ὁ μέλλων λυτροῦσθαι 
But we were hoping he itis who is about to redeem 
τὸν Ἰσραήλ. ἀλλά.γεϊ σὺν πᾶσιν τούτοις τρίτην ταύτην 
IsraeL But then with all these things ‘third 30} 15 


237 
words seemed to them 
as idle tales, and they 
believed them ποῦ, 
12 Then arose Peter, 
and ran unto thesepul- 
chre; and stooping 
down, he beheld the 
linen clothes laid by 
themselves, and de- 
parted, wondering in 
himself at that which 
Was come to pass. 


“13 And, behold, two 
of \them went that 
samy day toa village 
called Emmaus, which 
was from Jerusalem 
about threescore fur- 
longs. 14 And they 
talked together of all 
these things which had 
happened, 15 And it 
came to pass, that, 
while they communed 
together and reasoned, 
Jesus himself drew 
near, and went with 
them, 16 But their eyes 
were holden that they 
should not know him. 
17 And he said unto 
them, What manner 
of communicationsare 
these that ye have one 
to another, as ye walk, 
and are sad? 18 And 
the one of them, whose 
name was Cleopas, an- 
swering said unto him, 
Art thou only a stran- 
ger in Jerusalem, and 
hast not known the 
things which are come 
to pass there in these 
days? 19 And he said 
unto them, What 
things? And they said 
unto him, Concerning 
Jesus of Nazareth, 
which was a prophet 
mighty in deed and 
word before God and 
all the people: 20 and 
how the chief priests 
and our rulers deliv- 
ered him to be con- 
demned to death, and 
have crucified him. 
21 But we trusted that 
it had been he which 
should have redeemed 
Israel: and beside all 
this, to day is the third 
day since these things 


ἡμέραν ἄγει ™onpepoy' ἀφ᾽ οὗ ταῦτα ἐγένετο. 22 ἀλλὰ.καὶ were done. 22 Yea, 
Sday brings ‘to-day since these thingscame to pass, And withal and certain women 
~ oP > tin, yes cow , also of our company 
γυναῖκες τινες ἐξ ἡμῶν ἐξεστησαν ἡμᾶς, γενόμεναι made us astonished, 
3women ‘certain from amongst us astonished us, aving been which were early at 
t ταῦτα these LTTrA. τ — verse 12 [L]t[Tr]. π [κείμενα μόνα] A; — κείμενα Tr. 


X αὐτὸν Tr. Υ ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἦσαν πορευόμενοι T. 


2 συνζητεῖν LTTrA. 


8. --- ὃ ΤΊΤΑ. 


> 5 καὶ ἐστάθησαν ([ ; καὶ ἐστά.] A) σκυθρωποί. (question ends at walk) And they stood down- 


cast in countenance, TTraA. 
Tra. { — ἐν (read fn) 
Κ αὐτὸν παρέδωκαν L. 


¢—outtra. 4 -Ὁ [ἐξ αὐτῶν] of them x. 
GTTrAW. & εἶπαν TTr. 
+ καὶ also LTTrA. 


bh Ναζαρηνοῦ TTrA. 
™ — σήμερον (read it brings) T[Tra]. 


ε ὀνόματι by name 
i+ [ἐν] 18 τς 


298 


the sepulchre ; 23 and 
when they found not 
his body, they came, 
saying, that they had 
also seen a vision of 
angels, which said that 
he was alive. 24 And 
certain of them which 
were with us went 
to the sepulchre, and 
found it even so as the 
women had said: but 
him they saw not. 
25 Then he said unto 
them, O fools, and slow 
of heart to believe all 
that the prophets have 
spoken: 26 ought not 
Christ to have suffered 
these things, and to 
enter into his glory? 
27 And beginning at 
Moses and all the pro- 
phets, he expounded 
unto them in all the 
seriptures the things 
concerning himself. 
28 And they drew nigh 
unto the village, whi- 
ther they went : and he 
made as though he 
would have gone fur- 
ther, 29 But they con~ 
strained him, saying, 
Abide with us: for it 
is toward evening, and 
the day is far spent. 
And he went in to 
tarry with them. 
30 And it came to pass, 
as he sat at meat with 
them, he took bread, 
and blessed it, and 
brake, and gave to 
them. 31 And their 
eyes were opened, and 
they knew him; and 
he vanished out of 
their sight. 32 And 
they said one to an- 
other, Did not our 
heart burn within us, 
while he talked with 
us by the way, and 
while he opened to us 
the scriptures? 33 And 
they rose up the same 
hour, and returned to 
Jerusalem, and found 
the eleven gathered 
together, and them 
that were with them, 
34 saying, The Lord is 
risen indeed, and hath 
appeared to Simon. 
35 And they told what 
things were done in 
the way, and how he 
was known of them in 
breaking of bread. 


AOY KA. XXIV. 


"ὄρθριαι" ἐπὶ TO μνημεῖον" 23 Kai μὴ ευροῦσαι τὸ.σῶμα.αὐτοῦ 
early to the tomb, and not having found his body 


ἦλθον, λέγουσαι Kai ὀπτασίαν ἀγγέλων ἑωρακέναι, ot λέγουσιν 


came, declaring also ἃ vision of angels to have seen, who say 
αὐτὸν ζῇν. 24 καὶ ἀπῆλθόν τινες τῶν σὺν ἡμῖν ἐπὶ τὸ 
he is living. And ‘went lsome of *those *with 5 to the 


μνημεῖον Kai εὗρον οὕτως καθὼς Kai! ai γυναῖκες εἶπον, 


tomb and found [it] so as also the women said, 
αὐτὸν.δὲ οὐκιεἶῖδον. 25 Kai αὐτὸς εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, Ὦ 
but him Ehey saw not. And he said to them, ο 
ἀνόητοι καὶ βραδεῖς τῇ τι Ὁ τοῦ πιστεύειν ἐπὶ πᾶσιν οἷς 
senseless and slow to believe in all which 
ἐλάλησαν ot προφῆται" 26 οὐχὶ ταῦτα ἔδει 

spoke the _ prophets. *Not /°these gales 1was 7it *needful *for 
παθεῖν τὸν χριστόν, καὶ εἰσελθεῖν εἰς τὴν.δόξαν. αὐτοῦ ; 
δἴο suffer “the Christ, and toenter into his glory ? 


27 Kai ἀρξάμενος ἀπὸ ῬΜωσέως" καὶ ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν προ- 
And beginning from Moses and from all the pro- 


φητῶν 4διηρμήνευενϑ αὐτοῖς ἐν πάσαις ταῖς γραφαῖς τὰ 
phets he interpreted tothem in all the ΒΟΣΙΡΟΠΤΘΕ the things 


περὶ τέἑαυτοῦ. 28 Kai ἤγγισαν sic τὴν κώμην οὗ 
coneerning himself. And they drewnear to the village where 


ἐπορεύοντο, καὶ αὐτὸς "προσεποιεῖτο" ἱποῤῥωτέρω" πορεύεσθαι. 
they were going,and he appeared “farther to *be * going. 


29 καὶ παρεβιάσαντο αὐτόν, λέγοντες, Μεῖνον μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν, ὅτι 

And ὑΠ8Υ constrained him, saying, Abide with us, for 

πρὸς ἑσπέραν ἐστίν, Kai κέκλικεν ἡ ἡμέρα. Kai εἰσῆλθεν 

towards evening itis, and has declined the day. And heenteredin 

τοῦ μεῖναι σὺν αὐτοῖς. 30 Kai ἐν. τῷ. κατακλιθῆναι 
to abide with them. as “reclined 

> 4 ᾽ ? ~ ‘ \ » Ww ἦλ , i} 

αὐτὸν μετ᾽ αὐτῶν, λαβὼν τὸν ἄρτον “εὐλόγησεν, 

(at 401] *he with them, havingtaken the bread he blessed, 

kai κλάσας ἐπεδίδου αὐτοῖς. 81 abradydé διηνοίχθησαν οἱ 
and having broken he ΕΘ [10] to them. And their 2were “open 

ὀφθαλμοί καὶ ἐπέγνωσαν αὐτόν" Kai αὐτὸς ἄφαντος ἐγένετο 
15:78 and they knew him. And he disappeared 


an αὐτῶν. 32 Kai *eizor' πρὸς ἀλλήλους, Οὐχὶ ἡ καρδία 
from them. And they said to one another, 7Not ga 


ἡμῶν καιομένη ἦν γὲν nutv' ὡς ἐλάλει ἡμῖν ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ, 
Sour *burning ‘was ἢ us as he was speaking tous in Ae way, 
“kai ὡς διήνοιγεν ἡμῖν τὰς γραφάς; 33 Kai ἀναστάντες 
and ashe wasopening tous the scriptures? And rising up 


αὐτῇ.τῃῇ ὥρᾳ ὑπέστρεψαν εἰς ἹΙἹερουσαλήμ, καὶ εὗρον *ovyn- 
the same hour they. returned to Jerusalem, and they found gathered 


θροισμένους" τοὺς ἕνδεκα Kai τοὺς σὺν αὐτοῖς, 34 λέγοντας, 


ἐγένετο 
And it came to pass 


ial Gi the eleven and those with them, saying, 

“Ores? ἠγέρθη ὁ κύριος ὄντως, καὶ ὥφθη Σίμωνι. 35 Καὶ 
3Js*risen ‘the *Lord indeed, and appeared to Simon. And 

αὐτοὶ ἐξηγοῦντο τὰ ἐν τῷ ὁδῷ, Kai ὡς ἐγνώσθη αὐτοῖς 


they related thethings in the way, 


ἐν τῇ κλάσει TOU ἄρτου. 
in the breaking of the bread. 


and how he was known to them 


2 OpOpivar LTTrAW. 
τ αὑτοῦ EG 
v + ἤδη already [L]TTra. 
8 ἡθροισμένους gathered LTTrA. 


μήνευσεν TTrA. 


LTTra. 


° — καὶ LTrA., Ρ Μωΐύσεως͵ LTTraW. 
; αὐτοῦ LTr. 


* ηὐλόγησεν L. 


q διερμήνευεν L; διερ- 
5 προσεποιήσατο LTTrA. ξ ποῤῥώτερον LTrA. 

χ εἶπαν TTrA. Υ [ἐν ἡμῖν] Tra. 2 — καὶ 
Ὁ ὄντως ἠγέρθη ὃ κύριος LTTYA. 


XXIV. LUKE. 


36 Ταῦτα.δὲ αὐτῶν.λαλούντων, αὐτὸς “ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς" ἔστη ἐν 
And these aes as they were telling, “himself 1Jesus stood in 


μέσῳ αὐτῶν “καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, Εἰρήνη ὑμῖν." ὁ 87 Πτοηθέντες 


“midst ee and says tothem, Peace to you. $Terrified 
δὲ Kai οβοι γενόμενοι ἐδόκουν πνεῦμα θεωρεῖν. 
‘but ‘and aaa ith 7fear “being any ghonght aspirit they beheld. 


38 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Ti τεταραγμένοι ἐστέ; καὶ ‘vari δια- 
And he εαἰᾶ tothem, Why troubled are ye? and wherefore *rea- 


λογισμοὶ ἀναβαίνουσιν ἐν 8raic καρδίαις" ὑμῶν ; 989 ἴδετε 

scnings 1do come up in lyour ? see 

τὰς χεῖράς. μου καὶ τοὺς. πόδας. μου, ὅτι "αὐτὸς ἐγώ εἰμι." 
my hands and my feet, that 388 ἘΠ ΞΆ τη. 


ψηλαφήσατέ με καὶ ἴδετε" ὅτι πνεῦμα igapxa' καὶ ὀστέα οὐκ 
Handle me and 560, for a spirit fiesh and bones “ποῦ 
ἔχει, ἔσθ ἐμὲ θεωρεῖτε ἔχοντα. 40 ‘Kai τοῦτο εἰπὼν: 
sme ‘ye 868 having. And this having said 

ἐπέδειξεν! αὐτοῖς τὰς χεῖρας καὶ τοὺς πόδας." 41 ἔτι.δὲ 
he shewed to them [his] hands and feet But yet 


ἀπιστούὐντων.αὐτῶν πἀπὸ τῆς χαρᾶς καὶ θαυμαζόντων," εἶπεν 


whilethey weredisbelieving for joy and were wondering, hesaid 
αὐτοῖς, Ἔχετε τι βρώσιμον ἐνθάδε; 42 Οἱ. δὲ ἐπέδωκαν 
to et, Have ye angtlting eatable here ? And they gave 


αὐτῷ ἰχθύος ὀπτοῦ μέρος "Kai ἀπὸ μελισσίου.κηρίου." 43 καὶ 


to him ἼἊΣ 38. ‘fish “broiled re and of a honeycomb. And 
λαβὼν ἐνώπιον αὐτῶν ἔφαγεν. 44 Εἶπεν. δὲ “αὐτοῖς," 
naving taken Gt) before *them *he 2576. And he said to = 


Οὗτοι οἱ AdyouP Ode ἐλάλησα πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἔτι ὧν σὺν ὑμῖν, 
These [816] the words which I spoke to you yet being with you, 


ore δεῖ πληρωθῆναι πάντα τὰ BA |e mde ἐν τῷ νόμῳ 
that must be fulfilled all things that have m written in the law 


«“Μωσέως" καὶ προφήταις καὶ ψαλμοῖς περὶ ἐμοῦ. 45 ἘΠῚ 
of Moses and prophets and psalms concerning me, 


διήνοιξεν αὐτῶν Tov νοῦν τοῦ συνιέναι τὰς πόρεν 
he epee their mudersseriteny, to understand the Ξοσέρυνεεοις 


46 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Ὅτι οὕτως γέγραπται, Skai οὕτως 
and said  tothem, Thus it has been written, and thus 


ἔδει' παθεῖν τὸν χριστὸν καὶ ἀναστῆναι ἐκ νεκρῶν 
it behoved *to*suffer'the *Christ δὰ  torise from ἜΞΕΙΣ {the] dead 


τῷ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ, 47 καὶ κηρυχθῆναι ἐπὶ τῷ.ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ 
the third day; and should be proclatoed in his name 


μετάνοιαν ‘kai! ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν εἰς πάντα τὰ ἔθνη, "ἀρξά- 
repentance and remission of sins to all nations, begin- 


μενον ἀπὸ Ἱερουσαλήμ. 48 eee 0 éore' μάρτυρες τούτων. 
ning at erusalem., land are witnesses Se 


49 “καὶ ἰδού, ἐγὼ" "ἀποστέλλω" τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν τοῦ πατρός 


And lo, I send the promise of 7Father 
pou ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς" ὑμεῖς.δὲ καθίσατε ἐν τῇ πόλει Ἱερουσαλὴμ! 
my upon you; but *ye ‘remain in the city ot Jerusalem 
ἕως.οὗ ἐνδύσησθε δύναμιν ἐξ ὕψους." 

till yebeclothed with power from onhigh. 


© — 6’IngotsGLTTra. ὁ -- καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, Εἰρήνη ὑμῖν τ. 
Iam [he], fear not L fédare tra, 8 τῇ καρδίᾳ heart LTTra. 
i σάρκας 1. — verse 40 1{1τ]. 1 ἔδειξεν Ltr; dan Keifer A. 
τῆς χαρᾶς L. ἃ --- καὶ ἀπὸ μελισσίου κηρίου LT[Tra]. 
my words) [L]TTra. 4 Mwicéws LTTraW. 
SeistoT. ἃ ἀρξάμενοι TTrA. 

τ ἐξαποστέλλω send out TTra. 


τ + [rots] the tr. 


Υ͂ -- Ἱερουσαλήμ, GLTTrA. 


36 And as they thus 
spake, Jesus himself 
stood in the midst of 
them, and saith unto 
them, Peace be unto 
you. 37 But they were 
terrified and afiright- 
ed, and supposed that 
they had seen a spirit. 
38 And he said unto 
them, Why are ye 
troubled? and why do 
thoughts arise in your 
hearts? 39 Behold my 
hands and my feet, 
that it is I myself: 
handle me, and see; 
for a spirit hath not 
flesh and bones, as ye 
see me have. 40 And 
when he had thus spo- 
Ken, he shewed them 
his hands and his feet. 
41 And while they yet 
believed not for joy, 
and wondered, he said 
unto them, Have ye 
here any meat? 42 And 
they gave him a piece 
of a broiled fish, and 
of 80 honey comb. 
43 And he took it, and 
did eat before them. 
44 And ht said unto 
them, These are the 
words which I spake 
unto you, while I was 
yet with you, that all 
things must be ful- 
filed. which were 
written in the law of 
Moses, and in the pro- 
phets, and im the 

᾿ concerning 
me. 45 Then opened he 
their understanding, 
that they might under- 
stand the scriptures, 
46 and said unto the 
Thus it is written, an 
thus it behoved Christ 
to suffer, and to rise 
from the dead the 
third day : 47 and that 
repentance and remis- 
sion of sins should be 
preached in his name 
among all nations, be- 
ginning at J erusalem. 
48 And ye are wit- 
nesses of these things. 
49 And, behold, I send 
the promise of my Fa- 
ther upon you: but 
tarry ye in the city of 
Jerusalem, until ye be 
endued with power 
from on high. 


e+ [ἐγώ͵ εἰμι, μὴ φοβεῖσθε) 

Deyo εἰμι αὐτός LTTrA. 
™ καὶ θαυμαζόντων ἀπὸ 
ο πρὸς αὐτούς TTra. 


P + pov (read 


5 — καὶ οὕτως ἔδει [L]TTra. 
¥ — δέ ἐστε ([ἐστε] tr) (read [are]) TTra. 
τ ἐξ ὕψους δύναμιν TTra. 


* κἀγὼ and 11. 


240 


50 And he led them 
out as far as to Beth- 
any, and he lifted up 
his hands, and blessed 
them. 51 And it came 
to pass, while he bless- 
ed them, he was parted 
from them, and car- 
ried up into heaven, 
52 And they worship- 
ped him, and returned 
to Jerusalem with 
great joy: 53 and were 
continually in the 
temple, praising and 
blessing God. Amen. 


I Q-A IN IN HS. 

50 ᾿Ἐξήγαγεν.δὲ αὐτοὺς Ew! ἕως sic! Βηθανίαν, καὶ 
And he led them out asfaras to Bethany, and 

ἐπάρας Tac.xéipac.avrou εὐλόγησεν αὐτούς. 51 Kai 
having lifted up his hands he blessed them, And 
ἐγένετο ἐν.τῷ.εὐλογεῖν αὐτὸν αὐτοὺς διέστη ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν 

it came to pass as *was “blessing ‘he them hewasseparatedfrom them 
“καὶ ἀνεφέρετο εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν." 52 Kai αὐτοὶ “προσκυνή- 
and wascarriedupinto the heaven. And they having wor- 
σαντες αὐτὸν" ὑπέστρεψαν εἰς ἹΙερουσαλὴμ μετὰ χαρᾶς peya- 
shipped him returned to Jerusalem with “joy ‘great, 
Ane) 53 καὶ ἦσαν “διαπαντὸς" ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ, ἰαἰνοῦντες Kai 


I. 


and were continually in the temple, praising and 
εὐλογοῦντες" τὸν θεόν. 8 Apuny.' 
blessing God. Amen. 
hT6 κατὰ Λουκᾶν εὐαγγέλιον." 
The “according*to ‘Luke ‘glad ?tidings.. 
'TO KATA IQANNHN ATION ΕΥ̓ΑΓΓΈΛΙΟΝ." 


THE *ACCORDING *TO 


IN the beginning was 
the Word, and the 
Word was with God, 
andthe Word was God. 
2 The same was in the 
beginning with God. 
3 All things were made 
by him; and without 
him was not any thing 
made that was made, 
4 In him was life ; and 
the life was the light 
of men. 5 And the light 
shineth in darkness ; 
and the darkness com- 
prehended it not. 


6 There was a man 
sent from God, whose 
name was John. 7 The 
same came for a wit- 
ness, to bear witness 
of the Light, that all 
men through him 
might believe. 8 He 
was not that Light, 
but was sent to bear 
witness of that Light. 
9 That was the true 
Light, which lighteth 
every manthat cometh 
into the world. 10 He 
was in the world, and 
the world was made 
by him, and the world 
knew him not. 11 Me 
came unto his own, 
and his own received 
him not. 12 But as 
many as received him, 
to them gave he power 


°JOHN ‘HOLY *GLAD *TIDINGS. 


"EN ἀρχῇ ἦν ὁ λόγος, Kai ὁ λόγος HY πρὸς τὸν θεόν 
ρΡχΧΏ ἢ γος, Kat γος ἣν moog T ᾿ 
In [86] beginning was the Word, andthe Word was with God, 
καὶ θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος. 2 οὗτος ἦν ἐν ἀρχῇ πρὸς τὸν 
and *God *was 'the *Word. He _ was in [the] beginning with 
θεόν. 8 Πάντα δι αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο, καὶ χωρὶς αὐτοῦ 
God. All things through him cameintobeing, and without him 
ἐγένετο οὐδὲ Key ὃ γέγονεν. 4 ἐν!" αὐτῷ ζωὴ 
came into being not even one[thing]whichhascomeintobeing. In him “116 
liv," καὶ ἡ ζωὴ ἦν τὸ φῶς τῶν avOpwrwy 5 Kai TO φῶς ἐν 
ἔγγαβ, and the life was the light of men, And the light in 
τῇ σκοτίᾳ φαίνει, Kai ἡ σκοτία αὐτὸ οὐ.κατέλαβεν. 
the darkmess appears, and the darkness 7it ‘apprehended not. 
6 Ἐγένετο ἄνθρωπος ἀπεσταλμένος παρὰ θεοῦ, ὄνομα 
There was aman sent from God, *name 
αὐτῷ "" Ἰωάννης." 7 οὗτος ἦλθεν εἰς μαρτυρίαν, ἵνα μαρτυ- 
this John. He came for a witness, that he might 
ρήσῃ περὶ τοῦ φωτός, ἵνα πάντες πιστεύσωσιν δι᾿ αὐτοῦ. 
witness concerning the light, that all might believe through him. 
8 οὐκιἦν ἐκεῖνος TO φῶς, GAN ἵνα μαρτυρήσῃ περὶ τοῦ 
27Was*not ‘the the light, but that he might witness concerning the 
φωτός. 9 ἦν τὸ ps TO ἀληθινόν ὃ φωτίζει πάντα 
light. *Was ‘the “light *true that which lightens every 
ἄνθρωπον ἐρχόμενον εἰς τὸν κόσμον. 10 ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ ἦν, 
man coming into the world. In the world he was, 
καὶ ὁ κόσμος δι αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο, Kai ὃ κόσμος αὐτὸν 
and the world through him cameintobeing, and the world him 
? » 2 LW με ‘ cw ᾽ 5 > a 
ovkéyyw. 11 εἰς τὰ. ἴδια ἦλθεν, καὶ οἱ ἴδιοι αὐτὸν οὐ-παρέλα- 
knew not. To hisown hecame, and hisown him received not ; 
Bov? 12 de0r.d& ἔλαβον" αὐτὸν ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ἐξουσίαν 
but as many 88 received him he gave tothem authority 


a — ἔξω [u}rrr[a]. 
σαντες αὐτόν T. 


& -- ͵π᾽ςΑμήν @[L]TTra. 
i— ἅγιον E; Εὐαγγέλιον κατὰ ᾿Ιωάννην (Ἰωάνην tr) GLTrAW ; κατὰ Ἰωάννην T. 

γέγονεν ἐν (read Geek 

2 ἔλαβαν Tr. 


τὼ ᾿Ιωάνης Tr 


ε διὰ παντὸς LA. 


ς -- καὶ ἀνεφέρετο εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν τ. 4— προσκυνή- 
[αἰνοῦντες καὶ) εὐλογοῦντες TrA; --- καὶ εὐλογοῦντες 1. 
ἔλιον EGLTW. 

k ἕν. ὃ 


! ἐστιν is LE. 


Ὁ πρὸς LTTrA. 
h Κατὰ Λουκᾶν Tra ; — Τὸ κατὰ Λουκᾶν eva: 


thing]. That which was in him was life) rr. 


I. JOHN. 
τέκνα θεοῦ γενέσθαι, τοῖς πιστεύουσιν εἰς τὸ ὄνομα 
ehildren of God to be, to those that believe on "name 


αὐτοῦ" 13 ot οὐκ ἐξ αἱμάτων οὐδὲ ἐκ θελήματος σαρκὸς οὐδὲ 


this ; who not of bloods nor of will of flesh nor 
ἐκ ἐπε τς, ἀνδρὸς ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ θεοῦ ἐγεννήθησαν. 
οἵ ofman but of God were born. 


14 Kai ὁ λόγος σὰρξ ἐγένετο, Kai ἐσκήνωσεν ἐν ἡμῖν, 
And the Word fiesh became, and  tabernacled among us, 


καὶ ἐθεασάμεθα τὴν. δόξαν.αὐτοῦ, δόξαν ὡς μονογενοῦς παρὰ 
(and we discerned his glory, aglory as of anonly-begotten with 


πατρός, πλήρης χάριτος Kai ἀληθείας. 15° ἜΘΟΥΣ. μαρτυρεῖ 
John 


afather), full of Erne and truth. witnesses 
περὶ αὐτοῦ, Kai κέκραγεν, λέγων, Οὗτος ἦν ὃν εἶπον, 
concerning him, and cried, saying, This was he of whom I said, 
Ὁ ὀπίσω pou ἐρχόμενος, ἔμπροσθέν μου γέγονεν" Ort 
He who after me comes, “precedence “of *me *has, for 
πρῶτός μου ἦν. 16 PKai' ἐκ τοῦ.πληρώματος.αὐτοῦ ἡμεῖς 
before me he was. And of his fulness we 


πάντες ἐλάβομεν, καὶ χάριν ἀντὶ χάριτος" 17 ὕτι ὁ νόμος 
all received, and grace upon grace, For the law 
διὰ IMwoéwe'! ἐδόθη, ἡ χάρις Kai ἡ ἀλήθεια διὰ Ἰησοῦ 

through Moses wasgiven; the grace andthe truth through Jesus 


χριστοῦ ἐγένετο. 18 θεὸν οὐδεὶς ἑώρακεν πώποτε τὸ μονο- 
Christ came, °God ‘noone “has ‘seen at any ec the only- 


γενὴς Sutdc,' ὁ ὧν εἰς τὸν κόλπον τοῦ πατρός, ἐκεῖνος ἐξη- 
ἐποίσει Son, whois in the bosom ofthe Father, he de- 


ynoaro. 19 Kai αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ μαρτυρία τοῦ ᾿Τωάννου," 
clared [him]. And this is the witness of John, 
ὅτε ἀπέστειλαν ot ᾿Ιουδαῖοι ἐξ Ἱεροσολύμων ἱερεῖς Kai 
when ssent *the *Jews from Jerusalem priests and 
*Aevirac,' ἵνα ἐρωτήσωσιν αὐτόν, Σὺ τίς εἶ; 20 Kai 
Levites, that they en ask him, Thou whoart thou? And 


ὡμολόγησεν καὶ οὐκ.ἠρνήσατο, καὶ ὡμολόγησεν, Ὅτι *oUK εἰμὶ 
he Pee and denied not, and confessed, “Not *am 


ἐγώ ὁ χριστός. 21 Καὶ ἠρώτησαν αὐτόν, YTi οὖν ; ἩἩλίας 
the Christ. And they asked him, Whatthen? Elias 


el ov'; *Kai' λέγει, Οὐκ.εἰμί. ‘O προφήτης εἶ σύ; Kai 
art thou? And hesays, LIamnot. The prophet art thou? And 
ἀπεκρίθη, Ob. 22 *Elzov' Yoty' αὐτῷ, Tic εἴ; ἵνα ἀπό- 
he answered, No. They said therefore to him, Who art thou? that an 
κρισιν δῶμεν τοῖς πέμψασιν ἡμᾶς: τί λέγεις περὶ 
answer we may give to those who sent what sayest thou about 
σεαυτοῦ; 23 "Edn, Ἐγώ φωνὴ ἀδοῦτος ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ, 


thyself? He said, 1 [am] a voice crying in the ern e=e 
Εὐθύνατε τὴν ὁδὸν κυρίου: καθὼς εἶπεν Ἡσαΐας ὁ προ- 


Make straight the way of [the] Lord, as said Esaias the pro- 
7 ‘ ec, ll ? , Sx 2 ar 

φήητης. 24 Kai “οἱ ἀπεσταλμένοι ἦσαν ἐκ τῶν Φαρι- 

phet. And those who hadbeensent werefromamong the  Phari- 


σαίων. 25 καὶ ἠρώτησαν αὐτὸν καὶ “elrov' αὐτῷ, Ti οὖν 
sees, And _ they asked him and said tohim, Why then 


βαπτίζεις, εἰ σὺ οὐκ.εῖ ὁ χριστός, “οὔτε! “Hriac,' “οὔτε" 


241 


to become the sons of 
God, even to them that 
believe on his name: 
13 which were born, 
not of blood, nor of 
the will of the flesh, 
nor of the will of man, 
but of God. 


14 And the Word was 
made flesh, and dwelt 
among us, (and we be- 
held his glory, the 
glory as of the only 
begotten of the Fa- 
ther,) full of grace 
and truth. 15 John 
bare witness of him, 
and cried, saying, This 
was he of whom [ 
spake, He that cometh 
after me is preferred 
before me: for he was 
before me. 16 And of 
his fulness have all we 
received, and grace for 
grace. 17 For the law 
was given by Moses, 
but grace and truth 
came by Jesus Christ. 
18 No man hath seen 
God at any time; the 
only begotten Son, 
which is in the bosom 
of the Father, he hath 
declared him. 19 And 
this is the record of 
John, when the Jews 
sent priests and Le- 
vites from Jerusalem 
to ask him, Who art 
thou? 20 And he con- 
fessed, and denied not; 
but confessed, I am 
not the Christ. 21 And 
they asked him, What 
then? Art thou Elias? 
And he saith, Iam not. 
Art thou that prophet? 
And he answered, No, 
22 Thensaid they unto 
him, Who art thou? 
that we may give an 
answer to them that 
sent us. What sayest 
thou of thyself? 23 He 
said, I am the voice of 
one crying in the wil- 
derness, Make straight 
the way of the Lord, 
as said the prophet 
Esaias. 24 And they 
which were sent were 
of the Pharisees. 
25 And they asked him, 
and said unto him, 
Why baptizest thou 
then, if thou be not 
that Christ, nor Elias, 


baptizest thou, if thou art not the Christ, nor Elias, nor neither that prophet ? 

οΙωάνης fr. P ὅτι for GLTTrA. a Μωύσέως LTTrAW. —06(read[the]) Tr. 5 θεὸς 
God τε. τ Ἰωάνου Tr. Υ + πρὸς αὐτὸν to him Ltra. w τ Αεναίτας TTrA. x ἐγὼ οὐκ 
εἰμὶ ταττὰ. Υ τί οὖν; Ἡλείας ef ; τι τί οὖν; σὺ Ἡλίας el; Tr: σὺ οὖν τί; Ἡλίας εἴ; A. 
t— καὶ τ. 8 εἶπαν LTTrA, b’ — ody L. ς — οἱ (read [those who ]) rrra. 4 εἶπαν 
LYTrA. ε οὐδὲ τττὰ. ΓἩλείας 1. 


R 


242 


26 John answered 
them, saying, I bap- 
tize with water: but 
there standeth one a- 
mong you, whom ye 
know not; 27 he it is, 
who coming after me 
is preferred before me, 
whose shoe’s latchet I 
am not worthy to un- 
loose. 28 These things 
were done in Beth- 
abara beyond Jordan, 
where John was bap- 
tizing. 


29 The next day 
John seeth Jesus com- 
ing unto him, and 
saith, Behold the Lamb 
of God, which taketh 
away the sin of the 
world. 30 This is he 
of whom I said, After 
me cometh a man 
which is preferred be- 
fore me: for he was 
before me. 31 And I 
knew him not: but 
that he should be made 
manifest to Israel, 
therefore am I come 
baptizing with water. 
32 And John bare re- 
cord, saying, I saw the 
Spirit descending from 
heaven likea dove, and 
it abode upon him. 
33 And I knew him 
not: but he that sent 
me to baptize with 
water, the same said 
unto me, Upon whom 
thou shalt see the Spi- 
rit descending, and re- 
maining on him, the 
same is he which bap- 
tizeth with the Holy 
Ghost. 34 And I saw, 
and bare record that 
this is the Son of God. 


35 Again the next 
day after John stood, 
and two of his disci- 
ples; 36 and looking 
upon Jesus as he walk- 
ed, he saith, Behold 
the Lamb of God! 
37 And the two disci- 
ples heard him speak, 
and they followed Je- 


& ᾿Ιωάνης Tr. 


τῷ — ὃς ἔμπροσθέν μου γέγονεν G[L]TTrA. 

θαβαρᾷ E; Βηθανίᾳ Bethany Gurtraw. 

(read he sees) GLTTrAW. 

Υ + [0 αἴρων τὴν ἁμαρτίαν τοῦ κόσμου] who takes away the sin of the world 1, 
2 οἱ δύο μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ τ. 


LTrA. 
= - καὶ Τ. 


ILQANN HES. [. 
ὁ προφήτης ; 26 ᾿Απεκρίθη αὐτοῖς ὁ Iwavvyc' λέγων, ᾿Εγὼ 
the prophet? 2Answered *them 1John saying, I 
B , ? ὕδ - , ΒδὲΙ ς ~ itt Il a « - 
απτίζω €V VOATEL μέσος. υμων ἙσΤΉΚεΨν ον πυμεις 
baptize with water; butin([the] midst οὗ you stands (one] whom ye 
odk.otdare’ 27 Καὐτός ἐστιν" 16" ὀπίσω pov ἐρχόμενος, "πιὃς 
know not; he itis who after me comes, who 
a” θέ “2 ell τ n2 ‘ Il ? > 4 Oo » ΠΣ 
ἔμπροσθεν μου yeyovev οὐ πεγωΐ οὐκ εἰμὶ 5 ἄξιος ἵνα 
?precedence “of*me ‘has, of whom [1 7not ‘am worthy that 
λύσω αὐτοῦ τὸν ἱμάντα τοῦ ὑποδήματος. 28 Ταῦτα ἐν 
Ι should loose οὗ him the thong ofthe sandal. These things in 
ΡΒηθαβαρᾶ" ἐγένετο πέραν τοῦ ᾿Ιορδάνου, ὕπου ἦν «τ lway= 
Bethabara took place across the Jordan, where 7was ‘John 
νης" βαπτίζων. 
baptizing. 
29 Τῇ ἐπαύριον βλέπει "ὁ ᾿Ιωάννης" τὸν ‘Inoovy ἐρχόμενον 
On the morrow 2gees 1John Jesus coming 
4A > ’ 4 2 a” « ᾽ A ~ ~ € ” 
πρὸς αὐτόν, Kai λέγει, “Ide ὁ Hae τοῦ θεοῦ, ὁ αἴρων 
to him, and says, Behold the Lamb of God, who takesaway 
THY ἁμαρτίαν τοῦ κόσμου. 30 οὗτός ἐστιν ‘zepi' οὗ ἐγὼ 
the sin ofthe world. He itis concerning whom [ 
elrov, ᾿᾽Οπίσω μου ἔρχεται ἀνήρ, ὃς ἔμπροσθέν μου γ γεν; 
said, After me comes aman, who “precedence *of*me ‘has, 
ε --»ὕὔ τ ? ‘ > a ey hoa ᾽ 2 ἡ 
ὅτι πρῶτός μου ἦν. 31 κἀγὼ οὐκιἤδειν αὐτόν" ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα 


because before me he was. AndI knew not him ; but that 
~ ~? ἐν, ‘ — ἦλθ ? ‘ > v. “ἢ 
φανερωθῇ τῷ Ἰσραήλ, διὰ τοῦτο ἦλθον ἐγὼ ἐν τῷ 
he might be manifested to Israel, therefore came I with 


ὕδατι βαπτίζων. 32 Kui ἐμαρτύρησεν "Ἰωάννης" λέγων, Ὅτι 
water baptizing. And “bore “witness *John saying, 
τεθέαμαι τὸ πνεῦμα καταβαῖνον *wori' περιστερὰν ἐξ οὐ- 
I have beheld the Spirit descending as a dove out of hea- 
~ 7 ? 7 γ ΄ 7 ‘ ᾽ » > ἜΣ 2 ? 
ρανοῦ, καὶ ἔμεινεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτόν. 33 κἀγὼ οὐκιῴδειν αὐτόν" ἀλλ 
ven, and it abode upon him. AndI kmewnot him; but 
ὁ πέμψας pe βαπτίζειν ἐν ὕδατι, ἐκεῖνός μοι εἶπεν, Ed’ 
hewho sent me tobaptize with water, he tome said, Upon 
ὃν dy ἴδῃς τὸ πνεῦμα καταβαῖνον καὶ μένον ἐπ᾽ 
whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on 
αὐτόν, οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ βαπτίζων ἐν πνεύματι ἁγίῳ. 
him, he itis who  baptizes with {the} Spirit ‘Holy. 
34 κἀγὼ ἑώρακα, Kai μεμαρτύρηκα ὅτι οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ υἱὸς 
AndI havyeseen, and haveborne witness that this is the Son 
τοῦ θεοῦ. 
of God. 
35 Τῇ ἐπαύριον πάλιν x6" ᾿Ἰωάννης," καὶ ἐκ 
On the morrow again 1John, and “οὗ 
τῶν. μαθητῶν αὐτοῦ δύο. 36 καὶ ἐμβλέψας τῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ περιπα- 
*his *disciples ‘two. And looking at Jesus walk- 
τοῦντι, λέγει, Ἴδε ὁ ἀμνὸς τοῦ θεοῦῦ. 37 *Kai' ἤκουσαν 


εἱστήκει 
was *standing 


ing, he says, Behold the Lamb of God ! And *heard 
δαὐτοῦ οἱ δύο μαθηταὶ" λαλοῦντος, Kai ἠκολούθησαν τῷ 
Shim 'the *two “disciples speaking, and followed 
h— δὲ Ῥαῦ Tira. ἱστήκει Tira. * — αὐτός ἐστιν G[L}ttra. [ὃ] Tra. 
n — ἐγὼ [L]rTra. . 9. Ὁ ἐγὼ 1 1{τ|]Δ, P By- 
4 τ ὃ Lrtr[A]. τ Ἰωάνης Tr. 8 — ὁ Ἰωάννης 
t ὑπὲρ LITrA. ¥ —7@ LTTr[A]. Ἢ ὡς GLTTrAW. χ.-- ὁ 


I. JOHN. 
Ἰησοῦ. 38 στραφεὶς “δὲ! ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, καὶ θεασάμενος αὐτοὺς 
Jesus, *Having *turned *but ?Jesus, and beheld them 


ἀκολουθοῦντας, λέγει αὐτοῖς. 89 Ti ζητεῖτε; Οἱ. δὲ *eizrov' 


following, says tothem, What seek ye? And they said 
αὐτῷ, “Ῥαββί." ὃ λέγεται ἱἑρμηνευόμενον" διδάσκαλε, ποῦ 
to nee, Rabbi, which istosay being pecsEted Teacher, where 


μένεις; 40 Λέγει αὐτοῖς, ἼἜρχεσθε καὶ Sidere." ἬΛλθον" 
abidest thou ? He says to them, Come and see. They went 


‘kai Ἐεῖδον᾽ ποῦ péver’ καὶ παρ᾽ αὐτῷ ἔμειναν τὴν ἡμέραν 


and saw where heabides; and with him _ they abode ΞΔ 
ἐκεί ὥρα ἰδὲ! ἦν ὡς δεκάτη. 41 “Hy™ ᾿Ανδρέας 
‘that. (?The]*hour‘now was about (the] tenth. ™Was 1 Andrew 


ὁ ἀδελφὸς Σίμωνος Πέτρου εἷς ἐκ τῶν δύο τῶν ἀκουσάντων 
the “brother *of*®Simon ‘Peter one of the two who heard 


παρὰ "Ἰωάννου," καὶ ἀκολουθησάντων αὐτῷ. 42 εὑρίσκει 
him. 


[this] from John, and followed *Finds 
οὗτος “πρῶτος" τὸν ἀδελφὸν τὸν. ἴδιον Σίμωνα, καὶ λέγει 
the *first ®prother *his °own Simon, and says 


αὐτῷ, Ἑὑρήκαμεν τὸν μεσσίαν, 6 ἐστιν μεθερμηνευόμενον 


tohim, We have found the aenias, which is being interpreted 
Po! χριστός. 48 “καὶ! ἤγαγεν αὐτὸν πρὸς τὸν Ἰησοῦν. 
the Christ. And he led him to Jesus. 


ἐμβλέψας. "δὲ αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς εἶπεν, Σὺ εἶ Σίμων ὁ υἱὸς 
And looking at him Jesus said, Thou art Simon the son 


Ἰωνᾶ" ob κληθήσῃ Κηφᾶς, ὃ ἑρμηνεύεται Πέτρος. 
of Jonas; thou shalt be called Cephas, which isinterpreted Stone. 
44 Ty ἐπαύριον ἠθέλησεν ‘do Ἰησοῦς" ἐξελθεῖν εἰς τὴν 
Onthe morrow 7desired + Jesus to go forth into 


Γαλιλαίαν" καὶ εὑρίσκει Φίλιππον καὶ λέγει αὐτῷ", ᾿Ακολούθει 
Galilee, and he finds Philip and says to him, Follow 


po. 45 “Hy.dé ὁ Φίλιτπος ἀπὸ Βηθσαϊδά, ἐκ τῆς πόλεως 
me. Now *was *Philip from Bethsaida, of the city 


᾿Ανδρέου καὶ Πέτρου. 46 Εὑρίσκει Φίλιππος τὸν Ναθαναὴλ 


of Andrew and Peter. ?Finds *Philip Nathanael 

\ Ne > ~ WM ll 
καὶ λέγει αὐτῷ, Ὃν ἔγραψεν wong! ἐν τῷ νόμῳ καὶ 
and says ἴο him, So whom *wrote*of ‘Moses in the law and 


ol προφῆται, εὑρήκαμεν, Ιησοῦν "τὸν" υἱὸν τοῦ Ἰωσὴφ τὸν 


the prophets, wehavefound, Jesus the son of Joseph who 
ἀπὸ ΥΝαζαρέτ." 47 τΚαὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ Ναθαναήλ, Ἔκ 
(is) from Nazareth. : And ?said *to*him *Nathanael, Out of 
YNalapér' δύναταί τι ἀγαθὸν εἶναι; Λέγει αὐτῷ ὃ Φίλιππος, 
Nazareth can anygoodthing be? ?Says “to *him ee 
Ἔρχου καὶ ide. 48 Eldey od! Ἰησοῦς τὸν Ναθαναὴλ ἐρχόμενον 
Come and see. 7Saw + Jesus Nathanael coming 
πρὸς αὐτόν, καὶ λέγει περὶ αὐτοῦ, “Ide ἀληθῶς “"ἸἼσραηλ- 
to him, and says COnBEERINS him, Behold truly an Israel- 


ίτης," ἐν ᾧ δόλος οὐκ.ἔστιν. 49 Λέγει αὐτῷ Ναθαναήλ, 
ite, in whom guile is not. "Says *to*him ‘Nathanael, 


Πόθεν pe γινώσκεις; ᾿Απεκρίθη 26! Ἰησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, 
Whence me knowest thou? 7Answered *Jesus and said tohim, 


242 


sus. 38 Then Jesus 
turned, and saw them 
following, and saith 
unto them, What seek 
ye? They said unto 
him, Rabbi, (which is 
to say, being inter- 
preted, Master.) where 
dwellest thou? 39 He 
saith unto them, Come 
and see. They came 
and saw where he 
dwelt, and abode with 
him that day: for it 
was about the tenth 
hour. 40 One of the 
two which heard John 
speak, and foilowed 
him, was Andrew, Si- 
mon Peter’s brother. 
41 He first findeth his 
own brother Simon, 
and saith unto him, 
We have found the 
Messias, which is, be- 
ing interpreted, the 
Christ. 42 And he 
brought him to Jesus, 
And when Jesus be- 
held him, hesaid, Thou 
art Simon the son of 
Jona: thou shalt be 
called Cephas, which 
is by interpretation, A 
stone. 


43 The day following 
Jesus would go forth 
into Galilee, and find- 
eth Philip, and saith 
unto him, Follow me. 
44 Now Philip was of 
Bethsaida, the city of 
Andrew and Peter. 
45 Philip findeth Na- 
thanael, and _ saith 
unto him, We have 
found him, of whom 
Moses in the law, and 
the prophets, did write, 
Jesus of Nazareth, the 
son of Joseph. 46 And 
Nathanael said unte 
him, Can there any 
good thing come out 
of Nazareth? Philip 
saith unto him, Come 
and see. 47 Jesus saw 
Nathanael coming to 
him, and saith of him, 
Behold an Israelite in- 
deed, in whom is no 
guile! 48 Nathanael 
saith unto him, Whence 
knowest thou me? Je- 
sus answered and said 
unto him, Before that 


ς -- δὲ τ. ἃ εἶπαν LTTrA. e Ῥαββεί Ts _ beBepuenvevopevor | LTrA. 
shall see TTra. h ἦλθαν TTrA. 1 + οὖν therefore [u]rtra. 
GLTTraw. m+ [δὲ] and L. 2 *Iwavov Tr. ° πρῶτον LTra. 


4 — καὶ [L]TTrA. — δὲ and G@Ttraw. 5. Ἰωάνον of John itr ; 


Κ εἶδαν LTTrA. 


*Iwavvov TA. 


8 OWeabe ye 

1— δὲ 
P—o6 SE 
—o 


᾿Ιησοῦς (read he desired) GLTTraw. Y+o ees Jesus (finds) LITraW. Ww Moots 
LTTraWw. x —— yoy LT[Tr]. Y Ναξζαρέθ EGw. — καὶ τ. a+ 6 LTrA. b—o6 
LITraW. ca Ισραηλείτης ττι. da — ὃ GLTTrAW. 


244 


Philip called thee, 
when thou wast under 
the fig tree, [saw thee. 
49 Nathanael answered 
and saith unto him, 
Rabbi, thou art the 
Son of God; thou art 
the King of Israel. 
50 Jesus answered and 
said unto him, Because 
I said unto thee, I saw 
thee under the fig tree, 
believest thou? thou 
shalt see greater things 
than these. 51 And he 
saith unto him, Verily, 
verily, Isay unto you, 
Hereafter ye shall see 
heaven open, and the 
angels of God ascend- 
ing and _ descending 
upon the:'Son of man. 


11. And the third day 
there was a marriage 
in Cana of Galilee; 
and the mother of Je- 
sus was there: 2 and 
both Jesus was called, 
and his disciples, to 
the marriage. 3 And 
when they wanted 
wine, the mother of 
Jesus saith unto him, 
They have no wine. 
4 Jesus saith unto her, 
Woman, what have I 
to do with thee? mine 
hour is not yet come. 
5 His mother saith un- 
to the servants, What- 
soever he saith unto 
you, doit. 6 And there 
were set there six 
waterpots of stone, 
after the manner of 
the purifying of the 
Jews, containing two 
or three firkins apiece. 
7 Jesus saith unto 


them, Fill the water- Ὁ 


pots with water. And 
they filled them up to 
the brim. 8 And he 
saith unto them, Draw 
out now, and bear unto 
the governor of the 
feast. And they bare 
it. 9 When the ruler 
of the feast had tasted 
the water that was 
made wine, and knew 
not whence it was: 
(but the servants 
which drew the water 
kmew ;) the governor 
of the feast called the 
pridegroom, 10 and 
saith unto him, Every 
man at the beginning 
doth set forth good 


IQANNHS. I, II. 
Πρὸ τοῦ σε Φίλιππον φωνῆσαι, ὄντα ὑπὸ τὴν συκῆν, 
Before that *thee ‘Philip 2called, [thou] being under the fig-tree, 
εἶδόν σε. 50 ᾿Απεκρίθη" Ναθαναὴλ ‘rai λέγει" ἑξαὐτῷ," “PaBBi." 
Isaw thee. 7Answered ‘Nathanael and says to him, Rabbi, 
σὺ εἶ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ, σὺ ‘el ὁ βασιλεὺς"! τοῦ ᾿Ισραήλ. 
thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. 
51 ᾿Απεκρίθη ᾿Ιησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ὅτι εἶπόν σοι, Εῖδόν 


2Answered ‘Jesus and said tohim, Because I said tothee, Isaw 

σε ὑποκάτω τῆς συκῆς, πιστεύεις; μείζω τούτων 
thee under the fig-tree, believest thou? Greater things than these 
Oe." δῷ Kai λέγει αὐτῷ, ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, 
thou shalt see. And hesays tohim, Verily verily MIsay toyou, 


ἀπ᾽ ἄρτι' ὄψεσθε τὸν οὐρανὸν ἀνεῳγότα, Kai τοὺς ay- 
Henceforth yeshallsee the heaven opened, and the an- 
γέλους τοῦ θεοῦ ἀναβαίνοντας καὶ καταβαίνοντας ἐπὶ τὸν 


gels of God ascending and descending on the 

υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου. 

Son of man. 

2 Kai "ry ἡμέρᾳ τῇ τρίτῃ" γάμος ἐγένετο ἐν οΚανᾷ! 

And onthe “day ‘third amarriage took place in Cana 

τῆς Γαλιλαίας" καὶ ἦν ἡ μήτηρ τοῦ Ἰησοῦ ἐκεῖ. 2 ἐκλήθη.δὲ 
of Galilee, and*was'the “mother 308 *Jesus there. And*was‘*invited 

καὶ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς καὶ ot μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ εἰς τὸν γάμον. 8 Kai 

2also 1Jesus and his disciples to the marriage. And 


Ρὑστερήσαντος οἴνου" λέγει ἡ μήτηρ τοῦ Ιησοῦ πρὸς αὐτόν, 
being deficient of wine “says ‘the *mother %of*Jesus to him, 
IWivoy οὐκ.ἔχουσιν." 4 τΛέγει adr” ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, Τί ἐμοὶ καὶ 
Wine they have not. 7Says “to *her *Jesus, What tome and 
σοί, γύναι; οὔπω ἥκει ἡ. ὥρα.μου. 5 Λέγει ἡ. μήτηρ. αὐτοῦ 

to thee, woman? ποῦ γϑί iscome mine hour, 3Says his mother 
~ , σ΄ n , € ~ 7, FF 
τοῖς διακόνοις, “O.re ἂν λέγῃ Upiv, ποιήσατε. 6 “Hoay 
tothe servants, Whatever he may say to you, do. ?'There *were 
δὲ ἐκεῖ "ὑδρίαι λίθιναι"! ἕξ ἱκείμεναι' κατὰ τὸν καθα- 
land there *water-vessels of “stone ‘six standing according to the puri- 
ισμὸν τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων", χωροῦσαι ava μετρητὰς δύο ἢ τρεῖς. 
fication of the Jews, “holding ‘each metrets twoor three. 
λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Γεμίσατε τὰς ὑδρίας ὕδατος. 
7Says “to *them 1 Jesus, Fill the water-vessels with water. 
Kai ἐγέμισαν αὐτὰς ἕως ἄνω. ὃ Καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, ᾿Αν- 
And they filled them vunto(the] brim. And hesays tothem, Draw 
τλήσατε νῦν καὶ φέρετε τῷ ἀρχιτρικλίνῳ. ‘Kai! ἤνεγκαν. 
out now and carry tothe master of the feast. And _ they carried [it]. 
9 we.dé ἐγεύσατο ὁ ἀρχιτρίκλινος τὸ ὕδωρ olvoy γεγενη- 
But when Shad 7tasted 'the “master °of *the "feast the water ‘wine ‘that *had 
, ‘ ’ ’ , A ᾽ὔ ” « 
μένον, καὶ οὐκιΐδει πόθεν ἐστίν" οἱ. δὲ διάκονοι ἔδεισαν οἱ 
“become, and knewnot whence itis, (but the servants knew who 
ἠντληκότες TO ὕδωρ" φωνεῖ τὸν νυμφίον ὁ ἀρχιτρίκλινος 
haddrawn the water,) ‘calls ‘the *bridegroom ‘the *master “of *the *feast 
‘ , 2 ~ ~ » ~ 4 4 
10 καὶ λέγει αὐτῷ, Πᾶς ἄνθρωπος πρῶτον τὸν καλὸν οἶνον 


wine ; and when men and says tohim, Every man first the good wine 
e + αὐτῷ *him [L]rtra. f — καὶ λέγει [L]tTra. 8 — αὐτῷ LTTrA. h ‘PaBBei T. 


1 ὃ βασιλεὺς εἶ τ,; βασιλεὺς εἶ TTrA. 
" τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ TrA. 


ἄρτι LTTrA. 


k + ὅτι that LTTra. lOym GLTTrAW. = =™ — ἀπ 
° Kava ELTTr. P οἶνον οὐκ εἶχον, ὅτι συνετελέσθη 


ὁ οἶνος τοῦ γάμου. εἶτα wine they had not, for the wine of the marriage feast was finished. 


Then tT. 
ὑδρίαι LTTrA. 


4 οἶνος οὐκ ἔστιν Wine there is not τ. 
τ κείμεναι placed after ᾿Ιουδαίων TTrA. 


r+ καὶ and (Jesus) [L]TrA. 5 λίθιναι 
Vv οἱ δὲ and they (carried) Tira. 


JOHN. 

τίθησιν, και ὅταν μεθυσθῶσιν χγότε! τὸν ἐλάσσω" 
sets on, and when they may have drunk freely then the inferior; 
σὺ τετήρηκας τὸν καλὸν οἶνον ἕως ἄρτι. 11 Ταύτην ἐποίησεν 
thou hastkept the good wine until now. This Sdid 
Irn ἀρχὴν τῶν σημείων ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς ἐν *Kavg' τῆς Γαλιλαίας, 
‘beginning “οὗ *the ‘signs Jesus in Cana of Galilee, 


11. 


καὶ ἐφανέρωσεν τὴν.δόξαν.αὐτοῦ: καὶ ἐπίστευσαν εἰς αὐτὸν 
and manifested his glory ; and “believed fon “him 
οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ. 

*his *disciples. 

12 Μετὰ τοῦτο κατέβη εἰς "Καπερναούμ," αὐτὸς καὶ ἡ 


After this he went down to he and 


μήτηρ.αὐτοῦ Kai οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ" Kai οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ, Kai 

his mother and brethren this and his disciples, and 
ἐκεῖ ἔμειναν ov πολλὰς ἡμέρας. 18 Καὶ ἐγγὺς ἦν τὸ πάσχα 
there they abode not many days. And near was the passover 


~ > ΄ ‘ > , > c , Cas: ~ ‘ 
τῶν “lovdaiwy, καὶ ἀνέβη εἰς ἹἹεροσόλυμα ὁ Inoovc. 14 καὶ 
of the Jews, and *went *up *to ‘Jerusalem 1 Jesus. And 
εὗρεν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ τοὺς πωλοῦντας Boac Kai πρόβατα καὶ 
he found in the temple those who sold oxen and sheep and 
περιστεράς, Kai τοὺς κερματιστὰς καθημένους" 15 καὶ ποιή- 


Capernaum, 


doves, and the money-changers sitting ; and having 

, ? / ’ ᾽ , : ~ 

σας φραγέλλιον ἐκ σχοινίων πάντας ἐξέβαλεν ἐκ TOU 
made a scourge of cords *all the *drove *out from the 


ἱεροῦ, τά.τε πρόβατα καὶ τοὺς βόας. Kai TOY κολλυβιστῶν 
temple, both the sheep and the oxen; and ofthe money-changers 


ἐξέχεεν “τὸ κέρμα" καὶ τὰς τραπέζας ἀνέστρεψεν. 16 καὶ 


he poured out the coin and the tables overthrew. And 
τοῖς τὰς περιστερὰς πωλοῦσιν εἶπεν, Ἄρατε ταῦτα 
to those who #the “doves sold he said, Take these things 
ἐντεῦθεν. “μὴ.ποιεῖτε τὸν οἶκον τοῦ.πατρός. μου οἶκον ἐμ- 
hence ; make not the house of my father a house of mer- 
iov. 17 ᾿Εμνήσθησαν “δὲ! οἱ μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ % : 
πορίου. μνησθησαν. οὐἱιμαθηται αὐτοῦ OTL YE 
chandise, And “remembered ‘his 7disciples that writ- 


frarépayéy' με. 


ἕνον ἐστίν, ‘O ζῆλος τοῦ.οἴκου.σου 
’ ς 
ten has eaten 7up ‘me, 


itis, The zeal of thine house 
18 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν οὖν οἱ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι καὶ Seizov' αὐτῷ, Ti 


*Answered “therefore'the 7Jews and said tohim, What 
σημεῖον δεικνύεις ἡμῖν ὅτι ταῦτα ποιεῖς; 19 ᾿Απεκρίθ 
ι ¢ Ὸῃ C3 ρίθη 
sign shewest thou tous that these things thou doest? ? Answered 


46" Ἰησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Λύσατε τὸν ναὸν. τοῦτον, καὶ ἱὲν" 


Jesus and said tothem, Destroy this temple, and in 
τρισὶν ἡμέραις ἐγερῶ avrov.208Elroyv' οὖν οἱ Iovdain, 
three days Iwillraiseup it. “Said “*therefore’the 7Jews, 


ΚΤεσσαράκοντα! καὶ ἕξ ἔτεσιν ἰῳκοδομήθη" ὁ.ναὸς οὗτος, Kai 
Forty and six years was building ΄ this temple, and 
A ? ‘ « , ? ~ > , ᾽ ~ A ww 
σὺ ἐν τρισὶν ἡμέραις ἐγερεῖς αὐτόν; 21 Exsivoc.dé ἔλεγεν 
thou in three days wiltraiseup it? But he spoke 
περὶ τοῦ ναοῦ τοῦκ.σὠματος.αὐτοῦ. 22 bre οὖν ἠγέρ- 
concerning the temple of his body. When therefore he was 
θη ἐκ νεκρῶν ἐμνήσθησαν οἱ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ ὅτι 
raised up from among [the] dead Sremembered this “disciples that 


: Kava ELTTr, 


χ — τότε [L]1[Tra]. Υ — τὴν LTTrA. : a 
+ [καὶ] and L, 


b— αὐτοῦ (Jrr[a]. ὁ τὰ κέρματα the coins Tra. 
f καταφάγεταί will eat up GLTTraw. 8 εἶπαν LITrA. 
k Τεσσεράκοντα Tira. ! οἰκοδομήθη τ. 


h — ὃ LTTrAW. 


245 


have well drunk, then 
that which is worse: 
but thou hast kept the 
good wine until now. 
11 This beginning of 
miracles did Jesus in 
Cana of Galilee, and 
manifested forth his 
glory ; and his disci- 
ples believed on him. 


12 After this he went 
down to Capernaum, 
he, and his mother, 
and his brethren, and 
his disciples: and they 
continued there not 
many days. 13 And the 
Jews’ passover was at 
hand, and Jesus went 
upto Jerusalem, l4and 
found in the temple 
those that sold oxen 
and sheep and doves, 
and the changers of 
money sitting: 15 and 
when he had made a 
scourge of small cords, 
he drove them all out 
of the temple, and the 
sheep, and the oxen; 
and poured out the 
changers’ money, and 
overthrew the tables; 
16 and said unto them 
that sold doves, Take 
these things hence; 
make not my Father’s 
house an house of mer- 
chandise. 17 And his 
disciples remembered 
that it was written, 
The zeal of thine house 
hath eaten me up, 
18 Then answered the 
Jews and said unto 
him, What sign shew- 
est thou unto us, see- 
ing that thou doest 
these things? 19 Jesus 
answered and said un- 
to them, Destroy this 
temple, and in three 
days I will raise it up. 
20 Then said the Jews, 
Forty and six years 
was this temple in 
building, and wiltthou 
rear it up in three 
days? 21 But hespake 
of the temple of hia 
body. 22 When there- 
fore he wasrisen from 
the dead, his disciples 
remembered that he 


5 Καφαρναούμ, LITrAW. 


e -- δὲ and [L]TTra. 
i [ἐν] τς 


246 


had said this unto 
them; and they be- 
lieved the scripture, 
and the word which 
Jesus had said. 


23 Now when he was 
in Jerusalem at the 
assover, in the feast 
y, many believed in 
his name, when they 
saw the miracles which 
he did. 24 But Jesus 
did not commit him- 
self unto them, be- 
cause he knew all men, 
25 and needed not that 
any should testify of 
man: for he knew 
what was in man. 


III. There was a 
man of the Pharisees, 
named Nicodemus, a 
ruler of the Jews: 
2 the same came to 
Jesus by night, and 
said unto him, Rabbi, 
we know that thou art 
a teacher come from 
God: for no man can 
do these miracles that 
thou doest, except God 
be with him. 3 Jesus 
answered and said un- 
to him, Verily, verily, 
I say unto thee, Except 
aman be born again, 
he cannot see the king- 
dom of God. 4 Nico- 
demus saith unto him, 
How can a man be 
born when he is old? 
can he enterthe second 
time into his mother’s 
womb, and be born? 
5 Jesus answered, Ve- 
rily, verily, I say unto 
thee, Except a man 
be born of water and 
of the Spirit, he cannot 
enter into the kingdom 
of God. 6 That which 
is born of the flesh is 
flesh ; and that which 
is born of the Spirit is 
spirit. 7 Marvel not 
that I said unto thee, 
Ye must be born again, 
8 The wind bloweth 
where it listeth, and 
thou hearest the sound 
thereof, but canst not 
tell whence it cometh, 
and whither it goeth: 
ΒΟ is every one that is 
born of the Spirit. 
9 Nicodemus answered 


DP QUAN ΝΗ Σ. Ik; 1g. 
τοῦτο ἔλεγεν “avroic,' καὶ ἐπίστευσαν τῇ γραφῇ Kai τῷ 
this he had said ἴο them, and believed the scripture and the 
λόγῳ Yw' εἶπεν 0 'Inoodc. 
word which *had*spoken ‘Jesus. 
23 Ὡς δὲ ἦν ἐν ° Ἱεροσολύμοις ἐν τῷ πάσχα, Péy" τῇ 
But when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, at the 
ἑορτῇ, πολλοὶ ἐπίστευσαν εἰς τὸ. ὄνομα. αὐτοῦ, θεωροῦντες αὐτοῦ 
feast, many believed on his name, beholding his 
4 ~ et 2 ΄, > A A 42} ? ~ ? ΠῚ ΄, 
τὰ σημεῖα ἃ ἐποίει. 24 αὐτὸς.δὲ 40" ᾿Τησοῦς οὐκ. ἐπίστευεν 
signs which he was doing. But *himself 1 Jesus did not trust 
τἑαυτὸν" αὐτοῖς, διὰ T0.avToyv-ywwoKey πάντας, 25 Kai 
himself ἕο ὕβϑιω, because of his knowing all [men], and 
Ore ov χρείαν εἶχεν ἵνα Tic μαρτυρήσῃ περὶ "τοῦ! dvOpw- 
that *no “need the *had that any should testify concerning man, 
που" αὐτὸς. γὰρ ἐγίνωσκεν τί ἦν ἐν τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ. 
for he knew what was in man. 
3 Ἦν.δὲ ἄνθρωπος ἐκ τῶν Φαρισαίων, Νικόδημος ὄνομα 
But therewas aman of the Pharisees, Nicodemus 7name 
αὐτῷ, ἄρχων τῶν Ιουδαίων" 2 οὗτος ἦλθεν πρὸς ἱτὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν" 
this, aruler ofthe Jews; he came to Jesus 
νυκτός, καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, ᾿ῬῬαββί." οἴδαμεν ὅτι ἀπὸ θεοῦ ἐλή- 


by night, and said ἴο him, Rabbi, we know that from God thou 
λυθας διδάσκαλος" οὐδεὶς γὰρ “ταῦτα τὰ σημεῖα δύναται!" 
hast come ἃ teacher, for no one these signs is able 


ποιεῖν ἃ ov ποιεῖς ἐὰν.μὴ ἢ ὁ θεὸς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 3’ Απεκρίθη 
todo which thou doest unless *be 1God with him. * Answered 
x6" Ἰησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω σοι, ἐὰν. μή 
Δ 685 and said tohim, Verily verily 158. tothee, Unless 
τις γεννηθῇ ἄνωθεν, ob dvvara ἰδεῖν τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ 
anyone be born anew, he cannot see the kingdom 
θεοῦ. 4 Λέγει πρὸς αὐτὸν Yo" Νικόδημος, Πῶς δύναται ἄν- 


of God. "Says “to *him 1Nicodemus, How can a 
θρωπος γεννηθῆναι γέρων ὦν; μὴ δύναται εἰς τὴν κοιλίαν 
man be born 3old ‘being? σᾶ ΒΘ into the womb 


τῆς. μητρὸς. αὐτοῦ δεύτερον εἰσελθεῖν Kai γεννηθῆναι; 5 ᾿Απε- 

of his mother asecondtime enter and be born? 7An- 
κρίθη τὸ" Ἰησοῦς, ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω σοι, ἐὰν. μή τις γεννηθῇ 
swered 1Jesus, Verily verily Isay tothee, Unless anyone be born 
ἐξ ὕδατος Kai πνεύματος οὐ-δύναται εἰσελθεῖν εἰς THY βασιλείαν 


of water διὰ οὔ Spirit he cannot enter intothe kingdom 
“rod θεοῦ." 6 τὸ ὕγεγεννημένον" ἐκ τῆς σαρκὸς caps ἐστιν" 
of God. That which hasbeenborn of the  fiesh flesh is; 


καὶ τὸ γεγεννημένον" ἐκ τοῦ πνεύματος πνεῦμά ἐστιν. 
and that which has been born of the Spirit spirit is. 
, ~ « ~ ~ 
7 μὴ.θαυμάσῳς ὅτι εἶπόν σοι, Δεῖ ὑμᾶς γεννηθῆναι 
Do not wonder that 1 5αϊᾶ to thee, It is needful for you to be born 
ἄνωθεν. 8 τὸ πνεῦμα ὅπου θέλει πνεῖ, καὶ τὴν.φωνὴν αὐτοῦ 
anew. The wind “where *it*wills *blows, and its sound 
ἀκούεις, ©adX’" οὐκ.οἶδας πόθεν ἔρχεται “καὶ! ποῦ ὑπάγει" 
thou hearest, but knowest not whence itcomes and where it goes: 
~ c ~ , 
οὕτως ἐστὶν πᾶς ὁ γεγεννημένος ἐκ τοῦ πνεύματος. 9᾽᾿Απε- 
thus is  everyonethat has beenborn of the Spirit. 7An- 


™— αὐτοῖς GLTTrAW. 
§— Tou L. 
x — ὃ LTTraW. 


Ὁ γεγενημένον E. 


τ αὐτὸν LTTrA. 
7a σημεια ὩΤΤΤΑ. 
the heavens. T. 


ᾳ — ὃ LTTra, 

Ww δύναται ταῦτα 
ὐμβς ει ἃς 

5 τῶν οὐρανῶν of 


2 ὃν LTTrA. ο - τοῖς αὐτὰ. Ρ [ev] Ltr. 
t αὐτὸν him GLTTraw. v Ῥαββεί 1. 

Υ -- ὃ τι.  — ὃ GLT[Tra]W. 

© ἀλλὰ Tr. ἃ ἢ or τ᾿. 


JOHN. 


Νικόδημος καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ide δύναται ταῦτα γενέ- 
‘Nicodemus and said tohim, How can thesethings be? 
10 ᾿Απεκρίθη “ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Σὺ εἶ ὁ 
Answered Jesus and said tohim, Thou art the 
διδάσκαλος τοῦ Ἰσραήλ, καὶ ταῦτα ov-ywwoKec; 11 ἀμὴν 
teacher of Israel, andthese things knowest not? Verily 
> A Ld ev a m” ~ A a ε id 
ἀμὴν λέγω σοι, OTL ὃ οἴδαμεν λαλοῦμεν, καὶ ὃ ἑωρά- 
verily Isay to thee, That which we know wespeak, and that which we 
καμὲεν μαρτυροῦμεν᾽ καὶ τὴν. μαρτυρίαν. ἡμῶν οὐ-.λαμβάνετε. 
have seen we bear witness of ; and our witness ye receive not. 
12 εἰ τὰ ἐπίγεια εἶπον ὑμῖν, καὶ οὐ-πιστεύετε, πῶς ἐὰν εἴπω 
If earthly things Isaid toyou, and yebelievenot, how if Isay 
ὑμῖν τὰ ἐπουράνια πιστεύσετε; 18 Kai οὐδεὶς ἀναβέβηκεν 
to you heavenly things will ye believe? And noone has gone up 
εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν εἰμὴ ὁ ἐκ TOV οὐρανοῦ καταβάς, ὁ υἱὸς 
into the heaven excepthewhooutof the heaven camedown, the Son 
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ὁ ὧν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ" 14 καὶ καθὼς ἱΜωσῆς" 
ofman whois in the _ heaven. And even as Moses 
iyarey τὸν ὕφιν ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ, οὕτως ὑψωθῆναι δεῖ 
iftedup the serpent in the wilderness, thus tobelifted up it behoves 
ὁ πιστεύων Sic αὐτὸν" 
on him 


Ti 

κρίθη 
swered 
σθαι; 


τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου" 1ὅ ἵνα πᾶς 
the Son of man, that everyone that believes 
bh a5 , ? II » \ 27 er ‘ 
μὴ.ἀπόληται, add ἔχῃ ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 16 οὕτως. γὰρ 
may not perish, but may have life eternal. For *so 
ἠγάπησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν κόσμον ὥστε τὸν υἱὸν ἰαὐτοῦ" τὸν μονο- 
3Ἰουϑᾶ 1God the σοῦ that his Son the only be- 
γενῆ ἔδωκεν, ἵνα πᾶς ὁ πιστεύων εἰς αὐτὸν μὴ ἀπόληται, 
gotten hegave, thateveryone who believes on him may not perish, 
Kan! ἔχῃ ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 17 οὐ.γὰρ. ἀπέστειλεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν 
but may have life eternal, For “sent “ποῦ *God 


υἱὸν. αὐτοῦ" εἰς τὸν͵ κόσμον ἵνα Koi τὸν κόσμον, ἀλλ᾽ 
his Son into the world thathemightjudge the world, but 
wa σωθῇ ὁ κόσμος δι αὐτοῦ. 18 ὁ πιστεύων εἰς 


that *might *be °saved πο “world through him. He that believes 
αὐτὸν ov-xpivera® ὁ “δὲ μὴ. πιστεύων ἤδη κέκριται, 
him is not judged; but he that believes ποῦ already has been judged, 


OTL μὴ.πεπίστευκεν εἰς TO ὄνομα τοῦ μονογενοῦς υἱοῦ τοῦ 
because he has not believed on the name ofthe only begotten Son 


θεοῦ. 19 αὕτη.δέ ἐστιν ἡ κρίσις, Ort τὸ φῶς ἐλήλυθεν εἰς 
of God. And this is the judgment, that the light hascome into 


τὸν κόσμον, καὶ ἠγάπησαν οἱ ἄνθρωποι μᾶλλον τὸ σκότος 
the world, and “loved 1men Srather *the *darkness 
ἢ TO φῶς" ἦν.γὰρ "πονηρὰ αὐτῶν" τὰ ἔργα. 20 7ac-yap 
than the light; for were evil their works. For everyone 
ὁ φαῦλα πράσσων μισεῖ TO φῶς, καὶ οὐκιἔρχεται πρὸς TO 


on 


that evil does hates the light, and comes not to the 
~ ev R699: ~ \ > ~ Φ « ~ A 

φῶς, ἵνα μὴ-ἔλεγχθῇ τὰ.ἔργα.αὐτοῦ: 21 ὁ δὲ ποιῶν τὴν 

light, that may not be exposed his works ; but he that practises the 


ἀλήθειαν ἔρχεται πρὸς TO φῶς, ἵνα φανερωθῇ αὐτοῦ τὰ 
truth comes to the light, that may be manifested his 


ἔργα ὅτι ἐν θεῷ ἐστιν εἰργασμένα. 
works that in God they have been wrought. 


917 


mot ὁ 


and said unto him, 
How can these things 
be? 10 Jesus answered 
and said unto him, Art 
thou a master of Is- 
rael, and knowest not 
these things? 11 Veri- 
ly, verily, I say unto 
thee, We speak that we 
do know, and testify 
that we have seen; 
and ye receive not 
our witness. 12 If 1 
have told you earthly 
things, and ye believe 
not, how shall ye be- 
lieve, if I tell you 
of heavenly things? 
13 And no man hath 
ascended up to heaven, 
but he that came down 
from heaven, even the 
Son of man which is 
in heaven, 14 And as 
Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilder- 
ness, even so must the 
Son of man be lifted 
up: 15 that whoso- 
ever believeth in him 
should ποὺ perish, 
but have eternal life. 
16 For God so loved 
the world, that he gave 
his only begotten Son, 
that whosoever believ- 
eth in him should not 
perish, but have ever- 
lasting life. 17 For God 
sent not his Son into 
the world to condemn 
the world; but that 
the world through him 
might be saved. 18 He 
that believeth on him 
is not condemned: but 
he that believeth not 
is condemned already, 
because he hath not 
believed in the name 
of the only begotten 
Son of God. 19 And 
this is the condemna- 
tion, that light iscome 
into the world, and 
men loved darkness 
rather than light, be- 
cause their deeds were 
evil. 20 For every one 
that doeth evil hateth 
the light, neither com- 
eth to the light, lest 
his deeds should be 
reproved. 21 But he 
that doeth truth com- 
eth to the light, that 
his deeds may be 
made manifest, that 
they are wrought in 
God. 


22 After these things 


22 Mera ταῦτα ἦλθεν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς καὶ οἱ.μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ εἰς came Jesus and his 


After these things came Jesus and his disciples into 


disciples into the land 


®—oG.iitraw. ‘ Mwioys Lrtraw. 
améAnras ἀλλ᾽ [L}ttra. i — αὐτοῦ (read the Son) T. k ἀλλὰ Tr. 
Son) T[1ra]. m — δὰ but [1|]Τ{ττ]ὰ. 2 αὐτῶν πονηρὰ LTTrA. 


Sen αὐτὸν L; ev αὐτῷ in him τττὰ. 


ΣᾺ}. ae 
1 — αὐτοῦ (read the 


248 


of Juda; and there 
he tarried with them, 
and baptized. 23 And 
John also was bap- 
tizing in Anon near 
to Salim, because there 
was much water there: 
and they came, and 
were baptized. 24 For 
John was not yet cast 
into prison. 25 Then 
there arose a question 
between some of John’s 
disciples and _ the 
Jews about purifying. 
26 And they came un- 
to John, andsaid unto 
him, Rabbi, he that 
was with thee beyond 
Jordan, to whom thou 
barest witness, behold, 
the same _ baptizeth, 
and all men come to 
him. 27 Johnanswered 
and said, A man can 
receive nothing, except 
it be given him from 
heaven. 28 Ye your- 
selves bear me witness, 
that I said, I am not 
the Christ, but that I 
am sent before him. 
29 He that hath the 
bride is the _ bride- 
groom : but the friend 
of the bridegroom, 
which standeth and 
heareth him, rejoiceth 
greatly because of the 
bridegroom’s voice: 
this my joy therefore 
is fulfilled. 30 He 
must increase, but I 
must decrease. 31 He 
that cometh from a- 
pbove is above all: he 
that is of the earth is 
earthly, and speaketh 
of the earth: he that 
cometh from heaven is 
above all. 32 And 
what he hath seen 
and heard, that he tes- 
tifieth; and no man 
receiveth his testi- 
mony. 33 He that hath 
received his testimony 
hath set to his seal 
that God is true. 
34 For he whom God 
hath sent speaketh the 
words of God: for God 
giveth not the Spirit 
by measure unto him. 
35 The Father loveth 
the Son, and hath giv- 
en all things into his 
hand, 36 He that be- 
lieveth on the Son 
hath everlasting life: 
and he that believeth 
not the Son shall not 


IQANN HES. III. 


τὴν Τουδαίαν.γῆν. καὶ ἐκεῖ διέτριβεν per αὐτῶν καὶ ἐβάπ- 
the land of Judea; and there hestayed with them and was bap- 
τιζεν. 23 ἦν.δὲ καὶ ο᾿Ιωάννης" βαπτίζων ἐν Aivwy ἐγγὺς 
tizing. And ‘was ?also 1John baptizing in non, near 
τοῦ Σαλείμ, ὅτι ὕδατα πολλὰ ἦν ἐκεῖ᾽ Kai παρεγίνοντο καὶ 
Salim, because *waters ‘many were there; and they were coming and 
ἐβαπτίζοντο. 24 οὔπω.γὰρ ἦν βεβλημένος εἰς τὴν φυλακὴν 
being baptized. For not yet was 2cast 3into *the ‘prison 
Po!’ lwavyyc.|i25’Eyévero οὖν ζήτησις ἐκ τῶν μαθητῶν 
+ John. Arose thenaquestion[onthepartjof the disciples 
φΙωάννου" μετὰ τ᾿ Τουδαίων! περὶ καθαρισμοῦ" 26 καὶ "ἦλθον" 
of John with [some] Jews about purification, And they came 
πρὸς τὸν ᾿Ιωάννην" καὶ “εἶπον" αὐτῷ, “Ῥαββί,! ὃς ἦν pera 
to John and said  tohim, Rabbi, hewhowas with 
σοῦ πέραν τοῦ Ἰορδάνου, ᾧ σὺ μεμαρτύρηκας, ide οὗτος 
thee beyond the Jordan, to whom thou hast borne witness, behold he 
βαπτίζει, καὶ πάντες ἔρχονται πρὸς αὐτόν. 27 ᾿Απεκρίθη 
baptizes, and all come to him. ? Answered 


οΤωάννης" καὶ εἶπεν, Οὐ δύναται ἄνθρωπος λαμβάνειν οὐδὲν 
‘John and said, 315 015. ‘a “man toreceive nothing 


ἐὰν. μὴ ἢ δεδομένον αὐτῷ ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ. 28 αὐτοὶ ὑμεῖς 
unless it be given to him from the heaven, Ye yourselves 
~ er 5 x ? 2 Se? ‘il « , 2 .». Ὁ} 
μοι μαρτυρεῖτε ὅτι εἶπον, “Οὐκ.εἰμιὶ ἐγώ" 0 χριστός, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι 
tome bear witness that I said, *Am*not ‘I the Christ, but that 
ἀπεσταλμένος εἰμὶ ἔμπροσθεν ἐκείνου. 29 ὁ ἔχων τὴν νύμ- 
Ξβϑῃῦ I*am _— before him. Hethat has the bride 
ony, νυμφίος ἐστίν: ὁ.δὲ φίλος τοῦ νυμφίου, ὁ ἑστηκὼς καὶ 
%pridegroom ‘is; but {86 friend of the bridegroom,who stands and 
ἀκούων αὐτοῦ, χαρᾷ χαίρει διὰ τὴν φωνὴν τοῦ νυμφίου" 
hears him, withjoy rejoices because of the voice of the bridegroom, 
αὕτη οὖν ἡ χαρὰ ἡ ἐμὴ πεπλήρωται. 80 ἐκεῖνον δεῖ 
this then *joy my is fulfilled. *Him ‘+it *behoves 
᾽ , 3 4 Δί .2 ~ c » ᾽ , ? , 
αὐξάνειν, ἐμὲ.δὲ ἐχαττοῦσθαι. 310 ἄνωθεν ἐρχόμενος ἐπάνω 
toincrease, but me _ to decrease. Hewho fromabove comes, above 
πάντων ἐστίν. ὁ ὧν ἐκ τῆς γῆς ἐκ τῆς γῆς ἐστιν, Kai 
all is. He whois from the earth from the earth is, and 
ἐκ τῆς γῆς λαλεῖ ὁ ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἐρχόμενος “ἐπάνω 
from the earth speaks. Hewhofrom the heaven comes above 
πάντων éoriv,' 382 “Kai! ὃ ἑώρακεν Kai ἤκουσεν "τοῦτο! 
all is, and what he has seen and heard this 
ws ‘ A , > ~ ᾽ s 4 ε 
μαρτυρεῖ" καὶ τὴν. μαρτυρίαν.αὐτοῦ οὐδεὶς λαμβάνει. 88 ὁ 
he testifies; and his testimony noone receives. He that 
λαβὼν αὐτοῦ τὴν μαρτυρίαν ἐσφράγισεν ὅτι ὁ θεὸς ἀληθής 
has received his testimony hasset tohissealthat God true 
ἐστιν. 84 ὃν.γὰρ ἀπέστειλεν ὁ θεὸς τὰ ῥήματα τοῦ θεοῦ 
lis; for he whom 2sent 1God the words of God 
λαλεῖ’ οὐ.γὰρ ἐκ μέτρου δίδωσιν 6 θεὸς" τὸ πνεῦμα. 35 ὁ 
speaks; fornot by measure gives ‘God the _ Spirit. The 
πατὴρ ἀγαπᾷ τὸν υἱόν, καὶ πάντα δέδωκεν ἐν τῇ χειρὶ GD 


Father loves the Son, and all things has given into band. 
τοῦ. 36 ὁ πιστεύων εἰς τὸν υἱὸν ἔχει ζωὴν αἰώνιον: ὁ.“δὲ" 
Hethat believes on the Son has life eternal; and he that 
° Ιωάνης Tr. P — ὃ T[TrA]. 4 ᾿Ιωάνου tr. τ Ἰουδιιίου a Jew GLITrAW. 8 ἦλθαν 


Tra. 
πάντων ἐστίν T. 
5 — δὲ and 1. 


τ Ἰωάνην Tr. 


w Ῥαββεί τ. 


8 -- τοῦτο Τ. 


x Byo οὐκ εἰμὶ L. J — ἐπάνω 
b — ὃ θεὸς (read he gives) [L]t[Tr]a. 


ν εἶπαν Tra. 
— καὶ [π]τττὰ. 


Tit, Iv. JOHN. 
ἀπειθῶν τῷ υἱῷ οὐκιὄψεται ζωήν, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ ὀργὴ τοῦ θεοῦ 
is not subject tothe Son shall notsee life, but the wrath of God 
μένει ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν. 
abides on him. 
t rT a” « d , ll ev » « ~ 
4 Ὡς οὖν ἔγνω ὁ 4xdproc! ὅτι ἤκουσαν οἱ Φαρισαῖοι, 
When therefore*knew 'the *Lord that “heard (‘the Pharisees, 
dre ᾿Ιησοῦς πλείονας μαθητὰς ποιεῖ καὶ βαπτίζει ἢ “Ἰωάν- 
that Jesus more disciples makes and  baptizes than John 
ell , ? ~ ? 4 ? ? / ? ᾽ ε 
νης 2 καίτοιγε ᾿Ιησοῦς αὐτὸς οὐκ.ἐβάπτιζεν, ἀλλ᾽ οἱ 
(although indeed Jesus himself was not baptizing but 
" > ~ ? ~ A ? , ‘ ? ~ ΄ 
μαθηταὶ.αὐτοῦ" 8 ἀφῆκεν τὴν ᾿Ιουδαίαν, καὶ ἀπῆλθεν πάλιν 


his disciples), he left Judea, and went away again 
εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν. 4 ἔδει. δὲ αὐτὸν διέρχεσθαι διὰ τῆς 
into Galilee. Anditwas necessary for him topass through 


Parnagsias) ὅ ἔρχεται οὖν εἰς πόλιν τῆς Σαμαρείας" λεγο- 


maria. He comes therefore to acity of Samaria call- 


μένην ὄξυχάρ," πλησίον τοῦ χωρίον ὃ! ἔδωκεν Ἰακὼβ 
ed Sychar, near the land which ‘gave 1Jacob 
2 A ~ τω > [ων Ηρ ‘ > ~ A ~ ? , 
Iwonp τῷουϊῷφι.αὐτοῦ. 6 ἦν.δὲ ἐκεῖ πηγὴ Tov ᾿Ιακώβ. 
to Joseph his son. Now 3was ‘there *fountain ‘Jacob's ; 


ὁ.οὖν. Ἰησοῦς κεκοπιακὼς ἐκ τῆς ὁδοιπορίας ἐκαθέζετο οὕτως 
Jesus therefore, being wearied from the journey, sat thus 
ἐπὶ τῇ πηγῇ. ὥρα. ἦν ἰὼὡσε ἕκτη. 7 Ἔρχεται γυνὴ 
at the fountain, [16] ΒΟῸΣ was about [the] sixth. Comes a woman 
ἐκ τῆς Σαμαρείας" ἀντλῆσαι ὕδωρ. λέγει αὐτῇ 6’Iynoove, 
out of Samaria to draw water. Says “to *her Jesus, 
Δός μοι ἔπιεῖν"" 8 οἱ. γὰρ.μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ ἀπεληλύθεισαν εἰς 
Give me to drink; for his disciples had gone away into 
a , wv cy > 4 , ] ll > ~ 
THY πόλιν, ἵνα τροφὰς ἀγοράσωσιν. 9 Λέγει ἰοὖν" αὐτῷ 
the city, that provisions they might buy. 5Says “therefore *to “him 
c ‘ « m ~ ll ~ 4 ? ~ a ? ? ~ 
ἡ γυνὴ ἡ “Σαμαρεῖτις, Πῶς σὺ ‘lovdaiog ὧν παρ ἐμοῦ 
‘the -woman 7Samaritan, How ?thou ‘a*Jew “being *from ?°me 
Ἀπιεῖν" αἰτεῖς, “οὔσης γυναικὸς Σαμαρείτιδος" ; Ῥοὐ.γὰρ 
το “drink “dost “ask, being a*woman 1Samaritan? For *no 
~ ? ~ , " ;} , ? ~ 
συγχρῶνται ᾿Ιουδαῖοι Σαμαρείταις." 10 ᾿Απεκρίθη ᾿Ιησοῦς 
“have “intercourse 1Jews with Samaritans, 2Answered ‘Jesus 
καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῇ, Et ἤδεις τὴν δωρεὰν τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ τίς 
and said toher, If thouhadst known the gift of God, and who 
ἐστιν ὁ λέγων σοι, Δός μοι ἔπιεῖν." σὺ ἂν. ὕτησας 
itis that says tothee, Give me  todrink, thou wouldest have asked 
αὐτόν, καὶ ἔδωκενιἄν σοι ὕδωρ ζῶν. 11 Λέγει αὐτῷ “ἡ 
him, and he would have given ἴο thee *water ‘living. Says *to*him?the 


vyn,' Κύριε, οὔτε ἄντλ ἔχεις, καὶ τὸ φρέαρ ἐστὶν 
γυνή, OLE, Mpa, EXEC, φρέαρ 
*woman, Sir, A 


nothing to draw with thou hast, and the well is 
βαθύ: πόθεν lodv' ἔχεις τὸ ὕδωρ τὸ ζῶν ; 12 μὴ σὺ.μείζων εἴ 
deep; whence then hastthou the “water living? Art thou greater 
τοῦ.πατρὸς ἡμῶν ᾿Ιακώβ, ὃς ἔδωκεν ἡμῖν τὸ φρέαρ, Kai αὐτὸς 
than our father Jacob, who gave us the well, and himself 
ἐξ αὐτοῦ ἔπιεν, καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ τὰ.θρἐμματα.αὐτοῦ ; 
of it drank, and his sons and his cattle? 
13 ᾿Απεκρίθη τὸ" Ἰησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῇ, Πᾶς ὁ πίνων ἐκ 
*Answered Jesus and said toher, Everyone that drinks of 


249 


see life; but the wrath 
of God abideth on him, 


IV. When therefore 
the Lord knew how the 
Pharisees had heard 
that Jesus made and 
baptized more disciples 
than John, 2 (though 
Jesus himself baptized 
not, but his disciples,) 
3he left Judea, and 
departed again into 
Galilee. 4 And hemust 
needs go through Sa- 
maria. 5 Then com- 
eth he to a city of 
Samaria, which is call- 
ed Sychar, near to the 
parcel of ground that 
Jacob gave to _ his 
son Joseph. 6 Now 
Jacob’s well was there. 
Jesus therefore, being 
wearied with his jour- 
ney, sat thus on the 
well: and it was about 
the sixth hour. 7 There 
cometh a woman of 
Samaria to draw wa- 
ter: Jesus saith unto 
her, Give me to drink. 
8 (For his disciples 
were gone away unto 
the city to buy meat.) 
9 Then saith the wo- 
man of Samaria unto 
him, How is it that 
thou, being a Jew, 
askest drink of me, 
which am a woman of 
Samaria? for the Jews 
have no dealings with 
the Samaritans, 10 Je- 
sus answered and said 
unto her, If thou knew- 
est the gift of God, and 
who it is that saith to 
thee, Give me to drink; 
thou wouldest have 
asked of him, and he 
would have given thee 
living water. 11 The 
woman saith unto 
him, Sir, thou hast no- 
thing to draw with, 
and the well is deep: 
from whence then 
hast thou that liy- 
ing water? 12 Art 
thou greater than our 
father Jacob, which 
gave us the well, and 
drank thereof himself, 
and his children, and 
his cattle? 13 Jesus 
answered and _ said 
unto her, Whosoever 
drinketh of this water 


4 Ἰησοῦς Jesus T. εΙωάνης Tr. 
LTTraw. K πεῖν TTrA. 1 — οὖν 1. 
Σαμαρείτιδος (ξΣαμαρίτιδος T) οὔσης LTTrA,. 
4 [ἡ γυνή] a. τ--- ὃ GLTTraW. 


᾿ Σαμαρίας τ. δ Σιχάρε. 


m Ξαμαρῖτις Τ. 


π πῖν L3 πεῖν ΤΎΓΑ. 
P — ov γὰρ συγχρῶνται ᾿Ιουδαῖοι Ξαμαρείταις T. 


i. 
ws 
° γυναικὸς 


h οὗ GL. 


250 
shall thirst again: 
14 but whosoever 
drinketh of the water 
that I shall give him 
shall never thirst; but 
the water that I shall 
give him shall be in 
him a well of water 
springing up intoever- 
lasting life. 15 The 
woman saith unto him, 
Sir, give me this water, 
that I thirst not, nei- 
ther come hither to 
draw. 16 Jesus saith 
unto her, Go, call thy 
husband, and come 
hither. 17 The woman 
answered and said, I 
have no husband. Je- 
sus said unto her, Thou 
hast well said, I have 
no husband: 18 for 
thou hast had five hus- 
bands; and he whom 
thou now hast is not 
thy husband: in that 
saidst thou truly. 
19 The woman saith 
unto him, Sir, I per- 
ceive that thou art a 
prophet. 20 Our fa- 
thers worshipped in 
this mountain; and ye 
say, that in Jerusalem 
is the place where men 
ought to worship. 
21 Jesus saith unto her, 
Woman, believe me, 
the hour cometh, when 
yeshall neither in this 
mountain, nor yet at 
Jerusalem,worship the 
Father. 22 Ye worship 
ye know not what: we 
know what we wor- 
ship: for salvation is 
of the Jews. 23 But 
the hour cometh, and 
now is, when the true 
worshippers shall wor- 
ship the Father in 
epirit and in truth: for 
t Father seeketh 
such to worship him. 
24 God ts a Spirit: and 
they that worship him 
must worship kim in 
spirit and in truth. 
25 The woman saith 
unto him, I know that 
Messias cometh, which 
is called Christ: when 
he is come, he will tell 
usallthings. 26 Jesus 
saith unto her, I that 
k unto thee am he. 
And upon this came 


τ [ov μὴ διψήσει .. 
διέρχωμαι ΤΑ. 


LTTraw. 


7 — ὃ LT[Tr]A. 
e 4 αὐτῷ ἴο him [1]Δ. 

& προσκυνεῖν δεῖ LITraW. 
k — αὐτὸν τ. 


IQANNH®. 


~ ef , ΄ , τι aK , ? ~ 
Tov.Udatog.rouTouv διψήσει πάλιν" 14 ὃς.δ᾽ ἂν mig ἐκ τοῦ 
this water will thirst again; but whoever my, drinkof the 


ὕδατος οὗ ἐγὼ δώσω αὐτῷ Yod.un “διΨψήσῳῃ! εἰς τὸν. αἰῶνα" 
water which [ willgive him inno wise shall thirst for ever, 


ἀλλὰ τὸ ὕδωρ 0* δώσω αὐτῷ" γενήσεται iv αὐτῷ πη 
but the water whichI will give tohim shall become in him a fountain 


ὕδατος ἁλλομένου εἰς ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 15 Λέγει πρὸς αὐτὸν 
of water ἘΡΣΙΑΒΊΠΕΙ up into life eternal eae *to Shim 


ἡ γυνή, Κύριε, δός μοι τοῦτο τὸ ὕδωρ, iva μὴ.διψῶ 
1the ?woman, Sir, give me thts water, that I may not thirst 


μηδὲ γἔρχωμαι" ἐνθάδε ἀντλεῖν. 16 Λέγει αὐτῇ τὸ" "Ἰησοῦς," 
nor come here to draw. ah he Sto *her Jesus, 


Ὕπαγε, φώνησον ὕτὸν ἄνδρα.σοῦ" καὶ ἐλθὲ ἐνθάδε. 17 ᾿Απε- 
6ο, call thy husband and come here. 2An- 


κρίθη ἡ γυνὴ Kai εἶπεν", “Οὐκιἔχω ἄνδρα." Λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ 
swered ‘the?woman and said, Ihave not ahusband. *Says *to *her 

Ἰησοῦς, Καλῶς “εἶπας,, “Ore ἄνδρα οὐκ.ἔχω: 18 πέντε 
ene, Well  didst thou say, A husband I have not; five 
yap ἄνδρας ἔσχες, Kai νῦν ὃν ἔχεις οὐκ.ιἔστιν σου 
‘for husbands thou hast had, and now hewhom thouhast is not ay 


ἀνήρ᾽ τοῦτο ἀληθὲξ᾿ εἴρηκας. 19 Λέγει αὐτῷ ἡ γυνή, 
husband: this ny thou hast spoken. Says *to Shim ‘the 7woman, 


Κύριε, θεωρῶ ὕτι προφήτης εἶ σύ. 20 οἱ. πατέρες ἡμῶν ἐν 
air; I perceive that Sarcphet 2art ‘thou. Our fathers in 


τούτῳ τῷ ὄρει! προσεκύνησαν᾽ και ὑμεῖς λέγετε ὅτι ἔν Ἵε- 
this mountain ἢ ΟΣΕΒΙΡΡΘα; and ye say that in Je 


ροσολύμοις ἐστὶν ὁ τόπος ὅπον = 8dei_ προσκυνεῖν." 21 Λέγει 
Tusalem is the place whereitis necessary to worship. Ee 


αὐτῇ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Miva, πίστευσόν μοι," ὅτι ἔ ἔρχεται ὥρα ὅτε 
3to *her 1 Jesus, Woman, believe me, that is coming an hour when 


οὔτε ἐν τῷ. ὄρει.τούτῳ οὔτε ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις προσκυνήσετε 
neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem shall ye worship 


τῷ πατρί. 22 ὑμεῖς προσκυνεῖτε ὃ οὐκ. οἴδατε. ἡμεῖς προσ- 
the Father, pore what he know not: we wor- 


κυνοῦμεν ὃ otBapier” ὅτι ἡ σωτηρία ἐκ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων ἐστίν. 
ship what we mow for salvation of the Jews is. 


23 ἰἸάλλ᾽" ἔρχεται ὥρα Kai νῦν ἐστιν, ὕτε οἱ ἀληθινοὶ προσ- 
But iscoming an hour and now is, when the true wor- 


κυνηταὶ προσκυνήσουσιν τῷ πατρὶ ἐν πνεύματι καὶ ἀληθείᾳ" 
shippers will worship the Father in spirit and = truth; 


καὶ. γὰρ ὁ πατὴρ τοιούτους ζητεῖ τοὺς προσκυνοῦντας αὐτόν. 
for also the Father 7such Xseeks who worship him. 


24 Πνεῦμα ὁ θεός' καὶ τοὺς προσκυνοῦντας ἑαὐτὸν" ἐν 
A spirit God [is], and they that worship bis in 


πνεύματι καὶ ἀληθείᾳ ἰδεῖ προσκυνεῖν." 25 Λέγει αὐτῷ ἡ 
wa and truth must Tee 3Says “to ®him ‘the 


γυνή, Οἶδα ore μεσσίας ἔρχεται, ὁ λεγόμενος ΧΡΙ ΤΟΣ, orav 
2woman, Iknowthat Messias is coming, who is called Christ ; when 


ἔλθῃ ἐ ἐκεῖνος ἀναγγελεῖ ἡμῖν πάντα." 26 Λέγει αὐτῇ ὁ Ἰη- 


IV. 


f 


7comes ‘he he willtell us all things. "Says “to*her ‘Je- 
σοῦς, aya εἰμι, ὁ λαλῶν σοι. 27 Καὶ ἐπὶ τούτῳ 
sus, am [786], ;who 7am “speaking “to ‘thee. And upon this 


W διψήσει LITrA. * + ἐγὼ 1 τ. 

a— Ἰησοῦς (read he > Says) (wje[trja. b σου τὸν ἄνδρα A. 

a ἄνδρα οὐκ ἔχω 1. 8 εἶπες τ. ἴ τῷ ὄρει τούτῳ GLTTrAW. 
h Τύναι, πίστευέ μοι L; Πίστενυέ μοι, γύναι ΤΎΤΑ. 1 ἀλλὰ 
1 προσκυνεῖν δεῖ T. ἢ ἅπαντα TTrA. 


. ὃ δώσω αὐτῷ] L. yé χομαι Tr 5 


IV. JOHN. 


27 AGov' οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ, καὶ Oavpacar' ὅτι μετὰ γυναικὸς 
came his disciples, and wondered that with awoman 


Ἴ , /, 
ἐλάλει οὐδεὶς μέντοι εἶπεν, Τί ζητεῖς; ἢ Τί λα- 
he was speaking; noone however said, What seekest thou? or Why speakest 
λεῖς μετ᾽ αὐτῆς ; 
thou with her? 


28 ᾿Αφῆκεν οὖν τὴν. ὑδρίαν.αὐτῆς ἡ γυνὴ Kai ἀπῆλθεν εἰς 


*Left “then Sher “waterpot ‘the 7woman and went away into 
τὴν πόλιν, Kai λέγει τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, 29 Δεῦτε, ἴδετε ἄνθρω- 
the city, and says tothe men, oe see aman 


mov ὃς εἶπέν μοι πάντα Ῥόσα" ἐποίησα᾽ μήτι οὗτός ἐστιν 
who told me allthingswhatsoever I did: *perchance ?this lis 


ὁ χριστός; 30 «Τξῆλθον "οὖν" ἐκ τῆς πόλεως, καὶ 
the Christ! Ehey: went forth therefore outofthe city, and 


χοντο πρὸς αὐτόν. 
unto him. 


31 Ἔν. "δὲ" τῷ μεταξὺ ἠρώτων αὐτὸν ot μαθηταί, λέ- 
Butin the meantime *were‘asking “him ‘the “disciples, say- 
YOVTEC, pEaEBS " φάγε. 32 Ὃ.δὲ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Eye ey 


ing, Rabbi, eat. Buthe said tothem, meat 


ἔχω φαγεῖν ἣν ὑμεῖς οὐκ.οἴδατε. 88 Ἔλεγον "οὖν μαθη- 
have Pe eat which ye know not. *Said “therefore ἘΠ eae 


Tai πρὸς ἀλλήλους, Μή τις ἤνεγκεν αὐτῷ αγεῖν ; 
ples to one pugles, 7Anyone ‘did bring him (anything to eat? 


34 Λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ Incovc, Ἑμὸν βρῶμά ἐστιν ἵνα “ποιῶ τὸ 
7Says *to ‘them 1Jesus, meat is that I should do the 


θέλημα τοῦ πέμψαντός με, Kai τελειώσω αὐτοῦ τὸ ἔργον. 
μ PY 
4 of him who sent me, and should finish his work. 


35 οὐχ ὑμεῖς ) λέγετε, ¢ Ore ἔτι Υτετράμηνόν᾽" ἐστιν Kai ὁ θερισμὸς 
*Not e say, shat yet four months itis andthe harvest 


ἔρχεται; ἰδού, λέγω ὑμῖν, Exdpare τοὺς. ὀφθαλμοὺς. ὑμῶν καὶ 
comes? Behold, Isay to you, Lift up your eyes and 


θεάσασθε τὰς χώρας, ὅτι λευκαί εἰσιν πρὸς θερισμὸν *70n.' 
868 the fields, for white they are to harvest already. 


36 δκαὶ! ὁ θερίζων μισθὸν λαμβάνει, Kai συνάγει καρπὸν 
And hethat reaps a reward receives, and gathers fruit 
εἰς ζωὴν αἰώνιον" ἵνα kai! ὁ σπείρων ὁμοῦ χαίρῃ 
unto life eternal, that both hethat sows peomerhes 5may rejoice 
καὶ ὁ θερίξῶν. 97 ἐν.γὰρ τούτῳ ὁ λόγος ἐστὶν “ὁ" ἀλη- 
land *he *that “reaps Forin this’ the saying is true, 


θινός, ὅτι ἄλλος ἐστὶν ὁ σπείρων, Kai ἄλλος ὁ θερίζων. 
τὰ Fone lit 7is who sows, and another who reaps. 


38 é ἐγώ ἀἀπέστειλα' ὑμᾶς θερίζειν ὃ οὐχ ὑμεῖς κεκοπιάκατε᾽" 
sent you toreap onwhich*not ‘ye “have laboured ; 


ἄλλοι κεκοπιάκασιν, καὶ ὑμεῖς εἰς τὸν.κόπον. αὐτῶν εἰσεληλύ- 


ἤρ- 


came 


" 


others havelaboured, and ye _ into their labour have en- 
θατε. 
tered. 
89 ᾿Ἐκ.δὲ τῆς.πόλεως.ἐκείνης πολλοὶ ἐπίστευσαν εἰς αὐτὸν 
But out of that city many believed on him 
τῶν “Σαμαρειτῶν," διὰ τὸν λόγον τῆς γυναικὸς μαρ- 
of the Samaritans, because of the word of the woman tes- 
n7AGav TIr. ° ἐθαύμαζον were wondering GLITrAW. ? ἃ whichT. 
® — ogy GLTTrAW. s — δὲ but [L]tTra. t ‘Papper T. ’ — οὖν W. 


Υ τετράμηνός GLTTrAW. τ ἤδη (read already he that reaps) T. 
>’ καὶ Tr[a]. ς — ὃ Trr[a]. 4 ἀπέσταλκα have sent T. 


251 


his disciples, and mar- 
velled that he talked 
with the woman: yet 
no man said, What 
seekest thou ? or, Why 
talkest thou with her? 


28 The woman then 
left her waterpot, and 
went her way into the 
city, and saith to the 
men, 29 Come, see a 
man, which told me all 
things that ever I did: 
is not this the Christ? 
30 Then they went out 
of the city, and came 
unto him. 


31 In the mean while 
his disciples prayed 
him, saying, aster, 
eat. 32 But he said 
unto them, [ have meat 
to eat that ye know 
not of. 33 Therefore 
said the disciples one 
to another, Hath any 
man brought him ought 
to eat? 34 Jesus saith 
unto them, My meat is 
to do the will of him 
that sent me, and to 
finish his work. 35Say 
not ye, There are yet 
four months, and then 
cometh harvest ἢ be- 
hold, I say unto you, 
Lift up your eyes, and 
look on the fields ; for 
they are white already 
to harvest. 36 And he 
that reapeth receiveth 
wages, and gathereth 
fruit unto life eternal: 
that both he that sow- 
eth and he that reap- 
eth may rejoice to- 
gether. 37 And herein 
is that saying true, One 
soweth, and another 
reapeth. 381 sent you 
to reap that whereon 
ye bestowed no labour: 
other men laboured, 
and ye are entered into 
their labours. 


39 And many of the 
Samaritans of that 
city believed on him 
for the saying of the 
woman, which testi- 


4 + [καὶ] and 1,. 
α ποιήσω LTrA. 
5. — καὶ G[L]TTra. 


© Σαμαριτῶν 1. 


2052 


fied, He told me all 
that ever I did. 40 So 
when the Samaritans 
were come unto him, 
they besought him 
that he would tarry 
with them: and he 
abode there two days. 
41 And many more be- 
lieved because of his 
own word ; 42 and said 
unto the woman, Now 
we believe, not be- 
cause of thy saying: 

for we have heard him 
ourselves, and know 
that this is indeed the 
Christ, the Saviour of 
the world. 


43 Now after two 
days he departed 
thence, and went into 
Galilee. 44 For Jesus 
himself testified, that 
a prophet hath no 
honour in his own 
country. 45 Then when 
he was come into Ga- 
lilee, the Galilzans 
received him, having 
seen all the things that 
he did at Jerusalem at 
the feast: for they 
also went unto the 
teast. 


46 So Jesus came 
again into Cana of 
Galilee, where he made 
the water wine. And 
there was a certain no- 
bleman, whose son was 
sick at Capernaum. 
47 When he heard that 
Jesus was come out of 
Judza into Galilee, he 
went unto him, and 
besought him that he 
would come down, 
and heal his son: for 
he was at the point of 
death. 48 Then said 
Jesus unto him, Ex- 
cept ye see signs and 
wonders, ye will not 
believe. 49 The no- 
bleman saith untohim, 
Sir, come down ere my 
child die. 50 Jesus 
saith unto him, Go 
thy way ; thy son liv- 
eth. And the man be- 
lieved the word that 
Jesus had spoken unto 
him, and he went his 
way. 51 And as he was 
now going down, his 
servants met him, and 


fa@ which TTra. 
[L]TTra. 
came GLTTrAW. 
5 — αὐτὸν [L]TTrA. 


1_ ὃ era 


LV. 
ἐποίησα. 40 ‘Qc 
I did. When 


οὖν ἦλθον πρὸς αὐτὸν ot SZapapeirat," ἠρώτων αὐτὸν 
therefore cams to him the Sn they asked him 


μεῖναι παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς Kai ἔμεινεν ἐκεῖ δύο ἡμέρας. 41 Kai 
to abide with them, and heabode there two days. And 


πολλῷ. πλείους ἐπίστευσαν διὰ τὸν.λύγον.αὐτοῦ" 42 τῇ.τε 


ΙΏΑΝΝΗΣ. 


Ὅτι εἶπέν μοι πάντα ὅσα" 
Hetold me all Boece whatsoever 


τυρούσης, 
tifying, 


many more believed because of his word ; and to the 
γυναικὶ ἔλεγον, h’Qru' οὐκέτι διὰ τὴν σὴν λαλιὰν πισ- 
woman they said, No longer because of Bou. saying we 


αὐτοὶ. γὰρ ἀκηκόαμεν, καὶ οἴδαμεν ὅτι οὗτός ἐστιν 
for ourselves have heard, and we a that this is 


ἀληθῶς ὁ σωτὴρ τοῦ κόσμου, i6 χριστός." 
truly the Saviour of the world, the Christ. 


43 Mera.dé τὰς δύο ἡμέρας ἐξῆλθεν ἐκεῖθεν, *eai ἀπὴλ- 


τεύομεν᾽" 
believe, 


But after the two days hewenttforth thence, and went 
θεν! εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν. 44 αὐτὸς. γὰρ ἰὸ! ᾿Ιησοῦς ἐμαρτύρη- 
away into Galilee ; for himself ‘Jesus testifise, 
σεν, OTL προφήτης ἐν ΤῊΣ ἰδίᾳ πατρίδι τιμὴν οὐκ. ἔχει. 

that a prophet in his own country honour has not. 
45 ™ Ore! οὖν ἦλθεν εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν ἐδέξαντο αὐτὸν 

When therefore he came into Galilee sreceived *him 
ot Γαλιλαῖοι, πάντα ἑωρακότες "ἃ! ἐποίησεν ἐν ‘Ie- 
‘the ?Galileans, all things having seen which he did in Je- 
ροσολύμοις ἔν τῇ ἑορτῇ καὶ αὐτοὶ. γὰρ ἦλθον εἰς τὴν 
rusalem during the feast, for they also went to the 
ἑορτήν. 
feast. 

40 Ἦλθεν οὖν “ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς" πάλιν Ῥ εἰς τὴν Kava τῆς 


*Came “therefore 1 Jesus again to Cana 


Γαλιλαίας, ὅπου ἐποίησεν τὸ ὕδωρ οἶνον. «καὶ ἦν!" τις 
of Galilee, where hemade the water wine. And there was acertain 
βασιλικός, οὗ ὁ υἱὸς ἠσθένει ἐν Καπερναούμ." 47 οὗτος 
courtier, whose son wassick in Capernaum, He 
ἀκούσας ὅτι ᾿Ιησοῦς ἥκει ἐκ τῆς lovdaiac εἰς τὴν Γαλι- 
having heard that Jesus Πϑᾶ come out of Judza into Gali- 


Aaiay, ἀπῆλθεν πρὸς αὐτόν, Kai ἠρώτα "αὐτὸν" ἵνα κατα- 
166, went to him, and _ asked him that he would 


By καὶ ἰάσηται αὐτοῦ τὸν υἱόν" ἤμελλεν. γὰρ ἀποθνήσκειν. 
comedown and heal his son; forhe was about to die. 


48 εἶπεν οὖν ὁ Ἰησοῦς πρὸς αὐτόν, ᾿Εὰν.μὴ σημεῖα καὶ 
Ξ341α *therefore 1Jesus to him, Unless signs and 


τέρατα ἴδητε οὐ-μὴ πιστεύσητε. 49 Λέγει πρὸς ore ὁ 
wonders yesee in no wise will ye believe. 3Says to the 


βασιλικός, Κύριε, κατάβηθι πρὶν ἀποθανεῖν πὸ τῆν Τὰ ου. 
“courtier, Sir, come down before *dies imy “little *child, 


50 Λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Mie pete d.vidc.cov fy. ‘Kat 
*Says “to *him Jesus, thy son πῶς And 


ἐπίστευσεν ὁ ἄνθρωπος τῷ ΜῊΝ τῷ" εἶπεν αὐτῷ © ᾿ΙἸησοῦς, 
“believed ‘the man the word which said *to *him Jesus, 


kai ἐπορεύετο. 51 ἤδη.δὲ αὐτοῦ.καταβαίνοντος οἱ.δοῦλοι."αὐ- 
and went away. But already as he was going down his bondmen 
Σαμαρῖται τ. [ore] 1. 1 — ὁ χριστός LTTrA. k — καὶ ἀπῆλθεν 

m ὡς Τὶ. 2 σα Whatsoever LTrA. ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς (read he 
P + ὁ Ἰησοῦς Jesus w. 4 Hy δέ 7. r ‘Kapageaite LTTraW. 
t — καὶ [L}T[Tr]A. Y ὃν LTTrA. w + ὁ LTTrAW. x — αὐτοῦ 


(read the bondmen) T. 


τευ. JOHN. 
τοῦ! Υἀπήντησαν" αὐτῷ, *kai ἀπήγγειλαν" "λέγοντες," Ὅτι 
met him, and reported, saying, 
ὁ.παῖς σου" ζῇ. 52’ErvOero οὖν “παρ᾽ αὐτῶν τὴν ὥραν" 
Thy child lives. He inquired therefore from them the hour 


ἐν ἣ κομψότερον ἔσχεν. kai εἷπον' αὐτῷ, Ὅτι “χθὲς! 
in which Sbetter the *got. And they said to him, Yesterday 


“ < , ? ~ > A « , a 
ὥραν ἑβδόμην ἀφῆκεν αὐτὸν ὁ πυρετός. 53 Eyvw 
{at the] 7hour 1seventh left him the _ fever. sKnew 
οὖν ὁ πατὴρ ὅτι ἐν" ἐκείνῃ τῇ ὥρᾳ ἐν εἶπεν 
“therefore'the *father that [it was] at that hour in which ?said 
αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Ἰησοῦς, "Ore! ὁ.υἱός.σου ζῇ. Kai ἐπίστευσεν αὐτὸς 


*to *him Jesus, Thy son lives. And he “believed *himself 
‘ « DAY, ᾽ ~ ee ~ h , 2 ~ 
καὶ ἡ.οἰκία αὐτοῦ ὅλη. 54 τοῦτο ἢ πάλιν δεύτερον σημεῖον 

and his*house ‘whole. This again a second sign 

? δ, tc? ~ ? ‘ ? ~ ? , ᾽ A 

ἐποίησεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς, ἐλθὼν ἐκ τῆς lovdaiac εἰς τὴν Γα- 
did Jesus, having come out of Judza into Ga- 

λιλαίαν. 

lilee. 


5 Μετὰ ταῦτα ἦν ἑορτὴ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, καὶ ἀνέβη *o! 
After these things was afeast of the Jews, and *went *up 
Ἰησοῦς εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα. 2 ἔστιν.δὲ ἐν τοῖς ‘Tepocoddporc 
* Jesus to Jerusalem. And thereis in Jerusalem 
ἐπὶ τῇ προβατικῇ κολυμβήθρα, ἰὴ ἐπιλεγομένη" “EBpaiori 
at the sheepgate a pool, which [18] called in Hebrew 


ὩΒηθεσδά,! πέ ic ἔ ἐν ταύ ἐ 
? . 

ηθεσδὰ,} πέντε στοὰς ἔχουσα. 3 ἐν ταύταις κατέκειτο 

Bethesda, five porches having. In these were lying 


πλῆθος "πολὺ τῶν ἀσθενούντων, τυφλῶν, χωλῶν, 
a *multitude ‘great of those who were sick, blind, lame, 
ξηρῶν, °ékdeyopévwy τὴν τοῦ ὕδατος κίνησιν. 4 ἄγγελος 
withered, awaiting the *of *the ‘*water moving. 7An *angel 
yap? κατὰ.καιρὸν κατέβαινεν ἐν τῇ κολυμβήθρᾳ, Kai ἐτά- 
for ἔτοτια {ΐτηθ ἴο ὀΐω descended in the pool, and agi- 
ρασσεν τὸ ὕδωο᾽ ὁ οὖν πρῶτος ἐμβὰς μετὰ THY ταραχὴν 
tated the water. He who therefore first entered after the agitation 
τοῦ ὕδατος; ὑγιὴς ἐγίνετο, W-dnToTe' κατείχετο νοσήματι." 
ofthe water, well ‘became, whatever *he*was‘*held*by ‘disease. 
ὃ Ἦν.δε τις ἄνθρωπος ἐκεῖ ττριακονταοκτὼ" ἔτη ἔχων ἐν 


But‘*was'a?certain “man there *thirty *eight ‘years ‘being in 
τῇ ἀσθενείᾳ". 6 τοῦτον ἰδὼν ὁ Ιησοῦς κατακείμενον. Kai 

infirmity. *Him “seeing 1 Jesus lying, and 
γνοὺς ὅτι πολὺν ἤδη χρόνον ἔχει, λέγει αὐτῷ, θέλεις 


knowing that along ?already ‘time 
ὑγιὴς γενέσθαι; 7 ἀπεκρίθη αὐτῷ ὁ ἀσθενῶν, 


he has been, says to him, Desirest thou 
Κύριε, av- 


well to become? “Answered ‘him ‘the “infirm [*man], Sir, a 
θρωπον οὐκἔχω, ἵνα ὅταν ταραχθῇὴ τὸ ὕδωρ ‘Barry! 


man I have not, that when *has*been°agitated ‘the *water he may put 


pe εἰς THY κολυμβήθραν: ἐν.ᾧ.δὲ ἔρχομαι ἐγὼ ἄλλος πρὸ 
me into the pool ; but while 2am “coming *I another before 
ἐμοῦ καταβαίνει. ὃ Λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, “Eyepa,' ἢ ἄρον 
me descends, *Says *to *him 1 Jesus, Arise, take up 


253 


told him, saying, Thy 
son liveth. 52 Then in- 
quired he of them the 
hour when he began 
to amend. And they 
said unto him, Yester- 
day at the seventh 
hour the fever left 
him. 53 So the father 
knew that it was at 
the same hour, in the 
which Jesus said unto 
him, Thy son liveth: 
and himself believed, 
and his whole house. 
54 This zis again the 
second miracle that 
Jesus did, when he 
was come out of Ju- 
dza into Galilee. 


V. After this there 
was a feast of the 
Jews; and Jesus went 
upto Jerusalem. 2Now 
there is at Jerusalem 
by the sheep market a 
pool, which is called in 
the Hebrew tongue 
Bethesda, haying five 
porches. 3 In these lay 
8 great multitude of 
impotent folk,of blind, 
halt, withered, wait- 
ing for the moving of 
the water. 4 For an 
angel went down at 
a@ certain season into 
the pool, and troubled 
the water: whosoever 
then first after the 
troubling of the 
water stepped in 
was made whole of 
whatsoever disease he 
had. 5 And a cer- 
tain man was there, 
which had an infirmity 
thirty and eight years. 
6 When Jesus saw him 
lie, and knew that he 
had been now a long 
time in that case, he 
saith unto him, Wilt 
thou be made whole? 
7 The impotent man 
answered him, Sir, I 
have noman, when the 
water is troubled, to 
put me into the pool: 
but while I am com- 
ing, another steppeth 
down before me. 8 Je- 
sus saith unto him, 
Rise, take up thy bed, 


Υ ὑπήντησαν LITrA. 2 καὶ ἤγγειλαν T; [καὶ ἀπήγγειλαν] Tra. 
Ὁ αὐτοῦ (read that his child eeaiyeria® Ing iA J 
fore they said TTra. ¢& ἐχθὲς LTTrAW. 
Tr[a]. i + ἡ the (feast) τ. 
gatha τ. 5 -- πολὺ [L]TTrA. 
of [the] Lord L. 4 οἱῳδηποτοῦν L. 
τοῦ bis (infirmity) [L]rtra. t βάλῃ GLTTrAW. 


Ε --Οτι LTTrA. 
170 λεγόμενον T. 


f — ἐν Τ{ττ]. 
k — 9 LTTrAW. 


τ Ἔγειρε LTTrAW. 


ς τὴν ὥραν Tap αὐτῶν LTTrA. 


ο --- ἐκδεχομένων to end of verse 4 [G]TTra. 
τ τριάκοντα Kat (— καὶ [L]Tr) ὀκτὼ GLTTrAW. 


ἃ — λέγοντες τ. 
4 εἶπον οὖν there- 
h + δὲ now (this) 
τὰ Βηθζα θά Beth- 
Ρ + [κυρίου] 
5. + av- 
¥ -+ [καὶ] and L, 


254 


and walk. 9 And im- 
mediately the man 
was made whole, and 
took up his bed, and 
walked: and on the 
same day was the sab- 
bath. 10 The Jews 
therefore said unto 
him that was cured, 
It is the sabbath day: 
it is not lawful for 
thee to carry thy bed. 
11 He answered them, 
He that made me 
whole, the same said 
unto me, Take up thy 
bed, and walk. 12 Then 
asked they him, What 
man is that which said 
unto thee, Take up 
thy bed, and walk? 
13 And he that was 
healed wist not who 
it was: for Jesus had 
conveyed himself a- 
way, a multitude be- 
ing in that place. 
14 Afterward Jesus 
findeth him in the 
temple, and said unto 
him, Behold, thou art 
made whole: sin no 
more, lest a worse 
thing come unto thee. 
15 The man depurted, 
and told the Jews that 
it was Jesus, which 
had made him whole. 
16 And therefore did 
the Jews persecute Je- 
sus, and sought to 
slay him, because he 
had done these things 
on the sabbath day. 
17 But Jesus answer- 
ed them, My Father 
worketh hitherto, and 
I work. 18 Therefore 
the Jews sought the 
more to kill him, be- 
cause he not only had 
broken the sabbath, 
put said also that God 
was his Father, mak- 
ing himself equal with 
God. 19 Then answer- 
ed Jesus and said unto 
them, Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, The Son 
can do nothing of him- 
self, but what heseeth 
the Father do: for 
what things soever he 
doeth, these also do- 
eth the Son likewise. 
20 For the Father 
loveth the Son, and 


ITIQANN HE &. 


τὸν Σκράββατόν" σου, Kai 


Vv. 
περιπάτει. 9 Kai YevOéiwe" ἐγένετο 


δον bed, and walk. And immediately *became 

ὑγιὴς ὁ ἄνθρωπος, καὶ ἦρεν τὸν. Ζκράβ βατον" αὐτοῦ, καὶ 

*well ‘the en, and took uP his bed, and 

περιεπάτει: ἦν. δὲ σάββατον ἐν ἐκεί) ἢ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ. 10 Ἔλεγον 
walked; anditwas sabbath on 3514 

οὖν οἱ Ἰουδαῖοι τῷ ee ᾿Σάββατόν! ἐστιν" 
*therefore'the 7Jews tohimwho had been healed, Sabbath it is, 


Ζορὺὐκ ἔξεστίν σοι apa τὸν τεραβίβατον, ᾿ς. 11 ᾽Απεκρίθη 
it is not lawful for thee to take up. the He answered 


αὐτοῖς, Ὃ ποιήσας με ὑγιῆ, ἐκεῖνός μοι εἶπεν, ἾΑρον τὸν 
them, Hewho made me well, he tome said, — up 


χκμράββατόν!" σου καὶ περιπάτει. 12 ᾿Ηρώτησαν Coby" αὐτόν, 
thy bed and walk. They aan ?therefore *him, 


Τίς ἐστιν ὁ ἄνθρωπος ὁ εἰπών σοι, ΓΑρον “τὸν ipa Banca 
Who is’ the man who said to thee, Take up 


σου καὶ περιπάτει; 13 Ὁ δὲ fiabeic' od«.gde τίς ἐστιν" 
ERY; and walk? But he who had been healed knew not who it is, 


ὁ. γὰρ. Ἰησοῦς ἐξένευσεν, ὄχλου ὄντος ἐν τῷ τόπῳ. 14 Μετὰ 
for Jesus had moved 3.767; 8 crowd being in the place, After 


ταῦτα εὑρίσκει αὐτὸν ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ, Kai εἶπεν αὐτῷ, 
these things “finds *him 1Jesus said 


in the temple, oud to him, 
"Ide ὑγιὴς γέγονας" μηκέτι ἁμάρτανε, ἵνα μὴ χεῖρόν 
Behold, well thou hast become: 320 *more isin, that “ποῦ *worse 


Sri σοι! γένηται. 15 ᾿᾿Απῆλθεν ὁ ἄνθρωπος καὶ ἰἀνήγ- 
1something °to *thee *happens. Went away the man and told 


γειλεν" τοῖς Ιουδαίοις Ott ᾿Ιησοῦς ἐστιν 6 ποιήσας αὐτὸν 
the Jews that Jesus itis who made him 


ὑγιῆ. 16 Kai διὰ τοῦτο ἐδίωκον "τὸν ᾿Τησοῦν οἱ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι," 
well. And because of this “persecuted “Jesus ‘the 2Jews, 


ἱκαὶ ἐζήτουν αὐτὸν ἀποκτεῖναι. ὅτι ταῦτα ἐποίει ἐν caB- 
and sought him to kill, because these things he did on asab- 


βάτῳ. 17 ὁ. δὲ. "Ἰησοῦς" ἀπεκρίνατο αὐτοῖς, Ὃ.πατήρ.μου 
bath. But Jesus answered them, My Father 
ἕως.ἄρτι ἐργάζεται, κἀγὼ ἐργάζομαι. 18 Διὰ τοῦτο "οὖν" 
until now works, ΑΙ work. Because of this therefore 


μᾶλλον ἐζήτουν αὐτὸν οἱ Ἰουδαῖοι ἀποκτεῖναι, ὅτι ov μόνον 
themore sought ‘him ‘the 7Jews Sto *kill, because not only 


ἔλυεν τὸ σάββατον, ἀλλὰ Kai πατέρα ἴδιον ἔλεγεν τὸν 
did he break the _— sabbath, but also *°Father “his town ‘called 


θεόν, ἴσον ἑαυτὸν ποιῶν τῷ θεῷ. 19 ἀπεκρίνατο οὖν ὃ 
2God, equal himself smaking to God. *Answered “therefore 


᾿Ιησοῦς καὶ °elrev'! αὐτοῖς, ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, οὐ δύναται 
1Jesus and said tothem, Verily verily Isay toyou, 315 able 


ὁ υἱὸς ποιεῖν ap ἑαυτοῦ οὐδέν, Ῥέὰν" μή τι βλέπῃ 
1the 7Son todo from himself nothing, unless anything he may see 


τὸν πατέρα ποιοῦντα ἃ. γὰρ. ἂν" ἐκεῖνος ποιῇ, ταῦτα καὶ 
the Father doing : for whatever he does, these ehinga also 
ὁ υἱὸς τὁμοίως ποιεῖ." 20 ὁ. γὰρ πατὴρ φιλεῖ τὸν υἱόν, καὶ 
the Son inlike manner does. For the Father loves the Son, and 


χ κράβαττον LITraWw. 


bed) L. 
gov T[Tr]A. 
h + [καὶ] and L. 
ἀποκτεῖναι G[L 

P ἄν τ. i 


b + ὃς δὲ who however LTr. 
e κράβαττόν L[Tr]w. 


γα. 
ἄν] Tr. 


Υ — εὐθέως T. z eh καὶ and [w]T[Tr]A. 

— οὖν [L]1{Tr]Ja. 
fee was impotent T. 
i εἶπεν π᾿ Κ οἱ Ιουδαῖοι τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ΟΥ̓ΤΕΑ τ 
— Ἰησοῦς (read he answered) tT. 


ae ΄ 
τ ποίει ὁμοίως T. 


5. σον (read thy 

“τ τὸν κράββατόν 

& σοί τι GLITraW. 

1 — καὶ ἐζήτουν αὐτὸν 
— οὖν T. 9 ἔλεγεν Ὑ, 


Vv. JOHN. 


πάντα δείκνυσιν αὐτῷ ἃ αὐτὸς ot’ Kai μείζονα τοὐ- 
all things shews to him which 7himself *he does; and greater than 


των δείξει αὐτῷ ἔργα, ἵνα ὑμεῖς "θαυμάζητε." 21 ὥσπερ 
3these *he *will*shew “him ‘works, that ye may wonder. ?Even 345 


γὰρ ὁ πατὴρ ἐγείρει τοὺς νεκροὺς καὶ ζωοποιεῖ, οὕτως καὶ ὁ 
for the Father raisesup the dead and getekens; thus also the 


υἱὸς οὺς θέλει ζωοποιεῖ. 22 οὐδὲ γὰρ ὁ πατὴρ κρίνει οὐδένα, 
Son whom he will EO Sai for the Father judas no one, 


ἀλλὰ τὴν κρίσιν πᾶσαν δέδωκεν τῷ υἱῷ, 23 ἵνα πάντες 
but peers 1411 has given tothe Son, that all 


τιμῶσιν τὸν υἱὸν καθὼς τιμῶσιν τὸν πατέρα. ὃ μὴ.τιμῶν 
may honour the Son even 88 ey honour the Father. He that honours not 


τὸν υἱὸν οὐ.τιμᾷ τὸν πατέρα τὸν πέμψαντα αὐτόν. 24 ᾿Αμὴν 
the Son ries not the Father who sent him, πεῖν 


ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι ὁ τὸν. λόγον. μου ἀκούων, καὶ πιστεύων 
perily: I say to you, that hethat my word hears, and _ believes 


τῷ πέμψαντί με, ἔχει ζωὴν αἰώνιον, καὶ εἰς κρίσιν οὐκ 
him who sent me, has life eternal, and into judgment “ποῦ 


ἔρχεται, ἀλλὰ μεταβέβηκεν ἐκ τοῦ θανάτου εἰς τὴν ζωήν. 
comes, but has peseed out of death into life. 


25 ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι ἔρχεται ὥρα Kai νῦν ἐστιν, 
τινι verily Isay toyou, that is coming; an) hour and now is, 


ὅτε οἱ νεκροὶ ᾿ἀκούσονται" τῆς φωνῆς τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ, Kai 
whenthe dead shall hear the voice ofthe Son of God, and 


οἱ ἀκούσαντες “ζήσονται. 26 ὥσπερ.γὰρ ὁ πατὴρ ἔχει 
those pages) heard shall live. For even as τ Father has 


ζωὴν ἐν ἑαυτῷ, οὕτως “ἔδωκεν καὶ τῷ υἱῷ" ζωὴν ἔχειν 
life in himself, 80 he gave also tothe Son life to have 


ἐν ἑαυτῷ. 27 καὶ ἐξουσίαν ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ “καὶ! κρίσιν 
in himself, and authority gave to him also judgment 


ποιεῖν, ὅτι υἱὸς ἀνθρώπου ἐστίν. 28 μὴ.θαυμάζετε τοῦτο" 
to execute, because Son of man he is. Wonder not at this, 


Ore ἔρχεται ὥρα ἐν ἢ πάντες οἱ ἐν τοῖς μνημείοις taxov- 
for ee τ an*hour in which 41] those in the tombs shall 


σονται τῆς.φωνῆς.αὐτοῦ, 29 καὶ ἐκπορεύσονται, οἱ τὰ 
hear his voice, and shall come forth, those that 


ἀγαθὰ ποιήσαντες εἰς ἀνάστασιν ζωῆς, οἱ 7δὲ") τὰ φαῦλα 
good piace to aresurrection of life, and those that evil 


πράξαντες εἰς ἀνάστασιν κρίσεως. 80 οὐ δύναμαι ἐγὼ ποιεῖν 
did to a resurrection of coe 2Amable “I todo 


am’ ἐμαυτοῦ οὐδέν᾽ καθὼς ἀκούω κρίνω, Kai ἡ κρίσις ἡ 


from myself nothing ; evenas [66 Ijudge, and 2judgment 
ἐμὴ δικαία ἐστίν: ὅτι οὐ.ζητῶ τὸ θέλημα τὸ ἐμόν, ἀλλὰ τὸ 
‘my ‘just 515, because I seek not my, but the 


θέλ τοῦ πέμψαντός με ᾿πατρός. 31 ἘΠ: ἐγὼ μαρτυρῶ 
sve of the Suva Jags Father. ¥ eagle 


περὶ ἐμαυτοῦ, ἡ-μαρτυρία.μου οὐκ.ἔστιν ἀληθής. 92 ἄλλος 
conomaning myself, my witness is not true. Another 
ἐστὶν ὁ μαρτυρῶν περὶ ἐμοῦ, καὶ *olda' ὅτι ἀληθής ἐστιν 


and I know that 
ἐμοῦ. 33 Ὑμεῖς ἀπεστάλ- 


true 


τὸ is who bears witness concerning me, is 


ἡ μαρτυρία ἣν μαρτυρεῖ περὶ 


the witness which he witnesses SemeceLTEne, me. have 
κατε πρὸς Ῥ Ἰωάννην" καὶ μεμαρτύρηκεν τῇ ἀλ θείᾳ: 34 ἐ ἐγὼ 
sent unto John and hehas borne witness tothe truth. 1 


255 


sheweth him all things 
that himself doeth; 
and he will shew him 
greater works than 
these, that ye may 
marvel. 21 For as the 
Father raiseth up the 
dead, and quickeneth 
them; even so the Son 
quickeneth whom he 
will. 22 For the Fa- 
ther judgeth no man, 
but hath committed 
all judgment unto the 
Son: 23 that all men 
should honour the Son, 
even as they honour 
the Father. He that 
honoureth not the Son 
honoureth not the Fa- 
ther which hath sent 
him. 24 Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, He 
that heareth my word, 
and believeth on him 
that sent me, hath 
everlasting life, and 
shall not come into 
condemnation ; but is 

passed from death un- 
to life. 25 Verily, ve- 
rily, I say unto you, 
The hour is coming, 
and now is, when the 
dead shall hear the 
voice of the Son of 
God: and they that 
hear shall live. 26 For 
as the Father hath life 
in himself; so hath he 
given to the Son to 
have life in himself ; 
27 and hath given him 
authority to execute 
judgment also, be- 
cause he is the Son of 
man. 28 Marvel not 
at this: for the hour 
is coming, in the which 
all that are in the 
graves shall hear his 
voice, 29 and shall 
come forth; they that 
have done good, unto 


the resurrection of 
life; and they that 
have done evil, unto 


the resurrection of 
damnation. 30 I can 
of mine own self do 
nothing: as I hear, I 
judge : and my judg- 
ment is just; because 
I seek not mine own 
will, but the will of 
the Father which hath 
sent me. 31 If I bear 
witness of myself, my 
witness is not true 
32 There is another 
that beareth witness 
of me; and I know 
that the witness which 
he witnesseth of me is 
true. 33 Ye sent unto 
John, and he bare wit- 
ness unto the truth. 


5 θαυμάζετε wonder τ. t ἀκούσουσιν TTr. 
TTrA. X — καὶ LTTrA. y — δὲ and (u}r[tr]a. 
GLTTraw. 5 οἴδατε ye know T. Ὁ Ιωάνην Tr. 


ἡ φήσουσιν LTTra. 


¥ καὶ τῷ υἱῷ ἔδωκεν 


t — πατρός (read of him who sent me) 


256 


34 But I receive not 
testimony from man: 
but these things I say, 
that ye might be saved. 
35 He was a burning 
and a shining light: 
and ye were willing 
for a season to rejoice 
‘in his light. 36 But I 
have eater witness 
than that of John: for 
the works which the 
Father hath given me 
to finish, the same 
works that I do, bear 
witness of me, that 
the Father hath sent 
me. 37 And the Father 
himself, which hath 
sent me, hath borne 
witness of me. Ye 
have neither heard his 
voice at any time, nor 
seen his shape. 38 And 
ye have not his word 
abiding in you: for 
whom he hath sent, 
him ye believe not. 
39 Search the scrip- 
tures; for in them ye 
think ye have eternal 
life: and they are they 
which testify of me. 
40 And ye will not 
come to me, that ye 
might have life. 411 
receive not honour 
from men. 42 But I 
know you, that ye have 
not the love of God in 
you. 431am come in 
my Father’s name, and 
ye receive me not: if 
another shall come in 
his own name, him ye 
will receive. 44 How 
can ye believe, which 
receive honour one of 
another, and seek not 


the honour that com- . 


eth from God only? 
45 Do not think that 
I will accuse you to 
the Father: there is 
one that accuseth you, 
even Moses, in whom 
‘ye trust. 46 For had 
ye believed Moses, ye 
would have believed 
me: for he wrote of 
me. 47 But if ye be- 
lieve not his writings, 
how shall ye believe 
my words? 


© ἀγαλλιαθῆναι GLTTrAW. 
& — ἐγὼ (read ποιῶ I do) Lrtra. 


ὑμῖν μένοντα TTrA. 
θεοῦ 1. 
LITrA ; Μωῦσῃ Ww. 


ο λήμψεσθε LTTrA. 


ΙΏΑΝΝΗΣ. ἯΙ 
δὲ οὐ παρὰ ἀνθρώπου τὴν μαρτυρίαν λαμβάνω, ἀλλὰ ταῦ- 
‘but “ποὺ *from 7™man 5witness sreceive, but these 

, a « » ~ ? ~ 5 ε ΄ « 
τα λέγω ἵνα ὑμεῖς σωθῆτε. 385 ἐκεῖνος ἦν ὁ λύχνος ὁ 
things Isay that ye may be saved. He was the ‘lamp 
καιόμενος καὶ φαίνων, ὑμεῖς.δὲ ἠθελήσατε “ἀγαλλιασθῆναι! 


‘burning 7and “shining, andye were willing to rejoice 
πρὸς ὥραν ἐν τῷ.φωτὶ. αὐτοῦ. 36 ἐγὼὠ.δὲ ἔχω τὴν μαρτυρίαν 
for an hour in his light. ButI have the witness 
ἀμείζω" τοῦ “Iwavvou'' τὰ.γὰρ ἔργα ἃ fédwxév' po ὁ 
greater than John’s ; forthe works which “gave “me ‘the 
πατὴρ iva τελειώσω αὐτά, αὐτὰ.τὰ. ἔργα ἃ Biyw" 
2Father that Ishould complete them, the works themselves which I 


ποιῶ, μαρτυρεῖ περὶ ἐμοῦ OTe ὁ πατήρ με ἀπέσταλκεν. 
do, bear witness concerning me thatthe Father me has sent. 
37 καὶ ὁ πέμψας pe πατήρ, "αὐτὸς! μεμαρτύρηκεν περὶ 
And the *who “sent *me *Father, himself has borne witness concerning 
ἐμοῦ. οὔτε φωνὴν.αὐτοῦ ἱἀκηκόατε πώποτε," οὔτε εἶδος 
me. Neither his voice have ye heard at any time, nor “*form 
αὐτοῦ ἑωράκατε. 38 καὶ τὸν.λόγον.αὐτοῦ oiK.éxere Ἐμένοντα 
*his have ye seen. And his word yehavenot abiding 
ἐν ὑμῖν." ὅτι ὃν ἀπέστειλεν ἐκεῖνος, τούτῳ ὑμεῖς οὐ-πιστεύετε. 
in you, for whom ?sent The, him ye believe not. 
Vv ~ I 4 4 er « - - ? > ~ A 
39 "Ἐρευνᾶτε" rac γραφάς, ore ὑμεῖς δοκεῖτε ἐν αὐταῖς ζωὴν 


Ye search the scriptures, for ye think in them life 
αἰώνιον ἔχειν, Kai ἐκεῖναί εἰσιν at μαρτυροῦσαι περὶ 
eternal ἴο have, and they are they which bearwitness concerning 


? L. 3 ‘ ? , ? ~ , e \ » 
ἐμοῦ: 40 καὶ οὐ.θέλετε ἐλθεῖν πρός με, ἵνα ζωὴν ἔχητε. 
me; and yeareunwilling tocome ἴο me, that life yemay have. 
41 Δόξαν παρὰ ἀνθρώπων οὐ-.λαμβάνω" 42 πιἀλλ᾽᾽ ἔγνωκα 
Glory from men I receive not ; but I have known 
ὑμᾶς Ore "τὴν ἀγάπην τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ.ἔχετε! ἔν ἑαυτοῖς. 43 ἐγὼ 
you that the love of God ye have ποῦ in yourselves. af 
? {Z ? Coe J , ~ l4 ᾿ ? ’ , 
ἐλήλυθα ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ.πατρός.μου, Kai ob-AapBaveETE με" 
havecome in the name of my Father, and yereceivenot me; 
ἐὰν ἄλλος ἔλθῃ ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τῷ ἰδίῳ, ἐκεῖνον Anpeobe.!! 
if anothershould come in *name ‘*his *7own, him ye will receive. 
44 πῶς δύνασθειὑμεῖς πιστεῦσαι, δόξαν Ῥπαρὰ ἀλλήλων 


How are ye able to believe, 3glory *from one “another 
λαμβάνοντες, καὶ τὴν δόξαν τὴ παρὰ τοῦ μόνου “θεοῦ" 
lwho “receive, and the glory which[is] from the only God 


οὐ.ζητεῖτε ; 45 μὴ. δοκεῖτε ὅτι ἐγὼ κατηγορήσω ὑμῶν πρὸς TOY 
ye seek not? Think not that I will accuse you to the 
πατέρα ἔστιν ὁ κατηγορῶν ὑμῶν, "Μωσῆς," εἰς ὃν 
Father: there is [one] who accuses you, Moses, in whom 
ὑμεῖς ἠλπίκατε. 46 εἰ. γὰρ ἐπιστεύετε"Μωσῇ," ἐπιστεύετε.ἂν 


ye have hoped. Forif yebelieved Moses, yewould have believed 
ἐμοί: περὶ. γὰρ ἐμοῦ ἐκεῖνος ἔγραψεν. 47 εἰ.δὲ τοῖς ἐκείνου 
me, forconcerning me he wrote. But if his 
γράμμασιν ov.miorEevEeTe, πῶς τοῖς.ἐμοῖς. ῥήμασιν πιστεύ- 
writings ye believe not, how my words shall ye 
OETE ; 
believe ? 


ἃ μείζων LTrA. ε Ἰωάνου Tr. f δέδωκέν has given TTra. 
h ἐκεῖνος TTrA. i πώποτε ἀκηκόατε LITrAW. k ἐν 
m ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. Ὁ οὐκ ἔχετε τὴν ἀγάπην τοῦ 


1 ἐραυνᾶτε TTrA. 1 οὖ, TOU 
4 [θεοῦ] L. τ Μωῦὐσῆς LITrAW. " Mwioes 


P παρ᾽ A, 


Vill JOHN. 


6 Μετὰ ταῦτα ἀπῆλθεν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς πέραν τῆς θαλάσσης 
After these things *went “away 1Jesus over the sea 
τῆς Γαλιλαίας τῆς Τιβεριάδος" 2 ‘kai ἠκολούθει! αὐτῷ ὄχλος 
of Galilee (of Tiberias), and ‘followed Shim 'a *crowd 
πολύς, ὅτι “ἑώρων, αὐτοῦ" τὰ σημεῖα ἃ ἐποίει ἐπὶ 
Ζρτοαῦ, because they saw ofhim the signs which he wrought upon 
τῶν ἀσθενούντων. 3 ἀνῆλθεν.δὲ εἰς TO ὄρος "ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς, 
those who _— were sick. And *went *up *into *the ‘mountain 1Jesus, 
kai ἐκεῖ γἐκάθητο! pera τῶν. μαθητῶν.αὐτοῦ. 4 ἦν δὲ ἐγγὺς 
and there sat with his disciples ; and *was ‘near 
TO πάσχα ἡ ἑορτὴ τῶν lovdaiwy. 5 ἐπάρας οὖν Τὸ Ii- 
*the *passover, the feast of the Jews. =Having ‘lifted °up then ‘Je- 


~ ‘ ? i { . , a ‘4 » 
σοῦς τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς, καὶ θεασάμενος O71 πολὺς ὄχλος 
5058 [his] eyes, and havingseen that agreat crowd 


ἔρχεται πρὸς αὐτόν, λέγει πρὸς *rov' Φίλιππον, Πόθεν 
is coming to him, he says to Philip, Whence 
νἀγοράσομεν" ἄρτους ἵνα φάγωσιν οὗτοι; 6 Τοῦτο.δὲ ἔλεγεν 

shall we buy loaves that “may eat ‘these? But this hesaid 
πειράζων adrov’ abroc-yap Oe τί ἔμελλεν ποιεῖν. 7 “ἀπε- 


trying him, for he knew what he was about to do, An- 
κρίθη" αὐτῷ “ Φίλιππος, δΔιακοσίων δηναρίων ἄρτοι οὐκ 
swered him Philip, For *two *hundred ‘denarii ‘loaves "not 


λάβῃ. 


ἀρκοῦσιν αὐτοῖς ἵνα ἕκαστος “αὐτῶν βραχύ.ἱτι" 
some little may receive, 


*are sufficient forthem that each of them 
ὃ Λέγει αὐτῷ εἷς ἐκ τῶν.μαθητῶν αὐτοῦ, ᾿Ανδρέας ὁ ἀδελφὸς 
Says tohim one of his disciples, Andrew the brother 
Σίμωνος Πέτρου, 9 Ἔστιν παιδάριον &év' ὧδε, 6! ἔχει πέντε 
of Simon _ Peter, 115 little*boy δ here, who has five 
ἄρτους κριθίνους καὶ δύο ὀψάρια: ἀλλὰ ταῦτα Ti ἐστιν εἰς 
“loaves ‘barley and two small fishes; but “these ‘what “are for 
τοσούτους; 10 Εἶπεν δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Ποιήσατε τοὺς ἀνθρώπους 

sO Many? And “said 1Jesus, Make the men 
ἀναπεσεῖν. ἦν.δὲ χόρτος πολὺς ev τῷ τόπῳ. *avérecor' 

torecline. Now *was “grass tmuch in the place: reclined 

οὖν οἱ ἄνδρες τὸν ἀριθμὸν !woei πεντακισχίλιοι. 11 ἔλαβεν 
therefore the men, the number about five thousand. >Took 


τι δὲν ‘ » ©? ~ Yn? ΄ . oS 2S ll o pe 
τοὺς ἄρτους ο Ἰησοῦς, καὶ "εὐχαριστήσας διέδωκεν “τοῖς 


k 


tand *the ‘loaves 2Jesus, and having giventhanks distributed tothe 
μαθηταῖς, ode μαθηταὶ" τοῖς ἀνακειμένοις᾽ ὁμοίως καὶ 
disciples, and the disciples to those reclining ; and in like manner 


γ ~ ᾽ , er »Ἤ e 4 ᾽ , 
ἐκ τῶν OWapiwy ὕσον ἤθελον. 12 we.dé ἐνεπλήσθησαν 
of the small fishes as much as they wished. And when they were filled 


λέγει τοὶς.μαθηταῖς. αὐτοῦ, Συναγάγετε τὰ περισσεύσαντα 
he says to his disciples, Gather together the 7over7%and “above 


κλάσματα, ἵνα μή.τι ἀπόληται. 18 Συνήγαγον οὖν 
‘fragments, that nothing may be lost. They gathered together therefore 


καὶ ἐγέμισαν δώδεκα κοφίνους κλασμάτων ἐκ τῶν πέντε 


and filled twelve hand-baskets offragments from the five 
ἄρτων τῶν κριθύνων ἃ  Perepicoevcer' τοῖς βεβρω- 
“loaves ‘barley which were over and above to those who had 


τ ἠκολούθει δὲ LTTrA. VY ἐθεώρουν LTrA. 
¥ ἐκαθέζετο τ. 2 τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς LTTrAW. 


should we buy LTTraw. © ἀποκρίνεται ANSWers T. ἀ τ ὁ 1. 
f — τι (read a little) [L]rr[a]. 8 — ἕν (read παιδ. a little boy) (L}rtz[a]. 
i— δὲ and [L]rTra. k ἀνέπεσαν LTTra. 1 ὡς TTrA. 


ἃ εὐχαρίστησεν καὶ ἔδωκεν gave thanks and distributed τ. 
ταὶ LTTrA. P ἐπερίσσευσαν LTTrA. 


¥ — αὐτοῦ GLTTrAW. 
& — τὸν LTTYrA. 


257 
VI. After these 
things Jesus went 


over the sea of Gali- 
lee, which is the sea of 
Tiberias. 2 And a 
great multitude fol- 
lowed him, because 
they saw his miracles 
which he did on them 
that were diseased. 
3 And Jesus went up 
into a mountain, and 
there he sat with his 
disciples. 4 And the 
passover, a feast of 
the Jews, was nigh. 
5 When Jesus then 
lifted up his eyes, and 
Baw 8 great company 
come unto him, he 
saith unto Philip, 
Whence shail we buy 
bread, that these may 
eat? 6 And this he 
said to prove him: for 
he himself knew what 
he would do. 7 Philip 
answered him, Two 
hundred pennyworth 
of bread is not suffici- 
ent for them, that 
every one of them may 
take a little. 8 One of 
his disciples, Andrew, 
Simon Peter’s brother, 
saith unto him, 9 There 
is a lad here, which 
hath five barley loaves, 
and two small fishes: 
but what are they a- 
mong somany? 10 And 
Jesus said, Make the 
mon sit down. Now 
there was much grass 
in the place. So the 
men sat down, in num- 
ber about five thou- 
sand. 11 And Jesus 
took the loaves; and 
when he had given 
thanks, he distributed 
to the disciples, and 
the disciples to them 
that were set down; 
and likewise of the 
fishes as much as they 
would. 12 When they 
were filled, he said 
unto his disciples, Ga- 
ther up the fragments 
that remain, that no- 
thing belost. 13 There- 
fore they gathered 
them together, and fill- 
ed twelve baskets with 
the fragments of the 
five barley loaves, 
which remained over 
and above unto them 
that had eaten. 14 Then 


xX — 6 LTTrA. 

Ὁ ἀγοράσωμεν 

© — αὐτῶν LITrA. 
Β ὃς LTTTAW 


™ οὖν therefore (took) LTTra. 
° — τοῖς μαθηταῖς, ot δὲ μαθη- 


5 


258 


those men, when they 
had seen the miracle 
that Jesus did, said, 
This is of a truth that 
prophet that should 
come into the world. 
15 When Jesus there- 
fore perceived that 
they would come and 
take him by force, to 
make him a king, he 
departed again into a 
mountain himself a- 
lone. 


16 And when even 
was now come, his dis- 
ciples went down unto 
thesea, 17 and entered 
into a ship, and went 
over the sea toward 
Capernaum. And it 
was now dark, and Je- 
sus was not come to 
them. 18 And the sea 
arose by reason of a 
great wind that blew. 
19 So when they had 
rowed about five and 
twenty or thirty fur- 
longs, they see Jesus 
walking on the sea, 
and drawing nigh unto 
the ship: and they were 
afraid, 20 But he saith 
unto them, It is I; be 
not afraid. 21 Then 
they willingly received 
him into the ship: and 
immediately the ship 
was at the land whi- 
ther they went. 


22 The day following, 
when the people which 
stood on the other side 
of the sea saw that 
there was none other 
boat there, save that 
one whereinto his dis- 
ciples were entered,and 
that Jesus went not 
with his disciples into 
the boat, but that his 
disciples were gone a- 
way alone; 23 (howbeit 
there came other boats 
from Tiberias nigh un- 
to the place where they 
did eat bread, after 
that the Lord had 
given thanks:) 24 when 
the people therefore 
saw that Jesus was 
not there, neither his 
disciples,they also took 
shipping, and came to 
Capernaum, seeking 


4 — ὁ Ἰησοῦς (read he had done) rrra. 
᾿ φεύγει escapes T. 
κ᾿ κατέλαβεν δὲ αὐτοὺς ἡ σκοτια and darkness overtook them T. 
: Ἰησοῦς πρὺς αὐτούς T. 

© ἐγένετο τὸ πλοῖον LTTrA. 
μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ GLTTrA. 

0 — καὶ GLTTrAW. 


[him ]) Lrrra. 


ships L. 


IQANNHS. Wi: 


κόσιν. 14 οἱ. οὖν. ἄνθρωποι ἰδόντες ὃ ἐποίησεν σημεῖον 
eaten. The men therefore having seen what “had *done sign 
96 Ἰησοῦς," ἔλεγον, “Ore οὗτός é ἰληθῶς ὁ ὗ 
: γον, Οτι οὗτος ἔστιν ἀληθῶς ὁ προφήτης ὁ 

*Jesus, said, This is truly the prophet who 


μέλ- 


τέἐρχόμενος εἰς τὸν κόσμον." 15 Ἰησοῦς οὖν γνοὺς Oru - 
they 


iscoming into the’ world. Jesus therefore knowing that 
λουσι» ἔρχεσθαι Kai ἁρπάζειν αὐτόν, ἵνα ποιήσωσιν "αὐτὸν" 
areabout tocome and _ seize him, that they may make him 
βασιλέα, ‘avexwonoer' πάλιν εἰς τὸ ὄρος αὐτὸς μόνος. 
i withdrew again to the mountain himself alone. 

ὀψία ἐγένετο κατέβησαν οἱ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ 
this “disciples to 
ἤρχοντο 


16 Ὧς δὲ 


And when evening it became *went *down 
τὴν θάλασσαν, 17 Kai ἐμβάντες εἰς "τὸ" πλοῖον 


the sea, and having entered into the ship they were going 

πέραν τῆς θαλάσσης εἰς “Kazeovaotvp.' “καὶ ia 10 
0 μ.᾿ *Kal OKOTLA 0H 

over the 5ea to Capernaum. And dark already 


ἐγεγόνει," καὶ Yovn' ἐληλύθει πρὸς αὐτοὺς ὁ Ἰησοῦς," 18 ἥ.τε 
it had become, and ὁποὺ *had*come ‘to them 1 Jesus, and the 
θάλασσα ἀνέμου μεγάλου πνέοντος *Oinyeipero." 19 ἐληλα- 
sea by a“*wind ‘strong blowing was agitated. Having 
κότες οὖν we “σταδίους" δεἰκοσιπέντε' ἢ τριάκοντα θεωροῦσιν 
rowed then about ‘furlongs ‘twenty-five “’or “thirty they see 
τὸν Ἰησοῦν περιπατοῦντα ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης, Kai ἐγγὺς τοῦ 
Jesus walking on the sea, and near the 
πλοίου γινόμενον" καὶ ἐφοβήθησαν. 20 ὁ δὲ λέγει αὐτοῖς, 
ship coming, and they were frightened. Buthe says tothem, 
"Ey εἰμι’ μὴ.φοβεῖσθε. 21 “HOedov οὖν λαβεῖν αὐτὸν 
I 


am [he]; fear not. They were willing then toreceive him 
εἰς TO πλοῖον, Kai εὐθέως “τὸ πλοῖον ἐγένετο" ἐπὶ ἱτῆς γῆς" 


into the ship, and immediately the ship was at the land 
εἰς ἣν ὑπῆγον. 
to which they were going. 

22 Ty ἐπαύριον ὁ ὄχλος ὁ ἑστηκὼς πέραν τῆς θα- 


the crowd which stood _ the other side of the 
ὅτι πλοιάριον ἄλλο οὐκ ἦν ἐκεῖ εἰ μὴ ἕν 


On the morrow 
λάσσης. Sidwr' 


sea, having seen that “small‘ship “other ‘no was there except one 
héceivo εἰς ὃ ἐνέβησαν οἱ.μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ, Kai ὅτι οὐ 
that into which entered his disciples, and that “not 


συνεισῆλθεν τοῖς.μαθηταῖς. αὐτοῦ ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς εἰς τὸ Ἰπλοιάριον," 
?went *with “his disciples 1Jesus into the small ship, 
ἀλλὰ μόνοι οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ ἀπῆλθον, 23 ἄλλα."δὲ" ἰἦλθεν" 
but alone his disciples went away, (but other came 
m Xr , Il ? /, ? 4 ~ , « » A 
πλοιάρια" ἐκ Τιβεριάδος ἐγγὺς τοῦ τόπου ὕπου ἔφαγον τὸν 
1small *ships from Tiberias near the place where theyate the 
ἄρτον, εὐχαριστήσαντος τοῦ κυρίου" 24 ore οὖν εἶδεν ὁ 
bread, “having “given *thanks ‘the 7Lord;) when therefore*saw ‘the 
ὄχλος OTe ᾿Ιησοῦς οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκεῖ οὐδὲ οἱ. μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ, ἐνέ- 
crowd that Jesus “not is there nor his disciples, they 
Bnoav "καὶ" αὐτοὶ εἰς τὰ °mdota' Kai ἦλθον εἰς ῬΚαπερ- 
“entered ‘also ?themselves into, the ships and came to Caper- 


¥ εἰς TOV κόσμον ἐρχόμενος T. 5 — αὐτὸν (read 

~ Kadapvaovp LTTrAW. 

Υ οὔπω not yet LITra. 

Ὁ ὡσεὶ L. ςστάδιατ. Δ εἴκοσι πέντε LTTr. 

Ε εἶδον Saw LTTraA. 8 -- ἐκεῖνο εἰς ὃ ἐνέβησαν ot 

k — δὲ but rrr[A]. ἰ ἦλθον τ ™ πλοῖα 
P Kadapvaovm LTTrAW. 


v¥ — τὸ (read a ship) rrra. 


4 διεγείρετο Tra. 
 ἔτὴν γῆν Ὑ. 
i πλοῖον Ship GLYTTra. ; 
° πλοιάρια Small ships LTTrA. 


VE JOHN. 
vaovp,' ζητοῦντες τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν. 25 καὶ εὑρόντες αὐτὸν 
baum, seeking Jesus. And having found him 
πέραν τῆς θαλάσσης, εἶπον αὐτῷ, “Ῥαββί," πότε ὧδε 
the other side of the sea, they said to him, Rabbi, when here 
γέγονας; 26᾽᾿Απεκρίθη αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν, ᾿Αμὴν 
hast thou come? 7Answered *them Jesus and said, Verily 
ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ζητεῖτε με, οὐχ OTe εἴδετε σημεῖα, ἀλλ᾽ 
verily Isay toyou, Yeseek me, not because ye saw signs, but 


ὅτι ἐφάγετε ἐκ THY ἄρτων Kai ἐχορτάσθητε. 27 ἐργάξεσθε 
because yeate of the loaves and _ were satisfied. ork 

4 ‘ ~ Α > / > ‘ A ~ 
μὴ τὴν βρῶσιν τὴν ἀπολλυμένην, ἀλλὰ τὴν βρῶσιν 
ποῦ {for] the food which perishes, but [for] the food 
THY μένουσαν εἰς ζωὴν αἰώνιον, ἣν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 


which abides unto life eternal, whichthe Son of man 
τὑμῖν δώσει" τοῦτον.γὰρ ὁ πατὴρ ἐσφράγισεν ὁ θεός. 
to you will give; for him the Father sealed, {even] God. 


28 Εἶπον οὖν πρὸς αὐτόν, Ti "ποιοῦμεν," ἵνα ἐργαζώμεθα 
They said therefore to him, What do we, that we may work 
s » ~ ae ? iO tt? ~ ‘ 7 ? ~ 
Ta ἔργα τοῦ θεοῦ; 29 ᾿Απεκρίθη "ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, 
the works of God? 7Answered Jesus and said to them, 
Τοῦτό ἐστιν τὸ ἔργον τοῦ θεοῦ, ἵνα “πιστεύσητε; sic ὃν 
This is the work of God, that ye should believe on him whom 
ἀπέστειλεν ἐκεῖνος. 30 Εἶπον οὖν αὐτῷ, Ti οὖν ποιεῖς 
2sent The. They said therefore to him, What ?then “doest 
σὺ σημεῖον, iva ἴδωμεν καὶ πιστεύσωμέν σοι; τί ἐργάζῃ; 
‘thou ‘sign, that wemayseeand may ὈΘ]Ιθγα thee? whatdost thou work? 
31 οἱ.πατέρες. ἡμῶν τὸ μάννα ἔφαγον ἐν TY ἐρήμῳ, καθώς 
Our fathers the manna ate in the wilderness, as 
ἐστιν γεγραμμένον, “Aprov ἐκ Tov οὐρανοῦ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς 
it is written, Bread outof the heayen he gave them 
φαγεῖν. 82 Εἶπεν οὖν αὐτοῖς 0 Inoovc, ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω 
to eat. 7Said “therefore *to them 1Jesus, Verily verily Isay 
A ~ > τ ~ ll χδεδ HT « ~ A » > ~ > 
vpiv, Ov “Μωσῆς εδωκεν᾽ ὑμῖν TOY ἄρτον ἐκ τοῦ οὐρα- 
to you, Νοῦ ‘Moses has ‘given you the _ bread out of the hea- 
νοῦ" ἀλλ᾽ ὁ-πατήριμου δίδωσιν ὑμῖν τὸν ἄρτον ἐκ τοῦ ov- 


ven; but my Father gives you the “bread Sout “οἵ Sthe *hea- 
~~ ‘ > , « A » ~ ~ ? c 

pavov τὸν ἀληθινόν. 33 ὁ.γὰρ ἄρτος Υ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστιν ὁ 

ven true. For the bread of God is he who 


καταβαίνων ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, Kai ζωὴν διδοὺς τῷ κόσμῳ. 
comes down outof the heaven, and life gives tothe world. 

34 Εἶπον οὖν πρὸς αὐτόν, Κύριε, πάντοτε δὸς ἡμῖν τὸν 
They said therefore to him, ord, always give tous 

ἄρτον.τοῦτον. 30 Εἶπεν δὲ αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, ᾿Εγώ εἰμι ὁ 
this bread. 3Said ‘and “ἴο *them 7Jesus, Ι am the 


ἄρτος τῆς ζωῆς ὁ ἐρχόμενος πρός “ye! od-pn ὑπεινάσῃ"" 
bread of life: hethat comes to me inno wise may hunger, 
καὶ ὁ πιστεύων εἰς ἐμὲ οὐ-μὴ SOupnoy' πώποτε. 86 ἀλλ᾽ 


and hethat believes But 


εἶπον ὑμῖν ὅτι καὶ ἑωράκατέ Spe" καὶ οὐ.πιστεύετε. 37 πᾶν 
Isaid toyou that also yehaveseen me and believe not. All 


on me inno wise maythirst at any time. 


259 
for Jesus. 25 And when 
they had found him 
on the other side of 
the sea, they said unto 
him, Rabbi, when cam- 
est thou hither? 26 Je- 
sus answered themand 
said, Verily, verily, I 
Say unto you, Ye seek 
mne, not because ye saw 
the miracles, but be- 
cause ye did eat of the 
loaves, and were filled. 
27 Labour not for the 
meat which perisheth, 
but for that meat 
which endureth unto 
everlasting life, which 
the Son of man shall 
give unto you: for him 
hath God the Father 
sealed. 28 Then said 
they unto him, What 
shall we do, that we 
might work the works 
of God? 29 Jesus an- 
swered and said unto 
them, This is the work 
of God, that ye believe 
on him whom he hath 
sent. 30 They said 
therefore unto him, 
What sign shewest 
thou then, that we 
may see, and believe 
thee ? what dost thou 
work? 31 Our fathers 
did eat manna in the 
desert; as it is written, 
He gave them bread 
from heaven to eat, 
32 Then Jesus said un- 
to them, Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, Moses 
gave you not that 
bread from heaven; 
but my Father giveth 
you the true bread 
from heaven. 33 For 
the bread of God is he 
which cometh down 
from heaven, and giv- 
eth life unto the world. 
34 Then said they unto 
him, Lord, evermore 
give us this bread. 
35 And Jesus said unto 
them, I am the bread 
of life: he that com- 
eth to me shall never 
hunger ; and he that 
believeth on me shall 
never thirst. 36 But I 
said unto you, That ye 
also have seen me, and 
believe not. 37 All 
that the Father giveth 
me shall come to me; 
and him that cometh 


ὃ δίδωσίν μοι ὁ πατὴρ πρὸς ἐμὲ ἥξει Kai τὸν ἐρχό- 
that “gives *me ‘the*Father to me shall come, and him that comes 
ᾳ Ῥαββεί τ. τ δίδωσιν ὑμῖν gives to you T. 5 ποιῶμεν Should we do EGLTTraw. 
ὃ -- ὃ 1. Υ πιστεύητε ΤΊτΑ. © Μωῦσῆς Lrtraw. χα ἔδωκεν gave LTrA, Υ - ὃτ. 
= οὖν therefore T; --- δὰ [Π|ττὰ. 5 ἐμὲ TTrA. Ὁ πεινάσει Shall hunger L. © διψήσει 


shall thirst urtra. a4 — we [L]T. 


260 
to me I will in no wise 
cast out. 38 For I 


came down from hea- 
ven, not to do mine 
own will, but the will 
of him that sent me. 
39 And this is the Fa- 
ther’s will which hath 
sent me, that of all 
which he hath given 
me I should lose no- 
thing, but should raise 
it up again at the last 
day. 40 And this is 
the will of him that 
sent me, that every 
one which seeth the 
Son, and believeth on 
him, may have ever- 
lasting life: and 
will raise him up at 
the last day. 41 The 
Jews then murmured 
at him, because he 
said, I am the bread 
which came down from 
heaven. 42 And they 
said, Is not this Jesus, 
the son of Joseph, 
whose father and mo- 
ther we know ? how is 
it then that he saith, 
I came down from 
heaven? 43 Jesus there- 
fore answered and said 
unto them, Murmur 
not among yourselves, 
44 No man can come 
to me, except the Fa- 
ther which hath sent 
me draw him: and I 
will raise him up at 
the last day. 45 It is 
written in the pro- 
ae And they shall 
eall taught of God. 
Every man therefore 
that hath heard, and 
hath learned of the 
Father, cometh unto 
me, 46 Not that any 
man hath seen the Fa- 
ther, save he which is 
of God, he hath seen 
the Father. 47 Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, 
He that believeth on 
me hath everlasting 
life. 48 I am that 
bread of life. 49 Your 
Fathers did eat manna 
in the wilderness, and 
are dead. 50 This is 
the bread which com- 
eth down from hea- 
ven, that a man may 


IQANNH® 
μενον πρός fue οὐ-μὴ ἐκβάλω ἔξω: 88 ὅτι 

me ποῦ αὖ 811 willI cast out. 
f} 


ek τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, οὐχ iva ἐποιῶ" τὸ θέλημα TO ἐμόν, ἀλλὰ 
outof the heaven, not that I should do 2will my, but 


τὸ θέλημα τοῦ πέμψαντός pe. 39 τοῦτο.δὲ ἐστιν τὸ 
the will of him who sent me, And this is the 
θέλημα τοῦ πέμψαντός με "πατρός, ἵνα πᾶν ὃ δέδωκέν 
will ofthe *who*sent ‘me ‘Father, that([of] all that he has given 
μοι, μὴ-ἀπολέσω ἐξ αὐτοῦ, ἀλλὰ ἀναστήσω αὐτὸ ἱὲν" 
me, I should not lose [any] of it, but shouldraiseup it in 
τῇ ἐσχάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ. 40 rovro*dé! ἐστιν τὸ θέλημα τοῦ 
the last day. And this is the wilt of him who 
πέμψαντός με," ἵνα πᾶς ὁ θεωρῶν τὸν υἱὸν Kai πιστεύων 
sent me, that everyone who sees the Son and believes 
εἰς αὐτόν, ἔ ζωὴ» αἰώνιον, καὶ ἀναστήσω αὐτὸν yw! 
ΟἹ him, should have life eternal; and ?will*raise*up *him 1T 
om ἐσχάτῳ ἡμέρᾳ. 41 ᾿Εγόγγυζον οὖν οἱ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι περὶ 
at t day Were pt therefore the Jews about 


ore dicen ᾿Εγώ εἰμι ὁ ἄρτος ὁ καταβὰς ἐκ τοῦ 
because he said, 1 am the bread which came down outof the 


vi 
καταβέβηκα 


For I have come down 


αὐτοῦ. 
him, 
οὐρανοῦ. 42 καὶ ἔλεγον, οΟὐχ'᾽ οὗτός. ἐστιν ᾿Ιησοῦς ὁ υἱὸς 
heaven. And were saying, Is not this Jesus the Son 
Ἰωσήφ, οὗ ἡμεῖς οἴδαμεν τὸν πατέρα Kai τὴν μητέρα: 
of Joseph, of whom we know the father and the mother? 
~ Ρ | λέ 4 τ {I a ? ~ ~ , se Ὁ 
πῶς Ῥοῦν" λέγει δοῦτος," Ὅτι ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καταβέβηκα;, 
how therefore says he, Outofthe heaven I have come down? 
43 ᾿Απεκρίθη ody" "ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, M7j-yoyyvZere 
%Answered *therefore 1Jesus and said tothem, Murmur not 
‘uer' ἀλλήλων. 44 οὐδεὶς δύναται ἐλθεῖν πρός “pe! ἐὰν. μὴ 
with one another. No one isable tocome to me unless 


ὁ πατὴρ ὁ πέμψας με ἑλκύσῃ αὐτόν, “καὶ ἐγὼ" ἀναστήσω 
the fase who — sent me draw him, and 1 willraise up 


αὐτὸν * τῆ cory ieee: 45 & ἘΠ γεγράμμενον!ε ἐν τοῖς προ- 
att 


him written in the pro- 
φήταις, Kai ἔσονται πάντες οὐλτδιρτοὶ τοῦ" θεοῦ. Πᾶς 
phets, And they shall be 


all taught of Goc. Everyone 
“oby| 


ὁ ἀκούσας παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς Kai μαθών, ἔρχεται 
therefore that has heard from the ae. and has learnt, comes 


πρός "ys"! 46 οὐχ ὕτι τὸν πατέρα ric ἑώρακεν," εἰμὴ ὁ 


ἴο me: not that *the ®°Father rons 7has “seen, lg who 
ὧν παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ, οὗτος ἑώρακεν τὸν “πατέρα." 47 ἀμὴν 
is from God, he has seen the Father. Verily 
ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὁ πιστεύων “εἰς ἐμὲ" ἔχει ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 
ΤΌΣΗΣ _ to you, He that believes on me_ has _siife eternal, 


48 ἐγ εἰμι ὁ ἄρτος τῆς ζωῆς. 49 οἱ-πατέρες.ὑμῶν ΠΡ 
am the bread as life. Your Fathers 


τὸ μάννα ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ," Kai ἀπέθανον" 50 οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ 
the manna in the desert, and died. This is the 
ἄρτος ὁ ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καταβαίνων, ἵνα τις ἐξ αὐτοῦ 
bread which outof the heaven comes down, that anyone of it 


ε ἐμὲ τ. 
GLTTrAW. 
my father LTTrA. 


f ἀπὸ from LTTrA. 
— ἐν (read at the) Tra. 


g ποιήσω ἕν h — πατρός (read of him who sent) 
* yap for (this) GLTTraw. ! τοῦ πατρός μου Of 


m [ἐγὼ] L. o 4 ἐν in (the) aye ο Οὐχὶ Tr. P νῦν DOW TTrA. 


4— οὗτος (read λέγει says ae} [πττὰ. — οὗν G[L]TTraw. 8 — ὃ Tr. t μετὰ Tr. 
"ἐμὲ Tra. = κἀγὼ LITrA. x + ev in (the) GLTTraW. Υ — τοῦ @LTTraW. 2 — οὖν 
GLTTrA. a ἐμέ Tirw. Ὁ ἑώρακέν τις LTTrAW. © θεόν God τ. d — εἰς ἐμέ T[Tra]. 


® ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ τὸ μάννα LTTrA. 


JOHN. 


dl Sie εἰμι ὁ ἄρτος ὁ ζῶν, ὁ 
am the “bread ‘living, which 
ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ suai ἐάν τις φά fix τούτου 
outof the heaven camedown: if anyone shall have eaten of this 
τοῦ ἄρτου ζήσεται" εἰς. τὸν. αἰῶνα. Kai ὁ ἄρτος δὲ ὃν ἐγὼ 
bread he shall live for ever; andthe bread also which I 
δώσω, Ξὴ .σάρξιμου ἐστίν, hy ἐγὼ δώσω ὑπὲρ τῆς τοῦ 
will give, my flesh is, which 1 will give for the 7of *the 
κόσμου ζωῆς." δ2 ᾿Ἐμάχοντο οὖν ἱπρὺς ἀλλήλους οἱ Ἰου- 
‘world ‘life. Were contending therefore with one another the Jews 
λέγοντες, Πῶς δύναται οὗτος ἡμῖν" δοῦναι τὴν 
saying, How is able *he Sus Sto *give 
σάρκα" φαγεῖν; 53 Εἶπεν οὖν αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, ᾿Αμὴν 
7flesh ([*his] to eat? 3Said *therefore *to Sthem ‘Jesus, Verily 
ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ἐὰν.μὴ φάγητε τὴν σάρκα τοῦ υἱοῦ 
verily Isay toyou, Unless yeshallhayeeaten the flesh of the Son 
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου καὶ πίητε αὐτοῦ τὸ αἷμα, οὐκ.ἔχετε ζωὴν 
of man and shall have drunk his blood, ye have not life 
ἐν ἑαυτοῖς. 54 ὁ τρώγων pov τὴν σάρκα, Kai πίνων μου 5 
in yourselves. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my 
τὸ αἷμα, ἔχει ζωὴν αἰώνιον, καὶ ἐγὼ ἀναστήσω αὐτὸν " τῇ 
blood, has life eternal, and I  willraiseup him _ in the 
ἐσχάτῳ ἡμέρᾳ" 55 ἡ. γα: σάρξ.μου ἀληθῶς" ἐστιν βρῶσις, καὶ 
last day ; for my flesh truly is food, and 


τὸ αἵμά.μου ἀληθῶς" ἐστιν πόσις. 56 ὁ τρώγων μου τὴν 
any blood truly is drink. He that eats my 


σάρκα καὶ πίνων pov τὸ αἷμα, ἐν ἐμοὶ μένει, κἀγὼ ἐν αὐτῷ. 
flesh and drinks my blood, in me abides, andI in him. 
57 καθὼς ἀπέστειλέν pe ὁ ζῶν πατήρ, κἀγὼ ζῶ διὰ 
As “sent *me 'the “living *Father, andI live because of 
TOY πατέρα᾽ καὶ ὁ τρώγων με, κἀκεῖνος Ῥζήσεται Ou 
the Father, also he that eats me, he also shall live because of 
ἐμέ. 58 οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ ἄρτος ὁ “ἐκ τοῦ" οὐρανοῦ καταβάς" 
me. This is the bread which out of the heaven came down. 
οὐ καθὼς ἔφαγον οἱ πατέρες τὑμῶν" "τὸ μάννα," καὶ ἀπέθα- 
Not as Sate ‘the eather Sof*you the manna, and died: 
vov' ὁ τρώγων τοῦτον τὸν ἄρτον ‘{noETat' εἰς. τὸν.αἰῶνα. 
he that eats this bread shall live for ever. 


59 Ταῦτα simev ἐν συναγωγῇ διδάσκων ἐν Καπερναούμ." 
These things he said in [the] synagogue teaching in Capernaum, 


60 Πολλοὲ οὖν ἀκούσαντες ἐκ τῶν.μαθητῶν.αὐτοῦ εἶπον, 
Many therefore *having μοασὰ ‘of is ‘disciples said, 

Σκληρός ἐστιν “οὗτος ὁ λόγος" τίς δύναται αὐτοῦ ἀκούειν; 
Hard is this word ; who ἰ5 able it to hear? 


61 Εἰδὼς δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς ἐν ἑαυτῷ Ort 2G Geli περὶ 


eS *but 2Jesus in himself that *concerning 


τούτου οἱ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Τοῦτο ὑμᾶς σκανδα- 
5.815 ‘his palaceples said tothem, This *you ‘does *of- 


λίζει; 62 ἐὰν οὖν θεωρῆτε τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ava- 
fend? If then yeshouldsee the Son of man ascend- 


βαίνοντα ὕπου ἦν τὸ πρότερον ; 68 τὸ πνεῦμά ἐστιν τὸ 
ing up where he was before? The Spirit itis which 


WE. 
payy Kai μὴ a ag 


mayeat and not 


δαῖοι." 


261 


eat thereof, and not 
die. 51 I am the liy- 
ing bread which came 
down from heaven: 
if any man eat of 
this bread, he shall 
live for ever: and the 
bread that I will give 
is my flesh, which I 
will give for the life 
of the world. 52 The 
Jews therefore strove 
among themselves, 
saying, How can this 
man give us his flesh 
to eat? 53 Then Jesus 
said unto them, Verily, 
verily, 1 say unto you, 
Except ye eat the flesh 
of the Son of man, 
and drink his blood, 
ye have no life in you. 
54 Whoso eateth my 
flesh, and drinketh my 
blood, hath eternal 
life ; and I will raise 
him’ up at the last day. 

5 For my flesh is meat 
iidked) and my blood 
is drink indeed. 56 He 
that eateth my flesh, 
and drinketh myblood, 
dwelleth in me, and I 
in him. 57 As the liy- 
ing Father hath sent 
me, and I live by the 
Father: so he that eat- 
eth me, even he shall 
live by me. 58 This 
is that bread which 
came down from hea- 
ven: not as your fa- 
thers did eat manna, 
and are dead: he that 
eateth of this bread 
shall live for ever. 
59 These things said 
he in the synagogue, 
as he taught in Caper- 
naum. 60 Many there- 
fore of his disciples, 
when they had heard 
this, said, This is an 
hard saying; who can 
hear it ? 61 When Jesus 
knew in himself that 
his disciples murmur- 
ed at it, he said unta 
them, Doth this offend 
you? 62 What and if 
ye shall see the Son 
of man ascend up 
where he was before ? 
63 It is the spirit that 


f ἐκ τοῦ ἐμοῦ ἄρτου, ζήσει | of my bread, he shall live Ὁ. 
σάρξ μου ἐστίν τ. bh — ἣν ἐγὼ δώσω LTTra. 
οὗτος T. |! + αὐτοῦ his ".. m κἀγὼ LYTrA. 
P ζήσει LTTrA. a ἐξ out of LTTrA. 
TTrA. τ Καφαρναούμ. LTTraAW. 


n + [ev] τι. 
-- ὑμῶν LTTrA. 
Wo hehe οὗτος LTTra. 


1 οἱ "Iovdator πρὸς ἀλλήλους ΤΩ 
ο ἀληθής ΠΝ true LTTra. 


5 — τὸ μάννα GITrA 


g ὑπὲρ τῆς τοῦ κόσμον ζωῆς, ἢ n 


* ἡμῖν 


τ ζήσει 


262 


quickeneth ; the flesh 
profiteth nothing: the 
words that I speak 
unto you, they are 
spirit,and they are life. 
64 But there are some 
of you that believe 
not. For Jesus knew 
from the beginning 
who they were that 
believed not, and who 
should betray him. 
65 And he said, There- 
fore said I unto yon, 
that no man can come 
unto me, except it were 
given unto him of my 
Father. 66 From that 
time many of his dis- 
ciples went back, and 
walked no more with 
him. 67 Then said Je- 
sus unto the twelve, 
Will ye also go away ? 
68 Then Simon Peter 
answered him, Lord, 
to whom shall we go? 
thou hast the words of 
eternal life. 69 And 
we believeand are sure 
that thou art that 
Christ, the Son of the 
living God. 70 Jesus 
answered them, Have 
not I chosen you 
twelve, and one of you 
is a devil? 71 He 
spake of Judas Isca- 
riot the son of Simon: 
for he it was that 
should betray him, 
being one of thetwelve. 


VII. After these 
things Jesus walked in 
Galilee: for he would 
not walk in Jewry, 
because the Jews 
sought to kill him. 
2 Now the Jews’ feast 
of tabernacles was at 
hand. 3 His brethren 
therefore said unto 
him, Depart hence, 
and go into Judea, 
that thy disciples also 
may see the works 
that thou doest. 4 For 
there is no man that 
doeth any thing in se- 
cret, and he himself 
seeketh to be known 


IQANNHS&. VI, Vil 
ζωοποιοῦν, ἡ σὰρξ οὐκ ὠφελεὶ οὐδέν᾽ Ta ῥήματα ἃ ἐγὼ 
quickens, the flesh profits nothing; the words which y 
χλαλῶ" ὑμῖν. πνεῦμά ἐστιν Kai ζωή ἐστιν. 64 YAN’! εἰσὶν 
speak toyou, spirit are and life arc; but there are 
ἐξ ὑμῶν τινες ot οὐ.πιστεύουσιν. ἠδει.γὰρ ἐξ ἀρχῆς 
of you some who believe not. For *knew *from [*the] ®beginning 
ὁ Ἰησοῦς τίνες εἰσὶν οἱ μὴ.πιστεύοντες, Kai Tic ἐστιν ὁ 
1Jesus who they are who believe not, and who 5 he who 


παραδώσων αὐτόν. 65 καὶ ἔλεγεν, Atd.rovro εἴρηκα ὑμῖν, 
shall deliverup him. And hesaid, Therefore have I said to you, 


Ore οὐδεὶς δύναται ἐλθεῖν πρός “ye ἐὰν. μὴ ἢ δεδομένον 


that noone is able to come to me unless it be given 
αὐτῷ ἐκ τοῦ.πατρός μου." 66 Ἔκ τούτου ἢ πολλοὶ © 
to him from my Father. From __ that (time) many 


ἀπῆλθον τῶν. μαθητῶν. αὐτοῦ" εἰς.τὰ. ὀπίσω, Kai οὐκέτι μετ᾽ 


*went Saway tof “his *disciples back, and nomore with 
αὐτοῦ περιεπάτουν. 67 εἶπεν οὖν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς τοῖς δώδεκα, 
him walked. 7Said *therefore Jesus tothe twelve, 


Μὴ καὶ ὑμεῖς θέλετε ὑπάγειν : G8 ᾿Απεκρίθη “οὖν" αὐτῷ 

SAlso “ye ‘are *wishing to go away? *Answered “therefore *him 
Σίμων Πέτρος, Κύριε, πρὸς τίνα ἀπελευσόμεθα ; ῥήματα ζωῆς 
1Simon 7Peter, Lord, to whom _ shall we go? words of life 
αἰωνίου ἔχεις: 69 Kai ἡμεῖς πεπιστεύκαμεν Kai ἐγνώκαμεν 
eternal thou hast; and we have believed and have known 
ὅτι σὺ εἶ ὁ χριστὸς ὁ vidc' τοῦ θεοῦ 5τοῦ ζῶντος." 70’ Απε- 
that thou art the Christ the Son of *God ‘the “living. An- 

, ᾽ ~ ©? ~ ? 4. Ler tow, ‘ , Ϊ , 

κρίθη αὐτοῖς ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς. Οὐκ ἐγὼ ὑμᾶς τοὺς δώδεκα ἐξελεξάμην, 
swered them Jesus, *Not “I ‘you ‘the ‘twelve ‘did *choose, 


καὶ ἐξ ὑμῶν εἴς διάβολός ἐστιν; 71 “Edeyev.cé τὸν ᾿Ιούδαν 


and of you’ one a devil is? But he spoke of Judas 
>i hy Ζ ΕΞ 10 ἱἤζμελλεν!" Καὐτὸ 

{μωνος σκαριωτήν ovuToc.yap 1) HE εν *“aAUTOYV παρα- 

Simon’s [son], Iscariote, for he was about him to de- 


διδόναι," εἷς Ἰῶν" ἐκ τῶν δώδεκα. 
liver up, 7one *being of the twelve. 
7 ™Kai' περιεπάτει ὁ Ἰησοῦς μετὰ ταῦτα! ἐν τῇ Γαλι- 
And was *walking 1 Jesus after these things in Gali- 
aig’ οὐ ya ἤθελεν ἐν τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ περιπατεῖν, Ort 
166, *not ‘for *he *did desire in Judea to walk, because 
γΦ ? 4 δὰ Ὁ ~ ? ~ 7 \ ? 4 - 
ἐζήτουν αὐτὸν ot ᾿Ιουδαῖοι ἀποκτεῖναι. ἃ Ἣν.δὲ ἐγγὺς ἡ 
were *seeking τ ‘the “Jews to kill. Now was near the 
ἑορτὴ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων ἡ σκηνοπηγία. ϑεῖπον οὖν πρὸς αὐτὸν 
feast of the Jews, the tabernacles. 3Said *therefore °to ‘Shim 
οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ, Μετάβηθι ἐντεῦθεν, καὶ ὕπαγε εἰς τὴν 'lov- 
this *brethren, Remove hence, and go _ into Ju- 
daiay, iva καὶ οἱ. μαθηταί.σου ὁθεωρήσωσιν" Ῥτὰ.ἔργα.σου" ἃ 


dra, that also thy disciples may see thy works which 
ποιεῖς 4 ovdsic.yap “ἐν κρυπτῷ τι ποιεῖ, Kai ζητεῖ 
thou doest ; for no one in secret anything does, and _ seeks 


4 Η / > ~ =~ , 
ταὐτὸς" ἐν παῤῥησίᾳ εἶναι. εἰ ταῦτα ποιεῖς, φανέρωσον 


openly. If thou do : E 
these things, shewthy- himself in “public ‘to 7be. If these things thou doest, manifest 
= λελάληκα have spoken LTTraw. Σ ἀλλὰ TrW. :ἐμὲτ. 53.--- μου (read the Father) 


LTTrA. 
€ — oy GLTTrA. 


καριώτου (read son of Simon Iscariote) LTTra. 
1 — ὧν LTrA. 
© θεωρήσουσιν shall see TTrA. 


LTrA. 


b + οὖν therefore τ. 


4 τῶν μαθητῶν αὐτοῦ ἀπῆλθον LTTrA. 
! 6 ἅγιος the holy [one] ΟἸΤΎΤΑ. Β — τοῦ ζῶντος GLTTrA. Β Ἶσ- 
1 ἔμελλεν LTTrA. k παραδιδόναι αὐτόν 
2 μετὰ ταῦτα περιεπάτει ὁ ([ὃ] Tr) ᾿Ιησοῦς LTTrAW. 
4“ τι ἐν κρυπτῷ LTTrA. τ αὐτὸ it L. 


ς + ἐκ [L]Tr[A]. 


τὰ --καὶ T. 
P σου τὰ ἔργα 1.. 


WEE. JOHN. 


σεαυτὸν τῷ κόσμῳ. ὅ Οὐδὲ. γὰρ οἱ. ἀδελφοὶ. αὐτοῦ ἐπίστευον 
pede tothe world. For neither “his *brethren ‘believed 


εἰς αὐτόν. Ὁ Λέγει "οὖν" 


on him. 3Says ?therefore *to5them 1 ὅστε 7Time ®my 
οὔπω πάρεστιν" ὁ.δὲ καιρὸς ὁ ὑμέτερος πάντοτέ ἐστιν ἕτοιμος. 
not yet igs come, but ?time tyour always is Teaey 


ἐμὲ. δὲ μισεῖ, ὅτι ἐγὼ 


7 οὐ-δύναται ὁ κόσμος μισεῖν ὑμᾶς" 
but me it hates, because I 


3Is*unable ‘the “world tohate you, 


μαρτυρῶ περὶ αὐτοῦ, ὅτι Ta ἔργα αὐτοῦ πονηρά ἐστιν. 
bear witness concerning it, that the works ofit evil are, 
ὃ ὑμεῖς ἀνάβητε εἰς τὴν.-ἑορτὴν. "ταύτην" ἐγὼ Yoorw' ava- 
μεις 7) ς ΤῊ ] v4 
Ye, goyeup to this feast. I not yet am 


Baivw εἰς τὴν-ἑορτὴν.ταύτην, ὅτι ὁ “καιρὸς ὁ ἐμὸς" οὕπω 
goingup to this feast, for “time my not yet 
πεπλήρωται. 9 Ταῦτα." δὲ εἰπὼν Yadroic' ἔμεινεν ev τῷ 
has been fulfilled. Απᾶ these things havingsaid tothem he abode in 

Γαλιλαίᾳ. 10 Ὡς. δὲ ἀνέβησαν οἱ. ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ τότε Kai 


Galilee. But when were Cae up his brethren then also 
αὐτὸς ἀνέβη εἰς τὴν ἑορτήν, οὐ φανερῶς, "ἀλλ᾽" Pwo! ἐν 
he wentup to the feast, not openly, but as in 
κρυπτῷ. 11 Ot οὖν ᾿Ιουδαῖοι ἐζήτουν αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ, 
secret. The *therefore ‘Jews wereseeking him at the feast, 
kai ἔλεγον, Ποῦ ἐστιν ἐκεῖνος ; 12 Kai γογγυσμὸς “πολὺς 
and said, Where [15 he? And *murmuring *much 
περὶ αὐτοῦ ἦν!" ἐν “τοῖς ὄχλοις. οἱιμὲν ἔλεγον, 
ee him there was among the crowds. Some said, 
"Ort ἀγαθύς ἐστιν ἄλλοι. δὲ" ἔλεγον, Ob" ἀλλὰ πλανᾷ τὸν 

Θοοῦ ‘he “15; but others said, No; but he deceives the 
ὄχλον. 13 Οὐδεὶς μέντοι παῤῥησίᾳ ἐλάλει περὶ αὐτοῦ, 
crowd. No one owever publicly spoke concerning him, 

διὰ τὸν φόβον τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων. 
because of the fear of the Jews. 
14 Ηδη.δὲ τῆς ἑορτῆς μεσούσης ἀνέβη '0' ᾿Ιησοῦς 

But now *of*the ‘feast [10] “being “the *middle went up Jesus 


> 5 et , ΕῚ 2 , g ‘ > , Π ee ~ 
εἰς TO ἱερόν, Kai ἐδίδασκεν. 15 ἑκαὶ ἐθαύμαζον" οἱ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι 
into the temple, and was teaching: and *were*w SEE θὲς 2Jews 


λέγοντες, Πῶς οὗτος γράμματα οἶδεν, μὴ μεμαθηκώς; 


saying, How ‘“7this *one *letters ‘knows, not having learned? 


16 ᾿Απεκρίθη" αὐτοῖς 16" ᾿Ιησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν, Ἢ ἐμὴ.διδαχὴ οὐκ 
?Answered “*them Jesus and _= said, My teaching ποῦ 


ἔστιν ἐμή, ἀλλὰ τοῦ πέμψαντός pe 17 ἐάν τις θέλῳ τὸ 
is mine, but his who sent me. If anyone desire 

θέλημα.αὐτοῦ ποιεῖν, γνώσεται περὶ τῆς διδαχῆς πότερον 

his will to pesctiee; he shall know concerning the teaching whether 


ἐκ ἔτοῦ" θεοῦ ἐστιν, ἢ ἐγὼ am ἐμαυτοῦ λαλῶ. 18 ὁ ag’ 
from God itis, or I from myself epee He that from 
ἑαυτοῦ λαλῶν, τὴν. δόξαν.τὴν. ἰδίαν ζητεῖ ὁ.δὲ ζητῶν τὴν 


himself speaks, his own glory seeks; but hethat seeks the 
δόξαν τοῦ πέμψαντος αὐτόν, οὗτος ἀληθής ἐστιν, καὶ 

glory of him that sent him, he true is, and 

ἀδικία ἐν αὐτῷ οὐκιἔστιν. 19 οὐ 'Μωσῆς ™dédwxev' 
nnrighteousness in him is not. =Not 3Moses *has given 
5 — οὖν τ. * — ταύτην (read the feast) LTTraw. " οὐκ not GTTra. 

LTTrA. x — δὲ and Grrr. y αὐτὸς he (abode) τ. 

ἀνέβη LITrA. 8. ἀλλὰ LTrA. b — ὡς T. 
πολὺς T. «τῷ ὄχλῳ the crowd T. e—ééandarw. {f— ours. 


were wondering therefore LTTraW. 4 + οὖν therefore LTTraw. 
Mwivo7s LTTrAW. m ἔδωκεν gave LTrA. 


αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς. Ὁ καιρὸς ὁ ἐμὸς him. 


i — ὁ ΤΊτ. 


268 


self to the world 
5 For neither did his 
brethren believe in 
6 Then Jesus 
said unto them, My 
time is not yet come: 
but your time is alway 
ready. 7 The world 
cannot hate you; but 
me it hateth, because 
I testify of it, that the 
works thereof are evil. 
8Go ye up unto this 
feast: I go not up yet 
unto this feast; for my 
time is not yet full 
come. 9 When he had 
said these words unto 
them he abode still in 
Galilee. 10 But when 
his brethren were gone 
up, then went he also 
up unto the feast, not 
openly, but as it were 
in secret. 11 Then the 
Jews sought him at 
the feast, and said, 
Where ishe? 12 And 
there was much mur- 
muring among the 
people concerning him: 
for some said, He is a 
good man : others said, 
Nay; but he deceiveth 
the people. 18 How- 
beit no man spake 

nly of him for fear 
of the Jews. 


14 Now about the 
midst of the feast Je- 
sus went up into the 
temple, and taught. 
15 And the Jews mar- 
velled, saying, How 
knoweth this man iet- 
ters, having never 
learned? 16 Jesus an- 
swered them, and said, 
My doctrine is not 
mine, but his that sent 
me. 17 If any man 
will do his will, he 
shall know of the doc- 
trine, whether it be of 
God, or whether [speak 
of myself. 18 He that 
speaketh of himself 
seeketh his own glory: 
but he that seeketh 
his glory that sent 
him, the same is true, 
and no unrighteous- 
ness isinhim. 19 Did 
not Moses give you the 


ἡ ἐμὸς καιρὸς 


2 εἰς τὴν ἑορτήν, τότε καὶ αὐτὸς 
c περὶ αὐτοῦ ἦν πολὺς LTrA ; ἣν περὶ αὐτοῦ 


& ἐθαύμαζον οὖν 
k — τοῦ τ. 


264 

law, and yet none of 
you keepeth the law? 
Why go ye about to 
kill me? 20 The peo- 
ple answered and said, 
Thou hast a devil: 
who goeth about to kill 
thee? 21 Jesus an- 
swered and said unto 
them, I have done one 
work, and ye all mar- 
vel. 22 Moses there- 
fore gave unto you 
circumcision; (not be- 
cause it is of Moses, 
but of the fathers ;) 
and ye on the sabbath 
day circumcise a man. 
23 If a man on the 
sabbath day receive 
circumcision, that the 
law of Moses should 
not be broken; are ye 
angry at me, because 1 
have made aman every 
whit whole on the 
sabbath day ? 24 Judge 
not according to the 
appearance, but judge 
righteous judgment. 
25 Then said some of 
them of Jerusalem, Is 
not this he, whom they 
seek to kill? 26 But, 
lo, he speaketh boldly, 
and they say nothing 
unto him. Do the 
rulers know indeed 
that this is the very 
Christ? 27 Howbeit 
we know this man 
whence heis: but when 
Christ cometh, no man 
knoweth whence he is. 
28 Then cried J+-us in 
the temple as he 
taught, saying, Ye 
both know me, and ye 
know whence I am: 
and I am not come of 
myself, but he that 
sent me is true, whom 
ye know not. 29 But 
I know him: for I am 
from him, and he hath 
sent me, 30 Then they 
sought to take him: 
but no man iaid hands 
on him, because his 
hour was not yet come. 
31 And many of the 
people believed on him, 
ané said, When Christ 
cometh, will he do 
more miracles than 
these which this man 


2 — καὶ εἶπεν LITrA. 
διὰ τοῦτο, + OT. 
Υ κρίνετε LTrA. 
1 ---Οὶ δὲ but GLTTraw. 
πολλοὶ ἐπίστευσαν LIrA ; πολλοὶ δὲ ἐπίστευσαν ἐκ τοῦ ὄχλου 1. 
ε — τούτων (read ὧν than [these] which) tttraw. 


GLTrW 3 
t+or. 
he comes E. 


LTTrA. 


TQANNH &. Vick. 
ὑμῖν τὸν νόμον, καὶ οὐδεὶς ἐξ ὑμῶν ποιεῖ τὸν νόμον ; Ti 
you the law, and noone of you practises the law? Why 
pe ζητεῖτε ἀποκτεῖναι; 20 ᾿Απεκρίθη ὁ ὄχλος "καὶ εἶπεν," 
me do ye seek to kill? Answered 'the*crowd and said, 
Δαιμόνιον ἔχεις. τίς σε ζητεῖ ἀποκτεῖναι; 21 ᾿Απεκρίθη 

Ademon thou hast; whe thee seeks to kill? “Answered 
οὐ" Ἰησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, “Ev ἔργον ἐποίησα, καὶ πάντες 
1Jesus and said tothem, One work I did, and “all! 
Ρθαυμάζετε. 22 διὰ τοῦτο «Μωσῆς" δέδωκεν ὑμῖν τὴν περι- 
tye wonder. Therefore Moses has given you circum- 
τομήν, οὐχ ὅτι ἐκ τοῦ "Μωσέως" ἐστίν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ τῶν πατέρων" 
but of the 


cision, not that of Moses it is, fathers, 
καὶ Stv' σαββάτῳ περιτέμνετε ἄνθρωπον. 23 εἰ περιτομὴν 
and on sabbath ye circumcise a man. If ‘circumcision 
λαμβάνει ἄνθρωπος ἐν σαββάτῳ ἵνα μὴ-.λυθῇ ὁ νόμος" 
“receives 1a*man on sabbath, that may not be broken the law 
τη ὡσέως," got χολᾶτε ὅτι ὕλον ἄνθρωπον ὑγιῆ ἐποίησα 
of Moses, withme areyeangry because entirely ’a*man ‘sound I made 


ἐν σαββάτῳ; 24 μὴ.κρίνετε κατ᾿ ὄψιν, ἀλλὰ τὴν δικαίαν 
on sabbath? Judge not according to sight, but righteous 
κρίσιν κρίνατε." 25 "ἔλεγον οὖν τινες ἐκ τῶν “Lepoco- 
judgment judge. 7Said "therefore 'some “of *those ‘of °Jeru- 
λυμιτῶν," Οὐχ.οὗτός ἐστιν ὃν ζητοῦσιν ἀποκτεῖναι; 26 καὶ 
salem, Is not thishe whom they seek to kill? and 
ide, παῤῥησίᾳ λαλεῖ, καὶ οὐδὲν αὐτῷ λέγουσιν. μήποτε 


lo, publicly he speaks, and nothing to him they say. 

ἀληθῶς ἔγνωσαν οἱ ἄρχοντες, OTe οὗτός ἐστιν 
5Truly ‘have recognized *those γῆ. ‘rule, that _ this is 

χἀληθῶς" ὁ χριστός; 27 ἀλλὰ τοῦτον οἴδαμεν πόθεν ἐστίν" 
truly the Christ? But thisone weknow whence heis. 

ὁ δὲ χριστὸς ὕταν Yépynrat,' οὐδεὶς γινώσκει πόθεν ἐστίν. 

But the Christ, whenever he may come, noone knows whence _heis. 


οὖν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ διδάσκων ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς Kai λέγων, 


28 “Exoagev 
Jesus and saying, 


“Cried *therefore*in “the °temple ‘teaching 
Kapé οἴδατε, καὶ οἴδατε πόθεν εἰμί; καὶ ἀπ᾽ ἐμαυτοῦ οὐκ 


Both me ye know, and ye ΚΟΥ͂ whence δ; and of myself “not 
ἐλήλυθα, ἀλλ᾽ ἔστιν ἀληθινὸξ ὁ πέμψας ps ὃν ὑμεῖς 
Ἐ *have come, but 5is ®true ‘he who sent me, whom ye 


Bm rr > OO; ga), ΖΔ id ae .“ ᾽ ᾽ ~ ? 
ovk.oldare 29 éyw.20é' oida αὐτόν, ὅτι παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ εἰμι, 
know ποῦ. But [ know’ him, because from him Iam, 
κἀκεῖνός με "ἀπέστειλεν." 30 ᾿Εζήτουν οὖν αὐτὸν πιά- 
and he me sent. They were seeking therefore him to 
‘ ‘ ᾽ ᾽ " ~ 
oa καὶ οὐδεὶς ἐπέβαλεν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν τὴν χεῖρα, OTL οὔπω 


take, but no one Jaid upon him [818] hand, because not yet 
ἐληλύθει ἡ-ὥρα. αὐτοῦ. 31 ὑΠολλοὶ.δὲ ἐκ τοῦ ὄχλου ἐπίστευ- 
had come his hour. But many of the crowd believed 
σαν" εἰς αὐτόν, καὶ ἔλεγον, “Ὅτι! ὁ χριστὸς ὅταν ἔλθῃ 
on him, and said, The Christ, when he comes, 
dunre’ πλείονα σημεῖα “τούτων" ποιήσει ὧν οὗτος 
*more *signs ‘*than 7these ‘will 7he #do which this [man] 


°—oTTrA. Ρ θαυμάζετε διὰ τοῦτο. (read ye wonder therefore.) 

4 Μωῦσῆς LYTrAW. τ Mwiioéws LTTrAW. 5 [év] L. 
w ᾿ἹΙεροσολυμειτῶν T. X — ἀληθῶς GLITraw. Υ ἔρχεται 
® ἀπέσταλκεν has sent τ. b’Ek τοῦ ὄχλου δὲ 


© — "Ore LTTrA. qd μὴ 


VII. ΕΠ: 


ἱἐποίησεν" ; 52 Ἢ κυυσαν οἱ Φαρισαῖοι τοῦ ὄχλου γογγύζοντος 
did? ®Heard ‘the *Pharisees ofthe crowd murmuring 


περὶ αὐτοῦ ταῦτα καὶ ἀπέστειλαν foi Φαρισαῖοι Kai 
Scoucerning *him _ these “things, and 7sent ‘the Pharisees “and 


οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς ὑπηρέτας, ἵνα πιάσωσιν αὐτόν. 33 εἶπεν 
*the Schief ‘priests officers. that they might take him. 3Said 


οὖν Yabroic' ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, "Erte ἱ'μικρὸν χρόνον" μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν 
*therefore *to *them Jesus, Yet alittle time with you 
εἰμι, καὶ ὑπάγω πρὸς τὸν πέμψαντά με. 34 ζητήσετέ με καὶ 
Iam, and L go to him who sent me, Ye will seek me and 


οὐχ-εὑρήσετεξ" καὶ ὕπου εἰμὶ πο aes ov.dbvacbe ἐλθεῖν. 
shall not find [me], and where *am areunable to come. 


35 Εἶπον οὖν Ιουδαῖοι ith ἑαυτούς, Ποῦ ἰοὗῦτος 
*Said “*therefore ‘the 2Jews among themselves, Where “he 


μέλλει" πορεύεσθαι ὅτι "ἡ μεῖς" οὐχ.εὑρήσομεν αὐτόν ; μὴ εἰς 


is about to go that we shall not find him? to 
τὴν διασπορὼν τῶν ‘EXAnvwy μέλλει πορεύεσθαι, Kai 
the dispersion among the Greeks is he about to go, and 
διδάσκειν τοὺς “Ἕλληνας; 86 τίς ἐστιν "οὗτος ὁ λόγος ὃν 
teach the Greeks ? What [18 this word which 
εἶπεν, Znrnoeré με, kai οὐχ.εὑρήσετεξ' καὶ Ὅπου εἰμὶ ἐγὼ 
hesaid, Yewillseek me, and 5841] ποὺ find [me]; and Where 7am Ὁ 
ὑμεῖς οὐ-δύνασθε ἐλθεῖν ; 
ye are unable to come? 
37 ᾿ν.δὲ τῇ ἐσχάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ τῷ μεγάλῳ THE ἑορτῆς εἱστήκει 
Andin the last “day ‘the great ofthe feast stood 


ὁ Ἰησοῦς, καὶ “ἔκραξεν" λέγων, Ἐάν τις διψᾷ, ἐρχέσθω 
Jesus, and cried, saying, If anyone thirst, let him come 

Ῥπρός pe καὶ πινέτω" 88 ὁ πιστεύων εἰς ἐμέ, καθὼς εἶπεν 
to me and drink. He that believes on ne, as said 

ὴ γραφή, ποταμοὶ ἐκ τῆς. κοιλίας. αὐτοῦ ῥεύσουσιν ὕδατος 


the scripture, rivers out of his belly shall flow of *water 
ζῶντος. 39 'Ῥοῦτο. δὲ εἶπεν περὶ τοῦ πνεύματος οὗ “ἔμελ- 
‘living. But this hesaid concerning the pee which °were 
Nov" λαμβάνειν οἱ ᾿πιστεύοντες" εἰς αὐτόν" οὔπω.γὰρ ἦν 
"about ΕΝ “receive ‘those ἐρᾷ Zon *him; for not yet was 
Lt, ὅ 6" ?-L ΡΟΝ δὲ | ἐδοξάσθ 

πνεῦμα "ἅ Lov TL Inoovc “ουδεπω" εδοξάσθη. 
(the) “βρίσιῦ oly, ‘ae Jesus not yet was glorified. 
4. “πολλοὶ οὖν ἐκ τοῦ ὄχλου" ἀκούσαντες Yrov λόγον" 


Many therefore out of the crowd having heard the word 


ἔλεγον, * Οὗτός ἐστιν ἀληθῶς ὁ προφήτης. 41 ΄Αλλοι" ἔλεγον, 
said, This is truly the prophet. Others said, 


Οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ χριστός. Ῥ"Αλλοι" “δὲ" ἔλεγον, Μὴ γὰρ ἐκ 

This is the Christ. 7O0thers ‘and said, *Then °out Sof 

τῆς Γαλιλαίας ὁ χριστὸς ἔρχεται; 42 οὐχὶ ἡ γραφὴ εἶπεν, 
‘Galilee “the “Christ comes ? °Not ‘°the ''scripture *said, 


ὅτι ἐκ τοῦ σπέρματος *AaBid,' καὶ ἀπὸ Βηθλεὲμ τῆς Kw ug 
that out of the seed of David, and from Bethlehem the villa 


ὅπου ἢν “Δαβίδ," 6 χριστὸς Epxerar;' 48 Σχίσμα οὖν gy 
where “was ‘David, the Christ comes ? A division therefore in 


f ποιεῖ does 0. 


265 


hath done? 32 The 
Pharisees heard that 
the people murmured 
such things concer- 
ing him; and the Pha- 
risees and the chief 
priests sent officers to 
take him. 33 Then 
said Jesus unto them, 
Yet a little while am I 
with you, and then I 
go unto him that sent 
me. 34 Ye shall seek 
me, and shail not find 
me: and where 1 
am, thither ye cannot 
come. 35 Then said 
the Jews among them- 
selves, Whither will 
he go, that we shall 
not find him? will he 
go unto the dispersed 
among the Gentiles, 
and teach the Gen- 
tiles? 36 What man- 
ner of saying is this 
that he said, Ye shall 
seek me, and shall not 
find me: and where I 
am, thither ye cannot 
come ? 


37 In the last day, 
that great day of the 
feast, Jesus stood and 
cried, saying, If any 
man thirst, let him 
come unto me, and 
drink. 38 He that be- 
lieveth on me, as the 
scripture hath said,out 
of his belly shall flow 
rivers of living water. 
39 (But this spake he 
of the Spirit, which 
they that believe on 
him should receive: 
for the Holy Ghost 
was not yet given; be- 
cause that Jesus was 
not yet glorified.) 
40 Many of the people 
therefore, when they 
heard this saying, said, 
Of a truth this is the 
prophet. 41 Others 
said, This is the Christ. 
But some said, Shall 
Christ come out of 
Galilee? 42 Hath not 
the scripture said, 
That Christ cometh of 
the seed of David, and 
out of the town of 
Bethlehem, where Da- 
vid was? 43 So there 
was a division among 


Zou ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ οἱ Φαρισαῖοι v ὑπηρέτας LTrAwW ; ὑπηρέτας οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ 


οἱ Φαρισαῖοι Ὡς  — αὐτοῖς GLITrAW. ἰ χρόνον μικρὸν LTTrA, Κ Ἔμετηθιλ. μέλλει 
οὗτος 1. — ἡμεῖς (read εὑρή. we shall find) T. "0 Adyos οὗτος LTTrA. ὁ ἔκραζεν T. 

P — πρός me T. 4 ἥμελλον T, τ Ὑπεστ εὐ σαντες having believed ttra. 5 — ἅγιον 
LT[TrA]. t + δεδομένον given L. — ὃ LTTrAW. Ὑ ovmw LTrA. x ἐκ τοῦ ὄχλου οὖν 


[some] out of the crowd therefore Lrtra. 
τῶν W)LTTraW. * + [ore] a. 5. +4 [δὲ] andy. ὃ οἱ they ira. 
> Aavié Gw; Aaveid titra. ἄρχεται ὃ χριστός LTrA. 


7 τῶν λόγων τούτων these words (— t0v- 
ς--- δὲ ΤΩΣ 
88 ἐγένετο ἐν τῷ ὄχλῳ LTTYA. 


4 οὐχ LITA. 


266 


the people because of 
him. 44 And some of 
them would have ta- 
ken him; but no man 
laid hands on him, 
45 Then came the offi- 
cers to the chief priests 
and Pharisees; and 
they seid unto them, 
Why have ye not 
brought him? 46 The 
officers answered, Ne- 
ver man spake likethis 
man. 47 Then answer- 
ed them the Pharisees, 
Are ye also deceived ? 
48 Have any of the 
rulers or of the Pha- 
risees believed on him? 
49 But this people who 
knoweth not the law 
are cursed, 50 Nicode- 
mus saith unto them, 
(he that came to Jesus 
by night, being one of 
them,) 51 Doth our law 
judge any man, before 
it hear him, and know 
what he doeth? 52 They 
answered and _ said 
unto him, Art thou 
also of Galilee? Search, 
and look: for out of 
Galilee ariseth no pro- 
phet. 53 And every 
man went unto his 
own house. 


VIII. Jesus went 
unto the mount of 
Olives. 2 And early 
in the morning he 
came again into the 
temple, and all the 
people came unto him; 
and he sat down, and 
taught them. 3 And 
the scribes and Phari- 
sees brought unto him 
a woman taken in a- 
dultery ; and when 
they had set her in the 
midst, 4 they say unto 
him, Master, this wo- 
man was taken in a- 
duliery, in the very 
act. 5 Now Moses in 
the law commanded 
us, that such should 
be stoned: but what 
sayest thou? 6 This 
they said, tcmpting 
him, that they might 
have to accuse hin. 


ΓῺ A ΝΙΝ Εἰ Σ᾿ Vii, ΙΝ 
τῷ ὄχλῳ ἐγένετο δι αὐτόν. 44 τινὲς δὲ ἤθελον ἐξ αὐτῶν 
the crowd occurred because of him. But some “desired ‘of *them 

, 7 ΄ ᾽ ? ? ‘ h2 Ud 2 ? 7 \ A ~ 
πιάσαι αὐτόν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδεὶς δέπέβαλεν" ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν τὰς χεῖραο. 
to take him, but noone laid 2on “him ‘hands. 
45 ἦλθον οὖν οἱ ὑπηρέται πρὸς τοὺς ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ Papt- 

Came thereforethe officers to the chief priests and Phari- 
σαίους" Kai εἶπον αὐτοῖς ἐκεῖνοι, ‘Acari οὐκ.ἠγάγετε αὐτόν; 
sees, and “said *to*them ‘they, Why didyenotbring him? 
46 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν ot ὑπηρέται, Οὐδέποτε οὕτως ἐλάλησεν" 

“Answered ‘the officers, Never thus spoke 

ἄνθρωπος we οὗτος ™ ὁ ἄνθρωπος." 47 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν "ody! 

man 8ἃ85 this man, *Answered “therefore 
οαὐτοῖς" οἱ Φαρισαῖοι, Μὴ καὶ ὑμεῖς πεπλάνησθε; 48 μή 


5Sthem ‘the *Pharisees, Salso. ‘ye Shave been deceived ? 

τις ἐκ τῶν ἀρχόντων ἐπίστευσεν εἰς αὐτόν, ἢ ἐκ τῶν 
2Any Sone tof *the ®rulers ‘has believed on him, or of the 
Φαρισαίων; 49 Padd’' 0.0xAoc.0bTOG ὁ μὴ.γινώσκων τὸν 
Pharisees? But this crowd, which knows not the 
, q2 , All ? , , 4 ? - 
νόμον “ἐπικατάρατοί" εἰσιν. 80 Λέγει Νικόδημος πρὸς αὐτούς; 
law, accursed are. Says ‘Nicodemus to them, 
τὸ ἐλθὼν "νυκτὸς, πρὸς αὐτόν," εἷς ὧν ἐξ αὐτῶν, 51 Μὴ 


(he who came to 
ὁ νόμος-ἡμῶν κρίνει τὸν ἄνθρωπον, ἐὰν. μὴ ἀκούσῃ ‘rap’ 
“Our *law *does judge the man, unless it have heard from 
αὐτοῦ modrepor’,' καὶ γνῷ τί ποιεῖ; 52 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν καὶ 
himself first, and known what he does ? They answered and 
Welzrov' αὐτῷ, Μὴ καὶ od ἐκ τῆς Γαλιλαίας εἴ ; “ἐρεύνησον" 
said to him, °Also *thou *of *Galilee tart? Search 


καὶ ἴδε, ὅτι προφήτης ἐκ τῆς Γαλιλαίας" Τοὐκ.ἐγήγερται." 


by night hin, “one ‘being of themselves, ) 


and look, that a prophet out of Galilee has not arisen. 
53 "Καὶ ἐπορεύθη ἕκαστος εἰς τὸν. οἴκον.αὐτοῦ. 
And 2went teach to his house. 


? ~ ‘ ? , 2 4 » ~ ? ~ » 4 
8 ᾿Ιησοῦς.δὲ ἐπορεύθη εἰς τὸ ὄρος τῶν ἐλαιῶν" 2 ὄρθρου. δὲ 
But Jesus went to the mount of Olives. And at dawn 


πάλιν παρεγένετο εἰς TO ἱερόν, Kai πᾶς ὁ λαὸς ἤρχετο πρὸς 


again he came into the temple, and all the people came to 
αὐτόν: καὶ καθίσας ἐδίδασκεν αὐτούς. 3 ἄγουσιν δὲ οἱ 
him; and having sat down he was teaching them. 7Bring ‘and the 


γραμματεῖς καὶ οἱ Φαρισαῖοι πρὸς αὐτὸν γυναῖκα ἐν μοιχείᾳ 
“scribes *and *the ®Pharisees to him a woman in adultery 
κατειλημμένην, καὶ στήσαντες αὐτὴν ἐν μέσῳ, 4 λέγουσιν 
having been taken, and having set her in [the] midst, they say 
αὐτῷ, Διδάσκαλε, αὕτη ἡ γυνὴ κατειλήφθη ϑέπαυτοφώρῳ" 


to him, Teacher, this woman was taken in the very act 
“ 6 ? δὲ ~ , cM eit € ~ ? ir 
μοιχευομενήῆ- EV.0F TH νόμῳ WOonc μιν EVETELAATO 
committing adultery. Nowin the law Moses us commanded 
τὰς τοιαύτας “λιθοβολεῖσθαι" σὺ οὖν τί λέγεις; 
such to be stoned : thou therefore what sayest thou? 
6 Tovro.d? ἔλεγον πειράζοντες αὐτὸν ἵνα ἔχωσιν κατη- 
But this they said tempting him that they might have to ac- 


π ἔβαλεν LITrA. 
πος L[TrA]. 
4 ἐπάρατοί LTTrA. 
formerly LTra. 


Υ ἐκ THs Γαλιλαίας προφήτης Ltr. 
ρεύθη .... ἁμάρτανε (vili. 11) [@]urrra. 
4. + περὶ αὐτῆς concerning her w. 


atone w. 


m + λαλεῖ speaks T. 


i Διὰ τι LTrAW. 1 — ὡς οὗτος ὁ ἄνθρω. 
ἀλλὰ ᾿ 

Ραλλα LTTraw. 

t + πρότερον 

X ἐραύνησον TTra. 

2 — καὶ ἐπο- 


ἃ λιθάζειν to 


Κ ἐλάλησεν οὕτως LTTrA. 

π — οὖν ΤΑ. ο αὐτοῖς] Tr. 

τ.--- 6 ἐλθὼν νυκτὸς πρὸς αὐτόν T. 8 — νυκτὸς ΙΠτᾺ. 

Y πρῶτον Tap αὐτοῦ LTTrA. ~ εἶπαν LTTrA. 

2 οὐκ ἐγείρεται does not arise LTTrA. 
Ὁ ἐπ᾿ αὐτοφώρῳ W. © Μωῦσὴς Ww. 


JOHN. 


ὁ δὲ. Ἰησοῦς κάτω.κύψας, τῷ Γακτύλῳ 
But Jesus having stooped down, with [his} finger 
ἔγραφεν εἰς THY γῆν. 7 ὡς.δὲ ἐπέμενον ἐρωτῶντες αὐτόν, 
wrote on the ground. But as they continued asking him, 
ἀνακύψας εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, Ὃ ἀναμάρτητος v- 
having lifted up himself hesaid to them, The sinless one among 
μῶν πρῶτος TOY λίθον ἐπ᾿ αὐτῇ βαλέτω. 8 καὶ πάλιν 
you first *the “stone “at ‘Sher ‘let *him “cast. And again 
κάτω.κύψας ἔγραφεν εἰς τὴν γῆν. 9 o1.0& ἀκούσαντες, 
eee svogped down hewrote on the ground, But they having heard, 
καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς συνειδήσεως ἐλεγχόμενοι, ἐξήρχοντο εἷς Kad εἴς, 
and by the conscience being convicted, wentout one by one, 
ἀρξάμενοι ἀπὸ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων ἕως THY ἐσχάτων" καὶ 
beginning from the elder ones until the last ; and 
κατελείφθη μόνος ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς, καὶ ἡ γυνὴ ἐν μέσῳ 'ἑστῶσα." 
was left alone Seeiss and the ences midst standing. 


10 ἀνακύψας δὲ ἡ Τησοῦς, καὶ μηδένα θεασάμενος 
And “having “lifted *up shinagale | ‘Jesus, and 7no “one +seeing 
πλὴν τῆς γυναικός, εἶπεν αὐτῇ, ¥H γυνή." ποῦ εἰσιν ἐκεῖνοι 
but the woman, said to her, Woman, where are those 


ETT. 


= ake 
γορειν αὑτοῦυ. 
cuse him. 


Ol.KaTHyopol.cov, οὐδείς σε κατέκρινεν; 11 Ἡ.δὲ εἶπεν, 
thine goauseess =no *one *thee ὡς *condemn ? And she said, ° 
Οὐδείς, κύριε. Εἶπεν.δὲ αὐτῇ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, Οὐδὲ ἐγώ σε κατα- 
No one, Sir. And *said “to ‘her ‘Jesus, Neither “I ‘thee *do 
κρίνω πορεύου καὶ μηκέτι ἁμάρτανε. 
“condemn : go, “and no more sin. 
12 Πάλιν οὖν δὸ Ἰησοῦς αὐτοῖς ἐλάλησεν," λέγων, ᾿Εγώ 
Again therefore Jesus to them spoke, saying, I 
εἰμι TO φῶς τοῦ κόσμου ὁ ἀκολουθῶν ἱἐμοὶ οὐ.μὴ 
am the light ofthe world; 89 {πὰῦ follows me in no wise 


ἔπεριπατήσει" ἐν τῇ σκοτίᾳ, ἀλλ᾽ ἕξει τὸ φῶς τῆς ζωῆς. 


shall walk in the darkness, but shall have the light of the life. 
13 Εἶπον οὖν αὐτῷ ot Φαρισαῖοι, Σὺ περὶ σεαυτοῦ 
“Said “therefore *to®him'’the “Pharisees, Thou concerning thyself 


μαρτυρεῖς" ἡ-μαρτυρία. σου οὐκ.ἔστιν ἀληθῆς. 14 ᾿Απεκρίθη 


bearest witness ; ΓᾺΡ witness is not true. 2 Answered 


Ἰησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Κἂν ἐγὼ μαρτυρῶ περὶ ἐμαυτοῦ, 
‘Jesus and said tothem, Evenif [ bear witness concerning myself, 


ἀληθής ἐστιν ἡ μαρτυρία.μου, ὅτι οἶδα πόθεν ἦλθον καὶ 
true is my witness, because 1 know whence Icame and 


ποῦ ὑπάγω" ὑμεῖς. δὲ" οὐκιοἴδατε πόθεν ἔρχομαι Kai" ποῦ 


whither Igo: but ye know not whence I come and whither 
ὑπάγω. 15 ὑμεῖς κατὰ τὴν σάρκα κρίνετε" ἐγὼ οὐ κρίνω 
I go. Ye seca to the flesh judge, Ι judge 
οὐδένα. 16 καὶ ἐὰν κρίνω δὲ ye, ἡ κρίσις ἡ ἐμὴ πἀληθής" 
no one. And if sues “also use mnert “my true 
éoTiv* ὅτι μόνος οὐκ.εἰμί, ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ Kai ὁ πέμψας με ὅπα- 


is, because alone [181 πού, but I andthe *who“sent *me ‘'Fa- 


τήρ." 17 καὶ Ey TP νόμῳ δὲ τῷ ὑμετέρῳ γέγραπται," ore 
ther. And 4law also woes it has been eee that 
δύο ἀνθρώπων. ἡ μαρτυρία ἀληθῆς ἐστιν. 18 ἐγώ εἰμι 


of two men the witness true is. I 


ὁ 
am [one] who 


267 


But Jesus stooped 
down, and with his 
finger wrote on the 
| pb shes as though he 

them not. 7 So 
when they continued 
asking him, he lifted 
up himself, and said 
unto them, He that is 
without sin among 
you, let him first cast 
a stone ather. 8 And 
again he stooped down, 
and wrote on the 
ground. 9 And they 
which heard it, being 
convicted by their own 
conscience, went out 
one by one, beginning 
at the eldest, even unto 
the last: and Jesus 
was left alone, and the 
woman standing inthe 
midst. 10 When Jesus 
had lifted up himself, 
and saw none but the 
woman, he said unto 
her, Woman, where are 
those thine accusers? 
hath no man condemn- 
ed thee? 11 She said, 
No man, Lord. And 
Jesus said unto her, 
Neither do I condemn 
thee: go, and sin no 
more. 


12 Then spake Jesus 
again unto them, say- 
ing, Iam the light of 
the world: he that fol- 
loweth me shall not 
walk in darkness, but 
shall have the light of 
life. 13 The Pharisees 
therefore said unto 
him, Thou bearest re- 
cord of thyself; thy 
record is not true. 
14 Jesus answered and 
said unto them 
Though I bear record 
of myself, yet my re- 
cord is true: for I 
know whence I came, 
and whither I go; but 
ye cannot tell whence 
I come, and whither I 
go. 15 Ye judge after 
the flesh ; I judge no 
man. 16 And yet if I 
judge, my judgment 
is true: for I am not 
alone, but I and the 
Father that sent me, 
17 It is also written in 
your law, that the 
testimony of two men 
is true. 181 am one 
that bear witnesg of 


Γοῦσα being w. §—‘H γυνή w. 
‘you LTr, k ἐρίου τη: should walk LrTraw. 
" ἀληθινή LTTrA. 
written τ. 


— δὲ but 1. 
— πατήρ (read he who sent ΠΡΟ) τ. 


h αὑτοῖς ἐλάλησεν ὃ ([0} Tr) Ἰησοῦς LTTrA,. 


ἴῃ ἢ or GTTrAW. 


P γεγραμμένον ἐστὶν it is 


268 


myself, and the Father 
that sent me beareth 
witness of me. 19 Then 
said they unto him, 
Where is thy Father? 
Jesus answered, Ye 
neither know me, nor 
my Father: if ye had 
known me, ye should 
have known my Fa- 
ther also. 20 These 
words spake Jesus in 
the treasury, as he 
taught in the temple: 
andno man laid hands 
on him; for his hour 
was not yet come, 


21 Then said Jesus 
again unto them, I go 
my way, and ye shall 
seek me, and shall die 


in your sins: whither . 


I go, ye cannot come, 
22 Then said the Jews, 
Will he kill himself? 
because he saith, Whi- 
ther I go, ye cannot 
come. 23 And he said 
untothem, Ye are from 
beneath ; I am from 
above: ye are of this 
world; 1 am not of this 
world. 24 1 said there- 
fore unto you, that ye 
shall die in your sins: 
for if ye believe not 
that I am he, ye shall 
die in your sins. 
25 Then said they unto 
him, Who art thou? 
And Jesus saith unto 
them, Even the same 
that I said unto you 
from the beginning. 
26 Ihave many things 
to say and to judge of 
you: but he that sent 
me istrue; and I speak 
to the world those 
things which I have 
heard of him, 27 They 
understood not that he 
spake to them of the 
Father. 28 Then said 
Jesus unto them, When 
ye have lifted up the 
Son of man, then shall 
ye know that Iam he, 
and that I do nothing 
of myself; but as m 
Father hath taught 
me, I speak these 
things. 29 And he that 
sent me is with me: 
the Father hath not 
left me alone; for I do 


4 — ὃ GLTTrAW. 


— ὁ Ἰησοῦς (read he said) urtraw. 


— καὶ LTTrAW. 
Father) LITrA. 


Y and from 


ILQANNH &. 
μαρτυρῶν περὶ ἐμαυτοῦ, καὶ μαρτυρεῖ περὶ ἐμοῦ ὁ 
bears witness concen ats myself, and *bears 7witness *concerning *me ‘the 


aay « 
πέμψας με πατήρ. 19 Ἔλεγον οὖν αὐτῷ, Ποῦ ἐστιν ὁ 
“who *sent °me *Father. They said therefore tohim, Where is 


πατήρ.σου ; ᾿Απεκρίθη 4ὁ' Ἰησοῦς, Οὔτε ἐμὲ οἴδατε οὔτε τὸν 
thy Father ? * Answered 1Jesus, Neither me ye know nor 


πατέρα.μου᾽ εἰ ἐμὲ ἤδειτε, καὶ τὸν. πατέραιμου τῴδειτε. ἄν." 


VIIL 


my Father. If me yehad known, also my Father yewouldhaveknown. 
20 Ταῦτα τὰ ῥήματα ἐλάλησεν "ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς" ἐν τῷ γαζοφυλακίῳ, 
These words spoke Jesus in the treasury, 


διδάσκων ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ Kai οὐδεὶς ἐπίασεν αὐτόν, ὅτι οὔπω 


teaching in the temple; and noone took him, for not yet 
? , € ov ? Ld 
ἐληλύθει ἡ ὥρα. αὐτοῦ. 
had come his hour. 
21 Εἶπεν οὖν πάλιν αὐτοῖς ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς." ae ὑπάγω, 
2Said “therefore tagain ‘to *them 1 Jesus, go NEY, 
καὶ ζητήσετέ με, καὶ ἐν τῇ.ἁμαρτίᾳ ὑμῶν Πα τδν τς ὕπου 
and ye will seek me, and in your sin ye will die; where 
ve ὑπάγω ὑμεῖς οὐ.δύνασθε ἐλθεῖν. 22 !Ἔλεγον οὖν οἱ 


go ye areunable to come. *Said τ το τοζοις the 


Ἐς Μήτι ἀποκτενεῖ ἑαυτόν, ὅτι λέγει, Ὅπου ἐ ἐγὼ ὑπάγω 


2Jews, Willhe kill himself, that hesays, Where 80 
ὑμεῖς οὐ-δύνασθε ἐλθεῖν ; 23 Kai Velev" αὐτοῖς, «Ὑμεῖς ἐκ 
ye areunable to come? And hesaid to them, Ye from 
TOV.KATW ἐστέ, ἐγὼ ἐκ THY.dvw εἰμί: ὑμεῖς ἐκ Yrov κόσμου 
beneath are, I from above am ; Ye οἵ world 
τούτου! ἐστέ, ἐγὼ οὐκ.εἰμὶ ἐκ τοῦ.κόσμου.τούτου. 24 εἶπον 
‘this are, I amnot οἵ this world. I said 


~ 


οὖν ὑμῖν Ort ἀποθανεῖσθε ἐν ταῖς. ἁμαρτίαις. ὑμῶν" ἐὰν.γὰρ 


therefore toyor that 78 will die in your ins) for if 
μὴ.- πιστεύσητε OTL ἐγώ εἰμι, ἀποθανεῖσθε ἐν ταῖς ἁμαρτίαις 
ye believe not that LI am Che], ye will die in ?3ins 
ὑμῶν. 25 Ἔλεγον οὖν αὐτῷ, Σὺ τίς εἶ; *Kai! εἶπεν 
‘your. They le therefore to him, “Thou 'who tart? And said 
αὐτοῖς YO" ᾿Ιησοῦς, Tiv.apyiy ὕ.τι καὶ λαλῶ ὑμῖν. 
“to *them 1 Jesus, Altogether that which also JIsay toyou. 
26 πολλὰ ἔχω περὶ ὑμῶν λαλεῖν Kai κρίνειν" ἀλλ᾿ ὁ 


Many things I have concerning yon to aay and to judge 5 ; but he who 


πέμψας pe ἀληθῆς ἐστιν, κἀγὼ ἃ ἤκουσα παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ, ταῦτα 
sent me _ true is, and I what [heard from him, these things 


éyw' εἰς τὸν κόσμον. 27 Οὐκ. ἔγνωσαν ὅτι τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῖς 
Isay to the world. They knew not that the Father tothem 
ἔλεγεν. 28 Εἶπεν οὖν "αὐτοῖς" ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, Ὅταν ὑψώ- 
he spoke of. 3Said “therefore *to *them ‘Jesus, When ye shall have 


σητε τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, τότε γνώσεσθε Ort ἐγώ εἰμι’ 
lifted mp phe Son of man, then yeshall know that I am Che}, 


καὶ ἀπ᾽ ἐμαυτοῦ ποιῶ οὐδέν, ἀλλὰ καθὼς ἐδίδαξέν με ὃ 
myself Ido nothing, but as 3taught *me 


ταῦτα λαλῶ. 29 καὶ ὁ πέμψας με, per’ 
these things I par And he who sent me, with 
με μόνον “ὁ πατήρ," : ; 


Ore ἐγὼ τὰ 
*me ὅδίοπθ ‘the *Father, because I the things 


πατήρ."μου," 
Tay) “Father, 


ἐμοῦ ἐστιν᾽ οὐκ. ἀφῆκέν 
me is ; 3left “ποῦ 


* — ὃ Ἰησοῦς (read he spoke) GLTTraw. 
v ἔλεγεν LTTrA. ¥ τούτου TOU κόσμου LTrA. 
ind [Ὁ] tr. “ λαλῶ LITrA. 8 - αὐτοῖς LTTrA. b — μον (read the 
— ὃ πατήρ (read he left not) LtTra. 


τ ἂν ἤδειτε LTTrA. 


σΠΘΊΉΉΝΕ 


30 Ταῦτα αὐτοῦ.λαλοῦντος 
*These *things las 7he *spoke 


Vill. 


ἀρεστὰ αὐτῷ ποιῶ πάντοτε. 
pleasing tohim do always. 
πολλοὶ ἐπίστευσαν εἰς αὐτόν. 


many believed on = him. 

” > ©? ~ ‘ \ , > ~ 

91 Ἔλεγεν οὖν ὁ lnoovc πρὸς τοὺς πεπιστευκότας αὐτῷ 
"Said ἐὑμουθῆοσθ ‘Jesus to the *who *had ‘believed *on*him 

? , ? A « ~ , >? ~ , ~? ~ > ~ 
Ιουδαίους, “Eay ὑμεῖς μείνητε ἐν τῷ ΣΟΥ τῷ ἐμῷ, ἀληθῶς 
Jews, If ye abide in wor lmy, truly 

4 ? , ‘ , A > , ‘ « 
μαθηταί μου ἐστε" 92 καὶ γνώσεσθε τὴν ἀλήθειαν, καὶ ἡ 
?disciples “my ye are. And yeshall know the truth, and the 


ἀλήθεια ἐλευθερώσει. ὑμᾶς. 88 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν tadr@,' Σπέρμα 
truth shall set free you. They answered him, 7Seed 
᾿Αβραάμ ἐσμεν, καὶ obdevi δεδουλεύκαμεν πώποτε᾽ πῶς 
*Abraham’s weare, and to anyone have been under bondage never; how 
(lit. to no one) 


σὺ λέγεις, Ὅτι ἐλεύθεροι γενήσεσθε; 34 ᾿Απεκρίθη αὐτοῖς 
*thou ‘sayest, Free ye shall become ? 2Answered *them 
ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς, ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι πᾶς ὑ ποιῶν 
Jesus, Verily verily Isay toyou, that everyone that practises 
THY ἁμαρτίαν δοῦλός ἐστιν τῆς ἁμαρτίας. 35 0.6 δοῦλος 
sin a bondman is of sin. Now the bondman 
ov-péver ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ εἰς. τὸν. αἰῶνα" ὁ υἱὸς μένει εἰς.τὸν. αἰῶνα. 

abides ποῦ in the house for ever ; the Son abides for ever. 
36 ἐὰν οὖν ὁ υἱὸς ὑμᾶς ἐλευθερώσῃ, ὄντως ἐλεύθεροι ἔσ- 
If therefore the Son “you ‘shall *set.free, really free ye 


εσθε. 37 olda ὅτι σπέρμα ᾿Αβραάμ tore’ ἀλλὰ ζητεῖτε pe 
shall be. Iknow that “seed tAbraham’s yeare; but yeseek me 
ἀποκτεῖναι, Or: ὁ λόγος ὁ ἐμὸς οὐ-χωρεῖ ἐν ὑμῖν. 88 feyw 

to kill, because word "my hasnoentrance in you. I 


0 ἑώρακα παρὰ τῷ. πατρί.Ξμου" λαλῶ" Kai ὑμεῖς οὖν 6 
what Ihave seen with my Father speak; and ye _ therefore what 
ἑωράκατε! παρὰ ἱτῷ.πατρὶ ὑμῶν" ποιεῖτε. 39 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν 
yehavyeseen with your father do. They answered 
καὶ ξεῖπον" αὐτῷ, Ο.πατὴρ.ἡ μῶν ᾿Αβραάμ ἐστιν. Λέγει αὐτοῖς 
and said tohim, *Our*Father ‘Abraham = 7215. ®Says “to *them 
ἰδ" Ἰησοῦς, Ei τέκνα τοῦ ᾿Αβραὰμ "ἦτε." τὰ ἔργα Tov ABpaap 
‘Jesus, If children of Abraham ye were, the works of Abraham 
érrouetre."ay'" 40 νῦν.δὲ ζητεῖτέ pe ἀποκτεῖναι, ἄνθρωπον ὃς 
ye would do; but now yeseek me to Kill, ὃν man who 
τὴν ἀλήθειαν ὑμῖν λελάληκα, ἣν ἤκουσα παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ" 
the truth toyou hasspoken, which I heard from God: 
τοῦτο ᾿Αβραὰμ οὐκ.ἐποίησεν. 41 ὑμεῖς ποιεῖτε τὰ ἔργα τοῦ 
this Abraham did not. Ye do the works 
᾿ « » ony Ι p x i ᾽ ~ ε ~ ᾽ , 4 > 
πατρὺςυμῶν. EKizoy' Poty" αὐτῷ, Ἡμεῖς ex πορνείας 3οὺ 
of your father. They said therefore to him, We of fornication *not 
ΓΑ θ oe , » Ψ θ , 42 ἘΠ r ὖ iT} 
9) EY | so a éva πατερα EXOMEV, TOY VEOY. πεν οὔῦν 
have been born; one Father we have, God. Said *therefore 
αὐτοῖς "ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς, Ei ὁ θεὺς ' πατὴρ ὑμῶν ἦν, ἠγαπᾶτε.ἂν 
“to*them 1Jesus, If God Father of you were, ye would have loved 
tee 2 ‘ BY ? “ 5 ) “Ὁ \ fd = > A ies) 
ἐμέ: ἐγὼ.γὰρ ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐξῆλθον Kai ἥκω οὐδὲ.γὰρ ἀπ 
me, forI from God came forth andamcome; for neither of 
ἐμαυτοῦ ἐλήλυθα, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνός pe ἀπέστειλεν. 43 διατί" τὴν 
myself havelIcome, but he me sent. Why 


269 


always those things 
that please him. 30 As 
he spake these words, 
many believed on him. 


31 Then said Jesus 
to those Jews which 
believed on him, If ye 
continue in my word, 
then are ye my disci- 
ples indecd; 32 and ye 
shall know the truth, 
and the truth shall 
make you free. 33 They 
answered him, We be 
Abraham’s seed, and 
were never in bondage 
to any man: how say- 
est thou, Ye shall be 
made free? 34 Jesus 
answered them, Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, 
Whosoever commit- 
teth sin is the servant 
of sin. 35 And the 
servant abideth not in 
the house for ever: but 
the Son abideth ever. 
36 If the Son therefore 
shall make you free, 
ye shall be free indeed. 
37 I know that ye are 
Abraham’s seed; but 
ye seek to kill me, be- 
cause my word hath 
no placein you. 38 I 
speak that which I 
have seen with my Fa- 
ther: and ye do that 
which ye have seen 
with your father. 
39 They answered and 
said unto him, Abra- 
ham is our father. 
Jesus saith unto them, 
If ye were Abraham’s 
children, ye would do 
the works of Abraham, 
40 But now ye seek to 
kill me, a man that 
hath told you the 
truth, which I have 
heard of God: this did 
not Abraham. 41 Ye 
do the deeds of your 
father. Then saidthey 
to him, We be not born 
of fornication; we 
have one Father, even 
God. 42 Jesus said 
unto them, If God 
were your Father, ye 
would love me: for I 
proceeded forth and 
came from God; nei- 
ther came I of myself, 
but he sent me. 43 Why 


4 πρὸς αὐτόν to him LTtTra. e — ὃ {{τ|]. [ἃ ἐγὼ 
the Father) trtra. ἃ & ἠκούσατε what ye have heard LTTra. 
LTTra. Καεῖπαν LtTtra. [ὃ] Tr. ™ ἐστε ye are GLTTrA. 
P — οὖν LTTrA. 4 οὐκ ἐγεννήθημαν Were not born LTra. 
t+ 4 othet. ¥ διὰ τί LTrA. 


LTTr; ἐγὼ aa 

ae Sie Ξ 

i τοῦ πατρὸς the father 

m — ἄν GTTrA. 
' — οὖν GLTTrA. 


8. — pou (read 


© εἷπαν τ. 


5 — ὃ L[{Tr]. 


270 


do ye not understand 
my speech? even be- 
cause ye cannot hear 
my word. 44 Ye are of 
your father the devil, 
and the lusts of your 
father ye willdo. He 
was a murderer from 
the beginning, and a- 
bode not in the truth, 
because there is no 
truth in him. When 
he speaketh a lie, he 
speaketh of his own: 
for heis a liar, and the 
father of it. 45 And 
because I tell you the 
truth, ye believe me 
not. 46 Which of you 
convinceth me of sin? 
And if I say the truth, 
why do ye not believe 
me? 47 He that is of 
God heareth God’s 
words: ye therefore 
hear them not, because 
ye are not of God. 
48 Then answered the 
Jews, and said unto 
him, Say we not well 
that thou art a Sama- 
ritan, and hast a devil? 
49 Jesus answered, I 
have not a devil; but 
I honour my Father, 
and ye do dishonour 
me. 50 And I seek not 
mine own glory: there 
is one that seeketh and 
judgeth. 51 Verily, 
verily, 1 say unto you, 
If a man keep my say- 
ing, he shall never see 
death. 52 Then said 
the Jews unto him, 
Now we know that 
thou hast a devil. A- 
braham is dead, and 
the prophets; and thou 
sayest, If a man keep 
my saying, he shall 
never taste of death. 
53 Art thou greater 
than our father Abra- 
ham, which is dead? 
and the prophets are 
dead: whom makest 
thou thyself? 54 Jesus 
answered, If I honour 
myself, my honour is 
nothing: it is my Fa- 
ther that honoureth 
me; of whom ye say, 
that he is your God: 
55 yet ye have not 
known him; but I 
know him: and if I 


IQANNH®. VITk 


λαλιὰν τὴν ἐμὴν οὐ.γινώσκετε; ὅτι οὐ δύνασθε ἀκούειν τὸν 
“speech my doyenotknow? Because yeareunable to hear 

λόγον τὸν ἐμόν. 44 ὑμεῖς ἐκ πατρὸς τοῦ διαβόλου ἐστέ, 
word my. Ye of [the] father the devil are, 


kai τὰς ἐπιθυμίας τοῦ.πατρὸς ὑμῶν θέλετε ποιεῖν. ἐκεῖνος 
and the lusts of your father yedesire to do. He 
ἀνθρωποκτόνος ἦν ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς, καὶ ἐν τῇ ἀληθείᾳ “οὐχ 

ἃ murderer was from [the] beginning, and in the truth 2not 
e é e ? ” ? , ? ᾽ ~ « ~ 
ἕστηκεν Ore οὐκιἔστιν ἀλήθεια ἐν αὐτῷ. OSrav Nady 
"has stood, because there is not truth in him. Whenever he may speak 

A we , ~ 7a ~ ε΄ UJ ? 4 ‘ c 
τὸ ψεῦδος, ἐκ THv.idiwy λαλεῖ: bre ψεύστης ἐστὶν Kai ὁ 

falsehood, from hisown hespeaks; for a liar heis andthe 
πατὴρ αὐτοῦ. 45 ἐγὼ δὲ ore τὴν ἀλήθειαν λέγων, οὐ 
father of it. I ‘and *because the truth speak, “not 
πιστεύετέ μοι. 46 ric ἐξ ὑμῶν ἐλέγχει μὲ περὶ ἁμαρτίας; 
tye “do believe me. Whichof you convinces me concerning sin? 
εἰ “δὲ ἀλήθειαν λέγω, “dart! ὑμεῖς οὐ.πιστεύετέ μοι; 47 ὁ 
But if truth I speak, why “ye ‘donot believe me? He that 
ὧν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ τὰ ῥήματα τοῦ θεοῦ ἀκούει" dud-rovUTO ὑμεῖς 
is of God the words of God hears: therefore ye 

? ) U {2 2 ~ ~ > ᾽ , ? ΄ 
οὐκιἀκούετε, ὅτι ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκιἐστέ. 48 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν 

hear not, because of God ye are not. Answered 
boty" οἱ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι καὶ °elzrov' αὐτῷ, Οὐ καλῶς λέγομεν ἡμεῖς 
therefore the Jews and said tohim, *Not well ‘say “we 
ὅτι Σαμαρείτης" εἶ σύ, καὶ δαιμόνιον ἔχεις ; 49 ᾿Απεκρίθη 
that aSamaritan “art ‘thou, and a demon hast? ? Answered 
Ἰησοῦς, ᾿Εγὼ δαιμόνιον οὐκ.ιἔχω, ἀλλὰ τιμῶ τὸν.πατέρα.μου, 

‘Jesus, 11 ademon havenot; but I honour my Father, 

4 « ~ ? , , ? Ἢ A > ~ A a7 la 
καὶ ὑμεῖς ἀτιμάζετέ με. 5O ἐγὠ.δὲ οὐ.ζητῶ τὴν.δόξαν.μου 
and ye dishonour me. But I seek not my glory: 
ἔστιν ὁ ζητῶν Kai κρίνων. 51 a ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ἐάν 
thereishewho seeks and judges. erily verily Isay toyou, Τῇ 

τις τὸν “λόγον τὸν paca τηρήσῃ, θάνατον οὐ-μὴ θεωρήσῃ 
anyone Sword y ‘keep, death inno wise shall he see 
εἰς τὸν. αἰῶνα. 52 fElroy' βοῦν" αὐτῷ οἱ Ἰουδαῖοι, Νῦν 

for ever. *Said “therefore *to Shim ‘the Jews, Now 
ἐγνώκαμεν ὅτι δαιμόνιον ἔχεις. ᾿Αβραὰμ ἀπέθανεν καὶ οἱ 
we know that ademon thouhast. Abraham died and the 
προφῆται, καὶ od λέγεις, “Edy τις τὸν.λόγον.μου Toney, 
prophets, and thou sayest, If anyone “my “word keep, 
οὐ-μὴ yeboera' θανάτου εἰς. τὸν.αἰῶνα. 53 μὴ od μείζων 
in no wise shallhe taste of death for ever. “Thou *greater 
εἶ τοῦ.-πατρὸς.-ἡμῶν ᾿Αβραάμ, ὕστις ἀπέθανεν; Kai οἱ προ- 
‘art than our father Abraham, who died? and the pro- 
φῆται ἀπέθανον᾽ τίνα σεαυτὸν ‘od! ποιεῖς ; 54 ᾿Απεκρίθη 
phets died ! whom “thyself *thou *makest? 5’ Answered 
᾿Ιησοῦς, ᾿Εὰν ἐγὼ ἔδοξάζω" ἐμαυτόν, ἡ.δόξα.μου οὐδέν torn” 


¥ + τοῦ the GLTTrA. 
b — οὖν GLTTrA. 
& — ovy LTTrA. 
ποιεῖς Makest thou) GLTTrA. 


® διὰ τί LTrA. 
f eizrap T. 


*Jesus, If I glorify myself, my glory nothing ἰδ; 
ἔστιν O.maTnp-wov ὁ δοξάζων με, Ov ὑμεῖς λέγετε, Ore 
it is my Father who glorifies me, [of] whom ye say, that 
θεὸς ‘pay ἐστιν, 55 καὶ οὐκ. ἐγνώκατε αὐτόν, ἐγὼ δὲ οἶδα 
"God ‘your 8865. And ye have not known him, utI know 
χ ovK T. Υ + [ὑμῖν] to thee x. z — δὲ but @urtra. 


¢ εἶπαν LTTrA. © Σαμαρίτης T. © ἐμὸν λόγον LTTra. 
h γεύσηται should he taste GLTTrAW. i — σὺ (read 
k δοξάσω shall glorify LTTra. | ἡμῶν Our TTrAW. 


DLL, ΙΧ. JOHN. 


αὐτόν: "καὶ ἐὰν" εἴπω ὅτι ovK.olda αὐτόν, ἔσομαι ὅμοιος 


him ; and if Isay that Iknownot him, I shall be like 
πὑμῶν," ψεύστης" “ἀλλ᾽" olda αὐτόν, Kai τὸν.λόγον.αὐτοῦ 
you, a liar. But Iknow him, and his word 
τηρῶ. 56’ Αβραὰμ ὑ-πατὴρ.ὑμῶν ἠγαλλιάσατο wa ἴδῃ" 
I as Abraham your Father exulted in that he should see 


τὴν ἡμέραν τὴν ἐμήν" καὶ εἶδεν καὶ ἐχάρη. δ7 ἹΕἴπον" οὖν 


Said therefore 


2day ‘my, and hesaw and rejoiced. 
ot ᾿Ιουδαῖοι πρὸς αὐτόν, Πεντήκοντα ἔτη οὔπω ἔχεις, 
the Jews to him, Fifty years [old] not yet art thou, 


καὶ ᾿Αβραὰμ ἑώρακας; 58 Εἶπεν αὐτοῖς τὸ" Inoovc, ᾿Αμὴν 
and nice hast thou seen ? ?Said *to *them ‘Jesus, Verily 


ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, πρὶν ᾿Αβραὰμ γενέσθαι ἐ ἐγώ εἰμι. 59 Ἦραν 


verily Isay to you, Before Abraham was am. They took up 


οὖν λίθους ἵνα βάλωσιν ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν" ie ἐκρύβη: 
therefore stones thatthey mightcast at him; but Jesus hid himself, 
καὶ ἐξῆλθεν ἐκ τοῦ ἱεροῦ, "διλθὼν διὰ μέσου αὐτῶν᾽ 
and went forth outof the temple, going through the midst of them, 
καὶ παρῆγεν οὕτως." 
and *passed*on ‘thus. 


9 Kai παράγων εἶδεν ἄνθρωπον ee ἐκ γενετῆς. 2 καὶ 
And passing on he saw a man ἃ from birth. And 


ἠρώτησαν αὐτὸν οἱ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ λέγοντες, © Ραββί," τίς 

“asked *him this *disciples saying, Rabbi, who 
ἥμαρτεν, οὗτος ἢ οἱ. γονεῖς. αὐτοῦ, ἵνα τυφλὸς γεννηθῇ ; 

sinned, this [man] or his parents, that blind heshould be born? 


ἥμαρτεν οὔτε οἱ γονεῖς 


9᾽᾿Απεκρίθη "ὁ" ᾿Τησοῦς, Οὔτε οὗτος 
nor , “Tenants 


7 Answered ‘Jesus, Neither this (man] sinned 


wa φανερωθῇ τὰ ἔργα τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ. 
that should be manifested the works of God in him. 


ἐργάζεσθαι τὰ Eoya τοῦ πέμψαντός ne 
to work the works of him who sent 


ἔρχεται νύξ, Ore οὐδεὶς δύναται ΈΧ ΤΣ 
2comes ‘night, whennoone is able. to work. 


φῶς εἰμι τοῦ κόσμου. 6 Tav- 


αὐτοῦ: ἀλλ᾽ 
this; but 
4 ἐμὲ!) δεῖ 
Ξ3Μ6 ‘it *behoves 
ἕως ἡμέρα ἐστίν" 
while day. it is ; 


5 bray ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ ὦ, 


While in the world I may ἮΙ {the} Bel Tam ofthe world. These 
Ta εἰπών, ἔπτυσεν χαμαί, καὶ ἐποίησεν πηλὸν ἐκ 
things OES said, he ae on (the] ground, and made clay of 


τοῦ πτύσματος, καὶ ἐπέχρισεν * τὸν πηλὸν ἐπὶ τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς 
the spittle, and aPP ied the clay to the eyes 


Yrov τυφλοῦ" 7 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ὕπαγε, "νίψαι! εἰς τὴν 
of the blind [man]. And hesaid ἴο him, Go, wash in the 


roku SnGpay τοῦ Σιλωάμ, ὃ ἑρμηνεύεται, ἀπεσταλμένος. 
pool of Siloam, which is interpreted, Sent. 


ἀπῆλθεν οὖν καὶ ἐνίψατο, καὶ ἦλθεν βλέπων. ὃ ΟἹ οὖν 
He went therefore and washed, and came sostne The *therefore 


γείτονες καὶ οἱ θεωροῦντες αὐτὸν τὸ πρότερον Ort "τυφλὸς" 

‘neighbours and those who saw him before that blind 
ἦν. ἔλεγον, Οὐχ οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ καθήμενος Kai προσαιτῶν; 

he was, βαϊᾷ, 7Not >this lis hewho wassitting and begging? 


9 ἼΑλλοι ἔλεγον, Ὅτι οὗτός ἐστιν᾽ ἄλλοι."δέ," “Ὅτι! 6 ὅμοιος 
Some said, He it 7is; but others, Like 


271 


should ie I know 
him not, I shall be a 
liar like unto you: but 
I know him, and keep 
his saying. 56 Your 
father Abraham re- 
joiced to see my day: 
and he saw it, and was 
glad. 57 Then said the 
Jews unto him, Thou 
art not yet fifty years 
6ld, and hast thou seen 
Abraham ? 58 Jesus 
said unto them, Verily, 
verily, 1 say unto you, 
Before Abraham was, 
I am. 59 Then took 
they up stones to cast 
at him: but Jesus hid 
himself, and went out 
of the temple, going 
through the midst of 
them, and so passed 


by. 


IX. And as Jesus 
passed by, he saw a 
man which was blind 
from his birth. 2 And 
his disciples asked 
him, saying, Master, 
who did sin, this man, 
or his parents, that he 
was born blind? 3 Je- 
sus answered, Neither 
hath this man sinned, 
nor his parents: but 
that the works of God 
should be made mani- 
fest in him. 4 I must 
work the works of 
him that sent me, 
while it is day: the 
night cometh, when no 
man can work. 5 As 
long as I am in the 
world, I am the light 
of the world. 6 When 
he had thus spoken, he 
spat on the ground, 
and made clay of the 
spittle, and he anoint- 
ed the eyes of the blind 
man with the clay, 
Zand said unto him, 
Go, wash in the pool 
of Siloam, (which is by 
interpretation, Sent.) 
He went his way there- 
fore, and washed, and 
came seeing. 8 The 
neighbours therefore, 
and they which before 
had seen him that he 
was blind, said, Is not 
this he that sat and 
begged? 9 Some said, 
This is he: others said. 
He is like him: but he 


------------α---.»--.- - ο-ὔ3---- -- 


Ὁ ὑμῖν LTr. ο ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. Ρ εἴδῃ τ. 4 Εἶπαν τ. 
+++. οὕτως GLTTYA. t Ῥαββεί τ. u — ὃ GLTTrAW. 
τ + αὐτοῦ on an LTTrA. Υ — τοῦ τυφλοῦ [{Ἰτττὰ. 

GLTTraWw. — δέ but [L]rtra. 


ἔλεγον [Οὐχί, ann ]L. 


πὶ Kav LTTr. 


2 [νίψαι] L. 


τ-- ὁ TTr. 
¥ ἡμᾶς US TTr. 

® προσαίτης a beggar 
ς eXeyov, Οὐχί, ἀλλ᾽ (ἀλλὰ T) said, No, but TTra ; 


s — διελθὼν 
Ὁ ἡμᾶς Us T. 


272 

said, Lam he. 10 There- 
fore said they unto 
him, How were thine 
eyes opened? 11 He 
answered and said, A 
man that is called Je- 
sus made clay, and an- 
ointed mine eyes, and 
said unto me, Go to 
the pool of Siloam, 
and wash: and I went 
and washed, and I re- 
ceived sight. 12 Then 
said they unto him, 
Where is he? He said, 
I know not. 


13 They brought to 
the Pharisees him that 
aforetime was blind. 
14 And it was the 
sabbath day when 
Jesus made the clay, 
and opened his eyes, 
15 Then again the Pha- 
risees also asked him 
how he had received 
his sight. He said un- 
to them, He put clay 
upon mine eyes, and 1 
washed, and do see. 
16 Therefore said some 
of the Pharisees, This 
man is not of God, be- 
cause he keepeth not 
the sabbath day. 
Others said, How can 
a man that is a sinner 
do such miracles? And 
there was a division 
among them. 17 They 
say unto the blind man 
again, What sayest 
thou of him, that he 
hath opened _ thine 
eyes? He said, He is 
a prophet. 18 But the 
Jews did not believe 
concerning him, that 
he had been blind, and 
received his sight, un- 
til they called the pa- 
rents of him that had 


received his sight. 
19 And they asked 
them, saying, Is this 


your son, who ye say 
was born blind? how 
then doth he now see? 
30 His parents answer- 
ed them and said, We 
know that this is our 
son, and that he was 
born blind: 21 but by 
what means he now 


a + δὲ however L. 
i + ὁ (read the man that is called) Trr[a]. 
τὰ οὖν therefore LTTrA. 


[u]TTra. 
loam) GLTTrA. 


4 ἐν ἡ ἡμέρᾳ in which day LrTra. 
παρὰ θεοῦ ὃ ἄνθρωπος LTTrA. 


χα ἣν τυφλὸς ΤΊΤΑ. 
> εἶπαν ΤΊτΑ. 


ΙΧ, 


10 Ἔλεγον 
They said 


T QO2A0NSNGH >. 
αὐτῷ ἐστιν. ᾿Εκεῖνος ἔλεγεν, εἰμι. 
*him ‘he 7is. He said, am [86]. 
οὖν αὐτῷ, Πῶς" [ἀνεῴχθησάν! ἔσου" οἱ ὀφθαλμοί; 11 ᾿Απ- 
therefore tohim, How were opened thine eyes? 7An- 
exon ἐκεῖνος "καὶ εἶπεν," ᾿Ανθρωπος ἷ λεγόμενος Ἰησοῦς 
swered The and said, Aman called Jesus 
A ΄ὔ Ad , , ‘ ? Ul ‘ La 
πηλὸν ἐποίησεν Kai ἐπέχρισέν μου τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς, Kai εἶπέν 
clay made and appliedto mine eyes, and said 
μοι," Ὕπαγε εἰς ἱτὴν κολυμβήθραν τοῦ" Σιλωὰμ καὶ νίψαι. 
to me, Go to the pool of Siloam and wash: 
ἀπελθὼν ™0é καὶ νιψάμενος ἀνέβλεψα. 12°Eizoy' Ῥοῦν᾽ 
"having “gone ‘and and washed I received sight. They said therefore 
αὐτῷ, Ποῦ ἐστιν ἐκεῖνος ; Λέγει, Ovx-oida. 
tohim, Where is he? He says, I know not. 
13 “Ayovow αὐτὸν πρὸς τοὺς Φαρισαίους, τόν ποτε 
They bring *him to *the *Pharisees, who once [was_ 


Ὅτι ἐγώ 
I 


τυφλόν. 14 ἦν.δὲ σάββατον «ὅτε" τὸν πηλὸν ἐποίησεν ὁ 
blind, Now it was sabbath when “the “clay 2made 


? ~ ἘΞ > Ἂ 
Ιησοῦς καὶ ἀνέῳξεν αὐτοῦ τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς. 15 πάλιν οὖν 
Jesus and ογροπρᾶ his eyes. Again therefore 
ἠρώτων αὐτὸν Kai οἱ Φαρισαῖοι πῶς ἀνέβλεψεν. 6.62 εἶπεν 

asked him alsothe Pharisees how he received sight. Andhe said 

? ~ ‘A > , T2 7 4 ? , ll ‘ ? 
αὐτοῖς, Πηλὸν ἐπέθηκεν τέἐπὶ τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς. μου," καὶ ἐνι- 
to them, Clay he put on mine eyes, and I 
ψάμην, καὶ βλέπω. 16°ENeyoy οὖν ke τῶν Φαρισαίων τινές, 
washed, and 14.860, Said therefore “οὐ “the *Pharisees ‘some, 
3 τ c » ᾽ » ᾿ ~ θ “ἢ x , 

Οὗτος ὁ ἄνθρωπος οὐκ.ἔστιν παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ," ὅτι τὸ σάββατον 
This man is not from God, forthe sabbath 
ov-rnpet. Αλλοι ἔλεγον, Πῶς δύναται ἄνθρωπος ἁμαρτωλὸς 

he doesnot keep. Others said, How can aman a sinner 
τοιαῦτα σημεῖα ποιεῖν; Kai σχίσμα ἣν ἐν αὐτοῖς. 17 Λέ- 
such signs do ἢ» And adivision was among them. They 
γουσιν τῷ τυφλῷ πάλιν, “Σὺ i λέγεις περὶ αὐτοῦ, 
say tothe blind [man] again, “Thou ‘what *sayest concerning him, 
Ore ἤνοιξεν" σου τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς ; Ὃ.δὲ εἶπεν, Ὅτι προ- 
for heopened thine eyes? Andhe said, A pro- 
, 3 th ? > Ω « ? ~ ν᾿ 
φήτης ἐστίν. 18 Οὐκ. ἐπίστευσαν οὖν οἱ Ἰουδαῖοι περὶ 
phet he is. *Did "ποὺ “believe *therefore ‘the 7Jews concerning 
αὐτοῦ, ὅτι “τυφλὸς ἦν" καὶ ἀνέβλεψεν, ἕως ὅτου ἐφώνησαν 
him, that *blind ‘he *wasand received sight, until they called 


τοὺς γονεῖς αὐτοῦ τοῦ ἀναβλέψαντος. 19 Kai ἠρώτησαν 


the parents of him who had received sight. And they asked 
αὐτοὺς λέγοντες, Οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ.υἱὸς ὑμῶν ὃν ὑμεῖς λέγετε 
them saying, *This lis your son, of whom ye say 


Ort τυφλὸς ἐγεννήθη ; πῶς οὖν Τἄρτι βλέπει" ; 20 ᾿Απεκρίθη- 
that blind hewasborn? how then now does he see? 7Answered 
σαν *avroic' οἱ. γονεῖς. αὐτοῦ καὶ ϑεῖπον," Οἴδαμεν ὅτι οὗτός 
*them his *parents and said, We know that this 
᾽ « es « ~ ‘ eo ν > Ul ~ 4 “ὦ 
ἐστιν ὁ.υἱὸς ἡμῶν, καὶ ὅτι τυφλὸς ἐγεννήθη" 21 πῶς.δὲ νῦν 
is our son, and that blind he was born; but how now 


ἔ σοι Ἑ. 4 -- καὶ εἶπεν 
! τὸν (read Go to Si- 
P — οὗν LTTrA. 


Γἠνεῴχθησάν LITrA. 

k 4 ὅτι TTr. 
n+ [kat] and tr. ° εἶπαν LTTrA. 
τ μου ἐπὶ τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς GLTTrAW. “ Οὐκ ἔστιν οὗτος 
νυ Τί σὺ TrA. ν ἤνέωξέν Tra. 
ἃ — αὐτοῖς [{ΠΤΊΤΑ. 


8. + οὖν then [L]z[a]. 


t + οὖν therefore LTTraw. 


Y βλέπει ἄρτι LITrA. z + οὖν therefore Lr. 


ΙΧ. JOHN. 


λέπει οὐκ οἴδαμεν. ἢ τίς ἤνοιξεν αὐτοῦ τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς 
᾽ Cee δ ς 


he sees we know not, or who opened his eyes 
ἡμεῖς ovK.oldapev’ “αὐτὸς ἡλικίαν ἔχει, αὐτὸν ἐρωτήσατε." 
we know not; he is of age, 7him task, 
αὐτὸς περὶ “αὑτοῦ λαλήσει. 22 Ταῦτα εἶπον οἱ γονεῖς 
he concerning himself shall speak. These things said “parents 
αὐτοῦ, ὅτι ἐφοβοῦντο τοὺς Ἰουδαίους: ἤδη.γὰρ συνε- 


this, because they feared the Jews; for already had agreed 


τέθειντο οἱ Ιουδαῖοι. iva ἐάν τις αὐτὸν ὁμολογήσῃ 
together the Jews, that if anyone him _ should confess [to be the] 
χριστόν, ἀποσυνάγωγος γένηται. 23 διὰ τοῦτο οἱ γονεῖς 
Christ, put out of the synagogue he should be. Because of this *parents 
αὐτοῦ ‘etzrov,! "Ore ἡλικίαν ἔχει. αὐτὸν δἐρωτήσατε"" 24 ᾽᾿Εφώ- 
‘his said, He is of age, *him lask. They 
νησαν οὖν ix δευτέρου τὸν ἄνθρωπον! ὃς ἦν τυφλός, Kat 
ealled therefore asecondtime the man who was blind, and 
[εἶ Π ? ~ AG 06k D0 ως « ~ 10 e is » θ = 
εἶπον" αὐτῷ, Δὸς dogav τῷ θεῳ᾽ ἡμεῖς OLOapEY OTL 'O ἄνθρω 


said tohim, Give glory toGod; we know _— that “man 
x Ι t λό Ἴ τς ΟΣ Way - > ~ 

πος οὗτος" ἁμαρτωλός ἐστιν. 25 ᾿Απεκρίθη οὖν ἐκεῖνος 
this a sinner is. *Answered *therefore ‘he 

keai εἶπεν," El ἁμαρτωλός ἐστιν οὐκ.οἶδα᾽ ἕν οἶδα. Ore 


and said, If asinner heis I know not. One (thing} I know, that 


τυφλὸς ὧν ἄρτι βλέπω. 26 Πῖπον δὲ" αὐτῷ "πάλιν, Τί 
“blind ‘being ΠΟ 1566, And they said to him again, What 
> ͵ , 2 ~ ” , . ᾽ Σ ᾽ 
ἐποίησέν σοι; πῶς ἤνοιξεν σου τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς ; 27 ᾿Απε- 
ἅϊά πὸ tothee? how opened he thine eyes ἢ He an- 
, > ~ εὖ ὦ » ‘ ? ᾽ , , , 
κρίθη αὐτοῖς, Εἶπον ὑμῖν ἤδη, καὶ οὐκ.ἠκούσατε' τί πάλιν 
swered them, I told you already,and yedidnothear: why again 
θέλετε ἀκούειν; μὴ Kai ὑμεῖς.θέλετε αὐτοῦ μαθηταὶ γενέσθαι; 
do ye wish to hear? Zalso ‘do *ye wish his disciples to become? 
28" ’EXowWdpnoay “οὖν" αὐτόν, καὶ Ῥεῖπον," Σὺ “εἰ μαθητὴς" 
They “railed #at*therefore him, and _ said, Thou art “disciple 
> Ἐν, Φ « ~ A ~ r / I ? 4 / « ~ » 
ἐκείνου" ἡμεῖς.δὲ τοῦ "Μωσέως" ἐσμὲν μαθηταί. 29 ἡμεῖς οἴδα- 
‘his, but we of Moses are disciples. We know 
εν OTe "Μωσῇ" λελάληκεν ὁ θεός᾽ τοῦτον δὲ οὐκ.οἴδαμεν 
λελά ς μ 
that to Moses “has “spoken 1God ; but this [man] we know not 
πύθεν ἐστίν. 80 ᾿Απεκρίθη ὁ ἄνθρωπος καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Rv 
whence he is. %Answered ‘the *man and said tothem, 7In 
‘yap τούτῳ “θαυμαστόν ἐστιν, ὅτι ὑμεῖς οὐκ.οἴδατε πόθεν 
‘indeed this a wonderful thing is, that ye know not whence 
ἐστίν, καὶ ἀνέῳξεν" μου τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς. 31 οἴδαμεν .“δὲ" Ort 
heis, and heopened mine eyes. But we know that 
γἁμαρτωλῶν ὁ θεὸς" οὐκ. ἀκούει: ἀλλ᾽ ἐάν τις θεοσεβὴς ἢ), 
sinners God doesnothear; but if anyone God-fearing be, 
καὶ TO θέλημα αὐτοῦ ποιῷ, τούτου ἀκούει. 32 ἐκ τοῦ αἰῶνος 
and the will of him do, him he hears. “Ever 
ovKnKOvUGONn, OTL τῆνοιξεν᾽ τις ὀφθαλμοὺς τυφλοῦ 
‘it “was “not heard that “opened ‘anyone [the] eyes of fone] *blind 
yeyevynpevov. 33 εἰ μὴ ἦν οὗτος παρὰ θεοῦ οὐκ ἡ- 
‘having “becn *born. Tf ποῦ *were ‘this (*man] from God he 
δύνατο ποιεῖν οὐδέν. 84 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν Kai *sirov' αὐτῷ, Ἔν 
could do nothing. They answered and said tohim, In 


273 


seeth, we know not; 
or who hath opened 
his eyes, we know not: 
he is of age; ask him: 
he shall speak for him- 
self. 22 These words 
spake his parents, be- 
cause they feared the 
Jews: for the Jews had 
agreed already, that if 
any man did confess 
that he was Christ, he 
should be put out 
of the synagogue. 
23 Therefore said his 
parents, He is of age; 
ask him. 24 Then a- 
gain called they the 
man that was blind, 
and said unto him, 
Give God the praise: 
we know that this 
man isasinner. 25 He 
answered and said, 
Whether he be a sin- 
ner or no, I know not: 
one thing I know, 
that, whereas I was 
blind, now 1 see. 
26 Then said they to 
him again, What did 
he to thee ? how open- 
ed he thine eyes? 27 He 
answered them, I have 
told you already, and 
ye did not hear: where- 
fore would ye hear it 
again ? will ye also be 
his disciples? 28 Then 
they reviled him, and 
said, Thou art his dis- 
ciple; but we are 
Moses’ disciples. 29 We 
know that God spake 
unto Moses: as for this 


fellow, we know not 


from whence he is. 
30 The man answered 
and said unto them, 
Why herein is a mar- 
vellous thing, that ye 
know not from whence 
he is, and yet he hath 
opened mine eyes. 
31 Now we know that 
God heareth not sin- 
ners: but if any man 
be a worshipper of 
God, and doeth his 
will, him he heareth. 
32 Since the world be- 
gan was it not heard 
that any man opened 
the eyes of one that 
was born blind. 33 If 
this man were not of 
God, he could do no- 
thing. 34 They an- 
swered and said unto 
him, Thou wast alto- 


4 αὐτὸν ἐρωτήσατε, αὐτὸς (— αὐτὸς TTrA) ἡλικίαν ἔχει LTTrA. 
ξ ἐπερωτήσατε T. ὃ τὸν ἄνθρωπον ἐκ δευτέρου LTTrA. 
LiTrAW. ἰ οὖν therefore (they said) στιὰ. πὶ --- πάλιν LTTrAa. 
railed) τ. 0 — ody GLTTraw. P εἷπαν τ. 4 μαθητὴς εἶ LTTrA. 
3 Μωῦσεϊ LITra; Μῴυσῃ W. τ τούτῳ γὰρ TTrA. 
ἡ ἡνοιξέν LTTr. * — δὲ but LTTra. Y ὁ θεὸς ἁμαρτωλῶν LTrA. 


ε ἑαυτοῦ TTr. 
+ c 
‘ οὗτος ὃ ἄνθρωπος L. 


Γ εἶπαν LTTrA. 
k — καὶ εἶπεν 


n+ οἱ δὲ (read But they 


τ Mwicéws LITrAW. 


¥ + τὸ the (wonderful thing) rrr. 
τ ἤνεωξἕξέν Tr. 


8 εἶπαν LTTrA. 


r 


274 


gether born in sins, 
and dost thou teach 
us? And they cast him 
out. 35 Jesus heard 
that they had cast him 
out; and when he had 
found him, he said un- 
to him, Dost thou be- 
lieve on the Son of 
God? 36 He answered 
and said, Who is he, 
Lord, that I might be- 
lieve on him? 37 And 
Jesus said unto him, 
Thou hast both seen 
him, and it is he that 
talketh with thee, 
38 And he said, Lord, 
I believe. And he wor- 
shipped him. 39 And 
Jesus said, For judg- 
ment I am come into 
this world, that they 
which see not might 
see; and that they 
which see might be 
made blind. 40 And 
some of the Pharisees 
which were with him 
heard these words, and 
said unto him, Are we 
blind also? 41 Jesus 
aid unto them, If ye 
were blind, ye should 
have no sin: but now 
ye say, We see; there- 
tore your sin remain- 
eth. 


X. Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, He that 
entereth not by the 
door into the sheep- 
fold, but climbeth up 
some other way, the 
same is a thief and a 
robber. 2 But he that 
entereth in by the door 
is the shepherd of the 


sheep. ὃ. To him the 
porter openeth ; and 
the sheep hear his 
yoice : and he calleth 
his own sheep by 
name, and _ leadeth 


themout. 4 And when 
he putteth forth his 
own sheep, he goeth 
before them, and the 
sheep follow him: for 
they know his voice. 
5 And a stranger will 
they not follow, but 
will flee from him: for 
they know not the 
voice of strangers. 
6 This parable spake 
Jesus unto them: but 
they understood not 
what things they were 
which he spake unto 
them. 


IQANNHE S. TX) 2m. 


ἁμαρτίαις σὺ ἐγεννήθης ὕλος, καὶ σὺ διδάσκεις ἡμᾶς; Καὶ 
sins thou wast born wholly, and *thou ‘'teachest us? And 


ἐξέβαλον αὐτὸν ἔξω. 35 "Ἤκουσεν 6" ᾿Ιησοῦς ὅτι ἐξέβαλον 
they cast him out. *Heard ‘Jesus that they cast 


αὐτὸν ἔξω: καὶ εὑρὼν αὐτὸν εἶπεν “αὐτῷ," Σὺ πιστεύεις 
him out, and having found him said tohim, 7Thou ‘*believest 


εἰς τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ “θεοῦ ;" 86 ᾿Απεκρίθη ἐκεῖνος “καὶ εἶπεν," *Tic 
on the Son of God? 7Answered "he and said, Who 
? ’ τ , 2 > , He \ ? ~ 
ἐστιν, κύριε, ἵνα πιστεύσω εἰς αὐτόν; 37 Εἶπεν δδὲ᾽ αὐτῷ 


is he, Lord, that I may believe on him? And?said “to *him 
ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Καὶ ἑώρακας αὐτόν, καὶ ὁ λαλῶν μετὰ σοῦ 
seus; 7TBoth Sthou “hast seen him, and he who speaks with thee 


ἐκεῖνός ἐστιν. 38 Ὁ δὲ ἔφη, Πιστεύω, κύριε" καὶ προσεκύνη- 
“he lis. And he said, 1 believe, Lord: and he wie ot 


σεν αὐτῷ: 99 καὶ εἶπεν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, Eic κρίμα ἐγὼ εἰς τὸν 
And Ζ2βαϊᾶ ‘Jesus, For judgment I into 


κόσμον τοῦτον ἦλθον. ἵνα οἱ μὴ -BAETTOVTEC βλέπωσιν, καὶ 
this world came, that they that see not might see, and 


ot βλέποντες mae Nol γένωνται. 40 Καὶ" ἤκουσαν ἐκ τῶν 
they that see blind might become. And heard “of *the 
Φαρισαίων ἱταῦτα" οἱ ὄντες per αὐτοῦ," καὶ ἰεῖ- 
*Pharisees ‘°these *'things ‘those*who ‘were ‘with ‘*him, and they 
πον αὐτῷ, Μὴ Kai ἡμεῖς τυφλοί ἐσμὲν ; 41 Εἶπεν αὐτοῖς ὁ 
said ἔο Βἴτη, Also “we *blind ‘are? Said tothem 
> ~ ? ‘ Ἵ. ? n ” € , ~ 4 , 
Inoovc, Et τυφλοὶ ἦτε, οὐκ ἂν εἴχετε ἁμαρτίαν" νῦν.δὲ λέ- 


Jesus, If blind ye were. ye would not have sin ; but now ye 
γετε, Ὅτι βλέπομεν" ἡ "ποὖν" ἁμαρτία ὑμῶν μένει. 
say We see, the ?therefore ‘sin of you remains. 
10 ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὁ μὴ.εἰσερχόμενος διὰ τῆς 
Verily verily Isay ἴο you, He that enters not in by the 
θύρας εἰς THY αὐλὴν τῶν προβάτων, ἀλλὰ ἀναβαίνων ἀλ- 
door ἴο the fold of the sheep, but mountsup__ else- 
λαχόθεν, ἐκεῖνος κλέπτης ἐστὶν Kai λῃστής" 2 0.0& εἰσερ- 
where, he a thief is and arobber; but he that en- 


χόμενος διὰ τῆς θύρας πο μὴν ἐστιν τῶν προβάτων. 3 τούτῳ 
ters in by the door shepherd is _ of the sheep. To him 


ὁ θυρωρὸς ἀνοίγει, καὶ τὰ πρόβατα τῆς. φωνῆς αὐτοῦ ἀκούει, 
the door-keeper opens, and the pneee his voice hear, 


καὶ τὰ ἴδια πρόβατα "καλεῖ" Kar’ ὄνομα, Kai ἐξάγει αὐτά. 
and his own sheep he calls by name, and leads *out *them. 
4 οκαὶ! ὅταν τὰ ἴδια PrpdBara' ἐκβάλῃ ἔμπροσθεν αὐτῶν 

And when hisown sheep he puts forth before them 


πορεύεται" Kai Ta πρόβατα αὐτῷ ἀκολουθεῖ, ὅτι οἴδασιν 
he goes ; and the sheep him follow, because they know 


τὴν.φωνὴν. αὐτοῦ. 5 ἀλλοτρίῳ.δὲ οὐ.μὴ “ἀκολουθήσωσιν,." 
his voice. But astranger in no wise they should follow, 
ἀλλὰ 


φεύξονται ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ: Ort οὐκ. οἴδασιν τῶν ἀλλοτρίων 
but will flee from him, because they know not of strangers 


τὴν φωνήν. 6 Ταύτην τὴν π᾿ ig par ane: εἶπεν αὐτοῖς ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, 
the voice. This 2 sae! “spoke “to *them Jesus. 


ἐκεῖνοι. δὲ οὐκ. ἔγνωσαν τίνα τῇν" 
but they knew not what 


ἃ ἐλάλει αὐτοῖς. 
it was which he spoke to them. 


Ὁ- ὃ 1}: 


f + καὶ θὰ GrTraW. 


αὐτοῦ ὄντες LTTrA. 
ΤΊταΑ. 
it might be tr. 


P πάντα all (his own) LTTra. 


© — αὐτῷ 1[TrA }. 


4 ἀνθρώπου of man 1. ε --- καὶ εἶπεν L[A]. 


8 --- - δὲ aud. LTTrA. h — καὶ TTrA. i— ταῦτα 7. k μετ᾽ 
1 εἶπαν τ. — οὖν [ατττὰ. Ὁ φωνεῖ he calls Lrtra. °— Kat 
4 ἀκολουθήσουσιν Will they follow Lrtraw. τή 


DS JOHN. 
7 Εἶπεν οὖν "πάλιν αὐτοῖς" ὁ Ἰησοῦς, ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν NEyw 
?Said “therefore *again ‘to *them + Jesus, Verily verily Isay 
ὑμῖν, ‘ore! δου εἰμι ἡ θύρα τῶν προβάτων. ὃ πάντες ὕσοι 
to you, that am the door of the sheep. All whoever 
‘xpd ἐμοῦ ἦλθον" κλέπται εἰσὶν Kai λῃσταί: ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ.-ἤκουσαν 


before me came thieves are and robbers; but “did “ποῦ °hear 
αὐτῶν τὰ πρόβατα. 9 ἐγώ εἰμι ἡ θύρα᾽ Ov ἐμοῦ ἐάν τις 
*them ‘the “sheep. I am the door: by me if anyone 
εἰσέλθῃ σωθήσεται, Kai εἰσελεύσεται καὶ ἐξελεύσεται, καὶ 


enter in he shall be saved, and and shall go out, aud 


νομὴν εὑρήσει. 10 ὁ κλέπτης οὐκ.ἔρχεται εἰμὴ ἵνα κλέψῃ 
pasture shall find. The thief comes not except that he may steal 
καὶ θύσῃ Kai ἀπολέσῃ" ἐγὼ ἦλθον ἵνα ζωὴν ἔχωσιν, 
and may kill and τηδὺ destroy: I came that life they might have, 
καὶ περισσὸν ἔχωσιν. 11 ᾿Εγώ εἰμι ὁ ποιμὴν ὁ καλός" ὁ 
and abundantly might have [it]. I am the “shepherd tgood. The 
ποιμὴν ὁ καλὸς τὴν. Ψυχὴν.αὐτοῦ τίθησιν ὑπὲρ τῶν προβά- 
*shepherd 1go0d his life lays down’ for the sheep: 
των. 12 ὁ. μισθωτὸς. δέ," Kai οὐκ. ὧν ποιμήν. οὗ οὐκ 
but the hired servant, and whe .s not [the] shepherd, whose *not 
χεἰσὶν᾽ τὰ πρόβατα ἴδια, θεωρεῖ τὸν λύκον ἐρχόμενον, Kai 


shall go in 


*are the “sheep ‘own, 8668 the wolf coming, and 
ἀφίησιν τὰ πρόβατα καὶ φεύγει: Kai ὁ λύκος ἁρπάζει αὐτὰ 

eaves the sheep, and flees ; andthe wolf seizes them 
καὶ σκορπίζει Yra πρόβατα. 18 ὁ. δὲ μισθωτὸς φεύγει ὕτι 
and scatters the sheep. Now the hired servant flees because 


μισθωτός ἐστιν, καὶ οὐ-μέλει. αὐτῷ περὶ τῶν προβάτων. 


a hired servant heis, and is not himself concerned about the sheep. 

14 oie εἰμι ὁ ποιμὴν ὁ KadCC’ καὶ γινώσκω τὰ ἐμά, 
am the *shepherd ‘good; and Iknow those that (are) mine, 

καὶ γινώσκομαι ὑπὸ τῶν ἐμῶν. 15 καθὼς γινώσκει 


of as *knows 
με ὁ πατήρ, κἀγὼ γινώσκω τὸν πατέρα" Kai τὴν. Ψυχήν.μου 
*me *the *Father, and I know the Father; and my life 


τίθημι ὑπὲρ τῶν προβάτων. 16 Kai ἄλλα πρόβατα ἔχω, 


and am known those that [are] mine, 


Ilay down for the sheep. And other sheep I have, 
ἃ ovKéorw ἐκ τῆς. αὐλῆς.ταύτης᾽ κἀκεῖνά "pe δεῖ" 


which 816 ποῦ of this fold ; those also “me *+it *behoves 


? ~ . ~ ~ , , ~ .‘ b ΄ | , 
ἀγαγεῖν, καὶ τῆς.φωνήῆς. μου ακούσουσιν" Kat γενήσεται" μία 


to bring, and my voice they willhear; and thereshallbe one 
ποίμνη, εἷς ποιμήν. 17 διὰ τοῦτο “ὁ πατήρ pe! ἀγαπᾷ, 
flock, one shepherd. On this account the Father me loves, 


Ore ἐγὼ τίθημι τὴν.-Ψυχήν.μου, ἵνα πάλιν λάβω αὐτήν. 


because I lay down my life, that again I may take it. 
18 οὐδεὶς αἴρει αὐτὴν am ἐμοῦ, ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ τίθημι αὐτὴν an’ 
Noone takes it from me, but I laydown it of 
ἐμαυτοῦ. ἐξουσίαν ἔχω θεῖναι αὐτήν, καὶ ἐξουσίαν ἔχω 
myself. Authority Ihave tolay down it, and authority Ihave 
πάλιν λαβεῖν αὐτήν᾽ ταύτην τὴν ἐντολὴν ἔλαβον παρὰ 
again to take it. This commandment I received from 


τοῦ πατρός.μου. 19 Σχίσμα toby" πάλιν ἐγένετο ἐν τοῖς 
my Father. A division therefore again there was among the 


» αὐτοῖς πάλιν L} — πάλιν αὐτοῖς T; — αὐτοῖς a. 
ἐμοῦ GLTrA ; — πρὸ ἐμοῦ τ. w — δὲ but τί ττ]. 
([τὰ πρόβατα] A) ὃ δὲ μισθωτὸς φεύγει [L]TTra. 
mine know me LTtTra. ® δεῖ we LTTrA. 
«- οὖν LUTra. 


x ἔστιν LTTrA. 


Ὁ γενήσονται TrA. 


τ--- ὅτι [{]ττ[Α]. 


275 


7 Then said Jesus 
unto them again, Ve- 
rily, verily, I say unto 
you, I am the door of 
the sheep. 8 All that 
ever came before me 
are thieves and rob- 
bers: but the sheep 
did not hear them. 
9 I am the door: by 
me if any man enter 
in, he shall be saved, 
and shall go in and 
out, and find pasture. 
10 The thief cometh 
not,but for tosteal,and 
to kill, and to destroy: 
I am come that they 
might have life, and 
that they might have 
tt more abundantly. 
11 I am the good shep- 
herd: the good shep- 
herd giveth his life for 
the sheep. 12 But he 
that is an hireling, 
and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep 
are not, seeth the wolf 
coming, and leayeth 
the sheep, and fleeth: 
and the wolf catcheth 
them, and scattereth 
thesheep. 13 Thehire- 
ling fleeth, because he 
is an hireling, and car- 
eth not for the sheep. 
14 I am the good shep- 
herd, and know my 
sheep, and am known 
of mine. 15 As the 
Father knoweth me, 
even so know I the Fa- 
ther: and I lay down 
my life for the sheep. 
16 And other sheep I 
have, which are not of 
this fold: them also I 
must bring, and they 
shall hear my voice; 
and there shall be one 
fold, and one shep- 
herd. 17 Therefore 
doth my Father love 
me, because! lay down 
my, life, that 1 might 
take it again. 18 No 
man taketh it from 
me, but I lay it down 
of myself. I have 
power to lay it down, 
and I have power to 
take it again. This 
commandment have I 
received of my Father. 
19 There was a division 
therefore again among 
the Jews for these 


τ ἦλθον πρὸ 
7 — τὰ πρόβατα. 


: γινώσκουσίν με τὰ ἐμά those that [are] 


με ὃ πατὴρ LTTrA. 


270 


sayings. 20 And many 
of them said, He hath 
a devil, and is mad; 
why hear ye him? 
21 Others said, These 
are not the words of 
him that hath a devil. 
Can a devil open the 
eyes of the blind? 


22 And it was at 
Jerusalem the feast of 
the dedication, and it 
was winter. 23 And 
Jesus walked in the 
temple in Solomon’s 
porch, 24 Then came 
the Jews round about 
him, and said unto 
him, How long dost 
thou make us to 
doubt ? If thou be the 
Christ, tell us plain- 
ly. 25 Jesus answered 
them, 1 told you, and 
ye believed not: the 
works that I do in my 
Father’s name, they 
bear witness of me. 
25 But ye believe not, 
because ye are not of 
my sheep, as I said 
unto you. 27 My sheep 
hear my voice, and 1 
know them, and they 
follow me: 28 and [ 
give unto them eter- 
nal life; and they 
shall never perish, nei- 
ther shall any man 
pluck them out of my 
hand, 29 My Father, 
which gaye them me, 
is greater than all; 
and no man is able to 
pick them out of my 

ather’s hand. 301 
and mz Father are one. 
31 Then the Jews took 
up stones again to 
stone him, 32 Jesus 
answered them, Many 
good works have [ 
shewed you from my 
Father ; for which of 
those works do ye 
stoneme? 33The Jews 
answered him, saying, 


IQANNHS. 
διὰ 


on account of 


pA 
20 ἔλεγον “δὲ! 


said "but 

4 ? ? ~ , » ‘ , ΄ ᾽ - 
πολλοὶ ἐξ αὐτῶν, Δαιμόνιον ἔχει καὶ μαίνεται τί αὐτοῦ 
many of them, A demon he has and ismad; why him 


ἀκούετε; 21 [ΓΑλλοι ἔλεγον, Ταῦτα τὰ ῥήματα οὐκ ἔστιν 
do ye hear ἢ Others said, These sayings are not [those] 


δαιμονιζομένου" μὴ δαιμόνιον δύναται τυφλῶν 


᾿ΙΤουδαίοις 


τοὺς.λόγους τούτους. 
Jews 


these words ; 


of one possessed by a demon. 7A “demon ‘is able of [the] blind [the] 
ὀφθαλμοὺς ἱἀνοίγειν"; 

eyes to open ? 

22 ᾿Εγένετο. δὲ τὰ δἐγκαίνια' ἐν  roic! Ἱεροσολύμοις, 


And took place the feast of dedication at Jerusalem, 


Ἰκαὶ χειμὼν iy 23 καὶ περιεπάτει ὁ" Ἰησοῦς ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ 
and winter it was. And ?was *walking ‘Jesus in the temple 
? ~ ἘΞ ~ l ~ λ ~ Ι ? , x ἦ ? a 

ἐν τῇ στοᾷ ‘TOV Σολομῶντος." 24 ἐκύκλωσαν οὖν αὐτὸν 


in the porch of Solomon. *Encircled *therefore *him 
ot ᾿Ιουδαῖοι, καὶ ἔλεγον αὐτῷ, “Ewe πότε τὴγ.Ψυχὴν μῶν 
88 2Jews, and = said tohim, Until when our soul 
αἴρεις ; εἰ σὺ εἶ ὁ χριστός, "εἰπὲ" ἡμῖν παῤ- 
holdest thou in suspense? If thou art the Christ, tell us a 
ῥησίᾳ. 25 ᾿Απεκρίθη παὐτοῖς" *6' ᾿Ιησοῦς, Εἶπον ὑμῖν, καὶ 
Ye 2 Answered them Jesus, I told you, and 


οὐ. πιστεύετε. τὰ ἔργα ἃ ἐγὼ ποιῶ ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ πατρός 


ye believe not. ΤΠ ΟΥΚ5 which I do in the name of ?Father 
μου, ταῦτα μαρτυρεῖ περὶ ἐμοῦ: 26 οἀλλ᾽" ὑμεῖς οὐ 
ἴχῃν, these bear witness concerning me: but ye “not 


πιστεύετε. Ῥοὺ γάρ" ἐστε ἐκ τῶν προβάτων τῶν ἐμῶν, “καθὼς 
"believe, foryearenot of 4sheep my, as 

εἶπον ὑμῖν." 27 ra πρόβατα τὰ ἐμὰ τῆς.φωνῆς. μου τἀκούει," 
Isaid ἕο γοπ. "Sheep my my voice hear, 
κἀγὼ γινώσκω αὐτά: Kai ἀκολουθοῦσίν po, 28 κἀγὼ "ζωὴν 
and I know them, and _ they follow me ; andI _silife 
-Ovioy δίδωμι αὐτοῖς" καὶ ody ἀπόλωνται εἰς τὸν 
eternal give them ; and inno wise shall they perish for 
αἰῶνα, καὶ οὐχιἁρπάσει τις αὐτὰ ἐκ τῆς.χειρός.μου. 29 ὁ 


eyer, and *shall ‘not ‘seize “anyone them out of my hand. 
yn t I v8 all 6&0 , Wryel , 12 Dg ᾿ 
πατΉΡ. μου ος EOWKEV μοι μείζων παντων ἐστιν και 
My Father who has given([them]tome greater than all is, and 


οὐδεὶς δύναται ἁρπάζειν ἐκ τῆς χειρὸς τοῦ-πατρός ὅμου." 
no one is able toseize outof the hand of my Father. 
30 ἐγὼ καὶ ὁ πατὴρ ἕν ἐσμεν. 31 ’EBdoracay γοῦν" πάλιν 
I andthe Father one are. ®*Took*up “therefore *again 
λίθους οἱ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι ἵνα λιθάσωσιν αὐτόν. 82 ἀπεκρίθη 
7stones ‘the *Jews that they might stone him. 2Answered 
αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Πολλὰ τκαλὰ ἔργα" ἔδειξα ὑμῖν ἐκ τοῦ 


3them 1 Jesus, Many good works I shewed you from 
TAT , a oll ὃ AJ ~ > ~ » Ὀχιθάξ ’ lie 
ρος. μου ta TOLOV αὐτῶν ἐργον ἰισαςξτε με 7 
my Father ; because of which *of*them ‘work do ye stone me? 


33 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν αὐτῷ οἱ ᾿Τουδαῖοι “λέγοντες,." Περὶ καλοῦ 


For a good work we 7Answered *him ‘the * Jews, saying, For a good 

e οὖν then 1. f ἀνοῖξαι to have opened TTrA. 8 ἐνκαίνια 1. h — χρῖς τ. i— καὶ 
TTrA. k [0] Tr. 1 Σολομῶνος GLTAW ; τοῦ Σολομῶνος Tr. ™ εἰπὸν T. 2 — αὐ- 
τοῖς T. ° ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. POTLOUKTTr. 4 —- καθὼς εἶπον ὑμῖν [L]TTr[A]. τ ἀκούουσιν 


[are] hearing ΤΎΓΑ. 


Yo what (he has given) TTrA. 
2 ἔργα καλὰ LT. 
© — λέγοντες LITTAW 


Υ — οὖν 3[Tr]. 
TTrA, 


5 δίδωμι αὐτοῖς ζωὴν αἰώνιον TTrA. t — μου (read The Father) τ. 
W πάντων μεῖζόν TTrA. * — μου (read the Father) 1[tTrJa, 
a — μον (read the Father) [L]z[TrJa. ὃ ἐμὲ λιθάζετε 


ΧΈΧΙ JOHN. 
ἔργου οὐλιθάζομέν σε. ἀλλὰ περὶ βλασφημίας. Kai ὅτι 


work wedonotstone thee, but for blasphemy, and because 
ov eyepermns ὧν ποιεῖς σεαυτὸν θεόν. 84 ᾿Απεκρίθη αὐτοῖς 


thou ‘being makest apes God. ?Answered *them 
ἀδ᾽' Ἰησοῦς, Οὐκ.ἔστιν γεγραμμένον ἐν τῷ νόμῳ ὑμῶν, “ aie 
1 Jesus, Is it not written in your law, 


ἐεῖπα," θεοί tore; 35 Ei ἐκείνους εἶπεν θεούς, πρὸς ovc F 
said, *gods ‘ye 7are? If them hecalled gods, to whom the 


λόγος Srov θεοῦ ἐγένετο," Kai οὐ.δύναται λυθῆναι ἡ γραφή" 
word of God pate) (and #cannot *be broken ‘the qeaniatrare,) 


36 ὃν ὁ πατὴρ ἡγίασεν Kai ἀπέστειλεν εἰς TOY κόσμον, 


{of him] whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, 
ὑμεῖς. λέγετε, Ὅτι βλασφημεῖς, ὅτι εἶπον, Yidc "τοῦ" θεοῦ 
do ye say, Thou blasphemest, because Isaid, Son of God 
εἰμι; 87 εἰ οὐ-ποιῶ τὰ ἔργα τοῦ.πατρός. μου, μὴ.πιστεύετέ 
Iam? If Idonot the works of my Father, believe not 
por’ 38 εἰιδὲ ποιῶ, κἂν ἐμοὶ μὴ ἱπιστεύητε," τοῖς ἔργοις 
me; butif Ido, evenif me ye believe not, the works 
krisrevoare," iva γνῶτε καὶ ἱπιστεύσητε" Ore ἐν ἐμοὶ 
beliexe, that oe may perceive and may believe that in me [is] 
ὁ πατήρ, κἀγὼ ἐν παὐτῷ." 39 ᾿Εζήτουν "οὖν" οπάλιν" 
the Father, andI in him. They sought therefore again 
αὐτὸν midoa Kai ἐξῆλθεν ἐκ τῆς.χειρὸς.αὐτῶν. 40 Kai 
him to take, and he went forth out of their hand; and 


δάνου, εἰς τὸν τόπον ὕπου ἦν 
ordan, to the place where was 


καὶ ἔμεινεν" ἐκεῖ. 41 καὶ 


? ~ ’ , ~ 
ἀπῆλθεν πάλιν πέραν τοῦ ‘lo 
departed again beyond the 


ΡΤωάννης" τὸ πρῶτον βαπτίζων" 


John first baptizing ; and heabode there. And 
πολλοὶ ἦλθον πρὸς αὐτόν, Kai ἔλεγον, Ὅτι PIwavyne' piv 
many came to him, and said, John indeed 
σημεῖον ἐποίησεν οὐδέν᾽ πάντα.δὲὲ ὕσα εἶπεν ῬἸἸωάννης" 
Ssign ‘did =no; but all whatsoever “said 1 John 

περὶ τούτου, ἀληθῆ ἦν. 42 Καὶ τἐπίστευσαν πολλοὶ 
goncerning this [man], true were. And “believed ‘many 
ἐκεῖ εἰς αὐτόν." 
there on him. 

11 Ἤν δέ τις ἀσθενῶν Λάζαρος ἀπὸ Βηθανίας, 


Now there was acertain[{man] sick, Lazarus of Bethany, 


ἐκ τῆς κώμης " Μαρίας Kai Μάρθας τῆς.ἀδελφῆς. αὐτῆς. 2 ἦν 


of the village οἵ Mary and Martha her sister. 7It *was 
δὲ "Μαρία" ἡ ἀλείψασα τὸν κύριον μύρῳ καὶ ἐκμάξασα 
‘and = Mary who anointed the Lord withointment and wiped 


Tovc.760ac.adTov ταῖς.θριξὶν.αὐτῆς, ἧς ὁ ἀδελφὸς Λάζαρος 


his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus 
ἠσθένει. 8 ἀπέστειλαν οὖν at ἀδελφαὶ πρὸς αὐτὸν λέγου- 
was sick. *Sent ‘therefore'the sisters to him, say- 


σαι, Κύριε, ide ὃν φιλεῖς ἀσθενεῖ. 4 ᾿Ακούσας. δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς 


277 


stone thee not; but for 
blasphemy ; and be- 
cause that thou, being 
a man, makest thyself 
God. 34 Jesus answer- 
ed them, Is it not 
written in your law, I 
said, Yeare gods? 35 tf 
he called them gods, 
tuto whom the word 
of God came, and the 
scripture cannot be 
broken; 36 say ye of 
him, whom the Father 
hath sanctified, and 
sent into the world, 
Thou blasphemest; be- 
cause I said, I am the 
Son of God? 37 If I 
do not the works of 
my Father, believe me 
not. 38 But if I do, 
though ye believe not 
me, believe the works: 
that yemay know, and 


. believe, that the Fa- 


ther 7s in me, andI in 
him. 39 Therefore 


they sought again te 
take him: but he es- 
caped out of their 
hand, 40 and went 
away again beyond 
Jordan into the place 
where John at first 


baptized; and there he 
abode. 41 And many 
resorted unto him, and 
said, John did no mi- 
racle: but all things 
that John spake of this 
man were true. 42 And 
many believed on him 
there. 


ΧΙ, Now ao certain 
man was sick, named 
Lazarus, of Bethany, 
the town of Mary and 
her sister Martha. 2 (It 
was that Mary which 
anointed the Lord with 
ointment, and wiped 
his feet with her hair, 
whose brother Lazarus 
was sick.) 3 Therefore 
his sisters sent unto 
him, saying, Lord, be- 
hold, he whom thou 


ing, Lord, 1o, he whom thou lovest is sick. But7having*heard ‘Jesus lovest is sick. 4 When 
Jesus heard that, he 

εἶπεν, Αὕτη ἡ ἀσθένεια οὐκιἔστιν πρὸς θάνατον, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ said, This sickness ix 
said, This sickness is not unto death, but for not unto death, but 
a , = ἘΠ τε ‘ εν 30 ov for the glory of God, 
τῆς δόξης τοῦ θεοῦ, wa δοξασθῇ ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ Ov that the Son of God 
the glory of God, that may be glorified the Son of God by might be glorified 
4 [ὃ] tr. © + ὅτι that LrTra. f εἶπον L. 8 ἐγένετο τοῦ θεοῦ 1. h — τοῦ τ. 

1 πιστεύετε T. Κ πιστεύετε LTTr. 1 γινώσκητε may know LITra. m τῷ πατρί the 
Father Lrtra. 0 [οὖν] Tra. ο — πάλιν 1. ΡἸωάνης Tr. 4 ἔμενεν 1.. τ πολλοὶ 


ἐπίστευσαν εἰς αὐτὸν ἐκεῖ LITA, 5. τῆς τ Μαριὰμ Tr. 


278 


thereby. 5 Now Jesus 
loved Martha, and her 
sister, and Lazarus, 
6 When he had heard 
therefore that he was 
sick, he abode two days 
still in the same place 
where he was. 7 Then 
after that saith he to 
his disciples, Let us go 
into Judwa again. 
8 His disciples say un- 
to him, Master, the 
Jews of late sought 
to stone thee; and go- 
est thou thither again ? 
9 Jesus answered, Are 
there not twelve hours 
in the day? If any 
man walk in the day, 
he stumbleth not, be- 
cause he seeth the light 
of this world. 10 But 
if a man walk in the 
night, he stumbleth, 
because there is no 
light in him. 11 These 
things said he: and 
after that he saith 
unto them, Our friend 
Lazarus sleepeth ; but 
I go, that I may a- 
wake him out of sleep. 
12 Then said his disci- 
ples, Lord, if he sleep, 
he shall do well. 
13 Howbeit Jesus spake 
of his death: but they 
thought that he had 
spoken of taking of 
rest insleep. 14 Then 
said Jesus unto them 
plainly, Lazarus is 
dead. 15 And I am 
glad for your sakes 
that I was not there, 
to the intent ye may 
believe ; nevertheless 
let us go unto him. 
16 Then said Thomas, 
which is called Didy- 
mus, unto his fellow- 
disciples, Let us also 
go, that we may die 
with him 


17 Then when Jesus 
came, he found that 
he had lain in the 
grave four days al- 
ready. 18 Now Beth- 
any was nigh unto 
Jerusalem, about fif- 
teen furlongs off: 
19 and many of the 
Jews came to Martha 
and Mary, to comfort 
them concerning their 


IQANN H Σ. 
τυ τους ὃ Ἠγάπα δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς τὴν Μάρθαν καὶ 
=p ρ 


ved ‘now 3Jesus Martha and 


αὐτῆς Kai τὸν Λάζαρον. 6 we οὖν ἤκουσεν ὅτι ἀσθενεῖ, 
ther and Lazarus. When therefore heheard that he is sick, 


τότε μὲν ἔμεινεν ἐν ἣν τόπῳ δύο ἡ ἡμέρας. 7 Ἔπειτα 
then indeed heremained in which *he*was ‘place two days. Then 
μετὰ τοῦτο λέγει τοῖς μαθηταῖς. Αγωμεν εἰς τὴν Lovdatay 
after this hesays to the ESE Lee Let us go into Judza 


πάλιν. ὃ Aéyovow αὐτῷ ot μαθηταί, *PaZBi," viv ἐζή- 
again. *Say “to *him “the disciples, ey gue now *were 


τουν σε λιθάσαι ot ᾿Ιουδαῖοι, Kai πάλιν ὑπάγεις ἐκεῖ; 
‘seeking 7thee *to%stone ‘the 2Jews, and again goest thou thither? 
9 ᾿Απεκρίθη Yo" Ἰησοῦς, Οὐχὶ δώδεκά eloww ὧραι! τῆς 
2Answered 1Jesus, 5Not ®Stwelve “are *there hours in the 
saan ἐάν τις περιπατῇ ἐν TH ἡμέρᾳ, οὐ-προσκόπτει, 
ἜΣ If anyone walk in the day, he stumbles not, 
a , 7A , 
ὅτ ὥς τοῦ.κόσμου.τούτου βλέπει: 10 ἐὰν.δέὲ τις 
hin ite ight of this world he sees ; but if anyone 
περιπατῇ ἐν τῇ νυκτί, προσκόπτει, OTL TO φῶς οὐκ.ἔστιν ἐν 
walk in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not in 


XI. 
τὴν ἀ ἐδελφὴν 


*sister 


αὐτῷ. 11 Ταῦτα εἶπεν. καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο λέγει αὐτοῖς, Λά- 
him. These things he said; and after this hesays tothem, La- 
Zapoc ὁ.φίχλος.ἡμῶν κεκοίμηται ἀλλὰ πορεύομαι ἵνα ἐξ- 
zarus our friend has fallen asleep; but I go that I may 
υπνίσω αὐτόν. 12 Εἶπον οὖν" οὶ. μαθηταὶ" “αὐτοῦ, Κύριε, 
awake him. *Said ‘therefore his disciples, Lord, 
? / , sd \ <5 2. ~ 4 
εἰ κεκοίμηται σωθήσεται. 13 Ἑἰρήκει.δὲ ὁ Ἰησοῦς περὶ 
if he has fallen asleep he will get well. But *had *spoken 1 Jesus of 


τοῦ.θανάτου.αὐτοῦ" 


ἐκεῖνοι. δὲ ἔδοξαν ὅτι περὶ τῆς κοιμήσεως 
his death, 


but they thought that of the rest 


τοῦ ὕπνου λέγει. 14 τότε “ody' εἶπεν αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς 
of sleep he speaks. Then therefore *said *to *them 1Jesus 


παῤῥησίᾳ, Λάζαρος ἀπέθανεν. 15 καὶ χαίρω δι’ ὑμᾶς, 


plainly, Lazarus died, And I rejoice on your account, 
ἵνα πιστεύσητε, OTL οὐκ-ἤμην ἐκεῖ: “ἀλλ᾽ ἄγωμεν πρὸς 

in order that ye may believe, that 1 νγαὰβ ποῦ there. But  letus go to 
αὐτόν. 16 Εἶπεν οὖν Θωμᾶς, ὁ λεγόμενος Δίδυμος, τοῖς 

him. *Said ‘therefore Thomas, Didymus, to the 
‘cuppabnraig,' “Aywper καὶ ἡμεῖς. ἵνα ἀποθάνωμεν μετ᾽ 
fellow-disciples, Let *go “also us, that we may die with 
αὐτοῦ. 
him. 

17 8 Ἐλθὼν!" οὖν ὁ Inoovc™ εὗρεν αὐτὸν τέσσαρας 


*Having ‘come “therefore 1 Jesus found him four 


ἰἡμέρας On ἔχοντα ἐν τῷ μνημείῳ. 18 ἦν.δὲ *7! Βηθανία 
days already having been in the tomb. Now *was *Bethany 


ἐγγὺς τῶν Ἱεροσολύμων, ὡς ἀπὸ σταδίων δεκαπέντε: 19 ἱκαὶ 
near to Jerusalem, about “off *furlongs fifteen, oe 


modo! ἐκ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων ἐληλύθεισαν πρὸς “τὰς περὶ" 


many of the Jews had come unto those around 
Μάρθαν καὶ "Μαρίαν," ἵνα παραμυθήσωνται αὐτὰς περὶ 
Martha and Mary, that they might console them concerning 


* + [αὐτοῦ] (read his disciples) L. 
a+ αὐτῷ to him ur. 


LUTrAW. 
αὐτῷ to him Tra. 
4 + καὶ and L. 


(7 cad had come to Mar tha) LTra. 


x “PaBBei T. 


¥Y — ὃ GLTTraw. 2 ὧραί εἰσιν 
> [οἱ μαθηταὶ) a. 


ς — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) LT; 

4 [οὖν] x. © ἀλλὰ LTTrA. Γσυνμαθηταῖς T. &*HAGev came L. 
i ἤδη ἡμέρας TrA ; — ἤδη T. k— 77. 1 πολλοὶ δὲ LTTrA. ™ τὴν 
Ὁ Μαριάμ. LTTrA. 


ΧΙ. JOHN. 


Tov.adedgpov.-adrav.' 20 ἡ οὖν. Μάρθα we ἤκουσεν ὅτι PO" 
their brother. Martha therefore when she heard that 
Ἰησοῦς ἔρχεται, ὑπήντησεν αὐτῷ: Mapia.cé ἐν τῷ οἴκῳ ἐκα- 
Jesus is coming, met him ; but Mary in the house was 
θέζετο. 21 εἶπεν. οὖν «ἡ Μάρθα πρὸς ror! ᾿Ιησοῦν, Κύριε, εἰ 
sitting. Then said Martha to Jesus, Lord, if 

ἧς ὧδε, "ὁ.ἀδελφός. μου οὐκ.ἂν ἐτεθνήκει." 22 tadrAa" 
thou hadst been here, my brother had not died ; but 
καὶ νῦν olda ὅτι boa ἂν.αἰτήσῃ τὸν θεόν, δώσει 
even now Iknow that whatsoever thou mayest ask of God, *will *give 
σοι ὁ θεός. 23 Λέγει αὐτῇ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, ᾿Αναστήσεται ὁ ἀδελφός 
“thee ‘God. Says toher Jesus, *Will +rise Sagain 2brother 
σου. 24 Λέγει αὐτῷ Μάρθα, Οἶδα ὅτι ἀναστήσεται ἐν τῇ 
‘thy. Says to him Martha, I know that he willrise again in the 
ἀναστάσει ἐν τῇ ἐσχάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ. 25 Εἶπεν αὐτῇ ὁ Ἰησοῦς. 
resurrection in the last day. "Said “to *her 1 Jesus, 
"Ey εἰμι ἡ ἀνάστασις καὶ ἡ Jon. ὁ πιστεύων εἰς ἐμέ, 
I am the resurrection and the life: hethat believes on me, 
κἂν ἀποθάνῃ ζήσεται: 20 καὶ πᾶς ὁ ζῶν Kai πιστεύων 
though hedie he shall live; and everyone who lives and _ believes 
εἰς ἐμέ, οὐ-μὴ ἀποθάνῃ εἰς.τὸν. αἰῶνα. πιστεύεις τοῦτο: 
on me, innowise_ shall die for ever. Believest thou this? 
27 Λέγει αὐτῷ, Nai, Kip’ ἐγὼ πεπίστευκα ὅτι σὺ εἶ ὁ 
Shesays tohim, Yea, Lord; 1 have believed that thou art the 
χριστός, ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ, ὁ εἰς τὸν κόσμον ἐρχόμενος. 
Christ, the Son of God, who into’ the world comes, 
28 Kai “ταῦτα! εἰποῦσα ἀπῆλθεν, καὶ ἐφώνησεν *Mapiar' 


And these things having said she went away, and called Mary 
τὴν ἀδελφὴν.αὐτῆς YAabpa," *eizrovea,' Ὁ διδάσκαλος πάρ- 
her sister secretly, saying, The teacher is 


\ ~ ς ᾽ , a ,° δὼ b2 , ll A 
ἐστιν καὶ φωνεῖ σε. 29 Exeivn* ὡς ἤκουσεν "ἐγείρεται" ταχὺ 
come and 068115 thee. She when she heard risesup quickly 
καὶ “ἔρχεται πρὸς αὐτόν. 30 οὔπω. δὲ ἐληλύθει ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς 
and comes to him. Now not yet had *come + Jesus 
εἰς THY κώμην, ἀλλ᾽ ἢν “ ἐν τῷ τόπῳ ὕπου ὑπήντησεν αὐτῷ 
into the village, but was in the place where *met shim 
ἡ Μάρθα. 31 οἱ. οὖν Ἰουδαῖοι οἱ ὄντες μετ᾽ αὐτῆς ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ 

?Martha. The Jews therefore who were with her in the house 
καὶ παραμυθούμενοι αὐτήν, ἰδόντες τὴν ee OTL ταχέως 
and consoling her, having seen ary that quickiy 

, ᾿ ~ ? , ~ , i 
ἀνέστη καὶ ἐξῆλθεν, ἠκολούθησαν αὐτῇ, ‘eyorTec,' “Ore 


sheroseup and went out, followed her, saying, 
ὑπάγει εἰς TO μνημεῖον ἵνα κλαύσῃ ἐκεῖ. 82 Ἢ οὖν Μαρία" 
Sheisgoing to the tomb that she may weep there. Mary therefore 


ὡς ἦλθεν ὕπου ἦν "δ' ᾿Ιησοῦς, ἰδοῦσα αὐτὸν ἔπεσεν ieic 
when she came where *was 1 Jesus, seeing him, fell at 
τοὺς. πόδας.αὐτοῦ," λέγουσα αὐτῷ, Κύριε, «i ἧς ὧδε 
his feet, saying tohim, Lerd, if thou hadst been here 
ovK.avaréOaviv μου" ὁ ἀδελφός. 88 Ἰησοῦς οὖν ὡς εἶδεν 
Ξηᾷ “ποῦ died my “brother. Jesus therefore when hesaw 


279 


brother. 20 Then Mar- 
tha, as soon as she 
heard that Jesus was 
coming, went and met 
him: but Mary sat 
still in the house. 
21 Then said Martha 
unto Jesus, Lord, if 
thou hadst been here, 
my brother had not 
died. 22 But I know, 
that even now, what- 
soever thou wilt ask 
of God, God will give 
ἐξ thee. 23 Jesus saith 
unto her, Thy bro- 
ther shall rise again. 
24 Martha saith unto 
him, I know that he 
shall rise again in the 
resurrection at the 
last day. 25 Jesus 
said unto her, I am 
the resurrection, and 
the life: he that be- 
lieveth in me, though 
he were dead, yet shall 
he live: 26 and whoso- 
ever liveth and believ- 
eth in me shall never 
die. Believest thou 
this? 27 She saith un- 
to him, Yea, Lord: I 
believe that thou art 
the Christ, the Son of 
God, which should 
come into the world. 
28 And when she had 
so said, she went her 
way, and called Mary 
her sister secretly, say- 
ing, The Master is 
come, and calleth for 
thee. 29 As soon as 
she heard that, she 
arose quickly, and 
came unto him. 30 Now 
Jesus was not yet 
come into the town, 
but was in that place 
where Martha met 
him. 31 The Jews 
then which were with 
her in the house, and 
comforted her, when 
they saw Mary, that 
she rose up hastily and 
went out, followed her, 
saying, She goeth un- 
to the grave to weep 
there. 32 Then when 
Mary was come where 
Jesus was, and saw 
him, she fell down at 
his feet, saying unto 
him, Lord, if thou 
hadst been here, my 
brother had not died. 
33 When Jesus there- 
fore saw her weeping, 


ο — αὐτῶν (read [their] brother) Trra. P — ὃ GLTTrAW. 
5 οὐκ ἂν ἀπέθανεν (ἐτεθνήκει A) ὃ ἀδελφός μου LTTTA. 
* τοῦτο this ΤΊτα. * Μαριὰμ LTTrA. Y λάθρᾳ L. 
Ὁ ηγέρθη rose up LTrA. © ἤρχετο CaMe Tra. 

f δόξαντες thinking TTrA. 8 Μαριὰμ TTrA. 

τοὺς πόδας GTTrAW. k μον ἀπέθανεν TTrA. 


2 εἴπασα Tr. 
4 + ἔτι yet LT[a]. 
h — 9 LTTrA. 


4ᾳ --- ἡ GL. 
t ἀλλὰ [L]TTrA. 
a + δὲ and (she) τι[Α]. 


¥ — τὸν T[Tr]. 
¥ + ἡ LTTrA. 


© Μαριᾶμ, LTTrA. 


ι αὐτοῦ εἰς (πρὸς TTrA) 


280 


and the Jews also 
weeping which came 
with her, he groaned 
in the spirit, and was 
troubled, 34 and said, 
Where have ye laid 
him? They said unto 
him, Lerd, come and 
see. 35 Jesus wept. 
36 Then said the Jews, 
Behold how he loved 
him! 37 And some of 
them said, Could not 
this man, which open- 
ed the eyes of the 
blind, have caused 
that even this man 
should not have died ? 
38 Jesus therefore a- 
gain groaning in him- 
self cometh to the 
grave. It was a cave, 
and a stone lay upon 
it. 39 Jesus said, Take 
ye away the stone. 
Martha, the sister of 
him that was dead, 
saith unto him, Lord, 
by this time he stink- 
eth: for he hath been 
dead four days. 40 Je- 
sus saith unto her, Said 
I not unto thee, that, 
if thou wouldest be- 
lieve, thou shouldest 
see the glory of God? 
41 Then they took a- 
way the stone from the 
place where the dead 
was laid. And Jesus 
lifted up his eyes, and 
said, Father, Γ thank 
thee that thou hast 
heard me. 42 And I 
knew that thou hear- 
est me always: but be- 
cause of the people 
which stand by I said 
it, that they may be- 
lieve that thou hast 
sentme. 43 And when 
he thus had spoken, 
he cried with a loud 
voice, Lazarus, come 
forth. 44 And he that 
was dead came forth, 
bound hand and foot 
with graveclothes: and 
his face was bound 
about with a napkin. 
Jesus saith unto them, 
Loose him, and let 
him go. 


45 Then many of the 
Jews which came to 
Mary, and had seen 
the things which Jesus 
did, believed on him. 
46 But some of them 
wert their ways to the 
Pharisees, and told 


IQANNH®. 


αὐτὴν κλαίουσαν, καὶ rove συνελθόντας αὐτῇ Ιουδαίους 
her weeping, and the *who%came*with ‘*her 1Jews 


κλαίοντας, ἐνεβριμήσατο τῷ πνεύματι, Kai ἐτάραξεν ἑαυτόν, 
weeping, he groaned rae and troubled himself 
34 καὶ εἶπεν, Tov τεθείκατε αὐτόν ; Aéyovow αὐτῷ, Κύριε, 


ΧΙ. 


and said, Where haveyelaid him; They say tohim, Lord, 
ἔρχου καὶ ἴδε. 85 ᾿Εδάκρυσεν ὁ "Inooiie. 36 ἔλεγον οὖν οἱ 
come and see. 2Wept 1 Jesus. lke *therefore ‘the 
Ἰουδαῖοι, “Ide πῶς ἐφίλει αὐτόν. 87 Twic.di ἐξ αὐτῶν 

2Jews, Behold how heloved him! But some of them 
εἶπον, Οὐκ. ἠδύνατο" οὗτος ὁ ἀνοίξας τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς 
said, Was not “able this [? uate) who opened the eyes 


TOU eee ποιῆσαι ἵνα Kai οὗτος μὴ. ἀποθάνῃ; 
of the blind [man], to have caused that also this one should not have died ? 
38 Ἰησοῦς οὖν πάλιν πὲἐμβριμώμενος" ἐν ἑαυτῷ ἔρχεται 

Jesus. therefore again groaning in himself comes 
εἰς TO μνημεῖον. ἦν.δὲ σπήλαιον, καὶ λίθος ἐπέκειτο ἐπ᾽ 
to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and astone waslying upon 
ED. 39 λέγει "ὁ" Ἰησοῦς, “Apare τὸν λίθον. Λέγει αὐτῷ 

ΞΞ8Υ5 1Jesus, Take away the stone. “*Says ‘to *him 

ἡ ἀδελφὴ τοῦ τεθνηκότος" Μάρθα, Κύριε, ἤδη ὄζει" 
5the sister 7of EEE δ has ‘died, *Martha, Lord, already hestinks, 
τεταρταῖος γάρ 0 ἐστιν. 40 Λέγει αὐτῇ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Οὐκ. εἶπόν 
*four ‘days LOL! ΠΡ ἼΞῚ Says “to *her 1 Jesus, Said I not 

. ? UL p? ll \ , ~ ~ 
σοι, ὅτι ἐὰν πιστεύσῃς, ὄψει. τὴν δόξαν τοῦ θεοῦ : 
to thee, that if thou shouldest believe, thou shalt see the glory of ΡΩΝ 


41 Ἦραν οὖν τὸν λίθον 400 ἦν ὁ τεθνηκὼς SENS 
They took away therefore the stone where*was'the dead laid. 


Ὁ «δὲ ᾿[ησοῦς ἦρεν τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς ἄνω, καὶ εἶπεν, 1ά- 
And Jesus lifted [his] eyes upwards, and _ said, Fa- 
τερ. εὐχαριστῶ σοι OTL ἤκουσάς pov. 42 ἐγὼ.δὲ ἤδειν ὅτι 
ther, I thank thee that thou heardest me; and I knew that 
πάντοτε μου ἀκούεις ἀλλὰ διὰ τὸν ὄχλον τὸν περι- 
always me thouhearest; but onaccountof the crowd who stand 
ἑστῶτα εἶπον ἵνα πιστεύσωσιν ὅτι σύ με ἀπέστειλας. 
around 1 said [it], that they might believe that thou me didst send. 
43 Kai ταῦτα εἰπών, φωνῇ μεγάλῃ ἐκραύγασεν, Aa- 
And these things having said, with a?voice “loud he cried, La- 


Cape, δεῦρο ἔξω. 44 Καὶ" ἐξῆλθεν ὁ τεθνηκώς, δεδεμένος 


zarus, come forth. And came forth he who had been dead, bound 
τοὺς πόδας Kai τὰς χεῖρας κειρίαις, καὶ ἡ.ὄψις αὐτοῦ 
feet and hands with grave clothes, and his face 
σουδαρίῳ περιεδέδετο. λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Avoare 
with a handkerchief bound about. Says *to *them ‘Jesus, Loose 
αὐτὸν Kai ἄφετε ὑὕὑπαάγειν. 
him and let fhim) go. 


45 Πολλοὶ οὖν ἐκ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων οἱ ἐλθόντες πρὸς τὴν 


Many ὑμουθῆοσο αὐ the Jews who came to 
"Μαρίαν" καὶ θεασάμενοι ἃ" ἐποίησεν “ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς," ἐπίστευσαν 
Mary and saw what *did 1 Jesus, believed 


εἰς αὐτόν. 46 rivic.dé ἐξ αὐτῶν ἀπῆλθον πρὸς τοὺς Φαρι- 
on him ; but some of them went to the Phari- 


1 ἐδύνατο LTTrA. 


P ὄψῃ thou shouldest see LrTraw. 
5. + αὐτὸν him T[tTrJa. 


GTTrA. 


ἃ ἐμβριμούμενος τ. n — 6 1{1τ]. © τετελευτηκότος LTTYAW. 
4 — οὗ ἦν ὃ τεθνηκὼς κείμενος GLTTYA. τ- καὶ 
t Μαριὰμ. LITrA. YO TrA. ν — ὃ Ἰησοῦς 


(read he did) eLrrraw. 


ΧΡ JOHN: 
σαίους Kai *eizroy' αὐτοῖς Ya! ἐποίησεν Τὸ" Inootc. 47 συνήγα- 
sees and told them what 2did i Jesus, Gathered 


γον οὖν οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ οἱ Φαρισαῖοι συνέδριον, Kai ἔλεγον, 


therefore the chief priests andthe Pharisees acouncil, and said, 
Τί ποιοῦμεν ; ὅτι οὗτος ὁ ἄνθρωπος πολλὰ “σημεῖα ποιεῖ." 
What do we? for this man many signs does. 


48 ἐὰν ἀφῶμεν αὐτὸν οὕτως, πάντες πιστεύσουσιν εἰς αὐτόν" 
If weletalone him thus, all will believe on him, 
καὶ ἐλεύσονται οἱ Ρωμαῖοι καὶ ἀροῦσιν ἡμῶν καὶ τὸν τόπον 
and willcome the Romans and willtakeawayfromus both the place 
A 4 ” cd ’ ? ? ~ 7 ? \ 
καὶ τὸ ἔθνος. 49 Eic.déric ἐξ αὐτῶν, Καϊάφας, ἀρχιερεὺς 
and the nation. But acertain one of them, Caiaphas, high priest 
ὧν Tov.éviauzov.éKeivov, εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Ὑμεῖς οὐκ οἴδατε 
being of that year, said to them, Ye know 
οὐδέν, 50 οὐδὲ “SraroyiZecbe' ὅτι συμφέρει “ἡμῖν iva εἴς 


nothing, nor consider that itis profitable forus that one 
ἄνθρωπος ἀποθάνῃ ὑπὲρ τοῦ λαοῦ, Kai μὴ ὅλον TO ἔθνος 
man should die for the people, and not *whole ‘the nation 


ἀπόληται. 51 Τοῦτο.δὲ ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ οὐκ.εἶπεν, ἀλλὰ apy- 
should perish, But this from himself he said not, but high 


‘ n ~ ~ ? f d , Ι e ez I 
ιερεὺς ὧν τοῦ.ἐνιαυτοῦ. ἐκείνου, προεφήτευσεν" OTL “ἔμελλεν 


priest being of that year, prophesied that *was *about 
ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς ἀποθνήσκειν ὑπὲρ τοῦ ἔθνους, 52 καὶ οὐχ ὑπὲρ 
1 Jesus to die for the nation; and ποῦ for 


τοῦ ἔθνους μόνον, ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα καὶ τὰ τέκνα τοῦ θεοῦ τὰ διεσκορ- 


the nation only, but that also the children of God who have been 
πισμένα συναγάγῃ εἰς ἕν. 88 am ἐκείνης οὖν 
scattered abroad he might gather together into one. From that therefore 


THC ἡμέρας βσυνεβουλεύσαντο᾽ 
day they took counsel together that 
54 ’Incovce οὖν" ἰοὺκ ἔτι! 
Jesus therefore no longer 
᾿Ιουδαίοις, ἀλλὰ ἀπῆλθεν ἐκεῖθεν 
Jews, but wentaway thence 
ΓΆΡ > ? » , 
ἐρήμου, εἰς ᾿Εφραϊμ λεγομένην 
desert, to *Ephraim Scalled 
μετὰ τῶν. μαθητῶν. αὐτοῦ." 
with his disciples. 
δῦ "Hy.dé ἐγγὺς τὸ πάσχα τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, καὶ ἀνέβησαν 
Now ὅνγαβ ’near ‘the *passover “of *the 5 Jews, and wentup 
πολλοὶ εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα ἐκ τῆς χώρας πρὸ τοῦ πάσχα, ἵνα 
Many to Jerusalem outof the country before the passover, that 
ayviswow ἑαυτούς. 56 ἐζήτουν οὖν τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν, καὶ 
they might purify themselves. They were seeking therefore Jesus, and 
meheyov! μετ᾽ ἀλλήλων ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ ἑστηκότες, Τί δοκεῖ 
were saying among one another in the temple standing, What doesitseem 
ὑμῖν, ὅτι οὐμὴ ἔλθῃ εἰς THY ἑορτήν ; 57 Δεδώκεισαν. δὲ 
to you, that inno wise hewillcometo the _ feast? Now had given 
Meai' οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς Kai οἱ Φαρισαῖοι “ἐντολήν, ἵνα ἐάν τις 


ἵνα ἀποκτείνωσιν αὐτόν. 

they might kill him. 
παῤῥησίᾳ. περιεπάτει ἐν τοῖς 
publicly walked among the 
εἰς τὴν χώραν ἐγγὺς τῆς 
into the country near the 
πόλιν, κἀκεῖ "διέτριβεν" 
1a *city, and there he stayed 


both the chief priests and the Pharisees acommand, that if anyone 
νῷ ποῦ ἐστιν μηνύσῃ; ὕπως πιάσωσιν αὐτόν. 
should know where heis heshouldshew[it], that they mighttake him. 


τ εἶπαν τ. δ δι τς 2 -- OLTTrA. 8 ποιεῖ σημεῖα LTTrAW. 
© ὑμῖν for you ΤΎΓΑ. 4 ἐπροφήτευσεν LITrAW. 
& ἐβουλεύσαντο they took counsel LTTr. h ὁ οὖν Ἰησοῦς Tra. 
k ἔμεινεν TrA. | — αὐτοῦ (read the disciples) Trra. ™ ἔλεγαν T. 
Ὁ ἐντολὰς commands TTra. 


© ἤμελλεν LITrAW. 


281 


them what things Je< 
sus had done, 47 Then 
gathered the _ chief 
priests and the Phari- 
sees ἃ council, and said, 
What do we? for this 
man doeth many mi- 
racles. 48 If we let 
him thus alone, all men 
will believe on him: 
and the Romans shall 
come and take away 
both our place and na- 
tion. 49 And one of 
them, named Caiaphas, 
being the high priest 
that same year, said 
unto them, Ye know 
nothing at all, 50 nor 
consider that it is ex- 
pedient for us, that one 
man should die for the 
people, and that the 
whole nation perish 
not. 51 And thisspake 
he not of himself: but 
being high priest that 
year,he prophesied that 
Jesus should die for 
thatnation; 52and not 
for that nation only, 
but that also he should 
gather together in one 
the children of God 
that were scattered a- 
broad. 53 Then from 
that day forth they 
took counsel together 
for to put him to death, 
54. Jesus therefore 
walked no more openly 
among the Jews; but 
went thence unto a 
country near to the 
wilderness, into a city 
called Ephraim, and 
there continued with 
his disciples. 


55 And the Jews’ 
passover was nigh at 
hand: and many went 
out of the country up 
to Jerusalem before 
the passover, to purify 
themselves. 56 Then 
sought they for Jesus, 


and spake among 
themselves, as they 
stood in the temple, 


What think ye, that he 
will not come to the 
feast? 57 Now both 
the chief priests and 
the Pharisees had 
given a command- 
ment, that, if any man 
knew where he were, 
he should shew τέ, that 
they might take him. 


5 λογίζεσθε LTTrAW. 
f_— 6 GLTTrAW. 

1 οὐκέτι GLYTr. 

0 — καὶ LTTrAW. 


282 


XII. Then Jesus six 
days before the pass- 
over came to Bethany, 
where Lazarus was 
which had been dead, 
whom he raised from 
thedead. 2'There they 
made him a supper ; 
and Martha served: 
but Lazarus was one 
of them that sat atthe 
table with him, 3 Then 
took Mary a pound of 
ointment of  spike- 
nard, very costly, and 
anointed the feet of Je- 
sus, and wiped his feet 
with her hair : and the 
house was filled with 
the odour of the oint- 
ment, 4 Thensaith one 
of his disciples, Judas 
Iscariot, Simon’s son, 
which should betray 
him, 5 Why was not 
this ointment sold for 
three hundred pence, 
and given to the poor ? 
6 This he said, not that 
he cared for the poor ; 
but because he was a 
thief, and had the bag, 
and bare what was put 
therein. 7 Then said 
Jesus, Let her alone: 
against the day of my 
burying hath she kept 
this. 8 For the poor 
always ye have with 
you; but me ye have 
not always. 


9 Much people of the 
Jews therefore knew 
that he was there: and 
they came not for Je- 
sus’ sake only, but that 
they might see Lazarus 
also, whom he had 
raised from the dead. 
10 But the chief priests 
consulted that they 
might put Lazarus also 
to death; 11 because 
that by reason of him 
Many of the Jews 
went away, and be- 
lieved on Jesus. 


12 On the next day 
much people that were 
come to the feast, when 
they heard that Jesus 
was coming to Jerusa- 
lem, 13 took branches 
of palm trees, and went 
forth to meet him, and 


IQANNH2®. XII. 


τὰ « x ? ~ A nN € ~ ~ ΄ - > 

12 Ὃ.οὖν. Ἰησοῦς πρὸ ἕξ ἡμερῶν τοῦ πάσχα ἦλθεν εἰς 
Jesus therefore “before ‘six *days the passover came _ . to 
Βηθανίαν, ὕπου ἦν Λάζαρος Po τεθνηκώς, ὃν ἤγειρεν 
Bethany, where was Lazarus who haddied, whom heraised 
ἐκ vexpwvt, 2 ἐποίησαν οὖν αὐτῷ δεῖπνον ἐκεῖ, 
from among [the] dead. They made therefore him a supper there, 
καὶ ἡ Μάρθα διηκόνει: ὁ.δὲ. Λάζαρος εἷς ἦν τ τῶν "συνανα- 
and Martha served, but Lazarus one was of those re- 
κειμένων" αὐτῷ. 8 Ἣ.οὖν. "Μαρία! λαβοῦσα λίτραν μύρου 
clining with him. Mary therefore having taken a pound of ointment 
νάρδου πιστικῆς πολυτίμου, ἤλειψεν τοὺς πόδας “τοῦ Inoov, 
of *nard *pure of great price, anointed the feet of Jesus, 
καὶ ἐξέμαξεν ταῖς.θριξὶν. αὐτῆς τοὺς.πόδας. αὐτοῦ: ἡ δὲ οἰκία 
and wiped with her hair his feet ; and the house 
ἐπληρώθη 2 ΕΣ ΟΣ Te rey 4. λέ ποῦν. Xeieng 
ET. now ἢ ἐκ τῆς οσμῆης του μῦυρου. EVEL ουν ELC ἐκ 
was filled with the odour of the ointment. Says therefore one of 
τῶν. μαθητῶν.αὐτοῦ, ᾿Ιούδας, Σίμωνος Ἰσκαριώτης, ὁ 
his disciples, Judas, Simon’s (son) Iscariote, who 
ἕλλων αὐτὸν παραδιδόναι, 5 ΥΔιατί" τοῦτο τὸ μύρον οὐκ 
was δροὰαῦ him to deliver up, Why “this ‘ointment *not 
ἐπράθη τριακοσίων δηναρίων, καὶ ἐδόθη πτωχοῖς ; 6 Εἶπεν 
twas sold for three hundred denarii, and given to(the] poor? “he *said 
δὲ τοῦτο, οὐχ OTL περὶ τῶν πτωχῶν Ἐπ τ προ ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι 
*but this, not that for the poor ewascaring, but because 
κλέπτης ἦν, καὶ TO γλωσσόκομον *elyEv, Kai τὰ βαλλόμενα 
athief he was, and the bag had, and what was put into 
ἐβάσταζεν. 7 εἶπεν οὖν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, “Agec αὐτήν᾽ ὃ εἰς 
{it] carried. “Said “therefore 1Jesus, Let“alone ‘her: for 


τὴν ἡμέραν τοῦ.ἐνταφιασμοῦ.μου ὕτετήρηκεν" αὐτό. ὃ τοὺς 


the day of my burial has she kept it: *the 

πτωχοὺς γὰρ πάντοτε ἔχετε μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῶν, ἐμὲ.δὲ οὐ πάντοτε 
Spoor for always yehave with you, but me not always 

ἔχετε. 

ye have. 


9 Ἔγνω οὖν © ὄχλος πολὺς ἐκ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων Oru ἐκεῖ 


7Knew “therefore 'a “crowd great “οὐ *the &Jews that there 
ἐστιν, καὶ ἦλθον, οὐ διὰ τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν μόνον, ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα 
heis; and they came, not because of Jesus only, but that 
καὶ τὸν Λάζαρον ἴδωσιν ὃν ἤγειρεν ἐκ νεκρῶν. 


also Lazarus they might see whom he raised from among [the] dead. 
10 ἐβουλεύσαντο.δὲ οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς ἵνα Kai τὸν Λάζαρον ἀπο- 
But *took Scounsel ‘the ?chiet*priests that also Lazarus they 
κτείνωσιν, 11 ὅτι πολλοὶ Ov avrov ὑπῆγον 
might kill, because many “by ‘reason Sof “him *were °going "away 
τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων καὶ ἐπίστευον εἰς τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν. 
lof?the Jews and were believing on Jesus. 
12 Τῇ. ἐπαύριον ὄχλος πολὺς ὁ ἐλθὼν εἰς THY ἑορτήν, 
ΟἹ the morrow a*crowd ‘great who came to the feast, 
ἀκούσαντες ὅτι ἔρχεται “δ᾽ ᾿Ιησοῦς εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα, 18 ἔλα- 
having heard that “15 *coming 1Jesus into erusalem, took 
Boy ra Baia τῶν φοινίκων καὶ ἐξῆλθον εἰς ὑπάντησιν "αὐτῷ," 
branches of the palms and wentout to meet him, 


P — ὃ τεθνηκὼς [L]T[TrA]. 
5 ἀνακειμένων σὺν QLTTrAW. 
χ Ἰούδας ὁ ᾿Ισκαριώτης εἷς ἐκ (— - ἐκ Tr) τῶν μαθητῶν αὐτοῦ TTrA. 

a + ἵνα that LETrAW. 
4 — ὃ GLTTraWw. 


(those) Ta. 


having TTrA. 
(crowd) 1. 


4 + 6 (— ὁ τ) Ἰησοῦς Jesus (raised) LTTraw. r+ ἐκ of 
τ Μαριὰμ Tr. ν [τοῦ] tr. τ δὲ but (says) τ΄. 
Υ Διὰ τέ LTrA. : ἔχων 
ο΄ τηρήσῃ she may keep LrTraw. ¢ + ὁ the 
ε αὐτῶν them w. 


XII. JOHN. 


καὶ féxoaZoy," § ὥσαννά, εὐλογημένος ὁ ἐρχόμενος ἐν 


and were crying, ne blessed f[is]he who comes in [the] 
ὀνόματι κυρίου, ὃ ὁ βασιλεὺς τοῦ Ἰσραήλ: 14 Ἑὑρὼν δὲ 
name of (the] Lord, the king ael, pHaving, *found ‘and 


6 Ἰησοῦς ὀνάριον ἐκάθισεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτό, καθώς ἐστιν γεγραμ- 
7Jesus a young ass sat upon it, as iti writ- 


μένον, 15 Μὴ.φοβοῦ, ἰθύγατερ' Σιών" ἰδού, ὁ. βασιλεύς. σου 
ten, Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold, thy king 


ἔρχεται, καθήμενος ἐπὶ πῶλον ὄνου. 16 ταῦτα δὲ" οὐκ 
comes, sitting on acolt of anass. 2These sehings Inow 7not 


ἔγνωσαν ἰοὶ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ" τὸ πρῶτον, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε ἐδοξάσθη 
Sknew 415 ®disciples at the first, but when was glorified 


mo Ἰησοῦς τότε ἐμνήσθησαν ὅτι ταῦτα ἦν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ 
Jesus then they remembered that these things were of him 


γεγραμμένα, καὶ ταῦτα ἐποίησαν αὐτῷ. 17 ἐμαρτύρει οὖν 
written, and these Ehings they did to him. Bore witness therefore 


ὁ ὄχλος ὁ ὧν μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ, "ὅτε" τὸν Λάζαρον ἐφώνησεν ἐκ 
the crowd that was with him, when Lazarus he called out of 


TOU μνημείου, καὶ ἤγειρεν αὐτὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν. 18 διὰ 
the tomb, and _ raised him from among [the] dead. Onaccount of 


~ o | os , > Ms: 1k » λ Ἦ ev py, 1] ~ 
τοῦτο ὅκαι' ὑπήντησεν αὑτῷ ὁ ὄχλος, OTL Ῥῆκουσεν" τοῦτο 


this also met him the crowds because it heard 5this 
αὐτὸν. πεποιηκέναι τὸ σημεῖον. 19 οἱ οὖν Φαρισαῖοι εἶπον" 
of *his PhayAng *done sign. The “therefore ‘Pharisees said 


πρὸς ἑαυτούς, Θεωρεῖτε ὅτι οὐκ ὠφελεῖτε οὐδέν; ἴδε, ὁ κόσμος 
among themselves, Doyesee that yegain nothing? lo, the world 
ὀπίσω αὐτοῦ ἀπῆλθεν. 
after him is gone, 
20 Ἧσαν.δέ ‘rivec “EXAnvec' 
And there were certain Greeks 
*xpooKvynowow' ἐν τῇ ἑορτῇ" 
they might worship in the feast; 


Φιλίππῳ, τῷ ἀπὸ Βηθσαϊδὰ τῆς Γαλιλαίας. καὶ ἠρώτων 
to Philip, Ὑπὸ wasfrom  Bethsaida of Galilee, and they asked 


αὐτὸν λέγοντες, Κύριε, θέλομεν τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ἰδεῖν. 22 “Eoye- 
him saying, Sir, we desire 3Jesus ‘to “see. ®Comes 
ται ἢ Φίλιππος Kai λέγει τῷ Ανδρέᾳ᾽ "καὶ πάλιν" ᾿Ανδρέας 
*Philip and tells Andrew, and again Andrew 
καὶ Φίλιππος % λέγουσιν τῷ Ἰησοῦ. 2 ὁ.δὲ. Ἰησοῦς 
and EnIND tell Jesus. But Jesus 


κρίνατο" αὐτοῖς λέγων, ᾿Ελήλυθεν ἡ ὥρα ἵνα δοξασθῇ 
swered them saying, *Has *come ‘the *hour that should be glorified 


ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ae] TON 24 ἀμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν. ἐὰν. μὴ ὁ 
the Son man Veuly, verily Isay toyou, Unless the 


κόκκος τοῦ σίτου πεσὼν εἰς τὴν γῆν ἀποθάνῃ, αὐτὸς μόνος 
grain of wheat falling into the ground should die, it alone 


μένει" ἐὰν.δὲ ἀποθάνῃ, πολὺν καρπὸν φέρει. 25 ὁ φιλῶν 

abides; butif itshoulddie, much fruit it bears. He that loves 

τὴν. Ψυχὴν.αὐτοῦ ἀπολέσει. αὐτήν, καὶ ὁ μισῶν τὴν 
his life shall lose it, and hethat hates 


ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ.κόσμῳ.τούτῳ εἰς ζωὴν αἰώνιον φυλάξει 
"life this in this world to life eternal 8881] keep 


ἐκ τῶν ἀναβαινόντων ἵνα 

among those coming up that 

21 οὗτοι οὖν προσῆλθον 
these therefore came 


χάπε- 
an- 


 éxpavyacov LTTrA. 
« — δὲ [{τττὰ. 


8. Ὁ [λέγοντες] saying L. Β + καὶ Δ Πα TTra. 
! αὐτοῦ οἱ μαθηταὶ 1. 
ο — καὶ Tr. P ἤκουσαν they heard GLTTraw. 4 εἶπαν TTr. 
* προσκυνήσουσιν they shall worship Ltra. ¢ + ὃ Tra. 


" + καὶ and LTTra. X ἀποκρίνεται ANSWeYS TTr. 


283 
cried, Hosanna: Bless- 
ed zs the King of Israel 
that cometh in the 
name of the Lord, 
14 And Jesus, when he 
had found a young 
ass, sat thereon; as it 
is written, 15 Fear not, 
daughter of Sion: be- 
hold, thy King cometh, 
sitting on anass’s colt, 
16 These things under- 
stood not his disciples 
at the first: but when 
Jesus was glorified, 
then remembered they 
that these things were 
written of him, and 
that they had done 
these things unto him. 
17 The people therefore 
that was with him 
when he called Laza- 
rus out of his grave, 
and raised him from 
the dead, bare record. 
18 For this cause the 
people also met him, 
for that they heard 
that he had done this 
miracle. 19 The Pha- 
risees therefore said a- 
mong themselves, Per- 
ceive ye how ye pre- 
vail nothing? behold, 
the world is gone after 
him. 


20 And there were 
certain Greeks among 
them that came up to 
worship at the feast: 
21 the same came 
therefore to Philip, 
which was of Bethsaida 
of Galilee, and desired 
him, saying, Sir, we 
would see Jesus. 
22 Philip cometh and 
telleth Andrew: and a- 
gain Andrew and Phi- 
lip tell Jesus. 23 And 
Jesus answered them, 
saying, The hour is 
come, that the Son of 
man should be glori- 
fied. 24 Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, Except 
a corn of wheat fall in- 
to the ground and die, 
it abideth alone: but 
if it die, it bringeth 
forth much fruit. 25 He 
that loveth his life 
shall lose it; and he 
that hateth his life in 
this world shall keep it 
unto life eternal. 26 If 


m — ὁ TTrAW. n 
τ Ἑλληνές τινες LTTrA. 
Υ ἔρχεται (Andrew) comes LTTrA. 
Υ ἀπολλύει loses Trr. 


i θυγάτηρ LTTrAW. 
ὅτι because EGLTW, 


284 


any man serve me, let 
him follow me; and 
where I am, there shall 
also my servant be: if 
any man serve me, him 
will my Father honour, 


27 Now is my soul 
troubled; and what 
shall I say? Father, 
save me from this 
hour: but for this cause 
came 1 unto this hour. 
28 Father, glorify thy 
name. Then came there 
a voice from heaven, 
saying, I have both 
glorified it, and will 
glorify itagain. 29 The 
people therefore, that 
stood by, and heard τέ, 
said that it thundered: 
others said, An angel 
spake tohim. 30Jesus 
answered and _ said, 
This voice came not be- 
cause of me, but for 
your sakes. 31 Now is 
the judgment of this 
world: now shall the 
prince of this world be 
eastout. 32 And1I,if I 
be lifted up from the 
earth, will draw all 
men unto me. 33 This 
he said, signifying 
what death he should 
die. 34 The people an- 
swered him, We have 
heard out of the law 
that Christ abideth for 
ever: and how sayest 
thou, The Son of man 
must be lifted up? who 
is this Son of man? 
35 Then Jesus said un- 
to them, Yet a little 
while is the light with 
you. Walk while ye 
have the light, lest 
darkness come upon 
you: for he that walk- 
eth in darkness know- 
eth not whither he go- 
eth. 36 While ye have 
light, believe in the 
light, that ye may be 
the children of light. 
These things spake. Je- 
sus, and departed, and 
did hide himself from 
them. 37 But though 
he had done so many 
miracles before them, 
yet they believed not 
on him: 38 that the 
saying of Esaias the 
prophet might be ful- 


LOAN NHS: ΧΙ]. 

Ζ It ‘ 

αὐτήν. 26 ἐὰν ἐμοὶ διακονῇ τις, ἐμοὶ ἀκολουθείτω" καὶ 

it. If “me “serve sayens, me let him follow; : and 

ὅπου εἰμὶ ee ἐκεῖ καὶ ὁ διάκονος ὁ tee ἔσται. δκαὶ" ἐάν 

where aah there also *servant shallbe. And if 
τις ἐμοὶ διακονῇ, τιμήσει αὐτὸν ὁ πατήρ. 
anyone 86 serve, “will °honour *him “the *Father. 

27 Νῦν ἡ-Ψυχή.μου τετάρακται, καὶ τί εἴπω; Πάτερ, 


Now my soul has been troubled, and what shall I aye Father, 


σῶσόν μὲ ἐκ THe.Wpac.ravrnc.» ἀλλὰ διὰ τοῦτο ἦλθον 


save me from this hour. But on account of this I came 
εἰς τὴν.ὥραν. ταύτην. 28 Πάτερ, δόξασόν σου τὸ ὄνομα. 
to this hour. Father; glorify thy name. 


Ἤλθεν.οὖν φωνὴ ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, Kai ἐδόξασα καὶ πάλιν 
Therefore came a voice out of heaven, Both ‘I glorified and again 


δοξάσω. 29 Ὁ.“οὖν" ὄχλος ὁ δὲέστὼς" ἐκαὶ! ἀκούσας 
will glorify [it]. Therefore the crowd which stood [there] and heard 


ἔλεγεν βροντὴν.γεγονέναι. ἄλλοι ἔλεγον, ΓΑγγελος αὐτῷ 


said, ‘Thunder there has been: others said, An angel to him 
λελάληκεν. 80 ᾿Απεκρίθη ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν, OW δι ἐμὲ 
has Bee 2 Answered ‘Jesus and said, Not because of me 
ξαὕτη ἡ φωνὴ" γέγονεν, ἀλλὰ δι ὑμᾶς. 31 νῦν κρίσις 
this voice has coms; but because of you. Now judgment 


νῦν ὁ ἄρχων τοῦ κόσμου.τούτου 
is of this world ; now the _ prince of this world 

ἐκβληθήσεται ἔξω: 92 κἀγὼ ἐὰν ὑψωθῶ ἐκ τῆς γῆς, πάν- 
shall be cast out: andI if Ibe lifted up fromthe earth, Fall 


Tac ἑλκύσω πρὸς ἐμαυτόν. 33 Τοῦτο.δὲ ἔλεγεν, σημαίνων 
twill “draw to myself. But this he said, πους 


ἐστὶν τοῦ. κόσμου. τούτου" 


ποίῳ θανάτῳ ἤμελλεν ἀποθνήσκειν. 84 ἀπεκρίθη * αὐτῷ 
by what death he was about to die. 2 Answered *him 
ὁ ὄχλος, τ ἠκούσαμεν ἐκ τοῦ νόμου OTL ὁ χριστὸς 
1the Ζοσονγᾶ, heard out of the law that the Christ 


μένει Ἦν κάθα. ον καὶ πῶς job λέγεις," “Ore δεῖ ὑψωθῆναι 
abides for ever, aud how “thou 'sayest, that must be lifted up 


TOV υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ; τίς ἐστιν οὗτος ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου; 
the Son of man? Who is this Son of man? 


35 Εἶπεν οὖν αὐτοῖς ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, "Ἔτι μικρὸν χρόνον τὸ 
*Said *therefore *to °them 1Jesus, Yet alittle while the 


~ a " x ~ » ev 
φῶς Κμεθ᾽ ὑμῶν" ἐστιν. περιπατειτε ewe! TO φως ἔχετε. LV 


light with yon is. Walk while the light ye Daye: that 
μὴ σκοτία ὑμᾶς καταλάβῃ καὶ ὁ περιπατῶν ἐν TY 
not ‘darkness ‘Syou “may *overtake. And he who walks in the 
σκοτίςι ovK.oldey ποῦ ὑπάγει. 86 Ewe! τὸ φῶς ἔχετε, πισ- 
darkness knows not where he goes. While the light ye have, be- 
revere εἰς TO φῶς, ἵνα υἱοὶ φωτὸς γένησθε. Ταῦτα 
lieve in the light, that sons of light yemay become. These things 
ἐλάλησεν "ὁ" Ιησοῦς, καὶ ἀπελθὼν ἐκρύβη ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν. 
spoke Jesus, and goingaway washid from them. 


37 Τοσαῦτα.δὲ αὐτοῦ σημεῖα πεποιηκότος ἔμπροσθεν αὐτῶν 
But [though]so many “*he ‘signs had done before them 

> ? ΄, ᾽ ᾽ ΄ [7 « , « «- - 
οὐκ. ἐπίστευον εἰς αὐτόν, 38 ἵνα ὁ λόγος Ἡσαΐου τοῦ προ- 
they believed ποῦ on him, that the word of Esaias the pro- 


ἅτις διακονῇ LTTrAW. 


— καὶ GLTTrA. > ταύτης ; (continue the question to the word 


hour) Gutr. ς [οὖν] LTr. 4 ἑστηκὼς L. ε — καὶ τ. [.-- ὃ Τττὰ. & ἡ φωνὴ αὕτη 
ὨΡΤΓΑΥ,. ω oF οὖν therefore Ta. 1 λέγεις σύ TTrA. k ἐν ὑμῖν among you GLTTra. 
1 ὡς τττὰ. — OLTTrA. 


ΧΙ ΧΤΠ. JOHN. 
φήτου πληρωθῇ, ὃν εἶπεν, Κύριε, τίς ἐπίστευσεν τῇ 
phet might be fulfilled, which hesaid, Lord, who believed 


κυρίου τίνι ἀπεκαλύφθη; 
of [the] Lord to whom was it revealed ? 


e , ~ 
OTe πάλιν εἶπεν 
because again said 


ἀκοῃ. ἡμῶν; Kat ὁ βραχίων 
our report ? and the arm 


39 Aid.rovro οὐκ.ἠδύναντο πιστεύειν, 
On this account they could not believe, © 


Ἡσαΐας, 40 Τετύφλωκεν αὐτῶν τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς Kai "πε- 
Esaias, He has blinded their eyes and has 
πώρωκεν" αὐτῶν τὴν καρδίαν. ἵνα pij-idwoww τοῖς ὀφ- 
hardened their heart, that they should not see with the 
θαλμοῖς καὶ vonowow τῇ καρδίᾳ Kai “ἐπιστραφῶσιν," Kai 
eyes and understand with the heart and be converted, and 
Ρἰάσωμαι" αὐτούς. 41 Ταῦτα εἶπεν Ἡσαΐας, Are" εἶδεν 
I should heal them. These things said Esaias, when he saw 
‘ , > ~ , 2 ΄ \ > ~ eo q: 
THY.CoEay.avTov, καὶ ἐχάλησεν περὶ αὐτοῦ. 42 ὅμως μέντοι 
his glory, and spoke concerning him. Although indeed 
καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἀρχόντων πολλοὶ ἐπίστευσαν εἰς αὐτόν" 
even from among the rulers many believed on him, 
ἀλλὰ διὰ τοὺς Φαρισαίους οὐχιὡμολόγουν, ἵνα μὴ 
but onaccountof the Pharisees they confessed not, that not 
ἀποσυνάγωγοι γένωνται. 43 ἠγάπησαν.γὰρ τὴν δόξαν 
put out of the synagogue they might be; for they loved the glory 
~ 2. | ΄ ~ » ‘ , ~ ~ 21 - 
τῶν ἀνθρώπων μᾶλλον ἤπερ τὴν δόξαν τοῦ θεοῦ. 44 ᾿Τησοῦς 
of men more than the _ glory of God. 3Jesus 
δὲ ἔκραξεν καὶ εἶπεν, ‘O πιστεύων εἰς ἐμέ, οὐ-πιστεύει εἰς 
*but cried and said, Hethat believes on me, believes not on 
? , r ING Ι > ΕῚ , , ο Ν « Q ~ ? , 
ἐμὲ, τἀλλ᾽ εἰς τὸν πέμψαντά pe 45 καὶ ὁ θεωρῶν ἐμξ, 
Ine, but on him who sent me ; and hethat beholds mie, 
θεωρεῖ τὸν πέμψαντά pe. 46 he τὸν κόσμον 
beholds him who sent me. the world 
? U eo ~ « Ue ? ? , ? ~ ΄ \ 
ἐλήλυθα, ἵνα πᾶς ὁ πιστεύων εἰς ἐμέ ἐν τῇ σκοτίᾳ μὴ 
have come, that everyone that believes on me in the darkness “not 
μείνῃ. 47 καὶ ἐάν τις pov ἀκούσῃ τῶν ῥημάτων Kai μὴ 
*may abide. And if anyone*of*me ‘hear the Swords and “ποῦ 
"πιστεύσῃ, ἐγὼ ov-Kpivw avToy’ οὐ.γὰρ. ἦλθον ἵνα κρίνω 
believe, I donotjudge him, for [came not that I might judge 
τὸν κόσμον, ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα σώσω ἀθετῶν 


φῶς εἰς 
alight into 


τὸν κόσμον. 48 ὁ 


the world, but that I might save the world. Hethat rejects 
ἐμὲ καὶ μὴ.λαμβάνων Taphnyarapov, ἔχει τὸν κρίνοντα 
me δ): ἃ does not receive my words, has him who judges 


αὐτόν: ὁ λόγος ὃν ἐλάλησα, ἐκεῖνος κρινεῖ αὐτὸν ἐν TY 
him: the word which Ispoke, that shall judge him in the 

ἐσχάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ. 49 ore ἐγὼ ἐξ ἐμαυτοῦ οὐκ.-ἐλάλησα᾽ ἀλλ 
ΐ 


ast day ; for I from myself spoke not, but 
ὁ πέμψας μὲ πατήρ, αὐτός μοι ἐντολὴν ᾿ἔδωκεν" τί 
the *who*%sent *me ‘Father, himself τηθ commandment ' gave what 

μὴ ᾿ , u ‘ - .“ ἄς 3 x ᾽ ~~ 

εἴπω καὶ τί λαλήσω 50 καὶ οἶδα Ori ἡ. ἐντολὴ-αὐτοῦ 


I should say and what I should speak ; and I know that his commandment 

ζωὴ αἰώνιός ἐστιν ἃ οὖν "λαλῶ ἐγώ," καθὼς εἴρηκεν μοι 

life eternal is. Whattherefore *speak ‘I, as has said tome 
ὁ πατήρ, οὕτως λαλῶ. 
the Father, so Ispeak. 

‘ A ~ ~ ~ > 4» ~ / 
13 Πρὸ δὲ τῆς ἑορτῆς τοῦ πάσχα, εἰδὼς ὁ Ἰησοῦς ort 
Now before the feast ofthe passover, *knowing *Jesus that 


2 ἐπώρωσεν hardened TTra. ° στραφῶσιν LTTrA. 
4 ὅτι because GLTTrA. τ ἀλλὰ LYTrA. 


given LiTraw. ἡ ἐγὼ λαλῶ LYTra. 


5 φυλάξῃ keep [them] trtraw. 


285 


filled, which he spake, 
Lord, who hath be- 
lieved our report? and 
to whom hath the arm 
of the Lord been re- 
vealed? 39 Therefore 
they could uot believe, 
because that Esaias 
said again, 40 He hath 
blinded their eyes, and 
hardened their heart; 
that they should not 
see with their eyes, nor 
understand with their 
heart, and be convert- 
ed, and I should heal 
them. 41 These things 
said Esaias, when he 
saw his glory, and 
spake of him, 42 Never- 
theless among the chief 
rulers also many be- 
lieved on him; but be- 
cause of the Pharisees 
they did not confess 
him, lest they should 
be put out of the syna- 
gogue: 43 for they 
loved the praise of men 
more than the praise of 
God. 44 Jesus cried and 
said, He that believeth 
on me, believeth not on 
me, but on him that 
sent me. 45 And hethat 
seeth me seeth him 
that sent me. 461 am 
come a light into the 
world, that whosoever 
believeth on me should 
not abide in darkness, 
47 And if any man 
hear my words, and be- 
lieve not, I judge him 
not: for I came not to 
judge the world, but to 
save theworld. 48 He 
that rejecteth me, and 
receiveth not my 
words, hath one that 
judgeth him: the word 
that I havespoken, ihe 
same shall judge him 
in the last day. 49 For 
I have not spoken of 
myself ; butthe Father 
which sent me, he gave 
me a commandment, 
what Ishouldsay, and 
what I should speak. 
50 And I know that 
his commandment is 
life everlasting: what- 
soever I speak there- 
fore, even asthe Father 
said unto we, so I 
speak, 


XIII. Now before the 
feast of the passover, 
when Jesus knew that 


P ἰάσομαι I shall heal urtra, 


τ δέδωκεν bus 


280 

his hour was come that 
he should depart ont 
of ‘this world unto the 
Father, having loved 
his own which were in 
the world, he loved 
them unto the end. 
2 And supper being 
ended, the devilhaving 
now put into the heart 
of Judas Iscariot, Si- 
mon’s son, to betray 
him; 3 Jesus knowing 
that the Father had 
given all things into 
his hands, and that he 
was come from God, 
and went to God; 4 he 
riseth from supper, and 
laid aside his gar- 
ments; and took a 
towel, and girded him- 
self. 5 After that he 
poureth water into a 
bason, and began to 
wash the disciples’ feet, 
and to wipe them with 
the towel wherewith 
he was girded. 6 Then 
cometh he to Simon 
Peter: and Peter saith 
unto him, Lord, dost 
thou wash my feet? 
7 Jesus answered and 
said unto him, What I 
do thou knowest not 
now; but thou shalt 
know hereafter. 8 Pe- 
ter saith unto him, 
Thou shalt never wash 
my feet. Jesus answer- 
ed him, If I wash thee 
not, thou hast no part 
with me. 9 Simon Peter 
saith unto him, Lord, 
not my feet only, but 
also my hands and my 
head. 10 Jesus saith to 
him, He that is washed 
needeth not save to 
wash his feet, but is 
clean every whit: and 
ye are clean, but not 
all. 11 For be knew 
who should betray 
him; therefore said he, 
Ye are not all clean. 
12 So after he had 
washed their feet, and 
had taken his gar- 
ments, and was set 
down again, he said 
unto them, Know ye 
what I have done to 
you? 13 Ye call me 


w ἦλθεν was come LTTrA. 
καριώτης TTrA; ᾿Ιούδα Sip. Ἴσκ. ἵνα mapadot αὐτόν L. 


2 ἔδωκεν gave TTr. 
τοὺς πόδας LTTrA. 


"εἰ μὴ except LTra ; — ἢ τ. 


™ 4+ καὶ LTTrA 


XIII. 


ἐκ τοῦ.κόσμου.τού- 


ΙΏΑΝΝΗΣ. 
πἐλήλυθεν" αὐτοῦ ἡ ὥρα ἵνα μεταβῇ 
has come his hour that he should depart out of this world 


TOU πρὸς TOY πατέρα, ἀγαπήσας Tovg.idiove τοὺς ἐν τῷ 
to the Father, having loved his own which [were]in the 


κόσμῳ εἰς τέλος ἠγάπησεν αὐτούς. 2 καὶ δείπνου *yevo- 


world to [the] end he loved them. And supper taking 
μένου." τοῦ διαβόλου ἤδη βεβληκότος εἰς τὴν καρδίαν 
place, the devil already having put into the heart 
YIovda Σίμωνος Ἰσκαριώτου, iva αὐτὸν παραδῷ," 
of Judas, Simon’s [son] Iscariote, that him he should deliver up, 


3 εἰδὼς τὸ Ἰησοῦς" ὅτι πάντα "δέδωκεν" αὐτῷ ὁ πατὴρ 
2knowing 1 Jesus 3that 5411 °things Shas given “him ‘the 5Father 
εἰς τὰς χεῖρας, Kai Ore ἀπὸ θεοῦ ἐξῆλθεν καὶ πρὸς τὸν 
into [his] hands, and that from God hecame out and to 
θεὸν ὑπάγει, 4 ἐγείρεται ἐκ τοῦ δείπνου Kai τίθησιν 
God goes, herises from the supper and lays aside [his] 
ἱμάτια, Kai λαβὼν λέντιον διέζωσεν ἑαυτόν 5 εἶτα βάλ- 
garments and having taken atowel hegirded himself: afterwards he 


\ 
Ta 


λει ὕδωρ εἰς τὸν νιπτῆρα, Kai ἤρξατο νίπτειν τοὺς πόδας 
pours water into the washing-basin, and began towash _ the feet 
τῶν μαθητῶν, Kai ἐκμάσσειν τῷ λεντίῳῴῳ ᾧ ἦν 
ofthe disciples, and towipe [them] withthe towel with which he was 
διεζωσμένος. 6 ENE TG οὖν πρὸς Σίμωνα Πέτρον" καὶ" 
girded, ecomes therefore to Simon Peter, and 
λέγει αὐτῷ “ἐκεῖνος, Κύριε, σύ μου νίπτεις τοὺς πόδας ; 


"says *to *him the, Lord, *thou “of *me 'dost wash the feet ? 
7 ᾿Απεκρίθη Ἰησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ὃ ἐγὼ ποιῶ σὺ οὐκ 
2 Answered 1Jesus and said tohim, What I do thou not 


oldac ἄρτι, γνώσῃ. δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα. ὃ Λέγει αὐτῷ Πέ- 


1knowest now, but thou shalt know hereafter. *Says “to*him ‘*Pe- 
τρος, Οὐ-μὴ νίψῃς “τοὺς.πόδας. μου" εἰς.τὸν. αἰῶνα. 
ter, In no wise mayest thou wash my feet for ever. 


᾿Απεκρίθη “αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, ᾿Εὰν.μὴ vibw σε, οὐκ ἔχεις 
7Answered Shim 1 Jesus, Unless I wash thee, thou hast not 

, rey ~ , ? ~ , , , ᾿ 
μέρος per ἐμοῦ. 9 Λέγει αὐτῷ Σίμων Πετρος, Κύριε, μὴ 
part with me. 3Says *to*®him ‘Simon *Peter, Lord, not 
τοὺς. πόδας. μου μόνον, ἀλλὰ Kai τὰς χεῖρας Kai THY κεφαλήν. 


my feet only, but also the hands and _ the head. 
10 Λέγει αὐτῷ [ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Ὃ λελουμένος Sov χρείαν 
ays “to *him ‘Jesus, He that hasbeenlaved not “need 


ἔχει" ht! izove πόδας" νίψασθαι, ἀλλ᾽ ἔστιν καθαρὸς 
thas [other] than the feet to wash, but is clean 
e KS ~ eS. ? ᾽ ? ‘ , ” ‘ 
ὕλος᾽ Kai ὑμεῖς καθαροί ἐστε, ANN οὐχὶ πάντες. 11 ydEL-yap 


wholly; and ye clean are, but ποῦ all. For he knew 
τὸν παραδιδόντα αὐτόν' διὰ τοῦτο εἶπεν, " Οὐχὶ πάν- 
him who was delivering up him: onaccountof this hesaid, “Not “all 


, oY a > ” Ἢ , 7 wn 
τες καθαροί ἐστε. 12 Ore οὖν ἔνιψεν τοὺς πόδας.αὐτῶν, 
®clean ‘ye 7are. When therefore he had washed their feet, 
leai! ἔλαβεν τὰ ἱμάτια.αὐτοῦ, ™ "ἀναπεσὼν πάλιν, εἶπεν 

= = ’ ; 
and taken his garments, having reclined again, he said 
αὐτοῖς, Γινώσκετε τί πεποίηκα ὑμῖν; 18 ὑμεῖς φωνεῖτέ μὲ 
to them, Do ye know what I have done to you? Ye call me 
Υ ἵνα παραδοῖ αὐτὸν ᾿Ιούδας Σίμωνος ’Io- 
τ --- 6 Ἰησοῦς (read [Jesus] [L]TTra. 
© — ἐκεῖνος (read λέγει he says) LI[Tr]A. d μον 
f — ὃ 1(Tr]. & οὐκ ἔχει χρείαν LTTrAWw. 
Κ 4 ὅτι LTTrA. ι--- καὶ L. 


x γινομένου TTre 


b — καὶ TTrA. 
© Ἰησοῦς αὐτῷ LTTrA. 
i — τοὺς πόδας T. 
ἀνέπεσεν reclined TTra. 


SEITE JOHN. 


ὁ διδάσκαλος καὶ ὁ κύριος, Kai καλῶς λέγετε, εἰμὶ γάρ. 
the Teacher and the Lord, and well yesay, 7I *am [*so] ‘for. 
14 εἰ οὖν ἐγὼ ἔνιψα ὑμῶν τοὺς πόδας, ὁ κύριος Kai ὁ 
If therefore I washed your feet, the Lord «πᾶ the 
διδάσκαλος, καὶ ὑμεῖς ὀφείλετε ἀλλήλων νίπτειν τοὺς πόδας. 
Teacher, also ye ought of one another to wash the feet ; 
15 ὑπόδειγμα.γὰρ °édwKa' ὑμῖν, wa καθὼς ἐγὼ ἐποίησα ὑμῖν, 
for an example I gave you, that as I did to you, 
καὶ ὑμεῖς ποιῆτε. 16 ἀμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, οὐκιἔστιν δοῦλος 
also γ86 should do. Verily verily Isay toyou, “Is*not ‘a *bondman 
μείζων τοῦ.κυρίου.αὐτοῦ, οὐδὲ ἀπόστολος μείζων τοῦ.πέμψαν- 


greater than his lord, nor amessenger greater than he whosent 
τος αὐτόν. 17 εἰ ταῦτα οἴδατε, μακάριοί ἐστε ἐὰν ποιῆτε 
hin. If these things ye know, blessed areye if yedo 
αὐτά. 18 οὐ περὶ πάντων ὑμῶν λέγω ἐγὼρΡ οἶδα «οὑς" 
them, Not of “all tyou Ispeak. I know whom 
Ὁ ¢ , le ? a> « A od « ’ 
ἐξελεξάμην" ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα ἡ γραφὴ πληρωθῇ, Ο τρώγων 
I chose, but that the scripture might be fulfilled, Hethat eats 


Tuer ἐμοῦ! τὸν ἄρτον "ἐπῆρεν᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἐμὲ τὴν.πτέρναν. αὐτοῦ. 
Ξε ἢ “me Ἰθγϑδᾶ lifted up against me his heel, 
19 taz’_dpre! λέγω ὑμῖν πρὸ τοῦ.γενέσθαι, ἵνα ὅταν yévn- 
From this time 1 0611 you, before it comes ἴο Ρᾷ88, that when itcome 
ται, πιστεύσητε ὅτι ἐγώ εἰμ. 20 ἀμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, 
to pass, yemay believe that [ am [he]. Verily verily Isay toyou, 
Ὁ λαμβάνων “ἐάν τινα πέμψω, ἐμὲ λαμβάνει: ὁ δὲ 
He that receives whomsoever I shallsend, me receives; and he that 
ἐμὲ λαμβάνων, λαμβάνει τὸν πέμψαντά με. 21 Ταῦτα 
me receives, receives him who sent me. These things 
εἰπὼν τὸ" ᾿Ιησοῦς ἐταράχθη τῷ πνεύματι, Kai ἐμαρτύρησεν 
saying Jesus was troubled in spirit, and testified 
καὶ εἶπεν, ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι εἷς ἐξ ὑμῶν παραδώσει 
and said, Verily verily Isay toyou, that one of you  willdeliver up 
με. 22 Ἔβλεπον Yoby' εἰς ἀλλήλους οἱ μαθηταί, ἀπορού- 
me, *Looked “therefore ‘upon Sone ’another ‘the *disciples, doubt- 
μενοι περὶ τίνος λέγει. 23 ἦν. “δὲ ἀνακείμενος εἷς * τῶν 
ing of whom he speaks. But there was ___ reclining one 
μαθητῶν.αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ κόλπῳ τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ, ὃν ἠγάπα ὁ Ἰησοῦς" 
of his disciples in the bosom of Jesus, whom “loved 1 Jesus. 
24 vever οὖν τούτῳ Σίμων Πέτρος "πυθέσθαι τίς 
*Makes 7a ®sign *therefore *to*°him “Simon *Peter to ask who 
ἂν.εἴη! περὶ οὗ λέγει. 2 Sémimecwr" “δὲ! ἐκεῖνος" ἐπὶ τὸ 
it might be of whom he speaks. *Having ‘leaned ‘and 7he on the 
στῆθος τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ, λέγει αὐτῷ, Κύριε, τίς ἐστιν; 26 ᾿Απο- 
breast of Jesus, says tohim, Lord, who isit? 2An- 
, f «; ᾽ ~ ? ~ , ? τ᾿ ? ‘ h , τ \ 
κρίνεταιΐ 80" Ἰησοῦς, “Exéivoc ἐστιν ᾧ ἐγὼ βάψας τὸ 
ayers 1 Jesus, He itis towhom I, having dipped the 
ψωμίον ἐπιδώσω." "Καὶ ἐμβάψας" τὸ ψωμίον | δίδωσιν 
morsel, shall give [it], And having dipped the morsel he gives [it] 
lovdg@ Σίμωνος “Ioxapwry.' 27 καὶ μετὰ τὸ ψωμίον, 
to Judas, Simon’s [50}} Iscariote. And after the morsel, 
ὁ δέδωκα I have given T. P + [γὰρ] for (I) 1. 
8 ἐπῆρκεν has lifted up T. t ἀπάρτι τ. 
Way Τττὰ. *—OTTrA. ¥ — οὖν T[Tr]A. z— δὲ but rtra 
Ὁ καὶ λέγει αὐτῷ Εἰπὲ τίς ἐστιν and says to him, Say who it is urtra. 
leaned back LTra. 4 δὲ Tra; οὖν therefore T. 
therefore [L]a. 8 [Ὁ] Tr. h ἐμβάψας L; Baw shall dip TTrra. 
shall give to him TTra. 
καὶ he takes and TTra. 


4 τίνας TTrA. 
¥ πιστεύσητε (πιστεύητε Tr) ὅταν γένηται TTrA, 
a+ ἐκ of (his) GLTTrAWw. 


€ + οὕτως thus T[Tr]aw. 


287 
Master and Lord: and 
ye say well; for so 1 
am. 14 If I then, your 
Lord and Master, have 
washed your feet; ye 
also ought to wash one 
another’s feet. 15 For 
I have given you an 
example,that yeshoulé 
do as I have done to 
you. 16 Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, The 
servant is not greater 
than his lord; neither 
he that is sent greater 
than he that sent him. 
17 If ye know these 
things, happy are ye if 
yedothem, 18 I speak 
not of you all: I know 
whom I have chosen : 
but that the scripture 
may be fulfilled, He 
that eateth bread with 
me hath lifted up his 
heel against me, 
19 Now I tell you be- 
fore it come, that, 
when it is come to pass, 
ye may believe that I 
am he. 20 Verily, veri- 
ly, Isay unto you, He 
that receiveth whom- 
soever I send receiveth 
me; and hethat receiv- 
eth me receiveth him 
that sent me. 21 When 
Jesus had thus said, he 
was troubled in spirit, 
and testified, and said, 
Verily, verily, I say 
unto you, that one of 
you shall betray me. 
22 Then the disciples 
looked one on another, 
doubting of whom he 
spake. 23 Now there 
was leaning oun Jesus’ 
bosom one of his disci- 
ples, whom Jesus loy- 
ed. 24 Simon Peter 
therefore beckoned to 
him, that he should ask 
who it should be of 
whom he spake. 25 He 
then lying on Jesus’ 
breast saith unto him, 
Lord, who is it? 26 Je- 
sus answered, He it is, 
to whom I shall givea 
sop, when I have dip- 
ped it, And when he 
had dipped the sop, he 
gave tt to Judas Is- 
cariot,the son of Simon. 
27 And after the sop 


Tr μου My Tra, 


ς ἀναπεσὼν having 
f + οὖν 


! ixal δώσω αὐτῷ and 
k βάψας οὖν having dipped therefore Trra. 
Ὁ ᾿σκαριώτον (read son of Simon Iscariote.) τινα. 


14+ λαμβάνει 


2383 
Satan entered into 
him. Then said Jesus 


unto him, That thou 
doest, do quickly. 
28 Now no man at the 
table knew for what 
intent he spake this 
unto him. 29 For some 
of them thought, be- 
cause Judas had the 
bag, that Jesus had 
said unto him, Buy 
those things that we 
have need of against 
the feast; or, that he 
should give something 
tothe poor. 30 He then 
naving received the sop 
went immediately out: 
and it was night. 


31 Therefore, when 
he was gone out, Jesus 
said, Now is the Son of 
man glorified, and God 
is. glorified in him. 
32, 1f God be glorified 
in him, God shall also 
glorify himnin himself, 
and shall straightway 
giorify him. 33 Little 
children, yet a little 
while I am with you. 
Ye shall seekme: and 
as I said unto the Jews, 
Whither I go, ye can- 
not come; so now Isay 
to you. 34 A new com- 
mandment I give unto 
you, That ye love one 


another; as I have 
loved you, that ye 
also love one an- 


other. 35 By this shall 
ali men know that 
ye are my disciples, if 
ye have loveone to an- 
other. 36 Simon Peter 
said unto him, Lord, 
whither goest thou? 
Jesus answered him, 
Whither I go, thou 
canst not follow me 
now; but thou shalt 
follow me afterwards. 
37 Peter said unto him, 
Lord, why cannot I 
follow thee now? I 
will lay down my life 
for thy sake. 38 Jesus 
answered him, Wilt 
thou lay down thy life 
for my sake? Verily, 
verily, I say unto thee, 
The cock shall not 
orow, till thou hast de- 
nied me thrice. 


[QANNH 2. 


τότε εἰσῆλθεν εἰς ἐκεῖνον ὁ σατανᾶς. λέγει 


XIII. 


οὖν αὐτῷ πὸ 


then entered into him Satan. 3Says *therefore *to Shim 

? ~ a τ-- , ΄ - ‘ > Η͂ 
Ιησοῦς, Ὁ ποιεῖς, ποίησον τάχιον. 28 Τοῦτο.δὲ οὐδεὶς 
?Jesus, What thou doest, do quickly. But this noone 


ἔγνω τῶν ἀνακειμένων πρὸς. τί εἶπεν αὐτῷ. 29 τινὲς. γὰρ 
knew of those reclining wherefore he spoke to him; for some 
ἐδόκουν, ἐπεὶ TO γλωσσόκομον εἶχεν “ὁ" ᾿Ιούδας, ὅτι λέγει 
thought, since *the *bag *had ‘Judas, that *is*saying 
αὐτῷ 0" ᾿Ιησοῦς, ᾿Αγόρασν ὧν χρείαν ἔχομεν εἰς 
*to *him Jesus, Buy what things need [of] wehave for 
τὴν ἑορτήν" ἢ τοῖς πτωχοῖς ἵνα τι δῷ. 90 λα- 
the feast ; or to the poor that something he should give. Having 
βὼν οὖν τὸ ψωμίον ἐκεῖνος “εὐθέως ἐξῆλθεν" ἢἦν.δὲ 
received therefore the morsel he immediately went out; and it was 
νύξ. 
night. 
31 Ὅτε, ἐξῆλθεν λέγει "ὁ Inoovc, Νῦν ἐδοξάσθη 
When he was gone out *says + Jesus, Now has been glorified 
“; cA ~ ? , ‘4 « A ’ ’ > ? ~ » t ,’ 
ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, Kai ὁ θεὺς ἐδοξάσθη ἐν αὐτῷ. 32 tEt 
the Son of man, and God has been glorified in him, If 
ὁ θεὺς ἐδοξάσθη ἐν αὐτῷ," καὶ ὁ θεὸς δοξάσει αὐτὸν ἐν 
God has been glorified ἢ him, also God shall glorify him in 
νἑαυτῷ,, καὶ εὐθὺς δοξάσει αὐτόν. 33 Τεκνία, ἔτι 
himself, and immediately shall glorify him. Little children, yet 
μικρὸν μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν εἰμι. ζητήσετέ με, καὶ καθὼς εἶπον τοῖς 
alittle while with you Iam. Ye willseek me; and, as Isaid tothe 
? , ov er w, , > ’ Il « ~ ? 7 ? ~ 
Iovdaiowc, “Ore ὅπου “ὑπάγω ἐγώ," ὑμεῖς οὐ-δύνασθε ἐλθεῖν, 
Jews, That where *g0 1 ye are notable to come, 
4 £ ~ , » ? A A ΄ ε - er 
καὶ ὑμῖν λέγω ἄρτι. 84 ἐντολὴν καινὴν δίδωμι ὑμῖν, wa 
also toyou Isay now. A*commandment ‘new Igive toyou, that 
> ~ > ’ ‘ 4 « ~ ul « ~ 
ἀγαπᾶτε ἀλλήλους: καθὼς ἠγάπησα ὑμᾶς, ἵνα Kai ὑμεῖς 
ye should love one another; δοοούαϊπρ ἃ5 [loved you, thatalso ‘tye 
ἀγαπᾶτε ἀλλήλους. 85 ἐν τούτῳ γνώσονται πάντες OTL ἐμοὶ 


should love one another. By this shall *know lall that to me 
μαθηταί ἐστε, ἐὰν ἀγάπην ἔχητε ἐν ἀλλήλοις. 36 Λέγει 
disciples yeare, if love ye have among one another. 3Says 


αὐτῷ Σίμων Πέτρος, Κύριε, ποῦ ὑπάγεις ; ἀπεκρίθη Σαὐτῷ 
*to*him ‘Simon “Peter, Lord, where goestthou? “Answered shim 
ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς, Ὅπου ὑπάγω obdvvacai μοι νῦν ἀκολουθῆσαι" 
‘Jesus, Where Igo thouartnotable me now to follow, 
τὕστερον.δὲ ἀκολουθήσεις μοι." 37 Λέγει αὐτῷ "ὁ! Πέτρος, 
but afterwards thou shalt follow me. Says *to *him Peter, 
Κύριε, dari! ob.dbvapat σοι “ἀκολουθῆσαι" ἄρτι; τὴν ψυχήν 
Lord, why Β8111 ποῦ 8019 thee to follow now ? "life 
« " ~ ΄ ac , ~ ? ~ 
μου ὑπὲρ σοῦ θήσω. 38 ΦΑπεκρίθη αὐτῷ ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς, 
my for thee I will lay down. 2Answered *him 1Jesus, 
\ ΄ « \ ~ \ , 
Tyvbuxnv.cov ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ θήσεις ; ἀμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω 
Thy life for me thou wilt lay down! Verily verily Isay 
σοι, οὐ-.μὴ 


ἀλέκτωρ “φωνήσει ἕως. οὗ farapyycy' με 
to thee, in no wise [the] cock will crow until thouwiltdeny me 
τρίς. 


thrice. 


0 — ὃ TTrA. 
ELTTrA. 
ὑπάγω GLTTrAW. 
® — ὃ GLTTrAW. 
© φωνήσῃ LITrA. 


° — 9 LTTrA, 
8 — ὃ TTrA. 
x — αὐτῷ ὃ LTTrA. 


P — oT[Tr]A. 4 ἐξῆλθεν εὐθύς LTTrA. 
t [εἰ ὁ θεὸς ἐδοξάσθη ἐν αὐτῷ] LTrA. 
¥ + ἐγὼ i (go) 1. 


© ἀκολουθεῖν Tr. 


τ + οὖν therefore 
Υ αὐτῷ TTr. ν ἐγὼ 
z ἀκολουθήσεις δὲ ὕστερον LTTrA. 
b διὰ τί LTrA. 4 ἀποκρίνεται aUSWers LTTraW. 


f ἀρνή σῃ LTTrA. 


XIV. JO HAN. 
14 Μὴ.ταρασσέσθω ὑμῶν ἡ καρδία πιστεύετε εἰς τὸν θεόν, 
Let not be troubled your heart ; ye believe on God, 
καὶ εἰς ἐμὲ πιστεύετε. 2 Ey TH οἰκίᾳ τοῦ πατρός.μου μοναὶ 
also on me believe. In the house of my Father “abodes 
πολλαί εἰσιν᾽ εἰ δὲμή, εἶπον.ἂν ὑμῖν" ἔ πορεύομαι ἕτοι- 
‘many there are; otherwise I would have told you; I go to pre- 
μάσαι τόπον ὑμῖν. 8 Kai ἐὰν πορευθῶ "καὶ" ἑτοιμάσω ‘piv 
pare aplace for you; and if I go and prepare for you 
τόπον," πάλιν ἔρχομαι καὶ Ἐπαραλήψομαι" ὑμᾶς πρὸς ἐμαυ- 


a place, again Iam coming and will receive you to my- 
, er ‘ , ‘ « ~ Fz ‘ ‘ 
Tov’ ἵνα ὕπου εἰμὶ ἐγώ, καὶ ὑμεῖς ἦτε. 4 καὶ ὕπου ᾿ἐγὼ" 
self, that where 7am ‘J 4also “ye may be. And where I 


ὑπάγω οἴδατε ™kai' τὴν ὁδὸν "οἴδατε." 5 Λέγει αὐτῷ Θωμᾶς, 

go yeknow and the way yeknow. *Says °to*him ‘Thomas, 
Κύριε, οὐκιοἴδαμεν ποῦ ὑπάγεις, “καὶ! πῶς Ῥδυνάμεθα τὴν 
Lord, we know not where thou goest, and how can we the 
ὁδὸν eidévar;' 6 Λέγει αὐτῷ “ὁ! ᾿Τησοῦς, ᾿Εγώ εἰμι ἡ ὁδὸς 
way know? Says “to *him 1Jesus, I am the way 
καὶ ἡ ἀλήθεια καὶ ἡ ζωή" οὐδεὶς ἔρχεται πρὸς TOY πατέρα 


and the truth and the life. Noone comes to the Father 
εἰμὴ Ov ἐμοῦ. 7 εἰ τἐγνώκειτε με, καὶ τὸν.πατέρα.μου 
but by . me. If ye had known me, also my Father 


"ἐγνώκειτε. ἄν" ‘kai! Yar ἄρτι! γινώσκετε αὐτόν, Kai ἑωρά- 


ye would have known; and henceforth ye know him, and have 
κατε ταὐτόν." 8 Λέγει αὐτῷ Φίλιππος, Κύριε, δεῖξον ἡμῖν 
seen him. 2Says “to *him Philip, Lord, shew us 
τὸν πατέρα, καὶ ἀρκεῖ ἡμῖν. 9 Λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, 
the Father, and it suffices us, Says ‘to *him 1 Jesus, 
*Tooovroy χρόνον" μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν εἰμι, καὶ οὐκ.ἔγνωκάς με, 


So long atime with you amJ, and thou hast not known me, 
Φίλιππε; ὁ ἑωρακὼς ἐμέ, ἑώρακεν τὸν πατέρα᾽ YKai' πῶς 
Philip? Hethat has seen me, hasseen the Father ; and how 


σὺ λέγεις, Δεῖξον ἡμῖν τὸν πατέρα; 10 οὐ-πιστεύεις OTe 
7thou ‘sayest, Shew us the Father? Believest thou not that 


ἐγὼ ἐν τῷ πατρί, Kai ὁ πατὴρ ἐν ἐμοί ἐστιν ; τὰ ῥήματα 
I [am]in the Father, andthe Father 7in “me is? The words 
ἃ ἐγὼ "add" ὑμῖν, ἀπ᾿ ἐμαυτοῦ οὐνλαλῶ: ὁ. δὲ πατὴρ 


which I speak but the Father 
*6" ἐν ἐμοὶ μένων Ῥαὐτὸς ποιεῖ τὰ ἔργα" “. 11 πιστεύετέ μοι 
ὙΠΟ ἢ τ ΒΒ 1468 he does the works. Believe me 
Ore ἐγὼ ἐν τῷ πατρί, καὶ ὁ πατὴρ ἐν ἐμοί" εἰ δὲ μή, 
that [am]in the Father, and the Father in me; but if not, 
διὰ τὰ ἔργα αὐτὰ πιστεύετέ “μοι." 12 ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω 
because of the works themselves believe me. Verily verily Isay 
ὑμῖν. ὁ πιστεύων εἰς ἐμέ, τὰ ἔργα ἃ ἐγὼ ποιῶ, κἀκεῖνος 
to you, He that believes on me, the works which I do, also he 
ποιήσει, Kai μείζονα τούτων ποιήσει, OTL ἐγὼ πρὸς τὸν 


toyou, from myself I speak not; 


shalldo, and greater than these heshalldo, because I to 
πατέρα μου" πορεύομαι. 18 καὶ ὅτιᾶἂν αἰτήσητε ἐν τῷ 
my Father go. And whatsoever yemayask in 


289 


XIV. Let not your 
heart he troubled: ye 
believe in God, believe 
also in me, 2 In my 
Father’s house are 
many mansions: if ἐξ 
were not so,1 would 
have told you. I goto 
prepare a place for you. 
3 Andif I go and pre- 
pare a place for you 
I will come again, and 
receive you unto my- 
self ; that where I am, 
there ye may be also, 
4 And whither I go 
ye know, and the way 
ye know. 5 Thomas 
saith unto him, Lord, 
we know not whither 
thou goest; and how 
can we know the way ? 
6 Jesus saith unto him, 
I am the way, the 
truth, and the life: no 
man cometh unto the 
Father, but by me. 7If 
ye had known me, ye 
should have known my 
Father also: and from 
henceforth ye know 
him, and have seen 
him. 8 Philip saith 
unto him, Lord, shew 
us the Father, and it 
sufficeth us. 9 Jesu 
saith unto him, Havel 
been so long time with 
you, and yet hast thou 
not known me, Philip? 
he that hath seen me 
hath seen the Father ; 
and how sayest thou 
then, Shew us the Fa- 
ther? 10 Believest thou 
not that I am in the 
Father, and the Father 
in me? the words that 
I speak unto you I 
speak not of myself: 
but the Father that 
dwelleth in me, he do- 
eth the works. 11 Be- 
lieve me that I am in 
the Father, and the Fa- 
ther in me: or else be- 
lieve me for the very 
works’ sake. 12 Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, 
He that believeth on 
me, the works that I 
doshall he doalso; and 
greater works than 
these shall he do; be- 
cause I go unto my 
Father. 13 And what- 
soever ye shall ask in 


h — καὶ 1. i τόπον ὑμῖν TTrA. 


5 + ὅτι for LTTrAW. 3 
π — οἴδατε [L]TTrA. ο — καὶ LTr. 


᾿ [ἐγὼ] L. m — καὶ [L]TTrA. 
know we the way LTTrA. 4Y—OT. “ re k 
Tra; γνώσεσθε ye will know T. t καὶ [L]Tra. Y ἀπάρτι T. 
χα τοσούτῳ χρόνῳ LT. Υ — καὶ LI[Tr]. 1 λέγω τττα. 8 [0] LTrA. 
αὐτοῦ does his works TTra. ς + [αὐτοῦ] (read his works) 1». 

& — μοι T[Tr]. f — μου (read the father) LTTra. 


τ ἐγνώκατε ἐμέ ye have known me T. 


k παραλήμψομαι LTTrA. 


Ρ οἴδαμεν τὴν ὁδόν 
5 ἂν ἤἥδειτε 
W [αὐτόν] LTrA. 
Ὁ ποιεῖ τὰ ἔργα 
44 ἐστίν is E. 


U 


290 


my name, that will I 
do, that the Father 
may be glorified in the 
Son. 14 If ye shall 
ask any thing in my 
name, [ will do tt. 
15 If ye love me, keep 
Τη; commandments, 
16 And I will pray the 
Father, and he shall 
give you another Com- 
forter, that he may 
abide with you for 
ever; 17 even the Spirit 
of truth; whom the 
world cannot receive, 
because it seeth him 
not, neither knoweth 
him: but ye know him; 
for he dwelleth with 
you, and shall be in 
you. 18 I will not 
leave you comfortless: 
I will come to you. 
19 Yet a little while, 
and the world seeth 
me no more; but ye see 
me: because I live, ye 
shall live also. 20 At 
that day yeshall know 
that I am in my Fa- 
ther, and ye in me, and 
I in you. 21 He that 
hath my command- 
ments, and keepeth 
them, he it is that lov- 
eth me: and he that 
loveth me shall be loy- 
ed of my Father, and I 
will love him, and will 
manifest myself to 
him. 22 Judas saith 
unto him, not Iscariot, 
Lord, how is it that 
thou wilt manifest 
thyself unto us, and 
not unto the world? 
23 Jesus answered and 
saidunto him, Ifaman 
love me, he will keep 
my words: and my Fa- 
ther will love him, and 
we will come unto 
him, and make our a- 
bode with him. 24 He 
that loveth me not 
keepeth not my say- 
ings: and the word 
which ye hear is not 
mine, but the Fa- 
ther’s which sent me. 
25 These things have I 
spoken unto you, being 
yet present with you. 
26 But the Comforter, 
which is the Holy 
Ghost, whom the Fa- 
ther will send in m 
name, he shall teac 
bi all things, and 
ring all things to 


your remembrance, 


IQANNH®. XIV. 


ὀνόματί.μου, τοῦτο ποιήσω, ἵνα δοξασθῇ ὁ πατὴρ ἐν τῷ 
my name, this willIdo, that mney be ted the Father in the 


. 14 ἐάν τι αἰτήσητεξ ἐν τῷ. ὀνόματί. μου, ae ποιήσω. 


τι If anything ye ask in my name, will do [it]. 
15 ἐὰν ἀγαπᾶτε pe, τὰς ἐντολὰς τὰς ἐμὰς "τηρήσατε." 
If ye love me, ?commandments imy keep. 


16 ‘kai ἐγὼ" ἐρωτήσω τὸν πατέρα, καὶ ἄλλον παράκλητον 
And I will ask the Father, and another Paraclete 


δώσει ὑμῖν, ἵνα Ἐμένῃ μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν εἰς.τὸν.αἰῶνα," 17 τὸ 
he will give you, that he mayremain with you for ever, the 
πνεῦμα THC ἀληθείας, ὃ ὁ κόσμος οὐ-δύναται λαβεῖν, OTL 

Spiele of truth, whomthe world cannot receive, because 


οὐ.θεωρεῖ αὐτό, οὐδὲ γινώσκει ἰαὐτό"" ὑμεῖς. δὲ! γινώσκετε 
it does not see him, nor know him; but ye know 


αὐτό, Ort παρ᾽ ὑμῖν μένει, Kai ἐν ὑμῖν πἔσται." 18 οὐκ. ἀφήσω 
him, for with yom he abides, and in you _ shall be. I will not leave 


ὑμᾶς ὀρφανούς" ἔρχομαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς. 19 ἔτι μικρὸν καὶ ὁ 
zoe orphans, Iamcoming to you. Yet a little while and the 
κόσμος με “οὐκ ἔτι! θεωρεῖ, ὑμεῖς.δὲ θεωρεῖτέ με’ ὅτι ἐγὼ 
world me no _ longer sees, but ye gee me: because [ 


ζῶ, Ρζήσεσθε." 20 ἐν ἐκείνῃ Ty ἡμέρᾳ “γνώσεσθε 
live, shall live. In that shall *know 


ἐν τῷ πατρίου, Kai ὑμεῖς ἐν ἐμοί, κἀγὼ 
my Father, and ye in me, and I 
ἔχων τὰς.ἐντολάς.μου Kai τηρῶν αὐτάς. 
in you. He that has mycommandments and _ keeps them, 
ἐκεῖνός ἐστιν ὁ ἀγαπῶν pe 0.0& ἀγαπῶν με, ἀγαπηθήσε- 
he itis that loves me; buthethat loves me, _ shall be loved 
ται ὑπὸ τοῦ.πατρός.μου: ‘Kai ἐγὼ" ἀγαπήσω αὐτόν, Kai 
by my Father ; and I will love him, and 
ἐμφανίσω αὐτῷ ἐμαυτόν. 22 Λέγει αὐτῷ Ἰούδας, οὐχ 
Ὑ711] manifest tohim myself, 7Says 7to ‘him ‘Judas, (not 
ὁ ᾿Ισκαριώτης, Κύριε," τί γέγονεν ὅτι ἡμῖν μέλλεις 
the _Iscariote,) Lord, what has occurred that tous thou art about 


ἐμφανίζειν σεαυτόν, καὶ οὐχὶ τῷ κόσμῳ; 2 ᾿Απεκρίθη 'ὁ" 
tomanifest thyself, and not tothe world? 2Answered 


᾿Ιησοῦς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ἐάν τις ἀγαπᾷ με, τὸν.λόγον. μου 
lJesus and said to anim; Tf angone love me, my word 


τηρήσει, καὶ ὁ. πατήριμου ἀγαπήσει αὐτόν, Kai πρὸς αὐτὸν 


καὶ yee 
7also 


ὑμεῖς" ὅτι eye 
‘ye that Toten} in 
ἐν ὑμῖν: 21 ὁ 


he will keep, and my Father will love him, and _ to him 
ἐλευσόμεθα, καὶ μονὴν παρ᾽ αὐτῷ "ποιήσομεν." 24 ὁ μὴ 
we willcome, and an abode with him will make, He that *not 


‘ ς , τι 
καὶ ὁ λόγος ὃν 


ἀγαπῶν με, τοὺς.λόγους.μου οὐ.-τηρεῖ" 
and the word which 


loves me, δι words does not keep ; 


ἀκούετε OUK-EOTLY ἐμός, ἀλλὰ τοῦ πέμψαντός HE πατρός. 
ye hear is not mine, but of the 2who%sent ‘me ‘Father. 


25 Tatra λελάληκα ὑμῖν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν μένων" 26 ὁ-.δὲ παρά- 
These things Ihave said ἴο you, with you abiding; but the Para- 


κλητος, TO πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον, ὃ πέμψει ὁ πατὴρ ἐν τῷ 
clere, the Βρίσιν the oly, whom *will‘*send ‘the 7Father in 

ὀνόματί. μου, ἐκεῖνος ὑμᾶς διδάξει πάντα, καὶ ὑπο- 
my name, he 3you ‘will *teach all things, and will bring to *re- 


+ pe me [L]JT. 


4 χηρήσετε ye will keep rrr. i κἀγὼ LITrA. K μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν εἰς τὸν 


αἰῶνα ἢ be may be with you HES ever L; μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν ἢ εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τ; Dee ὑμῶν εἰς τὸν 


αἰῶνα Tra. 
Ῥ ζήσετε TIrA. 
then GT[a]w. 


1 [αὐτό] L. 
9 ὑμεῖς (ὑμεῖεῖ 1) γνώσεσθε Lira. 
‘— ὃ ΘΥΤΤΓΑΥ. 


© οὐκέτι GLT. 


— δὲ but [1 ]τ{τυ]ὰ. 
54 καὶ 


Ξ ἐστίν 18 LTrA. 
τ κἀγὼ LTTrAW. 


ἡ ποιησόμεθα LTTrA, 


JOHN. 
εἶπον ὑμῖν. 27 εἰρήνην ἀφίημι 


Peace I leave 


ov καθὼς ὁ κόσμος 
ποῦ as the world 


ὑμῶν ἡ καρδία, μηδὲ 


ΧΕ EV 


μνήσει σμᾶς πάντα ἃ 
membrance oe all ἘΠΙΣΙΕῈ which Isaid to you. 


ὑμῖν, νην τὴν ἐμὴν δίδωμι ὑμῖν" 
with you ; ue ‘my Igive toyou; 


δίδωσιν, ἐγὼ δίδωμι ὑ ὑμῖν: μὴ.ταρασσέσθω 
gives, 25 lgive to γοῦν Let ποὺ be troubled your heart, nor 


δειλιάτω. 28 ἠκούσατε ὅτι ἐγὼ εἶπον ὑμῖν, Ὑπάγω καὶ 
let it fear. Yeheard that 1 said toyou, lam going away and 

ἔρχομαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς. εἰ ἠγαπᾶτέ με, ἐχάρητειδὼν ὅτι 
Iamcoming to you. If 79 loved me, ye would have rejoiced that 


elroy," Πορεύομαι πρὸς τὸν πατέρα" ὅτι ὁ-πατήρ.“μου" 
I said, I am going to the Father, for my Father 


εἰζων μου ἐστίν. 29 καὶ νῦν εἴρηκα ὑμῖν πρὶν γενέ- 
“greater *than *I 18. And now Ihayetold you before it comes ig 


σθαι, iva ὅταν γένηται πιστεύσητε. 80 Your ἔτι" 
pass, that when it shall have come to pass we may believe. No longer 
πολλὰ λαλήσω μεθ᾽’ τὑμῶν"" ἔρχεται.γὰρ ὁ τοῦ κύσμου 
much ᾿ will speak with you, for comes the 7of *world 
*rovrou' ἄρχων, Kai ἐν ἐμοὶ οὐκ ἔχει οὐδέν᾽ 31 ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα 
Sthis ruler, and in me he has nothing; but that 
vp 0 κόσμος ὅτι ἀγαπῶ τὸν πατέρα, “Kai' καθὼς 
Smay *know'the world that 1Τῖοσθ {πὲ Father, and as 
“ἐγετείλατό᾽ μοι ὁ πατήρ, οὕτως ποιῶ" ἐγείρεσθε, ἄγωμεν 
=commanded *me'the ?Father, thus I do. Rise up, let us go 
ἐντεῦθεν. 
hence. 
15 ae εἰμι ἡ eles ἡ ἀληθινή, Kai ὁ πατήριμου ὁ 
am the care and my Father the 


γεωργός ἐστιν. 2 way κλῆμα ἐν ἐμοὶ μὴ φέρον καρπόν, 
husbandman is. Every branch in me .not bearing fruit, 


αἴρει αὐτό" καὶ πᾶν TO καρπὸν φέρον, καθαίρει αὐτὸ 
he takes away it; and ay that fruit Eee he cleanses it 


b 


ἵνα “πλείονα καρπὸν" φέρῃ. 8 dn ὑμεῖς καθαροί ἐστε 
that more fruit it may aM sp hh ye clean are 
διὰ τὸν λόγον ὃν λελάληκα ὑμῖν. 4 μείνατε ἐν ἐμοί, 


Abide me, 


κἀγὼ ἐν ὑμῖν. καθὼς τὸ κλῆμα οὐ.δύναται καρπὸν φέρειν ἀφ᾽ 
andI in you. As the branch is not able fruit to bear of 


ἑαυτοῦ ἐὰν.μὴ “μείνῃ ev τῇ ἀμπέλῳ, οὕτως οὐδὲ ὑμεῖς 
itself unless itabide in the ee so See {ean] ye 


ἐὰν. μὴ ἐν ἐμοὶ fusivnre." 5 τῷ εἰμι ἡ ἄμπελος, ὑμεῖς τὰ 


Loh MES of the thd which I have spoken to you. in 


unless in me ae abide. am the vine, ἐν [816] the 
κλήματα. ὁ μένων ἐν ἐμοί, κἀγὼ ἐν αὐτῷ, οὗτος φέρει 
branches. Hethat abides in me, andI in him, he bears 
καρπὸν πολύν" OTL χωρὶς ἐμοῦ ov δύνασθε ποιεῖν οὐδέν. 
*fruit tmuch ; for apartfrom me yeareable todo nothing. 


6 ἐὰν.μή τις Speivy' ἐν ἐμοί, ἐβλήθη ἔξω ὡς τὸ κλῆμα, Kai 


Unless anyone abide in me, heiscast out as the branch, and 
22 aul) : 5 ΒΡ ΔΕ i Ay ’ 
ἐξηράνθη, καὶ συνάγουσιν βαὐτὰ" καὶ εἰς ! πῦρ βάλλουσιν, καὶ 


isdriedup, and they gather them and into a fire cast, and 
καίεται. 7 ἐὰν μείνητε ἐν ἐμοί, Kai τὰ ῥήματά.μου ἔν ὑμῖν 
it is burned. If yeabide in me, and my words in you 


π — εἶπον GLTTrAW. 
& — τούτου (read of the world) GLTTraw. 
mandment trr. ἃ καρπὸν πλείονα LTTrA. 
ἃ αὐτὸ it τ΄. i+ τὸ the (fire) Trraw. 


x — pov (7ead the Father) [L]rtra. 
Ὁ [kat] L. 
© μένῃ T. 


Υ οὐκέτι GLT. 
ς ἐντολὴν ἔδωκέν gave (me) com- 
μένητε LTTrA. 


291 


whatsoever I have said 
unto you. 27 Peacel 
leave with you, my 
peace I give unto you: 
not as the world giv- 
eth, give I unto you. 
Let not your heart be 
troubled, neither let it 
be afraid. 28 Ye have 
heard how I said unto 
you, I go away, and 
come again unto you. 
If ye loved me, ye 
would rejoice, because 
I said, I go unto the 
Father: for my Father 
is greater than I. 
29 And now I have 
told you before it come 
to pass, that, when itis 
come to pass, ye might 
believe. 30 Hereafter I 
will not talk much 
with you: for the 
prince of this world 
cometh, and hath no- 
thing in me. 31 But 
that the world may 
know that I love the 
Father; and as the Fa- 
ther gave me com- 
mandment, even so I 
do. Arise, let us go 
hence. 


XY. I am the true 
vine, and my Father 
is the husbandman. 
2 Every branch in me 
that beareth not fruit 
he taketh away: and 
every branch that 
beareth fruit, he purg- 
eth it, that’ it may 
bring forth more fruit. 
3 Now ye are clean 
through the word 
which I have spoken 
unto you. 4 Abide in 
me,andTin you. As 
the branch cannot bear 
fruit of itself, except it 
abide in the vine; no 
more can ye, except ye 
abide in me. 5 1 am 
the vine, ye are the 
branches: he that a- 
bideth in me, andT in 
him, the same bringeth 
forth much fruit: for 
without me yecan do 
nothing. 6 If a man 
abide not in me, he is 
cast forth as a branch, 
and is withered ; and 
men gather them, and 
cast into the fire, 
and they are burned. 
7 If ye abide inme, and 
my words abide in you, 


τ ὑμῖν W. 


ὃ μένῃ LTTrA. 


292 


ye shall ask what ye 
will, and it shall be 
done unto you. 8 Here- 
in is my Father glori- 
fied, that ye bear much 
fruit; so shall ye be my 
disciples. 9 As the Fa- 
ther hath loved me, so 
have I loved you: con- 
tinue ye in my love. 
10 If ye keep my com- 
mandments, ye shall 
abide in my love; even 
as I have kept my Fa- 
ther’s commandments, 
and abide in his love. 
11 These things haveI 
spoken unto you, that 
my joy might remain 
in you, and that your 
joy might be full. 
12 This is my com- 
mandment, That ye 
love one another, as 
I have loved you. 
13 Greater love hath 
no man than this, that 
a man lay down his 
life for his friends. 
14 Ye are my friends, 
if ye do whatsoever 
I command you. 
15 Henceforth I call 
you not servants ; for 
the servant knoweth 
not what his lord do- 
eth: but I have called 
you friends; for all 
things that I have 
heard of my Father I 
have made known unto 
you. 16 Ye have not 
chosen me, but I have 
chosen you, and or- 
dained you, that ye 
should go and bring 
forth fruit, and that 
your fruit should re- 
main: that whatsoever 
ye shall ask of the Fa- 
ther in my name, he 
may give it you. 
17 These things I com- 
mand you, that ye love 
one another. 18 If the 
world hate you, ye 
know that it hated me 
before it hated you. 
19 If ye were of the 
world,the world would 
love his own: but be- 
cause ye are not of the 
world, but I nave cho- 
sen you out of the 
world, therefore the 
world hateth you. 
20 Remember the word 
that I said unto you, 
The servant is not 
greater than his lord. 
If they have persecut- 
ed me, they will also 
persecute you; if they 


IQANNH YS. XV. 
μείνῃ, O¥édy' θέλητε ἰαἰτήσεσθε,) καὶ γενήσεται ὑμῖν. 
abide, whatever yewill yeshall ask, and it shall come to pass to you. 
8 ἐν τούτῳ ἐδοξάσθη ὁ.πατήρ.μου, ἵνα καρπὸν πολὺν φέρητε, 

In this isglorified myFather, that *fruit ‘much yeshouldbear, 
καὶ γενήσεσθε! ἐμοὶ μαθηταί. 9 καθὼς ἠγάπησέν pe ὁ 
and yeshall become 200 *me ‘disciples. As loved me the 
πατήρ. κἀγὼ "ἠγάπησα ὑμᾶς" 
Father, TIalso loved you: 
10 ἐὰν τὰς ἐντολάς. μου τηρήσητε, 

If my commandments ye keep, 

θὼς ya" Pra 2 λὰ Ὁ "αἱ q "ΕΣ: . 
καῦσὼς Ain τας EVTOAAC TOV.TATPOC -μοῦυ TETNONKA, Και 

as the commandments of my Father have kept, and 

, > ~ ? ~ ?» 4 ~ Τὰ « - τ 
μένω αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ. 11 ταῦτα λελάληκα ὑμῖν, ἵνα 
abide *his lin love. These things I have spoken to you, that 


ἡ χαρὰ ἡ ἐμὴ ἐν ὑμῖν μείνῃ," Kai ἡ- χαρὰ ὑμῶν πληρωθῇ. 


μείνατε tv τῇ ἀγάπῃ τῇ ἐμῇ. 
abide in 2love my. 
μενεῖτε ἐν τῇ.ἀγάπῃ.μου" 
ye shall abide in my love, 


*joy Imy in you may abide, and your joy may be full. 
12 αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ἐντολὴ ἡ ἐμή, ἵνα ἀγαπᾶτε ἀλλήλους, 
This is 7commandment ‘my, that ye love one another, 
καθὼς ἠγάπησα ὑμᾶς. 18 μείζονα ταύτης ἀγάπην οὐδεὶς 
as I loved you. Greater than this love no one 
ΝΜ e 5 \ δ A ? Lad 07 « LI ~ vA 
ἔχει, ἵνα ὅτις! ryvbvyny-abrov ὑπὲρ τῶν φίλων 
has, that one his life should lay down for “friends 
? ~ «ε ~ / 2 A 2A ~ tv {| 2 ‘ 
αὐτοῦ. 14 ὑμεῖς φίλοι prov ἐστὲ ἐὰν ποιῆτε ooa' ἔγω 
this. Ye friends ‘my are if yepractise whatsoever I 


ἐντέλλομαι ὑμῖν. 15 οὐκέτι ὑμᾶς λέγω" δούλους, ὅτι ὁ δοῦ- 
command you. No longer you Icall bondmen, for the bond- 


λος οὐκιοῖδεν τί ποιεῖ αὐτοῦ ὁ κύριος" ὑμᾶς.δὲ εἴρηκα 


man knowsnot what %is‘*doing *his ?master. Butyou I have called 
φίλους, ὅτι πάντα ἃ ἤκουσα παρὰ τοῦ.πατρός.μου ἐγνώ- 


friends, for 41] things which I heard of I made 
pica ὑμῖν. 16 οὐχ ὑμεῖς pe ἐξελέξασθε, ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ ἐξελεξάμην 
I 


known to you. 3Not tye ΞΘ chose, but chose 
ὑμᾶς, καὶ ἔθηκα ὑμᾶς ἵνα ὑμεῖς ὑπάγητε καὶ καρπὸν 


my Father 


φέ- 


you, and appointed you that ye should go and fruit yeshould 
ρῆτε, καὶ ὁ.καρπὸς.ὑμῶν μένῃ: ἵνα ὕ-τιιἂν αἰτήσητε τὸν 
bear, and your fruit should abide ; that whatsoever ye may ask the 
πατέρα ἐν τῷ. ὀνόματίμου δῷ ὑμῖν. 17 ταῦτα ἐντέλ- 
Father in my name he may give you. These things I com- 
λομαι ὑμῖν, ἵνα ἀγαπᾶτε ἀλλήλους. 18 Εἰ ὁ κόσμος ὑμᾶς 
mand you, that yelove one another. If the world you 


μισεῖ, γινώσκετε OTL ἐμὲ πρῶτον ὑμῶν" μεμίσηκεν. 19 εἰ ἐκ 
hates, ye know that me _ before you it has hated. If of 
TOU κόσμου ἦτε, ὁ κόσμος av.70.idtoyégirer ὅτι. δὲ ἐκ τοῦ 
the world ye were, the world would love itsown; but because of the 
΄ ᾽ ? , ? 3.51.3 As. ΄ ε ~ > ~ , 
κόσμου οὐκ.ἐστξ, ἀλλ ἐγὼ ἐξελεξάμην ὑμᾶς ἐκ τοῦ κόσμου, 
world yearenot, but chose you outof the world, 
διὰ τοῦτο μισεῖ ὑμᾶς ὁ κόσμος. 20 μνημονεύετε τοῦ 
on account of this Shates ‘you ‘the world. Remember the 
λόγου οὗ ἐγὼ εἶπον ὑμῖν, Οὐκιἔστιν δοῦλος μείζων τοῦ 
word which 1 said to you, Ξ15 “ποῦ ‘'a*bondman greater 
κυρίου.αὐτοῦ. εἰ ἐμὲ ἐδίωξαν, Kai ὑμᾶς διώξουσιν: εἰ 
than his master. If me they persecuted, also you they will persecute; if 


Κἀν L. 
ἠγάπησα LTrA. 


(read the Father) tra. 
Ww — ὑμῶν T. 


ὑμᾶς LTTrA. 


1 αἰτήσασθε ask ye LTTrAW. m γένησθε ye should become LTrA. 0 ὑμᾶς 
7 > Ν ~~ Y 4 Ν > a " 

© κἀγὼ I also τ. P τοῦ πατρὸς (+ μου 1) Tas ἐντολὰς TA. 4 — μον 

τ 7 may be LTTrA. 5 — τις Τ᾿ τ ἃ what Lrtra. v λέγω 


XV, XVI. JOHN. 


x , δ.» ey BEN TNT ΄ ᾽ ᾿ 
τὸν. λόγον. μου ἐτήρησαν, καὶ τὸν ὑμέτερον τηρήσουσιν. 21 ἀλλὰ 


my word they kept, also yours they will keep. But 
ταῦτα πάντα ποιήσουσιν τὑμῖν' διὰ τὸ.ὄνομά.μου, 
*these things ‘all they will do to you on account of my name, 


ὅτι ovK.oidacw τὸν πέμψαντά pe. 22 εἰ μὴ ἦλθον καὶ 
because they know not him who sent me, If [had not come and 


ἐλάλησα αὐτοῖς, ἁμαρτίαν οὐκ. εῖχον νῦν.δὲ πρόφασιν 


spoken to them, sin they had not had; but now a pretext 
οὐκ.ἔχουσιν περὶ τῆς.ἁμαρτίας. αὐτῶν. 23 ὁ ἐμὲ μισῶν, Kai 
they have not for their sin, He that *me ‘hates, “also 


τον.πατέρα.μου μισεῖ. 24 εἰ Ta ἔργα μὴ-.ἐποίησα ἐν 

ΒΥ ©Father *hates. If “the *works ‘I *had “ποὺ *done ‘among 
αὐτοῖς ἃ οὐδεὶς ἄλλος πεποίηκεν," ἁμαρτίαν οὐκ." εἶχον" 
*them which no other one has done, sin they had not had; 
νῦν.δὲ Kai ἑωράκασιν καὶ μεμισήκασιν Kai ἐμὲ Kai TOY πατέρα 
but now both they have seen and have hated both me and *Father 
μου" 25 ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα πληρωθῇ ὁ λόγος ὁ ὑγεγραμμένος ἐν 
my. 


But that might be fulfilled the word that has been written in 
~ ’ ’ ~ ll « hd ΄ ’ ὃ ΄ 26 oe ἐδ 4 il 
τῳ.νομῳ.αὐτῶν," Ort ἐμίσησάν pe δωρεάν. Οταν.“ δὲ 


their law, They hated me without cause. But when 
ἔλθῃ ὁ παράκλητος, ὃν ἐγὼ πέμψω ὑμῖν παρὰ τοῦ πατρός, 
iscome the Paraclete, whom I willsend toyou from the Father, 
TO πνεῦμα THC ἀληθείας, ὃ παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς ἐκπορεύεται, 
the Spirit of truth, who from the Father goes forth, 
ἐκεῖνος μαρτυρήσει περὶ ἐμοῦ: 27 καὶ ὑμεῖς δὲ μαρ- 

he will bear witness concerning me; 5also ye ‘and bear 
τυρεῖτε, OTL ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς per’ ἐμοῦ ἐστε. 
witness, because from [the] beginning with me _ ΥὙ 876, 


16 Tatra λελάληκα ὑμῖν iva μὴ-σκανδαλισθῆτε. 2 ἀπο- 
These things I have spoken toyou that ye may not be offended. Out of 
συναγώγους ποιήσουσιν ὑμᾶς" ἀλλ᾽ ἔρχεται ὥρα ἵνα πᾶς 
the synagogues they willput you; but is coming an hour that everyone 
ὁ ἀποκτείνας ὑμᾶς δόξῃ λατρείαν προσφέρειν τῷ θεῷ. 
who kills you willthink service to render to God ; 


8 καὶ ταῦτα ποιήσουσιν “ὑμῖν ore οὐκ.ἔγνωσαν τὸν πα- 
and these things they will do toyou because they know not the Fa- 
, γ 9A ? , > \ a“ , ad) uv .“ 
τέρα οὐδὲ ἐμέ. 4 ἀλλὰ ταῦτα λελάληκα ὑμῖν, ἵνα ὕταν 
ther nor me, But thesethings [havesaid toyou, that when 
ἔλθῃ ἡ ὥρα" μνημονεύητε ἰαὐτῶν" Ore ἐγὼ εἶπον 
may have come the hour yemayremember them that I said (them) 
ὑμῖν ταῦτα.δξὲ ὑμῖν ἐξ ἀρχῆς οὐκ.εἶπον, ὅτι 
to you. But these things to you from [the] beginning I did ποὺ say, because 
μεθ’ ὑμῶν ἤμην. 5 νῦν.δὲ ὑπάγω πρὸς τὸν πέμψαντά pe, 
with you Iwas. But now Igo to him who sent me, 
καὶ οὐδεὶς ἐξ ὑμῶν ἐρωτᾷ pe, Τοῦ ὑπάγεις ; 6 ἀλλ᾽ ore 


and none of you asks me, Where goest thou? But because 
ταῦτα λελάληκα ὑμῖν ἡ λύπη TETANOWKEY ὑμῶν τὴν 

these things [havesaid ἴο γοὰ grief has filled your 

καρδίαν. 7 ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ τὴν ἀλήθειαν λέγω ὑμῖν, συμφέρει 


But I the 
c ~ τ >? ‘ > , CO 
ὑμῖν ἵνα ἐγὼ ἀπέλθω 


for you that {i should goaway; 


heart. truth say to you, It is profitable 


ἐὰν.γὰρ ὅ μὴ.ἀπέλθω ὁ παράκλη- 
for if I go not away the Paraclete 
h ? ? ,, tl A « ~ r; SAY A ~ vi 
τος "οὐκ. ἐλεύσεται; πρὸς ὑμᾶς: ἐὰν.δὲ πορευθῶ, πέμψω 
will not come to you ; but if I go, I will send 


α εἰς ὑμᾶς ἴο YOULTTrA. Y εἴχοσαν LTTrA. 2 ἐποίησεν did LTTrA. 
τῷ νόμῳ αὐτῶν γεγραμμένος LTTrA. © --- δὲ Ὑ{Ὁ Γ᾿]. 
their hour) utra. ᾧςαὐτῶν] τ. 58 + ἐγὼ L[A]W. 


8 εἴχοσαν LTTrA. 
4 — ὑμῖν GLTTrAW. 
4 ov μὴ ἔλθῃ in no wise should come Tr. 


293 


have kept my saying 
they will keep Sours 
also. 21 But all these 
things will they do un- 
to you for my name’s 
sake, because they 
know not him that 
sent me. 22 If I had 
not come and spoken 
unto them, they had 
not had sin: but now 
they have no cloke for 
their sin. 23 He that 
hateth me hateth my 
Father also, 24 If [had 
not done among them 
the works which none 
other man did, they 
had not had sin: but 
now have they both 
seen and hated both 
me and my Father. 
25 But this cometh to 
pass, that the word 
might be fulfilled that 
is written in their law, 
They hated me with- 
out a cause. 26 But 
when the Comforter is 
come, whom I will 
send unto you from the 
Father, even the Spirit 
of truth, which pro- 
ceedeth from the Fa- 
ther, he shall testify of 
me: 27 and ye also 
shall bear witness, be- 
cause ye have been 
with me from the be- 
ginning. . 

XV1. These things 
have I spoken unto 
you, that yeshould not 
be offended. 2 They 
shall put you out of 
the synagogues: yea, 
the time cometh, that 
whosoever killeth you 
will think that lte do- 
eth God service. 3 And 
these things will they 
do unto you, because 
they have not known 
the Father, nor me, 
4 But these things have 
I told you, that when 
the time shall come, ye 
may remember that I 
told youof them. And 
these things I said not 
unto you at the begin- 
ning, because I was 
with you. 5 ButnowI 
go my way to him that 
sent me; and none of 
you asketh me, Whi- 
ther goest thou? 6 But 
because I have said 
these things unto you, 
sorrow hath filled your 
heart. 7 Nevertheless 
I tell you the truth; 
It is expedient for you 
that I go away: for 
if I go not away, the 
Comforter will not 
come unto you; but if 
I depart, I will send 


Ὁ ἐν 
e+ αὐτῶν (read 


204 


him unto you. 8 And 
when he is come, he 
will reprove the world 
of sin, and of righte- 
ousness, and of judg- 
ment: 9 of sin, because 
they believe not on me; 
10 of righteousness, be- 
cause I go to my Fa- 
ther, and ye see me no 
more; 11 of judgment, 
because the prince of 
this world is judged. 
12 I have yet many 
things to say unto you, 
but ye cannot bear 
them now. 13 Howbeit 
when he, the Spirit of 
truth, is come, he will 
guide you into all 
truth: for he shall not 
speak of himself; but 
whatsoever he_ shall 
hear, that shall he 
speak: and he willshew 
you things to come. 
14 He shall glorify me: 
for he shall receive of 
mine, and shall shew 
tt unto you. 15 All 
things that the Father 
hath are mine: there- 
fore said I, that he 
shall take of mine, and 
shall shew ἐξ unto you. 
16 A little while, and 
ye shall not see me: 
and again, a little 
while, and ye shall see 
me, because I go to the 
Father. 17 Then said 
some of his disciples 
among themselves, 
What is this that he 
saith unto us, A little 
while, and ye shall not 
see me: and again, a 
little while, and ye 
shall.see me: and, Be- 
cause I go to the Fa- 
ther? 18 They said 
therefore, What is this 
that he saith, A little 
while? we cannot tell 
what hesaith. 19 Now 
Jesus knew that they 
were desirous to ask 
him, and said unto 
them, Do ye inquire 
among yourselves of 
that I said, A little 
while, and ye shall not 
see me: and again, a 
little while, and ye 
shall see me? 20 Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, 
That ye shall weep and 
lament, but the world 
shall rejoice: and ye 


TQANNHS. X VIE 


᾽ 5 SY « ~ \ ? ‘ 2 ~ ᾽ i x , 
αὐτὸν πρὸς ὑμᾶς" ὃ καὶ ἐλθὼν ἐκεῖνος ἐλέγξει τὸν κόσμον 
him to you. And having come he _ willconvict the world 

περὶ ἁμαρτίας καὶ περὶ δικαιοσύνης καὶ περὶ κρίσεως. 


concerning sin and concerning righteousness and concerning judgment. 
9 περὶ ἁμαρτίας μέν, OTe οὐ-πιστεύουσιν εἰς ἐμέ" 10 περὶ 


Concerning sin, because they believe not 
δικαιοσύνης δέ. ὅτι πρὸς TOYv-maTépaipou" ὑπάγω, Kai 
righteousness because to my Father I goaway, and 
ἔτι" θεωρεῖτέ pe’ 11 περὶ. δὲ κρίσεως, ὅτι ὁ ἄρχων τοῦ 
longer ye behold me; and concerning judgment, because the ruler 
, ’ , » A ” 1 , 
κόσμου.τούτου κέκριτα. 12 Ἔτι πολλὰ ἔχω 'λέγειν 
of this world has been judged. Yet many things I have tosay 
ὑμῖν," ἀλλ᾽ ob δύνασθε βαστάζειν ἄρτι" 13 ὕταν.δὲ ἔλθῃ 
to you, but yeare not able to bear them now. But when *may “have *come 
ἐκεῖνος, TO πνεῦμα τῆς ἀληθείας, ὁδηγήσει ὑμᾶς ic πᾶσαν 
"he, the Spirit of truth, hewill guide you into all 
τὴν ἀλήθειαν." ob yap λαλήσει ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ, ἀλλ᾽ ὅσα." ἂν" 
the truth ; *not ‘for 7he *will speak from himself, but whatsoever 
ἀκούσῃ λαλήσει, καὶ τὰ 
he may hear he will speak; and the things 
14 ἐκεῖνος ἐμὲ δοξάσει, OTe ἐκ τοῦ ἐμοῦ Ῥλήψεται," Kai avay- 
He me will glorify, for of mine he will receive, and will an 
γελεῖ ὑμῖν. 15 πάντα ὕσα ἔχει ὁ πατὴρ ἐμά ἐστιν" 
nounce toyou. All things whatsoever *has *the *Father ‘mine ‘are; 
διὰ τοῦτο εἶπον, bru ἐκ τοῦ ἐμοῦ “λήψεται," Kai avay- 
because of this Isaid, that of mine he will receive, and will an- 
γελεῖ ὑμῖν. 16 Μικρὸν καὶ τοὐ" θεωρεῖτέ με, καὶ πάλιν 
nounce to you. A little [while] and ye donot behold me; and again 
uKpOV καὶ ὄψεσθέ με, “ὅτι ἐγὼ ὑπάγω πρὸς TOY πα- 
a little [while] and yeshallsee me, because I goaway to the Fa- 
τέρα." 17 Eloy οὖν ἐκ τῶν. μαθητῶν.αὐτοῦ πρὸς 


on me; concerning 


Κοὺκ 
no 


ἐρχόμενα ἀναγγελεῖ ὑμῖν. 
coming he will announce to you. 


ther. Said therefore [some] of his disciples to 
ἀλλήλους, Ti ἐστιν τοῦτο ὃ λέγει ἡμῖν, Μικρὸν καὶ 
one another, What is this which hesays tous, A little [while} and 
οὐ.θεωρεῖτε με, καὶ πάλιν μικρὸν καὶ ὄψεσθέ με; καὶ 
yedonot beholdme; and again alittle [while] ἃ πα yeshallsee me? and 
er t2 ‘ ll c id \ " , Ρ » x 
Ore ttyw! ὑπάγω πρὸς τὸν πατέρα; 18 ἔλεγον οὖν; 
Because I go away to the Father ? They said therefore, 


YTovro τί tori" ὃ λέγει, Yro' μικρόν; οὐκ. οἴδαμεν 
3This γα 8 which hesays, the _ little [while]? We ἄο ποὺ know 
τί λαλεῖ. 19 Ἔγνω τοὖν" Yo'’Inoove ὅτι ἤθελον αὐτὸν 

what he speaks. "Knew “therefore ‘Jesus that they desired *him 
ἐρωτᾷν, καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, Περὶ τούτου ζητεῖτε μετ᾽ 
to?ask, and said to them, Concerning this do ye inquire among 

? ΄, « A ‘ > ~_ ff ‘ 

ἀλλήλων, OTL εἶπον, Μικρὸν καὶ οὐ.θεωρεῖτέ με, καὶ 

one another, that I said, A little [while] and ye donot behold me; and 
πάλιν μικρὸν καὶ ὄψεσθέ pe; 20 ἀμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, 
again a little [while] and ye shall see me? Verily verily Isay to you, 
ὅτι κλαύσετε Kai θρηνήσετε ὑμεῖς, ὁ. δὲ κόσμος χαρήσεται" 
that *will *weep “δα *will ®lament ye but the world will rejoice ; 


i— pov (read the Father) rrr[a]. 
ἀλήθειαν πᾶσαν LIrA ; ἐν TH ἀληθείᾳ πάσῃ T. 
hear trA ; ἀκούει he hears 1. 
τ οὐκέτι NO longer (do ye behold) LYA ; οὐκ ἔτι Tr. 
ΤΊΓΑ ; ὅτι ὑπάγω πρὸς τὸν πατέρα. G[L]W. 
w — τὸ (read a little [while]) Tra. 


ἐστιν τοῦτο LTr. 


* οὐκέτι GLT. 1 ὑμῖν λέγειν TPA. ™ εἰς THY 
2 — ἂν LTTrA. ο ἀκούσει he shall 
P λήμψεται LTTrA. 9 λαμβάνει receives GLTTrAW. 
5 — ὅτι ἐγὼ ὑπάγω πρὸς τὸν πατέρα 
t — ἐγὼ (read ὑπάγω I goaway) LTTrAW. * Τί 
x — ody GTTrAW. Υ — OTTrA. 


XVI. JOHN. 

ὑμεῖς. "δὲ" λυπηθήσεσθε, "ἀλλ᾽" ἡ.λύπη.ὑμῶν εἰς χαρὰν γενή- 
but ye will be sHeved; but your grief to joy shall be- 

σεται. 21 ἡ γυνὴ ὕταν τίκτῃ, λύπην ἔχει, ὅτι ἦλθεν 

come, The woman when she gives birth, grief has, because iscome 

ἡ-ὡρα.αὐτῆς: ὕταν.δὲ γεννήσῃ τὸ παιδίον, Pode ἔτι" 
her hopes but when she brings forth the child, no longer 


μνημονεύει τῆς θλίψεως, διὰ τὴν χαρὰν Ore ἐγεννήθη 
she remembers the ΣΊΡΕ ΘΟΙΟΣΣ on account of the joy that hasbeen born 
ἄνθρωπος εἰς τὸν κόσμον. 22 καὶ ὑμεῖς οὖν “λύπην μὲν 

a Man into the world. And ye therefore grief indeed 


νῦν" “ἔχετε. " πάλιν.δὲ ὄψομαι ὑμᾶς, Kai χαρήσεται ὑμῶν 
now have ; but again Iwillsee you, and “shall *rejoice ‘your 
ἡ καρδία, Kai τὴν.χαρὰν.ὑμῶν οὐδεὶς “αἴρει ἀφ᾽ ὑμῶν. 23 καὶ 

"heart, and your joy noone takes from you. And 
ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐμὲ οὐκ ἐρωτήσετε οὐδέν. ᾿Αμὴν ἀμὴν 
in that day of me ye shall ask nothing. Verily verily 
λέγω ὑμῖν, fori’ Sdca.dv' αἰτήσητε τὸν πατέρα δὲν τῷ 
Isay toyou, That whatsoever ye may) ask the Father in 
dvoparipov δώσει ὑμῖν." 24 ἕως ἄρτι οὐκ ἠτήσατε οὐδὲν 
my name he will give you. Hitherto yeasked nothing 
ἐν τῷ.ὀνόματί. OV" αἰτεῖτε, καὶ 'λήψεσθε," ἵνα ἡ-χαρὰ ὑμῶν 
in my name: ask, and yeshall receive, that your joy 


ῇ ee νη. 25 ταῦτα ἐν παροιμίαις λελάληκα ὑμῖν" 
may be full. These things in allegories I have spoken to you; 


Κἀλλ᾽" ἔρχεται ὥρα Ore ἰοὺκ ἔτι" ἐν παροιμίαις λαλήσω 
but is coming an hour when no longer in allegories I will speak 


ὑμῖν, ἀλλὰ 7 αὐῥησίᾳ περὶ τοῦ πατρὸς "ἀναγγελῶ" ὑμῖν. 
to you, but any concerning the Father I will announce to you. 


26 ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾷ ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί.μου αἰτήσεσθε' καὶ οὐ 
In_ that in my: name yeshallask; and “not 


λέγω ὑμῖν Ore ἐγὼ ᾿νε δῶ τὸν πατέρα περὶ ὑμῶν 27 αὐ- 
"Thay te you that I willbeseech the Father for you, *him- 


τὸς γὰρ ὁ πατὴρ φιλεῖ ὑμᾶς, OTe ὑμεῖς ἐμὲ πεφιλήκατε, καὶ 
self ‘for “the*Father loves you, because ye me _ haveloved, and 


πεπιστεύκατε OTL ἐγὼ παρὰ "τοῦ θεοῦ" ἐξῆλθον. 28 ἐξῆλθον 
have believed that I from God came out. I came out 


°rapa' τοῦ πατρὸς Kai ἐλήλυθα εἰς TOY κόσμον πάλιν ἀφίημι 


from the Father and havecomeinto the world; again I leave 
τὸν κύσμον καὶ πορεύομαι πρὸς τὸν πατέρα. 29 Λέγουσιν 
the world and go the Father. Say 


Ραὐτῷ" οἱ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ, “186, νῦν Sees λαλεῖς, καὶ 


“το "him *his “disciples, Lo, now ainly thou speakest, and 

παροιμίαν οὐδεμίαν λέγεις. 80 νῦν οἴδαμεν ὅτι οἶδας 
aeons no epenkest Now weknow that thou knowest 

πάντα, Kai ov χρείαν ἔχεις ἵνα τίς σε ἐ ὠτᾷ. ἐν τούτῳ 

allthings, and ποῦ eed *hast that anyone thee shouldask. By this 

΄ ou ? 4 

πιστεύομεν ὅτι ἀπὸ θεοῦ ἐξῆλθες. 31 ᾿Απεκρίθη αὐτοῖς 

we believe that from God thou camest forth. 2Answered *them 


τὸ" ᾿Ιησοῦς, “Apri πιστεύετε ; 
Jesus, ®Now ‘do *ye 7helicve ? 


ἐλήλυθεν, ἵνα σκορπισθῆτε 
has come, that ye will be scattered 


32 ἰδού, ἔρχεται ὥρα καὶ "νῦν" 
Lo, iscoming anhourand now 


ἕκαστος εἰς τὰ ἴδια, ‘kai ἐμὲ" 
each to hisown, and me 


295 


shall be sorrowful, but 
your sorrow shall be 
turned intojoy. 21 ἃ 
woman when she is in 
travail hath sorrow, 
because her hour is 
come: but as soon as 
she is delivered of the 
child,she remembereth 
no more the anguish, 
for joy that a man is 
born into the world. 
22 And ye now there- 
fore have sorrow: but 
I will see you again, 
and your heart shall 
rejoice, and your joy 
no man taketh from 
you. 23 And in that 
day ye shall ask me no- 
thing. Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, What- 
soever ye shall ask the 
Father in my name, 
he will give it you. 
24 Hitherto have ye 
asked nothing in my 
name: ask, and ye shall 
receive, that your joy 
may be full. 25 These 
things have I spoken 
unto you in proverbs: 
but the time cometh, 
when I shall no more 
speak unto you in pro- 
verbs, but I shall shew 
you plainly of the Fa- 
ther. 26 At that day ye 
shall ask in my name: 
and I say not unto 
you, that I will pray 
the Father for you: 
27 for the Father him- 
self loveth you, because 
ye have loved me, and 
have believed that I 
came out from God. 
28 I came forth from 
the Father, and am 
come into the world: 
again, I leave the 
world, and go to the 
Father. 29 His disci- 
ples said unto him, Lo, 
now  speakest thou 
plainly, and speakest 
no proverb. 30 Now 
are we sure that thou 
knowest all things, 
and needest not that 
any man should ask 
thee: by this we be- 
lieve that thou camest 
forth from God. 31 Je- 
sus answered them, Do 

e now believe? 32 Be- 

old, the hour cometh, 
yea, is now come, that 
ye shall be scattered, 
every man to his own, 
and shall leave me a- 


=— δὲ but irra. δ ἀλλὰ ττὰ. ὃ οὐκέτι GLT. 
have L. ¢aoec Shalltake τττὰ. ἔ -- ὅτι [L]rTra. 
ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί μου TTrA. 1 λήμψεσθε LITra. 
™ ἀπαγγελῶ LITrAW. = τοῦ L3 τοῦ mares the Father tra. 
[L]TTra. 4 + ἐν LTTrA. = ὃ TTrA. — νῦν LTTra, 


© νὺν μὲν λύπην LTTrA. 
ὃ ἂν τι if anything Lrtra. 
κ- ἀλλ G[L]TTraw. 
9 ἐκ LTTrA. 
τ κἀμὲ TTrA. 


ἃ ἕξετε shall 
ἃ δώσει ὑμῖν 
! οὐκέτι GLT. 

P — αὐτῷ 


296 


lone: and yet 1 am not 
alone, because the Fa- 
ther is with me. 
33 These things I have 
spoken unto you, that 
in me ye might have 
peace. In the world ye 
shall have tribulation: 
but be of good cheer; 
I have overcome the 
world. 


XVII. These words 
spake Jesus, and lifted 
up his eyes to heaven, 
and said, Father, the 
hour is come; glorify 
thy Son, that thy Son 
also may glorify thee: 
2as thou hast given 
him power over all 
flesh, that he should 
give eternal life to as 
many as thou hast 
given him. 3 And this 
is life eternal, that 
they might know thee 
the only true God, and 
Jesus Christ, whom 
thou hast sent. 4 [have 
glorified thee on the 
earth: I have finished 
the work which thou 
gavest meto do. 5 And 
now, O Father, glorify 
thou me with thine 
own self with the glory 
which I had with thee 
before the world was, 
6 I have manifested 
thy name unto the 
men which thou gavest 
me out of the world: 
thine they were, and 
thou gavest them me; 
and they have kept 
thy word. 7 Now they 
have known that all 
things whatsoever 
thou hast given me 
are of thee. 8 For I 
have given unto them 
the words which thou 
gavest me; and they 
have received them, 
and have known sure- 
ly that I came out 
from thee, and they 
have believed that 
thou didst send me. 
9 L pray for them: I 
pray not for the world, 
but for them which 
thou hast given me; for 
they are thine. 10 And 
all mine are thine, and 
thine are mine; and 
I am glorified in them, 
11 And now I am no 
more in the world, but 
these are in the world, 


ILQANNHS. XVI, XVII. 
μόνον ἀφῆτε: Kai οὐκεεἰμὶ μόνος, ὅτι ὁ πατὴρ μετ 
alone ye will leave; and [γϑ] lamnot alone, for the Father with 


7 ~ ? ~ , ε - ev ᾽ ? x > ΄ 
ἐμοῦ ἐστιν. 33 ταῦτα λελάληκα ὑμῖν ἵνα ἐν ἐμοὶ εἰρήνην 


me is. These things I have spoken toyou that in me peace 
ἔχητε. ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ θλίψιν γἔχετε"!] ἀλλὰ θαρσεῖτε, 


yemayhave. In the world tribulation ye have; 
ἐγὼ νενίκηκα τὸν κόσμον. 


but be of good courage, 


I have overcome the world. 

17 Ταῦτα ἐλάλησεν "ὁ" ᾽᾿Ιησοῦς. καὶ Ξἐπῆρεν" τοὺς ὀφθαλ- 
These things spoke Jesus, and lifted up “eyes 
μοὺς αὐτοῦ εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν Yeai' εἶπεν, Πάτερ, ἐλήλυθεν ἡ 
‘his to the heaven and said, Father, “has *come 'the 
ὥρα: δόξασόν σου τὸν υἱόν, ἵνα *xai! ὁ υἱός. σου" δοξάσῃ 
“hour; glorify thy Son, that also thy Son may glorify 

σε; ὦ καθὼς ἔδωκας αὐτῷ ἐξουσίαν πάσης σαρκός, ἵνα 
thee ; as thou gavest him authority overall flesh, that [of] 
πᾶν ὃ δέδωκας αὐτῷ, "δώσῃ" αὐτοῖς ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 


all which thou hast given him, heshould give tothem life eternal. 


a , ? « »» ΄ “ c , | <P \ 
3 αὕτη.δε ἐστιν ἡ αἰώνιος ζωή, ἵνα “γινώσκωσίν" σε τὸν 


And this is the eternal life, that they should know thee the 
μόνον ἀληθινὸν θεόν, καὶ ὃν ἀπέστειλας ᾿Ιησοῦν χριστὸν. 
only true God, and *whom ‘thou ‘didst °send *Jesus *Christ. 


4 ἐγώ σε ἐδόξασα ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς᾽ τὸ ἔργον “ἐτελείωσα" ὃ 
I thee glorified on the earth; the work Icompleted which 
δέδωκάς μοι iva ποιήσω" ὃ καὶ νῦν δόξασόν pe ob, πά- 

thou hast given me that Ishoulddo; and now glorify me thou, Fa- 

TEN, παρὰ σεαυτῷ, τῇ δόξῃ ῃᾧ εἶχον πρὸ τοῦ τὸν κόσμον 

ther, with thyself, withthe glory which 1 δᾶ before the world 


τ ‘ ΄ ? ͵ ΄ 4, ἊΝ - ; ΄ 
εἶναι παρὰ σοί. 6 ᾿Εφανέρωσά που τὸ ὄνομα τοῖς ἀνθρώποις 


was with thee. Imanifested thy name tothe men 
ove “δέδωκάς" μοι ἐκ τοῦ κόσμου" σοὶ ἦσαν, ‘rai ἐμοὶ" 


whom thou hast given me outof the world. Thine they were, and tome 


αὐτοὺς “δέδωκας"" καὶ τὸν.λόγον.σου ἐτετηρήκασιν." 7 νῦν 
ὕπο ὕμοι Παβὺ given, and thy word they have kept. Now 


ἔγνωκαν oTt πάντα doa δέδωκάς" μοι, παρὰ σοῦ 
they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me, of thee 
iZ δ “ ν An ‘ koe 4 cll ἐ ΤῊ Δ 
στιν" ὃ ὕτι τὰ ῥήματα ἃ δέδωκάς" μοι δέδωκα αὐτοῖς 


are; for the words which thouhastgiven me Ihave given them, 

‘ > ἢ » l Q ll ? ~ { A ~ 
καὶ αὐτοὶ ἔλαβον. καὶ ἔγνωσαν" ἀληθῶς ori παρὰ σοῦ 
and they received [them], and knew truly that from thee 


? ~ AY 99 ΄ « Ψ ? , ? ‘ ‘ 
ἐξῆλθον, καὶ ἐπίστευσαν OTL σύ με ἀπέστειλας. 9 ἐγὼ περὶ 


Icameout, and they believed that thou me didst send. 1 concerning 
αὐτῶν ἐρωτῶ οὐ περὶ τοῦ κόσμου ἐρωτῶ, ἀλλὰ 
them makerequest; not concerning the world makel request, but 
περὶ ὧν δέδωκάς μοι, ὕτι σοί εἰσιν. 10 καὶ τὰ 
concerning whom thou hast given me, for thine they are: (and “things 


ἐμὰ πάντα σά ἐστιν, Kai τὰ.σὰ ἐμά: καὶ δεδόξασμαι 

“my tall thine *are, and thine [are] mine:) and I have been glorified 
ἐν αὐτοῖς. 11 καὶ ode ἔτι" εἰμὶ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ, Kai "οὕτοι" ἐν 
in them. And no longer Iam in the world, and these in 


v ἕξετε ye will have Et. 


1 — καὶ LTTrAW. 


gavest LTTr. 
1 εἰσίν TTrA. 
ἢ αὐτοὶ they T. 


® — σου (read the Son) rrr[a]. 
σκουσιν they know rr. 

€ κἀμοὶ Tr. 
k ἔδωκάς thou gavest LTTra. 


Ὑ--- ὃ τ. ἡ ἐπάρας having lifted up LTTrA. Κ᾽ — καὶ LTTrA. 
υ δώσει he shall give a. © γινώ- 
4 τελειώσας having completed LTTra. © ἔδωκάς thou 

& τετήρηκαν LYTrA. h ἔδωκάς thou gavest 1. 


Mikal ἔγνωσαν] L. πὶ οὐκέτι LTW. 


XVII. JOHN. 


τῷ κόσμῳ εἰσίν, “Kai ἔγω" πρός σε ἔρχομαι. πάτερ ἅγιε, τήρη- 
the world are and 1 to thee come. “Father ‘Holy, eee 


σον αὐτοὺς ἔν τῷ.ὀνοματίσου Ῥοὺς δέδωκάς μοι, ἵνα 
them in ERY: name whom thou hast stven me, that 


ὦσιν ἕν, καθὼς 4 ἡμεῖς. 12 ὅτε ἤμην μετ᾽ αὐτῶν τὲν τῷ 
they may be one, as we. enIwas with them in the 


κόσμῳ" ἐγὼ ἐτήρουν αὐτοὺς ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί. σου δοὺς δέ- 
world I waskeeping them in thy name: whom thou 

€ 
δωκάς port ἐφύλαξα, καὶ οὐδεὶς ἐξ αὐτῶν ἀπώλετο, εἰ μὴ ὁ 


hast given me Iguarded, and noone of them perished, except the 
υἱὸς τῆς ἀπωλείας, ἵνα ἡ γραφὴ πληρωθῇ. 198 νῦν δὲ 
ΒΟ of perdition, that the scripture might be fulfilled, And now 


πρός σε ἔρχομαι, καὶ ταῦτα λαλῶ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ ἵνα ἔχω- 


to thee Icome; andthesethingsIspeak in the world that they ney) 
ow τὴν χαρὰν τὴν ail πεπληρωμένην ἐν "αὐτοῖς." 14 ἐγὼ 
have heey fulfilled in them. I 


ὀέδωκα αὐτοῖς rbd OST καὶ ὁ κόσμος ἐμίσησεν αὐτούς, 
have given them thy word, and the world hated them, 


ὅτι ovK.ticiv ἐκ τοῦ κόσμου, καθὼς ἐγὼ οὐκ.εἰμὶ ἐκ τοῦ 
because they δ΄ ποὺ of the world, as I am not of the 
κόσμου. 15 οὐκιἐρωτῶ ἵνα ἄρῃς αὐτοὺς ἐκ τοῦ 
world. I do not make request that thou shouldest take them outof the 
κόσμου, ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα τηρήσῃς αὐτοὺς ἐκ τοῦ πονηροῦ. 
world, but that thoushouldest keep them  outof the evil. 


16 ἐκ TOU κόσμου οὐκ.εἰσίν, καθὼς ἐγὼ γὲκ τοῦ κόσμου οὐκ 


Of the world ey are not, as I of ee world ?not 
εἰμί." 17 ἁγίασον αὐτοὺς ἐν τῇ.ἀληθείᾳ. σου" ὁ λόγος ὁ σὸς 
2am. Sanctify them by thy truth ; 2word thy 


ἀλήθειά ἐστιν. 18 καθὼς ἐμὲ ἀπέστεϊχας εἰς τὸν κόσμον, 


truth is. As me thou didst send into the world, 
κἀγὼ ἀπέστειλα αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸν κόσμον᾽ 19 Kai ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν 
T also sent them into the’ world; and for them 


χἐγὼ" ἁγιάζω ἐμαυτόν, ἵνα Yeai αὐτοὶ ὦσιν" ἡγιασμένοι ἐν 


I sanctify myself, that also they maybe sanctified in 
ἀληθείᾳ. 20 Οὐ περὶ τούτων δὲ ἐρωτῶ μόνον, ἀλλὰ 
truth, *Not *for “these ‘and ’make ®I Srequest °only, but 
καὶ περὶ τῶν ἵπιστευσόντων διὰ τοῦ.λόγου.αὐτῶν εἰς 
also for those who shall believe through their word on 
éué 91 ἵνα πάντες ἕν ὦσιν, καθὼς σύ, "πάτερ," ἐν ἐμοί, 
me ; that all one may be, as thou, Ἐθυπον; art] in me, 


κἀγὼ ἐν ool, ἵνα καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐν ἡμῖν “ev' dow ἵνα ὁ κόσμος 
804 1 in Hee that also they in us one maybe, thatthe world 


«πιστεύσῃ, ὅτι σύ μὲ ἀπέστειλας. 22 “kai ἐγὼ! τὴν δόξαν 
πα δ τ that thoume _ didst send. And I the glory 


ἣν “δέδωκάς" μοι δέδωκα αὐτοῖς, wa ὦσιν ἕν, καθὼς 
ὙΒΙΟΣ thow hast given me have piven them, that they Tey, be one, as 


ἡμεῖς ἕν feoper’' 23 aft ἐν αὐτοῖς, καὶ σὺ ἐν ἐμοί, ἵνα 


we one are: in them, and thou in me, that 
ὦσιν τετελειωμένοι εἰς ἕν, Seal! ἵνα γινώσκῃ ὁ κόσμος 
they may be __ perfected into one, and that *may*know ‘the ?world 


297 


and I come to thee. 
Holy Father, keep 
through thine own 
name those whom 
thou hast given me, 
that they may be 
one, as we are, 
12 While I was with 
them in the world, I 
kept them inthyname: 

those that thou gavest 
me I have kept, and 
none of them is lost, 
but the son of perdi- 
tion ; that the scrip- 
ture might be fulfilled, 
13 And now come I to 
thee ; and these things 
i speak in the world, 
that they might have 
my joy fulfilled in 
themselves. 14 Ihave 
given them thy word ; 

and the world hath 
hated them, because 
they are not of the 
world, even as I am 
not of the world. 151 
pray not that thou 
shouldest take them 
out of the world, but 
that thou shouldest 
keep them from the 
evil. 16 They are not 
of the world, even as 
1 am not of the world. 
17 ‘Sanctify them 
through thy truth: 

thy word is truth. 
18 As thou hast sent 
me intothe world,even 
so have I also sent 
them into the world. 
19 And for their sakes 
I sanctify myself, that 
they also might be 
sanctified through the 
truth. 20 Neither pray 
i for these alone, but 
for them also which 
shall believe on me 
through their word ; 
21 that they all may be 
one ; as thou, Father, 
art in me, and I in 
thee, that they also 
may be onein us: that 
the world may believe 
that thou hast sent 
me, 22 And the glory 
which thou gavest me 
I have given them; 
that they may be one, 
even 88 we are one: 
23 Lin them, and thou 
in me, that they may 
be made perfect in one; 
and that the world 
may know that thou 


© κἀγὼ τὰ. » wm Which @LTTraw. 4% + καὶ also Tr. 
which rvra. 
me, and i guarded [them]) [L]ttra. 
* — σου (read the truth) LITra. 

αὐτοὶ LITrAW. 
© πιστεύῃ TTr. 


% — καὶ LTTrA. 


BE ἑαυτοῖς TTra, 


z πιστευόντων Bolieve GLITrAW. 


2 πατὴρ TTra. 
4 κἀγὼ LTTrA. 


6 ἔδωκας thou gavest L. 


— ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ LTTYA. 
‘4 καὶ and (read I was keeping them in sig hame which thou hast given 


Y οὐκ εἰμὶ ἐκ τοῦ κόσμον LTTrAaw. 
— ἐγὼ (read ay. I sanctity) [1 jr. 


- 
ῳ 


Σ ὦσιν καὶ 
b -- éy[L]TTra. 


f — ἐσμεν (read [are]) TTra, 


298 


hast sent me, and hast 
loved them, as thou 
hast loved me, 24Fa- 
ther, I will that they 
also, whom thou hast 
given me, be with me 
where I am; thatjthey 
may behold my glory, 
which thou hast given 
me: for thou lovedst 
me before the founda- 
tion of the world. 
24 O righteous Father, 
the world hath not 
known thee: but I have 
jmown thee, and these 
have known that thou 
hast sent me, 26 And 
I have declared unto 
them thy name, and 
will declare it: that 
the love wherewith 
thou hast loved me 
may be in them, and I 
in them, 


XVIII. When Jesus 
had spoken these 
words, he went forth 
with his disciples over 
the brook Cedron, 
where wasa garden, in- 
to the which he enter- 
ed, and his disciples. 
2And Judasalso, which 
betrayed him, knew 
the place: for Jesus 
ofttimes resorted thi- 
ther with his disciples. 
3 Judas then, having 
received a band of men 
and officers from the 
chief priests and Pha- 
risees, cometh thither 
with lanterns and 
torches and weapons, 
4 Jesus therefore, 
knowing all things 
that should come upon 
him, went forth, and 
said unto them,Whom 
seek ye? 5 They an- 
swered him, Jesus of 
Nazareth. Jesus saith 
unto them, I am he. 
And Judas also, which 
betrayed him, stood 
with them. 6 Assoon 
then as he had said 
unto them, I am he, 
they went backward, 
and fellto the ground. 
7 Then asked he them 
again, Whom seck ye? 
And they said, Jesus 
of Nazareth. 8 Jesus 
answered, I have told 
you that I am he; if 
therefore ye seek me, 
let these go their way: 


IQANNHS. XVII, ΣΎΠΙΣ 
ef , 2 , ‘ ? , ? 4 τ > 4 ? , 

OTL σύ με ἀπέστειλας, καὶ ἠγάπησας αὐτοὺς καθὼς ἐμὲ ἡγα- 
that thou me didst send, and lovedst them as me thou 
mnoac. 24 "Πάτερ," ἰοὺς" ᾿δέδωκάς" μοι θέλω ἵνα ὕπου εἰμὶ 
lovedst. Father, whom thou hast given me I desire that where 7am 
ἐγὼ κἀκεῖνοι ὦσιν per ἐμοῦ, ἵνα θεωρῶσιν τὴν δόξαν τὴν 


ΠΣ they also may be with me, that they may behold 2elory 
ἐμὴν ny ἔδωκάς" μοι, ore ἠγάπησάς pe πρὸ καταβολῆς 


my which thou gayest me, for thou lovedst me before [the] foundation 


κόσμου. 25 ἸΠάτερ' δίκαιε, καὶ ὁ κόσμος σε οὐκ.ἔγνω, 
of [the] world. ?Father ‘righteous, and the world thee knew not, 
éyw.d& σε ἔγνων, Kai οὗτοι ἔγνωσαν OTL σύ με ἀπέστειλας" 
butI thee knew, and_ these knew that thoume  didst send. 
26 καὶ ἐγνώρισα αὐτοῖς T0-6vopa.cov, Kai γνωρίσω" 
And Imade known to them thy name, and will make [it] known; 
iva ἡ ἀγάπη ἣν ἠγάπησάς pe ἐν αὐτοῖς ἢ, κἀγὼ 


that the love with which thoulovedst me in them maybe, andI 
ἐν αὐτοῖς. 
in them, 

18 Ταῦτα εἰπὼν πιὸ! Ἰησοῦς ἐξῆλθεν σὺν τοῖς μαθηταῖς 


“These *things *having “said Jesus wentout with ?disciples 
αὐτοῦ πέραν τοῦ χειμάῤῥου "τῶν Κέδρων," ὅπου ἦν κῆποε, 
*his beyond the winter stream of Kedron, where was a garden, 
> τ 2a. 3. τον \ « Η > ~ » Η 
εἰς ὃν εἰσῆλθεν αὐτὸς καὶ οἱ. μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ.  ῃδει.δὲ καὶ 
into which entered The and his disciples. And ®*knew “also 
᾿Ιούδας ὁ παραδιδοὺς αὐτὸν τὸν τόπον' ὅτι πολλάκις 
1Judas #who ‘was *delivering 7up ®him the place, because “often 

συνήχθη “ὁ' ᾿Τησοῦς ἐκεῖ μετὰ τῶν. μαθητῶν. αὐτοῦ. 3 ὁ οὖν 

ὥγγὰβ *gathered 1Jesus there with his disciples. “Therefore 
Ιούδας λαβὼν τὴν σπεῖραν, καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἀρχιερέων Kai P 
1Judas having received the band, and *from *the ‘chief *priests Sand 


Φαρισαίων ὑπηρέτας, ἔρχεται ἐκεῖ μετὰ φανῶν Kai λαμπάδων 


7Pharisees ‘officers, comes there with torches and lamps 
καὶ ὅπλων. 4 ᾿Ιησοῦς Yotv' εἰδὼς πάντα τὰ ἐρχόμενα 
and weapons. Jesus therefore knowing all things that were coming 
ἐπ᾿ αὐτόν, τἐξελθὼν εἶπεν! αὐτοῖς, Τίνα ζητεῖτε; 5’ Ame- 


upon him, having goneforth said to them, Whom seek ye? They 
κρίθησαν αὐτῷ, Ἰησοῦν τὸν Nalwpaiov. Λέγει αὐτοῖς "ὁ 
answered him, Jesus the Nazarean. Says “to *them 

? ~ ll 2 ’ > Et Uy = δὲ ‘ “| Wh) c 

Ιησοῦς," Eyw εἰμι. ὑϊστήκειοΣ καὶ Ἰούδας ὁ παρα- 
1Jesus, 1 am [he]. And *was *standing ?also ‘Judas *who ‘was °de- 
διδοὺς αὐτὸν per αὐτῶν. Θ Ὡς οὖν εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, “Ort' 


livering ἃ» °him with them, When therefore he said to them, 


ἐγώ εἰμι, YamHOov' εἰς.τὰ.ὀπίσω Kai “ἔπεσον! χαμαί. 
I am {he}, they went backward and fell to([the] ground. 

πάλιν οὖν “αὐτοὺς ἐπηρώτησεν," Tiva ζητεῖτε; Οἱ. δὲ 
Again therefore “them *he 7questioned, Whom seekye? And they 
εἶπον, Ἰησοῦν τὸν Ναζωραῖον. 8 ᾿Απεκρίθη Yo! ᾿Τησοῦς, Εἶπον 
said, Jesus the Nazargean. ? Answered 1Jesus, Itold 
ὑμῖν ὅτι ἐγώ εἰμι. εἰ οὖν ἐμὲ ζητεῖτε, ἄφετε τούτους ὑπά- 
you that I am [he]. If thereforeme yeseek, suffer these to go 


4 πατήρ LUTrA. 
given LTTrAWw. 
ο — ὃ TTrA. 


LTTr. 
τησεν W. 


P + τῶν LTr[A]; + ἐκ τῶν from the T. 
καὶ λέγει went forth and says LTTrA. 
v ἀπῆλθαν LITA. 

Υ — ὃ GLTTrAW. 


k δέδωκάς thou hast 
π τοῦ Κεδρών GL; τοῦ κέδρου T. 
4 δὲ δηαὰ (Jesus) τ. * ἐξῆλθεν 
5.-- ὃτ; -- ὁ Ἰησοῦς (read he says) Tra. *— ὅτι 
W ἔπεσαν LTTrA. τ ἐπηρώτησεν αὐτούς LTrA ; αὐτὸς ἐπηρώ- 


16 what TTra. 
1 πατὴρ LTTrA. 


i ἔδωκάς thou gavest L. 
m— ὃ TTrA. 


JOHN. 


9 va πληρωθῇ ὁ λόγος ὃν εἶπεν. Ὅτι οὺς δέ- 
that might be fulfilled the word which he said, Whom thou 
αὐτῶν οὐδένα. 10 Σίμων οὖν 


XVIII. 


ye" 
away ; 


δωκάς μοι οὐκ ἀπώλεσα ἐξ 


hast given me I lost of them ποῦ one. Simon *therefore 
Πέτρος ἔχων μάχαιραν, εἵλκυσεν αὐτήν, καὶ ἔπαισεν τὸν 
Peter having a sword, drew it, and smote the 
τοῦ ἀρχιερέως δοῦλον, καὶ ἀπέκοψεν αὐτοῦ τὸ τὠτίον᾽ τὸ 
7of *the *high priest ‘bondman, and cut off his "ear 
δεξιόν. ἢν. δὲ ὄνομα τῷ δούλῳ Μάλχος. 11 εἶπεν οὖν 
lright. And*was *name ‘the“*bondman’s Malchus. 3Said *therefore 


0 Ἰησοῦς τῷ Πέτρῳ, Bare ryv-uaxaparcov" εἰς τὴν θήκην. 
1Jesus to Peter, Put thy sword into the sheath; 
TO ποτήριον ὃ δέδωκέν μοι ὁ πατὴρ οὐκ.μὴ.πίω αὐτό; 
the cup which “has ‘given *me ‘the 7Father should I not drink it? 
12 ἪἫ οὖν σπεῖρα καὶ ὁ χιλίαρχος Kai οἱ ὑπηρέται τῶν 
The *therefore ‘band andthe chief captain and the officers. of the 
? , , 4 ? ~ ‘ » ᾽ ’ ‘4 
Ιουδαίων συνέλαβον τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν, kai ἔδησαν αὐτόν, 18 καὶ 
Jews took hold of Jesus, and bound him ; and 
ἀπήγαγον αὐτὸν" πρὸς Ανναν πρῶτον" ἦν.γὰρ πενθερὸς 
they led away him to Annas first; for he was father-in-law 
τοῦ Καϊάφα, ὃς ἦν ἀρχιερεὺς τοῦ.ἐνιαυτοῦ.ἐκείνου. 14 ἢν. δὲ 
of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year. And it was 
Καϊάφας ὁ συμβουλεύσας τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις, ὅτι συμφέρει 
Caiaphas who gave counsel to the Jews, that it is profitable 


ἕνα ἄνθρωπον “ἀπολέσθαι" ὑπὲρ τοῦ λαοῦ. 15 ᾿Ηκολούθει. δὲ 
for one man to perish for the people. Now there followed 


τῷ Ἰησοῦ Σίμων Πέτρος καὶ 46" ἄλλος μαθητής. ὁ δὲ μαθητὴς 
Jesus Simon Peter and the other disciple. And disciple 
ἐκεῖνος ἦν γνωστὸς τῷ ἀρχιερεῖ, Kai συνεισῆλθεν τῷ Ιησοῦ 
‘that was known’ tothe high priest, and entered with Jesus 
εἰς THY αὐλὴν τοῦ ἀρχιερέως" 16 ὁ.δὲ Πέτρος εἱστήκει πρὸς 


into the court ofthe high priest, but Peter stood at 
τῇ θύρᾳ ἔξω. ἐξῆλθεν οὖν ὁ μαθητὴς ὁ ἄλλος “ὃς ἦν" 
the door without. Went out therefore the “disciple tother who was 


γνωστὸς frp ἀρχιερεῖ," καὶ εἶπεν τῇ θυρωρῷ Kai εἰσήγα- 


known tothe highpriest, and spoke tothe door-keeper and brought 

4 , , « / « A ~ 

γεν τὸν Πέτρον. 17 λέγει οὖν 8) παιδίσκη ἡ θυρωρὸς τῷ 
in Peter. *Says *therefore'the *maid “the *door-keeper 


Πέτρῳ, Μὴ καὶ σὺ ἐκ τῶν μαθητῶν el τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
to Peter, "not ‘also *thou ‘Sof ‘the ‘disciples ‘art of man 


τούτου; Λέγει ἐκεῖνος, Οὐκ.εἰμί. 18 Εἱστήκεισαν.δὲ ot δοῦλοι 
1this ? 4Says she, I am not. But ‘were ‘standing 'the?bondmen 


κ᾿ « « , ? ‘ , wa , ΄ 
καὶ οἱ ὑπηρέται ἀνθρακιὰν πεποιηκότες, ὅτι Ψψύχος ἦν, 


and *the officers, a fire of coals baying made, for cold it was, 
καὶ ἐθερμαίνοντο" ἦν. δὲ “wer αὐτῶν ὁ Πέτρος" ἑστὼς 
and were warming themselves; and *was *with ‘them *Peter standing 


καὶ θερμαινόμενος. 19 ‘O.oby.apyiepede ἠρώτησεν τὸν Ἰη- 
and warming himself. The high priest therefore questioned Je- 


σοῦν περὶ τῶν.μαθητῶν. αὐτοῦ, καὶ περὶ τῆς διδαχῆς 
5115 concerning his disciples, and concerning "teaching 
> ~ > , i ? ~|I ks Ι 7 - 2 ‘ γε , 
αὐτοῦ. 20 ἀπεκρίθη αὐτῷ" *o' Ιησοῦς, ᾿Εγὼ παρρησις 
this, *Answered *him 1 Jesus, it openly 


299 


9that the saying might 
be fulfilled, which he 
spake, Of them which 
thou gavest me have ἢ 
lost none. 10 Then 
Simon Peter having a 
sword drew it, and 
smote the high priesi’s 
servant, and cut off 
his right ear. The 
servant’s name was 
Malchus. 11 Then said 
Jesus unto Peter, Put 
up thy sword into the 
sheath : the cup which 
my Father hath given 
me, shall I not drink 
it? 


12 Then the bandand 
the captain and offi- 
cers of the Jews took 
Jesus, and bound him, 
13 and led him away 
to Annas first ; for he 
was father in law to 
Caiaphas, which was 
the high priest that 
same year. 14 Now 
Caiaphas was he, which 
gave counsel to the 
Jews, that it was ex- 
pedient that one man 
should die for the peo- 
ple. 15 And Simon 
Peter followed Jesus, 
and so did another dis- 
ciple: that disciple was 
known unto the high 
priest, and went in 
with Jesus into the pa- 
lace of the high priest. 
16 But Peter stood at 
the door without. 
Then went out that 
other disciple, which 
was known unto the 
high priest, and spake 
unto her that kept the 
door, and brought in 
Peter. 17 Then saith 
the damsel that kept 
the door unto Peter, 
Art not thou also one 
of this man’s dGisci- 
ples? Hesaith, I am 
not. 18 And the ser- 
vants and officers stood 
there, who had made 
a fire of coals; for it 
was cold: and they 
warmed themselves: 
and Peter stood with 
them, and warmed 
himself. 19 The high 
priest then asked Je- 
sus of his disciples, and 
of his doctrine. 20 Je- 
sus answered him, I 
spake openly to the 


- ὠτάριον ΤΊτΑ. 5 — gov (read thesword) GLitraw. 
L; ἤγαγον Tir; [ἀπ]ήγαγον αὑτὸν A. © ἀποθανεῖν to die LTtra. 
Lt[tra ]. eo Tira. f τοῦ ἀρχιερέως Of the high priest Tira. 

ἢ θυρωρός LTTrA, 5 και (also) ὁ Πέτρος μετ᾽ αὐτῶν LTTrA. 


4 


Ὁ ἤγαγον [αὐτὸν] they led him 

4d — 6 (read another) 
: 8 τῷ Πέτρῳ ἡ παιδίσκη 
i [αὐτῷ [1 


k—o qr, 


900 


world; I ever taught l 


in the synagogue, and 
in the temple, whither 
the Jews always re- 
sort; and in secret 
have I said nothing. 
21 Why askest thou 
me? ask them which 
heard me, what I have 
said unto them: be- 
hold, they know what 
I said. 22 And when 
be had thus spoken, 
one of the officers 
which stood by struck 
Jesus with the palm of 
his hand, saying, An- 
swerest thou the high 
priest so? 23 Jesusan- 
swered him, If 1 have 
spoken evil, bear wit- 
ness of the evil: butif 
well, why smitest thou 
me? 24 Now as 
had sent him bound 
unto Caiaphas the high 
priest. 


25 And Simon Peter 
stood and warmed 
himself. They said 
therefore unto him, 
Art not thou also one 
of his disciples? He 
denied it, and said, 
I am not. 26 One 
of the servants of the 
high priest, being his 
kinsman whose ear 
Peter cut off, saith, 
Did not I see thee in 
the garden with him ? 
27 Peter then denied 
again: and immedi- 
ately the cock crew. 


28 Then led they Je- 
sus from Caiaphas unto 
the hall of judgment : 
and it was early ; and 
they themselves went 
not into the judgment 
hall, lest they should 
be defiled: but that 
they might eat the 
passover. 29 Pilate 
then went out unto 
them, and said, What 
accusation bring ye 
against this man? 
30 They answered and 
said unto him, If he 
were nota malefactor, 
we would not have de- 
livered him up unto 
thee. 31 Then said 
Pilate unto them, Take 
ye him, and judge him 
according to your law. 
The Jews therefore 
said unto him, It isnot 


I QD AGNEN) HES: XVIII. 
ἐλάλησα' τῷ κόσμῳ᾽ ἐγὼ πάντοτε ἐδίδαξα ἐν “τῇ συνα- 
spoke to the world; I always taught in the syna- 
γωγῇ καὶ ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ, ὕπου "πάντοτε" οἱ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι συνέρχον- 
gogue and in the temple, where always the Jews come to- 
ται, καὶ ἐν κρυπτῷ ἐλάλησα οὐδέν. 21 τί pe “ἐπερωτᾷς ; 
gether, and in secret Ispoke nothing. Why me dost thou question? 
ἐπερώτησον᾽ τοὺς ἀκηκοότας τί ἐλάλησα αὐτοῖς" ἴδε οὗτοι 
question those who hayeheard what Ispoke tothem; lo, they 
οἴδασιν ἃ εἶπον ἐγώ. 22 Ταῦτα.δὲ αὐτοῦ.εἰπόντος εἷς τῶν 


know what “said (I. But *these*things ‘on *his*saying one of the 
ὑπηρετῶν παρεστηκὼς" ἔδωκεν ῥάπισμα τῷ 


officers standing by gave a blow with the palm of the hand 
᾿Ιησοῦ, εἰπών, Οὕτως ἀποκρίνῃ τῷ ἀρχιερεῖ; 23 ᾿Απεκρίθη 
toJesus, saying, Thus answerest thou the high priest? “Answered 
αὐτῷ 46" Incovc, Ei κακῶς ἐλάλησα, μαρτύρησον περὶ τοῦ 
shim 1 Jesus, If evil I spoke, bear witness concerning the 
ae ? ν᾿ ~ , wa κ ? ΄ r > 4 
κακοῦ" €.0& καλῶς, TL pe OEgpeic; 24 ᾿Απέστειλεν ᾿ αὐτὸν 
evil; butif well, why me strikest thou? *Sent Shim 
oe , ‘ os SY ? “2 
ὁ Avvac δεδεμένον πρὸς Καϊάφαν τὸν ἀρχιερέα. 
Annas bound to Caiaphas the high priest. 
25 Ἢν. δὲ Σίμων Πέτρος ἑστὼς καὶ θερμαινόμενος" 
Now *was ‘Simon ?Peter standing and warming himself, 
εἶπον οὖν αὐτῷ, Μὴ καὶ σὺ ἐκ τῶν.μαθητῶν.αὐτοῦ 
They said therefore tohim, *Not ‘also *thou *of Shis “disciples 
el; ἬἩρνήσατο.ἐκεῖνος, καὶ εἶπεν, Οὐκ εἰμί. 26 Λέγει εἷς 
tart? He denied, and said, 1 am not. Says one 


ἐκ τῶν δούλων τοῦ ἀρχιερέως, συγγενὴς ὧν οὗ 


of the bondmen ofthe high priest, kinsman being [of him] of whom 
ἀπέκοψεν Ilétpocg τὸ ὠτίον, Οὐκ.ἐγώ σε εἶδον ἐν τῷ κήπῳ 
Ζραῦ 5015 Peter the ear, 7IT%not ‘thee ‘saw in the garden 


per αὐτοῦ; 27 Πάλιν οὖν ἠρνήσατο "δ' Πέτρος, καὶ εὐθέως 


with him? Again therefore *denied ‘Peter, andimmediately 
ἀλέκτωρ ἐφώνησεν. 
a cock crew. 


τὸν Ἰησοῦν ἀπὸ τοῦ Καϊάφα εἰς τὸ 
Jesus from Caiaphas into the 
= atv t a. 41} 4 ᾽ 8 ? > HAO > A 
TV -0€ TP Wa και QUTOL OUK.ELONAUVOY ELC TO 
preetorium, andit was. early. And they entered not into the 
πραιτώριον, iva μὴ-μιανθῶσιν, "ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα' φάγωσιν τὸ 
pretorium, that they might ποῦ be defiled, but that they might eat the 
πάσχα. 29 ἐξῆλθεν οὖν ὁ *Taroc'* πρὸς αὐτούς, καὶ 
passover. sWent *forth “therefore *Pilate to them, and 
Yeizev," Τίνα κατηγορίαν φέρετε κατὰ" τοῦ.ἀνθρώὠπου.τούτου; 
said, What accusation bring ye against this man? 
30 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν καὶ *elzrov' αὐτῷ, Ei μὴ. ἦν οὗτος 
They answered and said tohim, If *were*not ‘he 
ποιός," οὐκ ἄν σοι παρεδώκαμεν αὐτόν. 81 Εἶπεν 
doer, *not *to thee ‘we 2would have delivered up him, *Said 
copy! αὐτοῖς 46" υΠιλάτος,. Λάβετε αὐτὸν ὑμεῖς, και 
*therefore *to *them Pilate, Take him ye, and 
κατὰ τὸν-νόμον.ὑμῶν κρίνατε “αὐτόν." Εἶπον 
according to your law judge him. “Said 


28 “Ayovow οὖν 
They lead therefore 


πραιτώριον" 


ὑκακο- 


an evil 


fopy!! 


*therefore 


1 λελάληκα have spoken LTTraw. 
ο ἐρωτᾷς ; ἐρώτησον (ἑπερ. W) LTTrAW. 

r + οὖν therefore ELT[trJa. 
x + ἔξω out LTTrA. 


all GLTTraAW. 
9 — ὃ LTTrA. 
© Πειλᾶτος Ὑ. 


h 


) κακὸν ποιῶν TTrA. 


m — τῇ (read a) GLTTrAW. π πάντοθεν E ; πάντες 
P παρεστηκὼς τῶν ὑπηρετῶν LITrA. 
τ πρωΐ GLITrAW. Y ἀλλὰ LTTrA. 

:..-- κατὰ T. ἃ εἶπαν LTTrA. 
f — οὗν LTra. 


8 — 6 LTTrAW. 
Υ φησίν says ΤΊΤΑ. 


ς [οὖν] L. 4 — ὃ Tra. ε-- αὐτόν 1. 


ΧΜΗΙΪ, XIX. 


> ~ «>? ~ « ~ > 
αὐτῷ οἱ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι, Ἡμῖν οὐκ 
5ῖο δμῃῖτα 86 Jews, To us 


JOHN. 


ἔξεστι,» ἀποκτεῖναι οὐδένα" 
it is permitted to put “to *death ‘noone ; 
32 iva ὁ λόγος τοῦ Ἰησοῦ πληρωθῇ ὃν εἶπεν σημαίνων 

that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled which hespoke signifying 
ποίῳ θανάτῳ ἤμελλεν ἀποθνήσκειν. 33 Εἰσῆλθεν οὖν 


by what death he was about to die. Entered “therefore 
δεὶς τὸ πραιτώριον πάλιν" ὁ ἘΠιλάτος," καὶ ἐφώνησεν τὸν 
*into *the retorium 7again pe Hates and called 
᾿Ιησοῦν, καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Σὺ εἶ ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν Ιουδαίων ; 
Jesus, and said tohim,*Thou ‘art the king of the Jews? 
34 ᾿Απεκρίθη ἰαὐτῷ ὁ" Ἰησοῦς, “Ad ἑαυτοῦ" σὺ τοῦτο 
2 Answered Shim Jesus, From thyself *thou 3.815 
λέγεις, ἢ ἄλλοι ἴσοι εἶπον" περὶ ἐμοῦ ; 35 ᾿Απεκρίθη 
tsayest, tor Sothers 7to *thee °did say [it] conceening: me? 2 Answered 
ὁ *TIiaroc," Myre ἐχὼ ἸΙουδαῖός εἰμι; τὸ ἔθνος τὸ σὸν καὶ 
Pilate, 5a SJew Sam ? SNation "thy and 


οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς ones σε ἐμοί: τί ἐποίησας : 36 ᾿Απεκρίθη 
μεν ones priests delivered up thee tome: what didst thou? ? Answered 


"Ἰησοῦς, Ἡ βασιλεία ἡ ἐμὴ οὐκ.ἔστιν ἐκ τοῦ. κόσμου.τούτου" 
1Jesus, 


Pngdam omy, is not of this world ; 
εἰ EK τοῦ.κόσμου.τούτου ἦν ἡ βασιλεία ἡ ἐμή, οἱ ὑπηρέται "ay 
if of this world were kingdom lmy, “attendants 


tae ‘ > / Π “ 
οἱ ἐμοὶ ἠγωνίζοντο" ἵνα 


μὴ-παραδοθῶ τοῖς ᾿Τουδαίοις" 
ay would fight 


that I might not be delivered up to the Jews ; 
νῦν. δὲ ἡ βασιλεία ἡ ἐμὴ obK-éorw ἐντεῦθεν. 37 Εἶπεν οὖν 


butnow ?kingdom lmy is not from hence. 3Said *therefore 
αὐτῷ ὁ "Πιλάτος," Οὐκοῦν βασιλεὺς εἶ σύ; ᾿Απεκρίθη “ὁ! 
*to *him 1Pilate, Then amis art rs 7Answered 
? ~ ‘ λέ x ΡΖ ll 42 ι iH ? ~ 
Ιησοῦς, Σὺ λέγεις, ὅτι βασιλεύς εἰμι ἐγώ: ἐγὼ" εἰς τοῦτο 
‘Jesus, Thou pve’ [it], for a king 2am I for this 
yeyévynpar, Kai εἰς τοῦτο ἐλήλυθα εἰς τὸν κόσμον, ἵνα 
have been born, and for this Ihave come into the world, that 
μαρτυρήσω ἀληθείᾳ. πᾶς b.ov ἐκ τῆς ἀληθείας 
Ἰξπισαν bear witness to the truth. versione thatis of the truth 


ἀκούει μου τῆς φωνῆς. 98 Λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ "Πιλάτος," Τί ἐστιν 
hears my voice. oars 3to him 1Pilate, What is 

ἀλήθεια; Kai τοῦτο εἰπών, πάλιν ἐξῆλθεν πρὸς τοὺς 
truth ? And this having said, again hewentout to the 


᾽ ΄, \ , ᾽ ~ ? ‘ ᾽ , ) ee Cre, >? 
Ιουδαίους, καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, ᾿Εγὼ οὐδεμίαν ‘airiay εὑρίσκω ἐν 
Jews, and says tothem, I not any fault find in 


αὐτῷ." 39 ἔστιν.δὲ συνήθεια ὑμῖν ἵνα ἕνα ὑμῖν ἀπολύσω" 
him. Butitis acustom with youthat one to you Ishould release 


ἐν τῷ πάσχα᾽ βούλεσθε οὖν ὑμῖν ἀπολύσω" τὸν βασιλέα 
at the passover ; willye therefore to youl should release the king 

τῶν “lovdaiwy; 40 ᾿Εκραύγασαν οὖν πάλιν “rartec," λέ- 
of the Jews? They “cried *out *therefore *again lall, say- 
yovrec, Μὴ τοῦτον, ἀλλὰ τὸν Βαραββᾶν: ἦν.δὲ ὁ Ba ee 
ing, Not this one, but Barabbas. Now 7was arab- 


Bac Anornc. 19 Τότε οὖν ἔλαβεν ὁ "Πιλάτος" τὸν Ἰησοῦν 
bas a robber. Then therefore took 1Pilate Jesus 


Kai ἐμαστίγωσεν. 2) καὶ οἱ στρατιῶται πλέξαντες στέφανον 
and scourged [him]. And the soldiers having platted acrown 


301 


lawful for us to put 
any man to death: 
32 that the saying of 
Jesus might ful- 
filled, which he Spake! 
signifying what death 
he should die. 33 Then 
Pilate entered into the 
judgment hall again, 
and called Jesus, and 
said unto him, Art 
thou the King of the 
Jews? 34 Jesus an- 
swered him, Sayest 
thou this thing of thy- 
self, or did others tell 
it thee of me? 35 Pi- 
late answered, Am I a 
Jew? Thine own na- 
tion and the chief 
priests have delivered 
thee unto me: what 
hast thou done? 36 Je- 
sus answered, My 
kingdom is not of this 
world: if my kingdom 
were of this world, 
then would my ser- 
vants fight, that I 
should notbe delivered 
to the Jews: but now 
is my kingdom not 
from hence. 37 Pilate 
therefore said unto 
him, Art thou a king 
then ? Jesus answered, 
Thou sayest that Iam 
a king. To this end 
was I born, and for 
this cause came I into 
the world,that Ishould 
bear witness unto the 
truth. Every onethat 
is of the truth heareth 
my voice. 38 Pilate 
saith unto him, What 
is truth? And when 
he had said this, he 
went out again unto 
the Jews, and saith 
unto them, I find in 
him no fault at ail. 
39 But ye have a cus- 
tom, that I should re- 
lease unto you one at 
the passover: will ye 
therefore that I re- 
lease unto you the 
King of the Jews? 
40 Then cried they all 
again, saying, Not this 
man, but Barabbas. 
Now Barabbas was a 
robber. XIX. Then 
Pilate therefore took 
Jesus, and scourged 
him. 2 And the sol- 
diers platted a crown 


8 πάλιν εἰς τὸ πραιτώριον LTrAW. h Πειλᾶτος T. 
Κ ἀπὸ σεαυτοῦ LTrA. | εἶπόν σοι Tra. - ὃ ese ΝΣ 
° — 9 [a]w. Ρ — ἐγώ (read εἰμι 1 am) ττία. 4 [ἐγὼ 7 L. 
LTTrA. 8 ἀπολύσω ὑμῖν LTTr. t ἀπολύσω ὑμῖν LTTrw. 


i—_ αὐτῷ ὃ LTTrA ; 5 αὐτῷ We 
2 οἱ ἐμοὶ ἠγωνίζοντο ἂν Tr. 
τ εὑρίσκω ἐν αὐτῷ αἰτίαν 

π — πάντες 1. 


- 


902 


of thorns, and put tt 
on his head, and they 
put on him a purple 
robe, 3 and said, Hail, 
King of the Jews ! and 
they smote him with 
their hands. 4 Pilate 
therefore went forth 
again, and saith unto 
them, Behold, I bring 
him forth to you, that 
ye may know that I 
find no fault in hin. 
5 Then came Jesus 
forth, wearing the 
crown of thorns, and 


the purple robe. And 
Pilate saith unto 
them, Behold the 


man! 6 When the chief 
priests therefore and 
officers saw him, they 
cried out, saying, Cru- 
cify him, crucify him. 
Pilate saith unto 
them, Take ye him, 
and crucify him. ΤΟΥῚ 
find no fault in him. 
7 The Jews answered 
him, We have a law, 
and -by our law he 
ought to die, because 
he made himself the 
Son of God. 8 When 
Pilate therefore heard 
that saying, he was 
the more afraid; 9and 
went again into the 
judgment hall, and 
saith unto Jesus, 
Whence artthou? But 
Jesus gave him no an- 
swer. 10 Then saith 
Pilate unto him, 
Speakest thou not un- 
to me? knowest thou 
not that I have power 
to crucify thee, and 
have power to release 
thee? 11 Jesus an- 
swered, Thou couldest 
have no power at all 
against me, except it 
were given thee from 
above: therefore he 
that delivered me un- 
to thee hath the great- 
er sin. 12 And from 
thenceforth Pilate 
sought'to release him : 
but the Jews cried out, 
saying, If thou let 
this man go, thou art 


IQANNH®S. XIX. 


ἐξ ἀκανθῶν ἐπέθηκαν αὐτοῦ τῇ κεφαλῇ, Kai ἱμάτιον πορ- 
of thorns put [it] on his head, and a cloak 1pur- 


φυροῦν περιέβαλον αὐτόν, 3% Kai ἔλεγον, Χαῖρε, ὁ βασιλεὺς 


ple cast around him, and said, Hail, king 
τῶν “lovdaiwy’ Kai ἐδίδουν" αὐτῷ ῥαπίσματα. 
of the Jews ! and they gave him blows with the palm of the hand. 


4 χ᾽ Ἐξῆλθεν Yotv' πάλιν *eEw ὁ Πιλάτος," καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς; 


*Went “therefore “again ‘out 1Pilate, and says to them, 
Ἴδε, ἄγω ὑμῖν αὐτὸν ἔξω, ἵνα γνῶτε ore δὲν αὐτῷ 
Behold, I bring *to*you “him out, that yemay knowthat in him 


οὐδεμίαν αἰτίαν εὑρίσκω." 5 Ἐξῆλθεν οὖν 0' Ἰησοῦς ἔξω, 
not any fault I find. Went therefore Jesus out, 
φορῶν τὸν ἀκάνθινον στέφανον Kai TO πορφυροῦν ἱμάτιον. 
wearing the thorny crown and the purple cloak ; 
καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς. “Ἴδε! ὁ ἄνθρωπος. 6 Ὅτε οὖν Δεῖδον! 
and he eaye to them, Behold the man ! When therefore saw 


αὐτὸν οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς Kai οἱ ὑπηρέται ἐκραύγασαν “λέγοντες, 2 
him the chief priests and the officers they cried out saying, 


Σταύρωσον, σταύρωσον. Λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ ἐΠιλάτος.," Λάβετε 
Says “to *them 'Pilate, Take 


Θ του ἐν; crucify thinel 
αὐτὸν ὑμεῖς καὶ σταυρώσατε" ἐγὼ. γὰρ οὐχ. εὑρίσκω ἐν αὐτῷ 
for I find not in him 


him ye and crucify [him], 


αἰτίαν. 7 ᾿Απεκρίθησαν Βαὐτῷ" οἱ ‘lovdaior, Ἣ μεῖς νόμον 
a fault. SAnswered *him ‘the Jews, We a law 
ἔχομεν, καὶ κατὰ τὸν.νόμον ἰἡμῶν" ὀφείλει ἀποθανεῖν, 
have, and according to our law he ought to die, 
ὅτι kéavrov υἱὸν θεοῦ" ἐποίησεν. ὃ Ὅτε οὖν ἤκουσεν 
because himself Son of God he made. When therefore *heard 
ὁ δπιλάτος" τοῦτον τὸν λόγον μᾶλλον ἐφοβήθη, 9 Kat 
‘Pilate this word [the] more he was afraid, and 


εἰσῆλθεν εἰς TO πραιτώριον πάλιν, Kai λέγει τῷ Ἰησοῦ, Πόθεν 
went into the przetorium again, and says to Jesus, Whence 


el σύ; ὋὉ δὲ. Ἰησοῦς ἀπόκρισιν οὐκιἔδωκεν αὐτῷ. 10 λέγει 
art thou ? But Jesus an answer did not give him, 3Says 
lody' αὐτῷ ὁ ΕΠιλάτος," ᾿Εμοὶ οὐ.λαλεῖς ; οὐκ.οἶδας 
“therefore *to “him Pilate, To me pecan thou not ? Knowest not thou 
ὅτι ἐξουσίαν ἔχω “oTavpWoai σε, Kai ἐξουσίαν ἔχω ἀπο- 
that authority Ihave to crucify thee, and authority Ihave tore- 
λῦσαί σε"; 11 ᾿Απεκρίθη" οὁ" Ἰησοῦς, Οὐκ Ρεΐχες" ἐξουσίαν 
lease thee? = Answered 1Jesus, Thou hadst “authority 
“ρὐδεμίαν κατ᾽ ἐμοῦ" εἰ μὴ.ἦν ἴσοι δεδομένον" ἄνωθεν" 
Ἰηοῦ any against me _ if it were not to thee given from above. 


διὰτοῦτο ὁ "παραδιδούς" μὲ σοι μείζονα ya, 
On this account he who delivers up me tothee' greater 


ἔχει. 12 “Ex τούτου ᾿ἐζήτει ὁ Πιλάτος" ἀπολῦσαι αὐτόν. 
has. From this sought Pilate to release him ; 


t oD ~ va” {i > 
ot.dé ᾿Ιουδαῖοι “*éxpaZor, λέγοντες, Ἐὰν τοῦτον ἀπο- 
but the Jews cried gut, saying, If this [man] thoure- 


Υ - Kal ἤρχοντο πρὸς αὐτὸν and came to him Lrtra. 
Mi οὖν GLITra. 
αὐτῷ LTr ; ᾿ αἰτίαν ἐν αὐτῷ οὐδεμίαν εὑρίσκω A; αἰτίαν οὐχ εὑρίσκω Ί. 


and LTra. 


Tora. ἃ ἴδον T. 


i — ἡμῶν (read the law) LTTrA. 


— οὖν TA]. 
[u}r[a}. 


δομένον σοι LTTrAs 


τὰ ἀπολῦσαί σεν καὶ ἐξουσίαν ἔχω σταυρῶσαί σε LTTrA. 
ο — ὃ GLTTrAW. 


w ἐδίδοσαν LITrA. x + καὶ 
ἃ οὐδεμιαν αἰτίαν εὑρίσκω ἐν 

Ὁ [ὃ Tr. © Ἰδοὺ 
f ates αὐτόν him GLw. g Πειλᾶτος τ. h — αὐτῷ τ. 
Κ ἑαυτὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ E; υἱὸν θεοῦ ἑαυτὸν LTTrA. 
» + αὐτῷ him 
4 κατ᾽ ἐμοῦ οὐδεμίαν LTTrAW. τ de- 

τ ὃ Πιλάτος (Πειλᾶτος 1) ἐζήτει LYTrA- 


1 ὃ Πειλᾶτος ἔξω 7. 
ε — λέγοντες T. 


ἔχεις thou hast 1. 


s ΞΣΤΕΙΣ delivered up LT. 


γᾷ éxpavyacov LT}; ἐκραύγασαν Tr, 
pavy , ραν 


~ 


EX JOHN. 
λύσῃς οὐκιεῖ φίλος τοῦ Καίσαρος. πᾶς, ὁ βασιλέα 
lease thou art not a friend of Ceesar. Everyone *the *king 


ταὐτὸν" ποιῶν ἀντιλέγει τῷ Καίσαρι. 18 ‘O.obv*TAdroc' 
*imself tmaking speaks against Ceesar. Pilate therefore 


ἀκούσας τοῦτον τὸν λόγον," ἤγαγεν ἔξω τὸν Ἰησοῦν, καὶ 


having heard this word, led out Jesus, and 
ἐκάθισεν ἐπὶ *rov" βήματος, εἰς τόπον λεγόμενον Λιθό- 
Βαὺ down upon the judgment-seat, at ἃ place called Pave- 
στρωτον, Ἑβραϊστὶ. δὲ Ταββαθᾶ᾽ 14 ive παρασκευὴ 


Gabbatha : (and it was [the] preparation 
8Gé ὡσεὶ" ἕκτη καὶ λέγει τοῖς ‘lov- 
?and about the sixth;) and hesays tothe Jews, 


ment, but in Hebrew 


τοῦ πάσχα,. ὥρα 
of the passover, [*the] *hour 


δαίοις, Ἴδε ὁ. βασιλεὺς. ὑμῶν. 15 01-6: txpatyacay,'”Aooy 

Behold your king ! But they cried out, Away, 
ἄρον, σταύρωσον αὐτόν. Λέγει αὐτοῖς ὁ “Πιλάτος," Τὸν 
away, crucify him, 2Says ὅἴο *them Pilate, 


βασιλέα.-ὑμῶν σταυρώσω; ᾿Απεκρίθησαν ot ἀρχιερεῖς, Οὐκ 
Your king shall I crucify ? *Answered ‘the ?chief *priests, 7Not 


ἔχομεν βασιλέα εἰμὴ Καίσαρα. 16 Τότε οὖν παρέδωκεν 
Swe*have aking except Cesar. Then therefore he delivered up 


> 4 > ~ e ~ ἐλ οδὲ" + ? 
αὑτὸν αὑτοῖς wa σταυρωθῇ. Blah aBov “δὲ" τὸν ’In- 

him tothem that he might becrucified. *They *took land Je- 
σοῦν “καὶ ἀπήγαγον"" 17 καὶ βαστάζων “τὸν. σταυρὸν αὐτοῦ" 
sus and led [him] away. And bearing his cross 
2 ~ > 5 ON , , , fs ΠῚ λέ 
ἐξῆλθεν εἰς τὸν λεγόμενον κρανίου τόπον, foc! λέγεται 
he went out to the 2called Sof a ®skull ‘place, which is called 
‘EBpaiori Γολγοθᾶ. 18 ὕπου αὐτὸν ἐσταύρωσαν. καὶ μετ᾽ 


d 


in Hebrew Golgotha: where him they crucified, and with 
> “ » 4 ? ~ ‘ 3 ~ , ‘ 

αὐτοῦ ἄλλους δύο ἐντεῦθεν Kai ἐντεῦθεν, ἐσον.δὲ 

him others ‘two onthisside and on that side [one], and in the middle 


τὸν Ἰησοῦν. 19 "Εγραψεν.δὲ καὶ τίτλον ὁ “Πιλάτος! καὶ 
Jesus. And *wrote Zalso *a ‘title Pilate and 
ἔθηκεν ἐπὶ τοῦ σταυροῦ  ἦὄν.δὲ γεγραμμένον, ᾿Ιησοῦς ὁ 
put on the cross. And it was written, Jesus the 
Ναζωραῖος, ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων. 20 Τοῦτον οὖν 
Nazarzan, the king of the Jews. This *therefore 
τὸν τίτλον πολλοὶ ἀνέγνωσαν τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, Ort ἐγγὺς ἦν 
‘title ‘*many "read of the Jews, for near “*was 
Eric πόλεως ὁ τόπος," ὕπου ἐσταυρώθη ὁ Ἰησοῦς" Kai ἦν 
‘the city the place, where was crucified Jesus ; and it was 
γεγραμμένον Ἑ βραϊστί, "Ἑλληνιστί, Ρωμαϊστί." 21 ἔλεγον 
written in Hebrew, in Greek, in Latin. 7Said 
οὗ» τῷ Πιλάτῳ" ot ἀρχιερεῖς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, Μὴ.γράφε, 
‘therefore °to}°Pilate ‘the 2chief*priests‘*of*the ‘Jews, Write not, 
Ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων᾽ ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι ἐκεῖνος εἶπεν, Βασιλεύς 


The king of the Jews, but that he said, King 
Κείμι τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων." 22 ᾿Απεκρίθη ὁ "Πιλάτος," “O ἐ- 
Iam of the Jews. 2 Answered Pilate, What I have 


23 Οἱ οὖν στρατιῶται, OTE ἐσταύρωσαν 

The *therefore ‘soldiers, when they crucified 

τὸν Ἰησοῦν ἔλαβον τὰ ἱμάτια.αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐποίησαν ἱτέσσαρα' 
Jesus took kis garments, and made four 


yeapa γέγραφα. 


written I have written. 


303 


not Cwesar’s friend : 
whosoever maketk 
himself a king speak- 
eth against Czsar. 
13 When Pilate there- 
fore heard that saying, 
he brought Jesus 
forth, and sat down in 
the judgment seat in 
a place that is called 
the Pavement, but in 
the Hebrew, Gabbatha, 
14 And it was the pre- 
paration of the pass- 
over, and about the 
sixth hour: and he 
saith unto the Jews, 
Behold your King | 
15 But they cried out, 
Away with him, away 
with him, crucify him. 
Pilatesaithunto them, 
Shall I crucify your 
King? The chief 
priests answered, We 
have no king but (:- 
sar. 16 Then delivered 
he him therefore unto 
them to be crucified. 
And they took Jesus, 
and led him away. 
17 And he bearing his 
cross went forth into 
a place called the place 
of a skull, which is 
called in the Hebrew 
Golgotha: 18 where 
they crucified him, 
and two other with 
him,on either side one, 
and Jesus in the midst. 
19 And Pilate wrote a 
title, and put 7ton the 
cross. And the writing 
was, JESUS OF NA- 
ZARETH,THE KING 
OF THE JEWS. 
20 This title then read 
many of the Jews: for 
the place where Jesus 
was crucified was nigh 
to the city: and it was 
written in Hebrew, 
and Greek, and Latin. 
21 Then said the chief 
priests of the Jews to 
Pilate, Write not, The 
King of the Jews; but 
that he said, I am 
King of the Jews. 
22 Pilate answered, 
What I have written 
LThave written. 23Then 
the soldiers,when they 
had crucified Jesus, 
took his garments, 
and made four parts, to 


ν ἑαυτὸν GLTTrAW. * Πειλᾶτος T. 
(read a judgment seat) LTTraw. 
they therefore cried out TTra. © ody therefore LTTra. 
LTTrA. © αὐτῷ (ἑαυτῷ T) τὸν σταυρὸν LTTYA. ὃ LTTrA. 
ὃ Ῥωμαϊστί, Ἑλληνιστί TTrA. 1 Πειλάτῳ Τ. 


a ἣν ὡς Was about LTTrAW. 


Υ τῶν λόγων τούτων these words LTTrAW. 
Ὁ ἐκραύγασαν οὖν ἐκεῖνοι 
d καὶ ἤγαγον α; — καὶ ἀπήγαγον 
ξ 0 τόπος τῆς πόλεως GLTTrAW. 
k ΄“ > ὃ ΄ ? ΄ 
τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων εἰμί Tra. 


2 — τοῦ 


! τέσσερα TTrA 


904 


every soldier a part; 
and also his coat: now 
the coat was without 
seam, woven from 
the top throughout. 
24 They said therefore 
among themselves, Let 
us not rend it,but cast 


lots for it, whose it 
shali be: that the 
scripture might be 


fulfilled, which saith, 
They parted my rai- 
ment among them,and 
for my vesture they 
did cast lots. These 
things therefore the 
soldiers did. 


25 Now there stood 
by the cross of Jesus 
his mother, and _ his 
mother’s sister, Mary 
the wife of Cleophas, 
and Mary Magdalene, 
26 When Jesus there- 
fore saw his mother, 
and the disciple stand- 
ing by, whom he loy- 
ed, he saith unto his 
mother, Woman, be- 
hold thy son ! 27 Then 
saith heto the disciple, 
Behold thy mother ! 
And from that hour 
that disciple took her 
unto his own : 
28 After this, Jesus 
knowing that all 
things were now ac- 
complished, that the 
scripture might be ful- 
filled, saith, I thirst. 
29 Now there was set & 
vessel full of vinegar : 


and they filled a In 


spunge with vinegar, 
and put it upon hys- 
sop, and put τέ to his 
mouth. 30 When Je- 
sus therefore had re- 
ceived the vinegar, he 
said, It is finished:and 
he bowed his head, and 
gave up the ghost. 
31 The Jews therefore, 
because it was the pre- 
paration, that the bo- 
dies should not remain 
upon the cross on the 
sabbath day, (for that 
sabbath day was an 
high day,) besought 
Pilate that their legs 
might be broken, and 
that they might be ta- 
ken away. 32 Then 
came the soldiers, and 
brake the legs of the 
first, and of the other 
which was crucified 
with him. 33 But 
when they came to Je- 


™ ἄραφος TTrA. 
[his]) [u)rrr[a]. 


¥ — οὖν LTTrAW. 


therefore full of the vinegar, *hyssop LTTra. 
σκευὴ ἦν placed after ᾿Ιουδαῖοι Tra. 


IQANNHS. XIX. 


μέρη. ἑκάστῳ στρατιώτῃ μέρος, Kai τὸν χιτῶνα. ἦν. δὲ ὁ 
parts, toeach soldier apart, and the tunic; but “was ‘the 


χιτὼν “appagoc,' ἐκ τῶν ἄνωθεν ὑφαντὸς δι ὅλου. 24 "εῖ- 


*tunic seamless, from the top woven throughout, They 
πον οὖν πρὸς ἀλλήλους, Μὴ.σχίσωμεν αὐτόν, ἀλλὰ 
said therefore to one another, Let us not rend it, but 

λάχωμεν περὶ αὐτοῦ τίνος ἔσται. ἵνα ἡ γραφὴ πλη- 


let us cast lots for it whose it shall be; that the scripture might be 
ρωθῇ σὴ λέγουσα," Διεμερίσαντο τὰ ἱμάτιά.μοι ἑαυτοῖς, 
fulfilled which says, They divided my garments among them, 
καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν.ἱματισμόν.μου ἔβαλον κλῆρον. Οἱ μὲν οὖν 
and for my vesture they cast a lot. The *therefore 


στρατιῶται ταῦτα ἐποίησαν. 
soldiers these things did, 


25 Ἑἱστήκεισαν.δὲ παρὰ τῷ σταυρῷ τοῦ Ἰησοῦ ἡ.μητηρ.αὐ- 
And stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, 
TOU, Kai ἡ ἀδελφὴ τῆς.μητρὸς. αὐτοῦ, PMapia'! ἡ τοῦ 
and the _ sister of his mother, Mary the [wife] 
Κλωπᾶ, καὶ PMapia' ἡ Μαγδαληνή. 26 ᾿Ιησοῦς οὖν ἰδὼν 
of Clopas, and Mary the Magdalene. Jesus therefore seeing 
THY μητέρα, Kai τὸν μαθητὴν παρεστῶτα ὃν ἠγάπα, λέγει 
{his} mother, and the disciple standing by whom he loved, says 
τῇ. μητρὶ. αὐτοῦ," Tivat, "ἰδοὺ" ὁ.υἱός. σου. 27 Eira λέγει τῷ 
to his mother, Woman, behold thy son. Then he says to the 
μαθητῇ, *1d0d' ἡ-μήτηρισου. Kai am ἐκείνης τῆς ὥρας 


disciple, Behold thy mother, And from _ that our 

ἔλαβεν "αὐτὴν ὁ μαθητὴς" εἰς τὰ ἴδια. 28 Μετὰ τοῦτο 
3took *her ‘the disciple to his own [home]. After this, 
ἰδ ‘ ©? ~ ¢ t ΄ no " ἐλ .“ Xr θ ~ 
ELOWC O Inoove OTL TAVTAYONHN TETEAEOTAL, LVA TEAELW Ώ 


“knowing ‘Jesus that all things now have been finished, that might be fulfilled 
ἡ γραφὴ λέγει, Διψῶ. 29 Σκεῦος οὖν" ἔκειτο ὄξους 

the scripture he says, I thirst. A vessel therefore was set 7of *vinegar 
coroy' “οἱ δὲ πλήσαντες σπόγγον ὄξους, Kai ὑσσώπῳ" 


full, and they having filled asponge with vinegar, and Shyssop 
περιθέντες προσήνεγκαν αὐτοῦ τῷ.στόματιι 80 ὅτε 
‘having “put [510] οπ. they brought it to [his] mouth. When 


οὖν ἔλαβεν τὸ ὄξος “ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς" εἶπεν, Τετέλεσται: καὶ 
therefore ?took “the *vinegar tJesus hesaid, It has been finished; and 
κλίνας τὴν κεφαλὴν παρέδωκεν τὸ πνεῦμα. 31 Οἱ 
having bowed the head he yielded up [his] spirit. The 
οὖν Ἰουδαῖοι, Υ ἵνα = pypeivy ἐπὶ τοῦ σταυροῦ τὰ 
“therefore 1 Jews, that might notremain on the cross the 
σώματα ἐν τῷ σαββάτῳ, γἐπεὶ παρασκευὴ ἦν," ἦν.γὰ 
bodies on the sabbath, because[the] preparation it was, (for *was 
, « « , 22 ΄, i ~ 4 ? , ‘ a 
μεγάλη ἡ ἡμέρα *eKELYOU TOU σαββάτου, ἠρώτησαν τὸν ὅΠι- 
Sgreat Sday that ?sabbath,) requested Pi- 


λάτον" ἵνα κατεαγῶσιν αὐτῶν τὰ σκέλη, Kai ἀρθῶσιν. 
late that *might *be *broken ‘their legs, and taken away. 


32 ἦλθον οὖν οἱ στρατιῶται, Kai τοῦ μὲν πρώτου κατέαξαν 
Came therefore the soldiers, and ofthe first broke 
τὰ σκέλη καὶ τοῦ ἄλλου τοῦ ὑσυσταυρωθέντος" αὐτῷ᾽ 33 ἐπὶ.δὲ 
the legs and ofthe other who wascrucified with him; but to 


4 εἶπαν T. ° — ἡ λέγουσα LT. Ρ Μαριὰμ τ. ᾳ -- αὐτοῦ (read 
τ ἴδε GLTTrA. ® 6 μαθητὴς αὐτὴν GTrAW. τ ἤδη πάντα LTTrAW. 
W σπόγγον οὖν μεστὸν τοῦ (--- τοῦ T) ὄξους ὑσσώπῳ (ὑσώπῳ 1) ἃ Sponge 
χ [ὃ] tr; — ὁ Ἰησοῦς 1. Υ ἐπεὶ παρα- 


- ἐκείνη E. 5 Πειλᾶτον τ. » συνσταυρωθέντος LTTrA. 


Wi, XX. 


A ? ~ ? ,’ « 16 c > 4 nO {l θ , 
τὸν Ἰησοῦν ἐλθόντες, we εἶδον “αὐτὸν ἤδη" τεθνηκότα, 
Jesus haying come, when they saw he already was dead, 
οὐκκατέαξαν αὐτοῦ τὰ σκέλη. 84 ἀλλ᾽ εἷς τῶν στρατιωτῶν 
they did not break his legs, but one of the soldiers 
λόγχῃ αὐτοῦ τὴν πλευρὰν ἔνυξεν, καὶ “εὐθὺς ἐξῆλθεν" 
with a spear i side pierced, and immediately came out 
αἷμα καὶ ὕδωρ. 35 καὶ ὁ ἑωρακὼς μεμαρτύρηκεν, Kai 
blood and _ water. And he who hasseen has borne witness, and 
2 1 ? ~ ? « , ee ~ Ι id a aN θῇ 
ἀληθινὴ αὐτου E0TLY 1) μαρτυρια, KAKELVOC OLOEY OTL αλῃθη 
true *his 115 witness, and he knows that true 
λέγει, ἵνα f ὑμεῖς πιστεύσητε." 86 ἐγένετο.γὰρ ταῦτα ἵνα 
he says, that ye may believe. For *took *place these*things that 
ἢ γραφὴ πληρωθῇ, ᾿Οστοῦν.οὐ συντριβήσεται αὐτοῦ. 
the scripture might be fulfilled, Nota bone shall be broken of him. 
37 καὶ πάλιν ἑτέρα γραφὴ λέγει, Ὄψονται εἰε ὃν 
And again another scripture says, They shalllook on him whom 
ἐξεκέντησαν. 
they pierced. 
38 Μετὰ. δὲ ταῦτα ἠρώτησεν τὸν "Πιλάτον" ὁ" ᾿Ιωσὴφ 
And after these things asked Pilate Joseph 
ΚΑΙ ) δῆ ΄ n 4 ~? ~ A , δὲ 
ὁ" ἀπὸ ᾿Αριμαθαίας. ὧν μαθητὴς τοῦ Ἰησοῦ, κεκρυμμέενος.ὃὲ 
(from Arimathga, being a disciple of Jesus, but concealed 
διὰ τὸν φόβον τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, ἵνα ἄρ τὸ σῶμα 
through fear ofthe Jews,) that he might take away the body 
τοῦ Ιησοῦ καὶ ἐπέτρεψεν ὁ 'TAdroe.' πιὖἦλθεν" οὖν καὶ 
of Jesus: and ὅρατο “leave Pilate. He came therefore and 
™hoev' οτὸ σῶμα" Prov Ἰησοῦ." 39 ἦλϑεν.δὲ καὶ Νικόδημος. 
took away the body of Jesus. Andcame also Nicodemus, 
ὁ ἐλθὼν πρὸς “τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν" νυκτὸς τὸ. πρῶτον. φέρων μίγμα 
who came to Jesus by night at first, bearing a mixture 
σμύρνης Kai ἀλόης ᾿ὡσεὶ" λίτρας ἑκατόν. 40 ἔλαβον οὖν 
ofmyrrh and aloes about *pounds ‘a *hundred. They took therefore 
TO σῶμα τοῦ 'Inoov, Kai ἔδησαν αὐτὸ " ὀθονίοις μετὰ τῶν 
the body of Jesus, and bound it in linen cloths with the 
ἀρωμάτων, καθὼς ἔθος ἐστὶν τοῖς ἐντα- 
aromatics, as acustom is among the to prepare for 
guage. 41 ἦν.δὲ ἐν τῷ τόπῳ ὅπου ἐσταυρώθη κῆπος, 
burial. Now there was in the place where he was crucified a garden. 
καὶ ἐν τῷ κήπῳ μνημεῖον καινόν, ἔν ᾧ οὐδέπω οὐδεὶς ἐτέθη. 


JOHN. 


Ἰουδαίοις 
Jews 


and in the garden a *tomb Inew, in which no one ever was laid. 
42 ἐκεῖ οὖν διὰ τὴν παρασκευὴν τῶν Ιουδαίων, ὕτι 
There therefore on account of the preparation of the Jews, because 
ἐγγὺς ἦν τὸ μνημεῖον, ἔθηκαν τὸν ᾿Τησοῦν. 
near was the tomb, they laid Jesus. 
20 Τῇ δὲ μιᾷ τῶν σαββάτων ‘Mapia' ἡ Μαγδαληνὴ 
But on the first [day] of the week Mary the Magdalene 


ἔρχεται πρωϊ σκοτίας ETL οὔσης εἰς TO μνημεῖον, Kai βλέπει 


comes early ‘dark ‘still 'it*being to the tomb, and sees 
τὸν λίθον ἠρμένον ἐκ τοῦ μνημείου. 2 τρέχει οὖν Kai 
the stone taken away from the tomb. She runs therefore and 


ἔρχεται πρὸς Σίμωνα Πέτρον καὶ πρὸς τὸν ἄλλον μαθητὴν 
comes to Simon Peter and to the other disciple 


ς ἤδη αὐτὸν Tra. ἃ ἐξῆλθεν εὐθὺς TTA. © και ἐκεῖνος LTr. 
ἔ πιστεύητε τ. i Πειλᾶτον T. i-— 6 LTTrAW. 
m ἦλθον they came T. 0 ἦραντ. ° — τὸ σῶμα τ. 


him 1. 4 αὐτὸν him btrtraw. τ ὡς GLTTrAW. 84 ἐν νυ. 


305 


sus, and saw that he 
was dead already,they 
brake not his legs: 
34 but one of the soi- 
diers with a s 
pierced his side, and 
forthwith came there 
out blood and water. 
35 And he that saw it 
bare record, and his 
record is true: and he 
knoweth that he saith 
true, that ye might be- 
lieve. 36 For these 
things were done, that 
the scripture should be 
fulfilled, A bone of him 
shall not be broken. 
37 And again another 
scripture saith, They 
shall look on him 
whom they pierced. 


38 And after this Jo- 
seph of Arimathza, be- 
ing a disciple of Jesus, 
but secretly for fear of 
the Jews, besought Pi- 
late that hemight take 
away the body of Je- 
sus: and Pilate gave 
him leave. He came 
therefore, and took the 
body of Jesus. 39 And 
there came also Nico- 
demus, which at the 
first came to Jesus by 
night, and brought a 
mixture of myrrh and 
aloes, about an hun- 
dred pound weight. 
40 Then took they the 
body of Jesus, and 
wound it in linen 
clothes with the spices, 
as the manner of the 
Jewsis to bury. 41 Now 
in the place where he 
was crucified there 
Was a garden; and in 
the garden a new se- 
pulchre, wherein was 
never man yet laid. 
42 There laid they Je- 
sus therefore because 
of the Jews’ prepara- 
tion day; for the se- 
pulchre was righ at 
hand. 


XX. The first day 
of the week cometh 
Mary Magdaleneearly, 
when it was yet dark, 
unto the sepulchre,and 
seeth the stone taken 
away from the sepul- 
chre, 2Then sherun- 
neth, and cometh te 
Simon Peter, and te 
the other disciple, 


f + καὶ also GLTTrAW. 
k— 6 LTrA. 
Ρ αὐτοῦ οἵ him Lira ; αὐτόν 
τ᾿ Μαριὰμ Τ. 


1 Πειλᾶτος T. 


x 


306 
whom Jesus loved, and 
saith unto them, They 


have taken away the 
Lord out of the sepul- 
chre, and we know not 
where they have laid 
him, 3 Peter there- 
fore went forth, and 
that other disciple,and 
came to the sepulchre, 
4 So they ran both to- 
gether : and the other 
disciple did outrun Pe- 
ter, and came first to 
the sepulchre. 5 And 
he stooping down, and 
looking in, saw the li- 
nen clothes lying ; yet 
went he notin. 6 Then 
cometh Simon Peter 
following him, and 
went into the sepul- 
chre, and seeth the li- 
nen clothes lie, 7 and 
the napkin, that was 
about his head, not ly- 
ing with the linen 
clothes, but wrapped 
together in a place by 
itself. 8 Then went in 
also that other disci- 
ple, which came first to 
the sepulchre, and he 
saw, and _ believed. 
9 For as yet they knew 
not the scripture, that 
he must rise again 
from the dead. 10 Then 
the disciples went a- 
way again unto their 
own home, 1] But 
Mary stood without at 
the sepulchre weeping: 
and as she wept, she 
stooped down, and 
looked into the sepul- 
chre, 12 and seeth two 
angels in white sitting, 
the one at the head, 
and the other at the 
feet, where the body 
of Jesus had lain, 
13 And they say unto 
her, Woman, why 
weepest thou? She 
saith unto them, Be- 
cause they have taken 
away my Lord, and I 
know not where they 
have laid him. 14 And 
when she had _ thus 
said, she turned her- 
self back, and saw Je- 
sus standing,and knew 
not that it was Jesus. 
15 Jesus saith unto 
her, Woman, why 
weepest thou? whom 
seekest thou? She, 
supposing him to be 
the gardener, saith un- 
to him, Sir, if thou 
have borne him hence, 
tell me where thou 
hast laid him, and I 
will take him away. 


IQANNH®. XX. 


“ ᾽ A co ~ ‘ , > ~ - 4A ’ 

ὃ» ἐφίλει ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς, καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, ἫΗραν τὸν κύριον 
whom “loved 1Jesus, and says tothem, They tookaway the Lord 

ἐκ τοῦ μνημείου, καὶ οὐκιοἴδαμεν ποῦ ἔθηκαν αὐτόν. 
out οὗ the tomb, and weknownot where they laid him, 
9 Ἐξῆλθεν οὖν ὁ Πέτρος καὶ ὁ ἄλλος μαθητής, Kai ἤρχοντο 
*Went “ΤΟΥ ἢ therefore *Peter and the other disciple, and came 

? 4 - 4 » δὲ « δύ « as. v ‘ cil AN : 
εις TO μνημειον.- ἐτρέχον. οι OVO ομου καὶ O' a4 ος 
to the tomb. And?ran ‘the *two together, andthe other 
μαθητὴς προέδραμεν τάχιον τοῦ Πέτρου, καὶ ἦλθεν πρῶτος 
disciple ran forward faster than Peter, and came first 

᾽ 4 ~ 5 4 U λέ w , " 50 , i] 
εἰς τὸ μνημεῖον, 5 καὶ παρακύψας βλέπει “κείμενα τὰ dO6ma, 
to the tomb, and stooping down he sees lying the linencloths; 
? , a is » x , , > 
οὐ μέντοι εἰσῆλθεν. 6 ἔρχεται οὖν * Σίμων ἹΠέτρος ἀκολου- 
*not “however *he *entered. Comes then Simon Peter follow- 
θῶν αὐτῷ, Kai εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὸ μνημεῖον, Kai θεωρεῖ τὰ 
ing him, and entered into the tomb, and sees the 
? , , ‘ a , “ ? ‘ ~ ~ 
ὀθόνια κείμενα, 7 Kai τὸ covdapioy ὃ ἦν ἐπὶ τῆς κεφαλῆς 
linencloths lying, and the handkerchief which was upon “head 
αὐτοῦ, ob μετὰ τῶν ὀθονίων κείμενον, ἀλλὰ χωρὶς ἐν- 
this, not with the linen cloths lying, but “by “itself 


τετυλιγμένον εἰς ἕνα τόπον. 8 τότε οὖν εἰσῆλθεν καὶ ὁ 
‘folded *up *inureca place, Then therefore entered also the 


ἄλλος μαθητὴς ὁ ἐλθὼν πρῶτος εἰς τὸ μνημεῖον, καὶ εἶδεν 
other disciple who came first to the tomb, and saw 
καὶ ἐπίστευσεν: 9 οὐδέπω. γὰρ ἤδεισαν τὴν γραφήν, Ort 
and believed ; for not yet knew they the _ scripture, that 

δεῖ αὐτὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀναστῆναι. 10 ἀπῆλθον 
it behoves him from Δ Πρ [{Π6] dead to rise. Went away 

οὖν πάλιν πρὸς Yéeavrovc' οἱ μαθηταί. 11 *Mapia'6é 


therefore again to their {home]the disciples. But Mary 
εἱστήκει πρὸς “rd μνημεῖον" *Kdaiovoa ἔξω." we οὖν 
stood at the tomb 2weeping ‘outside. As therefore 


ἔκλαιεν, παρέκυψεν εἰς τὸ μνημεῖον, 12 καὶ θεωρεῖ δύο ay- 
she wept, she stooped down into the tomb, and beholds two an- 
γέλους ἐν λευκοῖς καθεζομένους, Eva πρὸς TY κεφαλῇ Kai ἕνα 
gels in white sitting, one at the head and one 
πρὸς τοῖς ποσίν, ὕπου ἔκειτο τὸ σῶμα τοῦ Ἰησοῦ. 18 “καὶ! 
αὖ the feet, where was laid the body of Jesus. And 
λέγουσιν αὐτῇ ἐκεῖνοι, Γύναι, τί κλαίεις; Λέγει αὐτοῖς, 
“say °to*her ‘they, Woman, why weepest thou? Shesays to them, 
“Ort ἦραν τὸν κύριόν.μου, Kai οὐκιοῖδα ποῦ ἔθηκαν 
Because they took away my Lord, and I know not where they laid 
αὐτόν. 14 “Καὶ! ταῦτα εἰποῦσα ἐστράφη εἰς.τὰ. ὀπίσω, Kai 
him. And these things having said she turned backward, and 
θεωρεῖ τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ἑστῶτα' καὶ odK-yder ὅτι “ὁ' ᾿Τησοῦς ἐστιν. 
beholds Jesus standing, and knew not that Jesus it is. 
15 λέγει αὐτῷ "ὁ" ᾿Ιησοῦς, Γύναι, ri κλαίεις; τίνα ζητεῖς ; 
"Says “to *her 1Jesus, Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seekest thou? 
’Exeivn δοκοῦσα bre ὁ κηπουρός ἐστιν, λέγει αὐτῷ, Κύριε, εἰ 
She thinking thatthe gardener it is, says to him, Sir, if 
σὺ ἐβάστασας αὐτόν, εἰπέ μοι ποῦ [αὐτὸν ἔθηκας" κἀγὼ 
thou didst carry off him, tell me where him _ thoudidst lay, andI 


I6Jesussaith untoher, αὐτὸν ἀρῶ. 16 Λέγει αὐτῷ ξὸ" Ἰησοῦς, "Μαρία." Στρα- 
Mary. Sheturnedher- him will take away. *Says “to ‘her ‘Jesus, Mary. Turn- 
W τὰ ὀθόνια κείμενα L. * καὶ also Tra. Υ αὐτοὺς TTr. * Μαριάμ τ. 


vo δὲ 1, 


27 μνημείῳ GLITYAW. 
* — 6 LTTraw. 


© — 9 GLTTrAW. 


ς — καὶ τ. d --- καὶ GLTTrAW. 
&§—OLTTrA. © Μαριάμ TTrA, 


Ὁ ἔξω κλαίονσα ΤΊΤΑ ; — ἔξω L. 
f ἔθηκας αὐτόν GLTTrAW. 


JOHN. 

φεῖσα ἐκείνη λέγει adTyp', ‘PaBBovri' ὃ. λέγεται, διδάσκαλε. 

ing round she says to him, Rabboni, that is to say, Teacher. 

17 λέγει αὐτῇ "ὸ' ᾿Ιησοῦς, Μή pov ἅπτου, οὔπω.γὰρ ἀναβέ- 
*Says *to ther 1Jesus, 7Not “me ‘touch, for not yet have I 

βηκα πρὸς rov.raréipa.wou'' πορεύου.δὲ πρὸς τοὺς ἀδελφούς 

ascended tc my Father ; but go to *brethren 


XX. 


pou, καὶ εἰπὲ αὐτοῖς, ᾿Αναβαίνω πρὸς τὸν πατέρα.μου Kai 
my, and say tothem, I ascend to my Father and 
πατέρα.ὑμῶν, καὶ τωρ: καὶ θεὸνὑμῶν. 18 Ἔρχεται 
your Father, and my God and your God. *Comes 


™Mapia' ἡ Μαγδαληνὴ "ἀπαγγέλλουσα" τοῖς μαθηταῖς ὅτι 
‘Mary *the *Magdalene bringing word tothe disciples 
οἑώρακεν᾽ TOY κύριον, καὶ ταῦτα εἶπεν αὐτῇ. 19 Οὔσης οὖν 
she hasseen the Lord, and these thingshesaid toher. It being therefore 
ὀψίας τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ, τῇ pig τῶν" σαββάτων, Kai τῶν 
evening on that day, the first (day) of the week, and the 
θυρῶν κεκλεισμένων ὕπου ἦσαν ot μαθηταὶ συνηγμένοι," διὰ 
doors having been shut where “were ‘the “disciples assembled, through 
τὸν φόβον τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, ἦλθεν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς καὶ ἔστη εἰς τὸ 


fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the 
, ‘ Ul ? ~ Binal Rapes ‘ ~ > ‘ 
μέσον, καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, Εἰρήνη ὑμῖν. 20 Kai τοῦτο εἰπὼν 
midst, and says tothem, Peace toyou. And this having said 


ἔδειξεν ταὐτοῖς τὰς χεῖρας Kai THY πλευρὰν αὐτοῦ." ἐχάρη- 
he shewed tothem the hands and the side of himself. “*Rejoiced 
σαν οὖν οἱ μαθηταὶ ἰδόντες τὸν κύριον. 21 εἶπεν οὖν 
*therefore ‘the “disciples having seen the Lord, 3Said *therefore 
αὐτοῖς "ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς" πάλιν, Εἰρήνη ὑμῖν: καθὼς ἀπέσταλκέν 
*to “them ‘Jesus again, Peace toyou: as Shas *sent °forth 
ἐξ ὁ πατήρ, ἘΠ πέμπω ὑμᾶς. 22 Καὶ τοῦτο εἰπὼν 
6 ᾿ἴπ9 Εαύμου, I also send you. And this haying said 
ἐνεφύσησεν, καὶ λέγει αὐτοῖς, Λάβετε πνεῦμα ἅγιον. 
hebreathedinto(them],and says tothem, Receive [the] “Spirit 1Holy: 


23 ‘ay! τινων ἀφῆτε τὰς ἁμαρτίας, "ἀφίενται" αὐτοῖς" 
of whomsoever ye may remit the sins, they are remitted to them ; 
ἰἄν τινων κρατῆτε, κεκράτηνται. 24 Θωμᾶς δέ, εἷς ἐκ 


of whomsoever ye may retain, they have been retained. But Thomas, one of 


τῶν δώδεκα ὁ λεγόμενος Δίδυμος, οὐκιἣν per αὐτῶν ὕτε 
the twelve called Didymus, wasnot with them when 
ἦλθεν πὸ! ᾿Ιησοῦς. 25 ἔλεγον οὖν αὐτῷ ot ἄλλοι μαθηταί, 
7came ‘Jesus. 4Said *therefore *tohim'the “other “disciples, 
t /, 4 ΄ t 4 ? ~ ᾽ A ‘ » ᾽ 

Ἑωράκαμεν τὸν κύριον. Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, ᾿Εὰν. μὴ ἴδω ἐν 
We have seen the Lord. But he said tothem, Unless [866 in 
ταῖς. χερσὶν. αὐτοῦ τὸν τύπον THY ἥλων, Kai βάλω "τὸν δάκτυ- 


his hands the mark ofthe nails, and put “finger 
λόν pou" εἰς τὸν YréTroy'! τῶν ἥλων, καὶ βάλω *rijy.xEipa_pov' 
my into the mark ofthe nails, and put my hand 


εἰς τὴν.πλευρὰν.αὐτοῦ, οὐ-μὴ πιστεύσω. 26 Kai μεθ’ ἡμέρας 
into his side, not at all will I believe. And after “*days 

ὀκτὼ πάλιν ἦσαν tow οἱ.μαθηταὶ. αὐτοῦ, Kai Θωμᾶς per’ 
‘eight again were *within this *disciples, and Thomas with 
αὐτῶν. ἔρχεται ὁ ᾿Τησοῦς, τῶν θυρῶν κεκλεισμένων, καὶ ἔστη 
them. Comes Jesus, the doors having been shut, and stood 


k — 6 LTTrA. 


i + ‘Efpaioré in Hebrew [u]rtra. 
° ἑώρακα I have seen TTra. 


τὰ Μαριὰμ, TTrA. Ὁ ἀγγέλλουσα LTTrA. 
4 — συνηγμένοι LTTrA, 
Ἰησοῦς (read he said) τα Α]. 
ν — 6 LTTra. x μου Tov δάκτυλον T. 


t »»" 
εαν L, 
Υ τόπον place LT. 


τ καὶ (--- καὶ Τ) τὰς χεῖρας καὶ τὴν πλευρὰν αὐτοῖς LTTrA. 

χείρας καὶ τὴ ρ Σ 
Υ ἀφέωνται they have been remitted xrtr. 
τ μον THY χεῖρα TTrA, 


907 


self, and saith unto 
him, Rabboni ; which 
is to say, Master. 17Je- 
sus saith unto her, 
Touch me not; for I am 
not yet ascended to 
my Father: but go to 
my brethren, and say 
unto them, [ ascend 
unto my Father, and 
your Father; and to 
my God,and your God. 
18 Mary Magdalene 
came and told the 
disciples that she had 
seen the Lord, and 
that he had spoken 
these things unto her. 
19 Then the same day 
at evening, being the 
first day of the week, 
when the doors were 
shut where the disci- 
ples were assembled 
for fear of the Jews 
came Jesus and stood 
in the midst, and saith 
unto them, Peace be 
unto you. 20 And 
when he had sosaid, he 
shewed unto them his 
hands and his side, 
Then were the disci- 
ples glad, when they 
saw the Lord. 21 Then 
said Jesus to them a- 
gain, Peace be unto 

ou: as my Father 

ath sentme, even so 
send I you, 22 And 
when he had said this, 
he breathed on them, 
and saith unto them, 
Receive ye the Holy 
Ghost: 23 whose soever 
sins ye remit, they are 
remitted unto them; 
and whose soever 8ins 
ye retain, they are re- 
tained. 24But Thomas, 
one of the twelve,call- 
ed Didymus, was not 
with them when Jesus 
came. 25 The other 
disciples therefore said 
unto him, We have 
seen the Lord. But he 
said unto them, Except 
I shall see in his hands 
the print of the nails, 
and put my finger into 
the print of the nails, 
and thrust my hand 
into his side,I will not 
believe. 26And after 
eight days again his 
disciples were within, 
and Thomas with 
them: then came Je- 
sus, the doors being 
shut, and stood in the 


1 — μου (read the Father) [n]rtra. 


P — τῶν LITrAW. 
ε-- ὁ 


908 
midst, and snid, Peace 
be unto you. 27 Then 


saith he to Thomas, 
Reach hither thy fin- 
ger, and behold my 
hands ; and reach hi- 
ther thy hand, and 
thrust it into my side: 
and be not faithless 
but believing. 28 And 
Thomas answered and 
said unto him, M 
Lord and my God, 
29 Jesus saith unto 
him, Thomas, because 
thou hast seen me, 
thou hast believed : 
blessed are thoy that 
have not seen, and yet 
have believed. 


30 And many other 
signs truly did Jesus 
in the presence of his 
disciples, which are 
not written in this 
book: %1 but these are 
written, that yemight 
believe that Jesus is 
the Christ, the Son of 
God ; and that believ- 
ing ye might have life 
through his name, 


XXI. After these 
things Jesus shewed 
himself again to the 
disciples at the sea of 
Tiberias ; and on this 
wise shewed he him- 
self. 2 There were to- 
gether Simon Peter, 
and Thomas called Di- 
dymus, and Nathanael 
of Cana in Galilee, and 
the sons of Zebedee, 
and two other of his 
disciples. 3 Simon 
Peter saith unto them, 
I go a fishing. ‘They 
say unto him, We also 
go with thee. They 
went forth, and en- 
tered into a ship im- 
mediately; and that 
night they caught no- 
thing, 4 But when the 
morning was now 
come, Jesus stood on 
the shore: but the dis- 
ciples knew not that 
it was Jesus. 5 Then 
Jesus saith unto them, 
Children, have ye any 
meat ? ‘They answered 
him, No, 6 And he 
said unto them, Cast 
the net on the right 
side of the ship, and 


TQANNH&. XX, XXI. 
εἰς τὸ μέσον καὶ εἶπεν, Εἰρήνη ὑμῖν. 27 Εἶτα λέγει τῷ Θωμᾷ, 


in the midst and said, Peace to you. Then he says to Thomas, 


Φέρε τὸν. δάκτυλόν.σου ὧδε, Kai ἴδε Tag-xeipacg.pou' Kai 

Bring thy finger here, and = see my hands; and 

φέρε τὴν.χεϊρά.σου, Kai βάλε εἰς τὴνιπλευράμιμον: καὶ 

bring thy hand, and put Sit] into my side; and 

μὴ.γίνου ἄπιστος, ἀλλὰ πιστός. 28 "Καὶ! ἀπεκρίθη oll 
be not unbelieving, but believing. And answered 


Θωμᾶς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Ὁ.κύριός. μου καὶ ὁ.θεός. μου. 29 Λέγει 
1Thomas and said ἴο him, My Lor and my God. *Says 


αὐτῷ “ὁ"  Τησοῦς, “Ore ἑώρακάς με, Ἰθωμᾶ," πεπίστευκας" 


®to *him ‘Jesus, Because thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast believed : 
μακάριοι οἱ μὴ ἰδόντες καὶ πιστεύσαντες. 
blessed they who have not seen and _ have believed. 
30 Πολλὰ μὲν οὖν καὶ ἄλλα σημεῖα ἐποίησεν ὁ Ἴη- 
Many ‘therefore *also ‘other signs did Jo- 
σοῦς ἐνώπιον τῶν. μαθητῶν. “αὐτοῦ, ἃ obx.orw yeypap- 
sus in presence of his disciples, which are not written 
/ ᾽ ~ ‘ , ~ “ “ 
μένα ἐν τῷ. βιβλίῳ. τούτῳ. 91 ταῦτα.δὲ γέγραπται ἵνα 
in this book ; but these have been written that 


f y Sep 86". ’Incove ὁ ‘ dc. ὁ vie ᾿ 
πιστεύσητε! ort 80" Ιησοῦς ἐστιν ὁ χριστὸς ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ 


ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son 
θεοῦ, καὶ ἵνα πιστεύοντες ζωὴν " ἔχητε ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι 
of God, and that believing life ye may have in *name 
αὐτοῦ. 

‘his. 

Q1 Μετὰ ταῦτα ἐφανέρωσεν ἑαυτὸν πάλιν ἰὸ ᾿Ιησοῦς" 


After these things “manifested *himself “again 1Jesus 


τοῖς μαθηταῖς ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης τῆς Τιβεριάδος" ἐφανέρωσεν δὲ 


tothe disciples αὖ the sen of Tiberias, And he manifested 
u“ ᾿ ς ΐ΄ « ~ 7 A ‘ ~ « 
οὕτως" ὦ ἦσαν ὁμοῦ Σίμων Πέτρος, καὶ Θωμᾶς ὃ 

{himself} thus: There were together Simon Peter, and ‘Thomas 


λεγόμενος Δίδυμος, Kai Ναθαναὴλ ὁ ἀπὸ Κανᾶ τῆς Vare- 

called Didymus, and Nathanael from Cana of Gali- 
Aaiac, Kai οἱ τοῦ LeBedaiov, καὶ ἄλλοι ἐκ τῶν μαθητῶν 
lee, and the (sons) of Zebedee, and “others *of *disciples 
αὐτοῦ δύο. 8 λέγει αὐτοῖς Σίμων Πέτρος, Ὑπάγω ἁλιεύειν. 


*his 1thwo, "Says “to'’them “Simon ‘7Peter, I go to fish. 
Aéyovow αὐτῷ, ᾿Ερχόμεθα καὶ ἡμεῖς σὺν σοί. k READY 
They say to him, *Come “also ‘we with thee, They went forth 


EE ll sf 4 Me} Mic, |! ae Leet Ὁ 
καὶ Ἰἀνεέβησαν" εἰς τὸ πλοῖον "εὐθύς," καὶ ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ 
and went up into the ship immediately, and during that 

AT et / ἠδέ A δὲ » n la | ” Of ll 
νυκτὶ ἐπίασαν οὐδὲν. 4 πρωΐας. δὲ ἤδη "γενομένης" ἔστη “ὁ 
night they took nothing. And morning already being come “stood 
, ~ p ΜΙ , pas ’ , ” « ν τ΄ 
Ιησοῦς Pete! τὸν αἰγιαλόν" οὐ μέντοι δεισαν οἱ μαθηταὶ Ore 


1 Jesus on the shore ; ‘not “however ‘knew ‘the “disciples that 
Ἰησοῦς ἐστιν. ὃ λέγει οὖν αὐτοῖς “ὁ Ἰησοῦς, Tlasdia, 
Jesus it is. “Says *therefore *to °them ‘Jesus, Little children, 
μή τι προσφάγιον ἔχετε; ᾿Απεκρίθησαν αὐτῷ, Ov. 6 "Ὁ. δὲ 

any food have ye? ‘They answered him, No. And he 


εἴπεν" αὐτοῖς, Βάλετε εἰς τὰ δεξιὰ μέρη τοῦ πλοίου τὸ δίκτυον, 
said tothem, Cast to the right side ofthe ship the net, 


er ΄΄ῤῦὖῦὋΦΔᾧΦΨ'Ζίο͵᾿,υἝοἝ“5-΄-΄ΦὋΦἔὋορΎ:οάο““..... ΄-ἷἴἵἷ΄ἷς:.ς. 


® — καὶ GLITrAW. 


(read the disciples) irra. 
' — 6 Ἰησοῦς (read he manifested) a; — ὃ TTr. 
το — εὐθύς αὐτιὰ. 
᾿Ιησοῦς Tr ; 


GLTTrAW. 
4 [ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς} 1; [ὁ] 


b — 6 @LTLTrAW. 
! πιστεύητε 1. 


© [Ὁ] Tr. 4 — Θωμᾶ GLTTrAW. © — αὐτοῦ 
αὶ --α ὃ ΘΙ γα, Β + [αἰώνιον] eternal L. 

k + [καὶ] and L. 1 ἐνέβησαν entered 
ἃ γινομένης breaking Trrw. ° — OLTTrA, P ἐπὶ La. 


-- OTA. τ λέγει he says @. 


XXI. JOHN. 

καὶ εὑρήσετε. Ἔβαλον οὖν, καὶ “οὐκ ἔτι" αὐτὸ ἑλκῦσαι 
and yeshall find. They cast therefore, and no longer it to draw 
ἴσχυσαν! ἀπὸ τοῦ πλήθους τῶν ἰχθύων. 7 λέγει οὖν 


were they able from the multitude ofthe fishes. Says therefore 
ὁ. μαθητὴς. ἐκεῖνος ὃν ἠγάπα ὁ Ἰησοῦς τῷ Πέτρῳ, ὋὉ κύριός 
that disciple whom “loved ‘Jesus to Peter, The Lord 
ἐστιν. Σίμων οὖν Tlétpoc, ἀκούσας Ori ὁ κύριός ἐστιν, 
it is. Simon therefore ‘Peter, having heard that the Lord it is, 
τὸν ἐπενδύτην διεζώσατο: ἦν.γὰρ γυμνός: Kai ἔβαλεν 
Chis) upper garment he girdedon, for he was naked, and cast 
ἑαυτὸν sic τὴν θάλασσαν. ὃ οἱ. δὲ ἄλλοι μαθηταὶ τῷ 
himself into the sea, Andthe other disciples in the 
πλοιαρίῳ ἦλθον" οὐ.γὰρ ἦσαν μακρὰν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς, “ἀλλ᾽ 


small ship came, for not were they far from the land, but 
ὡς ἀπὸ πηχῶν διακοσίων, σύροντες τὸ δίκτυον τῶν 
somewhere about *cubits ‘two *hundred, dragging the net 


? , « + ρων ? ι - , 
ἰχθύων. 9 ‘Qc οὖν ἀπέβησαν εἰς τὴν γῆν βλέπουσιν 
of fishes. When therefore they wentup on the land they see 
ἀνθρακιὰν κειμένην καὶ ow ἐρίου ἐπικείμενον, καὶ ἄρτον. 
a fire of coals lying and fis’ lying on {it],and bread. 
10 λέγει αὐτοῖς τὸ" ᾿Τησοῦς, Evéiyxare ἀπὸ τῶν ὀψαρίων ὧν 


7Says *to *them 1Jesus, Bring of the fishes which 
ἐπιάσατε νῦν. 11 ’AvéBn* Σίμων Πέτρος, καὶ εἵλκυσεν τὸ 
yetook just now. Went up Simon Peter, and drew the 
δίκτυον ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς," μεστὸν ἰχθύων μεγάλων" ἑκατὸν 
net to the land, full of *fishes Marge a hundred [and] 
"πεντηκοντατριῶν '' Kai τοσούτων ὄντων οὐκ.ἐσχίσθη TO 
fifty three ; and(though] somany there were was notrent the 
δίκτυον. 12 Λέγει αὐτοῖς 6 ᾿Ιησοῦς, Δεῦτε ἀριστήσατε. 
net, 7Says *to *them 1Jesus, Come ye, dine. 


οὐδεὶς “δὲ ἐτόλμα τῶν μαθητῶν ἐξετάσαι αὐτόν, Σὺ τίς 


But none ‘ventured ‘of*the “disciples to ask him, *Thou 'who 
el; εἰδότες Ore ὁ κύριός tor’ 18 ἔρχεται δοὖν ὁ" Ἰησοῦς 
?art? knowing that the Lord it is. “Comes “therefore 1Jesus 


καὶ λαμβάνει τὸν ἄρτον καὶ δίδωσιν αὐτοῖς, καὶ τὸ ὀψάριον 
and takes the bread and _ gives tothem, and the fish 
ὁμοίως. 14 τοῦτο ἤδη τρίτον ἐφανερώθη “ὁ Ἰησοῦς 
in like manner. This [is] now the third time *was *manifested 1Jesus 
τοῖς. μαθηταῖς.ἰαὐτοῦ) ἐγερθεὶς ἐκ νεκρῶν. 
to his disciples having been raised from among [the] dead. 
1ὅ Ὅτε οὖ» ἠρίστησαν, λέγει τῷ Σίμωνι Πέτρῳ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, 


When therefore they had dined, *says Sto *Simon ‘Peter Jesus, 


Σίμων Ἰωνᾶ, ἀγαπᾷς με "πλεῖον" τούτων ; Λέγει αὐτῷ, 
Simon [son] of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? Hesays to him, 

" , ~ , ? ~ 
Nat, κύριε' σὺ οἶδας ὅτι AG σε. Λέγει αὐτῷ, 


Lord; thou knowest that I have affection for thee. Hesays to him, 
΄ ~ , , , 

Βόσκε τὰ ἀρνία.μου. 16 Λέγει αὐτῷ πάλιν δεύτερον, Σίμων 

Feed my lambs. Hesays tohim again asecondtime, Simon 

Blwva," ἀγαπᾷς pe; Λέγει αὐτῷ, Nai κύριε σὺ οἶδας 

{son} of Jonas, lovest thou me? Hesays tohim, Yea, Lord; thou knowest 


Yea, 


~ ~ , , 
ore φιλῶ σε. Λέγει αὐτῷ, Ποίμαινε τὰ Ἰπρόβατά! 
that I have affection for thee. Hesays tohim, Shepherd 4sheep 

SouxéreGLTW. ¢ ioxvov LTTrA. τ ἀλλὰ τττα. * [Ὁ] Tr. 


: μεγάλων ἰχθύων L. 
4 ροὗνα; — οὖν ὃ LTTrA. 
8. Ἰωάνου John itr; ᾿Ιωάννον TA. 


Υ εἰς τὴν γῆν LTTrA. 
¢ — δὲ but [TrJa. 
disciples) Lrtraw. 
little sheep T. 


e€ — 6 LTTrA. 


5 πεντήκοντα τριῶν LTTr. 


h πλέον LTTrA. 


309 


ye shall find. They 
cast therefore,and now 
they were not able to 
draw it for the multi- 
tude of fishes. 7 There- 
fore that disciple 
whom Jesus loved 
saith unto Peter, It is 
the Lord. Now when 
Simon Peter heard 
that it was the Lord. 
he girt his fisher’s 
coat unto him, (for he 
was naked,) and did 
cast himself into the 
sea. 8 And the other 
disciples came in a lit~ 
tle ship; (for they 
were not far from 
land, but as it were 
two hundred cubits.) 
dragging the net with 
fishes. -9 As soon then 
as they were come to 
land, they saw a fire 
of coals there, and fish 
laid thereon, and 
bread. 10 Jesus saith 
unto them, Bring of 
the fish which ye have 
now caught. 11 Simon 
Peter went up, and 
drew the net to land 
full of great fishes, an 
hundred and fifty and 
three: and for all there 
were so many, yet was 
not the net broken. 
12 Jesus saith unte 
them, Come and dine. 
And none of the disci- 
ples durst ask him, 
Who art thou? know- 
ing that it was the 


Lord. 13 Jesus then 
cometh, and taketh 
bread, and _ giveth 


them, and fish like- 
wise. 14 This is now 
the third time that 
Jesus shewed himself 
to his disciples, after 
that he was risen from 
the dead. 15 So when 
they had dined, Jesus 
saith to Simon Peter, 
Simon, son of Jonas, 
lovest thou me more 
thanthese? He saith 
unto him, Yea, Lord ; 
thou knowest that I 
love thee. He saith 
unto him, Feed my 
lambs. 16 He saith to 
him again the second 
time, Simon, sen of 
Jonas, lovest thou me? 
He saith unto him, Yea, 
Lord ; thou knowest 
that I love thee. He 
saith unto him, Feed 
my sheep. 17 He saith 


x + οὖν therefore Tra. 


Ὁ [ὃ] tr. 
f — αὐτοῦ (read the 
i προβάτιά 


910 


unto him the third 
time, Simon, son o 
Jonas, lovest thoume? 
Peter was grieved be- 
cause he said unto him 
the third time, Lovest 
thou me? And hesaid 
unto him, Lord, thou 
knowest all things ; 
thou knowest that 1 
love thee. Jesussaith 
unto him, Feed my 
sheep. 18 Verily, ve- 
rily, I say unto thee, 
When thou wast 
young, thou girdedst 
thyself, and walkedst 
whither thou would- 
est: but when thou 
shalt be old, thou 
shalt stretch forth thy 
hands, and another 
shall gird thee, and 
earry thee whither 
thou wouldest not. 
19 This spake he, sig- 
ifying by what death 
he should glorify God. 
And when he had spo- 
Ken this, he saith un- 
to him, Follow me. 
20 Then Peter, turning 
about, seeth the disci- 
ple whom Jesus loved 
following ; which also 
leaned on his breast at 
supper, and said,Lord, 
which is he that be- 
trayeth thee? 21 Pe- 
ter seeing him saith 
to Jesus, Lord, and 
what shall this man 
do? 22 Jesus saith 
unto him, If I will 
that he tarry till I 
come, what is that to 
thee? follow thou me. 
23 Then went this say- 
ing abroad among the 
brethren, that that 
disciple should not 
die: yet Jesus said not 
unto him, He shall not 
die ; but, If I will that 
he tarry till I come, 
what is that to thee? 


24 This is the disci- 
ple which  testifieth 
of these things, and 
wrote these things: 
and we know that his 


testimony is true. 
25 And there are also 
many other things 


which Jesus did, the 
which, if they should 
be written every one, 
I suppose that even 
the world itself could 
not contain the books 
that should be writ- 
ten, Amen. 


k Ἰωάνον John Ltr ; "Iwavvov TA. 
LTTra ; — Ἰησοῦς (read he says) T[Tr]. 
s— δὲ but Lrtraw. 


r + [σε] thee τ΄. 


τ οὗτος ὃ λόγος LTTrA. 
ἢ μαρτυρία ἐστίν ΤΊτΑ, 


ξ- ᾿Αμήν GLTrA. 


f pet 


IQANNH®S. XXI 


17 Λέγει αὐτῷ τὸ τρίτον, Σίμων "Ιωνᾶ." φι- 
He says tohim the thirdtime, Simon [50Π} of Jonas, hast thou 
λεῖς με; ἘἙλυπήθη ὁ Πέτρος ὅτι εἶπεν αὐτῷ τὸ 
affection for me? ὌὙγ845 “grieved *Peter because hesaid tohim the 
τρίτον, Φιλεῖς με; ἱκαὶ" τιεῖπεν" αὐτῷ, Κύριε, "od 
third time, Hast thouaffection forme? and said tohim, Lord, thou 
πάντα" oldacg’ σὺ γινώσκεις Ort Aw σε. Λέγει 
all things knowest; thou knowest that I have affectionfor thee. “Says 
αὐτῷ °0 Inoove,' Βόσκε rarpdBara'.pov. 18 ἀμὴν ἀμὴν 
3to *him Jesus, Feed my sheep, Verily verily 
λέγω ool, OTE To νεώτερος ἐζώννυες σεαυτόν, Kai 
Isay tothee, When thou wast younger thou girdedst thyself, and 
περιεπάτεις ὅπου ἤθελες ὕταν. δὲ γηράσῃς ἐκ- 
walkedst where thou didst desire; but when thou shalt be old thou shalt 
τενεῖς ταὰς.χεῖράς.σου, Kai ἄλλος σε ζώσει," Kai οἴσει * 
stretch forth thy hands, and another thee shall gird, and bring [thee] 


ὕπου οὐ. θέλεις. 19 Τοῦτο.δὲ εἶπεν σημαίνων ποίῳ 
where thou dost not desire. But this he said signifying by what 
θανάτῳ δοξάσει τὸν θεόν. καὶ τοῦτο εἰπὼν λέγει αὐτῷ, 
death heshould glorify God. And this having said he says to him, 
᾿Ακολούθει μοι. 20 ᾿Επιστραφεὶς." δὲ! ὁ Πέτρος βλέπει τὸν 
Follow me, But having turned Peter sees the 
μαθητὴν ὃν ΠΣ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς ἀκολουθοῦντα, ὃς καὶ ἀνέπεσεν 
disciple whom “loved 1 Jesus following, who also. reclined 
ἐν τῷ δείπνῳ ἐπὶ τὸ. στῆθος. αὐτοῦ Kai εἶπεν, Κύριε, τίς ἐστιν 
at the supper on his breast and said, Lord, who ἰδ 


ὁ παραδιδούς σε; 21 Τοῦτον ' ἰδὼν ὁ Πέτρος λέγει τῷ 'In- 


who is delivering up thee? *Him seeing Peter says to Je- 
σοῦ, Κύριε, otroc.dé τί; 22 Λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ Ἰησοῦς, ᾿Εὰν 
sus, Lord, but ofthis one what; Says “to *him iJesus, If 
αὐτὸν θέλω μένειν ἕως ἔρχομαι, τί πρός σε; σὺ 
Shim I *desire toabide till Icome, what[isit] to thee? Thou 
γἀκολούθει μοι. 23 Ἔξῆλθεν οὖν τὸ. λόγος οὗτος" εἰς 
‘follow me. Went out therefore this word among 


τοὺς ἀδελφούς, Ὅτι ὁ.μαθητὴς.ἐκεῖνος οὐκ-ἀποθνήσκει: “καὶ 
the brethren, That that disciple does not die, However 


οὐκ εἶπεν" αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, ὅτι οὐκ ἀποθνήσκει: ἀλλ᾽, Ἐὰν 


ϑηοῦ 7said ‘to *him 1Jesus, That he does notdie; but, If 
αὐτὸν θέλω μένειν ἕως ἔρχομαι, Fri πρός σε" 
Shim ‘I 7desire toabide till Icome, what[isit] to thee? 

24 Οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ μαθητὴς ὁ μαρτυρῶν περὶ τούτων, 


This the disciple who bears witness concerning these things, 
Zz ,ὔ ~ 4 4 10 e ir 07 δ᾽ « 
γράψας ταῦτα καὶ οἴδαμεν ὅτι ἀληθής “ἐστιν ἡ 
and[who] wrote these things: and weknow that true is 
paprupia.airov.' 25 Yéorw.dé καὶ ἄλλα πολλὰ “doa! 
his witness. And there are also *other*things *many whatsoever 
ἐποίησεν ὁ Inoove, ἅτινα ἐὰν ράφηται καθ᾽ ἕν, δΔοὐδὲ' 
*did 1Jesus, which if theyshould be written oneby one, ὁποῦ *even 
αὐτὸν olpat τὸν κόσμον “χωρῆσαι! τὰ γραφόμενα βιβλία. 


is 


καὶ 


Titself Ὁ ΞΌΡΡοβθ *the ‘world wouldcontain the “written *books. 
ΕΑ μήν." li g 
Amen. 
[καὶ]. ™Aéyersay8T. πάντα oULTTrA. 9 --- ὃ 


P προβάτιά little sheep TTra. 4 ζώσει σε Tra, 
t + οὖν therefore LTTrA. ὑ μοι ἀκολούθει LTTrAW. 
χ οὐκ εἶπεν δὲ Tr. Y—timposoeT. *%*+ Owhoura). * αὐτοῦ 

5 — yerse25t. ¢awhichutra. ἃ οὐδ᾽ Ltra. & χωρήσειν Tr. 
& + κατὰ ᾿Ιωάνην (Ἰωάννην A) according to John tra. 


ΠΡΑΞΕῚΣ "TON ΑΓΊΩΝ! ‘ATMOSTOAQN," 


ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES, 


TON μὲν πρῶτον λόγον ἐποιησάμην περὶ πάντων, ὦ 
The “indeed ‘first 7account I made concerning allthings, O 


Θεόφιλε, ὧν ἤρξατο δ" ᾿Ιησοῦς ποιεῖν.τε καὶ διδάσκειν, 


Theophilus, which *began 1Jesus bothtodo and to teach, 
2 ἄχρι ἧς-.ἡμέρας ἐντειλάμενος τοῖς ἀποστόλοις διὰ 
until the day in which, having given command δύο *the ‘apostles 1by 


πνεύματος ἁγίου ove ἐξελέξατο, *avehyngOn." 8. οἷς 
(*the] “βρισιῦ ΞΉΟΙΥ whom he chose, he wastakenup: to whom 
καὶ παρέστησεν ἑαυτὸν ζῶντα μετὰ τὸ.παθεῖν.αὐτόν, ἐν 
also he presented himself living after he had suffered, with 
πολλοῖς τεκμηρίοις, δι ἡμερῶν 'reccapdKoyvra' ὀπτανόμενος 
many proofs, during 7days lforty being seen 
αὐτοῖς, Kai λέγων τὰ περὶ τῆς βασιλείας τοῦ θεοῦ. 
by them, and speaking the things concerning the kingdom of God: 
4 καὶ συναλιζόμενος πιπαρήγγειλεν αὐτοῖς" ἀπὸ ‘Iepo- 
and being assembled with [him] he charged them from Jeru- 
σολύμων μὴ χωρίζεσθαι, ἀλλὰ περιμένειν THY ἐπαγγελίαν 
salem not to depart, but to await the promise 
τοῦ πατρός, ἣν ἠκούσατέ μου" ὅ ὕτι "Ἰωάννης" μὲν 
of the Father, which (said he] ye heard of me, For John indeed 
ἐβάπτισεν ὕδατι, ὑμεῖς.δὲ “βαπτισθήσεσθε tv πνεύμα- 
baptized with water, butye shall be baptized with[the] Spirit 
τι" ἁγίῳ ov μετὰ πολλὰς ταύτας ἡμέρας. Θ Οἱ μὲν οὖν 
ἸΉΟΙΥ “ποὺ “after many days. They indeed therefore 
συνελθόντες = Péernowrwy' αὐτὸν λέγοντες, Κύριε, εἰ ἐν 
having come together asked him, saying, Lord, Sat 
τῷ-χρόνῳ.τούτῳ ἀποκαθιστάνεις THY βασιλείαν τῷ Ἰσραήλ: 


*this °time 1restorest *thou the kingdom to Israel ? 
7 Εἶπεν. “δὲ πρὸς αὐτούς. Οὐχ ὑμῶν ἐστιν γνῶναι χρόνους 

And he said to them, SNot *yours 7it“is to know times 
ἢ καιροὺς οὺς ὁ πατὴρ ἔθετο ἐν τῷ ἰδίᾳ ἐξουσίᾳ. 8 ἀλλὰ 
or seasons whichthe Father placed in hisown authority; but 
yw θ i δύ 7 λθό ~ ε ΄ , ? ? 

ἡψεσθεῖ δύναμιν, ἐπελθόντος τοῦ ae) πνεύματος ἐφ 
ye willreceive power, *having °come ‘the oly *Spirit upon 


ὑμᾶς, Kai ἔσεσθε "por μάρτυρες ἔν τε ‘Iepovoadrp καὶ ‘ev! 


you, and yeshallbe tome witnesses bothin Jerusalem and in 
πάσῃ τῇ Ἰουδαίᾳ καὶ “Σαμαρείᾳ! καὶ ἕως ἐσχάτου 
811 Judza and Samaria and to [the] uttermost part 
τῆς γῆς. 9 Kai ταῦτα εἰπών, βλεπόντων αὐτῶν 
of the earth. And these things having said, “beholding [Shim] ‘they 
? £: A , « , ᾽ A ? 4 ~ ? ~ 
ἐπήρθη, καὶ νεφέλη ὑπέλαβεν αὐτὸν ἀπὸ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν 
he was taken up,and acloud withdrew him from 7eyes 
αὐτῶν. 
‘their. 
10 Καὶ ὡς ἀτενίζοντες ἦσαν εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν πο ευομένου 


And as *looking ‘intently ‘they*wereintothe heaven as 7was 


going 


Ὁ — ἁγίων G; — τῶν ἁγίων (read of [the]) LtTraw. 
© ἀνελήμφθη LTTrA. ! τεσσεράκοντα LTTra. 
© ἐν πνεύματι βαπτισθήσεσθε LTTrA, 


Ρ ἠρώτων LTTrA. 
LTTrA. Ss nov of me LTTraw. 


t — ἐν L[tra]. Y— THA. 


i — ἀποστόλων T. 
™ αὐτοῖς παρήγγειλεν AW. 
a — δὲ and rr. 
τ Σαμαρίᾳ T. 


THE former treatise 
have I made, O Theoe 
philus, of all that 
Jesus began both to 
do ard teach, 2 until 
the day in which he 
Was taken up, after 
that he through the 
Holy Ghost had given 
commandments unto 
the apostles whom he 
had chosen: 3 to whom 
also he shewed himseif 
alive after his pas- 
sion by many infalli- 
ble proofs, being seen 
of them forty days, 
and speaking of the 
things pertaining to 
the kingdom of God: 
4 and, being assem- 
bled together with 
them, commanded 
them that they should 
not depart from Jeru- 
salem, but wait for 
the promise of the Fa- 
ther, which, saith he, 
ye have heard of me. 
5 For John truly bap- 
tized with water ; but 
ye shall be baptized 
with the Holy Ghost 
not many days hence, 
6 When they therefore 
were come together, 
they asked of him, 
saying, Lord, wilt 
thou at this time re- 
store again the king. 
dom toIsrael? 7 And 
he said unto them, It 
is not for you to know 
the times or the sea- 
sons, which the Father 
hath put in his own 
power. 8 But yeshail 
receive power, after 
that the Holy Ghost is 
come upon you: and 
ye shall be witnesses 
unto me both in Jeru- 
salem, and in all Ju- 
da, and in Samaria, 
and unto the utter- 
most part of the 
earth. 9 And whenhe 
had spoken these 
things, while they be- 
held, he was taken up; 
and a cloud received 
him out of their sight. 


10 And while they 
looked stedfastly to- 
ward heaven as he 


j — ὃ LTraw, 
2 Ἰωάνης Tr. 
τ λήμψεσθε 


912 


went up, behold, two 
men stood by them in 
white apparel; llwhich 
also said, Ye men of 
Galilee, why stand ye 
gazing up into heaven? 
this same Jesus,which 
is taken up from you 
into heaven, shall so 
come in like manner 
as ye have seen him go 
into heaven. 12 Then 
returned they unto Je- 
rusalem from _ the 
mount called Olivet, 
which is from Jerusa- 
jem a sabbath day’s 
journey. 13 And when 
they were come in, 
they went up into an 
upper room, where 
abode both Peter, and 
James, and John, and 
Andrew, Philip, and 
Thomas, Bartholo- 
mew, and Matthew, 
James the son of Al- 
pheeus, and Simon Ze- 
totes, and Judas the 
brother of James. 
14 These all continued 
with one accord in 
prayer and supplica- 
tion, with the women, 
and Mary the mother 
of Jesus, and with his 
brethren. 


15 And in those days 
Peter stood up in the 
midst of the disciples, 
and said, (the number 
of names. together 
were about an hun- 
dred and _ twenty,) 
16 Men and brethren, 
this scripture must 
needs have been ful- 
filled, which the Holy 
Ghost by the mouth 
of David spake before 
eoncerning Judas, 
which was guide to 
them that took Jesus, 
17 For he wasnumber- 
ed with us, and had 
obtained part of this 
ministry. 18 Now this 
man purchased a field 
with the reward of 
iniquity ; and falling 


TIPAZEIS. I. 
> ~ ‘ ᾽ 4 ” , , > ~ > > ~ 
αὐτοῦ, Kai ἰδοὺ ἄνδρες δύο παρειστήκεισαν αὐτοῖς ἔν “ἐσθῆτι 

the, ‘also*behold 7men “two stood by them in “apparel 
λευκῇ," 11 ot καὶ Yeizor,"”Avdpeg Γαλιλαῖοι, τί ἑστήκατε τὲἐμ- 
1white, who also said, Men Galileans, why doyestand look- 
βλέποντες" εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν ; οὗτος ὁ Ἰησοῦς ὁ "ἀναληφθεὶς" 
i into the heaven? This Jesus who was taken up 
εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν οὕτως ἐλεύσεται ὃν.τρόπον 
into the heaven thus will come in the manner 


> 3 ? A , 7 a ᾽ , , 
ἐθεάσασθε αὐτὸν πορευόμενον εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν. 12 Τότε 
ye beheld him going into the heaven. Then 


ὑπέστρεψαν εἰς ‘lepovcadynp ἀπὸ ὄρους τοῦ καλουμένου 
they returned to Jerusalem from [the] mount called 
ἐλαιῶνος, 8 ἐστιν ἐγγὺς Ἱερουσαλήμ, σαββάτου ἔχον 
of Olives, which is near Jerusalem, 38. *sabbath’s ‘being *distant 
ὁδόν. 18 Kai Ore εἰσῆλθον ϑάνέβησαν εἰς τὸ ὑπερῷον," 
journey. And when they had entered they went up to the upper chamber, 
οὗ ἦσαν καταμένοντες ὕ.τε.Πέτρος καὶ “Ι,άκωβος καὶ Ιωάν- 


where were staying both Peter and James and John 
νης" καὶ ᾿Ανδρέας, Φίλιππος καὶ Θωμᾶς, Βαρθολομαῖος καὶ 
and Andrew, e Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and 
ἀματθαῖος," ᾿Ιάκωβος ᾿Αλφαίου καὶ Σίμων ὁ Ζηλωτής, 
Matthew, James fson]of Alpheus and Simon the Zealot, 
καὶ ᾿Ιούδας ἸΙακώβου. 14 οὗτοι πάντες ἦσαν προσκαρ- 
and Jude [brother] of James. These all were “steadfastly 


τεροῦντες ὁμοθυμαδὸν τῇ προσευχῇ “καὶ TY δεήσει," σὺν 
Scontinuing with one accord inprayer and_ supplication, with [the] 
γυναιξὶν καὶ ‘Mapig' τῇ μητρὶ τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ, καὶ ξσὺν" τοῖς 


women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with 
ἀδελφοῖς. αὐτοῦ. 
his brethren. 
15 Kai ἐν ταῖς.ἡμέραις.ταύταις ἀναστὰς Πέτρος ἐν 
And in those days having ‘stood ‘*up ‘Peter in 


μέσῳ τῶν "μαθητῶν" εἶπεν᾽ ἦν τε ὄχλος ὀνομάτων 
{the] midst of the disciples said, (‘was ‘and (*the]*number ‘of *names 
ἐπὶ. τὸ. αὐτὸ Ἰὼς" ἑκατὸν ξεΐκοσιν"" 16"Avdpec ἀδελφοί, ἔδει 

Stogether about ἃ hundred and twenty,) - Men _sobrethren, it was neces- 

πληρωθῆναι τὴν. γραφὴν ἰταύτην," ἣν προεῖπεν τὸ 

sary “to *have *been °fulfilled this *scripture, which ‘spoke ®before *the 


πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον διὰ στόματος ™AaBid' περὶ ᾿Ιούδα τοῦ 


*Spirit “the “Holy by [the] mouth of David concerning Judas who 
γενομένου ὁδηγοῦ τοῖς συλλαβοῦσιν "τὸν" ᾿Ιησοῦν" 17 ore 
became guide to those who took Jesus ; for 


κατηριθμημένος ἦν “σὺν" ἡμῖν. καὶ ἔλαχεν τὸν κλῆρον τῆς 


numbered he was with us, and obtained a part 
διακονίας.ταύτης. 18 Οὗτος μὲν οὖν ἐκτήσατο χωρίον 
in this service. This [man] indeed then got a field 


ἐκ Prov! μισθοῦ τῆς ἀδικίας, καὶ πρηνὴς γενόμενος 


headlong, he burst a- outof the reward of unrighteousness, and *headlong ‘having fallen 
sunder in the midst, >, 7 ͵ ὙΠ ἢ , , ‘ ΄ 2 αν 
and all his μόνε ἐλάκησεν μέσος, καὶ ἐξεχύθη πάντα τὰ.σπλάγχνα αὐτοῦ. 
gushed out. 19 Andit burst in [the] midst, and ‘gushed out ‘all “his *bowels. 

x ἐσθήσεσι(ν A) λευκαῖς LTTrA. Υ εἶπαν LTTrA. = βλέποντες ΤΊτ. ® ἀναλημφθεὶς 


LTTrA. 
ἃ Maé@atos LTTrA. 


ἃ ἀδελφῶν brethren LTTraw. 
scripture) Lttr[a]W. Y 
P — τοῦ (read a reward) GLTTrAW 


GLTTrAW. 


> εἰς TO ὑπερῴον ἀνέβησαν LTTrA. 


© Ἰωάννης (Ἰωάνης Tr) καὶ ᾿Ιάκωβος LTTrAW. 

Γ Μαριὰμ. TTr. & — σὺν LI[Tr]Aw. 
k εἴκοσι LTA. 1 _ ταύτην (read the 
2 — τὸν LTTrA. ο ἐν among 


ε — καὶ τῇ δεήσει GLTTrAW. 
VWTENT. “ 
m Aaveid LTTra; Δαυϊδ Gw. 


Bilt. ACTS. 


19 4 καὶ γνωστὸν ἐγένετο πᾶσιν τοῖς κατοικοῦσιν Ἱερουσαλήμ, 


And known [ἴΐ became toall those dwelling in Jerusalem, 
ὥστε κληθῆναι τὸ.χωρίον. ἐκεῖνο τῇ "ἰδίᾳ" διαλέκτῳ. αὐτῶν 
sothat was called that field in their own language 


᾿᾿Ακελδαμά," trovréori' χωρίον αἵματος. 20 yéypanraryap 


Aceldama ; that is, field of blood. For it has been written 
ἐν βίβλῳ ψαλμῶν, Γενηθήτω ἡ ἔπαυλις.αὐτοῦ ἔρημος. 
in [the] book of os Let *become "his 7homestead desolate, 
καὶ μὴ.ἔστω ὁ κατοικῶν ἐν αὐτῇ. καί, Τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν 
and let therenot be[one] dwelling in it; and, 5Overseership 
αὐτοῦ λάβοι" ἕτερος. 21 Δεῖ οὖν τῶν συνελθόντων 
*his ‘et take another. It behoves therefore of those *consorting 
ἡμῖν ἀνδρῶν ἐν παντὸὴ χρόνῳ ev ᾧ εἰσῆλθεν καὶ 
Swith*us ‘men aa all [the] time in which camein and 

> ? 
ἐξῆλθεν ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς ὁ κύριος ᾿Ιησοῦς, 22 ἀρξάμενος ἀπὸ τοῦ 
went out among 185 the Lord Jesus, beginning from the 
βαπτίσματος *Iwavvov' Yéwc! τῆς ἡμέρας ἧς ἀνελήφθη" 
aaa of John until the day inwhich he was taken up 
ἀφ᾽ τον τῷ Μάρτιηνα τῆς.ἀναστάσεως. αὐτοῦ “γενέσθαι σὺν 


from witness 10of 1*his }*resurrection *to *become *with 


« ~ ‘ » , ᾽ 4 ‘ , 
ἡμῖν" ἕνα τούτων. 23 Kai ἔστησαν δύο, ᾿Ιωσὴφ τὸν καλού- 
7us tone “of *these. And they set forth two, Joseph eall- 


μενον "BapoaBay,' ὃς ἐπεκλήθη ἸΙοῦστος, καὶ “Ματθίαν." 


ed Barsabas, who wassurnamed Justus, and Matthias. 
24 καὶ προσευξάμενοι elroy," Σὺ κύριε, καρδιογνῶστα 
And praying they said, Thou Lord, knower of the hearts 


πάντων, ἀνάδειξον “ἐκ τούτων τῶν δύο Eva ὃν ἐξελέξω" 
of all, shew of these two *one 'which thou didst choose 
25 λαβεῖν τὸν ἰκλῆρον" τῆς.διακονίας. ταύτης Kai ἀποστολῆς. 

to receive the part of this service and apodtleniity, 
8" ἧς παρέβη  ‘lovdac, πορευθῆναι εἰς τὸν τόπον 

from which ae 3661] ‘Judas, to go to his “place 


τὸν ἴδιον. 26 Kai ἔδωκαν κλήρους Ῥαὐτῶν," καὶ ἔπεσεν ὁ 
Jown. And they gave 2lots ‘their, and 3661 ‘the 


κλῆρος ἐπὶ “Ματθίαν," καὶ Ἰσυγκατεψηφίσθη" μετὰ τῶν’ ἕνδεκα 
“lot on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven 


ἀποστόλων. 
apostles. 


2 Kai ἐν τῷ ἔσυμπληροῦσθαι" τὴν ἡμέραν τῆς πεντη- 


And during the accomplishing of the day of Pente- 
κοστῆς ἦσαν ‘imavrec guobvpaddy' ἐπὶ. τὸ αὐτό. 2 καὶ 
cost they were all with one accord in the same place. And 
ἐγένετο ἄφνω ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἦχος τσ φ oni 

came tsuddenly out of the heaven a sound shing 
πνοῆς βιαίας, καὶ ἐπλήρωσεν ὅλον τὸν ste οὗ ἦσαν 


‘of 7a “breath “violent, and filled 2whole 'the house where they were 


313 


was known unto al 
tae dwellers at Jeru- 
salem; insomuch ag 
that field is called in 
their proper tongue, 
Aceldama, that is to 
say, The field of blood. 
20 For it is written in 
the book of Psalms. 
Let his habitation be 
desolate, and let ne 
man dwell therein: 
and his _bishoprick 
let another take. 
21 Wherefore of these 
men which have com- 
panied with us all the 
time that the Lord Je- 
sus went in and out 
among us, 22 begin- 
ning from the baptism 
of John, unto that 
same day that he was 
taken up from us, 
must one be ordained 
to be a witness with 
us of his resurrection. 
23 And they appointed 
two, Joseph called 
Barsabas, who was 
surnamed Justus, and 
Matthias. 24 And they 
prayed, andsaid, Thon, 
Lord, which knowest 
the hearts of all men, 
shew whether of these 
two thou hast chosen, 
25 that he may take 
part of this ministry 
and apostleship, from 
which Judas by trans- 
gression fell, that he 
might go to his own 
place, 26 And they 
gave forth their lots; 
and the lot fell upon 
Matthias ; and he was 
numbered with the 
eleyen apostles. 


II. And when the 
day of Pentecost was 
fully come, they were 
all with one accord in 
one place. 2 And sud- 
denly there came a 
sound from heaven as 
of a rushing mighty 
wind, and it filled all 
the house where they 
were sitting. 3 And 
there appeared unto 
them cloven tongues 
like as of fire, and it 
sat upon each of them. 
4 And they were all 


αἰκαθήμενοι"" 8 καὶ ὥφθησαν αὐτοῖς πο ρολῃς γλῶσσαι 
sitting. And there appeared to them divided tongues 
ὡσεὶ πυρός, "ἐκάθισέν. τε ἐφ᾽ Eva ἕκαστον αὐτῶν 4 Kai 
as of fire, and sat upon 7one Teach of them. And 
a+ ὃ Τ. τ [ἰδίᾳ] Tra. 


TTr. t τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν GTTr. ἡ λαβέτω LTTrAW. 
x ᾿Ιωάνον Tr. Υ axpeT. 2 ἀνελήμφθη LTTrA. 
σαββᾶν LTTrA. © Μαθθίαν TTra 4 εἶπαν LTTrAW. 

ἕνα GLTTrAW. { τόπον place LTTrA. 8 ἀφ᾽ LTTrAW. 
ἱσυν- Τ. k συν- Ta. 1 πάντες ὁμοῦ all together LrTra. 
ξκάθισεν LITr, 


8 ᾿Ακελδαμάχ Aceldamach La 5 ᾿Αχελδαμάχ Acheldamach 
* — ἐν (read ᾧ in which) LTTra. 
8 σὺν ἡμῖν γενέσθαι LITrAW. 


b Bap- 


ε ov εξελέξω ἐκ τούτων τῶν δύο 
h αὐτοῖς on them LTTra. 
τὰ καθεζόμενοι L. 


n kat 


914 


filled with the Holy 
Ghost, and began to 
speak with other 
tongues, as the Spirit 
gave them utterance. 
5 And there were 
dwelling at Jerusalem 
Jews, devout men, out 
of every nation under 
heaven, 6 Now when 
this was noised abroad, 
the multitude came 
together, and were 
confounded, because 
that every man heard 
them speak in his own 
language. 7 And they 
were all amazed and 
marvelled, saying one 
to another, Behold, are 
not all these which 
speak Galileans ? 
8 And how hear we 
every Man in our own 
tongue, wherein we 
were born? 9 Par- 
thians, and Medes, and 
Elamites, and _ the 
dwellers in Mesopo- 
tamia, and in Juda, 
and Cappadocia, in 
Pontus, and ia, 
10 Phrygia, and Pam- 
phylia, in Egypt,.and 
in the parts of Libya 
about Cyrene, and 
strangers of Rome, 
Jews and proselytes, 
11 Cretes and Arabi- 
als, we do hear them 
speak in our tongues 
the wonderful works 
of God. 12 And they 
were all amazed, and 
were in doubt, saying 
one to another, What 
meaneth this? 13 O- 
thers mocking said, 
These men are full of 
new wine. 14 But Pe- 
ter, standing up with 
the eleven, lifted up 
his voice, and said 
unto them, Ye men of 
Judza, and all ye that 
dwell at Jerusalem, be 
this known unto you, 
and hearken to my 
words: 15 for these 
arenot drunken, as ye 
suppose, seeing it is 
but the third hour of 
the day. 16 But this 
is that which was spo- 
ken by the prophet 
Joel; 17 And it shall 
come to pass in the 
last days, saith God, I 


© πάντες LTTr. 


were amazed) L[Tr]a. 


vw ᾽᾿Ελαμεῖται τ. 
3. Ὁ ὁ LTTrA. 


be Tah ἃς 


WPASZEIS. II. 


ἐπλήσθησαν ἅπαντες" πνεύματος ἁγίου, καὶ ἤρξαντο λαλεῖν 
they were “filled tall with({the]*Spirit ‘Holy, and began tospeak 
ἑτέραις γλώσσαις, καθὼς τὸ πνεῦμα ἐδίδου Ῥαὐτοῖς ἀποφθέγ- 
with other tongues, as the Spirit gave to them to utter 


γεσθαι." 5” Hoav.dé «ἐνὶ Ἱερουσαλὴμ κατοικοῦντες ᾿Ιουδαῖοι, 
forth. Now ?were (tin 2Jerusalem dwelling Jews, 


ἄνδρες εὐλαβεῖς ἀπὸ παντὸς ἔθνους τῶν ὑπὸ TOY οὐρανόν. 
"men pious from every nation of those under the heaven. 
6 γενομένης.δὲ τῆς φωνῆς ταύτης, συνῆλθεν τὸ πλῆθος 
But having *arisen'the “rumour οὗ “185, °came }°together 7the "multitude 
καὶ συνεχύθη᾽ ore ἤκουον εἷς ἕκαστος τῇ ἰδίᾳ διαλέκτῳ 
and were confounded, because “heard *one ‘cach inhisown language 
λαλούντων αὐτῶν. 7 ἐξίσταντο.δὲ πάντες! καὶ ἐθαύμαζον, 
“speaking ‘them. And *were *amazed tall and wondered, 
λέγοντες πρὸς ἀλλήλους," ᾿Οὐκ! ἰδοὺ πάντες" οὗτοί εἰσιν οἱ 
saying to one another, sNot ‘lo “all 5these “are who 
λαλοῦντες Γαλιλαῖοι; ὃ καὶ πῶς ἡμεῖς ἀκούομεν ἕκαστος 
are speaking Galileans ? and how 2we ‘hear each 
~ ar , « ~ ? ic > ,ὔ , ‘ 
τῇ. -ἰδίᾳ.διαλέκτῳ. ἡμῶν ἐν y ἐγεννήθημεν, 9 Πάρθοι καὶ 
in our own language in which we were born, Parthians and 


Μῆδοι καὶ τ᾿ EXapira," καὶ οἱ κατοικοῦντες τὴν Μεσοπο- 
Medes and Elamites, and those who inhabit Mesopo- 


/ > a “ ‘ / , 4 ‘ ? /, 
ταμίαν, lovdaiay.re καὶ Καππαδοκίαν, Πόντον καὶ τὴν ᾿Ασίαν, 
tamia, and Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, 


10 Φρυγίαν.τε καὶ Παμφυλίαν, Αἴγυπτον καὶ τὰ μέρη τῆς 
both Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts 
Λιβύης τῆς κατὰ Κυρήνην, καὶ οἱ ἐπιδημοῦντες 
of Libya which [15] about Cyrene, and the sojourning (here) 
Ῥωμαῖοι, Lovdaioi.re καὶ προσήλυτοι, 11 Κρῆτες καὶ “ApaBec, 
Romans, both Jews and _proselytes, Cretans and Arabians, 
ἀκούομεν λαλούντων αὐτῶν ταῖϊς.ἡμετέραις γλώσσαις τὰ 
we hear *speaking +them in our own tongues the 
μεγαλεῖα Tov θεοῦ ; 12 ᾿Εξίσταντο.δὲ πάντες καὶ “διηπόρουν," 


i 


great things of God? And *were *amazed tall and were in perplexity, 
ἄλλος.πρὸς. ἄλλον λέγοντες, Τί Τἂν.θέλοι" τοῦτο εἶναι ; 
one to another saying, What would this be? 


13 “Ἕτεροι.δὲ ἐχλενάζοντες" ἔλεγον, Ὅτι γλεύκους μεμεστω- 
But others mocking said, Of new wine 3full 
μένοι εἰσίν. 14 Σταθεὶς.δὲ * Πέτρος σὺν τοῖς ἕνδεκα ἐπῆρεν 
1they are. But *standing *up ‘Peter with the eleven liftedup 
‘ \ ᾽ ~ ‘ ? , ? ~ a ? ~ 
τὴν.φωνὴν.αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀπεφθέγξατο αὐτοῖς, “Avdpec ᾿Ιουδαῖοι; 
his voice and spoke forth to them, Men Jews, 
καὶ οἱ κατοικοῦντες ‘Iepovoadyp “ἅπαντες, τοῦτο ὑμῖν 
and*ye*who ‘inhabit 5Jerusalem tall, 7this 1°to **you 


γνωστὸν ἔστω, Kai ἐνωτίσασθε τὰ ῥήματά.μου. 15 ov-yap we 


*known “Ἰοὺ ®be, and give heed to my words: fornot as 
ὑμεῖς ὑπολαμβάνετε, οὗτοι μεθύουσιν" ἔστιν. γὰ ὥρα 

ye take it, “these ‘are drunken, foritis [the] “hour 
τρίτη τῆς ἡμέρας" 16 ἀλλὰ τοῦτό ἐστιν τὸ εἰρημένον 


‘third of the but this that which has been spoken 
διὰ τοῦ προφήτου ἢ ωήλ," 17 “Καὶ ἔσται ἐν ταῖς ἐσχάταις 
by the prophet Joel, And itshallbe in the last 


day ; is 


P ἀποφθέγγεσθαι αὐτοῖς LTTrAW. 4 εἰς T. τ — πάντες (read they 
® — πρὸς ἀλλήλους LTTrA. * Ovx LT; Οὐχὶ Tra. Y ἅπαντες LTA. 
x διηποροῦντο TTrA. Σ θέλει LT Tr. 1 διαχλευάζοντες GLTTrAW. 
ς -- Kala. 


Π. ACTS. 
ἡμέραις, λέγει ὁ θεός, ἐκχεῶ ἀπὸ τοῦ.πνεύματός.μου ἐπι 
days, Baye God, Iwill pour out of my Spirit wpon 


πᾶσαν σάρκα, Kai προφητεύσουσιν οἱ υἱοὶ ὑμῶν Kai ai θυγα- 
811 flesh; and shall prophesy, ope sons and REE 


τέρες ὑμῶν" καὶ οἱ-νεανίσκοι. ὑμῶν ὁράσεις ὄψονται, καὶ οἱ 


ters tyour; and your young men visions shallsee, and 
πρεσβύτεροι ὑμῶν “ἐνύπνια! tvuTmacOnoovra 18 feat γε" 
your elders dreams shall dream ; and even 


ἐπὶ τοὺς. δούλους. μου καὶ ἐπὶ τὰς.δούλας. μου ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις 


upon my bondmen and upon mai bondwomen in *days 
ἐκείναις ἐκχεῶ ἀπὸ τοῦ.πνεὐματός. μου, καὶ προφητεύ- 
‘those willl pourout of my Spirit, and they shall pro- 


σουσιν. 19 καὶ δώσω τέρατα ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ ἄνω Kai σημεῖα 


phesy j and I will give wonders in the heaven above and _ signs 
ἐπὶ THC γῆς κάτω, αἷμα καὶ πῦρ καὶ ἀτμίδα καπνοῦ. 20 ὁ 
on the earth below, blood and fire and vapour of smoke. The 


ἽΧΙΕ μεταστραφήσεται εἰς σκότος καὶ ἡ σελήνη εἰς αἷμα, 
shall be turned into darkness and the moon into blood, 


πρὶν δὴ" ἐλθεῖν "τὴν" ἡμέραν κυρίου τὴν μεγάλην ‘kai 
before come day Sof (7the] *Lord ‘the 2oreat Sand 
ἐπιφανῆ." 21 Kai ἔσται. πᾶς ὃς ἂν" ἐπικαλέσηται τὸ 
*manifest. And it shall be, everyone whoever shalleallupon the 


ὕνομα κυρίου σωθήσεται. 22” Avdoec ᾿Ισραηλῖται," ἀκούσατε 
name of [the] Lord shall be saved. Men Israelites, hear 


τοὺς λόγους τούτους" ᾿Ιησοῦν τὸν Ναζωραῖον, ἄνδρα "ἀπὸ 
these words : Jesus the Nazarean, ὃ. man by 
τοῦ θεοῦ ἀποδεδειγμένον" εἰς ὑμᾶς δυνάμεσιν καὶ τέρασιν 
God set forth to you by works of power and wonders 
καὶ σημείοις, οἷς ἐποίησεν Ou αὐτοῦ ὁ θεὸς ἐν ee ὑμῶν, 
and signs, which *wrought *by *him ‘God in *midst ‘your, 
‘ \ \ ~ ~ 
καθὼς "καὶ αὐτοὶ οἴδατε, 23 τοῦτον TH ὡρισμένῃ βουλῇ 
as also yourselves know: him, “*by *the *determinate ®counsel 


καὶ προγνώσει τοῦ θεοῦ ἔκδοτον σλαβόντες" διὰ Ῥχειρῶν" 
‘and "foreknowledge ®%of °God ‘given *up, having taken by “hands 


ἀνόμων προσπήξαντες “ἀνείλετε"" 24 ὃν ὁ θεὸς ἀνέστησεν, 
-lawless, having crucified ye put to death. Whom God raised up, 


, ~ , x 
λύσας τὰς ὠδῖνας τοῦ θανάτου, καθότι οὐκιἦν δυνατὸν 
having loosedthe throes of death, inasmuch as it was not pogsible 


κρατεῖσθαι αὐτὸν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 25 τΔαβὶδ'. γὰρ λέγει εἰς 
jfor] to *be *held tThim by it ; for David says asto 


αὐτόν, "Προωρώμην" τὸν κύριον ᾿ ἐνώπιόν μου “διὰςπαντός," 
him, I foresaw the Lord before me continually, 


o ? ? / ev ‘4 ~ 4 ~ 
ὅτι ἐκ δεξιῶν μου ἐστίν, ἵνα μὴ.σαλευθῶ. 26 διὰ τοῦτο 
because αὖ myrighthand heis, that I may not be shaken. Therefore 


γεὐφράνθη" τὴ καρδία. μου" καὶ ἠγαλλιάσατο ἡ.γλῶσσά. μου" 


315 


will pour out of my 
Spirit upon all flesh: 
and your sonsand your 
daughters shall pro- 
phesy, and your young 
men shall see visions, 
and your old men shall 
dream dreams: 18and 
on my servants and on 
my handmaidens I 
will pour out in those 
days of my Spirit; 
and they shall prophe- 
sy: 19and I willshew 
wonders in heaven 
above, and signs in 
the earth beneath; 
blood, and fire, and va- 
pour of smoke: 20the 
sun shall be turned 
into darkness, and the 
moon into blood, be- 
fore that great and 
notable day of the 
Lord come: 21 and it 
shall come to pass, 
that whosoever shall 
call on the name of 
the Lord shall be 
saved, 22 Ye men of 
Israel, hear these 
words; Jesus of Na- 
zareth, a man approv- 
ed of God among you 
by miracles and won- 
ders and signs, which 
God did by him in the 
midst of you, as ye 
yourselves also know: 
23 him, being delivered 
by the determinate 
counsel and_ fore- 
knowledge of God, ye 
have taken, and by 
wicked hands have 
crucified and slain: 
24 whom God hath 
raised up, having 
loosed the pains of 
death: because it was 
not possible that he 
should be holden of it. 
25 For David speak- 
eth concerning him, I 
foresaw the Lord al- 
ways before my face, 
for he is on my right 
hand, that Ishould not 
be moved: 26 therefore 
did my heart rejoice, 
and my tongue was 
glad; moreover also 
my flesh shall rest in 
hope : 27 because thou 
wilt not leave my soul 
in hell, neither wilt 


"rejoiced Amy *heart and Sexulted my *tongue ; 
ἔτιιδὲ καὶ ἡ. σἀρξ μου κατασκηνώσει Yim’! ἐλπίδι. 27 ὅτι οὐκ 
yeamore, also. my flesh shall rest in hope, for *not 
Ξἐγκαταλείψεις" τὴν.Ψυχήν.μου εἰς "ἔδου," οὐδὲ δώσεις τὸν 
thou *wilt leave my soul in hades, nor wilt thou give 
© ενυπνιοις With dreams GLTTraw. ‘ kavye GT. 8 — ἢ LTTr. h — rhy LITrA. 


— καὶ ἐπιφανῆ 1. Κ ἐὰν Tra. 1 Ἰσραηλεῖται Τ. 
2 — καὶ LTTrA. — λαβόντες LTTraA. 
[ones]) LTTra. 4 ce GLTTraw. 

* + pov (read my Lord) 1. 

Υ ἐφ᾽ LT. : ἐνκαταλείψεις τ. 


τ Δανεὶδ LTTrA ; Δαυὶδ αν. 
Υ διαπαντός ΟΤ. τ ηὐφράνθη LTTrAW. 
a ἄδην LTTrAW. 


τὰ ἀποδεδειγμένον ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ TTr. 


P χειρὸς hand (read by [the] hand of lawless 


5 Προορώμην LTTrA. 
χ μου ἡ καρδία TTrA. 


916 


thou suffer thine Holy 
One to see corruption. 
28 Thou hast made 
known to me the ways 
of life; thou shalt 
make me full of joy 
with thy countenance, 
29 Men and brethren, 
let me freely speak 
unto ace of the patri- 
arch David, that he is 
both dead and buried, 
and his sepulchre is 
with us unto this day. 
30 Therefore being a 
prophet, and knowing 
that God had sworn 
with an oath to him, 
that of the fruit of his 
loins, according to the 
flesh, he would raise 
up Christ to sit on his 
throne: 31 he seeing 
this before spake of 
the resurrection of 
Christ, that his soul 
was not left in hell, 
neither his flesh did 
see corruption. 32 This 
Jesus hath God raised 
up, whereof we all are 
witnesses. 33 There- 
fore being by the right 
hand of God exalted, 
and having received 
of the Father the pro- 
mise of the Holy 
Ghost, he hath shed 
forth this, which ye 
now see and hear. 
84 For David is not 
ascended into the hea- 
vyens: but he saith him- 
self, The LORD said 
unto my Lord, Sit 
thou on my right 
hand, 35until I make 
thy foes thy footstool. 
36 Therefore let all the 
house of Israel know 
assuredly, that God 
hath made that same 
Jesus, whom ye have 
crucified, both Lord 
and Christ. 


37 Now when they 
heard this, they were 
pricked in their heart, 
and said unto Peter 
and to the rest of the 
apostles, Men and 
brethren, what shall 
we do? 38 Then Peter 
said unto them, Re- 
pent, and be baptized 
every one of youin the 
name of Jesus Christ 


Ὁ Aavetd LYTrA; Δαυὶδ αν. 
ε οὔτε LTTrAW. 
h ἄδην 1. 


θρόνον LITrA. 

GLTTrA. 

τὰ + καὶ also t[a], 
ἱστὸν GLTTrAW. 


O TTra. sway: 


ΠΡΆΞΕΙΣ. 


ὅσιόν σου ἰδεῖν 
7holy one ‘thy to see 


Ths 


28 ἐγνώρισας μοι ὁδοὺς 
Thou didst make known tome paths 


διαφθοράν. 


corruption. 


ζωῆς: πληρώσεις pe εὐφροσύνης μετὰ τοῦ.προσώπου.σου. 
of life, thou wilt fill me with joy with thy countenance, 
29 ΓΑνδρες ἀδελφοί, ἐξὸν εἰπεῖν μετὰ παῤῥησίας 


Men brethren, 


πρὸς ὑμᾶς περὶ 
to 


it is permitted [me] to speak with freedom 
τοῦ πατριάρχου ὑΔαβίδ," Ore καὶ ἐτελεύτη- 
you concerning the patriarch David, that both he died 
σεν καὶ ἐτάφη. Kai τὸ.μνῆμα. αὐτοῦ ἐστιν ἔν ἡμῖν ἄχρι 
and was buried, and his tomb is amongst us unto 


τῆς.ἡμέρας. ταύτης. 80 προφήτης οὖν ὑπάρχων, καὶ εἰδὼς 


this day. A prophet therefore being, and knowing 
Ort ὅρκῳ ὥὦμοσεν αὐτῷ ὁθεός, ἐκ καρποῦ τῆς ὀσφύος 
that withan oath “swore *to*him 1God, οἵ [086] fruit of “loins 


αὐτοῦ “τὸ. κατὰ σάρκα ἀναστήσειν τὸν χριστόν," καθίσαι ἐπὶ 


this asconcerning flesh to raise up the Christ, tosit upon 
ἀγοῦ. θρόνου" αὐτοῦ, 31 προϊδὼν ἐλάλησεν περὶ τῆς ava- 
his throne, foreseeing he spoke concerning the  resur- 


στάσεως τοῦ χριστοῦ, ὅτι “οὐ" farEreidOn' ξὴ. ψυχὴ αὐτοῦ!" εἰ 
η" ξὴ ψυχὴ εἰς 


rection ofthe Christ, that was not left his soul in 
U Η 4 « : ~ ΄ ~ A 
hadov," tobdé" ἡ. σὰρξ. αὐτοῦ εἶδεν διαφθοράν. 32 τοῦτον τὸν 
hades, nor his flesh saw corruption. This 
Ἰησοῦν ἀνέστησεν ὁ θεὸς οὗ πάντες ἡμεῖς ἐσμεν μάρτυρες. 
Jesus “raised *up *God whereof all we are witnesses. 
33 τῇ δεξιᾷ οὖν τοῦ θεοῦ. ὑψωθείς, τήν.τε ἐπαγ- 
By the right hand therefore of God having been exalted, and the pro- 
γελίαν τοῦ "ἁγίου πνεύματος[ λαβὼν παρὰ τοῦ πατρός, 


mise of the Holy Spirit having received from the Father, 
It ~ τι ] ~ Ι « “1 , \ 2 , > 
ἐξέχεεν τοῦτο ὃ |viv' ὑμεῖς Ὁ βλέπετε Kai ἀκούετε. 84 οὐ 
he poured out this which now ye behold and hear. “Not 
yap -AaBid! ἀνέβη εἰς τοὺς οὐρανούς, λέγει.δὲ αὐτός, 
for 2David “ascended into’ the heavens, but he says himself, 
Εἶπεν °6' κύριος τῷ.κυρίῳ.μου, Κάθου ἐκ δεξιῶν. μου" 35 ἕως 


Said the lord to my Lord, Sit at my right hand, until 
ἂν θῶ τοὺς.ἐχθρούς.σονυ ὑποπόδιον τῶν. ποδῶν. σου. 36 ᾿Α- 
Iplace thine enemies a footstool of thy feet. As- 
σφαλῶς οὖν γινωσκέτω πᾶς 5 οἶκος ᾿Ισραήλ, ὅτι Prai! 
suredly therefore let know all [the] house of Israel, that both 
κύριον “καὶ χριστὸν αὐτὸν! τὸ θεὸς ἐποίησεν," τοῦτον τὸν 
Lord and Christ him God made, this 
Ἰησοῦν ὃν ὑμεῖς ἐσταυρώσατε. 
Jesus whom ye crucified. 


37 ᾿Ακούσαντες.δὲ κατενύγησαν *rp-Kapdig," εἴπόν.τε πρὸς 
And having heard they were pricked in heart, and said to 

τὸν Πέτρον καὶ τοὺς λοιποὺς ἀποστόλους, Τί ἱποιήσομεν," 
Peter and the other apostles, What 5881] we do, 

ἄνδρες ἀδελφοί ; 88 Πέτρος. δὲ "ἔφη" πρὸς αὐτούς, Meravon- 

men brethren ? And Peter said to them, Repent, 

care’, καὶ βαπτισθήτω ἕκαστος ὑμῶν "ἐπὶ" τῷ ὀνόματι ᾿Τησοῦ 

and be baptized each of you in the name of Jesus 


d τὸν 


© — τὸ κατὰ σάρκα ἀναστήσειν τὸν χριστόν GLTTrA. 
« “ - 
8 -- ἡ ψυχὴ αὐτοῦ 


f ἐγκατελείφθη LTrA; ἐνκ- T. 

i οὔτε LTTrAW. Κ πνεύματος τοῦ ἁγίου LTTrA. |! — νῦν GLTTrA. 
n — ὃ (read [the]) TTra. ° + othen. P — καὶ E. 4 αὐτὸν καὶ 
τ ἐποίησεν ὃ θεός T. 5 τὴν καρδίαν LTTrA. t ποιήσωμεν Should we 
— ἔφη LTTrA. ~ + gyoly says T. x ἐν LTr. 


Ti; IT. ACTS. 


χριστοῦ, εἰς ἄφεσιν Yapuaprioy,' καὶ "λήψεσθε" τὴν δωρεὰν 


Christ, for remission of eins, and Je will receive the gift 
τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος. 39 ὑμῖν.γάρ ἐστιν ἡ ἐπαγγελία και 
of the Holy Spirit. For to you is the promise and 
τοῖς.τέκνοις ὑμῶν, Kai πᾶσιν τοῖς εἰς μακράν, “ὕσους" ἂν 


to your children, and toall those at adistamce, as many as 


προσκαλέσηται κύριος ὁ.θεὸς. ἡμῶν. 40 Ἑτέροις. τε λόγοις 
®may ‘call [Ὁ86] *Lord Sour *God. And with “other *words 


πλείοσιν διεμαρτύρετο" καὶ παρεκάλει “ λέγων, Σώθητε ἀπὸ 
Imany heearnestly testified and exhorted, saying, Be revs from 


τῆς “γενεᾶς τῆς.σκολιᾶς.ταύτης. 41 Οἱιμὲν.οὖὗν δΔἀσμένως" 
Ξρϑποσαΐίοπ 1this *crooked. Those therefore who _ gladly 


ἀποδεξάμενοι τὸν.λόγον.αὐτοῦ ἐβαπτίσθησαν" Kai προσετέθη- 


had welcomed his word were baptized ; and were added 
σαν © τῇ-ἡμέρᾳ.ἐκείνῃ ψυχαὶ ὡσεὶ τρισχίλιαι. 42 Ἦσαν. δὲ 
that day souls tabout *three “thousand. And they were 


mpooxaprepovyTec! τῇ διδαχῇ τῶν ἀποστόλων καὶ τῷ κοινωνίᾳ 
Bees Si continuing inthe teaching of the apostles and in fellowship, 


βκαὶ" τῇ κλάσει τοῦ ἄρτου Kai ταῖς προσευχαῖς. 43 "ἐγένετο" 
and the breaking of bread and prayers. “There *came 


δὲ πάσῳ ψυχῇ φόβος, wodAd.Jre! τέρατα καὶ σημεῖα διὰ 


‘and uponevery soul fear, and ic oon é and signs through 


τῶν ἀποστόλων ἐγίνετο.) 44 * πάντες.δὲ οἱ ἱπιστεύοντες" ἦσαν 
the apostles took place. Andall who believed were 


ἐπὶ.τὸ. αὐτὸ Kai εἶχον ἅπαντα κοινά, 45 Kai τὰ κτήματα 
together and had _ allthings common, and{their] possessions 
καὶ τὰς ὑπάρξεις ἐπίπρασκον, Kai διεμέριζον αὐτὰ πᾶσιν, 

and goods they sold, and divided them  toall, 


καθότι ἄν τις χρείαν εἶχεν. 46 καθ᾽ ἡμέραν.τε προσκαρ- 
according as anyone “need ‘had. And every day steadfastly 


τεροῦντες ὁμοθυμαδὸν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ, κλῶντέες.τε κατ᾽ .οἶκον 
continuing with one accord in the ee) and breaking “in [*their] *houses 


ἄρτον, μετελάμβανον τροφῆς ἐν ἀγαλλιάσει καὶ ἀφελότητι 
bread, they panos of food with gladness and simplicity 


καρδίας, 47 αἰνοῦντες τὸν θεὸν, καὶ ἔχοντες χάριν πρὸς ὅλον 


of heart, praising God, and having favour with “whole 
τὸν λαόν. 0.6& κύριος προσετίθει τοὺς σωζομένους 
the ῬΕΌΡΙΘΙ; ; andthe Lord added “those “who *were *being °saved 


καθ᾽ ἡμέραν Ὅτῃ ἐκκλησίᾳ." 


‘daily tothe assembly. 
3 "᾿Επὶ τὸ. αὐτὸ! οδὲ Tlérpoc' καὶ ῬΊἸωάννης" ἀνέβαινον 
ἐπ ine τ: land. *Peter “and *John went up 
εἰς TO ἱερὸν ἐπὶ THY ὥραν τῆς προσευχῆς τὴν «ἐγνάτην." 
into the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth ; 

2 καί Tic ἀνὴρ χωλὸς ἐκ κοιλίας μητρὸς αὐτοῦ ὑπάρχων 
and acertain man “lame “from womb *mother’s ‘his *being 
ἐβαστάζετο᾽ ὃν ἐτίθουν καθ᾽ «ἡμέραν πρὸς τὴν θύραν τοῦ 
was being carried, whom they placed daily at the door of the 
ἱεροῦ τὴν λεγομένην ‘Qoaiay, τοῦ αἰτεῖν nallebadalie παρὰ 
temple called Beautiful, to ask from 


Υ τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν ὑμῶν οἵ your sins τῦττ. 
τύρατο LITraw. © + αὐτοὺς them LITraw. 4 — agneves LTTra. 
{Γ- [ἐν] τῇ ξ καὶ LITrA. h ἐγίνετο LITra. 1 δὲ T. 
ἦν μέγας ἐπὶ πάντας. in Jerusalem, and great fear was upon all. T. 
all also) τ. 1 πιστεύσαντες T. mm τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ LTTra. 
chapter ii. LTTrA. © Πέτρος δὲ LTTra. Ρ Ιωάνης Tr. 


* λήμψεσθε LTTrA. 


8. ovs Whom L. 


317 


for the remission of 
sins, and ye shall 
receive the gift of the 
Holy Ghost. 39 For 
the promise is unto 
you, and to your child- 
ren and to all that are 
afar off, even as many 
as the Lord our God 
shall call. 40 And with 
many other words did 
he testify and exhort, 
saying,Save yourselves 
from this untoward 
generation. 4] Then 
they that gladly re- 
ceived his word were 
baptized: and the 
Same day there were 
added unto them about 
three thousand souls. 
42 Andthey continued 
stedfastly in the apos- 
tles’ doctrine and fel- 
lowship, and in break- 
ing of bread, and in 
prayers. 43 And fear 
came upon eyery soul: 
and many wonders 
andsigns were done by 
the apostles. 44 And 
all that believed 
were together, and 
had all things com- 
mon ; 45and sold their 
possessions and goods, 
and parted them to 
all men, as every man 
had need. 46 And 
they, continuing daily 
with one accord in the 
temple, and breaking 
bread from house to 
house, did eat. their 
meat with gladness 
and  singleness. of 
heart, 47 praising God, 
and having favour 
with all the people. 
And the Lord added 
to the church daily 
such as should be 
saved. 


11, Now Peter and 
John went up together 
into the temple at the 
hour of prayer, being 
the ninth hour. 2 And 
8. certain man lame 
from his mother’s 
womb was carried, 
whom they laid daily 
at the gate of the tem- 
ple which is calied 
Beautiful, to ask alms 
of them that entered 


Ὁ διεμαρ- 
e + ἐν in LTTr[A]. 


J+ ἐν Ἱερουσαλήμ, φόβος τε 


ΞΡ καὶ (read And 


Ὁ ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτό joined to 
4 ἐνάτην LTTrAW. 


318 

into the temple : 3 who 
seeing Peter and John 
about to go into the 
temple asked an alms. 
4 And Peter, fastening 
his eyes upon him 
with John, said, Look 
onus. 5 And he gave 
heed unto them, ex- 
pecting to receive 
something of them. 
6 Then Peter said, Sil- 
ver and gold have I 
none; but such as I 
have give I thee: In 
the name of Jesus 
Christ of Nazareth 
rise up and walk. 
7 And he took him by 
the right hand, and 
lifted him up: and im- 
mediately his feet and 
ancle bones received 
strength. 8 And he 
leaping up stood, and 
walked, and entered 
with them into the 
temple, walking, and 
leaping, and praising 
God. 9 And all the 
people saw him walk- 
ing and praising God : 
10 and they knew that 
it was he which sat 
for alms at the Beau- 
tiful gate of the tem- 
ple: and they were 
filled with wonder and 
amazement at that 
which had happened 
unto him. 11 And as 
the lame man which 
was healed held Peter 
and John, all the peo- 
ple ran together unto 
them in the porch that 
is called Solomon’s, 
greatly wondering. 
12 And when Peter 
saw it, he answered 
unto the people, Ye 
men of Israel, why 
marvel ye at this? or 
why look ye so earn- 
estly on us, as though 
by our own power or 
holiness we had made 
this man to walk? 
13 The God of Abra- 
ham, and of Isaac, 
and of Jacob, the God 
of our fathers, hath 
glorified his Son Je- 
sus; whom ye _ de- 
livered up, and denied 
him in the presence of 
Pilate, when he was 
determined to let him 


W BAe BIS. ITl. 
~ > t ? 4 (ἃ , a Int , ι 
τῶν εἰσπορευομένων εἰς τὸ ἱερόν. 8 ὃς ἰδὼν Πέτρον καὶ 
those who were going into the temple; who seeing Peter and 
Plwarvyny' μέλλοντας εἰσιέναι εἰς TO ἱερόν, ἠρώτα ἐλεημοσύ- 
John being about toenter intothe temple, asked %alms 
νην λαβεῖν. 4 arevioag.dé Πέτρος εἰς αὐτὸν σὺν τῷ * lway- 
1to ζγϑοθῖτο. And*looking*intently *Peter upon him with John 
vy εἶπεν, Βλέψον εἰς ἡμᾶς. 5 ‘Ode ἐπεῖχεν αὐτοῖς, προσδοκῶν 
said, Look on 1.85. And he gave heed to them, expecting 
τι παρ᾽ αὐτῶν λαβεῖν. 6 εἶπεν.δὲ Πέτρος, ᾿Αργύριον καὶ 
something from them to receive. But said Peter, Silver and 
χρυσίον οὐχιὑπάρχει por 6.02 ἔχω, τοῦτό σοι δίδωμι. 
gold there isnot tome, but what Ihave, this tothee Igive: 
ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ Tov Ναζωραίου '᾿ἔγειραι καὶ" 
In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarrean riseup and 
περιπάτει. 7 Kai πιάσας αὐτὸν τῆς δεξιᾶς χειρὸς ἤγειρεν" 
walk, And having taken him by the right hand he raised up 
παραχρῆμα.δὲ ἐστερεώθησαν “αὐτοῦ at βάσεις" Kai τὰ 
{(him], and immediately were strengthened his feet and 
x Lar a|| yi ἊΣ , » \ ’ ΑἹ 27_w 
σφυρά"" 8 καὶ ἐξαλλόμενος ἔστη Kai περιεπάτει, καὶ εἰσῆλ- 
ankle bones. And leaping up hestoodand walked, and entered 
θεν σὺν αὐτοῖς εἰς TO ἱερόν, περιπατῶν Kai ἁλλόμενος Yrat' 
with them into the temple, walking and leaping and 
αἰνῶν τὸν θεόν. 9 Kai εἶδεν ταὐτὸν πᾶς ὁ λαὸς" περιπα- 
praising God. And ‘saw Shim tall the *people walk- 
τοῦντα καὶ αἰνοῦντα τὸν θεόν. 10 ἐπεγίνωσκόν ὅτε! αὐτὸν 
ing and praising God. And they recognized him 
ore Ῥοὗτος! ἦν ὁ πρὸς τὴν ἐλεημοσύνην καθήμενος ἐπὶ 
that he itwaswho for alms sitting at 
~ « / Γὰ ~ ε ae ‘ ? » ’ ‘ 
τῇ ‘Qoaig πύλῃ τοῦ ἱεροῦ" Kai ἐπλήσθησαν θάμβους καὶ 
the Beautiful gate ofthe temple, and they were filled with wonder and 


ἐκστάσεως ἐπὶ τῷ συμβεβηκότι αὐτῷ. 11 Κρατοῦντος.δὲ 


[was] 


amazement at that which had happened to him. And as *held 
ΞΡ ἰαθέ λοῦ" oy Ilé if ’' Twa ll 

TOU LAVEVTOC χωλου τον ETOOV Kat WAaVVNY, 

tthe who °had ®been “healed *lame [(*man) Peter and John, 


συνέδραμεν ἱπρὸς αὐτοὺς πᾶς ὁ λαὸς! ἐπὶ τῇ στοᾷ TH 
ran together to them all the people in the porch 
καλουμένῃ ΞΣολομῶντος," ἔκθαμβοι. 12 ἰδὼν. δὲ ὃ" Πέτρος 
called Solomon’s, greatly amazed. And seeing [it] Peter 
ἀπεκρίνατο πρὸς τὸν λαόν, “Avdpec ᾿Ἰσραηλῖται," τί θαυ- 
answered to the people, Men Israelites, why won- 
’ ᾿] ‘ 7 a « ~ Lf > / ε >? , , 
μάζετε ἐπὶ τούτῳ, ἢ ἡμῖν τί ἀτενίζετε ὡς ἰδίᾳ δυνάμει 
der ye at this? or onus why look intently as if by[our]own power 
ἢ εὐσεβείᾳ πεποιηκόσιν τοῦ περιπατεῖν αὐτόν; 18 ὁ θεὸς 
or piety [we] had made 2to “walk ‘him ? The God 
᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ ᾽Ἰσαὰκ καὶ ᾿Ιακώβ, ὁ θεὸς τῶν. πατέρων ἡμῶν, 
of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, the God of our fathers, 
ἐδόξασεν τὸν. παϊδα. αὐτοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦν᾽ ὃν dpeic! παρεδώκατε, 
glorified his servant Jesus, whom ye delivered up, 
καὶ ἠρνήσασθε αὐτὸν" κατὰ. πρόσωπον "Πιλάτου," κρίναντος 
and denied him in the presence of Pilate, having *adjudged 


τ Ἰωάνην Tr. 
him ΠΤΥΤΤΑ. 
LTTrAW. 
ε᾿Ιωάνην Tr. 
1 Ἰσραηλεῖται T. 
La[Tra ]. 


W ai βάσεις αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 
= δὲ LTTrA. 
f πᾶς ὃ λαὺς πρὸς αὐτοὺς LTTrA. 
k + θεὸς God L; + ὁ θεὸς T. 

» Πειλάτου T. 


- Ἰωάνῃ Tr. ¥ + αὐτόν 
2 πᾶς ὃ λαὸς αὐτὸν 
d + yoy ΤΊτ. 
bh + ὃ LITrA. 

πὶ — αὐτὸν 


t ἔγειρε καὶ L[Tr] ; — ἔγειραι και π[Α]. 

x σφυδρά 1. Υ [καὶ] L. 

ὁ αὑτοῦ he (held) Girrraw. 
8 Σολομῶνος GTrw. 

1 + μὲν indeed GLTTraw. 


b αὐτὸς LT. 


ACTS. 


ἐκείνου ἀπολύειν. 14 ὑμεῖς.δὲ τὸν ἅγιον καὶ δίκαιον 
the to release [him]. But ye the holy and righteous one 


ἠρνήσασθε, καὶ ἠτήσασθε ἄνδρα φονέα χαρισθῆναι ὑμῖν, 
denied, and requested aman amurderer to begranted to you, 
15 τὸν.δὲ ἀρχηγὸν τῆς ζωῆς ἀπεκτείνατε' ὃν ὁ θεὸς ἤγειρεν 
but 6 Author of life ye killed, whom God raised up 

ἐκ νεκρῶν, οὗ ἡμεῖς μάρτυρές ἐσμεν. 16 καὶ ἐπὶ 
from among [the] dead, whereof we witnesses are; and by 
TY πίστει τοῦ.ὀνόματος.αὐτοῦ τοῦτον ὃν θεωρεῖτε καὶ 
faith in his name this [man] whom yebehold and 
οἴδατε ἐστερέωσεν TO.dvopa.avTov' Kai ἡ πίστις ἡ δι᾿ 
know Ἰηδᾶθ *strong this "name ; and the faith which [15] by 


αὐτοῦ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ τὴν.ὁλοκληρίαν.ταύτην ἀπέναντι πάντων 
him gave tohim this complete soundness before all 

« ~ " ~ ? , e ‘ » ? , 

ὑμῶν. 17 καὶ νῦν, ἀδελφοί, οἶδα ὅτι κατὰ ἄγνοιαν ἐπράξατε, 

of you. And now, brethren, Iknowthat in ignorance  yeacted, 

ὥσπερ Kai οἱ.ἄρχοντες. ὑμῶν" 18 ὁ.δὲ θεὸς ἃ προκατήγγειλεν 


{π᾿ 


as also your rulers ; but God ‘what before announced 
διὰ στόματος πάντων τῶν.προφητῶν. αὐτοῦ" παθεῖν 
by [the] mouth of all his prophets (that] *should ‘suffer 


TOV χριστόνν, ἐπλήρωσεν οὕτως. 19 μετανοήσατε οὖν καὶ 
the Christ, he fulfilled thus, Repent therefore and 
ἐπιστρέψατε, Yeic' τὸ ἐξαλειφθῆναι ὑμῶν τὰς ἁμαρτίας, ὕπως 
be converted, for the blotting out of your sins, so that 
ἂν.ἔλθωσιν καιροὶ ἀναψύξεως ἀπὸ προσώπου τοῦ κυρίου, 
may come times of refreshing from([the] presence ofthe Lord, 
20 καὶ ἀποστείλῃ τὸν "προκεκηρυγμένον" ὑμῖν, "Ἰησοῦν 
and [that] he may send him who was before proclaimed toyou, Jesus 
χριστόν, 21 ὃν dei οὐρανὸν μὲν δέξασθαι ἄχρι χρόνων 


Christ, whom *must ‘heaven indeed receive till times 
ἀποκαταστάσεως πάντων, ὧν ἐλάλησεν ὁ θεὸς διὰ 
of restoration of all things, of which “spoke ‘God by [the] 


στόματος ‘ravrwy' ἁγίων “αὐτοῦ προφητῶν ἀπ᾽ αἰῶνος." 
mouth of all *holy this prophets from of old. 
22 ὑμωσῆς" μὲν *yap' ὑπρὸς τοὺς πατέρας" εἶπεν, Ὅτι 
“Moses 3indeed ‘for to the fathers said, 
προφήτην ὑμῖν ἀναστήσει κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὑμῶν" 
Α prophet toyou will raise *up ('the] *Lord 
τῶν.ἀδελφῶν. ὑμῶν, ὡς ἐμέ αὐτοῦ ἀκούσεσθε κατὰ πάντα 
your brethren, like me: him  shallyehear in _ all things 
doa.adv λαλήσῃ πρὸς ὑμᾶς. 23 ἔσται. δὲ πᾶσα ψυχὴ 
whatsoever he maysay to you. Anditshall be[thatjevery soul 
ἥτις δἂν" μὴ ἀκούσῃ τοῦ.προφήτου. ἐκείνου Ῥἐξολοθρευθήσεται" 
which may not hear that prophet shall be destroyed 
ἐκ τοῦ λαοῦ. 24 Kai πάντες.δὲ οἱ προφῆται ἀπὸ 
from among the people. And indeed all the prophets from 
Σαμουὴλ καὶ τῶν καθεξῆς, ὕσοι ἐλάλησαν καὶ “προκατήγ- 
Samuel and those subsequent, as many as spoke also before an- 
yerar' τὰς ἡμέρας. ταύτας. 25 ὑμεῖς ἐστε υἱοὶ τῶν προφητῶν 


ἐκ 
*God *your from among 


nounced these days. Ye are sons ofthe prophets 
καὶ τῆς διαθήκης ἧς “διέθετο ὁ θεὸς" πρὸς τοὺς πατέρας 
and of the covenant which “appointed ‘God to *fathers 


319 


go. 14 But ye denied 
the Holy One and the 
Just, and desired a 
murderer to be grant- 
ed unto you; ldand 
Killed the Prince of 
life, whom God hath 
raised from the dead ; 
whereof we are wit- 
nesses. 16 And his 
name through faith in 
his name hath made 
this man strong,whom 
ye see and know: yea, 
the faith which is by 
him hath given him 
this perfect soundness 
in the presence of 
you all. 17 And now, 
brethren, I wot that 
through ignorance ye 
did zt, as did also your 
rulers, 18 But those 
things, which God 
before had shewed by 
the mouth of all his 
prophets, that Christ 
should suffer, he hath 
so fulfilled. 19 Repent 
ye therefore, and be 
converted, that your 
sins may be blotted 
out, when the times 
of refreshing shall 
come from the pre- 
sence of the Lord; 
20 and he shall send 
Jesus Christ, which 
before was preached 
unto you: 21 whom 
the heaven must re- 
ceive until the times 
of restitution of all 
things, which God 
hath spoken by the 
mouth of all his holy 
prophets since the 
world began. 22 For 
Moses truly said unto 
the fathers, A prophet 
shall the Lord your 
God raise up unto you 
of your brethren, like 
unto me; him shall 
ye hear in all things 
whatsoever he shall 
say unto you. 23 And 
it shall come to pass, 
that every soul, which 
will not hear that pro- 
phet, shall be de- 
stroyed from among 
the people. 24 Yea, 
and all the prophets 
from Samuel and 
those that follow af- 
ter, as many as have 
spoken, have likewise 
foretold of these days. 
25 Ye are the children 
of the prophets, and 
of the covenant which 
God made with our 
fathers, saying unto 


ο — αὐτοῦ (read the prophets) Lrtra. 
τ προκεχειρισμένον was foreordained GLTTraw. 
GLTTrAW. am αἰῶνος αὐτοῦ προφητῶν LTTraA.  Mwioys GLTTraW. 
Υ — πρὸς τοὺς πατέρας LTTrA. 2 ἡμῶν Our T. 8 ἐὰν TA. 
© κατήγγειλαν announced GLTTraAw. ἃ + οἱ the GLTTraw. 


P + αὐτοῦ (read his Christ) Lrrraw. 
5 χριστὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν LTTraA. 


4 πρὸς Τ. 
t τῶν (omit all) 
xX — yap GLTTrAW. 


Ὁ ἐξολεθρευθήσεται LITra. 
© ὃ θεὸς διέθετο 1.. 


320 

Abraham, And in thy 
seed shall all the kin- 
dreds of the earth be 
blessed. 26 Unto you 
first God, having 
raised up his Son Je- 
sus, sent him to bless 
you, in turning away 
every one of you from 
his iniquities. 


IV. And as they 
spake unto the people, 
the priests, and the 
captain of the temple, 
and the Sadducees, 
came upon them, 
2 being grieved that 
they taught the peo- 
ple, and preached 
through Jesus the re- 
surrection from the 
dead. 3 And they laid 
hands on them, and 
put them in hold un- 
to the next day : for 
it was now eventide. 
4 Howbeit many of 
them which heard the 
word believed; and 
the number of the men 
was about five thou- 
sand, 


5 And it came to 
pass on the morrow, 
that their rulers, and 
elders, and _ scribes, 
6 and Annas the high 
priest, and Caiaphas, 
and John, and Alex- 
ander, andas many as 
were of the kindred 
of the high priest, 
were gathered toge- 
ther at Jerusalem. 
7 And when they had 
set them in the midst, 
they asked, By what 
power, or by what 
name, have ye done 
this? 8 Then Peter, 
filled with the Holy 
Ghost, said unto them, 
Ye rulers of the peo- 
ple, and elders of Is- 
rael, 9 if we this day 
be examined of the 
good deed done to 
the impotent man, by 
what means he ig 
made whole; 10 be it 
known unto you all, 
and to all the people 
of Israel, that by the 
name of Jesus Christ 
of Nazareth, whom ye 
crucified, whom God 
raised from the dead, 
even by him doth this 


TIPAZEIS. Ill, IV. 


᾿ἡμῶν," λέγων πρὸς ᾿Αβραάμ, Καὶ Ε τῷ σπερματίίσου ἐνευλο- 


our, saying to Abraham, in thy seed shall be 
γηθήσονται πᾶσαι αἱ πατριαὶ τῆς γῆς. 26 ὑμῖν πρῶτον 
blessed all the families of the earth. To you first 
h6 θεὸς ἀναστήσας" τὸν. παῖδα.αὐτοῦ ᾿Τησοῦν," ἀπέστειλεν 

God, having raised up his servant Jesus, sent 
αὐτὸν εὐλογοῦντα ὑμᾶς ἐν τῷ ἀποστρέφειν ἕκαστον ἀπὸ 
him, blessing you in turning each from 
τῶν πονηριῶν Εὑμῶν." 

*wickedness ‘your. 


4 Λαλούντων.δὲ αὐτῶν πρὸς τὸν λαόν, ἐπέστησαν αὐτοῖς 

And as *were *speaking ‘they to the people, came upon them 
οἱ ἱερεῖς Kai ὁ στρατηγὸς τοῦ ἱεροῦ Kai οἱ Σαδδουκαῖοι, 
the priests and captain ofthe temple and the Sadducees, 


2 διαπονούμενοι διὰ τὸ διδάσκειν αὐτοὺς τὸν λαόν, Kai 
being distressed because * teach 1they the people, and 


καταγγέλλειν ἐν τῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ τὴν ἀνάστασιν τὴν ἐκ 
announce in Jesus the resurrection which [is] from among 
νεκρῶν᾽ 3 καὶ ἐπέβαλον αὐτοῖς τὰς χεῖρας Kai ἔθεντοὶ 

[the] dead; and theylaid 7*on *them ‘hands and _ put 
εἰς τήρησιν εἰς THY αὔριον. ἢν. γὰρ ἑσπέρα ἤδη. 
[them] in hold till the morrow; for it was evening already, 


4 πολλοὶ δὲὲ τῶν ἀκουσάντων τὸν λόγον ἐπίστευσαν. 
But many of those who had heard the word believed, 


We. nO mil ? θ 4 ~ ᾽ ὃ ~ n° XII rx 10 , 
Kat EVEV) Uf ee 8) aol μος TWV αν βων WOEL χι ιαὺξες πέεγντε. 
and ®became ‘the *number “of*the ‘men about *thousand ‘five. 

5 “Eyévero.dé ἐπὶ τὴν αὔριον συναχθῆναι αὐτῶν 

And itcametopass on the morrow were gathered together their 
τοὺς ἄρχοντας καὶ 5 πρεσβυτέρους καὶ γραμματεῖς Peic! ‘Te- 
d 


rulers an elders and scribes at Je- 
ρουσαλήμ, 6 καὶ «Ανναν τὸν ἀρχιερέα καὶ Καϊάφαν καὶ 
rusalem, and Annas the high priest and Caiaphas and 
7 ΄ 4, , Π ‘ « ? , 
Ιωάννην καὶ ᾿Αλέξανδρον, καὶ door ἦσαν ἐκ γένους 
John and Alexander, and as many as were of *family 


ἀρχιερατικοῦ. 7 καὶ στήσαντες αὐτοὺς ἐν ττῷ" μέσῳ ἐπυν- 
thigh-priestly. And having placed them in the midst they 
θάνοντο, Ἔν ποίᾳ δυνάμει ἢ ἐν ποίῳ ὀνόματι “ἐποιήσατε 
inguired, In what power or in what name did 
τοῦτο" ὑμεῖς; ὃ Tore Πέτρος πλησθεὶς πνεύματος ἁγίου 
*this tye? Then Peter, filled with [the] *Spirit ‘Holy, 
εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, exaures τοῦ λαοῦ Kai πρεσβύτεροι 
said to them, ulers of the people and elders 
trov ᾿Ισραήλ," 9 εἰ ἡμεῖς σήμερον ἀνακρινόμεθα ἐπὶ εὐεργεσίᾳ 
of Israel, If we thisday areexamined asto a good work 
ἀνθρώπου.ἀσθενοῦς, ἐν τίνι οὗτος ᾿σέσωσται." 10 γνωστὸν 
{to the] infirm man, by what he has been cured, *known 
B “Ὁ ~ ‘ Αἵ ~ ~ > ΄ a ~ 
ἔστω πᾶσιν ὑμῖν Kai παντὶ τῷ aw ᾿Ισραήλ, ore ἐν τῷ 
‘be 7it toall you and toall the people ofIsrael, that in the 


, ~ ~ ~ ΄ὔ τι « ~ > 
ὀνόματι Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ τοῦ Ναζωραίου, ὃν ὑμεῖς ἐσταυ- 


name of Jesus Christ the Nazarewan, whom ye cruci- 

, Ν \ » “ ? ~ ? , 
ρώσατε, ὃν ὁ θεὸς ἤγειρεν ἐκ νεκρῶν, ἐν τούτῳ 
fied, whom God raised from among [the] dead, by him 


[ὑμῶν your TrA. 
< αὐτῶν their L. 
© + τοὺς the LTTrA. 
Ἀλέξανδρος LTTrA. 
Υ σέσωται T. 


h ἀναστήσας ὃ θεὸς ΤΑ. 1 — Ἰησοῦν GLTTrA. 

m — δ᾽ LI[Tr]A. 0 [ὡς7 LfrA; — ὡσεὶ T. 

9” Avvas ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς Kat Καϊάφας καὶ ᾿Ιωάννης καὶ 
5 τοῦτο ἐποιήσατε 1. t — τοῦ ᾿Ισραήλ Lrtr[a]. 


& + ἐν GLTTrAW. 

! + αὐτοὺς them w. 
Ρ ἐν LTrAW. 
τ --- τῷ @[A]. 


LW. 


οὗτος 


ACTS. 


παρέστηκεν ἐνώπιον ὑμῶν ὑγιής. 11 οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ 
this [man] stands before you sound, This is the 
λίθος ὁ ἐξουθενηθεὶς ὑφ᾽ ὑμῶν τῶν οἰκοδομούντων," 
stone which has been set at nought by you the builders, 

ὁ γενόμενος sic κεφαλὴν γωνίας. 12 καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν 
which is become head of [the] corner. And there is 
ἐν ἄλλῳ οὐδενὶ ἡ σωτηρία" "οὔτε". γὰρ ὄνομά ἐστιν ἕτερον 
in ζοῦμε ‘noone salvation, for neither *name ‘is?there another 
ὑπὸ τὸν οὐρανὸν τὸ δεδομένον ἐν ἀνθρώποις, ἐν ᾧ 
under the heayen which has been given among men, by which 
δεῖ σωθῆναι ἡμᾶς. 

Ξυηυβῦὺ *be *saved ‘we. 


13 Θεωροῦντες.δὲ 


But seeing 


YIwav- 
of John, 


τὴν τοῦ Πέτρου παῤῥησίαν καὶ 
the ?0f *Peter ‘boldness and 


‘4 , iA , » “2 7 
νου," καὶ καταλαβόμενοι ὅτι ἄνθρωποι ἀγράμματοί εἰσιν 
and having perceived that smen *unlettered ‘they “are 


A 3 ~ ? , ? v7, , > 4 ev 4 cmd 
καὶ ἰδιῶται, ἐθαύμαζον, ἐπεγίνωσκόν.τε αὐτοὺς Ori σὺν τῷ 


and uninstructed, they wondered, and they recognized them that with 
Ἰησοῦ ἦσαν. 14 rov2dé' ἄνθρωπον βλέποντες σὺν αὐτοῖς 
Jesus they were. But *the Sman Ybeholding ‘with “them 


ἑστῶτα τὸν τεθεραπευμένον, οὐδὲν εἶχον ἀντειπεῖν. 15 κελεύ- 
‘standing who 84 Ὀ661 Πθα]ϊθᾶ, nothing they had to gainsay. *Having 


σαντες δὲ αὐτοὺς ἔξω τοῦ συνεδρίου ἀπελθεῖν συνέβαλον" 
Scommanded*but them outside the sanhedrim to go they conferred 
πρὸς ἀλλήλους, 16 λέγοντες, Ti ποιήσομεν" τοῖς ἀνθρώ- 
with one another, saying, What shall we do to “men 
ποις τούτοις ; OTLpév.yao γνωστὸν σημεῖον γέγονεν 
these? for that indeed a known sign has come to pass 
Ov αὐτῶν, πᾶσιν τοῖς κατοικοῦσιν Ἱερουσαλὴμ φανερόν, 
through them, Sto*all *those ‘inhabiting Jerusalem (['is] *manifest, 
καὶ οὐ-δυνάμεθα “ἀρνήσασθαι" 17 ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα μὴ ἐπὶ. πλεῖον 
and we are unable to deny {it}. But that not further 


διανεμηθῇ εἰς τὸν λαόν, “ἀπειλῇ, ἀπειλησώμεθα αὐτοῖς 
it may spread among the people, withathreat let us threaten them 
μηκέτι λαλεῖν ἐπὶ τῷ.ὀνόματιιτούτῳ μηδενὶ ἀνθρώπων. 
no longer to speak in this name to any man. 
4 (lit. to no) 
\ , ‘ 7 ᾽ ~ | Aq , 
18 Kai καλέσαντες αὐτοὺς παρήγγειλαν “αὐτοῖς 'ro' καθόλου 
And having called them they charged them 7at Fall 
\ , x a7 > hs ~ , ~ ~ 
μὴ φθέγγεσθαι μηδὲ διδάσκειν ἐπὶ τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ Ἰησοῦ. 
ποῦ to speak nor to teach in the name of Jesus. 
« A , ‘ ΕΣ ’ " 
19 ὁ. δὲ: Πέτρος καὶ ξ᾿Τωάννης" ἀποκριθέντες "πρὸς αὐτοὺς 
But Peter and John apswering to them 
εἶπον. Et δίκαιόν ἐστιν ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ ὑμῶν ἀκοΐειν 


said, Whether right it is before God "to *you ‘to 7listen 


μᾶλλον ἢ τοῦ θεοῦ κρίνατε. 20 οὐ-δυνάμεθα yao ἡμεῖς ἃ 
rather than God, judge ye; Fcannot ‘for “we ‘what 
7.7" \ ~ e A 
Ἰεΐδομεν" καὶ ἠκούσαμεν μὴ. λαλεῖν. 21 Οἱ. δὲ προσαπειλη- 
™we*saw °and heard *but Sspeak. But they having further 
, ld x , ~ , 
σάμενοι ἀπέλυσαν αὐτούς, μηδὲν εὑρίσκοντες τὸπῶς κολά- 
threatened let 7g0 ‘them, nothing finding as to how they might 
σωνται αὐτοὺς διὰ τὸν λαόν, ὅτι πάντες ἐδόξαζον 
punish them onaccountof the people, because all were glorifying 


τ οἰκοδόμων LITA. χα οὐδὲ LTTrW. 
LITrA. > ποιήσωμεν Should we do Trra, 
ε — οαὐτοῖς (read [them]) LTTrA. f— τὸ LT. 
αὐτούς LTTrAW. i εἴδαμεν LTTrA. 


¥ Ἰωάνου Tr. 
© ἀρνεῖσθαι LTTrA. 


& ’Iwavns Tr. h 


321 
man stand here before 
you whole. 11 This is 


the stone which was 
set at nought of you 
builders, which is be- 
come the head of the 
corner. 12 Neither is 
there salvation in any 
other: for there is none 
other name under hea- 
ven given among men, 
whereby we must be 
saved. 


13 Now when they 
saw the boldness of 
Peter and John, and 
perceived that they 
were unlearned and 
ignorant men, they 
marvelled; and they 
took knowledge of 
them, that they had 
been with Jesus, 14And 
beholding the man 
which was _ healed 
standing with them, 
they could say nothing 
against it. 15 But 
when they had com- 
manded them to go a- 
side out of the council, 
they conferred among 
themselves, 16 saying, 
What shall we doto 
these men? for that 
indeed a notable mira- 
cle hath been done by 
them is manifest to 
all them that dwell in 
Jerusalem; and we 
cannot deny it. 17 But 
that it spread no fur- 
ther among the peo- 
ple, let us straitly 
threaten them, that 
they speak henceforth 
to no man in this 
name. 18And_ they 
called them, and com- 
manded them not to 
speak at all nor teach 
in the name of Jesus. 
19 But Peter and John 
answered andsaid un- 
to them, Whether it be 
right in the sight of 
God to hearken unto 
you more than unto 
God, judge ye. 20 For 
we cannot but speak 
the things which we 
have seen and heard. 
21So when they had 
further threatened 
them, they let them 
go, finding nothing 
how they might punish 
them, because of the 

ople: for all men 
glorified God for that 


2 yeand LrTr ἃ." συνέβαλλον 


d — ἀπειλῇ LIT:[Aj. 
εἶπον (εἶπαν Tr) πρὸς 


Y 


322 


which was done, 22 For 
the man was above 
forty years old, on 
whom this miracle of 
healing was shewed. 


23 And being let go, 
they went to their own 
company, and reported 
all that the chief 
priests and elders had 
said unto them. 24 And 
when they heard that, 
they lifted up their 
voice to God with one 
accord, and said, Lord, 
thou art God, which 
hast made heaven, 
and earth, and the 
sea, and all that in 
them is: 25 who by the 
mouth of thy servant 
David hast said, Why 
did the heathen rage, 
and the people ima- 
gine vain things? 
26 The kings of the 
earth stood up, and 
the rulers were ga- 
thered together a- 
gainst the Lord, and 
against his Christ. 
27 For of a truth a- 
gainst thy holy child 
Jesus, whom thou hast 
anointed, both Herod, 
and Pontius Pilate, 
with the Gentiles, and 
the people of Israel, 
were gathered toge- 
ther, 28 for to do what- 
soever thy hand and 
thy counsel determin- 
ed before to be done. 
29 And now, Lord, 
behold their threat- 
enings: and grant 
unto thy servants, 
that with all boldness 
they may speak thy 
word, 30 by stretch- 
ing forth thine hand 
to heal; and that 
signs and wonders 
may be done by the 
mame of thy holy 
child Jesus. 31 And 
when they had prayed, 
the place was shaken 
where they were as- 
sembled together; and 
they were all filled 
with the Holy Ghost, 
and they spake the 
word of God with 
boldness. 


32 And the multi- 
tude of them that be- 
lieved were of one 


TIPAS EIS. 


τὸν θεὸν ἐπὶ τῷ γεγονότι. 22 ἐτῶν.γὰρ ἦν 
God for that which has taken place; for *years [7old] *was 
πλειόνων *reccapacovra' ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἐφ’ ὃν ἰἐγεγόνει" 

*above forty ‘the ?man on whom had taken place 
τὸ σημεῖον.τοῦτο τῆς ἰάσεως. 
this sign of healing. 

23 ᾿Απολυθέντες.δὲ ἦλθον πρὸς τοὺς ἰδίους, 

And having been let go they came _ to 

ἀπήγγειλαν 


reported 


IV. 


Kai 
theirown [company], and 


doa πρὸς αὐτοὺς οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς Kai οἱ πρεσ- 
whatever to them the chief priests and the el- 
βύτεροι ™eizroy.' 24 οἱ δὲ ἀκούσαντες, ὁμοθυμαδὸν ἦραν 
ders said. And they having heard, with one accord lifted up 
φωνὴν πρὸς τὸν θεόν, kai ™elzrov," Δέσποτα, σὺ πὸ 
{their] voice to God, and said, O master, thou [art] the 
θεὸς" ὁ ποιήσας τὸν οὐρανὸν Kai THY γῆν Kai THY θάλασσαν 


God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea 

Kai πάντα Ta ἐν αὐτοῖς, 25 °O διὰ στόματος" ῬΔαβὶδ' 
and all that[areJin them, who by [the] mouth of David 
ἡγοῦ" παιδός.σου εἰπών, “Ivari! ἐφρύαξαν ἔθνη, καὶ 


thy servant didst say, 


λαοὶ ἐμελέτησαν κενά; 
2peoples ‘did meditate vain things? 


Why _ did “rage *haughtily ‘nations, and 
26 παρέστησαν οἱ βασιλεῖς τῆς 

Stood up the kings ofthe 
γῆς, Kat ot ἄρχοντες συνήχθησαν ἐπὶ.τὸ αὐτὸ κατὰ τοῦ 
earth, and the rulers were gathered together against the 
κυρίου καὶ κατὰ τοῦ«.χριστοῦ.αὐτοῦ. 27 Συνήχθησαν.γὰρ 


Lord and against his Christ. For were gathered together 
ἐπ᾿ ἀληθείας" ἐπὶ τὸν ἅγιον παῖδά cov ᾿Ιησοῦν, ὃν 
of a truth against 7holy Sservant ‘thy Jesus, whom 
ἔχρισας, Ἡρώδης.τε καὶ Πόντιος ᾿ἱΠιλάτος," σὺν ἔθνεσιν 
thou didst anoint, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with nations 
καὶ λαοῖς ᾿Ισραήλ, 28 ποιῆσαι ὕσα ἡ.χείρισου Kai ἡ βουλή 
and peoples. of Israel, todo whatever thyhand and counsel 
“gouv" προώ ἐσθ 29 καὶ τὰ νῦ ΄ γἔπιδε" 
ροώρισεν γενεσθαι. καὶ τὰ νῦν, κύριε, YETTLOE 

‘thy predetermined to come to pass. And now, Lord, look 


ἐπὶ τὰς. ἀπειλὰς αὐτῶν, Kai δὸς τοῖς. δούλοις.σου μετὰ παῤ- 


upon their threatenings, and give to thy bondmen with *bold- 

ῥησίας πάσης λαλεῖν τὸν.λόγον.σου, 80 ἐν τῷ τὴν.χεῖρά.“σου" 

ness tall to speak thy word, in that thy hand 
ἐκτείνειν oe! εἰς ἴασιν, Kai σημεῖα καὶ τέρατα γίνεσθαι 


?stretchest οαὺ *thou for healing, and signs and wonders take place 


διὰ τοῦ ὀνόματος τοῦ ἁγίου παιδός σου ᾿Ιησοῦ. 31 Kai 
through the name Sholy ‘servant ‘of *thy Jesus. And 
δεηθέντων αὐτῶν ἐσαλεύθη ὁ τόπος ἐν ᾧ Hoar ovyny- 
*having *prayed ‘they ‘was ’shaken ‘the ®place in which ΠΟΥ were assem- 
μένοι, Kai ἐπλήσθησαν amavrec ἵπνεύματος ἁγίου," Kai 
bled, and they were “filled 141] with [the] *Spirit *Holy, and 
ἐλάλουν τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ μετὰ παῤῥησίας. 
spoke the word of God with boldness. 
32 Τοῦ.δὲ πλήθους τῶν πιστευσάντων ἦν "ἡ" καρδία 
And of the multitude of those that believed were ‘the “heart 


k τεσσεράκοντα TTrA. 


LTTr[ A]. 


°"Iva τί LTrAW. 
L[Tr]. 
LTTraw. 


* + ἐν τῇ πόλει ταύτῃ in this city GLTTrawW. 
Y ἔφιδε L. 
2 —y7 LTTrA. 


1 γεγόνει LTTrA. ™ εἶπαν LTTrA. ™%— ὃ θεὸς (ead he who) 


© ὃ τοῦ πατρὸς ἡμῶν διὰ πνεύματος ἁγίου στόματος Who by [the] Holy Spirit 
by [the] mouth of our father Lrtra. 


P Δανεὶδ LITrA; Aavié Gw. 4 — τοῦ GLTTrAW. 


t Πειλᾶτος 1. u— gov 


Ἢ — σου (read [thy ]) Lr. Υ τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος 


Χ [σε] A. 


ΤΥ. ACTS. 
καὶ "ἡ ψυχὴ pia’ καὶ ϑοὐδὲ" εἷς τι τῶν ὑπαρ- 
and *the ‘soul one, and ποῦ one anything *of *that*which 7pos- 
χόντων αὐτῷ ἔλεγεν ἴδιον εἶναι, ἀλλ᾽ ἦν αὐτοῖς “ἅπαντα! 
sessed She ‘said "his ’°own *was, ‘but ‘were ‘*to '*them ?7all !¥things 
κοινά. 33 καὶ “μεγάλῃ δυνάμει" amedidovy τὸ μαρτύριον 
common, And with great power “gave “testimony 
οἱ ἀπόστολοι “τῆς ἀναστάσεως τοῦ κυρίου ᾿Τησοῦ," χάρις.τε 
‘the apostles of the resurrection ofthe Lord Jesus, and “grace 
΄ ? ‘ i ? 4 > ‘ 4 ? , 
μεγάλη ἦν ἐπὶ πάντας αὐτούς. 84 οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐνδεῆς τις 
great was upon all them. For neither in want “anyone 
fumnoxev' ἐν avroic’ ὕσοι.γὰρ κτήτορες χωρίων ἢ οἰκιῶν 
lwas among them; forasmanyas owners’ of estates or houses 
ὑπῆρχον, πωλοῦντες ἔφερον τὰς TYUWAaG τῶν πιπρα- 
were, selling [them] brought the values of those sold, 
σκομένων, 35 καὶ ἐτίθουν παρὰ τοὺς πόδας τῶν ἀπο- 
and laid [them] at the feet of the apos- 


Sdredidoro' δὲ ἑκάστῳ καθότιιἄν τις χρείαν 
and distribution was made toeach accordingas anyone “need 


στόλων" 
{165 ; 
εἶχεν. 
*had. 
36 ΒἸ ωσῆς" .δὲ ὁ 
And Joses who was surnamed 
στόλων, 0 ἐστιν μεθερμηνευόμενον. υἱὸς 
tles (which is, being interpreted, Son 
KAevirne,' Κύπριος τῷ.γένει, 87 ὑπάρχοντος αὐτῷ ἀγροῦ, 
a Levite, a Cypriot by birth, haying land, 
πωλήσας ἤνεγκεν τὸ χρῆμα Kai ἔθηκεν ἱπαρὰ! τοὺς πόδας 
having sold [it] brought the money and laid [10] at the feet 
τῶν ἀποστόλων. 5 ’Avyjo.dé τις ™“Avaviac ὀνόματι," 
of the apostles. But *man ‘a “certain, Ananias by name, 
σὺν "Σαπφείρῃ" τῇ.γυναικὶ αὐτοῦ, ἐπώλησεν κτῆμα, 2 Kai 
with Sapphira his wife, sold ἢ. possession, and 
ἐνοσφίσατο ἀπὸ τῆς τιμῆς: °ovvEdviac' Kai τῆς γυναικὸς 
kept back from the value, being aware of [it] also wife 
Ραὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐνέγκας μέρος-τι παρὰ τοὺς πόδας τῶν 
this, and having brought acertain part “at “the 5feet “of 7the 
ἀποστόλων ἔθηκεν. 3 εἶπεν. δὲ 4 Πέτρος, ᾿Ανανία. "dart 
“apostles Maid [21]. But said Peter, Ananias why 
ἐπλήρωσεν ὁ σατανᾶς τὴν.καρδίαν. σου, ψεύσασθαί σε τὸ 
did “611 ‘Satan thy heart, “to ‘lie to [‘for] *thee the 
πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον, Kai νοσφίσασθαι " ἀπὸ τῆς τιμῆς τοῦ 
Spirit the Holy, and to keep back from the value ofthe 
xwpiov; 4 οὐχὶ μένον σοὶ ἔμενεν; καὶ πραθὲν 
estate? *Not ‘remaining *to*thee *did °it remain? and having been sold, 
ἐν τῇ.σῃ ἐξουσίᾳ ὑπῆρχεν ; τί ὅτι ἔθου ἐν τῇ 
in thine own authority wasit [not]? why didst thou purpose in 
καρδίᾳ σου τὸ πρᾶγμα.τοῦτο; οὐκ. ἐψεύσω ἀνθρώποις, ἀλλὰ 
thy heart this thing ? Thou didst not lie to men, but 
τῴθεῷ. δ᾽ Ἀκούων δὲ Avaviac τοὺς. λόγους.τούτους, πεσὼν 
toGod. And?hearing ‘Ananias these words, falling down 


ἐπικληθεὶς Βαρνάβας Ἰὑπὸ! τῶν απο- 
Barnabas by the apos- 


παρακλήσεως, 
of consolation), 


8 — ἡ LTTrA. Ὁ οὐδ᾽ E. ς πάντα! L. 4 δυνάμει μεγάλῃ LITrA. 


[χριστοῦ Christ] τῆς ἀναστασεως 1,; τῆς ἀναστάσεως Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ τοῦ κυρίου 1. 


ῃ Ἰωσὴφ Joseph Lrtraw. i ἀπὸ LITrAW. 
1 Sardetpa LTr. 


τ διὰ ri LTrA. 


& διεδίδετο LTTrA. 
| πρὸς τ. τὰ ὀνόματι ᾿Ανανίας L. 
(read [Ὠ15]} τττὰ. 4+ 0LTTrA. 
τ + ὃ GLTTrAW. 


© συνειδυίης LTTrA. 
s + [ce] thoe (to keep back) a. 


323 


heart and of one soul: 
neither said any of 
them that ought of the 
things which he pos- 
sessed was his own; 
but they had all things 
common. 33 And with 
great power gave the 
apostles witness of the 
resurrection of the 
Lord Jesus: and great 
grace was upon them 
all. 34 Neither was 
there any among them 
that lacked: for as 
Many as were possess- 
ors of lands or houses 
soldthem, and brought 
the prices of the things 
that were sold, 35 and 
laid them down at the 
apostles’ feet: and dis- 
tribution was made 
unto every man ac- 


cording as he had 
need. 
36 And Joses, who 


by the apostles was 
surnumed Barnabas, 
(which is, being in- 
terpreted, The son of 
consolation,) a Levite, 
and of the country of 
Cyprus, 37 having 
land, sold it, and 
brought the money, 
and laid it at the 
apostles’ feet. V. But 
a certain man named 
Ananias, with Sapphi- 
ra his wife, sold a 
possession, 2and kept 
back part of the price, 
his wife also being 
privy toit,and brought 
a certain part, and 
laid it at the apostles’ 
feet. 3 But Petersaid, 
Ananias, why hath Sa- 
tan filled thine heart 
to lie to the Holy 
Ghost, and to keep 
back part of the price 
of the land? 4 Whiles 
it remained, was it not 
thine own? and after 
it was sold, was it not 
in thine own power ? 
why hast thou con- 
ceived this thing in 
thine heart? thou 
hast not lied unto 
men, but unto God. 
5 And Ananias hear- 
ing these words fell 
down, and gave up the 


ε τοῦ κυρίου Incov 
f Hy LITr. 
k Λενεΐτης TA. 

P — αὐτοῦ 


924 


ghost : and great fear 
came on all them that 
heard these things. 
6 And the young men 
arose, wound him up, 
and carried him out, 
and buried him. 7 And 
it was about the space 
of three hours after, 
when his wife, not 
knowing what was 
done,came in. 8And 
Peter answered unto 
her, Tell me whether 
ye sold the land for so 
much? And she said, 
Yea, for so much, 
9 Then Peter said un- 
to her, How is it that 
ye have agreed toge- 
ther to tempt the Spi- 
rit of the Lord? be- 
hold, the feet of them 
which have buried thy 
husband are at the 
door, and shall carry 
thee out. 10 Thenfell 
she down straightway 
at his feet, and yielded 
up the ghost : and the 
young men came in, 
and found her dead, 
and, carrying her 
forth, buried her by 
her husband. 11] And 
great fear came upon 
all the church, and 
upon asmany as heard 
these things. 12 And 
by the hands of the 
apostles were many 
signs and wonders 
wrought among the 
people; (and _ they 
were all with one ac- 
cord in Solomon’s 
porch. 13 And of the 
est durst no man join 
himself to them: but 
the people magnified 
snem. 14 And beliey- 
ers were the more add- 
ed to the Lord, mul- 
titudes both of men 
and women.) 15 In- 
somuch that they 
brought forth the sick 
into the streets, and 
laid them on beds and 
couches, that at the 
least the shadow of Pe- 
ter passing by might 
overshadow some of 
them. 16 There came 
also a multitude out 
of the cities round 
about unto Jerusalem, 
bringing sick folks, 
and them which were 
vexed with unclean 
spirits : and they were 
healed every one, 


ΠΡΑ ΕΣ. Vv. 

siebvtev’ καὶ ἐγένετο φόβος μέγας ἐπὶ πάντας rove 
expired. And Scame 2fear lgreat upon all who 
ἀκούοντας ταῦτα." 6 ἀναστάντες.δὲ οἱ νεώτεροι συνέ- 


heard these things. And having risen the younger [men] swathed 


> 2 e's , ” ? , Η͂ 
στειλαν αὐτόν, καὶ ἐξενέγκαντες ἔθαψαν. 7 ᾿Ἐγένετο.δὲ 
him, and having carried οαὖὐ buried (him). And it came to pass 


ὡς ὡρῶν τριῶν διάστημα Kai ἡ. γυνὴ. αὐτοῦ μὴ εἰδυῖα τὸ 


about *hours ‘three afterwards also his wife, not knowing what 
yeyovoc εἰσῆλθεν. 8 ἀπεκρίθη.δὲ “airy *o' Πέτρος, 
had come to pass, came in. And answered her Peter, 
Εἰπέ μοι εἰ τοσούτου τὸ χωρίον ἀπέδοσθε; Ἢ δὲ eizer, 
Tell me if for 50 much the _ estate ye sold ἢ And she said, 


Nai, τοσούτου. 9 Ὁ δὲ ἸΤέτρος Yelzrev' πρὸς αὐτήν. Ti 

Yes, for so much. And Peter said to her, Why [is it] 
ὅτι συνεφωνήθη. ὑμῖν πειράσαι TO πνεῦμα κυρίου; ἰδού, οἱ 
that yeagreed together totempt the Spirit of [the] Lord? Lo, the 


πόδες τῶν θαψάντων τὸν ἄνδρασου ἐπὶ τῇ θύρᾳ, Kai 
feet of those who buried thy husband [416] at the door, and 


ἐξοίσουσίν σε. 10 "Ἔπεσεν. δὲ παραχρῆμα παρὰ" rove 
they shall carry out thee. And she fell down immediately at 


πόδας. αὐτοῦ Kai ἐξεψυἕεν. εἰσελθόντες. δὲ οἱ νεανίσκοι 


his feet and expired. And having come in the young [men] 
“ehpov' αὐτὴν νεκράν, καὶ ἐξενέγκαντες ἔθαψαν πρὸς 


found her dead ; and having carried out they buried [her] by 


τὸν. ἀνδρα.αὐτῆς. 11 καὶ ἐγένετο φόβος μέγας ἐφ᾽ ὕλην THY 
her husband. And *came "fear ‘great upon *whole ‘the 


ἐκκλησίαν, καὶ ἐπὶ πάντας τοὺς ἀκούοντας ταῦτα. 12 Διὰ. δὲ 
assembly, and upon all who heard these things. And by 


τῶν χειρῶν τῶν ἀποστόλων Yéyévero" σημεῖα Kai τέρατα 


the hands of the apostles cametopass ‘signs “*and *wonders 
Sy τῷ λαῷ πολλά" Kai ἦσαν ὁμοθυμαδὸν “ἅπαντες" 


Samong “the ῬΘΟΡΙΒ ‘many; (and they were *with%one*accord ‘all 

ἐν τῇ στοᾷ “Σολομῶντος " 13 τῶν.δὲ λοιπῶν οὐδεὶς ἐτόλμα 
in the porch of Solomon, but of the rest noone durst 

κολλᾶσθαι αὐτοῖς, ἀλλ᾽ ἐμεγάλυνεν αὐτοὺς ὁ λαός" 14 μᾶλλον 

join them, but “magnified ‘them ‘the *people; the *more 

δὲ προσετίθεντο πιστεύοντες τῷ κυρίῳ, πλήθη ἀνδρῶν.τε 

Sand 7were ?°added ®believers tothe Lord, multitudes both of men 


καὶ γυναικῶν: 15 ὥστε ‘kara τὰς πλατείας ἐκφέρειν τοὺς 
and women ;) so as 


in the streets tobringout the 
ἀσθενεῖς καὶ τιθέναι ἐπὶ δκλινῶν" καὶ Ἐκραββάτων," ἵνα 
sick, and put [them] on 


beds and couches, that 

᾽ , ΄ nn « : 12 ’ " ‘ 

ἐρχομένου Πετρου Kav 1) OKta ἐπισκια σῇ τινι 
zooming Sof ©Peter ‘at “least *the *shadow might overshadow some one 

αὐτῶν. 16 συνήρχετο.δὲ Kai τὸ πλῆθος τῶν πέριξ 

of them. And came together also the multitude of the “round “about 


πόλεων Keic' Ἱερουσαλήμ, φέροντες ἀσθενεῖς καὶ ὀχλου- 


cities to Jerusalem, bringing sick ones and those 
μένους ὑπὸ πνευμάτων ἀκαθάρτων, οἵτινες ἐθεραπεύοντο 
beset by spirits unclean. who were “healed 
ἅπαντες. 


tall. 


¥ — ταῦτα LYTrA. 
fsaid] LTTra. 
LTTraw. 
VTTrA, 


2 πρὸς LITrA. 
ἃ πάντες LTY. 
h κραβάτ' ὧν LTTrAW. 


“ πρὸς αὐτὴν to her LYTra. X — 6 LITrA. Σ — εἶπεν (read 
ἃ εὗραν Tr. Ὁ ἐγίνετο EGLTTrAW. © πολλὰ ἐν τῷ λαῷ 
ε Σολομῶνος GTrAW. ἴ καὶ eis even into LrTr. 8 κλιναρίων 
i ἐπισκιάσει Shall overshadow Tr. k — εἰς LITrA. 


Vv. ACTS. 
17 ᾿Αναστὰς.δὲ ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς Kai πάντες ot σὺν αὐτῷ, 
And having risen up the high priest and all those with him, 


οὖσα αἵρεσις τῶν Σαδδουκαίων, ἐπλήσθησαν ζήλου, 
which is [the] sect ofthe ee were filled with anger, 


18 καὶ ἐπέβαλον τὰς χεῖρας ‘ara ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀποστόλους καὶ 


and laid “hands their on the apostles and 
ἔθεντο αὐτοὺς ἐν = THONoEL δημοσίᾳ. 19 ἄγγελος.δὲ κυρίου 
put them in{[the] “hold 4public. But an angel of [the] Lord 
διὰ πτῆς! νυκτὸς ™hvotev' τὰς θύρας τῆς φυλακῆς, 
during the night opened the doors of the prison, 
ἐξαγαγών τε αὐτοὺς εἶπεν, 20 Πορεύεσθε, καὶ σταθέντες 
and having brought 70ut ‘them said, Go ye, and standing 


~ 5 ~ « ~ ~ ~ vA A cv ~ ~ 

λαλεῖτε ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ TH λαῷ πάντα τὰ ῥήματα τῆς ζωῆς 

speak in the temple tothe people all the words of “life 
ταύτης. 21 ᾿Ακούσαντες.δὲ εἰσῆλθον ὑπὸ τὸν ὄρθοον εἰς τὸ 

1this, And having heard they entered at the dawn into the 
ἱερόν, Kai ἐδίδασκον. παραγενόμενος.δὲ ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς καὶ οἱ 
temple, and were teaching. But having come the high priest and those 
σὺν αὐτῷ, συνεκάλεσαν τὸ συνέδριον Kai πᾶσαν τὴν γερου- 
with him, they called together the sanhedrim and all the elder- 
σίαν τῶν υἱῶν ᾿Ισραήλ, Kai ἀπέστειλαν εἰς TO δεσμωτήριον 


hood ofthe sons ofIsrael, and sent to the prison 
ἀχθῆναι.αὐτούς. 22 οἱ. δὲ οὑπηρέται παραγενόμενοι" οὐχ 
to have them brought. But the officers having come 2not 


εὗρον αὐτοὺς ἐν τῇ φυλακῇ" ἀναστρέψαντες δὲ ἀπήγγειλαν, 
*did find them in the prison; and having returned they reported, 


23 λέγοντες, Ὅτι τὸ μὲν δεσμωτήριον εὕρομεν κεκλεισ- 
saying, The ?indeed prison we found shut 


μένον ἐν πάσῃ ἀσφαλείᾳ, καὶ τοὺς φύλακας “ἔξω" ἑστῶτας 
with all security, and the Keepers without standing 


πρὸ τῶν θυρῶν ἀνοίξαντες δέ. ἔσω οὐδένα εὕρομεν. 
before the doors ; but having opened, within no one we found. 
24 Ὡς δὲ ἤκουσαν τοὺς. λόγους. τούτους ὅτε ἱερεὺς Kai 
And when they heard these words both the priest and 
0! στρατηγὸς TOU ἱεροῦ καὶ οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς διηπόρουν περὶ 
the captain of the temple and the chief priests were perplexed concerning 
αὐτῶν, τί ay-yévoiro τοῦτο. 25 παραγενόμενος.δέ τις 


them, what *might *be pot But ae come a certain one 

UTI VEX they Ὅτι id ὃ ἔθεσθ 

ary yet εν αὐτοῖς ἐγων,ἢ Tee ov οἱ ἄν θρες οὺς ἐἑσεσῦσε 
reported to them, saying, Lo, the men whom ye put 


ἐν τῇ φυλακῇ εἰσὶν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ ἑστῶτες καὶ διδάσκοντες τὸν 
in the prison are in the eeuiple standing and ΠΕΒΘΒΊΒΕΙ the 
λαόν. 26 Tore ἀπελθὼν ὁ στρατηγὸς σὺν τοῖς ὑπηρέταις 
people. Then “having *gone ‘the “captain with the officers 

γἤγαγεν" αὐτούς, οὐ μετὰ βίας, ἐφοβοῦντο.γὰρ τὸν λαόν, 
bronght them, not with violence, for they feared the people, 
τίνα! μὴ λιθασθῶσιν. 27 ἀγαγόντες. δὲ αὐτοὺς ἔστησαν 
that they might not be stoned. And having brought them they set 


ἐν τῷ συνεδρίῳ᾽ καὶ ἐπηρώτησεν αὐτοὺς ὁ ἀρχιερεύς, 
{them]in the sanhedrim. And “asked ‘them ‘the “high “priest, 


28 λέγων, “Οὐ! παραγγελίᾳ παρηγγείλαμεν ὑμῖν μὴ διδάσ- 
saying, *Not~- *by ‘a ®charge did *we charge you not toteach 


1 — αὐτῶν LTTrAW. ™ — τῆς LTTrA. 
ὑπηρέται LTTrA. P — μὲν LITraw. 
καὶ ὃ LTTTA. -- EGE GLTTraw. 
stoned) foal 


π ἀνοίξας having opened τ. 
nS — ἔξω GLTTraAW. 
ἣγεν di 


© ἐπὶ LTTrA. 
~ — ἵνα (read lest they ἔπει be 
— Ov (read We did eee ge you by a charge, &.) LTTra. 


325 


17 Then the high 
priest rose up, and all 
they that were with 
him, (which is the sect 
of the Sadducees,) and 
were filled with in- 
dignation, 18 and laid 
their hands on the 
apostles, and put them 
in the common prison. 
19 But the angel of the 
Lord by night opened 
the prison doors, and 
brought them forth, 
and said, 20 Go, stand 
and speak in the tem- 
ple to the people all 
the words of this life. 
21 And when they 
heard that, they en- 
tered into the temple 
early in the morning, 
and taught. But the 
high priest came, and 
they that were with 
him, and called the 
councii together, and 
all the senate of the 
children of Israel, and 
sent to the prison to 
have them brought. 
22 But when the offi- 
cers caine, and found 
them not in the prison, 
they returned, and 
told, 23 saying, The 
prison truly found we 
shut with all safety, 
and the keepers stani- 
ing without before 
the doors: but when 
we had opened, we 
found no man with- 
in. 24 Now when the 
high priest and the 
captain of the tempie 
and the chief priests 
heard these things, 
they doubted of thein 
whereunto this would 
grow. 25 Then came 
one and told them, 
saying, Behold, the 
men whom ye put 
in prison are standing 
in the temple, and 
teaching the people. 
26 Then went the cap- 
tain with the officers, 
and brought them 
without violence: for 
they feared the people, 
Jest they should have 
been stoned. 27 And 
when they had brought 
them, they set them 
before the council: and 
the high priest asked 
them, 28saying, Did 
not we straitly com- 
mand you that ye 
shouid not teach in 


co ποβαγενόμεῦοι 
- ἱερεὺς 


920 


this name? and, be- 
hold, ye have filled 
Jerusalem with your 
doctrine, and intend to 
bring this man’s blood 
upon us. 29 Then Pe- 
ter and the other apos- 
tles answered and said, 
We ought to obey 
God rather than men, 
30 The God of our fa- 
thers raised up Jesus, 
whom ye slew and 
hanged on ἃ tree. 
31 Him hath God 
exalted with his right 
hand to be a Prince 
and a Saviour, for to 
give repentance to Is- 
rael, and forgiveness 
ofsins. 32 And weare 
his witnesses of these 
things; and 80 18 also 
the Holy Ghost, whom 
God hath given to 
them that obey him. 
33 When they heard 
that, they were cut to 
the heart, and took 
counsel to slay them. 
34 Then stood there up 
one in the council, a 
Pharisee, named Ga- 
maliel, adoctor of the 
law, had in reputation 
among all the people, 
and commanded to put 
the apostles forth a 
little space; 35 and 
said unto them, Ye 
men of Israel, take 
heed to yourselves 
what ye intend to do 
as touching these men. 
36 For before’ these 
days rose up Theudas, 
boasting himself to be 
somebody ; to whom a 
number of men, about 
four hundred, joined 
themselves: who was 
slain; and all, as many 
as obeyed him, were 
scattered, and brought 
to nought. 37 After 
this man rose up Ju- 
das of Galilee in the 
days of the taxing, 
and drew away much 
people after him: he 
also perished ; and all, 
even as many asobeyed 
him, were dispersed. 
38 And now I say unto 
you, Refrain from 
these men, and let 
them alone: for if 
this counsel or this 


Il PA 2, EI &. Ve 
KELY ETL τῷ.ὀνόματι. τούτῳ 53" καὶ ἰδοὺ πεπληρώκατε THY ‘le~ 
in this name? and lo, ye have filled Je 


ρουσαλὴμ τῆς.διδαχῆς ὑμῶν, καὶ βούλεσθε ἐπαγαγεῖν ἐφ 


rusalem with your teaching, and purpose to bring upon 


ἡμᾶς τὸ αἷμα τοῦ.ἀνθρώπου.τούτου. 29 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ 76" 
us the _ blood of this man, But *answering 


Πέτρος καὶ ot ἀπόστολοι "εῖπον," ΠΕειθαρχεῖν δεῖ 
Peter ’and *the ‘apostles said, *To ee tit iis = nee eeaey, 


θεῷ μᾶλλον ἢ ἀνθρώποις. 80 ὁ θεὸς τῶν.πατέρων.ἡμῶν 
God rather than men. The God of our fathers 


ἤγειρεν Ἰησοῦν, ὃν ὑμεῖς διεχειρίσασθε κρεμάσαντες ἐπὶ 
raised up Jesus, whom ye killed, having hanged on 


ξύλου" 81 τοῦτον ὁ θεὸς ἀρχηγὸν Kai σωτῆρα ὕψωσεν τῇ 


a tree. Him God achief and Saviour exalted by ‘the 
δεξιᾷ αὐτοῦ. *dovvar μετάνοιαν τῷ Ἰσραὴλ Kai ἄφεσιν 
night hand of him, to give repentance toIsrael and _ remission 


ἁμαρτιῶν. 32 τι ἡμεῖς Ῥέσμεν αὐτοῦ μάρτυρες" τῶν ῥημάτων 


of sins. we are ofhim witnesses of *things 
τούτων, Kai TO πνεῦμα “δὲ" TO ἅγιον, ὃ ἔδωκεν ὁ θεὸς 
these, and the “Bpint lalso the oly, which *gave 1God 


τοῖς πειθαρχοῦσιν αὐτῷ. 33 Οἱ δὲ ἀκούσαντες διεπρίοντο, 
to those that obey him. But they having heard were cut 


καὶ ἐβουλεύοντο! ἀνελεῖν αὐτούς. 34 ἀναστὰς 
[to the heart], and tookcounsel toputtodeath them. ES ES Srisen 7up 


δὲ τις ἐν τῷ συνεδρίῳ Φαρισαῖος, ὀνόματι Ta- 
but 7a “certain [*man] in the sanhedrim a Pharisee, by name Ga- 


μαλιήλ, νομοδιδάσκαλος, τίμιος παντὶ τῷ λαῷ, ἐκέλευσεν 


maliel, a teacher of the law, honoured byall the people, commanded 
ἮΝ ᾿ 6 ii} ἢ A ᾽ aN {| ~ > ΄ 
ἔξω ββραχύ.-.ξτι τοὺς ἀποστόλους" ποιῆσαι, 88 εἴπεν.τε 
Sout *for °a ®short 7while *the °apostles 1to *put, and said 
πρὸς αὐτούς, "Ανδρες δ᾽ Ισραηλῖται," προσέχετε ἑαυτοῖς 
them, Men Israelites, take heed to yourselves 
ἐπὶ τοῖς.ἀνθρώποις.τούτοις τί μέλλετε πράσσειν. 36 πρὸ 
as megands these men whatyeare about todo; *before 


γὰρ τούτων τῶν ἡμερῶν ἀνέστη Θευδᾶς, λέγων εἶναί τινα 

for these days roseup Theudas, affirming 7to*be ssomebody 
ἑαυτόν, Ὀπροσεκολλήθη ἀριθμὸς ἀνδρῶν, ὡσεὶ! τετρα- 
*himself, were joined anumber of men, about four 
κοσίων᾽" καὶ πάντες Ooo. ἐπείθοντο αὐτῷ 
hundred ; all as many as were persuaded by him 


διελύθησαν καὶ ἐγένοντο εἰς οὐδέν. 37 μετὰ τοῦτον ἀνέστη 
were dispersed and came to nothing. After thisone rose up 


Ἰούδας ὁ Γαλιλαῖος ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις τῆς ἀπογραφῆς, Kai 
Judas the. QGalilean in the days ofthe registration, and 


ἀπέστησεν λαὸν ἱἱκανὸν" ὀπίσω αὐτοῦ κἀκεῖνος ἀπώλετο, 
drew away “people ‘much after him ; and he perished, 


καὶ πάντες ὅσοι ἐπείθοντο αὐτῷ διεσκορπίσθησαν. 38 καὶ 
and all as many as were persuaded by him were scattered abroad. And 


Ta νῦν λέγω ὑμῖν, ἀπόστητε ἀπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων. τούτων, καὶ 
now Isay toyou, Withdraw from these τα ΟΣ; and 


Kigqoare" αὐτούς" ὅτι ἐὰν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἡ βουλὴ αὕτη ἢ 
let ?alone 1them, for if ‘be "from ®men this 7counsel “or 


©. 

2 

to whom 
ὃς ἀνῃρέθη, 
who was put to death, and 


—;LTTra. 
— αὐτου TTr. 


i — ἱκανὸν LTTrA. 


Υ — ὃ LTTrA. 
ο — δὲ LTT:[A]. 
ἀνθρώπους the men LTTrA. 


z εἶπαν LTTrA δ. τ τοῦτ. » ἐν αὐτῷ μάρτυρές ἐσμεν τι; 
4 ἐβούλοντο resolved Ltr. © — τι LTTrAW. f τοὺς 
Ε Ἰσραηλεῖται 1. h προσεκλίθη ἀνδρῶν ἀριθμὸς ὡς LTTrAW 


* ἄφετε LTTrA. 


Vaal ACTS. 

T0.éoyov.rovTo, καταλυθήσεται: 39 cide ἐκ θεοῦ ἐστιν, 
“this °work, it will be overthrown ; but if from God it be, 

Ἰοὐ- δύνασθε" καταλῦσαι ™avro,' μήποτε καὶ θεομάχοι 


ye are not able 


εὑρεθῆτε. 
ye be found. 


to overthrow it, lest also fighters against God 


40 ᾿Επείσθησαν.δὲ αὐτῷ᾽ Kai προσκαλεσάμενοι 
And they were persuaded by him; and having called to 


τοὺς ἀποστόλους, δείραντες παρήγγειλαν μὴ λαλεῖν 
{them] the apostles, having beaten they enjoined [them] not to speak 


? \ ~ ? , “2 ~ \ > , n ᾽ , I 4] « 
ἐπὶ τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ, καὶ ἀπέλυσαν "αὐτούς. Οἱ 
in the name of Jesus, and released them. They 
μὲν οὖν ἐπορεύοντο χαίροντες ἀπὸ προσώπου τοῦ 
therefore departed rejoicing from [the] presence of the 
συνεδρίου ὅτι °UTED τοῦ ὀνόματος αὐτοῦῦιΣ κατηξιώθησαν" 
sanhedrim that for the name of him they were accounted worthy 
ἀτιμασθῆναι: 42 πᾶσάν.τε ἡμέραν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ καὶ κατ᾽ οἶκον 


to be dishonoured. And every day in the temple and in the houses 
οὐκ.ἐπαύοντο διδάσκοντες καὶ εὐαγγελιζόμενοι P’ Inoovy 
they ceased not teaching and announcing the gladtidings— Jesus 
τὸν χριστόν." 
the Christ. 
> at ~ « , , , ~ ~ 
6 Ἔν δὲ ταῖς. ἡμέραις.ταύταις πληθυνόντων τῶν μαθητῶν 
But in those days Smultiplying ‘the “disciples 


ἐγένετο γογγυσμὸς τῶν ᾿Ἑλληνιστῶν πρὸς τοὺς ‘EBpaiouc, 
there arose 8. murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews, 
ort παρεθεωροῦντο ἐν τῷ διακονίᾳ τῇ καθημερινῇ αἱ 
because were overlooked in the ?ministration daily 
χῆραι.αὐτῶν. 2 προσκαλεσάμενοι. δὲ οἱ δώδεκα τὸ πλῆθος 
their widows. And *having “called to (*them] 'the *twelve the multitude 
τῶν μαθητῶν, “εἶπον," Οὐκ ἀρεστόν ἐστιν ἡμᾶς, καταλείψαν- 
of the disciples, said, Not seemly itis [for] us, leaving 


Tac τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ, διακονεῖν τραπέζαις. 3 ἐπισκέψασθε 


the word of God, to attend tables, Look out 
τοὖν," "ἀδελφοί," ἄνδρας ἐξ ὑμῶν μαρτυρουμένους 
therefore, brethren, 4men “from *among ‘yourselves, ®borne 7witness *to 


ἑπτά, πλήρεις πνεύματος ‘aylov' Kai σοφίας, οὺς ‘KaTa- 
‘seven, full of [the] *Spirit *Holy and wisdom, whom we will 


στήσομεν ἐπὶ τῆὴς.χρείας. ταύτης᾽ 4 ἡμεῖς. δὲ τῇ προσευχῇ 


appoint over this business ; but we to prayer 
καὶ TH διακονίᾳ τοῦ λόγου προσκαρτερήσομεν. ὃ Καὶ 
and the ministry of the word will steadfastly continue. And 
ἤρεσεν ὁ λόγος ἐνώπιον παντὸς τοῦ πλήθους καὶ 
*was *pleasing ‘the 7saying before all the multitude; and 
ἐξελέξαντο Στέφανον, ἄνδρα “πλήρη πίστεως καὶ πνεύ- 
they chose Stephen, aman full of faith and([the) 7Spi- 


ματος ἁγίου, καὶ Φίλιππον, Kai Πρόχορον: καὶ Νικάνορα, καὶ 
rit Holy, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and 


Τίμωνα, καὶ Παρμενᾶν, καὶ Νικόλαον προσήλυτον ᾿Αντιοχέα, 
Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch, 


6 οὺς ἔστησαν ἐνώπιον τῶν ἀποστόλων" Kai προσευξάμενοι 


whom they set before the apostles ; and having prayed 
ἐπέθηκαν αὐτοῖς τὰς χεῖρας. 7 καὶ ὁ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ 
they laid “on *them *hands. And the word of God 


1 ov δυνήσεσθε ye will not be able trrr. τὰ αὐτούς them GLTTra. 
[them]) rtra. 
χριστὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν LITrA. 


4 εἶπαν τττὰ. τ δή indec 
* — ἁγίου GLTTrA. 


’ καταστήσωμεν We INAy appoint EW. 


° — αὐτοῦ GLTTrAW ; κατηξιώθησαν ὑπὲρ τοῦ ὀνόματος LTTrA. 
L; 6é but T. 
w πλήρης L. 


327 
work beof men, it will 
come to nought: 39 but 
if it be of God, ye can- 
not overthrow it; lest 
haply ye be foundeven 
to fight against God. 
40 And to him they 
agreed: and when they 
had called the apostles, 
and beaten ther, they 
commanded that they 
should not speak in 
the uame of Jesus, 
and let them go. 
41 And they departed 
from the presence of 
the council, rejoicing 
that they were count- 
ed worthy to suffer 
shame for his name. 
42 And daily in the 
temple, and in every 
house, they ceased not 


to teach and preach 
Jesus Christ. 
VI. And in those 


days, when the num- 
ber of the disciples 
was iultiplied, there 
arose a murmuring of 
the Grecians against 
the Hebrews, because 
their widows were 
neglected in the daily 
ministration. 2 Then 
the twelve called the 
multitude of the dis- 
ciples unto them, and 
said, It is not reason 
that we should leave 
the word of God, and 
serve tables. 3 Where- 
fore, brethren, look ye 
out among you seven 
men of honest report, 
full of the Holy Ghost 
and wisdom, whom we 
may appoint over this 
business. 4 But we 
will give ourselves 
continually to prayer, 
and to the ministry 


of the word. 5 And 
the saying pleased 
the whole multi- 


tude: and they chose 
Stephen, a man full 
of faith and of the 
Holy Ghost, and Phi- 
lip, and Prochorus, 
and Nicanor, and Ti- 
mon, and Parmenas, 
and Nicolas a pros- 
elyte of Antioch: 
6 whom they set be- 
fore the apostles: and 
when they had prayed, 
they laid thezr hands 
on them. 7 And the 
word of God increased; 


n— αὐτούς (read 
P τὸν 
s — ἀδελφοί L. 


328 


and the number of the 
disciples multiplied in 
Jerusalem greatly; 
and a great company 
of the priests were 
obedient to the faith, 


8 And Stephen, full 
of faith and power, 
did great wonders and 
miracles among the 
people. 9 Then there 
arose certain of the 
synagogue, which is 
called the synagogue 
of the Libertines, and 
Cyrenians, and Alex- 
andrians, and of them 
of Cilicia and of Asia, 
disputing with Ste- 
phen. 10 And they 
were not able to resist 
the wisdom and the 
spirit by which he 
spake. 11 Then they 
suborned men, which 
said, We have heard 
him speak blasphe- 
mous words aguinst 
Moses, and. against 
God. 12 And they 
stirred up the people, 
and the elders, and 
the scribes, and came 
upon him, and caught 
him, and brought him 
to the council, 13 and 
set up false witnesses, 
which said, This man 
ceaseth not to speak 
blasphemous words 
against this holy 
place, and the law: 
i4 for we have heard 
him say, that this Je- 
sus of Nazareth shall 
destroy thisplace, and 
shall change the cus- 
toms which Moses de- 
livered us. 15 And all 
that sat in the council, 
looking stedfastly on 
him, saw his face as 
it had been the face of 
an angel, 


VII. Then said the 
high priest, Are these 
things so? 2 And he 
said, Men, brethren, 
and fathers, hearken ; 
The God of glory ap- 
peared untoour father 
Abraham, when he 
was in Mesopotamia, 
before he dwelt in 
Charran, 3and said 
unto him, Get thee out 
of thy country, and 
from thy kindred, and 


HM Pee Bie, VI, VIL. 
ηὔξανεν, καὶ ἐπληθύνετο ὁ ἀριθμὸς τῶν μαθητῶν ἐν Ἵε- 
increased, and °was 7multiplied *the *number “of *the “disciples in Je- 


ρουσαλὴμ σφόδρα, πολύς.τε ὄχλος τῶν ἱερέων ὑπήκουον 
rusalem exceedingly, and a great multitude of the priests were obedient 
τῇ πίστει. 
tothe faith. 
8 Στέφανος. δὲ πλήρης "πίστεως" Kai δυνάμεως 
And Stephen, full of faith and power, 


ἐποίει 
wrought 


τέρατα Kai σημεῖα μεγάλα ἐν τῷ aw. 9 aviornoay.oé 
wonders and 2signs ‘great among the people. And arose 
τινες τῶν ἐκ τῆς συναγωγῆς ὑτῆς λεγομένης" Λιβερτίνων, 


certain of those of the synagogue called 


A / ‘ ? , ‘ ~ > 4 / 
kai Κυρηναίων, καὶ ᾿Αλεξανδρέων, καὶ τῶν ἀπὸ Κιλικίας 
and of Cyrenians, and of Alexandrians, and of those from Cilicia 
“kai ᾿Ασίας, *ovgnrov "rp Στεφάνῳ" 10 καὶ ὑκιὶ 

C, “OUGHTOVYTEG’ τῳ Στεφανῳ και OUK.LOXUOV 
and Asia, disputing with Stephen. And they were not able 
ἀντιστῆναι TY σοφίᾳ καὶ τῷ πνεύματι ἐλάλει. 11 τότε 

to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke. Then ~ 
« a » , a ? ΄ ’ ~ ~ 
ὑπέβαλον ἄνδρας, λέγοντας, Ore ἀκηκόαμεν αὐτοῦ λαλοῦν- 
they suborned men, saying, We have heard him speaking 
Toc ῥήματα βλάσφημα εἰς "Mwoiy' καὶ τὸν θεόν. 12 Συν- 
2words ‘blasphemous against Moses and God, *T hey 
εκίνησάν τε τὸν λαὸν Kai τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους Kai τοὺς 
“stirred *up ‘and the people and_ the elders aud the 
γραμματεῖς, καὶ ἐπιστάντες συνήρπασαν αὐτόν, καὶ ἤγαγον 


Libertines, 


scribes, and coming upon they seized hin, and brought 
εἰς TO συνέδριον, 13 ἔστησάν.τε μάρτυρας ψευδεῖς, 
{him] to the sanhedrim, And they set *witnesses false, 


λέγοντας, Ὁ-ἄνθρωπος. οὗτος οὐ.παύεται ῥήματα βλάσφημα 
Υ ᾽ | 
saying, This man does not cease Swords “blasphemous 
λαλῶν" κατὰ τοῦ τόπου τοῦ ἁγίου “τούτου; Kai τοῦ νόμου. 
1speaking against Splace *holy this and the law; 
14 ἀκηκόαμεν.γὰρ αὐτοῦ λέγοντος, Ὅτι Ἰησοῦς ὁ Nalw- 
for we have heard him saying, That Jesus “the ‘*Naza- 
ραῖος οὗτος καταλύσει τὸν.τόπον. τοῦτον, Kai ἀλλάξει τὰ 


rean this will destroy this place, and willchange the 
ἔθη ἃ παρέδωκεν ἡμῖν Mwiojc. 15 Kai ἀτενίσαντες εἰς 


customs which 7delivered “to‘*us ‘Moses. And looking intently on 


ΕΣ 4 6, I « (a) , ? ~ ὃ ΄ f, Τὸ II 4 
QUTOV “UTAVTEG Ob κα εζόμενοι ἐν τῳ σῦυνξ βριῳ εἰοον TO 
him all who Bat in the sanhedrim Baw 
πρόσωπον.αὐτοῦ ὡσεὶ πρόσωπον ἀγγέλου. 
his face as [the] face of an angel. 
 Εἶπεν.δὲ ὁ ἀρχιερεύς, Ei Sapa! ταῦτα 
And ‘said ‘the *high “priest, *Then 7these *things 
2 Ὁ δὲ ἔφη, “Avdpec ἀδελφοὶ καὶ πατέρες, ἀκούσατε. ὁ θεὸς 
And he said, Men brethren and fathers, hearken. The God 
τῆς δόξης ὥφθη τῷ πατρὶ. ἡμῶν ᾿Αβραὰμ ὄντι ἐν τῇ Μεσο- 
of glory appeared to our father Abraham being in Meso- 
ποταμίᾳ, πρὶν ἢ κατοικῆσαι αὐτὸν ἐν Xappay, 3 καὶ εἶπεν 
potamia, before dwelt ‘he in Charran, and said 
πρὸς αὐτόν, Ἔξελθε ἐκ τῆς.γῆς.σου καὶ ‘x τῆς συγγενείας 
to him, Goout from thy land and from “kindred 


οὕτῳς 


heyec''; 
3580 5 


‘are ? 


x χάριτος of grace GLTTrAW. 
> Mwionv GLITrAW. 
(read the holy place) @urrraw. 
h — ἔχει (read [are]) w. 


LTTrA. 


Υ τῶν λεγομένων T. t—- καὶ ᾿Ασίας 1,. 8 συνζητοῦντες 
© — βλάσφημα GLITrAW ; λαλῶν ῥήματα. TTr. 4 — τρύτον 
© πάντες LTTr. f εἶδαν Tr. 8 — dpa LTTr[A]. 

i — ἐκ [L]Tr[A]. 


VII. AC TS: 

σου, καὶ δεῦρο εἰς" γῆν ἣν av σοι δείξω. 4 Τότε ἐξελθὼν 
thy and come into land which totheeI willshew. Then going out 
ἐκ γῆς Χαλδαίων, κατῴκησεν ἐν Χαῤῥάν, κἀκεῖθεν 


from [the] land of Chaldeans, he dwelt in and thence 


μετὰ τὸ ἀποθανεῖν τὸν πατέρα.αὐτοῦ. μετῴκισεν αὐτὸν εἰς 


Charran, 


after %died ‘his 7father, he removed him into 
τὴν.γῆν. ταύτην εἰς ἣν ὑμεῖς νῦν κατοικεῖτε. 5 καὶ οὐκ 
this land in which ye now dwell. And “not 


οὐδὲ Pijpua-moddc’ 


ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ κληρονομίαν ἐν αὐτῇ; 
noteven a foot’s tread: 


"he “did give tohim aninheritance in it, 
καὶ ἐπηγγείλατο ἰαὐτῷ δοῦναι" εἰς κατάσχεσιν “airyy,' Kai 
and promised tohim togive “for %a *possession it, and 
TW.oTéppaTiavToU μετ᾽ αὐτόν, οὐκιῦὔντος αὐτῷ τέκνου. 
to his seed after him, there not being to him a child, 
6 ἐλάλησεν δὲ οὕτως ὁ θεός, Ὅτι ἔσται τὸ σπέρμα.αὐτοῦ 
And *spoke sthus ‘God: That “shall *be this 7seed 
πάροικον ἐν γ ἀλλοτρίᾳ, καὶ δουλώσουσιν αὐτὸ καὶ 
asojourner in ἃ *land istrange, and they willenslave it and 
κακώσουσιν ἔτη τετρακόσια. 7 καὶ τὸ ἔθνος ᾧ "ἐὰν" 
ill-treat [10] “years ‘four *hundred ; and the nation to which 
ὁδουλεύσωσιν ." κρινῶ ἐγώ, ῬΡῬεῖπεν ὁ θεός" καὶ μετὰ 
they may bein bondage will?judge ‘I, said God; and after 
ταῦτα ἐξελεύσονται καὶ λατρεύσουσίν μοι ἐν TH τόπῳ 
these things they shall come forth and serve me in place 
τούτῳ. 8 Kai ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ διαθήκην περιτομῆς᾽ Kai οὕτως 
this. And hegave tohim acovenant of circumcision; and thus 
ἐγέννησεν τὸν ᾿Ισαάκ, καὶ περιέτεμεν αὐτὸν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ TY 
he begat Isaac, and _ circumcised him the “day 
ὀγδόῃ: Kai 40" ᾿Ισαὰκ τὸν Ἰακώβ, καὶ %6' ᾿Ιακὼβ τοὺς 
teighth; and Isaac [begat] Jacob, and Jacob the 
δώδεκα πατριάρχας. 9 Kai ot πατριάρχαι ζηλώσαντες τὸν 
twelve patriarchs, d the patriarchs, envying 
? , ? ’ » ” ‘ bt « ‘ ? 
iwongd ἀπέδοντο εἰς Αἰγυπτον᾽ καὶ ἣν 0 θεὸς per 
Joseph, sold (him) into Egypt. And *was 1God with 
αὐτοῦ, 10 καὶ τἐξείλετο" αὐτὸν ἐκ πασῶν τῶν.θλίψεων αὐτοῦ, 
him, and delivered him outof all his tribulations, 
καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ χάριν καὶ σοφίαν δἐναντίον᾽ Φαραὼ βασι- 
and gave him favour and wisdom before Pharaoh king 
λέως Αἰγύπτου, καὶ κατέστησεν αὐτὸν ἡγούμενον ἐπ᾽ Αἴγυπ- 
of Egypt, and heappointed him ruler over Egypt 
Tov Kai‘ ὅλον τὸν. οἷκον.αὐτοῦ. 11 ἦλθεν.δὲ λιμὸς ἐφ᾽ ὅλην 
and *whole 1815 house. But *came ‘a *famine upon *7whole 
τὴν γῆν Αἰγύπτου" καὶ Χαναάν, καὶ θλίψις μεγάλη καὶ 
‘the land of Egypt and Canaan, and *tribulation ‘great, and 
οὐχ."“εὕρισκον" χορτάσματα οἱ πατερες- ἡμῶν. 12 ἀκούσας. δὲ 
Sdid “ποὺ *find “sustenance ‘our *fathers. But “having *heard 
I ‘ » 5 ? 2 , I 2 , ‘ , 
ακὼβ ὄντα “σῖτα ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ," ἐξαπέστειλεν τοὺς πατέρας 
1Jacob ὅνγαβ ‘corn in Egypt, sent forth *fathers 
« ~ ~ Ἁ ~ , , A 
ἡμῶν πρῶτον" 13 καὶ ἐν τῷ δευτέρῳ γἀνεγνωρίσθη" ᾿Ιωσὴφ 
our first ; and at the secondtime wasmade known Joseph 
τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς αὐτοῦ, Kai φανερὸν ἐγένετο TH Φαραὼ τὸ γένος 
to his brethren, and *known ‘became to Pharaoh the family 


k 4 σὴν the LITraw. 
him w. ᾿ ἄν LTr. 
LTTraW. ᾳ — ὃ LTTrA. τ᾿ ἐξείλατο GLTTrAW. 

Y Αἴγυπτον (read over all Egypt) urrra. W ηὕρισκον TrA. 
Υ ἐγνωρίσθη τι. 


8 ἔναντι T. 


' δοῦναι αὐτῷ LITra ; δοῦναι αὐτὴν to give it w. 
ο δουλεύσουσιν they will be in bondage Trra. 


329 
come into the land 
which I shall shew 
thee. 4Then came he 
out of the land of the 
Chaldgwans, and dwelt 
in Charran: and from 
thence, when his father 
was dead, he removed 
him into this land, 
wherein ye now dwell. 
5 And he gaye him 
none inheritance in 
it, no, not so much as 
to set his foot on: yet 
he promised that he 
would give it to him 
for a possession, aud 
to his seed after him, 
when as yet he had no 
child. 6 And Godspake 
on this wise, That his 
seed should sojourn in 
a strange land; and 
that they should bring 
theminto bondage,and 
entreat them evil four 
hundred years. 7 And 
the nation to whom 
they shall be in bon- 
dage will I judge, said 
God: and after that 
shall they come forth,’ 
and serve me in this 
place. 8 And he gave 
him the covenant of 
circumcision: and 50 
Abraham begat Isaac, 
and circumcised him 
the eighth day; and 
Isaac begat Jacob ; and 
Jacob begat the twelve 
patriarchs. 9 And the 
patriarchs,moved with 
envy, sold Joseph into 
Egypt: but God was 
with him, 10 and de- 
livered him out of all 
his afflictions, and 
gave him favour aud 
wisdom in the sight 
of Pharaoh king of 
Egypt; and he made 


him governor over 
Egypt and all his 
house. 11 Now there 


came a dearth over all 
the land of Egypt and 
Chanaan, and great af- 
fliction : and our fa- 
thers found no suste- 
nance. 12 But when 
Jacob heard that there 
was corn in Egypt, he 
sent out our fathers 
first. 13 And at the 
second time Joseph 
was made known to 
his brethren; and Jo- 
seph’s kindred was 
made known unto Pha- 


™ αὐτῷ to 
P ὁ θεὸς εἶπεν 
t + ἐφ᾽ over Τ, 


x σιτία εἰς Αἴγνπτον LITrAW, 


330 

raoh. 14 Then sent Jo- 
seph, and called his fa- 
ther Jacob to him, and 
all his kindred, three- 
score and fifteen souls, 
15 SoJacob went down 
into Egypt, and died, 
he, and our fathers, 
16 and were carried 
over into Sychem, and 
laid in the sepulchre 
that Abraham bought 
for 2 sum of money of 
the sons of Emmor the 
father of Sychewe 
17 But when the time 
of the promise drew 
nigh, which God had 
sworn to Abraham, the 
people grew and mul- 
tipliedin Egypt, 18 till 
another king arose, 
which knew not Jo- 
seph. 19 The same 
dealt subtilly with 
our kindred, and 
evil entreated our 
fathers, so that they 
cast out their young 
children, to the end 
they might not live. 
20 In which time Mo- 
ses was born, and was 
exceeding fair, and 
nourished up in his 
father’s house three 
months: 21 and when 
he was cast out, Pha- 
raoh’s daughter took 
him up, and nourished 
him for her own son. 
22 And Moses was 
learned in all the wis- 
dom of the Egyptians, 
and was mighty in 
words and in deeds. 
23 And when he was 
full forty years old, it 
came into his heart to 
visit his brethren the 
children of Israel. 
24 And seeing one af 
them suffer wrong, he 
defended him, and a- 
yenged him that was 
oppressed, and smote 
the Egyptian: 25 for 
he supposed his breth- 
ren would have under- 
stood how that God by 
his hand would deliver 
them : but they under- 
stood not. 26 And the 


2 — τοῦ LITrA. 


© — αὐτοῦ (read [his]) GLTTra. 


& — rov TTr. h 


L + én’ Αἴγυπτον over Egypt Lrtr. 

ο Mwions GLTTrAW. 
τ ἀνείλατο GLTTrAW. 
* + αὐτοῦ (read his deeds) GLTTraw. 


ἔκθετα LTTrA. 
αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 


fhis]) Trr[a]. 


ΠΡ Ὰ ΣΕ Σ. 


trop!" Iwong.' 14 ἀποστείλας.δὲ ᾿Ιωσὴφ μετεκαλέσατο 
of Joseph. And having sent Joseph he called for 


πατέρα. αὐτοῦ ᾿Ιακώβ," καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν.συγγένειαν.“αὐτοῦ," ἐν 
his father Jacob, and all his kindred, in 
ψυχαῖς ἑβδομήκοντα πέντε. 15 “κατέβη. δὲ" ᾿Τακὼβ εἰς Αἴγυπ- 
Ssouls 1seventy ?five. And went down Jacob into gypt 
τον, Kai ἐτελεύτησεν αὐτὸς Kai ol.marépec-yuay? 16 Kai 
and died, he and our fathers, and 
μετετέθησαν sic Συχέμ, καὶ ἐτέθησαν ἐν τῷ μνήματι “δ' 
were carried over to Sychem, and were placed in the tomb which 


ὠνήσατο ᾿Αβραὰμ τιμῆς ἀργυρίου παρὰ τῶν υἱῶν PEupop' 


ΜΗ, 


broy 


2pought ‘Abraham fora sum ofmoney from the sons of Emmor 
frou" * Συχέμ. 17 KaOwedé ἤγγιζεν ὁ χρόνος τῆς ἐπαγ- 
of Sychem. But as drew near the time of the pro- 


Niacune to " ὁ θεὸ 2 ΑΙ 1 ἴ ἡ λαὸ ὶ 
γελίας ἧς 'ώμοσεν" ὁ θεὸς τῷ ᾿Αβραάμ, ηὔξησεν ὁ λαὸς καὶ 
mise which *swore God to Abraham, “increased ‘the *people and 
ἐπληθύνθη ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ, 18 ἔἄχρις" οὗ ἀνέστη βασιλεὺς 
multiplied in Egypt, until arose *king 
érepoc,! ὃς οὐκύδει τὸν Ἰωσήφ. 19 οὗτος κατασοφισάμενος 
‘another, who knew not Joseph. He having dealt subtilly with 
τὸ.γένος ἡμῶν, ἐκάκωσεν τοὺς. πατέρας. "ἡμῶν," τοῦ ποιεῖν 
our race, ill-treated our fathers, making 
πἔκθετα τὰ. βρέφη" αὐτῶν εἰς. τὸ μὴ.ζωογονεῖσθαι. 20 Ἔν ᾧ 
Ξε χροβθᾶ their *babes that they might not live. In which 
καιρῷ ἐγεννήθη °Mwoijc,' Kai ἦν ἀστεῖος τῷ θεῷ: ὃς ave- 


time was born Moses, and was beautiful to God; who was 
τράφη μῆνας τρεῖς ἐν τῷ οἴκῳ τοῦ.πατρὸς.Ῥαὐτοῦ." 
brought up “months ‘three in the house of his father. 


21 αἐκτεθέντα.δὲ αὐτόν," 'aveidero' αὐτὸν ἡ θυγάτηρ Φαραώ, 


And *being exposed ‘he, took up him the daughter of Pharaoh, 
καὶ ἀνεθρέψατο αὐτὸν ἑαυτῇ εἰς υἱόν. 22 Kai ἐπαιδεύθη 
and brought up him  forherself for ason. And ?was “instructed 
“Mwone' " πάσῃ σοφίᾳ Αἰγυπτίων. ἦν.δὲ δυνατὸς ἐν 


1Moses in all [the] wisdom of [the] Egyptians, and he was mighty in 
λόγοις καὶ ‘év' ἔργοις". 23 ὭὩς.δὲ ἐπληροῦτο αὐτῷ Χτεσ- 

words and in deeds. And when was fulfilled tohim Sof 
σαρακονταετὴς᾽ χρόνος, ἀνέβη ἐπὶ THY-Kapdiav.avToU ἐπι- 
“forty ‘years la period, itcame into his heart to 


σκέψασθαι τοὺς. ἀδελφοὺς. αὐτοῦ τοὺς υἱοὺς ᾿Ισραήλ. 24 Kai 


look upon his brethren the sons of Israel; and 
ἰδών τινα ἀδικούμενον, ἠμύνατο καὶ ἐποίησεν.ἐκδίκησιν 
seeing a certain one being wronged, he defended [him] and avenged 


τῷ καταπονουμένῳ, πατάξας τὸν Αἰγύπτιον. 25 ἐνόμιζεν. δὲ 
him being ΟΡῬσεββθᾶ, havingsmitten the Egyptian. For he thought 


συνιέναι τοὺς.ἀδελφοὺς.Σαὐτοῦ ὅτι ὁ θεὸς διὰ χειρὸς 


“would *understand ‘his *brethren that God by ‘hand 
αὐτοῦ δίδωσιν Ταὐτοῖς σωτηρίαν" οἱ- δὲ οὐ-συνῆκαν. 
this is giving them salvation. But they understood not 


® αὐτοῦ (read his family) rT. 
4 καὶ κατέβη LTTrAW. 
- ἐν iN LTTr. 


> Ἰακὼβ τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῦ LTTrAW. 
ε ᾧ ΟἸΤΥΓΑΜ. {᾿ Ἐμμὼρ LTTraw. 
i ὡμολόγησεν promised LTTraw. k ἄχρι LTTrA. 
m — ἡμῶν (read the fathers) LTTra. 1 τὰ βρέφη 
Ρ — αὐτοῦ (read [Π]5]} GLTTraw. 4 ἐκτεθέντος δὲ 
5 + ἐν in (read πάσῃ all) Trraw. t — ἐν LYTrA. 
W τεσσερακονταετὴς TTrA. τ — αὐτοῦ (read 


Y σωτηρίαν αὐτοῖς LTTrAW. 


VIE. AS CATS! 


26 τῷ "τε ἐπιούσῃ ἡμέρῳ ὦφθη αὐτοῖς μαχομένοις, Kai 
And on the following day heappeared to those who were contending, and 
"συνήλασεν" αὐτοὺς εἰς εἰρήνην, εἰπών, Avdpsc ἀδελφοί ἐστε 
urged them to peace, saying, Men ‘brethren “are 
ὑμεῖς" “ἱνατί" ἀδικεῖτε ἀλλήλους; 27 Ὃ.δὲ ἀδικῶν 
‘ye, why wrong ye one .nother? But he who was wronging (his) 
τὸν πλησίον ἀπώσατο αὐτόν, εἰπών, Τίς σε κατέστησεν 
neighbour thrust away him, saying, Who thee ‘appointed 
ἄρχοντα καὶ δικαστὴν ἐφ’ “ἡμᾶς"; 28 μὴ ἀνελεῖν pe 
ruler and judge over us? To put to death me 
σὺ θέλεις, ὃν. τρόπον ἀνεῖλες ἐχθὲς" τὸν Αἰγύπτιον ; 
*thou ‘wishest, in the way thou puttest to death yesterday the Egyptian? 
29 "Εφυγεν. δὲ Μωσῆς" ἐν τῷ.λόγῳ.τούτῳ, καὶ ἐγένετο 
And “fled 1Moses at this saying, and became 
πάροικος ἕν Μαδιάμ, οὗ ἐγέννησεν υἱοὺς δύο. 
asojourner in [the] land οὗ Madiam, where he begat *sons two. 
30 Kai πληρωθέντων ἐτῶν ἐτεσσαράκοντα" ὥφθη αὐτῷ ἐν 
And “being ‘fulfilled “years ‘forty appeared tohim in 
τῇ ἐρήμῳ τοῦ ὄρους Σινᾶ ἄγγελος "κυρίου ἐν φλογὶ 
the desert of the Mount Sina anangel of [the] Lord in a flame 
πυρὸς βάτου. 81 ὁ.δὲ "Μωσῆς" ἰδὼν ἰξθαύμασεν" τὸ 
of fire of a bush. And Moses seeing [10] wondered at the 
ὅραμα" προσερχομένου.δὲ αὐτοῦ κατανοῆσαι. ἐγένετο φωνὴ 


vision ; and *coming “near the toconsider [it], there was a voice 
, k A ᾽ , ΙΙ ᾽ ‘ « A ~ , 
κυρίου "πρὸς αὐτόν," 82 Ἐγὼ ὁ θεὸς τῶν.πατέρων.σου, 
of [the] Lord to him, {am] the God of thy fathers, 


ὁ θεὸς ᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ 16 θεὸς" Ἰσαὰκ καὶ ἰὸ θεὸς" ᾿Ιακώβ. 
the God of Abraham and the God ofIsaac and the God _ of Jacob. 
Ἔντρομος.δὲ γενόμενος ‘Mwonc' οὐκ.ἐτόλμα κατανοῆσαι. 

And ‘trembling *having *become ‘Moses he durst not consider [10]. 
33 εἶπεν.δὲ αὐτῷ ὁ κύριος, Λῦσον τὸ ὑπόδημα τῶν ποδῶν 


And *said “ἴο Shim ‘the *Lord, Loose the sandal of *feet 
σου" ὁ.γὰρ τόπος Mv" ᾧ ἕστηκας, γῆ ayia ἐστίν. 34 ἰδὼν 
lthy, forthe place on whichthoustandest,*ground*holy ‘is. Seeing, 


εἶδον τὴν κάκωσιν τοῦὔ.λαοῦ.μου τοῦ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ, καὶ τοῦ 
Isaw the ill-treatment of my people in Egypt, and 
στεναγμοῦ." αὐτῶν" ἤκουσα" καὶ κατέβην ἐξελέσθαι αὐτούς" 
their groaning heard, and came down to take “out ‘them ; 
‘ ~ 6 ~ re) ? λ ~ i > Al , 35 T ~ A 
καὶ νῦν δεῦρο, “ἀποστελῶΐ σε εἰς Αἴγυπτον. 30 Τοῦτον τὸν 
and now come, Iwillsend thee to Egypt. This 
Mwicny ὃν ἠρνήσαντο εἰπόντες, Tic σε κατέστησεν ἄρ- 
Moses, whom they refused, saying, Who “thee ‘appointed ru- 
χοντα καὶ δικαστήν ; τοῦτον ὁ θεὸς Ρ ἄρχοντα Kai λυτρωτὴν 
ler and judge? him God [5325] “ruler ‘and “*deliverer 
«ἀπέστειλεν ἐνὶ χειρὶ ἀγγέλου τοῦ ὀφθέντος αὐτῷ ἐν TH 
‘sent by [the] hand of[the] angel who appeared tohim in the 
βάτῳ. 36 οὗτος ἐξήγαγεν αὐτούς, ποιήσας τέρατα καὶ 
bush. This one led out them, having wrought wonders and 
σημεῖα ἐν τῇ "Αἰγύπτου" καὶ ἐν ἐρυθρᾷ θαλάσσῃ, 
signs in [the] land of Egypt and in (the) Red Sea, 


z δὲ EGW. 8 συνήλλασσεν LTT: W, 
LTrA. ἃ ἡμῶν LITrW. © ἐχθὲς LTTrA. 
h — κυρίου LTTrA. i ἐθαύμαζεν GTAW. 
m ἐφ᾽ LITrA, Ὁ αὐτοῦ (read [their]) utr. 
LT[Tr]A. 4 ἀπέσταλκεν σὺν has sent with LTTraw. 
* Αἰγύπτῳ GLTTrA, 


{Μωῦσῆς GLTTraw. 
k — πρὸς αὐτόν LTTra. 


Ὁ — ὑμεῖς (read ἐστε ye are) LTTr[A]W. 
ὃ τεσσεράκοντα TTrA. 


ο ἀποστείλω LTTrAW. 
τ τῇ (read in Egypt) utr 


331 


next day he shewed 
himself unto them as 
they strove, and would 
have set them at one 
again, saying, Sirs, ye 
are brethren ; why do 
ye wrong one to an- 
other? 27 But he that 
did his neighbour 
wrong thrust him a- 
Way. saying, Who made 
thee a ruler and a 
judge overus? 28 Wilt 
thou kill me, as thou 
diddest the Egyptian 
yesterday? 29 Then 
fled Moses at this say- 
ing, and was astranger 
in the iand of Madian, 
where he begat two 
sons. 30 And when 
forty years were ex- 
pired, there appeared 
to him in the wilder- 
ness of mount Sina an 
angel of the Lord ina 
flame of fire in a bush. 
31 When Moses saw it, 
he wondered at the 
sight : and as he drew 
near to behold τέ, the 
voice of the Lord came 
unto him, 32 saying, 
I am the God of thy 
fathers, the God of 
Abraham, and the God 
of Isaac, and the God 
of Jacob. Then Moses 
trembled, and durst 
not behold. 33 Then 
said the Lord to him, 
Put off thy shoes from 
thy feet: for the place 
where thou standest 
is holy ground. 34 I 
have seen, I have 
seen the affliction of 
my people which is in 
Egypt, and I have 
heard their groaning, 
and am come down to 
deliver them. And 
now come, I will send 
thee into Egypt. 
35 This Moses whom 
they refused, saying, 
Who made thee aruler 
anda judge? thesame 
did God send to be a 
ruler and a deliverer 
by the hand of the 
angel which appeared 
to him in the bush. 
36 He brought them 
out, after that he had 
shewed wonders and 
signs in the land of 
Egypt, and in the Red 
sea, and in the wil- 


ς ἵνα τί 


1 — ὃ θεὸς LTTrA. 
P + καὶ both 


532 


derness forty years. 
37 This is that Moses, 
which said unto the 
children of Israei, 
A prophet shali the 
Lord your God raise 
upunto you of your 
brethren, likeunto me; 
him shall ye hear. 
38 This is he, that was 
in the church in the 
wilderness with the 
angel which spake to 
him in the mount 
Sina, and wiih our fa- 
thers: who received 
the lively oracles to 
give unto us: 39 to 
whom our fathers 
would not obey, but 
thrust him from 
them, and in their 
hearts turned back 
again into Egypt, 
40 saying unto Aaron, 
Make us gods to go 
before us: for as for 
this Moses, which 
brought us out of the 
land of Egypt, we wot 
not what is become of 
him, 41 And they made 
a calf in those days, 
and offered sacrifice 
unto the idol, and re- 
joiced in the works 
of their own hands. 
42 Then God turned, 
and gave them up to 
worship the host of 
heaven ; as it jis writ- 
ten in the book of the 
prophets, O ye house 
of israel, have ye of- 
fered to meslain beasts 
and sacrifices by the 
space of forty years in 
the wilderness? 43 Yea, 
ye took up the ta- 
bernacle of Moloch, 
and the star of your 
god Remphan, figures 
which ye made to wor- 
ship them: and I will 
carry youaway beyond 
Babylon. 44 Our fa- 
thers had the taber- 
nacle of witness in the 
wilderness, as he had 
appointed, speaking 
unto Moses, that he 
should make it accor- 
ding to the fashion 
that he had seen. 
45 Which also our fa- 
thers that came after 
brought in with Jesus 
into the possession of 
the Gentiles, whom 
God drave out before 
the face of our fathers, 


WPA EI. VIF. 


καὶ ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ ἔτη τεσσαράκοντα" 37 Οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ 


and in the wilderness “years forty. This is the 
Mwvonce ὁ δείπων᾽ τοῖς υἱοῖς “Iopand, Προφήτην ὑμῖν 
Moses who said tothe sons of Israel, A prophet to you 
? ΄ x ᾿ " ¢ θ A Ay rt ἢ ? ~ . ~ 
AVAOTNHOEL κυριος 0 Geog Τυμῶν ἐκ τῶν ἀδελφῶν 
5:1011] raise πρ ['the] *Lord *God “your from among *brethren 
ὑμῶν ὡς ἐμέ" ταὐτοῦ ἀκούσεσθε." 38 Οὗτός torw ὁ γενό- 
‘your like me, him γ6 shall hear. This is hewho was 


μενος ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ ἐν TH ἐρήμῳ μετὰ τοῦ ἀγγέλου τοῦ 
in the assembly in the wilderness with the angel who 
λαλοῦντος αὐτῷ ἐν τῷ Ope Σινᾶ, καὶ τῶν.πατέρων ἡμῶν. 
spoke tohim in the mount Sina, and with our fathers ; 
ὃς ἐδέξατο λόγια ζῶντα δοῦναι ἡμῖν: 39 w οὐκ-ἠθέλησαν 
who received “oracles ‘living togive tous: to whom “would *not 
ὑπήκοοι γενέσθαι οἱ. πατέρες ἡμῶν, "ἀλλ᾽ ἀπώσαντο, καὶ 
Ssubject ®be lour “fathers, but thrust {him] away, and 
ἐστράφησαν ὃ ταῖς.καρδίαις.αὐτῶν εἰς Αἴγυπτον, 40 εἰπόντες 
turned back their hearts to Egypt, saying 
τῷ Aaowy, Ποίησον ἡμῖν θεοὺς ot προπορεύσονται ἡμῶν" 
to Aaron, Make us gods~ who shall go before Us ; 
ὁ yap “Μωσῆς" οὗτος ὃς ἐξήγαγεν ἡμᾶς ἐκ γῆς Αἰγύπ- 
for Moses lthat who brought 7out ‘us from [the] land of Egypt, 
του, οὐκιοἴδαμεν Ti ἀγέγονεν' αὐτῷ. 41 Kai ἐμοσχοποίησαν 
weknow not what has happened to him. And they made a calf 
ἐν ταὶς. ἡμέραις. ἐκείναις, καὶ ἀνήγαγον θυσίαν τῷ εἰδώλῳ, 
in those days, and offered sacrifice to the idol, 
Kai εὐφραίνοντο ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις τῶν.χειρῶν αὐτῶν. 42° Εστρεψεν 
and rejoiced in the works of their hands. °*Turned 


δὲ ὁ θεὸς Kai παρέδωκεν αὐτοὺς λατρεύειν τῇ στρατιᾷ τοῦ! 


*but ?God and deliveredup them toserve the host of the 
οὐρανοῦ" καθὼς γέγραπται ἐν BiBAW τῶν προφητῶν, 
heaven ; as it has been written in [the] book of the prophets, 


Μὴ σφάγια καὶ θυσίας προσηνέγκατέ or ἔτη ἵτεσσαρά- 
*Slain °beasts °and ‘sacrifices ‘did ὅγε ΟΠ tome “years forty 
κονταὶ ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ, οἶκος ᾿Ισραήλ; 43 καὶ ἀνελάβετε τὴν 
in the wilderness, O house of Israel ? And yetookup the 
σκηνὴν τοῦ Μολόχ:, καὶ τὸ ἄστρον τοῦ.θεοῦ. ὑμῶν" *Peugar, 
tabernacle of Moloch, and the — star of your god Remphan, 
Tove τύπους οὺἣς ἐποιήσατε προσκυνεῖν αὐτοῖς" καὶ μετοικιῶ 
the models which ye made to worship them; and I will remove 
ὑμᾶς ἐπέκεινα Βαβυλῶνος. 44 Ἢ σκηνὴ rot) μαρτυρίου ἢ' 
you beyond Babylon. The tabernacle of the testimony was 
Siy' τοῖς.πατράσιν.ωὩμῶν iv τῇ ἐρήμῳ, καθὼς διετάξατο 


among our fathers in the wilderness, as commanded 
ὁ λαλῶν τῷ "Μωσῇ,! ποιῆσαι αὐτὴν κατὰ τὸν τύπον 
he who spoke to Moses, to make it accordingto the modei 
ὃν ἑωράκει: 45 ἣν Kai εἰσήγαγον διαδεξάμενοι 


which he had seen; which also “brought *in *having ‘received δΌΥ °succession 


ol.rarépecnpoy pera ᾿Ιησοῦ ev τῇ κατασχέσει τῶν ἐθνῶν, 
tour “fathers with Joshua _ in the taking possession of the nations, 

ov ἰἔξωσεν" ὁ θεὸς ἀπὸ προσώπου τῶν.πατέρων. ἡμῶν. 

whom Ζἄγονο *out 1God from [the] face of our fathers, 


ἡ τεσσεράκοντα TTrA. 
2— αὐτοῦ ἀκούσεσθε LITrA. 
4 ἐγένετο happened LTTra. 
“Poud@av Romphan 1. 


¥ — ὑμῶν GLTTrA. 
© Μωῦσῆς GLTTraw. 
£‘Peday Rephan Ltraw ; 
1 ἐξέωσεν T. 


ἢ εἴπας LTTrA. X — κύριος LTTrA. 
ἃ ἀλλὰ LITrA. b 4+ ἐν LYTrA. 
ς — ὑμῶν (read the God) Lrtra, 


& — ἐν (ead to our) LYTrA. ἃ Μωῦσῇ GLTTrAw. 


WIL AVOUT S: 

ἕως τῶν ἡμερῶν Δαβίδ" 46 ὃς εὗρεν χάριν ἐνώπιον τοῦ 
until the aye of David; who found favour before 

θεοῦ, Kai ῃτήσατο εὑρεῖν σκήνωμα τῷ "θεῷ" ᾿Ιακώβ. 
God, and asked tofind a tabernacle for the God of Jacob ; 


47 "Σολομῶν".δὲ ὁφκοδόμησεν" αὐτῷ οἶκον. 48 AN οὐχ ὁ 
but Solomon built him ἃ house, But ‘not ‘the 


ὕψιστος ἐν χειροποιήτοις Pyaoic' κατοικεῖ, καθὼς ὁ προ- 
2Most *High in hand-made temples dwells ; as the pro- 
t ? , , t ‘ ~ ε 
φήτης λέγει, 49 Ὁ οὐρανός μοι Opie 7-0€ γῆ ὑπο- 
phet says, The heaven [is]}tomeathrone and the earth a foot- 
πόδιον τῶν. ποδῶν.μου" ποῖον οἶκον οἰκοδομήσετέ μοι; λέγει 
stool of ae feet: what house willye build me? _ says 
κύριος" ἢ τίς τόπος τῆς.καταπαύσεώς.μου ; ὅ0 οὐχὶ 
{||6] Lord, or what [the] place of my rest? 2not 
ἡ-χείριμου ἐποίησεν ταῦτα πάντα; 51 σκληροτράχηλοι καὶ 
βξτὴν *hand tmade ‘these things ‘all? O stiffnecked and 
ἀπερίτμητοι “τῇ καρδίᾳ" καὶ τοῖς ὠσίν, ὑμεῖς ἀεὶ τῷ πνεύματι 
uncircumcised inheart and ears, ye ease the Suet 


τῷ ἁγίῳ ἀντιπίπτετε, two! οἱ. πατέρες ὑμῶν, καὶ ὑμεῖς. 52 τίνα 
the Holy resist ; as oe eevee also ye. Which 


τῶν προφητῶν ovK-edlweay οἱ. “πατέρες. ὑμῶν; καὶ ἀπέ- 
of the prophets did ποὺ *persecute tyour *fathers ? and they 
κτειναν τοὺς προκαταγγείλαντας περὶ τῆς ἐλεύσεως TOU 
killed those who before announced concerning the coming of the 
δικαίου, οὗ νῦν ὑμεῖς προδόται καὶ φονεῖς "γεγένησθε" 

Just ae of whor: now ye betrayers and murderers have become! 


53 οἵτινες ἐλάβετε τὸν νόμον εἰς διαταγὰς ἀγγέλων, Kai 
who received the law by [the] disposition oofangels, and 
ovKk-epuraéare. 
kept [it] not. 
54 ᾿Ακούοντες.δὲ ταῦτα διεπρίοντο ταῖς. καρδίαις. αὐτῶν, 
And θα these aie they were cut to their hearts, 


καὶ ἔβρυχον τοὺς ὀδόντας ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν. 55 Ὑπάρχων δὲ πλήρης, 


teeth at him. But being 


πνεύματος ἁγίου, ἀτενίσας εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν, ΣΝ 
of [the] *Spirit *Holy, ao looked cere into heaven, he saw 


δόξαν θεοῦ, Kai ᾿Ιησοῦν ἑστῶτα ἐκ δεξιῶν τοῦ θεοῦ, 
{the] glory ofGod, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, 


56 καὶ εἶπεν, ᾿Ιδού, θεωρῶ τοὺς οὐρανοὺς tavepypévove,' Kai 

and βαϊᾶ, Lo, Ibehold the heayens opened, and 
τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐκ δεξιῶν ἑστῶτα τοῦ θεοῦ. 
the Son of man ?at the *right Shand ‘standing of God. 


57 Κράξαντες.δὲ φωνῇ μεγάλῃ συνέσχον τὰ. ὦτα.αὐτῶν 
And crying out with a *voice ous they held their ears 


καὶ ὥρμησαν ὁμοθυμαδὸν ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν, 58 καὶ ἐκβαλόντες 
and rushed with one accord upon him, and havingcast [him] 


ἔξω τῆς πόλεως ἐλιθοβόλουν. καὶ οἱ μάρτυρες ἀπέθεντο 


and gnashed_ the 


out of the city they stoned [him], And the witnesses laid aside 
τὰ ἱμάτια.αὐτῶν παρὰ τοὺς πόδας νεανίου καλουμένου 
their garments at the feet of a young man called 


Lavrov. ὅθ καὶ ἐλιθοβόλουν τὸν Στέφανον, ἐπικαλούμενον 
Saul. And they stoned Stephen, invoking 


καὶ λέγοντα, Κύριε Ἰησοῦ, δέξαι τὸ. πνεῦμά.μου. 60 Oeic.oé 
and = saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. And having bowed 


333 
unto the days of Da 
vid ; 46 who found fa: 
vour before God, and 
desired to find a taber- 
nacle for the God oi 
Jacob. 47 But Solo- 
mon built him an 
house. 48 Howbeit the 
most High dwelleth 
not in temples made 
with hands; as saith 
the prophet, 49 Heaven 
is my throne, and earth 
7s my footstool : what 
house willye build me? 
saith the Lord: or what 
is the place of my rest? 
50 Hath not my hand 
made all these things ? 
51 Yestiffmecked and 
uncircumcised in heart 
and ears, ye do always 
resist the Holy Ghost : 
as your fathers did, so 
do ye. 52 Which of the 
prophets have not your 
fathers persecuted ? 
and they have slain 
them which shewed be- 
fore of the coming of 
the Just One; of whom 
ye have been now the 
betrayers and murder- 
ers: 53 who have re- 
ceived the law by the 
disposition of angels, 
and have not kept it. 


54 When they heard 
these things, they were 
cut to the heart, and 
they gnashed on him 
with their teeth. 55 But 
he, being full of the 
Holy Ghost, looked up 
stedfastly into heaven, 
and saw the glory of 
God, and Jesus stand- 
ing on the right hand 
of God, 56 and said, 
Behold, I see the 
heavens opened, and 
the Son of man stand- 
ing on the right hand 
of God. 57 Then they 
cried out witha loud 
voice,and stopped their 
ears, and ran upon 
him with one accord, 
58 and cast him out of 
the city, and stoned 
him: and the witnesses 
laid down their clothes 
at a young man’s feet 
whose name was Saul. 
59 And they stoned 
Stepnen, caling upon 
God, and saying, Lord 
Jesus, receive my spi- 
rit. 60 And he kneeled 


1 Δαυείδ LITA ; Δαυΐδ Gw. ™ οἴκῳ house LT. 
2.-- ναοῖς (read [places]) GLTTraw. 
ἐγένεσθε became LTTraw. 


n Σαλωμὼν πὶ 


t διηνοιγμάνους LTTrAw. 


4 καρδίαις hearts LTTr ; ταῖς καρδίαις Ww. 


ο τ ΟΣ στῶ Tr, 
τ καθὼς τι 


994 
down, and cried with 


a loud voice, Lord, lay 
not this sin to their 


charge. And when he 
had said this, he fell 
asleep. VIII. And 


Saul was consenting 
unto his death. 


And at that time 
there was a great per- 
secution against the 
church which was at 
Jerusalem; and they 
were all scattered a- 
broad throughout the 
regions of Judwa and 
Samaria, except the 
apostles. 2 And devout 
men carried Stephen to 
his burial, and made 
great lamentation over 
him. 3 As for Saul, he 
made havock of the 
church, entering into 
every house, and ha- 
ling men and women 
committed them to pri- 
son. 


4 Therefore they that 
were scattered abroad 
went every where 
preaching the word. 
ὃ Then Philip went 
down to the city of 
Samaria, and preached 
Christ unto them. 
6 And the people with 
one accord gave heed 
unto those things 
which Philip spake, 
hearing and seeing the 
miracles which he did. 
7 For unclean spirits, 
crying with loud voice, 
came out of many that 
were possessed with 
them: and many taken 
with palsies, and that 
were lame, were heal- 
ed. 8 And there was 
great joy in that city. 


9 Put there was a 
certain man, called 
Simon, which before- 
time in the same city 
used sorcery, and be- 
witched the people of 
Samaria, giving out 
that himself was some 
great one: 10to whom 
they all gave heed, 
from the least to the 
greatest, saying, This 
man is the great power 
of God. 11 And to him 
they had regard, be- 
cause that of long time 
he had bewitched them 
with sorceries. 12 But 
when they believed 
Philip preaching the 
things concerning the 


* ταύτην THY ἁμαρτίαν LTrAW. 

z + τὴν the (city) Lr. 
ἐξήρχοντο (ἐξήρχετο G) GLTTrAW. 

{ + καλουμένη called GLTTraw. 


LTTraw. 


TPASEL*. VII, Vile 
φωνῃ μεγάλῃ, Kupre, μὴ-στήσῳς αὐτοῖς 
heeried witha*voice ‘loud, Lord, lay not to them 
ὑτὴν.ἁμαρτίαν.ταύτην" Kai τοῦτο εἰπὼν ἐκοιμήθη. 

this sin. And this having said he fell asleep. 
8 Σαῦλος.δὲ ἣν συνευδοκῶν τῇ ἀναιρέσει αὐτοῦ. 

And Saul was consenting tothe killing of him. 
᾿Εγένετο.δὲ ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ διωγμὸς μέγας ἐπὶ τὴν 
And took place θὰ. that day a persecution ‘great against the 

ἐκκλησίαν τὴν ἐν ἱΙεροσολύμοις᾽ πάντες.ἥτε! διεσπάρησαν 
assembly which[was] in Jerusalem, and all were scattered 
κατὰ τὰς χώρας τῆς lovdaiac καὶ “Σαμαρείας" πλὴν τῶν 
throughout the countries of Judwa and Samaria except the 
ἀποστόλων. 2 συνεκόμισαν.δὲ τὸν Στέφανον ἄνδρες εὐλαβεῖς, 


τὰ γόνατα ἔκραξεν 
the knees 


apostles. And *buried “Stephen 2men pious, 
καὶ "ἐποιήσαντο κοπετὸν μέγαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ. 3 Σαῦλος δὲ 
and made lamentation ‘great over him. But Saul 


ἐλυμαίνετο THY ἐκκλησίαν, κατὰ.τοὺς. οἴκους εἰσπορευόμενος, 
was ravaging the assembly, house *by ‘house entering, 
σύρων.τε ἄνδρας Kai γυναῖκας παρεδίδου εἰς φυλακήν. 
and dragging men and women delivered [them] up to prison. 

4 Οἱ μὲν οὖν διασπαρέντες διῆλθον, εὐαγγελιζό- 

They who therefore had been scattered passed through, announcing the 
μενοι τὸν λόγον. 5 Φίλιππος.δὲ κατελθὼν sic? πόλιν 
glad tidings— the word. And Philip, going down’ to a city 
τῆς “Σαμαρείας exnovacey αὐτοῖς τὸν χριστόν. 6 προσεῖχόν 


of Samaria, proclaimed tothem the Christ; “gave *heed 
"re! οἱ ὄχλοι τοῖς λεγομένοις ὑπὸ τοῦ Φιλίππου ὁμο- 
land “the *crowds tothethings spoken by Philip with 


θυμαδόν, ἐν.τῷ.ἀκούειν.αὐτοὺς καὶ βλέπειν τὰ σημεῖα ἃ 


one accord, when they heard and saw the signs which 
ἐποίει. 7 ὑπολλῶν" γὰῪρῤ τῶν ἐχόντων πνεύματα ἀκά- 
he did. For of many of those who had spirits un- 
θαρτα, βοῶντα “μεγάλῃ φωνῇ ἐξήρχετο" πολλοὶ δὲ 
clean, ‘crying ὅν ἢ ®a 7loud ®voice ‘they 7went Sout; and many 


παραλελυμένοι Kai χωλοὶ ἐθεραπεύθησαν. 8 “kai ἐγένετο 
having been paralysed and lame were healed. And Swas 
χαρὰ μεγάλη" ἐν TH.70AELeKeivy. 
ἼΟΥ ‘great in that city. 
9 ᾿Ανὴρ.δέ.ιτις ὀνόματι Σίμων προὐπῆρχεν ἐν τῷ πόλει 
But adertainman, by name Simon, wasformerly in the city 
μαγεύων καὶ “ἐξιστῶν" τὸ ἔθνος τῆς "Σαμαρείας," λέγων 
using magic arts and amazing the nation of Samaria, saying 
εἶναί τινα ἑαυτὸν μέγαν 10 ᾧ προσεῖχον πάντες 
2.0 *be ‘some ‘himself great one. To whom ?were *giving *heed tall 
ἀπὸ μικροῦ ἕως μεγάλου, λέγοντες, Οὗτός ἐστιν ἡ δύναμις 
from small to great, saying, This one _ is the power 
τοῦ θεοῦ ἡ | peyadn. 11 Προσεῖχον.δὲ airy, διὰ 
of God which [is] great. And they were giving heed tohim, because 


τὸ ἱκανῷ χρόνῳ ταῖς Suayetac' ἐξεστακέναι αὐτούς. 
that foralong time with the magic arts [he] had amazed them. 
12 “Ored& ἐπίστευσαν τῷ Φιλίππῳ εὐαγγελιζομένῳ 


But when they believed Philip announcing the glad tidings— 


Υ ἐποίησαν 
,, ἢ φωνῇ μεγάλῃ 
© ἐξιστάνων LITA. 


w δὲ LTrA; — Te T. x Σαμαρίας τ. 
a δὲ LTTrAW. Ὁ πολλοὶ LTTrA. 
4 ἐγένετο δὲ πολλὴ χαρὰ LTTrA. 

& μαγιαις T. 


VIII. A€¢TS: 
bra! περὶ τῆς βασιλεί ὕ θεοῦ καὶ τοῦ ὀνό 
ἧς ασιλειας TOU VEOU KAL τοῦ OVOLAaATOC 
the things concerning the kingdom of God and_ the name 
‘rov' ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, ἐβαπτίζοντο ἄνδρες.τε Kai γυναῖκες. 
of Jesus Christ, they were baptized bothmen and women. 
13 ὁ.δὲ Σίμων Kai αὐτὸς ἐπίστευσεν, καὶ βαπτισθες ἦν 
Απᾶ Simon also himself believed, and having been baptized was 


προσκαρτερῶν τῷ Φιλίππῳ᾽ θεωρῶν τε ἔσημεῖα καὶ δυνά- 
steadfastly continuing with Philip; *beholding ‘and signs and *works “of 


μεις μεγάλας γινομένας," ἐξίστατο. 14 ᾿Ακούσαντες.δὲ οἱ 


‘power ‘great being done, was amazed. And *having Sheard 'the 
ἐν Ἱεροσολύμοις ἀπόστολοι ὅτι δέδεκται ἡ ἱΣαμάρεια" τὸν 
in *Jerusalem 7apostles that *had *received 1Samaria the 


λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀπέστειλαν πρὸς αὐτοὺς τὸν!" Πέτρον καὶ 
v7 ᾽ 


word of God, they sent to them Peter and 
"Ἰωάννην" 15 οἵτινες καταβάντες προσηΐξαντο περὶ 
John ; who having come down prayed for 
αὐτῶν, ὅπως λάβωσιν πνεῦμα ἅγιον. 16 οὔπω". γὰρ 
them, that they might receive(the] 7Spirit ‘Holy; for not yet 
ἦν ἐπ᾽ οὐδενὶ αὐτῶν ἐπιπεπτωκός, μόνον.δὲ βεβαπ- 
was he upon any of them fallen, but only *bap- 
(it. no one) 


TLOMEVOL ὑπῆρχον εἰς τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ. 17 τότε 


tized ΠΟΥ͂ “were to the name ofthe Lord Jesus. Then 
Ρἐπετίθουν'" rac χεῖρας ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς, καὶ ἐκάμβανον πνεῦμα 
they laid hands upon them, and they received [the] Spirit 


ἅγιον. 18 “Θεασάμενος".δὲ ὁ Σίμων ὅτι διὰ τῆς ἐπιθέσεως 
"Holy. But *having *seen Simon that by the laying on 
TOY χειρῶν τῶν ἀποστόλων δίδοται TO πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον," 
ofthe hands of the apostles was given the Spirit the Holy, 
προσήνεγκεν αὐτοῖς χρήματα, 19 λέγων, Δότε κἀμοὶ τὴν 
he offered to them riches, saying, Give also to me 
ἐξουσίαν.ταύτην, wa wSdy ἐπιθῶ τὰς χεῖρας, Aap- 
this authority, that on whomsoever I may lay hands, he may re- 
βάν πνεῦμα ἅγιον. 20 Πέτρος. δὲ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτόν, 
ceive [the] 7Spirit ‘Holy. But Peter said to him, 
Τὸ ἀργύριόν.σου σὺν σοὺ εἴη εἰς ἀπώλειαν: ὅτι τὴν 
Thy money with thee may it be to destruction, because the 


δωρεὰν τοῦ θεοῦ ἐνόμισας διὰ χρημάτων κτᾶσθαι. 21 οὐκ 
gift of God thou didst think by Tiches _ to be obtained. sNot 


ἔστιν σοι μερὶς οὐδὲ κλῆρος ἐν TPACyw.TovTw* ἡ.γὰρ 


‘there 215 to thee part nor lot in this matter ; for the 
καρδία σου οὐκ.ἔστιν εὐθεῖα "ἐνώπιον" τοῦ θεοῦ. 22 μετανόη- 


heart of thee is not right before God. Repent # 
σον οὖν ἀπὸ τῆς κακίας. σου ταὕτης, καὶ δεήθητι "row θεοῦ," 
therefore of 7thy“wickedness ‘this, and supplicate God, 


εἰ dpa ἀφεθήσεταί σοι ἡ ἐπίνοια τῆς.καρδίας.σου. 23 εἰς 


if indeed may be forgiven to thee the thought of thy heart ; 7in 
γὰρ χολὴν πικρίας καὶ σύνδεσμον ἀδικίας ὁρῶ σε 
for agall of bitterness and a bond of unrighteousness Isee thee 


ὄντα. 24 ᾿Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ ὁ Σίμων εἶπεν, AenOnre ὑμεῖς ὑπὲρ 
to be. And “answering 1Simon said, Supplicate ye on behalf 
? ~ ‘ A , . ‘ ? , ? > on 
ἐμοῦ πρὸς τὸν κύριον, ὕπως μηδὲν ἐπέλθῃ ἐπ᾽ ἐμὲ ὧν 
of me to the Lord, sothat nothing maycome upon me of which 


h — τὰ LTITrAW. 1— τοῦ GLTTrAW. 
1 Σαμαρία T. τὰ — τὸν LTTrAW. 0 Ἰωάνην Tr. 
LTTrA. ᾳ ἰδὼν GLTTraw. τ--- τὸ ἅγιον T[Tr]A. 
Υ τοῦ κυρίου the Lord LTTraw. 


5" ἐὰν EGLTTrAW. 


990 


kingdom of God, and 
the name of Jesus 
Christ, they were bap- 
tized, both men and 
women. 13 Then Si- 
mon himself believed 
also : and when he was 
baptized, he continued 
with Philip, and won- 
dered, beholding the 
Iniracles and _ signs 
which were done. 
14 Now when the apo- 
stles which were at 
Jerusalem heard that 
Samaria had received 
the word of God, they 
sent unto them Peter 
and John: 15 who, 
when they were come 
down, prayed for them, 
that they might re- 
ceive the Hcly Ghost : 
16 (for as yet he was 
fallen upon none of 
them : only they were 
baptized in the name 
of the Lord Jesus.) 
17 Then laid they their 
hands on them, and 
they received the Holy 
Ghost. 18 And when Si- 
mon saw that through 
laying on of the apo- 
stles’ hands the Holy 
Ghost was given, he 
offered them money, 
19 saying, Give me al- 
so this power, that on 
whomsoever I lay 
hands, he may re- 
ceive the Holy Ghost. 
20 But Petersaid unto 
him, Thy money perish 
with thee, because thou 
hast thought that the 
gift of God may be 
purchased with money. 
21 Thou hast neither 
part nor lot in this 
matter: for thy heart 
is not right in the 
sight of God. 22 Re- 
pent therefore of this 
thy wickedness, and 
pray God, if perhaps 
the thought of thine 
heart may be forgiven 
thee, 23 For 1 perceive 
that thou art in the 
all of bitterness, and 
in the bond of iniquity. 
24 Then answered Si- 
mon, andsaid, Pray ye 
to the Lord for me, 
that none of these 
things which ye have 
spoken come upon me, 


Κ δυνάμεις Kal σημεῖα μεγάλα γινόμενα GW. 
© οὐδέπω LTTrAW. Ξ 


Ρ ἐπετίθεσαν 
τ ἔναντι GLTTrAW. 


336 


25 And they, when 
they had testified and 
preached the word of 
the Lord, returned 
to Jerusalem, and 
preached the gospel 
in many villages of the 
Samaritans, 


26 And the angel 
of the Lord spake 
unto Philip, saying, 
Arise, and go toward 
the south unto the 
way that goeth down 
from Jerusalem unto 
Gaza, which is desert. 
27 And he arose and 
went: and, behold, a 
man of Bthiopia, an 
eunuch of great autho- 
rity under Candace 
queen of the Ethio- 
pians, who had the 
charge of all her trea- 
sure, and had come to 
Jerusalem for to wor- 
ship, 28 was returning, 
and sitting in his cha- 
riot read Hsaias the 
prophet. 29 Then the 
Spirit said unto Philip, 
Go near, and join thy- 
self to this chariot. 
30 And Philip ran 
thither to him, and 
heard him read the 
prophet Esaias, and 
said, Understandest 
thou what thou read- 
est? 31 And he said, 
How can I, except 
some man should guide 
me? And he desired 
Philip that he would 
come up and sit with 
him. 32 The place of 
the scripture which he 
read was this, He was 
led as a sheep to the 
slaughter ; and like a 
lamb dumb before his 
shearer, so opened he 
not his mouth: 33 in his 
humiliation his judg- 
ment was taken away: 
and who shall declare 
his generation? for his 
life is taken from the 
earth. 34 And the eu- 
nuch answered Philip, 
and said, I pray thee, 
of whom speaketh the 
prophet this? of him- 
self, or of some other 
man? 35 ‘hen Philip 
opened his mouth, and 
began at the same 


TIPASGEIS. VI. 
elonkare. 25 Οἱ μὲν οὖν διαμαρτυράμενοι Kai λαλή- 
ye have spoken. They therefore having earnestly testified and having 


σαντες τὸν λόγον τοῦ κυρίου, ὑπέστρεψαν" εἰς “Ἰερουσαλήμ," 
spoken the word ofthe Lord, returned to Jerusalem, 
πολλάς. τε κώμας τῶν ΥὑΣαμαρειτῶν" Τεὐηγγελίσαντο." 
and [0] ΤΥ villages of the Samaritans announced the glad tidings, 
26 “AyyéAoc.dé κυρίου ἐλάλησεν πρὸς Φίλιππον, λέγων, 
But an angel οὗ [{Π6] Lord spoke to Philip, saying, 
᾿Ανάστηθι Kai *7opsvov' κατὰ μεσημβρίαν, ἐπὶ τὴν ὁδὸν 
Rise up and go towards [the] south, on the way 
THY καταβαίνουσαν ἀπὸ Ἰερουσάληῃ εἰς Τάζαν: αὕτη 
which goes down from erusalem to Gaza: the same 
ἐστὴν ἔρημος. 27 Kai ἀναστὰς ἐπορεύθη" Kai ἰδού, ἀνὴρ 
15 desert. And having risen up he went. And lo, aman 
Αἰθίοψ εὐνοῦχος δυνάστης Κανδάκης ὕτῆς" βασιλίσσης 
an Ethiopian, aeunuch, one in power under Candace the queen 
Αἰθιύπων, ὃς ἦν ἐπὶ πάσης τῆς.γάζης. αὐτῆς, “ὃς" 
of [the] Ethiopians,-who was over all her treasure, - who 
? ΄, , ae ΄ 5 ε ΄ 
ἐληλύθει προσκυνήσων εἰς Ἱερουσαλήμ, 28 ἢἦν.τε ὑποστρέφων 
#J 


had come “to *worship to erusalem, and was returning 
καὶ καθήμενος ἐπὶ Tov-doparoc.abrov, 4kai' ἀνεγίνωσκεν © 
and sitting in his chariot, and he was reading 


\ ΄ ε a4 5 ‘ ny ~ ~ 7 
τὸν προφήτην Ἡσαΐαν. 29 εἶπεν.δὲ τὸ πνεῦμα τῷ Φιλίππῳ, 
the prophet Esaias, Andsaid the Spirit to Philip, 


Πρόσελθε καὶ κολλήθητι τῷ.ἅρματι.τούτῳ. 30 Προσδραμὼνγ. δὲ 


Gonear and join thyself to this chariot. And running up 
ὁ Φίλιππος ἤκουσεν αὐτοῦ ἀναγινώσκοντος frov προφήτην 
Philip heard him reading the prophet 
Ἡσαΐαν," καὶ εἶπεν, Β΄Αρά.γε" γινώσκεις ἃ ἀναγινώσκεις; 
Esaias, and said, *Then*dost*thou know what thou readest? 


τις βΒὸδη- 


some one should 


31 Ὁ δὲ εἶπεν, Πῶς.γὰρ ἂνιδυναίμην ἐὰν. μή 
But he said, [No,] forhow shouldI beable unless 
ynoy' με; Παρεκάλεσέν.τε τὸν Φίλιππον ᾿ἀναβάντα καθίσαι 
guide me? And he besought Philip having comeup to sit 
σὺν αὐτῷ. 32 ἡ.δὲ περιοχὴ τῆς γραφῆς ἣν ἀνεγίνωσκεν 
with him. And the passage of the scripture which he was reading 
ἦν αὕτη, Ὥς πρόβατον ἐπὶ σφαγὴν ἤχθη, Kai we ἀμνὸς 
was this, As a sheep to slaughter he wasled, and as alamb 
ἐναντίον τοῦ ἱκείροντος" αὐτὸν ἄφωνος, οὕτως οὐκ.ἀνοίγει 
before him who shears him [18] dumb, thus he opens not 
τὸ στόμα.αὐτοῦ. 88 ἐν τῇ.ταπεινώσει. "αὐτοῦ" ἡ κρίσις. αὐτοῦ 


his mouth, In his humiliation his judgment 
ἤρθη, τὴν. ἰδὲ γενεὰν αὐτοῦ τίς διηγήσεται; ort 
wastaken να, andthe generation ofhim who _ shall declare? for 


αἴρεται ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς ἡ-ζωὴ αὐτοῦ. 34’ Αποκριθεὶς.δὲ ὁ εὐνοῦχος 
is taken from the earth his life. And answering the eunuch 


τῷ Φιλίππῳ εἶπεν, Δέομαί σου, περὶ τίνος ὁ προφήτης 


7to*Philip ‘said, Ipray thee, concerning whom *the “prophet 
λέγει τοῦτο: περὶ ἑαυτοῦ, ἢ περὶ ἐἑτέρου.τινός ; 
says this? concerning himself, or concerning some other? 


35 ᾿Ανοίξας.δὲ 
And *having *opened 


ὁ Φίλιππος τὸ.στόμα.αὐτοῦ, Kai ἀρξάμενος 
?Philip his mouth, and having begun 


τ ὑπέστρεφον were returning LTTraw. 
2 evnyyeAiGovro Were announcing the glad tidings LTTraw. 
© — ὃς LT[Tr]. 
5 apaye @T. 
(vead the humiliation) utr. 


LTTraw. 
LTTra. 


x Ἱεροσόλυμα LTTrA. Y Σαμαριτῶν v. 
ἃ πορεύθητι L. Ὁ — τῆς 
Γ Ἡσαΐαν τὸν προφήτην 


4 — καὶ LI[Tr]W. e+ τε, and x. 
k — αὐτοῦ 


h ὁδηγήσει shall guide rrr. 1 κείραντος TA. 
1— δὲ and Lrtz[A]. 


VIII, IX. 
ἀπὸ τῆς.γραφῆς.ταύτης, 
from this scripture, 


σοῦν. 36 we.dé ἐπορεύοντο κατὰ τὴν ὁδόν, 
sus. And as they were going along’ the way, 


ACTS. 
εὐηγγελίσατο.αὐτῷ τὸν In- 
announced to him the glad tidings— Je- 


ἦλθον ἐπί 
they came upon 


τι Udwp’ Kai φησιν ὁ εὐνοῦχος, ᾿Ιδοὺ ὕδωρ' Ti κωλύει 
acertain water, and “says ‘the eunuch, Behold water; what hinders 


pe βαπτισθῆναι ; 37 "Εἶπεν δὲ ὁ Φίλιππος, Εἰ πιστεύεις ἐξ 
me _ to be baptized? And ?said Philip, If thou believest from 


e ~ 7 Ν ? ‘ ,ὔ 
ὕλης τῆς καρδίας, ἔξεστιν. ᾿Αποκριθεὶς. δὲ εἶπεν, Πιστεύω 
2whole ‘the heart, it is lawful. And answering he said, I believe 
τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ εἶναι τὸν ’Inoovy χριστόν." 38 Kai ἐκέλευ - 
®the *Son 7of ®God *to*be 1 Jesus *Christ. And hecom- 
σεν στῆναι τὸ dopa’ καὶ κατέβησαν ἀμάόξεροι εἰς 
manded *to ‘stand ‘still 'the *chariot. And they went down oth to 
TO ὕδωρ, ὕ.τε. Φίλιππος Kai ὁ εὐνοῦχος" καὶ ἐβάπτισεν αὐτόν. 
the water, both Philip andthe eunuch, and he baptized him. 
39 ὅτειδὲ ἀνέβησαν ἐκ τοῦ ὕδατος πνεῦμα κυρίου 
But when they came up out of the water [the] Spirit of [the] Lord 


4 , ‘4 ‘ , « 
ἥρπασεν τὸν Φίλιππον" καὶ οὐκ εἶδεν αὐτὸν οὐκέτι ὁ 
caught away Philip, and saw *him ‘no ®longer 'the 


εὐνοῦχος, ἐπορεύετο.γὰρ τὴν. ὁδὸν αὐτοῦ χαίρων. 40 Φίλιππος 


eunuch, for he went his way rejoicing. ?Philip 
« , 2 » ‘ , ᾽ 
δὲ εὑρέθη εἰς “ACwrov καὶ διερχόμενος εὐηγ- 
*but was found at Azotus, and passing through he announced the 
γελίζετο τὰς πόλεις πάσας, ἕως τοῦ ἐλθεῖν. αὐτὸν εἰς 
glad tidings [0] 6 cities all, till he came to 
οΚαισάρειαν." 
Ceresarea. 
9 ὋὉ.δὲ Σαῦλος ἔτι Ῥέμπνέων" ἀπειλῆς Kai φόνου εἰς 
But Saul, still breathing out threatenings and slaughter towards 


τοὺς μαθητὰς τοῦ κυρίου, προσελθὼν τῷ ἀρχιερεῖ 2 ῃτήσατο 


the disciples ofthe Lord, having come to the high priest asked 
παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐπιστολὰς εἰς Δαμασκὸν πρὸς τὰς συναγωγάς, 
from him letters to Damascus, to the synagogues, 
ὕπως Tay! τινας εὕρῃ τῆς ὁδοῦ ὄντας" ἄνδρας.τε Kai 
so that if any hefound 7of*the *way ‘being both men and 
γυναῖκας, δεδεμένους aya εἰς Ἱερουσαλήμ. 8 ἐν.δὲ 
women, having bound he might bring [them] to Jerusalem, But in 


τῷ πορεύεσθαι 
proceeding 


EYEVETO 


αὐτὸν ἐγγίζειν τῇ Δαμασκῷ, "καὶ 
it came to pass 


he drew near to Damascus, and 
ἐξαίφνης" ἱπεριήστραψεν αὐτὸν" φῶς "ἀπὸ" τοῦ οὐρανοῦ" 
suddenly shone round about him alight from the heaven, 
4 καὶ πεσὼν ἐπὶ THY γῆν ἤκουσεν φωνὴν λέγουσαν αὐτῷ, 
and having fallen on the earth heheard a voice saying to him, 
Σαούλ, Σαούλ, τί pe διώκεις ; 5 Ἐπεν.δέ, Τίς εἶπ, 
Saul, Saul, why me dost thou persecute? And he said, Who art thou, 
΄ 5 « a. xf he 2 , ? ? ~ a ‘ 
κύριε; ὋὉ δὲ “κύριος εἶπεν, “Eyw εἰμι ᾿Ιησοῦς Υ ὃν σὺ 
Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou 
διώκεις" σκληρόν σοι πρὸς κέντρα λακτίζειν. 
persecutest. [1 158] hard for thee against [the] goads to kick. 
6 Τρέμων τε καὶ θαμβῶν εἶπεν, Κύριε, τί pe θέλεις 


Andtrembling and astonished he said, Lord, What me desirest thou 


337 
scripture,and preached 
unto him Jesus. 36 And 
as they went on their 
way, they came unto 
a certain water: and 
the eunuch said, See, 
here is water; what 
doth hinder me to be 
baptized ? 37 And Phi- 
lip said, Tf thou believ- 
est with all thine heart, 
thou mayest. And he 
answered and said, 1 
believe that Jesus 
Christ is the Son of 
God. 38 And he com- 
manded the chariot to 
stand still: and they 
went down both into 
the water, both Philip 
and the eunuch; and he 
baptized him. 39 And 
when they were come 
up out of the water, 
the Spirit of the Lord 
caught away Philip, 
that the eunuch saw 
him no more: and he 
went on his way re- 
joicing. 40 But Philip 
was found at Azotus: 
and passing through 
he preached in all the 
cities, till he came to 
Ceesarea. 


IX. And Saul, yet 
breathing out threat- 
enings and slaughter 
against the disciples of 
the Lord, went unto 
the high priest, 2 and 
desired of him letters 
to Damascus to the 
synagogues, that if he 
found any of this way, 
whether they were men 
or women, he might 
bring them bound un- 
to Jerusalem. 3 And 
as he journeyed, he 
came near Damascus : 
and suddenly there 
shined round about 
him a light from hea- 
ven: 4 and he fell to 
the earth, and heard a 
voice saying unto him, 
Saul, Saul, why perse- 
cutest thou me? 5 And 
he said, Who art thou, 
Lord? And the Lord 
said, lam Jesus whom 
thou persecutest : it is 
hard for thee to kick a- 
gainst the pricks. 6And 
he trembling and asto- 
nished said, Lord,what 
wilt thou haye me to 


Ὁ — verse 37 GLTTrA. 
5 ἐξαίφνης Te LTTrAW. 
Υ ἐκ out οὔτι. w+ [σύ] Α. 
Ναζωραῖος the Nazarene [L]w. 


° Καισαρίαν 1. Ρ ἐνπνέων 1. 4 ἄν 1. 


r " fol « - 
ὄντας τῆς ὁδοῦ, τ. 


* περιέστραψεν αὐτὸν B; αὐτὸν περιέ- LL; αὐτὸν περιή- TTrAW. 
* — κύριος εἶπεν (read he [said]) trtraw. 
2 — σκληρόν..... πρὸς αὐτόν (verse 6) GLTTraw. 


eet 


Z 


998 


do? And the Lord 
said unto him, Arise, 
and go into the city, 
and it shall be told 
thee what thou must 
do. 7 And the men 
which journeyed with 
him stood speechless, 
hearing a voice, but 
seeing no man. 8 And 
Saul arose from the 
earth ; and when his 
eyes were opened, he 
saw noman: but they 
led him by the hand, 
and brought him into 
Damascus. 9 And he 
was three days with- 
out sight, and neither 
did eat nor drink. 
10 And there was a 
certain disciple at Da- 
mascus, named Ana- 
nias; and to him said 
the Lord in a vision, 
Ananias, And he said, 
Behold, I am here, 
Lord. 11 And _ the 
Lord said unto him, 
Arise, and go into the 
street which is called 
Straight, and inquire 
in the house of Judas 
for one called Saul, of 
Tarsus: for, behold, he 
prayeth, 12 and bath 
seen in a vision a man 
named Ananias com- 
ing in, and putting 
his hand on him, that 
he might receive his 
sight. 13 Then Ananias 
answered, Lord, I have 
heard by many of this 
man, how mucheyvil he 
hath done to thy saints 
at Jerusalem: 14 and 
here he hath authority 
from the chief priests 
to bind allthat callon 
thy name. 15 But the 
Lord said unto him, 
@o thy way : for he is 
a chosen vessel unto 
me, to bear my name 
before the Gentiles, 
and kings, and the 
children of Israel : 
16 for Τ will shew him 
how great things he 
must suffer for my 
name’s sake. 17 And 
Ananias went his way, 
and entered into the 
house; and putting his 
hands on him said, 
Brother Saul,the Lord, 


TPAG@EIS. ΙΧ. 

ποιῆσαι; Καὶ ὁ κύριος πρὸς αὐτόν," *’AvdornO καὶ 

to do? And the Lord [5414] to him, Rise up and 
εἴσελθε εἰς τὴν πόλιν, Kai λαληθήσεταί σοι ὕτί)! ce δεῖ 


it shall be told thee what thee it behoves 


ποιεῖν. 7 Οἱ-δὲ ἄνδρες ot συνοδεύοντες αὐτῷ εἱστήκεισαν 
to do. But the men who were travelling with him stood 
σἐγγεοί." ἀκούοντες μὲν τῆς φωνῆς μηδένα.δὲ θεωροῦντες. 
speechless, hearing indeed the voice but no one seeing. 
8 ἠγέρθη.δὲ 40" Σαῦλος ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς᾽ “ἀνεῳγμένων" .δὲ τῶν 
And rose up Saul from the earth, and having been opened 
? θ Xx ~ ? ~ f NOs ΠΩ ~ ’ " 
ὀφθαλμῶν.αὐτοῦ foidéva' ἔβλεπεν. χειραγωγοῦντες δὲ αὐτὸν 
his eyes no one he saw. But leading “by *the*hand *him 
εἰσήγαγον εἰς Δαμασκόν. 9 καὶ ἦν ἡμέρας τρεῖς μὴ βλέ- 
they brought [him]to Damascus. Andhe was “days ‘three ποὺ see- 
} ᾽ » ᾽ δι τ , \ 
πων, καὶ οὐκιἔφαγεν οὐδὲ ἔπιεν. 10 Ην.δὲ τις μαθητὴς 
ing, and did not eat nor drink. And theré was acertain disciple 
ἐν Δαμασκῷ ὀνόματι Avaviag’ καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτὸν ϑὸ κύριος 
in Damascus byname aAnanias. And “said ‘*to ‘him ‘the ?Lord 
? « ’ Π ? / «ε 4 ᾽ 4 ᾽ ’ , 
ἔν ὁράματι," ᾿Ανανία. ‘Ode εἶπεν, Ἰδοὺ ἐγώ, κύριε. 
in ἃ vision, Ananias. Andhe = said, Behold [here am] I, Lord. 
11 ‘0.62 κύριος πρὸς αὐτόν, WAvaorac' πορεύθητι ἐπὶ 
Andthe Lord to him [said], Having risen up go into 
τὴν ῥύμην τὴν καλουμένην Ἐὐθεῖαν, καὶ ζήτησον ἐν 


enter into the city, and 


οἰκίᾳ 


the street which is called Straight, and seek in [the] house 
Ἰούδα Σαῦλον ὀνόματι, Ταρσέα. ἰδοὺ.γὰρ προσεὔχεται, 
of Judas[one] Saul by name, of Tarsus: for lo he prays, 


12 καὶ εἶδεν ἱὲν ὁράματι ἄνδρα" Ἑὀνόματι ᾿Ανανίαν" εἰσελθόντα 


andhesaw in avision aman by name Ananias coming 
καὶ ἐπιθέντα αὐτῷ ‘ysipa," ὅπως ἀναβλέψῃ. 13 ᾿Απε- 
and putting onhim ahand, sothat he should receive sight. "An- 


κρίθη δὲ ™o'’Avaviac, Κύριε, "ἀκήκοα! ἀπὸ πολλῶν περὶ 
swered ‘and Ananias, Lord, I have heard from many concerning 
Tov.avdpoc.rovTov, boa κακὰ “ἐποίησεν τοῖς. ἁγίοις. σου" ἐν 
this man, how many evils he did to thy saints in 
Ἱερουσαλήμ᾽ 14 καὶ ὧδε ἔχει ἐξουσίαν παρὰ τῶν ἀρχιερέων 
Jerusalem ; and here he has authority from the chief priests 
δῆσαι πάντας τοὺς ἐπικαλουμένους τὸ. Ὀνομά.σου. 15 Εἶπεν δὲ 


to bind all who call on thy name. And *said 
πρὸς αὐτὸν ὁ κύριος, Πορεύου, ὅτι σκεῦος ἐκλογῆς μοι 
*to Shim ‘the *Lord, Go, for avessel of election to me 
éoriv' οὗτος, τοῦ βαστάσαι τὸ.ὄνομά.μου ἐνώπιον «ἐθνῶν " 
is this [man], to bear my name before Gentiles 
kai βασιλέων, υἱῶν.τε ᾿Ισραήλ. 16 ἐγὠ.γὰρ ὑποδείξω 
and kings, and [the] sons of Israel : for I will shew 
αὐτῷ doa δεῖ αὐτὸν ὑπὲρ τοῦ.ὀνόματός. μου παθεῖν. 
to him how much it behoves him for my name to suffer. 


17 ᾿Απῆλθεν.δὲ ᾿Ανανίας καὶ εἰσῆλθεν εἰς THY οἰκίαν, Kai 
And ?went γα ‘Anmanias and entered into the house; and 

? ‘ ? , ? A Ay ~ 4 ᾽ Ψ «- 

ἐπιθεὶς ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν τὰς χεῖρας εἶπεν, Σαοὺλ ἀδελφέ, ὁ 

having laid upon him [his] hands hesaid, Saul ‘brother, the 


a + adda but GLTTrAW. 
μένων LA; ἡνοιγμένων T. 
Ἀ᾿Ανάστα Rise up L. 
| τὰς (— τὰς TTr) χεῖρας the hands LTTr. 

© τοῖς ἁγίοις σον ἐποίησεν LTTrA. 


LTITra. 
heard Lrtra. 


Ὁ ὅ τι 1ττὰ. Ὁ ἐνεοί LTTrAW. 4—6OLTTrAW. © ἤνεῳγ- 

f οὐδὲν nothing Lrtrw. & ἐν ὁράματι ὃ κύριος LTTrAW. 

ι-- ἐν ὁράματε EVA; ἄνδρα [ἐν ὁράματι] Tr. k’Avaviav ὀνόματι 
τὶ — 9 GLTTrAW. 2 ἤκουσα I 

Ρ ἐστίν μοι LTTrAW. 4 + τῶν the L. 


τ + re both (Gentiles) LTTraw. 


IX. ASC AMS: 
, > , , ? ~ c ? , > ~ caw 
κύριος ἀπέσταλκέν με, ᾿Ιησοῦς ὁ ὀφθείς σοι ἐν Ty ὁδῷ 
Lord has sent me, Jesus who appeared tothee in the way 
ῃ ἤρχου, ὅπως ἀναβλέψῃς καὶ πλησθῇς πνεύ- 
in which thou camest, that thou mightestreceivesight and be filled with{the] 
ματος ἁγίου. 18 Καὶ εὐθέως “ἀπέπεσον ἀπὸ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν 
Spirit ‘Holy. And immediately fell from “eyes 
αὐτοῦ" ὡσεὶ" ἀνεβλεψέν.τε 
*his as it were and he received sight 
ἀναστὰς ἐβαπτίσθη, 19 καὶ λαβὼν τροφὴν ἐνίσχυσεν" 
having risen up was baptized ; and haying taken food he wasstrengthened. 
᾿Εγένετο.δὲ “ὁ Σαῦλος" pera τῶν ἐν Δαμασκῷ μαθητῶν ἡμέρας 
And *was 1Saul with the 7in *Damascus ‘disciples ‘days 
τινάς" 20 καὶ εὐθέως ἐν ταῖς συναγωγαῖς ἐκήρυσσεν 
“οαγύδίῃ. And immediately ἢ the synagogues he was proclaiming 
TOV *ypLtoTOY,' ὅτι οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ. 21 ἐξίσταντο. δὲ 
Christ, that he is the Son of God. And *were *amazed 
πάντες οἱ ἀκούοντες, καὶ ἔλεγον, Οὐχ οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ πορθήσας 
‘all who heard, and said, "Not “this tis hewho destroyed 
Yev' Ἱερουσαλὴμ τοὺς ἐπικαλουμένους τὸ.Ὀνομα.τοῦτο, καὶ 
in Jerusalem those who called on this name, and 
ὧδε εἰς τοῦτο ἐληλύθει ἵνα δεδεμένους αὐτοὺς ἀγά 
here for this hadcome__ that ‘bound *them ‘he ?7might “bring 
ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀρχιερεῖς ; 32 Σαῦλος.δὲ μᾶλλον ἐνεδυναμοῦτο, Kai 
to the chief priests? But Saul more increasedin power, and 
*ouvexuver "τοὺς" ᾿Ιουδαίους τοὺς κατοικοῦντας ἐν Δαμασκῷ, 


καὶ 
and 


ὑπαραχρῆμα. 


instantly, 


λεπίδες, 


scales, 


confounded the Jews who dwelt in Damascus, 
συμβιβάζων ὅτι οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ χριστός. 23 ὡς. δὲ ἐπληροῦντο 
proving that this is the Christ. Now when were fulfilled 
ἡμέραι ἱκαναί, συνεβουλεύσαντο οἱ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι ἀνελεῖν αὐ- 
days tmany, ‘consulted *together *the ‘Jews to put to death him, 
τόν" 24 ἐγνώσθη.δὲ τῷ Σαύλῳ ἡ.ἐπιβουλὴ.αὐτῶν. ὕπαρε- 
But became known to Saul ~ their plot. They *were 


τήρουν" ὅτε τὰς πύλας ἡμέρας.τε καὶ νυκτός, ὕπως αὐτὸν 
“watching ‘and the gates both day and _ night, that him 

ἀνέλωσιν" 25 λαβόντες.δὲ αὐτὸν οἱ μαθηταὶ" νυκτὸς 

they might put to death ; but taking him the disciples by night 
εκαθῆκαν διὰ τοῦ reiyouc'!, χαλάσαντες ἐν σπυρίδι. 
letdown ?through*the ‘wall [him], lowering [him] ἴῃ a basket. 

26 Παραγενόμενος. δὲ ἐὸ Σαῦλος" *eic' Ἱερουσαλήμ; Ἰξέπει- 

And “having “arrived 1Saul at erusalem, he at- 

paro' κολλᾶσθαι τοῖς μαθηταῖς" Kai πάντες ἐφοβοῦντο 

tempted tojoin himself to the disciples, and all were afraid of 

αὐτόν, μὴ πιστεύοντες Ort ἐστὶν μαθητής. 27 BapyaBac.dé 


him, not believing that heis 8 disciple. But Barnabas 
ἐπιλαβόμενος αὐτόν, ἤγαγεν πρὸς τοὺς ἀποστόλους, καὶ 
having taken him, brought [him] to the apostles, and 


διηγήσατο αὐτοῖς πῶς ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ εἶδεν τὸν κύριον, Kai ὅτι 
related tothem how in the way he saw the Lord, and that 


ἐλάλησεν αὐτῷ, καὶ πῶς ἐν Δαμασκῷ ἐπαῤῥησιάσατο ἐν τῷ 


333 


even Jesus, that ap 
peared unto thee in the 
way as thou camest, 
hath sent me, that thou 
mightest receive thy 
sight, and be filled 
with the Holy Ghost. 
18 And immediately 
there fell from his 
eyes as it had been 
scales: and he re- 
ceived sight forth- 
with, and arose, and 
was baptized. 19 And 
when he had received 
meat, he was strength- 
ened. Then was Saul 
certain days with the 
disciples which were 
nt Damascus. 20 And 
straightway he preach- 
ed Christ in the syna- 
gogues, that he is the 
Son of God. 21 Butall 
that heard him were 
amazed, and said; Is 
not this he that de 
stroyed them which 
called on this name in 
Jerusalem, and came 
hither for that intent, 
that he might bring 
them bound unto the 
chief priests? 22 But 
Saulincreased the more 
in strength, and con- 
founded the Jews 
which dwelt at Damas- 
cus, proving that this 
is very Christ. 23 And 
after that many days 
were fulfilled,the Jews 
took counsel to Kil 
him; 24 but their lay- 
ing await was known 
of Saul. And they 
watched the gates day 
and night to kill him. 
25 Then the disciples 
took him by night, and 
let him down by the 
wallin a basket. 


26 And when Saul 
was come to Jerusa- 
lem, he assayed to join 
himself to the disci- 
ples: but they were all 
afraid of him, and be- 
lieved not that he was 
a disciple. 27 But Bar- 
nabas took him, and 
brought him to the a- 
postles, and declared 
unto them how he had 
seen the Lord in the 
way, and that he had 
spoken to him, and how 
he had preached boldly 


hespoke tohim, and how in Damascus he spoke boldly in the at Damascus in the 
ew kei? ~ τῷ ἘΣ ᾽ ΣΕ ᾿ , name of Jesus, 28 And 
ονόματι “τοῦ" Ἰησοῦ. 28 καὶ ἦν μετ αὐτῶν εἰσπορευόμενος he was with them com- 
name of Jesus. And he was with them coming in ing in and going out 
5 ἀπέπεσαν αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν LTTrA. t ὡς LTTr. ¥ — παραχρῆμα GLTTrA, 


* — ὁ Σαῦλος (read he was) GLTTraW. 
έχυννεν TA. * — τοὺς Τ. > παρετηροῦντο LTTrAW. 
μαθηταὶ αὐτοῦ his disciples LTTra. ¢ διὰ τοῦ τείχους καθῆκαν LTTra. 
ξ — ὁ Σαῦλος GLTTrAW. Β ἐν in L. i ἐπείραζεν LTTr. 


x Ἰησοῦν Jesus GLTTraw. 


ς δὲ καὶ and also LTTrA. 
£4 αὐτὸν him LTtra. 
k — χοῦ LTTra. 


= συν- 
do 


Υ εἰς at τ. 


940 


at Jerusalem. 29 And 
he spake boldly in the 
name of the Lord Je- 
sus, and disputed a- 
gainst the Grecians: 
but they went about to 
slay him. 30 Which 
when the brethren 
knew, they brought 
him down to Cxsarea, 
and sent him forth to 
Tarsus. 31 Then had 
the churches _ rest 
throughout all Judea 
and Galilee and Sama- 
Fria, and were edified ; 
and walking in the 
fear of the Lord, and 
in the comfort of the 
Holy Ghost, were mul- 
tiplied. 


32 And it came to 
pass, as Peter passed 
throughout all quar- 
ters, he came down 
also to thesaints which 
dwelt at Lydda. 33 And 
there he found a cer- 
tain man named Aine- 
as, which had kept 
his bed eight years, 
and was sick of the 
palsy. 34 And Peter 
said unto him, neas, 
Jesus Christ maketh 
thee whole: arise, and 
make thy bed. And 
he arose immediately. 
35 And all that dwelt 
at Lydda and Saron 
saw him, and turned 
tothe Lord. 


36 Now there was at 
Joppa a certain disci- 
pie named Tabitha, 
which by interpreta- 
tion is called Dorcas : 
this woman was full 
of good works and 
almsdeeds which she 
did. 37 And it came 
to pass in those days, 
that she was sick, and 
died : whom when they 
had washed, they laid 
her in an upper cham- 
ber. 38 And forasmuch 
as Lydda was nigh to 
Joppa, and the disci- 

les had heard that 

eter was there, they 
sentuntohimtwomen, 
desiring him that he 


TPAGZEIS. IX. 
καὶ ἐκπορευόμενος ἱέν᾽ ἱΙερουσαλήμ, ™Kai' παῤῥησιαζόμενος 
and going out in Jerusalem, and speaking boldly 


ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ κυρίου ™ Inaov'! 29 ἐλάλει.τε Kai συνεζήτει 


in the name ofthe Lord Jesus. And he spoke and discussed 
πρὸς τοὺς Ἑλληνιστάς" οἱ. δὲ ἐπεχείρουν “αὐτὸν ave- 
with the Hellenists ; but they took in hand *him 1to #put to 
λεῖν." 30 ἐπιγνόντες. δὲ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ κατήγαγον αὐτὸν εἰς 
death. But having known [it] the brethren broughtdown him ἴο 
ΡΚαισάρειαν," καὶ ἐξαπέστειλαν αὐτὸν" εἰς 'αρσόν. 31 *At' 
Cesarea, and sent away him to ‘Tarsus. The 
μὲν οὖν "ἐκκλησίαι! καθ᾽ ὕλης τῆς Ἰουδαίας καὶ Γαλι- 


?indeed *then and = = Gali- 
λαίας καὶ ‘Zapapeiac' Yelyor' εἰρήνην, “οἰκοδομούμεναι καὶ 
166 and Samaria ha peace, being built up and 
πορευόμεναι" τῷ φόβῳ τοῦ κυρίου, καὶ τῇ παρακλήσει τοῦ 

going on inthe fear ofthe Lord, and inthe comfort of the 
ἁγίου πνεύματος "ἐπληθύνοντο." 
Holy Spirit were increased. 

32 ᾿Ἐγένετο. δὲ Πέτρον διερχόμενον διὰ πάντων, 

Now it came to pass [that] Peter, passing through all 
κατελθεῖν Kai πρὸς τοὺς ἁγίους τοὺς κατοικοῦντας 
{quarters], wentdown also to the saints that inhabited 
γΛύδδαν." 33 εὗρεν. δὲ ἐκεῖ ἄνθρωπόν τινα *Alvéay ὀνόματι," 
Lydda, And he found there a certain man, 4ineas by name, 
ἐξ ἐτῶν ὀκτὼ κατακείμενον ἐπὶ Ἀκραββάτῳ," ὃς ἦν παρα- 
for “years ‘eight lying on a couch, who was para- 
λελυμένος. 34 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ ὁ Πέτρος, Aivéa, ἰᾶταί σε 
lysed. And 7said “to *him Peter, ‘ineas, ‘heals *thee 
Ἰησοῦς °6' yowrog? ἀνάστηθι Kai στρῶσον σεαυτῷ. 
Jesus the “Christ; rise up, and spread ([acouch] for thyself. 
Kai εὐθέως ἀνέστη 85 καὶ “εἶδον᾽ αὐτὸν πάντες οἱ 
And immediately he rose up. And saw him all those 
~ . YA ἡδὸ ll \ ᾿ dy ~ li -“ ? A 

κατοικουντες VOOaVY και TOV ApWVAY,” OLTLVEC ETTEDTPE αν 
inhabiting Lydda and the Saron, who turned 


‘assemblies throughout ?whole 'the of Judxa 


’ \ 


ἐπὶ τὸν κύριον. 
to the Lord. 
36 Ἔν. ἸΙύόππῃ.δε τις ἦν μαθήτρια ὀνόματι Ταβιθά, 
Andin Joppa “8 δοουίωϊῃ. 'σγαβ disciple, by name Tabitha, 


ἣ διερμηνευομένη λέγεται Δορκάς" αὕτη ἦν πλήρης “ἀγαθῶν 
which beinginterpreted iscalled Dorcas, She was full of good 
ἔργων" Kai ἐλεημοσυνῶν ὧν ἐποίει" 37 ἐγένετο.δὲ ἐν ταῖς 

works and of alms which she did. And it came to pass in 
ἡμέραις.ἐκείναις ἀσθενήσασαν αὐτὴν ἀποθανεῖν" λούσαν- 
those days {that] having sickened she died ; “having 
TEC δὲ Γαὐτὴν ἔθηκανα ἐν ἡ ὑπερῴῳ. 88 ἐγγὺς .δὲ 
?washed ‘and her they put [her] in an upper room. And *near 
οὔσης "Λύυδδης" τῇ Ἰόππῃ; οἱ μαθηταὶ ἀκούσαντες Ore ἸΤέτρος 


2being ‘Lydda to Joppa, the disciples having heard that Peter 
ἐστὶν ἐν αὐτῇ ἀπέστειλαν δύο ἄνδρας πρὸς αὐτόν. παρα- 
is in it sent two men to him, beseech- 


leis at LTTrAW. 
P Καισαρίαν T. 
τ Σαμαρίας T. 


LITraw. 
Γ ἔθηκαν αὐτὴν TTr. 


Υ εἶχεν LTTrAW. 
θύνετο was increased LTTraw. 
b — ὃ LTTrw. 


τὰ — καὶ LTTrA. 
4ᾳ — αὐτὸν L. 


n — Ἰησοῦ LYTraW. ο ἀνελεῖν αὐτόν LTTrAW. 

τ Ἢ LTTraw. 5 ἐκκλησία assembly Lrtraw. 
W οἰκοδομουμένη καὶ πορευομένη LTTrAW. χα ἐπλη- 
Υ Αὐδδα LITrA. 7 ὀνόματι Αἰνέαν LTTrAW.  κραβάττον 
4 Σάρωνα EGLTTrAW. © ἔργων ἀγαθῶν LTrw. 
bh Avddas Tra. 


¢ εἶδαν LTTra. 
Ε + τῷ the x. 


axe ACTS. 
καλοῦντες ἱμὴ ὀκνῆσαι! διελθεῖν Ewe Ξαὐτῶν." 39 ἀναστὰς 
ing {him} not to delay tocome to them. 7Having “risen *up 


δὲ Πέτρος συνῆλθεν αὐτοῖς ὃν παραγενόμενον ἀνήγαγον 
land Peter went with them, whom, havingarrived they brought 
εἰς TO ὑπερῷον, καὶ παρέστησαν αὐτῷ πᾶσαι ai χῆραι 
into the upperroom, and stood by him all the widows 


κλαίουσαι καὶ ἐπιδεικνύμεναι χιτῶνας Kai ἱμάτια ὅσα 
weeping and shewing tunics 


? 
é- 
and garments which *was 
ποίει μετ᾽ αὐτῶν οὖσα ἡ Δορκάς. 40 ἐκβαλὼν.δὲ ἔξω πάντας 
*making ®with ‘them “Ῥεΐϊπρ' ‘Dorcas. But *having put Sout “all 
ὁ ἹΠέτρος, 'O&ic τὰ γόνατα προσηύξατο᾽ Kai ἐπιστρέψας 
‘Peter, having bowed the knees he prayed. And haying turned 
πρὸς τὸ σῶμα εἶπεν, Ταβιθά, ἀνάστηθι. ᾿Ἡ.δὲ ἤνοιξεν 
to the body hesaid, Tabitha, Arise. And ghe opened 
τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς αὐτῆς Kai ἰδοῦσα τὸν Πέτρον ἀνεκάθισεν. 
her eyes, and seeing Peter she sat up. 
41 δοὺς. δὲ αὐτῇ χεῖρα ἀνέστησεν αὐτήν, φωνήσας. δὲ 
And havinggiven her [his] hand heraisedup her, and having called 
Tove ἁγίους Kai τὰς χήρας παρέστησεν αὐτὴν ζῶσαν. 42 γνω- 
the saints and the widows he presented her living. *Known 
στὸν δὲ ἐγένετο καθ᾽ ὕλης πτῆς! Ἰόππης; καὶ "πολλοὶ 
land 310 *became throughout *whole ‘the of Joppa, and many 
ἐπίστευσαν" ἐπὶ τὸν κύριον: 43 éyéverocé οἡ μέρας 
believed on the Lord. And it came to pass [that] ‘days 
ἱκανὰς μεῖναι αὐτὸν" ἐν ᾿Ιόππῃ παρά τινι Σίμωνι βυρσεῖ. 
Smany abode the in Joppa with acertain Simon a tanner. 
10 ᾿Ανὴρ.δέ.τις PAv' ἐν Wacapeia' ὀνόματι Κορνήλιος, 


Butacertainman was in Cawsarea by name Cornelius, 
ἑκατοντάρχης ἐκ σπείρης τῆς καλουμένης Iraduxije, 2 εὐ- 


a centurion of aband which is called Italic, pious 
σεβὴς Kai φοβούμενος τὸν θεὸν σὺν παντὶ τῷ.οἴκῳ αὐτοῦ, 

and fearing God with all his house, 
ποιῶν."τε" ἐλεημοσύνας πολλὰς τῷ λαῷ, καὶ δεόμενος 
both doing ‘alms ‘much tothe people, and supplicating 
τοῦ θεοῦ "διαπαντός." 8. εἶδεν ἐν ὁράματι φανερῶς, ὡσεὶ " 
God continually, Hesaw in avision plainly, about 


ὥραν "ἐννάτην" τῆς ἡμέρας, ἄγγελον τοῦ θεοῦ εἰσελθόντα 
shour 1the “ninth of the day, an angel of God coming 
‘ > , ‘ ? , ? ~ / ε 4 ? 
πρὸς αὐτόν, καὶ εἰπόντα αὐτῷ, Κορνήλιε. 4 Ὁ δὲ ἀτε- 
to him, and saying tohim, Cornelius. But he having looked 
νίσας αὐτῷ καὶ ἔμφοβος γενόμενος εἶπεν, Τί ἐστιν, κύριε: 
intently onhim and ‘afraid ‘becoming said, What isit, Lord? 
εἶπεν.δὲ αὐτῷ, Αἱ προσευχαί.σου καὶ αἱ.ἐλεημοσύναι. σου 
And he said tohim, Thy prayers and thine alms 
ἀνέβησαν εἰς μνημόσυνον “ἐνώπιον" τοῦ θεοῦ. 5 Kai νῦν 
816 ΌΠΘ ΠΡ for a memorial before God. And now 
πέμψον “εἰς ᾿Ιόππην ἄνδρας," καὶ μετάπεμψαι Σίμωνα ὃς 
send "to Joppa tmen, and send for Simon who 
2 ~ f re ΄ , , 
ἐπικαλεῖται Πέτρος" 6 οὗτος ξενίζεται παρά τινι Σίμωνι 
is surnamed Peter. He lodges with .acertain Simon 
βυρσεῖ, ᾧ ἐστιν οἰκία παρὰ θάλασσαν" Τοῦτος λαλήσει σοι 
atanner, whose 5218 Mhouse by [the] sea; he shall tell thee 


i μὴ ὀκνήσῃς delay not LTTraw. κΚ ἡμῶν us LTTrAW. 
Ὁ ἐπίστευσαν πολλοὶ LITrAW. 
GLTTraw. 4 Καισαρίᾳ T. 
¥ ἐνάτην LTTrAw. 


(Simon) trtra. 


το τε LTTrAW. 5 διὰ παντός LTrA. 
’ ἔμπροσθεν LTTrA. 1 ἄνδρας εἰς ᾿Ιόππην LITrAW. 
2 — οὗτος λαλήσει σοι τί σε δεῖ ποιεῖν GLTTrAW. 


1+ καὶ and LTTraw. 
ο αὐτὸν ἡμέρας ἱκανὰς μεῖναι LTr 3; — αὐτὸν τ. 


341 


would not delay to 
cometo them. 39 Then 
Peter arose and went 
with them. When he 
was come,they brought 
him into the upper 
chamber: and all the 
widows stood by him 
weeping, and shewing 
the coats and garments 
which Dorcas made, 
while she was with 
them. 40 But Peter 
put them all forth, 
and kneeled down, and 
| abe and turning 

im to the body said, 
Tabitha, arise. And 
she opened her eyes: 
and when she saw Pe- 
ter, she sat up. 41 And 
he gave her Ais hand, 
and lifted her up, and 
when he had called the 
saints and widows, 
presented her alive, 
42 And it was known 
throughout all Joppa; 
and many believed in 
the Lord. 43 And it 
came to pass, that he 
tarried many days in 
Joppa with one Simon 
a tanner. 


X. There was acer- 
tain man in Cesaresa 
called Cornelius, acen- 
turion of the band 
called the Italian ba 
2 a devout man, an 
one that feared God 
with all his house, 
which gavemuch alms 
to the people, and 
prayed to God alway. 
3 He saw in a vision 
evidently about the 
ninth hour of the day 
an angel of God com- 
ing in to him, andsay- 
ing unto him, Corne- 
lius. 4 And when he 
looked on him, he was 
afraid, and said, What 
is it, Lord? And he 
said unto him, Thy 
prayers and thine alms 
are come up for a 
memorial before God. 
5 And now send men 
to Joppa, and call for 
one Simon, whose sur- 
name is Peter: 6 he 
lodgethwithoneSimon 
a tanner, whose house 
is by the sea side: he 
shall tell thee what 


m [τῆς] Tr. 
Ῥ-- ἦν 

t + περὶ LITraw. 
Υ + τινα a certain 


942 


thou oughtest to do. 
7 And when the angel 
which spake unto Cor- 
nelius was departed, he 
called two of his house- 
hold servants, and a 
devout soldier of them 
that waited on him 
continually; 8 and 
when he had declared 
all these things unto 
them, he sent them to 
Joppa. 9 On the mor- 
row, #8 they went on 
their journey, and 
drew nigh unto the 
city, Peter went up 
upon the housetop to 

ray about the sixth 

our: 10 and he be- 
came very hungry, and 
would have eaten : but 
whilethey madeready, 
he fell into a trance, 
11 and saw heaven 
opened, and a certain 
vessel descending unto 
him, asit had been a 
great sheet knit at the 
four corners, and let 
down to the earth: 
12 wherein were all 
manner of fourfooted 
beasts of the earth, 
and wild beasts, and 
ereeping things, and 
fowls of the air. 13 And 
there came a voice to 
him, Rise, Peter; kill, 
andeat. 14 But Peter 
said, Not so, Lord ; for 
Ihave never eaten any 
thing that is common 
or unclean. 15 And the 
voice spake unto him 
again the second time, 
What God hath cleans- 
ed, that call not thou 
common. 16 This was 
done thrice : and the 
vessel was received up 
again into heaven. 
17 Now while Peter 
doubted in _ himself 
what this vision which 
he had seen should 
mean, behold, the men 
which were sent from 
Cornelius had made 
inquiry for Simon’s 
house, and stood be- 
fore the gate, 18 and 
called, and asked 
whether Simon, which 
was surnamed Peter, 
were lodged there. 
19 While Peter thought 
on the vision, the Spi- 
tit said unto him, Be- 


TIPAGEI®. p. © 
Tl σε δεῖ ποιεῖν." 7 Ὡς. δὲ ἀπῆλθεν ὁ ἄγγελος ὁ 
what *thee ‘it 7behoves to do. And when “departed 'the “angel who 
λαλῶν ὅτῷ Κορνηλίῳ," φωνήσας δύο τῶν οἰκετῶν "αὐτοῦ," 
spoke to Cornelius, having called two of his servants, 
καὶ στρατιώτην εὐσεβῆ τῶν προσκαρτερούντων αὐτῷ, 8 Kai 


and a “soldier Ipious ofthose continually waiting on him, and 
ἐξηγησάμενος “αὐτοῖς ἅπαντα' ἀπέστειλεν αὐτοὺς εἰς τὴν 
having related tothem all things he sent them to 
᾽ , ~ ᾿ J UJ c , d " ΄ " ‘ 
Ιύόππην. 9 Τῇ δὲ ἐπαύριον ὁδοιπορούντων “ἐκείνων" καὶ 
Joppa. Andonthe morrow, as 7?are *journeying these and 


πόλει ἐγγιζόντων, ἀνέβη Πέτρος ἐπὶ τὸ δῶμα προσ- 


ie 


city drawing near, “went*up ‘Peter on the housetop to 
εὐἕασθαι, περὶ ὥραν ἕκτην. 10 éyéverodé πρόσπεινος; 
pray, ‘about “hour ‘the sixth. And he became very hungry, 


iS, λ ΄ θ - LA 5 e2 , I f2 ’ 
kai ἤθελεν γεύσασθαι: παρασκευαζόντων.δὲ “ἐκείνων" ἰἐπέ- 
and wished to eat. But as *were “making ‘ready 1they 7fell 
πεσεν" ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν ἔκστασις, 11 καὶ θεώμεῖ τὸν οὐρανὸν ἀνεῳγ- 
‘upon "him ‘a “trance, and he beholds the heaven opened, 
μένον, καὶ καταβαῖνον 8x’ αὐτὸν" σκεῦός τι ὡς ὀθόνην 
and descending upon him a ?vessel’certain, as a “sheet 
μεγάλην, τέσσαρσιν ἀρχαῖς "δεδεμένον, καὶ" καθιέμενον ἐπὶ 
great, by four corners bound, and let down upon 
τῆς γῆς 12 ἐν ᾧ ὑπῆρχεν πάντα τὰ τετράποδα ἱτῆς γῆς 
the earth ; in which were all the quadrupeds of the earth 
kai τὰ θηρία καὶ τὰ ἑρπετὰ" xai*ra' πετεινὰ τοῦ ov- 
and the wild beasts and the creepingthings and the birds ofthe hea- 
pavov. 18 καὶ ἐγένετο φωνὴ πρὸς αὐτόν, ᾿Αναστάς, Tlézpe, 
ven. And came avoice to im, Havingrisen up, Peter, 


θῦσον καὶ φάγε. 14 ‘O.dé-Ilérpog εἶπεν, Μηδαμῶς, κύριε" ὅτι 


kill and eat. But Peter said, Innowise, Lord; for 
οὐδέποτε ἔφαγον πᾶν κοινὸν ἰἢ" ἀκάθαρτον. 15 Kai φωνὴ 
never did I eat anything common or unclean. And a voice 


πάλιν ἐκ.δευτέρου πρὸς αὐτόν, “A ὁ θεὸς ™ixabapioer," 
{came]again thesecondtime to him, What God cleansed, 
σὺ μὴ Koivov. 16 Τοῦτο.δὲ ἐγένετο ἐπὶ. τρίς" καὶ "πάλι ν" 
thou ?not 'makecommon. And this took place thrice, and agai 
οἀνελήφθη" τὸ σκεῦος εἰς TOY οὐρανόν. 17 Ὥς. δὲ ἐν ἑαυτῷ 
wastakenup the vessel into the heaven. Andas ‘in ‘him<elf 
διηπόρει ὁ Πέτρος τί dy.cin τὸ ὕραμα ὃ εἶδεν, Pxai' 
2was*perplexed ‘Peter what might be the vision which hesaw, ?also 
ἰδού, οἱ ἄνδρες ot ἀπεσταλμένοι Ia7ro" τοῦ Κορνηλίου, ὃιε- 
1behold, πὸ men who were sent from Cornelius, having 
wrhnoaytec τὴν οἰκίαν ᾿ Σίμωνος, ἐπέστησαν ἐπὶ TOY πυλῶνα" 
inquired for the house of Simon, stood at the porch; 


18 καὶ φωνήσαντες ἐπυνθάνοντο εἰ Σίμων ὁ ἐπικαλού- 
and having ο41164 out they asked if Simon who[is) surnamed 


μενος Πέτρος ἐνθάδε ἕξενίζεται. 19 Τοῦ.δὲ. Πέτρου "ἐνθυμου- 


Peter *here lodges. But as Peter was think- 
μένου" περὶ τοῦ ὁράματος, εἶπεν ‘airy τὸ πνεῦμα," ᾿Ιδού, 
ing over the vision, %said “*to*him ‘the “Spirit, Behold, 


8 αὐτῷ to him GLTTrAw. 

4 αὐτῶν they T. 

h — δεδεμένον καὶ LTTr[A]. 
1 καὶ and LTTra. 


LTTrA. 
GLTTraw. 
& — τὰ LTTTrA. 

ο ἀνελήμφθη LTTra. 


was pondering GLTTraw. 


b — αὐτοῦ (read of the servants) Lrtraw. ς ἅπαντα αὐτοῖς 
ε αὐτῶν LTTraw. ἴ ἐγένετο Came LTTrAw. & --- ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν 
i καὶ τὰ (— τὰ LTTrA) ἑρπετὰ τῆς γῆς LTTrAW. 

™ ἐκαθέρισεν Tr. 2 εὐθὺς immediately LTTraw. 
ᾳ ὑπὸ τι ‘* τοῦ LTTrAW. 5 διενθυμουμένον 


Ρ — καὶ LTTx[ ΑἹ. 
t τὸ πνεῦμα αὐτῷ LTTrA. 


| 


X. ΣΕ 5. 


ἄνδρες τρεῖς" “ζητοῦσίν" σε’ 20 ἀλλὰ ἀναστὰς κατάβηθι, 
7men 1three seek thee; but havingrisen go down, 


Kai πορεύου σὺν αὐτοῖς, μηδὲν διακρινόμενος" “διότι ἐγὼ 


διὰ proceed with them, nothing doubting, because [ 
ἀπέσταλκα αὐτούς. 21 Καταβὰς. δὲ Πέτρος πρὸς τοὺς 
have sent them. And ears gone *down ‘Peter the 
ἄνδρας rove ἀπεσταλμένους ἀπὸ τοῦ Κορνηλίου πρὸς αὐτόν," 
men who were sent from Cornelius to him, 
εἶπεν, ᾿Ιδού, ἐγώ εἰμι ὃν ζητεῖτε᾽ τίς ἡ αἰτία δι ἣν 


Behold, I 


πάρεστε; 22 οἱ. δὲ *elrrov,' Κορνήλιος ἑκατοντάρχης, ἀνὴρ 
ye are come? And they said, Cornelius a centurion, a 7man 


δίκαιος Kai φοβούμενος τὸν θεόν, μαρτυρούμενός.τε ὑπὸ ὅλου 
‘righteous and fearing God, and borne witness to by *whole 


τοῦ ἔθνους τῶν ‘lovdaiwy, ἐχρηματίσθη ὑπὸ ἀγγέλου 
‘the nation ofthe Jews, was divinely instructed by ‘angel 


ἁγίου, μεταπέμψασθαί σε εἰς τὸν. οἶκον. αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἀκοῦσαι 


said, am whom yeseek; what [15] the cause for which 


*a *holy, to send for thee to his house, and ἴο hear 
? 4 2 , 

ὁήματα παρὰ σοῦ. 23 Εἰσκαλεσάμενος οὖν αὐτοὺς ἐξένισεν. 

words from thee. Having called ?in “therefore ‘them he lodged 


Ty.dé ἐπαύριον "ὁ Πέτρος" ἐξῆλθεν σὺν αὐτοῖς, καί 
(them]. Andonthe morrow mae went forth with them, and 


τινες τῶν ἀδελφῶν τῶν ἀπὸ ὕτῆς" ᾿Ιόππης συνῆλθον αὐτῷ. 


certain ofthe brethren those from J SEPS went with him, 
24 “kai ry! ἐπαύριον “εἰσῆλθον εἰς τὴν “Καισάρειαν"" 
And onthe morrow they entered into Ceesarea. 


ὁ.δὲ Κορνήλιος ἦν προσδοκῶν αὐτούς, ἰσυγκαλεσάμενος" τοὺς 


And Cornelius was expecting them, having called together 
ovyyéveic.avTov Kai τοὺς ἀναγκαίους φίλους. 25 Ὥς δὲ 
his kinsmen and intimate friends. And as 


ἐγένετο 8 εἰσελθεῖν τὸν Πέτρον, συναντήσας αὐτῷ ὁ Κορνήλιος, 

as Foor ag ‘in Peter, Shaving 7met “him 5Cornelius, 
πεσὼν ἐπὶ τοὺς πόδας προσεκύνησεν. 26 ὁ δὲ. Πέτρος 

haying fallen at ae feet did homage. But Peter 


Βαὐτὸν ἤγειρεν," λέγων, ᾿Ανάστηθι' ἱκἀγὼ αὐτὸς ἄνθρωπός 
7him raised, saying, Rise up: Talso eee aman 


εἰμι. 27 Kai συνομιλῶν αὐτῷ εἰσῆλθεν, καὶ εὑρίσκει συνελη- 
am. And talking with him hewentin, and finds gathered to- 


λυθότας πολλούς. 28 ἔφη.τε πῤῥὸς αὐτούς, es ἐπίστασθε 
gether many. Andhesaid to them, know 


ὡς ἀθέμιτόν ἐστιν ἀνδρὶ ᾿Ιουδαίῳ κολλᾶσθαι ἢ προσέρ- 


how unlawful itis foraman a Jew to unite himself or come 
χεσθαι ἀλλοφύλῳ: = Kai ἐμοὶ 10 θεὸς ἔδειξεν" μηδένα 
near to one of another race. And tome God shewed sno 

κοινὸν ἢ ἀκάθαρτον λέγειν ἄνθρωπον" 29 διὸ καὶ ἀναν- 
‘common “or 7unclean "to “call *man. Wherefore also without 
τιῤῥήτως ἦλθον μεταπεμφθείς. πυνθάνομαι οὖν, τίνι 

gainsaying Icame, having been sent for. T inquire therefore, for what 


λόγῳ ByererréuPacbe' μὲ; 30 πῶς ὁ Κορνήλιος ἔφη, ᾿Απὸ 
Teason did ye send for me? Cornelius said, (Ago 


ἀπ τὰ ἡμέρας μέχρι Ταῦ ἘΝ rie poe ἤμην "νηστεύων, καὶ" 


days until our Iwas fasting, and 


343 
hold, three men seek 
thee. 20 Arise there- 
fore, and get thee 


down, and go with 
them, doubting no- 
thing : for I have sent 
them. 21 Then Peter 
went down to the men 
which were sent unto 
him from Cornelius ; 
and said, Behold,I am 
he whom ye seek: what 
ts the cause wherefore 
ye arecome? 22 And 
they said, Cornelius 
the centurion, a just 
man,and one that fear- 
eth God, and of good 
report among all the 
nation of the Jews, 
was warned from God 
by an holy angel to 
send for thee into his 
house, and to hear 
words of thee, 23 Then 
called he them in, and 
lodged them. And on 
the morrow Peter went 
away with them, and 
certain brethren from 
Joppa accompanied 
him, 24 And the mor- 
row after they enter- 
ed into Cwsarea. And 
Cornelius waited for 
them, and had called 
together his kinsmen 
and near _ friends, 
25 And as Peter was 
coming in, Cornelius 
methim, and felldown 
at his feet, and wor- 
shipped him. 26 But 
Peter took him up 
saying, Stand up; 1 
myself alsoam a man, 
27 And as he talked 
with him, he went in, 
and found many that 
were come together. 
28 And he said unto 
them, Ye know how 
that it is an unlaw- 
ful thing for a man 
that is a Jew to keep 
company, or come 
unto one of another 
nation ; but God hath 
shewed me that I 
should not call any 
man common or un- 
clean. 29 Therefore 
came 1 unto you with- 
out gainsaying, assoon 
asl was sentfor: Lask 
therefore for what in- 
tent ye have sent for 
me? 30 And Corneliua 
said, Four days agol 
was ‘fasting until this 
hour ; and ‘at the ninth 
hour I prayed in my 


¥ — τρεῖς TA. W ζητοῦντές TA. x ὅτι GLTTrAW. 
Κορνηλίου πρὸς αὐτόν GLTTrAW. 7 εἶπαν LYTrA. 
GLTTraw. —mSGLITrAW. 9 τῇ δὲ LTTraAW. 
ἐ Καισαρίαντ. fovv-T & + τοῦ GLTTrAW. 


Κ κἀμοὶ LTTrA. 1 ἔδειξεν ὁ θεὸς τ. τὸ μεταπέμψασθέ A. 
in 


Υ — τοὺς ἀπεσταλμένους ἀπὸ τοῦ 
8 ἀναστὰς having arisen (he went forth) 
qd εἰσῆλθεν he entered Ltr; εἰσηλθαν τς 
hy ἤγειρεν αὐτὸν LTTrAW. 
— νηστεύων καὶ LTTr[A]. 


i καὶ ἐγὼ TTrA, 


344 


house, and, behold, a 
man stood before me 
in bright clothing, 
31 and said, Cornelius, 
thy prayer is heard, 
and thinealms are had 
in remembrance in the 
sight of God. 32 Send 
therefore to Joppa, and 
call hither Simon, 
whose surname is Pe- 
ter; he is lodged in the 
house of one Simon a 
tanner by the sea side: 
who, when he cometh, 
shall speak unto thee. 
33 Immediately there- 
fore I sent to thee; 
and thou hast well 
done that thou art 
come. Now therefore 
are we all here present 
before God, to hear all 
things that are com- 
manded thee of God. 
34 Then Peter opened 
his mouth, and said, 
Of a truth I perceive 
that God is no respect- 
er of persons: 35 but 
in every nation he that 
feareth him, and work- 
eth righteousness, is 
accepted with him. 
36 The word which 
God sent unto the 


children of Israel, 
reaching peace by 
esus Christ: (he is 


Lord of all:) 37 that 
word, 7 say, ye know 
which was published 
throughout all Judea, 
and began from Gali- 
lee, after the baptism 
which John preached ; 
38 how God anointed 
Jesus of Nazareth with 
the Holy Ghost and 
with power : who went 
about doing good, and 
healing all that were 
oppressed of the devil; 
for God was with him. 
39 And we are wit- 
nesses of all things 
which he did both in 
the land of the Jews, 
and in Jerusalem; 
whom they slew and 
hanged on a tree: 
40 him God raised up 
the third day, and 
shewed him openly; 
41 not to all the peo- 
ple, but unto witnesses 


° ἐνάτην LTTrA. 
ξ ἐξ αὐτῆς A. 
¥ — ov {{11]. 


LTTra. 


8 ἀπὸ from La. 

x ἀρξάμενος TTrA. 
Ὁ — ἐσμεν (read [are]) GLTTraw. 
f+ ἐντ. 


ILPAe EI &. x. 
τὴν δἐννάτην" Ῥὥραν" προσευχόμενος ἐν τῷ.οἴκῳ. μου" καὶ ἰδού, 
the ninth hour praying in my house; and behold, 
ἀνὴρ ἔστη ἐνώπιόν μου ἐν ἐσθῆτι λαμπρᾷ. 31 Kai φησιν, 
aman stood before me in apparel ‘bright, and said, 
Κορνήλιε, εἰσηκούσθη σου ἡ προσευχὴ καὶ αἱ. ἐλεημοσύναι.σου 

Cornelius, 3wastheard ‘thy “prayer and thine alms 
ἐμνήσθησαν ἐνώπιον Tov θεοῦ. 82 πέμψον οὖν εἰς Ἰόππην, 
were remembereda before God. Send therefore to Joppa, 
Kai μετακάλεσαι Σίμωνα ὃς ἐπικαλεῖται ἹΤέτρος᾽ οὗτος Eevize- 


and call for Simon who issurnamed Peter; he lodges 
ται ἐν οἰκίᾳ Σίμωνος βυρσέως παρὰ θάλασσαν “ὃς 
in [the] house of Simon a tanner by [the] sea ; who 


παραγενόμενος λαλήσει σοι. 88 τ᾿ ξαυτῆς" οὖν ἔπεμψα 
haying come will speak to thee. Atonce therefore I sent 
πρός σε’ σύ.τε καλῶς ἐποίησας παραγενόμενος. νῦν οὖν 
to thee: andthou *well ldidst having come. Now therefore 
πάντες ἡμεῖς ἐνώπιον TOU θεοῦ πάρεσμεν ἀκοῦσαι πάντα τὰ 
all we before God arepresent tohear allthings that 
προστεταγμένα σοι δὑπὸ" 'τοῦ θεοῦ." 34 ᾿Ανοίξας.δὲ Πέτρος 


have been ordered thee by God. And opening ‘Peter 
τὸ στόμα εἶπεν, ᾿Επ΄ ἀληθείας καταλαμβάνομαι Ore οὐκ 
his] mouth said, Of a truth I perceive that “ποῦ 


ἔστιν ᾿προσωπολήπτης" ὁ θεός, 85 ἀλλ᾽ ἐν παντὶ ἔθνει ὁ 
2is ‘a Srespecter Sof 7persons 1God, but in every nation he that 


φοβούμενος αὐτὸν καὶ ἐργαζόμενος δικαιοσύνην, δεκτὸς αὐτῷ 
fears him and works righteousness, acceptable to him 


ἐστιν. 86 τὸν λόγον Yov' ἀπέστειλεν τοῖς υἱοῖς dopank 
f 


is. The word which he sent tothe sons of Israel, 
εὐαγγελιζόμενος εἰρήνην διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, οὗτός ἐστιν 
announcing the glad tidings— peace by Jesus Christ, (he is 
πάντων κύριος, 37 ὑμεῖς οἴδατε' τὸ γενόμενον ῥῆμα 
3208 3411 1Lord), ye know; the “which *came ‘declaration 


καθ᾽ ὕλης τῆς lovdaiae, “ἀρξάμενον" Υ ἀπὸ τῆς Γαλιλαίας, 


through *whole 'the of Judza, beginning from Galilee, 
μετὰ τὸ βάπτισμα ὃ ἐκήρυξεν *Iwavync'" 88 ᾿Ιησοῦν τὸν 
after the baptism which *proclaimed 1John : Jesus who 
ἀπὸ "Ναζαρέτ," ὡς ἔχρισεν αὐτὸν ὁ θεὸς πνεύματι 
[was] from Nazareth, how *anointed *him +God with [the] *Spirit 
ἁγίῳ καὶ δυνάμει, ὃς διῆλθεν εὐεργετῶν Kai ἰώμενος 
‘Holy and with power, who went through, doing good and healing 


πάντας τοὺς καταδυναστευομένους ὑπὸ τοῦ διαβόλου, OTE 
811 that were being oppressed by the deyil, because 

ὁ θεὸς ἦν μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ" 99 καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐσμεν" μάρτυρες πάντων 
God was with him. And we are witnesses of all things 
ὧν ἐποίησεν ἔν. τε TH χώρᾳ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων Kai “ἐν" ‘Te- 


which he did both in the country of the Jews and in Je- 
povoadnu ὃν “ayveidoy' κρεμάσαντες ἐπὶ ξύλου. 
rusalem ; whom they put todeath having hanged (him) on a tree. 


40 τοῦτον ὁ θεὸς ἤγειρεν ἴ τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ, καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτὸν 
This one God raisedup onthe third day, and gave him 

ἐμφανῆ γενέσθαι, 41 οὐ παντὶ τῷ λαῷ, ἀλλὰ μάρτυσιν τοῖς 

*manifest ‘to *become, not toall the people, but to witnesses who 


4 — ὃς παραγενόμενος λαλήσει σοι LTT: A |. 
t τοῦ κυρίου the Lord ᾿ττύ. Y προσωπολήμπτης LITA. 
¥ + [yap] 1. : Ἰωάνης Tr. § * Ναζαρέθ ELTTrA. 

ς — éy[x]tr. d + «at also GLTTrAW. © ἀνεῖλαν 


P — ὥραν LTTrA. 


ΧΟ ΧΙ. ACTS 
προκεχΞιροτονημένοις ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ, ἡμῖν, οἵτινες συνεφάγομεν 
had been chosen before by God, tous, who did eat with 

Kai συνεπίομεν αὐτῷ μετὰ TO.avacTHVaLavTOY ἐκ 

and diddrink with him after he had risen from among [the] 

νεκρῶν. 42 καὶ παρήγγειλεν ἡμῖν κηρύξαι τῷ aw, καὶ 
dead. And he charged us toproclaim tothe people, and 

διαμαρτύρασθαι ὅτι Sairéc! ἐστν ὁ ὡρισμένος ὑπὸ τοῦ 
to testify fully that he itis who has been appointed by 

θεοῦ κριτὴς ζώντων καὶ νεκρῶν. 43 τούτῳ πάντες οἱ προφῆται 


God judge ofliving and dead. Tohim all the prophets 
μαρτυροῦσιν; ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν λαβεῖν διὰ τοῦ ὀνόματος 
ear witness, [that]*remission “οὗ *°sins ‘receives **through 13name 


αὐτοῦ πάντα τὸν πιστεύοντα εἰς αὐτόν. 


“This Jevery7one *that ‘believes ‘on ‘him. 
44 Ἔτι λαλοῦντος τοῦ Πέτρου τὰ ῥήματα. ταῦτα, "ἐπέπεσεν" 
*Yet ‘as *is “speaking ?Peter these words, ‘fell 


TO πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον ἐπὶ πάντας τοὺς ἀκούοντας τὸν λόγον. 
‘the Spirit “the *Holy upon all those hearing the word. 


45 καὶ ἐξέστησαν ot ἐκ περιτομῆς πιστοὶ ‘cou ἔσυνῆλ- 
And wereamazed the ?o0f*the ‘circumcision *believers as many as came 


Gov' τῷ Πέτρῳ, Ort καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ ἔθνη ἡ δωρεὰ τοῦ ἰἁγίου 


with Peter, that also upon the Gentiles the gift ofthe Holy 
πνεύματος" ἐκκέχυται᾽ 46 ἤκουον. γὰρ αὐτῶν λαλούν- 
Spirit had been poured out ; for they heard them speak- 
των γλώσσαις Kai μεγαλυνόντων τὸν θεόν. τότε ἀπεκρίθη 
ing with tongues and magnifying God. Then answered 
m6" Tlérpoc, 47 Μήτι τὸ ὕδωρ "κωλῦσαι δύναταί, τις 
Peter, 5The water “forbid ‘can ?any “one 


τοῦ μὴ.βαπτισθῆναι τούτους, οἵτινες TO πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον 
that should not be baptized these, who _ the Spirit the Holy 
ἔλαβον °kabwe' καὶ ἡμεῖς ; 48 moocérakéyPre' «αὐτοὺς" "βαπ- 
received as also we? And he ordered them to be 
τισθῆναι ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ κυρίου." τότε ἠρώτησαν αὐτὸν 
baptized in the name ofthe Lord. Then they begged him 
ἐπιμεῖναι ἡμέρας τινάς. 
toremain ζΖδσβ ‘some. 
11 Ἤκουσαν δὲ οἱ ἀπόστολοι καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ ot ὄντες κατὰ 
And*heard ‘the apostles and the brethren who were in 
A ? / er ‘ 4 ν ? Le ‘ , ~ ~ 
τὴν ᾿Ιουδαίαν, ὅτι καὶ τὰ ἔθνη ἐδέξαντο τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ. 
Judea, that also the Gentiles received the word of God; 
2 Skai ὅτε! ἀνέβη Πέτρος εἰς “Ιεροσόλυμα," διεκρίνοντο πρὸς 
and when 7went*up ‘Peter ἴο Jerusalem, ‘contended ‘with 
αὐτὸν οἱ ἐκ περιτομῆς, 8 λέγοντες, Ὅτι πρὸς ἄνδρας 
Thim 'those “οὗ [*the]*cireumcision, saying, To men 
ἀκροβυστίαν. ἔχοντας “εἰσῆλθες,) Kai “ouvepayec' αὐτοῖς. 
uncircumcised thou wentestin, and  didst eat with them. 
4 ᾿Αρξάμενος.δὲ "ὁ" Πέτρος ἐξετίθετο αὐτοῖς καθεξῆς λέ- 
But *having *begun Peter heset[it]forth tothem inorder say- 
yor, 5’Eyw ἤμην ἐν πόλει ᾿Ιόππῃ προσευχόμενος, Kat 
ing, I was in(the) city of Joppa praying, and 
εἶδον ἐν ἐκστάσει ὕραμα, καταβαῖνον σκεῦός τι we ὀθόνην 
Isaw in atrance avision, ‘descending ‘a vessel 7certain like a *sheet 


345 


chosen before of God, 
even to us, who did eat 
and drink with him 
after he rose from the 
dead. 42 And he com- 
manded us to preach 
unto the people, and 
to testify that it is he 
which was ordained of 
God to be the Judge of 
quick and dead. 43 To 
him give all the pro- 
phets witness, that 
through his name who- 
soever believeth in 
him shall receive re- 
mission of sins. 


44 While Peter yet 
spake these words, the 

oly Ghost fellon all 
them which heard the 
word. 45 And they 
of the circumcision 
which believed were 
astonished, as many 
as came with Peter, 
because that on the 
Gentiles also was 
poured out the gift of 
the Holy Ghost. 46 For 
they heard them speak 
with tongues, and 
magnify God. Then 
answered Peter, 47 Can 
any man forbid water, 
that these should not 
be baptized, which 
have received the Holy 
Ghost as well as we? 
48 And he commanded 
them to be baptized in 
the name of the Lord. 
Then prayed they him 
to tarry certain days. 


XI. <And the apo- 
stles and brethren that 
were in Juda heard 
that the Gentiles had 
also received the word 
of God. 2 And when 
Peter was come up to 
Jerusalem, they that 
were of the circumci- 
sion contended with 
him, 3 saying, Thou 
wentest in to men 
uncircumcised, and 
didst eat with them. 
4 But Peter rehearsed 
the matter from the 
beginning, and ex- 
pounded it by order 
unto them, saying, 5 1 
was in the city of Jop- 
pa praying: and in a 
trance I saw a vision, 
A certain vessel de- 
scend, as it had beena 
great sheet, let down 


h évece L. 
m — ὃ LTTrA. 


& οὗτός LTr. 
ἁγίου L. 
4 αὐτοῖς 1. 
τοῦ κυρίου Bam. Α. “5 ὅτε δὲ ΤΎτΑ. 
in Tr) placed before πρὸς LTTrAW. 


iot who L. Κ συνῆλθαν Ττ. 
π δύναται κωλῦσαί LTTrA. 


τ Ἱερουσαλήμ LTTrA. 
* συνέφαγεν did eat with tr. 


° ὡς LTTrA. 
τ ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ (Jesus Christ) βαπτισθῆναι LITr; ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι 
Υ εἰσῆλθες (εἰσῆλθεν he went 
x — ὃ LTTrAW. 


| πνεύματος τοῦ 
Ρ δὲ TTr. 


946 


from heaven by four 
corners; and it came 
even to me: 6 upon 
the which when I had 
fastened mine eyes, I 
considered, and saw 
fourfooted beasts of 
the earth, and wild 
beasts, and creeping 
things, and fowls of 
theair. 7 AndI heard 
a Woice saying unto 
me, Arise, Peter ; slay 
andeat. 8 But I said, 
Not so, Lord: for no- 
thing common or un- 
clean hath at any 
time entered into my 
mouth. 9 But the 
voice answered me 
again from heaven, 
What God hath cleans- 
ed, that call not thou 
common. 10 And this 
was done three times: 
and all were drawnup 
again into heaven. 
11 And, behold, im- 
mediately there were 


three men_ already 
come unto the house 
where I was, sent 


from Cesarea unto 
me. 12 And the spi- 
rit bade me go with 
them, nothing doubt- 
ing. Moreover these 
six brethren accom- 
panied me, and we 
entered intothe man’s 
house: 13 and he shew- 
ed us how he had seen 
an angel in his house, 
which stood and said 
unto him, Send men to 
Joppa, and call for Si- 
mon, whose surname 
is Peter ; 14 who shall 
tell thee words, where- 
by thou and all thy 
house shall be saved. 
15 And as I began to 
speak, the Holy Ghost 
fell on them, as on 
us at the beginning. 
16 Then remembered 
I the word of the Lord, 
how that hesaid, John 
indeed baptized with 
water; but ye shall 
be baptized with the 
Holy Ghost. 17 For- 
asmuch then as God 
gave them the like 
gift as he did unto 
us, who believed on 
the Lord Jesus Christ; 
what was I, that I 
could withstand God ? 


TIPAZEI:. ΧΙ. 


μεγάλην, τέσσαρσιν ἀρχαῖς καθιεμένην ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, καὶ 


great, by four corners let down ooutofthe heaven, and 
ἦλθεν ἄχρις" ἐμοῦ. 6 εἰς ἣν ἀτενίσας κατεγόουν, 
itcame as faras me: 


on which having looked intently I considered, 


καὶ εἶδον τὰ τετράποδα τῆς γῆς καὶ τὰ θηρία καὶτὰ ép- 
and saw the quadrupeds of the earth and the wild beasts and thecreeping 


A ‘ A ‘4 bad ? ~ » A Z ~ 
πετὰ καὶ τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ. 7 ἤκουσα. δὲ φωνῆς λε- 


things and the birds ofthe heaven. AndIheard avoice say- 

72 >? ; , ~ 4 , , 
γούσης pot, ᾿Αναστάς, Ilérpe, θῦσον καὶ φάγε. 8 εἶπον. δέ, 
ing to me, Having risen up, Peter, kill and eat. But I said, 


Μηδαμῶς, κύριε: Ore "πᾶν" κοινὸν ἢ ἀκάθαρτον οὐδέποτε 
In no wise, Lord, for anything common or unclean never 


εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὸ. στόμα.μου. 9 ἀπεκρίθη.δέ ὕμοι! φωνὴ ἐκ. δευ- 


entered into my mouth. But answered ‘me ‘a ?voice the second 
τέρου ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, “A ὁ θεὸς Séxabapiev," σὺ μὴ 
time out of the heaven, What God cleansed, thou “ποὺ 

κοίνουι 10 rovro.dé ἐγένετο ἐπὶ. τρίς, καὶ “πάλιν ave- 


1make common. and 


And this took place thrice, again 
σπάσθη! ἅ ic τὸν οὐρανόν. 11 καὶ ἰδού, “ἐξαυτῆς! τρεῖς 

ἡ ἀπαντα εἰς ΤΟΊ ουρανον. και LOOU, ἐξαυτῆς TOELC 
drawn up all into the heaven. And lo, at once three 
ἄνδρες ἐπέστησαν ἐπὶ τὴν οἰκίαν ἐν ἡ Hunr,' ἀπεσταλμένοι 
men steod at the house in which I was, sent 


ἀπὸ ®&Kacapeiac' πρός pe. 12 εἴπεν.δὲ μοι τὸ πνεῦμα," 


was 


from Cresarea to me, And ‘said *to®'me’the Spirit, 
συνελθεῖν αὐτοῖς, ἱμηδὲν διακρινόμενον"" ἦλθον.δὲ σὺν ἐμοὶ 
to go with them, nothing doubting. And went with me 


καὶ ot ἐξ ἀδελφοὶ οὗτοι, καὶ εἰσήλθομεν εἰς τὸν οἶκον τοῦ 
also “six “brethren ‘these, and oweentered into the house of the 
ἀνδρός, 18 amnyyenrév*re ἡμῖν πῶς εἶδεν τὸν ἄγγελον ἐν 
man, and he related tous how hesaw_ the angel in 
τῷ.οἴκῳ.αὐτοῦ σταθέντα Kai εἰπόντα ἰαὐτῷ,! ᾿Απόστειλον εἰς 
his house standing and saying to him, Send *to 
’ , m » I ‘ ’ , 4 ’ , 
Ιόππην “ἄνδρας, kai μετάπεμψαι Σίμωνα τὸν ἐπικαλούμενον 
*Joppa men, and send for Simon who is surnamed 
Πέτρον, 14 ὃς λαλήσει ῥήματα πρός σε ἐν.οἷς σωθήσῃ 
Peter, who shall speak words to thee whereby shalt be saved 
‘ ‘ ~ « , ’ ‘ ~ , ~ 
σὺ Kai πᾶς ὁ.οἴκός. σου. 15 év.dé τῷ. ἄρξασθαί.με λαλεῖν 


thou and all thy house. And in my beginning to speak 
ἐπέπεσεν TO πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς, ὥσπερ καὶ ἐφ᾽ 
*fell the Spirit “the *Holy upon _ them, evenas also upon 
ἡμᾶς ἐν ἀ 16 ἐμνήσθην.δὲ τοῦ ῥήματος " κυρίου, 
us in [086] beginning. And I remembered the word of [the] Lord, 
ὡς ἔλεγεν, °lwavync! μὲν ἐβάπτισεν ὕδατι, ὑμεῖς. δὲ 
how he said, John indeed baptized with water, butye 
βαπτισθήσεσθε ἐν πνεύματι ἁγίῳ. 17 Et οὖν τὴν ἴσην 
shall be baptized with(the) Spirit Holy. If then the like 


δωρεὰν ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ὁ θεὸς we Kai ἡμῖν, πιστεύσασιν ἐπὶ 


18 When they heard gift “gave “to*them ‘*God as το tous, having ee on 
these things, they τὸν κύριον Ιησοῦν χριστόν, ἐγὼ. δὲ" τίς ἤ νατὸ 
1 ; , ἐγὼ. ς ἤμην υνατὸς 
held their peace, and 9 = Lord Jesus ὀ Christ, andI, who wasI,[tobe] able 
κωλῦσαι τὸν θεόν ; 18 ᾿Ακούσαντες.δὲ ταῦτα ἡσύχασαν, 
to forbid God? And having heard these things they were silent, 
Υ ἄχρι TTrA. + καὶ also LTTrA. ® — πᾶν GLTTrAW. b — wou LTTra. © ἐκαθέρι- 
σεν Tr. ἃ ἀνεσπάσθη πάλιν LTTrA. © ἐξ αὐτῆς A. [ἦμεν We were LTTr. & Kate 
σαρίας 1. h τὸ πνεῦμά μοι LTTrA. i μηδὲν διακρίναντα LTTr ; --- μηδὲν διακρινόμενον A. 
k δὲ LTTr. — αὐτῷ LTTr. m — ἄνδρας GLTTrAW. n + τοῦ of the GLTIN AW. 


οἸωάνης Tr. 


p — δὲ and urTr[a]. 


XI. ACTS. 


καὶ “ἐδόξαζον" τὸν θεόν, λέγοντες, τ΄Αραγεὶ Kai τοῖς ἔθνεσιν 
and glorified God, saying, Then indeed also to the Gentiles 
ὁ θεὸς THY μετάνοιαν "ἔδωκεν εἰς ζωήν." 
God 2repentance ‘gave unto life. 
19 Οἱ μὲν οὖν διασπαρέντες ἀπὸ τῆς θλίψεως τῆς 
They indeed therefore who were scattered by the tribulation that 
γενομένης ἐπὶ "Στεφάνῳ," διῆλθον ἕως Φοινίκης καὶ Κύπρου 
took place upon Stephen, passedthrough to Phceenicia and Cyprus 
καὶ ᾿Αντιοχείας, μηδενὶ λαλοῦντες τὸν λόγον εἰ μὴ μόνον 
and Antioch, to no one speaking the word except “only 
Ἰουδαίοις. 20 ἦσαν.δὲ τινες ἐξ αὐτῶν ἄνδρες Κύπριοι καὶ 
‘to "Jews. But were certain *of “them ‘men Cypriots and 
Κυρηναῖοι, οἵτινες "εἰσελθόντες" εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν, ἐλάλουν * 


Cyrenians, who having come into Antioch, spoke 
4 δ χ' Ἐλλ 4 tl , rn ζ , A ye 7 
προς τους ἡνιστας EVaYYE t OMEVOL TOV Kt O0tor 
to the Hellenists, announcing the glad tidings— the Lord 


᾿Ιησοῦν. 21 καὶ ἦν εὶρ κυρίου μετ᾽ αὐτῶν" πολύς.τε 
Jesus. And *was ['the] “hand of (*the]*Lord with them, and a great 
> 4 , ? , τ " " [2 ᾽ 

ἀριθμὸς Υ πιστεύσας ἐπέστρεψεν ἐπὶ τὸν κύριον. 22 ᾿Ηκούσθη 
number having believed turned to the Lord. *Was *heard 
δὲ ὁ λόγος sic τὰ ὦτα τῆς ἐκκλησίας τῆς ἐν “Ἴερο- 
‘and *the*report in the ears ofthe assembly which [Ὑ788] in Jeru- 
godtvpoc' περὶ αὐτῶν" καὶ ἐξαπέστειλαν Βαρνάβαν ὕδιελ- 
salem concerning them; and _ they sent forth Barnabas to go 

θεῖν! ἕως ᾿Αντιοχείας. 28 ὃς παραγενόμενος καὶ ἰδὼν 
through asfaras Antioch: who having come and haying seen 
τὴν χάριν © τοῦ θεοῦ ἐχάρη, Kai παρεκάλει πάντας τῇ.προθέσει 
the grace of God rejoiced, and exhorted all with purpose 
τῆς καρδίας προσμένειν τῷ Kvpip’ 24 ὅτι ἦν ἀνὴρ ἀγαθὸς 

ofheart toabidewith the Lord; for he wasa*man_ ‘good 
καὶ πλήρης πνεύματος ἁγίου Kai πίστεως. Kai προσετέθη 

and full of [the] *Spirit ‘Holy and _ of faith. And was added 
ὄχλος ἱκανὸς τῷ κυρίῳ. 25 ᾿Εξῆλθεν δὲ εἰς Ταρσὸν “ὁ Βαρ- 
a?crowd ‘large tothe Lord. And ?went*forth*to ®°Tarsus 1Bar- 
vaBac' ἀναζητῆσαι Lavrov, 26 καὶ εὑρὼν eavrov" ἤγαγεν 


nabas tose k Saul ; and having found him he brought 

ἑαὐτὸν" εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν. ἐγένετοδεὲ ἰαὐτοὺς" ἐνιαυτὸν 
him to Antioch. And it came to pass they a “year 

ὅλον συναχθῆναι ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, Kai διδάξαι ὄχλον 


1whole were gathered togetherin the assembly, and taught a “crowd 


ἱκανόν, χρηματίσαι.τε ϑπρῶτον" ἐν ᾿Αντιοχείᾳ τοὺς μαθητὰς 
Marge: and “were ‘called “first 7in *Antioch 1the disciples 
Χριστιανούς. 
Christians, 
27 Ἔν.ταύταις.δὲ ταῖς ἡμέραις κατῆλθον ἀπὸ Ἱεροσολύμων 
And in these days came down from Jerusalem 
~ 2 ᾽ , ? 3 Ἁ - ? 
προφῆται sic ᾿Αντιόχειαν. 28 avacrac.dé εἷς ἐξ 
prophets to Antioch ; and *having frisen 7up ‘one *from “among 
αὐτῶν ὀνόματι “AyaBoc, ἐσήμανεν" διὰ τοῦ πνεύματος, 
“them, by name Agabus, he signified by the Spirit, 
Λιμὸν ipéyav' μέλλειν ἔσεσθαι ἐφ᾽ ὅλην THY οἰκουμένην" 


947 


glorified God, saying, 

Then hath God alse 

to the Gentiles grant- 

od Tepentance unto 
6. 


19 Now they whick 
were scattered abroad 
upon the persecution 
that arose about Ste- 
phen travelled as far 
as Phenice,and Cyprus, 
and Antioch, preach- 
ing the word to none 
but unto the Jews 
only. 20 And some of 
them were men of Cy- 
prus and Cyrene, 
which, when they were 
come to Antioch, spake 
unto the Grecians, 
preaching the Lord 
Jesus. 21 And the 
hand of the Lord was 
with them: and a 
great number believ- 
ed, and turned unto 
the Lord. 22 Then 
tidings of these things 
came unto the ears of 
the church which was 
in Jerusalem: and 
they sent forth Barna- 
bas, that he should go 
as far as Antioch, 
23 Who, when he came, 
and had seen the graca 
of God, was glad, and 
exhorted them all, 
that with purpose of 
heart they would 
cleave unto the Lord. 
24 For he was a good 
man, and full of the 
Holy Ghost and of 
faith : and much peo- 
ple was added unto the 
Lord. 25 Then depart- 
ed Barnabas to Tar- 
sus, for to seek Saul: 
26and when he had 
found him, he trought 
him unto Antioch. 
And it came to pass, 
that a whole year they 
assembled themselves 
with the church, and 
taught much people. 
And the disciples were 
called Christians first 
in Antioch. 


27 And in these days 
came prophets from 
Jerusalem unto Anti- 
och. 28 And _ there 
stood up one of them 
named Agabus, and 
signified by the spirit 
that there should be 
great dearth through- 


A*famine ‘great is about tobe over ?whole ‘the habitable world; out all the world: 

q ἐδόξασαν LTTr. r’Apa then Lrtr; "Apa [ye] A. 5 εἰς ζωὴν ἔδωκεν LTTrAW. t Sre- 
gavovL. Ὑ ἐλθόντες GLTTrAW. ἢ + xatalsoLTTra. χα Ἕλληνας Greeks GLTTra. ¥ +6 
LTTrA. *%-+ οὔσης WaSTTr. δ᾽ Ἱερουσαλὴμ LITrAW. ὃ — διελθεῖν LTTr. © + τὴν which 


was] LTTra. 4 — 6 Βαρνάβας (read he went forth) urtra. 
αὐτοῖς καὶ to them even LTTrA. ὃ πρώτως ΤΊταΑ. ἢ ἐσήμαινεν L. 


© — αὐτὸν (read [him]) αὐτττὰ. 
i μεγάλην LTTraw. 


348 


which came to pass in 
the days of Claudius 
Cesar. 29 Then the 
disciples, every man 
according to his abili- 
ty, determined to send 
relief unto the breth- 
ren which dwelt in 
Judsa : 30 which also 
they did, and sent it 
to the elders by the 
hands of Barnabas and 
Saul. 


XIT. Now about that 
time Herod the king 
stretched forth his 
hands to vex certain 
of the church. 2 And 
he killed James the 
brother of John with 
thesword. 3And be- 
cause he saw it pleased 
the Jews, he proceeded 
further to take Peter 
also. (Then were the 
days of unleavened 
bread.) 4 And when 
he had apprehended 
him, he put him in 

rison, and delivered 
im to four quaterni- 
ons of soldiers to keep 
him ; intending after 
Easter to bring him 
forth to the people. 
5 Peter therefore was 
kept in prison: but 
prayer was made with- 
out ceasing of the 
church unto God for 
him. 6 And when 
Herod would have 
brought him forth, 
the same night Peter 
was sleeping between 
two soldiers, bound 
with two chains: and 
the keepers before the 
door kept the prison. 
7 And, behold, the an- 
gel of the Lord came 
upon him, and a light 
shined in the prison : 
and he smote Peter on 
the side, and raised 
him up, saying, Arise 
up quickly. And his 
chains fell off from his 
hands. 8 And the an- 
gel said unto him, 
Gird thyself, and bind 
onthy sandals. And so 
he did. And he saith 
unto him, Cast thy 
garment about thee, 
and follow me. 9 And 
he went out, and fol- 
lowed him ; and wist 
uot that it was true 
which was done by the 
augel; but thought 
he saw a_ vision. 


WPAZEIS. XL Sat. 
Κόὅστις" kai! ἐγένετο ἐπὶ Κλαυδίου "Καίσαρος." 29 τῶν δὲ 
which also cametopass under Claudius Ceesar. And the 
μαθητῶν καθὼς “nbzopeirol τις, ὥρισαν ἕκαστος av- 
disciples according as “was *prospered*any “one, determined, each of 


τῶν εἰς διακονίαν πέμψαι τοῖς κατοικοῦσιν ἐν τῇ Ἰουδαίᾳ 
them, for ministration tosend to the ?dwelling 3in *Judea 


ἀδελφοῖς. 30 ὃ καὶ ἐποίησαν, ἀποστείλαντες πρὸς Tove 
‘brethren ; which 4150 they did, sending [it] to the 
ποεσβυτέρους διὰ χειρὸς Βαρνάβα καὶ Σαύλου. 

elders by [the] hand of Barnabas and _ Saul, 

12 Kar ἐκεῖνον.δὲ τὸν. καιρὸν ἐπέβαλεν “Ἡρώδης ὁ βασι- 
And at that time *put *forth ‘Herod the “king 
τὰς χεῖρας κακῶσαί τινας τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας. 

{his} hands’  toill-treat some ofthose of the assembly; 

2 ἀνεῖλεν. δὲ ᾿Ιάκωβον τὸν ἀδελφὸν ῬΤωάννου" «μαχαίρᾳ." 
and he put todeath James the brother of John with a sword. 
3*kai ἰδὼν" ὅτι ἀρεστόν ἐστιν τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις προσέθετο 

And having seenthat pleasing itis tothe Jews he added 

συλλαβεῖν καὶ Tlérpov' ἦσαν δὲ " ἡμέραι τῶν ἀζύμων" 
to take also Peter: (and they were days of unleavened bread :) 

4 ὃν καὶ πιάσας ἔθετο εἰς φυλακήν, παραδοὺς τέσσαρ- 
whom also having seized heput in prison, having delivered to four 


ow τετραδίοις στρατιωτῶν φυλάσσειν αὐτόν, βουλόμενος μετὰ 
sets of four soldiers to guard him, purposing aiter 
TO πάσχα ἀναγαγεῖν αὐτὸν τῷ λαῷ. ὅ O.pév.odby_Ilérpoc 
the passover to bring out him ___ to the people. Peter therefore indeed 
ἐτηρεῖτο ἐν τῇ φυλακῇ προσευχὴ.δὲ ἦν "ἐκτενὴς" γινομένη 
was kept in the prison; but prayer “was “fervent made 
¢ x ~ ? ΄ nN " x vi Lil ? ~ .“ x 
ὑπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας πρὸς τὸν θεὸν ὑπὲρ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 6 Ore.dé 
by the assembly to God concerning him. But when 
WewedAey' ΞΣαὐτὸν t | 6 ‘Howéd 7] ὶ. ἐκεί ἢ 
μ τὸν προάγειν' ὁ Ἡρώδης, τῷ.νυκτὶ ἐκείνῃ ἣν 
2was *about Shim ‘to *bring ’forth *Herod, in that night was 
« , ’ 4 ΄ ~ , « ’ 
ὁ Πέτρος κοιμώμενος μεταξὺ δύο στρατιωτῶν, δεδεμένος ἁλύ-- 
Peter sleeping between two soldiers, bound with 
΄ 2 , ‘ ~ sf > [4 ᾿ Υ. 
σεσιν δυσίν, φύλακές τε πρὸ τῆς θύρας ἐτήρουν τὴν φυλακήν. 


λεὺς" 


“chains 'two, guards also before the door kept the prison. 

» Aue νὰ , » , Ses \ ~ ? 

7 καὶ ἰδού, ἄγγελος κυρίου ἐπέστη, Kai φῶς ἔλαμψεν ἐν 
And behold, anangel of [the] Lord stood by, and a light shone in 


πατάξας.δὲ τὴν πλευρὰν τοῦ Πέτρου ἤγειρεν 


τῷ οἰκήματι. 
side of Peter he roused up 


the building. And having smitten the 
? A , ? , ? ΄ ‘ ΥΣ , Il ? ~ « 
αὐτὸν λέγων, ᾿Ανάστα ἐν τάχει. Καὶ γἐξέπεσον" αὐτοῦ αἱ 


him, saying, Riseup in haste. And fell off of him the 
ἁλύσεις ἐκ τῶν Meee: 8 εἶπέν. "τε ὁ ἄγγελος πρὸς 
chains from [his] ands. And %said ‘the angel to 


> , a / {| ‘A € ἠδ 4A ὃ aN , ? , 
αὑτόν. Περίζωσαι, καὶ ὑπόδησαι τὰ-σανδαλιά.σου. Ἐποίη- 
him, Gird thyself about, and  bindon thy sandals. 7He “did 
σεν δὲ οὕτως. Kai λέγει αὐτῷ, Περιβαλοῦ τὸ ἱμάτιόν. σου, 

τὰ 80. And he βῆγ8β ἴο πΐτη, Cast about [thee] thy garment, 


καὶ ἀκολούθει μοι. 9 Kai ἐξελθὼν ἠκολούθει bare" καὶ 
and follow me. And going forth he followed him, and 
? a a ? / LJ ‘ , 4 ~ ? 
οὐκιῴδει ὅτι ἀληθές ἐστιν τὸ γινόμενον διὰ τοῦ ay- 
did not know that real itis which is happening by means of the an- 


k ἥτις LTTrAW. 


ο 6 βασιλεὺς Ἡρώδης τ. 
t ἐκτενῶς fervently LTTra. 


the GL[a]w. 


αὐτὸν LTA ; προάγειν αὐτὸν Tr. 
b — αὐτῷ ῦττὰ 


LTTrA,. 


m — Καίσαρος GLTTrAW. ἃ εὐπορεῖτό LTTrA. 
4 μαχαίρῃ TTA. τ ἰδὼν δὲ LITrA. * + ai 
YmrepuLTTr. τ ἤμελλεν TIrA. * προαγαγεῖν 
Υ ἐξέπεσαν LTTrA. 2 δὲ Ltr. 2 Zaoa gird thyself 


1— καὶ LTTr[A]. 
P "Iwavov Tr. 


XII. ACTS. 


γέλου, ἐδόκει.δὲ ὅραμα βλέπειν. 10 dtehOovreg.de πρώτην 
gel, but thought a vision hesaw. And having passed through a first 


φυλακὴν Kai δευτέραν, “ἦλθον᾽ ἐπὶ τὴν πύλην THY σιδηρᾶν 


guard and second, they came to the “gate iron 
τὴν φέρουσαν εἰς τὴν πόλιν, ἥτις αὐτομάτη “ἠνοίχθη" αὐτοῖς" 
that leads into the city, which of itself opened to them ; 
καὶ ἐξελθόντες προῆλθον ῥύμην μίαν, καὶ εὐθέως 


and having gone out they went on through “street ‘one, and immediately 
ἀπέστη ὁ ἄγγελος ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 11 Kai ὁ ἹΠέτρος “γενόμενος 
departed the angel from him. And Peter having come 
ἐν ἑαυτῷ"! εἶπεν, Νῦν οἶδα ἀληθῶς ὅτι ἐξαπέστειλεν 

to himself said, Now I know of a truth that ssent ‘forth [᾿{Π6] 
κύριος τὸν. ἀγγελον.αὐτοῦ, Kai fEeihero' pe ἐκ χειρὸς 
?Lord his angel, and delivered me out of(the] hand 
Ἡρώδου καὶ πάσης τῆς προσδοκίας τοῦ λαοῦ τῶν ᾿Τουδαίων. 
of Herod and all the expectation of the people of the Jews. 
12 συνιδώντε ἦλθεν ἐπὶ τὴν οἰκίαν 8 Μαρίας τῆς μητρὸς 


And considering [it] hecame to the house of Mary the mother 
Ἰωάννου" τοῦ ἐπικαλουμένου Μάρκου, οὗ ἦσαν ἱκανοὶ 
of John who is surnamed Mark, where were 


many 
, . . ΄ , “ι i ~ 
συνηθροισμένοι καὶ προσευχόμενοι. 13 Kpovoaytoc.cé 'τοῦ 
gathered together and praying. And “having *knocked 
Πέτρου" τὴν θύραν τοῦ πυλῶνος, προσῆλθεν παιδίσκη ὑπα- 
‘Peter [at] the door ofthe porch, %came 1a *damsel to 
κοῦσαι, ὀνόματι Ῥόδη 14 καὶ ἐπιγνοῦσα τὴν φωνὴν τοῦ 
listen, by name Rhoda; and having recognized the voice 
Πέτρου, ἀπὸ τῆς χαρᾶς οὐκ.ἤνοιξεν τὸν πυλῶνα, εἰσδρα- 


of Peter, from joy she opened not the porch, “having 

μοῦσα δὲ ἀπήγγειλεν ἑστάναι τὸν Πέτρον πρὸ τοῦ 
run‘*in ‘but shereported 7to *be *standing 1Peter before the 
πυλῶνος. 15 οἱ. δὲ πρὸς αὐτὴν *eiroy,' May. Ἡ δὲ 


porch. But they to 


διϊσχυρίζετο οὕτως ἔχειν. 
strongly affirmed thus it was. 


her said, Thou art mad, But she 
οἱ δ᾽ ἔλεγον, ‘O ἄγγελος παὐ- 
And they βϑϊᾶ, The angel of 
τοῦ ἐστιν." 16 Ὁ.δὲ. Πέτρος ἐπέμενεν Kpovwy ἀνοίξαντες. δὲ 
him itis. But Peter continued knocking: and having opened 
"“idov' αὐτόν, καὶ ἐξέστησαν. 17 κατασείσας.δὃὲ αὐτοῖς 
they saw him, and were amazed, And having made a sign to them 
τῇ χειρὶ σιγᾷν διηγήσατο Pavroic’ πῶς ὁ κύριος αὐτὸν 
with the hand to be silent he related tothem how the Lord him 
ἐξήγαγεν ἐκ τῆς φυλακῆς. εἶπεν. Ῥδέ," ᾿Απαγγείλατε Ἰακώβῳ 
brought outof the prison. And he said, Report to James 
καὶ τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς ταῦτα. Kai ἐξελθὼν ἐπορεύθη εἰς ἕτερον 
and tothe brethren these things. Andhavinggoneout he went to another 
τόπον. 18 γενομένης. δὲ ἡμέρξας ἦν τάραχος οὐκ ὀλίγος 
place. And “having *come ‘day there was*disturbance ‘no “small 
ἐν τοῖς στρατιώταις. Ti dpa ὁ ΤΈέτρος ἐγένετο. 19 Ἡρώδης 
among the soldiers, what then of] *Peter *was*become. "Herod 
δὲ ἐπιζητήσας αὐτὸν καὶ μὴ εὑρών, ἀνακρίνας τοὺς 
Zand having sought after “him and ὁποὺ Shaving *found, having examined the 
φύλακας ἐκέλευσεν ἀπαχθῆναι; καὶ κατελθὼν 
guards he commanded [them] to be led away [to death}. And having gone down 


© ἦλθαν LITrA, 4 qvotyn LTTrA. 
& + τῆς LTTrAW. h *Iwavov Tr. 
εἶπαν L; δὲ ἔλεγον GTTrAW. 
P τε LTTrA. 


9 ἐν ἑαυτῷ γενόμενος LTTrAW. 
i αὐτοῦ he GLTTraw. 


τὸ ἐστιν αὐτοῦ LTTrA. Ὁ εἶδαν LTTrA. 


849 
10 When they were 
past the first and the 
second ward, they 
came unto the iron 
gate that leadeth unto 
the city; which opened 
to them of his own 
accord: and they went 
out, and passed on 
through one street ; 
and forthwith the an- 
gel departed from him. 
11 And when Peter 
was come to himself, 
he said, Now I know 
of a surety, that the 
Lord hath sent his an- 
gel, and hath delivered 
me out of the hand of 
Herod, and from all 
the expectation of the 
people of the Jews. 
12 And when he had 
considered the thing, 
he came to the house 
of Mary the mother 
of John, whose sur- 
name was Mark; 
where many were ga- 
thered together pray- 
ing. 13 And as Peter 
knocked at the door of 
the gate, a damsel 
came to hearken, 
named Rhoda. 14 And 
when she knew Peter’s 
voice, she opened not 
the gate for gladness, 
but ran in, and told 
how Peter stood before 
the gate. 15And they 
said unto her, Thou 
art mad. But she 
constantly affirmed 
that it was even so. 
Then said they, It is 
his angel. 16 But Pe- 
ter continued knock- 
ing: and when they 
had opened the door, 
and saw him, they 
were astonished. 17But 
he, beckoning unto 
them with the hand to 
hold their peace, de- 
clared unto them how 
the Lord had brought 
him out of. the prison. 
And he said, Go shew 
these things unto 
James, and to the 
brethren. And he de- 
parted, and went into 
another place. 18 Now 
as soon as it was day, 
there was no small 
stir among the sol- 
diers, what was be- 
come of Peter. 19 And 
when Herod had 
sought for him, and 
found him not, he ex- 
amined the keepers, 
and commanded that 
they should be put to 


¥ εἶπαν LTTrA. 


[ἐξείλατό GLTITAW. 
1§& 
ο --- αὐτοῖς T[Tr]. 


350 


death, And he went 
down from Juda to 
Ceesarea, and there a- 
bode. 20And Herod 
was highly displeased 
with them of Tyre and 
Sidon : but they came 
with one accord to 
him, and, having made 
Blastus the king’s 
chamberlain their 
friend, desired peace ; 
because their coun- 
try was nourished by 
the king’s country. 
21 And upon a set 
day Herod, arrayed in 
royal apparel, sat up- 
on his throne, and 
made an oration une 
to them. 22 And 
the people gave a 
shout, saying, /t ts the 
voice of a god, and not 
ofaman, 23 Andim- 
mediately the angel of 
the Lord smote him, 
because he gave not 
God the glory: and he 
was eaten of worms, 
and gave upthe ghost. 
24 But the word of God 
grew and multiplied, 
25 And Barnabas and 
Saul returned from 
Jerusalem, when they 
had fulfilled their min- 
istry, and took with 
them John, whose sur- 
name was Mark. 


XIII, Now there 
were in the church 
that was at Antioch 
certain prophets and 
teachers; as Barna- 
bas, and Simeon that 
was called Niger, and 
Lucius of Cyrene, and 
Manaen, which had 
been brought up with 
Herod the _ tetrarch, 
and Saul. 2 As they 
ministered to the Lord, 
and fasted, the Holy 
Ghost said, Separate 
me Barnabas and Saul 
for the work where- 
unto I have called 
them. 3 And when 
they had fasted and 
prayed, and laid their 
hands on them, they 
sent them away. 4 80 
they, being sent forth 
by the Holy Ghost, de- 
parted unto Seleucia ; 
and from thence they 
sailed to Cyprus. 5 And 
when they were at Sa- 
Jamis, they preached 
the word of God in 
the synagogues of the 


9 — τὴν LTTraw. 
(LJr[tr]. 
5 τετραάρχον T. 
“ματος LTTrA. 


¥ — τὴν GL. 
b — re GLTTrAW. 
f — τὴν LTTrA. 


ΠΡΑΞ ΕΙΣ. 


ἀπὸ τῆς lovdatac εἰς τὴν" τΚ αισάρειαν" διέτριβεν. 
from Juda to Ceesarea he stayed [there]. *Was 
δὲ "ὁ Ἡρώδης" θυμομαχῶν Τυρίοις καὶ Σιδωνίοις" 
‘and "Herod ἰπ bitter hostility with([the] Tyrians and Sidonians; 
ὁμοθυμαδὸν.δὲ παρῆσαν πρὸς αὐτόν, καὶ πείσαντες Βλάστον 
but with one accord they came to him, and having gained Blastus 
TOV ἐπὶ τοῦ κοιτῶνος τοῦ βασιλέως, ἠτοῦντο εἰρήνην, 
who[{was]Jover the bedchamber of the king, sought peace, 
διὰ τὸ τρέφεσθαι αὐτῶν τὴν χώραν ἀπὸ τῆς βασιλικῆς. 
because wasnourished their country by the king’s. 
21 Τακτῇ.δὲ ἡμέρᾳ ὁ Ἡρώδης ἐνδυσάμενος ἐσθῆτα βασιλικήν, 
Andonaset day Herod having puton “apparel royal, 
ἱκαὶ καθίσας ἐπὶ τοῦ βήματος, ἐδημηγόρει πρὸς αὐ- 
and having sat on the tribunal, was making anoration to them. 
’ « ~ ’ ’ ~ A ‘ ? 
τούς. 22 ὁ δὲ δῆμος ἐπεφώνει, θεοῦ ωνὴ καὶ οὐκ 
And the people were crying out, ΟΞ “4 god [‘the]*voice and not 
ἀνθρώπου. 23 παραχρῆμα.δὲ ἐπάταξεν αὐτὸν ἄγγελος κυ- 
of a man! And immediately °smote 7him '‘an*angel “of (*the] 
piov, ἀνθ᾽ ὧν οὐκ ἔδωκεν τὴν" δόξαν τῷ θεῷ" Kai γενόμενος 
Lord, because he gave ποῦ the glory to God, and having been 
σκωληκόβρωτος ἐξέψυξἕεν. 24 ὁ δὲ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ ηὔξανεν 
eaten of worms he expired. But the word of God grew 


καὶ ἐπληθύνετο. 25 Βαρνάβας δὲ καὶ Σαῦλος ὑπέστρεψαν ἐξ 
and multiplied. And Barnabas and Saul returned from 


Ἱερουσαλήμ, πληρώσαντες τὴν διακονίαν, “συμπαραλαβόν- 
Jerusalem, having fulfilled the ministration, aving taken with 
τες" καὶ" ΥΙωάννην" τὸν ἐπικληθέντα Μάρκον. 
{them] also John who was surnamed Mark. 


Ὁ ἕν ΠΕΣ: ΄ . \ 
13 Ἤσαν.δε *rivec' ἐν ᾿Αντιοχείᾳ κατὰ τὴν οὖσαν 
Now there were certain in Antioch in the *which *was [*there] 


᾽ , - ᾿ ΄ « ΄ ᾿ ‘ 
ἐκκλησίαν προφῆται καὶ διδάσκαλοι, Ὁ.τε-Βαρνάβας καὶ Συμεὼν 
tassembly prophets and teachers, both Barnabas and Simeon 
ὁ καλούμενος Νίγερ, καὶ Λούκιος ὁ Κυρηναῖος, Mavany.re 
who was called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manaen, 
Ἡρώδου τοῦ "τετράρχου" σύντροφος, καὶ Σαῦλος. 2 λειτουρ- 
of Herod the tetrarch a foster-brother, and Saul. 7As*were °min- 
γούντων δὲ αὐτῶν τῷ κυρίῳ Kai νηστευόντων, εἶπεν τὸ 
istering land “they tothe Lord and fasting, ‘said ‘the 
~ Nees, ᾽ ΄ On , b Π ΄ ‘ 
πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον, ᾿Αφορίσατε δὴ μοι TOv.’re'.BapvaBay καὶ 
"Spirit “the *Holy, Separate indeed tome both Barnabas and 

c A | ~ ᾽ Δ ΝΡ a , ? , , 
τὸν" Σαῦλον εἰς τὸ ἔργον ὃ προσκέκλημαι αὐτούς. 3 Τότε 
Saul for the work towhich I have called them. Then 
νηστεύσαντες Kai προσευξάμενοι, Kai ἐπιθέντες τὰς χεῖρας 


XI, XI. 
20° Hy 


having fasted and prayed, and having laid hands 
αὐτοῖς, ἀπέλυσαν. 4 Οὗτοι" piv οὖν ἐκπεμφθέντες 
on them, they let [them] go. They indeed therefore having been sent forth 


ὑπὸ τοῦ “πνεύματος τοῦ ἁγίου," κατῆλθον εἰς fryv' &Dedev- 


by the Spirit the Holy, went down to Seleu- 

Ι ? “ΔΩ ᾽ , Ὰ é f \ Ι ΄ ‘ , 
κειαν," ἐκεῖθεν. τε ἀπέπλευσαν εἰς ‘ryv' Κύπρον. 5 καὶ yevo- 
cia, and thence sailed away to Cyprus. And having 


μενοι ἐν Σαλαμῖνι κατήγγελλον τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν ταῖς 
come into Salamis they announced the word of God in the 


τ᾿ Καισαρίαν T. 
¥ ouv- T. 


* — ὁ Ἡρώδης (read he was) GLTTraW. 
χ -- καὶ LTTr[A].  Y¥ Ιωάνην Tr. 
©— τὸν LITrAW. ‘4 αὐτοὶ LTTrA. 
& Σελευκίαν 1. 


τ - καὶ 
2. — τινες LTTra. 
ΠΣ , 
© αγίου πνεύ 


XIII. ACTS. 
συναγωγαῖς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων: εἶχον.δὲ καὶ "Ἰωάννην" 
synagogues of the Jews. And they had also John [as] 
ὑπηρέτην. 6 duehOovrecdé + τὴν νῆσον ἄχρι Πάφου 
an attendant. Αἀπᾶ having passed through the island as far as Paphos 
etpov) τινα μάγον Ψευδοπροφήτην ᾿Ιουδαῖον, ᾧ ὄνομα 


they found a certain magician, a false prophet whose name 


ΚΒαρϊησοῦς, 7 ὃς ἦν σὺν τῷ ἀνθυπάτῳ Σεργίῳ Παύλῳ, 
Barjesus, who was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, 
οὗτος προσκαλεσάμενος Βαρνάβαν καὶ 
He heving; called to {him} Barnabas and 


Lavrov ἐπεζήτησεν ἀκοῦσαι τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ" ὃ ἀνθίστατο. δὲ 
Saul desired tohear the word of God. But there withstood 


αὐτοῖς ᾿Ελύμας ὁ μάγος" ovrwc.yap μεθερμηνεύεται τὸ ὄνομα 


a Jew, 


({was] 


ἀνδρὶ συνετῷ. 
*man ‘an *intelligent. 


them Elymas the magician, (for so is interpreted 7name 
αὐτοῦ: ζητῶν διαστρέψαι τὸν ἀνθύπατον ἀπὸ τῆς πίστεως. 
1815), seeking topervert » the proconsul from the faith. 
9 Σαῦλος.δέ, ὁ καὶ Παῦλος, πλησθεὶς πνεύματος ἁγίου, 
But Saul, who 4150 [158] Paul, being filled with nae 2Spirit *Holy, 
ἱκαὶ! ἀτενίσας εἰς αὐτὸν 10 εἶπεν, ὔ Ὡ πλήρης παν- 
and having looked BIST upon him said, O of 


τὸς δόλου Kai πάσης ῥ(ἐιουργίας, υἱὲ διαβόλου, ἐχθρὲ πάσης 


all guile and all craft son of [the] devil, enemy ofall 


δικαιοσύνης, οὐ-παύσῃ διαστρέφων τὰς ὁδοὺς κυρίου 
Εἰ ΒΕ ΘΟΌΒΏΘΙΒ; wilt thou not cease perverting the 7ways “οὗ [*the] Lord 


rac εὐθείας ; 11 Kai νῦν ἰδού, χεὶρ “τοῦ κυρίου ἐπὶ σέ, 
straight ? And now lo, [the] hand ofthe Lord [18] upon thee, 


καὶ ἔσῃ τυφλός, μὴ βλέπων τὸν ἥλιον ἄχρι καιροῦ. 
and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for aseason. 
Παραχρῆμα." δὲ" οἐπέπεσεν" ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν ἀχλὺς Kai σκότος, Kai 
And immediately fell upon him amist and darkness, and 
περιάγων ἐζήτει χειραγωγούς. 12 τότε ἰδὼν 

going about he sought some to lead [him] by the hand, Then *having ‘seen 
ὁ ἀνθύπατος τὸ γεγονὸς ἐπίστευσεν, Ῥἐκπλησσόμενος ἐπὶ 


‘the *proconsul what had happened believed, being astonished at 
Ty διδαχῇ τοῦ κυρίου. 
the teaching ofthe Lord. 

13 ᾿Αναχθέντες.δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς Πάφου οἱ περὶ τὸν" 


And having sailed from Paphos ([?with] *those *about (*him) 
Παῦλον ἦλθον εἰς Πέργην τῆς Παμφυλίας. τΙωάννης «δὲ 
*Paul came to Perga of Pamphylia ; and John 


? , > ? ? ~ « , 2 c , ᾽ 
ἀποχωρήσας ἀπ αὐτῶν ὑπέστρεψεν εἰς ἱεροσόλυμα. 14 av- 


having departed from them returned to Jerusalem, *They 
τοὶ δὲ διελθόντες ἀπὸ τῆς Πέργης παρεγένοντο εἰς ᾽Αν- 
‘put, having passed through from Perga, came to An- 


τιόχειαν “τῆς Πισιδίας," καὶ ᾿εἰσελθόντες" εἰς THY συναγωγὴν 


tioch of Pisidia, and having gone into the pynsgogae 
τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῶν σαββάτων ἐκάθισαν. 15 Μετὰ. δὲ τὴν ἀνά- 
on the tsabbath they sat down. Andaiter the  read- 


γνωσιν τοῦ νόμου καὶ τῶν προφητῶν ἀπέστειλαν οἱ ἀρχισυνά- 


ing ofthe law andofthe prophets ®sent ‘the rulers %0f 
wyot πρὸς αὐτούς, AEYOVTEC, ” ᾿Ανῦρες ἀδελφοί, εἰ" ἔστιν 
the *synagogue to them, saying, Men brethren, if there is 


301 


Jews: and they had 
also John to their min- 
ister, 6 And when they 
had gone through the 
isle umto Paphos, they 
found a certain sor- 
cerer, ἃ false prophet, 
a Jew, whose name 
was Bar-jesus:7 which 
was with the deputy 
of the country, Sergius 
Paulus, a prudent man; 
who called for Barna- 
bas and Saul, and de- 
sired to hear the word 
of God. 8 But Elymas 
the sorcerer (for so is 
his name by inter- 
pretation) withstood 
them, seeking to turn 
away the deputy from 
the faith. 9 Then Sau 
(who also ὦ ca 
Paul,) filled with the 
Holy Ghost, set his 
eyes on him, 10 and 
said, O full of all sub- 
tilty and all mischief, 
thou child of the de- 
vil, thou enemy of 
all righteousness, wilt 
thou not cease to per- 
vert the right ways of 
the Lord? 11 And now, 
behold, the hand of 
the Lord is upon thee, 
and thou shalt be 
blind, not seeing the 
sun for a season. And 
immediately there fell 
on him a mist anda 
darkness ; and he went 
about seeking some,to 
lead him by the hand 
12 Then the deputy, 
when he saw what was 
done, believed, being 
astonished at the doc- 
trine of the Lord, 


13 Now when Paul 
and his company loos- 
ed from Paphos, they 
came to Pergain Pam- 
phylia: and John de- 
parting from them re- 
turned to Jerusalem. 
14 But when they de- 
parted from Perga, 
they came to Antioch 
in Pisidia, and went 
into the synagogue on 
the sabbath day, and 
sat down. 15 And after 
the reading of the law 
and the prophets the 
rulers of the syna- 
gogue sent unto them 
saying, Ye men a 
brethren, if ye have 


μἸωάνην Tr. 1 + ὅλην (the) whole GLTTraw. 
wood τ. 1 — καὶ LTTrAW. 
Ρ ἐκπληττόμενος Tr. 
t ἐλθόντες TITr. 


— τοῦ (read of [the]) GLTtraw. 
4 — τὸν LTTrAW. τ Ἰωάνης Tr. 
Υ + τις any (word) LTTraw 


J+ ἄνδρα a man LTTrAW. 
Terr. 
5 τὴν Πισιδίαν LTTra. 


k Bap- 
ο ἔπεσεν LTTr. 


302 


any word of exhorta- 
tion for the people, 
sayon. 16 Then ΓΤ 88] 
stood up, and beck- 
oning with Ais hand 
said, Men of Israel, 
and ye that fear God, 
give audience. 17 The 
God of this people of 
Israel chose our fa- 
thers, and exalted the 
people when they 
dwelt as strangers in 
the land of Egypt, and 
with an high arm 
brought he them out 
of it. 18 And about 
the time of forty years 
suffered he their man- 
ners in the wilderness. 
19 And when he had 
destroyed seven na- 
tions in the land of 
Chanaan, he divided 
their land to them by 
lot. 20 And after that 
he gave unto them 
judges about the space 
of four hundred and 
fifty years,until Samu- 
el the prophet. 21 And 
afterward they desired 
2 king: and God gave 
unto them Saul the 
son of Cis, a man of 
the tribe of Benjamin, 
by the space of forty 
years. 22 And when he 
had removed him, he 
raised up unto them 
David to be their king; 
to whom also he gave 
testimony, and said, 
I have found David 
the son of Jesse,a man 
after mine own heart, 
which shall fulfil ali 
my will. 23 Of this 
man’s seed hath God 
according to his pro- 
mise raised unto Is- 
rael a Saviour, Jesus: 
24 when John had first 
preached before his 
coming the baptism 
of repentance to all 
the people of Israel. 
25 And as John ful- 
filled his course, he 
said, Whom think ye 
thatI am? I am not 
he. But, behold, there 
cometh one after me, 
whose shoes of his feet 
I am not worthy to 
loose. 26 Men and 
brethren, children of 
the stock of Abraham, 
and whosoever among 
you feareth God, to 


TIIPAS EIS. XIII. 
λόγος ἐν ὑμῖν" παρακλήσεως πρὸς τὸν λαόν, λέγετε. 
aword among you of exhortation to the people, speak, 
16 ᾿Αναστὰς. δὲ Παῦλος, καὶ κατασείσας τῇ χειρί, εἶπεν, 
And *haying “risen Ρ ‘Paul, and making a sign with the hand, said, 
” x’ ~ il ‘ « , A , 7 , 
Avdpec * Ισραηλῖται," καὶ ot φοβούμενοι τὸν θεόν, ἀκούσατε. 
Men Israelites, and those fearing God, hearken. 
17 ὁ θεὸς τοῦ.λαοῦ.τούτου ΥἹσραὴλ" ἐξελέξατο τοὺς πατέρας 
The God of this people Israel chose *fathers 
ἡμῶν: καὶ τὸν λαὸν ὕψωσεν ἐν τῇ παροικίᾳ ἐν 7 
Your, and the *people ‘exalted in the sojourning in [the] land 
ΞΑἰγύπτῳ," Kai μετὰ βραχίονος ὑψηλοῦ ἐξήγαγεν αὐτοὺς ἐξ 
of Egypt, and with Sarm 1a *high brought them out of 
αὐτῆς 18 καὶ ὡς ἅτεσσαρακονταετῆ" χρόνον ϑέτροπο- 
it, and about *forty *years (‘the] “time he bore 
φόρησεν αὐτοὺς" ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ. 19 καὶ καθελὼν ἔθνη ἑπτὰ 
“manners their in the desert. Agd having destroyed “nations 'seyen 
ἐν 7 Χαναάν, “κατεκληροδότησεν" Δαὐτοϊς" τὴν.γῆν.αὐ- 
in [the] land of Canaan, he gave by lot to them their land. 
τῶν. 20 *kai μετὰ ταῦτα, ὡς ἔτεσιν τετρακοσίοις καὶ 


And after thesethings about ‘years ‘four “hundred “and 
πεντήκοντα! ἔδωκεν κριτὰς ἕως Σαμουὴλ frov' προφήτου" 
*fitty he gave judges until Samuel the prophet. 


21 κἀκεῖθεν ἠτήσαντο βασιλέα, καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ὁ θεὸς 
Andthen they askedfor aking, and “gave “*to *them God 
τὸν Σαοὺλ υἱὸν &Kic," ἄνδρα ἐκ φυλῆς "Βενιαμίν," ἔτη 
Saul son of Cis, aman _  of(the] tribe of Benjamin, “years 
ἱτεσσαράκοντα." 22 καὶ μεταστήσας αὐτὸν ἤγειρεν “adroic 


forty. And having removed him he raised up to them 
τὸν AaBid" εἰς βασιλέα, ᾧ καὶ εἶπεν μαρτυρήσας, 
David for king, to whom also *he *said ‘having *borne *witness, 


Evpoy 'AaBid" τὸν τοῦ Ἰεσσαί, ἄνδρα 
Ifound David the [son] of Jesse, aman according to 


μου, ὃς ποιήσει πάντα τὰ.θελήματά.μου. 23 Τούτου 


κατὰ τὴν καρδία» 
*heart 


tmy, who willdo all my will. *Of "this [*man,] 

ὁ θεὸς ἀπὸ τοῦ σπέρματος κατ᾿ ἐπαγγελίαν "ἤγειρεν" τῷ 
7God ‘of 7the 3seed according to promise raised up 

Ἰσραὴλ σωτῆρα Ἰησοῦν, 24 προκηρύξαντος "Ἰωάννου" 


ἕο Israel a Saviour Jesus, “having “before *proclaimed 1John 


πρὸ προσώπου τῆς. .εἰσόδου.αὐτοῦ βάπτισμα μετανοίας 
before [the] face of his entrance a baptism of repentance 
παντὶ τῷ λαῷ ᾿Ισραήλ. 25 ὡς. δὲ ἐπλήρου “ὁ! ΡΙωάννης"! 


to all Andas *was *fulfilling +John 
τὸν δρόμον. ἔλεγεν, “Τίνα pe! ὑπονοεῖτε εἶναι; οὐκ εἰμὶ 


the people of Israel, 


{his} course, he said, Whom me doyesuppose tobe? “Not “am 
ἐγώ, ἀλλ’ ἰδού, ἔρχεται μετ᾽ ἐμέ, οὗ οὐκ.εἰμὶ ἄξιος τὸ ὑπό- 
1I [hej], but lo, hecomes after me, of whomIamnot worthy the san- 


δημα τῶν ποδῶν λῦσαι. 26 ΄Ανδρες ἀδελφοί, υἱοὶ γένους 

dal ofthe feet to loose. Men brethren, sons of [the] race 
᾿Αβραάμ, καὶ ot ἔν ὑμῖν φοβούμενοι τὸν θεόν, τὑμῖν" ὁ 
of Abraham, and those among you fearing God, toyou the 


Ὑ ἐν ὑμῖν λόγος LETrW. λεῖτι - 
> ἐτροφοφόρησεν αὐτοὺς he nourished them GLTaw. 
4 — αὐτοῖς TTr[ A]. 


κονταέτη TTrA. 
GLTITraw. 


* Αἰγύπτου LIr.  Teaoepa- 
© κατεκληρονόμησεν 
© ὡς ἔτεσιν τετρακοσίοις καὶ πεντήκοντα" καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα (read 


χ Ἰσραηλεῖται τ. Y -- Ἰσραὴλ α. 


their land about four hundred and fifty years. And after these things he gave, &.) 


LTTrw. 


GLTTraw. 


f — τοῦ TTr[A]. 
Κ τὸν Δαυεὶδ αὐτοῖς LTTraA; Aavid GW. 
" ᾿Ιωάνου Tr. 


8 Kets Keis LtTra. h Βενιαμείν LFTrA. 1 τεσσεράκοντα TTrA. 
1 Δανεὶδ τττα ; AaviéGw. πὶ ἤγαγεν brought 


°—oumtrra. Ρ Ἰωάνης τ. 4 Τί ἐμὲ LTTraA. τ ἡμῖν to us TA. 


ΧΊΠ. ACTS: 


λόγος τῆς.σωτηρίας.ταύτης "ἀπεστάλη" 27 ol-yao κατοικοῦν- 
word of this salvation was sent : for those dwelling 


τες ἐν Ἱερουσαλὴμ καὶ οἱ. ἄρχοντες. αὐτῶν. τοῦτον ἀγνοήσαντες 
in Jerusalem and their rulers, him not having known 


καὶ τὰς φωνὰς τῶν προφητῶν τὰς κατὰ πᾶν σάββατον ἀνα- 


and the voices ofthe prophets who on every sabbath are 
γινωσκομένας. κρίναντες ἐπλήρωσαν" 28 καὶ μηδεμίαν 
read, “having “judged [Shim] "they “fulfilled. And no one 


αἰτίαν θανάτου εὑρόντες ἠτήσαντο ᾿Πιλάτον᾽ ἀναιρεθῆναι 
cause of death having found they begged Pilate to put “to *death 
αὐτόν. 29 we.dé ἐτέλεσαν “ἅπαντα' τὰ περὶ αὐτοῦ γε- 
*him. And when they finished allthings that concerning him had 
γραμμένα. καθελόντες ἀπὸ τοῦ ξύλου. ἔθηκαν εἰς 
been written, having taken fhim] down from the tree, they put {him} in 
μνημεῖον. 30 ὁ δὲ θεὸς ἤγειρεν αὐτὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν. 
a tomb ; but God Taised him from among{[the}] dead. 
31 ὃς ὦφθη ἐπὶ ἡμέρας πλείους τοῖς συναναβᾶσιν αὐτῷ 
who appeared for days 1many tothose who came up with him 
ἀπὸ τῆς Γαλιλαίας εἰς Ἱερουσαλήμ. οἵτινες δ εἰσιν μάρτυρες 
from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are *witnesses 
αὐτοῦ πρὸς τὸν λαόν. 82 καὶ ἡμεῖς 5“ ὑμᾶς εὐαγγελιζόμεθα 
1ῃ15 to the people. And we to you announce the glad tidings— 
τὴν πρὸς τοὺς πατέρας ἐπαγγελίαν γενομένην, OTL ταύτην 
the *to *the ‘fathers +promise made, that this 
ὁ θεὸς ἐκπεπλήρωκεν τοῖς τέκνοις αὐτῶν ἡμῖν." ἀναστήσας 
God has fulfilled ‘children “their ‘tous, having raised up 
᾿Ιησοῦν" 33 ὡς καὶ ἐν *r@ Ψψαλμῷ τῷ δευτέρῳ γέγραπται." 
Jesus ; as also in the “*psaim 1second it has been written, 
Υἱός pov εἶ σύ. ἐγὼ σήμερον γεγέννηκά σε. 34 Ὅτι. δὲ 
*Son ‘my ‘thou ασί, I to-day have begotten thee. And that 
ἀνέστησεν αὐτὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν, μηκέτι μέλλοντα ὑπο- 
he raised him from among [the] dead, uomore tobe about to 
στρέφειν εἰς διαφθοράν. οὕτως εἴρηκεν. Ὅτι δώσω ὑμῖν τὰ 
return to corruption, thus hespoke: I will give to you the 
ὕσια “AaBid' τὰ πιστά. 85 did" καὶ ἔν ἑτέρῳ λέγει, 
*mercies *of ‘David 1faithful. Wherefore also in another hesays, 
Oh δώσεις τὸν ὕσιόνισου ἰδεῖν διαφθοράν. 36 *AaBid' 
Thou wilt not suffer thy Holy One tosee corruption. “David 
piv yao ἰδίᾳ γενεᾷ ὑπηρετήσας τῇ τοῦ θεοῦ Bovry 
Sindeed ‘for to his own generation having ministered bythe of “God ‘counsel 
ἐκοιμήθη, Kai προσετέθη πρὸς τοὺς πατέρας αὐτοῦ, Kai εἶδεν 


fell asleep, and was added to his fathers, and saw 
διαφθοράν. 37 ὃν.δὲ ὁ θεὸς ἤγειρεν οὐκ εἶδεν διαφθοράν. 
corruption. But he whom God raisedup didnotsee corruption. 


38 Γνωστὸν οὖν ἔστω ὑμῖν, ἄνδρες ἀδελφοί, ὅτι διὰ τού- 

*Known “therefore *be*it toyou, men brethren, that through this 
τρυ ὑμῖν ἄφεσις ἁμαρτιῶν καταγγέλλεται: 39 “καὶ ἀπὸ 
one toyou remission of sins is announced, and from 
πάντων ὧν οὐκ ἠδυνήθητε ἐν “τῷ! νόμῳ “Μωσέως" δι- 
all things from which ye could not in the law of Moses be 

~ Π ΄ - « , ~ ͵ 

καιωθῆναι, ἐν τούτῳ πᾶς 6 πιστεύων δικαιοῦται. 40 βλέ- 
justified, in him everyone that believes is justified. Take 


5 ἐξαπεστάλη was sent forth LTTraw. t ἸΤειλᾶτον T. 


now LTTraw. x + yoy NOW w. 


Δαυὶδ Gw. Ὁ διότι LITrA. © — καὶ LT[TrA]. @ — τῷ LTTrAa. 


ἡ πάντα GLTTrAWw. 
Υ ἡμῶν to our LTTr; ἀυτῶν ἡμῶν W.- 
(first) Ψαλμῷ γέγραπται GTTr; τῷ Ψαλμῷ yey. τῷ πρώτῳ (δευτέρῳ AW) LAW. 

© Mwiicews GLTTrAW. 


353 


you is the word of this 
salvation sent. 27 For 
they that dwell at Je- 
rusalem, and their rm- 
lers, because they knew 
him not. nor yet the 
voices of the prophets 
which are read every 
sabbath day, they have 
fulfilled them in con- 
demning him. 28 And 
though they found no 
cause of death in him, 
yet desired they Pilate 
that he should be slain. 
29 And when they had 
fulfilled ali that was 
written of him, they 
took him down from 
the tree, and laid him 
in asepuichre. 20 But 
God raised him from 
the dead: 3land he 
was seen many daysof 
them which came up 
with him from Galilee 
to Jerusalem, who are 
his witnesses unto the 
people. 32 And we de- 
clare unto you glad 
tidings, how that the 
promise which was 
made unto the fathers, 
33 God hath fulfilled 
the same unto us their 
children, in that he 
hath raised up Jesus 
again; as it is also 
written in the second 
psalm, Thou art my 
Son, this day have I 
begotten thee. 34 And 
as concerning that he 
raised him up from 
the dead, now no more 
to return to corrup- 
tion, he said on this 
wise, I will give you 
the sure mercies of 
David. 35 Wherefore 
he saith also in an- 
other psalm, Thou 
shalt not suffer thine 
Holy One to see cor- 
ruption. 36 For David, 
after he had served his 
own generation by the 
will of God, fell on 
sleep, and was iaid un- 
to his fathers. and saw 
corruption : 37 but he, 
whom God raised a- 
gain, saw no corrup- 
tion. 38 Be it known 
unto you therefore, 
men and _ brethren, 
that through this mat 
is preached unto you 
the forgiveness of 
sins: 39 and by him 
all that believe are 
justified from 81} 
things, from which ye 
could not be justified 
by the law of Moses. 


w+ νῦν 
~ 2 
7 τῷ πρώτῳ 
a Δανεὶδ LTTrA ; 


AA 


984 


40 Beware therefore, 
lest that come upon 
you, which is spoken of 
in the prophets ; 41 Be- 
hold, yedespisers, and 
wonder, and perish: 
for I work a work in 
your days, a work 
which ye shall in no 
wise believe, though a 
man declare it unto 
you. 42 And when the 
Jews were gone out of 
the synagogue. the 
Gentiles besought that 
these words might be 
preached to them the 
next sabbath. 43 Now 
when thecongregation 
was broken up, many 
of the Jews and reli- 
gious proselytes fol- 
lowed Paul and Bar- 
nabas : who, speaking 
to them, persuaded 
them to continue in 
the grace of God. 


44 And the nextsab- 
bath day came almost 
the whole city toge- 
ther to hear the word 
of God. 45 But when 
the Jews saw the mul- 
titudes,they were filled 
with envy, and spake 
against those things 
which were spoken 
by Paul, contradict- 
ing and blaspheming. 
46 Then Paul and Bar- 
nabas waxed bold, and 
said, It was necessary 
that the word of God 
should first have been 
spoken to you: but 
seeing ye put it from 
you, and judge your- 
selves unworthy of 
everlasting life,lo, we 
turn to the Gentiles. 
47 For sohath the Lord 
commanded us, saying, 
I have set thee to be a 
light of the Gentiles, 
that thou shouldest be 
for salvation unto the 
ends of the earth. 
48 And when the Gen- 
tiles heard this, they 
were giad, and glori- 
fied the word of the 
Lord: and as many as 
were ordained to eter- 
nal life believed. 
49 And the word of the 
Lord was published 
throughout all the re- 
gion. 50Butthe Jews 
stirred up the devout 
and honourable wo- 
men, and the chief 


f — ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς LITr[A]. 


departed) GLTTraw. 
m7e GA. 
& λαλουμένοις LTTr. 
v — δὲ but xrrr. 


Ὁ ἐχομένῳ following GLAW. 


Ww Kad’ 1. 


IPA EI. XIII. 
ETE οὖν pn ἐπέλθῃ [ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς τὸ εἰρημένον ἔν 
heed therefore that it may ποῦ comeupon you that which has been said in 
~ , a” ε ΄ ‘ , 
τοῖς προφήταις, 41 Ἴδετε, οἱ καταφρονηταί, Kai θαυμάσατε 
the prophets, Behold, ye despisers, and wonder 
καὶ ἀφανίσθητε: ὅτι ἔργον Siyw ἐργάζομαι" ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις 
and perish ; for a work I work in *days 
ὑμῶν, ἔργον "ῴ' οὐ.μὴ πιστεύσητε ἐάν τις ἐκδιηγῆται 
your, a work which in no wise ye would believe if one should declare it 
ὑμῖν. 42 ᾿Εξιόντων. δὲ ἱὲκ τῆς συναγωγῆς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων," 
toyou. But *having*departed δἔγοτη δ 8 ‘synagogue ‘the *Jews, 
παρεκάλουν *ra ἔθνη" εἰς τὸ μεταξὺ σάββατον λαληθῆναι 
1°hesought ®the °Gentiles on the next sabbath “to *be *spoken 
αὐτοῖς τὰ ῥήματα.ταῦτα. 43 λυθείσης. δὲ τῆς συναγωγῆς; 
Sto “them 1these *words. And *having *broken up'the *synagogue, 
ἠκολούθησαν πολλοὶ THY ᾿Ιουδαίων Kai τῶν σεβομένων 
1©followed Smany ‘of *the ®Jews and of '*the ‘worshipping 
προσηλύτων τῷ Παύλῳ καὶ τῷ BapvaBg οἵτινες προσλα- 
‘*proselytes Paul and Barnabas, who speak- 
λοῦντες αὐτοῖς ἔπειθον αὐτοὺς 
ing to them persuaded them 


θεοῦ. 
of God. 


44 Tp dé! υἐρχομένῳ" σαββάτῳ σχεδὸν πᾶσα ἡ πόλις 
And on the coming sabbath almost all the city 
συνήχθη ἀκοῦσαι τὸν λόγον “τοῦ θεοῦ." 45 ἰδόντες. δὲ 
was gathered together tohear the word of God. But *having*seep 
ΤΩ a ~ 4 ” Ἴ ΄, , ἜΣ , 
οἱ Ιουδαῖοι τοὺς ὄχλους, ἐπλήσθησαν ζήλου, καὶ ἀντέλεγον 


Ἰἐπιμένειν" τῇ χάριτι τοῦ 
to continue inthe grace 


‘the *Jews the crowds, were filled with envy, and contradicted 
ie ὑπὸ Prov! Παύλ ga { Ι τάἀντιλέ pil 
τοῖς ὑπὸ Prov αὐλου εγομένοις," Τἀντιλέγοντες Kat 
the things *by Paul spoken, contradicting and 


βλασφημοῦντες. 46 παῤῥησιασάμενοι." δὲ" ὁ Παῦλος καὶ 0 Βαρ- 
blaspheming. But ‘speaking *boldly 1Paul 7and sBar- 
γνάβας 'εἶπον,, Ὑμῖν ἦν ἀναγκαῖον πρῶτον λαληθῆναι τὸν 
nabas said, To you was necessary first to be spoken the 
λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ" ἐπειδὴ." δὲ" ἀπωθεῖσθε αὐτόν, καὶ οὐκ ἀξίους 
word of God; butsince ye thrust away it, and not worthy 
κρίνετε ἑαυτοὺς τῆς αἰωνίου ζωῆς, ἰδοὺ στρεφόμεθα εἰς τὰ 
ye judge yourselves of eternal life, lo, we turn to the 
» ids A ’ , € ~ « ’ , ’ 
ἔθνη" 47 οὕτως.γὰρ ἐντέταλται ἡμῖν ὁ κύριος, Τέθεικά σε 
Gentiles ; for thus hasenjoined ous the Lord, I have set thee 
εἰς φῶς ἐθνῶν, τοῦ .εἴναί.σε εἰς σωτηρίαν ἕως ἐσχά- 
for a light of [the] Gentiles, ἐμαῦ ἕπου be for salvation to [the] uttermost 
του τῆς γῆς. 48 ᾿Ακούοντα.δὲ τὰ ἔθνη ἔχαιρον, καὶ ἐδόξα- 
part of the earth. And hearing [it] the Gentiles rejoiced, and _ glori- 
ζον τὸν λόγον τοῦ κυρίου, Kai ἐπίστευσαν ὕσοι ἦσαν 
fied the word ofthe Lord, and believed as Many as were 
τεταγμένοι εἰς ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 49 διεφέρετο.δὲ ὁ λόγος τοῦ 
appointed to 1186 eternal. And was carried the word of the 
κυρίου “du ὕλης τῆς χώρας. 50 01-6& ᾿Ιουδαῖοι παρώτρυναν 
Lord through *whole ‘the country. But the Jews excited 
τὰς σεβομένας γυναῖκας "καὶ" τὰς εὐσχήμονας Kai τοὺς προώ- 
the worshipping *women tand *honourable and _ the principal 


8 ἐργάζομαι ἔγὼ LTTrAW. OLTTrAW. ἱἰαὐτῶν they (having 
k — τὰ ἔθνη (read they besought) GLTTraw. '! προσμένειν GLTTrAW. 
ο τοῦ κυρίου of the Lord trtr, Ρ — τοῦ Lrtr[a]. 
¥ — ἀντιλέγοντες καὶ LTr[A]. S ve LTTrA. t εἶπαν LTTrA. 


X — καὶ GLTTrAW. 


MILE, XLV. A EDS: 


τους THC πόλεως. καὶ ἐπήγειραν διωγμὸν ἐπὶ τὸν Παῦλον 
men ofthe city, and stirred up a persecution against Paul 
A y A i ’ ‘A > , > 4 > A ~ « , > 
καὶ Yrov' Βαρνάβαν, καὶ ἐξέβαλον αὐτοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν ὁρίων αὐ- 
and Barnabas, and _ cast out them from their borders. 
τῶν. 51 ot.6& ἐκτιναξάμενοι τὸν κονιορτὸν τῶν. ποδῶν Ξαὐτῶν" 
But they having shaken off the dust of their feet 


ἐπ᾿ αὐτούς, ἦλθον εἰς ᾿Ικόνιον. 52 οἱ “δὲ μαθηταὶ ἐπλη- 


against them, came to Iconium. Andthe disciples were 
ροῦντο χαρᾶς καὶ πνεύματος ἁγίου. 
filled with joy and[the] Spirit lHoly. 


14 ᾿Εγένετο.δὲ ἐν ᾿Ικονίῳ κατὰ.τὸ αὐτὸ εἰσελθεῖν αὐτοὺς 


Απᾶ 1ὖ came ἕο pass in Iconium 2together Sentered they 
εἰς THY συναγωγὴν τῶν Ιουδαίων, Kai λαλῆσαι οὕτως ὥστε 
into the synagogue of the Jews, and spoke so that 


πιστεῦσαι Ἰουδαίων.τε καὶ Ἑλλήνων πολὺ πλῆθος. 2 οἱ δὲ 
*believed ‘both οὗ “Jews *and 5Greeks ‘a 7great Snumber. But the 


Ὀἀπειθοῦντες" ᾿Τουδαῖοι ἐπήγειραν καὶ ἐκάκωσαν τὰς ψυχὰς 
disobeying Jews stirredup and made evil-affected the souls 
τῶν ἐθνῶν κατὰ τῶν ἀδελφῶν. 3 ἱκανὸν μὲν οὖν χρόνον 
of the Gentiles against the brethren. A long *therefore ‘time 
διέτριψαν παῤῥησιαζόμενοι ἐπὶ τῷ κυρίῳ, τῷ μαρτυ- 
they stayed, speaking boldly, [confiding]in the Lord, who bore wit- 
ροῦντι “ τῷ λόγῳ τῆς. χάριτος. αὐτοῦ, “kai! "διδόντι" σημεῖα Kai 
mess tothe word of his grace, and giving signs and 
τέρατα γίνεσθαι διὰ τῶν χειρῶν αὐτῶν. 4 ἐσχίσθη.δὲ τὸ 
wonders tobe done through their hands. And was divided the 
πλῆθος τῆς πόλεως" Kai οἱ. μὲν ἦσαν σὺν τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις 
multitude of the city, and some were with the Jews 
οἱιδὲ σὺν τοῖς ἀποστόλοις. 5 Ὥς. δὲ ἐγένετο ὁρμὴ τῶν 
andsome with the apostles. And when there was a rush *of “the 
ἐθνῶν τε καὶ Ιουδαίων σὺν τοῖς. ἄρχουσιν. αὐτῶν, ὑβρίσαι 
“Gentiles ‘both and Jews with their rulers, to insult 


καὶ λιθοβολῆσαι αὐτούς, 6 συνιδόντες κατέφυγον εἰς τὰς 
and to stone them, being aware they fled to the 


πόλεις τῆς Λυκαονίας,  Avoroay, καὶ Δέρβην, καὶ τὴν περί- 
cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, and Derbe, and the country 
χωρον, ἢ κἀκεῖ δῆσαν εὐαγγελιζόμενοι." 
around, and there they were announcing the glad tidings. 
8 Kai τις ἀνὴρ δὲν Λύστροις ἀδύνατος" τοῖς ποσὶν ἐκά- 
And a certain man in Lystra, impotent inthe feet, sat, 
Onto, χωλὸς ἐκ κοιλίας μητρὸς. αὐτοῦ Ἰὑπάρχων," ὃς 
lame from [the] womb of his mother being, who 
οὐδέποτε ἔἘπεριπεπατήκει." 9 οὗτος  'jKover' τοῦ Παύλου 
never had walked. This [man] heard Paul 
λαλοῦντος" ὃς ἀτενίσας αὐτῷ. καὶ ἰδὼν ὅτι πίστιν 
speaking, who, having looked intently on him, and seeing that faith 
ἔχει" Tov σωθῆναι, 10 εἶπεν μεγάλῃ "τῇ" φωνῇ, “᾿Ανάστηθι 


356 


men of the city, and 
Taised persecution a- 
gainst Paul and Bar- 
nabas, and expelled 
them out of their 
coasts. 51 But they 
shook off the dust of 
their feet against 
them, and came unto 
Iconium. 52 And the 
disciples were filled 
with joy, and with the 
Holy Ghost. 


XTY. And it came 
to pass in Iconium, 
that they went both 
together into the syna- 
gogue of the Jews, 
and so spake, that a 
great multitude both 
of the Jews and also 
of the Greeks believed. 
2 But the unbelieving 
Jews stirred up the 
Gentiles, and made 
their minds evil af- 
fected against the 
brethren. 3 Longtime 
therefore abode they 
speaking boldly in the 
Lord, which gave tes- 
timony unto the word 
of his grace, and 
granted signs and 
wonders to be done by 
their hands. 4 But 
the multitude of the 
city was divided: and 
part held with the 
Jews, and part with 
the apostles. 5 And 
when there was an as- 
sault made both of the 
Gentiles, and also of 
the Jews with their 
rulers, to use them de- 
spitefully, and tostone 
them, 6 they were 
ware of it, and fled un- 
to Lystra and Derbe, 
cities of Lycaonia, and 
unto the region that 
lieth round about: 
7 and there’ they 
preached the gospel. 


8 And there sat a 
certain man at Lystra, 
impotent in his feet, 
being a cripple from 
his mother’s womb, 
who never had walked: 
9the same heard Paul 
speak: who stedfastly 
beholding him, and 
perceiving that he had 
faith to be healed, 
10said with a loud 
voice, Stand upright 
on thy feet. And he 
leaped and walked. 


he has to be healed, said with a loud voice, Stand up 
᾽ ‘ 4 56 ? θ , ‘ pe ll ‘ , 
ἐπὶ τοὺς πόδας. σου ὀρθός. Kat ΡῬἥλλετο καὶ περιεπάτει. 
on thy feet upright. And he sprang up and walked. 
Υ — τὸν LTTrA. 2 — αὐτῶν (read of the feet) Lrtra. 8. τε LTrA. 


LTTrA. ς + ἐπὶ to (the) T. d — καὶ GLTTrAW. 
& εὐαγγελιζόμενοι ἦσαν LTTrA. h ἀδύνατος ἐν Λύστροις T. 

Κ περιεπεπατήκει Ἑ ; περιεπάτησεν Walked LTTra. ἤκουσεν LITr. 
2 — τη. 


name of the Lord Jesus Christ τὰ. P ἥλατο GLTTraw. 


© διδόντος T. 
1 — ὑπάρχων GLITrAW. 

m ἔχει πίστιν LTTrA. 
© + Σοὶ λέγω ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ To thee I say in the 


Ὁ ἀπειθήσαντες 
f4 εἰς tO L. 


356 
11 And when the peo- 
ue saw what Panl had 
one, they lifted up 
their voices, saying in 
the speech of Lycaonia, 
The gods are come 
down to us in the like- 
ness of men. 12 And 
they called Barnabas, 
Jupiter; and Paul, 
Mercurius, because he 
was the chief speaker. 
18 Then the priest of 
Jupiter, which was be- 
fore their city, brought 
oxen and garlands 
unto the gates, and 
would have done sacri- 
fice with the people. 
14 Which when the 
apostles, Barnabas and 
Paul, heard ef, they 
rent their clothes, and 
ran in among the peo- 
ple, crying ont, 15 and 
saying, Sirs, why doye 
these things? Wealso 
are men of like pas- 
Sions with you, es 
preach unto you that 
ye should turn from 
these vanities unto 
the living God, which 
made heaven, and 
earth, and the sea, and 
all things that are 
therein: 16 who in 
times past suffered all 
nations to walk in 
their own ways. 17 Ne- 
vertheless he left not 
himself without wit- 
mess, in that he did 
good, and gaveusrain 
from heaven, and 
fruitful seasons, fill- 
ing our hearts with 
food and _ gladness. 
18 And with these say- 
ings scarce restrained 
they the people, that 
they had not done 
sacrifice unto them. 
19 Ard there came 
thither certain Jews 
from Antioch and Ico- 
nium, who persuaded 
the people, and, having 
stoned Paul, drew Atm 
out of the city, sup- 
posing he had been 
ead. 20 Howbeit, as 
the disciples stood 
round about him, hs 
rose up, and came in- 
to the city: and the 
next day he departed 
with Barnabas to Der- 
be. 2] And when they 
kad preached the gos- 
peltothatcity, and had 
taught many, they re- 
turned again to Lys- 


WPAS EIS. XIV. 
11 Οἱ δὲν ὄχλοι ἰδόντες ὃ ἐποίησεν “ὁ Παῦλος, ἐπῆραν 
Απᾷ the crowds having seen what “did +Paul, lifted up 


τὴν. φωνὴν. αὐτῶν Δυκαονιστὶ λέγοντες, Oi θεοὶ ὁμοιωθέντες 
their voice in Lycsonian saying, The gods, having become like 


ἀνθρώποις κατέβησαν πρὸς ἡμᾶς" 12 ἐκάλουν.τε τὸν ‘wer! 
men, are come down Ὁ us. And they called 
Βαρνάβαν Δία: τὸν. δὲ. Παῦλον Ἑρμῆν, ἐπειδὴ) αὐτὸς ἣν ὁ 
Barnabas Zeus; and Paul Hermes, because he was the 
ἡγούμενος TOV λόγου. 13 Yo.dé! ἱερεὺς τοῦ Awe τοῦ ὄντος 
leader in speaking. And the priest of Zeus who was 
πρὸ τῆς. πόλεως. αὐτῶν." ταύρους Kai στέμματα ἐπὶ τοὺς 


before their city, oxen and garlands to the 
πυλῶνας ἐνέγκας. σὺν τοῖς ὄχλοις ἤθελεν θύειν. 14 ᾿Ακού- 
gates having brought, with the crowds wished ἰὼ sacrifice. 7Having 


σαντες δὲ ot ἀπόστολοι Βαρνάβας καὶ Παῦλος, διαῤῥήξαντες 
Sheard ‘but *the ‘apostles *Barnabas ‘and ‘Paul, having rent 
τὰ ἱματια αὐτῶν εἰσεπήδησαν" εἰς τὸν ὄχλον, κράζοντες 
their garments, rushed in to the crowd, erying 
15 καὶ λέγοντες, “Avdoec, Ti ταῦτα ποιεῖτε; Kai ἡμεῖς 
and saying, Men, why these things do ye? also we 
ὁμοιοπαθεῖς ἐσμὲν ὑμῖν ἄνθρωποι, εὐαγγελιζόμενοι 
Sof*like Yeelings ‘are ‘with τοὺ men, announcing the glad tidings to 
ὑμᾶς ἀπὸ τούτων τῶν καταίων ἐπιστρέφειν ἐπὶ Yrov' θεὸν 
you ἔτου these vanities to turn to God 
στὸν ζῶντα. ὃς ἐποίησεν τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν Kai THY 
the living, who made the heaven and the earth and the 
θάλασσαν καὶ πάντα τὰ ἐν αὐτοῖς" 16 ὃς ἐν ταῖς παρ- 
sea and all the things in them; who in the 
ῳχημέναις γενεαῖς εἴασεν πάντα τὰ ἔθνη πορεύεσθαι ταὶς 
past generations suffered all the nations to go 
ὁδοῖς. αὐτῶν: 17 ἑκαί τοι. γε οὐκ ἀμάρτυρον ϑἑαυτὸν" ἀφῆ- 
in their [own] ways, though indeed not without witness himself be 
κεν ἀγαθοποιῶν, οὐρανόθεν “ἡμῖν" ὑετοὺς διδοὺς Kai καιροὺς 
left, Going good, fromheaven tous 47rains ‘giving and “seasons 
καρποφόρους, ἐμπιπλῶν τροφῆς Kai εὐφροσύνης τὰς καρδίας 


‘fruitful, filling with food and gladness the hearts 
ἡμῶν. 18 Kai ταῦτα λέγοντες = κατέπαυσαν τοὺς 
of us. And thesethings saying diy § they stopped the 


ὄχλους τοῦ.μὴ.θύειν αὐτοῖς. 19 “EwHAGoy' δὲ ἀπὸ ᾿Αντιοχείας 
erowds from sacrificing to them. But thither came from Antioch 
καὶ Ἰκονίου Ἰουδαῖοι, καὶ πείσαντες τοὺς ὄχλους, Kai λιθά- 
and Iconium Jews, and having persuaded the crowds, and having 
σαντες τὸν Παῦλον, ἔσυρον ἔξω τῆς πόλεως, ἱνομίσαντες" 
stoned Panl, drew [him] outside the city, supposing 
αὐτὸν ἐτεθνάναι." 20 κυκλωσάντων.δὲ adroy τῶν μαθητῶν," 
him τὸ have died. But Shaving ‘surrounded ‘Shim ‘the “disciples, 
ἀναστὰς εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὴν πόλιν" Kai ἐπαύριον ἐξὴῆλ- 
having risen up heentered into the city. And onthe morrow he went 
θεν σὺν τῷ Βαρνάβᾳ sic Δέρβην. 21 ἰεὐαγγελισάμενοί" τε 
away with Barnabas to Derbe. And having announced the glad tidingsto 
τὴν. πόλιν. ἐκείνην, καὶ μαθητεύσαντες ἱκανοὺς ὑπέστρεψαν εἰς 
that city, and having discipled many they returned to 


4 ' re LTA. 
city) GLTTraw. 


xacTorye GAW ; — ye LTTr. 
4 ὑμῶν οὗ you GLTTra. 
τῶν μαθητῶν αὐτὸν LTTraA. 


GLUT[Tr]A. 
LTTra. 


Ss — ὃ LTTYAW. 
x ἀξεπήδησαν rushed out GLITraw. 


τ 6 τε LTTrA. * — αὐτῶν (read the 
Σ — τὸν LTTraW. 2 καίτοι LT; 
5 αὐτὸν LTTr. Ὁ ἀγαθουργῶν LTTrAW. ς ὑμῖν to you 
© ἐπῆλθαν LTTra. ἵἱ νομίζοντες τττὰ. ὃ τεθνηκέναι 
1 εὐαγγελιζόμενοί announcing &c. LT, 


t — μὲν LYTra. 


XIV, XV. ACTS. 


τὴν Λύστραν καὶ Ε᾿Ἶκόνιον καὶ "΄᾿ Ἀντιόχειαν" 22 ἐπιστηρίζοντες 
Lystra and Iconium and Antioch, establishing 

τὰς ψυχὰς τῶν μαθητῶν, παρακαλοῦντες ἐμμένειν τῇ 

the souls ofthe disciples, exhorting (them] to continue in the 
πίστει, Kai ὅτε διὰ πολλῶν θλίψεων δεῖ ἡμᾶς εἰσελθεῖν εἰς 
faith, and that through many tribulations must we enter into 
τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ. 23 χειροτονήσαντες.δὲ αὐτοῖς ἵπρεσ- 
the kingdom of God. And having chosen for them el- 
βυτέρους κατ᾽ ἐκκλησίαν," προσευξάμενοι μετὰ νηστειῶν πα- 
ders in every assembly, having prayed with fastings they 
ρέθεντο αὐτοὺς τῷ κυρίῳ εἰς ὃν πεπιστεύκεισαν. 24 Kai 


committed them tothe Lord, on whom they had believed. And 
διελθόντες τὴν Πισιδίαν ἦλθον εἰς " ΤΙαμφυλίαν:" 25 καὶ 
having passed through Pisidia they came to Pampbylia, and 


λαλήσαντες "ἐν Πέργῃ᾽ τὸν λόγον κατέβησαν εἰς “᾿Αττάλειαν" 
having spoken in Perga the word they came down to Attalia; 


26 κἀκεῖθεν ἀπέπλευσαν εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν, ὅθεν ἦσαν παρα- 
and thence they sailed to Antioch, whence they had been 


δεδομένοι τῇ χάριτι τοῦ θεοῦ εἰς τὸ ἔργον ὃ ἐπλήρωσαν. 
committed tothe grace of God for the work which they fulfilled. 
27 παραγενόμενοι. δὲ καὶ συναγαγόντες τὴν ἐκκλησίαν 
And having arrived and having gathered together the assembly 
Ράνήγγειλαν" ὅσα ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς per αὐτῶν, καὶ ὅτι ἤνοιξεν 
they declared allthat “did ‘God with them, and that he opened 


τοῖς ἔθνεσιν ΟΥΡ ΩΣ πίστεως. 28 διέτριβον.δὲ «ἐκεῖ χρόνον 
to the nations a door of faith. And they stayed there *time 


οὐκ ὀλίγον σὺν τοῖς μαθηταῖς. 
‘not *a*little with the disciples. 


15 Kai τινες κατελθόντες ἀπὸ τῆς Ιουδαίας ἐδίδασκον 


And certain having come down from Judga were teaching 
τοὺς ἀδελφούς, Ὅτι ἐὰν. μὴ eke eae τῷ ἔθει * Μωῦ- 
the brethren, Unless ye be circumcised afterthe custom of Mo- 
σέως ov.dtvacbe σωθῆναι. 2 Γενομένης οὖν" στάσεως 


ses ye cannot be saved. Having taken place therefore a commotion 


καὶ ᾿συζητήσεως" οὐκ ὀλίγης τῷ Παύλῳ Kai τῷ Βαρνάβᾳ πρὸς 
and discussion not alittle by Paul and Barnabas with 
? ΄ » > ,ὔ ~ 4 / , 
αὐτούς, ἔταξαν ἀναβαίνειν Παῦλον καὶ Βαρνάβαν καί 
them, they appointed “ἴο °go “up *Paul 7and = =©6©* Barnabas and 
τινας ἄλλους ἐξ αὐτῶν πρὸς τοὺς ἀποστόλους καὶ 
certain others from amongst them to the apostles and 
πρεσβυτέρους εἰς ἹἹερουσαλήμ, περὶ Tov-Cytnparoe.robrov. 
elders to Jerusalem, about this question. 

3 ot μὲν οὖν προπεμφθέντες ὑπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας διήρ- 
They indeed therefore having been sent forward by the assembly passed 
xovro τὴν ἡ Φοινίκην καὶ *Zapapeay," ἐκδιηγούμενοι τὴν 
through Phoenicia and Samaria, relating the 
ἐπιστροφὴν τῶν ἐθνῶν" Kai ἐποίουν χαρὰν μεγάλην πᾶσιν 
conversion ofthe nations. Andthey caused “joy lgreat to all 
τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς. 4 mapayevopevoroé εἰς Ἱερουσαλὴμ *aze- 
the brethren. And having come to Jerusalem they were 
δέχθησαν" “ὑπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας Kai τῶν ἀποστόλων Kai τῶν 


907 


tra, and to Iconium, 
and Antioch, 22 con- 
firming the souls of 
the disciples, and ex- 
horting them to con- 
tinue in the faith, and 
that we must through 
much tribulation en- 
ter into the kingdom 
of God. 22 And when 
they had ordained 
them elders in every 
church, and had pray- 
ed with fasting, they 
commended them to 
the Lord, on whom 
they believed. 24 And 
after they had passed 
throughout Pisidia, 
they came to Pam- 
phylia. 25 And when 
they had preached the 
word in Perga, they 
went down into Atta- 
lia: 26and thence 
sailed to Antioch, 
from whence they had 
been recommended to 
the grace of God for 
the work which they 
fulfilled. 27And when 
they were come, and 
ha gathered the 
church together, they 
rehearsed all that God 
had done with them, 
and how he had opened 
the door of faith uxte 
the Gentiles. 28 And 
there eed abode long 
time with the disci- 
ples. 


XV. And certain 
men which came down 
from Judza taught 
the brethren, andsaid, 
Except ye be circum- 
cised after the manner 
of Moses, ye cannot be 
saved. 2 en there- 
fore Paul and Barna- 
bas had no small dis- 
sension and disputa- 
tion with them, they 
determined that Paui 
and Barnabas, and 
certain other of them, 
should go up to Jeru- 
salem unto the apo- 
stles and elders abont 
this question. 3 And 
being brought on their 
way by the church, 
they passed through 
Phenice and Samaria, 
declaring the conver- 
sion of the Gentiles: 
and they caused great 
joy unto aH the breth- 
ren. 4 And when they 
were come to Jerusa- 
lem,they were received 


welcomed by the assembly and the apostles and the of the church, and of 
k + εἰς to LTTrA. ! κατ᾽ ἐκκλησίαν πρεσβυτέρους LITrAW. =| ™ + τὴν TTr. 5 εἰς 
τὴν Πέργην Ἵ. ο᾽Ατταλίαν TA. Ρ ἀνήγγελλον LTTrA. 4 — ἐκεῖ GLTTrAW. τ περι- 


τμηθῆτε ye have been circumcised ἹΤΊΤΑ. 8 + 7@ LTTra. 
place) Trr. v ζητήσεως GLITrAW. Ww + τε both Lrtra. 


σόλυμα Tr. 2 παρεδέχθησαν they were received LTTrAW 8 ἀπὸ Tr. 


t δὲ but (having taken 
x Σαμαρίαν 1. 


¥ Ἵερο- 


358 


the apostles and elders, 
and they declared all 
things that God had 
done with them. 5 But 
there rose up certain 
of the sect of the Pha- 
risees which believed, 
saying, That it was 
needful to circumcise 
them, and to command 
them to keep the law 
of Moses. 6 And the 
apostles and_ elders 
came together for to 
consider of this matter. 
7 And when there had 
been much disputing, 
Peter rose up, and 
said unto them, Men 
and brethren, ye know 
how that a good while 
ago God made choice 
among us, that the 
Gentiles by my mouth 
should hear the word 
of the gospel, and be- 
lieve. 8 And God, 
which knoweth the 
hearts, bare them wit- 
ness, giving them the 
Holy Ghost, even as 
he did unto us ; 9and 
put no difference be- 
tween us and them, 
purifying their hearts 
by faith. 10 Now 
therefore why tempt 
ye God, to put a yoke 
upon the neck of the 
disciples, which nei- 
ther our fathers nor 
we were able to bear? 
11 But we believe that 
through the grace of 
the Lord Jesus Christ 
we shall be saved, even 
as they. 12 Then all 
the multitude kept si- 
lence, and gave audi- 
ence to Barnabas and 
Paul, declaring what 
miracles and wonders 
God had wrought a- 
mong the Gentiles by 
them. 13 And after 
they had held their 
peace, James answer- 
ed, saying, Men and 
brethren,hearken unto 
me: 14 Simeon hath 
declared how God at 
the first did visit the 
Gentiles, to take out 
of them a people for 
his name. 15 And to 
this agree the words 
of the prophets ; as it 
is written, 16 After 
this I will return, and 
will build again the 
tabernacle of David, 
whichis fallen down ; 
and I will build again 
the ruins thereof, and 


Ὁ re Tra. 
LTTrAaw. 


i— χριστοῦ GTTrAW. 


LITrA ; Δαυὶδ Gw. 


© συνζητήσεως LA; ζητήσεως TTr. 
€ — αὐτοῖς TTrA. 


WPA EI Σ XV. 

πρεσβυτέρων, ἀνήγγειλάν.τε doa ὁ θεὸς ἐποίησεν μετ᾽ αὐτῶν. 
elders, and they declared allthat God did with them. 

5 ἐξανέστησαν δὲ τινες τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς αἱρέσεως τῶν Φαρισαίων 
And rose up certain of those of the sect ofthe Pharisees 


, , a ~ 
πεπιστευκότες, λέγοντες, Ὅτι δεῖ περιτέμνειν αὐτούς, 
who believed, saying, It is necessary tocircumcise them, 


παραγγέλλειν.τε τηρεῖν τὸν νόμον Μωσέως. 6 Συνήχ- 
and charge [them]to keep the law of Moses. *Were *gathered 


θησαν δὲ! ot ἀπόστολοι Kai οἱ πρεσβύτεροι ἰδεῖν περὶ τοῦ 
*together tand the apostles and the elders tosee about 
λόγου.τούτου. 7 πολλῆς.δὲ συζητήσεως" γενομένης, ἀνα- 


this matter. And much discussion having taken place, “having 
\ τι ἢ = ‘ 7 fy » > ᾽ , € ~ 
στὰς Iletpoc εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτοῦς, Ανὸρες ἀδελφοί, υμεῖς 
“risen *up *Peter said to them, Men brethren, ye 
’ , ε 2 are: ~ ? / d « ‘ ? € ~ ? , iT] 
ἐπίστασθε Ort ad ἡμερῶν ἀρχαίων “ὁ θεὸς ἐν ἡμῖν ἐξελέξατο 
know thatfrom “days ‘early God among us chose 
διὰ τοῦ.στόματός. μου ἀκοῦσαι τὰ ἔθνη τὸν λόγον τοῦ 
by my mouth [for] *to*hear ‘the “nations the word of the 


εὐαγγελίου, καὶ πιστεῦσαι. 8 Kai ὁ καρδιογνώστης θεὸς ἐμαρ- 
glad tidings, πὰ to believe. Andthe heart-knowing God bore 


~ > ~ ‘ ~ A - ‘ τ 
τύρησεν αὐτοῖς, δοὺς “αὐτοῖς τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον, καθὼς καὶ 
witness tothem, giving tothem the Spirit the Holy, as also 
ἡμῖν" 9 καὶ foddév' διέκρινεν μεταξὺ ἡμῶν &re' καὶ αὐτῶν, 
to us, and put no difference between us ‘both and them, 

Ty πίστει καθαρίσας τὰς καρδίας. αὐτῶν. 10 νῦν οὖν τί 
by the faith having purified their hearts. Now therefore why 
πειράζετε τὸν θεόν, ἐπιθεῖναι ζυγὸν ἐπὶ τὸν τράχηλον τῶν 


tempt ye God to put ayoke upon the neck of the 
μαθητῶν, ὃν οὔτε οἱ.πατέρες ἡμῶν οὔτε ἡμεῖς ἰσχύσαμεν 
disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able 


βαστάσαι; 11 ἀλλὰ διὰ τῆς χάριτος κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ 'χριστοῦ" 
to bear ? But by the grace of{[the] Lord Jesus Christ 


πιστεύομεν σωθῆναι, καθ᾽ ὃν.τρόπον κἀκεῖνοι. 12 ᾿Εσίγησεν 
we believe tobe saved, in the same manner as they also. “Kept ‘silence 


δὲ πᾶν τὸ πλῆθος, Kai ἤκουον Βαρνάβα καὶ Παύλου ἐξη- 
land all the multitude, and heard Barnabas and Paul re- 


youpévwy ὅσα ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς σημεῖα καὶ τέρατα ἐν τοῖς 


lating what *did *God ‘signs “and *wonders among the 
ἔθνεσιν Ov αὐτῶν. 13 Mera.cé τὸ.σιγῆσαι αὐτοὺς ἀπεκρίθη 
nations by them. And after were “silent ‘they Fanswered 


᾿Ιάκωβος λέγων, “Avdpec ἀδελφοί, ἀκούσατέ pov. 14 Συμεὼν 
*James, saying, Men brethren, hear me. Simeon 

ἐξηγήσατο καθὼς πρῶτον ὁ θεὸς ἐπεσκέψατο λαβεῖν ἐξ 
related how first God visited totake out of 


ἐθνῶν λαὸν "ἐπὶ" τῷ.ὀνόματι. αὐτοῦ. 15 καὶ τούτῳ συμφω- 


nations apeople for his name, And with this agree 
vovow οἱ λόγοι τῶν προφητῶν, καθὼς γέγραπται, 16 Mera 
the words of the prophets: as it has been written, After 


ἀναστρέψω καὶ ἀνοικοδομήσω τὴν σκηνὴν ‘AaBid' 
Iwillreturn and will buildagain the tabernacle of David 


ταῦτα 
these things 


τὴν πεπτωκυϊαν" καὶ τὰ ""κατεσκαμμένα" αὐτῆς ἀνοικοδομήσω, 
which [15 fallen; and the ruins of it I will build again, 


d ἐν ὑμῖν you (ἡμῖν W) ἐξελέξατο ὁ θεὸς 
f οὐθὲν TTrA. 8. —Te W. b + τοῦ of the GLTTraw. 

« — ἐπὶ (read τῷ ov. αὐτοῦ for his name) LTTraw. 1 Δανεὶδ 
Ὁ κατεστραμμένα Ὑ ; κατεστρεμμένα Tr. 


XV. ACTS. 


καὶ ἀνορθώσω αὐτήν, 17 ὅπως ἂν.ἐκζητήσωσιν οἱ κατάλοιποι 
and willsct up ἘΔ so that Smay “seek 7out ‘the ?residue 
τῶν ἀνθρώπων TOY κύριον, Kai πάντα τὰ ἔθνη ἐφ᾽ οὺς ἐπι- 
Sof *men the Lord, and all the nations upon whom has 
κέκληται T0.0voua.pou ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς" λέγει κύριος τὸ" ποιῶν 


been called my name upon them, says [the] Lord who does 
ταῦτα πάντα." 18 ῬΓνωστὰ" an’ αἰῶνός “ἐστιν τῷ θεῷ 
*these “things 1411: known from eternity are to God 
πάντα τὰ ἔργα.αὐτοῦ." 19 διὸ ἐγὼ κρίνω μὴ παρενοχλεῖν 
all his works. Wherefore I judge not to trouble 
~ ? ‘ ~ > ~ ? , “2a, ν oa 9 2 A 
τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ἐθνῶν ἐπιστρέφουσιν ἐπὶ τὸν θεόν" 20 ἀλλὰ 


those who from the God; but 
ἐπιστεῖλαι αὐτοῖς τοῦ ἀπέχεσθαι τἀπὸ" τῶν αλισγημάτων τῶν 
to write to them to abstain from the pollutions of the 
εἰδώλων καὶ τῆς πορνείας Kai "τοῦ πνικτοῦ Kai τοῦ αἵματος. 
idols and fornication and what is strangled and blood. 
21 ‘Mwonje'-yap ἐκ γενεῶν ἀρχαίων κατὰ.πόλιν τοὺς KN- 
For Moses from generations of old inevery city those *pro- 
ρύσσοντας αὐτὸν ἔχει ἐν ταῖς συναγωγαῖς κατὰ.πᾶν σάββατον 


nations turn to 


claiming *him ‘has in the synagogues, every sabbath 
ἀναγινωσκόμενος. 
being read. 
22 Tore ἔδοξεν τοῖς ἀποστόλοις Kai τοῖς πρεσβυτέροις 


elders 
? ? ~ 
ἐξ αὐτῶν 
from among them 


Then it seemed good tothe apostles and to the 
‘ e ~~ 63 , 2 , » 
σὺν ὕλῃ τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, ἐκλεξαμένους ἄνδρας 
with *whole ?the assembly, chosen men 


πέμψαι εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν σὺν τῷ Παύλῳ καὶ Βαρνάβᾳ, ᾿Ιούδαν 


tosend to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas, Judas 
τὸν "ἐπικαλούμενον" “Βαρσαβᾶν, καὶ Σίλαν, ἄνδρας ἡγου- 
surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, 2men lead- 


μένους ἐν τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς. 23 γράψαντες διὰ χειρὸς. αὐτῶν 


ing among the brethren, having written by their hand 
*raoe, Οἱ ἀπόστολοι Kai οἱ πρεσβύτεροι YKai οἱ ἀδελφοί, 
thus: The apostles and the elders and the brethren, 


~ ay \ ᾽ , ‘ , ‘ r ,ὔ ? ~ 
τοῖς κατὰ τὴν Αντιόχειαν καὶ Συρίαν καὶ Κιλικίαν ἀδελφοῖς 
tothose in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, brethren 

~ ? ? ~ , ? ‘ > , ε 
τοῖς ἐξ ἐθνῶν, χαίρειν. 24 ᾿Ἐπειδὴ ἠκούσαμεν ore 
from among [the] nations, greeting. Inasmuch as we have heard that 


τινὲς ἐξ ἡμῶν ἐξελθόντες ἐτάραξαν ὑμᾶς λόγοις, 
certain from amongst us having gone out troubled you by words, 
ἀνασκευάζοντες τὰς. ψυχὰς ὑμῶν, λέγοντες περιτέμνεσθαι 
upsetting your souls, saying [ye must] be circumcised 
καὶ τηρεῖν TOY νόμον." οἷς οὐ.διεστειλάμεθα: 98 ἔδοξεν 
and keep the law; to whom we gayeno[such] command; it seemed good 


ἡμῖν γενομένοις ὁμοθυμαδόν, “ἐκλεξαμένους᾽ ἄνδρας πέμψαι 
tous hayingcome with one accord, chosen men to send 
πρὸς ὑμᾶς, σὺν τοῖς. ἀγαπητοῖς. ἡμῶν Βαρνάβᾳ Kai Παύλῳ, 
to you, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, 
26 ἀνθρώποις παραδεδωκόσιν τὰς. ψυχὰς αὐτῶν ὑπὲρ τοῦ 
men who have given up their lives for the 
ὀνόματος τοῦ.-κυρίου. ἡμῶν Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ. 27 ἀπεστάλκαμεν 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ. We have sent 


909 


I will set it up: 17 that 
the residue of men 
might seek after the 
Lord, and all the Gen- 
tiles, upon whom my 
name is called, saith 
the Lord, who do- 
eth all these things. 
18 Known unto God 
are all his works from 
the beginning of the 
world. 19 Wherefore 
my sentence is, that 
we trouble not them, 
which from among the 
Gentiles are turned to 
God: 20 but that we 
write unto them, that 
they abstain from pol- 
lutions of idols, and 
Jrom fornication, and 
Jrom things strangled, 
and from blood, 21 For 
Moses of old time hath 
in every city them that 
preach him, being 
read in the synagogues 
every sabbath day. 


22 Then pleased it 
the apostles and elders, 
with the whole church, 
to send chosen men of 
their own company to 
Antioch with aul 
and Barnabas;namely, 
Judas surnamed Bar- 
sabas, and Silas, chief 
men among the breth- 
ren: 23 and they wrote 
letters by them after 
this manner; The 
apostles and elders 
and brethren send 
greeting unto the 
brethren which are of 
the Gentilesin Antioch 
and Syria and Cilicia: 
24 forasmuch as we 
have heard, that cer- 
tain which went out 
from us have trou- 
bled you with words, 
subveLuing your souls, 
saying, 6 must be 
circumcised, and keep 
the law: to whom we 
gave no such com- 
mandment: 25 it seem- 
ed good unto us, being 
assembled with one 
accord, to send chosen 
men unto you with 
our beloved Barnabas 
and Paul, 26men that 
have hazarded their 
lives for the name of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 
27 We have sent there- 


ο — πάντα GLTTrAW. 


4 — oLTTr. P γνωστὸν LW. 


4 τῷ κυρίῳ τὸ ἔργον αὐτοῦ to the 


Lord his work L; ἐστιν τῷ θεῷ τὸ ἔργον αὐτοῦ W ; -- ἐστιν τῷ θεῷ πάντα τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ GTTTA. 


τ — ἀπὸ (read τῶν from the) LTTr[a]. 5 — τοῦ LTr. 
called LTTrawW. τ BapoaBBay Litra. *— τάδε LITrA. 
LTTrA. 2 — λέγοντες περιτέμνεσθαι Kal τηρεῖν TOV νόμον LTTTA. 
chosen Ltrw. 


τ Mwions GLTTrAw. 
Y — καὶ oi (vead elder brethren) 
Ὁ ἐκλεξαμένοις having 


ν καλούμενον 


360 


fore Judas and Silas, 
who shall also tell 
you the same things 
by mouth. 28 For it 
seemed good to the 
Holy Ghost, and to us, 
to lay upon you no 
greater burden than 
these necessary things ; 
29 that ye abstain 
from meats offered to 
idols, and from blood, 
and from things stran- 
gied, and from forni- 


cation: from which 
if ye keep your- 
selves, ye shall do 
well. Fare ye well. 


30 So when they were 
dismissed, they came 
to Antioch: and when 
they had gathered the 
multitude together, 
they delivered the 
epistle: 31 which when 
they had read, they 
rejoiced for the conso- 
lation, 32 And Judas 
and Silas, being pro- 
phets also themselves, 
exhorted the brethren 
with many words, and 
confirmed them. 33And 
after they had tarried 
there a space,they were 
let go in peace from 
the brethren unto the 
apostles. 34 Notwith- 
standing it pleased 
Silas to abide there 
still. 35 Panl also and 
Barnabas continued in 
Antioch, teaching and 
preaching the word of 
the Lord, with many 
others also, 


36 And some days 
after Paul said unto 
Barnabas, Let us go 
again and visit our 
brethren in every city 
where we have preach- 
ed the word of the 
Lord, and see how they 
do. 37 And Barnabas 
determined to take 
with them John, whose 
surname was Mark. 
38 But Paul thought 
not good to take him 
with them, who de- 
parted from them 
from Pamphylia, and 
went not with them to 
the work. 39 And the 
contention was 80 
sharp between them, 
that they departed 
asunder one from the 
other : and so Barna- 
bas took Mark, and 


WPA EI &. XV. 

οὖν ᾿Ιούδαν καὶ Σίλαν, καὶ αὐτοὺς διὰ λόγου ἀπαγγελ- 

therefore Judas and _ Silas, “also 'themselves by word telling 

λοντζας τὰ αὐτά. 28 ἔδοξεν.γὰρ ry ἁγίῳ πνεύματι" 
[you] the same things. For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit 

καὶ ἡμῖν, μηδὲν πλέον ἐπιτίθεσθαι ὑμῖν βάρος πλὴν “τῶν 


and tous, no = further "to 5140 *upon *you ‘burden than 

2 , ,ὔ Il ? , > ΄ . 
ἐπάναγκες τούτων," 29 ἀπέχεσθαι εἰδωλοθύτων καὶ 
these necessary things : to abstain from things sacrificed to idols, and 
αἵματος καὶ ἃ πγνικτοῦ" καὶ πορνείας" ἐξ ὧν 


from blood and from whateis strangled, and from fornication; from which 


διατηροῦντες ἑαυτούς, εὖ πράξετε: ἔῤῥωσθε. 80 Οἱ μὲν 
keeping yourselves, well ye will do. They 


Farewell. 
οὖν ἀπολυθέντες “ἤλθον᾽ εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν" Kai συναγαγόντες 
therefore, being let go went to Antioch, and having gathered 


TO πλῆθος ἐπέδωκαν τὴν ἐπιστολήν. 31 ἀναγνόντες.δὲ ἐχά- 


the multitude delivered the epistle. And having read they 
? ‘ ~ ’ ? ὃ ἔξ. ll δὴ in ‘ ? 

pnoay ἐπὶ τῇ παρακλήσει. 32 Lovdac.'re" καὶ Σίλας, καὶ av- 

rejoiced at the consolation. And Judas and Silas, also 'them- 


τοὶ προφῆται ὄντες. διὰ λόγου πολλοῦ παρεκάλεσαν τοὺς 
selves *prophets Sbeing, by “discourse tmuch exhorted the 
ἀδελφούς, καὶ ἐπεστήριξαν. 33 Ποιήσαντες.δὲ χρόνον ἀπε- 
brethren, and _ established [them]. Απᾶπμανίηνσ continued a time they 
λύθησαν μετ᾽ εἰρήνης ἀπὸ THY ἀδελφῶν πρὸς ἕτοὺς ἀποστό- 
were let go in peace from the _ brethren to the apostles; 
λους." 84 Βέἔδοξεν.δὲ τῷ Σίλᾳ ἐπιμεῖναι αὐτοῦ." 35 Παῦλος. δὲ 
but it seemed good to Silas toremain there. And Paul 
καὶ BapvaBac διέτριβον ἐν ᾿Αντιοχείᾳ, διδάσκοντες Kai εὐσγ- 
and Barnabas stayed in Antioch, teaching and 5an- 


γελιζόμενοι μετὰ καὶ ἑτέρων πολλῶν, τὸν λόγον τοῦ 
nouncing “the glad ®tidings ‘with “150. ’others *many— the word ofthe 
κυρίου. 

Lord. 


96 Meraoé 


τινας ἡμέρας εἶπεν Παῦλος πρὸς Βαρνάβαν," 
But after 


certain days said Paul to Barnabas, 
᾿Επιστρέψαντες δὴ ἐπισκεψώμεθα τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς. "ἡμῶν" κατὰ 

Having turned back *indeed ‘let 7us look after our brethren in 
ἱπᾶσαν πόλιν" ἐν αἷς κατηγγείλαμεν τὸν λόγον τοῦ κυρίου, 

every city in which we have announced the word ofthe Lord, 
πῶς ἔχουσιν. 37 Βαρνάβας.δὲ ™éBovdeicaro' "συμπαρα- 
how they ure. And Barnabas purposed to take 
λαβεῖν" © Prov' ΦἸωάννην" τὸν καλούμενον Μάρκον" 38 Παῦ- 
with {them] John called Mark; 2Paul 
hoe δὲ ἠξίου τὸν ἀποστάντα ar αὐτῶν ἀπὸ Ιαμ- 
*but thought it well him who withdrew from them from  Pam- 
φυλίας, καὶ μὴ.συνελθόντα αὐτοῖς εἰς τὸ ἔργον, μὴ Touprrapa- 


phylia, and went not with them to the work, not to take 
λαβεῖν" τοῦτον. 39 ἐγένετο "οὖν" παροξυσμός, ὥστε 
“with (*them] "him. Arose therefore a sharp contention so that 


ἀποχωρισθῆναι αὐτοὺς ax’ ἀλλήλων, τόν.τε.-Βαρνάβαν παρα- 
“departed 1they from one another, and Barnabas having 


" τῷ πνεύματι τῷ ἁγίῳ TIrw. © τούτων τῶν ἐπάναγκες LTTr; — τούτων A. 4 πνικτῶν 
LTTrA. © κατῆλθον LYTrA. ἴ δὲ Ε. & τοὺς ἀποστείλαντας αὐτούς those who sent them 
GLITrAW. ἢ — verse 34 LITrAW. ἱ πρὸς Βαρνάβαν ἸΠαῦλος Lira. k — ἡμῶν (read the 


brethren) GLTTraW. 
° + καὶ also GLTTrA. 


LTTra. 


πὶ ἐβούλετο LTTrAW. 2 συν- ΤΑ. 
τ συμ-ίσυν- ΤαΑ)παραλαμβάνειν 


1 πόλιν πᾶσαν LTTrA. 
Ρ — τὸν GLA. 4 Τωάνην Tr. 


5 δὲ and (arose) LTTra, 


ΧΥΧΥΙ. ACTS. 

λαβόντα τὸν ee ἐκπλεῦσαι εἰς Κύπρον 40 Παῦλος. δὲ 
taken Mark sailed to Cyprus; but Paul 

ἐπιλεξάμενος Σίλαν ἐξῆλθεν, παραδοθεὶς τῇ χάριτι 


having chosen Silas went forth, having been committed tothe grace 


*rov θεοῦ" ὑπὸ τῶν ἀδελφῶν. 41 διήρχετο.δὲ τὴν Συρίαν 
of God by the _ brethren. And he Le aie through Syria 


καὶ ™ Κιλικίαν, ἐπιστηρίζων τὰς ἐκκλησίας. 16 Κατήντησεν δὲ" 


and Cilicia, establishing the assemblies. And he arrived 
sic Δέρβην καὶ ¥ Λύστραν᾽ Kai ἰδού, μαθητής τις ἦν ἐκεῖ, 
at Derbe and Dystra: and behold, a pee ‘certain was there, 


ὀνόματι Τιμόθεος, υἱὸς γυναικός ἡτινος" ᾿Ιουδαίας πιστῆς 


by name ἘΤἰπιοΐμθτϑ, son of ἃ *woman ‘certain *Jewish *believing 

πατρὸς. δὲ “EXAnvoc’ 26¢ ἐμαρτυρεῖτο ὑπὸ τῶν ἐν Λύσ- 
but rete father a Greek, who was borne witness to by the “in *Lys- 
τροις καὶ ᾿Ικονίῳ ἀδελφῶν. 3 τοῦτον ἠθέλησεν ὁ ἸΤαῦλος σὺν 
tra ‘and *Iconium ‘brethren. Thisone *wished Paul with 
αὐτῷ ἐξελθεῖν, καὶ λαβὼν περιέτεμεν αὐτὸν διὰ τοὺς 


on account of the 
ἤδεισαν. γὰρ 


him togoforth, and having taken hecircumcised him 
Ιουδαίους τοὺς ὄντας ἐν τοῖς.τόποις.ἐκείνοις" 


Jews who were in those places, for they “knew 
ἅπαντες τὸν πατέρα.αὐτοῦ OTe “Ἕλλην! ὑπῆρχεν. 4 ὡς δὲ 

1411 his father that a Greek he was. And as 
διεπορεύοντο τὰς πόλεις Prapedidovy' αὐτοῖς φυλάσσειν 
ἅ5.) passed ἀδιῦηθε the _ cities cs delivered to them to keep 
τὰ δόγματα τὰ κεκριμένα ὑπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων καὶ ἐχῶν' 
the decrees decided on by the apostles and the 
πρεσβυτέρων τῶν ἐν “Ἱερουσαλήμ. 5 αἱ μὲν οὖν ἐκ- 

elders in Jerusalem. The “therefore ‘as- 

κλησίαι ἐστερεοῦντο τῇ πίστει; καὶ ἐπερίσσευον τῷ ἀριθμῷ 
semblies were strengthened in the faith, and abounded in number 
καθ᾽ ἡμέραν. 

every day. 4 

6 ἐΔιελθόντεε" δὲ τὴν Φρυγίαν καὶ ἱτὴν" Γαλατικὴν 

Having *passed “through ‘and Phrygia and the Galatian 
χώραν, κωλυθέντες ὑπὸ τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος λαλῆσαι! 
SOUNIEY, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak 


τὸν λόγον ἐν τῇ Aig, 7 ἐλθόντες ὃ κατὰ THY Μυσίαν ἐπείρα- 


the word in ia, having come down to Mysia they at- 
Zov cara izjy' Βιθυνίαν πορεύεσθαι" Kai οὐκ.εἴασεν 
tempted to Bithynia to go; and #did “ποὺ *suffer 
αὐτοὺς τὸ πνεῦμα. ὃ παρελθόντες.δὲ τὴν Μυσίαν κατέβη- 
*them ‘the Spirit; and haying passed by Mysia they came 
cay εἰς Τρωάδα. 9 καὶ ὕραμα διὰ ™rijc' νυκτὸς "ὠφθη 
down to Troas. And avision during the night appeared 
Παύλῳ ᾿Ανήρ ὅτις ἦν Μακεδὼν" ἑστώς, Ῥ παρακαλῶν 
to Paul: A *man ‘certain Swas “οἵ *Macedonia standing, beseeching 
αὐτὸν καὶ λέγων, δΔιαβὰς εἰς Μακεδονίαν βοήθησον 
him and saying, aay passed over into Macedonia help 


1 10 Ὡς. δὲ τὸ ὕραμα εἶδεν, εὐθέως ἐζητήσαμεν ἐξελθεῖν 


And when the vision he saw, immediately wesought ἴο 5ὉὋ forth 


361 


sailed unto Cyprus; 

40 and Paul chose Si- 
las, and departed, be- 
ing recommended by 
the brethren unto the 
grace of God. 41 And 
he went through Sy- 
ria and Cilicia, con- 
firming the churches. 
XVI. Then came he 
to Derbe and Lystra: 
and, behold, a certain 
disciple was there, 
named Timotheus, the 
son of a certain wo- 
man, which was a 
Jewess, and believed; 
but his father was a 
Greek: 2 which was 
well reported of by the 
brethren that were at 
Lystra and Iconium. 
3 Him would Panl 
have to go forth with 
him; and took and 
circumcised him be- 
cause of the Jews 
which were in those 
quarters: for they 
knew all that his fa- 
ther was a Greek. 
4 And as they went 
through the cities, 
they delivered them 
the decrees for to keep, 
that were ordained of 
the apostles and elders 
which were at Jerusa- 
lem. 5 Andso were the 
churches’ established 
in the faith, and in- 


ereased in number 
daily. 
6 Now when they 


had gone throughout 
Phrygia and the re- 
gion of Galatia, and 
were forbidden of the 
Holy Ghost to preach 
the word in Asia, 7 af- 
ter they were come to 
Mysia, they assayed to 
go into Bithynia: but 
the Spirit  sufiered 
them not. 8 And they 


_ passing by Mysia came 


down to 'roas. 9 And 
a vision appeared to 
Paul in the night; 
There stood a man of 
Macedonia, and pray- 
ed him, saying, Come 
over into Alacedonia, 
and help us. 10 And 
after he had seen the 
vision, immediately 
we endeavoured to go 


Y τοῦ κυρίου of the Lord LITrAW. 
— τινος GLTTrAW. 


"+ τὴ 


LTTraw. ¢ — τῶν LTTrAW. 4 Ἱεροσολύμοις LTTrAW. 
LTTraW. f — τὴν LTTrA. & + δὲ and (having come) LTTraw. 
i — τὴν Ww. Κ πορευθῆναι LTTra. 1 + Ἰησοῦ of Jesus GLTTraw. 


“to ΤΠ}αύλῳ ὥφθη TTrA. ο Μακεδών τις Hv (— ἣν A) LTTrAW. 


* + καὶ also L[Tr}. 
5 πάντες (ἅπαντες ἘΠ δ, ὅτι "Ἕλλην ὁ 0 πατὴρ αὐτοῦ LTr. 
© διῆλθον they passed through 


Σ + εἰς at LT Tr. 
ὃ παρεδίδοσαν 


Β εἰς GLTTrAW. 
m --- τῆς LTTr[A]W. 


P + καὶ and LTTr. 


362 


into Macedonia, as- 
suredly gathering that 
the Lord had called 
us for to preach the 
gospel unto them. 
11 Therefore loosing 
from Troas, we came 
with a straight course 
to Samothracia, and 
the next day to Nea- 
polis; 12 and from 
thence to Philippi, 
which is the chief city 
of that part of Mace- 
donia, and a colony: 
and we were in that 
city abiding certain 
days. 13 And on the 
sabbath we went out 
of the city by a river 
side, where prayer was 
wont to be made; and 
wesat down, andspake 
unto the women which 
resorted thither. 14 And 
acertain woman nam- 
ed Lydia, a seller of 
purple, of the city of 
Thyatira, which wor- 
shipped God, heard us: 
whose heart the Lord 
opened, that she at- 
tended unto the things 
which were spoken of 
Paul. 15 And when 
she was baptized, and 
her household, she be- 
sought us, saying, If 
ye have judged me to 
be faithful to the Lord, 
come into my house, 
and abide there. And 
she constrained us. 
16 And it came to pass, 
as we went to prayer, 
a certain damsel pos- 
sessed with a spirit of 
divination met us, 
which brought her 
masters much gain by 
soothsaying: 17 the 
same followed Paul 
and us, and cried, say- 
ing, These men are the 
servants of the most 
high God, which shew 
unto us the way of 
salvation. 18 And this 
did she many days. 
But Paul, being griev- 
ed, turned and said to 
the spirit, 1 command 
thee in the name of 
Jesus Christ to come 


out of her. And he 
came out the same 
hour. 19 And when 


her masters saw that 
she hope of their gains 
was gone, they caught 


9 — τὴν LTTr. 
v δὲ LTTrA. 


8 πύλης gate LTTrAW. 
© + τὴν the [place for] LrTraw. 
» κατακολουθοῦσα following TTr. 


ἃ μένετε LTTrW. 


w Νέαν πόλιν TTr. 


ΠΟΡΟΑΣΞ ἜΤΟΣ. ΧΥΙ. 


᾽ \ , ΄΄ εἰ « ~ 
εἰς τὴν" Μακεδονίαν, συμβιβάζοντες ὅτι προσκέκληται ἡμᾶς 
to us 


Macedonia, concluding that “had ‘called 

τὸ κύριος" εὐαγγελίσασθαι αὐτούς. 11 ᾿Αναχθέντες 
‘the *Lord ἴο announce the glad tidingsto them. Having sailed 

βοῦν" ἀπὸ ἱτῆς" Τρωάδος εὐθυδρομήσαμεν εἰς Σαμο- 
therefore from Troas we came with a straight course to Samo- 

ΓΔ ~ 1 , ? »Ἅ ᾽ ~ 

θρᾷκην, τῇ. τε ἐπιούσῃ εἰς “Μεάπολιν," 12 “ἐκεῖθέν. τεὶ 
thracia, and onthe following day to Neapolis, and thence 
εἰς Φιλίππους, ἥτις ἐστν πρώτη τῆς μερίδος rnc" 
to Philippi, which is [the] first “of (*that] ‘part 


Μακεδονίας πόλις, κολώνια. μεν.δὲ ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ πόλει δια- 


Sof °Macedonia ‘city, acolony. And wewere in this city stay- 
τρίβοντες ἡμέρας τινάς, 18 τῇττε ἡμέρᾳ τῶν σαββάτων 
ing *days ‘certain. Andonthe day of the sabbath 


ἐξήλθομεν Ττἔξω" τῆς "πόλεως" παρὰ ποταμόν, οὗ ἐνομίζετο 
we went forth outside the city by ariver, where wascustomary 
προσευχὴ" εἶναι, Kai καθίσαντες ἐλαλοῦμεν ταῖς ouved- 
prayer tobe, and havingsatdown wespoke_ to the *who *came 
θούσαις γυναιξίν. 14 Καί τις γυνὴ ὀνόματι Λυδία, πορ- 
*together ‘women. Andacertain woman, by name Lydia, a seller 
φυρόπωλις πόλεως Θυατείρων, σεβομένη τὸν θεόν, ἤκουεν" 
of purple of {the] city of Thyatira, who worshipped God, was hearing; 
ἧς ὁ κύριος διήνοιξεν τὴν καρδίαν προσέχειν τοῖς 
of whom the Lord opened the heart to attend to the things 
λαλουμένοις ὑπὸ “τοῦ" Παύλου. 15 ὡς δὲ ἐβαπτίσθη καὶ 
spoken by Paul. And when she was baptized and 
ὁ οἶκος. αὐτῆς παρεκάλεσεν λέγουσα, Et κεκρίκατέ με πιστὴν 
her house she besought saying, If ye have judged me faithful 
τῷ κυρίῳ εἶναι, εἰσελθόντες εἰς τὸν. οἴκόν μου, ἁμείνατε"" 
tothe Lord tobe, having entered into my house, abide. 
καὶ παρεβιάσατο ἡμᾶς. 16 Ἐγένετο.δὲ πορευομένων. ἡμῶν 
And she constrained us. And it came to pass as we were going 
εἰς ® προσευχήν, παιδίσκην τινὰ ἔχουσαν πνεῦμα Πύθωνος" 


to prayer, a*damsel ‘certain, having aspirit of Python, 
δἀπαντῆσαι' ἡμῖν, ἥτις ἐργασίαν πολλὴν παρεῖχεν τοῖς 
met us, who “gain ‘much brought 
κυρίοις αὐτῆς μαντευομένη. 17 αὕτη "κατακολουθήσασα" τῷ 
to her masters by divining. She having followed 


Παύλῳ καὶ ἡμῖν ἔκραζεν λέγουσα, Οὗτοι οἱ ἄνθρωποι δοῦλοι 
Paul and us cried saying, These men bondmen 


~ ~ ~ € , Chl? ev , i, ~ Π 
τοῦ θεοῦ row ὑψίστου εἰσίν, οἵτινες καταγγέλλουσιν ᾿ὴ) μῖν 


of the *God ‘Most *High are, who announce tous [the] 
€ a “ Ὕ “ὦ A ? / ? 4 \ « Γ 

ὁδὸν σωτηρίας. 18 Τοῦτο.δὲ ἐποίει ἐπὶ πολλὰς ἡμέρας" δια- 
way of salvation. Andthis shedid for many days. sBeing 


5 θ ‘ δὲ κ cil vr ‘ ? , ~ , 
πονηθεὶς δὲ *6' Παῦλος, καὶ ἐπιστρέψας τῷ πνεύματι εἶπεν, 
“distressed ‘but 2Paul, and having turned tothe spirit said, 
Παραγγέλλω σοι ἐν 'r@' ὀνόματι Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ ἐξελθεῖν 
I charge thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out 
ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς. Kai ἐξῆλθεν αὐτῇ. τῷ ὥρᾳ. 19 ᾿Ιδόντες. δὲ οἱ κύριοι 
from her. And it came out the same hour. And seeing ?masters 
? ~ e 1) ~ « ? ‘ ~ ? , ᾽ ~ ? , 
αὐτῆς ore ἐξῆλθεν ἡ ἐλπὶς τῆς.ἑργασιας αὐτῶν, ἐπιλαβόμενοι 
‘her that was gone the hope of their gain, haying taken hold of 


τ 6 θεὸς God LrTra. 5 δὲ and (having sailed) Ta. t — τῆς LTira, 
X κἀκεῖθεν LITrAW. Υ — τῆς LTTr. zt — ἔξω Ww. 
b ἐνομίζομεν προσευχὴν We Supposed prayer LTTr. © — τοῦ TTr. 
fWV0wva LTTrA. & ὑπαντῆσαι TTA, 


i ὑμῖν to you ETTr. k—6TTr. 1 -- τῷ LTTrA. 


XVI. ACTS. 


τὸν Παῦλον καὶ τὸν" Σίλαν εἵλκυσαν εἰς τὴν ἀγορὰν 


Paul and Silas they dragged [them]into the market 
ἐπὶ τοὺς ἄρχοντας. 20 Kai προσαγαγόντες αὐτοὺς τοῖς 
before the magistrates ; and haying brought up them to the 
στρατηγοῖς "εἶπον," Οὗτοι οἱ ἄνθρωποι ἐκταράσσουσιν ἡμῶν 
captains said, These men Sexceedingly *trouble ~*our 
THY πόλιν, ᾿Ιουδαῖοι ὑπάρχοντες" 21 Kai καταγγέλλουσιν ἔθη 

Scity, 2Jews ‘being, and announce customs 
ἃ οὐκ ἔξεστιν ἡμῖν παραδέχεσθαι οὐδὲ ποιεῖν, Ῥωμαίοις 


which it is not lawful for us to receive nor to do, “Romans 


οὖσιν. 22 Kai συνεπέστη ὁ ὄχλος κατ᾽ αὐτῶν, Kai οἱ στρα- 
*being. And rose up together the crowd against them, andthe  cap- 
τηγοὶ “περιῤῥήξαντες" αὐτῶν τὰ ἱμάτια ἐκέλευον papot- 
tains having torn off of them the garments commanded to beat [them] 
fey’ 28 πολλάς τε ἐπιθέντες αὐτοῖς πληγάς ἔβαλον 

with rods. And *many ‘having laid °on *them ‘stripes they cast [them] 
εἰς φυλακήν, παραγγείλαντες τῷ δεσμοφύλακι ἀσφαλῶς τηρεῖν 
into. prison, charging the jailor safely to keep 
αὐτούς" 34 ὺς παραγγελίαν τοιαύτην Ῥεἰληφὼς ἔβαλεν αὐτοὺς 


them ; who ᾿ “a %charge ‘such having received thrust them 
εἰς τὴν ἐσωτέραν φυλακήν, Kai τοὺς. πόδας. αὐτῶν ἠσφαλί- 
into the inner prison, and their feet secured 


σατο" εἰς TO ξύλον. 25 Κατὰ δὲ τὸ μεσονύκτιον Παῦλος καὶ 
to the stocks. And towards midnight Paul and 
Σίλας προσευχόμενοι ὕμνουν τὸν Gedy" ἐπηκροῶντο 
Silas praying were singing praises to God, “listened *to 
δὲ αὐτῶν οἱ δέσμιοι. 26 ἄφνω.δὲ σεισμὸς ἐγένετο μέγας, 
‘and ®*them “the “prisoners. And suddenly Searthquake ‘there *was “a *great, 
ὥστε σαλευθῆναι τὰ θεμέλια τοῦ δεσμωτηρίου" τἀνεῴχθησάν᾽" 
sothat wereshaken the foundations of the prison, “were “opened 
Sve! παραχρῆμα at θύραι πᾶσαι, καὶ πάντων τὰ δεσμὰ ἀνέθη. 
ἴδῃ ἃ immediately *the*doors ‘all, and 9508 1] the *bonds were loosed. 
27 ἔξυπνος δὲ γενόμενος ὁ δεσμοφύλαξ, καὶ ἰδὼν ἀνεῳγ- 
And *awoke *out ®of 7516 60 “being ‘the *jailor, and seeing opened 
μένας τὰς θύρας τῆς φυλακῆς, σπασάμενος μάχαιραν "ἔμελ- 
the doors ofthe prison, having drawn a sword was 
Aev' ἑαυτὸν ἀναιρεῖν, νομίζων ἐκπεφευγέναι τοὺς δεσμίους. 


about himself to put to death, supposing had escaped the prisoners. 
28 ἐφώγησεν.δὲ “φωνῇ μεγάλῃ ὁ Παῦλος" λέγων, Μηδὲν 
But *called out *with°a‘voice loud 1Paul saying, 4No 


πράξῃς σεαυτῷ κακόν᾽ ἅπαντες. γάρ ἐσμεν ἐνθάδε. 29 Ai- 
do “to “thyself injury ; for ?all lwe “are here. *Having 
τήσας δὲ φῶτα εἰσεπήδησεν, καὶ ἔντρομος. γενόμενος προσ- 
Sasked *for ‘and lights herushedin, and trembling fell 
ἔπεσεν τῷ Παύλῳ καὶ "τῷ" Σίλᾳ᾽ 80 καὶ προαγαγὼν αὐτοὺς 
down before Paul and Silas. And having brought them 
ἔξω ἔφη, Κύριοι, τί με. δεῖ ποιεῖν ἵνα σωθῶ; 
out he 5814, Sirs, what is necessary forme todo that I may be saved? 
31 Οἱ. δὲ Yelror,' Πίστευσον ἐπὶ τὸν κύριον ᾿Ιησοῦν *xpisror, | 
And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
καὶ σωθήσῳ, σὺ καὶ ὁ.οἷκός. σου. 32 Καὶ ἐλάλησαν αὐτῷ 
and thou shalt Ὅ6 βαυϑᾶ, thou απἃ thy house. And they spoke to him 


m — τὸν A. 
αὐτῶν LTTrA. 
Y ἤμελλεν LTTrA. 
2 — χριστόν LTTrA. 


Ὦ εἶπαν LYTrA. 9 περιρήξαντες LTTrA. 
τ ἠνεῴχθησαν LTrA; ἠνοίχθησαν T. 5 δὲ LTTra. 
Ὑ —o LITr; Παῦλος φωνῇ μεγάλῃ L- 


Ρ λαβὼν LTTrAW. 


363 
Paul and Silas, and 
drew them into the 


marketplace unto the 
rulers, 20and brought 
them to the magis- 
trates, saying, These 
men, being Jews, do ex- 
ceedingly trouble our 
city, 21 and teach cus- 
toms, which are not 
lawful for us to re 
ceive, neither to ob- 
serve, being Romans. 
22 And the multitude 
rose up together a- 
gainst them: and the 
magistrates rent off 
their clothes, and com- 
manded to beat ther. 
23 And when they had 
laid many stripes up- 
on them, they cast 
them into prison, 
charging the jailor to 
keep them safely: 
24 who, having receiv- 
ed such a charge,thrust 
them into the inner 
prison, and made their 
teet fast in the stocks. 
25 And at midnight 
Paul and Silas prayed, 
and sang praises unto 
God : andthe prisoners 
heard them. 26 And 
suddenly there was a 
great earthquake, so 
that the foundations 
of the prison were 
shaken: and imme- 
diately all the doors 
were opened, and every 
one’s bands were loos- 
ed. 27 And the keeper 
of the prison awaking 
out of his sleep, and 
seeing the prison doors 
open, he drew out his 
sword, and would have 
killed himself, suppos- 
ing that the prisoners 
had been fled. 28 But 
Paul cried with a loud 
voice, saying, Do thy- 
self no harm: for we 
are all here. 29 Then 
he called for a light, 
and sprang in, and 
came trembling, and 
fell down before 
Paul and Silas, 30 and 
brought them out, and 
said, Sirs, what must 
I do to be saved? 
31 And they said, Be- 
lieve on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and thou shalt 
be saved, and thy 
house. 32 And they 
spake unto him the 


4 ἠσφαλίσατο 


t + τὴν the (sword) titra. 
* — 7@ Lira. 


Υ εἶπαν LTTrA. 


364 


word of the Lord, and 
to all that were in 
his house. 33 And 
he took them the same 
hour of the night, 
and washed their 
stripes ; and was bap- 
tized, he and all his, 
straightway. 34 And 
when he had brought 
them into his house, 
he set meat before 
them, and rejoiced, be- 
lieving in God with all 
his house. 35 And 
when it was day, the 
magistrates sent the 
serjeants, saying, Let 
those men go, 36 And 
the keeper of the pri- 
son told this saying to 
Paul, The magistrates 
have sent to let you 
go: now therefore de- 
part, and go in peace. 
37 But Paul anid unto 
them, They have beat- 
en us openly uncon- 
demned, being Ro- 
mans, and have cast us 
into prison; and now 
do they thrust us out 
privily? nay verily; 
but let them come 
themselves and fetch 
us out. 38 And the 
serjeants told these 
words unto the magis- 
trates: and they feared, 
when they heard that 
they were Romans. 
39 And they came and 
besought them, and 
brought them out, and 
desired them to depart 
out of the city. 40 And 
they went out of the 
prison, and entered in- 
to the house of Lydia : 
and when they had 
seen the brethren, they 
comforted them, and 
departed, 


X VIL. Now when they 
had passed through 
Aimphipolis and Apol- 
lonia, they came to 
Thessalonica, where 
was ἃ synagogue of 
the Jews: 2 and Paul, 
as his manner was, 
wentin unto them, and 
three sabbath days 
reasoned with them 
out of the scriptures, 
3 opening and alleg- 
ing, that Christ must 
needs have suffered, 


2 σὺν πᾶσιν With all @LTTrAW. 
© πανοικεὶ TA. 
i ἀπήγγειλαν LTTrAW. 


d ἡγαλλιᾶτο A. 
h ἔβαλαν LTA. 


aro to depart from (the) Lira. 
4 ἐξῆλθαν TTr. 


ἀδελφούς LITA. 
t διελέξατο LTTr. 


TPAZETS. XVI, XVII. 


τὸν λόγον Tov κυρίου, “καὶ πᾶσιν" τοῖς ἐν TH-oiKig.avTov. 
the word ofthe Lord, and toall those in his house. 


33 καὶ παραλαβὼν αὐτοὺς ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ὥρᾳ τῆς νυκτὸς ἔλου- 


And having taken them in _ that hour of the night he wash- 
σεν ἀπὸ τῶν πληγῶν, καὶ ἐβαπτίσθη αὐτὸς καὶ οἱ αὐτοῦ 
ed [them] from the stripes; and *was*baptized ‘he and *his 
b 


πάντες" παραχρῆμα. 34 avayaywr.re αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸν οἶκον 


tall immediately. And having brought them into “house 
“αὐτοῦ" παρέθηκεν τράπεζαν, καὶ ἠγαλλιάσατο" ὅπαν- 
this he Ἰαϊὰ atable [for them], and exulted with all 


oui! πεπιστευκὼς τῷ θεῷ. 35 Ἡμέρας.δὲ γενομένης ἀπέ- 
[his] house, having believed in God. And day having come 


στειλαν οἱ στρατηγοὶ τοὺς ῥαβδούχους λέγοντες, ᾿Απόλυσον 


ϑροηῦ ‘the *captains the serjeants, saying, Let *go 
τοὺς. ἀνθρώπους ἐκείνους. 36 ᾿Απήγγειλεν.δὲ ὁ δεσμοφύλαξ 
‘those *men. And*reported ‘the *jailor 


τοὺς.λόγους ἱτούτους" πρὸς τὸν Παῦλον, Ὅτι ξἀπεστάλκασιν" 
these words to Paul, *Have *sent 
€ Nes, ? ~ 5 w τ ? Ἂ , 
οἱ στρατηγοὶ ἵνα ἀπολυθῆτε' νῦν οὖν ἐξελθόντες πο- 
‘the “captains that ye may be let go. Now therefore haying gone out de- 
ρεύεσθε ἐν εἰρήνῃ. 37 Ὃ δὲ. Παῦλος ἔφη πρὸς αὐτούς, Δείραντες 
part in peace, But Paul said to them, Having beaten 
ἡμᾶς δημοσίᾳ ἀκατακρίτους, ἀνθρώπους Ῥωμαίους ὑπάρχον- 
us publicly uncondemned, men . Romans being, 
rac, *’Bador' εἰς φυλακήν, καὶ νῦν λάθρα ἡμᾶς ἐκβάλλου- 
they cast [us]into prison, and now secretly us do they thrust 
σιν; ov yap’ ἀλλὰ ἐλθόντες αὐτοὶ ἡμᾶς ἐξαγαγέτωσαν. 
out? no indeed, but having come themselves » us let them bring out, 
.᾽ Pia ~ - εν ~ ε 
88 ᾿Ανήγγειλα»ν" "δὲ" τοῖς στρατηγοῖς οἱ ῥαβδοῦχοι τὰ ῥήματα 
And “reported *to*the captains ‘the *serjeants Swords 
ταῦτα ἱκαὶ ἐφοβήθησαν ἀκούσαντες ὅτι Ῥωμαῖοί εἰσιν. 


ΤΠ 686, And they were afraid having heard that Romans they are. 
39 καὶ ἐλθόντες παρεκάλεσαν αὐτούς, καὶ ἐξαγαγόντες 
And having come they besought them, and having brought out 


ἠρώτων τ ἐξελθεῖν! τῆς πόλεως. 40 ἐξελθόντες.δὲ "ἐκ" 
they asked [them] togoout of the city. And having gone forth out of 
τῆς φυλακῆς εἰσῆλθον °sic! τὴν Λυδίαν" καὶ ἰδόντες Prove 
the prison they came to Lydia ; and having seen the 
ἀδελφούς παρεκάλεσαν αὐτούς," καὶ “ἐξῆλθον." 
brethren they exhorted them, and went away. 

17 Διοδεύσαντες. δὲ τὴν ᾿Αμφίπολιν καὶ" ᾿Απολλωνίαν 

And having journeyed through Amphipolis and Apollonia 
ἦλθον εἰς Θεσσαλονίκην, ὕπου ἢν sy" συναγωγὴ τῶν ‘lov- 
they came to Thessalonica, where was the synagogue ofthe Jews. 
daiwy. 2 κατὰ.δὲ τὸ εἰωθὸς τῷ Παύλῳ εἰσῆλθεν πρὸς αὐτούς, 

And according to the custom with Paul he went in ἴο them, 

καὶ ἐπὶ σάββατα τρία διελέγετο" αὐτοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν γραφῶν, 
and for “sabbaths ‘three reasoned with them from the scriptures, 


3 διανοίγων Kai παρατιθέμενος OTe τὸν χριστὸν ἔδει πα- 
opening and setting forth that “the *Christ ‘it *behoved to have 


b ἅπαντες T. © — αὐτοῦ (read the house) τ τ]ὰ. 
f — τούτους (read the words) utr. 8 ἀπέσταλκαν LTTrA. 
k ve T. 1 ἐφοβήθησαν δὲ LITA. ™ ἀπελθεῖν 
“and from τ. ὃ πρὺς GLTTraw. P παρεκάλεσαν τοὺς 
r + τὴν LTTr. 8 ἡ (read a synagogue) Ltr]. 


XVII. ACTS. 


θεῖν καὶ ἀναστῆναι ἐκ νεκρῶν, καὶ ὅτι οὗτός ἐστιν 
suffered and tohaverisen from among [86] dead, and that this is 
w,!l SA xe ~ τὰ ΓΕ ΚΙ ͵ ois 1 
ὁ' χριστὸς 5 Ιησοῦς, ὃν ἐγὼ καταγγέλλω ὑμῖν. 4 Καί τινες 
the Christ Jesus, whom 1 announce to you. And some 
ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐπείσθησαν, καὶ προσεκληρώθησαν τῷ Παύλῳ καὶ 


of them were obedient, and joined themselves to Paul and 
τῷ Σίλᾳ, τῶν.τε σεβομένων Υ Ἕλληήνων *rodd πλῆθος." 
to Silas, and of the worshipping Greeks a great multitude, 


γυναικῶν.τε τῶν πρώτων οὐκ ὀλίγαι. 5 "ζηλώσαντες.δὲ 


and of “women ‘the *chicf not afew. But *having °become “envious 
οἱ ἀπειθοῦντες ᾿Ιουδαῖοι, καὶ προσλαβόμενοι, τῶν 

the disobeying *Jews, and having taken to [them] 7of *the 
ἀγοραίων τινὰς ἄνδρας" πονηρούς. καὶ ὀχλοποιήσαντες 


*market-loungers ‘certain “men Sevil, 

ἐθορύβουν τὴν πόλιν᾽ “ἐπιστάντες. τε᾽ τῇ οἰκίᾳ ᾿Ιάσονος 
roused “1π *tumult ‘the city; and having assaulted the house of Jason 
ἐζήτουν αὐτοὺς tayayeiv' εἰς τὸν δῆμον" 6 μὴ εὑρόντες.δὲ 
they sought *them 'to*~bring out to the people; but not having found 
αὐτοὺς éavpoyv- “τὸν ᾿Ιάσονα καί τινας ἀδελφοὺς ἐπὶ τοὺς 
them they dragged Jason and certain brethren before the 
πολιτάρχας, βοῶντες, Ὅτι οἱ τὴν οἰκουμένην ἀνα- 
city magistrates, crying out, Those who ‘the *habitable 7world ‘have *set 


»»ῃ τ ‘ ? 4 ΄ - ΓΙ « as 
στατώσαντες οὗτοι καὶ ἐνθάδε πάρεισιν, 7 ode ὑποδέδεκται 


and having collected a crowd 


3in *confusion these ‘also “here ‘are “come, whom “has *received 
᾿Ιάσων" καὶ οὗτοι πάντες ἀπέναντι τῶν δογμάτων Καίσαρος 
‘Jason; and these all contrary to the decrees of Cesar 
ἱπράττουσιν,, βασιλέα ἔλέγοντες Erepov' εἶναι, ᾿Ιησοῦν. 
᾽ ᾿ 
do, ®*king ‘saying another there is— Jesus. 


8 Ἑτάραξαν.δὲ τὸν ὄχλον Kai τοὺς πολιτάρχας ἀκούοντας 


And they troubled the crowd and the _ city magistrates hearing 
ταῦτα. 9 καὶ λαβόντες τὸ ἱκανὸν παρὰ τοῦ ᾿Ιάσονος Kai 
these things. And having taken security from Jason and 


διὰ 
But the brethren immediately by 


τῶν λοιπῶν ἀπέλυσαν αὐτούς. 10 Οἱ. δὲ ἀδελφοὶ εὐθέως 
the rest they let ὅσο ‘them. 
krijc! νυκτὸς ἐξέπεμψαν rov-reLlatAoy καὶ τὸν Σίλαν εἰς Βέ- 
night sent away both Paul and Silas to Be- 
oovay’ οἵτινες παραγενόμενοι, εἰς τὴν συναγωγὴν ‘THY Ἰου- 
Tea ; who, being arrived, into the synagogue ofthe Jews 
daiwy amyecay.' 11 οὗτοι.δὲ ἦσαν εὐγενέστεροι τῶν ἐν 
went. And these were more noble than those in 
Θεσσαλονίκῳῃ, οἵτινες ἐδέξαντο τὸν λόγον μετὰ πάσης προθυ- 
Thessalonica, who received the word with all readi- 


μίας, "τὸ καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἀνακρίνοντες τὰς γραφὰς εἰ ἔχοι 
ness, daily examining the scriptures if were 
~ “ \ \ x ᾽ »» Wao 
ταῦτα οὕτως. 12 πολλοὶ μὲν οὖν ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐπί- 
these things 50. Many indeed therefore from among them be- 
στευσαν, καὶ τῶν Ἑλληνίδων γυναικῶν τῶν εὐσχημόνων Kai 
lieved, and of the “Grecian *women ‘honourable and 
ἀνδρῶν οὐκ ὀλίγοι. 13 ὡς.δὲ ἔγνωσαν οἱ ἀπὸ τῆς Θεσσαλο- 
men not a few. But when “knew ‘the *from *Thessalo- 


vikne ᾿Ιουδαῖοι ὅτι Kai ἔν τῇ Βεροίᾳ κατηγγέλη ὑπὸ τοῦ 
nica *Jews that also in Berwa was announced by 


2 πλῆθος πολύ LTTraw. 
Ὁ ἄνδρας τινὰς LTrAW. 
ἔ πράσσουσιν LTTrAW. 
k — 70 LYTr. 


* — ὃ LITr. X4o0A. Υ + καὶ L. 
ot Ἰουδαῖοι G3; — ἀπειθοῦντες LTTrAW. 


ἃ προᾶδγαγεῖν LTTrA. TTr{ A |. 


© — τὸν L 
h — τῆς LTTrA. ‘ ἀπήεσαν τῶν ᾿Ιονδαίων A. 


365 


and risen again from 
the dead ; and that this 
Jesus, whom 1 preach 
unto you, is Christ, 
4 And some of them 
believed,and consorted 
with Paul and Silas; 
and of the devout 
Greeks a great multi- 
tude, and of the chief 
women nota few. 5 But 
the Jews which be- 
lieved not, moved with 
envy, took unto them 
certain lewd fellows of 
the baser sort, and ga- 
thered a company, and 
set all the city on an 
uproar, and assaulted 
the house of Jason, and 
sought to bring them 
out to the people, 
6 And when they found 
them not, they drew 
Jason and certain bre- 
erent unto the rulers 
of the city, crying 
These that have turned 
the world upside down 
are come hither also; 
7 whom Jason hath re- 
ceived: and these all 
do contrary to the de- 
crees of Cesar, saying 
that there is another 
king, one Jesus. 8 And 
they troubled the peo- 
ple and the rulers of 
the city, when they 
heard these things. 
9 And when they had 
taken security of Ja- 
son, and of the other, 
they let them go, 
10 And the brethren 
immediately sent a- 
way Paul and Silas by 
night unto Berea: who 
coming thither went 
into the synagogue of 
the Jews. 1} These 
were more noble than 
those in Thessalonica, 
in that they received 
the word with all rea- 


diness of mind, and 
searched the _ scrip- 
tures daily, whether 


those things were so. 
12 Therefore many of 
them believed; also 
of honourable women 
which were Greeks, 
and of men, not a few. 
13 But when the Jews 
of Thessalonica had 
knowledge that the 
word of God wae 
reached of Paul at 
erea, they came thi- 


ἃ προσλαβόμενοι δὲ 


Kat ἐπιστάντες LTTrA. 
& ἕτερον λέγοντες LTTr. 


366 


ther also, and stirred 
up the people. 14 And 
then immediately the 
brethren sent away 
Paul to go as it were 
to the sea: but Silas 
and Timotheus abode 
there still. 15 And they 
that conducted Paul 
brought him unto 
Athens: and receiving 
a commandment unto 
Silas and Timotheus 
for to come tohim with 
all speed, they depart- 
ed. 


16 Now while Paul 
waited for them at 
Athens, his spirit was 
stirred in him, when 
he saw the city wholly 
given to _ idolatry. 
17 Therefore disputed 
he in the synagogue 
with the Jews, and 
with the devout per- 
sons, and in the mar- 
ket daily with them 
that met with him. 
18 Then certain philo- 
sophers of the Epicu- 
reans, and of the Sto- 
icks, encountered him. 
And some said, What 
will this babbler say ? 
Other some, He seem- 
eth tobea setter forth 
of strange gods: be- 
cause he preached un- 
to them Jesus, andthe 
resurrection. 19 And 
they took him, and 
brought him unto A- 
reopagus, saying, May 
we know what this new 
doctrine. whereof thou 
speakest, ts? 20 For 
thou bringest certain 
strange things to our 
ears: we would know 
therefore what these 
things mean. 21 (For 
allthe Athenians and 
strangers which were 
there spent their time 
in nothing else, but 
either to tell, or to 
hear some new thing.) 
22 Then Paul stood in 
the midst of Mars’ 
hill, and said, Ye men 
of Athens, I perceive 
that in all things ye 


IIPAZETIS. 


Παύλου ὁ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ, ἦλθον κἀκεῖ cadebovrec! τοὺς 
Paul the word of God, they came also there stirring up the 


ὄχλους.. 14 ehOéwe.dé τότε τὸν Παῦλον ἐξαπέστειλαν οἱ 
crowds. And immediately then *Paul “sent *away ‘the 
ἀδελφοὶ πορεύεσθαι ""ὡς" ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν "ὑπέμενον. δὲ! 
“brethren to go as to the sea ; but remained 
ὅτε. Σίλας καὶ ὁ Τιμόθεος ἐκεῖ. 15 Οἱ. δὲ οκαθιστῶντες" τὸν 
both Silas and Timotheus there. But those conducting 
Παῦλον ἤγαγον Pabriv' ἕως ᾿Αθηνῶν" καὶ λαβόντες ἐντολὴν 
Paul brought him unto Athens; andhavingreceived acommand 
πρὸς τὸν Σίλαν καὶ 4 Τιμόθεον, Wa we τάχιστα ἔλθω- 
to Silas and ‘Timotheus, that as quickly as possible they should 
ow πρὸς αὐτόν, ἐξῴεσαν. 
come to him, they departed. 
(16 Ἐν.δὲ ταῖς ᾿Αθήναις ἐκδεχομένου αὐτοὺς τοῦ Παύλου 
[5 ; ς ’ 
But in Athens "waiting *for *them *Paul, 
παρωξύνετο τὸ πνεῦμα.αὐτοῦ ἐν αὐτῳ τθεωροῦντι" KaT- 
"was ®painfully *excited Shis °spirit in him seeing *full 
εἰδωλον οὖσαν τὴν πόλιν. 17 διελέγετο μὲν οὖν ἐν τῇ 


XVII. 


Sof Sidols Sbeing ‘the ~ city. He reasoned indeed therefore in the 
συναγωγῇ τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις καὶ τοῖς σεβομένοις, Kai ἐν τῇ 
synagogue with the Jews and those who worshipped, and in the 
ἀγορᾷ κατὰ.πᾶσαν.ἡμέραν πρὸς τοὺς παρατυγχάνον- 
market-place every day with those who met with 
tac. 18 τινὲς.δὲ 5" τῶν ᾿ Ἐπικουρείων" καὶ "roy"! ὙΣτωϊκῶν" 
{him}. But some of the Epicureans and the Stoics, 


φιλοσόφων συνέβαλλον αὐτῳ᾽ καί τινες ἔλεγον, Ti ἂν θέλοι 
philosophers, encountered him, And some said, What may “desire 
ὁ. σπερμολόγος. οὗτος λέγειν; Οἱ. δέ, Ξένων δαιμονίων δοκεῖ 


this *chatterer tosayf Andsome, Of foreign gods he seems 
(lt. demons) 


τὸν Ἰησοῦν Kai THY ἀνάστασιν 
Jesus and the _ resurrection 
19 ἐπιλαβόμενοί. "τε" αὐτοῦ, 

And having taken hold of him, 


e 
OTL 


καταγγελεὺς εἶναι" 
because [of] 


a proclaimer to be, 
Xabroic εὐηγγελίζετο." 
to them he announced the glad tidings. 
? ‘ ‘ 2" I ΄ » λ , Δ / θ 
ἐπ TOV Ἄρειον παγον yyayov EVOVTEC, UVa[LE a 
to the Mars’ hill they brought [him], saying, Are we able 
γνῶναι τίς ἡ-καινὴ.αὕτη "ἡ" ὑπὸ σοῦ λαλουμένη διδαχή; 
toknow what[is) this new *which *by *thee ‘is Sspoken teaching ? 


20 EeviZovra.yap Twa εἰσφέρεις εἰς τὰς. ἀκοὰς.ἡμῶν. Bov- 
We 


For *strange *things ‘certain thou bringest to our ears. 
Naor οὖν γνῶναι ri ἂν.θέλοι' ταῦτα εἶναι. 21 ᾿Αθη- 
wis therefore to know what *may *mean ‘these *things. 7A the- 


ναῖοι δὲ πάντες καὶ οἱ ἐπιδημοῦντες ἕένοι εἰς οὐδὲν ἕτερον 
nians ΠΟ all and the sojourning strangers in nothing’ else 
‘evkaipouy' ἢ λέγεν τι “καὶ ἀκούειν © καινότερον. 
spent their leisure than ἴο 611 *something ‘and “to “hear newer, 
22 Σταθεὶς. δὲ [1ὁ" Παῦλος ἐν μέσῳ τοῦ ® Ἀρείου! πάγου 
And “having “stood *Paul in [the] midst of Mars’ hill 
ἔφη, "Avdpec ᾿Αθηναῖοι, κατὰ πάντα we δεισιδαιμονεστέρους 


said, Men Athenians, in all things very religious 
(lit. very reverent to demons) 


1 + καὶ ταράσσοντες and troubling Lrtra. 
° καθιστάνοντες LTTrA. 


Τε LTTrA. 


 GewpovvTos LTTrAW. L als ΓΑ. KOU, 
χ εὐηγγελίζετο αὐτοῖς ([αὐτοῖς] A) LA; — αὐτοῖς TTr. 
Ὁ τίνα θέλει What Mean LTtr. 


“ Srotk@v LTA, 
vy) Bees 


® τὶ something LI[Tr]. 


Ὁ ὑπέμεινέν (-vav TTr) 

4 + τὸν TTr. 
ν — τῶν LTTrA. 
Υ δὲ τι. *”Apioy 1. 
© ηὐκαίρουν LTTrA. ἃ ἢ or BITrA. 
& ᾿Αρίου T. 


™ ἕως as far as LTTr. 
Ρ — αὐτὸν (read [him]) Lrtra. 


5. + καὶ also LTTrAW. τ ᾿Επικουρίων T. 


f— 9 LTTr. 


XVII ACTS. 


ὑμᾶς θεωρῶ. 28 duepxopuevoc-yap Kai ἀναθεωρῶν τὰ σεβάσ- 
you I behold; for, passing through and beholding “objects Sof 


para ὑμῶν, εὗρον καὶ βωμὸν ἐν ᾧ ἐπεγέγραπτο, 
*veneration ‘your, Ifound also 85 δ]δ8 5 on which had been inscribed, 


᾿Αγνώστῳ θεῷ. Ῥὸν" οὖν ἀγνοοῦντες εὐσεβεῖτε, ἱτοῦτον" 
To an unknown God. oe therefore not EES ye SE a him 


ἐγὼ καταγγέλλω ὑμῖν. 24 ὁ θεὸς ὁ ποιήσας τὸν κόσμον Kai 


if announce toyou. The God who made the world and 
πάντα Ta ἐν αὐτῷ, οὗτος οὐρανοῦ Kai γῆς Κκύριος 
all things that [876] in it, he of heayen and earth Lord 


ὑπάρχων," οὐκ ἐν χειροποιήτοις ναοῖς κατοικεῖ, 25 οὐδὲ ὑπὸ 
being, not in hand-made temples dwells, nor By, 


χειρῶν ἀνθρώπων" θεραπεύεται προσδεόμενός τινος, αὐτὸς 
hands of men is served as ne soy thing; himself 


διδοὺς πᾶσιν ζωὴν καὶ πνοὴν πκατὰ- πάντα" 26 ἐποίησέν.τε 
giving toall life and breath in every [respect]; and he made 
ἐξ ἑνὸς "αἵματος" πᾶν ἔθνος ἀνθρώπων, κατοικεῖν ἐπὶ σπᾶν 
of one blood every nation of men, todwell upon all 
TO πρόσωπον' τῆς γῆς: ὁρίσας προτεταγμένους" και- 
the face of the earth, having determined fore-arranged times 


ροὺς καὶ τὰς ὁροθεσίας τῆς.κατοικίας.αὐτῶν" 27 ζητεῖν “τὸν 
ae the boundaries of their dwelling— toseek the 


κύριον," εἰ ἄρα.γε Ψψηλαφήσειαν αὐτὸν ‘kai! εὕροιεν, 
Lord ; if perbeys they aight feelafter him and τρια find him, 


Skatrovye' οὐ μακρὰν ἀπὸ ἑνὸς ἑκάστου ἡμῶν ὑπάρχοντα. 

ἘΒΟΘΞΕ indeed “ποῦ 3far *from one Seach 7of δὰ ‘heing ; 

28 ἐν. αὐτῷ.γὰρ ζῶμεν Kai κινούμεθα καί ἐσμεν᾽ ὡς καί τινες 
for in him we live and move and are; as also some 


τῶν καθ᾽ ὑμᾶς ποιητῶν εἰρήκασιν, Τοῦ.γὰρ καὶ γένος 


of the "among *you 1poets have said, For of him “also ‘offspring 
ἐσμέν. ῶ9 Γένος οὖν ὑπάρχοντες τοῦ θεοῦ, οὐκ.ὀφείλομεν 
we are. Offspring therefore being of God, we ought not 


νομίζειν χρυσῷ ἢ ἀργύρῳ ἢ λίθῳ, χαράγματι τέχνης καὶ 
tothink togold or tosilver or tostone, agrayventhing ofart and 
ἐνθυμήσεως ἀνθρώπου, τὸ θεῖον εἶναι ὅμοιον. 30 Τοὺς 
imagination of aa, that which [is] divine tobe like. The 
μὲν οὖν χρόνους τῆς ἀγνοίας ὑπεριδὼν ὡὁθεός, ‘ra 
5ΞἸηᾶερα *therefore ‘times of ignorance *having see 1God, 
νῦν" “παραγγέλλει! τοῖς ἀνθρώποις πᾶσιν" πανταχοῦ μετα- 


now charges men all everywhere to re- 
γνοεῖν᾽ 31 “διότι! ἔστησεν ἡμέραν ἐν μέλλει κρίνειν τὴν 
pent, because 86 set aday in which heis about tojudge the 


οἰκουμένην ἐν δικαιοσύνῃ, ἐν ἀνδρὶ 
habitable world in righteousness, 
παρασχὼν πᾶσιν 
thaving “given 


ᾧ ὥρισεν, πίστιν 
by aman whom heappointed; *proof 


ἀναστήσας αὐτὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν. 
ἴο 811 [in] havingraised him fromamong([the] dead. 
32 ᾿Ακούσαντες.δὲ ἀνάστασιν νεκρῶν, οἱ μὲν ἐχλεύαζον" 


And having heard ἃ resurrection of [the] dead, some mocked, 
οἱ.δὲ γεῖπον,, ᾿Ακουσόμεθά σου πάλιν περὶ τούτου." 
Δα some said, We willhear’ thee again concerning this, 


367 


are too superstitious. 
23 For as I passed by, 
and beheid your devo- 
tions, I found an altar 
with this inscription 

TO THE UNKNOWN 
GOD. Whom therefore 
ye ignorantly worship, 
him declareI untoyou. 
24 God that made the 
world and all things 
therein, seeing that he 
is Lord of heaven and 
earth, dwelleth not in 
temples made with 
hands; 25 neither is 
worshipped with men’s 
hands, as though he 
needed any thing, see- 
ing he giveth to all 
life, and breath, and 
all things; 26 and hath 
made of one blood all 
nations of men for to 
dwell on all the face of 
the earth, and hath 
determined the times 
before appointed, and 
the bounds of their ha- 
bitation ; 27 that they 
should seek the Lord, 
if haply they might 
feel after him, and find 
him, though he be not 
far from every one of 
us: 28 for in him we 
live, and move, and 
have our being; as 
certain also of your 
own poets have said, 
For we are also his off- 
spring. 29 Forasmuch 
then as we are the 
offspring of God, we 
ought not to think 
that the Godhead is 
like unto gold, or sil- 
ver, or stone, graven 
by art and man’s de- 
vice. 30 And the times 
of this ignorance God 
winked at; but now 
commandeth all men 
every where torepent : 
31 because he hath ap- 
pointed a day, in the 
which he will judge 
the world in right- 
eousness by that man 
whom he hath ordain- 
ed; whereof ne hath 
given assurance unto 
all men, in that he 
hath raised him from 
the dead. 32 And when 
they heard of the re- 
surrection of the dead, 
some mocked: and 
others said, We will 
hear thee again of this 


bh ὃ what LTTraW. i τοῦτο this LTTraw. 
(read human hands) LTTra. 
(read made from one) LiTr[a]. 
GTTrAW ; πρὸς τεταγμένους L. 
katye T. t τανῦν EGW. 
x καθότι inasmuch as LTTraw. 


° παντὸς προσώπου LTTra. 

4 τὸν θεόν God GLTTrA. 
v ἀπαγγέλλει sends word (to all) Ὁ. 
Υ εἶπαν Tra. 


k ὑπάρχων κύριος LTTrA. 
τὰ καὶ τὰ πάντα and all things EGLTTraw. 


| ἀνθρωπίνων 
2 — αἵματος 


Ρ Seta μένους, arranged 
'7 Or L. 


S καὶ ye LTrA ; 
πάντας LTTrA. 


2 περὶ τούτου καὶ (also) πάλιν LTTrA. 


368 


matier. 33 So Paul de- 
parted from among 
them. 34 Howbeit cer- 
tain men clave unto 
him, and believed: a- 
mong the which was 
Dionysius the Areopa- 
gite, and a woman 
named Damaris, and 
others with them. 


XVI. After these 
things Paul departed 
from Athens,and came 
toCorinth; 2and found 
a certain Jew named 
Aquila, born in Pon- 
tus, lately come from 
Italy. with his wife 
Priscilla; (because that 
Claudius had com- 
manded all Jews to 
depart from Rome :) 
and came unto them. 
3 And because he was 
of the same craft, he 
abode with them, and 
wrought : for by their 
eccupation they were 
tentmakers, 4 And he 
reasoned in the syna- 
gogue every sabbath, 
and persuaded the 
Jews and the Greeks. 
5 And when Silas and 
Timotheus were come 
from Macedonia, Paul 
was pressed in the spi- 
rit and testified to the 
Jews that Jesus was 
Christ.6And when they 
opposed themselves, 
and blasphemed, he 
shook his raiment, and 
said unto them, Your 
blood δὲ upon your 
own heads; I am 
clean: from henceforth 
I will go unto the Gen- 
tiles. 7 And he de- 
parted thence, and en- 
tered into a certain 
man’s house, named 
Justus, one that wor- 
shipped God, whose 
house joined hard to 
the synagogue. 8 And 
Crispus, the chief ru- 
ler of the synagogue, 
believed on the Lord 
with all his house; 
and many of the Co- 
rinthians hearing be- 
lieved, and were bap- 
tized. 9 Then spake the 
Lord to Paul in the 
night by a vision, Be 
not afraid, but speak, 
anc hold not thy peace: 
10 for I am with thee, 


TIPAS EIS. 
33 “Καὶ οὕτως ὁ Παῦλος ἐξῆλθεν 


XVII, ΧΥ͂ΠΙ. 


ἐκ μέσου αὐτῶν. 


And thus Paul went out from [the] midst of them. 
34 τινὲς.δὲ ἄνδρες κολληθέντες αὐτῷ ἐπίστευσαν ἐν οἷς 


Butsome men joining themselvestohim believed; 


καὶ διονύσιος °6' “᾿Αρεοπαγίτης," καὶ γυνὴ ὀνόματι Δά- 
also[was] Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman by name Da- 
μαρις, Kai ἕτεροι σὺν αὐτοῖς. 
maris, and others with them. 
18 Μετὰ δὲ" ταῦτα χωρισθεὶς 
And after these things *having *departed 
᾿Αθηνῶν ἦλθεν εἰς Κόρινθον 2 καὶ εὑρών 


among whom 


ἐὸ Παῦλος" ἐκ τῶν 
Paul from 


τινα ᾿Ιουδαῖον 


Athens, came _ to Corinth ; and having found acertain Jew 

> ΄ ? , \ ~ , ’ γ , 
ὀνόματι ᾿Ακύλαν, Ποντικὸν τῷ; γένει, προσφάτως ἐληλυθότα 
by name Aquila, of Pontus by race, lately come 
ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας, Kai Πρίσκιλλαν γυναϊκα.αὐτοῦ, διὰ τὸ 
from Italy, and Priscilla his wife, because 


ἐδ eva! Κλαύδ ίζεσθ i > rove lovdai 
OLATETAXKED AL aidiuv χωρίζεσθαι πάντας τοὺς ᾿Ιουδαίους 
"had “ordered *Claudius to depart all the Jews 

> 1 ~ « ’ ~ ? ~ \ Q A ‘ « , 
Six’ τῆς Ῥώμης, προσῆλθεν αὐτοῖς" 8 καὶ διὰ τὸ ὁμό- 
out of Rome, he came to them, and because of πο *same 
τεχνον εἶναι, ἔμενεν παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς Kai "εἰργάζετο" ἦσαν.γὰρ 
*trade ‘being, heabode with them and worked ; for they were 
σκηνοποιοὶ ἱτὴν. τέχνην." 4 διελέγετο.δὲ ἐν TH συναγωγῇ 


tent makers by trade, And he reasoned in the synagogue 
\ ~ , Ὁ » , ? Wes . oe 
κατὰ. πᾶν. σάββατον, ἔπειθεν.τε ᾿Ιουδαίους καὶ ᾿Ἑλληνας. 
every sabbath, and persuaded Jews and Greeks. 


5 Ὡς δὲ κατῆλθον ἀπὸ τῆς Μακεδονίας ὕ.τε.Σίλας καὶ ὁ Τι- 
And when came down from Macedonia both Silas and Ti- 


μόθεος ἔσυνείχετο τῷ πνεύματι' ὁ Παῦλος διαμαρτυρόμενος 
motheus *was *pressed *in ®spirit *Paul earnestly testifying 

τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις ! τὸν χριστὸν Ἰησοῦν. 6 ἀντιτασ- 
tothe Jews [?to *be] *the Christ 1Jesus. 7As *set ‘°themselves '*in 


͵ \ ? ~ ‘ ΄ ? , 
σομένων δὲ αὐτῶν καὶ βλασφημούντων, ἐκτιναξάμενος 


*Zopposition “but “they «πᾷ were blaspheming, having shaken [his} 
Ta ἱμάτια, εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς, To.aipavpev ἐπὶ τὴν 
garments, he said to them, Your blood [be] upon 
κεφαλὴν ὑμῶν" καθαρὸς ἐγὼ ἀπὸ τοῦ.νῦν εἰς τὰ ἔθνη 
your head : pure (*from‘*it] ‘I from henceforth to the nations 
πορεύσομαι. 7 Kat μεταβὰς ἐκεῖθεν "ἦλθεν" gic οἰκίαν 
will go. And having departed thence he came to [the] house 
Twoe ὀνόματι" Ἰούστου, σεβομένου τὸν θεόν, οὗ 
of acertain one by name Justus, who worshipped God, of whom 


ἡ οἰκία ἦν συνομοροῦσα τῇ συναγωγῇ. ὃ Κρίσπος.δὲ ὁ 
the house was adjoining the synagogue. But Crispus the 
ἀρχισυνάγωγος ἐπίστευσεν τῷ κυρίῳ σὺν ὅλῳ τῷ.οἴκῳ.αὐ- 
ruler of thesynagogue _— believed inthe Lord with *whole this house; 
τοῦ" Kai πολλοὶ τῶν Κορινθίων ἀκούοντες ἐπίστευον καὶ 


and many ofthe Corinthians hearing believed and 
ἐβαπτίζοντο. 9 Εἶπεν.δὲ ὁ κύριος Ot ὁράματος ἐν νυκτὶ" 
were baptized. Andsaid the Lord by a vision in (the) night 


τῷ Παύλῳ, Μὴ.φοβοῦ, ἀλλὰ λάλει καὶ μὴ.σιωπήσῃς" 10 διότι 


ἃ -- καὶ LITA, 
LTTr[A]. 
from LITraw. 
ξ συνείχετο τῷ λόγῳ 
@ εἰσῆλθεν LT. 


“was “engrossed *with °the “word GLTTraw. 
1 + Τιτίου Titius Τ[Ὑ:1. 


to Paul, Fear not, but speak and be not silent; because 
Ὁ — 6 [fr]. © ᾿Αρεοπαγείτης T; ᾿Αρειοπαγίτης W. 4 — δὲ and 
€ — ὃ Παῦλος (read he having departed) Lrtra. f τεταχέναι τ. & ἀπὸ 


h ἠργάζετο LTrA: ἠργάζοντο they worked T i τῇ τέχνῃ LYTrAW. 
1 + εἶναι to bo xt. 


° ἐν νυκτὶ δι’ ὁράματος LITrA. 


XVIII. ACTS. 


aye εἰμι μετὰ GOV, Kai οὐδεὶς ἐπιθήσεταί σοι τοῦ κακῶσαί σε" 
am with thee, and noone shallseton thee to ill-treat thee ; 


διότι λαός ἐστίν μοι πολὺς ἐν τῇ.πόλει.ιταύτῃ. 11 ᾿Εκάθισέν 
oecause people there isto τ much ia this chy ?He *remained 


Pre! ἐνιαυτὸν aes Hades ἐξ διδάσκων ἐν αὐτοῖς τὸν λόγον 


‘and & year months ‘six, teaching among them the word 
τοῦ θεοῦ. 
of God. 
12 Γαλλίωνος δὲ Ἰἀνθυπατεύοντος τῆς Ayaiac, κατεπ- 
But Gallio being proconsul of Achaia, ®rose 
éoTnoay ὁμοθυμαδὸν οἱ Ἰουδαῖοι τῷ Παύλῳ, Kai ἤγαγον 
‘against “with ont 5Saccord ‘the 7Jews Paul, and led 
αὐτὸν ἐπὶ to βῆμα, 18 λέγοντες, Ὅτι παρὰ τὸν νόμον 
him to the judgment seat, saying, That contrary to the law 
τοῦτος ἀναπείθει" τοὺς ἀνθρώπους σέβεσθαι τὸν θεόν. 
this [man] persuades men to worship God. 
14 Μέλλοντος.δὲ τοῦ TlavAov ἀνοίγειν τὸ στόμα, εἶπεν ὁ 
But *being “about 1Paul to open [his] mouth, said 
Γαλλίων πρὸς τοὺς ᾿Ιουδαίους, Ei μὲν "οὖν" ἦν ἀδί- 


*Gallio the Tf indeed therefore it was *unrighteous- 
en τι ἢ ῥᾳδιούργημα πονηρόν, ὦ Ἰουδαῖοι, κατὰ λόγον 


to Jews, 


ness ‘some or onan palsy 1wicked, O Jews, according to reason 
ἂν "ἠνεσχόμην" ὑμῶν, 15 εἰ. δὲ '"ζήτημά" ἐστιν περὶ 
I should have borne with yon, but if aquestion itbe about 


λόγου Kai ὀνομάτων Kai νόμου τοῦ 
a@word and names and 


καθ᾽ ὑμᾶς, ὄψεσθε 
alaw which[is] among yon, ye willsee 
κριτὴς. “γὰρ! ἐγὼ τούτων οὐ.βούλομαι εἶναι. 
for a judge of these things do not wish to be. 
16 Kai ἀπήλασεν αὐτοὺς ἀπὸ τοῦ βήματος" 17 ἐπιλαβό- 
And he drove them from the Judgment. seat. parang, “laid 


νοι δὲ πάντες “οἱ EXAnvec! Σωσθένην τὸν ἀρχισυνάγωγον 
old®on'and 21 *the ‘Greeks Sosthenes the ruler of thesynagogue, 


ἔτυπτον ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ βήματος" Kai οὐδὲν τού- 
they beat {him) before the judgment seat. And *nothing °about 7these 


τω» τῷ Γαλλίωνι ἔμελεν. 
®things *to *Gallio ‘it mattered. 


18 Ὁ δὲ Παῦλος ἔτι προσμείνας ἡμέρας ἱκανάς, τοῖς ἀδελ- 


αὐτοί: 
to it] yourselves ; 


But Paul yet havingremained 7days ‘many, ‘the “breth- 
φοῖς ἀποταξάμενος. ἐξέπλει εἰς τὴν Συρίαν, καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ 
ren “having *taken *leave Sof sailed away to Syria, and with him 


Πρίσκιλλα καὶ ᾿Ακύλας, κειράμενος τὴν κεφαλὴν ἐν Key- 


Priscilla and Aquila, having shorn [his] head in Cen- 
χρεαῖς" εἶχεν. γὰρ εὐχήν. 19 Τκατήντησεν᾽" δὲ εἰς “Epeoor, κἀ- 
chrea, for he had avow: and he came to Ephesus, and 
κείνους κατέλιπεν δαὐτοῦ" αὐτὸς. δὲ εἰσελθὼν εἰς τὴν 
*them τοῖν there. But he himself having entered into the 


συναγωγὴν dtedéxOn! τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις. 20 ἐρωτώντων δὲ 
ἘΣΠΒΕοεῦΘ reasoned with the Jews. And (asking [Phim] 
αὐτῶν ἐπὶ πλείονα χρόνον μεῖναι “παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς οὐκ. ἐπένευσεν" 
‘they for ἃ longer time toremain with them he did not accede, 
21 ἀλλ᾽ ἀπετάξατο αὐτοῖς," εἰπών, “Δεῖ pe πάντως τὴν 
but tookleave of them, saying, It behoves me by all means the 


Ρ δὲ LITra. 
* ἀνεσχόμην LTTr. 


4 ἀνθυπάτου ὄντος LTTrA. τ ἀναπείθει οὗτος Lrtraw. 
* ζητήματά questions LITra. 
LITraw. Σ ἐν Keyxpeats (Κενχρεαῖς T) τὴν κεφαλήν. LTTra. 
LTTrA. a ἐκεῖ L. > διελέξατο aoe ¢ πῦρ αὐτοῖς LTTrA. 
καὶ but taking leave and LTtra. — Aci we .... Ἱεροσόλυμα LTTrA. 


369 


and no man shall set 
on thee to hurt thee : 
for I have much peo- 
ple in this city. 11 And 
he continued there a 
year and six months, 
teaching the word of 
God among them. 


12 And when Gallio 
was the deputy of A- 
chaia, the Jews made 
insurrection with one 
aecord against Paul, 
and brought him to 
the judgment seat, 
13 saying, This fellow 
persuadeth men to 
worship God contrary 
to the law. 14 And 
when Paul was now 
about to open his 
mouth, Gallio said un- 
to the Jews, If it were 
a matter of wrong or 
wicked iewdness, O ye 
Jews, reason would 
that [should bear with 
you: 15 but ifit bea 
question of words and 
names, and of your 
law, look ye to it; for I 
will be no judge οἵ 
such matters. 16 And 
he drave them from 
the judgment seat, 
17 Then all the Greeks 
took Sosthenes, Ξξ 
chief ruler of the s 
agogue, and beat 
before the Heer aby 
seat. And Gallio cared 
for none of those 
things. 


18 And Paul after 
this tarricd there yet 
a good while, and 
then took his leave of 
the brethren, andsail- 
ed thence into Syria, 
and with him Priscilla 
and Aguila; having 
shorn Ais head in Cen- 
chrea: for he had a 
vow. 19 And he came 
to Ephesus, and left 
them there: but he 
himself entered into 
the synagogue, and 
reasoned with the 
Jews. 20 When they 
desired him to tarry 
longer time with them, 
he consented not; 
21 but bade them fare- 
well, saying, I must 
by all means keep this 


— yap LTTraw. 


3 — οὖν LTTr[A]W. 
x — ot Ἕλληνες 


2 κατήντησαν they came 
ἃ ἀλλὰ ἀποταξάμενος 


ΒΒ 


970 


feast that cometh in 
Jerusalem : but I will 
return again untoyou, 
if God will. he 
sailed from Ephesus. 
22 And when he had 
landed at Cxsarea, and 
gone up, and saluted 
the church, he went 
down to Antioch. 
23 And after he had 
spent some time there, 
he departed, and went 
over all the country of 
Galatia and Phrygia 
in order, strengthen- 
ing all the disciples. 


24 And 4 certain 
Jew named Apollos, 
born at Alexandria, 
an eloquent man, 
and mighty in the 
scriptures, came to 
Ephesus. 25 This man 
was instructed in the 
way of the Lord; and 
being fervent in the 
spirit, he spake and 
taught diligently the 
things of the Lord, 
knowing only the bap- 
tism of John. 26 And 
he began to speak 
boldly in the syna- 
gogue: whom when 
Aquila and Priscilla 
had heard, they took 
him unto them, and 
expounded unto him 
the way of God more 
perfectly. 27 And when 
he was disposed to pass 
into Achaia, the breth- 
ren wrote, exhorting 
the disciples to receive 
him: who, when he 
was come, helped them 
much which had be- 
lieved through grace: 
28 forhe mightily con- 
vinced the Jews, and 
that publickly, shew- 
ing by the scriptures 
that Jesus was Christ. 


XIX. Andit came to 
pass, that, while A- 

ollos was at Corinth, 

aul having passed 
through the upper 
coasts came to Ephe- 
sus : and finding cer- 
tain disciples, 2he said 
unto them, Have ye 
received the Holy 
Ghost since ye beliey- 
ed? And they said un- 
to him, We have not so 
much as heard whe- 
ther there be any Holy 
Ghest. 3 And he said 


NPAZETIS. XVIII, XIX. 
ἑορτὴν THY ἐρχομένην ποιῆσαι εἰς ἹἹεροσόλυμα"" πάλιν ἰδὲ" 
*feast lcoming tokeep ὖ erusalem, but again 


ἀνακάμψω πρὸς ὑμᾶς, τοῦ θεοῦ θέλοντος. FKai' ἀνήχθη ἀπὸ 
I will return to you, God __— willing. And he sailed from 
τῆς Ἐφέσου" 22 καὶ κατελθὼν sic "Καισάρειαν, ἀναβὰς 
Ephesus. And having landed at Ceesarea, having gone up 
καὶ ἀσπασάμενος τὴν ἐκκλησίαν κατέβη εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν. 
and having saluted the assembly he went down to Antioch. 
23 καὶ ποιήσας χρόνον τινὰ ἐξῆλθεν, διερχόμενος καθεξῆς 


And having stayed *time ‘some he went forth, passing through °in 7order 
τὴν Γαλατικὴν χώραν καὶ Φρυγίαν, ᾿ἰἐπιστηρίζων᾽ πάντας 


‘the 7?Galatian ®country %and ‘Phrygian, establishing all 
τοὺς μαθητάς. 
the disciples. 


24 Ἰουδαῖος.δὲ τις ᾿Απολλὼς ὀνόματι, ᾿Αλεξανδρεὺς τῷ 


But 4 ον ‘certain, Apollos by name, an Alexandrian 
γένει, ἀνὴρ λόγιος, κατήντησεν εἰς "Ἔφεσον, δυνατὸς ὧν 


by race, *man ‘an *eloquent, came to Ephesus, “mighty ‘being 
ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς. 25 οὗτος ἦν Karnynpévoc τὴν ὁδὸν τοῦ 
in the scriptures. He was _ instructed in the way of the 
κυρίου, καὶ ζέων τῷ πνεύματι, ἐλάλει καὶ ἐδίδασκεν 
Lord, and being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught 

ἀκριβῶς τὰ περὶ ἔτοῦ κυρίου." ἐπιστάμενος μόνον τὸ 
accurately the things concerning the Lord, knowing only the 


’ 1’ ΄ ell , ” »ε , ? 
βάπτισμα Iwavvov'" 26 οὗτός τε ἤρξατο παῤῥησιάζεσθαι ἐν 
baptism of John. And he began to speak boldly in 
~ ~ ? , a > ~ τη , 4 , " 
τῇ συναγωγῇ. ἀκούσαντες.δὲ αὐτοῦ ™ Ακύλας καὶ Πρίσκιλλα 
the synagogue. ἀπᾶ “βαυΐηρ heard ®him Aquila ?and Priscilla 
προσελάβοντο αὐτόν, καὶ ἀκριβέστερον αὐτῷ ἐξέθεντο τὴν 
they took *to [*them] ‘him, and more accurately to him expounded the 
"rov θεοῦ ὁδόν." 27 βουλομένου.δὲ αὐτοῦ διελθεῖν εἰς τὴν 
?0f Ξ6οὔ ‘way. And *being *minded ‘he _ to pass through into 
? + , Capes: mm ~ ~ 
᾿Αχαΐαν. προτρεψάμενοι οἱ ἀδελφοὶ ἔγραψαν τοῖς μαθηταῖς 
Achaia, 7exhorting [*them]'the*brethren “wrote ‘to *the Sdisciples 
? [2 >? , a , ων. 4 ~ 
ἀποδέξασθαι αὐτόν" ὃς παραγενόμενος συνεβάλετο πολὺ τοῖς 
to welcome him, who having arrived helped much those who 
πεπιστευκόσιν διὰ τῆς χάριτος" 28 εὐτόνως. γὰρ τοῖς “lov- 
believed through grace. For powerfully the Jews 
δαίοις διακατηλέγχετο δημοσίᾳ, ἐπιδεικνὺς διὰ τῶν γραφῶν, 
he confuted publicly, shewing by the _ scriptures 
εἶναι τὸν χριστὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν. 
2[ο 86 *the ‘Christ 17 6585. 
19 ᾿Ἐγένετο.δὲ ἐν τῷ τὸν ᾿Απολλὼ εἶναι ἐν Κορίνθῳ, ἸΠαῦ- 
Andit came to pass, while Apollos was in Corinth, Paul, 
λον διελθόντα τὰ ἀνωτερικὰ μέρη, “ἐλθεῖν!" εἰς "Ἔφεσον" 
having passed through the upper parts, came to Ephesus, 
καὶ Ῥεὑρών" τινας μαθητὰς 2 εἶπεν ἃ πρὸς αὐτούς, Et 
and having found certain disciples he said to them, [The] 
~ idA ἐλ ld ᾿ ἁ [ δὲ Τ' Ϊ Π A 
πνεῦμα ἅγιον ἐλάβετε πιστεύσαντες ; Oi.dé τεῖπον" πρὸς 
2Spirit ‘Holy did ye receive, having believed? Andthey said to 
αὐτόν, ᾿Αλλ’ δοὐδὲ εἰ πνεῦμα ἅγιόν ἐστιν, ἠκούσαμεν. 
him, Not even if (the) 7Spirit Holy is, did we hear. 


f — δὲ but LTTrA. 


Ἰησοῦ Jesus LTTraw. 
LITr ; — Tov θεοῦ A. 
* — elroy (read [said]) LTTraw. 


5 Καισαρίαν T. ἱ στηρίζων LYTrA. Κ τοῦ 
ι "Iwavov Tr. m ἸΤρίσκιλλα καὶ ᾿Ακύλας LTTrA. π ὁδὸν τοῦ θεοῦ 
ο κατελθεῖν T. Ρ εὑρεῖν found LTTrA. 4 -- τε and (he said) τττὰ. 
5 οὐδ᾽ LTA. 


Β — καὶ {1ττὰ. 


XIX. ACTS. 
3 ᾿Εἶπέν τε" πρὸς αὐτούς," Εἰς τί οὖν ἐβαπτίσθητε; Oi-dé 
And he said to them, To what then were ye baptized? And they 


πεῖπον, Εἰς τὸ *Iwavvov' βάπτισμα. 4 Ἐπεν.δὲ Παῦλος, 
said, To the 308 SJohn *baptism. And *said *Paul, 
Τ᾽ Ἰωάννης" tpéiv' ἐβάπτισεν βάπτισμα μετανοίας, τῷ 
John indeed baptized [with] abaptism of repentance, to the 
λαῷ λέγων, εἰς τὸν ἐρχόμενον μετ᾽ αὐτὸν ἵνα πιστεύσωσιν, 
people saying, *7On “him ‘coming ‘after ‘Shim ‘that they should believe, 
"τουτέστιν᾽ εἰς TOY ὑχριστὸν᾽ Ἰησοῦν. ὃ ᾿Ακούσαντες δὲ ἐβαπ- 
that is, on *the Christ Jesus, And having heard they 
τίσθησαν εἰς τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ. 6 Kai ἐπιθέντος 
were baptized to the name ofthe Lord Jesus. And “having *laid 
αὐτοῖς Tov Παύλου ‘rac! χεῖρας ἦλθεν τὸ πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον 


Son *them Paul *hands came the Spirit the Holy 
ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς, ἐλάλουν.τε γλώσσαις καὶ “προεφήτευον." 
upon them, and they were speaking with tongues and prophesying. 


\ £ ΄ » e ‘ " ᾽ ‘ 5 

7 ἦσαν.δὲ ot πάντες ἄνδρες ὡσεὶ “δεκαδύο. 8 Εἰσελθὼν δὲ 
And‘*were*the ‘all Smen about twelve. And having entered 
εἰς τὴν συναγωγὴν ἐπαῤῥησιάζετο, ἐπὶ μῆνας τρεῖς διαλεγό- 
into the synagogue he spoke boldly, for “months ‘three reason- 
μενος καὶ πείθων τὰ! περὶ τῆς βασιλείας τοῦ θεοῦ. 
ing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God. 
9 Ὡς δὲ τινες ἐσκληρύνοντο Kai ἠπείθουν, κακολογοῦντες τὴν 
But when some werehardened and disobeyed, speaking evil of the 
ὁδὸν ἐνώπιον τοῦ πλήθους, ἀποστὰς ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν ἀφώρισεν 
way before the multitude, having departed from them he separated 
τοὺς μαθητάς, καθ᾽ ἡμέραν διαλεγόμενος ἐν τῇ σχολῇ Τυράν- 
the disciples, daily reasoning in the school of *Tyran- 
vou §rivoc." 10 Τοῦτο.δὲ ἐγένετο ἐπὶ ἔτη δύο, ὥστε πάντας 

nus 8 *certain. And this was for “years ‘two, so that all 

τοὺς κατοικοῦντας THY ᾿Ασίαν ἀκοῦσαι τὸν λόγον τοῦ κυρίου 

those who inhabited Asia heard the word ofthe Lord 
©Tyoov," ᾿Ιουδαίους.τε καὶ Ἕλληνας" 11 Δυνάμεις. τε ov τὰς 

Jesus, both Jews and Greeks. And works of power not 

, i2 , « ΡῈ} . - ~ Tl DN 12 ‘74 ‘ 
τυχουσας ἑποίξι O θεὸς διὰ των χειρων avAov, WOTE και 


common ?wrought ‘God by the hands of Paul, so that even 
ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀσθενοῦντας ἐπιφέρεσθαι! ἀπὸ τοῦὔ-χρωτὸς. αὐτοῦ 
to those being sick were brought from his skin 


σουδάρια ἢ σιμικίνθια, Kai ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν τὰς 

handkerchiefs or aprons, and departed from them the 
, ΄ ‘ ‘ > , ? ? ? ~ 

νόσους, τά.τε πνεύματα τὰ πονηρὰ ἰἐξέρχεσθαι ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν." 
diseases, and the “spirits ‘wicked wentout from _ them. 
, ? x ~ 1 δὶ 2 . , 

13 ᾿Επεχείρησαν.δέ τινες ard τῶν" περιερχομένων ᾿Ιουδαίων 
But ’took *in “hand ‘certain *from “the *wandering 5Jews, 

ἐξορκιστῶν ὀνομάζειν ἐπὶ τοὺς ἔχοντας Ta πνεύματα τὰ 

Sexorcists, to name over those who had the spirits 
πονηρὰ TO ὄνομα Tov κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ, λέγοντες, “ OpKiZopev" 


twicked the name ofthe Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure 
~ x ~ a ε ~ 7 , 

ὑμᾶς τὸν Ἰησοῦν ὃν °6' Παῦλος κηρύσσει. 14 “Hoav.dé 

you [by] Jesus, whom Paul proclaims. And there were 


371 
unto them, Unto what 
then were ye baptiz- 
ed? And they said, 
Unto John’s baptism. 
4 Thensaid Paul, John 
verily baptized with 
the baptism of repent- 
ance, saying unto 
the people, that they 
should believe on him 
which should come 
after him, that is, on 
Christ Jesus. 5 When 
they heard this, they 
were baptized in the 
Mame of the Lord 
Jesus. 6 And when 
Paulhad laid his hands 
upon them, the Holy 
Ghost came on them; 
and they spake with 
tongues, and prophesi- 
ed. 7 And all the men 
were about twelve. 
8 And he went into the 
synagogue, and spake 
boldly for the space of 
three months, disput- 
ing and persuading 
the things concerning 
the kingdom of God, 
9 But when divers 
were hardened, and be- 
lieved not, but spake 
evil of that way before 
the multitude, he de- 
parted from them, and 
separated the disciples, 
disputing daily in the 
school of one Tyran- 
nus. 10 And this con- 
tinued by the space of 
two years ; so that all 
they which dwelt in 
Asia heard the word 
of the Lord Jesus, 
both Jews and Greeks, 
11 And God wrought 
special miracles by the 
hands ef Paul: 12 so 
that from his body 
were brought unto the 
sick handkerchiefs or 
aprons, and the dis- 
eases departed from 
them, and the evil spi- 
Tits went out of them. 
13 Then certain of 
the vagabond Jews, 
exorcists, took upon 
them to call over 
them which had evil 
spirits the name of 
the Lord Jesus, say- 
ing, We adjure you 
by Jesus whom Paul 
preacheth. 14 And 
there were seven sons 


τ ὃ δὲ εἶπεν T. ¥ — πρὸς αὐτούς LTTrAW. ἡ εἶπαν LTTra. 
Υ Ἰωάνης Tr. 7—yéyGLTTraA. 8 τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν GT. 
1{1ΊτΑ᾿. 4 ἐπροφήτευον LTTra. @ δώδεκα LTTraW. 
4 — Ἰησοῦ GLTTraw. 1 ὁ θεὸς ἐποίει LTTrAW. 
πορεύεσθαι (--- ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν) GLTTrAW. ™ καὶ τῶν also of the Lrtra. 


GLTTrAW. ° — OLTTra. 


f— τὰ Ltr. 


> — χριστὸν GLTTrA. 


Κ ἀποφέρεσθαι LTTrA. 


x Ἰωάνου Tr. 
©— τὰς 
& — τινός LTTrA. 
1 éx- 
2 “Opxigw I adjure 


972 


of one Sceva, a Jew, 
andchief of the priests, 
which didso. 15 And 
the evil spirit answer- 
ed and said, Jesus I 
know, and Paul I 
know; but who are ye? 
16 And the man in 
whom the evil spirit 
was leaped on them, 
and overcame them, 
and prevailed against 
them, so that they fled 
out of that house na- 
ked and wounded. 
17 And this was known 
to all the Jews and 
Greeks also dwelling 
at Ephesus ; and fear 
fell on them all, 
and the name of the 
Lord Jesus was magni- 
fied. 18 And many that 
believed came, and 
confessed, and shewed 
their deeds. 19 Many 
of them also which 
used curious. arts 
brought their books 
together, and burned 
them before all men: 
and they counted the 
price of them, and 
found tt fifty thousand 
pieces of silver. 20 So 
mightily grew the 
word of God and pre- 
vailed. 


21 After these things 
were ended, Paul pur- 
posed in the spirit, 
when he had passed 
through Macedonia 
and Achaia, to go to 
Jerusalem, saying, Af- 
ter I have been there, 
1 must also see Rome. 
22 So-he sent into Ma- 
eedonia two of them 
that ministered unto 
him, Timotheus and 
Erastus ; but he him- 
self stayed in Asia for 
a season. 23 And the 
same time there arose 
no small stir about 
that way. 24 For a 
certain man named 
Demetrius, ἃ silver- 
smith, which made sil- 
ver shrines for Diana, 


TIPAZEIS. XIX. 


Prevec' υἱοὶ" Σκευᾶ ᾿Ιουδαίου ἀρχιερέως ἑπτὰ 4 τοὶ" τοῦτο 
certain [men] *sons *of *Sceva °a *Jew, 7a ®high *priest ‘seven who this 


ποιοῦντες. 15 ἀποκριθὲν.δὲ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ πονηρὸν εἴπεν", 


were doing. But answering the “spirit wicked said, 
x ? ~ , ‘ ~ ΄ t ~ 

Τὸν Ἰησοῦν γινώσκω. καὶ τὸν Παῦλον ἐπίσταμαι" ὑμεῖς 
Jesus Ikmow, and Paul Iam acquainted with; “ye 


δὲ τίνες ἐστέ: 16 Kai ᾿ἐφαλλόμενος" "ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς ὁ ἄνθρω- 
‘but, who are ye? And leaping on them the man 
ᾧ ἦν τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ πονηρόν, “καὶ! κατακυριεύσας 
in whom was the “spirit 1wicked, and having mastered 
χαὐτῶν" ἴσχυσεν κατ᾽ αὐτῶν, ὥστε γυμνοὺς καὶ τετραυματισ- 
them prevailed against them, sothat naked and wounded 
μένους ἐκφυγεῖν ἐκ τοῦ οἴκου.ἐκείνου. 17 τοῦτο.δὲ ἐγένετο 
they escaped out of that house. Andthis became 
γνωστὸν πᾶσιν Tovdaiorc.re καὶ Ἕλλησιν τοῖς κατοικοῦσιν τὴν 
known to all both Jews and Greeks, those inhabiting 
a” ‘ ? , Π , ? 4 , ? , CY be 
Εφεσον. καὶ γἐπέπεσεν" φόβος ἐπὶ πάντας αὐτούς, Kai ἐμεγα- 
Ephesus, and 3611 ‘fear upon all ‘them, and was mag- 
λύνετο τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ. 18 Πολλοίτε τῶν 
nified the name ofthe Lord Jesus. And many of those who 


πεπιστευκότων ἤρχοντο ἐξομολογούμενοι Kai ἀναγγέλλοντες 
believed came confessing and declaring 


3 , ᾽ ~ « aaa ~ Α » 
τὰς πράξεις αὐτῶν. 19 ἱκανοὶ δὲ τῶν τὰ περίεργα πρα- 


their deeds. And many of those who the curious arts prac- 
ἕάντων συνενέγκαντες τὰς βίβλους κατέκαιον ἐνώπιον 
tised having brought the books burnt [them] before 


πάντων Kai συνεψήφισαν τὰς τιμὰς αὐτῶν, Kai εὗρον 
all. And they reckonedup the prices ofthem, and found [it] 


3 ΄ ’ , Ω er a ’ zs , ~ 
ἀργυρίου μυριάδας πέντε. 20 οὕτως κατὰ κράτος Τὸ λόγος τοῦ 


3of *silver 2myriads "five. Thus with might the word of the 
κυρίου" ηὔξανεν καὶ ἴσχυεν. 

Lord increased and prevailed. 

21 Ὡς. δὲ ἐπληρώθη ταῦτα ἔθετο ὁ Παῦλος ἐν τῷ πνεύ- 


_And when were fulfilled these things purposed Paul in the _ spirit, 


ματι, διελθὼν" τὴν Μακεδονίαν καὶ Ὁ ᾿Αχαΐαν πορεύε-- 
having passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to 


σθαι εἰς “lepovoadnp," εἰπών, Ὅτι pera τὸ γενέσθαι pe ἐκεῖ 


go to Jerusalem, saying, After “having *been ‘my there 
δεῖ με καὶ Ῥώμην ἰδεῖν. 22 ᾿Αποστείλας.δὲ εἰς ὁτὴν!" 

it behoves me also Rome to see. And haying sent into 

Μακεδονίαν δύο τῶν διακονούντων αὐτῷ, Τιμόθεον Kai 


Macedonia two of those who ministered tohim, Timotheus and 


» ᾽ A ᾽ , ’ > ‘ ᾽ , ? , 
Εραστον, αὐτὸς ἐπέσχεν χρόνον εἰς τὴν Ασίαν" 23. Ἐγένετο 
rastus, he remained atime in Asia. 2Came *to *pass 
δὲ κατὰ τὸν. καιρὸν ἐκεῖνον τάραχος οὐκ ὀλίγος περὶ τῆς 
‘and = at that time 3disturbance ‘no small about the 
ὁδοῦ. 24 Δημήτριος.γάρ τις ὀνόματι, ἀργυροκόπος, 
way. For ‘Demetrius ‘a ?certain[*man] by name, a silversmith, 
ποιῶν ναοὺς ἀργυροῦς ᾿Αρτέμιδος. “παρείχετο" τοῖς τεχνίταις 


brought ΠΟ small gain making ?temples _'silver of Artemis, brought tothe artificers 
unto the craftsmen ; ¢) , Prey, sil 0 , ἢ ae 
25 whom hecalled to- ἐργασίαν οὐκ ὀλίγην" 25 οὺς συναθροίσας, Kai τοὺς 
gether with the work- 3eain ™o little ; whom having brought together, and the 
Ρ τινος (read seven sons of a certain one) LTr. 4 viol placed after ἑπτὰ LTTrA. τ -- οι 


LTT:[A]. 

LTTrA. ν — Kat 
λόγος LTTrA. 
LETCAW. 


5. + αὐτοῖς to them LTTrAw. 


@ διελθεῖν to have passed through t. 
qd — χὴν Τ. 


v ε "΄ » > , ΄ 
ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς 
Ἢ plate 
* TOU κυρίου ὁ 
ΕΣ la 
“Ἱεροσόλυμα 


ὃ ἐφαλόμενος LITA. 
τ ἀμφοτέρων both LTtra. Υ ἔπεσεν Lr. 
b+ τὴν 1,.. 

f οὐκ ὀλίγην ἐργασίαν LTTrA. 


LTTrAW. 


δ᾽ παρεῖχε, 


XIX. A€ ES. 


περὶ τὰ.τοιαῦτα ἐργάτας, εἶπεν, “Avdpec, ἐπίστασθε ὅτι εκ 
7in «©4such*things “workmen, he said, Men, yeknow that from 
ταύτης τῆς ἐργασίας ἡ εὐπορία Ξἡμῶν" ἐστιν᾽ 26 Kai θεωρεῖτε 
this gain the wealth of us is ; and ye see 
‘ > , ee ? , ? , ? ‘ h " ΄ ~ 

Kai ἀκούετε ὅτι οὐ μόνον ᾿Εφέσου ἀλλὰ ὃ σχεδὸν πάσης τῆς 
and hear that not only of Ephesus but almost of all 
᾿Ασίας ὁ-Παῦλος.οὗτος πείσας μετέστησεν ἱκανὸν ὄχλον, 
Asia this Paul having persuaded turned away agreat multitude, 
λέγων Ore οὐκ.εἰσὶν θεοὶ οἱ διὰ χειρῶν γινόμενοι. 27 ov 
saying that they ars not gods which by hands are made, *Not 
μόνον δὲ τοῦτο κινδυνεύει ἡμῖν τὸ μέρος εἰς ἀπελεγμὸν 


only ‘now “this Ὧ15 dangerous to us [lest] the business7into “disrepute 
ἐλθεῖν, ἀλλὰ Kai TO τῆς μεγάλης θεᾶς * ρτέμιδος ἱερὸν᾽ εἰς 
tcome, but alsothe *of*the *great ‘°goddess Artemis ‘temple for 


Κοὐδὲν" ᾿Ἰλογισθῆναι, μέλλειν" "δὲ" καὶ καθαιρεῖσθαι "τὴν μεγα- 
nothing be reckoned, and be about also tobe destroyed the ma- 
λειότητα" αὐτῆς, ἣν ὅλη %)'’Acia καὶ ἡ οἰκουμένη σέβεται. 
jesty of her, whom all Asia and the habitable world worships. 
28 ᾿Ακούσαντες.δὲ καὶ γενόμενοι πλήρεις θυμοῦ, ἔκρα- 

And having heard, and having become full of indignation, they cried 
lov λέγοντες, Μεγάλη ἡ “Aoremic  Edsciwy. 29 Kai 
out saying, Great the Artemis of [the] Ephesians. And 
? AY θ € aN POA ll q , - LA ΄ t θ ἂν 
ἐπλησθὴ ἢ πόλις Ῥολη" 4 συγχύσεως" ὠὡρμήσαν.τε ομοθὺυ 
“was °filled ‘the *city "whole with confusion, and they rushed with one 
paddy εἰς τὸ θέατρον, συναρπάσαντες Γάϊον καὶ ᾿Αρί- 
accord to the _ theatre, having seized with [them] Gaius and Ari- 
orapxov Μακεδόνας, συνεκδήμους ττοῦ" Παύλου. 30'rov' "δὲ 
starchus, Macedonians, fellcw-travellers of Paul, But 


Παύλου" βουλομένου εἰσελθεῖν εἰς τὸν δῆμον, οὐκ.εἴων αὐτὸν 


Paul intending togoin to the people, *did*not °suffer “him 
ot μαθηταί. 31 τινὲς δὲ καὶ τῶν ᾿Ασιαρχῶν ὄντες αὐτῷ 
“the *disciples, and some also of the chiefs of Asia being *to *him 


φίλοι, πέμψαντες πρὸς αὐτόν. παρεκάλουν μὴ δοῦναι ἑαυτὸν 
friends, having sent to him, urged [him] not toventure himself 
εἰς TO θέατρον. 32 addotpév.oty.adXo-71 ἔκραζον. 

into the theatre. Some therefore one thing and some another were crying out ; 
ἦν γὰρ ἡ ἐκκλησία 'ἱσυγκεχυμένη," καὶ οἱ πλείους οὐκ.ῴδεισαν 
for *was ‘the *assembly contused, and the most did not know 


τίνος Yévexey' συνεληλύθεισαν. 33 ἐκ.δὲ τοῦ 
for what cause they had come together. But from among the 


ὑπροεβίβασαν' ᾿Αλέξανδρον, *zpoBaddvrwy' αὐτὸν τῶν 


ὄχλου 


crowd 


they put forward Alexander, “thrusting °*forward *him ithe 
ἸἸουδαίων᾽ ὁ. δὲ ᾿Αλέξανδρος κατασείσας τὴν χεῖρα, 
Jews. And Alexander, having made a sign with the hand, 


ἤθελεν ἀπολογεῖσθαι τῷ δήμῳ. 34 γἐπιγνόντων" δὲ ὅτι 
wished to make a defence to the people. But having recognized that 
ἸἸουδαῖός ἐστιν, φωνὴ ἐγένετο μία ἐκ πάντων, ὡς ἐπὶ ὥρας 

a Jew heis, ‘cry ‘there*was *onefrom all, for about “hours 
δύο ᾿κραζόντων," Μεγάλη ἡ ΓΑρτεμις ᾿Εφεσίων. 35 Kara- 
‘two crying out, Great the Artemis of [the] Ephesians. *Having 

f A « ‘ 4 » 7 » ? iA 

στείλας δὲ ὁ γραμματεὺς τὸν ὄχλον φησίν. Avdpec ᾿Εφέσιοι, 
Scalmed ‘andthe “recorder the crowd says, Men Ephesians, 


& ἡμῖν to us LITra. h καὶ also L. 
1 λογισθήσεται (shall be counted), μέλλει L. τὰ τε EGLTTrA. 
° [ἡ] Tr. P— ὅλη LTTrA. 4. - τῆς GTTrAW. τ — τοῦ GLTTrAW. 
touv-T. "ἄνεκα LTTrA. * συνεβίβασαν they instructed Lrtr. 
J ἐπιγνόντες GLTTrAW. 2 κράζοντες 1. 


‘heard 


1 ἱερὸν ᾿Αρτέμιδος TA. 
π τῆς μεγαλειότητος LTTrA. 
8 Παύλου δὲ LTTrAW. 
X προβαλλόντων EGL, 


373 


men of like occupa- 
tion, and said, Sirs, ye 
know that by this craft 
we have our wealth. 
26 Moreover ye see and 
hear, that not alone at 
Ephesus, but almost 
throughout all Asia, 
this Paul hath per- 
suaded and turned a- 
way much people, say- 
ing that they be no 
gods, which are made 
with hands : 27 so that 
not only this our craft 
is in danger to be set 
at nought; but also 
that the temple of the 
great goddess Diana 
should be despised, 
and her magnificence 
should be destroyed, 
whom all Asia and 
the world worshippeth. 
28 And when they 
these sayings, 
theywere fullof wrath, 
and cried out, saying, 
Great is Diana of the 
Ephesians. 29 And the 
whole city was filled 
with confusion: and 
having caught Gaius 
and Aristarchus, men 
of Macedonia, Paul’s 
companions in travel, 
they rushed with one 
accord into the thea- 
tre, 30 And when Paul 
would have entered in 
unto the people, the 
disciples suffered him 
ποῦ, 31 And certain of 
the chief of Asia, which 
were his friends, sent 
unto him, desiring him 
that he would not ad- 
venture himself into 
the theatre. 32 Some 
therefore cried one 
thing, and some an- 
other: for the as- 
sembly was confused ; 
and the more part 
knew not wherefore 
they were come to- 
gether. 33 And they 
drew Alexander out 
of the multitude, the 
Jews putting him for- 
ward. And Alexander 
beckoned with the 
hand, and would have 
made his defence unto 
the people. 34 But 
when they knew that 
he was a Jew, all with 
one voice about the 
space of two hours 
cried out, Great ὦ 
Diana of the Ephe- 
sians. 35 And when the 
townclerk had oe 
peased the people, he 
said, Ye men of Ephe- 


ΚΕ οὐθὲν LTTrA. 


974 


sus, what man is there 
that knoweth not how 
that the city of the 
Ephesians is a wor- 
Fe po of the great 
goddess Diana, and of 
the image which fell 
down from Jupiter? 
36 Seeing then that 
these things cannot be 
spoken against, ye 
ought to be quiet, and 
to do nothing rashly. 
37 For ye have brought 
hither these men, 
which are neither rob- 
bers of churches, nor 
yetblasphemersof your 
goddess. 38 Wherefore 
if Demetrius, and the 
craftsmen which are 
with him, have a mat- 
ter against any man, 
the law is open, and 
there are deputies: let 
them implead one ano- 
ther. 39 But if ye in- 
quire any thing con- 
cerning other matters, 
it shall be determined 
in a lawful assembly. 
40 For we are in dan- 
ger to be called in 
question for this day’s 
uproar, there being no 
cause whereby we may 
give an account of this 
concourse, 41 And 
when he had thus 
een he dismissed 
the assembly. 


XX. And after the 
uproar was ceased, 
Paul called unto him 
the disciples, and em- 
braced them, and de- 
parted for to go in- 
to Macedonia, 2 And 
when he had gone over 
those parts, and had 
given them much ex- 
hortation, he came into 
Greece. 3 And there 
abode three months. 
And when the Jews 
laid wait for him, as 
be was about to sail 
into Syria, he purposed 
to return through Ma- 
cedonia, 4 And there 
accompanied him into 
Asia Sopater of Berea ; 
and of the 'hessa- 
lonians, Aristarchus 
and Secundus; and 
Gaius of Derbe, and 
Timotheus; and of A- 
sia, Tychicus and Tro- 
himus. 5 These going 
efore tarried for us at 


2 ἀνθρώπων (read τις Who) of men LTTrA. 


ἃ θεὸν GLTTrAW. 


8 περαιτέρω further ΤῸ, 
k μεταπεμψάμενος having sent for rrr. 


* πορεύεσθαι LITr. 


9 — ἄχρι τῆς ᾿Ασίας τ|τι]. 


πΡ ΑΞ ΕΙΣ. XL kee 


τίς yao ἐστιν "ἄνθρωπος" ὃς οὐ.γινώσκει THY ᾿Εφεσίων 
*what ‘for tis “there Sman who knowsnot the of (*the] *Ephesians 
πόλιν νεωκόρον οὖσαν τῆς μεγάλης "θεᾶς" ᾿Αρτέμιδος καὶ 
‘city 7temple-keepers °as “being of the great goddess temis, and 
τοῦ Διοπετοῦς; 36 ἀναντιῤῥήτων οὖν ὄντων τούτων 
of that fallen from Zeus? Undeniable therefore being these things 
δέον ἐστὶν ὑμᾶς κατεσταλμένους ὑπάρχειν, Kai μηδὲν προ- 
necessary itis for you calm to be, and “nothing *head- 
meric “πράττειν." 37 ἠγάγετε.γὰρ τοὺς ἄνδρας τούτους, 
long to *do. For ye brought these men, [who are) 
οὔτε ἱεροσύλους οὔτε βλασφημοῦντας τὴν θεὰν" ἐὑμῶν." 
neither temple plunderers nor are defaming °goddess ‘your. 
88 εἰ μὲν οὖν Δημήτριος Kai ot σὺν αὐτῷ τεχνῖται ἵπρός 
If indeed therefore Demetrius πὰ ὑπὸ *with “him  ‘'artificers against 
τινα λόγον ἔχουσιν," ἀγοραῖοι ἄγονται, καὶ ἀνθύπατοί εἰσιν" 
anyone amatter have, courts are held, and proconsuls there are: 
ἐγκαλείτωσαν ἀλλήλοις. 39 εἰδὲ Te S7Epi ἑτέρων" 
let them accuse one another. But if anything concerning other matters 
ἐπιζητεῖτε, ἐν τῇ ἐννόμῳ ἐκκλησίᾳ ἐπιλυθήσεται. 40 καὶ. γὰρ 
yeinquire, in the lawful assembly it shall be solved. For also 
κινδυνεύομεν ἐγκαλεῖσθαι στάσεως περὶ τῆς.σήμερον, 
we are in danger ἴο beaccused of insurrection in regard to this day, 
μηδενὸς αἰτίου ὑπάρχοντος περὶ οὗ © δυνησόμεθα ἀπο- 
not one cause existing concerning which we shall be able to 
δοῦναι λόγον ἱ τῆς. συστροφῆς.ταύτης. 41 Kai ταῦτα εἰπών, 
give a reason for this concourse. And these things having said, 
ἀπέλυσεν τὴν ἐκκλησίαν. 
he dismissed the assembly. 


20 Μετὰ δὲ τὸ παύσασθαι τὸν θόρυβον, "προσκαλεσάμενος" 


But after Sceased ‘the tumult, Shaving “called ‘to 
ὁ Παῦλος τοὺς μαθητάς, καὶ ἀσπασάμενος, ἐξῆλθεν 
(®him] *Paul the disciples, and saluted (them), went away 
πισγρρευθῆναι" εἰς "τὴν" Μακεδονίαν. 2 διελθὼν. δὲ τὰ 

to go to Macedonia. And having passed through 

͵ ’ ~ ‘ “ ᾽ 4 , ~ ἫΝ 
μέρη ἐκεῖνα, καὶ παρακαλέσας αὐτοὺς λόγῳ πολλῷ, ἦλ- 
those parts, and havingexhorted them with *discourse ‘much, he 


θεν εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα; 

came to Greece. 

μένης “αὐτῷ ἐπιβουλῆς" ὑπὸ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων μέλλοντι 

made against them a plot by the Jews being about 

ἀνάγεσθαι εἰς τὴν Συρίαν, ἐγένετο Ργνγώμη" τοῦ ὑποστρέφει» 
to sail into Syria, arose ‘a *purpose to return 


διὰ Μακεδονίας. 4 συνείπετο.δὲ αὐτῷ “ἄχρι τῆς ᾿Ασίας" 
through Macedonia. And accompanied him as far as Asia 
Σώπατρος * Βεροιαῖος Θεσσαλονικέων.δὲ ᾿Αρίσταρχος Kai 
Sopater a Berman, and of Thessalonians Aristarchus and 
Σεκοῦνδος, καὶ Γάϊος Δερβαῖος καὶ Τιμόθεος" ᾿Ασιανοὶ. δὲ 
Secundus, and Gaius of Derbe and ‘Timotheus, and of Asia 
Τυχικὸς καὶ Τροφιμοῦ. 5 οὗτοι" ἱπροελθόντες" ἔμενον» ἡμᾶς 
Tychicus and Trophimus, These having gone before waited for us 


γενο- 


8 ποιήσας.τε μῆνας τρεῖς, 
months ‘three, having been 


And having continued 


b — θεᾶς GLITrAW. © πράσσειν LTTrA, 

f ἔχουσιν πρός τινα λόγον GLTTrAW. 

i + περὶ concerning (this concourse) Lrtr. 

1 + παρακαλέσας having exhorted [and] Lrrra. 
© ἐπιβουλῆς αὐτῷ LTTr. P γνώμης TTrAs 

s + δὲ and (these) nrrr[a]. 


© ἡμῶν OUT LTTrA. 
h + ov TTr[A]. 


0 — τὴν LTTr[A]. 
r + Πύῤῥου of Py:rbhus Gurrraw. 


ὃ πρησελθόντες having gone Tr. 


XX 


; ACTS. 
ἐν 'τρωάδι" 6 


ἡμεῖς δὲ ἐξεπλεύσαμεν μετὰ τὰς ἡμέρας τῶν 
‘OAS ; ut we sailed away after the days of the 
᾽ , ᾽ 4 / ‘ » 4 ’ 4 ’ 
ἀζύμων ἀπὸ Φιλίππων, καὶ ἤλθομεν πρὸς αὐτοὺς εἰς 
unleayened bread from Philippi, and came to them = at 
τὴν “Τρωάδα, "ἄχρις" ἡμερῶν πέντε, γοῦ" διετρίψαμεν ἡμέρας 
Troas in *days ‘five, where we stayed *days 
ἑπτά. 7 Ἔν.δὲ τῇ μιᾷ ῦ ββά é 
° i Ώ μ ᾳ των σα ATWY, συνηγμενων 
‘seven. And on the first (day] of the week, *having *been °assembled 
"trav μαθητῶν τοῦ" κλάσαι ἄρτον, ὁ ἸΤαῦλος διελέγετο αὐτοῖς, 
‘the “disciples to break bread, Paul discoursed tothem, 
μέλλων ἐξιέναι ry ἐπαύριον, παρέτεινέν.τε τὸν λόγον μέχρι 
about todepart onthe morrow; and he continued the discourse til 
μεσονυκτίου" ὃ ἦσαν.δὲ λαμπάδες ἱκαναὶ ἐν τῷ ὑπερῴῳ οὗ 
midnight. And *were lamps ‘many in the upper room where 
"ἦσαν" συνηγμένοι. 9 "καθήμενος" δέ τις νεανίας ὀνόματι 
they were assembled. And was sitting acertain youth, by name 


Εὔτυχος ἐπὶ τῆς θυρίδος, καταφερόμενος ὕπνῳ βαθεῖ, δια- 


Eutychus, by the window, overpowered by “sleep ‘deep, as 
λεγομένου τοῦ Παύλου ἐπὶ. πλεῖον, κατενεχθεὶς ἀπὸ 
*discoursed -* Paul 


for a longer time, having been overpowered by 
τοῦ ὕπνου ἔπεσεν ἀπὸ τοῦ τριστέγου κάτω, Kai 
the sleep hefell *from “the ‘third “story ‘down, 
νεκρός. 10 καταβὰς. δὲ ὁ ἸΤαῦλος ἐπέπεσεν αὐτῷ, καὶ “συμ- 
dead. But “having *descended *Paul fellupon him, and having 
περιλαβὼν: εἶπεν, Μὴ.θορυβεῖσθε: ἡ. γὰρ ψυχὴ αὐτοῦ ἐν 
embraced {him} said, Donotmakeatumult, forthe life ofhim in 
αὐτῷ ἐστιν. 11 ᾿Αναβὰς. δὲ καὶ κλάσας ἃ ἄρτον Kai yevoa- 
him is, And having gone up and having broken bread and having 
μενος, ἐφ᾽ ἱκανόν.τε ὁμιλήσας “ἄχρις" αὐγῆς, οὕτως ἐξῆλ- 
eaten, and for long having conversed until day-break, 80 he de- 
θεν. 12 ἤγαγον.δὲ τὸν παῖδα ζῶντα, καὶ παρεκλήθησαν οὐ 
parted. Andthey brought the boy alive, and werecomforted not 
μετρίως. 13 Ἡμεῖς δὲ προελθόντες" ἐπὶ τὸ πλοῖον ἀνήχθημεν 
a little, ut we having gone before to the ship sailed 
Seic' τὴν Ασσον, ἐκεῖθεν μέλλοντες ἀναλαμβάνειν τὸν Παῦ- 
to Assos, *there being *about to take in Paul; 
λον" οὕτως.γὰρ "ἢν.διατεταγμένος," μέλλων αὐτὸς πεζεύειν. 
ΤΟΥ 80 he had appointed, *being “about ‘himself to goon foot. 
14 ὡς.δὲ iovvéBarer' ἡμῖν εἰς τὴν Ἄσσον, ἀναλαβόντες αὐτὸν 
And when he met with us at Assos, having taken “ἢ *him 
ἤλθομεν εἰς Μιτυλήνην 16 κἀκεῖθεν ἀποπλεύσαντες τῇ 
wecame to Mitylene ; and thence having sailed away, on the 
κατηντήσαμεν "ἀντικρὺ" Χίου" τῇ.δὲ ἑτέρᾳ 
arrived opposite Chios, andthe next (day) 
παρεβάλομεν εἰς Σάμον" ἱκαὶ μείναντες ἐν Τρωγυλλίῳ," ry™ 
we arrive at Samos; andhavingremainedat ‘Trogyllium, the 
ἤλθομεν εἰς Μίλητον. 16 πέἔκρινεν".γὰρ ὁ Παῦλος 
(day] wecame to Miletus: for *had “decided *Paul 
παραπλεῦσαι τὴν Epecoy, πως μὴ.γένηται αὐτῷ χρονο- 
to sail by Ephesus, so that it might not happen to him to spend 
τριβῆσαι tv τῇ ᾿Ασίᾳ" ἔσπευδεν.γὰρ εἰ δυνατὸν ny αὐτῷ 
time in Asia; forhehastened if possible it was for him 


ἤρθη 


and was taken up 


ἐπιούσῃ 
following (day] 


ἐχομένῃ 
next 


375 


Troas. 6 And we sailed 
away from Philippi 
after the days of un- 
leavened bread, and 
came unto them to 
Troas in five days; 
where we abode seven 
days. 7 And upon the 
first day of the week, 
when the disciples 
came together to break 
bread, Paul preached 
unto them, ready to 
depart on the morrow κα 
and continued his 
speech until midnight. 
8 Andthere were many 


lights in the upper 
chamber, where they 
were gathered  to- 


gether. 9 And there sat 
in a window a certain 

oung man named 
ΠΣ ΘΕ ΤΩ, being fallen 


into a deep sleep: and 
as Paul was long 
preaching, he sunk 


down with sleep, and 
fell down from the 
third loft, and was 
taken up dead. 10 And 
Paul went down, and 
fell on him, and em- 


bracing him said, 
Trouble not your- 
selves; for his life is 
in him. 11 When he 


therefore was come up 
again, and had broken 
bread, and eaten, and 
talked a long while, 
even till break of day. 
so he departed. 12 And 
they brought the 
young man alive, and 
were not a little com- 
forted. 13 And we went 
before toship, and sail- 
ed unto Assos, there 
intending to take in 
Paul: for so had he 
appointed, minding 
himself to go afoot, 
14 And when he met 
with us at Assos, we 
took him in, and came 
to Mitylene. 15 And 
we sailed thence, and 
came the next day over 
against Chios ; and the 
next day we arrived at 
Samos, and tarried at 
Trogyllium ; and the 
next day we came to 
Miletus. 16 For Paul 
had determined to sail 
by Ephesus, because he 
would not spend the 
time in Asia: for he 
hasted, if it were pos- 
sible for him, to be at 


’ Τρῳάδι 1.1. * Τρῳάδα LT, 
assembled) GLTTraw. 
4 + roy the LTTraw. © ἄχρι TTrA. 
Ὁ διατεταγμένος ἦν LITA. συνέβαλλεν LITrA. 
μείναντες ἐν Τρω. LITr. ™ + δὲ and (the) τττι. 


χα ἄχρι LTTrA. Υ ὅπου T. 


& ἦμεν WE Were GLTTrAW. 


k ἄντικρυς LTTrA. 
" κεκρίκει GLTTrAW. 


2 ἡμῶν we (having been 
Ὁ καθεζόμενος LTTrAW. 
ἔ προσελθόντες having gone Tr. 


© gur- T. 
& ἐπὶ LITA. 


' Τρωγυλίῳ a; — καὶ 
ο εἴη it might be LTTrA. 


970 

Jerusalem the day of 
Pentecost. 174nd from 
Miletus he sent to 
Ephesus, and called the 
elders of the church, 
18 And when they were 
come to him, he said 
nnto them, Ye know, 
from the first day that 
I came into Asia, after 
what manner I have 
been with you at all 
seasons, 19 serving the 
Lord with all humi- 
lity of mind,and with 
many tears, and temp- 
tations, which befell 
me by the lying in wait 
of the Jews: 20 and 
how I kept back πος 
thing that was profit- 
able unto you, but have 
shewed you, and have 
taught you publickly, 
and from house to 
house, 21 testifying 
both to the Jews, and 
also to the Greeks, 
repentance toward 
God, and faith toward 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 
22 And now, behold, 
I go bound in the spi- 
rit unto Jerusalem, 
not knowing thethings 
that shall befall me 
there: 29 save that 
the Holy Ghost wit- 
nesseth in every city, 
saying that bonds and 
afflictions abide me. 
24 But none of these 
things move me, nei- 
ther count I my life 
dear unto myself, so 
that I might finish my 
course with joy, and 
the ministry, which 1 
have received of the 
Lord Jesus, to testify 
the gospel of the grace 
of God. 25 And now, 
behold, I know that 
ye all, among whom I 
have gone preaching 
the kingdom of God, 
shall see my face no 
more. 26 Wherefore I 
take you to record 
this day, that I am 
pure from the blood of 
all men. 27 For Lhave 
not shunned to declare 
unto you all the coun- 


i PAS ET >. ee 
τὴν ἡμέραν τῆς πεντηκοστῆς γενέσθαι εἰς ῬἱἹεροσόλυμα." 
the day of Pentecost to be in Jerusalem, 


17 ᾿Απὸ.δὲ τῆς Μιλήτου πέμψας εἰς "Εφεσον perexadécaro 
And from Miletus having sent to Ephesus he called for 
τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους τῆς ἐκκλησίας. 18 ὡς.δὲ παρεγένοντο πρὸς 
the elders of the assembly. And when they werecome to 
αὐτὸν 4 εἶπεν αὐτοῖς, μεῖς ἐπίστασθε, ἀπὸ πρώτης ἡμέρας 
him he said to them, e know, from the first day 
ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἐπέβην εἰς τὴν ᾿Ασίαν, πῶς μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν τὸν. πάντα 


on which 1 ἀγστῖσοᾶ in Asia, how with you all the 
χρόνον ἐγενόμην, 19 δουλεύων τῷ κυρίῳ μετὰ πάσης ταπεινο- 
time I was, serving the Lord with all humi- 


φροσύνης Kai πολλῶν" δακρύων καὶ πειρασμῶν, TOY συμ- 


lity and many tears and temptations, which hap- 
βάντων μοι ἐν ταῖς ἐπιβουλαῖς τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων: 20 ὡς 
pened to me through the piots of the Jews ; how 


οὐδὲν ὑπεστειλάμην τῶν συμφερόντων τοῦ.μὴ ἀναγγεῖλαι 
nothing [1 Κορὺ back οὗ what [15 profitable soasnot toannounce [10] 


€ ~ ‘ Q7 «- ~ iy , Ν ? » 
ὑμῖν, καὶ διδάξαι ὑμᾶς δημοσίᾳ καὶ κατ᾽ οἴκους, 21 διαμαρ- 


ἕο you, and toteach you publicly and from house to house, earnestly 

τυρόμενος Ἰουδαίοις.τε καὶ “Ἕλλησιν τὴν εἰς "τὸν!" θεὸν 

testifying both toJews and Greeks “toward 3God 

ἑτάνοιαν Kai πίστιν ‘ryyv' εἰς τὸν κύριον ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦν 
repentance and faith toward our Lord Jesus 

*ypiorov.' 22 καὶ νῦν ἰδοὺ “ἐγὼ δεδεμένος" τῷ πνεύματι 
Christ. And now, lo, 16 bound in the spirit, 

πορεύομαι εἰς Ἱερουσαλήμ, τὰ ἐν αὐτῇ συναντήσοντά 
go to Jerusalem, the things whichin it shall happen 


χμοι μὴ εἰδώς, 23 πλὴν ὅτι TO πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον κατὰ.πόλιν 
tome not knowing; except thatthe Spirit the Holy ἴῃ every city 


διαμαρτύρεται) λέγον" ori δεσμά ὅμε καὶ θλίψεις" μένουσιν. 


fully testifies, saying that bonds *me'and “tribulations “await. 
24 ἀλλ᾽ οὐδενὸς Adyor' “ποιοῦμαι, οὐδὲ ἔχω" τὴν ψυχήν 
But “οὗ *nothing “account ὮΙ 2make, nor holdI life 


ἁμου" τιμίαν ἐμαυτῷ, we τελειῶσαι τὸν.δρόμον.μου “μετὰ 
‘my dear tomyself, so as to finish my course with 
χαρᾶς," καὶ THY διακονίαν ἣν ἔλαβον παρὰ τοῦ κυρίου ᾽1η- 
joy, and the ministry which Ireceived from the Lord Je- 
σοῦ, διαμαρτύρασθαι τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τῆς χάριτος τοῦ θεοῦ. 
sus, to testify fully the gladtidings ofthe grace of God, 
25 καὶ νῦν ἰδοὺ ἐγὼ οἶδα ὅτι οὐκέτι ὄψεσθε τὸ πρόσωπόν.μου 
And now, io, know that nomore *will*see ‘my “face 
ὑμεῖς πάντες, ἐν οἷς διῆλθον κηρύσσων THY βασιλείαν 
*ye “all, among whom Ihave goneabout proclaiming the kingdom 
‘rov θεοῦ." 26 8d10" μαρτύρομαι ὑμῖν ἐν τῇ.σήμερον. ἡμέρᾳ, 
of God. Wherefore I testify to you in this day 
ὅτι καθαρὸς “éyw' ἀπὸ τοῦ αἵματος mayvTwy' 27 οὐ γὰρ 
that pure I [am)from the blood of all, for “ποῦ 
ὑπεστειλάμην TOU μὴ ἀναγγεῖλαι ‘vuiv' πᾶσαν τὴν βουλὴν 
J *kept back from announcing to you all the counsel 


» Ἱερουσαλήμ. T. 
5 — Toy ΤΊΥΤΑ. 


ἢ — τὴν LTTra. 


4 + ὁμοῦ ὄντων αὐτῶν they being together L. 
τ — χριστόν L[Tr]A. 


τ — πολλῶν GLTTrAW. 
» δεδεμένος ἐγὼ GLTTrAW. 


* ἐμοὶ τ. Υ + μοι ἴο ME GLTTrAW. 7% λέγων A. 5 καὶ θλίψεις we LTTrA. Ὁ λόγον 
TTrA. © ἔχω, οὐδὲ ποιοῦμαι L; — οὐδὲ ἔχω TTra. 4 — μον LTTrA. © — μετὰ χαρᾶς 
LTTrA. f — τοῦ θεοῦ LTTrAW. & διότι TA. b εἰμι aM LTTrA. i — ὑμῖν 


LTTrA. 


XX, XXI. AS G20 SS’ 
τοῦ θεοῦ). 28 προσέχετε Koby ἑαυτοῖς καὶ παντὶ τῷ 
of God. Take heed therefore to yourselves and ἴο 41 the 


ποιμνίῳ, ἐνῷ ὑμᾶς TO πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον ἔθετο ἐπισκόπους, 
flock, wherein “you ‘the “Spirit “the *Holy ‘did ‘set overseers, 
ποιμαίνειν τὴν ἐκκλησίαν ἱτοῦ θεοῦ, ἣν περιεποιήσατο διὰ 
toshepherd the assembly of God, which he purchased with 
τοῦ “idiov αἵματος." 29 ἐγὼ." γὰρ᾽ οἶδα “τοῦτο, ort εἰσελεύ- 
the *of*his‘own ‘blood. For I know this, that will 
σονται μετὰ τὴν.ἄφιξίν.μου λύκοι βαρεῖς εἰς ὑμᾶς, μὴ 


comein after my departure *wolves ‘grievous amongst you, ποῦ 
φειδόμενοι Tov ποιμνίου" 30 καὶ ἐξ ὑμῶν.αὐτῶν ἀνα- 
sparing the flock ; and from amongst your own selves will 


στήσονται ἄνδρες λαλοῦντες διεστραμμένα, τοῦ ἀποσπᾷν τοὺς 


rise up men speaking perverted things, to draw away the 
μαθητὰς ὀπίσω Ῥαὐτῶν. 31 διὸ γρηγορεῖτε, μνημονεύοντες 
disciples after themselves. Wherefore watch, remembering 


ὅτι τριετίαν νύκτα Kai ἡμέραν οὐκιἐπαυσάμην μετὰ δακρύων 
that three years night and day I ceased not with tears 

νουθετῶν ἕνα ἕκαστον. 32 Kai “τανῦν παρατίθεμαι ὑμᾶς. 
admonishing “one .- ‘each. And now 1 commit you, 
τἀδελφοί," τῷ θεῷ καὶ τῷ λόγῳ τῆς.χάριτος. αὐτοῦ, τῷ δυνα- 
brethren, to God and to the word of his grace, which is 
μένῳ "ἐποικοδομῆσαι" Kai δοῦναι ‘vpir’'* κληρονομίαν ἐν 


abie to build up and to give you aninheritance among 

τοῖς ἡγιασμένοις πᾶσιν. 33 ἀργυρίου ἢ χρυσίου ἢ ἱματισμοῦ 

“the “sanctified 1811. Silver or gold oor clothing 

οὐδενὸς" ἐπεθύμησα: 34 αὐτοὶ “δὲ γινώσκετε OTe ταῖς 
of no one I desired. But yourselves know that 


οὖσιν per’ ἐμοῦ ὑπηρέτησαν at 


χρείαις, μου καὶ τοῖς 
were with me did “minister 


tomy needs and to those who 
χεῖρες.αὗται. 35 πάντα ὑπέδειξα ὑμῖν ὅτι οὕτως κοπιῶντας 
‘these “hands. All things Ishewed you that thus labouring 
δεῖ ἀντιλαμβάνεσθαι τῶν ἀσθενούντων, μνημονεύειν.τε 
i ᾽ 
it behoves [us] to aid those being weak, and to remember 
τῶν λόγων τοῦ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ ὅτι αὐτὸς εἶπεν, Μακάριόν ἐστιν 
the words ofthe Lord Jesus that himseif said, 7Blessed Sit *is 
Υδιδόναι μᾶλλον" ἢ λαμβάνειν. 36 Kai ταῦτα εἰπών, 


Sto °give lmore than _ to receive. And these things having said 
θεὶς τὰ γόνατα.αὐτοῦ σὺν πᾶσιν αὐτοῖς προσηύξατο. 
having bowed his knees with all them he prayed. 


37 ἹἹκανὸς. δὲ *eyévero κλαυθμὸς" πάντων᾽ Kai ἐπιπεσόντες 
And *much ‘there “was weeping of all: and falling 
ἐπὶ τὸν τράχηλον τοῦ Παύλον κατεφίλουν αὐτόν" 38 ὀδυνώ- 
upon the neck of Paul they ardently kissed him, dis- 
μένοι μάλιστα ἐπὶ τῷ AO εἰρήκει, ὅτι οὐκέτι μέλ- 
tressed most οὗ all for the word which he had said, that nomore they 


λουσιν τὸ πρόσωπον.αὐτοῦ θεωρεῖν. προέπεμπον.δὲ αὐτὸν 
are about his face to see. And they accompanied him 


εἰς τὸ πλοῖον. 
to the ship. 
« 4 > , ? ~ t ~ ? , > > 
21 Ὡς. δὲ ἐγένετο ἀναχθῆναι ἡμᾶς ἀποσπασθέντας ἀπ 
And when it was "sailed we, haying drawn away from 


i + ὑμῖν to you LTTrA. k — οὖν [L]tTr. 
τοῦ ἰδίου GLTTrAW. u — yap for LTTraw. Ὁ — τοῦτο LTTrAW. 
voy LTTrA. τ — ἀδελφοί LTTrA. 5 οἰκοδομῆσαι to build Lttraw. 
(read the inheritance) TTra. τ οὐθενὸς T. x — δὲ but GLTTraw. 
GLTITraw. * κλαυθμὺς ἐγένετο LTTrAW. 


1 τοῦ κυρίον of the Lord Gurr. 
Ρ ἑαυτῶν TTrA. 
¢ — ὑμῖν LTTra. 


377 
sel of God, 28 Take heed 
therefore unto your- 
selves, and to all the 
flock, over the which 
the Holy Ghost hath 
made you overseers, te 
feed the church of Ged, 
which he hath pur- 
chased with his own 
blood. 29 For I know 
this, that after my de- 
parting shall grievous 
wolves enter in among 
you, not sparing the 
flock. 30 Also of your 
own selves shall men 
arise, speaking per- 
verse things, to draw 
away disciples after 
them. 31 Therefore 
watch, and remember, 
that by the space of 
three years I ceased 
not to warn every one 
night and day with 
tears. 32 And now, 
brethren, I commend 
you to God, and to the 
word of his grace, 
which is able to build 
you up, and to give you 
an inheritance among 
all them which are 
sanctified. 33 I have 
coveted no man’s sil- 
ver, or gold, or ap- 
parel, 34 Yea, ye your- 
selves know, that these 
hands have ministered 
unto my necessities, 
and to them that were 
with me. 35 I have 
shewed you all things, 
how that so labouring 
ye ought to support 
the weak, and to re- 
member the words of 
the Lord Jesus, how 
he said, It is more 
blessed to give than to 
receive. 36 And when 
he had thus spoken, he 
kneeled down, and 
prayed with them 81]. 
37 And they all wept 
sore, and fell on Paul’s 
neck, and kissed him, 
38 sorrowing most of 
all for the words which 
he spake, that they 
should see his face no 
more. And they ac- 
companied him unto 
the ship. 


XXI. And it came to 
pass, that after we 
were gotten from 


τὰ αἵματος 
4 τὰ 
vo τὴν 
Υ μᾶλλον διδόναι 


378 

them, and had launch- 
ed, we came with a 
straight course unto 
Coos, and the day fol- 
lowing unto Rhodes, 
and from thence unto 
Patara: 2 and find- 
ing a ship sailing over 
unto Phenicia, we 
went aboard, and set 
forth. 3 Now when we 
had discovered Cyprus, 
we left it on the left 
hand, and sailed into 
Syria, and landed at 
Tyre: for there the 
ship was to unlade 
her burden. 4 And 


finding disciples, we 
tarried there seven 
days: who said _ to 


Paul through the Spi- 
rit, that he should not 
go up to Jerusalem. 
5 And when we had 
accomplished those 
days, we departed and 
went our way; and 
they all brought us on 
our way, with wives 
and children, till we 
we7e out of the city: 
and we kneeled down 
on the shore, and pray- 
ed. 6 And when we 
had taken our leave 
one of another, we 
took ship; and they 
returned home again. 
7 And when we had 
finished our course 
from Tyre, we came 
to Ptolemais, and sa- 
luted the brethren, and 
abode with them one 
day. 8 And the next 
day we that were of 
Paul’s company de- 
parted, and came unto 
Ceesarea: and we en- 
tered into the house 
of Philip the evangel- 
ist, Which was one of 
the seven; and abode 
with him. 9 And the 
same man had four 
daughters, virgins, 
which did prophesy. 
10 And as we tarried 
there many days, there 
came down from Ju- 
dza a certain pro- 
phet, named Agabus, 
11 And when he was 
come unto us, he 
took Paul’s_ girdle, 
and bound his own 
hands and feet, and 
said, Thus saith the 
Hoiy Ghost, So shall 
the Jews at Jerusalem 
bind the man that 


2 Κῶ GLTTraWw. 
πλοῖον ἣν LTTrAW. 


5 Ἱεροσόλυμα GLTTrAW. 
having prayed we took our leave 


ἀνέβημεν ΤΑΥ͂. 
Φάμεν Tr. 
LITraw. 


P Καισαρίαν T. 
t τε and LTTrawW. 


TIPAZEIS. XXI. 
αὐτῶν, εὐθυδρομήσαντες ἤλθομεν εἰς τὴν "Κῶν," τῷ.δὲ ἑξῆς 
them, having run direct wecame to Cos, andonthe next 

᾽ A « , ? ~ ? , ν « , 
εἰς τὴν Ῥόδον, κἀκεῖθεν εἰς Ilarapa. 2 καὶ εὑρόντες 
{day] to Rhodes, and thence to Patara, And having found 
πλοῖον διαπερῶν εἰς Φοινίκην, ἐπιβάντες ἀνήχθημεν. 
a ship passing over into Pheenicia, having gone on board we sailed ; 
3 *avagavarrec’ de τὴν Κύπρον, καὶ καταλιπόντες αὐτὴν 
and having sighted Cyprus, and having left it 
εὐώνυμον ἐπλέομεν εἰς Συρίαν, Kai “karHyOnpev' εἰς Τύρον" 
onthe left wesailed to Syria, and brought to at Tyre, 
éxeiae.yao “ἣν τὸ πλοῖον" ἀποφορτιζόμενον τὸν γόμον. 4 “καὶ 
for there was the ship discharging the lading. And 
ἀνευρόντες" τοὺς μαθητάς, ἐπεμείναμεν ἰαὐτοῦ" ἡμέρας ἑπτά" 
having found out the disciples, we remained there "days ‘seven; 
uv ~ U ” A ~ [4 ‘ g ? , " 
οἵτινες τῷ Παύλῳ ἔλεγον διὰ τοῦ πνεύματος, μὴ FavaBaivey 


who to Paul said by the Spirit, not to go up 
εἰς "Ἱερουσαλήμ." 5 ὅτε.δὲ ἐγένετο Ἰἡμᾶς ἐξαρτίσαι' τὰς ἡμέ- 
to Jerusalem. But when it was we completed the days, 
pac, ἐξελθόντες ἐπορευόμεθα, προπεμπόντων ἡμᾶς πάντων 
having set out we journeyed, accompanying Sus 1411 
σὺν γυναιξὶν καὶ τέκνοις ἕως ἔξω τῆς πόλεως" καὶ θέντες 
with wives and children asfaras outside the city. And having bowed 
τὰ γόνατα ἐπὶ τὸν αἰγιαλὸν Ἐπροσηυξάμεθα. 6 καὶ ἀσπασά- 
the knees on the shore we prayed. And having 


μενοι" ἀλλήλους ᾿πὲἐπέβημεν" εἰς τὸ πλοῖον, ἐκεῖνοι.δὲ ὑπέ- 
saluted one another we wentup into πὸ ship, and they re- 


? \ ἝΝ « - \ \ ~ Ul 
στρεψαν εἰς τὰ ἴδια. 7 Ἡμεῖς.δὲ τὸν πλοῦν διανύσαντες 
turned to their own [homes]. Andwe, the voyage having completed 


> A , , > a. ‘ ? 4 
ἀπὸ Τύρου κατηντήσαμεν εἰς ἸΠτολεμαΐδα, καὶ ἀσπασάμενοι 


from ‘Tyre, arrived at Ptolemais, and having saluted 
τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς ἐμείναμεν ἡμέραν μίαν παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς. ὃ τῷ.δὲ 
the brethren we abode *day Jone with them. And on the 
ἐπαύριον ἐξελθόντες πρὶ. περὶ τὸν Παῦλον"! οἦλθον" εἰς 
morrow ‘having “gone *forth *Paul ?and “*those*with Shim they came to 


΄ ell ‘ ? , ? 5 5 , ~ 
ΡΚαισάρειαν"" καὶ εἰσελθόντες εἰς τὸν οἶκον Φιλίππου τοῦ 
Ceesarea ; and having entered into the house of Philip the 


εὐαγγελιστοῦ, Irov' ὄντος EK τῶν ἑπτά, ἐμείναμεν Tap αὐτῷ. 
evangelist, being of the seven, weabode with him, 
9 τούτῳ. δὲ ἦσαν θυγατέρες παρθένοι τέσσαρες" προφη- 
Now to this [man] there were *daughters Syirgins 1four who pro- 
, A ~ , ,ὔ ~ , 
τεύουσαι. 10 ἐπιμενόντων.δὲ ἡμῶν" ἡμέρας πλείους κατῆλθεν 
d 


phesied. And ?remaining iwe ays Smany ®came *down 

τις ἀπὸ τῆς Ιουδαίας προφήτης ὀνόματι “AyaBoc 
58. Scertain 7one from Judza, a prophet, by name Agabus; 
11 καὶ ἐλθὼν πρὸς ἡμᾶς, καὶ ἄρας τὴν ζώνην τοῦ 

and having come _ to us, and having taken the girdle 
Παύλου, dnoac‘re' ταὐτοῦ τὰς χεῖρας Kai τοὺς πόδας" 
of Paul, andhaving bound of himself the hands δῃὰ the feet 

’ a 4 ~ ‘ .“ x » ὃ x , 

εἶπεν, Τάδε λέγει TO πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον, Τὸν ἄνδρα οὗ ἐστιν 
said, Thus says the Spirit the Holy, The man of whom is 


© κατήλθομεν landed LTtra. ἃ τὸ 
© ἀνευρόντες δὲ LTTrAWw. Γ αὐτοῖς With them L. 8 ἐπιβαίνειν LTTrA. 
\ ἐξαρτίσαι ἡμᾶς LTrAW. Κ προσευξάμενοι ἀπησπασάμεθα 
LTTrAW. 14 καὶ and LITraw. τὰ ἐνέβημεν LTr ; 
— οἱ περὶ τὸν Παῦλον GLTTraw. ο ἤλθομεν We Came EGLTAW ; ἤλ- 
4 — τοῦ GLTTrAW. τ τέσσαρες παρθένοι LTTrA. 5 — ἡμῶν 
ἡ ἑαυτοῦ τοὺς πόδας καὶ τὰς χεῖρας LTTrAW. 


Ὁ ἀναφανέντες EGLTrAW. 


ΧΧΙ. ACTS. 


ἡ. ζώνη αὕτη οὕτως δήσουσιν ἐν Ἱερουσαλὴμ ot ᾿Τουδαῖοι, καὶ 
this girdle thus shall*bind ‘in ‘Jerusalem ‘the “Jews, and 
παραδώσουσιν εἰς χεῖρας ἐθνῶν. 12 Ὡς δὲ ἠκούσαμεν 
deliver up into [the] hands of [the] nations. And when we heard 
ταῦτα, παρεκαλοῦμεν ἡμεῖς.τε καὶ οἱ ἐντόπιοι τοῦ 
these things, Sbesought ‘both “we %and ‘those *of (*the] “place 
μὴ ἀναβαίνειν αὐτὸν εἰς ἱερουσαλήμ. 13 * ἀπεκρίθη." δὲ! ὁ 
not 'to'*go'*up "him to Jerusalem, But 7answered 
Παῦλος, Τί ποιεῖτε κλαίοντες καὶ συνθρύπτοντές μου τὴν 
'Paul, What doye weeping and breaking my 
, ? " , ᾽ ΄ ~ > ‘ ‘ 2 ~ ? 
καρδίαν ; tyw-yap οὐ μόνον δεθῆναι ἀλλὰ Kai ἀποθανεῖν εἰς 
heart ? forI not only tobebound but also to die at 
Ἱερουσαλὴμ ἑτοίμως.ἔχω ὑπὲρ τοῦ ὀνόματος τοῦ κυρίου Ἰησοῦ. 
Jerusalem am ready for the name of the Lord Jesus. 
14 Μὴ.πειθομένου.δὲ αὐτοῦ ἡσυχάσαμεν εἰπόντες, “Τὸ θέλημα 
And *not *being persuaded ‘he weweresilent, saying, The will 
τοῦ κυρίου γενέσθω." 
of the Lord be done. 
15 Μετὰ.δὲ τὰς ἡμέρας ταύτας "ἀποσκευασάμενοι" ave- 
And after these days, having packed the baggage we 
βαίνομεν εἰς Tepovoadyp.' 16 συνῆλθον.δὲ καὶ τῶν 
went up to Jerusalem. And went also [some] of the 
μαθητῶν ἀπὸ “Καισαρείας" σὺν ἡμῖν, ἄγοντες παρ᾽ 
disciples from Cesarea with us, bringing [one] with whom 
ξενισθῶμεν, Μνάσωνί.τινι Κυπρίῳ, ἀρχαίῳ μαθητῇ. 17 Tevo- 
we might lodge, acertain Mnason, aCypriot, anold disciple. *Having 
μένων δὲ ἡμῶν εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα ἀσμένως “ἐδέξαντο! ἡμᾶς ot 
“arrived ‘and “we at Jerusalem 3gladly “received Sus ‘the 
ἀδελφοί. 18 τῃῇ.“δὲ" ἐπιούσῃ eloyer ὁ Ταῦλος σὺν ἡμῖν 
?brethren. And on the following [day]?went “πὶ 'Paul with us 
πρὸς ᾿Ιάκωβον, πάντες. τε παρεγένοντο οἱ πρεσβύτεροι. 19 Kai 
to James, and all Sassembled ‘the 7elders. And 
ἀσπασάμενος αὐτοὺς ἐξηγεῖτο καθ᾽ ἐν. ἕκαστον ὧν ἐποίησεν 
having saluted them  herelated one by one what things ?wrought 
« ‘ ᾽ ~ » ‘ ~ > / ? ~ « 4 
ὁ θεὸς ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν διὰ τῆς.διακονίας. αὐτοῦ. 20 οἱ.δὲ 
1God among the nations by his ministry. And they 
? , ? ty Γ 4 , 4 ξ t , I! ᾽ ~ ~ 
ἀκούσαντες ἐδόξαζον frov κύριον εἰπὸν. τε αὑτῷ, Θεωρεῖς, 
haying heard glorified the Lord. And they said tohim, Thou seest, 
ἀδελφέ, πόσαι μυριάδες εἰσὶν "Tovdaiwy' τῶν πεπι- 
brother, how many mpyriads_ there are of Jews who have be- 


OTEVKOTWY, καὶ πάντες ζηλωταὶ τοῦ νόμου ὑπάρχουσιν. 
lieved, and all zealous ones of the law are. 


21 κατηχήθησαν.δὲ περὶ cov, ὅτι ἀποστασίαν διδάσκεις 


< 


And they were informed concerning thee, that *%apostasy thou *teachest 
ἀπὸ ἸΜωσέως" rove κατὰ τὰ ἔθνη ἔπάντας" ᾿᾽Ἰουδαίους, 
*°from 1!Moses *the ‘among ‘the *nations 3411 5Jews, 


λέγων μὴ περιτέμνειν αὐτοὺς τὰ τέκνα, μηδὲ τοῖς ἔθεσιν 


telling “ποῦ *to*circumcise ‘them the children, nor inthe customs 
περιπατεῖν. 22 τί οὖν ἐστιν; πάντως ‘dei πλῆθος 
to walk. What then is it? certainly “must ‘a *multitude 


379 


owneth this girdle, 
and shall deliver him 
into the hands of the 
Gentiles. 12 And when 
we heard these things, 
both we, and they of 
that place, besought 
him not to go up to 
Jerusalem. 13 Then 
Paul answered, What 
mean ye to weep and 
to break mine heart ? 
for I am ready not to 
be bound only, but al- 
so to die at Jerusalem 
for the name of the 
Lord Jesus. 14 And 
when he would not be 
persuaded, we ceased, 
saying, The will of the 
Lord be done. 


15 And after those 
days we took up our 
carriages, and went up 
to Jerusalem, 16 There 
went with us also 
certain of the disci- 
ples of Cesarea, and 
brought with them 
one Mnason of Cy- 
prus, an old disciple, 
with whom we should 
lodge. 17 And when 
Wwe were come to Je- 
rusalem, the brethren 
received us_ gladly. 
18 And the day fol- 
lowing Paul went in 
with us unto James; 
and all the elders were 
present. 19 And when 
he had saluted them, 
he declared particu- 
larly what things God 
had wrought among 
the Gentiles by his 
ministry. 20 And when 
they heard it, they 
glorified the Lord, and 
said unto him, Thou 
seest, brother, how 
many thousands of 
Jews there are which 
believe; and they are 
all zealous of the law : 
21 and they are in- 
formed of thee, that 
thou teachest all the 
Jews which areamong 
the Gentiles to for- 
sake Moses, saying 
that they ought not to 
circumcise their chil- 
dren, neither to walk 
after the customs. 
22 What 1510 therefore? 
the multitude must 


w+ τότε then LTTrAW. *— δὲ but LTTraw. 
τὸ θέλημα γινέσθω LTTrAWw. 5 ἐπισκευασάμενοι LTTrAW. 
© Καισαρίας T. ἃ ἀπεδέξαντο Welcomed LITraw. e ve T. 
Ε εἰπόντες Saying 1, ; εἶπάν τε TTr. 
δαίων T. 1 Μωύσέως GLTTrAW. 


k — πάντας L[Tr]. 
πλῆθος συνελθεῖν Tr. 


Υ + καὶ εἶπεν and said T. 


2 Tov κυρίον 


Ὁ Ἱεροσόλυμα LTTrAW. 
f τὸν θεόν God GLTTraW. 
h ἐν τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαιοῖς among the Jews tTraw; — Ἰου- 
1 δεῖ συνελθεῖν πλῆθος LTA ; — δεῖ 


380 


needs come together : 
for they will hear that 
thou art come. 23 Do 
therefore this that we 
say to thee: We have 
four men which havea 
yow onthem ; 24them 
take, and purify thy- 
self with them, and be 
at charges with them, 
that they may shave 
their heads: and all 
may know that those 
things, whereof they 
were informed con- 
cerning thee, are no- 
thing; but that thou 
thyself also walkest 
orderly, and keepest 
thelaw. 25 As touch- 
ing the Gentiles which 
believe, we have writ- 
ten andconcluded that 
they observe no such 
thing, save only that 
they keep themselves 
from things offered to 
idols, and from blood, 
and from strangled, 
and from fornication. 
26 Then Paul took the 
men, and the next day 
purifying himself with 
them entered into the 
temple, to signify the 
accomplishment of the 
days of purification, 
until that an offering 
should be offered for 
every one of them. 
27 And when theseven 
days were almost end- 
ed, the Jews which 
were of Asia, when 
they saw him in the 
temple, stirred up all 
the people, and laid 
hands on him, 28 ery- 
ing out, Men of Israel, 
heip: This is the man, 
that teacheth all men 
every where against 
the people, and the 
law, and this place: 
and further brought 
Greeks also into the 
temple, and hath pol- 
luted this holy place. 
29 (For they had seen 
before with him in 
the city Trophimus an 
Ephesian, whom they 
supposed that Paul 
had brought into the 
temple.) 30 And all 
the city was moved, 
and the people ran to- 
gether : and they took 
Paul, and drew him 
out of the temple: and 
forthwith the doors 
were shut. 31 Andas 
they went about to kill 
him, tidings came un- 


ΤΕ ΛΕ Ei. 
συνελθεῖν"" ἀκούσονται. γὰρ" ὅτι ἐλήλυθας. ἡ 
come together; for ΠΟΥ͂ willhear ὑδαῦ ὑοῦ hast come. This therefore 


ποίησον 0 cot λέγομεν" εἰσὶν ἡμῖν ἄνδρες τέσσαρες εὐχὴν 
do thou what*to*thee 'we*say: Therearewithus *men four a VOW 


ἔχοντες ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῶν 24 τούτους παραλαβὼν ἁγνίσθητι σὺν 
having on themselves: eee hasing, taken be purified with 


αὐτοῖς, καὶ δαπάνησον ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς, iva "ξυρήσωνται! τὴν 


ΧΧΙ, 


93 τοῦτο οὖν 


them, and beatexpense for them, that they may shave the 
κεφαλήν, καὶ °yy@ow' πάντες Ort ὧν κατήχηνται 
head ; and *may *know tall that of which they have been informed 
περὶ σοῦ οὐδὲν ἐστιν, ἀλλὰ στοιχεῖς καὶ αὐτὸς 
about thee *nothing 118, but thou *walkest “orderly 7also ‘thyself 
Prov νόμον φυλάσσων... 25 περὶ δὲ τῶν πεπιστευκότων 
*the law Skeeping. But concerning those who have believed 
ἐθνῶν ἡμεῖς “ἐπεστείλαμεν," κρίναντες "μηδὲν. τοιοῦτον 
of the nations we wrote, judging “no ®such *thing 
τηρεῖν αὐτούς, εἰ μὴ! φυλάσσεσθαι αὐτοὺς τό τε εἰδωλό-- 
2to7%observe ‘them, except to keep *from ‘themselves things offered 
θυτον καὶ Sro' αἷμα καὶ πνικτὸν καὶ πορνείαν. 26 Tore 


to idols, and blood, and what is ee and fornication. Then 


ὁ Παῦλος παραλαβὼν τοὺς ἄνδρας, 7 ἐχομένῃ ἡμέρᾳ σὺν 


Paul having taken the men, onthe next day with 
αὐτοῖς ἁγνισθεὶς εἰσήει εἰς TO ἱερόν, διαγγέλλων τὴν 
them having been purified entered into the temple, declaring the 


ἐκπλήρωσιν τῶν ἡμερῶν τοῦ ἁγνισμοῦ, ἕως οὗ προσηνέχθη 
fulfilment ofthe days ofthe purification, until was offered 


ὑπὲρ ἑνὸς ἑκάστου αὐτῶν ἡ προσφορά. 27 ὡς. δὲ ἔμελλον 
for 20Π6 teach ofthem the offering. But when * a Sabout 


αἱ ἑπτὰ ἡμέραι συντελεῖσθαι οἱ ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿Ασίας ᾿Ιουδαῖοι 
‘the “seven “days ἴο "6 σοιηρ!θίθα the *from 35 Asia ‘Jews 


θεασάμενοι αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ, 'συνέχεον! πάντα τὸν ὄχλον, 
having seen him in the ene stirred up all the crowd, 


καὶ ᾿ἐπέβαλον᾽ “rac χεῖρας ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν," 28 κράζοντες, ᾿ΑΥνδρες 


and laid hands pron him, crying, 
χ᾿Γσραηλῖται." βοηθεῖτε. οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ ἄνθρωπος ὁ κατὰ 
Israelites, help! this is the man who against 


τοῦ λαοῦ καὶ TOU νόμου καὶ τοῦ.τόπου.τούτου πάντας ὕπαν- 
the people and the law and this place all every- 


ταχοῦ" διδάσκων" ἔτι.τε καὶ Ἕλληνας εἰσήγαγεν εἰς τὸ ἱερόν, 


where teaches, andfurtheralso Greeks he brought into the temple, 
καὶ κεκοίνωκεν τὸν ἅγιον τόπον τοῦτον. 99 Hoay.yap.7p0- 
and defiled "holy *place this. For they: had before 


εωρακότες Τρόφιμον τὸν Ἐφέσιον ἐν τῇ πόλει σὺν αὐτῷ, ὃν 
seen ee the nee in the city with him, whom 


ἐνόμιζον ore εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν εἰσήγαγεν ὁ Παῦλος. 80 ἐκινήθη 
they apposed that into the ETS “brought *Paul, *Was *moved 


τε ἡ πόλις OAH, Kai ἐγένετο συνδρομὴ τοῦ λαοῦ" Kai ἐπι- 
5and *the *city “whole, and there was a concourse of the Beebe and having 


λαβόμενοι τοῦ Παύλου, εἷλκον αὐτὸν ἔξω τοῦ ἱεροῦ" Kai 


laid hold of Paul, shies drew him outside the temple, and 
εὐθέως ἐκλείσθησαν αἱ θύραι. 31 ζητούντων.:δὲ! αὐτὸν 
immediately were shut the doors. But as they were seeking him 


m — yap for Tr. 
GLTTrAW. 


τηρεῖν αὐτούς, εἰ μὴ LTTr. 
αὑτὸν τὰς χεῖρας GLTITraw. 


1: χε And LTTrA. 


Ρ υλάσσων τὸν νόμον LTTrAW. 


» ξυρήσονται they shall shave TTra. ο Dears oe ται will know 
4 ἀπεστείλαμεν LTr. — μηδὲν τοιοῦτον 

t συνέχεαν L. v ἐπέβαλαν TTr. Wer 
Υ πανταχῇ LIr; πανταχῆ TAW, 


8 — τὸ LTTr[A]w. 
x Ἰσραηλεῖται T. 


XXI, ΧΧΙ. 


ἀποκτεῖναι ἀνέβη 
to kill 


ὅτι ὕλη "συγκέχυται" 


ACTS. 
φάσις τῷ χιλιάρχῳ τῆς σπείρης, 


there came a representation to the chief captain of the band, 


Ἱερουσαλήμ. 82 ὃς ὑξξαυτῆς" “παρα- 


that all *was*im‘a‘tumult ‘Jerusalem ; who at once having 
λαβὼν! στρατιώτας καὶ ἑκατοντάρχους" κατέδραμεν ἐπ᾽ 
taken with [him] soldiers and centurions ran down upon 


? , 
αὐτούς. 


οἱ δὲ ἰδόντες “τὸν χιλίαρχον καὶ τοὺς στρατιώτας 
them, 


And they having scen the chief captain and a soldiers 


ἐπαύσαντο τύπτοντες τὸν Παῦλον. 33 τότε ἐγγίσας 
ceased beating Paul. Then *having °drawn “near 


ὁ χιλίαρχος ἐπελάβετο αὐτοῦ, Kai ἐκέλευσεν δεθῆναι 
‘the *chief *captain laid hold ofhim, and commanded {him} to be bound 


ἁλύσεσιν δυσίν᾽ ἐπυνθάνετο τίς ἰἂν" εἴη, καὶ τί 

with “chains ‘two, inquired who he might be, and what 

ἐστιν.πεποιηκώς. 84 ἄλλοι.δὲ. ἄλλο. τι βέβόων᾽" 
he had been doing. But some *one *thing °*and “some another *were 7erying 

ἐν τῷ ὄχλῳ: "yr)-dvvapEvoc.dt' γνῶναι τὸ ἀσφαλὲς διὰ 

in the crowd. And not being able to know the certainty on account of 

τὸν θόρυβον, ἐκέλευσεν ἄγεσθαι αὐτὸν εἰς τὴν παρεμ- 

the tumult, he commanded *to*be*brought ‘him into the 

βολήν. 35 brecé ἐγένετο ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀναβαθμοὺς συνέβη 

tress. But wih hecame on_ the stairs it happened 


βαστάζεσθαι αὐτὸν ὑπὸ τῶν στρατιωτῶν διὰ τὴν βίαν 
*was *borne the by the soldiers because of the violence 


τοῦ ὄχλου. 86 ἠκολούθει.γὰρ τὸ πλῆθος τοῦ λαοῦ ἱκράζον," 
of the crowd. For followed the multitude of the people, crying, 


Aipe αὐτόν. 37 Μέλλων τε τ στα τ εἰς τὴν παρεμβολὴν 
Away with him, But being about to be brought into the fortress 


ὁ Παῦλος λέγει τῷ χιλιάρχῳ, Εἰ ἔξεστίν μοι εἰπεῖν 


καὶ 
and 


TL 


Paul says tothechiefcaptain, Is it permitted tome tosay Bonictng: 
πρός σε; ὋὉ δὲ ἔφη, “EXAnuicti γινώσκεις; 38 οὐκ ἄρα 
to thee? Andhe said, Greek dost thou know ? 5Not *then 


σὺ εἶ ὁ Αἰγύπτιος ὁ πρὸ τούτων THY ἡμερῶν ἀναστα- 
Ξἴποι ‘art the Egyptian whobefore these days caused a 


Twoac Kai ἐξαγαγὼν εἰς τὴν ἔρημον τοὺς τετρακισχιλίους 
confusion and led out into the desert the four thousand 


ἄνδρας τῶν σικαρίων ; 39 Εἶπεν.δὲ ὁ Παῦλος, gi ἄνθρωπος 
men ofthe assassins? But “said *Paul, aman 


μέν eit Ἰουδαῖος Tapoedc, τῆς Κιλικίας οὐκ ἀσήμου πόλεως 


indeed am a Jew of Tarsus, 7of *Cilicia *no%of *insignificant “city 
πολίτης δέομαι δὲ cov, ἐπίτρεψόν μοι λαλῆσαι πρὸς τὸν 
44 *citizen, and 1 beseech thee, allow me tospeak to the 


αὐτοῦ, ὁ Παῦλος ἑστὼς ἐπὶ 
the, Paul standing on 
χειρὶ τῷ Aa’ πολλῆς. δὲ 
and great 


λαόν. 40 ᾿Επιτρέψαντος. δὲ 
people. And *having ®allowed [*him] 
τῶν ἀναβαθμῶν κατέσεισεν τῇ 
the stairs madeasign with the hand ΤῸΝ the people ; 
σιγῆς γενομένης προσεφώνησεν 
silence having taken place he spoke to oe in ἃ δε Hebrew language 
λέγων, 299. “Avdoec ἀδελφοὶ καὶ πατέρες, ἀκούσατέ pov τῆς 


saying, Men, brethren and fathers, hear my 
apien ὑμᾶς *viy' ἀπολογίας. Ὡ᾿ Ακούσαντες.δὲ ὅτι τῇ “EBpatdr 
Ξξγ7γο.) “ΠΟΥ͂ defence, And having heard that nee Hebrew 


ἢ Ἑ βραΐῖδι διαλέκτῳ ine 


Δ] 
to the chief captain of 
the band, that all Je- 
rusalem was in an up- 
roar. 32 Who imme- 
diately took soldiers 
and centurions, and 
ran down unto them: 
and when they saw the 
chief captain and the 
soldiers, they left beat- 
ing of Paul. 33 Then 
the chief captain came 
near, and took him, 
and commanded him 
to be bound with two 
chains ; and demanded 
who he was, and what 
he had done. 34 And 
some cried one thing, 
some another, amoung 
the multitude: and 
when he could not 
know the certainty for 
the tumult, he com- 
manded him to be 
carried into the castle. 
35 And when he came 
upon the stairs, so it 


- was, that he was borne 


of the soldiers for the 
violence of the people. 
36 For the multitude 
of the people followed 
after, crying, Away 
with him. 37 And as 
Paul was to be led in- 
to the castle, he said 
unto the chief captain, 
May I speak unto thee? 
who said, Canst thou 
speak Greek? 38 Art not 
thou that Egyptian, 
which before these 
days madest an up 
roar, and leddest out 
into the wilderness 
four thousand men 
that were murderers? 
39 But Paul said, lam 
aman whichamaJew 
of Tarsus, a city in 
Cilicia, a citizen of no 
mean city : und, I be- 
seech thee, suffer me 
to speak unto the peo- 
ple. 40 And when he 
had given him licence, 
Paul stood on the 
stairs, and beckoned 
with the hand unto 
the people. And when 
there was made a great 
silence, he spake un- 
to them in the He- 
brew tongue, saying, 
XXII. Men, brethren, 
and fathers, hear ye 
my defence which I 
now unto you, 
2 (And when they 
heard that he spake in 
the Hebrew tongue to 


Ὁ ἐξ αὐτῆς A. 


5 συγίσυν- Τ)χύννεται LTTrA ; : συγχύνεται Ww. 
f — ay Lrtr[a]w. 


ἃ ἑκατοντάρχας LTTrAW. — τὸν W. 
Β μὴ δυναμένου δὲ αὐτοῦ he ‘abt being able Lttraw. 
GLTTraw. 


ς λαβὼν having taken L. 
8 ἐπεφώνουν LTTrAW, 
i κράζοντες LTTrAW. 


Κγυνι 


382 


them, they kept the 
more silence: and he 

saith,) 3 I am verily a 
man which ama Jew, 
born in Tarsus, @ city 
in Cilicia, yet brought 
up in this city at the 
feet of Gamaliel, and 
taught according to 
the perfect manner of 
the law of the fathers, 
and was zealous te- 
ward God, as ye all 
arethis day. 4 AndI 
persecuted this way 
unto the death, bind- 
ingand delivering into 
prisons both men and 
women, 5 As also the 
high priest doth bear 
me witness, and all 
the estate of the elders: 
from whom also I re- 
ceived letters unto the 
brethren, and went to 
Damascus, to bring 
them which were there 
bound unto Jerusalem, 
for to be punished. 
6 And it came to pass, 
that, as I made my 
journey, and wascome 
nigh unto Damascus 
about noon, suddenly 
there shone from hea- 
ven agreat lightround 
about me. 7 And I 
fell unto the ground, 
and heard a voice say- 
ing unto me, Saul, 
Saul, why persecutest 
thou me? 8 And Lan- 
swered, Who art thou, 
Lord? Andhe said un- 
to me, I am Jesus of 
Nazareth, whom thou 
persecutest. 9 And they 
that were with me saw 
indeed the light, and 
were afraid; but they 
heard not the voice of 
him that spake to me, 
10 And I said, What 
shall I do, Lord? And 
the Lord said unto me, 
Arise, and go into Da- 
mascus; and there it 
shall be told thee of 
all things which are 
appointed for thee to 
do. 11 And when 1 
could not see for the 
glory of that light, 
being led by the hand 
of them that were 
with me, 1 came into 
Damascus. 12 And one 
Ananias,a devout man 
according to the law, 
having a good report 
of all the Jews which 
dwelt there, 13 came 
unto me, and stood, 


and said unto me, 
Brother Saul, receive 
thy sight. And the 


TH PAAC 2) ET Σ. XXII. 


διαλέκτῳ προσεφώνει αὐτοῖς, μᾶλλον παρέσχον ἡσυχίαν. καί 
language he ΕΒ to them, “the *more ‘they *kept quiet; and 


φησιν, 3 mye ἱμέν" εἰμι ἀνὴρ ‘lovdaioc, gedit ἐν 


he says, indeed am aman a Jew, 


Ταρσῷ τῆς ea ae: ἀνατεθραμμένος δὲ ἐν τῇ. ΞΕ; εἴν 
Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought up in this city 


παρὰ τοὺς πόδας Γαμαλιήλ, πεπαιδευμένος κατὰ 
αὖ the feet of Gamaliel, having been instructed according to [the} 


ἀκρίβειαν τοῦ πατρῴου νόμου, ζηλωτὴς ὑπάρχων τοῦ θεοῦ, 
i ee ofthe ancestral law, 7a *zealous “one "being for God, 


καθὼς πάντες ὑμεῖς ἐστε σήμερον᾽ 4 ὃς ταύτην τὴν ὁδὸν 
even as all ye are this day ; who this way 
ἐδίωξα ἄχρι θανάτου, δεσμεύων καὶ παραδιδοὺς εἰς φυλακὰς 
persecuted unto death, binding and delivering up to prisons 


ἄνδρας. τε kai γυναῖκας, 5 ὡς Kai ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς μαρτυρεῖ μοι, 
both men and women; as age the high priest bears witness to me, 


καὶ πᾶν τὸ πρεσβυτέριον" παρ᾽ ὧν Kai ἐπιστολὰς δεξάμενος 
and all the ee from whom also letters having received 


πρὸς τοὺς ἀδελφούς, εἰς Δαμασκὸν ἐπορευόμην, ἄξων Kai τοὺς 

to the brethren, to Damascus I went, to bring also those 
ἐκεῖσε ὄντας, δεδεμένους εἰς Ιἱεορουσαλήμ, ἵνα τιμωρη- 
there who were, bound to Jerusalem, in order that they might 
θῶσιν. 6 éyévero.d& μοι πορευομένῳ καὶ ἐγγίζοντι τῇ 
be punished. And it came to pass to me journeying and drawing: near 


Δαμασκῷ περὶ μεσημβρίαν ἐξαίφνης ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ περι- 
to Damascus, about mid-day suddenly, outof the heaven 


αστράψαι φῶς ἱκανὸν περὶ ἐμέ 7 πέἔπεσόν".τε εἰς TO ἔδαφος, 


shone alight ‘great about di AndIfell to the ground, 
καὶ ἤκουσα φωνῆς λεγούσης μοι, Σαούλ, Σαούλ, τί με διώ- 
and heard ἃ voice saying tome, Saul, Saul, why me perse 
KELC 5 8 ᾿Εγὼ.δὲ ἀπεκρίθην, Tic εἴ, κύριε; Ἐϊπέν τε 
cutest thou? And I answered, Who artthou, Lord? And he said 
πρός “pe, ᾿Εγώ εἰμι Ἰησοῦς ὁ Ναζωραῖος ὃν σὺ διώκεις. 

to me, I am Jesus the Nazarewan, whom thou persecutest, 
9 Οἱδὲ σὺν ἐμοὶ ὄντες TO μὲν φῶς ἐθεάσαντο, “καὶ ἔμ- 

But those *with *me ‘being the *indeed ‘light beheld, and ae 


φοβοι ἐγένοντο" τὴν. δὲ φωνὴν οὐκ. ἤκουσαν τοῦ λαλοῦντός 


larmed were, but the voice didnot hear ofhim speaking 
μοι. 10 εἶπον.δέ, Ti ποιήσω κύριε; ὋὉ δὲ κύριος εἶπεν 
to me. AndI said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said 
πρός με, ᾿Αναστὰς πορεύου εἰς Δαμασκόν, κἀκεῖ σοι λα- 
to me, Having risen up go to Damascus, and there thee it 
ληθήσεται περὶ πάντων ὧν τέτακταί σοι ποιῆσαι. 


shallbe told concerning all things whichit has been appointed thee ἴο do. 
11 Ὡς δὲ οὐκιἐνέβλεπον ἀπὸ τῆς δόξης τοῦ.φωτὸς ἐκείνου, 
And as I did not see from the glory of that light, 
χειραγωγούμενος ὑπὸ THY συνόντων μοι, ἦλθον εἰς Δαμασ- 
being led by thehand by those being ἢ me, Icame _ to Damas- 
Kov. 12 ’Avaviac.oé-rtc, ἀνὴρ Ῥεὐσεβὴς" κατὰ τὸν νόμον, 
cus. And acertain Ananias,a*man ‘pious according to the law, 


μαρτυρούμενος ὑπὸ πάντων THY κατοικούντων Ἰουδαίων, 
borne witness to by all the dwelling ([Sthere] ‘Jews, 


18 ἐλθὼν πρός “με Kai ἐπιστὰς εἶπέν μοι, Σαοὺλ ἀδελφέ, 
coming to me and standing by said tome, *Saul ‘brother, 


1— μέν LTTrAW. 
P εὐλαβὴς LTTrA. 


τὰ ἔπεσά LTTrA. π ἐμέ LTTr, ο — καὶ ἔμφοβοι ἐγένοντο LTTr[A]. 


ᾳ ἐμὲ LTTr. 


XXII. & CrT.S: 
ἀνάβλεψον. Κἀγὼ aitg-rp-wpg ἀνέβλεψα εἰς αὐτόν. 14 ὁ.δὲ 
look up. AndI inthesamehour lookedup on him. And he 


εἶπεν, Ὁ θεὸς τῶν.πατέρων.ἡμῶν προεχειρίσατό σε γνῶναι 


said, The God of our fathers appointed thee to know 
τὸ θέλημα.αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἰδεῖν τὸν δίκαιον Kai ἀκοῦσαι φωνὴν 
his will, and tosee the Just One, and _ tohear & Voice 

ἐκ τοῦ.στόματος.αὐτοῦ: 15 Ore ἔσῃ μάρτυς αὐτῷ 
out of his mouth ; for thou shalt be a witness for him 
πρὸς πάντας ἀνθρώπους ὧν ἑώρακας καὶ ἤκουσας. 16 καὶ 
to all men of what thou hast seenand heard. And 
νῦν τί μέλλεις; ἀναστὰς βάπτισαι Kai ἀπόλουσαι τὰς 


now why delayest thou? Having arisen be baptized and wash away 
͵΄ 4 ~ ΄ ? 
ἁμαρτίας.σου, ἐπικαλεσάμενος TO ὄνομα τοῦ κυρίου." 17 E- 
thy sins, calling on the name ofthe Lord. 7Tt *came 


évero δὲ μοι ὑποστρέψαντι εἰς Ἱερουσαλήμ; Kai προσευ- 
Ὁ *pass ‘andtome havingreturned to erusalem, and on“pray- 
χομένου μου ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ, γενέσθαι.με ἐν ἐκστάσει, 18 και "ἰδεῖν" 
ing 1my in the temple, I became in a trance, and saw 
4 ~ . e 
αὐτὸν λέγοντά μοι, Σπεῦσον καὶ ἔξελθε ἐν τάχει ἐξ Ἵε- 
him saying tome, Makehaste and goaway with speed outof Je- 
ρουσαλήμ, διότι οὐ-παραδέξονταί σοῦ 'τὴν" μαρτυρίαν 
rusalem, because they will not receive thy testimony 
περὶ ἐμοῦ. 19 Κἀγὼ εἶπον, Κύριε, αὐτοὶ ἐπίστανται, 
concerning me, AndI said, Lord, themselves know 
OTL ἐγὼ ἤμην φυλακίζων καὶ δέρων κατὰ.τὰς.συναγωγὰς τοὺς 
that I Was imprisoning and beating in every synagogue those 
πιστεύοντας ἐπὶ σέ 20 καὶ ὅτε "ἐξεχεῖτο" τὸ αἷμα Στεφάνου 
believing on thee; and when was poured out the blood of Stephen 
τοῦ. μάρτυρός.σου, Kai αὐτὸς ἤμην ἐφεστὼς Kai συνευδοκῶν 
thy witness, also myself owas standing by and consenting 
ἀναιρέσει αὐτοῦ," καὶ φυλάσσων Ta ἱμάτια τῶν 
to the putting ἴο death οἵ him, and keeping the garments of those who 
ἀναιρούντων αὐτόν. 21 Kai εἶπεν πρός pe, Πορεύου, ori ἐγὼ 
illed him. And hesaid to me, Go, for I 
sic ἔθνη μακρὰν ἐξαποστελῶ σε. 232 Ἤκουον δὲ αὐτοῦ ἄχρι 
to nations afar off will send forth thee, And they heard him until 
τούτου τοῦ λόγου, Kai ἐπῆραν τηνι-φωνὴν. αὐτῶν λέγοντες, 
this word, and lifted up their voice, saying, 
Aipe ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς τὸν.τοιοῦτον᾽ οὐ.γὰρ "καθῆκον" αὐτὸν 
Away with “from *the *earth ‘such 28 Ξ016, for *not "it #is fit he 
ζῷ . 23 Κραυγαζόντων δὲ" αὐτῶν, καὶ ῥιπτούντων 
should live. And as *were *crying‘*out ‘they, and casting off (their) 
τὰ ἱμάτια, Kai κονιορτὸν βαλλόντων εἰς TOY ἀέρα, 24 ἐκέλευσεν 
garments, and 2dust throwing intothe air, “commanded 
Ξαὐτὸν ὁ χιλίαρχος ἄγεσθαι" εἰς τὴν παρεμβολήν, "εἰπὼν" 
Shim ‘the ?chief*captain to be brought into the fortress, bidding 
μάστιξιν ἀνετάζεσθαι αὐτόν, ἵνα ἐπιγνῷ δι᾽ ἣν αἰτίαν 
ΒῸΌΥ ®scourges *to*be*examined ‘him, that he might know for what cause 
οὕτως ἐπεφώνουν αὐτῷ. 2 we.dé ὕπροέτεινεν' αὐτὸν 
thus they cried out against him. But as he stretched forward him 
τοῖς ἱμᾶσιν εἶπεν πρὸς τὸν ἑστῶτα ἑκατόνταρχον “ὁ 
with the thongs 2814 to «=. “the ὅσο "stood *by Scenturion 


Y¥rn 


383 


same hour I looked 
up upon him, 14 And 
he said, The God of our 
fathers hath chosen 
thee, that thou should- 
est know his will, 
and see that Just 
One, and shouldest 
hear the voice of 
his mouth. 15 For 
thou shalt be his wit- 
ness unto all men of 
what thou hast seen 
and heard. 16 And 
now why tarriest thou? 
arise, and be baptized, 
and wash away thy 
sins, calling on the 
mame of the Lord. 
17 Andit came to pass, 
that, when I was come 
again to Jerusalem, 
even while I prayed in 
the temple, I was ina 
trance; 18 and saw 
him saying unto me, 
Make haste, and get 
thee quickly out of 
Jerusalem : for they 
will not receive thy 
testimony concerning 
me. 19 And I said, 
Lord, they know that 
Limprisoned and beat 
in every synagogue 
them that believed on 
thee: 20 and when 
the blood of thy mar- 
tyr Stephen was shed, 
I also was standing 
by, and consenting 
unto his death, and 
kept the raiment of 
them that slew him. 
21 Andhe said unto me, 
Depart: for I will send 
thee far hence unto 
the Gentiles. 22 And 
they gave him audi- 
ence unto this word, 
and then lifted up 
their voices, and said, 
Away with such a 
JSellow from the earth : 
for it is not fit that he 
should live. 23 And 
as they cried out, and 
cast off their clothes, 
and threw dust into the 
air, 24 the chief cap- 
tain commanded him 
to be brought into the 
castle, and bade that 
he should be examined 
by scourging ; that he 
might know wherefore 
they cried so against 
him. 25 And as the 

bound him wit 

thongs, Paul said un- 
to the centurion that 


τ αὐτοῦ (read his name) GLTTraw. 
Ἢ — τῇ ἀναιρέσει αὐτοῦ GLTTraw. 
εἰσάγεσθαι αὐτὸν GLTTrAW. 
GLITrAW. ς [ὁ Παῦλος] a. 


5 ἴδον T. t τὴν ἱτττ[Α]. 
χα καθῆκεν GLTTrAW. 
3 εἴπας LTTrAW. 


¥ ve LTrAW. 
Ὁ προέτειναν they stretched forward 


τ ἐξεχύννετο LTTrA. 
1 6 χιλίαρχος 


984 


stood by, Is it lawful 
for you to scourge a 
man that is a Roman, 
and uncondemned? 
26 When the centurion 
heard that, he went 
and told the chief cap- 
tain, saying, Take 
heed what thou doest: 
for this man is a Ro- 
man, 27 Then the chief 
captain came, and said 
unto him, Tell me, art 
thou a Roman? He 
said, Yea. 28 And the 
chief captain answer- 
ed, With a great sum 
obtained 1 this free- 
dom. And Paul said, 
But I was free born. 
29 Then straightway 
they departed from 
him which should 
have examined him: 
and the chief captain 
also was afraid, after 
he knew that he was 
a Roman, and because 
he had bound him. 
30 On the morrow, be- 
cause he would have 
known the certainty 
wherefore he was ac- 
cused of the Jews, he 
loosed him from his 
bands, and command- 
ed the chief priests 
and all their council 
to appear, and brought 
Paul down, and set 
him before them. 


XXIII. And Paul, 
earnestly beholding 
the council, said, Men 
and brethren, I have 
lived in all good con- 
science before God un- 
til this day. 2 And the 
high priest Ananias 
commanded them that 
stood by him to smite 
him on the mouth. 
3 Then said Paul unto 
him, God shall smite 
thee, thou whited wall: 
for sittest thou to 
judge me after the law, 
and commandest me 
tobe smitten contrary 
to the law? 4 And 


they that stood by 
said, Revilest thou 
God's high priest? 


6 Then said Paul, I 
wist not, brethren,that 
he was the high priest: 
for it is written, Thou 
shalt not speak evil of 
the ruler of thy peo- 
ple. 6 But when Paul 


perceived that the one β 


part were Sadducees, 


ΠΡΑΞΕΙΣ. XX, KEE 


Παῦλος," Ei ἄνθρωπον Ῥωμαῖον καὶ ἀκατάκριτον ἔξεστιν 
‘Paul, A man a Roman and uncondemned is it lawful 
ὑμῖν μαστίζειν ; 26 ᾿Ακούσας. δὲ ὁ ἑκατόνταρχος," προσ- 
for you toscourge? And *having ‘heard [510] 'the “centurion, having 
ελθὼν “ἀπήγγειλεν τῷ χιλιάρχῳ" λέγων, “Ὅρα! τί μέλ- 
gone he reported [10] to the chief captain saying, See what art 
λεις ποιεῖν; ὁ-.γὰρ. ἄνθρωπος. οὗτος Ῥωμαῖός ἐστιν. 
thou about todo? For this man a Roman is. 
27 Προσελθὼν.δὲ ὁ χιλίαρχος εἶπεν αὐτῷ, Λέγε μοι, Sei! σὺ 
And having come up the chief captain said tohim, Tell me, “thou 
Ῥωμαῖος εἶ; ὋὉ.δὲ ἔφη, Nat. 28 ᾿Απεκρίθη.Ἀτε! ὁ χιλίαρχος, 
3a “Roman ‘art? And he said, Yes. And *answered ‘the *chief *captain 
Ἐγὼ πολλοῦ κεφαλαίου τὴν. πολιτείαν.ταύτην ἐκτησάμην. 
I with a great sum this citizenship bought. 


Ὁ δὲ. Παῦλος ἔφη, ᾿Εγὼ.δὲ καὶ γεγέννημαι. 29 Εὐθέως οὖν 


And Paul said, But 1 also was[free) born. Immediately therefore 
ἀπέστησαν am αὐτοῦ ot μέλλοντες αὐτὸν ἀνετάζειν" και 
departed from him those beingabout “him ‘to *examine, and 


ὅτι Ρωμαῖός ἐστιν, 
a Roman he is, 


ὁ χιλίαρχος δὲ ἐφοβήθη. ἐπιγνοὺς 
the chief captain also was afraid, having ascertained that 
καὶ Ore ἰὴν.αὐτὸν" δεδεκώς. 30 Τῇ δὲ ἐπαύριον βουλόμενος 
and because he had bound him. And onthe morrow, desiring 
γνῶναι τὸ ἀσφαλὲς τὸ.τί κατηγορεῖται "παρὰ" τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, 
to know the certainty wherefore he is accused by the Jews, 
” Φ ἫΝ 1, ν ~ ὃ ~ ΠΩΣ ἐλ πιξλ θεῖ ll 4 
ἔλυσεν αὐτὸν “απὸ των εσμων, KQt EKEAEVOEV “ελῦειν TOUC 
he loosed him from the bonds, and commanded tocome the 
ἀρχιερεῖς Kai "ὅλον" τὸ συνέδριον. abr ay"! καὶ καταγαγὼν 
chief priests and "whole their sanhedrim, and having brought down 
τὸν Παῦλον ἕστησεν εἰς αὐτούς. 
Paul he set [him] among them, 
93 ᾿Ατεγίσας. δὲ Ρὸ Παῦλος τῷ 
And “having *looked ‘intently *Paul on the sanhedrim said, 
“Avopsc ἀδελφοί, ἐγὼ πάσῃ συνειδήσει ἀγαθῇ πεπολίτευμαι 
Men brethren, I inall “conscience ‘good have conducted myself 
~ ~ , ~ € , 7 « κ᾿ ᾽ ‘ > 
τῷ θεῷ ἄχρι ταῦτης THC ἡμέρας. 2 Ὁ «δὲ ἀρχιερεὺς Ανα- 
towards God unto this day. But the high priest Ana- 
viac ἐπέταξεν τοῖς παρεστῶσιν αὐτῷ τύπτειν αὐτοῦ TO στόμα 
nias ordered those standing by him  tosmite his mouth, 


3 τότε ὁ Παῦλος πρὸς αὐτὸν εἶπεν, Τύπτειν σε μέλλει ὁ 


it 


συνεδρίῳ! εἶπεν, 


Then Paul to him said, “Το smite “thee *is *about 
θεός, τοῖχε κεκονιαμένε' Kai σὺ κάθῃ κρίνων pe κατὰ 
᾿ᾳοᾶ, “wall 7whited. And thou dost thou sit judging me according to 


τὸν νόμον, Kai παρανομῶν κελεύεις με τύπτεσθαι; 4 Οἱ δὲ 
the law, and contrary to law commandest me to be smitten? And those who 
παρεστῶτες “εἶπον, Τὸν ἀρχιερέα τοῦ θεοῦ λοιδορεῖς ; 
stood by said, *The ‘high ‘priest Tof *God 'railest *thou *at? 
ὅ Ἔφη.τε ὁ Παῦλος, Οὐκῴδειν, ἀδελφοί, ὅτι ἐστὶν ἀρχ- 
And ’said 1Paul, I was not conscious, brethren, that heis a high 
ιερεύς' γέγραπται.γάρ, τἴΑρχοντα τοῦ.λαοῦ.σου οὐκ ἐ- 
priest ; for it has been written, A ruler ofthy people “not 'thou *shalt 
εἷς κακῶς. GBTvoic.dé ὁ Παῦλος bru τὸ ἕν μέρος ἐστὶν 
speak 70f ‘evil But *having *known 1Paul thatthe one part consists 


ἀ ἑκατοντάρχης Lr} 
δὲ LTTr; — τε A. 


GLITraw. 
δεσμῶν GLTTrAW. 


© — αὐτῶν (read the sanhedrim) @LTTraw. 


T+ ὅτι TTrIAl. 


f—°Opa GLTTrAW. 8 -- εἰ 
k ὑπὸ LTTrAW. 1 — ἀπὸ τῶν 
9 πᾶν all GLTTraw. 
4 εἷπαν TTr. 


© τῷ χιλιάρχῳ ἀπήγγειλεν GLTTrA. 
1 αὐτὸν ἣν LTTrAW. 

m συνελθεῖν to come together GLTTraw. 
P τῷ συνεδρίῳ ὃ Παῦλος LTTr. 


XXIII. A €.T.S: 


Σαδδουκαίων τὸ.δὲ ἕτερον Φαρισαίων "ἔκραξεν" ἐν τῷ συν- 
of Sadducees andthe other of Pharisees” criedout im the sanhe- 


εδρίῳ, Avdpec ἀδελφοί, ἐγὼ Φαρισαῖός εἰμι, υἱὸς ᾿Φαρισαίου"" 
drim, Men brethren, a Pharisee am, son ofa Pharisee: 

περὶ ἐλπίδος Kai ἀναστάσεως νεκρῶν ἐγὼ κρίνομαι. 
concerning a hope and resurrection of[the]dead I am judged, 


7 Τοῦτο.δὲ αὐτοῦ “λαλήσαντος" ἐγένετο στάσις τῶν Φαρι- 

And this he having spoken there was adissension of the Phari- 
σαίων καὶ τῶν" Σαδδουκαίων, καὶ ἐσχίσθη * τὸ πλῆθος" 
Bees and the Sadducees, and wasdivided the multitude, 


8 Σαδδουκαῖοι μὲν" yap λέγουσιν μὴ εἶναι ἀνάστασιν ᾿μηδὲ" 
*Sadducees indeed ‘for Bay there is no resurrection nor 


ἄγγελον μήτε πνεῦμα: Φαρισαῖοι.δὲ ὁμολογοῦσιν τὰ ἀμφότερα. 
angel nor spirit ; but Pharisees confess both. 

9 éyévero.dé κραυγὴ μεγάλη" καὶ ἀναστάντες "οἱ" ὕγραμ- 
And there was a’clamour ‘great, and havingrisenup the scribes 


ματεῖς τοῦ μέρους" τῶν Φαρισαίων διεμάχοντο λέγοντες, 
ofthe part ofthe Pharisees they werecontending, saying, 


Οὐδὲν κακὸν εὑρίσκομεν ἐν τῷ.ἀνθρώπῳ.τούτῳ᾽ εἰ. δὲ πνεῦμα 
Nothing evil we fin in this man ; andif a spirit 
ἐλάλησεν αὐτῷ ἢ ἄγγελος", μὴ.θεομαχῶμεν." 10 Πολλῆς .δὲ 
spoke tohim or an angel, let us not fight against God. And a great 
Iyevopéivne στάσεως, εὐλαβηθεὶς" ὁ χιλίαρχος μὴ δια- 
7arising ‘dissension, ‘fearing *the ‘chief °captain lest “should “be 
σπασθῇ ὁ Παῦλος ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν, ἐκέλευσεν τὸ στράτευμα 
“torn *in “pieces *Paul by them, commanded the troop 
καταβὰν ἁρπάσαι αὐτὸν ἐκ μέσου αὐτῶν, ἄγειν.τε 
having gone down to take by force him from *midst ‘their, and to bring 


εἰς τὴν παρεμβολήν. 11 Τῇ.δὲ ἐπιούσῃ νυκτὶ ἐπιστὰς 
(himjinto the fortress, But the following night *standing *by 


? ~ « , = , e ~ οἱ! e ‘A 
αὐτῷ ὁ κύριος εἶπεν, Θάρσει Παῦλε"" ὡς.γὰ διε- 
Shim ‘the *Lord said, Be οἵ good courage, Paul; foras thou didst 
ρτύρω τὰ περὶ ἐμοῦ εἰς Ἱερουσαλήμ, οὕτως σε. δεῖ 


fully testify the things concerning me at erusalem, so thou must 
καὶ εἰς Ρώμην μαρτυρῆσαι. 12 Γενομένης.δὲ ἡμέρας, ποιή- 
also at Rome bear witness. And it being day, Shaving 
σαντές τινες τῶν ‘lovdaiwy συστροφὴν ἀγεθεμάτισαν 
®made ‘some “of *the *Jews a combination put *under *a *curse 
ἑαυτούς, λέγοντες μήτε φαγεῖν μήτε πιεῖν ἕως.οὗ ἀποκτεί- 
‘themselves, declaring neither toeat ΠΟΙ todrink till they should 


vwow τὸν Παῦλον᾽ 18 ἦσαν.δὲ πλείους τεσσαράκοντα" οἱ 
kill Paul, And they were more than forty who 


ταύτην τὴν συνωμοσίαν "πεποιηκότες" 14 οἵτινες προσελ- 


this conspiracy had made ; who having 
θόντες τοῖς ἀρχιερεῦσιν Kai τοῖς πρεσβυτέροις ἰεῖπον," “Ava- 
come tothe chief priests and the elders said, Witha 


θέματι ἀνεθεματίσαμεν ἑαυτούς, "μηδενὸς! γεύσασθαι ἕως οὗ 
curse we have cursed ourselves, nothing to taste until 


ἀποκτείνωμεν TOY Παῦλον. 1ὅ νῦν οὖν ὑμεῖς ἐμφανίσατε 
we should kill Paul. Now therefore ye make arepresentation 


385 


and the other Phari- 
sees, he cried out in 
the council, Men and 
brethren, I am a Pha- 
risee, the son of a Pha- 
risee: of the hopeand 
resurrection of the 
dead I am called in 
question. 7 And when 
he had so said, there 
arose a dissension be- 
tween the Pharisees 
and the Sadducees : 
and the multitude was 
divided. 8 For the 
Sadducees say that 
there is no resurrec- 
tion, neither angel, 
nor spirit: but the 
Pharisees confess both, 
9 And there arose a 
great cry: and the 
scribes that were of 
the Pharisees’ part a- 
rose, and strove, say- 
ing, We find no evil in 
this man: but if a 
spirit or an angelhath 
spoken to him, let us 
not fight against God. 
10 And when there a- 
rose a great dissen- 
sion, the chief cap- 
tain, fearing lest Paul 
should have been pull- 
ed in pieces of them, 
commanded the sol- 
diers to go down, and 
to take him by force 
from among them, and 
to bring Azm into the 
castle. 11 And the 
night following the 
Lord stood by him, 
and said, Be of good 
cheer, Paul: for as 
thou hast testified of 
me in Jerusalem, s0 
must thou bear wit- 
ness also at Rome, 
12 And when it was 
day, certain of the 
Jews banded together, 
and bound themselves 
under a curse, saying 
that they would nei- 
ther eat nor drink till 
they had killed Paul 
13 And they were more 
than forty which had 
made this conspiracy. 
14 And they came to 
the chief priests and 
elders, and said, We 
have bound ourselves 
under a great curse, 
that we will eat no- 
thing until we have 
slain Paul. 15 Now 
therefore ye with the 


5 ἔκραζεν TTrA. t Φαρισαίων of Pharisees LTTraw. 
LTTraw. x + μὲν indeed L. Υ — μὲν L[Tr]. 2 μήτε LITrAW. 
Ὁ τῶν γραμματέων TOU μέρους ΤΊτΑ ; — γραμ. TOU μέρους L. 
the sentence incomplete) GLITrAW. 
στάσεως φοβηθεὶς TTrA. e — TlavAe GLTTrAw. 


& τεσσεράκοντα TTrA- h ποιησάμενοι LTTrAW. i εἶπαν LTTrA. 


Υ εἰπόντος LTrW. 


ν»- τῶν 
a τινὲς SOME LTTrA, 


©; — μὴ θεομαχῶμεν (leaving 
d στάσεως γινομένης φοβηθεὶς L; γενομένης (γιν- T) 
f συστροφὴν οἱ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι GLITrAW. 
k μηθενὸς A. 


GG 


386 


council signify to the 
chief captain that he 
bring him down unto 
you to morrow, as 
though ye would in- 
quire something more 
perfectly concerning 
him : and we, or ever 
he come near, are ready 
to kill him. 16 And 
when Paul’s sister’s 
son heard of their ly- 
ing in wait, he went 
and entered into the 
eastle, and told Paul. 
17 Then Paul called 
one of the centurions 
unto him, and said, 
Bring this young man 
unto the chief cap- 
tain: for he hath a 
certain thing to tell 
him. 18 So he took 
him, and brought him 
to the chief captain, 
and said, Paul the 
prisoner called me un- 
to him, and prayed me 
to bring this young 
man unto thee, who 
hath something to say 
unto thee. 19 Then 
the chief captain took 
him by the hand, and 
went with him aside 
rivately, and asked 
im, What is that 
thou hast to tell me? 
20 And he said, The 
Jews have agreed 
to desire thee that 
thou wouldest bring 
down Paul to morrow 
into the council, as 
though they would 
inquire somewhat of 
him more perfectly. 
21 But do not thou 
yield unto them: for 
there 116 in wait for 
him of them more 
than forty men, which 
have bound themselves 
with an oath, that 
they will neither eat 
nor drink till they 
have killed him: and 
now are they ready, 
looking for a promise 
from thee. 22 So the 
chief captain then let 
the young man _ de- 
part, and charged him, 
See thou tell ne man 
that thou hast shewed 
these things to me. 
23 And he called unto 
him two centurions, 
saying, Make ready 
two hundred soldiers 
to go to Cesarea, and 


TIPAZ EIS. XXIII. 
~ oN , ‘ ~ ὃ , τ ] » " m ? 4 
τῷ χιλιάρχῳ σὺν τῷ συνεόρίῳ, OTWC αὔριον “αὐτὸν 
to the chief captain with the sanhedrim, sothat to-morrow him 
καταγάγῃ πρὸς" ὑμᾶς, ὡς μέλλοντας διαγινώσκειν ἀκρι- 
he may bring down’ to you, as_ being about to examine more 
βέστερον τὰ περὶ αὐτοῦ" ἡμεῖς.δέ, πρὸ τοῦ ἐγγίσαι 
accurately the things concerning him, and we, before 7drawing *near 
αὐτὸν ἕτοιμοί ἐσμεν τοῦ ἀνελεῖν αὐτόν. 16 ᾿Ακούσας. δὲ 
this 5ready *are to put to death him. But *having *heard *°of 
ὁ υἱὸς τῆς ἀδελφῆς Παύλου "τὸ ἔνεδρον," παραγενόμενος 
‘the son “of “6 °sister Sof 7Paul the lying in wait, having come near 
‘ > ‘ , A A ? ΄ ~ / 
καὶ εἰσελθὼν εἰς τὴν παρεμβολὴν ἀπήγγειλεν τῷ Παύλῳ. 
and entered into the fortress he reported [10] to Paul. 
17 προσκαλεσάμενος. δὲ ὁ Παῦλος ἕνα τῶν ἑκατοντάρχων, 
And *having 3called *to [Shim] Paul one of the centurions, 
ἔφη, Τὸν.νεανίαν.τοῦτον “ἀπἀγαγε᾽ πρὸς TOY χιλίαρχον" ἔχει 


said, ?This *young ‘man ‘take to the chief captain, *he *has 
γάρ Pre ἀπαγγεῖλαι! αὐτῷ. 18 Ὁ μὲν οὖν παραλαβὼν 
for something ἴο report to him, He indeed therefore having taken 


αὐτὸν ἤγαγεν πρὸς τὸν χιλίαρχον, Kai φησιν, Ὃ δέσμιος 
him brought (him) to the chief captain, and says, The prisoner 
Παῦλος προσκαλεσάμενός μὲ ἠρώτησεν τοῦτον τὸν 
Paul having called ?to [him] ‘me asked [me] this 
«νεανίαν ἀγαγεῖν πρός σε, ἔχοντάα τι λαλῆσαί σοι. 
young man to lead to thee, having something tosay to thee. 
19 ᾿Επιλαβόμενος.δὲ τῆς.χειρὸς.-αὐτοῦ ὁ χιλίαρχος, καὶ 

And thaving *taken Shold 7of *his "παπᾶ 1the *chief “captain, and 
ἀναχωρήσας Kar ἰδίαν ἐπυνθάνετο, Τί ἐστιν ὃ ἔχεις 
having withdrawn apart inquired, What isit which thou hast 


ἀπαγγεῖλαί μοι; 20 Ἐξϊπεν.δέ, Ὅτι ot ᾿Ιουδαῖοι συνέθεντο 
to report to me? And he said, The Jews agreed 


τοῦ ἐρωτῆσαί σε, ὕπως αὔριον Tic TO συνέδριον κατα- 
ἴο request thee, that to-morrow into the sanhedrim thou mayest 
yayye τὸν Παῦλον, ὡς péddovtéc' τι ἀκριβέστερον 
bring down Paul, as being about *something *more *accurately 
πυνθάνεσθαι περὶ αὐτοῦ. 2] σὺ οὖν μὴ.πεισθῇς αὐτοῖς" 
1to*inquire concerning him. Thou therefore be not persuaded by them, 
ἐνεδρεύουσιν.γὰρ αὐτὸν ἐξιαὐτῶν ἄνδρες πλείους "τεσσαρά- 
for lie in wait for him of them *men ‘more *than *forty 
κοντα," οἵτινες ἀνεθεμάτισαν ἑαυτοὺς μήτε φαγεῖν pare 
who put *under °a “curse *themselves neither to eat nor 
πιεῖν twe.od ἀνέλωσιν adrév καὶ νῦν 'ἕτοιμοί εἰσιν" 
to drink till they puttodeath him; and now ready they are 
προσδεχόμενοι τὴν ἀπὸ σοῦ ἐπαγγελίαν. 22 Ὁ μὲν οὖν 
waiting the ?from “thee ‘promise. The *therefore 
χιλίαρχος ἀπέλυσεν τὸν “νεανίαν," παραγγείλας μηδενὶ 
lchief “captain dismissed the youngman, having charged [him] to no one 
ἐκλαλῆσαι OTe ταῦτα ἐνεφάνισας πρός με." 28 Καὶ 


to utter that these things thou didst represent to me. And 
προσκαλεσάμενος δύο τινὰς" τῶν ἑκατοντάρχων εἶπεν, 
having calledto [him] *two ‘certain of the centurions he said, 
ἑτοιμάσατε στρατιώτας διακοσίους ὕπως πορευθῶσιν ἕως 
Prepare soldiers twohundred, that they maygo as far as 


! — αὔριον GLTTrAW. 
P ἀπαγγεῖλαί τι LTrAW. 
εἰς TO συνέδριον ws μέλλων LTTrAW. 

* twas δύο TTr. 


ὁ ἅπαγε TTr. 


Y ἐμέ TTr 


2 σὴν ἐνέδραν EGLTTrA. 
τ τὸν Παῦλον καταγάγῃς 
τ εἰσὶν ἕτοιμος LTTYAW 


ἃ καταγάγῃ αὐτὸν εἰς LTTrAW. 
4 νεανίσκον LTTrA. 
5 τεσσεράκοντα ΤΊΤΑ. 


XXIi1. ACTS. 


x , Π} 3 ᾿ - ε , ‘ a , - 
Καισαρείας," καὶ ἱππεῖς ἑβδομήκοντα, καὶ δεξιολάβους δια- 
Ceesarea, and horsemen seventy, and  spearmen two 


κοσίους, ἀπὸ τρίτης ὥρας τῆς νυκτός" 24 κτήνη.τε παραστῆ- 


hundred, for thethird hour of the night. And ‘beasts ‘to *have *pro- 
σαι, ἵνα ἐπιβιβάσαντες τὸν Παῦλον διασώσωσιν 
vided, that having set on *Paul they may carry (him) safe through 


πρὸς Φήλικα τὸν ἡγεμόνα᾽ 2 γράψας ἐπιστολὴν ὕπερι- 
ities the governor, having written a letter hay- 


ἐχουσαν" τὸν. τύπον.τοῦτον᾽ 26 Κλαύδιος Λυσίας τῷ κρατίστῳ 
ing this form : Claudius Lysias tothe mostexcellent 


ἡγεμόνι Φήλικι χαίρειν. 27 Τὸν. ἄνδρα.τοῦτον *ovdAdngbevra' 
governor, Felix, greeting. This man, having been seized 
ὑπὸ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, καὶ μέλλοντα ἀναιρεῖσθαι ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν, 
by the Jews, and being about to be put todeath by them, 
ἐπιστὰς σὺν τῷ στρατεύματι δἐξειλόμην᾽ airov,! μαθὼν 
having come up with the troop I rescued him, having learnt 
ev «ε -’ ? , c a ~ ll A 2 / 
ὅτι Ῥωμαῖός ἐστιν. 28 βουλόμενος.“δὲ γνῶναι" τὴν αἰτίαν 


that a Roman he is. And desiring toknow the charge 
ov ἣν ἐνεκάλουν αὐτῷ κατήγαγον δΔαὐτὸν! εἰς τὸ 

on account of which they accused him I brought down him to 

συνέδριον. αὐτῶν 29 ὃν εὗρον ἐγκαλούμενον περὶ ζητη- 


their sanhedrim : whom Ifound tobeaccused concer a ques- 


μάτων τοῦ.-νόμου.αὐτῶν, μηδὲν. ὃ δὲ ἄξιον θανάτου ἢ δεσμῶν 
tions of their law, but*no ‘worthy ‘of death or "οὗ *bonds 


εἔγκλημα ἔχοντα." 30 μηνυθείσης.δέ μοι ἐπιβουλῆς εἰς 


Saccusation ‘having. Andit having beenintimatedtome ofaplot against 
τὸν ἄνδρα ἱμέλλειν" ἔσεσθαι βὑπὸ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων 


the man about tobe (carried out) by the Jews 
Βέξξαυτῆς" ἔπεμψα πρός σε, παραγγείλας καὶ τοῖς κα- 
at once Isent {him) to thee, havingcharged also the ac- 


k \ eee || ee ee ~ ΙἜ re ll 
πρὸς αὑτόν" ETL σοῦ. ῤρωσο. 
him before thee. Farewell. 


τηγόροις λέγειν tra 
cusers to ΕΝ the things against 


STAG: ody στρατιῶται, κατὰ τὸ διατεταγμένον 
The ἀξ esc paleeers, according to the orders given 
αὐτοῖς: ἀναλαβόντες τὸν Παῦλον ἤγαγον διὰ τῆς" νυκτὸς 
tothem, having taken Paul i brought (him) by night 
εἰς τὴν ᾿Αντιπατρίδα. 32 τῇ. δὲ ἐπαύριον ἐάσαντες τοὺς 
to Antipatris, and on the morrow are left the 
ἱππεῖς "πορεύεσθαι' σὺν αὐτῷ, ὑπέστρεψαν εἰς τὴν παρεμ- 
horsemen to go with him, ey returned to the for- 
βολήν᾽ 38 οἵτινες εἰσελθόντες εἰς τὴν “Καισάρειαν," καὶ 
tress. Who having entered into Cresarea, and 


ἀναδόντες THY ἐπιστολὴν τῷ ἡγεμόνι, παρέστησαν Kai τὸν 


given up the letter to the governor, presented also 
Παῦλον αὐτῷ. 34 avayvorveceé Po ἡγεμών," καὶ ἐπερω- 

Paul to him, And *having tread [Sit] ‘the *governor, and having 
τήσας ἐκ ποίας Yémapxiac' ἐστίν, Kai πυθόμενος ὅτι ἀπὸ 
asked of what province heis, and eine learnt that from 
Κιλικίας, 96 Διακούσομαί σου, ἔφη, ὅταν καὶ οἱ κατήγοροί 
Cilicia {he is], I will *hear *fully thee, he said, when also ?accusers 


387 
horsemen threescore 
and ten, and spearmen 
two hundred, at the 
third hour of the 
night ; 24and provide 
them beasts, that they 
may set Paul on, and 
bring him safe unto 
Felix the governor. 
25 And he wrote a let- 
ter after this manner: 
26 Claudius Lysias un- 
to the most excellent 
governor Felix send- 
eth greeting. 27 This 
man was taken of the 
Jews, and should have 
been killed of them: 
then came I with an 
army,andrescued him, 
haying understood 
that he was a Roman. 
28 And when I would 
have known the cause 
wherefore they ac- 
cused him, I brought 
him forth into their 
council: 29 whom I 
perceived to be accused 
of questions of their 
law, but to have no- 
thing laid to his charge 
worthy of death or of 
bonds. 30 And when 
it was told me how 
that the Jews laid 
wait for the man, 1 
sent straightway to 


ll thee, and gave com- 


mandment to his ac- 
cusers also to say be- 
fore thee what they 
had against him. 
Farewell. 31 Then the 
soldiers, as it was com- 
manded them, took 
Paul, and brought 
him by night to Anti- 
patris. 32 On the mor- 
row they left the 
horsemen to go with 
him, and returned to 
the castle: 33 who, 
when they came to 
Cresarea, and delivered 
the epistle to the go- 
vernor, presented Paul 
also before him, 34And 
when the governor 
had read the letter,he 
asked of what pro- 
vince he was. And 
when he understood 
that he was of Cilicia; 
35 I will hear thee, 
said he, when thine ac- 


* Καισαρίας T. 
® ἐξειλάμην LTTrAW. 
τὸν (read [him]) T[Tr]. 
τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων LTTrA. 
for them (to speak) LT, 
away LTTra, 


y ἔχουσαν τττ ; [περι]έχουσαν A. 

b— αὐτόν LTtr[4]W. 

Β ἔχοντα ἔγκλημα LITrAW. 
ae αὐτῶν by them LrTr; ἐξ αὐτῆς A. 

— Ἔῤῥωσο LTTra. τὰ — τῆς LTTrAW. 

° Jpeg y P — ὁ ἡγεμών GLTTrAW 


* συλλημφθέντα LTTra. 
© τε (δὲ W) ἐπιγνῶναι LTTrAW. 
f — μέλλειν LTTrA. 


d — αὐ- 
Β ---- ὑπὸ 
i — τὰ {τττ. Κ αὐτοὺς 


2 ἀπέρχεσθαι to go 


4 ἐπαρχείας T. 


388 


cusers are also come. 
And he commanded 
him to be kept in He- 
rod's judgment hall. 


XXIV. And after 
five days Ananias the 
high priest descended 
with the elders, and 
with a certain orator 
named Tertullus, who 
informed the gover- 
nor against Paul. 
2 And when he was 
called forth, Tertullus 
began to accuse him, 
saying, Seeing that by 
thee we enjoy great 
quietness, and that 
very worthy deeds are 
done unto this nation 
by thy providence, 
3 we accept tt always, 
and in all places, most 
noble Felix, with all 
thankfulness. 4 Not- 
withstanding, that I 
be not further tedious 
unto thee, I pray thee 
that thou wouldest 
hear us of thy cle- 
mency a few words. 
5 For we have found 
this man a pestilent 
fellow, and a mover of 
sedition among all the 
Jews throughout the 
world, and a ring- 
leader of the sect of 
the Nazarenes : 6 who 
also hath gone about 
to profane the temple: 
whom we took, and 
would have judged 
according to our law. 
7 But the chief cap- 
tain Lysias came upon 
us, and with great vio- 
lence took Aim away 
out of our hands, 
8 commanding his ac- 
cusers to come unto 
thee: by examining 
of whom thyself may- 
est take knowledge of 
all these things, where- 
of we accuse him. 
9 And the Jews also 
assented, saying that 
these things were so. 
10 Then Paul, after 
that the governor had 
beckoned unto him to 
speak, answered, For- 
asmuch as I know 
that thou hast been 
of many years a judge 
unto this nation, I do 
the more cheerfully 
answer for myself: 
11 because that thou 
mayest understand, 
that there are yet but 
twelve days since I 


IPAZEILS. XXIII, ΧΧΙΥ. 


σου παραγένωνται". ᾿Ἐκέλευσέν. τε αὐτὸν" ἐν τῷ πραιτωρίῳ 

‘thine may have arrived. Απᾶ hecommanded him in the pratorium 
ὕ Ἡρώδου φυλάσσεσθαι" 

τοῦ Ἡρωδου φυλάσσεσθαι". 


of Herod to be kept. 
24 Mera.oé πέντε ἡμέρας κατέβη ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς ᾿Ανανίας 
And after five days came down the high priest Ananias 


μετὰ ἱἹτῶν πρεσβυτέρων" καὶ ῥήτορος Τερτύλλου τινός. οἵτινες 
with the elders and anorator *Tertullus ‘a certain, who 
ἐνεφάνισαν τῷ ἡγεμόνι κατὰ τοῦ Παύλου. 2 κληθέν- 
made arepresentation tothe governor against Paul. *Having ‘been 
4 ᾽ - Hw - « , Ul 
TOC δὲ αὐτοῦ ἤρξατο κατηγορεῖν ὁ Bea λέγων, 
‘called ‘and he Tbegan ®to °accuse °Tertullus, saying, 
3 Πολλῆς εἰρήνης τυγχάνοντες διὰ σοῦ, Kai κατορθωμάτων" 
?Great Speace obtaining through thee, and excellent measures 
γινομένων τῷ.ἔθνειιττούτῳ διὰ τῆς.σῆς.προνοίας. πάντῃ.τε 
being done for this nation through thy forethought, bothin every way 
καὶ πανταχοῦ ἀποδεχόμεθα, κράτιστε Φῆλιξ, μετὰ πάσης 
and everywhere we gladly accept [10], mostexcellent Felix, with all 
εὐχαριστίας. 4 ἵνα.δὲ μὴ ἐπὶ πλεῖόν σε πέἐγκόπτω" 
thankfulness. But that ποὺ 7to *longer “thee ‘I *may *be °a *hindrance 
παρακαλῶ ἀκοῦσαί σε ἡμῶν συντόμως TH-op-eTELKELG. 5 εὑ- 
I beseech 7to*hear ‘thee us briefly in thy clemency. *7Having 
ρόντες γὰρ τὸν. ἄνδρα.τοῦτον λοιμόν, καὶ κινοῦντα στάσιν" 
found for this man apest, and moving insurrection 
πᾶσιν τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις τοῖς κατὰ τὴν οἰκουμένην, πρωτοστάτην 


amongall the Jews in the habitable world, *a leader 
τε τῆς τῶν Nalwpaiwy αἱρέσεως" 6 ὃς καὶ τὸ ἱερὸν 
‘and of the "of *the “Nazarzans sect ; who also the temple 


ἐπείρασεν βεβηλῶσαι, ὃν Kai ἐκρατήσαμεν Yeai κατὰ 


attempted to profane, whom also we seized, and according to 
τὸν ἡμέτερον νόμον ἠθελήσαμεν *kpivey.' 7 παρελθὼν. δὲ 
our law wished to judge; but ®having °come 7up 


Λυσίας ὁ χιλίαρχος μετὰ πολλῆς βίας ἐκ τῶν.χειρῶν. ἡμῶν 


1Lysias “the *chief‘captain with great force out of our hands 


ἀπήγαγεν, 8 κελεύσας τοὺς.κατηγόρους.αὐτοῦ ἔρχεσθαι 

took away [him], having commanaed his accusers to come 

ἐπὶ; σέ" παρ᾽ οὗ δυνήσῃ αὐτὸς ἀνακρίνας περὶ 
to thee, from whom thou wilt be able thyself, havingexamined concerning 

πάντων τούτων ἐπιγνῶναι ὧν ἡμεῖς κατηγοροῦμεν 
411 these things ‘to "know ‘of?which *we “accuse 


αὐτοῦ. 9 ὈΣυνέθεντο".δὲ καὶ ot ᾿Ιουδαῖοι, φάσκοντες ταῦτα 


Shim. And‘agreed also'the 7Jews, declaring these things 
οὕτως ἔχειν. 10 ᾿Απεκρίθη.“ δὲ" ὁ Παῦλος. νεύσαντος 
%thus ‘to 5306. But 7answered Paul, Shaving *made “a “sign 


αὐτῷ τοῦ ἡγεμόνος λέγειν, "Ex πολλῶν ἐτῶν ὄντα σε 
ϑὲο him “the ‘governor tospeak, δΕῸΣ ‘many ‘years *as*being “thee 


κριτὴν τῷ-ἔθνει. τούτῳ ἐπιστάμενος, *evOupdrEpor" τὰ 


judge "ἴο this **nation ‘knowing, more cheerfully [as to] the things 
περὶ ἐμαυτοῦ ἐπρλργοῦμαι; 11 δυναμένου σου “γνῶναι" 
concerning myself 1 make defence. 2Being*able ‘thou to know 
« ᾽ λ ΄, es, « , 0} 45) δύ i ? 3. ase 
OTL OU TAELOUC ELOLY μοι Ἡμέραι 1) EKAOVO ag -7)C 
Stwelve since 


that “ποῦ ‘more than "there are *to°me "days 


τ κελεύσας having commanded LTtTra. 
certain elders LTTrA. 
insurrections LTTrw. 
Ὁ συνεπέθεντο joined in attack GLTTraW. 


5 ἐπιγνῶναι LTTrA. 


* + αὐτόν him LITra. τ πρεσβυτέρων τινῶν 
¥ διορθωμάτων reforms LTTrA. ’ ἐνκόπτω T. χ στάσεις 

Υ — καὶ κατὰ .. .. ἐπὶ σέ (verse 8) τ τί ΑἹ]. τ κρῖναι A. ὃ πρὸς A. 

¢ τε and LTTrA. 4 εὐθύμως cheefully ΤΡΊΤΑ. 


f— ἢ GLITrAW. & δώδεκα LITrA. 


XXIV. ACTS. 


ἀνέβην προσκυνήσων δὲν “Ἱερουσαλήμ᾽ 12 καὶ οὔτε ἐν τῷ 
I went up to worship at Jerusalem, and neither in the 
ἱε εὗρόν μεπρός τινα διαλεγόμενον ἢ ᾿ἐπισύστασιν᾽" 
temple did they βπᾶ τὴθ with anyone reasoning, or a tumultuous gathering 
ποιοῦντα ὄχλου οὔτε ἐν ταῖς συναγωγαῖς οὔτε κατὰ THY 
making of acrowd neitherin the synagogues nor in the 
πόλιν" 13 *obre' παραστῆσαί 'με δύνανται" περὶ 
city ; neither ‘to *prove lare *they “able [the things] concerning 
ὧν "νῦν! κατηγοροῦσίν pov. 14 ὁμολογῶ.δὲ τοῦτό σοι. 
which now they accuse me. But I confess this to thee, 
ὅτι κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ἣν λέγουσιν αἵρεσιν, οὕτως λατρεύω τῷ 


that in the way which they call sect, so I serve the 
πατρῴῳ θεῷ, πιστεύων πᾶσιν τοῖς κατὰ τὸν νόμον καὶ “ 
ancestral God, believing all things which throughout the law and 


τοῖς προφήταις γεγραμμένοις, 15 ἐλπίδα ἔχων Ῥείς τὸν θεόν, 
the prophets have been written, ahope having in God, 
ἣν καὶ αὐτοὶ οὗτοι προσδέχονται. ἀνάστασιν μέλλειν 
which also they themselves receive, {that] a resurrection is about 
» 4 ~ u , ‘ > , ὃ 6 > — Us The! 
ἔσεσθαι «νεκρῶν," δικαίων τε καὶ ἀδίκων. 16 ev.rovTwTdé 
to be of (the) dead, both of just and of unjust. And in this 
αὐτὸς ἀσκῶ, ἀπρόσκοπον συνείδησιν ἔχειν πρὸς τὸν θεὸν 
myself I exercise, Swithout ‘offence “a *conscience ‘to *have towards God 
kai τοὺς ἀνθρώπους “διαπαντός." 17 Ov ἐτῶν. δὲ πλειόνων 


and men continually. And after years ‘many 
*zrapeyevounv' ἐλεημοσύνας ποιήσων εἰς τὸ.ἔθνος. μου * καὶ 
arrived alms ‘pringing to my nation and 


mooogopac’ 18 ἐν τοῖς" εἷρόν με ἡγγνισμένον ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ, 
offerings. Amidst which they found me purified in the temple, 
? ‘ » ᾽ κ ᾿ Γ Ud 4 WOE H ? ‘ ~ 
ov pera ὄχλου οὐδὲ μετὰ θορύβου, τινὲς “δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς 
not with crowd πὺ with tumult. But [it was] certain *from 
᾿Ασίας Ιουδαῖοι, 19 ode “δεῖ ἐπὶ σοῦ παρεῖναι Kai κατηγορεῖν 
SAsia 1Jews, who ought before thee toappear and _ to accuse 
ene 7 ἔχοιεν πρός Tye 20 ἢ αὐτοὶ. οὗτοι εἰπάτωσαν, 
if anything they may have against me; or these themselves let them say, 


Ξε! τι etpov δὲν ἐμοὶ" ἀδίκημα, o7dyvToc.mov ἐπὶ τοῦ 
if any “they *found “ἢ °me ‘unrighteousness, whenIstood before the 
συνεδρίου, 2] ἢ περὶ μιᾶς.ταύτης φωνῆς, ἧς éxpaka' 


sanhedrim, [other] than concerning this one voice, which I cried out 


“ἑστὼς ἐν αὐτοῖς, Ὅτι περὶ ἀναστάσεως νεκρῶν ἐγὼ 
standing among them: Concerning a resurrection of [the] dead I 
κρίνομαι σήμερον “ὑφ᾽ ὑμῶν. 22 “Ακούσας. δὲ ταῦτα ὁ 
am judged this day by you. And *having *heard *these things 
Φῆλιξ ἀνεβάλετο αὐτούς," ἀκριβέστερον εἰδὼς τὰ περὶ 
Felix he put 70ff ‘them, more accurately knowing the things concerning 
τῆς ὁδοῦ, feirwy,'"Oray Λυσίας ὁ χιλίαρχος καταβῷ, 

the way, saying, When Lysias the chief captain may have come down, 
διαγνώσομαι τὰ καθ᾽ ὑμᾶς" 23 διαταξάμενός Fre τῷ ἑκα- 
I willexamine the things asto you; having ordered the 


τοντάρχῃ τηρεῖσθαι ᾿ξ τὸν Ταῦλον, ἔχειν.τε ἄνεσιν, καὶ 

centurion to keep Paul, andto([lethim] have ease, and 
h εἰς LTTrAW. 

thee LTTraw. 

4 — νεκρῶν LTTra. 

LTTrA. Υ αἷς LTTrA. 

τι What) GLTTraw. 

4 ἐφ᾽ LITrAW. 

LYTrAw. 


® οὐδὲ LT. 
ἐν in ELW; + τοῖς ἐν GTT:[A]. 
ε διὰ παντός LTrA. 
« — δὲ but Ε. x ἔδει EGLITrAW. 
a — ἐν ἐμοὶ LI[Tra]. > ἐκέκραξα TIA. 
© "AveBareTo δὲ αὐτοὺς ὁ Φῆλιξ GLTTIAW. 
ha αὐτὸν him GLTTraw. 


i ἐπίστασιν LITrA. 
2 ψυνὶ LTTrA. o+ 
F καὶ LTTrAW. 


389 


went up to Jerusalem 
forto worship. 12 And 
they neither found me 
in the temple disput- 
ing with any mat, 
neither raising up the 
people. neither in the 
synagogues, nor in the 
city: 13 ncither can 
they prove the things 
whereof they now ac- 
cuse me. 14 But this 
I confess unto thee, 
that after the way 
which they call heresy, 
so worship I the God 
of my fathers, be- 
lieving 211 things 
which are written in 
the law and in the 
prophets : 15 and have 
hope toward God, 
which they themselves 
also allow, that there 
shall be a_resurrec- 
tion of the dead, both 
of the just and un- 
just. 16 And herein 
do I exercise myself, 
to have always 4 con- 
science void of offence 
toward God, and to- 
ward men. 17 Now 
after many years I 
came to bring alms to 
my nation, and offer- 
ings. 18 Whereupon 
certain Jews from Asia 
found me purified in 


the temple, neither 
with multitude, nor 
with tumult. 19 Who 


ought tohave been here 
before thee, and ob- 
ject, if they had ought 
againstme, 20O0relse 
let these same Here 
say, if they have found 
any evil doing in me, 
while I stood before 
the council, 21 except 
it be for this one 
voice, that I cried 
standing among them, 
Touching the resur- 
rection of the dead I 


am called in ques- 
tion by you this 
Gay. 22 And when 


Felix heard these 
things, having more 
perfect knowledge of 
that way, he deferred 
them, and said, When 
Lysias the chief cap- 
tain shall come down, 
I will know the utter- 
most of your matter. 
23 And hecommanded 
a centurion to keep 
Paul, and to let him 
have liberty, and that 


1— με EGLTTrAW. 


m+ σοι to 
P πρὸς towards T. 


t παρεγενόμην placed aster μον 
Y éué LTTra. 

ς ἐν αὐτοῖς ἑστώς LTTrAW. 
f εἴπας LTTrAW. 


: — et (read 


8 — τῷ 


990 


he should forbid none 
of his acquaintance to 
minister or come unto 
him. 24 And after 
sertain days, when Fe- 
lix came with his wife 
Drusilla, which was a 
Jewess, he sent for 
Paul, and heard him 
concerning the faith 
in Christ. 25 And as 
he reasoned of right- 
eousness, temperance, 
and judgment to come, 
Felix trembled, and 
answered, Go thy way 
for this time; when 
I have a convenient 
season, I will call for 
thee. 26 He hoped also 
that money should 
have been given him 
of Paul, that he might 
loose him: wherefore 
he sent for him the 
oftener, and com- 
muned with him. 
27 But after two years 
Porcius Festus came 
into Felix’ room: and 
Felix, willing to shew 
the Jews a pleasure, 
left Paul bound. 


XXV. Now when 
Festus was come into 
the province, after 
three days he ascended 
from Cesarea to Jeru- 
salem. 2 Then the 
high priest and the 
chief of the Jews in- 


formed him against ’ 


Paul, and besought 
him, 3 and desired fa- 
vour against him, that 
he would send for 
him to Jerusalem, 
* laying wait in the way 
to kill him. 4 But 
Festus answered, that 
Paul should be kept 
at Cesarea, and that 
he himself would de- 
part shortly thither. 
+ Let them therefore, 
said he, which among 
you are able, go down 
with me, and accuse 
this man, if there be 
apy wickedness in 
him. 6 And when he 
bad tarried among 
them more than ten 
days, he went down 


| — ἢ προσέρχεσθαι LTTrAW. 
" + Ἰησοῦν Jesus LT. 
4 — ὅπως λύσῃ αὐτόν LTTrAW. 

Md ot ἀρχιερεῖς t 
Υ ἐν ὑμῖν, φησίν, δυνατοὶ GLITraw. 


Y te LITra. 
σαρίαν T. 


LTTra; — τούτῳ G. 


TIPAGEIS. XXIV, XXV. 


μηδένα κωλύειν THY.idiwy.avTov ὑπηρετεῖν ᾿ἣ προσέρχεσθαι 
‘none ‘to “forbid of his own to minister or to come 


αὐτῷ. 24 Μετὰ δὲ Κἡμέρας τινὰς" παραγενόμενος ὁ Φῆλιξ 


to him, And after *days 1eertain *having *arrived Felix 
σὺν Δρουσίλλῃ τῇ! γυναικὶ "αὐτοῦ οὔσῃ Ἰουδαίᾳ, pere- 
with Drusilla his wife, who was’ aJewess, he 
πέμψατο τὸν Παῦλον, καὶ ἤκουσεν αὐτοῦ περὶ τῆς εἰς 
sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the “in 
χριστὸν ἃ πίστεως. 25 διαλεγομένου.δὲ αὐτοῦ περὶ δικαιο- 
“Christ ‘faith. And as *reasoned the concerning  =right- 


σύνης Kal ἐγκρατείας Kai τοῦ κρίματος τοῦ μέλλοντος “EcEGOaL,| 
eousness and self-control and the judgment about to be, 


ἔμφοβος γενόμενος ὁ Φῆλιξ ἀπεκρίθη, Τὸ.νῦν. ἔχον πορεύου" 


afraid becoming Felix answered, For the present go, 
καιρὸν.δὲ μεταλαβὼν μετακαλέσομαί σε; 26 ἅμα Pde! 
and an opportunity having found I will call for thee ; withal too 


καὶ ἐλπίζων ὅτι χρήματα δοθήσεται αὐτῷ ὑπὸ τοῦ Παύλου, 


also hoping that riches will be given him by Paul, 
αὕπως λύσῃ αὐτόν" διὸ Kai πυκνότερον αὐτὸν μετα- 
that he might loose him: wherefore also oftener him send- 
πεμπόμενος ὡμίλει αὐτῷ. 27 Διετίας δὲ πληρωθείσης 
ing for he conversed with him. But two years being completed 
ἔλαβεν διάδοχον ὁ Φῆλιξ Πόρκιον Pyorov’ θέλων.τε 
“received [Sas] *successor Felix Porcius Festus ; and wishing 
τχάριτάς" καταθέσθαι roic ᾿Τουδαίοις ὁ Φῆλιξ κατέλιπεν 
favours toacquire for himself with the Jews Felix left 
τὸν Παῦλον δεδεμένον. 
Paul bound, 
25 Φῆστος οὖν ἐπιβὰὲξῤ TH "ἐπαρχίᾳ," μετὰ τρεῖς 
Festus therefore being come into the province, after three 
€ , ? , > « 5X ? A t “ li > 
ἡμέρας ἀνέβη εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα ἀπὸ 'Καισαρείας. 2 ἐγε-- 
days wentup to Jerusalem from Crasarea, ?Made *a *re- 
φάνισαν δὲ! αὐτῷ “O ἀρχιερεὺς" καὶ οἱ πρῶτοι τῶν 


presentation *before 'and him the highpriest and the chief ofthe 
Ιουδαίων κατὰ τοῦ Παύλου, καὶ παρεκάλουν αὐτόν, 3 airov- 


Jews against Paul, and besought him, ask- 
μενοι χάριν κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ, ὕπως μεταπέμψηται αὐτὸν εἰς 
ing a favour against him, that he would send for him to 


ἀνελεῖν αὐτὸν κατὰ τὴν 


Ἱερουσαλήμ, ἐνέδραν ποιοῦντες 
to put ἴο death him on the 


J ernugalen, an ambush forming 
ὁδόν. 4 ὁ μὲν οὖν Φῆστος ἀπεκρίθη, τηρεῖσθαι τὸν Παῦλον 
way. Festus therefore answered, “should *be *kept 1Paul 


*ty Καισαρείᾳ, éavrovdé μέλλειν ἐν.τάχει ἐκπορεύεσθαι. 
at Crsarea, and himself was about’ shortly to set out. 

5 Οἱ οὖν YOuvaroi ἐν ὑμῖν, φησίν," ἐσυγκαταβάντες," 
Those therefore in power among you, says he, having gone down too, 


εἴ τι ἐστὶν ἐν τῷ ἀνδρὶ "τούτῳ," κατηγορείτωσαν αὐτοῦ. 
if anything is in *man ‘this, let them peense him. 

6 Διατρίψας. δὲ ἐν αὐτοῖς ἡμέρας Ὀπλείους ἢ" δέκα, κατα- 
And having spent among them days lmore than “ten, having 


k χινας ἡμέρας L. 1+ ἰδέᾳ Lrtr. τὰ -— αὐτοῦ GLTTrA. 
° — ἔσεσθαι (read μέλλοντος coming) GLITraw. P — δὲ GLTTrAW. 

piraa favour LTTrAW. 5 ἐπαρχείῳ τ. * Katoapias T. 
he ΩΣ priests LTTrA. * eis Καισάρειαν LTrAW; εἰς Και- 
2 guv- τ. 4 ἄτοπον amiss (in the man) 


Ὁ ov πλείους ὀκτὼ ἢ ποῦ More than eight or GLTTraW. 


XV. ACTS. 

‘ > c , I! ~ 2 , ᾽ x ~ 
Bac εἰς “Καισάρειαν," try emavp.ov καθίσας ἐπὶ τοῦ 
gone down to Ceesarea, on the morrow having sat on the 


βήματος ἐκέλευσεν τὸν Παῦλον ἀχθῆναι. 7 παραγενομένου 


judgment seat he commanded Paul to be brought. Being *come 
δὲ αὐτοῦ, περιέστησαν ἃ οἱ ἀπὸ ἱΙεροσολύμων καταβε- 
‘and he, stood round the *from SJerusalem “*who *had *come 


βηκότες ᾿Ιουδαῖοι, πολλὰ καὶ βαρέα “αἰτιάματα' ἰφέροντες 
7down 


1Jews, many and weighty charges bringing 
κατὰ τοῦ Παύλου ἃ ovK.iaxvoy ἀποδεῖξαι, 8 βἀπο- 
against Paul, which they were not able to prove: ?said *in 


εἰς τὸν νόμον τῶν Tovdaiwy 
Neither against the law οἵ the Jews 
οὔτε εἰς TO ἱερὸν οὔτε τι ἥμαρτον. 
nor against the temple nor against [1π} anything sinned 1. 
9 Ὁ-«Φῆστος.δὲ "τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις θέλων" χάριν 
But Festus, 7with *the ®Jews 1wishing 
θέσθαι ἀποκριθεὶς τῷ Παύλῳ εἶπεν, 
®himself answering Paul said, Art thou willing to Jerusalem 
ἀναβάς, ἐκεῖ περὶ τούτων ἱκρίνεσθαι ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ ; 
having gone up there concerning these things to be judged before me? 
10 Εἶπεν.δὲ ὁ Παῦλος, * Ἐπὶ τοῦ βήματος Καίσαρος "ἕ- 
But “said Paul, Before the judgment seat of Cesar  stand- 
στώς" εἰμι, οὗ με.-δεῖ κρίνεσθαι. ᾿Ιουδαίους οὐδὲν ἰήδί- 
ing I am, where it behoves me to be judged. ToJews “nothing 11 “did 
Kyoa,' wo Kai ov κάλλιον ἐπιγινώσκεις᾽ 11 εἰ μὲν yap’ 
wrong, as also thou very well knowest. 2321} “indeed ‘for 
ἀδικῶ καὶ ἄξιον θανάτου πέπραχά τι, οὐ-παραιτοῦμαι 
I do wrong and worthy of death have done anything, I do not deprecate 
TO ἀποθανεῖν: εἰ δὲ οὐδέν ἐστιν ὧν οὗτοι κατηγοροῦσίν 
to die ; but if nothing there is of which they accuse 
μου, οὐδείς pe δύναται αὐτοῖς χαρίσασθαι. Καίσαρα ἐπι- 


, ? ~ ye ” 
λογουμένου αὐτοῦ," Ὅτι οὔτε 
᾽ 
*defence the, 
εἰς Καίσαρά 
Cesar 
KaTa- 
°favour “to *acquire *for 


Θέλεις εἰς Ἱεροσόλυμα 


me, noone me can to them give up. To Czxsar LTap- 
καλοῦμαι. 12 Tore ὁ Φῆστος "συλλαλήσας μετὰ τοῦ συμ- 
peal. Then Festus, having conferred with the coun- 
βουλίου, ἀπεκρίθη, Καίσαρα ἐπικέκλησαι, ἐπὶ Καίσαρα 
cil, answered, To Cesar thou hast appealed, to Cesar 
πορεύσῃ." 


thou shalt go. 
13 Ἡμερῶν.δὲ διαγενομένων τινῶν, Aypimmag ὁ βασιλεὺς 
And ?days Shaving “passed ‘certain, Agrippa the king 
καὶ Βερνίκη κατήντησαν εἰς “Καισάρειαν," Ῥάσπασόμενοι τὸν 
and Bernice came down to Cesarea, saluting 


Φῆστον. 14 ὡς. δὲ πλείους ἡμέρας διέτριβον ἐκεῖ ὁ Φῆστος 


Festus. And when many days they stayed there Festus 
τῷ βασιλεῖ ἀνέθετο τὰ κατὰ τὸν Παῦλον λέγων, 
*the *king 1Jaid *before the things relating to Paul, saying, 
3 ΄ ? . , ε ᾿ ’ Ul 
Avnp τις ἐστὶν καταλελειμμένος ὑπὸ Φήλικος δέσμιος. 
A *man ‘certain there is left by Felix & prisoner, 
15 περὶ οὗ, γενομένου pov εἰς ‘lepoovAvpa, ἐνε- 
concerning whom, “being ton *my in Jerusalem, ‘made °a Sre- 
φάνισαν οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς καὶ οἱ πρεσβύτεροι τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, 


presentation ‘the “chief “priests and the eiders of the Jews, 


© Καισαρίαν 1. 4 αὐτὸν him LITraw. 
(— κατὰ tov Παύλου) LTTra. 

2 θέλων τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις LTTrAW. 

1 ηδίκηκα I have done wrong ΤΊτ. 
" Καισαρίαν τ. Ρ ἀσπασάμενοι ΤΊτΑ. 


i κριθῆναι LITrAW. 
τὸ οὖν therefore LTTrAW. 


© αἰτιώματα GLITrAW. 
& τοῦ Παύλου ἀπολογουμένου Paul said in defence LTTra. 
E ἑστὼς placed before Enc. 


991 


unto Crsarea; and 
the next day sitting 
on the judgment scat 
commanded Paui to 
be brought. 7 And 
when he was come, 
the Jews which came 
down from Jerusalem 
stood round about, and 
laid many and griev- 
ous complaintsagainst 
Paul, whichthey could 
not prove. § Whilehe 
answered for himself, 
Neither against the 
law of the Jews, nei- 
ther against the tem- 
ple, nor yet against 
Cesar, have I offend- 
ed any thing at all, 
9 But Festus, willing 
to do the Jews a plea- 
sure, answered Paul, 
and said, Wilt thou 
go up to Jerusalem, 
and there be judg- 
ed of these things 
before me? 10 Then 
said Paul, I stand 
at Cesar’s judgment 
seat, where I ought to 
be judged: to the 
Jews have I done no 
wrong, as thou ver 

well knowest. 11 For 
if I be an offender, or 
have committed any 
thing worthy of death, 
I refuse not to die: 
but if there be none 
of these things where- 
of these accuse me, no 
man may deliver me 
unto them. I appeal 
unto Cesar. 12 When 
Festus, when he had 
eonferred with the 
council, answered, 
Hast thou appealed 
unto Cwsar? unto 
Cesar shalt thou go. 


13 And after certain 
days king Agrippa and 
Bernice came unto 
Cxwsarea to salute Fes- 
tus. 14 And when 
they had been there 
many days, Festus de- 
elared Paul’s cause 
unto the king, saying, 
There is acertain man 
left in bond~ by Felix: 
15 about whom, when 
I was at Jerusalem, the 
chief priests and the 
elders of the Jews in- 
+tormed me, desiring to 


: καταφέροντες 


2 συνλαλήσας T. 


993 


havejudgment against 
him. 16 To whom I 
answered, It is not 
the manner of the Ro- 
mans to deliver any 
man to die, before 
that he which is 46- 
cused have the ac- 
cusers face to face, and 
have licence to an- 
swer for himself con- 
cerning the crime laid 
against him. 17 There- 
fore, when they were 
come hither, without 
any delay on the mor- 
row i sat on the judg- 
ment seat, and com- 
manded the man to be 
brought forth. i8 A- 
gainst whom when the 
accusers stood up, 
they brought none 
accusation of such 
things as I supposed : 
19 but had certain 
questions against him 
of their own supersti- 
tion, and of one Jesus, 
which was dead, whom 
Paul affirmed to be 
alive. 20And because 
I doubted of such man- 
ner of questions, 1 
asked him whether he 
would go to Jerusa- 
lem, and there be 
judged of these mat- 
ters. 21 But when Paul 
had appealed to be 
reserved unto the 
hearing of Augustus, 
I commanded him to 
be kept till I might 
send him to Cesar. 
22 Then Agrippa said 
unto Festus, 1 would 
also hear the man my- 
self. To morrow, said 
he, thou shalt hear 
him, 


23 And on the mor- 
row, when Agrippa 
was come, and Ber- 
nice, with great pomp, 
and was entered into 
the place of hearing, 
with the chicf cap- 
tains. and principal 
men of the city, at 
Festus’ commandment 
Paul was _ brought 
forth, 2#And Festus 
said, King Agrippa, 
and all men which 
are here present with 
us, ye see this man, 
about whom all the 
multitude of the 
Jews have dealt with 
me, both at Jerusa- 
lem, and also here, 
crying that he ought 


IPA EI. 


αἰτούμενοι Kar αὐτοῦ “δίκην 


ΧΧΥ. 


“10 πρὸς οὃς ἀπεκρίθην, 


asking 7against him ‘judgment: to whom I answered, 
ὅτι οὐκ-ἔστιν ἔθος Ῥωμαίοις χαρίζεσθαί τινα ἄνθρωπον 
Itisnot 2custom with Romans’ togiveup any man 


"sig ἀπώλειαν, πρὶν ἢ ὁ κατηγορούμενος κατὰ πρόσωπον 
to destruction, before he being accused face to face 
ἔχοι τοὺς κατηγόρους, τόπον.τε ἀπολογίας λάβοι 
may haye the accusers, and opportunity of defence he may get 
περὶ τοῦ ἐγκλήματος. 17 συνελθόντων οὖν "αὐτῶν!" 
concerning the aceusation. ?Having *come *together *therefore ‘they 
ἐνθάδε, ἀναβολὴν μηδεμίαν ποιησάμενος, TH ἑξῆς καθίσας 
here, delay none having made, the next [day] having sat 
ἐπὶ τοῦ βήματος ἐκέλευσα ἀχθῆναι τὸν ἄνδρα" 18 περὶ 
on the judgment seat [commanded tobebrought the man; concerning 
οὗ σταθέντες οἱ κατήγοροι οὐδεμίαν αἰτίαν “ἐπέφερον. ὧν 
whom standing up the accusers “no Scharge ‘brought of which 
vt , ᾽ All τ. ΄ , ᾿ ~ 2 
ὑπενόουν ἐγώ 19 {nrnpara.cdé τινα περὶ τῆς ἰδίας 
“supposed 1B but “questions ‘certain concerning their own 
δεισιδαιμονίας εἶχον πρὸς αὐτόν, καὶ περί τινος ᾿Ιησοῦ 
system of religion they had against him, andconcerningacertain Jesus 
(it. demon-worship) 


τεθνηκότος, ὃν ἔφασκεν ὁ ἸΤαῦλος 
whoisdead, whom 7affirmed 1Paul 
ἐγὼ τεἰς" τὴν περὶ τούτου!" ζήτησιν ἔλεγον, εἰ. βούλοιτο 
1T asto the*concerning “this ‘inquiry said, Wouldhe be willing 
πορεύεσθαι εἰς “Iepovoadnyp,' κἀκεῖ κρίνεσθαι περὶ 
to go to Jerusalem, and there to be judged concerning 
U oT ~ Α yy ? , - ᾽ 
τούτων. 21 τοῦ δὲ Ταύλου ἐπικαλεσαμένου τηρηθῆναι αὐ- 
these things. But Paul having appealed for *to*be*kept *him- 
τὸν εἰς τὴν τοῦ Σεβαστοῦ διάγνωσιν, ἐκέλευσα τηρεῖσθαι 
self for the “of “Augustus ‘cognizance, I commanded *to *be*kept 
αὐτὸν ἕως οὗ "πέμψω" αὐτὸν πρὸς Καίσαρα. 22 ᾿Αγρίππας 
thim till I might send him to Ceesar. Agrippa 
δὲ πρὸς τὸν Φῆστον Egy," Ἐβουλόμην καὶ αὐτὸς τοῦ 
‘and to Festus said, I was desiring also myself the 
> ΄ ᾽ - εἰ “Δ. ” , ? , ᾽ ~ 
ἀνθρώπου ἀκοῦσαι. © O08," Αὔριον, φησίν, ακουσῃ αὑτοῦ. 
man to hear. And he ?To-morrow ‘says, thou shalt hear him, 
23 Ty οὖν ἐπαύριον ἐλθόντος τοῦ ᾿Αγρίππα Kai τῆς 
On the “therefore ‘morrow ‘having *come Agrippa and 
᾽ ‘ ~ ͵΄ ‘ ᾽ , > 4 
Βερνίκης μετὰ πολλῆς φαντασίας, Kat εἰσελθόντων εἰς τὸ 
Bernice, with great pomp, and havingentered into the 
ἀκροατήριον, σύν τε 4roic! χιλιάρχοις Kai ἀνδράσιν τοῖς 
hall of audience, with both the chief captains and men 
car ἐξοχὴν οὖσιν" τῆς πόλεως, καὶ κελεύσαντος τοῦ Φήστου 
of eminence being ofthe city, and “having *commanded Festus 


ἤχθη 6 Παῦλος. 24 Kai φησιν ὁ Φῆστος, ᾿Αγρίππα βασι- 


20 ἀπορούμενος. δὲ 


ζῇν. 
And *being “perplexed 


to be alive. 


°was *brought “Paul. And says Festus, “Agrippa sking 
hed, καὶ πάντες οἱ 'συμπαρόντες" ἡμῖν ἄνδρες, θεωρεῖτε τοῦ- 

δ ἃ all the “being *present*with °us ‘men, ye see this 
τον περὶ οὗ &rav' τὸ πλῆθος τῶν Ἰουδαίων ἐνέτυχόν 


Jews pleaded 


‘ 


one concerning whom all the multitude of the 


μοι ἔν τε ἹἱἹεροσολύμοις καὶ ἐνθάδε, “értBowyrec' 
_with me in both Jerusalem and here, crying out [that] 


4 καταδίκην LITrAW. 
Υ ἐγὼ ὑπενόουν LTTrAW. 


© — eis TTr[A]. y 


I might send up Lrtraw. 
d — τρῖς LTTrA. 


he) LTTra. 


τ — εἰς ἀπώλειαν GLTTrAW. 5 [αὐτῶν] Α. τ ἔφερον LTTraw. 
τ + πονηράν (read evil charge) LT[A]w ; πονηρῶν of evils Tr. 
«Ἱεροσόλυμα LTTrTAW. * ἀναπέμψω 
ce —‘O δέ (read φησίν says 
£ oup- Ὁ. & ἅπαν LTTrAW 


τούτων these things LTTraw. 
b — ἔφη (read [said]) LTTrA. 
© — οὗσιν LTTrAW. 


ἃ βοῶντες crying LITr ; [ἐπι]βοῶντες A. 


RXVEX XVI ACTS 


δεῖν gv αὐτὸν" μηκέτι. 25 ἐγὼ.δὲ *karaXaBopevoc' μηδὲν 
“ought °to*live ‘*he no longer. But I having perceived nothing 
ἄξιον θανάτου αὐτὸν" πεπραχέναι, ™kai' αὐτοῦ δὲ τούτου 
worthy of death he had done, Falso *himself’and *this *one 
ἐπικαλεσαμένου τὸν Σεβαστόν. ἔκρινα πέμπειν "αὐτόν"" 
having appealed to Augustus, Idetermined tosend him, 
26 περὶ οὗ aogadic τι γράψαι τῷ-κυρίῳ οὐκ.ἔχω" 
concerning whom “certain ‘anything towrite to [my] lord I have not. 
66 προήγαγον αὐτὸν ἐφ᾽ ὑμῶν, Kai μάλιστα ἐπὶ σοῦ, 
Wherefore I brought “forth "him before you, and specially before thee, 
βασιλεῦ ᾿Αγρίππα, Owe τῆς ἀνακρίσεως γενομένης 
ing Agrippa, so that the examination having taken place 
σχῶ τι γράψαι." 27 ἄλογον.γάρ μοι δοκεῖ πέμ- 
I may have something to write ; for irrational tome it seems _ send- 
ποντα δέσμιον, μὴ Kai τὰς κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ αἰτίας σημᾶναι. 
ing a prisoner, not also the 7against “him ‘charges to signify. 
2 , A A A ~ ») ? , , 
26 ᾿Αγρίππας.δὲ πρὸς τὸν Παῦλον ἔφη, ἘΕπιτρέπεταί σοι 
And Agrippa to Paul said, It is allowed thee 
Ρὑπὲρ' σεαυτοῦ λέγειν. Τότε ὁ Παῦλος "ἀπελογεῖτο," ἐκτείνας 
for thyself tospeak. Then Paul made a defence, stretching out 
τὴν χεῖρα,4 2 ἸΠερὶ πάντων ὧν ἐγκαλοῦμαι ὑπὸ ‘Lov- 
the hand: Concerning all of which Iam accused by Jews, 
daiwy, βασιλεῦ ᾿Αγρίππα, ἥγημαι ἐμαυτὸν μακάριον "μέλλων 
king Agrippa, Lesteem myself happy being about 
ἀπολογεῖσθαι ἐπὶ σοῦ onuepov'' 3 μάλιστα γνώστην “ὄντα 
to make defence before thee to-day, especially “acquainted “being 
σεὶ πάντων τῶν κατὰ ᾿Ιουδαίους ἐθῶν τε Kai ζητημάτων. 
πο of all the °among Jews ‘customs 7and “also *questions ; 
διὸ δέομαί 'σου" μακροθύμως ἀκοῦσαί μου. 4 τὴν μὲν οὖν 
wherefore I beseech thee patiently tohear me. The ‘then 
βίωσίν Eo στὴν" ἐκ νεότητος, τὴν ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς 
4manner “οὗ “116 “my from youth, which from [15] commencement 
γενομένην ἐν τῷ ἔθνει. μου év™ ἹΙεροσολύμοις, ἴσασιν πάντες 
was among mynation in Jerusalem, know all 
χροὶ" ᾿Ιουδαῖοι, 5 προγινώσκοντες μὲ ἄνωθεν, ἐὰν θέλωσιν 
the Jews, who before knew me fromthe first, if they would 
μαρτυρεῖν, ὅτι κατὰ τὴν ἀκριβεστάτην αἵρεσιν τῆς 
bear witness, that according to the strictest sect 
ἡμετέρας ὑθρησκείας" ἔζησα Φαρισαῖος" 6 καὶ νῦν ἐπ᾽ 
of our religion I lived a Pharisee. And now for [the] 
ἐλπίδι τῆς πρὸς τοὺς πατέρας " ἐπαγγελίας γενομένης ὑπὸ 
hope ofthe “to “the ‘fathers ‘promise ?made by 
τοῦ θεοῦ ἕστηκα κρινόμενος, 7 εἰς ἣν To.dwdeKapvdroy.ypor 
God, Istand being judged, to which our twelve tribes 
évixreveia νύκτα καὶ ἡμέραν λατρεῦον ἐλπίζει καταντῆσαι" 
intently night and day serving hope to arrive ; 
ν᾿ τ ? sd ? ~ b 2 ~ 2? , tf ‘ 
περὶ ἧς ἐλπίδος ἐγκαλοῦμαι, βασιλεῦ ᾿Αγρίππα,, ὑπὸ 
concerning which hope I am accused, O king Agrippa, by 
«τῶν" "Iovdaiwy’. 8 τί ἄπιστον κρίνεται παρ᾽ ὑμῖν εἰ ὁ θεὸς 


the Jews. Why incredible is it judged by you if God 
νεκροὺς ἐγείρει; 9 ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν ἔδοξα ἐμαυτῷ πρὸς 
(the) dead raises ? 1 indeed therefore thought inmyself “το 


398 


not to live any longer. 
25 But when I found 
that he had committed 
nothing worthy of 
death, and that he 
himself hath appealed 
to Augustus, I have 
determined to send 
him. 260 whom i 
have no certain thing 
to write unto my lord. 
Wherefore I have 
brought him forth be- 
fore you, and specially 
before thee, O king 
Agrippa, that, aiter 
examination had, 1 
might have somewhat 
to write. 27 For it 
seemeth to me unrea- 
sonable to send a pri- 
soner, and not withal 
to signify the crimes 
laid against him, 
XXVI. Then Agrip- 
pa said unto Paul, 
Thou art permitted to 
speak for thyself. Ther 
Paul stretched forth 
the hand, and an- 
swered for himself: 
21 think myself happy, 
king Agrippa, because 
I shall answer for my- 
self this day before 
thee touching ali the 
things whereof I am 
accused of the Jews: 
3 especially because ἢ 
know thee to be expert 
in ali customs and 
questions which sre 
among the Jews: 
wherefore I beseecn 
thee to hear me pa- 
tiently. 4 My manner 
of life from my youth, 
which was atthe first 
among mine own na- 
tion at Jerusalem, 
know all the Jews; 
5 which knew me from 
the beginning, if they 
would testify, that 
after the most strait- 
est sect of our religion 
I lived a _ Pharisee. 
6 And now I standand 
am judged for the 
hope of the promise 
made of God unto 
our fathers: 7 unto 
which promise onr 
twelve tribes, instani- 
ly serving God day 
and night, hope to 
come. For which 
hope’s sake, king A- 
grippa, I am accused 
of the Jews. & Why 
should it be thought a 
thing incredible with 
you, that Ged should 
raise the dead? 91 
verily thought wits 


k κατελαβόμην LTTraAW. ! αὐτὸν θανάτου LTTraw. 


1 αὐτὸν ζῇν LITrAW. 
ο γράψω I shall write LrTraw. 


2 — αὐτὸν (read [him])-LTTra. 
λογεῖτο placed after χεῖρα LTTrAW. 
ὄντα T. t — gov LTTrA. νυ — τὴν Tr[A]. 
Σ θρησκίας τ. τ εἰς LTTraAW. 
᾿Αγρίππα LITrA; — ᾿Αγρίππα Ww. 


ς — τῶν GLTTrAW. d+ βασιλεῦ 


P περὶ LTTrA. 

τ ἐπὶ σοῦ μέλλων σήμερον ἀπολογεῖσθαι GLTTTA. 
τ + σε and (in) LTTraw. 
a+ ἡμῶν (read our fathers) LTTraw. 


m — καὶ LTTrAwW. 
ᾳ ἀπε- 

5σε 
X - ol LTrA. 
Ὁ — βασιλεῦ 
O king {ῖττὰ. 


994 
myself, that I ought 
to do many things 


contrary to the name 
of Jesus of Nazareth. 
19Which thing I also 
did in Jerusalem: and 
many of the saints did 
1 shut up in prison, 
having received au- 
thority from the chief 
priests; and when 
they were put to death, 
I gave my voice a- 
gainst them. 11 And 
I punished them oft 
in every synagogue, 
and compelled them 
to blaspheme; and 
being exceedingly mad 
against them, I per- 
secuted them even 
unto strange cities. 
12 Whereupon as I 
went to Damascus 
with authority and 
commission from the 
chief priests, 13 at 
midday, O king, I saw 
in the way a light 
from heaven, above 
the brightness of the 
sun, shining round 
about me and them 
which journeyed with 
me. 14 And when we 
were all fallen to the 
earth, I heard a voice 
speaking unto me, 
and saying in the He- 
brew tongue, Saul, 
Saul, why persecutest 
thou me? Jt is hard 
for thee to kick a- 
gainst the pricks. 
15 And I said, Who 
art thou, Lord? And 
he said, I am Jesus 
whom thou persecut- 
est. 16 But rise, and 
stand upon thy feet: 
for I have appeared 
unto thee for this pur- 
pose, to make thee a 
minister and a wit- 
ness both of these 
things which thou 
hast seen, and of those 
things in the which I 
will appear unto thee; 
17 delivering thee from 
the people, and from 
the Gentiles, unto 
whom now I send 
thee, 18to open their 
eyes, and to turn 
them from darkness 
to light, and from the 
ῬΟΝΟΣ of Satan unto 

od, that they may 
receive forgiveness of 
sing, and inheritance 
among them which 
are sanctified by faith 
thatisin me. 19Where- 
upon, O king Agrippa, 


TITPASETIS. xXVI. 
τὸ ὄνομα ᾿Ιησοῦ τοῦ Nalwpaiov δεν πολλὰ ἐναντία 
7the *name ὅοὗ ᾿σοβας ἴπ6 ‘*Nazarwan ‘I ought *many *things *contrary 

πο A . a ‘ 2 ΄ 2 e , ‘ Ay e 
πρᾶξαι: 10 ὃ καὶ ἐποίησα ἐν ἹἹεροσολύμοις, Kai πολλοὺς 
to do. Which also I did in Jerusalem, and many 
τῶν ἁγίων ἐγὼ ' φυλακαῖς κατέκλεισα, THY παρὰ τῶν ἀρχ- 


of the saints I in prisons shut up, the “from “the ‘chief 
ιερέων ἐξουσίαν aBwr' ἀναιρουμένων.τε αὐτῶν 
Spriests ‘authority having received; and "being *put *to *death ‘they 


κατήνεγκα.ψῆφον. 11 καὶ κατὰ πάφας τὰς συναγωγὰς 
I gave [my] vote against [them]. And in all the synagogues 
πολλάκις τιμωρῶν αὐτούς, ἠνάγκαζον βλασφημεῖν" περισ- 
often punishing them, I compelled [them] to blaspheme. *Exceed- 
σῶς τε ἐμμαινόμενος αὐτοῖς ἐδίωκον ἕως. καὶ εἰς 
ingly ‘and “being ?furious against them I persecuted [them] even as far as to 
rac ἔξω πόλεις. 12 ἐν οἷς Skai' πορευόμενος εἰς τὴν Aa- 
foreign cities. During which also journeying to Da- 
μασκὸν per ἐξουσίας Kai ἐπιτροπῆς Ἀτῇς παρὰ! τῶν ἀρχ- 


mascus, with authority and a commission from the chief 
pew, 13 ἡμέρας.μέσης κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν εἶδον. βασιλεῦ, 
priests, at mid-day in the way I saw, O king, 
οὐρανόθεν ὑπὲρ THY λαμπρότητα τοῦ ἡλίου περιλάμψαν 


from heaven above the ofthe sun “shining *round °about 


μὲ φῶς Kai τοὺς σὺν ἐμοὶ πορευομένους. 14 πάντων δὲ" 
®me ‘a 7light and those with me journeying. And all 
καταπεσόντων ἡμῶν εἰς τὴν γῆν ἤκουσα φωνὴν ἐλαλοῦσαν" 
*haying *fallen down of ?us to the ground Iheard a voice speaking 
πρός με kai λέγουσαν" τῇ ‘EBpatdr διαλέκτῳ, Σαούλ, Σαούλ, 
to me and saying inthe Hebrew language, Saul, Saul, 
Ti μὲ διώκεις; σκληρόν σοι πρὸς κέντρα λακτίζειν. 
why me persecutest thou? [itis] hard for thee against goads to kick. 
15 ᾿Εγὼ. δὲ ™elrov,' Τίς εἶ κύριε: Ὁ δὲ" εἶπεν. ᾿Εγώ εἰμι 
And I said, Who art thon, Lord? Andhe said, I am 
Ἰησοῦς ὃν σὺ διώκεις. 16 ἀλλὰ ἀνάστηθι, Kai στῆθι ἐπὶ 
Jesus whom thou persecutest: but rise up, and stand on 
τοὺς πόδας.σου: εἰς.τοῦτο.γὰρ ὥφθην σοι, προχειρίσασθαί 
thy feet ; for, for this purpose I appeared to thee, to appoint 
σε ὑπηρέτην καὶ μάρτυρα = wy.Te εἶδες OV.TE 
thee anattendant and awitness both of what thou didst see and in what 
ὀφθήσομαί σοι, 17 ἐξαιρούμενός σε ἐκ τοῦ λαοῦ Kai? 
I shall appear to thee, taking out thee from among the people and 
τῶν ἐθνῶν, εἰς ove Ῥνῦν σε ἀποστέλλω," 18 ἀνοῖξαι ὀφθαλμοὺς 
the nations, to whom now thee I send, to open 7eyes 
αὐτῶν, τοῦ.ἐπιστρέψαι ἀπὸ σκότους εἰς φῶς καὶ τῆς ἐξουσίας 
ltheir, that [they] may turn from darkness to light and the authority 
τοῦ σατανᾶ ἐπὶ τὸν θεόν, τοῦ.λαβεῖν αὐτοὺς ἄφεσιν apap- 
of Satan to God, that *may ‘receive ‘they remission ofsins 
τιῶν Kai κλῆρον ἐν τοῖς ἡγιασμένοις πίστει TY 
and inheritance among those that have been sanctified by faith that [is] 
εἰς ἐμέ. 19 Ὅθεν, βασιλεῦ ᾿Αγρίππα, οὐκ.ἐγενόμην ἀπειθὴς 
in me. Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient 
τῇ οὐρανίῳ ὀπτασίᾳ, 20 ἀλλὰ τοῖς ἐν Δαμασκῷ πρῶτον 4 
to the heavenly vision ; but to those in Damascus first 


brightness 


ες + τε also LTTrA. 
(read τῶν from the) L; — τῆς (Tr]W; — παρὰ TTr. 
!— καὶ λέγουσαν LITra. 
ὃ. + ἐκ from among LTTrA. 


5 - καὶ LTTrA. h — τῆς παρὰ 
ite LITrAW. k λέγουσαν LTTrA. 
™ εἶπα LTTrA. 2 + κύριος (read the Lord said) LrTraw. 

P ἐγὼ ἀποστέλλω σε (omit LOW) LTTrA ; ἐγὼ σε ἀποστ. GW. 


f + ἐν in (prisons) GLTTrAW. 


4+ te (read and also) Lrtra. 


XXVI. ACTS. 

‘ τ « , 5 2 ῃ ~ , \ , ~ > , 
καὶ ᾿ἱεροσολύμοις, "εἰς πᾶσάν τε τὴν χώραν τῆς lovdaiac 
and Jerusalem, 2to 3411 land the region of Judza 
καὶ τοῖς ἔθνεσιν. ἱἀπαγγέλλων" μετανοεῖν καὶ ἐπιστρέφειν 
and tothe nations, declaring [tothem] torepent and to turn 
ἐπὶ Tov θεόν, ἄξια τῆς μετανοίας ἔργα πράσσοντας. 21 ἕνεκα 
to God, *worthy ‘of 5repentance works 1doing. On account of 

τούτων με ‘ot! ᾿Ιουδαῖοι συλλαβόμενοι ev τῷ ἱερῷ, ἐπει- 
these things me the Jews having seized in the temple, at- 
ρῶντο διαχειρίσασθαι. 22 ἐπικηηρ τα οὖν τυχὼν τῆς 
tempted to kill. Ai therefore having obtained 
χπαρὰ" τοῦ θεοῦ ἄχρι τῆς. ἡμέρας. ταύτης ἕστηκα. ἵὑμαρτυρού- 

from God unto this day Ihave stood, bearing wit- 
μενος" μικρῷ.τε Kai μεγάλῳ. οὐδὲν ἐκτὸς λέγων ὧν TE 
ness both to small and togreat, nothing else saying than what both 
οἱ προφῆται ἐλάλησαν μελλόντων γίνεσθαι Kai *Mwoijc,' 


the prophets said *was®about ‘to 7happen ‘and ?Moses, 
23 εἰ παθητὸς ὑ χριστός, εἰ πρῶτος ἐξ ἀναστά- 
whether ?shonld *suffer ‘Christ ; whether [he] first through resurrec- 


σεως νεκρῶν φῶς μέλλει καταγγέλλειν τῷ " λαῷ Kai τοῖς 
tion of([the] dead *light 115 Ἄθου 7to*announce tothe people and to the 


ἔθνεσιν. 24 Tavra.di αὐτοῦ. ἀπολογουμένου, ὁ Φῆστος με- 


nations, And #these *things ‘uttering in his defence, Festus with 
γάλῃ τῇ φωνῇ Edn," Maivy Taide τὰ πολλά σε γράμ- 
loud voice said, Thouartmad, Paul; much “thee ‘learn- 


para εἰς μανίαν περιτρέπει. 25 Ὁ δὲς, Οὐ.μαίνομαι, φησίν, 
ing *to madness “turns. Buthe, “I am ‘not *mad, ‘says, 


΄ - d2 1) Xr θ , ‘ ΄ er 
κράτιστε Φῆστε. “ἀλλ᾽ ἀληθείας Kai σωφροσύνης ῥήματα 
most noble Festus, but of truth and discreetness words 


Coes lane: 26 ἐπίσταταιγὰρ περὶ τούτων ὁ βασι- 
utter ; for *is “informed *concerning ‘these things ‘the king 


λεύς, πρὸς ὃν Kai παῤῥησιαζόμενος λαλῶ: λανθάνειν. γὰρ 


to whom also using boldness I speak. For hidden from 
αὐτόν τι τούτων οὐ πείθομαι οὐδέν" οὐ γάρ 
him _any of these things [are] not I am persuaded ; *not ‘for 


πεπραγμένον τοῦτο. 27 πιστεύεις βασιλεῦ 
*this, Believest thou, king 
olda ὅτι πιστεύεις. 28 Ὁ δὲ 
Agrippa, the prophets ? I know that thou believest. And 
᾿Αγρίππας πρὸς τὸν Παῦλον fon," Ἔν ὀλίγῳ pe ξπείθεις 
Agrippa to Paul said, In alittle “me ‘thou *persuadest 
χριστιανὸν "γενέσθαι." 29 Ὁ δὲ. Παῦλος ἰεῖπεν," ἘΕὐξαίμην" ἂν 
a Christian to become. And Paul said, I would wish 
~ ~ . ’ DAL ‘ 9 1 - AX “Ὁ}ψ!} > , τλλ A - ‘ 
τῷ θεῷ, Kai ἐν ὀλίγῳ Kai ἐν ᾿πολλῴ" οὐ μόνον σε ἀλλὰ καὶ 
to God, both in alittle and in much ποῦ only thou but also 
πάντας τοὺς ἀκούοντάς μου σήμερον γενέσθαι τοιούτους 
811 those hearing me _  thisday should become such 
ὁποῖος κἀγώ εἰμι, παρεκτὸς τῶν.δεσμῶν.τούτων. 30 ™Kai 
a8 Ialso am, except these bonds, And 
ταῦτα εἰπόντος αὐτοῦ," ἀνέστη " ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ ὁ ἡγεμὼν 
these things “having °said ‘*he, Srose “up *the ‘*king and the governor 
ἥ τε Βερνίκη καὶ οἱ Ὁσυγκαθήμενοι" αὐτοῖς" 31 Kai ava- 
also Bernice and those who sat with them, and having 
T+évinn. 5 -- εἰς LTT:{A]. 
* + ὄντα being T. *amwoOLTTrAW. Y μαρτυρόμενος LTTrAW. 


ἐστιν ἐν γωνίᾳ 
7in ®a°corner “has *been “done 


᾿Αγρίππα τοῖς προφήταις; 


τ ἀπήγγελλον I was declaring EGLTT:aw. 
: Μωῦσῆς GLTTrAW. 


396 


I was not disobedient 
unto the heavenly vi- 
sion: 20 but shewed 
first unto them of Da- 
masceus, and at Jeru- 
salem, and throughout 
all the coasts of Jn- 
dzea, and then to the 
Gentiles, that they 
should repent and 
turn to God, and do 
works meet for re- 
pentance. 21 For these 
causes the Jews caught 
me in the temple, and 
went about to kill me. 
22 Having therefore 
obtained help of Ged, 
I continue unto this 
day, witnessing both 
to small and great, 
saying mone other 
things than those 
which the prophets 
and Moses did say 
should come: 23 that 
Christ should suffer, 
and that he should be 
the first that should 
rise from the dead, 
and should shew light 
unto the people, and 
to the Gentiles. 24And 
as he thus spake for 
himself, Festus said 
with a loud voice, 
Paul, thou art beside 
thyself ; much learn- 
ing doth make thee 
mad. 25 But he said, 
I am not mad, most 
noble Festus; but 
speak forth the words 
of truth and sober- 
ness, 26 For the king 
knoweth of these 
things, before whom 
also I speak freely: 
for I am _ persuaded 
that none of these 
things are hidden 
from him; for this 
thing was not done in 
a corner. 27 King A- 
grippa, believest thou 
the prophets? I know 
that thou believest. 
28 Then Agrippa said 
unto Paul, Almost 
thou persuadest me 
to be a Christian. 
29And Paul said. 1 
would to God, that 
not only thon. but 
also all that hear me 
this day, were both 
almost, and altogether 
such as I am, except 
these bonds, 30And 
when he had thus spo- 
ken, the king rose up, 
and the governor, and 
Bernice, and they that 
sat with them : 3] and 
when they were gone 


¥ — ot Tir. 
a + te (read 


both to the) LTTra. > φησίν says LTTrA. ¢ + Παῦλος (read Paulsays) Lrtrw. ἃ ἀλλὰ LITrA. 


© — ovdév L; οὐθέν T[Tr]a. f — ἔφη (read [said]) LTTraw. 
Β ποιῆσαι to make (mea Christian) yrtra. 
γάλῳ LITrA. πὶ — καὶ ταῦτα εἰπόντος αὐτοῦ GLTTrAW. 


& πείθῃ thou persuadest thyself a. 
i— εἶπεν (read [said]) tTTra. 
Ὁ + ze both GLTTraw. 


*evéaunvT. | pe- 


° oup- T. 


996 

aside, they talked be- 
tween themselves, say- 
ing, This man doeth 
nothing worthy of 
death or of bonds. 
32 Then said Agrippa 
unto Festus, This man 
might have been set 
at liberty, if he had 
not appealed unto Ce- 
sar. 


XXVIII. And when 
it was determined that 
we should sail into 
Italy, they delivered 
Paul and certain other 
prisoners unto one 
named Julius, a cen- 
turion of Augustus’ 
band. 2 And entering 
into a ship of Adra- 
myttium, we launched, 
meaning 'to sail by the 
coasts of Asia; one 
Aristarchus, a Mace- 
donian of Thessalo- 
nica, being with us. 
3 And the next day we 
tonched at Sidon. And 
Julius courteously en- 
treated Paul, andgave 
him liberty to go unto 
his friends to refresh 
himself. 4 And when 
we had launched from 


thence, we sailed un- 
der Cyprus, because 
the winds were con- 


trary. 5 And when 
we had sailed over the 
sea of Cilicia and 
Pamphylia, we came 
to Myra, a city of Ly- 
cia. 6 And there the 
centurion found aship 
of Alexandria sailing 
into Italy; and he put 
us therein. 7 And 
when we had sailed 
slowly many days, and 
scarce were come over 
against Cnidus, the 
wind not suffering us, 
we sailed under Crete, 
over against Salmone; 
8 and, hardly passing 
it, came unto a place 
which is called The 
fair havens; nigh 
whereunto was the 
city of Lasea. 9 Now 
when much time was 
spent, and when sail- 
ing was now danger- 
ous, because the fast 
was now already past, 
Paul admonished them, 
19 and said unto them, 


TIPAZEI *. XXVI, XXVIT. 


χωρήσαντες ἐλάλουν πρὸς ἀλλήλους λέγοντες, ᾿Ἡ Ὅτι οὐδὲν 
withdrawn they spoke to one another saying, Nothing 
θανάτου Ῥἄάξιον ἢ δεσμῶν" 4 πράσσει ὁ.ἄνθρωπος οὗτος. 
70f *death ‘worthy or of bonds does this man, 
32 ᾿Αγρίππας.δὲ τῷ Φήστῳ ἔφη, ᾿Απολελύσθαι τἐδύνατο" ὃ 
And Agrippa to Festus seid, *Have *been let ἴσο “might 
ἄνθρωπος. οὗτος εἰ μὴ "ἐπεκέκλητο" Καίσαρα. 
this 7man if he had not appealed to Czsar. 
QF Ὡς δὲ ἐκρίθη τοῦ.ἀποπλεῖν ἡμᾶς εἰς τὴν ᾿Ιταλίαν 
But when it was decided that *should *sail ‘we to Italy 
παρεδίδουν τόν.τε.- Παῦλον Kai τινας ἑτέρους δεσμώτας ἑκα- 
they delivered up both Paul and certain other prisoners toa 
TovTaoxy, ὀνόματι ᾿Τουλίῳ, σπείρης Σεβαστῆς. 2 ἐπιβάν- 
centurion, by name Julius, of the band of Augustus. *Having “gone*on 
τες δὲ πλοίῳ ᾿Αδραμυττηνῷ 'μέλλοντες" πλεῖν ἃ τοὺς κατὰ 
Spoard‘and aship of Adramyttinm about to navigate the uae 
τὴν ᾿Ασίαν τόπους ἀνήχθημεν, ὄντος σὺν ἡμῖν ’Aot ιστάρχου 
ΞΑβία ‘places we set sail, being with us istarchus 


Μακεδόνος Θεσσαλογικέως. 3 τῇ-.τειἑτερᾳῳ κατήχθημεν εἰς 
a Macedonian of Thessalonica. And the next [day] we landed at 


Σιδῶνα: φιλανθρώπως τε ὁ ᾿Ιούλιος τῷ Παύλῳ χρησάμενος 
Sidon. And ®kindly 1Julius Panl “having “treated 
ἐπέτρεψεν πρὸς ίλους “πορευθέντα" ἐπιμελείας 
allowed [him] “to [his] *friends leoing (’their] Scare 
τυχεῖν. 4 κἀκεῖθεν ἀναχθέντες ὑπεπλεύσαμεν τὴν Κύπρον 
5to ®receive. And ἔβότιοθ setting sail we sailed under Cyprus 
διὰ τὸ rove ἀνέμους εἶναι ἐναντίους. 5 τό.τε πέλαγος τὸ 
because the winds were contrary. And the sea 


κατὰ τὴν Κιλικίαν καὶ Παμφυλίαν διαπλεύσαντες *kaTnMopev" 
eiong Cilicia and Pamphylia BOBBED sailed over we came 


εἰς ΥΜύρα! τῆς Λυκίας. 6 Κἀκεῖί͵ εὑρὼν ὁ *éxarévraoxoc" 
to Myra of Lycia. And there *having *found "the “centurion 


πλοῖον ᾿Αλεξανδρῖνον πλέον εἰς τὴν Iraiay ἐνεβίβασεν 
a ship of Alexandria sailing to Italy he caused 7to “enter 


ἡμᾶς εἰς αὐτό. 7 ἐν ἱκαναῖς.δὲ ἡμέραις βραδυπλοοῦντες Kai 
μας εἰς ς 
Jus into) it, And for ees days sailing slowly and 


μόλις γενόμενοι κατὰ τὴν Κνίδον, μὴ προσεῶντος ἡμᾶς 


hardly LENE come over against Cnidus, *not “suffering 
τοῦ ἀνέμου, ὑπεπλεύσαμεν τὴν Κρήτην κατὰ Σαλμώνην' 
'the ?wind, we sailed under Crete over seatuat Salmone ; 


8 μόλις. τε παραλεγόμενοι αὐτὴν ἤλθομεν εἰς τόπον τινὰ 
and hardly coasting along τ wecame to a “place ‘certain 


καλούμενον Καλοὺς Λιμένας, ᾧ. ἐγγὺς "ἦν πόλις" ὑΛασαία." 


called Fair avens, near which was acity of Lasea. 
9 Ἱκανοῦ. δὲ χρόνου διαγενομένου καὶ ὄντος ἤδη ἐπισφαλοῦς 


And much time having Ῥβευθᾶ and being already dangerous 
τοῦ πλοός, διὰ τὸ Kai THY νηστείαν ἤδη παρεληλυθέναι, 
the voyage, because also the fast already had pest, 


Trapyver ὁ Παῦλος 10 λέγων αὐτοῖς, Avdpec, θεωρῶ ὅτι μετὰ 
Men, 


Sirs, I Bencelvies that “exhorted Paul ‘saying “*them, I perceive that ‘with 

this voyage will be 

with hurt and much ὕβρεως Kai πολλῆς ζημίας ob μόνον τοῦ “φόρτου! Kai τοῦ 

damage, not only of disaster and much loss not only ofthe cargo and of the 
4 δεσμῶν ἄξιον LTTr. 4 - WT. τ ἠδύνατο LW. 5 ἐπικέκλητο L. t μέλλοντι 


ine A Ww. ἿΣ 


E κατήλθαμεν TTr. 


’”’AX\aocoa Alassat; Δασέα Lasea Tra. 


W πορευθέντι LTTrA. 
8 πόλις ἦν τ. 


Υ + τοὺς the GLITrAW. 
: ἑκατοντάρχης LTTrA. 
ς φορτίου GLTTrAW. 


εἰς in LTTr[a]. 
Υ Μύῤῥα LTTrA. 


XXVII. ACTS. 
πλοίου ἀλλὰ Kai τῶν.-ψυχῶν.ἡμῶν μέλλειν ἔσεσθαι τον πλοῦν. 
ship but also of our lives is about tobe the voyage. 


11 ‘0.6 Δἑκατόνταρχος" τῷ κυβερνήτῃ Kai τῷ ναυκλήρῳ 


But the centurion by the steersman and the  ship-owner 
ἐἐπείθετο μᾶλλον" ἢ τοῖς ὑπὸ frov' Παύλου λεγο- 
was persuaded rather than by thethings *by 3Paul Ispoken. 


μένοις. 12 ἀνευθέτου.δὲ τοῦ λιμένος ὑπάρχοντος πρὸς παρα- 
And ill-adapted the ροτὺ being to winter 


χειμασίαν, οἱ Srdsiove' ἔθεντο.βουλὴν ἀναχθῆναι Ῥκἀκεῖθεν," 


in, the most counselled to set sail thence also, 
Ἰείπως" δύναιντο καταντήσαντες εἰς Φοίνικα παρα- 
if by any meansthey might beable havingarrived at Phonice to 


χειμάσαι, λιμένα τῆς Κρήτης βλέποντα κατὰ λίβα 
winter {there}, a port of Crete looking towards south-west 
καὶ κατὰ χῶρον. 18 ὑποπνεύσαντος.-δδ νότου, δόξαν- 
and towards north-west. And *blowing *gently ‘a*south*wind, think- 
TEC THC προθέσεως κεκρατηκέναι, ἄραντες ἄσσον 
ing the purpose to have gained, having weighed [anchor] “close *by 
παρελέγοντο τὴν Κρήτην. 14 per’ οὐ πολὺ δὲ ἔβαλεν 


*they “coasted “δ]οῃρ᾽ Crete. *After *not 
kar αὐτῆς ἄνεμος τυφωνικός, ὁ καλούμενος Ἐεὐροκλύδων." 
down it a7wind ‘tempestuous, called uroclydon. 
15 συναρπασθέντος.δὲ τοῦ πλοίου, Kai μὴ δυναμένου ἀντ- 
And ὅμαυίπρ “been caught ‘the “ship, and not able to bring 
οφθαλμεῖν τῷ ἀνέμῳ, ἐπιδόντες ἐφερόμεθα. 16 νησίον 
(her]head tothe wind, giving [her] up we were driven along. °Small7island 
δέ τι ὑποδραμόντες καλούμενον ᾿Κλαύδην "᾿μόλις 
*but “4 ‘certain ὙΠ Πρ “under called Clauda *hardly 
ἰσχύσαμεν" περικρατεῖς γενέσθαι τῆς σκάφης" 17 ἣν ἄραν- 
twe were able masters to become of the boat; which haying taken 
τες βοηθείαις ἐχρῶντο, ὑποζωννύντες TO πλοῖον" φοβούμενοί 
up helps they used, undergirding the ship; “fearing 
TE μὴ εἰς τὴν σύρτιν ἐκπέσωσιν, χαλάσαντες TO σκεῦος 
Ἰᾳπα lest into the quicksand they should fall, having lowered the gear 
.“ ? , ~ 4 , € ~ 
οὕτως ἐφέροντο. 18 Σφοδρῶς.δὲ χειμαζομένων ἡμῶν 
80 they were driven. But *violently *being *tempest-tossed we 
τῇ ἕξῆς ἐκβολὴν ἐποιοῦντο᾽ 19 καὶ τῇ 
on the next (day] °a *casting Sout [Sof 7cargo] ‘they “made, and on the 
τρί αὐτόχειρες τὴν σκευὴν τοῦ πλοίου πἐῤῥίψαμεν"" 
third [day] with [our] own hands the equipment ofthe ship we cast away. 
20 μήτε.δὲ ἡλίου μήτε ἄστρων ἐπιφαινόντων ἐπὶ πλείονας 
And neither sun nor stars appearing for many 
ἡμέρας, χειμῶνός. τε οὐκ ὀλίγου ἐπικειμένου, λοιπὸν περιῳ- 
ays, and*tempest ‘no *small lying on [us], henceforth was taken 
petro πᾶσα ἐλπὶς" τοῦ.σώζεσθαι.ἡμᾶς. 21 πολλῆς.Ῥδὲ" ἀσιτίας 
away all hope of our being saved. And *a *long ‘abstinence 
ὑπαρχούσης, τότε σταθεὶς ὁ Παῦλος ἔν μέσῳ.αὐτῶν εἶπεν, 
1there *being, then “standing *up ?Paul in their midst said, 
Ἔδει μέν, ὦ ἄνδρες, πειθαρχήσαντάς μοι μὴ ἀνά- 
It behoved [you] indeed, O men, haying been obedient tome not to have 
γεσθαι ἀπὸ τῆς Κρήτης κερδῆσαί.τε τὴν. ὕβριν.ταύτην καὶ 
set sail from Crete and to have gained this disaster and 


Slong ‘but there came 


ἃ ἑκατοντάρχης GLTTrA. © μᾶλλον ἐπείθετο LTTrA. 


LTTra. ἃ ἀκεῖθεν thence LTTrA. i εἴ πῶς LTrA. 
κλύδων Euryclydona@. ! Καῦδα Cauda τι; Κλαῦδα τ; Κ[λ]αῦδα a 
LTTraw. 5 ἔῤῥιψαν they cast away GLTrAW ; ἔριψαν τ. ο ἐλπὶς πᾶσα LTTrA. 


{-- τοῦ τατι[α]νν. 


997 


the lading and ship. 
but also of our lives, 
11 Nevertheless the 
centurion believed the 
master and the owner 
of the ship, more than 
those things whieh 
were spoken by Paul. 
12 And because the ha- 
ven was not commo- 
dious to winter in, the 
more part advised to 
depart thence also, if 
by any means they 
might attain to Phe- 
nice, and there to win- 
ter ; which is anhaven 
of Crete, and lieth to- 
ward the south west 
and north west. 13 And 
when the south wind 
blew softly, supposing 
that they had obtained 
thei purpose, loosing 
thence, they sailed 
close by Crete. 14 But 
not long after there 
arose against it a 
tempestuous wind, 
called Euroclydon. 
15 And when the 
ship was caught, and 
could not bear up into 
the wind, we let her 
drive. 16 And run- 
ning under a certain 
island which is called 
Clauda, we had much 
work to come by the 
boat: 17 which when 
they had taken up, 
they used helps, un- 
dergirding the ship; 
and, fearing lest they 
should fall into the 
quicksands,strake sail, 
and so were driven. 
18 And we being ex- 
ceedingly tossed with 
a tempest, the next 
day they lightened the 
ship; 19 and the third 
day we cast out with 
our own hands the 
tackling of the ship. 
20 And when neither 
sun nor stars in many 
days appeared, and no 
small tempest lay on 
us, all hope that we 
should be saved was 
then taken away. 
21 But after long ab- 
stinence Paul stood 
forth in the midst of 
them, and said, Sirs, 
ye should have heark- 
ened unto me, and not 
have loosed from Crete, 
and to have gained 
this harm and loss. 


ὃ πλείονες 


Κ εὐρακύλων Euracylon ΤΤΎΥΤΑῪ ; εὐρυ- 


™ ἰσχύσαμεν μόλις 
Ρ τε LTTraW. 


398 


22 And now I exhort 
you to be of good 
cheer : for there shall 
be no loss of any man’s 
life among you, but of 
the ship. 23 Forthere 
stood by me this night 
the angel of God, 
whosel am, and whom 
I serve, 24 saying, Fear 
not, Paul ; thou must 
be brought before Ce- 
sar: and, lo, God hath 
given thee all them 
that sail with thee. 
25 Wherefore, sirs, be 
of good cheer: for I 
believe God, that it 
shall be even as it was 
told me. 26 Howbeit 
we must be cast upon 
acertain island, 27But 
when the fourteenth 
night was come, as we 
were driven up and 
down in Adria, about 
midnight the shipmen 
deemed that they drew 
near to some country ; 
28 and sounded, and 
found it twenty fa- 
thoms : and when they 
had gone a little fur- 
ther, they sounded 
again, and found 7t fif- 
teen fathoms. 29 Then 
fearing lest we should 
have fallen upon rocks, 
they cast feur anchors 
out of the stern, and 
wished for the day. 
30 And as the shipmen 
were about to flee out 
of the ship, when they 
had let down the boat 
into the sea, under 
colour as though they 
would have cast an- 
chors out of the fore- 
ship, 31 Paul said to 
the centurion and to 
the soldiers, Except 
these abide in the ship, 
ye cannot be saved. 
32 Then the soldiers 
cut off the ropes of 
the boat, and let her 
fall off. 33And while 
the day was coming 
on, Paul besought 
them all to take meat, 
saying, This day is the 
fourteenth day that ye 
have tarried and con- 
tinued fasting, hav- 
ing taken nothing. 
34 Wherefore I pray 
you to take some meat: 
for this is for your 


TIPAMZEILS. 
τὴν ζημίαν. 22 καὶ “τανῦν! παραινῶ ὑμᾶς 
loss: and now I exhort you 


ἀποβολὴ.γὰρ ψυχῆς οὐδεμία ἔσται ἐξ 
Ὁ 


for “loss f life ‘not?any shall befrom among you, 


XXVII. 


εὐθυμεῖν" 
to be of good cheer, 
ὑμῶν, πλὴν τοῦ 
only of the 
πλοίου. 23 παρέστη.γάρ μοι ττῇ.νυκτὶ ταύτῃ" "ἄγγελος! τοῦ 
ship. For stood by me this night an angel 
θεοῦ, οὗ etm! ᾧ.καὶ λατρεύω," 24 λέγων, Μὴ-.φοβοῦ Παῦλε, 
of God, whose Iam and whom I serve, saying, Fear not, Paul ; 
Kaicapi σε δεῖ παραστῆναι" καὶ ἰδοὺ κεχάρισταί σοι ὁ θεὸς 
Cesar thou must stand before; and lo “has “granted *to*thee ‘God 
πάντας τοὺς πλέοντας μετὰ σοῦ. 25 Awd  εὐθυμεῖτε ἄνδρες" 
811 those sailing with thee. Wherefore be of good cheer, men, 
πιστεύω.γὰρ τῷ θεῷ OTL οὕτως ἔσται καθ᾿ ὃν.τρόπον 
for I believe God that thus itshallbe according to the way 
λελάληταί μοι. 26 εἰς.νῆσον.δέ τινα €i-pac ἐκπεσεῖν. 
it has been said to me. But on “island ‘a certain we must fall. 
27 Ὡς δὲ τεσσαρεσκαιδεκάτη νὺξ ἐγένετο διαφερομένων 
And when the fourteenth night was come “being *driven *about 
ἡμῶν ἐν τῷ ‘Adpia, κατὰ μέσον τῆς νυκτὸς ὑπενόουν 
lwe in the Adriatic, towards [the] middle ofthe night supposed 
οἱ ναῦται προσάγειν τινὰ αὐτοῖς χώραν" 28 καὶ βολίσαντες 
1the ?sailors ®neared *some ‘7them country, and having sounded 
εὗρον ΠΡΎΜΟ εἴκοσι: βραχὺ.δὲ διαστήσαντες καὶ πάλιν 
they found *fathoms ‘twenty, and “a *little ‘having *gone farther and again 
βολίσαντες εὗρον ὀργυιὰς dexarévre’ 29 φοβούμενοί.τε 
having sounded they found *fathoms ‘fifteen ; ~ and fearing 
Yunmwe' “εἰς! τραχεῖς τόπους “ἐκπέσωσιν," ἐκ πρύμνης 
lest on rocky places they should fall, outof [the] stern 
ῥίψαντες ἀγκύρας τέσσαρας Τηὔχοντο" ἡμέραν γενέσθαι. 
having cast anchors four they wished day to come, 
80 τῶν.δὲ ναυτῶν ζητούντων φυγεῖν ἐκ τοῦ πλοίου, Kal 
But the sailors seeking to flee out of the ship, and 
χαλασάντων τὴν σκάφην εἰς THY θάλασσαν, προφάσει WE ἐκ 
having let down the boat into the sea, with pretext as from 
πρώρας" "μελλόντων ἀγκύρας" ἐκτείνειν, 31 εἶπεν ὁ Ilav- 
[086] prow being about ‘anchors ‘to *cast “out, ®said ®Paul 
hoc τῷ ἑκατοντάρχῳ Kai τοῖς στρατιώταις, ᾿Εὰν-μὴ οὗτοι 
to the centurion and tothe soldiers, nless these 
μείνωσιν ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ, ὑμεῖς σωθῆναι οὐ.δύνασθε. 32 Tére Poi 
abide in the ship ye *be “saved 1cannot. Then the 
στρατιῶται ἀπέκοψαν" τὰ σχοινία τῆς σκάφης καὶ εἴασαν 
soldiers cut away the ropes ofthe boat and let 
αὐτὴν ἐκπεσεῖν. 83 ἄχρι.δὲ οὗ “ἔμελλεν ἡμέρα" γίνεσθαι, 
her fall. And until ?was‘about ‘day *to come, 
παρεκάλει ὁ Παῦλος ἅπαντας μεταλαβεῖν τροφῆς, λέγων, 
7exhorted ®Paul all to partake of food, saying, 
Ἱεσσαρεσκαιδεκάτην σήμερον ἡμέραν προσδοκῶντες ἄσι- 
*The °fourteenth ‘to-*day [tis] day watching without 
τοι διατελεῖτε, μηδὲν" “προσλαβόμενοι." 84 διὸ παρα- 
taking food yecontinue, nothing having taken. Wherefore I ex- 
καλῶ ὑμᾶς ἱπροσλαβεῖν" τροφῆς" τοῦτο.γὰρ πρὸς τῆς 
hort you to take food, for this for 


ᾳ τὰ νῦν LITrA. 
t + ἐγώ τ1[4]. 


πέσωμεν we should fall GLrTraw. 
Ὁ ἀπέκοψαν οἱ στρατιῶται LTTrA. 


© προσλαμβανόμενοι taking L. 


LTTrA. 
LITTra, 


8 ἄγγελος placed after λατρεύω LTTrAW. 
Y μήπω L; μήπου TTr; μή ποὺ A. Ἢ κατὰ against LTTraw. χα ἐκ- 
Υ εὔχοντο TTrA. πρῴρης 11. 5 ἀγκύρας μελλόντων 

© ἡμέρα ἤμελλεν (ἔμελλεν T) LTTrA. 4 μηθὲν 
f μεταλαβεῖν to partake of GLITraAW. 


τ ταύτῃ τῇ νυκτὶ GLTTrAW. 


SEV XX VII. 
ὑμετέρας. σωτηρίας ὑπάρχει: Ξοὐδενὸς" γὰρ ὑμῶν θρὶξ "ἐκ" 
your safety inls for of no one of you ahair of 


τῆς κεφαλῆς πεσεῖται." 35 ἘΕἰπὼν" . δὲ ταῦτα καὶ λαβὼν 
the head shall fall, And ES said these things and having taken 


ἄρτον εὐχαρίστησεν τῷ θεῷ ἐνώπιον πάντων, καὶ κλάσας 


ACTS. 


a loaf he gave thanks toGod before all, and having broken (it) 
ἤρξατο ἐσθίειν. 36 εὔθυμοι. δὲ γενόμενοι πάντες καὶ αὐ- 
began to eat, And ‘of good ®cheer having *become ‘all also them- 


τοὶ προσελάβοντο Teoptic’ 37 ‘her δὲ πὲν τῷ πλοίῳ at 


selves took And wewere in the ship ?the 


πᾶσαι ψυχαὶ" τ ρτὰ πέὲβδομηκονταέξ." 88 κορεσθέντες δὲ 
1411 souls twohundred{and] seventy six. And being satisfied 


τροφῆς ἐκούφιζον TO πλοῖον, ἐκβαλλόμενοι τὸν σῖτον εἰς τὴν 
ae food they lightened the _ ship, casting out the wheat into the 


θάλασσαν. 89"Ore.d2 ἡμέρα ἐγένετο τὴν γῆν οὐκ.ἐπεγίνωσκον᾽" 
sea, And when hee: 4it*was the land they did not recognize; 


κόλπον.δέ τινα κατενόουν ἔχοντα αἰγιαλόν, εἰς ὃν %Bov- 
buta*bay ‘certain they perceived having a shore, on which they 


λεύσαντο! εἰ δύναιντο ἐξῶσαι τὸ πλοῖον. 40 Kai rac 
je if they should be able to drive the ship ; and ‘the 


ἀγκύρας περιελόντες εἴων εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν, ἅμα 
‘anchors ‘having 7cut “away they left in the sea, at the same time 


ἀνέντες τὰς ζευκτηρίας τῶν πηδαλίων" καὶ ἐπάραντες τὸν 
having loosened the bands of the seen and having hoisted the 


Ῥάἀρτέμονα! τῇ πνεούσῃ κατεῖχον εἰς τὸν αἰγιαλόν. 41 περι- 
foresail tothe wind they made for the shore. *Having 


πεσόντες δὲ εἰς τόπον διθάλασσον “ἐπώκειλαν" τὴν ναῦν᾽ 
“fallen ‘and into a place where two seas met they ran aground the vessel; 
καὶ ἡ μὲν πρώρα ἐρείσασα ἔμεινεν ἀσάλευτος, ἡ.δὲ 
and the prow having stuck fast remained immovable, but the 
πρύμνα ἐλύετο ὑπὸ τῆς βίας ττῶν κυμάτων." 42 τῶν.δὲ 
stern was broken by the violence of the waves. And of the 
στρατιωτῶν  Bovdr ἐγένετο ἵνα τοὺς δεσμώτας ἀποκτείνωσιν, 
soldiers (the] counsel was that the prisoners’ they should/kill, 
μήτις ἐκκολυμβήσας "διαφύγοι"" 48 0.08 ‘éxarévrapxoc! 
lest anyone havingswum out should escape. But the centurion 
βουλόμενος διασῶσαι τὸν ἸΤαῦλον ἐκώλυσεν αὐτοὺς τοῦ 
desiring to save Paul hindered them of [their] 


βουλήματος, ἐκέλευσέν.τε τοὺς δυναμένους κολυμβᾷν, Yamrop- 
purpose, and commanded those being able to swim, Beis 


ῥίψαντας" πρώτους, ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν ἐξιέναι, 44 καὶ τοὺς 
cast [themselves] off first, on the nd to go out; and the 


λοιπούς, ove μὲν ἐπὶ σανίσιν οὺς.δὲ ἐπί τινων.τῶν ἀπὸ TOU 
rest, some indeed on boards andothers on somethings from the 
πλοίου: καὶ οὕτως ἐγένετο πάντας διασωθῆναι ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν. 
ship; and thus itcametopass all were broughtsafely to the land. 
28 Kai διασωθέντες τότε “ἐπέγνωσαν" ὅτι Μελίτη ἡ 
And having been saved then they knew that Melita the 
νῆσος καλεῖται. 2 Οἱ. “δὲ! βάρβαροι Yrapsixoy' ob τὴν 
island is called. And the barbarians shewed no 


τυχοῦσαν φιλανθρωπίαν ἡμῖν" ἀνάψαντες". γὰρ πυράν προσ- 
common philanthropy to us; for having kindled a fire they 


399 


health : for there shail 
not an hair fall from 
the head of any of yo: 
35 And when he had 
thus spoken, he tcok 
bread, and gave thanks 
to God in presence cf 
them all: and when 
he had broken 7, he he- 
gan to eat. 36 Then 
were they all of good 
cheer, and they also 
took some meat. 37And 
we were in all in 
the ship two hundred 
threescore and sixteen 
souls, 38 And when 
they had eaten enough, 
they lightened the 
ship, and cast out the 
wheat into the sea. 
39 And when it was 
day, they knew not 
the land: but they 
discovered a certain 
ereek with a shore, 
into the which they 
were minded, ifit were 
possible, to thrust in 
the ship. 40 And when 
they had taken up the 
anchors, they commit- 
ted themselves unto 
the sea, and loosed the 
rudder bands, and 
hoised up the mainsail 
to the wind, and made 
toward shore, 41 And 
falling into a place 
where two seas met, 
they ran the ship a- 
ground ; and the fore- 
part stuck fast, and 
remained unmoveable, 
but the hinder part 
was broken with the 
violence of the waves. 
42And the soldiers’ 
counsel was to kill 
the prisoners, lest any 
of them should swim 
out, and escape, 43 But 
the centurion, willing 
to save Paul, kept 
them from their pur- 
pose ; and command- 
ed that they which 
could swim should 
cast themselves first 
into the sea, and get 
to land: 44and the 
rest, some on boards, 
and some on 

pieces ofthe ship. And 
so it came to pass, 
that they escaped all 
safe to land. 


XXVIII. And when 
they were escaped,then 
they knew that the 
island was called Me- 
lita. 2 And the barbar- 
ous people shewed us 
no little kindness : for 
they kindled a fire, 


Ε οὐθενὺς L. 


c hand LTTra, 1 ἀπολεῖται Shall perish GLTTraw. 
ἥμεθα LTTrAW. 


τὰ ai πᾶσαι ψυχαὶ ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ LTTrAW. 
© ἐβουλεύοντο LTTrAW. Ρ ἀρτέμωνα LTTrAW. 
L1( Tra]. 5 διαφύγῃ GLTTraw. 

we knew LrTtraw. X re LTTrAW. 


4 ἐπέκειλαν LTTrA. 
t ἑκατοντάρχης LTTrA. 
¥ wapecxyav LTTra. 


Y ἀπορίψαντας T. 
: ἅψαντες LTTrAW. 


k εἴπας LTTrA. 


π ἑβδομήκοντα ἕξ GLTTrW. 


τ- τῶν κυμάτων 
W ἐπέγνωμεν 


400 


and received us every 
one, because of the pre- 
sent rain, and because 
of the cold. 3 And 
when Paul had ga- 
thered a bundle of 
sticks, and laid them 
on the fire, there 
came a viper out of 
the heat, and fastened 
on his hand. 4 And 
when the barbarians 
saw the venomous 
beast hang on his 
hand, they said among 
themselves, No doubt 
this man is a mur- 
derer, whom, though 
he hath escaped the 
sea, yet vengeance 
suffereth not to live. 
5 And he shook off the 
beast into the fire, and 
felt noharm. 6 How- 
beit they looked when 
he should have swol- 
len, or fallen down 
dead suddenly: but 
after they had looked 
a great while, and saw 
no harm come to him, 
they changed their 
minds, and said that 
he was a god. 7 In the 
same quarters were 
possessions of the chief 
man of the island, 
whose name was Pub- 
lius ; who received us, 
and lodged us three 
days courteously. 
8 And it came to pass, 
that the father of Pub- 
lius lay sick of a fever 
and of a bloody flux: to 
whom Paulentered in, 
and prayed, and laid 
his hands on him, and 
healed him. 9 So 
when this was done, 
others also, which had 
diseases in the island, 
came, and were healed: 
10 who also honoured 
us with many hon- 
ours; and when we 
departed, they laded 
us with such things as 
were necessary. 


11 And after three 
months we departedin 
a ship of Alexandria, 
which had wintered in 
the isle, whose sign 
was Castor and Pol- 
lux. 12 And landing 
at Syracuse, we tar- 
ried there three days. 
13 And from thence we 
fetched a compass,and 
came to Rhegium: and 


ΠΡΆΞΕΙΣ. 


ehaBovro πάντας ἡμᾶς, διὰ τὸν ὑετὸν τὸν ἐφεστῶτα καὶ 
received all ofus, becauseof the rain that was present and 


διὰ τὸ ψύχος. 3 Συστρέψαντος.δὲ τοῦ Παύλου φρυγάνων " 
because ofthe cold. And “having *gathered 1Paul Sof ‘sticks 
πλῆθος, καὶ ἐπιθέντος ἐπὶ τὴν πυρὰν ἔχιδνα Ῥέκ' τῆς 
“a®quantity,and having laid[{them] on the fire a viper out of the 
θέρμης “ἐξελθοῦσα" καθῆψεν τῆς.χειρὸς. αὐτοῦ. 4 ὡς δὲ Δεἴδον" 


heat having come wound about his hand. And when “saw 


ot βάρβαροι κρεμάμενον τὸ θηρίον ἐκ τῆς χειρὸς αὐτοῦ 
1the *barbarians Shanging “the ‘beast from his hand 


*tXeyov πρὸς ἀλλήλους," Πάντως φονεύς ἐστιν ὁ ἄνθρωπος 
they said to oneanother, Byallmeansa murderer is 2man 

- a r ? ~ ΄ ε , ας 5 
οὗτος, ὃν διασωθέντα ἐκ τῆς θαλάσσης ἡ δίκη ζῇν οὐκ 
‘this, whom having been saved from the sea justice *to *live *not 
εἴασεν. ὅ Ὃ μὲν οὖν farorwatac' τὸ θηρίον εἰς τὸ πῦρ 
‘permitted. He indeed then having shaken off the beast into the fire 
ἔπαθεν οὐδὲν κακόν. 6 οἱ δὲ προσεδόκων αὐτὸν μέλλειν 
suffered no injury. But they were expecting him _ tobe about 
δπίμπρασθαι" ἢ καταπίπτειν ἄφνω νεκρόν. ἐπὶ. πολὺ. δὲ 
to become inflamed or tofalldown suddenly dead. But for a long time 
αὐτῶν προσδοκώντων Kai θεωρούντων μηδὲν ἄτοπον εἰς αὐτὸν 
they expecting and seeing nothing amiss to him 
γινόμενον, μεταβαλλόμενοι" ἔλεγον ἰθεὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι." 


XXVIII. 


happening, changing their opinion said a god he was. 
7 ᾿Ἐν.δὲ τοῖς περὶ τὸν. τόπον ἐκεῖνον ὑπῆρχεν χωρία 
Nowin the [parts] about that place were lands 
τῷ πρώτῳ τῆς νήσου, ὀνόματι Ποπλίῳ, ὃς ἀνα- 
belonging tothe chief of the island, by name Publius, who having 
δεξάμενος ἡμᾶς "τρεῖς ἡμέρας" φιλοφρόνως ἐξένισεν. 
received us three days in a friendly way 


lodged [us]. 


8 ἐγένετο.δὲ τὸν πατέρα τοῦ Ποπλίου πυρετοῖς καὶ ἰδυσεν- 
And it happened the father of Publius “fevers ‘and “dysen- 


repia' συνεχόμενον κατακεῖσθαι: πρὸς ὃν ὁ Παῦλος εἰσελ- 
tery ?oppressed *with ‘ay, to whom Paul having en- 
θὼν Kai προσευξάμενος, ἐπιθεὶς τὰς χεῖρας αὐτῷ ἰάσατο 
tered and having prayed, having laid on [*his] Shands *him cured 
αὐτόν. 9 τούτου ποὖν γενομένου καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ οἱ "ἔχον- 
him. This therefore having taken place alsothe rest who had 
τες aobEveiag ἐν τῇ νήσῳ' προσήρχοντο Kai ἐθεραπεύοντο" 
infirmities in the island came and were healed : 
10 ot καὶ πολλαῖς τιμαῖς ἐτίμησαν ἡμᾶς, Kai ἀναγομένοις 


who also withmany honours honoured us, and on setting sail 
ἐπέθεντο τὰ πρὸς “τὴν χρείαν." 
they laid on {us}the things for [our] need. 
11 Μετὰ.δὲ τρεῖς μῆνας ἀνήχθημεν ἐν πλοίῳ παρακεχει-- 
Andafter three months we sailed in aship which had 
μακότι ἐν τῇ νήσῳ, ᾿Αλεξανδρίνῳ, παρασήμῳ Διοσκούροις" 
wintered in the island, an Alexandrian, withanensign(the] Dioscuri. 


12 καὶ καταχθέντες εἰς Συρακούσας ἐπεμείναμεν Ῥὴἡμέρας 
And having been brought to at yracuse we remained *days 

τρεῖς" 13 ὅθεν περιελθόντες κατηντήσαμεν εἰς Ῥήγιον, Kai 

‘three. Whence having gone round we arrived at Rhegium; and 


8 + τι (read a certain quantity) LTTraw. 
© πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔλεγον LTTrA. 

5 μεταβαλόμενοι Tra. i } 
πὶ δὲ and (this) LTTra. 
χρείας Needs LTTrAW. 


4 εἶδαν τι. 


LTTrAw. 


b ἀπὸ from LTTrAW. ὁ διεξελθοῦσα AW. 
' ἀποτιναἑξάμενος W. 8 ἐμπιπρᾶσθαι T. 
i αὐτὸν εἶναι θεόν LTTrAW. k ἡμέρας τρεῖς A. | δυσεντερίῳ 

π ἐν τῇ νήσῳ ἔχοντες ἀσθενείας LTTTA. ο τὰς 
P ἡμέραις τρισίν L. 


XXVIII. 


pera play ἡμέραν ἐπιγενομένου 
after one day, 


ACTS. 


νότου ζευτεραῖοι 
*having ®come Son ‘a *south *wind, on the second day 


ἤλθομεν εἰς Ποτιόλους᾽ 14 οὗ εὑρόντες ἀδελφοὺς παρε- 
wecame to Puteoli ; where having found brethren we were 
κλήθημεν “ἐπ᾽" αὐτοῖς ἐπιμεῖναι ἡμέρας ἑπτά" καὶ οὕτως "εἰς 
entreated “with ‘them ‘to*remain ‘days ὅβευθῃ. And thus to 
τὴν Ῥώμην ἤλθομεν." 15 κἀκεῖθεν οἱ ἀδελφοὶ ἀκούσαντες 


Rome we came. Andthence the brethren ae hear 5 
Ta περὶ ἡμῶν "ἐξῆλθον" εἰς ἀπάντησιν ἡμῖν 'ἄχρις" 
the things concerning us came out to meet us as far as 


᾿Αππίου-.Φόρου καὶ Τριῶν 'Γαβερνῶν: odc ἰδὼν ὁ Παῦ- 
(the] market-place of Appius and Three Taverns ; whom ? seeing *Paui, 


λος, εὐχαριστήσας τῷ θεῷ ἔλαβεν θάρσος. 
Bere given thanks to God he took ΘΟΣΓΒΡΈΣ 
16 Ὅτε.δὲ τἤλθομεν᾽ εἰς ¥ Ρώμην *0 ἑκατόνταρχος Eee 
And when we came to Rome _ the comers 


δωκεν τοὺς δεσμίους τῷ στρατοπεδάρχῃ"" vrij δὲ Παύλῳ 


livered the pribcners to the commander of the camp, but Paul 


ἐπετράπη" μένειν καθ᾽ ἑαυτόν, σὺν τῷ φυλάσσοντι αὐτὸν 
was allowed to remain by himself, with the *who *kept *him 


στρατιώτῳ. 17 ‘Eyévero.dé μετὰ ἡμέρας τρεῖς Τσυγκαλέσασ- 
*soldier. Anditcametopass after “7days ‘three *called *to- 
θαι" *roy TlavAov' τοὺς ὄντας τῶν ‘lovdaiwy πρώτους᾽ 
gether >Paui those who were “of *the ®Jews ‘chief “ones. 
συνελθόντων.δὲ αὐτῶν ἔλεγεν πρὸς αὐτούς, > Avdpec 
And “having *come*together ‘they he said to them, Men 
ἀδελφοί, ἐγὼ" οὐδὲν ἐναντίον ποιήσας τῷ λαῷ ἢ τοῖς 
brethren, I pnothing ‘against ‘having 7done the people or the 


ἔθεσιν τοῖς πατρῴοις δέσμιος ἐξ “Ἱεροσολύμων παρεδόθην 
7customs tancestral a prisoner from Jerusalem was delivered 


εἰς τὰς χεῖρας THY Ῥωμαίων᾽ 18 οἵτινες ἀνακρίναντες με 
into the hands ofthe Romans, who having examined me 


ἐβούλοντο ἀπολῦσαι, διὰ τὸ μηδεμίαν αἰτίαν θανάτου 
wished to let [me] go, because not one cause of death 


ὑπάρχειν ἐν ἐμοί. 19 ἀντιλεγόντων. δὲ τῶν ‘lovdaiwy 
was there in me. But *speaking *against (it) the *Jews 


ἠναγκάσθην ἐπικαλέσασθαι Καίσαρα, οὐχ ὡς τοῦ.ἔθνους.μου 


I was compelled to appeal to Ceesar, not as ἼΩΥ “nation 
ἔχων τι “κατηγορῆσαι." 20 διὰ ταύτην οὖν τὴν αἰτίαν 
‘having *anything *to ay coats For this “therefore * cause 
παρεκάλεσα ὑμᾶς ἰδεῖν Kai προσλαλῆσαι" depecey'. 


I called for you tosee and tospeakto [you]; for on account of 


τῆς ἐλπίδος τοῦ ᾿Ισραὴλ τὴν.ἅλυσιν.ταύτην περίκειμαι. 


the hope of Israel this chain T have is [me]. 
21 Οἱ. δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸν “εἶπον, Ἣ μεῖς οὔτε γράμματα frepi 
Andthey to him said, We neither letters concerning 
σοῦ ἐδεξάμεθα" ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿Ιουδαίας οὔτε παραγενόμενός τις 
thee received from Judza, nor having arrived any one 
τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἀπήγγειλεν ἢ ἐλάλησέν τι περὶ σοῦ 
ofthe brethren reported or said anything “concerning *thee 
πονηρόν. 22 ἀξιοῦμεν.δὲ παρὰ σοῦ ἀκοῦσαι ἃ φρονεῖς" 


1671], But we think well from 


ἃ παρ᾽ LITrA. 


thee to hear what thou thinkest, 


τ ἤλθαμεν εἰς Ρώμην 1,; εἰς τὴν Ῥώμην ἤλθαμεν ΤΎΤΑ, 


ἦλθον τι. t ἄχρι TTrA. * εἰσήλθομεν We Came in LTA; εἰσήλθαμεν ‘ir. 
* — ὃ ἑκατόνταρχος . - στρατοπεδάρχῃ, LTTra. 
ἐσυν- τ. 5 αὐτὸν he GUETrAW.. "᾿Εγώ, ἄνδρες ἀδελφοί, LTTrA. 


4 εἵνεκεν T. © εἶπαν LITrA. [ἐδεξάμεθα περὶ σοῦ L. 


401 


after one Gay the 
south wind  biew, 
and we came the 
next day to Pnteoli: 
14 where we found 
brethren, and were de- 
sired to tarry with 
them seven days: and 
so we went toward 
Rome. 15 And from 
thence, when the bre- 
thren heard of us, they 
came to meet us as far 
as Appii forum, and 
The three taverns: 
whom when Paul saw, 
he thanked God, and 
took courage. 


16 And when we 
came to Rome, the 
centurion delivered 
the prisoners to the 
captain of the guard : 
but Paul was suffered 
to dwell by himself 
with a soldier that 
kept him, 17 And it 
came to pass, that after 
three days Paul called 
the chief of the Jews 
together: and when 
they were come toge- 
ther,hesaid unto them, 
Men and brethren, 
though I have com- 
mitted nothing against 
the people, or customs 
of our fathers, yet 
was I delivered pri- 
soner from Jerusalem 
into the hands of the 
Romans, 18 Who, when 
they had examined me, 
would have let me go, 
because there was no 
cause of death in me, 
19 But when the Jews 
spake against it, I was 
constrained to appeal 
unto Cesar; not that 
I had ought to accuse 
my nation of. 20 For 
this cause therefore 
have 1 called for you, 
to sce you, and to 
speak with you: be- 
cause that for the hope 
ef Israei I am bound 
with this chain. 21 And 
they said unto him, 
We neither received 
letters out of Judzwa 
concerning thee, nei- 
ther any of the bre- 
thren that came shew- 
ed or spake any harm 
of thee. 22 But we 
desire to hear of thee 
what thou thinkest: 


ε ἦλθαν came ΤΊΤΑ ; 
~ + σὴν Τὶ 


» ἐπετράπη τῷ Παύλῳ (omit but) ττττα. 


- κατηγορεῖν LTTra. 


DD 


402 


for as concerning this 
sect, we know that 
every where it is spo- 
ken against. 23 And 
when they had ap- 
pointed him a day, 
there came many to 
kim into his lodging ; 
to whom he expounded 
and testified the king- 
dom of God, persuad- 
ing them concerning 
Jesus, both out of the 
law of Moses, and out 
of the prophets, from 
morning tili evening. 
24 And some believed 
the things which were 
spoken, and some be- 
lieved not. 25 And 
when they agreed not 
among themselves, 
they departed, after 
that Paul had spoken 
one word, Well spake 
the Holy Ghost by 
Esaias the prophet un- 
to our fathers, 26 say- 
ing, Go unto this peo- 
ple, and say, Hearing 
ye shall hear, andshall 
not understand; and 
seeing ye shall see, and 
not perceive: 27 for 
the heart of this pco- 
ple is waxed gross, 
and their ears are 
dull of hearing, and 
their eyes have they 
closed; lest they should 
see with their eyes, 
and hear with their 
ears, and understand 
with their heart, and 
should be converted, 
and 1 should heal 
them. 28 Be it known 
therefore unto you, 
that the salvation of 
God is sent unto the 
Geutiles, and fhat they 
will hear it. 29 And 
when he had said 
these words, the Jews 
departed, and had 
great reasoning among 
themselves. 


30 And Paul dwelt 
two whole years in his 
own hired house, and 
Teceived all that came 
in unto him, 31 preach- 
ing the kingdom of 
God,and teaching those 
things which concern 


the Lord Jesus Christ, 
with all confidence, 
no man _ forbidding 
hin. 


Tl RAZ EI &. XXVIII. 


TEpi-viv.yap τῆς αἱρέσεως.ταύτης γνωστόν Siorw ἡμῖν" 
for indeed as concerning this sect known it is to us 


ὅτι πανταχοῦ ἀντιλέγεται. 23 Ταξάμενοι.δὲ αὐτῷ ἡμέραν 


that everywhere it is spoken against. Andhaving appointed him ἃ day 
ἧκον πρὸς αὐτὸν εἰς τὴν ξενίαν πλείονες: οἷς ἐξετίθετο 


came to him to the lodging to whom he expounded, 


διαμαρτυρόμενος τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ, πείθων.τε αὐτοὺς 


many, 


fully testifying the kingdom of God, and persuading them 
irq περὶ τοῦ Ἰησοῦ, ἀπό.τε τοῦ νόμου ἘΜωσέως" 
the things concerning Jesus, both from the law of Moses 


‘ me ~ ? " 3. .“ ς Ud ‘ c 
Kai τῶν προφητῶν, ἀπὸ πρωϊ EWC ἑἕσπερας. 24 Kai οἱ 


and the prophets, from morning to evening. And some 
μὲν ἐπείθοντο τοῖς “λεγομένοις, οἱ. δὲ ἠπίστουν. 
indeed were persuaded of the things spoken, but some  disbelieved. 


"» 7 ; Ιδὲ ie. ‘ AX ΄ λ ᾽ Ν ΄ > , 
25 ἀσύμφωνοι." δε ὄντες moog ἀλλήλους ἀπελύοντο, εἰπὸν- 
And disagreeing with one another they departed; *having 


~ ΄ tw ΄ ~ A ~ A 
roc τοῦ Παύλου ῥῆμα ἕν, Ὅτι καλῶς τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον 


%spoken δὰ] Sword ‘one, Well the Spirit the Holy 
ἐλάλησεν διὰ Ἡσαΐου τοῦ προφήτου πρὸς τοὺς πατέρας 
spoke by Esaias the prophet to ?fathers 
"LGV," 26 "λέγον," Πορεύθητι πρὸς τὸν.λαὸν. τοῦτον Kai 
our, saying, Go to this people, and 


simé,' ᾿Ακοῇ ἀκούσετε, καὶ οὐ-.μὴ συνῆτε" Kai βλέποντες 
say, In hearing ye shall hear, and in no wise understand, and seeing 
βλέψετε, καὶ ov.pap ἴδητε. 27 ἐπαχύνθη.γὰρ ἡ καρδία 
ye shall sec, and in no wise perceive. For has grown fat the heart 
Tov_Aaov.ToUTOU, Kai τοῖς ὠσὶν βαρέως ἤκουσαν, καὶ 
of this people, and with the ears heavily they have heard, and 
τοὺς. ὀφθαλμοὺς. αὐτῶν ἐκάμμυσαν' μήποτε ἴδωσιν τοῖς 
their eyes they have closed, lest theyshouldsee with the 
ὀφθαλμοῖς, καὶ τοῖς ὠσὶν ἀκούσωσιν, Kai τῇ καρδίᾳ 
eyes, and with the ears they should hear, and with the heart 
συνῶσιν, καὶ ἐπιστρέψωσιν, καὶ Ῥίάσωμαι" αὐτούς. 
they should understand, and should be converted, and Ishouldheal them. 
28 Γνωστὸν οὖν “ἔστω ὑμῖν," Ore τοῖς ἔθνεσιν ἀπεστάλη τ 
Known therefore beit toyou, that tothe nations is sent 
τὸ σωτήριον τοῦ θεοῦ, αὐτοὶ καὶ ἀκούσονται. ῶ9 "Καὶ ταῦτα 
the salvation of God; and they will hear. And these things 
αὐτοῦ εἰπόντος ἀπῆλθον ot ᾿Ιουδαῖοι, πολλὴν ἔχοντες ἐν 
he having said #went‘*away 'the Jews, ®much Shaving "among 
ἑαυτοὶς συζήτησιν." 
*themselyes “discussion. 
30 “Epevey’ δὲ %0 Παῦλος" διετίαν ὕλην ἐν ἰδίῳ μισ- 
And “abode *Paul two “years ‘whole in his own hired 
θώματι, Kai ἀπεδέχετο πάντας τοὺς εἰσπορευομένους πρὸς 
house, and welcomed all who came in to 


αὐτόν, 81 κηρύσσων τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ, Kai διδάσκων 
him, proclaiming the kingdom of God, and teaching 
τὰ περὶ τοῦ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ “χριστοῦ, μετὰ πάσης 

the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, with all 


παῤῥησίας ἀκωλύτως. * 
freedom unhinderedly. 


& ἡμῖν ἐστιν LTTrA. 


πὶ ὑμῶν your LTTrA. 
a ὑμῖν ἔστω A. 
εἰ νέμεινεν TTrA. 


k Μωῦσέως GLTTrAW. l ren, 
P ἰάσομαι I shall heal rrra. 
# — verse 29 LTTrA. 

¥ — χριστοῦ T. 


h ἦλθον LTTrA. {— τὰ LTTrA. 
ἃ λέγων TTrA. 5 εἰπόν GLITrAW. 
τ + τοῦτο (read this salvation) LTTrA. 
τ — 6 IlavAos (read he abode) GLTTraw. 


* + Πράξεις ᾿Αποστόλων Tra. 


‘HAYAOY TOY AIIOSTOAOY H ΠΡῸΣ ΡΩΜΑΙΟΥΣ 
70F *PAUL ΤῊ *APOSTLE ‘THE "TO [(*THE}] *ROMANS 
EMMSTOAH.' 
7EPISTLE. 


ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ δοῦλος ἢ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ," κλητὸς ἀπόστολος; ἀφω- 
Paul, bondman ofJesus Christ, a called apostle, sepa- 


plopévoc εἰς εὐαγγέλιον θεοῦ, 2 0 προεπηγγείλατο διὰ 
rated to  gladtidings ofGod, which he before promised through 


τῶν. προφητῶν.αὐτοῦ ἐν γραφαῖς ἁγίαις, 3 περὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ 


his prophets in ?writings ‘holy, concerning 7Son 
αὐτοῦ, Tov γενομένου ἐκ σπέρματος “Δαβὶδ κατὰ 
this, who came of [the] seed of David according to 


σάρκα, 4 τοῦ ὁρισθέντος υἱοῦ θεοῦ ἐν δυνάμει. κατὰ 
flesh, who was marked out Son of God in power, according to [the] 
πνεῦμα ἁγιωσύνης, ἐξ ἀναστάσεως νεκρῶν, ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ 
Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of{the] dead— Jesus Christ 
τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν, 5 dv οὗ ἐλάβομεν χάριν Kai ἀποστολὴν 
our Lord; by whom wereceived grace and _  apostleship 
εἰς ὑπακοὴν πίστεως ἐν πᾶσιν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν, ὑπὲρ τοῦ 
unto obedience offaith among all the nations, in behalf of 
ὀνόματος.αὐτοῦ, 6 ἐν οἷς ἐστε Kai ὑμεῖς, κλητοὶ ᾿Ιησοῦ 
his name, among whom are also ye, called of Jesus 
χριστοῦ" 7 πᾶσιν τοῖς οὖσιν ἐν Ῥώμῃ ἀγαπητοῖς θεοῦ, 
Christ: toall thosewho are in Rome beloved of God, 
κλητοῖς ἁγίοις" χάρις ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη ἀπὸ θεοῦ πατρὸς. ἡμῶν 
called saints: grace toyou and peace from God our Father 
καὶ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ. 
and Lord Jesus Christ. 
~ x > ~ - - ws > ~ ~ 
ὃ Πρῶτον μὲν εὐχαριστῶ τῷ.θεῴῷ.μου διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ 


First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ 
“ὑπὲρ' πάντων ὑμῶν, ὅτι ἡ-.πίστις. ὑμῶν καταγγέλλεται ἐν 
for 7all you, that your faith is announced in 


ὅλῳ τῷ κόσμῳ" 9 μάρτυς. γάρ μου ἐστὶν ὁ θεός, ᾧ λατρεύω 
2whole‘the world; for*witness *my 7is 1God, whom I serve 
ἐν τῷ.πνεὐύματίμου ἐν TH εὐαγγελίῳ τοῦ.υἱοῦ. αὐτοῦ, ὡς 
in my spirit in the glad tidings of his Son, how 
ἀδιαλείπτως μνείαν ὑμῶν ποιοῦμαι, 10 πάντοτε ἐπὶ τῶν 
unceasingly mention of you I make, always at 
προσευχῶν. μου δεόμενος, “εἴπως᾽ ἤδη ποτὲ εὐοδωθήσομαι 
my prayers beseeching, if by any means now at lengthI shall be prospered 
ἐν τῷ θελήματι τοῦ θεοῦ ἐλθεῖν πρὸς ὑμᾶς" 11 ἐπιποθῶ.γὰρ 
by the will of God tocome_ to you, For I long 
ἰδεῖν ὑμᾶς, wa τι μεταδῶ χάρισμα ὑμῖν πνευματικόν, 
tosee you, that βοῖὴθ ἹἿ ἼἸΩΔΥ ‘impart gift Sto 7you spiritual, 
εἰς TO στηριχθῆναι ὑμᾶς, 192 τοῦτο.δέι ἐστιν, 'συμπαρα- 
to the([end]*be*established ‘ye, that is, to be comforted 


PAUL, a servant of 
Jesus Christ, called to 
be an apostle, separat- 
ed unto the gospel of 
God, 2 (which he had 
promised afore by his 
prophets in the holy 
seriptures,) 3 concern- 
ing his Son Jesus 
Christ our Lord, whick 
was made of the seed 
of David according to 
the flesh; 4 and de- 
clared to be the Son of 
God with power, ac- 
cording to the spirit of 
holiness, by the resur- 
rection from the dead : 
5 by whom we have 
received grace and 
apostleship, for obedi- 
ence to the faith 
mong all nations, for 
his name: 6 among 
whom are ye also the 
called of Jesus Christ: 
7 to all that be in 
Rome, beloved of God, 
called to be saints: 
Grace to vou and peace 
from God our Father, 
and the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


a- 


8 First, I thank my 
God through Jesus 
Christ for you all, that 
your faith is spoken of 
throughout the whole 
world. 9 For God is 
my witness, whom I 
serve with my spirit 
in the gospel of his, 
Son, that without 
ceasing I make men- 
tion of you always in 
my prayers; 10 mak- 
ing request, if by any 
means now at length 
I might have a pros- 
perous journey by the 
will of God to come 
unto you. 11 For J 
long to see you, that I 
may impart unto you 
some spiritual gift, to 
the end ye may be e€s- 
tablished ; 12 that is, 
that I may be com- 
forted together witk 


@ TlavAov ᾿Επιστολὴ πρὸς Ῥωμαιους α; Πρὸς Ῥω. TAW ; ᾿Επιστολαὶ Παύλου. 


ἱστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ τττ. 
συν- TA. 


Epistles of Paul. To [the] Romans rr. b 


david aw. a περὶ LITraW. ε εἴ πως LTrA. 


Πρὸς “Pa. 
© Δανεὶδ LYTra 5 


404 


you by the mutual 
faith both of you and 
me. 13 Now [I would 
not have you ignorant, 
brethren, that often- 
times I purposed to 
come unto you, (but 
was let hitherto,) that 
I might have some 
fruitamong you also, 
even as among other 
Gentiles. 14 1 am 
debtor both to the 
Greeks, and to the 
Barbarians ; both to 
the wise, and to the 
unwise. 15 So, as much 
as in me is, lam ready 
to preach the gospel to 
you that are at Rome 
also. 16 For I am not 


ashamed of the gospel Y 


of Christ : for it is the 
power of God unto 
salvation to every one 
that believeth ; to the 
Jew first, and aiso to 
the Greek. 17 For 
therein is the right- 
eousness of God re- 
yealed from faith to 
faith : asit is written, 
The just shall live by 
faith. 


13 For the wrath of 
God is revealed from 
heaven against all 
ungodliness and un- 
righteousness of men, 
who hold the truth 
in unrighteousness ; 
19 because that which 
may be known of God 
is manifest in them; 
for God hath shewed 
τὲ unto them. 20 For 
the invisible things of 
him from the creation 
of the worldare clearly 
seen, being understood 
by the things that are 
made, even his eternal 
power and Godhead ; 
so that they are with- 
ont excuse : 21 because 
that, when they knew 
God, they glorified 
him not as God, nei- 
ther were thankful; 
but became vain in 
their imaginations, 
and their foolish heart 
was darkened. 22 Pro- 
fessing themselves to 
be wise, they became 
fools, 23 and changed 
the glory of the un- 
corruptible God into 
an image made like to 
corruptible man, and 
to birds, and fourfoot- 
ed beasts, and creep- 
ing things. 24 Where- 
fore God also gave 
them up to unclean- 
ness through the lusts 
of their own hearts, to 


ΠΡΟΣ VEO ALTO Yes: 1 
κληθῆναι ἐν ὑμῖν διὰ τῆς ἐν ἀλλήλοις πίστεως ὑμῶν.τε 
together among you, through the 7in “one *another ‘faith, both yours 
καὶ ἐμοῦ" 13 οὐ.θέλω.δὲ ὑμᾶς ἀγνοεῖν, ἀδελφοί, ὕτι πολ- 
and mine. But Ido not wish you tobeignorant, brethren, that many 
λάκις προεθέμην ἐλθεῖν πρὸς ὑμᾶς, Kai ἐκωλύθην ἄχρι τοῦ 


times Iproposed tocome to you, and was hindered until the 
δεῦρο, iva ἐκαρπόν τινα σχῶ καὶ ἐν ὑμῖν, καθὼς 
present, that “fruit ‘some I might have also among you, according as 


καὶ ἐν τοῖς λοιποῖς ἔθνεσιν. 14 “Ἑλλησίν.τε καὶ βαρβάροις, 
also among the other nations. Both to Greeks and _ barbarians, 


~ ι ᾽ 4 ? μ DLs. er x ΔΑ x 
σοφοῖς.τε καὶ ἀνοήτοις, ὀφειλέτης εἰμί: 15 οὕτως τὸ κατ᾽ ἐμὲ 


bothtowise and unintelligent, adebtor Iam: so asto me 
πρόθυμον καὶ ὑμῖν τοῖς ἐν Ῥώμῃ εὐαγ- 

(there is] readiness 4180 ‘*to*you ‘who [7810] 'π *Rome ‘to ?announce 
ελίσασθαι. 16 οὐ.γὰρ.ἐπαισχύνομαι τὸ εὐαγγέλιον rod 
the glad tidings. For I am not ashamed of the gladtidings of the 
χριστοῦ" δύναμις.γὰρ θεοῦ ἐστιν εἰς σωτηρίαν παντὶ τῷ 
Christ: for power of God itis unto saivation to every one that 


πιστεύοντι, ᾿Ιουδαίῳ.τε ἱπρῶτον" καὶ Ἕλληνι. 17 δικαιοσύνη 
believes, both to Jew first and to Greek: *righteousness 


yap θεοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ ἀποκαλύπτεται ἐκ πίστεως εἰς πίστιν, 


*for of God in it is revealed by faith to faith; 
καθὼς γέγραπται, ὋὉ.δὲ δίκαιος ἐκ πίστεως ζήσεται. 
according as it has been written, Βαὺ the just by faith shall live. 


ἀπ᾽ οὐρανοῦ ἐπὶ πᾶσαν 
from heaven upon all 
~ A ? 7 ? 
τῶν τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἐν 


18 ᾿Αποκαλύπτεται. γὰρ ὀργὴ θεοῦ 
For there is revealed wrath of God 
ἀνθρώπων 


ἀσέβειαν καὶ ἀδικίαν 


ungodliness andunrighteousness of men who the truth in 
ἀδικίᾳ κατεχόντων. 19 διότι τὸ.γνωστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ 
unrighteousness hold. Because that which is known of God 


φανερόν ἐστιν ἐν αὐτοῖς, ὁ. ξγὰρ.θεὸς" αὐτοῖς ἐφανέρωσεν" 
“manifest ‘is among them, for God tothem manifested [it]; 
20 τὰ γὰρ ἀόρατα αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ κτίσεως κόσμου τοῖς 
forthe inyisiblethings ofhim from creation of{the] world by the 
ποιήμασιν voovpeva καθορᾶται, ἥ.τε ἀΐδιος αὐτοῦ δύνα- 
things made being understood are perceived, both eternal ‘his power 
pug Kai θειότης, εἰς τὸ εἶναι αὐτοὺς ἀναπολογήτους. 21 διότι 
and divinity; for 7to *be ‘them without excuse. Because 
γνόντες τὸν θεόν, οὐχ ὡς θεὸν ἐδόξασαν ἢ 'εὐχαρίο- 
having known God, not as God they glorified [him] or were thank- 
τησαν," ἀλλ᾽ ἐματαιώθησαν ἐν τοῖς διαλογισμοῖς. αὐτῶν, Kai 
ful; but became vain in their reasonings, and 
ἐσκοτίσθη ἡ ἀσύνετος αὐτῶν καρδία" 22 φάσκοντες 
was darkened the *without °understanding *of*them *heart: professing 
εἶναι σοφοὶ ἐμωράνθησαν, 23 καὶ ἤλλαξαν τὴν δόξαν τοῦ 
tobe wise they became fools, and changed the glory of the 
ἀφθάρτου θεοῦ ἐν ὁμοιώματι εἰκόνος φθαρτοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
incorruptible God into alikeness of an image of corruptible man 
καὶ πετεινῶν καὶ τετραπόδων καὶ ἑρπετῶν. 24 διὸ "καὶ" 
and of birds and quadrupeds and creeping things. Wherefore also 
παρέδωκεν αὐτοὺς ὁ θεὸς ἐν ταῖς ἐπιθυμίαις τῶν.καρδιῶν.αὐ- 
3gave *up *them 'God in the desires of their hearts 
τῶν εἰς ἀκαθαρσίαν, τοῦ ἀτιμάζεσθαι τα.σὠματα.αὐτῶν ἐν 
το  uncleanness, 30 *be *dishonoured ‘their *bodies between 


τινὰ καρπὸν GLTTrAW. 
nv χαοιστησαν QLTTra- 


h — τοῦ χριστοῦ GLITrAW. ‘[mpwrov] L. * θεὸς yap GLTTrAW 


πὶ ἀλλὰ Tr. 2 — καὶ LTTr{A]. 


1 ArT. ROMANS. 
οἑαυτοῖς"" 25 οἵτινες μετήλλαξαν τὴν ἀλήθειαν τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν 
themselves: who changed the truth of God into 


τῷ Wedd, Kai ἐσεβάσθησαν καὶ ἐλάτρευσαν τῇ κτίσει 
falsehood, and reverenced and served the created thing 


παρὰ τὸν κτίσαντα, ὃς ἐστιν εὐλογητὸς εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. 
beyond him who created [it], who is blessed to the ages. 
2 4 4 ~ ͵ ? 4 c 4 > / 
ἀμήν. 26 διὰ τοῦτο παρέδωκεν αὐτοὺς ὁ θεὸς εἰς πάθη 
Amen. For this reason gave *up them 1God to passions 


ἀτιμίας" αἵ τε γὰρ θήλειαι αὐτῶν μετήλλαξαν τὴν φυσικὴν 
ofdishonour, “both ‘for *females “their changed the natural 
χρῆσιν εἰς τὴν παρὰ φύσιν" 27 dpoiwePre! Kai οἱ Iappevec' 
use into that contrary to nature; andinlikemanneralsothe males 
ἀφέντες THY φυσικὴν χρῆσιν τῆς θηλείας, ἐξεκαύθησαν ἐν τῇ 
having Ἰοὺ the natural use ofthe female, wereinflamed in 


ὀ ἐξε > ~ ? ἀλλήλ ΤΣ Ι >? 327 ll a 
ρεξειιαὐτῶν εἰς ἥλους, τἄρσενες᾽ ἐν “ἄρσεσιν" τὴν 
their lust towards one another, males with males 
ἀσχημοσύνην κατεργαζόμενοι, καὶ THY ἀντιμισθίαν ἣν ἔδει 
shame 1working “out, and the recompense which was fit 
ae, » > ἂν ? ε - > , ‘ 
τῆς.πλάνης. αὐτῶν ἐν ἑαυτοῖς ἀπολαμβάνοντες. 28 καὶ 
of their error in themselves receiving. And 
καθὼς οὐκ.ἐδοκίμασαν τὸν θεὸν ἔχειν ἐν ἐπιγνώσει, 


according as they did not approve *God ‘to *have in [their] knowledge, 
παρέδωκεν αὐτοὺς ὁ θεὸς εἰς ἀδόκιμον νοῦν, ποιεῖν τὰ μὴ 

?gave ‘up Sthem 1God to anunapproving mind, todo things not 
καθήκοντα, 29 πεπληρωμένους πάσῃ ἀδικίᾳ, πορνείᾳ," 

fitting ; being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, 
ὑπονηρίᾳ, πλεονεξίᾳ, κακίᾳ" μεστοὺς φθόνου, φόνου, ἔριδος, 
wickedness, covetousness, malice; fu ofenvy, murder, strife, 


δόλου, κακοηθείας" Ψψιθυριστάς, 30 καταλάλους, θεοστυγεῖς, 
3 guile, evil dispositions ; whisperers, slanderers, hateful to God, 


ὑβριστάς, ὑπερηφάνους, ἀλαζόνας, ἐφευρετὰῈς κακῶν. 
insolent, proud, vyaunting, inventors of evil things 
γονεῦσιν ἀπειθεῖς, 31 ἀσυνέτους, ἀσυνθέτους, ἀ- 
to parents disobedient, without understanding, perfidious, without 
, , 2 , , " 
στόργους, πἀσπόνδους,) ἀνελεήμονας: 82 οἵτινες τὸ 
natural affection, implacable, unmerciful ; who the 
δικαίωμα τοῦ θεοῦ ἐπιγνόντες, ὅτι οἱ τὰ.τοιαῦτα 
righteous judgment of God having known, that those’ such things 
πράσσοντες ἄξιοι θανάτου εἰσίν, οὐ μόνον αὐτὰ ποιοῦσιν, 
doing worthy of death are, not only 7them ‘practise, 


ἀλλὰ Kai συνευδοκοῦσιν τοῖς πράσσουσιν. 
but also 46 consenting to those that do [them]. 
Q Διὸ ἀναπολόγητος εἶ, ὦ ἄνθρωπε. πᾶς ὁ κρίνων" 
Wherefore imexcusable thouart,O man, every one who judgest, 
ἐν ᾧ.γὰρ κρίνεις τὸν ἕτερον, σεαυτὸν κατακρίνεις" 
for in that in which thou judgest the other, thyself thou condemnest : 


Ta.yap αὐτὰ πράσσεις ὁ κρίνων. 2 οἴδαμεν *Oé' OTL τὸ 
forthe same things thou doest who judgest. *We *know ‘but that the 


κατὰ ἀλήθειαν ἐπὶ τοὺς τὰ τοιαῦτα 
accordingto truth uponthosethat such things 
τοῦτο, ὦ ἄνθρωπε, ὁ κρίνων 
this, 10) man, who judgest 


κρῖμα τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστιν 
judgment of God is 
πράσσοντας. 3 λογίζῃ.δὲ 
do. And reckonest thou 


τοὺς ταιτοιαῦτα πράσσοντας καὶ ποιῶν αὐτά, ὅτι 
those that such things do, and practisest them [thyself], that 
© αὐτοῖς LTTrA. Ρ δὲ x. 4 ἄρσενες ELTrAW. τ ἄῤῥενες T. 


τ-- πορνείᾳ GLTTrAW. 


σπόνδους LITrAW. x yap for τ. 


’ κακίᾳ πονηρίᾳ πλεονεξίᾳ, L; πονηρίᾳ κακίᾳ πλε. T. 


405 


dishonour their own 
bodies between theme 
selves: 25 whochanged 
the truth of God into a 
lie, and worshipped 
and served the crea- 
ture more than the 
Creator, who is blessed 
for ever. Amen. 26 For 
this cause God gave 
them up unto vile af- 
fections: for even their 
women did changethe 
natural use into that 
which is against na- 
ture: 27 and likewise 
also the men, leaving 
the natural use of the 
woman, burned in 
their lust one toward 
another; men with 
men working’ that 
which isunseemly, and 
receiving in them- 
selves that recompence 
of their error which 
was meet. 28 Andeven 
as they did not like to 
retain God in their 
knowledge, God gave 
them over to a repro- 
bate mind, to dothose 
things which are not 
convenient; 29 being 
filled with all unright- 
eousness, fornication, 
wickedness, covetous- 
ness, maliciousness ; 
full of envy, murder, 
debate, deceit, ma- 
lignity ; whisperers, 
30 backbiters, haters 
of God, despiteful, 
proud, boasters, in- 
yentors of evil things, 
disobedient to parents, 
31 without under- 
standing, covenant- 
breakers, without na- 
tural affection, im- 
placable, unmerciful : 
32 who knowing the 
judgment of God, that 
they which commit 
such things are worthy 
of death, not only do 
the same, but have 
pleasure in them that 
do them. 


11. Therefore thou 
art inexcusable, O 
man, whosoever thou 
art that judgest: for 
wherein thou judgest 
another, thou con- 
demnest thyself; for 
thou that judgest doest 
the same things. 2 But 
we are sure that the 
judgment of God is ac- 
cording to truth a- 
gainst them which 
commit such things, 
3 And thinkest thou 
this, O man, that 
judgest them which do 
such things, and doest 
the same, that thou 


5 dppeow T. 
ee 


406 


shalt escape the judg- 
ment of God? 4 or 
despisest thou the 
riches of his good- 
ness and forbearance 
and longsuffering ; not 
knowing that the 
goodness of God lead- 
eth thee to repentance? 
5 But after thy hard- 
ness and impenitent 
heart treasurest up un- 
to thyself wrath a- 
gainmst the day of 
wrath and revelation 
of the righteous judg- 
ment of God; 6 who 
will render to every 
man according to his 
deeds : 7 to them who 
by patient continu- 
ance in well doing 
seek for glory and 
honour and immortal- 
ity, eternal life: 8 but 
unto them that are 
contentious, and do 
not obey the truth, but 
obey unrighteousness, 
indignation andwrath, 
9 tribulation and an- 
guish, upon every soul 
of man that doeth evil, 
of the Jew first, and 
also of the Gentile; 
10 but glory, honour, 
and peace, to every 
man that worketh 
good, to the Jew first, 
and also to the Gen- 
tile: 11 for there is no 
respect of persons with 
God, 12 For as many 
as have sinned with- 
out law shall also 
perish without law: 
and as many as have 
sinned in the law shall 
be judged by the law; 
13 (for not the hearers 
of the law are just 
before God, but the 
doers of the law shall 
be justified. 14 For 
when the Gentiles, 
which have not the 
law. do by nature the 
things contained in 
the law, these, having 
not the law, are a 
law unto themselves : 
15 which shew _ the 
work of the law writ- 
ten in their hearts, 
their conscience also 
bearing witness, and 
their thoughts the 
mean While accusing 
or else excusing one 
another ;) 16 in the 
day when God shall 
judge the secrets of 
Inen by Jesus Christ 
according to my gos- 
pel. 

17 Behold, thou art 
called a Jew, and 
restest in the law, and 


Y — μὲν LT Tr. 
LITrAW. 
€ χοιστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ T. 


2 ὀργὴ καὶ θυμός GLTTrAW. 
¢ — τῷ [17]}Ὁτ-Ψ 


ΠΡῸΣ YRA@apAd 0 Y =. II. 
σὺ ἐκφεύξῃ τὸ κρῖμα τοῦ θεοῦ; 4 ἢ τοῦ πλούτου τῆς χρη- 
thou shalt escape the judgment of God? or the riches of the kind- 


στότητος αὐτοῦ Kai τῆς ἀνοχῆς Kai THC μακροθυμίας κατα- 
mess of him and the forbearance and the long-suffering despisest 


φρονεῖς, ἀγνοῶν bre TO χρηστὸν τοῦ θεοῦ εἰς μετάνοιάν σε 


thou, not knowing that the kindness of God to repentance thee 
ἄγει; 5 κατὰ. δὲ τὴν.σκληρότητά.σου καὶ ἀμετανόητον 
leads? but according to thy hardness and impenitent 


καρδίαν θησαυρίζεις σεαυτῷ ὀργὴν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ὀργῆς Kai ἀπο- 
heart treasurest up tothyself wrath in aday of wrath and re- 
καλύψεως δικαιοκρισίας τοῦ θεοῦ. 6 ὃς ἀποδώσει ἑκάστῳ 
velation of righteous judgment of God, who willrender toeach 
κατὰ τὰ ἔργα.αὐτοῦ. 7 τοῖς μὲν καθ᾽ ὑπομονὴν ἔργου 
according to his works : to those that with endurance in *work 
ἀγαθοῦ, δόξαν καὶ τιμὴν καὶ ἀφθαρσίαν ζητοῦσιν, ζωὴν 
good, glory and honour and incorruptibility are seeking— life 


αἰώνιον. ὃ τοῖς. δὲ ἐξ ἐριθείας, καὶ ἀπειθοῦσιν μὲν" τῇ 
eternal, But to those of contention, and who disobey the 
ἀληθείᾳ, πειθομένοις. δὲ τῇ ἀδικίᾳ, Ζθυμὸς καὶ ὀργή," 


truth, unrighteousness— indignation and wrath, 
9 θλίψις καὶ στενοχωρία, ἐπὶ πᾶσαν ψυχὴν ἀνθρώπου τοῦ 


but obey 


tribulation and strait, on every soul of man that 

κατεργαζομένου τὸ κακόν, ᾿Ιουδαίου.τε πρῶτον καὶ “Ἑλληνος" 

works out evil, both of Jew first and of Greek; 

10 δόξα. δὲ καὶ τιμὴ Kai εἰρήνη παντὶ τῷ ἐργαζομένῳ τὸ 
but glory and honour and _ peace to everyone that works 


> , ? a , ~ ‘ or > , 9, 
ἀγαθόν, ᾿ἸΙουδαίῳ. τε πρῶτον καὶ “Ἑλληνι' 11 ov_yap.éorw 
good, both to Jew first, and to Greek: for there is not 


: Apia’ παρὰ τῷ θεῷ. 12 booryap ἀνόμως ἥ 
προσωποληψία᾽ παρὰ τῷ θεῷ. 12 Ὁσοι.γὰρ ἀνόμως ἡμαρτον, 


respect of persons with God. For as many as without law sinned, 
ἀνόμως Kai ἀπολοῦνται" καὶ ὕσοι ἐν νόμῳ ἥμαρτον, da 
withoutlaw also shall perish ; andasmany asin law sinned, by 


νόμου κριθήσονται, 18 οὐ.γὰρ οἱ ἀκροαταὶ ὑτοῦ" νόμου δίκαιο 
law 5881] be judged, (for not the hearers ofthe law [are] just 
παρὰ “τῷ" θεῷ, ἀλλ᾽ οἱ ποιηταὶ ὕτοῦ" νόμου δικαιωθήσονται. 
with God, but the doers, ofthe law shall be justified. 
14 “ταν.γὰρ ἔθνη τὰ μὴ νόμον ἔχοντα φύσει τὰ 
For when nations which “not “law 1have by nature the things 
τοῦ νόμου Ἱποιῇ,, οὗτοι νόμον μὴ ἔχοντες, ἑαυτοῖς εἰσιν 
of the law practise, these, law not having, tothemselves are 
νόμος" 15 οἵτινες ἐνδείκνυνται τὸ ἔργον TOU νόμου γραπτὸν 
a law ; who shew the work ofthe law written 
ἐν ταῖς.καρδίαις. αὐτῶν, ἐσυμμαρτυρούσης" αὐτῶν τῆς συνει- 
in their hearts, Spearing *witness °with ‘their 2con- 
δήσεως, καὶ μεταξὺ ἀλλήλων τῶν λογισμῶν κατηγορούντων 
science, and between one another the reasonings accusing 
ἢ Kai ἀπολογουμένων, 16 ἐν ἡμέρᾳ fore κρινεῖ ὁ θεὸς 


or also defending ;) in  aday when ’shall*judge ‘God 
τὰ κρυπτὰ τῶν ἀνθρώπων, κατὰ τὸ. εὐαγγέλιόν. μου, διὰ 
the secrets of men, according to my glad tidings, by 
8’ Inoov χριστοῦ." 
Jesus Christ. 
17 "Ide! σὺ Ἰουδαῖος ἐπονομάζῃ, καὶ ἐπαναπαύῃ 'τῷ" 
Lo, thou a Jew art named, and restest in the 


b — τοῦ the 


2 προσωπολημψία LITrA. 
f 7 in which wa. 


4 ποιῶσιν LTTrA. © gup- 7. 


a εἰ δὲ but if GLrTraw. i — τῷ the LTTraw. 


PEATE ROMANS. 


νόμῳ, Kai καυχᾶσαι ἐν θεῷ, 18 Kai γινώσκεις τὸ θέλημα, Kai 


law, and boastest in God, and knowest the will, and 
δοκιμάζεις τὰ διαφέροντα, κατηχούμενος ἐκ τοῦ 
approvest the things that are moreexcellent, being instructed out of the 


νόμου" 19 πέποιθάς.τε σεαυτὸν ὁδηγὸν εἶναι τυφλῶν, 
law; and art persuaded [that] thyself aguide art of [the] blind, 
φῶς τῶν ἐν σκότει, 20 παιδευτὴν ἀφρόνων, διδάσκαλον 
a light of those in darkness, an instructor of [the] foolish, a teacher 
νηπίων, ἔχοντα THY μόρφωσιν τῆς γνώσεως Kai τῆς ἀληθείας 
of infants, having the form of knowledge and ofthe truth 


ἐν τῷ voup: 21 d.oty διδάσκων ἕτερον, σεαυτὸν οὐ δι- 
in the law: thou then that teachest another, thyself ποῦ ‘dost 
δάσκειο: ὁ κηρύσσων μὴ κλέπτειν, κλέπτεις; 22 ὁ 

?thou teach? ἐμοῦ that proclaimest not tosteal, dost thousteal? thou that 
λέγων μὴ μοιχεύειν, μοιχεύεις; ὁ 

sayest not to commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thon that 
βδελυσσόμενος τὰ εἴδωλα, ἱεροσυλεῖς ; 95 ὃς ey 


abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege? thou who in 


νόμῳ καυχᾶσαι; διὰ τῆς παραβάσεως τοῦ νόμου τὸν θεὸν 
law boastest, throughthe transgression ofthe law God 

ἀτιμάζεις; 24 Τὸ γὰρ ὄνομα τοῦ θεοῦ dv ὑμᾶς βλασ- 
‘dishonourest *thou? For the name of God through you is blas- 


φημεῖται ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν, καθὼς γέγραπται. 26 Περι- 
phemed among the nations, according as it has been written. 7Circum- 
τομὴ μὲν γὰρ ὠφελεῖ ἐὰν νόμον πράσσῃς" ἐὰν δὲ 
cision ‘indeed ‘for profits if [the] law thou doest; but if 


παραβάτης νόμου ἧς, ἡ-περιτομή.σου ἀκροβυστία γέγονεν. 

atransgressor of law thouart, thy circumcision uncircumcision has become. 

26 ἐὰν οὖν ἡ ἀκροβυστία τὰ δικαιώματα τοῦ νόμου φυλάσ- 

If therefore the uncircumcision the requirements ofthe law keep, 

oy, "οὐχὶ" ἡ ἀκροβυστία.αὐτοῦ εἰς περιτομὴν λογισθήσεται: 

οὗ Shis*uncircumcision ‘for ‘circumcision ‘shall be reckoned? 

27 καὶ κρινεῖ ἡ ἐκ φύσεως ἀκροβυστία, TOY νόμον τελοῦσα, 

and ®shall*judge ‘the *by *nature “uncircumcision, *the “law ‘fulfilling, 

σὲ τὸν διὰ γράμματος Kai περιτομῆς παραβάτην νόμου; 
thee who with letter and circumcision [art] atransgressor of law? 
28 οὐ.γὰρ ὁ ἐν. τῷ. φανερῷ Ἰουδαῖός ἐστιν, οὐδὲ 


For ποῦ he that [158 9056] outwardly 24 ον lis, neither 
ε 3 ~ ~ > ‘ , ie ] > >I « 
ἡ ἐν τῷ. φανερῷ ἐν σαρκὶ περιτομή᾽ 29 ᾿ἀλλ᾽ ὁ 
that outwardly in flesh [is] circumcision ; but he that [is] 
ἐν.τῷ.κρυπτῷ Ἰουδαῖος; καὶ περιτομὴ καρδίας ἐν πνεύ- 
hiddenly a Jew [is one]; and circumcision [is] of heart, in spi- 
ματι, οὐ γράμματι οὗ ὁ ἔπαινος οὐκ ἐξ ἀνθρώπων, 
rit, not inletter; of whom the praise [is] not of men, 
τ ἀλλ᾿" ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ. 
but οἵ God. 
3 Ti οὖν τὸ περισσὸν τοῦ Ἰουδαίου, ἢ Tic ἡ ὠφέλεια 
What then [is] the superiority of the Jew? or whatthe profit 


τῆς περιτομῆς; 2 πολὺ κατὰ πάντα τρόπον. πρῶτον μὲν 


of the circumcision ? Much in every way: z 
"yap! ὅτι ἐπιστεύθησαν τὰ λόγια τοῦ θεοῦ. 3 τί.γάρ, εἰ 
for that they were entrusted with the oracles of God. For what, if 


ἠπίστησάν τινες; μὴ ἡ.ἀπιστία. αὐτῶν THY πίστιν τοῦ θεοῦ 
"not *believed ‘some? 5their unbelief MNthe ‘faith of *God 


407 


makest thy boast of 
God, 18 and knowest 
his will, and approv- 
est the things that are 
more excellent, being 
instructed out of the 
law ; 19 and art con- 
fident that thou thy- 
self art a guide of the 
blind, a light of them 
which are in darkness, 
20 an instructor of the 
foolish, a teacher of 
babes, which hast the 
form of knowledge 
and of the truth in the 
law. 21 Thou there- 
fore which teachest 
another, teachest thou 
not thyself ? thou that 
preachest a man should 
not steal, dost thou 
steal? 22 thon that 
sayest a man should 
not commit adultery, 
dost thou commit a- 
dultery? thou that 
abhorrest idols, dost 
thou commit sacrilege? 
23 thou that makest 
thy boast of the law, 
through breaking the 
law dishonourest thou 
God ? 24 For the name 
of God is blasphemed 
among the Gentiles 
through you, as it is 
written. 25 For circum- 
cision verily profiteth, 
if thou keep the law: 
but if thou be a break- 
er of the law, thy cir- 
cumcision is madeun- 
circumcision. 26 There- 
fore if the uncireum- 
cision keep the right- 
eousness of the law, 
shall not his uncir- 
cumcision be count- 
ed for circumcision ? 
27 And shall not un- 
circumcision which is 
by nature, if it fulfil 
the law, judge thee, 
who by the letter 
and circumcision dost 
transgress the law? 
28 For he isnot aJew, 
which is one outward- 
ly; neither is that 
circumcision, which is 
outward in the flesh : 
29 but he is a Jew, 
which is one inward- 
ly ; and circumcision 
is that of the heart, in 
the spirit, and not in 
the letter; whose 
praise 7s not of men, 
but of God. 


Ill. What advan- 
tage then hath the 
Jew? or what profit 
is there of circumci- 
sion? 2 Much every 
way : chiefly, because 
that unto them were 
committed the oracles 


EERE 


k ovy LTTr. ι ἀλλὰ LTr. πὶ ἀλλὰ Tr. 


2 --- γὰρ τιτι[Α]. 


408 


of God. 3 For whatif 
some did not believe ? 
shall their unbelief 
make the faith of God 
without effect? 4 God 
forbid: yea, let God be 
true, but every mana 
liar ; as it is written, 
That thou mightest be 
justified in thy say- 
ings, and mightest 
overcome when thou 
art judged. 5 Butif our 
unrighteousness com- 
mend the righteous- 
ness of God, what shall 
we say? Js God un- 
righteous who taketh 
vengeance? (I speak 
as a man) 6 God for- 
bid: for then how 
shall God judge the 
world? 7 For if the 
truth of God hath more 
abounded through my 
lie unto his glory; 
why yet am I also 
judged as a sinner? 
8 And not rather, (as 
we be slanderously re- 
ported, and as some af- 
firm that we say,) Let 
us do evil, that good 
may come? whose 
damnation is just. 

9 What then? are 
we better than they? 
No, in no wise: for 
we have before proved 
both Jews and Gen- 
tiles, that they are all 
under sin; 10 as it is 
written, There is none 
righteous, no, notone: 
11 there is none that 
understandeth, there 
is none that seeketh 
after God. 12 They are 
all gone out of the 
way, they are together 
become unprofitable; 
there is none that do- 
eth good, no, not one. 
13 Their throat i an 
open sepulchre ; with 
their tongues they 
have used deceit ; the 
poison of asps ts under 
their lips: 14 whose 
mouth zs full of curs- 
ing and _ bitterness: 
15 their feet are swift 
to shed blood: 16 de- 
struction and misery 
are in their ways: 
17 and the way of 
peace have they not 
known: 18 there is no 
fear of God before 
their eyes. 19 Now we 
know that what things 
soever the law saith, 
it saith to them who 
are under thelaw: that 
every mouth may be 
stopped, and all the 
world may become 
guilty before God. 


ΠΡΟΣ: PQOMATIOYsS. 


καταργήσει; 4 μὴ-.γένοιτο" γινέσθω δὲ ὁ θεὸς ἀληθής, 
“shall ™make ®of ὅπο '°effect? τηδῦ itnot be! but let “be "God true, 


πᾶς δὲ ἄνθρωπος ψεύστης, °Kabwe' γέγραπται, Ὅπως 


τπ| 


and every man false, according as it has been written, That 
av.ducaw0yc ἐν τοῖς.λόγοις.σου, Kai Ῥνικήσῃς" ἐν τῷ 
thou shouldest be justified in thy words, and overcome in 


κρίνεσθαί.σε. 5 Ἐῤδὲ ἡ -ἀδικία-ἡμῶν θεοῦ δικαιοσύνην συνί- 
thy being judged. Butif our unrighteousness 7God’s “righteousness ‘com- 


στησιν, τί ἐροῦμεν; μὴ ἄδικος ὁ θεὸς ὁ ἐπιφέρων τὴν 
mend, what shallwesay? ([is]?unrighteous ‘*God who inflicts 
dpynv; κατὰ ἄνθρωπον λέγω. 6 μὴ.γένοιτο᾽ ἐπεὶ πῶς 
wrath? According to man I speak, Mayit not be! since how 
κρινεῖ ὁ θεὸς τὸν κόσμον ; 7 εἰ Iydp' ἡ ἀλήθεια τοῦ θεοῦ 


shall*judge ‘God the world? *7If ‘for the truth of God 
ἐν rp iup-pevopare ἐπερίσσευσεν εἰς τὴν.δόξαν. αὐτοῦ, τί ἔτι 
in my lie abounded to his glory, why yet 


καθὼς Bdac- 


and not, accordingas we are 
καὶ καθώς φασίν τινες ἡμᾶς λέγειν, Ὅτι 
injuriously charged and according as “affirm ‘some([that] we say, 
ποιήσωμεν τὰ.κακὰ ἵνα ἔλθῃ τὰ. ἀγαθά; ὧν τὸ κρῖμα 
Let us practise evil things that *may *come ‘good “things? whose judgment 
EVOLKOV ἐστιν. 

2just tis. 

9 Ti οὖν; προεχόμεθα ; οὐ-πάντως" προῃτιασάμεθα.γὰρ 


κἀγὼ ὡς ἁμαρτωλὸς κρίνομαι; ὃ καὶ μὴ 
Salso7I ‘as 5a Ssinner lam judged? 


φημούμεθα, 


What then? are we better? not at all: for we before charged 
? , , 0 ’ ε > e , 
Iovdaiove.re kai Ἕλληνας πάντας ὑφ᾽ ἁμαρτίαν εἶναι, 
both Jews and Greeks all Sunder ‘sin ('with] “being: 
10 καθὼς γέγραπται, Ὅτι οὐκ.ἔστιν δίκαιος οὐδὲ 


according as it has been written, There is not a righteous one, not even 
sic’ 11 οὐκ.ἔστιν τὸ" συνιῶν, οὐκ.ἔστιν 20" ἐκζητῶν 
one: there is not [one] that understands, there is not [one] that seeks after 

4 , , 7 , ida t > , θ 
τὸν θεόν. 12 πάντες ἐξέκλιναν, apa ἠχρειωθη- 
God. All did go out of the way, together they became unprofit- 


cav'" οὐκιἔστιν * ποιῶν χρηστότητα, ovK-éoTLY ἕως 
able; there is not [one] practising kindness, there is not so much as 
ἑνός. 18 τάφος ἀνεῳγμένος ὁ-.λάρυγξ αὐτῶν, ταῖς γλώσσαις 
one; ’sepulchre ‘an “opened [is] their throat, with *tongues 
αὐτῶν ἐδολιοῦσαν᾽ ἰὸς ἀσπίδων ὑπὸ τὰ.χείλη.αὐτῶν" 
‘their they used deceit: poison ofasps [is] under their lips: 

14 ὧν τὸ στόμα ἀρᾶς Kai πικρίας γέμει" 15 ὀξεῖς οἱ 


of whom the mouth swift 
4 ? ~ ? , - , ν , 

πόδες.αὐτῶν ἐκχέαι αἷμα: 16 σύντριμμα καὶ ταλαιπωρία 
their feet toshed blood; ruin and misery 

ἐν ταῖς.ὁδοῖς. αὐτῶν: 17 Kai ὁδὸν εἰρήνης 

in their ways ; and a way 


of cursing and of bitterness is full; 


[816] 


οὐκ.ἔγνωσαν. 
of peace they did not know: 


18 οὐκἔστιν φόβος θεοῦ ἀπέναντι τῶν.ὀφθαλμῶν αὐτῶν. 


there is no fear of God before their eyes. 
19 Oidapev.dé ὅτι ὅσα ὁ νόμος λέγει, τοῖς ἐν τῷ νόμῳ 
Now we know that whatsoever the law says, tothose in the law 
λαλεῖ: ἵνα πᾶν orépa gpayy, Kai ὑπόδικος γένηται 


it speaks, that every mouth may be stopped, and under judgment be 


ο καθάπερ TTr. 
* ηχρεώθησαν ΤΊτ. 


ᾳ δὲ but τι τ-- 6 L[Tr]. 5 [ὁ] 1 
w + [αὐτῶν] (read their mouth) tL. 


P νικήσεις Shalt overcome T, 
¥ + ὃ (read that practises) T. 


Ing IV. ROMANS. 

θήσεται πᾶσα σὰρξ ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ" διὰ.γὰρ νόμου ἐπί- 

justified phe ‘ flesh before him; forthrough law [is] know- 
it. 

γνωσις ἁμαρτίας. 

ledge of sin. 


21 Νυνὶ. δὲ χωρὶς νόμου δικαιοσύνη θεοῦ πεφανέρωται. 
But now apartfrom law righteousness of God has been manifested, 
μαρτυρουμένη ὑπὸ τοῦ νόμου Kai τῶν προφητῶν" 92 ὃδι- 
being bornewitness to by the law and the prophets : ?right- 
καιοσύνη δὲ θεοῦ διὰ πίστεως Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ, εἰς πάντας 
eousness ἰδύβῃ οἵ σοῦ through faith ofJesus Christ, towards all 

*kai ἐπὶ πάντας! τοὺς πιστεύοντας" οὐ-.γάρ.ἐστιν διαστολή" 
and upon all those that believe : forthereisno difference: 
23 πάντες. γὰρ ἥμαρτον Kai ὑστεροῦνται τῆς δόξης τοῦ θεοῦ, 
for all sinned and come short ofthe glory of God ; 

24 δικαιούμενοι δωρεὰν τῇ. αὐτοῦ.χάριτι, διὰ τῆς ἀπολυ- 
being justified gratuitously by his grace, through the re- 
τρώσεως THC ἐν χριστῷ ‘Inoov, 25 ὃν προέθετο ὁ θεὸς 
demption which [15] 'π Christ Jesus ; whom ?set *forth *God 
ἱλαστήριον διὰ. Υὑτῆς" πίστεως ἐν τῷ. αὐτοῦ. αἵματι, εἰς ἔν- 
ἃ mercy seat through faith in his blood, for a shew- 


δειξιν τῆς.δικαιοσύνης. αὐτοῦ, διὰ τὴν πάρεσιν τῶν 
ing forth of his righteousness, in respect of the passing by the 
προγεγονότων ἁμαρτημάτων 2306 ἐν τῇ ἀνοχῇ τοῦ 


*that *had *before *taken *place 
θεοῦ, mpdc* ἔνδειξιν τῆς.δικαιοσύνης. αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ νῦν 
of God; for [the] shewing forth of his righteousness in the present 
καιρῷ; εἰς τὸ εἶναι.αὐτὸν δίκαιον καὶ δικαιοῦντα τὸν ἐκ 


‘sins in the forbearance 


time, for his being just and justifying him that [is] of [the] 
πίστεως Ἰησοῦ. 27 Ποῦ οὖν ἡ καύχησις; ἐξεκλείσθη. 
faith of Jesus, Where then{[is]the boasting? It was excluded. 


διὰ ποίου vopov; τῶν ἔργων; οὐχί, ἀλλὰ διὰ νόμου 
Through what law ? of works? No, but through a law 
πίστεως. 98 λογιζόμεθα “οὖν ὕπίστει δικαιοῦσθαι" ἄνθρω- 
of faith. ?We*reckon ‘therefore *by'°faith “ἴο "be "justified *a°man 
πον, χωρὶς ἔργων νόμον. 29 ἢ Ἰουδαίων ὁ θεὸς μόνον; 
apart from works of law. Of Jews [ishe]the God only? 
οὐχὶ. “δὲ! καὶ ἐθνῶν; vai καὶ ἐθνῶν: 30 “ἐπείπερ' εἷς 
and not also of Gentiles? Yea, also of Gentiles: since indeed one 
ὁ θεὸς ὃς δικαιώσει περιτομὴν ἐκ πίστεως, καὶ 
God [itis] who will justify [the] circumcision by faith, and 
ἀκροβυστίαν διὰ τῆς πίστεως. 31 νόμον οὖν καταργοῦ- 
uncircumcision through faith. SLaw *then ‘do*we*make of no 
μὲν διὰ τῆς πίστεως ; μὴ-γένοιτο᾽ ἀλλὰ νόμον “ἱστῶμεν." 
effect through faith ? May it not be! but ‘law ‘we 7establish. 
4 Ti οὖν ἐροῦμεν ᾿ῬΑβραὰμ τὸν. πατέρα.ἡμῶν εὑρηκέναι" 
What then 5181] wesay Abraham our father has found 
κατὰ σάρκα; 2&i.yap ABpadp ἐξ ἔργων ἐδικαιώθη, ἔχει 
according to flesh? Forif Abraham by works was justified, he has 
καύχημα, ἀλλ’ οὐ πρὸς &rov' θεόν. 3 τί.γὰρ ἡ γραφὴ 
ground of boasting, but not towards God. For what *the “scripture 
λέγει ; ᾿Επίστευσεν.δὲ ᾿Αβραὰμ τῷ θεῷ, καὶ ἐλογίσθη αὐτῷ 
*says? And believed ‘Abraham God, and it was reckoned to him 


409 


20 Thersfore by the 
deeds of the law shere 
shall no flesh be justi- 
fied in his sight: for 
by the law is the know- 
ledge of sin. 

21 But now the right- 
eousness of God with- 
out the law is mani- 
fested, being witness- 
ed by the law and the 
prophets ; 22 even the 
righteousness of God 
which is by faith of 
Jesus Christ unto all 
and upon all them that 
believe: for there is 
no difference: 23 for 
all have sinned, and 
come short of the glory 
of God ; 24 being justi- 
fied freely by his grace 
through the redemp- 
tionthatisin Christ Je- 
sus: 25 whom God hath 
set forth to be a pro- 
pitiation through faith 
in his blood, to declare 
his righteousness for 
the remission of sins 
that are past, through 
the forbearance of 
God; 26 to declare, 7 
say, at this time his 
righteousness : {Ἐπὶ he 
might be just, and the 
justifier of him which 
believeth in Jesus. 
27 Where is boasting 
then? It is excluded. 
By what law? of 
works? Nay: but by 
the law of faith. 
28 Therefore we con- 
clude that a man is 
justified by faith with- 
out the deeds of the 
law. 29 Is he the God 
of the Jews only? is 
he not also of the 
Gentiles ? Yes, of the 
Gentiles also: 30 see- 
ing itzs one God, which 
shall justify the cir- 
cumcision by faith, 
and wuncircumcision 
through faith. 31 Do 
we then make void 
the law through faith? 
God forbid: yea, we 
establish the law. 


IV. What shall we 
say then that Abraham 
our father, as pertain- 
ing to the flesh, hath 
found ? 2 For if Abra- 
ham were justified by 
works, he hath whereof 
to glory; but not be- 
fore God. 3 For what 
saith thescripture? A- 
braham believed God, 
and it was counted 
unto him for right- 
eousness. 4 Now to him 
that worketh is the 


Υ -α τῆς τττὰ. 7% + τὴν the LITra. 
ς — δὲ and GLTTra. 


X — καὶ ἐπὶ πάντας LTTr[A]. 
Ὁ δικαιοῦσθαι πίστει GLTTTA. 
LTTra. 
& — τὸν LTTrAW. 


ἃ εἴ wep LTTrA. 
ἔ εὑρηκέναι ([εὑρηκέναι) A) ᾿Αβραὰμ τὸν προπάτορα (forefather) ἡμῶν LTTrA 


2 γὰρ ‘for GLTTrAW. 
© ἱστάνομεν 


410 


reward not reckoned 
of grace, but of debt. 
5 But to him that 
worketh not, but be- 
lieveth on him that 
justifieth the ungodly, 
his faith is counted for 
righteousness. 6 Even 
as David also de- 
seribeth the blessed- 
ness of the man, unto 
whom God imputeth 
righteousness without 
works, 7 saying, Bless- 
ed are they whose in- 
iquities are forgiven, 
and whose sins are 
covered. 8 Blessed zs 
the man to whom the 
Lord will not impute 


sin. 

9 Cometh this bless- 
edness then upon the 
circumcision only, or 
upon the uncireumci- 
sion also? for we say 
that faith was reckon- 
ed to Abraham for 
righteousness. 10 How 
was it then reckoned ? 
when he was in cir- 
cumcision, or in un- 
circumcision? Not in 
circumcision, but in 
unci cision. 1lAnd 
he received the sign of 
circumcision, a seal of 
the righteousness of 
the faith which he had 
yet being uncircumcis- 
ed: that he might be the 
father of allthem that 
believe, though they 
be not circumcised ; 
that righteousness 
‘might be imputed unto 
them also: 12 and the 
father of circumcision 
to them who are not 
of the circumcision 
only, but who also 
walk in the steps of 
that faith of our fa- 
ther Abraham, which 
he had being yet uncir- 
cumcised. 

13 For the promise, 
that he should be the 
heir of the world, was 
notto Abraham, or to 
his seed, through the 
law, but through the 
righteousness of faith. 
14 For if they which 
are of the law be heirs, 
faithis made void, and 
the promise made of 
none effect: 15 be- 
cause the law worketh 
wrath: for where no 
law is, thereis no trans- 
gression. 16 Therefore 
it is of faith, that it 
might be by grace ; to 
the end the promise 
might be sure to all 
the seed ; not to that 
only which is of the 


ΠΡΟ ΣΕ OMA oO YX =: IV. 
ἐργαζομένῳ ὁ μισθὸς οὐ-λογίζεται 
works the reward is not reckoned 


iro" ὀφείλημα: 5 τῷ.δὲ 
debt : but to him that 


εἰς δικαιοσύνην. 4 Τῷ.δὲ 


for righteousness. Now to him that 
κατὰ χάριν, ἀλλὰ κατὰ 
according to grace, but according to 
μὴ.ἐργαζομένῳ, πιστεύοντι.δὲ ἐπὶ τὸν δικαιοῦντα τὸν *a- 
does not work, but believes on himthat justifies the un- 

~ I λ , « / > ~ ΕΣ ὃ ’ (2) , 
σεβῆ," λογίζεται ἡ.πίστις. αὐτοῦ εἰς δικαιοσύνην. 6 καθάπερ 


godly, ‘is *reckoned this *faith for righteousness. Even as 
Ral | \ 94) , cy ξ ~ » ΄ τ « " 
καὶ ἸΔαβὶδ' λέγει τὸν μακαρισμὸν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ᾧ ὁ θεὸς 
also David declares the blessedness of the man towhom God 
λογίζεται δικαιοσύνην χωρὶς ἔργων, 7 Μακάριοι ὧν 


righteousness apart from works: Blessed [they] of whom 
ὧν ἐπεκαλύφθησαν αἱ ἁμαρτίαι. 


reckons 
ἀφέθησαν at ἀνομίαι, καὶ 


are forgiven thelawlessnesses, and of whom are covered the sins: 
8 μακάριος ἀνὴρ ™p! οὐ-μὴ λογίσηται κύριος ἁμαρτίαν. 
blessed [{the]man to whom inno wise *will *reckon [086] *Lord sin. 


9 .μακαρισμὸς.οὖν.οὗτος ἐπὶ τὴν περιτομήν, ἢ Kai ἐπὶ 
[15] this blessedness then on the circumcision, or also on 
‘ ᾽ , , 4 nv I ? , ~? ‘ 
τὴν ἀκροβυστίαν ; λέγομεν.γὰρ "ὅτι! ἐλογίσθη τῷ ᾿Αβραὰμ 
the uncircumcision ? For we say that was reckoned to Abraham 
ἡ πίστις εἰς δικαιοσύνην. 10 πῶς οὖν ἐλογίσθη; ἐν περι- 
faith -for righteousness. How then was it reckoned? “1π *cireum- 
τομῇ ὄντι, ἢ ἐν ἀκροβυστίᾳ ; οὐκ ἐν περιτομῇ: ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ἀκρο- 
cision ‘being, or in uncircumcision? Not incircumcision, but in uncir- 
Bvoria’ 11 καὶ σημεῖον ἔλαβεν περιτομῆς, σφραγῖδα 
cumcision. And [the] sign he received of circumcision, [as] seal 
τῆς δικαιοσύνης τῆς πίστεως τῆς ἐν τῇ ἀκροβυστίᾳ, 
of the righteousness ofthe faith which[hehad]in the uncircumcision, 
εἰς τὸ εἴναιιαὐτὸν πατέρα πάντων τῶν πιστευόντων OU"! 
for him to be father of all those that believe in 
ἀκροβυστίας. εἰς τὸ λογισθῆναι Ῥκαὶ αὐτοῖς I7nv' δικαιο- 
uncireumeision, for *to Sbe freckoned 7also ‘to *them ‘the “righteous- 
σύνην᾽ 12 καὶ πατέρα περιτομῆς τοῖς οὐκ ἐκ περιτομῆς 


NESS ; and father of circumcision tothose not of circumcision 
μόνον; ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς στοιχοῦσιν τοῖς ἴχνεσιν τῆς ἐν 
only, but also to those that walk inthe steps ofthe *during 


τῇ ἀκροβυστίᾳ πίστεως τοῦ.πατρὸς ἡμῶν ᾿Αβραάμ. 
Suncircumcision ‘faith of our father Abraham. 
13 Ov-ydp διὰ νόμου ἡ ἐπαγγελία 
Fornot by law the promise 
σπέρματι.αὐτοῦ, TO κληρονόμον αὐτὸν εἶναι "τοῦ" 
to his seed, that heir he should be of the 
ἀλλὰ διὰ δικαιοσύνης πίστεως. 14 εἰ.γὰρ οἱ ἐκ νόμου 
but by righteousness of faith. For if those of law ([be] 
κληρονόμοι, κεκένωται ἡ πίστις, καὶ κατήργηται ἡ ἐ- 
heirs, “has®been‘*made*void ‘faith, and *made*of πο “effect ‘the *pro- 
mayyédia’ 15 ὁ-γὰρ.νόμος ὀργὴν κατεργάζεται. οὗ ‘yao! οὐκ 
mise. Forthelaw wrath ‘works7out; ‘where *for “not 
ἔστιν νόμος, οὐδε παράβασις. 16 διὰ τοῦτο ἐκ πίστεως, 
7is Slaw, neither [is] transgression. Wherefore of faith 
wa κατὰ χάριν, εἰς τὸ εἶναι βεβαίαν τὴν 
{it is], that according to grace [it might be], for 310 “be ‘sure 1the 
ἐπαγγελίαν παντὶ τῷ σπέρματι, οὐ τῷ ἐκ TOU νόμου μόνον, 
2promise toall the seed, not tothat of the law only, 


τῷ ΑΞραὰμ ἢ τῷ 
[was] to Abraham or 
κόσμου, 
world, 


i —_ τὸ GLTTraw. 
® — ore [L]TTr. 


* — τοῦ (vead (the]) GLTTraw. 


m οὗ whose (sin) TTr. 
τ-- τῇ GLTTrAW 


1 Δανεὶδ LTTrA ; Δαυὶδ Gw. 
P — καὶ TTr[A]. 4 — τὴν T. 
τ δὲ but LTTraw. 


k ἀσεβήν T. 
ο διὰ L. 


ROMANS. 
πίστεως ᾿Αβραάμ, 
but also to that of [the] faith of Abraham, 


πάντων.ἡμῶν, 17 καθὺς γέγραπται. Ὅτι πατέρα πολ- 
of us all, (according as it has been written, A father of 


λῶν ἐθνῶν τέθεικά σε, κατέναντι οὗ ἐπίστευσεν θεοῦ, 
Many nations Ihave made thee,) _ before ?whom “he*believed ‘*God, 


τοῦ ζωοποιοῦντος τοὺς νεκρούς, Kai καλοῦντος τὰ μὴ 


IV, V. 


? Η͂ ‘ ~ γ᾽ a ? \ 
ἀλλὰ καὶ τῷ ἐκ ὃς ἐστιν πατὴρ 


who is father 


who quickens the dead, and calls the things not 
ὄντα we ὄντα. 18 Ὃς παρ᾽ ἐλπίδα "ἐπ᾽" ἐλπίδι ἐπίστευσεν, 
being as. being; who against hope in hope believed, 
εἰς τὸ γενέσθαι αὐτὸν πατέρα πολλῶν ἐθνῶν, κατὰ τὸ 


for ‘him father 


εἰρημένον, Οὕτως ἔσται τὸ σπέρμα.σου" 19 Kai μὴ ἀσθενήσας 
had been said, So shall be thy seed : and ποῦ being weak 


πίστει, You! κατενόησεν τὸ ἑαυτοῦ σῶμα τἤδη" νενεκρω- 


7to *become of many nations, according to that which 


inthe faith, 3not "he considered his own body already become 
μένον, ἑκατονταίτης Tov ὑπάρχων, Kai τὴν νέκρωσιν 
dead, 38. *hundred *years old *about ‘being, and the deadening 

τῆς μήτρας Σάῤῥας:" 20 εἰς. δὲ τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν τοῦ θεοῦ οὐ 
of the σοι} of Sarah, andat the promise of God *not 
διεκρίθη τῇ ἀπιστίᾳ, arr ἐνεδυναμώθη τῇ πίστει, 
'doubted through unbelief; but was strengthened in faith, 


δοὺς δόξαν τῷ θεῷ, 21 Kai πληροφορηθεὶς OTL ὃ ἐπήγ- 
᾿ 5 ] Y 
giving glory to God, and being fully assured that what he has 
γελται, δυνατός ἐστιν καὶ ποιῆσαι. 22 διὸ *xai' ἐλογίσθη 
promised, able heis also to do; wherefore also it was reckoned 
αὐτῷ εἰς δικαιοσύνην. 23 Οὐκ. ἐγράφη δὲ ou αὐτὸν 
tohim for righteousness. 7It νγαβ “ποὺ °written ‘but on account of him 
, ev ? / > ~ ’ A ‘ ? « ~ 
μόνον, OTe ἐλογίσθη αὐτῷ 24 ἀλλὰ καὶ δι ἡμᾶς, 
only, that it was reckoned to him, but also on account of us, 
οἷς μέλλει λογίζεσθαι, τοῖς πιστεύουσιν ἐπὶ τὸν 
to whom itis about to be reckoned, to those that believe on him who 
ἐγείραντα Inoovy τὸν.κύριον. ἡ μῶν ἐκ νεκρῶν, 25 ὃς 
raised Jesus our Lord from among [the] dead, who 
παρεδόθη διὰ τὰ παραπτὠματα.ἡμῶν, Kai ἠγέρθη διὰ τὴν 
was delivered for our offences, and was raised for 
δικαίωσιν ἡμῶν. 
our justification. 
5 Δικαιωθέντες οὖν ἐκ πίστεως, εἰρήνην "ἔχομεν 
Having been justified therefore by faith, peace we have 
πρὸς τὸν θεὸν διὰ τοῦ.κυρίου. ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, 2 dv 


toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through 
οὗ Kai τὴν προσαγωγὴν ἐσχήκαμεν ὕτῇ πίστει" εἰς THY χάριν 
whom also access we have by faith into *grace 
, ? e B ‘ , ? bate} ΄, ~ , 
ταύτην ἐν ἑστήκαμεν" καὶ καυχώμεθα ἐπ᾽ ἐλπίδι τῆς δόξης 
‘this in which westand, and we boast in hope of the glory 
τοῦ θεοῦ. 3 οὐκμόνον. δέ, ἀλλὰ Kai Skavywpeba' ἐν ταῖς 
of God, And not only [so], but also we boast in 
θλίψεσιν, εἰδότες Ore ἡ θλίψις ὑπομονὴν κατεργάζεται, 
tribulations, knowing that the tribulation “endurance ‘works ?out ; 


4 ἡ δὲ ὑπομονὴ δοκιμήν, ἡ.δὲ δοκιμὴ ἐλπίδα, ὃ ἡ.δὲ ἐλπὶς 
and the endurance proof; andthe proof hope ; and the hope 
οὐ.καταισχύνε: ὕτι ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ θεοῦ ἐκκέχυται ἐν 

does not make ashamed, because the love of God has been poured out in 


w — ov (read εἰς δὲ, verse 20, but at) LTTr[a]. 


Υ ἐφ᾽ τι. 
5 ἔχωμεν We Should have Trra. 


* [καὶ] “Tra. 
boasting Tra. 


_ 2 ἤδη (oh) 
Ὁ — τῇ πίστει [LTr]JA. 


41} 


law, but ἰὸ that 
also which is of ths 
faith of Abraham; 
who is the father of us 
all, 17 (as it is writ- 
ten, Ihave made thee 
afather of many na- 
tions,) before him 
whom he belicved, even 
God, who quickeneth 
thedead, and calleth 
those things which be 
not as though they 
were. 18 Who against 
hope believed in hope, 
that he might become 
the father of many 
nations, according to 
that which was spoken, 
So shall thy seed be. 
19 And being not weak 
in faith, he considered 
not hisown body now 
dead, when he was 
about an hundred 
years old, neither yet 
the deadness of Sarah’s 
womb: 20 he stag- 
gered not at the pro- 
mise of God through 
unbelief; but was 
strong in faith, giving 
glory to God; 21 and 
being fully persuaded 
that, what he had pro- 
mised, he was able al- 
soto perform. 22 And 
therefore it was im- 
puted to him forright- 
eousness. 23 Now it 
was not written for 
his sake alone, that it 
was imputed to him ; 
24 but for us also, to 
whom it shall be im- 
puted, if we believe 
on him that raised up 
Jesus our Lord from 
the dead ; 25 who was 
delivered for our of- 
fences, and was raised 
again for our justifi- 
cation, 


V. Therefore being 
justified by faith, we 
have peace with God 
through our Lord Je- 
sus Christ: 2 by whom 
also we have access 
by faith into this 
grace wherein we 
stand, and rejoice in 
hope of the glory of 
God. % And not only 
80, but we glory 
in tribulations also: 
knowing that tribula- 
tion worketh patience; 
4 and patience, ex- 
perience ; and experi- 
ence, hope : 5 and hope 
maketh not ashamed ; 
because the love of 
God is shed abroad in 


Υ ἀλλὰ Tr. 


© καυχώμενοι 


412 


our hearts by the Holy 
Ghost which is given 
anto us. 6 For when 
we were yet without 
strength, in due time 
Christ died for the un- 
godly. 7 For scarcely 
for a righteous man 
will one die : yet per- 
adventure for a good 
man some would even 
dare to die, 8But God 
commendeth his love 
toward us, in that, 
while we were yet sin- 
ners, Christ died for 
us. 9 Much more then, 
being now justified by 
his blood, we shall 
be saved from wrath 
through him. 10 For 
if, when we were en- 
emies, we were recon- 
ciled to God by the 
death of his Son, much 
more, being reconciled, 
we shall be saved by 
his life. 11 And not 
only so, but we also 
joy in God through 
our Lord Jesus Christ, 
by whom wehave now 
received the atone- 
ment. 


12 Wherefore, as by 
one man sin entered 
into the world, and 
death by sin; and so 
death passed upon all 
men, for that all have 
sinned: 13 (for until 
the law sin was in the 
world: but sin is not 
imputed when _ there 
is no law. 14 Never- 
theless death reigned 
from Adam to Moses, 
even over them that 
had not sinned af- 
ter the similitude of 
Adam’s transgression, 
who is the figure of 
him that was to come. 
15 But not as the of- 
fence, so also ts the 
free gift. For if 
through the offence of 
one many be dead, 
much more the grace 
of God, and the gift 
by grace, which ts by 
one man, Jesus Christ, 
hath abounded unto 
many. 16 And not as 
τέ was by one that 
sinned, so is the gift : 
for the judgment was 


ΠΡΟΣ PQMAIOYS. Wi. 


ταῖς καρδίαις ἡμῶν διὰ πνεύματος ἁγίου τοῦ δοθέντος ἡμῖν. 
our hearts by the *Spirit *Holy which was given tous: 
6 “Ἔτι.γὰρ! χριστὸς ὄντων ἡμῶν ἀσθενῶν ὁ Kard.Kaipoy 
for 3still é6Christ 7being we ‘twithoutSstrength in due time 
« ’ ~ ? , , 5) « \ , 
ὑπὲρ ἀσεβῶν ἀπέθανεν. 7 μόλις. γὰρ ὑπὲρ δικαίου 
for [the] ungodly died. For hardly for ajust [man] 
τις ἀποθανεῖται ὑπὲρ.γὰρ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ τάχα τις 
2any%one ‘will die; for on behalf of the good [man] perhaps some one 
καὶ τολμᾷ ἀποθανεῖν. 8 συνίστησιν.δὲ τὴν. ἑαυτοῦ ἀγάπην 
even might dare to die; . but 7commends %his town love 
εἰς ἡμᾶς {6 θεός," ὅτι ἔτι ἁμαρτωλῶν ὄντων ἡμῶν χριστὸς 
Sto ζᾳ.8 1God, that ?still “sinners 3being ‘we Christ 
ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν ἀπέθανεν. 9 πολλῷ οὖν μᾶλλον, δικαιωθέντες 
2for us died. Much therefore more, having been justified 
νῦν ἐν τῷ.αἵματι.αὐτοῦ, σωθησόμεθα δι’ αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς 
ΠΟΥ͂ by his blood, we shall be saved by him from 
ὀργῆς. 10 εἰ γὰρ ἐχθροὶ ὄντες κατηλλάγημεν τῷ θεῷ διὰ 
wrath. For if, enemies *being we were reconciled to God through 


τοῦ θανάτου τοῦ υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ, πολλῷ μᾶλλον καταλλαγέντες 
the death of his Son, much more, having been reconciled 


σωθησόμεθα ἐν τῇ ζωῇ. αὐτοῦ" 11 ov.povor.dé, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
we shall be saved by his life. And not only [so}, but also 
καυχώμενοι ἐν τῷ θεῷ διὰ τοῦ κυρίου.ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, 
boasting in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, 
δι οὗ νῦν τὴν καταλλαγὴν ἐλάβομεν. 
through whom now the reconciliation we received. 
12 Διὰ τοῦτο ὥσπερ dv ἑνὸς ἀνθρώπου ἡ ἁμαρτία εἰς τὸν 
On this account, as by one man sin into the 
, 7 ~ ‘ ‘ ~ € , « ’ ‘ e 
κόσμον εἰσῆλθεν, Kai διὰ τῆς ἁμαρτίας ὁ θάνατος, Kai οὕτως 
world entered, and by sin death, and thus 
; , ? (4) , εἰ θά sll ὃ ΛΘ 9. ΡΣ, , 
εἰς πάντας ἀνθρώπους 80 θανατος" ὀιῆλθεν, εὐ -p πᾶντες 
to all men death passed, for that all 
ἥμαρτον. 18 ἄχρι.γὰρ νόμου ἁμαρτία ἦν ἐν κόσμῳ" 
sinned : (for until law sin was in [the] world; 
ἁμαρτία.δὲ οὐκ. ἐλλογεῖται, μὴ.ὄντος νόμου: 14 arn’! 
but sin is not put to account, there not being law ; but 
’ , € , ? a ? . , i , Π ΡΠ s 
ἐβασίλευσεν ὁ θάνατος ἀπὸ ᾿Αδὰμ μέχρι Μωσέως" καὶ ἐπὶ 
?reigned ‘death from Adam until Moses even upon 
τοὺς μὴ ἁμαρτήσαντας ἐπὶ τῷ ὁμοιώματι τῆς παραβάσεως 
those who had not sinned in the likeness ofthe transgression 


"Adam, ὕς ἐστιν τύπος τοῦ μέλλοντος. 15 ᾿Αλλ᾽ οὐ 


of Adam, who is a figure of the coming [one]. But [shall] not 
ὡς TO παράπτωμα, οὕτως καὶ τὸ χάρισμα." εἰ,γὰρ τῷ 
as the offence, so also [be]the free gift? Forif by the 


~ « 4a 2 « ‘ > , ~ ~ 
Tov ἑνὸς παραπτώματι οἱ πολλοὶ ἀπέθανον, πολλῷ μᾶλλον 
2of *the *one ‘offence tue many died, much more 


« , ~ ~ A gat 4 ᾽ , ~ wl eek 
ἡ χάρις τοῦ θεοῦ Kai ἡ δωρεὰ ἐν χάριτι TF τοῦ ενὸς 


the grace of God, andthe gift in grace, which [18] of the one 

ἀνθρώπου Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ εἰς τοὺς πολλοὺς ἐπερίσσευσεν. 
man Jesus Christ, to the “ many did abound, 

16 καὶ οὐχ ὡς Ot ἑνὸς ἁμαρτήσαντος τὸ δώρημα" 


And [shall] ποῦ as by one having sinned [be] the gift ? 


4d εἴ ye if indeed a. 


mends) a. 


& [ὃ θάνατος] A. 


e + ἔτι still GLTTraW. 


f — ὃ θεός (read συνίστησιν he com- 
Β ἀλλὰ TTraAw. 


i Μωύσέως GLTTrAW. k The 


various Editors do not mark this as a question : to read tt as pointed in the Greek omit [shall] 
and substitute [is] for [be]. 


V, VI. ROMANS. 


τὸ. μὲν γὰρ κρῖμα ἐξ ἑνὸς εἰς κατάκριμα, τὸ.δὲ χάρισμα 
For the *indeed ‘judgment[was) of one to condemnation, but the free gift 


ἐκ πολλῶν παραπτωμάτων εἰς δικαίωμα. 17 εἰ. γὰρ τῷ 
[is] of many offences to justification. For if by the 


TOU ἑνὸς παραπτώματι: “άνατος ἐβασίλευσεν διὰ τοῦ ἑνός, 
30 =the *one offence death reigned by the one, 


πολλῷ μᾶλλον οἱ THY περισσείαν τῆς χάριτος Kai "τῆς 
much more those the abundance of grace, and ofthe 

δωρεᾶς" τῆς δικαιοσύνης λαμβάνοντες, ἐν ζωῇ βασιλεύσουσιν 
gift of righteousness receiving, in life shall reign 


διὰ τοῦ ἑνὸς ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ. 18”Apa οὖν we δι᾿ ἑνὸς παρα- 
by the one Jesus’ Christ:) so then as by one of- 


πτώματος εἰς πάντας ἀνθρώπους εἰς κατάκριμα, 
fence (it aes towards all men to condemnation, 


οὕτως καὶ Ov ἑνὸς δικαιώματος εἰς πάντας ἀνθρώ- 
s0 also by one accomplished Se towards all men 


πους εἰς δικαίωσιν ζωῆς. 19 ὥσπερ.γὰρ διὰ τῆς παρακοῆς 
to justification of life. For as by the disobedience 


τοῦ ἑνὸς ἀνθρώπου ἁμαρτωλοὶ κατεστάθησαν οἱ πολλοί, 
of the one man ‘sinners *were ‘constituted *the many, 


οὕτως καὶ διὰ τῆς ὑπακοῆς τοῦ ἑνὸς δίκαιοι κατασταθήσονται 
50 also by the obedience of the one ‘righteous *shall ‘be Sconstituted 


οἱ πολλοί. 20 Νόμος.δὲ παρεισῆλθεν, ἵνα πλεονάσῃ τὸ 


"the ng Butlaw came in By the bye, that might abound the 
παράπτωμα. οὗ-.δὲ ἐπλεόνασεν ἡ ἁμαρτία, ὑπερεπερίσσευσεν 
offence ; but where abounded - sin, overabounded 


ἡ χάρις" 21 ἵνα ὥσπερ ἐβασίλευσεν 3} ἁμαρτία ἐν τῷ θανάτῳ, 
hat 


grace, t as 7reigned *sin in death, 
οὕτως Kai ἡ χάρις βασιλεύσῃ διὰ δικαιοσύνης εἰς ζωὴν 
sO also grace might reign through righteousness to life 
αἰώνιον, διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ τοῦ. κυρίου ἡμῶν. 
eternal, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 


6 Τί οὖν ἐροῦμεν ; "ἐπιμενοῦμεν" τῇ ἁμαρτίᾳ ἵνα ἡ χάρις 
What then shall we sn: Shall we continue insin that oe 


πλεονάσῃ; 2 μὴ.γένοιτο. οἵτινες. ἀπεθάνομεν τῇ ἁμαρτίᾳ, 
may abound ? May it not ke! We who died to sin, 


πῶς ἔτι ζήσομεν ἐν αὐτῇ; 3 7 ἀγνοεῖτε ὅτι ὕσοι 
how still shallwelivein it? Or are ye ignorant that *as “many ‘as 


ἐβαπτίσθημεν εἰς χριστὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν, εἰς τὸν. θάνατον αὐτοῦ 
lwe were baptized unto Christ Jesus, unto his death 


ἐβαπτίσθημεν ; 4 συνετάφημεν οὖν αὐτῷ διὰ τοῦ βαπ- 
we were baptized? We were a therefore with him by bap- 
τίσματος εἰς τὸν θάνατον᾽ ἵνα ὥσπερ ἠγέρθη χριστὸς 
tism unto The death, that as 2was “raised * oy *Christ 
ἐκ γεκρῶν διὰ τῆς δόξης τοῦ πατρός, οὕτως καὶ 


from wii [the] dead by the glory of the Father, 50 also 
ἡμεῖς ἐν καινότητι ζωῆς περιπατήσωμεν. 5 Ei -γὰρ σύμφυτοι 
we in newness of life should walk. Forif conjoined 
γεγόναμεν τῷ ὁμοιώματι τοῦ.θανάτου.αὐτοῦ, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
᾽ have become in the likeness of his death, ΕΟ also 


τῆς.ἀναστάσεως ἐσόμεθα" 6 τοῦτο γινώσκοντες, OTL ὁ παλαιὸς 


of (his) resurrection we ΠΣ be; this knowing, ἀπο: Ξο1ἃ 
ἡμῶν ἄνθρωπος συνεσταυρώθη. ἵνα καταργηθῇ τὸ σῶμα 
‘our man was crucified with [him], that might be annulled the Ἔδην 


τ [τῆς δωρεᾶς] L. 


418 


by one to condemna- 

tion, but the free gift 

is of Many offences 
unto justification. 
17 For if by one man’s 
offence death reigned 
by one; much more 
they which receive a- 
bundance of grace and 
of the gift of right- 
eousness shall reign in 
life by one, Jesus 
Christ.) 18 Therefore 
as by the offence of 
onejudgment came up- 
onall men to con- 
demnation; even so 
by the righteous sess 
of one the free gift 
came upon all meu un- 
to justification of life, 
19 For as by one man’s 
disobedience many 
were made sinners, so 
by the obedience of one 
shall many be made 
righteous. 20 More- 
over the law entered, 
that the offence might 
abound. But where sin 
abounded, grace did 
much more abound: 
21 that as sin hath 
reigned unto death, 
even so might grace 
reign through right- 
eousness unto eternal 
life by Jesus Christ 
our Lord. 


Vi. What shall we 
say then? Shall we 
continue in sin, that 
grace may abound? 
2 God forbid. How 
shall we, that are dead 
to sin, live any longer 
therein? 3 Know ye 
not, that so many of 
us as were baptized 
into Jesus Christ were 
baptized into his 
death ἢ 4 Therefore we 
are buried with him 
by baptism into death: 
that like as Christ was 
raised up from the 
dead by the glory of 
the Father, even «0 
we also should walk 
in newness of life. 
5 For if we have been 
planted together in 
the likeness of his 
death, we shall be also 
in the likeness of his 
resurrection : 6 know- 
ing this, that our old 
man is crucified with 
him, that the body of 
sin might be destroyed, 


0 ἐπιμένωμεν Should we continue GLTTrAW. 


414 


that henceforth we 
should not serve sin, 
7 For he that is dead 
is freed from sin. 
3 Now if we be dead 
with Christ, we believe 
that we shall also live 
with him: 9 knowing 
thatChrist being raised 
from the dead dieth no 
more; death hath no 
more dominion over 
him. 10 For in that 
he died, he died unto 
sin once: but in that 
he liveth, he liveth 
unto God. 11 Like- 
wise reckon ye also 
yourselves to be 
dead indeed unto sin, 
but alive unto God 
through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. 12 Let not 
sin therefore reign in 
your mortal body,that 
ye should obey it in 
the lusts thereof. 
13 Neither yield ye 
your members as in- 
strumenis of unright- 
eousness unto sin: but 
yield yourselves unto 
God, as those that are 
alive from the dead, 
and your members as 
instruments of right- 
cousness unto God. 
14 For sin shall not 
have dominion over 
you: for ye are not 
under the law, but un- 
der grace. 

15 What then? shali 
we sin, because we are 
not under the law, but 
under grace? God 
forbid. 16 Know ye 
not, that to whom ye 
yield yourselves ser- 
vants to obey, his ser- 
yvants ye are to whom 
ye obey ; whether of 
sin unto death, or of 
obedience unto right- 
eousness? 17 But God 
be thanked, that ye 
were the servants of 
sin, but ye have o- 
beyed from the heart 
that form of doctrine 
which was delivered 
you. 18 Being then 
made free from sin, 
ye became the ser- 
vants of righteous- 
ness. 19 I speak after 
the manner of men 
because of the infirmi- 
ty of your flesh: for 
as ye have yielded 
your members ser- 
vants to uncleanness 
and to iniquity unto 
inianisy, ; even so now 
yield your members 
servants to righteous- 
ness unto holiness, 


20 For when ye were 


° συνζ- LTTrA, 


κυρίῳ ἡμῶν GLTTrAW. 
κα ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. 


LTTrA, 


Vi. 
ἡμᾶς τῇ ἁμαρτίᾳ. 


‘we to sin. 


iM POLS ΒΟΣΥΜ ΟΣ ΥΕΣ. 
τῆς ἁμαρτίας, τοῦ μηκέτι δουλεύειν 
of sin, that *no “longer “06 Ssubservient 
7 ὁ γὰρ ἀποθανὼν δεδικαίωται ἀπὸ τῆς ἁμαρτίας. & Ei.dé 
For ha that died has been justified from sin. Now if 
ἀπεθάνομεν σὺν χριστῷ, πιστεύομεν ὅτι Kai “συζήσομεν" 
we died with Christ, we believe that also we shall live with 
αὐτῷ, 9 εἰδότες OTL χριστὸς ἐγερθεὶς ἐκ 
him, knowing that Christ having been raised up from among [the] 
νεκρῶν, οὐκέτι ἀποθνήσκει" θάνατος αὐτοῦ οὐκέτι κυριεύει. 
dead, no more dies : death him ‘no 7more 2rules *over. 
10 Ρὸ" γὰρ ἀπέθανεν, τῇ ἁμαρτίᾳ ἀπέθανεν ἐφάπαξ. Ῥὸ" δὲ 


For ἴῃ that δ died, to sin he died once for all; but inthat 
ζῇ, Sy τῷ θεῷ. 11 οὕτως καὶ ὑμεῖς λογίζεσθε ἑαυτοὺς 4 
he lives, he lives to God. So also ye reckon yourselves 


γεκροὺς μὲν τεῖναι" τῇ ἁμαρτίᾳ, ζῶντας.δὲ τῷ θεῷ, ἐν χριστῷ 
δᾷραά ‘indeed 'to *be to sin, but alive to God, in Christ 

? ~s ~ , G ~ Π \ > , ει ὃς ΄ 
Τησοῦ "τῷ.κυρίῳ.ημῶν." 12 Μὴ οὖν βασιλευέτω ἡ ἁμαρτία 
Jesus our Lord. “Not *therefore ‘let reign $sin 

ἐν τῷ θνητῷ ὑμῶν σώματι, εἰς τὸ ὑπακούειν ᾿αὐτῇ év' "ταῖς 

in your mortal body, for to obey it in 

? θ ΄ ᾽ rll 4 ’ 4 f « ~ er 

ἐπιθυμίαις.αὐτοῦ"" 13 μηδὲ παριστάνετε τὰ. μέλη.ὑμῶν ὅπλα 

its desires. Neither be yielding your members instruments 


᾿ς ἀδικίας τῇ ἁμαρτίᾳ: ἀλλὰ παραστήσατε ἑαυτοὺς τῷ 
of unrighteousness to sin, but yield yourselves 
θεῷ τὼς" ἐκ νεκρῶν ζῶντας, καὶ τὰ.μέλη.ὑμῶν 
toGod as from “among [*the] °dead ‘alive, and your members 
ὅπλα δικαιοσύνης τῷ θεῷ. 14 ἁμαρτία.γὰρ ὑμῶν οὐ 
instruments of righteousness to God. For sin you “ποῦ 
κυριεύσει’ οὐγάρ ἐστε ὑπὸ νόμον, *adX’! ὑπὸ χάριν. 


‘shall *rule tover, for *not *are*ye under but under grace. 


οὐκιἐσμὲν ὑπὸ νόμον, 


law, 
15 Τί οὖν ; γἁμαρτήσομεν" ὅτι 


What then ? shall we sin because wearenot under law 
xZ "} ς 4 , \ , > ” er 
ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ χάριν; μὴ-γένοιτο. 16 οὐκ.οἴδατε Ort 
but under grace? May it not be! Know ye not that to whom 


παριστάνετε ἑαυτοὺς δούλους εἰς ὑπακοήν, δοῦλοί ἔστε 
ye yield yourselves bondmen for obedience, bondmen ye are 
ᾧ ὑπακούετε, ἤτοι ἁμαρτίας εἰς θάνατον, ἢ ὑπακοῆς 
to him whom ye obey, whether ΟΥ̓ βίῃ to death, or of obedience 
? A , ~ ~ « = ~ ~ 
εἰς δικαιοσύνην ; 17 χάρις.δὲ τῷ θεῷ, ὅτι ἦτε δοῦλοι τῆς 
to righteousness ὃ But thanks [be] to God, that ye were bondmen 
ἁμαρτίας, ὑπηκούσατε.δὲ ἐκ καρδίας εἰο ὃν παρεδόθητε 
of sin, but ye obeyed from [the] heart ‘to*which ye *were °delivered 
, Ὁ ? , LY 2 A ~ « ΄ 
τύπον διδαχῆς. 18 ἐλευθερωθέντες. δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ἁμαρτίας, 
la *form “of *teaching. And having been set free fgom sin, 
ἐδουλώθητε TH δικαιοσύνῃ. 19 ᾿Ανθρώπινον λέγω διὰ 


ye became bondmen to righteousness. Humanly I speakon account of 
τὴν ἀσθένειαν τῆς.σαρκὸς ὑμῶν. ὥσπερ.γὰρ παρεστήσατε 
the weakness of your flesh. For as ye yielded 


τὰ μέλη.ὑμῶν δοῦλα τῇ ἀκαθαρσίᾳ Kai τῇ ἀνομίᾳ εἰς τὴν 
your members in bondage to uncleanness and _ to Jawlessness unto 
ἀνομίαν, οὕτως νῦν παραστήσατε τὰ.-μέλη. ὑμῶν δοῦλα TY 


lawlessness, so now yield your members in bondage 
’ ᾽ ς , ee 4 ~ F ~ 
δικαιοσύνῃ εἰς ἁγιασμόν. 20 ὕτε.γὰρ δοῦλοι ἦτε τῆς 
to righteousness unto sanctification. For when bondmen ye were 
POE. 4 + εἶναι to be Ἱ{τι]. ¥ — εἶναι GLTTrAW. 5— τῷ 
t — αὐτῇ ἐν GLTTrAW. ¥ — ταῖς ἐπιθυμίαις αὐτοῦ α. τ ὡσεὶ 


Y ἁμαρτήσωμεν should we sin LtTraw. 


MEVVIL ROMANS. 

ἁμαρτίας, ἐλεύθεροι ἦτε τῇ δικαιοσύνῃ. 21 τίνα οὖν 
of sin, free ye were as to righteousness. What *therefore 

καρπὸν εἴχετε τότε," ἐφ᾽ οἷς viv ἐπαισχύνεσθε: 
fruit had ye then, inthe([things)of which now ye are ashamed? 

τὸ" γὰρ τέλος ἐκείνων θάνατος. 22 νυνὶ. δὲ ἐλευθερω- 
for the end οὗ those things [is] death. But now having been 


θέντες ἀπὸ τῆς ἁμαρτίας, 
set free from sin, 


δουλωθέντες.δὲ τῷ θεῷ, ἔχετε 
and having become bondmen ἰο God, ye have 
τὸν καρπὸν. ὑμῶν εἰς ἁγιασμόν, τὸ.δὲ τέλος ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 
your fruit unto sanctification, andthe end life eternal. 
23 τὰ.γὰρ ὀψώνια τῆς ἁμαρτίας θάνατος" τὸ.δὲ χάρισμα 
For the wages of sin |is) death; but the free gift 
τοῦ θεοῦ ζωὴ αἰώνιος ἐν χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ τῷ. κυρίῳ.ἡμῶν. 
of God life eternal in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
an > ~ ? , , 4 , ~ o 
7 Ἢ ἀγνοεῖτε, ἀδελφοί, γινώσκουσιν.γὰρ νόμον λαλῶ, ore 
Are yeignorant, brethren, for to those knowing law  Ispeak, that 
ὁ νόμος κυριεύει τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἐφ’ ὕσον χρόνον Cy ; 


the law rules over the man for aslong “as ‘time -he may live? 
2 ἡ-γὰρ ὕπανδρος γυνὴ τῷ ζῶντι ἀνδρὶ δέδεται νόμῳ" 
For the married- woman tothe living husband is bound by law; 
ἐὰν.δὲ ἀποθάνῃ ὁ ἀνὴρ κατήργηται ἀπὸ *rov νόμου τοῦ 
butif should die the husband, sheiscleared from the law _ of the 
ἀνδρός. 3 ἄρα. οὖν ζῶντος Tov ἀνδρὸς μοιχαλὶς χρηματίσει, 


husband : sothen, “living ‘the husband, anadulteress she shall be called, 
ἐὰν γένηται ἀνδρὶ ἑτέρῳ' ἐὰν.δὲ ἀποθάνῃ ὁ ἀνήρ, ἐλευθέρα 
if shebe to?man'another; butif should die the husband, free 
ἐστὶν ἀπὸ τοῦ νόμου, τοῦ.μὴ.εἶναι.αὐτὴν μοιχαλίδα, γενο- 
sheis from the law, soasforhernottobe an adulteress, having 
pest ἀνδρὶ ἑτέρῳ. 4 ὥστε, ἀδελφοί. μου, Kai ὑμεῖς ἐθανατώ- 
come ἴο “ἤδη ‘another. Sothat, πὰ brethren, also ye were made 
Onre τῷ νόμῳ διὰ τοῦ σώματος τοῦ χριστοῦ, εἰς TO γενέσθαι 
dead tothe law by the body of the Christ, for 7to *be 
ὑμᾶς ἑτέρῳ, τῷ ἐκ νεκρῶν ἐγερθέντι, ἵνα καρπο- 
1you toanother, who from among [6] dead was raised, that weshould 


φορήσωμεν τῷ θεῷ. 5 breyap ἦμεν ἐν τῇ σαρκί, τὰ παθή- 


bring forth fruit το God. For when we were in the flesh, the pas- 
ματα τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν τὰ διὰ τοῦ νόμου ἐνηργεῖτο ἐν 
sions of sins, which[were]through the law, wrought in 


τοὶς.μέλεσιν.ἡμῶν εἰς TO καρποφορῆσαι τῷ θανάτῳ" 6 νυνὶ. δὲ 
our members to the bringing forth fruit to death ; but now 
κατηργήθημεν ἀπὸ τοῦ νόμου, “ἀποθανόντες ἐν κατει- 
we werecleared from the law, having died [in that)in which we were 
χόμεθα, ὥστε δουλεύειν "ἡμᾶς" ἐν καινότητι πνεύματος, καὶ 


held, so that *should “serve ‘we in newness of spirit, and 
οὐ παλαιότητι γράμματος. 
not in oldness of letter. 

7 Tic οὖν ἐροῦμεν: ὁ νόμος ἁμαρτία; μὴ. γένοιτο" 


What then shall wesay? [Is]the law sin ? May it not be! 
ἀλλὰ τὴν ἁμαρτίαν οὐκ. ἔγνων εἰ.μὴ διὰ νόμου" THY.Te-yap 
But sin lknew not nunless by law: for also 
ἐπιθυμίαν οὐκδειν εἰμὴ ὁ νόμος ἔλεγεν, Οὐκ 
lust I had not been conscious of unless the law said, 3Not 
ἐπιθυμήσεις" ὃ ἀφορμὴν.δὲ λαβοῦσα ἡ ἁμαρτία διὰ τῆς 


‘thou *shalt lust ; but “an *occasion *having *taken sin by the 


415 


the servants of sin, ye 
were free from right- 
eousness. 21 What 
fruit had ye then in 
those things whereof 
ye are now ashamed P 
for the end of thocve 
things ὦ death. 22 But 
now being made free 
trom sin, and become 
servants to God, ye 
have your fruit unto 
holiness, and the end 
everlasting life. 23 For 
the wages of sin é 
death ; but the gift of 
God «# eternal life 
through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. 

VII. Know ye not, 
brethren, (for 1 speak 
to them that know 
the law,) how that 
the law hath domi- 
nion over a Man as 
long as he liveth? 
2 For the woman 
which hath an hus- 
band is bound by the 
law to her husbané so 
long as heliveth; but 
if the husband be 
dead, she is loosed 
from the law of her 
husband. 3So then 
if, while her husband 
liveth, she be married 
to another man, she 
shall be called an a- 
dulteress: but if her 
husband be dead, she 
is free from that law; 
so that she is no adul- 
teress, though she be 
married to another 
man. 4 Wherefore, my 
brethren, ye also are 
become dead to the 
law by the body cf 
Christ; that yeshould 
be married to another, 
even to him who is 
raised from the dead, 
that we should bring 
forth fruit unto God. 
5 For when we were in 
the flesh, the motions 
of sins, which were by 
the law, did work in 
our members to bring 
forth fruit unto death. 
6 But now we are de- 
livered from the law, 
that being dead where- 
in we were held; that 
we should serve in 
newness of spirit, and 
not im the oldness of 
the letter. 

7 What shall we say 
then? 118 thelaw sin? 
God forbid. Nay, I 
had not known sin, 
but by the law: for i 
had not known lust, 
except the law had 
said, Thou shalt not 
covet. & But sin, 


2; the question ends at then LTa. 


5. + μὲν indeed La. 


© ἀποθανόντος (read as A.V.) Ε. 4 [ἡμᾶς} LTr. 


Ὁ — τοῦ νόμου FE. 


4185 
taking occasion by 
the commandment, 


wrought in me all 
manner of concupis- 
cence. For without 
the law sin was dead. 
9 For I was alive 
without the law once: 
but when the com- 
mandment came, sin 
revived, and I died. 
19 And the command- 
ment, which was or- 
dained to life, I found 
to be unto death. 
11 For sin, taking oc- 
casion by the com- 
mandment, deceived 
me, and by itslew me. 
12 Wherefore the law 
is holy, and the com- 
mandment holy, and 
just, andgood. 13 Was 
then that which is 
good made death unto 
me? God forbid. But 
sin, that it might 
appear sin, working 
death in me by that 
which is good; that 
sin by the com- 
mandment might be- 
come exceeding sinful. 
14 For we know that 
the law is spiritual: 
but I am carnal, sold 
under sin. 15 For that 
which I do I allow 
not: for what I would, 
that do 1 not; but 
what I hate, that do 
I. 16 If then I do 
that which I would 
not, I consent unto 
the law that ἐξ ws 
good. 17 Now then it 
is no more 1 that do 
it, but sin that dwell- 
eth in me.18For I know 
that in me (that is, in 
my flesh,) dwelleth no 
good thing: for to will 
is present with me; but 
how to perform that 
which is good 1 find 
not. 19 For the good 
that I would I do not: 
but the evil which 1 
would not, that I do. 
20 Now if I do that 
I would not, it is 
no more [I that do 
it, but sin that dwell- 
eth in me. 211 find 
then a law, that,when 
I would do good, evil 
is present with me, 
22 For I delight in the 
law of God after the 
inward man: 23 but I 
gee another law in my 


i POS VEGA OY Σ. ὙΠ 
ἐντολῆς "κατειργάσατο" ἐν ἐμοὶ πᾶσαν ἐπιθυμίαν. χωρὶς.γὰρ 
commandment worked out in me_ every lust ; for apart from 
νόμου ἁμαρτία νεκρά" 9 ἐγὠ.δὲ ἔζων χωρὶς νόμου 
law sin (was) dead. ButI wasalive apartfrom law 
, ᾽ ~ ~ , 
ποτέ ἐλθούσης.δὲ τῆς ἐντολῆς, ἡ ἁμαρτία ἀνέζησεν, ἐγὼ.δὲ 
once; but having come the commandment, sin revived, but I 
᾽ , 5 ‘ « a c ᾽ Α ε 
ἀπέθανον" 10 καὶ εὑρέθη μοι ἢ ἐντολὴ ἡ 
died. And was found to me [that] the commandment which [was] 
εἰς ζωήν, ἰαὕτη!" εἰς θάνατον. 11 ἡ.γὰρ.ἁμαρτία ἀφορμὴν 
to life, this [tobe] to death : for sin ΞΔ ἢ “occasion 
λαβοῦσα διὰ τῆς ἐντολῆς ἐξηπάτησέν με, καὶ Ov αὐτῆς 


‘having "taken by thecommandment, deceived me, and by it 
ἀπέκτεινεν. 12 ὥστε ὑ-μὲν.νόμος ἅγιος, Kai ἡ ἐντολὴ 
slew {me}. Sothat the lawindeed [is] holy, and thecommandment 


ayia καὶ δικαία καὶ ἀγαθή. 18 Τὸ οὖν ἀγαθὸν ἐμοὶ 

holy and just and good. That which then [is] good, to me 
g la Π θά 3 4 es e Βάλλὰ! - « ΄ ev 
yéyover' θάνατος ; μῆ-γξγοιτο ἄλλα ἢ apapria, iva 


has it become death ? May it not be! But sin, that 
φανῇ ἁμαρτία, διὰ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ μοι κατεργαξομενῆ 
it might appear sin, by that which{is] good tome working out 


θάνατον,ἵνα γένηται καθ᾽ ὑπερβολὴν ἁμαρτωλὸς ἡ ἁμαρτία 
death ; that might *become *excessively *sinful sin 

διὰ τῆς ἐντολῆς. 14 Οἴδαμεν.γὰρ Ore ὁ νόμος πνευματικός 
by the commandment. For weknow thatthe law spiritual 

ἐστιν" ἐγὼ.δὲ ἱσαρκικός" εἶμι, πεπραμένος ὑπὸ τὴν ἁμαρτίαν. 
is ; but I 2fleshly ‘am, having been sold under sin, 


15 ὃ.γὰρ κατεργάζομαι, οὐ-.γινώσκω" ob.yap ὃ θέλω, τοῦτο 


For what I work out, Ido not own: for not what Iwill, this 
΄ e ? ? a » ~ ~ a n > , 
πράσσω" ἀλλ᾽ ὃ μισῶ, τοῦτο ποιῶ. 16.08 ὃ οὐ.θέλω, 
Ido; but what [hate, this I practise. But if what I do not will, 


τοῦτο ποιῶ, Ἐσύμφημι" τῷ νόμῳ Ore καλός. 17 νυνὶ δὲ 
this ΙΤρτγαοίίβθ, Ieconsent tothe law that [1ὖ 18] right. Now then 
οὐκέτι ἐγὼ κατεργάζομαι αὐτό, ‘add’! ἡ ποἰκοῦσα" ἐν ἐμοὶ 
nolonger “I ‘am working “out ‘it; but the dwelling “in ‘me 
ες Ἷ 18 ΟἹ ᾿ e ᾽ ᾽ ~ 3 ᾽ 7 in , Π ? 
αἀμαρτια. a.yap OTt OUVK.OLKEL ἐν épol, TOUTEOTLY ἐν 
tsin For I know that theredwells notin me, that is in 
τῇ-.σαρκί.μου, ἀγαθόν: τὸ. γὰρ.θέλειν παράκειταί μοι, τὸ δὲ 
my flesh, good: for to will is present with me, but 
κατεργάζεσθαι τὸ καλὸν “οὐχ.εὑρίσκω." 19 οὐ.γὰρ ὃ θέλω 
to work out the right I find not, For not what 71 *will 
~ ᾽ , σ᾿ Ρ ? ij τ᾿ ᾽ . ’ ~ ’ 
ποιῶ ἀγαθόν" Padd’' ὃ οὐ-.θέλω κακόν, τοῦτο πράὰσ- 
‘do 5I practise ‘good; but what 7I *do “πού *will ‘evil, this I do. 
ow. 20 εἰἰδὲ ὃ οὐ-.θέλω “ἐγώ," τοῦτο ποιῶ, οὐκέτι 
But if what *do*not*will ‘TI, this I practise, [it is] no longer 
ἐγὼ κατεργάζομαι αὐτό, Ῥάλλ᾽" ἡ οἰκοῦσα ἐν ἐμοὶ ἁμαρτία. 
I [who] work 7out lit, but the *dwelling *in *me *sin. 
21 Εὑρίσκω dpa τὸν νόμον τῷ θέλοντι ἐμοὶ ποιεῖν τὸ καλόν, 
Ifind then the law “who ‘will ‘tome topractisethe right, 
ὅτι ἐμοὶ τὸ κακὸν παράκειται. 22 συνήδομαι.γὰρ τῷ νόμῳ 
that me evil is present with. For I delight inthe law 


τοῦ θεῦῦ κατὰ τὸν ἔσω ἄνθρωπον: 28 βλέπω.δὲ ἕτερον 
of God according to the inward man: but Isee another 


a ee SS Ee --ς--.-.-.-.-ς-ς-:--ε---ς---.--------ο-ς- 


_ © κατηργάσατο TTrA. 
i σάρκινός fleshy GLITraW. 
ο οὔ [is] not Lrtra. 


ἔστιν GT. 
Ltr[A]w. 


& ἐγένετο did it become LTTraw. ἃ ἀλλ᾽ La. 
Ι ἀλλὰ LTTrA. 0 ἐνοικοῦσα T. 0 τοῦτ᾽ 
ᾳ -- ἐγώ (read ov θέλω I do not will) 


f αὐτὴ GW. 
k σύν- T. 
Ρ ἀλλὰ TTrA. 


Vi VIIT. ROMANS. 


νόμον ἐν τοῖς. μέλεσίν.μου ἀντιστρατευόμενον τῷ νόμῳ TOU 
law in my members warring against the law 

νοός μου, Kai αἰχμαλωτίζοντά pet τῷ νόμῳ τῆς ἁμαρτίας 

of my mind, and leading ?captive me tothe law of sin 


we ? ~ , ΄ὔ ΄ὔ ? ‘ » Ἢ 
τῷ ὄντι ἐν τοῖς. μέλεσίν. μου. 24 ταλαίπωρος ἐγὼ ἄνθρωπος 


which is in my members. O wretched zl tman ! 
τίς μὲ ῥύσεται ἐκ τοῦ σώματος τοῦ.θανάτου.τούτου; 
who *me 'shall “θ᾽ σοῦ out of the body of this death ? 


25 "εὐχαριστῶ" τῷ θεῷ διὰ ᾿Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ τοῦ. κυρίου. ἡμῶν᾽ 


I thank God through Jesus’ Christ our Lord. 
ἄρα.οὖὗν αὐτὸς ἐγὼ τῷ ‘pév' vot δουλεύω νόμῳ θεοῦ" 
Sothen *myself I withthe ?indeed ‘mind serve 7law ‘God’s; 

TH-0& σαρκὶ νόμῳ ἁμαρτίας. 


but with the flesh 
8 Ovdéiv.dpa.viy κατάκριμα τοῖς ἐν χριστῷ ‘In οὔ, "μὴ 
(There is] then now no condemnation tothose in Christ Jesus, “not 
κατὰ σάρκα περιπατοῦσιν, ἀλλὰ κατὰ πνεῦμα." 2 ὁ.γὰ 
“according Sto flesh twho ?walk, but according to Spirit. For the 
νόμος τοῦ πνεύματος τῆς ζωῆς ἐν χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ ἠλευθέρωσέν 
law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus set *free 
“pel ἀπὸ τοῦ νόμου τῆς ἁμαρτίας Kai τοῦ θανάτου. 3 TO γὰρ 
me from the law of sin and of death. For 
ἀδύνατον τοῦ νόμου, ἐνῷ ἠσθένει διὰ τῆς σαρκός, 
*powerless [*being]'the 7law, inthat it was weak through the esh, 
ὁ θεὸς τὸν. ἑαυτοῦ υἱὸν πέμψας ἐν ὁμοιώματι σαρκὸς ἁμαρτίας 
God, *his*own 5Son "having sent, in likeness’ of flesh of sin, 
Kai περὶ ἁμαρτίας κατέκρινεν τὴν ἁμαρτίαν ἐν τῇ σαρκί, 4 ἵνα 
and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that 
TO δικαίωμα τοῦ νόμον πληρωθῇ ἐν ἡμῖν, τοῖς μὴ κατὰ 
the requirement ofthe law should be fulfilled in us, who notaccordingto 
σάρκα περιπατοῦσιν, ἀλλὰ κατὰ πνεῦμα. 5 Οἱ γὰρ 
flesh walk, but according to Spirit. For they that 
κατὰ σάρκα ὄντες, τὰ τῆς σαρκὸς φρονοῦσιν" οἱ.δὲ 
according to flesh are, the thingsofthe flesh mind ; and they 
κατὰ πνεῦμα, Ta τοῦ πνεύματος. 6 τὸ.γὰρ φρόνημα 
according to Spirit, thethings ofthe Spirit. For the min 
τῆς σαρκὸς θάνατος" τὸ.δὲ φρόνημα τοῦ πνεύματος, ζωὴ 
ofthe flesh [is] death; but the mind of the Spirit, life 
καὶ εἰρήνη. 7 Διότι τὸ φρόνημα τῆς σαρκὸς ἔχθρα εἰς 
and peace. Because the mind ofthe flesh [18] enmity towards 
θεόν: τῷ.γὰρ νόμῳ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐχ.ὑποτάσσεται, οὐδὲ.γὰρ δύνα- 


“law 1sin’s. 


God: fortothe law of God it is not subject ; for neither can 
ται 8 οἱ δὲ ἐν σαρκὶ ὄντες, θεῷ ἀρέσαι οὐ.δύνανται. 
it [06]; andthey that *in “flesh tare, “God ‘please “cannot. 


9 Ὑμεῖς.δὲ οὐκ ἐστὲ ἐν σαρκί, "ἀλλ᾽" ἐν πνεύματι, εἴπερ 
Βαῦγα not ‘are in flesh, but in Spirit, if indeed [the] 
πνεῦμα θεοῦ οἰκεῖ ἐν ὑμῖν. e.d& τις πνεῦμα χριστοῦ 
Spirit οὗ God dwells in you; butif anyone([the) Spirit of Christ 
οὐκ ἔχει, οὗτος οὐκ.ἔστιν αὐτοῦ. 10 εἰ.δὲ χριστὸς ἐν ὑμῖν, τὸ 
has not, he is not of him: butif Christ [be]in you, the 
ἐν σῶμα νεκρὸν “δι! ἁμαρτίαν, τὸ. δὲ πνεῦμα ζωὴ 
“indeed ‘body [is] dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life 


διὰ δικαιοσύνην. 11 εἰ δὲ τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ ἐγείραντος 
on account of righteousness, But if the Spirit of him who raised up 


τ + ἐν in (the) Trr[a]. 
end of verse GLTTrAW. 


® χάρις thanks (to God) Lrtra. 


’ oe thee T. τ ἀλλὰ TTra. χα διὰ LTTra. 


t — μὲν Τ. 


417 


members, warring a- 
gainst the law of my 
mind, and bringing 
me into captivity to 
the law of sin which 
is in my members. 
24 O wretched man 
that I am! who shall 
deliver me from the 
body of this death? 
25 I thank God 
through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. So then 
with the mind I my- 
self serve the law of 
God; but with the 
flesh the law of sin. 
VIII. There is there- 
fore now no condem- 
nation to them which 
are in Christ Jesus, 
who walk not after 
the flesh, but after the 
Spirit. 2 For the law 


P of the Spirit of life 


in Christ Jesus hath 
made me free from 
the law of sin and 
death. 3 For what the 
law could not do, 
in that it was weak 
through the flesh, God 
sending his own Son 
in the likeness of sin- 
ful flesh, and for sin, 
condemned sin in the 
flesh : 4 that the right- 
eousness of the law 
might be fulfilled in 
us, who walk not after 
the flesh, but after the 
Spirit. 5 For they that 
are after the flesh do 
mind the things of 
the flesh; but they 
that are after the 
Spirit the things of 
the Spirit. 6For to be 
carnally minded ὦ 
death ; but to be spi- 
ritually minded ὦ life 
and peace. 7 Because 
the carnal mind ws 
enmity against God: 
for it ignot subject to 
the law of God, nei- 
ther indeed can be. 
8So then they that 
are in the flesh can- 
not please God. 9 But 
ye are not in the flesh, 
but in the Spirit, if so 
be that the Spirit of 
God dwell in you. 
Now if any man have 
not the Spirit of 
Christ, he is none of 
his. 10 And if Christ 
be in you, the body ὦ 
dead because of, sin ; 
but the Spirit ὦ life 
because of righteous- 
ness. 11 But if the 
Spirit of him that 
raised up Jesus from 
the dead dwell in 
you, he that rais- 
ed up Christ from 


ἃ — μὴ κατὰ to 
Υ + τὸν TTr[A]. 


EE 


418 


the dead shall also 
quicken your mortal 
bodies by his Spirit 
that dwelleth in you. 
12 Therefore, brethren, 
we are debtors, not to 
the fiesh, to live after 
the flesh. 13For if ye 
live after the flesh, ye 
shall die: but if ye 
through the Spirit do 
mortify the deeds of 
the body, ye shall 
live. 14 For as many 
as are led by the Spirit 
of God, they are the 
sons of God. 15 For 
ye have not received 
the spirit of bondage 
again to fear; but ye 
have received theSpirit 
of adoption, whereby 
we ery, Abba, Father. 
16 The Spirit itself 
beareth witness with 
our spirit, that we are 
the children of God: 
17 And if children, 
then heirs; heirs of 
God, and joint-heirs 
with Christ; if so be 
that we suffer with 
him, that we may be 
also glorified together, 


18 For I reckon that 
the sufferings of this 
present time are not 
worthy to becompared 
with the glory which 
shill be revealed in 
us. 19 Fortheearnest 
expectation of the 
creature waiteth for 
the manifestation of 
the sons of God. 
20 For the creature 
was made subject to 
vanity, not willingly, 
but by reason of him 
who hath subjected 
the same in hope, 
41 because the crea- 
ture itself also shall 
be delivered from the 
bondage of corruption 
into the glorious li- 
berty of the children 
of God. 22¥For we 
know that the whole 
creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain to- 
gether until now. 
23 And not only they, 
but ourselves also, 
which have the first- 
fruits of the Spirit, 
even δ ourselves 
groan within’ our- 
selves, waiting for the 
adoption, to wit, the 


ΠΡῸΣ ΚΕ ΟΣΝ ΑΘΓ OY Ss. 
) ~ ~ ῳ ἂν ε , τ 
Ιησοῦν ἐκ νεκρῶν οἰκεῖ ἐν ὑμῖν, ὁ ἐγείρας τὸν" 
Jesus from among{[the] dead dwells in you, he who raisedup_ the 
ἀχριστὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν" ζωοποιήσει καὶ τὰ θνητὰ σώματα 
Christ from among [86] dead will quicken also 7mortal “bodies 
ὑμῶν διὰ rd ἐνοικοῦν αὐτοῦ πνεῦμα" ἐν ὑμῖν. 12 Ἄρα 
your on account ef *that ‘dwells this ?Spirit in you. So 
a ? yet) ' ’ ‘ ᾽ ~ , ~ Η͂ ΄ 
οὖν, ἀδελφοί, ὀφειλέται ἐσμὲν οὐ τῇ σαρκί, τοῦ κατὰ σάρκα 
then, brethren, debtors weare, nottothe flesh, 2according *to *flesh 
ζῇν" 18 εἰγὰρ κατὰ σάρκα ζῆτε, μέλλετε ἀποθνήσκειν" 
to “live; for if according to flesh ye live, ye are about to die; 
el.0& πνεύματι Tac πράξεις TOY σώματος θανατοῦτε, ζήσεσθε. 
butif by [the] Spirit the deeds ofthe body yeput to death, ye νν11] live: 
-“ κω - ΄ὔ ᾽ εν Ζῳ, ~ 
14 Ὅσοι.γὰρ πνεύματι θεοῦ ἄγονται, οὗτοί “εἰσιν υἱοὶ θεοῦ." 
for as many as by [the] Spirit of God are led, these are sons of God. 
15 οὐ.γὰρ ἐλάβετε πνεῦμα Movreiac! πάλιν εἰς φόβον, arr’! 
For *not γε *received aspirit of bondage again unto fear, but 
ἐλ , ~ ε θ , ’ τ , ? ~ « , 
ἐλάβετε πνεῦμα υἱοθεσίας, ἐν.ᾧ κράζομεν, ᾿Αββᾶ, ὁ πατήρ. 
ye received aSpirit of adoption, whereby wecry, bba, Father. 
, 4 A ~ ~ ~ ~ « 
10 Αὐτὸ τὸ πνεῦμα ἰσυμμαρτυρεῖ" τῷ.πνεύματι.ἡμῶν, Ore 
ΞΤ(Β6 15 ‘the Spirit bears witness with our spirit, that 
5] A , ~ ᾽ " Ul ‘ , , 
ἐσμὲν τέκνα θεοῦ. 17 εἰ δὲ τέκνα, Kai κληρονόμοι" κληρονόμοι 
we are children of God. And if children, also heirs : heirs 
μὲν θεοῦ, ἰσυγκληρονόμοι" δὲ χριστοῦ" εἴπερ ἐσυμπάσχομεν," 
indeed of God, and joint-heirs of Christ ; if indeed we suffer together, 
ἵνα καὶ συνδοξασθῶμεν. 
that also we may be glorified together. 
18 Λογίζομαι.γὰρ ὅτι οὐκ ἄξια τὰ παθήματα τοῦ νῖν 
For I reckon that not worthy [are)the sufferings of the present 
~ ‘ A , , ? ~ 
καιροῦ πρὸς τὴν μέλλουσαν δόξαν ἀποκαλυφθῆναι 
time [to becompared] with the ?about lelory to be revealed 
εἰς ἡμᾶς. 19 ‘H-ydp ἀποκαραδοκία τῆς κτίσεως τὴν ἀποκά- 
to us. For the earnest expectation of the creation 7the Sreve- 
λυψιν τῶν υἱῶν τοῦ θεοῦ amexdéxyera. 20 TY-yap-paraornre 
lation ‘of ‘the °sons ΤΟΣ °God ‘awaits; for to vanity 
ἡ κτίσις ὑπετάγη, οὐχ ἑκοῦσα, ἀλλὰ διὰ τὸν ὑπο- 
the creation was subjected, not willingly, but by reasonof him who  sub- 


Vili 


, zg ἢ Π 2»: ? (ὃ iv’ {I ‘ ? ‘ « ,ὔ ? 
τάξαντα, én’! ἐλπίδι 21 ὅτι" καὶ αὐτὴ ἡ κτίσις ἐλευθερω- 
jected [1], in hope that also “itself *the “creation shall be 


θήσεται ἀπὸ τῆς iovdreiag' τῆς φθορᾶς εἰς THY ἐλευθερίαν 
freed from the bondage of corruption into the freedom 

τῆς δόξης τῶν τέκνων τοῦ θεοῦ. 22 οἴδαμεν.γὰρ OTL πᾶσα ἡ 
of the glory of the children of God. For we know that all the 
κτίσις βσυστενάζει! καὶ συνωδίνει ἄχρι Tov voy’ 23 οὐ 


creation groans together and travails together until now. *Not 
όνον δέ, ἀλλὰ Kai αὐτοὶ THY ἀπαρχὴν τοῦ πνεύματος 
Zonly ‘and([soj], but even ourselves the  first-fruit of the Spirit 


ἔχοντες, "καὶ ἡμεῖς" αὐτοὶ ἐν ἑαυτοῖς στενάζομεν, υἱοθεσίαν 
ving, also we ourselves *in “ourselves 1groan, ®adoption 


ἀπεκδεχόμενοι, τὴν ἀπολύτρωσιν τοῦ.σώὠώματος. ἡμῶν. 24 TY 


redemption of our 

body. 24For we are “awaiting— the redemption of our body. 

saved by hope: but va ry er ἫΝ δ ἢ ἢ ͵ Phen ts ἢ δέος 
hope that is seen is γὰρ. ἐλπίδι ἐσώθημεν: ἐλπὶς.δὲ βλεπομένη οὐκ. ἔστιν ἐλπίς 
not hope: for what a Forin hope we were saved; but hope seen is ποῦ hope ; 


Se ee -------ςς----ς-ςς.--ς-ς- ἐήἧ 


* — ov LTTrA. 


Ὁ τοῦ ἐνοικοῦντος αὐτοῦ πνεύματος (read as A.V.) ET. 
ε ἀλλὰ LTTrA. 


λίας τ. 


® χριστὸν [Ἰησοῦν] (Jesus) ἐκ νεκρῶν L; ἐκ νεκρῶν χριστὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν T. 
© υἱοί εἰσιν θεοῦ LITrAW. 4 δου- 
Β ἐφ᾽ τ. ἱ διότι τ. Jj δουλίας τ. 


f our- Ὁ. & συν- TA. 


k ἡμεῖς καὶ TA; [ἡμεῖς] καὶ LTr. 


VIII. ROMANS. 
ὃ. γὰρ βλέπει τις τί Meai' ἐλπίζει; 2 εἰδὲ ὃ οὐ 
for what sees ‘anyone why also does he hope for? But if what *not 


βλέπομεν ἐλπίζομεν, Ov ὑπομονῆς ἀπεκδεχόμεθα. 2 Ὡσαύτως 
we ?see we hopefor, in endurance we await. *In*like*manner 
δὲ καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα συναντιλαμβάγνεται "ταῖς. ἀσθενείαις" ἡμῶν" 
tand also the Spirit jointly helps our weaknesses ; 
τὸ γὰρ τί προσευξώμεθα καθὸ δεῖ, οὐκ.οἴδαμεν, "ἀλλ᾽" 
for that which we should pray for according as it behoves, we know not, but 
αὐτὸ τὸ πνεῦμα ὑπερεντυγχάνει Ῥὑπὲρ ἡμῶν" στεναγμοῖς 
‘itself 'the Spirit makes intercession for us with groanings 
ἀλαλήτοις" 27 ὁ. δὲ "ἐρευνῶν" τὰς καρδίας οἶδεν τί τὸ 
inexpressible But he who searches the hearts knows what [is] the 
φρόνημα τοῦ πνεύματος, ὅτι κατὰ θεὸν ἐντυγχάνει ὑπὲρ 
mind of the Spirit, because according to God heintercedes for 
ἁγίων. 28 Oidapev.dé ὅτι τοῖς ἀγαπῶσιν τὸν θεὸν πάντα 
saints. But we know that to those who love God all things 
τσυνεργεῖ" εἰς ἀγαθόν, τοῖς κατὰ πρόθεσιν κλητοῖς 
work together for good, tothose who according to purpose “called 
οὖσιν. 29 ὅτι οὃἣς προέγνω, καὶ προώρισεν συμμόρ- 


tare, Because whom he foreknew, also he predestinated [to be] conformed 
φους τῆς εἰκόνος τοῦ. υἱοῦ. αὐτοῦ, εἰς TO εἶναι αὐτὸν πρω- 
to the image of his Son, for 2to*be ‘him [the] first- 
τότοκον ἐν πολλοῖς ἀδελφοῖς 30 οὺς. δὲ προώρισεν, τούτους 
born among many brethren. But whom he predestinated, these 

Kai ἐκάλεσεν" Kai ode ἐκάλεσεν, τούτους Kai ἐδικαίωσεν: οὺς 
also hecalled; and whom he called, these also hejustified; *whom 


δὲ ἐδικαίωσεν, τούτους Kai ἐδόξασεν. 
‘but he justified, these also he glorified. 


31 Ti οὖν ἐροῦμεν πρὸς ταῦτα; εἰ ὁ θεὸς ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν, 
What then shall wesay to these things? If God [be] for us, 

τίς καθ᾽ ἡμῶν; 32 ὕς γε τοῦ ἰδίου.υἱοῦ οὐκ.ἐφείσατο, "ἀλλ᾽" 
who against us? Who indeed his own Son spared not, but 

ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν πάντων παρέδωκεν αὐτόν, πῶς οὐχὶ καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ 


for us all gave up him, how “not +also *with *him 
τὰ πάντα ἡμῖν χαρίσεται; 33 τίς ἐγκαλέσει κατὰ 
Yall'°things 8 ‘will he grant? Who shall bring an accusation against 
ἐκλεκτῶν θεοῦ ; θεὸς ὁ δικαιῶν. 84 τίς ὁ κατα- 
[the] elect of God ? [It is]God who justifies: who he that con- 
κρίνων; χριστὸς ᾿ ὁ ἀποθανών, μᾶλλον δὲ ᾿καὶ! ἐγερθείς, 
demns? ([Itis) Christ who αἰϊοᾶ, butrather also is raised up; 


ὃς καὶ" ἔστιν ἐν δεξιᾷ τοῦ θεοῦ. ὃς καὶ ἐντυγχάνει ὑπὲρ 
who also is at[the’right hand of God; who also _intercedes for 
ἡμῶν. 35 τίς ἡμᾶς χωρίσει ἀπὸ τῆς ἀγάπης τοῦ χριστοῦ; 
us: who 8 shallseparate from the love of Christ ? 
θλίψις, ἢ στενοχωρία, ἢ διωγμός, ἢ λιμός, ἢ γυμνότης, ἢ 
tribulation, or strait, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or 
κίνδυνος, ἢ μάχαιρα; 36 καθὼς γέγραπται, Ὅτι ἕνεκά" σου 
danger, or sword? According as it has been written, For thy sake 
θανατούμεθα ὕλην THY ἡμέραν᾽ ἐλογίσθημεν ὡς πρόβατα 
we are put to death *whole ‘the day ; we were reckoned as sheep 
σφαγῆς. 37 AAN ἐν τούτοις πᾶσιν ὑπερνικῶμεν διὰ 
of slaughter. But in these *things ‘all we more than overcome through 


πὶ — καὶ LTr[A]. 5 τῇ ἀσθενείᾳ (read our weakness) LTTrAW. 
P — ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν LTTrAW. 4 ἐραυνῶν TTr. 
5 ἀλλὰ LTTrA. t + Ἰησοῦς Jesus [L]T. 
GLTT+AW. 


’ — καὶ LTTr[a]. 


419 


man seeth, why doth 
he yet hope for? 25 But 
if we hope for that 
we see not, then do we 
with patience wait for 
wt, 26 Likewise the 
Spirit also helpeth our 
infirmities: for we 
know not what we 
should pray for as we 
ought: but the Spirit 
itself maketh inter- 
cession for us with 
groanings which can- 
not be uttered. 27 And 
he that searcheth the 
hearts knoweth what 
ts the mind of the 
Spirit, because he 
maketh intercession 
for the saints accord- 
ing to the will of God. 
28 And we know that 
all things work toge- 
ther for good to them 


that love God, to 
them who are the 
called according to 


his purpose. 29 For 
whom he did foreknow, 
he also did predesti- 
nate to be conformed to 
the image of his Son, 
that he might be the 
firstborn among many 
brethren. 30 Moreover 
whom he did predes- 
tinate, them he also 
called: and whom he 
called, them he also 
justified : and whom 
he justified, them he 
also glorified. 


31 What shall 
then say to these 
things? If God be 
for us, who can be 
against us? 32 He 
that spared not his 
own Son, but deliver- 
ed him up for us all, 
how shall he not with 
him also freely give us 
all things? 33Whoshall 
lay any thing to the 
charge of God’s elect ? 
[tis God that justifi- 
eth. 34 Who zs hethat 
condemneth? Jt is 
Christ that died, yea 
rather, that is risen 
again, who is even at 
the right hand of God, 
who also maketh in- 
tercession for us. 
35 Who shall separate 
us from the love of 
Christ? shall tribula- 
tion, or distress, or 
persecution, or fam- 
ine, or nakedness, or 
peril, or sword ? 36 As 
it is written, For th 
sake we are killed a 
the day long; we are 


we 


ο ἀλλὰ TTrw. 


τ συνεργεῖ ὁ θεὸς God works together 1. 
π -- καὶ [τ,|7]1. 


= ἕνεκεν 


420 


accounted as sheep for 
the slaughter. 37 Nay, 
in all these things we 
are more than con- 
querors through him 
that loved us. 38 For 
I am persuaded, that 
neither death, nor life, 
nor angels, nor prin- 
cipalities, nor powers, 
nor things present,nor 
things to come, 39 nor 
height, nor depth, nor 
any other creature, 
shall be able to sepa- 
rate us from the love 
of God, which is in 
Christ Jesus our Lord. 


IX. I say the truth 
in Christ, I lienot, my 
conscience also bear- 
ing me witness in the 
Holy Ghost, 2 that I 
have great heaviness 
and continual sorrow 
in my heart. 3 For I 
could wish that my- 
self were accursed 
from Christ for my 
brethren, my kinsmen 
according to the flesh: 
4 who are Israelites; to 
whom pertaineth the 
adoption, and the glo- 
ry, and the covenants, 
and the giving oz the 
law, and the service 
of God, and the pro- 
mises; 5 whose are 
the fathers, and of 
whom as concerning 
the flesh Christ came, 
who is over all, God 
blessed for ever. A- 
men. 6 Not as though 
the word of God hath 
taken none effect. For 
they are not all Israel, 
which are of Israel: 
7 Neither, because they 
are the seed of Abra- 
ham, are they all chil- 
dren: but, In Isaac 
shall thy seed be call- 
ed. 8 That is, They 
which are the chil- 
dren of the flesh, these 
are not the children of 
God: but the children 
of the promise are 
counted for the seed. 
9 For this is the word 
of promise, At this 
time will I come, and 
Sarah shall have a 
son. 10 And not only 
this; but when Re- 
becca also had con- 
ceived by one, even by 
our father Isaac ; 
11 (for the children 
being not yet born, 
neither having done 
any good or evil, that 
the purpose of God 
according to election 
might stand, not of 
works, but of him that 


ΠΡῸΣ + PaM ATO Y=. 


ἀγαπήσαντος ἡμᾶς. 
loved us. 


VITH Ae: 
38 πέπεισμαι.γὰρ OTL οὔτε 
For I am persuaded that neither 
θάνατος, οὔτε ζωή, οὔτε ἄγγελοι, οὔτε ἀρχαί, Yovre du- 
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor 
vapec," οὔτε ἐνεστῶτα, οὔτε μέλλοντα, 39 οὔτε ὕψωμα, οὔτε 


τοῦ 
him who 


powers, nor things present, nor things to be, nor height, nor 
βάθος, οὔτε Tic κτίσις ἑτέρα δυνήσεται ἡμᾶς χωρίσαι 
depth, nor any 7created*thing ‘other willbeable us _ to separate 
ἀπὸ τῆς ἀγάπης τοῦ θεοῦ, τῆς ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ τῷ κυρίῳ 
from the love of God, which[is)in Christ Jesus Lord 
ἡμῶν. 

our. 


9 ᾿Αλήθειαν λέγω ἐν χριστῷ, οὐ-.ψεύδομαι, ἐσυμμαρτυρούσης" 


Truth Isay in Christ, I lie not, bearing witness with 
μοι τῆς.συνειδησεώς.μου ἕν πνεύματι ἁγίῳ, 2 Ore λύπη 
me my conscience in {the} Spirit 1Holy, that *grief 


μοι ἐστὶν μεγάλη, καὶ ἀδιάλειπτος ὀδύνη τῷῇ-καρδίᾳ. μου" 
3to*me ‘is 1oreat, and unceasing sorrow in my heart, - 
3 ηὐχόμην.γὰρ "αὐτὸς ἐγὼ ἀνάθεμα elva' ἀπὸ τοῦ χριστοῦ 
ΤΟΥ | was wishing “myself ‘I & curse tobe from the Christ 
ὑπὲρ τῶν.ἀδελφῶν.μου, τῶν.συγγενῶν.μου κατὰ σάρκα" 
for my brethren, my kinsmen according to flesh; 
4 olriwvic εἰσιν “TopanXirat," ὧν ἡ υἱοθεσία καὶ ἡ δόξα, 
who are Israelites, whose [is] the adoption and the glory, 
‘ nee, ~ A ΄ ν ΄ὔ « 
καὶ “αἱ διαθῆκαι! καὶ ἡ νομοθεσία, καὶ ἡ λατρεία καὶ αἱ 
and the covenants and the lawgiving, and the service and the 
ἐπαγγελίαι, 5 ὧν οἱ πατέρες, καὶ ἐξ ὧν ὁ χριστὸς τὸ 
promises ; whose[are]the fathers; and of whom[is])the Christ 
κατὰ σάρκα, ὁ ὧν ἐπὶ πάντων θεὸς εὐλογητὸς εἰς τοὺς 
according to flesh, who is over all God blessed to the 
αἰῶνας. ἀμήν. 6 Οὐχ οἵον.δὲ ὅτι ἐκπέπτωκεν ὁ λόγος TOU 


ages. Amen. Not however that has failed the word 
θεοῦ. οὐ.γὰρ πάντες ot ἐξ ᾿Ισραήλ, οὗτοι ᾿Ισραήλ᾽ 
of God; for not all ‘which (are)*of ‘Israel 1those [2816] *Israel: 
7 οὐδ᾽ ὅτι εἰσὶν σπέρμα ABpadp, πάντες τέκνα, ἀλλ᾽ 


nor because they are of Abraham [are) all children: but, 


ἐν ᾿Ισαὰκ κληθήσεταί σοι σπέρμα. 8 “Τουτέστιν, οὐ τὰ 
In Isaac shall be called tothee a seed. That is, ®not ‘the 


τέκνα τῆς σαρκός, ταῦτα τέκνα τοῦ θεοῦ" ἀλλὰ τὰ τέκνα 
“children %of *the *flesh Sthese [7416] children of God; but thechildren 


τῆς ἐπαγγελίας λογίζεται εἰς σπέρμα. 9 ἐπαγγελίας.γὰρ 


566 


of the promise are reckoned for seed. For of promise 

ὁ λόγος.οὗτος, Κατὰ τὸν. καιρὸν. τοῦτον ἐλεύσομαι, καὶ 
this word [15], According to this time Iwillcome, and 
ἔσται τῇ Dappg υἱός. 10 Od.pdvor6e, ἀλλὰ καὶ ‘Pe- 


there shall be to Sarah ason. 
βέκκα ἐξ ἑνὸς κοίτην 


And not only [that], but also Re- 
ἔχουσα, ᾿Ισαὰκ τοῦ-.πατρὸς. ἡμῶν" 
Ἢ 


becca %by ‘one conception aving, Isaac our father, 
11 ἐμήπω" γὰρ γεννηθέντων, μηδὲ πραξάντων 
“πού Syet [286 *children] “for being born, nor having done 


> 4 a £ ’ iT] ev « > , ‘ ~ ~ 

ἀγαθὸν ἢ ἱκακόν," ἵνα ἡ κατ᾽ ἐκλογὴν &rov θεοῦ 

ΟΥ̓ evil, (that the *taccording δῦο Selection 305 “God 
οὐκ ἐξ ἔργων, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ Tov καλοῦντος, 
of works, but of him who calls), 


τι 
anything good 
πρόθεσις" μένῃ, 


‘purpose might abide, not 


Υ οὔτε δυνάμεις placed after μέλλοντα GLTTrAW. 
Ὁ Ἰσραηλεῖται 1. 
f φαῦλον LITA. 


LTTrAw. 
πὴὼ LTr. 


8 ἀνάθεμα εἷναι αὐτὸς ἐγὼ 


2 συνμ- T. 
d your ἔστιν GTTrA. © μή 


ὁ ἡ διαθήκη the covenant L. 
& πρόθεσις τοῦ θεοῦ GLTITAW. 


ἘΣ: ROMANS. 
12 Βέἐῤῥήθη" αὐτῇ, Ὅτι ὁ μείζων δουλεύσει τῷ ἐλάσσονι" 


it was said to her, The greater shall serve the lesser : 
18 καθὼς γέγραπται, Τὸν Ἰακὼβ ἠγάπησα, τὸν.δὲ Ἡσαῦ 
according as it has been written, Jacob I loved, and Esau 
ἐμίσησα. 
I hated. 
14 Ti οὖν ἐροῦμεν; μὴ ἀδικία παρὰ τῷ θεῷ; 
What then shall we say? Unrighteousness with God [is there]? 
\ , A 15 ~ i ‘ “Ἱ λέ "EX , τὰ n 
μη-γενοιτο τῷ. γὰρ. Μωσῇ λέγει, eNow OV.av 
May it not be! For to Moses he says, I will shew mercy to whomsoever 
ἐλεῶ, καὶ οἰκτειρήσω ὃν ἂν οἰκτείρω. 


I shew mercy, and I will feel compassion on whomsoever I feel compassion. 
16”Apa οὖν οὐ τοῦ θέλοντος, οὐδὲ τοῦ τρέχοντος, 
So then [itis] ποὺ of himthat wills, nor of him that runs, 
ἀλλὰ τοῦ ξἐλεοῦντος" θεοῦ. 17 λέγει.γὰρ ἡ γραφὴ τῷ Φαραώ, 
but *who *shews ͵ΙΏΘΙΌΥ ‘of 7God, For says thescripture to Pharaoh, 
Ὅτι sic αὐτὸ.τοῦτο ἐξήγειρά σε, ὕπως ἐνδείξωμαι ἐν σοὶ 
For this same thing 1 raised out thee, so that I πε! ΡΝ shew in thee 
τὴν. δύναμίν.μου, καὶ ὕπως διαγγελῇ τὸ. ὔνομά μου ἐν πάσῃ 


my power, and so that should be declared my name in all 
τῇ γῇ. 18 "Apa οὖν ὃν θέλει, ἐλεεῖ" ὃν. δὲ θέλει 
the earth. So then to whom he will he shews mercy, and whom he will 
σκληρύνει. 
he hardens. 
19 ’Epeic ody μοι,} Ti ἔτι μέμφεται : p' Bov- 


Thow wilt Bay then tome, Why yet does he find fault ες ie 1 ®pur- 


Anpare αὐτοῦ τίς ἀνθέστηκεν; 20 οΜενοῦνγε, ὦ ἄνθρωπε," 
pose Sof Thimtwho “has “resisted ἢ Yea,rather, O man, 


σὺ τίς εἶ ὁ ἀνταποκρινόμενος τῷ θείη μὴ ἐρεῖ τὸ 
*thou 'who ?art that answerest against Shall ‘say ‘the 


πλάσμα τῷ πλάσαντι, Τί pe ἐποίησας οὕτως : 
2thing "formed tohim who formed [it], Why me madest thou thus? 


21 Ἢ οὐκιἔχει ἐξουσίαν ὁ κεραμεὺς τοῦ πηλοῦ, ἐκ τοῦ 
Or 88 not authority the potter overthe clay, out of the 


αὐτοῦ φυράματος ποιῆσαι ὃδιμὲν εἰς τιμὴν σκεῦος, 6.02 
same lump tomake one to ‘honour ‘vessel, and another 


εἰς ἀτιμίαν; 22 εἰ.δὲ θέλων ὁ θεὸς ἐνδείξασθαι τὴν ὀργήν; 
to dishonour? And if *willing 1God to shew wrath, 


καὶ γνωρίσαι τὸ.δυνατὸν. αὐτοῦ, ἤνεγκεν ἐν πολλῇ μακρο- 


and to make known his power, bore in much Jong- 
θυμίᾳ σκεύη ὀργῆς κατηρτεσμερα εἰς ἀπώλειαν: 28 καὶ ἵνα 
suffering vessels of wrath fitted for destruction ; and that 

γνωρίσῃ τὸν πλοῦτον τῆς.δόξης αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ σκεύη 
he might make known the riches of his glory upon vessels 
ἐλέους. ἃ προητοίμασεν εἰς δόξαν; 24 οὺς Kai ἐκάλεσεν 


of mercy, which he before prepared for 
ἡμᾶς οὐ μόνον ἐξ Ιουδαίων, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐξ. 
lus ποῦ oa from parton, {the] Jews, but also from among [the] 


ἐθνῶν: 25 ὡς καὶ ἐν τῷ Ὡσηὲ λέγει, Καλέσω τὸν οὐ 
nations? As also in Hosea he says, I willcall that which [18] not 


λαόν.μου. λαόν.μου᾽ Kai THY οὐκ ἠγαπημένην, ἠγαπημένην. 

my people, My People; and that not beloved, Beloved. 

26 Kai ἔσται, ἐν τῷ τόπῳ οὗ ἐῤῥήθη" Padroic," Οὐ λαός 
And it shall be, in the place where it wassaid tothem, Not *people 


glory, 2whom 7also *he ®called 


421 


ealleth ;) 12 it was 
said unto her, The 
elder shall serve the 
younger. 13 As it is 
written, Jacob have [ 
loved, but Esau have 
I hated. 

14 What shall we 
say then? Js there 
unrighteousness with 
God’? God _ forbid. 
15 For hesaith to Mo- 
ses, I will have mercy 
on whom I will have 
mercy, and I will have 
compassion on whom 
I will have compas- 
sion. 16 So then τέ is 
not of him that will- 
eth, nor of him that 
runneth, but of God 
that sheweth mercy. 
17 For the scripture 
saith unto Pharaoh, 
Even for this same 
purpose have I raised 
thee up, that I might 
shew my power in 
thee, and that my 
name might be de- 
clared throughout all 
the earth. 18 There- 
fore hath he mercy on 
whom he will have 
mercy, and whom he 
will he hardeneth. 


19 Thou wilt say 
then unto me, Why 
doth he yet find fault? 
For who hath resisted 
his will? 20 Nay but, 
Oman, who art thou 
that repliest against 
God? Shall the thing 
formed say to him 
that formed it, Why 
hast thou made me 
thus ? 21 Hath not the 
potter power over the 
clay, of the same 
lump to make one 
vessel unto honour, 
and another unto dis- 
honour? 22 What if 
God, willing to shew 
his wrath, and to make 
his power known, en- 
dured with much 
longsuffering the ves- 
sels of wrath fitted to 
destruction: 23 and 
that he might make 
known the riches of 
his glory on the ves- 
sels of mercy, which 
he had afore prepared 
unto glory, 24 even 
us, whom he hath 
called, not of the Jews 
only, ‘put also of the 
Gentiles? 25 As he 
saith also in Osee, I 
will call them my 
people, which were 
not my epee ; and 
her belove hich 
was not "peloved. 
26 And it shall come 


h ἐῤῥέθη LTTrA. 
k ἐλεῶντος LTTrA. 1 wou οὖν LTTrAW. 


m+ οὖν ‘then L[A]w. 
ο ὦ ἄνθρωπε, μενοῦνγε (μενοῦν ye LTr) LTTrA. 


Ρ — αὐτοῖς [L]tr. 


i yap Μωῦσῇ G; Μωσῇ yap LA; Mwicet yap TTr ; OT γὰρ W. Ww. 


— yap for Ε. 


439 


to pass. ‘Avt in the 
place where it was said 
unto them, Ye are not 
my people ; there shall 
they be called the 
children of the living 
God. 27 Esaias also ecri- 
eth concerning Israel, 
Though the number of 
the children of Israel 
be as the sand of the 
sea, ἃ remnant shall 
be saved: 28 for he will 
finish the work, and 
σα ἐξ short in right- 
eousness: because a 
short work will the 
Lord make upon the 
earth, 29 And as H- 
saias said before, Ex- 
cept the Lord οἵ Sa- 
baoth had left us a 
secd, we had been as 


Sodoma. and _ been 
made like unto Go- 
morrha. 

30 What shall we 
say then ? That 
the Gentiles, which 
followed ποῦ after 


rizhteousness, have 
attained to righteons- 
ness, even the right- 
eousness which is of 
faith, 31 But Israel, 
which followed after 
the law of righteous- 
ness, hath not attain- 
ed to the law of right- 
eousness. 32 Where- 
fore? Because they 
sought it not by faith, 
but as it were by the 
works of the law. For 
they stumbled at that 
stumblingstone ; 33 as 
it is written, Behold, I 
iny in Sion a stum- 
blingstone and rock 
of offence: and who- 
soever believeth on 
him shall not be a- 
shamed. 


X. Brethren, my 
heart’s desire and 
prayer to God for 
tsrael is, that they 


might be saved. 2 For 
Il bear them record 
that they have azeal of 
God, but not accord- 
ing to knowledge. 
3 For they being ig- 
norant of God’s right- 
eousness, and going 
about to establish 
their own righteous- 
ness, have not sub- 
mitted themselves un- 
to the righteousness of 
God. 4 For Christ is 
the end of the law for 
righteousness to every 
one that believeth. 


5 For Moses describ- 


IPOs 424Eo@MArO Y &. IX ae 
μου ὑμεῖς, ἐκεῖ κληθήσονται υἱοὶ θεοῦ ζῶντος. 27 Ἣ- 
‘my [are] ye, there they shall be called sons of *God ['the] “living. 2h - 
σαΐας δὲ κράζει ὑπὲρ τοῦ ᾿Ισραήλ, Ἐὰν ὁ ἀριθμὸς 
saias ‘but cries concerning Israel, If *should be 'the 2nnmber 
τῶν υἱῶν 'Ισραὴλ ὡς ἡ ἄμμος τῆς θαλάσσης, τὸ τκατάλειμ- 
“of *the Ssons ®of 7Israel as the sand ofthe sea, the remnant 
pa" σωθήσεται" 28 λόγον yao συντελῶν καὶ συντέμνων 
shall be saved: for [the] matter [he is] conelnding and cutting short 
δὲν δικαιοσύνῃ ὅτι λόγον συντετμημένον" ποιήσει 
in righteousness: because a matter cut short will *do ['the] 
΄ ᾿ ‘ ~ ~ A F ‘ , «- Hy, 
κύριος ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. 29 Kat καθὼς προείρηκεν Ἡσαΐας, 
“Lord upon the earth. And according as_ said before Esaias, 
Εἰμὴ κύριος Σαβαὼθ ᾿ἐγκατέλιπεν" ἡμῖν σπέρμα, ὡς Σόδομα 
Unless [{Π6] Lord οἵ Hosts had left us aseed, as Sodom 
ἂν ἐγενήθημεν, καὶ we Τόμοῤῥα ἂν ὡμοιώθημεν. 
we should have become, and as Gomorrha we should have been made like, 
30 Τί οὖν ἐροῦμεν; ὅτι ἔθνη τὰ μὴ διώκοντα δικαιο- 
What then shall wesay? That Gentiles that follow not after right- 
σύνην, κατέλαβεν δικαιοσύνην, δικαιοσύνην δὲ τὴν ἐκ πίστεως" 
eousness, attained righteousness, but righteousness that[is]by faith. 
51 ᾿Ισραὴλ.δὲ διώκων νόμον δικαιοσύνης, εἰς νόμον Yé- 
But Israel, following after alaw of righteousness, to a law of 
U ΠΤ ? μὲ θ ΓΝ ΚᾺΔ] ε ? 3 “ 
καιοσύνης" οὐκιἔφθασεν. 32 ὕδιατί :" ὅτι οὐκ ἐκ πίσ- 
righteousness did not attain. Why? Because [it was] not by faith, 
τεως, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἐξ ἔργων *vdpov'' προσέκοψαν γὰρ" τῷ λίθῳ 
but as by works of law. For they stumbled at the stone 
τοῦ προσκόμματος, 33 καθὼς γέγραπται, ᾿ἸΙδοὺ τίθημι ἐν 
of stumbling, according as it has been written, Behold I place in 


Σιὼν λίθον προσκόμματος Kai πέτραν σκανδάλου" καὶ *7rac! 
Sion ἃ stone of stumbling and rock of offence : and every one 


ὁ πιστεύων ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ οὐ.καταισχυνθήσεται. 
that believes on him shall not be ashamed, 


10 ᾿Αδελφοί, ἡ μὲν εὐδοκία τῆς ἐμῆς καρδίας, καὶ ἡ 
Brethren, the good pleasure of my own heart, and 

δέησις “ἡ" πρὸς τὸν θὺν ὑπὲρ rov’Iopand ἐστιν" εἰς 
supplication to God on behalf of Israel is for 
σωτηρίαν. 2 μαρτυρῶ.γὰρ αὐτοῖς ὅτι ζῆλον θεοῦ ἔχουσιν, 
salvation. For I bear witness tothem that zeal for God they have, 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐ κατ᾽ ἐπίγνωσιν. 3 ἀγνοοῦντες. γὰρ τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ 
but not according to knowledge. For being ignorant of the *of *God 
δικαιοσύνην, καὶ τὴν ἰδίαν “δικαιοσύνην" ζητοῦντες στῆσαι, 
‘righteousness, and _ their own righteousness seeking to establish, 


TH δικαιοσύνῃ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐχ.ὑπετάγησαν. 4 τέλος. γὰρ 


to the righteousness of God they submitted not. For [*the] *end 
νόμου χριστὸς εἰς δικαιοσύνην παντὶ τῷ πιστεύοντι. 
Sof*law ‘Christ [215] for righteousness toevery one that believes. 


5 Μωσῆς". γὰρ γράφει 5 τὴν δικαιοσύνην τὴν  éx frou! 


For Moses writes [of] the righteousness which [is] of the 
νόμου, β"Ὅτι"! ὁ ποιήσας αὐτὰ ἄνθρωπος ζήσεται 
law, That the *having *practised *those *things man shall live 
ἐν ἰαὐτοῖς." 6 ‘H.dé ἐκ πίστεως δικαιοσύνη οὕτως λέγει, 
by them. But the ?of *faith ‘righteousness thus speaks: 


τ ὑπόλειμμα LTTrA. 
* — δικαιοσύνης (read to [that] law) trtraw. 


¥ — yap for LTTrA. 
fis] GLTTraw. 
€ — rod Trra. 


β —omnT, 


8 — ἐν δικαιοσύνῃ ὅτι λόγον συντετμημένον LTTr[A]. t ἐν- T. 
* διὰ Te LTrA. x — νόμου LTT: A ]W. 

+ — πᾶς (read ὃ he that) LTtraw. ἃ — ἢ LTTrAW. Ὁ αὐτῶν them 
- δικαιοσύνην GLTr[A]w. 4 Mwvons GLTTrAW. © + ὅτι that T. 
h — αὐτὰ (LJ. i αὐτῇ it LTTrA. 


ROMANS 
Μὴ.εἴπῃς ἐν ‘ry «καρδίᾳ σου, Τίς ἀναβήσεται εἰς τὸν 
Thou mayest not say in thy heart, Who = shall ascend to the 
οὐρανόν ; τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν χριστὸν καταγαγεῖν" 7 ἢ. Tie κατα- 
heaven ? that is, Christ to bring down. Or, Who shall 


βήσεται εἰς τὴν ἄβυσσον; τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν χριστὸν ἐκ 
descend into the abyss? that is, Christ from encug {the} 


νεκρῶν ἀναγαγεῖν. ὃ ἀλλὰ τί λέγει; ᾿Εγγύς cov τὸ ῥῆμά 


X. 


dead to bring up. But what says it? Near thee the word 
ἐστιν, ἐν τῷ.στύματί.σου καὶ ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ σου. τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν τὸ 
is, in thy mouth and in thy heart: that is the 
ῥῆμα τῆς πίστεως ὃ κηρύσσομεν 9 OTL ἐὰν ὁμολογήσῃς 
word of faith which we proclaim, that if thou contess 
ἐν Tw.oTOmati.cou κύριον ᾿Ιησοῦν, Kai πιστεύσῳς ἐν TY 
with thy mouth {the} Lord Jesus, and believe in 
καρδίᾳισου ὅτι ὁ θεὸς αὐτὸν ἤγειρεν ἐκ νεκρῶν, 
thy heart that God him raised from auieng {the} dead, 
σωθήσῃ" 10 καρδίᾳ. γὰρ πιστεύεται εἰς δικαιοσύνην. 
thou shalt be saved. For with {the} heart [15 belief to righteousness ; 
στόματιιδὲλ ὁμολογεῖται εἰς σωτηρίαν. 11 Λέγει.γὰρ ἡ 
and with [the] mouth is confession to salvation. For says the 


γραφή, Πᾶς ὁ πιστεύων ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ οὐ.καταισχυνθήσεται. 
scripture, πλάτες that believes on him shall not be ashamed. 


12 Οὐ.γάρ.ἐστιν διαστολὴ ᾿Ιουδαίου τε καὶ “Ἑλληνος" ὁ.γὰρ 
For there is ποῦ a difference of Jew and Greck ; for the 


αὐτὸς κύριος πάντων πλουτῶν εἰς πάντας τοὺς ἐπικαλου- 


same Lord ofall [is] rich toward ali that call 

μένους αὐτόν. 18 Πᾶς. γὰρ ὃς.ἂν ἐπικαλέσηται τὸ ὄνομα 

upon him. For everyone, whoever may call on the nDame 
κυρίου, σωθήσεται. 14 Πῶς οὖν ἱἐπικαλέσονται εἰς 

of [the] Lord, shall be saved. How then shall they call on [him} 
ὃν οὐκ.-ἐπίστευσαν 3; πῶς.δὲ ππιστεύσουσιν οὗ 


whom they believed not? 


οὐκ.ἤκουσαν ; πῶς.δὲ "ἀκούσουσιν χωρὶς 
they heard not? and how 


15 πῶς δὲ οκηρύξουσιν, 


and how shall they believe on (him) of whom 
κηρύσσοντος ; 
shall they hear apart from(one) preaching? 
ἐὰν.μὴ ἀποσταλῶσιν; καθὼς 
and how shallthey preach, unless they be sent? according as 
γέγραπται, ‘Qc ὡραῖοι οἱ πόδες τῶν Ρεὐαγγελιζο- 
it has been written, How beautiful the feet of those announcing the glad 
μένων εἰρήνην, τῶν" εὐαγγελιζομένων “τὰ ἀγαθά. 
tidings of Bence; of those CEG the glad tidings of good things ! 


16 ᾿Αλλ’ οὐ πάντες ὑπήκουσαν τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ: Ἡσαΐας. γὰρ 
But not ali obeyed the glad tidings. For Esaias 


λέγει, Κύριε, τίς ἐπίστευσεν τῇ ἀκοῇ ἡμῶν; 17° Ava ἡ πίστις 
ΒΑΕ; Lord, who believed our report ? So faith [is} 


ἐξ ἀκοῆς, ἡ-.δὲ ἀκοὴ διὰ ῥήματος "θεοῦ. 18 ἀλλὰ λέγω, 
by report, but the “aise by [the} word of God. But Isay, 


Μὴ οὐκιἤκουσαν; "μενοῦνγε' εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν ἐξῆλθεν 
Did they not hear? 55: aes Into all the earth went out 


ὁ. φθόγγος αὐτῶν, καὶ εἰς τὰ πέρατα τῆς οἰκουμένης τὰ ῥήματα 
their voice, and to the ends of the habitable world words 


423 


eth the righteousness 
Which is ot the iaw, 
That the man which 
doecth those things 
shali live by them. 
6 But the righieous- 
ness which is of faith 
speaketh on this wise, 
Say not in thine heart, 
Who shall ascend into 
heaven? (that is, to 
bring Christ down 
Srom above:) 7 or, 
Who shall descend in- 
to the deep? (thatis, to 
bring up Christ again 
from the dead.) 8 But 
what saith it? The 
word is nigh thee, 
evenin thy mouth, and 


in thy heart: that is, 
the word of faith, 
which we preach; 


9 Thai if thou shalt 
confess with thy 
mouth the Lord Je- 
sus, and shait believe 
ii thine heart that 
God hath raised him 
from the dead, thou 
shalt be saved. 10 For 
With the heart man 
believeth unto right- 
eousness; and with 
the mouth confession 
is made unto salva- 
tion. 11 For the scrip- 
ture saith, Whosoever 
believeth on him shail 
not beashamed. 12 For 
there is no difference 
between the Jew and 
the Greek: for the 
same Lord over all is 
rich unto all that 
call upon him. 13 For 
whosoever shail call 
upon the name of the 
Lord shall be saved. 
14 How then shall 
they call on him in 
whom they have not 
believed? and how 
shall they believe in 
him of whom they 
have not heard? and 
how shall they hear 
without a preacher? 
15 And how shalithey 
preach, except they be 
sent? as it is written, 
How beautiful are 
the feet of them that 
preach the gospel of 
peace, and bring glad 
tidings of good things! 
16 But they have not 
all obeyed the gospel. 
For  Esaias_ saith, 
Lord, who hath be- 
lieved our report? 
17 So then faith com- 
eth by hearing, and 


αὐτῶν. 19 ᾿Αλλὰ λέγω, Μὴ. οὐκ.ἔγνω ‘“Iopand"; πρῶτος be#ting by the word 
- ; τος : 

their. But I say, Did not *know τίνει ? irst, ἐπ ES PETS T 

k— τῇ EK. ‘ ἐπικαλέσωνται sould they call Lrtraw. ™ πιστεύσωσιν Should they 


believe LrTraw. 
should they preach LTT:aw. 


τ᾽ χριστοῦ of Christ Lrtra. ® μενοῦν ye LTrw. 


2 ἀκούσονται T ; ἀκούσωσιν should they hear LiraWw. 
Ρ-- εὐαγγελιζομένων εἰρήνην τῶν. LTTr[A]. 


° κηρύξωσιν 
9 — τὰ LTraw. 


τ: Ἰσραὴλ οὐκ ἔγνω GLTTrAW. 


424 


Have they not heard ? 
Yes verily, their sound 
went into all the 
earth, and their words 
unto the ends of the 
world. 19 But I say, 
Did not Israel know ? 
First Moses saith, I 
will provoke you to 
jealousy by them that 
are no people, and 
by a foolish nation I 
will anger you. 20 But 
Esaias is very bold, 
and saith, I was found 
of them that sought 
me not; I was made 
manifest unto them 
that asked not after 
me, 21 But to Israel 
he saith, All day iong 
I have stretched forth 
my hands unto a dis- 
obedient and gainsay- 
ing people. 

XI. Isay then,Hath 
God cast away his 
people? God forbid. 
For I also am an Is- 
raelite. of the seed of 
Abraham, of the tribe 
of Benjamin. 2 God 
hath not cast away 
his people which he 
foreknew. Wot ye 
not what the scrip- 
ture saith of Elias? 
how he maketh in- 
tercession to God a- 
gainst Israel, saying, 
% Lord, they have 
killed thy prophets, 
and digged down 
thine altars; and I 
am left alone, and 
they seek my life. 
4 But what saith the 
answer of God unto 
nim? I have reserved 
to myself seven thou- 
sand men, who have 
not bowed the knee 
to the image of Baai. 
5 Even so then at this 
present time _ also 
there is a remnant 
according to the elec- 
tion of grace. 6 And 
if by grace, then ts tt 
mo more of works: 
otherwise grace is no 
more grace. But if tt 
be of works, then is it 
no more grace: other- 
wise work is no more 
work. 


7 What then ? Israel 
hath not obtained 
that which he seeketh 
for; but the election 
hath obtained it, and 
the rest were blinded 
8 (according as it is 


ΤΡ ΟΣ Pasa Mea OF eS. 
"Μωσῆς" λέγει, ᾿Εγὼ 


X, Xa. 


παραζηλώσω ὑμᾶς ἐπ’ οὐκ 

Moses Says, I will ῬΠΟΣΟΚΟ to jealousy you ee ({those] not 
ἔθνει, "ἐπὶ" ἔθγει ἀσυνέτῳ παροργιῶ ὑμᾶς. 20° 25 
& pation! through a nation without understanding I will anger oon 


oatac δὲ ἀποτολμᾷ καὶ λέγει, Ἑὑρέθην  roic ἐμὲ 


saias ‘but is Nery shold and says, 


μὴ a 


I was found by those *me ‘not ?seek- 


τοῦσιν, ἐμφανὴς ἐγενόμην * τοῖς ἐμὲ μὴ “ἐπερωτῶσιν. 21 πρὸς 
ing ; manifested 1 became to those *me ‘not “enquiring “after. ®To 


δὲ τὸν ᾿Ισραὴλ λέγει, Ὅλην τὴν ἡμέραν ἐξεπέτασα τὰς 
®but Israel hesays, *Whole ‘the day I stretched out 


χεῖράς. μου πρὸς λαὸν ἀπειθοῦντα καὶ ἀντιλέγοντα. 
my hands to a people disobeying and contradicting. 


11 Λέγω οὖν, Μὴ ἀπώσατο 6 θεὸς τὸν. λαὸν.αὐτοῦνγ ; 
Isay then, Did *thrust “away ‘God his people ? 
μὴ.γένοιτο᾽ καὶ. γὰρ ἐγὼ *IoopanXirnc' εἰμί, ἐκ σπέρματος 
May it not be! For also if an Israelite am, of [the] seed 
᾿Αβραάμ, φυλῆς *Bemapiv." 2 οὐκ.ιἀπώσατο ὁ θεὸς 
of Abraham, of [the] tribe of Benjamin. “Did *not *thrust 5away 1God 
τὸν.λαὸν. αὐτοῦ, ὃν προέγνω. ἢ οὐκ.οἴδατε ἐν 
his people, whom he foreknew. Know ye not in {the history of] 
“HXia' τί λέγει ἡ γραφή; ὡς ἐντυγχάνει τῷ θεῷ κατὰ 
Elias what says the scripture? how he pleads with God against 
τοῦ ᾿Ισραήλ, “λέγων," 8 Κύριε, τοὺς.προφήτας.σου ἀπέκτειναν, 
Israel, saying, Lord, thy Brephete they killed, 
καὶ" τὰ.θυσιαστήριά.σου κατέσκαψαν κἀγὼ ὑπελείφθην a 
and thine altars they dug down; andI was left 


voc, καὶ ζητοῦσιν τὴν-Ψυχήν.μου. 4 ᾿Αλλὰ τί λέγει αὐτῷ ὃ 
lone, and they seek my life. But what says to him the 


χρηματισμός ; Κατέλιπον ἐμαυτῷ ἑπτακισχιλίους ἄνδρας 
divine answer ? I left to myself seven thousand men 

οἵτινες οὐκιἔκαμψαν γόνυ τῇ Βάαλ. ὃ Οὕτως οὖν καὶ ἐν τῷ 
who bowed not a knee to Baal. Thus then also in the 
νῦν καιρῷ λεῖμμα Kar ἐκλογὴν χάριτος γέγονεν. 


d 


present time a remnant according to election of grace there has been. 
6 €i.0& χάριτι, οὐκέτι ἐξ ἔργων" ἐπεὶ ἡ χάρις οὐκέτι γίνεται 
But if by grace, nolongerof works; else grace nolonger becomes 
χάρις. “εἰ.δὲ ἐξ ἔργων, οὐκέτι fiariv' χάρις" ἐπεὶ τὸ ἔργον 
grace * butif of works, no longer isit grace ; else work 
οὐκέτι ἐστὶν ἔργον." 
nolonger is work. 
7 Ti οὖν ; ὃ ἐπιζητεῖ ᾿Ισραήλ, %rovrov' οὐκ.ἐπέτυχεν, 
᾽ ’ ἕξ 


What then? What “seeks Ὁ ‘Israel, this it did not obtain ; 
1.08 ἐκλογὴ ἐπέτυχεν. οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ ἐπωρώθησαν. 8 "καθὼς" 
but the election obtained [it], andthe rest were hardened, according as 


γέγραπται, Ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ὁ θεὸς πνεῦμα κατανύξεως, 
it has been written, “Gave “them ‘God «τ spirit of slumber, 


ὀφθαλμοὺς τοῦ.μὴ βλέπειν, καὶ ὦτα τοῦ.μὴ ἀκούειν, Ewe 


eyes 80 as not to see, and ears so as not to Bok unto 
ΤΠ ΘΈΡΟΣ ἡμέρας. 9 καὶ ἸΔαβὶδ' λέγει, Benes ἡ τράπεζα 
And David says, “table 


αὐτῶν εἰς eres καὶ εἰς θήραν, Kai εἰς Prin καὶ εἰς 


written, God hath 
given them the spirit ‘their for asnare, and for atrap, and for cause of offence, and for 
υ Μωῦσῆς GLTTrAW. Υ ἐπ᾿ Trr. + [ev] by (those) tra. x + [ev] by (those) utr. 


r+, ¢ ov mpoéyvw] whom he foreknew L. 
c— λέγων GLTTraw. 
f— ἐστὶν A. 


Ὁ“ Hela τ. 
Gurtr[a]. 
{πττὰ ; Aavtd Gw. 


τ Ἰσραηλείτης T. a Βενιαμείν LTTrA. 
d — cai LTTrAW. e — εἰ δὲ ἐξ to end of verse 


5 τοῦτο GLTTrAW. h καθάπερ even as TTr. i Aaveid 


Xi. 


ἀνταπόδομα αὐτοῖς" 
8. recompense to them: 


ROMANS. 


10 σκοτισθήτωσαν οἱ. ὀφθαλμοὶ αὐτῶν 
let be darkened their eyes 


τοῦ.μὴ βλέπειν, καὶ τὸν.νῶτον.αὐτῶν διαπαντὸς ἰσύγ- 
50 85 ποῦ to see, and their back continually bow thou 
καμψον." 
down. 
11 Λέγω οὖν, μὴ ἔπταισαν ἵνα πέσωσιν; μὴ-γένοιτο᾽ 
Isay then, Did they stumble that they might fall? May it not be! 


ἀλλὰ τῷ. αὐτῶν παραπτώματι ἡ σωτηρία τοῖς ἔθνεσιν, εἰς 


but by their offence salvation [is]tothe nations, for 
TO παραζηλῶσαι αὐτούς. 12 εἰ δὲ TO.7upaTTwpa.avTorY 
to provoke to jealousy them. But if their offence [be the} 
πλοῦτος κόσμου, καὶ τὸ ἥττημα.αὐτῶν πλοῦτος ἐθνῶν. 


wealth οΥΓ[[Π6] world, and their default [the] wealth of[the] nations, 

πόσῳ μᾶλλον τὸ-πλήρωμα αὐτῶν ; 13 Ὑμῖν ™yap λέγω 
how much more their fulness? “To *you ‘for I speak, 
τοῖς ἔθνεσιν᾽ ἐφ᾽ ὅσον μέν ™ εἰμι ἐγὼ ἐθνῶν ἀπόστολος, 
the nations, inasmuch as I “οἵ [Sthe] ‘nations Sapostle, 
τὴν.διακονίαν.μου δοξάζω, 14 εἴ.πως παραζηλώσω 

my service I glorify, if by any means I shall provoke to jealousy 

μου τὴν σάρκα, Kai σώσω τινὰὲῤξῤ ἐξ αὐτῶν. 16 εἰ. γὰρ 
my fiesh, and shall save some from ameng them, For if 
7)-ATOBOAN-AabT OY καταλλαγὴ κύσμου, τίς ἡ “πρόσ- 

their casting away [bethe] reconciliation of [the] world, what the recep- 
ληψις,} εἰμὴ ζωὴ ἐκ νεκρῶν ; 
tion, except life from ameng [the] dead? 


16 εἰδὲ ἡ ἀπαρχὴ ayia, Kai τὸ φύραμα: Kai εἰ ἡ ῥίζα 
Now if the first-fruit [be] holy, alsothe lump; _ and if the root 


ayia, καὶ ot κλάδοι. 17 εἰ.δὲ τινες τῶν κλάδων ἐξεκλάσθη- 
{bejholy, also the branches. But if some ofthe branches were broken 
σαν, σὺ δὲ ἀγριέλαιος ὧν ἐνεκεντρίσθης ἐν αὐτοῖς, Kai 
out, and thou, a wild olive tree being, wast σγαῦίθα ἴπ amongst them, and 
ἰΙσυγκοινωνὸς τῆς ῥίζης Ῥκαὶ τῆς πιότητος THE ἐλαίας 
a fellow partaker of the root and of the fatness οἱ the olive tree 
ἐγένου, 18 μὴ.κατακαυχῶ τῶν κλάδων' εἰ δὲ κατακαυχᾶσαι, 
became, boast not against the branches; but if thou boastest against 
οὐ σὺ τὴν ῥίζαν βαστάζεις, Yar’! ἡ ῥίζα σέ. 19 Ἔ- 
[them], *not*thou*the *root *bearest, but the aa thee. Thou 


peic οὖν, ᾿Εξεκλάσθησαν τοὶ" κλάδοι, iva ἐγὼ “ἐγκεντρισθῶ." 
wilt say then, Werebrokenout the branches, that I might be grafted in. 
20 Καλῶς" τῷ ἀπιστίᾳ ᾿ἐξεκλάσθησαν., σὺ.δὲ τῇ πίστει 
Well: by unbelief they were broken out, and thou by faith 
ἕστηκος. μὴ.“ὑψηλοφρόνει," ἀλλὰ φόβου. 21 εἰ-γὰρ ὁ θεὸς 
standest. Be not high-minded, but for if God 
τῶν κατὰ φύσιν κλάδων οὐκ. ἐφείσατο. © μήπως" οὐδὲ σου 
the Ξδοοογαϊηρ *to*nature *branches cranes not— lest neither thee 
*peionrar.' 22 “Ide οὖν χρηστότητα Kai ἀποτομίαν θεοῦ" 
he should spare. Behold then [the] kindness and severity of God: 


ἐπὶ μὲν τοὺς πεσόντας, Τἀποτομίαν"" ἐπὶ. δὲ σε, ἐχρηστό- 


upon those that feil, severity ; and Epon thee, kind- 

τητα," ἐὰν 5ἐπιμείνῳς! τῇ χρηστότητι ἐπεὶ καὶ σὺ ἐκ- 

ness, if thou continue in [his] kindness, else also thou wilt 
k διὰ παντὸς LTrA. 1 oyp- τ. m δὲ and LTtra. 


© πρόσλημψις LTTrA. P — καὶ T[Tr]a. 4 ἀλλὰ TIrA. 
t ἐκλάσθησαν broken off τττ. v ὑψηλὰ φρόνει TTr. 

he will spare GLTTraw. Υ ἀποτομία LTTrA. 
8 ἐπιμέντις ΤΈΓ. 


425 


of slumber, eyes thst 
they should not sex, 
and ears that they 
should not hear;) unte 
this day. 9 And David 
saith, Let their table 
be made a snare, anda 
trap, and a stumbling- 
biock, and a recom- 
pence unto them: 
10 let their eyes he 
darkened, that they 
inay not see, and bow 
down their back ai- 
way. 


111 say then, Have 
they stumbled that 
they should fall? 
God forbid: but ra- 
ther through their fall 
salvation ts come unto 
the Gentiles, for to 
provoke them to jea- 
lousy. 12 Now if the 
fall of them be the 
riches of the world, 
and the diminishing 
of them the riches οἵ 
the Gentiles; how 
much more their ful- 
ness? 13 For I speak 
to you Gentiles, inas- 
much as I am the a- 
postle of the Gentiles, 
i magnify mine office: 
14 if by any means I 
may pr ovoke to emu- 
lation them which are 
my tiesh, and might 
save some of then, 
15 For if the casting 
away of them be the 
reconciling of the 
world, what shall the 
receiving of them te, 
but life from the dead? 

16 For if the first- 
fruit be holy, the 
lump is also holy. aud 
if the root be hoiy, 
so are the branches. 
17 And if some of the 
branches be broken 
off, and thou, being 
a wild olive tree, 
wert graffed in among 
them, and with them 
partakest of the root 
and fatness of the 
olive tree; 18 boast not 
against the branches. 
But if thou boast, thou 
bearest not the root, 
but the root thee. 
19 Thou wilt say then, 
The branches were 
broken off, that 1 
might be grafied in. 
20 Well; because of 
unbelief they were 
broken off, and thou 
standest by faith. Be 
not highminded, but 
fear: 21 for if God 
goes not the natural 


n+ οὖν then: ταὶ τε jaw. 
τ--- οἱ GLTTrAW. 

-- μήπως LTTr[A}. 
2 χρηστότης θεοῦ kindness of God Lrrra. 


53 ey-T. 
χ φείσεται 


420 


branches, take heed 
lest he also spare not 
thee. 22 Behoid there- 
fore the goodness and 
severity of God: on 
them which fell, seve- 
rity ; but toward thee, 
goodness, if thou con- 
tinue in his goodness: 
otherwise thou also 
shalt be cut off. 23 And 
they 150, if they a- 
bide not still in un- 
belief, shall be graffed 
in: for God is abie to 
graff them in again. 
24 For if thou wert 
cut out of the olive 
tree which is wild by 
nature, and wert graff- 
ed contrary to nature 
into a good olive tree: 
how much more shall 
these, which be the 
natural branches, be 
grafted into their own 
olive tree? 25 For I 
would not, brethren, 
that ye should be ig- 
norant of this mys- 
tery, lest ye should be 
wise in your own con- 
ceits; that blindness 
in part is happened to 
Israel, until the ful- 
ness of the Gentiles be 
come in. 26 And soall 
Israel shall be saved: 
as it is written, There 
shall come out of Sion 
the Deliverer, and 
shall turn away un- 
godliness from Jacob: 
27 for this # my 
covenant unto them, 
when [shall take away 
their sins, 28 As con- 
cerning the gospel, 
they are enemies for 
your sakes: but as 
touching the election, 
they are beloved for 
the fathers’ sakes. 
29 For the gifts and 
calling of God are 
without repentance, 
30 For as ye in times 
past have not believed 
God, yet have now ob- 
tained mercy through 
their unbelief: 31 even 
so have these also 
now not believed, that 
through your mercy 
they also may obtain 
mercy. 32 For God 
hath coneluded them 
all in unbelief, that he 
might have mercy up- 
on all. 33 Othe depth 
of the riches both of 
the wisdom and know- 
ledge of God! how 
unsearchable are his 
judgments, and his 
ways past finding out! 
34 For who hath known 
the mind of the Lord? 


P03 POM A LOWS: ΧΙ, 
κοπήσῃ. 23 cai ἐκεῖνοι" δέ, ἐὰν μὴ “ἐπιμείνωσιν" τῇ ἀπιστίᾳ, 
be cut off. Also “they ‘and, if they continue not in unbelief, 
ἀξγκεντρισθήσονται" duvaroc.yap ἐστιν ὁ θεὸς πάλιν “ἐγκεν- 

shall be grafted in ; for able is God = again to graft 
τρίσαι" αὐτούς. 24 εἰγὰρ σὺ ἐκ τῆς κατὰ φύσιν ἐξε- 
in them. For if thou out of the *according °to *nature 7wast 
κόπης ἀγριελαίου, Kai παρὰ φύσιν ἐνεκεντρίσθης εἰς 
Scut off ‘wild “olive *tree, and, contrary to nature, wast grafted in to 


καλλιέλαιον, πόσῳ μᾶλλον οὗτοι οἱ κατὰ φύσιν, 
a good olive tree, how much more these who according to nature [are], 


ἀἐγκεγτρισθήσονται" τῇ ἰδίᾳ ἐλαίᾳ; 25 Ob.yao θέλω ὑμᾶς 
shall be graftedinto their own olive tree ? For “ποῦ *do ‘I wish you 
ἀγνοεῖν, ἀδελφοί, τὸ μυστήριον τοῦτο, ἵνα μὴ ἦτε “παρ᾽" 
to be ignorant, brethren, of this mystery, that yemay not be in 
ἑαυτοῖς φρόνιμοι, OTL πώρωσις ἀπὸ μέρους τῷ Topanr γέ- 
yourselves wise, that hardness in part to Israel has 
» A , ~ ? ~ ? , ‘ 
yovey, axpic.od TO πλήρωμα τῶν ἐθνῶν εἰσέλθῃ: 26 Kat 


happened, until the fulness of the nations be come in; and 
οὕτως πᾶς ᾿Ισραὴλ σωθήσεται, καθὼς γέγραπται, 
sO all Israel shall be saved, according as it has been written, 
Ls ᾽ ὃν ‘ « « , f sil ? , ? ΝΜ 
Ηξἕει ἐκ Σιὼν ὁ ῥυόμενος, 'καὶ ἀποστρέψει ἀσεβείας 


Shall come out of Sion the deliverer, 
ἀπὸ ‘Taras: 27 καὶ αὕτη 


and he shall turn away ungodliness 
αὐτοῖς ἡ παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ διαθήκη, 


from Jacob. And this [is] *to®them ‘the *from ‘*me covenant, 
ὅταν ἀφέλωμαι τὰς.ἁμαρτίας. αὐτῶν. 28 Κατὰ μὲν 
when I may have taken away their sins. As regards indecd 
τὸ εὐαγγέλιον, ἐχθροὶ δι ὑμᾶς" κατὰ.δὲ τὴν 
the gladtidings, [they are] enemies on your account; but as regards the 


ἐκλογήν, ἀγαπητοὶ διὰ τοὺς πατέρας. 29 ἀμεταμέλητα 


election, beloved onaccountofthe fathers. Not *to *be repented Sof 
4 A , ‘ « Va ~ ~ .“ A 
ya τὰ χαρίσματα καὶ ἡ κλῆσις τοῦ θεοῦ. 80 ὥσπερ. γὰρ 
‘for [are] the gifts and the calling of God. For as 
βκαὶ" ὑμεῖς ποτε ἠπειθήσατε τῷ θεῷ, νῦν. δὲ ἠλεήθητε 


also once were disobedient to God, but now have been shewn mercy 


ye 
~ , ᾽ ΕΣ Ὲ er x - ~ ? , 
τῇ τούτων ἀπειθείᾳ" 31 οὕτως Kai οὗτοι νῦν ἠπείθησαν 
through their disobedience ; so also these now were disobedient 
Tp "ὑμετέρῳ" ἐλέει, ἵνα Kai αὐτοὶ ἐλεηθῶσιν. 
to your mercy, that also they may have mercy shewn [them]. 


32 συνέκλεισεν. γὰρ ὁ θεὸς τοὺς πάντας εἰς ἀπείθειαν, iva τοὺς 


For “shut *up *together ‘God all in disobedience, that 
πάντας ἐλεήσῃ. 88 Ὦ βάθος πλούτου καὶ σοφίας 
all he might shew mercy to. O depth ofriches both of wisdom 


we *aveéepevynra' τὰ κρίματα.αὐτοῦ, Kai 
unsearchable his judgments, and 
34 τίς. γὰρ ἔγνω νοῦν 
For who did know [the] mind 

35 ἢ Tic προέ-- 
Or who first 

? ? re 
ἐξ αὐτοῦ 


καὶ γνώσεως θεοῦ. 
and knowledge of God! How 
ἀνεξιχνίαστοι αἱ.ὁδοὶ αὐτοῦ. 
untraceable his ways ! 
΄ , Ψ' ᾽ ~ ΞΘ, 
κυρίου; ἢ τις σύμβουλος αὐτοῦ EYEVETO ; 
of [the] Lord, or who his counsellor became ? 
δωκεν αὐτῷ, καὶ ἀνταποδοθήσεται αὐτῷ; 36 Ort 
gave to him, and it shall be recompensed to him ? For of him 
καὶ δι αὐτοῦ Kai εἰς αὐτὸν τὰςπάντα' air 4 δόξα 
and through him and unto him (are) allthings: to him [be] the glory 
εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. ἀμήν. 
to the ages. Amen, 


> κἀκεῖνοι GLTTrAW. 
h ἡμετέρῳ (read to our mercy) E. 


§— KaliGLTTraw. 


f — καὶ LTTrAW. 
k ἀνεξεραύνητα TTrAé. 


dq ἐν- T. 6 ἐν Tra. 
i+ pov πον [L]r. 


© ἀπιμένωσιν TTr. 


X11. ROMANS. 


12 Παρακαλῶ οὖν ὑμᾶς, ἀδελφοί, διὰ τῶν οἰκτιρμῶν τοῦ 


ITexhort therefore you, pacthrens by the compassions 
θεοῦ, παραστῆσαι τὰ.σώματα.ὑμῶν θυσίαν ζῶσαν, ἁγίαν, 
of God, to present your bodies a “sacrifice ‘living, holy, 


ἰεὐάρεστον τῷ θεῷ," τὴν λογικὴν λατρείαν ὑμῶν 2 καὶ μὴ 
well-pleasing to God, 2intelligent “service ‘your. And *not 
Ὡσυσχηματίζεσθε" τῷ αἰῶνι.τούτῳ, ἀλλὰ ἡμεταμορφοῦσθε τῇ 

fashion SOE IE to this age, but be transformed by the 
εἰς τὸ δοκιμάζειν ὑμᾶς τί 


ἀνακαινώσει τοῦ.νοὸς οὑμῶν," 
for to prove by you what [is] 


renewing of your mind, 
τὸ θέλημα Tov θεοῦ τὸ ἀγαθὸν Kai εὐάρεστον Kai τέλειον. 
Twill Sof *God'the “good and *well-pleasing °and ‘perfeci. 
3 λέγω. γὰρ διὰ τῆς χάριτος τῆς δοθείσης μοι, παντὶ 
ForIsay through the grace which isgiven tome, to everyone 
Tp.ovT. ἐν ὑμῖν, μὴ ὑπερφρονεῖν παρ᾽ ὃ δεῖ 
thatis among you, not to be high-minded above what it behoves [you] 
φρονεῖν, ἀλλὰ φρονεῖν εἰς τὸ σωφρονεῖν. ἑκάστῳ ὡς ὁ 
tobe minded; but tobeminded soas to Ὀ6 Βουοι-τηϊπας ἃ toeach as 
θεὸς ἐμέρισεν μέτρο» πίστεως. 4 Καθάπερ.γὰρ ἐν ἑνὶ σώματι 


God divided a measure of faith. Forevenas in one _ body 
Ρμέλη πολλὰ" ἔχομεν, Trade μέλη πάντα οὐ τὴν αὐτὴν 
?members ‘many wehave, butthe members all *not *the ‘same 


ἔχιι πρᾶξιν: & οὕτως οἱ πολλοὶ ἕν σῶμά ἐσμεν ἐν χριστῷ, 
Thave function ; thus *the *many ‘one “body ‘we‘tare in Christ, 


«ὁ δὲ καθ᾽ εἷς ἀλλήλων μέλη. 6 ἔχοντες. δὲ χαρίσματα 
and each one of *each “οὔμοι 'members. But having 2cifts 
κατὰ τὴν χάριν τὴν δοθεῖσαν ἡμῖν διάφορα. εἴτε 
according *to *the ὅργαθοθ. 7which 515 °given ?°to **us ‘different, whether 
προφητείαν, κατὰ τὴν ἀναλογίαν τῆς πίστεως" 7 εἴτε δια- 
Brophecy- according, to the proporiica of faith ; or ser- 
κονίαν, ἐν TY διακονίᾳ" εἴτε ὁ διδάσκων, ἐν τῇ διδασκαλίᾳ" 
vice— in service ; or hethat teaches— in teaching ; 


8 εἴτε ὁ παρακαλῶν, ἐν τῇ παρακλήσει’ ὁ μεταδιδούς, ἐν 
or that exhorts— in eehoreon, hethat imparis— in 


e , ~ c 
ἁπλότητι ὁ προϊστάμενος, ἐν σπουδῇ ὁ ἐλεῶν, 
aumplicity, hethat takes the lead— with diligence; he that shews mercy— 


ἐν ἱλαρότητι. 9 ἪἫ ἀγάπη ἀνυπόκριτος᾽ ἀποστυγοῦντες TO 
with cheerfulness. {Let} love [be] unfcigned ; abhorring 
ἀλ- 


πονηρόν; κολλώμεγνοι τῷ ἀγαθῷ" 10 τῇ φιλαδελφίᾳ εἰς 


evil, cleaving to gocd ; in brotherly love towards onc 


λήλους φιλόστοργοι: τῇ τιμῇ ἀλλήλους προηγούμενοι" 


another kindly affectioned ; in[giving]honour“one *another ‘going before ; 


11 τῷ σπουδῇ μὴ ὀκνηροί. τῷ πνεύματι ζέοντες, "τῷ Kaipy' 
in diligence, not slothful; in spirit, fervent ; 7in Sseason 


ξουλεύοντες" 12 ry ἐλπίδι χαίροντες, TY θλίψει ὑπομένον- 
lserving. In hope, rejoicing ; in tribulation, endur- 
TEC, τῇ προσευχῇ προσκαρτεροῦντες᾽ 13 ταῖς χρείαις τῶν 
ing: in prayer, stedfastly continuing ; tothe needs of the 
ἁγίων κοινωνοῦντες, THY φιλοξενίαν διώκοντες" 14 εὐλογεῖτε 
sainis communicating ; hospitality pursuing. Biess 
τοὺς διώκοντας ὑμᾶς" εὐλογεῖτε, Kai μὴ.καταρᾶσθε. 15 χαί- 


those that persecute you; bless, and curse not. Re- 
ρειν μετὰ χαιρόντων, "καὶ" κλαίειν μετὰ κλαιόντων. 16 τὸ 
jeice with rejoicing ones, and weep with weeping ones; the 


427 


or who hath been his 
counseller ? 35 or who 
hath first given to him, 
aud it shall be recom- 
pensed unto him again? 
36 For of him, ané 
through him, and to 
him, are ail things : te 


whom le giory for 
ever. Amei}. 
XII. I beseech you 


therefore, brethren, by 
the mercies of God, 
that ye present your 
bedies a living sacri- 
fice, holy, acceptable 
unto Goud, which is 
your reasonable ser- 
vice. 2 And be not 
conformed to _ this 
world: but be ye trans- 
formed by the renew- 
ing of your mind, that 
ye may prove what ἐξ 
that good, and accept- 
able, and perfect, will 


of God. 3 For 1 say, 
through the grace 
given unto me, to 


every man that is a- 
mong you, not tothink 
of hiniself more highly 
than he ought to think; 
but to think sobe rly, 
according as God hath 
dealt to every man the 
measure of faith. 4 For 
as we have many nem- 
bers in one body, and 
all members have not 
the same office: 5 so we, 
being many, are one 
bedy in Christ, and 
every one members one 
of another. 6 Having 
then gifts differing ac- 
cording to the grace 
that is given to us, 
whether prophecy, /et 
us prophesy according 
to the proportion οἵ 
faith; 7 or ministry, 


let ws wait on our 
ministering: or he 
that teacheth, on 


teaching ; 8 or he that 
exhorteth, on exhor- 
tation : hethat giveth, 
let him do it with sim- 
plicity; he that ruleth, 
with diligence; he that 
sheweth merey, with 
cheerfulness. 9 Let 
love be without dissi- 
mulation. Abhor that 
whicit is evil; cleave 
tothat which is good. 
10 Be kindly affec- 
tioned one to another 
with brotherly love; 
in honour preferring 
one another; 11 not 
slothful in business ; 


fervent inspirit ; serv- 
ing the Lord; 12 re- 
joicing in hope; pa- 


tient in tribulation ; 
continuing instant in 


Ἰ τῷ θεῷ εὐάρεστον T. 
ματιΐζεσθετ. κα μεταμορφοῦσθαι to be transformed La. 
P πολλὰ μέλη LTTrAW. GTOLTTrAW. τῷ κυρίῳ the Lord ELTIraw. 


τι συίσυν- α)σχηματίζεσθαι to fashion yourselves) La ; 
ο — ὑμῶν (read the mind) LTPraw. 


συνσχη- 


5 καὶ LTTTAW. 


428 


prayer; 15 distribut- 
ing to the necessity of 
saints ; given to hospi- 
tality. 14 Bless them 
which persecute you : 
bless, and curse not. 
15 Rejoice with them 
that do rejoice, and 
weep with them that 
weep. 16 Be of the 
same mind one toward 
another. Mind not 
high things, but con- 
descend to men of low 
estate. Be not wise in 
your own conceits. 
17 Recompense to no 
man evil for evil. Pro- 
vide things honest in 
the sight of all men. 
18 If it be possible, as 
much as lieth in you, 
live peaceably with all 
men.19 Dearly beloved, 
avenge not yourselves, 
but rather give place 
unto wrath: for it 
is written, Vengeance 
is mine; I will re- 
pay, saith the Lord. 
20 Therefore if thine 
enemy hunger, feed 
him ; if he thirst, give 
him drink: for in so 
doing thou shalt heap 
coals of fire on his 
head. 21 Be not over- 
come of evil. but over- 
come evil with good. 


XIII. Let every soul 
be subject unto the 
higher powers. For 
there is no power but 
of God: the powers 
that be are ordained 
of God. 2 Whosoever 
therefore resisteth the 
power, resisteth the 
ordinance of God: and 
they that resist shall 
receive to themselves 
damnation. 3 For ru- 
lers are not a terror to 
good works, but to the 
evil. Wilt thou then 
not be afraid of the 
power? do that which 
is good, and thou shalt 
have praise of the 
same: 4 for he is the 
minister of God to thee 
for good. But if thou 
do that which is evil, 
be afraid ; for he bear- 
eth not the sword in 
vain: for he is the 
minister of God, a 
revenger to execute 
wrath upon him that 
doeth evil. 5 Where- 
fore ye must needs be 
subject, not only for 
wrath. but also for 
conscience sake. 6 For 
for this cause pay ye 
tribute also: for they 
are God’s ministers, 
attending continually 


ΠΡῸΣ, PQMAIOYS. XII, XII1. 
ἀλλήλους φρονοῦντες" μὴ τὰ.ὑψηλὰ φρο- 


minding, not highthings mind- 


νοῦντες, ἀλλὰ τοῖς ταπεινοῖς συναπαγόμενοι. μὴ.γίνεσθε 
ing, but with the lowly going along: be not 


ΠΡΟΣ ΙΟΕ παρ᾽ ἑαυτοῖς. 17 μηδενὶ κακὸν ἀντὶ κακοῦ ἀποδι- 
wi in yourselves: tonoone evil for evil ren- 

δόντες" προνοούμενοι καλὰ ἐνώπιον πάντων" ἀνθρώπων" 

ΠΟΤΟΤΙΣΙΣ OGLE Behe (things] before all men: 


18 εἰ δυνατόν, τὸ. ἐξ ὑμῶν, μετὰ πάντων ἀνθρώπων εἰρη- 
if possible, 8800 ὙΟΌΣΕΘΙ ΜΒ; with all Inen being 


νεύοντες. 19 μὴ ἑαυτοὺς ἐκδικοῦντες, ἀγαπητοί, ἀλλὰ δότε 
at peace ; not Σουτεοινοι avenbing, beloved, ee give 


τόπον τῇ ὀργῇ γέγραπται.γάρ, ᾿Ἐμοὶ ἐκδίκησις, ἐγὼ ἀντα- 


αὐτὸ εἰς 
same thing toward one another 


place to wrath; for ithas been written, Tome vengeance! I will 
ποδώσω, λέγει κύριος. 20% Εὰν οὖν!" πεινᾷ ὁ ἐχθρός 
recompense, says ceed Lord. If therefore should hunger “*enemy 
σου, ψώμιζε αὐτόν" ἐὰν διψᾷ, πότιζε αὐτόν" τοῦτο 


‘thine, feed him ; if he should thirst, give *drink eee “this 
ee ποιῶν, ἄνθρακας πυρὸς σωρεύσεις ἐπὶ τὴν ee 
doing, coals of fire thou wilt heap upon 
αὐτοῦ. 
this. 
ἀγαθῷ τὸ κακόν. 
3ροοᾶ evil. 


13 Πᾶσα ψυχὴ ἐξουσίαις ὑπερεχούσαις ὑποτασσέσθω. 
ΞΕ ΤΟΥ “soul “to 7authorities ®above (him) *let *be ®subject. 
ov-yap.iorw ἐξουσία εἰμὴ "ἀπὸ" θεοῦ" aide  οὖσω 
For there is no authority except from God; and those that are 
γέἐξουσίαι" ὑπὸ τοῦ" θεοῦ τεταγμέναι.εἰσίν. 2 ὥστε ὁ 
authorities, by God have been appointed. So that he that 
ἀντιτασσόμενος τῇ ἐξουσίᾳ, τῇ τοῦ θεοῦ διαταγῇ ἀνθέστηκεν 
sets himself against τ authority, the 7of God ‘ordinance Tesists ; 
οἱ δὲ ἀνθεστηκότες, ἑαυτοῖς κρῖμα λήψονται." 8 οἱ 
and they that resist, to themselves judgment shall receive. 2The 
γὰρ ἄρχοντες οὐκ.εἰσὶν φόβος "rev ἀγαθῶν ἔργων," ἀλλὰ 
‘for rulers are not a terror to good works, but 
“τῶν κακῶν." θέλεις.δὲ μὴ φοβεῖσθαι τὴν ἐξουσίαν ; τὸ 
to evil [ones]. Dost thou desire not to be afraid of the authority?! ?the 
ἀγαθὸν ποίει, καὶ ἕξεις ἔπαινον ἐξ αὐτῆς" 4 θεοῦ.γὰρ 
good ‘practise, and thoushalt have praise from _ it; for of God 
διάκονός ἐστίν σοι εἰς τὸ ἀγαθόν. ἐὰν δὲ τὸ κακὸν ποιῇς, 
aservant itis to 866 for Bood: But if evil thou practisest, 
φοβοῦ" ov.yap εἰκῆ THY μάχαιραν φορεῖ" θεοῦ.γὰ ey eS 
fear ; for not in vain the sword it wears; forofGod a servant 
ἐστιν, ἔκδικος εἰς ὀργὴνΘ τῷ τὸ κακὸν πράσσοντι. 5 διὸ 
itis, anavenger for wrath to him that evil does, Wherefore 
ἀνάγκη ὑποτάσσεσθαι, οὐ μόνον διὰ τὴν ὀργήν, 
necessary [itis] to be subject, not only on account of wrath. 


ἀλλὰ καὶ διὰ τὴν συνείδησιν. 6 διὰ τοῦτο. γὰρ καὶ 
but also on account of conscience. For on this account also 


φόρους τελεῖτε' etrovpyoi-yap θεοῦ εἰσιν, εἰς αὐτὸ τοῦτο 
tribute pay ye; for ministers of God they are, on this same thing 
προσκαρτεροῦντες. 7 ἀπόδοτε δοῦν! πᾶσιν τὰς ὑφειλάς" 
attending continually. Benger therefore toall their dues: 


ἀλλὰ νίκα 
but 


ὑπὸ τοῦ κακοῦ, 
evil, 


21 μὴ.νικῶ 


Be not overcome by 


ἐν τῷ 
overcome ?with 


® ὑπὸ LTTr. 


t + [ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ] before God and τ. 
y — ἐξουσίαι GLTTrAW. 
ἔργῳ to a good work LTTraw. 


Υ τῶν L. Ww ἀλλὰ ἐὰν But if LTTrA. 
_ *— TOUGLITrAW. 8 λήμψονται LTTra. Ὁ τῷ ἀγαθῷ 
© τῷ kakw to an evil [one] LTTrAW 4d οὖν LTTrAW. 


MAE, XLV. ROMANS. 
τῷ τὸν φόρον, τὸν Popov τῷ τὸ τέλος, TO TE\OG TH 
to whom tribute, tribute; towhom custom, custom ; to whom 
τὸν φόβον, τὸν φόβον: τῷ τὴν τιμήν, THY τιμήν. ὃ Μηδενὶ 
fear, fear; to whom honour, honour. To no one 
μηδὲν ὀφείλετε, εἰμὴ τὸ ἀγαπᾷν ἀλλήλους" ὑ.γὰρ 
anything oweye, unless to love one another: for he that 


(lit. nothing) τ = 
? ~ ‘ er , , 4 ’ 
ἀγαπῶν τὸν ἕτερον, νόμον πεπλήρωκεν. 9 τὸ yap, Οὐ 

loves the other, law has fulfilled. For, *Not 

μοιχεύσεις, οὐ-φονεύσεις, οὐ.κλέψεις, 

‘thou “shalt commit adultery, Thoushalt not commit murder, Thou shalt not steal, 

fob. pevdopaorupnoese,' οὐκ.ἐπιθυμήσεις, Kai εἴ τις ἑτέρα 
Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not lust; and if any other com- 

, ~ s ~ ~y 2 

ἐντολή, ἐν ἔτούτῳ τῷ λόγῳ! ἀνακεφαλαιοῦται, "ἐν τῷ," “Aya- 
mandment, in this word it is sammed up, in this, Thou 
πήσεις τὸν πλησίον.σου we ἰἑξαυτόν." 10 Ἣ ἀγάπη τῷ πλη- 
shaltlove thy neighbour 85 thyself. Love to the neigh- 
σίον κακὸν ovK.ipyaZerau’ πλήρωμα οὖν νόμου ἡ ἀγάπη. 
bour, evil does not work : 3fulness ‘therefore 5of([*the]7law ‘*love([7is]. 

11 Kai τοῦτο, εἰδότες τὸν καιρόν, ὅτι ὥρα ἡμᾶς 

Also this, knowing the time, that [the] hour *we [it 5215] 

non ἐξ ὕπνου ἐγερθῆναι: viv-yap ἐγγύτερον ἡμῶν ἡ 
ΞΙΤΘΘΔΑΥ͂ out of sleep should be roused; for now nearer {is] of us the 
σωτηρία, ἢ Ore ἐπιστεύσαμεν. 12 ἡ νὺξ προέκοψεν, 1.08 
salvation, than when we believed. The night is advanced, and the 


ἡμέρα ἤγγικεν. ἀποθώμεθα οὖν τὰ ἔργα τοῦ σκότους, 
day has drawn near; we should cast off therefore the works of darkness, 
‘kai ἐνδυσώμεθα' τὰ ὕπλα τοῦ φωτός. 13 ὡς ἔν ἡμέρᾳ, 


and should puton the armour of light. As in([the] day, 


εὐσχημόνως περιπατήσωμεν, μὴ κώμοις Kai μέθαις, μὴ κοί- 
becomingly weshould walk; ποῦ inrevels and drinking, not in cham- 
ταις καὶ ἀσελγείαις, μὴ ἔριδι Kai ζήλῳ' 14 ™adX’! ἐνδύσασθε 
beringand wantonness, ποῦ instrife and emulation. But put on 
τὸν κύριον Ἰησοῦν χριστόν, Kai τῆς σαρκὸς πρόνοιαν μὴ 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and of *the *flesh ‘forethought “ποῦ 
ποιεῖσθε εἰς ἐπιθυμίας. 
ἴᾷο *take ‘for ‘desire. 


14 Tov.di ἀσθενοῦντα τῇ πίστει προσλαμβάνεσθε, μὴ εἰς 
But him being weak inthe faith receive not for 


διακρίσεις διαλογισμῶν. 2 Ὃς μὲν πιστεύει φαγεῖν πάντα, 


decisions of reasonings, One believes teeat all things; 

6.08 ἀσθενῶν λάχανα ἐσθίει. 8 ὁ ἐσθίων, τὸν μὴ 
another being weak “herbs eats. He that eats, ®him “that "ποῦ 
ἐσθίοντα μὴ.ἐξουθενείτω: "καὶ ὁ" μὴ-.ἐσθίων, τὸν é- 

7eats ‘let “him “not *despise; and hethat eats not, Shim “that 
σθίοντα μὴ-κρινέτω. ὁ.θεὸς. γὰρ αὐτὸν προσελάβετο. 4 σὺ 
Teats Net him ὁποὺ *judge: for God him received. *Thou 


τίς εἶ ὁ κρίνων ἀλλότριον οἰκέτην ; τῷ.ἰδίῳ κυρίῳ -oTNKEL 
who τὰ judging another’s servant? tohisown master he stands 
ἢ πίπτει. σταθήσεται. δέ" οδυνατὸς. γάρ ἐστιν ὁ θεὸς!" 
or falls. And he shall be made to stand; for able is God 
στῆσαι αὐτόν. ὅ Ὅς μὲν Ρ κρίνει ἡμέραν παρ᾽ ἡμέραν, 

to make *stand *him. One judges aday [tobe)above aday; 


ε ἀλλήλους ἀγαπᾶν GLTTrAW. f — οὐ ψευδομαρτυρήσεις GLTTrAw. 


LTTraw. h [év τῷ] LTra. i σεαυτόν LTTrA. 
you Ta. | ἐνδυσώμεθα δὲ LTTTAW. m ἀλλὰ TTrAW. = ὃ δὲ LTTrA. 


κύριος for able is the Lord Lrtra ; évvaret yap ὁ θεὸς W. 


429) 


upon this very thing. 
7 Render therefore to 
all their dues : tribute 
to whom tribute is 
due ; custom to whom 
custom ; fear to whom 
fear ; honour to whom 
honour. 8 Owe noman 
any thing, but to love 
one another: for he 
that loveth another 
hath fulfilled the law. 
9 For this, Thou shalt 
not commit adultery, 
Thou shalt not kill, 
Thou shalt not steal, 
Thou shalt not bear 
false witness, Thou 
shalt not covet; and 
if there be any other 
commandment, it is 
briefly comprehended 
in this saying, namely, 
Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself. 
10 Love worketh no 
ill to his neighbour: 
therefore love is the 
fulfilling of the law. 

11 And that, know- 
ing the time, that now 
it ws high time to a- 
wake out of sleep: for 
now 7s our salvation 
nearer than when we 
believed. 12 The night 
is far spent, the day is 
at hand: let us there- 
fore cast off the works 
of darkness, and let us 
put on the armour of 
light. 13 Let us walk 
honestly, as in the day; 
not in rioting and 
drunkenness, not in 
chambering and wan- 
tonness, not in strife 
and envying. 14 But 
put ye onthe Lord Je- 
sus Christ, and make 
not provision for the 
flesh, to fulfil the lusts 
thereof. 


XIV. Him that is 
weak in the faith re- 
ceive ye, but not to 
doubtful disputations. 
2 For one believeth 
that he may eat all 
things : another, who 
is weak, eateth herbs. 
3 Let not him that 
eateth despise him 
that eateth not; and 
let not him which eat- 
eth not judge him that 
eateth : for God hath 
received him. 4 Who 
art thou that judgest 
another man’s ser- 
vant? to his own 
master he standeth or 
falleth. Yea, he shall 
be holden up: for God 
is able to make him 
stand. 5 One man es- 


Β τῷ λόγῳ τούτῳ 


Κ ἤδη ἡμᾶς LTrw ; ἤδη ὑμᾶς already 


° δυνατεῖ γὰρ ὁ 


P + yap for (one) [L]r. 


490 

teemeth one day above 
another : anvther es- 
teemeth every day a- 
like. Let every man 
be fully persuaded in 
his own mind. 6 He 
that regardeth the day, 
regardeth it unto the 
Lord ; and he that re- 
gardeth not the day, to 
the Lord he doth not 
regard it. He that 
eatcth, eateth to the 
Lord, for he giveth 
God thanks; and he 
that eateth not, to 
the Lord he eateth 
not, and giveth God 
thauks. 7 For none of 
us liveth to himself, 
and no man dieth to 
himself, 8 For whether 
we live, we live unto 
the Lord ; and whether 
we die, we die unto 
the Lord : whether we 
live therefore, or die, 
we are the Lord’s, 
9 For to this end 
Christ both died, and 
rose, and revived, that 
he might be Lord both 
of the dead and living. 
10 But why dost thou 
judge thy brother? or 
why dost thou set at 
nought thy brother? 
for we shall all stand 
before the judgment 
seat of Christ. 11 For 
it is written, As I live, 
saith the Lord, every 
knee shall bow to me 
and every tongue shall 
confess to God. 12 So 
then every one of us 
shall give account of 
himself toGod. 13 Let 
us not therefore judge 
one another any more: 
but judge this rather, 
that no man put a 
stumbling block or an 
occision to fall in his 
brother’s way. 14 I 
know, and am _per- 
suaded by the Lord 
Jesus, that there ts no- 
thing unclean of it- 
self: but to him that 
esteemeth any thing 
to be unclean, to him 
tt is unclean. 15 But 
if thy brother be 
grieved with thy meat, 
now walkest thou not 
charitably. | Destroy 
not him with thy 
meat, for whom Christ 
died. 16 Let not then 
your good be evil 
spoken of: 17 for the 
kingdom of God is 
not meat and drink; 
but sighteousness, and 


4 - καὶ ὃ μὴ φρονῶν τὴν ἡμέραν, κυρίῳ ov φρονεῖ LTTr[A]. 
die L. ὶ 
x ἐξομολογήσεται πᾶσα γλῶσσα LTr. 
. [τῷ deg] L. 


ε ἀποθνήσκομεν We 
of God Lrtraw. 
[ἀ το]δώσει a. 


IPO SL QMALOY S. 
ὃς. δὲ κρίνει πᾶσαν ἡμέραν. ἕκαστος ἐν τῷ. ἰδίῳ vot 
another judges every day [tobealike], ?Each ‘in “his °own ‘mind 


πληροφορείσθω. GO φρονῶν τὴν ἡμέραν, κυρίῳ φρονεῖ" 
‘et be fully assured. ΠῸ that regards the day, to[the) Lord regards [it]; 
“καὶ ὁ μηὴς.φρονῶν τὴν ἡμέραν, κυρίῳ οὐ-φρονεῖ." τ ὁ 
and he that regards ποῦ {π6 day, to[the] Lordregards [it] not. He that 
ἐσθίων, κυρίῳ ἐσθίει, εὐχαριστεῖ.γὰρ τῷ Oem Kai ὁ μὴ 
eats, ἕο [16] Lord eats, for he gives thanks to God ; and he that “not 
ἐσθίων, κυρίῳ οὐκ.ἐσθίει, Kai εὐχαριστεῖ τῷ θεῷ. 7 οὐδεὶς 
teats, to[the] Lord heeatsnot, and gives thanks toGod. *No *one 
γὰρ ἡμῶν ἑαυτῷ Cy, Kai οὐδεὶς ἑαυτῷ ἀποθνήσκει. ὃ ἐάν.τε 


XIV. 


for ofus tohimself lives, and noone to himself dies. 2Both “1 
γὰρ ζῶμεν, τῷ κυρίῳ ζῶμεν" ἐάν.τε δἀποθνήσκωμεν," 
for we should live, tothe Lord weshould live; and if we should die, 


τῷ κυρίῳ ἀποθνήσκομεν. tav.reoby ζῶμεν, tav.te δἀπο- 
tothe Lord we die: both if then we should live, and if we should 


θνήσκωμεν," τοῦ κυρίου ἐσμέν. 9 εἰς.τοῦτο.γὰρ χριστὸς ἱκαὶ" 


die, the Lord’s weare. For, for this Christ both 
ἀπέθανεν καὶ Yavéiorn καὶ ἀνέζησεν," ἵνα καὶ νεκρῶν καὶ 

died and rose and livedagain, that both[the] dead and 
ζώντων κυριεύσῃ. 10 Σὺ δὲ τί κρίνεις τὸν ἀδελφόν 


living he might rule over. But thou why judgest thou *brother 
σου; ἢ καὶ ob τί ἐξουθενεῖς τὸν. ἀδελφόν.σου; πάντες.γὰρ 
‘thy? or also thou why dost thou despise thy brother ? For ?all 
παραστησόμεθα τῷ βήματι “Tov χριστοῦ." 11 γέγραπται 
lwe shall stand before the judgment seat of the Christ. 7It *has *been *written 
γάρ, Le ἐγώ, λέγει κύριος ὅτι ἐμοὶ κάμψει πᾶν γόνυ, 
for, “Live ‘I, says [the] Lord, that to me shall bow every kmee, 
καὶ πᾶσα γλῶσσα ἐξομολογήσεται τῷ θεῷ. 12”Apa Yodr' 
and = every tongue shall confess to God. So then 
ἕκαστος ἡμῶν περὶ ἑαυτοῦ λόγον *Owoa' “τῷ θεῷ." 18 Μη- 
each of us concerning himself account shall give to God, No 
κέτι οὖν ἀλλήλους κρίνωμεν: ἀλλὰ τοῦτο κρίνατε μᾶλλον, 
longer therefore one another should we judge; but this judgeye rather, 
τὸ μὴ.τιθέναι πρόσκομμα Tw ἀδελφῷ ἢ σκάνδαλον. 
not to put an occasion of stumbling tothe brother or a cause of offence. 
14 οἶδα Kai πέπεισμαι ἐν κυρίῳ ᾿Ιησοῦ, Ore οὐδὲν 
Iknow and am persuaded in [the] Lord Jesus, that nothing [is]} 
κοινὸν δι᾿ Yéaurov' εἰμὴ τῷ λογιζομένῳ τι κοινὸν 
unclean of itself : except to him who reckons anything unclean 
εἶναι, ἐκείνῳ κοινόν" 15 εἰ “δὲ! διὰ βρῶμα ὁ 
tobe, to that one unclean [it is]. “If ‘but on account of meat 
ἀδελφός. σου λυπεῖται, οὐκέτι κατὰ ἀγάπην περιπατεῖς. 
thy brother is grieved, no longer according to love thou walkest. 
μὴ τῷ βρώ ari.cou ἐκεῖνον ἀπόλλυε ὑπὲρ οὗ χριστὸς ἀπέ- 
“Not “with *thy *meat Shim 1destroy for whom Christ died. 
θανεν. 16 Μὴ.βλασφημείσθω οὖν ὑμῶν τὸ ἀγαθόν" 17 οὐ 
Let ποὺ *be ὅ6Υ]} “spoken 7of ‘therefore your good ; μοῦ 
΄ ᾽ c ‘ ~ ~ ~ ‘ ‘ > ‘4 
yap ἐστιν ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ βρῶσις καὶ πόσις, ἀλλὰ 


“for is the kingdom of God eating and drinking; but 
δικαιοσύνη Kai εἰρήνη Kai χαρὰ ἐν πνεύματι ἁγίῳ᾽ 18 ὁ 
righteousness and peace and joy ἱπ [86] 7Spirit Holy. *He *that 


r+ καὶ and GLTTyAw. 
ν ἔζησεν lived GLTTraW. “ τοῦ θεοῦ 
Υ -- οὖν ττ[4]. 1 ἀποδώσει LT: } 
© yap for LTTrAW. 


τ- καὶ LTTrAW. 


Ὁ αὐτοῦ GLTrw. 


MEV, XV. ROMANS. 


do ἐν 4rovrotc! δουλεύων “τῷ χριστῷ εὐάρεστος τῷ θεῷ, 
or in these things serves the Christ [is] well-pleasing to God, 
καὶ δόκιμος τοῖς ἀνθρώποις. 19 ἄρα οὖν τὰ τῆς εἰρήνης 
and approved by men, So then the things of peace 
ἰδιώκωμεν,, Kai τὰ τῆς οἰκοδομῆς τῆς.εἰς ἀλλήλους. 
we should pursue, and the things for building up one another. 
20 Μὴ ἕνεκεν βρώματος κατάλυε τὸ ἔργον τοῦ θεοῦ. 
Not for the sake of meat destroy the work of God, 
πάντα μὲν καθαρά, ἀλλὰ κακὸν τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ τῷ 


All things indeed [are] pure; but [itis] evil tothe man who 


διὰ ποοσκόμματος ἐσθίοντι. 21 καλὸν τὸ μὴ φαγεῖν κρέα, 
through ΄ stumbling eats. {It 15] right not toeat flesh, 


~ ? τ Τ € ᾽ , , a 
μηδὲ τιεῖν οἷνον, μηδὲ ἐν ᾧ ὁ.ἀδελφός. σου προσκόπτει 8H 
nor drink wine, nor in what thy brother stumbles, or 


σκανδαλίζεται ἢ ἀσθενεῖ." 22 Σὺ πίστιν yee; Kara’ Ἰσαυτὸν" 


is offended, or is weak, 2Thou “faith ‘hast? To thyself 
ἔχε ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ" μακάριος ὁ μὴ-.κρίνων ἑαυτὸν 
have [it] before God. Blessed [is] hethat judgesnot himself 
ἐν δοκιμάζει. 28 ὁ. δὲ διακρινόμενος, ἐὰν φάγῃ. κατα- 
in what he approves. But he that doubts, i he eat, has been 
κέκριται, ὅτι οὐκ ἐκ πίστεως: πᾶν δὲ ὃ οὐκ ἐκ 


condemned, because [it is] not of and everything which [is] not of 


πίστεως, ἁμαρτία ἐστίν. * 
faith, 2sin tig 
15 ᾿Οφείλομεν.δὲ ἡμεῖς oi δυνατοὶ τὰ ἀσθενήματα τῶν 
But we ought, we who(are]strong, the infirmities of the 
ἀδυνάτων βαστάζειν, καὶ μὴ ἑαυτοῖς ἀρέσκειν" 2 ἕκαστος 'γὰρ" 
weak to bear, and not ourselves to please. For *each 
ἡμῶν τῷ πλησίον ἀρεσκέτω εἰς τὸ ἀγαθὸν πρὸς οἰκοδομήν. 
50Υ τι *the 7neighbour ‘let ®please unto good or building up. 
3 καὶ γὰρ ὁ χριστὸς οὐχ ἑαυτῷ ἤρεσεν, ἀλλά, καθὼς γέ- 
For also the Christ not “himself ‘pleased; but, according as it has 


faith ; 


yoarrat, Οἱ dvediopoi τῶν ὀνειδιζόντων σε "ἐπέπεσον" 
been written, The reproaches of those reproaching thee fell 
ἐπ᾿ ἐμέ. 4°Oca-yap προεγράφη, εἰς τὴν ἡμετέραν 


on me. Foras many things as were written before for our 


διδασκαλίαν "προεγράφη, ἵνα διὰ τῆς ὑπομονῆς καὶ THC 


instruction were written before, that through endurance and 
παρακλήσεως τῶν γραφῶν τὴν ἐλπίδα ἔχωμεν. 5 0.08 
encouragement of the scriptures hope we might have. Now the 
> \ 
avuToO 


θεὸς τῆς ὑπομονῆς Kai τῆς παρακλήσεως δῴη ὑμῖν τὸ 
God of endurance and encouragement give you *the*same*thing 
~ ? > , 4 Pp Ἂ Η͂ > ~~ ll - 
φρονεῖν ἔν ἀλλήλοις κατὰ χριστὸν Ἰησοῦν" 6 ἵνα 
to mind with one another according to Christ Jesus ; that 
« A ? 25 iN , , ᾿Ὶ \ , 
ὁμοθυμαδὸν ἐν ἑνὶ στόματι δοξάζητε τὴν θεὸν καὶ πατερα 
with one accord with one mouth yemayglorify the God and Father 
τοῦ κυρίουἡμῶν "Insov χριστοῦ. 7 Διὸ προσλαμβάνεσθε 
of our Lord Jesus hrist. Wherefore receive ye 
WAX DN ‘ ἀν ᾿ , αὐ sl gal || 2 
ἀλλήλους, καθὼς Kai ὁ χριστὸς προσελάβετο ἡμᾶς" εἰς 
one another, accordingas also the Christ received us to 
δόξαν * θεοῦ. 
{the} glory of God. 


4 τούτῳ this GLTTrAW. f διώκομεν We pursue T. 
ἀσθενεῖ 1. 
GLTTraWw. 
πέσαν LTTrA, 


χριστόν Tr. 


ε — τῷ L[Tr]. 


k Place here verses 25—27 of chapter xvi. G. 
0 ἐγράφη were written LTTrAWw. 
9 ὑμᾶς you GLTTraw. ¥ 4+ τοῦ LTTrA. 


431 


ep and joy in the 
oly Ghost. 18 For he 
that in these things 
serveth Christ 7s ac- 
ceptable to God. and 
approved of men. 
19 Let us_ therefore 
follow after the things 
which make for peace, 
and things wherewith 
one may edify another. 
20 For meat destroy 
not the work of God, 
All things indeed are 
pure; but ἐέ is evil for 
that man who eateth 
with offence. 21 /t is 
good neither to eat 
flesh, nor to drink 
wine, nor any thing 
whereby thy brother 
stumbieth, or is of- 
fended, or is made 
wenk. 22 Hast thou 
faith ? have it to thy- 
self before God. Hap- 
py is he that con- 
demneth not himself 
in that thing which he 
alloweth. 23 And he 
that doubteth is damn- 
ed if he eat, because 
he eateth not of faith: 
for whatsoever 7s not 
of faith is sin. 


XV. We then that 
are strong ought to 
bear the infirmities 
of the weak, and 
not to please our- 
selves. 2 Let every one 
of us please his neigh- 
bour for his good to 
edification. 3 For even 
Christ pleased not him- 
self ; but, as it is writ- 
ten, The reproaches of 
them that reproached 
thee fellon me. 4 For 
whatsoever things 
were written afore- 
time were written for 
our learning, that we 
through patience and 
comfort of the serip- 
tures might have 
hope. 5 Now the God 
of patience and conso- 
lation grant you to 
be likeminded one to- 
ward another acccrd- 
ing to Christ Jesus: 
6 that ye may with 
one mind and one 
mouth glorify God, 
even the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 
7 Wherefore receive ye 
one another, as Christ 
also reccived us to the 
glory of God. 


i & — ἢ σκανδαλίζεται ἢ 
h ἣν ([ἣν] A) ἔχεις κατὰ (read faith which thou hast, to &€.) ἱτττα. 
yap for GLTTrAW. 
° + διὰ through LTTraw. 


i σεαυτὸν 
> , 

™ €7T€- 

P Ἰησοῦν 


492 


8 Now I say that 
Jesus Christ was 8 
minister of the cir- 
cumcision forthetruth 
of God, to confirm the 
promises made unto 
the fathers: 9 and 
that the Gentiles 
might glorify God for 
his merey ; as it is 
written, For this cause 
I will confess to thee 
among the Gentiles, 
and sing unto thy 
name. 10 And again 
he saith, Rejoice, ye 
Gentiles, with his peo- 
ple. 11 And again, 
Praise the Lord, all ye 
Gentiles; and laud 
him, all ye people. 
12 And again, Hsaias 
saith, There shall be a 
root of Jesse, and he 
that shall rise toreign 
over the Gentiles ; in 
him shall the Gentiles 
trust. 13 Now the God 
of hope fill you with 
all joy and peace in 
believing, that ye 
may abound in hope, 
through the power of 
the Holy Ghost. 


14 And I myself al- 
so am persuaded of 
you, my brethren, that 
ye also are full of 
goodness, filled with 
all knowledge, able 
also to admonish one 
another. 15 Neverthe- 
less, brethren, I have 
written the more bold- 
ly unto you in some 
sort, as putting you 
in mind, because of 
the grace that is 
given to me of God, 
16 that I should be 
the minister of Jesus 
Christ to the Gentiles, 
ministering the gospel 
of God, that the offer- 
ing up of the Gentiles 
might be acceptable, 
being sanctified by the 
Holy Ghost. 17 I have 
therefore whereof I 
may glory through Je- 
sus Christ in those 
things which pertain 
to God. 18 For I will 
not dare to speak of 
any of those things 
which Christ hath not 
wrought by me, to 
make the Gentiles o- 
bedient, by word and 
deed, 19 through migh- 
ty signs and wonders, 
by the power of the 
Spirit of God; so that 


ΤΡ ΟΣ EQ AGE OY. XV. 


ὃ Λέγω 868," "Inoovy" χριστὸν διάκονον γεγενῆσθαι" περι- 


51 say ‘but, Jesus Christ a servant has become οἴ cir- 
τομῆς ὑπὲρ ἀληθείας θεοῦ, εἰς τὸ βεβαιῶσαι τὰς ἐπαγ- 
cumcision for [the] truth of God, for to confirm the pro- 


γελίας τῶν πατέρων" 9 τὰ δὲ ἔθνη ὑπὲρ ἐλέους δοξάσαι τὸν 
mises of the fathers ; andthe nations for mercy toglorify 
θεόν, καθὼς γέγραπται, Διὰ τοῦτο ἐξομολογήσομαί 


I will confess 


ψαλῶ. 10 Kai 
will I praise. And 


πάλιν λέγει, Εὐφράνθητε, ἔθνη, μετὰ τοῦ.λαοῦ.αὐτοῦ. 11 Kai 
again it says, Rejoice ye, nations, with his people. And 


wadw™, Αἰνεῖτε *rov κύριον πάντα τὰ ἔθνη," καὶ γἐπαινέσατε" 


God; according as it has been written, Because of this 


σοι ἐν ἔθνεσιν, καὶ τῷ.ὀνόματί. σου 
to thee among [the] nations, and thy name 


again, Praise the Lord, all the nations, and praise 
αὐτὸν πάντες ot λαοί. 12 Kai πάλιν, Ἡσαΐας λέγει, “E- 
him, all the peoples. And again, Esaias says, There 
ora ἡ ῥίζα τοῦ Ἰεσσαί, καὶ ὁ ἀνιστάμενος ἄρχειν 
shall be the root of Jesse, and he that arises to rule [the] 
ἐθνῶν, ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ ἔθνη ἐλπιοῦσιν. 18 Ὁ.δὲ θεὸς τῆς 
nations: in him [the] nations shall hope. Now ?the *God 
ἐλπίδος πληρώσαι ὑμᾶς πάσης χαρᾶς Kai εἰρήνης ἐν TH 
*of Shope lmay fill you with ali joy and peace in 
πιστεύειν, εἰς TO περισσεύειν ὑμᾶς ἐν τῇ ἐλπίδι, ἐν δυνάμει 
believing, for 2to Sabound you in hope, in power 
πνεύματος ἁγίου. 
of [the] *Spirit *Holy. 

14 Πέπεισμαι.δέ, ἀδελφοί.μου, καὶ αὐτὸς ἐγὼ περὶ 

But +am *persuaded, ἼΩΥ brethren, “also “myself Γ᾽ concerning 


ὑμῶν, ὅτι καὶ αὐτοὶ μεστοί tore ἀγαθωσύνης, πεπληρωμένοι 
you, that also yourselves full are of goodness, being filled 
πάσης * γνώσεως, δυνάμενοι καὶ ἀλλήλους νουθετεῖν. 15 "τολ- 


πὶ 811 knowledge, beingable also oneanother to admonish. ?More 
μηρότερον" δὲ ἔγραψα ὑμῖν, Ῥάδελφοί,,) ἀπὸ μέρους, ὡς 
boldly but I did write to you, brethren, in part, as 


διὰ τὴν χάριν τὴν δοθεῖσάν μοι 
because of the grace which was given to me 


ε λειτουργὸν “Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ" 
a minister of Jesus Christ 


ἐπαναμιμνήσκων ὑμᾶς, 
reminding you, 
εὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ, 16 εἰς τὸ εἶναί 
by God, for 2to *be ‘me 
εἰς τὰ ἔθνη, ἱερουργοῦντα τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ θεοῦ, 
to the nations, administering in sacred service the glad tidings of God, 
iva γένηται ἡ προσφορὰ τῶν ἐθνῶν εὐπρόσδεκτος, ἡγιασμένη 


that might be the offering up of the nations acceptable, sanctified 
ἐν πνεύματι ἁγίῳ. 17 ἔχω οὖν “ καύχησιν ἐν χριστῷ 
by (the] Spirit 1Holy. Ihave therefore boasting in Christ 
Ἰησοῦ τὰ πρὸς θεόν" 18 οὐ.γὰρ τολμήσω ἔλα- 
_ Jesus [as to] the things pertaining to God. For not will I dare te 
λεῖν τιὶ ὧν οὐ κατειργάσατο χριστὸς δι᾿ ἐμοῦ, εἰς 
speak anything of what*not “worked *out Christ by me, for [the] 
ὑπακοὴν ἐθνῶν, λόγῳ καὶ ἔργῳ, 19 ἐν δυνάμει on- 
obedience of [the] nations, by word and work, in [the] power of 


μείων καὶ τεράτων, ἔν υνάμει πνεύμα v'" ὥστε. 
δυνάμει πνεύματος ᾿θεοῦ"" ὥστε.με 


s yap for LrTrAW. 
says L[A]. 
® τολμηροτερῶς Tr. 
e+ τὴν LITraw 
GLT:[A]W. 


signs and wonders, in([the] power of(the] Spirit of God; so as for me 
t — Ἰησοῦν LTTrA. ν γενέσθαι became LTr. w + λέγει it 
χ πάντα τὰ ἔθνη τὸν κύριον LTTrA. Υ ἐπαινεσάτωσαν LTTrA. 2+ ryst[Al. 


4 χριστοῦ Ἰησοῦ LTTraw. 
h ἁγίου Holy (Spirit) 


© ἀπὸ TTr. 


b — ἀδελφοί LrTr[a |. 
& τι λαλεῖν LTTrAW. 


f 4+ τὸν QLTTrAW. 


XV. ROMANS. 


ἀπὸ ‘lepovoadip καὶ κύκλῳ μέχρι TOU Ἰλλυρικοῦ πεπληρω- 
from Jerusalem, and inacircuit unto Tilyricum, to have fully 
κέναι τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ χριστοῦ" 320 οὕτως. δὲ ᾿φιλοτιμού- 
preached the gladtidings ofthe Christ; and so being am- 
vov' εὐαγγελίζεσθαι, οὐχ ὕπου ὠνομάσθη χριστός, 
itious to announce the gladtidings, not where “was “πδιηθὰ ‘Christ, 
ἵνα μὴ ἐπ᾽ ἀλλότριον θεμέλιον oikodouw 21 ἀλλὰ καθὼς 
that not upon another’s foundation I might build; but according as 
γέγραπται, Οἷς οὐκιἀνηγγέλη περὶ αὐτοῦ, ὄψον- 
it has been written, To whom it was ποῦ announcedconcerning him, they shall 
Tau’ καὶ οἱ οὐκ.ἀκηκόασιν, συνήσουσιν. 22 Διὸ Kai ἐνε- 
see; and thosethat have ποὺ heard, shall understand. Wherefore also I was 
κοπτόμην ἔτὰ.πολλὰ᾿ τοῦ.ἐλθεῖν πρὸς ὑμᾶς. 28 vurvi-cé 
hindered any times from coming to you. But now, 
μηκέτι τόπον ἔχων ἐν τοῖς. κλίμασιν. τούτοις, ἐπιποθίαν.ὃ δὲ 
nolonger *place ‘having in these regions, and *a *longing 
ἔχων τοῦ" ἐλθεῖν πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἀπὸ πολλῶν ἐτῶν, 24 ὡς "ἐὰν" 
Hee tocome to you for many Tents whenever 


πορεύωμαι εἰς THY Σπανίαν, “ἐλεύσομαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς" ἐλπίζω 
I oo go to Spain, I will come to you ; =I *hope 


γὰρ διαπορευόμενος θεάσασθαι ὑμᾶς, καὶ Pig"! ὑμῶν προπεμ- 
‘for going through to see you, and by you to be set 


φθῆναι ἐκεῖ, ἐὰν ὑμῶν πρῶτον ἀπὸ μέρους ἐμπλησθῶ. 

forward thither, if of Jen first in part I should be filled. 

25 Νυνὶ.δὲ πορεύομαι εἰς Ἱερουσαλήμ, διακονῶν τοῖς ἁγίοις. 
But now 1 go to Jerusalem, doing service tothe saints; 


26 “εὐδόκησαν .γὰρ Μακεδονία καὶ ᾿Αχαΐα, κοινωνίαν τινὰ 
for * eres ΙΕ ΒΩ *Macedonia “and *Achaia ©a *contribution 7certain 


ποιήσασθαι εἰς τοὺς πτωχοὺς τῶν ἁγίων τῶν ἐν Ἱερουσα- 
to make for the poor ofthe saints who Exe in Jerusa- 


Anp 27 εὐδόκησαν" γὰρ Kai ὀφειλέται ταὐτῶν εἰσιν. εἰ γὰ 
lem. For they were pleased and “debtors itheir they are; for if 


τοὶς.πνευματικοῖς. αὐτῶν ἐκοινώνησαν τὰ ἔθνη, ὀφείλουσιν 
in their spiritual things *participated ithe “nations, they ought 


Kal ἐν τοῖς σαρκικοῖς λειτουργῆσαι αὐτοῖς. 2B τοῦτο οὖν 
also in the fieshly things to minister to them. This therefore 
ἐπιτελέσας, καὶ σφραγισάμενος αὐτοῖς τὸν.καρπὸν.τοῦτον, 
baying finished, and haying sealed to them this fruit, 
ἀπελεύσομαι Ov ὑμῶν εἰς "τὴν" Σπανίαν. 29 oida.dé ὅτι 
I will set off by oe into Spain. And I know that 


ἐρχόμενος πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ἔν πληρώματι εὐλογίας ‘TOU εὐαγγελίου 
coming to you, in fulness of blessing of the glad tidings 


τοῦ" χριστοῦ ἐλεύσομαι. 30 Παρακαλῶ. δὲ ὑμᾶς, "ἀδελφοί," διὰ 


οὗ Christ I shall come. But I exhort you, brethren, by 
τοῦ.κυρίου- ἡμῶν Inco’ χριστοῦ, Kai διὰ τῆς ἀγάπης τοῦ 
our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of the 


πνεύματος, συναγωνίσασθαί μοι ἐν ταῖς προσευχαῖς ὑπὲρ 
Spirit, to strive together with me in prayers for 


ἐμοῦ πρὸς τὸν Gedy’ 31 ἵνα ῥυσθῶ ἀπὸ τῶν ἀπει- 
me to God, that I may be deliveredfirom those being 
θούντων ἐν τῇ Ἰουδαίᾳ, καὶ ἵνα ἡ "ζιακονία' μου ἡ 

disobedient in Judea ; and that *service *my which [15] 


1 φιλοτιμοῦμαι 1 am ambitious Ltr. Κ πολλάκις L. 
" ἂν LTTrAW. ο-- ἐλεύσομαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς GLITraW. 
τεἰσὶν αὐτῶν LTTrAW. ‘* — τὴν LITrA. 
* — ἵνα LITrA. x 6wpodopia offering of gifts x. 


Pad LA. 


1 [τοῦ] 1. 


t — τοῦ εὐαγγελίου τοῦ GLTTraW. 


495 


from Jerusalem, and 
round about unio 1|- 
lyricum, I have fully 
preached the gospel of 
Christ. 20 Yea, so have 
I strived to preach 
the gospel, not where 
Christ was named, lest 
I should build upon 
another man’s founda- 
tion: 21 but as it is 
written, To whom he 
was not spoken of, they 
shall see: and they that 
have not heard shall 
understand. 22 For 
which cause alsoI have 
been much hindered 
from coming to you. 
23 But now haying no 
more place in these 
parts, and having a 
great desire thesemany 
years to come unto 
you ; 24 whensoever I 
take my journey into 
Spain, I will come to 
you : for I trust to see 
you in my journey, 
and to be brought on 
my way thitherward 
by you, if first I be 
somewhat filled with 
your company. 25 But 
now I go unto Jerusa- 
lem to minister unto 
the saints. 26 For it 
hath pleased them of 
Macedoniaand Achaia 
to make a certain con- 
tribution for the poor 
saints which are at 
Jerusalem, 27 It hath 
pleased them verily ; 


0 and their debtors they 


are. For if the Gen- 
tiles have been made 
partakers of their spi- 
ritual things, their 
duty is also to mini- 
ster unto them in car- 
nal things. 28 When 
therefore I have per- 
formed this, and have 
sealed to them this 
truit, I will come by 
you into Spain. 29 Ang 
I am sure that, when 
I come unto you, 1 
shall come in the ful- 
ness of the blessing οὗ 
the gospel of Christ. 
30 Now I beseech you. 
brethren, for the Lord 
Jesus Christ’s sake, 
and for the love of the 
Spirit, that ye strive 
together with me in 
your prayers to God 
for me; 31 that I may 
be delivered from 
them that do not be- 
lieve in Jud#a; and 
that my service which 


τ ἱκανῶν TrA. 
4 ηὐδόκησαν Tir. 
¥ [ἀδελφοί a. 


FF 


434 


I have for Jerusalem 
may be accepted of 
the saints; 32 that I 
May come unto you 
with joy by the will 
of God, and may with 
you be_ refreshed. 
33 Now the God of 
peace be with you ail. 
Amen, 


XVI. I commend 
unto you Phebe our 
sister, which is a ser- 
vant of the church 
which is at Cenchrea: 
2that ye receive her 
in the Lord, as be- 
cometh saints, and 
that ye assist her in 
whatsoever business 
she hath need of you: 
for she hath been a 
succourer of many, 
and of myself also. 
3 Greet Priscilla and 
Aquila my helpers in 
Christ Jesus: 4 who 
have for my life laid 
down their own necks: 
unto whom not only I 
give thanks, but also 
all the churches of 
the Gentiles. 5 Like- 
wise greet the church 
that is in their house. 
Salute my wellbe- 
loved Epzenetus, who 
is the firstfruits of 
Achaia unto Christ. 
6 Greet Mary, who be- 
stowed much labour 
on us. 7 Salute An- 
dronicus and Jnunia 
my kinsmen, and my 
fallowprisoners, who 
are of note among the 
apostles, who also 
were in Christ before 
me. 8 Greet Amplias 
my beloved in the 
Lord. 9 Salute Ur- 
bane, our helper in 
Christ, and Stachys 
my beloved. 10Salute 
Apelles approved in 
Christ. salute them 
which arg of Aris- 
tobulus’ household. 
li Salute MHerodion 
my kinsman. Greet 
them that be of the 
household of Narcissus, 
which arein the Lord. 
12 Salute Tryphena 
and Tryphosa, who 
labour in the Lord. 
Salute the beloved 
Persis. which laboured 


ΠΡῸΣ PQOMAIOYS. XV, XVE 


Yeic' Ἱερουσαλὴμ εὐπρόσδεκτος "γένηται τοῖς aytowc’' 32 iva 


for Jerusalem acceptable maybe tothe saints; that 
δὲν χαρᾷ ἔλθω" πρὸς ὑμᾶς διὰ θελήματος "θεοῦ," “καὶ 
in joy Imaycome to you by (the) will of God, and 
συναναπαύσωμαι ὑμῖν." 33 0.6@ θεὸς τῆς εἰρηνης μετὰ 
I may berefreshed with you. And the God of peace (be) with 


πάντων ὑμῶν. ἁἀμήν." 
34}} you. Amen. 
16 Συνίστημι δὲ ἡμῖν Φοίβην τὴν ἀδελφὴν.ἡμῶν, οὖσαι 
But lcommend toyou Phebe, our sister, being 
διάκονον τῆς ἐκκλησίας τῆς ἐν “Κεγχοεαῖς " 2 ἵνα [αὐτὴν προσ- 
servant ofthe assembly in Cenchrea ; that her ye may 
dsEnoOe' ἐν κυρίῳ ἀξίως τῶν ἁγίων, Kai παραστῆτε αὐτῇ 


receive in [the] Lord worthily of saints, and yemayassist her 
fos) € ~ , \ ‘ 
ἐν w.av ὑμῶν χρῴζῃ πράγματι" καὶ. γὰρ ξαὕτη" προ- 
in whatever “of *you ‘she °may “need ‘matter ; for also she a 5τ6- 
[4 λ ~ 7 , ‘ h > ~ ? ~ il > 4 
στάτις πολλῶν ἐγενήθη, Kai αὐτοῦ ἐμοῦ." 3 Ασπάσασθε 
courer of many has been, and “myself ‘of *me. Salute 


ἸΠρίσκιλλαν" καὶ ᾿Ακύλαν τοὺς συνεργούς.μου ἐν χριστῷ In- 
Priscilla and Aquila my fellow-workers in Christ Je- 
4 οἵτινες ὑπὲρ τῆς ψυχῆς. μου τὸν. ἑαυτῶν τράχηλον 
(who for my life their own neck 
« , od ’ ? \ ΄ ? ~ ? \ ‘ ~ « 
ὑπέθηκαν, οἷς οὐκ ἐγὼ μόνος εὐχαριστῶ, ἀλλὰ καὶ πᾶσαι αἱ 
laid down: whom not “I ‘only thank, but also all the 
ἐκκλησίαι τῶν ἐθνῶν: 5 καὶ τὴν Kar’ οἶκον αὐτῶν ἐκκλησίαν. 
assemblies of the nations,) and the at ‘*house “their tassembly. 
ἀσπάσασθε ᾿Επαίνετον τὸν. ἀγαπητόν.μου, ὅς ἐστιν ἀπαρχὴ 
Salute Epenetus my beloved, who is a first-fruit 
τῆς * Ayatac' εἰς χριστόν. 6 ἀσπάσασθε 'Μαριάμ," ἥτις πολλὰ 
of Achaia for Christ. Salute Mary, who ?much 


ἐκοπίασεν εἰς ἡμᾶς." 7 ἀσπάσασθε ᾿Ανδρόνικον καὶ ᾿Ἰουνίαν 
Naboured for us. Salute Andronicus and Junias 


τοὺς. συγγενεῖς. μου Kai συναιχμαλώτους pov" οἵτινές εἰσιν 
my kinsmen and 2fellow-prisoners my, who are 


ἐπίσημοι ἐν τοῖς ἀποστόλοις. οἱ Kai πρὸ ἐμοῦ πγεγόνασιν" 


σοῦ" 
sus, 


of note among the apostles ; who also before me were 
ἐν χριστῷ. ὃ ἀσπάσασθε ο“᾿Αμπλίαν" τὸν. ἀγαπητόν.μου ἐν 
in Christ. Salute Amplias my beloved in (the] 


κυρίῳ. 9 ἀσπάσασθε Οὐρβανὸν τὸν συνεργὸν. ἡμῶν ἐν Ῥχριστῷ," 
Lord. Salute Urbanus our fellow-worker in Christ, 


καὶ Στάχυν τὸν ἀγαπητόν. μου. 10 ἀσπάσασθε ᾿Απελλῆν τὸν 


and Stachys my beloved, Salute Apelles the 
δόκιμον ἔν χριστῷ. ἀσπάσασθε τοὺς ἐκ τῶν ᾽Αρι- 
approved in Christ. Salute those of the (household) of Ari- 
στοβούλου. 11 ἀσπάσασθε THpodiwva' τὸν. “συγγενῆ -μου. 
stobulus. Salute Herodion my kinsman, 
ἀσπάσασθε τοὺς ἐκ τῶν Ναρκίσσου. τοὺς ὄντας ἐν 


Salute those of the [household] of Narcissus, who are in(the 


κυρίῳ. 12 ἀσπάσασθε Τρύφαιναν kai Τρυφῶσαν τὰς κοπιώσας 
Lord. Salute Tryphena and ‘Tryphosa, who labour 

ἐν κυρίῳ. "ἀσπάσασθε Περσίδα τὴν ἀγαπητήν, ἥτις πολλὰ 
in (the] Lord. Salute Persis the beloved, who much 


Υ Ἐν att, 


GLTTrAw. 
LTTrA. 
© συγγενὴν Tr. 


2 τοῖς ἁγίοις γένηται LYTrA. 
of [the] Lord Jesus t. 
i προσδέξησθε αὐτὴν LTrA. 
k’Agias Asia GLTTrAW. 
°’AurAtatrov Ampliatus TTrA. 
5 [ἀσπάσασθε..... 


a ἐλθὼν (having come) ἐν χαρᾷ τ. ὃ κυρίου Ἰησοῦ 
© καὶτ; -- καὶ συναναπαύσωμαι ὑμῖν fa}, “ [ἀμήν7Ὑ τ. “ Kev-3 
& αὐτὴ GLTAW. h ἐμοῦ αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 1 Πρίσκαν Prisca 
! Μαρίαν LTra. ™ ὑμᾶς YOu LTTrA. π γέγοναν 

P κυρίῳ [the] Lord in. «Ἡρωδίωνα GLITraw. 
κυρίῳ) τι. 


ROMANS. 
ἐκοπίασεν ἐν κυρίῳ." 18 ἀσπάσασθε Ῥοῦφον τὸν ἐκλεκτὸν 
laboured in([the} Lord. Salate Rufus the chosen 
ἐν κυρίῳ, καὶ τὴν. μητέρα.αὐτοῦ Kai ἐμοῦ. 14 ἀσπάσασθε 
in [the] Lord, and his mother and mine. Salute 
V Actyxoroy,' Φλέγοντα, “Eouar,' Πατρόβωαν, * Eouny,' 

? Y μ 3 δ μ 
Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, 
τοὺς σὺν αὐτοῖς ἀδελφούς. 15 ἀσπάσασθε Φιλόλογον 


XVI. 


καὶ 
and 
Kal 


the ?with *them ‘brethren, Salute Philoiogus and 
Ἰουλίαν, Νηρέα καὶ τὴν-ἀδελφὴν.αὐτοῦ, καὶ ᾿Ολυμπᾶν, Kai 
Julias, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and 


τοὺς σὺν αὐτοῖς πάντας ἁγίους. 16 ἀσπάσασθε ἀλλήλους 


Ξῖ88. *with ‘them all *saints. Salute one another 
ἐν φιλήματι ἁγίῳ. ἀσπάζονται ὑμᾶς at ἐκκλησίαι * Tov 

with a kiss "holy. 7Salute ®you “the *assemblies 
ριστοῦ. 

Sof Christ. 


17 Παρακαλῶ.δὲ ὑμᾶς, ἀδελφοί, σκοπεῖν τοὺς 
But I exhort you, brethren, to consider those who 
στασίας καὶ τὰ σκάνδαλα, παρὰ τὴν διδαχὴν ἣν ὑμεῖς 
sions and ‘causes οὗ Soffence 7contrary *to *the *°teaching **which ‘*ye 
ἐμάθετε, ποιοῦντας" καὶ YéxkNivate ax αὐτῶν. 18 οἱ yap 
3learnt, imake, and turnaway from them. For 
τοιοῦτοι τῷ κυρίῳ. ἡμῶν *Inood χριστῷ οὐ.δουλεύουσι"», ἀλλὰ 
such Sour *Lord 5Jesus ®Christ serve “ποῖ, but 
TH-EavT@Y κοιλίᾳ: Kai διὰ τῆς χρηστολογίας καὶ εὐλογίας 
their own belly, and by kind speaking and praise 
ἐξαπατῶσιν τὰς καρδίας τῶν ἀκάκων. 19 ἡ.γὰρ ὑμῶν ὑπακοὴ 


deceive the hearts ofthe innocent. For the “of “you ‘obedience 
εἰς πάντας ἀφίκετο" *yaipw οὖν τὸ ἐφ᾽ ὑμῖν. θέλω. δὲ 
5to 5411 *rcached. I rejoice therefore concerning you; but I wish 


εἰς TO ἀγαθόν. axepaiouc.6é εἰς TO 


« ~ ‘ b 4. ἄπ “ 
υμας σοφοὺς “μέν. εἰναι 
i good, and simple to 


you wise to be [as] to 
, « 4 ‘ ~ , , 4 ~ 4 ‘ 
κακόν. 20 6.6 θεὸς τῆς εἰρήνης συντρίψει TOY σατανᾶν ὑπὸ 


evil, But the God of peace will bruise Satan under 
τοὺς πόδας. ὑμῶν ἐν τάχει. ἡ χάρις τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ 
your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus 
ἐχριστοῦ" μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν. 4 
Christ [be] with you. 


12Salute 13you ‘Timotheus *my *fellow-worker‘and ‘*Lucius 
καὶ ᾿Ιάσων καὶ Σωσίπατρος oicvyyeveic_uov. 22 ἀσπάζομαι 


2] Φ᾿Ασπάζονται" ὑμᾶς Τιμόθεος ὁ-συνεργός.μου καὶ Λούκιος 
μᾶς Tey γός, μ 


Sand 7Jason ‘and ‘*Sosipater 2°my **kinsmen. 2°Salute 
ὑμᾶς ἐγὼ Τέρτιος ὁ γράψας τὴν ἐπιστολὴν ἐν κυρίῳ. 
**the 


3you I 1Tertius ‘who '*wrote ?°epistle in (the) Lord. 


23 ἀσπάζεται ὑμᾶς Γάϊος ὁ ξένος pov καὶ frie ἐκκλησίας 


?Salutes Syou ‘Gaius, the host ofme and ofthe “assembly 
er Π 7 ’ J ~ » « ’ , ~ , 
ὅλης." ἀσπάζεται ὑμᾶς “Epacroc ὁ οἰκονόμος τῆς πόλεως, 
ἐγ 016. 13Salutes 44you “Erastus *the ‘steward ‘oi‘the ‘city, 


ν᾿ , « >a , ot , ~ ΄ ' md 
καὶ Kovaproc ὁ adedgoc. 24 ©H χάρις τοῦ.κυρίου-ημῶν 
®and ?°Quartus ‘the ‘*brother. The grace of our Lord 
Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ μετὰ πάντων ὑμῶν. apy. 

Jesus Christ [be] with 3411 you. Amen. 


435 


much in the Lord. 
13 Salute Rufus chosen 
in the Lord, and his 
mother and mine. 
14 Salute Asynecritus, 
Phiegon, Hermas, Pa- 
trobas, Hermes, and 
the brethren which are 
with them. 15 Salute 
Philologus, and Julia, 
Nereus, and his sister, 
and Olympas, and ail 
the saints which are 
with them. 16 Salute 
one another with an 
holy kiss. The churches 
of Christ salute you. 


17 Now I beseech 
you, brethren, mark 
them which cause di- 
visigns and offences 
contrary to the doc- 
trine which ye have 
learned; and avoid 
them. 18 Forthey that 
are such serve not our 
Lord Jesus Christ, but 
their own belly; and 
by good words and 
fair speeches deceive 
the hearts of the sim- 
ple. 19 For your obe- 
dience is come zbroad 
unto all men. I am 
glad therefore on your 
behalf: but yet I would 
have you wise unto 
that which is good, 
and simple concerning 
evil. 20 And the God 
of peace shall bruise 
Satan under your feet 
shortly. The grace of 
our Lord Jesus Christ 
be with you, Amen. 


21 Timotheus my 
workfellow, and Lu- 
cius, and Jason, and 
Sosipater, my kins- 
men, salute you. 221 
Tertius, who wrote 
this epistie, salute you 
in the Lord. 23 Gaius 
mine host, and of the 
whole church, saluteth 
you. Erastus the 
chamberiain of the 
city saluteth you, aud 
Quartus a_ brother. 
24 The grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ be 
with you 411. Amen. 


νυ Ἑρμῆν LTTraWw. 
GLTTraWw, Υ éxxAcvere TTr. 

Ὁ — μὲν LTTra. ς — χριστοῦ T[Tra}. 
LTTraw. f OAns τῆς ἐκκλησίας LTTrA. 


w Ἕρμαν LTTrAW. 
z — Ἰησοῦ GLITraw. 
¢ + ἀμήν Amen E. 

& — verse 24 LTTrx[a]. 


t ’Agup- T. 


τ + πᾶσαι all (the assemblies) 
5. ἐφ᾽ ὑμῖν οὖν χαίρω LTTrAW. 
ε᾽Ασπάζεται Salutes 


490 


25 Now to him that 
is of power to stablish 
you according to my 
gospel, and the preach- 
ing of Jesus Christ, 
according to the reve- 
lation of the mystery, 
which was kept secret 
since the world began, 
26 but now is made 
manifest, and by the 
scriptures of the pro- 
phets, according tothe 
commandment of the 
everlasting God, made 
known to all nations 
for the obedience of 
faith : 27 to God only 
wise, be glory through 
Jesus Christ for ever. 
Amen. 


ΠΡΟΣ SK O BP ENVOsr Os A. I, 
2 "Τῷ. δὲ δυναμένῳ ὑμᾶς στηρίξαι κατὰ τὸ εὐαγ- 
Now to him who is able you to establish according to Iglad 
gus? ov Kai τὸ κήρυγμα Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ, κατὰ ἀπο- 
idings ‘my and theproclamation of Jesus Christ, according to a reve- 
κάλυψιν μυστηρίου χρόνοις αἰωνίοις σεσιγημένου, 
lation of [the] mystery intimes of the ages having been kept secret, 


26 φανερωθέντος δὲ νῦν, διά.τε γραφῶν προφητικῶν, κατ᾽ 
but made manifest now, and by “scriptures prophetic, according to 
ἐπιταγὴν τοῦ αἰωνίου θεοῦ, εἰς ὑπακοὴν πίστεως εἰς πάντα 

commandment of the eternal God, for obedience offaith to all 
τὰ ἔθνη γνωρισθέντος. 27 μόνῳ σοφῷ θεῷ, διὰ “In- 


the nations having been made known— [the] only wise God through Je- 


σοῦ χριστοῦ, ᾧ ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. ἀμήν 
sus Christ, to whom[be]the glory to the ages. Amen. 
Κπρὸὲ  ‘Pwpatove ἐγράφη ἀπὸ Κορίνθου, διὰ Φοίβης τῆς 


To [the] Romans written from Corinth. 


διακόνου τῆς ἐν Κεγχρεαῖς ἐκκλησίας." 


servant ofthe7in “*Cenchrea ‘assembly. 


by Phosbe 


Ἢ ΠΡΟΣ TOYS KOPINOIOYS EMIZTOAH IIPOTH.' 


‘THE ‘*TO 


PAUL, called to be an 
apostle of Jesus Christ 
through the will of 
God, and Sosthenes 
our brother, 2 unto the 
church of God which 
is at Corinth, to them 
that are sanctified in 
Christ Jesus, called to 
be saints, with all that 
in every place call up- 
on the name of Je- 
sus Christ our Lord, 
both theirs and ours: 
3 Grace be unto you, 
and peace, from God 
our Father, and from 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 


4 I thank my God 
always on your behalf, 
for the grace of God 
whichis given you by 
Jesus Christ; 5 that 
in every thing ye are 
enriched by him, in 
all utterance, and in 
all knowledge; 6 even 
as the testimony of 
Christ was confirmed 
in you: 7so that ye 
come behind in no 
gift ; waiting for the 
coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ: & who 


STHE SCORINTHIANS 3EPISTLE ?FIRST. 
ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ ὕκλητὸς" ἀπόστολος “Inoot χριστοῦ," διὰ θελή- 
Paul a called apostle of Jesus’ Christ, by [the] will 


ματος θεοῦ, καὶ Σωσθένης ὁ ἀδελφός, 2 ry ἐκκλησίᾳ Tot 
of God, and ϑοβύμοπθοβὝυ:Ὺ: the brother, to the assembly 
θεοῦ ὁτῇ οὔσῃ ἐν Κορίνθῳ, ἡγιασμένοις ἐν χριστῷ Ἰη- 
of God which is in Corinth, having been sanctified in Christ de- 
σοῦ.“ κλητοῖς ἁγίοις, σὺν πᾶσιν τοῖς ἐπικαλουμένοις TO ὄνομα 
sus, cajlled saints, with ll those *calling °on *the ’name 


τοῦ. κυρίου- ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ ἐν παντὶ τόπῳ, αὐτῶν re! 
®of our ‘°Lord "Jesus Christ ‘in every “place, both theirs 
καὶ ἡμῶν" 3 χάρις ὑμῖν Kai εἰρήνη ἀπὸ θεοῦ πατρὸς ἡμῶν 


and ours: grace toyou and peace from God our Father 
καὶ κυρίου Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ. 
and [the] Lord Jesus Christ. 

4 Ἑὐῤχαριστῶ τῷ«.θεῷ.μου πάντοτε περὶ ὑμῶν, ἐπὶ τῇ 


I thank my God always concerning you, for the 


χάριτι τοῦ θεοῦ τῇ δοθείσῃ ὑμῖν ἐν χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ, 5 ὅτι ἐν 
grace of God that was given toyou in Christ Jesus, that in 
παντὶ ἐπλουτίσθητε ἐν αὐτῷ, ἐν παντὶ λόγῳ Kai πάσῃ 
everything ye wereenriched in him, in all discourse and all 
γνώσει, 6 καθὼς τὸ μαρτύριον τοῦ χριστοῦ ἐβεβαιώθη ἐν 
knowledge, accordingasthe testimony ofthe Christ was confirmed in 
ὑμῖν" 7 ὥστε ὑμᾶς μὴ ὑστερεῖσθαι ἐν μηδενὶ χαρίσματι, aTrEK- 
you, sothat ye are behind in not one gift, 
δεχομένους τὴν ἀποκάλυψιν τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ" 
awaiting the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ ; 


h Verses 25—27 placed at end of chapter xiv. a. 


subscription GLTW ; 


i+ τῶν αἰώνων of ages LT. k — the 


Πρὸς Ῥωμαίους Tra. 


4 + Παύλου τοῦ ᾿Αποστόλου of Paul the Apostle E; + IavAovG; -- τοὺς EG; Πρὸς 


Κορινθίους a LTTrAW. 
Κορίνθῳ placed after Incov LTra. 


Ὁ [κλητὺς LA. © χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ LTTraW. 


4 τῇ οὔσῃ ἐν 
e — τε both tral. ioe 


i. Ie CORA N TRA ANS: 


ὃ ὃς καὶ βεβαιώσει ὑμᾶς ἕως 
who also willconfirm you to [the] 
ἡμέρᾳ τοῦ.κυρίου-ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ. 9 πιστὸς ὁ θεύς, Ov 
day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful [is] God, by 
ov ἐκλήθητε εἰς κοινωνίαν τοῦ.υἱοῦ.αὐτοῦ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ 
whom ye were called into fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ 
τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡ μῶν. 
our Lord. 

10 Παρακαλῶ.δὲ ὑμᾶς, ἀδελφοί, διὰ τοῦ ὀνόματος τοῦ 
Now I exhort you, brethren, by the name 
κυρίου.ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, ἵνα τὸ αὐτὸ λέγητε πάντες, 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that *the °same “thing ‘ye “say all, 

ἐν ὑμῖν σχίσματα, ἤἦτε.δὲ κατηρτισμένοι 
3500 ‘there *be among ‘you ‘divisions; but ye be knit together 
ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ νοὶ καὶ ἐν τῇ αὐτῇ γνώμῃ. 11 ἐδηλώθη.γάρ 
in the same mind and in the same judgment. For it was shewn 
μοι περὶ ὑμῶν, ἀδελφοί μου, ὑπὸ τῶν Χλόης, 
to me concerning you, my brethren, by those of [the house of] Chloe, 
Ore ἔριδες ἔν ὑμῖν εἰσιν 12 λέγω.δὲ τοῦτο, ὅτι ἕκαστος 
that strifes among you there are. But I say this, that each 
ὑμῶν λέγει, Ἐγὼ μέν εἰμι Παύλου, ἐγὼ.δὲ ᾿Απολλώ, ἐγω. δὲ 
of you says, I am of Paul, andI of Apollos, andI 
Κηφᾶ, ἐγὼ.δὲ χριστοῦ. 13 Μεμέρισται ὁ χριστός ; μὴ Llav~ 
of Cephas, andI_ of Christ. Has *been*divided ‘the “Christ? 5Paul 
Log ἐσταυρώθη fizrip' ὑμῶν; ἢ εἰς τὸ ὄνομα Παύλου ἐβαπ- 
“was crucified for you? or to the name of Paul wereye 
τίσθητε; 14 εὐχαριστῶ Srp Yew ὅτι οὐδένα ὑμῶν ἐβάπτισα, 
baptized ? I thank God that noone ofyou _ I baptized, 
εἰμὴ Κρίσπον καὶ Λάϊον 1ὅ ἵνα ph τις εἴπῃ Ore εἰς TO 
except Crispus and Gaius, that not anyone shouldsay that unto 
ἐμὸν ὄνομα δέβάπτισα." 16 ἐβάπτισα.δὲ καὶ τὸν Στεφανᾶ 
my name I baptized. AndI baptized also the *of *Stephanas 
oikov’ λοιπὸν ovx.olda εἴ τινα ἄλλον ἐβάπτισα. 17 Οὐ.γὰρ 
thouse ; astotherest Iknownot if any other I baptized. For *not 
ἀπέστειλέν we! χριστὸς βαπτίζειν, ἀλλ᾽ εὐαγγελίζεσθαι" 
7sent 3me 4Christ to baptize, but to announce the glad tidings ; 
οὐκ ἐν σοφίᾳ λόγου, iva μὴ κενωθῇ ὁ σταυρὸς TOU χριστοῦ. 
not in wisdom of word, that not *bemadevoidthe cross ofthe Christ. 
18 ὁ.λόγος.γὰρ ὁ τοῦ σταυροῦ τοῖς μὲν ἀπολλυμένοις μωρία 
Forthe word ofthe cross to those perishing 2foolishness 
ἐστίν, τοῖς. δὲ σωζομένοις ἡμῖν δύναμις θεοῦ ἐστιν. 19 ys- 
lis, but *who ‘are *being “saved ᾿ΐο 18 *power ‘°of **God “it "15. **It**has 
γραπται γάρ, ᾿Απολῶ τὴν σοφίαν τῶν σοφῶν, καὶ τὴν 
1Sheen ‘written ‘*for, I willdestroy the wisdom ofthe wise, amd the 
σύνεσιν τῶν συνετῶν ἀθετήσω. 20 Ποῦ σοφὸς; 
understanding of the understanding ones I will set aside. Where [is the] wise? 
ποῦ γραμματεύς; ποῦ = !ovEnrnrijc| τοῦ.αἰῶνος τούτου; 
where [the] scribe? where [the] disputer of this age? 
> ὧς 9: , ε sy \ ΄ὔ ~ , ,ὔ = 
οὐχὶ. ἐμώρανεν ὁ θεὸς THY σοφίαν Tov.Kdopov."TOUTOU' ; 
did not *make “foolish ‘God the wisdom of this world ? 
21 ᾿Επειδὴ.γὰρ ἐν τῇ σοφίᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ ἔγνω ὁ κόσμος διὰ 
For since, in the wisdom of God, *knew “ποῦ ‘the *world *by 
τῆς σοφίας τὸν θεόν, εὐδόκησεν ὁ θεὸς διὰ τῆς μωρίας τοῦ 


τέλους, ἀνεγκλήτους ἔν τῇ 
end, unimpeachable in the 


Kat 
and 


*wisdom God, 2was*pleased* ‘God by the foolishness of the 
f περὶ L. & — τῷ θεῷ (read εὐχαριστῶ I give thanks) r. 


baptized LrTraw. k αλλὰ TTrA. | συνζητητὴς LTTrA. 


the world) LTTraw. 


i+ [ὃ] L. 


437 


shall also confirm you 
unto the end, that ye 
may be blameless in 
the day of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 9 God 
is faithful, by whom 
ye were called unto 
the fellowship of his 
Son Jesus Christ our 
Lord. 


10 Now I beseech 
you, brethren, by the 
name of our Lord Je- 
sus Christ, that ye all 
speak the same thing, 
and that there be no 
divisions among you; 
but that ve be per- 
fectly joined together 
in the same mind and 
in the same judgment. 
11 For it hath been 
declared unto me of 
you, my brethren, by 
them which are of the 
house of Chloe, that 
there are contentions 
among you. 12 Now 
this I say, that every 
one of you saith, I am 
of Paul; and I of 
Apollos ; and I of Ce- 
phas ; and 1 of Christ. 
13 Is Christ divided? 
was Paul crucified for 
you? or were ye bap- 
tized in the name of 
Paul? 141 thank God 
that I baptized none 
of you, but Crispus 
and Gains; 15 lest any 
should say that I had 
baptized in mine own 
name, 16 And I bap- 
tized also the house- 
hold of Stephanas ; 
besides, I know not 
whether I baptized any 
other. 17 For Christ 
sent me not to bap- 
tize, but to preach the 
gospel: not with wis- 
dom of words, lest the 
cross of Christ should 
be made of none effect. 
18 For the preaching 
of the cross isto them 
that perish foolish- 
ness; but unto us 
which are saved it is 
the power of God. 
19 For it is written, I 
will destroy the wis- 
dom of the wise, and 
will bring to nothing 
the understanding of 
the prudent. 20 Where 
is the wise? where 1s 
the scribe? where ts 
the disputer of this 
world? hath not God 
made foolish the wis- 
dom of this world? 
21 For after that in 
the wisdom of God 
the world by wisdom 
knew not God, it 
pleased God by the 


h ἐβαπτίσθητε ye were 


m — τούτου (read 


438 


foolishness of preach- 
ing to save them 
that believe. 22 For 
the Jews require a 
sign, and the Greeks 
seek after wisdom: 
23 but we preach 
Christ crucified, unto 
the Jews a stumbling- 
block, and unto the 
Greeks foolishness ; 
24 but unto them 
which are called, both 
Jews and Grecks, 
Christ the power of 
God, and the wisdom 
of God. 25 Because 
the foolishness of God 
is wiser than men; and 
the weakness of God 
is stronger than men. 
26 For ye see your 
calling, brethren, how 
that not many wise 
men after the flesh, 
not many mighty, not 
many noble, are call- 
ed: 27 but God hath 
chosen the foolish 
things of the world 
to confound the wise ; 
and God hath chosen 
the weak things of 
the world to confound 
the things which are 
mighty; 28 and base 
things of the world, 
and things which are 
despised, hath God 
chosen, yeda,and things 
which are not, to 
bring to nought things 
that are: 29 that no 
flesh should glory in 
his presence, 30 But 
of him are ye in 
Christ Jesus, who of 
God is made unto us 
wisdom, and right- 
eousness, and sanctifi- 
cation, and redemp- 
tion : 31 that, accord- 
ing as it is written, 
He that glorieth, let 
him glory in. the 
Lord. 


Il. And I, brethren, 
when I came to you, 
came not with excel- 
lency of speech or of 
wisdom, declaring un- 
to you the testimony 
of God, 2 For I de- 
termined not to know 
any thing amongyou, 
save Jesus Christ, and 
him crucified. 3 And 
1 was with you in 
weakness, and in fear, 
aud in much trem- 
bling. 4 And my speech 
and my preaching was 
not with enticing ἡ 
words of man’s wis- 
dom, but in demon- 


Il PO LIAO TNODOYS . A. ik 
κηρύγματος σῶσαι τοὺς πιστεύοντας 22 ἐπειδὴ Kai ‘lov 
proclamation tosave those that believe. Since both Jews 
δαῖοι "σημεῖον" αἰτοῦσιν, καὶ “Ἕλληνες σοφίαν ζητοῦσιν. 

38 *sign task *for, and Greeks 2wisdom seek ; 
23 rpueic.d& κηρύσσομεν χριστὸν ἐσταυρωμένον, ᾿Ιουδαίοις 
but we proclaim Christ crucified, to Jews 


μὲν σκάνδαλον, “Ἕλλησιν" δὲ μωρίαν" 


24 αὐτοῖς δὲ τοῖς 
indeed a cause of eience, *to “Greeks ‘and foolishness ; 


but to those the 
κλητοῖς, ᾿Ιουδαίοις.τε καὶ “Ἕλλησιν, χριστὸν θεοῦ δύναμιν Kai 


called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ God's power and 
θεοῦ σοφίαν. 25 Ort τὸ μωρὸν τοῦ θεοῦ σοφώτερον τῶν 
God’s wisdom. Because the foolishness of God wiser 


ἀνθρώπων toriv’ Kai τὸ ἀσθενὲς τοῦ θεοῦ ἰσχυρότερον τῶν 
than men is, and the weakness of God stronger 


ἀνθρώπων Ῥέστίν." 26 Βλέπετε.γὰρ τὴν.κλῆσιν. ὑμῶν, ἀδελφοί, 
than men is. For ye see your calling, brethren, 


ὅτι οὐ πολλοὶ σοφοὶ κατὰ σάρκα, οὐ πολλοὶ δυνα- 
thatnot many wise according to flesh [there are],not many power- 


Tol, οὐ πολλοὶ εὐγενεῖς" 27 ἀλλὰ τὰ wod τοῦ κόσμου 
ful, not many high-born. But the foolish things ἐπ the world 


ἐξελέξατο ὁ θεός, «ἵνα τοὺς σοφοὺς καταισχύνῃ" " "Kai Ta 
*chose 1God, that the wise he might puttoshame; and the 


ἀσθενὴ τοῦ κόσμου ἐξελέξατο ὁ θεός," ἵνα καταισχύνῃ 
weak things of the world 2chose *God, that he might put to shame 
τὰ ἰσχυρά: 28 Kai τὰ ἀγενῆ τοῦ κόσμου Kai τὰ ἐξουθενη- 
BBs strong things ; and the low-born of the world, and the de- 
μένα ἐξελέξατο ὁ θεός. "κα τὰ μὴ.ὄντα, ἵνα τὰ 
spised “chose 1God, and the bninge that arenot, that the things that 
ὄντα καταργήσῃ' 29 ὕπως μὴ ἱκαυχήσηται πᾶσα σὰρξ 

are he may annul; sothat ποῦ *might °boast tall “flesh 
ἐνώπιον ᾿αὐτοῦ." 80 &&.avrov.oé ὑμεῖς ἐστε ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ, 

before him. But of him ye are in Christ Jesus, 


ὃς ἐγενήθη “piv copia" azo θεοῦ δικαιοσύνη.τε Kai ἁγιασ- 
who was made tous wisdom from God and righleoust and saucti- 


μὸς καὶ ἀπολύτρωσις: 31 ἵνα, καθὼς γέγραπται. 
fication and redemption ; that, according as it has been written, 


Ὃ καυχώμενος, ἐν κυρίῳ καυχάσθω. 
He that boasts, in wae Lord let him boast. 
Q Κἀγὼ ἐλθὼν πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ἀδελφοί, ἦλθον οὐ Kab! 
AndI having σοθ to you, brethren, came not ee to 
ὑπεροχὴν λόγου ἢ σοφίας καταγγέλλων ὑμῖν τὸ μαρτύριον 


excellency of word or wisdom, announcing to you ον ἀραΣ θοΥ 
τοῦ θεοῦ. 2 οὐ.γὰρ ἔκρινα “τοῦ γείδεναι τι ἐν ὑμῖν, 
of God. For “not 'I *decided to know poe among you, 


εἰ μὴ Ἰησοῦν χριστόν, καὶ τοῦτον ἐσταυρωμένον. 3 *Kai ἐγὼ" 
except Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And 1 


ἐν ἀσθενείᾳ καὶ ἐν φόβῳ Kai ἐν τρόμῳ πολλῷ ἐγενόμην πρὸς 


in weakness and in fear and in pense 1much was with 


ὑμᾶς" 4 καὶ ὁ-λόγος.μου καὶ τὸ.κἠρυγμά.μου οὐκ ἐν πειθοὶς 
you; and my word and a pr eachiny {was} not in uate 


“avOowzivng' σοφίας λόγοις, θάλλ᾽" ἐν ἀποδείξει πνεύματος 
Shuman 2of *wisdom words, but in demonstration of (the) Spirit 


n σημεῖα signs GLITraW. 
καταισχύνῃ TOUS σοφούς [L]1Tra. 


σεται Ἑ. 
εἰδέναι GLTrAW. 


: κἀγὼ LTTrA 


© ἔθνεσιν to Nations GLTTrAW. Ρ — ἐστίν TTr. 4 ἵνα 
τ [καὶ τὰ ....0 θεός] L. ® — καὶ LTTrA, * καυχή- 
v τοῦ θεοῦ God GLTTraw. w Ἔχε ἡμῖν LVTrA, X — rou GLTTrAW. Υ τι 


a — ᾿ἀνθρωπίνης GLITrAW. Ὁ ἀλλὰ Tr. 


ΤΠ t ¢OR FN ΈΓΡΑ Ν 5: 

" ’ uv « , ε ~ Vy 4, ? , ? , 
Kal δυνάμεως" ὃ ἵνα ἡ πίστις ὑμῶν μὴ.) ἐν σοφίᾳ ἀνθοώ- 
and of power; that your faith might not be in wisdom of men, 


πων, Ῥάλλ᾽" ἐν δυνάμει θεοῦ. 
but in power of God. 

6 Σοφίαν. δὲ λαλοῦμεν ἐν τοῖς τελείοις᾽ σοφίαν.δὲ ov τοῦ 
But wisdom wespeak among the perfect; but wisdom, not 
αἰῶνος.τούτου, οὐδὲ τῶν ἀρχόντων τοῦ αἰῶνος τούτου, τῶν 

of this age, ΠΟΙ͂ of the rulers of this age, who 
καταργουμένων᾽" 7 ἀλλὰ λαλοῦμεν “σοφίαν θεοῦ" ἐν μυστηρίῳ, 
are coming to nought, But we speak wisdom of God in ἃ mystery, 
THY ἀποκεκρυμμένην ἣν προώρισεν ὁ θεὸς πρὸ τῶν 
the hidden ({wisdom] which predetermined ‘God before the 
αἰώνων sic δόξαν ἡμῶν, ὃ ἣν οὐδεὶς τῶν ἀρχόντων τοῦ 
ages for our glory, which noone of the rulers 
αἰῶνος.τούτου ἔγνωκεν" εἰ γὰρ ἔγνωσαν, οὐκ ἂν τὸν κύριον 
of this age has known, (for if they had known, "ποῦ ‘the Lord 
~ ΄ 2 , ? δ \ , 
τῆς δόξης ἐσταύρωσαν" 9 ἀλλὰ καθὼς γέγρατ- 
50 Ὲ *the ®glory *they 7would have crucified,) but according as it has been 
a“ ? ‘ > τ ‘ μα ? » \ 
Tal, A ὀφθαλμὸς οὐκ.εἶδεν, καὶ οὖς οὐκ. ἤκουσεν, καὶ 
written, Things which ’ eye saw not, and ear heard not, and 
ἐπὶ καρδίαν ἀνθρώπου ovK.avéBn, “ἃ" ἡτοίμασεν ὁ θεὸς 
into heart of man came not, which prepared *God 
τοῖς ἀγαπῶσιν airov’ 10 ἡμῖν. δὲ “ὁ θεὸς ἀπεκάλυψεν!" 
forthose that love him, but to us God revealed [them] 
διὰ rov.rvedparoc-favrov'' ro-yao πνεῦμα πάντα ἐρευνᾷ," 
by his Spirit ; for the Spirit allthings searches, 
καὶ τὰ βάθη τοῦ θεοῦ. 11 τίς.γὰρ οἷδεν ἀνθρώπων τὰ 
even the depths of God. For who “knows ‘of?men the things 
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, εἰμὴ τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ ἀνθρώπου τὸ ἐν 
of man, except the spirit of man which [151 in 
> ~ oe \ ‘ ~ 0. “ ἠδ ‘ h δ HH] 2 ‘ ‘ 
AUTH, οὕτως και τα του DEOV OVOELG “OLOEV, ει. ΜΉ TO 
him? so also the things of God noone knows, except the 
πνεῦμα τοῦ θεοῦ. 12 ἡμεῖς.δὲ οὐ τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ κόσμου ἐλά- 
Spirit of God. But we not the spirit of the world re- 
βομεν, ἀλλὰ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ, ἵνα εἰδῶμεν 
ceived, but the Spirit which [is} from God, that we might know 
τὰ ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ χαρισθέντα ἡμῖν. 13 “A Kai λαλοῦμεν, 
the things by God granted tous: which also we speak, 


οὐκ ἐν διδακτοῖς ἀνθρωπίνης σοφίας λόγοις, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν δι- 
not in taught %of*human ‘wisdom ‘words, but in [those] 
δακτοῖς πνεύματος ἁγίου," πνευματικοῖς πνευματικὰ 


tanght of {the] *Spirit ‘Holy, *by ’spiritual [*means] ‘spiritual *things 
Ἐσυγκρίνοντες." 14 ψυχικὸς δὲ ἄνθρωπος ob.déyerar τὰ 
scommunicating. But [the] natural man receives not the things 
τοῦ πνεύματος τοῦ θεοῦ" Boy αὐτῷ ἐστιν, Kai 
of the Spirit of God, for foolishness to him they are; and 


ov.divarar γνῶναι, OTL πνευματικῶς ἀνακρίνεται. 
he cannot know [them], because spiritually they are discerned ; 
15 ὁ. δὲ πνευματικὸς ἀνακρίνει ‘piv' πάντα, αὐτὸς. δὲ ὑπ᾽ 
but the spiritual discerns all things, but he by 
οὐδενὸς ἀνακρίνεται. 16 τίς. γὰρ ἔγνω νοῦν κυρίου, 
no one is discerned. For who did know [the] mind of [the] Lord? 
᾿ς συμβιβάσει αὐτόν; ἡμεῖς. δὲ νοῦν ™ypiorov' ἔχομεν. 
vho shall instruct him? But we [the] mind of Christ have, 


420 


stration of the Spirit 
and of power: ὃ that 
your faith should not 
stand in the wisdom 
of men, but 
power of God. 


in the 


6 Howbeit we speak 
wisdom among them 
that are perfect: yet 
not the wisdom of this 
world, nor of the 
princes of this world, 
that come to nought: 
7 but we speak the 
wisdom of God ina 
mystery, even the hid- 
den wisdom, which 
God ordained before 
the world unto our 
glory: 8 which none 
of the princes of this 
world xnew: for had 
they known it, they 
would not have cruci- 
fied the Lord of glory. 
9 But as it is written, 
Eye hath not seen, 
nor ear heard, neither 
have entered into the 
heart of man, the 
things which God hath 
prepared for them that 
lovehim. 10 But God 
hath revealed them 
unto us by his Spirit : 
for the Spirit search- 
eth all things, yea, the 
deep things of God. 
11 For what man know- 
eth the things of a 
man, save the spirit of 
man which is in him ? 
even so the things of 
God knoweth no man, 
but the Spirit of God. 
12 Now we have re- 
ceived, not the spirit 
of the world, but the 
spirit which is of God; 
that we might know 
the things that are 
freely given to us of 
God. 13 Which things 
also we speak, not in 
the words which man’s 
wisdom teacheth, but 
which the Holy Ghost 
teacheth ; comparing 
spiritual things with 
spiritual, 14 But the 
natural man receiveth 
not the things of the 
Spirit of God: for 
they are foolishness 
unto him: neither can 
he know them, because 
they are spiritually 
discerned. 15 But he 
that is spiritual judg- 
eth all things, yet he 
himself is judged of 
no man. 16 For who 
hath known the mind 
of the Lord, that he 
may instruct him? 
But we have the mind 
of Christ. 


Ὁ ἀλλὰ Tr. © θεοῦ σοφίαν GLTTrAW. 4 ὅσα whatsoever LTrA. 
“rtraw. ἴ-- αὐτοῦ (read the Spirit) trrr[a]. 
i — ᾿Αγίον GLTTraw. k oup- T. 1 [τὰ] τι; — μὲν T[Tra]. 


© ἀπεκάλυψεν ὁ θεὸς 


Sépavvg TTrA. ἢ ἔγνωκεν has known’ ΤΊΤΑ 
™ κυρίου of [the) urd τι. 


440 


III, AndI, brethren, 
could not speak unto 
you as unto spiritual, 
but as unto carnal, 
even as unto babes in 


Christ. 2 I have fed 
you with milk, and 
not with meat: for 


hitherto ye were not 
able to bear it, neither 
yet now are ye able. 
3 For ye are yet carnal: 
for whereas there is 
among you enyying, 
and strife, and divi- 
sions, are ye not car- 
nal, and walk asmen ? 
4 For while one saith, 
Iam of Paul; andan- 
other, Lam of Apollos; 
are ye not carnal? 
5 Who then is Paul, 
and who is Apollos, 
but ministers by whom 
ye believed, even as 
the Lord gave toevery 
man ? 61 have planted, 
Apollos watered ; but 
God gave the increase. 
7 So then neither is 
he that planteth any- 
thing, neither he that 
watereth; but God 
that giveth the in- 
crease. 8 Now hethat 
planteth and he that 
watereth are one: and 
every man shall re- 
ceive his own reward 
according to his own 
labour. 9 For we are 
labourers together 
with God: ye are God’s 
husbandry, ye are 
God’s building. 10 Ac- 
cording tothe grace of 
God which is given 
unto me, as a wise 
masterbuilder, I have 
laid the foundation, 
and another buildeth 
thereon. But letevery 
man take heed how 
he buildeth thereupon. 
11 For other foun- 
dation can no man 
lay than that is 
laid, which is Jesus 
Christ. 12 Now if any 
man build upon this 
foundation gold, sil- 
ver, precious stones, 
wood, hay, stubble, 
13 every man’s work 
shall be made mani- 
fest : for the day shall 
declare it, because it 
shall be revealed by 
fire; and the fire 
shall try every man’s 
work of what sort it 
is. 14 If any man’s 


" κἀγώ GLTTrAW. 
GLITrA. 


transposed LTTrAW. 
> λήμψεται LTTrA. 


(read the foundation) Lrtr[a]. 
4 μενεῖ Shall abide GLTAW. 


τ οὐδὲ GLTTrAW. 
ἄνθρωποί not Men LTTrAw. 


WTP Os AF OQPEPNGrOY > A. ΠῚ. 


3 πΚαὶ ἐγώ; " ἀδελφοί, οὐκ.ἠδυνήθην λαλῆσαι ὑμῖν ὡς 
And I, brethren, was not able to speak, toyou as 


πνευματικοῖς, ἀλλ᾽ we “σαρκικοῖς," we νηπίοις ἔν χριστῷ. 
to apie; but as to Hoey 85 tobabes in hrist. 


2 γάλα ὑμᾶς ἐπότισα, Ῥκαὶ" οὐ βρῶμα: οὔπω.γὰρ «ἠδύνασθε," 
Milk ise ‘I?gaveto drink; and not meat, for not yet were ye able, 


ἀλλ᾽ Tobre' "ἔτι! νῦν dvvacOe 3 ἔτι-γὰρ σαρκικοί ἐστε. 
but neither yet now are ye able; for yet fleshly ye are. 
ὕπου.γὰρ ἐν ὑμῖν ζῆλος Kai ἔρις ‘kai διχοστασίαι.," 

For where among you emulation and strife and divisions [there are], 


ἐστε, καὶ κατὰ 

tare *ye, and pacconding, Sto twalk? 

4 ὅταν.γὰρ λέγῃ τις. ΠΕ γὼ μέν εἰμι ἸΤαύλου, ἕτερος. δέ, Ἔχω 
For when *may “say ‘one, am of Paul, and another, 

᾿Απολλώ, “οὐχὶ σαρκικοί! ἐστε; 5 Τίς" οὖν ἐστιν «Παῦλος, 


οὐχὶ σαρκικοί 


Snot *fleshly ‘man 


of Apollos, Snot *fleshly ‘are ye? Who then is Paul, 
Wric' δὲ Υ Σ᾿Απολλώς," *aXX’ ἢ" διάκονοι Ov ὧν ἐπιστεύ- 
3who ‘and Apolles? but servants thronsk mon ye be- 
σατε, καὶ ἑκάστῳ ὡς ὁ κύριος ἔδωκεν; 6 ἐγὼ ἐφύτευσα, 
lieved, and toeach as the Lord gave? planted, 
᾿Απολλὼς ἐπότισεν, "ἀλλ᾽ ὁ θεὸς ηὔξανεν" 7 ὥστε οὔτε 
Apollos watered ; but God gave growth. So that neither 
c , > , » « / > ? « > , 
ὁ φυτεύων ἐστίν TL, οὔτε ὁ ποτίζων, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ avéa- 
he that plants is anything, nor hethat waters; but *who “gives 


νων θεός. ὃ 0.puTedwv.dé Kai ὁ ποτίζων ἕν iow" ἕκαστος 
*srowth ‘God. But Β6 that plantsand hethat waters one ‘are; ‘each 


δὲ τὸν. ἴδιον μισθὸν Anpera' κατὰ τὸν ἴδιον κόπον. 
Sbut hisown reward shall receive ΒΟΘΌΣΟΙΠΡΙ to hisown labour. 


9 θεοῦ.γάρ ἐσμὲν συνεργοί; θεοῦ γεώργιον, θεοῦ οἰκοδομή 
For God’s *we ὅδυθ ‘fellow-workers ;God’s husbandry, God’s building 


ἐστε. 10 Κατὰ τὴν χάριν τοῦ θεοῦ τὴν δοθεῖσάν μοι, we 
ye are. According to the grace of God which was given tome, as 


4 > , c , I» ἄν 2? ὃ τὰ 
σοφὸς ἀρχιτέκτων θεμέλιον “τέθεικα," ἄλλος.δὲ ἐποικοδομεῖ 
a wise architect [the] foundation I have laid, and another builds up. 


ἕκαστος. δὲ βλεπέτω πῶς ἐποικοδομεῖ' 11 θεμέλιον. γὰρ ἄλλον 
But 7each ‘let take heed how he builds up. For *foundation ‘other 


οὐδεὶς δύναται θεῖναι παρὰ τὸν κείμενον, bc ἐστιν VIn- 


noone is able tolay besides that which islaid, which is Je- 
σοῦς ὁ χριστός." 12 εἰδὲ τις ἐποικοδομεῖ ἐπὶ τὸν θεμέλιον 
sus the cae Now if anyone build οἷν on *foundation 
ἐτοῦτον ἰχρυσόν, ἄργυρον," λίθους τιμίους, ξύλα, χόρτον, 
this gold, othyet stones ‘precious, wood, grass, 
καλάμην, 13 ἑκάστου τὸ ἔργον φανερὸν γενήσεται' ἡ.γὰρ 
BEEAN ofeach the work manifest willbecome; for the 


ὅτι ἐν πυρὶ ἀποκαλύπτεται: καὶ ἑκάστου 
it is revealed ; and of each 


ἡμέρα δηλώσει" 

ey will declare Cit), because in fire 
TO ἔργον ὁποῖόν ἐστιν, TO πῦρξ δοκιμάσει. 14 εἴ τινος τὸ 
the work whatsort itis, the fire will prove. If of anyone the 
ἔργον "μένει! ὃ ἱἐπῳκοδόμησεν," μισθὸν ἔλήψεται"" 15 εἴ 


work abides which he built up, a reward he shall receive. If 


ο σαρκίνοις to fleshy GLTTrAW. Ρ — καὶ GLTTrAW. 4 ἐδύνασθε 
5 [ere] L. — kat διχοστασίαι LTTrA. ¥ οὐκ (οὐχὶ W) 
Ww τί ett a LITr ; ; τίς] A. x ᾿Απολλώς Und ἸΤαῦλος 
— ἀλλ᾽ ἢ GLITrAW. 8 ἀλλὰ LTTrA. 
¢ ἔθηκα Llaid τῦττα. 4 χριστὸς Ἰησοῦς L; —OGTIrAW. ὁ — τοῦτον 
ἔ χρυσίον, ἀργύριον TTr. & + αὐτὸ itself LrTraw. 

i ἐποικοδόμησεν TTrA. K λήμψεται LTTrA. 


¥ + ἐστιν is LITrA. 


ἄνθρωπον περιπατεῖτε 5 


FM TV. FACORINTHIA NS. 


τὸ ἔργον κατακαήσεται, ζημιωθήσεται: adroc.dé 
work shall be consumed, he shall suffer loss, but himself 


τινος 
of anyone the 


σωθήσεται, οὕτως δὲ ὡς διὰ πυρός. 16 Οὐκ οἴδατε ὅτι ναὸς 
shall be saved, Ὀαῦ 50 as through fire. Know ye not that *temple 
θεοῦ ἐστε, καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ θεοῦ οἰκεῖ ἐν ὑμῖν ; 17 εἴ τις 
1God’s yeare, and the Spirit of God dwells in you? If anyone 
τὸν ναὸν τοῦ θεοῦ φθείρει, φθερεῖ ἰτοῦτον" ὁ 
the temple of God corrupt, 7shall*bring ®to Scorruption ‘*him 
θεός" ὁ. γὰρ ναὸς τοῦ θεοῦ ἅγιός ἐστιν, οἵτινές ἐστε ὑμεῖς. 
Ξᾳοᾶ; forthe temple of God “holy lis, which are γα. 
18 μηδεὶς ἑαυτὸν ἐξαπατάτω' εἴ τις δοκεῖ σοφὸς 
Noone “himself let *deceive: if anyone “thinks [*himself] 7wise 
εἶναι ἐν ὑμῖν ἐν τῷ αἰῶνιντούτῳ, μωρὸς γενέσθω, ἵνα 
5to She ‘among you’ in this age, foolish let him become, that 
γένηται σοφός. 19 ἡ-.γὰρ σοφία τοῦ.κόσμου.τούτου μωρία 
he may 6 wise. For the wisdom of this world foolishness 
παρὰ τῷ" θεῷ ἐστιν᾽ γέγραπται.γάρ. Ὁ δρασσόμενος τοὺς 
God i 


with is; for it has been written, He takes the 
σοφοὺς ἐν τῇ-πανουργίᾳ. αὐτῶν. 20 καὶ πάλιν, Κύριος 
wise in their craftiness. And again, [The] Lord 


γινώσκει τοὺς διαλογισμοὺς τῶν σοφῶν, OTL εἰσὶν μάταιοι. 
knows the reasonings ofthe wise, that they are vain. 
21 “Ὥστε μηδεὶς καυχάσθω ἐν ἀνθρώποις" πάντα.γὰρ ὑμῶν 
50 ὑμαῦ *no%ene ‘let boast in men ; for allthings *yours 
ἐστιν, 22 εἴτε ἸΤαῦλος, εἴτε ᾿Απολλώς, εἴτε Κηφᾶς, εἴτε 
lare, Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas,_ or (the) 
κόσμος, εἴτε ζωή, εἴτε θάνατος, εἴτε ἐνεστῶτα, εἴτε μέλλοντα" 
world, or life, or death, or present things, or coming things, 
πάντα ὑμῶν "ἐστιν᾽" 23 ὑμεῖς.δὲ χριστοῦ" χριστὸς. δὲ θεοῦ. 


811 yours ‘are; andye  Christ’s, and Christ God’s. 
4 Οὕτως ἡμᾶς λογιζέσθω ἄνθρωπος ὡς ὑπηρέτας χριστοῦ 
So ‘of®us ‘let *reckon 7a *man as attendants οἵ Christ 
καὶ οἰκονόμους μυστηρίων θεοῦ. Ὡ οὃ δὲ" λοιπόν, ζητεῖται 
and stewards 3mysteries ‘of 7God’s. But as to the rest, it is required 
ἐν τοῖς οἰκονόμοις ἵνα πιστός Tic εὑρεθῇ. 8 ἐμοὶ. δὲ εἰς ἐλά- 
in stewards that faithful one be found, But tome  thesmall- 


χιστόν ἐστιν iva ὑφ᾽ ὑμῶν ἀνακριθῶ, ἢ ὑπὸ ἀνθρωπίνης 
est matter itis that by you JIbeexamined, or by man’s 
ἡμέρας" ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ἐμαυτὸν avaxpivw. 4 οὐδὲν. γὰρ ἐμαυτῷ 
day. But neither myself dolIexamine. Forof nothing in myself 
, ? ? ? ? , , c \ ? 
σύνοιδα' ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐν τούτῳ OediKaiwpat ὁ. δὲ ἀνα- 
Iamconscious; but not by this havelI beenjustified: but Βα who ex- 
κρίνων με κύριός ἐστιν. ὅ ὥστε μὴ πρὸ καιροῦ τι 
amines τὴθ [086] Lord is. So that not before [the] time anything 
κρίνετε, ἕως ἂν ἔλθῃ ὁ κύριος, ὃς καὶ φωτίσει τὰ 


judge, until may have come the Lord, who both will bring to light the 
κρυπτὰ TOU σκότους, καὶ φανερώσει τὰς βουλὰς τῶν 
hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels 


καρδιῶν" Kai τότε ὁ ἔπαινος γενήσεται ἑκάστῳ ἀπὸ TOU θεοῦ. 
of hearts; and then praise shall be toeach from God. 
6 Ταῦτα.δέ, ἀδελφοί, μετεσχημάτισα εἰς ἐμαυτὸν καὶ P’A- 
Now these things, brethren, I transferred to myself and A- 
AX ‘ I δ ? « ~ ε > t ~ 10 A 1 e a 
πολλω t ὑμᾶς, wa ἐν ἡμῖν μάθητε τὸ μὴ ὑπὲρ 
pollos on account of you, that in us yemay learn not *above 


44] 


work abide which he 
hath built thereupon, 
he shall receive a re- 
ward. 15 ΤῈ anyman’s 
work shall be burned, 
he shall suffer loss: 
but he himself shall 
be saved ; yet so as by 
fire. 16 Know ye not 
that ye are the temple 
of God, and that the 
Spirit of God dwelleth 
in’ “you? | 17 Ef ‘any 
man defile the temple 
of God, him shall God 
destroy ; for the tem- 
ple of God is holy, 
which temple ye are. 
18 Let no man deceive 
himself. If any man 
among you seemeth to 
be wise in this world, 
let him become a fool, 
that he may be wise. 
19 For the wisdom of 
this world is foolish- 
ness with God. For 
itis written, He taketh 
the wise in their own 
eraftiness. 20 And 
again, The Lord know- 
eth the thoughts of the 
wise, that they are 
vain. 21 Therefore let 
no man glory in men. 
For all things are 
yours; 22 whether 
Paul, or Apollos, or 
Cephas, or the world, 
or life, or death, or 
things present, or 
things to come; all 
are yours ; 23 and ye 
are Christ’s; and 
Christ is God’s. 

IV. Let a man so 
account of us, as of 
the ministers of Christ, 
and stewards of the 
mysteries of God. 
2 Moreover it is re- 
quired in stewards, 
that a man be found 
faithful. 3 But with 
me it is a very small 
thing that I should be 
judged of you, or of 
man’s judgment: yea, 
1 judge not mine own 
self. 4 For I know 
nothing by myself; 
yet am I not hereby 
justified: but he that 
judgeth me is the 
Lord. 5 Therefore 
judge nothing before 
the time, until the 
Lord come, who both 
will bring to light the 
hidden things of dark- 
ness, and will make 
manifest the counsels 
of the hearts: and 
then shall every man 
have praise of God. 

6 And these things, 
brethren, I have in a 
figure transferred to 
myself and to Apollos 
for your sakes; that 


Ἰ αὐτὸν L. 


ν : m— τῷ L[A]. 
P ᾿Απολλὼν TTr. 


2 — ἐστιν (read [are]) LTTra. 


© ὧδε here LTTr/. 


442 


ye might learn in us 
not to think of men 
above that which is 
written, that no one 
of you be puffed up 
for one against an- 
other. 7 For who 
maketh thee to differ 
from another? and 
what hast thou that 
thou didst not receive? 
now if thou didst re- 
ceive tt, why dost thou 
glory, as if thou hadst 
not received it ? 8 Now 
ye are full, now ye 
are rich, ye have 
reigned as kings with- 
out us: and 1 would 
to God ye did reign, 
that we also might 
reign with you. 9 For 
I think that God hath 
set forth us the apos- 
tles last, as it were 
appointed to death: 
for we are made a 
spectacle unto the 
world, and to angels, 
and to men. 10 We 
are fools for Christ’s 
sake, but ye are wise 
in Christ; we are 
weak, but ye are 
strong; ye are ho- 
nourable, but we are 
despised. 11 Even un- 
to this present hour 
we both hunger, and 
thirst, and are naked, 
and are buffeted, and 
have no certain dwell- 
ingplace ; 12 and la- 
pour, working with 
our own hands : being 
reviled, we bless; being 
persecuted, we suffer 
10:19 being defamed,we 
intreat: we are made 
as the filth of the 
world, and are the off- 
scouring of all things 
unto this day. 14 I 
write not these things 
to shame you, but as 
my beloved sons I 
warn you. 15 For 
though ye have ten 
thousand instructors 
in Christ, yet have ye 
not many fathers; for 
in Christ Jesus I have 
begotten you through 
the eeenete 16 Where- 
fore I beseech you, 
be ye followers of me. 


17 For this cause 
have I sent unto you 
Timotheus, who is my 
beloved gon, and faith- 
ful in the Lord, who 
shall bring you into 
remembrance of my 
ways which be in 
Christ, as I teach 
every where in every 
church, 18 Now some 
are puffed up, as 


9 @ LTTrAW. 


adimonishing T. 


* — φρονεῖν (read μὴ nothing) LTTraW. 
Υ γυμνιτεύομεν LTITIAW. 
24 αὐτὸ very [thing] 1. 


ΠΡΟΣ wk OPIN GHOYS +A. 
4} τφὠρονεῖν." ἵνα 
“what το *think, 
φυσιοῦσθε κατὰ τοῦ ἑτέρου. 
ye be puffed up against the other. For who thee makes to differ? 
ri.dé ἔχεις ὃ οὐκιἔλαβες; εἰδὲ καὶ ἔλαβες, 
and what hast thou which thou didst not receive? but if also thou didst receive, 
τί καυχᾶσαι we μὴ λαβών; 8 ἤδη κεκορεσμένοι ἐστέ, 
why boastest thou as ποὺ having received? Already satiated ye are; 
» γ ΄ 4s « ~ > , - AY ἊΨ , 
ἤδη ἐπλουτήσατε, χωρὶς ἡμῶν ἐβασιλεύσατε" Kai ὀφελόν 
already ye were enriched; apart from us ye reigned ; and 1 would 
ye ἐβασιλεύσατε, iva Kai ἡμεῖς ὑμῖν "συμβασιλεύσωμεν " 
surely ye did reign, that also we *you lmight “reign *with. 
9 δοκῶ.γὰρ ‘bre! ὁ θεὸς ἡμᾶς τοὺς ἀποστόλους ἐσχάτους ἀπέ- 
For I think that God us the apostles last set 
δειξεν ὡς ἐπιθανατίους᾽ ὅτι θέατρον ἐγενήθημεν τῷ κόσμῳ, 
forth as appointed todeath. For aspectacle webecame tothe world, 
καὶ ἀγγέλοις καὶ ἀνθρώποις. 10 ἡμεῖς μωροὶ διὰ 
both toangels and to men. We [are] fools on account of 
χριστόν, ὑμεῖς. δὲ φρόνιμοι ἔν χριστῷ ἡμεῖς ἀσθενεῖς, ὑμεῖς. δὲ 
Christ, but ye prudent in Christ; we weak, but ye 
ἰσχυροί᾽ ὑμεῖς ἔνδοξοι, ἡμεῖς. δὲ ἄτιμοι. 11 ἄχρι τῆς ἄρτι 
strong; ye glorious, but we without honour. To the present 
ὥρας καὶ πεινῶμεν καὶ διψῶμεν, καὶ ᾿γυμνητεύομεν," Kai 
hour both wehunger and thirst, and are naked, and 
κολαφιζόμεθα, καὶ ἀστατοῦμεν, 12 καὶ κοπιῶμεν, ἐργα- 
are buffeted, and wander without a home, and labour, work- 
ζόμενοι ταῖς ἰδίαις χερσίν᾽ λοιδορούμενοι, εὐλογοῦμεν᾽" διω- 
ing with our own hands. Railed at, we bless ; per- 
κόμενοι, ἀνεχόμεθα: 13 “᾿βλασφημούμενοι,) παρακαλοῦμεν" 
secuted, we bear ; evilly spoken to, we beseech : 
ὡς περικαθάρματα τοῦ κόσμου ἐγενήθημεν, πάντων 
as [the] refuse ofthe world we are become, ofall [the] 
περίψημα ἕως ἄρτι. 14 Οὐκ ἐντρέπων ὑμᾶς γράφω ταῦτα, 
off-scouring until now. Not shaming you dol write these things, 
χάἀλλ᾽" ὡς τέκνα μου ἀγαπητὰ ὑνουθετῶ." 15 ἐὰν.γὰρ 


inv. 


μὴ εἷς ὑπὲρ τοῦ ἑνὸς 
that not οὔθ for one 
7 Tic-yap σε διακρίνει ; 


γέγραπται 
Shas ®been ?written 


but as “children ‘my “beloved T admonish [you]. For if 
μυρίους παιδαγωγοὺς ἔχητε ἐν χριστῷ, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ πολ- 


ten thousand tutors ye should have in Christ, yet not many 


ove warépac’ ἐν.γὰρ χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ διὰ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου 

fathers ; for in hrist Jesus through the glad tidings 
ἐγὼ ὑμᾶς ἐγέννησα. 16 παρακαλῶ οὖν ὑμᾶς. μιμηταί μου 
1 


you did beget. I exhort therefore you, imitators %of *me 
γίνεσθε. ἶ 
become. 
17 Διὰ τοῦτο ἔπεμψα ὑμῖν Τιμόθεον, ὕς ἐστιν "τέκνον 


On account of this I sent who is Schild 


μου" ἀγαπητὸν καὶ πιστὸν ἐν κυρίῳ, ὃς ὑμᾶς ἀναμνήσει 
my beloved and faithful in{[the] Lord, who “you ‘will*remind of 
τὰς ὁδούς μου rac ἐν χριστῷ," καθὼς πανταχοῦ ἐν πάσῃ 
my ways that [are]in Christ, according as everywhere in every 
ἐκκλησίᾳ διδάσκω. 18 ὡς μὴ ἐρχομένου δέ μου πρὸς ὑμᾶς 
assembly I teach. 2As%to ‘not ®coming ΠΟ *my to you 
> , , ol ( ’ , ‘ , ‘ « - 98 
ἐφυσιώθησάν τινες" 19 ἐλεύσομαι.δὲ ταχέως πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ἐὰν 
“were *puffed *up ‘some; but I shall come shortly to you, if 


to you Timotheus, 


8 gup- T. t ὅτι LTTraAW. 
x ἀλλὰ Tr. Υ νουθετῶν 
b + Ἰησοῦ Jesus LT. 


w δυσφημούμενοι defamed Ta. 
® wou τέκνον LTTrA. 


Vi Vv: Ero RENT HEA NS) 


ὁ κύριος θελήσῃ, Kai γνώσομαι, ob τὸν λόγον τῶν 
the Lord will, and I will know, ποῦ the word of those who 


πεφυσιωμένων, ἀλλὰ τὴν δύναμιν. 20 οὐ.γὰρ ἐν λόγῳ ἡ 


are puffed up, but the power. For not in word the 
βασιλεία τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν δυνάμει. 21 τί θέλετε : ἐν 
kingdom of God [is], but in power. What willye? with 
ῥάβδῳ ἔλθω πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ἢ ἐν ἀγάπῃ πνεύματί. τε “πρᾳό- 
arod Ishouldcome_ to you, or in love andaspirit of meek- 
τητος": 
ness ? 


5 Ὅλως ἀκούεται ἐν ὑμῖν πορνεία, καὶ τοιαύτη πορνεία 

Commonly ?is reported *among *you ‘fornication, and such fornication 

¢ ~ ’ 

ἥτις οὐδὲ ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν Δὀνομάζεται,; ὥστε γυναῖκά 
which noteven among the nations is named, so as Swife 


τινα τοῦ πατρὸς ἔχειν. 2 Kai ὑμεῖς περ υσι οι δὲ ἐστέ: 
‘one Bis} Sfather’s 210 “have. And ye uffed “up lare, 


, ~ 
καὶ οὐχὶ μᾶλλον ἐπενθήσατε, iva “ἐξαρθῇ ἐκ μέσου. ὑμῶν 
and not rather did ages that might te taken out of oan midst 


« ene 


0 τὸ ἔργον. τοῦτο 'ποιήσας ; ΠΙΓΟῚ: i μὲν yao ξὼς" ἀπὼν τῷ 
he who this deed did! ‘for as beingabsent 


σώματι, παρὼν δὲ τῷ πνεύματι, ἤδη κέκρικα ὡς παρών, 
in body, but being present in spirit, already have judged as being present, 


TOV οὕτως τοῦτο κατεργασάμενον, 4 ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ 
him who 50 sthis ‘worked “out, in the name 


~ ἢ - ~ ε ~ \ 

κυρίου. "ἡμῶν" "Incod ἱχριστοῦ,, συναχθέντων ὑμῶν καὶ 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, being gathered together ye and 

~ ? ~ ᾿ ~ , ~ , - ~ ? ~ 
τοῦ ἐμοῦ πνεύματος, σὺν TY δυνάμει τοῦ κυρίου. ἡ μῶν" ᾿Τησοῦ 
my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus 
Ἰχριστοῦ," ὃ παραδοῦναι τὸν τοιοῦτον τῷ σατανᾷ εἰς ὄλεθρον 


Christ— to deliver such a one toSatan for destruction 
τῆς σαρκός, ἵνα τὸ πνεῦμα σωθῇ ἐν TH ἡμέρᾳ τοῦ κυρίου 
of the flesh, that the spirit may besavedin the day ofthe Lord 


vp τὸ il ἣν ? A 4 10 ev A 
Ιησοῦ." 6 Οὐ καλὸν τὸ.καὐύχημα.ὑμῶν᾽ οὐκ οἴδατε ὅτι μικρὰ 
Jesus, Not good [is] your boasting. Know ye not that a little 


ζύμη ὕλον τὸ φύραμα ζυμοῖ; 7 ἐκκαθάρατε “ody! τὴν πα- 
leaven *whole *the Ἅππεν ‘leavens ? Purge out therefore the 


aay ζύμην. ἵνα ἦτε νέον φύραμα, καθώς ἐστε ἄξζυμοι' 
ola Jeaven, that ye ΠΕ beanew lump, according as yeare unleavened, 


καὶ. γὰρ τὸ. ᾿“πάσχα. ἡμῶν "ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν! οἐτύθη) χριστός. 
For also 2our *passover *for ™s “was Ἐπ ταδὶ Christ. 


8 wore ἑορτάζωμεν, μὴ ἔν ζύμῃ παλαιᾷ, μηδὲ ἐν 


So that we should celebrate the feast, not with “leaven ‘old, nor with 


ζύμῃ κακίας καὶ πονηρίας, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ἀζύμοις Ρείλι- 
leaven Of malice and wickedness, but with sia ΙΕ ἢ (bread) of 


κρινείας" Kai ἀληθείας. 
sincerity and. of truth. 
9 Ἔγραψα ὑμῖν ἐν τῇ ἐπιστολῇ, μὴ συναναμίγνυσθαι 
Iwrote toyou in the epistle, not to associate with 


mopvow’ 10 “καὶ οὐ πάντως τοῖς πόρνοις τοῦ.κόσμου τού- 
fornicators ; and not altogether with the fornicators of this world, 


~ ’ Ξ ᾽ 
του, ἢ τοῖς πλεονέκταις, τὴ" ἅρπαξιν, ἢ εἰδωλολάτραις" ἐπεὶ 
or withthe  covetous, or rapacious, or idolaters, since 


443 


thongh I would not 
come to you. 19 But 
I will come to you 
shortly, if the Lord 
will, and will know 
not the speech of them 
which are puffed up, 
but the power. 20 For 
the kingdom of God 
is not in word, but in 
power. 21 What will 
ye? shall I come unto 
you with a rod, or in 
love, and in the spirit 
of meekness ? 

Vv. It is reported 
commonly that there 
is fornication among 
you, and such fornica- 
tion as is not so much 
as named among the 
Gentiles, that one 
should have his fa- 
ther’s wife. 2And ye 
are puffed up,and have 
not rather mourned, 
that he that hath done 
this deed might be 
taken away from a- 
mong you. 3 For I 
verily, as absent in 
body, but present in 
spirit, have judged al- 
ready, as though I 
were present, concern- 
ing him that hath so 
done this deed, 4 in 
the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, when ye 
are gathered toge- 
ther, and my spirit, 
with the power of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, 5 to 
deliver such an one 
unto Satan for the de- 
struction of the flesh, 
that the spirit may 
be saved in the day 
of the Lord Jesus. 
6 Your glorying is 
not good. Know ye 
not that a little lea- 
ven leaveneth the 
whole lump? 7 Purge 
out therefore the eld 
leaven, that ye may 
be a new lump, as ye 
are unleayened. For 
even Christ our pass- 
over is sacrificed for 
us: 8therefore Ict us 
keep the feast, not 
with old leaven, nei- 
ther with the leaven 
of malice and wicked- 
ness; but with the un- 
leavened bread of sin- 
cerity and truth. 

9 I wrote unto you 
in an epistle not to 
company with forni- 
cators: 10 yet not al- 
together with the for- 
nicators of this world, 
or with the covetous, 


or extortioners, or 

ς πραὕὔτητος ue 4 — ὀνομάζεται (read [is]) GuTTr AW. ἀρθῇ GuTtraw. f πράξας: τ. 

8 --- ὡς LTTrAW. — ἡμῶν (read the Lord) {1|]1. -- χριστοῦ LTTra. k tf ae Es 
1 [ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ] (read our Lord Jesus Christ) HY Ἰησοῦ A; ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ w. 
- οὖν GLTTraW. — ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν LTTrAW. - 268 E. Ρ εἰλικρινίας τ q— καὶ 


LTTraw. Γ καὶ and LTTraw. 


144 


with idolaters; for 
then must ye needs 
go out of the world. 
11 But now I have 
written unto you not 
to keep company, if 
any man that is called 
a brother be a forni- 
eator, or covetous, or 
an idolater, or a rail- 
er, or a d, or 
an extortioner; with 
such an one no not to 
eat. 12 For what have 
I to do to judge them 
also that are without? 
donot ye judge them 
that are within? 13 But 
them that are without 
God judgeth. There- 
fore put away from 
among yourselves that 
wicked person. 

V1. Dare any of you, 
having a matter a- 
gainst another, go to 
law before the un- 
just, and not before 
the saints? 2Do ye 
not know that the 
faints shall judge the 
world? and if the 
world shall be judg- 
ed by you, are ye 
unworthy to judge 
the smallest matters? 
3 Know ye not that 
we shall judge an- 
gels? how much more 
things that pertain 
to this life? 4If then 
ye have judgments 
of things pertaining 
to this life, set them 
to judge who are 
least esteemed in the 
church. 5 I speak to 
your shame. Is itso, 
that there is not a 
wise man among you? 
no, not one that shall 
be able to judge be- 
tween his brethren? 
6 But brother goeth 
to law with brother, 
and that before the 
unbelievers. 7 Now 
therefore there is ut- 
terly a fault among 

ou, because ye go to 

w one with another. 
Why do ye not rather 
take wrong? why do 
ye not rather suffer 
yourselves to be de- 
frauded? 8 Nay, ye 
do wrong, and de- 
fraud, and that your 
brethren. 9 Know ye 
not that the unright- 
eous shall not inherit 
the kingdom of God ? 


POs ALKOP UNG DOYS A. Vi VI- 


> , | ” > ~ , ~ . oo” 
ἐὀφείλετε᾽ ἄρα ἐκ τοῦ κόσμου ἐξελθεῖν. 11 ἵ'νυνὶ" δὲ ἔγραψα 

γ8 ought then outof the world to go. But now, I wrote 
ὑμῖν μὴ συναναμίγνυσθαι, ἐάν τις ἀδελφὸς ὀνομαζόμενος 
to you not to associate with [him],if anyone *brother designated 


ἢ" πόρνος, ἢ πλεονέκτης, ἢ εἰδωλολάτρης, ἢ λοίδορος, 


[be] either a fornicator, or covetous, or idolater, or railer, 


na la na iid ~ ΄ 
ἢ μέθυσος, ἢ ἅἵἅρπαξ᾽ τῷ.τοιούτῳ μηδὲ συνεσθίειν. 12 τί 
or ἃ ἀπ ΠΑΙ͂, or rapacious; withsucha one noteven ἴο Θϑῦ. 2What 


γάρ οι “καὶ τοὺς ἔξω κρίνειν ; οὐχὶ τοὺς ἔσω ὑμεῖς 
for [isit]tome also those outside tojudge, “ποὺ “those within ‘ye 

κρίνετε; 18 τοὺς. δὲ ἔξω ὁ θεὸς *xpiver." Yai 
340 “ye judge? But those outside God judges. 
τὸν πονηρὸν ἐξ ὑμῶν. αὐτῶν. 
the wicked person from among yourselves. 

6 Τολμᾷ τις ὑμῶν, πρᾶγμα ἔχων πρὸς τὸν ἕτερον, 

Dare anyone ofyou, amatter having against the other, 

κρίνεσθαι ἐπὶ τῶν ἀδίκων, Kai οὐχὶ ἐπὶ TOY ἁγίων ; 27 οὐκ 
gotolaw before the unrighteous, and not before the saints? sNot 
οἴδατε OTe οἱ ἅγιοι TOY κόσμον κρινοῦσιν; Kai εἰ ἐν ὑμῖν 
‘know γούμαῦ the saints “the ‘world ‘will*judge? and if by you 
κρίνεται ὁ κόσμος, ἀνάξιοί ἐστε κριτηρίων ἐλαχίστων ; 3 οὐκ 
is judged the world, “unworthy ‘are *ye of judgments the smallest? SNot 
οἴδατε Ort ἀγγέλους κρινοῦμεν: "μήτι .γεὶ βιωτικά; 
ΚΟΥ *yethat angels we shall judge? much more then things of this life ? 

4 Bwrika ἐν οὖν κριτήρια ἐὰν ἔχητε, τοὺς 
®Things *of !°this '*life *then *judgment [3848 700] ‘if *ye “have, who 
ἐξουθενημένους ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, τούτους "Kabigere.' 5 πρὸς 


ἐξαρεῖτε" 
And ye shall put out 


areleastesteemed in the assembly, *those 1set #ye Sup. For 
ἐντροπὴν ὑμῖν “λέγω." οὕτως οὐκ. “ἔστιν ἐν ὑμῖν “σοφὸς 
shame toyou Ispeak. Thus istherenot among you a wise[man] 


> δὲ a " « ὃ “ ὃ - ) . , ον ~ 
οὐδὲ εἷς," ὃς OUYNHOETAL OlakpLYaL ἄναᾶ.μεσον TOV ἀδελφοῦ 
not even one, who shall be able to decide between “brother 


αὐτοῦ; 6 ἀλλὰ ἀδελφὸς μετὰ ἀδελφοῦ κρίνεται, καὶ 
‘his [and brother]? But brother with brother goestolaw, and 
τοῦτο ἐπὶ ἀπίστων; 7 ἤδη μὲν fobv" ὅλως ἥττημα 


this before unbelievers ! Already indeed therefore altogether a default 
Sty! ὑμῖν ἐστιν, ὅτι κρίματα ἔχετε μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῶν. *Orari' οὐχὶ 
among you is, that law-suits ye have among yourselves. Why not 
μᾶλλον ἀδικεῖσθε ; "dari οὐχὶ μᾶλλον ἀποστερεῖσθε ; 8 ἀλλὰ 
rather suffer wrong? why not rather be defrauded ? But 
ὑμεῖς ἀδικεῖτε καὶ ἀποστερεῖτε, καὶ ταῦτα" ἀδελφούς. 

ye do wrong and defraud, and these things [to your] brethren. 


9 ἢ ovK-oldare ὅτι ἄδικοι κβασιλείαν θεοῦ" οὐ κληρονο- 
Or know ye ποὺ that unjust ones[the]) kingdom ofGod*not 5 in- 


’ A ~ » ΄ » ᾽ ᾽’ 
(ERIE ; Μὴ-.πλανᾶσθε: οὔτε πόρνοι, οὔτε εἰδωλολάτραι, 
erit ? Be not misled ; neither fornicators, nor idolaters, 
οὔτε μοιχοί, οὔτε μαλακοί, οὔτε ἀρσενο-- 
nor adulterers, ΠΟΙ͂ abusers of themselves as women, nor abusers of them- 
~ » , » , l » Π , 
KOUTat, 10 οὔτε κλέπται, οὔτε πλεονέκται, "οὔτε" μέθυσοι, 


Be not decsived: nei- 8elves with men, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, 
ther fornicators, nor οὐ Χρίδοροι, οὐχ ἅρπαγες, ββασιλείαν θεοῦ ™ov' KAnpovo- 
terers, Or effemin- Dor railers, nor rapacious, [086] kingdom of God shall 

® ὠφείλετε LTTrA. ‘voy Lira. ‘qj be EGLTTrAW. “— καὶ LTTrA. * κρινεῖ (; LTr) will 


judge Gur. 


(read do ye set up those, &c.) GTw. 
& — ἐν (read ὑμῖν with you) GLTTraw. 


{- οὖν T[ tr]. 


K θεοῦ βασιλείαν GLTTrAW. 


y ἐξάρατε put ye out GLTTrAW. 


2 + ἢ Or GLITraAW. 


& μήτιγε GT. 
© λαλῶ L. 


4 ἔνι GLTTrAW. 
h διὰ ri LTrA. 


Ὁ καθίζετε; 
© οὐδεὶς σοφός LTTrA. 
i τοῦτο this LTTraw. 


lov TA. m — ov LITrA. 


VI, VI. Ι 


μήσουσιν. 11 καὶ ταῦτά τινες. ἦτε; 

inherit. And these things some of you were ; 
2 A ε ’ 

σασθε, ἀλλὰ ἡγιάσθητε, 

washed, but ye were sanctified, 


CORINTHIANS. 


"ἀλλὰ" ἀπελού- 
but ye were 
οἀλλ᾽" ἐδικαιώθητε. ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι 
but γ8 were justified, in the name 
τοῦ κυρίου P Inoov,4 καὶ ἐν τῷ πνεύματι τοῦ.θεοῦ. ἡμῶν. 
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 
12 Ilavra μοι ἔξεστιν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ πάντα συμφέρει: πάντα 
All things to me are lawful, but ποῦ allthings doprofit; all things 
μοι ἔξεστιν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐγὼ ἐξουσιασθήσομαι ὕὑπό τινος. 
tomearelawful, but “not ‘I 7willbebrought underthe power of any. 
13 Ta βρώματα τῇ κοιλίᾳ, Kai ἡ κοιλία τοῖς βρώμασιν" 
Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats ; 
0.02.080¢ καὶ ταύτην Kai ταῦτα καταργήσει. τὸ.δὲ σῶμα 
but God both this and these will bring to nought: but the body [is] 
οὐ τῇ πορνείᾳ, ἀλλὰ τῷ κυρίῳ, Kai ὁ κύριος τῷ σώματι" 
not for fornication, but for the Lord, andthe Lord forthe body. 
14 ὁ δὲ θεὸς καὶ τὸν κύριον ἤγειρεν, Kai τἡμᾶς᾽ "ἐξεγερεῖ" διὰ 
AndGod both the Lord γχϑῖβθα ὉΡ, and us will raise out by 


τῆς.δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ. 18 οὐκ. οἴδατε ὅτι τὰ.σώματα. ὑμῶν μέλη 


his power, Know ye not that your bodies members 
χριστοῦ ἐστιν; ἄρας οὖν Ta μέλη τοῦ χριστοῦ, ποιήσω 
of Christ are? Having taken then the members of the Christ, shall I make 


πόρνης μέλη; pny-yévorro. 16 ἣ οὐκιοἴδατε ὅτι ὁ 
(them] 5οΥ 38. *harlot ‘members? May it not be! Or know ye not that he that 
κολλώμενος TY πόρνῃ, ἕν σῶμά ἐστιν; Γἔσονται.γάρ, ἱφησίν," 
isjoined tothe harlot, *one *body lis? For shall be, he says, 
οἱ δύο εἰς σάρκα piay’ 17 ὁ. δὲ κολλώμενος τῷ κυρίῳ, ἕν 


the two for “flesh one. But he that is joined tothe Lord, 7one 
πνεῦμά ἐστιν. 18 Φεύγετε τὴν πορνείαν. πᾶν ἁμάρτημα ὃ 
sspirit 718, Flee fornication. Every sin which 
ἐὰν ποιήσῃ ἄνθρωπος, ἐκτὸς τοῦ σώματός ἐστιν' ὁ.δὲ 

3.8 ‘practise +a “man, without the body is, but he that 

πορνεύων, εἰς τὸ ἴδιον σῶμα ἁμαρτάνει. 19 ἢ οὐκ 
commits fornication, against his own body sins, Or *not 
οἴδατε OTL τὸσῶμα.ὑμῶν ναὸς τοῦ ἐν ὑμῖν ἀγίου πνεύματός 
Κη ον ζγ8 μαῦ your body atemple of the “ἴθ *you ‘Holy 2Spirit 


ἐστιν, οὗ ἔχετε ἀπὸ θεοῦ, Kai οὐκ ἐστὲ ἑαυτῶν; 


20 ἠγορά- 


is, which ye have from God; and “not ?are ‘ye your own? 2ye *were 
σθητε γὰρ τιμῆς" δοξάσατε δὴ τὸν θεὸν ἐν τῷ σώματι 
“bought ‘for withaprice; glorify indeed God in “body 


ὑμῶν, "καὶ ἐν τῷ.πνεύματι. ὑμῶν, ἅτινά ἐστιν τοῦ θεοῦ." 

your, and in your spirit, which are God’s. 
7 Ἱερὶ.δὲ ὧν ἐγράψατε * por," καλὸν ἀνθρώπῳ 
But concerning whatthings yewrote tome: [Itis] good for a man 


γυναικὸς μὴ ἅπτεσθαι 2 διὰ.δὲ τὰς πορνείας ἕκαστος 
*a5woman ‘not 7to*touch; but on account of fornication 7each 


τὴν. ἑαυτοῦ. γυναῖκα ἐχέτω, Kai ἑκάστη τὸν ἴδιον ἄνδρα ἐχέτω. 


*his °own ‘wife llet*have,and *each “ΠΟΥ own Shusband ‘let “have. 
3 γυναικὶ ὁ ἀνὴρ τὴν *dderouéyny εὔνοιαν ἀπο- 
To the wife “the *husband 5due ®benevolence et 


διδότω" dpoiwe%dé' καὶ ἡ γυνὴ τῷ ἀνδρί. 4 ἡ γυνὴ τοῦ ἰδίου 
‘render, and likewise 8150 the wife tothe husband. The wife ΠΟΥ οὔτι 
σώματος οὐκ.ἐξουσιάζει, τάἀλλ᾽" ὁ ἀνήρ' ὁμοίως.δὲ Kai ὁ 


446 


ate, nor abusers of 
themselves with man- 
kind, 10 nor thieves, 
nor covetous, nor 
drunkards, nor. re- 
vilers, nor extortion- 
ers, shall inherit the 
kingdom of God. 
11 And such were 
some of you: but ye 
are washed, but ye are 
sanctified, but ye are 
justified in the name 
of the Lord Jesus, 
and by the Spirit of 
our God. 

12 All things are 
lawful unto me, but 
all things are not ex- 
pedient: all things 
are lawful for me, 
but I will not be 
brought under the 
power of any. 13 Meats 
for the belly, and the 
belly for meats: but 
God shall_ destroy 
both it and them. 
Now the body 8 not 
for fornication, but 
for the Lord; and 
the Lord for the body. 
14 And God hath both 
raised up. the Lord, 
and will also raise up 
us by his own power. 
15 Know ye not that 
your bodies are the 
members of Christ? 
shall I then take the 
members of Christ, 
and make them the 
members of an har- 
lot? God __ forbid. 
16 What? know ye 
not that he which is 
joined to an harlot is 
one body? for two, 
saith he, shall be one 
flesh. 17 But he that 
is joined unto the 
Lord is one spirit. 
18 Flee fornication. 
Every sin that a man 
doeth is without the 
body; but he that 
committeth fornica- 
tion sinneth against 
his own body. 19 What! 
know ye not that your 
body is the temple of 
the Holy Ghost which 
is in you, which ye 
have of God, and ye 
are not your own? 
20 For ye are bought 
with a price: there- 
fore glorify God in 
your body, and in your 
spirit, which are God’s. 

VII. Now concern- 
ing the things where- 
of ye wrote unto me: 
It ws good for a man 
not to touch a wo- 
man, 2 Nevertheless, 
to avoid fornication, 


body has not authority over, .but the husband; and likewise also the let every man have 

2 ἀλλ᾽ L. ο ἀλλὰ TTrA. P + [ἡμῶν] (read our Lord) L. 4 + χριστοῦ Christ Lrtr. 
τ ὑμᾶς you E. 5 ἐξεγείρει raises out L. t [φησιν] L. νυ — καὶ ev to end of verse 
QLTTraW. ν — μοι T[Tr]A. x ὀφειλὴν [her] due Gittraw. Υ [δὲ] L. 2 ἀλλὰ LTTrA. 


446 


his own wife, and let 
every woman have her 
own husband. 3 Let 
the husband render 
unto the wife due be- 
nevolence: and like- 
wise also the wife un- 
to the husband, 4 The 
wife hath not power 
of her own body, but 
the husband: and like- 
wise also the husband 
hath not power of his 
own body,but the wife. 
8 Defraud ye not one 
the other, except τῇ 
de with consent for a 
time, that ye may give 
yourselves to fasting 
and prayer; and come 
together again, that 
Satan tempt you not 
for your incontinency. 
6 But I speak this by 
permission, and not of 
commandment. 7 For 
I would that all men 
were even as I myself. 
But every man hath 
his proper gift of God, 
one after this manner, 
and another after that. 
@1 say therefore to 
the unmarried and 
widows, It is good for 
them if they abide 
even as I. 9 But if 
they cannot contain, 
let them marry: for 
it is better to marry 
than to burn, 10 And 
unto the married 1 
command, yet not I, 
but the Lord, Let not 
the wife depart from 
her husband: 11 but 
and if she depart, let 
her remain unmar- 
ried, or be reconciled 
to her husband: and 
let not the husband 
put away Ais wife. 
12 But to the rest speak 
I, not the Lord: If 
any brother hath a 
wife that believeth 
not, and she be pleased 
to dwell with him, let 
him not put her away. 
13 And the woman 
which hath an hus- 
band that believeth 
not, and if he be 
pleased to dwell with 
ner, let her not leave 
him. I+ For the un- 
believing husband is 
sanctificd by the wife, 
and the unbelieving 
wife is sanctified by 
the husband: else 
were your children 
unclean ; but now are 
they holy. 15 But if 
the unbelieving de- 


τ ἀλλὰ LTTrA. 


Κ κρεῖττον LTTr. 
? αὕτη LTAW. 


ἃ σχολάσητε GLTTrAW. 
συνέρχεσθε E; ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτὸ ἦτε together may be GLTTraw. 
[ὄχει χάρισμα GLTTrAW. 
t 1— ἐστιν W. 

4 εἴ τις if any T. 
* ἀδελφῷ brother LTTraw. 


ΠΡΟΣ Α KIO PLNOTOY > A. MIF. 
᾽ ι ~ As , , > , ᾿ 
ἀνὴρ τοῦ ἰδίον σώματος οὐκ. ἐξουσιάζει, τἀλλ᾽" ἡ γυνή. 5 μὴ 
husband his own body has not authority over, but the wife. “Not 
> ~ > , ᾽ , n ’ A , 
ἀποστερεῖτε ἀλλήλους, εἰ.μή TL ἂν EK συμφώνου πρὸς καιρὸν, 
‘defraud one another, unless by consent for a season, 
“ , ~ , \ ~ ~ N ΄ 
ἵνα "σχολάζητε' ry νηστείᾳ καὶ" τῇ προσευχῇ, καὶ πάλιν 
that ye may be at leisure for fasting and for prayer, and again 
“ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτὸ συνέρχησθε," iva μὴ πειράζῃ ὑμᾶς ὁ σατανᾶς 
into one place come together, that *not ?may *tempt ὅγοι ‘Satan 
διὰ τὴν.ἀκρασίαν ὑμῶν. 6 τοῦτο δὲ λέγω κατὰ “ovy- 
because of your incontinence. But this Isay by way of per- 
γνώμην," οὐ κατ᾽ ἐπιταγήν. 7 θέλω “γὰρ! πάντας ἀνθρώ- 
mission, not by wayof command. “I wish ‘but all men 
πους εἶναι ὡς καὶ guavtov’ *adX" ἕκαστος ἴδιον ἰχάρισμα 
tobe evenas myself: but each his own gift 
Eyer! ἐκ θεοῦ, δὸς" μὲν οὕτως, Sdc'_dé οὕτως. 8 Λέγω.δὲ 
has from God; one so, and another so. But I say 
τοῖς ἀγάμοις καὶ ταῖς χήραις, καλὸν αὐτοῖς Βέστιν! ἐὰν ἷ 
tothe unmarried and tothe widows, good for them it is if 
μείνωσιν ὡς κἀγώ. 9 εἰ.δὲ οὐκ. ἐγκρατεύονται, γαμησά- 
they should remainas even I. But if they have not self-control, let them 
rwoav' κρεῖσσον". γάρ ἱἐστιν! ™yapnoa' ἢ πυροῦσθαι. 
marry ; for better it is tomarry than to burn. 
10 Τοῖς. δὲ γεγαμηκόσιν παραγγέλλω, οὐκ ἐγώ, *adX'! ὁ 
But to the married I charge, not 1 but the 
κύριος, γυναῖκα ἀπὸ ἀνδρὸς μὴ "χωρισθῆναι" 11 ἐὰν.δὲ καὶ 
Lord, wife fron: husband not _ to be separated; (butif also 
χωρισθῇ, μενέτω ἄγαμος, ἢ τῷ ἀνδρὶ καταλλαγήτω" 
she be separated, let her remain unmarried, or to the husband be reconciled ;) 
καὶ ἄνδρα γυναῖκα μὴ ἀφιέναι. 12 Toic.d& λοιποῖς yw λέγω," 


h 


and husband ‘wife ‘not “to “leave. But tothe rest I say, 
οὐχ ὁ κύριος, εἴ τις ἀδελφὸς γυναῖκα ἔχει ἄπιστον, καὶ 
not the Lord, If any _ brother ‘wife ‘has an “unbelieving, and 

\ - 2. ὦ ᾽ τ ᾽ 
Ραὐτὴ! συνευδοκεῖ οἰκεῖν μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ, μὴ-ἀφιέτω αὐτήν" 

she consents to dwell with him, let him not leave her. 
13 καὶ γυνὴ “ἥτις" ἔχει ἄνδδα ἄπιστον, καὶ ‘avroc! 


And has “husband ‘an “unbelieving, and he 


συνευδοκεῖ οἰκεῖ» μετ᾽ αὐτῆς, μὴ. ἀφιέτω "αὐτόν." 14 ἡγίασται 
consents todwell with her, let hernot leave him. ΞῚ5 “sanctified 
ap ὁ ἀνὴρ ὁ ἄπιστος ἐν TH γυναικί, καὶ ἡγίασται ἡ γυνὴ 
for the "husband ‘unbelieving in the wife, and is sanctified the *wife 
ἡ ἄπιστος ἐν τῷ 'ἀνδρί"" ἐπεὶ ἄρα τὰ.τέκνα ὑμῶν ἀκάθαρτά 

‘unbelieving in the husband; else then  yourchildren unclean 

ἐστιν, νῦν. δὲ ἅγιά ἐστιν. 1ὅ εἰ δὲ ὁ ἄπιστος χωρίζεται, 
are, but now holy ‘are. But if the unbeliever separates himself, 
χωριζέσθω. ov. dedovAwra ὁ ἀδελφὸς ἢ ἡ ἀδελφὴ ἐν 
let him separate himself; isnot under bondage the brother orthe_ sister in 
~ , 5 ? δὲ te , κὶ v,5 SII « , , 
τοῖς τοιούτοις ἐν. δὲ εἰρήνῃ κέκληκεν ἡμᾶς" ὁ θεός. 16 τί 
such [cases], butin peace “has “called ‘us 'God. ‘What 

do οἶδας, γύναι. εἰτὸν ἄνδρα σώσεις; ἢ τί οἶδας. 
for knowest thou, Owife, if the husband thou shalt save ? or what knowest thou, 


awoman who 


ὁ ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτο 
4 guy- T. e δὲ but LTTraw. 
4 — ἐστιν (read [it is]) GLTTrAW. 1 + [οὕτως] L. 
π χωρίζεσθαι L. © λέγω ἐγώ LTTrAW. 
3 τὸν ἄνδρα the husband Lrtraw. 


Ὁ — τῇ νηστείᾳ καὶ GLITrAW. 


8 δ LTTrAW. 
ἃ γαμεῖν T. 

τ ρὗτος LT'TrAW. 
ἡ ὑμᾶς You T. 


VIE FF ΞΘ BRINTHLANS 
ἄνερ, εἰ THY γυναῖκα σώσεις: 17 εἰμὴ ἑκάστῳ we 
Ὁ husband, if the wife thou shalt save? Only to each as 
πἐμέρισεν᾽ χὸ θεός," ἕκαστον ὡς κέκληκεν τὸ κύριος," οὕτως 
‘divided God, each as “has*called 'the 7Lord, 50 


περιπατείτω᾽ καὶ οὕτως ἐν ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις πάσαις διατάσ- 
let him walk ; and thus in *the “assemblies Yall I order. 
copa. 18 Περιτετμημένος τις ἐκλήθη ; μ᾽.-ἐπι- 

Having been circumcised 7any *one ‘wascalled? let him not be 
ἐν ἀκροβυστίᾳ Yric ἐκλήθη :" μὴ.περι- 
in uncircumcision ?any “one ‘was called? let him not be 


τεμνέσθω. 19 ἡ περιτομὴ οὐδὲν ἐστιν, Kai ἡ ἀκροβυστία οὐδὲν 
circumcised, Circumcision “nothing ‘is, and uncircumcision 7nothing 


ἐστιν, ἀλλὰ τήρησις ἐντολῶν θεοῦ. 20 ἕκαστος ἐν τῇ κλήσει 


σπάσθω. 
uncircumcised : 


Fis: but keeping 7commandments 'God’s. Each in the calling 

ῃ ἐκλήθη, ἐν ταύτῃ μενέτω. 21 δοῦλος ἐκλή- 

in which he was called, in this let him abide. Bondman [being] wast 

θης; py σοι μελέτω ἀλλ᾽ εἰκαὶ δύνασαι ἐλεύθερος 
thou called, not to thee let it beacare; but andif thou art able Sfree 
ene μᾶλλον χρῆσαι. 22 ὁ. γὰρ ἐν κυρίῳ κληθεὶς 

o*become, ‘rather *use [51]. For he #in (*the} "Lord ‘being ?called 

δοῦλος, ἀπελεύθερος κυρίου ἐστίν᾽ ὁμοίως *kat' ὁ 

[being] ἃ bondman, afreedman  of{[thejLord is; likewise also he 


ἐλεύθερος κληθείς. δοῦλός ἐστιν χριστοῦ. 23 τιμῆς ἠγορά- 
free being called, abondman is_ of Christ, Witha price ye were 


aOnre* μὴ. γίνεσθε δοῦλοι ἀνθρώπων. 24 ἕκαστος év.p ἐκλή- 
bought; become not bondmen of men, Each wherein he was 


θη, ἀδελφοί, ἐν τούτῳ μενέτω παρὰ ὅτῷ DEW. 

called, brethren, in that lethimabide with God. 
25 Περὶ. δὲ τῶν παρθένων ἐπιταγὴν κυρίου οὐκιἔχω" 
But concerning virgins, commandment of [the] Lord I have not; 
γνώμην.δὲ δίδωμι, ὡς ἠλεημένος ὑπὸ κυρίου πιστὸς 


but judgment igive, as having received maerey from [86] Lord “faithful 
εἶναι. 26 νομίζω οὖν τοῦτο καλὸν ὑπάρχειν διὰ τὴν ἐν- 
ἦτο *be. Ithink then this *good lis because of the  pre- 
ἑστῶσαν ἀνάγκην, ὅτι καλὸν ἀνθρώπῳ τὸ οὕτως εἶναι. 
Beni necessity, that Cit 15] good for a man so to be. 

27 δέδεσαι γυναικί ; μὴ.ζήτει λύσιν. λέλυσαι ἀπὸ 


Hast thou been bound to a wife? seek not to beloosed. Hast thou been loosed from 
γυναικός; μὴ.ζήτει γυναῖκα. 28 ἐὰν.δὲ καὶ ὑγήμῳῃς, 


a wife? seek not 8. Wite. But if also thou mayest have married, 

οὐχιἥμαρτες" καὶ ἐὰν yey “ἡ παρθένος, οὐχ 
thou didst ποὺ sin; and if ‘may *have °*married ‘the 2virgin, ®not 

ἥμαρτεν: θλίψιν.δὲ τῇ σαρκὶ ἕξουσιν οἱ τοιοῦτοι" ἐγὼ. δὲ 
*she 7did sin: but tribulation in the flesh “shall have such ; but I 


ὑμῶν φείδομαι. 29 Τοῦτο.δε φημι, ἀδελφοί, ὁ καιρὸς συν- 


spare, Butthis I say, brethren, the season  strait- 


ἐσταλμένος" “τὺ. λοιπόν ἐστιν," iva καὶ fot' ἔχοντες γυναῖκας, 
sued [15]. For the rest is, that even those having wives, 


ὡς μὴ ἔχοντες ὦσιν" 90 καὶ οἱ κλαίοντες. ὡς μὴ κλαίοντες" καὶ 


365 “not *having ‘be; and those weeping, as not weeping; and 
οἱ χαίροντες, ὡς μὴ χαίροντες" Kai οἱ ἀγοράζοντες, ὡς μὴ 
those rejoicing, as not rejoicing; and those buying, us not 


447 
part. let him depart. 
A brother or a sister 
is not under bondage 
in such cases: but 
God hath called us to 
peace. 16 For what 
Knowest thou, O wite, 
whether thon shalt 
save thy husband ? or 
how knowest thon, O 
man, whether thou 
shalt save thy wife? 
17 But as God hath 
distributed to every 
man, as the Lord hath 
called every one, 50 
let bim walk. And 
sc ordain I in all 
churches. 18 Is any 
man called being cir- 
cuimcised? let him 
not become uucircum- 
cised. Is any called 
in uncireumcision ? 
let him not be cir- 
cumcised. 19 Circum- 
cision is nothing, and 
uncireumeision is no- 
thing, but the keep- 
ing of the commana- 
ments of God. 20 Let 
every man abide in 
the same calling 
wherein he was called. 
21 Art thou called be- 
img a servant? care 
not for it: but if theu 
mayest be made free, 
use tt rather. 22 For 
he that is called in whe 
Lord, being a servant, 
is the Lord’s freeman: 
likewise also he that is 
called, being free, is 
Christ’s servant. 23Ye 
are bought with 8 
price ; be not ye the 
servants of men, 
24 Brethren, let every 
man, wherein he is 
called, therein abide 
with God. 

25 Now concerning 
virgins I have no 
commandment of the 
Lord: yet I give my 
judgment, as one that 
hath obtained mercy 
of the Lord to be 
faithful. 261 suppose 
therefore that this is 
good for the present 
distress, J suy, that 
tt ts good fora man 
s0to be. 27 Art thou 
bound unto ἃ wife? 
seek not to be loosed. 
Art thou loosed from 
a wife? seek not & 
wife. 28 But and if 
thou marry, thou hasi 
not sinned; and ifs 
virgin marry, she 
hath not sinned. Ne- 
vertheless such shali 
have trouble in the 
flesh: but I spare you. 
29 But this I savy, 


* μεμέρικεν has divided rrr. 
τις has any one been called irt:aw. 
LTTra. ¢ [ἡ] LTra. 4+ ὅτι Ε. 
the rest joined to straitened) ETrAW ; ἐστίν᾽ τὸ λοιπὸν LT. 


-- καὶ LTTraw. 


{- oR, 


6 θεός and ὃ κύριος transposed GLTTraW. 
2— τῷ GLTTrAW. 
© ἐστὶν τὸ λοιπόν, (τὸ λοιπόν ἐστιν᾽ Ε) (read is for 


Σ κέκληται 


> γαμήσῃς 


448° 


brethren, the time 15 
short: it remaineth, 
that both they that 
have wives be as 
though they had none; 
30 and they that weep, 
as though they wept 
not; and they that re- 
joice, as though they 
rejoiced not ; andthey 
that buy, as though 
they possessed not; 
31 and they that use 
this world, as not a- 
busing it: for the 
fashion of this world 
passeth away. 32 But 
I would have you 
without carefulness. 
He that is unmarried 
eareth for the things 
that belong to the 
Lord, how he may 
please the Lord: 33 but 
he that is married 
careth for the things 
that are of the world, 
how he may please his 
wife. 34 There is dif- 
ference also between a 
wife and a virgin. The 
unmarried woman car- 
eth for the things of 
the Lord, that shemay 
be holy both in body 
and in spirit: but she 
that is married careth 
for the things of the 
world, how she may 
please her husband. 
35 And this I speak 
for your own profit ; 
not that I may cast 
a 3nare upon you, but 
for that which is 
comely, and that ye 
may attend upon the 
Lord without distrac- 
tion. 36 But if any 
man think that he 
hehaveth himself un- 
comely toward his vir- 
fin, if she pass the 
flower of her age, and 
need so require, let 
him do what he will, 
he sinneth not: let 
them marry. 37 Ne- 
vertheless he that 
standeth stedfast in 
his heart, having no 
necessity, but hath 
power over his own 
will, and hath so de- 
creed in his heart that 
he will keep his virgin, 
doeth well. 38 Sothen 
he that giveth her in 
marriage doeth well ; 
but he that giveth her 


Ε τὸν κόσμον the world LYTrA. 
καὶ and has become divided. 
divided are also Taw. 
(vead the virgin cares for) Tr. 


ρισται. 


please LTTrA. 
" — τοῦ LTTrA. 


GLTTraAw. 
LTTrA. 


Ρ σύμφορον LITrA. 
(in his heart) ἑδραῖος LTTra. 

¥ ποιήσει he shall do Lrtra. 
παρθένον T) marries his own virginity LITr ; [ἐκ]γαμίζων [τὴν ἑαυτοῦ παρθένον A. 
* γαμίζων marries GLTTr ; [ἐκ]γαμίζων a. 


ΤΡ Oz. AK /OcPIN-GayOs¥S, AA. ὙΠ. 


κατέχοντες" 81 καὶ οἱ χρώμενοι ϑὁτῷ.κόσμῳ τούτῳ," ὡς μὴ 
possessing ; and those using this world, 85 not 
καταχρώμενοι. παράγει.γὰρ τὸ σχῆμα τοῦ.κόσμου.τούτου. 

using [it] as their own; for passes away the fashion of this world. 

32 θέλω.δὲ ὑμᾶς ἀμερίμνους εἶναι. ὁ ἄγαμος μεριμνᾷ τὰ 


ButI wish you withoutcare tobe, The unmarried cares for the things 


τοῦ κυρίου, πῶς "ἀρέσει' τῷ κυρίῳ 33 ὁ δὲ γαμήσας 
ofthe Lord, how heshall please the Lord; but he that is married 
μερμμνᾷᾳἄ τὰ τοῦ κόσμου, πῶς ὃ ἀρέσει" γυναικί. 


eares for the things of the world, how he shall please the wife, 
34 ἱμεμέρισται" ἡ ἔγυνὴ" καὶ ἡ παρθένος. ἰὴ ἄγαμος" μεριμνᾷ 
Divided are the wife andthe virgin. The unmarried cares for 
τὰ τοῦ κυρίου, iva ἁγία πικαὶ! α σώματι καὶ " 
the things of the Lord, that she may be hoiy both in body and 
πνεύματι .0& γαμήσασα μεριμνᾷ τὰ τοῦ κόσμου, 
spirit ; but she that’ is married cares for the things of the world, 
πῶς Capéice' τῷ ἀνδρί. 35 τοῦτο.δὲ πρὸς το.ὑμῶν.αὐτῶν 
how she shall please the husband. But this for your own 
Ρσυμφέρον" λέγω" οὐχ iva βρόχον ὑμῖν ἐπιβάλω, ἀλλὰ 
profit Isay; , not that anoose *you ‘I *may “cast *before, but 
πρὸς TO εὔσχημον καὶ Tehrrpdcedpov' τῷ κυρίῳ ἀπερι-- 
for what[is] seemly, and waiting on the Lord without 
σπάστως. 36 εἰ.δὲ τις ἀσχημονεῖν ἐπὶ τὴν παρθένον 
distraction. But if anyone (7he] *behaves *unseemly *to 7yvirginity 
αὐτοῦ νομίζει, ἐὰν ὑπέρακμος, καὶ οὕτως ὀφείλει γίνε- 
Shis ‘thinks, if he be beyond [his]prime, and 50 it ought to 
σθαι, ὃ θέλει ποιείτω, ObX.adpapTavE’ γαμείτωσαν. 37 ὃς δὲ 
be, what ΒΘ wills let him do, - he does not sin: let them maryy. But he who 
ἕστηκεν τἑδραῖος ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ," μὴ ἔχων ἀνάγκην, ἐξουσίαν. δὲ 
stands firm in heart, not having necessity, but authority 


ἔχει περὶ Tov.idiov θελήματος, καὶ τοῦτο κέκρικεν ἐν 72° 


has over  hisown will, and this has judged in 

καρδίᾳ. "αὐτοῦ! τοῦ" τηρεῖν rHv.éavrov παρθένον, καλῶς 
his heart to keep his own virginity, well 

“rot. 88 ὥστε καὶ ὁ τ"ἐκγαμίζων" καλῶς ποιεῖ; 0.08" 


he does. 
Wy 2) Ἴ i Ὄ w ii 
μὴ ᾿ἐκγαμίζων" κρεῖσσον “ποιεῖ. 
Ξηοῦ 'givesin marriage better ‘does. 
ἐφ ὕσον χρόνον ζῇ 
for aslong?as ‘time ‘may ‘live 


So that also he that givesin marriage *well 
| 


‘does; and he that 


39 Γυνὴ δέδεται "νόμῳ!" 
Awife isbound by law 
ὁ.ἀνὴρ.αὐτῆς" ἐὰν.δὲ κοι- 
Sher *husband ; but if may have fallen 
wt fe 7 ‘ b Fre ! 7 θέ ? \ , 
μηθῇ ὁ ἀνὴρ αὐτῆς," ἐλευθέρα ἐστὶν θέλει γαμη- 
asleep the husband of her, free she is to whom she wills _ to be 
θῆναι, μόνον ἐν κυρίῳ. 40 μακαριωτέρα.δέ ἐστιν ἐὰν οὕτως 
married, only in(the] Lard. But happier she is if so 
μείνῃ, κατὰ τὴν ἐμὴν γνώμην. δοκῶ.δὲ κἀγὼ 
she should remain, according to my judgment; and I think I also 


πνεῦμα θεοῦ ἔχειν. 
*Spirit *God’s *have. 


" ἀρέσῃ he should please trtra. 1, Kal μεμέ- 
Also LTr; καὶ (— καὶ Ww) μεμέρισται καὶ And 

ΚΕ γυνὴ ἡ ἄγαμος UNMarried woman LTr. 1— ἡ ἄγαμος 
m [καὶ] LTr. Ὁ τῷ the LTTraA. ° ἀρέσῃ she should 

4 εὐπάρεδρον GLTTrAW. τ ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ αὐτοῦ 

3 + ἰδίᾳ (read his own) TTra. * αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 
τ γαμίζων τὴν παρθένον ἑαντοῦ (ἑαυτοῦ 
Υ καὶ ὃ 


® — νόμῳ GLTTrAW. >’ — αὐτῆς 


WT: rYGOREINTHIANS. 
8 Περὶ. δὲ τῶν.εἰδωλοθύτων, οἴδαμεν, ὅτι πάντες γνῶσιν 


But concerning things sacrificed toidols, weknow, (for 241 ‘knowledge 
ἔχομεν. ἡ γνῶσις φυσιοῖ, ἡ δὲ ἀγάπη οἰκοδομεῖ. 2 εἰ.“δέ" 
twe*have: knowledge puffs up, but love builds up. But if 

ξ- ὃ - ἡ ids Π ς Os ἠδὲ μ᾿ Π 

τις OKEt ELOEVAL Tl, OQUVOETTW_OUVOEV EYVWKEV 
anyone thinks to have known anything, nothing yet he has known 

καθὼς δε γνῶναι. 8 εἰδὲ τις ἀγαπᾷ τὸν θεόν, 
according as it is necessary to know. Butif anyone love 
οὗτος ἔγνωσται ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 4 περὶ τῆς βρώσεως οὖν τῶν 
he isknown by him:) concerning the eating then 


εἰδωλοθύτων, οἴδαμεν ὅτι οὐδὲν εἴδωλον ἐν κόσμῳ, 
of things sacrificed to idols, we know that nothing an idol [is] in [the] world, 


καὶ ὅτι οὐδεὶς θεὸς ἕτερος" εἰ μὴ εἴς. 5 καὶ. γὰρ εἴπερ 
and that {thereis] no Ὅρα other except one. For even if indeed 
εἰσὶν λεγόμενοι θεοί, εἴτε ἐν οὐρανῷ εἴτε ἐπὶ ξτῆς! 
there are [those] called gods, whether in heaven or on the 
~ Ld ΝᾺ ‘4 ‘ ‘ ye ? > 
γῆς" ὥσπερ εἰσὶν θεοὶ πολλοὶ Kai κύριοι πολλοί᾽ 6 badd’! 
earth, as thereare gods many and _ lords many, but 
ἡμῖν εἷς θεὸς ὁ πατήρ, ἐξ οὗ τὰ πάντα. καὶ ἡμεῖς 
to us [there is] one God the Father, of whom [are] allthings, and we 
εἰς αὐτόν᾽ Kai εἷς κύριος ᾿Τησοῦς χριστός, du οὗ τὰ-πάντα, 


for him; andone Lord Jesus Christ, by whom [are] all things, 
Kai ἡμεῖς Ov αὐτοῦ. 7 ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐν πᾶσιν ἡ γνῶσις" τινὲς 
and we by _ him. But not in all [18] the knowledge: “some 


δὲ τῇ Ἰσυνειδήσει" ἔτοῦ εἰδώλου Ewe ἄρτι" we εἰδωλό- 
‘but withconscience ofthe idol, until now 7as “of *a*thing ®sacrificed 
Burov ἐσθίουσιν, Kai ἡ -συνείδησις. αὐτῶν ἀσθενὴς οὖσα 
7to ὅλῃ 5140] leat, and their conscience, 2weak ‘being, 
μολύνεται. 8 βρῶμα δὲ ἡμᾶς ob-rapicrnow' τῷ θεῷ: οὔτε 
is defiled. But meat us does not commend to God; *neither 
™ydo' ἐὰν "φάγωμεν περισσεύομεν᾽' οὔτε ἐὰν μὴ φάγωμεν 
for if weeat have wean advantage; neither if we eat not 


ὑστερούμεθα." 9. βλέπετε.δὲ μήπως ἡ ἐξουσία ὑμῶν αὕτη 

do we come short. But take heed lest power 7your ‘this 
πρόσκομμα γένηται “τοῖς ἀσθενοῦσιν." 10 ἐὰν.γάρ 

an occasion of stumbling become tothose being weak, For if 


τις ἴδῃ Pas," τὸν ἔχοντα γνῶσιν, ἐν IeidwAsip' κατακείμενον, 
anyone see thee, who hast knowledge, in an idol-temple reclining 


οὐχὶ ἡ συνείδησις αὐτοῦ ἀσθενοῦς ὄντος οἰκοδο- 


{at table], ποῦ *the “conscience ‘of “him Sweak "being twill be 
, ‘ , / ? 
μηθήσεται εἰς.τὸ τὰ. εἰδωλόθυτα ἐσθίειν ; 11 "kai ἀπο- 
built up soas “things sacrificed ®to Sidols ‘to “eat? and will 


~ ε ~ A ? ~ ~ , ? ‘ 
λεῖται" ὁ ἀσθενῶν "ἀδελφὸς ἐπὶ τῇ. σῃ.γνώσει," dv ὃν χριστὸς 
perish the weak brother on thy knowledge, forwhom Christ 
’ ? ? ’ 
ἀπέθανεν. " 12 οὕτως.δὲ ἁμαρτάνοντες εἰς τοὺς ἀδελφούς, 
died. Now thus sinning against the brethren, 
καὶ τύπτοντες αὐτῶν THY συνείδησιν ἀσθενοῦσαν, εἰς χριστὸν 
and wounding their 7conscience iweak, against Christ 
ἁμαρτάνετε. 13 "διόπερ! εἰ βρῶμα σκανδαλίζει τὸν ἀδελφόν 
ye sin. Wherefore if meat cause *to *offend “brother 
¢ — δὲ but urtraw. 4 ἐγνωκέναι LITrAW. © 
f — ἕτερος LTTrA. 8 — τῆς GLTITrAw. h [ἀλλ᾽ L. 
respect to the idol) urtr. Κ ws ἄρτι τοῦ εἰδώλου LTTrAW. 
commend Ἱτττὰ. m— γὰρ for LTTra, “ 
οὔτε ἐὰν φάγωμεν περισσεύομεν (ὑστερούμεθα 1, περισσευόμεθα Tr) LTrA. 
to the weak LTTrAW. Ρ [σὲ] L. 4 εἰδωλίῳ 1. 
ἀπόλλυται AW. 5 ἐν τῇ σῇ γνώσει, ὃ ἀδελφὸς LTTrAW. 
ἡ διό περ Tr. 


449 
not in marriage doeth 
better. 39 The wife 


is bound by the law 
as long as her hus- 
band liveth; but if 
her husband be dead, 
she is at liberty to be 
married to whom she 
will; onl in the 
Lord. 40 But she is 
happier if she so abide, 
after my judgment: 
and I think also that I 
have the Spirit of God. 


VIII. Now astoucn- 
ing things offered un- 
to idols, we know that 
we all have know- 
ledge. Knowledge 
puffeth up, but cha- 
rity edifieth. 2 And 
if any man think that 
he knoweth anything, 
he knoweth nothing. 
yet as he ought to 

ow. 3 But if any 
man love God, the 
same is known of him. 
4 Asconcerning there- 
fore the eating of 
those things that are 
offered in sacrifice 
unto idols, we know 
that an idol ts nothing 
in the world, and 
that there is none other 
God but one. 5 For 
though there be that 
are called gods, whe- 
ther in heaven or in 
earth, (as there be 
gods many, and lords 
many,) 6 but to us 
there iz but one God, 
the Father, of whom 
are all things, and we 
in him; and one Lord 
Jesus Christ, by whom 
are all things, and we 
μὰ him. 7 Howbeit 
there is not in every 
man that knowledge : 
for some with con- 
science of the idol un- 
to this hour eat τέ as 
a thing offered unto 
an idol ; and their con- 
science being weak is 
defiled. 8 But meat 
commendeth us not to 
God: for neither, if 
we eat, are we the bet- 
ter ; neither, if we eat 
not, are we the worse. 
9 But take heed lest 
by any means this li- 
berty of yours become 
@ stumblingblock to 
them that are weak. 
10 For if any man see 
thee which hast know- 
ledge sit at meat in 


© οὔπω ἔγνω not yet did he know Lrtra. 
i συνηθείᾳ from custom (with 
' παραστήσει shall not 
Ὁ μὴ φάγωμεν ὑστερούμεθα (περισσεύομεν L)* 


ο τοῖς ἀσθενέσιν 


τ ἀπόλλυται γὰρ for perishes LTTr; καὶ 
t 5 (read verse 11 as a question) a. 


GG 


450 


the idol’s temple, shall 
not the conscience of 
him which is weak be 
emboldened to _ eat 
those things which 
are offered to idols; 
11 and through thy 
knowledge shall the 
weak brother perish, 
for whom Christ died ? 
12 But when ye sin 
80 against the breth- 
ren, and wound their 
weak conscience, ye 
sin against Christ. 
13 Wherefore, if meat 
make my brother to 
offend, I will eat no 
flesh while the world 
standeth, lest I make 
my brother to offend. 
. Am I not an 
apostle? am I not 
free? haveI not seen 
Jesus Christ our Lord? 
are not ye my work in 
the Lord? 2 If I be 
not an apostle unto 
others, yet doubtless I 
am to you: for the 
seal of mine apostle- 
ship are ye in the Lord. 
3 Mine answer to them 
that do examine meis 
this, 4 have we not 
wer to eat and to 
ink? 5 have we not 
power to lead about a 
sister, a wife, as well 
as other apostles, and 
as the brethren of the 
Lord, and Cephas ?6 or 
I only and Barnabas, 
have not we power 
to forbear working? 
7 Who goeth a warfare 
any time at his own 
_ charges? whoplanteth 
a vineyard, and eateth 
not of the fruit there- 
of? or who feedeth a 
flock, and eateth not 
of the milk of the 
flock? 8 Say I these 
things as a man? or 
saith not the law the 
same also? 9 for it is 
written in the law of 
Moses, Thou shalt not 
muzzle the mouth of 
the ox that treadeth 
out the corn. Doth 
God take care for 
oxen? 10 or saith he 
tt altogether for our 
sakes? For our sakes, 
no doubt, this is writ- 
ten: that he that 
ploweth should plow 
in hope; and that he 
that thresheth in hope 
should be partaker of 
his hope. 11 If we have 
sown unto you spi- 
ritual things, ts tt a 
great thing if we 


ΠΡῸΣ ARO PING POM. 7A: VIII, IX. 


μου, οὐ.μ ἄγω κρέα εἰς.τὸν. αἰῶνα, ἵνα μὴ τὸν ἀδελφόν 
my, not A a should I eat fiesh for ever, that *not “brother 
μὸν σκανδαλίσω. 

ἯΙ *may “cause to offend. 


9 Οὐκ.εἰμὶ Ξἀπόστολος"; οὐκ εἰμὶ Oo 3 οὐχὶ ‘Inoovy 
Am I not an spostlp ? am I not free ? Snot ‘Jesus 


χριστὸν" τὸν. κύριον. ἡμῶν *éwpaka'; ov τὸ.ἔργον.μου ὑμεῖς 
®Christ Tour *Lord thave 7I “seen ??°not my ‘Swork lye 

ἐστε ἐν κυρίῳ; 2 εἰ ἄλλοις οὐκ.εἰμὲ ἀπόστολος, ἀλλά 

ῬᾺΓ6 in iene Lord? If toothers Iam not an apostle, yet 


γε ὑὕμῖν sige’ ἡ.γὰρ oppayic™ τῆς. ἐμῆς. ἀποστολῆς" ὑμεῖς 
at any rate to you Lam; for the seal of my apostleship ye 


ἐστε ἐν κυρίῳ. 8 ἡ-ἐμὴ.ἀπολογία τοῖς ἐμὲ ἀνακρίνουσιν 
are in [the] Lord. el defence to those *me ‘who 7examine 


barn ἐστίν," 4 Μὴ οὐκ.ἔχομεν ἐξουσίαν φαγεῖν καὶ “πιεῖν" ; 
Sthis ‘is: Have wenot authority toeat and to drink? 


5 μὴ οὐκ.ἔχομεν ἐξουσίαν ἀδελφὴν γυναῖκα περιάγειν, ὡς καὶ 
have wenot authority ἃ sister, a wife, to take about, as also 


οἱ λοιποὶ ἀπόστολοι, Kai οἱ ἀδελφοὶ τοῦ κυρίου, Kai Κηφᾶς; 
the other eS and the brethren ofthe Lord, and ec 


67 μόνος ἐγὼ καὶ Βαρνάβας οὐκ ἔχομεν ἐξουσίαν “τοῦ" μὴ 
ΟΥ only I and Barnabas have we ποῦ authority not 


ἐργάζεσθαι; 7 Tic στρατεύεται ἰδίοις ὀψωνίοις ποτέ; 
to work ? Who serves as a soldier at hisown charges atany time? 


Tic φυτεύει ἀμπελῶνα. Kai “ἐκ τοῦ καρποῦ" αὐτοῦ οὐκ. ἐσθίει ; 
μετ pes Severe and of the fruit of it does not eat ὃ 
τῇ" τίς ποιμαίνει τῷ νην, καὶ ἐκ τοῦ γάλακτος τῆς ποίμνης 
or who shepherds ock, and of the milk of the flock 


οὐκ.ἐσθίει;: 8 μὴ κατὰ ἄνθρωπον ταῦτα λαλῶ; ἢ F0vxXi 
does not eat? according to aman these things do I speak, or *not 
καὶ ὁ νόμος ταῦτα" λέγει; ; 9 ἐν.γὰρ τῷ "Μωσέως" νόμῳ 
34,150 ‘the ‘Slaw ‘these 7things ‘says? Forin the of *Moses aw 
γέγραπται, Οὐ-ἰφιμώσει! βοῦν ἀλοῶντα. μὴ τῶν 
it has been written, Thou shalt not muzzle an ox treading out corn. ‘*For *the 
μέλει rp ep; 10 ἢ δι᾽ ἡμᾶς πάντως λέγει ; 
Soxen ‘is “there Ὅτ withGod? or becauseof us altogether eeys he Cit]? 
Ou ἡμᾶς. γὰρ ἐγράφη, ὅτι ἐπ᾿ ἐλπίδι ὀφείλει: ὁ ἀροτριῶν 
For because of us it was written, that in Cae ought he that ploueas 


ἀροτριᾷν, καὶ ὁ ἀλοῶν τῆς ἐλπίδος. αὐτοῦ μετέχειν 
to plough, and he that treads out corn, Sof Shis ἴΒΟΒΘ 310 *partake 


ἐπ᾿ ἐλπίδι." 11 Εἰ ἡμεῖς ὑμῖν τὰ πνευματικὰ ἐσπείραμεν, 
tin hope. If we to you spiritual things did sow, [15 it] 
μέγα εἰ ἡμεῖς ὑμῶν τὰ σαρκικὰ OE ἘθΙσΌΜΕΗῚ 3 12 εἰ ἄλλοι 
a great thing if we ΤΟΝ RY things shall reap? If others 
τῆς ἐξουσίας ὑμῶν" μετέχουσιν, οὐ μᾶλλον ἡμεῖς; 
308 the peushority, Sover *you ‘partake, shouts not rather we? 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ.ἐχρησάμεθα rp.étovoig-rairy’ ἀλλὰ πάντα στέ- 
But we did not use this authority ; but all things we 
γομεν, ἵνα μὴ ᾿-ὲἐγκοπήν twa! δῶμεν τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ τοῦ 
ar, that not “hindrance ‘any we sneha Eis to the αἰαὶ tidings of the 


χριστοῦ. 13 οὐκ.οἴδατε ὅτι οἱ τὰ ἱερὰ ἐργαζόμενοι, " 
Christ. Know ye not that those [?at]*sacred “things ‘labouring, [the 


βοῶν 


x ἀπόστολος and ἐλεύθερος transposed GLTTraW. 
* ou τῆς ἀποστολῆς LTTrA. 
καρπὸν the fruit LTTraw. 
i κημώσεις TTrA. 
1 ὑμῶν ἐξουσίας GLTTrAW. 


GLTTraw. 


Υ — χριστὸν LTTrA. * e0paxa τ. 

> ἐστιν αὕτη LITraA. ¢ πεῖν τὰ. d — τοῦ LTTr[A]. ε τὸν 
— ἢ L[tr]aw. & καὶ ὃ νόμος ταῦτα οὐ LTTraW. h Μωῦσέως 
F ὀφείλει ἐπ᾽ ἐλπίδι LTTrA. ἃ én’ ἐλπίδι τοῦ μετέχειν GLTTrAW. 
™ tia ἐγκοπὴν (ἐκκ- ΤΊ LTTrAW. 5 + τὰ the things Tra]. 


ἘΣ. ΤΟ ΣΥΝ Hs A NS. 


ἐκ τοῦ ἱεροῦ ἐσθίουσιν᾽ οἱ τῷ θυσιαστηρίῳ “προσεὃ- 


things]of the temple eat ; those ?at *the ‘altar ‘attend- 
εὐοντες,} τῷ θυσιαστηρίῳ συμμερίζονται; 14 οὕτως Kai ὁ 
ϑϑᾳ with the altar partake ? So also the 


κύριος διέταξεν τοῖς τὸ εὐαγγέλιον καταγγέλλουσιν, ἐκ τοῦ 
Lord didorder tothosethe glad tidings announcing, of the 
εὐαγγελίου ζῇν. 15 ἐγὼ.δὲ Poddevi ἐχρησάμην" τούτων" 
glad tidings to live. But I 2none used of these things. 
οὐκ ἔγραψα.δὲ ταῦτα ἵνα οὕτως γένηται ἐν ἐμοί" 
Now I did not write thesethings that thus itshonld be with me; ([*it *were] 
καλὸν γάρ μοι μᾶλλον ἀποθανεῖν, ἢ τὸ. καὐχημά.μου «ἵνα 
*good for for me rather to die, than ‘my *boasting ‘that 
τις ‘Tkevwoy.' 16 ἐὰν.γὰρ εὐαγγελίζωμαι, οὐκ.ἔστιν 
?anyone should make void. Forif Lannounce the glad tidings, there is not 
μοι καύχημα' ἀνάγκη.γάρ μοι ἐπίκειται: ovaisdé' μοι 
*to *me ‘boasting ; for necessity ‘me "18 7laid “upon; Swoe *but to me 
ἐστὶν ἐὰν μὴ "εὐαγγελίζωμαι." 17 εἰ. γὰρ ἑκὼν τοῦτο 
itis if Ishould not announce the glad tidings. For if willingly this 
πράσσω, μισθὸν ἔχω" εἰδὲ ἄκων οἰκονομίαν πεπί- 


I do, areward I have; but if unwillingly an administration Iam en- 
στευμαι. 18 τίς οὖν reo ἐστὶν ὁ μισθός ; ἵνα εὐαγ- 
trusted with. What then y tis reward? That in announcing 
γελιζόμενος ἀδάπανον θήσω τὸ εὐαγγέλιον “τοῦ 


the glad tidings *without °expense *I 7should *make *the *°glad “tidings ‘of *the 
χριστοῦ," εἰς τὸ μὴ καταχρήσασθαι ryétovcig.uov ἐν τῷ 


3Christ, sO as not using as my own my authority in the 
εὐαγγελίῳ. 19 ᾿Ελεύθερος.γὰρ ὧν ἐκ πάντων, πᾶσιν ἐμαυτὸν 
glad tidings. For free being from all, to all myself 


? 7 “ 4 ,ὔ ’ . Ans? , 
ἐδούλωσα, ἵνα τοὺς πλείονας KEpdnow 90 Kai ἐγενόμην 
I became bondman, that the more I might gain. And I became 
τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις we Ἰουδαῖος. ἵνα ᾿Ιουδαίους κερδήσω" τοῖς 
to the Jews as a Jew, that Jews I might gain: to those 
ὑπὸ νόμον ὡς ὑπὸ νόμον," ἵνα τοὺς ὑπὸ νόμον κερδήσω" 
under law as under law, that those under law I might gain: 
21 τοῖς ἀνόμοις ὡς ἄνομος, μὲ ὧν ἄνομος Yep,’ ἀλλ᾽ 
to those without law as without law, (not being without law toGod, but 
ἔννομος χριστῷ," ἵνα “κερδῆησω ἀνόμους. 22 ἐγενόμην 
within law toChrist,) that I might gain those without law. I became 
τοῖς ἀσθενέσιν Ῥὼς" ἀσθενής, iva τοὺς ἀσθενεῖς κερδήσω. 
to the weak as weak, that the weak I might gain. 
τοῖς. πᾶσιν γέγονα “τὰ -πάντα, ἵνα πάντως τινὰς σώσω. 
To allthese Ihave become allthings, that by 31] means some I might save. 
234rovro! δὲ πιῶ διὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον, ἵνα ovyKowwroc" 
?This ‘and Ido onaccountofthe gledtidings, that a fellow-partaker 
αὐτοῦ γένωμαι. 
with it {might be. 
24 Οὐκ.οἴδατε ὅτι 


οἱ ἐν σταδίῳ τρέχοντες πάντες μὲν 


Know ye not that those whoin arace-course ΤΙ all 
τρέχουσιν, εἷς.δὲ λαμβάνει τὸ βραβεῖον; οὕτως τρέχετε, ἵν, 
PEX ἢ. 13:5} B ρ 3 OUTWC TPEXETE, Va 
run, but one receives the prize? Thus run, that 


καταλάβητε. 25 πᾶς δὲ 


ὁ ἀγωνιζόμενος, πάντα ἐγκρα- 
ye may obtain. 


But everyone that strives, in all things controls 


451 


shall reap your carnal 
things? 12 If others 
be partakers of this 
power over you, are 
not we rather? Never- 
theless we have not 
used this power; but 
suffer all things, lest 
we should hinder the 
gospel of Christ. 13 Do 
ye not know that they 
which minister about 
holy things live of the 
things of the temple? 
and they which wait 
at the altar are par- 
takers with the altar? 
14 Even so hath the 
Lord ordained that 
they which preach the 
gospel should live of 
the gospel. 15 But I 
have used none of these 
things : neither have I 
written these things, 
that it should be so 
done unto me: for it 
were better for me to 
die, than that any 
man should make my 
glorying void. 16 For 
though I preach the 
gospel, I have nothing 
to glory of: for ne- 
cessity is laid upon me; 
yea, woe is unto me, if 
I preach not the gos- 
pel ! 17 For if I do this 
thing willingly, I have 
a reward: but if a- 
gainst my will, a dis- 
pensation of the gospel 
is committed unto me. 
18 What is my reward 
then? Verily that, 
when I preach the gos- 
pel, I may make the 
gospel of Christ with- 
out charge, that I a- 
buse not my power in 
the gospel. 19 For 
though I be free from 
all men, yet have I 
made myself servant 
unto all, that I might 
gain the more. 20 And 
unto the Jews 1 be- 
came as a Jew, that I 
might gain the Jews; 
to them that are under 
the law, as under the 
law, that I might gain 
them that are under 
the law; 21 to them 
that are without law, 
as without law, (being 
not without law to 
God, but under the 
law to Christ,) that I 
might gain them that 
are without law, 22 To 
the weak became I as 
weak, that I might 
gain the weak: I am 
made all things to all 
men, that I might by 


° παρεδρεύοντες LTTrAW. 
LTtr. τ κενώσει shall make vain uttra. 
Y μον TIrA. τ — τοῦ χριστοῦ LTTrAW. 
under law GLTTrAw. Υ θεοῦ of God LTTraw. 
τοὺς LTIrAW. Ὁ —@s([L]TTrAw. 


3 γάρ for GLTTrAw. 


© — τὰ LTTrAawW. 


P ov κέχρημαι οὐδενὶ have not used any GLTTraw. 


4 οὐδεὶς 


τ εὐαγγελίσωμαι LTrAW. 

X + μὴ ὧν αὐτὸς ὑπὸ νόμον ποὺ being myself 
* χριστοῦ οὗ Christ Lrtraw. 

4 πάντα all things LTTraw. 


5. κερδάνω 
© oup- T. 


452 


all means save some, 
23 And this I do for 
the gospel’s sake, that 
I might be partaker 
thereof with you. 

24 Know ye not that 
they which run in a 
race run all, but one 
receiveth the prize? 
So run, that ye may 
obtain. 25 And every 
man that striveth for 
the mastery is temper- 
ate in allthings. Now 
they do it to obtain 
a corruptible crown ; 
but we an incorrupti- 
ble. 26 I therefore so 
Tun, not as uncertain- 
ly; so fight I, not as 
one that beateth the 
air: 27 but I keep 
under my body, and 
bring it into subjec- 
tion : lest that by any 
means, when I have 
preached to others, I 
myself should be a 
castaway. 

X. Moreover, breth- 
ren, I would not that 
ΜΞ should be ignorant, 

ow that all our fa- 
thers were under the 
cloud, and all passed 
through the sea; 2 and 
were all baptized unto 
Moses in the cloud and 
in the sea; 3 and did 
all eat the same spi- 
ritual meat ; 4and did 
all drink the same spi- 
ritual drink : for they 
drank of that spiritual 
Rock that followed 
them: and that Rock 
was Christ. 5 But with 
many of them God 
was not well pleased : 
for they were over- 
thrown in the wilder- 
ness. 6 Now these 
things were our ex- 
amples, to the intent 
we should not lust 
after evil things, as 
they also lusted. 7 Nei- 
ther be ye idolaters, as 
were some of them; 
as it is written, The 
people sat down to eat 
and drink, and rose up 
to play. 8 Neither let 
us commit fornication, 
as some of them com- 
mitted, and fell in one 
day three and twenty 
thousand. 9 Neither 
let us tempt Christ, as 
some of them also 
tempted, and were de- 
stroyed of serpents. 
10 Neither murmur ye, 
as some of them also 
murmured, and were 


ΠΡΟΣ AK OF EN 6 LOA Ss A: 
τεύεται" ἐκεῖνοι μὲν οὖν iva φθαρτὸν στέφανον 
himself : they indeed then that acorruptible crown they may receive, 
ἡμεῖς.δὲ ἄφθαρτον. 26 ἐγὼ τοίνυν οὕτως τρέχω, ὡς οὐκ 

but we an incorruptible. 1: therefore 80 run, as not 
ἀδήλως" οὕτως πυκτεύω, ὡς οὐκ ἀέρα δέρων" 27 BadX’! 
uncertainly; 50 I combat, as not [the] air beating. But 
ὑπωπιάζω μου τὸ σῶμα, καὶ δουλαγωγῶ, μήπως ἄλλοις 

I buffet my body, and bring [it] into servitude, lest to others 

κηρύξας αὐτὸς ἀδόκιμος γένωμαι. 
having preached *myself ‘rejected ‘I *might “be. 

10 Οὐ-θέλω dé! ὑμᾶς ἀγνοεῖν, ἀδελφοί, Ort οἱ πατέρες 

31 ὅγῖβῃ *not ‘now you to ὈΘ ἱρτιοσαπύ, brethren, that *fathers 
ἡμῶν πάντες ὑπὸ THY νεφέλην ἦσαν, Kai πάντες διὰ τῆς 
tour all under the cloud were, and all through the 
θαλάσσης διῆλθον, 2 καὶ πάντες εἰς τὸν ἱΜωσῆν" *tBarricavro' 
sea passed, and all to Moses were baptized 
ἐν τῇ νεφέλῃ καὶ ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ, ὃ καὶ πάντες τὸ αὐτὸ βρῶμα 
in the cloud and in the 5ea, and all the same 7meat 
πνευματικὸν ἔφαγον," 4 καὶ πάντες τὸ αὐτὸ ππόμα πνευ- 

‘spiritual ate, and all the same drink 1spi- 
ματικὸν ἔπιον" ἔπινον. γὰρ ἐκ πνευματικῆς ἀκολουθούσης 
ritual drank ; for they drank of a spiritual 7following 
πέτρας: ἡ-"δὲ πέτρα" ἦν ὁ χριστός. 5 ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐν τοῖς 
rock, and the rock was the Christ: yet not with the 
πλείοσιν αὐτῶν “εὐδόκησεν! ὁ θεός" κατεστρώθησαν. γὰρ ἐν 


IX, X. 
λάβωσιν, 


most of them was *well*pleased ‘God; for they were strewed in 
τῇ ἐρήμῳ. 6 ταῦτα.δὲ τύποι ἡμῶν ἐγενήθησαν, εἰς τὸ μὴ 
the desert. But these things types for us became, for *not 


κακῶν, καθὼς κἀκεῖνοι ἐπεθύμη- 
of evil things, according as they also desired, 


εἶναι ἡμᾶς ἐπιθυμητὰς 
3to*be ‘us desirers 
σαν. 7 μηδὲ εἰδωλολάτραι γίνεσθε, καθώς τινες αὐτῶν" Puc! 
Neither idolaters be ye, according assome ofthem; as 
γέγραπται, ᾿Ἑκάθισεν ὁ adc φαγεῖν καὶ “πιεῖν," καὶ av- 
it has been written, *Sat‘*down ὑπ *people toeat and todrink, and rose 
éoryoay παίζειν. 8 μηδὲ πορνεύωμεν, καθώς τινες 
up to play. Neither should we commit fornication, according as some 
αὐτῶν ἐπόρνευσαν, καὶ τἔπεσον" "ἐν" μιᾷ ἡμέρᾳ εἰκοσιτρεῖς 
of them committed fornication,and fell in one day twenty-three 
χιλιάδες. 9 μηδὲ ἐκπειράζωμεν τὸν txproroy,' καθὼς ‘cai! 
3 ᾿ c ‘Kat 
thousand. Neither should wetempt the Christ, according as also 
τινες αὐτῶν “ἐπείρασαν, Kai ὑπὸ τῶν ὄφεων “ἀπώλοντο." 
some of them tempted, and by the serpents perished. 
10 μηδὲ γογγύζετε, ἡκαθὼς" καί" τινες αὐτῶν ἐγόγγυσαν, 
Neither murmur ye, according as also some of them murmured, 
i ἀπώλ ὑπὸ τοῦ ὀλοθ ὕ. 11 ταῦτα.δὲ ἐπάντα! 
και ἀπώλοντο ὕπο TOV OAD βευτου. ταῦυτα. παντα 
and __ perished by the destroyer. Now these things all [88] 
ἀγύποι" YcuvéBarvor' ἐκείνοις ἐγράφη.δὲ πρὸς νουθεσίαν 
types happened tothem, and were written for admonition 
ἡμῶν εἰς οὺς τὰ τέλη THY αἰώνων “κατήντησεν." 12 ὥστε 
Your on whom the ends ofthe ages are arrived. So that 


Ε ἀλλὰ Tr. 


Ὁ πέτρα δὲ LTTrA. 
§ — ἐν LTTr[A]. 
λυντο TTr. 

Ὁ συνέβαινεν TTr. 


h yap for G@LTTrAW. 
ματικὸν ἔφαγον βρῶμα (βρῶμα ἔφαγον Tir) LTTr. 

ο ᾽ηὐδόκησεν LTrAW. 
t κύριον Lord ΠΤΊΤΑ. 
Σ καθάπερ TTr. 


i Μωῦσῆν GLTTraw. k ἐβαπτίσθησαν LT. | πνευ- 
τὰ πνευματικὸν ἔπιον πόμα LTTrAW. 
P@omep LTTrA. 4 πεῖν TA. τ ἔπεσαν LTTrAW. 
Υ — καὶ LTTrAW. Ww ἐξεπείρασαν T. x ἀπώλ- 
2 — πάντα [u|TTr[A]. 8 τυπικῶς typically LTTraw. 
© κατήντηκεν have come LTTraw. 


X. rr (COR EN TH PLAINS. 
βλεπέτω μὴ πέσῃ. 13 Πειρασμὸς 
he that thinks tostand, let him take heed lest he fall. Temptation 
ὑμᾶς οὐκ εἴληφεν εἰμὴ ἀνθρώπινος. πιστὸς. δὲ 6 θεός, ὃς 
you has not taken except what belongs to man; and faithful [is] God, who 
οὐκ.ἐάσει ὑμᾶς πειρασθῆναι ὑπὲρ ὃ δύνασθε, ἀλλὰ ποιήσει 
will not suffer you to be tempted above what yeareable, but will make 
σὺν τῷ πειρασμῷ καὶ τὴν ἔκβασιν, τοῦ.δύνασθαι “ὑμᾶς" 


ὁ δοκῶν ἑστάναι, 


with the temptation also the issue, for *to *be *able *you 
ὑπενεγκεῖν. 14 Διόπερ, ἀγαπητοί.μου, φεύγετε ἀπὸ τῆς 
to bear [1]. Wherefore, my beloved, flee from 


εἰδωλολατρείας. 15 we φρονίμοις δλέγω᾽ κρίνατε ὑμεῖς 6 


idolatry. As to intelligent ones Ispeak: judge ye what 
φημι. 16 τὸ ποτήριον τῆς εὐλογίας ὃ εὐλογοῦμεν, οὐχὶ 
I say. The cup of blessing which we bless, Snot 
κοινωνία ‘frov αἵματος τοῦ χριστοῦ tori; τὸν ἄρτον ὃν 


“fellowship ‘of *the "blood ‘of *the °Christ lis 7it ? 
κλῶμεν, οὐχὶ κοινωνία τοῦ σώματος τοῦ χριστοῦ ἐστιν ; 
webreak, ‘not “fellowship δοῦ ἴθ ‘body ‘of*the “Christ 181 3 
17 ὅτι εἷς ἄρτος, ἕν σῶμα οἱ πολλοί ἐσμεν" οἱ yap πάντες 
Because ὍΠπΠ6 ‘loaf, 7one “body ἴθ “many ‘we ‘are; for 3411 


The bread which 


ἐκ TOU ἑνὸς ἄρτου μετέχομεν. 18 βλέπετε τὸν Ἰσραὴλ κατὰ 
301 *the one ‘loaf ‘we partake. See Israel according to 
σάρκα: 8ovyi! οἱ ἐσθίοντες τὰς θυσίας, κοινωνοὶ 
flesh : =not *those ‘eating ἴθ “sacrifices, 7fellow-partakers 


Tov θυσιαστηρίου εἰσίν; 19 τί οὖν φημι; OTe *eidwrov! τί 


*with *the 1°altar tare? What then say I? that anidol anything 
ἐστιν; ἢ OTe ΒβΒεϊίδωλόθυτον" τί ἐστιν; 20 ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι 


ig, or that what is sacrificed to an idol anything is? but that 
ἃ ‘Ove ra ἔθνη," δαιμονίοις Ove," καὶ οὐ θεῷ" - 
what “sacrifice ‘the *nations, todemons they sacrifice, and not to God. 


οὐ.θέλω. δὲ ὑμᾶς κοινωνοὺς τῶν δαιμονίων γίνεσθαι. 
ButIdonot wish you  fellow-partakers with demons to be. 
21 οὐ. δύνασθε ποτήριον κυρίου πίνειν, καὶ ποτήριον 
Yecannot [the] cup of [the] Lord drink, and [the] cup 


δαιμονίων᾽ ov.dvvacbe τραπέζης κυρίου μετέχειν καὶ 
of demons : ye cannot of [the] table of [the] Lord partake and 
τραπέζης δαιμονίων. 227) παραζηλοῦμεν τὸν κύριον ; 
of{the]table of demons. Or, do we provoke to jealousy the Lord? 
μὴ ἰσχυρότεροι αὐτοῦ ἐσμεν; 
stronger than he are we? 
23 Πάντα "por! ἔξεστιν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ πάντα 
All things for me are lawful, but ‘not ‘all *things 
πάντα “po ἔξεστιν, ἀλλ᾽ ov πάντα οἰκοδομεῖ. 


συμφέρει" 
3816 profitable ; 


24 pats 
‘No 


allthings forme areiawful, but “not ‘all 380 build up. Sone 
TO ἑαυτοῦ ζητείτω, ἀλλὰ TO τοῦ ἑτέρου “ἕκαστος." 
‘that “οὗ “himself ‘let *seck, but “that ‘of the ‘other 4each Zone. 


25 Πᾶν 
Everything that in 


TO ἐν μακέλλῳ πωλούμενον ἐσθίετε, μηδὲν ava- 
a market is sold eat, nothing in- 
κρίνοντες διὰ τὴν συνείδησιν. 26 τοῦ.Ῥγὰρ κυρίου" 

quiring on account of conscience, For *the SLord’s [15] 
y γὴ καὶ τὸ πλήρωμα αὐτῆς. 27 ei.49dE τις καλεῖ ὑμᾶς 
86 7earth and the fulness of it. Butif anyone “invite ou 


ε — ὑμᾶς (read [you)) GLTTraw. 
b εἴδωλον and εἰδωλόθυτον transposed LTTrAw. 
ἔθνη LTA. 1 __ θύει LTTrA. m θύουσιν they sacrifice LTTra. 
ο — ἕκαστος GLTTraWw. Ρ κυρίου yap LTTrAW. ᾳ — δὲ but Lrtraw. 


f ἐστὶν τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ χριστοῦ Tr. 
1 θύουσιν they sacrifice LTTraw. 


453 
destroyed of the de- 
stroyer. 11 Now all 


these things happened 
unto them for en- 
samples: and they are 
written for our ad- 
monition, upon whom 
the ends of the world 
are come. 12 Where- 
fore let him that think- 
eth he standeth take 
heed lest he fail. 
13. There hath no 
temptation taken you 
but such as is com- 
mon to man : but God 
is faithful, who will 
not suffer you to be 
tempted above that ye 
are able ; but will with 
the temptation also 
make a way to escape, 
that ye may be able to 
bear it. 14 Wherefore, 
my dearly beloved, flee 
from idolatry. 15 i 
speak as to wise men ; 
judge ye what I say. ͵ 
16 The cup of blessing 
which we bless, isitnot 
the communion of the 
blood of Christ? The 
bread which we break, 
isitnot the communion 
of the body of Christ ? 
17 For we being many 
are one bread, and one 
body: for we are all 
partakers of that one 
bread, 18 Behold Israel 
after the flesh: are 
not they which eat of 
the sacrifices parta- 
kers of the altar? 
19 What say I then? 
that the idol is any 
thing, or that whichis 
offered in sacrifice to 
idols is any thing? 
20 But 7 say, that the 
things which the Gen- 
tiles sacrifice, they 
sacrifice to devils, and 
not to God: and I 
would not that ye 
should have fellow- 
ship with devils. 21 Ye 
cannot drink the cup 
of the Lord, and the 
cup of devils: ye can- 
not be partakers of 
the Lord’s table, and 
of the table of devils. 
22 Do we provoke the 
Lord to jealousy? are 
we stronger than he? 
23 All things are 
lawful for me, but all 
things are not expe- 
dient: all things are 
lawful for me, but all 
things edify not, 24 Let 
no man seek his own, 
but every man ano- 
ther’s wealth, 25 What- 
soever is sold in -the 


&ovx LTAW. 
Κ.-- τὰ 
n— μοι GLTTrAW, 


484 


shambles, that eat, 
asking no question 
for conscience sake: 
26 for the earth is the 
Lord’s, and the ful- 
ness thereof. 27 If any 
of them that believe 
not bid you toa feast, 
and ye be disposed to 
go; whatsoever is set 
before you, eat, asking 
no question for con- 
science sake. 28 But 
if any man say unto 
you, This is offered in 
sacrifice unto idols, eat 
not for his sake that 
shewed it, and for 
conscience sake: for 
the earthis the Lord’s, 
andthe fulness there- 
of: 29 conscience, I 
say, not thine own, but 
of the other: for why 
is my liberty judged 
of another man’s con- 
science ? 30 For if I by 
grace be a partaker, 
why am I evil spoken 
of for that for which 
Igivethanks ?31 Whe- 
ther therefore ye eat, 
er drink, or whatso- 
ever ye do, do all to 
the glory of God. 
82 Give none offence, 
neither to the Jews, 
nor to the Gentiles, 
nor to the church of 
God: 33 even as I 
please all men in all 
things, not seeking 
mine own profit, but 
the profit of many, that 
they may be saved. 
XI. Be ye followers 
of me, even as I also 
am of Christ. 

2 Now I praise you, 
brethren, that ye re- 
member me in all 
things, and keep the 
ordinances, as | de- 
livered them to you. 
3 But I would have 
you know, that the 
head of every man is 
Christ ; and the head 
of the woman ὦ the 
man ; and the head of 
Christ ὦ God. 4 Every 
man praying or pro- 
phesying, having his 
head covered, dis- 
honoureth his head, 
5 But every woman 
that prayeth or pro- 
phesieth with her head 
uncovered dishonour- 
eth her head : for that 
is even all one as if 
she were shaven. 6 For 
if the woman be not 
covered, let her also 
be shorn: but if it be 
a shame for a woman 
to be shorn or shaven, 


LLP OS KOsBANOAFOW Sie A; X; XE 


TOY ἀπίστων, Kai θέλετε πορεύεσθαι, πᾶν TO παρατιθέμενον 


of *the “unbelieving, and ye wish to go, all that is set before 
ὑμῖν ἐσθίετε. μηδὲν ἀνακρίνοντες διὰ τὴν συνείδησιν. 
you eat, nothing inquiring on account of conscience. 


28 ἐὰν.δὲ τις ὑμῖν εἴπῃ, Τοῦτο τεἰδωλόθυτόν" éorw* μὴ 
Butif anyone toyou say, This *offered *to *an ‘idol is, Tot 
ἐσθίετε, δι ἐκεῖνον τὸν μηνύσαντα καὶ τὴν συνείδησιν" 
Sdoeat, onaccourtof him that shewed [it],and the conscience; 
Srov-yap κυρίου ἡ γῆ καὶ TO πλήρωμα αὐτῆς." 29 συνεί- 
for *the ‘Lord’s [*is]'the *earthandthe fulness of it. 2Con- 
Onow δὲ λέγω. οὐχὶ τὴν ἑαυτοῦ, ἀλλὰ THY τοῦ ἑτέρου. 
science ‘but, I say, ποῦ that of thyself, but that of the other; 
ἵνα.τί-γὰρ ἡ ἐλευθερία.μου κρίνεται ὑπὸ ἄλλης συνειδήσεως ; 


for why 2my *freedom *is judged by another’s conscience ? 
30 εἰ 'δὲ᾽ ἐγὼ χάριτι μετέχω, Ti βλασφημοῦμαι ὑπὲρ οὗ 
But if I withthanks partake, why amlevilspokenof for what 


ἐγὼ εὐχαριστῶ; 31 Eire οὖν ἐσθίετε, εἴτε πίνετε, εἴτε 
if give thanks ? Whether therefore ye eat, or ye drink, or 


τι ποιεῖτε, πάντα εἰς δόξαν θεοῦ ποιεῖτε. 32 ἀπρόσκοποι 
anything yedo, allthings to "glory ‘God’s_ do. Without offence 


‘yiveote καὶ ᾿ΙΤουδαίοις" καὶ “Ἕλλησιν καὶ τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ τοῦ 
be ye both to Jews and Greeks and tothe assembly 
θεοῦ: 88 καθὼς κἀγὼ πάντα πᾶσιν ἀρέσκω, μὴ ζητῶν 
of God. According as I also all in all things please ; not seeking 
κ ᾽ ~ ow , ᾽ 4 x ~ ~ a ~ 
TO ἐμαυτοῦ “συμφέρον,." ἀλλὰ τὸ τῶν πολλῶν, ἵνα σωθῶ- 
the “οὗ *myself *profit, but that ofthe many, that they may 
σιν. 11 μιμηταί μου γίνεσθε. καθὼς κἀγὼ χριστοῦ. 
be saved. Imitators of me be, according as I also [am] of Christ. 
2 ᾿Επαινῶ.δὲ ὑμᾶς, "ἀδελφοί," ὅτι πάντα μον μέ- 
Now | praise you, brethren, that inallthings me ye have 
μνησθε, καὶ καθὼς παρέδωκα ὑμῖν, τὰς TWapaddoac κατ- 
remembered; and according as I delivered to you, the traditions ye 
, 2 4 « ~ »ῷ ee 4A ᾽ A « ‘ 
ἔχετε. 3 θέλω.δὲ ὑμᾶς εἰδέναι, OTL παντὸς ἀνδρὸς ἡ κεφαλὴ 
keep , But I wish you to know, that of every man ‘the ‘head 
ὁ χριστός ἐστιν κεφαλὴ.δὲ γυναικὸς ὁ ἀνήρ' κεφαλὴ. δὲ 
‘the “Christ Sis, but head of [the] woman [is]the man, and head 
χριστοῦ, ὁ θεός. 4 πᾶς ἀνὴρ προσευχόμενος ἢ προφητεύων, 
οἵ Christ, God. Every man praying or  prophesying, 
κατὰ κεφαλῆς ἔχων, καταισχύνει τὴν.κεφαλὴν. αὐτοῦ. 
{anything} on {his} head having, puts toshame his head. 
5 πᾶσα.δὲ γυνὴ προσευχομένη ἢ προφητεύουσα ἀκατακαλύπτῳ 
But every woman praying or prophesying “uncovered 
τῇ κεφαλῇ, καταισχύνει τὴν.κεφαλὴν. ἑαυτῆς" ἕν.γάρ 


i 


lwith *the “head, puts to shame her head ; for one 
ἐστιν καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ τῷ. ἐξυρημένῃ. 6 εἰ.γὰρ οὐ.κατακαλύπ- 
itis and the same with having been shaven. For if be not covered 


εἰ. δὲ αἰσχρὸν γυναικὶ τὸ 


τεται yurn, καὶ κειράσθω" 
But if [it be] shameful to a woman 


a woman, also let her be shorn. 

, nA - ~ , 2 \ 4 ‘ > 
κείρασθαι ἢ ξυρᾶσθαι, κατακαλυπτέσθω. 7 ἀνὴρ.μὲν. γὰρ οὐκ 
to beshorn or tobe shaven, let her be covered. For manindeed *not 


ὀφείλει κατακαλύπτεσθαι τὴν κεφαλήν, εἰκὼν καὶ δόξα θεοῦ 
tought to have “covered the *head, image and glory of God 


ὑπάρχων" " γυνὴ.δὲ δόξα ἀνδρός ἐστιν᾽ ὃ οὐ.γάρ ἐστιν ἀνὴρ 


let her be covered. being ; but woman glory ofman is. For not is man 
τ ἱερόθυτόν Offered in sacrifice LTTra. Ss — τοῦ yap to end of verse QLTTrAW. t — δὲ 


but GLTTraw. 


ἡ καὶ Ἰουδαίοις γίνεσθε LITA. 
Υ + τοῦ (raid οἵ the Christ) [L]ttra. 


~ σύμφορον LTTrA, 5 — ἀδελφοί LTTrAW. 


2 αὐτῆς LTTrA. a + ἡ the (woman) LTTraw. 


XI. I ' CORINTHIANS: 

ἐκ γυναικός, ἀλλὰ γυνὴ ἐξ ἀνδρός" 9 καὶ. γὰρ οὐκ ἐκτίσθη 
of woman, but woman of man, For also not was created 
ἀνὴρ διὰ τὴν γυναῖκα, ἀλλὰ γυνὴ διὰ τὸν ἄνδρα" 
man onaccount of the woman, but woman on account of the man, 
10 διὰ τοῦτο ὀφείλει ἡ γυνὴ ἐξουσίαν ἔχειν ἐπὶ τῆς κε- 
Because of this ought the woman authority tohave on the 
φαλῆς, διὰ τοὺς ἀγγέλους. 11 πλὴν οὔτε ὕάνὴρ 
head, onaccount of the angels. However neither [15] man 
χωρὶς γυναικός, οὔτε γυνὴ χωρὶς ayvdpdc,! ἐν Kup’ 
apart from woman, nor woman apartfrom man, in {the] Lord. 
12 ὥσπερ.γὰρ ἡ γυνὴ ἐκ τοῦ ἀνδρός, οὕτως καὶ ὁ ἀνὴρ 


For as the woman of the man [is], so also the man 
διὰ τῆς γυναικός, τὰ.δὲ. πάντα ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ. 18 ἐν ὑμῖν.αὐτοῖς 
by the woman [is]; butallthings of God. In yourselves 


κρίνατε' πρέπον ἐστὶν γυναῖκα ἀκατακάλυπτον τῷ θεῷ 
judge: becoming isit for a woman uncovered to God 


προσεύχεσθαι; 14 “ἢ οὐδὲ Δαὐτὴ ἡ φύσις" διδάσκει ὑμᾶς, 


to pray? Or ?not even itself “nature ‘does teach you, 

ὅτι ἀνὴρ μὲν tay’ κομᾷ, ἀτιμία αὐτῷ ἐστιν" 15 γυνὴ 
that 7a*man 4if have long hair a dishonour to him itis? 3A *woman 
δὲ ἐὰν κομᾷ, δόξα αὐτῇ ἐστιν; ὅτι ἡ κόμη ἀντὶ 


‘put 7if havelonghair, glory toher itis; for the long hair instead 


περιβολαίου δέδοται “αὐτῇ"" 16 εἰδὲ τις δοκεῖ φιλόνεικος 
of a covering is given to her. But if anyone thinks “contentious 


εἶναι, ἡμεῖς τοιαύτη» συνήθειαν οὐκ.ἔχομεν, οὐδὲ αἱ ἐκκλησίαι 


4to7be, we 3such *custom thave “not, nor the assemblies 
τοῦ θεοῦ. 

of God. 

17 Τοῦτο.δὲ ἱπαραγγέλλων οὐκ.ἐπαινῶ," ὅτι οὐκ 


But [368 *to] Sthis {?you] I do not praise [you], that not 
? \ καὶ ~ ih ὑλλ᾽} ᾽ . ir It , θ 18 ~ 
ει TO KOELTTOY, a εις TO 1NTTOV’ συνερχέσσε. TTOWTOV 
for the batter, but for the worse ye come together. First 
μὲν γὰρ συνερχομένων ὑμῶν ἐν ἔτῃ ἐκκλησίᾳ, ἀκούω oxio- 
5Ἰἰηᾶοοᾶ ‘for coming together ye in the assembly, I hear di- 
para ἐν ὑμῖν ὑπάρχειν, Kai μέρος. τι πιστεύω: 19 déi-yap 
visions among you to be, and partly I believe [it]. For there must 
καὶ αἱρέσεις ἐν ὑμῖν εἶναι, tva! οἱ δόκιμοι φανεροὶ γένωνται 
also sects among you be, that the approved manifest may become 
ἐν ὑμῖν. 20 συνερχομένων 
among you. Coming together therefore 
ἔστιν κυριακὸν δεῖπνον φαγεῖν" 
lit 318 [the]  Lord’s supper to eat. For each one his own 


δεῖπνον προλαμβάνει ἔν τῷ φαγεῖν, Kai O¢-pev πεινᾷ ὃς δὲ 
i and ishungry and another 


1charging 


οὖν ὑμῶν ἐπὶ.τὸ. αὐτό, οὐκ 
ye into one place, *not 
21 ἕκαστος.γὰρ τὸ ἴδιον 


supper takes first in eating, one 
μεθύει. 22 μὴ yap οἰκίας οὐκ. ἔχετε εἰς TO ἐσθίειν καὶ πίνειν ; 
is drunken. or houses have ye not for eating and drinking? 


ἢ τῆς ἐκκλησίας τοῦ θεοῦ καταφρονεῖτε, Kai καταισχύνετε ἢ 


or the assembly of God do ye despise, and put to shame 
Dee 


Tove μὴ ἔχοντας ; τί ὑμῖν εἴπω"; "ἐπαινέσω" ὑμᾶς “ἐν 
them that have not? What to you shouldI say? shall I praise you in 
τούτῳ; ovK' ἐπαινῶ. 238 ᾿Εγὼ.γὰρ παρέλαβον ἀπὸ τοῦ κυρίου, 

this? I do not praise. For I received from the rd 


455 
7 For a man indeed 
ought not to cover his 
head, forasmuch as 
he is the image and 
glory of God: but the 
woman is the glory of 
the man. 8 For the 
man is not of the wo- 
man ; but the woman 
of the man. 9 Neither 
was the man created 
for the woman; but 
the woman for the 
man. 10 For this cause 
ought the woman to 
have power on her head 
because of the angels. 
1l Nevertheless nei- 
ther is the man with- 
out the woman, nei- 
therthe woman with- 
out the man, in the 
Lord. 12 For as the 
woman is of the man, 
even so 7s the man al- 
so by the woman; but 
all things of God. 
13 Judge in yourselves: 
is it comely that a wo- 
man pray unto God 
uncovered? 14 Doth 
not even nature itself 
teach you, that, if a 
man have long hair, it 
is ashame unto him ? 
15 But if a woman 
have long hair, it is a 
glory to her: for her 
hair is given her fora 
covering. 16 Butif any 
man seem to be con- 
tentious, we have no 
such custom, neither 
the churches of God. 
17 Now in this that 
I declare unto you I 
praise you not, that ye 
come together not for 
the better, but for the 
worse. 18 For first of 
all, when ye come to- 
gether in the church, 
I hear that there be 
divisions among you ; 
and I partly believeit. 
19 For there must be 
also heresies among 
you, that they which 
are approved may be 
made manifest among 
you. 20 When ye come 
together therefore in- 
to one place, this is 
not to eat the Lord’s 
supper. 21 For in eat- 
ing every one taketh 
before other his own 
supper: and one is 
ungry, and another 
is drunken. 22 What? 
have ye not houses to 
eat and to drink in? 
or despise ye the church 
of God, and shame 
them that have not? 
What shall I say to 


b * τς > x ἌΡ. ᾿ “ “ ὃ GLTT AW. 
γυνὴ χωρὶς ἀνδρὸς οὔτε ἀνὴρ χωρὶς γυναικὸς Τ 


¢ --  LTTraW. 


d ἡ φύσις 

8 κρεισσον LTTrA, 
” « ~ 

™ ELIT) υμιν 


αὐτὴ LTTrAW. ε [αὐτῇ] A. f παραγγέλλω οὐκ ἐπαινῶν LTrAW. 
4 ἀλλὰ TTrA. ifjcoov uTTra. * — τῇ GLTTrAW. 1+ xatalso[L]rrfa]. 
LTTraw. ἢ ἐπαινῶ praiselL. 5; ἐν τούτῳ οὐκ (read In this I do not praise) Er. 


430 

you ?shalil praise you 
in this? I praise you 
not. 23 ForI have re- 
ceived of the Lord that 
which also I delivered 
anto you, That the 
Lord Jesus the same 
night in which he was 
betrayed took bread : 
24 and when he had 
given thanks, he brake 
tt, andsaid, Take, eat: 
this is my body, which 
is broken foryou : this 
do {n remembrance of 
me, 29 After the same 
manner also fe took 
the cup, when he had 
supped, saying, This 
cup is the new testa- 
ment in my blood: this 
do ye, as oft as ye drink 
it, in remembrance of 
me, 26 For as often as 
ye eat this bread, and 
drink this cup, ye do 
shew the Lord’s death 
tillhe come. 27 Where- 
fore whosoever shall 
eat this bread, and 
drink this cup of the 
Lord, unworthily, 
shall be guilty of the 
body and blood of the 
Lord. 28 But let a man 
examine himself, and 
so let him est of that 
bread, and drink of 
that cup. 29 For he 
that eateth and drink- 
eth unworthily, eateth 
and drinketh damna- 
tion to himself, not 
discerning the Lord’s 
body. 30 For this cause 
many are weak and 
sickly among you, and 
many sleep, 31 For if 
we would judge our- 
selves, we should not 
be judged. 32 But when 
we are judged, we are 
chastened of the Lord, 
that we should not be 
condemned with the 
world. 33 Wherefore, 
my brethren, when ye 
come together to eat, 
tarry one for another. 
34 And if any man 
hunger, let him eat at 
home ; that ye come 
not together unto con- 
demnation. And the 
rest will I set in order 
when I come. 

XII. Now concern- 
ing spiritual gifts, 
bretiren, I would not 
have you _ ignorant. 
2 Ye know that ye 
were Gentiles, carried 
away unto these dumb 
idols, even as ye were 
led. 3 Wherefore I give 
youtounderstand,that 


P παρεδίδετο LTTrA. 4 -- Λάβετε, φάγετε GLTTrAW. 
t — τοῦτο (vead the cup) LTTraw. 
y + τοῦ of the @LTTraw. 


bread) GLTTraw. 


Ὁ — τοῦ κυρίου LTTrA. 


“tet 


da. 


ΠΡΟΣ, KOOP TN @hOY S.A. Be 
ὃ καὶ παρέδωκα ὑμῖν, ὅτι ὁ κύριος ᾿Ιησοῦς ἐν TY νυκτὶ 
that which also 1 delivered to you, thatthe Lord Jesus in the night 


ἡ παρεδίδοτο," ἔλαβεν ἄρτον, 24 καὶ εὐχαριστήσας 
in which he was delivered up took bread, and having given thanks 


ἔκλασεν, καὶ εἶπεν, «λάβετε, φάγετε""" τοῦτό pou ἐστὶν τὸ 
he broke [it], and said, Take, eat, this ofme is the 
σῶμα TO ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν τκλώμενον" τοῦτο ποιεῖτε εἰς τὴν 
body which for you [18] being broken: this do in 
ἐμὴν. ἀνάμνησιν. 25 Ὡσαύτως Kai τὸ ποτήριον, μετὰ τὸ 
remembrance of me. ᾿ In like manner also the cup, after 


δειπνῆσαι, λέγων, Τοῦτο τὸ ποτήριον ἡ καινὴ διαθήκη ἐστὶν 

having supped, saying, This cup the new covenant is 

ἐν τῷ-ἐμῷ.αἵματι: τοῦτο ποιεῖτε, ὁσάκις "ἂν" πίνητε, 

in my blood: this do, as often as ye may drink [it], 
, A ? 1 > , t , ‘ 8} Hl ", θί x 

εἰς τὴν. ἐμὴν. ἀνάμνησιν. 26 Ὁσάκις. γὰρ "ἂν" ἐσθίητε τὸν 
in remembrance of me. For as often as ye may eat 

» ~ ἊΝ , ~ " , \ , 

ἄρτον.τοῦτον, Kai τὸ.ποτήριον ἱτοῦτο" πίνητε, τὸν θάνατον 


this bread, and this cup may drink, the death 
τοῦ κυρίου καταγγέλλετε, “ἄχρις! οὗ Wav" ἔλθῃ. 27 “Qore 
of the Lord ye announce, until he may come, So that 
ὃς.-ἂν ἐσθίῃ τὸν. ἄρτον “τοῦτον ἢ πίνῃ τὸ ποτήριον 
whosoever should eat this bread or should drink the cup 


τοῦ κυρίου ἀναξίως, ἔνοχος ἔσται τοῦ σώματος Kal’ αἵματος 
of the Lord unworthily, guilty shall be of the body and blood 
τοῦ κυρίου. 28 δοκιμαζέτω. δὲ “ἄνθρωπος ἑαυτόν." καὶ οὕτως 
of the Lord. But let *prove ‘a "man himself, and thus 
ἐκ τοῦ ἄρτου ἐσθιέτω, Kai ἐκ TOU ποτηρίου πινέτω" 29 ὁ. γὰρ 
of the bread let him eat, and of the cup let him drink, Forhe that 
ἐσθίων καὶ πίνων "ἀναξίως." κρίμα ἑαυτῷ ἐσθίει καὶ πίνει, 
eats and drinks unworthily, judgment tohimself eats and drinks, 
μὴ διακρίνων τὸ σῶμα ὕτοῦ κυρίου." 30 διὰ τοῦτο ἐν ὑμῖν 
not discerning the body ofthe Lord. Because of this among you 
πολλοὺ ἀσθενεῖς Kai ἄῤῥωστοι, καὶ κοιμῶνται ἱκανοί. 
many [are] weak and infirm, and are fallen asleep many. 
31 εἰ °ydo' ἑαυτοὺς διεκρίνομεν, οὐκ.ἂν.ἐκρινόμεθα: 32 κρινό- 
ἽΣ ‘for ourselves wescrutinized, we should not be judged. Being 
μενοι δέ, ὑπὸ Δὀ κυρίου παιδευόμεθα, ἵνα μὴ σὺν τῷ 
“judged ‘but, by [the] Lord wearedisciplined, that not with the 
κόσμῳ κατακριθῶμεν. 9598 Ὥστε, ἀδελφοί. μου, συνερχόμενοι 
world we should be condemned, So that, my brethren, coming together 
εἰς TO φαγεῖν, ἀλλήλους ἐκδέχεσθε᾽' 84 εἰ “δὲ τις πεινᾷ, 
for to eat, one another wait for. But if anyone be hungry, 
ἐν.οἴκῳ ἐσθιέτω: ἵνα μὴ εἰς κρίμα συνέρχησθε. τὰ δὲ 
athome lethimeat, that not for judgment ye may come together ; and the 
λοιπά, ὠςἂν ἔλθω, δἮιατάξομαι. 
other things whenever I may come, I will set in order. 
12 Περὶ. δὲ τῶν πνευματικῶν, ἀδελφοί, οὐ.θέλω ὑμᾶς 
But concerning spirituals, brethren, Idonot wish you 
ἀγνοεῖν. οἴδατε Ori’ ἔθνη ἦτε, πρὸς τὰ εἴδωλα τὰ ἄφωνα 
to be ignorant. Ye know that Gentiles ye were, *to Sidols “dumb 
og ἂν.ἤγεσθε, ἀπαγόμενοι" 3 διὸ γνωρίζω ὑμῖν, ore 
Sas Tye "might *be led, ‘led *away. Therefore I give *to *know ‘you, that 


T κλώμενον LTTrA. ὃ ἐὰν LTTrA. 
x — τοῦτον (read the 

a — ἀναξίως LTTrA. 
e — δὲ but GLTTraW. 


~ — ἂν GLTTrA. 
* ἑαυτὸν ἄνθρωπος W. 
4 + τοῦ the Trr[a]w. 


Yaxpe Tt. 


ς δὲ but LTTraw. 


€ + ὅτε when (LJrtra. 


XII. I 


πνεύματι θεοῦ λαλῶν λέγει ἀνάθεμα 


CORIEN T HTAIN:S: 


οὐδεὶς ἐν ὩΤησοῦν"" 


noone in[{the] Spirit ofGodspeaking says accursed Gis) Jesus ; 
καὶ οὐδεὶς δύναται εἰπεῖν ἸΚύριον ᾿Τησοῦν," εἰ μὴ ἐν πνεύ- 
and noone can say Lord Jesus, Se in {the} “Spirit 


ματι ἄγ; 4 διαιρέσεις.δὲ χαρισμάτων εἰσίν, τὸ.δὲ αὐτὸ 
Hol But diversities of ae there ate, but the same 


πνεῦμα" 5 καὶ διαιρέσεις διακονιῶν εἰσίν, Kai ὁ αὐτὸς κύριος" 


Spirit ; and diversities of services there are,andthe same Lord; 
6 καὶ διαιρέσεις ἐνεργημάτων εἰσίν, τὸ δὲ! αὐτός aru’ θεός, 
and diversities of operations thereare, but the same 2it%is 4G@od, 


ὁ ἐνεργῶν τὰ-πάντα ἐν πᾶσιν. 7 ἑκάστῳ.δὲ δίδοται ἡ φανέ- 
who operates allthings in all, But toeach is given the mani- 
pwoic τοῦ πνεύματος πρὸς τὸ συμφέρον. ὃ ᾧ.μὲν.γὰρ διὰ 
festation of the Spirit or profit. For to one by 
τοῦ πνεύματος δίδοται λόγος σοφίας. ἄλλῳ.δὲ λόγος 
the Spirit isgiven aword of wisdom; and to another a word 
γνώσεως, κατὰ τὸ αὐτὸ πνεῦμα᾽ 9 ἑτέρῳ.""δὲ᾽ πίστις, 
of knowledge, according tothe same _ Spirit; and toa different one faith, 
ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ πνεύματι ἄλλῳ.δὲ χαρίσματα ἰαμάτων, ἐν τῷ 
in the same Spirit ; and to another gifts of healing, in the 
"αὐτῷ πνεύματι. 10 ἄλλῳ.δὲ ἐνεργήματα δυνάμεων, 

same Spirit ; and to another operations of works of power ; 

ἄλλῳ. “δὲ προφητεία, ἄλλῳ.Ῥδὲ᾽ διακρίσεις" πνευμάτων, 
and to another propheey; and to another’ discerning of spirits ; 
c , τδὲ! , iN ~ IAX Qt st 7ὔ Il Xr = 
ETEOW-"OE γενῆ γλωσσῶν, adAw.cé *éopnveta' yAwo 
and to a different one kinds of tongues; and to another interpretation of 
oy’ 11] πάντα.δὲ ταῦτα ἐνεργεῖ τὸ ἕν Kai τὸ αὐτὸ πνεῦ- 
tongues. But all these things “operates 'the one *and *the *same “Spirit, 


a, διαιροῦν ἰδίᾳ ἑκάστῳ καθὼς βούλεται. 12 Καθάπερ 
pa, te 
dividing separately toeach according as he wills. “Byen 388 


γὰρ 0 τὸ σῶμα ἕν ἐστιν καὶ μέλη ἔχει πολλά," πάντα.δὲ τὰ 
for the body one ‘is and “members *has “*many, but all the 


ἔλη τοῦ σώματος Yrov ἑνός," πολλὰ ὄντα, ἕν ἐστιν copa’ 


membersofthe *body one, +many ἼΣΩΣ fone °are body: 
οὕτως καὶ ὁ χριστός. 18 καὶ γὰρ ἐν ἑνὶ πνεύματι ἡμεῖς 
80 also [15] the Christ. Foralso by one Spirit we 


’ ᾽ a ~ 2 , ” ? ~ ” uv 
πάντες εἰς ἕν σῶμα ἐβαπτίσθημεν, εἴτε ᾿Ιουδαῖοι εἴτε “Ἔλ- 
all into one body were baptized, whether Jews or 
Anvec, εἴτε δοῦλοι εἴτε ἐλεύθεροι" Kai πάντες “εἰς ἕν πνεῦμα 
Greeks, whether bondmen or free, and 8] into one Spirit 
᾽ , \ A 4 ~ > »” τι , ? A 
ἐποτίσθημεν. 14 Καὶ γὰρ τὸ σῶμα οὐκ.-ἔστιν ἕν μέλος, ἀλλὰ 
were made to drink. For also the body isnot one member, but 
πολλά. 15 ἐὰν εἴπῃ ὁ πούς, Ὅτι οὐκ.εἰμὶ χείρ, οὐκ.εἰμὶ 
many. If should say the foot, Because Iamnot ahand, I am not 
ἐκ τοῦ σώματος᾽ οὐ παρὰ τοῦτο οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ τοῦ σώματος"; 
of the body: on account of this isitnot of the body ? 
16 καὶ ἐὰν εἴπῃ τὸ οὖς, Ὅτι οὐκ.εἰμὶ ὀφθαλμὸς οὐκ εἰμὶ ἐκ 
And if should say the ear, Because I am not an eye Iam not of 
τοῦ σώματος" οὐ παρὰ τοῦτο ovK-éoTLY ἐκ τοῦ σώματος": 
the body: on account of this igsitnot of the body ? 
17 εἰ ὅλον τὸ σῶμα ὀφθαλμός, ποῦ ἡ ἀκοή; εἰ Odo” 
If*whole*the body [were] aneye, where the hearing? if [the] whole 


457 


no man speaking by 
tne Spirit of God call- 
eth Jesus accursed : 
and that no man can 
say that Jesus is the 
Lord, but by the Holy 
Ghost. 4 Now there 
are diversities of gifts, 
but the snme Spirit. 
5 And there are differ- 
ences of administra- 
tions, but the same 
Lord. 6 And there are 
diversities of opera- 
tions, but it is the 
same God which work- 
eth all in all. 7 But the 
manifestation of the 
Spirit is given toevery 
man to profit withal. 
8 For to one is given 
by the Spirit the word 
of wisdom ; to another 
the word of knowledge 
by the same Spirit; 
9 to another faith by 
the same Spirit; to 
another the gifts of 
healing by the same 
Spirit; 10 to another 
the working of mira- 
cies; to another pro- 
phecy ; to another dis- 
cerning of spirits ; to 
another divers kinds 
of tongues ; to another 
the interpretation of 
tongues: 11 but ali 
these worketh that one 
and the selfsame Spi- 
rit, dividing to every 
man severally as he 
will. 12 For as the body 
is one, and hath many 
members, and all the 
members of that one 
body, being many, are 
one body: so also ws 
Christ. 13 For by one 
Spirit are we all ba 

tized into one body, 
whether we be Jews or 
Gentiles, whether we 
be bond or free ; and 
have been all made to 
drink into one Spirit. 
14 For the body is not 
one member,but many. 
15 If the foot shall 
say, Because I am not 
the hand, I am not of 
the body; is it there- 
fore not of the body? 
16 And if the ear shali 
say, Because I am not 
the eye, I am not of 
the body ; is it there- 
fore not of the body? 
17 If the whole body 
were an eye, where 
were the hearing? If 
the whole were hear- 


a "Ingovs LTIraw. i Κύριος Ἰησοῦς Lrtraw. K καὶ ὃ and the a, 
m — δὲ and [L]rTz[a]. 0 ἑνὶ One LTTrA. ° — §€and Ltr. 
κρισις T. r— δὲ and LiTr. 5 διερμηνεία L. 
LTTrAW.  -- εἰς ΤΤΤΑΥ͂. *% 


Ρ — δὲ and Lrr. 
nv t πολλὰ ἔχει LTTrA. 
— ; (read it is not on account of this not of the body.) ur. 


1 — ἐστιν GLTTrAW. 
9 διά- 
ν — τοῦ ἑνός 


458 


ing, where were the 
smelling? 18 But now 
hath God set the mem- 
bers every one of them 
in the body, as it hath 
pleasedhim. 19 Andif 
they were all one mem- 
ber, where were the 
body ? 20 But now are 
they many members, 
yet but one body. 
21 And the eye can- 
not say unto the 
hand, I have no need 
of thee: nor again 
the head to the feet, 
1 have no need of 
you. 22 Nay, much 
more those members 
of the body, which 
seem to be more feeble, 
are necessary : 23 and 
those members of the 
body, which we think 
to be less honourable, 
upon these we bestow 
more abundant hon- 
our ; and our uncome- 
ly parts have more 
abundant comeliness. 
24 For ourcomely parts 
have noneed : but God 
hath tempered the 
body together, having 
given more abundant 
honour to that part 
which lacked: 25 that 
there should be no 
schism in the body; 
but that the members 
should have the same 
care one for another. 
26 And whether one 
member suffer, all the 
members suffer with 
it ; or one member be 
honoured, all the mem- 
bers rejoice with it. 
27 Now yeare the body 
of Christ, and mem- 
bers in particular. 
28 And God hath set 
some in the church, 
first apostles, second- 
arily prophets, thirdly 
teachers, after that 
miracles, then gifts of 
healings, helps, go- 
vernments, diversities 
of tongues, 29 Are all 
vpostles ? are all pro- 
phets ἢ are all teach- 
ers? are all workers 
of miracles? 30 have 
all the gifts of heal- 
ing? do all speak with 
tongues ? do all inter- 
pret? 31 But covet 
earnestly the best 
gifts: and yet shew I 
unto you a more ex- 
cellent way. 


XIII. Though I speak 
with the tongues of 


i P:O;>) pK Ὁ BLN ΘΕ ΟΌΣ Σ ΑΔ. ΧΙ. 
ἀκοή, ποῦ ἡ ὄσφρησις ; 18 νυνὶ" δὲ ὁ θεὸς ἔθετο τὰ μέλη, 
hearing, wherethe smelling? But now God set the members, 


“a ee ? ~ ) » , ‘ ΕΣ A ᾽ ι 
ἕν ἕκαστον αὐτῶν ἐν τῷ σώματι, καθὼς ἠθέλησεν. 19 εἰ δὲ 
Zone ‘each ofthem in the body, according as he would. But if 


ἦν "τὰ! πάντα ἕν μέλος, ποῦ τὸ σῶμα; 20 νῦν.δὲ πολλὰ 


were all one member, where the body ? But now many 
μὲν" μέλη, ἕν.δὲ σῶμα. 21 οὐ.δύναται. "δὲ « ὀφ- 
{are the] members, but one body. And is not able (the] 


θαλμὸς εἰπεῖν τῇ χειρί, Χρείαν σου οὐκ ἔχω" ἢ πάλιν ἡ 
eye tosay tothe hand, Need of thee [have not; or again the 
κεφαλὴ τοῖς ποσίν, Χρείαν ὑμῶν ovK-Exw. 22 ἀλλὰ πολλῷ 
head to the feet, Need of you I have not. But much 
μᾶλλον τὰ δοκοῦντα μέλη τοῦ σώματος ἀσθενέστερα ὑπάρ- 
rather the ®which*seem'members7of*the *body °weaker to 
χειν, ἀναγκαῖά tor’ 38καὶ ἃ δοκοῦμεν “ἀτιμότερα" 
She, necessary are; and those which we think more void of honour 
εἶναι τοῦ σώματος, τούτοις τιμὴν περισσοτέραν περιτίθεμεν᾽" 
to be of the body, *these “honour more fabundant ‘we “put about ; 
καὶ τὰ ἀσχήμονα ἡμῶν εὐσχημοσύνην περισαρτεραν ἔχει" 
and the uncomely [parts] of us comeliness More abundant have; 
24 τὰ.δὲ εὐσχήμονα ἡμῶν οὐ χρείαν ἔχει. “ἀλλ᾽! ὁ θεὸς 
butthe comely (parts]ofus πὸ meed ‘have. But God 
συνεκέρασεν τὸ σῶμα, τῷ ‘voTEepovYTt' περισσοτέραν 
tempered together the body, to that being deficient more abundant 
dove τιμήν, 25 wa μὴ- ἐσχίσμα" ἐν τῷ 
“having “given ‘honour, that there might not be division in the 
’ ? 4 ‘ > A « A ᾽ fe ~ 4A 
σώματι, ἀλλὰ TO αὐτὸ ὑπὲρ ἀλλήλων μεριμνῶσιν τὰ 
body, but ‘the same “for °one ‘another *might *have 7concern ‘the 
μέλη" 26 καὶ "sire" πάσχει ἕν μέλος, ἰσυμπάσχει! πάντα 
2members, And if suffers one member, sufferswith [it] all 
τὰ μέλη" etre δοξάζεται ἕν᾽ μέλος, ἰσυγχαίρει' πάντα τὰ 
the members; if be glorified one member, rejoice with [10] all the 
μέλη. 27 ὕμεις δὲ ἐστε σῶμα χριστοῦ, καὶ μέλη ἐκ 
members. ow ye are [the] body otf Christ, and members in 
μέρους. 28 Kai ove μὲν ἔθετο ὁ θεὸς ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ πρῶ- 
particular. And ‘certain *did *set ‘God in the assembly: first, 
τον ἀποστόλους, δεύτερον προφήτας, τρίτον διδασκάλδ ove, 
apostles ; secondly, prophets ; thirdly, teachers ; 
ἔπειτα δυνάμεις, “elra! χαρίσματα ἰαμάτων, "ἀντιλήψεις," 
then worksof power; then gifts of healings ; helps ; 
κυβερνήσεις, γένη γλωσσῶν. 29 μὴ πάντες ἀπόστολοι; μὴ 
governments; kinds of tongues. [Are] all apostles ? 
πάντες προφῆται; μὴ πάντες διδάσκαλοι; μὴ πάντες δυνά- 
811 prophets ? all teachers? [have] all works of 
pec; 80 μὴ πάντες χαρίσματα ἔχουσιν ἰαμάτων ; μὴ πάντες 
power ? all gifts *have of healings? 3411 
γλώσσαις λαλοῦσιν ; μὴ πάντες διερμηνεύουσιν ; 81 Ζηλοῦτε 
‘do speak with tongues? 3411 ‘do interpret ? 2Be *emulous *of 
δὲ τὰ χαρίσματα τὰ °Kpeitrova’' Kai ἔτι καθ᾽ ὑπερβολὴν 
‘hut the *cifts ‘better, and yet *more “surpassing 
ὁδὸν ὑμῖν δείκνυμι. 
'a‘*way toyou Ishew. 


Υ νῦν LTrA. 
ἃ ἀτιμώτερα Ἑ. 


Ἀ εἴ τι 1Γ anything rr. 


™ ἔπειτα, LTTrA. 


τ: [τὰ] LTrA. 


" ἀντιλήμψεις LTTrA. 


¢ + 9 the GLTTraWw. 
Ε σχίσματα divisions T. 
1 συν- T. 


@ [ev] LTr. 5 — δὲ and G[L]. 
Γὑστερουμένῳ LTTrA. 
k — ἕν (read a member) TTr[A]. 
ο μείζονα greater LTTrA. 


ε ἀλλὰ LTTra. 
τι συν- TA. 


ΠῚ χν- 12°C’ Oh NT ET ἈΞ ΝΟ: 459 


IN = , ~ “Ὁ πεν 7 ἊΣ ᾿ “,, ΤΡ δᾶ ofangels, and 
13 ᾿Εὰν ταῖς γλώσσαις τῶν ee: λαλῶ Καὶ Τῶν Toe nobelimeiey, bam 

If withthe tongues of men Ispeak an become as sounding 
> , > , Η ὯΝ ἐὰν on eS 2. ney Η brass, or a tink ling 
ἀγγέλων, ἀγάπην δὲ [AB OS 9 5 MAS χαλκὸς Xu 1 cymbal. 2 And though 


of angels, but love have not, gee become “*brass tsounding or Thave the gift of pra- 

κύμβαλον ἀλαλάζον. 2 Ῥκαὶ ἐὰν" ἔχω προφητείαν, καὶ εἰδῶ τε στ οιτει 
a mys "» “5 

a EES clanging: πε if nets Ν rae Be a os ἘΠῚ iengsledge agente 

τὰ μυστήρια πάντα Kai πᾶσαν THY γνῶσιν, “καὶ édy' ἔχω though I have all 

2mysteries 1.11 and all knowledge, and if I have faith, so that I could 


rs R ; a Ξ ᾿ rigs a) WO , remove mountains, 
πᾶσαν τὴν πίστιν, ὥστε ὄρη eran ἀγάπην.δὲ and have not cha- 


τ F 2 : ἐ butlove ΤΙΓΓΣ, I am nothing. 

ali pee ΐ 80 85 πεν ὑχρτ o remove, aukndthoush, bbe. 
gr -EXW, Ξούθεν ειμι. 3 ‘kai ear’ Yop ig πάντα τὰ stow all my goods to 
venot, nothing Iam. And if Igive arog hes ΠΕΣ all feed the poor, and 

= > , though I give my body 

ὑπάρχοντά. μου, “Kai ἐὰν" σι γοῦν τὸ σῶμά. μου ἕνα *xav@n- to be burned, and have 
“my coe and if I deliver up my body that Imay be notcharity, it profiteth 

πὰ Lo» 1 2 ~ « nes me nothing. 4 Charity 

σωμαι," ἀγάπην.δὲ μὴ-.ἔχω, γοὐδὲν" ὠφελοῦμαι. 4 Ἣ ἀγάπη suffereth long, and is 


burned, but love have not, a I am profited. Love kind; charity envieth 


« , not; charity vaunteth 
μακροθυμεῖ, χρηστεύεται: ἡ ἀγάπη οὐ. ζηλοῖ: τὴ ἀγάπη" οὐ Τοῦ iuself de Rob Heir 


has patience, is kind; love is not envious; love “not ed up, 5 doth not be- 
h tself I 
περπερεύεται, οὐ-φυσιοῦται, 5 οὐκ. ἀσχημονεῖ, O-CnTEL τὰ pene een με σαν’ 
lis yain-glorious, is not puffed up, acts not umseemly, seeks not the things js not easily provoked, 
ἑαυτῆς, οὐ.παροξύνεται, ov.oyiZerar τὸ κακόν, 6 οὐ.χαίρει a 
of its own, is not quickly provoked, reckons not evil, rejoices not }yyt rejoiceth in the 
. ~ > , ΄ \ ΤΟΣ r ΄ , . 36 
ἐπὶτῇ ἀδικίᾳ, Yovyxaipe'.dé τῇ ἀληθείςι, 7 πάντα στέγει, ay τς 
at ag Ose but rejoices with the truth; all things carers, thing ao hopeth all 


πάντα πιστεύει, πάντα ἐλπίζει, πάντα ὑπομένει. ὃ Ἢ ἀγάπη | things, endureth all 


allthings believes, allthings hopes, allthings endures. Love | pee eee 


οὐδέποτε “Zerinre.' εἴτε. “δὲ᾽ προφητεῖαι, καταργηθήσονται. ἘΞ 2, prophecios, 
ils: a al » 

never fails; . but whether Ξ prophecies, they shall be done away ; ther there be tongues, 
ElTE γλῶσσαι, παυσονται ELITE γνωσις. καταργηθήσεται. they shall cease ; whe- 


ms ther there be know- 
whether tongues, they shallcease; whether knowledge it shall be done away. ledge, itahall wack 


9 ἐκ. “μέρους. γὰρ γινώσκομεν, καὶ ἐκ μέρους προφητεύομεν" away. 9 For we know 


or in part we know, and in rt we prophesy ; in part, and we pro- 

᾿ d 5 phesy in part. 10 But 

10 ὅταν.δὲ ἔλθῃ τὸ τέλειον, “τότε' τὸ ἐκ μέρους κατ- when that which ir 
but when may come that which is perfect, that in part shall be perfect is come, then 

ε ει that which is in part 

αργηθήσεται. 11 ὅτε ἤμην νήπιος, “ὡς νήπιος ἐλάλουν," fwe shali be done away. 
done away. When Iwas aninfant, as an infant I spoke, as 11 When Iwas achild, 
δε κδὲὶ ve I spake as a child, I 

νήπιος ἐφρόνουν, we νήπιος ἐλογιζόμην"" ὕτε.β δὲ" γέγονα ynderstood as a child, 
an infant I thought, as aninfant I reasoned; but when I became I thought asa child: 
\ ~ , , 1 but when I became a 

ἀνήρ, κατήργηκα τὰ τοῦ νηπίου: 12 βλεπῦμεν γὰρ jan I putaway child. 
aman, I did anes with the ee ofthe infant. For we see ish things. 12 For now 
» -»’ we see through a glass 
αρτι οι ἐσόπτρου ἐν αὐ ῳθστο τότε. δὲ πρόσωπον πρὸς darkly ; but then toes 


now through  aglass obscurel but then face to to face: now I know 


πρόσωπον" ἄρτι γινώσκω EK ΠΡ ας τύτειδὲ ExtyvMoopar 4" Part; butthen shall 
face ; now I know in part, butthen Ishallknow 4m known. 13 And 
καθὼς καὶ ἐπεγνώσθην. 13 νυνὶ.δὲ μένει πίστις, ἐλπίς ἢ nw sbideth faith, 
hope, charity, these 

mere as also I have been known. And now abides faith, hope, ἘΣ τ τς πὶ ne pe 

2 ΄ Ε ᾽ - pea 

ἀγάπη, τὰ.τρία.ταῦτα᾽ς μείζων.δὲ τούτων ἡ ἀγάπη. est of these is charity. 
love ; these three things; but the greater of these [is] love. XIV. Follow after 


14 Διώκετε τὴν ἀγάπην᾽ ζηλοῦτε.δὲ τὰ πνευματικά, ea ἘΣ 
Pursue love, and be emulous of spirituals, rather that ye may 
μᾶλλον. δὲ ἵνα προφητεύητε. 2 ὁ-γὰρ λαλῶν γλώσσῃ, οὐκ Prophesy. 2 For he that 
but rather that ye may-prophesy. For he that speaks witha tongue, not Jpop tongue speak- 


eth not unto men, but 


P Kay LA. q κἂν TrA. τ μεθιστάναι LTTr. 5 οὐδέν EGW. ¢ κἂν LTrd. νυ Ψωμίζω E. 
¥ κἂν LA. x καυθήσομαι 1 shall be burned T. Υ οὐθὲντ. +7 in ayamm])LTrA. 7 ovy-T, 
Ὁ πίπτει LTTrA. c[ée] tr. 4 --α τότε LTTrAW. © ἐλάλουν ὡς νήπιος LTTrAW. ξ ἐφρόνουν 


ὡς νήπιος, ἐλογιζόμην ὡς νήπιος LTTrA. gs — δὲ but ᾿ττγὰ. 


460 


unto God : for noman 
understandeth him; 
howbeit in the spirit 
he speaketh mysteries. 
3 But he that pro- 
phesieth speaketh un- 
to men to edification, 
and exhortation, and 
comfort. 4 He that 
speaketh in an wun- 
known tongue edifieth 
himself ; but he that 
prophesieth edifieth 
the church. 5 I would 
that ye allspake with 
tongues, but rather 
that ye prophesied : 
for greater is he that 
prophesieth than he 
that speaketh with 
tongues, except he 
interpret, that the 
church may receive 
edifying. 6 Now, bre- 
thren, if I come unto 
you speaking with 
tongues, what shall I 
profit you, except I 
shall speak to you 
either by revelation, or 
by knowledge, or by 
prophesying, or by 
doctrine? 7 Andeven 
things without life 
giving sound, whether 
pipe or harp, except 
they give a distinctio. 

in the sounds, ho 

shallit be known what 
is piped or harped? 
8 For if the trumpet 
give an _ uncertain 
sound, who shall pre- 
pare himself to the 
battle ? 9 So likewise 
ye, except ye utter by 
the tongue words easy 
to be understood, how 
shall it be known what 
is spoken? for ye shall 
speak into the air. 
10 There are, it may 
be, so many kinds of 
voices in the world, 
and none of them is 
without signification. 
11 Therefore if IT know 
not the meaning of the 
voice, I shall be unto 
him that speaketh a 
barbarian, and he that 


barbarian unto me. 


Il POs) 1K OPIN OLOY = A; XIV. 


ἀνθρώποις λαλεῖ, ἀλλὰ "rq! θεῷ" οὐδεὶς. γὰρ ἀκούει, πνεύματι 
to men speaks, but toGod: fornoone hears; 7in spirit 
δὲ λαλεῖ μυστήρια: 3 ὁ. δὲ προφητεύων, ἀνθρώποις λαλεὶ 
‘but he speaks mysteries. But hethat prophesies, to men speaks 
οἰκοδομὴν Kai παράκλησιν καὶ παραμυθίαν. 4 ὁ λαλῶν 
{for] building up and encouragement and consolation. He that speaks 
γλώσσῃ, ἑαυτὸν οἰκοδομεῖ" 0.0 προφητεύων, ἐκκλησίαν 
witha ὕοπρτιθ, himself buildsup; buthethat prophesies, [the] assembly 
οἰκοδομεῖ. 5 θέλω.δὲ πάντας ὑμᾶς λαλεῖν γλώσσαις, μᾶλλον 
builds up. Now I desire all you tospeak withtongues, “rather 
δὲ ἵνα προφητεύητε᾽ μείζων ‘yao! ὁ προφητεύων ἢ 
‘but that ye should prophesy: *greater ‘for [is] hethat prophesies than 
ὁ λαλῶν γλώσσαις, ἐκτὸς εἰμὴ διερμηνεύῃ, ἵνα ἡ ἐκ- 
he that speaks with tongues, unless he should interpret, that the» as- 
κλησία οἰκοδομὴν λάβῃ. 6 Νυνὶ" δέ, ἀδελφοί, ἐὰν ἔλθω 
sembly building up may receive. And now, brethren, if Icome 
πρὸς ὑμᾶς γλώσσαις λαλῶν, τί ὑμᾶς ὠφελήσω, ἐὰν.μὴ 
to you withtongnes speaking, what you shalllI profit, unless 
Cawsey , A > 2 ’ Ain? ΄ Au? 
ὑμῖν λαλήσω ἢ ἐν ἀποκαλύψει, ἢ ἐν γνώσει, ἢ ἐν προ- 
to you I shall speak either in revelation, or in knowledge, or in pro- 
΄ n 12 I ~ o ‘ ” ‘ , 
φητείᾳ, ἢ ἱὲν' διδαχῇ; 1ὕμως ra ἄψυχα φωνὴν διδόντα, 
phecy, or in teaching? ven lifeless things a sound '-=_ giving, 
” 7 bY ” ΄ 7A ὃ αὶ δ \ m ~ , “af 
εἴτε αὐλὸς εἴτε κιθάρα, ἐὰν διαστολὴν "τοῖς φθόγγοις 
whether pipe or harp, if distinction to the sounds 
μὴ.δῷ, πῶς γνωσθήσεται τὸ αὐλούμενον ἢ τὸ κιθαρι- 
they give not, how shall be known that being piped or being 


“ζΖόμενον ; 8 καὶ. γὰρ ἐὰν ἄδηλον "φωνὴν σάλπιγξ' δῷ, τίς 


harped ἢ For also if anuncertain sound atrumpet give, who 


παρασκευάσεται εἰς πόλεμον ; 9 οὕτως καὶ “ὑμεῖς διὰ Τῆς 
shall prepare himself for war ? So also ye, by meansof the 
γλώσσης ἐὰν.μὴ εὔσημον λόγον δῶτε, πῶς γνωσθήσεται τὸ 

tongue unless anintelligible speech ye give, how shall be known that 
λαλούμενον ; ἔσεσθε.γὰρ εἰς ἀέρα λαλοῦντες. 10 Τοσαῦτα, 


being spoken? for ye will be7into[*the]*air ‘speaking. So many, 

> ΄ ΄ wee 02 lee. , . ORs Dar, 
εἰ τύχοι, γενῆ PwVYwWY CcoTLY EV κόσμῳ, και ἐν Pav- 
it may be, kinds of sounds there are ἰπ [{Π6] world, and none of 


11 ἐὰν οὖν μὴ εἰδῶ τὴν δύναμιν 
Tf therefore I know not the power 
THC φωνῆς, ἔσομαι τῷ λαλοῦντι βάρβᾶδος" καὶ ὁ 
of the sound, I shall be tohimthat speaks abarbarian; and he that 
λαλῶν, ἐν ἐμοὶ βάρβαρος" 12 οὕτως καὶ ὑμεῖς, ἐπεὶ ζηλωταί 
a 


speaks, “for *me *barbarian. So also ye, since emulous 


τῶν" ἄφωνον" 
them without [distinct] sound. 


for seek 


speaketh shall be WROTE TVEU LAT WY, πρὸς τὴν οἰκοδομὴν τῆς ἐκκλησίας ζηῆδτεῖ 


12 Even so ye, foras- 


of spiritual gifts, see 

that ye may excel t 

the edifying of the 
ehurch. 13 Wherefore 
tet him that speaketh 
in an unknown tongue 
pray that he may in- 
terpret. 14 For if I 
pray in an wnknown 
tongue, my spirit pray- 
eth, but my _ under- 
standing 15 unfruitful. 


much as yeare ion 


15 What isitthen? 1 


yeare ΟΥ̓ spirits, the buildingup ofthe assembly 


ἵνα περισσεύητε. 13 “Διόπερ' ὁ λαλῶν γλώσσῃ, προσευ- 
that ye may abound. Wherefore he that speaks with a tongue, let him 
χέσθω ἵνα διερμηνεύῃ. 14 ἐὰν "γὰρ' προσεύχωμαι γλώσσῃ. 
pray that he may interpret. For if I pray with a tongue, 
τὸ πνεύμά.μου προσεύχεται; ὁ δὲ νοὔῦς.μον ἄκαρπός ἐστιν. 
my spirit prays, but my understanding unfruitful is. 
15 τί οὖν torw; προσεύξομαι τῷ πνεύματι, προσεύξομαι 
What then is it? Iwillpray withthe Spirit, J Swill *pray 
δὲ καὶ τῷ vot" ψαλῶ τῷ πνεύματι, ψαλῶ 
‘put also with the understanding. Iwill praise withthe Spirit, I *will *praise 


bh — τῷ LTTr[A]. 
the sound tn. 
* [γὰρ] Ltr. 


ἃ σάλπιγξ φωνὴν T. 


k νῦν LTTrAW. 
° εἰσὶν LTTrAW. 


1 — ἐν T[tTr]. ™ τοῦ φθόγγου of 
P — αὐτῶν LTTrAW. ἢ διὸ LITrA. 


i δὰ and LTTrA. 


SERV’. I 


*0é' καὶ ‘rq! vol. 
Ibut also with the understanding. 


COBINTHIANS. 
16 ἐπεὶ ἐὰν τεὐλογήσῃς" "rq! 
Else if thou bless with the 


πνεύματι, ὁ ἀναπληρῶν τὸν τόπον τοῦ ἰδιώτου πῶς 
spirit, he that fills the place of the uninstructed how 
ἐρεῖ τὸ ἀμὴν ἐπὶ τῇ.σῃ.εὐχαριστίᾳ, ἐπειδὴ τί λέγεις 
shallhesay the Amen δὖ thy giving of thanks, since what thou sayest 
οὐκιοῖδεν; 17 σὺ.μὲν.γὰρ καλῶς εὐχαριστεῖς, "ἀλλ᾽" ὁ ἕτερος 
he knows not ὃ For thou indeed well  givest thanks, but the other 


οὐκ.οἰκοδομεῖται. 18 εὐχαριστῶ τῷ θεῷ ὕμου, πάντων ὑμῶν 
is not built up. 1 thank 7God ‘my, ‘than ®all °of }°you 


μᾶλλον *yAwacaic λαλῶν"" 19 "ἀλλ᾽" ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ θέλω πέντε 


Smore ‘with *tongues *speaking ; but in([the] assembly Idesire five 
λόγους "dia τοῦ  vodc! ov λαλῆσαι, ἵνα καὶ ἄλλους 
words with *understanding ‘my tospeak, that also others 


κατηχήσω, ἢ μυρίος λόγους ἐν γλώσσῃ. 20 ᾿Αδελφοί, μὴ 
I may instruct, than ten thousand words in a tongue. Brethren, *not 


παιδία γίνεσθε ταῖς. φρεσίν: ἀλλὰ τῇ κακίᾳ νηπιάζετε, 
3children 1be in [your] minds, but in malice _—be babes ; 

ταῖς.δὲ φρεσὶν τέλειοι γίνεσθε. 21 ἐν τῷ νόμῳ rhe eam 
but in [your] minds ?full *grown be. In the law it has n 
mrat, Ὅτι ἐν ἑτερογλώσσοις, καὶ ἐν χείλεσιν “ἑτέροις. λα- 
written, By other tongues, and by lips other I will 
λήσω τῷκ.λαῴφ. τούτῳ, Kai οὐδ᾽ οὕτως εἰσακούσονταί μου, 


speak to this people, and noteven thus will they hear me, 

λέγει κύριος. 232 Ὥστε ai γλῶσσαι εἰς σημεῖόν εἰσιν, οὐ 

saith [the] Lord. Sothat the tongues for a sign are, not 
τοῖς πιστεύουσιν, ἀλλὰ τοῖς ἀπίστοις ἡ.δὲ. προφητεία, 

to those that believe, but to the unbelievers ; but prophecy, 

> ~ ? , ? AJ ~ , 2A 

οὐ τοῖς ἀπίστοις, ἀλλὰ τοῖς πιστεύουσιν. 23 ἐὰν οὖν 

not tothe unbelievers, but to those that believe. If therefore 


ἀσυνέλθῃ" ἡ ἐκκλησία ὕλη ἐπὶ. τὸ αὐτό, Kai πάντες “γλώσ- 
*come *together 'the assembly *whole inone place, and all with 


~ Il > , A 2 ~ n » 
σαις λαλῶσιν," εἰσέλθωσιν. δὲ ἰδιῶται ἢ ἄπιστοι, 
tongues should speak, and come in uninstructed ones or unbelievers, 


ovK-épovow Ori μαίνεσθε; 24 ἐὰν. δὲ πάντες προφητεύωσιν, 
will they not say that ye are mad? But if all prophesy, 
εἰσέλθῃ.δὲέ τις ἄπιστος ἢ ἰδιώτης, ἐλέγχεται ὑπὸ πάν- 
and should come in some unbeliever or uninstructed, heis convicted by all, 
των, ἀνακρίνεται ὑπὸ πάντων, 25 ‘kai οὕτως" τὰ κρυπτὰ 


he is examined by all; and thus the secrets 
τῆς καρδίας. αὐτοῦ φανερὰ γίνεται: καὶ οὕτως πεσὼν ἐπὶ 
of his heart manifest become; and thus, falling upon 
πρόσωπον, προσκυνήσει τῷ θεῷ. ἀπαγγέλλων ὅτι 80 θεὸς 
Chis) face, he will do homage to God, dec that God 
ὄντως ἐν ὑμῖν ἐστιν. 
indeed amongst you is. 
26 Ti οὖν ἐστιν, ἀδελφοί; ὅταν συνέρχησθε, ἕκαστος 


What then isit, brethren? when yemaycometogether, each 


b ε ~ ἢ λ 5 » ὃ ὃ ‘ ” i λ ~ » ? 2. 
ὑμῶν" ψαλμὸν ἔχει, διδαχὴν ἔχει, 'yAdooay ἔχει, ἀποκά 
of you a psalm has, a teaching has, a tongue has, 8. reve- 


λυψιν Exe," ἑρμηνείαν Exe’ πάντα πρὸς οἰκοδομὴν *ye- 


461 


will pray with the spi- 
rit,and Iwill pray with 
the understanding al- 
so: I will sing with 
the spirit, and I will 
sing with the under- 
standing also. 16 Else 
when thou shalt bless 
with the spirit, how 
shall he that oceupieth 
the room of the un- 
learned say Amen at 
thy giving of thanks, 
seeing he understand- 
eth not what thousay- 
est ? 17 For thou verily 
givest thanks well, but 
the other is not edified. 
18 Ithank my God, I 
speak with tongues 
more than ye all: 
19 yet in the church I 
had rather five 
words with my under- 
standing, that by my 
voice I might teach 
others also, than ten 
thousand words in 
an unknown tongue. 
20 Brethren, be not 
children in under- 
standing : howbeit in 
malice be ye children, 
but in understanding 
be men, 21 In the law 
it is written, With 
men of other tongues 
and other lips will I 
ak unto this peo- 
ple; and yet for all 
that will they not hear 
me, saith the Lord. 
22 Wherefore tongues 
are for a sign, not to 
them that believe, but 
to them that believe 
not : but prophesying 
serveth not for them 
that believe not, but 
for them which be- 
lieve. 23 If therefore 
the whole church be 
come together into one 
place, and all speak 
with tongues, and 
there come in those 
that are unlearned, or 
unbelievers, will they 
not say that ye are 
mad? £4 But if all 
prophesy, and there 
come in one that be- 
lieveth not, or one un- 
learned, he is convine- 
ed of all, he is judged 
of all: 25 and thus 
are the secrets of his 
heart made manifest ; 
and so falling down 
on his face he will 
worship God, and re- 
port that Godisin you 
of a truth, 
26 How is it then, 
brethren? when ye 
come together, every 


lation has, aninterpretation has. Allthings for buildingup let be 
s— δὲ {{π. ‘t—zt@thex. ¥ εὐλογῇς LTTrA. 
LTTrA. τ ἀλλὰ Tr. Υ — μον GLTTraw. 


5 ἀλλὰ LTTrA. 
γλώσσαις LTTrA. 
LTTr[A]. 


Ὁ τῷ vot LITrAW. ὀἔ ἑτέρων ‘others’ LTTra. 
f - καὶ οὕτως GLTTTAW. 
1 ἀποκάλυψιν ἔχει, γλῶσσαν ἔχει LTTrAW. 


ν — τῷ (read mvev. with [the] Spirit) 
2 γλώσσῃ λαλῶ I speak with a tongue urtra. 
4 ἔλθῃ come L. 
8 ὄντως 6 (— ὁ T) θεὸς LTTrAW. 
Χ γινέσθω GLTTrAW. 


© λαλῶσιν 
h — ὑμῶν 


402 


one of you hath a 
psalm, hath a doctrine, 
hath a tongue, hatha 
revelation, hath an in- 
terpretation. Let all 
things be done unto 
edifying. 27 If any 
man speak in an un- 
known tongue, let it be 
by two, or at the most 
by three, and that by 
course; and let one 
interpret. 28 But if 
there beno interpreter, 
let him keep silence in 
the church; and let 
him speak to himself, 
and to God. 29 Let 
the prophets speak two 
or three, and let the 
other judge. 30 If any 
thing be revealed to 
another that sitteth 
by, let the first hold 
his peace. 31 For ye 
may all prophesy one 
by one, that all may 
learn, and all may be 
comforted. 32 And the 
spirits of the prophets 
are subject to the pro- 
phets. 33 For God is 
not the author of con- 
fusion, but of peace, as 
in all churches of the 
saints. 

34 Let your women 
keep silence in the 
churches : for it is not 
permitted unto them 
to speak ; but they are 
comman to be un- 
der obedience, as also 
saiththelaw. 35 And 
if they will learm any 
thing, let them ask 
their husbands at 
home :forit is ashame 
for women to 
in the church. 

36 What? came the 
word of God out from 
you? or came it unto 
you only? 37 If any 
man think himself to 
be a prophet, or spi- 
ritual, let him ac- 
knowledge that the 
things that I write un- 
to you are the com- 
mandments of the 
Lord. 38 But if any 
man be ignorant, let 

i be ignorant. 
39 Wherefore, breth- 
ren, covet to prophesy, 
and forbid not to speak 
with tongues. 40 Let 
all things be done de- 
cently and in order, 

. Moreover, bre- 
thren, I declare unto 
outhe gospel which 
preached unto you, 


1 ἑρμηνευτής LTr. 
© — vpwy LTTrA. 


is LITrAW. 


P ἐπιτρέπεται LTTrAW. 


IPOs AK ORUNG ELOY Ss: A. 


νέσθω." 27 εἴτε γλώσσῃ 
done. 


XIV; Re. 


τις λαλεῖ, κατὰ δύο ἢ τὸ 
If withatongue anyone speak, [letitbe] by two or the 
πλεῖστον τρεῖς, καὶ ἀνὰ μέρος, Kai εἷς διεομηνευέτω. 28 eave 
most three, and insuccession, and one ‘let interpret: and if 
4 33, , ΄ , ~ ‘ 
pny 'διερμηνευτήῆς, σιγάτω ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ: ἑαυτῷ. δὲ 
there be not aninterpreter, let him be silent in an assembly; and to himself 
λαλείτω καὶ τῷ θεῷ. 2 προφῆται.δὲ δύο ἢ τρεῖς λαλεί- 
let him speak and to God. And prophets two or ‘three et 
τωσαν, καὶ ot ἄλλοι dvakpwéeTwoayv' 30 ἐὰν. δὲ ἄλλῳ 
speak, and *the ‘others Net discern. Butif to another 
ἀποκαλυφθῇ καθημένῳ, ὁ πρῶτος σιγάτω. 581 δύ- 
Sshould *be 54 revelation ‘sitting *by, *the first 7let be silent. 7Ye 
γνασθε yap καθ᾽ ἕνα πάντες προφητεύειν. Wa πάντες μαν- 


Ξ0Ά} 1for one by one all prophesy, that all may 
θάνωσιν, Kai πάντες παρακαλῶνται: 32 καὶ πνεύματα 
learn, and all may be exhorted. And spirits 

προφητῶν προφήταις ὑποτάσσεται: 33 ov-yap ἐστιν ἀκατα- 
of prophets to prophets are subject. For “ποὺ the7is ‘of 7dis- 
στασίας ὁ θεός, τι ἀλλ᾽" εἰρήνης. we ἐν πάσαις ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις 
order *the *God, but of peace, as in all the assemblies 


τῶν "ἁγίων. 
ofthe saints. 
34 Αἱ! γυναῖκες οὑμῶν᾽ ἐν ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις σιγάτωσαν" 
2Women ‘your in _ the assemblies let them be silent, 
ov-yap-Pémirérparrar’ αὐταῖς λαλεῖν, τ ἀλλ᾽ αὑποτάσσεσθαι." 
for it is not allowed to them to speak; but to be in subjection, 
καθὼς Kai ὁ νόμος λέγει. BS εἰδὲ τι μαθεῖν θέλουσιν, 
according as alsothe law says. But if anything tolearn they wish, 
ἐν.οἴκῳ τοὺς. ἰδίους ἄνδρας ἐπερωτάτωσαν᾽ αἰσχρὸν. γάρ ἰστιν 
athome their own husbands let them ask; forashame itis 
τγυναιξὶν ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ λαλεῖν." 
for women in assembly to speak. 
80 Ἢ ἀφ᾽ aay ὁ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ ἐξῆλθεν; ἢ εἰς ὑμᾶς 
Or *from “you ‘the ‘word 7of*®God ‘went 7out, or to you 
μόνους κατήντησεν; 37 εἴ τις δοκεῖ προφήτης εἶναι ἢ 


only did it arrive ? If anyone thinks a prophet tobe or 
πνευματικός, ἐπιγινωσκτω ἃ γράφω ὑμῖν, ὅτι "τοῦ" 
spiritual, let him recognize the things I write toyou, that of the 
κυρίου "εἰσὶν" τἐντολαί"" 88 εἰδέ τις ἀγνοεῖ. ““ἀγνοείτω." 
Lord they are commands. But if any be ignorant, let him beignorant. 
39 Ὥστε, ἀδελφοίξ, ζηλοῦτε τὸ προφητεύειν, καὶ τὸ λαλεῖν 
Ξο ἐμπαῦ, brethren, be emulous to prophesy, and to speak 
γγλώσσαις μὴ.κωλύετε." 40 πάντα " εὐσχημόνως Kai κατὰ 
with tongues do not forbid. All things becomingly and with 
τάξιν γινέσθω. 
order let be done. 


15 Γνωρίζω.δὲ ὑμῖν, ἀδελφοί. τὸ εὐαγγέλιον ὃ εὐηγ- 
But I make known toyou, brethren, the gladtidings which Ian- 
γελισάμην ὑμῖν, ὃ Kai παρελάβετε, ἐν ᾧ καὶ ἑστήκατε, 
nounced to you, which also ye received, in which also yestand, 


2 ἁγίων, αἱ (read verse 33 joined to verse 34) GLT. 
4 ὑποτασσέσθωσαν let them be in subjection Ltr. 


τὸ ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. 


τ γυναικὶ (a woman) λαλεῖν ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ LTTra. * -- τοῦ (read of (the]) GLTTraw. ὃ ἐστὶν it 
τ ἐντολή δι command Ltr[A]w ; — ἐντολαί τ. _™ ἀγνοεῖται he is ignored LT. 
Υ μὴ κωλύετε (+ ἐν [L]4) γλώσσαις LTTrA. z+ δὲ 


x + μον my (brethren) [1]7ττ| ΑἹ. 


But (all things) curtraw. 


XV. EYGORINTHIANS: 


26: οὗ καὶ σώζεσθε, τίνι λόγῳ “ed 


γελισάμην" ὑμῖν 
by which also ye are being saved, Swhat Sword 


ΤΊ “announced *to *°you 
> , 2 a ? 1 2) “σῷ 5 , , ‘ 
εἰ KQTEXETE, ἐκτὸς εἰ. μὴ εἰκῆ ἐπιστεύσατε. 3 ἸΠαρέδωκα.γὰρ 
4if 7ye *hold “fast, unless invain ye believed. For I delivered 
ὑμῖν ἔν πρώτοις, ὃ Kai παρέλαβον, ὅτι χριστὸς ἀπέθανεν 

toyou in the first place, what also I received, that Christ died 
ὑπὲρ τῶν.ἁμαρτιῶν. ἡμῶν, κατὰ τὰς γραφάς" 4 Kai ὅτι 
for our sins, according to the scriptures ; and that 
2 ’ WZ ? , ~ c , « , il ‘ A 
éTagn, Kat OTt ἐγήγερται TY TOL ἡμέρᾳ, κατα τας 
he was buried ; and that he was raised the ae day, according to the 
γραφάς" ὃ καὶ ὅτι ὥφθη Κηφᾷ. “εἶτα! τοῖς δώδεκα. 6 ἔπειτα 
seriptures; and that he appeared to Cephas, then tothe twelve. Then 


3 


ὥφθη ἐπάνω πεντακοσίοις ἀδελφοῖς ἐφάπαξ, ἐξ ὧν οἱ 


he appeared toabove five hundred brethren at once, of whom the 
ἐπλείους! μένουσιν ἕως ἄρτι, τινὲς.δὲ ‘rai ἐκοιμήθησαν. 
greater part Temain until now, but some also _ are fallen asleep. 


7 ἔπειτα ὥφθη Ἰακώβῳ, *elra" τοῖς ἀποστόλοις πᾶσιν. 
Then he appeared to James; then to *the Sapostles tall; 

8 ἔσχατον.δὲ πάντων, ὡσπερεὶ τῷ. ἐκτρώματι, ὠφθη κἀμοί. 
and last of all, as to an abortion, he appeared also to me. 

9 éyw.yap εἰμι ὁ ἐλάχιστος THY ἀποστόλων, ὃς οὐκ εἰμὶ 


For I am the least of the apostles, who am not 
ε 4 ~ ? , , ? , A ? ΄ 
ἱκανὸς καλεῖσθαι ἀπόστολος. διότι ἐδίωξα τὴν ἐκκλησίαν 
δι to be called apostle, because I persecuted the assembly 


τοῦ θεοῦ. 10 χάριτιιδὲ θεοῦ εἰμι 0 εἰμι, καὶ ἡ-χάρις. αὐτοῦ 
of God. But by grace of God Iam what Iam, and his grace 

ἢ) εἰς ἐμὲ οὐ κενὴ ἐγενήθη, ἀλλὰ περισσότερον αὐ- 

which [was]towards me not void hasbeen, but more abundantly than 

τῶν πάντων ἐκοπίασα" οὐκ.ἐγὼ.δέ, FAX’ ἡ χάρις τοῦ θεοῦ 


them all I laboured, but not I, but the grace of God 
δὴ" σὺν ἐμοί. 11 εἴτε οὖν ἐγὼ εἴτε ἐκεῖνοι, οὕτως κηρύσ- 
with me, Whether therefore I or they, sO we 


σομεν, Kai οὕτως ἐπιστεύσατε. 12 Ἐῤ δὲ χριστὸς κηρύσσεται, 


preach, and so ye believed. Now if Christ is preached, 
fore =k νεκρῶν ἐγήγερται, πῶς λέγουσίν *rivec 
that from among [the] dead hehas beenraised, how say some 


ἐν ὑμῖν" ὅτι ἀνάστασις νεκρῶν οὐκ.ἔστιν; 18 εἰ δὲ ἀνά- 
among you’ that ἃ τοβυστθούίζοη of [the] dead there is not? But if aresur- 
στασις νεκρῶν οὐκιἔστιν, οὐδὲ χριστὸς ἐγήγερται" 14 εἰ δὲ 
rection οὗ [{Π6] dead there 15 ποῦ, neither Christ has been raised: but if 
χριστὸς οὐκ.ἐγήγερται, κενὸν ἄρα ' τὸ.κἠρυγμα.-ἡμῶν, κενὴ 
Christ 885 ποῦ beenraised, thenvoid fis} our proclamation, 2void 
mde! καὶ ἡ.πίστις. ὑμῶν. 15 εὑρισκόμεθα.δὲ καὶ Wevdoudorupec 
Jand also your faith. And we arefound also false witnesses 
τοῦ θεοῦ, ὅτι ἐμαρτυρήσαμεν κατὰ τοῦ θεοῦ ὅτι ἤγειρεν 
of God; for we witnessed concerning God that he raised up 
τὸν χριστόν, ὃν οὐκ.ἤγειρεν εἴπερ ἄρα νεκροὶ οὐκ 
the Christ, whom he raised not if then [the] dead *not 
ἐγείρονται: 16 εἰγὰρ νεκροὶ οὐκ.ἐγείρονται, οὐδὲ χριστὸς 
tare raised. For if [the] dead arenotraised, neither Christ 
ἐγήγερται" 17 et.de χριστὸς οὐκ. ἐγήγερται, ματαία ἡ πίστις 
ist i 


has been raised : but if has not been raised, vain *faith 


463 


which also ye have re- 
ceived, and wherein ye 
stand ; 2 by which al- 
so ye are saved, if ye 
keep in memory what 
I preached unto you, 
unless ye have believed 
in vain. 3 For I de- 
livered unto you first 
of all that which I 
also received, how that 
Christ died for our 
sims according to the 
scriptures ; 4 and that 
he was buried, and 
that he rose again the 
third day according to 
the scriptures : 5 and 
that he was seen of 
Cephas, then of the 
twelve: 6 after that, 
he was seen of above 
five hundred brethren 
at once; of whom 
the greater part re- 
main unto this pre- 
sent, but some are 
fallen asleep. 7 After 
that, he was seen of 
James ; then of all the 
apostles. 8 And last of 
all he was seen of me 
also, as of one born 
out of due time. 9 For 
Iam the least of the 
apostles, that am not 
meet to be called an 
apostle, because I per- 
secuted the church of 
God. 10 But by the 
grace of God am 
what I am: and his 
grace which was be- 
stowed upon me was 
not in vain; but I 
laboured more abun- 
dantly than they all: 
yet not I, but the grace 
of God which was with 
me. 11 Therefore whe- 
ther it were I or they, 
80 we preach, and so 
ye believed. 12 Now if 
Christ be preached that 
he rose from the dead, 
how say some among 
you that there is no 
resurrection of the 
dead? 13 But if there 
be no resurrection of 
the dead, then is 
Christ not risen:14 and 
if Christ be not risen, 
then is our preaching 
vain, and your faith zs 
also vain. 15 Yea, and 
we are found false 
witnesses of God; be- 
cause we have testified 
of God that he raised 
up Christ: whom he 
Taised not up, if so be 
that the dead rise not. 
16 For if the dead rise 
not, then is not Christ 
raised: 17 and if Christ 


> εὐαγγελισάμην L. 
LTTraw. {— καὶ LTTr[A]. 
νεκρῶν OTL A, 


© ἡμέρᾳ τῇ τρίτῃ LTTrAW. 
* ἔπειτα TA. 8 ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. 
Kev ὑμῖν τινὲς LTTraw. | + καὶ also [L]raw. 


4 ἔπειτα T. 
bh — ἡ LTTrA. 
m — δὲ LTTraw. 


© πλείονες 
i ἐκ 


464 


be not raised, your 
faith is vain; ye are 
yet in your sins. 
18 Then they also 
which are fallen asleep 
in Christ are perished. 
19 If in this life only 
we have hope in Christ, 
we are of all men most 
miserable, 


20 But now is Christ 
risen from the dead, 
and become the first- 
fruits of them that 
slept. 21 For since by 
man came death, by 
man came also the re- 
surrection of the dead. 
22 For asin Adam all 
die, even so in Christ 
shall all be made a- 
live. 23 But every man 
in his own order: 
Christ the firstfruits ; 
afterward they that 
are Christ’s at his 
coming. 24 Then com- 
eth the end, when he 
shall have delivered 
up the kingdom to 
God, even the Father ; 
when he shall have put 
down all rule and all 
authority and power. 
25 For he must reign, 
till he hath put all 
enemies under his feet. 
26 The last enemy that 
shall be destroyed is 
death. 27 For he hath 
put all things under 

is feet. But when he 
saith,all things are put 
under him, it is mani- 
fest that he is except- 
ed, which did put all 
things under him. 
28 And when all things 
shall be subdued unto 
him, then shall the 
Son also himself be 
subject unto him that 
ane all things under 

that God may be 
all in all. 


29 Else what shall 
they do which are 
baptized for the dead, 
if the dead rise not 
at all? why are they 
then baptized for the 
dead? 30 and why 
stand we in jeopardy 
every hour? 31 I pro- 
test by your rejoicing 
which 1 have in Christ 
Jesus our Lord, I die 
daily. 32 If after the 
manner of men 1 have 


HPOSAKOPINGVOYS “A. XV. 
ὑμῶνο" ἔτι ἐστὲ ἐν Taic.apapriac.tpoy' 18 ἄρα.καὶ οἱ 
your [is]; still ye are in your sins, And then those that 


κοιμηθέντες ἔν χριστῷ ἀπώλοντο. 19 εἰ ἐν τῇ.ζωῇ. ταύτῃ 
fell asleep in Christ Laban τος If in this life 


Ρηλπικότες. ἐσμὲν ἐν orange μόνον, ἐλεεινότεροι πάντων ἀν- 
2we *have ere Sin hrist ‘only, more miserable than all 


θρώπων ἐσμέν. 
men we are. 


20 Νυνὶ.δὲ χριστὸς ἐγήγερται ἐκ νεκρῶν, ἀπαρχὴ 
Βαῦ πο Christ has been raised from among (the] dead, first-fruit 


τῶν κεκοιμημένων “ἐγένετο. 21 ἐπειδὴ. γὰρ δι᾿ ἀνθρώπου 
of those fallen asleep he became, For since by man [18] 


r « " θ ᾽ὔ 4 ὃ 3Μ} 9 θ ’ ᾽ ΄ 99 iA 
ὁ" θάνατος, καὶ dv ἀνθρώπου avacracicg νεκρῶν. MAS. 
death, also by man resurrection of Kee dead, 


yap iv τῷ Addp πάντες ἀποθνήσκουσιν, οὕτως Kai ἐν τῷ 
‘for in Adam all die, 80 also in the 


χριστῷ πάντες ζωοποιηθήσονται. 23 ἕκαστος.δὲ ἐν τῷ. ἰδίῳ 
Christ all shall be made alive. But each in his own 


τάγματι: ἀπαρχὴ χριστός, ἔπειτα οἱ " χριστοῦ ἐν τῇ 
rank: Ethel 3first-fruit ‘Christ, then those of a at 


παρουσίᾳ. αὐτοῦ" 24 εἶτα τὸ τέλος, ἱ ὅταν ἱπαραδῷ" τὴν 
his coming. Then the end, when he shall have given up the 


βασιλείαν τῷ θεῷ καὶ πατρί, ὅταν καταργήσῃ 
kingdom tohim ὙΠῸ [15] God and Father; when he shall have Snnubied 


~ > \ ‘ ~ > , ‘4 ’ὔ 
πᾶσαν ἀρχὴν καὶ πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν καὶ δύναμιν: 25 δεῖ. γὰ 


all rule and all authority and ed For it Ls 
αὐτὸν βασιλεύειν, "ἄχρις" οὗ “ἂν' πάντας τοὺς 
him to zclen; until he 48 aveput 41 


ἐχθροὺς * ὑπὸ τοὺς. πόδας αὐτοῦ. 26 ἔσχατος ἐχθρὸς Karap- 


enemies under his feet. {The} last enemy an- 
~ « , e ‘ a 
γεῖται ὁ θάνατος. 27 Πάντα.γὰ ὑπέταξεν ὑπὸ τοὺς 
nulled [is] death. For all things he put in subjection under 


πόδας.αὐτοῦ" ὅταν.δὲ εἴπῃ Yoru πάντα ὕὑποτέτακται, 

his feet. But when it be said that all things have been put in subjection, 
δῆλον Ort ἐκτὸς τοῦ ὑποτάξαντος αὐτῷ τὰ.πάντα" 

[it is] manifest that [it is]except him who putin subjection to him 811 things. 
28 ὕὅταν.δὲ ὑποταγῇ αὐτῷ τὰ πάντα, τότε 
But when shall have been put in eo tohim 81] things, then 

‘cai! αὐτὸς ὁ υἱὸς ὑποταγήσεται τῷ ὕὑποτάαξαντι 
also “himself ‘the 7Son will be pat in oe to him who put in subjection 


αὐτῷ τὰ.πάντα, ἵνα ὁ θεὸς τὰ" πάντα ἐν πᾶσιν. 
tohim all ee that 7may*be ‘God all in all 


29 ᾿Επεὶ ri ποιήσουσιν οἱ βαπτιζόμενοι ὑπὲρ τῶν νεκρῶν 


Since what shallthey do who are baptized for the dead 
εἰ ὅλως νεκροὶ οὐκ ἐγείρονται; τί καὶ βαπτίζονται ὑπὲρ 
if “αὖ 5411 [Ὁ}6] 7dead “not are raised? why also are they peut for 
ὑγῶν νεκρῶν" ; 30 τί καὶ ἡμεῖς κινδυνεύομεν πᾶσαν ὥραν; 

the dead ? Why also ‘arein danger every hour? 
31 καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἀποθνήσκω, Kl τὴν ἩΜΈΤΕΡΟΝ. καύχησιν, 4 
Dally: I die, boasting, 
82 εἰ κατὰ 


ἣν ἔχω ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ τῷ. ΡΒ -ἡμῶν. 
10) 


which I have in’ Christ Jesus rd If according te 


° + [ἐστίν] is L. 
τας δ LTTr[A]Ww. 
LTTrA. 
*— καὶ [L]tr[a]. 


ἡ ἄχρι TA. 
8 — 7a LTrA. 


P ἐν χριστῷ ἠλπικότες ἐσμὲν LTTrAW. 4 — ἐγένετο GLTTraw. 
* + τοῦ (read of the Christ) GLTTraw. t παραδιδοῖ he may give up 
ν᾿ — av LTTrAW. x + [αὐτοῦ] his (enemies) L. Σ [Ore] L. 


Ὁ αὐτῶν them GLTTraw. ς ὑμετέραν yOur EGLTTraw. 


4 + ἀδελφοί brethren LTTra. 


XV. fF ΟΝ ΉΤΑΝ Κ᾽: 


ἄνθρωπον ἐθηριομάχησα ἐν Ἐφέσῳ, τί μοι τὸ δὔφελος, 
man I fought with beasts in Ephesus, what tome the profit, 

εἰ νεκροὶ οὐκ.ἐγείρονται 3 φάγωμεν καὶ πίωμεν, 

if [the] dead are not raised ? We may eat and we may drink; 


αὔριον.γὰρ ἀποθνήσκομεν. 33 μὴ.πλανᾶσθε" φθείρουσιν ἤθη 


for to-morrow we die Be not misled : “corrupt Smanners 


fyvono@’! ὁμιλίαι κακαί. 84 ἐκνήψατε δικαίως, καὶ μὴ 
*cood Seopa ome Jevil. Awakeup righteously, and “ποῦ 


ἁμαρτάνετε: ἀγνωσίαν. γὰρ θεοῦ τινες ἔχουσιν" πρὸς ἐντροπὴν 


1818; forignorance of αοᾶ some have: to *shame 
ὑμῖν λέγω." 
‘your 1ΒΡ68Κ, 
35 AN’! ἐρεῖ τις, Πῶς ἐγείρονται οἱ νεκροί; ποίῳ 
But willsay someone, ΗΟ areraised the dead? wii Swhat 
δὲ σώματι ἔρχονται; 36 'άφρον,, σὺ ὃ σπείρεις, οὐ 
‘and body do they come? Fool; *thou *what sowest, ?not 


ζωοποιεῖται ἐὰν. μὴ ἀποθάνῃ" 37 καὶ ὃ σπείρεις, οὐ TO σῶμα 
‘is quickened unless it die. And what thou sowest, notthe body 


τὸ γενησόμενον σπείρεις, ἀλλὰ γυμνὸν κόκκον, εἰ τύχοι, 
that shall be thou sowest, but a bare grain, it may be 
σίτου ἢ τινος τῶν λοιπῶν 38 ὁ.δὲ. θεὸς αὐτῷ δίδωσιν" 


οὗ wheat or of some one ofthe γχοϑῦ ; and God to it gives 


σῶμα καθὼς ἠθέλησεν, Kai ἑκάστῳ τῶν σπερμάτων τὸ" ἴδιον 
a body according as he willed, and toeach of the seeds its own 


σῶμα. 89 ob πᾶσα σὰρξ ἡ αὐτὴ σάρξ: ἀλλὰ ἄλλη μὲν 
body. Not every flesh [is}the same flesh, but one 


ἰσὰρξ' ἀνθρώπων, ἄλλη.δὲ σὰρξ κτηνῶν, ἄλλη. δὲ τ πἰχθύων, 


flesh of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another a fishes, 
ἄλλη.δὲ πτηνῶν." 40 καὶ σώματα ἐπουράνια, καὶ 
and another of birds. And bodies [there are} heavenly, and 
σώματα ἐπίγεια' “ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέρα μὲν ἡ τῶν ἐπουρανίων 
bodies earthly: but = different [151 the *of the *heavenly 
δόξα, ἑτέρα δ ἡ τῶν ἐπιγείων. 41 ἄλλη δόξα ἡλίου, 


*glory, and different that of the ear Ne glory of [the] sun, 
καὶ ἄλλη δόξα σελήνης, Kai ἄλλη δόξα. aoTipwy' ἀστὴρ 


and another glory of[the} moon, and another glory of [the] stars; star 
γὰρ ἀστέρος διαφέρει ἐν δόξῃ. 42 οὕτως καὶ ἡ ἀνάστασις 
for “from ‘star ‘differs in glory. So 8180 [15] the resurrection 


τῶν νεκρῶν. σπείρεται ἔν φθορᾷ, ἐγείρεται ἐν ἀφθαρσίᾳ" 
ofthe dead. Itissown in ne Tae it is raised in inecrruptipllity. 


43 σπείρεται ἐν ἀτιμίᾳ, ἐγείρεται ἐν δόξῃ" σπείρεται ἐν ἀ- 
Itissown in dishonour, itisraised in glory. Itissown in weak- 


σθενείᾳ, ἐγείρεται ἐν δυνάμει: 44 σπείρεται σῶμα ψυχικόν, 
uess, it israised in power. Itissown a*body ‘natural, 


ἐγείρεται pele πνευματικόν. Piotr σῶμα ψυχικόν, “καὶ 


one 


465 
fought with beasts at 
Ephesus, what ad- 


vantageth it me, if 
the dead rise not? let 
useatand drink ; for 
to morrow we die. 
33 Be not deceived : 
evil communications 
corrupt good manners. 
34 Awake to righteous- 
ness, and sin not ; for 
some have not the 
knowledge of God: I 
speak this to your 
shame. 


35 But some maz 
will say, How are the 
dead raised up? and 
with what body do 
they come? 36 hou 
fool, that which thou 
sowest is not quicken- 
ed, except it die: 37 and - 
that which thou sow- 
est, thou sowest not 
that body that shall 
be, but bare grain, it 

may chance of wheat, 
or of some other grain: 
38 but God giveth it a 
body as it hath pleas- 
ed him, and’ to every 
seed his own body. 
39 All ἤθε ἐδ not the 
same flesh: but ihere 
ts one kind of fiesh 
of men, another flesh 
of beasts, another of 
fishes, and another of 
birds, 40 There are al- 
so celestial bodics, and 
bodies terrestrial: but 
the glory of the celes- 
tial 7 one, and the 
glory of the terrestrial 
ws another. 41 There 
is oneglory of the sun, 
and another glory of 
the moon, and another 
glory of the stars: for 
one star differeth from 
another star in glory. 
42 So 8150 8 the resur- 
rection of the dead. It 
is sown in corruption ; 
it is raised in incor- 
ruption : 43 it is sown 
in dishonour; it is 
raised in glory: it is 
sown in weakness ; it 
is raised in power: 44 it 
is sown a natural 
body ; it is raised a 
spiritual body. There 


it is raised eonoay ‘spiritual : there is a*body ‘natural, and is a natural body, and 
i Fy A there is a spiritual 
ἔστιν! σῶμα" πνευματικόν. 45 οὕτως καὶ γέγραπται, body. 45 And so it is 
there is a *body 1gpiritual, So also it has been written, written, The first man 
A « Adam was made a liy- 

Ἐγένετο ὁ πρῶτος BETES ee εἰς ψυχὴν ζῶσαν" ὁ ing soul; 5 the last A- 
‘Became ‘the first a*soul ‘living; the damwas made a quick 
ening spirit. 46 How- 

ἔσχατος Add εἰς πνεῦμα ΠΝ κοθν 46 ἀλλ᾽ οὐ πρῶτον beit that was not first 
last Adam a*spir® ‘quickening. But not first [was] which 185 spiritual, 

© ὄφελος ; ᾿ς . ἐγείρονται, (end the question at profit)Girtra. χρηστὰ GTTraW. Ε λαλῶ 
LTTrA. h ἀλλὰ TTr. i ἄφρων LTTrA. j δίδωσιν αὐτῷ LTTraw. k — τὸ LTTra. 


1 — σὰρξ GLTT: Aw. 
ο ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. 
LTTraw. 


m+ σὰρξ flesh [L}rTra. 
P + et if Lrtraw. 
5 [ἄνθρωπος] 1». 


2 πτηνῶν, ἄλλη δὲ ἰχθύων LITrAW. 
4 ἔστιν και there is also LTTraw. 


— σῶμα 


ἘΠῚ ἘΠ 


406 


but that which is na- 
tural: and afterward 
that which is spiritual. 
47 The first man is of 
the earth, earthy : the 
second man ts the Lord 
from heaven. 48 As i 
the earthy, such are 
they also that are 
earthy : and as 7s the 
heavenly, such are 
they also that are 
heavenly. 49 And as we 
have borne the image 
of the earthy, we shall 
also bear the image of 
the heavenly. 50 Now 
this I say, brethren, 
that flesh and blood 
cannot inherit the 
kingdom of God ; nei- 
ther doth corruption 
inherit incorruption. 


51 Behold, I shew 
you a mystery; We 
shall not all sleep, but 
we shall all be chang- 
ed, 52 ina moment, in 
the twinkling of an 
eye, at the last trump: 
for the trumpet shall 
sound, and the dead 
shall be raised incor- 
ruptible, and we shall 
be changed, 53 For this 
eorruptible must put 
on incorruption, and 
this mortal must put 
on immortality. 54 So 
when this corruptible 
shall have put on in- 
eorruption, and this 
mortal shall have put 
en immortality, then 
shall be brought to 
pass the saying that 
is written, Death is 
swallowed up in vic- 
tory. 55 O death, where 
ws thy sting ? O grave, 
where 18 thy victory ? 
56 The sting of death 
?gsin; and the strength 
of sin wt the law. 
57 But thanks be to 
God, which giveth us 
the victory through 
our Lord Jesus Christ, 
58 Therefore, my be- 
loved brethren, be ye 
stedfast, unmoveable, 
always abounding in 
the work of the Lord, 
forasmuch as ye know 
that your labour is 
not in vain in the 
Lord. 


XVI. Now concern- 
ing the collection for 
the saints, as I have 


ΤΡΌΘΕΣΣ ΣΚΕΟΣΕΝ ΘΟ ΤΣ A XV, ΧΥΙ 


τὸ πνευματικόν, ἀλλὰ τὸ ψυχικόν, ἔπειτα τὸ πνευματικόν. 
the spiritual, but the natural, then the spiritual : 


47 ὁ πρῶτος ἄνθρωπος ἐκ γῆς, χοϊκός᾽ ὁ δεύτερος ἄν- 
the first man out of earth, made of dust; the second 
θρωπος, to κύριος" ἐξ οὐρανοῦ. 48 οἷος ὁ χοϊκός, τοιοῦτοι 
man, the Lord outof heaven. Such as he madeof dust, such 
καὶ οἱ χοϊκοί' καὶ οἷος ὁ ἐπουράνιος, τοιοῦτοι καὶ οἱ 
also[are]those made of dust; and such asthe heavenly [one], such also the 
ἐπουράνιοι: 49 καὶ καθὼς ἐφορέσαμεν THY εἰκόνα τοῦ 
heavenly [ones]. Andaccording as we bore the image of the [one] 
χοϊκοῦ, τφορέσομεν" καὶ τὴν εἰκόνα τοῦ ἐπουρανίου. 
made of dust, weshallbear also the image οὗ Π6 [3956] ‘heavenly. 
50 Τοῦτο.δέ φημι, ἀδελφοί, ὅτι σὰρξ καὶ αμα ββασιλείαν 
Βαύ this LIsay, brethren, that flesh and blood[the} kingdom 


θεοῦ κλη ἡηρονομῆσαι οὐ- δύνανται," οὐδὲ ἡ φθορὰ τὴν ἀ- 
of God inherit leannot, nor 2corruption *incor- 


φθαρσίαν *c\npovopet." 


ruptibility ‘does *inherit. 
51 ᾿Ιδοὺ μυστήριον ὑμῖν λέγω" Πάντες μὲν" τοὺ κοιμηθη- 
Lo amystery toyou I tell: All Snot ‘we *shall 
σόμεθα΄ πάντες.δὲ ἀλλαγησόμεθα, 52 ἐν ἀτόμῳ, ἐν 
fall asleep, but all we shall be changed, in an instant, in [the] 
ῥιπῇ ὀφθαλμοῦ, ἐν τῇ ἐσχάτῃ σάλπιγγι: σαλπίσει.γάρ, 


twinkling of an eye, at the last for a trumpet shall sound, 


καὶ ot νεκροὶ δἐγερθήσονται" ἄφθαρτοι, Kai ἡμεῖς ἀλλαγησό- 


trumpet ; 


andthe dead Bball beraised incorruptible, and we shall be 
‘ A ~ ? ’ ? ΄ 
μεθα. 53 δεῖ.γὰρ τὸ.φθαρτὸν τοῦτο ἐνδύσασθαι ἀφθαρσίαν, 
changed. For it Rees this corruption to put on incorruptibility, 
καὶ τὸ.θνητὸν.τοῦτο ἐνδύσασθαι ἀθανασίαν. 54 ὕταν.δὲ τὸ 
and this mortal to put on immortality. But when 
φθαρτὸν. τοῦτο ἐνδύσηται ἀφθαρσίαν, Kai τὸ θνητὸν. τοῦτο 
this jonah shall have put on incorruptibility, and this mortal 


ἀθανασίαν, τότε γενήσεται ὁ λόγος ὁ γε- 
immortality, then 5881] come to pass the word that has 
γραμμένος, Κατεπόθη ὁθάνατος εἰς νῖκος. 55 ἸΠοῦ σου, 
been written: *Was *swallowed *up ldeath in victory. Where of thee, 
΄ \ ~ Yo ~ \ 
θάνατε. τὸ ὑκέντρον" ; ποῦ σου, “ἀδη," τὸ »vixoc'; 56 Τὸ δὲ 
O death, the sting ? where of thee, O hades, the victory? Now the 


κέντρον τοῦ θανάτου ἡ ἁμαρτία: ἡ.δὲ δύναμις τῆς ἁμαρ- 
sting of death [is] sin, and the BOWED: of sin 


riac ὁ νόμος" 57 τῷ.δὲ θεῷ χάρις τῷ διδόντι ἡμῖν τὸ νῖκος 


ἐνδύσηται 
shall have put on 


the law; but to God [be]thanks, who gives us the victory 
διὰ τοῦ.κυρίου.-ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ. 58 “Ὥστε, ἀδελφοί. μου 
by our Lord Jesus Christ. Sothat, my brethren 


ἀγαπητοί, εὐραῖοι γίνεσθε, ἀμετακίνητοι, περισσεύοντες ἐν τῷ 
beloved, 106, immovable, spor ae in the 


ἔργῳ τοῦ κυρίου πάντοτε, εἰδότες ore ὁ. κόπος. ὑμῶν OUK.EOTLY 


work ofthe Lord always, knowing that your toil is not 
κενὸς ἐν κυρίῳ. 
void in([the] Lord. 

16 Περὶ. δὲ τῆς Aoyiac τῆς εἰς τοὺς ἁγίους, ὥσπερ 


Now concerning the collection which(is]for the saints, as 


νομήσει Shall inherit L. 
sleep, but not all &.) L. 


¥ φορέσωμεν we should bear Lrtr.  dvvarae TTr. χ «Anpo- 
¥ — μὲν [L]T Tra. * κοιμηθησόμεθα, ov (read we shall all 
4 ἀναστήσονται L. Ὁ νῖκος Und κέντρον transposed LTTr. 


ς θάνατε O death Lttra. 


XVI. 1 ΚΟΛΟΣΕΣΙΕΝ TET ACN SS? 
διέταξα ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις τῆς Γαλατίας, οὕτως καὶ ὑμεῖς 
I directed the assemblies of Galatia, 80 also ye 

΄ \ , ΄ ; oe « ~ ? 
ποιήσατε. 2 κατὰ.μίαν σαββάτων. ἕκαστος ὑμῶν παρ 

do. Every first [day] ofthe week “each Sof*you ‘by 
« ~ , ͵ « e n Il ? ὃ ~ - ev A 
ἑαυτῷ τιθέτω, θησαυρίζων ὕ.τι “ἂν εὐοδῶται ἵνα μὴ 
Thim ‘let *put, treasuring up whatever he may be prospered in, that not 
ὅταν ἔλθω τότε λογίαι γίνωνται. 3 ὕταν.δὲ παραγένω- 


when I may come then collections there should be. And when I shall have 


τ᾿ JAY , ~ ,ὔ [2 
μαι, οὗς ἐὰν" δοκιμάσητε Ov ἐπιστολῶν τούτους πέμψω 
arrived, whomsoever yemay approve by epistles these I will send 


ἀπενεγκεῖν τὴν χάριν. ὑμῶν εἰς Ἱερουσαλήμ 4 ἐὰν. δὲ %y 


to carry your bounty to Jerusalem : andif it be 
SF; " ~ > Uy 4 > A , 5 “BN , 
ἄξιον" τοῦ κἀμὲ πορεύεσθαι, σὺν» ἐμοὶ πορεύσονται. εὑ- 
suitable for me also to go, with me they shall go. 21 Swill 
σομαι δὲ πρὸς ὑμᾶς ὅταν Μακεδονίαν διέλθω" 
“come ‘but to you when Macedonia  Ishall have gone through ; 


Μακεδονίαν.γὰρ διέρχομαι. 6 πρὸς ὑμᾶς.δὲ τυχὸν παραμενῶ, 
for Macedonia I do go through, And with you it may be I shall stay, 
ἢ Kai παραχειμάσω, va ὑμεῖς pe προπέμψητε οὗ ἐὰν 
or even I shall winter, that ye me maysetforward wheresoever 
πορεύωμαι. 7 οὐ.θέλω.γὰρ ὑμᾶς ἄρτι ἐν παρόδῳ ἰδεῖν" ἐλπίζω 


Imay go. ForIwillnot *you ‘now ‘in “passing ‘to7see, %I *hope 
bOé! χρόνον τινὰ ἐπιμεῖναι πρὸς ὑμᾶς. ἐὰν ὁ κύριος ᾿ἐπι- 
τραῦ atime ‘certain to remain with you, if the Lord per- 
τρέπῃ." ὃ ἐπιμενῶ.δξὲ᾿ ἐν ᾿Εφέσῳ ἕως τῆς πεντηκοστῆς" 
mit. But I shall remain in Ephesus till Pentecost, 

9 θύρα.γάρ por ἀνέῳγεν μεγάλη Kai ἐνεργῆς; Kai ἀντι- 

Fora ΟΟΥ tome has been opened great and efficient, and op- 


πολλοί. 


κείμενοι 
(are) many. 


posers 
10 ’Edy.dé ἔλθῃ Τιμόθεος, βλέπετε ἵνα ἀφόβως γένηται 
Nowif come *Timotheus, see that without fear he may be 
πρὸς ὑμᾶς" τὸ.γὰρ ἔργον κυρίου ἐργάζεται, ὡς *eai éyw.' 
with you; forthe work of[the]) Lord heworks, as even 1. 
11 μή τις οὖν αὐτὸν ἐξουθενήσῃ᾽ προπέμψατε.δὲ αὐτὸν 
*Not “anyone ‘therefore him should despise ; but set forward him 
ἐν εἰρήνῃ, wa ἔλθῃ πρός |e ἐκδέχομαι.γὰρ αὐτὸν μετὰ 
in peace, that hemaycome to me ; for I await him with 
τῶν ἀδελφῶν. 12 Περὶ. δὲ ᾿Απολλὼ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ, πολλὰ 
the brethren. Andconcerning Apollos the __ brother, much 
παρεκάλεσα αὐτὸν ἵνα ἔλθῃ πρὸς ὑμᾶς μετὰ τῶν 
I exhorted him that he should go to you with the 
ἀδελφῶν" Kai πάντως οὐκ ἦν θέλημα ἵνα νῦν ἔλθῃ, 
brethren; and not at all was [his] will that now he should come ; 


ἐλεύσεται. δὲ bray εὐκαιρήσῃ. 18 ΓΤρηγορεῖτε, στήκετε 


but he will come when he shall have opportunity. Watch γε; stand fast 
ἐν πίστει, ἀνδρίζεσθε, πὶ κραταιοῦσθε. 14 πάντα 
in the faith, quit yourselves like men, be strong. 2411 “things 


ὑμῶν ἐν ἀγάπῃ γινέσθω. 
our *in ‘love ‘let be done. 
15 Παρακαλῶ.δὲ ὑμᾶς, ἀδελφοί: οἴδατε τὴν οἰκίαν Στεφανᾶ, 
But I exhort you, brethren, (ye know the house of Stephanas, 
ὅτι ἐστὶν ἀπαρχὴ τῆς Axatac, καὶ εἰς διακονίαν τοῖς ἁγίοις 
that itis “first-fruit +Achaia’s, and "for ‘service ‘tothe ‘saints 


467 


given order to the 
churches of Galatia, 
even so do ye. 2 Upon 
the first day of the 
week let every one of 
you lay by him in 
store, as God hath 
prospered him, that 
there be no gather- 
ings when I come. 
3 And when I come, 
Wwhomsoever ye shall 
approve by your let- 
ters, them will I send 
to bring your liberal- 
ity unto Jerusalem. 
4 And if. it be meet 
that I go also, they 
shall go with me. 
5 Now I will come un- 
to you, when I shall 
pass through Mace- 
donia: for I do 
pass through Mace- 
donia. 6 And it may 
be that I will abide, 
yea, and winter with 
you, that ye may bring 
Ime On my journey 
whithersoever I go. 
7 For I will not tee 
you now by the way ; 
but I trust to tarry a 
while with you, if the 
Lord permit. 8 But I 
will tarry at Ephesus 
until Pentecost. 9 For 
a great door and ef- 
fectual is opened unto 
me, and there are 
many adversaries, 


10 Now if Timo- 
theus come, see that 
he may be with you 
without fear: for he 
worketh the work of 
the Lord, as I also do, 
11 Let no man there- 
fore despise him: but 
conduct him forth in 
peace, that he may 
come unto me: for [ 
look for him with the 
brethren. 12 As touch- 
ing our brother Apol- 
los, I greatly desired 
him to come unto you 
with the brethren: but 
his will was not at all 
to come at this time; 
but he will come when 
he shall have conveni- 
ent time. 13 Watch 
ye, stand fast in the 
faith, quit you like 
men, be strong. 14 Let 
all your things be 
done with charity. 


15 I beseech you, 
brethren, (ye know the 
house of Stephanas, 
that it is the first- 
fruits of Achaia, and 
that they have ad- 
dicted themselves to 
the ministry of the 


[ἂν Ltr. 
1 ἐμέ LTr. 


© ἐὰν Tr. 


4 σαββάτου LTTrAW. : 
Κ κἀγώ LTTrA. 


ἕξ ἄξιον ἢ LTA. 
ἱ ἐπιτρέψῃ LTTraw. 


h γὰρ for GLTTraw. 


m+ [καὶ] and L. 


468 


saints,) 16that ye sub- 
mit yourselves unto 
such, and to every one 
that helpeth with us, 
and laboureth. 17 I 
am glad of the coming 
of Stephanas and For- 
tunatus and Achai- 
cus: for that which 
was lacking on your 
part they have sup- 
lied. 18 For they 

ve refreshed my 
spirit and yours: 
therefore acknowledge 
ye them that are such, 
19 The churches of 
Asia salute you. A- 
quila and Priscilla 
salute you much in 
the Lord, with the 
church that is in their 
house. 20 All the breth- 
ren greet you. Greet 
ye one another with 
an holy kiss. 


21 The salutation of 
me Paul with mine 
own hand. 22 If any 
man love not the Lord 
Jesus Christ, let him 
be Anathema Maran- 
atha. 23 The grace of 
our Lord Jesus Christ 
be with you. 24 My 
love be with you all in 
Christ Jesus. Amen. 


I POs VRGOePAWNOWTO GS BR. ee 
ἔταξαν ἑαυτούς" 16 ἵνα καὶ ὑμεῖς ὑποτάσσησθε τοῖς 
‘they ?appointed *themselves,) that also ye be subject 


τοιούτοις, καὶ παντὶ τῷ συνεργοῦντι Kai κοπιῶντι. 17 Xaiow 
tosuch, andtoeyeryone working with [us]and labouring. Ξ1 3rejoice 


δὲ ἐπὶ τῇ παρουσίᾳ Στεφανᾶ καὶ "Φουρτουνάτου" καὶ ᾿Αχαϊκοῦ, 
ταῦ αὖ the coming of Stephanas and ortunatus and Achaicus ; 
ὅτι τὸ οὑμῶν" ὑστέρημα Pobrou' ἀνεπλήρωσαν᾽ 18 ἀνέπαυ- 


because your deficiency these filled up. *They *re- 
σαν γὰρ τὸ ἐμὸν πνεῦμα καὶ TO ὑμῶν. ἐπιγινώσκετε οὖν 
freshed ‘for my spirit and yours ; recognize therefore 


τοὺς τοιούτους. 19 ᾿Ασπάζονται ὑμᾶς αἱ ἐκκλησίαι τῆς ᾿Ασίας" 


such. 5Salute *you ‘the ?assemblies 305 *Asia. 
ἀσπάζονται" ὑμᾶς ἐν κυρίῳ πολλὰ ᾿Ακύλας καὶ Πρίοσ- 
10Salute σοῦ |3in (‘*the}'SLord ?**much 7Aquila "and Pris- 


1! ‘ ~ ? > ~ ? Aen ? , 
κιλλα," σὺν τῇ Kar οἶκον. αὐτῶν ἐκκλησίᾳ: 20 ἀσπάζονται 
cilla, with the 7in 3their *house ‘assembly. *Salute 
ὑμᾶς ot ἀδελφοὶ πάντες. ἀσπάσασθε ἀλλήλους ἐν φιλήματι 
Syou *the *brethren tall. Salute ye oneanother with a *kiss 
ἁγίῳ. 

"holy. 
21 Ὁ ἀσπασμὸς τῷ. ἐμῇ χειρὶ Παύλου" 22 εἴ τις οὐ.φιλεῖ 

The salutation *by ‘my (Sown] *®hand ‘of ?Paul. If anyone love not 
τὸν κύριον "Ἰησοῦν χριστόν, ἤτω ἀνάθεμα᾽ papay aba. 
the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed: Maran atha, 

e ΄ - , ? fade “ῃἩ ᾽ ε ~ « 
28 ἡ χάρις τοῦ κυρίου Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ ped ὑμῶν. 24 ἡ 
The grace ofthe Lord Jesus Christ [be] with you. 
ἀγάπη.μου μετὰ πάντων ὑμῶν ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ. ἀμήν." 
My love [06] with Zall you in Christ Jesus. Amen. 
algae Κορινθίους πρώτη ἐγράφη ἀπὸ Φιλίππων, διὰ 
2To [516] *Corinthians first written from Philippi, by 
Στεφανᾷ καὶ Povprovvarov καὶ ᾿Αχαϊκοῦ καὶ Τιμοθέου." 
Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus and Timotheus, 


Ἢ ΠΡῸΣ TOYS ΚΟΡΙΝΘΙΟΥΣ ENIZSTOAH AEYTEPA.' 


THE *TO 


PAUL, an apostle of 
Jesus Christ by the 
will of God, and Ti- 
mothy our brother, 
nnto the church of 
God which is at Co- 
rinth, with all the 
saints which are in 
all Achaia: 2 Grace be 
to you and peace from 
God our Father, and 
from the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


3 Blessed be God, 
even the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the 


“THE 5CORINTHIANS ?EPISTLE ‘SECOND. 


ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ ἀπόστολος ''Incov χριστοῦ" διὰ θελήματος θεοῦ, 

Paul, apostle of Jesus Christ by will of God, 
καὶ Τιμόθεος ὁ ἀδελφός, τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ TY οὔσῃ ἐν 
and Timotheus the brother, tothe assembly of God which is in 


Κορίνθῳ, σὺν τοῖς ἁγίοις πᾶσιν τοῖς οὖσιν ἐν ὕλῃ τῇ Α- 
Corinth, with *the *saints tall who are’ in *whole ‘the [of] A- 
yaig’ 2 χάρις ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη ἀπὸ “θεοῦ" πατρὸς. ἡμῶν καὶ 
chaia, Grace toyou and peace from God our Father and 
κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ. 
(the] Lord Jesus : 
9 Εὐλογητὸς ὁ θεὸς καὶ πατὴρ τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡ μῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ 
Blessed [be] the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 


2 Φορτουνάτου LTTrAW. 
τ Πρίσκα Prisca TTr. [ ν = 
~ — the subscription GLTTrW ; Πρὸς Κορινθίους a A. 


{{]|Τττί Α1. 


@ 4+ Παύλον τοῦ ᾿Αποστόλον of Paul the Apostle Ε; 
Πρὸς Κορινθίους β΄ LTTrAW. 


ᾳ ἀσπάζεται ΤΑ. 


Ρ αὐτοὶ they LAW. 
* — ἀμήν 


ο ὑμέτερον LTTrAW. 
τ--- χριστοῦ ΤΊΤΑ. 


8 — Ἰησοῦν χριστόν LTTrA. 


+ Παύλον of Paul G; — τοὺς EG; 


Ὁ χριστοῦ Ιησοῦ TTra. ς — θεοῦ Ww. 


Ir. Il CORINTHIANS. 


χριστοῦ, ὁ πατὴρ τῶν οἰκτιρμῶν καὶ θεὸς πάσης παρακλή- 
Christ, the Father of comtpassions, and God of all enqouraae. 


σεως, 4 ὁ παρακαλῶν ἡμᾶς ἐπὶ πάσῃ τῇ θλίψει. ἡμῶν, εἰς 
ment; who encourages us in all our tribulation, for 


τὸ δύνασθαι ἡμᾶς παρακαλεῖν τοὺς ἔν πάσῃ θλίψει, διὰ 
2to “be table toencourage those in every tribulation, through 


τῆς παρακλήσεως ἧς παρακαλούμεθα αὐτοὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ 
the encouragement with which weareencouraged ourselves by 


θεοῦ" 5 ὅτι καθὼς περισσεύει τὰ παθήματα τοῦ χριστοῦ 
God. Because agcording as abound the aaa ofthe Christ 


εἰς ἡμᾶς, οὕτως διὰ “ χριστοῦ περισσεύει καὶ ἡ “παράκλησις 
togert us, 80 through Christ abounds also *encouragement 


ἡμῶν. θ εἴτε.δὲ θλιβόμεθα, ὑπὲρ τῆς. ὑμῶν. παρακλήσεως 
our. But whether we are ἜΡΘΗ (it is] for your encouragement 

Kai σωτηρίας, *ric ἐνεργουμένης ἐν ὑπομονῇ τῶν αὐτῶν 

and salvation, os wrought in [the] endurance ofthe same 


παθημάτων ὧν καὶ ἡμεῖς πάσχομεν" feire παρακαλούμεθα, 
eninge which 7also ‘we suffer, whether we are encouraged, 


ὑπὲρ τῆς. ὑμῶν. παρακλήσεως" βκαὶ σωτηρίας" " καὶ ἡ ἐλπὶς 


{it is] for your encouragement and salvation; (and “hope 
ἡμῶν. βεβαία ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν" 7 εἰδότες ὅτι "ὥσπερ" κοινωνοί 
our [15] sure for rH 3) knowing that as partucts 


ἐστε TOY παθημάτων, οὕτως καὶ τῆς παρακλήσεως. 8 Οὐ.γὰρ 
ye are of the sutterine2, so also of the encouragement. For *not 
θέλομεν ὑμᾶς ἀγνοεῖν, ἀδελφοί, ἰὑπὲρ" τῆς.θλίψεως. ἡμῶν 
340 we wish jou ἐς be ἸΕΕΟΚΒΒΙ, brethren, as to our tribulation 
τῆς γενομένης ἡμῖν" ἐν τῇ Acia, ὅτι καθ᾽ ὑπερβολὴν ᾿ἐβαρή- 
which happened tous in Asia, that excesssxely we were 
θημεν ὑπὲρ δύναμιν," ὥστε ἐξαπορηθῆναι.ἡμᾶς καὶ τοῦ.ζῇν᾽" 
burdened beyond Cour] Bere so as for us to despair even of living. 
9 πάλλὰ" αὐτοὶ ἐν ἑαυτοῖς τὸ ἀπόκριμα τοῦ θανάτου ἐσχή- 
But ourselves in ourselves the sentence of death we have 
καμεν, ἵνα μὴ.πεποιθότες. ὦμεν ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῖς, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ τῷ 
had, that we should not have trust in ourselves, but in 
θεῷ τῷ ἐγείροντι τοὺς νεκρούς 10 ὃς ἐκ τηλικούτου θανάτου 
God γῆο raises the dead ; who from so great a death 
πἐξῤῥύσατο" ἡμᾶς “καὶ ῥύεται." εἰς ὃν ἠλπίκαμεν Port καὶ 
delivered us and does feliveny in whom we have Rope that also 


ἔτι ῥύσεται, 11 συνυπουργούντων καὶ ὑμῶν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν 
still he will EGS labouring togenher 2also tye for us 


τῇ δεήσει. ἵνα ἐκ πολλῶν προσώπων TO εἰς ἡμᾶς χάρισμα 
by supplication, that by many, persons the *towards *us Aeift 


διὰ πολλῶν εὐχαριστηθῇ ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν. 12 ‘H 
*through pray, supe Το pankesizing for us. 
yap καύχησις.ἡμῶν αὕτη ἐστίν, τὸ μαρτύριον τῆς συνειδήσεως 
Hos our boasting this is, the testimony of *conscience 


ἡμῶν, ὅτι ἐν ἁπλότητι! καὶ τεϊλικρινείᾳ" " θεοῦ, οὐκ ἐν σοφίᾳ 
tour, that in sunplicity and nincesity of God, (not in owinion 


σαρκικῇ, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν χάριτι θεοῦ, ἀνεστράφημεν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ, 
1fleshly, but in grace of God,) we had per. conduct in the world, 
περισσοτέρως. δὲ πρὸς ὑμᾶς. 13 od-yap ἄλλα γράφομεν 


and more abundantly towards you. For not other things do we write 


*might ὃ 


d + τοῦ the GLTTraw. © τῆς ἐνεργουμένης. 
f εἴτε παρακαλούμεθα .... σωτηρίας placed. after v ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν LTrAW. 
b ὡς LTTrTAW. i περὶ LTTr. K — ἡμῖν LITrAW. 
τὰ ἀλλ᾽ 1, 2 ἀρύσατο Tr. 
9 ἁγιότητι holiness LTTra. 


T εἰλικρινίᾳ τ. 8 + τοῦ LTTrAW. 
βρινιᾳ 


409 


Father of mercies, and 
the God of all com- 
fort ; 4 who comfort- 
eth us in all our tri- 
bulation, that we may 
be able to comfort 
them which are in any 
trouble, by the com- 
fort wherewith we 
ourselves are comfort- 
edof God. 5 Foras the 
sufferings of Christ 
abound in us, so our 
consolation also a 
boundeth by Christ. 
6 And whether we be 
afflicted, it 7s for your 
consolation and sal- 
vation, which is ef- 
fectual in the endur- 
ing of the same suffer- 
ings which we also 
suffer : or whether we 
be comforted, ἐξ zs for 
your consolation and 
salvation. 7 And our 
hope of you 7 sted- 
fast, knowing, that as 
ye are partakers of 
16. sufferings, 80 
shall ye be also of the 
consolation. 8 For we 
would not, brethren, 
have you ignorant of 
our trouble which 
came to us in Asia, 
that we were pressed 
out of measure, above 
strength insomuch 
that we despaired even 
of life: 9 but we had 
the sentence of death 
in ourselves, that w3 
should not trust in 
ourselves, but in God 
which raiseth the dead: 
10 who delivered us 
from so great a death, 
and doth deliver: in 
whom we trust that 
he will yet deliver us ; 
11 ye also helping to- 
gether by prayer for 
us, that for the gift 
bestowed upon us by 
the means of many 
persons thanks may 
be given by many on 
our behalf, 12 For 
our rejoicing is this, 
the testimony of our 
conscience, that in 
simplicity and godly 
sincerity, not with 
fleshly wisdom, but by 
the grace of God, we 
have had our conver- 
sation in the world, 
and more abundantly 
{9 you-ward. 13 For 
we write none other 
things unto you, than 


- πάσχομεν placed ajter παρακλήσεως GT. 
& — Kat gampias GT. 
l ὑπὲρ δύναμιν ἐβαρήθημεν LTTrA. 
ο καὶ ῥύσεται and will deliver [L]rtra. 


P [ore] Ltr. 


470 


what ye read or ac- 
knowledge; andI trust 
ye shall acknowledge 
even to the end; 14 as 
also ye have acknow- 
lJedged us in part, that 
we are yourrejoicing, 
even as ye also are 
ours in the day of the 
Lord Jesus. 15 And 
in this confidence I 
was minded to come 
unto you before, that 
ye might have a se- 
cond benefit; 16 and 
to pass by you into 
Macedonia, and to 
come again out of 
Macedonia unto you, 
and of you to be 
brought on my way to- 
ward Judwa. 17 When 
I therefore was thus 
minded, did J use 
lightness ? or the 
things that I purpose, 
do I purpose accord- 
ing to the flesh, that 
with me there should 
be yea yea, and nay 
nay? 18 But as God 
ts true, our word to- 
ward you was not yea 
and nay. 19 For the 
Son of God, Jesus 
Christ, who was 
preached among you 
by us, even by me and 
Silvanus and Timo- 
theus, was not yea 
and nay, but in him 
was yea. 20 For all the 
promises of God in 
him are yea, and in 
him Amen, unto the 
glory of God by us. 
24 Now he which sta- 
blisheth us with you 
in Christ, and hath 
anointed us, ws God; 
22 who hath also seal- 
ed us, and given the 
earnest of the Spirit 
in our hearts. 


23 Moreover I call 
God for a record upon 
my soul, that to spare 
you I came not as yet 
unto Corinth. 24 Not 
for that we have do- 
minion over your 
faith, but are helpers 
of your joy: for by 
faith ye stand. II. But 
I determined this with 
myself, that I would 
not come again to you 
in heaviness. 2 For if 
I make you sorry,who 
is hethenthat maketh 
126 glad, but the same 


ΠΡΟΣ KO PAE NO VOY > BB. ΤῊΝ. 


« ~ t ἰλλ᾽ bal cay > , n ‘ , , 3 , 
ὑμῖν ta ἢ ἃ ἀναγινώσκετε, ἢ Kai ἐπιγινώσκετε, ἐλπίζω. δὲ 
to you but what ye read, or even recognize ; and I hope 
« Υ͂ sy EX ? , ‘ ‘ > , 
ὁτι καὶ" ἕως τέλους ἐπιγνώσεσθε, 14 καθὼς καὶ ἐπέ- 
that even to [the] end ye will recognize, according as also ye did 
γνωτε ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ μέρους, br καύχημα ὑμῶν ἐσμεν, καθάπερ 
recognize us in part, that *your*boasting ‘we7are, even as 
καὶ ὑμεῖς ἡμῶν ἐν TH ἡμέρᾳ τοῦ κυρίου  ᾿Τησοῦ. 15 Kai 
also ye [are] ours in the day ofthe Lord Jesus. And 
’ ~ θ , ? λ , Χχ 4 c ~ ? ~ , TT 
ταύτῃ τῇ πεποιθήσει ἐβουλόμην “πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἐλθεῖν πρότερον, 
with this confidence I purposed 3.0 *you 'to?come previously, 
ἵνα δευτέραν χάριν γἔχητε" 10 καὶ Ov ὑμῶν διελθεῖν" 
that asecond favour ye might have ; and by you _ to pass through 
᾽ , ‘4 ’ > A , ’ ~ A « ~ 
εἰς Μακεδονίαν, καὶ πάλιν ἀπὸ Μακεδονίας ἐλθεῖν πρὸς ὑμᾶς, 
to Macedonia, and again from Macedonia tocome _ to you, 
καὶ Up ὑμῶν προπεμφθῆναι εἰς THY Ἰουδαίαν. 17 τοῦτο.οὖν 
and by you  tobesetforward to Judea. This therefore 


βουλευόμενος," μή τι ἄρα τῇ ἐλαφρίᾳ ἐχρησάμην ; ἢ ἃ 


purposing, Sindeed Slightness ‘did*I*use? or what 
βουλεύομαι, κατὰ σάρκα βουλεύομαι, ἵνα παρ᾽ 
I purpose, according to flesh 401 purpose, that there should be with 


? 3 A ‘ , 4 4 n » ΔῊ c , ev ες 
ἐμοὶ τὸ ναὶ ναί, καὶ τὸ οὗ οὔ; 18 πιστὸς δὲ ὁ θεός, ὅτι ὁ 
me yea yea, and nay nay ὃ Now faithful God [is], that 
λόγος ἡμῶν ὁ πρὸς ὑμᾶς οὐκ Yéyévero" vai καὶ οὔ" 19 ὁ. “γὰρ 
our word to you *not lwas yea and nay. For the 
τοῦ θεοῦ" υἱὸς VInoove χριστὸς" ὁ ἐν ὑμῖν Ov ἡμῶν κη- 
“of Ξ6 οὔ ‘Son, Jesus Christ, whoamongyou by us was 
» 3... ~ A ~ " , ᾽ ? a ‘ 
ρυχθείς, δι’ ἐμοῦ Kai Σιλουανοῦ καὶ Τιμοθέου, οὐκ. ἐγένετο vai 
proclaimed, (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus,) was not yea 
‘ » ᾽ A) ΤῊΣ ? ~ , Ὁ e ‘ 3 , 
καὶ οὔ, ἀλλὰ ναὶ ἐν αὐτῷ γέγονεν" 20 ὕσαι. γὰρ ἐπαγγελίαι 


and nay, but yea in him has been. For whatever proinises 
θεοῦ, ἐν αὐτῷ τὸ ναί, kai ἐν αὐτῷ" τὸ ἀμήν, 


of God [there are], in him [15] ὑῃ9 yea, and in 


τῷ θεῷ πρὸς δόξαν dt ἡμῶν. 21 ὁ δὲ 


him the en, 
βεβαιῶν ἡμᾶς σὺν 


Sto*God ‘for “glory by us. Now he who confirms us with 
ὑμῖν εἰς χριστόν, Kai χρίσας ἡμᾶς, θεός" 22 ὁ καὶ σῴφραγι- 
you unto Christ, and anointed us, [is] God, who also sealed 
σάμενος ἡμᾶς, καὶ δοὺς τὸν ἰἀῤῥαβῶνα" τοῦ πνεύματος ἐν 

us, and gave the earnest of the Spirit in 
ταῖς.καρδίαις. ἡμῶν. 
our hearts. 


23 ᾿Εγὼ.δὲ μάρτυρα τὸν θεὸν ἐπικαλοῦμαι ἐπὶ τὴν ἐμὴν 
ButI “as “witness *God 1641] upon my 
ψυχήν, ore φειδόμενος ὑμῶν οὐκέτι ἦλθον εἰς Κόρινθον" 
soul, that sparing you notyet didIcome to Corinth. 
24 οὐχ Ore κυριεύομεν ὑμῶν THC πίστεως, ἀλλὰ συνεργοί 
Not that weruleover your faith, but fellow-workers 
ἐσμεν τῆς.χαρᾶς.ὑμῶν, τῇ-.γὰρ.πίστει ἑστήκατε. Q Expwwa.dé 
are of your joy: for by faith ye stand. But I judged 
ἐμαυτῷ τοῦτο, TO μὴ πάλιν BEhOsiv ἐν λύπῃ πρὸς ὑμᾶς." 
with myself this, not again tocome in grief to you. 
2 εἰ. γὰρ ἐγὼ λυπῶ ὑμᾶς, καὶ τίς orw' ὁ εὐφραίνων pe, εἰ. μὴ 


t [ἀλλ᾽ L; ἀλλὰ Μ΄. 
πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἐλθεῖν LTTrA ; πρό. ἐλθ. πρὸς ὑμᾶς W. 
8 βουλόμενος LTTrAW. 
ε διὸ καὶ δι᾽’ αὐτοῦ wherefore also through him LTtTraw. 
& ἐν λύπῃ πρὺς ὑμᾶς ἐλθεῖν GLTTrAW. 


᾿Ιησοῦς τ. 


Forif I grieve you, 7also'who isit that gladdens me, except 
ν — καὶ LTTrA. * + ἡμῶν (read our Lord) [L]TA. “5 πρότερον 

Υ σχῆτε TTrA. 2 ἀπελθεῖν tO pass On L. 

Ὁ ἔστιν iS LTTrAW. © τοῦ θεοῦ yap LTTrAW. 4 χριστὸς 


f dpaBova LT. 
h — ἐστιν LTTrAW. 


ΤΙ. FilyG@ORENTHIANS. 


« x , ? ? aa Sy Ἂν it «Ὁ ἢ ~ > , 
ὁ λυπούμενος ἐξ ἐμοῦ; 8 καὶ ἔγραψα ἰὑμῖν" τοῦτο αὐτό, 
hewho is grieved by me? And Iwrote toyou this same, 
ἵνα.μὴ ἐλθὼν λύπην ἔχω" ἀφ᾽ ὧν ἔδει με 
lest havingcome grief ΤΙ might have from [those] of whom it behoves me 
χαίρειν' πεποιθὼς ἐπὶ πάντας ὑμᾶς, Gre ἡ. ἐμὴ.χαρὰ 
to rejoice ; trusting in 3411 ‘you, that my joy (that) 
, « - ? > 4 ~ , \ ~ 
πάντων ὑμῶν ἐστιν. 4 ἐκ.γὰρ πολλῆς θλίψεως Kai συνοχῆς 
308. 51 ‘you lis. Foroutof much tribulation and distress 
καρδίας ἔγραψα ὑμῖν διὰ πολλῶν δακρύων, οὐχ ἵνα λυπη- 
ΟΥ̓ βρασὺ Iwrote toyou through many tears ; not that ye might 
Ore, ἀλλὰ THY ἀγάπην ἵνα γνῶτε ἣν ἔχω περισ- 
be grieved, but “the love ‘that ye might know which I have more 
, ? « ~ > , φ ? ? 4 
σοτέρως εἰς ὑμᾶς. 5 Eide τις λελύπηκεν, οὐκ ἐμὲ 
abundantly towards you. But if anyone has grieved, snot me 
λελύπηκεν, ἀλλ᾽" ἀπὸ.μέρους, ἵνα μὴ ἐπιβαρῶ, πάντας 
‘he “has *grieved, but in part (that I may not overcharge) all 
ὑμᾶς. Θ ἱκανὸν τῷ.τοιούτῳ ἡ. ἐπιτιμία.αὕτη ἡ ὑπὸ τῶν 
you. Sufficient tosuch a one [is] this rebuke which [is] by the 
πλειόνων 7 ὥστε τοὐναντίον μᾶλλον" ὑμᾶς χαρίσασθαι 


greater part ; so that on the contrary - rather ye should forgive 
καὶ παρακαλέσαι, μήπως τῇ.περισσοτέρᾳ λύπῃ κατα- 
and encourage, lest with more abundant grief should be swal- 
ποθῇ o.rowvroc. ὃ διὸ παρακαλῶ ὑμᾶς κυρῶσαι εἰς 
lowed up such a one. Wherefore I exhort you toconfirm *towards 
αὐτὸν ἀγάπην. 9 εἰς. τοῦτο. γὰρ καὶ ἔγραψα, ἵνα γνῶ 
shim love. For, for this also did I write, that I might know 
τὴν δοκιμὴν ὑμῶν, εἰ εἰς πάντα ὑπήκοοί ἐστε. 10 ᾧ.δὲ 
{86 proof of you, if to everything obedient ye are. But to whom 
τι χαρίζεσθε, "καὶ ἐγώ"" καὶ γὰρ ἐγὼ i τι κεχάρισ- 
anything ye forgive, also I; for also I if anything I have for- 
ΑΛ , ε ~ , ~ 
μαι, ᾧ κεχάρισμαι," δ ὑμᾶς,ἐν προσώπῳ χριστοῦ, 


given, of whom I have forgiven, [15] forsakeof you, in{the] person of Christ ; 
ll ἵνα μὴ-πλεονεκτηθῶμεν ὑπὸ τοῦ σατανᾶ" οὐ.γὰρ αὐτοῦ 
that we should not be overreached by Satan, for not of his 


Ta νοήματα ἀγνοοῦμεν. 

thoughts are we ignorant. 

12 ᾿Ελθὼν.δὲ εἰς τὴν PTowdda' εἰς τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ 
ς 7 0 ς ey. 

Now having come to Troas for the gladtidings of the 
χριστοῦ, καὶ θύρας por ἀνεῳγμένης ἐν κυρίῳ, 18 οὐκ 
Christ, also adoor tome having been opened in [the] Lord, =not 
ἔσχηκα ἄνεσιν τῷ-πνεύματί.μου τῷ. μὴ.εὑρεῖν.με Τίτον τὸν 
ΣῊ d ease in wy spirit at my not finding Titus 
ἀδελφόν. μου: ἀλλὰ ἀποταξάμενος αὐτοῖς, ἐξῆλθον εἰς Μακε- 


my brother ; but having taken leave of them, Iwentout to Mace- 
doviay. 14 Τῷ. δε.θεῷ χάρις τῷ πάντοτε θριαμβεύοντι 
donia. But to God [be] thanks, who always leads in triumph 
ἡμᾶς ἐν τῷ χριστῷ, Kai THY ὀσμὴν τῆς γνώσεως αὐτοῦ 
us in the Christ, and the odour of the owledge of him 
φανεροῦντι δι ἡμῶν ἐν παντὶ τόπῳ. 15 ὅτι χριστοῦ 
makes manifest through us in every place. For oft Christ 

εὐωδία ἐσμὲν τῷ θεῷ ἐν τοῖς σωζομένοις καὶ ἐν τοῖς ἀπολ- 


asweetperfume weare toGodin those being saved and in those perish- 


λυμένοις" 16 οἷς.μέν, ὀσμὴ 4Oavarov εἰς θάνατον: οἷς.δέ, 


471 


which is made sorry 
by me? 3 And I wrote 
this same unto you 
lest, when I came, I 
should have sorrow 
from them of whom I 
ought to rejoice; hay- 
ing confidence in you 
all, that my joy is the 
joy of you all. 4 For 
out of much affliction 
and anguish of heart 
I wrote unto you with 
many tears ; not that 
ye should be grieved, 
but that ye might 
know the love which 
[have more abundant- 
ly unto you. 5 Butif 
any have caused grief, 
he hath not grieved 
me, but in part: that 
I may not overcharge 
you all. 6 Sufficient to 
such a man 185 this 
punishment which 
was inflicted of many. 
7 So that contrariwise 
ye ought rather to for- 
give him, and comfort 
him, lest perhapssucha 
one should be swallow- 
ed up with overmuch 
sorrow. 8 Wherefore I 
beseech you that ye 
would confirm your 
love toward him. 
9 For to this end also 
did I write, that I 
might know the proof 
of you, whether ye be 
obedient in all things. 
10 To whom ye forgive 
any thing, I /forgive 
also: for if I forgave 
any thing, to whom I 
forgave it, for your 
sakes forgave I it in 
the person of Christ ; 
11 lest Satan should 
get an advantage of 
us: for we are not ig- 
norant of his devices. 


12 Furthermore,when 
I came to Troas to 
preach Christ’s gospel 
and a door was opened 
unto me of the Lord, 
13 I had no rest inmy 
spirit, because I found 
not Titus my brother: 
but taking my leave 
of them, I went from 
thence into Macedo- 
nia. 14 Now thanks 
be unto God, which 
always causeth us to 
triumph in Christ, and 
maketh manifest the 
savour of his know- 
ledge by us in every 
place. 15 For we are 
unto God a sweet sa- 
your of Christ, in 
them that are saved, 
and in them that pe- 


ing; to the ones, anodour ofdeath to death, but tothe others, rish: 16 to the one we 
i — ὑμῖν LTTrAW. k σχῶ ΤΊτΑ. 1 ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. m [μᾶλλον] Tra. ἢ κἀγώ. 
LTTraw. ο ὃ κεχάρισμαι, εἴ TL κεχάρισμαι GLTTrAW. P Τρῳάδα LT. q+ ἔκ (read 


from death) LTTra. 


472 


are the savour of death 
unto death; and to 
the other the savour 
of life unto life. And 
who 8 sufficient for 
these things ? 17 For 
Wwe are not as many, 
which corrupt the 
word of God: but as 
of sincerity, but as of 
God, in the sight of 
God speak we in 
Christ. 


Ill, Do we begin 
again to commend 
ourselves ? or necd we, 
as some others, epis- 
tles of commendation 
to you, or letters of 
commendation from 
you? 2 Ye are our 
epistle written in our 
hearts, known and 
read of all men: 3for- 
asmuch as ye are man- 
ifestly declared to be 
the epistle of Christ 
ministered by us, 
written not with ink, 
but with the Spirit of 
the living God; not 
in tables of stone, but 
in fleshy tables of the 
heart. 4 And such 
trust have we through 
Christ to God-ward : 
5 not that we are 
sufficient of  our- 
selves to think any 
thing as of ourselves; 
but our sufficiency 7s 
of God; 6 who also 
hath made us able 
ministers of the new 
testament ; not of the 
letter, but of the spi- 
rit: for the letter kill- 
eth, but the spirit 
giveth life. 7 But if 
the ministration of 
death, written and en- 
graven in stones, was 
glorious, so that the 
children of Israel 
could not stedfastly 
behold the face of Mo- 
sos for the glory of his 
countenance ; which 
glory was to be done 
away: 8 how shall not 
the ministration of 
the spirit be rather 
glorious? 9 For if 
the ministration of 
condemnation be glo- 
ry, much more doth 
the ministration of 


ΠΡῸΣ KOPINOIOYS OB. II, III. 
ὀσμὴ 4 ζωῆς εἰς ζωὴν. καὶ moog ταῦτα τίς ἱκανός: 
an odour pes life to life ; and for these things who[is] poMiperelive 


17 οὐ.γά ἐσμεν ὡς οἱ πολλοί, καπηλεύοντες τὸν λόγον 
For “ποὺ ‘we ?are as the many, making gain by corrupting the word 


τοῦ θεοῦ, "ἀλλ᾽! we ἐξ "εἰλικρινείας," ἀλλ᾽ we ἐκ θεοῦ, ἱκατ- 


of God, but as οὗ sincerity, but as of God, be- 
ἐνώπιον" ὑτοῦ" θεοῦ, ἐν χριστῷ λαλοῦμεν. 
fore God, in Christ wespeak. 


3 ᾿Αρχόμεθα awe ἑαυτοὺς Youvicraven"; δεῖ! μὴ χρύή- 


Do we begin again ourselves to commend ? ess we 
ζομεν, We* τινες, συστατικῶν" ἐπιστολῶν πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ἢ ἐξ 
need, as some, i a aoalaee | ΒΡΊΞΟΙΕΣ to you, or *from 


ὑμῶν συστατικῶν"; 2 ἡ ἐπιστολὴ ἡμῶν ὑμεῖς ἐστε, *tyyeypap- 


you Pcearuar en (Fones]? Our epistle are, having been 
μένη! ἐν ταῖς. καρδίαις ἡμῶν, τίν εδ εν ἡ καὶ ἀναγινω- 
inscribed in our hearts, being known and being 
σκομένη ὑπὸ πάντων avOowrwy 3 φανερούμενοι ὅτι ἐστὲ 
read by all men, being manifested that we are 
ἐπιστολὴ χριστοῦ διακονηθεῖσα ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν, "ἐγγεγραμμένη" 

7epistle hrist’s, ministered by us ; avig been inscribed, 
ov μέλανι, ἀλλὰ πνεύματι θεοῦ ζῶντος, οὐκ ἐν πλαξὶν 
ποὺ withink, but with(the] Spirit of "6 οὔ [86] “living; not on tablets 


λιθίναις, adr’! ἐν πλαξὶν “καρδίας! σαρκίναις. 4 ἸΤεποί- 
of stone, but on “tablets %of [*the]Sheart ‘fleshy. 7Confi- 
Onow δὲ τοιαύτην ἔχομεν διὰ τοῦ χριστοῦ πρὸς τὸν θεόν" 
dence Sand such have we ene the Christ towards God: 


5 οὐχ Ore Tixavot ἐσμεν ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτῶν λογίσασθαί τι! we ἐξ 
not that Compe yee we are from ourselves toreckon anythingas of 


οἑαυτῶν," ἀλλ᾽ ἡ ἱκανότης.ἡμῶν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ; 6 ὃς καὶ 
ourselves, but our competency [15] of God ; who also 


(KAY WOEV ἡμᾶς διακόνους καινῆς διαθήκης, οὐ γράμ- 
made “competent ‘us [88] servants of anew covenant; not of let- 
ματος, ἀλλὰ πνεύματος" τὸ.γὰρ γράμμα 'ἱἀποκτείνει," τὸ. δὲ 
ter, but of Spirit ; for the letter kills, but the 


πνεῦμα ζωοποιεῖ. 7 ἘΠ δὲ ἡ διακονία τοῦ θανάτου ἐν 8ypap- 
Spirit qniskeng. Butif the service of death in let- 


μασιν, ἐντετυπωμένη ev" λίθοις, ἐγενήθη ἐν δόξῃ, ὥστε 
ters, having been engraven in stones, was produced with glory, soas 
μὴ. «δύνασθαι ἀτενίσαι τοὺς υἱοὺς ᾿Ισραὴλ εἰς τὸ πρόσω- 
not “to 706 5816 *to '°look "intently ὕπο ?children %of *Israel into the face 


πον ἹΜωσέως,, διὰ τὴν δόξαν τοῦ προσώπου.αὐτοῦ, τὴν 


of Moses, on account of ὑπὸ glory of his face, which 
καταργουμένην" ὃ πῶς οὐχὶ μᾶλλον ἡ διακονία τοῦ πνεύμα- 
is being annulled ; how ποῦ rather the service ofthe Spirit 


τος ἔσται ἐν δόξῃ; 9 εἰ. γὰρ ξὴ διακονία! τῆς κατακρίσεως 
shallbe in glory? Forif the _ service of condemnation [be] 


δόξα, πολλῷ μᾶλλον περισσεύει ἡ διακονία τῆς δικαιοσύνης 


righteousness exceed glory, much rather abounds the _ service of righteousness 

in glory. 10 Foreven 1» | 9, ἜΝ ΤῸΝ το , 

that which was made 'év' δόξῃ. 10 καὶ. γὰρ “ovdé δεδόξασται τὸ 

glorious had no glory in glory. Foreven neither "has *been °made '°glorious *that which 
4 + ἐκ (read from life) Lrrra. τ ἀλλὰ Tr. 5 εἰλικρινίας T. τ κατέναντι LTTrA. 

ἃ τοῦ LIM[A]. “ συνιστᾶν Ltr. τ ἣ (read or need we) GLTTraA. ἃ - [πέρ] 1. Y συνσ- Tr. 

2 συστατικῶν LITrAW. 5 ἐν- Τ᾿ b ἀλλὰ EGW. c κα δίαις hearts LITrA. 4 ixavot 


ἐσμεν λογίζεσθαί (λογίσασθαί Aw) τι ag’ ἑαυτῶν LAW ; 
© αὐτῶν them Ltr. 
» — ἐν (read λίθοις On stones) LTTraAW. 


τι TTr. 


service LTTr. 


1 — ἐν (read δόξῃ in glory) Lrtra. 


ἀφ᾽ ἑαντῶν ἱκανοί ἐσμεν λογίσασθαί 
f ἀποκταίνει τ,; ἀποκτάννει TTrA. 8 γράμματι writing Lira. 

i Μωύσέως GLITrAW. τῇ διακονίᾳ with the 
™ οὐ ποῦ GLTTrAW. 


BES FV: Peleg. C0, LN) TjHel ACN)S. 


δεδοξασμένον ἐν τούτῳ τῷ μέρει, 
7has *been °made ®glorious in this 


βαλλούσης δόξης. 11 εἰ. γὰρ 
passing glory. 


πέμεκεν" τῆς ὑπερ- 
respect, on acogunt of the sur- 


τὸ καταργούμενον διὰ 
For if that which is being annulled [was] through 


δόξης, πολλῷ μᾶλλον τὸ μένον ἐν δόξῃ. 12 Ἔχοντες 
glory, much rather that which remains [15] in a Having 
οὖν τοιαύτην ἐλπίδα, πολλῇ παῤ ῤῥῥησίᾳ χρώμεθα 18 καὶ 
therefore such hope, much oldness we use: and 
οὐ καθάπερ “Μωσῆς" ἐτίθει ἜΣ; πα ἐπὶ τὸ πρόσωπον Ῥέαυ- 
not according as Moses put a veil on the face of him- 
TOU," πρὸς τὸ μὴ ἀτενίσαι τοὺς υἱοὺς ᾿Ισραὴλ εἰς τὸ τέλος 
self, for Snot *to 7look *intently *the 7sons “of*Israel to the end 
~ , A, q ? 1] ? , 4 ’ >? ~ 
τοῦ Karapyoupévov' 14 “ἀλλ᾽ ἐπωρώθη τὰ.νοἡματα.αὐτῶν. 
of that bee annulled. But were hardened their thoughts, 
ἄχρι. γὰρ τῆς σήμερον τὸ αὐτὸ κάλυμμα ἐπὶ Τῇ ἀναγνώσει 
for unto the present the same veil αὖ the reading 


τῆς παλαιᾶς διαθήκης μένει, μὴ ἀνακαλυπτόμενον, 86 τι" 
of the old covenant remains, not unveiled, which 


ἐν χριστῷ καταργεῖται: 15 ἀλλ᾽ ἕως σήμερον, ἡνίκα ‘ava- 
in Christ is being annulled. But unto this ay, when is 
γινώσκεται! οΜ ωσῆς," κάλυμμα ἐπὶ τὴν. καρδίαν. αὐτῶν κεῖται" 
read Moses, a vei upon their heart lies. 
16 nvika’S dv" ἐπιστρέψῃ πρὸς κύριον, περιαιρεῖται τὸ 
But when it shall have turned to {{86] Lord, is taken away the 
κάλυμμα. 17 Ὁ δὲ κύριος τὸ πνεῦμά ior’ οὗ. δὲ τὸ πνεῦμα 
veil. Now the Lord the _ Spirit is; and where the Spirit 
κυρίου, Wéxei'! ἐλευθερία. 18 ἡμεῖς.δὲ πάντες ἀνακεκα- 
of [the] Lord [is], there [is] freedom. But we all with un- 
λυημεμενιῳ αρυσώπῳ τὴν δόξαν κυρίου κατοπτριζόμενοι, 

186 glory of [the] Lord beholding as in a mirror, [10] 
τὴν αὐτὴν εἰκόνα μεταμορφούμεθα ἀπὸ δόξης εἰς δόξαν, 
the same image are being transformed from glory to glory, 
καθάπερ ἀπὸ κυρίου πνεύματος. 

evenas from([the) Lord ([the) Spirit. 


4 Διὰ τοῦτο ἔχοντες τὴν.διακονίαν. ταύτην, 
Therefore, having this service, 


καθὼς ἡἠλεή- 
according as we re- 

ovK.*éxxaxouper’'! 2 Τἀλλ᾽" ἀπειπάμεθα τὰ κρυπτὰ 
we faint not. But we renounced the hidden things 


THC αἰσχύνης, μὴ περιπατοῦντες ἐν πανουργίᾳ μηδὲ δολοῦν- 


of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor falsify- 


τες τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀλλὰ τῇ φανερώσει τῆς ἀληθείας 
ing the word of God, but by manifestation of the truth 


Z6uVioT@YTEC! ἑαυτοὺς πρὸς πᾶσαν συνείδησιν ἀνθρώπων 
commending ourselves to every conscience of men 


ἐνώπιον Tov θεοῦ. 8 EHi.dé καὶ ἔστιν κεκαλυμμένον τὸ εὐαγ- 
before God. But if also is veiled poled 


γέλιον ἡμῶν, ἐν τοῖς ἀπολλυμένοις ἐστὶν κεκαλυμμένον" 4 ἐν 
idings ‘our, in those porehing it is veiled; in 


οἷς ὁ θεὸς τοῦ.αἰῶνος. τούτου ἐτύφλωσεν τὰ νοήματα τῶν 
whom the god of this age blinded the thoughts of the 
ἀπίστων, εἰς.τὸ μὴ αὐγάσαι "αὐτοῖς" τὸν φωτισμὸν τοῦ 
unbelieving, soas not tobeam Του ἴο them the radiancy of the 


θημεν, 


ceived mene: 


473 


in this respect, by rea- 
son of the glory that 
excelleth. 11 For if 
that which is done a- 
way was _ glorious, 
much more that which 
remaincth is glorious. 
12 Seeing then that we 
have such hope, we 
use great plainness of 
hae : 13and notas 
oses, which puta vail 
over his face, that 
the children of Israel 
could not stedfastly 
look to the end of that 
which is abolished : 
14 but their minds 
were blinded: for un- 
tilthis day remaineth 
the same vail untaken 
away in the reading 
of the old testament ; 
which vail is done a- 
way in Christ. 15 But 
even unto this day, 
when Moses is read, 
the vail is upon their 
heart, 16 Nevertheless 
when it shall turn to 
the Lord,the vail shall 
be taken away. 17 Now 
the Lord is that Spirit: 
and where the Spirit of 
the Lord is, there is 
liberty. 18 But we all, 
with open face behold- 
ing as in a glass the 
glory of the Lord, are 
changed into the same 
image from glory to 
glory, even as by the 
Spirit of the Lord. 


IV. Therefore see- 
ing we have this min- 
istry, as we have re- 
ceived mercy,we faint 
not; 2 but have re- 
nounced the hidden 
things of dishonesty, 
not walking in crafti- 
ness, nor handling the 
word of God deceit- 
fully; but by mani- 
festation of the truth 
commending ourselves 
to every man’s con- 
science in the sight of 
God. 3 But if our gos- 
pel be hid, it is hid to 
them that are lost: 4 in 
whom the god of this 
world hath blinded the 
minds of them which 
believe not, lest the 
light of the glorious 
gospel of C t, who 
is the image of 
God, should shine 


° Μωῦσῆς GLTTrAW. 
t + ἡμέρας day LrTraw. * ὅτι that [it] GLrTraw. 
v δὲ av Tr; δὲ ἐ ἐὰν τοῖν Siow ἐκεῖ LTTrAW. 
LTTraw. — αὐτοῖς GLTTraw. 


D εἵνεκεν LTTrA. 


x eyx- LTTrAW. 


Ρ αὐτοῦ (read his face) LTraw. 


ᾳ ἀλλὰ Tr. 


t ay ἀναγινώσκηται may be read LTTra. 
Υ ἀλλὰ LITrA. 


® συνιστάντες 


474 


unto them, 5 For 
we preach not our- 
selves, but Christ Je- 
sus the Lord; and our- 
selves your servants 
for Jesus’ sake, 6 For 
God, who commanded 
the light to shine out 
of darkness, hath 
shined in our hearts, 
to give the light of the 
knowledge of theglory 
of God in the face of 
Jesus Christ. 7 But 
we have this treasure 
in earthen vessels, 
that the excellency of 
the power may be of 
God, and not of us. 
8 We are troubled on 


every side, yet not dis- εἰ 


tressed ; we are per- 
plexed, but not in de- 
spair; 9 persecuted, 
but not forsaken; cast 
down, but not de- 
stroyed ; 10 always 
= Ε about in ἴδ 
ody the dying o 
the Lord Jesus, that 
the life also of Je- 
sus might be made 
manifest in our body. 
11 For we which live 
are alway delivered 
unto death for Jesus’ 
sake, that the life also 
of Jesus might be 
made manifest in our 
mortal flesh. 12 So 
then death worketh in 
us, but life in you. 
13 We having thesame 
spirit of faith, accord- 
ing as it is written, I 
believed, and there- 
fore have I spoken; we 
also believe, and there- 
fore speak; 14 knowing 
that he which raised 
up the Lord Jesus 
shall raise up us algo 
by Jesus, and shall 
present us with you. 
15 For all things are 
for your sakes, that 
the abundant grace 
might through the 
iving of many 
redound to She glory 
of God. 


16 For which cause 
we faint not; but 
though our outward 


man perish, yet the 
inward man is renew- 


ed day by day. 17 For 


ς τὸν the E. 
his glory) L. 

— μὲν GLTTrAW. 
LTTraw. 


4 Ἰησοῦν χριστὸν L. 
& — Ἰησοῦ LiTra. 


1 O24 KOPINGTOYsS 8. Ly. 


εὐαγγελίου “τῆς" δόξης τοῦ χριστοῦ, ὅς ἐστιν εἰκὼν τοῦ 
gladtidings of the glory of the Christ, who is bye image 
θεοῦ. 5 οὐ.γὰρ ἑαυτοὺς κηρύσσομεν, ἀλλὰ «χριστὸν “In- 
of God. For not ourselves do we proclaim, but Christ Je 
σοῦν" κύριον ἑαυτοὺς.δὲ δούλους ὑμῶν διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦν. 
sus Lord, and ourselves yourbondmen for the sake of Jesus. 

6 ore ὁ θεὸς ὁ εἰπὼν ἐκ σκότους φῶς Aap Wa," ὃς 


Because [itis] God who spoke outof darkness light toshine, who 


ἔλαμψεν ἐν ταῖς. καρδίαις. ἡμῶν, πρὸς φωτισμὸν τῆς γνώ- 
shone in our hearts, for ie radiancy of the know- 


σεως τῆς δόξης * προσώπῳ & Incov' SS 


τοῦ θεοῦ" ἐν 
ledge ofthe glory of God in [the] face of Jesus 


7 ἜἜχομεν.δὲ τὸν.θησαυρὸν.τοῦτον ἐν ὀστρακίνοις σκεύεσιν, 
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, 


ἵνα ἡ ὑπερβολὴ τῆς δυνάμεως yi τοῦ θεοῦ, Kai μὴ ἐξ 
that the surpassingness of the power may be of God, and not from 
ε aes ? ‘ , ? ? > , + 
ἡμῶν" ὃ ev παντὶ θλιβόμενοι, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ στενοχωρούμενοι 
us: in every tway] oppressed, but not straitened ; 
ἀπορούμενοι, ἄλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐξαπορούμενοι" 9 διωκόμενοι, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ 
perplexed, but not utterly ata loss; Pennie but not 


ἐγκαταλειπόμενοι᾽ καταβαλλόμενοι, τ οὐκ ἀπολλύμενοι" 
oes cast down, not eee 


10 πάντοτε τὴν νέκρωσιν τοῦ ae Ἰησοῦ ἐν τῷ σώματι 
sani the dying ofthe Lord Jesus in the — 


περιφέροντες, ἵνα Kai ἡ ζωὴ τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ ἐν itp roe ἡμῶν 
bearing about, that also the life of Jesus in 7body tour 


φανερωθῇ. 11 ἀεὶ. γὰρ ἡμεῖς ot ζῶντες εἰς θάνατον παρα- 
may be manifested ; for always we who live to death are de=- 


διδόμεθα διὰ Ἰησοῦν, ἵνα καὶ ἡ ζωὴ τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ φανε- 
livered onaccountof Jesus, that also the life of Jesus may be 


ρωθῇ ἐν τῇ θνητῇ σαρκὶ ἡμῶν. 12 ὍὭστε ὁ Ἐμὲν" θάνατος 
manifested in 2mortal flesh es so that death 


ἐν ἡμῖν ἐνεργεῖται, ἡ.δὲ ζωὴ ἐν ὑμῖν᾽ 18 ἔχοντες.δὲ τὸ αὐτὸ 
in us works, and life in you: And haying the same 


πνεῦμα τῆς πίστεως, κατὰ τὸ γεγραμμένον, ᾿Ἐπίστευσα, 
spirit of faith, oe to what has been written, I believed, 


διὸ ᾿ἐλάλησα, καὶ ἡμεῖς πιστεύομεν, διὸ Kai λαλοῦμεν" 
therefore Ispoke; 7also ‘we BERENS: therefore also wespeak; 


14 εἰδότες ὅτι ὁ ἐγείρας τὸν κύριον" ᾿Ιησοῦν, Kai ἡμᾶς 
knowing that he whoraisedup the ord Jesus, also. Us 


Ὡδιὰ Ἰησοῦ ἐγερεῖ, Kai παραστήσει σὺν ὑμῖν. 15 τὰ 
through Jesus willraise up, and will present with you. 


yap πάντα ov ὑμᾶς, iva ἡ χάρις πλεονάσασα 
For 41] things [are] for the sake of you, that the grace, abounding 


διὰ τῶν πλειόνων THY εὐχαριστίαν περισσεύσῃ εἰς THY 


through the most, *thanksgiving *may *cause toexceed to the 
δόξαν τοῦ θεοῦ. 
glory of God. 
16 Διὸ οὐκ. ἐκκακοῦμεν"" ἀλλ᾽ εἰ καὶ ὁ ἔξω ἡμῶν ἄν- 
Wherefore we faint not; but if indeed outward 
θρωπος διαφθείρεται, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ Ῥἔέσωθεν" ἀνακαινοῦται 
man is being brought to decay, yet the inward is being renewed 


© λάμψει shall shine Lrtra. 
h — κυρίου GLTTraw. 
τὸ [κύριον] TrA. 


; {αὐτοῦ (read 
i τοῖς σώμασιν bodies τ. 


14 καὶ also 1. τ σὺν with LTTrAW. © ἐγκ- 
ey 


Ρ ἔσω ἡμῶν (read our inward [man]) LTTr ; ἔσω[θεν] ἡμῶν A. 


ΤΥΎΞΥ- II CORINTHIANS. 


ἡμέρᾳ.καὶ ἡμέρᾳ. 17 ro-yap παραυτίκα ἐλαφρὸν τῆς θλίψεως 
day by day. Forthe momentary lightness of tribulation 
ἡμῶν καθ᾽ ὑπερβολὴν εἰς. ὑπερβολὴν αἰώνιον βάρος δόξης 


tour *excessively *surpassing San eternal weight of glory 
κατεργάζεται ἡμῖν, 18 μὴ σκοπούντων ἡμῶν τὰ ββλεπό- 
works out for us ; “not considering we the things seen, 
? ᾿ Sy ᾿ , - 5) 3 , 
μενα, ἀλλὰ τὰ μὴ βλεπόμενα: τὰ.γὰρ βλεπόμενα 
but the things not seen ; for the things seen {are} 
πρόσκαιρα. τὰ. δὲ μὴ βλεπόμενα αἰώνια. § οἴδαμεν.γὰρ 
temporary, but the things not seen eternal. For we know 


ὅτι ἐὰν ἡ ἐπίγειος ἡμῶν οἰκία τοῦ σκήνους καταλυθῇ. οἰκο- 
that if Zearthly our house of the tabernacle be destroyed, a bnild- 
δομὴν ἐκ θεοῦ ἔχομεν, οἰκίαν ἀχειροποίητον, αἰώνιον ἐν τοῖς 
ing from God wehave, ahouse not made with hands, eternal in the 
οὐρανοῖς. 2 καὶ.γὰρ ἐν τούτῳ στενάζομεν, τὸ. οἰκητήριον. ἡμῶν 
heavens. For indeed in i we groan, our dwelling 
TO ἐξ οὐρανοῦ ἐπενδύσασθαι ἐπιποθοῦντες" 3 “εἴγε" 
which [15] from heaven to *be *clothed *with longing ; if indeed 
καὶ ἐνδυσάμενοι, οὐ γυμνοὶ εὑρεθησόμεθα. 4 Kai-yap οἱ 
also beingclothed, - not naked we shall be found. For indeed *who 
ὄντες ἐν τῷ σκήνει στενάζομεν Baoobpevor τἐπειδὴ οὐ 
Sare ‘in ‘the *tabernacle ‘we groan being burdened ; since “*not 
θέλομεν ἐκδύσασθαι, "ἀλλ᾽" ἐπενδύσασθαι, ἵνα καταποθῇ 
twe7do wishtobeunclothed, but to be clothed upon, that may be swallowed up 
τὸ θνητὸν ὑπὸ τῆς ζωῆς. 5 6.6& κατεργασάμενος ἡμᾶς εἰς 
the mortal by life. | Now he who wrought out us for 
αὐτὸ.τοῦτο θεός. ὁ ‘kai" δοὺς ἡμῖν τὸν ἀῤῥαβῶνα" τοῦ 
this same thing [is] God, who also gave tous _ the earnest of the 
πνεύματος. 6 θαῤῥοῦντες οὖν πάντοτε, καὶ εἰδότες ὅτι 
Spirit. Being “confident *therefore ‘always, and knowing that 
ἐνδημοῦντες ἐν TH σώματι ἐκδημοῦμεν ἀπὸ τοῦ κυρίου" 
being αὖ home in the body wearefrom home awayfrom the Lord, 
7 διὰ.πίστεως. γὰρ περιπατοῦμεν, ov διὰ εἴδους" 8 θαῤῥοῦμεν δέ, 
(for by faith we walk, not by sight;) weareconfident, 
Kai εὐδοκοῦμεν μᾶλλον ἐκδημῆσαι ἐκ τοῦ σώματος Kai 
and are pleased rather to befrom home out of the body and 
ἐνδημῆσαι πρὸς τὸν κύριον. 9 Aw καὶ φιλοτιμούμεθα, 
tobe athome with the Lord. Wherefore also we are ambitious, 
εἴτε ἐνδημοῦντες εἴτε ἐκδημοῦντες, εὐάρεστοι αὐτῷ εἶναι. 
whether being αὖ ποθ ΟΥ̓ being from home, well-pleasing tohim to be. 


10 rove-yap.ravrac ἡμᾶς φανερωθῆναι δεῖ ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ 


For all ‘we ‘be manifested *must before the 
βήματος τοῦ χριστοῦ, ἵνα κομίσηται ἕκαστος τὰ 
judgment seat of the Christ, that *may ‘receive ‘each the things [done] 


διὰ τοῦ σώματος, πρὸς ἃ ἔπραξεν, εἴτε ἀγαθὸν εἴτε 
in the body, according to what he did, whether good or 
ὑκακόν." 11 Εἰδότες οὖν τὸν φόβον τοῦ κυρίου, ἀνθρώπους 
evil. Knowing thereforethe terror ofthe Lord, smen 
πείθομεν, θεῷ. δὲ πεφανερώμεθα: ἐλπίζω.δὲ καὶ ἐν ταῖς 
‘we *persuade, but to God we have been manifested, andIhope also in 
συνειδήσεσιν. ὑμῶν πεφανερῶσθαι. 12 οὐ.“ γὰρ" πάλιν ἑαυτοὺς 
your consciences to have been manifested. For not again ourselves 
συνιστάνομεν ὑμῖν, ἀλλὰ ἀφορμὴν διδόντες ὑμῖν καυχήματος 
do wecommend toyou, but occasion aregiving toyou of boasting 


478 
our light affliction, 
which is but for a 
moment, worketh for 
us a far more exceed- 
ing and eternal weight 
of glory; 18 while we 
look not at the things 
which are seen, but at 
the things which are 
not seen: for the things 
which are seen are 
temporal; but the 
things which are not 
seen are eternal. 
V. For we know that 
if our earthly house 
of this tabernacle 
were dissolved, we 
have a building of 
God, an house not 
made with hands, e- 
ternal in the heavens. 
2 For in this we groan, 
earnestly desiring to 
be clothed upon with 
our house which is 
from heaven: 3 if so 
be that being clothed 
we shall not be found 
naked. 4 For we that 
are in this tabernacle 
do groan, being bur- 
dened : not for that we 
would be unclothed, 
but clothed upon, that 
mortality might be 
swallowed up of life. 
5 Now he that hath 
wrought us for the 
selfsame thing «@# 
God, who also hath 
given unto us_ the 
earnest of the Spirit. 
6 Therefore we are al- 
ways confident, know- 
ing that, whilst we 
are at home in the bo- 
dy, we areabsentfrom 
the Lord: 7 (for we 
walk by faith, not by 
sight :) 8 we are con- 
fident, Jsay, and will- 
ing rather to be absent 
from the body, and to 
be present with the 
Lord. 9 Wherefore we 
labour, that, whether 
present or absent, we 
may be accepted of 
him. 10 For we must 
all appear before the 
judgment seat of 
Christ; that every 
one may receive the 
things in his bo- 
dy, according to that 
he hath done, whether 
itt be good or bad 
11 Knowing therefore 
the terror of the Lord, 
we persuade men; but 
we are made manifest 
unto God ; and I trust 
also are made mani- 


fest im your con- 
sciences. 12 For wa 
commend not our- 


selyes again unto you, 


τ ἐφ᾽ ᾧ for that EGLITrAW. 5 ἀλλὰ Tr. 


4 εἴ περ ται. 
π φαῦλον Tir. x — yap for LTTraw. 


’ ἀραβῶνα τ. 


τ--- καὶ LTTrAW. 


470 


but give you occasion 
to glory on our be- 
half, that ye may have 
somewhat to answer 
them which glory in 
appearance, and not in 
heart. 13 For whe- 
ther we be beside our- 
selves, it 1s to God: 
or whether we be so- 
ber, tii wis for your 
cause. 14 For the love 
of Christ constraineth 
us; because we thus 
jud -, that if one died 
for all, then were all 
dead : 15 and that he 
died for all, that they 
which live should 
not henceforth live 
unto themselves, but 
unto him which died 
for them, and rose a- 
gain. 16 Wherefore 
henceforth know we 
no man after the flesh: 
798, though we have 

own Christ after 
the flesh, yet now 
henceforth know we 
him no more. 17 There- 
fore if any man be in 
Christ, hezs a new crea- 
ture: old ἘΡΣΩΒΕ ope 
passed away; behold, 
all things are become 
new. 18 Andallthings 
are of God, who hath 
reconciled us to him- 
self by Jesus Christ, 
and hath given to us 
the ministry of recon- 
ciliation; 19 to wit, 
that God was in 
Christ, reconciling the 
world unto himself, 
not imputing their 
trespasses unto them ; 
and hath committed 
unto us the word of 
reconciliation. 20 Now 
then we are ambassa- 
dors for Christ, as 
though God did beseech 
you by us: we pray you 
in Christ’s stead, be 
ye reconciled to God. 
21 For he hath made 
him to be sin for us, 
who knew no sin; that 
we might be made the 
righteousness of God 
in him, 

VI. We then, as 
workers together with 
him, beseech you also 
that ye receive not the 
grace of God in vain. 
2 (For he saith, I have 
heard thee in a time 
accepted, and in the 
day of salvation have 
I succoured thee: be- 
hold, now δ the ac- 
cepted time; behold, 
now is the day of sal- 
vation.) 3 Giving no 
offence in anything, 
that the ministry be 


ΠΡΙΟΥΣ Se Ke OPP MSN Θ᾽ ΕΟ es eB. 
ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν, ἵνα ἔχητε πρὸς τοὺς ἐν προσώπῳ 
in behalf of us, that ye may have [such] towards those 7in appearance 
καυχωμένους καὶ You' καρδίᾳ. 18 εἴτε.γὰρ ἐξέστημεν, 
*boasting and not in heart. For whether we were beside ourselves, 
Oem εἴτε σωφρονοῦμεν, ὑμῖν. 14 ἡ.γὰρ ἀγάπη 
{it was]}toGod; or are sober-minded [it is] for you. For the love 
τοῦ χριστοῦ συνέχει ἡμᾶς, κρίναντας τοῦτο, ὅτι “el εἷς ὑπὲρ 
of the Christ constrains us, havingjudged this, that if one *for 
πάντων ἀπέθανεν, dpa ot πάντες ἀπέθανον' 15 Kai ὑπὲρ 


Υ͂, VI. 


3411 died, then all died ; and for 
πάντων ἀπέθανεν, iva ot ζῶντες μηκέτι ἑαυτοῖς ζῶ- 
all he died, that they who live no longer to themselves should 


σιν, ἀλλὰ τῷ ὕὑὕὑπὲρ αὐτῶν ἀποθανόντι καὶ ἐγερθέντι. 
live, but ἴο Εΐτῃη who for them died and was raised again, 
16 ὥστε ἡμεῖς ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν οὐδένα οἴδαμεν κατὰ σάρκα" 


So that we from now noone know according to flesh; 
εἰ "δὲ" καὶ ἐγνώκαμεν κατὰ σάρκα χριστόν, ἀλλὰ νῦν 
butif even we have known according to flesh Christ, yet now 
οὐκέτι γινώσκομεν. 17 ὥστε εἴ τις ἐν χριστῷ, 


no longer we know, [him]. 


καινὴ κτίσις" 
anew creation: 


Sothat if anyone[be}in Christ [there is] 
τὰ ἀρχαῖα παρῆλθεν, ἰδοὺ γέγονεν καινὰ 
the old things passed away; lo, havebecome new 

bra.mayra." 18 τὰ δὲ πάντα ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ, τοῦ καταλλάξαν- 


all things : and all things [are] of God, who reconciled 
roc ἡμᾶς ἑαυτῷ διὰ “Ἰησοῦ! χριστοῦ, καὶ δόντος ἡμῖν τὴν 
us tohimself by Jesus Christ, and gave tous the 


διακονίαν τῆς καταλλαγῆς" 19 we ὅτι θεὸς ἦν ἐν χριστῷ 


service of reconciliation : how that God was in Christ [the] 
κόσμον καταλλάσσων ἑαυτῷ, μὴ λογιζόμενος αὐτοῖς τὰ 
world reconciling to himself, not reckoning to them 


παραπτώματα αὐτῶν, καὶ θέμενος ἔν ἡμῖν τὸν λόγον τῆς 
their offences, and having put in us the word 
καταλλαγῆς. 20 ὑπὲρ χριστοῦ οὖν πρεσβεύομεν, we 
of reconciliation. For Christ therefore we are ambassadors, as it were 
τοῦ θεοῦ παρακαλοῦντος dt ἡμῶν" δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ χριστοῦ, 
God exhorting by us, we beseech for Christ, 
καταλλάγητε τῷ θεῷ: 21 rov4yap' μὴ.γνόντα ἁμαοτίαν 


Be reconciled to God. For him who knew not sin 
ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν ἁμαρτίαν ἐποίησεν, ἵνα ἡμεῖς “γινώμεθα" δι- 
*for 8 Sgin the 7made, that we might become right- 


καιοσύνη θεοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ. 
eousness of God in him. 
6 ΤΉ Te ἀπ 0 καὶ 


παρακαλοῦμεν μὴ εἰς κενὸν τὴν 
But working together 7also 


we exhort “not *in ‘vain ‘the 
χάριν τοῦ θεοῦ δέξασθαι ὑμᾶς" 2 λέγει.γάρ, Καιρῷ δεκτῷ 
®grace Tof "God ὅἴο ‘°receive ‘you: (for he says, Ina time accepted 
ἐπήκουσά σου, καὶ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ σωτηρίας ἐβοήθησά cov ἰδοὺ νῦν 
1 Ἰἰβδίεπδᾷ to thee, and in aday ofsalvation JIhelped thee: lo, now 
καιρὸς εὐπρόσδεκτος, ἰδοὺ νῦν ἡμέρα σωτηρίας" ὃ μηδεμίαν 
{the]time  well-accepted; behold, now [the]day of salvation :) not one 
ἐν μηδενὶ διδόντες προσκοπήν, iva sar eg ἡ διακονία" 
3in ‘anything “giving offence, that benot blamed the _ service; 
(lit. nothing) j 
‘ ~ La AJ c ~ 
4 ἀλλ᾽ ἐν παντὶ ἱσυνιστῶντες" ἑαυτοὺς ὡς θεοῦ διάκονοι, 
but in everything commending ourselves as God’s servants, 


Υ μὴ ἐν LITr. 
LTTrAW. 


* — εἰ LTTrAW. 
4 — yap for LTTrAW. 


irae δὲ but LrTra. 
6 γενώμεθα LTTrAW. 


b— τὰ πάντα ᾿τττλ. 5“ -- Ἰησοῦ 
f συνιστάντες LTTrAW. 


iver. PY * CO RAEN Τ ἘΠΕ ΑΝ: 


ἐν ὑπομονῇ πολλῷ, ἐν θλίψεσιν, ἔν ἀνάγκαις, ἐν στενο- 
in endurance ‘much, in ing er in necessities, in straits, 


χωρίαις, 5 ἔν πληγαῖς, ἐν φυλακαῖς, ἐν ἀκαταστασίαις, ἐν 


in stripes, in fupeonwents, i in commotions, in 
κόποις, ἐν ἀγρυπνίαις, ἐν νηστείαις, 6 ἐν ἁγνότητι, ἐν γνώσει, 
labours, in matchings; in fastings, in BEES pee ete, 


ἐν μακροθυμίᾳ, ἐν χρηστότητι, ἐν πνεύματι ἁγίῳ, ἐν ἀγάπῃ 
Κιηᾶῃι 


in iene aUeEINE, in 688, in [the] pues *Holy, in love 
ἀνυποκρίτῳ, 7 ἐν λόγῳ ἀληθείας, ἐν δυνάμει θεοῦ, 
unfeigned, in [the] word of truth, in [the] power of God; 


διὰ τῶν ὕπλων τῆς δικαιοσύνης τῶν δεξιῶν Kai ἀριστερῶν, 
through the arms of righteousness on the right hand and left, 
8 διὰ δόξης καὶ ἀτιμίας, διὰ δυσφημίας καὶ εὐφημίας" we 
through glory and cishonoue, ἙΒΕΟΒΕῚΣ ot report and good report: as 
πλάνοι, Kai ἀληθεῖς" 9 ὡς ἀγνοούμενοι, καὶ ἐπιγινωσκόμενοι" 


as and true; as being own, and well-known ; 
ὡς ἀποθνήσκοντες, καὶ ἰδοὺ ζῶμεν we παιδευόμενοι, καὶ 
as dying, and lo welive; as Gs and 
μὴ θανατούμενοι: 10 ὡς λυπούμενοι, ἀεὶ. δὲ χαίροντες" we 
not putto death; as sorrowful, butalways rejoicing; as 
πτωχοί, πολλοὺς.δὲ πλουτίζοντες ὡς μηδὲν ἔχοντες, Kai 
ῬΟΟΥ͂, but many enriching ; as nothing having, and 
πάντα κατέχοντες. 
allthings possessing. 

11 Τὸ. στόμα.-ἡμῶν ἀνέῳγεν πρὸς ὑμᾶς, Κορίνθιοι, ἡ 


Our mouth to 


καρδία.ἡμῶν memdarvyrac’ 
our heart has been expanded. 


στενοχωρεῖσθε.δὲ ἐν τοῖς. σπλάγχνοις ὑμῶν. 18 τὴν.δὲ αὐτὴν 
but ye 819 βίταϊϊΐθῃϑθᾶ in your bowels ; but the same 


ἀντιμισθίαν. ὡς τέκνοις λέγω, πλατύνθητε Kai ὑμεῖς. 
[as] recompense, (as tochildren Ispeak,) beexpanded also ye. 


14 Μὴ. ee ἑτεροζυγοῦντες ἀπίστοις τίς. γὰρ με- 
diversely yored with unbelievers; for what  par- 


TOX?) ἀδρζω ξύνν καὶ ἀνομίᾳ; ὃτίς.δὲ" κοινωνία φωτὶ 
ei Bo righteousness and lawlessness? and what eolomane ight 


πρὸς σκότος; 165 τίς. δὲ συμφώνησις ᾿χριστῷ! ™poc kBeXiao'; 
Christ Beliar, 


has been opened you, Corinthians, 


12 ov.crevoxwpsicbe ἐν ἡμῖν, 
Ye are not straitened in us, 


with darkness ἢ and what concord 


ἢ τίς pepi¢ πιστῷ μετὰ ἀπίστου; 16 τίς δὲ lovykara- 
or what part toabeliever with an unbeliever? and what agree- 
θεσις) ναῷ θεοῦ μετὰ εἰδώλων ; ™opeic' γὰρ ναὸς θεοῦ 
ment atemple οὗ God with idols? Oe for atemple of *God 
πξστεὶ ζῶντος, καθὼς εἶπεν ὁ θεός, Ὅτι ἐνοικήσω 
‘are [the] “living, according as “said 1God, 
αὐτοῖς, καὶ σἐμπεριπατήσω"" καὶ ἔσο τ: αὐτῶν θεός, καὶ 
them, and walk among [them]; and Iw their God, and 
αὐτοὶ ἔσονταί Ῥμοι λαός. 17 διὸ WEEAOETE" ἐκ μέσου 
ney shallbe tome apeople. Wherefore comeout from the midst 


ἐν 
I will dwell among 


αὐτῶν καὶ ἀφορίσθητε, λέγει κύριος, Kai ἀκαθάρτου 
efthem and _ beseparated, says [the] Lord, and [the] unclean 
μὴ. ἅπτεσθε. κἀγὼ εἰσδέξομαι ὑμᾶς, 18 καὶ ἔ gone ὑμῖν εἰς 
touch not, andI_ will receive you; and I willbe toyou for 
πατέρα, καὶ ὑμεῖς ἔσεσθέ por εἰς υἱοὺς καὶ θυγατέρας, λέγει 
afather, and ye shallbe tome for sons and daughters, says 


h ἢ τίς or What Se 


"ἢ 7 χριστοῦ of Curist LTTrA. 
τ ἡμεῖς We LTTr. 


2 ἐσμὲν LTTr, ° ἐν- τὶ, P pov of me LTTr. 


« BeAcaA Belial Ex. 
9 ἐξέλθατε LITrA. 


477 


not blamed: 4 but in 
all things approving 
ourselves as the minis- 
ters of God, in much 
patience, in afflictions, 
in necessities, in dis- 
tresses, 5 in stripes, in 
imprisonments, in iu- 
mults, in labours, in 
watchings, in fast- 
ings; 6 by pureness, 
by knowledge, by long- 
suffering, by kindness, 
by the Holy Ghost, by 
love unfeigned, 7 by 
the word of truth, by 
the power of God, by 
the armour of right- 
eousness on the right 
hand and on the left, 
8 by honour and dis- 
honour, by evil report 
and good report: as 
deceivers, and yet 
true; 9 as unknown, 
and yet well known; 
as dying, and, behold, 
we live; as chastened, 
and not killed; 10as 
sorrowful, yet alway 
rejoicing ; as poor, yet 
making many rich ; as 
having nothing, and 
yet possessing all 
things. 

11 O ye Corinthians, 
our mouth is open unto 
ἦρι our heart is en- 

arged. 12 Ye are not 

straitened in us, but 
ye are straitened in 
your own bowels. 
13 Now for a recom- 
pence in the same, (1 
speak as unto my chil- 
dren,) be ye also en- 
larged. 

14 Be ye not un- 
equally yoked toge- 
ther with unbelievers : 
for what fellowship 
hath righteousness 
with unrighteousness 7 
and what communion 
hath light with dark- 
ness? 15 and what 
concord hath Christ 
with Belial? or what 

art hath he that be- 
ieveth with an infi- 
del? 16 and what a- 
greement hath the 
temple of God with 
idols? for ye are the 
temple of the living 
God; as God hath 
said, I will dwell in 
them, and walk in 
them; and I will be 
their God, and they 
shall be my people. 
17 Wherefore come out 
from among them, and 
be ye separate, saith 
the Lord, and touch 
not the unclean thing ; 
and I will receive 
you, 18 and willbe a 


! συν- Τὶ, 


478 


Father unto you, and 
ye shall be my sons 
and daughters, saith 
the Lord Almighty. 
ὙΠ. Having therefore 
these promises, dearly 
beloved, let us cleanse 
ourselves from all fil- 
thiness of the flesh 
and spirit, perfecting 
holiness in the fear of 
God. 


2 Receive us; we 
have wronged noman, 
we have corrupted no 
man, we have defraud- 
ednoman. 3Ispeaknot 
this to condemn you: 
for I have said before, 
that ye are in our 
hearts to die and live 
with you, 4 Great is 
my boldness of speech 
toward you, great 7s 
my glorying of you: I 
am filled with com- 
fort, I am exceeding 
joyful in all our tri- 
bulation. 5For, when 
we were come into Mas 
cedonia, our flesh had 
no rest, but we were 
troubled on _ every 
side; without were 
fightings, within were 
fears. 6 Nevertheless 
God, that comforteth 
those that are cast 
down, comforted us 
by the coming of Ti- 
tus ; 7 and not by his 
coming only, but by 
the consolation where- 
with he was comfort- 
ed in you, when he 
told us your earnest 
desire, your mourn- 
ing, yourfervent mind 
toward me; so that I 
rejoiced the more. 
8 For though I made 
you sorry with a let- 
ter, I do not repent, 
though I did repent: 
for I perceive that the 
same epistle hath made 
you sorry, though it 
were but for a season, 
9 Now I rejoice, not 
that ye were made 
sorry, but that ye sor- 
Towed to repentance: 
for ye were made sor- 
ry after a godly man- 
ner, that ye might re- 
ceive damage by us in 
nothing. 10 For godly 
sorrow worketh re- 
pentance to salvation 
not to be repented of : 
but the sorrow of the 
world worketh death. 
11 For behold this 
selfsame thing, that 
ye-sorrowed after a 
godly sort, what care- 
fulness it wrought in 
you, yea, what clear- 


ΠΡΟΣ KORE LN ΘΙ ΘΙ Ss ἢ; Vit: 
κύριος παντοκράτωρ. ἢ Ταύτας οὖν ἔχοντες τὰς 


[086] Lord Almighty. °These “therefore ‘having 
ἐπαγγελίας, ἀγαπητοί, καθαρίσωμεν ἑαυτοὺς ἀπὸ παντὸς 
promises, beloved, we shouldcleanse ourselves from every 
μολυσμοῦ σαρκὸς Kai πνεύματος, ἐπιτελοῦντες ἁγιωσύνην ἐν 
defilement offlesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in 


φόβῳ θεοῦ. 


fear of God. 
2 Χωρήσατε ἡμᾶς" οὐδένα ἠδικήσαμεν, οὐδένα ἐφθείραμεν, 


Receive us: no one did we wrong, noone. did we corrupt, 
οὐδένα ἐπλεονεκτήσαμεν. 3 τοὺ πρὸς κατάκρισιν" λέγω" 
no one did we overreach. Not for condemnation I speak, 


προείρηκα.γὰρ ὅτι ἐν ταῖς.καρδίαις ἡμῶν ἐστε εἰς TO συν- 


for I have before said that in our hearts ye are, for to die 
αποθανεῖν καὶ “συζῇν." 4 πολλή μοι παῤῥησία πρὸς 
together and to live together. Great [15] tome boldness towards 
ὑμᾶς, πολλή μοι καύχησις ὑπὲῤ ὑμῶν. πεπλήρωμαι 


great tome boasting I have been filled 


ὑπερπερισσεύομαι τῇ χαρᾷ ἐπὶ πάσῃ TY 


you, in respect of you; 


τῇ παρακλήσει. 


with encouragement ; I overabound with joy at all 
θλίψει ἡμῶν. 5 Καὶ. γὰρ ἐλθόντων ἡμῶν εἰς Μακεδονίαν, 
our tribulation. For indeed, *having “come ‘we into Macedonia, 


ἠδ , t” ΤΠ] » ς \ ¢ € ~ iD’ ? ‘ 
ου ἐεμιᾶν ἐἑσχῆκεν AVEOLY ἡ-σαρξ-ημων,. a ἐν TWAVTL 


*not any Shad Sease ‘our *flesh, but ἱπ every [way] 
θλιβόμενοι: ἔξωθεν μάχαι, ἔσωθεν φόβοι. 6 ἀλλ’ ὁ 
being oppressed ; without contentions, within fears. But he who 


παρακαλῶν τοὺς ταπεινοὺς παρεκάλεσεν ἡμᾶς ὁ θεὸς ἐν TH 
encourages those brought low encouraged us— God— by the 


παρουσίᾳ Tirov' ἢ οὐ-μόνον.δὲ ἐν τῇ. παρουσίᾳ. αὐτοῦ, ἀλλὰ 
0 0 «μόνον. τῇ παρουσίᾳ.αὐτοῦ, a 


coming of Titus ; andnotonly by his coming, but 
καὶ ἔν τῇ παρακλήσει παρεκλήθη ἐφ᾽ ὑμῖν, 
also by the encouragement with which he wasencouraged asto you; 


ἀναγγέλλων ἡμῖν τὴν ὑμῶν.ἐπιπόθησιν, τὸν. ὑμῶν.ὀδυρμόν, 
relating to us your longing, your mourning, 
\ € ~ ~ « . ? ~ 74 ~ ~ τ 
τὸν. ὑμῶν. ζῆλον ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ, ὥστε.με μᾶλλον» χαρῆναι. δϑ' τι 


your zeal for me; soas for me the more to be rejoiced. For 
εἰ καὶ ἐλύπησα ὑμᾶς ἐν τῇ ἐπιστολῇ, οὐ.μεταμέλομαι, εἰ καὶ 
if also I grieved you in 6 epistle, Idonotregret [it], if even 


μετεμελόμην᾽ βλέπω. γὰρ" ὅτι ἡ.ἐπιστολὴ ἐκείνη εἰ καὶ πρὸς 
I did regret ; for I see that that epistle, if even for 
“ bl , € ~ ~ / ᾽ « ? ΄ ? ? 
ὥραν ἐλύπησεν ὑμᾶς. 9 νῦν χαίρω, οὐχ Ore ἐλυπήθητε, ἀλλ 
anhour, grieved you. Now Irejoice, not that ye were grieved, but 
ὅτι ἐλυπήθητε εἰς μετάνοιαν" ἐλυπήθητε.γὰρ κατὰ θεόν, 
that ye were grieved to repentance; for ye were grieved δοσογαϊηρ ο God, 
ἵνα ἐν μηδενὴ ζημιωθῆτε ἐξ ἡμῶν. 10 ἡ-.γὰρ Kara 
that in nothing ye might suffer loss by us, For the “according “to 
θεὸν λύπη μετάνοιαν εἰς σωτηρίαν ἀμεταμέλητον ἵκατερ- 


*God ‘grief repentance to salvation not to be regretted works 

yalerau'' 9.08 τοῦ κόσμου λύπη θάνατον κατεργάζεται. 

out ; but the *of*the ‘world ‘grief death works out. 

11 ἰδοὺ. γὰρ αὐτὸ τοῦτο τὸ κατὰ θεὸν λυπηθῆναι "ὑμᾶς, 
ἰδοὺ.γὰρ QUTO.TOUTO τὸ κατα θεὸν ὑπηθῆναι ἕυμας, 


For lo, this same thing, according to God 7to *have*been ®grieved *you, 


πόσην κατειργάσατο" " ὑμῖν σπουδήν, ἀλλὰ ἀπολογίαν, 
how much 7it *worked ‘out "ἴῃ ὅγοι ‘diligence, but [what] defence, 


τ πρὸς κατάκρισιν OV LTTrA. 
* ἐργάζεται WOrKS LTTraW. 


5 συνζὴν LTTrA. 
τ — ὑμᾶς LTTr[A]. 


Υ-- yap for (L]tr. 


t ἔσχεν Lir. 
z + [ἐν] L. 


Y κατηργάσατο T. 


Wily VET. If -CORANT HI ANS: 


ἀλλὰ ἀγανάκτησιν, ἀλλὰ φόβον, ἀλλὰ ἐπιπόθησιν, ἀλλὰ 
but indignation, but fear, but longing, but 
ζῆλον, "ἀλλ᾽" ἐκδίκησιν ; ἐν παντὶ συνεστήσατε ἑαυτοὺς 
zeal, but vengeance! in every [way] ye proved yourselves 
ἁγνοὺς εἶναι Yév" τῷ πράγματι. 12 ἄρα εἰ καὶ ἔγραψα ὑμῖν, 
Spure 4to7be in the matter. Then if also Iwrote to you, 
οὐχ ‘eivexev' τοῦ ἀδικήσαντος. οὐδὲ “εἵνεκεν᾽ τοῦ 
not forthesakeof him who did wrong, nor for the sake of him who 
ἀδικηθέντος" ἀλλ᾽") “εἵνεκεν! τοῦ φανερωθῆναι τὴν σπουδὴν 
suffered wrong, but for the sake of *being "manifested “diligence 
“ὑμῶν! τὴν ὑπὲρ ἰἡμῶν' πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ. 


tyour “which [415] *for *us to you before God. 
13 Ata τοῦτο παρακεκλήμεθα ἐπὶ 8 τῇ παρακλήσει 
On account of this we have been encouraged in encouragement 


ὑμῶν" περισσοτέρως. δὲ μᾶλλον ἐχάρημεν ἐπὶ τῇ χαρᾷ 
1your, and the more abundantly rather we rejoiced at the joy 
Τίτου, Ort ἀναπέπαυται τὸ.πνεῦμα.αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ πάντων 
of Titus, because has been refreshed his spirit by all 
ὑμῶν: 14 Bre εἴ τι αὐτῷ ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν κεκαύχημαι, οὐ 
of you. Because if anything to him about you I have boasted, *not 
’ὔ > ? e ’ ᾽ > , ᾿ 
KkaryoxuvOnyv' ἀλλ᾽ ὡς πάντα ἐν ἀληθείᾳ ἐλαλήσαμεν 
ἯΙ 2was put toshame; but 85 all things in truth we spoke 
ὑμῖν, οὕτως Kai ἡ καύχησις "yay! ἰὴ! ἐπὶ Τίτου 
to you, so also the boasting of us which [was] to Titus 
ἀλήθεια ἐγενήθη" 15 καὶ τὰ. σπλάγχνα.αὐτοῦ περισσοτέρως 
truth became ; and his bowels more abundantly 
εἰς ὑμᾶς ἐστιν, ἀναμιμνησκομένου τὴν πάντων ὑμῶν 
towards you are, remembering the 7ofSall ‘of Syou 


ὑπακοήν, ὡς μετὰ φόβου Kai τρόμου ἐδέξασθε αὐτόν. 
tobedience, how with fear and trembling ye received him. 
16 yaiow™ Ore ἐν παντὶ θαῤῥῶ ἐν ὑμῖν. 
Irejoice that in everything Iamconfident in you. 
8 Γνωρίζομεν.δὲ ὑμῖν, ἀδελφοί, τὴν χάριν τοῦ θεοῦ τὴν 
But we make known ἴο you, brethren, the grace of God which 
δεδομένην ἐν ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις τῆς Μακεδονίας" 2 ὅτι ἐν πολλῇ 
has been given in the assemblies of Macedonia ; thatin much 
δοκιμῇ θλίψεως ἡ περισσεία τῆς.χαρᾶς. αὐτῶν Kai ἡ κατὰ 
proof οἵ tribulation the abundance of their joy and 
βάθους πτωχεία αὐτῶν ἐπερίσσευσεν εἰς "τὸν πλοῦτον! τῆς 
3deep Spoverty their abounded to the riches 
ἁπλότητος. αὐτῶν. 3 ὅτι κατὰ δύναμιν, μαρτυρῶ, 
of their liberality. For according to [their] power, I bear witness, 
καὶ οὑπὲρ" δύναμιν αὐθαίρετοι, 4 μετὰ πολ- 
and beyond [their] power [they were] willing of themselves, with much 
Ane παρακλήσεως δεόμενοι ἡμῶν THY χάριν καὶ τὴν κοινωνίαν 
entreaty beseeching ofus, *the ®grace 7and *the °fellowship 
τῆς διακονίας τῆς εἰς τοὺς ἁγίους Ῥδέξασθαι. ἡμᾶς"" 
of the ᾿ζξογζυϊοθ ‘*which ['*was] ‘*for ‘*the saints ‘for 7us 3to *receive. 
5 καὶ ov καθὼς ἠλπίσαμεν, 1arNr’'! ἑαυτοὺς ἔδωκαν πρῶ- 
And not [only] according as we hoped, but themselves they gave first 
τον τῷ κυρίῳ, καὶ ἡμῖν διὰ θελήματος θεοῦ᾽ 6 εἰς.τὸ παρα- 
tothe Lord, and tous by [the] will of God. So that 7ex- 


479 


ing of yourselves, yea, 
what indignation, yea, 
what fear, yea, whut 
vehement desire, yea, 
what zeal, yea, what 
revenge! Inall things 
yehave approved your- 
selves to be clear in 
this matter. 12 Where- 
fore, though I wrote 
unto you,/ did it not 
for his cause that had 
done the wrong, nor 
for his cause that suf- 
fered wrong, but that 
our care for you in the 
sight of God might 
appear unto you. 
13 Therefore we were 
comforted in your 
comfort : yea, and ex- 
ceedingly the more 
joyed we for the joy of 
Titus, because his spi- 
rit was refreshed by 

ou all. 14 Forif I 

ave boasted anything 
to him of you, I am 
not ashamed; but as 
we spake all things to 
you in truth, even so 
our boasting, which ἢ 
made before Titus, is 
found a truth, 15 And 
his inward affection is 
more abundant toward 
you, whilst he remem- 
bereth the obedience 
of you all, how with 
fear and trembling ye 
received him. 161 re- 
joice therefore that I 
have confidence in you 
in all things. 


VEL Moreover, 
brethren, we do you to 
wit of the grace of 
God bestowed on the 
churches of Macedo- 
nia; 2 how that ina 
great trial of affliction 
the abundance of their 
joy and their deep po- 
verty abounded unto 
the riches of their li- 
berality. 3 For to 
their power, I bear re- 
cord, yea, and beyond 
their power they were 
willing of themselves; 
4 praying us with much 
intreaty that we would 
receive the gift, and 
take upon us the fel- 
lowship of the minis- 
tering to the saints. 
5 And this they did, 
not as we hoped, but 
first gave their own 
selves to the Lord, and 
unto us by the will of 
God. 6 Insomuch that 
we desired Titus, that 


8 ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. 
ες ἡμῶν Our EG. 
h μῶν our LTTrAW. 
τὰ + οὖν therefore E. 
GLTTraw. ᾳ ἀλλὰ TTr. 


b — ἐν (read τῷ in the) [L]TTraw. 
[ὑμῶν you EG. 
i — δὲ and Lrtraw. 


0 τὸ πλοῦτος LTTrA. ° παρὰ LTTrAW. 


3 © ἕνεκεν LTTrA. 
ἕ - δὲ and (in) commencing a sentence at ἐπὶ LTTrAW. 
K ὑμῶν of you La. 


4 ἀλλὰ Tr. 


!— ἡ τ{τιτ]. 
Ρ — δέξασθαι ἡμᾶς 


4380 

as he had begun, so he 
would also finish in 
you the same grace 
also. 7 Therefore, as 
ve abound in every 
thing, in faith, and ut- 
terance, and know- 
ledge, and in all dili- 
gence, and in your love 
to us, see that ye a- 
bound in this grace 
also. 8 Lspeak not by 
commandment, but by 
oceasion of the for- 
wardness of others, 
and to prove the sin- 
cerity of your love. 
9 For ye know the 
grace of our Lord Je- 
sus Christ,that,though 
he was rich, yet for 
your sakes he became 
poor, that ye through 
his poverty might be 
rich. 10 And hereinI 
give my advice: for 
this is expedient for 
you, who have begun 
before, not only to do. 
but also to be forward 
a year ago. 11 Now 
therefore perform the 
doing of it; that as 
there was a readiness 
to will, so there may 
be a, performance also 
out of that which ye 
have. 12 Forif there 
be first a_ willing 
mind, it is accepted ac- 
cording to that a man 
hath, and not accord- 
ing to that he hath 
not. 13 For 7 mean 
not that other men be 
eased, and ye be bur- 
dened: 14 but by an 
equality, that now at 
this time your abun- 
dance may bea supply 
for their want, that 
their abundance also 
may be a supply for 
your want: that there 
may be equality : 15 as 
it is written, He that 
had gathered much 
had nothing over ; and 
he that had gathered 
little had no lack. 


16 But thanks δὲ to 
God, which put the 
game earnest care into 
the heart of Titus for 

ou. 17 For indeed 

e accepted the exhor- 
tation; but being 
more forward, of his 
own accord he went 
unto you. 18 And we 
havesent with him the 
brother, whose praise 
ig in the — gospel 
throughout 8211 the 
churches; 19 and not 
that only, but who 
was alsochosen of the 


τ ἡμετέρας Of Our EL 
~ δόντι gave w. 


but Lrir[a]. 


WIPOEAKOPEN 8 DOYS! -B. 
καλέσαι ἡμᾶς Τίτον, wa καθὼς προενήρξατο, οὕτως καὶ 
horted ‘we Titus, that according as he before began, sO also 

ἐπιτελέσῃ εἰς ὑμᾶς καὶ τὴν. χάριν.ταύτην. 7 ᾿Αλλ᾽ ὥσπερ 
he might complete with you also this grace. But even as 


ἐν παντὶ περισσεύετε, πίστει, καὶ λόγῳ, καὶ γνώσει, καὶ 
in every [way} ye abound, in faith, and word, and knowledge, and 


, Ei i Aas i Ξ : 
πάσῃ σπουδῇ, καὶ τῇ ἐξ ὑμῶν ἐν me ἀγάπῃ, ἵνα Kai ἐν 
5 
? 


ὙΠ 


all diligence, andinthe*from *you ‘to ‘love, that also in 
ταύτῃ τῇ χάριτι περισσεύητε' Bod Kar ἐπιταγὴν λέγω, 
this grace yeshould abound. Not according to acommand do I speak, 
ἀλλὰ διὰ τῆς ἑτέρων σπουδῆς Kai τὸ τῆς ὑμετέρας" ἀγάπης 
but through the 7o0f*others ‘diligence and the 4of “your *love 
γνήσιον δοκιμάζων 9 ywwoKere-yao τὴν χάριν τοῦ κυρίου 
‘genuineness proving. For ye know the grace of *Lord 
ἡμῶν “Inoov χριστοῦ, ὅτι ov ὑμᾶς ἐπτώχευσεν 
‘our Jesus Christ, that *for ‘the °sake*of 7you *he *became !°poor 
πλούσιος ὦν, ἵνα ὑμεῖς τῇ ἐκείνου.πτωχείᾳ πλουτήσητε. 
?rich ‘being, that ye by his poverty might be enriched. 
10 καὶ γνώμην ἐν τούτῳ δίδωμι; τοῦτο.γὰρ ὑμῖν συμφέρει, 
And ἃ judgment in this I give, for this for you is profitable, 
οἵτινες οὐ μόνον τὸ ποιῆσαι, ἀλλὰ Kai τὸ θέλειν προενήρ- 


who not only the doing, but also the being willing began 
ξἕασθε ἀπὸ.πέρυσι: 11 νυνὶ δὲ καὶ τὸ ποιῆσαι ἐπιτελέσατε, 
before a year ago, But now also*the doing ‘complete; 

ὅπως καθάπερ ἡ προθυμία τοῦ θέλειν, οὕτως καὶ 
sothat evenas {there was]the readiness ofthe being willing, so also 


ἔχειν. 12 Et-yap ἡ προθυμία πρό- 
the completing out of that [ye] have. Forif the readiness is pre- 
κειται, καθὸ "ἐὰν ἔχῃ ‘rec εὐπρόσδεκτος, οὐ καθὸ 
sent, according as *may *have ‘anyone [he is] accepted, not according as 
> » 1 ᾽ \ ἄλλ a” ε - Υ Sil 
οὐκ ἔχει. 13 οὐ.γὰρ ἵνα ἄλλοις ἄνεσις, ὑμῖν." δὲ 
he has not. For (it is] not that to others[there may be] ease, but for you 
θλίψις" ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἰσότητος, ἐν τῷ νῦν καιρῷ τὸ ὑμῶν TeEpic- 
pressure, but of equality, in the present time your abun- 
σευμα εἰς τὸ ἐκείνων ὑστέρημα, 14 ἵνα καὶ τὸ ἐκείνων περίοσ- 
dance for their deficiency, that also their abun- 
σευμα “γένηται εἰς τὸ ὑμῶν ὑστέρημα: ὅπως γένηται 
dance may be for your deficiency, so that there should be 
ἰσότης 15 καθὼς γέγραπται, Ὁ τὸ πολὺ οὐκ 
equality. According as it has been written, He that [gathered] much “ποῦ 
ἐπλεόνασεν᾽ καὶ ὁ τὸ ὀλίγον οὐκ.ἠλαττόνησεν. 
had over, and he that [gathered] little did not lack. 
16 Χάρις. δὲ τῷ θεῷ, τῷ "διδόντι" τὴν αὐτὴν σπουδὴν ὑπὲρ 
But thanks to God, who gives the same diligence for 
ὑμῶν ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ Τίτου: 17 ore τὴν μὲν παράκλησιν ἐ- 
you in the heart οἵ Titus. For the ?indeed ‘exhortation he 
δέξατο, σπουδαιότερος.δὲ ὑπάρχων, αὐθαίρετος ἐξῆλθεν 
received, but more diligent being, of his own accord he went out 
πρὸς ὑμᾶς. 18 συνεπέμψαμεν.δὲ “μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ τὸν ἀδελφόν" 
to you. But we sent with him the brother 
οὗ ὁ ἔπαινος ἐν τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ διὰ πασῶν τῶν ἐκ- 
of ποτ the praise fis]in the gladtidings through all 19 as- 
KAnowwy 19 οὐ povoy.dé, ἀλλὰ Kai χειροτονηθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν 
semblies ; and not only [so], but also having beenchosen by the 


TO ἐπιτελέσαι ἐκ τοῦ 


t — τις (read ἔχῃ he may have) LTTraw. y — ée 


x τὸν ὀδελφὴν μετ΄ αὐτοῦ T. 


8 ay T. 


VALE TX. If *OORFNTHEANS. 
ἐκκλησιῶν συνέκδημος ἡμῶν Yobv" τῇ.χάριτιιταύτῃ τῇ 
assemblies [is] our fellow-traveller with this grace, which [is] 
διακονουμένῃ Up ἡμῶν πρὸς THY ZadTOU' Tov κυρίου δόξαν 
served by us to the himself 7of*the *Lord ‘glory 
προθυμίαν δὑμῶν"!ΒἘ 20 στελλόμενοι τοῦτο, μή 
eadiness tyour; avoiding this, lest 
τις ἡμᾶς μωμήσηται ἐν τῇ. ἁδρότητιιτταύτῃ τῇ διακονου- 
anyone us_ shouldblame in this abundance which [15] served 
μένῃ ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν" 21 Ῥπρονοούμενοι' καλὰ οὐ μόνον ἐνώπιον 
by us; providing things right not only before 
κυρίου, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐνώπιον ἀνθρώπων. 22 Συνεπέμψαμεν. δὲ 
(the} Lord, but also before men. And we sent with 
> ~ x ? A « - τι > , ? Ὁ 
αὐτοῖς τὸν. ἀδελφὸν. ἡμῶν ὃν ἐδοκιμάσαμεν ἐν πολλοῖς πολ- 
them our brother whom _— we proved in many things often 
λάκις σπουδαῖον ὄντα, vuvi.dé πολὺ σπουδαιότερον πεποι- 


καὶ 
and [a witness of] 


diligent tobe, andnow much more diligent by the ?con- 
θήσει πολλῷ εἰς ὑμᾶς. 925 εἴτε ὑπὲρ Τίτου, 
fidence ‘great which[is] towards you. Whether asregards Titus, 


4 2 A ‘ > € ~ , ” ? ‘ 
κοινωνὸς ἐμὸς καὶ εἰς ὑμᾶς συνεργός" εἴτε ἀδελφοὶ 


{he is] *partner 


my and for you afellow-worker; or “brethren 
ἡμῶν, ἀπόστολοι ἐκκλησιῶν, δόξα χριστοῦ. 24 Τὴν 
Your, [they are] messengers of assemblies, 7glory ‘Christ’s. The 


οὖν 


ἔνδειξιν τῆς. ἀγάπης.ὑμῶν, καὶ ἡμῶν καυχήσεως ὑπὲρ 
*therefore 


1proof of your love, and of our boasting about 
« - > > * .c2 , HT] d ΜΠ ,7 , ~ 2 ~ 
ὑμῶν, εἰς αὐτοὺς “ἐνδείξασθε" καὶ" εἰς πρόσωπον τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν. 
you, *to *them Ishew 7ye and in face of the assemblies. 
9 Περὶ μὲν. γὰρ τῆς διακονίας τῆς εἰς τοὺς ἁγίους 
For concerning the service which [is] for the saints 
περισσόν μοι ἐστὶν TO γράφειν ὑμῖν. 2 οἷδα.γὰρ τὴν προθυ- 


superfluous forme itis writing toyou. For I know *readi- 
μίαν ὑμῶν ἣν ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν καυχῶμαι Μακεδόσιν, ὅτι 
ness tyour which concerning you I boast of to Macedonians ; that 
? eo 7 ? x , A . eft £2 ll « - aN 

Αχαΐα παρεσκεύασται ἀπὸ.πέρυσι" Kai ©o! [ἐξ ὑπο ζῆλος 
Achaia has been prepared ayearago, and the 7of τ zeal 


ἠρέθισεν τοὺς πλείονας. 3 ἔπεμψα.δὲ τοὺς ἀδελφούς, ἵνα.μὴ 
provoke the greater number, But I sent the brethren, lest 
τὸ καὐχημα.ἡμῶν τὸ ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν κενωθῇ ἐν τῷ 
our boasting which [is] about you should be made void in 
μέρειιτούτῳ ἵνα καθὼς ἔλεγον, παρεσκευασμένοι ἦτε, 
this respect, that according as I said, prepared ye may be; 
4 μήπως ἐὰν ἔλθωσιν σὺν ἐμοὶ Μακεδόνες, καὶ εὕρωσιν ὑμᾶς 
lest perhaps if should come with me Macedonians, and find you 
ἀπαρασκευάστους, καταισχυνθῶμεν ἡμεῖς, ἵνα μὴ.λέγωμεν 
unprepared, 7should *be *put ®to*shame ‘we, (that we may notsay 
ὑμεῖς, ἐν τῇ. ὑποστάσει. ταύτῃ Srij¢ καυχήσεως." 5 ἀναγκαῖον 


γ9) in this confidence of boasting. Necessary 
, 
οὖν ἡγησάμην παρακαλέσαι τοὺς ἀδελφούς ἵνα προΐλ- 
therefore Lesteemed [it] to exhort the brethren that they should 


θωσιν sic! ὑμᾶς, καὶ προκαταρτίσωσιν τὴν 'προκατηγ- 
5ο Ὀθέοσ to you, and should complete beforehand 3foree 
, ΄ ~ μὰ « 
γελμένην" εὐλογίαν ὑμῶν ταύτην ἑτοίμην εἶναι οὕτως ὡς 
announced ‘blessing your this Tready ®to*be thus as 


481 
churches to _ travel 
with us with this 


grace, which is ad- 
ministered by us to 
the glory of the same 
Lord, and declaration 
of your ready mind: 
20 avoiding this, that 
no man should blame 
us in this abundance 
which is administered 
by us: 21 providing 
for honest things, not 
only in the sight of 
the Lord, but also in 
the sight of men. 
22 And we have sent 
with them our bro- 
ther, whom we have 
oftentimes proved di- 
ligent in many things, 
but now much more di- 
ligent, upon the great 
confidence which J 
have inyou. 23 Whe- 
ther any do inquire of 
Titus, he is my part- 
ner and fellowhelper 
concerning you: or 
our brethren be in- 
quired of, they are the 
messengers of the 
churches, and the glo- 
ry of Christ. 24 Where- 
fore shew ye to them, 
and before the church- 
es, the proof of your 
love, and of our boast- 
ing on your behalf. 


IX. For as touching 
the ministering to the 
saints, it is superfluous 
for me to write to 
you: 2 for I know the 
forwardness of your 
mind, for which I 
boast of you to them 
of Macedonia, that 
Achaia was ready a 
year ago; and your 
zeal hath provoked 
very many. 3 Yet 
have I sent the breth- 
ren, lest our boasting 
of you should be in 
yain in this behalf; 
that, as I said, ye 
may be ready: 4 lest 
haply if they of Ma- 
cedonia come with 
me, and find you un- 
prepared, we (that we 
say not, ye) should be 
ashamed in this same 
confident boasting. 
5 Therefore I thought 
it necessary to exhort 
the brethren, that 
they would go before 
unto you, and make 
up beforehand your 
bounty, whereof ye 
had notice before,that 
the same might be 
ready, as a matter of 


Υ ἐν in LTraw. ® — αὐτοῦ LTrAW. 
we provide LTTrA ; mpovoovpevor yap G. 
GLTTrAW. « τὸ Τττ. f — ἐξ (read ὑμῶν of you) τττ[Α]. 
& πρὸς LTrW. i προεπηγγελμένην before promised LTTraw 


8 ἡμῶν ΟἿΓ GLTTrAW. 


Ὁ προνοοῦμεν yap for 
ς ἐνδεικνύμενοι SheWwiNg LTTrA. 
8 — τῆς καυχήσεως GLITrAW. 


— και 


1k 


482 


bounty, and not as of 
covetousness. 6 But 
this 7 say, He which 
soweth sparingly shall 
reap also sparingly; 
and he which soweth 
bountifully shall reap 
also bountifully. 7 E- 
very Man according as 
he purposeth in his 
heart, so let him give ; 
not grudgingly, or of 
necessity: for God 
loveth a _ cheerful 
iver. 8 And God its 
able to make‘all grace 
abound toward you; 
that ye, always having 
all sufficiency in all 
things, may abound to 
every good work: 9 (as 
it is written, He hath 
dispersed abroad ; he 
hath given to the poor: 
his righteousness re- 
maineth for ever. 
10 Now he that mi- 
nistereth seed to the 
sower both minister 
bread for your food, 
and multiply your 
seed sown, and in- 
crease the fruits of 
your righteousness ;) 
11 being enriched in 
every thing to all 
bountifulness, which 
causeth through us 
thanksgiving to God. 
12 For the administra- 
tion of this service not 
only supplieth the 
want of the saints, but 
is abundant also by 
many thanksgivings 
unto God; 13 whiles by 
the experiment of this 
ministration they glo- 
rify God for your pro- 
fessed subjection unto 
the gospel of Christ, 
and for your libe- 
ral distribution unto 
them, and unto all 
men ; 14 and by their 
prayer for you, which 
jong after you for the 
exceeding grace of 
God in you. 15 Thanks 
be unto God for his 
unspeakable gift. 


X. Now I Paul 
myself beseech you 
by the meekness and 
gentleness of Christ, 
who in presence am 
base among you, but 
being absent am bol 
toward you: 2 but I 
beseech you, that I 
may not be bold when 
I am present with that 
confidence, wherewith 
I think to be bold,a- 
gainst some, which 


ΠΡῸΣ AK @P UNG LOY ST B: IX, X. 
εὐλογίαν, "καὶ" μὴ oreo! πλεονεξίαν. 6 Τοῦτο. δέ, ὁ 


ablessing, and ποῦ as [8] covetousness. But this [1 say], he that 


σπείρων φειδομένως, φειδομένως Kai θερίσει: Kai ὁ σπείρων 
SOWS sparingly, sparingly also shallreap; and hethat sows 
ϑι 3 ᾽ , eh) ᾽ ΄, 8 , «“ ᾿ 
ἐπ᾿ εὐλογίαις, ἐπ᾽ εὐλογίαις καὶ θερίσει. 7 ἕκαστος καθὼς 
on blessings, on blessings also shall reap: each according as 
m ~ ΤΙ ~ δί A Yas | λύ nan ὦ ? , τ « A 
προαιρεῖται" τῇ καρδίᾳ" μὴ ExAdTNC ἢ ἐξ ἀνάγκης" ἱλαρὸν 
epurposes inthe heart; ποῦ grievingly, or of necessity ; 7a *cheerful 
‘ 60 > ~ 4 θ , Ἐ ὃ a δὲ! « 6 a ~ , 
γὰρ ὀότην ἀγαπᾷ o Veo. 8 "δυνατὸς. 0 θεὸς πᾶσαν χάριν 
for giver “loves 1God. For able [is} God every’ grace 
περισσεῦσαι εἰς ὑμᾶς. ἵνα ἐν παντὶ πάντοτε πᾶσαν 
to make abound towards you, that in every (way) always all 
αὐτάρκειαν ἔχοντες, περισσεύητε εἰς πᾶν Ἔργον ἀγαθόν" 
sufficiency having, ye may abound to every ork good: 
9 καθὼς ἔγραπται, ᾿Ἑσκόρπισεν, ἔδωκεν τοῖς πένησιν" 
according as it has been written, He scattered abroad, he gave tothe ῬΟΟΣ, 
ἡ-δεκαιοσύνη.αὐτοῦ μένει εἰς. τὸν. αἰῶνα. 10 Ὁ. δὲ ἐπιχορηγῶν 
his righteousness abides for ever. Now he that supplies 
ὁσπέρμα' τῷ σπείροντι καὶ ἄρτον εἰς βρῶσιν Ῥχορηγήσαι" 
seed tohim that sows and bread for eating may he supply 
καὶ IdnOdva' τὸν. σπόρον ὑμῶν, καὶ ταὐξήσαι" τὰ "γεννή- 
and may he multiply your sowing, and may heincrease the fruits 


para" τῆς. δικαιοσύνης ὑμῶν. 11 ἐν παντὶ πλουτιζόμενοι 
of your righteousness : in every [way] being enriched 
εἰς πᾶσαν ἁπλότητα, ἥτις κατεργάζεται Oe ἡμῶν εὐχαρισ- 
ἴο all liberality, which works out through us thanks- 
τίαν ‘rq θεῷ: 12 ὅτι ἡ διακονία ric-dEroupyiac-ravTne 
giving to God. Because the service of this ministration 
οὐ μόνον ἐστὶν προσαναπληροῦσα τὰ ὑστερήματα τῶν ἁγίων, 
not only is completely filling up the deficiencies ofthe saints, 
ἀλλὰ Kai περισσεύουσα διὰ πολλῶν εὐχαριστιῶν τῷ θεῷ" 
but also abounding through many thanksgivings to God ; 
13 διὰ τῆς δοκιμῆς τῆς.διακονίας.ταύτης δοξάζοντες τὸν 
through the proof of this service [they] glorifying 
θεὸν ἐπὶ TH ὑποταγῇ τῆς. ὁμολογίας. ὑμῶν εἰς τὸ εὐαγγέλιον 
God at the subjection, by your confession, to the glad tidings 
τοῦ χριστοῦ, Kai ἁπλότητι THC κοινωνίας εἰς αὐτοὺς καὶ 
of the Christ, and liberality ofthecommunication towards them and 
εἰς πάντας, 14 καὶ αὐτῶν.δεήσει ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν, ἐπιποθούν- 
towards all; and in theirsupplication for you, a longing 
των ὑμᾶς διὰ τὴν ὑπερβάλλουσαν χάριν τοῦ θεοῦ ἐφ᾽ 
for you, on account of the surpassing grace of God upon 
« -. 15 ’ νυ δὲ! ~ (4) ~ > 7 ~ Ὁ ὃ Ul > ~ ~ 
υμιν. χαρις. € τῳ VEG ἔπι TY AVEK (NnYNT@ αὐτου δωρε ὃ 
you. Now thanks [be] toGod for “indescribable this free ie 
10 Avroc.dé ἐγὼ Παῦλος παρακαλῶ ὑμᾶς διὰ τῆς “πρᾳό- 
Now *myself *I Paul exhort you by the meek- 


ἃ τητος" καὶ ἐπιεικείας τοῦ χριστοῦ, ὃς κατὰ πρόσωπον μὲν 


ness who as to 


ταπεινὸς 
mean 

TO μὴ 

that i, 


and gentleness ofthe Christ, appearance {am] 
? « - 7 ‘ 4 )ὲ»"ν > « ~ ’ 
ἐν ὑμῖν, ἀπὼν.δὲ θαῤῥῷ εἰς ὑμᾶς" 2 δέομαι.δὲ 
among you, butabsent ambold towards you; but I beseech 
παρὼν θαῤῥῆσαι τῇ πεποιθήσει 


‘being *present Ἵ ‘should be bold with the confidence with which 


k— aT. 
For is able Urtra. 


will multiply @Lraw ; πληθύνει multipiies Tr. 
τ [τῷ] L. 


ματα QLTTrAW. 


1 ὡς GLITrAW. 


™ προήρηται he has purposed LTtraw. Ὁ duvaret δὲ 

P χορηγήσει will supply GLrTraw. 4 πληθυνεξ 

τ αὐξήσει Wiil increase GLTTrAW. 5 γενή- 
W πραὕὔτητος LTTrAW. 


© σπόρον LTr. 


vy — δὲ now LTTrA. 


xX. EET ‘COV NITE ANOS: 


λογίζομαι τολμῆσαι ἐπί τινας τοὺς λογιζομένους medic we 
I reckon to be daring towards some who reckon of as 
κατὰ σάρκα περιπατοῦντας. 8 ἐν. σαρκὶ γὰρ περιπατοῦντες, 

7according *to *flesh 1walking. For in flesh walking, 

οὐ κατὰ σάρκα στρατευόμεθα" 4 τὰ.γὰρ ὕπλα τῆς *oTpa- 

not according to flesh do we war. Forthe arms of *war- 

τείας! ἡμῶν οὐ σαρκικά, ἀλλὰ δυνατὰ τῷ θεῷ πρὸς 

fare ‘our [are] not fieshly, but powerful through God to [the] 


Kadai ee ὀχυρωμάτων" 5 λογισμοὺς καθαιροῦντες καὶ πᾶν 
overt of ΒΙΣΟΤΒΊ ΠΟΙΌΝ: ?reasonings toverthrowing and every 


iieruns ἐπαιρόμενον κατὰ τῆς γνώσεως τοῦ θεοῦ, Kai αἰχμα- 
high thing lifting itself ἘῈΡ ἘΡΕΙ͂Ν the ene of God, and leading 


λωτίζοντες πᾶν νόημα εἰς τὴν ὑπακοὴν τοῦ χριστοῦ, 6 Kai 
captive WEES thought into the obedience ofthe Christ; and 


ἐν ἑτοίμῳ ἔχοντες ἐκδικῆσαι πᾶσαν παρακοῆν, ὅταν πλη- 
3in Ξγραᾶϊηθεβ ‘having ἴο avenge all disobedience, when may have 
ρωθῇ ὑμῶν ἡ ὑπακοή. 7 Τὰ κατὰ πρόσωπον 
een fulfilled your obedience, The things according to appearance 
βλέπετε; εἴ τις πέποιθεν ἑαυτῷ χριστοῦ εἶναι, τοῦτο 
do ye look at? If anyone is persuaded in himself οὗ Christ to be, this 

λογιζέσθω πάλιν Τἀφ᾽". ἑαυτοῦ, ὅτι καθὼς αὐτὸς χριστοῦ, 
let him reckon again of himself, that according as he [is] of Christ, 


οὕτως καὶ = peic χριστοῦ." ὃ ἐάν. "τε" γὰρ cai! περισ- 
80 also [are] we of Christ. For and if even more a- 
σότερόν τι “καυχήσωμαι' περὶ τῆς ἐξουσίας ἡμῶν, ἧς 


which 


ἔδωκεν ὁ κύριος ἡμῖν" εἰς οἰκοδομὴν καὶ οὐκ εἰς καθαίρεσιν 
ϑξθαυθ ‘the *Lord tous for buildingup and not for overthrowing 


ὑμῶν, ovK.aioxvyOnoopa 9 ἵνα μὴ.δόξω we ἂν ἐκφοβεῖν 
you, Ishallnot ὈΘ puttoshame; that _Imaynotseem asif frightening 
ὑμᾶς διὰ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν. 10 bre αἱ “μὲν ἐπιστολαί, 
you by means of epistles : because the epistles, 
φησίν, ββαρεῖαι καὶ ἰσχυραί ἡ.δὲ παρουσία τοῦ σώματος 
says he, [are] Eten and strong, butthe presence ofthe body 


ἀσθενής, Kai ὁ λόγος ᾿[ἐξουθενημένος." 11 τοῦτο λογιζέσθω 
weak, and the be naught. This let *reckon 


ὁ τοιοῦτος, OTL οἷοί ἐσμεν τῷ λόγῳ Ov ἐπιστολῶν ἀπόντες, 
‘such 7a ὯΠ6, that such as we are in word by epistles being absent, 


TOLOUTOL καὶ παρόντες τῷ eye 12 Οὐ.γὰρ τολμῶμεν 
such ([weare] also being Ma in deed. For ποῦ dare ‘we 


βἐγκρῖναι"! ἢ Ἐσυγκρῖναι! ἑαυτούς τισιν τῶν ἑαυτοὺς συν- 
rank among or conan 2with ‘ourselves some who themselves com- 


ιστανόντων, ἀλλὰ αὐτοὶ ἐν ἑαυτοῖς ἑαυτοὺς μετροῦντες, Kai 


bundantly somewhat ἐς art boast concerning our suthoxity, 


mend ; but these by themselves themselves measuring, and 
ὑσυγκρίνοντες" ἑαυτοὺς ἑαυτοῖς, οὐ-ἷ'συνιοῦσιν." 18 ἡμεῖς 
comparing themselves with themselves, do not understand. *We 
δὲ Kobyi" ες τὰ ἄμετρα καυχησόμεθα, ἀλλὰ κατὰ 


‘now ποῦ to the things beyond measure will boast, but according, to 


TO μέτρον τοῦ κανόνος οὗ ἐμέρισεν ἡμῖν ὁ θεὸς μέτρου 
the measure of the rule which °divided *to7us ‘the 7God *of *measure 


ἐφικέσθαι ἄχρι καὶ ὑμῶν. 14 Ἰοὺ γὰρ ρ ὡς! μὴ ἐφικνούμενοι εἰς 
toreach 7to ‘also you. νοῦ ‘for as eu, reaching to 
x στρατιᾶς T. Υ ἐφ᾽ TTr. — χριστοῦ GLTTraW. 


LTTra. © καυχήσομαι I eee oat T. da — ἡμῖν LTTrA. 
(φασιν say they τι} LTtr. f ἐξονδενημένος L. 8 ἐν- τ΄ h oup- Τ. 
© οὐκ LTTrAW. las yap (reading the sentence as a question) L. 


— τε and [u]tr[4]. 


483 


think of us as if we 
walked according to 
the flesk. 3 For though 
we walk in the flesh, 
we do not war after 
the flesh: 4 (for the 
weapons of our war- 
fare are not carnal, 
but mighty through 
God to the pulling 
down of strong holds;) 
5 casting down i imagi- 
nations, and every 
high thing that exalt- 
eth itself against the 
knowledgeof God, and 
bringing into captivi- 
ty every thought tothe 
obedience of Christ ; 
6 and having in a 
readiness to revenge 
all disobedience, when 
your obedience is ful- 
filled. 7 Do ye look 
on things after the 
outward appearance ? 
If any man trust to 
himself that he is 
Christ’s, let him of 
himself think this a- 
gain, that, as he ὦ 
Christ’s, even so are 
we Christ’s. 8 For 
though I should boast 
somewhat more of our 
authority, which the 
Lord hath given us for 
edification, and not for 
your destruction, 1 
should not be asham- 
ed: 9 that I may not 
seem as if I would 
terrify pie by letters. 
10 For letters, say 
they, are weighty and 
powerful ; but Ais bo- 
dily presence is weak, 
and his speech con- 
temptible. 11 Let such 
an one think this, that, 
such as we are in word 
by letters when we are 
absent, such will we 
be also in deed when 
we are present. 12 For 
we dare not make our- 
selves of the number, 
or compare ourselves 
with some that com- 
mend themselves: but 
they measuring them- 
selves by themselves, 
and comparing them- 
selves among them- 
selves, are not wise. 
13 But we will not 
boast of things with- 
out our measure, but 
according to the mea- 
sure of the rule which 
God hath distributed 
to us, ἃ measure to 
reach even unto you. 
14 For we stretch not 
ourselves beyond our 
measure, as though we 


> — και 


e ἐπιστολαὶ μέν φησιν 


i συνιᾶσιν LTTrA. 


484 


reached not unto you: 
for we are come as 
far as to you also 
in preaching the gos- 
pel of Christ: 15 not 
boasting of things 
without our measure, 
that is, of other men’s 
labours; but having 
hope, when your faith 
is increased, that we 
shall be enlarged by 
you according to our 
rule abundantly, 16 to 
preach the gospel in 
the regions beyond 

‘ou, and not to boast 
in another man’s line 
of things made ready 
to our hand, 17 But 
he that glorieth, let 
him glory in the 
Lerd. 18 For not he 
that commendeth him- 
self is approved, but 
whom the Lord com- 
mendeth. 


XI, Would to God 
ye could bear with me 
a little in my folly: 
and indeed bear with 
me. 2 For I am jea- 
lous over you with 
godly jealousy: for I 
have espoused you to 
one husband, that I 
may present you as 
a chaste virgin to 
Christ. 3 But I fear, 
lest by any Means, as 
the serpent beguiled 
Eve through his sub- 
tilty, so your minds 
should be corrupted 
from the simplicity 
that is in Christ. 4 For 
if he that cometh 
preacheth another Je- 
sus, whom we have 
not preached, or Uf ye 
receive another spirit, 
which ye have not re- 
ceived, or another gos- 
pel, which ye have 
not accepted, ye 
might well bear with 
him. 5 For I suppose 
I was not a whit be- 
hind the very chiefest 
apostles. 6 But though 
Z be rude in speech, 
yet not in knowledge ; 
but we have been 
throughly made mani- 
fest among you in all 
things. 7 HaveI com- 
mitted an offence in 
abasing myself that 

e might be exalted, 

ecause 1 have preach- 
ed to you the gospel of 
God freely ? 8 Lrobbed 
other churches, taking 
wages of them, to do 
you service 9 And 


" συνιστάνων LTTrAW. 
τ τῆς E3 ἀφροσύνης ELTTrAW. 
τῆς ἁγνότητος and the purity LTraw. 
y δὲ but x. 


bear with La. 
manifest LITra. 


IL PO). KEOJPA NiO ΤΟΎΣ .8. Xe, ΧΙ 


ὑμᾶς ὑπερεκτείνομεν ἑαυτούς" ἄχρι.γὰρ Kai ὑμῶν ἐφθάσαμεν 
you do we overstretch ourselves, (forto also ‘you we came 
ἐν τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ τοῦ χριστοῦ" 1ὅ οὐκ εἰς τὰ ἄμετρα 
in the glad tidings of the Christ ;) not *to *the *things *beyond ‘measure 
καυχώμενοι ἐν ἀλλοτρίοις κόποις, ἐλπίδα.δὲ ἔχοντες, avEavo- 
‘boasting in others’ labours, but hope having, 3increas- 
μένης τῆς.πίστεως. ὑμῶν, ἐν ὑμῖν μεγαλυνθῆναι κατὰ 
ing 1your 7faith, among you to beenlarged according to 
τὸν. κανόνα ἡμῶν εἰς περισσείαν, 16 εἰς τὰ ὑπερέκεινα ὑμῶν 
our rule to abundance, to that beyond you 
᾽ , > 2 ? , , > ‘ 
εὐαγγελίσασθαι, οὐκ ἐν ἀλλοτρίῳ κανόνι εἰς τὰ 
to announce the glad tidings, not ἢ ‘another’s Srule ‘as 7to *things 


ἕτοιμα καυχήσασθαι. 17 Ὁ δὲ καυχώμενος, ἔν κυρίῳ 
®ready 1to *boast. But he that boasts, in (the] Lord 


καυχάσθω" 18 od-yap ὁ ἑαυτὸν "συνιστῶν," ἐκεῖνός ἐστιν 
let him boast, For not he that himself commends, this [one] is 
δόκιμος, “ἀλλ᾽! ὃν ὁ κύριος συνίστησιν. 
approved, but whom the Lord commends. 
11 “Ogedov PaveiyecOé' μου μικρὸν 4 "τῇ ἀφροσύνῃ 
Iwould ye were bearing with me a little in folly ; 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀνέχεσθέ μου. 2 ζηλῶ.γὰρ ὑμᾶς θεοῦ ζή- 
but indeed bear with me. ForIam jealous 848 to you “οὔ *God'with [*the) 
A" ἡρμοσάμην.γὰρ ὑμᾶς ἑνὶ ἀνδρὶ παρθένον ἁγνὴν 
sjealousy, for I have espoused you towne man *a ‘virgin ‘chaste 
παραστῆσαι τῷ χριστῷ" 8 φοβυῦμαιιδξλξτ᾽͵ἄέ μήπως ὡς ὁ 
4to7present [Syou] tothe (Christ. But I fear lest byany means as the 
ὄφις "Εὔαν ἐξηπατησεν" ἐν τῇ.πανουργίᾳ.αὐτοῦ, ᾿οὕτως" 
Ἧ 


ell 


serpent 7Eve 1deceived his craftiness, 80 
φθαρῇ τὰ υρο μετ aie) ἀπὸ τῆς ἁπλότητος" τῆς 
should ὍΘ corrupted your thoughts from simplicity which [is] 


εἰς “rov" χριστόν. 4 εἰμὲν. γὰρ ὁ ἐρχόμενος ἄλλον ‘Inoovy 
asto the Christ. For if indeed he that comes another Jesus 
κηρύσσει ὃν οὐκιἐκηρύξαμεν, ἢ πνεῦμα ἕτερον λαμβάνετε 
proclaims whom we αἸᾶ ποῦ proclaim, or a*spirit ‘different ye receive 
τι ? 5] , n ? , oe a ᾽ or 
ὃ οὐκιἐλάβετε, ἢ εὐαγγέλιον ἕτερον ὃ οὐκ.ἐδέξασθε, 
which ye did not receive, or “glad *tidings ‘different which ye did not accept, 
καλῶς τηνείχεσθε." 5 Λογίζομαι Yyaoll μηδὲν ὕὑστερη- 
well were ye bearing with [it]. ΞῚ reckon for in nothing to have been 
κέναι τῶν τὑπὲρ.λίαν! ἀποστόλων. 6 εἰ δὲ καὶ ἰδιώτης 
behind those in a surpassing degree apostles. But if even unpolished 
~ ΄ ᾽ ? ᾽ “ ΄ 4 > 2 9 \ a 
τῷ λόγῳ, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ TY γνώσει: ἀλλ᾽ ἐν παντὶ φανε- 
in speech ΓΙ am], yet ποῦ in knowledge; but in every [way] made 
ρωθέντες" ἐν πᾶσιν εἰς ὑμᾶς. 7 ἢ ἁμαρτίαν ἐποίησα, ἐμαυτὸν 


manifest in allthings to you. Or did I commit sin, myself 
ταπεινῶν iva ὑμεῖς ὑψωθῆτε, ὕτι δωρεὰν τὸ τοῦ θεοῦ 
thumbling that ye might be exalted, because gratuitously the Sof *God 


εὐαγγέλιον εὐηγγελισάμην ὑμῖν ; 8 ἄλλας ἐκκλησίας ἐσύλησα, 
1elad “tidings I announced to you? Other assemblies I despoiled, 
λαβὼν ὀψώνιον πρὸς TRY ὑμῶν διακονίαν" 9 Kai 
having received wages for towards *you ‘service. And 
παρὼν πρὸς ὑμᾶς καὶ ὑστερηθείς,ρ οὐ κατενάρκησα 
being present with you and having been deficient, I did lazily burden 


4 + τι some (little) ELTTraw. 
t— οὕτως LTTrA. Y + καὶ 

x ἀνείχεσθε GTIrW ; ἀνέχεσθε ye 
a φανερώσαντες having made [it] 


ο ἀλλὰ LTr. P ἠνείχεσθέ E. 
5 ἐξηπάτησεν Εὔαν LITraw. 
w — τὸν T. 
2 ὑπερλίαν GLTAW. 


ΧΙ. II CORINTHIANS. 

b ἠδ , “}} ‘ \ « , , Ni « ἐδ NE 
οὐδενὸς" TO-yap ὑστερημὰ μου προσανεπλήρωσαν OL AOE 
no one, (forthe deficiency of me “completely *filled *up ‘the *breth- 

goi ἐλθόντες ἀπὸ Μακεδονίας" καὶ ἐν παντὶ ἀβαρῆ 

ren whocame from  Macedonia,) and in everything not burdensome 
οὑμῖν ἐμαυτὸν" ἐτήρησα Kai τηρήσω. 10 ἔστιν ἀλήθεια 
toyou myself I kept and will keep. ‘Is [the] *truth 
χριστοῦ ἐν ἐμοὶ ὅτι ἡ καύχησις. αὕτη 4ob.cppayicerat εἰς ἐμὲ 

Sof*Christ in me that this boasting shall not be sealed up as to me 

ἐν τοῖς κλίμασιν τῆς Axatac. 11 ἐδιατί"; ὅτι odK.ayar@ 


in the regions of Achaia, Why? because I do not love 
ὑμᾶς; ὁ θεὸς οἶδεν. 12 6.68 ποιῶ, Kai ποιήσω, ἵνα ἐκ- 
you? God knows. But what Ido, also Iwilldo, that I may 


κόψω τὴν ἀφορμὴν τῶν θελόντων ἀφορμήν, ἵνα tv. Kav- 


cutoff the occasion of those wishing an occasion, that wherein they 
χῶνται εὑρεθῶσιν καθὼς Kai ἡμεῖς. 18 οἱ. γὰρ.τοιοῦτοι 
boast they may befound accordingasalso we. ‘orsuch [are] 


ψευδαπόστολοι, ἐργάται δόλιοι, μετασχηματιζόμενοι εἰς ἀπο- 
false apostles, workers ‘deceitful, transforming themselves into apo- 
στόλους χριστοῦ 14 Kai fou θαυμαστόν" abroc-yap ὁ 
stles of Christ. And not wonderful [5 10], for "himself 
σατανᾶς μετασχηματίζεται εἰς ἄγγελον φωτός" 15 οὐ 
1Satan transforms himself into an angel of light. [It is} not 
éya οὖν εἰ Kai οἱ.διάκονοι.αὐτοῦ μετασχηματίζον - 
a great thing therefore if also his servants transform themselves 
ται we διάκονοι δικαιοσύνης, ὧν τὸ τέλος ἔσται κατὰ 
as servants of righteousness; of whom the end shall be according to 
τὰ.ἔργα.αὐτῶν. 
their works. 
16 Πάλιν λέγω, μή Tic pe δόξ ἄφρονα εἶναι" εἰ δὲ 
Again [1858., Not anyone*me ᾿βῃοια *think afool tobe; butif 
μήγε, κἂν we ἄφρονα δέξασθέ pe, ἵνα ἐμικρόν τι κἀγὼ" 
otherwise, even as a fool receive me, that “little ‘some Ialso 
καυχήσωμαι. 17 ὃ λαλῶ, οὐ λαλῶ κατὰ κύριον," 
may boast. What I speak, *not “do I speak according to [the] Lord, 
ἀλλ᾽ we ἐν ἀφροσύνῃ, ἐν ταύτῃ TY ὑποστάσει τῆς καυχήσεως. 
but as in folly, in this confidence of boasting. 


18 ἐπεὶ πολλοὶ καυχῶνται 


κατὰ ἱτὴν! σάρκα, κἀγὼ Kav- 
Since many boast 


according to flesh, T also will 
χήσομαι. 19 ἡδέως. γὰρ ἀνέχεσθε THY ἀφρόνων, φρόνιμοι 
boast. For ‘gladly ‘ye *bear *with "fools “intelligent 
ὄντες" 230 ἀνέχεσθε.γὰρ εἴ τις ὑμᾶς καταδουλοῖ, εἴ TIC 
*being. For ye bear [it] if anyone “you ‘bring into bondage, if anyone 
κατεσθίει, εἴ τις λαμβάνει, εἴ τις ἐπαίρεται, 
devour (you), if anyone take {from you], if anyone exalt himself, 
εἴ τις "ὑμᾶς εἰς πρόσωπον" δέρει. 21 κατὰ ἀτιμίαν λέγω, 
if anyone “you “on “the *face beat. Asto dishonour I speak, 
we Ore ἡμεῖς ᾿ἠσθενήσαμεν"" ἐν. ᾧ.δ᾽ ἄν τις τολμᾷ, ἐν 
as that we were weak ; but wherein anyone may be daring, (in 
ἀφροσύνῃ λέγω, τολμῶ κἀγώ. 322 Ἑ βραϊῖοί εἰσιν; κἀγώ" 
olly I speak,) 7am 3daring ‘I also. Hebrews are they? I also. 
ὩΙσραηλῖταί! εἰσιν; κἀγώ" σπέρμα ᾿Αβραάμ slow; κἀγώ" 
Israelites are they ? 1 also. Seed of Abraham are they? I also. 


Ὁ οὐθενός LTTrA. © ἐμαυτὸν ὑμῖν LTTrA. 
EGLTTrAW. © διὰ τί LTrA. 
Ὁ κατὰ κύριον λαλῶ LITrAW. 
καμεν have been weak Ltr. 


f ov θαῦμα NO Wonder LTTraWw. 
i χὴν TTr. 
™ *TopanAeitat T. 


485 


when I was present 
with you, and wanted, 
I was chargeable to no 
man: for that which 
was lacking tome the 
brethren which came 
from Macedonia sup- 
plied: and in all things 
I have kept myself 
from being burden- 
some unto you, and so 

ill I keep myself. 
10 As the truth of 
Christ is in me, no 
man shall stop me of 
this boasting in the 
regions of Achaia. 
11 Wherefore ? because 
I love you not? God 
knoweth, 12 But what 
I do, that I will do, 
that I may cut off occa- 
sion from them which 
desire occasion; that 
wherein they glory, 
they may be found 
even as we. 13 For 
such are false apos- 
tles, deceitful workers, 
transforming them- 
selves into the apostles 
of Christ. 14 And no 
marvel; for Satan him- 
self is transformed 
into an angel of light. 
15 Therefore it i no 
great thing if his min- 
isters also be trans- 
formed as the minis- 
ters of righteousness ; 
whose end shall be ac- 
cording totheir works. 


161 say again, Let 
no man think mea 
fool; if otherwise, yet 
as a fool receive me, 
that I may boast my- 


self a little. 17 That 
which I speak, I speak 
it not after the Lord, 


but as it were foolish- 
ly, in this confidence of 
boasting. 18 Seeing 
that many glory after 
the flesh, I will glory 
also. 19 For ye suffer 
fools gladly, seeing ye 
yourselves are wise. 
20 For ye suffer, if a 
man bring you into 
bondage, if a man de- 
vour you, if a man 
takeof you, if a man 
exalt himself, if aman 
smite you on the face. 
21 I speak as concern- 
ing reproach,as though 
we had been weak. 
Howbeit whereinso- 
ever any is bold, (1 
speak foolishly,) I am 
boldalso, 22 Are they 
Hebrews?soamlI. Are 
they Ievaelites ? so am 
1. Are they the seed of 


4 ov φραγήσεται shall not be stopped 
: ὃ κἀγὼ μικρόν τι GLTTrAaw. 
Κ εἰς πρόσωπον ὑμᾶς LTTrAW. 


' ἠσθενή- 


480 


Abraham? so am I. 
23 Are they ministers 
of Christ? (I speak as 
a fool) I am more; 
in labours more abun- 
dant, in stripes above 
measure, in prisons 
more frequent, in 
deaths oft. 24 Of the 
Jews five times re- 
ceived I forty stripes 
save one. 25 Thrice 
was 1 beaten with 
rods,once was I stoned, 
thrice I suffered ship- 
wreck, a night and 
a day I have been 
in the deep; 26 in 
journeyings often, in 
perils of waters, in 
perils of robbers, in 
perils by mine own 
countrymen, im perils 
by the heathen, zm pe- 
rils in the city, τη pe- 
rils in the wilderness, 
mm perils in the sea, in 
perils among false 
brethren ; 27 in weari- 
ness and painfulness, 
in watchings often, in 
hunger and thirst, in 
fastings often, in cold 
and nakedness, 28 Be- 
sidethose things that 


are without, that 
which cometh upon 
me daily, the care 


of all the churches. 
29 Who is weak, and I 
am not weak? who is 
offended, and I burn 
not? 30 If I must 
needs glory, I will 
glory of the things 
which concern mine 
infirmities, 31 The God 
and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, 
which is blessed for 
evermore, knoweth 
that I lie not. 32In 
Damascus the govern- 
or under Aretas the 
king kept the city of 
the Damascenes with 
a garrison, desirous to 
apprehend me: 33 and 
through a windowina 
basket was I let down 
by the wall, and escap- 
ed his hands, 


XII. It is not expe- 
pedient for me doubt- 
less to glory. I will 
come to visions and 
revelations of the 
Lord. 21 knew aman 
in Christ above four- 
teen years ago, (whe- 
ther in the body, I can- 
not tell; or whether 
out of the body, I can- 
not tell: God know- 
eth;) such an one 


Tl BeOxSs TKSOPPATINIONICO YisS: OB: 


23 διάκονοι χριστοῦ εἰσιν; 
Servants 


XTX 
παραφρονῶν λαλῶ, "ὑπὲρ 
of Christ are they? (as being beside myself Ispeak,) above 

ἐγώ"" ἐν κόποις περισσοτέρως, “ἐν πληγαῖς ὑπερ- 
[measure] I [000]; in labours moreabundantly, in _ stripes above 
βαλλόντως, ἐν φυλακαῖς περισσοτέρως," tv θανάτοις ToA- 


measure, in imprisonments more abundantly, in deaths often, 
λάκις. 24 ὑπὸ ᾿Ιουδαίων πεντάκις Ῥτεσσαράκοντα! 
From Jews five times forty (stripes | 


παρὰ μίαν ἔλαβον. 25 τρὶς “ἐῤῥαβδίσθην." ἅπαξ ἐλιθάσθην, 


except one I received. Thrice I was beaten with rods, once _ I was stoned, 
τρὶς ἐναυάγησα, νυχθήμερον ἐν τῷ βυθῷ πεποίηκα" 
three times I was shipwrecked, a night anda dayin the deep I have passed: 
26 ὁδοιπορίαις πολλάκις: κινδύνοις ποταμῶν, κινδύνοις 
in journeyings often, in perils of rivers, in perils 
λῃστῶν, κινδύνοις ἐκ γένους, κινδύνοις ἐξ ἐθνῶν, 


in perils from {my own) race, in perils from [the] nations, 
κινδύνοις ἐν͵ πόλει, κινδύνοις ἐν ἐρημίᾳ, κινδύνοις ἐν 
in perils in {the} city, in perils in [the] desert, in perils on 
θαλάσσῃ, κινδύνοις ἐν ψευδαδέλφοις" 27 Tév" κόπῳ Kai 
sea, in perils among false brethren ; in labour and 


of robbers, 


[the] 
μόχθῳ, ἐν ἀγρυπνίαις πολλάκις, ἐν λιμῷ καὶ δίψει, ἐν νη- 
oil, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fast- 


στείαις πολλάκις, ἐν ψύχει Kai γυμνότητι. 2 χωρὶς τῶν 
ings often, in cold and nakedness. Besides the things 


, ? 
παρεκτός, "ἡ ἐπισύστασίς μου! ἡ καθ᾽ ἡμέραν, ἡ μέριμνα 
without, the crowding on me daily, the care 
πασῶν τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν. 29 τίς ἀσθενεῖ, Kai οὐκ. ἀσθενῶ ; τίς 


Who is weak, and Iam ποῦ weak? who 
πυροῦμαι; 80 εἰ καυχᾶσθαι 


concerning allthe assemblies. 


σκανδαλίζεται, Kai οὐκ ἐγὼ 
Ι 


is offended, and “not 340 burn? If ἴο *boast 
δεῖ, τὰ τῆς ἀσθενείας.μου καυχήσομαι. 81 Ὁ 
it *behoves, {in] the things concerning my infirmity I will boast. The 


θεὸς Kai πατὴρ τοῦ.κυρίου."ἡμῶν" ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ" οἶδεν, ὁ 

God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows, he who 
ὧν εὐλογητὸς εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας, ὅτι οὐ-.ψεύδομαι. 32 ἐν Aa- 
is blessed to the ages, that Ido not lie. In Da- 
pack ὁ ἐθνάρχης ᾿Αρέτα τοῦ βασιλέως ἐφρούρει τὴν 
mascus the ethnarch of Aretas the king was guarding the 


τλαμασκηνῶν πόλιν," πιάσαι pe θέλων" 33 Kai διὰ 
70f *the *Damascenes__ ‘city, Sto "take ®"me wishing. And through 
θυρίδος ἐν σαργάνῃ ἐχαλάσθην διὰ τοῦ τείχους, Kai 
a window in a basket I was let down through the wall, and 
ἐξέφυγον τὰς. χεῖρας. αὐτοῦ. 

escaped his hands. 


12 Καυχᾶσθαι δὴ οὐ-συμφέρει po ἐλεύσομαι.γὰρ" " εἰς 
Τὸ boast indeed is not profitable tome; for I will come to 
ὀπτασίας Kai ἀποκαλύψεις κυρίου 2 olda ἄνθρωπον ἐν 
visions and revelations of [the] Lord. I know aman in 
χριστῷ πρὸ. ἐτῶν δεκατεσσάρων, εἴτε ἐν σώματι ovK.olda, 
Christ “years “ago ‘fourteen, (whether in {the} body I know not, 
εἴτε ἐκτὸς "τοῦ! σώματος ovK.olda’ ὁ θεὸς οἶδεν ἁρπαγέντα 
or outof the body I know not, God knows,) ‘caught ‘away 


1 ὑπερεγώ L. 
ev φυλ. ὑπερβ. 1. 


στασίς μοι my anxiety LITraw. 
πόλιν Δαμασκηνῶν LTTrA. [ 
it behoves [me], not profitable [is it], but I will come rrr. 


ο ἐν φυλακαῖς περισσοτέρως, ἐν πληγαῖς ὑπερβαλλόντως LTrA ; ἐν πλη. περισ. 
Ρ τεσσεράκοντα LTTrA. 


4 ἐραβδίσθην LTTrA. τ -- ἐν LTTrAW. 5 ἡ ἐπί- 
t — ἡμῶν (read the Lord) Lttraw. ° — χριστοῦ LTTrA. 

x — θέλων LTTr[A]W. Υ δεῖ, ov συμφέρον μέν, ἐλεύσομαι δὲ 

7+ xatalsoL. ® — τοῦ L. 


XII. Flt CO GREEN THI ANS. 


τὸν τοιοῦτον ἕως τρίτου οὐρανοῦ. 8 Kai οἶδα τὸν τοιοῦτον 
‘such 7a %one to [the] third heaven. Ané I know snch 


ἄνθρωπον, εἴτε ty σώματι εἴτε “txroc' τοῦ σώματος “οὐκ 


aman, (whether in [the] body or outof the body Snot 
16 Ξ 1 ε θ ᾿Ὶ 16 +4 4 ou c , = ᾽ 4 , ὃ 
oloa O σεος OLOEYV OTL nOTa γῆ εις TOV παραύεισον, 
‘I Ἔπονγ, God knows:) that he was caught away to Paradise, 
καὶ ἤκουσεν ἄῤῥητα ῥήματα, ἃ οὐκ ἐξὸν ἀνθρώπῳ 


and heard unutterable sayings, which itis not permitted to man 


λαλῆσαι. 5 ὑπὲρ τοῦ.τοιούτου καυχήσομαι: ὑπὲρ.δὲ ἐμαυτοῦ 
tospeak. Concerning sucha one I will boast, butconcerning myself 
οὐ.καυχήσομαι, εἰμὴ ἐν ταῖς.ἀσθενείαις ἅμου" 6 ἐὰν.γὰρ 
I will not boast, unless in my weaknesses. For if 
, , ? » » 2 , ‘ 
θελήσω καυχήσασθαι, οὐκιἔσομαι ἄφρων ἀλήθειαν.γὰρ 
I should desire to boast, Ishall not be a fool; for truth 
ἐρῶ: φείδομαι.δέ, μή τις εἰς ἐμὲ λογίσηται ὑπὲρ ὃ 
Iwillsay; butIforbear, lest anyone asto me should reckon above what 
βλέπει με, ἢ ἀκούει “τι' ἐξ ἐμοῦ. 7 Kai τῇ ὑπερβολῇ 
hesees me, or hears anything of me. And by the surpassingness 
~ ? 7 ευ ate , ? ’ ’ὔ 
τῶν ἀποκαλύψεων iva μὴ ὑπεραίρωμαι, ἐδόθη μοι σκόλοψ, 
ofthe revelations that I might not be exalted, was given to me a thorn 
τῇ σαρκί, ἄγγελος Scaray' ἵνα pe κολαφίζῃ, iva μὴ 
for the flesh, amessenger ofSatan, that me he might buffet, that *not 
ὑπεραίρωμαι." 8.1 ὑπὲρ τούτου τρὶς τὸν κύριον παρεκάλεσα, 
11 7might be exalted. For this thrice the Lord I besought 
u > ~ ~ ‘ » ~ « 
ἵνα ἀποστῇ ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ 9 καὶ εἴρηκέν μοι, ᾿Αρκεῖ σοι ἡ 
that it might depart from me, And hesaid tome, Suffices thee 
, , = > ΄ Lad 
χάρις.μου: ἡ.γὰρ δύναμίς ἔμου" ἐν ἀσθενείᾳ ἱτελειοῦται." 


my grace ; for the power of me in weakness is perfected. 
ἥδιστα οὖν μᾶλλον καυχήσομαι ἐν ταῖς ἀσθενείαις μου" 


Most gladly therefore rather in 


ἵνα ἐπισκηνώσῃ 


will [ boast my weaknesses 
> ? ? A « , ~ ~ A 
ἐπ᾿ ἐμὲ ἡ δύναμις τοῦ χριστοῦ. 10 διὸ 
that may dwell upon me the power of the Christ. Wherefore 
εὐδοκῶ ἐν ἀσθενείαις, ἐν ὕβρεσιν, ἐν ἀνάγκαις, ἐν διωγ- 
I take pleasure in weaknesses, in insults, in necessities, in  perse- 
μοῖς, "ἐν" στενοχωρίαις, ὑπὲρ χριστοῦ" ὅταν. γὰρ ἀσθενῶ, 
cutions, in straits, for Christ : for when I may be weak, 


τότε δυνατός εἰμι. 
then powerful Iam. 


11 Γέγονα ἄφρων °Kavxywpevoc’' ὑμεῖς μὲ ἠναγκάσατε. 

I have become a fool boasting ; ye me compelled : 

? ‘ , » bens ~ ΄ ? 4 ‘ 
éyw.yao woerov ὑφ᾽ ὑμῶν συνίστασθαι" οὐδὲν. γὰρ 
forl ought by you tohave beencommended; for nothing 
ὑστέρησα τῶν ΡῬὺὑπὲρ.λίαν' ἀποστόλων, εἰ Kai οὐδέν εἰμι. 
I was behind those ἴῃ asurpassing degree apostles, if also nothing I am. 
12 Τὰ μὲν σημεῖα τοῦ ἀποστόλου “κατειργάσθη" ἐν ὑμῖν 
ΤῊΘ “indeed ‘signs of the apostle were workedout among you 
ἐν πάσῃ ὑπομονῇ; τέν᾽ σημείοις "καὶ" τέρασιν καὶ δυνάμεσιν. 


in all er “‘urance, in signs and wonders and works of power. 
18 riyap ἐστιν ὃ ἡττήθητε! ὑπὲρ τὰς λοιπὰς ἐκ- 
Forin what isit that ye ὙΧ61Θ inferior beyond the rest [of the) as- 


οὐ κατενάρκησα ὑμῶν ; χαρί- 
did not lazily burden you? For- 


κλησίας, εἰμὴ ὅτι αὐτὸς 


ἐγὼ 
semblies, unless that “myself ‘I 


© — οὐκ οἶδα L. 


b xpi: apart from LTTra. 
ἐπε 


d— μον my ᾿ττ[Α]. 


487 
caught up to the third 
heaven. 3 And I knew 


such a man, (whether 


im the body, or out of 
the body, I cannot tel1- 


God knoweth;) 4 how 
thathe was caught up 
into paradise, and 
heard unspeakable 
words, which it is not 
lawful for a man to 
utter. 5 Of such an 
one will I glory: yet 
of myself I will not 
glory, but in mine in- 
firmities. 6 For thougk 
I would desire to glo- 
ry, I shall not bea 
fool ; forI willsay the 
truth: but now I for- 
bear, lest any man 
should think of me 
above that which he 
seeth me to be, or that 
he heareth of me. 
7 And lest I should be 
exalted above mea- 
stre through the a- 
bundance of the re- 
velations, there was 
given to mea thornin 
the flesh, the messen- 
ger of Satan to buffet 
me, lest I should be 
exalted above mea-~ 
sure. 8 For this thing 
I besought the Lord 
thrice, that it might 
depart from me. 
9 And he said unto me, 
My grace is sufficient 
for thee: for my 
strength is made per- 
fect in weakness. 
Most gladly therefore 
willI rather glory in 
my infirmities, that 
the power of Christ 
may rest upon me, 
10 Therefore I take 
pleasure in infirmities, 
in reproaches, in ne- 
cessities, in persecu- 
tions, in distresses for 
Christ’s sake: for when 
I am weak, then am I 
strong. 


111 am become a 
fool in glorying 5 ye 
have compelled me: 
for I ought to have 
been commended of 
you: for in nothing 
am I behind the 
very chiefest apostles, 
though I be nothing. 
12 Truly the signs 
of an apostle were 
wrought among you 
in all patience, in 
signs, and wonders, 
and mighty deeds. 
13 Fox what is it 
wherein ye were infe- 
rior to other churches, 


€ — ru LTTr[A]. 


vo therefore LTr{[a]. 2 σατανᾶ LTTra. Ὁ — ἵνα μὴ ὑπεραίρωμαι [114]. + + [καὶ] 
and L. k — μον LITra. 1 τελεῖται LTIrA. τὸ μου} Tr. "xatandT. ° — καυχώ- 
μενος GLTTrAW. P ὑπερλίαν GLTAW. 4 κατηργάσθη T. τ--- ἐν LTTrAW. * τε καὶ 
and also Ta. τ ἠσσώθητε LITA. 


488 


except tt be that I 
myself was not bur- 
densome to you? for- 
give me this wrong. 
14 Behold, the third 
time I am ready to 
come to you; and I 
will not be burden- 
some to you: for I 
seek not yours, but 
you: for the children 
ought not to lay up 
for the parents, but 
the parents for the 
children. 15 And Iwill, 
very gladly spend and 
be spent for you; 
though the moreabun- 
dantly I love you, the 
less Ibe loved. 16 But 
be it so, I did not bur- 
den you: neverthe- 
less, being crafty, I 
caught you with guile. 
17 DidI make a gain 
of you by any of them 
whom I sent unto you? 
18 I desired Titus, and 
with him I sent a 
brother. Did Titus 
makea gain of you? 
walked we not in the 
same spirit? walked 
we not in the same 
steps ? 

19 Again, think ye 
that we excuse our- 
selves unto you? we 
speak before God in 
Christ : but we do all 
things, dearly beloved, 
for your edifying. 
20 For I fear, lest, when 
1 come,I shall not find 
you such as I would, 
and that I shall be 
found unto you such 
as ye would not: lest 
there be debates, en- 
vyings, wraths, strifes, 
backbitings, whisper- 
ings, swellings, tu- 
mults : 21 and lest, 
when I come again, 
my God will humble 
me among you, and 
that I ‘shall bewail 
many which have sin- 
ned already, and have 
not repented of the 
uncleanness and for- 
nication and lascivi- 
ousness which they 
have committed. 


XII. This ts the 
third time I am com- 
ing to you. In the 
mouth of twoor three 
witnesses shall every 
word be established. 
2 I told you before, 
and foretell you, as if 
I were present, the se- 
cond time; and being 
absent now I write 


ἃ - τοῦτο this (third time) GLTT:[A]w. 


Υ — καὶ LTTrA. 


and —; (read Long ago ye are thinking, &c.) LrTra. 
f ἔρις strife LT. 
i ταπεινώσει Shall humble trtra. 


LTTraw. 
LTTraw. 


TBGOyIKGQPUN@IoOYs 8Β. XII, XE. 


σασθὲέ μοι τὴν. ἀδικίαν.ταύτην. 14 ἰδοὺ τρίτον ἃ ἑτοίμως ἔχω 
give this injustice. Lo, athirdtime ready Iam 
? ~ κ᾿ δἰ ι ΄ ~ ~ 
ἐλθεῖν πρὸς ὑμᾶς, Kai οὐ. καταναρκήσω Viper" οὐ.γὰρ.ζητῶ 
tocome to you, andIwillnotlazily burden you; for I do not seek 
4 € ~ 71} € ~ , ᾿ - 
τὰ ὑμῶν, "ἀλλ᾽" ὑμᾶς. οὐ.γὰρ ὀφείλει τὰ τέκνα τοῖς 
the things of you, but you; for*not “ought ‘the ?children for the 
γονεῦσιν θησαυρίζειν, “ἀλλ᾽ οἱ γονεῖς τοῖς τέκνοις. 15 ἐγὼ.δὲ 
parents to treasure up, but the parents for the children. Now I 
ἥδιστα δαπανήσω καὶ ἐκδαπανηθήσομαι ὑπὲρ τῶν ψυχῶν 
most gladly will ΒΡ πα and _ will be utterly spent for ?souls 
ὑμῶν" εἰ Teai' περισσοτέρως ὑμᾶς *ayary," "ἧττον" Ῥἀγαπῶ- 
tyour, if even moreabundantly *you loving, less I am loved. 
μαι." 16 "Eorw.6é, ἐγὼ οὐ.κατεβάρησα ὑμᾶς" "ἀλλ᾽" ὑπάρχων 
But be itso, IL did not burden you; but being 


me 


πανοῦργος δόλῳ ὑμᾶς ἔλαβον. 17 μήτινα ὧν ἀπέσταλκα 


οὐ with guile you I took. Any of whom I have sent 


πρὸς ὑμᾶς, dv αὐτοῦ ἐπλεονέκτησα ὑμᾶς ; 18 παρεκάλεσα 


to you, by him did I overreach you? I besought 
Τίτον; καὶ συναπέστειλα τὸν ἀδελφόν" ph τι ἐπλεονέκτησεν 
Titus, and sent with fhim}the brother: Did ?overreach 


ὑμᾶς Τίτος; οὐ τῷ αὐτῷ πνεύματι περιεπατήσαμεν ; οὐ 


*you ‘Titus? Not by the same spirit walked we? Not 
τοῖς αὐτοῖς ἴχνεσιν ; 
inthe same steps? 
19 “Πάλιν" δοκεῖτε Ore ὑμῖν ἀπολογούμεθα ;° “karevo- 
Again do ye think that to you we are making a defence? be- 


πιον" “τοῦ" θεοῦ ἐν χριστῷ λαλοῦμεν" τὰ δὲ πάντα, ἀγαπητοί, 
fore God in Christ wespeak; and all things, beloved, 

« ν᾿ ~ J ~ > ~ ne , 7 > . 
ὑπὲρ τῆς ὑμῶν.οἰκοδομῆς. 30 φοβοῦμαι.γάρ, μηπως ἐλθὼν 
for your building up. ForI fear, lest perhaps having come 
οὐχ οἵους θέλω εὕρω ὑμᾶς, κἀγὼ εὑρεθῶ ὑμῖν οἷον 
not such as 1 wish I should find you, andI be found by you such as 
ov.OéreTEe” μήπως fEoec,' SZHAow,' θυμοί, ἐριθεῖαι, 
ye do not wish: lest perhaps [there be]strifes, jealousies, indignations, contentions, 
καταλαλιαί, ψιθυρισμοί, φυσιώσεις, ἀκαταστασίαι" 21 μὴ 


evil speakings, whisperings, puffings up, commotions ; lest 
s h EXO , Π i , " κ « θ0 , Y « - 
πάλιν EATOVTa με TATELVWOY O GEOC μου προς veac, 
again having come °*me “should *humble 7G@od ‘my asto you, 
καὶ πενρθήηήσω πολλοὺῤξ τῶν προημαρτηκότων, καὶ 


and 1 5Βουϊᾶ mournover many _ of those who and 


pp-meravonoayvrwy ἐπὶ τῇ ἀκαθαρσίᾳ Kai πορνείᾳ Kai ἀσελ- 
have not repented upon the uncleanness and fornication and _ licen- 

γείᾳ ἔπραξαν. 

tiousness which they practised. 


have before sinned, 


13 Τρίτον.τοῦτο ἔρχομαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς. ἐπὶ στόματος 
This third time I am coming’ to you. In [the] mouth 

δύο μαρτύρων καὶ τριῶν σταθήσεται πᾶν ῥῆμα. 2 προεί- 

oftwo witnesses ΟΥ̓ of three shall be established every matter. I have be- 

onka καὶ προλέγω, we παρὼν τὸ δεύτερον, Kai 


fore declared and Isay beforehand, as being present the second time, and 
ἀπὼν νῦν 'ypapw' τοῖς προημαρτηκύσιν, καὶ τοῖς 


being absent now Iwrite tothose who have before sinned, and to *the 
¥—Uue@v LTTTA. WaAAGLTTrAW. * ἀλλὰ Tr. 

: ἀγαπῶ LlovetT. ὃ. ἧσσον LTTraA. ὃ ἀγαπῶμαι; aml loved? τ. ¢ Πάλαι 
ἃ κατέναντι LTTrAW. ε-- τοῦ 


8 ζῆλος jealousy LTTraW. h ἐλθόντος μου I having come 
k + we °*me LTTrAW. !— γράφω GLTTraw. 


ΧΠΙ. Il CORINTHIANS. 


λοιποῖς πᾶσιν, ὅτι ἐὰν ἔλθω εἰς TO πάλιν οὐ.φείσομαι. 3 ἐπεὶ 
Srest 141, that if Icome again I will not spare. Since 
δοκιμὴν ζητεῖτε Tov ἐν ἐμοὶ λαλοῦντος χριστοῦ, ὃς εἰς 

a proof ye seek ‘in me “speaking 1of 2Christ, (who towards 
ὑμᾶς οὐκ.ἀσθενεῖ, ἀλλὰ δυνατεῖ ἐν ὑμῖν. 4 καὶ. γὰρ ™ei' 


you is not weak, but is powerful in you, for indeed if 
ἐσταυρώθη ἐξ ἀσθενείας, ἀλλὰ ζῇ ἐκ δυνάμεως θεοῦ" 
he was crucified in weakness, yet he lives by 2power *God’s ; 


καὶ. γὰρ" ἡμεῖς ἀσθενοῦμεν ἐν αὐτῷ, ἀλλὰ “ζησόμεθα" σὺν 


for indeed we are weak in him, but we shalllive with 
αὐτῷ ἐκ δυνάμεως θεοῦ Pete spac’ 5 ἑαυτοὺς πειράζετε 
him by 2power ?God’s towards you,) yourselves try ye 


εἰ ἐστὲ ἐν TH πίστει, ἑαυτοὺς δοκιμάζετε. ἢ OVK.ETLYLYWOKETE 
if yeare in the faith; yourselves prove: or do ye not recognize 
ἑαυτούς, ὅτι «Ἰησοῦς χριστὸς" ἐν ὑμῖν τέστιν! : εἰ μή τι ἀδό- 
yourselves, that Jesus Christ in you i unless re- 
, ? > , 4 .“ ’ e c ~ > ? A 
κιμοί tore. 6 ἐλπίζω.δὲ ὅτι γνώσεσθε Ori ἡμεῖς οὐκ.ἐσμὲν 


is, 


jected ye are? Nowlhope that yewillknow that we are not 
ἀδόκιμοι. 7 "εὔχομαι" δὲ πρὸς τὸν θθὺν μὴ ποιῆσαι ὑμᾶς 
rejected. But I pray to God [that] 2may *do ye 


x , > ev « - , ~ > γ ὦ J ~ 
κακὸν μηδέν, οὐχ ἵνα ἡμεῖς δόκιμοι φανῶμεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα ὑμεῖς 


Sevil ‘nothing; not that we approved mayappear, but that ye 
TO καλὸν ποιῆτε, ἡμεῖς.δὲ ὡς ἀδόκιμοι ὦμεν. ὃ οὐ.γὰρ 
what [is] right may do, and we as_ rejected be. For not 


δυνάμεθά τι κατὰ τῆς ἀληθείας, ᾿ἀλλ᾽" ὑπὲρ τῆς ἀληθείας. 
have we “power ‘any against the truth, but for the truth, 
9 χαίρομεν. γὰρ bray ἡμεῖς ἀσθενῶμεν, ὑμεῖς.δὲ δυνατοὶ rE 
For we rejoice when we may be weak, andye powerful may be. 
τοῦτο. δὲ" καὶ εὐχόμεθα, τὴν. ὑμῶν κατάρτισιν. 10 διὰ τοῦτο 


But this also we pray for, your perfecting. On this account 
ταῦτα ἀπὼν γράφω, iva παρὼν μὴ ἀποτόμως χρή- 
these things being absent I write, that being present not with severity I may 
σωμαι, κατὰ τὴν ἐξουσίαν ἣν “ἔδωκέν μοι ὁ κύριος" εἰς 


treat [you], according tothe authority which 


οἰκοδομὴν καὶ οὐκ εἰς καθαίρεσιν. 
building up and not for overthrowing. 
11 Λοιπόν, ἀδελφοί, χαίρετε, καταρτίζεσθε, παρακαλεῖσθε, 
For the rest, brethren, rejoice; be perfected ; be encouraged ; 
τὸ. αὐτὸ φρονεῖτε, ElpnvEvETE’ Kai ὁ θεὸς τῆς ἀγάπης καὶ 
*the ὅβδιὴθ *thing ‘mind; be at peace; and the God of love and 
> , » ᾽ « ~ ᾽ / > , ᾽ c / 
εἰρήνης ἔσται μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν. 12 ᾿Ασπάσασθε ἀλλήλους ἐν ἁγίῳ 
peace shall be with you. Salute one another with a holy 
φιλήματι. ἀσπάζονται ὑμᾶς ot ἅγιοι πάντες. 18 Ἧ χάρις 
kiss, “Salute ‘you *the *saints 1411, The grace 
τοῦ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, Kai ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ θεοῦ, Kai ἡ 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the 
κοινωνία TOU ἁγίου πνεύματος μετὰ πάντων ὑμῶν. "ἀμήν." 
fellowship of the Holy Spirit [be] with 3411 you. Amen, 
YIIpoc Κορινθίους δευτέρα ἐγράφη ἀπὸ Φιλίππων τῆς 
“To [3586] *Corinthians ‘second written from Philippi 


Μακεδονίας, διὰ Τίτου καὶ Λουκᾶ." 
of Macedonia, by ‘Titus and Lucas. 


Sgave ‘*me 'the *Lord for 


τῷ — ες [LJTTrA. n+ καὶ also E. © ζήσομεν LTTrAW. 
᾿Ιησοῦς Tir. τ — ἐστιν (read [is]) [L]rtr[a]. 
v¥ — δὲ but LiTraw. Ἢ ὃ κύριος ἔδωκέν μοι LTTrA. 
subscription GLTW ; Πρὸς Κορινθίους β΄ Tra. 


i P [εἰς ὑμᾶς] A. 
5 εὐχόμεθα We pray LTTrAW. 
χα — ἀμήν GLTTrAW. 


489 


to them which hereto- 
fore have sinned, and 
to all other, that, if I 
come again, I will not 
spare: 3 since ye seek 
a@ proof of Christ 
speaking in me, whick 
to you-ward is not 
weak, but is mighty 
in you. 4 For though he 
was crucified through 
weakness, yet he liveth 
by the power of God. 
For we also are weak 
in him, but we shall 
live with him by the 
power of God toward 
you. 5 Examine your- 
selves, whether ye be 
in the faith; prove 
your own selves. Know 
ye not your own selves, 
how that Jesus Christ 
is in you, except ye be 
reprobates? 6 But I 
trust that ye shall 
know that we re not 
reprobates. 7 Now I 
pray to God that ye do 
no evil; not that we 
should appear approv- 
ed, but that ye should 
do that which is ho- 
nest, though we be as 
reprobates. 8 For we 
can do nothing against 
the truth, but for the 
truth. 9 For we are 
glad, when we are 
weak, and e are 
strong: and t also 
we wish, even your 
perfection. 10 There- 
fore I write these 
things being absent, 
lest being present I 
should use sharpness, 
according to the power 
which the Lord hath 
given me to edifica- 
tion, and not to de- 
struction. 


11 Finally, brethren, 
farewell. Be perfect, 
be of good comfort, 
be of one mind, live 
in peace ; and the God 
of love and peace shall 
be with you. 12 Greet 
one another with an 
holy kiss. 13 All the 
saints salute you. 
14 The grace of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and 
the love of God, and 
the communion of the 
Holy Ghost, be with 
you all, Amen. 


4 χριστὺς 
t ἀλλὰ TTra. 
y — the 


Ἢ ΠΡΟΣ 


THE *TO 


PAUL, an _ apostle, 
(mot of men, neither 
by man, but by Jesus 
Christ, and God the 
Father, who raised 
him from the dead ;) 
2 and all the brethren 
which are with me, 
unto the churches of 
Galatia: 3 Grace be to 
you and peace from 
God the Father, and 
from our Lord Jesus 
Christ, 4 who gave 
himself for our sins, 
that he might deliver 
us from this present 
evil world, according 
to the will of God and 
our Father: 5to whom 
be glory for ever and 
ever. Amen. 


6 I marvel that ye 
are so soon removed 
from him that called 
you inte the grace of 
Christ unto another 
gospel: 7 which is not 
another ; but there be 
some that trouble you, 
and would pervert the 
gospelof Christ. 8 But 
though we, or an angel 
from heaven, preach 
any other gospel unto 
you than that which 
we have preached unto 
you, let him be ac- 
cursed. 9 As we said 
hefore, so say I now 
again, If any man 
preach any other gos- 
vel unto you than 
that ye have received, 
‘et him be accursed. 
[0 For do I now per- 
suade men, or God? or 
do 1 seek to please 
men? for if I yet 
pleased men, I should 
not be the servant of 
Christ. 


11 But I certify you, 
brethren, that the gos- 
pel which was preach- 


ed of me is not after Y 


man, 12 For I nei- 


TAAATA> 


°GALATIANS 


ἘΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ͂ ΠΑΥΛΟΥ." 


THR) ‘EPISTLE 70F *PAUL. 


ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ ἀπόστολος, οὐκ az’ ἀνθρώπων οὐδὲ 

Paul apostle, not from men nor 
θρώπου, ἀλλὰ διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, καὶ θεοῦ πατρὸς τοῦ 
man, but through Jesus Christ, and God [the] Father, who 
’ , 4 ~ c 4 S 
ἐγείραντος αὐτὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν, καὶ οἱ σὺν ἐμοὶ 

raised him from among([the] dead, and *the *with e 
πάντες ἀδελφοί, ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις τῆς Γαλατίας" ἃ χάρις ὑμῖν 

tall ’prethren, tothe assemblies of Galatia. Grace to you 
καὶ εἰρήνη ἀπὸ θεοῦ πατρὸς Kai κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χρισ- 


ou 


through 


? 
αν- 


and peace from God [the] Father and 7Lord ‘our Jesus Christ, 
τοῦ, 4 τοῦ δόντος ἑαυτὸν drip" τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν. ἡμῶν, ὅπως 
who gave himself _ for our sins, so that 
yt € ~ ~ ~ ~ ἢ ~ 
ἐξέληται ἡμᾶς ἐκ τοῦ “ἐνεστῶτος αἰῶνος" πονηροῦ, 
he might deliver us out Οὗ the present 7age evil, 
κατὰ τὸ θέλημα τοῦ θεοῦ Kai πατρὸς ἡμῶν, ὅ ᾧ 
aecording to the will of οὔ *and *Father our; to whom [be 


4 , ? A) I~ ~ ᾽ν», ᾽ ’, 
ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. 


the glory to the ages ofthe ages, Amen. 
6 Θαυμάζω ort οὕτως ταχέως μετατίθεσθε ἀπὸ τοῦ 
Iwonder that thus quickly ye are being changed from him who 
καλέσαντος ὑμᾶς ἐν χάριτι χριστοῦ, εἰς ἕτερον εὐαγ- 
called you in “grace *Christ’s, to a different glad 
γέλιον: 7 ὃ οὐκ ἔστιν ἄλλο, εἰ μή τινές εἰσιν οἱ ταράσ- 
tidings, which is not another; but “some ‘there 7are who trou- 


σοντες ὑμᾶς, Kai θέλοντες μεταστρέψαι τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ 
ble you, and desire to pervert the glad tidings of the 
~ 8 ἀλλ 4 Che a | « ~ n » ? > ~ d ? 
χριστοῦ. ὃ ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐὰν ἡμεῖς ἢ ἄγγελος ἐξ οὐρανοῦ “evay- 
Christ : but even if we or anangel outof heaven should an- 
, «ε ~ ᾽ τι ΄ J ~ , 
γελίζηται! viv’ map ὃ εὐηγγελισάμεθα ὑμῖν, ἀνάθεμα 
nounce glad tidings to youcontrarytowhat weannounced toyou, accursed 
ἔστω. 9 ὡς προειρήκαμεν, Kai ἄρτι πάλιν λέγω, εἴ τις 
let him be, As we have said before, “also *now again Isay, If anyone 


ὑμᾶς εὐαγγελίζεται map ὃ παρελάβετε, ἀνάθεμα 
[to] you announces glad tidings contrary to what ye received, accursed 

ἔστω. 10 ἄρτι.γὰρ ἀνθρώπους πείθω ἢ τὸν θεόν; ἢ 
let him be. For now men do I persuade or God? or 


ζητῶ ἀνθρώποις ἀρέσκειν ; εἰ γὰρ" ἔτι ἀνθρώποις ἤρεσκον, 

do I seek men toplease? Forif yet men I were pleasing, 

χριστοῦ δοῦλος ovK.ay.nuny. 

Christ’s bondman I should not be. 

11 Γνωρίζω dé" ὑμῖν, ἀδελφοί, τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τὸ εὐαγ- 
21 make ‘known ‘but toyou, brethren, the gladtidings which was 

ελισθὲν ὑπ᾽ ἐμοῦ, ὅτι οὐκιἔστιν κατὰ ἄνθρωπον" 12 οὐδὲ 


announced by me, that itisnot according to man. ?Neither 


a4 τοῦ ἀποστόλου the apostle Ε; Πρὸς Τ'αλάτας LTTraw. 
τοῦ ἐνεστῶτος LTTrA. 


E γὰρ for ΤτΑ. 


Ὁ περὶ GLTTrAW. © αἰῶνος 


4 εὐαγγελίσηται T. © -- ὑμῖν τ. f — yap for LTTrAW. 


GALATIANS. 


? ‘ 9. , , ? , b » Ι 2 , 
ἐγὼ παρὰ ἀνθρώπου παρέλαβον αὐτό, οὔτε" ἐδιδάχθην, 
for I from man received it, nor was I taught [it], 
2 AY a? , ? ~ ~ ? , ‘ ‘ 
ἀλλὰ bv ἀποκαλύψεως ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ. 13 Ἤκούσατε.γὰρ τὴν 
but by 8. revelation of Jesus Christ. For ye heard of 
? A ? 4, > ~? oe ~ a ἈΠ 6 ‘ 
éunv.avacroogny ποτε ἐν τῷ Ἰουδαϊσμῷ, ὅτι Kal’ ὑπερβολὴν 
my conduct once in Judaism, that excessively 
ἐδίωκον τὴν ἐκκλησίαν τοῦ θεοῦ Kai ἐπόρθουν αὐτήν" 
I was persecuting the assembly of God and was ravaging it; 
14 καὶ προέκοπτον ἐν τῷ lovdaiopyp ὑπὲρ πολλοὺς συνηλικιώτας 
and was advancing in Judaism beyond many contemporaries 
ἐν τῷ. γένει.μου, περισσοτέρως ζηλωτὴς ὑπάρχων τῶν πατρι- 


ΤΥ i 


‘ 


in my{own]race, moreabundantly zealous being *of *fathers 
κῶν μου παραδόσεων. 15 bredé εὐδόκησεν ‘0 θεὸς" ὁ 

“my ‘for (?the] ‘traditions. But when ?was “pleased 1God, who 
ἀφορίσας με ἐκ κοιλίας μητρός.μου, Kai καλέσας διὰ τῆς 


selected mine from *womb and called [me] by 


χἀριτος.αὐτοῦ, 16 ἀποκαλύψαι τὸν.υἱὸν. αὐτοῦ ἐν ἐμοί, ἵνα 


*my *mother’s, 


his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that 
εὐαγγελίζωμαι. αὐτὸν ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν; εὐθέως 
I should announce him as the gladtidings among the nations, immediately 


ul 


οὐ. προσανεθέμην σαρκὶ Kai πππητο 17 οὐδὲ Ἑἀνῆλθον" εἰς 


I conferred not with flesh and blood, nor wentIup to 
Ἱεροσόλυμα πρὸς τοὺς πρὸ ἐμοῦ ἀποστόλους, ἰἀλλ᾽" 
Jerusalem to those [who were] 7before *me apostles, but 


> ~ 2 ’ , \ , t , ? , 
ἀπῆλθον εἰς ᾿Αραβίαν, kai πάλιν ὑπέστρεψα εἰς Δαμασκόν. 
I went away into Arabia, and again returned to Damascus, 


18 Ἔπειτα μετὰ ™érn τρία" ἀνῆλθον εἰς ‘lepocdAvpa ἱσ- 
Then after 7years ‘three Iwentup to Jerusalem to make 
τορῆσαι πέτρον," καὶ ἐπέμεινα πρὸς αὐτὸν ἡμέρας 
acquaintance with Peter, and Iremained with him days 
δεκαπέντε: 19 ἕτερον.δὲ τῶν ἀποστόλων οὐκ.εἶδον, εἰ. μὴ 
‘fifteen ; but other of the apostles Isaw not, except 


᾿Ιάκωβον τὸν ἀδελφὸν τοῦ κυρίου. 20 ἃ δὲ ράφω ὑμῖν, 
James the brother ofthe Lord. Now what[things] I write to you, 
ἰδοὺ ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ, Ori οὐ-ψεύδομαι. 21 Ἔπειτα ἦλθον εἰς 
lo, before God, I lie not. Then I came into 
τὰ κλίματα τῆς Συρίας καὶ τῆς Κιλικίας" 22 ἤμην.δὲ a- 
the regions of Syria and Cilicia ; butI was un- 
yvoobpevoc τῷ προσώπῳ ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις τῆς ᾿Ιουδαίας ταῖς 
known by face tothe assemblies of Judea which 
Ἵ ~ , \ ? , «“ c 
ἐν χριστῷ: 23 μόνον.δὲ ἀκούοντες ἦσαν, Ὅτι ὁ 
fare] in Christ, only Shearing ‘they *were, That he who 
διώων ἡμᾶς ποτε, νῦν εὐαγγελίζεται τὴν πίστιν 
*perseeuted s once, now announces the gladtidings— the faith, 
ἥν ποτε ἐπόρθει. 24 καὶ ἐδόξαζον ἐν ἐμοὶ τὸν θεόν. 
which once he ravaged: and they were glorifying 7in “me *God. 
a \ , 7 ~ , J , 2 « 
Ω "Ἔπειτα διὰ δεκατεσσάρων ἐτῶν πάλιν ἀνέβην εἰς “1ε- 
Then after fourteen years again Iwentup to Je- 
ροσόλυμα pera BapyaBa, οσυμπαραλαβὼν" καὶ Τίτον" 
rusalem wit Barnabas, taking with [116] αἰδὸ Titus; 
2 ἀνέβην.δδλ᾿ κατὰ ἀποκάλυψιν, καὶ ἀνεθέμην αὐτοῖς τὸ 
but 1 went up according to revelation, and laid before them the 
εὐαγγέλιον ὃ κηρύσσω ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν, κατ᾽ ἰδίαν. δὲ τοῖς 
glad tidings τ ἢ 1 proclaim among the nations, but privately to those 


491 
ther received it of 
man, neither was I 
taught it, but by the 
revelation of Jesus 
Christ. 13 For ye have 
heard of my conver- 
sation in time past in 
the Jews’ religion, how 
that beyond measure 
I persecuted the church 
of God, and wasted it: 
14 and profited in the 
Jews’ religion above 
Many my equals in 
mine own nation, be- 
ing more exceedingly 
zealous of the tradi- 
tions of my fathers. 
15 But when it pleased 
God, who separated 
me from my mother’s 
womb, and called me 
by his grace, 16to re- 
veal his Son in me, 
that I might preach 
him among the hea- 
then; immediately 1 
conferred not with 
flesh and blood: 17 nei- 
ther went I up to Je- 
rusalem tothem which 
were apostles before 
me; but I went into 
Arabia, and returned 
again unto Damascus, 
18 Then after three 
years I went up to Je- 
rusalem to see Peter, 
and abode with him 
fifteen days. 19 But 
other of the apostles 
saw Inone, save James 
the Lord’s brother. 
20 Now the things 
which I write unto 
you, behold, before 
God, Llie not. 21 Af- 
terwards I came into 
the regions of Syria 
and Cilicia; 22 and 
was unknown by face 
unto the churches of 
Juda which were in 
Christ: 23 but they 
had heard only, That 
he which persecuted 
us in times past now 
preacheth the faith 
which once he de- 
stroyed, 24 And they 
glorified God in me. 


Il. Then fourteen 
years after I went up 
again to Jerusalem 
with Barnabas, and 
took Titus with me 
also. 2 And I went 
up by revelation, and 
communicated unto 
them that gospel 
which | preachamong 
the Gentiles, but pri- 
vately so them which 
were of reputation, 
lest by any meaus 1 
should run, or had 
run, in vain. 3 But 
neither Titus, who 


b οὐδὲ LTr. 
ἀλλὰ LTTrA. 


i— ὃ θεὸς (read he was pleased) [L]Ta. 
τὰ τρία ἔτη 1. Ὁ Kndav Cephas LrTraw. 


Κ ἀπῆλθον went I away La. 
° auv- TA. 


492 


was with me, being a 
Greek, was compelled 
to be circumcised : 
4 and that because of 
false brethren una- 
wares brought in, 
who came in privily to 
spy out our liberty 
which we have in 
Christ Jesus, that they 
might bring us into 
bondage: 5 to whom 
we gave place by sub- 
jection, no, not for an 
hour; that the truth 
of the gospel might 
continue with you. 
6 But of these who 
seemed to be some- 
what, (whatsoever 
they were, it maketh 
no matter to me: God 
accepteth no man’s 
person :) for they who 
seemed to be somewhat 
in conference added 
nothing to me: 7 but 
contrariwise, | when 
they saw that the gos- 
pel of the uncireumci- 
sion was committed 
unto me, as the gospel 
of the circumcision 
was unto Peter ; 8 (for 
he that wrought ef- 
fectually in Peter to 
the apostleship of the 
circumcision, the same 
was mighty in me to- 
ward the Gentiles :) 
9 and when James, 
Cephas, and John,who 
seemed to be pillars, 
perceived the grace 
that was given unto 
me, they gave to me 
and Barnabas _ the 
right hands of fellow- 
ship; that we should 
go unto the heathen 
and they unto the cir- 
eumcision. 10 Only 
they would that we 
should remember the 
poor ; the same which I 
also was forward to do. 


11 But when Peter 
was come to Antioch, 
I withstood him to 
the face, because he 
was to be blamed. 
12 For before that cer- 
tain came from James, 
he did eat with the 
Gentiles: but when 
they were come, he 
withdrew and _ sepa- 
rated himself, fear- 
ing them which were 
of the circumcision. 
13 And the other Jews 
dissembled likewise 
with him; insomuch 
that Barnabas also 
was carried away 
with their dissimula- 
tion. 14 But when I 
saw that they walked 


Tl POS. (PAAATA Σ. ΤΙ 


δοκουσιν, μήπως εἰς κενὸν τρέχω ἢ ἔδραμον" 3 ἀλλ’ 
of repute, lest somehow in vain 1 should berunningor hadrun; (but 


7 Nh ’ ς ΄ ᾽ ΄ 
οὐδὲ Τίτος ὁ σὺν ἐμοί, Ἕλλην ὦν, ἠναγκάσθη περι- 


noteven Titus who[was]with me, 24 ΟἼΘΟΙΚ *being, was compelled tobe 
τμηθῆναι. 4 διὰ δὲ τοὺς παρεισάκτους wWevd- 
circumcised ;) and [this] on account of the *brought ‘in *stealthily ‘false 


“ ev ~ ~ ‘ 
αδέλφους, οἵτινες παρεισῆλθον κατασκοπῆσαι τὴν ἐλευθερίαν 
?prethren, who came in by stealth to spy out *freedom 


€ ~ τι » ? ~ ? ~ tt t ~ ΄ 
ἡμῶν ἣν ἔχομεν ἐν χριστῷ Inoov, wa ἡμᾶς Ῥκαταδουλώ- 


Your which wehave in Christ Jesus, that 8 they might bring 
cwvra' ὅ οἷς οὐδὲ πρὸς ὥραν εἴξαμεν τῇ ὑποταγῇ, 
into bondage; to whom noteven for 81 hour did we yield in subjection, 


ἵνα ἡ ἀλήθεια τοῦ εὐαγγελίου διαμείνῃ πρὸς ὑμᾶς. 6 ᾿Απὸ 


thatthe truth ofthe gladtidings might continue with you. *From 
δὲ τῶν δοκούντων elyai τι, ὁποῖοί. ποτε ἦσαν οὐδέν 
*but those reputed tobe something, whatsoever they were 7no 

μοι διαφέρει" πρόσωπον “θεὸς ἀνθρώπου οὐ λαμ- 


“to ὅ“Π16 makes "difference: [the] person >God of?man ‘not ‘does 


, a > 4 A « ~ Dr , ? x 
βάνει: ἐμοὶ.γὰρ ot δοκοῦντες οὐδὲν προσανέθεντο, 7 ἀλλὰ 
accept ; fortome those ofrepute nothing conferred ; but 

τοὐναντίον, ἰδόντες Ort πεπίστευμαι τὸ εὐαγγέλιον 

on the contrary, having seen that I have been entrusted with the glad tidings 
~ > / ~ ~ 

τῆς ἀκροβυστίας, καθὼς Πέτρος τῆς περιτομῆς 8 ὁ 


of the uncireumcision, according as Peter [that] of the circumcision, (*he *who 


γὰρ évepynoac Πέτρῳ εἰς ἀποστολὴν τῆς περιτομῆς, ἐνήργη- 


‘for wrought in Peter for apostleship of the circumcision, wrought 
σεν “kai ἐμοὶ! εἰς τὰ ἔθνη" 9 καὶ γνόντες τὴν χάριν THY 


also in me towards the nations,) and having known the’ grace which 


δοθεῖσάν μοι, ᾿Ιάκωβος καὶ Κηφᾶς καὶ "ἸΙωάννης," ot do- 
was given to me, James and Cephas and John, those re- 
κοῦντες στῦλοι εἶναι, δεξιὰς ἔδωκαν ἐμοὶ καὶ Βαρνάβᾳ 
puted 3pillars 'to *be,(the] right hands “they *gave Sto *me 7and *Barnabas 
κοινωνίας, ἵνα ἡμεῖς ἢ εἰς τὰ ἔθνη, αὐτοὶ δὲ εἰς τὴν 
lof *fellowship, that we {should go] to the nations, andthey to the 
περιτομήν᾽ 10 μόνον τῶν πτωχῶν iva μνημονεύωμεν, ὃ 


circumcision : only the poor that we should remember, which 
καὶ ἐσπούδασα αὐτὸ.τοῦτο ποιῆσαι. 
2also *I "was ‘diligent *very “thing to do, 


11 Ὅτε.δὲ ἦλθεν Πέτρος" εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν, κατὰ-πρόσωπον 


But when *came 1Peter to Antioch, to [the] face 
αὐτῷ ἀντέστην, OTL κατεγνωσμένος ἦν. 12 πρὸ.τοῦ.γὰρ 
him I withstood, because to becondemned he was: for before that 


ING) ~ ? ee ’ 4 ~ > ~ , e A 
ἐλθεῖν τινας ἀπὸ Τακώβου, pera τῶν ἐθνῶν συνήσθιεν" ὅτε. δὲ 
2came ‘some from «81η65, with the nations he waseating; but when 
σῆλθον ὑπέστελλεν καὶ ἀφώριζεν ἑαυτόν, φοβούμενος 
they came, he was drawing back and wasseparating himself, being afraid of 
Tove ἐκ περιτομῆς" 13 καὶ συνυπεκρίθησαν αὐτῷ καὶ ot 
those of [the] circumcision ; and conjointly dissembled with him also the 
λοιποὶ Ἰουδαῖοι, ὥστε καὶ BapyaBac συναπήχθη αὐτῶν 
rest of {the] Jews, sothat even Barnabas’ wascarriedaway “their 
TH ὑποκρίσει. 14 ᾿Αλλ᾽ Ore εἶδον Ore οὐκ. ὀρθοποδοῦσιν 
‘by dissimulation. But when I saw that they walk not uprightly 
πρὸς τὴν ἀλήθειαν τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, εἶπον τῷ "Πέτρῳ' 

according to the truth of the glad tidings, 1 said to Peter 


 καταδουλώσουσιν they shall bring into bondage Lrtraw. 
t+ μὲν O[L]. 


® [warns Tr. 


4  ὃτ. τ κἀμοὶ LTrW. 


ν Κηφᾶς Cephas LTTraw. w ἦλθεν he came LTr. 


ν᾿ Κηφᾷ Cephas LTTraw. 


Tay ti. GALATIANS. 


ἔμπροσθεν πάντων, Ei σύ, ᾿Ιουδαῖος ὑπάρχων, ἐθνικῶς 
before all, If thou, 7a *Jew ‘being, nation-like 
γζῇς καὶ οὐκ ᾿Ιουδαϊκῶς," *ri' τὰ ἔθνη ἀναγκάζεις “Lov- 
livest and ποῦ Jewishly, why the nations dost thou compel to ju- 
δαίζειν; 15 Ἡμεῖς φύσει ᾿Ιουδαῖοι, καὶ οὐκ ἐξ ἐθνῶν 
daize ἢ We, *by*nature ‘Jews, and not of (the) *nations 
e , > , at > “Ὅ » ? » 
ἁμαρτωλοί, 16 εἰδότες ἃ Ort οὐ.δικαιοῦται ἄνθρωπος ἐξ ἔργων 
‘sinners, knowing that “15 “ποὺ ‘justified %'a?man by works 
νόμου, éav.pn διὰ πίστεως ῬΙησοῦ χριστοῦ," καὶ ἡμεῖς εἰς 
of law, but through faith of Jesus Christ, also we on 


χριστὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ἐπιστεύσαμεν, iva δικαιωθῶμεν ἐκ πίστεως 
Christ Jesus believed, that we might be justified by faith 


χριστοῦ, καὶ οὐκ ἐξ ἔργων νόμου" “διότι! “οὐ.δικαιωθήσεται 
of Christ, and not by works of law; because _ 5881] not be justified 
’ » , Π] ~ ’ 17 ἰ δὲ ~ ὃ θῇ 

ἐξ ἔργων νόμου! πᾶσα σάρξ. εἰ. δὲ ζητοῦντες δικαιωθῆναι 


by works of law any flesh. Now if seeking to be justified 
(lit. all) 


ἐν χριστῷ εὑρεθημεν καὶ αὐτοὶ ἁμαρτωλοί, “ἄρα! χριστὸς 
in Christ we*were *found 7also ‘ourselves sinners, {is) then Christ 
ἁμαρτίας διάκονος ;f μὴ.γένοιτο. 18 éi-yap ἃ κατέλυσα 
208 581π ?minister ? May it not be! For if what I threw down 
ταῦτα πάλιν οἰκοδομῶ, παραβάτην ἐμαυτὸν Ξσυνίστημι." 
these things again I build, a transgressor myself I constitute. 
19 ’Eyw.ydp διὰ νόμου νόμῳ ἀπέθανον, ἵνα θεῷ ζήσω. 
ForI through law to law died, that to God I may live. 
20 χριστῷ συνεσταύρωμαι:" ζῶ.δέ, οὐκέτι ἐγώ, ζῃ.δὲ 
°Christ ‘I *have *been *crucified *with, yet 1 live, nolonger I, but lives 
ἐν ἐμοὶ χριστός" 6.6 viv ζῶ ἐν σαρκί, ἐν πίστει 
3in *me Christ; but that which now I live in flesh, in faith 
ζῶ τῇ "τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ," τοῦ ἀγαπήσαντός με καὶ παρα- 
I live, that of the Son of God, who loved me and gave 
δόντος ἑαυτὸν ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ. 21 οὐκ. ἀθετῶ τὴν χάριν τοῦ θεοῦ" 


up himself for me. I do not set aside the grace of God ; 
εἰγὰρ διὰ νόμου δικαιοσύνη, ἄρα χριστὸς δωρεὰν 
for if through law righteousness [is], then Christ *for *nought 
ἀπέθανεν. 

‘died. ‘ 

3°Q ἀνόητοι Γαλάται, τίς ὑμᾶς ἐβάσκανεν ity ἀληθείᾳ 

O senseless Galatians, who you bewitched, ‘the ‘truth 

μὴ πείθεσθαι ;"} οἷς κατ᾽ ὀφθαλμοὺς ᾿Ιησοῦς χριστὸξὰᾷ προε- 


not *to*obey? 7whose °before Jesus Christ was openly 


γράφη ᾿ὲν ὑμῖν" ἐσταυρωμένος: 2 τοῦτο μόνον θέλω μαθεῖν 
set forth among you— crucified ? This only Iwish to learn 
ἀφ᾽ ὑμῶν, ἐξ ἔργων νόμου τὸ πνεῦμα ἐλάβετε, ἢ ἐξ ἀκοῆς 
from you, by works oflaw the Spirit received ye, or by report 
πίστεως ; 8 οὕτως ἀνόητοί ἐστε; ἐναρξάμενοι πνεύματι, νῦν 
of faith ? So senseless are ye? Having begun inSpirit, now 
σαρκὶ ἐπιτελεῖσθε; A τοσαῦτα ἐπάθετε εἰκῆ; εἴγε 

in flesh are ye being perfected? So many things did ye suffer in vain? if indeed 
καὶ εἰκῆ. ὃ ὁ οὖν ἐπιχορηγῶν ὑμῖν «τὸ πνεῦμα, καὶ 
also invain. He who therefore supplies to you the Spirit, and 
ἐνεργῶν δυνάμεις ἐν ὑμῖν, ἐξ ἔργων νόμου ἢ ἐξ ἀκοῆς 
works works Οὗ power among you, [isit]by works oflaw or by report 


eyes 


493 


not uprightly accord- 
ing to the truth of the 
gospel, I said unto Pe- 
ter before them all, If 
thou, being a Jew, 
livest after the man- 
ner of Gentiles, and 
not as do the Jews, 
why compellest thou 
the Gentiles to live as 
do the Jews? 15 We 
who are Jews by na- 
ture, and not sinners 
of the Gentiles, 
16 knowing that a 
man is not justified;by 
the works of the law, 
but by the faith of 
Jesus Christ, even we 
have believed in Jesus 
Christ, that we might 
be justified by the 
faith of Christ, and 
not by the works of 
the law: for by the 
works of the law shall 
no flesh be justified. 
17 But if, while we 
seek to be justified by 
Christ, we ourselves 
also are found sinners, 
7s therefore Christ the 
minister of sin? God 
forbid, 18 For if I 
build again the things 
which I destroyed, I 
make myself a trans- 
gressor. 19 For I 
through the law am 
dead to the law, that 
I might live unto God. 
201 am crucified with 
Christ : nevertheless I 
live; yet not I, but 
Christ liveth in me: 
and the life which I 
now live in the flesh I 
live by the faith of 
the Son of God, who 
loved me, and gave 
himself for me. 211 
do not frustrate the 
grace of God: for if 
righteousness come by 
the law, then Christ is 
dead in vain. 

III. O foolish Gala- 
tians, who hath be- 
witched you, that ye 
should not obey the 
truth, before whose 
eyes Jesus Christ hath 
been evidently set 
forth, crucified among 
you? 2 This only 
would I learn of you, 
Received ye the Spirit 
by the works of the 
law, or by the hearing 
of faith? 3 Are yeso 
foolish ? having be- 
gun in the Spirit, are 
ye now made perfect 
by the flesh, 4 Have 
ye suffered so many 
things in vain? if 1 


Υ καὶ οὐχ (οὐκ TrA) Ἰουδαϊκῶς ζῇς LTTrA.  * πῶς how GLTTraw. 


a + δὲ but (knowing) 


GLTTrAWw. Ὁ χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ Trr. ς ὅτι LTTrA. ἃ ἐξ ἔργων νόμου οὐ δικαιωθήσεται 
ΟἸΤΎΓΑΥ, 5 ἄρατ.,. f—; (read Christ [is] then &.)L. Ε συνιστάνω GuTTrAW. © τοῦ 
θεοῦ καὶ χριστοῦ of God and Christ utr. ' — τῇ ἀληθείᾳ μὴ πείθεσθαι GLTTrAW. — ἐν 


ὑμῖν LYTrA. 


494 


be yet in vain. 5 He 
therefore that minis- 
tereth to you the Spi- 
rit, and worketh mira- 
cles among you, doeth 
he it by the works of 
the law, or by the 
hearing of faith? 
6 Even as Abraham 
believed God, and it 
was accounted to 
him for righteousness, 
7 Know ye therefore 
that they which are 
of faith, the same are 
the children of Abra- 
bam. 8 And the scrip- 
ture, foreseeing that 
God would justify the 
heathen through faith, 
preached before the 
gospel unto Abraham, 
saying, In thee shall 
all nations be blessed. 
9 So then they which 
be of faith are blessed 
with faithful  Abra- 
ham. 10 For as many 
as are of the works of 
the law are under the 
curse: for it is writ- 
ten, Cursed is every 
one that continueth 
not in all things which 
are written in the book 
of the law to do them. 
11 But that no man is 
justified by the law 
in the sight of God, ἐξ 
is evident: for, The 
just shall live by faith, 
12 And the law is not 
of faith: but, The man 
that doeth them shall 
live in them. 13 Christ 
hath redeemed us from 
the curse of the law, 
being made acurse for 
us: for it is written, 
Cursed is every one 
that hangeth on a 
tree: 14 that the 
blessing of Abraham 
might come on the 
Gentiles through Je- 
sus Christ; that we 
might receive the pro- 
mise of the Spirit 
through faith. 

15 Brethren, I speak 
after the manner of 
men; Though it be 
but a man’s covenant, 
yet if it be confirmed, 
no man disannulleth, 
or addeth thereto. 
16 Now to Abraham 
and his seed were the 
promises made. He 
saith not, And to seeds, 
as of many; but as 
of one, And to thy 
seed, which is Christ. 
17 And thisI say, that 
the covenant, that was 
confirmed before of 
God in Christ, the law, 
which was four hun- 


k υἱοί εἰσιν LTTr. 


πᾶσιν in all things) Trr. 
4 ὅτι γέγραπται LTTrAW. 
¥ — εἰς χριστὸν LITrA. 


GLTTraw. 
t ἀλλὰ Tr. 


ΠΈΡΧΟΣΣΝ PIVALAPACTIVA SS. Ill 


πίστεως ; 6 καθὼς ᾿Αβραὰμ ἐπίστευσεν τῷ θεῷ, καὶ ἐλογίσθη 
of faith? Evenas Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned 


> ~ 2 , , » € , 
αὐτῷ εἰς δικαιοσύνην. 7 γινώσκετε ἄρα ὅτι οἱ ἐκ πίστεως, 


ἴο Ηΐτη for righteousness. Know then that they that of faith 
- tok? eye sit Ὁ , os ~ \ € \ 
οὗτοί "εἰσιν υἱοὶ ᾿Αβραάμ. 8 προϊδοῦσα.δὲ ἡ γραφὴ 
[41.868], these are sons of Abraham; and *foreseeing ‘the “scripture 
ὅτι ἐκ πίστεως δικαιοῖ τὰ ἔθνη ὁ θεός, προευηγγελί-- 
that by faith *justifies *the ‘nations *God, before announced glad 


σατο τῷ ABoaap, Ὅτι Ἰἐνευλογηθήσονται" ἐν σοὶ πάντα τὰ 
tidings to Abraham : Shall be blessed in thee all the 


ἔθνη. 9 ὥστε οἱ ἐκ πίστεως εὐλογοῦνται σὺν τῷ πιστῷ 
nations. So that those of faith are being blessed with the believing 
᾿Αβραάμ. 10 ὕσοι.γὰρ ἐξ ἔργων νόμου εἰσίν, ᾿ὑπὸ κατάραν 
Abraham. Forasmanyas of works oflaw are, under acurse 
εἰσίν γέγραπται.γάρ, ™ ᾿Επικατάρατος πᾶς ὃς οὐκ ἐμ- 
are. For it has beea written, Cursed [15] everyone who not ‘does 
μένει "ἐν" πᾶσιν τοῖς γεγραμμένοις ἐν τῷ βιβλίῳ τοῦ νόμου, 
continue in all things which have been written in the book ofthe Ww 


~ ~ > Ld « A ? , > ‘ ~ 
τοῦ ποιῆσαι αὐτά. 11 “Ὅτι δὲ ἐν νόμῳ οὐδεὶς δικαιοῦται 
todo them. But thatin virtueof law no one is being justified 


παρὰ τῷ θεῷ δῆλον: Ore ὁ δίκαιος ἐκ πίστεως ζήσεται" 
with God [is] manifest ; because the just by faith shall live ; 
12 0.6& νόμος οὐκιἔστιν ἐκ πίστεως, “ἀλλ᾽ ὁ ποιήσας 
but the law is not of faith ; but, the ?who ‘did 
αὐτὰ Ῥάνθρωπος" ζήσεται ἐν αὐτοῖς. 18 χριστὸς ἡμᾶς 
“these "things Iman shall live in virtue of them. Christ us 
ἐξηγόρασεν ἐκ τῆς κατάρας τοῦ νόμου, γενόμενος ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν 


ransomed from the curse ofthe law, having become for us 
κατάρα' yéyoanrat.yap,' ᾿Επικατάρατος πᾶς ὁ κρεμά- 
acurse, (for it has been written, Cursed [15] everyone who hangs 


μενος ἐπὶ ξύλου" 14 ἵνα εἰς τὰ ἔθνη ἡ εὐλογία τοῦ ᾿Αβραὰμ 
on ἃ tree,) that to the nations the blessing of Abraham 
γένηται ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ," ἵνα τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν τοῦ πνεύμα- 


might come in Christ Jesus, that the promise of the Spirit 
τος λάβωμεν διὰ τῆς πίστεως. 
we might receive through faith. 
1ὅ ᾿Αδελφοί, κατὰ ἄνθρωπον λέγω, ὕμως ἀνθρώπου 
Brethren, (according to man  Iamspeaking,) even of man 
κεκυρωμένην διαθήκην oddsic ἀθετεῖ ἢ ἐπιδιατάσσεται. 
a confirmed covenant no one sets aside, or adds thereto. 


16 τῷ.δὲ᾿Αβραὰμ "ἐῤῥήθησαν" ai ἐπαγγελίαι, Kai τῷ σπέρματι 
But to Abraham owerespoken the promises, an to *seed 
? ~ ‘ ~ ? 4 ~ ? 
αὐτοῦ" οὐ.λέγει, Kai τοῖς σπέρμασιν, ὡς ἐπὶ πολλῶν, "ἀλλ᾽" 
his: [6 does ποῦ 58., And to seeds, as of many; but 
we ἐφ᾽ ἑνός, Kai τῷ.σπέρματί.σου, ὅς ἐστιν χριστός. 17 τοῦτο 
as of one, And to thy seed ; which is Christ. *This 
δὲ λέγω, διαθήκην προκεκυρωμένην ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ “Eig χρισ- 
‘now I say, [the] covenant confirmed beforehand by God to Christ, 
τὸν" ὁ μετὰ “ἔτη τετρακόσια καὶ tTpidkovra' γεγονὼς 
the ‘after ‘*years “four 7hundred *and *thirty “which *took “place 
νόμος οὐκ.ἀκυροῖ, eic.7O καταργῆσαι τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν. 18 


> 
ει 
1]ῶν doesnotannul 8088 to make of no effect the promise. if 


m + ὅτι that GLTTrAW. π -- ev (read 

Ρ — ἄνθρωπος (read ὃ ποιήσας he who did) 

τ Ἰησοῦ χριστῷ Tr. 5 ἐῤῥέθησαν LITrA. 
W τετρακόσια καὶ τριάκοντα ἔτη GLTTrAW. 


| εὐλογηθήσονται BE. 
© ἀλλὰ TTr. 


ΠΙ, IV. GALATI ANS! 


γὰρ ἐκ νόμου ἡ κληρονομία, οὐκέτι ἐξ ἐπαγγελίας" 
for by law ([be)the inheritance, [it is] no longer by promise ; 
τῷ.δὲ ᾿Αβραὰμ δι’ ἐπαγγελίας κεχάρισται ὁ θεός. 19 Τί 
but ἴο Abraham through promise 7granted [Sit] ‘God. Why 
οὖν ὁ νόμος; τῶν παραβάσεων άριν Σπροσετέθη." 
then the law? Stransgressions ‘for “the *sake*of it was added, 
ἄχρις οὗ ἔλθῃ τὸ σπέρμα ᾧ ἐπήγγελται, 
until should have come the seed to whom promise has been made, 
διαταγεὶς δι ἀγγέλων ἔν χειρὶ μεσίτου. 20 ὁ. δὲ 


having been ordained through angels Shand 'a?mediator’s. But the 


μεσίτης ἑνὸς ovK-EoTIV, ὑ-δὲ. θεὸς εἷς ἐστιν. 


in 


Mediator *of*one ‘is “not, butGod 7one is. 
21 ὋὉ- οὖν. νόμος κατὰ τῶν ἐπαγγελιῶν Yrov θεοῦ"; 
The lawthen [5 10] against the promises of God? 


μὴ.γένοιτο᾽ εἰ γὰρ ἐδόθη νόμος ὁ δυνάμενος ζωοποιῆσαι, 
Mayitnotbe! Forif wasgiven alaw which was 8016 to quicken, 
” zn 2 , an | t ΄ ΣΝ 7 ‘ , 
ὄντως *ay ἐκ νόμου ἦν ἡ δικαιοσύνη" 22 ἀλλὰ συνέ- 
indeed by law wouldhavebeen righteousness ; but sshut 
κλεισεν ἡ γραφὴ τὰ.πάντα “ὑπὸ ἁμαρτίαν, ἵνα 1 ἐπαγγελία 


+ 


up ‘the 7scripture allthings under sin, that the promise 
ἐκ πίστεως ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ δοθῇ τοῖς πιστεύουσιν. 
by faith of Jesus Christ might be given tothose that believe. 


23 Πρὸ τοῦ.δὲ ἐλθεῖν τὴν πίστιν, ὑπὸ νόμον ἐφρουρούμεθα, 
But before 7came lfaith, under law we were guarded, 


Ὀσυγκεκλεισμένοι" εἰς THY μέλλουσαν πίστιν ἀποκαλυφθῆναι" 
having been shutup to the being “about ‘faith to be revealed. 


24 ὥστε ὁ νόμος παιδαγωγὸς ἡμῶν γέγονεν εἰς χριστόν, ἵνα 
"to 


Sothat the law tor lour hasbeen{up}to Christ, that 
ἐκ πίστεως δικαιωθῶμεν: 25 ἐλθούσης.δὲ τῆς πίστεως, 
by faith we might be justified. But “having *come ‘faith, 


οὐκέτι ὑπὸ παιδαγωγόν ἐσμεν. 26 πάντες. γὰρ υἱοὶ θεοῦ 
no longer under a tutor we are; for all sons of God 
ἐστε διὰ τῆς πίστεως ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ 27 ὕσοι.γὰρ εἰς 
ye are through faith in Christ Jesus. For as many as to 
χριστὸν ἐβαπτίσθητε, χριστὸν ἐνεδύσασθε. Ἰου- 

Christ were baptized, Christ "ye did *put on. Jew 
δαῖος οὐδὲ “Ἕλλην ovK-Evt δοῦλος οὐδὲ ἐλεύθερος" 

nor Greek; thereis ποῦ bondman nor free ; 

ἄρσεν καὶ θῆλυ “πάντες".γὰρ ὑμεῖς εἷς ἐστε ἔν χριστῷ Τησοῦ" 


28 οὐκ.ἔνι 
There is not 


OUK.EVL 
there is not 


male and female; for all ye one are in Christ Jesus: 
29 cid ὑμες χριστοῦ, ἄρα τοῦ ᾿Αβραὰμ σπέρμα ἐστέ, 
butif ye 816] Christ’s, then Abraham's seed ye are, 
«καὶ ear’ ἐπαγγελίαν κληρονόμοι. 
and according to promise heirs. 
4 Λέγω.δέ, ἐφ’ ὕσον χρόνον ὁ κληρονόμος νήπιός ἐστιν, 
ΝΟΥ Isay, for aslong?as ‘time the heir aninfant is, 


? \ , , ᾽ὔ , a 9 ἰλλὰ 
οὐδὲν διαφέρει δούλου, κύριος πάντων wy’ Ὁ ἀλλὰ 
nothing μο differs from abondman, [though] “lord of “811 *being; but 
ὑπὸ ἐπιτρόπους ἐστὶν Kai οἰκονόμους ἄχρι τῆς προθεσμίας 
under guardians heis and stewards until the time before appointed 

~ e ᾿ ~ ev = ΄ ε Ν ᾿ 
τοῦ πατρός. 8 οὕτως καὶ ἡμεῖς, OTE ἦμεν νήπιοι, ὑπὸ τὰ 
of the father. So also we, when wewere infants, under the 
στοιχεῖα τοῦ κόσμου ‘perv’ δεδουλωμένοι" 4 ὕὅτε.δὲ ἦλθεν τὸ 
elements ofthe world were held in bondage ; but when came the 


χα ἐτέθη it was appointed @. ¥ [τοῦ θεοῦ! L. 
Ὁ συγίσυν- τ)κλειόμενοι being shut up LTTra. 
© κατὰ T. ἥμεθα τ. 


© ἅπαντες TTrA, 


2 ἐκ νόμου ἂν ἣν (ἣν ἂν T) LTTrA. 


495 


dred and thirty years 
after,cannot disannul!, 
that it should make 
the promise of none 
effect. 18 For if the 
inheritance be of the 
law, it 7s no more of 
promise: but God 
gaveit to Abraham by 
promise. 19 Wherefore 
then serveth the law? 
It was added because 
of transgressions, till 
the seed should come 
to whom the promise 
Was made; and it was 
ordained by angels in 
the hand of a media- 
tor. 20 Nowa media- 
tor is not a mediator 
of one, but God is one. 

21 75 the law then 
against the promises 
of God? God forbid: 
for if there had been 
a law given which 
could have given life, 
verily righteousness 
should have been by 
the law. 22 But the 
scripture hath con- 
cluded all under sin, 
that the promise by 
faith of Jesus Christ 
might be given to 
them that believe. 
23 But before faith 
came, we were kept 
under the law, shut 
up unto the faith 
which should after- 
wards be revealed. 
24 Wherefore the law 
Was our schoolmaster 
to Ἴ us unto 
Christ, that we might 
be justified by faith. 
25 But after that faith 
is come, we are no 
longer under a school- 
master. 26 For ye are 
all the children of God 
by faith in Christ Je- 
sus. 27 For as many 
of you as have been 
baptized into Christ 
have put on Christ. 
28 There is neither 
Jew nor Greek, there 
is neither bond nor 
free, there is neither 
male nor female: for 
ye are sll one in Christ 
Jesus. 29 And if ye 
be Christ’s, then are 
ye Abraham’s seed, 
and heirs according to 
the promise. 

IV. NowI say, That 
the heir, as long as he 
is a child, differeth no- 
thing from a servant, 
though he be lord of 
all; 2 but is under 
tutors and governors 
until the time appoint- 
ed of the father. 
3 Even so we, when 


8 ὑφ᾽ L. 
d — καὶ LTTrA. 


496 


we were children, 
were in bondage under 
the elements of the 
world: 4 but when the 
fulness of the time 
was come, God sent 
forth his Son, made of 
a woman, made under 
the law, 5 to redeem 
them that were under 
the law, that we might 
receive the adoption 
of sons. 6 And because 
yeare sons, God hath 
sent forth the Spirit 
of his Son into your 
hearts, crying, Abba, 
Father. 7 Wherefore 
thou art no more a 
servant, but a son; 
andif a son, then an 
heir of God through 
Christ. 8 Howbeit 
then, when ye knew 
not God, ye did ser- 
vice unto them which 
by nature are no 
gods. 9 But now, after 
that ye have known 
God, or rather are 
known of God, how 
turn ye again to the 
weak and beggarly 
elements, whereunto 
ye desire again to be 
in bondage? 10 Ye 
observe days, and 
months, and times, and 
years. 11 1am afraid 
of you, lest I have be- 
stowed upon you la- 
bour in vain. 

12 Brethren, 1 be- 
seech you, be 851 am; 
for Lam as ye are: 
ye have not injured 
me δὖ 811, 13 Ye know 
how through infirmity 
of the fleshI preached 
the gospel unto you 
at the first. 14 And my 
temptation which was 
in my flesh ye despised 
not, nor rejected ; but 
received me as anan- 
gel of God, even as 
Christ Jesus. 15 Where 
is then the blessed- 
ness ye spake of? for 
I bear you record, 
that, if τὸ had been 
possible, ye would 
have plucked out your 
own eyes, and have 
given them to me. 
16 Am I therefore be- 
come your enemy, be- 
eause I tell you the 
truth? 17 They zeal- 
ously affect you, but 
not well; yea, they 
would exclude you, 
that ye might affect 
them. 18 But tt ts 
good to be zealously 
affected always in a 
good thing, and not 
only when I am pre- 


Il PiOcS. ἘΠ᾿ ALALAVE A-S. IV. 
πλήρωμα τοῦ χρόνου, ἐξαπέστειλεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν.υἱὸν. αὐτοῦ, 
fulness of the time, ?sent *forth 1God his Son, 
, , , e + ΄ 3 
γενόμενον ἐκ γυναικὸς, γενόμενον ὑπὸ νόμον, 5 ἵνα τοὺς 
come of woman, come under law, that those 


ε Ν , Ἵ , , ,ὔ > , 
ὑπὸ νόμον ἐξαγοράσῃ, ἵνα τὴν υἱοθεσίαν ἀπολάβωμεν. 
under law hemight ransom, that adoption we might receive. 


, t ΄ ε ‘ ~ ~ 
6 ὅτιδέ ἐστε υἱοί, ἐξαπέστειλεν ὁ θεὸς τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ 
But because yeare sons, “sent *forth ‘God the Spirit 


viov.abrov εἰς τὰς καρδίας δὑμῶν," κράζον, ABBa ὁ πατήρ. 


of hisSon into *hearts tyour, crying, Abba, Father. 
7 wore οὐκέτι εἶ δοῦλος, Ῥάλλ᾽" vide’ εἰ δὲ υἱός, Kai 


and if also 
8 ᾿Αλλὰ τότε μὲν οὐκ 


So no longer thouart bondman, but 
κληρονόμος ἰθεοῦ διὰ χριστοῦ." 


SOD ; son, 


heir of God through Christ. But then indeed not 
εἰδότες θεόν, ἐδουλεύσατε τοῖς "μὴ φύσει" οὖσιν 
knowing God, ye were in bondage to those who not by nature = are 
θεοῖς: 9 viv.d&, γνόντες θεόν, μᾶλλον.δὲ γνωσθέντες 


gods ; but now, having known God, but rather having been known 
€ A ~ ~ , ‘ A ~ ‘ ᾿ 
ὑπὸ θεοῦ, πῶς ἐπιστρέφετε πάλιν ἐπὶ τὰ ἀσθενῆ καὶ πτωχὰ 
by God, how do ye turn again to the weak and beggarly 
στοιχεῖα οἷς πάλιν ἄνωθεν ‘Sovdedery' θέλετε; 10 ἡμέρας 
elements to which again anew to bein bondage ye desire? Days 
παρατηρεῖσθε, καὶ μῆνας, Kai καιρούς, Kai ἐνιαυτούς." 11 φο- 
ye observe, and mouths, and _ times, and years. am 
βοῦμαι ὑμᾶς, μήπως εἰκῆ κεκοπίακα εἰς ὑμᾶς. 
afraid of you, lest somehow in vain I have laboured asto you. 
12 Γίνεσθε we ἐγώ, ὕτικἀγὼ we ὑμεῖς, ἀδελφοί, δέο- 
Be as I jam}, forI also [am] as ye, brethren, Ibe- 
μαι ὑμῶν: οὐδέν pe ἠδικήσατε. 18 οἴδατε.δὲ Ore dv 
seech you: ἰπ πούμὶπρ me ye wronged. But ye know that in 
ἀσθένειαν τῆς σαρκὸς εὐηγγελισθάμην ὕὑμῖν τὸ.-πρότερον, 
weakness ofthe flesh I announced the glad tidings to you at the first ; 
14 καὶ τὸν πειρασμόν ἅμου τὸν" ἐν τῇ-.σαρκί.μου οὐκ ἐξου- 


and 2temptation ‘my in my flesh Snot "ye *de- 
θενήσατε οὐδὲ ἐξεπτύσατε, add’! ὡς ἄγγελον θεοῦ ἐ- 
spised nor rejected with contempt ; but as anangel of God ye 


δέξασθέ με, ὡς χριστὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν. 15 ric’ οὖν Ῥῆἦν" ὁ μακαρισμὸς 
received me, 8ἃΞ Christ Jesus. What then was *blessedness 
ὑμῶν ; μαρτυρῶ.γὰρ ὑμῖν Ore, εἰ δυνατόν, τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς 
tyour? forl bear “witness *you that, if possible, 7eyes 
« ~ > , q n ll ἐδ »9 , a ? 4 
ὑμῶν ἐξορύξαντες Iav' ἐδώκατε μοι. 16 ὥστε ἐχθρὸς 
‘your having plucked out yewould have given [them] to me. So “enemy 
ὑμῶν γέγονα ἀληθεύων ὑμῖν; 17 Ζηλοῦσιν ὑμᾶς 
‘your havel become speaking truth toyou? ‘They are zealousafter you 
? ~ 2 A b ~ r « ~ ΤΠ , ou ᾽ A 
ov καλῶς, ἀλλὰ ἐκκλεῖσαι τὑμᾶς θέλουσιν, ἵνα αὐτοὺς 
not rightly, but toexclude you [from us] they desire, that them 
ζηλοῦτε. 18 καλὸν. δὲ "τὸ" ζηλοῦσθαι ἐν καλῷ 
ye may be zealous after. But right [it is] to be zealous in aright [thing] 
πάντοτε, Kai μὴ μόνον ἐν τῷ.παρεϊναί.με πρὸς ὑμᾶς, 19 ἵτεκ- 
atalltimes, andnot only in mybeingpresent with you— “little 
via’ μου, οὺἣς πάλιν ὠδίνω "ἄχρις" 0b μορφωθῇ 
3children ‘my, of whom again I travail until shall have been formed 


& ἡμῶν our GLTTrAW. 
μὴ (vead are not &.) GLTTraw. 
2 ὑμῶν YOUr LTTrA ; ὑμῶν τὸν W. 


had given) LTTraW. 


h ἀλλὰ LTTrA. i διὰ θεοῦ through God LTTra. k φύσει 
-- & 
1 δουλεῦσαι TTr. m ; (read Do ye observe &c.) GLT. 
ξ ᾽ δ : 
° ποῦ Where LTTrAW. Ρ — ἦν LTTrAW. 4 — ἂν (read ye 


TyuasusE. “ - τὸ τὰ. ὃ τέκνα children Lrtr. ¥ μέχρις TTr. 


LV; AV; GALATIANS. 
χριστὸς ἐν ὑμῖν" 20 ἤθελον.δὲ παρεῖναι πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἄρτι, Kai 
Christ in you: andIwas wishing tobe present with you now, and 


ἀλλάξαι τὴν.φωνήν-μου, ὅτι ἀποροῦμαι ἐν ὑμῖν. 
to change my voice, for Iam perplexed asto you. 
21 Aéyeré μοι, οἱ ὑπὸ νόμον θέλοντες εἶναι, τὸν νόμον 


Tell me, Υ6 ΠΟ under law wish tobe, the law 
> ? [4 , , ev ? f ‘ 7 « ‘ 
οὐκ. ἀκούετε: 22 γέγραπται.γάρ, ὕτι ᾿Αβραὰμ δύο υἱοὺς 
do ye ποῦ hear? For it has been written, that Abraham two sons 

ἔσχεν" Eva ἐκ τῆς παιδίσκης, Kai ἕνα ἐκ τῆς ἐλευθέρας" 

had ; one of the maid-servant, and one of the free (woman). 

23 ¥arr" ὁ *pév' ἐκ τῆς παιδίσκης, κατὰ σάρκα ὕγε- 
But he of the maid-servant, accordingto flesh has 


yévynra'! ὁ.δὲ ἐκ τῆς ἐλευθέρας, διὰ τῆς" ἐπαγγελίας. 
been born, δδηᾶ heof the free [woman], through the promise. 

24 dria ἐστιν addAnyopovpeva’ αὗται.γάρ εἰσιν “ai! δύο 
Which things are allegorized ; for these are the two 
διαθῆκαι: μία μὲν ἀπὸ ὄρους Σινᾶ, εἰς δουλείαν" γεννῶσα, 
covenants; one from mount Sina, to bondage bringing forth, 


ou 2 ’ » 5) s Cc” ll ~ ” ? \ ? ~ 
ἥτις ἐστὶν Ayap. 25 τὸ yao © Ayap" Σινᾶ. ὄρος ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ 
which is Agar. For Agar *Sina “mount 115 in 
᾿Αραβίᾳ, ‘ove τ δὲ τῇ νῦν ‘Teouvaady δουλεύ 
ραβιᾳ, τοιχεῖ".- TY oveaadrnp, OVAEVEL 


Arabia, and corresponds tothe now ?she *is *in *bondage 
“δὲ! μετὰ τῶν.τέκνων αὐτῆς. 26 ἡ.δὲ ἄνω ‘Teoovcadhp, ἐλευ- 
Jand with her children ; but the above ‘Jerusalem, “free 
θέρα ἐστίν, ἥτις ἐστὶν μήτηρ πάντων" ἡμῶν" 27 γέγραπται 
315, which is mother of all of us. 7It *has *been written 
γάρ, Ἑὐφράνθητι στεῖρα ἡ ov.Tikrovoa’ ῥῆξον Kai βόησον 
*for, Rejoice, Obarren that bearest not; break forth and cry, 
ἡ οὐκ. ὠδίνουσα" ὅτι πολλα τὰ τέκνα τῆς ἐρήμου μᾶλλον ἢ 
that travailest not; because many the children of the desolate more than 


τῆς ἐχούσης τὸν ἄνδρα. 28% Hyeic'.oé, ἀδελφοί, κατὰ Ἰσαάκ, 


Jerusalem, 


ofherthat has the husband. But we, brethren, like Isaac, 
ἐπαγγελίας τέκνα iopév’' 29 ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ τότε ὁ κατὰ 


But then he who according to 


σάρκα γεννηθεὶς ἐδίωκεν τὸν κατὰ πνεῦμα, οὕτως καὶ 
flesh was born persecuted him [born] accordingto Spirit, so also 
νῦν. 80 ἀλλὰ Ti λέγει ἡ γραφή; “ExBare τὴν παιδίσκην 
now. But what says the scripture? Castout the maid-seryant 
Kai τὸν υἱὸν. αὐτῆς, οὐ.γὰρ.μὴ ἰἱκληρονομήσῃ' ὁ υἱὸς τῆς 
and her son, for in no wise may “inherit 1the *son %of “the 
παιδίσκης μετὰ τοῦ υἱοῦ τῆς ἐλευθέρας. 91 Κ[Αρα,"! ἀδελ- 
Smaid-servant with the son ofthe free (woman). So then, breth- 
Pol, οὐκιἐσμὲν παιδίσκης τέκνα, ἀλλὰ τῆς ἐλευθέρας. 
ren, weare not “of *a *maid-servant *children, but of the free [woman]. 
5 Tp ἐλευθερίᾳ Ἰοῦν πὴ! πχριστὸς ἡμᾶς" ἠλευθέρω- 
Inthe freedom therefore wherewith Christ us made free, 
σεν, CoTiKere," P kai μὴ πάλιν ζυγῷ "δουλείας" ἐνέχεσθε. 2 ἴδε 
stand fast, and not again ἴῃ ἃ γόοκ of bondage ὍΘ held. Lo, 
ἐγὼ Παῦλος λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι ἐὰν περιτέμνησθε, χριστὸς ὑμᾶς 
I Paul say toyou,that if yebecircumcised, Christ ou 
οὐδὲν ὠφελήσει: 3 μαρτύρομαι.δὲ πάλιν παντὶ ἀνθρώπῳ 
“nothing ‘shall “profit. And I testify again to every man 


W ἀλλὰ Tr. 7 [μὲν] L. ¥ γεγένηται Ww. z δι tr. 
¢—"Ayap LI[Tr]. 4 συνσ- 7. © yap for GLITraw. 
Β ἐστέ LYTrA. i κληρονομήσει Shall inherit Lrtr. 
GLITraw. =— ἡ (read With freedom το.) Lrtra. 
(commencing a sextence αὐ Stand fast) trtra. 


%of *promise *children ‘are. as 


4 — ai GLTTraw. 
f — πάντων @[L]TTrA. 
Κ διό wherefore trtra. 

0 ἡμᾶς χριστὸς GLTT AW. 9. 
P + οὖν therefore LTTraw. 


497 


sent with you. 19 My 
little children, of 
whom I travail in 
birth again until 
Christ be formed in 
you, 20 I desire to be 
present with you now, 
and to change my 
voice ; for I stand in 
doubt of you. 

21 Tell me, ye that 
desire to be under the 
law, do ye not hear 
the law ? 22 For it is 
written, that Abra- 
ham had two sons, the 
one by a bondmaid, the 
other by 2 freewoman. 
23 But he who was οἱ 
the bondwoman was 
born after the flesh ; 
but he of the freewo- 
man was by promise. 
24 Which things are 
an allegory : for these 
are the two covenants; 
the one from the mount 
Sinai, which gender- 
eth to bondage, which 
is Agar. 25 For this 
Agar is mount Sinai 
in Arabia, and answer- 
eth to Jerusalem which 
now is, and is in bon- 
dage with her child- 
ren. 26 But Jerusalem 
which is above is free, 
which is the mother 
of usall. 27 For it is 
written, Rejoice, thou 
barren that bearest 
not; break forth and 
ery, thou that travail- 
est not: for the deso- 
late hath many more 
children than 5860 
which hath an hus- 
band. 28 Now we, bre- 
thren, as Isaac was, 
are the children of 
promise. 29 But as 
then he that was born 
after the flesh perse- 
cuted him that was 
born after the Spirit, 
even so tt 7 now. 
30 Nevertheless what 
saith the scripture? 
Cast out the bond- 
woman and her son: 
for the son of the 
bondwoman shall not 
be heir with the son 
of the freewoman, 
31 So then, brethren, 
we are not children of 
the bondwoman, but 
of the free, 


V. Stand fast there- 
fore in the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath 
made (us free, and be 
not entangled again 
with tie yoke of bon- 
dage. 2 Behold, I Paul 


Ὁ δουλίαν T. 
5 ὑμεῖς YOU LTTrA. 
Ι- οὖν 
στήκετε 
9 δουλίας τ. 


ἘΠῚ: 


498 


say unto you, that if 
e be circumcised, 
Christ shall profit you 
nothing. 3 For I tes- 
tify again to every 
man that is circum- 
cised, that he is a 
debtor to dothe whole 
law. 4 Christ is be- 
come of no effect un- 
to you, whosoever of 
you are justified by 
the law ; ye are fallen 
frem grace. 5 For we 
through the Spirit 
wait for the hope of 
righteousness by taith. 
6 For in Jesus Christ 
neither circumcision 
availeth any thing, 
nor wuncireumcision ; 
but faith which work- 
ethby love. 7 Ye did 
ron well; who did 
hinder you that ye 
should not obey the 
truth? 8 This  per- 
suasion cometh not of 
him that calleth you. 
9 A little leaven 
leayeneth the whole 
lump. 10 I have con- 
fidence in you through 
the Lord, that ye will 
be none otherwise 
minded: but he that 
troubleth you shall 
bear his judgment, 
whosoever he be. 


1] And I, brethren, 
if I yet preach cir- 
cumeision, why do I 
yet suffer persecution? 
then is the offence of 
the cross ceased. 12 I 
would they were even 
cut off which trouble 
you. 13 For, brethren, 
ye have been called 
unto liberty ; only use 
not liberty for an oc- 
casion to the flesh, but 
by love serve one an- 
other. 14 For all the 
law is fulfilled in one 
word, even in this; 
Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself. 
15 But if ye bite and 
devour one another, 
take heed that ye be 
not consumed one of 
another. 16 7'his I say 
then, Walk in the Spi- 
rit, and ye shall not 
fulfil the lust of the 
flesh. 17 For the flesh 
lusteth against the 
Spirit, and the Spirit 
against the flesh : and 
these are contrary the 
one to the other: so 
that ye cannot do the 
things that ye would. 
18 But if ye be led of 
the Spirit, ye are not 


ΠΡΟΣ ΓΑΟΛ AT ἈΠ Σ: We 
περιτεμνομένῳ, OTL ὀφειλέτης ἐστὶν OAOY TOY νόμον ποιῆσαι. 
being circumcised, that a debtor heis *whole ‘the law to do. 


4 κατηργήθητε ἀπὸ *rov" χριστοῦ, οἵτινες ἐν νόμῳ δι- 
Ye are deprived of all effect from the Christ, whosoever in law are 


καιοῦσθε, τῆς χάριτος tkertoare’ 5 ἡμεῖς. γὰρ πνεύματι 

being justified ; grace ye fell from. For we, by [the] Spirit 
ἐκ πίστεως ἐλπίδα δικαιοσύνης ἀπεκδεχόμεθα. 6 ἐν.γὰρ 
by faith [the] hope of righteousness await. For in 


χριστῷ “Inoov οὔτε περιτομή τι ἰσχύει, οὔτε ἀκροβυστία, 
Christ Jesus neither circumcision “any ‘is*of force, nor uncircumcision ; 


ἀλλὰ πίστις Ov ἀγάπης ἐνεργουμένη. 7 ᾿Ετρέχετε καλῶς" 


but faith *by 7love tworking. Ye were running well: 

τίς Bete "ἀνέκοψεν" try" ἀληθείᾳ μὴ πείθεσθαι; 8 ἡ πεισ- 
who ou *hindered Sthe "truth ‘not ‘to Sobey ? The persua- 
μονὴ οὐκ ἐκ τοῦ καλοῦντος ὑμᾶς. 9 Μικρὰ ζύμη ὕλον 
sion [is] not of him who calls you. A little leaven *whole 


TO φύραμα ζυμοῖ. 10 ἐγὼ πέποιθα εἰς ὑμᾶς ἐν κυρίῳ, 
*the “lump  ‘leavens. I ampersuaded asto you in [the] Lord, 
ὅτι ovdEY.dAXO.PpovHoETE, 0.0 ταράσσων ὑμᾶς βαστάσει TO 
that ye will πᾶσα no other mind, andhe troubling you shall bear the 
κρίμα, ὕστις Yay" gp. 
judgment, whosoever he may be. 
11 ᾿Εγὼ. δέ, ἀδελφοί, εἰ περιτομὴν ἔτι κηρύσσω, τί ἔτι διώ- 
But 1, brethren, if circumcision yet Iproclaim, why yet amI 


κομαι; ἄρα κατήργηται τὸ σκάνδαλον τοῦ σταυροῦ. 
persecuted? Then has been doneaway the offence of the cross. 
12 ὄφελον Kai ἀποκόψονται οἱ ἀναστατοῦντες 


I would “even ‘they *would cut themselves off who throw *into *confusion 
ὑμᾶς. 18 Ὑμεῖς.γὰρ ἐπ᾽ ἐλευθερίᾳ ἐκλήθητε, ἀδελφοί: μόνον 
you. For ye for freedom werecalled, brethren; only 
μὴ τὴν ἐλευθερίαν εἰς ἀφορμὴν τῇ σαρκί, ἀλλὰ διὰ τῆς 
[156] not the freedom for an occasion tothe flesh, but by 
ἀγάπης δουλεύετε ἀλλήλοις. 14 ὁ.γὰρ.πᾶς νόμος ἐν Evi 
love serve ye one another. For the whole law in one 
λόγῳ “πληροῦται, ἐν τῷ, ᾿Αγαπήσεις τὸν. πλησίον.σου ὡς 
word is fulfilled, in Thou shalt love thy neighbour as 


Yéaurov.' 15 εἰ.δὲ ἀλλήλους δάκνετε καὶ κατεσθίετε, βλέπετε 
thyself ; but if oneanother yebite and devour, take heed 


ἡ τὑπὸ ἀλλήλων ἀναλωθῆτε. 
οὐ by ‘one ἌΠΟΙΟΣ tye be *consumed. 


16 Λέγω.δέ, Πνεύματι περιπατεῖτε, καὶ ἐπιθυμίαν σαρκὸς 
ButIsay, ΒΥ [{16] ϑρίσιῦὺ walk γα, and ?desire *flesh’s 
οὐνμὴ τελέσητε. 17 ἡ.γὰρ σὰρξ ἐπιθυμεῖ κατὰ τοῦ πνεύ- 
in no wise should ye fulfil. Forthe flesh desires against the Spirit, 
ματος, τὸ δὲ πνεῦμα κατὰ τῆς σαρκός: ταῦτα "δὲ" ὑάντί- 
andthe Spirit against the flesh; 7these*things ‘and are op- 
? Uy li e A “acnr il , ~ ~ 

κειται ἀλλήλοις," ἵνα μὴ ἃ. “ἂν" θέλητε ταῦτα ποιῆτε. 
posed to one another, that not whatsoever ye may wish those things yeshould do: 
18 εἰ δὲ πνεύματι ἄγεσθε, οὐκιἐστὲ ὑπὸ νόμον. 19 φανερὰ 
but if by [the] Spirit yeareled, yeare*no‘under law. Manifest 
δὲ ἐστιν τὰ ἔργα τῆς σαρκός, ἅτινά ἐστιν ἁμοιχεία,, πορνεία, 
1now are the works of the flesh, which 816 adultery, fornication, 
ἀκαθαρσία, ἀσέλγεια, 20 εἰδωλολατρεία, φαρμακεία, ἔχθραι, 


under thelaw. 19 ΝΟΥ͂ uncleanness, licentiousness, idolatry, sorcery, enmities, 
t — τοῦ LTTr[A]. 5 ἐνέκοψεν GLITrAW. ‘*—77TIx[A]. Y + [δὲ] but x. Ἢ ἐὰν TTrA. 
κ πεπλήρωται has been fulfilled nrtraw. Υ σεαυτόν GLTTrAW. τ ὑπ᾽ LTTr. 8 γὰρ fox 


LTTraAw. 


Ὁ ἀλλήλοις ἀντίκειται GLTTrAW. 


¢ ἐὰν (L]rTra. d — μοιχεία GLTTrAW. 


Ver VI. 
ξέρεις, ζῆλοι," θυμοί, 


GALATIANS, 


ἐριθεῖαι, διχοστασίαι, αἱρέσεις, 
strifes, jealousies, indignations, contentions, divisions, sects, 
21 φθόνοι, fpdvo1," μέθαι, κῶμοι, καὶ τὰ ὕμοια τούτοις" 
enyyings, murders, drunkennegses, revels, and things like these ; 
a προλέγω ὑμῖν, καθὼς Skai' προεῖπον, ὅτι οἱ 
as to which I tell *beforehand 'you, evenas also I said before, that they who 


τὰ τοιαῦτα πράσσοντες βασιλείαν θεοῦ οὐ-κληρονομήσουσιν. 
such things do ?kingdom 'God’s shall not inherit. 


22 6.0 καρπὸς τοῦ πνεύματός ἐστιν ἀγάπη, χαρά, εἰρήνη, 
But the fruit οὗ the Spirit is love, joy, peace, 
μακροθυμία, χρηστότης, ἀγαθωσύνη, πίστις, 23 "πρᾳότης," 
long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faith, meekness, 


ἐγκράτεια᾽ κατὰ τῶν τοιούτων οὐκ. ἔστιν νόμος. 24 οἱ.δὲ 
self-control: against such things thereisno law. But they that [are] 


τοῦ χριστοῦ; τὴν σάρκα ἐσταύρωσαν σὺν τοῖς παθήμασιν καὶ 
of the Christ "the flesh crucified with the passions and 


ταῖς ἐπιθυμίαις. 25 εἰ ζῶμεν πνεύματι, πνεύματι καὶ 
the desires. If welive by [the] Spirit, by [the] Spirit also 


στοιχῶμεν. 26 μὴ.γινώεθα κενόδοξοι, ἀλλήλους προκα- 


we should walk. Weshouldnotbecome vain-glorious, one another provok- 
λούμενοι, ξἀλλήλοις" φθονοῦντες. 
ing, one another envying. 
G ᾿Αδελφοί, ἐὰν καὶ 'zpodrndOy' ἄνθρωπος ἔν τινι παρα- 
Brethren, if even be taken aman in some of- 
πτώματι, ὑμεῖς οἱ πνευματικοὶ καταρτίζετε τὸν.τοιοῦτον ἐν 
fence, ye, the spiritual [ones], restore such a one in 


πνεύματι ππρᾳύτητος,, σκοπῶν σεαυτὸν μὴ καὶ σὺ πει- 


a spirit of meekness, considering thyself lest also thou be 
ρασθῇς. 2 ἀλλήλων τὰ βάρη βαστάζετε, καὶ οὕτως "ἀνα- 
tempted. One another’s burdens bear ye, and thus ful- 


πληρώσατε! τὸν νόμον τοῦ χριστοῦ. 8 εἰ γὰρ δοκεῖ τις 
fil the law of the Christ. Forif thinks ‘anyone 
, » οἵ ‘ ~ ll " ry » 

εἶναι τι, μηδὲν ὦν, ἑαυτὸν φρεναπατᾷ᾽" 4 τὸ.δὲ ἔργον 
to be something, "nothing ‘being, himself he deceives: but the work 
ἑαυτοῦ δοκιμαζέτω ἕκαστος; Kai τότε εἰς ἑαυτὸν μόνον TO 
cf himself _let Ῥσουθ Teach, and then asto himself alone the 
καύχημα ἕξει, καὶ οὐκ εἰς rovtrepov’ 5 ἕκαστος.γὰρ τὸ 
boasting hewillhave, and not asto another, For each 
ἴδιον φορτίον βαστάσει. 
hisown load shall bear. 

6 Κοινωνείτω.δὲ ὁ κατηχούμενος τὸν λύγον a 

Let ‘share "him “being *taught*in *the ‘word with him that 

κατηχοῦντι ἐν πᾶσιν ἀγαθοῖς. 7 μὴ-πλανᾶσθε, θεὸς ov puK- 

teaches in all good things. Be not misled ; God ποῦ lis 
τηρίζεται: 0.yapPéay' σπείρῃ ἄνθρωπος, τοῦτο Kai Oepi- 
mocked ; for whatsoever *may *sow ‘a “man, that also he shall 
ce’ ὃ ὅτι ὁ σπείρων εἰς τὴν.σάρκα. ἑαυτοῦ, EK τῆς σαρκὸς 
reap. For he that sows to his own flesh, from the esh 
θερίσει φθοράν 0.6 σπείρων εἰς TO πνεῦμα, ἐκ τοῦ 
shallreap corruption; but hethat sows to the Spirit, from the 


πνεύματος θερίσει ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 9 τὸ δὲ καλὸν ποιοῦντες 
Spirit shall reap life eternal: but (in) well doing 


499 


the works of the fiesh 
are manifest, which 
are these; Adultery, 
fornication, unclean- 
ness, lasciviousness, 
20 idolatry, witcheraft, 
hatred, variance, emu- 
lations, wrath, strife, 
seditions, heresies, 
21 envyings, murders, 
drunkenness, revel- 
lings, and such like: 
of the which 1 tell 
you before, as [ have 
also told you in time 
past, that they which 
do such things shall 
not inherit the king- 
dom of God. 22 But 
the fruit of the Spirit 
ig love, joy, peace, 
longsuffering, gentle- 
ness, goodness, faith, 
23 meekness, temper- 
ance: against such 
thereis no law. 24 And 
they that are Christ’s 
have crucified the flesh 
with the affections and 
lusts. 25 If we live in 
the Spirit, let us also 
walk in the Spirit. 
26 Let us not be de- 
sirous of vain glory, 
provoking one another, 
envying one another. 


VI. Brethren, if a 
man be overtaken ina 
fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such 
an one in the spirit of 
meekness ; considering 
thyself, lest thou also 
be tempted. 2 Bear ye 
one another’s burdens, 
and so fulfil the law of 
Christ. 3 For if a man 
think himself to be 
something, when he is 
nothing, he deceiveth 
himself. 4 But let 
every man prove his 
own work, and then 
shall he have rejoicing 
in himself alone, and 
not in another. 5 For 
every man shall bear 
his own burden. 


6 Let him that is 
taught in the word 
communicate unto 
him that teacheth in 
all good things. 7 Be 
not deceived; God is 
not mocked: for what- 
soever a man sowetk, 
that shall he also reap. 
8 For he that sowet 
to his flesh shall of the 
fiesh reap corruption ; 
but he that soweth 
tothe Spirit shall of the 
Spirit reap life ever- 
lasting. 9 And let us 


8 ἔρις, ζῆλος strife, jealousy LTTraw. 
LTTrAW. i + Ἰησοῦ Jesus [L]?Tra. Χ ἀλλήλους L. 
™ πραὔτητος ΤΊΤΑΥ. π ἀναπληρώσετε ye Shall fulfil Lr. 
LTTrA. P ἂν LTr. 


f— φόνοι [L]t[TraA]. 8 — καὶ [ujrtr. 


h πραὕτης 
1 προλημφθῇ LTTra. 
© φρεναπατᾷ ἑαντόν 


600 


not be weary in well 
doing : for in due sea- 
son we shall reap, if 
we faint not. 10 As 
we have therefore op- 
portunity, let us do 
good unto all men, es- 
pecially unto them 
who are of the house- 
hold of faith. 


11 Ye see how large 
a letter I have written 
unto you with mine 
own hand. 12 As many 
ag desire to make a fair 
shew in the flesh, they 
constrain you to he 
circumcised ; only lest 
they should suffer per- 
secution for the cross 
of Christ. 13 For nei- 
ther they themselves 
who are circumcised 
keep the law; but de- 
sire to have you cir- 
cumcised, that they 
may glory in your 
flesh. 14 But God for- 
bid that Ishould glory, 
save in the cross of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, 
by whom the world is 
crucified unto me, and 
I unto the world. 
15 For in Christ Jesus 
neither circumcision 
availeth any thing, nor 
uncirecumcision, but a 
new creature. 16 And 
as many as walk ac- 
cording to this rule, 
peace be on them, and 
merey, and upon the 
Israel of God. 


17 From henceforth 
let no man trouble 
me: for I bear in my 
body the marks of the 
Lord Jesus. 18 Bre- 
thren, the grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ be 
with your spirit. A- 
men. 


ΠΡῸΣ» 
“TO 


PAUL, an apostle of 
Jesus Christ by the 
will of God, to the 
saints which are at 
Ephesus, and to the 


(THE) 


WeBPOs.’A PALATVA &. Vi, 
py .Δἐκκακῶμεν"" καιρῷ. γὰρ ἰδίῳ θερίσομεν, pn ἐκλυόμενοι. 
we should not lose heart; for in *time ‘due °we ὅ5841] ῶρ ‘not fainting. 


10 ἄρα οὖν we καιρὸν ᾿ἔχομεν" ἐργαζώμεθα τὸ ἀγαθὸν πρὸς 
So then as occasion wehaye τῦρ should work good towards 
πάντας, μάλιστα.δὲ πρὸς τοὺς οἰκείους τῆς πίστεως. 
all, and specially towards those of the household of faith. 
11 Ἴδετε πηλίκοις ὑμῖν γράμμασιν ἔγραψα τῇ. ἐμῇ. χειρί. 
See ἴῃ ΒΟΥ large*to*you ‘letters ?T*wrote with my [own] hand. 
12 ὅσοι θέλουσιν εὐπροσωπῆσαι ἐν σαρκί, οὗτοι 
Asmanyas wish to have a fair appearance in [the] flesh, these 
ἀναγκάζουσιν ὑμᾶς περιτέμνεσθαι, μόνον wa “μὴ τῷ 
compel you to be circumcised, only that for the 


not 
σταυρῷ τοῦ χριστοῦ" "“Ὑδιώκωνται." 13 οὐδὲ γὰρ οἱ 
cross of the Christ they may be persecuted. For neither they who 
ἀπεριτεμνόμενοι" αὐτοὶ νόμον φυλάσσουσιν ἀλλὰ θέ- 
are being circumcised themselves [the] law keep ; but they 
ovow ὑμᾶς περιτέμνεσθαι, ἵνα ἐν τῇ ὑμετέρᾳ. σαρκὶ καυ- 
wish you to be circumcised, that in your flesh they 
χήσωνται. 14 ἐμοὶ. δὲ μὴ.γένοιτο καυχᾶσθαι εἰμὴ ἐν τῷ 
might boast. But for me may it not be to boast except in the 
σταυρῷ τοῦ κυρίου. ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ: δι od ἐμοὶ 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; through whom to me [the] 
κόσμος ἐσταύρωται, κἀγὼ τῷ" κόσμῳ. 15 δὲν γὰρ χριστῷ 
world has beencrucified, andI tothe world. 7In ‘for Christ 
Ἰησοῦ ovre' περιτομή ὅτι ἰσχύει, οὔτε ἀκροβυστία, 
Jesus neither circumcision “any ‘is *of force, nor uncircumcision ; 


ἀλλὰ καινὴ κτίσις. 16 καὶ ὕσοι τῷ. κανόνι τούτῳ στοι- 
but anew creation. And as many as by this rule shall 


χήσουσιν, εἰρηνη ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς Kai ἔλεος, Kai ἐπὶ τὸν ᾿Ισραὴλ 
walk, peace [be]upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel 


τοῦ θεοῦ. 
of God. 


17 Tov.rorrov, κόπους μοι μηδεὶς παρεχέτω" ἐγὼ.γὰρ τὰ 
For the rest, ‘troubles δΐο τη πὸ Ὅη6 ‘let *give, forI the 
στίγματα τοῦ Yeupiov' ᾿Ιησοῦ ἐν τῷ.σώματί.μου βαστάζω. 
brands of the Lord Jesus in my body bear. 
18 Ἢ χάρις τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ μετὰ τοῦ πνεύ- 


The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with *spi- 
ματος ὑμῶν, ἀδελφοί. ἀμήν. 
rit lyour, brethren. Amen. 
pies Γαλάτας ἐγράφη ἀπὸ Ῥώμης." 
o {the} Galatians written from Rome. 


E®ESIOY= EMIZSTOAH ΠΑΥΛΟΥ. 


*HPHESIANS ‘EPISTLE 2OF *PAUL, 


ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ ἀπόστολος 'Inoot χριστοῦ" διὰ θελήματος θεοῦ, 

Paul, apostle of Jesus Christ by will of God, 
τοῖς ἁγίοις τοῖς οὖσιν “ἐν ᾿Εφέσῳ" καὶ πιστοῖς ἔν χριστῷ 
tothe saints who are at Ephesus and faithful in Christ 


4 éy- LTrAW ; ἐν- T. 
* διώκονται are being persecuted τ 
‘read to [the]) urtra. 


¥ — κυρίου LTTrAw. 


5. τοῦ ᾿Αποστόλουν of the Apostle E; Πρὸς ᾿Εφεσίους LTTraw. 


5 [év ᾿Εφέσῳ] va. 


τ ἔχωμεν We May have T. * μὴ placed after χριστοῦ LITra. 

ἃ περιτετμημένοι have been circumcised L. * -- τῷ 
ν οὔτε yap For neither TTra. x τι ἐστὶν is anything GLTTrAw. 

z — the subscription GLTW ; Πρὸς Γαλάτας Tra. 

Ὁ χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ LTTrA. 


1: EPHESIANS. 


Ἰησοῦ 2 χάρις ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη ἀπὸ θεοῦ πατρὸς ἡμῶν Kai 


Jesus, Grace toyou and peace from God our Father and 
κυρίου ᾿Τησοῦ χριστοῦ. 
{the] Lord Jesus Christ. 
3 Εὐλογητὸξ ὁ θεὸς Kai πατὴρ τοῦ κυρίου. ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ 
Blessed {be]the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 


χριστοῦ, ὁ εὐλογήσας ἡμᾶς ἐν πάσῃ εὐλογίᾳ πνευματικῇ ἐν 
Christ, who blessed us with every “blessing spiritual in 
τοῖς ἐπουρανίοις ἃ χριστῷ, 4 καθὼς ἐξελέξατο ἡμᾶς ἐν αὐτῷ 
the heavenlies with Christ; according as he chose us in him 
πρὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου, elvatnpac ἁγίους καὶ ἀμώ- 
before [the] foundation of([the] world, for us to be holy and blame- 
μους κατενώπιον αὐτοῦ “ἐν ἀγάπῃ, ὃ mpoopicac ἡμᾶς εἰς 
less before him in love; having predestinated us for 
υἱοθεσίαν διὰ ᾿Τησοῦ Χριστοῦ εἰς αὐτόν, κατὰ τὴν εὐδο- 
adoption through Jesus ist to himself, according to the good 


κίαν τοῦ.θελήματος.αὐτοῦ, Θ εἰς ἔπαινον δόξης τῆς χάρι- 


pleasure of his will, to[the] praise of[the}glory of “grace 
τος αὐτοῦ, ἴὲν. ἡ" ἐχαρίτωσεν ἡμᾶς ἐν τῷ ἠγαπημένῳ" 
this, wherein he made 7cbjects *of *grace ‘us in the Beloved : 


> zt ” ι ΕΣ , " ~ er > ~ 
7 ἐν ᾧ ἔχομεν τὴν ἀπολύτρωσιν διὰ τοῦ αἱἵματος.αὐτοῦ, 


in whom we have redemption through his blood, 
THY ἄφεσιν τῶν παραπτωμάτων, κατὰ ἕτὸν πλοῦτον" τῆς 
the remission of offences, according to the riches 


χάριτος αὐτοῦ: 8 ἧς ἐπερίσσευσεν εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐν πάσῃ 
of his grace ; which he οφτιβοα to abound toward τ in all 
σοφίᾳ Kai φρονήσει, 9 γνωρίσας ἡμῖν TO μυστήριον τοῦ 
wisdom and intelligence, having made known tous the mystery 
OeXnuaroc.avrov, κατὰ ὴν εὐδοκίαν.αὐτοῦ, ἣν προέθετο 
np ς 2 ᾽ μ 5 
of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he purposed 
ἐν αὐτῷ 10 εἰς οἰκονομίαν τοῦ πληρώματος τῶν καιρῶν, 
in himself for [the] administration of the fulness oz times ; 
ἀνακεφαλαιώσασθαι τὰ-πάντα ἐν τῷ χριστῷ, Ta Pre! ‘ey! 
to head up allthings in the Christ, boththethings in 
τοῖς οὐρανοῖς και τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς" 11 ἐν αὐτῷ, ἐν ᾧ 
the heavens and the things upon the earth; in hin, in whom 
καὶ Βἐκληρώθημεν," προορισθέντες κατὰ πρό- 
also we obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according to [the] pur- 
θεσιν τοῦ τὰ πάντα ἐνεργοῦντος κατὰ τὴν βουλὴν 
pose of him who all ‘things works according to the counsel 
τοῦ.θελήματος αὐτοῦ, 12 εἰς τὸ εἶναι ἡμᾶς εἰς ἔπαινον 
of his will, for 2to*be ‘us to [the] praise 
τῆς" δόξης. αὐτοῦ, τοὺς προηλπικότας ἐν τῷ χριστῷ 18 ἐν 
of his glory ; who have fore-trusted in the Christ: in 
Kai ὑμεῖς, ἀκούσαντες τὸν λόγον τῆς ἀληθείας, TO εὐαγ- 
ye, having heard the word ofthe truth, the glad 
γέλιον τῆς.σωτηρίας. ὑμῶν, ἐν ᾧ καὶ πιστεύσαντες ἐσφρα- 
tidings of your salyation— in whom also, having believed, ye were 
γίσθητε τῷ πνεύματι τῆς ἐπαγγελίας τῷ ἁγίῳ. 14 τς" ἐστιν 
sealed with the Spirit of promise the Holy, who is 
ἀῤῥαβὼν τῆς.κληρονομίας. ἡμῶν, cic ἀπολύτρωσιν τῆς 
{the] earnest of our inheritance, to [the] redemption of the 
περιποιήσεως, εἰς ἔπαινον τῆς.δόξης. αὐτοῦ. 
acquired possession, to praise of his glory. 


ᾧ 


whom also 


501 
faithful in Christ Je- 
sus : 2 Grace be to you, 
and peace, from God 


our Father, and from 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 


3 Blessed be the God 
and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who 
hath blessed us with 
all spiritual blessings 
in heavenly places in 
Christ : 4according as 
he hath chosen us in 
him before the founda- 
tion of the world, that 
we should be holy and 
without blame before 
him in love : 5 having 
predestinated us unto 
the adoption of chil- 
dren by Jesus Christ 
to himself, according 
to the good pleasure of 
his will, 6 to the praise 
of the glory of his 
grace, wherein he hath 
made us accepted in 
the beloved. 7In whom 
we have redemption 
through his blood, the 
forgiveness of sins, ac- 
cording to the riches 
of his grace; 8 where- 
in he hath abounded 
toward us in all wis- 
dom and prudence; 
9 having made known 
unto us the mystery 
of his will, according 
to his good pleasure 
which he hath purpos- 
ed in himself: 10 that 
in the dispensation of 
the fulness of times 
he might gather to- 
gether in one all things 
in Christ, both which 
are in heaven, and 
which are on earth; 
even in him: 11 in 
whom also we have 
obtained an _ inherit- 
ance, being predesti- 
nated according to the 
purpose of him who 
worketh all things 
after the counsel of 
his own will: 12 that 
we should be to the 
praise of his glory, who 
first trusted in Christ. 
13 In whom ye also 
trusted, after that ye 
heard the word of 
truth, the gospel of 
your salvation: in 
whom also after that 
ve believed, ye were 
sealed with that holy 
Spirit of promise, 
14 which is the earnest 
of our inheritance un- 
til the redemption of 
the purchased posses- 
sion, unto the praise 
of his glory. 


4d + ἐν in (Christ) EGLTTraw. 
f Hs which (read éxa. he freely bestowed on) Lrtra. 


©, ἐν ἀγάπῃ (read in love having predestinated us) GLT 
& τὸ πλοῦτος LTTrAW. 
GLTTrAW. lemtupon LTTra. © ἐκλήθημεν we were called τι. ἰ --- τῆς LITraw. 


h — ze both 
m9 which La. 


502 


15 Wherefore I also, 
after I heard of your 
faith in the Lord Je- 
sus, and love unto all 
the saints, 16 cease not 
to give thanks for you, 
making mention of 
you in my prayers ; 
17 that the God of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of glory, may 
give unto you the spi- 
rit of wisdom and re- 
yelation in the know- 
ledge of him: 18 the 
eyes of your under- 
standing being en- 
lightened; that ye 
may know what is the 
hope of his calling, 
and what the riches of 
the glory of his in- 
heritance in the saints, 
19 and what ts the ex- 
ceeding greatness of 
his power to us-ward 
who believe, accord- 
ing to the working of 
his mighty power, 
20 which he wrought 
in Christ, when he 
raised him from the 
dead, and set him at 
his own right hand in 
the heavenly places, 
21 far above all princi- 
pality, and power, and 
might, and dominion, 
and every name that 
is named, not only in 
this world, but also 
in that which is to 
come: 22 and hath 
put all things under 
his feet, andgave him 
to be the head over all 
things to the church, 
23 which is his body, 
the fulness of him that 
fillethallin all. II. And 
you hath he quicken- 
ed, who were dead 
in trespasses and sins; 
2 wherein in time past 
ye walked according 
to the course of this 
world, according to 
the prince of the 
power of the air, the 
spirit that now work- 
eth in the children of 
disobedience : 3 among 
whom also we all had 
our conversation in 
times past in the 
lusts of our flesh, ful- 
filling the desires of 
the flesh and of the 
mind; and were by 
nature the children of 


Ὁ — τὴν ἀγάπην 14]. 
κεν he has wrought ura. 


S RUE ΞΕ 
% + αὐτὸν him T. 


Ti PROVES, EPs 1S. YS. 


15 Διὰ τοῦτο κἀγὼ 
Because of this 


Iva 
ἀκούσας τὴν καθ᾽ ὑμᾶς πίστιν ἐν 
Ialso having heard of the 7among *you ‘faith in 
τῷ κυρίῳ ᾿Ιησοῦ, καὶ "τὴν ἀγάπην" τὴν εἰς πάντας τοὺς 
the Lord Jesus, and _ the love which [15] toward all the 
ἁγίους, 16 οὐ-παύομαι εὐχαριστῶν ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν, μνείαν οὑμῶν" 
saints, donot cease giving thanks for you, mention of you 
ποιούμενος ἐπὶ τῶν. προσευχῶν. μου" 17 ἵνα ὁ θεὸς τοῦ κυρίου 


making in my prayers, that the God of *Lord 
ἡμῶν ‘Inoov χριστοῦ, ὁ πατὴρ τῆς δόξης, δῴη ὑμῖν πνεῦμα 
tour Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give to you[the] spirit 


σοφίας Kai ἀποκαλύψεως ἐν 


ἐπιγνώσει αὐτοῦ, 18 πεφω- 
of wisdom and revelation 


in [the] knowledge of him, ®being 
, 4 ? 4 ~ PS s Π « ~ 2 4 ἰδὲ 
τισμένους τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς τῆς Ῥδιανοίας" ὑμῶν, εἰς τὸ εἰδέναι 
7enlightened ‘the 7eyes 5mind 3of*your, for to “know 
ὑμᾶς τίς ἐστιν ἡ ἐλπὶς τῆς.κλήσεως αὐτοῦ, Ixai' τίς ὁ πλοῦ- 
tyou what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches 
τος τῆς δόξης Tic-KAnoovopiac.abrov ἐν τοῖς ἁγίοις, 19 Kai 
ofthe glory of his inheritance in the saints, and 
Ti TO ὑπερβάλλον μέγεθος τῆς.δυνάμεως. αὐτοῦ εἰς ἡμᾶς 


what the surpassing greatness of his power towards us 
τοὺς πιστεύοντας κατὰ THY ἐνέργειαν τοῦ κράτους τῆς 
who believe according to the working ofthe might 
ἰσχύος. αὐτοῦ, 20 ἣν τἐνήργησεν" ἐν τῷ χριστῷ ἐγείρας 
of his strength, which he wrought in the Christ, having raised 
αὐτὸν ἐκ 5 ψεκρῶν, καὶ ᾿ἐκάθισεν 5 ἐν δεξιᾷ 


him fromamong([the] dead, and he set fhimjat right *hand 


αὐτοῦ ἐν τοῖς “ἐπουρανίοις, 21 ὑπεράνω πάσης ἀρχῆς 
this in the heavenlies, above every principality 
καὶ ἐξουσίας καὶ δυνάμεως καὶ KUPLOTNTOC, καὶ παντὸς ὀνό- 
and authority and power and lordship, and every name 
ματος Crepes κοι οὐ μόνον ἐν τῷ.αἰῶνι.τούτῳ, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
named, not only in this age, but also 

ς " Se 4 « , c A ‘4 ’ 

22 καὶ * πάντα ὑπέταξεν ὑπὸ τοὺς πόδας 
and all things he put under *feet 
αὐτοῦ" καὶ αὐτὸν ἔδωκεν κεφαλὴν ὑπὲρ πάντα ἐκ- 
this, and “*him ‘gave [tobe] ~ head over all things to the as- 

κλησίᾳ, 23 ἥτις ἐστὶν τὸ σῶμα.αὐτοῦ, τὸ πλήρωμα τοῦ 
sembly, which ig his body, the fulness of him who 
Yravraiy πᾶσιν πληρουμένου: Q καὶ ὑμᾶς ὄντας νεκροὺς 
all things in all fills— and you being dead 
τοῖς παραπτώμασιν Kai ταῖς ἁμαρτίαις, 2 ἐν αἷς ποτε 
in offences and sins, in which once 


περιεπατήσατε κατὰ TOY αἰῶνα τοῦ κόσμου.τούτου, κατὰ 
ye walked according to the age of this world, according to 
τὸν ἄρχοντα τῆς ἐξουσίας τοῦ ἀέρος, τοῦ πνεύματος τοῦ νῦν 
the ruler ofthe authority ofthe air, the spirit that now 
ἐνεργοῦντος ἐν τοῖς υἱοῖς τῆς ἀπειθείας" 3 ἐν οἷς Kai ἡμεῖς 
works in the sons of disobedience: among whom also we 
πάντες ἀνεστράφημέν ποτε ἐν ταῖς ἐπιθυμίαις τῆς σαρκὸς 
all had our conduct once in _ the desires of *flesh 
ἡμῶν, ποιοῦντες τὰ θελήματα τῆς σαρκὸς Kai τῶν διανοιῶν, 
‘our, doing the things willed ofthe flesh and ofthe thoughts, 


> ~ , 
ἐν τῷ μέλλοντι" 
in the coming [one]; 


P καρδίας heart GLTtraW 4 — καὶ LTTrA. 
' καθίσας having set LrTra. 
Y + τὰ GLITrAW. z+ ὑμῶν 


ο — ὑμῶν LITrA. 
5. + τῶν the w. 


* οὐρανοῖς heavens L. X+ τὰ W. 


‘read your offences and sins) Lrtr[ 4]. 


EPHESIANS. 
ὀργῆς, ὡς καὶ οἱ λοιποί" 4 ὁ.δὲ θεός, 
ο 


Il. 


καὶ ἦμεν" ὑτέκνα φύσει" 


and were children, ΒΥ nature, of wrath, as even the rest: but God, 
, na > γἋ 7 Η͂ ᾿ Π ? , ? ~ 
πλούσιος ὧν ἐν ἐλέει, διὰ τὴν πολλὴν ἀγάπην αὐτοῦ 

"rich ‘being in mercy, because of 2creat Slove this 
ἣν ἠγάπησεν ἡμᾶς, 5 Kai ὄντας ἡμᾶς νεκροὺς τοῖς 

wherewith he loved us, Zalso *being lwe dead 

παραπτώμασιν, συνεζωοποίησεν 5 τῷ χριστῷ YapITi ἐστε 
in offences, quickened [us] with, the Christ, (by grace ye are 
σεσωσμένοι᾽ 6 καὶ συνήγειρεν, καὶ συνεκάθισεν ἐν τοῖς 
saved,) and raised [us] up together, and seated [us] together in the 


ἐπουρανίοις ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ" 7 ἵνα ἐνδείξηται ἐν τοῖς 
heavenlies in Christ Jesus, that he might shew in the 
αἰῶσιν τοῖς ἐπερχομένοις τὸν ὑπερβάλλοντα πλοῦτον᾽ 
ages that [are] coming the surpassing riches 
τῆς.χάριτος. αὐτοῦ ἐν χρηστότητι ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς ἐν χριστῷ Inco’ 
of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. 
8 τῇ γὰρ χάριτί ἐστε σεσωσμένοι διὰ “τῆς πίστεως" Kai 
For by grace ye are saved through faith ; and 
τοῦτο οὐκ ἐξ ὑμῶν, θεοῦ τὸ δῶρον" 9 οὐκ ἐξ ἔργων, ἵνα 
this ποῦ of yourselves; [it is] God’s gift: not of works, that 
μή τις καυχήσηται. 10 αὐτοῦ.γάρ ἐσμεν ποίημα, κτισθέν- 
not anyone might boast. For his *we *are 'workmanship, created 
τες ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ ἐπὶ ἔργοις ἀγαθοῖς, οἷς ποοητοίμασεν ὁ 
in Christ Jesus for *works ‘good, which *before “prepared 
θεὸς ἵνα ἐν αὐτοῖς περιπατήσωμεν. 


Ἰᾷᾳᾷοᾶ that in them we should walk. 
11 Διὸ μνημονεὔετε ὅτι [ὑμεῖς more τὰ ἔθνη ἐν 
Wherefore remember that ye once the nations in [the] 


σαρκί, ot λεγόμενοι ἀκροβυστία ὑπὸ τῆς λεγομένης περιτο- 
flesh, who arecalled uncircumcision by that called circum- 
μῆς ἐν σαρκὶ χειροποιήτου, 12 ὅτι ἦτε δέν" τῷ καιρῷ.ἐκείνῳ 
cisionin [the] flesh made by hand— that ye were at that time 
χωρὶς χριστοῦ, ἀπηλλοτριωμένοι τῆς πολιτείας τοῦ Ἰσραήλ, 
apart from Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, 
kai ξένοι τῶν διαθηκῶν τῆς ἐπαγγελίας, ἐλπίδα μὴ ἔχον- 
and strangers from the covenants of promise, hope not hay- 
τες, καὶ ἄθεοι ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ" 13 νυνὶ.δὲ ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ, 
ing, and without God in the world: but now in Christ Jesus, 
ὑμεῖς οἱ ποτὲ ὄντες μακρὰν "ἐγγὺς ἐγενήθητε" ἐν τῷ αἵματι 
ye who once were afar off near are become by the blood 
τοῦ χριστοῦ. 14 αὐτὸς. γάρ ἐστιν ἡ.εἰρήνη.ἡμῶν, ὁ ποιήσας 
of the Christ. For he is our peace, who made 
τὰ ἀμφότερα ἕν, καὶ TO μεσότοιχον τοῦ φραγμοῦ λύσας" 
both one, and the middlewall ofthe fence broke down, 
15 τὴν ἔχθραν ἐν τῇ. σαρκὶ αὐτοῦ, τὸν νόμον TOY ἐντολῶν 
Sthe ‘enmity *in *his *flesh, Sthe Ἴδαν 10of 1!¢ommandments 
ἐν δόγμασιν καταργήσας" ἵνα τοὺς dbo κτίσῃ ἐν ἰέἑαυ- 
*2in ‘Sdecrees ‘having “annulled, that the twohe mightcreatein him- 
Tw εἰς ἕνα καινὸν ἄνθρωπον, ποιῶν εἰρήνην" 16 Kai ἀπο- 
self into one new man, making peace; and might 
καταλλάξῃ τοὺς ἀμφοτέρους ἐν ἑνὶ σώματι τῷ θεῷ διὰ τοῦ 
reconcile both in one body to God through the 
σταυροῦ, ἀποκτείνας THY ἔχθραν ἐν αὐτῷ 17 καὶ ἐλθὼν 
cross, having slain the enmity by it; and having come 
> φύσει τέκνα L, e+ [ἐν] L. 
f ποτὲ ὑμεῖς LITA. 
i αὐτῷ LTTra. 


5 ἤμεθα TTrA. 
© — τῆς LTTr[A]. 
ἢ ἐγενήθητε ἐγγὺς LTTrA. 


503 


wrath. even as others, 
4 But God, whois rich 
in mercy, for his great 
love wherewith he 
loved us, 5 even when 
we were dead in sins, 
hath quickened us to- 
gether with Christ, (by 
grace ye are saved ;) 
6 and hath raised us 
up together, and made 
us sit together in hea- 
venly places in Christ 
Jesus: 7 that in the 
ages to come he might 
shew the exceeding 
riches of his grace in 
his kindness toward 
us through Christ Je- 
sus. 8 For by grace 
are ye saved through 
faith; and that not 
of yourselves : 7¢ is the 
gift of God: 9 not of 
works, lest any man 
should boast. 10 For 
we are his workman- 
ship, created in Christ 
Jesus unto good works, 
which God hath be- 
fore ordained that we 
should walk in them, 


1 Wherefore re- 
member, that ye being 
in time past Gentiles 
in the flesh, who are 
called Uncircumcision 
by that whichis called 
the Circumcision in 
the flesh made by 
hands ; 12 that at that 
time ye were without 
Christ, being aliens 
from the common- 
wealth of Israel, and 
strangers from the co- 
venants of promise, 
having no hope, and 
without God in the 
world: 13 but nowin 
Christ Jesus ye who 
sometimes were far 
off are made nigh by 
the blood of Christ, 
14 For he is our peace, 
who hath made both 
one, and hath broken 
down the middle wali 
of partition between 
us ; 15 having abolish- 
ed in his flesh the en- 
mity, even the law of 
commandments con- 
tained in ordinances ; 
for to make in himsel? 
of twain onenew man, 
somaking peace; l6and 
that he might recon- 
cile both unto God in 
one body by the cross, 

aving slain the en- 
mity thereby: 17 and 
came and preached 


d τὸ ὑπερβάλλον πλοῦτος LTTrAW. 
8 --- ἐν (read τῷ kx. ἐκ. at that time) LTTraw. 


ὅθ4 

peace to you which 
were afar off, and to 
them that were nigh. 
i8 For through him 
we both have access by 
one Spirit unto the Fa- 
ther. 19 Now there- 
fore ye are no more 
strangers and foreign- 
ers, but fellowcitizens 
with the saints, and 
of the household of 
God; 20 and are built 
upon the foundation 
of the apostles and 
prophets, Jesus Christ 
himself being the 
chief corner stone; 
21 in whom all the 
building fitly framed 
together groweth unto 
an holy temple in the 
Lord : 22 in whom ye 
also are builded toge- 
ther for an habitation 
of God through the 
Spirit. 


III. For this cause 
1 Paul, the prisoner 
of Jesus Christ for you 
Gentiles, 2 if ye have 
heard of the dispensa- 
tion of the grace of 
God which is given me 
to you-ward: 3 how 
that by revelation he 
made known unto me 
the mystery; (as I 
wrote afore in few 
words, 4 whereby, 
when ye read, ye may 
understand my know- 
ledge in the mystery 
of Christ) 5 which in 
other ages was not 
made known unto the 
sons of men, as it is 
now revealed unto his 
holy apostles and pro- 
phets by the Spirit ; 
6 that the Gentiles 
should be fellowheirs, 
and of the same body, 
and partakers of his 
promise in Christ by 
the gospel : 7 whereof 
I was made a minister, 
according to the gift 
of the grace of God 
given unto me by the 
effectual working of 
his power. 8 Unto me, 
who am less than the 
least of all saints, is 


WPOt EP@EZIOY SE. 


εἰρήνην ὑμῖν τοῖς 


It, ΠῚ: 


εὐηγγελίσατο μακρὰν καὶ " 


he announced the glad tidings— peace to you who [were] afarofé and 
τοῖς ἐγγύς, 18 ὕτι.δι αὐτοῦ ἔχομεν τὴν προσαγωγὴν οἱ 


to those near. For through him we have 
ἀμφότεροι ἐν ἑνὶ πνεύματι πρὸς τὸν πατέρα. 19 ἄρα οὖν 
both by one Spirit to the Father. So then 

> ͵ > ry , ‘ ΄ ] > ΝΠ 1 ἢ - il ~ 
οὐκέτι ἐστὲ ἕένοι Kai πάρθικοι, ᾿ἀλλὰ" 'Ἃ συμπολῖται" τῶν 
ΠΟ longer are ye strangers and sojourners, but fellow-citizens of the 
ἁγίων καὶ οἰκεῖοι τοῦ θεοῦ, 20 ἐποικοδομηθέντες ἐπὶ τῷ 
saints and of the household of God, being built up on the 
θεμελίῳ τῶν ἀποστόλων Kai προφητῶν, ὄντος ἀκρο- 
foundation of the apostles and prophets, *being [the] ®corner- 
γωνιαίου αὐτοῦ °Inoov χριστοῦ," 21 ἐν ᾧ πᾶσα Ῥὴ" οἰκοδομὴ 
stone Shimself ‘Jesus “Christ, in whom all _ the _ building 
συναρμολογουμένη αὔξει εἰς ναὸν ἅγιον ἐν κυρίῳ, 22 ἐν 
fitted together increases to a*temple ‘holy in[the] Lord; in 


καὶ ὑμεῖς συνοικοδομεῖσθε εἰς κατοικητήριον τοῦ θεοῦ 
whom also ye are being built together for a habitation of God 


ἐν πνεύματι. 
in [the] Spirit. 
3 Totrov-yapw ἐγὼ Παῦλος ὁ δέσμιος τοῦ χριστοῦ 4 Iyn- 
For this cause I Paul prisoner of the Christ Je- 
σοῦ! ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν τῶν vay" 2 εἴγε ἠκούσατε τὴν οἰκονομίαν 
sus for you nations, ifindeed ye heardof the administration 
τῆς χάριτος τοῦ θεοῦ τῆς δοθείσης μοι εἰς ὑμᾶς, 8. Tort" 


access 


of the grace of God which was given to me towards you, that 
κατὰ ἀποκάλυψιν ϑἐγνώρισέν! μοι τὸ μυστήριον, καθὼς 
by revelation he made known to me the mystery, (according as 


προέγραψα év.odiyw, 4 πρὸς ὃ δύνασθε ἀναγινώσκοντες 

I wrote before briefly, by which ye are able, reading [it], 
νοῆσαι τὴν. σύνεσίν.μου ἐν τῷ μυστηρίῳ τοῦ χριστοῦ" ὃ ὃ 

to perceive my understanding in the mystery ofthe Christ,) which 
τὲν" ἑτέραις γενεαῖς οὐκ.ἐγνωρίσθη τοῖς υἱοῖς τῶν ἀνθρώ- 
in other generations was not made known tothe sons of men, 
πων, ὡς νῦν ἀπεκαλύφθη τοῖς ἁγίοις ἀποστόλοις αὐτοῦ καὶ 


as now it was revealed to 7holy Sapostles this and 
προφήταις ἐν πνεύματι" 6 εἶναι τὰ ἔθνη ᾿συγκληρονόμα" 
prophets ἰπ {the} Spirit, Sto “be ‘the *nations joint-heirs 


καὶ “ovoowpa' καὶ ᾿συμμέτοχα" τῆς. ἐπαγγελίας. “αὐτοῦ! ἐν 
and ajoint-body and joint-partakers of his promise in 
γτῷ" χριστῷξ, διὰ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, 7 οὗ "ἐγενόμην" διάκονος 
the Christ throughthe gladtidings; of which I became servant 
κατὰ τὴν δωρεὰν τῆς χάριτος τοῦ θεοῦ ὕτὴν JobEicay' 
according to the gift ofthe grace of God given 
μοι κατὰ τὴν ἐνέργειαν τῆς.δυνάμεως. αὐτοῦ: ὃ ἐμοὶ 
to me, according to the working of his power. To me, 
τῷ ἐλαχιστοτέρῳ πάντων “τῶν" ἁγίων ἐδόθη ἡ χάρις. αὕτη, 


this grace given, that the lessthan ὑμθ Ἰϑαδῦ of all the saints, was given this grace, 

Ishould preachamong gq) 1} ~ ᾽ , Cae alle? 4 

the Gentiles the un. “ἐν! τοῖς ἔθνεσιν εὐαγγελίσασθαι τὸν" ἀνεξιχνίαστον 

searchable riches of among the nations to announce the glad tidings— the unsearchable 
«+ εἰρήνην peace LTTrAw. ἰἀλλ᾽ τ. ™ - ἐστὲ ye are LTTrA. “ovv- TA. ° χριστοῦ 

Ἰησοῦ τὰ. Ρ — ἡ (read [the]) Lrtraw. 4 --- Ἰησοῦ τ[4]. τ [ore] u. 5 ἐγνωρίσθη 

was made known GLitraw. ὃ — ἐν (read ἑτέραις to other) GLITrAW. Youv-T. “ σύν- 


LTTra, 
ἃ φγενήθην LITTAW. 
to the) Lrvra. Θ 


x — αὐτοῦ (read of the promise) LITra. 


z + Ἰησοῦ Jesus LITra. 


Υ — τῷ LTTrA. 
Ξ = 
4 — ἐν (read τοῖς 


© τῆς δοθείσης GLTTrA. ς — τῶν GLTTraW. 


τὸ LTTrAW,. 


ἘΠῚ ΤΥ. EPHESIANS. 
fzovrov' τοῦ χριστοῦ, 9 καὶ φωτίσαι Srdvrac' τίς 
riches of the Christ, and to enlighten all [885 to) what [is] 


ἡ "κοινωνία! τοῦ μυστηρίου τοῦ ἀποκεκρυμμένου ἀπὸ τῶν 
the fellowship ofthe mystery which has been hidden from the 
αἰώνων ἐν τῷ θεῷ, τῷ τὰ-πάντα κτίσαντι Oia Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ, 
i Jesus 


ages in God, who all things created by Christ, 
10 ἵνα γνωρισθῇ viv ταῖς ἀρχαῖς καὶ ταῖς ἐξουσίαις ἐν 


that might be known now tothe principalities and the authorities in 


τοῖς ἐπουρανίοις διὰ τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἡ πολυποίκιλος σοφία 
the heavenlies through the assembly the multifarious wisdom 
τοῦ θεοῦ, 11 κατὰ πρόθεσιν τῶν αἰώνων, ἣν ἐποίησεν 


of God, δοοογαϊηρ ἴο [{Π6] purpose ofthe ages, which he made 
ἐν Ἐ χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ τῷ κυρίῳ.ἡμῶν, 12 ἐν ᾧ ἔχομεν τὴν παῤ- 
in Christ Jesus our Lord, in whom we have bold- 
ῥησίαν καὶ ἱτὴν᾽ προσαγωγὴν ἐν πεποιθήσει διὰ τῆς πίστεως 
ness and access in confidence by the faith 
> ~ 4 > Load ‘ m2 ~ i] ? ~ , , 
αὐτοῦ. 13 διὸ αἰτοῦμαι μὴ "ἐκκακεῖν" ἐν ταῖς θλίψεσίν 
of him, Wherefore I beseech [you] not to faint at “tribulations 


pou ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν, ἥτις ἐστὶν δόξα ὑμῶν. 14 rovrov-xaow 

my for you, which is your glory. For this cause 

κάμπτω τὰ.γόνατά.μου πρὸς TOY πατέρα "τοῦ. κυρίου.ἡμῶν 
I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord 


? ~ ~ I ? - ~ ΖΕ. ? ~ " 
Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ." 15 ἐξ οὗ πᾶσα πατριὰ ἐν οὐρανοῖς καὶ 


Jesus Christ, of whom every family in [the] heavens and 
? \ ~ ? , = - oO , Π tc w~ A Ρ Ν 

ἐπι γῆς ὀνομάζεται, 10 ἵνα δῴη υμῖν κατα τὸν 
on earth is named, that he may give you according to the 


πλοῦτον" τῆς δόξης. αὐτοῦ, δυνάμει κραταιωθῆναι διὰ τοῦ 
riches of his glory, with power tobestrengthened by 


πνεύματος αὐτοῦ εἰς τὸν ἔσω ἄνθρωπον, 17 κατοικῆσαι τὸν 
his Spirit in the inner man ; {for] *to*dwell ‘the 


χριστὸν διὰ τῆς πίστεως ἐν ταῖς.καρδίαις ὑμῶν" 18 ἐν ἀγάπῃ 


“Christ, through faith, in your hearts, in love 

9, 9. € , ‘ , ev ? , 

ἐῤῥιζωμένοι καὶ τεθεμελιωμένοι ἵνα ἐξισχύσητε κατα- 
being rooted and founded, that ye may be fullyable to ap- 


λαβέσθαι σὺν πᾶσιν τοῖς ἁγίοις τί τὸ πλάτος καὶ μῆκος 
prehend with all the saints what{[is] the breadth and length 
καὶ «βάθος καὶ ὕψος, 19 γνῶναίτε τὴν ὑπερβάλλουσαν 
and depth and height ; and to know the surpassing 
τῆς γνώσεως ἀγάπην τοῦ χριστοῦ, ἵνα πληρωθῆτε εἰς πᾶν 
knowledge love of the Christ; that ye may be filled unto all 
τὸ πλήρωμα τοῦ θεοῦ. 20 τῷ. δὲ δυναμένῳ ὑπὲρ πάντα 
the fulness of God. Butto him who [15 able above all things 
ποιῆσαι τὑπὲρ.ἐκ περισσοῦ" ὧν αἰτούμεθα ἢ νοοῦμεν, κατὰ 
to do exceedingly above what weask or think, according to 
τὴν δύναμιν τὴν ἐνεργουμένην ἐν ἡμῖν, Ql αὐτῷ ἡ δόξα 
the power which works in us, tohim[bej_ glory 
ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ " ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ, εἰς πάσας τὰς γενεὰς TOU 
in the assembly in Christ Jesus, to all the generations of the 
αἰῶνος τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. 4 Παρακαλῶ οὖν ὑμᾶς ἐγὼ 
age of the ages, Amen, Iexhort therefore you, I 
ὁ δέσμιος ἐν κυρίῳ, ἀξίως περιπατῆσαι τῆς κλήσεως 
the prisoner ἴῃ [the] Lord, “*worthily 1to 7walk of the calling 


f πλοῦτος LTTrAW. 8 — πάντας [L]T. 
i — διὰ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ GLTTraW. k + τῷ LTTrA. 
ἐν- T. 1 — τοῦ κυρίον ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ LTTrAW. 
LTTraW. ᾳ ὕψος καὶ βάθος LTrA. τ ὑπερεκπερισσοῦ GLTTrAW. 


δ08ὃ 


Christ ; 9 and tomake 
all men see what is 
the fellowship of the 
mystery, which from 
the beginning of the 
world hath been hid in 
God, who created all 
things by Jesus Christ: 
10 to the intent that 
now unto the princi- 
palities and powers in 
heavenly places might 
be known by _ the 
church the manifold 
Wisdom of God, 11 ac- 
cording to the eternal 
purpose which he pur- 
posed in Christ Je- 
sus our Lord: 12 in 
whom we have bold- 
ness and access with 
confidence by the faith 
of him. 13 Wherefore 
I desire that ye faint 
not at my tribulations 
for you, which is your 
glory. 14 For this cause 
I bow my knees unto 
the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, 15 of 
whom the whole fa- 
mily in heaven and 
earth is named, 16 that 
he would grant you, 
according to the riches 
of his glory, to be 
strengthened with 
might by his Spirit in 
the inner man ;17 that 
Christ may dwell in 
your hearts by faith- 
that ye, being rooted 
and grounded in love, 
18 may be abletocom- 
prehend withall saints 
what is the breadth, 
aud length, and depth, 
and height; 19 and 
to know the love of 
Christ, which passeth 
knowledge, that ye 
might be filled with 
all the fulness of God. 
20 Now unto him that 
is ableto do exceeding 
abundantly above all 
that we ask or think, 
according to the power 
that worketh in us, 
21 unto him be glory 
in the church by Christ 
Jesus throughout all 
ages, world without 
end. Amen. 

therefore, the prisoner 
of the Lord, beseech 
you that ye walk wor- 
thy of the vocation 
wherewith ye are call- 


4 οἰκονομία administration GLITraw. 
1 — τὴν LiTr[A]. 

° δῷ LTTra. 
5. - καὶ and LTtr[a]. 


™ ἐγ- LTrAW ; 
P τὸ πλοῦτος 


506 


ed, 2 with all lowli- 
ness and meekness, 
with longsuffering, 
forbearing one an- 
other in love; 3 en- 
deavouring to keep 
the unity of the Spirit 
in the bond of peace, 
4 There is one body, 
and one Spirit, even as 
ye are called in one 
hope of your calling ; 
5 one Lord, one faith, 
one baptism, 6 one 
God and Father of all, 
who is above all, and 
through all, and in you 
all. 7 But unto every 
one of us is given grace 
according to the mea- 
sure of the gift of 
Christ. 8 Wherefore 
he saith, When he as- 
cended up on high, he 
led captivity captive, 
and gave gifts unto 
men. 9 (Now that he 
ascended, what is it 
but that he also de- 
scended first into the 
lower parts of the 
earth? 10 He that de- 
scended is the same 
also that ascended up 
far above all heavens, 
that he might fill all 
things.) 11 And he 
gave some, apostles ; 
and some, prophets ; 
and some, evangelists; 
and some, pastors and 
teachers; 12 for the per- 
fecting of the saints, 
for the work of the 
ministry, for the edi- 
fying of the body of 
Christ: 13 till we all 
come in the unity of 
the faith, and of the 
knowledge of the Son 
of God, unto a perfect 
man, unto the mea- 
sure of the stature of 
the fulness of Christ: 
14 that we henceforth 
be no more children, 
tossed to and fro, and 
carried about with 
every wind of doctrine, 
by the sleight of men, 
and cunning crafti- 
ness, whereby they lie 
in wait to deceive; 
15 but speaking the 
truth in love, may 
grow up into him in 
all things, which is 
the head, even Christ : 
16 from whom _ the 
whole body fitly join- 
ed together and com- 
pacted by that which 
every joint supplieth, 
according to the ef- 
fectual working in the 
measure of every part, 


τ mpavrntos TTrA. 


Υ — πρῶτον GLITrAW. 
4 συν- T. 


¢ — 9 LTTrAW. 


i POs. PES ES Hows. LV. 
’ ’ ‘4 , , ‘ δι 
ἐκλήθητε, 2 μετὰ πάσης ταπεινοφροσύνης καὶ ἱπρᾳό- 

with all humility and meek- 

τητος," μετὰ μακροθυμίας, ἀνεχόμενοι ἀλλήλων ἐν ἀγάπῃ, 
ness, with longsuffering, bearing with one another in love; 

3 σπουδάζοντες τηρεῖν τὴν ἑνότητα τοῦ πνεύματος ἐν τῷ 


ἧς 


wherewith ye were called, 


being diligent to keep the unity of the Spirit in the 
συνδέσμῳ τῆς εἰρήνης. 4 Ἕν σῶμα καὶ ἕν πνεῦμα, καθὼς καὶ 
bond of peace. One body and one Spirit, evenas also 


ἐκλήθητε ἐν μιᾷ ἐλπίδι τῆς.κλήσεως ὑμῶν" 5 εἷς κύριος, pia 


ye were called in one hope of your calling ; one Lord, one 
πίστις, ἕν βάπτισμα" 6 εἷς θεὸς Kai πατὴρ πάντων, ὁ 
faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who [is] 
ἐπὶ πάντων, Kai διὰ πάντων, καὶ ἐν πᾶσιν τὑμῖν." 
over all, and through all, and in 2all tyou. 
« ‘ ΓΤ , « ~ ? ΄ «ει ’ ‘ ‘ 
7 ἑνὶ δὲ ἑκάστῳ ἡμῶν ἐδόθη δὴ" χάρις κατὰ τὸ μέτρον 
But to each one ofus was given grace according to the measure 
τῆς δωρεᾶς τοῦ χριστοῦ. ὃ διὸ λέγει, ‘AvaBac εἰς 


of the gift of the Christ. 
ὕψος ἠχμαλώτευσεν αἰχμαλωσίαν, “καὶ! ἔδωκεν δόματα τοῖς 
high he led *captive captivity, and gave gifts 
ἀνθρώποις. 9 T0.6& ἀνέβη, τί ἐστιν Ely) ὅτι καὶ κατέβη 
to men, But that heascended, what isit but that also he descended 
Υπρῶτον" εἰς τὰ κατώτερα ἡμέρη" τῆς γῆς; 10 ὁ καταβὰς 
first into the lower parts of the earth? Hethat descended 
αὐτός ἐστιν καὶ ὁ ἀναβὰς ὑπεράνω πάντων τῶν οὐρανῶν, 
*the*same ‘is also who ascended above all the heavens, 
ἵνα πληρώσῃ τὰ-πάντα. 11 Kai αὐτὸς ἔδωκεν τοὺς. μὲν ἀπο- 
that he might fill all things; and he gave some apo- 
στόλους, τοὺς.δὲ προφήτας, τοὺς.δὲ εὐαγγελιστάς, τοὺς .δὲ 
stles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some 
ποιμένας καὶ διδασκάλους, 12 πρὸὲξ τὸν καταρτισμὸν τῶν 
shepherds and teachers, with a view to the perfecting of the 
ἁγίων, εἰς ἔργον διακονίας, εἰς οἰκοδομὴν τοῦ σώματος TOU 
saints; for work of{the]service, for building up of the ody of the 
χριστοῦ" 18 μέχρι καταντήσωμεν οἱ πάντες εἰς THY ἑνότητα 
Christ ; until we *may “arrive 1411 at the unity 
τῆς πίστεως Kai τῆς ἐπιγνώσεως τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ, εἰς ἄνδρα 
of the faith and ofthe knowledge ofthe Son of God, at a *man 
τέλειον, εἰς μέτρον ἡλικίας τοῦ πληρώματος τοῦ 
‘full-grown, at {the} measure of [{Π6] stature of the fulness of the 


χριστοῦ 14 iva μηκέτι ὦμεν νήπιοι, κλυδωνιζόμενοι καὶ 
Christ ; that no longer we may be infants, being tossed and 


περιφερόμενοι παντὶ ἀνέμῳ τῆς διδασκαλίας ἐν τῇ "κυβείᾳ" 


Wherefore he says, Having ascended up on 


carried about by every wind of the teaching in the sleight 
τῶν ἀνθρώπων, ἐν mavoupyi¢ πρὸς τὴν "ueodeiar' τῆς 
of men, in craftiness withaview to the systematizing 


πλάνης" 15 ἀληθεύοντες.δὲ ἐν dyanry αὐξήσωμεν εἰς αὐτὸν 
of error ; but holding the truth in ove wemaygrowup into him 

τὰ- πάντα, ὕς ἐστιν ἡ κεφαλή, °O' χριστός, 16 ἐξ οὗ πᾶν 
in allthings, who ἴδ the head, the Christ: from whom all 
τὸ σῶμα συναρμολογούμενον Kai ἡσυμβιβαζόμενον" διὰ πάσης 


the body, tted together and compacted by every 
ἁφῆς τῆς ἐπιχορηγίας κατ᾽ ἐνέργειαν ἐν μέτρῳ 
joint of supply according to [the] working in [its] measure 


x — καὶ LTW. 


w — ἡ LTr[A]. 
Ὁ μεθοδίαν T. 


ν — ὑμῖν LTTrA; ἡμῖν US GW. 
8 κυβίᾳ T. 


z — μέρη (read [parts]) w. 


TY. EPHESIANS. 


ἑνὸς ἑκάστου μέρους, τὴν αὔξησιν τοῦ σώματος ποιεῖται 
of each one part, the increase of the 
οἰκοδομὴν ξἑαυτοῦ" ἐν ἀγάπῃ. 
[the] buildingup ofitself in love. 
17 Τοῦτο οὖν λέγω Kai μαρτύρομαι ἐν κυρίῳ. μηκέτι 
This therefore Isay, and testify in [the] Lord, *no *longer 
ὑμᾶς.περιπατεῖν καθὼς καὶ τὰ ‘Nord Ἐἔθνη περιπατεῖ ἐν 
1that *ye walk evenas also the’ rest, [the] nations, are walking in 
ματαιότητι τοῦ.νοὸς αὐτῶν, 18 δἐσκοτισμένοι! τῇ δια- 
vanity of their mind, being darkened in the under- 
ὄντες ἀπηλλοτριωμένοι τῆς ζωῆς τοῦ θεοῦ, διὰ 
alienated from the life of God, on account of 


εἰς 
body makes for itself to 


[the] 

“δι 
Vola, 
standing, being 


τὴν ἄγνοιαν τὴν οὖσαν ἐν αὐτοῖς, διὰ τὴν πώρωσιν 
the ignorance which is in them, onaccountof the hardness 
Tie-Kapdiac.avTay' 19 οἵτινες ἀπηλγηκότες ἑαυτοὺς 

of their heart, who haying cast off allfeeling, themselves 


παρέδωκαν τῇ ἀσελγείᾳ εἰς ἐργασίαν ἀκαθαρσίας πάσης 
gave up to licentiousness, for [the] working of *uncleanness tall 
ἐν πλεονεξίᾳ" 20 ὑμεῖς δὲ οὐχ οὕτως ἐμάθετε τὸν γχριστόν, 
with craving. Butye not *thus ‘learned the Christ, 
21 εἴγε αὐτὸν ἠκούσατε καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ ἐδιδάχθητε, καθώς 
ifindeed him yeheard and in him  weretaught, according as 
? I~ / ? ~? ~ ? , « ~ ‘ 
ἐστιν ἀλήθεια ἐν τῷ Ἰησοῦ" 92 ἀποθέσθαι ὑμᾶς κατὰ 
is [the] truth in Jesus ; for you to have put off according to 
THY προτέραν ἀναστροφήν τὸν παλαιὸν ἄνθρωπον, τὸν 
the former conduct the old man, which 
φθειρόμενον κατὰ τὰς ἐπιθυμίας τῆς ἀπάτης" 23 ava- 
is corrupt according to the desires of deceit; to *be *re- 
veovoda de! τῷ πνεύματι τοῦ.νοὸς ὑμῶν" 24 Kai ἐνδύσασθαι 


newed ?and inthe spirit of your mind; and to have put on 
τὸν καινὸν ἄνθρωπον, τὸν κατὰ θεὸν κτισθέντα ἐν δι- 
the new man, which according to God was created in right- 


καιοσύνῃ Kai ὁσιότητι τῆς ἀληθείας. 25 Διὸ ἀποθέμενοι τὸ 
eousness and holiness of truth. Wherefore having put off 

“ ~ 2 7 ee 4 ~ ἐς > ~ 
ψεῦδος, λαλεῖτε ἀλήθειαν ἕκαστος μετὰ τοῦ.πλησίον. αὐτοῦ" 
falsehood, speak truth each with his neighbour, 

ὅτι ἐσμὲν ἀλλήλων μέλη. 26 ᾿Οργίζεσθε Kai μὴ apap- 


because we are of one another members. Beangry, and *not tsin ; 


ravere’ ὁ ἥλιος μὴ.ἐπιδυέτω ἐπὶ ἱτῷ". παροργισμῷ ὑμῶν, 
5the ὅβπ 31οὐ *not set upon your provocation, 


27 "μήτε"! δίδοτε τόπον τῷ διαβόλῳ. 28 ὁ κλέπτων μηκέτι 
neither give place tothe devil. He that steals *no °more 

κλεπτέτω, μᾶλλον. δὲ κοπιάτω, ἐργαζόμενος ἱτὸ 

‘let *him *steal, but rather let him labour, working what [is] 

ταῖς. χερσίν, ἵνα ἔχῃ μεταδιδόναι τῷ χρείαν ἔχοντι. 

τ ἢ [his] Βα 5, ὑπαῦ he may have toimpart tohimthat “need thas, 

29 πᾶς λόγος carpog ἐκ τοῦ.στόματος. ὑμῶν μὴ ἐκ- 


"Any ‘word ‘corrupt ‘out !of 12yvour ‘mouth *not “let 
(lit. every) 


, θ m ? Ar’! nm” ? ‘ A > ‘ —, , 
πορευέσθω, ™a εἴ τις ἀγαθὸς πρὸς οἰκοδομὴν τῆς χρείας, 
®zo °forth, but if any good for building up in respectof need, 


wa δῷ χάριν τοῖς ἀκούουσιν. 80 καὶ μὴ λυπεῖτε τὸ 
that it may give grace to them that hear. And grievenot the 


~ \ .“ - - ? τ. 2 s 2 « , 
πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον τοῦ θεοῦ, ἐν ᾧ ἐσφραγίσθητε εἰς ἡμέραν 


? ‘ 
ἀγαθὸν 
good 


507 


maketh increase of the 
body unto the edifying 
of itself in love, 


17 This I say there- 
fore, and testify in the 
Lord, that ye hences 
forth walk not as other 
Gentiles walk, in the 
vanity of their mind, 
18 having the under- 
standing darkened, 
being alienated from 
the life of God through 
the ignorance that is 
in them, because of 
the blindness of their 
heart: 19 who being 
past feeling have given 
themselves over unto 
lasciviousness,to work 
all uncleanness with 
greediness. 20 But ye 
have not so learned 
Christ; 21 if so be that 
ye have heard him, and 
have been taught by 
him, as the truth is in 
Jesus: 22 that ye put 
off concerning the 
former conversation 
the old man, which is 
corrupt according to 
the deceitful lusts; 
23 and be renewed in 
the spirit of your 
mind ; 24and that ye 
put onthe new man, 
which after God is 
created in righteous- 
ness and true holiness, 
25 Wherefore putting 
away lying, speak 
every Man truth with 
his neighbour : for we 
are members one of 
another. 26 Be ye an- 
gry, and sin not: let 
not the sun go down 
upon your wrath: 
27 neither give place 
to the devil. 28 Let 
him that stole steal no 
more: but rather let 
him labour, working 
with Ais hands the 
thing which is good, 
that he may have to 
give to him that need- 
eth. 29 Let no corrupt 
communication pro- 
ceed out of your 
mouth, but that which 
is good to the use of 
edifying, that it may 
minister grace unto 
the hearers. 30 And 
grieve not the holy 
Spirit of God, where- 
by ye are sealed unto 


Spirit the Holy of God, by which ye weresealed for([the] day the day of redemption, 
δ αὐτοῦτ. £—AowmaLTTrA. 8 €oxotwmévorLTTrA. Β [δὲ] τ᾿. i—r@crtrf[a]. * μηδὲ 
LTTrAW. ταῖς ἰδίαις with his own (— ἰδίαις A) χερσὶν τὸ ἀγαθόν LTTrAW. τὸ ἀλλὰ LTT. 


508 


31 Let all bitterness, 
and wrath, and anger, 
and clamour, and evil 
speaking, be put away 
from you, with all ma- 
lice: 32 and beye kind 
one to another, ten- 
der-hearted, forgiving 
one another, even as 
God for Christ’s sake 
hath forgiven you. 
YV. Be ye therefore fol- 
lowers of God, as dear 
children ; 2 and walk 
in love, as Christ also 
hath loved us,and hath 
given himself for us 
an offering and a Sa- 
erifice to God for a 
eweetsmelling savour. 


3 But fornication, 
and all uncleanness, 
or coyetousness, let it 
not be once named a- 
mong you, as becom- 
eth saints; 4 neither 
filthiness, nor foolish 
talking, nor jesting, 
which are not conve- 
nient: but rather giv- 
ing of thanks. 5 For 
this ye know, that no 
whoremonger, nor un- 
clean person, nor cove- 
tous man, who is an 
idolater, hath any in- 
heritance in the king- 
dom of Christ and of 
God. 6 Let no man 
deceive you with vain 
words: for because of 


these things cometh. 


the wrath of Godupon 
the children of disobe- 
dience. 7 Be not ye 
therefore partakers 
with them. 8 For ye 
were sometimes dark- 
ness, but now are ye 
light in the Lord: 
walk as children of 
light: 9 (for the fruit 
of the Spirit ὦ in all 
goodness and right- 
eousness and truth ;) 
10 proving what is 
acceptable unto the 
Lord. 11 And have no 
fellowship with the 
unfruitful works of 
darkness, but rather 
reprove them. 12 For 
it is a shame even to 
speak of those things 
which are done of 
them in secret. 13 But 
all things that are re- 
proved are made mani- 
fest by the light: for 
whatsoever doth make 
manifest 15 light. 
14 Wherefore he saith, 
Awake thou that sleep- 
est, and arise from the 
dead, and Christ shall 


WPOSs HiG@ES1OY >. 


ἀπολυτρώσεως. 31 πᾶσα πικρία καὶ 
of redemption. All 
κραυγὴ Kai βλασφημία 


clamour, and _ evil speaking 


IV, Va 
θυμος Kai ὀργὴ καὶ 
bitterness, and indignation, and wrath, and 

ἀρθήτω ἀφ᾽ ὑμῶν, σὺν πάσῃ 
let be removed from you, with all 
κακίᾳ" 32 γίνεσθε."δὲ! εἰς ἀλλήλους χρηστοί, εὔσπλαγχνοι, 


malice ; and be to one another kind, tender-hearted, 
χαριζόμενοι ἑαυτοῖς, καθὼς καὶ ὃ θεὸς ἔν χριστῷ ἐχαρί- 
forgiving each other, according as also God in Christ for- 
σατο “ὑμῖν. 5 Γίνεσθε οὖν μιμηταὶ τοῦ θεοῦ, we τέκνα 
gave you. Beye therefore imitators of God, as children 
ἀγαπητά" 2 καὶ περιπατεῖτε ἐν ἀγάπῃ, καθὼς Kai ὁ χριστὸς 
beloved, and walk in love, evenas also the Christ 
ἠγάπησεν Pryde," καὶ παρέδωκεν ἑαυτὸν ὑπὲρ «“ἡμῶν" προσ- 

loved us, and gave up himself for us, an of- 
φορὰν καὶ θυσίαν τῷ θεῷ εἰς ὀσμὴν εὐωδίας. 


to God for an odour of a sweet smell. 
3 Πορνεία.δὲ καὶ πᾶσα ἀκαθαρσία" ἢ πλεονεξία μηδὲ 
But fornication and all uncleanness or covetousness not even 
ὀνομαζέσθω ἐν ὑμῖν, καθὼς πρέπει ἁγίοις" 4 "καὶ! αἰσχρό- 
let it be named among you, even 848 is becoming to saints ; and filthi- 
5 ῖ Η]} λ ΄ n ? λί v ‘ ? > ip Il ? ‘ 
της ‘kai" μωρολογία ἢ εὐτραπελία, “τὰ οὐκιἀνήκοντα," ἀλλὰ 
mess and foolish talking or jesting, which are not becoming; but 
μᾶλλον εὐχαριστία. 5 τοῦτο.γάρ “ἐστε.γινώσκοντες" br. πᾶς 
rather thanksgiving. For this ye know that any 
- ἐξ Sips i 4 if : (lit. every) 
πόρνος, ἢ ἀκάθαρτος, ἢ πλεονέκτης, "ὅς" ἐστιν εἰδωλολά- 
fornicator, or unclean person, or covetous, who is an idoiater, 
TPC, οὐκ.ἔχει κληρονομίαν ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ τοῦ χριστοῦ Kai 
has not inheritance in the kingdom ofthe Christ and 
θεοῦ. 6 μηδεὶς ὑμᾶς ἀπατάτω κενοῖς λόγοις" διὰ 
of God. “No*%one ‘you ‘'let*deceive withempty words; on Ξδοοοπηὺ *of 
ταῦτα yap ἔρχεται ἡ ὀργὴ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐπὶ τοὺς υἱοὺς τῆς 
5Ξ[Πθ56 things *for comes the wrath of God upon the _ sons 
ἀπειθείας. 7 μὴ οὖν γίνεσθε Youppéroxoc' αὐτῶν. 8 ἦτε 
of disobedience. *Not “therefore ‘be  joint-partakers with them; “ye “were 


γάρ ποτε σκότος, νῦν.δὲ φῶς ἐν κυρίῳ᾽ ὡς τέκνα φωτὸς 


fering and ἃ sacrifice 


1for once darkness, butnow light in [the] Lord; as children of light 
περιπατεῖτε: 9 ὁ γὰρ καρπὸς τοῦ πνεύματος) ἐν πάσῃ 
walk, (for the fruit of the Spirit [15] in. all 


ἀγαθωσύνῃ Kai δικαιοσύνῃ Kai ἀληθείᾳ" 10 δοκιμάζοντες τί 

goodness and righteousness and _ truth,) proving what 
ἐστιν εὐάρεστον τῷ κυρίῳ. 11 Kai μὴ “συγκοινωνεῖτε" τοῖς 
is well-pleasing to the Lord; and have no fellowship with the 
ἔργοις τοῖς ἀκάρποις τοῦ σκότους, μᾶλλον.δὲ Kai ἐλέγχετε" 


*works tunfruitful of darkness, butrather 4150 reprove; 
12 τὰ γὰρ ὕκρυφῆ" γινόμενα ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν αἰσχρόν ἐστιν καὶ 
for the things in secret being done by them shameful itis even 


λέγειν. 13 τὰ.δὲ πάντα ἐλεγχόμενα ὑπὸ τοῦ φωτὸς φανεροῦ- 
to say. But all of them being reproved by the light are made mani- 
ται πᾶν.γὰρ τὸ φανερούμενον φῶς ἐστιν" 14 διὸ 

fest ; for *everything ‘that *which *makes *manifest “light “is. Wherefore 
λέγει, “"Ἐγειραι" ὁ καθεύδων, καὶ ἀνάστα ἐκ τῶν 
he says, Arouse, [thou] that sleepest, and riseup from among the 


o — δὲ Δα Lb. 


° ἡμῖν US L. P ὑμᾶς you TTrA. 4 ὑμῶν you A. τ ἀκαθαρσία 


πᾶσα LTTrA. 8% Or L. ty or LT. νυ ἃ οὐκ ἀνῆκεν LTTrA. W ἴστε γινώσκοντες 
ye are aware of, knowing GLTTraw. x ὃ that LTTra. Y συν- TA. 1 φωτὸς light 
GLTTraw. ἃ συν- T. Ὁ κρυφῇ 1.. “Ἔγειρε GLTTrAw. 


Υ. EPHESIANS. 
νεκρῶν, καὶ ἐπιφαύσει σοι ὁ χριστός. 15 Βλέπετε οὖν 
dead, and shall shineupon thee the Christ. Take heed therefore 


“nic ἀκριβῶς! περιπατεῖτε, μὴ ὡς ἄσοφοι, ἄλλ᾽ ὡς σοφοί, 


how accurately ae walk, not as aang but as_ wise, 

16 ἐξαγοραζόμενοι τὸν καιρόν, Ore αἱ ἡμέραι πονηραί εἰσιν. 
ransoming the time, because the days evil lare. 

17 διὰ.τοῦτο μὴ.γίνεσθε ἄφρονες, ἀλλὰ ἐσυνιέντες) τί τὸ 


On this account be not 
θέλημα τοῦ κυρίου. 


foolish, 
18 καὶ μὴ.μεθύσκεσθε οἴνῳ, ἐν 


but aE nee what oe 


will of the Lord [15]. And be not drunk with wine, in which 
ἐστιν ἀσωτία: ἀλλὰ πληροῦσθε ἐν πνεύματι, 19 λα- 
15 dissoluteness; but be filled with [the] Spirit, speak- 


λοῦντες ἑαυτοῖς f ψαλμοῖς καὶ ὕμνοις καὶ ὠδαῖς ἐπνευματι- 
ing to each other inpsalms and hymns and nob ispiritual, 


kaic,' ἄδοντες καὶ ψάλλοντες "έν" ἱτῇ καρδίᾳ! ὑ ὑμῶν τῷ κυρίῳ, 


singing and peeing with 7heart ‘your tothe Lord; 
20 εὐχαριστοῦντες πάντοτε ὑπὲρ πάντων iv ὀνόματι τοῦ 
giving thanks atalltimes for allthings in [the] name 
κυρίου. ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ τῷ θεῷ καὶ πατρί" 21 ὑπο- 
of our Lord Jesus Christ to him who [is] God and Father, submit- 
τασσόμενοι ἀλλήλοις ἐν φόβῳ *Oeod.' 
ting yourselves to one another in [the] fear of God. 


22 Αἱ γυναῖκες, τοῖς.ἰδίοις ἀνδράσιν ἱὑποτάσσεσθε," we τῷ 
τες to Se own husbands submit yourselves, as to the 


23 ὅτι ™o' ἀνήρ ἐστιν κεφαλὴ τῆς γυναικός, we Kai 
Lord, for the husband [15 head ofthe wife, 85. also 


ὁ χριστὸς κεφαλὴ τῆς ἐκκλησίας, "καὶ" αὐτός Por" σωτὴρ 
the Christ [is] head ofthe assembly, and he is Saviour 


Tov σώματος" 24 Parr’ «ὥσπερ' ἡ ἐκκλησία ὑποτάσσεται τῷ 
of the body. But even as the assembly is subjected tothe 


χριστῷ, οὕτως Kai αἱ γυναῖκες τοῖς "ἰδίοις" ἀνδράσιν ἐν παντί. 
Christ, 80 also wives totheirown husbands in everything. 
25 Οἱ ἄνδρες, ἀγαπᾶτε τὰς. γυναϊκας."ἑαυτῶν," καθὼς Kai ὁ 
Husbands, love your own ais even as also the 


χριστὸς ἠγάπησεν τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, καὶ ἑαυτὸν παρέδωκεν ὑπὲρ 
‘hrist loved the πεξειο σι and himself gave up for 


αὐτῆς" 20 ἵνα αὐτὴν ἁγιάσῃ. καθαρίσας τῷ λουτρῷ 
it, that it he might SStChinys having cleansed [it] by the washing 


τοῦ ὕδατος ἐν ῥήματι, 27 ἵνα παραστήσῃ 'αὐτὴν" ἑαυτῷ 
of water by [the] word, that hemightpresent it to himself 


ἔνδοξον τὴν ἐκκλησίαν μὴ ἔχουσαν σπῖλον ἢ ῥυτίδα ἤ τι 
*glorious ‘the SEE not es spot, or wrinkle, or any 


τῶν. τοιούτων, ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα ἁγία καὶ ἄμωμος. 38 οὕτως 
of such things ; but that it might be holy and blameless. So 


γὀφείλουσιν © ot ἄνδρες" ἀγαπᾷν τὰς ἑαυτῶν. γυναῖκας ὡς 


κυρίῳ" 


509 


give thee light. 15 See 
then that ye walk cir- 
cumspectly, not as 
fools, but as wise, 
16 redeeming the 
time, because the days 
are evil. 17 Wherefore 
be ye not unwise, but 
understanding what 
the will of the Lord 
is, 18 And be not 
drunk with wine, 
wherein is excess; but 
be filled with the Spi- 
rit; 19 speaking to 
yourselves in psalms 
and hymns and spiri- 
tual songs, singing and 
making melody in 
your heart to the ards 
20 giving thanks al- 
ways for all things 
unto God and the Fa- 
ther in the name of 
our Lord Jesus Christ; 
21 submitting your- 
selyes one to another 
in the fear of God. 


22 Wives, submit 
yourselves unto your 
own husbands, as unto 
the Lord, 23 For the 
husband is the head 
of the wife, even as 
Christ is the head of 
the church: and he is 
the saviour of the bo- 
dy. 24 Therefore as 
the church is subject 
unto Christ, so let the 
wives be to their own 
husbands in every 
thing. 25 Husbands, 
love your wives, even 
as Christ also loved the 
church, and gave him- 
self for it; 26 that he 
Might sanctify and 
cleanse it with the 
washing of water by 
the word, 27 that he 
might present it to 
himself a _ glorious 
church, not having 
spot, or wrinkle, or 
any such thing; but 
that it should be holy 
and without blemish. 


ought husbands to love their own wives as 28 So ought men to 

“ , « love their wives as 
τὰ ἑαυτῶν σωματα᾿ ο ἀγαπῶν τὴν ἑαυτοῦ γυναῖκα ἑαυτὸν their own bodies. He 
their own bodies: hethat loves bis own wite “himself that loveth his wite 
> Ξε > SAF , χει ~ ΄ ΠΣ ΕΟ loveth himself, 29 For 
αγαπᾳ 9209 ου i¢-yap TTOTE THV-EAUTOU σαρκα ἐμισήσεν, no Man ever yet hated 
loves. For noone at any time his own flesh hated, his own flesh; but 
d ἀκ ριβῶς πῶς T. ε συνίετε understand LITrA. f+ [ἐν] ua. g [πνευματικαῖς] TAG 


h — ἐν (read with your heart) Τ[ὙΓΑ]. 
GLTTraw. 
submit themselves) τυ. 
© — ἐστιν LITrAW. 
LTTra. 

QLTTrAW. 


i ταῖς καρδίαις hearts L, 


-- ὁ (read a husband) τερον 
Ρ ἀλλὰ LTTrA. 4 ὡς aS LTTra. 
* — ἑαυτῶν (read the Wives) LTTra. 


Υ καὶ (also) οἱ ἄνδρες ὀφείλουσιν LW. Ἢ + καὶ also Tra. 


Κ χριστοῦ of Christ 


1 — jrotaccedbe ΤΑΙ; ὑποτασσέσθωσαν (vead to their own husbands let them 


— καὶ GLTTrAW. 


— ἰδίοις (read ἣν the husbands) 
τ αὐτὸς ea he might himself present) 


510 


nourisheth and che- 
risheth it, even as the 
Lord the church: 30 for 
we are members of 
his body, of his flesh, 
and of his bones. 
31 For this cause shall 
a man leave his father 
and mother, and shall 
be joined unto his 
wife, and they two 
shall be one flesh. 
32 This is agreat mys- 
tery : but I speak con- 
cerning Christ and the 
church, 33 Neverthe- 
less let every one of 
ou in particular so 
ove his wife even as 
himself ; and the wife 
see that she reverence 
her husband. 


VI. Children, obey 
your parents in the 
Lord: for this is 
right. 2 Honour thy 
father and mother ; 
which is the first 
commandment with 
promise; 3 that it 
may be well with thee, 
and thou mayest live 
long on the earth. 
4 And, ye fathers, pro- 
voke not your chil- 
dren to wrath: but 
bring them up in the 
nurture and admoni- 
tion of the Lord. 


5 Servants, be obedi- 
ent to them that are 
your masters accord- 
ing to the flesh, with 
fear and trembling, 
in gingleness of your 
heart, as unto Christ; 
§ not with eyeservice, 
as menpleasers; but 
as the servants of 
Christ, doing the will 
of God from the 
heart; 7 with good 
will doing service, as 
to the Lord, and not 
to men: 8 knowing 
that whatsoever good 
thing any man doeth, 
the same shall he re- 
ceive of the Lord,whe- 
ther he be bond or 
free. 9 And, ye mas- 
ters, do the same 
things unto them, for- 
bearing threatening: 
knowing that your 
Master also is in hea- 
yen; neither is there 
respect of persons with 
him. 


χ ἀλλὰ LITrAW. 
LTrA. 
f [ets] LA. 
δουλίαν 1. 


GLTTrAaw. 


b — αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 


1 τοῦ the LTTraw. 
thing) TA) ἐάν (ἂν Tr) τι (—7TeLTr) LTTraW. 
4 αὐτῶν καὶ ὑμῶν ὃ οἵ them and of you the Lrrraw. 


IPOs. AE® EZ HOW sS. ViVi 


> 1) 9 , ‘ ΄ ΄ ‘ qk , 
*add'| ἐκτρέφει καὶ θάλπει αὐτήν, καθὼς Kai ὁ YRip.oc' τὴν 


but nourishes and cherishes it, evenas also the Lord the 
γ , er , ‘ ~ 
ἐκκλησίαν. 30 ὅτι μέλη ἐσμὲν τοῦ σώματος αὐτοῦ, τὲκ τῆς 
assembly : for members we are of his body, of ‘ 
σαρκὸς. αὐτοῦ, Kai ἐκ τῶν. ὀστέων. αὐτοῦ." 31 ᾿Αντὶ τούτου 
his flesh, and of his bones. Because of this 


καταλείψει. ἄνθρωπος "τὸν" πατέρα ϑαὐτοῦ" καὶ °rijy' μητέρα 
3shall leave ἴῃ “man *father Shis and sHOthene 
καὶ προσκολληθήσεται ἁπρὸς τὴν γυναῖκα! "αὐτοῦ." καὶ ἔσον- 
and shall be joined to *wife ‘his, and shall 
ται οἱ δύο εἰς σάρκα μίαν. 32 Τὸ. μυστήριον. τοῦτο μέγα ἐστίν" 
406. *the*two for flesh ‘one. This mystery 7ereat 118, 
Ἵ ‘ 4 “ > A ᾽ A , 
ἐγὼ.δὲ λέγω εἰς χριστὸν καὶ feic' τὴν ἐκκλησίαν. 88 πλὴν 
but I speak asto Christ and as to the assembly. However 

ν « - e 3. (ἢ ee A ~ ~ ᾽ 
καὶ ὑμεῖς οἱ καθ᾽ ἕνα. ἕκαστος τὴν. ἑαυτοῦ γυναῖκα οὕτως ἀγα- 
also ye everyone, 7each *his °own ®wife 780 Net 

, e «ε , « Α ~ A » 
πάτω ὡς ἑαυτόν: ἡ δὲ γυνὴ ἵνα φοβῆται τὸν ἄνδρα. 
love as himself; andthe wife that 5Π6 mayfear the husband. 

4 , c 4 ~ ~ € ~ ΄ 
6 Τὰ τέκνα, ὑπακούετε τοῖς. γονεῦσιν. ὑμῶν ἐν κυρίῳ" 
Children, obey your parents in {the] Lord, 

~ if ? / / 4 
τοῦτο.γάρ ἐστιν δίκαιον. 2 Τίμα τὸν.πατέρα.σου Kai τὴν 

for this is just. Honour thy father and 

, - er ᾽ ‘ > ‘ ’ ? / 
μητέρα ἥτις ἐστὶν ἐντολ) πρώτη ἐν ἐπαγγελίᾳ diva 
mother, which is *commandment ‘the first with a promise, that 
, ‘ » fd s ~ ~ 
εὖ σοι γεγηται, Kai ἔσῃ μακροχρόνιος ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. 
well with thee it may be, and thou mayest be long-lived on the earth. 
᾿ « , , ro, 

4 Kai ot πατέρες, μὴ-παροργίζετε τὰ. τέκνα. ὑμῶν, "ἀλλ᾽" ἐκ- 


And fathers, do not provoke your children, but bring 
, ͵ ‘ , ,ὔ 

τρέφετε αὐτὰ ἐν παιδείᾳ καὶ νουθεσίᾳ κυρίου. 

up them in([the] discipline and admonition of [the] Lord. 
5 Ot δοῦλοι, ὑπακούετε τοῖς "κυρίοις κατὰ σάρκα" 


Bondmen, obey [your] flesh 
‘ , ‘ , © , + ~ ΄ ~ ε 
μετὰ φόβου καὶ τρόμου, ἐν ἁπλότητι ἱτῆς" καρδίας. ὑμῶν, ὡς 
with fear and trembling, in simplicity of your heart, as 
~ ΤΙ ‘ ? / e , 
τῷ χριστῷ" 6 μὴ κατ᾽ *opPadpodovdrtiay' ὡς ἀνθρωπάρεσκοι, 
tothe Christ; not with eye-service as men-pleasers ; 
? > € a ~ ~ ~ ~ " ~ ~ 
ἀλλ᾽ we δοῦλοι !rod' χριστοῦ, ποιοῦντες TO θέλημα τοῦ θεοῦ 


masters according to 


but as bondmen ofthe Christ, doing the will of God 
ἐκ ψυχῆς, 7 per εὐνοίας δουλεύοντες '' τῷ κυρίῳ καὶ 
from [the] soul, with good will doing service tothe Lord and 
οὐκ ἀνθρώποις" ὃ εἰδότες Ore "ὃ.ἐάν.τι ἕκαστος" ποιήσῃ 
ποῦ to men ; knowing that whatsoever each *?may *have °done 
ἀγαθόν, τοῦτο “κομιεῖται! παρὰ Prov' κυρίου, εἴτε δοῦλος 
good, this he shall receive from the Lord, whether bondman 
» ’ A e , 4 ᾽ ‘ ~ οὶ 
εἴτε ἐλεύθερος. 9 Καὶ οἱ κύριοι, τὰ.αὐτὰ ποιεῖτε πρὸς 
or free, And masters, the same things do towards 


͵ > , κ ΄ " ~ ~ 
αὐτούς, ἀνιέντες THY ἀπειλήν" εἰδότες OTL Kai «ὑμῶν. αὐτῶν 


them, giving up threatening, knowing that also your own 
« if , , ᾽ Ἵ ~ " , 
ὁ" κύριός ἐστιν EV οὐρανοῖς, καὶ ᾿προσωποληψίαϊ! οὐκ. ἔστιν 
master is in [the] heavens, and respect of persons there is not 
παρ᾽ αὐτῷ. 
with him. 
Υ χριστὸς Christ GLITrAw. ὁ — ἐκ τῆς to end of verse LTIr[A]. * — τὸν 
i ; ¢— τὴν utra. ἃ τῇ γυναικὶ to the wife τσ. © — αὐτοῦ T. 
Β — ἐν κυρίῳ L[TrA]. h κατὰ σάρκα κυρίοις LT Tr. i—qst. * ὀφθαλμο- 


m + ὡς aS GLITrAW. π ἕκαστος ὃ (— ὃ (read if any- 
ο κομίσεται LITrA. Pp — τοῦ (γεαα [the]) 


τ προσωπολημψία LTTrA. 


VI. EPHESIANS. 


10 "Τὸ λοιπόν," "ἀδελφοί. μου," ἐνδυναμοῦσθε ἐν κυρίῳ, 
For the rest, my brethren, be empowered in [the] Lord, 

καὶ ἐν τῷ κράτει τῆς.ἰσχύος. αὐτοῦ. 11 ἐνδύσασθε τὴν παν- 
διὰ in the might of his strength. Put on the pan- 
οπλίαν τοῦ θεοῦ, πρὸς τὸ δύνασθαι ὑμᾶς στῆναι πρὸς τὰς 
oply of God, for “to *be *able oe tostand against the 
μεθοδείας" τοῦ διαβόλου" 12 ὅτι οὐκι-ἔστιν *piv' ἡ πάλη 
artifices ofthe deyil: because “is *not Sto®us 'the*wrestling 
πρὸς αἷμα Kai σάρκα, ἀλλὰ πρὸς τὰς ἀρχάς, πρὸς τὰς 


against blood and flesh, but against principalities, against 
ἐξουσίας, πρὸς τοὺς κοσμοκράτορας τοῦ σκότους ὑτοῦ αἰῶνος" 
authorities, against the world-rulers of the darkness of “age 
*rovTou,' πρὸς Ta πνευματικὰ τῆς πονηρίας ἐν τοῖς ἐπου- 
this, against the spiritual [powers] ofwickednessin the hea- 
ρανίοις. 13 διὰ τοῦτο ἀναλάβετε τὴν πανοπλίαν τοῦ θεοῦ. 
venlies. Because of this take up the panoply of God, 
ἵνα δυνηθῆτε ἀντιστῆναι ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ πονηρᾷ, καὶ ἅπαντα 
that ye may be able to withstand in the “day *evil, and all things 
κατεργασάμενοι στῆναι. 14 στῆτε οὖν περιζωσάμενοι τὴν 
having worked out ἴο stand. Stand therefore, having girt about 


ὀσφὺν. ὑμῶν ἐν ἀληθείᾳ, καὶ ἐνδυσάμενοι τὸν θώρακα τῆς 
your loins with truth, and having puton the breastplate 


δικαιοσύνης, 15 καὶ ὑποδησάμενοι τοὺς πόδας ἐν ἑτοι- 
of righteousness, and having shod the feet with [the] pre- 


ασίᾳ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου τῆς sionynce’ 16 *%éri' πᾶσιν avada- 
paration of the glad tidings of peace: besides all having 
βόντες τὸν θυρεὸν τῆς πίστεως, ἐν δυνήσεσθε πάντα 


takenup the 58161α of faith, with which ye will be able all 
τὰ βέλη τοῦ πονηροῦ ra! πεπυρωμένα σβέσαι: 17 καὶ 
the “darts Sof *the *wicked Sone *purning to φυσι Also 


τὴν περικεφαλαίαν τοῦ σωτηρίου δέξασθε, καὶ τὴν μάχαιραν 
the helmet of salvation receive, and the sword 


τοῦ πνεύματος, Ὁ ἐστιν ἡ ῥῆμα θεοῦ" 18 διὰ πάσης προσευχῆς 
ofthe Spirit, which is word *God’s; by all prayer 


Kai δεήσεως προσευχόμενοι ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ ἕν πνεύματι, 
and supplication ee in every season in [the] Sur 


καὶ εἰς αὐτὸ. “τοῦτο" ἀγρυπνοῦντες ἐν πάσῃ προσκαρτερήσει 
and unto this very thing watching with all Demeey sears 


καὶ δεήσει περὶ πάντων τῶν ἁγίων, 19 καὶ ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ ἵνα 
and supplication for all saints ; and for me _ that 


μοι “δοθείη) λόγος ἐν ἀνοίξει τοῦ. στόματός.μου ἐν 
tome may be given utterance in aad opening of my mouth with 


παῤῥησίᾳ, γνωρίσαι τὸ μυστήριον “τοῦ εὐαγγελίου," 20 ὑπὲρ 


boldness to make known the ΤΟΥΒΊΘΕΥ of the glad eninge; for 
οὗ πρεσβεύω ἐν ἁλύσει, ἵνα ἐν αὐτῷ παῤῥησιάσωμαι 
eWEt Tain Aisa in achain, that in it I may be bold 
ὡς δεῖ pe λαλῆσαι. 
as it behoves τῶθΘ to speak. 
21 “Iva.dé [εἰδῆτε καὶ ὑμεῖς" τὰ κατ᾽ ἐμέ, τί 
But that *may *know “also tye thethings concerning me, what 
πράσσω, πάντα Svpiy γνωρίσει: Τυχικὸς ὁ ἀγαπητὸς 


Iam doing, all things toyou willmake known Tychicus the beloved 


‘tov λοιποῦ LTTra. Y¥ — ἀδελφοί μον LTTrA. 
ἡ — τοῦ αἰῶνος (read of this aes) GLTTraw. 
in τιν. >— τὰ L[Tra]. 
γελίου] L. 


w pebodias τ: 


— τοῦτο very thing LITrA. 
f καὶ ὑμεῖς εἰδῆτε LTTr. ὃ γνωρίσει ὑμῖν LTTr. 


— τούτου (read of darkness) w. 
4 δοθῇ GLTTraw. 


oll 


10 Finally, my bre- 
thren, be strong in 
the Lord, and in the 
power of his might. 
11 Put on the whole 
armour of God, that 
ye may be able to 
stand against the 
wiles of the devil. 
12 For τὸ wrestie 
not against flesh and 
blood, but against 
principalities, against 
powers, against the 
rulers of the dark- 
ness of this world, a- 
gainst spiritu: al wick- 
edness in high places. 
13 Wherefore take un- 
to you the whole ar- 
mour of God, that ye 
may be able to with- 
stand in the evil day, 
and having done all, 
to stand. 14 Stand 
therefore, having your 
loins girt about with 
truth, and haying on 
the breastplate of 
righteousness ; 15 and 
your feet shod with 
the preparation of the 
gospel of peace; 16 a- 
bove all, taking the 
shield of faith, where- 
with ye shall be able 
to quench all the fiery 
darts of the wicked. 
17 And take the helmet 
of salvation, and the 
sword of the Spirit, 
which is the word of 
God: 18 praying al- 
ways with all prayer 
and supplication in 
the Spirit, and watch- 
ing thereunto with 
all perseverance and 
supplication for all 
saints ; 19 and for me, 
that utterance may 
be given unto me, 
that I may open my 
mouth boldly, tomake 
known the mystery of 
the gospel, 20 for 
which I am an ambas- 
sador in bonds: that 
therein I may speak 
boldly, as I ought to 
speak. 


21 But that ye also 
may know my affairs, 
and how I do, Tychi- 
cus, a beloved brother 


x ὑμῖν to you L. 
a ἐν 
© [τοῦ evay- 


512 


and faithful minister 
in the Lord, shall make 
known to you all 
things: 22 whom I 
have sent unto you 
for the same purpose, 
that ye might know 
our affairs, and that 
he might comfort 
your hearts. 


23 Peace be to the 
brethren, and love 
with faith, from God 
the Father and the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 
24 Grace be with all 
them that love our 
Lord Jesus Christ in 
sincerity. Amen. 


π PO Se 4 ha TES I ΟὝΣ. Vy. 
ἀδελφὸς Kai πιστὸς διάκονος ἐν 
brother and faithful servant in [86] Lord; whom Isent 
πρὸς ὑμᾶς εἰς avTo.TOUTO, ἵνα γνῶτε τὰ περὶ 

to you for thisvery thing, that ye might know the things concerning 
ἡμῶν καὶ παρακαλέσῃ τὰς.καρδίας ὑμῶν. 

us and he might encourage your hearts. 

23 Eionyn τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς Kai ἀγάπη μετὰ πίστεως ἀπὸ 

Peace tothe brethren, and love with faith from 
θεοῦ πατρὸς Kai κυρίου Inoov χριστοῦ. 24 Ἢ χάρις pera 
God [the] Father and _ Lord Jesus Christ. Grace with 
πάντων τῶν ἀγαπώντων τὸν κύριον. ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦν χριστὸν 


κυρίῳ: 22 ὃν ἔπεμψα 


all those that love our Lord Jesus Christ 
ΕΝ. ΤΡ ΡΤ 
ἐν ἀφθαρσίᾳ. "ἀμήν. 
in incorruption. Amen, 

‘TIpdc¢ Ἐφεσίους ἐγράφη ἀπὸ Ῥώμης, διὰ Τυχικοῦ." 


To [the] Ephesians written from Rome, by ‘Tychicus. 


KH ΠΡΟΣ TOYS OIAINMASIOYS EMMSTOAH.' 


THE 


PAULand Timotheus, 
the servants of Jesus 
Christ, to all the saints 
in Christ Jesus which 
are at Philippi, with 
the bishops and dea- 
cons: 2 Grace be unto 
you, and peace, from 
God our Father, and 
from the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


3 I thank my God 
upon every remem- 
brance of you, 4al- 
ways in every prayer 
of mine for you all 
making request with 
joy, 5 for your fellow- 
ship in the gospel from 
the first day until 
now; 6 being confident 
of this very thing, 
that he which hath be- 
gun a good work in 
you will perform τέ 
until the day of Jesus 
Christ : 7 even as it is 
meet for me to think 
this of you all, be- 
cause I have you in my 
heart; inasmuch as 
both in my bonds, and 
in the defence and 
confirmation of the 
gospel, ye all are par- 
takers of my grace. 
8 For God is my re- 


4X0) 


*THE *PHILIPPIANS "EPISTLE. 


ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ καὶ Τιμόθεος δοῦλοι ᾿Πησοῦ χριστοῦ," πᾶσιν τοῖς 


Paul and Timotheus, bondmen ofJesus Christ, toall the 
ἁγίοις ἐν χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ τοῖς οὖσιν ἐν Φιλίπποις, σὺν 
saints in hrist Jesus who are in Philippi, with (thej 


ἐπισκόποις Kai διακόνοις" 2 χάρις ὑμῖν Kai εἰρήνη ἀπὸ θεοῦ 
from God 


overseers and those whoserve. Grace toyou and _ peace 
πατρὸς.ἡμῶν καὶ κυρίου "Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ." 
our Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ. 
3 Εὐχαριστῶ τῷ θεῷ.μου ἐπὶ πάσῃτῇ μνείᾳ ὑμῶν, 
I thank my God on the whole remembrance of you, 
4 πάντοτε ἐν πάσῃ δεήσει pov ὑπὲρ πάντων ὑμῶν μετὰ 
always in every “supplication ‘my for 3411 you with 


~ 4 , U ? A ~ , « ~ > 
χαρᾶς τὴν δέησιν ποιούμενος, ὃ ἐπὶ τῇ.-κοινωνίᾳ. ὑμῶν εἰς 


joy 2supplication ‘making, for your fellowship in 
τὸ εὐαγγέλιον, ἀπὸ" πρώτης ἡμέρας ἄχρι τοῦ νῦν" 6 πε- 
the gladtidings, from [the] first day until now; being 
ποιθὼς αὐτὸ τοῦτο, Ort ὁ ἐναρξάμενος ἐν ὑμῖν ἔργον 
persuaded of this very thing, that he who began in you ἃ *work 
ἀγαθόν ἐπιτελέσει ἄχρις" ἡμέρας ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ"" 

‘good will complete [it] until [the] day of Jesus Christ : 


7 καθώς ἐστιν δίκαιον ἐμοὶ τοῦτο φρονεῖν ὑπὲρ πάντων ὑμῶν, 


as itis righteous forme this tothink as to 2411 ‘you, 
διὰ τὸ ἔχειν pe ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ ὑμᾶς, ἔν.τε τοῖς.δεσμοῖςι μου 
because “have “me *in “ἴθ Sheart tye, both in my bonds 


kai P τῇ ἀπολογίᾳ καὶ βεβαιώσει τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, «“συγ- 
and inthe defence and confirmation of the glad tidings, fellow- 
κοινωνούς" μου.τῆς.χάριτος πάντας ὑμᾶς ὄντας. 8 μάρτυς.γάρ 
partakers of my grace all ye are. For *witness 


h — ἀμήν GLTTrA. 


4 — the subscription GLTW; Πρὸς ᾿Εφεσίους Tra. 


k + Παύλον τοῦ ᾿Αποστόλου of Paul the Apostle E; + IlavAov α; -- τοὺς EG; Πρὸς 


Φιλιππησίους LTTrAW. 
ο ἄχρι LTA. 


the LTTra. 


1 χριστοῦ Ιησοῦ LTTrAW. ™ χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ Ww. u + τῆς 


Ρ + ἐν in (read τῇ the) [L]tTrAw,.— 1. ovr T. 


Ι, ΡΗΠΕΙΣΓΕΡΕΒΊΤΓΑΕΝ S. 
ov Téoriv' ὁ θεός, ὡς ἐπιποθῶ πάντας ὑμᾶς ἐν σπλάαγ- 
ἐν 518 1God, how I long after 3411 ‘you in{[the] bowels 
χνοις "Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ." 9 καὶ τοῦτο προσεύχομαι, ἵνα ἡ ἀγάπη 
of Jesus Christ. And this I pray, that love 
ἔτι μᾶλλον Kai μᾶλλον 'περισσεύῃ" ἐν ἐπιγνώσει Kai 
yet more and more may abound in knowledge and 
αἰσθήσει, 10 εἰς τὸ δοκιμάζειν ὑμᾶς τὰ δια- 
all intelligence, for 2to *approve you thethingsthat are 
, x ~ ‘ , ? 
φέροντα, iva ἦτε εἰλικρινεῖς Kai ἀπρόσκοποι εἰς ἡμέραν 
excellent, that ye may be pure and without offence for[the] day 
χριστοῦ, 11 πεπληρωμένοι καρπῶν, δικαιοσύνης roy" 
of Christ, being filled with fruits of righteousness which [are] 
διὰ ᾿Τησοῦ χριστοῦ, εἰς δόξαν Kai ἔπαινον θεοῦ. 
by Jesus Christ, to glory *and ‘praise ‘G@od’s. 
12 Γινώσκειν.δὲ ὑμᾶς βούλομαι, ἀδελφοί, ὅτι τὰ κατ᾽ 
But *to *know ou ‘I ?wish, brethren, that the thingsconcerning 
> 4 ~ ᾽ ᾿ ~ ᾽ , ? 4 . 
ἐμὲ μᾶλλον εἰς προκοπὴν τοῦ εὐαγγελίον ἐλήλυθεν 
me rather to [the] advancement of the gladtidings have turned ont, 
13 ὥστε τοὺς.δεσμούς. μου φανεροὺς ἐν χριστῷ γενέσθαι 
so as my bonds *manifest ‘in ‘Christ ‘to “have “become 
ἐν ὅλῳ τῷ πραιτωρίῳ Kai τοῖς λοιποῖς πᾶσιν" 14 Kai τοὺς 


« ~ 
ὑμῶν 
up 
your 
πάσῃ 


in *whole ‘the pretorium απᾶ ἴο 6 “rest 1411; and the 
πλείονας τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἐν κυρίῳ πεποιθότας τοῖς δεσμοῖς 
most of the brethren in (*the) *Lord trusting by *bonds 


μου περισσοτέρως τολμᾷν ἀφόβως τὸν λόγον ᾿ λαλεῖν. 15 Τινὲς 

‘my *more*®abundantly “dare ‘fearlessly *the ®word ‘to 5Ρ68Κ. Some 

μὲν καὶ διὰ φθόνον καὶ ἔριν, τινὲς.δὲ καὶ δι᾿ εὐδοκίαν τὸν 

indeed even from envy and strife, but some also from good-will the 
A 


χριστὸν κηρύσσουσιν. 16 ot μὲν YE ἐριθείας *rdv' χριστὸν 


Christ are proclaiming. Those indeed out of contention the Christ 
’ ? « ~ >” ib a2 , Ι 
καταγγέλλουσιν οὐχ ἁγνῶς, οἰόμενοι θλίψιν "ἐπιφέρειν 
are announcing, not purely, supposing tribulation to add 


τοῖς. δεσμοῖς. μου"" 17 οἱ. δὲ τἐξ ἀγάπης, εἰδότες ὅτι εἰς ἀπο- 

to my bonds, but these out of love, knowing that for de- 
λογίαν τοῦ εὐαγγελίου κεῖμαι." 18 τί,γάρ; πλὴν ὃ παντὶ 
fence of the gladtidings I am set. What then? nevertheless in every 
τρόπῳ, εἴτε προφάσει εἴτε ἀληθείᾳ, χριστὸς καταγγέλλεται" 

way, whether ἴῃ ργθίοχὺ ΟΓΎ in truth, Christ is announced ; 

καὶ ἐν τούτῳ χαίρω, ἀλλὰ Kai χαρήσομαι. 19 olda-yap ὅτι 
and in this MIrejoice, yea, also I will rejoice: for I know that 
τοῦτό μοι ἀποβήσεται εἰς σωτηρίαν διὰ τῆς ὑμῶν δεήσεως, 


this for me shallturnout to salvation through your supplication, 
καὶ ἐπιχορηγίας Tov πνεύματος Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ, 20 κατὰ 
and (the! supply of the Spirit of Jesus’ Christ: according to 


τὴν ἀποκαραδοκίαν καὶ ἐλπίδα pov, ὅτι ἐν οὐδενὶ αἰσχυνθή-- 

“earnest “expectation *and ‘hope ‘my, that in nothing I shall be 
σομαι, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν πάσῃ παῤῥησίᾳ, ὡς πάντοτε, Kai νῦν μεγα- 
ashamed, but in all boldness, as always, also now shall be 
λυνθήσεται χριστὸς ἐν τῷ.σώματί.μου εἴτε διὰ ζωῆς εἴτε διὰ 


magnified Christ in my body whether by life or by 
θανάτου. 21 ᾿Ἐμοὶ. γὰρ ro ζῶν χριστός, Kai τὸ ἀποθανεῖν 
death. For to me to live [is] Christ, and to die 


t — ἐστὶν (read [15]} [L]TTra. 5 χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ GLTTrAW. 
mov (with) fruit GLTTrAW. Υ τὸν (read which [is]) G[u]rTraw. 
¥ verses 16 and 17 transposed, except οἱ μὲν and ot δὲ GLTTraw. 
to arouse LTTrAW. Ὁ + ὅτι that (read πλὴν except) LTTrA. 


* περισσεύσῃ L. 
* + τοῦ θεου of God LTTra. 
* [τὸν] τὰ. 


513 


cord, bow greatly I 
long after you all in 
the bowels of Jesus 
Christ. 9 And this I 
pray, that your love 
may abound yet more 
and more in know- 
ledge and in all judg- 
ment; 10 that ye may 
approve things that 
are excellent ; thatys 
Imay be sincere and 
without offence till 
the day of Christ; 
11 being filled with 
the fruits of right- 
eousness, which are by 
Jesus Christ, unto the 
glory and praise of 
God. 


12 But I would ye 
should understand, 
brethren, that the 
things which happened 
unto me have fallen 
out rather unto the 
furtherance of the gos- 
pel; 13 so that my 
bonds in Christ are 
manifest in all the pa- 
lace, and in all other 
places; 14 and many 
of the brethren in the 
Lord, waxing confi- 
dent by my bonds, are 
much more bold to 
speak the word without 
fear. 15 Some indeed 
preach Christ even of 
envy and strife; and 
some also of good will: 
16 the one preach 
Christ of contention, 
not sincerely, suppos- 
ing to add affliction to 
wy bonds: 17 but the 
other of love, knowing 
that I am set for the 
defence of the gospel. 
18 What then? not- 
withstanding, every 
way, whether in pre- 
tence, or in truth, 
Christ is preached ; 
and I therein do re- 
joice, yea, and will re- 
joice. 19 For I know 
that this shall turn to 
my salvation through 
your prayer, and the 
supply of the Spirit of 
Jesus Christ, 20 ac- 
cording to my earnest 
expectation and my 
hope, that in nothing 
I shall be ashamed, 
but that with all bold- 
ness, as always, 80 
now also Christ shall 
be magnified in my 
body, whether it be 
by life, or by death. 
21 For to me to live ἐδ 
Christ, and to die is 


¥ Kap- 
ἃ eyerpery 
LL 


514 


gain. 22 But if I live 
in the flesh, this 7s the 
fruit of my labour: 

et what'l shall choose 

wot not. 23 For Iam 
in a strait betwixt 
two, having a desire 
to depart, and to be 
with Christ ; which is 
far better: 24 never- 
theless to abide in the 
flesh is more needful 
for you, 25 And hay- 
ing this confidence, I 
know that I shall a- 
bide and _ continue 
with you all for your 
furtherance and joy 
of faith ; 26 that your 
rejoicing may be more 
abundant in Jesus 
Christ for me by my 
coming to you again, 
27 Only let your con- 
versation be as it be- 
cometh the gospel of 
Christ: that whether 
I come and see you 
or else be absent, 1 
may hear of your af- 
fairs, that ye stand 
fast in one spirit,with 
one mind striving to- 
gether for the faith of 
the gospel; 28 and 
in nothing terrified 
by your adversaries, 
which is to them an 
evident token of per- 
dition, but to you of 
salvation, and that 
of God. 29 For unto 
you itis given in the 
behalf of Christ, not 
only to believe on 
him, but also to suffer 
for his sake; 30 hav- 
ing the same conflict 
which ye saw in me, 
and now hear to be in 
me, 


Il. If there be there- 
fore any consolation 
in Christ, if any com- 
fort of love, if an 
fellowship of the Spi- 
rit, if any bowels and 
mercies, 2 fulfil ye my 
joy, that ye be like- 
minded, having the 
same love, being of one 
accord, of one mind, 
3 Let nothing be done 
through strife or vain- 
glory; but in low- 
liness of mind let 
each esteem other bet- 
ter than themselves. 
4 Look not every man 
on hisown things, but 


ο δὰ but GLTTraw. 
μενῶ continue (read πᾶσιν with all) Lrtra. 
i ὑμῶν (read but of your salvation) LTTrAw. 
© μηδὲ κατὰ nor according to LITra. 


Ὁ κατ᾽ TTrAW. 


ΠΡΌΣ ΦΨΙΛΙΙΠΓΗ ΣΤΟΥΣ. I, Il. 
κέρδος. 22 εἰ δὲ τὸ ζῇν ἐν σαρκί, τοῦτό μοι καρπὸς ἔργου" 
gain ; but if tolive in flesh, this forme([is] fruit of labour: 


καὶ τί αἱρήσομαι οὐ-γνωρίζω: 23 συνέχομαι “γὰρ' ἐκ τῶν 
and what 1 5.411 choose I know not. 7I°am ‘pressed “for by the 
δύο, τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν ἔχων εἰς τὸ ἀναλῦσαι, Kai σὺν χριστῷ 
two, the *desire "having for to depart, and with Christ 
εἶναι, πολλῴἉ μᾶλλον κρεῖσσον" 24 τὸ.δὲ ἐπιμένειν “ἐν! 
to be, [for it is) very much better ; but to remain in 
TH σαρκὴ ἀναγκαιότερον ou ὑμᾶς: 25 καὶ τοῦτο 
the flesh [is] more necessary ΤῸ ὕΠ6 βακὸ οὔ you; and this 
πεποιθὼς οἶδα drt μενῶ καὶ 'συμπαραμενῶ" πᾶσιν 
being persuaded of, I know that I shall abide and continue with all 
ὑμῖν εἰς τὴν. ὑμῶν. προκοπὴν Kai χαρὰν τῆς πίστεως, 26 ἵνα 
'γοὰ ; for your advancement and joy of faith ; that 
τὸ καύχημα.ὑμῶν περισσεύῃ ἐν χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ ἐν ἐμοὶ διὰ 
your boasting may abound in hrist Jesus in me through 
τῆς.ἐμῆς.παρουσίας πάλιν πρὸς ὑμᾶς. 27 Μόνον ἀξίως τοῦ 
my presence again with you. Only  worthily of the 


εὐαγγελίου τοῦ χριστοῦ πολιτεύεσθε, ἵνα εἴτε ἐλθὼν καὶ 
glad tidings ofthe Christ conduct yourselves, that whether having come and 


ἰδὼν ὑμᾶς, εἴτε ἀπὼν ἀκούσω! τὰ περὶ ὑμῶν, 
having seen you, or being absent I might hear the things concerning you, 
Ore στήκετε ἐν ἑνὶ πνεύματι, μιᾷ ψυχῇ συναθλοῦντες 
that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one soul striving together 
τῇ πίστει τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, 28 Kai μὴ πτυρόμενοι ἐν μη- 
withthe faith of the glad tidings ; and being frightenedin  no- 
devi ὑπὸ τῶν ἀντικειμένων" ἥτις "αὐτοῖς μέν ἐστιν ἔν- 
thing by those who oppose ; which tothem is ἃ demon- 
δειξις ἀπωλείας, ὑμῖν! δὲ σωτηρίας, καὶ τοῦτο ἀπὸ θεοῦ" 
stration of destruction, *to *you ‘but of salvation, and this from God; 
29 ὅτι ὑμῖν ἐχαρίσθη τὸ ὑπὲρ χριστοῦ, οὐ μόνον τὸ 
because to you it was granted concerning Christ, ποῦ only 
εἰς αὐτὸν πιστεύειν, ἀλλὰ Kai τὸ ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ πάσχειν" 
Yon ‘him ‘to *believe, but also concerning him to suffer, 
4 ? A ᾽ ~ » k” 2 / ‘ ~ 
30 τὸν αὐτὸν ἀγῶνα ἔχοντες οἷον "ἴδετε! ἐν ἐμοί, Kai νῦν 


the same conflict having suchas yesaw in me, and now 
ἀκούετε iv ἐμοί. 
hearof in me, 


” Ϊ , ’ ~ ” 
2 Ei τις οὖν παράκλησις ἐν χριστῷ, EL τι παρα- 


If ?any ‘then encouragement [there be) in hrist, if any conso- 
pobeou ἀγάπης; εἴ τις κοινωνία πνεύματος, εἴ ‘twa! σπλάγ- 
ation of love, if any fellowship of [the] Spirit, if an bowels 


χνα καὶ οἰκτιρμοί, 2 πληρώσατέ pov τὴν χαράν, ἵνα 
fulfil my j 


and compassions, joy, that 
τὸ αὐτὸ. φρονῆτε, τὴν αὐτὴν ἀγάπην ἔχοντες, “σύμψυχοι; " 
ye may beof the same mind, the same love having, joined in soul, 


τὸ ἕν 


minding— nothing according to contention or vain- 
/ J ‘ ~ [2 ᾽ , « , « 
δοξίαν, ἀλλὰ Ty Ramsey of ρησυνῃ ἀλλήλους ἡγούμενοι ὑπερ- 
y 


glory, but in hum one another esteeming a- 
~ A ~ ' 
ἔχοντας ἑαυτῶν. 4 μὴ τὰ ἑαυτῶν Ῥξἕκαστος" 
bove themselves, *not ‘the “things °of 7themselves Seach 
4 + yap for EGLTTrAW. © — ἐν (read τῇ in the) T. f rapa- 
& ἀκούω LITr. ἐστὶν αὐτοῖς GLTTrAW. 
k εἴδετε LTTrAW. 1 σις GLTTrA. ™ συν- T. 


P ἕκαστοι LTTrA, 


II. 


ὩἩσκοπεῖτε, ἀλλὰ Kat 


PHT LAPP 1 ANS. 


Ta ἑτέρων ἕκαστος." ὃ Τοῦτο 


1consider, but also “πὸ *things °of °others each, °This 
"γὰρ ονείσθω" ἐν ὑμῖν ὃ καὶ ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ, 6 ὃς 
for ‘*letmindbe in you whichalso in Christ Jesus [was]; who, 


ἐν 
in [the] form 


‘ica θεῷ, 


μορφῇ θεοῦ ὑπάρχων, οὐχ ἁρπαγμὸν ἡγήσατο τὸ εἶναι 
of God subsisting, “ποῦ *rapine ‘esteemed 7it to be 
7 "ἀλλ᾽" ἑαυτὸν ἐκένωσεν, μορφὴν δούλου 
equal with God ; but himself ‘emptied, "form , 5a Spondman’s 
λαβών, ἐν ὁμοιώματι ἀνθρώπων γενόμενος" 8 Kai σχή- 
Shaving *taken, in [the] likeness ofmen havingbecome; and in 
ματι εὑρεθεὶς ὡς ἄνθρωπος, ἐταπείνωσεν ἑαυτόν, γενό- 
figure having been found as @man, he humbled himself, having 
μενος ὑπήκοος μέχρι θανάτου, θανάτου.δὲ σταυροῦ. 9 διὸ 
become obedient unto death, even death of [the] cross. Wherefore 
καὶ ὁ θεὸς αὐτὸν ὑπερύψωσεν Kai ἐχαρίσατο aitw”™ ὄνομα 
also God him highly exalted and granted tohim aname 
τὸ ὑπὲρ πᾶν ὄνομα" 10 ἵνα ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι Ἰησοῦ πᾶν 
which [is] above every mame, that at the name of Jesus every 
γόνυ Kappy ἐπουρανίων καὶ ἐπιγείων καὶ καταχθονίων" 
knee should bow of [Ὀ61Π65] ἴῃ heaven and onearth and under the earth, 
11 καὶ πᾶσα γλῶσσα "“ἐξομολογήσηται! ὅτι κύριος Ἰησοῦς 


and every tongue should confess that [318] *Lord 1 Jesus 
χριστὸς εἰς δόξαν θεοῦ πατρός. 
Christ to [the] glory of αοῦ [{Π6] Father. 


12 ὍὭστε, ἀγαπητοί.μου, καθὼς πάντοτε ὑπηκούσατε, μὴ 
So that, my beloved, even as always ye obeyed, not 

ὡς ἐν τῇ.παρουσίᾳ μου μόνον, ἀλλὰ νῦν πολλῷ μᾶλλον ἐν 
as) π my presence only, but now much rather in 
τῇ.ἀπουσίᾳ.μου, μετὰ φόβου Kai τρόμου τὴν.ἑαυτῶν σωτηρίαν 
my absence, wit fear and trembling yourown salvation 
κατεργάζεσθε: 13 Υὁ".θεὸς.γάρ ἐστιν ὁ ἐνεργῶν ἐν ὑμῖν καὶ τὸ 


work out, for God itis who works in you both 
θέλειν Kai τὸ ἐνεργεῖν ὑπὲρ τῆς εὐδοκίας. 14 πάντα 
to will and to work according to [his] good pleasure. 241] *things 


ποιεῖτε χωρὶς γογγυσμῶν Kai διαλογισμῶν, 15 ἵνα *yévnobe'! 
180 apart from murmurings and reasonings, that ye may be 
ἄμεμπτοι καὶ ἀκέραιοι, τέκνα θεοῦ *apwpnra' δὲν ἐσῳ" 
faultless and simple, children ofGod unblamable in [the] midst 
γενεᾶς σκολιᾶς καὶ διεστραμμένης, ἐν οἷς φαίνεσθε ὡς 
of a generation crooked and perverted ; among whom ye appear as 
φωστῆρες ἐν κόσμῳ, 16 λόγον ζωῆς ἐπέχοντες, εἰς καύχημα 
luminaries in [the] world, [the] word οἵ 116 holding forth, for a boast 
ἐμοὶ εἰς ἡμέραν χριστοῦ, ὅτι οὐκ εἰς κενὸν ἔδραμον οὐδὲ εἰς 
tome in *day *Christ’s, that not in vain Iran nor in 
a ? , 17 c ἀλλ᾽ > \ , ὃ ? ‘ ~ θ ΄ A 
KEVOY ἑκοπιασα. a ξι Καὶ σπεν. ομαι ἕπι TZ VOLE και 
vain laboured. But if alsolam poured outon the sacrifice and 
λειτουργίᾳ τῆς.πίστεως ὑμῶν, χαίρω Kai “ovyxaipw' πᾶσιν 
ministration of your faith, Irejoice, and rejoice with all 
ὑμῖν" 18 τὸ. “δ᾽. αὐτὸ Kai ὑμεῖς χαίρετε καὶ “ovyyxaiperé" por. 
you. Andinthesame also “ye ‘rejoice and rejoice with me, 
19 ᾿Ελπίζω.δὲ iv ἱκυρίῳ! ᾿Ιησοῦ Τιμόθεον ταχέως πέμψαι 


ButIhope in(the) Lord Jesus *Timotheus ‘soon ‘to “send 


515 


every man also on the 
things of others. 5 Let 
this mind be in you, 
which was also in 
Christ Jesus: 6 who, 
being in the form of 
God, thought it not 
robbery to be equal 
with God: 7 but made 
himself of no reputa- 
tion, and took upon 
him the form of a 
servant, and wasmade 
in the likeness of men: 
8 and being found in 
fashion as a man, he 
humbled himself, and 
became obedient unto 
death, even the death 
of the cross. 9 Where- 
fore God also hath 
highly exalted him, 
and given him a name 
which is above every 
name: 10 that at the 
name of Jesus every 
knee should bow, of 
things in heaven, and 
things in earth, and 
things under the earth; 
11 and that every 
tongue should confess 
that Jesus Christ is 
Lord, to the glory of 
God the Father. 


12 Wherefore, my 
beloved, as ye have 
always obeyed, not as 
in my presence only, 
but now much more in 
my absence, work out 
your own salvation 
with fear and trem- 
bling. 13 For it is God 
which worketh in you 
both to will and to do 
of his good pleasure. 
14 Do all things with- 
out murmurings and 
disputings: 15 that ye 
may be blameless and 
harmless, the sons of 
God, without rebuke, 
in the midst of a 
crooked and perverse 
nation, among whom 
ye shine as lights in 
the world ; 16 holding 
forth the word of life ; 
that I may rejoice in 
the day of Christ, that 
I havenot runin vain, 
neither laboured in 
vain. 17 Yea, and if I 
be offered upon the 
sacrifice and service of 
your faith, I joy, and 
rejoice with you all 
18 For the same canse 
also do ye joy,and re- 
joice with me. 19 But 
I trust in the Lord 
Jesus to send Timo- 
theus shortly unto 


τ ἕκαστοι GLTTrAW. 

πο + τὸ the (name) LTTr[A]w. 
τ ἦτε L. 8 ἄμωμα LTTrA. 
d συν- T. ε δὲ TTr. 


" 
4ᾳ σκοποῦντες Considering GLTTrAW. 
tiga LTAW. ’ ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. 
shall confess Taw. Υ — ὃ LTTraw. 
midst LTTraw. © ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. 


5 φρονεῖτε (omit for) LTTra. 


x ἐξομολογήσεται 
> μέσον [in the] 


χριστῷ Christ τ,. 


516 


you, that I also may 
be ‘of good comfort, 
when I know your 
state. 20 For I have 
no man _ likeminded, 
who will naturally 
eare for your state. 
21 For all seek their 
own, not the things 
which are Jesus 
Christ’s, 22 But ye 
know the proof of him, 
that, as a son with the 
father, he hath served 
with me in the gospel. 
23 Him therefore I 
hope to send presently, 
so soon as 1 shall see 
how it will go with 
me, 24 But I trust in 
the Lord that I also 
myself shall come 
shortly. 25 Yet I sup- 
posed it necessary to 
send to you Epaphro- 
ditus, my brother, and 
companion in labour, 
and fellowsoldier, but 
your messenger, and 
he that ministered to 
my wants. 26 For he 
longed after you all, 
and was full of heavi- 
ness, because that ye 
had heard that he had 
been sick. 27 For in- 
deed he was sick nigh 
unto death: but God 
had mercy on him ; 
and not on him only, 
but on me also, lest I 
should have sorrow up- 
on sorrow. 28 1 sent 
him therefore the more 
carefully, that, when 
ye see him again, ye 
may rejoice, and that I 
may be the less sorrow- 
ful. 29 Receive him 
therefore in the Lord 
with all gladness ; and 
hold such in reputa- 
tion : 30 because for 
the work of Christ he 
was nigh unto death, 
not regarding his life, 
to supply your lack of 
service toward me. 


Ill. Finally, my 
brethren, rejoice in 
the Lord. To write the 
same things to you, to 
me indeed is not griev- 
ous, but for you tt 
as safe. 2 Beware of 
dogs, beware of evil 
workers, beware of the 
concision. 3 For weare 
the circumcision, which 
worship God in the 
spirit, and rejoice in 
Christ Jesus, and have 
no confidence in the 
flesh. 4 Though I might 
also have confidence in 


ΠΡΟΣ ΦΙΛΙΠΠΗΣΊΙΟΥΣ. Il, TER 


ὑμῖν, ἵνα κἀγὼ εὐψυχῶ, γνοὺς τὰ περὶ 
to you, that I also may be of See courage, having known the pe concerning 
ὑμῶν" 20 οὐδένα.γὰρ ἔχω ἰσόψυχον, ὕστις γνησίως 


τὰ 
you. Fornoone have I like-minded, who genuinely the things 
περὶ ὑμῶν μεριμνήσει" 21 οἱ.πάντες. γὰρ τὰ ἑαυτῶν 


relative to you  willcare for. 
ζητοῦσιν, ov τὰ ἢ 


For all the things of themselves 


τοῦ" ἰχριστοῦ Ἰησοῦ"" 22 τὴν. δὲ δοκιμὴν 
are seeking, not the thoes of Christ Jesus. But the proof 


αὐτοῦ γινώσκετε, OTL ὡς πατρὶ τέκνον, σὺν ἐμοὶ ἐδούλευσεν 
ofhim yeknow, that, as *to *a ὅζαύμοσ ‘a child, with me he served 


εἰς TO εὐαγγέλιον. 23 τοῦτον μὲν οὖν ἐλπίζω πέμψαι ὡς 
for the glad tidings. Him therefore I hope to send *when 


ἂν = *aridw!! τὰ περὶ ἐμέ, ἐξαυτῆς. 34 πεέ- 

41 5shall Shave 7seen *the *things ‘°concerning **me ‘at *once: Shee sam 
ποιθα δὲ ἐν κυρίῳ ὕτι καὶ αὐτὸς ταχέως ἐλεύσομαι. 
15persuaded **but in [{86] Lord that also *myself ‘soon 1 35}41] come: 


25 ᾿Αναγκαῖον.δὲ ἡγησάμην ᾿Ἑπαφρόδιτον τὸν ἀδελφὸν καὶ 
but meeoasary: I esteemed τὸ Haga) toa ge "brother and 


συνεργὸν καὶ ᾿ἰσυστρατιώτην" μου, ὑμῶν.δὲ ἀπόστολον καὶ 
®fellow-worker '°and *fellow-soldier ‘my, **but exons messenger ‘*and 


λειτουργὸν τῆς. χρείας. μου, πέμψαι 7, πρὺς ὑμᾶς" 20 ἐπειδὴ 


16minister ‘7of 1®my **need, to 7send “you, since 


ἐπιποθῶν ἦν πάντας ὑμᾶς", Kai ἀδημονῶν διότι 
᾿Ἰομεῖπε “after the ὄνγδβ ®all Syou, and([was] deeply depressed because 


ἠκούσατε Ore ἠσθένησεν" 27 καὶ. γὰρ ἠσθένησεν παραπλήσιον 
ye heard that he was sick; for indeed ἘΠ was sick like 


θανάτῳ: "ἀλλ᾽"! ὁ θεὸς αὐτὸν ἠλέησεν," οὐκ.αὐτὸν.δὲ μόνον 
we Uy] Sh 3 


] 


to death, but God him hadmercyon, andnothim alone, 
ἀλλὰ Kai ἐμέ, ἵνα μὴ λύπην ἐπὶ PUTTY" σχῶ. 28 σπου- 
but also me, that not sorrow upon sorrow I might have. The more 


οὖν ἔπεμψα αὐτόν, ἵνα ἰδόντες αὐτὸν πάλιν 

diligently ΠΟΙ ΓΟ 1 sent him, that seeing him again 
χαρῆτε, κἀγὼ ἀλυπότερος ὦ. 29 προσδέχεσθε οὖν 

ye might mej cioes and I the less sorrowful might be. Receive therefore 


αὐτὸν ἐν κυρίῳ μετὰ πάσης χαρᾶς, καὶ τοὺς τοιούτους 
him in [the] Lord with all joy, and such 
διὰ 


ἐντίμους ἔχετε" 80 ὅτι τὸ ἔργον “τοῦ" χριστοῦ" 
inhonour hold; because for the sake of the work of the Christ 


μέχρι θανάτου ἤγγισεν, “παραβουλευσάμενος" τῇ ψυχῇ, 

unto death he went near, having disregarded life, 

ἵνα ἀναπληρώσῃ τὸ. ὑμῶν ὑστέρημα τῆς πρός με 

that he might fill up your deficiency of the 7towards*me ‘ministration, 
3 Τὸ λοιπόν, ἀδελφοί. μου, χαίρετε ἐν κυρίῳ τὰ αὐτὰ 

For the rest, my brethren, meloite in 89] Lord: thesame things 
γράφειν ὑμῖν, ἐμοὶ μὲν οὐκ ὀκνηρόν, ὑμῖν.δὲ ἀσφαλές. 
ἴο write to you, to me {is] not irksome, and for you safe. 


2 βλέπετε τοὺς κύνας, βλέπετε τοὺς κακοὺς ἐργάτας, βλέπετε 
See to SoBe; see to evil coe see to 


δαιοτέρως 


{his} 
λειτουργίας. 


τὴν κατατομήν" 3 mpeic. γάρ ἐσμεν ἡ περιτομή, οἱ πνεύματι 


the concision. For we are the GEE ay who “in one 
‘ep! λατρεύοντες, Kai καυχώμενοι ἐν χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ, Kai οὐκ 
2God serve, and boast in Christ Jesus, and not 


4 — τοῦ GLTTrAW. 


m + [ἰδεῖν] to see L. 


4 — τοῦ the LTTra. 
* θεοῦ (read serve in 


i Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ GLTraW, ¥ apidw LITA. loyvo- LTTrA. 

Ὁ ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. ο ἠλέησεν αὐτόν LTTrAW. P λύπην GLTTrAW. 

¥ — χριστοῦ A. 5 παραβολευσάμενος having hazarded Girtraw. 
[the] Spirit of God) Lrrraw. 


III. PEL re PEA NS: 
> \ ΄ ἘΝ , ? Va) ow ἌΣ wus 
ἐν σαρκὶ πεποιθότες, 4 καίπερ ἐγὼ ἔχων πεποίθησιν Kai ἐν 
in flesh trust. Though I have trust even in 
Lee Vv » ~ » , > , ? ‘ ~ e 
σαρκί" ¥ ei τις δοκεῖ ἄλλος πεποιθέναι ἐν σαρκί, ἐγὼ μᾶλλον 
flesh ; if any “thinks ‘other to trust in flesh, I rather : 
5 ὑπεριτομὴ" ὀκταήμερος, ἐκ γένους Iopand, φυλῆς 
[as to] circumcision, on [the] eighth day ; of [the] race οὗ Israel, of [the] tribe 
*Beriapir," “EBpaioc ἐξ Ἑβραίων, κατὰ νόμον Φαρισαῖος. 
of Benjamin, Hebrew of Hebrews; accordingto[the]iaw a Pharisee; 


6 κατὰ ζῆλον" διώκων τὴν ἐκκλησίαν, κατὰ δικαιοσύ- 
according to zeal, persecuting the assembly; accordingto righteous- 
νην τὴν ἐν νόμῳ γεγόμενος ἄμεμπτος. 77a" ἅτινα 


ness which [15] in[the]law, having become blameless; but what things 
"iv μοι! κέρδη, ταῦτα ἥγημαι διὰ τὸν χριστὸν 
were tome gain, these Ihave esteemed, on account of Christ, 
ζημίαν. ὃ ἀλλὰ ὕμενοῦνγεϊ! καὶ ἡγοῦμαι πάντα ζημίαν 
1058. But yearather, also Lamesteeming all things loss 
εἶναι διὰ τὸ ὑπερέχον τῆς γνώσεως “ χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ 
to be on account of the excellency of the knowledge ofChrist Jesus 
τοῦ.κυρίου.μου, Ov ὃν Ta.mavra ἐζημιώθην, Kai ἡγοῦ- 
my Lord, on account of whom all things I suffered loss of, and esteem 
μαι σκύβαλα εἶναι," ἵνα χριστὸν κερδήσω, 9 καὶ εὑρεθῶ 
{them] refuse tobe, that Christ I may gain; and be found 
ἐν αὐτῷ, μὴ ἔχων ἐμὴν.δικαιοσύνην τὴν ἐκ νόμου, ἀλλὰ 
in him, not having my righteousness which [isj of law, but 
THY διὰ πίστεως χριστοῦ, THY ἐκ θεοῦ δικαιοσύνην ἐπὶ 
that which by faith of Christ [is], the “of °~God ‘righteousness on 
τῇ πίστει, 10 τοῦ γνῶναι αὐτὸν Kai τὴν δύναμιν τῆς ava- 
faith, to know him and the power of *resur- 
στάσεως αὐτοῦ, καὶ τὴν" κοινωνίαν ἱτῶν" παθημάτων. αὐτοῦ. 
rection *his, and the tellowship of his sufferings, 
Sovupoppovpevoc' τῷ-.θανάτῳ.αὐτοῦ, 11 εἴπως καταντήσω 
being conformed to his death, if by any means I may arrive 
εἰς THY ἐξανάστασιν "τῶν" νεκρῶν. 12 οὐχ ὅτι ἤδη ἔλαβον, 
at the resurrection of the dead. Not that “already ‘I received, 
ἢ ἤδη τετελείωμαι" διώκω. δὲ εἰ ἱκαὶ" καταλάβω 
or already ave been perfected; butIam pursuing, if also I may lay hold, 
ἐφ᾽ ᾧ καὶ ‘kkarehngOny' ὑπὸ ἱτοῦ" χριστοῦ "Ἰησοῦ." 13 aded- 
for that also I was laid hold οἵ by the Christ Jesus, Bre- 
pot, ἐγὼ ἐμαυτὸν "οὐ" λογίζομαι κατειληφέναι: év.0&, 
thren, 1 myself “not ‘doreckon to have laid hold; but one thing— 
τὰ μὲν ὀπίσω ἐπιλανθανόμενος, τοῖς. δὲ ἔμπροσθεν 
the things behind forgetting, and to the things before 
ἐπεκτεινόμενος, 14 κατὰ σκοπὸν διώκω “ἐπὶ! τὸ βραβεῖον 


stretching out, towards [the] goal 1 pursue for the prize 
τῆς ἄνω κλήσεως τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ. 15 Ὅσοι 
of the “on *high . ‘calling of God in Christ Jesus, As many as 


οὖν τέλειοι τοῦτο.φρονῶμεν᾽ καὶ εἴ τι ἑτέρως 
therefore [are] perfect should be of this mind ; and if [inj anything differently 
φρονεῖτε, Kai τοῦτο ὁ θεὸς ὑμῖν ἀποκαλύψει. 16 πλὴν εἰς ὃ 
ye are minded, “also ‘+this God toyou will reveal. But whereto 


617 
the flesh. If any other 
man thinketh that he 
hath whereof he might 
trust in the flesh, 1 
more: 5 circumcised 
the eighth day, of the 
stock of Israel, of the 
tribe of Benjamin, an 
Hebrew of the He- 
brews; as touching 
the law, a Pharisee ; 
6 concerning zeal, per- 
secuting the church ; 
touching the right- 
eousness which is in the 
law, blameless. 7 But 
what things were gain 
to me, those I counted 
loss for Christ. 8 Yea 
doubtless, and I count 
all things but loss for 
the exceliency of the 
knowledge of Christ 
Jesus my Lord: ror 
whom I have suffered 
the loss of all things, 
and do count them 
but dung, that J muy 
win Christ, 9 and be 
found in him, not hay- 
ing mine own right- 
eousness, which is of 
thelaw, but that which 
is through the faith of 
Christ, the righteous- 
ness which is of God 
by faith: 10 that I 
may know him, and 
the power of his resur- 
rection, and the fel- 
lowship of his sui- 
ferings, being made 
conformable unto his 
death ; 11 if by any 
means 1 might attain 
unto the resurrection 
of the dead. 12 Not 
as though I had al- 
ready attained, either 
were already  per- 
fect: but I follow 
after, if that I may 
apprehend that for 
which also I am ap- 
prehended of Christ 
Jesus, 13 Brethren, I 
count not myself to 
have apprehended: but 
this one thing J do, 
forgetting those things 
which are behind, and 
reaching forth unto 
those things which are 
before, 14 1 press to- 
ward the mark for the 
prize of the high call- 
ing of God in Christ 
Jesus. 15 Let us there- 
fore, as many as be 
perfect, be thus mind- 
ed: and if in any 
thing ye be otherwise 


v To read as pointed in the Greek join though I have &c. to what precedes, commencing a 


sentence at εἴ τις. 


ἘΣ Ἢ περιτομῇ GLITrAW. δ Βενιαμείν τῦττ. 
[Ljtr[A] ; — αλλ᾽ 1. 


ὦ μοι ἣν 1. ὃ μὲν οὖν then indeed GLTraw. 


Christ) L. 4 — εἶναι LTTr. © — τὴν LIT: [a]. f — τῶν TTr. 
(συν- Τ) LTTrAW. h σὴν ἐκ from among [the] Lrtraw. i— καὶ 1. 
LTTra. 1 — τοῦ GLTTraw. m — Ἰησοῦ GLIraw. ἢ οὔπω not yet 1. 


Y ζῆλος LTTraW. 
ὁ + Οτοῦ (vead of the 


2 ἀλλὰ 
& συμμορφιζόμενος 


* κατελήμφθην 
© εἰς LTTrA, 


518 


minded, God shall re- 
veal even this unto 
you. 16 Nevertheless, 
whereto we have al- 
ready attained, let us 
walk by the samerule, 
let us mind the same 
thing. 17 Brethren, be 
followers together of 
me, and mark them 
which walk so as ye 
have us for an en- 
sample. 18 (For many 
walk, of whom I have 
told you often, and 
now tell you even 
weeping, that they are 
the enemies of the cross 
of Christ: 19 whose end 
ts destruction, whose 
God is their belly, and 
whose glory is in their 
shame, who mind 
earthly things.) 20 For 
our conversation is in 
heaven ; from whence 
also we look for the 
Saviour, the Lord Je- 
sus Christ: 21 who 
shall change our vile 
body, that it may be 
fashioned like unto his 
glorious body, accord- 
ing to the working 
whereby heis ableeven 
to subdue all things 
unto himself. 


IV. Therefore, my 
brethren dearly be- 
loved and longed for, 
my joy and crown, so 
stand fast in the Lord, 
my dearly beloved. 21 
beseech Euodias, and 
beseech Syntyche, that 
they be of the same 
mind in the Lord, 
3 And I entreat thee 
also, true yokefellow, 
help those women 
which laboured with 
me in the gospel, with 
Clement also, and with 
other my fellowla- 
bourers, whose names 
are in the book of life. 


4 Rejoice in the Lord 
alway: and again I 
say, Rejoice. 5 Let 
your moderation be 
Known unto all men, 
The Lord is at hand. 
6 Be careful for no- 
thing ; but in every 
thing by prayer and 


supplication with 
thanksgiving let your 
requests be made 
known unto God. 


IGP iOS), SL AAI Hes OY Ss: IIL, ΝΣ 


ἐφθάσαμεν, τῷ αὐτῷ στοιχεῖν Ῥκανόνι, τὸ αὐτὸ φρονεῖν." 
we attained, by the same 2to Swalk *rule, to be of the same mind. 
17 Wovppuyrat' pov γίνεσθε, ἀδελφοί, καὶ σκοπεῖτε τοὺς 
2Tmitators “together tof °me ‘be, brethren, and consider those 
οὕτως περιπατοῦντας καθὼς ἔχετε τύπον ἡμᾶς. 18 πολ- 
thus walking as ye have [*for]*a‘*pattern ‘us; Smany 
Aoi yap περιπατοῦσιν οὺὃς πολλάκις ἔλεγον ὑμῖν, νῦν.δὲ 
°for are walking [of] whom often I told you, and now 
καὶ κλαίων λέγω, τοὺς ἐχθροὺς τοῦ σταυροῦ τοῦ 
even weeping Itell [γοὰ, they 416] ‘the enemies ofthe cross 
χριστοῦ" 19 ὧν τὸ τέλος ἀπώλεια, ὧν ὁ θεὸς ἡ κοιλία, 
of Christ: whose end [is] destruction, whose God [is] the belly, 
‘ « ~ ~ ~ 
καὶ ἡ δόξα ἐν THaloxbyvy.abToy, ot Td.éziyea φρονοῦντες. 
and the glory in their shame, who earthly things mind : 
€ ~ ‘ ~ c ΄ 
20 ἡμῶν.γὰρ τὸ πολίτευμα ἐν οὐρανοῖς ὑπάρχει, ἐξ οὗ 
forofus the commonwealth in [the] heavens exists, from which 
καὶ σωτῆρα ἀπεκδεχόμεθα κύριον ᾿Τησοῦν χριστόν, 21 ὃς 
8150 [85] Saviour τῦϑ 8416 awaiting [the] Lord Jesus Christ, who 
μετασχηματίσει TO σῶμα τῆς ταπεινώσεως ἡμῶν, TEC TO γε- 
will transform *body 308 humiliation ‘our, for 2to 
γέσθαι αὐτὸ" Iobppopgor' τῷ σώματι τῆς.δόξης. αὐτοῦ, κατὰ 
%become = 7it conformed to *body 301 *his*glory, according to 
τὴν ἐνέργειαν τοῦ.δύνασθαι. αὐτὸν Kai ὑποτάξαι "ἑαυτῷ" 


the working of his power even to subdue _ to himself 
τὰ-πάντα. 
all things. 
4 “Ὥστε, ἀδελφοί.μον ἀγαπητοὶ Kai ἐπιπόθητοι, χαρὰ καὶ 
So that, my brethren beloved and longed for, "joy *and 
στέφανός μου, οὕτως στήκετε ἐν κυρίῳ, ἀγαπητοί. 2 *Kiw- 
*crown my, thus stand fast in [the] Lord, beloved. Euo- 


δίαν" παρακαλῶ, καὶ Συντύχην παρακαλῶ, τὸ. αὐτὸ. φρονεῖν 
dia I exhort, and Syntyche I exhort, to be of the same mind 
ἐν κυρίῳ" 3 "καὶ! ἐρωτῶ Kai σε, Youluye γνήσιε," *ovd- 
in (the) Lord. And 1851 also thee, *yoke-fellow ‘true, as- 
λαμβάνου" αὐταῖς, αἵτινες ἐν τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ συνήθλησάν 
sist these [women], who in the gladtidings strove together 

οι, μετὰ καὶ Κλήμεντος, καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν συνεργῶν.μου, 
with me; with also Clement, and the rest of my fellow-workers, 


ὧν τὰ ὀνόματα ἐν βίβλῳ ζωῆς. 


whose names [8476] ἴῃ [the] book of life. 
4 Χαίρετε iv κυρίῳ πάντοτε' πάλιν ἐρῶ, χαίρετε. 
Rejoice in [the] Lord always: again I will say, rejoice. 


5 τὸ.ἐπιεικὲς. ὑμῶν γνωσθήτω πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις. ὁ κύριος 
Your *gentleness ‘let be known toall men. The Lord [is] 
ἐγγύς. 6 Μηδὲν μεριμνᾶτε, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν παντὶ τῇ-προσευχῇ 
near. Nothing becareful about, but in everything by prayer 
καὶ τῇ.δεήσει μετὰ εὐχαριστίας τὰ. αἰτήματα ὑμῶν γνωρι- 
and by supplication with thanksgiving ?your “requests ‘let be made 
ζέσθω πρὸς τὸν θεόν" 7 Kai ἡ εἰρήνη τοῦ θεοῦ ἡ ὑπερέχουσα 


7 And the peace of known to God; and the peace of God which surpasses 

God, which passeth all Ἢ Ξ , ‘ , tere ad 7 

understanding, shall 7AVT@ γοῦν φρουρήσει τὰς. καρδίας. ὑμῶν καὶ τὰ νοήματα 

keep your hearts and every understanding shall guard your hearts and “thoughts 

minds through Christ « ὦ ~ ~ ἢ , , ἢ 

Jesus 8Finally,breth. ὑμῶν ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ. 8 Τὸ. λοιπόν, ἀδελφοί, ὅσα 

ren, whatsoeverthings ‘your in hrist Jesus. For the rest, brethren, whatsoever [things] 
P — κανόνι, τὸ αὐτὸ φρονεῖν GLTTrA. 4 συν- T. τ — εἰς τὸ γενέσθαι αὐτὸ GLTTrAW. 


5 αὐτῷ LTTrA. 
% συν- TTrA. 


t Ἑυοδίαν EGLTTrAW. 


Y ναὶ yea GLTTrAW. ¥ γνήσιε σύνζυγε LTTrA. 


ἘΝ. Pier? PP EA NS: 


ἐστὶν ἀληθῆ, ὅσα σεμνά, ὅσα 
are true, whatsoever venerable, whatsoever just, 
doa προσφιλῆ, doa εὔφημα, εἴ τις ἀρετὴ καὶ εἴ τις 
whatsoever lovely, whatsoever of good report; if any virtue and if any 


” ~ / [3] ‘ ? / sy , 
ἔπαινος, ταῦτα λογίζεσθε: 9 ἃ Kai ἐμάθετε καὶ παρελάβετε 
praise, these things consider. What also ye learned and received 
καὶ ἠκούσατε Kai εἴδετε ἐν ἐμοί, ταῦτα πράσσετε" Kai ὁ θεὸς 
and heard and saw in me, these things do; and the God 
~ > , m” 2 c ~ 2 , x > Ζ 
τῆς εἰρήνης ἔσται μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν. 10 ᾿Εχάρην.δὲ ἐν κυρίῳ 

of peace shall be with you, But I rejoiced in (the) Lord 
μεγάλως, bre ἤδη.ποτὲ ἀνεθάλετε τὸ ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ φρονεῖν" 


δίκαια, boa ἁγνά, 


whatsoever pure, 


greatly, that now atlength yerevived [your] *of e ‘thinking ; 

ἐφ᾽ ᾧ Kai ἐφρονεῖτε, ἠκαιρεῖσθε.δέ. 11 οὐχ Ort 
although also ye were thinking, but ye were lacking opportunity. Not that 
καθ᾽ ὑστέρησιν λέγω" ἐγὼ. γὰρ ἔμαθον ἐν οἷς εἰμι, 
asto destitution I speak; for I learned in what [circumstances] I am, 
αὐτάρκης εἶναι. 12 οἶδα.) δὲ" ταπεινοῦσθαι, οἶδα καὶ 

content to be. And I know [how] to be brought low, and I know [how] 


περισσεύειν. ἐν παντὶ Kai ἐν πᾶσιν μεμύημαι Kai χορτά- 
to abound, In everything and in all things I am initiated both to be 
ζεσθαι καὶ πεινᾷν, Kai περισσεύειν Kai ὑστερεῖσθαι" 13 πάντα 
full andtohunger, both toabound and tobedeficient. ‘All*things 
ἰσχύω ἐν τῷ ἐνδυναμοῦντί μὲ χριστῷ." 14 πλὴν 
11 7am “strong ‘for in the *who*empowers ἢ  ‘?Christ. But 
AG ? 7 a , , ll ~ ΄ and » 
καλῶς ἐποιήσατε, “συγκοινωνήσαντές" μου τῇ θλίψει. 15 οἴδατε 
well ye did, haying fellowshipin my tribulation. 2Know 
δὲ Kai ὑμεῖς, Φιλιππήσιοι, ὅτι ἐν ἀ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, 
‘and also ye, O Philippians, that in [the] beginning of the glad tidings, 
eo ? ~ > ‘A , ᾽ ᾽’ > , >? 
ὅτε ἐξῆλθον ἀπὸ Μακεδονίας, οὐδεμία μοι ἐκκλησία ἐκοι- 
when Icame out from Macedonia, notany *with*me ‘assembly 7288 
νώνησεν εἰς λόγον δόσεως καὶ AnWewe," εἰ μὴ ὑμεῖς 
3fellowship with regard to an account of giving and receiving, except ye 
μόνοι" 16 ὅτι Kai ἐν Θεσσαλονίκῃ καὶ ἅπαξ καὶ δὶς “εἰς! τὴν 
alone ; because also in Thessalonica both once and twice for 
χρείαν.μοι ἐπέμψατε. 17 οὐχ Ore ἐπιζητῶ τὸ δόμα, “ἀλλ᾽" 
my need ye sent. Not that I seek after gift, but 
ἐπιζητῶ τὸν καρπὸν τὸν πλεονάζοντα εἰς λόγον ὑμῶν" 
I seek after fruit that abounds to your account. 
18 ἀπέχω.δὲ πάντα καὶ περισσεύω" πεπλήρωμαι, δεξάμενος 
But I have all things and abound; I am full, haying received 
mapa ‘Emagpodirov τὰ παρ᾽ ὑμῶν, ὀσμὴν εὐωδίας, 
from Epaphroditus thethings from you, anodour of asweet smeli, 
θυσίαν δεκτήν, εὐάρεστον τῷ θεῷ. 19 ὁ δὲ θεός.μου πληρώσει 
a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God. But myGod will fill up 
πᾶσαν χρείαν. ὑμῶν κατὰ “τὸν. πλοῦτον αὐτοῦ ἐν δόξῃ ἐν 


519 
are true, whatsoever 
things are _ honest, 
whatsoever things 


are just, whatsoever 
things are pure, what- 
soever things are 
lovely, whatsoever 
things are of good re- 
port; if there be any 
virtue, and if there be 
any praise, think on 
these things. 9 Those 
things, which ye have 
both learned, and re- 
ceived, and heard, and 
seen in me, do: and 
the God of peace shall 
be with you. 10 But 
I rejoiced in the Lord 
greatly, that now at 
the last your care of 
me hath flourished 
again; wherein ye were 
also careful, but ye 
lacked opportunity. 
11 Not that I speak in 
respect of want: forl 
have learned, in what- 
soever state I am, 
therewith to be con- 
tent. 12 I know both 
how to be abased, and 
I know how to abound: 
every where and in all 
things I am instructed 
both to be full and to 
be hungry, both to 
abound and to suffer 
need. 13 I can do all 
things through Christ 
which strengthenetk 
me. 14 Notwithstand- 
ing ye have well done, 
that ye did commu- 
nicate with my aftlic- 
tion. 15 Now ye Phil- 
ippians know also, that 
in the beginning of 
the gospel, when I de- 
parted from Mace- 
donia, no church com- 
municated with meas 
concerning giving and 
receiving, but ye only. 
16 For even in Thes- 
salonica ye sent once 
and again unto my 
necessity. 17 Not be- 
cause I desire a gift: 
but I desire fruit that 
may abound to your 
account. 18 But Ihave 
all, and abound: Iam 
full, having received 
of Epaphroditus the 
things which were sent 


all , your eee according to his ne ae glory, = from you, an odour of ἃ 
χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ. 20 τῷῴ.δὲ θεῷ Kai πατρὶ ἡμῶν ἡ δόξα εἰς τυ λυ ξεν τ noe 
Chribe τ Jesus. 4 as to the ee and Father of us [be] glory to ing to G od. 19 But my 
τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. God shall supply all 
the ages ofthe ages. Amen. ne et poe’ to 
Ἢ Ἢ riches in glory by 
21 ᾿Ασπάσασθε πάντα ἅγιον ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ. ἀσπάξον- Christ Jesus. 20 Now 
Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. Sgg- unto God and our Fa- 
Ἄν 5 x eae , 3 ; Lyles - ther be glory for ever 

Tat ὑμᾶς οἱ σὺν Jie ἀδελφοί. 22 ἀσπάζονται ὑμᾶς πάν- πιὰ ever. Amen. 
lute ‘you “the *with e *brethren. 10Salute ryou 7411 21 Salute every saint 
Υ και GLTTrAW. : -- κριστῷ (read τῷ him) GLTTraw. 2 our- T. Ὁ λήμψεως LTTra. 


© [eis] L. ἃ ἀλλὰ LTTrAw. ε τὸ πλοῦτος LTTrAW. 


520 


in Christ Jesus. The 
brethren which are 
with me greet you. 
22 All the saints salute 
you, chiefly they that 
are of Ceesar’s house- 
hold. 23 The grace of 
our Lord Jesus Christ 
be with you all. A- 
men, 


Ἢ ΠΡΟΣ 


THE “TO 


PAUL, an apostle of 
Jesus Christ by the 
will of God, and Ti- 
motheus our brother, 
2 to the saints and 
faithful brethren in 
Christ which are at 
Colosse: Gracs be un- 
to you, and peace, 
from God our Father 
and the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


3 We give thanks to 
God and the Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, 
praying always for 
you, 4 since we heard 
of your faith in Christ 
Jesus, an? of the love 
which y* have to all 
the saiuts, 5 for the 
hope ~vhich is laid up 
for you in heaven, 
wheceof ye heard be- 
fore in the word of 
the truth of the gos- 
pel; 6 which is come 
unto you, aszt isin all 
the world; and bring- 
eth forth fruit, as ἐξ 
doth also in you, since 
the day ye heard ofit, 
2nd knew the grace of 
God in truth : 7 as ye 
also learned of Epa- 
phras our dear fellow- 
servant, whois foryou 
a faithful minister of 
Christ ; 8 who also 
declared unto us your 
love in the Spirit. 


ΠΡΌΣ (KONASSARTS. 


TEC οἱ ἅγιοι, 


5.ῃ6 ®saints, and especially those of the 


χάρις τοῦ κυρίου "ἡμῶν" ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ 


2of Ξξββδαυ "household. 


I. 


μάλιστα.δὲ ot ἐκ τῆς Καίσαρος οἰκίας. 23 Ἢ 


The 


μετὰ βπάντων 


grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with 3411 
ὑμῶν." Βάμην." 
*you. Amen. 
ἹΠρὸς Φιλιππησίους ἐγράφη ἀπὸ Ῥώμης, δ Ἔπα- 
To [the] Philippians written from Rome, ' by Epa- 
ροδίτου." 
phroditus. 
KOAASSAEI= ENLETOAH ITIAYAOY." 
(OTHE) ®COLOSSIANS ‘EPISTLE 20F *PAUL. 


ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ ἀπόστολος "Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ" διὰ θελήματος θεοῦ, Kai 


Paul 


apostle 


of Jesus 


Christ 


by 2will 


1God’s, and 


Τιμόθεος ὁ ἀδελφός, 2 τοῖς ἐν ™KoXaooaic' ἁγίοις καὶ πισ- 


Timothens the brother, 


to the 


Tin 


®Colosse 


‘saints *and *faitk- 


τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς ἐν χριστῷ)" χάρις ὑμῖν Kai εἰρήνη ἀπὸ θεοῦ 


ful *brethren *in 
πατρὸς. ἡμῶν “Kai 
our Father and 


*Christ. 


Grace 


to you and 


peace 


κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ χοιστοῦ." 


{the] Lord 


Jesus 


Christ. 


from God 


, ~ ~ ~ ‘II ‘ ~ , € ~ ? 
3 Εὐχαριστοῦμεν τῷ θεῴ Ῥκαὶ" πατρὶ τοῦ κυρίου.ἡμῶν ‘In- 


We give thanks 


to the God 


and Father 


of our Lord 


Je- 


σοῦ χριστοῦ, πάντοτε “περὶ" ὑμῶν προσευχόμενοι: 4 ἀκού- 


sus Christ, 


continually *for 


ou 


‘praying, 


having 


σαντες τὴν. πίστιν. ὑμῶν ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ, Kai THY ἀγάπην 


heard 
"ry" 


which [ye have] towards 


THY 


which [15] laid up 


of your faith 


in 
all 


for you in 


Christ 


> U s € » A 
εἰς πάντας τοὺς ἁγίους, 5 διὰ 
saints, 


the 


the 


Jesus, and _ the 


on account of the 


love 


τὴν ἐλπίδα 


hope 


ἀποκειμένην ὑμῖν ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς, ἣν προηκούσατε 
heavens; which ye heard of before 


ἐν τῷ λόγῳ τῆς ἀληθείας τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, 6 τοῦ παρόντος εἰς 


in the word of the 


truth 


of the glad tidings, 


which are come 


to 


ὑμᾶς, καθὼς καὶ ἐν παντὶ τῷ κόσμῳ, "καὶ" ἔστιν καρποφορού- 


you, 


fruit, even as 


even as also in 


all 


the 
μενον", καθὼς καὶ ἐν ὑμῖν, ἀφ᾽ 
also among you, 


world, 


and are 


from the day in which ye heard 


bringing forth 
ἧς. ἡμέρας ἠκούσατε Kai 


and 


ἐπέγνωτε τὴν χάριν τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν ἀληθείᾳ: 7 καθὼς “Kai! 


knew the 


grace 


of God in 


? , ᾽ A ᾽ ~ ~ 7 τω 
ἐμάθετε ἀπὸ ᾿Επαφρᾶ τοῦ ἀγαπητοῦ 


ye learned from 


ἐστιν πιστὸς ὑπὲρ 
*for 


is “faithful 


Epaphras 


Υ͂ « ~ ΤΠ 
Ων 
you 


beloved 


truth : 


even as 


also 


a , « ~ e 
συνδούλου ἡμῶν, ὃς 


Sfellow-bondman 


tour, 


who 


διάκονος τοῦ χριστοῦ, ὃ ὁ Kai 


1% Ξβοσυδηῦ 


δηλώσας ἡμῖν τὴν ὑμῶν. ἀγάπην ἐν 
in {the] Spirit. 


signified tous 


your love 


*of °Christ, 
πνεύματι. 


who also 


{- ἡμῶν (read of the Lord) Lttraw. 


© — ἀμήν [L]rtr[A]. 


EGTAW. 


LTTrAW. 
us LTraA, 


n + Ἰησοῦ Jesus L. 
to God [the] Father) La. 


4 ὑπὲρ LTr. 


& τοῦ πνεύματος ὑμῶν your spirit LTTrAWw. 
i — the subscription GLTW ; Πρὸς Φιλιππησίους Tra. 

k 4 τοῦ ᾿Αποστόλου of the Apostle Ε; Πρὸς Κολοσσαεῖς ET; Παῦλον ἐπιστολὴ πρὸς 
Κολοσσαεῖς α ; Πρὸς Κολασσαεῖς LTrAW. 


1 χριστοῦ Ἰησοῦ LITrAW. 

ο --- καὶ κυρίου Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ G[L]TTraw. 
τ ἣν ἔχετε Which ye have LT?traw. 
t+ καὶ αὐξανόμενον and growing GLITraw. 


u 


3 
— καὶ LTTraAWw. 


v 


πὶ Κολοσσαῖς 
Ρ --- καὶ (read 


— Kat 
Rtas 
ἡμῶν 


1. COLOSSIANS. 


9 Διὰ τοῦτο Kai ἡμεῖς ἀφ᾽ 


ἧς ἡμέρας ἠκούσαμεν, 
On account of this also we 


from the day in which we heard (of it], 
οὐ παυόμεθα ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν προσευχόμενοι καὶ αἰτούμενοι ἵνα 
do not cease "for syou ‘praying and asking that 
πληρωθῆτε τὴν ἐπίγνωσιν τοῦ. θελήματος. αὐτοῦ ἐν πάσῃ 
ye may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all 
σοφίᾳ καὶ συνέσει πνευματικῇ, 10 περιπατῆσαι ὑμᾶς" 
wisdom and ?understanding ‘spiritual, Sto Swalk [Sfor] *you 
ἀξίως τοῦ κυρίου εἰς πᾶσαν "ἀρέσκειαν" ἐν παντὶ ἔργῳ ἀγαθῷ 
worthily ofthe Lord to all pleasing, in every *work ‘good 
καρποφοροῦντες καὶ αὐξανόμενοι etc τὴν ἐπίγνωσιν" τοῦ 
bringing forth fruit and growing into the knowledge 
θεοῦ: 11] ἐν πάσῃ δυνάμει δυναμούμενοι κατὰ τὸ κράτος 
of God; with all power being strengthened according tothe might 
τῆς.δόξης. αὐτοῦ εἰς πᾶσαν ὑπομονὴν Kai μακροθυμίαν μετὰ 
of his glory to all endurance and longsuffering with 
χαρᾶς" 12 εὐχαριστοῦντες τῷ πατρί, TY? ἱκανώσαντι δἡ μᾶς" 
joy ; giving thanks tothe Father, who made*competent ‘us 
εἰς THY μερίδα τοῦ κλήρου τῶν ἁγίων ἐν τῷ φωτί, 13 ὃς 
for the share oftheinheritanceofthe saints in the light, who 
bipptoaro' ἡμᾶς ἐκ τῆς ἐξουσίας τοῦ σκότους, Kai μετέστη- 


delivered us irom the authority of darkness, and trans- 
σεν εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ υἱοῦ τῆς.ἀγάπης. αὐτοῦ, 14 ἐν 
lated [usJinto the kingdom ofthe Son of his love: in 


ca ” ‘ τὰ , ce ‘ ~ er ᾽ ~ II ‘ 
ᾧ ἔχομεν THY ἀπολύτρωσιν “διὰ τοῦ. αἵματος. αὐτοῦ," τὴν 


whom we have redemption through his blood, the 
ἄφεσιν τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν: 15 be ἐστιν εἰκὼν τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ 
remission of sins ; who is_ [the] image of God the 
ἀοράτου, πρωτότοκος πάσης κτίσεως" 16 ὅτι ἐν αὐτῷ ἐ- 


invisible, firstborn 
κτίσθη τὰ πάντα, “ra ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοὶς Kai 
created allthings, the thingsin the heavens and 
γῆς, τὰ ὁρατὰ Kai Ta ἀόρατα, εἴτε θρόνοι εἴτε κυριότητες 
earth, the visible and the invisible, whether thrones, or lordships, 
εἴτε ἀρχαὶ εἴτε ἐξουσίαι: τὰ πάντα Ov αὐτοῦ Kai εἰς αὐτὸν 
or principalities, or authorities: allthings by him andfor him 
ἔκτισται: 17 καὶ αὐτός ἐστιν πρὸ πάντων, καὶ τὰ-πάντα 
have been created. And he is before all, and all things 
ἐν αὐτῷ συνέστηκεν 18 Kai αὐτός ἐστιν ἡ κεφαλὴ τοῦ σώμα- 
in him subsist. And he is the head ofthe body, 
τος τῆς ἐκκλησίας" Oc ἐστιν ἀρχή. πρωτότοκος ἐκ 
the assembly; who 15 [{86] beginning, firstborn from among 
τῶν νεκρῶν, ἵνα γένηται ἐν πᾶσιν αὐτὸὸῤ πρωτεύων" 
the dead, that “might *be*in*all*things ‘he holding the first place ; 
19 bre ἐν αὐτῷ εὐδόκησεν πᾶν τὸ πλήρωμα κατοικῆσαι, 
because in him ‘was Spleased ‘all *the “fulness to dwell, 
20 καὶ δι’ αὐτοῦ ἀποκαταλλάξαι τὰ-πάντα εἰς αὐτόν, εἰρη- 


of all creation ; because by him were 
τὰ"! ἐπὶ τῆς 
the things upon the 


521 
9 For this cause we 
also, since the day we 
heard it, do not cease 
to pray for you, and 
to desire that ye might 
be filled with the 
knowledge of his will 
in all wisdom and 
spiritual understand- 
ing ; 10 that ye might 
walk worthy of the 
Lord unto all pleas- 
ing, being fruitful in 
every good work, and 
increasing in the 
knowledge of God; 
11 strengthened with 
all might, according 
to his glorious power, 
unto all patienceand 
longsuffering with 
joyfulness; 12 siving 
thanks unto the Fa- 
ther, which hath made 
us meet to be _ par- 
takers of the inherit- 
ance of the saints in 
light : 13 who hath de- 
livered us from the 
power of darkness, 
and hath translated 
us into the kingdom of 
his dear Son: 14 in 
whom we have re- 
demption through his 
blood, even the for- 
giveness ofsins:15 who 
is the image of the in- 
visible God, the first- 
born of every crea- 
ture: 16 for by him 
were all things cre- 
ated, that are in hea- 
ven, and that are 
in earth, visible and 
invisible, whether 
they be thrones, or 
dominions, or princi- 
palities, or powers: 
all things were cre- 
ated by him, and for 
him : 17 and he is be- 
fore all things, and by 
him all things con- 
sist. 18 And he is 
the head of the body, 
the church: who is 
the beginning, the 
firstborn from _ the 
dead; that in all things 
he might have the pre- 
eminence. 19 For it 
pleased the Father 
that in him should ali 
fulness dwell; 20 and, 
having made peace 
through the blood of 
his cross, by him to re- 
concile all things unto 


and by him τω reconcile allthings to Breet having himself; by him, 
γνοποιήσας διὰ τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ.σταυροῦ αὐτοῦ, ‘dc αὐτοῦ, Sy ας ἢ iy ee 
made peace by the blood of his cross, by him, things “in Renae 
εἴτε τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, εἴτε τὰ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς. 21 καὶ 21 And you, that were 
whether the things on the earth, or thethingsin the heavens. And Sometime alienated 
eas » ᾽ ; ΩΣ τ i , and enemies in your 
ὑμᾶς ποτε ὄντας ἀπηλλοτριωμένους Kai ἐχθροὺς τῇ διανοίᾳ mindby wicked works, 


you once being alienated and enemies in mind 


W — ὑμᾶς GLITrA. x ἀρεσκίαν T. 
2+ καλέσαντι καὶ called and tL. 


8 ὑμᾶς you T. 
αὐτοῦ GLTTrAW. d — τὰ LTTr. 


ε — τὰ [L][Tr]. 


> ἐρύσατο TTr. 


¥ τῇ ἐπιγνώσει by the knowledge currraw. 


© — διὰ τοῦ αἵματος 


- δι᾽ αὐτοῦ LTr. 


022 


yet now hath he re- 
conciled 22 in the body 
of his flesh through 
death, to present you 
holy and unblameable 
and unreproveable in 
his sight : 23 if ye con- 
tinue in the faith 
grounded and settled, 
and be not moved a- 
way from the hope of 
the gospel, which ye 
have heard, and which 
was preached to every 
creature which is un- 
der heaven; whereof 
I Paul am made a 
minister ; 


24 who now rejoice 
in my sufferings for 
you, and fill up that 
which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ in 
my flesh for his body’s 
sake, which is the 
ehurch : 25 whereof I 
am made a minister, 
according to the dis- 
pensation of God 
which is given to me 
for you, to fulfil the 
word of God; 26 even 
the mystery which 
hath been hid from 
ages and from gene- 
rations, but now is 
taade manifest to his 
saints: 27 to whom God 
would make known 
what is the riches of 
the glory of this mys- 
tery among the Gen- 
tiles ; which is Christ 
in you, the hope of 
glory: 28 whom we 
preach, warning every 
man, and _ teaching 
every man in all 
wisdom; that we 
may present every 
man perfect in Christ 
Jesus: 29 whereunto 
I also labour, striv- 
ing according to his 
working, which work- 
eth in me mightily. 


Ii. For I would that 
ye knew what great 
conflict I havefor you, 
and for them at Lao- 
dicea, and for as many 
as have not seen my 
face in the flesh; 2 that 
their hearts might be 
comforted, being knit 


& ἀποκατηλλάγητε were ye reconciled L. 
k — μου (read the sufferings) GLTTraw, 
° — Ἰησοῦ GLTTrAW 


LTTrAaw. 
π ὅ LTrA. 
ἑόρακαν T. 


ΤΡΌΣΣ KOAAZSSAEIS J, Ute 


ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις τοῖς πονηροῖς, γυνὶ δὲ Ξἀποκατηλλαξεν" 22 ἐν 


by ?wor wicked, yet now he reconciled in 
τῷ σώματι τῆς.σαρκὸς αὐτοῦ διὰ τοῦ θανάτοῦ", παρα- 
the body of his flesh through death, to’ pre- 


στῆσαι ὑμᾶς ἁγίους καὶ ἀμώμους καὶ ἀνεγκλήτους κατενώ- 


sent you holy and unblamable and unimpeachable before 
mov αὐτοῦ" 23 εἴγε ἐπιμένετε τῇ πίστει τεθεμελιωμένοι 
him, if indeed ye continue in the faith founded 


Kai ἑδραῖοι, Kai μὴ μετακινούμενοι ἀπὸ τῆς ἐλπίδος τοῦ 


and firm, and not being moved away from _ the hone a oa 
evayyeriov οὗ ἠκούσατε, τοῦ κηρυχθέντος ἐν πάσῃ } 
glad ee which ye heard, which were proclaimed in all ae 
κτίσει τῇ ὑπὸ τὸν οὐρανόν, οὗ ἐγενόμην ἐγὼ Παῦλος 
creation which [is] under heaven, of which *became ἘΠ *Paul 
διάκονος. 

servant. 


24 Νῦν χαίρω ἐν τοῖς παθήμασίν μου" ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν, Kai 
Now, I am rejoicing in my sufferings for you, and 


ἀνταναπληρῷ τὰ ὕᾧὕστερήματα τῶν ON ey TOU χριστοῦ 
Iam fillingup thatwhich isbehind ofthetribulations ofthe Christ 


ἐν TH-capKlov ὑπὲρ τοῦ σώματος. αὐτοῦ, ὅ ἡ ἐκ- 
in my fiesh for his body, which is the .as- 


κλησία' 25 ἧς ἐγενόμην ἐγὼ διάκονος κατὰ τὴν οἰκονο- 
sembly ; of which *became ἘΠ servant, cape AD the adminis- 


μίαν τοῦ θεοῦ τὴν δοθεῖσάν por εἰς ὑμᾶς πληρῶσαι τὸν 
tration of God which [15] given me towards you to SOE the 


λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ, 26 τὸ μυστήριον τὸ ἀποκεκρυμμένον ἀπὸ 
word of God, the mystery which has been hidden from 


τῶν αἰώνων Kai ἀπὸ τῶν γενεῶν, 'vuvi'.dé ἐφανερώθη 
ages and from generations, butnow was made manifest 


τοῖς. ἁγίοις. αὐτοῦ" 27 οἷς ἠθέλησεν ὁ θεὸς γνωρίσαι “ric 

to his saints ; to whom ?did *will 1God to make known what 
0' πλοῦτος τῆς δόξης τοῦ.μυστηρίου.τούτου ἐν τοῖς ἔ- 
the riches ofthe glory of this mystery {are]among the na- 
θγνεσιν, "ὥς" ἐστιν χριστὸς ἐν ὑμῖν ἡ ἐλπὶς τῆς δόξης" 28 ὃν 
tions, which is Christ in you the Hope of glory: whom 


ἡμεῖς καταγγέλλομεν, νουθετοῦντες πάντα ἄνθρωπον, καὶ 
Ree aimonising every man, and 


ae ee πάντα ἄνθρωπον ἐν πάσῃ σοφίᾳ, iva παρα- 
CEU RTS every man in) call wisdom, eens we may 


στήσωμεν πάντα ἄνθρωπον τέλειον ἐν corm "Ἰησοῦ." 
μ 


ἐστιν 


present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. 
29 εἰς ὃ Kai κοπιῶ, ἀγωνιζόμενος κατὰ τὴν ἐνέργειαν 
Whereunto also 1 labour, Been according to 2working 


αὐτοῦ τὴν ἐνεργουμένην ἐν ἐμοὶ ἐν δυνάμει. 
*his which works in me in power 
2 Θέλω.γὰρ ὑμᾶς εἰδέναι ἡλίκον ἀγῶνα ἔχω Ῥπερὶἱ" ὑμῶν 
ForI wish you toknow howgreat conflict I have for Jou 


καὶ τῶν ἐν Λαοδικείᾳ," Kai Boor οὐχ-"ἑωράκασιν" τὸ πρόσω- 
and those in ERASED andasmanyas have not seen "face 


πόν μου ἐν σαρκί, 2 iva παρακληθῶσιν αἱ.καρδίαι.αὐτῶν, 
my in flesh; that may be encouraged their hearts, 


h + [αὐτοῦ (read his death) L. 
l νῦν LTTrA. τὰ τί τὸ LTTrAW. 


P ὑπὲρ LTTrA. 9 Λαοδικίᾳ T. τ ἑώρακαν LTrAW κα 


If. COLOSSIANS. 


SoupBiBacbevTwr' ἐν ἀγάπῃ, Kai εἰς πάντα πλοῦτον" τῆς 
being knit together in love, and to all riches of the 
πληροφορίας τῆς συνέσεως, εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν τοῦ μυστηρίου 
full assurance of understanding ; to [the] knowledge ofthe mystery 
~ ~ \ ~ ~ It ς ? 
Tov θεοῦ καὶ πατρὸς καὶ τοῦ" χριστοῦ," 3 ἐν εἰσιν 
of God and of [the] Father and of the Christ ; in which are 
πάντες οἱ θησαυροὶ τῆς σοφίας Kai "τῆς" γνώσεως ἀπόκρυ- 
all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge hid. 
~ κ᾿ ~ , ? 
gor. 4 τοῦτο." δὲ" λέγω, ἵνα “μὴ τις" ὑμᾶς παραλογίζηται ἐν 
Andthis Isay, that not anyone you may beguile by 
πιθανολογίᾳ: 5 εἰ.γὰρ Kai TY σαρκὶ ἄπειμι, ἀλλὰ τῷ 
persuasive speech. Forif indeed inthe flesh Iam absent, yet 
πνεύματι σὺν ὑμῖν εἰμί, χαίρων Kai βλέπων ὑμῶν THY τάξιν, 


in spirit with you Iam, rejoicing and _ seeing your order, 
καὶ τὸ στερέωμα τῆς εἰς χριστὸν πίστεως ὑμῶν. Ὁ ὡς οὖν 
and the firmness * ‘4in ®Christ lof “your *faith. As therefore 


παρελάβετε τὸν χριστὸν Ἰησοῦν τὸν κύριον, ἐν αὐτῷ περιπα- 
ye received the Christ, Jesus the Lord, in him walk, 
τεῖτε, 7 ἐῤῥιζωμένοι καὶ ἐποικοδομούμενοι ἐν αὐτῷ, καὶ 
having been rooted and being built up in him, = and 
βεβαιούμενοι "ἐν" τῇ πίστει, καθὼς ἐδιδάχθητε, περισσεύοντες 


being confirmed in the faith, evenas ye were taught, abounding 
δὲν αὐτῇ ἐν εὐχαριστίᾳ. 
in it with thanksgiving. 

8 Βλέπετε μή τις “ὑμᾶς ἔσται" ὁ συλαγωγῶν 


Take heed lest *anyone ‘°you ‘there *shall *be who *makes 7a *prey ®%of 
διὰ τῆς φιλοσοφίας Kai κενῆς ἀπάτης, κατὰ τὴν Tapa- 


through philosophy and empty deceit, according to the tra- 
doow τῶν ἀνθρώπων, κατὰ τὰ στοιχεῖα TOU κόσμου, Kai 
dition of men, according to the elements of the world, and 
οὐ κατὰ χροιστόν᾽ 9 ort ἐν αὐτῷ κατοικεῖ πᾶν TO πλήρωμα 


Christ. For in him dwells all the fulness 


τῆς θεότητος σωματικῶς, 10 καί ἐστε ἐν αὐτῷ πεπληρωμένοι" 
ofthe Godhead odily ; and ye are *in *him *complete, 


oc! ἐστιν ἡ κεφαλὴ πάσης ἀρχῆς Kai ἐξουσίας" 11 ἐν ᾧ 


not according to 


who is’ the head ofall principality and authority, in whom 
καὶ περιετμήθητε περιτομῇ ἀχειροποιήτῳ., ἐν TH ἀπ- 
also ye were circumcised with circumcision not made by hand, in the put- 


εκδύσει TOU σώματος “τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν" τῆς σαρκός, ἐν TH περι- 
ting off ofthe body of the sins of the flesh, in the cirenm- 


τομῇ τοῦ χριστοῦ, 12 συνταφέντες αὐτῷ ἐν τῷ βαπτίσματι" 


cision of the Christ; having been buried with him in baptism, 
ἐν καὶ συνηγέρθητε διὰ τῆς πίστεως τῆς ἐνερ- 
in which also ye were raised with [him] through the faith of the work- 


γείας τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ ἐγείραντος αὐτὸ ἐκ ray" νεκρῶν. 
ing of God who raised him fromamong the - dead. 
13 καὶ ὑμᾶς νεκροὺς ὄντας "έν" τοῖς παραπτώμασιν Kai 

And you, dead ‘being in offences and in the 
ἀκροβυστίᾳ τῆς. σαρκὺς. ὑμῶν, 'Ἰσυνεζωποίησεν" * ody αὐτῷ, 
uncircumcision of your flesh, he quickened together with him, 


523 


together in love, and 
unto all riches of the 
full assurance of un- 
derstanding, to the 
acknowledgement of 
the mystery of God 
and of the Father, an 

of Christ ; 3 in whom 
are hid all the trea- 
sures of wisdom and 
knowledge, 4 And this 
I say, lest any man 
should beguile you 
with enticing words, 
5 For though I be 
absent in the flesh, yet 
am I with you in the 
spirit, joying and be- 
holding your order, 
and the stedfastness 
of your faith in Christ. 
6 As ye have there- 
fore received Christ 
Jesus the Lord, so walk 
ye in him: 7 rooted 
and built up in him, 
and stablished in the 
faith, as ye have been 
taught, abounding 
therein with thanks- 
giving. 


8 Beware lest any 
man spoil you through 
philosophy and vain 
deceit, after the tra- 
dition of men, af- 
ter the rudiments of 
the world, and not 
after Christ. 9 For in 
him dwelleth all the 
fulness of the God- 
head bodily. 10 And 
ye are complete in 
him, which is the head 
of all principaiity and 
power : 11 in whom al- 
so ye are circumcised 
with the circumcision 
made without hands, 
uputting off the body 
of the sins of the flesh 
by the circumcision of 
Christ : 12 buried with 
him in baptism, where- 
in also ye are risen 
with him through the 
faith of the operation 
of God, who hathrais- 
ed him from the dead. 
13 And you, being dead 
in your sins and 
the uncircumcision of 
your flesh, hath he 
quickened together 
with him, having for- 


8 συμβιβασθέντες GLTTrAW. 
καὶ τοῦ (read [even] Christ) GLrtraw. 
T[TrA]. z μηδεὶς LTTrAW. a — ἐν (read τῇ in the) urtr[a]. 
© ἔσται ὑμᾶς L. ἀ ὅδ τ,. ε — τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν GLTTrAW. 
(read [the]) GT[A]w. h — ἔν (read παραπ. in offences) rr. 
k + duas you LTTrAW. 


¥ — χριστοῦ GA. 


t πᾶν (+ τὸ the L[Tr|w) πλοῦτος LTTrAW. 
x — τῆς LTTrA. 


 βαπτισμῷ TrA. 
1 συνεζωοποίησεν GLTTrAW. 


ν — καὶ πατρὸς 

Υ — δὲ and 
Ὁ — ἐν αὐτῇ ὙΤΙ[ΑΊ. 
& - τῶν 


9234 
given you all tres- 
passes; 14 blotting 


out the handwriting 
of ordinances that was 
against us, which was 
contrary to us, and 
took it out of the way, 
nailing it to his cross; 
15 and having spoil- 
ed principalities and 
powers, he made a 
shew of them openly, 
triumphing over them 
in it. 


16 Let no man there- 
fore judge you in 
meat, or in drink, or 
in respect of an holy- 
day, or of the new 
moon, or of the sab- 
bath days: 17 which 
area shadow of things 
to come ; but the body 
ts of Christ. 18 Let no 
man beguile you of 
your reward in a vo- 
luntary humility and 
worshipping of angels, 
intruding into those 
things which he hath 
not seen, vainly puffed 
up by his fleshiy mind, 
19 and not holding the 
Head, from which all 
the body by joints and 
bands haying nourish- 
mert ministered, and 
knit together, inereas- 
eth with the increase 
of God. 


20 Wherefore if ye 
be dead with Christ 
from the rudiments of 
the world, why, «as 
though living in the 
world, are ye subject to 
ordinances, 21 (Touch 
not ; taste not ; handle 
not ; 22 which all are 
to perish with the 
using ;) after the com- 
mandments and doc- 
trines of men? 23 which 
things have indeed a 
shew of wisdom in 
will worship, and hu- 
mility, and neglecting 
of the body; not in 
any honour to the 
satisfying of the flesh. 


111. If ye then be 
risen with Christ, seek 
those things which are 
above, where Christ 
sitteth on the right 
hand of God. 2 Set 
your affection on 
things above, not on 
things on the earth. 
3 For ye are dead, and 


l ὑμῖν you B. 


4 θρησκίᾳ T. 
Υ-- ovv ΟἸΤΥΓΑΥ͂,. 


of verse 22L7; to end of verse 23 A. 


πὶ καὶ δα A. 
τ-- μὴ (read ἐμβ. ‘standing “on) [L]tTra. 


TPOsy KOWAS = AE ΤΣ. Π, ΠΙ. 


χαρισάμενος Ἰἡμῖν" πάντα τὰ παραπτώματα" 14 ἐξαλείψας 
having forgiven us all the offences ; having blotted out 


x ? e ~ , ~ , ΝΥ x 
TO Kal ἡμῶν χειρόγραφον τοῖς δόγμασιν, ὃ ἦν ὑπεναν- 


the °against ‘us *handwriting *in*the ‘decrees, which was adverse 
΄ὔ δἰ τὼ - > ~ ΄ 
τίον ἡμῖν, καὶ αὐτὸ ἦρκεν ἐκ τοῦ μέσου, προσηλώσας 
tous, also it hehastaken out of the midst, having nailed 
αὐτὸ τῷ σταυρῷ, 15 ἀπεκδυσάμενος τὰς ἀρχὰς Kai τὰς 
it tothe cross; having stripped the principalities and the 
ἐξουσίας ἐδειγμάτισεν ἐν.παῤῥησίᾳ, θριαμβεύσας 
authorities, he made a show fof them] publicly, leading in triumph 
αὐτοὺς ἐν αὐτῷ. 
them in it. 
16 Μὴ οὖν τις ὑμᾶς κρινέτω ἐν βρώσει "τὴ" ἐν πόσει, 


?Not *therefore *anyone ὅγοὰ ‘let *judge in meat or in drink, 
“ὖ ta , e ~ A n , Ι Δ ,᾿ μ ΟΠ 2 
ἢ ἐν μέρει ἑορτῆς ἢ "νουμηνίας" ἢ σαββάτων" 17 °c" ἐστιν 
or in respect of feast, or new moon, or sabhaths, which are 
σκιὰ τῶν μελλόντων, τὸ. δὲ σῶμα τοῦ" χριστοῦ. 18 μη- 
a shadow of things tocome; but the body [is] ofthe Christ. No 
δεὶς ὑμᾶς καταβραβευέτω θέλων ἐν ταπεινοφροσύνῃ καὶ 
Sone *you "οὐ *defraud of the prize, doing [his] will in humility and 
«θρησκείᾳ! τῶν ἀγγέλων. ἃ Tun ἑώρακεν"! ἐμβατεύων, 
worship ofthe angels, *things*which 7not 586 °has *seen tintruding “into, 
εἰκῆ φυσιούμενος ὑπὸ τοῦ νοὸς τῆς. σαρκὸς. αὐτοῦ, 19 Kai οὐ 
vainly puffed up by the mind of his flesh, and not 
κρατῶν τὴν κεφαλήν. ἐξ οὗ πᾶν τὸ σῶμα διὰ τῶν ἁφῶν 
holding fast the head, from whom all the body, by the joints 


‘ , > , 3 <t ΄ Π » 
καὶ συνδέσμων ἐπιχορηγούμενον καὶ ἱσυμβιβαζόμενον," αὔξει 


and bands being supplied and knit together, increases 
τὴν αὔξησιν τοῦ θεοῦ. 
{with] the increase of God. 
20 Εἰ τοῦν" ἀπεθάνετε σὺν “ry χριστῷ ἀπὸ τῶν στοιχείων 
If then ye died with the Christ from the’ elements 
Tov κύσμον, TL we CovTecéiv κόσμῳ doypari- 


of the world. why asif alive in {the} world do ye subject yourselves 


ζεσθε: 5 21 Μὴ ἅψῃ, μηδὲ. γεύσῃ, μηδὲ θίγῃς" 


to decrees ? Thou mayest not handle, Thou mayest not taste, Thou mayest not touch, 


‘ ~ 4 ‘ 
22 & ἐστιν πάντα εἰς φθορὰν τῇ amoxpnoe κατὰ 
(which things are all unto corruption in the using,) according to 


τὰ ἐντάλματα καὶ διδασκαλίας τῶν ἀνθρώπων" * 23 ἅτινά 
the injunctions and teachings of men, which 
2 ’ ‘ » , ? y20 λ θ ΄ Π 
ἐστιν λόγον μὲν ἔχοντα σοφίας ἕν γεθελοθρησκείᾳ 
are ΖΔ ἌΡΡοδσδηοα ‘indeed “having of wisdom in voluntary worship 
Kai ταπεινοφροσύνῃ “Kai! *agerdia' σώματος, οὐκ ἐν 
and humility and unsparing treatment of[the] body, not in 
τιμῇ τινι πρὸς πλησμονὴν τῆς σαρκός.“ 
“honour ‘a certain for satisfaction ofthe flesh. 

3 Εἰ οὖν συνηγέρθητε τῷ χριστῷ, τὰ 
If therefore ye were raised with Christ, *the*things above 
ὁ χριστός ἐστιν ἐν δεξιᾷ τοῦ θεοῦ καθήμενος" 
Christ is 2at (the) ‘right Shand ‘of 7God *sitting : 
ἄνω φρονεῖτε, μὴ τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. 3 ἀπεθάνετε 
not the things on the earth; γα 3died 


ἄνω ζητεῖτε, 

‘seek, 
οὗ 

where the 


2 τὰ 
°the°things *tabove ®mind, 


Ρ — τοῦ (read of Christ) ew. 
5 ἑόρακεν TA. τ συν- TA. 
x Continue question to end of verse 21 Gw ; to end 

Υ ἐθελοθρησκίᾳ τ. z [καὶ] 1.. ἃ ἀφειδείᾳ τ,. 


π νεομηνίας Lire ° OLA. 


W — τῷ GLTTrAW. 


1. COLOSSIANS. 
γάρ, SE ἡ.ζωὴ ὑμῶν κέκρυπται σὺν τῷ χριστῷ ev τῷ Bets 
for, your life has been hid with the Christ in 
4 ὅταν ὁ χριστὸς φανερωθῇ ἡ-.ζωὴ. "ἡμῶν," τότε καὶ 
When the Christ *may *be *manifested our “life, then also 
ὑμεῖς σὺν αὐτῷ φανερωθήσεσθε ἐν δόξῃ. 
ye with him = shall be manifested in glory. 
5 Nexpwoare οὖν ra μέλη εὑμῶν" τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, 


Put to death therefore *members tyour which [are] on 


πορνείαν, ἀκαθαρσίαν, πάθος, ἐπιθυμίαν κακήν, 
fornication, uncleanness, passion, 2desire ‘evil, and 
πλεονεξίαν, ἥτις ἐστὶν εἰδωλολατρεία, 6 dv ag! 
covetousness, which is idolatry. On account of which things 


ἔρχεται “ἡ" ὀργὴ τοῦ θεοῦ [ἐπὶ τοὺς υἱοὺς τῆς ἀπειθείας" 
comes the wrath 


of God ἜΡΟΝ the sons of disobedience. 
m 2 
4 ev 


οἷς Kai ὑμεῖς περιεπατήσατέ ποτε OTE ἐζῆτε ἐν 
Among whom also ye walked once when ye were asi in 


Sabroic’' 8 νυνὶ. δὲ ἀπόθεσθε καὶ ὑμεῖς τὰ- πάντα, ὀργήν, 
these mee But now, put off also ye, all ee things, wrath, 


θυμόν, κακίαν, βλασφημίαν, αἰσχρολογίαν ἐκ τοῦ στόμα- 
indignation, malice, piss phage: foul language out of 2mouth 


TOC ὑμῶν. 9 Μὴ.ψεύδεσθε εἰς ἀλλήλους. ἀπεκδυσάμενοι τὸν 
your. Do not lie to one another, haying put off the 


παλαιὸν ἄνθρωπον σὺν ταῖς. πράξεσιν. αὐτοῦ, 10 καὶ ἐνδυσά- 
old man with his deeds, and having 


μένοι TOY νέον τὸν ἀνακαινούμενον εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν κατ᾽ 
puton the new that[is] being renewed into knowledge according to 


εἰκόνα τοῦ κτίσαντος αὐτόν᾽ 11 ὕπου οὐκ ἔνι 
{the] image of him who created him ; where there is not 


Ἕλλην καὶ ᾿Ιουδαῖος, περιτομὴ Kai ἀκροβυστία, βάρβαρος, 


the earth, 
καὶ τὴν 


Greek and a circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, 
Σκύθης, δοῦλος, " ἐλεύθερος" ἀλλὰ τὰ" πάντα καὶ ἐν πᾶσιν 
Seythian, bondman, 6; but Sall*things ‘and “in all 

ριστός. 
[3158] ‘Christ. 
12 Ἐνδύσασθε οὖν, ὡς ἐκλεκτοὶ *rov' θεοῦ, ἅγιοι καὶ 
Put on therefore, as elect of God, holy and 
ἠγαπημένοι. σπλάγχνα ἰοἰκτιρμῶν," χρηστότητα, ταπεινο- 
beloved, bowels of compassions, kindness, humi- 


φροσύνην, "πρᾳότητα," μακροθυμίαν" 
lity, meekness, long-enftering 5 


18 ἀνεχόμενοι ἀλ- 
bearing with one 
λήλων, kai χαριζόμενοι ἑαυτοῖς, ἐάν τις πρός τινα ἔχῳ 
another, and forgiving each other, if any against any should have 
μομφήν᾽ καθὼς καὶ ὁ "χριστὸς" ἐχαρίσατο ὑμῖν, οὕτως Kai 
a complaint ;evenas alsothe Christ forgaye you, so also [do] 
ὑμεῖς" 14 ἐπὶ πᾶσιν. δὲ τούτοις τὴν ἀγάπην, “ἥτις! ἐστὶν 
ye. And to all these [add] love, which [15 [the] 


σύνδεσμος τῆς τελειότητος. 15 Kai ἡ εἰρήνη Prov θεοῦ" Boa- 
bond of perfectness. And the peace of God let 


βευέτω ἐν raic.capdiac0 ὑμῶν, εἰς ἣν καὶ ἐκλήθητε ἐν ἑνὶ σώ- 
preside in your hearts, to which also ye were called in one 


525 


your life is hid with 
Christ in God. 4 When 
Christ, who is our 
life, shall appear, then 
shall ye also appear 
with him in glory. 


5 Mortify therefore 
your members which 
are upon the earth; 
fornication, unclean- 
ness, inordinate afiec- 
tion, evil concupis- 
cence, and covetous- 
ness, which is idola- 
try: 6 for which 
things’ sake the wrath 
of God cometh on the 
children of disobedi- 
ence: 7in the which 
ye also walked some 
time, when ye lived in 
them. 8 But now ye 
also put off all these ; 
anger, wrath, malice, 
blasphemy, filthy com- 
munication out of 
your mouth. 9 Lie not 
one to another, seeing 
that ye have put off 
the old man with his 
deeds; 10 and have 
put on the new man, 
which is renewed in 
knowledge after the 
image of him that 
created him. 11 where 
there is neither Greek 
nor Jew, circumcision 
nor uncircumcision, 
Barbarian, Scythian, 
bond nor free: but 
Christ ὦ all, and in all. 


12 Put on therefore, 
as the elect of God, 
holy and_ beloved, 
bowels of mercies, 
kindness, humbleness 
of mind, meekness, 
longsuffering ; 13 for- 
bearing one another, 
and forgiving one 
another, if any man 
have a quarrel against 
any: even as Christ 
forgave you, 50 also 
do ye. 14 And above 
all these things put on 
charity, which is the 


bond of | eeepc 
15 And let the peace 
of God rule in your 
hearts, to the which 
also ye are called in 
one body; and be ye 


ματι: καὶ εὐχάριστοι γίνεσθε. 16 ὁ λόγος τοῦ χριστοῦ ἐνοικείτω AKFal 16 Let ths 
body, and thankful be. The word ofthe Christ let dwell in you ere in all 

> ὑμῶν (read your life) TTr. — ὑμῶν (read the members) Trra. ὃ which a. 
e [ἢ] x. £ — ἐπὶ τοὺς υἱοὺς τῆς ἀπειθείας (read ἐ ἐν οἷς In which things) De 8 τού- 
τοις LTTrAW. Ὁ + καὶ and L. — τὰ τ. k — τοῦ L. 1 οἰκτιρμοῦ of compassion 
GLTTrAW. τι πραὕτητα LTTrAW. Ὁ κύριος Lord Tra. © 6 LTTraw. P τοῦ χριστοῦ 


of the Christ GLTTraw. 


526 


wisdom ; teaching and 
admonishing one aD- 
other in psalms and 
hymns and _ spiritual 
songs, singing with 
grace in your hearts 
to the Lord. 17 And 
whatsoever ye do in 
word or deed, doall in 
the name of the Lord 
Jesus, giving thanks 
to God and the Father 
by him, 


18 Wives, submit 
yourselves unto your 
own husbands, as it is 
fit in the Lord. 19 Hus- 
bands, love your 
wives, and be not 
bitter against them. 
20 Children, obey 
your parents in all 
things: for this is well 
pleasing unto the Lord. 
21 Fathers, provoke 
not your children to 
anger, lest they be 
discouraged. 22 Ser- 
vants, obey in all 
things your masters 
according to the flesh; 
not with eyeservice, 
as menpleasers; but 
in singleness of heart, 
fearing God: 23 and 
whatsoever ye do, do 
aw heartily, as to the 
Lord, and not unto 
men ; 24 knowing that 
of the Lord ye shall 
receive the reward of 


theinheritance: forye ; 


serve the Lord Christ. 
25 But he that doeth 
wrong shall receive 
for the wrong which 
he hath done: and 
there is no respect of 
persons. IY. Masters, 
give unto your ser- 
vants that which is 
just and equal; know- 
ing that ye also have 
a Master in heaven. 


2 Continue in prayer, 
and watch in the same 
with thanksgiving ; 
3 withal praying also 
for us, that God would 
open unto us adoor of 
utterance, to speak 
the mystery of Christ, 
for which I am also 
in bonds: 4 that I 
may make it manifest, 


ΠΡΟΣ ΚΟΛΑΣΣΑΕΙ͂Σ ILE; Vt 


ἐν ὑμῖν πλουσίως, ἐν πάσῃ copia’ διδάσκοντες Kai νουθε- 
in you richly, in all wisdom; teaching and admon- 


τοῦντες ἑαυτοὺς ψαλμοῖς “καὶ" ὕμνοις "kai" ᾧδαῖς πνευματι- 


ishing each other inpsalms and hymns and “songs ‘spiritual 
Kaic ἐν ὃ χάριτι ἄδοντες ἐν ‘rH καρδίᾳ!" ὑμῶν ‘rm κυρίῳ" 
with grace singing in “heart sour to the Lord. 
17 καὶ πᾶν ὕ.τι- "ἂν" ποιῆτε ἐν λόγῳ ἢ ἐν ἔργῳ, πάντα 
And everything, whatsoever ye may do in word or in work, [do] all 
, , ? ~ ~ ~ ~ 
ἐν ὀνόματι “κυρίου Ἰησοῦ," εὐχαριστοῦντες τῷ θεῷ Yai! 
in{the] name οὔ [{Π6] Lord Jesus, giving thanks toGod and 
πατρὶ δι᾿ αὐτοῦ. 
{the] Father by him. 


18 Αἱ γυναῖκες, ὑποτάσσεσθε roicidiow' ἀνδράσιν, we 


Wives, subject yourselves to JOR own husbands, as 
ἀνῆκεν ἐν κυρίῳ. 19 Οἱ ἄνδρες, ἀγαπᾶτε τὰς γυναϊκας" 
is Reponuing in {the} Lord. Sar, love the wives, 


‘ 
Kat 


μὴ-πικραίνεσθε πρὸς αὐτάς. 20 Τὰ τέκνα, ὑπακούετε 
and 


be not bitter eoaitist them. Children, aes 


τοῖς γονεῦσιν κατὰ πάντα᾽ τοῦτο.γάρ ϑέστιν εὐάρεστον" “τῷ! 
the parents in all things ; for this is Well-vleasie) to the 


κυρίῳ. 21 Ot πατέρες, μὴ.“ἐρεθίζετε! τὰ. τέκνα. ὑμῶν, ἵνα μὴ 
Lord. Fathers, do not provoke your children, that *not 


ἀθυμῶσιν. 22 Οἱ δοῦλοι, ὑπακούετε κατὰ.πάντα τοῖς 
‘they *be disheartened. Bondmen, obey in all things the 

κατὰ σάρκα κυρίοις, μὴ ἐν “ὀφθαλμοδουλείαις" we av- 
“according *to *flesh ‘masters, not with eye-services, as 
θρωπάρεσκοι, ἀλλ᾽" ἐν ἁπλότητι καρδίας, φοβούμενοι Srov 
men-pleasers, but in etaplelty: of heart, fearing 


θεόν." 23 kai πᾶν.ὅ.τι! ἐὰν ποιῆτε, ἐκ.ψυχῆς ἐργάζεσθε, oe 
God. And whatsoever ye may do, ee, twork, 


τῷ κυρίῳ Kai οὐκ ἀνθρώποις" 24 εἰδότες OTL ἀπὸ 
tothe Lord and not to men ; knowing that from [the] 
Ἰἀπολήψεσθεὶ τὴν pees Glee τῆς κληρονομίας" 
ye shall receive the zecompense of the inheritance, 


κυρίῳ χριστῷ δουλεύετε. 25 ὁ ἰδὲὶ ἀδικῶν ™kometrar' 
Lord Christ ye serve. But he that does wrong shall receive [for] 


ὃ ἠδίκησεν, Kai οὐκ.ἔστιν "προσωποληψία." 4 Οἱ κύριοι, 
what he did wrong, and there is no respect of ee Masters, 


TO δίκαιον καὶ τὴν ἰσότητα τοῖς δούλοις 
that which [is] just and that which [is] equal to bondmen 
παρέχεσθε, εἰδότες OTL καὶ ὑμεῖς ἔχετε κύριον ἕν οὐρανοῖς." 

give, knowing that also ye have a Master in [the] heavens. 


2 Τῇ προσευχῇ προσκαρτερεῖτε, γρηγοροῦντες ἐν αὐτῇ ἐν 
ΤΟΥ ΕΣΑΥΘΕ Ase aL continue, yea tt in it with 


εὐχαριστίᾳ" 3 προσευχόμενοι ἅμα καὶ περὶ ἡμῶν, ἵνα ὁ θεὸς 
thanksgiving ; praying withal also for us, that God 
ἀνοίξῃ ἡμῖν θύραν τοῦ λόγου λαλῆσαι τὸ μυστήριον τοῦ 
may open tous adoor ofthe word tospeak the mystery of the 
χριστοῦ, ov PO" καὶ δέδεμα, 4 ἵνα φανε- 

Christ, _onaccountof which also I have nee .bound, that I may make 


κυρίου 
Lord 


τῷ. "γὰρ! 
for the 


ᾳ — καὶ LITrAW. 
GLTTrAW. 
Y — καὶ LTTraAW. 
Wives) L. 


Lord GuTTraw. 
LTTrAW. 


ἡ τῷ θεῷ to God GLTTraw. 


> εὐάρεστόν ἐστιν LTTrA. 
© ὀφθαλμοδουλείᾳ eye- -service LW ; ὀφθαλμοδουλίαις 1. 


1 γὰρ Goan for he that) yrtraw. 
ο οὐρανῷ heaven LTTraAW. 


* — καὶ LTTrAW. 8 + Τῇ LITrAW. τ rats καρδίαις hearts 
ν ἐὰν LIr- ἃ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ of J esus Christ Lw. 
z ἰδίοις (read to the husbands) GLTTrAw. a+ ὑμῶν (read your 
¢ ἐν in [the] GLTTraw. 4 παροργίζετε L. 

f ἀλλὰ Tr. & τὸν κύριον the 
i ἀπολήμψεσθε LTTrA. k — yap for 
™ κομίσεται L. 2 προσωπολημψία LTTrA. 


ὃ (read whatever) LTTraw. 


P ov Whom L, 


HV; COLOSSIANS: 


pwow αὐτὸ ὡς δεῖ με λαλῆσαι. 5 ᾽ν σοφίᾳ περιπατεῖτε 
manifest it as it behoves me_ to speak. In wisdom walk 


πρὸς τοὺς ἔξω, τὸν καιρὸν ἐξαγοραζόμενοι. 6 ὁ λόγος 
towards those without, 6 “time 1ransoming. [160] ?word 


ὑμῶν πάντοτε ἐν χάριτι, dare ἠρτυμένος, εἰδέναι πῶς 
tyour [be] always with grace, 7with*salt ‘seasoned, to know how 
δεῖ ὑμᾶς ἑνὶ ἑκάστῳ ἀποκρίνεσθαι. 
it behoves you Seach *one ‘to 7answer. 
7 Ta kar ἐμὲ πάντα γνωρίσει ὑμῖν Τυχικὸς 


2The 3.Πῖπρβ *concerning ἼΠ6 [811 7will πο *known '°to*you ®Tychicus 


ὁ ἀγαπητὸς ἀδελφὸς Kai πιστὸς διάκονος Kai σύνδουλος 


the beloved brother and faithful servant and fellow-bondman 
ἐν κυρίῳ, 8 ὃν ἔπεμψα πρὸς ὑμᾶς εἰς αὐτὸ.τοῦτο, ἵνα 
in (the) Lord; whom Isent to you for this very thing, that 


aya Ὶ 
γνῷ τὰ περὶ 


τὑμῶν" καὶ παρακαλέσῃ τὰς 
he might know the things concerning 


you, and might encourage 
καρδίας. ὑμῶν, 9 σὺν ᾿Ονησίμῳ, τῷ πιστῷ Kai ἀγαπητῷ 


your hearts; with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved 
ἀδελφῷ, ὅς ἐστιν ἐξ ὑμῶν: πάντα ὑμῖν ξγνωριοῦσιν" 
brother, who is of you. ΑἹ] things 7to*you “ΠΟΥ *will τα κο 7known 
Ta ὧδε. 
there. 
10 ᾿Ασπάζεται ὑμᾶς ᾿Αρίσταρχος ὁ-συναιχμάλωτός μου, Kai 
*Salutes ou ‘Aristarchus 2my *fellow-prisoner, and 


Μάρκος ὁ ἀνεψιὸς BapyaBa, περὶ οὗ ἐλάβετε ἐντολάς" 
Mark, the cousin of Barnabas, concerning whom yereceivyed orders, 


ἐὰν ἔλθῃ πρὸς ὑμᾶς, δέξασθε αὐτόν᾽ 11 Kai ᾿Τησοῦς ὁ λεγό- 


(if hecome to you, receive him,) and Jesus called 
μενος lovaroc, οἱ ὄντες ἐκ περιτομῆς" * οὗτοι όνοι 
Justus, who 81.965 of [the] circumcision. These [are the] only 


συνεργοὶ εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ, οἵτινες ἐγενήθησάν 


fellow-workers for the kingdom of God, who were 
μοι παρηγορία. 12 ἀσπάζεται ὑμᾶς Exagodc ὁ ἐξ ὑμῶν 
to me ἃ consolation. 3Salutes ‘aye *Epaphras who [15] of you, 


δοῦλος χριστοῦ", πάντοτε ἀγωνιζόμενος ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν ἐν ταῖς 


a bondman of Christ, always striving for you in 
προσευχαῖς, ἵνα στῆτε' τέλειοι Kai “πεπληρωμένοι; ἐν 
prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete in 


παντὶ θελήματι Tov θεοῦ. 13 μαρτυρῶ.γὰρ αὐτῷ ὅτι ἔχει 
every will of God. For I bear witness to him that he has 
χζῆλον πολὺν" ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν Kai τῶν ἐν ΥΛαοδικείᾳ! Kai τῶν 
*zeal tmuch for you and them in Laodicea and them 
3 « , > 4 c ~ ~ « > ‘ « > 
ἐν Ἱεραπόλει. 14 ἀσπάζεται ὑμᾶς Λουκᾶς ὁ ἰατρὸς ὁ aya- 
in Hierapolis. *Salutes Syou 1Luke *the *physician Sbe- 
πητός, Kai Anuac. 15 ἀσπάσασθε τοὺς ἐν Λαοδικείᾳ" aded- 
loved, and Demas, Salute the in “*Laodicea 1preth- 
, ‘ 1 = fh A ‘ ? a > ~ II > , - 
φούς, καὶ Νυμφᾶν" καὶ τὴν κατ᾽ οἶκον "αὐτοῦ" ἐκκλησίαν 
ren, and Nymphas, and the ?in *his house lassembly. 
16 καὶ ὅταν ἀναγνωσθῇ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ἡ ἐπιστολή, ποιήσατε 


And when may beread among you the epistle, cause 
ἵνα καὶ ἐν τῇ Λαοδικέων ἐκκλησίᾳ ἀναγνωσθῇ, καὶ 
that also in the 7of [*the] *Laodiceans ‘assembly it may be read, and 


4 γνῶτε ye might know LTtr. τ ἡμῶν USLTTr. 5 γνωρίσουσιν L. 
r These only who are of the circumcision [are the] &c. τὰ. ¥% + 
Υ͂ σταθῆτε TTr. ¥ πεπληροφορημένοι fully assured LTTraw. 
GLTTrA ; πόνον πολὺν W. Υ Λαοδικίᾳ 1. 


: Νύμφαν Nympha t, 
house) L; αὐτῶν (read their house) Trra. 


527 


as I ought to speak. 
5 Walk in wisdom to- 
ward them that are 
without, redeeming 
the time. 6 Let your 
speech be alway with 
grace, seasoned with 
salt, that ye may know 
how ye ought to an- 
swer every man. 


7 All my state shall 
Tychicus declare unto 
you, who is a beloved 
brother, and a faith- 
ful minister and fel- 
lowservant in_ the 
Lord : 8 whom I have 
sent unto you for the 
same purpose, that he 
might know your es- 
tate, and comfort 
your hearts; 9 with 
Onesimus, a faithful 
and beloved brother, 
who is one of you. 
They shall make 
known unto you all 
things which are done 
here, 


10 Aristarchus my 
fellowprisoner_ salut- 
eth you, and Marcus, 
sister’s son to Barna- 
bas, (touching whom 
ye received command- 
ments: if he come un- 
to you, receive him ;) 
11 and Jesus, which is 
called Justus, who are 
of the circumcision. 
These only are my 
fellowworkers unto 
the kingdom of God, 
which have been a 
comfort unto me, 12 E- 
paphras, who is one 
of you, a servant of 
Christ, saluteth you, 
always labouring fer- 
vently for you in 
prayers, that ye may 
stand perfect andcom- 
plete in all the will of 
God. 13 For I bear 
him record, that he 
hath a great zeal for 
you, and them that are 
in Laodicea, and them 
in Hierapolis. 14 Luke, 
the beloved physician, 
and Demas, greet you. 
15 Salute the brethren 
which are in Laodicea, 
and Nymphas, and the 
church which is in his 
house. 16 And when 
this epistle is read a- 
mong you, cause that 
it be read also in the 
church of the Laodi- 
ceans; and that ye 


t Punctuate so as to 
Ἰησοῦ Jesus LITra. 


x πολὺν πόνον much labour 


8. αὐτῆς (read her 


528 


likewise read the e- 
pistle from Laodicea. 
17 And say to Archip- 
pus, Take heed to the 
ministry which thou 
hast received in the 


ΠΡΟΣ 


ΘΕΣΣΑΛΟΝΙΚΕΙΣ A. I. 


τὴν ἐκ ὕΛαοδικείας" ἵνα καὶ ὑμεῖς avayvere’ 17 Kai εἴπατε 


that from Laodicea that also ye may read. And say 

? , , 4 , τι (ἢ 5 
Αρχίππῳ, Βλέπε τὴν διακονίαν ἣν παρέλαβες ἐν 

to Archippus, Take heed to the service which thou didst receive in [the} 


Lord, that thou fulfil κυρίῳ, ἵνα αὐτὴν πληροῖς. 18 Ὃ ἀσπασμὸς τῇ .ἐμῃ. χειρὶ 
ie 1S They ee uiatiee Lord, that it thou fulfil. The salutation “by *my eae Shand 
Paul. Remember my Παύλου. μνημονεύετε μου τῶν δεσμῶν. ἡ χάρις μεθ᾽ 
bonds era be with τοῦ ΞΡ]. Remember my bonds. Grace [be] with 
ὑμῶν. Sapny.'! 
you. Amen. 
πρὸς Κολασσαεῖς ἐγράφη ἀπὸ Ῥώμης, διὰ Τυχικοῦ καὶ 
To [the] Colossians written from Rome, by Tychicus and 
‘Ovycipov.!' 
Onesimus, 
eH ΠΡΟΣ GESZAAONIKEIS EMISTOAH TAYAOY 
THE ΤΟ [ἼΠΕ]Ὶ] 7THESSALONIANS 7EPISTLE 7OF *PAUL 
TIPOTH:! 
FIRST. 


PAUL, and Silvanus, 
and Timotheus, unto 
the church of the 
Thessalonians which is 
in God the Father and 
in the Lord Jesus 
Christ: Grace be unto 
you, and peace, from 
God our Father, and 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 


2 We give thanks to 
God aiways for you 
all, making mention 
of you in our prayers ; 
3 remembering with- 
out ceasing your work 
of faith, and labour of 
love, and patience of 
hope in our Lord Je- 
sus Christ, in the sight 
of God and our Fa- 
ther ; 4 knowing, bre- 
thren beloved, your 
election of God. 5 For 
our gospel came not 
unto you in word only, 
but also in power, and 
in the Holy Ghost, and 
in much assurance ; as 
ye know what manner 
of Men we were a- 
mong you for your 
sake. 6 And ye be- 
came followers of us, 


Ὁ Λαοδικίας T. 


ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ καὶ Σιλονανὸς καὶ 


Paul and Silvanus and 


Τιμόθεος, τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ Θεσ- 
Timotheus, tothe assembly of Thes- 
σαλονικέων ἐν θεῷ πατρὶ καὶ κυρίῳ Ἰησοῦ χριστῷ" 
salonians in God [the] Father and{[the] Lord Jesus Christ. 
χάρις ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη fad θεοῦ πατρὸς. ἡμῶν Kai κυρίου 
Grace toyou and peace from God our Father and [the] Lord 
Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ." 


Jesus Christ. 
2 ἙΕὐχαριστοῦμεν τῷ θεῷ πάντοτε περὶ πάντων ὑμῶν, 
We give thanks toGod always concerning all you, 


μνείαν ξὑμῶν" ποιούμενοι ἐπὶ τῶν.προσευχῶν. ἡμῶν, 8. ἀδια- 
“mention *of *you making at our prayers, un- 
λείπτως μνημονεύοντες ὑμῶν TOU ἔργου τῆς πίστεως καὶ TOU 
ceasingly remembering your work of faith and 
κόπου τῆς ἀγάπης καὶ THC ὑπομονῆς τῆς ἐλπίδος τοῦ κυρίου 
labour oflove and endurance of hope of “Lord 
ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ πατρὸς ἡμῶν" 
tour Jesus Christ, before "God “and *Father our ; 
4 εἰδότες, ἀδελφοὶ ἠγαπημένοι ὑπὸ " θεοῦ, τὴν. ἐκλογὴν. ὑμῶν" 
knowing, brethren beloved by God, your election. 
5 Ore τὸ εὐαγγέλιον.ἡμῶν ovK.éyevnOn ‘eic' ὑμᾶς ἐν λόγῳ 


Because our glad tidings came not to you in word 
μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν δυνάμει καὶ ἐν πνεύματι ἁγίῳ, Kai "ἐνὶ 
only, but also in power and in([the] “7Spirit ‘Holy, and in 


πληροφορίᾳ πολλῇ, καθὼς οἴδατε οἷοι ἐγενήθημεν él 
“full assurance ‘much, even as ye know what we were among 
ὑμῖν ov ὑμᾶς. Ὁ καὶ ὑμεῖς μιμηταὶ ἡμῶν ἐγενήθητε 
you for thesake of you: and ye imitators of us became 


ὁ — ἀμήν GLTTrAW. 4 TIpos Κολοσσαεῖς &c. E; — the subscription. 


SLTw ; Πρὸς Κολασσαεῖς Tra. 


© + τοῦ ᾿Αποστόλου the apostle Ε ; Πρὸς Θεσσαλονικεῖς a’ LTTrAW. 


of verse [L]TTrA. 
1 [ev] tr. 


f ἀπὸ θεοῦ to end 


Β — ὑμῶν LTTr[A]. h + τοῦ 1. impos L. Kk — ἐν {{ττ]. 


ΤΠ: I THESSALONIANS. 
Kai τοῦ κυρίου, ὑεξάμενοι τὸν λόγον ἐν θλίψει πολλῇ 
and of the Lord, having aecupeed the word in *tribulation ‘much 


μετὰ χαρᾶς πνεύματος ἁγίου, 7 ὥστε γενέσθαι ὑ ὑμᾶς πγύπους" 
with joy of [the] Sate gy so that “became tye patterns 


πᾶσιν τοῖς πιστεύουσιν ἐν τῇ Μακεδονίᾳ kai” τῇ ᾿Αχαΐᾳ. 
toall those believing in Macedonia and Achaia : 


8 ad ὑμῶν.γὰρ ἐξήχηται ὁ λόγος τοῦ κυρίου οὐ μόνον ἐν 
forfrom you hassounded out the word of the Lord not only in 
τῇ Μακεδονίᾳ cai’ Ayaig, Pada! “καὶ ἐν παντὶ τόπῳ ἡ 


Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place 
πίστις.ὑμῶν ἡ πρὸς τὸν θεὸν ἐξελήλυθεν, ὥστε μὴ 
your faith which [is] towards God has gone abroad, 50 as 
χρείαν τἡμᾶς ἔχειν! λαλεῖν Te 9 αὐτοὶ, γὰῤρ περὶ 
"need ‘for “us *to *have tosay anything; for themselves concerning 


ἡμῶν ἀπαγγέλλουσιν ὁποίαν εἴσοδον “ἔχομεν᾽ πρὸς ὑμᾶς. 
us relate what entrancein we have to you, 
καὶ πῶς ἐπεστρέψατε πρὸς τὸν θεὸν ἀπὸ τῶν εἰδώλων, δου- 
and how ye turned to God from idols, to 
λεύειν θεῷ ζῶντι καὶ ἀληθινῷ, 10 Kai ἀναμένειν τὸν υἱὸν 
serve a *God diving 2and = = true, and to await 7Son 
αὐτοῦ ἐκ τῶν οὐρανῶν, ὃν ἤγειρεν ἐκ ‘ ψεκρῶν, In- 
‘his from the heavens, whom he raised from among [the] dead— Je- 
σοῦν τὸν ῥυόμενον ἡμᾶς "ἀπὸ" τῆς ὀργῆς τῆς ἐρχομένης. 
sus, who delivers us from the “wrath ‘coming. 
2 Αὐτοὶ. γὰρ οἴδατε, ἀδελφοί, τὴν.εἴσοδον. ἡμῶν THY 
For yourselves 'ye know, brethren, ourentrancein which{wehad) 
πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ὅτι οὐ κενὴ γέγονεν. 2 ἀλλὰ “κα προπαθόν- 
to you, that not void it has been ; but also having before suf- 
τες καὶ ὑβρισθέντες, καθὼς οἴδατε, ἐν Φιλίπποις. ἐπαῤ- 
fered and having been insulted,evenas yeknow, at Philippi, 


ῥησιασάμεθα ἐν τῷ.θεῷ. ἡμῶν λαλῆσαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς τὸ εὐαγγέλιον 
were bold in our God to speak to you the glad tidings 


τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν πολλῷ ἀγῶνι. 8 Ἢ yap παράκλησις ἡμῶν οὐκ 

of Godin much _ conflict. For “exhortation ‘our [was] not 
ἐκ πλάνης, οὐδὲ ἐξ ἀκαθαρσίας, *ov7e'! ἐν δόλῳ, 4 ἀλλὰ καθὼς 
of error, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile; but evenas 


δεδοκιμάσμεθα ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ πιστευθῆναι τὸ εὐαγγέλιον, 
we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the glad tidings, 


οὕτως λαλοῦμεν, οὐχ ὡς ἀνθρώποις ἀρέσκοντες, ἀλλὰ rq 
so we speak ; not as =men pleasing, but 
θεῷ, τῷ δοκιμάζοντι τὰς καρδίας τὴ μῶν." ὃ Οὔτε.γάρ 


we 


ποτε 


God, who proves the hearts of us. For neither at any time 
ἐν λόγῳ "κολακείας" ἐγενήθημεν, καθὼς οἴδατε, οὔτε 
with word of flattery were we {with you], evenas yeknow, nor 


ἐν προφάσει πλεονεξίας, θεὸς 
with apretext of covetousness, 


μάρτυς, 6 οὔτε ζητοῦντες 
God [is] witness ; nor seeking 


ἐξ ἀνθρώπων δόξαν, οὔτε ἀφ᾽ ὑμῶν οὔτε ἀπ᾽ ἄλλων, 


from men glory, neitherfrom you ΠΟΙ͂ from others, [though] 
δυνάμενοι ἐν. βάρει εἶναι we χριστοῦ ἀπόστολοι: 7 add’! 
having power “burdensome ‘to*be 8Ξ  Christ’s apostles ; but 
ἐγενήθημεν “ἤπιοι" ἐν μέσῳ. ὑμῶν, we ἂν" rpopog θάλπῃ 


we were gentle in yourmidst, as ἃ nurse would cherish 


™ τύπον a pattern LTTraw. n+ ἐν ἸῺ LITraw. 
4 — καὶ LTTrAW. τ ἔχειν ἡμᾶς LTTraw. 
GLTTrA. “ἐκ out of TTr. 


2 ὑμῶν of you w. 4 κολακίας T. 


x οὐδὲ LTTrAW. 
ς νήπιοι Simple L. 


= καὶ GLTITraw. 
> ἀλλὰ TTr. 


© + ἐν (in) τῇ LT. 
5 ἔσχομεν We had GLrtraw. 


529 


and of the Lord, hav- 
ing received the werd 
in much afiliction, 
with joy of the Holy 
Ghost: 7 s0 that ye 
were ensamples to all 
that believe in Mace- 
donia and Achaia. 
8 For from you sound- 
ed out the word of the 
Lord not only in Ma- 
eedonia and Achaia, 
but also in every place 
your faith to God- 
ward is spread abroad; 
so that we need not 
to speak any thing. 
9 For they themselves 
shew of us what man- 
ner of entering in we 
had unte you, and how 
ye turned to God irom 
idols to serve the liv- 
ing and true God; 
10 and to wait for 
his Son from heaven, 
whom he raised from 
the dead, even Jesus. 
which delivered us 
from the wrath to 
cone. 


11, For yourselves, 
brethren, know our 
entrance in unto you, 
that it was not in 
vain: 2 but even after 
that we had suffered 
before, and were 
shametully entreated, 
as ye know, at Phi- 
lippi, we were bold in 
our God to speak unto 
you the gospel of God 
with much contention. 
3 For our exhortation 
was not of deceit, nor 
of uncleanness, nor in 
guile: 4 but as we 
were allowed of God 
to be put in trust with 
the gospel, even so we 
speak ; not as pleasing 
men, but God, which 
trieth our hearts. 5 For 
neither at any time 
used we flattering 
words, as ye know, 
nor a cloke of covet- 
ousness; God is wit- 
ness: 6 nor of men 
sought we glory, uei- 
ther of you, nor yet of 
others, when we might 
have peor burden- 
some, as the apostles 
of Christ. 7 But we 
were gentle among 
you, even as @ nurse 
cherisheth her chil- 


Ρ ἀλλ᾽ La. 
* + τῶν the 
Y — τῷ [L]rTra. 


ἃ ἐὰν LTTra. 
NUM 


690 


dren: 8 βὸ being af- 
fectionately desirous 
of you, we were will- 
ing to have imparted 
unto you, not the gos- 
pel of God only, but 
also our own souls, 
because ye were dear 
unto us. 9 For ye re- 
member, brethren, our 
labour and travail: 
for labouring night 
and day, because we 
would not be charge- 
able unto any of you, 
we preached unto you 
the gospel of God. 
10 Ye are witnesses, 
and God also, how 
holily and justly and 
unblameably' we be- 
haved ourselves a- 
mong you that be- 
lieve: 11 as ye know 
how we exhorted and 
comforted and charged 
every one of you, as a 
father doth his chil- 
dren, 12 that ye would 
walk worthy of God, 
who hath called you 
unto his kingdom and 
glory. 13 For this 
cause also thank we 
God without ceasing, 
because, when ye re- 
ceived the word of 
God which ye heard 
of us, ye received it 
not as the word of 
men, but as it is in 
truth, the word of 
God, which effectually 
worketh also in you 
that believe. 14 For 
ye, brethren, became 
followers’ of the 
churches of God which 
in Judza are in Christ 
Jesus: for ye also 
have suffered like 
things of your own 
countrymen, even as 
they have of the Jews: 
15 who both killed the 
Lord Jesus, and their 
own prophets, and 
have persecuted us; 
and they please not 
God, and are con- 
trary to all men: 
16 forbidding us to 
speak to the Gentiles 
that they might be 
saved, to fill up their 
sins alway: for the 
wrath is come upon 
them to the utter- 
most. 


17 But we, brethren, 
being taken from you 
for a short time in 


© ὁμειρόμενοι GLTTrAW. 
h μαρτυρόμενοι TIrAW. 


αὐτὰ GLTTrAW. 
ο ξῴθακεν has come 


iP Os £0 BSS ἌΡΑΤΟΝ ἘΚ ΤῈΣ 4-A; II. 
τὰ ἑαυτῆς τέκνα. 8 οὕτως “ἱμειρόμενοι! ὑμῶν, εὐδοκοῦμεν 

herown children. Thus yearning over you, we were pleased 
μεταδοῦναι ὑμῖν οὐ μόνον τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀλλὰ 
to have imparted toyou not only the glad tidings of God, but 
καὶ Tac ἑαυτῶν ψυχάς, διότι ἀγαπητοὶ ἡμῖν fyeyévnobs." 
also our own lives, because _ beloved tous ye have become, 
9 μνημονεύετε.γάρ, ἀδελφοί, τὸν.κόπον. ἡμῶν Kai τὸν μόχθον" 


For ye remember, brethren, our labour and the toil, 
νυκτὸς. δγὰρ' Kai ἡμέρας ἐργαζόμενοι, πρὸς τὸ μὴ ἐπιβαρῆσαί 
for night and day working, for not to burden 


τινα ὑμῶν, ἐκηρύξαμεν εἰς ὑμᾶς TO εὐαγγέλιον τοῦ θεοῦ. 
anyone of you, we proclaimed to you’ the _ glad tidings of God. 
10 ayer μάρτυρες Kai ὁ θεός, ὡς ὁσίως καὶ δικαίως καὶ 
e fare] witnesses, and God, how holily and righteously and 
ἀμέμπτως ὑμῖν τοῖς πιστεύουσιν ἐγενήθημεν, 11 καθάπερ 
blamelessly with you that believe we Were : even as 
οἴδατε, ὡς EVA.EKAOTOY ὑμῶν, ὡς πατὴρ τέκνα ἑαυτοῦ, παρα- 
ye know, ΠΟ each one of you, as a father *children *his *own, ex- 
καλοῦντες ὑμᾶς Kai παραμυθούμενοι 12 Kai "μαρτυρούμενοι," 
horting you and consoling and testifying, 
εἰς τὸ ἱπεριπατῆσαι" ὑμᾶς ἀξίως τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ καλοῦντος 
for *to “have *walked ‘you worthily of God, who calls 
ὑμᾶς εἰς τὴν.ἑαυτοῦ βασιλείαν Kai δόξαν. 18* Ata τοῦτο 
you to his own kingdom and_ glory. Because of this 
καὶ ἡμεῖς εὐχαριστοῦμεν τῷ θεῷ ἀδιαλείπτως, ὅτι παραλα- 
also. we give thanks toGod unceasingly, that, having re- 
Bovrec λόγον ἀκοῆς Tap ἡμῶν τοῦ θεοῦ ἐδέξασθε οὐ 
ceived [the] word of [the] report *by *us tof *God, ye accepted not 
λόγον ἀνθρώπων, ἀλλὰ καθώς ἐστιν ἀληθῶς, λόγον θεοῦ, ὃς 
?word men’s, but evenas itis truly, 2word ‘'God’s, which 
kai ἐνεργεῖται ἐν ὑμῖν τοῖς πιστεύουσιν. 14 ὑμεῖς.γὰρ μιμηταὶ 
also works in you who believe. or ye imitators 
ἐγενήθητε, ἀδελφοί, τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν τοῦ θεοῦ τῶν οὐσῶν ἐν TY 


became, brethren, of the assemblies of God which are in 
᾿Ιουδαίᾳ ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ, Ort ταὐτὰ; ἐπάθετε καὶ ὑμεῖς 
Judza in Christ Jesus ; because the same things “suffered also “ye 


ὑπὸ τῶν ἰδίων συμφυλετῶν καθὼς Kai αὐτοὶ ὑπὸ τῶν “Iov- 
from yourown countrymen as also they from the Jews, 
δαίων, 15 τῶν Kai τὸν κύριον, ἀποκτεινάντων Ἰησοῦν καὶ 
who *both *the “Lord killed Jesus and 
τοὺς. ἰδίους" προφήτας, Kai “vpac' ἐκδιωξάντων, Kai θεῷ 
their own prophets, and *you drove out, and *God 
μὴ.ἀρεσκόντων, καὶ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις ἐναντίων, 16 κω- 
180 “ποὺ “please, διὰ 4all 3to *men (‘are] ?contrary, for- 
λυόντων ἡμᾶς τοῖς ἔθνεσιν λαλῆσαι ἵνα σωθῶσιν, εἰς 
bidding us tothe nations to speak that they may besaved, for 
τὸ ἀναπληρῶσαι αὐτῶν τὰς ἁμαρτίας πάντοτε" “ἔφθασεν" δὲ 
to fill up their sins always : but is come 
ἐπ᾿ αὐτοὺς ἡ ὀργὴ εἰς.τέλος. 
upon them _ the wrath to the uttermost. 
~ / , ? J ~ a 
17 Ἡμεῖς.δέ, ἀδελφοί, ἀπορφανισθέντες ἀφ᾽ ὑμῶν πρὸς 


But we, brethren, having been bereaved of you for 


8 — yap for GLTTraW. 
k + καὶ and LITrA. lra 
π ἡμᾶς US EGLTTrAW. 


£ ἐγενήθητε ye became LTTraw. 
i περιπατεῖν “to “walk LrTraw. 
τὰ — ἰδίους (read the prophets) GLTTrAW 
tp 


TE ΠῚ. I' THESSALONIANS. 


καιρὸν ὥρας προσώπῳ οὐ καρδίᾳ, περισσοτέρως ἐσπου- 
time ofanhour in 2 not inheart, more abundantly were 


δάσαμεν τὸ. πρόσωπον ὑμῶν ἰδεῖν ἐν πολλῇ ἐπιθυμίᾳ" 18 "διὸ" 


diligent your face to see pas much desire ; wherefore 
ἠθελήσαμεν ἐλθεῖν πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ἐγὼ μὲν Παῦλος καὶ ἅπαξ 
we wished tocome to γοα, I indeed Paul, both once 


καὶ dic, καὶ ἐνέκοψεν ἡμᾶς ὁ σατανᾶς. 19 Tic-yap ἡμῶν 
and twice, and “hindered ee for what [is] our 


ἐλπὶς ἢ χαρὰ ἢ στέφανος καυχήσεως ; ἢ οὐχὶ καὶ ὑμεῖς 


hope or joy or crown of boasting? oorfare) not even ye 
ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν τ. τχριστοῦ" ἐν τῇ αὐτοῦ 
before our Lord Jesus Christ at his 
παρουσίᾳ; ; 30 ὑμεῖς.γάρ ἐστε ἡ. δόξα. ἡμῶν καὶ ἡ χαρά. 
coming ? for ye are our glory and joy. 
9. Διὸ μηκέτι στέγοντες, “εὐδοκήσαμεν" καταλειφθῆναι 
Wherefore no ἸΟΣΞΕΣ, enduring, we thought good to be left 
ἐν ᾿Αθήναις μόνοι, 2 καὶ ἐπέμψαμεν Τιμόθεον τὸν ἀδελφὸν 
in Athens alone, and sent Timotheus ?prother 


ἡμῶν καὶ 'διάκονον" τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ συνεργὸν ἡμῶν" ἐν τῷ 
Your and servant of God and 7fellow-worker ‘our in the 
εὐαγγελίῳ τοῦ χριστοῦ, εἰς τὸ στηρίξαι ὑμᾶς Kai παρακαλέσαι 
glad tidings ofthe Christ, for toestablish you and _ to encourage 
υὑμᾶς" "περὶ" τῆς. πίστεως ὑμῶν 3 ὕτῷ" μηδένα σαίνεσθαι" 
you concerning your faith that no one be moved 
ἐν ταῖς.θλίψεσιν ταύταις. αὐτοὶ. γὰρ οἴδατε OTL εἰς τοῦτο 
by these tribulations. as yourselves know that for this 
κείμεθα" 4 Kai-yap ὅτε πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἦμεν, προελέγομεν ὑμῖν 
we are set ; foralso, when with you wewere, we told *beforehand you 


Ore μέλλομεν θλίβεσθαι, καθὼς καὶ ἐγένετο καὶ ot- 
we are about [0 suffer tribulation, evenas also itcametopass and ye 


dare’ 5 διὰ τοῦτο κἀγὼ μηκέτι στέγων, ἔπεμψα εἰς τὸ 

know.) Because οὗ this Ι 4150 no longer enduring, sent for 

γνῶναι τὴν. πίστιν ὑμῶν, μήπως ἐπείρασεν Vac ὁ 

to know your faith, lest perhaps *did*tempt ‘you ‘he *who 

πειράζων, καὶ εἰς κενὸν γένηται ὁ.κόπος.-ἡμῶν. 6 ἄρτι δὲ 
tempts, and void should become our labour. But now 


ἐλθόντος Τιμοθέου πρὸς ἡμᾶς ἀφ᾽ ὑμῶν, καὶ εὐαγγελισα- 


Ramdas’ Scome *Timotheus us from you; and ἜΡΥΙΠΕ, announced 
μένου ἡμῖν τὴν πίστιν καὶ τὴν ἀγάπην ὑμῶν, καὶ ὅτι 
glad tidings to us [of] “faith 7and 4love ‘your, and that 
ἔχετε μνείαν ἡμῶν ἀγαθὴν πάντοτε, ἐπιποθοῦντες ἡ ας 
ye have *remembrance ‘of Sus gcod lalways, longing 


ἰδεῖν, καθάπερ Kai ἡμεῖς ὑμᾶς, 7 διὰ τοῦτο 
1to*see, evenas also we yor: because of this 
θημεν, ἀδελφοί, ἐφ᾽ ὑμῖν, ἐπὶ com τῇ "θλίψει Kai ἀνάγκῃ" 
ΤΒΈΘΙ: brethren, asto you, in *tribulation “and τας ιν 
ἡμῶν, διὰ Tie. ὑμῶν.πίστεως" δ᾽ ὅτι νῦν ζῶμεν ἐὰν ὑμεῖς 
tour, through your faith, because now welive if ye 
Ὀστήκητε' ἐν κυρίῳ. 9 riva-yap εὐχαριστίαν δυνάμεθα 
HELE stand fast in [the] Lord. For what thanksgiving are we able 
ᾧ θεῷ ἀνταποδοῦναι περὶ ὑμῶν, ἐπὶ πάσῃ τῇ χαρᾷ 
ee *God *to 7render concerning you, for the joy 


epee 


we were encou- 


591 


presence, not in heart, 
endeavoured the more 
abundantly tosee your 
face with great desire. 
18 Wherefore we would 
have come unto you, 
even I Paul, once 
and again ; but Satan 
hindered us. 19 For 
what is our hope, or 
joy, or crown of re- 
joicing ? Are noteven 
ye in the presence of 
our Lord Jesus Christ 
at his coming? 20 for 
ye are our glory and 
joy. 


II, Wherefore when 
we could no longer 
forbear, we thought 
it good to be left at 
Athens alone; 2 and 
sent Timotheus, our 
brother, and minister 
of God, and our fellow- 
labourer in the gospel 
of Christ, to establish 
you, and to comfort 
you concerning your 
faith: 3that no man 
should be moved by 
these afflictions: for 
yourselves know that 
we are appointed there- 
unto. 4 For verily, 
when we were with 
you, we told you be- 
fore that we should 
suffer tribulation ; 
even as it came to pass, 
and ye know. 5 For 
this cause, when 1 
could no longer for- 
bear, I sent to know 
your faith, lest by 
some means the temp- 
ter have tempted you, 
and our labour be in 
vain, 6 But now when 
Timotheus came from 
you unto us, and 
brought us good tid- 
ings of your faith and 
charity, and that ye 
have good remem- 
brance of us always, 
desiring greatly to see 
us, as we also to see 
you: 7 therefore, bre- 
thren, we were com- 
forted over you in all 
our affliction and dis- 
tress by your faith: 
8for now we live, if 
ye stand fast in the 
Lord. 9 For what 
thanks can we render 
to God again for you, 
for all the joy where- 


4 διότι because LTTraW. — χριστοῦ LITrA. 
fellow-worker (read τοῦ θεοῦ τ God) GLaw. 

— ὑμᾶς LTTrAW. χα ὑπὲρ GLTTrAW. Υ τὸ LTTrAW. 
Gat ie 5 ἀνάγκῃ καὶ θλίψει LTTrAW. > στήκετε stand fast TTra. 


5 ηὐδοκήσαμεν Tir: 
— Kat συνεργὸν ἡμῶν GLTTraw. 
z μηδὲν (nothing [ye]) ἀσαίνεσ- 


: συνεργὸν 


532 


with we joy for your 
sakes before our God; 
10night and day pray- 
ing exceedingly that 
we might see your 
face, and might per- 
feet that which is 
lacking in your faith? 
1t Now God himself 
and our Father, and 
our Lord Jesus Christ, 
direct our way unto 
you. 12 And the Lord 
make you to increase 
and abound in ilove 
one toward another, 
and toward all men, 
even as we do toward 
you: 13 tothe end he 
may stablish your 
hearts unblameable in 
holiness before God, 
even our Father, at the 
eoming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ with all 
his saints. 


IV. Furthermore then 
we beseech you, bre- 
thren, and exhort you 
by the Lord Jesus, that 
as ye have received of 
us how ye ought to 
walk and to please 
God, so ye would a- 
bound more and more. 
2 For ye know what 
commandments _ we 
gave you by the Lord 
Jesus. 3 For this is 
the will of God, even 
your sanctification, 
that ye should abstain 
from fornication : 
4 that every one of you 
should know how to 
possess his vessel in 
sanctification and ho- 
nour ; 5 not inthe lust 
of concepiscence, even 
as the Gentiles which 
know not God : 6 that 
no man go beyond and 
defraud his brother in 
any matter: because 
that the Lord is the 
avenger of all such, as 
we also have fore- 
warned you and testi- 
fied. 7 For God hath 
not called us unto un- 
cleanness, but unto 
holiness. 8 He there- 
fore that despiseth, de- 
spiseth not man, but 
God, who hath also 
given unto us his holy 
Spirit. 


© ; (ending the question at ἡμῶν) GA. 
£ — χριστοῦ LTTrAw. 
Kk 4+ καθὼς καὶ περιπατεῖτε even as also ye are walking LTTraw. 
m — 6 (read [the]) Lrtra. 
4 διδόντα. gives LTTr. v 


of God) L. 


IPOS ,@ESSAALONTDTEKETS: “A. Il, IV. 
) χαίρομεν δί ὑμᾶς ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ.θεοῦ. ἡμῶν," 
wherewith werejoice onaccountof you before our God, 


10 νυκτὸς καὶ ἡμέρας “ὑπὲρ.ἐκπερισσοῦ" δεόμενοι εἰς τὸ ἰδεῖν 
night and day exceedingly beseeching for to see 
ὑμῶν τὸ πρόσωπον, Kai καταρτίσαι TA.VOTEOnMATA τῆς πίστεως 


your face, and toperfect the things lacking in *faith 
ὑμῶν; 11 Adric.dé ὁ θεὸς καὶ πατὴρ.ἡμῶν Kai ὁ.κύὐριος.-ἡμῶν 
1your ? But himself °God *and 7our’Father ‘and Sour *Lord 
Ἰησοῦς "χριστὸς" κατευθύναι τὴν ὁδὸν ἡμῶν πρὸς ὑμᾶς. 
‘Jesus Christ may direct our way to you. 
12 ὑμᾶς.δὲ ὁ κύριος πλεονάσαι καὶ περισσεύσαι τῇ 
But °you πο *Lord ‘may *make to exceed and to abound 
ἀγάπῃ εἰς ἀλλήλους καὶ εἰς πάντας, καθάπερ Kai ἡμεῖς 
inlove toward one another and toward all, evenas also we 


εἰς ὑμᾶς, 18 εἰς τὸ στηρίξαι ὑμῶν τὰς καρδίας ἀμέμπτους 


toward you, for toestablish your hearts blameless 
ἐν aywotvy ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ θεοῦ Kai πατρὸς ἡμῶν, ἐν τῇ 
in holiness before ?God “and *Father our, at the 


παρουσίᾳ τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ" μετὰ πάντων τῶν 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all 
ἁγίων. αὐτοῦ. 5 
his saints. 
4 *To"_doroy οὖν, ἀδελφοί, ἐρωτῶμεν ὑμᾶς Kai παρα- 
Fortherest then, brethren, we beseech you and we 
καλοῦμεν ἐν κυρίῳ ᾿Ιησοῦ,ἷ καθὼς παρελάβετε παρ᾽ ἡμῶν 
exhort in [the] Lord Jesus, evenas ye received from us 
τὸπῶς δεῖ ὑμᾶς περιπατεῖν Kai ἀρέσκειν θεῷ, " ἵνα περισ- 
how it behoves you to waik and please God, that yeshould 
σεύητε μᾶλλον. 2 οἴδατε.γὰο τίνας παραγγελίας ἐδώκαμεν 
abound more. For yeknow what injunctions we gave 
ὑμῖν διὰ τοῦ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ. 3 τοῦτο.γάρ éoriy! θέλημα τοῦ 
you through the Lord Jesus. For this is 2will 
θεοῦ, ὁ ἁγιασμὸς. ὑμῶν. ἀπέχεσθαι ὑμᾶς ἀπὸ τῆς πορνείας. 
6 οὔ᾽β, τοῦ sanctification, *to*abstain (’for]*you from fornication, 
4 εἰδέναι ἕκαστον ὑμῶν τὸ ἑαυτοῦ σκεῦος κτᾶσθαι ἐν 
*to "know teach οὗ *you fhow] *his *own ‘vessel ‘to *possess in 
ἁγιασμῷ καὶ τιμῇ, 5 μὴ ἐν πάθει ἐπιθυμίας καθάπερ καὶ 


sanctification and honour, (not in passion of lust evenas 8150 
τὰ ἔθνη τὰ μὴ εἰδότα τὸν θεόν: 6 τὸ μὴ ὑπερβαίνειν Kai 
the nations who know not God,) not to go beyond and 
πλεονεκτεῖν ἐν τῷ πράγματι τὸν. ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ, διότι ἔκ- 
to overreach in the matter his brother ; because [the] a- 
δικος πὸ κύριος περὶ πάντων τούτων, καθὼς καὶ 


venger [15] the ord concerning all also 
ππροείπαμεν, ὑμῖν καὶ διεμαρτυράμεθα. 
wetold*before ‘you and fully testified. 
ἡμᾶς ὁ θεὸς ἐπὶ ἀκαθαρσίᾳ, “ἀλλ᾽" ἐν ἁγιασμῷ. 8 τοιγαροῦν 
5118 7God to wuncleanness, but in sanctification. So then 


ὁ ἀθετῶν, οὐκ ἄνθρωπον ἀθετεῖ, ἀλλὰ τὸν θεόν, τὸν 


these things, even as 
7 οὐ.γὰρ ἐκάλεσεν 
For ἢοῦ “called 


he that sets aside, *not 3man “sets aside, but God, who 
Peat" «δόντα! "τὸ. πνεῦμα αὐτοῦ" τὸ ἅγιον εἰς "ἡμᾶς." 
also gave his “Spirit ‘Holy to us. 


© — χριστὸς LTTrA. 

i+ ἵνα that Lrtra. 
1 +4 [τὸ] (read the will 
2 προείπομεν G. © ἀλλὰ TTr. Ρ — καὶ LTr[A]. 
5 ὑμᾶς YOU LTTrAW. 


ἃ ὑπερεκπερισσοῦ GLTTrAW. 


_& + ἀμήν Amen [π|]0.Ψ h — To @LTTrAW. 


τ αὐτοῦ TO πνεῦμα L. 


THESSALONIANS. 
τῆς φιλαδελφίας οὐ χρείαν ᾿ἔχετε" γρά- 
brotherly love *no ‘*need ‘ye *have {for me] to 
φειν ὑμῖν, αὐτοὶ γὰρ ὑμεῖς θεοδίδακτοί ἐστε εἰς TO ἀγαπᾷν 
write toyou, for*yourselves ‘ye ‘taught °of °God “are for to love 
ἀλλήλους" 10 καὶ γὰρ ποιεῖτε αὐτὸ εἰς πάντας τοὺς ἀδελ- 
one another. For also ye do this towards all the bre- 
φοὺς "τοὺ" ἐν ὕλῃ.τῇ. Μακεδονίᾳ. παρακαλοῦμεν δὲ ὑμᾶς, 
thren who [816] in the whole of Macedonia ; but we exhort you, 
ἀδελφοί, περισσεύειν μᾶλλον, 11 Kai φιλοτιμεῖσθαι ἡσυχάζειν 


BV. Vv. I 
9 Περὶ δὲ 


Now concerning 


brethren, to abound more, and endeavour earnestly to be quiet 
καὶ πράσσειν τὰ ἴδια, Kai ἐργάζεσθαι ταῖς."ἰδίαις" χερσὶν 
and to do your own things, and to work with 70wn *hands 


ὑμῶν, καθὼς ὑμῖν παρηγγείλαμεν, 12 iva περιπατῆτε εὐ- 
‘your, evenas on you we enjoined, that yemaywalk  be- 
σχημόνως πρὸς τοὺς ἔξω, Kai μηδενὸς χρείαν ἔχητε. 
comingly towards those without, and ofnoone “need ‘may “have. 
13 Οὐ *Oédw" δὲ ὑμᾶς ἀγνοεῖν, ἀδελφοί, περὶ 
‘Not *Isdo*°wish *but you ἴο be ignorant, brethren, concerning 
τῶν ὑκεκοιμημένων," ἵνα μὴ.λυπῆσθε, καθὼς Kai οἱ λοιποὶ 
those who have fallen asleep, that ye be not grieved, even 85 also the rest 
ot μὴ.ἔχοντες ἐλπίδα. 14 εἰ γὰρ πιστεύομεν Ori Ἰησοῦς ἀπέ- 
who have no hope. Forif webelieve that Jesus died 
θανεν καὶ ἀνέστη, οὕτως Kai ὁ θεὸς τοῦς κοιμηθέντας 
and rose again, so also God those who are fallen asleep 
διὰ τοῦ Ἰησοῦ ἄξει σὺν αὐτῷ. 15 τοῦτο.γὰρ ὑμῖν λέ- 


through Jesus willbring with him. For this to you we 
γομεν ἐν λόγῳ κυρίου, ὅτι ἡμεῖς οἱ ζῶντες, οἱ περι- 
say in [the] word of[the] Lord, that we the living who re- 


λειπόμενοι εἰς THY παρουσίαν τοῦ κυρίου, οὐ-μὴ φθάσωμεν 
main to the coming ofthe Lord, inno wise may anticipate 

τοὺς κοιμηθέντας" 16 ὅτι αὐτὸς ὁ κύριος ἐν κελεύσ- 
those who are fallen asleep; because “himself *the *Lord with a shout of com- 
ματι, ἐν φωνῇ ἀρχαγγέλου Kai ἐν σάλπιγγι θεοῦ κατα- 
mand, with “voice ‘archangel’s and with trumpet οἵ God shall 
βήσεται ἀπ᾽ οὐρανοῦ, Kai οἱ νεκροὶ ἐν χριστῷ ἀναστήσονται 


descend from heaven, and the dead in Christ shall rise 
πρῶτον" 17 ἔπειτα ἡμεῖς ot ζῶντες οἱ περιλειπόμενοι, ἅμα 
first ; then we the living who remain, together 
σὺν αὐτοῖς ἁρπαγησόμεθα ἐν νεφέλαις εἰς ἀπάντησιν 
with them _ shall be caught away in[the] clouds for {the} meeting 
τοῦ κυρίου εἰς ἀέρα, Kai οὕτως πάντοτε σὺν κυρίῳ ἐσό- 
ofthe Lord ἴῃ [{Π6] air; and thus always with [the] Lord we shall 


μεθα. 18 ὥστε παρακαλεῖτε ἀλλήλους ἐν τοῖς.λόγοις.τούτοις. 
be. So encourage one another with these words, 
5 Mepidé τῶν χρόνων καὶ τῶν καιρῶν, ἀδελφοί, οὐ χρείαν 
But concerning the times and the seasons, brethren, “no ‘need 
ἔχετε ὑμῖν γράφεσθαι. 2 αὐτοὶ γὰρ ἀκριβῶς οἴδατε ὅτι 
“ye *have for you to be written [to], for “yourselves *accurately 'ye*know that 
2)' ἡμέρα κυρίου we κλέπτης ἐν νυκτὶ οὕτως ἔρχεται" 


the day of{(the] Lord as _ a thief by night so comes. 
3 orav"yap' λέγωσιν, Ἑϊρήνη καὶ ἀσφάλεια, τότε αἰφνί- 
For when they maysay, Peace and security, then sud- 
διος αὐτοῖς δέφίσταται" ὄλεθρος, ὥσπερ ἡ.ὠδ,ν τῇ 
den “upon *them 7comes ‘destruction, as travail to her 


533 


9 But as touching 
brotherly love ye need 
not that I write unto 
you: for ye yourselves 
are taught of God 
to love one another. 
10 And indeed ye do 
it toward all the bre- 
thren which are in 411 
Macedonia: but we 
beseech you, brethren, 
that ye increase more 
and more; ll and that 
yestudy to bequiet,and 
to do your own busi- 
ness, and to work with 
your own hands, as 
we commanded you; 
12 that ye may walk 
honestly toward them 
that are without, and 
that ye may have lack 
of nothing. 


13 But I would not 
have you to be igno- 
rant, brethren, con- 
cerning them which 
are asleep, that ye sor- 
row not, even as others 
which have no hope. 
14 For if we believe 
that Jesus died and 
rose again, even so 
them also which sleep 
in Jesus will God bring 
with him. 15 For this 
we say unto you by 
the word of the Lora, 
that we which are a- 
live and remain unto 
the coming of the Lord 
shall not prevent them 
which are. asleep. 
16 For the Lord him- 
self shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, 
with the voice of the 
archangel, and with 
the trump of God: 
and the dead in Christ 
shall rise first : 17 then 
we which are alive and 
remain shall be caught 
up together with them 
in the clouds, to meet 
the Lord in the air: 
and so shall we ever 
be with the Lord, 
18 Wherefore comfort 
one another with these 
words. 


VY. But of the times 
and the seasons, bre- 
thren, ye have no need 
that Il write unto you. 
2 For yourselves know 
perfectly that the day 
of the Lord so com- 
eth as a thief in the 
night. 3 For when 
they shall say, Peace 
and safety ; then sud- 
den destruction com- 
eth upon them, as 
travail upon a woman 


t ἔχομεν we have L. ¥ — χοὺς LT[Tr]. 
sdo “wish GLTTrAW. Y κοιμωμένων are falling asleep LTTra. 
4 — γὰρ for ertra ; [δὲ] but L. Ὁ ἐπίσταται TTr. 


ν --- ἰδίαις OWN LTTrAW. 
3. --- 7 (read [the]) trts[a]w. 


χα θέλομεν we 


534 ΠΡΟΣ “Oth 2 Aen ONS Ke ES) Ar Ve 


with child ; and they 
shall not escape. 4 But 
ye, brethren, are not 
in darkness, that that 
day should overtake 
you as a thief. 5 Ye 
are all the children of 
light, and the child- 
ren of the day: we are, 
not of the night, nor of } 
darkness. 6 Therefore ~ 
let us not sleep, as do 
others; but let us 
watch and be sober. 
7 For they that sleep 
sleep in the night; 
and they that be 
drunken are drunken 
in the night. 8 But 
let us, who are of the 
day, be sober, putting 
on the breastplate of 
faith and love; and for 
an helmet, the hope 
of salvation. 9 For 
God hath not appoint- 
ed us to wrath, but to 
obtain salvation by 
our Lord Jesus Christ, 
10 who died for us, 
that, whether we wake 
or sleep, we should live 
together with him. 
11 Wherefore comfort 
yourselves together, 
and edify one another, 
even as also ye do. 


12 And we beseech 
you, brethren, to know 
them which labour a- 
mong you, and are over 
you in the Lord, and 
admonish you; 13 and 
to esteem them very 


their work’s. sake. 
And be at _ peace 


ἐν. γαστρὶ ἐχούσῃ, Kai ov. ἐκφύγωσιν. 4 ὑμεῖς.δέ, ἀδελ- 
that is with child ; and in no wise shall they escape. But ye, bre- 
pol, οὐκ. ἐστὲ ἔν σκότει, ἵνα “ἡ ἡμέρα ὑμᾶς" ὡς ἀκλέπτης"! 
thren, are not in darkness, that the day you as a thief 
καταλάβῃ 5 πάντες " ὑμεῖς υἱοὶ φωτός ἐστε Kai υἱοὶ ἡμέρας" 
should overtake : all ye sons oflight are and sons. of day; 
οὐκ. ἐσμὲν νυκτὸς οὐδὲ σκότους. 6 ἄρα οὖν ju1j_KabEddwpeEY 
wearenot ofnight nor of darkness. So _ then we should not sleep 
we ἱκαὶ οἱ λοιποί, ἀλλὰ γρηγορῶμεν καὶ νήφωμεν. 
as also the _ rest, but we should watch and we should be sober ; 
7 οἱ, γὰρ καθεύδοντες νυκτὸς καθεύδουσιν, καὶ οἱ μεθυ- 
for they that sleep “by *night sleep, and they that are 
σκόμενοι νυκτὸς μεθύουσιν᾽ ὃ ἡμεῖς.δὲ ἡμέρας ὄντες νήφω- 
drunken “*by *night ‘get *drunk; but we 7of*day ‘being should be 
μεν, ἐνδυσάμενοι θώρακα πίστεως καὶ ἀγάπης, καὶ 
sober, having puton [the] breastplate offaith and love, and [as] 
περικεφαλαίαν ἐλπίδα σωτηρίας" 9 Ott οὐκ ἔθετο ἡμᾶς 
helmet “hope tsalvation’s ; because *not has “set 
ὁ θεὸς εἰς ὀργήν, FadX’'! εἰς περιποίησιν σωτηρίας διὰ τοῦ 
1God for wrath, but for obtaining salvation through 
κυρίου.ἡ μῶν ᾿Τησοῦ χριστοῦ, 10 τοῦ ἀποθανόντος "ὑπὲρ" ἡμῶν, 
our Lord Jesus Christ, who died \ for us, 
iva εἴτε γρηγορῶμεν εἴτε καθεύδωμεν, ἅμα σὺν αὐτῷ 
that whether we may watch or wemay sleep, together with him 
ζήσωμεν. 11 διὸ παρακαλεῖτε ἀλλήλους, Kai οἰκοδομεῖτε εἷς 
we may live. Wherefore encourage one another, and build up one 


τὸν ἕνα, καθὼς καὶ ποιεῖτε. 
the other, evenas also ye are doing. 


12 ᾿Ερωτῶμεν.δὲ ὑμᾶς, ἀδελφοί, εἰδέναι τοὺς κοπιῶντας 
But we beseech you, brethren, to know thosewho labour 

ἐν ὑμῖν, Kai προϊσταμένους ὑμῶν ἐν κυρίῳ, Kai νουθε- 

among you, and take the lead of you in[the] Lord, and admo- 

τοῦντας ὑμᾶς, 18 Kai ἡγεῖσθαι αὐτοὺς ἰὑπὲρ.ἐκπερισσοῦ" ἐν 


highly in love for Dish you, and toesteem them exceedingly in 
ἀγάπῃ διὰ τὸ.ἔργον.αὐτῶν. εἰρηνεύετε ἐν ‘éavroic." 
love on account of their work. Be at peace among yourselves, 


among yourselves. 
14 Now we exhort you, 
brethren, warn them 
that are unruly, com- 
fort the feebleminded, 
support the weak, be 
patient toward all men. 


14 παρακαλοῦμεν.δὲ ὑμᾶς, ἀδελφοί, νουθετεῖτε τοὺς ἀτάκτους, 
But we exhort you, brethren, admonish the disorderly, 
παραμυθεῖσθε τοὺς ὀλιγοψύχους, ἀντέχεσθε THY ἀσθενῶν, μα- 
console the faint-hearted, sustain the weak, be 


15 See that nonerender κροθυμεῖτε πρὸς πάντας. 15 ὁρᾶτε μή τις κακὸν ἀντὶ κακοῦ 


evil for evil unto any 
man; but ever follow 
that which is good, 
both among  your- 
selves, and to all men, 
16 Rejoice evermore. 


patient towards all. See that not anyone 671] for evil 
τινὶ Ἰάποδῷ"" ἀλλὰ πάντοτε τὸ ἀγαθὸν διώκετε πικαὶ" εἰς 


to anyone render, but always the good pursue both towards 


ἀλλήλους Kai εἰς πάντας. 16 πάντοτε χαίρετε. 17 ἀδια- 


17 Pray without ceas- one another andtowards all; always rejoice ; unceas- 


ing. 18 In every thing 


give thanks: for this λείπτως προσεύχεσθε. 18 ἐν παντὶ εὐχαριστεῖτε' TOUTO-yap™ 
is the will of God ingly pray ; in everything give thanks, for this 


in Christ Jesus con- 
cerning you. 19 Quench 
not the Spirit. 20 De- 
spise not prophesy- 
ings. 21 Prove all 
things ; hold fast that 


c ὑμᾶς ἡ ἡμέρα Lw. 


θέλημα θεοῦ ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ εἰς ὑμᾶς. 19 τὸ πνεῦμα 
{is the] will of God in Christ Jesus towards you; the Spirit 


pn oBévvure.' 20 προφητείας μὴ. ἐξουθενεῖτε. 21 πάνταϑ 
do not quench ; prophecies do not set at naught; all things 


ἃ κλέπτας thieves L. e + yap for (all) GLrTraw. £— καὶ 


LITr[A ]. & ἀλλὰ TTrA. h περὶ TTr. i ὑπερεκπερισσῶς LTTrA ; ὑπερεκπερισσοῦ GW. 
Κ αὐτοῖς (read with them) rrr. ! ἀποδοῖ 1. m — καὶ LTTr. n+éorwisSL. ° CBév- 
VUTE 1. p + δὲ but (all things) exrrraw. 


16 


δοκιμάζετε" τὸ 


II THESSALONIANS. 


καλὸν κατέχετε. 22 ἀπὸ παντὸς εἴδους πονη- 


prove, the right hold fast; from every, form of wicked- 
pov ἀπέχεσθε. 23 Αὐτὸς δὲ ὁ θεὸς τῆς εἰρήνης ἁγιάσαι 
ness abstain. Now ‘himself *the *God *of *peace ΡΣ pence hs 
ὑμᾶς ὁλοτελεῖς" Kai ὁλόκληρον ὑμῶν τὸ πνεῦμα καὶ ἡ ψυχὴ 
you wholly ; and 3entire "your ‘spirit ‘and ‘soul 


Kai TO σῶμα ἀ EUTTWC ἐν Τῇ παρουσίᾳ τοῦ. κυρίου. ἡμῶν 


7and ®body **blameless }7at aos ae 1508 1Sour ae 
Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ Tp nOein. | y+ 24 πιστὸς ὁ καλῶν ὑμᾶς, 
18Jesus ‘*Christ *may lle 10preserved.. ‘(He is] faithful who calls you, 
a A 4, 
ὃς Kai zoos. 25 ᾿Αδελφοί, προσεύχεσθε 4 περὶ ἡμῶν. 
who also will perform Cit]. Brethren, Tray, for us. 
26 ἀσπάσασθε τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς πάντας ἐν φιλήματι ἁγίῳ. 
Salute the *brethren tall with a kiss holy. 
27 τὸὁρκίζω" ὑμᾶς τὸν κύριον ἀναγνωσθῆναι τὴν ἐπιστο- 
1 δα]ιτθ you [by] the Lord [that] be read the epistle 


Any πᾶσιν τοῖς "ἁγίοις" ἀδελφοῖς. 28 ἡ χάρις τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν 
toall the holy brethren, The grace of our Lord 
Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν. 'άμήν." 


Jesus Christ [be] with you. Amen, 
γ᾿ Πρὸς Θεσσαλονικεῖς πρώτη ἐγράφη ἀπὸ ᾿Αθηνῶν." 
?To ([*the] “Thessalonians first written from Athens. 


“HY HPO 


THE ΞΠΟῸ [(*THE) >THESSALONIANS ?EPISTLE 


ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ καὶ Σιλουανὸς καὶ Τιμόθεος, τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ Θεσ- 


Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus, to the assembly of Thes- 


σαλονικέων ἐν θεῷ πατρὶ ἡμῶν καὶ κυρίῳ ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστῷ" 
salonians in God ?Father ‘our and eae Ie Christ. 


2 χάρις ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη ἀπὸ θεοῦ πατρὸς Pyar" καὶ κυρίου 
Grace toyou and peace from God 7?Father tour and Lord 


Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ. 


Jesus Christ. 
3 Εὐχαριστεῖν ὀφείλομεν τῷ θεῷ πάντοτε περὶ ὑμῶν, 
310 *thank we sone God always concerning you, 
ἀδελφοί, καθὼς ἀξιόν ἐστιν, Ore ὑπεραυξάνει ἡ πίστις 
prem, even as meet itis, because increases ΒΧΟΒΕΠΙΠΕΊΝΙ 2faith 


ὑμῶν, καὶ πλεονάζει ἡ ἀγάπη ἑνὸς ἑκάστου πάντων ὑμῶν 


pees and abounds the love of bi teach of 3211 you 
εἰς ἀλλήλους 4 ὥστε “ἡμᾶς αὐτοὺς" ἐν ὑμῖν ἃ καυχᾶσθαι" ἐν 
to oneanother; soasfor us _ ourselves “1π prom *to “boast in 


ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις τοῦ θεοῦ ὑπὲρ τῆς. ὑπομονῆς. ὑμῶν καὶ πίστεως 
the assemblies of God for your endurance and faith 


ἐν πᾶσιν τοῖς. διωγμοῖς. ὑμῶν Kai ταῖς θλίψεσιν αἷς ἀνέ- 
in all your persecutions and the tribulations which ye are 


χεσθε, 5 ἔνδειγμα τῆς δικαίας κρίσεως τοῦ θεοῦ, εἰς τὸ 
bearing; a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, for 


4 + [καὶ] also 1. τ ἐνορκίζω LTTraw. 8 — ἁγίοις LTTrA. 
— the subscription GLTW ; pos Θεσσαλονικεῖς a TrA. 


535 


which is good. 22 Ab- 
stain from all appear- 
ance of evil. 23 And the 
very God of 
sanctify you wholly; 
and 7 pray God your 
whole spirit and soul 
and body be preserved 
blameless unto the 
coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, 24 Faith- 
fulis he that calleth 
you, who also will de 
τί. 25 Brethren, pray 
for us. 26 Greet allthe 
brethren with an holy 
kiss. 27 I charge you 
by the Lord that this 
epistle be read unto 31] 
the holy brethren. 
28 The grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ be 
with you. Amen. 


OETTAAONIKEIS EMTSETOAH ΔΕΎΤΕΡΑ." 


*SECOND. 


PAUL, and Silvanus, 
and Timotheus, unto 
the church of the 
Thessalonians in God 
our Father and the 
Lord Jesus Christ : 
2 Grace unto you, and 
peace, from God our 
Father and the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 


3 We are bound to 
thank God always for 
you, brethren, as itis 
meet, because that 
your faith groweth 
exceedingly, and the 
charity of every one 
of you all toward each 
other aboundeth ; 4 so 
that we ourselves glory 
in you in the churches 
of God for your pa- 
tience and faith in all 
your persecutions and 
tribulations that ye 
endure : 5 which is a 
manifest token of the 
righteous judgment of 
God, that ye may be 


t — ἀμήν GLITrAW. 


a+ Παύλου τοῦ ᾿Αποστόλου of the Apostle Paul £; ΓΕ Παύλου G; Πρὸς Θεσσαλονικεῖς B 


LTTraw. 


Ὁ — ἡμῶν (read [the]) [LtrJa 
(ἐν- T) Lira. 


ς αὐτοὺς ἡμᾶς TTrA. 


ἃ ἐγκαυχᾶσθαι 


536 


counted worthy of the 
kingdom of God, for 
which ye also suffer : 

6 seeing it 18 a right- 
eous thing with God 
to recompense tribu- 
lation to them that 
trouble you; 7 and 
to you who are trou- 
pled rest with us, 
when the Lord Je- 
sus shall be revealed 
’ rom heaven with his 
mighty angels, 8 in 
flaming fire taking 
vengeance on them 
that know not God, 
and that obey not the 
gospelof our Lord Je- 
sus Christ: 9 who shall 
be punished with ever- 
lasting destruction 
from the presence of 
the Lord, and from 
the glory of his power; 
10 when he shall come 
to- be glorified in his 
saints, and to be ad- 
mired in all them that 
believe (because our 
testimony among you 
was believed) in that 
day. 11 Wherefore al- 
so we pray always 
for you, that our 
God would count you 
worthy of this calling, 
and fulfil all the good 
pleasure of his good- 
ness, and the work of 
faith with power : 

{2 that the name of 
cur Lord Jesus Christ 
may be glorified in 
you, and ye in him, 
according to the grace 
of our God and the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 


11. Now we beseech 
you, brethren, by the 
coming of ovr Lord 
Jesus Christ, and by 
our gathering together 
unto him, 2 that ye be 
not soon shaken in 
mind, or be troubled, 
neither by spirit, nor 
by word, nor by letter 
as from us, as that the 
day of Christ is at 
hand, 3 Let no man 
deceive you by any 
means: for that day 
shall not come, except 
there come a falling 
away first, and that 
man of sin be reveal- 
ed, the son of perdi- 
tion ; 4 who opposeth 
and exalteth himself 
above all that is called 


© φλογὶ πυρὸς a flame of fire Lrrw. 
h πιστεύσασιν believed GLTTraw. 


eternal) 1. 


ἱ κυρίου Lord GLTTraw. 


TPO" OBS TAAONITKEDTS: bs. 


I, τὲ 
καταξιωθῆναι ὑμᾶς τῆς βασιλείας τοῦ θεοῦ, ὑπὲρ ἧς 
Ξῖο “be *accounted *worthy ‘you of the kingdom of God, for which 


καὶ maoyere’ 6 εἴπερ δίκαιον παρὰ θεῷ ἀνταποδοῦναι 
also ye suffer ; if at least righteous [itis] with God  torecompense 


τοῖς θλίβουσιν ὑμᾶς θλίψιν, 7 Kai ὑμῖν τοῖς θλιβο- 


to those who oppress you tribulation, and to you that are op- 
μένοις ἄνεσιν μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν, ἐν τῇ ἀποκαλύψει Tov κυρίου Ἰησοῦ 
pressed repose with us, at the revelation ofthe Lord Jesus 


am οὐρανοῦ per ἀγγέλων δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ, 8 ἐν “πυρὶ φλογός," 
from heaven with[the]angels of his power, in afire of flame, 
διδόντος ἐκδίκησιν τοῖς μὴ εἰδόσιν θεόν, καὶ τοῖς μὴ 
ayarding, vengeance on those that “not *know God, and those that *not 


ὑπακούουσιν τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ ἰχριστοῦ"" 
ΤΟΡΘΥ͂ the glad ns of our Lord Jesus Christ, 


9 οἵτινες δίκην τίσουσιν, δὔλεθρον! αἰώνιον, ἀπὸ 
who [the] penalty shall suffer, “destruction ‘eternal, from [the] 


προσώπου τοῦ κυρίου, Kai ἀπὸ τῆς δόξης τῆς.ἰσχύος αὐτοῦ, 
presence ofthe Lord, and from the_ glory of his strength, 

10 ὅταν ἔλθῃ ἐνδοξασθῆναι ἐν τοῖς. ἁγίοις. αὐτοῦ καὶ 

when heshallhavecome tobeglorified in his saints and 


θαυμασθῆναι ἐν πᾶσιν τοῖς "πιστεύουσιν," Ore ἐπιστεύθη 
to be wondered αὖ in all them that believe, (because °was ®believed 


τὸ. μαρτύριον. ἡμῶν ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς, ἐν τῇ. ἡμέρᾳ.ἐκείνῃ. 11 εἰς ὃ 
tour *testimony Sto 6*you,) in eee dey For which 


καὶ προσευχόμεθα πάντοτε περὶ ὑμῶν, iva ὑμᾶς ἀξιώσῃ 
also we pray always for you, that *you *may ‘count °worthy 


τῆς κλήσεως ὑ.θεὸς.-ἡμῶν, καὶ πληρώσῃ πᾶσαν εὐδοκίαν 
7of *the *calling Jour 7God, and may fulfil every good pleasure 
ἀγαθωσύνης Kai ἔργον πίστεως ἐν δυνάμει: 12 ὅπως ἐν- 
of goodness and work offaith with power, so that may 
δοξασθῇ τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Ἰχριστοῦ" ἐν ὑμῖν, 


be glorified the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in you, 

καὶ ὑμεῖς ἐν αὐτῷ, κατὰ THY χάριν τοῦ.θεοῦ.ἡμῶν καὶ 
and ye in him, according to the grace of our God and 
κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ. 


of [the] Lord Jesus Christ. 


2. ᾿Ερωτῶμεν «δὲ ὑμᾶς, ἀδελφοί, ὑπὲρ τῆς παρουσίας τοῦ 
Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming 


κυρίου-ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ Kai ἡμῶν ἐπισυναγωγῆς ἐπ᾽ 
of our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering fas eae to 


αὐτόν, 2 εἰς TO μὴ ταχέως σαλευθῆναι υμᾶς ἀπὸ τοῦ νοός, 
him, for “not pay Sto *be shaken aon in mind, 


Kunre’ θροεῖσθαι, μήτε διὰ πνεύματος, μήτε διὰ λόγου, μήτε 


ΤΟΙ to be troubled, neither by ΡΤ; nor by word, nor 
δι ἐπιστολῆς ὡς Ov ἡμῶν, ὡς ὅτι ἐνέστηκεν ἡ ἡμέρα τοῦ 
by _ epistle, as if by us, as that ispresent the day ofthe 


ἰχριστοῦ." 3 Μή τις ὑμᾶς ἐξαπατήσῃ κατὰ μηδένα τρόπον" 


Christ. Not anyone “you ‘should "deceive in any way, 

' pes | A ε ? (lit. no) 

ὕτι ἐὰν. μὴ ἔλθῃ ἡἣ ἀποστασία πρῶτον 
because [it will not be] unless shall hace, come the apostasy first, 
καὶ ἀποκαλυφθῇ ὁ ἄνθρωπος τῆς "ἁμαρτίας," ὁ υἱὸς 
and shall have been revealed the man of sin, the son 


τῆς ἀπωλείας, 4 ὁ ἀντικείμενος Kai ὑπεραιρόμενος ἐπὶ πάντα 
of perdition, he who opposes and exaltshimself above all 

f — χριστοῦ {L]rTra. & ὀλέθριον, (read, fatal, 

— χριστοῦ [L|TTraw. * μηδὲ LTTrAW. 

™ ἀνομίας οἵ ἘΞ  ϑέηθος TTr. 


11: II THESSALONIANS. 
λεγόμενον θεὸν ἢ σέβασμα, ὥστε.αὐτὸν εἰς τὸν ναὸν 
called God or object of veneration: soasforhim in the temple 
τοῦ θεοῦ "ὡς θεὸν" καθίσαι, ἀποδεικνύντα ἑαυτὸν Ort ἐστὶν 
οἵ God as God tositdown, setting forth himself that he is 
θεός. 5 οὐ.μνημονεύετε OTe ἔτι WY πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ταῦτα 
God. Do ye not remember that, yet being with you, these things 
ἔλεγον ὑμῖν: Θ καὶ voy τὸ κατέχον οἴδατε, εἰς τὸ ἀπο- 
Isaid toyou? And now that which restrains ye know, for =to “be 
καλυφθῆναι αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ ἑαυτοῦ" καιρῷ. 7 TO-yap μυστήριον 
“revealed *him in his own time, For the mystery 
ἤδη ἐνεργεῖται τῆς ἀνομίας, μόνον ὁ κατέχων 
?already “15 "working lof 7lawlessness; only [there is] he who restrains 
ἄρτι ἕως ἐκ μέσου γένηται" ὃ καὶ τότε ἀποκαλυ- 
at present until out of [the] midst he be [gone], and then will be re- 
φθήσεται ὁ ἄνομος, ὃ ὁ κύριος “ἀναλώσει: τῷ 
vealed the lawless [one], whom the Lord will consume with the 
πνεύματι τοῦ.στόματος αὐτοῦ, Kai καταργήσει TH ἐπιφανείᾳ 
breath of his mouth, and annul by the appearing 
τῆς.παρουσίας αὐτοῦ" 9 οὗ ἐστιν ἡ παρουσία κατ᾽ 
of his coming ; whose “is tecoming according to [the] 
ἐνέργειαν τοῦ σατανᾶ ἐν πάσῃ δυνάμει Kai σημείοις Kai τέρασιν 
working of Satan in every power and _$ signs and wonders 
ψεύδους, 10 Kai ἐν πάσῃ ἀπάτῃ "τῆς" ἀδικίας %év' τοῖς 
of falsehood, and in every deceit of unrighteousness in them that 
? , ? » απ 1 ᾽ ΄ ~ > , > ale 
ἀπολλυμένοις, ἀνθ᾽ ὧν τὴν ἀγάπην τῆς ἀληθείας οὐκ. ἐδέξαντο 


perish, because the love ofthe truth they received not 

? κι - > - e = 4 ὃ 4 ~ t , i 
εἰς TO σωθῆναι αὐτούς᾽ 11 καὶ ιὰ τοῦτο ἵπέμψει 

for 2to *be *saved ‘them, And on account of this ?will *send 


αὐτοῖς ὁ θεὸς ἐνέργειαν πλάνης, εἰς TO πιστεῦσαι αὐτοὺς 
4to *them ‘God a working oferror, for *to “believe 1them 
τῷ ψεύδει" 12 ἵνα κριθῶσιν πάντες" οἱ μὴ.πιστεύσαντες 
what [15] false, that may be judged all who believed not 
τῇ ἀληθείᾳ, ἀλλ᾽" εὐδοκήσαντες "ἐν τῇ ἀδικίᾳ. 
the truth, but delighted in unrighteousness, 

13 Ἡμεῖς. δὲ ὀδείλομεν εὐχαριστεῖν τῷ θεῷ πάντοτε περὶ 


But we ought to give thanks toGod always concerning 
ὑμῶν, ἀδελφοὶ ηγαπημένοι ὑπὸ κυρίου, Ore YéideTo' ὑμᾶς 
you, brethren beloved by [the] Lord, that chose *you 


ὁ θεὸς 7am ἀρχῆς" εἰς σωτηρίαν ἔν ἁγιασμῷ πνεύματος 
*God ἔτγοχῃ [86] beginning to salvation in sanctification of [the] Spirit 
καὶ πίστει ἀληθεί 14 εἰς. ὃ 5 ἐκάλ ὑμᾶς" διὰ v 
Ἢ ηθείας, εἰς. ὃ * ἐκάλεσεν Yvpac' διὰ τοῦ 


and belief of [the] truth;. whereto he called you by 
εὐαγγελίου.ἡμῶν, εἰς Tepizoinow δόξης τοῦ κυρίου 
our glad tidings, to [the] obtaining of {the} glory of “Lord 


ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ. 15 dpa οὖν, ἀδελφοί, στήκετε, καὶ 


‘our Jesus Christ. So then, brethren, stand firm, and 
κρατεῖτε τὰς παραδόσεις ἃς ἐδιδάχθητε, εἴτε διὰ λόγου 
hold fast the traditions which ye were taught, whether by word 
εἴτε Ou ἐπιστολῆς. ἡμῶν. 16 αὐτὸς.δὲ ὁ κύριος ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦς 
or by our epistle, But himself Lord ‘our *Jesus 
© χριστός, Kai 40! θεὸς ἑκαὶ" πατὴρ ἡμῶν, ὁ ἀγαπήσας ἡμᾶς 
“Christ, and 7God *and *Father ‘our, who loved us, 


537 
God, or that is wor- 
shipped; so that he 
as God sitteth in the 
temple of God, shew- 
ing himself that he is 
God. 5 Remember ye 
not, that, when I was 
yet with you, I told 
you these things? 
6 and now ye know 
what withholdeth that 
he might be revealed 
in his time. 7 For ths 
mystery of iniquity 
doth aiready work: 
only he who now let- 
teth will let, until he 
be taken out of the 
way. 8 And then shall 
that Wicked be reveal- 
ed, whom the Lord 
shall consume with 
the spirit of his mouth, 
and shall destroy with 
the brightness of his 
coming: 9 even him, 
whose coming is after 
the working of Satan 
with all power and 
signs and lying won- 
ders, 10 and with ali 
deceivableness of un- 
righteousness in them 
that perish; because 
they received not the 
love of the truth, that 
they might be saved. 
11 And for this cause 
God shall send them 
strong delusion, that 
they should believea 
lie : 12 that they all 
might be damned who 
believed not the truth, 
but had pleasure in 
unrighteousness. 


13 But we are bound 
to give thanks alway 
to God for you, bre- 
thren beloved of the 
Lord, because God 
hath from the begin- 
ning chosen you to sal- 
vation through sanc- 
tification of the Spirit 
and belief of the 
truth: 14 whereunto 
he called you by our 
gospel, to the obtain- 
ing of the glory of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 
15 Therefore, brethren, 
stand fast, and hold 
the traditions which 
ye have been taught, 
whether by word, or 
our epistle. 16 Now 
our Lord Jesus Christ 
himself, and God, even 
our Father, which hath 
leved us, and hath 


2 — ὡς θεὸν GLTTrAW. 
ἀνελεῖ will slay LTtra. 
' πέμπει Sends LTTraw. 
unrighteousness) (L]Ttr[a]. 
Ὁ ἡμᾶς 81. ς + ὃ 861. 


9 αὐτοῦ (read his time) ΤΊΣ. 
τ.-- τῆς LTTrAW. 
ἡ ἅπαντες ΤΊτΑ. 
Υ εἵλατο GLTTrAW. 
4 — δ [L}tr. © ὃ LTTrA, 


Ἢ ἀλλὰ TTr. 
: ἀπαρχὴν L. 


: P + Ἰησοῦς Jesus GLTTraw. 
5. — ev (read τοῖς to them that) Lrtraw. 
x — ἐν (read ἀδικίᾳ in 


8 4+ καὶ also Τ᾿ 


538 


given us everlasting 
consolation and good 
hope through grace, 
17 comfort your hearts, 
and stablish you in 
every good word and 
work, 


Til. Finally, bre- 
thren, pray for us, that 
the word of the Lord 
may have free course, 
and ‘be glorified, even 
as tt is with you :2and 
that we may be de- 
livered from unreason- 
ableand wicked men: 
for all men have not 
faith. 3 But the Lord 
is faithful, who shall 
stablish you, and 
keep you from evil. 
4 And we have confi- 
dence in the Lord 
touching you, that ye 
both do and will do 
the ‘things which we 
command you. 5 And 
the Lord direct your 
hearts into the love 
of God, and into the 
patient waiting for 
Christ. 


6 Now we command 
you, brethren, in the 
name of our Lord Je- 
sus Christ, that ye 
withdraw yourselves 
from every brother 
that walketh disorder- 
ly, and not after the 
tradition which he re- 
ceived of us. 7 For 
yourselves know how 
ye ought to follow us: 
for we behaved not 
ourselves disorderly 
among you; 8 neither 
did we eat any man’s 
bread for nought ; but 
wrought with labour 
and travail night and 
day, that we might 
net be chargeable to 
any of you: 9 not 
because we have not 
power, but to make 
ourselves an ensample 
unto you to follow us, 
10 For even when we 
were with you, this 
we commanded you, 
that if any would 
not work, neither 
should he eat. 11 For 
we hear that there 
are some which walk 
among you disorderly, 
working not at all, 
but are busybodies. 
12 Now them that are 
such we command and 
exhort by our Lord Je- 


ΠΡΟΣ. Θ ΕΣ DALONEK ETS 8. 


Ti ΠῚ 
καὶ δοὺς παράκλησιν αἰωνίαν καὶ ἐλπίδα ἀγαθὴν ἐν χάριτι, 
and gave[us] encouragement ‘eternal and “hope good by grace, 
17 παρακαλέσαι ὑμῶν τὰς καρδίας, καὶ στηρίξαι fipae' 
may he encourage your hearts, and may heestablish you 
ἐν παντὶ δλόγῳ Kai ἔργῳ" ἀγαθῷ. 
in every *word *and *work ‘good. 
3 Τὸλοιπόν, προσεύχεσθε, ἀδελφοί, περὶ ἡμῶν, ἵνα ὁ 
For the rest, pray, brethren, for us, that the 
λόγος τοῦ κυρίου τρέχῃ Kai δοξάζηται, καθὼς Kai πρὸς 
word ofthe Lord may run and may beglorified, even as also with 
ὑμᾶς, 2Kaiiva ῥυσθῶμεν ἀπὸ τῶν ἀτόπων καὶ πονηρῶν 
you; and that we may be delivered from perverse and wicked 
ἀνθρώπων" ov.yap πάντων ἡ πίστις. 3 πιστὸς 
men, for*not ‘of7all [218] lfaith ([*the Sportion]. °Faithful 
δὲ ἐστιν "6 κύριος," ὃς στηρίξει ὑμᾶς Kai φυλάξει 
®but iis the Lord, who will establish you and _ will keep [you] 
ἀπὸ τοῦ πονηροῦ. 4 πεποίθαμεν.δὲ ἐν κυρίῳ ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς, 
from evil. But we trust in [the] Lord asto you, 
ὅτι ἃ παραγγέλλομεν ἰὑμῖν," * ἰκαὶ! ποιεῖτε καὶ 
that the things which we charge you, both ye are doing and 
ποιήσετε. 5 0.0& κύριος κατευθύναι ὑμῶν τὰς καρδίας εἰς 
will do. But 7the *Lord *may direct your hearts into 
THY ἀγάπην τοῦ θεοῦ, Kai εἰς ™ ὑπομονὴν τοῦ χριστοῦ. 
the love of God,and into [the] endurance ofthe Christ. 
6 Παραγγέλλομεν.δὲ ὑμῖν, ἀδελφοί, ἐν ὀνόματι τοῦ 
in [the] name 


Now we charge you, brethren, 
κυρίου. "ἡμῶν" ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, στέλλεσθαι ὑμᾶς ἀπὸ παν- 


of our Lord Jesus Christ, [that] *withdraw lye from every 
TOC ἀδελφοῦ ἀτάκτως περιπατοῦντος, καὶ μὴ κατὰ τὴν 
brother disorderly 1walking, and not according to the 


παράδοσιν ἣν “παρέλαβεν" παρ᾽ ἡμῶν. 7 αὐτοὶ. γὰρ οἴδατε 
tradition which hereceived from _ us, For *yourselves +ye know 
πῶς δεῖ μιμεῖσθαι ἡμᾶς: ὅτι οὐκ.ἠτακτήσαμεν 
how it behoves [you] to imitate us, because we behaved not disorderly 
? ey Bas ? δὲ ὃ BY » :] ’ ’ Ρ ? 3} 
ἐν ὑμῖν, ὃ οὐδὲ δωρεὰν ἄρτον ἐφάγομεν παρά τινος, Ῥάλλ 
among you; nor fornought bread did weeat from anyone; but 
ἐν κόπῳ καὶ μόχθῳ, “νύκτα Kai ἡμέραν" ἐργαζόμενοι, πρὸς TO 
in labour and _ toil, night and day working, for 
μὴ ἐπιβαρῆσαί τινα vey" 9 οὐχ Ort οὐκ.ἔχομεν ἐξουσίαν, 
not to be burdensome to anyone of you. Not that wehavenot authority, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα ἑαυτοὺς τύπον δῶμεν ὑμῖν εἰς TO μιμεῖσθαι ἡμᾶς. 
but that ourselves a pattern we might give to you for to imitate us. 
10 καὶ. γὰρ Ore ἦμεν πρὸς ὑμᾶς τοῦτο παρηγγέλλομεν ὑμῖν, 
For also when we were with you this we charged you, 
e ” > , ? ΄ A ? , ? Ud 
Ore εἴ τις οὐ.θέλει ἐργάζεσθαι, μηδὲ ἐσθιέτω. 11 ἀκούομεν 
that if anyone doesnot wish to work, neither let him eat. *We “hear 
γάρ τινας περιπατοῦντας ἐν ὑμῖν ἀτάκτως, μηδὲν ἐργαζο- 
‘for some are walking among you disorderly, not at all work- 
μένους, ἀλλὰ περιεργαζομένους. 12 τοῖς.δὲ. τοιούτοις παραγ- 
ing, but being busy bodies. Now such we 
γέλλομεν καὶ παρακαλοῦμεν "did τοῦ.κυρίου.-ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ 
charge and exhort by our Lord Jesus 


f — ὑμᾶς (read [you]) LrTTraw. 


[L]tTra. 


received Ltr. 


k + [καὶ ἐποιήσατε! ye did x. 
2 — ἡμῶν (read the Lord) [L]a. 
P ἀλλὰ Tr. 


Ε ἔργῳ καὶ λόγῳ LTTrAW. 46 GedsGodL. i— ὑμῖν 
1 — καὶ [1]1{{τ]. m + τὴν the GLTTraw. 

° παρελάβοσαν they received GATW ; παρελάβετε ye 
ᾳ νυκτὸς καὶ ἡμέρας LTTr. ‘* ev κυρίῳ Ἰησοῦ χριστῷ in [the] 


Lord Jesus Christ LTTra. 


1. ΤΥ Tylpne.0, TE. 


χριστοῦ," iva μετὰ ἡσυχίας ἐργαζόμενοι, τὸν ἑαυτῶν ἄρτον 
Christ, that with quietness working, their own bread 
ἐσθίωσιν. 18 ὑμεῖς.δέ, ἀδελφοί, pn-Séxkaxnonre! καλοποιοῦν- 
they may eat. But ye, brethren, donot lose heart [in] well-doing, 
τες. 14 εἰδὲ τις οὐχ ὑπακούει τῷ. λόγῳ.ἡμῶν διὰ τῆς ἐπι- 
But if anyone obey not our word by the epis- 
στολῆς. τοῦτον σημειοῦσθε ἱκαὶ" Yun .συναναμίγνυσθε" αὐτῷ, 
tle, *that (*man) ‘mark and associate net with him, 
ἵνα ἐντραπῇῆ ὀ 18 καὶ μὴ we ἐχθρὸν ἡγεῖσθε, ἀλλὰ 
that he may be ashamed ; and not as anenemy esteem [him], but 
~ « , ~ > , 
νουθετεῖτε ὡς ἀδελφόν. 16 αὐτὸς. δὲ ὁ κύριος τῆς εἰρήνης 
admonish [him]as a brother. But *himself the *Lord *of Speace 


, ς « \ Siege: \ 5 ? \ ow , Ι « 
δῴη ὑμῖν τὴν εἰρήνην διὰ παντὸς ty παντὶ “τρόπῳ." ὁ 


‘may give you peace continually in every way. The 
κύριος μετὰ πάντων ὑμῶν. 
Lord [be] with all you. 


17 Ὁ ἀσπασμὸς τῇ. ἐμῃῇ.χειρὶ Παύλου, 0 ἐστιν σημεῖον 
The salutation *by*my([°own]*hand ‘of?Paul, which is [the] sign 


1) l? ? ~ .“ ’ € ’ ~ / € ~ 
ἐν πάσῃ ἐπιστολῇ" οὕτως γράφω. 18 1) χάρις τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν 


in every epistle ; so I write. The grace of our Lord 
᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ μετὰ πάντων ὑμῶν. "ἀμήν." 
Jesus Christ [be] with all you, Amen, 

YIIpoc Θεσσαλονικεῖς δευτέρα ἐγράφη ἀπὸ ᾿Αθηνῶν." 


?To [86] *Thessalonians ‘second written from Athens. 


039 


sus Christ, that with 
quietness they work, 
and eat their own 
bread. 13 But ye, bre- 
thren, be not weary in 
well doing. 14 And if 
any man obey not our 
word by this epistle, 
note that man, and 
have no company with 
him, that he may be 
ashamed, 15 Yet count 
him not as an enemy, 
but admonishhim as a 
brother. 16 Now the 
Lord of peace himself 
give you peace always 
by all means. Θ 
Lord be with you all. 


17 The salutation of 
Paul with mine own 
hand, which is the to- 
ken in every epistle: 
so I write. 18 The 
grace of our Lord Je- 
sus Christ be with you 
all. Amen. 


Ἢ ΠΡῸΣ TIMOOEON EIMSTOAH ΠΡΩΤΗ:" 


THE STO *TIMOTHY 2EPISTLE 
ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ ἀπόστολος Ὁ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ κατ᾽ ἐπιταγὴν 
Paul, apostle of Jesus Christ according to [the] command 
θεοῦ σωτῆρος.ἡμῶν, καὶ “κυρίους “Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ" τῆς 


and of [the] Lord Jesus Christ 


γνησίῳ τέκνῳ ἐν πίστει" χάρις, 
in 


of God our Saviour, 


ἐλπίδος. ἡμῶν, Τιμοθέῳ 


our hope, to Timotheus, [my] true child faith ; grace, 
>’ ’, A ~ A c ~ ‘ ~ ? ~ 
ἔλεος, εἰρηνη ἀπὸ θεοῦ πατρὸς. “ἡμῶν" Kai χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ 
mercy, peace, from God our Father and Christ Jesus 
τοῦ κυρίου.ἡ μῶν. 
our Lord. 


3 Καθὼς παρεκάλεσά σε προσμεῖναι ἐν ᾿Ἔφέσῳ, 


Even as I besought thee toremain in Ephesus, [when I was] 
πορευόμενος εἰς Μακεδονίαν, ἵνα παραγγείλῃς τισὶν μὴ 
going to Macedonia, that thou mightest charge some not 


ἑτεροδιδασκαλεῖν, 4 μηδὲ προσέχειν μύθοις Kai γενεαλογίαις 
to teach other doctrines, nor togive heed to fables and ?cenealogies 


? ΄ uv f , Π , αλλ A g ᾽ ὦ. 
ἀπεράντοις, αἵτινες ἰζητήσεις" παρέχουσιν μᾶλλον ἢ ϑοίκονο 


linterminable, which *questionings 1pring rather than ?adminis- 
μίαν" θεοῦ τὴν ἐν πίστει" 5 τὸ. δὲ τέλος τῆς παραγγελίας 
tration 'God’s which [15] πὰ faith. But the end of the charge 


‘FIRST. 


PAUL, an apostle of 
Jesus Christ by the 
commandment of God 


our Saviour, and 
Lord Jesus Christ, 
which is our hope; 


2 unto Timothy, my 
own son in the faith: 
Grace, mercy, and 
peace, from God our 
Father and Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 


3 AsI besought thee 
to abide still at Ephe- 
sus, when I went into 
Macedonia, that thou 
mightest charge some 
that they teach no 
other doctrine, 4 nei- 
ther give heed to fables 
and endless genealo- 
gies, which minister 
questions, rather than 
godly edifying which 
is in faith: so do. 
5 Now the end of the 
commandment is cha- 


t καὶ LTTrA. 


5 éy- LTTrAW. yy 
x — αμὴν ΤΊτΑ. 


with LTra. W τόπῳ place L. 
σαλονικεῖς β΄ TrA. 


ἡ μὴ συναναμίγνυσθαι not to associate yourselves 
Υ — the subscription GLTw ; Πρὸς Θεσ- 


5 + Παύλου τοῦ ᾿Αποστόλου of the Apostle Paul Ε ; + Παύλου 6; Πρὸς Τιμόθεον a’ LTTrAW. 


ς — κυρίου GLTTrAW. 


Ὁ χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ TTrAW. ; 
f ἐκζητήσεις TTr. 


(read [the]) Lrtraw. 


4 χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ GLTTrAW. 
8 οἰκοδομίαν building up Ε. 


° — ἡμῶν 


ὅ40 


rity out of a pure 
heart, and of a good 
conscience, and of 
faith unfeigned:6 from 
which some having 
swerved have turned 
aside unto vain jang- 
ling ; 7 desiring to be 
teachers of the law; 
understanding neither 
what they say, nor 
whereof they affirm. 
8 But we know that 
the law is good, if a 
man use it lawfully; 
9 knowing this, that 
the law is not made 
for a righteous man, 
but for the lawless 
and disobedient, for 
the ungodly and for 
sinners, for unholy 
and profane, for mur- 
derers of fathers and 
murderers of mothers, 
for manslayers, 10 for 
whoremongers, for 
them that defile them- 
selves with mankind, 
for menstealers, for 
liars, for  perjured 
persons, and if there 
be any other thing 
that is contrary 
to sound doctrine ; 
11 according to the 
glorious gospel of the 
blessed God, which 
was committed to m 
trust. 12 And I thank 
Christ Jesus our Lord, 
who hath enabled me, 
for that he counted 
me faithful, putting 
me into the ministry ; 
13 who was before a 
pblasphemer, and a per- 
secutor, and injurious: 
but I obtained mercy, 
because I did ἐξ igno- 
Trantly in unbelief. 
14 And the grace of 
our Lord was exceed- 
ing abundant with 
faith and love which 
is in Christ Jesus, 
15 This is a faithful 
saying, and worthy of 
all acceptation, that 
Christ Jesus came into 
the world to save sin- 
ners; of whom I am 
chief. 16 Howbeit for 
this cause I obtained 
mercy, thatin me first 
Jesus Christ might 
shew forth all long- 
suffering, for a pat- 
tern to them which 
should hereafter be- 
lieve on him to life 


Υ ᾿Ιησοῦ τῷ κυρίῳ.ἡμῶν, Ore πιστόν με ἡγήσατο, θέμενος 


ΤΡ OS TIM OOCE ON, A. I. 


ἐστὶν ἀγάπη ἐκ καθαρᾶς καρδίας καὶ συνειδήσεως ἀγαθῆς 


is love outof “pure 2a heart and a “conscience good 
καὶ πίστεως avuToKpirov' 6 ὧν τινες ἀστοχήσαντες, 
and faith unfeigned ; from which some, having missed the mark, 


ἐξετράπησαν εἰς ματαιολογίαν, 7 θέλοντες εἶναι νομοδιδάσ-- 
turned aside to vain talking, wishing tobe  law-teachers, 


καλοι, μὴ νοοῦντες μήτε ἃ λέγουσιν, μήτε περὶ τίνων 
understanding neither what they say, nor concerning what 


διαβεβαιοῦνται. 8 οἴδαμεν.δὲ ὅτι καλὸς ὁ νόμος, ἐάν τις 


they strongly affirm. Now we know that good [15] 8 law, if anyone 
αὐτῷ νομίμως Ἐχρῆται," 9 εἰδὼς τοῦτο, ὅτι δικαί 

it JJawfully use, knowing this, that for a righteous [one] 
νόμος οὐ.κεῖται, ἀνόμοις.δὲ καὶ ἀνυποτάκτοις, ἀσεβέσιν 


law is not enacted, but for lawless and insubordinate [ones], for [the] ungodly 
καὶ ἁμαρτωλοῖς, ἀνοσίοις καὶ βεβήλοις, ἱπατραλῴαις" 
and sinful, for [the] unholy and profane, for smiters of fathers 
καὶ ‘uynrpargac," ἀνδροφόνοις, 10 πόρνοις, ἀρσενο- 
and smiters of mothers; forslayers of man, fornicators, abusers of them- 
κοίταις, ἀνδραποδισταῖς, Ψψεύσταις, ἐπιόρκοις, καὶ εἴ 
selves with men, men-stealers, liars, perjurers, and if 
τι ἕτερον TH ὑγιαινούσῃ διδασκαλίᾳ ἀντίκειται, 11 κατὰ 
any *thing ‘other to sound teaching is opposed, according to 
TO εὐαγγέλιον τῆς δόξης τοῦ μακαρίου θεοῦ, ὃ ἐπιστεύ- 
the gladtidings ofthe glory ofthe blessed God, which “was %entrusted 
θην ἐγώ. 12 ἱκαὶ! χάριν ἔχω τῷ ἐνδυναμώσαντί με χριστῷ 
‘with Ὁ. And I thank him who strengthened me, Christ 
εἰς 
Jesus our Lord, that faithful me he esteemed, appointing [me] to 


διακονίαν. 18 ™rov' πρότερον ὄντα βλάσφημον καὶ διώκτην 
3 ρ i} 7) 


service, *previously *being ablasphemer and persecutor 
‘ 4 7 O ΠῚ ? Ww’ ll ? λ ΄ Q oe ? ~ ? ΄ 
καὶ ὑβριστήν" °a ἠἡλεηθην, OTL ἀγνοῶν ἑἕποίησα 
and insolent ; but lIwasshewn mercy, because being ignorant I did 


ἐν ἀπιστίᾳ" 14 ὑπερεπλεόνασεν δὲ ἡ χάρις τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν 


[10] in unbelief, But superabounded the grace of our Lord 
μετὰ πίστεως Kai ἀγάπης τῆς ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ. 15 πιστὸς 
with faith and love which [is}in Christ Jesus, Faithful 


ὁ λόγος Kai πάσης ἀποδοχῆς ἄξιος, ὅτι χριστὸς ᾿Ιησοῦς 


[15] the word, and ofall acceptation worthy, that Christ Jesus 
ἦλθεν εἰς TOY κόσμον ἁμαρτωλοὺς σῶσαι, ὧν πρῶτός 
came into 6 world sinners to save, of whom [the] first 
? ? ’ ? ‘ : “ ᾽ , a ? ? " 
εἰμι ἐγώ. 16 ἀλλὰ διὰ. τοῦτο ἠλεήθην, ἵνα ἐν ἐμοὶ 
“am 18 But for this reason I was shewn mercy, that in me, [the] 
πρώτῳ ἐνδείξηται P Inoov¢ χριστὸς" τὴν πᾶσαν" μακρο- 
first, ‘might *shew *forth 1Jesus “Christ the whole long- 


θυμίαν, πρὸς ὑποτύπωσιν τῶν μελλόντων πιστεύειν ἐπ᾽ 


suffering, for adelineation of those being about to believe on 
αὐτῷ εἰς ζωὴν αἰώνιον. 17 τῷ.δὲ βασιλεῖ τῶν αἰώνων, 
him to life eternal. Nowtothe King of the ages, [the] 


ἀφθάρτῳ, ἀοράτῳ, μόνῳ "σοφῷ" θεῷ, τιμὴ Kai δόξα εἰς τοὺς 


oe eae! eae incorruptible, invisible, only wise God, honour and glory to the 
. . ss I~ ~ x7 ? , ’ ‘ ,ὔ 
immortal, invisible, αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. 18 ταύτην τὴν παραγγελίαν 
the only wise God, be ages ofthe ages Amen This charge 
honour and glory for / 2 ᾿ ᾽ Ἶ ᾿ y . ἣ 
ever andever. Amen. παρατίθεμαί σοι, τέκνον Τιμόθεε, κατὰ τὰς προ- 
18 This charge I com- 1 commit to thee, [my] child Timotheus, according to the ‘going 
h χρήσηται L. i πατρολῴαις LYTrA. K μητρολῴαις LTTrA. ἰ -- καὶ LTTrA. m 70 
LTTrA. n + με me (being) 1,. ο ἀλλὰ LITrAW. Ρ χριστὸς ᾿Ιησοῦς Lira. 4 ἅπασαν 


LTTrAW. 


¥ — σοφῷ GLTTrAW. 


I, Il. I TIMOTHY. 


ayovoac ἐπί σε προφητείας, ἵνα “στρατεύῃ' ἐν αὐταῖς τὴν 
“before 245 ἴο *thee “prophecies, that thoumightest warby them the 
καλὴν στρατείαν, 19 ἔχων πίστιν καὶ ἀγαθὴν συνείδησιν, 
good warfare, holding faith and “good 1a conscience ; 
i τινες ἀπωσάμενοι, περὶ THY πίστιν ἐναυάγησαν᾽ 


ἣν 
which [conscience] some, having cast away, as to faith made shipwreck ; 


20 ὧν ἐστιν Ὑμέναιος καὶ ᾿Αλέξανδρος, οὺς παρέδωκα τῷ 
of whom are Hymenzus and Alexander, whom I delivered up 


σατανᾷ, ἵνα παιδευθῶσιν μὴ βλασφημεῖν. 
to Satan, that they may be disciplined not to blaspheme. 


2 Παρακαλῶ οὖν πρῶτον πάντων ποιεῖσθαι δεήσεις, 


I exhort therefore, first of all, to be made supplications, 
προσευχάς, ἐντεύξεις, εὐχαριστίας, ὑπὲρ πάντων ἀνθρώ- 
prayers, intereessions, thanksgivings, for all men ; 


πων, 2 ὑπὲρ βασιλέων καὶ πάντων τῶν ἐν ὑπεροχῇ ὄντων; 
for kings and all that in dignity are, 
iva ἤρεμον Kai ἡσύχιον βίον διάγωμεν ἐν πάσῃ εὐσεβείᾳ καὶ 
that atranquil and quiet life wemaylead in all piety and 
σεμνότητι" 3 TovToyao' καλὸν Kai ἀποδεκτὸν ἐνώπιον τοῦ 
gravity ; for this [15] good and acceptable before 
σωτῆρος. ἡμῶν θεοῦ, 4 ὃς πάντας ἀνθρώπους θέλει σωθῆναι 
our Saviour God, who 231] Smen 4wishes to be saved 
καὶ εἰς ἐκίγνωσιν ἀληθείας ἐλθεῖν. ὃ εἷς. γὰρ θεός, εἷς.καὶ 
and *to *knowlkedge ‘of [5086] 7truth 'to*come. For *one ‘God (*is], and one 
μεσίτης θεοῦ καὶ ἀνθρώπων, ἄνθρωπος χριστὸς ᾿ἰη- 
[the] mediater of God and men, {the} man Christ Je- 
cove, 6 ὁ δοὺς ἑαυτὸν ἀντίλυτρον ὑπὲρ πάντων. “τὸ pap- 
ΒΒ, who gave himself a ransom for all, the tes- 
τύριον᾽" καιροῖς ἰδίοις, 7 εἰς ὃ ἐτέθην ἐγὼ 
timony [to be rendered] 1 *times ‘its *own, to which “was *appointed +I 
κήρυξ Kai ἀπόστολος" ἀλήθειαν λέγω *év χριστῷ," οὐ 
a herald and apostle, ({the} truth I speak in Christ, “not 
, - , ? ~ > , " > ΄ 
ψεύδομαι. διδάσκαλος ἐθνῶν, ἐν πίστει καὶ ἀληθείᾳ. 
ἢ 940 lie,) ateacher of[the]nations, in faith and truth. 
8 Βούλομαι οὖν προσεὔχεσθαι τοὺς ἄνδρας ἔν παντὶ τόπῳ, 
Iwill therefore 3to “pray the 7men in every place, 
ἐπαίροντας ὑσίους χεῖρας χωρὶς ὀργῆς Kai διαλογισμοῦ" 


lifting up holy hands apart from wrath and reasoning. 
9 ὡσαύτως “καὶ Yrac' γυναῖκας ἐν καταστολῇ κοσμίῳ μετὰ 
In like manner also’ the women in *enise tseemly with 


αἰδοῦς Kai σωφροσύνης κοσμεῖν ἑαυτάς, μὴ ἐν πλέγμασιν, 
modesty and discreetness toadorn themselves, not with  plaitings, 
τῇ! χρυσῷ," ἢ μαργαρίταις, ἢ ἱματισμῷ πολυτελεῖ, 10 add’! 
or gold, or pearls, or *clothing costly, but 
«᾿ ͵ ‘ ? , , a? 
ὃ πρέπει γυναιξὶν ἐπαγγελλομέναις θεοσέβειαν, δι 
what is becoming to women professing (the) fear of God, by 


ἔργων ἀγαθῶν. 11 Tum ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ μανθανέτω ἐν πάσῳ 
“works “good, *A °woman 7in ‘quietness “let “learn in all 
€ ae 9c ‘ δὲ ὃ Ν᾿,’ TT ? ? , ὑδὲ ᾽ 
ὑποταγῇ᾽ 12 “γυναικὶ.δὲ διδάσκειν" οὐκ. ἐπιτρέπω, οὐδὲ:  αὐ- 


but awoman ἴο teach I do not allow, nor to exercise 


ἀνδρός, “ἀλλ᾽: εἶναι ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ. 13 ᾿Αδὰμ.γὰρ 
man, but tobe in quietness; for Adam 
πρῶτος ἐπλάσθη, εἶτα Eva. 14 καὶ ᾿Αδὰμ οὐκ-ἠπατήθη" ἡ.δὲ 


first was formed, then Eve: and Adam was not deceived ; but the 


subjection ; 


θεντεῖν 
authority over 


t — yap for LTTr. ν — τὸ μαρτύριον L. 
Σ — τὰς LITrAW. 2 καὶ and LTTra. 
ἃ ἀλλὰ Lrr. 


5 στρατεύσῃ Tir. 
* — καὶ LI[Tr]. 
© διδάσκειν δὲ γυναικὶ ΤΎΤΑ. 


641 
mit unto thee, son Ti- 
mothy, xccording τὸ 
the prophecies whics 
went before on thee, 
that thou by them 
mightest war a good 
warfare; 19 holding 
faith, and a good con- 
science; which some 
having put away con- 
cerning faith have 
made shipwreck : 20 of 
whom is Hymenzus 
and Alexander ; whom 
1 have delivered unto 
Satan, that they may 
learn not to  blas- 
pheme. 

Il. I exhort there- 
fore, that, first of al}, 
supplications, prayers, 
intercessions, and giv- 
ing of thanks, be made 
for all men; 2 for 
kings, and jor all that 
are in authority ; that 
we may lead a quiet 
and peaceable life in 
all godliness and ho- 
nes 3 For this ts 
good and acceptable in 
the sight of God our 
Saviour; 4 who will 
have all men to be 
saved, and to come 
unto the knowledge 
of the truth. 5 For 
there is one God, and 
one mediator between 
God and men, the man 
Christ Jesus; 6 whe 
gave himself a ransom 
for all, to be testified 
in due time. 7 Where- 
unto Il am ordained a 
preacher, and an apo- 
stle, (I speak the truth 
in Christ, and lienot ;) 
a teacher of the Gen- 
tiles in faith and ve- 
rity. 

3 i will therefore 
that men pray every 
where, lifting up holy 
hands, without wrath 
and doubting. 9 In 
like manner also, that 
women adorn them- 
selves in modest ap- 
parel, with shamefac- 
edness and sobriety ; 
not with broided hair, 
or gold, or pearls, or 
costly array; 10 but 
(which becometh wo- 
men professing godli- 
ness) with good works. 
11 Let the woman 
learn in silence with 
all subjection. 12 But 
I suffer not 3 Woman 
to teach, nor to usurp 
authority over ithe 
man, but to be in si- 
lence. 13 For Adam 
was first formed, then 
Eve. 14 And Adam 


was not deceived, bnt 


w — ἐν χριστῷ GLTTraw. 
*® xpvotw L. 


Ὁ ἀλλὰ Ww, 


542 


the woman being de- 
ceived was in the 
transgression, 15 Not- 
withstanding she shall 
be saved in childbear- 
ing, if they continue 
in faith and charity 
and holiness with so- 
briety. 

Ill. This is a true 
saying, If a man de- 
sire the office of a 
bishop, he desireth a 
good work. 2 A bishop 
then must be blame- 
less, the husband of 
one wife, vigilant, so- 
ber, of good behaviour, 
given to hospitality, 
apt to teach; 3 not 
given to wine, no 
striker, not greedy of 
filthy lucre; but pa- 
tient, not a brawler, 
not covetous; 4 one 
that ruleth well his 
own house, having 
his children in sub- 
jection with all gra- 
vity; 5 (forif a man 
know not how torule 
his own house, how 
shall he take care of 
the church of God?) 
6 not a novice, lest 
being lifted up with 
pride he fall into the 
condemnation of the 
devil. 7 Moreover he 
must have a good re- 
port of them which 
are without; lest he 
fall into reproach and 
the snare of the devil. 
8 Likewise must the 
deacons be grave, not 
doubletongued, not 
given to much wine, 
not greedy of filthy 
lucre; 9 holding the 
mystery of the faith 
in a pure conscience, 
10 And let these also 
first be proved ; then 
let them use the of- 
fice of a deacon, be- 
ing found blameless. 
11 Even so must their 
wives be grave, not 
slanderers,sober,faith- 
ful in all things. 12 Let 
the deacons be the 
husbands of one wife, 
ruling their children 
and their own houses 
well. 13 For they that 
have used the office of 
a deacon well pur- 
chase to themselves a 
good degree, and great 
boldness in the faith 
which is in Christ Je- 
sus. 

14 These things write 
I unto thee, hoping to 
come unto thee short- 
ly: 15 but if I tarry 
long, that thou mayest 


ΠΡΟΣ TIMOOEON 4A. IT, MT: 


γυνὴ “ἀπατηθεῖσα' ἐν παραβάσει yeyovey’ 15 σωθήσεται. δὲ 
woman, having been deceived, in transgression has become. But she shall be saved 


διὰ τῆς τεκνογονίας, ἐὰν μείνωσιν ἐν πίστει καὶ ἀγάπῃ 


through the childbearing, if theyabide in faith and love 

καὶ ἁγιασμῷ μετὰ σωφροσύνης. 

and sanctification with  discreetness, 

9 Πιστὸξ ὁ λόγος" εἴ τις ἐπισκοπῆς ὀρέγεται, 

Faithful [is]the word: if any “overseership ‘stretches *forward *to 

καλοῦ ἔργου ἐπιθυμεῖ. 2 δεῖ οὖν τὸν ἐπίσκοπον favemi- 

of 7good 4a work heis desirous. It behoves then the overseer irreproach- 

ληπτον" εἶναι, μιᾶς γυναικὸς ἄνδρα, δνηφάλεον," σώφρονα, 

able tobe, 70f “one *wife thusband, sober, discreet, 


κόσμιον, φιλόξενον, διδακτικόν" 3 μὴ πάροινον, μὴ πλήκτην, 
decorous, hospitable, apt to teach; not given to wine, not astriker, 
h cy 2 on N i YAN’! 2 ~ » ? ir ΄ a 
py aloxpoKepon, ‘a ἐπιεικῆ; ἄμαχον, ἀαφιλάργυρον 
not greedy of base gain, but gentle, not contentious, not loving money; 
4 τοῦ. ἰδίου.οἴκου καλῶς προϊστάμενον, τέκνα ἔχοντα ἐν 

his own house well ruling, {his] children having in 
ὑποταγῇ μετὰ πάσης σεμνότητος" 5 εἰ.δὲ τις τοῦ ἰδίου.οἴκου 


subjection with all gravity ; (but if one his own house 
προστῆναι οὐκ.οἶδεν, πῶς ἐκκλησίας θεοῦ ἐπιμελήσεται ; 
{how] torule knows not, how ([thejassembly of God shall hetake care of ἢ) 


6 μὴ νεόφυτον, van τυφωθεὶς εἰς κρίμα ἐμπέσῃ 


ποῦ a novice, lest being puffed up, into[the] crime *he °may ‘fall 

τοῦ διαβόλου. 7 δεῖ.δὲ Καὐτὸν" καὶ μαρτυρίαν καλὴν 
10Ὲ 386 devil. But it behoves him also a testimony ‘good 
ἔχειν ἀπὸ τῶν ἔξωθεν, ivan εἰς ὀνειδισμὸν ἐμπέσῃ Kai 


to have from those without, lest into reproach he may fall and [the] 


παγίδα τοῦ διαβόλου. 8 Διακόνους ὡσαύτως σεμνούς, μὴ 
snare ofthe devil Those who serve, inlike manner, grave, not 
διλόγους, μὴ οἴνῳ πολλῷ προσέχοντας, μὴ αἰσχροκερδεῖς, 
double-tongued, not to*wine ‘much given, not greedy of base gain, 
9 ἔχοντας TO μυστήριον τῆς πίστεως ἐν καθαρᾷ συνειδήσει. 
holding the mystery ofthe faith in “pure 1a conscience. 


10 καὶ. οὗτοι.δὲ δοκιμαζέσθωσαν πρῶτον, εἶτα διακονείτωσαν, 
And these also let them be proved first, then let them serve, 


ἀνέγκλητοι ὄντες. 11 γυναῖκας ὡσαύτως σεμνάς, μὴ δια- 


*animpeachable *being. Women inlike manner grave, not slan- 
βόλους, ἱνηφαλέους," πιστὰς ἐν πᾶσιν. 12 διάκονοι ἔστω- 
derers, sober, faithful in allthings. *Those *who “serve let 


σαν μιᾶς γυναικὸς ἄνδρες, τέκνων καλῶς προϊστάμενοι 
5be 7of%one wife ‘husbands, [᾿ὑΠ 617] Schildren 7*well °rnling 
καὶ τῶν ἰδίων οἴκων. 13 οἱ. γὰρ καλῶς διακονήσαντες, βαθμὸν 
and theirown houses. For those well having served, a *degree 
ἑαυτοῖς καλὸν περιποιοῦνται, Kai πολλὴν παῤῥησίαν ἐν 
*for *themselves *good acquire, and much boldness in 
πίστει TH ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ. 
faith which[is]in Christ Jesus. 
14 Ταῦτά σοι γράφω, ἐλπίζων ἐλθεῖν πρός σε τάχιον" 
These thingstotheeI write, hoping tocome to thee more quickly; 
15 tav.dé Boadivw, ἵνα εἰδῇς πῶς δεῖ ἔν 
but if I should delay, that thou mayest know how it behoves [one] in [the] 
οἴκῳ θεοῦ ἀναστρέφεσθαι, ἥτις ἐστὶν ἐκκλησία θεοῦ 
house of God to conduct oneself, which is [the] assembly of *God [86] 


© ἐξαπατηθεῖσα LTTrAW. 
αἰσχροκερδὴ GLTTrAW. 
νηφαλίους EGLTTrAW. 


 ἀνεπίλημπτον LTTrA. & νηφάλιον EGLTTrAW. 
i ἀλλὰ LTTr. « — αὐτὸν (read δεῖ it is necessary) LTTrA. 
τὰ ἐν τάχει quickly Ltr. 


h— μὴ 


ΤΠ. Po PPMwo TH ¥. 


ζῶντος, στῦλος Kai ἑδραίωμα τῆς ἀληθείας. 16 Kai ὁμολο- 


ieee pee and base ofthe truth. And  confes- 
γουμένως μέγα ἐστὶν τὸ τῆς εὐσεβείας μυστήριον. "θεὸς" 
sedly gecee is the 308 *piety eg ee God 
ἐφανερώθη ἔν σαρκί, ἐδικαιώθη ἐν πνεύματι, WhOn ay- 
was manifested in flesh, wasjustified in [the] Spirit, was seen by 
γέλοις, ἐκηρύχθη ἐν ἔθνεσιν, ἐπιστεύθη ἐν κόσμῳ, 


angels, was proclaimed among [the] nations, was believed on in [the] world, 
οἀνελήφθη" ἐν δόξῃ. 
wasreceivedup in glory. 

4 Τὸ. δὲ πνεῦμα ῥητῶς λέγει, OTe ἐν ὑστέροις καιροῖς ἀπο- 

Butthe Spirit expressly speaks, that in latter times shall 

στήσονταί τινες τῆς πίστεως, προσέχοντες πνεύμασιν πλάνοις 
*depart *from ‘some the faith, giving heed to’spirits ‘deceiving 
καὶ διδασκαλίαις δαιμονίων ἐν ὑποκρίσει ψευδολόγων, 
and teachings of demons in hypocrisy of speakers of lies, 


ΡῬκεκαυτηριασμένων" τὴν. ἰδίαν συνείδησιν, 3 κωλυόντων 
being cauterized [as to] their own conscience, forbidding 


γᾶμ: μεῖν, ἀπέχεσθαι βρωμάτων, ἃ ὁ θεὸς ἔκτισεν εἰς 

Ὁ marry, [bidding] to abstain from meats, which God _ created for 

«μετάληψιν" μετὰ εὐχαριστίας τοῖς πιστοῖς Kai ἐπεγνωκόσιν 
reception with thanksgiving forthe faithful and who know 


τὴν ἀλήθειαν. 4 ὅτι πᾶν κτίσμα θεοῦ καλόν, Kai οὐδὲν 
the truth. Because every creature of God[is] good, and nothing 
ἀπόβλητον, μετὰ εὐχαριστίας λαμβανόμενον" 5 ἁγιάζεται 
to be rejected, with thanksgiving being received ; "it *is *sanctified 
yap διὰ λόγου θεοῦ καὶ ἐντεύξεως. 6 Ταῦτα ὑὕὑποτι- 
‘for by ποτὰ ‘God’s and intercourse [with him]. These things laying 
θέμενος τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς: καλὸς ἔσ διάκονος *Inoov 
before the brethren, good *thou >wilt ®*be ‘a%servant of Jesus 
χριστοῦ," ἐντρεφόμενος τοῖς λόγοις τῆς πίστεως, καὶ τῆς 
ist, being nourished with the words ofthe faith, and of the 
καλῆς διδασκαλίας ἢ παρηκολούθηκας. 7 Τοὺς. δὲ βεβήλους 
good teaching which thou hast closely followed. Butthe profane 
Kai γρὰώδεις μύθους παραιτοῦ" γύμναζε.δὲ σεαυτὸν πρὸς 


and old wives’ fables refuse, but exercise thyself to 
εὐσέβειαν 8 ἡ.γὰρ.σωματικὴ γυμνασία πρὸς ὀλίγον ἐστὶν 
piety ; for bodily exercise for a little is 


ὠφέλιμος" ἡ.δὲ. εὐσέβεια πρὸς πάντα ὠφέλιμός ἐστιν, ἐπαγγε- 
profitable, but piety for everything peers tis, pro- 


λίαν ἔχουσα ζωῆς τῆς νῦν καὶ ελλούσης. 
mise having of life, of that which [is]now and of that Φ 5 ts) coming. 


9 πιστὸς ὁ λόγος Kai πάσης ἀποδοχῆς ἄξιος. 10 εἰς.τοῦτο.γὰρ 
Faithful [15]}}6 word and ofall ΒΟΟΟΡΊΒΌΟΝ worthy ; for, for this 


‘kai κοπιῶμεν καὶ 'ὀνειδιζόμεθα,, ὅτι ἠλπίκαμεν ἐπὶ θεῷ 
both welabour 888. are ἘΘΒΕΘΒΌΠΘΙ, because we have hope in 8. 7?God 


ζῶντι, ὅς ἐστιν σωτὴρ πάντων ἀνθρώπων, μάλιστα πιστῶν. 


‘living, who is Preserver ofall men, specially of believers. 
11 Παράγγελλε ταῦτα καὶ δίδασκε. 12 J σου τῆς 
Charge these things and __ teach. No *one *thy 


νεότητος καταφρονείτω, ἀλλὰ τύπος γίνου THY πιστῶν ἐν 


Syouth let *despise, but a Se be of the believers in 
λόγῳ, ἐν ἀναστροφῇ; ἐν Ὁ ὍΛΩΝ ἐν πνεύματι," ἐν πίστει, 
word, in conduct, in love, in{the) Spirit, in faith, 


ο ἀνελήμφθη Bete ae 
— καὶ LTTr[A 


4s who GLTITraw. 
LTTra. x : χριστοῦ Ἰησοῦ LTTraw. 
ν - ἐν πνεύματι GLTTraw. 


Ρ κεκαυστηριασμένων TTr. 


543 


know how thou ought- 
est to behave thyself 
in the house of God, 
which is the church of 
the living God, the 
pillar and: ground of 
the truth. 16 And with- 
out controversy great 
is the mystery of. god- 
liness : God was Imani- 
fest in the flesh, jus- 
tified in the Spirit, 
seen of angels, preach- 
ed unto the Gentiles, 
believed on in the 
world, received up in- 
to glory. 


IV. Now the Spirit 
speaketh _ expressly, 
that in the latter times 
some shall depart from 
the faith, giving heed 
to seducing spirits, and 
doctrines of devils; 
2 speaking lies in hy- 
pocrisy ; haying their 
conscience seared with 
a hot iron; 3 for- 
bidding to marry, and 
commanding to abstain 
from meats, which 
God hath created to be 
received with thanks- 
giving of them which 
believe and know the 
truth. 4 For every 
creatureof God is good, 
and nothing to be re- 
fused, if it be received 
with thanksgiving : 
5 for it is sanctified by 
the word of God and 
prayer. 6 If thou put 
the brethren in re- 
membrance of these 
things, thou shalt bea 
good minister of Jesus 
Christ, nourished up 
in the words of faith 
and of good doctrine, 
whereunto thou hast 
attained. 7 But re- 
fuse profane and old 
wives’ fables, and ex- 
ercise thyself rather 
unto godliness. 8 For 
bodily exercise profit- 
eth little: but godliness 
is profitable unto all 
things, having promise 
of the life that now 
is, and of that which 
is to come. 9 This is a 
faithful saying and 
worthy of all accepta- 
tion. 10 For therefore 
we both labour and 
suffer reproach, be- 
cause we trust in the 
living God, who is the 
Saviour of all men, 
specially of those that 
believe. 11 These things 
cemmand and teach, 
12 Let no man despise 
thy youth; but be thou 
an example of the be- 
lievers, in word, in 


4 μετάλημψιν 


t ἀγωνιζόμεθα we combat Lrtr 


544 


conversation, in cna- 
rity, in spirit, infaith, 
in purity. 13 Till I 
come, give attendance 
to reading, to exhor- 
tation, to doctrine. 
14 Neglect not the gift 
that is in thee, which 
was given thee by pro- 
phecy, with the laying 
on of the hands of the 
presbytery. 15 Medi- 
tate upon these things; 
give thyself wholly to 
them ; that thy profit- 
ing may appear to all. 
16 Take heed unto 
thyself, and unto the 
doctrine; continue in 
them: for in doing 
this thou shalt both 
save thyself,and them 
that hear thee. 


Vv. Rebuke not an 
elder, but intreat him 
as a father; and the 
younger men as bre- 
thren; 2 the elder 
women as mothers; 
the younger as Sis- 
ters, with all purity. 
3 Honour widows that 
are widows indeed. 
4 But if any widow 
have children or ne- 
phews, let them learn 
first to shew piety at 
home, and to requite 
their parents : for that 
is good and acceptable 
before God. 5 Now 
she that is a widow 
indeed, and desolate, 
trusteth in God, and 
continueth in suppli- 
cations and prayers 
night and day. 6 But 
she that liveth in 
pleasure is dead while 
she liveth. 7 And these 
things give in charge, 
that they may be 
blameless. 8 But if 
any provide not for 
bis own, and specially 
for those of his own 
house, he hath denied 
the faith, and is worse 
than an infidel. 9 Let 
uot a widow be taken 
into the number under 
threescore years old, 
having been the wife 
of one man, 10 well 
reported of for good 


works; if she have 
brought up child- 
ren, if she have 


lodged strangers, if 
she have washed the 
saints’ feet, if she have 
relieved the afflicted, 
if she have diligently 
followed every good 
work. 11 But the 
younger widows re- 
fuse : for when they 
have begun to wax 


Me Oey ht LEMEORGFEVOIN: FA: HV VV. 
ev ἁγνείᾳ. 13 ἕως ἔρχομαι. πρόσεχε τῇ ἀναγνώσει, τῇ Tapa- 
in purity. Till lIcome, give heed to reading, to exhor- 
κλήσει, τῇ διδασκαλίᾳ. 14 μὴ.ἀμέλει τοῦ ἐν σοὶ χαρίσματος, 
tation, to teaching. Be not negligent of the 7in *thee gift, 

ὃ ἐδόθη σοι 
which was given ἕο thee through prophecy 
ρῶν τοῦ πρεσβυτερίου. 15 ταῦτα 

of the elderhood. These things meditate on, in 
ἵνα σου ἡ-προκοπὴ φανερὰ gy Vey" πᾶσιν. 
that thy advancement manifest maybe among _ all. 
σεαυτῷ Kai διδασκαλίᾳ: ἐπίμενε αὐτοῖς τοῦτο. γὰρ 
to thyself and tothe teaching; continue in them; for this 


ποιῶν. καὶ σεαυτὸν σώσεις καὶ τοὺς ἀκούοντάς σου. 
doing, both thyself thou Βῃδ] βᾶυθ and those that hear thee, 


, ’ ΄ὔ΄ ΄ 
5 Πρεσβυτέρῳ μὴ.ἐπιπλήξῃς, ἀλλὰ παρακάλει ὡς 
An elder do not sharply rebuke, but exhort {him] as 
πατέρα" νεωτέρους ὡς ἀδελφούς" 2 πρεσβυτέρας ὡς 
a father ; younger [menjas_ brethren; elder (women) as 
, , e , , , , 
μητέρας" νεωτέρας ὡς ἀδελφάς, ἐν πάσῃ ἁγνείᾳ. 3 χήρας 
mothers; younger as sisters, with all purity. Widows 
τίμα τὰς ὄντως χήρας. 4 εἰ.δέ τις χήρα τέκνα ἢ ἔκγονα 
*honour that [816] indeed ‘widows; Ὀπὺ 1 any widow “children *or*descendants 
ἔχει, μανθανέτωσαν πρῶτον τὸν ἴδιον οἶκον εὐσεβεῖν, καὶ 
*have, let them learn first [asto] theirown house tobe pious, and 
ἀμοιβὰς ἀποδιδόναι τοῖς.προγόνοις" τοῦτο.γάρ ἐστιν "καλὸν 
Srecompense ᾽ΐο ὝΘΠαΘ ἴο [{Π6]}} parents ; for this is good 
καὶ" ἀποδεκτὸν ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ. 5 ἡ.δὲ ὄντως χήρα 
and acceptable before God. Now she who [is] *indeed 1a *widow, 
Kai μεμονωμένη ἤλπικεν ἐπὶ Yrov' θεόν, καὶ προσμένει ταῖς 
and left alone, has [her] hope in God, and _ continues 
δεήσεσιν καὶ ταῖς προσευχαῖς νυκτὸς Kai ἡμέρας" 6 ἡ.δὲ 


διὰ προφητείας μετὰ ἐπιθέσεως τῶν χει- 
with laying on of the hands 
μελέτα, ἐν τούτοις ἴσθι" 
them be, 
16 ἔπεχε 
Give heed 


in supplications and prayers night and day. αὖ 586 that 
σπαταλῶσα, ζῶσα τέθνηκεν. ἢ Kai ταῦτα παράγγελλε, 
lives in self-gratification, living is dead. And these things charge, 


8 εἰδὲ τις τῶν ἰδίων Kai μάλιστα 


ἵκγα Σἀνεπίληπτοι' ὦσιν. 
Butifanyone higown and specially 


that irreproachable they may be. 
δγῶν" οἰκίων οὐῬπρονοεῖ." τὴν πίστιν ἤρνηται, Kat 


{his] household does not provide for, the faith he has denied, and 
ἔστιν ἀπίστου χείρων. 9 Χήρα καταλεγέσθω μὴ 
is “than 7an *unbeliever *worse. ®A 7widow ‘let be put on the list *not 
ἔλαττον ἐτῶν ἑξήκοντα γεγονυῖα, ἑνὸς ἀνδρὸς γυνή, 10 ἐν 
31655 *than *years Ssixty *being, ofone man wife, in 


ἔργοις καλοῖς μαρτυρουμένη! εἰ ἐτεκνοτρόφησεν, εἰ ἐξενο- 
2works ‘good being borne witness to, if she brought up children, if she enter- 
δόχησεν, εἰ ἁγίων πόδας ἔνιψεν, εἰ θλιβομένοις ἐπήρ- 
tained strangers, if saints’ feet she washed, if to the oppressed she impart- 


κεσεν, εἰ παντὶ ἔργῳ ἀγαθῷ ἐπηκολούθησεν. 11 Newrépac.dé 
edrelief, if every *work ‘good she followed after. But younger 


χήρας παραιτοῦ" ὕταν.γὰρ ςκαταστρηνιάσωσιν" τοῦ 
widows refuse ; for when they may have grown wanton against 
χριστοῦ, γαμεῖν θέλουσιν, 12 ἔχουσαι κρίμα ὅτι τὴν 
Christ, to marry they wish, having judgment because [their] 
πρώτην πίστιν ἠθέτησαν. 13 ἅμα.δὲ καὶ ἀργαὶ μανθά- 
first faith they cast off. And withal also [to be] idle they 


~ — ἐν (read πᾶσιν to all) LTTraw. 
: ἀνεπίλημπτοι LTTrA. 


Υ — τὸν [L]t. 
ς καταστρηνιάσουσιν 


X — Ἦ καλὸν καὶ GLTTrAW, 


& — τῶν LTTr[A]. Ὁ προνοεῖται TTr. 


they shall grow wanton against A. 


LE MO Tyo Y. 


οὐ-.μόνον.δὲ apyai, ἀλλὰ 


ΜΟΥ͂Ι. I 


vouol, περιερχόμεναι τὰς οἰκίας" 
learn, going aboutto the houses; and notonly idle, but 
καὶ φλύαροι Kai περίεργοι, λαλοῦσαι Ta μὴ.δέοντα. 14 βού- 
also tattlers and Ee a speaking things [they] ought not. I 
λομαι οὖν νεωτέρας γαμεῖν, TEKVOYOVELY, οἰκοδεσποτεῖν, 
will therefore younger [ones] to TDs to bearchildren, to rule the house, 
meee ἀφορμὴν διδόναι τῷ ἀντικειμένῳ λοιδορίας χάριν. 
Sno “occasion ‘to 7give tothe Ad TEFEONy 305 *reproach ‘on “account. 
15 ἤδη.γάρ τινες ἐξετράπησαν ὀπίσω τοῦ σατανᾶ. 16 Εἴ τις 
For already some areturnedaside after Satan. If any 
ἁ πιστὸς ἢ" πιστὴ ἔχει χήρας, “ἐπαρκείτω;) αὐ- 
believing [man] or believing [woman] have midoWs, let him Depart relief to 
ταῖς, Kai μὴ βαρείσθω ἡ ἐκκλησία, ἵνα ταῖς ὄντως χήραις 
them, and not let be burdened the assembly, that tothe 2indeed “widows 
ἐπαρκέσῃ. 
it may impart relief. 
17 Οἱ καλῶς 
The ‘well 
ἀξιούσθωσαν. 
let be counted worthy, 
καλίᾳ. 18 λέγει.γὰρ ἡ 


ing Ξ for says 


προεστῶτες πρεσβύτεροι διπλῆς τιμῆς 
2who *take “the ®lead lelders of double honour 


μάλιστα οἱ κοπιῶντες ἐν λόγῳ Kai διδασ- 

specially, those labouring in word and _ teach- 

γραφή. 'Boty ἀλοῶντα οὐ φι- 

τω scripture, An ox treading out corn “ποὺ ‘thou 

os” e ᾽ ’ὔ’ ~ ~ > ΄« x 

μώσεις" καί, Αξιος ὁ ἐργάτης τοῦ.μισθοῦ. αὐτοῦ. 19 Κατὰ 

shalt muzzle, and, Worthy [is]the workman of his hire. Against 
πρεσβυτέρου κατηγορίαν μὴ.παραδέχου, ἐκτὸς εἰ μὴ ἐπὶ 

an elder an mocesstce receive not, unless on Tne testi- 


δύο ἢ τριῶν μαρτύρων. 20 Τοὺς 8 ἁμαρτάνοντας ἐνώπιον 
pony, of] two or three witnesses. Those that sin "before 


πάντων ἔλεγχε, ἵνα Kai ot λοιποὶ φόβον ἔ ἔχωσιν. 21 Διαμαρ- 
Fall 1convict, that also the rest aig: ‘may “have. I Barra! 


τύρομαι ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ Kai "κυρίου Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ" καὶ 
testify before God and{the} Lord Jesus Christ and 


τῶν ἐκλεκτῶν ἀγγέλων, ἵνα ταῦτα φυλάξῃς χωρὶς 
the elect angels, that these things thou shouldest keep, apart from 


προκρίματος, μηδὲν ποιῶν κατὰ ἱπρόσκλισιν." 
prejudice, eel doing by partiality. 


22 Χεῖρας ταχέως μηδενὶ ἐπιτίθει, μηδὲ κοινώνει ἁμαρτίαις 
Hands quickly onnoone lay, nor share in sins 


ἀλλοτρίαις. σεαυτὸν ἁγνὸν τήρει. 23 μηκέτι ὑδροπότει. *adX’! 
of others. Thyself pure keep. No longer oa water, but 
οἴνῳ ὀλίγῳ διὰ τὸν. στόμαχόν.'σου" καὶ τὰς πυκνάς 


ρω 
es 7a little χρῶ on account of thy stomach and *frequent 


σου ἀσθενείας. 24 Τινῶν ἀνθρώπων ai ἁμαρτίαι πρόδηλοί 


Eby, infirmities. Of some men the sins manifest 
εἰσιν, προάγουσαι εἰς κρίσιν" τισὶν. δὲ Kai ἐπακολουθοῦσιν. 
are, going before to judgment; andsome also they follow after. 


25 woattwo™ καὶ τὰ "καλὰ ἔργα" πρόδηλά οἐστιν καὶ τὰ 


In like manner also good works manifest are, and those that 
ἄλλως ἔχοντα, κρυβῆναι οὐ-Ῥδύναται." 
otherwise are, *be *hid leannot. 
6 Ὅσοι εἰσὶν ὑπὸ ζυγὸν δοῦλοι, τοὺς. ἰδίους δεσπότας 
As many 7as *are ‘under ‘yoke ‘bondmen, their own masters 
4 .— πιστὸς ἢ (read ἐπαρ. let her impart relief) trtr[a]. 
φιμώσεις βοῦν ἀλοῶντα L. s+ δὲ but (those that) L[a]. n 


k ἀλλὰ LITrA. 


1 πρόσκλησιν advocacy L. 
2 ἔργα Ta καλὰ LTTrAW. 


but (in like manner) Lw. 
P δύνανται LTTrAW. 


© ἐπαρκείσθω LTTr. 
χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ LITraw. 
1 — σοῦ (read [thy]) Lrtra. 
ο — ἐστιν LTTrA ; εἰσιν W. 


δ48 
wanton against Christ, 
they marry; 


12 having damnation, 
because they have east 
off their first faith. 
13 And withal they 
learn to be idle, wan- 
dering about from 
house to house; and 
not only idle, but 
tattlers also and busy- 
bodies,speaking things 
which they ought not. 
14 I will therefore 
that the younger wo 
men marry, bear chil- 
dren, guide the house, 
give none occasion to 
the adversary to speak 
reproachfully. 15 For 
some are already turn- 
ed aside after Satan. 
16 If any man or wo- 
man that believeth 
have widows, let them 
relieve them, and let 
not the church be 
charged; that it may 
relieve them that are 
widows indeed. 


17 Let the elders 
that rule well be 
counted worthy of 
double honour, espe- 
cially they who labour 
in the word and doc- 
trine. 18 For the scrip- 
ture saith, Thou shalt 
not muzzle the ox that 
treadeth out thecorn, 
And, The labourer is 
worthy of his reward. 
19 Against an elder 
receive not an accusa- 
tion, but before two 
or three witnesses, 
20 Them that sin re- 
buke before all, that 
others also may fear. 
211 eharge thee before 
God, and the Lord Je- 
sus Christ, and the 
elect angels, that thou 
observe these things 
without preferring one 
before another, doing 
nothing by partiality. 


22 Lay hands sud- 
denly on no man, nei- 
ther be partaker of 
other men’s sins : keep 
thyself pure. 23 Drink 
no longer water, but 
use a little wine for 
thy stomach’s sake 
and thine often infir- 
Iities, 24 Some men’s 
sing are open before- 
hand, going before to 
judgment ; and some 
men they follow after. 
25 Likewise also the 
good works of some 
are manifest before- 


fov 


m+ δὲ 


NN 


546 


hand; and they that 
are otherwise cannot 
be hid. 

VI. Let as many 
servants as are under 
the yoke count their 
own masters worthy 
of all honour, that the 
name of God and his 


doctrine be not blas- [4 


phemed. 2°And they 
that have believing 
masters, let them not 
despise them, because 
they are brethren ; but 
rather do them ser- 
vice, because they are 
faithful and beloved, 
partakers of the bene- 
fit. These things teach 
and exhort. 3 If any 
man teach otherwise, 
and consent not to 
wholesome words, even 
the words of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and to 
the doctrine which is 
according to godliness; 
4 he isproud, knowing 
nothing, but doting 
about questions and 
strifes of words, 
whereof cometh envy, 
strife, railings, evil 
surmisings, 5 perverse 
disputings of men 
of corrupt minds, 
and destitute of the 
truth, supposing that 
gainis godliness: from 
such withdraw thy- 
self. 6 But godliness 
with contentment is 
great gain. 7 For we 
brought nothing into 
this world, and it is 
certain we can carry 
nothing out. 8 And 
having food and rai- 
ment let us be there- 
with content. 9 But 
they that will be rich 
fall into temptation 
and asnare, and into 
many foolish and hurt- 
ful lusts, which drown 
men in destruction and 
perdition. 10 For the 
love of money is the 
root of all evil: which 
while some coveted 
after, they have erred 
from the faith, and 
pierced themselves 
through with many 
sorrows. 11 But thou, 
O man of God, flee 
these things; and fol- 
low after righteous- 
ness, godliness, faith, 
love, patience, meek- 
ness. 12 Fight the good 
fight of faith, lay hold 
on eternal life, where- 
unto thou art also call- 
ed, and hast professed a 
good profession before 
many witnesses. 13 I 


ΡΟΣ VIMO GFE OIN 4A. VI. 
πάσης τιμῆς ἀξίους ἡγείσθωσαν. ἵνα μὴ τὸ ὄνομα Tov θεοῦ 
ofall honour worthy let themesteem, that not the name of God 


καὶ ἡ διδασκαλία βλασφημῆται. 2 οἱ. δὲ πιστοὺς ἔχοντες 
and the teaching be blasphemed. And they that *believing ‘have 


δεσπότας, μὴ.καταφρονείτωσαν, ὅτι ἀδελφοί εἰσιν ἀλλὰ 
masters, let them not despise [them], because brethren they are; but 


ἄλλον δουλευέτωσαν, OTL πιστοί εἰσιν καὶ ἀγα- 
rather let them serve [them], because believing [ones] they are and be- 


πητοὶ οἱ τῆς εὐεργεσίας ἀντιλαμβανόμενοι. ταῦτα δίδασκε 
loved who ὅθ °good ‘service ‘are *being “helped *by. Thesethings teach 
καὶ παρακάλει. 3 Et τις ἑτεροδιδασκαλεῖ, καὶ 4u)-mpoctoyerat' 
and exhort. If anyone teaches other doctrine,and draws not near 
ὑγιαίνουσιν λόγοις τοῖς τοῦ.κυρίου. ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, Kai 


?sound 1to words, those of our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
τῇ κατ᾿ εὐσέβειαν διδασκαλίᾳ, 4 τετύφωται, μηδὲν 
the according *to ‘piety 1teaching, he is puffed up, nothing 


ἐπιστάμενος, ἀλλὰ νοσῶν περὶ ζητήσεις Kai λογομαχίας, 
knowing, but sick about questions and disputes of words, 
? / , B / , 
ἐξ ὧν γίνεται φθόνος, ἔρις, βλασφημίαι, ὑπόνοιαι πονηραί, 
out of which come envy, strife, evilspeakings, “suspicions ‘wicked, 
5 ᾿παραδιατριβαὶ" διεφθαρμένων ἀνθρώπων τὸν νοῦν, καὶ 
vain argumentations Scorrupted of 7men in mind, and 
ἀπεστερημένων τῆς ἀληθείας, νομιζόντων πορισμὸν εἶναι τὴν 
destitute ofthe truth, holding “gain 2to *be 
᾽ la aye ΄ ? cy ~ ΄ ll a \ cy 
εὐσέβειαν" *apioraco ἀπὸ τῶν τοιούτων." 6 Ἔστιν δὲ πορισμὸς 


piety ; withdraw from such. But ‘is Sgain 
μέγας ἡ εὐσέβεια eee αὐταρκείας. 7 οὐδὲν. γὰρ εἰσηνέγκαμεν 
great ‘piety “with contentment. For nothing we brought 
εἰς TOY κόσμον, τδῆλον" Ore οὐδὲ ἐξενεγκεῖν τι δυνά- 
into the world, [itis] manifest that neither to carry out anything are we 
μεθα’ 8 ἔχοντες.δὲ διατροφὰς Kai σκεπάσματα, τούτοις ἀρ- 
able. But having sustenance and coverings, with these we shall 


κεσθησόμεθα. 9 Oi.dé βουλόμενοι πλουτεῖν, ἐμπίπτουσιν εἰς 
be satisfied. Butthose desiring to be rich, fall into 


πειρασμὸν Kai παγίδα καὶ ἐπιθυμίας πολλὰς ἀνοήτους καὶ 
temptation and asnare and ‘desires 1many 7unwise “and 
βλαβεράς, αἵτινες βυθίζουσιν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους εἰς ὄλεθρον 


“hurtful, which sink men into destruction 
καὶ ἀπώλειαν. 10 ῥίξα- γὰρ πάντων τῶν κακῶν ἐστιν ἡ φιλ- 
and perdition. or a root of all evils is the love 


apyupia’ fc τινες ὀρεγύμενοι ἀπεπλανήθησαν ἀπὸ τῆς 
of money; which some stretching after were seduced from the 


πίστεως, καὶ ἑαυτοὺς περιέπειραν ὀδύναις πολλαῖς. 11 Σὺ 


faith, and themselves pierced with *sorrows ‘many. “Thou 
δέ, ὦ ἄνθρωπε "τοῦ" θεοῦ, ταῦτα φεῦγε δίωκε.δὲ δικαιο- 
Sbut, O man of God, these things flee, and pursue _—irright- 


σύνην, εὐσέβειαν, πίστιν, ἀγάπην, ὑπομονήν, πρᾳότητα") 
eousness, piety, faith, love, endurance, meekness, 


12 ἀγωνίζου τὸν καλὸν ἀγῶνα τῆς πίστεως᾽ ἐπιλαβοῦ τῆς 


Combat the good combat of the faith. Lay hold 
αἰωνίου ζωῆς, εἰς ἣν rai" ἐκλήθης, Kai ὡμολόγησας 
of eternal life, to which also thou wastcalled, and _ didst confess 


THY καλὴν ὁμολογίαν ἐνώπιον πολλῶν μαρτύρων. 13 Παραγ- 
the good confession before many witnesses. I 


4 μὴ προσέχεται cleaves not T. 
5 --- ἀφίστασο απὸ τῶν τοιούτων LTTrAW. 
τ πραὔπάθειαν meekness Of spirit Lrraw; πραὐπαθίαν T. 


LTTr[ A]. 


τ διαπαρατριβαὶ constant quarrellings GLTTraw. 
t — δῆλον (read ὅτι so that) LTTra. u— τοῦ 
W — καὶ GLTTrAW. 


VI. iy REMOUL HY. 


γέλλω ζσοι" ἐνώπιον Yrov' θεοῦ τοῦ τζωοποιοῦντος" τὰ πάντα, 


charge thee before God who quickens all things, 
Kai χριστοῦ Ιησοῦ τοῦ μαρτυρήσαντος ἐπὶ Ποντίου "Πι- 
and Christ Jesus who witnessed before Pontius Pi- 


Aarov' τὴν καλὴν ὁμολογίαν, 14 τηρῆσαί.σε τὴν ἐντολὴν 
late the good confession, that thou keep the commandment 
ἄσπιλον, ᾿ἀνεπίληπτον,! μέχρι τῆς ἐπιφανείας τοῦ κυρίου 
spotless, irreproachable, until the appearing of 7Lord 
e ~ ? ~ ~ cal ~ 3. , « 
ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ, 15 ἣν καιροῖς. ἰδίοις δείξει ὁ 
Jour Jesus Christ ; which initsowntimes shall 7shew ‘the 
μακάριος και μόνος δυνάστης, ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν βασιλευόν- 
2blessed "and ‘only 5Ruler, the King of those being kings 
των Kai κύριος τῶν κυριευόντων, 16 ὁ μόνος ἔχων ἀθα- 


and Lord of those being lords; who alone has im- 
vaciay, ὥς οἰκῶν ἀπρόσιτον, ὃν εἶδεν οὐδεὶς 
mortality, in ‘light ‘dwelling *unapproachable, whom ‘did ‘see *no 7one 


ἀνθρώπων οὐδὲ ἰδεῖν δύναται, τιμὴ καὶ κράτος 


i 


308 *men nor to see is able; to whom honour, and might 
αἰώνιον. apny. 
eternal. Amen. 


~ , 3 ~ ~ I~ , A 
17 Τοῖς πλουσίοις ἐν τῷ νῦν αἰῶνι παράγγελλε, μὴ 
To the Tich in the present age charge, not 
εὑψηλοφρονεῖν," μηδὲ ἠλπικέναι ἐπὶ πλούτου ἀδηλότητι, 
to be high-minded, nor tohavehope in of *riches(['the) *uncertainty ; 
ἀλλ᾽ vy" erp! θεῷ frp ζῶντι," τῷ παρέχοντι ἡμῖν 8 "πλου- 
but in ®God ‘the “living, who gives us richly 
σίως πάντα" sic amddavow 18 ἀγαθοεργεῖν, πλουτεῖν ἐν 
all things for enjoyment ; to do good, toberich in 
ἔργοις καλοῖς, εὐμεταδότους εἶναι, κοινωνικούς, 19 ἀπο- 
2works ‘good, liberal in distributing to be, ready to communicate, trea- 
, e ~ , 4 > A , .“ 
θησαυρίζοντας ἑαυτοῖς θεμέλιον καλὸν εἰς τὸ μέλλον, ἵνα 
suring up for themselves a foundation *good for the future, that 
ἐπιλάβωνται τῆς aiwviov" ζωῆς. 
they may lay hold of eternal life. 
20 Ὦ Τιμόθεε, τὴν Ἐπαρακαταθήκην" φύλαξον, 
O ‘Timotheus, the deposit committed [to thee] Keep, 
ἐκτρεπόμενος τὰς βεβήλους κενοφωνίας, Kai ἀντιθέσεις τῆς 
avoiding profane empty babblings, and oppositions 
ψευδωνύμου.γνώσεως" 21 ἥν τινες ἐπαγγελλόμενοι, περὶ 
of falsely-named knowledge, which some professing, in reference to 
τὴν πίστιν ἠστόχησαν. Ἣ χάρις ‘pera σοῦ." ™apny.' 
the faith missed the mark, Grace [be] with thee, Amen, 
"Πρὸς Τιμόθεον πρώτη ἐγράφη ἀπὸ Λαοδικείας, ἥτις 
310 *Timothy ‘first written from Laodicea, which 
ἐστὶν μητρόπολις Φρυγίας τῆς Πακατιανῆς." 


547 


give thee charge in 
the sight of God, who 
quickeneth all ae 
and before Christ Je- 
sus, who before Pon- 
tius Pilate witness- 
ed a good confession: 
14 that thou keep this 
commandment with- 
out spot, unrebuke- 
able, until the appear- 
ing of our Lord Jesus 
Christ: 15 which in 
his times he shall 
shew, who is the bless- 
ed and only Potentate 
the King of kings, and 
Lordof lords ; 16 who 
only hath immortality, 
dwelling in the light 
which no man can ap- 
proach unto; whom 
no man hath seen, nor 
can see: to whom be 
honour and power 
everlasting. Amen. 


17 Charge them that 
are rich in this world, 
that they be not high- 
minded, nor trust in 
uncertain riches, but 
in the living God, who 
giveth us richly all 
things to enjoy; 18 that 
they do good, that 
they be rich in good 
works, ready to dis- 
tribute, willing tocom- 
municate; 19 laying up 
in store for them- 
selves a good founda- 
tion against the time 
tocome, that they may 
lay hold on eternal 
life. 


20 O Timothy, keep 
that which is com- 
mitted to thy trust 
avoiding profane and 
vain babblings, and 
oppositions of science 
falsely so called: 
21 which some profess- 
ing have erred con- 
cerning the _ faith. 
Grace be with thee. 
Amen, 


is the chief city of Phrygia Pacatiana. 

x — σοι (read [thee}) T. Υ — τοῦ T. 2 ζωογονοῦντος preserves alive LTTrA. a Πει- 
AdrovT. ὃ ἀνεπίλημπτον LTTrA. ς ὑψηλὰ φρονεῖν to mind high things T. 4 ἐπὶ LTTr. 
© — τῷ TTr. f τῷ ζῶντι LTTrA. 8 + τὰ 1. h πάντα πλουσίως GLTTrAW. 1 ὄντως 


(read of that which [is] truly life) Gurtraw. 


Κ παραθήκην GLTTrAW. 
you LTTr. ™ — ἀμήν GLTTrAW. 


1 μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν with 


n — the subscription GLTW3; Πρὸς Τιμόθεον a’ Tra. 


Ἢ ΠΡῸΣ ΤΙΜΌΘΕΟΝ EIMSTOAH AEYTEPA.! 


THE ‘TO 


PAUL, an apostle of 
Jesus Christ by the 
will-of God, according 
to the promise of life 
which is in Christ Je- 
sus, 2 to Timothy, my 
dearly beloved son: 
Grace, mercy, and 
ace, from God the 
father and Christ Je- 
sus our Lord. 
31 thank God, whom 
I serve from my fore- 
fathers with pure con- 
science, that without 
ceasing I have remem- 
brance of thee in my 
prayers night and day; 
4 greatly desiring to 
see thee, being mind- 
ful of thy tears, that 
I may be filled with 
joy ; 5 when I call to 
remembrance the un- 
feigned faith that is 
in thee, which dwelt 
first in thy grandmo- 
ther Lois, and thy mo- 
ther Eunice; and I 
am persuaded that in 
thee also. 6 Where- 
fore I put thee in re- 
membrance that thou 
stir up the gift of 
dod, which is in thee 
by theputting on of my 
hands. 7 For God hath 
not given us the spirit 
of fear ; but of power, 
and of love, and of a 
sound mind. 8 Be not 
thou therefore asham- 
ed of the testimony of 
our Lord, nor of me 
his prisoner: but be 
thou” partaker of the 
afflictions of the gos- 
pel according to the 
power of God ; 9 who 
ath saved us, and 
called us with an holy 
calling, not according 
to our works, but ac- 
cording to his own 
purpose and grace, 
which was given us in 
Christ Jesus before the 
world began, 10 but 
is now made manifest 
by the appearing of 
our Saviour Jesus 
Christ, who hath abo- 
lished death, and hath 
brought life and 
immortality to light 
through the gospel: 
11 whereunto I am 


*TIMOTHY 7EPISTLE *SECOND. 


ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ ἀπόστολος "Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ" διὰ θελήματος θεοῦ 


Paul, apostle of Jesus Christ by [the] will of God 

κατ ἐπαγγελίαν ζωῆς τῆς ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ, 2 Τι- 
according to promise of life which [is]in Christ Jesus, to Ti- 
μοθὲῳ ἀγαπητῷ τέκνῳ" χάρις, ἔλεος, εἰρήνη ἀπὸ θεοῦ 
motheus [my] beloved child : Grace, mercy, peace from God [the] 
πατρὸς καὶ χριστοῦ Ἰησοῦ τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν. 
Father and Christ Jesus our Lord. 

8 Χάριν ἔχω τῷ θεῷ, ᾧ λατρεύω ἀπὸ προγόνων ἐν 

I am thankful to@God, whom Iserve from[my] forefathers with 


καθαρᾷ συνειδήσει, ὡς ἀδιάλειπτον ἔχω THY περὶ σοῦ μνείαν 
pure conscience, how unceasingly Ihave the 7of *thee ‘remembrance 
ἐν ταῖς δεήσεσίν. μου “νυκτὸς Kai ἡμέρας, 4 ἐπιποθῶν σε 
in my supplications night and day, longing 3thee 
ἰδεῖν, μεμνημένος cov τῶν δακρύων, ἵνα χαρᾶς πληρωθῶ" 
1to7see, remembering thy tears, that with joy I may be filled ; 
5 ὑπόμνησιν λαμβάνων!" τῆς ἐν σοὶ ἀνυποκρίτου πίστεως, 
7remembrance ‘taking of the *in ‘thee ‘unfeigned faith, 
ἥτις ἐνῴκησεν πρῶτον ἐν τῇ.μάμμῃς.σου Λωΐδι Kai τῇ μητρί 
which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois and in *mother 
e ? ΄, tl [ 4 a SW 2 J ? τι Jal 4 
σου “Εὐνεικῃ, πέπεισμαι. δὲ ὅτι καὶ ἐν σοί. 6 Δι’ ἣν αἰτίαν 
ΠΥ Eunice, and Iampersuaded that also in thee. For which cause 
ἀναμιμνήσκω σε ἀναζωπυρεῖν τὸ χάρισμα τοῦ θεοῦ, ὕ ἐστιν 
1 remind thee ἕο ΚίμᾶϊθαρΡ the gift of God which is 
ἐν σοὶ διὰ τῆς ἐπιθέσεως τῶν.χειρῶν.μου" 7 οὐ.γὰρ ἔδωκεν 
in thee by the laying ΟΝ of my hands. For*not gave 
« ~ € 4 ~ la 2 ΑΣ , ‘ > ’ 
ἡμῖν ὁ θεὸς πνεῦμα δειλίας, ἀλλὰ δυνάμεως καὶ ἀγάπης 
sus ‘God aspirit ofcowardice, but of power, and of love, 
καὶ σωφρονισμοῦ. ὃ μὴ οὖν ἐπαισχυνθῇς τὸ 
and of wise discretion. *Not ‘therefore *thou *shouldest be ashamed of the 
μαρτύριον τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν, μηδὲ ἐμὲ τὸν. δέσμιον.αὐτοῦ" ἀλλὰ 
testimony of our Lord, nor me his prisoner ; but 
ἰσυγκακοπάθησον" τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ κατὰ δύναμιν θεοῦ, 9 τοῦ 
suffer evils along with the glad tidings according to *power ᾿Θοᾶβ; who 
σώσαντος ἡμᾶς Kai καλέσαντος κλήσει ἁγίᾳ, οὐ κατὰ 
saved us and called [us] with a *calling *holy, not according to 
τὰ ἔργα.ἡμῶν, ἀλλὰ Bear’! ἰδίαν πρόθεσιν καὶ χάριν τὴν 
our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which 
δοθεῖσαν ἡμῖν ἐν χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ πρὸ χρόνων.αἰωνίων, 
[was] given us in Christ Jesus before the ages of time, 
10 φανερωθεϊῖσαν.δὲ νῦν διὰ τῆς ἐπιφανείας τοῦ.σωτῆρος.ἡμῶν 
but made manifest now by the appearing of our Saviour 
»’Tnoou χριστοῦ," καταργήσαντος μὲν τὸν θάνατον, φωτίσαν- 
Jesus hrist, who annulled death, rought *to 
roc δὲ ζωὴν καὶ ἀφθαρσίαν διὰ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, 11 εἰς ὃ 
‘light ‘and life and incorruptibility by the glad tidings; to which 


® + Παύλου τοῦ ᾿Αποστόλον of the Apostle Paul =; + Παύλου G; Πρὸς Τιμόθεον β΄ 


LTTrAW. 
&c.) Ltr. 


LTTrA. h χριστοῦ 


Ὁ χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ TTraW. 
4 λαβὼν having taken LTTra. 


© , νυκτὸς καὶ ἡμέρας (read night and day longing 
© Εὐνίκῃ EGLTTrAWw. f ouv- T. & κατὰ 
᾿ Ξ 

Ιησοῦ LITr. 


1s il: lid POM OT AY 
ἐτέθην ἐγὼ κήρυξ καὶ ἀπόστολος καὶ διδάσκαλος 
2was “appointed I a herald and apostle and teacher 
ἐθνῶν" 1260 ἣν αἰτίαν καὶ ταῦτα πάσχω᾽ ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ 


of [the} nations. For which cause also these things Isuffer; but “ποὺ 
ἐπαισχύνομαι, olda-yap ᾧ πεπίστευκα, Kai πέπεισμαι ὅτι 
ἍΤ 2am ashamed; for I know whom Ihave believed, and am persuaded that 
δυνατός ἐστιν THY παραθήκην μου φυλάξαι εἰς ἐκείνην 

able heis the deposit committed [tohim]ofme tokeep for that 
τὴν ἡμέραν. 18 ὑποτύπωσιν ἔχε ὑγιαινόντων λόγων, BY 

day. 2A Sdelineation *have of sound words, which [words] 

map ἐμοῦ ἤκουσας, ἐν πίστει καὶ ἀγάπῃ τῇ ἐν χριστῷ 
from me thoudidsthear, in faith and love which[arejin Christ 
Ἰησοῦ. 14 τὴν καλὴν Ἰπαρακαταθήκην" φύλαξον διὰ 
Jesus. The good deposit committed [to thee] keep by [the] 
πνεύματος ἁγίου τοῦ ἐνοικοῦντος ἐν ἡμῖν. 15 Οἶδας τοῦτο, 

Spirit 1Holy which dwells in us. Thou knowest this, 
OTL ἀπεστράφησάν pe πάντες οἱ ἐν τῇ Acig, ὧν ἐστιν 
that turned away from me all who [are] in Asia, of whom is 


Κφύγελλος" καὶ “Eppoyévne.' 16 Δῴη ἔλεος ὁ κύριος τῷ 
if ΡΜμΟΎ 


Phygellus and Hermogenes. May “grant *mercy ‘the *Lord to the 
᾿Ονησιφόρον οἴκῳ: Ore πολλάκις pe ἀνέψυξεν, καὶ τὴν 
7of *Onesiphorus ‘house, because oft me herefreshed, and 


ddvoiv._pov οὐκ. ἐπῃσχύνθη," 17 ἀλλὰ γενόμενος ἐν Ῥώμῃ, 
my chain was not ashamed of ; but having been in Rome, 
“gmrovdarepov' ἐζήτησέν με καὶ etpev’ 18 δῴη αὐτῷ 
more diligently he sought out me and found{me]— may “grant *to*him 
ὁ κύριος εὑρεῖν ἔλεος παρὰ κυρίου ἐν ἐκείνῃ TY ἡμέοᾳ᾽ Kai 
‘the *Lord tofindmercy from (the) Lord ἴθ ὑμδῦ day— and 
doa tiv Ἐφέσῳ διηκόνησεν βέλτιον σὺ γινώσκεις. 
howmuchinEphesus heserved “better[(*than*I*need’say]'thou *knowest. 
2 Σὺ οὖν, τέκνον.μου, ἐνδυναμοῦ ἐν τῇ χάριτι TH 
Thou therefore, my child, be strong in the grace which [15] 
ἐν Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ" 2 καὶ ἃ ἤκουσας παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ 
in i Jesus. And the things which thou didst hear of me 
διὰ πολλῶν μαρτύρων, ταῦτα παράθου πιστοῖς ἀνθρώποις, 
with many witnesses, these commit to faithful men, 
οἵτινες ἱκανοὶ ἔσονται καὶ ἑτέρους διδάξαι. 3 οσὺ οὖν 
such as competent shallbe also others to teach. Thou therefore 
κακοπάθησον! we καλὸς στρατιώτης Ῥ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ." 4 οὐδεὶς 
sufferhardship as good a soldier of Jesus Christ. No one 
στρατευόμενος ἐμπλέκεται ταῖς τοῦ βίου Ἱπραγματείαις," 
serving as a soldier entangles himself with the 308 *life affairs, 
ἵνα τῷ στρατολογήσαντι ἀρέσῃ. 5 ἐὰν.δὲ καὶ ἀθλῷ 
that him who enrolled him as a soldier he may please. Andif also contend 
TiC, οὐ-.στεφανοῦται iay.un νομίμως a- 
(Sin *the °games] ‘anyone, he is not crowned unless lawfully he shall 
θλήσῃ. 6 τὸν κοπιῶντα γεωργὸν δεῖ πρῶτον τῶν 
have contended. The ‘labour ‘husbandman *must before of the 
καρπῶν μεταλαμβάνειν. 
fruits partaking. 
7 Νόει λέγω: *dyin' yap σοι ὁ κύριος σύνεσιν 
Consider the things I say, *may ®give “for ‘thee *the*Lord understanding 


τὰ 


049 


appointed a preacher, 
and an apostle, and a 
teacher of the Gen- 
tiles. 12 For the which 
cause I also suffer 
these things: never- 
theless I am not a- 
shamed: for I know 
whom 1 have believed, 
and am persuaded that 
he is able to keep that 
which I have commit- 
ted unto him against 
that day. 13 Hold fast 
the form of sound 
words, which thou hast 
heard of me, in faith 
and love which is in 
Christ Jesus. 14 That 
good thing which was 
committed unto thee 
keep by the Holy 
Ghost which dwelleth 
in us. 15 This thon 
knowest, that all they 
which are in Asia be 
turned away from me; 
of whom are Phygel- 
lus and MHermoge- 
nes. 16 The Lord give 
mercy unto the house 
of Onesiphorus; for 
he oft refreshed me, 
and was not ashamed 
of my chain: 17 but, 
when he was in Rome, 
he sought me out very 
diligently, and found 
me. 18 The Lord graprt 
unto him that he may 
find mercy of the Lord 
in that day: and in 
how many things he 
ministered unto me 
at Ephesus,thou know- 
est very well. 


11. Thou therefore, 
my son, be strong in 
the grace that is in 
Christ Jesus. 2 And 
the things that thou 
hast heard of me a- 
mong mary witnesses, 
the same commit thou 
to faithful men, who 
shall be able to teach 
others also. 3 Thou 
thereforeendure hard- 
ness, as a good soldier 
of Jesus Christ. 4 No 
man that warreth en- 
tangleth nimself with 
the affairs of this life ; 
that he may please him 
who hath chosen hin: 
to be a soldier. 5 And 
if a man also strive 
for masteries, yet is 
he not crowned, ex- 
cept he strive lawfully. 
6 The husbandman 
that laboureth must 
be first partaker of the 
fruits. 

7 Consider what I 


i— ἐθνῶν τ. 3 παραθήκην GLITrAW. 
Ermogenes τ. ™ ἐπαισχύνθη LITrA. ἃ σπουδαίως diligently Lrtr, 
(συνκ- T) suffer hardship with [me] trtraw. 

τ ὃ what Lrrraw. 5 δώσει will give LTTraw. 


 duyedos Phygelus tttraw. 


P χριστοῦ Ἰησοῦ LTTraW. 


1 Ἑρμογένης 
© συγκακοπάθησον 
4 πραγματίαις T. 


5900 


say; and the Lord give 
thee understanding in 
all things. 8 Remem- 
ber that Jesus Christ 
of the seed of David 
was raised from the 
dead according to my 
gospel; 9 wherein I 
suffer trouble, as an 
evildoer, even unto 
bonds ; but the word 
of God is not bound, 
10 Therefore I endure 
all things for the 
elect’s sakes, that they 
may also obtain the 
salvation which is in 
Christ Jesus with eter- 
nalglory. 11 Jt isa 
faithful saying: For 
if we be dead with 
him, we shall also live 
with him: 12 if we 
suffer, we shall also 
reign with him: if we 
deny him, he also will 
deny us: 13 if we 
believe not, yet he a- 
bideth faithful: he 
cannot deny himself. 
14 Of these things put 
them in remembrance, 
eharging them before 
the Lord that they 
strive not about words 
to no profit, but to 
the subverting of the 
hearers. 15 Study to 
shew thyself approved 
unto God, a workman 
that needeth not to be 
ashamed, rightly di- 
viding the word of 
truth. 16 But shun pro- 
fane and vain bab- 
blings ; for they will 
increase unto more uD- 
godliness. 17 And their 
word will eat as doth 
a canker : of whom is 
Hymenzus and Phile- 
tus; 18 who concern- 
ing the truth have 
erred, saying that the 
resurrection is past al- 
ready ; and overthrow 
the faith of some. 
19 Nevertheless the 
foundation of God 
standeth sure, having 
this seal, The Lord 
knoweth them that are 
his. And, Let every 
one that nameth the 
name of Christ depart 
from iniquity. 20 But 
in a great house there 
are not only vessels of 
gold and of silver, but 
also of wood and of 
earth; and some to 
honour, and some to 
dishonour, 21 If a man 
therefore purge him- 
self from these, he 


ΠΡΟΣ ΤΙΜΟΘΕΟΝ. B! 


ἐν πᾶσιν. 8 Μνημόνευε ᾿Ιησοῦν χριστὸν ἐγηγερμένον 
in all things. Remember Jesus Christ raised 
~ ? Ud t (ὃ ll 4 4 > (2 ’ 
νεκρῶν, ἐς σπέρματος 'Δαβίδ, κατὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιόν 
[the] dead, of [the] seed of David, according to ?elad “tidings 
μου" 9 ἐν ᾧ κακοπαθῶ μέχρι δεσμῶν ὡς κακοῦργος" Yann"! 
my, in which { suffer hardship unto bonds as anevildoer: but 
ὁ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ οὐ.δέδεται. 10 διὰ τοῦτο πάντα ὑπο- 
the word of God is not bound, Because of this allthings Ien- 
évw διὰ τοὺς ἐκλεκτούς, ἵνα καὶ αὐτοὶ σωτηρίας τύ- 
dure forsakeof the elect, that also they [the] salvation may 
χωσιν τῆς ἐν χριστῷ' Inoov μετὰ δόξης αἰωνίου. 11 πιστὸς 
obtain which [is] in Christ Jesus with °glory ‘eternal. Faithful 
ὁ λόγος᾽ él-yap συναπεθάνομεν, καὶ ᾿συζήσομεν"" 
[15] the word; for if we died together with [him], also we shall live together; 
12 εἰ ὑπομένομεν, καὶ “συμβασιλεύσομεν"" εἰ Yaovovpeba,' 
if we endure, also weshallreign together; if we deny 
κἀκεῖνος ἀρνήσεται ἡμᾶς" 13 εἰ ἀπιστοῦμεν, ἐκεῖνος 
[him], he also will deny us ; if we are unfaithful, he 
πιστὸς péver’ ἀρνήσασθαι " ἑαυτὸν ob.dvvarat. 
faithful abides ; to deny himself he is not able. 
14 Ταῦτα ὑπομίμνησκε, διαμαρτυρόμενος ἐνώπιον 
These *things *put °in remembrance ‘of, testifying earnestly before 


II. 


ἐκ 
from among 


“cov κυρίου μὴ δλογομαχεῖν' “εἰς! οὐδὲν χρήσιμον, ἐπὶ 
the Lord not to dispute about words for ‘nothing ‘profitable, to 
καταστροφῇ τῶν ἀκουόντων. 15 σπούδασον σεαυτὸν 
subversion of those who hear. Be diligent sthyself 


δόκιμον παραστῆσαι τῷ θεῷ, ἐργάτην ἀνεπαίσχυντον, ὀρθο- 
*approved ‘to 7present to God, a workman not ashamed, _ straight- 
τομοῦντα τὸν λόγον τῆς ἀληθείας" 16 τὰς. δὲ. βεβήλους κενο- 
ly cutting the word of truth ; but profane empty 
φωνίας περιΐστασο᾽ ἐπὶ πλεῖον γὰρ προκόψουσιν ἀσεβείας, 

babblings stand aloof from, ἴο *more ‘for they will advance of ungodliness, 


17 καὶ ὁ.λόγος.αὐτῶν ὡς yayypawa νομὴν eae ὧν ἐστιν 
and their word as a@gangrene pasture will have;of whom is 
Ὑμέναιος καὶ Φιλητός, 18 οἵτινες περὶ τὴν ἀλήθειαν 
Hymeneus and  Philetus; who concerning the truth 


ἠστόχησαν, λέγοντες τὴν" ἀνάστασιν ἤδη γεγονέναι, 
missed the mark, asserting the resurrection already to have taken place ; 


καὶ ἀνατρέπουσιν τῆν τινων πίστιν. 19 ὁ “μέντοι' στερεὸς 
and areoverthrowing the *of%some ‘faith. Nevertheless firm 


θεμέλιος τοῦ θεοῦ ἕστηκεν, ἔχων τὴν.σφραγϊδα.ταύτην, Eyyw 


foundation 1God’s stands, having this seal, *Knows 
κύριος τοὺς ὄντας αὐτοῦ, Kai ᾿Αποστήτω ἀπὸ ἀδι- 
[89] *Lord those ὑμαῦ are his, and Let depart from unright- 


κίας πᾶς ὁ ὀνομάζων τὸ ὄνομα fypiorov." 20 ἐν μεγάλῃ 
eousness everyone who names the name __ of Christ. In “great 
δὲ οἰκίᾳ οὐκιἔστιν μόνον σκεύη χρυσᾶ Kai ἀργυρᾶ, ἀλλὰ 


Xput 2a house there δἃῖθ ποῦ only vessels golden and silver, but 


καὶ ξύλινα καὶ ἀστράκινα, καὶ ἃ μὲν εἰς τιμήν, ἃ.δὲ εἰς 
also wooden and earthen, and some to honour, others to 
ἀτιμίαν. 21 ἐὰν οὖν τις ἐκκαθάρῃ ἑαυτὸν ἀπὸ τούτων, 
dishonour, If therefore one shall have purged himself from these, 


τ Δαυείδ yrtra; Δαυΐδ aw. 
we shall deny Lrtra. 
λογομάχει Dispute thou not about words L. 

f κυρίου of [the] Lord GLtTtraw. 


© μέν τοι Tr. 


Υ ἀλλὰ LTTrTAW. WY συν- LITrA. 
* + yap for (to deny) LTTraw. 
© em LTTrA. 


Xouv- τ. Y ἀρνησόμεθα 
® τοῦ θεοῦ God rrr, δ΄ μὴ 
4 — τὴν (read [the]) rrm{[a]. 


ἘΠ SEE. BIS CHEMO Τ' Hx 


ἔσται σκεῦος εἰς τιμὴν, ἡγιασμένον, 
he shall be 8. γχϑβξβθὶ to honour, having been sanctified, 

τῷ δεσπότῃ, εἰς πᾶν ἔργον ἀγαθὸν ἡτοιμασμένον. 
to the master, for every work 1g00d having been prepared. 
22 τὰς δὲ.νεωτερικὰς ἐπιθυμίας φεῦγε" δίωκε.δὲ δικαιοσύνην, 
But youthful lusts flee, and pursue righteousness, 
πίστιν, ἀγάπην, εἰρήνην μετὰ ἢ τῶν ἐπικαλουμένων τὸν 
faith, love, peace with those that call on the 
κύριον ἐκ καθαρᾶς καρδίας. 23 τὰς.δὲ μωρὰς Kai ἀπαι- 
Lord outof “pure 1a heart. But foolish and undis- 
δεύτους ζητήσεις παραιτοῦ, εἰδὼς OT. γεννῶσιν μάχας" 
ciplined questionings refuse, knowing that they beget contentions. 
24 δοῦλον δὲ κυρίου οὐ.δεῖ μάχεσθαι, ἰάλλ᾽" ἤπιον 
And *a *bondman ®of [“0}6] 7Lord ‘it *behoves ποῦ tocontend, but gentle 
εἶναι πρὸς πάντας, διδακτικόν, ἀνεξίκακον, 25 ἐν Ἐπρᾳότητι" 

to be towards all; apt toteach; forbearing; in meekness 


παιδεύοντα τοὺς ἀγντιδιατιθεμένους, μήποτε ‘dp αὐτοῖς 
disciplining those that oppose, if perhaps *may “give *them 


βκαὶ! εὔχρηστον 
and serviceable 


ὁ θεὸς μετάνοιαν εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν ἀληθείας, 26 καὶ ava- 
*God repentance to acknowledgment of [the] truth, and they may 
γήψωσιν ἐκ τῆς Tov διαβόλου παγίδος, ἐζωγρημένοι ὑπ᾽ 
awakeup outof the “of*the ‘devil 1snare, having been taken by 
αὐτοῦ εἰς TO ἐκείνου θέλημα. Ἶ 

him for his will, 


3 Τοῦτο.δὲ γίνωσκε," ὅτι ἐν ἐσχάταις ἡμέραις ἐνστή- 
But this know thou, that in [the] last days Swill *be 
σονται καιροὶ χαλεποί. 2 ἔσονται.γὰρ οἱ ἄνθρωποι φίλαυτοι, 
Spresent *times difficult ; for *will “be 1men lovers of self, 
΄ > , « , ΄ - 
φιλάργυροι, ἀλαζόνες, ὑπερήφανοι, βλάσφημοι, γονεῦσιν 
lovers of money, vaunting, proud, evil speakers, to parents 
ἀπειθεῖς, ἀχάριστοι, ἀνόσιοι, 3 ἄστοργοι, ἄσπονδοι, 
disobedient, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, implacable, 
διάβολοι, ἀκρατεῖς, ἀνήμεροι, ἀφιλάγαθοι, 4 προδόται, 
slanderers, incontinent, savage, not lovers of good, betrayers, 
προπετεῖς, τετυφωμένοι, φιλήδονοι μᾶλλον ἢ φιλόθεοι, 
headlong, puffed up, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God ; 
5 ἔχοντες μόρφωσιν εὐσεβείας, Tv. δύναμιν αὐτῆς ἠρνη- 
having a form of piety, but the power of it deny- 
EVOL. καὶ τούτους ἀποτρέπου. BEK.TOUTWY.yap εἰσιν οἱ 
ing: and these turn away from. For of these are those who 
ἐνδύνοντες εἰς τὰς οἰκίας Kai "αἰχμαλωτεύοντες τὰ" γυναικάρια 
[are] entering into houses and leading captive silly women 
σεσωρευμένα ἁμαρτίαις, ἀγόμενα ἐπιθυμίαις ποικίλαις, 7 πάν- 


laden with sins, led away by ?lusts various, al- 
Tore μανθάνοντα Kat μηδέποτε εἰς ἐπίγνωσιν ἀληθείας 
ways learning and never to [the] knowledge of [the] truth 


> ~ ΄ rt ΄ τι} ~ vp ~ > , 
ἐλθεῖν δυνάμενα. 8 ὃν.τρόπον.δὲ Ιαννῆς καὶ ᾿Ιαμβρῆς ἀντέ- 
2to%come ‘able. Now intheway Jannes and Jambres with- 
στησαν Μωῦσεῖ, οὕτως καὶ οὗτοι ἀνθίστανται τῇ ἀληθείᾳ, 
stood Moses, thus also these withstand the _ truth, 
ἄνθρωποι κατεφθαρμένοι τὸν νοῦν, ἀδόκιμοι περὶ 
men utterly corrupted inmind, found worthless as regards 
τὴν πίστιν. 9 ἀλλ᾽ οὐ-προκόψουσιν ἐπὶ. πλεῖον᾽ ἡ γὰρ ἄνοια 
the faith. But they shall not advance farther, for *folly 


i ἀλλὰ LTTra, 
0 αἰχμαλωτίζοντες GLTTrAW. 


&—katLtTtra. © + πάντων all L. 
™ γινώσκετε know ye L. 


Κ πραύτητι LTTraw. 


ool 
Shall be a vessel untc 
honour, sanctified, and 
meet for the master’s 
use, and prepared un- 
to every good work. 
22 Flee also youth- 
ful lusts: but follow 
righteousness, faith, 
charity, peace, with 
them that call on the 
Lord out of a pure 
heart. 23 But foolish 
and unlearned ques- 
tions avoid, knowing 
that they do gender 
strifes. 24 And the 
servant of the Lord 
must not strive; but 
be gentle unto all men, 
apt to teach, patient, 
25 in meekness in- 
structing those that 
oppose themselves ; if 
God peradventure will 
give them repentance 
to the acknowledging 
of the truth; 26 and 
that they may recover 
themselves out of the 
snare of the devil, who 
are taken captive by 
him at his will. 


Ill. This know al- 
so, that in the last 
days perilous times 
shall come. 2 For 
men shall be lovers 
of their own selves, 
covetous, boasters, 
proud, blasphemers, 
disobedient to parents, 
unthankful, unholy, 
3 without natural af 
fection, trucebreakers, 
false accusers, incen- 
tinent, fierce, despisers 
of those that are good, 
4 traitors, heady, high- 
minded, lovers of plea- 
sures more than lovers 
of God; 5 having a 
form of godliness, but 
denying the power 
thereof: from such 
turn away. 6 For of 
this sort are they 
which creep into 
houses, and lead cap- 
tivesilly women laden 
with sins, led away 
with divers lusts,7 ever 
learning, and never 
able to come to the 
knowledge of the 
truth. 8 Now as Jan- 
nes and Jambres with- 
stood Moses, so do 
these also resist the 
truth : men of corrupt 
minds, reprobate con- 
cerning the faith, 9But 
they shall proceed no 
further: for their folly 


1 δῴη LTTraw. 


552 TPOLaATOIMOGEON Β. III, lV. 


shall be manifest unto ,7),-,~ Af εἴτ δι δ γ» 
all men, as theirs also CUT ἔκδηλος ἔσται πᾶσιν, ὡς καὶ  EKELYWY ξγεέεγψετο. 


was. 10 Butthouhast ‘their fully manifest shall be toall, as also that of those became, 
fully Known my doc- 10 σὺ δὲ ὁπαρηκολούθηκάς" μου τῇ διδασκαλίᾳ, τῇ ἀγωγῇ, 


trine, manner of life, 


purpose, faith, long- But thou hast closely followed my teaching, conduct, 
eee Ge τῇ προθέσει, τῇ πίστει, τῇ μακροθυμίᾳ, τῷ ἀγάπῃ; τῇ ὑπομονῇ, 
afflictions, which came DEEDOBEs faith, patience, Mth Bee, 


untomeat Antioch, at 1] τοῖς διωγμοῖς, τοῖς παθήμασιν, οἷά μοι ἐγένετο ἐν ᾽᾿Αν- 


Ie , eb Τὶ 

sian ἘΣ stra fen ee such as to me oneal in An- 

endured: but out of τιοχείᾳ, ἐν ᾿Ικονίῳ, ἐν υστροις" οἵους ιωγμοὺς ὑπ- 
2 ς π 

them all the Lord de- tigch’ in Iconium, in Lystra; what manner of persecutions I en- 


livered me. 12 Yea, Poe 4 Ά Ρ 
and all that will live ἤνεγκα, καὶ ἐκ πάντων pe Ῥέῤῥύσατο! ὁ κύριος. 12 καὶ 
godly in Christ Jesus qured; απᾶ out of all ‘me delivered ‘the *Lord. And 
shall suffer persecu- A J ἢ 

tion, 18 Butevilmen πάντες δὲ οἱ θέλοντες “εὐσεβῶς ζῇν" ἐν ΧΡΙΣΤΩ͂Ι Ἰησοῖ 
and seducers shall wax all indeed who wish piously tolive in hrist Jesus 
worse and worse, de- 

ceiving, and being de- OlwyOnoovra’ 13 πονηροὶ. δὲ ἄνθρωποι καὶ γόητες προ- 
ceived. 14 But con- will be persecuted. But wicked men and impostors shall 
tinue thou in the 

things whichthouhast κόψουσιν ἐπὶ τὸ χεῖρον, πλανῶντες Kai πλανώμενοι. 14 σὺ δὲ 


learned and hast been advance to worse, misleading and _ being misled. But thou 
assured of, knowing of τ » +2 , γπν ν᾿ 
whom thou hast learn- HEvE év oc ἔμαθες καὶ ἐπιστώθης, εἰδὼς παρὰ 


ed them; 15 and that abide in the things thou didst learn, and wast assured of, having known from 

hil d 7 » ‘ A 4 
poe the help acting Trivoc' ἔμαθες, 15 καὶ ὅτι ἀπὸ βρέφους "τὰ! ἱερὰ 
tures, which are able whom thou didst learn [them] ; and that from ἃ babe the sacred 


i - ΄ ‘ ΄ ΄ ΄ > 
po ΤΟΒΕΘ ΤΩΡ ‘through γράμματα oldas, , τὰ δυνάμενά σε σοφίσαι εἰς 


faith whichis in Christ letters thou hast known, which {are} able Sthee ‘to *make wise to 


Jesus. 16 All scrip- , \ , 2 ~ ’ oon ed ~ 3 
ture is given by inspi- “Ὁ Τηριᾶν, διὰ πιστεὼς THC εν χριστῷ Inoov. 16 πᾶσα 
ration of God, and is salvation, through faith which [is]in Christ Jesus. Every 


profitable for doctrine, yoagn θεόπνευστος καὶ ὠφέλιμος πρὸς διδασκαλίαν, πρὸς 
dontior instructionin scripture [is] God-inspired and prottepie! for ae ΘῈ 
righteousness: 17 that τ Il je ἐ 5 ὃς ὑπαιδείαν! τὴν Ev 
the man of God may ἔλεγχον, τρῶς ἐπανόρθωσιν, me aie ae eens: 
be perfect, throughly C2Viction, for correction, for discipline which [is] in 
Ἢ of , » 

ἘΠ πα ΒΚΤ unto all δικαιοσύνῃ 17 ἵνα ἄρτιος ἢ ὁ τοῦ θεοῦ ἄνθρωπος, πρὸς 
good works. righteousness ; that complete may be the ?of 3God 1man, 


πᾶν ἔργον ἀγαθὸν ἐξηρτισμένος. 
every “work ‘good fully fitted. 


4 Atapapripopa “οὖν eye) ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ Kai “τοῦ 
Basnently “testify *therefore before God and the 


IV. I charge thee κυρίου" Y Inaov χριστοῦ," τοῦ μέλλοντος κρίνειν ζῶντας καὶ 
therefore before God, τ γᾷ Jesus Christ, who is about to judge living and 
and the Lord Jesus ; : 
Christ, whoshalljudge γεκροὺς κατὰ" τὴν. ἐπιφάνειαν.αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν βασιλείαν 
the quick andthedead = gend according to his appearing and *kingdom 
at his appearing and θ 
his kingdom; 2 preach αὐτοῦ, 2 κήρυξον τὸν λόγον, ἐπίστηθι εὐκαίρως ἀκαίρως, 
the word; be instant this, proclaim the word; beurgent in season, out of season, 


in season, out of iI 
season; reprove, τὸς ἔλεγξον, “ἐπιτίμησον, παρακάλεσον," ἐν macy μακροθυμίᾳ 


buke, exhort with all convict, rebuke, ‘encourage, with all patience 
longsuffering and doc- ἢ “ 

trine, 8 Forthe time καὶ διδαχῇ. 8. ἔσται.γὰρ καιρὸς OTE τῆς ὑγιαινούσης δι- 
will come when they and teaching. For there will be atime when sound teach- 
will not endure sound ν ) b 

ΠΌΣΙΣ μόν put after δασκαλίας οὐκιἀνέξονται. ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὰς ἐπιθυμίας 


their own lusts shall ing they will not bear ; but according to 3desires 


wey eo” τὶς ἰδίας" ἑαυτοῖς ἐπισωρεύσουσιν διδασκάλους, κνηθό- 


itching ears; 4 and "their?0wn to themselves * will] heap up resol 


Chey, melee ΑΥ̓ΤΟΥ͂ μένοι. τὴν. ἀκοήν" 4 καὶ ἀπὸ μὲν τῆς ἀληθείας τὴν ἀκοὴν ἀπο- 
truth, and shall be having an itching ear; and from the truth the ear they will 


.ςιι ͵͵΄΄΄΄΄΄ἷ“΄---..-.-.--------- 


TTrA. P ἐρύσατο LTTr. 9 ζῇν εὐσεβῶς TTr. 

° παρηκολούθησάς didst closely follow L1 

τ ᾿ revo what [persons] LTTrA. 5. — τὰ (L}t[TrA]. ᾿ ἐλεγμόν LTTrA. uv παιδίαν τ. 
- οὖν ἐγὼ GLTTrAW. xX — τοῦ κυρίου GLTTraW. J χριστοῦ Ἰησοῦ LTTraw. - καὶ 


ἘΠῚ [by] Gurtraw. 8 παρακάλεσον, ἐπιτίμησον τ. ὃ ἰδίας ἐπιθυμίας GLTTrAW. 


FV: LE DE eM ΘΙ HY. 
στρέψουσιν, imide τοὺς μύθους ἐκτραπήσονται. 5 σὺ. δὲ 
turn away, and to fables will be turned aside. But thou, 
νῆφε ἐν πᾶσιν, κακοπάθησον, ἔργον ποίησον εὐαγ- 
be sober in allthings, suffer hardships, [the] work do of an 
γελιστοῦ, τὴν.διακονίαν.σου πληροφόρησον. 6 [Bee yap ἤδη 
evangelist, thy service ae carry out. ForI already 
σπένδομαι, καὶ ὁ καιρὸς τῆς. "“ἐμῆς-.ἀναλύσεως" ἐφ- 
am being poured out, and the time of my release is 
ἔστηκεν. 7 τὸν 4ay@va τὸν καλὸν" ἠγώνισμαι, τὸν δρόμον 
come. The combat 1g00d #Ihavecombated, the course 
τετέλεκα, τὴν πίστιν τετήρηκα᾽ ὃ λοιπὸν ἀπόκειταί μοι 
Ihave finished, the faith I have Eee Hencetorth islaidup for me 


ὁ τῆς δικαιοσύνης στέφανος, ὃν ἀποδώσει 


μοι ὁ κύριος 
the 2of See ἘΠΕ 


which *will 7render *to *me ‘the 7Lord 


ἐν ἐκείνῃ TH ἡμέρᾳ, δίκαιος κριτής" οὐ-μόνον.δὲ ἐμοί, 
Pin Uthat day a ‘righteous “judge; and not only to me, 


ἀλλὰ καὶ πᾶσιν τοῖς ἠγαπηκόσιν THY. ἐπιφάνειαν. αὐτοῦ. 


but also toall .who have loved his appearing. 
9 Σπούδασον ἐλθεῖν πρός pe ταχέως. 10 Δημᾶς.γάρ με 
Bediligent tocome to me ΤΟΣ 5 for Demas 7*me 


ἐγκατέλιπεν, ἀγαπήσας τὸν νῦν αἰῶνα, Kai ἐπορεύθη εἰς 
1forsook, having loved the present age, and [8 gone to 


Θεσσαλονίκην" Κρήσκης εἰς Γαλατίαν," Τίτος εἰς Δαλματίαν" 


Thessalonica ; Creseens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia. 


11 Λουκᾶς ἐστιν μόνος per ἐμοῦ. Μάρκον ἀναλαβὼν ἄγε 
Luke 3is talone with me. Mark having taken bring 


μετὰ σεαυτοῦ" ἔστιν.γάρ μοι εὔχρηστος εἰς διακονίαν. 12 Τυ- 
with thyself, forheis *to*me ‘useful for service. *Ty- 


χικὸν δὲ ἀπέστειλα εἰς “Edecov. 13 ieee an 
chicus ‘but Isent to Ephesus. cloak which 


ἀπέλιπον ἐν Τρωάδι! παρὰ πάρηφΣ τ ἐρχόμενος φέρε, καὶ τὰ 
I left in Troas with Carpus, [when] comirg bring, and the 


βιβλία, μάλιστα τὰς μεμβράνας. 14 ᾿Αλέξανδρος ὁ χαλκεὺς 
books, especially the parchments, Alexander the ae 


πολλά μοι κακὰ évedeigato’ ἰἀποδῴη" αὐτῷ ὁ 
Ἐπ ον Sagainst °*me “evil “things did. May “render ‘to Shim ‘the 

κύριος κατὰ τὰ:ἔργα.αὐτοῦ: 15 ὃν καὶ od φυλάσσου, 
2Lord according to his works, Whom also thou be ware of, 


λίαν.γὰρ "ἀνθέστηκεν" τοῖς ἡμετέροις λόγοις. 16 dt TY 
for exceedingly he has withstood ur words, 


TOWTY-MOV ἀπολογίᾳ οὐδείς μοι Ἰσυμπάρε γένετο," ἀλλὰ πάντες 
my first defence no one “me stood *with, but all 


pe ἐγκατέλιπον: μὴ αὐτοῖς λογισθείη 17 06 κύριός 
me forsook. Not tothem may 186 reckorted: Butthe Lord 


μοι παρέστη, καὶ ἐνεδυνάμωσέν με, ἵνα δι ἐμοῦ τὸ κή- 
me ‘stood*by, and eee me, that through me _ the pro- 


ovypa πληροφορηθῇ, καὶ ™axotoy πάντα τὰ ἔθνη" καὶ 
elamation might be fully ae and ‘should *hear ‘all the *nations; and 


RippucOny' ἐκ στόματος λέοντος. 18 °kai' ῥύσεταί με 


I was delivered out of [the] “mouth 1lion’s. And *will *deliver *me 
ὁ κύριος ἀπὸ παντὸς ~ ἔργου πονηροῦ, καὶ σώσει εἰς τὴν 
‘the “Lord from every work ‘wicked, and will preserve[me] for 


—— 


© ἀναλύσεώς μου LITr. 
& φελόνην EGLTTrAW. 
he withstood hrtraw. 
5 ἐρύσθην LTTrA. 


d καλὸν ἀγῶνα LTTr. 
Ὁ Τρῳάδι LT. 

ἱσυν- A; παρεγένετο stood by LrTr. 
° — καὶ LTTrA. 


e Ταλλίαν Gallia τ. 
i ἀποδώσει Shall render LITraw. 


doe 
turned unto fables, 
5 But watch thou in 
all things, endure af- 
flictions, do the work 
of an evangelist, make 
full proof of thy mi- 
nistry. 6 For am 
now ready to be of- 
fered, and the time of 
my departure is at 
hand. 7 I have fought 
a good fight, I have 
finished my course, I 
have kept the faith : 
8 henceforth there is 
laid up for me a crown 
of righteousness, which 
the Lord, the righteous 
judge, shall give me 
at that day: and not 
to me only, but unto 
all them also that love 
his appearing. 


9 Do thy diligence 
to come shortly unto 
me : 10 for Demas hath 
forsaken me, having 
loved this present 
world, and is depart- 
ed unto Thessalonica ; 
Crescens to Galatia, 
Titus unto Dalmatia. 
11 Only Luke is with 
me. ‘l'ake Mark, and 
bring him with thee: 
for he is profitable to 
me for the ministry. 
12 And Tychicus have 
I sent to Ephesus. 
13 The cloke that I left 
at Troas with Carpus, 
when thou comest, 
bring with thee, and 
the books, but especi- 
ally the parchments. 
14 Alexander the cop- 
persmith did me much 
evil: the Lord reward 
him according to his 
works: 15 of whom be 
thou ware also; for 
he hath greatly with- 
stood our words. 16 At 
my firsu answer noman 
stood with me, but all 
men forsook me: / 
pray God that it may 
not be laid to their 
charge. 17 Notwith- 
standing the Lord 
stood with me, and 
strengthened me; thot 
by me the preaching 
might be fully known, 
and that all the Gen- 
tiles might hear : and 
I was delivered out of 
the mouth of the lion. 
18 And the Lord shall 
deliver me from eve 
evil work, and wi 
preserve me unto his 


f Δελματίαν L. 
Κ ἀντέστη 


™ ἀκούσωσιν LTTrAW. 


554 


heavenly kingdom: 
to whom be glory for 
ever and ever. Amen, 


19 Salute Prisca and 
Aquila, and the house- 
hold of Onesiphorus. 
20 Erastus abode at 
Corinth: but Trophi- 
mus have I left at Mi- 
letum sick. 21 Do thy 
diligence to come be- 
fore winter. Eubulus 
greeteth thee, and Pu- 
dens, and Linus, and 
Claudia, and all the 
brethren. 22 The Lord 
Jesus Christ be with 
thy spirit. Grace be 
with you. Amen. 


TEP ONS) YT Τ ΟἿΝ- I. 


βασιλείαν.αὐτοῦ τὴν éemoupaviov' 
his kingdom the heavenly ; 


I~ ~ 
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. 


ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς 
to whom [be] glory unto the 


ages of the ages. Amen, 
a” / . κ᾿ Sy ᾽ ΄ 
19 Ασπασαι Πρίσκαν καὶ ᾿Ακύλαν, καὶ τὸν ᾿Ονησιφόρου 
Salute risca and Aquila, and the 7of *Onesiphorus 


οἶκον. 20”Epaoroc ἔμεινεν ἐν Κορίνθῳ Τρόφιμον.δὲ ἀπέλιπον 
Thouse. Erastus remained in Corinth, but Trophimus 1 left 
’ , ? “ , 4 ~ 2 ~ 
ἐν Μιλήτῳ ἀσθενοῦντα. 21 Σπούδασον πρὸ χειμῶνος ἐλθεῖν. 


in Miletus sick. Be diligent before winter to come. 
? / “ ~ . 
Ασπάζεταί σε Ἐὔβουλος, καὶ Πούδης, καὶ Aivoc," καὶ 

?Salutes thee +Eubulus, and Pudens, and Linus, and 


Κλαυδία, καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ πάντες. 22 ‘O κύριος τ᾽ Ἰησοῦς" 


Claudia, and *the *brethren 141], The Lord Jesus 
χριστὸς) μετὰ τοῦ.πνεὐματός.σου. ἡ χάρις μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν. 
Christ [be] with thy spirit. Grace [be] with you. 

ιἀμήν." 
Amen. : ; 
Πρὸς Τιμόθεον δευτέρα, τῆς ᾿Εφεσίων ἐκκλη- 
Ξ3 09. $$ *Timotheus’ ‘second, “of *the ''of[??the] ‘*Ephesians *°assem- 
σίας πρῶτον ἐπίσκοπον χειροτονηθέντα, ἐγράφη ἀπὸ 
bly [516] “first 7overseer “chosen, written from 
‘Pw OTE ἐκ.δευτέρου παρέστ Παῦλο " Καίσα 
μης, - ρ peoTn Cae pt 


Rome, when asecond time ?was*placed*before ‘Paul Ceesar 


Νέρωνι." 
ero. 


Ἢ ΠΡῸΣ TITON EMISTOAH TAYAOY.' 


THE 


PAUL, a servant of 
God, and an apostle of 
Jesus Christ, accord- 
ing to the faith of 
God’s elect, and the 
acknowledging of the 
truth which is after 
godliness; 2 in hope 
of eternal life, which 
God, that cannot lie, 
promised before the 
world began; 3 but 
hath in due times 
manifested his word 
through preaching, 
which is committed 
unto me according to 
the commandment of 
God our Saviour ; 4 to 
Titus, mine own son 
after the common 
faith : Grace, mercy, 
and peace, from God 
the Father and the 
Lord Jesus Christ our 
Saviour. 


5 For this cause left 
I thee in Crete, that 


“πὸ STITUS ‘EPISTLE 7OF *PAUL. 


ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ δοῦλος θεοῦ, ἀπόστολος.δὲ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ κατὰ 
Paul bondman of God, and apostle of Jesus Christ according to 


πίστιν ἐκλεκτῶν θεοῦ Kai ἐπίγνωσιν ἀληθείας τῆς 


{the] faith Select ‘of?God’sand knowledge of [the] truth which [is] 

Kar εὐσέβειαν, ἃ ἐπ᾿ ἐλπίδι ζωῆς αἰωνίου, ἣν ἐπηγ- 
according to piety; ἐπ [86] hope oflife eternal, which ‘pro- 
γείλατο ὁ ἀψευδὴς θεὸς πρὸ χρόνων.αἰωνίων, 3 é- 
mised 1the who *cannot 5116 God before the ages of time, 


φανέρωσεν.δὲ καιροῖς.ἰδίοις τὸν λόγον.αὐτοῦ, ἐν κηρύγματι 
but manifested in its own seasons his word in [the] proclamation 
ὃ ἐπιστεύθην ἐγὼ κατ᾽ ἐπιταγὴν τοῦ σωτῆρος 
which *was “entrusted *with *I according to [the] commandment of 7Saviour 
ἡμῶν θεοῦ, 4 Τίτῳ γνησίῳ τέκνῳ κατὰ κοινὴν 
tour God; to Titus [my] true child according to [our] common 
πίστιν, χάρις, "ἔλεος," εἰρήνη ἀπὸ θεοῦ πατρός, καὶ 
faith : Grace, mercy, peace from God [the] Father, and [the} 
κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ" τοῦ.σωτῆρος.ἡμῶν. 
Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour. 
= , , d , , iT] ? , τ Ν , 
5 Τούτου.χάριν κατέλιπόν" σε ἐν Κρήτῃ, wa τὰ.λείποντα 
For this cause I left thee in Crete, that the things lacking 


9 Aivos LTW. 


τ — Ἰησοῦς TTr[A]. ® — χριστὸς LTT:[A]. t — ἀμήν GLTTraw. 


v — the subscription GLTW ; Πρὸς Τιμόθεον β΄ (— β΄ A) Tra. 


8. + τοῦ ᾿Αποστόλου the apostle E; Πρὸς Τίτον LTTraw. 
4 ἀπέλιπόν LTTrAW. 


Ἰησοῦ LTTra. 


> καὶ and TTraWw. © χριστοῦ 


εἶπ. TET 8. 


ἐεἐπιδιορθώσῃ," καὶ καταστήσῃς κατὰ.πόλιν πρεσ- 
thou mightest go on to set right, and mightest appoint ἴπ every city 
βυτέρους, we ἐγώ σοι dueratauny’ 6 εἴ τις ἐστὶν ἀνέγ- 
elders, as I *thee *ordered : if anyone is unim- 
κλητος, μιᾶς γυναικὸς ἀνήρ: τέκνα ἔχων πιστά, μὴ ἐν 
peachable, *of%one ‘wife ‘husband, "children Shaving ®believing, not under 
κατηγορίᾳ ἀσωτίας ἢ ἀνυπότακτα. 7 δεῖ.γὰρ τὸν ἐπί- 
accusation of dissoluteness or insubordinate, For it behoves the over- 
σκοπὸν ἀνέγκλητον εἶναι, ὡς θεοῦ οἰκονόμον: μὴ αὐθάδη, 
seer unimpeachable tobe, as God’s steward ; not selfwilled, 
μὴ ὀργίλον, μὴ πάροινον, μὴ πλήκτην, μὴ αἰσχροκερδῆ, 


not passionate, not giventowine, ποῦ astriker, not greedy of base gain, 


8 ἀλλὰ φιλόξενον, φιλάγαθον, σώφρονα, δίκαιον, ὕσιον, éy- 
but hospitable, a lover of good, discreet, just, holy, tem- 
κρατῆ, 9 ἀντεχόμενον τοῦ κατὰ τὴν διδαχὴν πιστοῦ 
perate, holding to the %according *to *the “teaching ‘faithful 
λόγου, ἵνα δυνατὸς καὶ παρακαλεῖν ἐν τῇ διδασκαλίᾳ 
2word, that able he may be both toencourage with teaching 


τῇ ὑγιαινούσῃ, καὶ τοὺς ἀντιλέγοντας ἐλέγχειν. 10 εἰσὶν. γὰρ 
tsound, and those who gainsay to convict. For there are 


πολλοὶ ‘kai! ἀνυπότακτοι ματαιολόγοι Kai φρεναπάται, pa- 
many and  insubordinate vain talkers and mind-deceivers, espe- 


λιστα ot ἐκ © περιτομῆς, 11 ovdc δεῖ ἐπιστο- 
cially those of [the] circumcision, whom itis necessary to stop the 
pier? οἵτινες ὕλους οἴκους ἀνατρέπουσιν, διδάσκοντες 
mouths of, who whole houses overthrow, teaching 
ἃ μὴ.δεῖ, αἰσχροῦ κέρδους χάριν: 12 εἶπεν 
things which [they] ought not, “base °gain for “sake of. 14Said 
τις ἐξ αὐτῶν idwe.airmy προφήτης, Κρῆτες ἀεὶ 
Sone “of "themselves ‘of }*their ‘*own °%a *°prophet, Cretans always [are] 
ψεῦσται, κακὰ θηρία, γαστέρες apyat. 18 ἡ.μαρτυρία.αὕτη 
liars, evil wild beasts, *gluttons Mazy. This testimony 
ἐστὶν ἀληθής" Ov ἣν αἰτίαν ἔλεγχε αὐτοὺς ἀποτόμως, ἵνα 
15 true ; for which cause convict them with severity, that 
ὑγιαίνωσιν ἔν τῇ πίστει, 14 μὴ προσέχοντες ᾿Ιουδαϊκοῖς 
they may besound in the faith, not giving heed to Jewish 
μύθοις καὶ ἐντολαῖς ἀνθρώπων ἀποστρεφομένων τὴν ἀλή- 
fables andcommandments of men, turning away from the _ truth, 
θειαν. 15 πάντα ἱμὲν" καθαρὰ τοῖς καθαροῖς’ τοῖς δὲ 
All things [are] pure tothe pure; but to those who 
Κμεμιασμένοις" καὶ ἀπίστοις οὐδὲν καθαρόν, ἀλλὰ μεμίαν- 
are defiled and unbelieving nothing [is] pure; but are de- 
ται αὐτῶν Kai ὁ νοῦς Kai ἡ-.-συνείδησις. 16 θεὸν ὁμολογοῦσιν 
filed *their *both mind and [their] conscience. God they profess 


IZ ~ 1 7 2 ~ ‘ ” ‘ 
εἰδέναι, τοῖς.δὲ ἔργοις ἀρνοῦνται, βδελυκτοὶ ὄντες καὶ 


to know, but in works deny {him], “abominable ‘being and 
ἀπειθεῖς, Kai πρὸς πᾶν ἔργον ἀγαθὸν ἀδόκιμοι. 
disobedient, and as to every ork *zood found worthless. 
Q Σὺ δὲ λάλει ἃ πρέπει τῇ ὑγιαινούσῃ διδασ- 
But *thou ‘speak the things that become sound teach- 
καλίᾳ᾽ 2 πρεσβύτας νηφαλίους εἶναι, σεμνούς, σώ- 
ing: [the] aged (men) ‘sober 1to *be, grave, dis- 


poovac, ὑγιαίνοντας τῇ πίστει, τῇ ἀγάπῃ, τῇ ὑπομονῇ" 
creet, sound in faith, in love, in endurance ; 


f — καὶ LTT:[a]. g + [δὲ] but (especially) L. 


9 ἐπιδιορθώσης L. 
Κ μεμιαμμένοις LTTr; μεμιαμένοις A. 


i— μὲν ΤΎΤΑΥ͂,. 


555 


thou shouldest set in 
order the things that 
are wanting, and or- 
dain elders in every 
city, as [had appointed 
thee: 6 if any be 
blameless,the husband 
of one wife, having 
faithful children not 
accused of riot or up- 
ruly. 7 For a bishop 
must be blameless, as 
the steward of God; 
not selfwilled, not 
soon angry, not given 
to wine, no striker, 
not given to filthy 
lucre ; 8 but a lover 
of hospitality, a lover 
of good men, sober, 
just, holy, temperate ; 
9 holding fast the 
faithful word as he 
hath been taught, that 
he may be able by 
sound doctrine both to 
exhort and to con- 
vince the gainsayers. 
10 For there are 
many unruly and vain 
talkers and deceivers, 
specially they of the 
circumcision : 11 whose 
mouths must be stop- 
ped,who subvert whole 
houses,teaching things 
which they ought not, 
for filthy lucre’s sake. 
12 One of themselves, 
even a prophet of their 
own, said, The Cre- 
tians are alway liars, 
evil beasts, slow bel- 
lies. 13 This witness is 
true. Wherefore re- 
buke them sharply, 
that they may besound 
in the faith; 14 not 
giving heed to Jewish 
fables, and command- 
ments of men, that 
turn from the truth. 
15 Unto the pure all 
things are pure: but 
unto them that are de- 
filed and unbelieving 
is nothing pure; but 
even their mind and 
conscience is defiled. 
16 They profess that 
they know God; but 
in works they deny 
him,being abominable, 
and disobedient, and 
unto every good work 
reprobate. Il. But 
speak thou the things 
which become sound 
doctrine: 2 that the 
aged men be so- 
ber, grave, temperate, 
sound in faith, in cha- 
rity, in patience. 3The 


h + τῆς the TTr 


556 


aged women likewise, 
that they be in be- 
haviour as becometh 
holiness, not false ac- 
cusers, not given to 
much wine, teachers 
of good things ; 4 that 
they may teach the 
young women to he 
sober, to love their 
husbands, to love their 
children, 5 to be dis- 
ereet, chaste, keepers 
at home, good, obe- 
dient to their own hus- 
bands, that the word 
of God be not blas- 
phemed. 6 Young men 
likewise exhort to be 
sober minded. 7 Inall 
things shewing thy- 
self a pattern of good 
works: in doctrine 
shewing uncorrupt- 
ness, gravity, since- 
rity, 8 sound speech, 
that cannot be con- 
demned ; that he that 
is of thecontrary part 
may be ashamed, hay- 
ing no evil thing to 
say of you. 9 Hxhort 
servants to be obe- 
dient unto their own 
masters, and to please 
them wellin all things; 
not answering again ; 
10 not purloining, but 
shewing all good fide- 
lity ; that they may 
adorn the doctrine of 


God our Saviour in 
all things. 11 For 
the grace of God 


that bringeth salva- 
tion hath appeared to 
all men, 12 teaching 
us that, denying un- 
godliness and worldly 
lusts, we should live 
soberly, righteously, 
and godly, in this pre- 
sent world ; 13 looking 
for that blessed hope, 
and the glorious ap- 
pearing of the great 
God and our Saviour 
Jesus Christ; 14 who 
gave himself for us, 
that he might redeem 
us from all iniquity, 
and purify unto him- 
self a peculiar people, 
zealous of good works, 
15 These things speak, 
and exhort, and re- 
buke with all autho- 
rity. Let no man de- 
spise thee. 


11, Put them in 
mind to be subject 
to principalities and 


i P Orsi TT ON. 1 1 
3 πρεσβύτιδας ὡσαύτως ἐν καταστήματι ἱερο- 
[the] aged (women) in like manner in deportment as becomes 


~ 4 , ] Stl ” ~ Ν “ 
πρεπεῖς. μὴ διαβόλους, Ἱμὴ" οἴνῳ πολλῷ δεδουλωμένας, 
sacred ones, ποῦ  slanderers, not ?to *wine *much enslaved, 
καλοδιδασκάλους, 4 ἵνα τ'σωφρονίζωσιν" τὰς νέας 
teachers of what is right ; that they may school the young [women] 


φιλάνδρους εἶναι, φιλοτέκνους, 5 σώφρονας, 
lovers of [their] husbands to be, lovers of [their] children, discreet, 


ἁγνάς, “oikoupovc,' ἀγαθάς, ὑποτασσομένας τοῖς.ἰδίοις ἀν- 
chaste, keepersat home, good, subject to theirown hus- 


δράσιν, ἵνα μὴ ὁ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ βλασφημῆται. 6 Τοὺς 


bands, that not the word of God may be evil spoken of. The 
νεωτέρους ὡσαύτως παρακάλει σωφρονεῖν, 5 7 περὶ 
younger [men] ἴῃ 11ὸ manner’ exhort to be discreet αὶ in 


πάντα σεαυτὸν παρεχόμενος τύπον καλῶν ἔργων, ἐν τῇ 
all things thyself holding forth a pattern of good works; in 
διδασκαλίᾳ Ῥἀδιαφθορίαν," σεμνότητα, ἀφθαρσίαν," 8 λόγον 
teaching uncorruptness, gravity, incorruption, 2speech 
ὑγιῆ, ἀκατάγνωστον, ἵνα ὁ. ἐξ ἐναντίας ἐντραπῇ. μηδὲν 
1sound, not to be condemned : that he who is opposed may be ashamed, *nothing 
ἔχων περὶ ὑμῶν eye φαῦλον. 9 Δούλους "ἰδίοις 
thaving °concerning 7you “to *say evil. Bondmen to their own 
δεσπόταις" ὑποτάσσεσθαι, ἐν πᾶσιν εὐαρέστους εἶναι, μὴ 
masters to be subject, in everything well-pleasing to be, not 
? a A , ? A) t ΄ ~ tl 
ἀντιλέγοντας, 10 μὴ νοσφιζομένους, ἀλλὰ 'πίστιν πᾶσαν 
contradicting ; bot purloining, but *fidelity 3411] 
ἐνδεικνυμένους ayadny’ ἵνα τὴν διδασκαλίαν τοῦ σωτῆρος 
1shewing 5good, that the teaching Saviour 
wt ~ ll θ ~ ~ ’ ~ ? , 4 ε 
ὑμῶν" θεοῦ κοσμῶσιν ἐν πᾶσιν. 1] Ἐπεφάνη.γὰρ a] 
lof 2your God they may adorn in all things. For **appeared ‘the 
χάρις τοῦ θεοῦ χὴ σωτήριος πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις, 
grace 308 *God ‘which ‘brings ‘salvation "for 3411 °men, 
12 παιδεύουσα ἡμᾶς ἵνα ἀρνησάμενοι THY ἀσέβειαν Kai τὰς 
instructing us that, having denied ungodliness and 
κοσμικὰς. ἐπιθυμίας, σωφρόνως Kai δικαίως Kai εὐσεβῶς ζή- 
worldly desires, discreetly and righteously and piously we 
σωμεν ἐν τῷ νῦν αἰῶνι, 13 προσδεχόμενοι τὴν paKapiar’ 
should live in the present age, awaiting the blessed 
ἐλπίδα καὶ ἐπιφάνειαν τῆς δόξης τοῦ μεγάλου θεοῦ Kai σωτῆ- 
hope and appearing of the glory Srreat *God °and ®Sa- 
ρος ἡμῶν Τ᾽ ησοῦ χριστοῦ," 14 ὃς ἔδωκεν ἑαυτὸν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν: 
viour*of%our Jesus Christ ; who gave himself for us, 
iva λυτρώσηται ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ πάσης ἀνομίας, Kai καθαρίσῃ 
that he might redeem us from all lawlessness, and might purify 
ἑαυτῷ λαὸν περιούσιον, ζηλωτὴν καλῶν ἔργων. 15 Ταῦτα 
to himself a people peculiar, zealous ofgood works. These things 
λάλει, καὶ παρακάλει, Kai ἔλεγχε μετὰ πάσης ἐπιταγῆς. 
speak, and exhort, and oonvict with all command. 
μηδείς σου περιφρονείτω. 
ΖΝο ὅθπο *thee ‘let ‘despise. 
3 Ὑπομίμνησκε αὐτοὺς ἀρχαῖς *kai' ἐξουσίαις ὑποτάσ- 
Put *in *remembrance 'them torulers and to authorities to be 


μηδὲ Dor TTrA. 
home LTTrA. 


ταις ἰδίοις L. 


ο Read to be discreet in all things, T. 
9.--Ο ἀφθαρσίαν EGLTTrAW. 
τ πᾶσαν πίστιν ΤΊΤΑ. 
᾿ς ἡ (vead σωτή. bringing salvation) LTTra. 


τὰ σωφρονίζουσιν they school Trra. π οἰκουργούς workers at 
P ἀφθορίαν incorruption LTTraw. 
τ λέγειν περὶ ἡμῶν (US) LITrA ; περὶ ἡμῶν λέγειν GW. 5 δεσπό: 
v + χὴν which [is] Lrtraw. τ ἡμῶν of our EGLTTrAW 


Υ χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ TTr. - - καὶ LTTrA, 


ΠΤ TU;8. 


πᾶν ἔργον ἀγαθὸν ἑτοίμους εἶναι, 
Severy 7work ®good ?ready ‘to 096, 
2 μηδένα βλασφημεῖν, ἀμάχους εἶναι, ἐπιεικεῖς, 
noone ἴο speak evil of, ποὺ *contentious ‘to *be, [tobe] gentle, 
πᾶσαν ἐνδεικνυμένους "πρᾳότητα" πρὸς πάντας ἀνθρώπους. 
3411 tshewing meekness towards all men, 
3 ἦμεν.γάρ ποτε Kai ἡμεῖς ἀνόητοι, ἀπειθεῖς, πλανώ- 
For were “once ‘also ‘we without intelligence, disobedient, led 
μένοι, δουλεύοντες ἐπιθυμίαις Kai ἡδοναῖς ποικίλαις, ἐν κακίᾳ 
astray, serving ?lusts Sand *pleasures ‘various, in malice 
\ , , , ~ > U - ev \ 
καὶ φθόνῳ διάγοντες, στυγητοί, μισοῦντες ἀλλήλους" 4 ὕτε. δὲ 


Ill. 


σεσθαι, πειθαρχεῖν, πρὸς 
subject, tobeobedient, ‘to 


and envy living, hateful, hating one another. But when 
ἡ χρηστότης Kai ἡ φιλανθρωπία ἐπεφάνη τοῦ. σωτῆρος ἡμῶν 
the kindness andthe lovetoman Sappeared tof “our “Saviour 


θεοῦ, 5 οὐκ ἐξ ἔργων τῶν ἐν δικαιοσύνῃ oy ἐποιήσαμεν 


*God, not by works which[were]in righteousness which “practised 
ἡμεῖς, ἀλλὰ κατὰ “τὸν αὐτοῦ.ἔλεον" ἔσωσεν ἡμᾶς. διὰ 
we, but according to his mercy he saved us, through [the] 


λουτροῦ παλιγγενεσίας" καὶ ἀνακαινώσεως πνεύματος ἁγίου, 
washing of regeneration and renewing of [the] 7Spirit *Holy, 
6 οὗ ἐξέχεεν ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς πλουσίως διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ τοῦ 
which he poured out on {8 richly through Jesus Christ 
σωτῆρος. ἡμῶν" 7 ἵνα δικαιωθέντες τῃ. ἐκείνου. χάριτι, κληρο- 
our Saviour ; that having been justified by his grace, eirs 
νόμοι “γενώμεθα! κατ᾽ ἐλπίδα ζωῆς αἰωνίου. 
we should become according to [the] hope of life eternal. 
8 Πιστὸὲὸ ὁ λόγος, καὶ περὶ τούτων βούλομαί σε δια- 
Faithful [is] the word, and concerning thesethings Idesire thee ἴο 
βεβαιοῦσθαι, iva φροντίζωσιν καλῶν ἔργων προΐστασθαι 
affirm strongly, that ‘may 7take®care ‘°good ‘works *to }°be **forward ‘in 
οἱ πεπιστευκότες ἰτῷ" θεῷ. ταῦτά ἐστιν Sra" καλὰ καὶ 
‘they *who “have “believed 5God. These things are good and 
ὠφέλιμα τοῖς ἀνθρώποις: 9 μωρὰς.δὲ ζητήσεις Kai γενεαλο- 
profitable to men ; but foolish questions and genealo- 
yiac καὶ *épec' καὶ μάχας νομικὰς περιΐστασο᾽ εἰσὶν 
and strifes and contentions about [the] law stand aloof from; ΠΟΥ “are 


gies 

yap ἀνωφελεῖς καὶ μάταιοι. 10 Αἱρετικὸν ἄνθρωπον μετὰ 

‘for unprofitable εὐ vain. A sectarian man after 

μίαν καὶ δευτέραν νουθεσίαν παραιτοῦ, 11 εἰδὼς ὅτι ἐξέ- 
one and 8 second admonition reject, knowing that is 


στραπται ὁ τοιοῦτος, Kai ἁμαρτάνει. ὧν αὐτοκατάκριτος. 
perverted suchaone, and sins, being self-condemned. 
12 Ὅταν πέμψω ᾿Αρτεμᾶν πρός σε ἢ Τυχικόν, σπούδα- 
When Ishallsend Artemas to thee, or Tychicus, be dili- 
cov ἐλθεῖν πρός pe εἰς Νικόπολιν: ἐκεῖ.γὰρ κέκρικα 
gent to come to me to Nicopolis ; for there I have decided 
παραχειμάσαι. 13 Ζηνᾶν τὸν νομικὸν καὶ ᾿Απολλὼ" σπου- 


to winter. Zenas the lawyer and Apollos dili- 
daiwe πρόπεμψον, ἵνα μηδὲν αὐτοῖς ἔλείπῃ." 14 μαν- 
gently set forward, that nothing tothem may be lacking; “let 


θανέτωσαν δὲ Kai οἱ ἡμέτεροι καλῶν ἔργων προΐστασθαι 


Slearn Jand ‘also Sours “°¢o0d «}4+works *to “be ®forward *in 
εἰς τὰς ἀναγκαίας χρείας, ἵνα μὴ.ὦσιν ἄκαρποι. 15 ᾿Ασ- 
for necessary wants, that they may not be unfruitful. 5Sa- 


557 
powers, to obey magis- 
trates, to be ready to 
every good work, 2 to 
speak evil of no man, 
to be no brawlers, but 
gentle, shewing all 
meekness unto all men. 
3 For we ourselves al- 
80 were sometimes 
foolish, disobedient, 
deceived, serving di- 
vers lusts and plea- 
sures, living in malice 
and envy, hateful, and 
hating one another. 
4 But after that the 
kindness and love of 
God our Saviour to- 
ward man appeared 
5 not by works of 
righteousness which 
we have done, but ac- 
cording to his mercy 
he saved us, by the 
washing of regenera- 
tion, and renewing 
of the Holy Ghost; 
6 which he shed on us 
abundantly through 
Jesus Christ our Sa- 
viour; 7 that being 
justified by his grace, 
we should be made 
heirs according to the 
a of eternal life, 
8 This is a faithful say- 
ing, and these things 
I will that thou affirm 
constantly, that they 
which have believed 
in God might be care- 
fal to maintain good 
works. These things 
are good and profitable 
unto men. 9 But a- 
void foolish questions, 
and genealogies, and 
contentions, and striv- 


ings about the law; 
for they are un- 
profitable and vain. 


10 A man that is an 
heretick after the first 
and second admonition 
reject; 11 knowing 
that he that is such is 
subverted, and sin- 
neth, being condemned 
of himself. 


12 When Ishalisend 
Artemas unto thee, or 
Tychicus, be diligent 
to come unto me to 
Nicopolis: for I have 
determined there to 
winter. 13 Bring Ze- 
nas the lawyer and 
Apollos on their jour- 
ney diligently, that 
nothing be wanting 
unto them. 14 And 
let ours also learn to 
maintain good works 
for necessary uses,that 
they be not unfruitful, 
15 All that are with 


© τὸ αὐτοῦ ἔλεος LTTrAW. 
ἕ --- τὰ LTTrAWw. 


Ὁ δ ττττα. 


5 πραὔτητα LTTrA. 
f —7@ LTTrAW. 


© γενηθῶμεν LTTrAW. 
λὼν τ΄ Κ λίπῃ τ. 


h ἔριν strife T. 


4 παλινγενεσίας T. 
i’ A7roA- 


558 


me salute thee. Greet 
them that love us in 
the faith. Grace be 
with youall, Amen. 


ΠΡΟΣ @®@IAHMONA. 


πάζονταί σε οἱ per ἐμοῦ πάντες. ἄσπασαι τοὺς φι- 
lute Sthee *those *with *me tall, Salute those who 
λοῦντας ἡμᾶς ἐν πίστει. ἡ χάρις μετὰ πάντων ὑμῶν. 
love us in (the) faith, Grace [be] with 3411 you. 
ἀμήν." 

Amen. 


πρὸς Τίτον, τῆς Κρητῶν ἐκκλησίας πρῶτον ἐπί- 


To Titus ‘of *the 70 [*the] ®Cretans Sassembly *first Sover- 
σκοπον χειροτονηθέντα, ἐγράφη ἀπὸ Νικοπόλεως τῆς Make- 
seer ?chosen, written from Nicopolis of Mace- 
δονίας." 
donia. 


Ἢ ΠΡῸΣ ®IAHMONA EDIZSTOAH I[MAYAOY.' 


THE 


PAUL, a prisoner of 
Jesus Christ, and Ti- 
mothy our brother, 
unto Philemon our 
dearly beloved, and 
fellowlabourer, 2 and 
to our beloved Apphia, 
and <Archippus our 
fellowsoldier, and to 
the church in thy 
house: 3 Grace to you, 
and peace, from God 
our Father and the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 


41 thank my God, 
making mention of 
thee always in my 
prayers, 5 hearing of 
thy love and faith, 
which thou hast to- 
ward the Lord Je- 
sus, and toward all 
saints; 6 that the 
communication of thy 
faith may become ef- 
fectual by the ac- 
knowledging of every 
good thing which is in 
you in Christ Jesus, 
7 For we have great 
joy and consolation in 
thy love, because the 
bowels of the saints 
are refreshed by thee, 
brother. 


8 Wherefore, though 
I might be much 
bold in Christ to en- 
join thee that which 
ig convenient, 9 yet 
for love’s sakeI rather 
beseech thee,being such 
an one as Paul the 
aged, and now also 
&@ prisoner of Jesus 
Christ. 10 I beseech 
thee for my son One- 


“TO 


5PHILEMON EPISTLE OF *PAUL. 


ΠΑΥ͂ΛΟΣ δέσμιος χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ, καὶ Τιμόθεος ὁ ἀδελφός, 
Paul, prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timotheus the brother, 
Φιλήμονι τῷ ἀγαπητῷ καὶ συνεργῷ.ἡμῶν, 2 καὶ ᾿Απφίᾳ τῇ 
to Philemon the beloved and our fellow-worker, and to Apphia the 
νἀγαπητῇ," καὶ ᾿Αρχίππῳ τῷ. “συστρατιώτῃ" ἡμῶν, καὶ τῇ 
beloved, and to Archippus our fellow-soldier, and to the 
kar’ oikév.cov ἐκκλησίᾳ 3 χάρις ὑμῖν Kai εἰρήνη ἀπὸ θεοῦ 
2in “thy *house ‘assembly: Grace to you and peace from God 
πατρὸς.-ἡμῶν καὶ κυρίου ᾿Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ. 
our Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ. 
4 Εὐχαριστῶ τῷ.θεῷ.μου, πάντοτε μνείαν cov ποιούμενος 
1 thank my God, always mention of thee making 
ἐπὶ τῶν.προσευχῶν.μου, 5 ἀκούων σου THY ἀγάπην Kai THY 
at my prayers, hearing of thy love and 
πίστιν ἣν ἔχεις “πρὸς! τὸν κύριον ᾿Ιησοῦν καὶ εἰς πάν- 
faith which thou hast towards the Lord Jesus, andtowards all 
τας Tove ἁγίους, 6 ὅπως ἡ κοινωνία τῆς.πίστεώς.σου ἐνεργὴς 
the saints, so that the fellowship of thy faith efficient 
γένηται ἐν ἐπιγνώσει παντὸς ἀγαθοῦ ἐτοῦ" ἐν 
may become in [the] acknowledgment of every good (thing) which [is] in 
ὑμῖν! εἰς χριστὸν θ᾿ Inoovy." 7 Ῥχάριν" γὰρ Ἰέχομεν πολλὴν" 
you towards Christ Jesus, ®Thankfulness *for 7we*have ‘great 
καὶ παράκλησιν ἐπὶ τῇ ἀγάπῳισου, ὅτι τὰ σπλάγχνα 
and encouragement by occasion of thy love, because the bowels 
τῶν ἁγίων ἀναπέπαυται διὰ σοῦ, ἀδελφέ. 
ofthe saints have beenrefreshed by thee, brother. 
8 Διὸ πολλὴν ἐν χριστῷ παῤῥησίαν ἔχων ἐπιτάσσειν σοι 
Wherefore much 21 “Christ *boldness having toorder’ thee 
τὸ ἀνῆκον, 9 διὰ τὴν ἀγάπην μᾶλλον παρακαλῶ" 
what [is] becoming, for the sake of love rather I exhort, 
~ A € ~ , ‘ ‘ , 
τοιοῦτος ὧν ὡς Παῦλος πρεσβύτης, νυνὶ.δὲ καὶ δέσμιος 
such aone being as Paul [the] aged, and now also prisoner 
”Tnood χριστοῦ"" 10 παρακαλῶ σε περὶ τοῦ ἐμοῦ τέκνου, ὃν 
of Jesus Christ, Iexhort thee for my child, whom 


᾿ς ἀμήν G[L]TTraw. Σ᾿ n 
8 + τοῦ ᾿Αποστόλου the Apostle E; Πρὸς Φιλήμονα LTTraw. 
d εἰς LTra. 


© guvo- LTTrA. 


h χαρὰν joy EGLTTrAW. 


m — the subscription GLTw ; Πρὸς Τίτον Tra. 
Ὁ ἀδελφῇ sister LTTra. 
& — ‘Inoovr LTTr[A]. 


€ — τοῦ Ltr. {ἡμῖν US GLTrAW. 
Κ χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ LTTrA. 


1 πολλὴν ἔσχον I had great LTTraw. 


PHILEMON. 


ἐγέννησα ἐν τοῖς δεσμοῖς 'μου," ᾿Ονήσιμον, 11 τόν ποτέ σοι 
Ibegot in 2bonds ‘my, Spesimus, once to thee 


ἄχρηστον. νυνὶ.δὲ ™ σοι καὶ ἐμοὶ εὔχρηστον, ὃν ἀνέπεμ- 
unserviceable, butnow tothee and tome serviceable: whom I sent 


par 12 ὁσὺ δὲ! αὐτόν, Ῥτουτέστιν᾽ τὰ ἐμὰ σπλάγχνα, 
back [to thee]: but thou him, (that is, my oS) 


IrpookaBov'' 13 ὃν ἐγὼ ἐβουλόμην πρὸς ἐμαυτὸν κατέχειν, 
receive : whom [ was desiring with myself to keep, 


ἵνα ὑπὲρ σοῦ τδιακονῇ μοι! ἐν τοῖς δεσμοῖς τοῦ εὐαγγελίου" 
that for thee hemightserve me in the bonds of the glad ndings; 


14 χωρὶς. δὲ τῆς.σῆς. γνώμης οὐδὲν ἠθέλησα ποιῆσαι, ἵνα μὴ 


but apart from thy mind nothing I wished to do, that not 
ὡς κατὰ.ἀνάγκην τὸ. ἀγαθόν.σου ῇ: ἀλλὰ κατὰ. ἑκούσιον. 
as of necessity thy good might be, but of willingness: 
15 raxa-yao διὰ τοῦτο ἐχωρίσθη πρὸς ὥραν, 


for perhaps because of this 
ἵνα αἰώνιον αὐτὸν 
that eternally him 
SGN"! ὑπὲρ 
but above 
, A 
πόσῳ. δὲ 


he was separated [from thee] for 
ἀπέχῃς" 16 οὐκέτι ὡς δοῦλον, 
thou mightest Done F no longer as a bondman, 


δοῦλον, ἀδελφὸν ἀγαπητόν, μάλιστα ἐμοί, 
a bondman, a brother beloved, specially to me, 


μᾶλλόν σοι καὶ ἔν σαρκὶ Kai ἐν κυρίῳ; 
and how much rather to thee both in [the] flesh and in([the) Lord? 
17 εἰ οὖν ᾿ἐμὲὶ ἔχεις κοινωνόν, προσλαβοῦ αὐτὸν we 
If therefore me thou holdest a yrees receive him as 

ἐ v 
ἐμέ" 18 εἰδὲ τι ἠδίκησέν σε ἢ ὀφείλει, τοῦτο ἐμοὶ. "ἐλλόγει." 
me; but if anything he wronged eo or owes, this puttomy Sneak 

’ > ’ la 

19: ἐγὼ Τιαρλος ἔγραψα τῇ ἐμῇ χειρί, ἐγὼ ἀποτίσω" ἵνα 
wrote [it] withmy[{own]hand; I  willrepay; that 
pay). Ny ω σοι OTL Kai σεαυτόν μοι πε τος εἰ ει 20 Ναί, 
I may Hee ney to theethat even thyself to me thou owest also. Yea, 
ἀδελφέ, ἐγώ σον ὀναίμην ἐν Kupiw ἀνάπαυσόν μου 
brother, 305 *thee ‘may have profit in [the] Lord: refresh my 


a time, 


Ta σπλάγχνα ἐν = *upiy.' 21 πεποιθὼς τῷ. ὑπακοῇ.σου 
bowels in [the] Lord. Being persuaded of thy obedience 
ἔγραψά σοι, εἰδὼς ὅτι Kai ὑπὲρ ὃ) λέγω ποιήσεις. 


Iwrote to thee, knowing that even above what I may say thou wilt do. 


22 “Αμα.δὲ καὶ ἑτοίμαζε μοι ξενίαν: ἐλπίζω.γὰρ ὅτι διὰ 
But withal also prepare me Ode; forI hope that through 


τῶν.προσευχῶν.ὑμῶν χαρισθήσομαι ὑμῖν. 23 Τ᾿ Ασπάζονταί" 
your prayers I shall be granted to δος, 13Salute 


559 


simus, whom I have 
begotten i in my bonds: 
11 which in time past 
was to thee unprofit- 
able, but now profit- 
able to thee and to me: 
12 whom I have sent 
again: thou therefore 
receive him, that is, 
mine own bowels: 
13 whom I would have 
retained with me, 
that in thy stead he 
might have ministered 
unto me in the bonds 
of the gospel: 14 but 
without thy mind 
would I do nothing; 
that thy benefit should 
not be as it were of 
necessity, but willing- 
ly. 15 For perhaps he 
therefore departed for 
@ season, that thou 
shouldest receive him 
for ever; 16 not now 
as a servant, but a- 
bove a servant, a bro- 
ther beloved, specially 
to me, but how much 
more unto thee, both 
in the flesh, andin the 
Lord? 17 If thou count 
me thereforea partner, 
receive him as myself. 
18 If he hath wronged 
thee, or oweth thee 
ought, put that on 
mine account; 19 I 
Paul have written it 
with mine own hand, 
I will repay tt: albeit 
I do not say to thee 
how thou owest unto 
me even thine own 
self besides. 20 Yea, 
brother, let me have 
joy of thee in the 
Lord: refresh my bow- 
elsin the Lord. 21 Hay- 
ing confidence in thy 
obedience I wrote un- 
to thee, knowing that 
thou wilt also do more 
than I say. 22 But 
withal prepare me al- 
so a lodging: for I 
trust that through 
your prayers I shall 


σε ᾿Ἑπαφρᾶς ὁ συναιχμάλωτός μου ἐν χριστῷ: Ἰησοῦ, de given unto you. 
*thee ‘Epaphras *fellow-prisoner 2my “ἢ Christ ®Jesus; 23 There salute thee 
2 Epaphras, my fellow- 
4 Μάρκος, ᾿Αρίσταρχος, Δημᾶς, Λουκᾶς, οἱ. συνξεργ οί.μου. prisoner in Christ Je- 
™ark, ®Aristarchus, ®Demas, 2°Tuke, ay fellow walkers sus iat areus, Ais 
25 ἡ χάρις τοῦ.κυρίου. ἡμῶν" Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ μετὰ τοῦ aes Gad paren 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be) with 25 The grace of our 
πνεύματος ὑμῶν. "ἀμήν." ἘΞ τ τον 
your spirit. Amen. men. 
"Πρὺς Φιλήμονα ἐγράφη ἀπὸ Ῥώμης, διὰ ᾿Ονησίμου 
Philemon written from Bome, by Onesimus 
cae 
a servant. 
— μου LTTra. m+ καὶ also T. π + got to thee LITraw. — ov δὲ LTTra. 
P τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν GT. 4 -- προσλαβοῦ LTTra. τ μοι διακονῇ GLITrAW. 5 ἀλλὰ TTr. 


‘me GLITrAw. " ἐλλόγα LTTrA. χριστῷ Christ GLITraw. 


of the Lord) τ. ® — ἀμήν GLTTrAW. 


x ἃ the things which Lrtra, 
¥ ἀσπάζεταί (read Epaphras my fellow-prisoner salutes thee) GLTTraw. 


— ἡμῶν (read 


b — the subscription GLTW ; Πρὸς Φιλήμονα Tra. 


ἬΠΠΕΟΣ 


THE +*TO 


GOD, who at sundry 
times and in divers 
manners spake in time 
past unto the fathers 
by the prophets, 2 hath 
in these last days 
spoken unto us by his 
Son, whom he hath 
appointed heir of all 
things, by whom also 
he made the worlds ; 
3 who being the bright- 
ness of his glory, and 
the express image of his 
person, and upholding 
all things by the word 
of his power, when he 
had by himself purged 
our sins, sat down on 
the right hand of 
the Majesty on high ; 
4 being madeso much 
better than the angels, 
as he hath by inherit- 
ance obtained a more 
excellent name than 
they. 5 For unto which 
of the angels said he 
at any time, Thou art 
my Son, this day have 
I begotten thee? And 
again, I will be to him 
a Father, and he shall 
be to me a Son? 6 And 
again, when he bring- 
eth in the firstbegotten 
into the world, he 
saith, And let all the 
angels of God worship 
him. 7 And of the 
angels he saith, Who 
maketh his angels spi- 
rits, and his minis- 
ters a flame of fire. 
8 But unto the Son 
he saith, Thy throne, 
O God, is for ever and 
ever: a sceptre of 
righteousness 7 the 
sceptre of thy king- 
dom. 9 Thou hast loy- 
ed righteousness, and 
hated iniquity ; there- 
fore God, even thy 
God, hath anointed 
thee with the oil of 
gladness above thy 
fellows. 10 And, Thou, 
Lord, in the beginning 
hast laid the founda- 
tion of the earth; and 
the heavens are the 
works of thine hands: 
11 they shall perish ; 


* — Παύλου EG; Πρὸς “Ἑβραίους LTTrAW. 
© ἐποίησεν τοὺς αἰῶνας LTTrAW. 


ΟΥΤΎΓΑΨ. 
ποιησάμενος LTTrA. 
Ὁ + THs LTTr. 


i — ἡ (read [the]) urtr. 


EBPAIOYS EUIZTOAH MAYAOY.1 


(STHE] SHEBREWS EPISTLE Ξ30Ε *PAUL. 


TIOAYMEPQ® καὶ πολυτρόπως πάλαι ὁ θεὸς λαλήσας 


In many parts and inmany ways of old God having spoken 
τοῖς πατράσιν ἐν τοῖς προφήταις, ἐπ᾽ Ῥἐσχάτων" τῶν ἡμερῶν 


to the fathers in the prophets, in “last #days 

, ? , c ~ > cw “a » ’΄ 
τούτων ἐλάλησεν ἡμῖν éevvig, 2 ὃν ἔθηκεν κληρονό- 
*these spoke tous in Son, whom he appointed heir 


μον πάντων, dt οὗ καὶ “τοὺς αἰῶνας ἐποίησεν," ὃ ὃς ὧν 
of allthings, by whom also the worlds he made: who being 
ἀπαύγασμα τῆς. δόξης Kai χαρακτὴρ τῆς ὑποστάσεως 

[{890] effulgence of [his] glory δηᾶ [the] exact expression of “substance 

αὐτοῦ, φέρων. τε τὰ πάντα TP ῥήματι τῆς. δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ, 


*his, and upholding allthings by the word of his power, 
45,’ ἑαυτοῦ" καθαρισμὸν “ποιησάμενος τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν" 
by himself {the} purification having made of ?sins 


τἡμῶν," ἐκάθισεν ἐν δεξιᾷ τῆς μεγαλωσύνης 
tour, sat down on([the]right hand ofthe greatness 
4 τοσούτῳ κρείττων γενόμενος τῶν ἀγγέλων, 

by so much better having begome than the angels, 
διαφορώτερον παρ᾽ αὐτοὺς κεκληρονόμηκεν ὄνομα. 5 Tint.yap 
more “excellent "beyond *them 786 *has *inherited ‘a ?name, For to which 
εἶπεν ποτε τῶν ἀγγέλων, Υἱός μου εἶ σύ, ἐγὼ σήμερον 
*said "he Sever ‘of 7the angels, ®Son ‘my art thou: I to-day 
γεγέννηκά σε; καὶ πάλιν, ᾿Εγὼ ἔσομαι αὐτῷ εἰς πατέρα, 
have begotten thee? and again, I will be tohim for Father, 
καὶ αὐτὸς ἔσται μοι εἰς υἱόν; 6 ὕταν.δὲ πάλιν εἰσαγάγῃ 
and - he shall be tome for Son? and *when ‘again he brings in 
τὸν πρωτότοκον εἰς THY οἰκουμένην, λέγει, Kai προσκυνη- 
the first-born into the habitable world, he says, And let wor- 
σάτωσαν αὐτῷ πάντες ἄγγελοι θεοῦ. 7 Kai πρὸς μὲν 
ship him all {the] angels of God. And asto 

4 ? , , « ~ 4 2 uA ᾽ - , 
τοὺς ἀγγέλους λέγει, Ὃ ποιῶν τοὺς. ἀγγελους.αὐτοῦ πνεύ- 
the angels he says, Who makes his angels spi- 
ara, Kai τοὺς. λειτουργοὺς.αὐτοῦ πυρὸς φλόγα ὃ πρὸς .δὲ 
μ ’ : ng ς Ὕ ρος 


ἐν ὑψηλοῖς, 
on high, 


vow 
as much as 


rits, and his ministers Sof *fire ‘a *flame; but as to 
τὸν υἱόν, ‘O.0pdvoc.cov, ὁ θεός, εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τοῦ αἰῶνος" 
the Son, Thy throne, O God, [18] to the age ofthe age. 
EpdBdoc® εὐθύτητος ἰὴ" ῥάβδος τῆς. βασιλείας. σου. 9 ἠγά- 
asceptre of uprightness [15] the sceptre of thy kingdom. Thou 
πησας δικαιοσύνην καὶ ἐμίσησας Ἑἀνομίαν. διὰ τοῦτο 
didst love righteousness and didsthate lawlessness; because of this 


ἔχρισεν σε ὁ θεὸς ὁ.θεός.σου ἔλαιον ἀγαλλιάσεως παρὰ τοὺς 
“anointed Sthee ἰθοὰ thy *God with[the]oil of exultation above 

μετόχους.σου. 10 Kai, Σὺ κατ᾽ ἀρχάς, κύριε, τὴν γῆν ἐθε- 
thy companions, And, Thou in the beginning, Lord, the earth didst 
μελίωσας, Kai ἔργα τῶν.χειρῶν.σου εἰσὶν οἱ οὐρανοί" 11 αὐτοὶ 
found, and works of thy hands are the heavens. They 


Ὁ ἐσχάτου (read at the end of these days) 

4 — δι᾽ ἑαντοῦ LITrA. © τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν 

8 -- xai.and τ,; + καὶ ἡ and the (sceptre) TTra. 
k ἀδικίαν unrighteousness T. 


f — ἡμῶν LTTrAW. 


PPT HEBREWS. 


ἀπολοῦνται, σὺ.δὲ διαμένεις᾽ καὶ πάντες ὡς ἱμάτιον παλαιω- 
shall perish, butthon continuest; and([they] all as a garment shall grow 


θήσονται, 12 Kai ὡσεὶ περιβόλαιον ἰἑλίξεις' αὐτοὺς, Kai 
old, and as acovering thoushaltrollup them, and 


ἀλλαγήσονται: σὺ.δὲ ὁ αὐτὸς εἶ, Kai τὰ ἔτη.σου οὐκ ἐκλεί- 
ise. shall be changed ; but thou the same art, and oy years *not ‘shall 


vovow. 13 Πρὸς.τίνα.δὲ τῶν ἀγγέλων εἴρηκέν ποτε, Κάθου ἐκ 


fail. But as to which of the angels said he ever, Sit at 
δεξιῶν. μου, Ewe.dv.06 τοὺς. ἐχθρούς σον ὑποπόδιον τῶν 
ΤΑΥ͂ Τρ πα ἃ wuntilI place thine enemies [485] a footstool for 


ποδῶν σου; 14 οὐχὶ πάντες εἰσὶν λειτουργικὰ πνεύματα, εἰς 
*feet thy? ®Not 7all ‘are Sthey apace spirits, for 


διακονίαν ἀποστελλόμενα διὰ τοὺς μέλλοντας κληρονο- 
to inherit 


service being sent forth onaccount of those being about 
μεῖν σωτηοίαν ; 
salvation ? 
2 Διὰ τοῦτο det περισσοτέρως "ἡμᾶς προσέχειν" 
On account of this it behoves more abundantly us to give heed 
τοῖς ἀκουσθεῖσιν, μήποτε “σπαραῤῥυῶμεν." 2 εἰ γὰρ 
to the things heard, lest at any time we should slip away. For if 


ὁ δι ἀγγέλων λαληθεὶς λόγος ἐγένετο βέβαιος, καὶ πᾶσα 
the *by “angels *spoken lword was confirmed, and every 


παράβασις Kai παρακοὴ ἔλαβεν ἔνδικον μισθαποδοσίαν, 3 πῶς 
oe sae and disobedience received just recompense, how 
ἡμεῖς ἐκφευξόμεθα τηλικαύτης ἀμελήσαντες σωτηρίας ; ἥτις 
2we *shall escape 530 °great (‘if we! Shave ‘neglected a salvation ? which 
ἀρχὴν λαβοῦσα λαλεῖσθαι διὰ τοῦ κυρίου, ὑπὸ 
34 “commencement areas “received tobe spoken [of] by the Lord, Sby 


τῶν ἀκουσάντων εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐβεβαιώθη, 4 συνεπιμαρτυ- 
*those "that *heard 33:0 5 ss ‘was *confirmed; bearing ++ witness 


οοὔντος τοῦ θεοῦ σημείοις τε καὶ τέρασιν, καὶ ποικίλαις 
12 with (‘*them] °God ‘Sby ‘*sigus ‘*both and wonders, and various 
δυνάμεσιν, καὶ πνεύματος ἁγίου μερισμοῖς, κατὰ τὴν 
acts of power, and 7of [*the]*Spirit *Holy ‘distributions, according to 
αὐτοῦ θέλησιν. 

his will. 

5 Ov.yao ἀγγέλοις ὑπέταξεν τὴν οἰκουμένην τὴν μέλ- 

Fornot toangels didhesubject the habitable world which isto 

λουσαν, περὶ ἧς λαλοῦμεν" 6 διεμαρτύρατο.δε που τὶς 
come, of which we speak; but fully *testified ‘somewhere ‘one 


, ΄ > » oe ’ ᾽ ~ n εν 
λέγων, Τί ἐστιν ἄνθρωπος, ὅτι μιμνησκῃ αὑτοῦ" ἢ υἱὸς 


saying, What is psn, that thou art mindful of him, or son 
ἀνθρώπου, ore ἐπισκέπτῃ Ῥαὐτόν:! 7 ἠλάττωσας αὐτὸν 
of ane, that thou visitest him? Thou didst make“*lower ‘*thim 


δόξῃ καὶ τιμῇ ἐστεφάνωσας 


βοαχύ τι παρ᾽ ἀγγέλους 
with glory and honour thou didst crown 


Aes some than {the] angels; 
(or for a little) 


αὐτόν. “καὶ κατέστησας αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὰ ἔργα τῶν χειρῶν. σου" 


him, and didst set him over the works of thy hands ; 
8 πάντα ὑπέταξας ὑποκάτω τῶν ποδῶν αὐτοῦ. eevee 
all things thou didst subject under his feet. For in 


τῷ" ὑποτάξαι "αὐτῷ" τὰ πάντα, οὐδὲν ἀφῆκεν αὐτῷ ἀνυπότακ- 
subjecting tohim allthings, nothing heleft to him unsubject. 
νῦν.δὲ οὔπω ὁρῶμεν αὐτῷ τὰ.πάντα ὑποτεταγμένα" 
But now notyet dowesee tohim all ἘΕΠΡῈ subjected ; 
1 ἀλλάξεις thou shalt change rT. 
ἡμᾶς LITrAW. 9 παραρνυῶμεν LTTYA. 
Q[L]t[tr]a. τ τῷ yap LTTraAW. 


τον" 


Ρ αὐτοῦ W. 
5 [αὐτῷ] L. 


oe ὡς ἱμάτιον as a garment Ltr]. 
4 — καὶ κατέστησας to end of verse 


561 


but thou remainest ; 

and they all shall wax 
old as doth a garment; 

12 and as a vesture 
shalt thou fold them 
up, and they shall be 
changed: but thou art 
the same, and thy years 
shall not fail. 13 But 
to which of the angels 
said he at any time, 
Sit on my right hand, 
until I make thine 
enemies thy footstool? 
14 Are they not all 
ministering spirits, 
sent forth to minister 
for them who shall be 
heirs of salvation ? 


Il. Therefore we 
ought to givethe more 
earnest heed to the 
things which we have 
heard, lest at any time 
we should let them 
slip. 2 For if the word 
spoken by angels was 
stedfast, and every 
transgression and dis- 
obedience received a 
just recompence of re- 
ward; 3 howshall we 
escape, if we neglect 
sO great salvation ; 
which at the first be- 
gan to be spoken by 
the Lord, and wascon- 
firmed unto us by 
them that heard him; 
4 God also bearing 
them witness, both 
with signs and won- 
ders, and with divers 
miracles, and gifts of 
the Holy Ghost, ac- 
cording to his own 
will? 


5 For unto the angels 
hath he not put in 
subjection the world 
to come, whereof we 
speak. 6 But one ina 
certain place testified, 
saying, What is man, 
that thou art mindful 
of him ? or the son of 
man, that thou visit- 
est him? 7 Thou mad- 
est him a little lower 
than the angels ; thou 
crownedst him with 
, glory and honour, and 
didst set him over the . 
works of thy hands: 
8 thou hast put all 
things in subjection 
under his feet. For in 
that he put all in sub- 
jection under him, he 
left nothing that w 
not put under him. 
But now we see not 
yet all things put un- 


0 προσέχειν 


00 


562 


der him. 9 But we see 
Jesus, who was made 
a little lower than the 
angels for thesuffering 
of death, crowned with 
glory and honour; 
that he by the grace 
of God should taste 
death for every man. 
10 For it became him, 
for whom are all 
things, and by whom 
are all things, in 
bringing Many sons 
unto glory, to make 
the captain of their sal- 
vation perfect through 
sufferings. 11 For both 
he that sanctifieth and 
they who are saneti- 
fied are all of one: for 
which cause he is not 
ashamed to call them 
brethren, 12 saying, I 
will declare thy name 
unto my brethren, in 
the midst of the church 
will I sing praise unto 
thee. 13 And again, I 
will put my trust in 
him, And again, Be- 
hold I and the chil- 
dren which God hath 
given me. 14 Foras- 
much then as the 
children are partakers 
of flesh and blood, he 
also himself likewise 
took part of the same; 
that through death 
he might destroy him 
that had the power of 
death, that is, the 
devil; 15 and deliver 
them who through 
fear of death were all 
their lifetime subject 
to bondage. 16 For 
verily he took not on 
him the nature of an- 
gels; but he took on 
him the seed of Abra- 
ham. 17 Wherefore in 
all things it behoved 
him to be made like 
unto Ais brethren, that 
he might be a merci- 
ful and faithful hign 
priest in things per- 
taining to God, to 
make reconciliation 
for the sins of the peo- 
ple. 18 For in that he 
himself hath suffered 
being tempted, he is 
able to succour them 
that are tempted. 


TII. Wherefore, holy 
brethren, partakers of 
the heavenly calling, 
consider the Apostle 
and High Priest of our 
profession, Christ Je- 
sus; 2 who was faith- 
ful to him that ap- 
pointed him, as also 
Moses was faithful in 
all his house. 3 For 


τ αἵματος Kal σαρκός LTTrAW. 


: Mwvo7s GLTTrAW. 


ΠΡΟΣ EE PAO Y=. 


9 τὸν. δὲ 


II, III. 


βραχύ τι map’ ἀγγέλους ἠλαττωμένον βλέπομεν 


but ‘who ‘little 7s0ome?°than["'the] ‘?angels [*was]*made ον ‘we 2560 
(or for a little) 
> ~ 4 4 ᾽’ ~ , , 4 ~ 
Ιησοῦν διὰ τὸ πάθημα τοῦ θανάτου δόξῃ καὶ τιμῇ 


sJesus onaccountof the suffering of death with glory and with honour 
ἐστεφανωμένον, ὅπως χάριτι θεοῦ ὑπὲρ παντὸς γεύσηται 
crowned ; so that by [the] grace of God for everyone he might taste 
ἢ Ἵ (or every thing) : 
» 4 > ~ a , ‘ 
θανάτου. 10 Ἔπρεπεν.γὰρ αὐτῷ, δι ὃν τὰ.-πάντα Kai δι 
death. For it was becoming tohim, for whom [are] allthings and by 
οὗ τὰ. πάντα, πολλοὺς υἱοὺς εἰς δόξαν ἀγαγόντα, τὸν 
whom [are] all things, many sons to glory bringing, the 
ἀρχηγὸν τῆς.σωτηρίας.αὐτῶν διὰ παθημάτων τελειῶσαι. 
leader of their salvation through sufferings to make perfect. 
11 ὕ.τεγὰρ ἁγιάζων καὶ οἱ ἁγιαζόμενοι, ἐξ ἑνὸς πάντες" 
For both he who sanctifies and those sanctified of one [are] all; 
δι ἣν αἰτίαν οὐκ.ἐπαισχύνεται ἀδελφοὺς αὐτοὺς καλεῖν, 12 λέ- 
for which cause _heis not ashamed “brethren “them ‘to ?call, say- 
yor, ᾿Απαγγελῶ τὸ.ὄνομά.σου τοῖς. ἀδελφοῖς. μου, ἐν μέσῳ 
ing, I will declare thy name to my brethren ; in [the] midst 
᾽ ΄ « ΄ ‘ , ? ‘ wn” 
ἐκκλησίας ὑμνήσω.σε. 13 Καὶ πάλιν, ᾿Εγω ἔσομαι 
of[{the]assembly Iwillsing praise to thee. And again, I will be 


πεποιθὼς ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ. Kai πάλιν, ᾿Ιδοὺ ἐγὼ καὶ τὰ παιδία & 


trusting in him. And again, Behold I and the children which 
» « ’ ? ‘ 4 , , 
μοι ἔδωκεν ὁ θεός. 14 Ἐπεὶ οὖν τὰ παιδία κεκοινώνηκεν 
3me *cave 1God. Since therefore the children have partaken 


ὑσαρκὸς καὶ αἵματος, καὶ αὐτὸς παραπλησίως μετέσχεν 
of flesh and blood, also he inlike manner took part in 
τῶν.αὐτῶν, va διὰ τοῦ θανάτου Karapynoy τὸν τὸ κράτος 
the same, that through death he might annul himwho *the *might 
ἔχοντα τοῦ θανάτου, τουτέστιν" τὸν διάβολον, 15 καὶ ἀπαλ- 


‘has of death, that is, the devil; and might set 
λάξῃ τούτους ὅσοι φόβῳ θανάτου διὰ παντὸς τοῦ.ζῇν 
free those whosoever by fear ofdeath throvzh all _ their lifetime 


ἔνοχοι ἦσαν “δουλείας." 16 οὐ.γὰρ δήπου ἀγγέλων ἐπιλαμ- 
Ξραᾳ Ὀ]6 οὐ ‘were to bondage. For ποῦ indeed of angels takes he 


βάνεται, ἀλλὰ σπέρματος ᾿Αβραὰμ ἐπιλαμβάνεται. 17 ὅθεν 


hold, but of {the} seed of Abraham he takes hold. Wherefore 
ὥφειλεν κατὰ πάντα τοῖς. ἀδελφοῖς ὁμοιωθῆναι, ἵνα ἐλεή- 


it behoved [him] in all things to [815] brethren to be made like, that a merci- 
μων γένηται καὶ πιστὸς ἀρχιερεὺς τὰ πρὸς τὸνθεόν, 
ful "he *might 706 ‘and *faithful *high “priest [in] things relating to God, 
εἰς τὸ ἱλάσκεσθαι τὰς ἁμαρτίας Tov λαοῦ. 18 ἐν.ᾧ.γὰρ 
for ὕο make propitiation for the sins of the people; for in that 
πέπονθεν αὐτὸς πειρασθείς, δύναται τοῖς πειραζομένοις 
he “has %suffered "himself having been tempted,heisable those being tempted 
βοηθῆσαι. 
to help. 
a 7S ‘ oe , ? , , 
3 Ὅθεν, ἀδελφοὶ ἅγιοι, κλήσεως ἐπουρανίου μέτοχοι, 
Wherefore, brethren ‘holy, οἵ [{Π6] calling ‘heavenly partakers, 
κατανοήσατε TOY ἀπόστολον καὶ ἀρχιερέα τῆς. ὁμολογίας. ἡμῶν 


consider the apostle and high priest of our confession, 
χριστὸν" ᾿Ιησοῦν᾽ 2 πιστὸν ὄντα τῷ ποιήσαντι αὐτόν, ὡς 
Christ Jesus, ?faithful being tohim who appointed him, as 


καὶ Μωσῆς" ἐν ὅλῳ τῷ. οἴκῳ.αὐτοῦ. 3 πλείονος.γὰρ "δόξης 
also Moses in all his house. For 70f *more “glory 


ν τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν GT. Υ — χριστὸν GLTTrAW. 


8 οὗτος δόξης GLTTrAW. 


x δουλίας T. 


Τ. 
οὗτος" παρὰ "Muon! ἠξίωται, 
*he than Moses hasbeencountedworthy,byhowmuch more 


ἔχει τοῦ οἴκου ὁ κατασκευάσας αὐτόν" 4 πᾶς γὰρ οἶκος 
has *than *the 7house he who sbuilt *it. For every house 


κατασκευάζεται ὑπό τινος ὁ.δὲ “τὰ! πάντα κατασκευάσας 
is built by someone; buthewho all things built [18] 


θεός. 5 καὶ Μωσῆς" μὲν πιστὸς ἔν ὅλῳ τῷ.οἴκῳ. αὐτοῦ ὡς 
God. And Moses indeed[was]faithful in all his house as 
θεράπων, εἰς μαρτύριον τῶν δλαληθησομένων᾽ 
aministering servant, for atestimony οἷ thethings going to be spoken; 
6 χριστὸς.δὲ ὡς υἱὸς ἐπὶ τὸν.οἷκον.αὐτοῦ, οὗ οἶκός ἐσμεν 
but Christ as Son over his house, whose house are 
ἡμεῖς, ξἐάνπερ' τὴν παῤῥησίαν Kai τὸ καύχημα τῆς ἐλπίδος 


HEBREWS. 


καθ᾽ ὅσον πλείονα τιμὴν 
honour 


we, ifindeed the boldness and the boasting ofthe hope 
fuéypt τέλους βεβαίαν" κατάσχωμεν. 
unto [the] end firm we should hold. 


7 Διό, καθὼς λέγει TO πνεῦμα TO ἅγιον, Σήμερον ἐὰν τῆς 
Wherefore,evenas says the Spirit the Holy, To-day if 


φωνῆς.αὐτοῦ ἀκούσητε, 8 μὴ.σκληρύνητε τὰς.καρδίας. ὑμῶν, 


his voice ye willhear, harden not your hearts, 
ὡς ἐν τῷ παραπικρασμῷ, κατὰ THY ἡμέραν τοῦ πειρασμοῦ ἐν 
as in the provocation, in the day of temptation, in 


τῇ ἐρήμῳ, 9 οὗ ἐπείρασάν Spe" οἱ. πατέρες. ὑμῶν, *idoKxipacay 
the wilderness, where “tempted ‘me your “fathers, proved 
με." καὶ εἶδον τὰ-ἔργα.μου ἱτεσσαράκοντα' ἔτη: 10 διὸ προσ- 


me, and saw my works forty years. Wherefore I was 
ώχθισα TH γενεᾷ "ἐκείνῃ," καὶ *elroy," ᾿Αεὶ πλανῶνται τῇ 
indignant with generation ‘that, and said, Always they err 


καρδίᾳ" αὐτοὶ δὲ οὐκ. ἔγνωσαν τὰς ὁδούς. μου" 11 we wpooa ἐν 
inheart; andthey did not know my ways ; so Iswore in 


τῇ-ὀργῇ- μου, Εἰ εἰσελεύσονται εἰς τὴν. κατάπαυσίν. μου. 12 Βλέ- 
my wrath, If theyshallenter into my rest. Take 


πετε, ἀδελφοί, μήποτε ἔσται ἔν τινι ὑμῶν καρδία πονηρὰ 
heed, brethren, lest perhaps shall be in anyone of you a“heart ‘wicked 


ἀπιστίας ty τῷ ἀποστῆναι ἀπὸ θεοῦ ζῶντος" 18 ἀλλὰ 
of unbelief in departing from *God['the] “living. But 
παρακαλεῖτε ἑαυτοὺς καθ᾽ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν, ἄχρις.οὗ TO σήμερον 
encourage yourselves every day as long as “to-day 
~ “ A ~ ] 3 « ~ Π ? , ~ 
καλεῖται, iva μὴ σκληρυνθῇ ric ἐξ ὑμῶν ἀπάτῃ τῆς 
it 7is called, that ποῦ may be hardened any of you by([the] deceitfulness 
ἁμαρτίας" 14 μέτοχοι.γὰρ γεγόναμεν Tov χριστοῦ," "ἐάνπερ" 


of sin. For companions we have become of the Christ, if indeed 
THY ἀρχὴν τῆς ὑποστάσεως μέχρι τέλους βεβαίαν κατά- 
the beginning of the assurance unto [the] end firm we 


oxwpuev' 15 ἐν rpdeyecOar, Σήμερον ἐὰν τῆς.φωνῆς. αὐτοῦ 
should hold ; in its being said, To-day if his voice 
ἀκούσητε, μὴ.σκληρύνητε τὰς.καρδίας. ὑμῶν, we ἐν τῷ παραπι- 
ye willhear, harden not your hearts, as in the provoca- 
κρασμῷ. 16 “τινὲς. γὰρ ἀκούσαντες παρεπίκραναν," ἀλλ᾽ οὐ 
tion. For some having heard provoked, but not 
πάντες ot ἐξελθόντες ἐξ Αἰγύπτου διὰ PMwoéwe."4 17 τίσιν δὲς 
411 who cameout from gypt by Moses. And with whom 
Ὁ MwionvGLTTrAW. ©—taLTTrAw. 4 Μωῦσῆς GLTTrAW. 
f— μέχρι τέλους βεβαίαν A. & — με LTTraw. 
LTTraw. i τεσσεράκοντα TTrA. J ταύτῃ this LrtTraw. 
GLaw. ™ Tov χριστοῦ γεγόναμεν GLTTrAW. Ὁ ἐάν περ LTr. 
κραναν ; For who, having heard, provoked? GLTTraw. 
as @ question but [was it] not all, &. ?) GLrtraw. 


563 


this man was counted 
worthy of more glory 
than Moses, inasmuch 
as he who hath build- 
ed the house hath more 
honour than the house. 
4 For every honse is 
builded by some man; 
but he that built all 
things 1s God. 5 And 
Moses verily was faith- 
ful in all his house, as 
aservant, for a testi- 
mony of those things 
which were to be 
spoken after; 6 but 
Christ as a son over 
his own house ; whose 
house are we, if we 
hold fast the confi- 
dence and the rejoic- 
ing of the hope firm 
unto the end. 


7 Wherefore (as the 
Holy Ghost saith, To 
day if ye will hear his” 
voice, 8 harden not 
your hearts, as in the 
provocation, in the 
day of temptation in 
the wilderness: 9 when 
your fathers tempted 
me, proved me, and 
saw my works forty 
years. 10 Wherefore I 
Was grieved with that 
generation, and said, 
They do alway err in 
their heart ; and they 
have not known my 
ways. 11 So Iswarein 
my wrath, They shall 
not enter into my rest.) 
12 Take heed, brethren, 
lest there be in any of 
you an evil heart of 
unbelief, in departing 
from the living God. 
13 But exhort one an- 
other daily, while itis 
called To day ; lestany 
of you be hardened 
through the deceitful- 
ness of sin. 14 For we 
are made partakers of 
Christ, if we hold the 
beginning of our con- 
fidence stedfast unto 
the end ; 15 whileit is 
said, To day if ye will 
hear his voice, harden 
not your hearts, as in 
the provocation. 16 For 
some, when they had 
heard, did provoke: 
howbeit not all that 
came out of Egypt by 
Moses. 17 But with 


© ἐάν[περ] L; ἐὰν if TTrra. 
hey δοκιμασίᾳ by proving [me ] 
Κ εἶπα L. ῶ 
° τίνες γὰρ ἀκού. παρεπί- 
Ρ Mwiicéws GLTTrAW. 
τ + [καὶ] also 1,. 


1 ἐξ ὑμῶν τις 


9; (read 


564 


whom was he grieved 
forty years? was it not 
with them that had 
sinned, whose carcases 
fell in the wilderness? 
18 And to whom sware 
he that they should 
not enter into his rest, 
but to them that be- 
lieved not? 19 So we 
see that they could not 
enter in because of 
unbelief. IV. Let us 
therefore fear, lest, a 
promise being left us 
of entering into his 
rest, any of you should 
seem to come short of 
it. 2 For unto us was 
the gospel preached, as 
well as unto them: but 
the word preached did 
not profit them, not 
being mixed with faith 
in them that heard it. 
3 For we which have 
believed do enter into 
rest, 88 he said, As I 
have sworn in my 
wrath, if they shall 
enter into my rest: 
althougn the works 
were finished from 
tae foundation of the 
world. 4 For he spake 
in a certain place of 
theseventh day on this 
wise, And God did rest 
the seventh day from 
all his works. 5 And 
in this place again, If 
they shall enter into 
my rest. 6 Seeing 
therefore it remaineth 
that some must enter 
therein, and they to 
whom it was first 
preached entered not 
in because of unbe- 
lief: 7 again, he li- 
raiteth a certain day, 
saying in David, To 
cay, after so long a 
time; as itis said, To 
day if ye will hear his 
voice, harden not your 
hearts. 8 For if Jesus 
had given them rest, 
then would he not 
afterward have spok- 
en of another day. 
9 There remaineth 
therefore a rest to the 
people of God. 10 For 
ne that is entered inte 
his rest, he also hath 
ceased from his own 
works, as God did 
from his. 11 Let us 
labour therefore to en- 
ter into that rest, lest 
any man fall after the 
same example of un- 


ΠΡΟΣ EBPAIOTS. 


προσώχθισεν “τεσσαράκοντα! ἔτη ; 
was he indignant forty 


τήσασιν, 


ΠῚ, IV. 


οὐχὶ τοῖς ἁμαρ- 
years? [Was it] not with those who 

ὧν τὰ κῶλα ἔπεσεν ἐν TH ἐρήμῳ; 18 τίσιν.δὲ 
sinned, of whom the carcases fell in the wilderness? And to whom 


ὦμοσεν μὴ.εἰσελεύσεσθαι εἰς τὴν.κατάπαυσιν.αὐτοῦ, εἰ μὴ 
swore he (that they]shallnotenter into his rest, except 


~ ? ΄ ‘ , e 7 ᾽ ΄ 
τοῖς ἀπειθήσασιν ; 19 καὶ βλέπομεν ὅτι οὐκ.ἠδυνήθησαν 
tothose who disobeyed ? And  wesee that they were not able 


> ~ 42} > / ~ ’ 
εἰσελθεῖν δι ἀπιστίαν. 4 Φοβηθῶμεν οὖν μήποτε 
to enter in on account of unbelief. We should fear therefore lest perhaps 


καταλειπομένης ἐπαγγελίας εἰσελθεῖν εἰς τὴν.κατάπαυσιν.αὖ- 
*being “left ‘a *promise to enter into his rest, 
τοῦ, δοκῇ τις ἐξ ὑμῶν ὑστερηκέναι. 2 καὶ γάρ ἐσμεν. εὐηγ- 
*might ®seem 'any ὍΣ “you to come short. For indeed we have had 
, 4 J ~ e ? > ? Ε) , ε 
γελισμένοι, καθάπερ κἀκεῖνοι" ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ὠφέλησεν ὁ 
glad tidings announced (to us]evenas alsothey; but not didprofit *the 
λόγος τῆς ἀκοῆς ἐκείνους, μὴ 'συγκεκραμένος" τῇ πίστει 
3word ‘ofthe “report ‘them, not having been mixed with faith 
τοῖς ἀκούσασιν. 3 εἰσερχόμεθα. γὰρ εἰς "τὴν" κατάπαυσιν 
in those who heard. For we enter into the rest, 
οἱ πιστεύσαντες. καθὼς εἴρηκεν, Ὥς ὦμοσα ἐν τῇ.ὀργᾷῇ.μου, 
who believed ; as hehassaid, So Iswore in my wrath, 


Εἰ εἰσελεύσονται εἰς τὴν. κατάπαυσίν. μου: καίτοι τῶν ἔργων 
If they shall enter into my rest ; though verily the works 


ἀπὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου γενηθέντων. 4 Εἴρηκεν.γάρ ov 
from [the] foundation of [the] world were done. For he has said somewhere 
περὶ τῆς ἑβδόμης οὕτως, Kai κατέπαυσεν ὁ θεὸς ἔν Tz 
concerning the seventh ({day] thus, And “rested 1God onthe 
ἡμέρᾳ TH ἑβδόμῃ ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν.ἔργων. αὐτοῦ" 5 Kai ἐν τού- 
"day tseventh from all his works : and in this 
/ 2 > 7 > A id , ? \ 
τῳ πάλιν, Ei εἰσελεύσονται εἰς τὴν.κατάπαυσίν.μου. 6 ᾿Επεὶ 


[place] again, If they shall enter into my rest. Since 
οὖν ἀπολείπεταί τινας εἰσελθεῖν εἰς αὐτήν, καὶ οἱ πρό- 
therefore it remains [for] some toenter into it, and those who 


τερον εὐαγγελισθέντες οὐκ.εἰσῆλθον YOu" ἀπείθειαν.  πά- 
NY. ς 


formerly heard glad tidings did not enter in onaccountof disobedience, again 
Aw τινὰ ὁρίζει ἡμέραν, Σήμερον, ἐν ΣΔαβὶδ' λέγων, μετὰ 
8 certain 7he’determines ‘day, To-day, in MDavid saying, after 


τοσοῦτον χρόνον, καθὼς Yeipnrat,' Σήμερον ἐὰν τῆς φωνῆς 
solong atime, (according as ithas beensaid,) To-day, if 2voice 


αὐτοῦ ἀκούσητε, μὴ.σκληρύνητε τὰς καρδίας. ὑμῶν. 8 Εἰ. γὰρ 


‘this ye will hear, harden not your hearts. For if 
αὐτοὺς ᾿Ιησοῦς κατέπαυσεν, οὐκ ἂν περὶ ἄλλης ἐλά- 


them 1 Jesus 2gave*rest, not concerning another *would “he ‘have 
(z.e. Joshua) 
~ « , »ἭἬἬ > / A ~ 
λει μετὰ. ταῦτα ἡμέρας" 9 aoe ἀπολείπεται σαββατισμὸς τῷ 


day. en remains asabbatism to the 


λαῷ τοῦ.θεοῦ. 10 ὁ.γὰρ εἰσελθὼν εἰς τὴν. κατάπαυσιν. αὐτοῦ, 

people of God. For hethat entered into his rest, 

καὶ αὐτὸς κατέπαυσεν ἀπὸ τῶν.ἔργων.αὐτοῦ, ὥσπερ ἀπὸ 

also he rested from his works, as 3from 

τῶν.ἰδίων ὁ θεός. 11 Σπουδάσωμεν οὖν εἰσελθεῖν εἰς 
*his δόντα 1God did]. | Weshould be diligent therefore toenter into 

ἐκείνην τὴν κατάπαυσιν, ἵνα.μὴ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ τις ὑποδείγ- 
that rest, lest ‘*after δύῃ “same ‘anyone ‘example 


Sspoken “afterwards 


5 τεσσεράκοντα TTrA. 
united in faith with those, &c.); συνκεκερασμένος T. 


LTTra ; Δαυὶδ aw. 


t συγκεκερασμένους LTrA, κεκραμένους W, (read them not 
Υ [τὴν] Tr. w διὰ A. x Aaveté 
Υ προείρηται it has been said before Lrtraw. 


ΤΥ: HEBREWS. 
ματι πέσῃ τῆς ἀπειθείας. 12 ζῶν. γὰρ ὁ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ 
?may “fall of disobedience. For living [is] the word of God and 


ἐνεργής, καὶ τομώτερος ὑπὲρ πᾶσαν μάχαιραν δίστομον, καὶ 
efficient, and sharper than every 7sword 1two-edged, even 
διϊκνούμενος ἄχρι μερισμοῦ ψυχῆς ὅτε" καὶ πνεύματος, ao- 
penetrating to [the} division bothofsoul and spirit, "of 
Gy τε καὶ μυελῶν, καὶ κριτικὸς ἐνθυμήσεων καὶ ἐννοιῶν 
Coie both and marrows, and([is] a discerner of [the] thoughts and intents 
καρδίας 13 καὶ οὐκιἔστιν κτίσις ἀφανὴς ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ" 
of [the] heart. And there is not acreatedthing unapparent before him; 
mavra.dé γυμνὰ καὶ τετραχηλισμένα τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς αὐτοῦ, 


but all things [are] naked and laid bare to the eyes of him, 
πρὸς ὃν ἡμῖν ὁλόγος. 
with whom [is]our account. 
14 “Eyorrec.oty ἀρχιερέα μέγαν διεληλυθότα τοὺς 
Having therefore a*high*priest ‘great [who] has passed through the 
οὐρανούς, ᾿Ιησοῦν τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ, κρατῶμεν τῆς ὁμο- 


heavens, Jesus the Son of God, weshould hold fast the con- 


λογίας. 15 οὐ-.γὰρ ἔχομεν ἀρχιερέα μὴ δυνάμενον ὅσυμπα- 
fession. For not have we a high priest not able to sym- 
θῆσαι" ταῖς.ἀσθενείαις.ἡμῶν, ὑπεπειραμένον᾽ .δὲ κατὰ πάντα 
pathise with our infirmities, but [who] has been tempted in all things 
καθ᾽ ὁμοιότητα χωρὶς ἁμαρτίας. 16 προσερχώμεθα οὖν 
according to(our] likeness, apartfrom sin. We should come therefore 
μετὰ παῤῥησίας τῷ θρόνῳ τῆς χάριτος, ἵνα λάβωμεν “ἔλεον," 
with boldness tothe throne of grace, that wemayreceive mercy, 
καὶ χάριν εὕρωμεν εἰς εὔκαιρον βοήθειαν. 


and *grace ‘may “find for opportune help. 
5 Πᾶς.γὰρ ἀρχιερεὺς ἐξ ἀνθρώπων λαμβανόμενος, ὑπὲρ 
For every high priest from among men being taken for 


πρὸς τὸν θεόν, ἵνα προσφέρῃ 
God, that he may offer 


2 μετριοπαθεῖν δυνά- 
30 *exercise "forbearance ‘being 


ἀνθρώπων καθίσταται τὰ 
men is constituted in things relating to 


a~_2 ‘ , q ~ 
δῶρά ὅτε! καὶ θυσίας ὑπὲρ ἁμαρτιῶν, 
both gifts, δηᾶ βδουϊῆἔσθβ for sins ; 
μενος τοῖς ἀγνοοῦσιν καὶ πλανωμένοις, ἐπεὶ καὶ αὐτὸς 
able withthose being ignorant and erring, since also himself 
΄ὔ 3. θέ Ξ ‘ εὃδ 4 , Π] ? ir 
περίκειται ἀσθενειαν" 3 Kai ia ταύτην ὀφείλει, 
is encompassed with infirmity ; and on account of . this [infirmity] he ought, 
~ ~ . ‘ « ~ , 
καθὼς περὶ τοῦ λαοῦ, οὕτως Kai περὶ ‘éavTOU' προσφέρειν 
evenas for the people, so also for himself to offer 
« " ~ ‘ ~ , ‘ ΄ 
βεὑπὲρ! ἁμαρτιῶν. 4 Καὶ οὐχ ἑαυτῷ τις λαμβάνει τὴν τιμήν, 
for sins. And not tohimself anyone takes the honour, 
’ € ‘ ~ ~ Ι ‘ « ᾽ , 
ἀλλὰ Βὸ" καλούμενος ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ, ἱκαθάπερ' καὶ "δ" ᾿Ααρών. 
but he being called by God, even as also Aaron, 
5 οὕτως καὶ ὁ χριστὸς οὐχ ἑαυτὸν ἐδόξασεν γενηθῆναι apy- 
Thus alsothe Christ ποὺ himself didglorify tobecome 8 ΒΙρἪ 
7 , ACs LZ ‘ 4 
septa, ἀλλ’ ὁ NaANoac πρὸς αὐτόν, Υἱός μου εἶ ov, ἐγὼ on- 
priest ; but he who said to him, Son ‘my artthou, I_ to- 
, ‘ ‘ , 
μερον γεγέννηκά σε. Θ καθὼς καὶ ἐν ἑτέρῳ λέγει, Σὺ 


day have begotten thee. Even as also in another [place] he says, Thou [art] 
~ 4 y2 A>) 

ἱερεὺς εἰς τὸναἰῶνα κατὰ τὴν τάξιν Μελχισεδέκ. 7 Ὃς ἐν 

8. priest forever accordingtothe order of Melchisedec. Who in 


565 


belief. 12 For the word 
of God is quick, and 
powerful, and sharper 
than any twoedged 
sword, piercing even te 
the dividing asunder 
of soul and spirit, and 
of the joints and mar- 
row, and 7s a discerner 
of the thoughts and 
intents of the heart, 
13 Neither is there any 
creature that is not 
manifest in his sight: 
but all things are na- 
ked and opened unto 
the eyes of him with 
whom we have to do. 


14 Seeing then that 
we have a great high 
priest, that is passed 
into the heavens, Je- 
sus the Son of God, let 
us hold fast our pro- 
fession. 15 For we 
have not an high 
priest which cannot 
be touched with the 
feeling of our infirm- 
ities ; but was in all 
points tempted "like 
as we are, yet without 
sin. 16 Let us there- 
fore come boldly unto 
the throne of grace, 
that we may obtain 
mercy, and find grace 
to help in time of need. 


Vv. For every high 
priest taken from a- 
mong men is ordained 
for menin things per- 
taining to God, that 
he may offer both gifta 
and sacrifices for sins : 
2 who can have com- 
passion on the igno- 
rant, and on them that 
are out of the way; 
for that he himself al- 
ΒΟ is compassed with 
infirmity. 3 And by 
reason hereof he ought, 
as for the people, so 
also for himself, to of- 
fer for sins, 4 And no 
man taketh this ho- 
nour untohimself, but 
he that is called of 
God, as was Aaron. 
5 So also Christ glori- 
fied not himself to be 
made an high priest ; 
but he that said unto 
him, Thou art my Son, 
to day havel begotten 
thee. 6 As he saith al- 
so in another place, 
Thou art a priest for 
ever after the order of 
Melchisedec. 7 Who in 


8 συν- TA. Ὁ πεπειρασμένον EGLTTrAW. 
ε δι’ αὐτὴν on account of it LTTraw. 
1 καθὼς L; καθώσπερ TA; καθώς περ Tr. 


 — χε both LTTraw. 
d — τε both [tr]. 
bh — ὃ GLTTrAW. 


f aurov L. 


ς ἔλεος LTTrAW. 
ΒΕ περὶ LTTrAW. 


606 


the days of his flesh, 
when he had offered up 
prayers and supplica- 
tions with strong cry- 
ing and tears unto him 
that was able to save 
him from death, and 
was heard in that he 
feared ; 8 though he 
were a Son, yet learn- 
ed he obedience by the 
things which he suf- 
fered; 9 and being 
made perfect, he be- 
came the author of 
eternal salvation unto 
all them that obey 
him ; 10 called of God 
an high priest after 
the order of Melchise- 
dec. 11 Of whom we 
have many things to 
say, and hard to be 
uttered, seeing ye are 
dull of hearing. 12 For 
when for the time ye 
ought to be teachers, 
ye have need that one 
teach you again which 
be the first principles 
of the oracles of God; 
and are become such 
as have need of milk, 
and not of strong meat. 
13 For every one that 
useth milk zs unskil- 
ful in the word of 
righteousness: for he 
is a babe. 14 But strong 
meat belongeth tothem 
that are of full age, 
even those who by rea- 
son of use have their 
senses exercised to dis- 
cern both good and 
evil, 


VI. Therefore leay- 
ing the principles of 
the doctrine of Christ, 
let us go on unto per- 
fection ; not laying a- 
gain the foundation 
of repentance from 
dead works, and of 
faith toward God, 2 of 
the doctrine of bap- 
tisms, and of laying on 
of hands, and of resur- 
rection of the dead, 
and of eternal judg- 
ment. 3 And this will 
we do, if God permit. 
4 For it ts impossible 
tor those who were 
once enlightened, and 
have tasted of the hea- 
venly gift, and were 
made partakers of the 
Holy Ghost, 5and have 
tasted the good word 
of God, and the powers 
of the world to come, 
6 if they shall fall a- 
way, to renew them 
again untorepentance; 


ΠΡΌΣ, HBP ALLOYNS. ViVi 
ταῖς ἡμέραις τῆς. σαρκὸς αὐτοῦ δεήσεις.τε καὶ ἱκετηρίας πρὸς 
the days of his flesh both supplications and entreaties 30 

τὸν δυνάμενον σώζειν αὐτὸν ἐκ θανάτου, μετὰ κραυ- 
“him *who [‘was] ‘able ‘to*save ‘him ‘from death, ‘with ‘Sery- 
γῆς ἰσχυρᾶς καὶ δακρύων προσενέγκας, καὶ εἰσακουσθεὶς ἀπὸ 
ing ‘*strong ‘*and ?’tears ‘having “offered, and having been heard in 
τῆς.εὐλαβείας, 8 καίπερ ὧν υἱός, ἔμαθεν ad’ ὧν 
that [he] feared ; though being ason, he learned, from the things which 
ἔπαθεν τὴν ὑπακοήν, θ9 καὶ τελειωθεὶξὶ ἐγένετο "τοῖς 
he suffered, obedience ; and having been perfected became to *those *that 
ὑπακούουσιν αὐτῷ πᾶσιν" αἴτιος σωτηρίας αἰωνίου" 10 προσ- 

*obey Shim lall, author of *salvation ‘eternal ; having 

αγορευθεὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ἀρχιερεὺς κατὰ τὴν τάξιν Μελ- 
been saluted by God [as] high priest according to the order of Mel- 
xeoedéx. 11 Περὶ οὗ πολὺς ἡμῖν.ὁ.λόγος καὶ δυσερμή- 
chisedec, Concerning whom [*is]*much ‘our *discourse and difficult ἴῃ inter- 
veuTocg λέγειν, ἐπεὶ νωθροὶ γεγόνατε ταῖς.ἀκοαῖς. 12 καὶ. γὰρ 


pretation to speak, since sluggish yehavebecome in hearing. For truly 
/ sg ’ A A , 4 
ὀφείλοντες εἶναι διδάσκαλοι διὰ τὸν χρόνον, πάλιν 
(when ye} ought to be teachers becauseof the time, again 


χρείαν ἔχετε τοῦ.διδάσκειν ὑμᾶς τίνα τὰ στοιχεῖα τῆς 
need yehave of [one] to teach you what [are]the elements of the 


ἀρχῆς τῶν λογίων τοῦ θεοῦ" Kai γεγόνατε χρείαν ἔχοντες 
beginning of the oracles of God, and havebecome 7need ‘t+having 
΄ ‘ ~ ~ ~ «ς ,ὔ 
γάλακτος, ἱκαὶ" οὐ στερεᾶς τροφῆς. 18 πᾶς.γὰρ ὁ μετέχων 
of milk, and not of solid food ; for everyone that partakes 
γάλακτος ἄπειρος λόγου δικαιοσύνης" νήπιος.γάρ ἐστιν" 
of milk [is] unskilled in [{Π6] word of righteousness, for an infant he is; 
14 τελείων dé ἐστιν ἡ στερεὰ τροφή, τῶν διὰ τὴν 
but *for [86] Sfully 7"grown “15 *solid *food, who on account of 
ἕξιν τὰ αἰσθητήρια γεγυμνασμένα ἐχόντων πρὸς διάκρισιν 


habit ?the *senses exercised *have for distinguishing 
~ ν᾿ ~ Φ 
καλοῦ τε καὶ κακοῦ. 
Ξρβοοᾶ ‘bothand evil. 
‘ ? , a ~ ? ~ ~ ~ ΄ > ‘A 
6 Διὸ ἄφεντες TOY THC ἀρχῆς τοῦ χριστοῦ λόγον, ἐπὶ 


Wherefore, having left the *of *the ‘beginning Sof ἴθ “Christ ‘discourse, to 


τὴν τελειότητα φερώμεθα' μὴ πάλιν θεμέλιον καταβαλλόμενοι 
the full growth we should goon; ποῦ again a foundation laying 
μετανοίας ἀπὸ νεκρῶν ἔργων, Kai πίστεως ἐπὶ θεόν, 2 βατ- 
of repentance from dead works, and faith in God, *of®wash- 
τισμῶν ™dWayic,' ἐπιθέσεώς.τε χειρῶν, ἀναστάσεώς. "τε! vE- 
ings ‘of(*the]*doctrine, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrection of [the] 
‘ ΄, > 7ὔ \ ~ ΄ 72 
κρῶν, καὶ κρίματος αἰωνίου. 3 καὶ τοῦτο ποιήσομεν, σἐάνπερ" 
dead, and of*judgment ‘eternal; and this will we do, if indeed 
‘ , 
ἐπιτρέπῃ ὁθεός. 4 ἀδύνατον.γὰρ τοὺς ἅπαξ φωτισθέντας, 
permit 1God. For [it is] impossible, those once enlightened, 
γευσαμένους.τε τῆς δωρεᾶς τῆς ἐπουρανίου, καὶ μετόχους 
and [who] tasted of the 2eift *heavenly, and partakers 
γενηθέντας πνεύματος ἁγίου, ὃ καὶ καλὸν γευσαμένους 


became of [086] *Spirit *Holy, and [*the] *good 1tasted 
θεοῦ ῥῆμα δυνάμεις.τε μέλλοντος αἰῶνος, 6 καὶ 
Sof δᾳοἅ “word and [the] works of power of [the] *to “come lage, and 


3 / 2 , ? 
παραπεσόντας, πάλιν ἀνακαινίζειν εἰς μετάνοιαν, ἀνασταὺυ- 
{who] fell away, again to renew to repentance, crucify- 


Ξ- A ᾿ ἜΣ 
x πᾶσιν τοῖς ὑπακούουσιν αὐτῷ ΙΎΤΑ. 
ο ἐάν περ LTrw. 


Ὁ fre} Tr. 


1 — καὶ T[Tr]. m διδαχήν [the] doctrine L. 


HEBREWS. 


ἑαυτοῖς τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ παραδειγ- 
ing for themeelves [as they do] the Son of God, and exposing 
ατίζοντας. 7 γῆ.γὰρ ἡ πιοῦσα τὸν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῆς Ῥπολλάκις 
de publicly. For ground which drank the ‘upon ‘it %often 
ἐρχόμενον" ὑετόν, Kai τίκτουσα βοτάνην εὔθετον ἐκείνοις 
7coming train, and produces “herbage 180 for those 
δι ove καὶ γεωργεῖται, μεταλαμβάνει εὐλογίας ἀπὸ τοῦ 
for sake of whom also it is tilled, partakes of blessing from 
θεοῦ: 8 ἐκφέρουσα.δὲ ἀκάνθας Kai τριβόλους, ἀδόκιμος καὶ 
God; but [that]bringing forth thorns and thistles [is]rejected and 
κατάρας ἐγγύς, ἧς τὸ τέλος εἰς καῦσιν. 9 Πεπείσμεθα. δὲ 
38. “curse ‘near “ἴο, of which the end[is]for burning. Butweare persuaded 
περὶ ὑμῶν, ἀγαπητοί, τὰ “κρείττονα" καὶ ἐχόμενα 
concerning you, beloved, better things, and([things] connected with 
σωτηρίας. εἰ καὶ οὕτως λαλοῦμεν. 10 οὐ.γὰρ ἄδικος ὁ θεὸς 
salvation, *if*even thus we speak. For not unrighteous [is] God 
ἐπιλαθέσθαι τοῦ.ἔργου.ὑμῶν Kai ᾿τοῦ κόπου" τῆς ἀγάπης ἧς 
to forget your work and the labour of love which 
ἐνεδείξασθε εἰς τὸ. ὄνομα.αὐτοῦ, διακονήσαντες τοῖς ἁγίοις Kai 
yedidshew to his name, having served tothe saints and 
διακονοῦντες. 11 ἐπιθυμοῦμεν.δὲ ἕκαστον ὑμῶν THY αὐτὴν 
(still] serving. But we desire each of you the same 
ἐνδείκνυσθαι σπουδὴν πρὸς THY πληροφορίαν τῆς ἐλπίδος ἄχρι 
Ξἴο 5 ‘diligence to the fullassurance ofthe hope unto 
τέλους" 12 aye: μὴ νωθροὶ γένησθε, μιμηταὶ δὲ τῶν διὰ 
(the) end; that“not*sluggish ‘ye *be,. but imitators of those who through 
πίστεως καὶ μακροθυμίας κληρονομούντων τὰς ἐπαγγελίας. 
faith and long patience inherit the promises. 
13 Τῷ.γὰρ. Αβραὰμ ἐπαγγειλάμενος ὁ θεός, ἐπεὶ κατ᾽ οὐδενὸς 
For *to >Abraham “having *promised God, since by no one 
= , ? , »Ἤ Le ~ , a? T ‘ 
εἶχεν μείζονος ὀμόσαι, ὥμοσεν καθ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ, 14 λέγων, "Ἢ ".μὴν 
he had greater toswear, swore by himself, saying, Surely 
εὐλογῶν εὐλογήσω σε, Kai πληθύνων πληθυνῶ cE 15 Kai 
blessing Iwill bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee; and 
οὕτως μακροθυμήσας ἐπέτυχεν τῆς ἐπαγγελίας. 16 ἄνθρω- 
thus having had long patience he obtained the promise. *Men 
ποι ἱμὲν" γὰρ κατὰ τοῦ μείζονος ὀμνύουσιν, Kai πάσης αὐτοῖς 
Sindeed ‘for ‘by ‘the “greater “swear, and ofall *to *them 
ἀντιλογίας πέρας εἰς βεβαίωσιν ὁ ὅρκος" 17 ἐν.ᾧ περισσό- 
‘gainsaying anend for confirmation [is] the oath. Wherein *more *a- 
τερον βουλόμενος ὁ θεὸς ἐπιδεῖξαι τοῖς κληρονόμοις τῆς ἐπαγ- 
bundantly 7desiring God toshew tothe heirs of pro- 
γελίας τὸ ἀμετάθετον τῆς. βουλῆς αὐτοῦ, ἐμεσίτευσεν ὅρκῳ, 
mise the unchangeableness of his counsel, interposed byanoath, 
18 ἵνα διὰ δύο πραγμάτων ἀμεταθέτων, ἐν οἷς ἀδύνατον 
that by two *things tunchangeable, in which [it was] impossible 
ψεύσασθαι “θεόν, ἰσχυρὰν παράκλησιν ἔχωμεν οἱ κατα- 
3ἴο 116 ([‘for] *God, strong encouragement we might have who fled 
φυγόντες κρατῆσαι τῆς προκειμένης ἐλπίδος" 19 ἣν we 
forrefuge tolay holdon the 7set “before [*us] *hope, which as 
ἄγκυραν ἔχομεν τῆς ψυχῆς “ ἀσφαλῆ" τε καὶ βεβαίαν, καὶ εἰσ- 
ananchor wehave ofthe soul both certain and firm, and en- 
ἐρχομένην etc τὸ ἐσώτερον τοῦ καταπετάσματος, 20 ὕπου 
tering into that within the veil ; where 


Viz 


pouvrac 


4 κρείσσονα LTTraw. 


Ῥ ἐρχόμενον πολλάκις LITrAW. 
* — μὲν ἱτττ[Α]. 


the love) Girtraw. s Et LTTra. v + Tov T. 


567 
seeing they crucify to 
themselves the Son of 
God afresh, and put 
him to an open shame. 
7 For the earth which 
drinketh in the rain 
that cometh oft upon 
it, and bringeth forth 
herbs meet for them by 
whom it is dressed, re- 
ceiveth blessing from 
God: 8 but that which 
beareth thorns and 
briers is rejected, and 
ts nigh unto cursing; 
whose end is. to be 
burned. 9 But, belov- 
ed, we are persuaded 
better things of you, 
and things that ac- 
company _ salvation, 
though we thus speak. 
10 For God is not un- 
righteous to forget 
your work and labour 
of love, which ye have 
shewed toward his 
name, in that ye have 
ministered to the 
saints, and do mini- 
ster. 11 And we desire 
that every one of you 
do shew the same dili- 
gence to the full as- 
surance of hope unto 
the end: 12 that ye be 
not slothful. but fol- 
lowers of them who 
through faith and’ pa- 
tience inherit the pro- 
mises. 13 For when 
God made promise to 
Abraham, because he 
could sware by no 
greater, he sware by 
himself, 14 saying, 
Surely blessing I will 
bless thee, and multi- 
plying I will multiply 
thee. 15 And so, after 
he had patiently en- 
dured, he obtained the 
promise. 16 For men 
verily swear by the 
greater: and an oath 
for confirmation ts to 
them an end of all 
strife. 17 Wherein God, 
willing more abun- 
dantly to shew unto 
the heirs of promise 
the immutability of 
his counsel, confirmed 
it by an oath : 18 that 
by two immutable 
things, in which ἐξ 
was impossible for God 
to lie, we might have 
a strong consolation, 
who have fled for re- 
fuge to lay hold upon 
the hope set before us: 
19 which hope we have 
as an anchor of the 
soul, both sure and 
stedfast,and which en- 
tereth into that with- 
in the veil; 20 whi- 


τ — τοῦ κόπου (read τῆς ay. 


π ἀσφαλήν LI. 


568 


ther the forerunner is 
for us entered, even 
Jesus, made an high 
priest for ever after 
the order of Melchise- 
dec. 

VII. For this Mel- 
chisedec, king of Sa- 
lem, priest of the most 
high God, who met 
Abraham __ returning 
from the slaughter of 
the kings, and blessed 
him ; 2 to whom also 
Abraham gave a tenth 
part of all; first being 
by interpretation King 
of righteousness, and 
after that also King 
of Salem, which is, 
King of peace ;3 with- 
out father, without 
mother, without de- 
scent, having neither 
beginning of days, nor 
end of life; but made 
like unto the Son of 
God ; abideth a priest 
continually. 4 Now 
consider how great 
this man was, unto 
whom even the patri- 
arch Abraham gave 
the tenth of the spoils. 
5 And verily they that 
are of the sons of Levi, 
who receive the office 
of the priesthood, have 
a commandment to 
take tithes of the peo- 

le according to the 
aw, that is, of their 
brethren, though they 
come out of the loins 
of Abraham: 6 but 
he whose descent is 
not counted from them 
received tithes of A- 
pbraham, and blessed 
him that had the pro- 
mises. 7 And without 
all contradiction the 
less is blessed of the 
better. 8 And here men 
that die receive tithes; 
put there he receiveth 
them, of whom it is 
witnessed that he liv- 
eth. 9 And as I may 
so say, Levi also, who 
receiveth tithes, payed 
tithes in Abraham. 
10 For he was yet in 
the loins of his father, 
when Melchisedec met 
him. 11 If therefore 
erfection were by the 
evitical priesthood, 
ufor under it the peo- 
ple received the law,) 
what further need was 
there that another 
priest should rise after 
the order of Melchise- 
dec, and not be called 


* — - τοῦ E. 
[sons']) 106 
f ηὐλόγηκεν L. 


Υ ὃς (read who, having met) LTra. 
Ὁ Aevet TTrA. 

8 δι Lrtra. 
‘ αὐτῆς (read on the ground of it) τι AW. 


ΠΡῸΣ ΒΡ Ory =. . 
πρόδρομος ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν εἰσῆλθεν ᾿Ιησοῦς, 


[25] forerunner for us 7entered 1 Jesus, 
Μελχισεδὲκ ἀρχιερεὺς γενόμενος εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα. 
of Melchisedec a high priest having become for ever. 
7 Οὗτος.γὰρ ὁ Μελχισεδέκ, βασιλεὺς Σαλήμ, ἱερεὺς Tov θεοῦ 
For this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of God 
rou! ὑψίστου, YO" συναντήσας ᾿Αβραὰμ ὑ : ἱπὸ TH 
ὁ σας ρααμ ὑποστρέφοντι ATO TNC 
the most high, who met Abraham returning from the 
κοπῆς THY βασιλέων, καὶ εὐλογήσας αὐτόν" 2 ᾧ Kai δεκάτην 
en of the Kings, and having blessed him; to whom also “a *tenth 


ἀπὸ πάντων ἐμέρισεν ᾿Αβραάμ᾽ πρῶτον μὲν ἑρμηνευόμενος 
Fof Sall *divided Abraham ; st being inienpried 


βασιλεὺς δικαιοσύνης, ἔπειτα.δὲ καὶ βασιλεὺς Σαλῆμ, ὕ ἐστιν 
king of righteousness, andthen also king of Salem, which is 


βασιλεὺς εἰρήνη. 3 ἀπάτωρ, ἀμήτωρ, ἀγενεαλόγητος" 
king of ences ; without father, without mother, without genealogy ; 

μήτε ἀρχὴν ἡμερῶν, μήτε ζωῆς τέλος ἔχων" ἀφωμοιωμένος δὲ 

neither beginning of days nor “of *life tend ΠΆΙΣ but assimilated 


τῷ vip τοῦ θεοῦ, μένει ἱερεὺς εἰς.τὸ.διηνεκές. 4 Θεωρεῖτε. δὲ 
to the Son of God, abides _a priest in perpetuity. Now consider 


πηλίκος οὗτος, καὶ" δεκάτην ᾿Αβραὰμ ἔδωκεν ἐκ 
how great this [one was], to whom Seven “a 7tenth ‘Abraham “gave “out %of 


τῶν ἀκροθινίων ὁ πατριάρχης. 5 Kai οἱ μὲν ἐκ τῶν 
1.0} Mspoils “the patriarch. And they indeed from anions the 
*yi@y' -Aevi' τὴν ἱερατείαν λαμβάνοντες, ἐντολὴν ἔχουσιν 


VI, VIL. 


κατὰ τὴν τάξιν 
according to the order 


sons of Levi, *the “priesthood ('who] seein commandment have 
οἀποδεκατοῦν" τὸν Nady κατὰ τὸν νόμον, “τουτέστιν, " 
to take tithes from the people Secon tothe law, thatis [from] 


τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς. αὐτῶν, καίπερ ἐξεληλυθότας ἐκ τῆς ὀσφύος 
their brethren though having come out of the loins 


>? ’ « A > ~ ’ 
Αβραάμ' 6 ὁ- δὲ  μηὴ.γενεαλογούμενος ἐξ αὐτῶν δεδεκάτω- 
of Abraham ; but he[who} reckons no genealogy, from them has tithed 
κεν °rov' ᾿Αβραάμ, καὶ τὸν ἔχοντα τὰς ἐπαγγελίας ἰεὐλό- 
Abraham, and “him*who *had ®the 7promises, thas 


κεν" 7 χωρὶς.δὲ πάσης ἀντιλογίας τὸ ἔλαττον ὑπὸ τοῦ 
“blessed. But apart from all gainsaying the inferior by the 


κρείττονος εὐλογεῖται. ὃ καὶ ὧδε μὲν δεκάτας ἀποθνήσκοντες 
superior is blessed. And here ‘tithes gene 3418 
ζῇ. 


ἄνθρωποι λαμβάνουσιν" ἐκεῖ. δέ, μαρτυρούμενος Ort 
men “receive ; but there[one] witnessed of that he lives; 


9 Kai, ἘΣ ἐδιὰ! ᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ ἈΛευϊ! ὁ δεκάτας 
and, so to speak, through Abraham, also Levi, who “tithes 
λαμβάνων dedecarwrav’ 10 ἔτι.γὰρ ἐν τῇ ὀσφύϊ τοῦ.πατρὸς 
‘receives, has been tithed. For yet in the loins of {his} father 
5 «- ΄ ? ~ iki oF ᾽ \ > 
ἦν, OTE συνήντησεν αὐτῷ *o' Μελχισεδέκ. 11 Εἰ μὲν οὖν 
he was when ?met shim *Melchisedec. Ifindeed then 

τελείωσις διὰ τῆς ‘Asviricie! ἱερωσύνης ἦν, ὁ.λαὸς. γὰρ 


perfection by the Levitical priesthood were, for the people[*based] 
ἐπ᾿ ἰαὐτῇ" Ὀνενομοθέτητο," τίς ἔτι χρεία κατὰ 
Supon 7it ‘had “τθοθιγοϑᾶ [5086] slaw, what still need [was ἘΒΕΣΘῚ according to 


τὴν τάξιν Μελχισεδὲκ ἕτερον ἀνίστασθαι ἱερέα, καὶ οὐ 
the order of Melchisedee [for] another *to *arise ‘priest; and not 


:--- καὶ LTr. 2 — υἱῶν (read 
© ἀποδεκατοῖν TTrA. 4 τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν GT. € — τὸν LTTrA. 
h Aevis L; Aevets TTrA. i—outtra, K Λενειτικῆς ΤΑ. 


πὶ ψενομοθέτηται has received [the] law LrtTraw. 


VII. HEBREWS. 
κατὰ τὴν τάξιν ᾿Ααρὼν λέγεσθαι: 12 μετατιθεμένης. γὰρ 
according to the order of Aaron to be named ? For *being ‘changed 
τῆς ἱερωσύνης, ἐξ ἀνάγκης Kai νόμου μετάθεσις γίνεται. 
1the priesthood, from necessity also of law achange takes place. 
13 ἐφ᾽ ὃν. γὰρ λέγεται ταῦτα, φυλῆς ἑτέρας μετέσχηκεν, ἀφ᾽ ἧς 
For he of whom are said these things, a7tribe ‘different haspartin, of which 
οὐδεὶς προσέσχηκεν τῷ θυσιαστηρίῳ: 14 πρόδηλον. γὰρ ὅτι 
no one hasgiven attendance at the altar. For [it is] manifest that 
ἐξ ᾿Τούδα ἀνατέταλκεν ὁ.κύριος. ἡμῶν, εἰς ἣν φυλὴν "οὐδὲν 
out of Juda has sprung our Lord, asto which tribe “nothing 
περὶ ἱερωσύνης" “Μωσῆς! ἐλάλησεν. 15 Kai περισσότερον 
*concerning *priesthood 1Moses "spoke. And more abundantly 
ἔτι κατάδηλόν ἐστιν, εἰ κατὰ τὴν ὁμοιότητα Μελχισεδὲκ 
yet quite manifest itis, since according ἕο the similitude of Melchisedec 
aviorarat ἱερεὺς ἕτερος, 16 ὃς οὐ κατὰ νόμον ἐντο- 


arises a *priest ‘different, who not according to law of?command- 
λῆς Poapxucijc! γέγονεν, ἀλλὰ κατὰ δύναμιν ζωῆς 
ment ‘fleshly has been constituted, but according to power of “life 


? ,ὔ Ἁ 4 ~II , oe ‘ « 4 > 4 
akatahvrou' 17 “μαρτυρεῖ".γάρ, Ore ov ἱερεὺς εἰς τὸν 
1indissoluble. For he testifies, Thou [art] apriest for 
αἰῶνα κατὰ τὴν τάξιν Μελχισεδέκ. 18 ᾿Αθέτησις μὲν yao 
ever according to the order of Melchisedec. 2A Sputting *away ‘for 
γίνεται προαγούσης ἐντολῆς, διὰ τὸ. αὐτῆς. ἀσθενὲς 
thereis of the going *before ‘commandment, because of its weakness 
καὶ ἀνωφελές, 19 οὐδὲν.γὰρ ἐτελείωσεν ὁ νόμος, ἐπεισ- 
and unprofitableness, (for *nothing “perfected ‘the 7law,) (*the] 7intro- 
aywyn δὲ κρείττονος ἐλπίδος, dv ἧς ἐγγίζομεν τῷ θεῷ. 20 Kai 
duction *and of a better hope by which we draw near to God. And 
καθ᾽ ὕσον οὐ χωρὶς ὁρκωμοσίας: οἱ μὲν γάρ, 
by how much [it was] not apart from [the] swearing of an oath, (*they for 
χωρὶς ὁρκωμοσίας εἰσὶν ἱερεῖς γεγονότες, 21 ὁ δέ, 
without [the] swearingof anoath are “priests *become, but he 
τμετὰ" ὁρκωμοσίας, διὰ τοῦ λέγοντος πρὸς αὐτόν, 
with [the] swearing οὗ anoath, by him who says, as to him, 
"Quocey κύριος καὶ οὐ.μεταμεληθήσεται; Σὺ ἱερεὺς εἰς τὸν 
*swore ['the] Lord, and will not repent, Thou [art] a priest for 
αἰῶνα ‘kata τὴν τάξιν Μελχισεδέκ" 22 κατὰ τοσοῦτον" 
ever according to the order of Melchisedec,) by so much 
κρείττονος διαθήκης γέγονεν ἔγγυος ᾿Ιησοῦς. 23 Kai ot 
of a better covenant *has*become ‘surety Jesus. And they 
μὲν πλείονές εἰσιν. “γεγονότες ἱερεῖς" διὰ τὸ θανάτῳ κω- 
*many ‘are priests on account of by death being 
λύεσθαι παραμένειν: 24 0.6&, διὰ τὸ μένειν. αὐτὸν εἰς 
hindered from continuing; but he, because of his abiding for 
τὸν αἰῶνα, ἀπαράβατον ἔχει τὴν ἱερωσύνην᾽ 25 ὅθεν Kai 


ever, ‘intransmissible ‘thas *the riesthood,. Whence also 
σώζειν εἰς.τὸ. παντελὲς δύναται τοὺς προσερχομένους Ou 
to save completely heis able those who approach by 


αὐτοῦ τῷ θεῷ, πάντοτε ζῶν εἰς.τὸ. ἐντυγχάνειν ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν. 


him toGod, always living to intercede for them. 
26 τοιοῦτος.γὰρ apr τ ἔπρεπεν ἀρχιερεύς, ὕσιος, ἄκακος, 
For such 53 *became ‘a“*high*priest, holy, harmless, 


569 
after the orderof Aar- 
on? 12 For the priesi- 
hood being changed, 
there igs made of ne- 
cessity a change also 
of the law. 13 For 
he of whom these 
things are spoken per- 
taineth to another 
tribe, of which no maz 
gave attendance at the 
altar. 14 For tt ts evi- 
dent that our Lord 
sprang out of Juda; 
of which tribe Moses 
spake nothing con- 
cerning priesthood. 
15 And it is yet far 
more evident : for that 
aiter the similitude of 
Melchisedec there a- 
riseth another priest, 
16 who is made, not 
after thelaw of a car- 
nal commandment, 
but after the power of 
an endless life. 17 For 
he testifieth, Thou 
art a priest for ever 
after the order of 
Melchisedec. 18 For 
there is verily a dis- 
annulling of the com- 
mandment going be- 
fore for the weakness 
and unprofitableness 
thereof. 19 For the law 
made nothing perfect, 
but the bringing in of 
a better hope did; by 
the which we draw 
nigh unto God. 20 And 
inasmuch as not with- 
out an oath he was 
made priest: 21 (for 
those priests were 
made without an oath; 
but this with an oath 
by him that said unto 
him, The Lord sware 
and will not repent, 
Thou art a priest for 
ever after the order 
of Melchisedec :) 22 by 
so much was {6503 
made a surety ofa bet- 
ter testament. 23 And 
they truly were many 
priests, because they 
were not suffered to 
continue by reason of 
death: 24 but this 
man, because he con- 
tinueth ever, hath an 
unchangeable priest- 
hood. 25 Wherefore he 
is able also to save 
them to the uttermost 
that come unto God 
by him, seeing he ever 
liveth to make in- 
tercession for them. 
26 For such an high 
priest became us, w 


ο Μωῦσῆς GLTTrAW. 


π περὶ ἱερέων (priests) οὐδὲν LTTrAW. 
pe vep pa 
μεθ᾽ Le 


4 μαρτυρεῖται (read for he is testified of) Lrtraw. 
χισεδέκ TIrA. ἵ TogovTOLTTrAW. ἃ + καὶ also Ta. 
also [L]rTraw. 


τ ἱερεῖς γεγονότες LAW. 


P σαρκίνης fleshy LTTraw. 
5. — κατὰ τὴν τάξιν Μελ- 


w+ καὶ 


670 


as holy, harmless, un- 
defiled, separate from 
sinners, and made 
higher than the hea- 
vens ; 27 who needeth 
not daily, as those high 
priests, to offer up sa- 
crifice, first for hisown 
sins, and then for the 
people’s: for this he 
did once, when he 
offered up himself. 
28 For the law maketh 
men high priests which 
have infirmity; but 
the word of the oath, 
which was since the 
law, maketh the Son, 
who is consecrated for 
evermore. 


VIII. Now of the 
things which we have 
spoken this ts the sum: 
We have such an high 
priest, who is set on 
the right hand of the 
throne of the Majesty 
in the heavens; 2 4 
minister of the sanctu- 
ary, and of the true 
tabernacle, which the 
Lord pitched, and not 
man. 


3 For every high 
priest is ordained to 
offer gifts and sacri- 
fices: wherefore tt is 
of necessity that this 
man have somewhat 
also to offer. 4 For if 
he were on earth, he 
should not be a priest, 
seeing that there are 
priests that offer gifts 
according to the law: 
5 who serve unto the 
example and shadow 
of heavenly things, 
as Moses was admo- 
nished of God when 
he was about to make 
the tabernacle: for, 
See, saith he, that 
thou make all things 
according to the pat- 
tern shewed to thee in 
the mount. 6 But now 
hath he obtained a 
more excellent mini- 
stry, by how much al- 
so he is the mediator 
of a better covenant, 
which was established 
upon better promises. 
7 For if that first co- 
venant had been fault- 
less, then should no 
place have been sought 
for the second. 8 For 
finding fault with 


ΠΡΟ YEEVEIP AAMT ΟΥΣ VII, Vill. 
ἀμίαντος, κεχωρισμένος ἀπὸ τῶν. ἁμαρτωλῶν, Kai ὑψηλότερος 
undefiled, separated from sinners, and 7higher 

τῶν οὐρανῶν γενόμενος" 27 ὃς οὐκ. ἔχει καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἀνάγ- 
3Ξύμδῃ *the ®heavens *become : who has not day by day neces- 
κην, ὥσπερ οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς, πρότερον ὑπὲρ τῶν.ἰδίων ἁμαρτιῶν 
sity, as the high priests, first for his own sins 
θυσίας ἀναφέρειν, Exeira τῶν τοῦ λαοῦ" τοῦτο.γὰρ 
“sacrifices ᾽ἴο *offer *up, then for those of the people; for this 
ἐποίησεν Ξξἐφάπαξ," ἑαυτὸν γἀνενέγκας." 28 ὁ.νόμος. γὰρ av- 

he did once for all, *himself 'having “offered “up. For the law 
θρώπους καθίστησιν ἀρχιερεῖς, ἔχοντας ἀσθένειαν" ὁ.λόγος. δὲ 
?men Xconstitutes high priests, [who] have infirmity; but the word 
THC ὁρκωμοσίας τῆς ετὰ τὸν νόμον, υἱὸν εἰς τὸν 
of the swearing of the oath, which [is] after the law, aSon for 
αἰῶνα τετελειωμένον. 


ever perfected, 
8 Κεφάλαιον.δὲ ἐπὶ τοῖς λεγομένοις, τοιοῦτον 
Now a summary of the things being spoken of [15], Ssuch 


ἔχομεν ἀρχιερέα, ὃς ἐκάθισεν ἐν δεξιᾷ τοῦ θρόνου τῆς 
‘we “have ἃ high priest, who sat down on([the]right hand of the throne of the 
μεγαλωσύνης ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς, 2 THY ἁγίων λειτουργός, Kai 

greatness in the _ heavens; “of *the *holies 2minister, and 
τῆς σκηνῆς τῆς ἀληθινῆς, ἣν ἔπηξεν ὁ κύριος, *kai' οὐκ 
of the *tabernacle 1true which “pitched 'the *Lord and not 
ἄνθρωπος. 

man, 

3 Πᾶς γὰρ ἀρχιερεὺς εἰς TO προσφέρειν δῶρα.τε Kai θυσίας 

Forevery high priest for to offer both gifts and sacrifices 

καθίσταται" ὕθεν ἀναγκαῖον ἔχειν Te Καὶ τοῦ- 
is constituted ; whence [it is] necessary “ἴο °have °something 7also [*for] this 
Tov ὃ προσενέγκῃ. 4 εἰμὲν *yap' ἣν ἐπὶ γῆς, οὐδ᾽ 


3016 which he may ofter. *If*indeed ‘for he were on earth, not even 
ἂν.ἣν ἱερεύς, ὄντων ὕτῶν ἱερέων! τῶν προσφερόντων 
would he be apriest, there being the priests who offer 
κατὰ ‘rov' νόμον τὰ δῶρα, 5 οἵτινες ὑποδείγματι Kai 
according to the law the gifts, who [the] representation and 


σκιᾷ λατρεύουσιν τῶν ἐπουρανίων, καθῶς κεχρημάτισ- 


shadow serve ofthe heavenlies, according as *was “divinely *in- 
d ~ Il / ? ~ ‘ , «“ ΄ 

ται Μωσῆς" μέλλων ἐπιτελεῖν τὴν σκηνήν, “Opa,-yap 

structed *Moses being about toconstruct the tabernacle; for, see, 


φησιν, ποιήσῃς" πάντα κατὰ τὸν τύπον τὸν δειχθέντα 
says he, thoumake all things according to the pattern which was shewn 
σοι ἐν τῷ ὄρει. 6 fyvvi'dé διαφορωτέρας τέτευχεν" 
thee in the mountain, But now amoreexcellent “he *has ‘obtained 
λειτουργίας, Oow καὶ κρείττονός ἐστιν διαθήκης μεσίτης; 
lministry ὈΓΥ somuchasalso of abetter “he*is ‘covenant mediator, 
ἥτις ἐπὶ κρείττοσιν ἐπαγγελίαις νενομοθέτηται. 7 ἘΕἰ.γὰρ 
which upon better promises has been established. For if 
ἡ-πρώτη.ἐκείνη ἦν ἄμεμπτος, οὐκ ἂν δευτέρας ἐζητεῖτο 
that first {one] were faultless, not for a second would *be “sought 
8 μεμφόμενος.γὰρ "avroic' λέγει, ᾿Ιδού, ἡμέραι ἔρ- 


For finding fault, “*to*them ‘he says, Lo, days are 


τόπος. 
place. 


χ ἐφ᾽ ἅπαξ τι. 


if then indeed) Lrtraw. 


4 Mwions GLITrAW. 


2 οὖν (read 
© — τὸν LITrA. 
ὃ τέτυχεν LTAW. 


Υ προσενέγκας having offered τ. 2 — καὶ LTTrAW. 
b — τῶν ἱερέων (read τῶν those who) LTTraw. 
€ ποιήσεις thou shalt make Lrtraw. T νῦν L. 


ἃ αὐτοὺς (read finding fault with them) rr. 


VIII, IX. HEBREWS. 


χονται, λέγει κύριος, Kai συντελξσω ἐπὶ τὸν οἶκον 
coming, saith [the] Lord, and I wiilratify as regards the house 
Ἰσραὴλ καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν οἶκον ᾿Ιούδα διαθήκην καινήν" 9 οὐ 
of Israel and asregardsthe house ofJuda a*covenant ‘new; not 
κατὰ τὴν διαθήκην ἣν ἐποίησα τοῖς.πατράσιν αὐτῶν, 
according to the covenant which I made with their fathers, 


ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ἐπιλαβομένου μου" τῆς.χειρὸς αὐτῶν ἐξαγαγεῖν 

in [the] day of my taking hold of their hand to lead 

αὐτοὺς ἐκ ἧς Αἰγύπτου" ore αὐτοὶ οὐκ.ἐνέμειναν ἐν 
them out of[the]land of Egypt; because they did not continue in 


τῃῇ.διαθήκῃς. μου, κἀγὼ ἠμέλησα αὐτῶν, λέγει κύριος. 10 ὅτι 
my covenant, andI disregarded them, saith [the] Lord. Because 
αὕτη ἡ διαθήκη" ἣν διαθήσομαι τῷ οἴκῳ ᾿Ισραὴλ pera 
this [is] the covenant which I will covenant with the house of Israel after 
Tac-npépac.éxeivac, λέγει κύριος, διδοὺς νόμους. μου εἰς 
those days, says [the] Lord, giving my laws into 
τὴν. διάνοιαν αὐτῶν, καὶ ἐπὶ ἱκαρδίας" αὐτῶν ἐπιγράψω αὐτούς" 
their mind, alsoupon “hearts ‘their I willinscribe them; 
καὶ ἔσομαι αὐτοῖς εἰς θεόν, καὶ αὐτοὶ ἔσονταί μοι εἰς λαόν. 
and Iwillbe tothem for God, and _ they shall be tome for people. 
11 καὶ οὐ.μὴ διδάξωσιν ἕκαστος τὸν ™xAnoioyv' αὐτοῦ, καὶ 
And ποῦ at 811] 5881] they teach each 2neighbour this, and 
ἕκαστος τὸν. ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ, λέγων, Γνῶθι τὸν κύριον" Ore 
each his brother, saying, Know the Lord; because 
πάντες εἰδησουσίν με, ἀπὸ ικροῦ παὐτῶν" ἕως 
all shall know me, from [the] little [one] of them to [the] 
μεγάλου αὐτῶν" 12 ὅτι ἵλεως ἔσομαι ταῖς. ἀδικίαις.αὐτῶν, 
great [one] of them. Because merciful I will be to their unrighteousnesses, 


καὶ τῶν.ἁμαρτιῶν.αὐτῶν “καὶ τῶν.ἀνομιῶν. αὐτῶν! οὐ-μὴ 
and their sins and their lawlessnesses in no wise 
μνησθῶ ἔτι. 18 Ἔν τῷ λέγειν καινήν, πεπαλαίωκεν 
willlremember more. In the saying New, he has made old 
THY πρώτην᾽ τὸ.δὲ παλαιούμενον Kai γηράσκον ἐγγὺς 
the first; but that which grows old and aged [15] near 
ἀφανισμοῦ. 
disappearing. 


9 ΡΕΐχεν" piv οὖν “καὶ ἡ πρώτη σκηνὴ" δικαιώματα 
*Had 7indeed Stherefore also tthe “first “tabernacle ordinances 


λατρείας, τότε ἅγιον κοσμικόν. 2 σκηνὴ-.γὰρ κατε- 
of service, and the sanctuary, a worldly [one]. For a tabernacle was 


σκευάσθη ἡ πρώτη. ἐν ἥτε λυχνία καὶ ἡ τρά- 
prepared, the first, in which [were] both the lampstand and the  ta- 
mela καὶ ἡ πρόθεσις τῶν ἄρτων, ἥτις λέγεται "ἁγία." 3 μετὰ 
ble and the presentation of the loaves, which iscalled holy; “after 
δὲ τὸ δεύτερον καταπέτασμα σκηνὴ ἡ λεγομένη 'ἅγια" 
‘but the second veil a tabernacle which [is] called holy 
ἁγίων, 4 χρυσοῦν ἔχουσα θυμιατήριον, καὶ τὴν κιβωτὸν τῆς 
of holies, “a *golden ‘having censer, and the ark of the 
διαθήκης περικεκαλυμμένην πάντοθεν χρυσίῳ, ἐν 
covenant, haying been covered round “in *every *part ‘with *gold, in which 
στάμνος χρυσῆ ἔχουσα τὸ μάννα, Kai ἡ ῥάβδος ᾿Ααρὼν 
{was the] “pot ‘golden having the manna, and the rod of Aaron 


1 — μου My E. k + [μου] (read my covenant) L. 
(read his [fellow] citizen) GLrtraw. 2 — αὐτῶν LTTrA. 
TTrA. P Etye T. 9 [καὶ] Tr. τ σκηνὴ GLTTrAW. 
ἅγια ἁγίων holy of holies 1. 


1 καρδίαν heart T. 
° — Kal TOV ἀνομιῶν αὐτῶν 
5. ἅγια holy place EGTTrAW ; 

τὰ ἅγια τῶν (read the holy of holies) tr. 


071 
them, he saith, Be- 
hold, the days come, 
saith the Lord, when I 
will make a new cove- 
nant with the house of 
Israel and with the 
house of Judah:9 not 
according to the cove- 
nant that I made with 
their fathers in the 
day when I took them 
by the hand to lead 
them out of the land of 
Egypt; because they 
continued not in my 
covenant, and I re- 
garded them not, saith 
the Lord. 10 For this 
as the covenant that I 
will make with the 
house of Israel after 
those days, saith the 
Lord; I will put my 
laws into their mind, 
and write them in 
their hearts: and I 
will be tothem a God, 
and they shall be to me 
a people: 11 and they 
shall not teach every 
man his neighbour, 
and every man _ his 
brother, saying, Know 
the Lord :.for allshall 
know me, from the 
least to the greatest. 
12 For I will be merci- 
ful to their unright- 
eousness, and their 
sins and their iniqui- 
ties will I remember 
no more. 13 In that he 
saith, A new covenant, 
he hath made the first 
old. Now that which 
decayeth and waxeth 
old is ready to vanish 
away. 


IX. Then verily the 
first covenant had also 
ordinances of divine 
service, and a worldly 
sanctuary. 2 For there 
was a tabernacle made; 
the first, wherein was 
the candlestick, and 
the table, and the 
shewbread; which is 
called the sanctuary. 
3 And after the second 
veil, the tabernacle 
which is called the Ho- 
liest of all; 4 which 
had the golden censer, 
and the ark of the cove- 
nant overlaid round a- 
bout with gold, where- 
in was the golden pot 
that had manna, and 


™ πολίτην 


572 


Aaron’s rod that bud- 
ded, and the tables of 
the covenant; 5 and 
over it the cherubims 
of glory shadowing the 
mereyseat ; of which 
we cannot now speak 
particularly. 

6 Now when these 
things were thus or- 
jained, the priests 
went always into the 
first tabernacle, ac- 
complishing the ser- 
vice of God. 7 But 
into the second went 
the high priest alone 
once every year, not 
without blood, which 
he offered for himself, 
and for the errors of 
the people: 8 the 
Holy Ghost this signi- 
fying, that the way in- 
to the holiest of all 
was not yet made 
manifest, while as the 
first tabernacle was 
yet standing : 9 which 
was a figure for the 
time then present, in 
which were offered 
both gifts and sacri- 
fices, that could not 
make him that did the 
service perfect, as per- 
taining to the con- 
science ; 10 which stood 
only in meats and 
drinks, and divers 
washings, and carnal 
ordinances, imposed on 
them until the time of 
reformation. 11 But 
Christ being come an 
high priest of good 
things to come, by a 
greater and more per- 
fect tabernacle, not 
made with hands, that 
is to say, not of this 
building ; 12 neither 
by the blood of goats 
and calves, but by his 
own blood he entered 
in once into the holy 
place, having obtained 
eternal redemption for 
us. 13 For if the blood 
of bulls and of goats, 
and the ashes of 
an heifer sprinkling 
the unclean, sancti- 
fieth to the purifying 
of the flesh: 14 how 
much more shall the 
blood of Christ, who 
through the eternal 
Spirit offered himself 
without spot to God, 
purge your conscience 
trom dead works to 
serve the living God? 
15 And for this cause 
he is the mediator of 


HPOsS ZBPATOY =. IX. 


ἡ βλαστήσασα, καὶ αἱ πλάκες τῆς διαθήκης" 5 ὑπεράνω. δὲ 
sprouted, and the tablets of the covenant; and above 


ἱχερουβὶ" δόξης κατασκιάζοντα τὸ ἱλαστήριον" 
it {the} cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat ; 


περὶ ὧν οὐκἔστιν νῦν λέγειν κατὰ. μέρος. 
concerning which itisnot now([thetime] tospeak in detail. 


6 Τούτων.δὲ οὕτως κατεσκευασμένων, εἰς μὲν THY πρώτην 
Now these things thus having been prepared, into the first 


σκηνὴν διαπαντὸς" εἰσίασιν οἱ ἱερεῖς τὰς λατρείας ἐπιτελοῦν- 
tabernacle at all times enter the yricte, the _ services aecomplsh- 


rec’ 7 εἰς δὲ τὴν δευτέραν ἅπαξ τοῦ. ἐνιαυτοῦ μόνος ὁ ἀρχιε- 
πε: A but into the second once in the year alone the high 


ρεύς, οὐ χωρὶς αἵματος, ὃ προσφέρει ὑπὲρ ἑαυτοῦ Kai 
priest, not apart from blood, which he offers for himself and 
τῶν τοῦ λαοῦ ἀγνοημάτων" 8 τοῦτο δηλοῦντος TOU πνεύ- 
the “οὗ *the *people ‘sins *of “ignorance: this ‘signifying ‘the “Spirit 
ματος τοῦ ἁγίου, μήπω πεφανερῶσθαι τὴν τῶν ἁγίων 
°the ἬΟΙΥ, [that] not yet has been made manifest the 7of *the *holies 
ὁδὸν ἔτι τῆς πρώτης σκηνῆς ἐχούσης στάσιν" 9 ἥτις 
lway, *still *the ®first "tabernacle ἸΆΒΈΔΑΡ a standing which [15] 


παραβολὴ εἰς τὸν καιρὸν τὸν ἐνεστηκότα, καθ᾽ σὸν" δῶρά.τε 
a simile for the “time present, in which both gifts 


καὶ θυσίαι προσφέρονται, μὴ δυνάμεναι κατὰ συνείδησιν 71Ἐ-- 
and sacrifices are offered, not being able as to conscience to 


λειῶσαι τὸν λατρεύοντα, 10 μόνον ἐπὶ βρώμασιν καὶ 
perfect him who serves, {consisting} only in meats and 


πόμασιν Kai διαφόροις βαπτισμοῖς, *xai' ἡδικαιώμασιν" σαρκός, 
drinks and divers washings, and ordinances of flesh, 


[EXO καιροῦ διορθώσεως ἐπικείμενα. 11 Χριστὸς. δὲ 
την [Sthe] “time ‘of ‘setting 7things fright ‘imposed. But Christ 


παραγενόμενος ἀρχιερεὺς THY ἐμελλόντων" ἀγαθῶν, διὰ τῆς 
being come high priest of the coming soon things, by the 


μείζονος καὶ τελειοτέρας σκηνῆς; οὐ χειροποιήτου, τουτέστιν" 
greater and moreperfect tabernacle, not made by hand, (that is, 


οὐ ταύτης τῆς κτίσεως, 12 οὐδὲ δι αἵματος τράγων Kai 
ποῦ of this creation,) nor by blood of goats and 
διὰ.δὲ 


μόσχων, τοῦ.ἰδίου. αἵματος εἰσῆλθεν ϑέφάπαξ' εἰς 

calves, but by his own blood, entered once for all into 
τὰ ἅγια, αἰωνίαν λύτρωσιν “εὑράμενος." 13 εἰ γὰρ τὸ αἷμα 
the holies, eternal redemption having found. Forif the blood 


ἀταύρων καὶ Tpadywr', καὶ σποδὸς δαμάλεως ῥαντίζουσα τοὺς 
of bulls and of goats, and _ ashes of a heifer sprinkling the 


κεκοινωμένους, ἁγιάζει πρὸς τὴν τῆς σαρκὸς καθαρότητα, 


mee 
αὐτῆς 


defiled, sanctifies for the 7of*the ‘flesh Paras 
14 πόσῳ μᾶλλον τὸ αἷμα τοῦ χριστοῦ, bc διὰ πνεύματος 
how much rather the bloodofthe Christ who through[the] *Spirit 


αἰωνίου ἑαυτὸν προσήνεγκεν ene nay τῷ θεῷ, καθαριεῖ τὴν 
eternal *himself %offered epotles to God, shall purify 


συνείδησιν ὑμῶν" ἀπὸ νεκρῶν ἔργων, εἰς τὸ λατρεύειν θεῷ 


7conscience tyour from dead works for toserve *God eee 
ζῶντιῖ, 15 Kai διὰ. τοῦτο διαθήκης καινῆς μεσίτης ἐστίν, 
2living ! And for this reason of a *covenant ‘new ediator “he ‘is, 


* χερουβεὶν LTTr; χερουβὶν A. 


(simile}) LTTrAW. 
8 τοῦτ’ ἐστιν GT. 
5. ἡμῶν our LAW. 


v διὰ παντὸς LTrA. Ἢ ἣν (read according to which 
x — καὶ GLT[Tr]aAW. Υ δικαιώματα LITrAW. z γενομένων L. 
Ὁ ἐφ᾽ ἅπαξ Ἧτο ς τὐβόμανος E. 4 τράγων καὶ ταύρων LTTrAW. 


IX. HEBREWS. 


ὕπως θανάτου γενομένου, εἰς ἀπολύτρωσιν τῶν ἐπὶ τ 
so that, death having taken place for redemption of the 7under *the 
πρώτῃ διαθήκῃ παραβάσεων, τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν λάβωσιν 
“first ‘covenant ‘transgressions, the promise °might 'receive 
οἱ κεκλημένοι τῆς αἰωνίου κληρονομίας. 16 ὕπου.γὰρ 
Sthey “who “have *been *called 'of *the 36 6.81 4inheritance, (For where 
διαθήκη, θάνατον ἀνάγκη φέρεσθαι τοῦ 
(there is] a testament, (*for *the] ®death [‘it 318] “necessary }°to+come?7in 7of *the 
διαθεμένου" 17 διαθήκη.γὰρ ἐπὶ.νεκροῖς βεβαία, ἐπεὶ 
*testator. For a testament in the case of [the] dead [is] affirmed, since 
μήποτε ἰσχύει ὅτε ζῇ ὁ διαθέμενος.δ 18 ὅθεν *odd"! 
in no way it is of force when “15 ‘living ‘the testator.) Whence neither 
ἡ πρώτη χωρὶς αἵματος ᾿ἐγκεκαίνισται." 19 λαληθείσης 
the first apartfrom blood has beeninaugurated. ‘Having ®been *spoken 
yap πάσης ἐντολῆς κατὰ νόμον ὑπὸ Μωῦσέως παντὶ 
for “every “commandment according to law by Moses to all 
τῷ λαῷ, λαβὼν τὸ αἷμα τῶν μόσχων καὶ ᾿Ἰτράγων, μετὰ 
the people, having taken the blood of calves and _ of goats, with 
ὕδατος Kai ἐρίου κοκκίνου καὶ ὑσσώπου, αὐτό.τε τὸ βιβλίον 
water and *wool ‘scarlet and hyssop, both *itself'the *book 
καὶ πάντα τὸν λαὸν πέἐῤῥάντισεν,, 20 λέγων, Τοῦτο τὸ 
and all the people he sprinkled, saying, This [18] the 
αἷμα τῆς διαθήκης ἧς ἐνετείλατο πρὸς ὑμᾶς ὁ θεός. 21 καὶ 
blood of the covenant which “enjoined “to *you *God. And 
τὴν σκηνὴν δὲ καὶ πάντα τὰ σκεύη τῆς λειτουργίας τῷ 
the tabernacle too and all the vessels of the ministration with 
αἵματι ὁμοίως πἐῤῥάντισεν"" 22 καὶ σχεδὸν ἐν αἵματι 
blood inlike manner he sprinkled; and almost “with “*blood 
πάντα καθαρίζεται κατὰ τὸν νόμον, Kai χωρὶς aipar- 


‘all*things are purified according to the law, and apart from Ὀ]οοᾶ- 
εκχυσίας οὐ.γίνεται ἄφεσις. 28 ᾿Ανάγκη οὖν τὰ μὲν 
shedding there isno remission. {It was] necessary then [for] the 

ὑποδείγματα τῶν ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς τούτοις καθαρίζεσθαι, 


representations of the thingsin the heavens withthese to be purified, 
αὐτὰ δὲ τὰ ἐπουράνια κρείττοσιν θυσίαις παρὰ ταύτας. 

but *themselves ‘the “heavenlies with better sacrifices than these. 
24 ov-yap εἰς χειροποίητα "ἅγια εἰσῆλθεν" “ὁ χριστός, ἀντί- 
For not into *made*by *hands “holies entered the Christ, fi- 
Tura τῶν ἀληθινῶν, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς αὐτὸν τὸν οὐρανόν, νῦν ἐμφα- 
gures of the true f[ones], but into “itself theaven, now to 
νισθῆναι τῷ.προσώπῳ τοῦ θεοῦ ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν: 2 οὐδ᾽ ἵνα 
appear before the face of God for us: nor that 
πολλάκις προσφέρῃ ἑαυτόν, ὥσπερ ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς εἰσέρχεται εἰς 
often heshould offer himself, δυϑῃ 88 ῃ8 high priest enters into 
Ta ἅγια κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν ἐν αἵματι ἀλλοτρίῳ: 26 ἐπεὶ é- 


the holies year by year with “blood ‘another’s; since it was neces- 
dee αὐτὸν πολλάκις παθεῖν ἀπὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου" 

saryfor him often tohavesuffered from [the] foundation of[the] world. 
ΡῬνῦν" δὲ ἅπαξ ἐπὶ συντελείᾳ τῶν αἰώνων, εἰς ἀθέτη- 
Butnow once in [the]consummation ofthe ages, for [the] putting 
σινᾷ ἁμαρτίας, διὰ τῆς.θυσίας. αὐτοῦ πεφανέρωται. 27 καὶ 
away of sin by his sacrifice he has been manifested. And 


καθ᾽ ὅσον ἀπόκειται τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἅπαξ ἀποθανεῖν, pera 
for as much as itis apportioned to men once to die, 7after 


& Read the sentence as a question L. 
1 + τῶν LTTrAW. τὰ ἐράντισεν LITrA. 
P νυνὶ LTTra, 4 + τῆς LTTr. 


h οὐδὲ LTrAW. i éy- τ΄ 
π εἰσῆλθεν ἅγια TTrA. 


573 


Ὦ the new testament, 
that by means of death, 


for the redemption of 
the transgressions that 
were under the first 
testament, they which 
are called might re- 
ceive the promise of 
eternal inheritance. 
16 For where a testa- 
ment is, there must al- 
so of necessity be the 
death of the testator. 
17 For a testament is 
of force after men are 
dead: otherwise it is 
of πὸ strength at 
all while the testator 
liveth. 18 Whereupon 
neither the first testa- 
ment was dedicated 
without blood. 19 For 
when Moses had spok- 
en every precept to 
all the people ac- 
cording to the law, 
he took the blood of 
calves and of goats, 
with water, and scar- 
let wool, and hyssop, 
and sprinkled both the 
book, and all the peo- 
ple, 20 saying, This is 
the blood of the tes- 
tament which God 
hath enjoined unto 
you. 21 Moreover he 
sprinkled with blood 
both the tabernacle, 
and all the vessels of 
the ministry. 22 And 
almost all things are 
by the law purged with 
blood ; and without 
shedding of blood isno 
remission, 23 Jt was 
therefore necessary 
that the patterns of 
things in the heavens 
should be purified with 
these; but the hea- 
venly things them- 
selves with better sac- 
rifices than these, 
24 For Christ is not 
entered into the holy 
places made with 
hands, which are the 
figures of the true; 
but into heaven itself, 
now to appear in the 
presence of God for 
us: 25 nor yet that he 
should offer himsel? 
often, as the high 
priest entereth into 
the holy place every 
year with blood of 
others; 26 for then 
must he often have 
suffered since the foun- 
dation of the world: 
but now once in the 
end of the world hath 
he appeared to put a- 
way sin by the sacri- 
fice of himself, 27 And 
as it is appointed unto 


k + soy the Ltraw. 
° — 6 LTTrAW. 


574 


men once to die, but 
aiter this the judg- 
ment: 28 so Christ 
was once offered to 
bear the sins of many; 
and unto them that 
jJook for him shall he 
appear the second time 
without sin unto sal- 
vation. 


X. For the law hav- 
ing a shadow of good 
things to come, and 
not the very image of 
the things, can never 
with those sacrifices 
which they offered year 
by year continually 
make the comers there- 
unto perfect. 2 For 
then would they not 
have ceased to be of- 
fered? because that 
the worshippers once 
purged should have 
had no moreconscience 
of sins. 3 But in those 
saerijices there is a 
remembrance again 
made of sins every 
year. 4 For ἐξ t not 
possible that the blood 
of bulls and of goats 
should take away sins. 
5 Wherefore when he 
cometh into the world, 
he saith, Sacrifice and 
offering thou wouldest 
not, but a body hast 
thou prepared me: 6 in 
burnt offerings and 
sacrifices for sin thou 
hast had no pleasure. 
7 Then said I, Lo, I 
come (in the volume 
of the book it is writ- 
ten of me,) to do thy 
will, O God. 8 Above 
when he said, Sacrifice 
and offering and burnt 
offerings and offering 
for sin thou wouldest 
not, neither hadst plea- 
sure therein; which 
are offered by the law ; 
9 then said he, Lo, I 
eome to do thy will, 
O God. He taketh a- 
way the first, that he 
may establish the se- 
cond, 10 By the which 
will we are sanctified 
through the offering of 
the body of Jesus 
Christ once for all. 
11 And every priest 
standeth daily mini- 
stering and offering 
oftentimes the same 
sacrifices, which can 
never take away sins: 


+ καὶ also GLTTrAW. 
the sentence not as a question) E. 
* προσφορὰν καὶ θυσίαν W. 

" προσφορὰς Offerings LTTrAaw. 
© — οἱ EGLTTrAW. 


GLTTrAW. 
high priest La. 


WP Os) BEB PAEO YX &. IX, X. 


δὲ τοῦτο κρίσις' 28 οὕτως " ὁ χριστὸς ἅπαξ προσενεχθεὶς 
‘and this, judgment; thus the Christ, once having been offered 


εἰς TO πολλῶν ἀνενεγκεῖν ἁμαρτίας, éx.devTépov χωρὶς 


for ‘of *many '‘to7bear [the] ‘sins, a@second time ‘apart *from 
ἁμαρτίας ὀφθήσεται τοῖς αὐτὸν ἀπεκδεχομένοις εἰς 
resin *shall appear *to “those *that 7him °await for 
σωτηρίαν. 
salvation. 


10 Σκιὰν.γὰρ ἔχων ὁ νόμος τῶν μελλόντων ἀγαθῶν, οὐκ 
For *a ® shadow *having ‘the “law of the coming good things, not 
αὐτὴν THY εἰκόνα τῶν πραγμάτων, κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν ταῖς. αὐταῖς 
Sitself 9 image of the things, year by year with the same 
θυσίαις "ἃς" προσφέρουσιν εἰς.τὸ.διηνεκὲς οὐδέποτε ἰδύναται" 
sacrifices which they offer in perpetuity never is able 


τοὺς προσερχομένους τελειῶσαι. 2 ἐπεὶ τοὐκ'. ἂν. ἐπαύσαντο 
30Ποβθ *who Sapproach to *perfect. Since would they not have ceased 
προσφερόμεναι, διὰ τὸ μηδεμίαν ἔχειν ἔτι συνείδησιν 


to be offered, on account of ™jo%any “having ®longer }°conscience 


ἁμαρτιῶν τοὺς λατρεύοντας, ἅπαξ “κεκαθαρμένους!; 8 ἀλλ᾽ 
1 


of ?*sins !those who Sserve *once Spurged ? But 
ἐν αὐταῖς ἀνάμνησις ἁμαρτιῶν Kar ἐνιαυτόν. 4 ἀδύ- 
in these aremembrance Οἵ sins year by year [thereis]. *Impos- 


vaTov yap αἷμα ταύρων Kai τράγων ἀφαιρεῖν ἁμαρ- 
sible [7it 3515] ‘for [for the] blood of bulls and of goats totakeaway sins, 
riac. 5 Διὸ εἰσερχόμενος εἰς τὸν κόσμον λέγει, “Θυσίαν Kai 
Wherefore coming into the world hesays, Sacrifice and 
προσφορὰν" οὐκ.ἠθέλησας, σῶμα.δὲ κατηρτίσω μοι" G6 ὁλο- 
offering thou willedst not, but a body thou didst prepare me. Burnt 
καυτώματα καὶ περὶ ἁμαρτίας οὐκ. εὐδόκησας." 
offerings and [sacrifices] for sin thou delightedst not in, 
7 τότε εἶπον, Ἰδοὺ ἥκω, ἐν κεφαλίδι βιβλίου γέγραπται 
Then I said, Lo, Icome, (in{the} roll of [the] book it is written 
περὶ ἐμοῦ, τοῦ ποιῆσαι, ὁ θεός, τὸ.-θέλημά.σου. 8 ᾿Ανώτερον 
of me,) to do, O God, thy will, Above 
λέγων, Ὅτι *Ovciay' καὶ "προσφορὰν! καὶ ὁλοκαυτώματα 


saying, Sacrifice and offering and burnt offerings 

\ ‘ « ΄ὔ ? > , ὑδὲ b > , ll 
καὶ περὶ ἁμαρτίας οὐκ.ἠθέλησας, οὐδὲ ϑεὐδόκησας, 
and [sacrifices] for sin thou willedst not, nor delightedst in, 
αἵτινες κατὰ ‘roy' νόμον προσφέρονται, 9 τότε εἴρηκεν, 


are offered) ; then he said, 


ἀναιρεῖ τὸ 
He takes away the 


(which according to the law 
᾿Ιδοὺ ἥκω τοῦ ποιῆσαι, “ὁ θεός," ro.0éAnpa.cov. 
Lo, Icome, to do, O God, thy -will. 
~ 5 ΄ - ΄ 
πρῶτον, ἵνα τὸ δεύτερον στήσῃ" 10 ἐν ᾧ θελήματι 
first, that the second he may establish ; by which will 
ἡγιασμένοι ἐσμὲν “οἱ" διὰ τῆς προσφορᾶς τοῦ σώματος ἱτοῦϊ 
Ssanctified ‘we ?are through the offering of the body 
᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ ξἐφάπαξ." 11 Kai πᾶς μὲν δἱερεὺς" ἕστηκεν 
of Jesus’ Christ once for all. And every priest stands 
καθ᾽ ἡμέραν λειτουργῶν, καὶ τὰς αὐτὰς πολλάκις προσφέρων 
day by day ministering, and the same 7often Soffering 
θυσίας, αἵτινες οὐδέποτε δύνανται περιελεῖν ἁμαρτίας" 
‘sacrifices, which never areable to take away sins. 
5 als TA. t δύνανται they are able urr. νυ — ovx« not (read 
Ἢ κεκαθερισμένους L; κεκαθαρισμένους TIrAW. 
Υ ηὐδόκησας LITrA. * θυσίας sacrifices LITraW. 
b ηὐδόκησας LTTr. ¢ — τὸν LrTr[a]. 4 — ὃ θεός 
f — τοῦ GLTTrAW. & ἐφ᾽ ἅπαξ Tr. b ἀρχιερεὺς 


x. HEBREWS. 


12 ἰαὐτὸς".δὲ μίαν ὑπὲρ ἁμαρτιῶν προσενέγκας θυσίαν, εἰς 
But he, one 5for ‘sins thaving 7offered ‘sacrifice, in 


τὸ διηνεκὲς ἐκάθισεν ἐν δεξιᾷ τοῦ θεοῦ, 18 τὸ.λοιπὸν 
perpetuity satdown at [86] right hand of God, henceforth 


2 ’ .“ ~ eps ‘ ᾽ ~ - , ~ 
ἐκδεχόμενος ἕως τεθῶσιν οἱ. ἐχθροὶ αὐτοῦ ὑποπόδιον τῶν 


awaiting until be placed his enemies [85] a footstool 
ποδῶν αὐτοῦ. 14 μιᾷ. γὰρ προσφορᾷ τετελείωκεν εἰς. τὸ. διη- 
for*feet ‘*his. For by one offering he has eee in perpe- . 


»νεκὲς τοὺς ἁγιαζομένους. 15 Μαρτυρεῖ.δὲ ἡμῖν καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα 
tuity the sanctified. And bears witness tous also the Spirit 
τὸ ἅγιον μετὰ.γὰρ τὸ ἔπροειρηκέναι,, 16 Αὕτη. ἡ δια- 
the Holy; for after the having said before, This [15] the cove- 
θήκη ἣν διαθήσομαι πρὸς αὐτοὺς μετὰ τὰς ἡμέρας ἐκείνας, 
nant which I willcovenant towards them after those days, 

λέγει κύριος, διδοὺς νόμους. μου ἐπὶ καρδίας αὐτῶν, καὶ ἐπὶ 
ΠΕΡ {the} Lord: giving my laws into their hearts, also into 


ἱτῶν dvavowv' αὐτῶν ἐπιγράψω αὐτούς" 17 καὶ τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν 
“minds ‘their I willinscribe them; and 7sins 


αὐτῶν Kai τῶν.ἀνομιῶν. αὐτῶν ov-un “μνησθῶ ἔτι. 
their and their lawlessnesses inno wise will remember any more. 
18 ὅπου.δὲ ἄφεσις τούτων, οὐκέτι προσφορὰ περὶ 


But where remission of these [is], no longer [is there] an offering for 
ἁμαρτίας. 
sin, 
19 Ἔχοντες οὖν, ἀδελφοί, παῤῥησίαν εἰς τὴν.εἴσοδον 
oe therefore, brethren, boldness for entrance into 


TOY ἁγίων ἐν τῷ αἵματι ᾿Ιησοῦ, 20 ἣν ἐνεκαίνισεν ἡμῖν 
the holies by the blood of Jesus, Twhich *he *dedicated *°for '*us 


ὁδὸν πρόσφατον καὶ ζῶσαν διὰ τοῦ καταπετάσματος, "τουτ- 
1a *way “newly ‘made *and ‘living through the veil, that 


ἐστιν" τη: δ ρεὺο TOU, 21 καὶ ἱερέα μέγαν ἐπὶ τὸν οἶκον 
is, his flesh ; and ORE a ‘great over the house 


τοῦ θεοῦ, 22 προσερχώμεθα μετὰ ἀληθινῆς καρδίας ἐν 
of God [having], we should approach with a true heart, in 


πληροφορίᾳ πίστεως, EPpavTioMéevoL' τὰς καρδίας ἀπὸ συν- 
full assurance of faith, having beensprinkled[asto]the hearts from a7con- 


εἰδήσεως πονηρᾶς, καὶ Ῥλελουμένοι" τὸ σῶμα ὕδατι 
science 1wicked, and having been washed [as to] the body with *water 


καθαρῷ" 4. 28 κατέχωμεν τὴν ὁμολογίαν τῆς ἐλπίδος ἀκλινῆ, 
pure. We should hold fast the confession ofthe hope unwavering, 


πιστὸς.γὰρ ὁ ἐπαγγειλάμενος" 24 καὶ κατανοῶμεν ἀλ- 
for [is] faithful he who promised ; and weshouldeconsider one 
λήλους εἰς παροξυσμὸν ἀγάπης Kai καλῶν ἔργων, 25 μὴ 
another for provoking tolove and to Sood works ; not 


> , ‘ ‘ 
ἐγκαταλείποντες τὴν ἐπισυναγωγὴν ἑαυτῶν, καθὼς 
forsaking the assembling together of ourselves, even as Lee] 


ἔθος τισίν, ἀλλὰ παρακαλοῦντες" καὶ τοσούτῳ 
custom [is] withsome; but encouraging one guother!; and byso much 


μᾶλλον ὅσῳ βλέπετε ἐγγίζουσαν τὴν ἡμέραν. 206 ἑκου- 
[086] more 85 bie see ieee near the day. Ewin swill- 


σίως γὰρ σμαρπανόνεο ἡμῶν μετὰ τὸ. λαβεῖν τὴν ἐπίγνωσιν 
ingly ‘for ‘we after receiving the knowledge 


τῆς ἀληθείας, οὐκέτι περὶ ἁμαρτιῶν ἀπολείπεται θυσία" 
of ‘the truth, no longer *for *sins *remains 1a 4sacrifice, 


075 


12 but this man, after 
he had offered one sac- 
rifice for sins for ever, 
sat down on the right 
hand of God; 13 from 
henceforth expecting 
till his enemies be 
made his footstool. 
14 For by one offering 
he hath perfected for 
ever them that are 
sanctified, 15 Whereof 
the Holy Ghost also is 
8 witness to us: for 
after that he had said 
before, 16 This ts the 
covenant that I will 
make with them after 
those days, saith the 
Lord, I will put my 
laws into their hearts, 
and in their minds 
will I write them; 
17 and their sins and 
iniquities will I re- 
member no more. 
18 Now where remis- 
sion of these is, there 
iz no more offering for 
sin. 


19 Having therefore, 
brethren, boldness to 
enter into the holiest 
by the blood of Jesus, 
20 by a new and liv- 
ing way, which he 
hath consecrated for 
us, through the veil, 
that is to say, his flesh; 
21 and Aaving an high 
priest over the house 
of God; 22 let us draw 
near with a true heart 
in full assurance of 
faith, having our 
hearts sprinkled from 
anevil conscience, and 
our bodies washed 
with pure water. 
23 Let us hold fast 
the profession of our 
faith without waver- 
ing ; (for he is faith- 
ful that promised ;) 
24 and let us consider 


one another to Ὁ- 
voke unto love and to 
good works: 25 not 


forsaking the assem- 
bling of ourselves to- 
gether, as the manner 
of some is; but ex- 
horting one another: 
and so much the more, 
as ye see the day ap- 
proaching. 26 For if 
we sin wilfully after 
that we have received 
the knowledge of the 
truth, there remaineth 
no more sacrifice for 
sins, 27 but a certain 
fearful looking for of 


“dedros (read But this one trtraw. 
mind LTTraw. m μνησθήσομαι LTTrA. 
P λελουσμένοι T. 


2 τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν GT. 


K εἰρηκέναι having said LTTraw. 
° ῥεραντισμένοι LTTrA. 
a Punctuate so as to join we should hold fast with what precedes GLTTr. 


1 τὴν διάνοιαν 


576 


judgment and fiery 
indignation, which 
shall devour the ad- 
versaries. 28 He that 
despised Moses’ law 
died without mercy 
under two or three 
witnesses: 29 of how 
much sorer punish- 
ment, suppose ye, shall 
he be thought worthy, 
who hath trodden un- 
der foot the Son of God, 
and hath counted the 
blood of the covenant, 
wherewith he was 
sanctified, an unholy 
thing, and hath done 
despite unto the Spirit 
of grace? 30 For we 
know him that hath 
said, Vengeance be- 
longeth unto me, I will 
recompense, saith the 
Lord. And again, The 
Lord shall judge his 
people. 31 Jt is a fear- 
ful thing to fall into 
the hands of the living 
God, 


32 But call to re- 
membrance the former 
days, in which, after 
ye were illuminated, 
ye endured a great 
fight of afflictions; 
33 partly, whilst ye 
were made a gazing- 
stock both by re- 
proaches and afflic- 
tions; and partly, 
whilst ye bee.me com- 
panions of them that 
were so used. 34 For 
ye had compassion of 
me in my bonds, and 
took joyfully the 
spoilingof your goods, 
knowing in yourselves 
that ye have in hea- 
ven a better and an 
enduring substance, 
35 Cast not away 
therefore your confi- 
dence, which hath 
great recompence of 
reward. 36 For ye have 
need of patience, that, 
after ye have done the 
will of God, ye might 
receive the promise. 
37 For yet a little 
while, and he that 
shall come will come, 
and will not tarry. 
38 Now the just shall 
live by faith: but if 
any man draw back, 


ΠΡΟΣ EBPAIOY®sS. Χ. 


27 φοβερὰ.δὲ τις ἐκδοχὴ κρίσεως, καὶ πυρὸς ζῆλος ἐσ- 
but a *fearful ‘certain expectation of judgment, and 7of*fire ‘fervour ‘to 


θίειν μέλλοντος τοὺς ὑπεναντίους. 28 ἀθετήσας τις 
Sdevour “about the adversaries, *Having ‘set Saside ‘any Zone 
νόμον Μωσέως" χωρὶς οἰκτιρμῶν ἐπὶ δυσὶν 
[088] law of Moses, *without *compassions *on [*the *testimony 705] *two 
ἢ τρισὶν μάρτυσιν ἀποθνήσκει: 29 πόσῳ δοκεῖτε χείρονος 
dies: 


30 ‘°three **witnesses how much *think “ye ‘worse 


ἀξιωθήσεται τιμωρίας ὁ τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ 
5shall he 7be ®counted σου "θοῦ ?punishment who the Son of God 


καταπατήσας, Kai τὸ αἷμα τῆς διαθήκης κοινὸν ἡγησά- 


trampled upon, and “the *blood Sof *the “covenant "common ‘esteem- 
μενος ἐνιῷ ἡγιάσθη, καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα τῆς χάριτος 
ed wherewith he was sanctified, and the Spirit of grace 


ἐνυβρίσας; 80 οἴδαμεν.γὰρ τὸν εἰπόντα, ᾿Ἐμοὶ ἐκδίκησις, 


insulted ! or we know him who = said, To me “vengeance 
ἐγὼ ἀνταποδώσω, "λέγει κύριος" Kai πάλιν, 
(‘belongs]; I _ will recompense, says [the] Lord: and again,(The] - 
ἱΚύήριος κρινεῖ" τὸν.λαὸν.αὐτοῦ. 31 Φοβερὸν τὸ ἐμπεσεῖν 
Lord will judge his people. (It is] a fearful thing to fall 
aic χεῖρας θεοῦ ζῶντος. 


into [the] hands of *God [᾿{Π6] living. 
32 ᾿Αναμιμνήσκεσθε.δὲ τὰς πρότερον ἡμέρας, ἐν αἷς φωτισ- 
But 6411 ὕο remembrance the former days inwhich, having 
θέντες πολλὴν ἄθλησιν ὑπεμείνατε παθημάτων" 33 τοῦτο 
been enlightened,*much ‘conflict ‘ye *endured of sufferings; partly, 
μέν, ὀνειδισμοῖς.τε καὶ θλίψεσιν θεατριζόμενοι: τοῦτο.δέ, 
both in reproaches and tribulations being made a spectacle; and partly, 


κοινωνοὶ THY οὕτως ἀναστρεφομένων γενηθέντες" 
Ξραυύμοβ ‘of *those °thus 7passing *through [them] *having *become. 


34 καὶ. γὰρ τοῖς. δεσμοῖς. μου" συνεπαθήσατε, καὶ THY ἁρπαγὴν 


For both and the 


τῶν. ὑπαρχόντων ὑμῶν μετὰ χαρᾶς προσεδέξασθε. γινώσκοντες 
of your possessions with joy ye received, knowing 


” ~ , > 
ἔχειν ἐν" *éavroic κρείττονα" ὕπαρξιν Jey 


with my bonds ye sympathized, plunder 


οὐρανοῖς" Kai 


to have in yourselves a better possession “in [*the] Sheavens ‘and 
évovoav. 85 μὴ-.ἀποβάλητε οὖν τὴν.παῤῥησίαν ὑμῶν, 
ΞΔ ὈΙαΙ Ηρ. Cast not away therefore your boldness 


ἥτις ἔχει μισθαποδοσίαν μεγάλην." 36 ὑπομονῆς. γὰρ ἔχετε 
which has “recompense *great. For of endurance ye have 
χρείαν, ἵνα τὸ θέλημα τοῦ θεοῦ ποιήσαντες κομίσησθε THY 
need, thatthe will of God having done yemayreceive the 


ἐπαγγελίαν. 37 ἔτι.γὰρ μικρὸν. ὅσον.ὅσον, ὁ ἐρχόμενος 
promise. For yet a very little while, he who comes 
ἥξει, καὶ ovypomet.'| 38 ὁ.δὲ Pdixatoc! ἐκ πίστεως ζήσε- 


willcome, and will not delay. But the by faith shali 
rau καὶ ἐὰν ὑποστείληται, οὐκ.εὐδοκεῖ ἡ-.ψυχή.μου ἐν αὐτῷ. 


just 


my soul shallhaveno live; and if he draw back, “delights *not tmy soul in him. 

leasure in him. 39 But ad \ \ ε ~ is. p , 5 
Tae UottLa wie 139 ἡμεῖς.δὲ οὐκ.ἐσμὲν ὑποστολῆς εἰς ἀπώλειαν, ἀλλὰ 
draw back unto per- But we are not of [those] drawing back to destruction, but 
dition ; but of them , > , ~ 
that believe to the πίστεως εἰς περιποίησιν ψΨψυχῆς. 
saving of the soul. of faith to saving (the! soul. 

τ Mwiioéws GLTTrAW. * -- λέγει κύριος τ ἵ κρινεῖ κύριος LTTrAW. 7 bec- 

wtots (read with prisoners) GLTTrAW. τ — ἐν GLTTrAW. — χα ἑαυτοὺς κρείσσονα 
1τττ; ἑαυτοῖς (for yourselves) κρείσσονα A. Υ — ἐν οὐρανοῖς LTTraAw. : μεγάλην 


μισθαποδοσίαν LTTrAW. 


8 χρονίσει TTr. Ὁ δίκαιός μον (read my just [one]) LTTra. 


ΧΙ. HEBREWS. 


11 Ἔστιν. δὲ πίστις ἐλπιζομένων 


ὑπόστασις, πραγμά- 
Now 215 


faith of [things} hoped for πιῶ sep of things 
των ἔλεγχος οὐ βλεπομένων. 2 ἐν. ταύτῃ. γὰρ 


[186] ‘conviction ‘not 3seen. For by this 
, « , ΄ ~ 
ρήθησαν ot πρεσβύτεροι. 3 Πίστει νοοῦμεν 
5Switness ἴο ‘the ?elders. By faith weapprehend to have been framed 
τοὺς αἰῶνας ῥήματι θεοῦ, εἰς.τὸ μὴ ἐκ αινομένων 
the worlds by(the] word of God, so that "ποὺ 7from [(®things] "appearing 
“τὰ βλεπόμενα" γεγονέναι. 4Tliora πλείονα θυσίαν 
1the *things 3seen *have ®being. By faith 7a *more*excellent ®sacrifice 
"ABeX παρὰ Κάϊν προσήνεγκεν τῷ θεῷ, Ov ἧς ἐμαρτυ- 
1Abel than Cain offered to God, by which he was borne wit- 
ρήθη εἶναι δίκαιος, μαρτυροῦντος ἐπὶ τοῖς.δώροις. αὐτοῦ “τοῦ 
ness to as being righteous, *bearing *witness ‘to Shis ®gifts 


ἐμαρτυ- 
3were *borne 


κατηρτᾶσθαι 


θεοῦ" καὶ δι᾿ αὐτῆς ἀποθανὼν ἔτι “λαλεῖται." ὃ Πίστει Evo 
Ὡς 

‘God, andthrough it, having died, yet speaks, By faith Enoch 

μετετέθη τοῦ μὴ ἰδεῖν θάνατον, Kai οὐχ. εὑρίσκετο, διότι 


was translated death, 


μετέθηκεν αὐτὸν ὁ θεός᾽ πρὸ. γὰρ τῆς. μεταθέσεως ξαὐτοῦ" με- 
“translated shim 1God; for before his translation he has 


μαρτύρηται ΤΣ τῷ θεῷ. 6 χωρὶς.δὲ πίστεως 
been borne witness to to have well pleased God. But apart from faith 
ἀδύνατον εὐαρεστῆσαι πιστεῦσαι. γὰρ δεῖ τὸν 
{it is] HRiye ee to well please [him]. For °to *believe ‘it 7behoves *him *who 
προσερχόμενον ἱτῷ" θεῷ. ὅτι ἐστίν, καὶ τοῖς ἐκζητοῦσιν 
Sapproaches ®to Ged, that he is, aad (that]forthose who seek 7out 
αὐτὸν μισθαποδότης γίνεται. 7 Πίστει χρηματισ- 


not ἴο 566 and was notfound, because 


*him a rewarder he becomes, By faith *having *been ‘divinely *in- 
θες Νῶε περὶ τῶν μηδέπω βλεπομένων, εὐλαβη- 
structed ‘Noah concerning ὑπο things not yet seen, having been moved 
θεὶς κατεσκεύασεν κιβωτὸν εἰς σωτηρίαν τοῦ οἴκου 
with fear, prepared an ark for (the) salvation of *house 
αὐτοῦ" δι᾿ ἧς κατέκρινεν τὸν κόσμον, Kai τῆς κατὰ πίστιν 

‘this; by whichhecondemned the world, αδπᾶ οὔθ ?according*to *faith 


δικαιοσύνης ἐγένετο MAY πο: 8 Πίστει " καλούμενος ᾿Α- 
Ἐπ ASS became eir. By faith being called A- 


βραὰμ ὑπήκουσεν ἐξελθεῖν εἰς 'rov' τόπον ὃν "ἤμελλεν" 
braham obeyed to goout into the place which he was about 


λαμβάνειν sic κληρονομίαν, καὶ ἐξῆλθεν, μὴ ἐπιστάμενος ποῦ 


to receive for aninheritance, and went out, not knowing where 
ἔρχεται. 9 Πίστει παρῴκησεν εἰς ὑτὴν" γῆν τῆς ἐπαγγελίας, 
he is going. By faith he 50} ourned ἢ the land of the promise, 


ὡς ἀλλοτρίαν, 


ἐν σκηναῖς κατοικῆσας μετὰ ᾿Ισαὰκ καὶ 
as [in] bet Se: {country], in 


tents having dwelt with Isaac and 


᾿Ιακὼβ τῶν οσυγκληρονόμων" τῆς ἐπαγγελίας τῆς αὐτῆς" 
Jacob, the By -heirs of the ?promise Isame ; 


10 ἐξεδέχετο.γὰρ τὴν τοὺς θεμελίους ἔχουσαν πόλιν, ἧς 

for he was waiting for the foundations “having ‘city, of which [the] 

τεχνίτης Kai δημιουργὸς ὁθεός. 11 Πίστει καὶ αὐτὴ Σάῤῥα 
artificer and constructor [is] God. By faith also *herself ‘Sarah 


δύναμιν εἰς καταβολὴν σπέρματος ἔλαβεν, καὶ παρὰ καιρὸν 
power for([the] conception of seed received, and beyond age 


577 


XI. Now faithis the 
substance of things 
hoped for, the evi- 
dence of things not 
seen. 2 For by it the 
elders obtained a good 
report. 3 Through 
faith we understand 
that the worlds were 
framed by the word of 
God, so that things 
which are seen were 
not made of things 
which do appear. 4 By 
faith Abel offered un- 
to Goda more excel- 
lent sacrifice than 
Cain, by which he ob- 
tained witness that he 
was righteous, God 
testifying of his gifts: 
and by it he being dead 
yet speaketh. 5 By 
faith Enoch was trans- 
lated that he should 
not see death; and 
was not found, be- 
cause God had trans- 
lated him : for before 
his translation he had 
this testimony, that 
he pleased God. 6 But 
without faith it ts im- 
possible to please him: 
for he that cometh to 
God must believe that 
he is, and that heisa 
rewarder of them that 
diligently seek him. 
7 By faith Noah, be- 
ing warned of God of 
things not seen as yet, 
moved with fear, pre- 
pared an ark to the 
saving of his house; 
by the which he con- 
demned the world, and 
became heir of the 
righteousness which is 
by faith. 8 By faith 
Abraham,when he was 
called to go out intoa 
place which he should 
after receive for an in- 
heritance, obeyed; and 
he went out, not know- 
ing whither he went, 
9 By faith he sojourn- 
ed in the land of pro- 
mise, as in a strange 
country, dwelling in 
tabernacles with Isaac 
and Jacob, the heirs 
with him of the same 
promise: 10 for he 
looked for a_ city 
which hath fonnda- 
tions, whose builder 
and maker ts God. 
11 Through faith also 
Sara herself received 
strength to conceive 
seed,and was delivered 
of a child when she 


© τὸ βλεπόμενον that seen (read yey. *has *being) Lrtra. 
ness by his gifts to God) Ltr. © λαλεῖ GLTTraW. 
the translation) LTTra. h εὐαρεστηκέναι LA. 


i — τῷ T[Tr]. 
1 — τὸν (read a place) LTTrA. πὶ ἔμελλεν LA. 


4 τῷ θεῷ (read bearing wit- 
f nupioKero LTTrAW. 
k + 6 the [one] L[tr]. 
2 — τὴν (read [the]) titra. 


& — αὐτοῦ (read 


οσυν- τ. 
PP 


578 


Was past age, because 
she judged him faith- 
ful who had promised. 
12 Therefore sprang 
there even of one, and 
him as good as dead, 
so many as the stars 
of the sky in multi- 
tude, and as the sand 
which is by the sea 
shore innumerable. 


13 These all died in 
faith, not having re- 
ceived the promises, 
but having seen them 
afar off, and were per- 
suaded of them, and 
embraced them, and 
confessed that they 
were strangers and 
pilgrims on the earth. 
14 For they that say 
such things declare 
plainly that they seek 
8 country. 15 And 
truly, if they had been 
mindful of that coun- 
try from whence they 
came out, they might 
have had opportunity 
to have returned, 
16 But now they desire 
a better country, that 
is, an heavenly: where- 
fore God is not a- 
shamed to be called 
their God: for he hath 
prepared for them a 
city. 


17 By faith Abra- 
ham, when he was 
tried, offered up Isaac: 
and he that had re- 
ceived the promises of- 
fered up his only be- 
gotten son, 18 0f whom 
it was said, That in 
Isaac shall thy seed 
becalled: 19 account- 
ing that God was 
able to raise him up, 
even from the dead ; 
from whence also he 
received him in a 
figure. 20 By faith 
Isaac blessed Jacob 
and Esau concerning 
things to come. 21 By 
faith Jacob, when he 
was a dying, blessed 
both the sons of Jo- 
seph ; and worshipped, 
leaning upon the top 
of his staff. 22 By 
faith Joseph, when he 
died, made mention of 
the departing of the 
children of Israel ;and 
gave commandment 
concerning his bones. 

23 By faith Moses, 
when he was born, was 


ΠΡΌΣΞΥΗ EB BA ΠΟῪ >. ΧΙ, 


ἡλικίας Ῥἔτεκεν," ἐπεὶ πιστὸν ἡγήσατο τὸν ἐπαγγειλάμενον. 
‘seasonable gave birth ; since faithful she esteemed him who promised. 


12 διὸ καὶ ἀφ᾽ ἑνὸς “ἐγεννήθησαν," καὶ ταῦτα νενεκρω- 
Wherefore also from one were born, and that too of [one] having 
μένου, καθὼς τὰ ἄστρα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ τῷ πλήθει, Kai Twoei'! 
become dead, even as the stars ofthe heaven in multitude, and as 
ἄμμος ἡ παρὰ τὸ χεῖλος τῆς θαλάσσης ἡ ἀναρίθμητος. 
sand *which[‘is] “by 7080 ®shore οὗ '°the “sea ‘the countless. 


13 Kara πίστιν ἀπέθανον οὗτοι πάντες, μὴ "λαβόντες" rac 
In faith %died 2these tall, not having received the . 


Υ ΄ ᾽ soe = ΓΑ ἘΣ O72 t \ , 
ἐπαγγελίας, ἀλλὰ πόῤῥωθεν αὐτὰς ἰδόντες, ἱκαὶ πεισθεν- 
promises, but from afar them having seen, and having been per- 
τες, Kai ἀσπασάμενοι, καὶ ὁμολογήσαντες ὅτι ξένοι καὶ 
suaded, and having embraced [them],and having confessed ὑμαῦ strangers and 
παρεπίδημοί εἰσιν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. 14 ot-yap τοιαῦτα λέ- 
sojourners they are on the earth. For they who such things 
yovrec, ἐμφανίζουσιν ὅτι πατρίδα ἐπιζητοῦσιν. 15 καὶ εἰ 


say, make manifest that [their] own country they are seeking. And if 

μὲν ἐκείνης “ἐμνημόνευον! ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἐξῆλθον," εἴ- 
indeed ‘that ‘they were *remembering from whence they came out, they might 
χονἂν καιρὸν ἀνακάμψαι" 16 *vuvi'.dé κρείττονος ὀρέ- 


but now 


διὸ 


wherefore 


have had opportunity to have returned ; 


yovra, Yrovréori,' ἐπουρανίου" 
forward to, that is, a heavenly ; 


αὐτοὺς ὁ θεός. θεὸς ἐπικαλεῖσθαι αὐτῶν" ἡτοίμασεν.γὰρ αὐτοῖς 
them 1God,''God ‘“to*%be °called ‘?°their; for he prepared for them 
πόλιν. 
a city. 

17 Πίστει προσενήνοχεν ᾿Αβραὰμ τὸν ᾿Ισαὰκ πειραζόμενος, 

By faith ‘has δοβξοσθα Ὃν ‘Abraham "Isaac “being “tried, 
Kai τὸν. μονογενῆ προσέφερεν ὁ τὰς ἐπαγγελίας ἀνα- 
δια [his] '°only-begotten *was ‘offering up 6 *who*the ‘promises Sac- 
δεξάμενος, 18 πρὸς ὃν ἐλαλήθη, Ὅτι ἐν ᾿Ισαὰκ κληθήσεταί 
cepted, as to whom it was said, In Isaac shall be called 
σοι σπέρμα" 19 λογισάμενος Ore καὶ ἐκ νεκρῶν 
thy seed ; reckoning that even fromamong([the] dead 
Ξἐγείρειν δυνατὸς" ὁ θεός, ὅθεν αὐτὸν καὶ ἐν παραβολῇ 
*to °raise Sable ([?was) ‘God, whence him _ also in a simile 
ἐκομίσατο. 20 Πίστει * περὶ μελλόντων Ὀεὐλόγησεν" ᾿Ισαὰκ 
he received. By faith concerning things coming 2blessed 1TIsaac 
τὸν Ἰακὼβ καὶ τὸν Ἤσαῦ. 21 Πίστει ᾿Ιακὼβ ἀποθνήσκων 
Jacob and Esau. By faith Jacob dying 

ἕκαστον τῶν υἱῶν Ἰωσὴφ δϑεὐλόγησεν" Kai προσεκύνησεν 
“each 30f tthe ‘sons Sof 7Joseph ‘blessed and worshipped 
ἐπὶ TO ἄκρον τῆς. ῥάβδου.αὐτοῦ. 22 Πίστει ᾿Ιωσὴφ τελευτῶν 
on the top of his staff. By faith Joseph, dying, 

περὶ τῆς ἐξόδου τῶν υἱῶν ᾿Ισραὴλ ἐμνημόνευσεν, καὶ 
concerning the going forth of the sons ΟΕ Israel Θ mention, and 
TW@V.OOTEWY.aUTOU ἐνετείλατο. 


a better theystretch 


OvKETALOXUVETAL 
“is “not ‘ashamed ‘of 


περὶ 
concerning his bones gave command. 
23 Πίστει “Μωσῆς") γεννηθεὶς ἐκρύβη τρίμηνον ὑπὸ 
By faith Moses, having been born, was hid three months by 


P — ἔτεκεν (read and [that] beyond a seasonable age) GLTTrA. 


τ ὡς ἡ GLTTrAW. 


4 ἐγενήθησαν LA. 


5 προσδεξάμενοι τ,; κομισάμενοι TTr. t — καὶ πεισθέντες GLTTrAW. 


γ᾽ μνημονεύουσιν they are mindful Tir. w ἐξέβησαν they went out LITraw. x νῦν 
GLITraw. Υ τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν GT. - ἐγεῖραι δύναται is able to raise L. a + καὶ also 
L[Tr]AWw. Ὁ ηὐλόγησεν LA. © Μωὕσης GLTTrAW. 


ΣΙ. 


τῶν πατέρων.αὐτοῦ διότι 
his parents 


HEBREWS. 


εἶδον ἀστεῖον τὸ παιδίον" Kai 
because they saw “beautiful ‘the little Schild; and 


οὐκ ἐφοβήθησαν τὸ ἀδιάταγμα' τοῦ βασιλέως. 24 Πίστει 
did not fear the injunction of the king. By faith 


"Mwone! μέγας γενόμενος ἠρνήσατο λέγεσθαι υἱὸς θυγατρὸς 


Moses, great having become, refused tobecalled son of *daughter 
Φαραώ, 25 μᾶλλον ἑλόμενος ἰσυγκακουχεῖσθαι! τῷ rap 
1Pharaoh’s ; Srather “having *chosen to suffer affliction with the people 


τοῦ θεοῦ, ἢ πρόσκαιρον ἔχειν ἁμαρτίας ἀπόλαυσιν" 
of God, than [*the] *temporary ‘to “have Sof 7sin Senjoyment ; 
26 μείζονα πλοῦτον ἡγησάμενος τῶν δὲν" "Αἰγύπτῳ" On- 
greater riches having esteemed *than ’the °in 0Hgypt “trea- 
σαυρῶν τὸν ὀγειδισμὸν τοῦ χριστοῦ" ἀπέβλεπεν.γὰρ εἰς τὴν 
sures ‘the reproach “of *the °Christ; for he had respect to the 
μισθαποδοσίαν. 27 Πίστει κατέλιπεν Αἴγυπτον, μὴ φοβηθεὶς 
recompense. By faith he left Egypt, not having feared 
τὸν θυμὸν τοῦ βασιλέως" τὸν.γὰρ ἀόρατον ὡς ὁρῶν 
the indignation of the king; for*the ‘invisible [Sone] ‘as seeing 
ἐκαρτέρησεν. 28 Πίστει πεποίηκεν τὸ πάσχα Kai THY πρόσ- 
he persevered, By faith hehaskept the passover and the affu- 
χυσιν τοῦ αἵματος, ἵνα.μὴ 0d\0OpEbwr'! τὰ πρωτότοκα θί- 
sion of the blood, lest the destroyer of the firstborn [ones] might 
yy αὐτῶν. 29 Πίστει διέβησαν τὴν ἐρυθρὰν θάλασσαν 
touch them. By faith they passed through the Red Sea 
ὡς διὰ ξηρᾶς": ἧς πεῖραν. λαβόντες οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι 
as through dry [land]; of which “having *made ‘trial ‘the *Egyptians 
κατεπόθησαν. 80 Πίστει τὰ τείχη "Ἱεριχὼ" πἔπεσεν", κυ- 
were swallowed up. By faith the walls of Jericho fell, having 
κλωθέντα ἐπὶ ἑπτὰ ἡμέρας. 81 Πίστει Ῥαὰβ ἡ πόρνη οὐ 
been encircled for seven days. By faith Rahab the harlot not 


συναπώλετο τοῖς ἀπειθήσασιν, δεξαμένη τοὺς κατασκό- 
‘did *perish *with thosewho disobeyed, having received the spies 


πους μετ᾽ εἰρήνης. 
with peace. 
32 Kai τί ἔτι λέγω ; ἐπιλείψει. "γάρ pe' διηγούμενον ὁ 
And what more dol say? For *will *fail ®me ‘relating ‘the 
χρόνος περὶ Γεδεών, ὁΒαράκ Pre καὶ Σαμψὼν acai" ᾿Τεφθάε, 
“time of Gedeon, Barak also and Sampson and Jephthae, 


FAaBid" τε kai Σαμουὴλ καὶ τῶν προφητῶν" 33 οἱ διὰ πίστεως 


David also and Samuel and of the prophets : who by faith 
κατηγωνίσαντο βασιλείας, “εἰργάσαντο᾽ δικαιοσύνην, ἐπέτυχον 
overcame kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained 
ἐπαγγελιῶν, ἔφραξαν στόματα λεόντων, 34 ἔσβεσαν δύναμιν 
promises, stopped mouths of lions, quenched [the] power 
πυρός, ἔφυγον στόματα tpayaipac,' “ἐνεδυναμώθησαν" ἀπὸ 
of fire, escaped [the] mouths of[the]sword, acquired strength outof 
ἀσθενείας, ἐγενήθησαν ἰσχυροὶ ἐν πολέμῳ, παρεμβολὰς 
weakness, became mighty in war, (?the] 7armies 


ἔκλιναν ἀλλοτρίων" 35 ἔλαβον "γυναῖκες" ἐξ ἀνα- 
4made “ἴο “give *way “οἵ *strangers. 1°Received *women by resur- 
στάσεως τοὺς νεκροὺς. αὐτῶν" ἄλλοι.δὲ ἐτυμπανίσθησαν, οὐ 
rection their dead ; and others were tortured, not 
ἃ δόγμα decree L. ε Μωῦὐσῆς GLTTraw. f ouv- T. 
of Egypt GLTTraw. 1 ὀλεθρεύων LA. 
™ ἔπεσαν LTTrA. ™ με yap LTTrA. 
τ Δανείδ LITrA ; Δαυΐδ ον. 
strengthened LTTr. 
their dead x. 


° + καὶ and w. 


5 ἠργάσαντο TIr. ἵ μαχαίρης LTTrA. 


- ξ - ἐν GTTraw. 
k + γῆς land Lrtraw. 
P — τε καὶ LTTrw, 


579 


hid three months of his 
parents, because they 
saw he was a proper 
child ; and they were 
not afraid of the king’s 
commandment. 24 By 
faith Moses, when he 
was come to years, re- 
fused to be called 
the son of Pharaoh’s 
daughter ; 25 choosing 
rather to suffer afflic- 
tion with the people of 
God, than toenjoy the 
pleasures of sin fora 
season; 26 esteeming 
the reproach of Christ 
greater riches than the 
treasures in Egypt: for 
he had respect unto 
the recompence of the 
reward. 27 By faith 
he forsook Egypt, not 
fearing the wrath of 
the king: for he en- 
dured, as seeing 
him who is invisible. 
28 Through faith he 
kept the passover, and 
the sprinkling of blood, 
lest he that destroyed 
the firstborn should 
touch them, 29 By faith 
they passed through 
the Red sea as by dry 
land : which the Egyp- 
tians assaying to do 
were drowned. 30 By 
faith the walls of Je- 
richo fell down, after 
they were compassed 
about seven days. 
31 By faith the harlot 
Rahab perished not 
with them that believ- 
ed not, when she had 
received the spies with 
peace. 


32 And what shall I 
more say ? for the time 
would fail me to tell 
of Gedeon, and of Ba- 
rak, and of Samson, 
and of Jephthae; of 
David also, and Sam- 
uel, and of the pro- 
phets : 33 who through 
faith subdued king- 
doms, wrought right- 
eousness, obtained 
promises, stopped the 
mouths of lions, 
34 quenched the vio- 
lence of fire, escaped 
the edge of the sword, 
out of weakness were 
made strong, waxed 
valiant in fight, turn- 
ed to flight the armies 
of the aliens, 35 Wo- 
men _ received their 
dead raised to life a- 

h Αἰγύπτον 

! Ἱερειχὼ τ. 
4 — καὶ LTTr. 


ἡ ἐδυναμώϑησαν were 
ἡ γυναίκας (read they received by resurrection women [that is] 


580 


gain : and others were 
tortured, not accept- 
ing deliverance ; that 
they might obtain a 
better resurrection : 
36 and others had trial 
of cruel mockings 
and scourgings, yea, 
moreover of bonds 
and imprisonment: 
37 they were stoned, 
they were sawn asun- 
der, were tempted, 
were slain with the 
sword: they wander- 
ed about in sheepskins 
and goatskins ; being 
destitute, afflicted, tor- 
mented ; 38 (of whom 
the world was not 
worthy:) they wander- 
ed in deserts, and in 
mountains, and in 
dens and caves of the 
earth. 39 And these 
all, having obtained a 
good report through 
faith, received not the 
promise : 40 God hay- 
ing provided some bet- 
ter thing for us, that 
they without us should 
not be made perfect. 


XII. Wherefore see- 
ing we also are com- 
passed about with so 
great a cloud of wit- 
nesses, let us lay aside 
every weight, and the 
sin which doth soeasily 
beset ws, and letus run 
with patience the race 
that is set before us, 
2 looking unto Jesus 
the author and finish- 


er of our faith; who M 


for the joy that was 
set before him en- 
dured the cross, de- 
spising the shame, and 
is set down at the 
right hand of the 
throne of God. 3 For 
consider him that en- 
dured such contradic- 
tion of sinners against 
himself, lest ye be 
wearied and faint in 
your minds. 4 Ye have 
not yet resisted unto 
blood, striving against 
sin. 5 Andye have for- 
gotten the exhortation 
which speaketh unto 
you as unto children, 
My son, despise not 
thou the chastening of 
the Lord, nor faint 
when thou art rebuk- 
ed of him: 6 for 
whom the Lord loveth 
he chasteneth, «and 
scourgeth every son 
whom he receiveth. 
7 If ye endure chas- 
tening, God dealeth 


x ἐπειράσθησαν, ἐπρίσθησαν T. 


promises L. 
as a question L. 


Ὁ κεκάθικεν has sat down GLTTraw. 
ἐ παιδίας 1. 


ΠΡΟΣ ἘΒΡΑΙΟΥ͂Σ. ΧΙ, XII. 


προσδεξάμενοι τὴν ἀπολύτρωσιν, ἵνα κρείττονος ἀναστάσεως 
having accepted redemption, that a better resurrection 
Tuxwow' 36 Erepol.dé ἐμπαιγμῶν καὶ μαστίγων πεῖραν 
they might obtain ; and others *of *mockings ‘and ‘of Sscourgings ‘trial 
ἔλαβον, ἔτιιδὲ δεσμῶν καὶ φυλακῆς: 87 ἐλιθάσθησαν, 
received, yea, moreover, of bonds and of imprisonment. They were stoned, 
Σἐπρίσθησαν, ἐπειράσθησαν," ἐν φόνῳ Yuaxyaioac' ἀπέθα- 
were sawn asunder, were tempted, by slaughter of [the] sword they 
voy’ περιῆλθον ἐν μηλωταῖς, ἐν αἰγείοις δέρμασιν, ὑστερού- 
died ; they wandered in sheep-skins, in goats’ skins, being des- 
, ΄, r > x ” © 
μενοι, θλιβόμενοι, κακουχούμενοι, 38 ὧν οὐκ.ιἦν ἄξιος ὁ 
titute, being oppressed, being evil treated, (of whom “was “ποῦ ®worthy ‘the 
κόσμος" *év' ἐρημίαις πλανώμενοι καὶ ὄρεσιν καὶ σπηλαίοις 
*world,) in deserts wandering and inmountainsand in caves 
Kai ταῖς ὀπαῖς τῆς γῆς. 39 Kai οὗτοι πάντες μαρτυρη- 
and inthe holes οΥ̓́[Β8 earth. And these all, having been borne 
θέντες διὰ τῆς πίστεως, οὐκ. ἐκομίσαντο τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν," 
witness to through faith, did not receive the promise, 
40 τοῦ θεοῦ περὶ ἡμῶν κρεῖττόν τι προβλεψαμένου, ἵνα μὴ 
God _ for us "better something having foreseen, that not 
χωρὶς ἡμῶν τελειωθῶσιν. 
apartfrom us _ they should be made perfect. 
12 Τοιγαροῦν καὶ ἡμεῖς τοσοῦτον ἔχοντες περικείμενον 
Therefore also we 380 Sgreat *having ®Sencompassing 
ἡμῖν νέφος μαρτύρων, ὄγκον ἀποθέμενοι πάντα καὶ 
ϑ5Β “(ἃ cloud Sof 7witnesses, **weight *°having *'laid ‘aside ‘Severy and 
τὴν εὐπερίστατον ἁμαρτίαν, dt ὑπομονῆς τρέχωμεν τὸν 
the easily-surrounding sin, with endurance weshouldrun the 
προκείμενον ἡμῖν ἀγῶνα, ἀφορῶντες εἰς τὸν τῆς πίστεως 
“lying *before us race, looking away to “the Sof "faith 
ἀρχηγὸν καὶ τελειωτὴν ᾿Ιησοῦν, ὃς ἀντὶ τῆς προκει- 
Sleader “and ‘completer 2Jesus: who inviewof the *ly- 
ἕνης αὐτῷ χαρᾶς ὑπέμεινεν σταυρύν, αἰσχύνης 
ing *before “him joy endured [the] cross, [the] shame 
καταφρονήσας, ἐν.δεξιᾷ. τε τοῦ θρόνου τοῦ θεοῦ θὲκάθι- 
having despised, andat[the)right hand ofthe throne of God sat 
σεν. 3 ἀναλογίσασθε.γὰρ τὸν τοιαύτην ὑπομεμενηκότα 
down. For consider well himwho 380 “great thas *endured 
ὑπὸ τῶν ἁμαρτωλῶν εἰς “αὐτὸν" ἀντιλογίαν, ἵνα μὴ Ka- 
®from "sinners ‘against *himself ‘gainsaying, that “not 'ye “be 
μητε, Taic.puyaic.vpay ἐκλυόμενοι. 4 Οὔπω μέχρις αἵματος 
*wearied, Sin 7your Ssouls ®fainting. Not yet unto blood 
ἀντικατέστητε πρὸς τὴν ἁμαρτίαν ἀνταγωνιζόμενοι, ὃ καὶ 
resisted ye 7against sin 1wrestling, and 
5» , ~ , ev « ~ e ε - “ 
ἐκλέλησθε τῆς παρακλήσεως, ἥτις ὑμῖν ὡς υἱοῖς διαλέ- 
ye have quite forgotten the exhortation, which to you, as tosons, he ad- 
γεται ἃ Yiépou, μὴ.ὀλιγώρει παιδείας" κυρίου, μηδὲ ἐκ- 
dresses: My son, despise not [0186] discipline of [the] Lord, nor 
Avou ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐλεγχόμενος. 6 ὃν.γὰρ ἀγαπᾷ κύριος 
faint, by him being reproved ; forwhom “loves ['the] *Lord 
παιδεύει: μαστιγοὶ.δὲ πάντα υἱὸν ὃν παραδέχεται. 7 ‘Ei! 
he disciplines, and scourges every son whom he receives, If 
ἐπαιδείαν! ὑπομένετε, we ὑμῖν προσφέρεται 
discipline yeendure, ‘as “with Syou “15 Sdealing 


υἱοῖς 
"with “sons 


témULTTrA. 8 τὰς ἐπαγγελίας the 
y ς ἑαυτὸν LTTraA. 4 Read the sentence 
f εἰς (read ye endure for discipline) LtTTra. & παιδίαν τ. 


Υ maxatpys LITrA. 


HEBREWS. 
οὐ.παιδεύει πατήρ; 
3disciplines *not [‘the] 7Father? 


γεγόνασιν πάν- 
have *become ‘all, 


Xi. 

ὁ θεός" τίς.γάρ “éoriv' 
*God; for who is {the] son whom 

᾽ , , > i ΄ ll ©. , 

ὃ εἰδὲ χωρίς ἐστε ἱπαιδείας,,) ἧς μέτοχοι 
But if *without *ye?are discipline, of which *partakers 

τες. doa νόθοι "ἐστὲ καὶ οὐχ viol." 9 εἶτα τοὺς μὲν τῆς σ 

then bastards yeareand not sons, Moreover the 


υἱὸς ὃν 


αρκὸς 
“flesh 


ἡμῶν πατέρας εἴχομεν παιδευτάς, καὶ *everpe- 
70f 5our fathers we have had [as] those who discipline [us], and we respected 
πόμεθα" οὐ ἱπολλῴ! μᾶλλον ὑποταγησόμεθα τῷ πατρὶ 


{them];*not ‘much 5rather ‘shall *we be in subjection to the Father 


τῶν πνευμάτων, Kai ζήσομεν; 10 οἱιμὲν.γὰρ πρὸς ὀλίγας 


of spirits, and = shall live? For they indeed for a few 
ἡμέρας κατὰ τὸ δοκοῦν αὐτοῖς ἐπαίδευον᾽ ὁ. δὲ ἐπὶ 
days according to that which seemed good to them disciplined; but ΒΘ for 
τὸ συμφέρον, εἰς τὸ μεταλαβεῖν THC.a4yLoTHTOG-.avTOU. 11 πᾶσα 


of his holiness. 7Any 


(lit, every) 
πρὸς μὲν τὸ παρὸν οὐ.δοκεῖ χαρᾶς εἶναι, 
or the present seems not [*matter]*of *joy ‘to *be, 
δι αὐτῆς 
1216 


profit, for [8] to partake 


πὸ δὲ παιδεία" 
*pbut discipline 
? A ’ eo 4 ‘ ? ‘ ~ 
ἀλλὰ λύπης" ὕστερον.δὲ καρπὸν εἰρηνικὸν τοῖς 
but ofgrief; butafterwards “fruit “peaceable ®to 7those **by 
γεγυμνασμένοις ἀποδίδωσιν δικαιοσύνης. 
®having *been }°exercised lrenders *of righteousness. 
12 Διὸ τὰς παρειμένας χεῖρας Kai τὰ παραλελυμένα γόνατα 
Wherefore the hanging *down ‘hands and the enfeebled knees 
ἀνορθώσατε᾽ 18 καὶ τροχιὰς ὀρθὰς "ποιήσατε" τοῖς.ποσὶν ὑμῶν, 


lift up; and paths ‘straight make for your feet, 
(vay TO χωλὸν ἐκτραπῇ; ἰαθῃ.δὲ 
lest that which [18] lame be turned aside; but that *it *may “06 *healed 


μᾶλλον. 14 εἰρήνην διώκετε μετὰ πάντων, Kai TOY ἁγιασμόν, 
1rather, Peace pursue with all, and sanctification, 
οὗ χωρὶς οὐδεὶς ὄψεται τὸν Kiptov’ 15 ἐπισκοποῦντες μή 
Swhich ‘apart 7from no one shallsee the Lord; looking diligently lest 
τις ὑστερῶν ἀπὸ τῆς χάριτος τοῦ θεοῦ" μή τις ῥίζα πικρίας 
any lack the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness 
ἄνω φύουσα ἐνοχλῇ. καὶ διὰ ταύτης" μιανθῶσιν Ῥ 


up ‘springing should trouble [you),and by this be defiled 
πολλοί: 16 μή τις πόρνος ἢ βέβηλος, ὡς Ἢσαῦ, ὃς 
many ; lest [there be] any fornicator or profane person, as Esau, who 


ἀντὶ βρώσεως μιᾶς ἀπέδοτο" τὰ πρωτοτόκια "αὐτοῦ." 17 ἴστε 
for 2meal tone sold *pirthright this ; *ye "know 
yao Ort kai μετέπειτα θέλων κληρονομῆσαι THY εὐλογίαν ἀπε- 
*for that also afterwards, wishing to inherit the blessing, he was 
δοκιμάσθη" peravoiac-yap τόπον οὐχ.εὗρεν, καίπερ μετὰ δακ- 
rejected, for *of *repentance ‘place he found not, although with 
ρύων ἐκζητήσας αὐτήν. 

tears having earnestly sought it. 


18 Οὐ.γὰρ προσεληλύθατε ψηλαφωμένῳ βύρει,} καὶ 
For *not tye “have come to 3being *touched ['the] “mount and 
κεκαυμένῳ πυρί, καὶ γνόφῳ, καὶ ‘oxdTw,' Kai θυέλλῃ, 


having been kindled with fire, and to obscurity, and to darkness, and totempest, 


19 kai σάλπιγγος ἤχῳ, Kai φωνῇ ῥημάτων, ἧς οἱ 
and *trumpet’s ‘to sound, and to voice of words; which [voice]they that 


581 


with you as with sons; 
for what son is he 
whom the father chas- 
tenucth not? 8 But if 
ye be without chastise- 
ment, whereof all are 
partakers, then are ye 
bastards, and not sons. 
9 Furthermore we have 
had fathers of our 
flesh which corrected 
us, and we gave them 
reverence: shall we 
not much rather be in 
subjection unto the 
Father of spirits, and 
live? 10 For they ve- 
rily for a few days 
chastened wus after 
their own pleasure; 
but he for our profit, 
that we might be par- 
takers of his holiness. 
11 Now no chastening 
for the present seem- 
eth to be joyous, but 
grievous : nevertheless 
afterward it yieldeth 
the peaceable fruit of 
righteousness unto 
them which are ex- 
ercised thereby. 


12 Wherefore lift up 
the hands which hang 
down, and the feeble 
knees; 13 and make 
straight paths for your 
feet, lest that which is 
lame be turned out 
of the way; but let 
it rather be healed. 
14 Follow peace with 
all men, and holiness, 
without which noman 
shall see the Lord: 
15 looking diligently 
lest any man fail of 
the grace of God ; lest 
any root of bitterness 
springing up trouble 
you, and thereby many 
be defiled ; 16 lest there 
be any fornicator, or 
profane person, as E- 
sau, who for one mor- 
sel of meat sold his 
birthright. 17 For ye 
know how that after- 
ward, when he would 
have inherited the 
blessing, he was re- 
jected: for he found 
no place of repentance, 
though he sought it 
carefully with tears. 


18 For ye are not 
come unto the mount 
that might be touched, 
and that burned with 
fire, nor unto black- 
ness, and darkness, 
and tempest, 19 and 
the sound ofa trumpet, 
and the voice of words; 


i παιδίας T. J καὶ οὐχ viol ἐστε LTTrA. 
τὰ μὲν παιδία discipline indeed T. 

4 ἀπέδετο LA. 
τ ζόφῳ LTTraw. 


b — ἐστιν LITr[A]. 
respect E. 1 πολὺ LITrA. 
αὐτῆς through it L. P + οἱ the LTTraw. 
® — ὄρει (read [that] being touched) trtra. 


k ἐμτρεπόμεθα we 
» 


Ὁ ποιεῖτε TTr. ο δι 
τ ἑαυτοῦ his own LTTrA. 


582 


which voice they that 
heard intreated that 
the word should not 
be spoken to them any 
more: 20 (for they 
could not endure that 
which was command- 
ed, And if somuchasa 
beast touch the moun- 
tain, it shall bestoned, 
or thrust through with 
a dart: 21 and so ter- 
rible was the sight, 
that Moses said, I ex- 
ceedingly fear and 
quake :) 22 but ye are 
come unto mount 
Sion, and unto the 
city of the living God, 
the heavenly Jerusa- 
lem, and to an in- 
numerable company 
of angels, 23 to the 
general assembly and 
church of the first- 
born, which are writ- 
ten in heaven, and to 
God the Judge of all, 
and to the spirits of 
just men made_per- 
fect, 24 and to Jesus 
the mediator of the 
new covenant, and to 
the blood of sprink- 
ling, that speaketh 
better things than that 
of Abel. 25 See that ye 
refuse not him that 
speaketh. For if they 
escaped not who re- 
fused him that spake 
on earth, much more 
shall not we escape, if 
we turn away from 
him that speaketh from 
heaven : 26 whose voice 
then shook the earth: 
but now he hath pro- 
mised, saying, Yet once 
more I shake not the 
earth only, but also 
heaven. 27 And this 
word, Yet once more, 
signifieth the remov- 
ing of those things 
that are shaken, as 
of things that are 
made, that those 
things whichcannot be 
shaken may remain. 
28 Wherefore we re- 
ceiving a kingdom 
whichcannot be mov- 
ed, let us have grace, 
whereby we may serve 
God acceptably with 
reverence and godly 
fear : 29 for our God 
ig a consuming fire. 
XIII. Let brotherly 
love continue. 2 Be 
not forgetful to enter- 
tain strangers: for 
thereby some have en- 
tertained angels una- 


ΠΡΟΣ EBPAIOYS. XII, XIII. 


ἀκούσαντες παρῃτήσαντο μὴ προστεθῆναι αὐτοῖς 
heard excused themselves [asking] *not *to °be*addressed "to *them ["the] 


λόγον" 20 οὐκ. ἔφερον.γὰρ τὸ διαστελλόμενον, Κἂν θηρίον 


2word ; (for they could not bear that [which] was commanded: And if a beast 
θίγῃ τοῦ ὄρους λιθοβοληθήσεται, ἢ βολίδι κατατοξευ- 
should touch the mountain, it shall be stoned, or with a dart shot 
θήσεται" 21 καί, οὕτως φοβερὸν ἦν τὸ φανταζόμενον, 
through ; and, so fearful was the spectacle {that] 


ὑΜωσῆς" εἶπεν, "Εκφοβός εἰμι καὶ ἔντρομος" 22 ἀλλὰ προσ- 
Moses said, “greatly *afraid ‘I *amand trembling:) but ye have 


εληλύθατε Σιὼν ὄρει, Kai πόλει θεοῦ ζῶντος, Ἵερου- 
come to ?Sion ‘mount;and [the] city of *God['the] “living, Jeru- 
σαλὴμ ἐπουρανίῳ, καὶ μυριάσιν “ἀγγέλων 28 πανηγύρει, 

salem *heavenly ; and tomyriads ofangels, [the] universal gathering ; 
καὶ ἐκκλησίᾳ πρωτοτόκων χὲέν οὐρανοῖς ἀπογεγραμ- 
and ἴο [{Π6] assembly of [the] firstborn [ones] in [the] heavens regis- 


μένων," καὶ κριτῇ θεῷ πάντων, Kai πνεύμασιν δικαίων 
tered ; and to[?the]*judge *God ofall; and to([the] spirits of [the] just 


τετελειωμένων, 24 καὶ διαθήκης νέας μεσίτῃ Ἰησοῦ, Kai 
(who] have been perfected; and *of*®a’covenant *fresh “mediator ‘to 7Jesus; and 
αἵματι ῥαντισμοῦ ὑκρείττονα" λαλοῦντι παρὰ τὸν Αβελ 
to [the] blood of sprinkling, *better*things ‘speaking than Abel. 
25 Βλέπετε μὴ.παραιτήσησθε τὸν λαλοῦντα. εἰ. γὰρ ἐκεῖνοι 


Take heed ye refuse not him who _ speaks. Forif they 

οὐκ ἔφυγον," *rov' ἐπὶ ὑτῆς" γῆς παραιτησάμενοιδ χρη- 
escaped not, “him‘*that °on ‘the earth (*who] 7refused divine- 
See ὁπολλῷ -μᾶλλον ἡμεῖς οἱ TOY ἀπ᾿ οὐρανῶν 
y instructed [them], much more we who *him *from [*the] “heavens 
ἀποστρεφόμενοι. 26 οὗ ἡ φωνὴ τὴν γῆν ἐσάλευσεν τότε, 
turn ?away “from ! whose voice the “earth *shook then ; 
~ \ > , , » ev ? ‘ d ΄ li ? , 
νῦν.δὲ ἐπήγγελται, λέγων, Ere ἅπαξ ἐγὼ “σείω! ov μόνον 
but now hehas promised, saying, Yet once I shake not only 


γῆν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸν οὐρανόν. 27 Τὸ.δὲ “Eri ἅπαξ, δηλοῖ 
earth, but also the heaven. But the Yet once, signifies 
σαλευομένων τὴν" μετάθεσιν, ὡς πεποιημένων, 
308 *the [things] ®shaken 1the ?removing, as having been made, 
e , 4 A , A / 
ἵνα μείνῃ τὰ μὴ.σαλευόμενα. 28 διὸ βασιλείαν 
that ‘may remain ‘the[?things] “ποὺ *shaken. Wherefore a kingdom 
ἀσάλευτον παραλαμβάνοντες, ἔχωμεν χάριν, dv ἧς 
not to be shaken receiving, may we have grace, by which 
λατρεύωμεν εὐαρέστως τῷ θεῷ μετὰ [αἰδοῦς Kai εὐλαβείας." 
we may serve *well *pleasingly 1God with reverence and fear. 
29 καὶ. γὰρ ὁ.θεὸς ἡμῶν πῦρ καταναλίσκον. 
For also our God [is] a "fire *consuming. 
13 Ἡ φιλαδελφία μενέτω. 2 τῆς φιλοξενίας μὴ ἐπιλαν- 
Brotherly *love ‘let abide ; of hospitality ?not ‘be for- 
θάνεσθε" διὰ.ταύτης.γὰρ ἔλαθόν τινες ξενίσαντες ἀγγέλους. 
getful ; for by this unawares some entertained angels. 
3 μιμνήσκεσθε τῶν δεσμίων, ὡς συνδεδεμένοι" τῶν κακου- 
Be mindful of prisoners, as bound with [them]; those being 
χουμένων, ὡς καὶ αὐτοὶ ὄντες ἐν σώματι. 4 τίμιος 
evil-treated, as also yourselves being in [the] body. Honourable [let] 


τὴν 
the 
“τῶν 


u — ἢ βολίδι κατατοξευθήσεται GLTTrAW. 
of angels by a comma GLTrA. 
better thing GLTTraw. 


Ὁ — τῆς GLTTrAW. 
μένων LTTrA. 


νυ Mwions GLTTrAwW. W Separate myriads from 

x ἀπογεγραμμένων ἐν οὐρανοῖς GLTTrAW. Υ κρεῖττον ἃ 
2 ἐξέφυγον LTTra. a τὸν placed after παραιτησάμενοι LTTrA. 
© πολὺ LTTrA. 4 σείσω will shake titra. © τὴν τῶν σαλευο- 


f εὐλαβείας καὶ δέους fear and awe LTTrA. 


HEBREWS. 
καὶ ἡ κοίτη ἀμίαντος" πόρ- 
bed [be] undefiled; for- 


5 ἀφιλάργυρος 
Without love of money [let 


XIII. 
ὁ γάμος ἐν πᾶσιν, 
marriage (be held] in’ every [way], and the 
νους 80é' Kai μοιχοὺς fe ὁ θεός. 
nicators *but and adulterers *will*judge ‘God. 
ὁ τρόπος" ἀρκούμενοι τοῖς. παροῦσιν" αὐτὸς 
your] manner of life [be], satisfied with present [circumstances]; *he 
yap εἴρηκεν, Οὐμμή σὲ ave, οὐδ᾽ οὐ.μή σε *tyKaraXizw.' 
“for has said, In no wise thee will I leave, norinany wise thee will I forsake. 
~ ~ , ’ ‘ , 
6 wore θαῤῥοῦντας ἡμᾶς.λέγειν, Κύριος ἐμοὶ βοηθός, 
So that we may boldly say, {The} Lord [18] tome a helper, 
Ἰκαὶ" οὐ. φοβηθήσομαι" Ἑ τί ποιήσει μοι ἄνθρωπος ; 
and I will notbe afraid: what shall 7do *to *me 4man ? 
7 Μνημονεύετε τῶν.ἡγουμένων ὑμῶν, οἵτινες ἐλάλησαν 
Remember your leaders, who spoke 
ὑμῖν τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ; ὧν ἀναθεωροῦντες τὴν ἔκβασιν 
to you the word of God; of whom, considering the issue 
τῆς. ἀναστροφῆς, μιμεῖσθε τὴν.πίστιν. 8ὃ ᾿Ιησοὺς χριστὸς 
of [their] conduct, imitate [their] faith. Jesus Christ 
ἰχθὲς" καὶ σήμερον ὁ αὐτός, Kai εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. 9 dida- 
yesterday and to-day [is] the same, and to the ages. With 
xaic ποικίλαις καὶ ξέναις μὴ.““περιφέρεσθε"᾿ Kadov-yao 
*teachings *various and “strange be not carried about; for [it is] good [for] 
χάριτι βεβαιοῦσθαι τὴν καρδίαν, οὐ βρώμασιν, ἐν οἷς οὐκ 
‘with ’grace *to *be °confirmed ‘the heart, not meats; in which ?not 
> , « n U ll 10 τῇ τ᾿ θ as 
ὠφελήθησαν οι περιπατήσαντες. χομεν VOLa 
1were *profited those who walked (therein). We have an al- 
στήριον ἐξ οὗ φαγεῖν οὐκ ἔχουσιν ἐξουσίαν οἱ τῇ σκηνῇ 
tar of which to eat they have not authority who the tabernacle 
λατρεύοντες. 11 wy.yap εἰσφέρεται ζώων τὸ αἷμα 
serve ; for of those *whose *is °brought ‘animals %blood [as sacri- 
ὁπερὶ ἁμαρτίας" εἰς τὰ ἅγια διὰ τοῦ ἀρχιερέως. τούτων 
fices] for sin into the holies by the  highpriest, of these 
τὰ σώματα κατακαίεται ἔξω τῆς παρεμβολῆς 12 διὸ καὶ 


the bodies are burned outside the camp. Wherefore also 
Ἰησοῦς, ἵνα ἁγιάσῃ διὰ τοῦ ἰδίου αἵματος τὸν λαόν, 
Jesus, that he might sanctify by his own blood the people, 


ἔξω τῆς πύλης ἔπαθεν. 13 τοίνυν ἐξερχώμεθα πρὸς αὐτὸν 
outside the gate suffered: therefore weshould goforth to him 
ἔξω τῆς παρεμβολῆς, τὸν.ὀνειδισμὸν. αὐτοῦ φεβοντξοι 14 οὐ 
outside the camp, his reproach earing ; “not 
‘ » Y= , , > 4 ‘ , ᾽ 
γὰρ ἔχομεν ὧδε μένουσαν πόλιν, ἀλλὰ τὴν μέλλουσαν ἐπι- 
‘for *we*have here an abiding city, but the comingone weare 
~ ? > ~ q Ἢ] ᾽ , θ , ae 
ζητοῦμεν. 15 Av αὐτοῦ «οὖν ἀναφερωμεν υσίαν αἰνέσεως 
seeking for. By him _ therefore we should offer [the] sacrifice of praise 
‘ 1 ~ ~ , , € ’ 
τδιαπαντὸς" τῷ θεῷ, "τουτέστιν, καρπὸν χειλέων ὁμολογούν- 
continually to God, that is, fruit of [the] lips confess- 
των τῷ-ὀνόματι.αὐτοῦ. 16 τῆς δὲ. εὐποιΐας καὶ κοινωνίας 
ing to his name, But of doing good and of communicating 
μὴ-ἐπιλανθάνεσθε: τοιαύταις.γὰρ θυσίαις εὐαρεστεῖται ὁ θεός. 


be not forgetful, for with such sacrifices is*well*pleased ‘God. 
17 Πείθεσθε τοῖς. ἡγουμένοις. ὑμῶν, καὶ wreixere’ αὐτοὶ γὰρ 
Obey your leaders, and besubmissive: for they 


083 


wares. 3 Remember 
them that are in bonds, 
as bound with them ; 
and them which suffer 
adversity, as being 
yourselves also in the 
body. 4 Marriage is 
honourable in all, and 
the bed undefiled : but 
whoremongers and a- 
dulterers God _ will 
judge. 5 Let your con- 
versation be without 
covetousness ; and be 
content with such 
things as ye have: for 
he hath said, I will 
never leave thee, nor 
forsake thee. 6So that 
we may boldly say, 
The Lord is my helper, 
and I will not fear 
what man shall do un- 
to me. 

7 Remember them 
which have the rule 
over you, who have 
spoken unto you the 
word of God: whose 
faith follow, consider- 
ing the end of their 
conversation. 8 Jesus 
Christ the same yester- 
day, and to day, and 
for ever. 9 Be not 
carried about with di- 
vers and strange doc- 
trines. For it is a good 
thing that the heart 
be established with 
grace ; not with meats, 
which have not profit- 
ed them that have been 
occupied therein. 10We 
have an altar, where- 
of they have no right 
to eat which serve the 
tabernacle. 11 For the 
bodies of those beasts, 
whose blood is brought 
into the sanctuary by 
the high priest for sin, 
are burned without 
the camp. 12 Where- 
fore Jesus also, that he 
might sanctify the 
people with his own 
blood, suffered with- 
out the gate. 13 Let 
us go forth therefore 
unto him without the 
camp, bearing his re- 
proach. 14 For here 
have we no continuing 
city, but we seek one 
to come. 15 By him 
therefore let us offer 
the sacrifice of praise 
to God continually, 
that is, the fruit of our 
lips giving thanks to 
his name. 16 But to 
do good and to com- 
municate forget not: 
for with suchsacrifices 


8 yap for LTTrA. 4 ἐγκαταλείπω do I forsake Ta. 
Receptus is punctuated as in Authorized version. 
away GLTTrAW. Ὁ περιπατοῦντες Walk LTTr. 
ἁμαρτίας for sin L. 9 [οὖν] Tr. 


1 ἐχθὲς LTTrAW. 


τ διὰ παντὸς LTrA. 


i — καὶ [L]1[Tra]. 


k Textus 


™ παραφέρεσθε carried 
© — περὶ ἁμαρτίας LA. 
8 τοῦτ᾽ ἐστιν GT, 


P + περὶ 


84 


God is well pleased. 
17 Obey them that have 
the rule over you, and 
submit yourselves: 
for they watch for 
your souls, as they 
that must give ac- 
count, that they may 
do it with joy, and not 
with grief: for that is 
unprofitable for you. 
18 Pray for us: for 
we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all 
things willing to live 
honestly. 19 But I be- 
seech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be 
restored to you the 
sooner. 20 Now the God 
of peace, that brought 
again from the dead 
our Lord Jesus, that 


great Shepherd of 
the sheep, through 
the bleod of the 


everlasting covenant, 
21 make you perfect in 
every good work to do 
his will, working in 
you that which is well- 
pleasing in his sight, 
through Jesus Christ ; 
to whom be glory for 
ever and ever. Amen. 
22 And I beseech you, 
brethren, suffer the 
word of exhortation : 
for I have written a 
letter unto you infew 
words. 


23 Know ye that our 
brother Timothy is set 
at liberty; with whom, 
if he come shortly, I 
will see you. 24 Salute 
allthem that have the 
rule over you, and all 
the saints. They of 
Italy salute you. 
25 Grace be with you 
all, Amen. 


JAMES, a servant of 


WP OW EBrPrArlio Y=. XIII. 


? ~ t cy ~ ~ ~ , “ον 
ἀγρυπνοῦσιν ὑπὲρ τῶν.Ψυχῶν. ὑμῶν, ὡς λόγον ἀποδώσον- 


ame for your souls, as ‘account ‘about “to *ren- 
C t A ~ ~ ~ A ‘ , 

TEC’ τινὰ μετὰ χαρᾶς τοῦτο ποιῶσιν, καὶ μὴ στενάζοντες" 
der; that with joy this they may do, and not groaning, 


> 4 4 € ~ ~ , 
ἀλυσιτελὲς. γὰρ ὑμῖν τοῦτο. 18 Προσεύχεσθε περὶ 
for unprofitable for you [would be] this. Pray for 
€ ~ Ε 7, , € A ΄ > 
ἡμῶν" ἱ'ἱπεποίθαμεν".γάρ, ore καλὴν συνείδησιν ἔχομεν, ἐν 
us: for we are persuaded, that a good conscience we have, in 


πᾶσιν καλῶς θέλοντες ἀναστρέφεσθαι: 19 περισσοτέρως. δὲ 


allthings ®well lwishing *to *conduct *ourselves. But more abundantly 
παρακαλῶ τοῦτο ποιῆσαι, ἵνα τάχιον ἀποκατασταθῶ 
Iexhort [you] this to do, that more quickly I may be restored 


€ ~ 4 ~ , 4 
ὑμῖν. 20 ‘0.dé θεὸς τῆς εἰρήνης, ὁ ἀναγαγὼν ἐκ 
to you. And the God of peace, who brought again from among [the 


νεκρῶν τὸν ποιμένα τῶν προβάτων TOY μέγαν ἐν 


dead the Shepherd of the sheep the great [one] in [the power of 

ids U ΄ 4 ~ ~ 
αἵματι διαθήκης αἰωνίου, τὸν.κύριον. ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦν, 

the] blood of[the]?covenant ‘eternal, our Lord Jesus, 
21 καταρτίσαι ὑμᾶς ἐν παντὶ ‘éoyp' ἀγαθῷ, εἰς τὸ ποιῆσαι 
perfect you in_ every 2work “good, for to do 
τὺ.θέελημα.αὐτοῦ, “ποιῶν ἐν ὑμῖν τὸ εὐάρεστον ἐνώ- 
his will, doing in you that which[is] well pleasing be- 
πιον αὐτοῦ, διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ" ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς 
fore him, through Jesus Christ; to whom [be] glory to the 


αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. 22 Παρακαλῶ.δὲ ὑμᾶς, ἀδελ- 
ages of the ages. Amen. But I exhort you, breth- 
pol, Τἀνέχεσθε! τοῦ λόγου τῆς παρακλήσεως" Kai-yap διὰ 
ren, bear the word of exhortation, for also in 
βραχέων ἐπέστειλα ὑμῖν. 
few words I wrote toyou. 
23 Γινώσκετε τὸν adehody? Τιμόθεον ἀπολελυμένον, μεθ᾽ 
Know γα the brother Timotheus' has been released; with 
- 7A , » ” € ~ ? , 
οὗ, ἐὰν τάχιον ἔρχηται, ὄψομαι ὑμᾶς. 24 ᾿Ασπάσασθε 
whom, if sooner heshould come, I willsee you. Salute 
πάντας τοὺς. ἡγουμένους. ὑμῶν, Kai πάντας τοὺς ἁγίους. 
411 your leaders, and all the saints. 
ἀσπάζονται ὑμᾶς οἱ ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας. 25 ἡ χάρις μετὰ 
*Salute Syou ‘they *from "Italy. Grace [be] with 
πάντων ὑμῶν. δάμην." 
3411 you. Amen, 
« , , ᾽ 4 ~ , 
“Tose ἙἉἉβραίους ἐγράφη ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας, διὰ Τιμοθέου." 
To [the] Hebrews written from Italy, by Timotheus. 


“ἸΑΚΏΒΟΥ ἘΠΙΣΤΟΛῊ ΚΑΘΟΛΙΚΗ." 
4OF 5JAMES [ΤῊ 3EPISTLE IG@ENERAL. 
ἸΑΚΩΒΟΣ θεοῦ καὶ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ δοῦλος, ταῖς 


God «πᾶ of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, to the 
twelve tribes which 
are scattered abroad, 
greeting. 


2of 3God *and Sof (*the] "Lord "Jesus *Christ 


δώδεκα φυλαῖς ταῖς ἐν τῇ διασπορᾷ χαίρειν. 
twelve tribes which[are] in the dispersion, greeting. 


James *bondman, to the 


t πειθόμεθα We persuade ourselves LTTrAW. 
Υ ἀνέχεσθαι to bear L. 


α ἡμῖν US T. 


v—eé 


ame ῳ T. * + αὐτῷ to himself t. 
2 + ἡμῶν (read our brother) LTTrAW. 8 — ἀμήν T. 


> — the subscription GLTW ; Πρὸς Ἑβραίους Tra. 
© + τοῦ ἀποστόλου the Apostle E 5 ᾿Ἐπιστολαὶ ( --- Ἔπιστ. L) καθολικαί. ᾿Ιακώβου ἀπι- 
στολή General Epistles. Epistle of James Guw; ᾿Ιακώβον ἐπιστολή TTrA. 


1. JAMES. 
2 Πᾶσαν χαρὰν ἡγήσασθε, ἀδελφοί. μου, ὅταν πειρασμοῖς 
All joy esteem [it], my brethren, when ‘temptations 


περιπέσητε ποικίλοις, 8 γινώσκοντες ὅτι τὸ δοκίμιον ὑμῶν 
tye ἼΩΔΥ 141] “πο ‘various, knowing that the proving of your 
τῆς πίστεως κατεργάζεται ὑπομονήν᾽ 4 ἡ).δὲ ὑπομονὴ ἔργον 
faith works out endurance. But *endurance [*its] “work 
τέλειον ἐχέτω, ἵνα ἦτε τέλειοι καὶ ὁλόκληροι, ἐν μηδενὶ λει- 
‘perfect ‘let*have, that ye may be perfect and complete, in nothing lack- 
πόμενοι. 5 εἰ. δέ τις ὑμῶν λείπεται σοφίας, αἰτείτω παρὰ τοῦ 
ing. But if anyone of you lack wisdom, let himask from *who 
διδόντος θεοῦ πᾶσιν ἁπλῶς, Kai μὴ ὀνειδίζοντος, Kai δοθήσε- 
βΞεῖνεβ ἰᾷοα toall freely, and reproaches not, and it shall be 
ται αὐτῷ. 6 αἰτείτω.δὲ ἐν πίστει, μηδὲν διακρινόμενος" ὁ.γὰρ 
given ἴο Ηἴΐτη : butlethimaskin faith, nothing doubting. For he that 
διακρινόμενος ἔοικεν κλύδωνι θαλάσσης ἀνεμιζομένῳ καὶ 
doubts is like awave of [the] sea being driven by the wind and 
ῥιπιζομένῳ. 7 μὴ.γὰρ οἰέσθω ὁ. ἄνθρωπος ἐκεῖνος, ὅτι “An- 
being tossed ; for “not ‘let Ssuppose Sthat “man that he 
Werai'! TL παρὰ τοῦ κυρίου" 8 ἀνὴρ δίψυχος, 
shall receive anything from the Lord; [Π6]15] 84. δὴ ‘double-minded, 
ἀκατάστατος ἐν πάσαις ταῖς ὁδοῖς. αὐτοῦ. 9 Καυχάσθω δὲ 
unstable in all his ways. But let *boast 
« >a 4 « ‘ > ~ er > ~ « , , 
ὁ ἀδελφὸς ὁ ταπεινὸς ἐν τῷ. ὕψει.αὐτοῦ" 10 ὁ. δὲ πλούσιος 
‘the *brother 3of *low ®degree in his elevation, andthe rich 
ἐν TY-TATELVWOELAUTOU, OTL ὡς ἄνθος χόρτου παρελεύ-- 
in his humiliation, because as “flower [*the] *grass’s he will pass 
σεται. 11 ἀνέτειλεν. γὰρ ὁ ἥλιος oly τῷ.καύσωνι, Kai ἐξή--: 
away. For *rose ‘the ?sun with [its] burning heat, and dried 
pavey τὸν χόρτον, καὶ TO ἄνθος αὐτοῦ ἐξέπεσεν, Kai ἡ εὐ- 
up the grass, and the flower of it fell, and the 
πρέπεια τοῦ.προσώπου.αὐτοῦ ἀπώλετο" οὕτως Kai ὁ πλούσιος 
comeliness of its appearance perished : thus also the rich 
ἐν ταῖς. πορείαις.αὐτοῦ μαρανθήσεται. 12 Μακάριος ἀνὴρ 
in his goings shall wither. Blessed [18 the] man 
ὃς ὑπομένει πειρασμόν: Ort δόκιμος γενόμενος *AnWerar 
who endures temptation; because *proved ‘having “been he shall receive 
τὸν στέφανον τῆς ζωῆς, ὃν ἐπηγγείλατο fd κύριος" τοῖς 
the crown of life, which spromised *the *Lord to those that 
ἀγαπῶσιν αὐτόν. 
love him. 
13 Μηδεὶς πειραζόμενος λεγέτω, Ὅτι ἀπὸ Srov' θεοῦ πειρά- 
7No one *being *tempted ‘let say, From God I am 
ζομαι" ὁ-γὰρ.θεὸς ἀπείραστός ἐστιν κακῶν, πειράζει. δὲ αὐτὸς 
tempted. ForGod *not*to*be*®tempted ‘is by evils, and “tempts ‘himself 
οὐδένα. 14 ἕκαστος.δὲ πειράζεται, "ὑπὸ" τῆς ἰδίας ἐπιθυμίας 
no one. Buteachone is tempted, by his own lust 
ἐξελκόμενος καὶ δελεαζόμενος᾽ 15 εἶτα ἡ ἐπιθυμία συλλαβοῦσα 
being drawnawayand being allured; then lust having conceived 
΄ ΄ « « ΄ > τ ~ > ΄ 
τίκτει ἁμαρτίαν" ἡ δὲ ἁμαρτία ἀποτελεσθεῖσα ἀποκύει 
gives birthto sin; but sin having been completed brings forth 
θάνατον. 16 Μὴ.πλανᾶσθε, ἀδελφοί pov ἀγαπητοί: 17 πᾶσα 


death, Be not misled, %brethren ‘my “beloved. Every 
δόσις ἀγαθὴ Kai πᾶν δώρημα τέλειον ἄνωθέν ἐστιν 
"act%of*giving ‘good and every “gift perfect *from 7above 3ig 


ee eee en 
f — ὃ κύριος (read émmy. he promised) urtra, 


4 λήμψεταί LTTrA. 


© λήμψεται LTTrA. 
8 — τοῦ GLTTrAW. ὃ 


Β ἀπὸ Α.. 


580 


2 My brethren, count 
it 411 joy when ye fali 
into divers tempta- 
tions ; 3 knowing this, 
that the trying of 
your faith worketh pa- 
tience. 4 But let pa- 
tience have her perfect 
work, that ye may be 
perfect and _ entire, 
wanting nothing. 5 If 
any of you lack wis- 
dom, let him ask of 
God, that giveth to all 
men liberally, and up- 
braideth not; and it 
shall be given him. 
6 But let him ask in 
faith, nothing waver- 
ing. For he that wa- 
vereth is like a wave 
of the sea driven with 
the wind and tossed. 
7 For let not that map 
think that heshall re- 
ceive any thing of the 
Lord. 8 A double mind- 
ed man is unstable in 
all his ways. 9 Let the 
brother of low degree 
rejoice in that he is 
exalted: 10 but the 
rich, in that he is made 
low: because as the 
flower of the grass he 
shall pass away. 11 For 
the sun is no sooner 
risen with a burning 
heat, but it withereth 
the grass, and the 
flower thereof falleth, 
and the grace of the 
fashion of it perisheth: 
so also shall the rich 
man fade away in his 
ways. 12 Blessed is the 
man that endureth 
temptation : for when 
he is tried, he shall 
receive the crown of 
life, which the Lord 
hath promised to them 
that love him. 


13 Let no man say 
when he is tempted, I 
am tempted of God: 
for God cannot be 
tempted with evil, nei- 
ther tempteth he any 
man: 14 but every 
man is tempted, when 
heis drawn away of 
his own lust, and en- 
ticed. 15 Then when 
last hath conceived, it 
bringeth forth sin: 
and sin, when it is fi- 
nished, bringeth forth 
death. 16 Do not err, 
my beloved brethren. 
17 Every good giftand 
every perfect gift is 
from above, and com- 
eth down from the Fa- 
ther of lights, with 


586 


whom is no variable- 
ness, neither shadow of 
turning. 18 Of his own 
will begat he us with 
the word of truth, that 
we should be a kind of 
firstfruits of his crea- 
tures. 


19 Wherefore, my be- 
loved brethren, let 
every man be swift to 
hear, slow to speak, 
slow to wrath: 20 for 
the wrath of man 
worketh ποῦ the 
righteousness of God. 
21 Wherefore lay a- 
part all filthiness and 
superfluity of naughti- 
ness, and receive with 
meekness the engraft- 
ed word, which is able 
to save your souls, 
22 But be ye doers of 
the word, and not 
hearers only, deceiving 
your own selves, 23 For 
if any be a hearer of 
the word, and not a 
doer, he is like untoa 
man beholding his 
natural face ina glass: 
24 for he beholdeth 
himself, and goeth his 
way, and straightway 
forgetteth what man- 
ner of man he was. 
25 But whoso looketh 
into the perfect law of 
liberty, and continu- 
eth therein, he being 
not a forgetful hearer, 
but a doer of the work, 
this man shall be bless- 
ed in his deed. 26 If 
any man among you 
seem to be religious, 
and bridleth not his 
tongue, but deceiveth 
his own heart, this 
man’s religion is vain, 
27 Pure ‘religion and 
undefiled before God 
and the Father is this, 
To visit the father- 
less and widows in 
their affliction, and to 
keep himself unspot- 
ted from the world. 


II. My brethren, have 
not the faith of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Lord of glory, with 
respect of persons, 
2 For if there come un- 


i*Igre Ye know [it] yttra. 
τ ἀκροαταὶ μόνον LTrAW. 
4 ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. * 
ν᾽ προσωπολημψίαις LTTrA. 


GLTTraw. 
*§— τῷ TW. 


IAKQBOS. I, Il. 


καταβαῖνον ἀπὸ Tov πατρὸς τῶν φώτων, Tap’ οὐκ. ἔνι 
*coming®down from the Father of lights, with whom there is not 


παραλλαγή, ἢ τροπῆς ἀποσκίασμα. 18 βουληθεὶς ἀπε- 


variation, or οὗ *turning ishadow. Having willed [it] he be- 
κύησεν ἡμᾶς λόγῳ ἀληθείας, εἰς τὸ εἶναι ἡμᾶς ἀπαρχήν 
gat us by(the] word oftruth, for “to *be lus “first-fruits 


τινα τῶν. αὐτοῦ.κτισμάτων. 
*a δεουύ Sof of his creatures. 
19 Ωστε." ἀδελφοί μου ἀγαπητοί, ἔστω 
So that, *brethren ‘my “beloved, let *be 
Cy > ‘ > ~ A ? τὰ ~ 4 > > , 
ταχὺς εἰς TO ἀκοῦσαι, βραδὺς εἰς τὸ λαλῆσαι, βραδὺς εἰς ὀργήν. 
swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath; 
20 ὀργὴ.γὰρ ἀνδρὸς δικαιοσύνην θεοῦ ἰοὐ.κατεργάζεται." 
for ?wrath iman’s 7righteousness ‘“God’s Sworks *not °out. 
21 Aw ἀποθέμενοι πᾶσαν ῥυπαρίαν kai περισσείαν κα- 
Wherefore, having laidaside all filthiness and abounding of wick- 
κίας, ἐν πρᾳὕτητι δέξασθε τὸν ἔμφυτον λόγον, τὸν δυνά- 
edness, in meekness accept the implanted word, which [is] 
μενον σῶσαι τὰς. ψυχὰς ὑμῶν. 22 γίνεσθε.δὲ ποιηταὶ λόγου, 
able to save your souls, But be ye doers of [the} word, 
καὶ μὴ μόνον ἀκροαταί," παραλογιζόμενοι ἑαυτούς. 23 ὅτι 
and not only hearers, beguiling yourselves, Because 
εἴ τις ἀκροατὴς λόγου ἐστὶν Kai ov ποιητής, οὗτος 
if any man ahearer οἵ [{Π6] word [15 and not a doer, this one 
ἔοικεν ἀνδρὶ κατανοοῦντι TO πρόσωπον τῆς γενέσεως αὐτοῦ 
is like toaman _ considering Sface “natural *his 
ἐν ἐσύπτρῳ᾽ 24 κατενόησεν.γὰρ ἑαυτὸν Kai ἀπελήλυθεν, Kai 
ἴῃ amirror: for he considered himself and has goneaway, and 
> , 3 ’ὔ «ε ~ a « A , > 
εὐθέως ἐπελάθετο ὁποῖος ἦν. 25 ὁ. δὲ παρακύψας εἰς 
immediately forgot what like 'he*was. Buthethat looked into 
νόμον τέλειον τὸν τῆς ἐλευθερίας, Kai παραμείνας, 
[016] *law ‘perfect, that of freedom, and continued in [it], 
πρὗτος"! οὐκ ἀκροατὴς ἐπιλησμονῆς γενόμενος, ἀλλὰ ποιητὴς 
thisone ποῦ a *hearer ‘forgetful having been, but a doer 
ἔργου, οὗτος μακάριος ἐν τῇ.ποιήσει.αὐτοῦ ἔσται. 26 Et 
of [the] work, thisone blessed in his doing shall be. Tf 
°ric δοκεῖ θρῆσκος εἶναι ὑμῖν, μὴ χαλιναγωγῶν 
anyone “seems §®religious *to *be “you, not bridling 
λῶσσαν.αὐτοῦ, “ἀλλ᾽ ἀπατῶν Kapdiavtadbrov,' τούτου 
his tongue, but deceiving his heart, of this one 
μάταιος ἡ "θρησκεία." 27 SOpnoxeia' καθαρὰ καὶ ἀμίαντος 
vain [is] the religion. Religion pure and undefiled 
παρὰ ‘rw θεῷ Kai πατρὶ αὕτη ἐστίν, ἐπισκέπτεσθαι dp- 
before God and [the] Father “this lis: to visit or- 
φανοὺς Kai χήρας ἐν τῇ.θλίψει.αὐτῶν, ἄσπιλον ἑαυτὸν τηρεῖν 
phans and widows in their tribulation, umspotted “oneself ‘to *keep 
ἀπὸ τοῦ κόσμου. 
from the world. 
Q ᾿Αδελφοί. μου, μὴ ἐν ᾿προσωποληψίαις" ἔχετε τὴν πίστιν 
My brethren, “ποὺ *with ‘respect Sof 7persons ‘do*have the faith 
~ / ~ “ “Ὁ ne , e 8. AJ 
τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ τῆς δόξης" 2 ἐὰν.γὰρ 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, [Lord] of glory ; for if 


k πᾶς ἄνθρωπος 


tevery 2man 


Péy 
lamong 


κα δὲ but (let) LTTra. ᾿ οὐκ ἐργάζεται works not LTTra. 
0 — οὗτος LTTrA. o + δὲ but (if) τ. Ρ -- ἐν ὑμῖν 
τ ἑαυτοῦ (read his own heart) L. 5 θρησκία T. 


JAMES. 


εἰς “τὴν συναγωγὴν. ὑμῶν ἀνὴρ χρυσοδακτύλιος 
May have come into your synagogue aman with gold rings 

ἐν ἐσθῆτι λαμπρᾷ, εἰσέλθῃ.δὲ καὶ πτωχὸς ἐν ῥυπαρᾷ 
in ?apparel ‘splendid, andmay havecomeinalso ἃ poor [man] ἴῃ vile 

ἐσθῆτι, 8 "καὶ ἐπιβλέψητε' ἐπὶ τὸν φοροῦντα THY ἐσθῆτα 
apparel, and ye may have looked upon him who wears the *apparel 
τὴν λαμπράν, καὶ εἴπητε ΥΤαὐτῷ," Σὺ κάθου ὧδε καλῶς, Kai 


II. 
εἰσέλθῃ 


‘splendid, and may havesaid tohim, Thousitthou here well, and 
Tp πτωχῷ εἴπητε, Σὺ στῆθι ἐκεῖ, ἢ κάθου τὧδε" ὑπὸ 
tothe poor may have said, Thou standthou there, or sitthou here under 


τὸ ὑποπόδιόν. μου" 4*Kai' οὐ διεκρίθητε ἐν ἑαυτοῖς, 
my footstool : “also *not ‘did *yemake a difference among yourselves, 
καὶ ἐγένεσθε κριταὶ διαλογισμῶν πονηρῶν ; ὅ ᾿Ακούσατε, 
and became judges [having] *reasonings evil? Hear, 
ἀδελφοί μου ἀγαπητοί, οὐχ ὁ θεὸς ἐξελέξατο τοὺς πτωχοὺς 
*brethren ‘my “beloved: ὅπου, °God ‘*didchoose the poor 
*rov κόσμου" “τούτου, πλουσίους ἐν πίστει, Kai κληρονόμους 
Sworld of *this, rich in faith, and heirs 
τῆς βασιλείας ἧς ἐπηγγείλατο τοῖς ἀγαπῶσιν αὐτόν ; 
of the kingdom which hepromised ἴο those that love him? 
6 ὑμεῖς.δὲ ἠτιμάσατε τὸν πτωχόν. ἀοὐχ᾽ οἱ πλούσιοι 
But ye dishonoured the poor [man]. “Not “the *rich 
καταδυναστεύουσιν “ὑμῶν, Kai αὐτοὶ ἕλκουσιν ὑμᾶς 
1do oppress you, and [ποῦ] *they ‘do drag you 
εἰς κριτήρια; 7 οὐκ αὐτοὶ βλασφημοῦσιν τὸ καλὸν 
before [the] tribunals ? “not *they 1do blaspheme the good 
ὔνομα τὸ ἐπικληθὲν ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς; 8 Ei μέντοι νόμον τελεῖτε 
mame which wascalled upon you? If indeed [the] “law “ye *keep 
βασιλικόν, κατὰ τὴν γραφήν, ᾿Αγαπήσεις τὸν. πλησίον. σου 
ἾΤΟΥ͂ΔΙ according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour 
ὡς σεαυτόν, καλῶς ποιεῖτε" 9 εἰ δὲ ‘ro0cwroAnTTEITE,! ἁμαρ- 
as thyself, swell tye 7do. But if ye have respect of persons, 3531} 
τίαν ἐργάζεσθε, ἐλεγχόμενοι ὑπὸ τοῦ νόμου ὡς παραβάται. 
tye*work, beingconvicted by the law as transgressors. 
10 ὕστις. γὰρ ὅλο» τὸν νόμον δτηρήσει, mraicsr' δὲ ἐν ἑνί, 
For whosoever “whole ‘the law shall keep, “shall *stumble ‘but in one 
γέγονεν πάντων ἔνοχος. 11 ὁ. γὰρ εἰπών, Μὴ μοι- 
[point], he has become of 411 ‘guilty. Forhe who said, “not 'Thou 
χεύσῃς, εἶπεν καί, Μὴ φονεύσῃς" εἰ δὲ 
2mayest commit adultery, said also, Thou mayest not commit murder. Now if 
οὐ-Βμοιχεύσεις, φονεύσεις" δέ, γέγονας 
thou shalt not commit adultery, *shalt “commit “murder ‘but, thou hast become 
παραβάτης νόμου. 12 Οὕτως λαλεῖτε καὶ οὕτως ποιεῖτε, ὡς 
a transgressor of [the] law. So speak ye and so do, as 
διὰ νόμου ἐλευθερίας μέλλοντες κρίνεσθαι" 13 1-yap-Kpiowg 
by (the) law of freedom being about to be judged ; for judgment 
Ἰἀνίλεως" τῷ μὴ.-ποιήσαντι ἔλεος" "καὶ" κατα- 
{will be] without mercy tohimthat wrought not mercy. And “boasts 
καυχᾶται ἔλεος κρίσεως. 
Fover 1mercy judgment. 


587 


to your assembly a 
man with a gold ring, 
in goodly apparel, and 
there come in also a 
poor man in vile rai- 
ment; 3 and ye have 
respect to him that 
weareth the gay cloth- 
ing, and say unto him, 
Sit thou here in agood 
place ; and say to the 
poor, Stand thou there, 
or sit here under my 
footstool : 4 are ye not 
then partial in your- 
selves, and are be- 
come judges of evil 
thoughts? 5 Hearken, 
my beloved brethren, 
Hath not God chosen 
the poor of _ this 
world rich in faith, 
and heirs of the king- 
dom which he hath 
promised to them that 
love him? 6 But ye 
have despised the poor. 
Do not rick men op- 
press you, and draw 
you before the judg- 
ment seats ? 7 Do not 
they blaspheme that 
worthy name by the 
which ye are call- 
ed? 8 If ye fulfil the 
royal law according to 
the scripture, Thou 
shalt love thy neigh- 
bour as thyself, ye do 
well: 9 but if ye have 
respect to persons, ye 
commit sin, and are 
convinced of the law 
as transgressors. 10 For 
whosoever shall keep 
the whole law, and yet 
offend in one point, he 
is guilty of all. 11 For 
he that said, Do not 
commit adultery, said 
also, Do not kill. Now 
if thou commit no 
adultery, yet if thou 
kill, thou art becomea 
transgressor of thelaw. 
12 So speak ye, and so 
do, as they that shall 
be judged by the law 
of liberty. 13 For he 
shall have judgment 
without mercy, that 
hath shewed no mercy; 
and mercy rejoiceth 
against judgment. 


14 Ti _!ro! ὄφελος, ἀδελφοί μου, ἐὰν πίστιν λέγῃ TiC’ 14 What doth it 
What [is] the profit, my brethren, if ‘faith sey ‘anyone profit, my brethren, 
Y —7yvLitraA. "ἐπιβλέψητε δὲλ. Y— avT@GLTITrA. 1 --οὧδε LTTrA. 8-- καὶ LTTrA. 


Ὁ τῷ κόσμῳ (asregardsthe world) LTTraw. © — τούτου GLTTrAW. 
ἔ προσωπολημπτεῖτε LTTrA. 
bled) trrraw. 

murder) LTT:a. 


1 ἀνέλεος pitiless LTTrAW. * — καὶ GLTTrAw. 


4 οὐχὶ LW. 
ὃ τηρήσῃ; πταισῃ (read shall have kept, but shall have stum- 
5 μοιχεύεις, hovevers (read if thoucommittest not adultery but committest 
1—70L. 


εὑμᾶς τ΄ 


™ Tus λέγῃ 1.. 


588 


though a man say he 
hath faith, and have 
not works? can faith 
save him? 15 If a 
brother or sister be 
naked, and destitute 
of daily food, 16 and 
one of you say unto 
them, Depart in peace, 
be ye warmed and fill- 
ed; notwithstanding 
ye give them not those 
things which are need- 
ful to the body ; what 
doth ἐξ profit ? 17 Even 
so faith, if it hath not 
works, is dead, being 
alone. 18 Yea, a man 
may say, Thou hast 
faith, and I have 
works: shew me thy 
faith without thy 
works, and I willshew 
thee my faith by my 
works. 19 Thou be- 
lievest that there is 
one God; thou doest 
well: the devils also 
believe, and tremble. 
20 But wilt thou know, 
O vain man, that faith 
without works is dead? 
21 Was not Abraham 
our father justified by 
works, when he had 
offered Isaac his son 
upon the altar ? 
22 Seest thou how faith 
wrought with his 
works, and by works 
was faith made per- 
fect? 23 And _ the 
scripture was fulfilled 
which saith, Abraham 
believed God, and it 
was imputed unto him 
for righteousness: and 
he was called the 
Friend of God. 24 Ye 
see then how that by 
works a man is justi- 
fied, and not by faith 
only. 25 Likewise also 
was not Rahab the 
harlot justified by 
works, when she had 
received the messen- 
gers, and had sent them 
out another way? 
26 For as the body 
without the spirit is 
dead, so faith without 
works is dead also. 


111. My brethren, be 
not many masters, 
knowing that we shall 
receive the greater 
condemnation. 2 For 
in many things we of- 
fend all. If any man 


IAKQBOS. Π ls 


ἔχειν, ἔργα.δὲ μὴ.ἔχῃ ; μὴ δύναται ἡ πίστις σῶσαι αὐτόν ; 


[16] *has, but works have ποῦ ? is 7able ‘faith tosave him? 
15 ἐὰν. "δὲ" ἀδελφὸς ἢ ἀδελφὴ γυμνοὶ ὑπάρχωσιν, καὶ λειπό- 
Nowif abrother or asister naked be, and desti- 


μένοι ὦσιν" τῆς ἐφημέρου τρο 

tute may be of daily foo 
> e ~ « id τι > , / 4 ’ 
ἐξ ὑμῶν, Yrayere ἐν εἰρήνῃ, θερμαίνεσθε καὶ χορτά- 

"from 7amongst *you, Go in peace; bewarmed and be fill- 

ζεσθε, μὴ-δῶτε.δὲ αὐτοῖς Ta ἐπιτήδεια τοῦ σώματος, τί 

ed; but give not tothem the needful thingsfor the body, what [is] 

Pro! ὄφελος ; 17 οὕτως Kai ἡ πίστις ἐὰν μὴ “ἔργα ἔχῃ! νεκρά 


je, 16 εἴπῳῃ.δέ τις αὐτοῖς 
d, and °say 'anyone *to 7them 


the profit? So also faith, if *not *works 'it *have, *dead 
? ? « ’ 7 ? ᾽ ~ ‘ , » 
ἐστιν καθ᾽ ἑαυτήν. 18 ἀλλ΄ ἐρεῖ τις Σὺ πίστιν ἔχεις, 
515 by itself. But *will*say 'some’one, Thou “faith ‘hast 
κἀγὼ ἔργα ἔχω" δεῖξόν μοι τὴν.πίστιν.σου τέκὶ τῶν ἔργων 
andi “works ‘have. Shew me thy faith from works 


Scou,' κἀγὼ δείξω σοι! ἐκ τῶν.ἔργων. μου τὴν πίστιν ἅμου." 

"thy, and I will shew thee from my works "faith ‘my. 

19 σὺ πιστεύεις ὅτι “ὁ θεὸς εἷς ἐστιν." καλῶς ποιεῖς" Kai τὰ 
Thou believest that God one 15. *Well *thou*doest; even the 


δαιμόνια πιστεύουσιν, Kai φρίσσουσιν. 20 θέλεις. δὲ γνῶναι, 
demons believe, and shudder. But wilt thou know, 


ὦ ἄνθρωπε KEVE, ὅτι ἡ πίστις χωρὶς τῶν ἔργων YvEKoa' ἐστιν ; 
O 2man ‘empty, that faith apart from works dead is? 
21 ᾿Αβραὰμ ὁ.πατὴρ.ἡμῶν οὐκ ἐξ ἔργων ἐδικαιώθη, ave- 


3A braham *our *father "not “by “works ‘was ‘justified, having 
γνέγκας Ἰσαὰκ τὸν.υἱὸν.αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον; 22 βλέ- 
offered Isaac his son upon the altar ? Thou 


πεις OTL ἡ πίστις συνήργει" τοῖς.ἔργοις.αὐτοῦ, Kai ἐκ τῶν 
seest that faith was working with his works, and by 
ἔργων ἡ πίστις ἐτελειώθη 27 23 καὶ ἐπληρώθη ἡ γραφὴ ἡ 
works faith was perfected. And was fulfilled the scripture which 
λέγουσα, ᾿Επίστευσεν.δὲ ᾿Αβραὰμ τῷ θεῷ, καὶ ἐλογίσθη 
says, Now “believed Abraham God, and it was reckoned 
αὐτῷ εἰς δικαιοσύνην, Kai φίλος θεοῦ ἐκλήθη. 24 Ὁρᾶτε 
to him for righteousness, and friend of God he was called. Ye see 
*roivuy" ὅτι ἐξ ἔργων δικαιοῦται ἄνθρωπος, καὶ οὐκ ἐκ πίστεως 
then that by works is justified aman, and not by faith 
μόνον." 25 ὁμοίως.δὲ καὶ Ῥαὰβ ἡ πόρνη οὐκ ἐξ ἔργων 
only. But in like manner also *Rahab *the *harlot ὁποὺ 7by ‘works 
ἐδικαιώθη, ὑποδεξαμένη τοὺς ἀγγέλους, καὶ ἑτέρᾳ ὁδῷ 
lwas ‘justified, having received the messengers, and by another way 
ἐκβαλοῦσα; 26 ὥσπερ.γὰρ τὸ σῶμα χωρὶς πνεύματος 


having put [them] forth ? For as the body apart from spirit 
νεκρόν ἔστιν, οὕτως καὶ ἡ πίστις χωρὶς dv! ἔργων νεκρά 
*dead lis, ΞΟ alse faith apart from works *dead 
ἐστιν. 

tis, 


3 Μὴ πολλοὶ διδάσκαλοι γίνεσθε, ἀδελφοί. μου, εἰδότες ὅτι 
2Not *many *teachers "be, my brethren, knowing that 
μεῖζον κρίμα “ληψόμεθα"" 2 πολλὰ. γὰρ πταίομεν ἅπαντες. 


greater judgment we shall receive. For %often ‘we‘stumble all 


! 


n — δὲ now TTr. 


from GLTTrAW. 5 
ὁ θεός LTTr; εἷς ὁ θεός ἐστιν AW. ι 
y Read verse 22 interrogatively, as pointed in the Greek EGLTrw. 
® Read verse 24 as a question GLTr. 


P—TOL. 
t coe δείξω TTr. 
Ἢ ἀργή idle LrTra. 


ο -— ὦσιν TTrA. 
— σου LTTrAwW. 


4 ἔχῃ ἔργα GLTTrAW. χωρὶς apart 
u— μον TTrAW. Υ els ἐστὶν 
x συνεργεῖ works with rrr. 

% — ᾿τοινυν GLTTrAW. 


Ὁ — τῶν T[Tr]. © λημψόμεθα LITrA. 


IIL. JAMES. 


εἴ τις ἐν λόγῳ ov.mraist, οὗτος τέλειος ἀνήρ, δυνατὸς 
If anyone in word stumble ποῦ, this one [is] ἃ perfect man, able 


~ ‘ ἢ 5 ~ ᾽ ~ , 
χαλιναγωγῆσαι καὶ ὅλον τὸ σῶμα. 8 ΤΙδοὺϊ τῶν ἵππων 


to bridle also *whole ‘the body. Lo, Sof 7the horses 
AY λ 4 > 4 ΄ 1AX e A Il | iQ. θ 
τους χαλινοῦς εἰς TA στόματα α. OPEV “προς TO TTELGEOUAL 
1the “bits 3in *the ®months we put, for 2to Sobey 
[αὐτοὺς ἡμῖν," καὶ ὅλον τὸ σῶμα.αὐτῶν μετάγομεν. 4 ᾿Ιδοὺ 


1them us, and ?whole 1their body we turn about. Lo, 


καὶ τὰ πλοῖα τηλικαῦτα ὄντα, Kai ὑπὸ ξσκληρῶν ἀνέμων" 
also the ships, 380 great ‘being, and by violent winds 
ἐλαυνόμενα, μετάγεται ὑπὸ ἐλαχίστου πηδαλίου, ὅπου 
being driven, areturned about by @ very small rudder, wherever 
hay" ἡ ὁρμὴ τοῦ εὐθύνοντος iBotAnrat." 5 οὕτως Kai 
steers may will. Thus also 


the impulse of him who 
« AG 4 ἐλ ? ΄, ‘ k λ ~ jl a i , 
ἢ γλῶσσα μικρὸν μελος ἐστίν, καὶ “peyadavyet. 0ov, 
the tongue alittle member is, and boasts great things. Lo, 
Ἰὀλίγον" πῦρ ἡλίκην ὕλην ἀνάπτει: 6 "καὶ" ἡ γλῶσσα 

a little fire how large a wood it kindles; and the tongue [is] 
πῦρ, ὁ κόσμος τῆς ἀδικίας. "οὕτως" ἡ γλῶσσα καθίσταται 
fire, the world of unrighteousness. Thus the tongue is set 
ἐν τοῖς. μέλεσιν. ἡμῶν, “ἡ " σπιλοῦσα ὅλον TO σῶμα, Kai φλο- 
in our members, the defiler [of] "whole ‘the body, and setting 
γίζουσα τὸν τροχὸν τῆς γενέσεως, Kai φλογιζομένη ὑπὸ τῆς 
on fire the course ofnature, and beingsetonfire by 


γεέννης 7 πᾶσα.γὰρ φύσις θηρίων.τε καὶ πετεινῶν, ἐἑρπε- 
gehenna. For every species both of beastsand of birds, of *creeping 
τῶν τε καὶ évadiwy, δαμάζεται καὶ δεδάμασται τῇ 


*things *both and things of the sea, is subdued 


φύσει τῇ ἀνθρωπίνῃ ὃ τὴν.δὲ γλῶσσαν οὐδεὶς Ῥδύναται 
Sspecies ‘the 7human ; but the tongue noone 18 table 
ἀνθρώπων δαμάσαι" “ἀκατάσχετον᾽ κακόν, μεστὴ ἰοῦ 
lof 7men tosubdue; [it is] an unrestrainable_ evil, full of ?poison 
θανατηφόρου. 9 ἐν.αὐτῇ εὐλογοῦμεν τὸν θεὸν! καὶ πατέρα, 
}death-bringing. Therewith we bless God and [the] Father, 
καὶ ἐνι.αὐτῇ καταρώμεθα τοὺς ἀνθρώπους τοὺς καθ᾽ 
and therewith we curse men who according to [the] 
ὁμοίωσιν θεοῦ γεγονότας 10 ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ στύματος ἐξέρ- 
likeness of God are made. Out of the same mouth goes 
χεται εὐλογία καὶ κατάρα. οὐ χρή, ἀδελφοί. μου, ταῦτα 
forth blessing and cursing. ‘Not δουρῃῦ, ‘my “brethren, “these *things 
οὕτως γίνεσθαι. 11 μήτι ἡ- πηγὴ ἐκ τῆς αὐτῆς ὀπῆς 
thus to be. *The *fountain Sout of "the *same %opening 
, A 4 ‘ 4 ’ Ἁ ΚΑ > ΄ 
βρύει τὸ γλυκὺ καὶ τὸ πικρόν; 12 μὴ δύναται, ἀδελφοί 
‘pours *forth sweet and bitter ? Is able, *brethren 
ae) 3, , ~ bat » ~ A ee Il t > ΄ 
μου, συκῆ ἐλαίας ποιῆσαι, ἢ ἄμπελος σῦκα ; "οὕτως" ᾿οὐδεμία 
my, afig-tree olives toproduce, or 8 vine figs? Thus no 
πηγὴ ἁλυκὸν καὶ γλυκὺ ποιῆσαι ὕδωρ. 
fountain [15 8016] salt and sweet *to *produce ‘water. 
13 Τίς σοφὸς καὶ ἐπιστήμων ἐν ὑμῖν; δειξάτω ἐκ τῆς 
Who [15] wise and understanding among you; lethimshewout of 


and has been subdued by 


589 
offend not in word, the 
same 18 a perfect man, 
and able also to bridie 
the whole body. 3 Be- 
hold, we put bits in 
the horses’ mouths, 
that they may obey us ; 
and we turn about 
their whole body. 4 Be- 
hold also the ships, 
which though they be 
so great, and are dri- 
ven of fierce winds, yet 
are they turned about 
with a very small 
helm, whithersoever 
the governor listeth. 
5 Even so the tongue 
is a little member, and 
boasteth great things. 
Behold, how great a 
matter a little fire 
kindleth! 6 And the 
tongue is a fire, a 
world of iniquity : so 
is the tongue among 
our members, that it 
defileth the whole 
body, and setteth on 
fire the course of na- 
ture ; and it is set on 
fire of hell. 7 For every 
kind of beasts, and of 
birds, and of serpents, 
and of things in the 
sea, is tamed, and 
hath been tamed of 
mankind: 8 but the 
tongue can no man 
tame ; 7¢7s an unruly 
evil, full of deadly pci- 
son. 9 Therewith bless 
we God, even the Fa- 
ther; and therewith 
curse we>men, which 
are made after the si- 
militudeof God. 10 Out 
of the same mouth pro- 
ceedeth blessing and 
cursing. My brethren, 
these things ought not 
so to be. 11 Doth a 
fountain send forth at 
the same place sweet 
water and _ bitter? 
12 Can the fig tree, 
my brethren, bear 
olive berries? either a 
vine, figs? so can no 
fountain both yield 
salt water and fresh. 


13 Who 15 a _ wise 
man and endued with 
knowledge among you? 


ἀ ἴδε α ; et δὲ but if (read καὶ also) trtraw. 8 εἰς LTTra. 
Ε ἀνέμων σκληρῶν LTTraWw. h — ἄν (read where) Τττ. 
Κ μεγάλα αὐχεῖ LTTrA. 
τὰ — καὶ (read the tongue kindles. A fire, &c.) 1. 
(read both defiling) T. 
LTTraw. τ τὸν κύριον the Lord Lrtra. 
salt [water is able] GLTTraw. 


P δαμάσαι δύναται ἀνθρώπων LTrA. 
5.--- οὕτως LTTrAW. 


ἡμῖν αὐτούς a. 


i βούλεται wills TTr. 
1 ἡλίκον literally how great (some translate how small) LTTraw. 
2 — οὕτως LTTrAW. 


° Kat 


4ᾳ ἀκατάστατον an unsettled 
τ οὔτε aAvxov Neither 


590 


let him shew out of a 
good conversation his 
works with meekness 
of wisdom. 14 But if 
ye have bitter envying 
and strife in your 
hearts, glory not, and 
lie not against the 
truth. 15 This wisdom 
descendeth not from 
above, but is earth- 
ly, sensual, devilish. 
16 For where envying 
and strife is, there i 
confusion and every 
evil work. 17 But the 
wisdom that is from 
above is first pure, 
then peaceable, gentle, 
and easy to be intreat- 
ed, full of mercy and 
good fruits, without 
partiality, and with- 
out-hypocrisy. 18 And 
the-fruit of righteous- 
ness.is sown in peace of 
them that make peace. 
IV. From whence come 
wars and fightings a- 
mong you? come they 
not hence, even of your 
lusts that war in your 
members? 2 Ye lust, 
and have not: ye kill, 
and desire to have, and 
cannot obtain: ye 
fight and war, yet ye 
have not, because ye 
ask not. 3 Ye ask, and 
receive not, because ye 
ask amiss, that ye may 
consume it upon your 
Insts. 4 Ye adulterers 
and adulteresses, know 
ye not that the friend- 
ship of the world is 
enmity with God? 
Whosoever therefore 
will be a friend of 
the world is_ the 
enemy of God. 5 Do 
ye think that the 
scripture saith in vain, 
The spirit that dwell- 
eth in us lusteth to 
envy? 6 But he giveth 
more grace. Wherefore 
he saith, God resisteth 
the proud, but giveth 
grace untothe humble, 
7 Submit yourselves 
therefore to God. Re- 
sist the devil, and he 
will flee from you. 
8 Draw nigh to God, 
and he will draw nigh 
to you. Cleanse your 
hands, ye sinners ; and 
purify your hearts, ye 
double minded, 9 Be 
afflicted, and mourn, 
aud weep: let your 


IAKQBOS. II, IV, 


καλῆς ἀναστροφῆς τὰ ἔργα.αὐτοῦ ἐν πρᾳὕτητι σοφίας. 14 εἰ. δὲ 
good conduct his works in meekness of wisdom; but if 
ζῆλον πικρὸν ἔχετε καὶ ἐριθείαν ἐν τῇ.καρδίᾳ ὑμῶν, μὴ κατα- 
“emulation ‘bitter ye have and contention in your heart, “not ldo 
καυχᾶσθε “Kai ψεύδεσθε κατὰ τῆς ἀληθείας." 15 Οὐκ ἔστιν 
boast against and lie against the truth. SNot 7is 
[2 «ε ΄ » θ , vZ || ? , 
αὕτη ἡ σοφία ἄνωθεν κατερχομένη, "ἀλλ᾽! ἐπίγειος, ψυ- 
1this the wisdom from above coming down, but earthly, na- 


χική, δαιμονιώδης. 16 ὕπου.γὰρ ζῆλος Kai ἐριθεία, ἐκεῖ 


tural, devilish. For where emulation and contention [are], there 
ἀκαταστασία καὶ πᾶν φαῦλον πρᾶγμα. 17 9.0 ἄνωθεν 
[15] commotion and every evil thing. But the ?from *above 


σοφία πρῶτον μὲν ἁγνή ἐστιν, ἔπειτα εἰρηνική, ἐπιεικής; 
+wisdom first Spure “ig, then peaceful, gentle, 
εὐπειθής, μεστὴ ἐλέους Kai καρπῶν ἀγαθῶν, ἀδιάκριτος Yai! 
yielding, full of mercy and of *fruits *good, impartial and 
ἀνυπόκριτος. 18 καρπὸς. δὲ "τῆς" δικαιοσύνης ἐν εἰρήνῃ σπεί- 
unfeigned. But [the] fruit of righteousness in peace is 
ρεται τοῖς ποιοῦσιν εἰρήνην. 4 Πόθεν πόλεμοι καὶ ¥ 
sown for thosethat make peace. Whence [come] wars and 
μάχαι ἐν ὑμῖν; οὐκ ἐντεῦθεν, ἐκ τῶν. ἡδονῶν ὑμῶν 
fightings among you? [18 it] not thence, from your pleasures, 
τῶν στρατευομένων ἐν τοῖς. μέλεσιν ὑμῶν ; 2 ἐπιθυμεῖτε, Kai 
which war in your members ? Ye desire, and 
ovK-EXETE’ φονεύετε Kai ζηλοῦτε, Kai οὐ-δύνασθε ἐπιτυχεῖν. 
have not ; ye kill and areemulous, and 816 not able to obtain ; 
μάχεσθε καὶ πολεμεῖτε, Τοὐκ.ἔχετε *O€," διὰ τὸ μὴ αἰτεῖσθαι 
ye fight and war, 2ye Shave *not *but because “not 7ask 
ὑμᾶς" 8 αἰτεῖτε, καὶ ov-AauBavere, διότι κακῶς αἰτεῖσθε ἵνα 
you. Yeask, and receive not, because evilly yeask, that 
ἐν ταῖς. ἡδοναῖς ὑμῶν damavnonre. 4 "Μοιχοὶ καὶ! μοιχα- 
in your pleasures ye may spend [it]. Adulterers and  adulte- 
λίδες, ovK.oidaTe ὅτι ἡ φιλία τοῦ κόσμου, ἔχθρα “χοῦ 
resses, know yenot that the friendship of the world enmity [with] 
θεοῦ éoriv;" ὃς ἂν! οὖν βουληθῇ φίλος εἶναι τοῦ κόσμου, 
God is? | Whosoever therefore be minded afriend tobe ofthe world, 


ἐχθρὸς τοῦ θεοῦ καθίσταται. 5 ἢ δοκεῖτε Ori κενῶς ἡ ypa- 
an enemy of God is constituted. Or think ye that in vain the scrip- 
φὴ AéyEL;® πρὸς φθόνον ἐπιποθεῖ τὸ πνεῦμα ὃ ἱκατῴκησεν" 
ture speaks? with envy does*long ‘the 7Spirit which took up[his]abode 
ἐν ἡμῖν 38 6 μείζονα.δὲ δίδωσιν χάριν' διὸ λέγει, Ὁ θεὸς 
in us? But “greater ‘he *gives grace. Wherefore he says, God 
ὑπερηφάνοις ἀντιτάσσεται, ταπεινοῖς.δὲ δίδωσιν χάριν. 
[086] 5proud ‘sets “himself “against, but to[the]lowly hegives grace, 
7 Ὑποτάγητε οὖν τῷ θεῷ. avriornre® rp διαβόλῳ, Kai 
Subject yourselves therefore toGod. Resist the devil, and 
φεύξεται ap ὑμῶν" 8 ἐγγίσατε τῷ θεῷ, καὶ ἐγγιεῖ ὑμῖν. 
he will flee from you. Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. 
καθαρίσατε χεῖρας, ἁμαρτωλοί, καὶ ἁγνίσατε καρδίας, 
Have cleansed [your] hands, sinners, and have purified [your] hearts, 


δίψυχοι. 9 ταλαιπωρήσατε καὶ πενθήσατε ‘kai! κλαύσατε. 
ye double minded. Be wretched, and mourn, and weep. 


u τῆς ἀληθείας Kal ψεύδεσθε T. 
Υ + πόθεν whence Lrtraw. 
LTTrAW 3 join adulteresses to what precedes 1. 
e— 5; Text. Rec. and wa. 


i — καὶ T. 


(resist) LrTra. 


x — τῆς GLTTrAw. 
b — Μοιχοὶ καὶ 


Ww — καὶ LTTrA. 
a8 — δέ QLTTrA. 


ν ἀλλὰ TTr. 
2. - καὶ and 1. 


5 ἐστὶν τῷ θεῷ is With God τ 4 ἐὰν LT, 
f κατῴκισεν he made to dwell Lrrra. i= τ h + δὲ but 


EV, V. JAMES. 
ὁ. γέλως ὑμῶν εἰς πένθος μεταστραφήτω, Kai ἡ- χαρὰ εἰς 
7Your*laughter ‘to ®mourning Net beturned, and [your] joy to 


κατήφειαν. 10 ταπεινώθητε ἐνώπιον "τοῦ" κυρίου, καὶ ὑψώ- 
heaviness, Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will 
oe ὑμᾶς. 
exalt you. 
11 Μὴ.καταλαλεῖτε ἀλλήλων, ἀδελφοί" ὁ καταλαλῶν 
Speak not against oneanother, brethren. He that speaks against 
? ~ 1 ‘II ΄, BY 10. λ \ ? ~ λ λ - 
ἀδελφοῦ, ἱκαὶ" κρίνων τὸν.αδελφὸν. αὐτοῦ, καταλαλεῖ 
{his] brother, and judges his brother, speaks against [the] 
νόμου, καὶ κρίνει νόμον" εἰδὲ νόμον κρίνεις, οὐκ 


law, and judges [the] law. But if[the] law thou judgest, “ποῦ 
εἶ ποιητὴς νόμου, ἀλλὰ κριτής. 12 εἷς ἐστιν ὁ νομο- 
‘thou ?art adoer of [the]law, but a judge. One is the law- 


Bérnc™, ὁ δυνάμενος σῶσαι Kai ἀπολέσαι" σὺ" τίς εἶ OC 
giver, who is able tosave and todestroy: *thou ‘who 7art that 
κρίνεις" τὸν Pérepor' ; 
judgest the other ? 
13 “Aye νῦν οἱ 


Go to now, ye who 


λέγοντες, Σήμερον “καὶ αὔριον τπορευ- 
say, To-day and to-morrow wemay 
ou μεθα" εἰς τήνδε. τὴν. πόλιν, Kai "ποιήσωμεν" ἐκεῖ ἐνιαυτὸν 
go into such a city and may spend there “year 
‘tva! καὶ "ἐμπορευσώμεθα," καὶ “κερδήσωμεν"" 14 οἵτινες οὐκ 
Jone and may traffic, and may make gain, ye who ?7not 
ἐπίστασθε Στὸ" τῆς αὔριον" ποία. γὰρ' ἡ.ζωὴ ὑμῶν ; 
1know what on the morrow [will be], (for what [is] your life? 
ἀτμὶς *yap'| *éorw' ἡ πρὸς ὀλίγον φαινομένη, ἔπειτα 
Avapour even itis, which for a little [while] appears, "then 
ὑδὲ" ἀφανιζομένη: 15 ἀντὶ τοῦ λέγειν. ὑμᾶς, Bay ὁ κύριος 
tand disappears, ) instead of your saying, If the Lord 
θελήσῃ, καὶ “ζήσωμεν, καὶ ποιήσωμεν" τοῦτο ἢ ἐκεῖνο. 
should will and τὺ Βῃοπ]ᾶ live, also we may do this or that. 
16 νῦν.δὲ καυχᾶσθε ἐν raic-adaZovetac'vpuorv πᾶσα καύχη- 
Βαῦ πο yeboast in your vauntings : all 7boasting 
σις τοιαύτη πονηρά ἐστιν. 17 εἰδότι οὖν καλὸν ποιεῖν, 


d 


‘such evil is. To [him] knowing therefore good to do, 
καὶ μὴ ποιοῦντι, ἁμαρτία αὐτῷ ἐστιν. 
and not doing [it], sin tohim itis. 
» ~ « ,΄ ’ > fe ? ‘ ~ 
5 “Ayé νῦν οἱ-.πλούσιοι, κλαύσατε ὀλολύζονπες ἐπὶ ταῖς 
Goto now, [75] rich, weep, howling over 
ταλαιπωρίαις ὑμῶν ταῖς ἐπερχομένγαις. 2 ὁ πλοῦτος 
2miseries ‘your that [are] coming upon [you]. ?Riches 


ὑμῶν σέσηπεν, καὶ τὰ ἱμάτια. ὑμῶν σητόβρωτα γέγονεν" 
tyour haverotted, and your garments moth-eaten have become. 
3 ὁ.χρυσὸς ὑμῶν Kai ὁ ἄνγυρος κατίωται, καὶ ὁ ἰὸς. αὐτῶν 
our gold and silver has been eaten away, and their canker 
εἰς μαρτύριον ὑμῖν ἔσται, Kai φάγεται τὰς.σάρκας. ὑμῶν ὡς 
for 8. testimony against you shall be, and shall eat your flesh as 
mvp’ ἐθησαυρίσατε ἐν ἐσχάταις ἡμέραις. 4 ἰδού, ὁ μισθὸς 
fire, Yetreasuredup in{[the] last days. Lo, the hire 


᾿ 


591 


laughter be turned to 
mourning, and your 
joy to heaviness. 
10 Humble yourselves 
in the sight of.;the 
Lord, and he shall lift 
you up. 


11 Speak not evil one 
of another, brethren. 
He that speaketh evil 
of Ais brother, and 
judgeth his brother, 
speaketh evil of the 
law, and judgeth the 
law : but if thou judge 
the law, thou art not 
a doer of the law, but 
a judge. 12 There is 
one lawgiver, who is 
able to save and to 
destroy: who art thou 
that judgest another 2 


13 Go to now, ye that 
say, To day or to mor- 
row we will go into 
such a city, and con- 
tinue therea year, and 
buy and sell, and 
get gain: 14 whereas 
ye know not what 
shall be on the mor- 
row. For what 18 your 
life? It is even a va- 
pour, that appeareth 
for a little time, and 
then vanisheth away. 
15 For that ye ought 
to say, If the Lord 
will, we shall live, and 
do this, or that, 16 But 
now ye rejoice in your 
boastings: all such re- 
joicing isevil.17 There- 
fore to him that know- 
eth to do good, and 
doeth zt not, to him it 
is sin. 


V. Go to now, ye 
rich men, weep and 
howl for your miseries 
that shall come upon 
you. 2 Your riches are 
corrupted, and your 
garments are moth- 
eaten. 3 Your gold 
and silver iscankered ; 
and the rust of them 
shall be a witness a- 
gainst you, and shall 
eat your flesh as it 
were fire. Ye have 
heaped treasure to- 
gether for the last 
days. 4 Behold, the 


k — τοῦ (read [the]) Lrtra. 1% or LTTrA. 
n+ 6¢but(who)GLITra. ° ὃ κρίνων LTTrA. 
4 ἢ Or RLTTr. τ πορευσόμεθα we will go ELTTrAW. 
t — ἕνα (read 8, year) LTTr. ἡ ἐμπορευσόμεθα will traffic ELTTraw. 
make gain ELTTrAW. Χ τὰ L. Υ [yap] Tr. 7 — yap L. 
Ὁ καὶ LTTra ; — δὲ w. ς ζήσομεν We shall live LtTraw. 
ELTTraw. ε ἀλαζονίαις τ. 


™ + καὶ κριτής and judge, αἸτττγα. 
P πλησίον (read [thy] neighbour) Lrtra. 
8 ποιήσομεν Will spend ELTAW. 


* κερδήσομεν Will 


8 ἐστε ye are LTTrAW. 
4 ποιήσομεν We Shall do 


092 


hire of the labourers 
who have reaped down 
your fields, which is 
of you kept back by 
fraud, crieth : andthe 
eries of them which 
have reaped are en- 
tered into the ears of 
the Lord of sabaoth, 
5 Ye have lived in 
pleasure on the earth, 
and been wanton; ye 
have nourished your 
hearts, as in a day of 
slaughter. 6 Ye have 
condemned and killed 
the just; and he doth 
not resist you, 


7 Be patient there- 
fore, brethren, unto 
the coming of the Lord. 
Behold, the husband- 
man waiteth for the 
precious fruit of the 
earth, and hath long 
patience for it, until 
he receive the early 
and latter rain. 8 Be 
ye also patient; sta- 
blish your hearts: for 
the coming of the 
Lord draweth nigh. 
9 Grudge not one a- 
gainst another, bre- 
thren, lest ye be con- 
demned: behold, the 
judge standeth before 
the door. 10 Take, my 
brethren, the prophets, 
who have spoken in 
the name of the Lord, 
for an example of suf- 
fering affliction, and 
of patience. 11 Be- 
hold, we count them 
happy which endure. 
Ye have heard of the 
patience of Job, and 
have seen the end of 
the Lord; that the 
Lord is very pitiful, 
and of tender mercy. 
12But above all things, 
my brethren, swear 
not, neither by hea- 
ven, neither by the 
earth, neither by any 
other oath: but let 
your yea be yea; 
and your nay, nay; 
lest ye fall into con- 
demnation. 13 Is any 
among you afflicted? 
let him pray. Is any 
merry? let him sing 
psalms. 14 Is any sick 
among you? let him 
eall for the elders of 
the church; and let 
them pray over him, 
anointing him with 
oil in the name of the 


f ἀφυστερημένος TTr. 
3} — ὑετὸν (read [rain]) LTTra. 
énre tye ὍΘ judged GLTTraw. 
(— μον My LTTraw) GLTTraw. 


¥ ἴδετε see ye A. 


ΓΑΚΩΒΟΣ. V. 


τῶν ἐργατῶν TOY ἀμησάντων τὰς.χώρας. ὑμῶν, ὁ 'ἀπεστερη- 
of the workmen who harvested your fields, which has been 
μένος" ad ὑμῶν κράζει, καὶ at Boat τῶν θερισάντων εἰς 
keptback by you, ories οαὖ, and the cries of those who reaped, into 
τὰ ὦτα κυρίου Σαβαὼθ ἐἑεἰσεληλύθασιν." 5 ἐτρυφήσατε 
the ears of [the] Lord of Hosts have entered. Ye lived in indulgence 
ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, καὶ ἐσπαταλήσατε. ἐθρέψατε τὰς. καρδίας. ὑμῶν 
upon the earth, and lived inself-gratification; ye nourished your hearts 
hoc! ἐν ἡμέρᾳ σφαγῆς. 6 κατεδικάσατε, ἐφονεύσατε τὸν δί- 
as in aday οΥ slaughter ; ye condemned, ye killed, the 
καιον᾽ οὐκ. ἀντιτάσσεται ὑμῖν. 
just ; he does not resist you. 
7 Μακροθυμήσατε οὖν, ἀδελφοί, ἕως τῆς παρουσίας τοῦ 
Be patient therefore, brethren, till the coming of the 
κυρίου. ἰδού, 0 γεωργὸς ἐκδέχεται TOY τίμιον καρπὸν τῆς 
Lord. Lo, the husbandman awaits the precious fruit ofthe 
γῆς, μακροθυμῶν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ ἕως ἰἂᾶν" λάβῃ jverov' Ἐπρώ- 
earth, being patient for it) until it receive [the] ‘rain +ear- 
ἱμονὶ καὶ ὄψιμον: ὃ μακροθυμήσατε καὶ ὑμεῖς, στηρίξατε 
ly 7and = “latter. Be patient also ye: establish 
τὰς. καρδίας. ὑμῶν, OTL ἡ παρουσία τοῦ κυρίου ἤγγικεν. 
your hearts, because the coming of the Lord hasdrawnnear, 


9 Μὴ.στενάζετε 'kar’ ἀλλήλων, ἀδελφοί," ἵνα μὴ πκατακρι- 


Groan not against one another, brethren, that*not ‘ye *be con- 
θῆτε"" ἰδού, ἃ κριτὴς πρὸ τῶν θυρῶν ἕστηκεν. 10 Ὑπό- 
demned, Lo, [the] judge before the door stands, [45] an ex- 
δειγμα λάβετε στῆς κακοπαθείας, ἀδελφοί. μου." Kai τῆς 


ample ®take lof *suffering “evils, ™my ®brethren, ‘and 
μακροθυμίας, τοὺς προφήτας ot ἐλάλησαν Ῥ τῷ ὀνόματι KU- 
508 Spatience, the prophets who spoke inthe name of[the] 
piov. 11 ἰδού, μακαρίζομεν τοὺς «“ὑπομένοντας." τὴν ὑπο- 
Lord. Lo, Ὑ 081] blessed those who endure. The en~ 
μονὴν ᾿Ιὼβ ἠκούσατε, Kai TO τέλος κυρίου τεἴΐδετε," OT: 
durance of Job ye have heard of, and the end of(the] Lord yesaw; thas 
πολύσπλαγχνός ἐστιν ὁ κύριος Kai οἰκτίρμων. 12 Πρὸ 
full of tender pity is the Lord and compassionate, “Before 
πάντων δέ, ἀδελφοί. μου, μὴ. ὀμνύετε, μήτε τὸν οὐρανόν, 
3411 *things *but my brethren, swear not, neither [by] heaven, 
μήτε THY γῆν, μήτε ἄλλον.τινὰ ὅρκον. ἤτω.δὲ ὑμῶν τὸ ναί, 
nor the earth, nor any other oath; but let be of you the yea, 
ναί, Kai TO οὔ, οὔ ἵνα μὴ "εἰς ὑπόκρισιν! πέσητε. 18 KaKo- 
yea, and the nay, nay, that not into hypocrisy yemay fall. Does *suf- 
παθεῖ τις ἐν ὑμῖν; προσευχέσθω" εὐθυμεῖ τις; 
fer °hardships ‘anyone “among “you? let him pray: is *cheerful ‘anyone? 
ψαλλέτω. 14 ἀσθενεῖ τις ἐν vpiv; προσκαλεσάσθω 
let him praise ; is*sick ‘anyone among you? let him callto [him) 
τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους τῆς ἐκκλησίας, Kai προσευξάσθωσαν ἐπ᾽ 
the elders of the assembly, and let them pray over 
αὐτόν, ἀλείψαντες ᾿αὐτὸν" ἐλαίῳ ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ" κυρίου" 
him, having anointed him withoilin the name _ οὗ the Lord; 


& εἰσελήλυθαν LTTrAW. h — ὡς LTTrAW. i— ἂν TTra. 
K πρόϊμον TTr. 1 ἀδελφοί, kat ἀλλήλων LTrA. τὰ κρι- 
n + ὁ the GLTTrAW. ©, ἀδελφοί μου, τῆς κακοπαθείας 
P + évin (the) Lrtr. 4 ὑπομείναντας endured LITra. 
8 ὑπὸ κρίσιν under judgment EGLTTraw. t — αὐτὸν (read [him)]) 7, 


° — τοῦ (read of [the]) L[Tr]a. 


1: l PETER. 
15 καὶ ἡ εὐχὴ τῆς πίστεως σώσει TOY κάμνοντα, Kai ἐγε- 
and the prayer offaith shallsavye the exhaustedone, and will 


ρεῖ αὐτὸν ὁ κύριος" κἂν ἁμαρτίας ῃ-πεποιηκώς, 
*raise®up “ἶσα ‘the *Lord; andif ‘sins ‘he*be[°one*who]*has*committed, 
ἀφεθήσεται αὐτῷ. 16 ἐξομολογεῖσθε * ἀλλήλοις 
it shall be forgiven him. Confess to one another [your] 
x 4 , Il ‘ y » i « ‘ ? , ἐς ev > θῇ 
τὰ παραπτώματα, καὶ εὔχεσθε" ὑπὲρ ἀλλήλων, ὕπως ἰαθῆ- 
offences, and pray for oneanother, that yemaybe 
τε. πολὺ ἰσχύει δέησις δικαίου ἐνεργουμένη. 
healed. *Much ®prevails [‘the] *supplication *of°a‘*righteous(’man] operative. 
17 *HXiac! ἄνθρωπος ἦν ὁμοιοπαθὴς ἡμῖν, Kai προσευχῇ 
Elias 22 *man lwas oflikefeelings tous, and with prayer 
προσηύξατο τοῦ μὴ βρέξαι" καὶ οὐκ.ιἔβρεξεν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς 
eprayed (for it] not torain; and itdidnotrain upon the earth 


ἐνιαυτοὺς τρεῖς καὶ 


pfivac ἕξ. 18 καὶ πάλιν προσηΐξατο, καὶ 
onths ᾿βίχ ; 


“years ‘three and and again he prayed, and 
ὁ οὐρανὸς *verdy ἔδωκεν, Kai ἡ γῆ ἐβλάστησεν τὸν 
the heaven 7rain igave, and the earth caused *to *sprout 
καρπὸν αὐτῆς. 

7fruit tits. : 

19 ᾿Αδελφοὶ, ἐάν Tic ἐν ὑμῖν πλανηθῇ ἀπὸ τῆς ἀλη- 

Brethren, if anyone among you err from the truth, 


θείας, καὶ ἐπιστρέψῃ τις αὐτόν, 20 “γινωσκέτω" ὅτι ὁ 
and *bring*back ‘anyone him, let him know that he who 
ἐπιστρέψας ἁμαρτωλὸν ἐκ πλάνης ὁδοῦ. αὐτοῦ, 

brings back @ sinner from [the] error of his way, 

wu ‘ d ? θ0 , ‘ iw ARO « - 
χὴν “ ἐκ θανάτου, καὶ καλύψει πλῆθος ἁμαρτιῶν. 

8ι soul from death, and shall cover a multitude of sins. 

*laxw Bou ἐπιστολή." 
7Of James tepistle, 


σώσει 
shall save 


593 


Lord: 15 and the 
prayer of faith shall 
save the sick, and 
the Lord shall raise 
him up; and if he 
have committed sins, 
they shall be for- 
given him. 16 Con- 
fess your faults one 
to another, and pray 
one for another, that 
ye may be healed. 
The effectual fervent 
prayer of a righteous 
man availeth much. 
17 Elias was a man 
subject to like pas- 
sions as we are, and he 
prayed earnestly that 
it might not rain: and 
it rained not on the 
earth by the space of 
three years and six 
months. 18 And he 
prayed again, and the 
heaven gave rain, and 
the earth brought 
forth her fruit. 


19 Brethren, if any 
of you do err from the 
truth, and one convert 
him ; 20 let him know, 
that he which con- 
verteth the sinner from 
the error of his way 
shall save a soul from 
death, and shall hide 
multitude of sins, 


‘TIETPOY KAOOAIKH ETISTOAH TPOTH.' 


‘OF SPETER *GENERAL 7EPISTLE 


TIETPOS ἀπόστολος ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, ἐκλεκτοῖς παρεπιδήμοις 
Peter, apostle of Jesus Christ, to [the] elect sojourners 


διασπορᾶς Πόντου, Γαλατίας, Καππαδοκίας, ᾿Ασίας, καὶ 
of [the] dispersion of Pontus, of Galatia, of Cappadocia, of Asia, and 


Βιθυνίας, 2 Kara πρόγνωσιν θεοῦ πατρός, ἐν ἁγιασ- 
Bithynia, according to [the] foreknowledge of God [the] Father, by sanctifi- 
πνεύματος, ες ὑπακοὴν Kai ῥαντισμὸν αἵματος 
cation of [the] Spirit, unto[the] obedience and sprinkling of [the] blood 
Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ" χάρις ὑμῖν Kai εἰρήνη πληθυνθείη. 
of Jesus Christ: Grace toyou and peace be multiplied. 
3 Εὐλογητὸὲξ ὁ θεὸς Kai πατὴρ τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ 
Blessed [be]the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
χριστοῦ, ὁ κατὰ τὸ.πολὺ. αὐτοῦ ἔλεος ἀναγεννήσας δὴ μᾶς" 
Christ, who according to his great us 


mercy begat *again 


+FIRST. 


PETER, an apostle of 
Jesus Christ, to the 
strangers scattered 
throughout Pontus, 
Galatia, Cappadocia, 
Asia, and Bithynia, 
2 elect according to 
the foreknowledge 
of God the Father, 
through sanctification 
of the Spirit, unto o- 
bedience and sprink- 
ling of the blood of 


Jesus Christ: Grace 
unto you, and peace, 
be multiplied. 


3 Blessed be the 
God and Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, 
which according te 


* + οὖν therefore LTTra. “5 τὰς ἁμαρτίας 51}8 LTTr. 
3 ἔδωκεν ὑετὸν LTTr. Ὁ + μου my (brethren) LTTra. 
> - . μ δὴ 
4 + αὐτοῦ (read his soul) LT. 


Υ προσεύχεσθε L. 
ς γινώσκετε KNOW Ye A. 
e — the subscription EGLTW ; Ἰακώβου TrA. 


z Ἡλείας T 


f + τοῦ ἀποστόλου the apostle E; — καθολικὴ G ; Πέτρου ἐπιστολὴ a Tr; Ilétpova LTaW 


& ὑμᾶς you E. 


QQ 


594 


his abundant mer- 
cy hath begotten us 
again unto a lively 
hope by the resurrec- 
tion of Jesus Christ 
from the dead, 4to an 
inheritance incorrup- 
tible, and undefiled, 
and that fadeth not 
away, reserved in hea- 
ven for you, 5 who args 
kept by the power of 
God through faith un- 
to salvation ready to 
be revealed in the last 
time. 6 Wherein ye 
greatly rejoice, though 
now for a season, if 
need be, ye are in 
heaviness through ma- 
nifold temptations: 
7 that the trial of your 
faith, being much 
more precious than of 
gold that perisheth, 
though itbe tried with 
fire, might be found 
uuto praise and ho- 
nour and glory at the 
appearing of Jesus 
Christ: 8 whom hay- 
ing not seen, ye love; 
in whom, though now 
ye see him not, yet be- 
lieving, ye rejoice with 
joy unspeakable and 
full of glory: 9 re- 
ceiving theend ofyour 
faith, even the salva- 
tion of your souls. 
10 Of which salvation 
the prophets have in- 
quired and searched 
diligently, who pro- 
phesied of the grace 
that should come unto 
you: 11 searching what, 
or what manner of 


time the Spirit of 
Christ which was in 
them did _ signify, 


when it testified be- 
forehand the suffer- 
ings of Christ, and the 
glory that should fol- 
low. 12 Unto whom it 
was revealed, that not 
unto themselves, but 
unto us they did mini- 
ster the things, which 
are now reported unto 
you by them that have 
preached the gospel 
unto you with the 
Holy Ghost sent down 
from heaven; which 
things the angels de- 
sire to look into. 

13 Wherefore gird 
up the loins of your 
mind, be sober, and 
hope to the end for the 
grace that is to be 
brought unto you at 
the revelation of Je- 
sus Christ ; 14 as obe- 
dient children, not fa- 
shioning yourselves 


WETTER CA. 


εἰς ἐλπίδα ζῶσαν δι 
to a *hope 


i 


ἀναστάσεως Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ ἐκ 
‘living through [the] resurrection οὗ Jesus Christ from amoung 


νεκρῶν, 4 εἰς κληρονομίαν ἄφθαρτον Kai ἀμίαντον Kai 


[086] dead, to aninheritance incorruptible and undefiled and 
ἀμάραντον, τετηρημένην ἐν οὐρανοῖς εἰς Βἡμᾶς," 5 τοὺς ἐν 
unfading, reserved in [the] heavens for us, who vy 


δυνάμει θεοῦ φρουρουμένους διὰ πίστεως. εἰς σωτηρίαν 
{the] power of God [8416] being guarded through faith, for salvation 
ἑτοίμην ἀποκαλυφθῆναι ἐν καιρῷ ἐσχάτῳ" 6 ἐνιῷ ayad- 
ready to be revealed in [the] ?time "last. Wherein ye ex- 
ὀλίγον ἄρτι, εἰ δέον ἰἐστίν, λυπηθέντες 
for a little while at present, if necessary itis, having been put to grief 
ἐν ποικίλοις πειρασμοῖς, 7 iva τὸ δοκίμιον ὑμῶν τῆς πίστεως 
in various trials, that the proving of your faith, 
k ‘ , Π , ~ 9 ’ ὃ ay A δὲ 
πολὺ τιμιώτερον, χρυσίου τοῦ ἀπολλυμένου, διὰ πυρὸς 
(much more precious than gold that perishes, ) 2by “fire ‘thougr 
δοκιμαζομένου, εὑρεθῇ εἰς ἔπαινον καὶ τιμὴν καὶ δόξαν," ἐν 
᾽ 7 phe 
being proved, be found to praise and honour and glory, in 
ἀποκαλύψει ᾿Τησοῦ χριστοῦ" ὃ ὃν οὐκ "εἰδότες! ἀγαπᾶτε, 
{the] revelation ofJesus Christ, whom not having seen ye love; 
εἰς ὃν ἄρτι μὴ ὁρῶντες, πιστεύοντες.δέ, ἀγαλλιᾶσθε 
on whom now [though] ποῦ looking, but believing, ye exult 


~ ? ’ ‘ , , A , 
χαρᾷ ἀνεκλαλήτῳ καὶ δεδοξασμένῃ, 9 κομιζόμενοι τὸ τέλος 
with joy unspeakable and glorified, receiving the end 
τῆς.πίστεως ὑμῶν, σωτηρίαν ψυχῶν" 10 περὶ ἧς 

of your faith, [086] salvation of [your] souls ; concerning which 
σωτηρίας ἐξεζήτησαν καὶ πἐξηρεύνησαν" προφῆται οἱ περὶ 


λιᾶσθε, 
ult, 


salvation sought *°out Mand searched ‘out ‘prophets, *who “οὗ 
THC εἰς ὑμᾶς χάριτος προφητεύσαντες, 11 Epevvmvrec" εἰς 
5the 7towards ®you ‘grace sprophesied ; ’ searching to 
τίνα ἢ ποῖον καιρὸν ἐδήλον τὸ ἐν αὐτοῖς πνεῦμα 


what or what manner of time ‘7was "δι ρ γίηρ 6 Sin ‘them 2Spirit 


χριστοῦ, προμαρτυρόμενον TA εἰς. χριστὸν παθήματα, καὶ 
Sof *Christ, testifying beforehand of the[*belonging]*to *Christ ‘sufferings, and 


A} ‘ ~ , T ? , oe ᾽ ς ~ 
τὰς μετὰ ταῦτα δόξας" 12 οἷς ἀπεκαλύφθη ὅτι οὐχ ἑαυτοῖς, 
the “δον these ‘glories; to whom it was revealed, that not to themselves 


Ρὴμῖν" δὲ διηκόνουν αὐτά, ἃ νῦν ἀνηγγέλη ὑμῖν διὰ 
7to *us ‘but were serving those things, which now were announced to you by 
τῶν εὐαγγελισαμένων ὑμᾶς “ἐν" 


πνεύματι ἁγίῳ ἀπο- 
those who announced the glad tidingsto you 


in [086] 7Spirit ‘Holy 
σταλέντι an οὐρανοῦ, εἰς ἃ ἐπιθυμοῦσιν ἄγγελοι παρακύψαι. 
sent from heaven, into which desire ‘angels to look. 
18 Aw ἀναζωσάμενοι τὰς ὀσφύας τῆς.διανοίας ὑμῶν, νή- 
Wherefore having girded up the loins of your mind, be- 
povrec, τελείως ἐλπίσατε ἐπὶ THY φερομένην ὑμῖν χάριν ἐν 
ing sober, perfectly hope in the *being “brought “to °you ‘grace at 
ἀποκαλύψει ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ. 14 we τέκνα ὑπακοῆς, μὴ 
{the} revelation of Jesus Christ ; as children of obedience, not 
τσυσχηματιζόμενοι" ταῖς πρότερον ἐν τῇ ἀγνοίᾳ ὑμῶν ἐπιθυ- 
fashioning yourselves tothe former 7in “your *ignorance de- 
μίαις, 15 ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὸν καλέσαντα ὑμᾶς ἅγιον Kai 
sires ; but according as he who called you [is] holy, also 
αὐτοὶ ἅγιοι ἐν πάσῃ ἀναστροφῇ yevnOnre’ 16 διότι 
Syourselves*holy °in ‘all [("your) conduct *be *ye; because 


Ὁ ὑμᾶς you GLTTrAW. 


τιμήν LTTrAW. 


P ὑμῖν to you GLTTrAW. 


Κ πολυτιμότερον GLTTrA. 
Ὁ ἐξηραύνησαν TTrA. 
4 --- ἐν (read ἁγίῳ by [the] Holy) tra. 


i — ἐστίν TTr. 


l ὃ ᾽΄ὔ Ἀ 
όξαν καὶ 
m δόντες LTTrAW. 


° ἐραυνῶντες TITA. 
τ guvo- TrA. 


ἜΤΠ 1 ΡΕΊΒΜΗΣ 


, .“ 3 , θ HT te " 9 ‘ ΄“ ’ Vv >? {| il K 4 
γεγραπται, ᾿Αγιοι ἔγενεσθε," ‘ore’ eyw ἅγιός YEipe. 7 Καὶ 
ithas been written,*Holy ‘be*ye, because I “holy lam. And 
εἰ πατέρα ἐπικαλεῖσθε τὸν “ἀπροσωπολήπτως" κρίνοντα 
if [as] Father yecallon him who without regard of persons judges 
κατὰ τὸ ἑκάστου ἔργον, ἔν φόβῳ τὸν τῆς.παροικίας ὑμῶν 
according tothe “of *each work, in fear’ the ?of your *sojourn 
χρόνον ἀναστράφητε' 18 εἰδότες ὅτι οὐ φθαρτοῖς, ap- 
time pass ye, knowing that not by corruptible things, by 
γυρίῳ ἢ χρυσίῳ, ἐλυτρώθητε ἐκ τῆς. ματαίας. ὑμῶν ἀναστροφῆς 


silver or by gold, ye wereredeemed from your vain manner of life 
πατροπαραδότου, 19 ἀλλὰ τιμίῳ αἵματι ὡς ἀμνοῦ 
handed down from [your] fathers, but by precious blood as of a lamb 
ἀμώμου Kai ἀσπίλου χριστοῦ; 30 προεγνωσ- 


without blemish and without spot [the blood] of Christ: having been fore- 


μένου μὲν πρὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου, φανερωθέντος.δὲ ἐπ᾽ 
own indeed before [the] foundation οὔ [the] world, but manifested at 
*toxatwy' τῶν χρόνων ov ὑμᾶς, 21 τοὺς dv αὐτοῦ 
{the] last times forthe sake of you, who by him 
¥riorevovrac' sic θεόν, τὸν ἐγείραντα αὐτὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν, 
believe in God, who raised up him fromamong([the] dead, 
καὶ δόξαν αὐτῷ δόντα, ὥστε τὴν.πίστιν. ὑμῶν Kai ἐλπίδα εἶναι 
and glory tohim gave, soasfor your faith and hope to be 
εἰς θεόν. 22 Τὰς ψυχὰς ὑμῶν ἡγνικότες ἐν τῇ ὑπακοῇ τῆς 
in God, Your souls having purified by obedience to the 
ἀληθείας "διὰ πνεύματος" εἰς φιλαδελφίαν ἀνυπόκριτον, ἐκ 
truth tkrough[the] Spirit to brotherly love unfeigned, outof 
*xaBapac' καρδίας ἀλλήλους ἀγαπήσατε ἐκτενῶς" 23 avaye- 
*pure ‘a heart one another love ye fervently. Having been 
γεννημένοι οὐκ ἐκ σπορᾶς φθαρτῆς, ἀλλὰ ἀφθάρτου, διὰ 
begotten again, not of “seed *corruptible, but of incorruptible, by 
λόγου ζῶντος θεοῦ Kai μένοντος “éic-rov.aidva." 24 διότι 


{the] word “living ‘of*God and abiding for ever. Because 
πᾶσα σὰρξ “ὡς" χόρτος, καὶ πᾶσα δόξα ἀνθρώπου" we 
411 flesh [is] as grass, and all (the) glory of man as [the] 


ἄνθος χόρτου. ἐξηράνθη ὁ χόρτος, Kai τὸ ἄνθος “αὐτοῦ" 
flower of grass, *Withered ‘the “grass, and the flower of it 
ἐξέπεσεν" 25 τὸ. δὲ ῥῆμα κυρίου μένει εἰς. τὸν. αἰῶνα. 'Ῥοῦτο. δέ 
fell away ; but the word of [the] Lord abides for ever. But this 
ἐστιν TO ῥῆμα τὸ εὐαγγελισθὲν εἰς ὑμᾶς. 

is the word which was announced to you. 

2 ᾿Αποθέμενοι οὖν πᾶσαν κακίαν καὶ πάντα δόλον Kai 

Having laid aside therefore all malice and all guile and 

ὑποκρίσεις Kai φθόνους Kai πάσας καταλαλιάς, 2 ὡς ἀρτιγέν- 
hypocrisies and envyings and all evil speakings, as new- 
νητα βρέφη, TO λογικὸν ἄδολον yada ἐπιποθήσατε, ἵνα ἐν 
born babes, the *mental ‘genuine milk long ye after, that by 

? ~ ? ~ » ? LZ ‘4 c 7 
αὐτῷ αὐξηθῆτε, 3 δεΐπερ' ἐγεύσασθε ὅτι χρηστὸς ὁ κύριος. 
it ye may grow, ifindeed ye did taste that is] *good ‘the *Lord. 
4 πρὸς ὃν προσερχόμενοι, λίθον ζῶντα, ὑπὸ ἀνθρώπων μὲν 


598 


according to the forms 
er lusts in your ignor- 
ance: 15 but as he 
which hath called you 
is holy, so be ye holy 
in all manner of con- 
versation ; 16 because 
it is written, Be ye 
holy ; for I am holy. 
17 And if ye call on 
the Father, who with- 
out respect of persons 
judgeth according to 
every man’s work, pass 
the time of your so- 
jeurning Aere in fear: 
18 forwsmuch as ye 
knew that ye were not 
redeemed with cor- 
ruptible things, as 
silver and gold, from 
your vain conversa- 
tion received by tradi- 
tion from your fathers; 
19 but with the pre- 
cious blood of Christ, 
as of a lamb without 
blemish and without 
spot: 20 who verily 
was foreordained be- 
fore the foundation of 
the world, but was 
manifest in these last 
times for you, 21 who 
by him do believe in 
God, that raised him 
up from the dead, and 
gave him glory ; that 
your faith and hope 
might be in God. 
22 Seeing ye have puri- 
fied your souls in 
obeying the truth 
through the Spirit un- 
to unfeigned love of 
the brethren, see that 
ye love one another 
with a pure heart fer- 
vently : 23 being born 
again, not of corrupti- 
ble seed, but of incor- 
ruptible, by the word 
of God, which liveth 
and abideth for ever. 
24 For all flesh is as 
grass, and all the 
glory of man as the 
flower of grass. The 
grass withereth, and 
the flower thereof 
falleth away: 25 but 
the word of the Lord 
endureth forever. And 
this is the word which 
by the gospelis preach- 
ed unto you. 

II, Wherefore lay- 
ing aside all malice, 
and all guile, and hy- 
pocrisies, and envies, 
and all evil speakings, 


ee main 2s ivi b men indeed 2 as new born babes 

᾽ rs ke , ae ἢ ᾿ seen 5 age a . _» desire thesincere milk 
ἀποδεδοκιμασμένον, παρὰ.δὲ Hep ἐκλεκτόν, ἔντιμον, 5 καὶ αὐ- of the word, that ye 
rejected, but with God chosen, precious, alsoyour- may grow thereby : 

5 ἔσεσθε ye shall be Lrtraw. t διότι T. ν — εἶμι (read [am]) LTTraw. ν ἀπροσ- 


ὠπολήμπτως LTTrA. x ἐσχάτου (read end of the times) L1Traw. 
lievers LTTrA. z— διὰ πνεύματος LTTrAW. 
Ὁ — εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα GLITrAW. ς --- ὡς hk. 


τοῦ LTTr[A]W. f + εἰς σωτηριαν unto salvation GLTTraw. 


Υ πιστοὺς [are] be- 


@ — καθαρᾶς (read from [the] heart) yrtra. 
4 αὐτῆς (read its glory) GLITraw. 
& εἰ if LTT 


€ — avu- 


596 


3 if so be ye have 
tasted that the Lord 
ts gracious, 4 To whom 
coming, as unto a liv- 
ing stone, disallowed 
indeed of men, but 
ehosen of God, and 
precious, 5 ye also, as 
lively stones, are built 
up a spiritual house, 
an holy priesthood, to 
offer up spiritual sac- 
Yifices, acceptable to 
God by Jesus Christ. 
6 Wherefore also it is 
contained in the scrip- 
ture, Behold, I lay in 
Sion a chief corner 
stone, elect, precious : 
and he that believeth 
on him shall not be 
confounded. 7 Unto 
you therefore which 
believe he is precious: 
but unto them which 


be disobedient, the 
stone which the build- 
ers disallowed, the 


Same is made the head 
of the corner, 8 and a 
stone of stumbling, 
and a rock of offence, 
even to them which 
stumble at the word, 
being disobedient : 
whereunto also they 
were appointed. 9 But 
ye areachosen gene- 
ration, a royal priest- 
hood, an holy nation, 
a peculiar people ; that 
ye should shew forth 
the praises of him who 
hath called you out of 
darkness into his mar- 
vellous light: 10 which 
in time past were not 
a people, but are now 
the people of God: 
which had not ob- 
tained mercy, but now 
have obtained mercy. 

11 Dearly beloved, I 
beseech you as strang- 
ers and pilgrims, ab- 
stain from fleshly lusts, 
which war against the 
soul; 12 having your 
conversation honest a- 
mong the Gentiles: 
that, whereas they 
speak against you 
as evildoers, they 
may by your good 
works, which they 
shall behold, glorify 
God in the day of visi- 
tation. 

13 Submit yourselves 
to every ordinance of 
man for the Lord’s 
sake : whether it be to 
the king, as supreme ; 
14 or unto governors, 
as unto them that are 


WETPOY A. IL, 


ve AiO ῷ Ἰοἰκοδομεῖσθε," of dc, * 
ὡς λίθοι ζῶντες 'οἰκοδομεῖσθε,) οἶκος πνευματικός; 
stones ‘living, are being built up, a “house ‘spiritual, 


τοὶ 
selves, as 


ἱεράτευμα ἅγιον. ἀνενέγκαι πνευματικὰς θυσίας εὐπροσδέκτους 
a7priesthood ‘holy to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable 


‘rp’ θεῷ διὰ ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ. 6 "Διὸ καὶ" περιέχει πὲν τῇ 
toGod by Jesus Christ. Wherefore also it is contained in the 
γραφῇ." ᾿Ιδοὺ τίθημι ἐν Σιὼν λίθον ἀκρογωνιαῖον, ἐκλεκτόν, 
scripture: Behold, Iplace in Sion a stone ‘corner, chosen, 
ἔντιμον" καὶ ὁ πιστεύων ET αὐτῷ οὐνμὴ καταισχυνθῇ. 


precious: and hethat believes on him ἴῃ ΠΟ wise shouldbe put toshame, 
7 Ὑμῖν οὖν ἡ τιμὴ τοῖς πιστεύουσιν" οἀπει- 
To you therefore [515] *the *preciousness }who *believe; 7to([®those] *dis- 


Bovow" δὲ, λίθον! ὃν ἀπεδοκίμασαν ot οἰκοδομοῦντες, 

obeying ‘but, [the] stone which Srejected those ?building, 
οὗτος ἐγενήθη εἰς κεφαλὴν γωνίας, 8 Kai λίθος προσκόμ- 
this became head of [the] corner, and a stone of stum- 
ματος καὶ πέτρα σκανδάλου ot προσκόπτουσιν τῷ λόγῳ 
bling and arock of offence ; who stumble at the word, 
ἀπειθοῦντες, εἰς ὃ Kai ἐτέθησαν. 9 ὑμεῖς. δὲ γένος ἐκ- 

being disobedient, to which also they were appointed. But ye [are] a “race 
λεκτόν, βασίλειον ἱεράτευμα, ἔθνος ἅγιον, λαὸς εἰς περι- 
1chosen, a kingly priesthood, a’nation ‘holy, aspeople for a pos- 
ποίησιν, ὕπως τὰς ἀρετὰς ἐξαγγείλητε τοῦ ἐκ σκότους 
session, that the virtues yemight set forth of him who out of darkness 
ὑμᾶς καλέσαντος εἰς τὸ θαυμαστὸν αὐτοῦ φῶς" 10 οἱ ποτὲ 
“you Xealled to his wonderful light ; who once 

᾽ , ~ Y ~. € > ᾽ , 

ov λαός, νῦν.δὲ λαὸς θεοῦ: οἱ οὐκ.ἠλεημένοι, 

{were] not a people, but now [are] *people 'God’s; who had not received mercy, 
γῦν.δὲ ἐλεηθέντες. 
but now received mercy. 

11 ᾿Αγαπητοί, παρακαλῶ ὡς παροίκους καὶ παρεπιδή- 
Beloved, ITexhort [you] as strangers and sojourners, 
μους, ἀπέχεσθαι! τῶν σαρκικῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν, αἵτινες στρατεύον- 


to abstain from  fleshly desires, which war 
ται κατὰ τῆς ψυχῆς" 12 τὴν.ἀναστροφὴν.ὑμῶν ἐν τοῖς 
against the soul ; “your “manner ‘of *life ‘among ‘the 


» » ΄ oe ? “ἢ ~ - ~ € 
ἔθνεσιν ἔχοντες καλήν, ἵνα évp καταλαλοῦσιν ὑμῶν ὡς 


ΠΑ ΟΠ 5 *having Sright that wherein they speak against you as 
κακοποιῶν, ἐκ τῶν καλῶν ἔργων ᾿ἐποπτεύσαντες" δοξά- 
evil doers, through [your] good works having witnessed they 
σωσιν τὸν θεὸν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ἐπισκοπῆς. 
may glorify God in[the] day of visitation. 
13 Ὑποτάγητε δοὖν" πάσῃ ἀνθρωπίνῃ κτίσει, διὰ 


Be in subjection therefore toevery human institution for thesake of 


τὸν κύριον" εἴτε βασιλεῖ, we ὑπερέχοντι" 14 εἴτε ἡγεμόσιν, 
the Lord; whether to [the] king as supreme, or to governors 
ὡς Ov αὐτοῦ πεμπομένοις εἰς ἐκδίκησιν ἱμὲν" κακοποιῶν, 
as by him sent, for vengeance [on] evil doers, 
” A 2 ~ Fy ef e ) ‘ sy , 
ἔπαινον.δὲ ἀγαθοποιῶν 15 ὅτι οὕτως ἐστὶν τὸ θέλημα 


and praise [to] well doers ; (because 80 is the will 
τοῦ θεοῦ, ἀγαθοποιοῦντας . φιμοῦν τὴν τῶν ἀφρόνων 
of God, [by] well doing to put to silence the 2of “senseless 


{ ἐποικοδομεῖσθε τ. 
" τῇ TTrA ; ἡ γραφή (read the scripture contains) L. 


unbelieving) Trr. 


οντες Witnessing LTTraw. 


1 — τῷ LITrA. m διότι because GLTTrAWw. 
ο ἀπιστοῦσιν (read but to [those] 
4 + ὑμᾶς (read that ye abstain) L. τ ἐποπτεύ- 
t — μὲν GLTTrAW. 


ΚΕ εἰς for LTTrA. 


Ρ λίθος LTrA. 
8 — οὖν LTTrA. 


II, III. I PEPER 


ἀγνωσίαν. 16 we ἐλεύθεροι, Kai μὴ ὡς ἐπικά- 
as free, and not as #9) 


*ignorance ;) 
Avupa ἔχοντες τῆς κακίας τὴν ἐλευθερίαν, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς "δοῦλοι 
as bondmen 


®cloak thaving Sof 7malice *freedom, but 


θεοῦ." 17 πάντας τιμήσατε, τὴν ἀδελφότητα ἀγαπᾶτε, τὸν 
of God. *All ‘shew “honour *to, the “brotherhood Slove, 


θεὸν φοβεῖσθε, τὸν βασιλέα τιμᾶτε. 
God ®fear, the }?king /°honour. 


18 Οἱ οἰκέται, ὑποτασσόμενοι ἐν παντὶ φόβῳ τοῖς.δεσ- 


ἀνθρώπων 
*men 


Servants, being subject with all fear to [your] 
πόταις, οὐ μόνον τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς Kai ἐπιεικέσιν, ἀλλὰ Kai 
masters, not only tothe good and gentle, but = also 
τοῖς σκολιοῖς. 19 τοῦτο.γὰρ χάρις. εἰ διὰ συνείδησιν 
tothe crooked. For this [is] acceptable if for sake of conscience 

θεοῦ ὑποφέρει τις λύπας, πάσχων ἀδίκως. 20 ποῖον.γὰρ 


towardsGod “endures ‘anyone griefs, suffering unjustly. For what 
κλέος, εἰ ἁμαρτάνοντες καὶ κολαφιζόμενοι ὑπομενεῖτε ; 
glory (is it], if sinning and being buffeted ye endure it ? 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ ἀγαθοποιοῦντες Kai πάσχοντες ὑπομενεῖτε, τοῦτο * 
but if doing good and suftering yeendure [10], this [15] 
χάρις παρὰ θεῷ. 21 εἰς. τοῦτο.γὰρ ἐκλήθητε, ὅτι Kai 
acceptable with God. For to this ye were called; because also 
χριστὸς ἔπαθεν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν ." Τἡμῖν" ὑπολιμπάνων ὑπογραμ- 
Christ suffered for us, “us Neaving a model 
μόν, ἵνα ἐπακολουθήσητε τοῖς ἴχνεσιν.αὐτοῦ: 22 ὃς ἁμαρτίαν 
that ye should follow after in his steps ; who Ssin 
? > / > 4 ε , , ? ~ , ? “ὦ a 
οὐκ.ἐποίησεν, οὐδὲ εὑρέθη δόλος ἐν τῷ.στόματι. αὐτοῦ" 23 ὃς 
‘did 7no, neither was *found ‘guile in his mouth ; who, 
λοιδορούμενος οὐκ. ἀντελοιδόρει, πάσχων οὐκ.ἠπείλει, 


being railed at, railed notinreturn; [when] suffering threatened ποῦ; 
παρεδίδου.δὲ τῷ κρίνοντι δικαίως. 24 ὃς τὰς 
but gave [himself] Οὐ tohim γο judges righteously ; who 


ἁμαρτίας.ἡμῶν αὐτὸς ἀνήνεγκεν ἐν TH.cwpaTl.avToU ἐπὶ TO 
i on the 


our sins himself bore in his body 
ξύλον, ἵνα ταῖς.ἁμαρτίαις ἀπογενόμενοι, TY δικαιοσύνῃ ζή- 
tree, that, to sins [we] being dead, to righteousness we 


25 ἦτε.γὰρ ὡς πρό- 


σωμεν᾽ οὗ. τῷ.μώλωπι. αὐτοῦ" ἰάθητε. 
For ye were as 


may live ; by whose bruise ye were healed. 
Bara “πλανώμενα"" ἀλλ᾽ ἐπεστράφητε νῦν ἐπὶ τὸν ποιμένα 
sheep going astray, but arereturned now to _ the _ shepherd 
Kai ἐπίσκοπον τῶν.Ψψυχῶν ὑμῶν. 


and overseer of your souls. 
9. Ὁμοίως, Yai! γυναῖκες, ὑποτασσόμεναι τοῖς.ἰδίοις ἀν- 
Likewise, wives, being subject to yourown hus- 


δράσιν, iva καὶ εἴ τινες ἀπειθοῦσιν τῷ λόγῳ, διὰ τῆς τῶν 
bands, that,evenif any aredisobedient tothe word, by the 7of *the 
γυναικῶν ἀναστροφῆς ἄνευ λόγου “κερδηθήσωνται," 2 ἐπο- 
“wives Xeonduct’ without([the] word they may be gained, hay- 
πτεύσαντες τὴν ἐν φόβῳ EG ἀναστροφὴν ὑμῶν" 
ing witnessed [‘carried Sout] Sin fear chaste 3conduct your ; 
rT » ᾽ - ” ? ~ d ~ ie “I 

3 ὧν ἔστωοὐχ ὁ ἔξωθεν ἐμπλοκῆς “τριχῶν," “καὶ 
whose “let *it “ποὺ *be *the 7outward [fone] ®of braiding “of hair, ‘and 
περιθέσεως χρυσίων, ἢ ἐνδύσεως ἱματίων κόσμος" 
“putting '°around *°of '’gold, ‘Sor ᾿δραϊίϊῃρ 7°on “of ?*garments ‘adorning; 
θεοῦ δοῦλοι TTrA. τ γὰρ for (this) La. 
EGLTTrAW. * — αὐτοῦ LTr[A]. 
>—aiuttr[A]. “ κερδηθήσονται they will be gained trrtra. 


x ὑμῶν YOU EGLTTrA. 
5. πλανώμενοι (read ye were going astray as sheep) LTTrA. 
4 τριχῶν L. 


597 


sent by him for the 
punishment of eyvil- 
doers, and for the 
praise of them that do 
well. 15 For so is the 
will of God, that with 
well doing ye may put 
to silence the ignor- 
ance of foolish men: 
16 as free, and not 
using your liberty for 
a cloke of malicious- 
ness, but as the ser- 
vants of God. 17 Ho- 
nour all men. Love 
the brotherhood. Fear 
God. Honour the king, 
_ 18 Servants, be sub- 
ject to your masters 
with all fear; not 
only to the good and 
gentle, but also to the 
froward. 19 For this 
is thankworthy, if a 
man for conscience to- 
ward God endure grief, 
suffering wrongfully. 
20 For what glory is 12, 
if, when ye be buffeted 
for your faults, ye 
shall take it patiently? 
but if, when ye do 
well, and suffer for it, 
ye take it patient- 
ly, this ts acceptable 
with God. 21 For 
even hereunto were 
ye called: because 
Christ also suffered for 
us, leaving us an ex- 
ample, that ye should 
follow his steps: 22 who 
did no sin, neither was 
guile found in his 
mouth: 23 who, when 
he was reviled, reviled 
not again; when he 
suffered, he threatened 
not; but committed 
himself to him that 
judgeth righteously : 
24 who his own self 
bare our sins in his 
own body on the tree, 
that we, being dead to 
sins, should live un- 
to righteousness: by 
whose stripes ye were 
healed. 25 For ye were 
as sheep going astray : 
but are now returned 
unto the Shepherd and 
Bishop of your souls. 
Ill. Likewise, ye 
wives, be in subjection 
to your own husbands; 
that, if any obey not 
the word, they also 
may without the word 
be won by the conver- 
sation of the wives; 
2 while they behold 
your chaste conversa- 
tion coupled with fear. 
3 Whose adorning let 
it not be that outward 
adorning of plaiting 
the hair, and of wear- 


Υ ὑμῖν you 


e 7 or L. 


098 

ing of gold, or of put- 
ting on of apparel ; 
4 but letit be the hid- 
den man of the heart, 
in that which is not 
corruptible, even the 
ornament of a meek 
and quiet spirit, which 
is in the sight of God 
of great price. 5 For 
after this manner in 
the old time the holy 
women also, who trust- 
ed in God, adorned 
themselves, being in 
subjection unto their 
own husbands: 6 even 
as Sara obeyed Abra- 
ham, calling him lord: 
whose daughters ye 
are, as long as ye do 
well, and are not a- 
fraid with any amaze- 
ment. 7 Likewise, ye 
husbands, dwell with 
them according to 
knowledge, giving ho- 
nour unto the wife, as 
unto the weaker ves- 
sel, and as being heirs 
together of the grace 
of life; that your 
prayers be not hin- 
dered. 


8 Finally, be ye all 
of one mind, having 
compassion or3of an- 
other, loveas brethren, 
be pitiful, be court- 
eous: 9 not rendering 
evil for evil, or railing 
for railing : but con- 
trariwise blessing ; 
knowing that ye are 
thereunto called, that 

e should inherit a 

lessing. 10 For he 
that will love life, and 
see good days, let him 
refrain his tongue 
from evil, and his lips 
that they speak no 
guile: 11 let him es- 
chew evil, and do good; 
let him seek peace, and 
ensue it. 12 For the 
eyes of the Lord are 
over the righteous, and 
his ears are open unto 
their prayers : but the 
face of the Lord is a- 
gainst them that do 
evil. 13 And whots he 
that will harm you, 
if ye be followers of 
that which is good? 
14 But and if ye suf- 
fer for righteousness’ 
sake, happy are ye: 
and be not afraid of 
their terror, neither 
be troubled; 15 but 
sanctify the Lord God 
in your hearts : and be 


TET ΡΟΘῪ 4A. IIL 

4 ἀλλ᾽ ὁ κρυπτὸς τῆς καρδίας ἄνθρωπος, ἐν τῷ ἀφθάρτῳ 
but the hidden of *the *heart man, in the incorruptible 
τοῦ ‘roqgéoc καὶ ἡσυχίου" πνεύματος, 0 ἐστιν ἐνώπιον 
{ornament]ofthe meek and quiet spirit, which is before 


τοῦ θεοῦ πολυτελές. 5 οὕτως.γάρ ποτε Kai αἱ ἅγιαι γυναῖκες 
God of great price. For thus formerly also the holy women 


« .) / δὲ ‘ 4 Il 4 > , € / e , 
αἱ ἐλπίζουσαι Sexi τὸν" θεὸν ἐκόσμουν ἑαυτάς, ὑποτασσό- 


those hoping in God adorned themselves, being sub- 
μεναι τοῖς. ἰδίοις ἀνδράσιν: 6 ὡς Σάῤῥα "ὑπήκουσεν" τῷ 
ject to theirown husbands ; as Sarah obeyed 
᾿Αβραάμ, κύριον αὐτὸν καλοῦσα, ἧς ἐγενήθητε τέκνα" aya- 
Abraham, lord “him Xealling; of whom yebecame children, do- 
θοποιοῦσαι Kai μὴ-.φοβούμεναι μηδεμίαν πτόησιν. 7 Οἱ 
ing good and not fearing [with] , any consternation. 
(lit. no) 
ἄνδρες ὁμοίως, συνοικοῦντες κατὰ γνῶσιν, ὡς ἀσθε- 


Husbands likewise, dwelling with [them] according to knowledge,as witha 
νεστέρῳ σκεύει τῷ γυναικείῳ ἀπονέμοντες τιμήν, ὡς 
weaker [even] *vessel’with*the *female, rendering [them] honour, as 
καὶ Ἰσυγκληρονόμοι" χάριτος ζωῆς, εἰς τὸ μὴ ξἐκκόπτεσ- 
also[{being] joint-heirs of [the] grace of life, soas “not ‘to *be ®°cut 
θαι" τὰς προσευχὰς ὑμῶν. 


Toft your “prayers. 
8 Τὸ δὲ. τέλος, πάντες ὁμόφρονες, συμπαθεῖς, φιλ- 
Finally, all {being] ofone mind, sympathizing, loving 
άδελφοι, εὔσπλαγχνοι, ἰφιλόφρονες" 9 pj ἀποδιδόντες 
the brethren, tender hearted, friendly, not rendering 


κακὸν ἀντὶ κακοῦ, ἢ λοιδορίαν ἀντὶ λοιδορίας" τοὐναντίον.δὲ 
evil for 601], or railing for railing; but on the contrary, 


εὐλογοῦντες, "εἰδότες" ὅτι εἰς τοῦτο ἐκλήθητε, ἵνα εὐλογίαν 
blessing, knowing that to this ye were called, that blessing 
κληρονομήσητε. 10 ὁ-.γὰρ θέλων ζωὴν ἀγαπᾷν, καὶ ἰδεῖν 
ye should inherit. For he that wills [life ‘to*love, and tosee 
ἡμέρας ἀγαθάς, παυσάτω τὴν.γλῶσσαν."αὐτοῦ" ἀπὸ 
*days good, let him cause to cease his tongue from 
κακοῦ, καὶ χείλη "αὐτοῦ! τοῦ μὴ λαλῆσαι δόλον. 11 ἐκκλι- 


evil, and “lips this not tospeak guile. Let him turn 
νάτω ἀπὸ κακοῦ, Kai ποιησάτω ἀγαθόν ζητησάτω εἰρήνην, 
aside from evil, and 16οὐ him ἅο good. Let him seek peace 
καὶ διωξάτω αὐτήν. 12 ὅτι Pow! ὀφθαλμοὶ κυρίου ἐπὶ 


and let him pursue it: because the of [the] Lord [816] on 


δικαίους, καὶ ὦτα.αὐτοῦ εἰς δέησιν.αὐτῶν᾽ πρόσωπον. δὲ 
[086] righteous, and hisears towards their supplication. ut [the] face 
κυρίου ἐπὶ ποιοῦντας κακά. 18 καὶ τίς ὁ κακώ- 
of [the] Lord [is] against those doing 601]. And who [15] he that shall in- 
σων ὑμᾶς, ἐὰν τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ «μιμηταὶ! γένησθε ; 
jure you, if of *that ‘which [515] “good imitators ye shoulibe? 
14 ἀλλ᾽ εἰ καὶ πάσχοιτε διὰ δικαιοσύνην, μακάριοι. 
But if also ye should suffer on account of righteousness, blessed [are ye); 
A 4 ’ ᾽ ~ A ~ A ~ 
τὸν δὲ φόβον.αὐτῶν μὴ-φοβηθῆτε, μηδὲ ταραχθῆτε" 
but their fear yeshould not be afraid of, neither should ye be troubled ; 
15 κύριον.δὲ τὸν "Oedv" ἁγιάσατε ἔν ταῖς καρδίαις. ὑμῶν" 
but *Lord ?the *God ‘sanctify in your hearts, 


eyes 


i ἡσυχίου καὶ πραέος L ; mpacws (mpacos A) Kat ἡσυχίου TTrA. 8 εἰς LTTrAW. } ὑπήκουεν Τ,. 


‘ συνκληρονύμοις T ; 


GLTrAW ; ἐν- T. 
because) LITrA. 


» — οἱ (read [the] Lord’s eyes) LTTrA. 


συγκληρονόμοις to joint-heirs Tra. k ἐγκόπτεσθαι to be hindered 

1 ταπεινόφρονες humble minded GLrTraw. m — εἰδότες (read ὅτι 
2 — αὐτοῦ (read [his}) LTTra. ο + δὲ and (let him turn aside) Ltra. 
4 ζηλωταὶ zealouSLTTrAW. * χριστὸν Christ LTTraw. 


III, IV. I PETER. 


ἕτοιμοι. "δὲ" ἀεὶ πρὸς ἀπολογίαν παντὶ τῷ αἰτοῦντι ὑμᾶς 
and ready [be] always for adefence to everyone that asks you 
λόγον περὶ τῆς ἐν ὑμῖν ἐλπίδος, ‘ μετὰ πρᾳὕτητος Kai 
an account concerning the 7in “you hope, with meekness and 
φόβου: 16 συνείδησιν ἔχοντες ἀγαθήν, iva ἐν. ᾧ ᾿καταλαλῶ- 
fear ; *a*conscience ‘having Sgood, that whereas they may speak 
σιν! “ὑμῶν ὡς κακοποιῶν," καταισχυνθῶσιν οἱ ἐπηρεάζοντες 
against you as Φ6Υ]Ι] doers, they may be ashamed who calumniate 
ὑμῶν THY ἀγαθὴν ἐν χριστῷ ἀναστροφήν. 17 κρεῖττον. γὰρ 
your good ‘in Christ ‘manner 7of “life. For [it is] better, 
ἀγαθοποιοῦντας, εἰ “θέλει! τὸ θέλημα τοῦ θεοῦ, πάσχειν, 
("for ®you]°doing'*good, ‘if *wills [7it]?the ὅν} “οἵ "God, to suffer, 
ἢ κακοποιοῦντας" 18 ὅτι καὶ χριστὸς ἅπαξ περὶ ἁμαρ- 
than doing evil; because 7indeed ‘Christ once for sins 
τιῶν Yérabev δίκαιος ὑπὲρ ἀδίκων, ἵνα ἡμᾶς προσαγάγῃ 
suffered, (the) just for [the] unjust, that us he might bring 
τῷ θεῷ θ θεὶ ὲ UG θεὶο. δὲ ὅτῳ" 
τῷ" θεῷ, ανατωθεὶς μὲν σαρκί, ζωοποιηθεὶς. δὲ ἅτῷ 
to God; having been put to death in flesh, but made alive by the 
πνεύματι, 19 ἐν καὶ τοῖς ἐν φυλακῇ πνεύμασιν πορευθεὶς 
Spirit, in which also tothe ?7in “prison tspirits having gone 
ἐκήρυξεν, 20 ἀπειθήσασίν ποτε, Ore mak ἐξεδέχετο" ἡ 
he preached, [who] disobeyed sometime, when once was waiting the 
τοῦ θεοῦ μακροθυμία ἐν ἡμέραις Νῶε, κατασκευα- 
“of °God "longsuffering in[the] days of Noe, [while was] being pre- 


, ~ ? τι c ? ΄ {| d , ΙΔ ’ ‘ 
ζομένης κιβωτοῦ, εἰς ἣν COAtyat," τουτέστιν" ὀκτώ, ψυχαὶ 
pared (the) ark, into which few, that is eight souls, 


διεσώθησαν dv ὕδατος, 21 °6' καὶ fac! ἀντίτυπον νῦν 


were saved through water, which 7also >us figure snow 
σώζει βάπτισμα, οὐ σαρκὸς ἀπόθεσις ῥύπου, ἀλλὰ 
*saves [even] baptism, not of fi6sk a putting away of [the] filth, but 
συνειδήσεως ἀγαθῆς ἐπερώτημα εἰς θεόν, δι ἀνα- 
‘of ®a Sconscience good [89] 7demand “towards *God, by([the] _ re- 
στάσεως ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, 22 ὕς ἐστιν ἐν δεξιᾷ Srov' θεοῦ, 
surrection of Jesus Christ, who ἰ5 at(the] right hand of God, 
πορευθεὶς εἰς οὐρανόν, ὑποταγέντων αὐτῷ ἀγγέλων καὶ 
gone into heaven, “having 7been *subjected °to ‘°him angels and 


ἐξουσιῶν καὶ δυνάμεων. 
Sauthorities *and powers, 


~ , h e A « ~ I , Ce ~ 4 
4 Χριστοῦ οὖν παθόντος "ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν" σαρκί, καὶ ὑμεῖς τὴν 


Christ then havingsuffered for us in(the]flesh,also ye “the 
αὐτὴν ἔννοιαν ὁπλίσασθε’' = Ort ὁ παθὼν tv" σαρκί, 
Ssame Smind ‘arm ?yourselves *with; for he that suffered in [the] flesh 


πέπαυται ἁμαρτίας" 2 εἰς τὸ μηκέτι ἀνθρώπων ἐπιθυμίαις, 
has done with sin ; no longer 1°men’s ®to } lusts, 
ἀλλὰ θελήματι θεοῦ τὸν ἐπίλοιπον ἐν σαρκὶ βιῶσαι χρόνον. 
2but ‘to ‘*will *God’s*the ‘remaining ‘in (’the]*flesh ‘to7live ‘time. 
2 \ A k eal | « \ , 1 ~ , I \ 
3 ἀρκετὸς. γὰρ *ypiv' ὁ παρεληλυθὼς χρόνος ἱτοῦ βίου," τὸ 
For [is] sufficient for us the past time of life the 
Ὡθέλημα! τῶν ἐθνῶν πκατεργάσασθαι,, πεπορευμένους ἐν 
will of the nations to have worked out, having walked in 


599 
ready always to give 
an answer to every 
man that asketh you 
a@ reason of the hope 
that is in you with 
meekness and fear: 
16 having a good con- 
science; that, where- 
as they speak evil of 
you, as of evildoers, 
they may be ashamed 
that falsely accuse 
your good conversa- 
tion inChrist. 17 For 
it is better, if the will 
of God be so, that ye 
suffer for well doing, 
than for evil doing. 
18 For Christ alsohath 
once suffered for sins, 
the just for the un- 
just, that he might 
bring us to God, being 
put to death in the 
flesh, but quickened by 
the Spirit : 19 by which 
also he went and 
preached unto the spi- 
rits in prison; 20 which 
sometime were disobe- 
dient, when once the 
longsuffering of God 
waited in the days 
of Noah, while the 
ark was a preparing, 
wherein few, that is 
eight souls were saved 
by water. 21 The like 
figure whereunto even 
baptism doth also now 
save us (not the put- 
ting away of the filth 
of the flesh, but the 
answer of a good con- 
science toward God,) 
by the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ: 22 who is 
gone into heaven, and 
is on the right hand of 
God; angels and au- 
thorities and powers 
being madesubject un- 
to him. 


IV. Forasmuch then 
as Christ hath suffered 
for us in the flesh, arm 
yourselves likewise 
with the same mind: 
for he that hath suf-- 
fered in the flesh hath 
ceased from sin; 2 that 
he no longer should 
live the rest of his time 
in the flesh to the lusts 
of men, butto the will 
of God. 3 For the time 
past of our life may 
suffice us to have 
wrought the will of 
the Gentiles, when we 


s — δὲ and χὐττ[Α]. t ἀλλὰ but LTTrAW. 
Lirw ; καταλαλεῖσθε ye are spoken against Ta. 
may willaurtraw. YamnéSaveydieduttr. *%*—7T@ W. 
Ὁ ἀπεξεδέχετο (omit once) GLTTraw. © ὀλίγοι few [persons] LTTraw. 
ὁ ᾧ to which z. ὑμᾶς yOu LTTrA. & — τοῦ TTr[A]. 

i — ἐν (read [in])) Lrtra. k ἡμῖν LTTra. !— τοῦ βίου LTTrAW. 
2 κατειργάσθαι LTTrAW. 


τ καταλαλοῦσιν they speak against 
W — ὑμῶν ὡς κακοποιῶν TA. 
2 — τῷ (read [in the]) GLTTraw. 


x θέλοι 


ἃ τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν GT. 


h --Οπῆ;͵Θπὲρ ἡμῶν LTTrA. 


τι βούλημα LTTrAW. 


600 


walked in lascivious- 
ness, lusts, excess of 
wine, revellings, ban- 
quetings, and abo- 
minable _ idolatries: 
4 wherein they think it 
strange that yerun not 
with them to the same 
excess of riot, speak- 
ing evil of you: 5 who 
shall give account to 
him that is ready to 
judge the quick and 
the dead. 6 For for 
this cause was the 
gospel preached also to 
them that are dead, 
that they might be 
judged according to 
men in the flesh, but 
live according to God 
in the spirit. 

7 But the end of all 
things is at hand: be 
ye therefore sober, and 
watch unto prayer. 
8 And above all things 
have fervent charity 
egmong yourselves : for 
charity shall cover 
the multitude of sins. 
9 Use hospitality one 
to another without 
grudging. 10 As every 
man hath received the 
gift, even so minister 
the same one to an- 
other, as good stewards 
of the manifold grace 
of God. 11 Ifany man 
speak, let him speak 
as the oracles of God ; 
if any man minister, 
let him doit as of the 
ability which God giv- 
eth: that God in all 
things may be glorified 
through Jesus Christ, 
to whorn be praiseand 
dominion for ever and 
ever. Amen, 

12 Beloved, think it 
not strange concern- 
ing the fiery trial 
which is to try you, as 
though some strange 
thing happened unto 
you: 13 but rejoice, 
inasmuch as ye arepar- 
takers of Christ’s suf- 
ferings; that, when his 
glory shall berevealed, 
ye may be glad also 
with exceeding joy. 
14 If yebe reproached 
for the name of Christ, 
happy ave ye; for the 
spirit of glory and of 
God resteth upon you: 
on their part he is evil 
spoken of, but on your 
part he is glorified. 
15 But let none of you 
suffer as a murderer, 
or as a thief, or as an 
evildoer, or as a busy- 
body in other men’s 
matters. 16 Yet if any 


ILE DPOy A. IV. 


ἀσελγείαις, ἐπιθυμίαις, οἰνοφλυγίαις, κώμοις, πότοις, Kat 
γ ὅτοις, 


licentiousness, lusts, wine-drinking, revels, drinkings, and 
> 7, > ΄ ? i ΄ ‘ 

ἀθεμίτοις eldwrodarpeiaic’ 4 ἐνιῷ = Eeviovrar, fp συν- 
unhallowed idolatries, Wherein they thinkitstrange*not *run- 
τρεχόντων ὑμῶν εἰς τὴν αὐτὴν τῆς ἀσωτίας ἀνάχυσιν, 
ning *with [δ 611} ‘your to the same 308 3dissoluteness ‘overflow, 
βλασφημοῦντες" 5 οἱ ἀποδώσουσιν λόγον τῷ ἑτοίμως 


speaking evil {of you); who 


ἔχοντι κρῖναι ζῶντας Kai 


shall render account to him “ready 
νεκρούς. 6 εἰς.τοῦτο.γὰρ καὶ 
1who 215 to judge[the] living «πᾶ [89] dead. For to this [end] also 
νεκροῖς εὐηγγελίσθη, ἵνα κριθῶσιν μὲν 
to [the] dead were the glad tidings announced, that they might be judged indeed 
kara ἀνθρώπους σαρκί, ζῶσιν.δὲλ κατὰ θεὸν πνεύματι. 
as regards men in [the] flesh; but might live as regards God in [the] Spirit. 


7 Πάντων.δὲ τὸ τέλος ἤγγικεν: σωφρονήσατε οὖν 

Butofallthings the end has drawn near: be sober-minded therefore, 

καὶ vipbare εἰς στὰς! προσευχάς" ὃ πρὸ πάντων Ῥδὲ" τὴν 
and be watchful unto prayers ; *before *all *things *but 

εἰς ἑαυτοὺς ἀγάπην ἐκτενῆ ἔχοντες, ὅτι Ἱ ἀγάπη "καλύψει" 

among yourselves Slove “fervent ‘having, because love will cover 

πλῆθος ἁμαρτιῶν. 9 φιλόξενοι εἰς ἀλλήλους ἄνευ “γογγυσ- 


a multitude of sins; hospitable to oneanother, without murmur- 


μῶν" 10 ἕκαστος καθὼς ἔλαβεν χάρισμα, εἰς ἑαυτοὺς 

ings ; each according as he received a gift, to each other 

αὐτὸ διακονοῦντες, ὡς καλοὶ οἰκονόμοι ποικίλης χάριτος 
it serving, as good stewards of [the] various grace 


θεοῦ" 11 εἴ τις λαλεῖ, ὡς λόγια θεοῦ" εἴ τις διακονεῖ, ὡς 
of God. If anyone speaks— as oracles ofGod; if anyone serves— as 
ἐξ ἰσχύος ἧς χορηγεῖ ὁ θεός: ἵνα ἐν πᾶσιν δοξάζηται ὁ 
of strength which *supplies *God; that in all things may be glorified 
θεὸς διὰ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ, ᾧ ἐστιν ἡ δόξα Kai TO κράτος 
God through Jesus Christ, towhom is the glory and the might 
sic τοὺς αἰῶνας THY αἰώνων. ἀμήν. 
to the ages ofthe ages. Amen, 
12 ᾿Αγαπητοί, μὴ-.ξενίζεσθε rH ἐν ὑμῖν πυρώσει 
Beloved, take notas strange the *amongst *you “fire [*of*persecution] 
πρὸς πειρασμὸν ὑμῖν γινομένῃ, wc ἕένου ὑμῖν 
for trial to you [which is] taking place, asif a strange thing to you 


συμβαίνοντος" 13 ἀλλὰ ἱκαθὸ κοινωνεῖτε τοῖς τοῦ χρισ- 
[18] happening; but according as ye haveshare in the 30 


- ΄ , wv ΝΆ ~ ? , ~ , 
τοῦ παθήμασιν, χαίρετε, ἵνα Kai ἐν τῇ ἀποκαλύψει τῆς δόξης 


3Christ “sufferings, rejoice, thatalso in the revelation of *glory 
αὐτοῦ χαρῆτε ἀγαλλιώμενοι. 14 εἰ ὀνειδίζεσθε ἐν 

*his ye mayrejoice exulting. If yeare reproached in [the] 
ὀνόματι χοιστοῦ, μακάριοι" ὅτι τὸ τῆς δόξης" καὶ 


name of Christ, of glory and 


τὸ τοῦ θεοῦ πνεῦμα ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς ἀναπαύεται" “κατὰ.μὲν. αὐτοὺς 
the of*God ‘Spirit upon you rests ; on their part 
βλασφημεῖται, κατὰ.δὲ ὑμᾶς δοξάζεται." 15 μὴ.γάρ τις 
he 18 blasphemed, but on your part he is glorified. Assuredly “not “anyone 
ὑμῶν πασχέτω ὡς φονεύς, ἢ κλέπτης, ἢ κακοποιός, ἢ ὡς 
*of Syou ᾿Ιοὺ βυ 8 Ὁ as ἃ murderer, or thief, or evil doer, or as 


χἀλλοτριοεπίσκοπος." 16 εἰ δὲ we χριστιανός, μὴ αἰσχυ- 
overlooker of other people’s matters; butif as achristian, ποῦ ‘let *him 


blessed [are ye]; because the [spirit] 


° — τὰς LTTrAwW. 


γυσμιοῦ Murmuring LTTraw. 
μὲν to end of verse LTTrA. 


Ρ — δὲ TTrA. 4 + ἡ EG. τ καλύπτει COVerS LTTTAW, 
τ καθὼς ἘΞ. YY + καὶ δυνάμεως and of power L. 


x ἀλλοτριεπίσκοπος LTTr. 


Paya 


W — κατὰ 


IV, V. i EPBTER, 
γέσθω, δοξαζέτω.δὲ τὸν θεὸν ἔν τῷ μέρει" τούτῳ. 17 ὅτι 
be ashamed, but let him glorify God in ?respect this. Because 


ὁ καιρὸς τοῦ ἄρξασθαι τὸ κρίμα ἀπὸ τοῦ οἴκου τοῦ θεοῦ" 
the time([for] *to*have *begun’the*judgment from the house of God 
εἰ δὲ πρῶτον ad ἡμῶν, TL TO τέλος τῶν ἀπειθούντων 
{iscome]; θα 1 first from us, whatthe end ofthose disobeying 
τῷ τοῦ θεοῦ εὐαγγελίῳ ; 18 καὶ εἰ ὁ δίκαιος μόλις owerat, 
the 308 ‘God ‘glad*tidings? And iftherighteous with difficulty is saved, 
ὁ ἀσεβὴς Kai Σ ἁμαρτωλὸς ποῦ φανεῖται; 19 ὥστε καὶ 
*the *ungodly and ®sinner lwhere ?shall appear ? Wherefore also 
ol πάσχοντες κατὰ τὸ θέλημα τοῦ θεοῦ, "ὡς" πιστῷ 
they who suffer according tothe will of God as toa faithful 
κτίστῃ παρατιθέσθωσαν rac.puyac.éavToy' ἐν “ἀγαθοποιΐᾳ. 
Creator let them commit their souls in well doing. 
5 Πρεσβυτέρους 4 “τοὺς" ἐν ὑμῖν παρακαλῶ ὁ foup- 
Elders who [are] among you ITexhort ὑπὸ [ἃ] a 
πρεσβύτερος. καὶ μάρτυς τῶν τοῦ χριστοῦ παθημάτων, ὁ 
fellow elder and witness ofthe 7o0f *the *Christ 1sufferings, who 


καὶ τῆς μελλούσης ἀποκαλύπτεσθαι δόξης κοινωνός; 2 ποι- 
also of the Z2about Sto *be Srevealed 1glory [am] partaker: shep- 


μάνατε τὸ ἐν ὑμῖν ποίμνιον τοῦ θεοῦ, ξἐπισκοποῦντες" μὴ 
herd the *among *you flock ?of *God, exercising oversight not 
ἀναγκαστῶς, add’ ἑκουσίως" μηδὲ αἰσχροκερδῶς, ἀλλὰ προ- 
by constraint, bat willingly ; not for base gain, but = readi- 
θύμως" 3 μηδ᾽ ὡς κατακυριεύοντες τῶν κλήρων, ἀλλὰ 


ly; not as exercising lordship over [your] possessions, but 
τύποι γινόμενοι τοῦ ποιμνίου. 4 καὶ φανερωθέντος 
patterns being of the flock, And *having *been *manifested 


τοῦ ἀρχιποίμενος, κομιεῖσθε τὸν ἀμαράντινον τῆς δόξης 
‘the chief “shepherd, ye shall receive the unfading 7of “glory 
στέφανον. 

1crown. 

5 Ὁμοίως, νεώτεροι, ὑποτάγητε πρεσβυτέροις" πάντες 

Likewise, [ye] younger [ones], besubject to([the]elder(ones], all 

δὲ ἀλλήλοις Κὑποτασσόμενοι" τὴν ταπεινοφροσύνην ἐγκομβώ- 
*andonetoanother being subject humility ‘bind 
σασθε" ὅτι ὁ θεὸς ὑπερηφάνοις ἀντιτάσσεται, ταπεινοῖς 
7on; because God [the] proud sets himself against, *to [*the]*humble 


δὲ δίδωσιν χάριν. 6 ταπεινώθητε οὖν ὑπὸ THY κραταιὰν 
therefore under the 


but gives grace, Be humbled mighty 

ἰχεῖρα! τοῦ θεοῦ, ἵνα ὑμᾶς ὑψώσῃ ἐν καιρῷ" 7 πᾶσαν 
hand of God, that you he may exalt in [due] time; all 

τὴν. μέριμναν. ὑμῶν "ἐπιῤῥίψαντες" ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν, ὅτι αὐτῷ 


your care having cast upon him, because with him 


μέλει περὶ ὑμῶν. 8 vy Ware, γρηγορήσατε, °Ore' ὁ ἀντίδικος 
thereiscare about you. Be sober, watch, because adversary 
ὑμῶν διάβολος, we λέων ὠρυόμενος, περιπατεῖ, ζητῶν Priva! 
tyour [the] devil, as a 7lion roaring, goes about, seeking whom 
“καταπίῃ"" 9 ᾧ ἀντίστητε στερεοὶ τῇ πίστει, εἰδότες τὰ 
he may swallow up. Whom resist, firm in faith, knowing the 
αὐτὰ τῶν παθημάτων ἐν * κόσμῳ ὑμῶν ἀδελφότητι 
same sufferings 7which [*is]*®in [!°the] '! world ‘in ‘your *brotherhood 


Gol 


man suffer as a Chris 
tian, let him «ποῦ be 
ashamed ; but let him 
glorify God on this 
behalf. 17 For the time 
is come that judgment 
must begin at the 
house of God: and if 
tt first begin at us, what 
shall the end be of 
them that obey not the 
gospel of God? 18 And 
if the righteousscarce- 
ly be saved, where 
shall the ungodly and 
the sinner appear? 
19 Wherefore let them 
that suffer according 
to the will of God 
commit the keeping of 
their souls to him iz 
well doing, as unto a 
faithful Creator. 

V. The elders which 
are among you I ex- 
hort, who am also an 
elder, and a witness 
of the sufferings of 
Christ, and.also a par- 
taker of the glory that 
shall be _ revealed: 
2 Feed the flock of 
God which is among 
you, taking the over- 
sight thereof, not by 
constraint, but wil- 
lingly ; not for filthy 
lucre, but of a ready 
mind; 3 neither as 
being lords over God’s 
heritage, but being en- 
samples to the fiock, 
4 And when the chief 
Shepherd shall appear, 
ye shall receive a 
crown of glory that 
fadeth not away. 

5 Likewise, ye young- 
er, submit yourselves 
unto the elder. Yea, 
all of you be subject 
one to another, and be 
clothed with humility: 
for God resisteth the 
proud, and = giveth 
grace to the humble, 
6 Humble yourselves 
therefore under the 
mighty hand of God, 
that he may exalt you 
in due time: 7 casting 
all your care upon him; 
for he careth for you, 
8 Be sober, be vigilant; 
because your adver- 
sary the devil, as a 
roaring lion, walketh 
about, seeking whom 
hemay devour: 9whom 
resist stedfast in the 
faith, knowing that 
the same afflictions are 


Υ ὀνόματι NaMe LTTrAw. z+ othe. ® — ὡς LTTrA. 
© ἀγαθοποιΐαις LW. 4 + οὖν then Lrtra. © — τοὺς LTrA. 
σκοποῦντες T[A].  » aAAaTTrA. 
μενοι LTTrAW. 1 χεῖραν τ. 
ψαντες LTTrA. °— ὅτι GLTTrAW. 
καταπίειν Tr. t+ τῷ the Trr. 


Ρ τινὰ SoMe One L. 


2 ; f ouv- τ. 
i+ κατὰ θεόν according to God uttr. Κ 
m + ἐπισκοπῆς (read in time of visitation) τ. 


Ὁ αὐτῶν LTTrAW. 

& — ἐπι- 
— ὑποτασσό- 
2 ἐπιρί- 


4 καταπιεῖν to swallow up LTA; 


602 


accomplished in your 
brethren that are in 
the world. 10 But the 
God of all grace, who 
hath called us unto his 
eternal glory by Christ 
Jesus, after that ye 
have suffered a while, 
make you perfect, sta- 
blish, strengthen, set- 
tle you. 11 To him be 

lory and dominion 

or ever andever. A- 
men. 


12 By Silvanus, a 
faithful brother unto 
ou, as I suppose, I 
ae written briefly, 
exhorting, and testify- 
ing that this is the true 
grace of God wherein 
ye stand.13 The church 
that is at Babylon, 
elected together with 
you, saluteth you ; and 
so doth Marcus my son. 
14 Greet ye one an- 
other with a kiss of 
charity. Peace be with 
you all that are in 
Christ Jesus, Amen. 


HEEE ON 8. ᾿ς 


ἐπιτελεῖσθαι. 10 ὁ. δὲ θεὸς πάσης χάριτος, ὁ καλέσας 
are being “accomplished. Butthe God ofall grace, who called 
δὴ μᾶς" εἰς τὴν αἰώνιον αὐτοῦ δόξαν ἐν χριστῷ “Ιησοῦ," ὀλίγον 
us to 7eternal ‘his glory in Christ Jesus, alittle while 
παθόντας, αὐτὸς “καταρτίσαι ὑμᾶς," “στηρίξαι, σθενώ- 
{ye] having suffered, "himself *may perfect you, mayheestablish, may he 
σαι, *Oeuekwwoa'' 11] αὐτῷ Τὴ δόξα καὶ" τὸ κράτος εἰς 
strengthen, may he found[you]: tohim{[be]the glory and the might, to 
τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. 
the ages ofthe ages. Amen, 
12 Διὰ Σιλουανοῦ ὑμῖν *rov" πιστοῦ ἀδελφοῦ, we λογίζο- 
ΒΥ Silvanus, *to*you ‘the faithful brother, as Lreckon, 
μαι, δι. ὀλίγων ἔγραψα, παρακαλῶν καὶ ἐπιμαρτυρῶν ταύτην 
briefly wrote, exhorting and testifying this 
ἀληθῆ χάριν τοῦ θεοῦ, εἰς ἣν ἑστήκατε." 18 ᾿Ασπά- 
grace of God, in which γα stand. "Sa- 
ζεται ὑμᾶς ἡ ἐν Βαβυλῶνι συνεκλεκτή; καὶ Μάρκος 
lutes ou ‘she δίῃ ®Babylon 7elected *with [*yon], and Mark 
€ cv ? , ? , ? U > ie 
ὁιυϊός. μου. 14 ἀσπάσασθε ἀλλήλους ἐν φιλήματι ἀγάπης. 
my son. Salute one another with akiss of love. 
εἰρήνη ὑμῖν πᾶσιν τοῖς ἐν χριστῷ Ὁ Ἰησοῦ." “ἀμήν." 
Peace [be] withyou all who [arejin Christ Jesus. Amen, 
ἀπέτρου ἐπιστολὴ καθολικὴ πρώτη." 
 κασολικῇ πρωτή. 
*Of*Peter “Epistle General First. 


εἶναι 
to be [the] true 


ἝἜΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ TETPOY KAOOAIKH AEYTEPA." 


sEPISTLE 


SIMON Peter, a ser- 
yant and an apostle of 
Jesus Christ, to them 
that have obtained like 
precious faith with us 
through the righteous- 
ness of God and our 
Saviour Jesus Christ: 
2 Grace and peace be 
multiplied unto you 
through the know- 
ledge of God, and of 
Jesus our Lord, 


3 According as his 
divine power hath giv- 
en unto us all things 
that pertain unto life 
and godliness, through 
the knowledge of him 
that hath called us 
to glory and virtue: 
4 whereby are given 
unto us _ exceeding 
great and precious 
promises: that by these 
ye might be partakers 
of the divine nature, 
having escaped the 


‘OF °PETER 2GENERAL SECOND. 


s 


fSYMEQN" Πέτρος δοῦλος καὶ ἀπόστολος ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, 
Simeon Peter, bondman and apostle of Jesus Christ, 


τοῖς ἰσότιμον ἡμῖν λαχοῦσιν πίστιν ἐν δικαιο- 
to those who 211Κ6 *precious with *us ‘obtained ‘faith through[the] right- 


σύνῃ τοῦ.θεοῦ. ἡμῶν Kai σωτῆρος 8 ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ" 2 χάρις 


eousness of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ : Grace 
ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη πληθυνθείη ἐν ἐπιγνώσει τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ 
toyou and peace bemultiplied in([the] knowledge of God, and 


᾿Ιησοῦ τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡ μῶν. 
of Jesus our Lord. 
3 Ὡς πάντα ἡμῖν τῆς θείας δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ τὰ 
As 5411 *things *to 7us 2divine *power *his }°which [''pertain] 
πρὸς ζωὴν καὶ εὐσέβειαν δεδωρημένης, διὰ τῆς ἐπιγνώσεως 


120 13116 Mand piety 485 °given, through the knowledge 
τοῦ καλέσαντος ἡμᾶς ida δόξης Kai ἀρετῆς, 4 δι ὧν 
of him who called us by glory and _ virtue, through which 


τὰ Ἐμέγιστα ἡμῖν καὶ τίμια! ἐπαγγέλματα δεδώρηται, ἵνα 
Sthe greatest “ἴο ὅὰβ "δπᾶ *precious 2°promises the *has*given, that 

διὰ τούτων γένησθε θείας κοινωνοὶ φύσεως; ἀπο- 
through these ye may become of [*the] *divine *partakers nature, hav- 


5 ὑμᾶς you LTTrAW. 
π στηρίξει, σθενώσει will establish, will strengthen GLrTraw. 
GTAW; — θεμελιώσαι LTr. 
Ὁ — Ἰησοῦ LTTrA. 


ἼΘ᾽ LITrA. 
létpov a’ Tra. 


’ καταρτίσει will perfect [you] LTTraw. 
x θεμελιώσει Will found 
2— τοῦ L. 8 στῆτε Stand 

ἀ--- the subscription EGLTW ; 


t — Ἰησοῦ [τι]. 


Υ — ἡ δόξα καὶ LTTrA. 
© — ἀμήν GLTTrA. 


6. + τοῦ ἀποστόλου the apostle &; — καθολικὴ G; Πέτρου β΄ LTAW ; Πέτρου ἐπιστολὴ β΄ Tr. 


[Σίμων Simon iL. 


own glory and virtue LTTraw. 


& + ἡμῶν our (Saviour) Ε. 


b+trat. i ἰδίᾳ δόξῃ καὶ ἀρετῇ by [his] 
k μέγιστα Kal τίμια ἡμῖν LITA; τίμια ἡμῖν καὶ μέγιστα τ. 


PETER. 
ἐπιθυμίᾳ φθορᾶς. 5 καὶ 
‘lust ‘corruption. ‘also 


παρεισενέγκαν- 
Shaving ‘brought *°in **be- 


i. II 

, ~ ? ] , ? 
φυγόντες THC ev KOO, ἐν 
ingescaped the 7in [the] ‘world ‘through 


MajTo.rovTo' ὃδεέ, σπουδὴν πᾶσαν 
®for *this }°very ‘treason 7but, ‘diligence 7411 
TEC, ἐπιχορηγήσατε ἐν τῇ. πίστει. ὑμῶν τὴν ἀρετήν, ἐν.δὲ TY ἀρετῇ 
sides, supply ye in your faith virtue, andin virtue 
τὴν γνῶσιν, 6 ἐν.δὲ τῇ γνώσει τὴν ἐγκράτειαν, ἐν. δὲ τῇ ἐγκρα- 


knowledge, andin knowledge self-control, and in self-con- 

, A ’ὔ ~ ~ ? A 
τείᾳ THY ὑπομονήν, ἐν.δὲ τῇ ὑπομονῇ τὴν εὐσέβειαν, 7 ἐν. δὲ 
trol endurance, andin endurance piety, and in 


mond / A ~ ‘ 4 
τῇ εὐσεβείᾳ τὴν φιλαδελφίαν, ἐν.δὲ τῇ φιλαδελφίᾳ THY ἀγάπην. 
piety brotherly love, and in brotherly love love: 
~ \ tow nt ΄, il \ , 2 
8 ταῦτα.γὰρ ὑμῖν "ὑπάρχοντα' καὶ πλεονάζοντα, οὐκ 
for these things *in *you being and abounding ([*to *be] neither 
ἀργοὺς οὐδὲ ἀκάρπους καθίστησιν εἰς τὴν TOU.KUpLOU-nUwY 
Sidle nor ®unfruitful lmake (*you] as to the 2of Sour *Lord 
"Inoov χριστοῦ ἐπίγνωσιν. 9 ᾧ.γὰρ μὴ-πάρεστιν ταῦτα 
®Jesus Christ lknowledge; for with whom are not present these things 
τυφλός ἐστιν, μυωπάζων, λήθην. λαβὼν τοῦ καθαρισμοῦ τῶν 


blind heis, shortsighted, having forgotten the purification 
πάλαι αὐτοῦ “ἁμαρτιῶν. 10 Διὸ μᾶλλον, ἀδελφοί, σπου- 
*of δο]Ιά ‘of 2η15 3sins Wherefore rather, brethren, be dili- 
δάσατε βεβαίαν ὑμῶν τὴν κλῆσιν καὶ ἐκλογὴν “ποιεῖσθαι" 
gent 7sure syour *calling ‘Sand “election 1to 7make, 
ταῦτα.γὰρ ποιοῦντες οὐμὴ πταίσητε ποτε. 11 οὕτως 
for these things doing inno wise shall ye stumble at any time. ?Thus 


γὰρ πλουσίως ἐπιχορηγηθήσεται ὑμῖν ἡ εἴσοδος εἰς τὴν aiw- 
for Srichly ’shall *be supplied toyouthe entrance into the eter- 
νιον βασιλείαν τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν Kai σωτῆρος ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ. 
nal kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 
12 Aw τοὐκ.ἀμελήσω" ὑμᾶς ἀεὶ" ὑπομιμνήσκειν 
Wherefore I willnot neglect “you ‘always ‘to*put in remembrance 
περὶ τούτων, καίπερ εἰδότας, καὶ ἐστηριγμένους ἐν 
concerning these things, although knowing [them] and having been established in 
~ ΓΖ ? ΄ ΄ A « ~ ? re 2 Sey J 
TH παρούσῃ ἀληθείᾳ. 13 δίκαιον.δὲ ἡγοῦμαι, ἐφ᾽ ὅσον εἰμὶ ἐν 


the present truth. But right lLesteemit, aslongas Iam in 
τούτῳ τῷ σκηνώματι, διεγείρειν ὑμᾶς ἐν ὑπομνήσει" 
this tabernacle, tostirup you by putting[you]inremembrance, 


14 εἰδὼς ὅτι ταχινή ἐστιν ἡ ἀπόθεσις τοῦ. σκηνώματός μου, 
knowing that speedily is the putting off of my tabernacle 
καθὼς καὶ ὁ.κύριος.ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦς χριστὸς ἐδήλωσέν μοι. 
{to be}, as also our Lord Jesus Christ signified tome; 
15 σπουδάσω.δὲ Kai ἑκάστοτε ἔχειν ὑμᾶς μετὰ 
but I will be diligent also at every time for you to have [it in your power] after 
τὴν. ἐμὴν ἔξοδον τὴν τούτων μνήμην. ποιεῖσθαι. 16 οὐ.γὰρ 
my departure 5these *things 'to 7have *in *remembrance. For not 
σεσοφισμένοις μύθοις ἐξακολουθήσαντες ἐγνωρίσαμεν ὑμῖν τὴν 
“cleverly-imagined *fables *having followed *out we made known to you the 
τοῦ.κυρίου. ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ δύναμιν Kai παρουσίαν, ἀλλ᾽ 
“of Sour “Lord 7Jesus *Christ lpower 7and coming, but 
ἐπόπται γενηθέντες rijcéxeivov μεγαλειότητος. 17 λαβὼν 
eye-witnesses having been of his majesty. “Having “received 
παρὰ θεοῦ πατρὸς τιμὴν Kai δόξαν, φωνῆς ἐνεχθεί- 
from God([the] Father honour and glory, 7a *voice *having “been 


χὰ 


for 


603 


corruption that is in 
the world through lust, 
5 And beside this, giv- 
ing all diligence, add 
to your faith virtue; 
and to virtue know= 
ledge ; 6and to know- 
ledge temperance ; and 
to temperance pati- 
ence ; and to patience 
godliness; 7 and to 
godliness brotherly 
kindness; and to bro- 
therly kindness cha- 
rity. 8 For if these 
things be in you, and 
abound, they make 
you that ye shall nei- 
ther be barren nor un- 
fruitful in the know- 
ledge of our Lord Je= 
sus Christ. 9 But he 
that lacketh these 
things is blind, and 
cannot see afar off, 
and hath forgotten 
that he was purged 
from his old sins, 
10 Wherefore the ra- 
ther, brethren, give 
diligence to make your 
calling and election 
sure: for if ye do these 
things, ye shall never 
fall: 11 for so an en- 
trance shall be mini- 
stered unto you abun- 
dantly into the ever- 
lasting kingdom of our 
Lord and Saviour Je- 
sus Christ. 


12 Wherefore I will 
not be negligent to put 
you always inremem- 
brance of these things, 
though ye know them, 
and be established in 
the present truth. 
13 Yea, [think it meet, 
as long as I am in this 
tabernacle, to stir you 
up byputting yowin re- 
membrance; 14 know- 
ing that shortly I 
must put off this my 
tabernacle, even as our 
Lord Jesus Christ hath 
shewed me, 15 More- 
over I will endeavour 
that ye may be able 
after my decease to 
have these things al- 
ways in remembrance, 
16 For we have not 
followed cunningly 
devised fables, when 
we made known unto 
you the power and 
coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, but were 
eyewitnesses of | his 
majesty. 17 For he re- 
ceived from God the 
Father honour and 
glory, when therecame 
such a voice to him 
from the excellent 
glory, This is my be 


1+ τῷ the LTTr. τὰ αὐτοὶ (read but ye also) L. 
© ἁμαρτημάτων GTTr. 


4 ποιεῖσθε ye make L. τ μελλήσω I will take care LTTraw. 


2 παρόντα being present L. 
P + ἵνα διὰ τῶν καλῶν ὑμῶν ἔργων that by your good works L, 
5 ἀεὶ ὑμᾶς GTITAW. 


604 


loved Son, in whom I 
am well pleased. 18And 
this voice which came 
from heaven we heard, 
when we were with 
him in the holy mount. 
19 We have also a more 
sure word of prophecy; 
whereunto ye do well 
that ye take heed, as 
unto a light that 
shineth ina dark place, 
until the day dawn, 
and the day star a- 
rise in your hearts: 
20 knowing this first, 
that no prophecy of 
the scripture is of any 
private interpretation, 
21 For the prophecy 
came not in old time 
by the will of man: 
but holy men of God 
spake as they were 
moved by the Holy 
Ghost. 


11. But there were 
false prophets also a- 
mong the people, even 
as there shall be false 
teachers among you, 
who privily shall bring 
in damnable heresies, 
even denying the Lord 
that bought them, 
and bring upon them- 
selves swift destruc- 
tion. 2 And many shall 
follow their pernicious 
ways; by reason of 
whom the way of truth 
shall be evil spoken 
of. 3 Andthrough co- 
vetousness shall they 
with feigned words 
make merchandise of 
you : whose judgment 
now of a long time 
lingereth not, and 
their damnation slum- 
bereth not. 4 For if 
God spared not the 
angels that sinned, 
but cast them down to 
hell, and _ delivered 
them into chains of 
darkness, to be reserv- 
ed unto judgment ; 
5 and spared not the 
old world, but saved 
Noah the eighth per- 
son, ὃ preacher of 
righteousness, bring- 
ing in the flood upon 
the world of the un- 
godly ; 6 and turning 
the cities of Sodom and 
Gomorrha into ashes 
condemned them with 
an overthrow, making 
them an ensample unto 
those that after should 
live ungodly; 7 and 
delivered just Lot, 
vexed with the filthy 
conversation of the 


WET Por Bp. I, ti 


σης αὐτῷ τοιᾶσδε ὑπὸ τῆς μεγαλοπρεποῦς δόξης, ἸοΟῦτός 
Sbrought 7to*him ‘such by the very excellent glory: This 
ἐστιν O.vidc.uou ο ἀγαπητός," εἰς ὃν ἐγὼ εὐδόκησα. 18 Kai 
is my Son the beloved, in whom I have found delight. And 
ταύτην THY φωνὴν ἡμεῖς ἠκούσαμεν ἐξ οὐρανοῦ ἐνεχθεῖσαν, 
this voice we heard "from “heaven ‘brought, 
‘ > ~ n” > ~ vr ~ € , Il »»Ρ» 
σὺν αὐτῷ ὄντες ἐν τῷ Opa τῷ ἁγίῳ." 19 καὶ ἔχομεν βεβαι- 
5with Shim ‘being on the *mount *holy. and we have more 
ότερον TOY προφητικὸν λόγον, ᾧ καλῶς ποιεῖτε προσέχοντες, 
sure the _ prophetic word, towhich *well ‘ye do taking heed, 
we λύχνῳ φαίνοντι ἐν αὐχμηρῷ τόπῳ, ἕως.οὗ ἡμέρα διαυγάσῃ, 
as toalamp shining in anobscure place, until day should dawn, 
καὶ φωσφόρος ἀνατείλῃ ἐν ταῖς.καρδίαις. ὑμῶν: 20 τοῦτο 
and [the] morning star should arise in your hearts ; this 
πρῶτον γινώσκοντες, OTL πᾶσα προφητεία γραφῆς ἰδίας 
first knowing, that ?any “prophecy ‘of ‘scripture 7of "105 °own 
(lit. every) 
3 , ᾽ / > ‘ ΄ ? , > , 
ἐπιλύσεως ov.yiverat. 21 οὐ.γὰρ θελήματι ἀνθρώπου ἠνέχθη 
1°interpretation “is ‘not, for not by [the] will of man was*brought 
“zoré προφητεία," “ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ πνεύματος ἁγίου φερό- 
3at*any®time ‘prophecy, but, Spy [*the] Spirit ®SHoly ‘being 
μένοι ἐλάλησαν Yot" ἐἄἅγιοι! ἃ θεοῦ ἄνθρωποι. 
borne, ᾿ἜΡΟΚΘ "the ὅΠΟΙΥ ‘of **?God *men. 
? ‘ A ‘ ~ > ~ ~ ᾿ ‘ 
2 ᾿Ἐγένοντο.δὲ καὶ ψευδοπροφῆται ἐν τῷ aw, ὡς Kai 
But there were also false prophets among the people, as also 
ἐν ὑμῖν ἔσονται ψευδοδιδάσκαλοι, οἵτινες τταρεισάξουσιν 
among you will be false teachers, who _ will bring in stealthily 
αἱρέσεις ἀπωλείας, Kai τὸν ἀγοράσαντα αὐτοὺς δεσπότην ap- 
*sects ‘destructive, and *the ‘*who*bought ‘them 3Master 1de- 
VOUMEVOL, ἐπάγοντες ἑαυτοῖς ταχινὴν ἀπώλειαν" 2 καὶ πολλοὶ 
nying, bringing upon themselves swift destruction ; and many 
? , ? ~ ~ b J ΄ Il ? τι «ς ὁδὸ 
ἐξακολουθήσουσιν αὐτῶν ταῖς Ῥἀπωλείαις." δι οὺς ἡ ὁδὸς 
will follow out their destructive ways, through whom the way 
τῆς ἀληθείας βλασφημηθήσεται 8 καὶ ἐν πλεονεξίᾳ πλασ- 
ofthe truth will be evil spoken of. And through covetousness with 
τοῖς λόγοις ὑμᾶς ἐμπορεύσονται. οἷς τὸ κρίμα ἔκπαλαι 
well-turned words you they willmakegainof:forwhom judgment of old 
οὐκ. ἀργεῖ, καὶ ἡ-ἀπώλεια.αὐτῶν οὐ-νυστάζει. 4 ἘΕῤ γὰρ ὁ θεὸς 
15 ηοῦ 1416, and their destruction slumbers not, For if God 
ἀγγέλων ἁμαρτησάντων οὐκ.ἐφείσατο, ἀλλὰ “σειραῖς" 
{the] angels who sinned spared not, but ®to *chains 
ζόφου ταρταρώσας παρέδωκεν 
100 8 11darkness ‘having οαβὺ [Sthem] *to δ °deepest abyss delivered [them] 
εἰς κρίσιν “τετηρημένους" 5 καὶ ἀρχαίου κόσμου οὐκ 
for judgment having been kept; and [the] ancient world *not 
ἐφείσατο, “ἀλλ᾽ ὄγδοον Νῶε δικαιοσύνης κήρυκα ἐφύ- 
‘spared, but [Sthe]*eighth 7Noe 7of righteousness ‘aherald ‘pre- 
λαξἕεν, κατακλυσμὸν Koo ἀσεβῶν ἐπάξας. 6 καὶ 
served, [the] floodupon [the] world of [the] ungodly having brought in; and 
πόλεις Σοδόμων καὶ Toudppac τεφρώσας κατα- 
[the] cities of Sodom and Gomorrha having reduced toashes with an 
στροφῇ κατέκρινεν, ὑπόδειγμα μελλόντων ἀσε- 
overthrow condemned [them], ΞΔ *example [*to *those] 7being®about *to *°live 


τ Ὁ vids μου ὃ ἀγαπητός μου οὗτός ἐστιν My Son my beloved thisis a. ¥ ἁγίῳ 
ἔξει ΤΑ. » προφητεία ποτέ Tra. χα ἀλλὰ TTrAW. Υ — οἱ GLTTrAW. : ἀπὸ 
(read nen from God) τὰ. 8. - τοῦ 1. Ὁ ἀσελγείαις licentiousnesses GLTTrAW. © σιροῖς 


to dens LT ; σειροῖς to dens Tra. 
to keep, to be punished 1,. 


4 τῃρουμένους to be kept Grtraw; κολαζομένους τηρεῖν 
ε ἀλλὰ TTrA. 


II. Ty (PAR Vn 

Bev τεθεικώς" 7 καὶ δίκαιον Λώτ, καταπονούμενον ὑπὸ τῆς 
“tungodly *having “set; and righteous Lot, oppressed by the 
τῶν ἀθέσμων ἐν ἀσελγείᾳ ἀναστροφῆς, éppvcaro*" 8 βλέμ- 
*of *the “lawless in “licentiousness ‘conduct he delivered, (through 
ματι yap καὶ ἀκοῃ 80" δίκαιος, Ὀἐγκατοικῶν! ἐν αὐτοῖς, 


seeing ‘for and hearing, the righteous [man], dwelling among them, 
ἡμέραν ἐξ ἡμέρας γψυχὴν δικαίαν ἀνόμοις ἔργοις 
day by day [15] *soul Srighteous *with “their] 7lawless *works 


ἐβασάνιζεν: 9 οἷδεν κύριος εὐσεβεῖς ἐκ Ἱπειρασμοῦ" 


4tormented,) *1knows [*the]*°Lord [how the] pious outof temptation 


ῥύεσθαι. ἀδίκους.δὲ εἰς ἡμέραν κρίσεως κολαζομένους 
to deliver, and [the] unrighteous to aday ofjudgment “to *be Spunished 
τηρεῖν" 10 μάλιστα.δὲ τοὺς ὀπίσω σαρκὸς ἐν ἐπιθυμίᾳ 
to *keep; and specially those who after [the] flesh in [the] lust 


μιασμοῦ πορευομένους, Kai κυριότητος καταφρονοῦντας. 
of pollution walk, and lordship despise. (They 


Τολμηταί, αὐθάδεις, δόξας οὐ-.τρέμουσιν βλασφημοῦντες" 


are] daring, self-willed; 7glories ‘they “tremble*not “speaking ‘evil of; 
11 ὕπου ἄγγελοι ἰσχύϊ καὶ δυνάμει μείζονες ὄντες, οὐ φέ- 

where angels *in*strength®and ‘power greater ‘being, "ποῦ “do 
povow Kar αὐτῶν "παρὰ κυρίῳ! βλάσφημον κρίσιν. 
bring against them, before [the] Lord, a railing charge. 
12 οὗτοι.δέ, ὡς ἄλογα ζῶα φυσικὰ γεγενημένα" εἰς ἅλω- 

But these, as “irrational animals ‘natural born for cap- 
ow καὶ φθοράν, ἐν ο΄Σς ἀγνοοῦσιν ββλασφημοῦντες, ἐν 


ture and corruption, *in *what *they °are 7ignorant °of 
τῃ-φθορᾷ. αὐτῶν ™karagbapnoovra,! 13 
their corruption shall utterly perish, being about to receive [the] 
μισθὸν ἀδικίας, ἡδονὴν ἡγούμενοι τὴν ἐν.-ἡμέρᾳ τρυφήν, 
reward of unrighteousness;*pleasure ‘esteeming ephemeral 7indulgence ; 
σπῖλοι καὶ μῶμοι, ἐντρυφῶντες ἐν ταῖς "ἀπάταις" αὐτῶν, συν- 
spots andblemishes, Iluxuriating in *deceits ‘their, feast- 
ευωχούμενοι ὑμῖν, 14 ὀφθαλμοὺς ἔχοντες μεστοὺς μοιχαλίδος 
ing with you ; eyes having full of an adulteress, 
καὶ θἀκαταπαύστους" ἁμαρτίας, δελεάζοντες ψυχὰς ἀστηρίκ- 
and that cease not from sin, alluring souls unestablish- 
τους, καρδίαν γεγυμνασμένην Ῥπλεονεξίαις" ἔχοντες, κατάρας 
ed; 24 sheart *exercised Sin craving ‘having, °of °curse 
, 4 λ , I r 4 " > θ ~ « ὃ ’ > λ vA θ 
τέκνα, 1ὃ “καταλιπόντες" ττὴν᾿ εὐθεῖαν odov, ἐπλανήθησαν, 
7children ; having left 7868 straight way, they went astray, 
ἐξακολουθήσαντες TH ὁδῷ τοῦ Βαλαὰμ Tov Boodp, ὃς 
having followed in the way of Balaam, [son] of Bosor, who[the] 
4 > , > , ξ 1» ? , 
μισθὸν ἀδικίας ἠγάπησεν, 16 ἔλεγξιν.δὲ ἔσχεν ἰδίας 
reward of unrighteousness loved ; but reproof had of his own 
παρανομίας" ὑποζύγιον ἄφωνον, ἐν ἀνθρώπου φωνῇ 
wickedness, [the] *beast *of *burden dumb, in man’s voice 
φθεγξάμενον, ἐκώλυσεν THY τοῦ προφήτου παραφρονίαν. 
speaking, forbade the of *the ‘prophet madness, 
17 οὗτοί εἰσιν πηγαὶ ἄνυδροι, "νεφέλαι" ὑπὸ λαίλαπος ἐλαυ- 


1speaking “evil, in 


KOMLOU [EVOL 


These are fountains withoutwater, clouds by storm being 
γνόμεναι, οἷς ὁ ζόφος τοῦ σκότους ‘eic.aidva' τετήρηται. 
driven, to whom the gloom of darkness for ever is kept. 

f ἐρύσατο Tra. & — ὃ (read [the)) L. h ἐν- T. 


k — παρὰ κυρίῳ L[Tr]. 
tional animals, born naturally) LtTraw. 
2 ἀγάπαις “love “feasts Ltr. 
9 καταλείποντες leaving T. 
GLTTraW. 


° ἀκαταπάστους insatiable (for sin) L. 
τ — τὴν (read [the]) GLTTraw. 
t — εἰς αἰῶνα LTTrA. 


605 


wicked: 8 (for that 
righteous man dwell- 
ing among them, in 
seeing and hearing, 
vexed his righteous 
soul from day to day 
with their wiul 
deeds ;) 9 the Lord 
knoweth how to de- 
liver the godly out of 
temptations, and to 
reserve the unjust un- 
tothe day of judgment 
to be punished : 10 but 
chiefly them that walk 
after the flesh in the 
lust of uncleanness, 
and despise govern- 
ment. Presumptuous 
are they, selfwilled, 
they are not afraid to 
speak evil of dignities. 
11 Whereas angels, 
which are greater in 
power and might 
bring not railing ac- 
cusation against them 
before the Lord. 12 But 
these, as natural 
brute beasts, made to 
be taken and destroy- 
ed, speak evil of the 
things that they un- 
derstand not; and 
shall utterly perish in 
their own corruption ; 
13 and shall receive the 
reward of unright- 
eousness, as they that 
count it pleasure to 
riot in the daytime. 
Spots they are and 
blemishes, sporting 
themselves with their 
own deceivings while 
they feast with you ; 
14 having eyes full of 
adultery, and that 
cannot cease from 
sin ; beguiling unsta- 
ble souls: an heart 
they have exercised 
with covetous practi- 
ces; cursed children: 
15 which have forsaken 
the right way, and are 
gone astray, following 
the way of Balaam tie 
son of Bosor, who lov~ 
ed the wages of un- 
righteousness; 16 but 
was rebuked for his in- 
iquity: the dumb ass 
speaking with man’s 
voice forbad the mad- 
ness of the prophet. 
17 These are wells 
without water, clouds 
that are carried with 
a tempest; to whom 
the mist of darkness 
is reserved for ever. 
18 For when they 
speak great swelling 
words of vanity, they 


1 πειρασμῶν temptations τ. 
| φυσικὰ γεγεννημένα EG ; γεγεννημ. (γεγενημ. T) φυσικὰ (read irra- 
τὸ καὶ φθαρήσονται shall even perish LTTraw. 

P πλεονεξίας GLTTrAW. 
® καὶ ὁμίχλαι and mists 


606 
allure through the 
lusts of the flesh, 


chrough much wanton- 
ness, those that were 
clean escaped from 
them who live in error. 
19 While they promise 
them liberty, they 
themselves are the ser- 
vants of corruption: 
for of whom a man is 
overcome, of the same 
is he brought in bon- 
dage. 20 For if after 
they have escaped the 
pollutions of the world 
through the know- 
ledge of the Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ, 
they are again en- 
tangled therein, and 
overcome, the latter 
end is worse with them 
than the beginning. 
21 For it had been bet- 
ter for them not to 
have known the wsy of 
righteousness, than, 
after they have known 
it, to turn from the 
holy commandment 
delivered unto them. 
22 But it is happened 
unto them according 
to the true proverb, 
The dog zs turned to 
his own vomit again ; 
and the sow that was 
washed to her wallow- 
ing in the mire. 

117. This second e- 
pistle, beloved, I now 
write unto you; in 
both which I stir up 
your pure minds by 
way of remembrance: 
2 that ye may be mind- 
ful of the words which 
were spoken before by 
the holy prophets, and 
of the commandment 
of us the apostles of 
the Lord and Saviour: 
3 knowing this first, 
that there shall come 
in the last days scof- 
fers, walking after 
their own lusts, 4and 
saying, Where is the 
promise of his coming? 
for since the fathers 
fell asleep, all things 
continue as they were 
from the beginning of 
the creation. 5 For 
this they willingly are 
ignorant of, that by 
the word of God the 
heavens were of old, 
and the earth standing 
out of the water and 
in the water : 6 where- 
by the world that then 
was, being overflowed 
with water, perished: 


v + ἐν Ε. 
y — καὶ T[Tr]. 
[things] behind L. 
LTTrA. 


GLYTraw. 


¥ ὀλίγως scarcely GLTTrAW. 
z + ἡμῶν (read our Lord) LT. 


f κυλισμὸν rolling Trra. 
(read in the last days) LTTraw. 
k ἐπιθυμίας αὐτῶν GLTrA. 


ΠΕΊΤΡΟΥ Β. 
« , AY , , , 
18 ὑπέρογκα.γὰρ ματαιότητος φθεγγόμενοι, δελεάζουσιν 
For great swelling [words] of vanity speaking, they allure 
ἐν ἐπιθυμίαις σαρκός, ‘ ἀσελγείαις, τοὺς “ὔντως" 
with [the] desires of [the] flesh, by licentiousnesses, those who indeed 
Xaropuyovrac'! τοὺς ἐν πλάνῳ ἀναστρεφομένους, 19 éhev- 
escaped ἔσο those who7in “error walk, °free- 
θερίαν αὐτοῖς ἐπαγγελλόμενοι, δοῦλοι ὑπάρχοντες 


II, III. 


αὐτοὶ 


dom 5them “promising, themselves *bondmen being 
τῆς φθορᾶς'΄ w-yap τις ἥττηται, τούτῳ Yeai' δε- 
of corruption; for by whom anyone has been subdued, by him also he is 


, ᾽ x ? , ‘ , ~ , 
δούλωται. 20 εἰ γὰρ ἀποφυγόντες τὰ μιάσματα τοῦ κόσμου 


held in bondage. For if having escaped the pollutions of the world 
ἐν ἐπιγνώσει τοῦ κυρίου καὶ σωτῆρος ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, 
through [the] knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, 
τούτοις.δὲ πάλιν ἐμπλακέντες ἡττῶνται, γέγονεν 
but *by *these ‘again "having “been *entangled Sthey *are ᾿βι Ὀατπι64, has become 
αὐτοῖς Ta ἔσχατα χείρονα τῶν πρώτων. 21 δκρεϊττον" 
tothem the last [state] worse than the first. *Better 
yao ἦν αὐτοῖς μὴ ἐπεγνωκέναι τὴν ὁδὸν τῆς δικαιοσύνης, 


‘for it were forthemnot tohaveknown the way of righteousness, 
ἢ ἐπιγνοῦσιν " “ἐπιστρέψαι! “ἐκ! τῆς παραδοθείσης αὐ- 
than having known [it] to have turned from the 3delivered *to 
τοῖς ἁγίας ἐντολῆς. 22 συμβέβηκεν "δὲ" αὐτοῖς τὸ τῆς 


‘them “holy *commandment. 


ἀληθοῦς παροιμίας. 


But has happened tothem the[word] οὗ the 
Κύων ἐπιστρέψας ἐπὶ τὸ ἴδιον ἐξέραμα" 


true proverb: [The] dog having returned to his own vomit ; 
kai, ὉΥς λουσαμένη, εἰς [κὐλισμα! βορβόρου. 
and,[(The]?sow ‘washed, to [her] rolling place in [the] mire. 


3 Tavrny ἤδη, ἀγαπητοί, δευτέραν ὑμῖν γράφω ἐπιστολήν, 
This now, beloved, asecond *to*you “1 Swrite ‘epistle, 
ἐν αἷς διεγείρω ὑμῶν ἐν ὑπομνήσει τὴν εἰλικρι- 
in [both] which Istirup your 7in*putting[®you]*in’remembrance ‘pure 
νῇ διάνοιαν, 2 μνησθῆναι τῶν προειρημένων ῥημάτων ὑπὸ τῶν 
?mind, to be mindful of the “spoken “before ‘words by the 
ἁγίων προφητῶν, καὶ τῆς τῶν ἀποστόλων ξἡμῶν" ἐντολῆς; 
holy prophets, and of the *the ?°apostles ΤΥ Sus ‘commandment 
τοῦ κυρίου Kai σωτῆρος" 3 τοῦτο πρῶτον γινώσκοντες, Ort 
*of*the*Lord ‘and ‘Saviour; this first knowing, that 
ἐλεύσονται ἐπ᾽ "ἐσχάτου! τῶν ἡμερῶν ' ἐμπαῖκται, κατὰ 
will come at the close of the days mockers, according to 
τὰς ἰδίας. αὐτῶν ἐπιθυμίας" πορευόμενοι, 4 καὶ λέγοντες, Ποῦ 
their own lusts walking, and saying, Where 
ἐστιν ἡ ἐπαγγελία Tic.-Tapovaiac.avTov ; ἀφ᾽ ἧς. γὰρ ot πατέ- 
is the promise of his coming ? for since the fa- 
pec ἐκοιμήθησαν, πάντα οὕτως διαμένει ἀπ΄ a κτί- 
thers fell asleep, allthings thus continue from [the] beginning of[the? 
σεως. 5 λανθάνει γὰρ αὐτοὺς τοῦτο θέλοντας, ὅτι 
creation. For 315 *hidden*from *them ‘this, [they] willing [it], that 
> ‘ oa » 4 ~ ᾽ .“ ‘ 3. νι 
οὐρανοὶ ἦσαν ἔκπαλαι, καὶ γῆ ἐξ ὕδατος καὶ δι᾿ ὕδατος 


heavens were of old, and anearth out of water and in water 
συνεστῶσα, τῷ τοῦ θεοῦ λόγῳ, 6 δι ὧν ὁ τότε 
subsisting, by the 2of °God ‘word, through which [waters] the then 


X ἀποφεύγοντας are escaping from LTTrAW 
8. κρεῖσσον T. ὃ + εἰς τὰ ὀπίσω to the 

© ὑποστρέψαι to have turned back rrtra. danrou. ¢— δὲ but 
& ὑμῶν (read by your apostles) LTTrAW. ἢ ἐσχάτων 
i+ ἐν ἐμπαιγμονῇ (read mockers, with mocking) 


III. II -PETER. 


κόσμος ὕδατι κατακλυσθεὶς ἀπώλετο" 7 οἱ. δὲ νῦν οὐρανοὶ 
world with water having been deluged perished. But the now heavens 


kai ἡ γῆ ‘abrov' λόγῳ τεθησαυρισμένοι εἰσίν, πυρὶ τηρού- 
and the earth byhis word "treasured *up tare, for fire being 
μενοι εἰς ἡμέραν κρίσεως Kai ἀπωλείας τῶν ἀσεβῶν ἀνθρώπων. 
kept to aday ofjudgment and destruction of ungodly men. 

8 ἐν.δὲτοῦτο μὴ-λανθανέτω ὑμᾶς, ἀγαπητοί, ὅτι pia ἡμέρα 


But this one thing let not be hidden from you, beloved, that one day 
παρὰ κυρίῳ we χίλια ἔτη, καὶ χίλια ἔτη we ἡμέρα 
with [the] Lord [is]as ἃ thousand years, and a thousand years as “day 


9 οὐ. βραδύνει ™o' κύριος τῆς ἐπαγγελίας, ὥς τινες Boa- 

*Does “ποὺ 7delay *the *Lord the promise, as some 2de- 
δυτῆτα ἡγοῦνται" ἀλλὰ μακροθυμεῖ "εἰς" οἡμᾶς," μὴ βουλό- 
lay testeem, but is longsuffering towards us, not will- 
μενός τινας ἀπολέσθαι, ἀλλὰ παντας εἰς μετάνοιαν χωρῆ- 
ing {for] any to perish, but all to repentance to 
σαι. 10 H&erde Py ἡμέρα κυρίου we κλέπτης Ὡρ νυκτί," 
come. Butshallcomethe day of{[the]Lord as _ a thief in [the] night, 


ῥοιζηδὸν παρελεύσονται, στοιχεῖα. δὲ 
rushing noise shall passaway, and [the] elements 


καὶ Ta ἐν αὐτῇ ἔργα 


μία. 


one. 


ἐν ῃ τοὶ" οὐρανοὶ 
in which the heavens wit 
καυσούμενα "λυθήσονται." καὶ 


burning with heat shall be dissolved, and [(theJearth and the 7in “it ‘works 
ἱκατακαήσεται." 
shall be burnt up. 

11 Τούτων οὖν! πάντων λυομένων, ποταποὺς 


These things then all _ being to be dissolved, what kind of [persons] 
δεὶ ὑπάρχειν ὑμᾶς ἐν ayiaes avacrpopaic καὶ εὐσεβείαις, 
ought 7to* tye in oly conduct and piety, 


12 προσδοκῶντας καὶ σπεύδοντας τὴν παρουσίαν τῆς τοῦ 
expecting and hastening the coming of the 


θεοῦ ἡμέρας dv ἣν οὐρανοὶ πυρούμενοι λυθή- 
70f *God ‘day by reason of which [the] heavens, being on fire, shall be dis- 


σονται, καὶ στοιχεῖα καυσούμενα “τήκεται; 18 καινοὺς 
solved, and [the] elements burning with heat shall melt? 2New 


δὲ οὐρανοὺς καὶ “γῆν καινὴν" Yeara' τὸ ἐπάγγελμα" αὐτοῦ 
*but heavens and ‘earth ‘a7new according to Thi 


?promise his, 
~ ? - ΄ - , ? 
προσδοκῶμεν, ἐν οἷς δικαιοσύνη κατοικεῖ. 14 διό, ἀγαπη- 
we expect, in which righteousness dwells. Wherefore, 


belov- 
Toi, ταῦτα προσδοκῶντες, σπουδάσατε ἄσπιλοι καὶ ἀμώ- 
ed, these things expecting be diligent 


without spot and unblam- 
μήτοι αὐτῷ εὑρεθῆναι ἐν εἰρήνῃ, 15 Kai τὴν τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡ μῶν 


able byhim tobefound in peace; and the 2of Sour *Lord 
μακροθυμίαν, σωτηρίαν ἡγεῖσθε: καθὼς Kai ὁ ἀγαπητὸς 
*longsuffering, 7salvation ‘esteem *ye; according as also 2beloved 


ἡμῶν ἀδελφὸς Παῦλος κατὰ τὴν "αὐτῷ δοθεῖσαν" σοφίαν 

tour brother Paul accordingto the *to*him ?given 1wisdom 

ἔγραψεν ὑμῖν, 16 ὡς καὶ ἐν πάσαις ταῖς" ἐπιστολαῖς, λαλῶν 
wrote toyou, as also in all _ [his] epistles, speaking 

ἐν αὐταῖς περὶ τούτων" ἐν “οἷς" ἐστιν δυσνόητά 

in them concerning these things, among which are *hard “ἴο 09 understood 


607 
7 but the heavens and 
the earth, which are 
now, by thesame word 
are kept in store, re- 
served unto fire a- 
gainst the day of judg- 
ment and perdition of 
ungodly men. 8 But, 
beloved, be not igno- 
rant of this one thing, 
that one day 18 with the 
Lord as a thousand 
years, and a thousand 
years as one day. 9 The 
Lord is not slack con- 
cerning his promise, as 
some men count slack- 
ness; but is long- 
suffering to us-ward, 
not willing that any 
should perish, but that 
all should come to re- 
pentance. 10 But the 
day of the Lord will 
come as a thief in the 
night ; in the which 
the heavens shall pass 
away with a great 
noise, and the ele- 
ments shall melt with 
fervent heat, the earth 
also and the works 
that are therein shall 
be burned up. 


11 Seeing then that 
all these things shall 
be dissolved, what 
Manner Of persons 
ought ye to be in all 
holy conversation and 
godliness, 12 looking 
for and hasting unto 
the coming of the day 
of God, wherein the 
heavens being on fire 
shall be dissolved, and 
the elements shall melt 
with fervent heat? 
13 Nevertheless we, 
according to his pro- 
mise, look for new hea- 
vens and a new earth, 
wherein dwelleth righ- 
teousness. 14 Where- 
fore, beloved, seeing 
that ye look for such 
things, be diligent that 
ye may be foundof him 
in peace, without spot, 
and blameless. 15 And 
account that the long- 
suffering of our Lord 
is salvation; even as 
our beloved brother 
Paul also according to 
the wisdom given unto 
him hath written unto 

ou; 16 as also in all 
is epistles, speaking 
in them of these things; 
in which are some 
things hard to be 


1 τῷ αὐτῷ (read by the same word) ELT ; τῷ αὐτοῦ GTrAW. 


τὰ — ὃ (read [the}]) 


Ρ — ἡ (read [the]) LTTraw. 


LTTrAW. 2 δι because of LT. ο ὑμᾶς YOU LTTrA. 

ᾳ — ἐν νυκτί GLTTrAW. τ--- οἱ (vead [[86]) ΤΑ. 5 λυθήσεται LTTr. t evpe- 
θήσεται shall be detected Tr. ¥ οὕτως thus a. * τακήσεται L. * καινὴν γῆν τ. 
7 καὶ and 1,. 2 τὰ ἐπαγγέλματα promises LT. 5 δοθεῖσαν αὐτῷ LTTrAW. Ὀ-- ταῖς 
LTraw. ς als LTTrAW. 


608 


understood, which they 
that are unlearned and 
unstable wrest, as they 
do also the other scrip- 
tures, unto their own 
destruction. 

17 Ye therefore, be- 
loved, seeing ye know 
these things before, be- 
ware lest ye also, being 
led away with the er- 
ror of the wicked, fall 
from your own sted- 
fastness. 18 But grow 
in grace, and im the 
knowledge of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus 
Christ. To him be glory 
both now and for ever. 
Amen. 


IQANNOY A. I. 
“ « > ~ . ? , ~ e 
τινα, ἃ οἱ ἀμαθεῖς καὶ ἀστήρικτοι στρεβλοῦσιν, ὡς 
tsome *things, which the untaught and unestablished wrest, as 
kai τὰς λοιπὰς γραφάς, πρὸς τὴν. ἰδίαν αὐτῶν ἀπώλειαν. 
also the other _ scriptures, to their own destruetion. 
17 Ὑμεῖς οὖν, ἀγαπητοί, προγινώσκοντες φυλάσσεσθε, 
Ye therefore, beloved, knowing beforehand, beware, 
wan τῇ τῶν ἀθέσμων πλάνῃ συναπαχθέντες, ἐκπέ- 


lest with the 7of *the*lawless [Sones] ‘error having been led away, ye should 


σητε τοῦ ἰδίου στηριγμοῦΣ 18 αὐξάνετε. δὲ ἐν χάριτι καὶ 
fallfrom yourown steadfastness : but grow in grace, and 
γνώσει τοῦ. κυρίου ἡμῶν Kai σωτῆρος Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ. 
in [the] knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 
αὐτῷ ἡ δόξα καὶ νῦν Kai sic ἡμέραν αἰῶνος. ἀμήν." 
Tohim [be] glory both now and ἰοὸ [Π6] day of eternity. Amen. 


ΓΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ IQANNOY KAOOAIKH IIPOTH." 


3EPISTLE 


THAT which wasfrom 
the beginning, which 
we have heard, which 
we have seen with our 
eyes, which we have 
looked upon, and our 
hands have handled, of 
the Word of life; 2 (for 
the life was manifest- 
ed, and we have seen 
it, and bear witness, 
and shew unto you 
that eternal life, which 
was with the Father, 
and was manifested 
unto us;) 3 that which 
we have seen and heard 
declare we unto you, 
that ye also may have 
fellowship with us: 
and truly our fellow- 
ship ὦ with the Fa- 
ther, and with his Son 
Jesus Christ. 4 And 
these things write we 
unto you, that your 
joy may be full. 


5 This then is the 
message which we 
have heard of him, 
and declare unto you, 
that God is light, and 
in him is no darkness 
atall. 6 If we say that 
we have fellowship 
with him, and walkin 
darkness, we lie, and 
do not the truth : 7 but 
if we walk in the lignt, 
as he isin the light, we 
have fellowship one 


Se Te tate ,τ τῇ 


4 — ἀμήν T[TrA]. 


f +. τοῦ ἀποστόλον the apostle E; — καθολικὴ G; 
& + καὶ also LTTrAW. 


a Tr. 
Κ ἔστιν αὕτη TIrAW. 


*OF ΟΗΝ *GENERAL ‘FIRST. 


Ὃ ἦν ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς, ὃ ἀκηκόαμεν, ὃ ἑω- 
That which was from [the] beginning, that which we have heard, that which we 
ED τοῖς. ὀφθαλμοῖς-ἡμῶν, ὃ ἐθεασάμεθα Kai ai χεῖρες 
ave seen with our eyes, that which we gazed upon and *hands 
« ~ 3 id 4 ~ , ~ aA 4 « 4 
ἡμῶν ἐψηλάφησαν περὶ τοῦ λόγου τῆς ζωῆς" 2 Kai ἡ ζωὴ 
tour handled concerning the Word of life; (and the life 
ἐφανερώθη, Kai ἑωράκαμεν, Kai μαρτυροῦμεν, Kai ἀπαγγέλ- 
was manifested, and wehaveseen, and bear witness, and re- 
λομεν ὑμῖν τὴν ζωὴν THY αἰώνιον, ἥτις ἦν πρὸς τὸν πατέρα, 
port toyou the “life leternal, : which was with the Father, 
4 ? , ~ a ’ ‘ ? , 
καὶ ἐφανερώθη ἡμῖν. 8 ὃ ἑωράκαμεν καὶ ἀκηκόαμεν, 
and was manifested to us :) that which we haveseen and have heard 
ἀπαγγέλλομενβ ὑμῖν, iva καὶ ὑμεῖς κοινωνίαν ἔχητε μεθ᾽ 
we report to you, that also ye fellowship may have with 


ἡμῶν" Kai ἡ κοινωνία δὲ ἡ ἡμετέρα μετὰ TOU πατρὸς Kai 


us; and 2fellowship *indeed tour [is] with the Father, and 
μετὰ τοῦ.υἱοῦ.αὐτοῦ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ" 4 καὶ ταῦτα "ypago- 
with his Son Jesus Christ. And these things we 


ev ὑμῖν," ἵνα ἡ χαρὰ yey" ῃ πεπληρωμένη. 
μεν ὑμῖν, χαρὰ 'ἡμῶν" ᾧ ρωμένη 


write toyou that “joy *our may be full. 
5 Kai Καὕτη ἐστὶν" ἡ ἐπαγγελία! ἣν ἀκηκόαμεν ἀπ᾽ 
And this is the message which we have heard from 
αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἀναγγέλλομεν ὑμῖν, ὅτι ὁ θεὸς φῶς ἐστιν, καὶ 
him, and announce to you, that God light Tin; and 
σκοτία πὲν αὐτῷ οὐκ. ἔστιν" οὐδεμία. 6 ἐὰν εἴπωμεν Ort 


darkness in him If weshould say that 
κοινωνίαν ἔχομεν μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ, Kai ἐν τῷ σκότει περιπατῶμεν, 

fellowship wehave with him, and in darkness should walk, 
, ‘ ᾽ ~ \ 2\/ Ἢ 2A ᾽ ~ 
ψευδόμεθα, καὶ οὐ-ποιοῦμεν τὴν ἀλήθειαν. 7 tav.dé ἔν τῷ 
we lie. and donot practise the truth. Butif in the 


φωτὶ περιπατῶμεν, ὡς αὐτός ἐστιν ἔν τῷ φωτί, κοινωνίαν 
light weshould walk, as he is in the light, fellowship 


is not any at all. 


e + Πέτρου β΄ 2 Peter Tra. 

*Iwavvov a’ LTAW; ᾿Ιωάνον ἐπιστολὴ 
h γράφομεν ἡμεῖς We write TTrA. ἰἷὺὑμῶν ‘your EGW. 
1 ἀγγελία GLTTrAW. τὰ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῷ Tr. 


Τ}ΠῚῈ ΤΈΨΘῊΗ Ν. 
ἔχομεν per’ ἀλλήλων, καὶ τὸ aipa ᾿Ιησοῦ "χριστοῦ" τοῦ υἱοῦ 
we have with ΟΠ6 another, and the blood of Jesus Christ 2Son 
αὐτοῦ καθαρίζει ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ πάσης ἁμαρτίας. ὃ ἐὰν εἴπωμεν 

*his cleanses us from every sin. If we should say 
ὅτι ἁμαρτίαν ovK-éyouer, ἑαυτοὺς πλανῶμεν Kai ἡ ἀλήθεια 
that sin we have not, ourselves wedeceive, andthe truth 
οὐκ. ἔστιν ἐν ἡμῖν." 9 ἐὰν ὁμολογῶμεν τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἡμῶν, 

is not in us. If we should confess our sins, 
πιστός ἐστιν Kai δίκαιος, iva ἀφῇ Ρὴμῖν! τὰς ἁμαρτίας, 
faithful heis and righteous, that he mayforgive us the sins, 
Kai καθαρίσῃ ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ πάσης ἀδικίας. 10 ἐὰν εἴπωμεν 
and maycleanse us from 411 unrighteousness. If we should say 
ὅτι οὐχιἡμαρτήκαμεν, ψεύστην ποιοῦμεν αὐτόν, Kai ὁ λόγος 
that we have not sinned, a liar we make him, and 2word 
αὐτοῦ obK.éori ἐν ἡμῖν. 

this is not inv uss 

2 Texvia pov, ταῦτα γράφω ὑμῖν, ἵνα μὴ.ἁμάρτητε' 

“Little *children ταν, these things Iwrite toyou, that ye may ποῦ 512; 
καὶ ἐάν τις ἁμάρτῃ, παράκλητον ἔχομεν πρὸς τὸν πατέρα, 


and if anyone shouldsin, a Paraclete wehave with the Father, 
Ἰησοῦν χριστὸν δίκαιον" 2 καὶ αὐτὸῤΓῤ  δἱλασμός ἐστιν" 
Jesus Christ [the] righteous ; and he ([the]propitiation is 


δὲ μόνον, 


περὶ τῶν.ἁμαρτιῶν.ἡμῶν" οὐ περὶ τῶν.ἡμετέρων 
*ours 4pbut only, 


for our sins ; *not “for 
ἀλλὰ Kai περὶ ὕλου τοῦ κόσμου. 
but also for whole *the world, 
3 Kai ἐν τούτῳ γινώσκομεν ὅτι ἐγνώκαμεν αὐτόν, ἐὰν 
And by this we know that we have known him, if 
Tac-évTohac.avTov τηρῶμεν. 4 ὁ λέγων," Ἔγνωκα αὐτόν, 
his commandments we keep. He that says, Ihave known him, 
καὶ τὰς. ἐντολὰς.αὐτοῦ μὴ.τηρῶν, ψεύστης ἐστίν, Kai ἐν τούτῳ 
and hiscommandments isnotkeeping, a liar is, and in kim 
ἡ ἀλήθεια ovKtoriv’ 5 ὃς.δ᾽. ἂν τηρῇ αὐτοῦ τὸν λόγον, 
the truth is not ; but whoever may keep his word, 
ἀληθῶς ἐν τούτῳ ἡ ἀγάπη Tov θεοῦ τετελείωται. ἐν τούτῳ 


truly in him the love of God has been perfected. By this 
γινώσκομεν ὅτι ἐν αὐτῷ ἐσμεν. Ὁ ὁ λέγων ἐν αὐτῷ 
we know that in him we are. Hethat says in him fhe) 


μένειν, ὀφείλει, καθὼς ἐκεῖνος περιεπάτησεν, καὶ αὐτὸς "οὕτως" 
abides, ought, evenas he walked, also himself 40 
περιπατεῖν. 7 ᾿ἀδελφοί," οὐκ ἐντολὴν καινὴν γράφω ὑμῖν, 
to walk. Brethren, ποῦ a*commandment ‘new I write to you, 
ἀλλ᾽ παλαιάν, ἣν εἴχετε ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς ἡ 
but tan old, which yehad from [the] beginning: the 
ἐντολὴ ἡ παλαιά ἐστιν ὁ λόγος ὃν ἠκούσατε Yar’ 
“commandment lold is the word which yeheard from([the] 
ἀρχῆς." ὃ πάλιν ἐντολὴν καινὴν γράφω ὑμῖν, 0 ἐστιν 
beginning. Again a*?commandment ‘new I write toyou, which is 
ἀληθὲς ἐν αὐτῷ καὶ ἐν ὑμῖν, ὅτι ἡ σκοτία παράγεται, 
true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing away, 
‘ A ~ ‘ ? 4 » ,ὔ ε , ? ~ 
καὶ TO φῶς TO ἀληθινὸν ἤδη φαίνει. 9 ὁ λέγων ἐν TH 
and the light ‘true already shines. Hethat says in the 
φωτὶ εἶναι, καὶ τὸν.ἀδελφὸν. αὐτοῦ μισῶν, ἐν τῇ σκοτίᾳ ἐστὶν 
light [he] is, and 2his *brother thates, inthe darkness is 


ἐντολὴν 
Scommandment 


609 


with another, and the 
blood of Jesus Christ 
his Son cleanseth us 
from all sin. 8 If we 
say that we have no 
sin, we deceive our- 
selves, and the truth 
is not in us, 9 If we 
confess our sins, he is 
faithful and just to 
forgive us our sins, 
and to cleanse us from 
all unrighteousness. 
10 If we say that we 
have not sinned, we 
make him a liar, and 
his word is not in us. 


II. My little chil- 
dren, these things 
writeI unto you, that 
ye sin not. And ifany 
man sin, we have an 
advocate with the Fa- 
ther, Jesus Christ the 
righteous: 2 and he is 
the propitiation for 
our sins: and not for 
ours only, but also for 
the sins of the whole 
world. 


3 And hereby we do 
know that we know 
him, if we keep his 
commandments, 4 He 
that saith, Iknow him, 
and keepeth not his 
commandments, is a 
liar, and the truth is 
not inhim, 5 But who- 
so keepeth his word, in 
him verily is the love 
of God _ perfected: 
hereby know we that 
we are inhim. 6 He 
that saith he abideth 
in him ought himself 
also so to walk, even 
as he walked. 7 Bre- 
thren, I write no new 
commandment unto 
you, but an old com- 
mandment which ye 
had from the begin- 
ning. The old com- 
mandment is the word 
which ye have heard 
from the beginning. 
8 Again, a new com- 
mandment I write un- 
to you, which thing is 
true in himandin you: 
because the darkness 
is past, and the true 
light now = shineth. 
9 He that saith he 
is in the light, and 
hateth his brother, is 
in darkness even until 


Ἢ — χριστοῦ LTTrA. ° ἐν ἡμῖν οὐκ ἔστιν LTTW. 
ἱλασμὸς L. r+ ὅτι [L]TTra. 8 — oUTws LTr[A]. 
Y—an ἀρχῆς LTTra. 


P ἡμῶν our (sins) W. 
τ ἀγαπητοί beloved GLTTra Ww. 


q ἐστιν 


RE 


610 


now. 10 He that lov- 
eth his brother abideth 
in the light, and there 
is nope occasion of 
stumbling him. 
11 But he that hateth 
his brother is in dark- 
ness, and walketh in 
darkness, and know- 
eth not whither he 
goeth, because that 
darkness hath blinded 
his eyes. 


12 I write unto you, 
little children, because 
your sins are forgiven 
you for his name’s 
sake, 


13 I write unto you, 
fathers, because ye 
have known him that 
7a from the beginning. 
I write unto you, 
young men, because ye 
have overcome the 
wicked one. I write 
unto you, little chil- 
dren, because ye have 
known the Father. 

14 I have written 
unto you, fathers, be- 
cause ye have known 
him that is from the 
beginning. I have 
written unto you, 
young men, because 
ye are strong, and the 
word of God abideth 
in you, and ye have 
overcome the wicked 
one. 15 Love not the 
world, neither the 
things that are in the 
world. If any man 
love the world, the 
love of the Father is 
notinhim. 16 Forall 
that is in the world, 
the lust of the flesh, 
and the lust of the 
eyes, and the pride of 
life, is not of the Fa- 
ther, but is of the 
world. 17 And the 
world passeth away, 
and the lust thereof : 
but he that doeth the 
will of God abideth 
for ever. 18 Little 
children, it is the last 
time : and as ye have 
heard that antichrist 
shall come, even now 
are there many anti- 
christs; whereby we 
know that it is the 
last time, 19 Theywent 
out from us, but they 
were not of us; for if 
they had been of us, 
they would no doubt 
have continued with 
us: but they went out, 
that they might be 
made manifest that 


IQANNOYT Α. II. 


ἕως dptt. 10 ὁ ἀγαπῶν τὸν. ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ, ἐν τῷ φωτι 
until now. He that loves his brother, in the light 
μένει, καὶ σκάνδαλον iy αὐτῷ οὐκιἔστιν." 11 6.68 

abides, and *cause Sof offence 7in ‘him ‘there 218 "πού. But he that 


μισῶν τὸν. ἀδελφὸν. αὐτοῦ, ἐν τῇ σκοτίᾳ ἐστίν, καὶ ἔν TY σκοτίᾳ 
hates his brother, in the darkness is, and in the darkness 


περιπατεῖ, Kai οὐκιοῖδεν ποῦ ὑπάγει, OTL ἡ σκοτία ἐτύφ- 


walks, and knowsnot where hegoes, because the darkness blind- 
λωσεν Todvc.dp8arpovc.avrov. 
ed his eyes. 
12 Τράφω ὑμῖν, τεκνία, ὅτι ἀφέωνται ὑμῖν 
Iwrite ἴο γοῦ, little children, because have been forgiven you [your] 
αἱ ἁμαρτίαι διὰ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ. 


sins for the sake of his name, 


18 Τράφω ὑμῖν, πατέρες, ὅτι ἐγνώκατε τὸν an 
Iwrite to you, fathers, because ye have known him who([is] from 
ἀρχῆς. Toagw ὑμῖν, νεανίσκοι, OTe νενικήκατε τὸν 
{the] beginning. Iwrite toyou, youngmen, because ye have overcome the 
πονηρόν. ἸΓράφω" ὑμῖν, παιδία, ὅτι ἐγνώκατε τὸν 
wicked fone]. Iwrite to you, little children, because ye nave known the 
πατέρα. 
Father. 
14 Ἔγραψα ὑμῖν, πατέρες, Ore ἐγνώκατε τὸν 
I wrote to you, fathers, because ye have known him who [18] 
an ἀρχῆς. Ἔγραψα ὑμῖν, νεανίσκοι, ὅτι ἰσχυροί ἐστε, 
from [the] beginning. Iwrote toyou, young men, because strong yeare 
kai ὁ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ ἐν ὑμῖν μένει, καὶ νενικήκατε TOY 
and the word of God in you abides, and ye have overcome the 
πονηρόν. 15 μὴ.ἀγαπᾶτε τὸν κόσμον, μη τὰ ἐν τῷ 
wicked [one]. Love not the world, nor the things in the 
κόσμῳ" ἐάν τις ἀγαπᾷ τὸν κόσμον, οὐκ ἔστιν ἡ ἀγάπη. 
world. If anyone shouldlove the world, ™ot is ‘the “love 
τοῦ πατρὸς ἐν αὐτῷ 16 ὅτι πᾶν τὸ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ, 
3of *the °Father in him; because all that which [is] in the world, 
ἡ ἐπιθυμία τῆς σαρκός; Kai ἡ ἐπιθυμία τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν, Kai 
the lust of the fiesh, and the lust of the eyes, and 
ἡ YadaLoveia' τοῦ βίου, οὐκ-ἔστιν ἐκ τοῦ πατρός, ταλλ᾽" ἐκ 
the vaunting of life, is not of the Father, but of 
τοῦ κύσμου ἐστίν. 17 καὶ ὁ κόσμος παράγεται, καὶ ἡ ἐπι- 
the world is; and the world [158 passing away, and the 
θυμία αὐτοῦ ὁ.δὲ ποιῶν τὸ θέλημα τοῦ θεοῦ μένει εἰς τὸν 
lust of it, buthethat does the will of God abides for 
18 Παιδία, ἐσχάτη ὥρα ἐστίν" Kai καθὼς 
Little children, [the] last hour itis, and according as 
ἠκούσατε OTe *0' ἀντίχριστος ἔρχεται, Kai νῦν ἀντίχροιστοι 
ye heard that the antichrist iscoming, even now  ‘“antichrists 
πολλοὶ γεγόνασιν" ὅθεν γινώσκομεν OTL ἐσχάτη ὥρα ἐστίν. 
‘many have arisen, whence we know that [086] last hour it is. 
1. ἐξ ἡμῶν δϑέξῆλθον," ἀλλ᾽ οὐκιἦσαν ἐξ ἡμῶν" εἰ.γὰρ 
From among 85 they wentout, but they were not of us ; for if 
“ἧσαν ἐξ ἡμῶν," μεμενήκεισαν.ἂν μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν" ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα φανε- 
they were of us, they wouldhaveremained with us, but that they 
ρωθῶσιν Ort οὐκ.εἰσὶν πάντες ἐξ ἡμῶν. 20 καὶ ὑμεῖς 


αἰῶνα. 
ever. 


they were not all of might be made manifest that “are “not tall of us. And ye 
Ἢ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῷ LTA. x ἔγραψα I wrote LTTrAW. Υ adagovia T. : ἀλλὰ TIrW. 


4 — ὃ LTTrAW. 


Ὁ ἐξῆλθαν LTTrAW. 


ς ἐξ ἡμῶν ἦσαν Tr. 


ΤΠ TIT. Iy 3 0 E-N: 
χρῖσμα ἔχετε ἀπὸ τοῦ ἁγίου, καὶ οἴδατε πάντα." 
{the] anointing have from _ the holy [one], and ye know all things. 


21 οὐκιἔγραψα ὑμῖν ὅτι οὐκ οἴδατε THY ἀλήθειαν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι 
I wrote not toyou because ye know not the truth, but because 


οἴδατε αὐτήν, Kai ὅτι πᾶν ψεῦδος ἐκ τῆς ἀληθείας οὐκ ἔστιν. 


ye know it, and that 7any lie Sof Sthe 7truth not ‘is. 
, ? « , (iit. cyury) ε 2 , a ? ~ > 
22 Tic ἐστιν ὁ ψεύστης εἰμὴ ὁ ἀρνούμενος ὅτι Ἰησοῦς οὐκ 
Who is_ the liar but he that denies that Jesus 
ἔστιν ὁ χριστός ; οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ ἀντίχριστος ὁ ἀρνούμενος 
is the Christ ? He is the antichrist who denies 
τὸν πατέρα Kai τὸν υἱόν. 23 πᾶς ὁ ἀρνούμενος τὸν υἱόν, 
the Father and the Son. Everyone that denies the Son, 


οὐδὲ τὸν πατέρα ἔχει. 5 24 Ὑμεῖς οὖν ὃ ἠκούσατε ἀπ᾽ 
neither *the *Father ‘has *he, Ye therefore what yeheard from 

ἀρχῆς, ἐν ὑμῖν μενέτω. ἐὰν ἐν ὑμῖν μείν ὃ ἀπ᾽ 
{the] beginning,in you letitabide: if in you should abide what from 

ἀρχῆς ἠκούσατε, καὶ ὑμεῖς ἐν τῷ υἱῷ Kai Fév' τῷ πατρὶ 
[the] beginning yeheard, also ye in the Son and in the Father 
μενεῖτε. 25 Kai αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ἐπαγγελία, ἣν αὐτὸς ἐπηγ- 
shall abide. And this is the promise which he pro- 
γείλατο ἡμῖν, τὴν ζωὴν τὴν αἰώνιον. 26 ταῦτα ἔγραψα ὑμῖν 


mised us, life eternal. These things I wrote to you 
περὶ τῶν πλανώντων ὑμᾶς. 27 καὶ ὑμεῖς τὸ χρῖσμα 
concerning those who lead ?astray you: and you the anointing 


ὃ ἐλάβετε ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, Βὲν ὑμῖν μένει," καὶ οὐ χρείαν ἔχετε 
which ye received from him, in you abides, andnot need ye have 
wa τις διδάσκῃ ὑμᾶς" ἀλλ᾽ we τὸ ἰαὐτὸ" χρῖσμα διδάσκει 
that anyone shouldteach you; but as the same anointing teaches 
ὑμᾶς περὶ πάντων, Kai ἀληθές ἐστιν, Kai οὐκ. ἔστιν ψεῦ- 
you concerning allthings, and true is, and is not a 
dog’ καὶ καθὼς ἐδίδαξεν ὑμᾶς, Ipeveire! ἐν αὐτῷ. 
lie; and evenas ittaught you, yeshallabidein him. 
28 Kai νῦν, τεκνία, μένετε ἐν αὐτῷ" ἵνα *oray' φανερω- 
And now, little children, abide in him, that when he be mani- 
θῇ, ἔχωμεν" παῤῥησίαν, καὶ μὴ αἰσχυνθῶμεν ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ, 
fested we may have boldness, and not be put toshame from before him 
ἐν τῇ-παρουσίᾳ αὐτοῦ. 
at his coming. 
29 ᾿Εὰν εἰδῆτε ὅτι δίκαιός ἐστιν, γινώσκετε ὅτι πᾶς ὁ 
If yekmow that righteous ἨΘ is, yeknow that everyone who 
~ κ [4 > ? ~ n , ν Il "16. 
ποιῶν τὴν δικαιοσύνην, ἐξ αὐτοῦ "γεγέννηται." 3 “dere πο- 
practises righteousness of him _ has been begotten. See 
, ~ « , 7 , ~ 
ταπὴν ἀγάπην δέδωκεν ἡμῖν ὁ πατήρ, ἵνα τέκνα θεοῦ 
what love Shas *given ‘to‘us ‘the *Father, that children of God 
κληθῶμεν"" διὰ τοῦτο ὁ κόσμος οὐ.γινώσκει ἡμᾶς, 
we should be called. On account of this the world knows not us, 


ὅτι ovKéyvw αὐτόν. ἀγαπητοί, νῦν τέκνα θεοῦ ἐσμεν, 

because it knew ποῦ him. Beloved, now children of God are we, 
" » ? , ΄ ? , θ Ξ ἰδ PGE! .“ 2A 

καὶ οὕπω ἐφανερώθη τί ἐσόμεθα’ οἴδαμεν.Ῥδὲ" ὅτι ἐὰν 


and ποῦ yet wasit manifested what weshallbe; butweknow that if 


φανερωθῇ, ὅμοιοι αὐτῷ ἐσόμεθα, ὅτι ὀψόμεθα αὐτὸν καθώς 
he be manifested, like him weshall be, for weshallsee him as 


4 πάντες (read ye all know) Ὁ. 
confesses the Son has the Father also GLTTraw. f — οὖν LTTrA. 
ἐν ὑμῖν LTTrA. i αὐτοῦ (read as his anointing) TTra. 
if LTTra. 1 σχῶμεν LTTrA. m + καὶ also TTrA. 
ἐσμέν and we are [such] LTTra. Ρ — δὲ but LTTraw. 


611 


us. 20 But ye havean 
unction from the Holy 
One, and ye know all 
things. 21 I have not 
written unto you be- 
cause ye know not the 
truth, but because ye 
know it, and that nolie 
is of the truth. 22 Who 
is a liar but he that 
denieth that Jesus is 
the Christ? He is an- 
tichrist, that denieth 
the Father and the 
Son. 23 Whosoever de- 
nieth the Son, thesame 
hath not the Father: 
(but) he that acknow- 

geth the Son hath 
the Father also, 24 Let 
that therefore abide 
in you, which ye have 
heard from the begin- 
ning. If that which 
ye have heard from 
the beginning shall 
remain in you, ye 
also shall continue 
in the Son, and in 
the Father. 25 And 
this is the promise 
that he hath promised 
us, even eternal life. 
26 These things haveI 
written unto you con- 
cerning them that se- 
duce you. 27 But the 
anointing which ye 
have received of him 
abideth in you, and ye 
need not that any man 
teach you : but as the 
same anointing teach- 
eth you of all things, 
and is truth, and is no 
lie, and evenasit hath 
taught you, ye shall 
abide in him. 

28 And now, little 
children, abide in him; 
that, wher he shall 
appear, we may have 
confidence, and not be 
ashamed before him at 
his coming. 

29 If ye know that 
he is righteous, ye 
know that every one 
that doeth righteous- 
ness is born of him, 
111. Behold, what man- 
ner of love the Father 
hath bestowed upon 
us, that we should be 
called the sons of God: 
therefore the world 
knoweth us not, be- 
cause it knew him not. 
2 Beloved, now are 
we the sons of God, 
and it doth not yet 
appear what we shall 
be: but we know that, 
when he shall appear, 
we shall be like him ; 
for we shall see him 


© + ὃ ὁμολογῶν τὸν υἱὸν Kal τὸν πατέρα ἔχει he that 
8 --- ἐν 1,. 

i μένετε abide τἰττταΑΎ. 
Ὁ γεγένηται in Stephens. 


b μένει 
χ ἐὰν 
ο - καὶ 


612 


asheis. 3 And every 
man that hath this 
hope in him purifieth 
himself, even as he is 
pure. 


4 Whosoever com- 
mitteth sin transgres- 
seth also the law : for 
sin is the transgres- 
sion of the law. 5 And 
ye know that he was 
manifested to take a- 
way our sins; and in 
him is no sin. 6 Who- 
soever abideth in him 
sinneth not: whoso- 
ever sinneth hath not 
seen him, neither 
known him. 


7 Little children, let 
no man deceive you: 
he that doeth right- 
eeusness is righteous, 
even as heis righteous. 
8 He that committeth 
sin is of the devil ; for 
the devilsinneth from 
the beginning. For 
this purpose the Son 
of God was manifest- 
ed, that he might de- 
stroy the works of the 
devil. 9 Whosoever is 
born of God doth not 
commit sin; for his 
seed remaineth in him: 
and he cannot sin, be- 
cause he is born of God. 
10 In this the children 
of God are manifest, 
and the children of the 
devil: whosoever do- 
eth not righteousness 
is not of God, neither 
he that loveth not his 
brother. 11 For this 
is the message that ye 
heard from the begin- 
ning, that we should 
love one _ another. 
12 Not as Cain, who 
was of that wicked 
one, and slew his bro- 
ther. And wherefore 
slew he him? Because 
his own works were 
evil, and his brother’s 
righteous, 


13 Marvel not, my 
brethren, if the world 
hate you. 14 We know 
that we have passed 
from death unto life, 
because we love the 
brethren. He that 
loveth not Ais bro- 
ther abideth in death. 
15 Whosoever hateth 


IQANNOYT 4A. III. 


᾽ ‘ ~ » ΄ ~ 
ἐστιν. 3 καὶ πᾶς ὁ ἔχων τὴν ἐλπίδα.ταύτην in’ αὐτῷ, 
he is, And everyone that has this hope in him, 
ἁγνίζει ἑαυτόν, καθὼς ἐκεῖνος ἁγνός ἐστιν. 
purifies himself, even as he *pure tis. 
~ c ~ , ‘ , - ὦ 
4 Πᾶς ὁ ποιῶν τὴν ἁμαρτίαν, καὶ τὴν ἀνομίαν ποιεῖ: 
Everyone that practises sin, also lawlessness practises ; 


4 Gy I! € ΄ ’ ‘ € > , ‘ ” {1 ~ 
καὶ “ἡ ἁμαρτία ἐστὶν ἡ ἀνομία. 5 καὶ οἴδατε ὅτι ἐκεῖνος 


and sin is lawlessness. And yeknow that he 
ἐφανερώθη, ἵνα τὰς ἁμαρτίας τἡμῶν" ἄρῃ" καὶ 


was manifested, that ?sins ‘our 
ἁμαρτία ἐν αὐτῷ οὐκ.ἔστιν. 6 πᾶς 

sin in him is not. ?2Anyone “that Sin 
Mit. everyone) 


ὁ ἁμαρτάνων οὐχ εώρακεν αὐτόν, οὐδὲ 


he might take away; and 
ὁ ἐν αὐτῷ μένων οὐχ 
Shim ‘abides ‘not 


ἁμαρτάνει" πᾶς 


sins: anyone “that “sins ‘ot has seen him, nor 
(lit. everyone) 
»” > , 
ἐγνωκεν auTov. 
has known him. 
7 ‘Texvia, μηδεὶὶξ πλανάτω ὑμᾶς" ὁ ποιῶν τὴν 


Little children, *no “one ‘let *lead ®astray 


δικαιοσύνην, δίκαιός ἐστιν, καθὼς ἐκεῖνος δίκαιός ἐστιν. 8 ὁ 
righteousness, righteous is, even as he righteous 1s. He that 


~ ‘ « ᾿ 9, ~ , > , ev ? ? 
ποιῶν τὴν ἁμαρτίαν, ἐκ τοῦ διαβόλου ἐστίν. OTL ἀπ 


you; he ὑμαὺ practises 


practises sin, of the devil is; because from [the] 
ἀρχῆς ὁ διάβολος ἁμαρτάνει. εἰς τοῦτο ἐφανερώθη ὁ υἱὸς 
beginning the devil sins. For this was manifested the Son 
~ ~ wv Ud A » ~ La ~ c 
τοῦ θεοῦ, ἵνα λύσῃ τὰ ἔργα τοῦ διαβόλου. 9 πᾶς ὁ 


devil. 2Anyone “that 


; Ν (lit. everyone) 

᾽ ~ ~ 7, > ~ « , 
γεγεννημένος ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἁμαρτίαν οὐ ποιεῖ, ὅτι σπέρμα 
*has "been begotten 7of ®God, 0sin ‘not *practises, because seed 
αὐτοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ μένει" καὶ οὐ.δύναται ἁμαρτάνειν, ὅτι ἐκ Tot 


of God, that he might undo the works of the 


this in him abides, and he is not able to sin, because of 
θεοῦ γεγέννηται. 10 ἐν τούτῳ φανερά ἐστιν τὰ τέκνα TOU 
God he has been begotten. In this manifest are the children 
θεοῦ καὶ τὰ τέκνα τοῦ διαβόλου.υ: πᾶς ὁ μὴ "ποιῶν 


of God and the children of the devil. ?Anyone *that ®not “practises 


4 (lit. everyone) 
, > » ne. aw ‘ « ~ 4 
δικαιοσύνην" οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ TOU θεοῦ, καὶ ὁ μὴ.ἀγαπῶν τὸν 
Srighteousness ‘not is of God, and hethat loves not 
> ‘ ᾽ ~~ « τ, > ‘ € > , a ᾽ , 
ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ. 11 ore αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ἀγγελία ἣν ἠκούσατε 
*brother this, Because this is the message which ye heard 
᾽ , Σ ~ “ ? ~ ? ΄ A > ι 
ἀπ ἀρχῆς, ἵνα ἀγαπῶμεν ἀλλήλους" 12 οὐ καθὼς 
from [the] beginning; that weshould love one another: not as 
Κάϊν ἐκ τοῦ πονηροῦ ἦν, καὶ ἔσφαξεν τὸν BENT 
Cain [who] of the wicked [one] was, and slew *brother 
αὐτοῦ" καὶ χάριν τίνος ἔσφαξεν αὐτόν ; ort τὰ.ἔργα.αὐτοῦ 
this; πᾶ ου account of what slew he him? because his works 
πονηρὰ ἦν, τὰ.δὲ τοῦ.ἀδελφοῦ.αὐτοῦ δίκαια. 
3wicked ‘were, and those of his brother righteous. 


13 'Μὴ.θαυμάζετε, ἀδελφοί pou," εἰ μισεῖ ὑμᾶς ὁ κόσμος. 


Wonder not, brethren ‘my, if “hates *you ‘the ?world. 

14 ἡμεῖς οἴδαμεν ὅτι μεταβεβήκαμεν ἐκ τοῦ θανάτου εἰς τὴν 
Θ know that wehavepassed from death to 
ζωήν, ore ἀγαπῶμεν τοὺς ἀδελφούς ὁ μὴ.ἀγαπῶν 

life, because we love the brethren. Hethat loves not [818] 

Ww A ἰδ Xr , Ι , > ~ θ ’ 15 ~ « - 4 

τὸν ἀδελφον," μένει ἐν τῷ θανάτῳ. πᾶς O μισῶν τὸν 
brother, abides in death. Everyone that hates 


4 — ἡ L (misinformed as to codex B). 
t+ «at And 1. 


righteous) L. 


ε ὧν δίκαιος (read that is not 


¥ — ἡμῶν LTTrA. 
* — τὸν ἀδελφόν LTTrAW. 


vY — μον LTTrAW. 


ITE IV. I) JOHN. 


ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ, ἀνθρωποκτόνος ἐστίν, Kai οἴδατε OTL πᾶς 
“brother this a murderer is, and yeknow that any 
(lit. every) 


ἀνθρωποκτόνος οὐκ ἔχει ζωὴν αἰώνιον ἐν ταὐτῷ" μένουσαν. 
Smurderer Inot has _ life eternal “in “him labiding. 
16 "Ev τούτῳ ἐγνώκαμεν τὴν ἀγάπην, ὅτι ἐκεῖνος ὑπὲρ 
ΒΥ this we have known love, because he for 
ἡμῶν τὴν. Ψυχὴν. αὐτοῦ ἔθηκεν" Kai ἡμεῖς ὀφείλομεν ὑπὲρ τῶν 
us his life laid down; and we ought for the 
ἀδελφῶν τὰς ψυχὰς γτιθέναι.! 17 ὃς δ᾿ ἂν ἔχῃ τὸν 
brethren [our] lives to lay down. But whoever may have 
βίον τοῦ κόσμου, καὶ θεωρῇ Tov.adehpov.abrov χρείαν 
Ξ768}8 ‘of ‘life ‘the world’s, and may see his brother “need 
ἔχοντα, καὶ κλείσῃ τὰ.σπλάγχνα.αὐτοῦ an’ αὐτοῦ, THC ἡ 
*having, and may shut up his bowels from him, how *the 
ἀγάπη τοῦ θεοῦ μένει ἐν αὐτῷ; 
love *of °God ‘abidesin him? 
18 Texvia ὅμου, μὴ. ἀγαπῶμεν λόγῳ μηδὲ" γλώσσῃ, 
3Little *children ‘my, weshould ποῦ ἸοΥΘ inword, nor with tongue, 
PadA'" « ἔργῳ καὶ ἀληθείᾳ. 19 “καὶ ἐν τούτῳ “γινώσκομεν" 
but in work and in truth. And by this we know 
ὅτι ἐκ τῆς ἀληθείας ἐσμέν, Kai ἔμπροσθεν αὐτοῦ πείσομεν 
that of the truth we are, and before him shall persuade 
τὰς καρδίας ἡμῶν" 20 ὅτι" ἐὰν καταγινώσκῃ ἡμῶν ἡ καρδία, 
our hearts, that if “should*condemn ‘our "heart, 
ὅτι μείζων ἐστὶν ὁ θεὸς τῆς.καρδίας. ἡμῶν Kai γινώσκει πάντα. 
that greater is God than our heart and knows all things. 
21 ἀγαπητοί, ἐὰν ἡ καρδία Bay μὴ-καταγινώσκῃ ἡμῶν, 
Beloved, if "heart our should not condemn us, 
παῤῥησίαν ἔχομεν πρὸς τὸν θεόν, 32 καὶ διἐὰν αἰτῶμεν, 
boldness we have towards God, and whatsoever we may ask, 
λαμβάνομεν "zap"! αὐτοῦ, ὅτι τὰς.ἐντολὰς αὐτοῦ τηροῦμεν, 


we receive from him, because his commandments we keep, 
καὶ τὰ ἀρεστὰ ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ ποιοῦμεν. 23 Kai αὕτη 
and the things pleasing before him we practise. And this 


ἐστὶν ἡ-ἐντολὴ.αὐτοῦ. iva ‘moretowpev' τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ 
is hiscommandment, that weshould believe onthe name 
υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, καὶ ἀγαπῶμεν ἀλλήλους, καθὼς 
of his Son Jesus Christ, and should love oneanother, evenas 
Ν > A € ~ ‘ « ~ A ? 4 ᾽ [τὰ 
ἔδωκεν ἐντολὴν ἡμῖν. 34 καὶ ὁ τηρῶν τὰς.ἐντολὰς. αὐτοῦ, 
he gave commandment to us. And he that keeps his commandments, 
ἐν αὐτῷ μένει, καὶ αὐτὸς ἐν αὐτῷ᾽ Kai ἐν τούτῳ γινώσκομεν 
in him abides, and he in him: and by this we know 
ὅτι μενει ἐν ἡμῖν, ἐκ τοῦ πνεύματος οὗ ἡμῖν ἔδωκεν. 


that he abides in us, by the Spirit which tous he gave. 
4 ᾿Αγαπητοί, pn παντὶ πνεύματι πιστεύετε, ἀλλὰ δοκιμά- 
Beloved, ot “every ‘spirit believe, but prove 


ζετε τὰ πνεύματα, εἰ ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστιν᾽ ὅτι πολλοὶ ψευδο- 
the spirits, if of God they are; because many false 


προφῆται ἐξεληλύθασιν εἰς τὸν κόσμον. 2 ἐν τούτῳ γινώσκετε 
prophets have gone out into the world. By this ye know 
τὸ πνεῦμα TOU θεοῦ" πᾶν πνεῦμα ὃ ὁμολογεῖ Ἰησοῦν χριστὸν 
the Spirit of God: every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ 


χα ἑαυτῷ himself xT. Υ θεῖναι LTTrAW 
tongue) GLITrAaw. » ἀλλὰ τττ. 
μεθα we shall know Lrtraw. 
the heart) Ltr[a]. 


7 — mov LTTrAW. 
¢ + ἐν in (work) GLTtTraw. 

£0 τι (read whatever our heart) L. 
b ἀπ’ LTTrA. 


613 
his brother is a mur- 
derer: and ye know 
that no murderer hath 
eternal life abiding in 
him. 


16 Hereby perceive 
we the love of God, 
because he laid down 
his life for us: and 
we ought to lay down 
our lives for the bre- 
thren. 17 But whoso 
hath this world’s good, 
and seeth his brother 
have need, and shut- 
teth up his bowels of 
compassion from him, 
how dwelleth the love 
of God in him? 


18 My little chil- 
dren, let us not love 
in word, neither in 
tongue; but in deed 
and in truth. 19 And 
hereby we know that 
we are of the truth, 
and shall assure our 
hearts before him, 
20 For if our heart 
condemn us, God is 
greater than our heart, 
and knoweth all 
things. 21 Beloved, if 
our heart condemn us 
not, then have we con- 
fidence toward God. 
22 And whatsoever we 
ask, wereceive of him, 
because we keep his 
commandments, and 
do those things . hat 
are pleasing in his 
sight. 23 And this is 
his commandment, 
That we should be- 
lieve on the name of 
his Son Jesus Christ, 
and love one another, 
as he gave us com- 
mandment. 24 And he 
that keepeth his com- 
mandments dwelleth 
in him, and he inhim, 
And hereby we know 
that he abideth in us, 
by the Spirit which he 
hath given us, 


IV. Beloved, believe 
not every spirit, but 
try the spirits whe- 
ther they are of God: 
because many false 
prophets are gone out 
into the world, 2 Here- 
by know ye the Spirit 
of God: Every spirit 
that confesseth that 
Jesus Christ is come 


5. + τῇ (read with the 
ἃ — καὶ L[Tra]. 


εγνωσό- 
& — ἡμῶν (read 


i πιστεύωμεν We believe LITr; πιστεύ[σῆωμεν A. 


614 


in the flesh is of God: 
3 and every spirit that 
confesseth not that 
Jesus Christ is come in 
the flesh is not of God: 
and this is that spirit 
of antichrist, where- 
of ye have heard that 
it should come; and 
even now already is it 
in the world, 4 Ye are 
of God, little children, 
and have overcome 
them: because greater 
is he that is in you, 
than he that is in the 
world. 5 They are of 
the world: therefore 
speak they of the 
world, and the world 
heareth them. 6 We 
are of God: he that 
knoweth God heareth 
us; he that is not of 
God heareth not us. 
Hereby know we the 
spirit of truth, and the 
spirit of error. 


7 Beloved, let us 
love one another: for 
love is of God; and 
every one that loveth 
is born of God, and 
knoweth God. 8 He 
that loveth not know- 
eth not God; for God 
is love. 9 In this was 
manifested the love 
of God toward us, be- 
cause that God sent 
his only begotten Son 
into the world, that we 
might live through 
him. 10 Herein is love, 
not that we loved God, 
but that he loved us, 
and sent his Son to 
be the propitiation for 
our sins. 11 Beloved, 
if God so loved us, we 
ought also to love oue 
another. 12 No man 
hath seen God at 
any time. If we love 
one another, God 
dwelleth in us, and his 
love is perfected in us, 
15 Hereby know we 
that we dwell in him, 
and he in us, because 
he hath given us of 
his Spirit. 14 And we 
have seen and do testi- 
fy that the Father sent 
the Son to be the Sa- 
viour of the world. 


LQANNOY) A: lV. 


ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα, ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστιν. 3 Kai πᾶν πνεῦμα 
“πα = “flesh ‘come, of God is ; and any Sspirit 
(lit. every) 
a r Π 2 
ὃ μὴ ὁμολογεῖ τὸν Ἰησοῦν ἔχριστὸν ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα," ἐκ 


“which Sconfesses “ποῦ 7 Jesus ®Christ }°in *"flesh ®come, Sof 
τοῦ θεοῦ οὐκ ἔστιν Kai τοῦτό ἐστιν TO τοῦ ἀντιχρίστοιι, 
4*God ‘not 1318: and _ this is that[power]ofthe antichrist, 


ὃ ἀκηκόατε Ort 
{of] which ye heard that 
4 Ὑμεῖς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ 


ἔρχεται, καὶ νῦν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ ἐστὶν ἤδη. 
it comes, and now in the world isit already. 
ἐστε, τεκνία, καὶ νενικήκατε αὐτούς" 
Ye of God are, little children, and have overcome them, 

ὅτι μείζων ἐστὶν ὁ ἐν ὑμῖν ἢ ὁ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ. 
because greater is hewho([is}in you thanhewho[is)in the world. 
ὃ αὐτοὶ ἐκ τοῦ κόσμου εἰσίν, διὰ τοῦτο ἐκ τοῦ κόσμου a- 


They of the world are; becauseof this of the world they 
Nova, Kai ὁ κόσμος αὐτῶν ἀκούει. 6 ἡμεῖς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ 
talk, and the world *them ‘hears. We of God 
éopev’ ὁ γινώσκων τὸν θεόν, ἀκούει ἡμῶν: ὃς οὐκ.ἔστιν 
are; he ὑδμαὺ knows God, hears us; he that is not 
ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ, οὐκ-ἀκούει ἡμῶν. ἐκ τούτου γινώσκομεν τὸ πνεῦμα 
of God, hears not us. ΒΥ this weknow the _ spirit 
τῆς ἀληθείας Kai TO πνεῦμα τῆς πλάνης. 

οὗ ὑσα ἢ πᾶ 0890 spirit of error. 
7 ᾿Αγαπητοί, ἀγαπῶμεν ἀλλήλους" ὅτι ἡ ἀγάπη ἐκ τοῦ 


Beloved, 


θεοῦ ἐστιν, Kat 
°God lis, 


love 2of 


ὁ ἀγαπῶν, ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ γεγέννηται, 
loves, of God has been begotten, 
καὶ γινώσκει τὸν θεόν. 8 ὁ μὴ.ἀγαπῶν, οὐκ.ἔγνω τὸν θεόν 
and knows God, He that loves not, knew not God; 
ὅτι ὁ θεὸς ἀγάπη ἐστίν. 9 ἐν τούτῳ ἐφανερώθη ἡ ἀγάπη 
because God love ΕἼΗΣ In this wasmanifested the love 
Tou θεοῦ ἐν ἡμῖν, ὅτι τὸν.υἱὸν αὐτοῦ τὸν μονογενῆ ἀπέ- 


we should love one another; because 


πᾶς 
and everyone that 


of Godasto us, that his Son the only-begotten *has 
σταλκεν ὁ θεὸς εἰς τὸν κόσμον, ἵνα ζήσωμεν dv αὐτοῦ. 
Ssent 7God into the world, that we might live ponozen him. 
10 ἐν τούτῳ ἐστὶν ἡ ἀγάπη, οὐχ OTL ἡμεῖς ἠἡἠγαπήσαμεν τὸν 
1π this is love, not that we loved 
θεόν, ἀλλ᾽ Ore αὐτὸς ἠγάπησεν ἡμᾶς, Kai ἀπέστειλεν TOY υἱὸν 
God, but that he loved us, and sent 2Son 


αὐτοῦ ἱλασμὸν περὶ τῶν.ἁμαρτιῶν ἡμῶν. 11 ἀγαπητοί, εἰ 
"this apropitiation for our sins. Beloved, if 


οὕτως ὁ θεὸς ἠγάπησεν ἡμᾶς, Kai ἡμεῖς ὀφείλομεν ἀλλήλους 


2380 'God loved us, also we ought one another 
ἀγαπᾷν. 12 θεὸν οὐδεὶς πώποτε τεθέαται ἐὰν ἀγαπῶμεν 
to love. God ‘no 7one “at 7any time *has ‘seen; if weshould love 


ἀλλήλους, ὁ θεὸς ἐν ἡμῖν μένει, Kai ἡ.ἀγἀπη.αὐτοῦ ἱτετελειω- 


one aoOrners God in us abides, and his love Dees 
μένη ἐστὶν ἐν ἡμῖν." 18 ἐν τούτῳ γινώσκομεν ὅτι ἐν αὐτῷ 
ed ΕἼΗ. = in us. By this weknow that in him 
μένομεν, Kai αὐτὸς ἐν ἡμῖν, ὅτι ἐκ τοῦ.πνεύματος.αὐτοῖ 
we abide, and he in us, because of his Spirit 


δέδωκεν ἡμῖν. 14 καὶ ἡμεῖς τεθεάμεθα Kai μαρτυροῦμεν Ort 
he has given to us. And we have seen and  obearwitness' that 
ὁ πατὴρ ἀπέσταλκεν τὸν υἱὸν 
the Father has sent the 


σωτῆρα TOU κόσμου. 
Son [as] Saviour of the world. 


— χριστὸν Ww; — χριστὸν. ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα (read the Jesus) GLTTrA. 


1 > « a“ 
ἐν Tay 


janie ἐστίν L$; τετελ. ἐν ἡμῖν ἐστίν TTrA, 


IV, V. I JOHN. 


15 Ὃς. ἂν ὁμολογήσῃ Ori ᾿Ιησοῦς ἐστιν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ. ὁ 
Whosoever aa confess that Jesus is the Son of God, 
θεὸς ἐν αὐτῷ μένει, καὶ αὐτὸς ἐν τῷ θεῷ. 16 Kai ἡμεῖς ἐγνώ- 
God in him abides, and he in God. And we have 
καμεν καὶ πεπιστεύκαμεν THY ἀγάπην ἣν ἔχει ὁ θεὸς ἐν ἡμῖν. 
known and have believed the love δ te has ‘God asto us. 
ὁ θεὸς ἀγάπη ἐστίν, καὶ ὁ μένων ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ, ἐν τῷ τα 
God 7love 5, and he that abides in love, in 
μένει, Kai ὁ θεὸς ἐν αὐτῷ. 17 ἐν τούτῳ τετελείωται ἡ ἀγάπη 
2 and God in him, In_ this has been perfected love 
μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν, iva παῤῥησίαν ἔχωμεν ἐν TH ἡμέρᾳ τῆς κρίσεως, 
with us, that © boldness we my have in the day of a 
ὅτι καθὼς ἐκεῖνός ἐστιν, καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐσμεν ἐν τῷ.κόσμῳ. τούτῳ. 
that even as he a also. we are in this world. 
18 φόβος οὐκ.ἔστιν ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ, "ἀλλ᾽" ἡ τελεία ἀγάπη ἔξω 
*Fear ‘there “is “not in love, but perfect love out 
βάλλει τὸν φόβον, Ore ὁ φόβος κόλασιν ἔχει: ὁ. δὲ φοβού- 
casts ear; because fear “torment ‘has,andhethat fears 
μενος οὐ.-τετελείωται ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῳ. 19 {ines ἀγαπῶμεν 
has not been made perfect in love. love 
Ραὐτὸν! ὅτι “αὐτὸς" πρῶτος Peres ἡμᾶς. 
him because he firs loved us. 
20 ᾿Εάν τις εἴπῃ, 


Ὅτι ἀγαπῶ τὸν θεόν, καὶ τὸν adeh- 
If anyone should say, 


I love God, and *bro- 
pov αὐτοῦ μισῇ, Ψεύστης ἐστίν: O.yao μὴ-.ἀγαπῶν τὸν 
ther Shis tshould sees a liar he is. For he that loves not 
ἀδελφὸν.αὐτοῦ ὃν ἑώρακεν, τὸν θεὸν ὃν οὐχ.ἑώρακεν, 
his brother whom he has seen, 7God ®whom *he ?°has '!not !?seen, 
‘rc δύναται ἀγαπᾷν; 21 καὶ ταύτην τὴν ἐντολὴν ἔχο- 
‘how 7is*he*able ‘to “love? And this commandment we 
μεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, ἵνα ὁ ἀγαπῶν τὸν θεὸν ἀγαπᾷ καὶ τὸν 
have from him, that hethat loves God _ should love also 
᾽ ‘ ᾽ - ~ « , oe ? ~ > t 
ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ. δ Πᾶς 6 πιστεύων Ore ᾿Ιησοῦς ἐστιν ὁ 
7prother “his. Everyone that believes that Jesus is the 
χριστὸς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ γεγέννηται. Kai πᾶς ὁ ἀγαπῶν τὸν 
Christ, of God has been begotten; andeveryonethat loves him that 
γεννήσαντα ἀγαπᾷ "καὶ" τὸν γεγεννημένον ἐξ αὐτοῦ. 2 ἐν 
begat, loves also him that has been begotten of him. By 
τούτῳ γινώσκομεν OTL ἀγαπῶμεν τὰ τέκνα τοῦ θεοῦ, ὅταν τὸν 
this we know that we love’ the children of God, when 
θεὸν ἀγαπῶμεν καὶ τὰς.ἐντολὰς αὐτοῦ ἱτηρῶμεν." 3 αὕτη.γάρ 
God welove and _ his commandments keep. For this 
ἐστιν ἡ ἀγάπη Tov θεοῦ, ἵνα τὰς ἐντολὰς.αὐτοῦ τηρῶμεν᾽ 
is the love of God, that his commandments we should keep; 
καὶ αἱ. ἐντολαὶ αὐτοῦ βαρεῖαι οὐκ.εἰσίν. 4 ὅτι πᾶν τὸ γε- 
and hiscommandments burdensome are not. Because all that has 
γεννημένον ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ νικᾷ τὸν κόσμον" Kai αὕτη ἐστὶν 
been begotten of God overcomes the world; and _ this is 
ἡ νίκη ἡ νικήσασα τὸν κόσμον, ἡ.πίστις. ἡμῶν" 5 Tic’ 
the victory which overcame the world, our faith, Who 
ἐστιν ὁ νικῶν τὸν κόσμον, εἰμὴ ὁ πιστεύων OTL Ἰησοῦς 
is hethat overcomes the world, but hethat believes that Jesus 


ἐστιν ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ ; 
is the Son of God? 


m + μένει abides [n]ra. 0 ἀλλὰ Tr. ° + οὖν therefore L, 
90 θεὸς God L. τ οὐ (readheis notable) Lrtra. 5 [καὶ] Ltr. 
τ + [δέ] but (who) tr. 


615 


15 Whosoever shall 
confess that Jesus is 
the Son of God, God 
dwelleth in him, and 
he in God. 16 And we 
have known and be- 
lieved the love that 
God hathto us. God 
is love; and he that 
dwelleth in love dwell- 
eth in God, and God 
in him. 17 Herein is 
our love made perfect, 
that we may have 
boldness in the day of 
judgment : because as 
he is, so are we in this 
world. 18 There is no 
fear in love ; but per- 
fect love casteth out 
fear: because fear hath 
torment. He that fear- 
ethis not made per- 
fect in love. 19 We 
love him, because he 
first loved us. 


20 If a man say, I 
love God, and hateth 
his brother, he is a 
liar: for he that loveth 
not his brother whom 
he hath seen, how can 
he love God whom he 
hath not seen? 21 And 
this commandment 
have we from him, 
That he who loveth 
God love his brother 
also. V. Whosoever be- 
lieveth thatJesus is the 
Christ is born of God: 
and every one that loy- 
eth him that begat 
loveth him also that is 
begotten of him. 2 By 
this we know that we 
love the children of 
God, when we love 
God, and keep his com- 
mandments, 3 For 
this is the love of God, 
that we keep his com- 
mmandments: and his 
commandments are 
not grievous. 4 For 
whatsoever is born of 
God overcometh the 
world: and this is the 
victory that overcom- 
eth the world, even 
our faith. 5 Who is he 
that overcometh the 
world, but he that be- 
lieveth that Jesus is 
the Son of God? 


P — αὐτὸν LTTrAW. 


t ποιῶμεν May do LITraw. 


616 


6 This is he that came 
by water and blood, 
even Jesus Christ ; not 
by water only, but by 
water and blood. And 
it is the Spirit that 
beareth witness, be- 
eause the Spirit is 
truth. 7 For there are 
three that bear record 
in heaven, the Father, 
the Word, and the 
Holy Ghost : and these 
three are one. 8 And 
there are three that 
bear witness in earth, 
the Spirit, and the 
water, andthe blood: 
and these three agree 
In one. 9 If we receive 
the witness of men, 
the witness of God is 
greater: for thisisthe 
witness of God which 
he hath testified of his 
Son. 10 He that be- 
lieveth on the Son 
of God hath the wit- 
ness in himself: he 
that believeth not God 
hath made him a liar ; 
because he believeth 
not the record that 
God gave of his Son. 
11 And this is the re- 
cord, that God hath 
given to us eternal 
life, and this life 
is in his Son. 12 He 
that hath the Son hath 
life ; and he that hath 
not the Son of God 
hath not life. 


13 These things 
have I written un- 
to you that believe 
on the name of the 
Son of God; that ye 
may know that ye 
have eternal life, and 
that ye may believe 
on the name of the 
Son of God. 14 And 
this is the confidence 
that we have in him, 
that, if we ask any 
thing according to his 
will, he heareth us: 
‘6 and if we know 
shat he hear us, what- 
soever we ask, we 
know that we have the 
petitions that we de- 
sired of him. 


16 If any man see 
his brother sin a 
sin which is not unto 
death, he shall ask, 
and he shall give 
him life for them that 


T5QOeAVNEINCORY: 1 7A. ἯΙ 

6 Οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ ἐλθὼν dv ὕδατος καὶ αἵματος, Ἰησοῦς 
This is hewho came by water and blood, Jesus 

Wo! Leper ? ? ~ VO , x ἀλλ᾽" ? ~ VO. iy 
XPLOTOC οὐκ ἕν τῳ VOaTL Povoy, a. ἐν τῳ VOATL Kat 

the Christ; not by water only, but by water and 


τῷ αἵματι" Kai TO πνεῦμά ἐστιν TO μαρτυροῦν OTL TO πνεῦμά 
blood. Andthe Spirit it is that bears witness, because thg Spirit 
ἐστιν ἡ ἀλήθεια. 7 ὅτι τρεῖς εἰσιν οἱ μαρτυροῦντες *év τῷ 
is the truth. Because three there are who bear witness in 
οὐρανῷ, ὁ πατήρ, ὁ λόγος, Kai TO ἅγιον πνεῦμα" Kai οὗτοι 
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these 
οἱ τρεῖς ἕν εἰσιν. 8 καὶ τρεῖς εἰσιν οἱ μαρτυροῦντες ἐν TH 
three one are. And three thereare who’ bear witness on 
YQ," TO πνεῦμα, καὶ TO ὕδωρ, καὶ TO αἷμα, καὶ οἱ τρεῖς εἰς TO 


earth, the Spirit, and the water, andthe blood; and the three to the 
ἕν εἰσιν. 9 εἰ τὴν μαρτυρίαν τῶν ἀνθρώπων λαμβάνο- 
one [point] are. If the witness of men we re- 
μὲν, ἡ μαρτυρία τοῦ θεοῦ μείζων ἐστίν: ὅτι αὕτη ἐστὶν 
ceive, the witness of God “greater lis. Because this is 


ἡ μαρτυρία τοῦ θεοῦ, ἣν μεμαρτύρηκεν περὶ τοῦ. υἱοῦ.αὐτοῦ. 
the witness of God which he has witnessed concerning his Son. 
10 ὁ πιστεύων εἰς τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ ἔχει τὴν μαρτυρίαν ἐν 
Hethat believes on the Son of God has the witness in 
“ἑαυτῷ ὁ μὴ.-πιστεύων “τῷ θεῷ ψεύστην πεποίηκεν αὐτόν, 
himself; he that believes not God *q Sliar *has*made “him, 
OTL οὐ-.πεπίστευκεν εἰς THY μαρτυρίαν, ἣν μεμαρτύρηκεν ὁ 
because he has not believed in the witness which “has “witnessed 
θεὸς περὶ τοῦ.υἱοῦ αὐτοῦ. 11 Kai αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ μαρτυρία 


God concerning his Son. And this is the witness, 
Ore ζωὴν αἰώνιον ἔδωκεν ἡμῖν ὁ θεός" Kai αὕτη ἡ ζωὴ ἐν τῷ 
that life eternal *gave  *to*us ‘God; and _ this life ?in 
vig αὐτοῦ ἐστιν. 12 ὁ ἔχων τὸν υἱόν, ἔχει THY ζωήν ὁ 
“Son “his lis: hethat 88 the Son, has life: he that 
μὴ-ἔχων τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ, THY ζωὴν οὐκ. ἔχει. 

has not the Son of God, life has not. 


18 Ταῦτα ἔγραψα ὑμῖν “τοῖς πιστεύουσιν εἰς τὸ ὄνομα 

These things Iwrote toyou who believe on the name 

τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ," ἵνα εἰδῆτε Ori ζωὴν féyere αἰώνιον," ἐκαὶ 

of the Son of God, that yemay know that ‘life *ye “have *eternal, and 

iva πιστεύητε! εἰς TO ὄνομα τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ. 14 Kai αὕτη 

that γ8 Ὁ believe on the name ofthe Son of God. And this 
ἐστὶν ἡ παῤῥησία ἣν ἔχομεν πρὸς αὐτόν, “dre ἐάν τι" 


is the boldness which wehave towards him, that if anything 
αἰτώμεθα κατὰ τὸ.θέλημα.αὐτοῦ, ἀκούει ἡμῶν: 15 καὶ 
we may ask according to his will, he hears us. And 


Ἰξὰν" οἴδαμεν ὅτι ἀκούει ἡμῶν, OKdy' αἰτώμεθα, οἴδαμεν ὅτι 
if we know that hehears us, whatsoever we may ask, we know that 
» . ΄ © ΄ ? ? ~ 
ἔχομεν τὰ αἰτήματα ἃ φτήκαμεν ‘rag’! αὐτοῦ. 
we have ὑπὸ requests which we haveasked from him. 
16 Ἐάν zie ἴδῃ! τὸν. ἀδελφὸν. αὐτοῦ ἁμαρτάνοντα 
If anyone should see his brother sinning 
ἁμαρτίαν μὴ πρὺς θάνατον, αἰτήσει, καὶ δώσει αὐτῷ ζωήν, 
a sin not to death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life 


Ὁ — ὃ TTrAW. 
verse 8 GLTTraw. 
υἱῷ the Son i. 
ἔχετε G. 


hove ἂν whatever L. 


8 ὅτι that LTTrAW. ; < 
© — τοῖς πιστεύουσιν εἰς TO ὄνομα TOU υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ GLTTrAW. : 
8 ot πιστεύοντες [ye] believers GLW ; τοῖς πιστεύουσιν to [you] who believe TTra, 


τῷ οὐρ ++ τῇ γῇ 
ς αὐτῷ him ΤΊΓΑ. “τῴ 
f αἰώνιον 


x ἀλλὰ Tr. y + ἐν by LITraw. : --- ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ. 


Ὁ + τοῦ θεοῦ of God L. 


i ἂν L. k ἐὰν T. lan’ LYTr. ™ «67 L. 


ΤΙΕΤΘΗ Ν: 


ἁμαρτάνουσιν μὴ πρὸς θάνατον. ἔστιν ἁμαρτία 

sin not to death. There is asin 
οὐ περὶ ἐκείνης λέγω ἵνα ἐρωτήσῃ 
ποῦ Concer ΠΡῚΝ that doIsay that he should beseech. 


ἁμαρτία ἐστίν, καὶ ἔστιν ἁμαρτία οὐ mpoc 
Every unrighteousness “sin lis; and thereis asin not 


θάνατον. 18 οἴδαμεν ὅτι πᾶς ὁ 
death. We know that “anyone *that *has *been ®begotten “of 
(lit. everyone) 


οὐχ ἁμαρτάνει" "ἀλλ᾽ ὁ γεννηθεὶς ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ τηρεῖ “ἑαυ- 
tot sins, but hethat was begotten of God_ keeps him- 
τόν," Kai ὁ πονηρὸς οὐχ.-ἅπτεται αὐτοῦ. 19 οἴδαμεν ὅτι 
self, and the wicked fone] does not touch him. We know that 


ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐσμεν, Kai ὁ κόσμος ὅλος ἐν τῷ πονηρῷ κεῖται. 
of God weare, andthe *world ‘whole in the wicked [one] 1165. 


20 Ροΐδαμεν.δὲ! ὅτι ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ ἥκει, καὶ δέδωκεν ἡμῖν 
μ ἥ ’ ἡμ 
And we know thatthe Son of God iscome, and hasgiven {8 


διάνοιαν ἵνα SywwoKwpev τὸν ἀληθινόν" καί ἐσμεν 
an understanding that wemight know him that [15] true ; and weare 
ἐν τῷ ἀληθινῷ, ἔν τῷ.υἱῷφ. αὐτοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστῷ. οὗτός 
in him that [158] true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He 
? e Σὰ 4 , ‘ r « il ‘ ΞΟ 
ἐστιν ὁ ἀληθινὸς θεός, καὶ τὴ" ζωὴ αἰώνιος. 

is the true God, and life eternal. 

21 Texvia, φυλάξατε δἑαυτοὺς" ἀπὸ τῶν εἰδώλων. ἀμήν." 

Little children, keep yourselves from idols, Amen, 


“Iwdvvov ἐπιστολὴ καθολ ὅτη." 
ὠαννοῦ ETTLOTOAN) KAUVO UK?) T PWT). 
*Of ‘John “epistle ?general ‘first. 


τοῖς 
for those that 
πρὸς θάνατον" 
ἴο death ; 
17 πᾶσα ἀδικία 


γεγεννημένος ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ 
®God 


ΔΕ ΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ 


2EPISTLE 7OF *JOHN *SECOND. 


1 ϑ' | ‘ ~ , ΡΞ 
Ὃ πρεσβύτερος ϑἐκλεκτῇ “κυρίᾳ" καὶ. τοῖς. τέκνοις αὐτῆς, 


The elder to [the] elect lady and her children, 
οὺς ἐγὼ ἀγαπῶ ἐν ἀληθείᾳ, καὶ οὐκ ἐγὼ μόνος, ἀλλὰ καὶ 


whom I love in truth, and not I only, but also 
πάντες οἱ ἐγνωκότες τὴν ἀλήθειαν, 2 διὰ τὴν ἀλή- 
all those who have known the truth, for sake of the 


θειαν τὴν μένουσαν ἐν ἡμῖν, καὶ μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν ἔσται εἰς.τὸν. αἰῶνα" 
truth which abides in us, and with 18 shall be for ever. 


8 ἔσται μεθ᾽ TL χάρις, ἔλεος, εἰρήνη παρὰ θεοῦ πατρὸς 
2Shall *be *with ‘grace, mercy, peace, from God [the] ἜΡΙΔΟΣ; 


καὶ παρὰ ἌΝ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ πατρός, ἐν 


and from [{86] Lord Jesus Christ, the Son ofthe Father, in 
ἀληθείᾳ Kai ἀγάπῃ. 
truth πᾶ love, 
4 Ἐχάρην λίαν bre εὕρηκα ἐκ τῶν.τέκνων. σου περιπα- 
I pe cased exceedingly that I have found of thy children walk- 
τοῦντας ἐν ἀληθείᾳ, καθὼς ἐντολὴν ἐλάβομεν παρὰ τοῦ 


IQANNOY ΔΕΥΤΈΡΑ. 


617 
sin not unto death. 
There is a sin unto 
death: I do not say 
that he shall pray for 
it. 17 All unright- 
eousness is sin: and 
there is a sin not 
unto death. 18 We 
know that whosoever 
is born of God sinneth 
not ; but hethat is be- 
gotten of God keepeth 
himself, and that wic- 
ked one toucheth him 
not. 19 And we know 
that we are of God, 
and the whole world 
licth in wickedness. 
20 And we know that 
theSon of God is come, 
and hath given us an 
understanding, that 
we may know him that 
is true, and we are in 
him that is true, even 
in his Son Jesus Christ. 
This is the true God, 
and eternal life. 


21 Little children, 
keep yourselves from 
idols, Amen, 


THE elder unto the 
elect lady and her 
children, whom I love 
in the truth ; and not 
I only, but also all 
they that have known 
the Marathi 2 for the 
truth’s sake, which 
dwelleth in us, and 
shall be with us for 
ever. 3 Grace be with 
you, merey, and peace, 
from God the Father, 
and from the Lord Je- 
sus Christ, the Son of 
the Father, in truth 
and love. 


4 I rejoiced greatly 
that I found of thy 
children walking in 
truth, as we have re-~ 
ceived a command- 
ment from the Father, 


ing in truth, as commandment we received from the 
2 ἀλλὰ Tr. © αὐτόν him TTra. P καὶ οἴδαμεν GL. 
τ- ἡ ΕΥ̓ΤΤΑ. 3 ἑαυτὰ LTTr. t — ἀμήν GLTTrAw. 


ἸἸωάνου a Tr; Ἰωάννου a’ A. 


a + τοῦ gnogroAov the apostle E; + καθολικὴ general E; Ἰωάννου β΄ LTaw; 
Ὁ Stephens puts a capital’E, reading the word as a pr oper name. 
d ὑμῶν you EGLW. 


ἐπιστολὴ β΄ Tr. 
© Κυρίᾳ Cyria (reading the word as a proper name) GLT. 
ptov LTTrAW. 


q γινώσκομεν we a TTra. 
— the subscription EGLTW ; 


Ἰωάνον 


ε-- κὺ- 


618 


5 And now I beseech 
thee, lady, not as 
though I wrote a new 
commandment unto 
thee, but that which 
we had from the be- 
ginning, that we love 
one another. 6 And 
this is love, that we 
walk after his com- 
mandments. This is 
the commandment, 
That, as ye have heard 
from the beginning, 

e should walk in it. 

For many deceivers 
are entered into the 
world, who confess 
not that Jesus Christ 
is come in the flesh. 
This is a deceiver and 
an antichrist. 8 Look 
to yourselves, that 
we lose not those 
things which we have 
wrought, but that we 
receive a full reward. 
9 Whosoever trans- 
gresseth, and abideth 
not in the doctrine of 
Christ, hath not God. 
He that abideth in the 
doctrine of Christ, he 
hath both the Father 
and the Son. 10 If 
there come any unto 
you, and bring not 
this doctrine, receive 
him not into your 
house, neither bid him 
God speed: 11 for he 
that biddeth him God 
speed is partaker of 
his evil deeds, 


12 Having many 
things to write unto 
you, 1 would not write 
with paper and ink: 
but I trust to come 
unto you, and speak 
face to face, that our 
joy may befull. 13 The 
children of thy elect 
sister greet thee. A- 
men. 


ΤΩ ΤΑΝ NVOVY 7 TB. 

πατρός. ὃ καὶ νῦν ἐρωτῶ σε, ‘kupia,' οὐχ ὡς ἐντολὴν 
Father. And now I beseech thee, lady, not as a 7commandment 
Sypagw σοι καινήν," ἀλλὰ ἣν — “elyouev" ἀπ᾽ ἀρ- 
31 *write δἴο ποθ ‘new, but that which we were having from [the] begin- 
χῆς; wa ἀγαπῶμεν ἀλλήλους. 6 καὶ αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ ἀγάπη, 
ning, that weshould love one another. And this is love, 
ἵνα περιπατῶμεν κατὰ τὰς. ἐντολὰς. αὐτοῦ. αὕτη izoriv ἡ 
that weshould walk according to his commandments. This is the 

ἐντολή," ἘἙ καθὼς ἠκούσατε ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς, ἵνα ἐν αὐτῇ 


commandment, even as ye heard from [the] beginning, that in it 
meoimaryre 7 Ott πολλοὶ πλάνοι ἱἰεἰσῆλθον! εἰς τὸν 
ye might walk. Because many _ deceivers entered into the 


κόσμον, οἱ μὴ-ὁμολογοῦντες ᾿Ιησοῦν χριστὸν ἐρχόμενον ἐν 
world, thosewho donot confess Jesus Christ coming in 
σαρκί: οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ πλάνος Kai ὁ ἀντίχριστος. 8 βλέπετε 
flesh— _ this is the deceiver andthe antichrist. See to 
ἑαυτούς, ἵνα μὴ "ἀπολέσωμεν" ἃ πεἰργασάμεθα," ἀλλὰ 
yourselves, that *not we *may lose what things we wrought, but 
μισθὸν πλήρη ἀπολάβωμεν." 9 πᾶς ὁ PrapaBaivwy,' Kai 
a 7reward ‘full we may receive. *Anyone*who ‘transgresses, ‘and 
(lit. everyone) 


μὴ.μένων ἐν τῇ διδαχῇ τοῦ χριστοῦ, θεὸν οὐκ ἔχει' ὁ 
®abides 7not ®in *the }°teaching ''of '*the ‘*Christ, ᾿δαοᾶ ‘not ‘has. He that 
μένων ἐν τῇ διδαχῇ “τοῦ χριστοῦ," οὗτος καὶ τὸν πατέρα 
abides in the teachingofthe Christ, this [one] both the Father 
καὶ τὸν υἱὸν ἔχει. 10 εἴ τις ἔρχεται πρὸς ὑμᾶς, Kai ταύτην 
and the Son has, If anyone comes to you, and this 
τὴν διδαχὴν ov.gépet, μὴ.λαμβάνετε αὐτὸν εἰς οἰκίαν, 
teaching does not bring, do not receive him into (the) house, 


καὶ χαίρειν αὐτῷ μὴ λέγετε. 11 ὁ. "γὰρ λέγων" αὐτῷ χαίρειν, 


and ἮἬἪΔ1)| ‘*to®him ‘say not; for he who says tohim Hail! 
κοινωνεῖ τοῖς ἔργοις αὐτοῦ τοῖς πονηροῖς. 
partakes in “works ‘this evil. 


12 Πολλὰ ἔχων ὑμῖν γράφειν, οὐκ."ἠβουλήθην᾽ διὰ χάρ- 


Many things having *to *you ‘to ?write, I would not with = pa- 
του καὶ μέλανος" ᾿ἀλλὰ ἐλπίζω" "ἐλθεῖν" πρὸς ὑμᾶς, Kai στόμα 


per and ink; but hope tocome ἴο you, and mouth 
εἶ , ~ e € \ wt ~ il x.F Xr , " 
πρὸς στόμα λαλῆσαι, ἵνα ἡ χαρὰ “ημῶν" “ῃ-πεπληρωμενη. 
ἴο mouth tospeak, that “joy our may be full. 
13 ἀσπάζεταί σε τὰ τέκνα τῆς ἀδελφῆς σου τῆς Τἐκλεκ- 
7Salute ®thee ‘the *children Ssister “of *thine elect. 
~ Ι ? , ll 
τῆς." τάμην. 
Amen. 


a , ? ‘ , I! 
Iwavvov ἐπιστολὴ δευτέρα. 
30 *John 7epistle *second. 


{Κυρία Cyria (see verse 1) @LT. 
b εἴχαμεν TTr. 
Gav (-θον TAW) went forth Ltr. 


σοι LTTr. 


ye wrought LTTrw. 
LTTraw. 


t ἐλπίζω yap for I hope 61. 
y See note Ὁ verse 1. 


ρωμένη ἡ LT. 


ᾳ --- τοῦ χριστοῦ LTTrAW. 


ΒΕ γράφων (writing) σοι καινὴν FGAW; καινὴν γράφων 

iq ἐντολή ἐστιν LTTrAW. k + ἵνα that Υ. 1 ἐξηλ- 
™ ἀπολέσητε ye May lose LTTraW. π εἰργάσασθε 

P προάγων goes forward 
τ λέγων yap LTTrA. 5 ἐβουλήθην LTTrAW. 
ν ὑμῶν your LTrA. X πεπλη- 
8. — the subscription EGLTW ; 


° ἀπολάβητε ye may receive LTTrAW. 


ἡ γενέσθαι LITrAW. 
2 -- ἀμήν GLTTrAW. 


Iwavov β΄ tr; ᾿Ιωάννον β΄ A. 


"ΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗ IQANNOY ‘TPITH." 


?HPISTLE 30F *JOHN ‘THIRD. 


a 
ον 
whom 


Ὃ πρεσβύτερος Γαΐῳ τῷ ἀγαπητῷ, 
The elder to Gaius the beloved, 
ἀληθείᾳ. 
truth. 
2 ᾿Αγαπητέ, περὶ 
Beloved, concerning all things 
ὑγιαίνειν, καθὼς εὐοδοῦταί cov 


πάντων εὔχομαί σε εὐοδοῦσθαι καὶ 
Iwish thee toprosper and 


ἡ ψυχή. 3 ἐχάρην “γὰρ" 


be in health, evenas prospers thy soul, For I rejoiced 
λίαν ἐρχομένων ἀδελφῶν καὶ μαρτυρούντων σου τῇ 
exceedingly, *coming (‘the] *brethren and _ bearing witness of thy 


2 , ‘ ‘4 > ? ΄ - , , 
ἀληθείᾳ, καθὼς σὺ ἐν ἀληθείᾳ περιπατεῖς. 4 μειζοτέραν τού- 
truth, even as thou in truth walkest. 5Greater Sthan 
των οὐκιἔχω χαράν, ἵνα ἀκούω τὰ ἐμὰ τέκνα ἐν ἃ 
"these*things ‘I*have*not ‘joy, that Ishould hearof mychildren in 
ἀληθείᾳ περιπατοῦντα. 5 ᾿Αγαπητέ, πιστὸν ποιεῖς ὃ ἐὰν 
truth walking. Beloved, faithfully thou doest whatever 
ἐἐργάσῃ" εἰς τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς καὶ feie τοὺς" 
thou mayest have wrought towards the brethren and towards 
ξένους, 6 ot ἐμαρτύρησάν σου τῇ ἀγάπῃ ἐνώπιον ἐκ- 
strangers, (who witnessed of thy love before [the] as- 
κλησίας" ovc καλῶς ποιήσεις προπέμψας ἀξίως τοῦ θεοῦ" 
sembly) whom *well ®thou ’wilt *do ‘setting *forward *worthily *of*God; 
7 ὑπὲρ. γὰρ Tov ὀνόματος ὃ δέξῆλθον" μηδὲν λαμβάνοντες 
for,for the name they went forth, “nothing ‘taking 
ἀπὸ τῶν ἐθνῶν." 8 ἡμεῖς οὖν ὀφείλομεν -arrodapBaverr' 
from the nations, We therefore ought to receive 
AY , “ ‘ , ~ > , » 
τοὺς τοιούτους, ἵνα συνεργοὶ γινώμεθα τῇ ἀληθείᾳ. 9 ἜἜ- 
such, that fellow-workers we may be withthe truth. I 
] ~ ? Pi are ? ? ε , ? ~ 
yoala’ ry ἐκκλησίᾳ, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ φιλοπρωτεύων αὐτῶν 
wrote tothe assembly; but “who “loves *to *be °first 7among *them 
Ὁ Αιοτρεφὴς" οὐκ ἐπιδέχεται ἡμᾶς. 10 διὰ τοῦτο, ἐὰν ἔλθω, 
*Dictrephes, receives not us. On account of this, if Icome, 
ὑπομνήσω αὐτοῦ τὰ ἔργα ἃ ποιεῖ, λόγοις 
I will bring toremembrance of him the works which he does, with *words 
πονηροῖς φλυαρῶν ἡμᾶς" Kai μὴ ἀρκούμενος ἐπὶ τούτοις, 
teyil prating against us; and not satisfied with these, 
οὔτε αὐτὸς ἐπιδέχεται τοὺς ἀδελφούς, Kai τοὺς βουλομέ- 


neither himself receives the brethren, and those who would 
νους κωλύει, Kai πὲκ' τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἐκβάλλει. 11 ’Aya- 
he forbids, and from the assembly casts [them] out. Be- 


πητέ, μὴ. μιμοῦ τὸ κακόν, ἀλλὰ τὸ ἀγαθόν. ὁ 
loved, donotimitate that which [is] evil, but what{[is] good. He that 
ἀγαθοποιῶν, ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστιν ὁ “δὲ κακοποιῶν οὐχ ἑώ- 
does good, of God is ; but he that does evil ποῦ ‘has 
ρακεν τὸν θεόν. 12 Δημητρίῳ μεμαρτύρηται ὑπὸ πάντων, Kai 
seen God. To Demetrius witnessis borne by all, and 


THE el¢er unto the 
wellbeloved Gaius, 
whom 1 love in the 
truth. 


2 Beloved, I wish a- 
bove all things that 
thou mayest prosper 
and be in health, even 
as thy soul prospereth. 
3 For I rejoiced great- 
ly, when the brethren 
came and testified of 
the truth that is in 
thee, even as thou 
walkest in the truth. 
4 I have no greater 
joy than to hear that 
my children walk in 
truth. 5 Beloved, thou 
doest faithfully what- 
soever thou doest to 
the brethren, and to 
strangers; 6 which 
have borne witness of 
thy charity before the 
church : whom if thou 
bring forward on their 
journey after a godly 
sort, thou shalt do 
well: 7 because that 
for his name’s sake 
they went forth, tak- 
ing nothing of the 
Gentiles. 8 We there- 
fore ought to receive 
such, that we might 
be fellowhelpers to 
the truth. 9 I wrote 
unto the church: but 
Diotrephes, who lov- 
eth to have _ the 
preeminence among 
them, receiveth us not. 
10 Wherefore, if I 
come, I will remember 
his deeds which he do- 
eth, prating against 
us with malicious 
words: and not con- 
tent therewith, nei- 
ther doth he himself 
receive the brethren, 
and forbiddeth them 
that would, and cast- 
eth them out of the 
church. 11 Beloved, 
follow not that which 
is evil, but that which 
is good. He that doeth 
good is of God: but 
he that doeth evil hath 
not seen God. 12 De- 
metrius hath good 
report of all men, 


Ὁ + τοῦ ἀποστόλου the apostle E; + καθολικὴ general Ε; "Iwavvov γ΄ 


ἐπιστολὴ γ΄ Tr. © — γὰρ 1[Tr]. d + τῇ the LTTraw. 
f τοῦτο that LTTraw. & + αὐτοῦ (read his name) E. 
(read those of the nations) Lrtraw. 


somewhat LTTraw. m Διοτρέφης LA. Ὁ — ἐκ (read [from]) T. 


LTAW; ‘Iwavav 


© ἐργάζῃ thou workest t. 
h ἐξῆλθαν LITr. 
Κ ὑπολαμβάνειν to sustain LTTraw. 


1 ἐθνωετῶν 
ἐπ εἴτι 


o — δὲ but GLTTraw. 


620 


and of the truth it- 


self: yea, and we also 
bear record; and ye 
know that our record 
is true. 


131 had many things 
to write, but I will 
not with ink and pen 
writeunto thee: 14 but 
I trust I shall shortly 
see thee, and we shall 
speak face to face. 
Peace beto thee. Our 
friends salute thee. 
Greet the friends by 
name. 


LOYA AS: 
Pix’! αὐτῆς τῆς ἀληθείας" Kai ἡμεῖς δὲ μαρτυροῦμεν, Kai 
by 3itself ‘the *truth; and we also bear witness, and 
Joidare! ὅτι ἡ-μαρτυρία.ἡμῶν ἀληθής ἐστιν. 
ye know that our witness *true tis. 


15 Πολλὰ εἶχον Typagey,' ἀλλ᾽ οὐ.θέλω διὰ μέλανος Kai 


Many things I had towrite, but Iwill not with ink and 
καλάμου ὅσοι γράψαι" 14 ἐλπίζω.δὲ εὐθέως "ἰδεῖν σε," 
pen 5to *thee ‘to *write ; but [hope immediately tosee thee, 


καὶ στόμα πρὸς στόμα λαλήσομεν. 15 Εἰρήνη σοι. ἀσπά- 
and mouth to mouth we shall speak. Peace to thee. 3Sa- 


Zovrai σε ot φίλοι. ἀσπάζου τοὺς φίλους κατ᾽ ὄνομα. 


lute *thee ‘the *friends. Salute the friends by name. 
VY Iwavvov ἐπιστολὴ καθολικὴ τρίτη." 
*Of *John Sepistle *ceneral ‘third. 


4EMISPOAH. TOY TOYAA, KAGOATKE:! 


JUDE, the servant of 
Jesus Christ, and bro- 
ther of James, to them 
that are sanctified by 
God the Father, and 
preserved in Jesus 
Christ, and called: 
2 Mercy unto you, and 
peace, and love, be 
multiplied. 


3 Beloved, when I 
gave all diligence to 
write unto you of the 
common salvation, it 
was needful for me to 
write unto you, and 
exhort you that ye 
should earnestly con- 
tend for the faith 
which was once deliy- 
ered unto the saints. 
4 For there are-cer- 
tain men crept in una- 
wares, who were be- 
fore of old ordained 
to this condemnation, 
ungodly men, turning 
the grace'of our God 
into lasciviousness, 
and denying the only 
Lord God, and our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 


5 I will therefore 
put you in remem- 
brance, though ye 
once knew this, how 
that the Lord, having 
saved the people out 
of the land of Egypt, 
afterward destroyed 
them that believed 


2HPISTLE 


°OF *JUDE 1GENERAL. 


"IOYAAS ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ δοῦλος, ἀδελφὸς.δὲ ᾿Ιακώβου, τοῖς 


Jude, of Jesus Christ bondman, and brother of James, tothe 
ἐν θεῷ πατρὶ Ῥὴήγιασμένοις" καὶ ἸΙησοῦ χριστῷ τετηρη- 
4in 5God (*the] 7Father ᾿βαπού θα Sand ?°in ‘Jesus +*Christ ®kept 
μένοις κλητοῖς" 2 ἔλεος ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη καὶ ἀγάπη 


‘ealled [0165]. 
πληθυνθείη. 
be multiplied. 

3 ᾿Αγαπητοί, πᾶσαν σπουδὴν ποιούμενος γράφειν ὑμῖν 

Beloved, 3411 *diligence ‘using to write to you 

περὶ τῆς κοινῆς “ σωτηρίας, ἀνάγκην ἔσχον γράψαι ὑμῖν, 


Mercy toyou and peace, and love 


concerning the common salvation, necessity Thad towrite to you, 
παρακαλῶν ἐπαγωνίζεσθαι τῇ ἅπαξ παραδοθείσῃ τοῖς 
exhorting [you] tocontendearnestly forthe “once *delivered “ἴο the 
ἁγίοις πίστει. 4 παρεισέδυσαν.γάρ τινες ἄνθρωποι, οἱ 
Ssaints faith. For came in stealthily certain men, they who 
πάλαι προγεγραμμένοι εἰς τοῦτο TO κρίμα, ἀσεβεῖς 


of old have been before marked out to this sentence, ungodly [persons] 


τὴν τοῦ.θεοῦ.ἡμῶν “χάριν᾽ μετατιθέντες εἰς ἀσέλγειαν καὶ τὸν 


2088 *of ur οὔ Sorace ‘changing into licentiousnessand “the 
μόνον δεσπότην °Oedv' καὶ κύριον. ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦν χριστὸν 
Sonly “master— 5God ‘and our *Lord °Jesus *°Christ 
ἀρνούμενοι. 

ἐᾷρηγίπρ. 

5 Ὑπομνῆσαι. δὲ ὑμᾶς βούλομαι, εἰδότας ὑμᾶς" ἅπαξ 

But *put °in®*remembrance *you ἿἿ σοι], *knowing ‘you once 

ἐτοῦτο." ὅτι "δ" κύριος" λαὸν ἐκ γῆς Αἰγύπτου σώ- 

this, that the Lord a people out of({the] land of Egypt having 


σας, τὸ.δεύτερον τοὺς μὴ.πιστεύσαντας ἀπώλεσεν. 6 ay- 
saved, in the second place those who believed not he destroyed. 


P ὑπὸ T. 


LTTrAaw. 
?— ὑμᾶς LTTrAW. 


4 oidas thou knowest LTTra. 
5 γράφειν got L3 σοι γράφειν TTrAw. 
᾿Ἰωάνου γ΄ τ᾿; ᾿Ιωάννου γ΄ A. 

a + ἀποστόλου apostle  ; ᾿Ιούδα ἐπιστολή GLTrW ; Ἰούδα ΤΑ. 
c+ ἡμῶν (read our common) LTTrA, 


aie τ γράψαι σοι to write to thee LTTraw. 
t oe ἰδεῖν LTTrAW. v — the subscription EGLTW; 


> ἠγαπημένοις beloved 
ε-- θεὸν GLTTrAW 
1 Ἰησοῦς Jesus LA. 


4 χάριτα LTTrAW. 


8 πάντα all things Lrrraw. bh — ὃ (Tra. 


JUDE. 
γέλους τε τοὺς μὴ τηρήσαντας τὴν.ἑαυτῶν ἀρχήν, ἀλλὰ 


Angels ‘and who kept not their own first-state, but 
ἀπολιπόντας τὸ ἴδιον οἰκητήριον, εἰς κρίσιν μεγάλης 
left their own dwelling, unto([the] judgment of [the] great 


ἡμέρας δεσμοῖς ἀϊδίοις ὑπὸ ζόφον τετήρηκεν" 7 ὡς Σόδομα 
day 


in *bonds ‘eternal under darkness he keeps; as Sodom 


καὶ Topoppa, καὶ ai περὶ αὐτὰς πόλεις, τὸν ὅμοιον ἰτού- 
and Gomorrha, and the ?around *them 1cities, inlike ?with 
τοις τρόπον" ἐκπορνεύσασαι. καὶ ἀπελθοῦσαι 
3} ‘manner having given themselves to fornication and having gone 
ὀπίσω σαρκὸς ἑτέρας, πρόκεινται δεῖγμα, πυρὸς αἰωνίου 

after flesh ‘other, aresetforthas an example, “οὗ *fire ‘eternal 


δίκην ὑπέχουσαι. 8 ὁμοίως. μέντοι καὶ οὗτοι ἐνυπνια- 
(7the]} *penalty pon dessunies Yet inlike manner 4150 these dream- 


ζόμενοι, σάρκα μὲν μιαίνουσιν, κυριότητα.δὲ ἀθετοῦσιν, 
ers (?the] *flesh 1defile, and Py 4set 7aside, 


δόξας. δὲ βλασ ημοῦσιν. 9 τὸ δὲ Μιχαὴλ ὁ ἀρχάγγελος, 
and*glories ‘speak evil "οὗ. But Michael the archangel, 


πὕτε' τῷ διαβόλῳ διακρινόμενος διελέγετο περὶ τοῦ °Mw- 
when with the devil disputing he reasoned about the "of 


σέως" σώματος, οὐκ.ἐτόλμησεν κρίσιν ἐπενεγκεῖν βλασ- 
=Moses "body, did not dare °a 7charge "to He Sagainst([*thim) ®rail- 


φημίας, Pann’! εἶπεν, ᾿πιτιμήσαι σοι κύριος. 10 οὗτοι.δὲ 
ing, but said, ?Rebuke ‘thee [6] *Lord. But these, 


ὅσα μὲν οὐκ.οἴδασιν βλασφημοῦσιν᾽ ὅσα.δὲ 

whatever things they know not theyspeak evilof; but whatever things 
φυσικῶς, ὡς τὰ ἄλογα ζῶα, ἐπίστανται, ἐν τούτοις 
naturally, as the irrational animals, they understand, in these things 

o0eipovra. 11 οὐαὶ αὐτοῖς. bre τῇ ὁδῷ τοῦ Κάϊν 
they ee themselves. Woe tothem! because in the way of Cain 
ἐπορεύθησαν, Kat τῇ πλάνῃ τοῦ Βαλαὰμ μισθοῦ ἐξεχύθησαν, 

they went, and tothe error of Balaam for reward rushed, 

καὶ τῇ ἀντιλογίᾳ τοῦ Κορὲ ἀπώλοντο. 
and in the Spinsaying of Korah perished. 


ταῖς.ἀγάπαις. ὑμῶν σπιλάδες, συνευωχούμενοιϊ 
your love feasts 


12 οὗτοί εἰσιν 4 ἐν 

These are in 
? », 
ἀφόβως," 

sunkenrocks, feasting together Ewasle you] Pa eel 


ἑαυτοὺς ποιμαίνοντες" νεφέλαι ἄνυδροι, ὑπὸ ἀνέμων 
2themselves ἘΒΆΒΙΠΣΙΒΕ; clouds without water, by winds 


"περιφερόμεναι"" δένδρα φθινοπωρινὰ ἄκαρπα δὶς ἀποθα- 
being carried about, trees Jautumnal, without fruit, twice dead, 


γνόντα éxpilw0évra’ 18 κύματα ἄγρια θαλάσσης ἐπαφρίζοντα 
rooted up; ; 2waves ‘wild of[the]sea, foaming out 


τὰς. ἑαυτῶν αἰσχύνας" ἀστέρες πλανῆται, οἷς ὁ ζόφος τοῦ 
their own shames ; 4stars wandering, to whom the gloom 


σκότους εἰς 'τὸν" αἰῶνα τετήρηται. 14 προεφήτευσεν" δὲ Kai 
of darkness for ever has been kept. And prophesied ‘also 


τούτοις ἕβδομος ἀπὸ “Addu ᾿Ενώχ, λέγων, ᾿Ιδού, 
Sas ἴο these Ethel ena *from ἐκ A ee saying, Behold, 


ἦλθεν κύριος ἐν “μυριάσιν ἁγίαις" αὐτοῦ, 15 ποιῆσαι 
Secame ['the] 2Lord amidst “myriads “holy this, to execute 
κρίσιν κατὰ πάντων, Kai "ἐξελέγξαι" πάντας τοὺς ἀσεβεῖς 
judgment against all, and toconvict all the ungodly 


1 τπρόπον τούτοις LTTrAW. τῷ ὅτε when L. 
LTTraw. P ἀλλὰ LTTrAW. 
Tr place the comma after συνευ- 


GLTTrAaw. ¥ ἐπροφήτευσεν TTr. we ἁγίαις μυριάσιν GLTTrAW. 


= τότε at that time L. 
4 + ot (read the sunken rocks) trtra. 

* παραφερόμεναι being carried along GLTTraw. 
x ἐλέγξαι LTTrA. 


621 


not. 6 And the angels 
which kept not their 
first estate, but left 
their own habitation, 
he hath reserved in 
everlasting chains un- 
der darkness unto the 
judgment of the great 
day. 7 Even as Sodom 
and Gomorrha, and 
the cities about them 
in like manner, giving 
themselves over to 
fornication, and going 
after strange flesh, ara 
set forth for an ex- 
ample, sufiering the 
vengeance of eternal 
fire. 8 Likewise also 
these filthy dreamers 
defile the flesh, despise 
dominion, and speak 
evil of dignities.9 Yet 
Michael thearchangel, 
when contending with 
the devil he disputed 
about the body of Mo- 
ses, durst not bring a- 
gainst him a railing 
accusation, but said, 
The Lord rebuke thee. 
10 But these speak evil 
of those things which 
they know not: but 
what they know na- 
turally, as brute 
beasts, in those things 
they corrupt them- 
selves. 11 Woe unto 
them ! for they have 
gone in the way of 
Cain, and ran greedily 
after the error of 
Balaam for reward, 
and perished in the 
gainsaying of Core. 
12 These are spots in 
your feasts of charity, 
when they feast with 
you, feeding them- 
selves without fear: 
clouds they are with- 
out water, carried a- 
bout of winds; trees 
whose fruit withereth, 
without fruit, twice 
dead, plucked up by 
the roots; 13 raging 
waves of thesea, foam- 
ing out their own 
shame ; wandering 
stars, to whom is re- 
served the blackness 
of darkness for ever. 
14 And Enoch also, 
the seventh from A- 
dam, prophesied of 
these, saying, Behold, 
the Lord cometh with 
ten thousands of his 
saints, 15 to δχοσαίο 
judgment upon all 

and to convince all 


° Mwicéws 
τ Text. Rec. and 
t — τὸν 


622 


that are ungodly a- 
mong them of all 
their ungodly deeds 
which they have un- 
godly committed, and 
of all their hard 
speeches which ungod- 
ly sinners have spoken 
against him. 16 These 
are murmurers, com- 
plainers, walking af- 
ter their own lusts; 
and their mouth speak- 
eth great swelling 
words, having men’s 
persons in admiration 
because of advantage. 
17 But, beloved, re- 
member yethe words 
which were spoken be- 
fore of the apostles 
of our Lord Jesus 


Christ ; 18 how that 
they told you there 
should be mockers 


in the last time, who 
should walk after 
their own ungodly 
lusts. 19 These be they 
who separate them- 
selves, sensual, hay- 
ing not the Spirit. 
20 But ye, beloved, 
building up yourselves 
on your most holy 
faith, praying in the 
Holy Ghost, 21 keep 
yourselves in the love 
of God, looking for the 
mercy of our Lord Je- 
sus Christ unto eternal 
life. 22 And of some 
havecompassion, mak- 
ing a difference: 23 and 
others save with fear, 
pulling them out of 
the fire; hating even 
the garment spotted 
by the flesh. 


24 Now unto him 
that is able tokeep you 
from falling, and to 
present you faultless 
before the presence of 
his glory with exceed- 
ing joy, 25 to the only 
wise God our Saviour, 
be glory and majesty, 
dominion and power, 
both now andever. A- 
men, 


Υ — αὐτῶν LTTrA. 


μάτων words having been spoken before 1,. 
Tr[A]W) χρόνον at the end of Υ 
κοδομοῦντες ἑαυτοὺς τῇ ἁγιωτάτῃ ὑμῶν πίστει LTTrAW. 
dispute, convict LTTrAw. 
ἐν φόβῳ but others save, from [the] fire snatching [them], 
i ὑμᾶς you (and read set [you] before) EGLTTrw. 
\ 4+ διὰ Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν through Jesus Christ our Lord GLrtraw. 
LTTrAW. © +4 πρὸ παντὸς τοῦ αἰῶνος before the whole age (read καὶ and) LTTraw. 
subscription EGLTW ; 


LTTrAwW. 


WOMMATASS: 
γαὐτῶν' περὶ πάντων τῶν ἔργων ἀσεβείας" αὐτῶν ὧν 
of them concerning all ?works *of *ungodliness ‘their which 
, ‘ . , ~ ~ 
ἠσέβησαν, καὶ περὶ πάντων τῶν σκληρῶν " ὧν 


they did ungodlily, and concerning all the hard [things] which 


ἐλάλησαν κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἁμαρτωλοὶ ἀσεβεῖς. 16 οὗτοί εἰσιν 
Sspoke ‘against ‘him ?sinners 


Aungodly. These are 
yoyyvorai, μεμψίμοιροι, κατὰ τὰς.ἐπιθυμίας.αὐτῶν πορευό- 
murmurers, complainers, after ’their ‘lusts ἔγχε] κα 
μενοι" καὶ τὸ στόμα.αὐτῶν λαλεῖ ὑπέρογκα, θαυμάζοντες 
ing ; and their mouth speaks great swelling[words], admiring 
πρόσωπα ὠφελείας χάριν. 17 ὑμεῖς.δέ, ἀγαπητοί, μνή- 

persons 5profit ‘for *the *sake ‘of. But ye, beloved, re- 
σθητε τῶν δημάτων τῶν προειρημένων! ὑπὸ τῶν ἀπο- 
member the words which haye been spoken before by the apo- 


, ~ / « ~ ? ~ ~ « Ἢ « ~ 
στόλων τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν Inoov χριστοῦ" 18 ore ἔλεγον ὑμῖν, 


stles of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they said toyou, 
οὔτι" dey ἐσχατῷ χρόνῳ" ἔσονται ἐμπαῖκται, κατὰ τὰς 
that in [the] ast time there willbe mockers, ?after 
ἑαυτῶν ἐπιθυμίας πορευόμενοι τῶν ἀσεβειῶν. 19 οὗτοί εἰσιν 
®their town ®lusts ‘walking of ungodlinesses. These are 
οἱ ἀποδιορίζοντες“, ψυχικοί, πνεῦμα μὴ 
they who set apart {themselves}, natural[men], (Sthe] ‘Spirit ‘not 


ἔχοντες. 20 ὑμεῖς.δέ. ἀγαπητοί, ἱτῇ.ἁγιωτάτῃ. ὑμῶν πίστει 


shaving. But ye, beloved, on your most holy faith 
ἐποικοδομοῦντες ἑαυτούς." tv πνεύματι ἁγίῳ προσευχό- 

building up yourselves, in [the] 2Spirit ‘Holy pray- 
μενοι, 21 ἑαυτοὺς ἐν ἀγάπῃ θεοῦ τηρήσατε, προσδεχό- 
ing, “yourselves *in [*the] “love ‘of 7God tkeep, await- 
μενοι τὸ ἔλεος τοῦ. κυρίου.ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, εἰς ζωὴν 
ing the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto life 


αἰώνιον. 22 καὶ ode μὲν ἐἐλεεῖτε διακρινόμενοι"" 23 “odc-dé 


eternal. And *some lpity, making a difference, but others 
ἐν φόβῳ owZere, ἐκ τοῦ πυρὸς ἁρπάζοντες," μισοῦντες 
with fear save, outof the fire snatching (them); hating 
καὶ TOY ἀπὸ THE σαρκὸς ἐσπιλωμένον χιτῶνα. 
even the “by ‘the flesh 2spotted garment. 
24 Τῷ δὲ δυναμένῳ φυλάξαι ἰαὐτοὺς"! ἀπταίστους, καὶ 
But to him who is able to keep them without stumbling, and 
στῆσαι κατενώπιον τῆς.δόξης.αὐτοῦ ἀμώμους ἐν ἀγαλ- 
toset [them) before his glory blameless with exul- 
λιάσει, 25 μόνῳ σοφῷ" θεῷ owriornpov,! δόξα "καὶ!" 
tation, to [the] only wise God our Saviour, [be] glory and 


μεγαλωσύνη, κράτος καὶ ἐξουσία, " Kai νῦν Kai εἰς πάντας 


greatness, might and authority, both now, and to all 
τοὺς αἰῶνας. ἀμήν. 
the ages, Amen. 


°’Em.sroAn Ἰούδα καθολική." 
2Epistle οὔ “πᾶθ ‘general. 
® + λόγων speeches T. > προειρημένων ῥη- 
ς — ὅτι LI[Tr]. 4 ἐπ᾽ ἐσχάτου τοῦ (--- τοῦ 
ε + ἑαυτοὺς themselves EG f ἐποι- 
& ἐλέγχετε διακρινομένους [who] 
h obs δὲ σώζετε ἐκ πυρὸς ἁρπάζοντες, οὺς δὲ ἐλεᾶτε (ἐλεεῖτε W) 
and others pity in fear 
k — σοφῷ GLTTrAw. 
m— καὶ 
o — the 


: [ἀσεβείας] Tr. 


the time LTTraw. 


Ἰούδα Tra. 


"᾿ΑΠΟΚΑΛΎΨΙΣ IQANNOY TOY ΘΕΟΛΟΓΟΥ." 


REVELATION OF JOHN THE 


ATIOKAAY VI 
Revelation 


δεῖξαι τοῖς. δούλοις αὐτοῦ 
to shew to his bondmen 


Ἰησοῦ χριστοῦ, ἣν ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ 0 θεός, 
of Jesus Christ, which gave “to*him ‘God, 


a δεῖ γενέσθαι ἐν.τάχει, Kai 
what things must take place shortly: and 
> ΄ > / A) POL ἀδὲ 7 > ~ ~ , ? an 
ἐσήμανεν ἀποστείλας διὰ τοῦ.ἀγγέλου.αὐτοῦ τῷ δούλῳ αὐτοῦ 
he signified [it], having sent By his angel to his bondman 
'Twavvy, Wy ὃς ἐμαρτύρησεν τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τὴν 

John, who testified the word of God and the 
μαρτυρίαν ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, ὅσα Crell ἀεῖδεν." 5. μακά- 
testimony of Jesus Christ, ane teat Maes land he saw. Bless- 
ιος ὁ ἀναγινώσκων, καὶ οἱ ἀκούοντες “τοὺς λόγους" 
ed [is] he that reads, and they that hear the words 
τῆς προφητείας, Kai τηροῦντες τὰ ἐν αὐτῇ γεγραμμένα" 
of the prophecy, and keep the things ἢ. “it ‘written ; 
ὁ. γὰρ καιρὸς ἐγγύς. 
forthe time [is] near. 
4 © lwavyne' ταῖς ἑπτὰ 
John tothe seven 
χάρις ὑμῖν καὶ εἰρήνη ἀπὸ 
Grace toyou and Beare from 


ἐκκλησίαις ταῖς 
assemblies 

βτοῦ" ὁ 
him who 


¥ ~? , 5 
ἐν τῇ Aoia 
which [are] in Asia: 
ὧν καὶ ὁ ἦν καὶ ὁ 
is and who was and who[is] 
ἐρχόμενος" Kai ἀπὸ τῶν ἑπτὰ πνευμάτων *é' ἱέστιν' ἐνώπιον 


to come ; and from the seven Spirits which are before 
τοῦ.θρόνου. αὐτοῦ" 5 καὶ ἀπὸ ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ, ὁ μάρτυς ὁ 
his throne ; and from Jesus Christ, the witness 
πιστός, ὁ πρωτότοκος "ἐκ' τῶν νεκρῶν, καὶ ὁ ἄρχων τῶν 
lfaithful, the firstborn from among the dead, and the ruler ofthe 
βασιλέων τῆς γῆς τῷ ἰἀγαπήσαντι" ἡμᾶς. καὶ ™ov- 
kings oftheearth. To him who loved us, and wash- 


σαντι" ἡμᾶς "ἀπὸ" τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν. “ἡμῶν" ἐν τῷ. αἵματι.αὐτοῦ" 


ed us from our sins in his blood, 
6 καὶ ἐποίησεν Ῥἡμᾶς" «βασιλεῖς καὶ ¢ ἱερεῖς τῷ θεῷ καὶ πατρὶ 
and made us kings and Ele to ?God *and *Father 


αὐτοῦ" αὐτῷ δόξα καὶ τὸ κράτος εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας "τῶν 


‘his: tohim([be]the glory and the might to the ages of the 
αἰώνων." ἀμήν. 
8.568. Amen. 


7 ᾿Ιδού, ἔρχεται μετὰ τῶν νεφελῶν, καὶ ὄψεται αὐτὸν πᾶς 


Behold, hecomes with the clouds, and shallsee him every 

ὀφθαλμός, καὶ οἵτινες αὐτὸν ἐξεκέντησαν" καὶ κόψονται 

eye, and they which “him pierced, and ‘shall ®wail 
ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν πᾶσαι αἱ φυλαὶ τῆς γαί, ἀμήν. 


Fon °account!'of ἢ ‘all 2.16 “tribes “οἵ 5the zis. Yea, amen. 
8 ee εἰμι τὸ SA" Kai τὸ 'Q," "ἀρχὴ Kai τέλος"" λέγει 


DIVINE 


THE Revelation of Je- 
sus Christ, which God 
gave unto him, toshew 
unto his’ servants 
things which must 
shortly come to pass; 
and he sent and signi- 
fied 7t by his angel un- 
to his servant John: 
2 who bare record of 
the word of God, and 
of the testimony of 
Jesus Christ, and of 
all things that he saw. 
3 Blessed ts he that 
readeth, and they that 
hear the words of this 
prophecy, «and keep 
those things which are 
written therein: for 
the time zs at hand. 


4 JOHN totheseven 
churches which are in 
Asia: Grace be unto 
you, and peace, from 
him which is, and 
which was, and which 
is to come ; and from 
the seven Spiritswhich 
are before his throne ; 
5 and from Jesus 
Christ, who is the 
faithful witness, and 
the firstbegotten of 
the dead, and the 
prince of the kings of 
the earth. Unto him 
that loved us, and 
washed us from our 
sins in his own blood, 
6 and hath made us 
kings and priests unto 
God and his Father ; 
to him be glory and do- 
minion for ever and 
ever. Amen. 


7 Behold, he cometh 
with clouds;andevery 
eye shall see him, and 
they also which pierc- 
ed him: and all kin- 
dreds of: the earth shall 
wail because of him, 
Even so, Amen. 


8 I am Alpha and 
Omega, the beginning 


am the A and the Ω, beginning and ending, says and the ending, saith 
5᾽᾿Αποκάλυψις α ; ᾿Αποκάλυψις ᾿Ιωάννου (Iwavov Tr) LTTraw. Ὁ ᾿Ιωάνῃ Tr. ς-- τε 
GLTTrAaw. ἃ ἴδεν T. © τὸν λόγον the word 1. Γ᾿ Ἰωάνης Tr. Ε --- τοῦ (read [him]) 
GLTTrAW. h τῶν Tr. — ἐστιν (read [are]) LTTraw. k — ἐκ (read τῶν of the) 
GLTTraw. ἃ ἀγαπῶντι loves GLTTraAW. ™ λύσαντι freed uttr; λ[ο]ύσαντι A. 5 ἐκ LITrA. 
ο [ἡμῶν] A. P ἡμῶν τ,; ἡμῖν for us Tr. 4 βασιλείαν, a kingdom, GLTTraw. τ- τῶν 
αἰώνων A. 5 ἄλφα Alpha LTTraw. ta, ¥ — ἀρχὴ καὶ τέλος GLTTrAW. 


624 


the Lord, which is, 
and which was, and 
which is to come, the 
Almighty. 


9 I John, who also 
am your brother, and 
companion in tribula- 
tion, and in the king- 
dom and patience of 
Jesus Christ, was in 
the isle that is called 
Patmos, for the word 
of God, and for the 
testimony of Jesus 
Christ. 10 I was in the 
Spirit on the Lord’s 
day, and heard behind 
me a great voice, as of 
a trumpet, 11 saying, 
Tam Alpha and Ome- 
ga, the first and the 
last: and, What thou 
seest, write in a book; 
and send zt unto the 
seven churches which 
are in Asia; unto Eph- 
esus, and unto Smyr- 
na, and unto Perga- 
mos, and unto Thya- 
tira, and unto Sardis, 
and unto Philadelphia, 
and unto Laodicea. 
12 And I turned tosee 
the voice that spake 
with me. And being 
turned, I saw seven 
golden candlesticks ; 
13 and in the midst of 
the seven candlesticks 
one like unto the Son 
of man, clothed with 
a garment down to 
the foot, and girt a- 
bout the paps witha 
golden girdle. 14 His 
head and Ats hairs 
were white like wool, 
as white as snow; and 
his eyes were as a 
flame of fire ; 15 and 
his feet like unto fine 
brass, as if they burn- 
ed in a furnace; and 
his voice as the sound 
of many waters.16 And 
he had in his right 
hand seven stars: and 
out of his mouth went 
a sharp  two-edged 
sword: and his coun- 
tenance was as the 
sun shineth in his 
strength, 17 And when 
Isaw him,I fell at his 
feet as dead. And he 


A ΠΟΙ ΚΟΛΟΛΥΥ ΨΥ Σ, 
πὸ κύριος,' ὁ ὧν καὶ ὁ ἦν καὶ ὁ 
the Lord, who is and who νγὰβ and who(isj 
κράτωρ. 
mighty. 
9 ᾿Εγὼ "Ἰωάννης," ὁ ᾿καὶ" ἀδελφὸς ὑμῶν καὶ ᾿συγκοινωνὸςἱϊ 
I John, also *brother ‘your and fellow-partaker 
ἐν τῇ θλίψει καὶ δὲν τῇ" βασιλείᾳ καὶ ὑπομονῇ " “Ἰησοῦ χρισ- 
in {86 tribulationand in the kingdom and endurance of Jesus Christ, 
rou, ἐγενόμην ἐν τῇ νήσῳ τῇ καλουμένῃ Πάτμῳ, διὰ 
was in the island which [is] called Patmos, because of 
τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ “διὰ τὴν μαρτυρίαν ᾿Ιησοῦ “χρισ- 
the word of God and because of the testimony of Jesus Christ. 
τοῦ." 10 ἐγενόμην ἐνὲή πνεύματι ἐν τῇ κυριακῇ ἡμέρᾳ" Kai 
became in([the} Spirit on the Lord’s day, and 
ἤκουσα ὀπίσω μου φωνὴν μεγάλην ὡς σάλπιγγος, 11 λεγού- 
Iheard behind me ἃ “voice ‘loud as of a trumpet, say- 
σης, f Ἐγώ εἰμι τὸ A καὶ τὸ Q, ὁ πρῶτος Kai ὁ ἔσχατος" Kai," 
ing, 1 am the A and the Q, the first and the last ; and, 
a , , / 4 , - ΄, 
O βλέπεις γράψον εἰς βιβλίον, καὶ πέμψον ταῖς ὅ ἐκκλησίαις 


"ς 


ἐρχόμενος, ὁ παντο- 
tocome, the Al- 


What thou seest write in abook, and send tothe assemblies 
Βγαῖς ἐν ᾿Ασίᾳ," εἰς Ἔφεσον, καὶ εἰς ἸΣμύρναν," καὶ εἰς 
which [are] in Asia: to Ephesus, and to Smyrna, and to 


Πέργαμον, καὶ εἰς Ἐθυάτειρα," καὶ εἰς Σάρδεις, καὶ εἰς ἸΦιλα- 


Pergamos, and to Thyatira, and to Sardis, and to Phila- 
δέλφειαν," καὶ εἰς ἃ Λαοδίκειαν." 12 καὶ ἐπέστρεψα βλέπειν 
delphia, and to Laodicea, And = Iturned to see 


τὴν φωνὴν ἥτις "ἐλάλησεν" per ἐμοῦ" καὶ ἐπιστρέψας εἶδον 
the voice which spoke with me, and havingturned I saw 
ἑπτὰ λυχνίας χρυσᾶς, 13 Kai ἐν éow τῶν οἑπτὰ" λυχ- 
seven “lampstands ‘golden, and in{[the] midst ofthe seven lamp- 


νιῶν ὕμοιον Ρυϊῷ"! ἀνθρώπου, ἐνδεδυμένον 
stands [one] like [the} Son of man, clothed in [a garment] 
, ‘ 4 ~ x , 
ποδήρη, καὶ περιεζωσμένον πρὸς τοῖς Ywaoroic' ζώνην 


reaching to the feet, and ‘*girt °about®with ‘at the “breasts 78 *girdle 
~ ε A ? ~ ‘ e , ‘ € ‘ 
τχρυσῆν" 14 ἡ δὲ κεφαλὴ. αὐτοῦ Kai αἱ τρίχες λευκαὶ “ὡσεὶ" 
ΒρΌΪαΘΩ : and his head and hair white as if 
» ΝΥ , e , fa 4 € ᾽ s Ψ ~ e A , 
ἔριον λευκόν, ὡς χιών᾽ καὶ οἱ. ὀφθαλμοὶ. αὐτοῦ ὡς φλὸξ πυρός" 
2wool ‘white, as snow; and his eyes as aflame of fire; 


15 καὶ οἱ πόδες αὐτοῦ ὅμοιοι χαλκολιβάνῳ we ἐν καμίνῳ 


and his feet like fine brass, asif *in *a®°furnace['they] 
, \ ~ , 
ἱπεπυρωμένοι"" καὶ ἡ-φωνὴ.αὐτοῦ ὡς φωνὴ ὑδάτων πολλῶν" 
2glowed ; and his voice as [the] voice of “waters ‘many, 


16 καὶ ἔχων ἐν τῇ δεξιᾷ “αὐτοῦ χειρὶ" ἀστέρας ἑπτά" Kai ἐκ 
and having in "right this hand *stars ‘seven, and out of 
~ ΄ ~ e@ ΄ ΄ ~ , ‘ 
TOU.oTOpaToC.avTOU ῥομφαία δίστομος ὀξεῖα ἐκπορευομένη" Kai 
his mouth a*sword *two-edged 'sharp. going forth, and 
CIE) ? we «ς e , ? ~ ΄ ~ ‘ 
ἡ--ψις.αὐτοῦ ὡς ὁ ἥλιος φαίνει ἐν Ty_dvyapEt.avrov. 17 Kat 
his countenance as the sun_ shines in its power. And 

er , ν ~ , 

Ore εἶδον αὐτόν, ἔπεσα πρὸς TOVC.TOdaC_avTOU ὡς νεκρός" Kai 
when Isaw him, I fell at his feet as dead: and 


Ἢ κύριος ὃ θεός [the] Lord God GLrtraw. 


ἃ — ἀν τῇ GLITrAW. 
LTTra, 
GLTTrAW. 
Κ Θυάτειραν LAW. 
ο — ἑπτὰ LT[TrA]. 
as GLTTrAW. 


ἀἁ διὰ χ11[Α]. 
& + ἑπτὰ seven GLTTrAW. 


Ὁ πεπυρωμένης (-ένῳ T) [it] glowed ttr. 


Y—kalGLTTrAW. δ συν- Ὁ. 
© χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ W; -- χριστοῦ 
ῦ τος ἵπο Ἐγώ εἰμι... ἔσχατος" καὶ 

— ταῖς ev Agta GLTTrAW. 1 Ζμύρναν T. 

m Λαοδικίαν T. " ἐλάλει Was speaking Lrtraw. 

4 μαζοῖς L; μασθοῖς T. τ χρυσᾶν LTTrA. - ὡς 
Υ χειρὶ αὐτοῦ LTTrA. 


Γ x ᾽Ιωάνης Tr. 
- b + ἐν ἴῃ (Jesus) LTTrAw. 
© — χριστοῦ LITrA. 


ι Φιλαδελφίαν τ. 
Ρ υἱὸν τ΄ 


ΠῚ REVELATION. 
ἐπέθηκεν" τὴν.δεξιὰν αὐτοῦ "χεῖρα" ἐπ᾽ ἐμέ, λέγων ὕμοι," 
he laid his right hand upon me, saying tome, 
« ~ « ‘ « 
Μὴ φοβοῦ" ἐγώ εἰμι ὁ πρῶτος καὶ ὁ ἔσχατος, 18 καὶ ὁ 
Fear ποῦ; I am the first and the last, and the 
‘ ᾽ , , ‘ 2 4 ~ 2 > ΕἸ 
ζῶν, καὶ ἐγενόμην νεκρός, καὶ ἰδοὺ ζῶν εἰμι εἰς τοὺς 
living [one]: and I became dead, and behold “alive 7I “am to the 
ey, AY ~ ~ “ ‘ 
αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων" τἀμήν"" Kai ἔχω τὰς κλεῖς τοῦ *gdov καὶ 


ages of the ages, Amen; and have the keys of hades and 
τοῦ θανάτου." 19 γράψον ἃ εἶδες, καὶ : ὦ 
of death. Write the things which thou sawest and the things 
εἰσιν, καὶ ἃ μέλλει “γίνεσθαι! μετὰ ταῦτα" 20 τὸ 


which are, and thethings which are about totake place after 
μυστήριον τῶν ἑπτὰ ἀστέρων “ὧν" 
mystery of the seven stars 


these. The 
εἶδες “ἐπὶ τῆς δεξιᾶς! 
which thou sawest on “right *hand 
μου, καὶ τὰς ἑπτὰ λυχνίας τὰς χρυσᾶς. οἱ ἑπτὰ ἀστέρες 
my, and the seven *lampstands ‘golden. The seven stars 
ἄγγελοι τῶν ἑπτὰ ἐκκλησιῶν εἰσιν καὶ fai! ξἑπτὰ λυχνίαι" 
?7angels %of*the ®seven fassemblies ‘are; and _ the seven lampstands 
ἃς εἶδες" ἑπτὰ ἐκκλησίαι εἰσίν. 
which thou sawest *seven “assemblies ‘are, 
~ ? i ~ 1 ? , ΄ὔ id LAN 
2 Τῷ ἀγγέλῳ ἱτῆς" * Εφεσίνης" ἐκκλησίας γράψον, Τάδε 
Tothe angel ofthe Ephesian assembly write: These things 
ς ~ ‘ \ ᾽ 2 ~ ~ ? ~ ‘ 
λέγει ὁ κρατῶν τοὺς ἑπτὰ ἀστέρας ἐν τῇ δεξιᾷ αὐτοῦ, ὁ 
says he who holds the seven stars in his right hand, who 
περιπατῶν ἐν μέσῳ τῶν ἑπτὰ λυχνιῶν τῶν ἰχρυσῶν" 
walks in [the] midst ofthe seven *lampstands golden. 
ττ᾿ὸἍβλφ , » ‘ ‘ , ‘ A c ’ 
ὦ Οἶδα τὰ.ἔργα.σου, καὶ τὸν κόπον ™oov,' καὶ τὴν ὑπομονήν 


I know thy works, and “labour ‘thy, and endurance 
σου, Kai ὅτι οὐ-δύνῃ βαστάσαι κακούς, καὶ πὲἐπειράσω" 
‘thy, and that thou canst not bear evil [ones]; and thou didst try 


τοὺς φάσκοντας 


εἶναι ἀποστόλους" καὶ οὐκ. εἰσίν; 
those who declare 


{themselves] to be apostles and are not, 
καὶ εὗρες αὐτοὺς Wevdeic, 3 Kai Ῥέβάστασας Kai ὑπομονὴν 
and didst πὰ them liars ; and didst bear and endurance 
ἔχεις. καὶ διὰ τὸ ὄνομά.μου “κεκοπίακας καὶ οὐ-κέκμηκας." 
*hast, and forthesake of my name hast laboured and hast not wearied: 
4 *adX’'! ἔχω κατὰ σοῦ, Ort τὴν. ἀγάπην.σου τὴν πρώτην 

but MLhave against thee, that thy “love lfirst 
"ἀφῆκας." 5 μνημόνευε οὖν πόθεν ᾿ἐκπέπτωκας," καὶ 
thou didst leave. Remember therefore whence thou hast fallen from, and 
μετανόησον, καὶ τὰ πρῶτα ἔργα ποίησον᾽ side μή, ἔρχομαί 
repent, and the first works do: butif not, Iam coming 
σοι ‘rayet," Kai κινήσω τὴνιλυχνίαν.σου ἐκ τοῦ τόπου 


tothee quickly, and I will remove thy lampstand out of “place 
αὐτῆς, ἐὰν μὴ μετανοήσῃς. 6 ἀλλὰ τοῦτο ἔχεις, Or 
hits, except thou shouldest repent. But this thou hast, that 


μισεῖς τὰ ἔργα τῶν Νικολαϊτῶν, ἃ κἀγὼ 


μισῶ. 7 ὁ 
thou hatest the works ofthe Nicolaitanes, which I also 


hate. He that 


625 


laid his right hand up- 
on me, saying unto 
me, Fear not; I am 
the first and the last : 
18 J amhe that liveth, 
and was dead; and, 
behold, I am alive for 
evermore, Amen ; and 
have the keys of hell 
and of death. 19 Write 
the things which thou 
hast seen, and the 
things which are, and 
the thizgs which shall 
be hereezfter; 20 the 
mystery of the seven 
stars which thou saw- 
est in my right hand, 
and the seven golden 
candlesticks. The se- 
ven stars are the an- 
gels of the seven 
churches : and the se- 
ven candlesticks which 
thou sawest are the 
seven churches. 


11, Unto the angel of 
the church of Ephesus 
write; These things 
saith he that holdeth 
the seven stars in his 
right hand, who walk- 
eth in the midst of the 
seven golden candle- 
sticks; 2 I know thy 
works, and thy labour, 
and thy patience, and 
how thou canst not 
bear them which are 
evil: and thou hast 
tried them which say 
they are apostles, and 
are not,and hast found 
them liars : 3 and hast 
borne, and hast pa- 
tience, and for my 
name’s sake hast la- 
boured, and hast not 
fainted. 4 Neverthe- 
less I have somewhat 
against thee, because 
thou hast left thy first 
love. 5 Remember 
therefore from whence 
thou art fallen, and 
repent, and do the first 
worksg or else I will 
come unto thee quick- 
ly, and will remove 
thy candlestick out of 
his place, except thou 
repent. 6 But thisthou 
hast, that thou hatest 
the deeds of the Nico- 
laitanes, which I also 
hate. 7 He that hath 


ee EE ee 


w ἔθηκεν GLTTrAW. 


x — χεῖρα (read δεξιὰν right hand) GLTtraw. 
% — ἀμήν GLITrAW. 


® θανάτου kat τοῦ ἄδου GLTTraw. 
ς γενέσθαι TA. 4 os LYTrA. © ἐν (in) τῇ δεξιᾷ L. 

GLITrAaW. h — ἃς εἶδες GLTTrAW. 
᾿Εφέσῳ in Ephesus Girtraw. 


f— gi w. 


'yXpucéwy Ltra. = ™ — gov τα. 


1 τῷ (read éxxd. of the assembly) Ltr. 


¥y — μοι GLTTraw, 


Ὁ + οὖν therefore GLTTraw. 


& λυχνίαι αἱ ἑπτὰ 
K ἐν 


4 ἐπείρασας GLTTrAW. 


° λέγοντας ἑαυτοὺς ἀποστόλους εἶναι declare themselves to be apostles (— εἶναι LTTra) 


GLTTrAw. P ὑπομονὴν ἔχεις καὶ ἐβάστασας GLTTrAW. 
wearied LTTrA ; καὶ οὐκ ἐκοπίασας and didst not weary ΟὟ. 
: πέπτωκας thou hast fallen GLTrAW; πέπτωκες T. 


4 καὶ οὐ κεκοπίακες and hast not 
τ᾿ ἀλλὰ TIrw. 
Y ταχὺ EGW ; — τάχει {τττὰ. 


5 ἀφῆκες TIr. 


ss 


626 


an ear, let him hear 
what the Spirit saith 
unto the churches ; 10 
him that overcometh 
will I give to eat of 
the tree of life, which 
is in the midst of the 
paradise of God. 


8 And unto the an- 
gel of the church in 
Smyrna write; These 
things saith the first 
and the last, which 
was dead, and is a- 
live; 91 know thy 
works, and tribula- 
tion, and poverty, (but 
thou art rich) and J 
know the blasphemy of 
them which say they 
are Jews, and are not, 
but are the synagogue 
of Satan. 10 Fear none 
of those things which 
thou shalt suffer : be- 
hold, the devil shall 
cast some of you into 
prison, that ye may be 
tried ; nnd ye shall 
have tribulation ten 
days: be thou faithful 
unto death, and I will 
give thce a crown of 
life. 11 He that hath 
°a ear, let him hear 
what the Spirit saith 
unto the churches ; 
He that overcometh 
shall not be hurt of 
the second death. 


12 And to the angel 
of the church in Per- 
gamos write; ‘These 
things saith he which 
hath the sharp sword 
with two edges; 13 I 
know thy works, and 
where thou dwellest, 
even where Satan’s 
seat is: and thou hold- 
est fast my name, and 
hast not denied my 
faith, even in those 
days wherein Antipas 
was my faithful mar- 
tyr, who was slain a- 
mong you, where Sa- 
tan dwelleth. 14 But I 
have a few things a- 
gainst thee, because 
thou hast there them 
that hold the doctrine 
of Balaam, who taught 
Balac to cast a stum- 
blingblock before the 
children of Israel, to 
eat things sacrificed 
unto idols, and to com- 
mit fornication. 15 So 


ATITOKAAY WTI. ii. 


ἔχων οὖς ἀκουσάτω τί τὸ πνεῦμα λέγει Taic® ἐκκλησίαις" 
has anear, let him hear what 6 Spirit says tothe assemblies, 
τῷ "νικῶντι δώσω αὐτῷ φαγεῖν ἐκ τοῦ ξύλου τῆς ζωῆς 
Tohim that overcomes, Iwillgivetohim toeat of the tree of life 
0 ἐστιν ἐν Yputow τοῦ παραδείσου" τοῦ BEd". 
which is in{the} midst of the paradise of God. 
8 Kai τῷ ἀγγέλῳ ὅτῆς" "ἐκκλησίας Σμυρναίων" γράψον, 
And tothe angel of the assembly of Smyrneans write: 
lade λέγει ὁ πρῶτος Kai ὁ ἔσχατος, ὃς ἐγένετο νεκρὸς 
These things says the first and the last, who became dead 
καὶ ἔζησεν: 9 Olda σου “τὰ ἔργα καὶ" τὴν θλίψιν Kai τὴν 


and lived. Iknow thy works and tribulation and 
πτωχείαν᾽ ᾿πλούσιος.δὲ" εἶ: καὶ τὴν βλασφημίαν" τῶν 
poverty ; but rich thou art;and the calumny of those wha 


λεγόντων Ιουδαίους εἶναι ἑαυτούς. καὶ οὐκ.εἰσίν, ἀλλὰ συν- 
eclare “Jews *to *be ‘themselves, and are not, but asyn- 
aywyn τοῦ σατανᾶ. 10 fundév" φοβοῦ ἃ μέλλεις 
2Not “at ‘all 


agogue of Satan. ‘fear the things which thou art about 
πάσχειν. ἰδού, μέλλει *Bareiv' ἰἐξ ὑμῶν ὁ διάβολος" 
to suffer. Lo, %is*about °to®east [’some]®of *%you *the devil 
? ΄, oe ~ ς ‘ ktiz Π ΄ «- ~ 
εἰς φυλακήν, wa πειρασθῆτε: καὶ ‘ezere! θλίψιν ἡμερῶν 


into prison, that ye may betried; and yeshall have tribulation *days 


δέκα. γίνου πιστὸς ἄχρι θανάτου, καὶ δώσω σοι τὸν στέ- 
1ten. Bethou faithful unto death, and I will give to thee the 


pavov τῆς ζωῆς. 11 ὁ ἔχων οὖς ἀκουσάτω τί τὸ πνεῦμα 


crown of life. He that has anear, let him hear what the Spirit 
λέγει ταῖς ἐκκλησίαι ὁ νικῶν οὐ-μὴ ἀδικηθῇ ἐκ 
says tothe assemblies. Hethat overcomes innowise shall beinjured of 
τοῦ θανάτου τοῦ δευτέρου. 
the “death second, 
12 Kai τῷ ἀγγέλῳ τῆς ἐν Περγάμῳ ἐκκλησίας γράψον, 
And tothe angel of the *in *Pergamos ‘assembly write : 
Τάδε λέγετε ὁ ἔχων τὴν ῥομφαίαν τὴν δίστομον τὴν 
These things says he who has the sword *two-edged 


dgeiav’ 18 Οἶδα ἱτὰ.ἔργα.σου καὶ" ποῦ κατοικεῖς, Sov ὁ 
‘sharp, 1 know thy works and where thou dwellest, where the 
θρόνος τοῦ σατανᾶ, καὶ κρατεῖς τὸ.Ὀνομά.μου, Kai οὐκ 


throne of Satan [is]; and thou holdest fast and *not 
ἠρνήσω τὴν.πίστιν. μου ™Kai' ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις "ἐνὶ aig! Ῥ᾽Αν- 
‘didst *deny my faith even in the days in which An- 
τίπας" ὁ.μάρτυς.μου ὁ πιστός, ὃς ἀπεκτάνθη παρ᾽ ὑμῖν, 
tipas my *witness 1faithful [was], who waskilled among you, 
ὕπου τκατοικεῖ ὁ σατανᾶς." 14 "ἀλλ᾽" ἔχω κατὰ σοῦ ὀλίγα, 
where 2ἅνγν6115 ‘Satan. But I have against thee afew things; 
τὸ ἔχεις ἐκεὶ κρατοῦντας τὴν διδαχὴν Βαλαάμ, ὃς 


OTL 
because thou hast there [those] holding the teaching of Balaam, who 


ἐδίδασκεν Yév' **ry' Βαλὰκ βαλεῖν σκάνδαλον ἐνώπιον τῶν 
taught Balak to cast a snare before the 

υἱῶν ᾿Ισραήλ, φαγεῖν εἰδωλόθυτα καὶ πορνεῦσαι. 

sons of Israel, ἴο ϑαῦ things sacrificed to idols and to commit fornication. 


my name, 


| 


w + ἑπτὰ seven L. 
(read of my God) o[a]w. 
T.) ἐκκλησίας assembly in Smyrna GLTTraw. 
ὁ + ἐκ of (those who) GLTTraw. 


GLTTrawWw. 
h βάλλειν LTrA. 
ἔργα σον καὶ LTTrA. 


[was] Antipas) Lrtr[a]. 
τ 0 σατανᾶς κατοικεῖ GLTTrAW. 


X νικοῦντι L. Υ τῷ παραδείσῳ the paradise GLTTraW. z + μου 
8. τῷ (read ἐκκλ. of the assembly) t. Ὁ ev Σμύρνῃ (Ζμύρνῃ 
© --- τὰ ἔργα καὶ {ΤΊΓΑ- 4 ἀλλὰ πλούσιος 
Γμὴ Not Lrraw. & + dy indeed [a]w. 
i διάβολος ἐξ ὑμῶν GLITrAW. k ἔχητε ye May have 1,. 1— τὰ 
m — καὶ T|TrA]. n — ἐν LITrAW. ° — ais (read in those days 
Ρ᾿Αντείπας T. 4 + μου (read my faithful (one]) La[Tra]w. 
* ἀλλὰ W. t—oreL. v — ἐν EGLTTrAW. wa τὸν E, 


II. 


15 οὕτως ἔχεις Kai σὺ 


REVELATION. 


κρατοῦντας τὴν διδαχὴν τῶν" 
So hast also thou([those] holding the teaching of the 
Νικολαϊτῶν Υὸ μισῶ." 16 μετανόησον Τ᾽ εἰ.δὲ μή, ἔρχομαί 
Nicolaitanes, which thing I hate. Repent ! but if not, lam coming 
U ‘ ΄ ᾽ ~ ᾽ ~ e ΄ - 
σοι ταχύ, καὶ πολεμήσω μετ᾽ αὐτῶν ἐν τῇ ῥομφαίᾳ τοῦ 
to thee quickly, and willmake war with them with the sword 
oroparoc.uov. 17 ὁ ἔχων οὖς ἀκουσάτω τί τὸ πνεῦμα 
of my mouth. Hethat has anear, let him hear what the Spirit 
λέγει ταῖς ἐκκλησίαι" τῷ νικῶντι" δώσω αὐτῷ ὑφαγεῖν 
says tothe assemblies, ΤῸ him that overcomes, Iwillgivetohim toeat 
ἐπὸ" τοῦ μάννα τοῦ κεκρυμμένου, Kai δώσω αὐτῷ ψῆφον 
of the ?manna *hidden ; and I will give to him a “pebble 
λευκήν, καὶ ἐπὶ THY ψῆφον ὄνομα καινὸν γεγραμμένον, ὃ 
‘white, and on the pebble a*name ‘new written, which 
οὐδεὶς “ἔγνω εἰμὴ ὁ λαμβάνων. 
no one knew except he who receives [it]. 
18 Kai τῷ ἀγγέλῳ “τῆς" ἐν Θυατείροις ἐκκλησίας γράψον, 
Andtothe angel ofthe *in *Thyatira ‘assembly write: 
Τάδε λέγει ὁ υἱὸς Tov θεοῦ, ὁ ἔχων τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς 
These things says the Son of God, he who has *eyes 
"αὐτοῦ" we φλόγα" πυρός, Kai οἱ.πόδες. αὐτοῦ ὅμοιοι χαλκολι- 
this as afiame of fire, and his feet like fine 
βάνῳ" 19 Oida σου τὰ ἔργα καὶ τὴν Sayarny, Kai τὴν δια- 
brass. I know thy works, and love, and ser- 
κονίαν, καὶ τὴν πίστιν" Kai τὴν" ὑπομονήν σου," Kai τὰ ἔργα 
vice, and faith, and “endurance ‘thy, and *works 
σου, "καὶ" τὰ ἔσχατα πλείονα τῶν πρώτων. 20 ἰἀλλ᾽" 
‘thy, and the last [tobe] more than the first. But 
ἔχω κατὰ σοῦ ""ὀλίγα,, Ore “ede! τὴν γυναῖκα" P'leZa- 
I have against thee afew things that thou sufferest the woman Jeze- 


Br," «τὴν λέγουσαν" τἑαυτὴν᾽ προφῆτιν, "διδάσκειν Kai πλα- 


k 


bel, her who calls herself aprophetess, to teach and to 
νᾶσθαι! ἐμοὺς δούλους, πορνεῦσαι καὶ ᾿εἰδωλό- 
mislead my bondmen to commit fornication and *things ‘sacrificed ‘to 


Sura φαγεῖν." 21 καὶ ἔδωκα αὐτῇ χρόνον wa μετανοήσῃ "ἐκ 
1015 ‘to eat. And I gave her time that she might repent of 
~ ΄ > ~ ‘ > , ll 92 ἰὃ ’ w2 ‘ Π τλλ 
τῆς. πορνείας. αὐτῆς, καὶ οὐ.μετενόησεν. ἰδού, "ἐγὼ" βάλλω 
her fornication ; and she repented not. Lo, 1 cast 
αὐτὴν εἰς κλίνην, καὶ τοὺς μοιχεύοντας μετ᾽ αὐτῆς εἰς 
her into abed, and those who commit adultery with her into 
θλίψιν μεγάλην, ἐὰν. μὴ *peravorjowow' ἐκ τῶν ἔργων 
“tribulation lereat, except they should repent of “works 
avT@v.' 23 καὶ τὰ.τέκνα. αὐτῆς ἀποκτενῶ ἐν θανάτῳ᾽ Kai 

‘their. And her children Iwillkill with death; and 
γνώσονται πᾶσαι ai ἐκκλησίαι ὅτι ἐγώ εἰμι ὁ ἐρευνῶν" 
*shall°kmow ‘all the “assemblies that I am he who _ searches 


627 


hast thou also them 
that hold the doctrine 
of the Nicolaitanes, 
which thing I hate. 
16 Repent; or else I 
will come unto thee 
quickly, and will fight 
against them with the 
sword of my mouth. 
17 He that hath anear, 
let him hear what the 
Spirit saith unto the 
churches ; ΤῸ him that 
overcometh willI give 
to eat of the hidden 
manna, and will give 
him a white stone, and 
in the stone a new 
name written, which 
no man knoweth say- 
ing he that receiveth 
τὶ. 


18 And unto the an- 
gel of the church in 
Thyatira write ; These 
things saith the Son 
of God, who hath his 
eyes like unto a flame 
of fire, and his feet are 
like fine brass; 19 I 
know thy works, and 
charity, and service, 
and faith, and thy pa- 
tience, and thy works; 
and the last to be more 
than the first. 20 Not- 
withstanding I havea 
few things against 
thee, because thou 
sufferest that woman 
Jezebel, which calleth 
herself a prophetess, 
to teach and to seduce 
my servants to commit 
fornication, and to eat 
things sacrificed unto 
idols. 21 And I gave 
her space to repent of 
her fornication; and 
she repented not. 22Be- 
hold, I will cast her 
into a bed, and them 
that commit adultery 
with her into great 
tribulation, except 
they repent of their 
deeds, 23 And I will 
kill her’ children 
with death ; and all 
the churches shall 
know that I am he 
which searcheth the 


x — τῶν the L[tr ]aw. Y ὁμοίως in like manner GLTTraw. 
Qutr[A]w. 8 νικοῦντι LTTr. Ὁ — φαγεῖν ἀπὸ GLTTraw. 
4 τῷ (read ἐκκλ. of the assembly) 1,. € — αὐτοῦ L. ἴ φλὸξ τ. 


πίστιν καὶ τὴν διακονίαν GLTA ; πίστιν καὶ τὴν ἀγάπην καὶ τὴν διακονίαν Tr. 
i 1 ἀλλὰ Traw. 
° + gov (read thy wife) GL[a]w. 
4 ἡ λέγουσα she who calls GLTTraw. 
5 καὶ διδάσκει καὶ πλανᾷ τοὺς and she teaches and misleads GLrTraw. 
Υ καὶ ov θέλει μετανοῆσαι ἐκ τῆς πορνείας αὐτῆς and she 
Ὑ-- ἐγὼ (read βάλλω I cast) GLYTraw. 
28 ἐραυνῶν LTTr. 


i— gov T. k — καὶ (read thy last works) GLTTraw. 
GLTTrAW. " ἀφεῖς thou lettest alone GLTTraw. 
P τὴν Ἱεζάβελ L; ᾿Ιεζάβελ GT; ᾿Ιεζαβὲλ Traw. 

τ αὐτὴν Ἱ. 
* φαγεῖν εἰδωλόθυτα GLTTrAW. 
wills not to repent of her fornication GLTTraw. 


κε μετανοήσουσιν they shall repent Trra. γ8 αὐτῆς her @LTTraw. 


z + οὖν therefore 


¢ οἷδεν knows GLTTraw. 


8 ἀγάπην, Kal τὴν 
b — τὴν L. 
™ — ὀλίγα 


628 


reins and hearts : and 
I will give unto every 
one of you according 
to your works. 24 But 
unto you I say, and 
unto the rest in Thya- 
tira, as many as have 
not this doctrine, and 
which have not known 
the depths of Satan, 
as they speak; I will 
put upon you none 
other burden. 25 But 
that which ye have 
already hold fast till 
I come. 26 And he that 
overcometh, and keep- 
eth my works untothe 
end, to him wiil I give 
power over the na- 
tions: 27 and he shall 
rule them witha rod of 
iron ; as the vessels of 
a potter shall they be 
broken to. shivers: 
even as I received of 
my Father. 28 And I 
will give him’ the 
morning ‘star. 29 He 
that hath an ear, let 
him hear what the 
Spirit saith unto the 
churches. 


11. And unto the 
angel of the church in 
Sardis write; These 
things saith he that 
hath the seven Spirits 
of God, and_ the 
seven stars; I know 
thy works, that thou 
hast a name that 
thou livest, and art 
dead. 2 Be watch- 
ful, and strengthen 
the things which re- 
main, that are ready 
to die: for I have not 
found thy works per- 
fect before God. 3 Re- 
member therefore how 
thou hast received and 
heard, and hold fast, 
and repent. If there- 
fore thou shalt not 
watch, I will come on 
thee as a thief, and 
thou shalt not know 
what hour I will come 
upon thee. 4 Thou 
hast a few names even 
in Sardis which have 
net defiled their gar- 
ments; and they shall 
walk with 


me in 
white: for they are 
worthy. 5 He that 


overcometh, the same 
shall be clothed in 
white raiment; and I 


ATIOKAAYYWI2&. Il, π᾿ 
νεφροὺς καὶ καρδίας: καὶ δώσω ὑμῖν ἑκάστῳ κατὰ τὰ 
reins and hearts; and I will give to you each according to 
” G ~ Clan x , a si ~ «5 ᾽ 
ἔργα ὑμῶν. 24 ὑμῖν.δὲ λέγω "καὶ" λοιποῖς τοῖς ἐν 
*works ‘your. But to you Isay, and to(the]rest who [8416] in 
Θυατείροις, door οὐκιἔχουσιν τὴν.διδαχὴν.ταύτην, καὶ" 
Thyatira, as many as have not this teaching, and 
τ ᾽ ” Sc ΄ θ Π - - ε λ , O > 
OLTLVEC OUK.EyYVwoaY Ta βάθη" τοῦ σατανᾶ, ὡς λέγουσιν, Οὐ 

who knew not the depths of Satan, as  theysay; “not 


ἀβαλῶ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς ἄλλο βάρος" 25 πλὴν ὃ ἔχετε κρατή- 


1] *will*cast upon you any other burden ; but what ye have hold 
care, “ἄχρις! οὗ. ἂν ἥξω. 26 καὶ ὁ νικῶν καὶ ὁ 


fast till 
τηρῶν ἄχρι 
keeps until [the] 
ἐπὶ τῶν ἐθνῶν" 27 Kai 
over the nations, 


I shall come. and he that 


δώσω αὐτῷ ἐξουσίαν 
end my works, Iwillgive tohim authority 
ποιμανεῖ αὐτοὺς ἐν ῥάβδῳ σι- 
and heshallshepherd them with “rod lan 
a Ἔ. 4 , A} 4A / 

δηρᾷ᾽ we τὰ σκεύη τὰ. κεραμικὰ συντρίβεται, 
“iron, as vessels of pottery are broken in pieces; as  JIalso 

εἴληφα παρὰ τοῦ-πατρός.μου" 28 καὶ δώσω αὐτῷ τὸν 
have received from my Father ; and Iwillgive tohim the 
ἀστέρα τὸν πρωϊνόν. 29 ὁ ἔχων οὖς ἀκουσάτω Ti τὸ 

*star imorning. He that has anear, let him hear what the 
πνεῦμα λέγει ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις. 

Spirit says tothe assemblies. 

3 Kai τῷ ἀγγέλῳ τῆς ἐν Σάρδεσιν ἐκκλησίας γράψον, 

Andtothe angel of the ἡ. “Sardis lassembly write : 

Τάδε λέγει: ὁ ἔχων ra! πνεύματα τοῦ θεοῦ Kai τοὺς 
These things says he who has_ the Spirits of God and the 
ἑπτὰ ἀστέρας" Οἶδά σου τὰ ἔργα, ὅτι Bro" ὄνομα ἔχεις OTe 
seven stars. I know thy works, that *the *name "thou *hast that 

ζῇς. Kai νεκρὸς el. 2 γίνου γρηγορῶν, Kai ϑῬστήριξον" 
thou livest,and dead ‘art. Be watchful, and _ strengthen 

τὰ. λοιπὰ ἃ μέλλει! ἀποθανεῖν. οὐ.γὰρ. εὕρηκά 

the things that remain, which are about to die, for I have not found 
σου "τὰ" ἔργα πεπληρωμένα ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦξ. 3 μνημόνευε 


And he that overcomes, 
τέλους τὰ.ἔργα.μου, 


ὡς κἀγὼ 


thy works complete before God. Remember 
Ιοῦν! πῶς εἴληφας καὶ ἤκουσας, καὶ τήρει, καὶ 
therefore how thou hast received and heard, and keep [it] and 
μετανόησον᾽ ἐὰν οὖν μὴ-γρηγορήσῃς, ἥξω πιἐπὶ σὲ" 
repent, If therefore thou shalt not watch Iwillcome upon thee 
ὡς κλέπτης, καὶ ov.un γνῷς" ποίαν ὥραν ἥξω 


as a thief, and inno wise shaltthouknow what hour I shall come 


ἐπὶ σέ. 4 ° Ῥἔχεις ὀλίγα" ὀνόματα “καὶ! ἐν Σάρδεσιν, ἃ οὐκ 
upon thee. Thou hast afew names also in Sardis which “ποὺ 
ἐμόλυναν τὰ ἱμάτια.αὐτῶν" Kai περιπατήσουσιν per’ ἐμοῦ ἐν 

defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in 
λευκοῖς, OTe ἄξιοί εἰσιν. 5 ὁ νσνικῶν, τοῦτος" περι- 

white, because worthy they are. He that overcomes, he shall 
βαλεῖται ἐν ἱματίοις λευκοῖς" Kai od.un ἐξαλείψω τὸ ὄνομα 


will not blot out his beclothed in *garments ‘white; and in no wise willI blot out "name 

a τοῖς to the (rest) GLTTrAW. Ὁ — καὶ GLTTrAW. ς βαθέα GLTTrAW. d βάλλω 
I cast (not) LTTraWw. © ἄχρι LTTr. f + ἑπτὰ seven EGLTTrAW. 8 — τὸ (read a 
name) GLTTrAW. h στήρισον GLTTrAWw. i ἔμελλον were about GLTTraw. )-- τὰ 
L{Tra]. k + μου (read my God) GLTTraw. 1 [οὖν] a. ma — ἐπὶ σὲ LYTrA. π γνώσῃ 
ττι. ο + ἀλλὰ (ἀλλ᾽ G) But LITrAW P ὀλίγα ἔχεις τ. 4 -- καὶ GLTTrAW. τ οὕτως 


thus τττ. 


Ill. 


αὐτοῦ ἐκ τῆς 
*his from the 


REVELATION. 


βίβλου τῆς ζωῆς. καὶ ἐξομολογήσομαι" τὸ ὄνομα 
book of life, and will confess *name 


αὐτοῦ ἐνώπιον τοῦ.πατρός.μου Kai ἐνώπιον τῶν ἀγγέλων 
this before my Father and before angels 

αὐτοῦ. 6 ὁ ἔχων οὖς ἀκουσάτω τί τὸ πνεῦμα λέγει 
this. Hethat has anear, let himhear what the Spirit says 


ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις. 
tothe assemblies. 


7 Kai τῷ ἀγγέλῳ τῆς ἐν ᾿Φιλαδελφείᾳ" ἐκκλησίας γράψον, 


Andtothe angel ofthe*in +7Philadelphia lassembly write : 
Τάδε λέγει Τὸ ἅγιος, ὁ ἀληθινός,, ὁ ἔχων τὴν κλεῖδα" 
These things says the Holy, the True; he who has’ the key 


χτοῦ" Δαβίδ," ὁ ἀνοίγων Kai οὐδεὶς ᾿κλείει," *kai! Ὀκλείει" καὶ 


of David, who opens and noone _ shuts, and shuts and 

? ‘ c ? / ell ψ / . ἈΝ e 2 , 7s 2 , , 
οὐδεὶς “ἀνοίγει"" ὃ Olda σου τὰ ἔργα" ἰδού. δέδωκα ἐνώπιόν 
no one opens. Iknow thy works. Lo, Ihave set before 


σου θύραν ἀνεῳγμένην," “καὶ οὐδεὶς δύναται κλεῖσαι αὐτήν" 
thee “door lan 7opened, and noone is able to shut it, 
ὅτι μικρὰν ἔχεις δύναμιν, Kai ἐτήρησάς μου τὸν λόγον; 
because 38. *little ‘thou hast power, and didst keep my word, 
καὶ οὐκ.ἠρνήσω τὸ.ὄνομά.μου. 9 ἰδού, δίδωμι" ἐκ τῆς συνα- 
and didst not deny my name. Lo, I give of the syna- 
ywyne τοῦ σατανᾶ τῶν λεγόντων ἑαυτοὺς Ιουδαίους εἶναι, 


gogue of Satan thosethat declare themselves SJews 1to *be, 
4 ᾽ > / > \ , . > , Ἂν» > ΕῚ vw 

καὶ οὐκ.εἰσίν, ἀλλὰ ψεύδονται" ἰδού, ποιήσω αὐτοὺς ἵνα 

and are not, but do lie; lo, I will cause them that 
εἥξωσιν! Kai "προσκυνήσωσιν" ἐνώπιον τῶν.ποδῶν.σου, 

they should come and ___ should do homage before thy feet, 

καὶ γνῶσιν ὕτι ἐγὼ ἠγάπησά σε. 10 ὅτι ἐτήρησας τὸν 


and should know that 1 loved thee. Beeause thou didst keep the 


λόγον τῆς. ὑπομονῆς. μου, κἀγώ σε τηρήσω ἐκ τῆς ὥρας τοῦ 
word of my endurance, ITalso thee will keep outof the hour 
πειρασμοῦ τῆς μελλούσης ἔρχεσθαι ἐπὶ τῆς οἰκουμένης 
of trial which [15] about tocome upon the *habitable *world 
ὅλης, πειράσαι τοὺς κατοικοῦντας ἐπὶ THE γῆς. 11 ᾿Ιδού," 


whole, totry themthat dwell upon the earth. Behold, 
ἔρχομαι ταχύ: κράτει ὃ ἔχεις, ἵνα μηδεὶς λάβῃ τὸν 
I come quickly: hold fast what thou hast, that no one take 


στέφανόν σου. 12 ὁ νικῶν, ποιήσω αὐτὸν στύλον ἐν τῷ 
2crown thy. He that overcomes, I willmake him apillar in the 


ναῷ τοῦ.θεοῦ.μου, καὶ ἔξω ov.un ἐξέλθῃ ἔτι, καὶ γράψω 
temple of my God, and out not at all shall he go more; and I will write 
ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ.θεοῦ.μου, καὶ TO ὄνομα τῆς πόλεως 


upon him the name ofmy God, andthe name ofthe city 
τοῦ.θεοῦ.μου, τῆς καινῆς Ἱερουσαλήμ, ἔὴ καταβαίνουσα, 
of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down 


ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἀπὸ τοῦ.θεοῦ.μου, Kai τὸ.ὄνομά.μου τὸ 


out of heaven from my God, and my *name 
καινόν. 15 ὁ ἔχων οὖς ἀκουσάτω τί TO πνεῦμα λέγει 
new. Hethat has anear, let himhear whatthe Spirit says 


ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις. 
tothe assemblies. 


629 


name out of the book 
of life, but I will con- 
fess his name before 
my Father, and before 
his angels. 6 He that 
hath an ear, let him 
hear what the Spi- 
rit saith unto the 
churches. 


7 And to the angel 
of the church in Phil- 
adelphia write ; These 
things saith he that is 
holy, he that is true, 
he that hath the key 
of David, he that 
openeth, and no man 
shutteth; and shut- 
teth, and no man 
openeth ; 8I know thy 
works : behold, I have 
set before thee an open 
door, andno man can 
shut it: for thou hast 
a little strength, and 
hast kept my word, 
and hast not denied 
my name. 9 Behold, I 
will make them of the 
synagogue of Satan, 
which say they are 
Jews, and are not, but 
do lie ; behold, I will 
make them to come 
and worship before 
thy feet, and to know 
that [have loved thee. 
10 Because thou hast 
kept the word of my 
patience, I also will 
keep thee from the 
hour of temptation, 
which shall come upon 
all the world, to try 
them that dwell upon 
the earth. 11 Behold, 
I come quickly : hold 
that fast which thou 
hast, that no man take 
thy crown. 12 Him 
that overcometh will 
I make a pillar in the 
temple of my God, and 
he shall go no more 
out: and I will write 
upon him the name of 
my God, and the name 
of the city of my God, 
which is new Jerusa- 
lem, which cometh 
down out of heaven 
from my God: and 7 
will write upon him 
my new name. 13 He 
that hath an ear, let 
him hear what the 
Spirit saith unto the 
churches. 


5 ὁμολογήσω GLTTrAW. t Φιλαδελφίᾳ τ. 
χ - χοῦ LTr[a.] Y Δανείδ ττττγὰ ; Δαυΐδ aw. 
b κλείων shutting Lrtr. ς ἀνοίξει Shall open TTraw. 
which GLTTraw. ἐδιδῶ I will give LTA; δίδω Tr. 
h προσκυνήσουσιν shall do homage LTTra. i 


¥ ὁ ἀληθινός, ὃ ἅγιος A. 


: κλείσει Shall shut LTTraw. 


W κλεῖν GLTTrAW. 


690 


14 And unto the an- 
gel of the church of 
the Laodiceans write; 
These things saith the 
Amen, the faithful 
and true witness, the 
beginning of the crea- 
tion of God; 15 1 know 
thy works, that thou 
art neither cold nor 
hot: I would thou wert 
cold or hot. 16 So then 
because thou art luKe- 
warin,and neither cold 
nor hot, I will spue 
thee out of my mouth. 
17 Because thou say- 
est, I am rich, and 
increased with goods, 
and have need of no- 
thing; and knowest 
not that thou art 
wretched, and miser- 
able, and poor, and 
blind, and naked: 18 1 
counsel thee te buy of 
me goid tried in the 
fire, that thou mayest 
be rich; and white rai- 
ment, that thou may- 
est be clothed, and 
that the shame of thy 
nakedness do not ap- 
pear; and anoint thine 
eyes with eyesalve, 
that thou mayest see, 
19 As many as I love, 
I rebuke and chasten: 
be zealous therefore, 
and repent. 20 Behold, 
I stand at the door, 
and knock: if any man 
hear my voice, and 
open the door, I will 
come in to him, and 
will sup with him, and 
he with me. 21 To him 
that overcometh will 
I grant to sit with me 
in my throne, even as 
I also overcame, and 
am set down with my 
Father in his throne. 
22 He that hathan ear, 
let him hear what the 
Spirit saith unto the 
churches. 


IV. After this I 
looked, and, behold, a 
door was opened in 
heaven: and the first 
voice which I heard 
was as it were of a 
trumpet talking with 
me; which said, Come 

up hither, and I 
will shew thee things 
which must be here- 
after. 2 And imme- 


1 ἐν Λαοδικείᾳ (Λαοδικίᾳ T) ἐκκλησίας assembly in Laodicea GLTTraw. 
Ὁ ζεστὸς οὔτε ψυχρός GTTrAW. 
τ ἐλεινὸς Α. 
ἔγχρισαι anoint with TTr. 
Y ἀνεῳγμένη GLW. 
whatsoever things L. 


9114]. 
τ ἴδον T. 


4 - καὶ LITrAW. 


ASTRO KA AY Wis. 
14 Kai τῷ ἀγγέλῳ τῆς ἰἐκκλησίας Λαοδικέων" γράψον, 
And tothe angel of the eT, of [the] Laodiceans write: 
Τάδε λέγει ὁ ἀμήν, ὁ μάρτυς ὁ πιστὸς Kai ἀληθινός, ἡ 
These things says the Amen, the witness faithful and true, the 
ἀρχὴ τῆς κτίσεως Tov θεοῦ" 15 Olda σου τὰ ἔργα, ὅτι οὔτε 
beginning of the creation of God. I know thy works, that neither 
A fi » Z ΄ 5 Hy r\ 4A m » Il n , . 
vxpoc εἶ, οὔτε ζεστός᾽ ὄφελον ψυχρὸς Meine, ἢ Ceordc 
cold thou art, nor hot ; I would cold thou wert or hot. 
16 οὕτως Ore χλιαρὸς εἶ, Kai οὔτε "ψυχρὸς οὔτε ζεστός," 
Thus because lukewarm thou art, and neither cold nor hot, 
μέλλω σε ἐμέσαι ἐκ τοῦ-.στόματός. μου. 17 ὅτι λέγεις, 
I am about “thee ‘to spue out of my mouth. Because thou aod 
"Ore! πλούσιός εἰμι καὶ πεπλούτηκα Kai Ῥοὐδενὸς" χρείαν ἔχω, 


LIL, ΙΝ: 


Rich Iam, and have grown rich and “of *nothing need “have, 
καὶ οὐκοῖδας ὅτι σὺ εἶ ὁ ταλαίπωρος Kai 4 τέλεεινός," Kai 
and knowest not that thou art the wretched, and miserable, and 


πτωχὸς καὶ τυφλὸς Kai γυμνός" 18 συμβουλεύω σοι ἀγοράσαι 
poor, and blind, and naked; I counsel thee to buy 

παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ χρυσίον πεπυρωμένον EK πυρός, ἵνα πλουτήσῳς, 

from me gold purified by fire, that aha ὑϑπίθις 

καὶ ἱμάτια λευκά, iva περιβάλῃ καὶ μηὴςφανερωθῇ 

and * searmente 1white, that thou anay este clothed, and hey te made manifest 


ἡ αἰσχύνη τῆς. γυμνότητός.σου" καὶ "κολλούριον" ᾿ἔγχρισον" 
the shame of thy nakedness ; and *eye-salve ‘anoint “thou%with 


τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς.σου, iva βλέπῳς. 19 ἐγὼ ὅσους ἐὰν φιλῶ, 


thine eyes, that thou mayest see. 1 as many as I love 
ἐλέγχω καὶ παιδεύω: YOnwoov' οὖν καὶ μετανόησον. 
1 rebuke and discipline; bethou zealous therefore and repent. 


20 ἰδού, ἕστηκα ἐπὶ τὴν θύραν Kai Kpotw' ἐάν τις ἀκούσῃ 
Behold, Istand at the door and knock; if anyone hear 
τῆς.φωνῆς. μου, Kai ἀνοίξῃ τὴν θύραν, % εἰσελεύσομαι πρὸς 
my voice and open the door, I will come in to 
αὐτόν, καὶ δειπνήσω per αὐτοῦ, καὶ αὐτὸς per ἐμοῦ. 21 ὁ 
him, and _ will SUP with him, and he with me. He that 


νικῶν, δώσω αὐτῷ καθίσαι μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ ἐν τῷ.θρόνῳομου, ὡς 
ΟΥΘΡΓΟΙΘΕΣ; I will give tohim tosit with me in my ΣΌΣ; as 


κἀγὼ ἐνίκησα, καὶ ἐκάθισα μετὰ τοῦ.πατρός. μου ἐν τῷ θρόνῳ 


Ialso overcame, and satdown with my Father in *throne 
αὐτοῦ. 22 ὁ ἔχων οὖς ἀκουσάτω τί τὸ πνεῦμα λέγει 

this. Hethat has anear, let himhear what the _ Spirit says 
ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις. : 


tothe assemblies. 
4 Mera ταῦτα "εἶδον," καὶ ἰδοὺ θύρα Υὐἠνεῳγμένη" ἐν τῷ 
After these things Isaw, and behold a door opene in 
οὐρανῷ, Kai ἡ φωνὴ ἡ πρώτη ἣν ἤκουσα ὡς σάλπιγγος 
heaven, andthe *voice first which LIheard [was] as of a trumpet 
λαλούσης per ἐμοῦ, λέγουσα," *AvaBa' ὧδε, καὶ δείξω 
speaking with me, saying, Come up hither, and I will shew 


σοι bg! δεῖ γενέσθαι pera ταῦτα. 2 “καὶ! εὐθέως 
to thee what things must take place after these things. And immediately 


m ἧς GLTTrAW. 
P οὐδὲν *in “no ἢ wise LTTrA. 4 - 0 the 
5 κολλύριον TITA. τ ἐγχρίσαι GW ; ἐγχρῖσαι to anoint with 1,Α΄; 

v ζήλενε LTTrAW. w + καὶ (read 1 will both come in) T[A]w. 
2 λέγων GLTTrAW. 2 ᾿Ανάβηθι L. υ ὅσα 
ς Punctuate so as to read Immediately after these things L, 


© — ὅτι [A]w. 


IV. REVELATION. 
ἐγενόμην ἐν πνεύματι: καὶ ἰδού, θρόνος ἔκειτο ἐν τῷ 
I became in {the} Spirit; and behold, athrone wasset in the 


οὐρανῷ, καὶ ἐπὶ “τοῦ Oodvov' καθήμενος" ὃ καὶ ὁ καθή- 
heaven, andupon 6 throne [one] sitting, and he who[was] sit- 
μενος ‘hv! ὕμοιος ὁράσει λίθῳ ἰάσπιδι Kai ἐσαρδίνῳ"" Kai 
ting was like in appearance toa7stone ‘jasper and asardius; and 
ἶρις κυκλόθεν τοῦ θρόνου "ὅμοιος! ὁράσει σμαραγ- 
a rainbow [was] around the throne like in appearance to an eme- 
divw. 4 καὶ κυκλόθεν τοῦ θρόνου θρόνοι" εἴκοσι "καὶ" ἱτέσ- 
rald. And around the throne ‘*thrones ‘twenty and 
σαρες," Kai ἐπὶ τοὺς ™Opdvove εἶδον τοὺς εἴκοσι Kai τέσσαρας" 
*four, and on the thrones [5807 twenty and four 
πρεσβυτέρους καθημένους, περιβεβλημένους "ἐνὶ ἱματίοις 
elders sitting, clothed in ?garments 
λευκοῖς᾽ Kai δἔσχον" ἐπὶ τὰς κεφαλὰς. αὐτῶν στεφάνους Ῥχρυσ- 
‘white; and they Ββαᾶ on their heads crowns ‘gold- 


ovc.' 5 Kai ἐκ τοῦ θρόνου ἐκπορεύονται ἀστραπαὶ καὶ 
en, And out of the throne go forth lightnings and 
4 ‘ 7 οἷ! ‘ ε 4 as A = , 
IBpovrai καὶ φωναί" Kai ἑπτὰ λαμπάδες πυρὸς καιόμεναι 
thunders and γτὸοΐοθβ; and seven lamps of fire burning 
ἐνώπιον τοῦ θρόνου", "αἵ! teisw' τὰ! ἑπτὰ πνεύματα τοῦ 
before the throne, which are the seven Spirits 
θεοῦ: 6 καὶ ἐνώπιον τοῦ θρόνου θάλασσα ὑαλίνη, ὁμοία 
of God; and before the throne a 7sea ‘glass, like 


, ‘ > , ~ 0 , ‘ Ui λ ~ 0 , 
κρυστάλλῳ. καὶ ἐν μέσῳ τοῦ θρόνου καὶ κύκλῳ τοῦ θρόνου 


crystal. And in [the] midst of the throne and around the _ throne 
χτέσσαρα" ζῶα γέμοντα ὀφθαλμῶν γἔμπροσθεν" καὶ 
four living creatures, full of eyes before and 
ὄπισθεν. ἢ καὶ τὸ ζῶον τὸ πρῶτον ὅμοιον λέοντι, 
behind ; and the “living *creature first [was] like a lion, 
καὶ τὸ δεύτερον ζῶον ὅὕμοιον μόσχῳ, Kai τὸ τρίτον ζῶ- 
and the second livingcreature like acalf, and the third living 


ov τἔχον" τὸ πρόσωπον *we' ἄνθρωπος," Kai τὸ τέταρτον 


creature having the face as a man, and the fourth 
ζῶον ὕμοιον ἀετῷ “πετωμένῳ." ὃ Kai 4 récoaoa' 
living creature _ like Seagle a "flying. And [the] four 
ζῶα ἕν [καθ᾽ ἑαυτό," Selxyov' ἀνὰ πτέρυγας ἕξ 
᾽ 5 ? 4 
living creatures, each for itself had respectively wings Six; 


κυκλόθεν καὶ ἔσωθεν “yénovra' ὀφθαλμῶν, καὶ ἀνάπαυσιν οὐκ 
around and _ within full of eyes ; and ‘cessation “not 


” Ἐπ τὰ . ΄ ἴδλ ς i “ .“ “ 
ἔχουσιν ἡμέρας καὶ YUKTOC, ἐγοντα," Αγιος, ἅγιος, ἅγιος 


‘they “have day and night, saying, oly, holy, holy, 
κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ παντοκράτωρ, ὁ ἦν Kai ὁ ὧν καὶ ὁ 
Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is, and who[is] 
ἐρχόμενος. 9 Kai ὅταν δώσουσιν τὰ ζῶα δόξαν καὶ 
to come. And when ‘shall °give ‘the 7living *creatures glory and 
τιμὴν καὶ εὐχαριστίαν. τῷ καθημένῳ ἐπὶ **rod θρόνου," τῷ 
honour and thanksgiving to him who sits upon the throne, who 


© τὸν θρόνον LTTrAW. f— ἦν GLTTrAW. 8 capdiw GLTTrAW. 
k — καὶ @LTTrAW. 1 τέσσερας L3 τέσσαρας T. 
τέσσαρας GITrW ; εἴκοσι τέσσερας (τέσσαρας A) θρόνους LA. 
garments) L. ο — ἔσχον GLTTrAW. P χρυσέους Tr. 
τ + [αὐτοῦ] (read his throne) a. 5. LT. t ἐστιν L. 
GLTTrAW. ‘*tTegoepaLTTr. γΥ ἔνπροσθεντ. * ἔχων TTrA. 
που of a Man GLTTrAw. © πετομένῳ GLTTrAW. 
LTTr. 
TTrA) having ΟἹ. 


ha γέμουσιν are ful] @uTTraw. 
θρόνῳ LITra. 


Β ὁμοία Ε. 
™ θρόνους τοὺς (--- τοὺς GTTr) εἴκοσι 
4 — ἐν (read ἱματίοις with 
4 φωναὶ καὶ βρονταί GLTTraw. 
v [τὰ] A. 
8 — ws G[A]w.- 
4 + τὰ the GLTTraw. 
fa καθ᾽ ἕν αὐτῶν (ἕκαστον αὐτῶν Tr) (read each of them) GLTA. 
ia λέγοντες GLTTrAW. 


631 


diately I was in the 
Spirit: and, behold, a 
throne was set in hea- 
ven, and one sat on 
the throne. 3 And he 
that sat was to look 
upon like a jasper and 
a sardine stone: and 
there was a rain- 
bow round about the 
throne, in sight like 
unto an_ emerald, 
4 And round about the 
throne were four and 
twenty seats: and up- 
on the seats Isaw four 
and twenty elders sit- 
ting, clothed in white 
raiment; and they had 
on their heads crowns 
of gold. 5 And out of 
the throne proceeded 
lightnings and thun- 
derings and voices: 
and there were seven 
lamps of fire burning 
before the _ throne, 
which are the seven 
Spirits of God. 6 And 
before the throne there 
was a sea of glass like 
unto crystal: and in 
the midst of the 
throne, and round a- 
bout the throne, were 
four beasts full of eyes 
before and_ behind, 
7 And the first beast 
was like a lion, and 
the second beast likea 
calf, and the third 
beast had a face asa 
man, and the fourth 
beast was like a flying 
eagle. 8 And the four 
beasts had each of 
them six wings about 
him; and they were 
full of eyes within: 
and they rest not day 
and night, saying 
Holy, holy, holy, Lord 
God Almighty, which 
was, and is, and is to 
come. 9 And when 
those beasts give glory 
and honourand thanks 
to him that sat on the 


1 θρόνους LT. 


¥ ὡς as 
Ὁ avOpw- 

, 
“8 τέσσερα 
88 ἔχον (ἔχων 
ka τῷ 


632 


throne, who liveth for 
ever and ever, 10 the 
four and twenty elders 
fall down before him 
that sat on the throne, 
and worship him 
that liveth for ever 
and ever, and cast 
their crowns before 
the throne, saying, 
11 Thou art worthy, 
O Lord, to receive 
glory and honour and 
power: for thou hast 
created allthings, and 
for thy pleasure they 
are and were created. 


V¥. And I saw in the 
right hand of him that 
sat on the throne a 
book written within 
and on the backside, 
sealed with seven 
seals. 2 And I sawa 
strong angel proclaim- 
ing with a loud voice, 
Who is worthy to open 
the book, and to loose 
the seals thereof ? 
3 And no man in hea- 
ven, nor in earth, nei- 
ther under the earth, 
was able to open the 
book, neither to look 
thereon. 4 And 1 wept 
much, because no man 
was found worthy to 
open and to read the 
book, neither to look 
thereon. 5 And one of 
the elders saith unto 
me, Weep not: behold, 
the Lion of the tribe 
of Juda, the Root of 
David, hath prevailed 
to open the book, and 
to loose the seven 
seals thereof. 6 And 
I beheld, and, lo, in 
the midst of the 
throne and of the 
four beasts, and inthe 
midst of the elders, 
stood a Lambas it had 
been slain, having 
seven horns and seven 
eyes, which are the 
seven Spirits of God 
sent forth into all the 
earth. 7 And he came 
and took the book out 
of the right hand of 


ATIOKAAY WIS. TV Ni 


ζῶντι εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων, 10 πεσοῦνται οἱ εἴκοσι ‘Kai 
lives to the ages ofthe ages, shall fall the twenty and 
τέσσαρες πρεσβύτεροι ἐνώπιον καθημένου ἐπὶ τοῦ 
four elders before sits upon the 
θρόνου, καὶ ™zpookvvovew' τῷ ζῶντι εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν 
throne, and they worship himwho lives ἕο the ages of the 
αἰώνων, καὶ "BaddAovow' τοὺς. στεφάνους. αὐτῶν ἐνώπιον τοῦ 


τοῦ 
him who 


Ages ; and cast their crowns before the 
θρόνου, λέγοντες, 11 ΓΑξιος εἶ, οκύριε,! λαβεῖν τὴν δόξαν 
throne, saying, Worthy art thou, O Lord, to receive glory 
καὶ τὴν τιμὴν καὶ Ῥτὴν" δύναμιν. Ort od ἔκτισας τὰ 
and honour and power : because thou didst create 


πάντα, καὶ διὰ τὸ θέλημά.σου “εἰσὶν" Kai ἐκτίσθησαν. 


allthings, and for thy will they are, and were created. 
5 Kai εἶδον ἐπὶ τὴν δεξιὰν τοῦ καθημένου ἐπὶ τοῦ 
And Isaw on the righthand of him who sits upon the 


θρόνου βιβλίον γεγραμμένον ἔσωθεν Kai ὄπισθεν, κατεσῴφρα- 


throne a book, written within and on([the] back, having been 
γισμένον σφραγῖσιν ἑπτά. 2 καὶ εἶδον ἄγγελον ἰσχυρὸν κη- 
sealed with “seals ‘seven. And I saw Sangel ‘a *strong pro- 
ρύσσοντα᾽ φωνῇ μεγάλῃ, Tic Séori' ἄξιος ἀνοῖξαι τὸ 
claiming with a “voice ‘loud, Who is worthy toopen the 


βιβλίον, καὶ λῦσαι τὰς σφραγῖδας αὐτοῦ; 3 Kai οὐδεὶς ᾿ἠδύ- 
book, and toloose the seals of it? And noone was 
varo' ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, Yovde' ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, “οὐδὲ! ὑποκάτω τῆς 
able in the heaven, nor upon the earth, nor under the 
γῆς, ἀνοῖξαι τὸ βιβλίον, "οὐδὲ" βλέπειν αὐτό. 4 Kai “ἐγὼ! 
earth, toopen the book, nor to look at it. And I 
ἔκλαιον YroAda,' Ore οὐδεὶς ἄξιος εὑρέθη avot~at7*Kai ava- 
Was weeping much because noone worthy wasfound toopen and to 
γνῶναι! τὸ βιβλίον, οὔτε βλέπειν αὐτό. 5 Kai εἷς te τῶν 
? 
read the book, nor to look at it. And one of the 
’ “ \ ~ > ζ ? / « , 
πρεσβυτέρων λέγει μοι, Μὴ-κλαϊε: ἰδού, ἐνίκησεν ὁ λέων 
elders says tome, Donot weep. Behold, Sovercame 'the Lion 


ὁ δῶν" ἐκ τῆς φυλῆς ᾿Ιούδα, ἡ ῥίζα AaBid,' ἀνοῖξαι 


which is of the _ tribe of Juda, the root of David, [50 85] to open 
TO βιβλίον, καὶ λῦσαι" τὰς ἑπτὰ σφραγῖδας αὐτοῦ. 6 Kai 
the book, and toloose the seven seals of it. And 
εἶδον “καὶ “ἰδού. ἐν μέσῳ τοῦ θρόνου καὶ τῶν τεσσάρων 
Isaw, and behold, ἴῃ [086] midst ofthe throne and of the four 
ζώων, Kai ἐν μέσῳ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων, ἀρνίον ᾿ἑστη- 
living creatures, and in [the] midst of the elders, a Lamb © stand- 
x " « > , gy. i] “ € ‘ ‘ > Oar 4 
Kog) ὡς ἐσῴφαγμενον, Sexov' κέρατα ἔπτα καὶ ὀφθαλμοὺς 
ing as having beenslain, having horns ‘seven and 7eyes 


ἑπτά, Yow εἰσιν τὰ ἱἑπτὰ" ἔτοῦ θεοῦ πνεύματα" ra! ™are- 
Iseven, which are the seven 2of “God 1Spirits which have 
σταλμένα! εἰς πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν. 7 Kai ἦλθεν, καὶ εἴληφεν ™ rd 
been sent into all the earth: and he came and took the 


1__ καὶ GLTTrAW. 
EGLTTrAwW. 


they were GLTTraw. 
ἡ oute T. 
ee ~ 
7 — και ἀναγνῶναι GLTTrAW. 


t ἐδύνατο 7. 

ἡ πολύ LTTrAW. 
uttraA; Δαυϊδ GW. 
1 ἑστηκὼς Tr. 


‘8 — τὰ (read ἀπεστ. : 
na — τὸ βιβλίον (read [it]) LTTra. 


being sent w. 


© ὃ κύριος Kat ὃ θεὸς ἡμῶν O Lord and our God LrTraw. 


8 ἔχων TTrA. 


Ὁ βαλοῦσιν shull cast 
Ρ- χὴν. «ἦσαν 

r + ἐν in (ἃ loud voice) GLTTraw. Ss — ἐστιν (read [is]) LTTraw. 
W οὔτε LITr. x — ἐγὼ (read ἔκλαιον 1 was weeping) T[Tr]. 

2 — ὧν (read [is]) GLTTraW. Ὁ Δανεέδ 

d — καὶ ΟΥΤΙΑΎ,. e — ἰδού GLTTrAW. 
i— ἑπτὰ L. k πνεύματα τοῦ θεοῦ GLTTrA. 
ma ἀπεσταλμένοι LTr ; ἀποστελλόμενα [are] 


τὶ προσκυνήσουσιν Shall worship EGLITraw. 


¢ — λῦσαι GLTTrAw. 
haw. 
having been sent) LTTra. 


V, VI. 
βιβλίον! ἐκ τῆς δεξιᾶς τοῦ 
book outof the ment hand of him who 


8 καὶ ὅτε ἔλαβεν τὸ βιβλίον τὰ °Técoapa' 
And when hetook the book {86 four 


Ῥεἰκοσιτέσσαρες᾽ πρεσβύτεροι “ἔπεσον" 


REVELATION. 


καθημένου ἐπὶ τοῦ θρόνου. 
sits on the throne. 
ζῶα καὶ οἱ 

living creatures and the 

ἐνώπιον τοῦ ἀρνίου, 


four-and- sewenty, elders fell before the Lamb, 
ἔχοντες ἕκαστος ᾿κιθάρας" Kai φιάλας "χρυσᾶς" γεμούσας θυ- 

having each DBEES and *bowls golden full of 
μιαμάτων, at εἰσιν at προσευχαὶ τῶν ἁγίων" 9 Kai gdovow 
incenses, which are the prayers ofthe saints. And they sing 


pony καινήν, λέγοντες, ΓΑξιος εἶ λαβεῖν τὸ βιβλίον, καὶ 


a *song mew, saying, Worthy art thou totake the book, and 
ἀνοῖξαι τὰς. σῤραγῖδας. αὐτοῦ: ὅτι ἐσφάγης Kai nydpacac 
to open its seals ; because thou wast slain, and didst purchase 


τῷ θεῷ “yuac' ἐν τῴιαἵματί.σου, ἐκ πάσης φυλῆς Kai yAwo- 
7to°God ‘us by thy blood, out of every tribe and tongue 


σης Kai λαοῦ καὶ ἔθνους, 10 καὶ ἐποίησας τἡ μᾶς" “τῷ.θεῷ. ἡμῶν" 
and people and nation, and didst make us to our God 


*Baoursic! καὶ ἱερεῖς" Kai ἡβασιλεύσομεν" ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. 11 Καὶ 
kings and priests; and weshallreign over the earth, And 


εἶδον, Kai ἤκουσαΞ φωνὴν ayyéhwy πολλῶν *"kuKAdOEY! τοῦ 


Isaw, and Iheard [the] voice of “angels ‘many around the 
θρόνου καὶ τῶν ζώων καὶ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων" Kai χιλι- 
throne and of the living creatures and of the elders ; and thou- 


άδες χιλιάδων, 12 λέγοντες φωνῇ μεγάλῳ, “"Αξιόν ἐστιν 


sands of thousands ; saying witha*voice ‘loud, saa is 


TO ἀρνίον τὸ ἐσφαγμένον λαβεῖν τὴν δύναμιν καὶ ἃ πλοῦτον 
the Lamb that hasbeenslain to receive power, and riches, 


καὶ σοφίαν καὶ ἰσχὺν καὶ τιμὴν καὶ δόξαν καὶ εὐλογίαν. 
and wisdom, and _ strength, and honour, and - glory, ἜΣ blessing. 


13 Kai πᾶν κτίσμα ὅ “ἐστιν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, καὶ έν τῇ γῇ," 
And ΘΎΡΕΣ creature which is in the heaven and_ in the earth 


Kai ὑποκάτω τῆς γῆς, Kai ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης δ᾽ δξέστιν," 
and under the earth,and ‘on ‘the ®sea ‘those 7that “are, 


καὶ τὰ ἐν αὐτοὶς ἱπάντα," ἤκουσα |Méyovrac,' Τῷ 
and *the things *in *them 141], heard I Sayauey To him who 


καθημένῳ ἐπὶ ™rov θρόνου καὶ τῷ ἀρνίῳ ἡ εὐλογία Kai ἡ 
sits on the throne, and to the Lamb, Blessing, and 


« ~ ~ ’ 
τιμὴ καὶ ἡ δόξα καὶ τὸ κράτος εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. 


honour,and glory, and might, to the ages of the ages. 
14 Καὶ τὰ "τέσσαρα' ζῶα ἔλεγον, ““᾿Αμήν᾽ Kai ot *sikoot- 
And the four living creatures said, Amen; andthe four-and- 
τέσσαρες" πρεσβύτεροι ἔπεσαν, καὶ προσεκύνησαν 
twenty elders felldown and worshipped (him who] 
. ζῶντι εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων." 
lives to the ages of the ages, 


6 Kai “eidov' ore ἤνοιξεν τὸ ἀρνίον μίαν ἐκ τῶν S* σφρα- 
And 1587 when “opened ‘the "Lamb one οὗ the seals, 


633 
him that sat upon the 
throne. 8 And when 


he had taken the book, 
the four beasts and 
four and twenty el- 
ders tell down before 


the Lamb, having 
every one of them 
harps, and_ golden 


vials full of odours, 
which are the prayers 
of saints. 9 And they 
sung a new song, say- 
ing, Thou art worthy 
to take the book, and 
to open the seals there- 
of: for thou wast slain, 
and hast redeemed us 
to God by thy blood 
out of every kindred, 
and tongue, and peo- 
ple, and nation; 10and 
hast made us unto our 
God kings and priests: 
and we shall reign on 
the earth. 11 And I 
beheld, and I heard 
the voice of many an- 
gels round about the 
throne and the beasts 
and the elders: and 
the number of them 
was ten thousand 
times ten thousand, 
andthousands of thou- 
sands; 12 saying with 
a loud voice, Worthy 
is the Lamb that was 
slain to receive power, 
and riches, and wis- 
dom, and strength, 
and honour, and glory, 
and blessing. 13 And 
every creature whick 
is in heaven, and on 
the earth, and under 
the earth, and such as 
are in the sea, and all 
that are in them, heard 
I saying, Blessing, and 
honour, and glory, ana 
power, ὅδ unto him 
that sitteth upon the 
throne, and unto the 
Lamb for ever and 
ever. 14 And the four 
beasts said, Amen. 
And the four and 
twenty elders fell 
down and worshipped 
him that liveth for 
ever and ever, 


VI. And I saw when 
the Lamb opened one 


ο τέσσερα LITr. Ρ εἴκοσι τέσσαρες LTA. 
5 χρυσέας τι. — ἡμᾶς LTAW. 
% βασιλείαν a navaee LTTra. 
shall reign 61. 2. - ws as TTr[A]. 


9 ἔπεσαν LTTrAW. 
Υ αὐτοὺς them GLTTraw. 


2 κύκλῳ GLTTrAW. 


d + Tov W. — ἐστιν (read [is]) Lrtraw. 


F κιθάραν a harp LTTraw. 


— τῷ θεῷ ἡμῶν A, 


Υ βασιλεύουσιν they reign LIrAW 3 βασιλεύσουσιν they 


b+ καὶ a 6 ἀριθμὸς αὐτῶν μυ- 
piabes μυριάδων ἈΠΟ the number of them was myriads of “myriads EGLITraw. 


ς “A€uds τ΄ 


f ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ON the earth GLTTrAW. 


Bite ἅ LTTrA. » — ἐστιν TTr. iby πάντας (read I heard all) Ww. Κ + Οκαὶ also 1. 
l λέγοντα L. ™ τῷ θρόνῳ LTA. a τέσσερα LTTr. oa + 70 W. ΡΒ — εἰκοσι- 
τέσσαρες GLTTrAW. 48 — ζῶντι to end of verse GLTTrAW. ra ἴδον T. 82 - ἑπτὰ 


seven GLTTraw. 


634 


of the seals, and I 
heard, as it were the 
noise of thunder, one 
of the four beasts say- 
ing, Come and see. 
2 And I saw, and be- 
hold a white horse: 
and he thatsat on him 
had a bow; and a 
crown was given unto 
him: and he went 
forth conquering, and 
to conquer. 


3 And when he had 
opened the second seal, 
I heard the second 
beast say, Come and 
see, 4 And there went 
out another horse that 
was red: and power 
was given to him that 
sat thereon to take 
peace from the earth, 
and that they should 
kill one another: and 
there was given unto 
him a great sword. 


5 And when he had 
opened the third seal, 
I heard the third beast 
say, Come and _ see. 
And I beheld, and lo 
a black horse; and he 
that sat on him had a 
pair of balances in his 
hand. 6 And I heard 
a voice in the midst of 
the four beasts say, 
A measure of wheat 
for a penny, and three 
measures of barley for 
a penny; and see thou 
hurt not the oil and 
the wine. 


7 And when he had 
opened the fourth seal, 
I heard the voice of 
the fourth beast say, 
Come and see. 8 AndI 
looked, and behold a 
pale horse: and his 
name that sat on him 
was Death, and Hell 
followed with him. 
And power was given 
unto them over the 
fourth part of the 
earth, to kill with 
sword, and with hun- 
ger, and with death, 
and with the beasts of 
the earth. 


9 And when he had 
opened the fifth seal, 


τ φωνὴ (read without the numer als) GLTTrAW. 


LTTrA. w ἴδον T. 
βλέπε @LTTrAW. 


ἃ σφραγῖδα τὴν τρίτην GLTTrAW. 
(read 1 heard the fourth) G[Tr]w. 


ζώου) GLTTrAW. 


ATIOKAAY WI2X. 
γίδων, Kai ἤκουσα ἑνὸς ἐκ THY τεσσάρων λέγον- 
and Iheard one ‘of ®the °four ‘say- 


τος, ὡς ἱφωνῆς" βροντῆς, Ἔρχου "καὶ βλέπε." 2 Καὶ Yeidor,' 


ing, ‘as “a*voice *of thunder, Come and see, And eae 
kai ἰδού, ἵππος λευκός, Kai ὁ καθήμενος ἐπ᾽ “αὐτῷ! ἔχων 


Vi. 


ζώων 
"living ' creatures 


and behold, a “horse tes and he sitting on it having 

, 4 ? ~ ~ 4 
τόξον" Kai ἐδόθη αὐτῷ στέφανος, καὶ ἐξῆλθεν νικῶν, Kai 
abow; 8ΔΠ6 wasgiventohim acrown, and he went forth overcoming and 
iva νικήσῃ. 


that he might overcome. 
3 Kai ore ἤνοιξεν τὴν Yoevripay σφραγῖδα" ἤκουσα τοῦ 


And when he opened the second seal Iheard the 
δευτέρου ζώου λέγοντος, Ἔρχου Τκαὶ βλέπε." 4 Καὶ 
second living pane saying, Come and see, And 


ἐξῆλθεν ἄλλος ἵππος πυῤῥός" Kai τῷ καθημένῳ ἐπ᾽ see 


went forth ke horse red ; and to a sitting on 


ἐδόθη "αὐτῷ" λαβεῖν τὴν εἰρήνην Ῥάπὸ" τῆς γῆς, Kai wa 


was given to him to take peace from the earth, and that 


ἀλλήλους “σφάξωσιν"" καὶ ἐδόθη αὐτῷ μάχαιρα μεγάλη. 


one another ane should slay ; and was giventohim a *sword great, 
5 Kai ore ἤνοιξεν τὴν “τρίτην oppayica' ἤκουσα τοῦ τρίτου 


And when he opened the third seal Iheard the _ third 
ζώου λέγοντος, Ἔρχου “καὶ βλέπε." Kai *eldor," καὶ 
living creature saying, Come and see. And Isaw, and 


ἰδού, ἵππος μέλας, καὶ ὁ καθήμενος ἐπ᾽ ταὐτῷ" ἔχων ζυγὸν 
behold, a *horse ‘black, andhe sitting on it haying a balance 
ἐν τῇ χειρὶ αὐτοῦ. 6 Kai ἤκουσα 5 φωνὴν ἐν tow τῶν 
in his hand. And IJ heard avoice in(the]midst of the 
τεσσάρων λέγουσαν, Χοῖνιξ σίτου δηναρίου, 
four saying, Achoenix of wheat for a denarius, 
καὶ τρεῖς χοίνικες κριθῆς" Snvapiov' Kai τὸ ἔλαιον Kai τὸν 
and three chenixes of barley foradenarius: and the oil and the 
οἶνον μὴ ἀδικήσῃς. 
wine thou mayest not injure. 
7 Καὶ ore ἤνοιξεν τὴν σφραγῖδα τὴν τετάρτην; ἤκουσα 


ζώων. 
living creatures, 


And when he opened the ?seal ‘fourth, 1 heard [the] 
φωνὴν!" τοῦ τετάρτου ζώου λέγουσαν," [Ἔρχου "καὶ 
voice οἵ the fourth living creature saying, Jome and 


βλέπε." 8 Kai πεῖδον," καὶ ἰδού, ἵππος χλωρός, καὶ ὁ καθήμενος 


see. And Isaw, and pehold, eee ‘pale, andhe — sitting 
« oe 
ἐπάνω αὐτοῦ, ὄνομα αὐτῷ 6' Θάνατος, και ὁ ἅδης Κάκο- 
on it, “name ‘his [was] Death, and hades fol- 


λουθεῖ" per αὐτοῦ: καὶ ἐδόθη lavroic' ἐξουσία ™amoxreivat 
lows with him; and was giver tothem authority to kill 


ἐπὶ τὸ τέταρτον τῆς γῆς" ἐν ῥομφαίᾳ Kai ἐν λιμῷ καὶ ἐν 
over the fourth of the earth with sword and with famine and with 


θανάτῳ, καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν θηρίων τῆς γῆς. 
death, and by the beasts of the earth. 


9 Kai ore ἤνοιξεν τὴν πέμπτην σφραγῖδα Veldoy' ὑποκάτω 
And when he opened the fifth seal Isaw under 


v καὶ ἴδε and behold aw; — καὶ βλέπε 

Υ σφραγῖδα τὴν δευτέραν GLTTrAW. — καὶ 
2 [αὐτῷ] 1. > ἐκ GLTTrAW. ¢ σφάξουσιν they shall slay LTTrA. 
€ + ὡς aS LTTrA. ἔ κριθῶν LTTrAW. & — φωνὴν 
h λέγοντος (connect λίσυσαν with φωνὴν ; “λέγοντος with 
k ῃκολούθει followed GLTTrAw. 1 αὐτῷ to him a. 


x αὐτὸν GLTTraw. 


i—o T[A]. 


™ ἐπὶ τὸ τέταρτον τῆς γῆς. ἀποκτεῖναι GLTTrAW. 


VE REVELATION. 
τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου τὰς ψυχὰς τῶν ἐσφαγμένων διὰ τὸν 
the altar the souls of those having been slain because of the 


λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ dia! τὴν μαρτυρίαν ἣν εἶχον, 10 Kai 
word of God, and becauseof the testimony which they held; and 


ΡῬἔκραζον" φωνῇ μεγάλῳ, λέγοντες, Ἕως πότε, ὁ deo- 
they were crying with avoice ‘loud, saying, Until when, O Mas- 
πότης ὁ ἅγιος Kai 16" ἀληθινός, οὐ-.κρίνεις καὶ ἐκδικεῖς 
ter, the holy and the true, dost thou not judge and avenge 


TO.aiparpov τἀπὸϊ τῶν κατοικούντων ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς; 11 Kai 
our blood on those who dwell on the earth? And 
δἐδόθησαν" " ἑκάστοις" “στολαὶ λευκαί," καὶ ἐῤῥέθη αὐτοῖς iva 
were given to each 7robes white; and it was said to them that 
ἀναπαύσωνται Ξἔτι χρόνον" ὑμικρόν," ἕως τοῦ" "πληρώσονται" 
they should σὲ yet atime little, until shall be fulfilled 
‘ € ΔΛ ᾽ ~ A « ) ‘ ? ~ « , 
καὶ οἱ. σύνδουλοι αὐτῶν καὶ οἱ. ἀδελφοὶ αὐτῶν, οἱ μέλλοντες 
both their fellow-bondmen and their brethren, those being about 
θάἀποκτείνεσθαι! we Kai αὐτοί. 
to be killed as also. they. 
12 Kai “εἶδον! ore ἤνοιξεν τὴν σφραγῖδα τὴν ἕκτην" καὶ 
And Isaw when heopened the 2seal lsixth, and 
450d," σεισμὸς μέγας ἐγένετο, καὶ ὁ ἥλιος “ἐγένετο μέλας" 
a 


_ behold, *earthquake “a *great 'there was, andthe sun became black 
ὡς σάκκος τρίχινος, Kai ἡ σελήνη ἷ ἐγένετο ὡς αἷμα, 13 Kai 


as sackcloth and the became blood, and 


οἱ ἀστέρες τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἔπεσαν εἰς THY γῆν, ὡς συκῆ Ξβάλλει" 
the stars of the heaven fell unto the earth, as afig-tree casts 
τοὺς. ὀλύνθους. αὐτῆς, ὑπὸ μεγάλου ἀνέμου" σειομένη" 14 Kai 
its untimely figs, by a great wind being shaken. And 
1 οὐρανὸς ἀπεχωρίσθη ὡς βιβλίον ξεϊλισσόμενον," καὶ πᾶν 
heaven departed as a book being rolled up, and every 
ὄρος καὶ νῆσος ἐκ τῶν.τόπων.αὐτῶν ἐκινήθησαν" 16 καὶ 
mountain and island out of their places were moved, And 
οἱ βασιλεῖς τῆς γῆς, Kai οἱ μεγιστᾶνες, καὶ οἱ ἱπλούσιοι, Kai 
the kings of the earth, and the great, and the rich, and 
οἱ χιλίαρχοι," Kai ot ™dvvarol,' Kai mac δοῦλος Kai "πᾶς" 


‘hair, moon as 


the chief captains, and the powerful, and every bondman, and every 
ἐλεύθερος ἔκρυψαν ἑαυτοὺς εἰς τὰ σπήλαια καὶ εἰς τὰς 
free (man) hid themselves in the caves and in the 


πέτρας τῶν ὀρέων, 16 Kai λέγουσιν τοῖς ὄρεσιν καὶ ταῖς 


rocks of the mountains ; and theysay tothe mountains and tothe 
πέτραις, “Πέσετε" ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς, Kai κρύψατε ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ προσ- 

rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from [the] face 
ὦπου τοῦ καθημένου ἐπὶ P*rov θρόνου," καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς ὀργῆς 

of him who sits on the throne, and from the wrath 

~ ? ΄ « = « € , « » ~ > ~ 
Tov ἀρνίου" 17 ore ἦλθεν ἡ ἡμέρα ἡ μεγάλη τῆς ὀργῆς 
of the Lamb; because iscome the “δ lgreat ®wrath 
Vavrov,' καὶ τίς δύναται σταθῆναι ; 

Sof *his, and who is 8016 to stand? 


° — διὰ L{a]. Ρ ἔκραξαν they cried GLTTIrAW. 4 — ὃ GLTTrAw. 
5 ἐδόθη was given GLTTraw. t+ αὐτοῖς to them GLTTraw. 
each LTT: [A]. Ἢ στολὴ λευκή a white robe @LTTraW. 
Kpov G. * — οὗ GLITrAW. 5 πληρωθῶσιν should be fulfilled tw ; 
fulfil [it] ertra. Ὁ ἀποκτέννεσθαι GLTTrA. ς ἴδον T. 
© μέλας ἐγένετο GT. {- ὅλη whole (moon) GLTTraw. 
h ἀνέμου μεγάλον GLTTrAW. ‘+ ὁ the GLTTraw. 
καὶ οἱ πλούσιοι GLTTrAW. ™ ἰσχυροὶ strong GLTTrAW. 
LAW. ΡΒ τῷ θρόνῳ TA. 44 αὐτῶν “οὗ ‘their TTr. 


635 


I saw under the altar 
the souls of them that 
were slain for the word 
of God, and for the 
testimony which they 


held: 10 and _ they 
cried with a _ loud 
voice, saying, How 
long, Lord, holy 


and true, dost thou 
not judge and avenge 
our blood on them 
that dwell on the 
earth? 11 And white 
robes were given unto 
every one of them; 
and it was said unto 
them, that they should 
rest yet for a little 
season, until their fel- 
lowservants also and 
their brethren, that 
should be killed as 
they were, should be 
fulfilled. 


12 And I beheld 
when he had opened 
the sixth seal, and, lo, 
there was a great 
earthquake; and the 
sun became black as 
sackcloth of hair, and 
the moon became as 
blood; 13 and the 
stars of heaven fell 
unto the earth, even 
as a fig tree casteth 
her untimely figs, 
when she is shaken 
of a mighty wind. 
14 And the heaven de- 


parted as a_ scroll 
when it is rolled to- 
gether; and every 


mountain and island 
were moved out of 
their places. 15 And 
the kings of the earth, 
and the great men, 
and the rich men, and 
the chief captains, and 
the mighty men, and 
every bondman, and 
every free man, hid 
themselves in the dens 
and in the rocks of 
the mountains; 16 and 
said to the mountains 
and rocks, Fall on us, 
and hide us from the 
face of him that sit- 
teth on the throne, 
and from the wrath of 
the Lamb: 17 for the 
great day of his wrath 
is come; and who shall 
be able to stand ? 


τ ἐκ from LTTrAW. 


¥ — ἑκάστοις GW ; ἑκάστῳ 
x χρόνον ἔτι L. 


)-- μι- 
πληρώσωσιν should 
4 — ἰδού @LTTraw. 


8 βάλλουσα casting T. 
k ἑλισσόμενον LTTrAW. 
0 — πᾶς LTTrAW. 


1 χιλίαρχοι, 
8 Tlecate 


696 


VII. And after these 
things I saw four an- 
gels standing on the 
four corners of the 
earth, holding the four 
winds of the earth, 
that the wind should 
not blow on the earth, 
nor on the sea, nor on 
any tree. 2 And I saw 
another angel ascend- 
ing from the east, hav- 
ing the seal of the 
living God: and he 
eried with a loud voice 
to the four angels, to 
whom it was given to 
hurt the earth and the 
sea, 3 saying, Hurt 
not the earth, neither 
the sea, nor the trees, 
till we have sealed the 
servants of our God 
in their foreheads. 
4 And I heard the 
number of them which 
were sealed: and there 
were sealed an hun- 
dred and forty and 
four thousand of all 
the tribes of the chil- 
dren of Israel. 5 Of 
the tribe of Juda 
were sealed twelve 
thousand. Of the 
tribe of Reuben were 
sealed twelve thou- 
sand. Of the tribe of 
Gadweresealed twelve 
thousand. 6 Of the 
tribe of Aser were 
sealed twelve thou- 
sand, Of the tribe of 
Nepthalim were sealed 
twelve thousand. Of 
the tribe of Manasses 
were sealed twelve 
thousand. 7 Of the 
tribe of Simeon were 
sealed twelve thou- 
sand. Of the tribe 
of Levi were sealed 
twelve thousand. Of 
the tribe of Issachar 
were sealed twelve 
thousand. § Of the 
tribe of Zabulon were 
sealed twelve thou- 
sand. Of the tribe of 
Joseph were sealed 
twelve thousand. Of 
the tribe of Benjamin 


were sealed twelve 
thousand. 
9 After this I be- 


held, and, lo, a great 
multitude, which no 
man could number, 
of all nations, and 


ANTOKAAY WIS. VIL. 


7 ‘Kai' pera sravra' ‘sidov' τέσσαρας ἀγγέλους ἑστῶτας 
And after these things I saw four angels standing 
ἐπὶ τὰς τέσσαρας γωνίας τῆς γῆς, κρατοῦντας τοὺς τέσσαρας 
upon the four corners of the earth, holding the four 
ἀνέμους τῆς γῆς, ἵνα μὴ πνέῃ ἄνεμος ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, μήτε 
winds οὗ the earth, that no *might*blow ‘wind on the earth, nor 
ἐπὶ THC θαλάσσης, μήτε ἐπὶ "πᾶν" δένδρον. 2 Kai teldov' ad- 
on the sea, nor upon any tree, And Isaw an- 
(lit. every) 


ww, , Π ? 3 xZ ΦΦῊ «ς Ω » 
γελον "ἀναβάντα" ἀπὸ ἀνατολῆς" ἡλίου, ἔχοντα 
other angel having ascended from [the] rising of{the]sun, having 
σφραγῖδα θεοῦ δζῶντος" καὶ ἔκραξεν φωνῇ μεγάλῃ 
[the] seal of *God [‘the] “living; and hecried with a “voice "loud 
τοῖς τέσσαρσιν ἀγγέλοις, ος ἐδόθη αὐτοῖς ἀδικῆσαι τὴν 
to the four angels to whom itwasgiven tothem to injure the 
γῆν καὶ τὴν θάλασσαν, 3 λέγων, Μὴ. ἀδικήσητε τὴν γῆν, 
earth and the sea, saying, Injure not the earth, 
pyre τὴν θάλασσαν, μήτε τὰ δένδρα, Yaxouc' τοῦ" ἐσφραγίζω- 
nor the sea, nor the _ trees, until we 
μεν" τοὺς δούλους τοῦ.θεοῦ ἡμῶν ἐπὶ τῶν. μετώπων αὐτῶν. 

seal the bondmen of our God on their foreheads. 
4 Kai ἤκουσα τὸν ἀριθμὸν τῶν ἐσφραγισμένων" θρμδΊ! χιλιάδες, 
And Iheard the number of the sealed, 144 thousand, 

ἐσφραγισμένοι ἐκ πάσης φυλῆς υἱῶν ᾿Ισραήλ' 5 ἐκ 
sealed outof every tribe of [the] sons of Israel; out of [the] 
φυλῆς ᾿Ιούδα, “ιβ΄} χιλιάδες ἐσφραγισμένοι: ἐκ φυλῆς 
tribe of Judah, 12 thousand sealed ; out of [the] tribe 
Ῥουβήν, 1B" χιλιάδες Φἐσφραγισμένοι"" ἐκ φυλῆς Γάδ, 
of Reuben, 12 thousand sealed ; out of [the] tribe of Gad, 
13" χιλιάδες “ἐσφραγισμένοι"" 6 ἐκ φυλῆς ᾿Ασήρ, °3"! 
12 thousand sealed ; out of [the] tribe of Aser, 12 
χιλιάδες téoppayiopévor! ἐκ φυλῆς “Νεφθαλείμ," “ἰβΊ 
thousand sealed ; out of [the] tribe of Nepthalim, 12 
χιλιάδες Stogpayiopevo" ἐκ φυλῆς ‘Mavacon," “ι"" 
12 
φυλῆς Συμεών, “ιβ΄ χιλι- 


thousand sealed ; out of [the] tribe of Manasses, 
of Simeon, 12 thou- 


χιλιάδες téogoayiopévor’ 7 ἐκ 
thousand sealed ; out of [the] tribe 
deggoayiopévo ἐκ φυλῆς ®Aevi," «ιβ΄. χιλιάδες 
sealed ; out of [the] tribe . of Levi, 12 thousand 
ἀξσφραγισμένοι"" ἐς φυλῆς *Ioaxdo,' 1B" χιλιάδες δἐσφρα- 
sealed ; out of[the} tribe of Issachar, 12 thousand seal- 
yropévor' ὃ ἐκ φυλῆς Ζαβουλών, “ιβ΄ χιλιάδες Φἐσφρα- 
ed ; out of [the] tribe of Zabulon, 12 thousand seal- 
γισμένοι"" ἐκ φυλῆς ἸΙωσήφ, “ιβ΄. χιλιάδες Yeadpayiopévor" 
ed; outof[the]tribe ofJoseph, 12 thousand sealed ; 
ἐκ φυλῆς Βενιαμίν," “ι΄ χιλιάδες ἐσφραγισμένοι. 
out of[{the] tribe of Benjamin, 12 thousand sealed. 
9 Μετὰ ταῦτα ‘eldor,' Κκαὶ" lidod," ™byXoe πολύς," ὃν 
After these things I saw, and behold, a*crowd ‘great, which 


᾽ θ ~ > A ? ὃ ‘ = ἢ ᾽ ὃ , Il ? , ‘ ἔθ ‘ 
αρισμῆσαι αὐτὸν OUOELC “ἡθυνατο, εκ WavToc εσνοὺυς era 
an 


λον ἄγ 


d 


ἄδες 
sand 


τ--- καὶ LU Tra]. 


vovra ascending GLTTrAw. 
γίσωμεν We may have sealed EGLTTrAW. 
a hundred and forty-four @LTTraw. 

ε Νεφθαλὶμ. a. 


LITrAW. 
TrA ; Ἱσσάχαρ 1. 
ἢ ἐδύνατο LTTrAW. 


®to “ΠΌΤΟΥ 7it Moone *was‘table, outof every nation 
5 τοῦτο this LTTrAw. τ ἴδον T. Υ τι any LTr[A]w. W ἀναβαί- 
X ἀνατολῶν L. Y ἄχρι LTA, * — οὗ LITra. ® ohpa- 


Ὁ ἑκατὸν τεσσεράκοντα (τεσσαρ- GW) τέσσαρες 
΄ ’ ,ὔ 
ς δώδεκα twelve LTTraW. d — ἐσφραγισμένοι 
a > a ρ ὯΝ ir ‘ 
ὃ Aevet TTr. Ὁ Ἰσασχὰρ E; ᾿Ισσαχὰρ 


f Μαννασσὴ Tr. : 
1— ἰδού L. ™ ὄχλον πολύν L. 


1 Βενιαμεὶν LTTr. k — καὶ L. 


Vil. REVELATION. 
φυλῶν καὶ λαῶν καὶ γλωσσῶν, °éorwrEc' ἐνώπιον τοῦ θρόνου 
tribes, and peoples, and tongues, standing before the throne 


καὶ ἐνώπιον Tov apviov, Ῥπεριβεβλημένοι! στολὰς λευκάς, Kai 
and before the Lamb, clothed with 7robes ‘white, and 


φοίνικες" ἐν ταῖς. χερσὶν. αὐτῶν" 10 καὶ *kpalortec! φωνῇ 


palms in their hands; and crying with a *voice 
μεγάλῳ, λέγοντες, Ἣ σωτηρία "τῷ καθημένῳ ἐπὶ τοῦ 
*lond, saying, Salvation to him who sits on the 


θρόνου τοῦ.θεοῦ ἡμῶν," καὶ τῷ aovip. 11 Kai πάντες οἱ ay- 
throne of our God, and to the Lamb. And all the an- 


γελοι ᾿ἑστήκεσαν" κύκλῳ τοῦ θρόνου καὶ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων Kai 
gels stood around the throne and the elders and 


τῶν τεσσάρων ζώων, Kai "ἔπεσον" ἐνώπιον Tov θρόνου 
the four living creatures, and fell before the throne 


ἐπὶ “πρόσωπον" αὐτῶν, kai προσεκύνησαν τῷ θεῷ, 12 éEyor- 
upon 7face ltheir, and Wea God, say- 
TEC, "Aun? ἡ εὐλογία Kai ἡ δόξα καὶ ἡ σοφία Kai ἡ εὐχαριστία 
ing, Amen: BESTE; and glory, and ey and I 
καὶ ἡ τιμὴ καὶ ἡ δύναμις καὶ ἡ ἰσχὺς τῷ.θεῷ. ἡμῶν εἰς τοὺς 
and honour, and power, and_ strength, to our God to the 


αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ξάἀμήν." 
ages of the ages. Amen. 


13 Kai ἀπεκρίθη εἷς ἐκ τῶν πρεσβυτέρων, λέγων μοι. Οὗτοι 
And ‘answered ‘one *of *the *elders, saying tome, These 


οἱ περιβεβλημένοι τὰς στολὰς Tac λευκάς, τίνες εἰσίν, Kai 
who __ are clothed with the ?robes ‘white, who are they, and 


πόθεν ἦλθον; 14 Kai εἴρηκα αὐτῷ, Kuo’, od οἶδας. Kai 
whence came they ? And Isaid tohim, [My] lord, thou knowest. And 


εἶπέν μοι, Οὗτοί εἰσιν οἱ ἐρχόμενοι "ἐκ τῆς θλίψεως τῆς" 


he said tome, These are they who come out of the “tribulation 
μεγάλης, Kai ἔπλυναν τὰἀς.στολὰς. αὐτῶν, καὶ ἐλεύκαναν 
great, and they washed their robes, and made white 


a <b ἐὰν ΠΣ ~ oe ~ 2 ΄ - ὃ . -““ 
στολὰς" ϑαὐτῶν" ἐν τῷ αἵματι τοῦ ἀρνίου. 15 ιὰ τοῦτο 
2robes ‘their in the blood ofthe Lamb. Because of this 


εἰσιν ἐνώπιον τοῦ θρόνου τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ λατρεύουσιν αὐτῷ 
are oe before the throne of God, and serve him 


ἡμέρας Kai νυκτὸς ἐν τῷ ναῷ.αὐτοῦ" Kai ὁ 
day and night in his temple ; and he who 


“τοῦ θρόνου" σκηνώσει ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς. 16 οὐ.-πεινάσουσιν 
the throne’ shalltabernacle over them. They shall not hunger 

» ᾽ δὲ d ΄ » 6 > XII \ , ? ᾽ ? 

ἔτι, οὐδὲ διψήσουσιν ἔτι, “οὐδὲ μὴ πέσῃ ἐπ᾽ αὐ- 
any more, neither shall they thirst any more, ΠΟΙ ϑὖ 411] shall fall upon 
τοὺς ὁ ἥλιος, οὐδὲ πᾶν Kadpa’ 17 OTL TO ἀρνίον τὸ 
them the sun, nor any heat ; because the Lamb which [15] 
favapecoy' τοῦ θρόνου ποιμανεῖ αὐτούς, καὶ ὁδηγήσει αὐτοὺς 
in [the] midst of the throne willshepherd them, and willlead them 
ἐπὶ Blwoac' πηγὰς ὑδάτων, καὶ ἐξαλείψει ὁ θεὸς πᾶν 
to living fountains of waters, and *will*wipe‘away ‘God every 
δάκρυον »azd' τῶν. ὀφθαλμῶν αὐτῶν. 

tear from their eyes. 


καθήμενος ἐπὶ 
sits on 


Ὁ ἑστῶτας AW. Ρ περιβεβλημένους GLITrAW. 4 φοίνικας T. 
GLTTrAw. 
on the throne EGLTTrAW. 
* τὰ πρόσωπα faces GLTTrAW. x — ἀμήν L. 
θλίψεως from “tribulation 1. ® — στολὰς GLTTrAW. 
θρόνῳ T. d + μὴ (read neither at all) L. ε οὐδ᾽ ov A. 
& ζωῆς (read to fountains of waters of life) a@LTTraw. 


ἵἷ εἱστήκεισαν LITrA ; ἐστήκεισαν W. 


Υ + pov my (lord) e[L]rtraw. 

Ὁ αὐτὰς them GLTTr[A]w. 
f ava μέσον EGLTAW, 
h ἐκ GLTTrAW. 


637 
kindreds, and peo- 
ple, and tongues, stood 
before the throne, and 
before the Lamb, 
clothed with white 
robes, and palms in 
their’ hands; 10 and 
cried witha loud voice, 
saying, Salvation to 
our God which sitteth 
upon the throne, and 
unto the Lamb. 1] And 
all the angels stood 
round about’ the 
throne, and about the 
elders and the four 
beasts, and fell before 
the throne on their 
faces, and worshipped 
God, 12 saying, Amen: 
Blessing, and glory, 


and wisdom, and 
thanksgiving, and 
honour, and power, 


and might, be unto 
our God for ever and 
ever. Amen, 


13 And one of the 
elders answered, say- 
ing unto me, What 
are these which are 
arrayed inwhite robes? 
and whence came 
they? 14 And I said 
unto him, Sir, thou 
knowest. And he 
said to me, These are 
they which came out 
of great tribulation, 
and have washed their 
robes, and made them 
white in the blood of 
the Lamb. 15 There- 
fore are they he- 
fore the throne of God, 
and serve him day and 
night in his temple : 
and he that sitteth on 
the throne shall dwell 
among them. 16 They 
shall hunger no more, 
neither thirst any 
more; neither shall 
the sun light onthem, 
nor any heat. 17 For 
the Lamb which is in 
the midst of the 
throneshailfeed them, 
and shall lead them 
unto living fountains 
of waters: and God 
shall wipe away all 
tears from their eyes. 


τ κράζουσιν they cry 
5 τῷ θεῷ ἡμῶν TO καθημένῳ ἐ ἐπὶ τῷ θρόνῳ (τοῦ θρόνου EG) to our God who sits 


v ἔπεσαν LTTrAW. 
2 ἀπὸ 
ε τῷ 


638 


VIII. And when he 
had opened the seventh 
seal, there was silence 
in heaven about the 
space of half an hour. 
2 And I saw theseven 
angels which stood be- 
fore God; and to them 
were given seven 
trumpets. 3 And ano- 
ther angel came and 
stood at the altar, hav- 
ing a golden censer ; 
and there was given 
unto him much in- 
cense, that he should 
offer it with the 
prayers of all saints 
upon the golden altar 
which was before the 
throne. 4 And the 
smoke of the incense, 
which came with the 
prayers of the saints, 
ascended up before 
God out of the angel’s 
hand. 5 And the an- 
gel took the censer, 
and filled it with fire 
of the altar, and cast 
wt into the earth: and 
there were voices, 
and thunderings, and 
lightnings, and an 
earthquake. 


6 And the seven an- 
gels which had the 
seven trumpets pre- 
pared themselves to 
sound. 


7 The first angel 
sounded, and _ there 
followed hail and fire 
mingled with blood, 
and they were cast up- 
on the earth: and the 
third part of trees 
was burnt up, and all 
green grass was burnt 
up. 


8 And the second 
angel sounded, and as 
it were a great moun- 
tain burning with fire 
was cast into the sea: 
and the third part of 
the sea became blood ; 
9 and the third part 
of the creatures which 
were in the sea, and 
had life, died; and the 
third part of the ships 
were destroyed. 


10 And the third an- 
gel sounded, and there 


i ὅταν LTTrA. 


get he shall give LrTra. 
ἀστραπαὶ καὶ φωναὶ L; βρονταὶ καὶ φωναὶ καὶ ἀστραπαὶ TIrA. 
5 αὐτοὺς LTTr. 


GLTTraw. 


with (blood) eLTTraw. 


burnt up @LTTraw. 


k ἡμίωρον LTTrA. 


AMOKAAY Via 3. VIIl. 


8 Kai ‘dre! ἤνοιξεν τὴν σφραγῖδα τὴν ἑβδόμην, ἐγένετο 
And when heopened the 2seal 1seventh, “was 
σιγὴ ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ we *ypiwprov." 2 Kai 'eldov' τοὺς ἑπτὰ 
Ssilence in the heaven about half-an-hour. And Isaw the seven 
ἀγγέλους, ot ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ ἑστήκασιν, Kai ἐδόθησαν 
angels, who “before 3God ‘stand, and were given 
᾽ - € \ , \ ” ” 5 " 
αὐτοῖς ἑπτὰ σάλπιγγες. 8 καὶ ἄλλος ἄγγελος ἦλθεν, καὶ 
tothem seven trumpets. And another angel came and 


ἐστάθη ἐπὶ "τὸ θυσιαστήριον," ἔχων λιβανωτὸν χρυσοῦν" καὶ 
stood at the altar, having a *censer ‘golden; and 


ἐδόθη) αὐτῷ θυμιάματα πολλά, wa "δώσῃ" ταῖς 
Swas*given ‘to Shim “incense ‘much, that he might give [it]to the 


προσευχαῖς τῶν ἁγίων πάντων ἐπὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον τὸ 
prayers of *the “saints Mall upon the 2altar 


χρυσοῦν τὸ ἐνώπιον τοῦ θρόνου. 4 καὶ ἀνέβη ὁ καπνὸς 
‘golden which [was] before the throne. And wentupthe smoke 


TOY θυμιαμάτων ταῖς προσευχαῖς τῶν ἁγίων, ἐκ χειρὸς 


of the incense with the prayers of the saints, outof [the] hand 
τοῦ ἀγγέλου, ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ. ὃ Kai εἴληφεν ὁ ἄγγελος “τὸ 
ofthe angel, before God. And “took ‘the angel the 
λιβανωτόν, καὶ ἐγέμισεν Ῥαὐτὸ" ἐκ τοῦ πυρὸς τοῦ θυσιαστη- 
censer, and filled it from the fire of the altar, 
ρίου, Kai ἔβαλεν εἰς τὴν γῆν" Kai ἐγένοντο “φωναὶ Kai 
and cast [10] into the earth: and _ there were voices, and 


βρονταὶ καὶ ἀστραπαὶ" καὶ σεισμός. 
thunders, and lightnings, and an earthquake. 
4 « ε ‘ » r » ἣν Ἁ « A , « , 
6 Kai ot ἑπτὰ ἄγγελοι ἔχοντες τὰς ἑπτὰ σάλπιγγας ἡτοί- 
And the seven angels haying the seven trumpets pre- 
αν δὲ ὺς! ἵ αλπίσωσιν. 
ασαν δἑαυτοὺς" ἵνα σαλπίσωσιν 


pared themselves that they might sound [their] trumpets. 
7 Kai ὁ πρῶτος 'ayyedoc' ἐσάλπισεν, καὶ ἐγένετο 
And the first angel sounded [his] trumpet; and there was 


χάλαζα Kai sal ὑμεμιγμένα" ἡ αἵματι, καὶ ἐβλήθη εἰς τὴν 


hail and fire mingled with blood, and it was cast upon the 
γῆν" * καὶ τὸ τρίτον τῶν δένδρων κατεκάη, Kai πᾶς χόρτος 


earth: andthe third of the trees Was burnt up, and all “grass 
χλωρὸς κατεκάη. 
lereen was burnt up. 
ὃ Kai ὁ δεύτερος ἄγγελος ἐσάλπισεν, καὶ ὡς 
And the second angel sounded (his) tenmpetii and as [it were} 


ὄρος μέγα πυρὶ καιόμενον ἐβλήθη εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν" καὶ 
a?mountain'great*with*fire “burning was οαϑὺ into the sea, and 


ἐγένετο TO τρίτον τῆς θαλάσσης αἷμα. 9 Kai ἀπέθανεν τὸ 
®pecame ‘the “third “of *the 5sea blood ; and *died the 


τρίτον τῶν κτισμάτων τῶν ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ τὰ ἔχοντα 
third “of*the ‘creatures Swhich[’were] *in *the bi ‘twhich **have 


ψυχάς, καὶ τὸ τρίτον τῶν πλοίων ὑδιεφθάρη." 
13} 6; andthe third ofthe ships was Galen 
10 Kai ὁ τρίτος ἄγγελος ἐσάλπισεν, 
And the third angel sounded [his] trumpet; and 


Kal ἔπεσεν EK 
*fell Sout Sof 


1 (Sov T. 
ο τὸν EGUTTrAW. 


τὰ τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου TTrA. a δώ- 
P αὐτὸν EQGLTTrAW. 4 βρονταὶ καὶ 
τ + ot (read who have) 
ὃο--- “ἄγγελος GLTTraW. Y μεμιγμένον 1. ~ +e 
x + Kal τὸ τρίτον τῆς γῆς κατεκάη, and the third of the earth was 
y διεφθάρησαν were destroyed LTTrA. 


WHT, TX. REVELATION. 


τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἀστὴρ μέγας καιόμενος ὡς λαμπάς, καὶ ἔπεσεν 
7the ®heaven ‘a‘star “great, burning as alamp, and it fell 


ἐπὶ TO τρίτον τῶν ποταμῶν, Kai ἐπὶ τὰς mHyadC* ὑδάτων. 


uponthe third of the ΣΈ τε, and upon the fountains of waters. 
11 καὶ τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ ἀστέρος Néyerar*® "AYiwOo0c" Kai ὑγίνεται" 
Andthe name ofthe star is called ia and *becomes 
τὸ τρίτον “ εἰς ἄψινθον, καὶ πολλοὶ ἃ ἀνθρώπων ἀπέθανον 
the *third into wormwood, and “many ‘of 7men died 
ἐκ τῶν ὑδάτων, ὅτι ἐπικράνθησαν. 
of the waters, because they were made bitter. 
12 Kai ὁ τέταρτος ἄγγελος ἐσάλπισεν, καὶ ἐπλήγη 


And 86 fourth sounded [his] trumpet; and was smitten 
TO τρίτον τοῦ ἡλίου Kai TO τρίτον τῆς σελήνης καὶ TO τρίτον 
the third ofthe sun, and the third ofthe moon, and the third 
TOY ἀστέρων, ἵνα σκοτισθῇ τρίτον αὐτῶν, καὶ ἡ 


angel 


TO 


of the stars; that should be darkened the third of them, and the 
ἡμέρα μὴ &paivy" τὸ τρίτον αὐτῆς, καὶ ἡ νὺξ ὁμοίως. 
day “ποῦ 'should appear [for]the third of it, and the night likewise. 


13 Kai ἰεἶδον," καὶ ἤκουσα ἑνὸς ἀγγέλου πετωμένου" ἐν 
And Isaw, and heard one angel aying. in 


μεσουρανήματι; λέγοντος φωνῇ μεγάλῃ, Οὐαί, οὐαί, οὐαί, 
mid-heaven, saying witha“*voice ‘'loud, Woe, woe, woe, 


*roic κατοικοῦσιν" ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ἐκ τῶν λοιπῶν φωνῶν 
to those who dwell on the earth,from the remaining voices 


THC σάλπιγγος τῶν τριῶν ἀγγέλων τῶν μελλόντων σαλ- 


οὗ the trumpet of the three angels who [are] about tosound 
πίζειν. 
{their] mmpets 
Kai ὁ πεμῖτος ἄγγελος ἐσάλπισεν, καὶ ἰεῖδον" 
And the fifth angel sounded (his]trumpet; and Isaw 
ἀστέρα ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ πεπτωκότα εἰς τὴν γῆν, καὶ ἐδό- 


a star outof the heaven fallen 


to the earth, and there was 
θὴ αὐτῷ ἡ κλεὶς τοῦ φρέατος τῆς ἀβύσσου. 2 Kai ἤνοιξεν 
given toit the key ofthe pit of the abyss. And it opened 

ὁ φρέαρ τῆς ἀβύσσου. καὶ ἀνέβη καπνὸς ἐκ τοῦ φρέατος 
the pit ofthe abyss; andthere wentup smoke out οὗ the pit 


we καπνὸς K αμίνου μεγάλης, καὶ Ἐἐσκοτίσθη" ὁ ἥλιος 
as [the] smoke of a “furnace ‘great ; and *was ‘darkened 'the sun 


καὶ ὃ ἀὴρ ἐκ τοῦ καπνοῦ τοῦ φρέατος. 8 Kai ἐκ τοῦ καπνοῦ 
andthe air by the smoke of the pit. And out of the smoke 


2 nrAO ? id > \ ~ ‘ ἐδ 50 ] > ΒΞ ye" ΄ 
ἐξῆλθον ἀκρίδες εἰς τὴν γῆν, καὶ ἐδόθη ᾿αὐταῖς" ἐξουσία, 
came forth locusts unto the earth, and was given to them power, 


we ἔχουσιν ἐξουσίαν οἱ σκορπίοι τῆς γῆς" 4 καὶ ἐῤῥέθη 
as Shave ἘΡΌΣΤΕΣ ‘the scorpions %of *the Searth; and it was said 


labraic! ἵνα μὴ πἀδικήσωσιν" τὸν χόρτον τῆς γῆς, οὐδὲ πᾶν 
tothem, that *not ‘they *should i Sapare the grass of theearth, nor any 


χλωρόν, οὐδὲ πᾶν δένδρον, εἰ.μὴ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους "μόνους 


aren eee nor any tree, but the men only 
οἵτινες οὐκ. ἔχουσιν τὴν σφραγῖδα τοῦ θεοῦ ἐπὶ τῶν μετώπων 
who have not the seal of God on "foreheads 


οαὐτῶν." ὃ καὶ ἐδόθη Padraic" ἵνα μὴ.ἀποκτείνωσιν αὐτούς, 
their. And itwasgiven tothem that they should not kill 


z + τῶν of the (waters) GLTTrA Ww. 8. + ὁ GLTAW. 


them. 


639 


fell a great star from 
heaven, burning as it 
were a lamp, and it 
fell upon the third 
part of the rivers, and 
upon the fountains of 
waters; 11 and the 
name of the star is 
called Wormwood : 
and the third part of 
the waters became 
wormwood; and many 
men died of the wa- 
ters, because they were 
made bitter. 

12 And the fourth 
angelsounded, and the 
third part of the sun 
was smitten, and the 
third part of the moon, 
and the third part 
of the stars; so as the 
third part of them was 
darkened, and the day 
shone not for a third 
part of it, and the 
night likewise. 

13 And I beheld, and 
heard an angel flying 
through the midst of 
heaven, saying with a 
loud voice, Woe, woe, 
woe, to the inhabiters 
of the earth by reason 
of the other voices of 
the trumpet of the 
three angels which are 
yet to sound! 


1X. And the fifth an- 
gel sounded, and lsaw 
a star fall from hea- 
ven unto the earth: 
and to him was given 
the key of the bottom- 
less pit. 2 And he 
opened the bottomless 
pit; and there arose 
a smoke out of the pit, 
as thesmoke of a great 
furnace ; and the sun 
and the air were dark- 
ened by reason of the 
smoke of the pit. 
3 And there came out 
of the smoke locusts 
upon the earth: and 
unto them was given 
power, as the scorpions 
of the earth have 
power. 4 And it was 
commanded them that 
they should not hurt 
the grass of the earth, 
neither any green 
thing, neither any 
tres; but only those 
men which have not 
the seai of God in 
their foreheads. 5 And 
to them it was given 


Ὁ ἐγένετο became LITraw. 


© + τῶν ὑδάτων of the waters EGLTTrAW. dy τῶν of the (men) @LTTraw. © φάνῃ 
LTW; φανῇ Tra. f (dor τ. ὃ ἀετοῦ πετομένου eagle flying eLrtraw. 4 τοὺς 
κατοικοῦντας ΤΊΤΑ. 1 ἴδον T. k ἐσκοτώθη wes ! αὐτοῖς T. τὰ ἀδικήσουσιν ‘they 


*shall injure LT. 
Ρ αὐτοῖς LT. 


Ὁ — μόνους ΘΙΧΤΊΓΑΨ. 


— αὐτῶν (read on the foreheads) trtr[a]. 


640 


that they should not 
kill them, but that 
they should be tor- 
mented five months : 
and their torment was 
as the torment of a 
scorpion, when he 
striketh a man. 6 And 
in those days shall 
men seek death, and 
shall not find it; and 
shall desire to die,and 
death shall flee from 
them. 7 And _ the 
shapes of the locusts 
were like unto horses 
prepared unto battle ; 
and on their heads 
were as it were crowns 
like gold, and their 
faces were as the faces 
of men. 8 And they 
had hair as the hair of 
women, and_ their 
teeth were as the teeth 
of lions. 9 And they 
had breastplates, as it 
were breastplates of 
iron; and the sound 
of their wings was as 
the sound of chariots 
of many horses run- 
ning to battle. 10 And 
they had tails like 
unto scorpions, and 
there were stings in 
their tails: and their 
power was to hurt 
men five months. 
11 And they had a 
king over them, which 
is the angel of the 
bottomless pit, whose 
name in the Hebrew 
tongueis Abaddon, but 
in the Greek tongue 
hath his name Apol- 
lyon. 


12 One woe is past ; 
and, behold, there 
come two woes more 
hereafter. 


13 And the sixth an- 
gel sounded, and I 
heard a voice from the 
four horns of the gold- 
en altar which is be- 
fore God, 14 saying to 
the sixth angel which 
had the trumpet, 
Loose the four angels 
which are bound in 
the great river Eu- 
phrates. 15 And the 
four angels were 
loosed, which were 
prepared fer an hour, 


MWOKA AY Wi Σ. 


1X. 


᾽ > q ~ Π - , Ε ΡΥ . 
ἀλλ᾽ wa “«βασανισθῶσιν' μῆνας πέντε" Kai ὁ βασανισμὸς 
but that they should be tormented *months ‘five; and ?torment 
αὐτῶν ὡς ββασανισμὸς σκορπίου, ὅταν παίσῃ ἄν- 
‘their [was] as [the] torment 


of ascorpion, when it may strike a 
θρωπον᾽ 6 καὶ ἐν ταῖς. ἡμέραις. ἐκείναις ζητήσουσιν οἱ ἄνθρω- 
man. And in those days *shall “seek ‘men 


ποι τὸν θάνατον, Kai "οὐχὶ "εὑρήσουσιν" αὐτόν" καὶ ἐπιθυμή- 


death, and “not shall find it; and shall 

σουσιν ἀποθανεῖν, καὶ ἱφεύξεται" "ὁ θάνατος am αὐτῶν." 
desire to die, and shall “flee ‘death from them. 

7 καὶ τὰ ὁμοιώματα τῶν ἀκρίδων ὅμοια" ἵπποις ἡτοι- 

And the likenesses ofthe locusts [were] like to horses pre- 

μασμένοις εἰς πόλεμον, καὶ ἐπὶ τὰς.κεφαλὰς. αὐτῶν ὡς στέφανοι 
pared for war, and upon their heads as | crowns 


ὅμοιοι χρυσῷ." Kai τὰ πρόσωπα.αὐτῶν ὡς πρόσωπα ἀνθρώ- 
like gold; and their faces as faces of 
muy 8 Kai Yeixor' τρίχας we τρίχας γυναικῶν" Kai οἱ ὀδόντες 
men ; and they had hair as “hair women’s; and *teeth 
αὐτῶν we λεόντων ἦσαν" 9 Kai εἶχον θώρακας ὡς θώρακας 
‘their 48 ‘of ®lions “were ; and they had breastplates as *breastplates 
σιδηροῦς" Kai ἡ φωνὴ τῶν.-πτερύγων αὐτῶν ὡς φωνὴ 
ΤΟΣ ; and the sound of their wings [was] as [the] sound 
ἁρμάτων ἵππων πολλῶν τρεχόντων εἰς πόλεμον. 10 Kai 
of chariots of *horses ‘many running to war; and 
ἔχουσιν οὐρὰς ὁμοίας" σκορπίοις, καὶ κέντρα" ἃ Ῥἦν" ἐν ταῖς 
they have tails like scorpions, and _ stings; *was *in 
οὐραῖς αὐτῶν “καὶ! ἡ.ἐξουσία. αὐτῶν ἀδικῆσαι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους 
tails Stheir ‘and *their “power to injure men 
μῆνας πέντε. 11 4xai' ἔχουσιν “ἐφ᾽ αὑτῶν" βασιλέα ' τὸν!" 


2months ᾿Ηγο. And they have over them a king, the 

ἄγγελον τῆς ἀβύσσου" ὅ ὄνομα αὐτῷ ‘EBpatori ᾿Αβαδδών, καὶ 
angel ofthe abyss: his name in Hebrew Abaddon, and 

> ~ ¢ ~ δ ” ? , 

ἐν τῇ Ἑλληνικῇ ὄνομα ἔχει ᾿Απολλύων. 

in the Greek {for} name he has Apollyon. 


12 Ἢ οὐαὶ ἡ pia ἀπῆλθεν: ἰδού, *Eoxovra' ἔτι δύο οὐαὶ 


2Woe'the “first is past. Lo, *come tyet *two *woes 
μετὰ ταῦτα. 
after these things. 
13 Kai ὁ ἕκτος ἄγγελος ἐσάλπισεν, καὶ ἤκουσα φωνὴν 


And the sixth angel sounded [his] trumpet;and LIheard voice 


μίαν ἐκ τῶν ἱτεσσάρων" κεράτων τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου τοῦ χρυσοῦ 
tone from the four horns of the “altar *golden 
~ ? , ~ ~ k , iT] ~ a > , 
τοῦ ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ, 14 *Neyovoay' τῷ ἕκτῳ ἀγγέλῳ 
which [is] before God, saying tothe sixth angel 


ἰὸς εἶχε" τὴν σάλπιγγα, Λῦσον τοὺς τέσσαρας ἀγγέλους τοὺς 
who had the 


trumpet, Loose the four angels who 
δεδεμένους ἐπὶ τῷ ποταμῷ τῷ μεγάλῳ Εὐφράτῃ. 15 Kai ἐλύ- 
arebound at the “river ‘great § Euphrates. And were 


θησαν οἱ τέσσαρες ἄγγελοι οἱ ἡτοιμασμένοι εἰς THY ὥραν Kai 
loosed the four angels who had been prepared for the hour and 


4 βασανισθήσονται they shall be tormented trtra. 
5 εὕρωσιν should find L. 


x χρυσοῖ golden 6. 


stings were in their tails Text. Rec. and α. 


d — καὶ GLTTrAW. 
whom T. 
who has @LTTrAWw. 


Β ἔρχεται LTTrA. 


τ ov μὴ iD NO wise GLTTraAW. 
Yam αὐτῶν ὁ θάνατος G. W ὅμοιοι T. 
2 ὁμοίοις Tr. a8 Punctuate so as to read and 
Ὁ καὶ and LTT: aw. ¢ — καὶ LTTrAW. 
f — τὸν (read an angel) a. s+ to 
i — τεσσάρων LTr[A ]. Κ λέγοντα LITrAW. 16 ἔχων 


t φεύγει “flees LTTra. 
Υ εἶχαν LITrA. 


ε ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν LTTrA. 


χν X: ΕΒ Υ ἘΠΕ A 1 VON, 


ἡμέραν καὶ μῆνα καὶ ἐνιαυτόν, ἵνα ἀποκτείνωσιν τὸ τρίτον 
day and month and year, that they might kill the third 

τῶν ἀνθρώπων. 16 Kai ὁ ἀριθμὸς ἃ στρατευμάτων τοῦ ἱππι- 

of men; and the number of (the] armies ofthe caval- 
κοῦ οδύο μυριάδες" μυριάδων" Ῥκαὶ ἤκουσα τὸν ἀριθμὸν 
ry [was] two myriads of myriads, and Iheard the number 
αὐτῶν. 17 Kai οὕτως “εἶδον' τοὺς ἵππους ἐν τῇ ὁράσει, Kai 
of them. And _ thus I saw the horses in the vision, and 
τοὺς καθημένους ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν, ἔχοντας θώρακας πυρίνους Kai 


those sitting on them, having  breastplates fiery, and 
ὑακινθίνους καὶ θειώδεις" καὶ ai κεφαλαὶ τῶν ἵππων 
hyacinthine, and brimstone-like; and the heads ofthe horses [were] 


we κεφαλαὶ λεόντων, καὶ ἐκ τῶν. στομάτων αὐτῶν ἐκπορεύε- 
as heads of lions, and out of their mouths goes 
ται πῦρ Kai καπνὸς Kai θεῖον. 18 τὑπὸ" τῶν τριῶν " τούτων 
out fire and smoke and brimstone. By *three these 
ἀπεκτάνθησαν τὸ τρίτον τῶν ἀνθρώπων, ἐκ τοῦ πυρὸς Kai 
were killed the third ofthe men, by the fire and 
‘éx' τοῦ καπνοῦ καὶ 'ix' τοῦ θείου, τοῦ ἐκπορευομένου ἐκ 
by the smoke and by the brimstone, which goes forth out of 
τῶν στομάτων. αὐτῶν. 19 Yai-yap ἐξουσίαι αὐτῶν ἐν τῳ 
their mouths. For the powers ofthem 7in 
στόματι αὐτῶν εἰσιν"" αἱ.γὰρ.οὐραὶϊ. αὐτῶν Goran ὄφεσιν, 
“mouth Stheir tare; for their tails {are] like serpents, 
ἔχουσαι κεφαλάς, καὶ ἐν αὐταῖς ἀδικοῦσιν. 20 Kai ot λοιποὶ 
having heads, and with them they injure. And the _ rest 
τῶν ἀνθρώπων οἱ οὐκ.ἀπεκτάνθησαν ἐν ταῖς πληγαῖς ταύταις, 
of the men who were not killed by these plagues, 
Ὑοὔτε' μετενόησαν ἐκ τῶν ἔργων τῶν χειρῶν αὐτῶν, ἵνα μὴ 
Ξηοῦ *even ‘repented of the works of their hands, that "ποὺ 
*rpooxuvnowo' τὰ δαιμόνια, καὶ εἴδωλα τὰ χρυσᾶ Kai 
‘they “should do homage to the demons, and 7idols ‘the golden and 
τὰ ἀργυρᾶ Kai τὰ χαλκᾶ καὶ τὰ λίθινα καὶ τὰ ξύλινα, 
silver and brazen and stone and wooden, 
τι » , τδύ il » ? ΄ » ΠΡ. 
ἃ οὔτε βλέπειν δύναται," οὔτε ἀκούειν, οὔτε περιπατεῖν 
which neither *to *see are *able, nor to hear, nor to walk. 
21 καὶ ovd.perevonoay ἐκ τῶν. φόνων αὐτῶν, οὔτε ἐκ THY 
And they repentednot of their murders, nor of 
ἐφαρμακειῶν" αὐτῶν, οὔτε ἐκ THC-TopVElac.avTwY, οὔτε ἐκ 
ΞΦΘΟΓΌΘΤΊΘΒ 1their, nor of their fornications, nor of 


τῶν κλεμμάτων. αὐτῶν. 
their thefts. 


10 Kai εἶδον ἄλλον ἄγγελον ἰσχυρὸν καταβαίνοντα ἐκ τοῦ 
And Isaw another 7angel 1strong coming down out of the 

οὐρανοῦ, περιβεβλημένον νεφέλην, Kai © ἶρις ἐπὶ “τῆς κεφ- 
heaven, clothed with acloud, and arainbow on the 
αλῆς" 4, καὶ τὸ πρόσωπον. αὐτοῦ we ὁ ἥλιος; καὶ οἱ. πόδες.αὐτοῦ 
head, and his face as the sun, and his feet 
ὡς στῦλοι πυρός" 2 Kai "εἶχεν" ἐν τῇ.χειρὶ αὐτοῦ βιβλαρίδιον 
as pillars of fire, and hehad in his hand a little book 


641 


and a day, and a 
month, and a year, for 
to slay the third part 
of men. 16 And the 
number of the army 
of the horsemen were 
two hundred thou- 
sand thousand: and 
I heard the number 
of them. 17 And thus 
I saw the horses in 
the vision, and them 
that sat on them, hay- 
ing breastplatesof fire, 
and of jacinth, and 
brimstone: and the 
heads of the horses 
were as the heads of 
lions ; and out of their 
mouths issued fire and 
smoke and brimstone. 
18 By these three was 
the third part of men 
killed, by the fire, and 
by the smoke, and by 
the brimstone, which 
issued out of their 
mouths. 19 For their 
power is in _ their 
mouth, and in their 
tails: for their tails 
were like unto ser- 
pents, and had heads, 
and with them they 
do hurt. 20 And the 
Test of the men 
which were not killed 
by these plagues yet 
repented not of the 
works of their hands, 
that they should not 
worship devils, and 
idols of gold, and sil- 
ver, and brass, and 
stone, and of wood: 
which neither can see, 
nor hear, nor walk: 
21 neither repented 
they of their murders, 
nor of their sorceries, 
nor of their fornica- 
tion, nor of their 
thefts. 


X. And I saw an- 
other mighty angel 
come down from hea- 
yen, clothed with a 
cloud: and a rainbow 
was upon his head, 
and his face was as it 
were the’sun, and his 
feet as pillars of fire: 
2 and he had in his 
hand a little book 


0 + τῶν of the (armies) GLTTrAW. © δισμυριάδες LTA. 
9 ἴδον T. τ ἀπὸ from GLTTraW. 
GLTTrAw. 


8 + πληγῶν “plagues GLTTraw. 
’ ἡ yap ἐξουσία τῶν ἵππων For the power of the horses (αὐτῶν for τῶν ἵππων 


P — καὶ GLTTrAW. 
τ- ἐκ 


W) ἐν τῷ στόματι αὐτῶν ἐστιν καὶ ἐν ταῖς οὐραῖς αὐτῶν᾽ is in their mouth and in their tails 


* ov ποῦ @w; οὐδὲ TA. 
2 δύνανται LTTrA. 
© χὴν κεφαλὴν LITrAW. 


GLTTraw. 
7 + Ta GLITrAW. 

(rainbow) @LTTraw. 
* ἔχων having GLTTrAw. 


x προσκυνήσουσιν they shall do homage to Lrtraw. 
84 φαρμακιῶν T; φαρμάκων A. 
d + αὐτοῦ (read his head) GLrtraw 


Ὁ +7 the 


AY 


642 


open: and he set his 
Tight foot upon the 
sea, and his left foot 
on the earth, 3 and 
cried witha loud voice, 
as when a lion roar- 
eth : and when he had 
cried, seven thunders 
uttered their voices. 
4 And when the seven 
thunders had uttered 
their voices, I was 
about to write: and I 
heard a voice from hea- 
ven saying unto me, 
Seal up those things 
which the seven thun- 
ders uttered, and write 
them not. 5 And the 
angel which I saw 
stand upon the sea 
and upon the earth 
lifted up his hand to 
heaven, 6 and sware 
by him that liveth for 
ever and ever, who 
created heaven, and 
the things that therein 
are, and the earth, and 
the things that there- 
in are, and the sea, and 
the things which are 
therein, that there 
should be time no 
longer: 7 but in the 
days of the voice of 
the seventh angel, 
when he shall begin 
to sound, the mystery 
of God should be 
finished, as he hath 
declared to his ser- 
vants the prophets. 


8 And the _ voice 
which I heard from 
heaven spake unto me 
again, and said, Go 
and take the little 
book which is open 
in the hand of the 
angel which standeth 
upon the sea and upon 
the earth. 9 And I 
went unto the angel, 
and said unto him, 
Give me the little 
book. And he said 
unto me, Take τέ, and 
eat it up; and it shall 
make thy belly bitter, 
but it shall be in thy 
mouth sweet as honey. 
10 And I took the 
little book out of the 
angel’s hand, and ate 
it up; and it was in 
my mouth sweet as 
honey: and as 


soon * 


ATITOKAAYWI14&. p<: 

f ave (2 “ἢ! ‘A ἐθ Ν 50 ? ~~ ‘4 ὃ » ᾽ ‘ ‘ 
ῳγμένον"" καὶ ἔθηκεν τὸν. πόδα.αὐτοῦ τὸν δεξιὸν ἐπὶ τὴν 
open. And he placed his *foot ‘right upon the 
θάλασσαν," τὸν.δὲ εὐώνυμον ἐπὶ "τὴν γῆν." 8 καὶ ἔκραξεν 
868, and the left upon the _ earth, and cried 
φωνῇ μεγάλῃ ὥσπερ λέων μυκᾶται: Kai bre ἔκραξεν, 
with a?voice ‘loud as a lion roars, And when he cried, 

> , € « ‘ ‘ A) « ~ , ‘ [1 
ἐλάλησαν αἱ ἑπτὰ βρονταὶ τὰς. ἑαυτῶν. φωνάς" 4 Kai Ore 


*spoke ‘the “seven “thunders their voices. And when 
ἐλάλησαν at ἑπτὰ βρονταὶ ἱτὰς. φωνὰς.ἑαυτῶν," *Eyedrov' 
*spoke 1the seven **thunders their voices, I was about 
γράφειν" Kai ἤκουσα φωνὴν ἐκ τοῦ PM λέγουσάν !no1," 
to write: And LIheard avoice out of the eaven, saying to me, 
Σφράγισον a ἐλάλησαν at ἑπτὰ βρονταί, καὶ μὴ ™ravra' 
Seal what(things] ‘spoke ‘the “seven *thunders, and*not ?them 


γράψῃς. 5 Kai ὁ ἄγγελος, ὃν εἶδον ἑστῶτα ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης 


write. And the angel whom Isaw standing on the sea 
καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ἦρεν τὴν.χεῖρα.αὐτοῦ " εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν, 
and on the earth, lifted up his hand to the heaven, 


6 καὶ ὥμοσεν ἐν τῷ ζῶντι εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων, ὃς 
and sware by himwho lives to _ the ages ofthe ages, who 
ἔκτισεν τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὰ ἐν αὐτῷ, Kai τὴν γῆν καὶ 
created the heaven and the things in it, and the earth and 
τὰ ἐν αὐτῇ, “καὶ τὴν θάλασσαν καὶ τὰ ἐν αὐτῇ," 
the things in it, and the sea and the things in it, 
ὝὍ ’ p ? m” » ell 7 4ὰἀλλ S | > ~ « ΄ ~ 
τι χρόνος Ῥοὺκ ἔσται ETL ἀλλὰ" ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις τῆς 
Delay 2no ‘shall *be longer ; but in the days of the 
φωνῆς τοῦ ἑβδόμου ἀγγέλου, ὅταν μέλλῃ σαλπίζειν, 
voice ofthe seventh angel, when he is about to sound [the] trumpet, 
καὶ FredeoOg τὸ μυστήριον τοῦ θεοῦ, ὡς εὐηγ- 
also should be completed the mystery of God, as he did announce 
γέλισεν 5τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ.δούλοις τοῖς προφήταις." 
the glad tidings to his bondmen the prophets, 
8 Kai ἡ φωνὴ ἣν ἤκουσα ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, πάλιν 
And the voice which LIheard outof the heaven [was] again 
‘\adovoa' per’ ἐμοῦ, καὶ λέγουσα," Ὕπαγε λάβε τὸ ᾿βιβλα- 
speaking with me, and saying, Go, take the little 
ρίδιον᾽ τὸ ἠνεῳγμένον ἔν TH χειρὶ * ἀγγέλου τοῦ ἑστῶτος 
book which is open in the hand οἵ [the] angel who is standing 
ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης Kai ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. 9 Kai Τἀπῆλθον" πρὸς τὸν 


on the sea and on the earth. And I went to the 
ἄγγελον, λέγων αὐτῷ, *Adc' μοι τὸ βιβλαρίδιον. Kai λέγει 
angel, saying tohim, Give me the little book. And he says 
μοι, Λάβε καὶ κατάφαγε αὐτό: καὶ πικρανεῖ gov τὴν 
tome, Take and eat “up it: andit shall make bitter thy 


κοιλίαν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ. στύματί.σου ἔσται γλυκὺ we μέλι. 10 Kai 
belly, but in thy mouth it shall be sweet as honey. And 
ἔλαβον τὸ βιβλαρίδιον ἐκ τῆς χειρὸς τοῦ ἀγγέλου, καὶ κατέ- 
Itook the little book outof the hand ofthe angel, and ate 
payor αὐτό: καὶ ἦν ἐν τῷ«.στόματί. μου ὡς μέλι γλυκύ" καὶ 
up lit; and it was in my mouth 285 Shoney ‘sweet; and 


ι.-.-᾿ΝὉΘὉΘ ΦθὉὈὉὈὈὈΘΘΘΘΡΘΡΘΡΘΡρΡρψρψ.ψ.ι τ... τὯὯτ{ τὉι΄ὯτΙΓῖτῖΓΠΤἕΠττ͵Ὡτ,ῖ;ἝἋῖἝὋἷ“0ῦῖτῥττ««-...--τ“-“  -Ὃτ-ς-΄ - 


Γηνεῳγμένον LYTrA. 
φωνὰς ἑαυτῶν GLITrAW. 
" σὴν δεξιὰν the right @LTTraw. 


ἔσται @LTTrAW. 


δούλους τοὺς προφήτας GLITrAW. 


λίον book LTra. 


h τῆς γῆς GLTTraAW. i— τὰς 


8 τῆς θαλάσσης GLTTrAW. 
τὰ αὐτὰ LITrAW. 


k ἤμελλον LTrAWw. | — woe @LTTrAW. 
ο [καὶ τὴν θάλασσαν καὶ τὰ ἐν avTy] L. Ρ οὐκέτι 

τ ἐτελέσθη Was completed @LTTraw. 5 τοὺς ἑαυτοῦ 
t λαλοῦσαν LYTrAW. ν λέγουσαν LTTrAW. W βιβ- 
Υ ἀπῆλθα LT. : δοῦναί (vead telling 


4 ἀλλ᾽ LTTrA. 


x + τοῦ of the @LITraw. 


him to give) @LTTraAW. 


REVELATION. 


ἡ-κοιλία μου. 11 καὶ “λέγει! 88 
tmy “belly. And hesays 


» 
ἔθνεσιν καὶ 
nations, and 


ΧΙ 
« » ᾽ , ? , 

ὅτε ἔφαγον αὐτό, ἐπικράνθη 
when Idideat it, *was *made *bitter 


μοι, Δεῖ.σε πάλιν προφητεῦσαι ἐπὶ λαοῖς καὶ 
to me, Thou must again prophesy as to peoples, and 
γλώσσαις καὶ βασιλεῦσιν πολλοῖς. 
tongues, and ?kings many. 
11 Kai ἐδόθη μοι κάλαμος ὅμοιος ῥάβδῳ, " λέγων, !”Eyet- 
And was given tome areed like a staff, saying, Rise, 
pat, Kai μέτρησον τὸν ναὸν τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον, 
and measure the temple of God, and the altar, 


καὶ τοὺς προσκυνοῦντας ἐν adT@ 2 Kai THY αὐλὴν τὴν 
and those who worship in it. And the court which 


βἔσωθεν" τοῦ ναοῦ ἔκβαλε Sew," καὶ μὴ αὐτὴν μετρήσῃς, 


{is] within the temple cast out, and “not it ‘measure ; 
OTe ἐδόθη τοῖς ἔθνεσιν. Kai τὴν πόλιν THY ἁγίαν 
because it was given {up]tothe nations, and _ the 2city tholy 


πατήσουσιν 
shall they trample upon “months 


τοῖς. δυσὶν. μάρτυσίν.μου, καὶ προφητεύσουσιν ἡμέρας 


μῆνας ἱτεσσαράκοντα' * δύο. 3 καὶ δώσω 
‘forty “two. And I will give 


(power) to my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy 7days 
nN / ὃ , e , 1 Ἃ , Π ΄ δ 
χιλίας ιακοσιας ἑξήκοντα, “περιβεβλημένοι σάκ 
4a *thousand “two *hundred [and] Ssixty, clothed in sack- 
4 < 4 ? ς ὃ 7 ἐλ ~ ‘ m ὃ , Ἂ ΄, 
κους. OUTOL εἰσιν αἱ VO ξἕξλαιαῖ, Και vO UXVLAL 


cloth, 
αἱ 
which 


These the two olivetrees, and {the] two lampstands 
ἐνώπιον "rov'! οθεοῦ" τῆς γῆς Ῥέστῶσαι." 5 Kai εἴ τις 
before 6 *God ‘of‘the earth ‘stand. And if anyone 
αὐτοὺς “θέλφ" ἀδικῆσαι, πῦρ ἐκπορεύεται ἐκ τοῦ στόματος 
“them ‘should will *to*injure, fire goes out of “mouth 


» ~ ‘ , Cree ‘ ee , oo” Γ,,.ἢ ‘ 
αὐτῶν, καὶ κατεσθίει τοὺς ἐχθροὺς. αὐτῶν" καὶ εἴ τις "αὐτοὺς 


are 


‘their, and devours their enemies. And ifanyone *them 
θέλῃ"! ἀδικῆσαι, οὕτως δεῖ.αὐτὸν ἀποκτανθῆναι. 6 οὗτοι 
‘should “will *to*injure, thus must he be killed... These 
ἔχουσιν" ᾿ἐξουσίαν κλεῖσαι τὸν οὐρανόν," ἵνα μὴ "βρέχῃ 
have authority toshut the heaven, that no ?may “fall 
ὑετὸς ἐν ἡμέραις αὐτῶν τῆς προφητείας" καὶ ἐξουσίαν 
train in [the] days of their prophecy ; and authority 


ἔχουσιν ἐπὶ τῶν ὑδάτων, στρέφειν αὐτὰ εἰς αἷμα, Kai πατά- 
they have over the waters, toturn them into blood, and to 
¢ \ ~ wx 7, aN ae « , 8 θ x ΙΑ Π] 7 ‘ 
αι τὴν γὴν πάσῃ πληγῇ; ὑσάκις ἐᾶν θελησωσιν. καὶ 


S 
smite the earth withevery plague, as often as they may will. And 


ὅταν τελέσωσιν τὴν. μαρτυρίαν. αὐτῶν, τὸ θηρίον τὸ 
when they shall have completed their Geel the beast ae 


ἀναβαῖνον ἐκ τῆς ἀβύσσου ποιήσει πόλεμον μετ᾽ αὐτῶν," 
comesup outof the abyss will make war with them, 
καὶ νικήσει αὐτούς, Kai ἀποκτενεῖ αὐτούς. ὃ Kai *ra 
and will overcome them, and will kill them : and 
πτώματα! αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τῆς πλατείας ** πόλεως τῆς με- 
2bodies 1their [will be] on the street of *city ‘the 


643 
as I had eaten it, my 
Belle was bitter. 
11 d he said unto 
me, Thon must pro- 
phesy again before 
many peoples, and na- 
tions, and tongues, 
and kings, 


ΧΙ, And there was 
given me a reed like 
unto a rod: and the 
angel stood, saying 
Rise, aud measure the 
temple of God, and the 
altar, and them that 
worship therein. 2 But 
the court which is 
without the temple 
leave out, and measure 
it not ; for it is given 
unto the Gentiles: and 
the holy city shall 
they tread under foot 
forty and two months. 
3 And I will give 
power unto my two 
witnesses, and they 
shall prophesy a thou- 
sand two hundred and 
threescore days, cloth- 
ed in sackcloth. 4 These 
are the two olive trees, 
and the two candle- 
sticks standing before 
the God of the earth, 
5 And if any man 
will hurt them, fire 
proceedeth out of their 
mouth, and devoureth 
their enemies : and if 
any man will hurt 
them, he must in this 
manner be_ killed. 
6 These have power to 
shut heaven, that it 
rain not in the days 
of their prophecy :and 
have power over wa- 
ters to turn them to 
blood, and to smite 
the earth with all 
plagues, as often as 
they will. 7 And when 
they shall have finish- 
ed their testimony, the 
beast that ascend- 
eth out of the bottom- 
less pit shall make 
war against them, and 
shall overcome them, 
and killthem. 8 And 
their dead bodies shall 
lie in the street of 
the great city, which 


ς λέγουσίν they say LTTrA. d + érias tot. 
the angel stood E. tz Eyetpe LTTraw. 
outside LrTr. 1 FDOT LTTrA. 
m + αἱ the GLTTrAW. — τοῦ τ. 

9 θέλει wills GLTTrawW. 
should have willed them T; αὐτοὺς θελήσῃ Tr. 
ἐξουσίαν κλεῖσαι G. 
(read (during] the days) GLTTraw. 
σωσιν ἐν πάσῃ πληγῇ GW. Υ μετ᾽ αὐτῶν πόλεμον GLTTrAW. 


aa τῆς LTTrAW. 


ΞΕ καὶ and LAW. 
ο κυρίου Lord GLTTraW. 


w + ἐν with (every) LTTrA. 


8 ἔξωθεν outside EGLTTrAW. 
| περιβεβλημένους Tr. 


€ + Kat ὃ ἄγγελος εἱστήκει and 


h ἔξωθεν 


P ἑστῶτες GLITraw. 


τ αὐτοὺς θέλει them wills @; θέλει αὐτοὺς LAW ; θελήσῃ αὐτοὺς 
5. + τὴν the Ltr[a]w. 
Y ὑετὸς βρέχῃ Tas ἡμέρας τῆς προφητείας αὐτῶν (αὐτῶν τῆς προφ. w) 


- τὸν οὐρανὸν 


τ ὁσάκις ἐὰν θελή- 


: τὸ πτῶμα body ΟἸΤΤΓΑΥ͂Κ. 


θ44 

spiritually is calle 

Sodom and Egypt, 
where also our Lord 
was crucified. 9 And 
they of the people and 
kKindreds and tongues 
and nations shall see 
their dead bodies three 
days and an half, and 
shall not suffer their 
dead bodies to be put 
in graves. 10 And they 
that dwell upon the 
earth shall rejoice o- 
ver them, and make 
merry, and shall send 
gifts one to another ; 
because these two pro- 
phets tormented them 
that dwelt on the 
earth. 11 And after 
three days and an 
half the Spirit of life 
from God entered into 
them, and they stood 
upon their feet ; and 
great fear fell upon 
them which saw them, 
12 And they heard a 
great voice from hea- 
ven saying untothem, 
Come up hither. And 
they ascended up to 
heaven in acloud; and 
their enemies beheld 
them. 13 And the 
same hour was there a 
great earthquake, and 
the tenth part of the 
city fell, and in the 
earthquake were slain 
of men seven thou- 
sand: and the rem- 
nant were aftrighted, 
and gave glory to the 
God of heaven. 


14 The second woe 
is past; and, behold, 
the third woe cometh 
quickly. 


15 And the seventh 
angel sounded; and 
there were great voices 
in heaven, saying, The 
kingdoms’ of this 
world are become the 
kingdoms of our Lord, 
and of hisChrist; and 
he shall reign for ever 
andever. 16 And the 
four and twenty el- 
ders, which sat before 


ἈΠ KA AX Y ES ΧΙ. 


, ~ ~ 7 \ » 

γάλης, ἥτις καλεῖται πνευματικῶς Σόδομα καὶ Αἴγυπτος, 
“great, which is called spiritually Sodom and gypt, 
ὅπου καὶ ὁ κύριος θὴ μῶν" ἐσταυρώθη. 8 Kai “βλέψουσιν!" 

where also *Lord our was crucified. And ‘7'shall**see ['some] 
ἐκ τῶν λαῶν Kai φυλῶν καὶ γλωσσῶν Kai ἐθνῶν Ira πτώ- 
*of *the *peoples®and “tribes 7’and ‘tongues Y%and /°nations bodies 
ματα" αὐτῶν ἡμέρας τρεῖς “καὶ" ἥμισυ, καὶ τὰ πτώματα. αὐτῶν 


13their ἰθᾷαγβ ‘*three and ahalf, and their bodies 
οὐκ ἀφήσουσιν! τεθῆναι εἰς μνήματα." 10 καὶ οἱ κατ- 
Snot ‘they *willsuffer tobeput into tombs, And they that 


οικοῦντες ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ᾿χαροῦσιν" ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς, καὶ ἰἸεὐφρανθή- 


dwell on the earth willrejoice over them, and will make 
σονται" καὶ δῶρα "πέμψουσιν" ἀλλήλοις, Ore οὗτοι οἱ δύο 
merry, and gifts will send to one another, because these, the two 
προφῆται ἐβασάνισαν τοὺς κατοικοῦντας ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. 
prophets, tormented them that dwell upon the earth. 
11 καὶ μετὰ τὰς τρεῖς ἡμέρας καὶ ἥμισυ, πνεῦμα ζωῆς 
And after the three days and ahalf, [the] _ spirit of life 


? ~ ~ I~ 1 ? ΄, Il ΟΝ 2. τ . 
ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ εἰσῆλθεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς, καὶ ἔστησαν ἐπὶ τοὺς 


from God didenter into them, and they stood upon 
πόδας αὐτῶν, καὶ φόβος μέγας ἔπεσεν" ἐπὶ τοὺς θεωροῦντας 
“feet ‘their; and “fear ‘great fell upon those beholding 


αὐτούς. 12 καὶ ἥκουσαν "φωνὴν μεγάλην" ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, 
them : and they heard a *voice ‘great outof the heaven, 

ολέγουσαν" αὐτοῖς, PAvaBnre' ὧδε. Kai ἀνέβησαν εἰς τὸν 
saying to them, Come up hither. And they wentup to _ the 

οὐρανὸν ἐν τῇ νεφέλῃ, Kai ἐθεώρησαν αὐτοὺς οἱ. ἐχθροὶ αὐτῶν. 


heaven in the cloud; and beheld *them 1their “enemies. 
13 Kai ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ὥρᾳ ἐγένετο σεισμὸς μέγας, Kai τὸ 
And ἴθ that hour there was “earthquake ‘a*great, and the 


δέκατον τῆς πόλεως ἔπεσεν, Kai ἀπεκτάνθησαν ἐν τῷ σεισμῷ 
tenth ofthe . city fell, and there were killed in the earthquake 


ὀνόματα ἀνθρώπων χιλιάδες ἑπτά" Kai ot λοιποὶ ἔμφοβοι 
3names *of *men *thousand ‘seven. And 6 rest "afraid 


ya .» "5" , ~ ~ ~ ᾽ ~ 
ἐγένοντο, καὶ ἔδωκαν δόξαν τῷ θεῷ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ. 


‘became, and = gave glory tothe God ofthe heaven. 
14 ‘H οὐαὶ “ἡ" δευτέρα ἀπῆλθεν: ἰδού, ἡ οὐαὶ ἡ τρίτη 
3Woe ‘the *second is past: lo, the *woe third 
ἔρχεται ταχύ. 
comes quickly. 
15 Kai ὁ ἕβδομος ἄγγελος ἐσάλπισεν, καὶ ἐγένον τὸ 


And the seventh and Swere 


φωναὶ μεγάλαι ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, ™éyovoa,' *Eyévovro αἱ 
*voices great in the heaven, saying, SAre "become ‘the 
βασιλεῖαι! τοῦ κόσμου τοῦ.κυρίου.ἡμῶν, Kai τοῦ.χριστοῦ αὐτοῦ, 
“kingdoms “of*the *world our Lord’s, an his Christ’s, 

. ’ > ‘4 I~ ~ 2. 0. ‘ t c \ 
καὶ βασιλεύσει εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. 16 Kai ‘ot 
and heshallreign to the ages of the ages. And the 


εἴκοσι καὶ" τέσσαρες πρεσβύτεροι "οὶ" ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ “καθή- 
twenty and four elders, who __ before God sit 


angel sounded [his] trumpet ; 


» αὐτῶν their GLTTraw. 
f ἀφίουσιν they suffer LTTra ; ἀφιοῦσιν W. 


® [καὶ] A. 


5 χαίρουσιν rejoice GLITrAW. 
! ἐν ( — ἐν Tr[A]) αὐτοῖς GLTTrAW. 

P’AvaBare LTTrAW. 
βασιλεία “is "become ‘the “kingdom GLTTraw. 
* — οἱ (read καθή. sitting) L[A] 


γούσης Tra. 


4 70 πτῶμα body GLITraw. 
Β μνῆμα a tomb GLTTraw. 
i εὐφραίνονται Make merry LTTrAW. ἔ πέμπουσιν send T. 
ἴὰ ἐπέπεσεν LI'TrAW. Ὁ φωνῆς μεγάλης Tra. ο λε- 
4ᾳ -- ἡ ΝΥ. τ λέγοντες GLTAW. 5 ᾿Εγένετο ἡ 
το οἱ 1{41]. νυ — καὶ GLITrAW. 
χ οἵ κάθηνται (read who [are] before God who sit) rrr. 


ς βλέπουσιν See GLTTrAW. 


XI, XII. REVELATION. 


evou! ἐπὶ τοὺς. θρόνους. αὐτῶν, ἔπεσαν ἐπὶ τὰ- πρόσωπα αὐτῶν 
μ ’ 
on their thrones, fell upon their faces, 


καὶ προσεκύνησαν τῷ θεῷ, 17 λέγοντες, Εὐχαριστοῦμέν σοι, 
and ‘worshipped God, saying, We give thanks to thee, 


κύριε ὁ θεὸς ὁ παντοκράτωρ. ὁ ὧν καὶ ὁ ἦν Yai ὁ 
Lord God Almighty, {He} who is, and who was, and who [is] 


ἐρχόμενος," 7 ὅτι εἴληφας τὴν δύναμίν σου τὴν μεγάλην. 
coming, that thou hast taken spower thy 2creat, 
καὶ ἐβασίλευσας. 18 καὶ τὰ ἔθνη ὠργίσθησαν, Kai ἦλθεν ἡ 
and reigned. And the nations were angry, and is come 
ὀργή σου. Kai ὁ καιρὸς THY νεκρῶν, κριθῆναι, Kai δοῦναι TOY 
“wrath ‘thy, andthe time of the dead tobejudged, and togive the 
μισθὸν τοῖς. δούλοις.σου τοῖς προφήταις, καὶ τοῖς ἁγίοις Kai 
reward to thy bondmen the prophets, and tothe saints, and 
τοῖς φοβουμένοις τὸ.ὄνομά.σου, *Toic μικροῖς Kai τοῖς 
to those who fear thy name, the small and the 
μεγάλοις," καὶ διαφθεῖραι τοὺς 'διαφθείροντας" τὴν γῆν. 
great ; and toring toconruption those who corrupt the earth. 
19 Kai ἠνοίγη ὁ ναὸς τοῦ θεοῦ “ ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, Kai Wo- 


And was opened the temple of God in the heaven, and was 
θη ἡ κιβωτὸς τῆς. διαθήκης.Δαὐτοῦ" ἐν τῷ.ναῷ.αὐτοῦ" Kai 
seen the ark of his covenant in his temple: and 
ἐγένοντο ἀστραπαὶ Kai φωναὶ Kai βρονταὶ καὶ σεισμὸς καὶ 
there were lightnings and voices and thunders and an earthquake and 
χάλαζα μεγάλη. 

7hail 1 great, 


12 Kai σημεῖον μέγα ὥφθη ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, γυνὴ περι- 
hee py Y ῷ, Ὑ ρ 


a“sign ‘great wasseen in the heaven ; a@ woman cloth- 


βεβλημένη τὸν ἥλιον, καὶ ἡ σελήνη ὑποκάτω τῶν. ποδῶν αὐτῆς. 
ed with the sun, andthe moon under her feet, 


καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς. κεφαλῆς. αὐτῆς στέφανος ἀστέρων δώδεκα᾽ 2 Kai 


and on ker head 8. crown of *stars ‘twelve; and 

ty.yaotpiéxovoa,® ἱκράζει' ὠδίνουσα καὶ βασανιζομένη 
being with child she cries being in travail, and being in pain 
τεκεῖν. 

to bring forth. 
3 Kai ὥφθη ἄλλο σημεῖον ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, Kai ἰδού, δρά- 


And was seen another in the and behold, a *dra- 


κων ἐμέγας 7 πυῤῥός," ἔχων κεφαλὰς ἑ ἑπτὰ καὶ κέρατα δέκα" καὶ 
gon lereab “red, having “heads ‘seven and “horns ‘ten, and 


ἐπὶ τὰς κεφαλὰς. αὐτοῦ "διαδήματα ἑπτά"" 4 Kai ἡ οὐρὰ.αὐτοῦ 
upon his heads ?diadems 1seven ; and his tail 


σύρει TO τρίτον THY ἀστέρων τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, Kai ἔβαλεν αὐτοὺς 
drags the third ofthe stars ofthe heaven, and [6 cast them 


εἰς τὴν γῆν. Kai ὁ δράκων ἕστηκεν ἐνώπιον τῆς γυναικὸς τῆς 


sign HeSyeD, 


to the earth. And the dragon stands before the woman who 
μελλούσης τεκεῖν, ἵνα bray τέκῃ, τὸ τέκνον. αὐτῆς 
is about to bring forth, that when she should bring forth, her child 


καταφάγῃ. 5 καὶ ἔτεκεν υἱὸν 1a ppeva,' ὃς μέλλει ποι- 
he might devour. Andshe brought fortha*son ‘male, who is about to 


paivey πάντα τὰ ἔθνη ἐν ῥάβδῳ σιδηρᾷ" καὶ ἡρπάσθη 
shepherd all the nations with rod Jan *iron: and was caught away 


Υ — καὶ ὃ ἐρχόμενος GLTTrAW. * + καὶ and T. 
LTrA. Ὁ διαφθείραντας corrupted τι. ¢ + ὃ which [is] LTTr. 
the covenant of the Lord) G. e+ xatand 11[4]. 


μέγας LTTrA. b ἑπτὰ διαδήματα GLTTrAW. i ἄρσεν LTTrAW. 


f ἔκραζεν Was crying L. 


019 
God on their seats, 
fell upon their faces, 
and worshipped Goa, 
17 saying, We give 
thee thanks, O Lord 
God Almighty, which 
art, and wast, and art 
to come; because thou 
hast taken to thee thy 
great power, and hast 
reigned. 18 And the na- 
tions were angry, and 
thy wrath iscome, and 
the time of the dead, 
that they should be 
judged, and that thou 
shouldest give reward 
unto thy servants the 
prophets, and to the 
saints, and them that 
fear thy name, smali 
and great; and should- 


est destroy them 
which destroy the 
earth. 


19 And the temple 
of God was opened in 
heaven, and there was 
seen in his temple the 
ark of his testament : 
and there were light- 
nings, and voices, and 
thunderings, and an 
earthquake, and great 
hail. 


XII. And there ap- 
peared a great wonder 
in heaven ; a woman 
clothed with the sun, 
and the moon under 
her feet, and upon her 
head a crown of 
twelve stars: 2 and 
she being with child 
cried, travailing in 
birth, and pained to 
be delivered. 


3 And there ap- 
peared another won- 
der in heaven; and 
behold a great red 
dragon, having seven 
heads and ten horns 
and seven crowns upon 
his heads. 4 And his 
tail drew the third 
part of the stars of 
heaven, and did cast 
them to the earth: 
and the dragon stood 
before the woman 
which was ready to be 
delivered, for to de- 
vour her child as soon 
as it was born. 5 And 
she brought forth a 
man child, who was to 
rule ali nations with 
a rod of iron: and her 


5 τοὺς μικροὺς Kal TOUS μεγάλους 


4 τοῦ κυρίου (read 
8 πυρῥὸς 


040 

child was caught up 
unto God, and to his 
throne. 6 And the wo- 
man fled into the wil- 
derness, where she 
hath a place prepared 
of God, that they 
should feed her there a 
thousand two hundred 
and threescore days. 


7 And there was 
war in heaven: Mi- 
chael and his angels 
fought against the 
dragon ; and the dra- 
gon fought and his 
angels, 8 and _ pre- 
vailed not; neither 
was their place found 
any more in heaven. 
9 And the great dra- 
gon was cast out, that 
old serpent, called the 
Devil, and Satan, 
which deceiveiu the 
whole world: he was 
cast out into the 
earth, and his angels 
were cast out with 
him, 10 And I heard 
a loud voice saying 
in heaven, Now is 
come salvation, and 
strength, and the 
kingdom of our God, 
and the power of his 
Christ: for the ac- 
ecuser of our brethren 
is cast down, which 
accused them before 
our God day and 
night. 11 And they 
overcame him by the 
blood of the Lamb, 
and by the word of 
their testimony ; and 
they loved not their 
lives unto the death, 
12 Therefore rejoice, 
ye heavens, and ye 
that dwell in them. 
Woe to the inhabiters 
of the earth and of 
the sea! for the devil 
is come down unto 
you, having great 
wrath, because he 
knoweth that he hath 
but a short time. 


13. And when the 
dragon saw that he 
was cast unto the 
earth, he persecuted 
the woman which 
brought forth the 
man child. 14 And to 


AIT O'KAASY 0 3. Xo, 
τὸ. τέκνον. αὐτῆς πρὸς τὸν θεὸν καὶ τὸν. θρόνον αὐτοῦ. 6 Kai 
her child to God and his throne. And 


ἡ γυνὴ ἔφυγεν εἰς THY ἔρημον, ὕπου ἔχει! τόπον ἡτοιμασ- 
the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place pre- 


μένον ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ, ἵνα ἐκεῖ ™rpipwow' αὐτὴν ἡμέρας 

pared of God, that there they should nourish her 7days 
χιλίας διακοσίας ἑξήκοντα. 

‘a *thousand “two *hundred [84η4] ‘sixty. 


7 Kai ἐγένετο πόλεμος ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ" "ὁ' Μιχαὴλ καὶ 


And there was war in the heaven: Michael and 
οἱ. ἄγγελοι αὐτοῦ “ἐπολέμησαν κατὰ" τοῦ δοάκοντος, Kai ὁ 

his angels warred against the dragon, and the 
δράκων ἐπολέμησεν, καὶ οἱ ἄγγελοι.αὐτοῦ" 8 Kai οὐκ Ρίσχυ- 
dragon warred, and his angels ; and “not ‘they “pre- 
σαν." “οὔτε' τόπος εὑρέθη αὐτῶν ἔτι ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ. 9 Kai 
vailed, nor “place 'was*found “their any morein the heaven. And 


ἐβλήθη ὁ 


was cast [out] the 
μενος διάβολος, Kai ὁ σατανᾶς, ὁ πλανῶν τὴν οἰκουμένην 


δράκων ὁ μέγας, ὁ ὄφις ὁ ἀρχαῖος, ὁ καλού- 
dragon 1yreat, the 7serpent ancient, who is 


called Devil, and the Satan, who misleads the "habitable 
ὕλην, ἐβλήθη εἰς THY γῆν, καὶ οἱ. ἄγγελοι. αὐτοῦ 
(*world] 'whole, he wascast into the earth, and his angels 


μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐβλήθησαν. 10 Kai ἤκουσα φωνὴν μεγάλην τλέ- 
Swith *him lwere “cast. And Theard a voice ‘great 
yovoay ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ," Αρτι ἐγένετο ἡ σωτηρία Kai ἡ δύνα- 
saying in the heaven, Now iscome the salvation and the power 
μις καὶ ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ.θεοῦ.ἡμῶν, Kai ἡ ἐξουσία τοῦ χριστοῦ 
and the kingdom of our God, and the authority $Christ 

> La ev Si = ANA Il c t , " ~ 10. λ ~ ε ~ 
αὐτοῦ: ὅτι "“κατεβλήθη" ὁ 'κατήγορος" τῶν.ἀδελφῶν ἡμῶν. 
‘of 7his; because iscast down the accuser of our brethren, 

ὁ κατηγορῶν αὐτῶν" ἐνώπιον τοῦ.θεοῦ. ἡμῶν ἡμέρας Kai 


who accuses them before our God day and 
νυκτός. 11 καὶ αὐτοὶ ἐνίκησαν αὐτὸν διὰ τὸ αἷμα τοῦ 
night. And they overcame him by reason of the blood of the 
apviov, καὶ διὰ τὸν λόγον τῆς.μαρτυρίας. αὐτῶν, καὶ 
Lamb, and by reason of the word of their testimony, and 


ὙΔΉ ΟΝ ἡ \ ‘ > ~ » θ ΄ 19 3 ‘ 
οὐκ' ἠγάπησαν τὴν.ψυχὴν. αὐτῶν ἄχρι θανάτου. ιὰ 
Ξηοῦ ‘loved their life unto death. Because of 

τοῦτο εὐφραίνεσθε "οἱ" οὐρανοὶ καὶ οἱ ἐν αὐτοῖς OKNVOUY TEC. 
this rejoice ye heavens and[ye]whoin them tabernacle. 

ovat Yrote κατοικοῦσιν! *rnyv γῆν Kai τὴν θάλασσαν," Ort 

Woe to those who inhabit the earth and the sea, because 

κατέβη ὁ διάβολος πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἔχων θυμὸν μέγαν, εἰ- 
is come down the devil to you having “fury ‘great, know- 

Owe Ore ὀλίγον καιρὸν ἔχει. 

ing that δι βϑῆοσῦ time he has, 


13 Kai Ore εἶδεν ὁ δράκων Ore ἐβλήθη εἰς THY γὴν. 


And when ὅβανγ ‘the “dragon that he wascast into the earth, 

γ Δ ‘ ~ «“ » ‘ 8422 iT} 14 4 
ἐδίωξεν τὴν γυναῖκα ἥτις ἕτεκεν τὸν "ἄῤῥενα. καὶ 
he persecuted the woman which brought forth the male [child]. And 


k + πρὸς to GLTTrAW. 


ἐκτρέφωσιν W. 


GLTITraWw. PU 
GLTTrAW. : 
Ἢ οὐχ L. x — οἱ TTrA. 


5 εβλήθη is cast [out] LTTrA. 


1+ éxet there GTAW. m τρέφουσιν they nourish rrr ; 
ο τοῦ ( — τοῦ T[A]) πολεμῆσαι μετὰ Warred with 
4 οὐδὲ GLTTrAW. τ ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ λέγουσαν 

τ κατήγωρ GLTA. ἡ αὐτοὺς LTA. 
: τῇ γῇ καὶ τῇ θαλάσσῃ aw. 


ἢ ὅ τα both 1». 
υσεν he prevailed 4. 


Υ — τοῖς κατοικοῦσιν GLTTrAW. 


κ ἄρσεναν 1,; ἄρσενα TTrA. 


MEE XIII. REVELATION. 


ἐδόθησαν τῇ γυναικὶ" δύο πτέρυγες τοῦ ἀετοῦ τοῦ μεγάλου, 
were given tothe woman two wings of the eagle great, 
ἵνα πέτηται εἰς τὴν ἔρημον εἰς τὸν. τόπον. αὐτῆς, ὕπου τρέ- 
that she might fly into the wilderness into her place, where sheis 
φεται ἐκεῖ καιρόν, καὶ καιρούς, καὶ ἥμισυ καιροῦ, ἀπὸ 
nourished there atime, and times, and half atime, from [the] 
? ~ » A » «ε m” c2 ΄ ~ 
προσώπου τοῦ ὄφεως. 15 Kai ἔβαλεν ὁ ὄφις “ὀπίσω τῆς 
face of the serpent. And Scast ‘the “serpent “after 3086 
‘ ~ , ~) e ’ .“ 
γυναικὸς ἐκ τοῦ-.στόματος.αὐτοῦ" ὕδωρ ὡς ποταμόν, ἵνα 
‘Cwoman ‘out Sof his 7mouth water as a river, that 
“ταύτην" ποταμοφόρητον ποιήσῃ. 16 καὶ 
*her (®as Sone] “carried ®away *by '°a ΕἾΤ ΘΙ *he *might *make. And 
ἐβοήθησεν ἡ yi) TH γυναικί, Kai ἤνοιξεν ἡ γῆ τὸ στόμα 
“helped ‘the 7earththe woman, and “opened ‘the “earth 5mouth 
αὐτῆς, καὶ κατέπιεν τὸν ποταμὸν ὃν ἔβαλεν ὁ δράκων 
*its, and swallowed up the river which cast ‘the *dragon 
ἐκ τοῦ. στόματος αὐτοῦ. 17 Kai ὠργίσθη ὁ δράκων "ἐπὶ" 
out of his mouth. And *was *angry ‘the *dragon with 
Ty γυναικί, Kai ἀπῆλθεν ποιῆσαι πόλεμον μετὰ τῶν λοιπῶν 
the woman, and went to make war with the rest 
τοῦ. σπέρματος. αὐτῆς, τῶν τηρούντων τὰς ἐντολὰς τοῦ 
of her seed, who keep the commandments 
θεοῦ, καὶ ἐχόντων THY μαρτυρίαν frov' ᾿Ιησοῦ δχριστοῦ." 
ofGod,and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. 
18 Kai *éora@ny'" ἐπὶ τὴν ἄμμον τῆς θαλάσσης" 13 καὶ 
And I stood upon the sand of the sea ; and 


εἶδον ἐκ τῆς θαλάσσης θηρίον ἀναβαῖνον, ἔχον ἱκεφαλὰς 


Isaw outof the sea a beast rising, having “heads 

t 4 +7 ~ if ? ~ , 

ἑπτὰ καὶ κέρατα δέκα" καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν. κεράτων αὐτοῦ δέκα δια- 
*seven and “horns ‘ten, and on its horns ten dia: 


δήματα, Kai ἐπὶ Tac.Kepaddc.avTov Kovoua' βλασφημίας. 
dems, and upon its heads {the} name of blasphemy. 


2 καὶ τὸ θηρίον ὃ εἶδον ἦν ὅμοιον παρδάλει, Kai οἱ πόδες 


And the beast whicnlsaw was like to a leopard, and 2feet 

> ~ » " , ~ e ΄ , 1 
αὐτοῦ we ἱἄρκτου," καὶ τὸ.στόμα.αὐτοῦ ὡς στύμα Ὄλέοντος." 

‘its as ofabear, and its mouth as([the] mouth ofalion; 


καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ ὁ δράκων τὴν.δύναμιν. αὐτοῦ, Kai τὸν θρόνον 
and “gave “ἴο °it ‘the *dragon his power, and *throne 
αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐξουσίαν μεγάλην. 3 Kai "εἶδον" μίαν 5 τῶν κεφα- 
this, and *authority 1great, And Isaw one sheads 
~ > ~ e , >? , ‘ « ‘ ~ 
λῶν αὐτοῦ ὡς ἐσφαγμένην εἰς θάνατον᾽ Kai ἡ πληγὴ τοῦ 
lof 1 5. as slain to death ; and the wound 
θανάτου αὐτοῦ ἐθεραπεύθη, Kai Ῥέεθαυμάσθη" Yév' τόλῃ τῷ 
3death ‘of its washealed: and there was wonder in “whole ‘the 
yp ὀπίσω τοῦ θηρίου. 4 καὶ προσεκύνησαν “τὸν δράκοντα" 
earth after the beast, And they didhomageto the dragon, 
‘Oc! ἔδωκεν “ἐξουσίαν τῷ θηρίῳ, Kai προσεκύνησαν “τὸ 


who gave authority tothe beast; and they didhomageto the 
θηρίον," λέγοντες, Τίς ὕμοιος τῷ θηρίῳ; “τίς δύναται 
beast, saying, Who [15] like tothe beast? who is able 


647 


the woman were given 
two wings of a great 
eagle, that she might 
Ἐν into the wilderness, 
into her place, where 
she is nourished for a 
time, and times, and 
half atime, from the 
face of the serpent. 
15 And the serpent 
cast out of his mouth 
water as a flood after 
the woman, that he 
might cause her to be 
carried away of the 
flood. 16 And the 
earth helped the wo- 
man, and the earth 
opened her mouth, and 
swallowed up the flood 
which the dragon cast 
out of his mouth. 
17 And the dragon was 
wroth with the wo- 
man, and went to 
make war with the 
remnant of her seed, 
which keep the com- 
mandments of God, 
and have the testi- 
mony of Jesus Christ. 


« 


XIII. And I stood 
upon the sand of the 
sea, and saw a 
beast rise up out of 
the sea, having seven 
heads and ten horns, 
and upon his horns 
ten crowns, and upon 
his heads the name of 
blasphemy. 2 And the 
beast which I saw was 
like unto a leopard, 
and his feet were as 
the feet of a bear, and 
his mouth as the 
mouth of a lion: and 
the dragon gave him 


his power, and his 
seat, and great au- 
thority. 3 And 1 


saw one of his heads 
as it were wounded to 
death ; and his deadly 
wound was healed: 
and all the world won- 
dered after the beast. 
4 And they worship- 
ped the dragon which 
gave power unto the 
beast: and they wor- 
shipped the beast, say- 
ing, Who is like unto 
the beast? whois abie 


Ὁ + αἱ the Lrtr[a]w. ’ σ 
GLTTrAw. ε — ἐπὶ (read τῇ With the) L. f — τοῦ GLTTrAW. 
Β ἐστάθη it stood LTra. i κέρατα δέκα kat κεφαλὰς ἑπτά GLTTrAW. 


© ἐκ τοῦ στόματος αὐτοῦ ὀπίσω τῆς γυναικὸς GLTTraW. 


4 αὐτὴν 


8 --- χριστοῦ GLTITrAW. 


κ ὀνόματα Hames 


GLTTrw. 1 Gpkov GLTTrAW. τὼ λεόντων Of lions τ. Ὁ--- εἶδον GLTTraw. o+ ἐκ 
of (its) GLTTrAW. Ρ ἐθαύμασεν (vead the whole earth wondered) ee@Taw. 4 — ἐν 
EGLTAW. τ ὅλη ἡ γῆ EGLTAW. S τῷ δράκοντι GLITrAW. τ ὅτι (read because he gave) 
GLTTrAW ν + τὴν the GLTtraw. " τῷ θηρίῳ GLTTrAW. 2+ καὶ and GLTTrAW 


648 


to make war with 
him ? 5 And there was 
given unto him a 
mouth speaking great 
things and _ blasphe- 
mies ; and power was 
given unto him to 
continue forty and 
two months, 6 And he 
opened his mouth in 
blasphemy against 
God, to blaspheme his 
name, and his taber- 
nacie, and them that 
dwellin heaven. 7 And 
it was given unto him 
to make war with 
the saints, and to 
overcome them: and 
power was given him 
over all kindreds, and 
tongues, and nations. 
8 Andall that dwell 
upon the earth shall 
worship him, whose 
Dames are not writ- 
ten in the book of 
life of the Lamb slain 
from the foundation 
of the world. 9 If any 
man have an ear, let 
him hear. 10 He that 
leadeth thto captivity 
shall gointo captivity: 
he that killeth with 
the sword must be 
killed with the sword. 
Here is the patience 
and the faith of the 
saints. 


11 And I beheld an- 
other beast coming up 
out of the earth; and 
he had two horns like 
a lamb, and he spake 
as a dragon. 12 Andhe 
exerciseth all the pow- 
er of the first beast 
before him, and caus- 
eth the earth and 
them which dwell 
therein to worship the 
first beast, whose 
deadly wound was 
healed. 13 And he do- 
eth great wonders, so 
that he maketh fire 
come down from hea- 
ven on the earth in 
the sight of men, 
14 and deceiveth them 
that dwell on the 


earth by the means of 


those miracles which 


Υ βλάσφημα blasphemous [things] La. 
σαρακονταδύο E ; τεσσεράκοντα δύο LITrA. 
ε — καὶ ἐδόθη.. 
λαὸν and people @LTTraw. 
not been written) LTTrA. 


d καὶ LITrAW. 


ATLOK A AY ¥ Fs. 
πολεμῆσαι per αὐτοῦ; 5 καὶ ἐδόθη αὐτῷ στόμα λαλοῦν 
to make war with it? And wasgiven toit amouth speaking 
μεγάλα καὶ βλασφημίας" Kai ἐδόθη αὐτῷ ἐξουσία " ποιῆ- 


great things and aE Peay 5 and was given to it a te 
σαι μῆνας "τεσσαράκοντα ὃ δύο" 6 καὶ ἤνοιξεν τὸ στόμα.αὐτοῦ 
act “months forty *two. And it opened its mouth 


εἰς “BAacdnpiav' πρὸς τὸν θεόν, βλασφημῆσαι τὸ ὄνομα 
for blasphemy, eeainge God, to pagan 7name 


αὐτοῦ, Kai τὴν. σκηνὴν. αὐτοῦ, “καὶ τοὺς ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ 
this, and his tabernacle, and those who 7in “the ‘heaven 


σκηνοῦντας. 7 “καὶ ἐδόθη αὐτῷ 'πόλεμον ποιῆσαι μετὰ τῶν 
‘tabernacle. And was given to it 3war 1to*make with the 


ἁγίων, Kai νικῆσαι αὐτούς" καὶ ἐδόθη αὐτῷ ἐξουσία ἐπὶ 
saints, and toovercome' them; and was given toit authority over 
πᾶσαν φυλὴν 8 καὶ γλῶσσαν καὶ ἔθνος. 8 Kai προσκυνήσου- 
every ὑγ106, and tongue, and nation; and 5881] do homage 
σιν βαὐτῷ" πάντες οἱ κατοικοῦντες ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς iwv' οὐ 
to it all who hoes on the earth of whom “not 

é k Ι 2 rw! G 2) 

Y γρᾶατπται τὰ ὀνόματα ἐν ἱτῇ ί ῳ τῆς ωῆς του 
"have been written the names in sis ®book 10of | life '*of **the 


ἀρνίου ™ ἐσφαγμένου ἀπὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου. 9 Εἰ 
1SLamb slain ‘from (?the) “founding ‘of [the] world. If 


> ” n ο ᾽ X , Π 
τις ἔχει οὖς, ἀκουσάτω. 10 Ei τις αἰχμαλωσίαν 
anyone has anear, let him hear. If anyone [7into] “captivity 


Ῥσυνάγει," εἰς αἰχμαλωσίαν ὑπάγει" εἴ τις ἐν «μαχαίρᾳ" 
‘gathers, into captivity he goes. If anyone with [the] sword 


τἀποκτενεῖ," Sei" αὐτὸν ἐν «μαχαίρᾳ ἀποκτανθῆναι" ὧδέ 
will kill, 2must ‘he with{the] sword be killed. Here 


ἐστιν ἡ ὑπομονὴ «τὶ ἡ πίστις τῶν ἁγίων. 
is the endurance and the faith ofthe saints, 


11 Kai εἶδον ἄλλο θηρίον avaBaivoy ἐκ τῆς γῆς; 
And Isaw another beast rising out of the earth, 

- , ’ a ? , "7 ΄ « , ‘ 
εἶχεν κέρατα δύο ὕμοια ἀρνίῳ, Kai ἐλάλει ὡς δράκων. 12 Kai 
ithad “horns ‘two liketo alamb, and spoke as a dragon; and 
τὴν ἐξουσίαν τοῦ πρώτου θηρίου πᾶσαν ποιεῖ ἐνώπιον 


XIII. 


καὶ 
and 


*the “authority “οἵ °the first 7beast tall itexercises before 
αὐτοῦ" Kai ποιεῖ THY γῆν Kai τοὺς κατοικοῦντας ἐν αὐτῇ" 
it, and causes the earth and those who dwell in it 
ἵνα “προσκυνήσωσιν᾽ τὸ θηρίον τὸ πρῶτον, οὗ ἐθερα- 
that they should do homage to the “beast ‘first, of whom was 
πεύθη ἡ πληγὴ τοῦ.θανάτου.αὐτοῦ" 13 Kai ποιεῖ σημεῖα 


of its death. 


Toy | 
it should cause 


healed the wound And it works “signs 


χκαταβαίνειν ἐκ τοῦ ov- 
tocome down outof the hea- 


~ iI ᾽ - x ~ ? , ~ 2. θ , 14 ‘ Xr ~ 
Pavov’ ELC τὴν γὴν EVWTLOY TWY ανσρωπων. Kat TAAVE 


μεγάλα, δ 


1preat, 


ἵνα Kai πῦρ 
that even fire 


ven to the earth before men. And it misleads 
τοὺς κατοικοῦντας ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, διὰ τὰ σημεῖα ἃ 
those who dwell on the earth, by reason of the signs which 


2 + πόλεμον war (read ποιῆ. to make) Ε. 
b + [καὶ] and 1». 


8 τεσ- 
© βλασφημίας LTTrAW. 
νικῆσαι αὐτούς L. ἱ ποιῆσαι πόλεμον TTrA. 8 + καὶ 
h αὐτὸν GLTTrAW. i οὗ (read [everyone] of whom has 
K τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ his name LTTrA ; τὸ ὄνομα the name Gw. 


ἱ τῷ βιβλίῳ Q@LTTrAW. m + τοῦ (read which was slain) GLTTrAW. Ὁ + εἰς Lis] 
for LTAW. ° — αἰχμαλωσίαν (read εἰς for) Tr. P — συνάγει LTTrAW. 4 μαχαίρῃ 
LfTra. τ ἀποκταίνει kills τι; ἀποκτανθῆναι to be killed a. s — δεῖ a. * ἐν αὐτῇ 


κατοικοῦντας QTTrA. 
ΟΥ̓. 


Υ προσκυνήσουσιν they shall do homage ΤΊΓΑ. Ὑ καὶ πῦρ ἵνα 


x ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καταβαίνειν (καταβῇ α ; καταβαίνῃ should come down W) @LutTraw 


XIII, XIV. REVELATION. 
ἐδόθη αὐτῷ ποιῆσαι ἐνώπιον Tov θηρίου, λέγων τοῖς 
it γγαβ given toit towork before the beast, saying to those who 
κατοικοῦσιν ἐπὶ THC γῆς, ποιῆσαι Zeikova' τῷ θηρίῳ ὃ) 
dwell on the earth, to make animage tothe beast, which 
ἔχει THY πληγὴν τῆς μαχαίρας" καὶ ἔζησεν. 15 Kai ἐδόθη 
has the wound of the sword, and lived. And it was given 
“αὐτῷ! δοῦναι πνεῦμα! τῇ εἰκόνι τοῦ θηρίου; ἵνα καὶ λα- 
to it to give breath tothe image ofthe beast, that’also®should 
digg ἡ εἰκὼν τοῦ θηρίου, Kai ποιήσῃ, doa fav" μὴ 
®speak ‘the *image *of*the ‘beast, and should cause as many as ot 
ἐπροσκυνήσωσιν'" Ῥτὴν εἰκόνα" τοῦ θηρίου ‘iva! ἀποκτανθῶσιν. 
would dohomageto the image ofthe beast that theyshouldbekilled. 
16 καὶ ποιεῖ πάντας, τοὺς μικροὺς καὶ τοὺς μεγάλους, Kai 
And it causes all, the small d the great, and 
τοὺς πλουσίους Kai τοὺς πτωχούς, Kai τοὺς ἐλευθέρους καὶ 


the rich and the poor, and the free and 
τοὺς δούλους, ἵνα ἔδώσῃ᾽ αὐτοῖς χάραγμα ἐπὶ τῆς χειρὸς 
the bondmen, that itshould give them a mark on “hand 
αὐτῶν τῆς δεξιᾶς, ἢ ἐπὶ ray μετώπων" αὐτῶν, 17 "καὶ" ἵνα 
‘their “right, or on “foreheads ‘their; and that 
μή.τις δύνηται ἀγοράσαι ἢ πωλῆσαι, εἰμὴ ὁ ἔχων τὸ 


noone should be able to buy to sell, except he who has_ the 


χάραγμα "ἢ" οτὸ ὄνομα" τοῦ θηρίου, ἢ τὸν ἀριθμὸν τοῦ 


or 


mark or the name οἵ the beast, or the number 
ὀνόματος αὐτοῦ. 18 Ὧδε ἡ σοφία ἐστίν. ὁ ἔχων Prov’ 

“name *of its, Here ?wisdom ‘is. He who has 

νοῦν, Ψψηφισάτω τὸν ἀριθμὸν τοῦ θηρίου" ἀριθμὸς. γὰρ 


understanding let himcount the number ofthe beast: tor “number 


ἀνθρώπου ἐστίν, καὶ ὁ.ἀριθμὸς αὐτοῦ 4 τχξς΄." 
Ja “man’s itis; and its number [153] 666, 
14 Kai "εἶδον," καὶ ἰδού, * ἀρνίον "ἑστηκὸς! ἐπὶ τὸ ὄρος 


And tIsaw, and behold, (the) Lamb standing upon mount 
Σιών, καὶ per αὐτοῦ ἑκατὸν ὑτεσσαράκοντα τέσσαρες" 
Sion, and with him a hundred [and] forty four 


χιλιάδες, ἔχουσαι τὸ ὄνομα" τοῦ-.πατρὸς. αὐτοῦ γεγραμμένον 
thousand, having the name of his Father written 

ἐπὶ τῶν. μετώπων.αὐτῶν. 2 Kai ἤκουσα φωνὴν ἐκ τοῦ οὐ- 
on their foreheads, And tLIheard a voice outof the hea- 
pavov we φωνὴν ὑδάτων πολλῶν, Kai ὡς φωνὴν βροντῆς 


ven as avoice of *waters ‘many, and as avoice of “thunder 
μεγάλης" καὶ Yowryy ἤκουσα! τ" κιθαρῳδῶν κιθαριζόντων ἐν 
great: and a voice 1 heard of harpers harping with 


ταῖς.κιθάραις.αὐτῶν. 3 Kai gdovow “we! δὴν καινὴν ἐνώ- 

their harps. And theysing as a7song ‘new be- 
πιον τοῦ θρόνου, καὶ ἐνώπιον THY τεσσάρων ζώων καὶ 
fore the throne, and _ before the four living creatures and 
τῶν πρεσβυτέρων" Kai οὐδεὶς Ῥ"ἠδύνατο" μαθεῖν τὴν ᾧδήν, 
the elders. And no one was able tolearn the song 


649 


he had power to do 
in the sight of the 
beast ; saying to then: 
that dwell on the 
earth, that ther 
should make an image 
to the beast, which 
had the wound by « 
sword, and did live. 
15 And he had power 
to give life unto the 
image of the beast, 
that the image of the 
beast should both 
speak, and cause that 
as many as would not 
worship the image of 
the beast should be 
killed. 16 And hecaus- 
eth all, bothsmall and 
great, rich and poor, 
tree and bond, to re- 
ceive a mark in their 
right hand, or in their 
foreheads : 17 and 
that no man might 
buy or sell, save he 
that had the mark, or 
the name of the beast, 
or the number of his 
name, 18 Here is wis- 
dom, Let him that 
hath understanding 
count the number of 
the beast : for itis the 
number of a man; 
and his number is Six 
hundred _threescore 
and six. 


XIV. And I looked, 
and, lo, a Lamb stood 
on the mount Sion, 
and with him an hun- 
dred forty and four 
thousand, having his 
Father’s name written 
in their foreheads, 
2 And 1 heard a voice 
from heaven, as the 
voice of many waters, 
and as the voice of a 
great thunder: and 1 
heard the voice of 
harpers harping with 
their harps: 3 and 
they sung as it were 
a new song before the 
throne, and before the 
four beasts, and the 
elders: and no man 
could learn that song 
but the hundred and 


4 ὃς who LTTraw. Ὁ μαχαίρης LTTrA. 
ἃ πνεῦμα δοῦναι w. © + wa that Lrr[a]w. f ἐὰν LTTrA. 
homage T. ἃ τῇ εἰκόνι αὐτὴν. ἰ -- ἵνα (omit that they) Lrrraw. 
give GLTTraw. 170 μέτωπον forehead GLTTraw. πὶ — καὶ LI[A]. 
© τοῦ ὀνόματος οἵ the name L. P—ToyGLTTrAW. 4-4 ἐστὶν is Tr. 
ἕξ six hundred [and] sixty-six La. 5 ἴδον T. 
π τεσσαρακοντατέσσαρες EGW ; τεσσεράκοντα τέσσαρες LTTrA. 
(read his name and the name) GLTTraw. 
[was] GLrtraw. 18. + ws aS GLTTraW. 


® εἰκόναν L. 


aa — ὡς GT[TrA]. 


t+ τὸ the GLTTraw. 


© αὐτῇ (that is, the image) τι. 
ὃ προσκυνήσουσιν Shall do 
* δῶσιν they should 


1 — ἢ GLITraWw. 


τ ἑξακόσιοι ἑξήκοντα 


Υ ἑστὸς LTTYAW. 


; χα + αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ ὄνομα 
) ἡ φωνὴ ἣν ἤκουσα the voice which I heard 
ba ἐδύνατο LTTrA. 


650 


forty and four thou- 
sand, which were re- 
deemed from the earth. 
4 These are they which 
were not defiled with 
women; for they ure 
virgins, These are they 
which follow the Lamb 
whithersoever he go- 
eth. These were re- 
deemed from among 
men, being the first- 
fruits unto God and 
to the Lamb. 5 And 
in their mouth was 
found no guile : for 
they are without fault 
before the throne of 
God. 


6 And Isawanother 
angel fly in the midst 
of heaven, having the 
everlasting gospel. to 
preach unto them that 
dwell on theearth, and 
to every nation, and 
kindred, and tongue, 
and people, 7 saying 
with a loud _ voice, 
Fear God, and give 
glory to him; for the 
hour of his judgment 
is come : and worship 
him that made hea- 
ven, and earth, and 
the sea, and the foun- 
tains of waters. 


8 And there followed 
another angel, saying, 
Babylon is fallen, is 
fallen, that great city, 
because she made all 
nations drink of the 
wine of the wrath of 
her fornication. 


9 And the third angel 
followed them, saying 
with a loud voice, If 
avy man worship the 
beast and his image, 
and receive his mark 
in his forehead, or in 
his hand, 10 the same 
shall drink of the wine 
of the wrath of God, 
which is poured out 
without mixture into 
the cup of his indig- 
nation ; and he shall 
be tormented with fire 
and brimstone in the 
presence of the holy 
angels, and in the pre- 
sence of the Lamb: 


© τεσσαρακοντατέσσαρες EGW ; τεσσεράκοντα τέσσαρες LITrA. 
© ὑπάγει he goes Lira. 

h — ἐνώπιον τοῦ θρόνου Tov θεοῦ GLITraw. 
K + ἐπὶ unto LITraw. 


LTTra. 


GLITraw. 


ἄγγελος a second angel LTrAW ; ἄγ. dev. T. 


πόλις GLTTrAW. 
LITrAW. 
τὸ θηρίον GLTTrAW. 


χα + ἄλλος another GLTTraw. 


ἌΠΟ KA. A ¥ Wak 3: XIV. 


εἰμὴ at ἑκατὸν “τεσσαράκοντα τέσσαρες" χιλιάδες, οἱ 
except the hundred (and) forty four thousand, whe 

ἠγορασμένοι ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς. 4 οὗτοί slow οἱ pera 
have been purchased from the earth. These are they who with 


γυναικῶν οὐκ.ἐμολύνθησαν" παρθένοι.γάρ εἰσιν᾽ οὑτοί Δεἰσιν'" 
women were not defiled, for virgins they are: these are 
ot ἀκολουθοῦντες τῷ apvip ὕπου ἂν *uTayy." οὗτοι 
they who follow the amb wheresoever he may go. These 
ἠγοράσθησαν ἀπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων, ἀπαρχὴ τῷ θεῷ καὶ 
were purchased from among men [88] firstfruits to God and 
τῷ ἀρνίῳ. 5 καὶ ἐν τῷ.στόματι.αὐτῶν οὐχ.εὑρέθη 'δόλος" 


tothe Lamb: and in their mouth was not found guile ; 
adpwporsyao εἰσιν "ἐνώπιον Tov θρόνου τοῦ θεοῦ." 
for blameless they are before the throne of God. 
6 Kai εἶδον ‘addXov' ἄγγελον ἱπετώμενον" ἐν μεσου- 
And I saw another angel flying in mid- 
ρανήματι, ἔχοντα εὐαγγέλιον αἰώνιον εὐαγγελίσαιἜ 


heaven, to announce 


τοὺς 
those who 


having [the] “glad “tidings [00] 
κατοικοῦντας ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, Kai™ πᾶν ἔθνος καὶ φυλὴν 

dwell on the earth, and every nation and tribe 
καὶ γλῶσσαν καὶ λαόν, 7 "Aéyovta' “ἐνὶ φωνῇ μεγάλῳ, 
and tongue and people, saying with a “voice *loud, 
Φοήθητε τὸν θεόν, καὶ δότε αὐτῷ δόξαν, Ore ἦλθεν ἡ ὥρα 


‘everlasting 
1 


Fear God, and give tohim glory, because is come the hour 
THC-Kploewo.avTOU’ καὶ προσκυνήσατε τῷ ποιήσαντι τὸν 
of his judgment ; and do homage to him who made the 


οὐρανὸν καὶ THY γῆν Kai? θάλασσαν καὶ πηγὰς ὑδάτων. 
heaven and the earth and sea and fountains of waters. 
8 Kai ἄλλος “ἄγγελος" ἠκολούθησεν, λέγων, "ἔπεσεν "ἔπε- 
And another angel followed, saying, [5 fallen, is 
σεν "Βαβυλὼν" 4) πόλις ἡ μεγάλη" “ὕτι" ἐκ TOU οἴνου τοῦ 
fallen Babylon 3city ‘the “great, because of the wine of the 
θυμοῦ τῆς.πορνείας.αὐτῆς πεπότικεν πάντα" ἔθνη. 
fury of her fornication she has given *to*drink ‘all “nations, 
9 Καὶ * Yrpirog ἄγγελος" ἠκολούθησεν αὐτοῖς, λέγων ἐν 
And a third angel followed them, saying, with 
φωνῇ μεγάλῳ, Εἴ τις “τὸ θηρίον προσκυνεῖ" Kai τὴν 
a *voice ‘loud, If anyone ‘the ‘beast ‘does “homage “to and 
εἰκόνα αὐτοῦ, καὶ λαμβάνει χάραγμα ἐπὶ τοῦ.μετὠπου.αὐτοῦ, 
“image ‘its, and receives a mark on his forehead 
ἢ ἐπὶ τὴν.χεϊρα.αὐτοῦ, 10 Kai αὐτὸς πίεται ἐκ TOU οἴνου 
or upon his hand, also he shalldrink of the wine 
τοῦ θυμοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ, τοῦ κεκερασμένου ἀκράτου ἐν τῷ 
of the fury of God which is mixed undiluted in the 
ποτηρίῳ τῆς.ὀργῆς.αὐτοῦ, καὶ βασανισθήσεται ἐν πυρὶ καὶ 
cup of his wrath, and heshallbetormented in fire and 
θείῳ, ἐνώπιον "τῶν" Yayiwy ἀγγέλων," καὶ ἐνώπιον τοῦ 
brimstone, before the holy angels, and before the 


ἃ — εἰσιν (read |are}) 
Β — yap for La, 
) πετόμενον GLTTrAW. 


! ψεῦδος falsehood GLTTraw. 
1 [ἄλλον] A. 


! καθημένους Sit GLTTrAW. m + ἐπὶ unto @LTTrAW. Ὁ λέγων 

ο — ἀν (read φωνῇ with a voice) L. P + τὴν the arw. 4 δεύτερος 
τ [ἔπεσεν] A. 5 Βαβουλὼν E, t— ἡ 

ν ἣ which (read wer. has given to drink) Τ᾿  ΑὟὟ. Ὑ + τὰ the 


Y ἄγγελος τρίτος GLTTraw. * προσκυνεῖ 


& — τῶν LTTr. b ἀγγέλων ἁγίων LITr; — ἁγίων A. 


XIV. REVELATION. 

? , ~ ‘ t 2 ‘ x ~ ~ ᾽ ~ c > , 
ἀρνίου" 11 καὶ ὁ καπνὸς τοῦ. βασανισμοῦ. αὐτῶν “ἀναβαίνει 
Lamb. Andthe smoke of their torment goes up 
εἰς αἰῶνας αἰώνων" Kai οὐκ ἔχουσιν ἀνάπαυσιν ἡμέρας Kal 
ἴο ages of ages, and they have no respite day and 


νυκτὸς οἱ προσκυνοῦντες TO θηρίον καὶ τὴν.εἰκόνα. αὐτοῦ, καὶ 
night who do homage to the beast and its image, and 


εἴ τις λαμβάνει τὸ sss a τοῦ.ὀνόματος. αὐτοῦ. 12°Qde 4 
ifanyone receives the mark of its name, Here [*the] 


ὑπομονὴ τῶν ἁγίων ἐστίν᾽ “ὦδε' οἱ τηροῦντες τὰς ἐν- 
“endurance *of the “saints ‘is, here they who keep the command- 


τολὰς τοῦ θεοῦ Kai THY πίστιν ᾿Ιησοῦ. 
mnents of God and the faith of Jesus. 


13 Kai ἤκουσα φωνῆς ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, λεγούσης ἵμοι," 
And ILheard avoice outof the rag saying to me, 


Γράψον, Μακάριοι οἱ νεκροὶ ot ἐν iw ἀποθγή Ππευητες 
ρ ’ p 
Write, Blessed the dead who in bene ee 


βἀπάρτι." Nai, λέγει τὸ πνεῦμα, wa bi crpiniciert ἐκ 
from henceforth. Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from 


τῶν. κόπων αὐτῶν" τὰ ‘dé! ἔργα αὐτῶν ἀκολουθεῖ μετ᾽ αὐτῶν. 
their labours ; and *works ‘their follow with them. 


14 Kai ξεῖδον," καὶ ἰδού, νεφέλη λευκή; καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν νεφέλην 


And Isaw, and se sites a*cloud ‘white, and upon the cloud 
ἰκαθήμενος Sporoc' "vig' ἀνθρώπου, ἔχων ἐπὶ "τῆς 
Cone] sitting like [the] Son of ry having on 
κεφαλῆς" αὐτοῦ στέφανον χρυσοῦν, καὶ ἐν τῇ.χειρὶ αὐτοῦ δρέ- 
*head this a *crown ‘golden, and in his hand a 
πανον ὀξύ. 15 καὶ ἄλλος ἄγγελος ἐξῆλθεν ἐκ τοῦ ναοῦ, 
4sickle ‘sharp. And another angel came out of the temple, 


κράζων ἐν “μεγάλῳ φωνῇ" τῷ καθημένῳ ἐπὶ τῆς νεφέλης, 
crying with loud voice to him sitting on the cloud, 


Πέμψον τὸ.δρέπανόν.σου, καὶ θέρισον, Ore ἦλθέν Poor ἡ 
Send thy sickle and Rt because iscome tothee the 


ὥρα Irov' θερίσαι, ὅτι ἐξηράνθη ὁ ὁ θερισμὸς τῆς γῆς. 16 Καὶ 


hour toreap, because is dried the harvest of the earth. And 


ἔβαλεν ὁ καθήμενος ἐπὶ τὴν νεφέλην" τὸ δρέπανον.αὐτοῦ 
“put 7forth the ?sitting “upon *the “cloud his sickle 
ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν, Kai ἐθερίσθη ἡ γῆ. 
upon the earth, and was reaped the earth. 
17 Kai ἄλλος ἄγγελος ἐξῆλθεν ἐκ TOU ναοῦ τοῦ ἐν τῷ 
And another angel came outof the temple which [is] in the 
οὐρανῷ, ἔχων Kai αὐτὸς δρέπανον ὀξύ. 18 καὶ ἄλλος ay- 
heaven, “having ?also ‘*he a*sickle ‘sharp. And another an- 
γελος SeEnAGev'! ἐκ τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου, ᾿ ἔχων ἐξουσίαν ἐπὶ τοῦ 
gel came out of the altar, having authority over 


πυρός, Kal ἐφώνησεν ἡ κραυγῷ᾽ μεγάλῳ τῷ ἔχοντι τὸ δρέπανον 
ἔπε and hecalled witha“cry ‘loud tohim heres “sickle 


τὸ ὀξύ, λέγων, Πέμψον cov τὸ δρέπανον τὸ ὀξύ, καὶ τρύγη- 

*the *sharp, saying, Send thy *sickle ‘sharp, and gather 

cov τοὺς βότρυας“ τῆς γῆς, ὅτι ἤκμασαν αἱ σταφυλαὶ 
the bunches of the earth; because are fully ripe *grapes 


651 


11 and the smoke of 
their torment ascend- 
eth up for ever and 
ever: and they have 
no rest day nor night, 
who worship the beast 
and his image, and 
whosoever receiveth 
the mark of his name, 
12 Here is the patience 
of the saints : hereare 
they that keep the 
commandments or 
God, «nd the faith οὗ 
Jesus. 


13 And 1 neard a 
vuice from heaven 
saying unto me, Write, 
Blessed are the dead 
which die in the Lord 
from henceforth: Yea, 
saith the Spirit, that 
they may rest from 
their labours; and 
their works do follow 
them. 


14 And I looked, 
und behold a white 
cloud, and upon the 
cloud’ one gat like 
unto the Son of man, 
haying on his head a 
golden crown, and in 
his hand a sharp sic- 
kle. 15 And another 
angel came out of the 
temple, crying with a 
loud voice to him that 
sat on the cloud, 
Thrust in thy sickle, 
and reap: for the time 
ts come for thee to 
reap ; for the harvest 
of the earth is ripe. 
16 And he that sat 
on the cloud thrust in 
his sickle on theearth; 
and the earth was 
reaped. 


17 And another an- 
gel came out of the 
temple which is in 
heaven, he also hay- 
ing a sharp sickle. 
18 And another ange! 
came out from the al- 
tar, which had power 
over fire; and cried 
with a loudery to him 
that had the sharp 
sickle, saying, Thrust 
in thy sharp sickle, 
and gather the clusters 
of the vine of the 
earth ; for her grapes 


ς εἰς αἰῶνας αἰώνων ἀναβαίνει GLTTrAW. d+ ἡ the LTTraw. 


— POLGLTTrAW. ὃ ἀπ᾽ ἄρτι GLa. 


e — ὧδε GLTTrAW. 


a EE OER they shall rest LTTra ; ἀναπαύσονται 


P — σοι GLTTrAw. 


they shall rest w. i yap for LTTra. k ἴδον 1. ! καθήμενον ὅμοιον GLTTraW. 
™ υἱὸν T. 2 τὴν κεφαλὴν LT. ο φωνῇ μεγάλῃ GLTTrAW. 

4 — τοῦ LTTrAW. τ τῆς νεφέλης LTTrA. " — ἐξῆλθεν L. * + ὁ who (read ἔχωι 
has) LAW. τ φωνῇ With ἃ *voice Ltr. * + τῆς ἀμπέλου of the vine EGLTTrAW 


652 


are fully ripe. 19 And 
the angel thrust in 
his sickle into the 
earth, and gathered 
the vine of the earth, 
and cast it into the 
great winepress of 
the wrath of God. 
20 And the winepress 
was trodden without 
the city, and blood 
came out of the wine- 
press, even unto the 
horse bridles, by the 
space of a thousand 
and six hundred fur- 
longs. 

XV. And I saw an- 
other sign in heaven, 
great and marvellous, 
seven angels having 
the seven iast plagues; ἃ 
for in them is filled up 
the wrath of God. 


2 And I saw as it 
were a sea of glass 
mingled with fire: 
and them that had 
gotten the victory over 
the beast, and over his 
image, and over his 
mark, and over the 
number of his name, 
stand on the sea of 
glass, having the harps 
of God. 3 And they 
sing the song of Mo- 
sea the servant of God, 
and the song of the 
Lamb, saying, Great 
and marvellous are 
thy works, Lord God 
Almighty; just and 
true are thy ways, 
thou King of saints. 
4 Who shall not fear 
thee, Ὁ Lord, and 
glorify thy name? for 
thou only art holy : for 
all nations shall come 
and worship before 
thee; for thy judg- 
ments are made mani- 
fest. 


5 And after that I 
looked, and, behold. 
the temple of the ta- 
bernacle of the testi- 
mony in heayen was 
opened: 6 and the se- 
yen angels came out 
of the temple, having 
the seven plagues, 
clothed in pure and 
white linen, and hay- 
ing their breasts gird- 
ed with golden gird- 
les. 7 And one of the 


ATLOKAAY WIZ. XIV, XV. 


19 Kai ἔβαλεν ὁ ἄγγελος τὸ δρεπανον.αὐτοῦ εἰς 
And *put‘*forth 'the “angel his sickle to 


THY γῆν; Kai ἐτρύγησεν THY ἄμπελον τῆς γῆς, καὶ ἔβαλεν 

the earth, and gathered the vine oftheearth, and cast [the fruit} 

εἰς τὴν ληνὸν τοῦ θυμοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ "τὴν μεγάλην." 20 Kai 

into ’winepress *of *the “ΠΥ 7of °God ‘the “great ; and 
> ’ θ «ε λ 4 yee ΙΪ ~ 5A. ‘ ? HAP. ca 
ematnOn ἢ Anvog Yesw' τῆς πόλεως, καὶ ἐξῆλθεν αἷμα 

was trodden the winepress outside the city, and came “forth ‘blood 
ἐκ τῆς ληνοῦ ἄχρι τῶν χαλινῶν τῶν ἵππων, ἀπὸ 

out of the winepress as far as the bits of the horses, to the distance of 


σταδίων χιλίων ἑξακοσίων. 
®furlongs ‘a “ὑποιβαπᾶ “six *hundred. 


15 Kai "εἶδον" ἄλλο σημεῖον ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ μέγα καὶ θαυ- 


And I ρα another sign in the heaven, grea and won- 
ees ἀγγέλους ἑπτά, ἔχοντας πληγὰς ἑπτὰ τὰς ἐσχάτας, 


αὐτῆς. 
ther. 


5 pengels seven, Hains “plagues ‘seven, the last ; 
ὅτι ἐν αὐταῖς ἐτελέσθη ὁ θυμὸς τοῦ θεοῦ. 
because in them wascompleted the fury of God. 
2 Kai *eidov' we θάλασσαν ὑαλίνην μεμιγμένην πυρί, 
And I saw as a *sea 1elass mingled with fire, 
καὶ τοὺς νικῶντας ἐκ τοῦ θηρίου Kai ἐκ τῆς.εἰκόνος. αὐτοῦ 
and the overcomers of the beast, and of its image, 
καὶ Ῥὲκ rov-yapayparoc.avrov,' ἐκ Tov ἀριθμοῦ τοῦ ὀνόματος 
and of its mark, of the number *name 
αὐτοῦ, ἑστῶτας ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν τὴν ὑαλίνην, ἔχοντας 
ofits, standing upon the sea glass, having 
κιθάρας τοῦ θεοῦ. 8 Kai gdovow τὴν wory “Μωσέως! 4 dov- 
harps of God. And they sing the song of Moses, bond- 


λου τοῦ θεοῦ, Kai τὴν Woy τοῦ ἀρνίου, λέγοντες, Μεγάλα καὶ 
man of God, and the song ofthe Lamb, saying, Great and 
θαυμαστὰ τὰ ἔργα.σου, κύριε ὁ θεὸς ὁ παντοκράτωρ᾽ δί- 
wonderful [are] thy works, Lord God Almighty ; right- 
καιαι Kai ἀληθιναὶ αἱιὁδοίισουη, ὁ βασιλεὺς THY ἁγίων." 
eous and true Had thy UATE, [thou] King of saints, 
4 τίς ov “μὴ φοβηθῇ foe," κύριε, καὶ ἐδοξάσῃ' τὸ.ὄνομά.σου; 
Who 2not ‘should fear tee! OlLord, and_ glorify thy name ? 


OTL όνος ὕσιος᾽ ὅτι πάντα τὰ ἔθνη ἥξουσιν καὶ 
for [thou] only [art] holy; for all the nations shallcome and 
προσκυνήσουσιν ἐνώπιόν σου OTe τὰ.δικαιώματά.σου 
do homage before thee; for thy righteous {acts] 
> , (lit. righteousnesses) 
ἐφανερώθησαν. 
were manifested, 
ὃ Kai pera ταῦτα *eidov," καὶ dod," ἠνοίγη ὁ ναὸς 
And after thesethings Isaw, and behold, was rene the temple 


τῆς σκηνῆς τοῦ μαρτυρίου ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ 6 καὶ ἐξῆλθον οἱ 


of the tabernacle of the testimony in the heaven; and came forth the 
ἑπτὰ ἄγγελοι ἔχοντες τὰς ἑπτὰ πληγάς, ἐκ τοῦ ναοῦ, 
seven angels “having ‘the “seven “plagues ‘out 7of *the *temple, 


ἐνδεδυμένοι "λίνον" καθαρὸν ἰκαὶ" λαμπρόν, καὶ περιεζωσμένοι 
clothed in linen pure and bright, and girt with 


περὶ τὰ στήθη ζώνας χρυσᾶς. 7 καὶ ἕν ἐκ τῶν τεσσάρων 
3about *the °breasts “girdles ‘golden. And one of the four 


x τὸν μέγαν GLTTrAW. 


αὐτοῦ GLTTrAW. 
GLITraAw. 


f — ge LTTrA. 
1+ ot those GLTTr[a]w. 


Ὁ — ἐκ τοῦ χαράγματος 
ε ἐθνῶν of nations 
h — ἰδού GLTTrAW. 


Υ ἔξωθεν GLTTrAW. 2 ἴδον T. 
ς Μωυσέως GLTTrAW. d + τοῦ the LTTrA. 
8 δοξάσει shall glorify LTTraw. 
k λίθον stone Lr. 1 — καὶ GLTTrAw. 


REVELATION. 


ζώων ἔδωκεν τοῖς ἑπτὰ ἀγγέλοις ἑπτὰ φιάλας χρυσᾶς, 
living creatures gave tothe seven angels seven “bowls ‘golden, 


γεμούσας τοῦ θυμοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ ζῶντος εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας 


XV, XVI. 


full ofthe fury of God, who lives to the ages 
τῶν αἰώνων. 8 Kai ἐγεμίσθη ὁ ναὸς καπνοῦ ἐκ τῆς δόξης 
of the ages. And *was *filled *the *temple with smoke from the glory 


τοῦ θεοῦ, Kai ἐκ τῆς.δυνάμεως.αὐτοῦ" Kai οὐδεὶς πιἠδύνατο" 
of God, and from his power : and noone was able 
? ~ >’ A , » ~ € ε \ ‘ ~ 
εἰσελθεῖν εἰς τὸν ναόν, ἄχρι τελεσθῶσιν αἱ ἑπτὰ πληγαὶ THY 
toenter into the temple until were completed the seven plagues of the 
ἑπτὰ ἀγγέλων. 
seven angels, 
16 Kai ἤκουσα "φωνῆς μεγάλης" ἐκ τοῦ ναοῦ, λεγούσης 
And Iheard a *voice loud out of the temple, saying 
~ ε 4 ? , « ’ ‘02 , I 3 p aN ~ 
τοῖς ἑπτὰ ἀγγέλοις, Ὕπαγετε, καὶ “ἐκχέατε' τὰς Ῥ φιάλας τοῦ 
to the seven angels, Go, and pourout the bowls of the 
θυμοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ εἰς τὴν γῆν. 
fury of God into the earth. 
2 Kai ἀπῆλθεν ὁ πρῶτος, Kai ἐξέχεεν τὴν. φιάλην. αὐτοῦ 
And ‘departed "the “first, and poured out his bowl 
ἐπὶ" τὴν γῆν" καὶ ἐγένετο ἕλκος κακὸν Kai πονηρὸν τείς" τοὺς 
onto the earth;und came asore, evil and grievous, upon the 
ἀνθρώπους τοὺς ἔχοντας τὸ χάραγμα τοῦ θηρίου, Kai τοὺς 
men who had the mark ofthe beast, and _ those 
"τῇ. εἰκόνι. αὐτοῦ προσκυνοῦντας." 
“to *his δίτηδρβ 1doing 7homage. 
3 Kai ὁ δεύτερος ᾿ἄγγελος" ἐξέχεεν τὴν. φιάλην αὐτοῦ εἰς 
And ῃ 6 second angel poured out his bowl into 
τὴν θάλασσαν" Kai ἐγένετο αἷμα ὡς νεκροῦ, Kai πᾶσα ψυχὴ 


the sea; and it became blood, as of [one]dead; and every soul 
Υ ΖΔ) ll fare w 2 7 4 
ζῶσα" aréOavey™ ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ. 
living died in the sea. 
4 Kai ὁ τρίτος “ἄγγελος! ἐξέχεεν τὴν.φιάλην αὐτοῦ εἰς 
And the third angel poured out his bowl into 


τοὺς ποταμοὺς Kai Yeic! τὰς πηγὰς τῶν ὑδάτων" Kai *eyévETO' 


the rivers, and into the fountains of waters ; and they became 
αἷμα. ὃ καὶ ἤκουσα τοῦ ἀγγέλου τῶν ὑδάτων λέγοντος, 
blood. And lLIheard the angel of the waters saying, 
Δίκαιος, *ktoue," ef, ὁ ὧν καὶ ὁ ἦν "Kai ὁ! ὕσιος, ὅτι 
Righteous, Ο Lord, artthou, whoart andwhowast and the holy one, that 
ταῦτα ἔκρινας. 6. ὅτι “αἷμα! ἁγίων καὶ προ- 
these things thou didst judge ; because {the] blood ofsaints and of pro- 
φητῶν ἐξέχεαν, καὶ αἷμα αὐτοῖς “ἔδωκας. “πιεῖν"" ἄξιοι 
phets they poured ουὖ, and blood to them thou didst give to drink ; worthy 


γάρ" εἰσιν. 7 Kai ἤκουσα ξἄλλου ἐκ' τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου λέ- 
for they are. And Iheard another outof the altar say- 
jovroc, Nai, κύριε ὁ θεὸς ὁ παντοκράτωρ, ἀληθιναὶ Kai δίκαιαι 
ing, Yea, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous 
αἱ. κρίσεις. σου. 
[8161] thy judgments. a 

8 Kai ὁ τέταρτος "ἄγγελος" ἐξέχεεν THv-piadnv.abrov ἐπὶ 
Andthe fourth angel poured out his bowl upon 

m ἐδύνατο LTTrA. 2 μεγάλης φωνῆς LTAW. © ἐκχέετε LTA. 


GLTTraw. 4 εἰς into LITraw. τ ἐπὶ ὍΡΟΙ LTTrAw. 
GLTTrAW. *—ayyeAosLTTrAW. Ὑ ζωῆς (read soul of life) Girrra. 
LTTrAW. *— @yyeAosGLTTrAW. Y—eisLTTraA. Ἢ ἐγένοντο L. 


b — καὶ GT; — καὶ ὁ (read ὅσιος holy) Ltraw. ς αἵματα bloods τ. 


given LTraw. © wiv L3 πεῖν ΤΑ. f — γάρ GLTTraw. 


653 
four beasts gave unto 
the seven angelsseven 
golden vials full of the 
wrath of God, who 
liveth for ever and 
ever. 8 And the tem- 
ple was filled with 
smoke from the glory 
of God, and from nis 
power; and no man 
was able to enter into 
the temple, till the se- 
ven plagues of the se- 


ven angels were ful- 
filled. 


XVI. And [heard a 
great voice out of the 
temple saying to the 
seven angels, Go your 
ways, and pour out the 
vials of the wrath of 
God upon the earth. 


2 And the first went, 
and poured out his 
vial upon the earth ; 
and there fell a noi- 
some and grievous 
sore upon the men 
which had the mark of 
the beast, and upon 
them which worship- 
ped his image. 


3 And the second 
angel poured out his 
vial upon the sea ; and 
it became as theblood 
of a dead man: and 
every living soul died 
in the sea. 


4 And the third an- 
gel poured out his vial 
upon the rivers and 
fountains of waters ; 
and they became 
blood. 5 And I heard 
the angel of the waters 
say, Thou art right- 
eous, O Lord, which 
art, and wast, and 
shalt be, because thou 
hast judged thus. 6 For 
they have shed the 
blood of saints and 
prophets, and thou 
hast given them blood 
to drink ; forthey are 
worthy. 7AndI heard 
another out of the al- 
tar say, Even so, Lord 
God Almighty, true 
and righteous are thy 
judgments. 


8 And the fourth 
angel poured out his 


P + ἑπτὰ seven 


53 προσκυνοῦντας TH εἰκόνι αὐτοῦ 


w 4 τὰ the [things] 


8 — κύριε GLTTrAW. 
ἃ δέδωκας thou hast 


8 — ἄλλον ἐκ GLTTrAW. 


654 

vial upon the sun ; 
and power was given 
uuto him to scorch 
men with fire. 9 And 
men were scorched 
with great heat, and 


blasphemed the name 
of God, which hath 


power over these 
plagues: and _ they 
repented not to give 
him glory. 


10 And the fifth an- 
gel poured out his 
vial upon the seat of 
the beast; and his 
kingdom was full of 
darkness; and they 
gnawed their tongues 
for pain, 11 and blas- 
phemed the God of 
heaven because of 
their pains and their 
sores, and repented 
not of their deeds, 


12 And the sixth an- 
gel poured out his 
vial upon the great 
river Euphrates ; and 
the water thereof was 
dried up, that the way 
of the kings of the 
east might be prepar- 
ed. 13 And I sawthree 
unclean spirits like 
frogs come out of the 
mouth of the dragon, 
and out of the mouth 
of the beast, and out 
of the mouth of the 
false prophet. 14 For 
they are the spirits of 
devils, working mi- 
racles, which go forth 
unto the kings of the 
earth and of the 
whole world, to ga- 
ther them to the bat- 
tle of that great day 
of God Almighty. 
15 Behold, I come as 
a thief. Blessed ts he 
that watcheth, and 
keepeth his garments, 
lest he walk naked, 
and they see his 
shame. 16 And he ga- 
thered them together 
into a place called in 
the Hebrew tongue 
Armageddon, 


17 And the seventh 
angel poured out his 


bh + τὴν LTTrw. 
πὶ ἀνατολῆς TTrA. 


ANLOKAAYWIS. ΧΨΙΗΣ 
4 eo A ? , ’ ~ , ‘ . , ? 
τὸν ἥλιον" καὶ ἐδόθη αὐτῷ Kavparioa τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἐν 
the sun; and it was given to it to scorch men with 
πυρί" 9 καὶ ἐκαυματίσθησαν οἱ ἄνθρωποι καῦμα μέγα, Kai 
fire, And were 4scorched 1men with *heat ‘great, and 
? ΄ 4 μὲ ~ ~ ~ WH h ’ , ᾿ ‘ 
ἐβλασφήμησαν τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ.ἔχοντος ἢ ἐξουσίαν ἐπὶ 
they blasphemed the name of God, who has authority over 
τὰς. πληγὰς ταὕὔτας, Kai οὐ.μετενόησαν δοῦναι αὐτῷ δόξαν. 
these plagues, and did not repent togive him glory. 
10 Kai ὁ πέμπτος ᾿ἄγγελος" ἐξέχεεν τὴν. φιάλην.αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ 
And the fifth angel poured out his bowl upon 
τὸν θρόνον τοῦ θηρίου" Kai ἐγένετο ἡ. βασιλεία.αὐτοῦ ἐσκοτω- 
the throne ofthe beast; and *became tits *kingdom dark- 
μένη" καὶ Ἐἐμασσῶντο! τὰς. γλώσσας. αὐτῶν ἐκ τοῦ πόνου, 
ened; and they were gnawing their tongues for the distress, 


11 καὶ ἐβλασφήμησαν τὸν θεὸν τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἐκ τῶν πόνων 
and blasphemed the God ofthe heaven for *distresses 


αὐτῶν καὶ ἐκ τῶν.ἑλκῶν. αὐτῶν, Kai ov.perevdnoay ἐκ THY 


‘their and for their sores, and did not repent of 
ἔργων αὐτῶν. 
works "their. 
12 Kai ὁ ἕκτος ᾿ἰἄγγελος" ἐξέχεεν τὴν.φιάλην αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τὸν 
And the sixth angel poured out his bowl upon the 
ποταμὸν τὸν μέγαν ἱτὸν" Εὐφράτην" καὶ ἐξηράνθη τὸ ὕδωρ 
"river great, the Euphrates; and was dried up 2watel 
αὐτοῦ, ἵνα ἑτοιμασθῇ ἡ ὁδὸς τῶν βασιλέων τῶν ἀπὸ 
tits, that might be prepared the way of the kings *the ‘from 
™ayvatodka@y' ἡλίου. 18 Kai "sidov' ἐκ τοῦ στόματος τοῦ 
rising of [the] sun. And Isaw outof the mouth of the 


δράκοντος, Kai ἐκ τοῦ στόματος τοῦ θηρίου, Kai ἐκ τοῦ 
dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the 
στόματος τοῦ ψευδοπροφήτου, πνεύματα τρία ἀκάθαρτα 
mouth of the false prophet, ’spirits three 7unclean 
οὕμοια Parpayorc'! 14 εἰσὶν.γὰρ πνεύματα Ῥδαιμόνων" ποι- 
like frogs ; for they are spirits of demons do- 
οὔντα Ionpeia ἐκπορεύεσθαι" ἐπὶ τοὺς βασιλεῖς ᾿τῆς γῆς καὶ" 
ing signs, to go forth to the kings of the earth and 
τῆς οἰκουμένης ὕλης, συναγαγεῖν αὐτοὺς εἰς " πόλεμον 
ofthe “habitable [*world] 'whole to gather together them unto battle 
τῆς ᾿ἡμέρας ἐκείνης τῆς μεγάλης" τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ παντοκράτορος. 
of “day ‘that “great of God the Almighty. 
15 ᾿Ιδού, ἔρχομαι we κλέπτης. μακάριος ὁ γρηγορῶν, 
Behold, Icome 88 a thief. Blessed [18] he that watches, 
καὶ τηρῶν τὰ ἱμάτια αὐτοῦ, ἵνα μὴ γυμνὸς περιπατῇ, Kai 


and keeps his garments, that not naked he may walk, and 
βλέπωσιν τὴν.ἀσχημοσύνην.αὐτοῦ. 16 Kai συνήγαγεν 
they see his shame, And he gathered together 
αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸν τόπον τὸν καλούμενον ᾿Ἑβραϊστὶ Τ᾿Αρμα- 
them to the place which is called in Hebrew Arma- 
γεδδών." 
geddon. Ἀ 
17 Καὶ ὁ ἕβδομος “ἄγγελος" ἐξέχεεν τὴν.φιάλην.αὐτοῦ 
And the seventh angel poured out his bowl 


1 — τὸν @v[Tr]. 


i — ἄγγελος GLTTraW. k ἐμασῶντο LTTrAW. 
P δαιμονίων GLTTrAW. 


n ἴδον Ὑ. ο ὡς (as) βάτραχοι GLTTrAW. 


ἢ σημεῖα ἃ ἐκπορεύεται Signs Which go forth EGTTrAW; σημεῖα' ἐκπορεύεται Signs: they go 


forth L. 


ἡμέρας τῆς μεγάλης ΤΊΝΑ. 


τ — τῆς γῆς καὶ GLTTrAwW. 


5. + τὸν the ΟἸΤΤΓΑΎ,. t μεγάλης ἡμέρας 1, ; 


Vv “Αρμαγεδών GLITrAW. ¥ — ἄγγελος GLTTrAW. 


ΧΦΗΡΈΧΥΤΙ. REVELATION. 


χε οἱ roy ἀέρα" καὶ ἐξῆλθεν φωνὴ Υμεγάλη" τἀπὸ" τοῦ ναοῦ 


into the air; and cameout a ?voice ‘loud from the temple 
*rov οὐρανοῦ," ἀπὸ τοῦ θρόνου, λέγουσα, Γέγονεν. 18 Καὶ 
of the heaven, from the _ throne, saying, It is done. And 


ἐγένοντο φωναὶ καὶ βρονταὶ καὶ ἀστραπαί," καὶ σεισμὸς 
there were voices and thunders and τ αταιΒΡεῚ ; and scanthanake 


ἐγένετο μέγας, οἷος οὐκ. ἐγένετο ἀφ᾽ οὗ “οἱ ἄνθρωποι ἐγέ- 
‘there re *a “great, such as was not since men 


vovro' ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, τηλικοῦτος σεισμὸς οὕτως μέγας. 19 Kai 
were on the earth somighty an Se ied 80 great. And 


ἐγένετο ἡ πόλις ἡ μεγάλη εἰς τρία μέρη, καὶ αἱ πόλεις τῶν 
*became 'the “city great into three parts; and the cities ofthe 


ἐθνῶν “ἔπεσον"" καὶ Βαβυλὼν ἡ μεγάλη ἐμνήσθη ἐνώπιον 
nations fell; and Babylon the great wasremembered before 


τοῦ θεοῦ, δοῦναι αὐτῇ τὸ ποτήριον τοῦ οἴνου τοῦ θυμοῦ τῆς 
God, togive her the cup ofthe wine ofthe fury 


ὀργῆς αὐτοῦ. 20 καὶ πᾶσα νῆσος ἔφυγεν, καὶ ὄρη 
Swrath ‘of *his. And every island fled ; and ?mountains 


εὑρέθησαν. 21 καὶ χάλαζα μεγάλη ὡς. ταλαντιαία καταβαίνει 
were found ; and a hail ‘great asofatalent weight comes down 


ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἐπὶ Tove ἀνθρώπους" Kai ἐβλασφήμησαν οἱ 
outof the heaven upon men ; and ἘΡΙΒΕΡΕΟΙΠΘα 


ἄνθρωποι τὸν θεόν, ἐκ τῆς πληγῆς τῆς χαλάζης" ὅτι με- 
men God, becauseofthe plague of the hail, for 


yon ἐ ἐστὶν ἡ πληγὴ. αὐτῆς σφόδρα. 
greut is *its *plague ‘exceeding. 


17 Kai ἦλθεν εἷς ἐκ τῶν ἑπτὰ ἀγγέλων τῶν ἐχόντων τὰς 


οὐχ 


‘no 


And came one of the seven angels ofthose having the 
ἑπτὰ φιάλας, καὶ ἐλάλησεν μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ, λέγων ὅμοι," Δεῦρο, 
seven bowls, and spoke with me, saying tome; Come here, 


δείξω σοι TO κρίμα τῆς πόρνης τῆς μεγάλης, τῆς καθη- 
Iwillshew thee the sentence of the *harlot great, who sits 
μένης ἐπὶ frév" ὑδάτων frév' πολλῶν" 2 pel ἧς ἐπόρνευ- 
upon the 7?waters many ; with whom *committed 7for- 
σαν οἱ βασιλεῖς τῆς γῆς, Kai ἐμεθύσθησαν Fix τοῦ οἴνου 
nication 'the ?kings “οὗ *the °earth; and were made drunk with the wine 
τῆς.πορνείας. αὐτῆς οἱ κατοικοῦντες τὴν γῆν." 3 Kai 
of her fornication those that dwell on the earth. And 


ἀπήνεγκέν με εἰς ἔρημον ἐν πνεύματι᾽ καὶ *eldov' γυναῖκα 
he carried away me “ἴο 58 °wilderness *in ene “Spirit; and Isaw a woman 


καθημένην ἐπὶ On nptov κόκκινον, ὌΡΟΣ ὀνομάτων" βλασφημίας, 
sitting upon a*beast ‘scarlet, of names of blasphemy, 
κἔχον" κεφαλὰς ἑπτὰ καὶ κέρατα sae 4 καὶ ἡ γυνὴ ἰὴ!" 
having heads ‘seven and horns’ ‘ten, And the woman 
περιβεβλημένη “πορφύρᾳ! καὶ "κοκκίνῳ," οκαὶ! κεχρυσωμένη 
clothed in purple and scarlet, and decked 
(lit. gilded) 
Ρχρυσῷ" Kai λίθῳ τιμίῳ καὶ μαργαρίταις, ἜΠΟΣ, “χρυσοῦν 


with gold and *stone’ precious and pearls, having a golden 


ποτήριον" ἐν τῇ.χειρὶ αὐτῆς, pious βδελυγμάτων καὶ “ἀκωθ- 
cup in her hand, of abominations and of unclean- 


655 
vial into the air; and 
there came a great 


voice out of the 
temple of heaven, 
from the throne, 
saying, It is done. 
18 And there were 


voices, and thunders, 
and lightnings; «nd 
there was ἃ great 
earthquake, such as 
was not since men 
were upon the earth, 
so mighty an earth- 
quel and so great. 

19 And the great city 
was divided into three 
parts, and thecities of 
the nations fell: and 
great Babylon came 
in remembrance be- 
fore God, to give unto 
her the cup of the wine 
of the fierceness of his 
wrath. 20 And every 
island fled away, and 
the mountains were 
not found. 21 And 
there fellupon mena 
great hail out of hea- 
ven, every stone about 
the weight of a talent: 
and men blasphemed 
God because of the 
plague of the hail; 
tor the plague thereof 
was exceeding great. 


XVII. And there 
came one of the seven 
angels which had the 
seven vials, and talked 
with me, saying unto 
me, Come hither; I 
will shewunto thee the 
judgment of the great 
whore that sitteth 
upon many waters: 
2 with whom the kings 
of theearth have com- 
mitted fornication, 
and the inhabitants 
of the earth have been 
made drunk with the 
wine of her fornica- 
tion. 3So he carried 
me away in the spirit 
into the wilderness: 
and I saw a woman 
sit upon 8. scarlet 
coloured beast, full of 
names of blasphemy, 
having seven heads 
and ten horns. 4 And 
the woman was array- 
edin purple and scar- 
let colour, and decked 
with gold and pre- 
cious stones and 
pearls, having a gold- 
en cup in her handfull 
of abominations and 


τ ἐπὶ upon GLTTrAW. Υ — μεγάλη LA. z ἐκ out of LTTra. 
p LOY 


— τοῦ οὐρανοῦ 


LTTraAW. b ἀστραπαὶ καὶ φωναὶ eke βρονταί GLTTraWw. ς ope ἐγένετο Man was 
LITraw dé ἔπεσαν LTTrAW. — μοι GLTTraw. f τῶν Lorr[ A]. & οἱ κατοι- 
κοῦντες τὴν γῆν ἐκ τοῦ οἴνου τῆς πορνείας αὐτῆς GLTTraw.  eida L. i γέμοντα ὀνόματα 
LTA; γέμον τὰ (-- τα W) ὀνόματα Trw. k ἔχοντα TA. 1 ἣν was GLTTraw.  Trop- 


φυροῦν GLTTraw. 
ριον χρυσοῦν LTTraW. 


π κόκκινον GLTTrAW. 
τ γέμων Τ. 


ο [καὶ] A. 


Ρ χρυσίῳ GLAW. 
5 τὰ ἀκάθαρτα τῆς the unclean things GLTTrAW. 


4 ποτὴ- 


656 


filthiness of her forni- 
cation: 5 and upon 
her forehead was a 
name written, MYS- 
TERY, BABYLON 
THE GREAT, THE 
MOTHER OF HAR- 
LOTS AND ABOMI- 
NATIONS OF THE 
EARTH. 6 AndI saw 
the woman drunken 
with the blood of the 
saints, and with the 
blood of the mar- 
tyrs of Jesus: and 
when I saw her, 1 
wondered with great 
admiration. 7 And the 
angel said unto me, 
Wherefore didst thou 
marvel? I will tell 
thee the mystery of 
the woman, and of the 
beast that carrieth 
her, which hath the 
seven heads and ten 
horns. 8 The beast 
that thou sawest was, 
and is not ; and shall 
ascend out of the bot- 
tomless pit, and go 
into perdition: and 
they that dwell on the 
earth shall wonder, 
whose names were 
not written in the 
book of life from the 
foundation of the 
world, when they be- 
hold the beast that 
was, and is not, and 
yet is. 9 And here is 
the mind which hath 
wisdom. ‘The seven 
heads are seven moun- 
tains, on which the 
woman sitteth. 10 And 
there are seven kings: 
five are fallen, and 
one is, and the other 
is not yet come; and 
when he cometh, he 
must continue a short 
space. 11] And the 
beast that was, and is 
not, even he is the 
eighth, and is of the 
seven, and goeth into 
perdition. 12° And the 
ten horns which thou 
sawest are ten kings, 
which have received 
no kingdom as yet; 
but receive power as 
kings one hour with 
the beast. 13 These 
have one mind, and 
shall give their power 
and strength unto the 
beast. 14 These shall 


τ εἶδα LTTrA. 
goes LAW. 


was) GLTTraw. 

8 — καὶ GLTTrAW. 
m — τὴν LTrA. 
GLTTrawWw. 


v Διὰ τί LTrA. 
2 θαυμασθήσονται L. 
(vead the name is not written) LYrTra. 
© καὶ παρέσται and shall be present GLTTrAw. 


ATIOKAAY WIS. 


πορνείας αὐτῆς, 
of her fornication ; 


XVII. 
5 καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ.μέτωπον. αὐτῆς 
and upon her forehead 


ὄνομα γεγραμμένον, Μυστήριον, Βαβυλὼν ἡ μεγάλη, ἡ 
a name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the 


μήτηρ τῶν πορνῶν Kai τῶν βδελυγμάτων τῆς γῆς. 6 Kai 
mother ofthe harlots and ofthe abominations of the earth. And 


‘eldov' τὴν γυναῖκα μεθύουσαν ἐκ τοῦ αἵματος THY ἁγίων, καὶ 
Isaw the woman drunk with the blood ofthe saints, and 


3 - “ ~ , ᾽ ~ ΓΝ Ὁ 2 ᾽ ‘ 
ἐκ TOU αἵματος τῶν μαρτύρων ᾿Ιησοῦ" Kai ἐθαύμασα, ἰδὼν 


ἀρτητος" 
ness 


withthe blood ofthe witnesses of Jesus. And I wondered, having seen 
᾽ ’ ~ , ‘ - , « » v All 

αὐτήν, θαῦμα μέγα. 7 Kai εἶπεν μοι ὁ ἄγγελος, “Διατί 
her, with *wonder great. And said *to*me'the angel, Why 


ἐθαύμασας; ἐγώ “oor ἐρῶ" τὸ μυστήριον τῆς γυναικός, 
didst thou wonder ? 1 thee will tell the mystery ofthe woman, 


kat τοῦ θηρίου τοῦ βαστάζοντος αὐτήν, Tov ἔχοντος τὰς 
and of the beast which carries her, which has the 
ἑπτὰ κεφαλὰς καὶ τὰ δέκα κέρατα. 8 * θηοίον ὺ εἶδες, 

seven heads and the ten horns. (The) beast which thou sawest 
ἦν, Kai οὐκ ἔστιν, Kai μέλλει ἀναβαίνειν ἐκ τῆς ἀβύσσου, 
was, and is not, and is about tocomeup outof the abyss, 

kai εἰς ἀπώλειαν Υὑπάγειν"" καὶ τθαυμάσονται" οἱ Karol 
and into destruction to go; and shall wonder they who dwell 
κοῦντες ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, ὧν δοὐ.γέγραπται" >ra ὀνόματα" ἐπὶ 


on the earth,ofwhom are ποῦ written the names in 

τὸ βιβλίον τῆς ζωῆς ἀπὸ καταβολῆς κόσμου, “βλέ- 

the book of life from [the] foundation of [the] world, see- 

ποντες" τὸ θηρίον 40 τι! ἣν, καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν, “καίπερ ἐστίν." 
ing the beast which was and “not Liss and yet is. 
9 ὧδε ὁ νοῦς ὁ ἔχων σοφίαν. αἱ ἑπτὰ κεφαλαί, fon 

Here [is]the mind which has wisdom: The seven heads *mountains 


> 4 « CAN ese ς A , ? ? ? ~ ‘ 
εἰσὶν ἑπτά," ὕπου ἡ γυνὴ κάθηται ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν. 10 Kai Ba- 


‘are ?sevyen, where the woman sits on them. And 

σιλεῖς ἑπτά εἰσιν' οἱ πέντε ἔπεσαν, δκαὶ! ὁ sic ἔστιν, ὁ 
*kings “seven ‘there “are: the five are fallen, and the one is, the 
ἄλλος οὔπω ἦλθεν" Kai ὅταν ἔλθῃ, ὀλίγον αὐτὸν δεῖ 


other ὁποὺ “yet ‘is come: and when heshallhavecome, ἃ 110016 while he must 


μεῖναι. 11 καὶ τὸ θηρίον ὃ ἦν, Kai οὐκ ἔστιν, Kai αὐτὸς" 
remain. And the beast which was, and “not lis, ‘also she 


ὐὑγδοός ἐστιν, Kai ἐκ τῶν ἑπτά ἐστιν, Kai εἰς ἀπώλειαν 
San 7eighth Sis, and οὗ the seven is, and into destruction 
ὑπάγει. 12 καὶ τὰ δέκα κέρατα ἃ εἶδες, δέκα βασιλεῖς 
goes. And the ten horns which thou sawest ten kings 


εἰσιν, οἵτινες βασιλείαν ‘ovrw' ἔλαβον, Ἑάλλ᾽" ἐξουσίαν we 
’ ’ ς 


are, which ‘*a *kingdom ?not*yet ‘received, but authority as 
βασιλεῖς μίαν ὥραν λαμβάνουσιν μετὰ Tov θηρίου. 13 οὗτοι 
kings one hour receive with the _ beast. These 
μίαν Ἰγνώμην ἔχουσιν," καὶ τὴν δύναμιν καὶ τὴν" ἐξουσίαν 
one mind have, and the power and_ the authority 
"ἑαυτῶν! τῷ θηρίῳ “οδιαδιδώσουσιν." 14 οὗτοι μετὰ τοῦ 


of themselves tothe beast they shall give up. These with the 
W ἐρῶ σοι LirA. x + τὸ The GLTTraw. Υ ὑπάγει 
ἃ οὐκ ἐγέγραπτο Was not written x. Ὁ τὸ ὄνομα 

ς βλεπόντων GLITrAW. 4 ὅτι (read that it 

f ἑπτὰ ὄρη εἰσίν GLTTra, 
1 ἔχουσιν γνώμην G. 

ο διδόασιν they give 


h οὗτος thistr. ἰοὺκ Ποῦ 1. * ἀλλὰ LTTraw. 
2 αὐτῶν (read their authority) Lrtraw. 


XVI, XVIII. REVELATION. 


apviov πολεμήσουσιν, Kai TO ἀρνίον νικήσει αὐτούς, OTt 
Lamb warwillmake, and the Lamb willovercome them; _ because 
κύριος κυρίων ἐστὶν Kai βασιλεὺς βασιλέων" καὶ οἱ 
Lord oflords heis and King of kings: and those that [are] 
rt ? ~ Ν ‘ ‘ ? δ ‘ ‘ , 15 K ‘ Pr , Η 
μεῖ αὐτου, ΚΛΉΤΟι καὶ EKAEKTOL καὶ TLOTOL. αι EVEL 
with him, ealled, and chosen, and faithful, And hesays 
μοι, Τὰ ὕδατα ἃ εἶδες, οὗ ἡ πόρνη κάθηται, λαοὶ καὶ 
to me, The waters which thou sawest, where the harlot sits, *peoples 7and 


ὄχλοι εἰσίν, Kai ἔθνη Kai γλῶσσαι. 16 Kai Ta δέκα κέρατα 
*multitudes ‘are, and nationsand tongues. And the ten horns 
ἃ εἶδες “ἐπὶ" τὸ θηρίον, οὗτοι μισήσουσιν τὴν πόρνην, 
which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall hate the harlot, 
καὶ ἠρημωμένην ποιήσουσιν αὐτὴν καὶ γυμνήν, καὶ τὰς 
and esolate shall make her and naked, and 
Gaede αὐτῆς φάγονται, Kai αὐτὴν κατακαύσουσιν "ἐν᾿ πυρί. 
“flesh ®her ‘shall eat, and “her shall *burn with fire; 
17 ὁ-γὰρ.θεὸς ἔδωκεν εἰς τὰς καρδίας. αὐτῶν ποιῆσαι τὴν 
for God gave to their hearts to do 
γνώμην αὐτοῦ, "καὶ ποιῆσαι μίαν γνώμην," καὶ δοῦναι τὴν 
2mind this, and to do one mind, and togive 
βασιλείαν αὐτῶν τῷ θηρίῳ, ἄχρι τελεσθῇ τὰ ῥήματα" 
?kingdom ‘their tothe beast, until should be fulfilled the sayings 
τοῦ θεοῦ. 18 καὶ ἡ γυνὴ ἣν εἶδες, ἔστιν ἡ πόλις ἡ 
of God. Andthe woman whom thou sawest is the *city 
μεγάλη, ἡ ἔχουσα βασιλείαν ἐπὶ τῶν βασιλέων τῆς γῆς. 
1great, which has kingship over the kings of the earth. 
18 "Καὶ! μετὰ ταῦτα εἶδον ¥ ἄγγελον καταβαίνοντα ἐκ 


And after these things I saw an angel descending out of 
TOU οὐρανοῦ, ἔχοντα ἐξουσίαν μεγάλην" καὶ ἡ γῆ ἐφω- 
the 


heaven, having “authority great: and the earth was enlight- 


τίσθη ἐκ τῆς.δόξης. αὐτοῦ. 2 Kai ἔκραξεν “ἐν ἰσχύϊ, φωνῇ 
ened with his glory. And hecried mightily with a *voice 
μεγάλῳ," λέγων, “Exeoey Yerrecev' Βαβυλὼν ἡ μεγάλη, καὶ 
loud, saying, Isfallen, is fallen Babylon the great, and 
ἐγένετο κατοικητήριον δαιμόνων," Kai φυλακὴ παντὸς πνεύ- 


is beeome a habitation of demons, and ahold of every *spi- 
ματος ἀκαθάρτου", καὶ φυλακὴ παντὸς ὀρνέου ἀκαθάρτου Kai 
rit tunclean, and ahold  ofevery “*bird 7unclean *and 
μεμισημένου᾽ 3 Ore ἐκ “rod οἴνου" τοῦ θυμοῦ τῆς πορ- 
Shated : because of the wine of the fury *forni- 
νείας αὐτῆς “πέπωκεν' πάντα τὰ ἔθνη, καὶ ot βασιλεῖς 
tation ‘of*her 7have *drunk ‘all ‘the Snations; and the kings 
τῆς γῆς per αὐτῆς ἐπόρνευσαν, καὶ οἱ ἔμποροι τῆς 


of the earth with her didcommit fornication, and the merchants of the 


γῆς ἐκ τῆς δυνάμεως τοῦ.στρήνους. αὐτῆς ἐπλούτησαν. 

earth through the power of her luxury were enriched. 

4 Kai ἤκουσα ἄλλην φωνὴν ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, λέγουσαν, 
And MJIheard another voice outof the heaven, saying, 

> , ~ « ΄ ε A , " 

“᾿Εξέλθετε" “ἐξ αὐτῆς ὁ.λαός μου," ἵνα μὴ ἰσυγκοινωνήσητε" 
Come ye outof her, my people, that ye may not have fellowship 


P εἶπεν L. 4 καὶ and GLTTrAw. 
σαι μίαν γνώμην L; καὶ ποιῆσαι γνώμην μίαν α[ ΑἸ. 
οἱ λόγοι GLTTrAW. ¥ — καὶ LTTrAW. 
x ἐν ([ἐν] A) ἰσχυρᾷ φωνῇ with a strong voice GLTTraw. 
LTTrA, a + καὶ μεμισημένου and hated (spirit) L. 
kav LTW; πέπτωκαν have fallen (read ἐκ by) tr; πέπίτ]ωκαν a. 
Ἔξελθε Come thou tL. © ὃ λαός μου ἐξ αὐτῆς T. ἔσυν- Ὁ. 


τ — ἐν (read πυρί with fire) T[a]. 


657 
make war with the 
Lamb, and the I-amb 
shall overcome them, 
for he is Lord of lords, 
and King of kings: 
and they that are with 
him are called, and 
chosen, and faithful 
15 And he saith unto 
me, The waters which 
thou sawest, where 
the whore sitteth, 
are peoples, and mul- 
titudes, and nationa, 
and tongues. 16 And 
the ten horns which 
thou sawest upon the 
beast, these shall hate 
the whore, and shall 
make her desolateand 
naked, and shall eat 
her flesh, and burn 
her with fire. 17 For 
God hath put in their 
hearts to fulfil his 
will, and to agree, 
and give their king- 
dom unto the beast, 
until the words of 
God shall be fulfilled. 
18 And the woman 
which thou sawest is 
that great city, which 


reigneth over the 
kings of the earth. 
XVIII. And after 


these things I saw 
another angel come 
dcwn from heaven, 
having great power ; 
and the earth was 
lightened with his 
glory. 2 And he cried 
mightily witha strong 
voice, saying, Babylon 
the great is fallen, is 
fallen, and is become 
the habitation of de- 
vils, and the hold 
of every foul spirit, 
and a cage of every 
unclean and hateful 
bird. 3 For all na- 
tions have drunk of 
the wine of the wratk 
of her fornication, 
and the kings of the 
earth have committed 
fornication with her, 
and the merchants of 
the earth are waxed 
rich through the a- 
pundance of her deli- 
cacies. 4 And I heard 
another voice from 
heaven, saying, Come 
out of her, my people, 


5 — καὶ ποι- 


τ τελεσθήσονται (shall be fulfillea} 
~ + ἄλλον (read another angel) GLTTraw. 
Υ — ἔπεσεν τι[Δ]. 

Ὁ — τοῦ οἴνου L[Tr]A. 


2 δαιμονίων 
© πέπω- 
ἃ ᾿Ἐξέλθατε TTraw ; 


UU 


658 


that ye be not par- 
takers of her sins, and 
that ye receive not of 
her plagues. 5 For her 
sins have reached un- 
to heaven, and God 
hath remembered her 
iniquities. 6 Reward 
her even as she re- 
warded you, and don- 
ble uuto her double 
according to her 
works: in the cup 
which she hath filled 
fill to her double. 
7 How much she hath 
glorified herself, and 
lived deliciously, so 
much torment and 
sorrow give her: 
for she saith in her 
heart, I sit a queen, 
and am no widow, 
and shall see no sor- 


row. 8 Therefore 
shall her plagues 
come in one day, 


death, and mourning, 
and famine; and she 
shall be utterly burn- 
ed with fire: for 
strong is the Lord 
God who judgeth her. 
9 And the kings of 
the earth, who have 
committed fornication 
and lived deliciously 
with her, shall bewail 
her, and lament for 
her, when they shall 
see the smoke of her 
burning, 10 standing 
afar off for the fear of 
her torment, saying, 
Alas, alas that great 
city Babylon, that 
mighty city! for in one 
hour is thy judgment 
come. ll And the 
merchants of the 
earth shall weep and 
mourn over her; for 
no man buyeth their 
merchandise any 
more: 12 the merchan- 
dise of gold, and sil- 
ver, and _ precious 
stones, and of pearls, 
and fine linen, and 
purple, and silk, and 
scarlet, and all thyine 
wood, and all man- 
ner vessels of 
ivory, and all man- 
ner vessels of most 
recious wood, and of 
rass, and iron, and 
marble, 13 and cinna- 
mon, and odours, and 
ointments, and frank- 
incense, and wine, 
and o11.and fine flour, 


8 ἐκ τῶν πληγῶν αὐτῆς ἵνα μὴ λάβητε GLTTrAW. 


ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ. XVIII. 

ταῖς. ἁμαρτίαις αὐτῆς, Kai Siva μὴ λάβητε ἐκ THY πληγῶν 
in her sins, and that ye may not receive of *plagues 
αὐτῆς" ὃ ore "ἠκολούθησαν" αὐτῆς ai ἁμαρτίαι ἄχρι τοῦ 
ther : for %followed *her "sins asfaras the 
οὐρανοῦ, Kai ἐμνημόνευσεν ὁ θεὸς τὰ.ἀδικήματα.αὐτῆς. 6 ἀπό- 
heaven, and “remembered ‘God her unrighteousnesses. Ren- 
δοτε αὐτῇ ὡς Kai αὐτὴ ἀπέδωκεν ἰὑμῖν," καὶ διπλώσατε Ἑαὐτῇ" 
der toher as also she rendered toyon; and doubleye to her 


ἰδιπλᾶ κατὰ τὰ-ἔργα.αὐτῆς᾽ ἐν τῷ ποτηρίῳ ᾧ ἐκέρασεν, 


double, according to her works. In the cup which she mixed, 
κεράσατε αὐτῇ διπλοῦν. 7 boa ἐδόξασεν 'λἑαυτὴν" καὶ 
mix ye to her double. So much as she glorified herself and 


ἐστρηνίασεν, τοσοῦτον δότε αὐτῇ βασανισμὸν Kai πένθος" 
lived luxuriously, so much give toher torment and mourning. 
« ? ~ [ἢ ? ~ , n ’ / ᾿ 
ὕτι ἐν τῇ. καρδίᾳ.αὐτῆς λέγει, " Κάθημαι βασίλισσα, καὶ 
Because in her heart she says, I sit a queen, and 
χήρα οὐκ.εἰμί, καὶ πένθος οὐμὴ ἴδω. 8 Διὰ τοῦτο 
a widow Lam ποῦ : and mourning inno wise mayIsee. Onaccountof this 
ἐν μιᾷ ἡμέρᾳ ἥξουσιν αἱ.πληγαὶ. αὐτῆς, θάνατος καὶ πένθος 
in one day shall come her plagues, death and mourning 
καὶ λιμός" καὶ ἐν πυρὶ κατακαυθήσεται" ὅτι ἰσχυρὸὲξ "κύριος" 
and famine, and with fire sheshallbeburnt; for strong [isthe] Lord 
ὁ θεὸς ὁ Ῥκρίνων" αὐτήν. 9 Kai “κλαύσονται" ταὐτὴν," Kai 
God who judges her. And shall weep for her, and 
κόψονται ἐπ᾽ "αὐτῇ" οἱ βασιλεῖς τῆς γῆς, οἱ μετ᾽ αὐτῆς πορ- 
shall bewail for her, the kings ofthe earth,whowith her commit- 
γνεύσαντες καὶ στρηγνιάσαντες, ὅταν βλέπωσιν TOY καπνὸν 
ted fornication and lived luxuriously, when they see the smoke 
τῆς.πυρώσεως. αὐτῆς, 10 ἀπὸ μακρόθεν ἑστηκότες διὰ 
of her burning, “from Safar tstanding on account of 
τὸν φόβον τοῦ. βασανισμοῦ.αὐτῆς, λέγοντες, Οὐαί, ovat, ἡ 
the fear of her torment, saying, Woe, woe, the 
, « , , € aN « ᾽ ΄ « t2 I ~ [2 
πόλις ἡ μεγάλη Βαβυλών, ἡ πόλις 1) ἰσχυρά, ὅτι tev μιᾷ ὥρᾳ 
“city ‘great, Babylon, the “city ‘strong! for in one hour 
ἦλθεν ἡ-κρίσις.σου. 11 Kai ot ἔμποροι τῆς γῆς κλαίουσιν Kai 
iscome thy judgment. And the merchants of the earth weep and 
πενθοῦσιν ἐπ᾿ ᾿αὐτῇ, OTe τὸν.γόμον. αὐτῶν οὐδεὶς ἀγοράζει 
mourn for her, because their lading no one buys 
ovkére’ 12 γόμον χρυσοῦ, καὶ ἀργύρου, καὶ λίθου τιμίου, 
any more ; lading of gold, and  ofsilver, and of *stone ‘precious, 
(lit. no more) 


καὶ “wapyapirov,' καὶ βύσσου," καὶ πορφύρας, καὶ YonpKou,' 
and of pearl, and of fine linen, and ofpurple, and of silk, 

καὶ κοκκίνου" kai πᾶν ξύλον Ovivoy, kai πᾶν σκεῦος ἐλεφάν- 
and ofscarlet, and all *wood ‘thyine, and every article of 


τινον, Kai πᾶν σκεῦος ἐκ ξύλου τιμιωτάτου, καὶ χαλκοῦ, καὶ 


ivory, andevery article of *wood ‘most *precious, and of brass, and 
σιδήρου, Kai μαρμάρου, 13 Kai "κινάμωμον," * καὶ θυμιάματα 
of iron, and _ of marble, and cinnamon, and incense, 


καὶ μύρον, καὶ λίβανον, καὶ οἶνον, καὶ ἔλαιον, καὶ σεμίδαλιν, 
and ointment, and frankincense,and wine, and oil, and finest flour, 


h ἐκολλήθησαν were joined together 


GLTTraw. i — ὑμῖν GLTTrAW. k — αὐτῇ LTTrAW. 14 τὰ the rrr[a]. ™ αὐτὴν 
LTTraAW. n+ ὅτι LITrA. ο [κύριος] A. Ρ κρίνας Judged GLTTraw. 4 κλαύσου- 
σιν TIrAW. τ--- αὐτήν GLITrAW. 5 αὐτὴν TITAW. t ἐν (read [in]) GLTTraw. 


τ αὐτην TTrA. 
Υ σιρικονυ LT, 


* μαργαρίτας pearls L; μαργαριτῶν of pearls TTrA. 
- κιννάμωμον LTTrA. 


* βυσσίνου GLTTraw. 
&4+ καὶ ἄμωμον and amomum GLTTrAW. 


XViIl. REVELATION. 


καὶ σῖτον, καὶ κτηνη, καὶ πρόβατα, Kai ἵππων, καὶ ῥεδῶν, 


and wheat, and cattle, and sheep, and of horses, and of chariots, 
καὶ σωμάτων, καὶ ψυχὰς ἀνθρώπων. 14 Kai ἡ ὀπώρα “τῆς 
and ofslaves, and _ souls of men. And the ripe fruits of the 


(lit. of bodies) 

? θ 7, ~ ~ li d ? AAG | ? A ~ . , ‘ 
ἐπιθυμίας THC Ψυχῆς.σου" “απήλθεν᾽ ἀπὸ σοῦ, Kal TayvTa Ta 
desire of thy soul are departed from thee, and all the 
λιπαρὰ καὶ ταῦ λαμπρὰ famndOev' ἀπὸ cov, καὶ Fovxére' 
fat things and the bright things are departed from thee, and ‘any ‘more 
(lit. no more) 
- «ε » , « 
1ὅ οἱ ἔμποροι τούτων οἱ 
The merchants of thesethings, who 

διὰ 
shall stand because of 


ποὺ. μὴ εὑρήσῃς αὐτά." 
‘in πο ὅν 158 shouldst thou find them. 
πλουτήσαντες ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς, ἀπὸ μακρόθεν στήσονται 
were enrighed from her, from afar 
τὸν φόβον τοῦ-.βασανισμοῦ.αὐτῆς, κλαίοντες Kai πενθοῦντες, 
the fear of her torment, weeping and mourning, 
16 ‘kai! λέγοντες, Οὐαί, οὐαί, ἡ πόλις ἡ μεγάλη, ἡ περι- 
and saying, Woe, woe, the “city tgreat, which [was] cloth- 
βεβλημένη "βύσσινον" καὶ πορφυροῦν καὶ *KoKkvoy,' καὶ 
ed with fine linen and purple and scarlet, and 
κεχρυσωμένη liv! χρυσῷ" καὶ λίθῳ τιμίῳ Kai "μαργαρί- 
decked with gold and *stone ‘precious and pearls! 
(lt. gilded) 


ταις" 17 Ore μιᾷ ὥρᾳ ἠρημώθη ὁ τοσοῦτος πλοῦτος. Kai 
for in one hour was made desolate so great wealth, And 
πᾶς κυβερνήτης, Kai °rac ἐπὶ τῶν πλοίων ὁ ὕμιλος," Kai 
every steersman, and all 7in ‘ships ‘the 7company, and 
ναῦται, καὶ ooo την.θάλασσαν.ἐργάζονται, ἀπὸ.μακρόθεν 
sailors, and asmany as trade by sea, afar off 
ἔστησαν, 18 Kai Ῥἔέκραζον," Ipwyrec' τὸν καπνὸν τῆς πυρώ- 
stood, and cried, seeing the smoke *burn- 
σεως αὐτῆς, λέγοντες, Tic ὁμοία τῇ πόλει" τῇ μεγάλῳ; 
ing lof *her, saying, What([cityis] like tothe “city ‘great ? 
19 Kai ξἔβαλον" χοῦν ἐπὶ τὰς.κεφαλὰς.αὐτῶν, Kai "ἔκραζον" 
And they cast dust upon their heads, and cried, 
κλαίοντες Kai πενθοῦντες, λέγοντες, Οὐαί, οὐαί, ἡ πόλις ἡ 
weeping and mourning, saying, Woe, woe, the “city 
μεγάλη, ἐν y ἐπλούτησαν πάντες οἱ ἔχοντες Y πλοῖα ἐν TY 
‘great, in which were enriched all who had ships in the 
θαλάσσῃ ἐκ τῆς.τιμιότητος. αὐτῆς, OTL μιᾷ Wed ἠρημώ- 
868 through her costliness ! for inone hour she was made 
θη. 20 Εὐφραίνου ἐπ᾽ “αὐτήν, οὐρανέ, καὶ οἱ ἅγιοι * ἀπό- 
desolate. Rejoice over her, O heaven, and [ye] holy apo- 
OTOAOL καὶ οἱ προφῆται, OTL ἔκρινεν ὁ θεὸς τὸ κρίμα.ὑμῶν ἐξ 
stles and [ye] prophets; for *did*judge *God yourjudgment upon 
αὐτῆς. 21 Kai ἦρεν εἷς ἄγγελος ἰσχυρὸς λίθον we ὑμύλον" 


k 


her. And *took*up‘one “angel “strong a stone, as a “millstone 
μέγαν, καὶ ἔβαλεν εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν, λέγων, Οὕτως ὁρμή- 
igreat, and οδδῦ [1Ὁ] into the sea, saying, Thus with 
ματι PdAnOnoerac Βαβυλὼν ἡ μεγάλη πόλις, Kai οὐ.-μὴ 


violence shall be cast down Babylon the _ great city, and not at all 


659 


and wheat, and beasts, 
and sheep, and horses, 
and chariots, and 
slaves, and souls of 
men. 14 And the 
fruits that thy 
soul lusted after are 
departed from _ thee, 
and ail things which 
were dainty and good- 
ly are departed from 
thee, and thou shalt 
find them no more at 
all. 15 The merchants 
of these things, which 
were made rich by 
her, shall stand afar 
off for the fear of her 
torment, weeping and 
wailing, 16 and say- 
ing, Alas, alas that 
great city, that was 
clothed in fine linen, 
and purple, and scar- 
let, and decked with 
gold, and _ precious 
stones, and pearls! 
17 for in one hour so 
great riches is come to 
nought. And every 
shipmaster, and all 
the company in ships, 
and sailors, and as 
many as trade by sea, 
stood afar off, 18 and 
cried when they saw 
the smoke of her burn- 
ing, saying, What city 
is like unto this great 
city! 19 And they 
cast dust on their 
heads, and cried, 
weeping and wailing, 
saying, Alas, alas that 
great city, wherein 
were maderichallthat 
had ships in the sea by 
reason of her costli- 
ness !| for in one hour 
is she made desolate. 
20 Rejoice over her, 
thou heaven, and ye 
holy apostles and 
prophets; for God hath 
avenged you on her. 
21 And a mighty an- 
gel took up a stone 
like a great millstone, 
and cast it into the 
sea, saying, Thus with 
violence shall that 
great city Babylon 
be thrown down, and 
shall be found no more 


© σου τῆς ἐπιθυμίας τῆς ψυχῆς LTTraAW. 
ἀπώλετο (-λοντο T) are destroyed GLTFraw. ὃ — οὐκέτι Tr. 
σουσιν (shall they find) (εὕρῃς w) Law ; οὐ μὴ αὐτὰ εὑρήσουσιν TTr. 
k βύσσινον and κόκκινον transposed L. 1 —. ἐν (read [with]) ttr[a]. 
4 μαργαρίτῃ pearl LTTra. 
GLTTraW. Ρ ἔκραξαν LTrA. 4 βλέποντες GLTTrAW. 
city) L. 5 ἔβαλαν L; [ἐπ]έβαλον a. " ἔκραξαν LA. 
« + καὶ οἱ (read [ye] saints and [ye] apostles) αὐ ΤΊτγα νυν. 


4 ἀπώλετο are destroyed w. 


ε [τὰ] a. 
» αὐτὰ οὐ μὴ εὑρή- 

i — καὶ LTTrAW. 
ἢ χρυσίῳ GLTrAW. 


° πᾶς ὁ ἐπὶ τόπον πλέων every One who sails to [any] place 

_ 1 + ταύτῃ (read this great 

¥+ τὰ LYTrAW. 
¥ μύλινον La, 


Ἢ αὐτῇ GLTTraw, 


060 


at all. 22 And the 
voiceof harpers, and 
tousicians, and of pi- 
pers, and trumpeters, 
shall be heard no 
more at all in thee; 
and no craftsman, of 
whatsoever craft he be, 
shall be found any 
more in thee; and 
the sound of a mill- 
stone shall be heard 
no more at all in 
thee ; 23 and the light 
of a candle shall shine 
no more atallin thee ; 
and the voice of the 
bridegroom and of 
the bride shall be 
heard no more at all 
in thee: for thy mer- 
chants were the great 
men of the earth; for 
by thy sorceries were 
all nations deceived. 
24 And in her was 
found the blood of 
prophets, and οἵ 
saints, and of all that 
were slain upon the 
earth, 


XIX. And after 
these things I heard a 
great voice of much 
people in heaven, say- 
ing, Alleluia; Salva- 
tion, and glory, and 
honour,and power,un- 
to the Lord our God : 
2 for true and right- 
eous are his judg- 
ments: for he hath 
judged the great 
whore, which did cor- 
rapt the earth with 
her fornication, and 
hath avenged {πὸ 
blood of his servants 
at her hand. 3 And 
again they said, Al- 
leluia, And her smoke 
rose up for ever and 
ever. 4 And the four 
and twenty elders 
and the four beasts 
fell down and wor- 
shipped God that sat 
on the throne, say- 
ing, Amen; Alleluia. 
ὃ And a voice came 
out of the throne, 
saying, Praise our 
God, all ye his ser- 
vants, and ye that 
fear him, both small 
and great. 6 And I 
heard as it were the 


ATIOKAAY VIS XVIII, XIX. 


εὑρεθῇ ἔτι. 22 Kai φωνὴ κιθαρῳδῶν Kai μουσικῶν Kai 
may be found longer: and voice ofharpers and musicians and 
αὐλητῶν καὶ σαλπιστῶν οὐ μὴ ἀκουσθῇ ἐν σοὶ ἔτι, Kai 
flnte-players and trumpeters ποῦ αὖ 811] may be heard in thee longer, and 
πᾶς τεχνίτης πάσης τέχνης Ov.un εὑρεθῇ ἐν σοὶ ἔτι, Kai 
any artificer ofany art ποῦ at all may be found in thee longer, and 
(lit, every) (lit. of every) 
4 ‘ ~ 
23 Kai φῶς 


φωνὴ μύλου οὐ.μὴ ἀκουσθῇ 

sound of millstone ποῦ at all may be heard and light 
λύχνου ov.un φανῇ" *év' σοὶ ἔτι, καὶ φωνὴ νυμφίου Kai 
oflamp notatallmayshine in thee longer,and voice of bridegroom and 
νύμφης ov.) ἀκουσθῇ ἐν σοὶ ἔτι. ὅτι ϑοὶ" ἔμποροί. σου 
of bride ποῦ «αὖ 811] may Ὀ6 Πρασὰά in thee longer; for thy merchants 
ἦσαν οἱ μεγιστᾶνες τῆς γῆς» ὅτι ἐν τῇ. φαρμακείᾳ" σου ἐπλα- 


ἐν σοὶ ἔτι, 
in thee longer, 


were the greatones ofthe earth, for by thy sorcery were 
nQ , _ 4 ἔθ ives, > ~ d τ Tf 

νήθησαν πάντα τὰ ἔθνη. 24 καὶ ἐν aur αἱμα" προφη- 

misled all the nations. And in her [the] blood of pro- 


τῶν καὶ ἁγίων εὑρέθη, Kai πάντων τῶν ἐσφαγμένων ἐπὶ τῆς 
phets δῃηᾶ saints was found, and of all the slain on the 
γῆς. 
earth. 
19 “Καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα ἤκουσα φωνὴν ἐὔὄχλου 
And after thesethings I heard a7voice “of *a “multitude 
πολλοῦ μεγάλην" ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, "λέγοντος," ᾿Αλληλούϊα᾽ ἡ 
δρτοαῦ loud in the heaven, saying, Hallelujah: the 
σωτηρία καὶ ἡ δόξα ἱκαὶ ἡ τιμὴ" Kai ἡ δύναμις "κυρίῳ 
Βαϊναύϊοη andthe glory and the honour andthe power to the Lord 
τῷ.θεφ.ἡμῶν"" 2 ὅτι ἀληθιναὶ καὶ δίκαιαι αἱ.κοίσεις. αὐτοῦ" 
our God: for true and righteous[are] his judgments; 
ὅτι ἔκρινεν τὴν πόρνην THY μεγάλην, ἥτις ἔφθειρεν τὴν γῆν 
for hejudged the “harlot great, who corrupted the earth 
ἐν τῇ-πορνείᾳ.αὐτῆς, καὶ ἐξεδίκησεν τὸ αἷμα τῶν δούλων 
with her fornication, and hedidavenge the blood *pondmen 


αὐτοῦ ἐκ 'τῆς".χειρὸς.αὐτῆς. 3 Kai δεύτερον εἴρηκαν, ᾿Αλλη- 


‘of his at her hand. Anda second time they said, Halle- 
Aovia’ Kai ὁ.καπνὸς. αὐτῆς ἀναβαίνει εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν 
lujah. And her smoke goes up to the ages of the 

JTS. 4 m” " « n , t n” ‘ , 
αἰώνων. 4 Kai πἔπεσαν" ot "πρεσβύτεροι οἱ εἴκοσι Kai τέσ- 

ages. And felldown the *elders ‘twenty *and 
capec," καὶ τὰ °récoapa' ζῶα, Kai προσεκύνησαν τῷ 
3four, and the four living creatures and worshipped 


θεῷ τῷ καθημένῳ ἐπὶ Prov θρόνου," λέγοντες, ᾿Αμήν" ᾿Αλλη- 
God who sits on the _ throne, saying, Amen, Halle- 
Novia. 5 Και φωνὴ “ἐκ' τοῦ θρόνου ἐξῆλθεν λέγουσα, Αἰνεῖτε 
174}. Anda voice out of the throne cameforth, saying, Praise 
r~} θεὸ i af ~ ΄ i. or ? ~ 8 ΗΠ « , 
τὸν.θεὸν" ἡμῶν πάντες οἱ.δοῦλοι.αὐτοῦ, "καὶ" οἱ. φοβούμενοι 
our God all [ye] his bondmen, and [ye] who fear 

αὐτὸν ‘kai' οἱ μικροὶ Kai οἱ μεγάλοι. 6 Kai ἤκουσα we φωνὴν 


voice of a great mul- him, both the small and Π6Ὸ great. And Iheard as a voice 
titude, and as the ~ ‘ , Pe ͵ 
olga πεν ΞΩΞΣΣ ὄχλου πολλοῦ, καὶ ᾿ὼς" φωνὴν ὑδάτων πολλῶν, καὶ ὡς 
and as the voice of ofa?multitude ‘great, and as avoice of*waters ‘many, and as 
τ φάνῃ LT. a — ἐν (read σοι upon thee) [a]. " --- οἷ, ὃ φαρμακίᾳ τα. 4 αἵματα 
bloods arw. ©—«alGLTTrAw. |!-{ ὡς 88 EGLTTrAW. 8 μεγάλην ὄχλου πολλοῦ GLTTrA. 


ἃ λεγόντων GLTTrAW. 


᾿-- τῆς GLTTrAW. 
© τέσσερα LITrA. 
*— - καὶ ΤίττΑ]. 


t— καὶ GLTTrAW. 


i— καὶ ἡ τιμὴ GLTTrAW. k τοῦ θεοῦ ἡμῶν of our God GLTTraw. 
™ ἔπεσον EG. n — καὶ GTTrAW ; εἴκοσι τέσσαρες πρεσβύτεροι LL. 
P τῷ θρόνῳ LTTrAW. 4 ἀπὸ from LTrAW. τ τῷ θεῷ LTTrAW. 
ν--- ὡς 1, 


xix REVELATION. 
φωνὴν βροντῶν ἰσχυρῶν, “λέγοντας," ᾿Αλληλούϊα" ὅτι ἐβασί- 
avoice of *thunders ‘strong, saying, Hallelujah, for has 
λευσεν κύριος ὁ θεὸς " ὁ παντοκράτωρ. 7 χαίρωμεν καὶ 
reigned [the] Lord God the Almighty. We should rejoice and 
γἀγαλλιώμεθα," καὶ δῶμεν! τὴν δόξαν αὐτῷ᾽ ὅτι ἦλθεν ὁ 
should exult; and should give glory tohim; for is come the 
γάμος τοῦ ἀρνίου, Kai ἡ. γυνὴ. αὐτοῦ ἡτοίμασεν ἑαυτήν. 8 Kai 
marriage of the Lamb, and his wife did make’ready ‘herself. And 
? , > ~ er , 4, a \ ‘ 
ἐδόθη αὐτῇ ἵνα περιβάληται βύσσινον "καθαρὸν καὶ 
it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, pure and 
λαμπρόν" τὸ γὰρ βύσσινον τὰ δικαιώματά ὕέστιν τῶν 
bright ; for the fine linen “the *righteousnesses tis of the 
ἁγίων." 9 Kai λέγει μοι, Γράψον, Μακάριοι οἱ εἰς τὸ 
saints, And he saystome, Write, Blessed [are] they who to the 
δεῖπνον τοῦ γάμου τοῦ apviov κεκλημένοι. Kai λέγει μοι, 
supper ofthe marriage of the Lamb are called. And he says to me 
Οὗτοι οἱ λόγοι “ ἀληθινοί εἰσιν τοῦ θεοῦ." 10 Kai “ἔπεσον" 
These *the *words 3true tare of God. And I fell 
ἔμπροσθεν τῶν. ποδῶν.αὐτοῦ προσκυνῆσαι αὐτῷ" Kai λέγει 


before his feet todohomage tohim. And he says 
μοι, Ὅρα n° σύνδουλός σου εἰμὶ καὶ τῶν ἀδελ- 
tome, See [thou ἄο 10] not. Fellow-bondman of thee I am and *breth- 


~ ~ , A ΄ ~ > κω ~ ~ 

φῶν σου τῶν ἐχόντων THY μαρτυρίαν ‘rov' “Inoov τῷ θεῷ 

ren ‘of *thy who have the testimony of Jesus, To God 

προσκύνησον᾽ ἡ.γὰρ μαρτυρία ἱτοῦ" Ἰησοῦ ἐστιν τὸ πνεῦμα 

do homage. For *the ‘testimony Sof *Jesus is ‘the spirit 
τῆς προφητείας. 
30 *prophecy. 
‘ inl ‘ ‘ ? ΓΔ eo 

11 Kai εἶδον τὸν οὐρανὸν Βἀνεῳγμένον," καὶ ἰδού, ἵππος 

And Isaw the heaven opened, and behold, a *horse 

λευκός, καὶ ὁ καθήμενος ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν, "καλούμενος πιστὸς" 

ἀγγῃϊίθ, and he who sits upon it, called Faithful 

καὶ ἀληθινός, καὶ ἔν δικαιοσύνῃ κρίνει Kai πολεμεῖ: 12 οἱ 


and True, and in righteousness he judges and makes war. 
δὲ ὀφθαλμοὶ αὐτοῦ Ἰὼς" φλὸξ πυρός, καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν 
And 7eyes "his [were] as aflame of fire, and upon *head 


κ ὄνομα γεγραμμένον ὃ οὐδεὶς 


αὐτοῦ διαδήματα πολλά, ἔχων ) 
& Dame written which no one 


*his *diadems Smany, having 
\ , ‘ ὦ « ’ 1 
οἶδεν εἰ μὴ αὐτός: 13 καὶ περιβεβλημένος ἱμάτιον ἰβεβαμ- 
knows but himself, and clothed with a garment dip- 
A ~ 4A la ~ « , ~ 
μένον" αἵματι" καὶ πκαλεῖται" τὸ. Ὀνομα.αὐτοῦ, Ὁ λόγος τοῦ 
ped in blood; and is *called "his 7name, The Word 
“ ‘ -~ > ~ > , , ~ 
θεοῦ. 14 Kai τὰ στρατεύματα" ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ ἠκολούθει αὐτῷ 
of God. And the armies in the heaven were following him 
ἐφ᾽ ἵπποις λευκοῖς, ἐνδεδυμένοι βύσσινον λευκὸν °Kai’ καθαρόν. 
upon *horses ‘white, clothed in fine linen, white and pure, 
~ , ? ~ , , « , ? ~ 
15 καὶ ἐκ τοῦ.στόματος. αὐτοῦ ἐκπορεύεται ῥομφαία ὀξεῖα, 
And out of his mouth goes forth a’sword ‘sharp, 
ἵνα ἐν αὐτῇ Prardcoy' τὰ ἔθνη" καὶ αὐτὸς ποιμανεῖ 
that with it he might smite the nations; and he 5881] shepherd 


W λεγόντων ELTTrW ; λέγοντες GA. 
LTTrA. z δώσομεν Shall give La. 
Ὁ τῶν ἁγίων ἐστίν ETTrA. © + οἱ LAW. 
f — τοῦ LTTrAW. 8 ἠνεῳγμένον LTTrA. 

i — ὡς TTr[A]. 
μένον sprinkled round T. ™ κέκληται LTTrAW. 
GLTAW. P πατάξῃ GLITrAW. 


ἃ τοῦ θεοῦ εἰσιν LTTrA. 


x + ἡμῶν (read our God) ertrw. y 
ἃ λαμπρὸν καὶ (— καὶ LTTrA) καθαρόν GLTTrA. 


k + [ὀνόματα γεγραμμένα, kat] names written and a, 
Sue el 1 + τὰ which [are] EaL[a]w. 


661 


mighty thunderings, 
saying, Alleluia: for 
the Lord God omnipo- 
tent reigneth. 7 Let 
us be glad and re- 
joice, and give honour 
to him: for the mar- 
riage of the Lamb is 
come, and his wife 
hath made herself 
ready. 8 And to her 
was granted that sha 
should be arrayed in 
fine linen, clean and 
white: for the fine 
linen is the righteous- 
ness of saints. 9 And 
he saith unto me, 
Write, Blessed are 
they which are called 
unto the marriagesup- 
per of the Lamb, 
And he saith unto 
me, These are the 
true sayings of God. 
10 And I fell at his 
feet to worship him. 
And he said unto me, 
See thou do it not: 1 
am thy fellowservant, 
and of thy brethren 
that have the testi- 
mony of Jesus: wor- 
ship God : for the tes- 
timony of Jesus is 
the spirit of prophecy. 


11 And I saw hea- 
ven opened, and be- 
hold a white horse ; 
and he that sat upon 
him was called Faith- 
ful and True, and in 
righteousness he doth 
judge and make war. 
12 His eyes were asa 
flame of fire, and.on 
his head were many 
crowns; and he hada 
name written, that no 
man knew,but he him- 
self. 13 And he was 
clothed with a ves- 
ture dipped in blood: 
and his name is called 
The Word of God. 
14 And the armies 
which were in heaven 
followed him upon 
white horses, clothed 
in fine linen, white 
and clean. 15 And 
out of his mouth go- 
eth a sharp sword, 
that with it he should 


Y ἀγαλλιῶμεν 


© ἔπεσα LTTrAW. 


h πιστὸς καλούμενος τι; [καλούμενος] πιστὸς A. 


1 περιρεραμ- 
ο -- καὶ 


662 
smite the nations: 
and he shall rule 


them with a rod of 
iron : and he treadeth 
the winepress of the 
fierceness and wrathof 
Almighty God. 16And 
he hath on his ves- 
ture and on his thigh 
a name written, KING 
OF KINGS, AND 
LORD OF LORDS. 


17 And I saw an an- 
gel standing in the 
sun; and he cried with 
aloud voice, saying to 
all the fowls that fly 
in the midst of hea- 
ven, Come and gather 
yourselves together 
unto the supper of 
the great God ; 18 that 
ye may eat the flesh 
of kings, and the flesh 
of captains, and the 
flesh of mighty men, 
and the flesh of horses, 
and of them that sit 
on them, and the flesh 
of all men, both free 
and bond, both small 
and great. 


19 And I saw the 
beast, and the kings 
of the earth, and their 
armies, gathered to- 
gether to make war 
against him that sat 
on the horse, and 
against his army. 
20 And the beast was 
taken, and with him 
the false prophet that 
wrought miracles be- 
fore him, with which 
he deceived them that 
had received the mark 
of the beast, and them 
that worshipped his 
image. These both 
were cast alive into a 
lake of fire burning 
with brimstone. 21And 
the remnant were 
slain with the sword 
of him that sat upon 
the horse, which 
sword proceeded out 
of his mouth : and all 
the fowls were filled 
with their flesh. 


4ᾳ — καὶ GLITrA. 


ἐ πετομένοις GLTTrAW. 
χα αὐτούς LTrA. 

b αὐτοῦ its L. 

LYTrA ; ὃ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ GW. 


of) @LTTrAW. 
® ἴδον T. 


ΑΠΟΚΑΛΥ͂ΨΙΣ. XIX. 


αὐτοὺς ἐν ῥάβδῳ σιδηρᾷ Kai αὐτὸς πατεῖ τὴν ληνὸν τοῦ 
them with “rod ?an *iron; and he treads the press of the 


οἴνου τοῦ θυμοῦ “καὶ τῆς ὀργῆς Tov θεοῦ τοῦ παντοκρά- 


wine ofthe fury and ofthe wrath of God the Alnighty. 
τορος. 16 καὶ ἔχει ἐπὶ τὸ ἱμάτιον Kai ἐπὶ TOY_uNpdY.abTOU 
And he has upon [his] garment and upon his thigh 
‘ro! ὄνομα γεγραμμένον, Βασιλεὺς βασιλέων καὶ κύριος 
the name written, ing of kings and Lord 
κυρίων. 
of lords. 


17 Kai εἶδον ἕνα ἄγγελον ἑστῶτα ἐν τῷ Alp’ καὶ 


And Isaw one angel standing ἱπ the sun; and 
ἔκραξεν " φωνῇ μεγάλῳ λέγων πᾶσιν τοῖς ὀρνέοις τοῖς 
hecried witha?voice ‘loud, saying toall the birds which 


ἱπετωμένοις' ἐν μεσουρανήματι, Δεῦτε “καὶ συνάγεσθε" εἰς 
fi i Come and gather yourselves to 


Υ in mid-heaven, 
τὸ δεῖπνον “τοῦ μεγάλου" θεοῦ, 18 ἵνα φάγητε σάρκας Ba- 
the supper. ofthe great God, that ye may eat flesh of 
σιλέων, καὶ σάρκας χιλιάρχων, καὶ σάρκας ἰσχυρῶν, 
kings, and flesh of chief captains, and fiesh of strong [men], 


‘ , \ ~ , ~ Ι \ 
καὶ σάρκας ἵππων καὶ τῶν καθημένων ἐπ᾽ "αὐτῶν," καὶ 


and flesh of horses and of those who sit on them, and 
σάρκας πάντων, ἐλευθέρων ¥ καὶ δούλων, καὶ μικρῶν 7 καὶ 
flesh of all, free and bond, and small and 
μεγάλων. 
great. 
19 Kai δεῖδον" τὸ θηρίον, καὶ Τοὺς βασιλεῖς τῆς γῆς; 
And JIsaw _ the beast, and the kings of the earth, 


καὶ τὰ στρατεύματα αὐτῶν" συνηγμένα ποιῆσαι © πόλε- 


and “armies 1their gathered together to make 
μον μετὰ τοῦ καθημένου ἐπὶ Tov ἵππου, Kai μετὰ τοῦ 
war with him who sits on the horse, and with 


στρατεύματος αὐτοῦ. 20 καὶ ἐπιάσθη τὸ θηρίον, καὶ 4 ἐμετὰ 
"army this. And wastaken the beast, and with 
τούτου ὁ ψευδοπροφήτης ὁ ποιήσας τὰ σημεῖα ἐνώπιον 
him the false prophet who wrought the signs before 
αὐτοῦ, ἐν οἷς ἐπλάνησεν τοὺς λαβόντας τὸ χάραγμα τοῦ 
him, by which hemisled those who received the mark of che 
θηρίου, Kai τοὺς προσκυνοῦντας τῇ. εἰκόνι.αὐτοῦ" ζῶντες 
beast, and those who do homage to his image. Alive 
ἐβλήθησαν ot δύο εἰς τὴν λίμνην Tov πυρὸς ἱτὴν καιομένην" 
werecast the two into the lake of fire which burns 
ἐν τῷ" θείῳ. 21 Kai ot λοιποὶ ἀπεκτάνθησαν ἐν TH 
with brimstone ; and the rest were killed with the 
ῥομφαίᾳ τοῦ καθημένου ἐπὶ τοῦ ἵππου, τῇ "ἐκπο- 
sword οἵ him who sits on the horse, (the sword] which goes 
pevopevy ἐκ TOU.cTOMaTOC.avTOU' Kai πάντα τὰ ὄρνεα ἐχορ- 
forth out of his mouth ; and all the birds were 


τάσθησαν ἐκ τῶν σαρκῶν αὐτῶν. 
filled with their flesh. 


τ — τὸ (read a Dame) G@LTTraAW. * + ἐν in (a loud voice) Τ[Α]. 
¥ συνάχθητε GLTTrAW. W τὸ μέγα τοῦ (read the great supper 

Υ + τε both (free) GLrTraw. τ + τε both (small) w. 

© + τὸν LTTrAW. 4 + [oi] those a. © μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ὃ 
Γῆς καιομένης LT'TrA. & — τῷ GLITrAW. Β ἐξελθούσῃ 


came forth GLTTraw. 


ΧΧ. REVELATION. 
20 Kai 'eldov" ἄγγελον καταβαίνοντα ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, 
And I saw an angel descending out of the heaven, 
ἔχοντα τὴν Ikdeida' τῆς ἀβύσσου, Kai ἅλυσιν μεγάλην ἐπὶ 
having the key of the abyss, and a chain ‘great in 
THV-xXEipa.avTov. 2 καὶ ἐκράτησεν τὸν δράκοντα, ‘roy ὄφιν 


his hand. And he laid hold of the dragon, the ?serpent 

TOV a ~ Il 1. ? Π ὃ , δὰ \m ~ ‘ £0 
PXatov, ὃς ἔστιν ιάβολος καὶ ™ σατανᾶς, καὶ ἔδησεν 
ancient, who is_ [the] devil and Satan, and bound 


αὐτὸν χίλια ἔτη, 8 καὶ ἔβαλεν αὐτὸν εἰς τὴν ἄβυσσον, Kai 


him a thousand years, and cast him into the abyss, and 
ἔκλεισεν Bavrov,! Kai ἐσφράγισεν ἐπάνω αὐτοῦ, ἵνα μὴ 
shut him _ [up], and sealed over him, that “ποὺ 
°rhavnoy' Pra ἔθνη ert," ἄχρι τελεσθῇ τὰ χίλια 
‘he *should mislead the nations longer, until were completed the thousand 
ἔτη: “καὶ! μετὰ ταῦτα δεῖ αὐτὸν λυθῆναι" μικρὸν 
years; and after these things he must be loosed a little 
χρόνον. 

time, 


4 Kai 'eldov' θρόνους, καὶ ἐκάθισαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς, καὶ κρίμα 
And Isaw _ thrones; and theysat upon them, πᾶ judgment 
ἐδόθη αὐτοῖς" καὶ rac ψυχὰς τῶν πεπελεκισμένων διὰ 
was given tothem; and 86 souls of those beheaded on account of 
τὴν μαρτυρίαν ᾿Ιησοῦ, καὶ διὰ τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ. Kai 
the testimony of Jesus, andonaccount of the word of God, and 
οἵτινες οὐ.προσεκύνησαν "τῷ θηρίῳ," ᾿οῦτε" “τὴν εἰκόνα" αὐτοῦ, 
those who did not do homage to the beast, nor his image, 
καὶ οὐκιἔλαβον τὸ χάραγμα ἐπὶ τὸ μέτωπον. αὐτῶν," Kai ἐπὶ 
and did not receive the mark upon their forehead, and upon 
τὴν. χεῖρα.αὐτῶν" Kai ἔζησαν, Kai ἐβασίλευσαν μετὰ * χριστοῦ 
their hand ; and they lived and reigned with Christ 
¥ra' χίλια ἔτη" 5 * οἱ "δὲ" λοιποὶ τῶν νεκρῶν οὐκ Ῥάνέζησαν 
the thousand years: but the rest ofthe dead “not ‘lived again 
ἕως" τελεσθῇ τὰ χίλια ἔτη. adTn ἡ ἀνάστασις 
till may have been completed the thousand years. This [is] the ?resurrection 
« , , ” ~ ? 
ἡ πρώτη. 6 μακάριος Kai ἅγιος ὁ ἔχων μέρος ἐν τῇ ava- 
‘first. Blessed and holy he who has part in the ?resur- 
στάσει τῇ πρώτῳ᾽ ἐπὶ τούτων ὁ “θάνατος ὁ δεύτερος" οὐκ. ἔχει. 
rection first: over these the “death tsecond has no 
ἐξουσίαν, add’! ἔσονται ἱερεῖς τοῦ θεοῦ Kai τοῦ χριστοῦ, 
authority ; but they shall be priests of God and ofthe Christ, 
καὶ °Baoisvoovow' per a’rov! χίλια ἔτη. 7 Kai ὕταν re- 


and shall reign with him a thousand years. And when may 
Aes Oy Ta χίλια ἔτη, λυθήσεται ὁ σατανᾶς ἐκ τῆς 


have beencompleted the thousand years, will be loosed Satan 


out of 
φυλακῆς αὐτοῦ, ὃ καὶ ἐξελεύσεται πλανῆσαι τὰ ἔθνη τὰ 
*prison this, and 011 go out to mislead the nations which [are] 
ἐν ταῖς τέσσαρσιν γωνίαις τῆς γῆς; τὸν Twy καὶ ὅτὸν! Maywy, 
in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, 


1 ἴδον T. ) κλεῖν GLTTrAW. K ὃ ὄφις ὁ ἀρχαῖος LTTrA. 
m + ὁ LTTrAW. 2 — αὐτὸν GLTTrAW. ο πλανᾷ G. Ρ ἔτι τὰ ἔθνη GLTTYA. 
LTTrAW. λυθῆναι αὐτὸν LA. δ τὸ OnpioyGLTTrAW. + ovdé LTTraw. 


* — αὐτῶν (read [their]) GLTTraw. x + τοῦ the EGLTTrAW. 
sand) LTTraW. 2 + καὶ (read and the rest) Tr. 

‘lived till GLTTraw. © δεύτερος Javatos GLTTrA. 
{ + τὰ the (thousand) Trr[a]. 3 — τὸν LT[Tr]A. 


ἃ ἀλλὰ TTrw. 


663 
XX, And I saw an 
angel come down 


from heaven, having 
the key of the bot- 
tomless pit and a 
great chain in his 
hand. 2 And he laid 
hold on the dragon, 
that old serpent, 
which is the Devil, 
and Satan, and bound 
him a thousand years, 
3 and cast him 
into the bottomless 
pit, and shut him up, 
and set a seal upon 
him, that he should 
deceive the nations no 
more, till the thou- 
sand years should be 
fulfilled: and after 
that he must be loosed 
a little season. 


4 AndI saw thrones, 
and they sat upon 
them, and judgment 
was given unto them: 
and 7 saw the souls of 
them that were be- 
headed for the wit- 
ness of Jesus, and 
for the word of God, 
and which had not 
worshipped the beast, 
neither his image, 
neither had received 
his mark upon their 
foreheads, or in theiz 
hands; and they lived 


and reigned with 
Christ ἃ thousand 
years. ὃ But the 
rest of the dead 


lived not again until 
the thousand years 
were finished, This 
is the first resurrec- 
tion. 6 Blessed and 
holy is he that hath 
part in the first r 

surrection: on suc 

the second death hath 
no power, but they 
shall be priests of 
God and of Christ, 
and shall reign with 
him a thousand years, 
7 And when the thou- 
sand years are ex- 
pired, Satan shall be 
loosed out of his pri- 
gon, 8 and shall go out 
to deceive the nations 
which are in the four 
uarters of the earth, 
Gos and Magog, to 


16 ἐστιν ὃ which is the τ΄ 


ᾳ — καὶ 
~ > 
Y τῇ εἰκόνι EG. 


Υ — τὰ (read a thou- 
a — δὲ but LTTraw. 


Ὁ ἔζησαν ἄχρι 


6 βασιλεύ[σ]ουσιν 4 


664 


gather them together 
to battle: the num- 

ber of whom is as 
the sand of the sea. 

9 And they went up 
on the breadth of the 
earth, and compassed 
the camp of the saints 
about, and the beloved 
city : and fire came 
down from God out of 
heaven, and devoured 
them. 10 Andthe de- 
vil that deceived them 
was cast into the lake 
of fire and brimstone, 
where the beast and 
the false prophet are, 
and shall be torment- 
ed day and night for 
ever and ever. 


11 AndIsaw agreat 
white throne, and 
him that sat on it, 
from whose face the 
earth and the heaven 
fled away; and there 
was found no place 
for them. 12 And I 
saw the dead, small 
and great, stand be- 
fore God; and the 
books were opened : 
and another book was 
opened, which is the 
book of life: and 
the dead were judged 
out of those things 
which were written 
in the books, accord- 
ing to their works. 
13 And the sea gaveup 
the dead which were 
in it ; and death and 
hell delivered up the 
dead which were in 
them: and they were 
judged every man 
according to their 
works. 14 And death 
and hell were cast 
into the lake of 
fire. This is the se- 
cond death. 15 And 
whosoever was not 
found written in the 
book of life was cast 
into the lake of fire. 


XXI, And I saw a 
new heaven and a new 
earth : 


ATITOKAAYYWI2&. 


συναγαγεῖν αὐτοὺς εἰς ἢ πόλεμον, ὧν ὁ ἀριθμὸςΪ ὡς 
ἴο gather together them unto war, of whomthe number [18] as 


ἡ ἄμμος τῆς θαλάσσης. 9 καὶ ἀνέβησαν ἐπὶ τὸ πλάτος τῆς 
the sand of the sea, And they went upupon the breadth ofthe 


γῆς, καὶ "ἐκύκλωσαν" τὴν παρεμβολὴν τῶν ἁγίων, καὶ τὴν 
earth, and encircled the camp ofthe saints, and the 


πόλιν THY ἠγαπημένην᾽ Kai κατέβη πῦρ ἰἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐκ 
2city *beloved : and *came “down ‘fire from God out of 


τοῦ οὐρανοῦ," Kai κατέφαγεν αὐτούς" 10 Kai ὁ διάβολος ὁ 
the heaven and devoured them : and the devil who 


πλανῶν αὐτοὺς ἐβλήθη εἰς τὴν λίμνην τοῦ πυρὸς Kai™ 
misleads them was cast into the lake of fire and 


θείον, ὕπου ™ τὸ θηρίον Kai ὁ ψευδοπροφήτης" Kai 
of brimstone, where Care] the beast and the false prophet ; and 


βασανισθήσονται ἡμέρας Kai νυκτὸς εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν 
they shall be tormented day and night for the ages of the 
αἰώνων. 

ages. 


11 Kai εἶδον θρόνον “λευκὸν μέγαν," καὶ τὸν καθήμενον 
And Isaw a‘“throne ?white 1great and him who sits 


ΡΖ ? || q ’ ~ Ι" Ψ 2 4 r , wy « ~ ‘ « > 
ἐπ “αὐτου, ov amo προσωώποῦ εφυγεν ἢ γὴ καὶ ὁ οὐ- 
on it, 2whose ‘from face fied the earth and the hea- 


ρανός, Kai τόπος οὐχ.-εὑρέθη αὐτοῖς. 12 καὶ εἶδον τοὺς 
ven, and place was not eee for them, And Isaw the 


νεκρούς, "μικροὺς Kai μεγάλους," ἑστῶτας ἐνώπιον ‘rov θεοῦ," 
dead, small and great, standing before God, 


καὶ βιβλία τἠνεῴχθησαν"" Kai “βιβλίον ἄλλο! τἠνεῴχθη," 


and books were opened ; and 2book Xanother was opened, 


ὕ ἐστιν τῆς ζωῆς" καὶ ἐκρίθησαν οἱ νεκροὶ ἐκ τῶν 
which is [that] of life. And were judgedthe dead out of the res 


γεγραμμένων ἐν τοῖς βιβλίοις, κατὰ τὰ-ἔρ ργα. «αὐτῶν. 
written in the books Sosording, to their works. 


13 καὶ ἔδωκεν ἡ θάλασσα τοὺς Yév αὐτῷ νεκρούς," καὶ ὁ 
And %gave ‘uP: ih "sea the) 14im sit ‘dead, and 


θάνατος καὶ ὁ ἅδης Τέδωκαν" τοὺς "ἐν αὐτοῖς νεκρούς" Kai é- 
ς ρους 


XX) ΣῈ 


death and hades gave up the 7in “them ‘dead ; and they 
κρίθησαν ἕκαστος κατὰ Taépya.air@y. 14 καὶ ὁ θάνατος 
were judged each accor ei to their works : and death 
καὶ ὁ ᾧδης ἐβλήθησαν εἰς τὴν λίμνην τοῦ πυρός" οὗτός “éorw 
and adegs  werecast into the ake of fire. This is 

ὁ δεύτερος θάνατος." “ 15 Kai εἴ τις οὐχ.-εὑρέθη ἐν τῇ 
the second death. And if anyone wasnotfound in the 


βίβλῳ τῆς ζωῆς γεγραμμένος, ἐβλήθη εἰς τὴν λίμνην τοῦ 


b+ τὸν LTTrAW. 


οὐρανοῦ ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ α; --- ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ LTAW. 
ο μέγαν λευκόν GLTTrAW. 


of whom) LTTrAW. 


ἢ τοῦ θρόνου the throne @LTTraw. 


x ἡνοίχθη LTTrAW. 
kev L. 


of fire L:TTraw. 


* νερκοὺς τοὺς ἐν αὐτοῖς dead which [were] in phere GLTTraW. 
δεύτερος ἐστιν GLTAW ; ὃ δεύτερος θάνατός ἐστιν Tr. 


written, he was cast into the lake 
πυρός. 
of fire. 
Q1 Kai εἶδον οὐρανὸν καινὸν καὶ γῆν καινήν" ὁ. γὰρ 
for the first And Isaw_ a *heaven new and earth ‘a*new; forthe 
14 αὐτῶν of them GLTTraw. k ἐκύκλευσαν LTAW. lé« τοῦ 


m+ τοῦ T. n + καὶ both GLTTraw. 

Ρ ἐπάνω Tr. 4 αὐτόν GT. τ + τοῦ (read from the face 
5 τοὺς μεγάλους καὶ τοὺς μικρούς the great and the small LrTraw. 
" ἠνοίχθησαν GLTTraw. W ἄλλο βιβλίον GLTTrAw. 
y νεκροὺς τοὺς ἐν αὐτῇ dead which [were] in it ΟἸΤΎΓΑΥ. 2 ἔδω- 
Ὁ ὸ θάνατος ὃ 
© + , ἡ λίμνη τοῦ πυρός the lake 


AXI, 


πρῶτος οὐρανὸς Kai ἡ πρώτη γῆ 
first heaven andthe first 


REVELATION. 


ἀπαρῆλθεν," καὶ ἡ θά- 
earth were passed away, and the 


λασσα οὐκ ἔστιν ETL. 
sea no tis longer. 
2 Kai %yw Ἰωάννης" feldov" τὴν πόλιν τὴν ayiar', ‘Tep- 
And 1 John saw the city "holy, *Jer- 
ουσαλὴμ Kkarnr!, caraBaivovoay Βἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐκ τοῦ οὐ- 
usalem *new, cee down from God out of hea- 
ρανοῦ," ἡτοιμασμένην ὡς νύμφην κεκοσμημένην τῷ ἀνδρὶ 
ven preerered as a bride adorned for 7husband 
αὐτῆς. 3 Kai ἤκουσα φωνῆς μεγάλης ἐκ τοῦ "ovpavoi,' 
*her. And TIheard a ?voice great outof the heaven, 


λεγούσης, ᾿Ιδού, ἡ σκηνὴ τοῦ θεοῦ μετὰ τῶν ἀνθρώπων, 
saying, Behold, the eae of God [is] with men, 
καὶ σκηνώσει μετ᾽ αὐτῶν᾽ Kai αὐτοὶ ‘Navi αὐτοῦ ἔσονται, 


and he shall tabernacle with and they *peoples “his ‘shall 2306, 


καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ θεὸς "ἔσται per αὐτῶν" ἰθεὸς αὐτῶν." 4 καὶ ἐξα- 
and *himself ‘God shallbe with them their God. And ?shall 
λείψει πὸ θεὸς" πᾶν δάκρυον "ard" τῶν.ὀφθαλμῶν. αὐτῶν, 
Swipe away 1God auery, tear from their eyes ; 

καὶ °0' θάνατος οὐκιἔσται ἔτι: οὔτε πένθος, οὔτε κραυγή, 
and death shallbeno longer, nor mourning, nor crying, 
οὔτε πόνος οὐκ ἔσται ἔτι. Port τὰ πρῶτα “ἀπῆλθον." 


nor eee ik a shall *be longer, because the former things are passed away. 
it, not) 


5 Kai εἶπεν ὁ καθήμενος ἐπὶ "τοῦ θρόνου," ᾿Ιδού, καινὰ 
And said he who sits on the throne, Lo, new 


5 ll K λέ ll 1 ee τ « λ , 
πάντα ποιῶ. αἱ éyée ἵμοι, ρά OV’ OTL OUTOL OL ογοι 
allthings Imake. And hesays tome, Write, because these words 


τἀληθινοὶ καὶ πιστοί" εἰσιν. 6 Kai εἶπέν μοι, ὑΓέγονεν." 
true and faithful are. And hesaid tome, Itisdone. I 


Σεἰμι! τὸ YA" καὶ τὸ 7Q," ἡ ἀρχὴ Kai τὸ τέλος. ἐγὼ τῷ 
am the A andthe Ω, the beginning andthe end. I to him that 


διψῶντι δώσω * ἐκ τῆς πηγῆς τοῦ ὕδατος τῆς ζωῆς δωρεάν. 
thirsts willgive of the fountain of the water of life eravarvously. 


7 ὁ νικῶν κληρονομήσει ὕπάντα," καὶ ἔσομαι αὐτῷ θεός, 
He that overcomes shall inherit allthings, and Iwillbe tohim God, 


καὶ αὐτὸς ἔσται μοι “ὁ' υἱός. ὃ **0eXoic.dé! καὶ ἀπίστοις “5 
and he shall be tome son : but to (the) fearful, and unbelieving, 


καὶ ἐβδελυγμένοις Kai φονεῦσιν καὶ πόρνοις καὶ δφαρμακεῦσιν" 
and abominable, and murderers, and fornicators, and SGECErers; 


καὶ εἰδωλολάτραις, καὶ πᾶσιν τοῖς δ" Ψευδέσιν," τὸ.μέρος αὐτῶν 


shane, 


and idolaters, and all iars, their part 
ἐν τῇ λίμνῃ τῇ καιομένῃ πυρὶ Kai θείῳ, ὅ ἐστιν 
[15] in the lake which burns. with fire and eae eaer: which is [the] 
*®SedTE00¢ θάνατος." 
second death. 


ἐγώ 1 


6665 


heaven and the first 
earth were passed a- 
way; and there was 
no more sea. 


2 And I John saw 
the holy city, new 
Jerusalem, coming 
down from God out 
of heaven, prepared as 
a bride adorned for 
her husband. 3 And I 
heard a great voice 
out of heaven saying, 
Behold. the tabernacle 
of God is with men, 
and he will dwell with 
them, and they shall 
be his people, and God 
himself shall be with 
them, and δὲ their 
God, 4 And God shall 
wipe away all tears 
from their eyes; and 
there shall be no more 
death, neither sorrow, 
nor crying, neither 
shall there be any 
more pain: for the 
former things are 
passed away. 5 And 
he that sat upon the 
throne said, Behold, I 
make all things new. 
And he said unto me, 
Write: for these words 
are true and faithful. 
6 And hesaid unto me, 
It is done. Iam Alpha 
and Omega, the be- 
ginning and the end. 
will give unto him 
that is athirst of the 
fountain of the water 
of life freely. 7 He 
that overcometh shali 
inherit all things ;and 
I will be his God, and 
he shall be my son. 
8 But the fearful, and 
unbelieving, and the 
abominable, and mur- 
derers, and whore- 
mongers, and sorcer- 
ers, and idolaters, and 
all liars, shall have 
their part in the lake 
which burneth with 
fire and brimstone : 
which is the second 
death. 


da ἀπῆλθον GW ; ἀπῆλθαν LTTrA. 

καινήν GLTTrW ; ‘after ἁγίαν A. 
throne LTa. i λαὸς people aw. 
TTr 3 αὐτῶν θεός Bue 
n ἐκ "LTTrA. — ὃ 1. Ρ --- ὅτι L[TrA]. 
θρόνῳ GLTTrAw. 5 ποιῶ πάντα LTTrAW. 
ae 

— εἰμι (read [am] 7)[a]. 
b ταῦτα these things GLTTraw. 
εθ + καὶ ἁμαρτωλοῖς and sinners w. 
θάνατος ὃ δεύτερος GLTTrAW,. 


— ἐγὼ ᾿Ιωάννης GLITrAW. 


Κ μετ᾽ αὐτῶν ἔσται GLTrAW. 


— μοι LI[Tr]Aw. 


¥ ἄλφα Alpha LIVTrAW. 
¢ — oLTTraw. 
fa φαρμακοῖς GLTTrAW. 


zOL. 


& ἐκ TOU οὐρανοῦ ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ GLTTrAW. 


f εἶδον I saw placed aster 


Β θρόνον 
- θεὸς αὐτῶν 


— ὃ θεὸς (read ἐξαλείψει he shall wipe ταν ΟΥ̓ΤΙΓ ΑἸ]. 
4 ἀπῆλθαν LTTrA ; ἀπῆλθεν. Ww. 
y πιστοὶ καὶ ἀληθινοι 
~ Τέγοναν They are done LiTrw ; réovete] (read Τάγονα ἐγώ 1 am become) a. 
8. + αὐτῷ to him T[A]w. 
da τρῖς (the) δὲ δειλοῖς GLTTrAW. 
ξβ Ψψεύσταις L. 


Ξ τῷ 


ha ὁ 


666 


9 And there came 
unto me one of the 
seven angels which 
had the seven vials 
full of the seven last 
plagues, and talked 
with me, saying, Come 
hither, I will shew 
thee the bride, the 
Lamb’s wife. 10 And 
he carried me away 
in the spirit to a great 
and high mountain, 
and shewed me that 
great city, the holy Je- 
Tusalem, descending 
out of heaven from 
God, 11 having the 
glory of God: and her 
light was like unto a 
stone most precious, 
even like a jasper 
stone, clear as crystal; 
12 and had a wall 
great and high, and 
had twelve gates, and 
at the gates twelve 
angels, and names 
written thereon,which 
are the names of the 
twelve tribes of the 
children of Israel: 
13 on the east three 
gates; on the north 
three gates; on the 
south three gates; and 
on the west three 
gates. 14 And the wall 
of the city had twelve 
foundations, and in 
them the names of the 
twelve apostles of the 
Lamb. 15 And he that 
talked with me hada 
golden reed to measure 
the city, and the gates 
thereof, and the wall 
thereof. 16 And the 
city lieth foursquare, 
and the length is as 
large us the breadth: 
and he measured the 
city with the reed, 
twelve thousand fur- 
longs. The length and 
the breadth and the 
height of it are equal, 
17 And he measured 
the wall thereof, an 
hundred and forty and 
four cubits, according 
to the measure of a 
man, that is, of the an- 


i — πρός με GLTTrAW. 
[angels] were full LTTra. 
μεγάλην (read the holy city) GLTTraw. 


also) GLTTraw. 
τ τοὺς πυλῶνας Tr. 
χα ἀπὸ GLTTrAW. 


αὐτῶν δώδεκα on them twelve GLTTraAW. 
τόν ἐστιν (read [is]) GLTTrAW. 


ATIOKAAY WIS. XXI. 
9 Kai ἦλθεν ἱπρός ps" εἴς " τῶν ἑπτὰ ἀγγέλων τῶν ἐχόν- 
And came to me one ofthe seven angels which had 
των Tac ἑπτὰ φιάλας ἱτὰς γεμούσας" τῶν ἑπτὰ πληγῶν τῶν 
the seven bowls full ofthe seven “plagues 
᾽ ’; ‘ ? ’ ᾽ > ~ , ~ / 
ἐσχάτων, καὶ ἐλάλησεν μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ, λέγων, Δεῦρο, δείξω 
last, and spoke with me, saying, Come hither, I will shew 
σοι THY νύμφην τοῦ ἀρνίου τὴν γυναῖκα." 10 Kai ἀπήνεγκέν 


thee the _ bride ?Lamb's ‘the wife. And he carried away 

€ ἐν πνεύματι er’! ὄρος μέγα καὶ ὑψηλόν, καὶ ἔδειξέν 
me in{the] Spirit to amountain great and high, and shewed 
μοι THY πόλιν THY μεγάλην," τὴν ἁγίαν ‘lepovcadnp, κατα- 
me the 2city great, the holy Jerusalem, de- 
Baivovoay ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ, 11 ἔχουσαν τὴν 
scending out of the heaven from God, having the 


ὕμοιος λίθῳ τιμιω- 


δόξαν τοῦ θεοῦ" Ῥκαὶ" ὁ. φωστὴρ.αὐτῆς 
like astone most pre- 


glory of God, and her radiance [was] 
(lit. her luminary) 

»" ,, » ’΄ 

ἰάσπιδι κρυσταλλίζοντι 12 “ἔχουσάν τεὶ 


τάτῳ, ὡς λίθῳ 
also 


cious, as a‘stone jasper erystal-like ; having 
~ , ‘ 4 , rv { ~ ὃ ’ ὃ - 8 , ? ‘ 
τεῖχος μέγα Kai ὑψηλόν, τέχουσαν" πυλῶνας δώδεκα, "καὶ ἐπὶ 
awall great and _ high; having "gates twelve, and at 
‘roic πυλῶσιν' ἀγγέλους δώδεκα." καὶ ὀνόματα ἐπιγεγραμ- 
the gates angels ‘twelve, and names inscrib- 
μένα, ἅ ἐστιν τῶν δώδεκα φυλῶν τῶν!" υἱῶν ᾿Ισραήλ. 
ed, which are [those]ofthe twelve tribes ofthe sons οἵ Israel. 
1S χά πη γἀνατολῆς" πυλῶνες τρεῖς" * ἀπὸ βοῤῥᾶ 
On [86] east 27ates ‘three ; on [the] north 
πυλῶνες τρεῖς" * ἀπὸ νότου πυλῶνες τρεῖς" * ἀπὸ 
2ραῦθε ‘three ; on {the} south 2rates three, on [the] 
δυσμῶν πυλῶνες τρεῖς. 14 Kai τὸ τεῖχος τῆς πόλεως "ἔχον" 
west ?gates three, And the wall ofthe city having 
θεμελίους δώδεκα, καὶ vy αὐτοῖς" ὀνόματα τῶν δώδεκα 
“foundations ‘twelve, and in them names ofthe twelve 
ἀποστόλων τοῦ apviov. 15 καὶ ὁ λαλῶν per ἐμοῦ εἶχεν © 
apostles of the Lamb. And he speaking with me had 
κάλαμον χρυσοῦν, ἵνα μετρήσῃ τὴν πόλιν, Kai τοὺς πυ- 
a 7reed ‘golden, that he might measure the city, and 


λῶνας αὐτῆς, καὶ τὸ τεῖχος. .αὐτῆς. 16 Kai ἡ πόλις τετράγωνος 


“gates lits, and its wall. And the city ?four-square 
κεῖται, καὶ τὸ. μῆκος. αὐτῆς “τοσοῦτόν tori" ὅσον “καὶ! τὸ 
‘lies, and its length so much is as also the 


πλάτος. Kai ἐμέτρησεν τὴν πόλιν τῷ καλάμῳ ἐπὶ foradiwy'! 
breadth. And hemeasured the city withthe reed— Sfurlongs 


δώδεκα χιλιάδων" τὸ μῆκος Kai τὸ πλάτος Kai TO ὕψος αὐτῆς 


‘twelve “thousand; the length and the breadth and theheight of it 
ἴσα ἐστίν. 17 καὶ ἐμέτρησεν τὸ τεῖχος. αὐτῆς ἑκατὸν 
7equal ‘are. And he measured its wall, a hundred [and] 


SrecoapaKkovTa τεσσάρων πηχῶν 


, ? , tld ? 
fools ἀνθ ὠποῦυ, ὁ ἔστιν 
forty four cubits, 


measure ‘a“*man’s, which is, 


| — gas W; τῶν γεμόντων Which 
τὰ THY γυναῖκα τοῦ ἀρνίου LTTrAW. ἢ ἐπὶ LTTrAW. 9 — τὴν 

Ρ --- καὶ GLTTrAW. 4 ἔχουσα (omit 
5 — καὶ ἐπὶ τοῖς πυλῶσιν ἀγγέλους δώδεκα L. 
w — τῶν (read of [the]) L1Traw. 
8 ἔχων TIrA. Ὁ ἐπ᾽ 
4d — τοσοῦ- 
& τεσσερά- 


k + ἐκ of (the) Lrrra. 


τ ἔχουσα GLTTrA. 
ν + τὰ ὀνόματα the names L[Tra]. 
Υ ἀνατολῶν GW. z+ καὶ and LTTraw. 
¢ + μέτρον a Measure GLTTrA. 


€ — καὶ TTr[A]. f σταδίους EGLTrA. 


κοντα τεσσάρων LT; τεσσαρακοντατεσσάρων (τεσσε- A) EAW. 


XXI, XXII. REVELATION. 

yédov. 18 καὶ ‘iy ἡ *évdopnotc' τοῦ.τείχους. αὐτῆς 
(the) angel’s. And ‘was ‘the “structure Sof *its *wall 
ἴασπις᾽ Kai ἡ πόλις χρυσίον καθαρόν, ὁμοία" ὑάλῳ καθαρῷ. 
jasper; andthe city gold pure, like 2¢glass ‘pure: 


19 "kai! οἱ θεμέλιοι τοῦ τείχους τῆς πόλεως παντὶ λίθῳ 
and the foundations ofthe wall ofthe city withevery 2stone 


τιμίῳ κεκοσμημένοι. ὁ θεμέλιος ὁ πρῶτος ἴασπις᾽ ὁ 
‘precious | were] adorned: the foundation first, jasper; the 


δεύτερος σάπφειρος᾽ ὁ τρίτος "χαλκηδών"" ὁ τέταρτος σμά- 


second, eapphe ; the third, ee! ; the fourth, eme- 
ΡΩΝ 20 ὁ πέμπτος Pcapddrvvé'! ὁ ἕκτος Ῥσάρδιος"" ὁ 
ral the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the 
ἕβδομος χρυσόλιθος" ὁ ὄγδοος βήρυλλος" ὁ “ἔνατος" τοπά- 
seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl ; the ninth, to- 
Ziov' ὁ δέκατος "ypvodmpacoc’' ὁ ἑνδέκατος ὑάκινθος" ὁ 
paz; the tenth, chrysoprasus ; the eleventh, jacinth ἢ the 
δωδέκατος ἀμέθυστος. 21 καὶ ot δώδεκα πυλῶνες, δώδεκα 
twelfth, amethyst. And the twelve gates, twelve 
papyaoirav ἀνὰ εἷς ἕκαστος τῶν πυλώνων ἦν ἐξ ἑνὸς 
peas rae as ane ‘each of the gates was of one 
μαργαρίτου" καὶ ἡ πλατεῖα τῆς πόλεως, χρυσίον καθαρόν, ὡς 
pearl ; andthe street ofthe ΟἿΣ 2g0ld pure, as 
ὕαλος "διαφανής." 22 Kai ναὸν οὐκ εἶδον ἐν airy ὁ γὰρ 
2¢lass ‘transparent. And *temple “no ‘I ?saw in it; for the 
κύριος ὁ θεὸς ὁ παντοκράτωρ * ναὸς αὐτῆς ἐστιν, καὶ τὸ 
Lord God Almighty its temple is, and the 
ἀρνίον. 23 καὶ ἡ πόλις οὐ χρείαν ἔχει τοῦ ἡλίου, οὐδὲ τῆς 
Lamb, Andthe city no “need ‘has ofthe sun, nor ofthe 
σελην τ, ,ὔ v2 il > at « . δόξ. κει ~ (a) ~ > oe 
νης, ἵνα φαίνωσιν “éev' αὐτῇ" ἡ-γὰρ δόξα τοῦ θεοῦ egw 
moon, that they shouldshine in it; forthe glory of God en- 
τισεν αὐτήν, Kai ὁ λύχνος αὐτῆς τὸ ἀρνίον. 24 Kai “τὰ 
lightened it, and the lamp ofit [18] the Lamb. And the 


ἔθνη τῶν σωζομένων ἐν τῷ.φωτὶ αὐτῆς περιπατήσουσιν" καὶ 


nations of the saved in its light shall walk ; and 
οἱ βασιλεῖς τῆς γῆς φέρουσιν τὴν δόξαν *kat τὴν τιμὴν" αὐτῶν 
the kings oftheearth bring ΞΡΊΟΥΥ #and *honour ‘their 


εἰς αὐτήν. 25 καὶ οἱ.πυλῶνες.αὐτῆς οὐ.μὴ κλεισθῶσιν ἡμέρας" 
unto it. And its gates not at all shall beshut by day; 


νὺξ γὰρ οὐκ ἔσται ἐκεῖ. 26 Kai οἴσουσιν τὴν δόξαν καὶ 
Snight ‘for ΠΟ shall be there. Andthey shallbringthe glory and 
τὴν τιμὴν τῶν ἐθνῶν εἰς αὐτήν. 27 Kai οὐ.μὴ εἰσέλθῃ εἰς 
the honour of the nations unto it. And in no wise may enter into 
αὐτὴν πᾶν ὑκοινοῦν," καὶ ἐποιοῦν" βδέλυγμα καὶ wWev- 


it anything defiling, and practising abomination and a 
(lit. everything) 
doc’ εἰμὴ οἱ γεγραμμένοι ἐν τῷ βιβλίῳ τῆς ζωῆς τοῦ 
lie ; but those who arewritten in the book of life of the 
aoviov. 
Lamb. 
22 Kai ἔδειξεν por “καθαρὸν ποταμὸν ὕδατος ζωῆς, 


And heshewed me “pure ‘a river of water of life, 


i — ἦν (read [was]) LTA. 
κεδών 1. ο σαρδιόννξ L. 
* διαυγής GLTTrAW. 


1 ὅμοιον LTTrAW. 
4 ἔννατος EGW. 


Κα ἐνδώμησις TTr. 
P σάρδιον ἐδρυνεδνςς 
aoe o 1[A]w. 


— ἐν (read αὐτῇ for it) GLTTraw. 


667 


gel. 18 And the bnild- 
ing of the wall of it 
was of jasper : and the 
city was pure gold, 
like unto clear glass. 
19 And the founda- 
tions of the wall of the 
city were garnished 
with all manner of 
precious stones. The 
first foundation was 
jasper; the second, 
sapphire ; the third, 
a chalcedony; the 
fourth, an emerald; 
20 the fifth, sardonyx; 
the sixth, sardius ; the 
seventh  chrysolite κα 
the eighth, beryl; the 
ninth, a topaz; the 
tenth, a chrysoprasus; 
the eleventh,a jacinth; 
the twelfth, an ame- 
thyst. 21 And the 
twelve gates were 
twelve pearls; every 
several gate was of 
one pearl: and the 
street of the city was 
pure gold, as it were 
transparent glass, 
22 And I saw no tem- 
ple therein: for the 
Lord God Almighty 
and the Lamb are the 
temple of it. 23 And 
the city had no need 
of the sun, neither of 
the moon, to shine in 
it: for the glory of 
God did lighten it, 
and the Lamb 7s the 
light thereof. 24 And 
the nations of them 
which are saved shall 
walk in the light of 
it: and the kings of the 
earth do bring their 
glory and honour into 
it. 25 And the gates 
of it shall not be shut 
at all by day: for 
there shall be no night 
there. 26 And they 
shall bring the glory 
and honour of the na- 
tions into it. 27 And 
there shall in no wise 
enter into it any 
thing that defileth, 
neither whatsoever 
worketh abomination, 
or maketh a lie: but 
they which are written 
in the Lamb’s book of 
life. 


XXII. And heshew- 
ed me a pureriver of 
water of life, clear ag 


τὰ — καὶ LTA. π χαλ- 
τ χρυσόπρασον L, 
W περι- 


πατήσουσιν τὰ SOF, διὰ τοῦ φωτὸς αὐτῆς thie nations shall walk by means of its light 


GLTTraw. = vy WwW; — καὶ τὴν τιμὴν LTTra. 
he who TTr) eee ([he who] LAW) practises LTTraWw. 


y SOE common GLTTraw. 
— καθαρὸν GLTTrAW. 


z(+a 


668 


crystal, proceeding 
out of the throne of 
God and of the Lamb. 
2 Inthe midst of the 
street of it, and on 
either side of the ri- 
ver, was there the 
tree of life, which bare 
twelve 
fruits, and yielded her 
fruitevery month; and 
the leaves of the tree 
were for the healing 
of the nations. 3 And 
there shall be no more 
curse : but the throne 
of God and of the 
Lamb shall be in it ; 
and his servants shall 
serve him : 4and they 
shallsee his face ; and 
his name shall be in 
their foreheads, 5 And 
there shall be no 
nightthere; and they 
need no candle, nei- 
ther light of the sun ; 
for the Lord God giv- 
eth them light: and 
they shall reign for 
ever and ever. 


6 And he said unto 
wma, These sayings are 
faithful and true: and 
the Lord God of the 
holy prophets sent his 
angel to shew unto 
his servants the things 
which must shortly 
be done. 7 Behold, I 
come quickly : blessed 
ts he that keepeth the 
sayings of the prophe- 
ey of this book, 8AndI 
John saw these things, 
and heard them. And 
when I had heard and 
seen, I fell down to 
worship before the 
feet of the angel 
which shewed me these 
things. 9 Then saith 
he unto me, See thou 
do it not: for I am 
thy fellowservant, 
and of thy brethren 
the prophets, and of 
them which keep the 
sayings of this book: 
worship God. 10 And 
he saith unto me, Seal 
not the sayings of the 
prophecy of this book: 


manner of 


AVVO! AAW ΤᾺΣ: XXII. 
λαμπρὸν we κρύσταλλον, ἐκπορευόμενον ἐκ τοῦ θρόνου τοῦ 
bright as crystal, going forth out of the thrane 


θεοῦ καὶ τοῦ apviov. 2 ἐν μέσῳ τῆς.πλατείας.αὐτῆς, Kai TOU 
of God andofthe Lamb, In the midst of its street, and ofthe 


ποταμοῦ, ἐντεῦθεν καὶ Ῥέντεῦθεν," ξύλον ζωῆς, “ποιοῦν" 
river, on this side and on that side, [the] tree of life, producing 


4 ΄ὕ ~ u u ~ ‘ 
καρποὺς δώδεκα, κατὰ Spijva' “ἕνα' ἕκαστον ἰἀποδιδοῦν" τὸν 


2fruits 1twelve, *month Seach yielding 
‘ ᾽ ~ ‘ A , ~ , 2 , ~ 

καρπὸν αὐτοῦ" καὶ τὰ φύλλα τοῦ ξύλου εἰς θεραπείαν τῶν 

*fruit 1108; and the leaves ofthe tree for healing of the 
’ ~ 4 ~ ξ ΄ ll ᾽ » » a ay “Ἢ , 
ἐθνῶν. 3 Kai πᾶν ἑκαταναθεμα" οὐκ ἔσται ἔτι" καὶ ὁ θρόνος 
nations. And ?any Scurse 1not shallbe longer; and the throne 

(lit. every) 


τοῦ θεοῦ Kai τοῦ apviov ἐν αὐτῇ ἔσται" καὶ οἱ. δοῦλοι. αὐτοῦ 
of God and ofthe Lamb in it shall be; and his bondmen 


λατρεύσουσιν αὐτῷ" 4 καὶ ὄψονται τὸ-πρόσωπον.αὐτοῦ, Kat 
shall serve him, and they shall see his face; and 


τὸ Ὀνομα.αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τῶν. μετὠπων. αὐτῶν. 5 καὶ νὺξ οὐκ ἔσται 

his name on their foreheads [15]. And ?night πο shall be 
μέκεῖ! καὶ ‘yosiay οὐκ Exovow' λύχνου καὶ φωτὸς ἰἡλίου," 
’ 

there, and ‘need no ‘they*have ofalamp and of iight of[the]sun, 


ev ’ « 4 m ‘ ll ’ Ul . " U 
ὅτι κύριος ὁ θεὸς πι φωτίζει" αὐτούς" καὶ βασιλεύσουσιν 
because {the} Lord Ged enlightens them, and they shall reign 


εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας THY αἰώνων. 


to the ages of the ages. 
6 Kai εἶπέν μοι, Οὗτοι οἱ λόγοι πιστοὶ καὶ ἀληθινοί" 
And hesaid tome, These words [are] faithful and true; 


καὶ ἃ κύριος ὁ θεὸς τῶν Cayiwy' προφητῶν ἀπέστειλεν τὸν 
and [the] Lord God ofthe holy prophets sent 
ἄγγελον αὐτοῦ δεῖξαι τοῖς.δούλοις. αὐτοῦ ἃ δεῖ γε- 
‘angel this toshew his bondmen the things which must come 
νέσθαι ἐν.τάχει. 7 Ἰδού, ἔρχομαι ταχύ. μακάριος ὁ 
to pass soon. Behold, Iam coming quickly. Blessed [is] he who 
~ 4 , ~ ΄ ~ , ’ ‘ 
τηρῶν τοὺς λόγους τῆς προφητείας τοῦ.βιβλίου.τούτου. ὃ “Καὶ 
keeps the words ofthe prophecy of this book. And 
ἐγὼ" ᾿Ιωάννης ὁ τβλέπων ταῦτα καὶ ἀκούων"" 
I John {was] he who [was] seeing *these *things ‘and “hearing. 
καὶ ὅτε ἤκουσα καὶ ξέἔβλεψα! 'ἔπεσα" προσκυνῆσαι ἔμπροσθεν 
And when Iheard and saw I fell down to do homage before 
τῶν ποδῶν TOU ἀγγέλου τοῦ “δεικνύοντός" μοι ταῦτα. 9 καὶ 
the feet ofthe angel who[was]  shewing me these things. And 
λέγει μοι, “Opa py σύνδουλός σου γάρ" εἰμι, καὶ 
he says to me, See [thou doit] not: *fellowbondman Sof*thee ‘for *I~am, and 
τῶν.ἀδελφῶν.σου THY προφητῶν, καὶ THY τηρούντων τοὺς 
of thy brethren the prophets, and of those who keep the 
λόγους τοῦ.βιβλίου.τούτου: τῷ θεῷ προσκύνησον. 10 Kai 
words of this book : to God do homage. And 
λέγει μοι, Μὴκσφραγίσῃς τοὺς λόγους τῆς προφητείας τοῦ 


he says to me, Seal not the words of the prophecy 


’ , fo wt " c 4 x > ΄ ? « ? ὃ 
fartho ποτε ΒΡ ΠΕ, βιβλίου τούτου Ὅτι" 0 καιρὸς * ἑγγὺς ἔστιν. ll o aot 
11 Hethat is unjust, *book lof “this; becausethe time “near lis. He that is un- 

Ὁ ἐκεῖθεν LITrAW. © ποιῶν T. ἃ μῆναν L. e€ — ἕνα GLTTrAW. f ἀποδιδοὺς TTrA- 


& κατάθεμα GLITrAW. 
ἔχουσιν TTr) χρείαν LTTrAW 3 οὐ χρεία G. 
τὰ φωτιεῖ (φωτίσει L) ἐπ᾽ shall enlighten GLTTraw. 
spirits of the GLTTrAaw. 
ταῦτα GLTrAW ; βλέπων καὶ ἀκούων ταῦτα T. 
Y — γάρ GLITrAw. 


TOS T. 


h ἔτι longer @LTTrAw. i οὐχ ἕξουσιν they shall have no (οὐκ 
k + φωτὸς of light Lrtra. 1 — ἡλίον w. 

n + 9 the LTTrA. ο πνευμάτων TOV 
4 κἀγὼ LITrAW. τ ἀκούων καὶ βλέπων 
8 ἔβλεπον W. τ ἔπεσον EG. ἃ δεικνύν 
W — ὅτι @LTTrAW x + yap for (the time) LrTraw. 


P + katana GLTTraw. 


XXII. REVELATION. 

κῶν ἀδικησάτω ἔτι καὶ Τὸ ῥυπῶν" ῥυπωσάτω" 

righteous let him be unrighteous still; and he ὑμαῦ is filthy let him be filthy 
ἔτι" καὶ ὁ δίκαιος δδικαιωθήτω! ἔτι καὶ ὁ ἅγιος 
still ; and he that [is] righteous let him be righteous still; and he that [is] holy 


ἁγιασθήτω ἔτι. 12 Kai! ἰδού, ἔρχομαι ταχύ, Kai ὁ 
let him be sanctified still. Aud, behold, Iam eominy avickly, and 

ισθός μ ov μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ, ἀποδοῦναι ἑκάστῳ ὡς τὸ ἔργον “αὐτοῦ 
πο ΝΣ my with me, to render toeach as work this 


ἔσται." 18 ἐγώ deine τὸ A" καὶ τὸ fQ," Sapx7) καὶ τέλος, 
shall be. am the A _ and the 2. (the] beginning and end, 

ὁ πρῶτος Kai ὁ ἔσχατος." 14 Μακάριοι οἱ ποιοῦν- 
the first and the last. Blessed [are] they that do 


ἡ-.ἐξουσία.αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τὸ 
their 7authority to the 


εἰσέλθωσιν εἰς τὴν πόλιν. 
they should goin to the city. 


πόρνοι Kai 
and the fornicators, and 


τες τὰς ἐντολὰς αὐτοῦ," ἵνα ἔσται 
his commandments, that 4shall *be 
ξύλον τῆς ζωῆς, Kai τοῖς πυλῶσιν 

tree of life, and by the ee 


15 ἔξω ise" οἱ κύνες Kai οἱ φαρμακοὶ Kai οἱ 
But without [are] the dogs, andthe sorcerers, 


« 
οι 


φονεῖς καὶ οἱ εἰδωλολάτραι, καὶ πᾶς *o' φιλῶν καὶ 
the murderers, and the idolaters, and everyone that loves and 
ποιῶν" ψεῦδος. 
practises a 116, 
16 ᾿Εγὼ Ἰησοῦς ἔπεμψα τὸν. ἄγγελόν.μον μαρτυρῆσαι 
I Jesus sent mine angel to testify 
ὑμῖν ταῦτα Meri ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις" ἐγώ εἰμι ἡ ῥίζα καὶ 


to you these things in the assemblies, I am the root and 


ib! AaBid," ὁ λαμπρὸς Peai" “ὀρθρι- 
τὸ γένος "τοῦ αβι ὁ ἀστὴρ ὁ λαμπρὸς Ρκαὶ ὄρθρι 
the offspring of Davids the ‘star *bright 7and morn- 
voc.’ 17 Kai ro πνεῦμα καὶ ἡ νύμφη λέγουσιν, τ᾿ Ἔλθε"" 
ing. And the Spirit and the bride Bay, Come. 
καὶ ὁ ἀκούων εἰπάτω, "ENO." καὶ ὁ διψῶν "ἐλθέτω," 
And hethat hears lethimsay, Come, Andhe that thirsts let him come, 
‘kai" ὁ θέλων λαμβανέτω τὸ" ὕδωο ζωῆς δωρεάν. 


and hethat wills, let him take 


18 “Συμμαρτυροῦμαι.γὰρ' παντὶ 5 ἀκούοντι τοὺς λόγους 
For I jointly testify to everyone: hearing the words 


τῆς προφητείας τοῦ.βιβλίου. τούτου" ἐάν τις γϑἐπιτιθῇ πρὸς 


the water of iife pretuitously. 


669 


let him be unjust still: 
and he which is filthy, 
let him be filthy still: 
and he that is right- 
eous, let him be right- 
eous still: and he 
that is holy, let hizo 
be holy still. 12 And, 
behold, I come quick- 
ly ; and my reward iz 
with me, to give every 
man according as his 
work shall be. 13 I 
am Alpha and Omega, 
the beginning and the 
end, the first and the 
last. 14 Blessed are 
they that do his com- 
mandments, that they 
may have right to the 
tree of life, and may 
enter in through the 
gates into the city. 
15 For without are 
dogs, and sorcerers, 
and whoremongers, 
and murderers, and 
idolaters, and whoso- 
ever loveth and mak- 
eth a lie. 


16 I Jesus have seni 
mine angel to testify 
unto you these things 
in the churches. I ara 
the root and the of- 
spring of David, ana 
the bright and morn- 
ing star. 17 And the 
Spirit and the bride 
say, Come. And let 
him that heareth say, 
Come. And let him 
that is athirst come. 
And whosoever will, 
let him take the water 
of life freely. 


18 For I testify un- 
to every man that 
heareth the words of 


a a the prophecy of this 

ofthe prophecy of this book, τε anyone shouldadd to book, If aiy τα κτὶ ΓΙ 
ταῦτα," ἐπιθήσει 0 θεὸς ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν" τὰς πληγὰς τὰς γε- add unto these things, 
these things, *shall 3add 1God unto him the plagues which are God shall add unto 
aa balz him the plagues that 

γραμμένας ae βιβλίῳ.τούτῳ᾽ 19 Kai ἐάν τις ὕδάφαιρ py are written in this 
written this book. And if anyone Bee take book: 19 and if any 
on man shall take a- 

ἀπὸ τῶν Vas βίβλου" τῆς.προφητείας. ταύτης, “*agpaipy- way from the words 
from the words of [the] book of this prophecy, 4shall3take of the book of this 
1 θεὸ εαβί(βλουὶ τῇ - » prophecy, God shall 
cet ὁ θεὸς τὸ-μέρος.αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ Βιβχουν τῆς Ζωῆς, καὶ take away his part 
“away God his part from [the] book of life, and out of the book of life, 
Yo ῥυπαρὸς the filthy [one] GLTTraw. τ ῥυπανθήτω LTTrA ; ῥυπαρευθήτω G@w. 5 δικαιο- 
σύνην ποιησάτω let him practise righteousness GLTTraw. Ὁ — καὶ GLTTrAW. © ἐστὶν 


αὐτοῦ (read his work is) LTTrA. d εἰμι (read [am]) GLITraW. 

τῶτ, 8 ὃ (--- ὁ 1{4}) πρῶτος καὶ ὁ (-- ὁ L[a)) ἔ 

GLTA) τέλος GLTTrA. 

Ee GLTTraW. k_ ὃ (read loving aud practising) Lrtraw. 
- ἐπὶ (read ταῖς to the) W3 ev L. — Tov GLTTrAW. 

Ρ — καὶ ie ον 4 ὃ πρωϊνός [88 ἘΣ GLTTrAW. 

GLTTraw. — καὶ GLTTrAW. Υ λαβέτω GLITraw. 

x + 7» who Gas ) GLTTraw. 75 ἐπιθῇ ἐπ᾽ αὐτά GLITraAW. 

“8 Ὁ τῷ GLTTrAW. > ἀφέλῃ GLTTrAW. ca τοῦ βιβλίον GLTTrAW. 

2 τοῦ ξύλου the tree GLITraW. 


© ἄλφα Alpha LTTraw. 
atos, (+ ἡ the GLTA) ἀρχὴ καὶ (+ τὸ the 
h πλύνοντες Tas στολὰς αὐτῶν Wash their robes LTTré 


i— δὲ 


l ποιῶν Kat φιλῶν τ. 


© Δαυείδ LTTra; aoe Gw. 
F Ἔρχου GLITraW. 
~ Μαρτυρὼ ἐγὼ I _testify ΝΟΣ 
18 ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν ὁ θεὸς T. 


ρχέσθω ς 


da ἀφελεῖ GLTTraW. 


670 ΑἸΠΟΚΑΛΥΨΙΣ. XXII. 


and out of the hol f 2,-I| = , mol igh 17 \ ~ , 
city, and from th, ek THC πόλεως τῆς ἁγίας, ἐκα! τῶν γεγραμμένων 
things which are writ- outof the 2city holy, and of those who are written 
ten in this book. ἐν " βιβλίῳ τούτῳ. 
in “book ‘this. 
die ieee 20 Aéye ὁ αρτυρῶν ταῦτα, Nai ἔρχομαι ταχύ. 
Surely τς come quickly. ®Says ‘he 7who eee “these ®things, Yea, lamcoming quickly. 
men. Even 80, come, ᾿ 4 i 6 Ζ ᾿ by 
ΤΕΣ ΞΕ dee Ναί," ἔρχου; κύριε Ἰησοῦ. 
en; yea, come, Lord Jesus. 
p2iyEhe grace of σας 2] Ἢ χάρις τοῦ κυρίου. "ἡμῶν" ᾿Ιησοῦ 'χριστοῦ!ῤ —_—era 
with you all, Amen. ; The Εὐϑῦῦ ΟΣ one Lord Jesus Christ (be! with 
πάντων" "ὑμῶν." ° PApuny.' 4 
2411 you. Amen, 

f— ἐκ L[TrA]. 8 — και (read τῶν which) GLITraw. h τῷ GLTTrAW. 1— Nas 
GLTTraAW ; (join Amen with quickly ETr). k — ἡμῶν (read of the Lord) gLrtraw. 
1_— χριστοῦ LITra. τὰ — πάντων Tra. 2 — ὑμῶν GLTTrAW. ° + τῶν ἁγίων the 
saints GTraW. Pp —’Aunv GLTTrA. 4 + ἀποκάλυψις Iwavvov Revelation of John a. 


HAO. 


b's Pa 


Ν τ. ἐρ ἀρ “ypu 
pire, ve. σοῦ om 


i Pdpw, Rta wikia tn μῶν tnoan ty 


ἐπ εὶς wy gee νὲ καὶ ἴω τι dite ne 
ie; @x's 7 ᾿ ᾿ Ρ Ν iY ‘ ᾿ ᾿ 
- "Ἢ Sara’ “Wa, bein wos ; 
τῇ ? 01) ἕν γῆν: 
2 - 
.-. δ = 
Pon Dp es 4 ἃ ~~ am frad- (Ὁ ules Lay Aw ἃ 0 Fe J ιν 
moe ie Patent aha ον» ie irs, τὸς thedcow cf'tiaig. Οἱ =e 
“= xe δὼ hts oe where IPA "ὦ dyads ΠῚ 
wey gee 5 haste GiLETes 5 ὁ ro Leer ae laters ΓΖ. 
ae Ξ ᾿ 7 
a Η 
3 a 
roy ω; 4 Ν i 
i ey i = : 
ohh ΡΥ 
iJ 
oe | 
a _o 
- cr VIP, 
μὰ 
un 
| ἃ ; 
i 
a 
| 
aN 
ἴω _ 
a ἣ “ὮΝ 7 
᾿ - ᾿ ἐὰν 7 
> a 


rinceton Theologic al Seminary-Speer Library 


VOLUN AMM 


1 1012 01097 0632 
Date Dug 


‘ote ee ee 


RAN 
~~ > 

᾿ a 
a : 


Be tee SILLS 


oe ee ν 


: : πον PS Σ, 
a, ane ee th ΝΣ πε Χο SK 


tate τ 


a 
Ss 


ES 
ee GG: are Sh ὅκ σ δΣ LOI ILI IIE. 


ed ee ee 


Se 


\ 


