CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


'm 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101105025 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 
AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VTSy.  AECHDEACON  F.  W.  FAKEAE,  D.D.,  F.E.S.— RIGHT  EEV.  H.  COTTEEILL,  D.D.,  F.E.S.E 
— VEEY  EEV.  PEINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— EEV.  CANON  G.  EAWUNSON,  M.A. 
—EEV.  A.  PLUMMHE,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoke  and  Toeonto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  REV.  H.  1).  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 


DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 
AND   BY  THE 


REY.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


ROMANS. 


By  rev.   J.  BAEMBY,  B.D., 

VICAR  OF  PITTINGTON. 

igomiktic0 : 
By  rev.   professor  J.   RADFORD  THOMSON,   M.A, 

igomilics  by  Various  Q\,utl)ors : 

REV.   C.    H.   IRWIN,   M.A.  REV.  S.  R.  ALDRIDGE,  B.A.,  LL.B. 

REV.  T.   F.   LOCKYER,   B.A.  REV.    R.    M.   EDGAR,   M.A. 


PUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoek  and  Toronto, 


THE  EPISTLE  OF 

PAUL   TO    THE    ROMANS, 

INTRODUCTION. 


§  1.  Adthenticitt. 

Thk  authenticity  of  this  Epistle  is  indisputable,  and  acknowledged  ;  except 
that  Baur  has  questioned  that  of  the  two  concluding  chapters.  The 
relation  of  these  two  chapters  to  the  body  of  the  Epistle,  and  the  evidence 
of  their  having  been  written  as  well  as  the  rest  by  St.  Paul,  will  be 
considered  in  loco.  The  internal  evidence  of  the  Epistle  as  a  whole  is  in 
itself  convincing.  In  tone  of  thought,  method  of  argument,  and  style,  it 
has  all  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  St.  Paul.  It  may  be  safely  said  that 
no  one  could  possibly  have  written  it  but  himself.  The  external  evidence 
is  no  less  complete,  including  the  testimony  of  such  early  Fathers  as 
Clement  of  Borne,  Polycarp  ('  Ad  Philip.'),  Justin  Martyr,  Ignatius,  and 
Ii'cnseuB. 

§  2.   Time  and  Place. 

Equally  certain  is  our  knowledge  of  the  time  and  place  of  writing, 
derived  from  intimations  in  the  Epistle  itself,  in  conjunction  with  what 
is  found  in  other  Epistles  and  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  It  was  written 
from  Corinth,  in  the  spring  of  A.D.  68  (according  to  the  received  chronology 
of  the  Acts),  when  St.  Paul  was  about  to  leave  that  place  to  take  the  alms 
he  had  collected  to  Jerusalem  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  Christians  there,  as 
related  in  Acts  xx.  3.  The  proofs  of  this  conclusion  are  briefly  these :  It 
appears  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  that  St.  Paul,  after  staying  for  more 
than  two  years  at  Ephesus,  "  purposed  in  the  Spirit,  when  he  had  passed 
through  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  to  go  to  Jerusalem,  saying.  After  I  have 
been  there,  I  must  also  see  Eome"  (Acts  xix.  21).     He  sent  Timotheus 

ROMANS.  b 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


and  ErastuB  before  him  into  Macedonia,  intending  to  follow  them  before 
long.  His  departure  seems  to  have  been  hastened  by  the  tumult  raised  by 
Demetrius  the  silversmith,  after  which  he  proceeded  at  once  to  Macedonia, 
and  thence  to  Greece  (i.e.  Achaia),  remaining  three  months  at  Corinth. 
His  intention  at  first  was  to  sail  thence  direct  to  Syria,  so  aa  to  reach 
Jerusalem  without  unnecessary  delay ;  but,  in  order  to  elude  the  Jews  who 
laid  wait  for  him,  he  changed  his  plan  at  the  last  moment,  and  returned  to 
Macedonia,  whence  he  hastened  towards  Jerusalem,  hoping  to  reach  it  before 
Pentecost  (Acts  xx.  X — 6, 13 — 16).  His  purpose  in  going  there  was,  as  just 
stated,  to  carry  the  alms  from  various  Gentile  Churches  which  he  had 
long  been  soliciting  from  them  for  the  poor  Jewish  Christians  in  Palestine ; 
and  his  previous  tour  through  Macedonia  and  Achaia  had  been  for  re- 
ceiving these  alms.  He  declared  this  to  have  been  the  purpose  of  his  visit 
to  Jerusalem,  in  his  defence  before  Felix  (Acts  xxiv.  17)  ;  and  in  both  his 
Epistles  to  the  Corinthians  his  design  is  distinctly  spoken  of.  In  the  first, 
written  probably  during  his  stay  at  Ephesus,  he  alludes  to  "  the  collection 
for  the  saints  "  as  something  already  going  on,  and  already  urged  upon  the 
Corinthians ;  he  directs  them  to  offer  for  the  purpose  every  Lord's  day,  so 
as  to  have  the  money  ready  for  him  when  he  comes  for  it,  as  he  hopes  to 
do  before  long,  after  first  passing  through  Macedonia  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1 — 8). 
In  the  Second  Epistle,  written  probably  from  Macedonia,  after  he  had  left 
Ephesus  and  was  on  his  way  to  Achaia,  he  refers  to  the  subject  at  length, 
saying  how  liberal  the  Macedonians  had  been,  and  how  he  had  incited  them 
by  boasting  to  them  of  the  Corinthians  having  been  ready  a  year  ago; 
and  he  implores  the  latter  not  to  let  his  boasting  be  in  vain  in  this  bebalf, 
having  sent  certain  brethren  to  them  to  get  the  contributions  ready  in 
preparation  for  his  own  arrival  (2  Cor.  viii.,  ix.).  Now,  inasmuch  as  in 
ch.  XV.  25,  eeq.,  of  this  epistle  he  speaks  of  being  on  the  point  of  going  unto 
Jerusalem  to  minister  unto  the  saints,  and  of  both  the  Macedonians  and 
Achaians  having  already  made  their  contribution  for  the  purpose,  it  is  evident 
that  he  wrote  his  ktter  to  the  Romans  after  he  had  been  in  Achaia,  but  before 
going  to  Jerusalem.  And,  further,  he  must  have  sent  it  before  leaving  Corinth, 
or  its  port  Cenchrea ;  for  he  commends  to  them  Phoebe  of  Cenchrea,  who 
was  on  the  point  of  going  thence  to  Rome,  and  who  was  probably  the 
bearer  of  the  letter  (ch.  xvi.  1,  2)  ;  he  sends  salutations  from  Erastus  the 
chamberlain  of  the  city  (which,  after  mention  of  Cenchrea,  must  be  con- 
cluded to  be  Corinth)  ;  and  from  Gains,  then  his  host,  who  was  probably 
the  GaiuB  mentioned  in  1  Cor.  i.  14  as  having  been  one  of  the  two  baptized 
at  Corinth  by  himself  (ch.  xvi.  23),  Further,  the  time  of  year  may  be 
gathered  from  the  narrative  in  Acts.  The  letter  was  sent,  as  we  have  seen, 
on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Jerusalem;  navigation  after  the  winter 
season  had  then  begun ;  for  he  had  first  intended  to  go  by  sea  to  Syria 
(Acts  XX.  3)  :  after  his  journey,  in  consequence  of  his  change  of  intention, 
to  Macedonia,  he  spent  Easter  at  Philippi  (Acts  xx.  6)  ;  and  he  hoped  to 
reach  Jerusalem  by  Pentecost  (Acts  xx.  16).     Thus  the  time  must  hay* 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAQL  TO  THE   E0MAN8,  iU 

been  early  spring — the  year,  aocording  to  received  dates,  having  been,  aa 
said  above,  a.d.  58.  We  may  oonolnde  the  letter  to  have  been  finished 
and  committed  to  Phoebe  before  he  changed  his  intention  of  going  by  seA 
in  consequence  of  the  discovered  plots  of  the  Jews  against  him  (Acts  xx.  8) ; 
for  in  the  letter,  though  he  expresses  apprehension  of  danger  from  the 
Jews  in  JudsBft  after  his  arrival  there  (ch,  xv.  31),  he  gives  no  intimation  of 
any  plots  against  him  known  of  at  the  time  of  writing ;  and  be  speaks  as 
if  he  were  about  to  go  at  once  to  Jernsalem. 

Thus  our  knowledge  of  the  time  and  circumstances  of  the  sending  of 
this  Epistle  is  exact,  and  the  correspondence  between  the  references  to  them 
in  the  Epistle  and  elsewhere  complete.  Further  correspondence  of  this 
kind  is  found  in  oh.  i,  10 — 13  and  xv.  22 — 28  compared  with  Acts  xix.  21.. 
In  the  Epistle  is  expressed  his  fixed  intention  of  visiting  Rome  after 
carrying  the  alms  of  the  Ohnrches  to  Jerusalem,  as  well  as  hia  desire  to  do 
so  having  been  entertained  for  some  time  past ;  and  from  Acts  xix.  21  it 
appears  that  the  desire  had  been  already  in  his  mind  before  he  left  Ephesua 
for  Macedonia.  His  further  intention,  expressed  in  the  Epistle,  of  prooeed-> 
ing  from  Bome  to  Spain,  does  not  indeed  appear  in  Acts  xix.  21 ;  but  ho 
may  have  had  it,  though  there  was  no  need  to  mention  it  there ;  or  he  may 
have  enlarged  the  plan  of  westward  travel  subsequently.  For  consideration 
of  the  reason  of  his  strong  desire  to  visit  Some,  of  his  having  been  "  let 
hitherto  "  (ch.  i,  13),  and  of  his  finally  determining  to  take  Borne  only  on 
hiB  way  to  Spain,  see  notes  on  ch.  i.  13  and  xv.  21,  etc. 

§  9.  Occasion  op  Weitino. 

Thus  the  occasion  and  reason  of  St.  Paul's  sending  a  letter  to  the  Roman 
Christians  at  the  time  he  did  are  sufficiently  obvious.  He  had  long  been 
intending  to  visit  them  as  soon  as  he  had  finished  the  business  he  had  in 
hand ;  he  had  probably  been  for  some  time  preparing  his  long  and  import 
tant  letter,  which  could  not  have  been  written  hastily,  to  be  sent  at  the  first 
favourable  opportunity ;  and  Phoebe's  voyage  to  Rome  afforded  him  one. 
But  why  his  letter  took  the  form  of  an  elaborate  dogmatic  treatise,  and 
what  was  the  then  condition,  as  well  as  the  origin,  of  the  Roman  Church, 
are  farther  questions  that  have  been  much  discussed.  So  much  hag  been 
written  on  these  subjects,  to  be  fonnd  in  various  commentaries,  that  it  has 
not  been  thought  necessary  here  to  go  at  any  length  over  beaten  ground. 
It  may  suffice  to  show  briefly  what  is  obvious  or  probable  with  regard  to 
these  qneationa. 

§  4.  Obioin  ot  thi  Roman  Ghubch. 

First,  as  to  the  origin  of  the  Roman  Church.  It  had  sot  been  founded 
by  St.  Paul  himself,  since  it  is  plain  from  the  Epistle  that,  when  be  wrgte, 
he  bad  never  been  to  Rome,  and  only  knew  of  the  Roman  Church  by  report. 


INTEODUCTION  TO 


Nor  does  the  narrative  of  the  Acts  allow  any  time  when  he  could  possibly 
have  visited  Rome.  The  tradition,  which  in  time  came  to  be  accepted, 
that  St.  Peter  had  already  founded  it,  cannot  be  true.  Eusebius  ('  Eccl. 
Hist.,'  ii.  14),  expressing  this  tradition,  says  that  he  had  gone  to  Rome  in 
the  reign  of  Claudius  to  encounter  Simon  Magus,  and  thus  brought  the 
light  of  the  gospel  from  the  East  to  those  in  the  West ;  and  in  his '  Chronioon' 
he  gives  the  second  year  of  Claudius  (t.«.  a.d.  42)  as  the  date,  adding  that 
he  remained  at  Rome  twenty  years.  The  probable  origin  of  this  tradition 
is  well  and  concisely  shown  in  the  Introduction  to  Romans  in  the  '  Speaker's 
Commentary '  (pp.  4,  5) .  Enough  to  say  here  that  it  has  no  trustworthy 
evidence  in  its  favour,  and  that  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  two  facts — firstly, 
that  certainly  up  to  the  time  of  the  apostolic  conference  at  Jerusalem 
(a.d.  52)  Peter  was  still  there  (cf .  Acts  xii.  4  ;  xv.  7  ;  Gal.  ii.  1,  seq.)  ;  and 
secondly,  that  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  St.  Paul  makes  no  mention 
whatever  of  St.  Peter,  as  he  surely  would  have  done  if  so  prominent  an 
apostle  had  founded,  or  even  so  far  visited,  the  Roman  Church.  A  different 
and  independent  tradition,  to  the  effect  that  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  jointly 
preached  the  gospel  at  Rome,  and  were  both  martyred  there,  is  too  well 
supported  to  be  set  aside.  It  is  attested  by  Irenseus,  iii.  c.  i.  and  c.  iii.  2, 
and  by  other  early  authorities  quoted  in  addition  to  Irenseus  by  Eusebius, 
namely,  Dionysius  of  Corinth  (Eusebius,  '  Eccl.  Hist.,'  ii.  25),  Caius,  an 
ecclesiastic  of  Rome  in  the  time  of  Pope  Zephyrinus  (ibid.),  and  Origen 
('Eccl.  Hist.,'  iii.  1).  Eusebius  also  quotes  the  aforesaid  Caius  as  pointing 
in  proof  to  the  monuments  of  the  two  apostles  in  his  time  existing  on  the 
Vatican  and  on  the  road  to  Ostia  (ii.  25).  Indeed,  even  apart  from  this 
testimony,  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  account  for  the  general  and  early 
association  of  the  see  of  Rome  with  the  name  of  St.  Peter,  had  that  apostle 
had  no  connection  with  the  Roman  Church  at  some  time  before  his  death. 
But  it  must  have  been  a  considerable  time  after  the  writing  of  the  Epistle 
to  the  Romans,  and  after  the  writing  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  too, 
which  was  undoubtedly  sent  by  Paul  from  Rome  during  his  detention  there, 
in  which  the  history  of  the  Acts  leaves  him.  For  in  it,  though  he  speaks 
much  of  the  state  of  things  in  the  Church  at  Rome,  he  says  nothing  about 
St.  Peter.  Further,  the  statement  of  Irenseus  that  Peter  and  Paul  together 
founded  (Oe/ieXiovvTinv)  the  Church  in  Rome  cannot  be  accepted  in  the  sense 
that  either  of  them  first  planted  it  there ;  for  St.  Paul  spoke  of  it  as 
existing,  and  even  notorious,  when  he  wrote  his  letter.  But  still  they 
may,  at  a  later  period,  have  founded  it  in  the  sense  of  consolidating  and 
organidng  it,  and  providing,  as  they  are  said  to  have  done,  for  its  govern- 
ment after  their  own  decease.  This  is  not  the  place  for  considering  why, 
in  after-times,  the  Church  of  Rome  came  to  be  regarded  as  peculiarly  St. 
Peter's  see,  whereas  in  the  early  testimonies  above  referred  to  the  two 
apostles  are  spoken  of  together  without  distinction.  St.  Paul  at  any  rate 
in  point  of  time,  has  been  seen  to  have  had  to  do  with  it  before  St.  Peter 
though  neither  of  them  can  have  been  its  original  planter. 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS. 


It  Is  further  higUy  improbable  tbat  any  other  of  the  apostles  properly 
so  called  had  planted  it.  For  not  only  are  there  no  traces  of  any  tradition 
connecting  it  with  any  apostles  but  Peter  and  Paul,  but  also  the  absence  o£ 
allusion  to  any  apostle  in  St.  Paul's  Epistle  is  strongly  against  the  snpposi* 
tion.  It  is  true  that  St.  Paul's  original  agreement  with  James,  Cephas, 
and  John  (Gtal.  ii  9),  and  his  avowed  principle  of  not  building  on  any  other 
man's  foundation  (ch.  xv.  20 ;  2  Oor.  x.  13 — 16),  cannot  properly  be  pressed 
as  affording  a  conclusive  argument.  For  if  his  way  of  addressing  the 
Roman  Church  be  considered,  it  will  be  seen  that  he  carefully  avoids 
assuming  personal  jurisdiction  over  it,  such  as  we  find  him  distinctly 
claiming  over  Churches  of  his  own  foundation.  In  virtue  of  his  general 
apostleship  to  the  Grentiles,  he  is  bold  to  admonish  and  demand  a  hearing ; 
but  he  does  not  propose  in  his  letter  to  take  the  reins,  or  set  things  in 
order  among  them  when  he  comes,  but  rather  to  be  "  filled  with  their 
company  "  with  a  view  to  mutual  refreshment  and  edification,  during  a 
short  stay  with  them  on  his  way  to  Spain.  Such  a  mode  of  address, 
accompanying  a  doctrinal  treatise  meant  doubtless  for  the  edification,  not 
of  the  Romans  only,  but  of  the  Church  at  large,  is  consistent  with  the 
supposition  of  even  an  apostle  having  first  founded  the  Church  addressed. 
Still,  for  the  reasons  above  given,  any  personal  agency  of  any  of  the  apostles 
themselves  in  the  first  planting  of  the  Roman  Church  is,  to  say  the  least, 
highly  improbable. 

Who  had  first  planted  it  we  have  no  means  of  determining.  There  are 
many  possibilities.  The  large  number  of  people  from  aU  parts  of  the 
empire  who  resorted  to  Rome  would  be  likely  to  include  some  Christians ; 
and  wherever  believers  went,  they  preached  the  gospeL  "  Strangers  from 
Rome  "  were  present  at  Pentecost,  and  some  of  them  may  have  been  con- 
verted, and  so,  having,  perhaps,  partaken  of  the  Pentecostal  gift,  carried 
the  gospel  to  Rome.  Among  those  who  were  scattered  abroad  after  the 
martyrdom  of  Stephen,  and  "  went  everywhere  preaching  the  Word,"  some 
may  have  gone  to  Rome.  For  though  in  Acts  viii.  1  they  are  said  only 
to  have  been  scattered  through  the  regions  of  Judeea  and  Samaria,  so  as 
to  lead  up  to  the  account  of  Philip's  preaching  in  Samaria,  yet  some  of 
them  are  mentioned  afterwards  as  travelling  as  far  as  Phoenice  and  CypruB 
and  Antioch,  and  there  preaching  ;  and  others  may  have  travelled  as  far  aa 
Rome. 

Further,  though  we  have  seen  sufficient  reason  for  concluding  that  no 
apostle,  properly  so  called,  had  visited  Rome,  yet  evangelists  and  persons 
endowed  with  prophetic  gifts  may  possibly  have  been  sent  from  the  com- 
pany of  the  apostles.  Among  the  Christians  at  Rome  greeted  in  the  Epistle 
are  Andronicus  and  Junia  (or  Junias),  "  of  note  among  the  apostles,"  who 
had  been  in  Christ  before  St.  Paul.  These  may  be  supposed  to  have 
belonged  to  the  circle  of  the  twelve,  and  may  have  been  instrumental  in 
planting  the  gospel  in  Rome.  Again,  among  others  saluted,  several  are 
spoken  of  aa  known  to  St.  Paul  elsewhere,  and  fellow-workers  with  him,  so 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


that  some  of  his  own  associates  had  evidently  contributed  to  the  result; 
among  whom  were  notably  Aquila  and  Prisoilla,  in  whose  house  a  congrega- 
tion assembled  (oh.  xvi.  5).  In  fact,  from  many  sources,  and  through  various 
means,  Christianity  was  likely  to  get  an  early  footing  at  Rome ;  and  it 
■would  have  been  rather  remarkable  if  it  had  not  been  so.  Tacitus,  it  may 
be  observed,  testifies  to  the  fact ;  for,  speaking  of  the  Neronian  persecution 
(a.d.  64),  he  says  of  the  Christians,  •'  Auctor  nominis  ejus  Christus,  Tiberio 
imperitante,  per  procuratorem  Pontinm  Pilatum  supplicio  adfectus  erat : 
repressaquo  in  prsssens  exitiabilis  superstitio  rursus  erumpebat,  non  modo 
per  Judeeam,  originem  ejus  mali,  sed  per  Urbem  etiam,  quo  cuncta  undique 
atrocia  aut  pudenda  confluunt  celebranturque "  (*  Ann.,'  xv.  44).  Thi* 
implies  an  early  as  well  as  extensive  spread  of  Christianity  in  Borne. 

§  5.  Extent  of  Eoman  Chukch. 

Against  the  supposition,  which  is  thus  probable,  and  which  the  Epistle 
confirms,  of  the  Christians  in  Borne  being  at  that  time  numerous  or 
important,  has  been  alleged  the  fact  that,  when  St.  Paul  actually  arrived 
there,  "  the  chief  of  the  Jews  "  whom  he  called  to  him  seem  to  have  known 
little  about  them.  They  only  say  of  them  contemptuously,  "  As  con- 
cerning this  sect,  we  know  that  everywhere  it  is  spoken  against "  (Acts 
xxviii.  22).  But  this  really  proves  nothing  as  to  the  actual  extent  or  con- 
dition of  the  Church  at  Eome.  It  only  shows  that  it  was  apart  from  the 
synagogue,  and  that  the  members  of  the  latter  scouted  it.  Their  words 
only  express  the  prevalent  prejudice  against  the  Christians,  such  as  Tacitus 
intimates  when  he  says,  "  Quos  per  flagitia  invisos,  vulgua  Chiistianos 
appellabant,"  and  when  he  speaks  of  their  religion  aa  "  ezitiabilis  super- 
stitio;"  and,  at  any  rate,  notoriety  is  implied,  from  which  extent  may  be 
inferred.  Bodies  of  men  are  not  usually  "  everywhere  spoken  against"  till 
they  have  attained  a  position  which  is  felt.  Further,  what  is  said  in  Acts 
xxviii.  of  St.  Paul's  intercourse  with  the  Christiana  themselves  when  he 
went  to  Rome  suggests  the  idea  of  a  numerous  and  zealous  community 
rather  than  the  contrary.  Even  at  PuteoH,  before  reaching  Rome,  he 
found  brethren,  who  entertained  him  for  a  week;  and  at  Appii  forum 
Christians  came  from  Rome  to  meet  him,  so  that  he  thanked  God,  and  took 
courage  (Acts  xxviii.  13 — 15). 

§  6.  Obqanization  or  Roman  Church. 

The  Church  at  Eome  being  supposed  to  have  grown  up  through  yariona  ' 
agencies,  and  not  to  have  been  formally  constituted  at  first  by  any  apostle, 
the  qneation  has  been  raised  whether  it  was  likely  to  possess,  at  the  time 
of  the  writing  of  the  Epistle,  a  regular  ministry  of  presbyters,  as  other 
Churches  did,  so  as  to  be  fully  organized.  There  is  no  conclusive  reason 
against  the  supposition ;  though  in  the  admonitions  and  greetings  of  the 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS.  tU 

Epistle  there  is  no  reference  to  any  of  whom  it  ia  intimated  that  they  were 
in  an  official  position,  having  the  rule  over  others,  and  to  be  submitted  to. 
The  passage  oh.  xii.  6 — 8  does  not  apparently  refer  to  any  regular  ordained 
ministry,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  notes  in  loco.  For  references  to  one  in 
other  Churches,  cf.  1  Oor.  xvi.  16 ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  Col.  iv.  17  ;  1  Thess.  v.  12, 
13;  1  Tim.  iii.  1,  seg.;  v.  17;  2  Tim.  ii.  2;  Titaa  i.  5;  Heb.  xiii.  17;  Jas. 
v.  14;  Acts  vi.  5,  sej. ;  xiv.  23;  xv.  2,  4,  23;  xx.  17,  «eg.  Bat  absence  of 
allasion  is  no  sufficient  proof  of  non-existence.  It  may,  however,  have  boen 
the  case  that  the  Roman  Christians  were  as  yet  an  unorganized  body,  united 
only  by  a  common  faith,  and  meeting  for  worship  in  various  houses,  the 
gifts  of  the  Spirit  supplying  the  place  of  a  settled  ministry,  and  that  it  was 
reserved  for  the  apostles  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  afterwards  to  organize  it, 
and  provide  for  a  due  succession  of  ordained  clergy.  As  to  the  exercise  of 
the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  in  the  early  period  before  the  universal  settlement  of 
the  Oharch  order  which  afterwards  prevailed,  see  notes  under  ch.  xii.  4 — 7. 

§  7.  Whether  mainly  a  Jewish  or  a  Gentile  Chuech. 

Another  question  that  has  been  much  discussed,  and  this  partly  with 
reference  to  the  supposed  intention  of  the  Epistle,  is  whether  the  Roman 
Church  at  that  time  was  mainly  a  Jewish  or  a  Gentile  one.  St.  Paul's  way 
of  addressing  it  can  leave  hardly  any  doubt  that  he  regarded  it  as  the  latter. 
This  is  shown,  to  begin  with,  by  his  introduction,  in  which  he  speaks  of  his 
apostleship  for  obedience  of  faith  among  all  the  nations,  among  which,  he* 
continues,  those  whom  he  addresses  were,  and  gives  as  his  reason  for  being 
ready  to  preach  the  gospel  to  them  that  he  is  debtor  both  to  the  Gtreeks 
and  to  the  barbarians,  and  that  the  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salva- 
tion, though  to  the  Jew  first,  yet  to  the  Greek  also.  Then  afterwards,  in 
ch.  ix. — xi.,  where  the  position  and  prospects  of  the  Jewish  nation  are 
under  review,  when  he  comes  to  admonition,  it  is  to  the  Gentile  believers 
that  he  addresses  it,  bidding  them  not  be  high-minded,  bat  fear,  lest 
God,  who  spared  not  the  natural  branches  of  the  olive  tree,  spare  not  them 
(ch.  xi.  13 — 24)  ;  and  in  his  concluding  admonitions  (ch.  xiv.  1 — xv.  16)  it 
is  the  enlightened  and  free  from  prejudice  that  he  mainly  admonishes  to 
bear  with  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  the  latter  being  presumably,  as 
will  be  seen,  prejudiced  believers  of  Jewish  race.  Doubtless,  as  appears 
also  from  the  Epistle  itself,  Jews,  who  are  known  to  have  been  numerous  in 
Rome,  would  be  included  among  the  converts,  and  probably  many  Gentiles 
who  had  previously  been  proselytes  to  Judaism.  Such  may  have  been  the 
original  nucleus  of  the  Church ;  and  the  first  evangelists  may,  as  St.  Paul 
was  wont  to  do,  have  announced  the  gospel  first  in  the  synagogues ;  but  it 
seems  evident  that,  when  St.  Paul  wrote  his  Epistle,  Jews  did  not  consti- 
tate  the  main  body  of  the  Church,  which  is  addressed  as  essentially  a, 
Gentile  one.  The  same  conclusion  follows  from  what  occurred  when  St. 
Paul  arrived  at  Rome.    At  first,  in  accordance  with  the  principle  he  always 


viB  INTEODUOTION  TO 


acted  on,  he  called  the  chief  of  the  Jews  together  to  his  lodging,  who  seem, 
aa  has  been  seen,  to  have  known  little,  or  professed  to  know  little,  of  the 
Christian  community.  With  them  he  argued  for  a  whole  day,  from  morn- 
ing till  evening,  and  made  an  impression  on  some  ;  but,  perceiving  their 
general  adverse  attitude,  he  declared  to  them  "  that  the  salvation  of  God  is 
sent  unto  the  Gentiles,  and  that  they  will  hear  it "  (Acts  xxviii.  17 — 29). 
From  this  it  seems  to  follow  that  his  ministrations  thenceforth  would  be 
mainly  among  the  Gentiles.  Later  on  also,  when  he  wrote  to  the  Philip- 
pians  from  Biome,  it  is  in  the  palace  (or  Praatorium),  and  among  those  of 
Caesar's  household,  that  he  intimates  that  the  gospel  was  taking  hold  (Phil. 
L  13;  iv.  22), 

The  fact  of  the  argument  of  the  Epistle  being  based  on  Jewish  ideas, 
and  presupposing  acquaintance  with  the  Old  Testament,  affords  no  valid 
argument  against  the  Church  to  which  it  was  sent  having  been  in  the 
main  a  Gentile  one.  The  same  fact  is  observed  in  other  Epistles  addressed 
to  what  must  have  been  mainly  Gentile  Churches.  In  fact,  we  find  the 
gospel  always  announced  by  apostles  and  evangelists  as  the  issue  and  fulfil- 
ment of  the  old  dispensation ;  and  for  a  full  understanding  of  it,  as  well  as 
of  its  evidences,  it  would  be  necessary  to  indoctr'inate  all  converts  in  the  Old 
Testament  (see  note  under  eh.  i.  2).  It  is  true  that,  in  preaching  to  the 
Athenians,  who  had  as  yet  no  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  St.  Paul  dis- 
courses on  what  we  may  call  natural  religion  only  (Acts  xvii.) ;  and  so  also 
at  Lystra  (Acts  xiv.  15 — 17)  ;  but  doubtless  in  preparation  for  baptism  all 
would  be  instructed  in  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  observ- 
able too  that  even  in  this  Epistle,  though  its  main  argument  is  based 
on  the  Old  Testament,  yet  there  are  parts  which  appeal  to  philosophical 
thinkers  generally,  and  which  would  seem  especially  suited  for  cultured 
Gentiles,  such  as,  in  ch.  i.  14 — 16,  the  writer  seems  to  expect  to  have  among 
his  readers  at  Rome.  Such  passages  are  ch.  i.  18 — ii.  16,  where  the  guilt  of 
the  world  at  large  is  proved  by  a  review  of  human  history,  and  appeals  to 
general  human  consciousness ;  and  the  latter  part  of  ch.  vii.,  where  the 
experience  of  the  human  soul  under  the  operation  of  law  bringing  convic- 
tion of  sin  is  analyzed. 

§    8.    PUEPOSB   OF   THE   EPISTLB. 

We  may  next  consider  the  apostle's  purpose,  as  distinct  from  the  occa- 
sion, in  sending  such  an  Epistle  as  this  is  to  the  Roman  Church.  We 
cannot,  in  the  first  place,  regard  it,  as  some  have  done,  as  written  with  a 
polemical  intention,  either  against  the  Jews,  or  the  Jadaizers  among  Chris- 
tians,  or  any  others.  Its  tone  is  not  polemical.  It  is  rather  a  carefully 
reasoned  theological  treatise,  drawn  up  with  the  view  of  setting  forth  the 
writer's  views  of  the  meaning  of  the  gospel  in  its  relation  to  the  Law,  to 
prophecy,  and  to  the  universal  needs  of  mankind.  The  chapters  (ix.— xi.) 
about  the  present  position  and  future  prospects  of  the  Jews  have  no  appear- 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  ix 

ance  of  being  written  controversially  against  them,  but  rather  with  the 
purpose  of  discussing  a  difficult  question  connected  with  the  general  sub- 
ject; and  the  admonitions  and  warnings  at  the  end  of  the  Epistle  do 
not  seem  to  be  directed  against  any  classes  of  persons  known  to  be  then 
troubling  the  Roman  Church,  but  are  rather  general  ones  in  view  of  what 
was  possible  or  probable  there.  The  Epistle  to  the  Gulatians,  written 
probably  not  long  previously,  resembles  this  in  its  general  subject,  and,  as 
far  as, it  goes,  enforces  the  same  doctrine;  it  shows  signs  of  having  been 
written  when  the  apostle's  mind  was  already  full  of  thoughts  which  pervade 
his  Epistle  to  the  Bomans.  Its  purpose  is  avowedly  polemical,  against  the 
Judaists  who  were  bewitching  the  Galatian  Church;  and,  in  accordance 
with  its  purpose,  it  has  a  tone  throughout  of  disappointment,  indignation, 
reproof,  and  occasional  sarcasm,  such  as  is  wholly  absent  from,  the  Epistle 
to  the  Bomans.  The  contrast  between  the  two  Epistles  in  this  respect 
strengthens  the  internal  evidence  of  the  latter  not  having  been  composed 
with  a  polemical  intention. 

The  following  considerations  may  help  us  to  understand  the  apostle's 
real  purpose  in  composing  the  Epistle  when  he  did,  and  sending  it  to  Elome. 
He  had  long  entertained  a  deep  and  comprehensive  view  of  the  meaning 
and  purpose  of  the  gospel,  such  as  even  the  original  apostles  seem  at  first 
to  have  been  slow  to  follow,  or,  at  any  rate,  some  of  them  in  aU  cases  to 
act  up  to.  This  appears  from  such  passages  as  Gal.  ii.  6  and  ii.  11,  seq. 
He  ever  speaks  of  his  comprehension  of  the  gospel  as  having  been  a  reve- 
lation to  himself ;  not  derived  from  man — not  even  from  those  who  had 
been  apostles  before  him.  It  was  the  clear  revelation  to  himself  of  the 
mystery  of  which  he  so  often  speaks ;  even  "  the  mystery  of  his  will,  accord- 
ing to  the  good  pleasure  which  he  hath  purposed  in  himself ;  that  in  the 
dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times  he  might  gather  together  in  one  all 
things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in  heaven,  and  which  are  in  earth,  even 
in  him  "  (Eph.  i.  9.  For  a  fuller  view  of  what  St.  Paul  means  by  "  the 
mystery,"  cf.  Eph.  iii.  3—11 ;  Col.  i.  26,  27  ;  ch.  xi.  25  ;  xvi.  25,  seq.).  Full 
of  his  grand  conception  of  what  the  gospel  was  for  all  mankind,  which  it 
was  his  special  mission  to  bring  home  to  the  conscience  of  the  Church,  he 
had,  since  his  conversion,  been  preaching  in  accordance  with  it ;  he  had 
met  with  much  opposition  to  his  views,  much  misconception  of  them,  and 
much  slowness  to  comprehend  them ;  he  has  now  planted  Churches  in 
Gentile  centres,  "  from  Jerusalem  and  round  about  as  far  as  Illyricam," 
and  fulfilled  his  appointed  mission  in  those  regions ;  and  has  formed  bis 
definite  plan  of  going  without  delay  to  Rome,  in  the  hope  of  thence  extend- 
ing the  gospel  westward  to  the  Gentile  world.  At  such  a  time,  he  is  suit- 
ably moved  to  set  forth,  in  a  doctrinal  treatise,  and  support  by  argument, 
his  views  of  the  far-reaching  significance  of  the  gospel,  that  they  might 
be  fully  understood  and  appreciated ;  and  he  sends  his  treatise  to  Rome, 
whither  he  was  just  going,  and  which  was  the  metropolis  of  the  Gentile 
world,  and  the  centre  of  Gentile  thought.     But,  though  thus  sent  in  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


first  place  to  Home  for  the  enlightenment  of  the  Christians  there,  it  may 
be  supposed  to  have  been  intended  ultimately  for  all  the  Churches  ;  and  the 
evidence  there  is  of  the  absence  of  all  mention  of  Rome  throughout  the 
Epistle,  and  also  of  the  concluding  chapters  specially  addressed  to  Rome, 
in  some  ancient  copies  (as  to  which,  see  note  at  the  end  of  ch.  xiv.),  may 
lead  us  to  conclude  that  it  was,  in  fact,  afterwards  circulated  generally.  It 
may  be  observed  further,  with  regard  to  the  purpose  of  the  Epistle,  that, 
though  based  on  Scripture  and  full  of  scriptural  proofs  and  illustrations, 
it  is  by  no  means  (as  has  been  before  observed)  addressed  in  its  argument 
to  Jews  exclusively.  It  is  rather,  in  its  ultimate  drift,  a  setting  forth  of 
what  we  may  call  the  philosophy  of  the  gospel,  showing  how  it  meets  haman 
needs,  and  satisfies  human  yearnings,  and  is  the  true  solution  of  the  problems 
of  existence,  and  the  remedy  for  the  present  mystery  of  sin.  And  so  it  is 
meant  for  philosophers  as  well  as  for  simple  souls ;  and  it  is  sent,  therefore, 
in  the  first  place,  to  Rome,  in  the  hope  that  it  may  reach  even  the  most 
caltured  there,  and  through  them  commend  itself  to  earnest  thinkers 
generally.  For,  says  the  apostle,  "  I  am  a  debtor  to  the  Greeks  and  to  the 
wise,"  as  well  as  to  barbarians  and  unwise ;  "  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the 
gospel  J  for  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth ; 
to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Greek  "  (ch.  i.  14 — 16). 

§  9.  Doctrine. 

1.  Meaning  of  "  the  righteousness  of  Ood."  As  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
Epistle,  of  which  detailed  explanation  will  be  attempted  in  the  notes,  there 
is  one  leading  idea,  which,  because  of  its  importance,  claims  introductory 
notice — ^the  idea  expressed  by  the  phrase,  "  the  righteousness  of  God." 
With  this  the  apostle  (ch.  i.  17)  announces  the  thesis  of  his  coming  argu- 
ment, and  he  has  the  thought  of  it  ever  before  him.  It  is  to  be  observed, 
in  the  first  place,  that  the  expression  in  ch.  i.  17  (as  afterwards  in  ch.  iii. 
21,  22, 25, 26 ;  x.  3)  is  simply  "  God's  righteousness  "  (SiKaioavvi)  ©eoC).  It  is 
nsnal  to  interpret  this  as  meaning  man's  imputed  or  forensic  righteousness, 
which  is  from  God — ©eov  being  understood  as  the  genitive  of  origin.  But 
if  St.  Paul  meant  this,  why  did  he  not  write  ^  ek  ®eov  SiKaio&vvri,  as  he  did 
in  Phil.  iii.  9,  where  he  was  speaking  of  the  righteousness  derived  to  man 
from  God,  in  opposition  to  e/i'^v  SiKawaivrjv  Trjv  e/c  vo/xov  ?  The  phrase,  in 
itself,  suggests  rather  the  sense  in  which  it  is  continually  used  in  the  Old 
Testament,  as  denoting  God's  own  eternal  righteousness.  It  is  indeed 
contended,  as  by  Meyer,  that  it  cannot  have  this  sense  in  ch.  i.  17, 
where  it  first  occurs,  because  of  «  mo-Tews  following,  and  the  quotation 
from  Habakkuk,  'O  Sc  StKatos  Ik  iricrrecos  ^ijo-eroi.  But,  as  will  be  pointed 
out  in  the  Exposition,  eic  TrioTtcos  (not  ^  Ik  irto-Teojs),  which  is  connected  in 
construction  with  airoKoXvirTCTai,  cannot  properly  be  taken  as  defining  the 
righteousness  intended ;  nor  does  the  quotation  from  Habakkuk  really  of 
necessity  support  this  idea.     Reasons  for  this  last  assertion  will  be  found 


THE  BPISTLB  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


also  in  th.e  Exposition.  Farther,  in  oh.  iii.  22,  where  the  idea,  here  con- 
cisely expressed,  is  taken  ap  and  carried  out,  Stot  moTcus  (corresponding 
to  Ik  irioTcois  here)  seems  intended  to  he  connected  with  fit  iravrat,  eto.,  fol- 
lowing, and  perhaps  also  with  ire^avepaiTot  preceding,  which  corresponds  to 
AiroKoXinrrcrai  in  the  verse  before  us.  If  so,  the  phrases,  tie  vlvrtiat  and  8ta 
Turrcus,  do  not  qnalify  the  essential  meaning  of  SiKoioavvr)  ®eov,  bat  rather 
express  only  how  it  is  now  revealed  or  manifested  to  man.  The  intended 
meaning  of  SiKaioavvT)  ®t(yu  is  thus  rather  to  be  got  at,  in  the  passage  before 
as,  from  the  obvious  reference  of  vers.  16  and  17  to  Ps.  xviii.,  of  which  ver.  2 
in  the  liXX.  is,  "Eyvmpure  Kvpiot  rh  aayr^piov  avrov,  tvavrCov  rStv  i6vS>v  dircKoXv^f 
TTv  Sucaioa-uvriv  avrov;  where  we  observe  the  same  verb,  airoKoXmrrciv,  the 
same  parallelism  between  "  salvation  "  and  "  his  righteousness,"  and  the 
same  inclusion  of  the  Gentile  world  with  Israel  as  objects  of  the  revelation. 
Now,  in  the  psalm,  Q-od's  own  righteousness  is  undoubtedly  meant ;  and  so 
surely  in  our  text,  in  the  absence  of  any  insuperable  objections  to  so  under- 
standing the  expression.  And  not  only  from  the  reference  to  the  psalm  in 
this  particular  passage,  but  from  the  very  fact  of  the  constant  use  of  the 
same  phrase  in  a  known  sense  in  the  Old  Testament,  we  should  expect  St. 
Paul  to  use  it  in  the  same  sense,  with  which  he  would  be  so  familiar,  and 
which  his  readers  also,  whom  he  so  continually  refers  to  the  Old  Testament^ 
would  understand.  It  is  maintained  in  this  Commentary  (with  all  due 
deference  to  the  distinguished  ancients  and  modems  who  have  held  other- 
wise)  that  not  only  in  this  opening  passage,  but  throughout  the  Epistle, 
Succuocrvi/i}  ®cov  does  mean  God's  own  eternal  righteousness,  and  that  even 
in  passages  where  a  righteousness  that  is  of  faith  is  spoken  of  as  communi- 
cated to  man,  the  essential  idea  beyond  is  still  that  of  God's  own  righteous- 
ness including  believers  in  itself. 

For  a  better  understanding  of  the  subject,  let  us  first  see  how  God's 
righteousness  is  regarded  in  the  Old  Testament  with  reference  to  man. 
The  Hebrew  word  rendered  in  the  LXX.  by  SiKaiocrvvrj  denotes  moral 
excellence  in  perfection — the  realization  of  whatever  the  mind  conceives, 
and  the  conscience  approves,  of  what  is  right  and  good.  It  is  indeed  some- 
times used  for  such  moral  excellence  as  man  is  capable  of ;  but  this  only  in 
a  secondary  or  comparative  sense ;  for  the  Old  Testament  is  as  emphatio 
as  the  New  against  any  perfect  righteousness  in  man.  As  Hooker  says, 
"  The  Scripture,  ascribing  to  the  persons  of  men  righteousness  in  regard  to 
their  manifold  virtues,  may  not  be  construed  as  though  it  did  thereby  clear 
them  from  all  faults."  Absolute  righteousness  is  ascribed  to  God  alone ; 
and,  in  contrast  with  the  unrighteousness  prevailing  in  the  world,  his 
righteousness  is  a  constant  theme  of  psalmists  and  prophets.  We  find 
them  at  times  perplexed  in  view  of  the  unrighteousness  prevalent  and  often 
dominant  in  the  world,  as  being  inconsistent  with  their  ideal  of  what  should 
be  under  the  sway  of  the  righteous  God.  But  they  still  believed  in  the 
supremacy  of  righteousness;  their  innate  moral  sense,  no  less  than  their 
Mceived  religion,  assured  them  that  there  must  be  a  reality  answering  tc 


ili  INTRODUCTION  TO 


their  ideal ;  and  they  found  this  reality  in  their  belief  in  God.  And  thus 
their  undying  faith  in  the  Divine  righteousness  sustains  them  in  spite  of 
all  appearances;  and  they  look  forward  to  God's  eventual  vindication  of 
his  own  righteousness,  even  on  this  earth  below,  under  a  "  King  of  righteous- 
ness "  'to  come.  But  the  righteousness  of  the  Messiah's  kingdom  is  stUl  to 
be  God's  own,  manifested  in  the  world  and  reconciling  it  to  him — flooding 
it  (as  it  were)  with  its  own  glory.  "  My  righteousness  is  near ;  my  salva- 
tion is  gone  forth,  and  mine  arms  shall  judge  the  people ;  the  isles  shall 
wait  upon  me,  and  on  mine  arm  shall  they  trust.  Lift  up  your  eyes  to  the 
heavens,  and  look  upon  the  earth  beneath :  for  the  heavens  shall  vanish 
away  like  smoke,  and  the  earth  shall  wax  old  like  a  garment,  and  they  that 
dwell  therein  shall  die  in  like  manner :  but  my  salvation  shall  be  for  ever, 
and  my  righteousness  shall  not  be  abolished.  .  .  .  My  righteousness  shall 
be  for  ever,  and  my  salvation  from  generation  to  generation"  (Isa.  li 
6—8). 

Now,  St.  Paul  ever  views  the  gospel  as  being  the  true'  fulfilment,  as  of 
the  Old  Testament  generally,  so  of  all  those  inspired  prophetic  yearnings ; 
and,  when  he  says  here  that  in  it  the  righteousness  of  God  is  revealed,  his 
language  must  surely  bear  the  sense  of  that  of  the  ancient  prophets.  In 
the  gospel  he  perceived  God's  own  eternal  righteousness  as  last  vindicated, 
and  in  Christ  manifested  to  mankind ;  vindicated  with  regard  to  the  past, 
during  which  God  might  seem  to  have  been  indifferent  to  human  sin  (cf. 
ch.  iii.  25),  and  manifested  now  for  the  reconciliation  of  all  to  God,  and 
the  "  salvation  for  ever  "  of  all.  (It  may  be  observed,  in  this  connection, 
that  the  common  idea  of  Christ's  personal  righteousness  being  imputed  to 
believers  is  not  scriptural.  It  is,  of  course,  scriptural  to  say  that  in  the , 
Person  of  Christ  the  Divine  righteousness  was  humanly  manifested  ;  he  was 
peculiarly  6  SiKaios ;  but  we  find  nowhere  in  the  New  Testament  the  phrase, 
"  the  righteousness  of  Christ,"  but  always  "  the  righteousness  of  God.") 
Bnt,  further,  we  find  such  expressions  as  Aoyi^erai  ■^  mcmi  ovroB  «is  Sixaio- 
irimijv  (ch.  iv.  5)  ;  T'^s  8iKaioowi;s  t^s  irto-Tscos  (ch.  iv.  11)  ;  T^s  S(i>/)cas  t§s 
hixaioirmnQi  (ch.  v.  17)  ;  'H  tK  iriVreus  8tKcuotrvvr}  (ch.  x.  6) ;  Trtv  tK  ®£ov 
SiKcuoiTvvri  iirl  r^  iria-ra  (PhiL  iii.  9).  In  these  modes  of  speech  a  righteous- 
ness attributed  to  man  himself,  derived  to  him  through  Christ  from  God  ia 
certainly  denoted ;  and  thus  comes  in  the  idea  of  man's  imputed  righteous- 
ness. But  it  is  submitted  that  such  conceptions  do  not  interfere  with  the 
essential  meaning  of  ®iov  hiKaioa-uvrj,  wher  used  as  a  phrase  by  itself ;  and 
also  that  all  along  God's  own  inherent  righteousness  is  stUl  in  view  as 
the  source  of  the  justification  of  man  ;  the  idea  being  that  man,  by  faith 
and  through  Christ,  is  embraced  by,  and  made  partaker  in,  the  eternal 
righteousness  of  God. 

Thus  the  main  contention  of  St.  Paul  as  against  the  Jews  of  his  day  is 
pregnantly  expressed  by  "God's  righteousness,"  opposed  to  "mine  own 
righteousness,"  or  "  the  righteousness  of  the  Law."  It  was  that  man,  being 
what  he  is,  cannot  possibly  raise  himself  to  the  ideal  of  the  Divine  righteous- 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  xiii 

ness,  bat  that,  for  his  acceptance,  the  righteousness  of  God  must  come 
down  to  him  and  take  him  into  itself.  And  he  maintains  that  this  is  the 
very  thing  that  the  gospel  means  and  accomplishes  for  man.  The  Jew 
went  about  to  establish  his  own  righteousness  by  imagined  strict  conformity 
to  Law.  But  the  apostle  well  knew  the  vanity  of  this  pretension  ;  how  it 
was  a  delusion,  put  man  in  a  false  position  before  God,  and  lowered  the 
true  ideal  of  Divine  righteousness.  He  himseU  had  once  been  "  touching 
the  righteousness  which  is  in  the  Law,  blameless."  But  he  was  painfully 
conscious  how,  when  he  would  have  done  good,  evil  was  present  with  him. 
The  Jew  might  trust  to  sacrifices  to  expiate  his  own  shortcomings.  But 
St.  Paul  felt,  and  Scripture  itself  confirmed  his  feeling,  how  impossible  it 
was  for  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  to  be  in  themselves  of  avail  in  the 
spiritual  sphere  of  things.  He  had,  we  may  suppose,  long  been  on  such 
grounds  dissatisfied  with  the  religious  system  he  had  been  trained  in,  and 
may  possibly  have  thrown  himself  into  the  fierce  excitement  of  persecution 
the  more  eagerly  in  order  to  drown  uneasy  thoughts.  And  he  may  have 
been  impressed  by  what  he  had  heard  of  Jesus  and  his  teaching,  and  of 
what  his  followers  held  about  him,  more  than  he  acknowledged  to  himself. 
For  his  sudden  illumination  on  his  conversion  implies  surely  some  prepara- 
tion for  receiving  it ;  the  material  that  burst  into  a  flame  must  surely  have 
been  ready  for  the  kindling  spark.  On  that  memorable  journey  to  Damascus 
the  spark  fell,  and  the  illumination  came.  Jesus,  whose  voice  at  length 
penetrated  his  soul  from  heaven,  now  rose  clearly  before  his  eye  of  faith  as 
the  King  of  righteousness,  foretold  of  old,  who  was  to  bring  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  to  man.  Thenceforth  (his  creed  in  its  completeness  becoming, 
we  may  suppose,  further  settled  and  matured  during  his  sojourn  in  Arabia, 
and  through  subsequent  "  visions  and  revelations  of  the  Lord  ")  he  saw  in 
the  human  life  of  Jesus  a  manifestation  at  last  even  in  man  of  Divine 
righteousness ;  and  in  his  offering  of  himself  a  true  atonement,  not  made  by 
man,  but  provided  by  God,  of  a  character  to  avail  in  the  spiritual  sphere  of 
things :  in  his  resurrection  from  the  dead  (the  evidence  of  which  he  no 
longer  resisted)  he  perceived  him  declared  the  Son  of  God  with  power, 
ordained  for  accomplishing  the  perpetual  reconciliation  of  mankind;  and 
in  his  gospel,  proclaiming  pardon,  peace,  regeneration,  inspiration,  and 
immortal  hopes,  to  all  alike,  without  distinction  of  rank  or  race,  he  saw 
opening  before  him  the  glorious  prospect  of  a  realization  at  last  of  the 
prophetic  anticipation  of  a  kingdom  of  righteousness  to  come.  To  complete 
our  view  of  his  conception,  we  must  further  note  that  the  full  manifestation 
of  God's  righteousness  is  regarded  by  him  as  still  future:  the  gospel  is 
but  the  dawning  of  the  full  day :  "  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature  " 
still  "  waiteth  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God ; "  "  Even  we  our- 
selves groan  within  ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemp- 
tion of  our  body  "  (ch.  viii.)  ;  it  is  not  till  "  the  end  "  that  "  all  things  shall 
be  subdued  unto  him,"  "  that  God  may  be  all  in  all "  (1  Cor.  xv.).  But  mean- 
while believers  are  regarded  as  already  partaking  in  the  righteo'isneos  of 


XIT 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


God,  revealed  and  brought  home  to  them  in  Christ;  faith,  aspiration,  and 
earnest  endeavour  (which  are  all  man  is  capable  of  now)  being  accepted  in 
Christ  for  righteousness. 

The  above  is  by  no  means  intended  as  a  full  exposition  of  St.  Paul's 
doctrine  of  God's  righteousness,  such  as  to  make  his  lines  of  thought  in 
all  places  clear,  or  to  remove  all  difficulties  ;  but  only  to  set  forth  what  is 
conceived  to  have  been  his  fundamental  conception.  There  had,  we  may 
suppose,  been  in  the  first  place  borne  in  upon  him  a  grand  idea  of  a  realiza- 
tion in  Christ  of  the  predicted  Messianic  kingdom,  as  at  length  vindicating 
and  exhibiting  to  man  God's  own  eternal  righteousness.  To  him,  as  a 
devout  Jew  and  a  student  of  the  Scriptures,  this  conception  would  naturally 
first  present  itself,  so  soon  as  he  came  to  recognize  the  Messiah  in  Jesus. 
But  then,  the  ordinary  Jewish  conception — as  of  the  purport  of  the  promise 
to  Abraham,  so  also  of  the  character  of  the  Messianic  kingdom — ^having  to 
his  mind  become  enlarged  and  spiritualized,  he  seems  to  have  interwoven 
with  Jewish  ideas  others  suggested  by  his  own  contemplation  of  human 
consciousness,  of  the  condition  of  the  world  as  it  is,  and  the  general  problems 
of  existence;  and  to  have  found  in  Christ  an  answer  to  his  various  diffi- 
culties and  his  various  cravings.  But  it  is  not  always  easy  to  trace  or 
define  exactly  his  lines  of  thought ;  and  hence  arises  one  main  difficulty  in 
the  way  of  a  clear  interpretation  of  this  Epistle,  in  which  there  are  certainly, 
as  is  said  of  his  Epistles  generally  in  the  Second  Epistle  of  St.  Peter,  "  some 
things  hard  to  be  understood."  Perhaps  even  he  himself  could  hardly  have 
defined  exactly  all  that  "  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  him  did  signify '' 
on  a  subject  so  transcendent;  while  his  style  of  writing — often  abrupt, 
unstudied,  and  pregnant  with  undeveloped  thoughts — increases  our  difficulty 
in  the  way  of  a  clear  interpretation. 

2.  Universalism.  The  doctrine  as  above  set  forth  seems  to  lead  logically 
to  universalism,  i.e.  the  reconciliation  in  the  end  of  all  things  to  the  righteous- 
ness of  God.  Without  such  sequel  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  the  supposed 
ideal  of  God's  righteousness  embracing  all  can  be  regarded  as  fulfilled. 
Nor  can  it  be  denied,  except  by  the  prejudiced,  that  St.  Paul,  in  some 
passages  of  his  writings,  does  more  or  less  distinctly  intimate  such  an 
expectation ;  cf .  1  Cor.  xv.  24—28 ;  Eph.  i.  9,  10,  22,  23 ;  Col.  L  15—21  • 
and  in  this  Epistle  ch.  v.  18,  seg. ;  xi.  26,  32,  seq.  (see  notes  under  these  two 
passages).  Without  here  entering  on  this  mysterious  subject  (at  present 
occupying  so  many  minds)  we  may  observe,  as  to  the  intimations  respecting 
it  found  in  this  Epistle  (which  are  all  that  concern  us  here),  firstly,  that, 
whatever  hope  may  seem  to  be  held  out  of  the  salvation  of  all  at  last,  it  must 
be  in  the  undefined  ages  of  eternity,  beyond  the  range  of  our  present  view ; 
faith  and  walking  in  the  Spirit  being,  at  any  rate  for  enlightened  Christians, 
insisted  on  as  the  condition  of  partaking  in  the  eternal  life  of  God ;  and 
secondly,  that  punishment  after  this  life  is  rs  distinctly  spoken  of  as  reward 
(ch.  ii.  8,  9),  and  death  in  a  spiritual  sense  as  distinctly  regarded  as  being 
the  proper  result  of  sin,  as  is  life  as  being  the  result  of  holiness  (ch.  viii.  13). 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


In  fact,  just  retribution  is  essential  to  the  apostle's  conception  of  the  display 
of  the  righteousness  of  Qod ;  and  the  Divine  wrath  has  to  him  a  real  and 
awful  meaning.  Thus  he  by  no  means  ignores  or  abates  the  force  of  what- 
ever is  meant  by  the  Trup  to  awnov,  and  the  koXmtk  atwios,  spoken  of  by 
oui  Lord  (Matt.  xxv.  41,  46)  ;  as  to  which  expressions  the  question  is — 
What  is  implied  by  the  word  o/«vios  ?  One  view,  entertained  by  some,  ia 
that,  though  such  expressions  as  SX^dpoi  alavwi  (2  Thess.  i,  9)  and  &v  to 
reXos  dirmXeia  (Phil.  iii.  19)  preclude  hope  of  any  restoration  of  the  utterly 
lost,  yet  that  their  perdition  may  be  reconciled  with  the  idea  of  the  final 
triumph  of  universal  good  by  supposing  such  lost  ones  to  cease  in  the  end 
to  be  as  individual  souls  at  all,  like  things  hopelessly  blighted  which  come 
to  nothing.  And  it  has  been  argued  that  such  words  as  oAc^pot  and 
iirwXeia  m  themselves  suggest  the  idea  of  final  destruction  rather  than  of 
endless  suffering.  Enough  here  to  draw  attention  to  this  view,  our  purpose 
in  this  Commentary  being  not  to  dogmatize  on  mysterious  subjects  which 
are  evidently  beyond  our  grasp,  but  rather  to  present  conceptions  of  them 
that  may  be  considered  tenable. 

3.  Predestination.  This  Epistle  having  been  a  principal  battle-ground  of 
the  predestinarian  controversy,  and  often  regarded  as  a  stronghold  of 
Calvinism,  special  attention  may  be  directed  to  the  sections  that  bear  upon 
this  subject.  These  are  especially  ch.  viii.  28 — 39  j  ix.  6 — 24 ;  and,  in  a 
more  general  way,  oh.  ix.,  x.,  xi.,  throughout.  In  the  exposition  of  these 
passages  an  honest  attempt  has  been  made  to  view  them  apart  from  the 
battle-field  of  controversy,  so  as  to  get  at  their  real  meaning  in  view  simply 
of  their  context,  their  apparent  purpose,  and  the  language  used.  It  will  be 
seen,  among  other  things,  that  oh.  ix.,  x.,  xi.,  though  they  have  been  used 
in  support  of  theories  of  the  absolute  predestination  of  individuals  to  glory 
or  damnation,  do  not  really  bear  on  individual  predestination,  but  rather  on 
the  election  of  races  of  men  to  positions  of  privilege  and  favour ;  the  present 
rejection  of  the  race  of  Israel  from  the  inheritance  of  the  promises,  and  ita 
prospect  of  restoration  to  favour,  being  in  view  throughout  these  chapters. 
In  ch.  viii.,  where  the  predestination  to  final  glory  of  such  as  are  called  to 
faith  in  Christ  is  undoubtedly  spoken  of,  all  that  need  be  here  said  is  that 
in  the  Exposition  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  discover  what  the  apostle 
really  teaches,  and  his  purpose  in  so  teaching,  on  this  mysterious  subject, 
which  is  in  its  depths  inscrutable. 

4.  Law.  One  idea  pervading  the  doctrinal  part  of  the  Epistle,  and 
evidently  deeply  fixed  in  St.  Paul's  mind,  is  that  of  law.  What  is  often 
specifically  meant,  and  what  had  probably  suggested  the  whole  idea  to 
him,  is  the  Law  given  from  Mount  Sinai ;  but  he  uses  the  word  also  in  a 
wider  sense,  so  as  to  denote  generally  requirement  of  obedience  to  a  moral 
code,  appealing  to  the  conscience.  We  may  suppose  that  he  had  long,  even 
before  his  conversion,  wondered  how  it  was  that  the  Law  given  through 
Moses,  holy  and  Divine  as  he  had  ever  esteemed  and  never  oeased  to  esteem 
it.  should  have  proved  so  inoperative  for  conversion  of  the  heart,  nay 


xt5  IHTEODUCTION  TO 


should  seem  rather  to  intensify  the  guilt  of  sin  than  to  deliver  from  it.  He 
had  thus  been  led  to  consider  what  the  oflSce  and  purpose  of  the  Law  really 
was,  and  hence  of  law  generally,  as  expressing  the  principle  of  exaction  of 
obedience,  under  threat  of  punishment,  to  moral  behests.  And  he  found  that 
all  that  law  in  itself  could  do  was  to  restrain  from  overt  transgressions  such 
persons  as  would  not  be  restrained  withoat  it;  but  that  it  had  also  a 
further  office  in  the  economy  of  grace,  viz.  to  define  and  bring  out  the 
sense  of  sin  in  the  human  conscience,  and  so  to  prepare  for  the  deliverance 
of  redemption.  This  his  view  of  the  meaning  and  office  of  law  it  is  impor- 
tant to  keep  in  mind.  As  to  the  difference  of  meaning  of  o  vo/iot  and  of  vo/iot 
without  the  article,  as  used  by  St.  Paul,  see  note  on  oh.  ii.  13. 


§  10.     SUUMAST  or  CONTENTIk 

L  Imtbodttotobt.    Ch.  1. 1 — 16. 

A.  Salutation,  with  significant  parenthesis.     Ch.  1,  1 — ^7. 

B.  Introduction,  expressing  the  writer's  motives  and  feelings  towards  thoss 

addressed.    Ch.  i.  8—16. 
IL  DooTBiNAL.    Oh.  i.  17— xi.  36. 

0.  The  doctrine  of  the  righteousneu  of  Ood,  propounded,  established,  and 
explained.    Ch.  i.  17 — viii.  39. 

(1)  All  mankind  liable  to  the  wrath  of  God.     Ch.  L  18— ii.  29. 

(a)  The  heathen  world  in  general.    Ch.  i.  18—32. 

(b)  Those  also  who  judge  others,  not   excepting   the  Jews.     Ch. 

ii.  1—29. 

(2)  Certain  objections  with  regard  to  the  Jews  suggested  and  met.    Oh. 

iii.  1—8. 

(3)  The  testimony  of  the  Old  Testament  to  universal  sinfulness.    Oh.  Iii, 

9-20. 

(4)  The  righteousness  of  God,  manifested  in  Christ,  and  apprehended  by 

faith,  set  forth  as  the  sole  remedy,  available  for  all.    Oh,  iii.  21 — 31. 
(6)  Abraham  himself  shown  to  have  been  justified  by  faith,  and  not  by 
works,  believers  being  his  true  heirs.    Oh.  Iv.  1 — 25. 

(6)  Results  of  the  revelation  of  the  righteousness  of  God.     Oh.  v.  1 — 21. 
(a)  On  the  cousciousnesa  and  hopes  of  believers.    Oh.  v.  1 — 11. 

(J)  On  the  position  of  mankind  before  God,    Oh.  v.  12 — ^21. 

(7)  Moral  results  to  believers.     Oh.  vi.  1 — viii  39. 

(o)  The  obligation  to  holiness  of  Ufe.    Ch.  vi.  1 — ^vii  6. 

(J)  How  Law  prepares  the  soul  for  emancipation  in  Christ  from  the 

dominion  of  sin.    Oh.  vii.  7 — 25. 
(e)  The  blessed  condition  and  assured  hope  of  them  that  are  in  Christ, 
and  walk  after  the  Spirit.    Ch.  viii.  1 — 39, 
D.   The  present  position  and  the  prospects  of  the  Jewish  nation  with  reference 
thereto.    Ch.  ix.  1 — ^xi.  36. 

(1)  Deep  regret  expressed  for  the  present  exclusion  of  the  Jewish  nation 

from  inheritance  of  the  promises.    Ch,  ix.  1 — 5, 

(2)  But  it  is  not  inconsistent  with — 


(o)  God's  faithfulness  to  his  promises.    Ch.  ix.  6 — 13. 

(b)  His  justice.    Oh.  ix.  14—24. 

(c)  The  word  of  prophecy.     Oh.  ix.  25 — 29. 


|8^  The  cause  is  in  the  fault  of  the  Jews  themselves.    Ch.  ix.  30— x.  21. 
,4)  They  are  not  finally  rejected,  but,  through  the  calling  of  the  Gentilesb 
will  be  brought  into  the  Church  at  last.    Oh.  zL  1 — 36. 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  irfl 


m.  Hortatory.    Ch.  xU.  1 — ^xiv.  23  (followed  by  the  doxology  of  oh.  xyL  25 — ^27).* 
B.  Varioiis  practical  duties  enforced.    Oh.  xii.  1 — ^xiii.  14. 
F.  Mutual  toleration  enjoined,    Ch.  xiv.  1 — ^23. 
Q-.  Concluding  doxology.    Ch.  xvi.  25 — 27. 

rV.   SlTPPIiEMENTART.      Oh.  XV.  1 — ^Xvi.  24. 

H.  Resumption  and  further  enforcement  of  F.    Ch.  xv.  1 — ^13. 

L  The  writer's  account  of  himself  and  his  plans.    Oh.  xv.  14 — 33. 

K.  Greetings  to  Ckristia/ns  at  Borne,  vfith  tuaming  in,  eoncluiion.    Ok.  xvi. 

1—20. 
L.  Qreetingsfrom  Corinth.     Oh.  xvL  21 — ^24. 

>  The  original  position  of  the  Doxology  is  coudderad  w  Jmo.     That  which  i«  than 
■egarded  m  nKMt  iprobable  ia  aMigaed  \a  it  heN. 


THE   EPISTLE  OF 


PAUL   TO    THE    ROMAN'S. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  L 


Vers.  1 — 16. — I.  Intkodcotobt. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — A.  Salutation,  with  long  in- 
terposed parenthesis,  suggested  by  "  gospel 
of  God."  The-  parenthesis,  expressing 
khoughtB  of  which  the  writer's  mind  is  full, 
intimates  the  purport  of  the  coming  treatise. 
It  also  intimates  bis  claim,  afterwards  more 
fully  asserted  (oh.  xv.  15,  «ej.),  to  demand 
a  hearing  from  the  Roman  Church.  It  is 
St.  Paul's  way,  when  full  of  an  idea,  tlius 
to  interrupt  bis  sentences  at  the  suggestion 
of  a  word.  Somewhat  similar  interpositions 
are  found  in  the  opening  salutations  of 
Galatians  and  Titus,  especially  in  the  latter; 
but  this  is  peculiar  for  its  length  and  fulness. 

Ver.  1. — Paul,  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ, 
called  to  be  an  apostle.  In  his  salutations 
to  the  Philippians  and  to  Titus  also  St. 
Paul  calls  himself  SoSAo;  (i.e.  "  bond- 
servant ")  of  Jesus  Christ ;  but  usually  only 
air6crTo\os,  or,  as  here,  KKriris  iirSiTTo^os, 
which  is  rightly  translated  in  the  Authorized 
Version,  "  called  to  he  an  apostle,"  Divine 
vocation  to  the  oflSoe  being  the  prominent 
idea.  St.  Paul  often  elsewhere  insists  on 
the  reality  of  his  vocation  from  Christ 
himself  to  be  an  apostle  to  the  Gentiles; 
and  this  with  regard  to  disparagement  of 
his  claim  to  be  a  tme  apostle  at  all  on  the 
part  of  some  (of.  1  Cor.  ix.  1 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  5 ; 
xii.  12 ;  Gal.  i.  1,  12 ;  ii.  8).  It  does  not 
follow  from  his  thus  asserting  his  claim  here 
and  afterwards  in  this  Epistle  that  he  was 
aware  of  any  disparagement  of  it  at  that 
time  among  the  Roman  Christians;  still 
less  that  he  wrote  his  Epistle  with  a  polemical 
purpose  against  the  Judaizere,  as  some  have 
supposed.     Still,  he  may  have  suspected 

BOMANS. 


that  some  might  possibly  have  been  busj 
there,  as  they  were  in  other  places;  and, 
however  that  might  be,  writing  as  he  waa 
to  a  Church  not  founded  by,  and  as  yet 
unvisited  by,  himself,  he  might  think  dis- 
tinct assertions  of  his  claim  to  be  heard 
desirable.  Separated  (or,  eet  apart)  nnto 
the  gospel  of  God ;  i.e.  to  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel,  not  the  reception  of  it  only,  as 
is  evident  from  the  context.  The  word 
iupwpla-fifvos  here,  as  well  as  the  previous 
KXnris,  is  best  taken,  in  pursuance  of  the 
line  of  thought,  as  referring  to  the  Divine 
counsels,  not  to  the  agency  of  the  Church. 
It  is  true  that  the  word  is  elsewhere  used 
with  the  latter  reference,  as  in  Acts  liii.  2, 
'A(l>opicTaTf  5))  /4oi  r6y  tc  Bapvi&av  Kal  rtiii 
^avKov  els  rh  fpyoy  h  irpocKenXrifiai  aurov^^ 
where  the  a<popurfi6i  spoken  of  was  sub- 
sequent to  the  Divine  KKrjiris,  and  effected  by 
human  laying  on  of  hands.  But  we  have 
also  St.  Paul's  own  words  (Gal.  i.  15),  'O  Qehi 
i  a(p6pi<ras  yue  ix  KOi\las  ii,r]Tp6s  fxov,  Kol  KaKiaas 
Sid  T9JS  X'^P''''"^  airov,  where  the  a<papiirfi.6s 
is  that  of  God's  eternal  purpose,  and  previous 
to  the  K\Tj<ns  (of.  Acts  ix.  15  and  xivi. 
16,  17). 

Ver.  2.  —Which  he  promised  before  through 
•his  prophets  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  concern- 
ing his  Son.  Here  the  parenthetical  passajje 
begins,  extending  to  the  end  of  ver.  6.  Ii 
is  unnecessary  to  complicate  it  by  connect- 
ing trfpl  Tov  viov  aiiToS  with  the  previous 
euayyeAiov  @eov.  It  goes  more  naturally 
with  TrpofirriyytlKaTo,  denoting  the  subject 
of  the  Old  Testament  promises.  By  irpo- 
(fnirav  are  meant  not  only  the  sacred  writers 
distinctively  so  called,  but  (as  in  Heb.  i.  1)  all 
who  spoke  of  old  under  Divine  inspiration,  as 
by  ypa<f)ius  ayiais  is  signified  the  Old  Testa- 
ment generally.  This  intimation  of  the 
gospel  being  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  is 
fitly  introduced  here,  as  preparing  the 
reader  for  the  argument  of  the  Epiutle,  in 


THE  EPISTLE  01*  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.      [en.  1. 1—32. 


the  course  of  wliich  tlie  doctrine  propounded 
is  shown  to  oe  in  accordance  with  the  Old 
Testament,  and  in  fact  anticipated  therein. 
This  is,  iu.leed,  a  prominent  point  in  the 
general  teaching  of  apostles  and  evangoliets. 
They  announce  the  gospel  ns  the  fulfilment 
of  prophecy,  and  the  true  completion  of  all 
the  ancient  dispensation ;  and  it  is  to  the 
Old  Testament  that,  in  addressing  Israelites, 
thsj  ever  in  the  first  place  appeal.    Thus 
St.  Peter  (Acts  ii.  14;  iii.  18;  iv.  11);  thus 
Stephen    (Acts    vii.);    thus    St.   Paul    at 
Antioch  in  Pisidia,  at  Tliessalonica,  and 
before  Agrippa  (Acts  xiii.  16;  xvii.  2  ;  xxvi. 
6,    22);    thus    Philip    to    the    Ethiopian 
proselyte  (Acts  viii.  35);  thug  ApolloB  at 
Corinth  (Acts  xviii.  28).    Our  Lord  himself 
had  done  the  same,  as  in  Matt.  v.  17 ;  Luke 
iv.  21 ;  xxiv.  27,  44 ;  John  v.  39.    All  this 
is  important  as  showing  how  the  old  and 
new  dispensations  are  regarded  together  as 
parts  of  a  whole,  the  old  one  being  but  the 
needful  preparation  for  a  fulfilment  in  the 
new,  and    so   becoming   intelligible ;    and 
thus  how  "through  all  the  ages  one  eternal 
purpose  runs."     There  was   also  a  provi- 
dential preparation  in  the  Gentile  world, 
though  not  so  direct  and  obyions,  and  though, 
of  course,  not  similarly  noticed  in  addresses 
to  disciples  of  the  Law.    But  St.  Paul  in- 
timates it;  as  in  his  speech  on  Areopagus, 
and  also,  as  will  be  seen,  in  this  Epistle. 
Even  the  gospel  (it  may  be  further  observed) 
is  set  forth  as  but  a  further  stage  of  progress 
towards  a  final  consummation,  as  the  dawn 
only  of  a  coming  daybreak.    We  have  still 
but  an    earnest    of   our    inheritance ;   the 
"  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature  "  still 
awaits  "  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of 
God."    Meanwhile,  in  the  revelation  already 
made  through  Christ,  and  the  redemption 
accomjiliBhed   by  him,  we    are  taught  to 
cling  to  our    faith  in  a   Divine   purpose 
throughout  the  world's  perplexing  history — 
that  of  resolving  at  last  all  discords  Into 
eternal  harmony,  and  making  manifest  "one 
great  lore,  embracing  all."      This  grand 
view  of  a  providential  order  leading  to  a 
final  consummation  (though  how  and  when 
we  know  not)  pervades  St.  Paul's  writings, 
and  should  be  kept  in  mind  for  a  proper 
nnderstanding  of  this  Epistle.     God's  pro- 
mises through  his  prophets  in  Holy  Scripture 
are  said  to  have  been  "concerning  his  Son;" 
and  a  question  hence  arises  as  to  the  exact 
sense  in  which   "his  Son"  is  to  be  here 
understood ;  a  consideration  of  which  ques- 
tion may  help  our   interpretation  of   the 
expression  in  the  following  verse,  which  is 
not    without  difficulty,  ToS  ipivBivros  vtoS 
Beov  iv  Swifiei.    We  may  distinguish  be- 
tween three  senses  in  which  Christ  is  called 
"the  Son  of  God."    (1)  With  reference  to 
hi«  Divine  pre-ezistence,  the  term  expressing 


his  relation  to  the  Father  from  eternity,  like 
the  A6yos  (and  probably  the  /lovoyeviis  vias) 
of  St.  John.     (2)  With  reference  to  his  in- 
carnation, as  being  conceived  by  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  as  in  Luke  i.  35,  Ai^  koI  rh  yevyiifievov 
&yiov  K\TiSiiffeTai  vlhs  @eov.    (3)  With  refer- 
ence to  the  position  assigned  to  the  Messiah 
in  psalm  and  prophecy,  as  the  8on  exalted 
to  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  crowned  with 
glory.     It  is  with  the  last  of  these  three 
references  that  the  title    is    used  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews ;  where  the  ideal  of 
Bonsbip,  found  in  the  Old  Testament,  and 
imperfectly  typified  by  the  theoretic  position 
of  the  theocratic  kings,  is  r/prnrded  as  pro- 
phetic, aud  pointing  to  Christ,  in   whom 
alone  it  is  shown  to  be  fulfilled.     Hence  in 
that  Epistle  his  exaltation  to  the  rank  and 
vdignity  of  Son  is  regarded  as  subsequent  to 
his  human  obedience,  and  even  the  con- 
sequence and  reward  of  it.    It  was  "  became 
of  the  sufiering  of  death   (Sii  rh  TrdBniia 
Savirou)  "  that  he  has  been  "  crowned  with 
glory  and  honour"  (Heb.  ii.  9);  it  was  after 
he  had  made  »  purification  of  sins  that 
he  "eat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high,"  having  "inherited"  tliat 
"more  excellent  name"— the  name  of  Son 
(Heb.  i.  4).    It  is  by  no  means  implied  that 
the  said  Epistle  does  not  recognize  a  true 
Sonship  of  Christ  be/ore  his  exaltation ;  he 
was  all  along  "the  Son"  (cf  Heb.  v.  7,  Kalr^p 
Hv  vlhs,  efuiesv,  etc.),  though  not  enthroned 
as  such  over  mankind  and  all  creation  till 
after   his    resurrection ;   and,    further,  the 
essential  doctrine  of  his  pre-existent  and 
eternal  Sonship.  in  the  first  of  the  8en.ses 
noted  above,  is  distinctly  taught  (as  in  eh.  i. 
3),  though  not  there  by  the  use  of  the  term 
"Son."     All  we  say  is  that  this  word  is 
used  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  to  denote 
Christ's   position  and  office  as    the   royal 
High  Priest   of   humanity,  exalted,  after 
suffering,  to  the  right  hand  of  God,  rather 
than  his  original  Divine  Personality  ;  such 
being  the  significance  of  the  title  in  the 
prophetic  anticipations  of  the  Messiah.  Now, 
this  being  so,  and  it  being  the  promises 
made  "through  his  prophets  in  the  Holy 
{scriptures  concerning  his  Son"   that  are 
being  spoken  of  in  the  passage  before  us,  it 
may  seem  at  first  most  probable  that  the  idea 
here  implied  by  the  word  "Son"  is  the 
same  as  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  and 
no  more.  We  ought,  however,  to  take  further 
into  account  what  St.  Paul  himself  seems  to 
signify  by  the  term  when  he  uses  it  else- 
where.   It  does  not  follow  that  his  own 
conception  of  its  significance  was  confined 
to  what  was  apparent  in  "the  prophets." 
Reading  them  in  the  light  of  the  gospel 
revelation,    he    may   have   seen   in   their 
language  more  implied  than  it  distinctly 
expressed,  and  himself  intended  to  impl* 


OH.  1. 1—32.]      THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS. 


more.  The  passages  in  his  Epistles,  apart 
from  this  chapter,  where  Christ  is  called  God's 
Son  are  these:  (1)  oh.  v.  10,  "We  were 
reconciled  to  God  through  the  death  of  his 
Son;"  (2)  ch.  viii.  3,  "Sending  his  own 
Son  (rb:/  eavTou  vliv)  in  the  likeness  of  flesh 
of  sin ; "  (3)  oh.  viii.  29,  "  To  bo  conformed 
to  the  image  of  his  Son,  that  he  might  be 
the  Firstborn  among  many  brethren  ;  "  (4) 
eh.  viii.  32,  "  Spared  not  liis  own  Son  (toS 
iBiov  vlov) ; "  (5)  2  Gor.  i.  19,  "  The  Son  of 
God  .  .  .  was  not  Yea  and  Nay ; "  (6)  Gal. 
iv.  4,6,  "God  sent  forth  his  Son,"— "sent 
forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  your  hearts, 
crying,  Abba,  Father;"  (7)  Col.  1.  13, 
"  Translates  us  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son 
of  his  love."  In  all  these  passages— except 
(3),  in  whicb  the  reference  may  be  only  to 
Christ  in  glory — the  term  "  Son  "  denotes  a 
relation  to  the  Father,  peculiar  to  our  Lord, 
previous  to  the  death  and  exaltation,  and 
in  some  of  them,  (2),  (6),  (7),  previous  to 
the  Incarnation.  Such  previous  relation 
is  especially  apparent  in  the  sequence  to 
(7),  where  "  the  Son  of  his  love  "  is  defined 
jiot  only  as  "  the  Head  of  the  body,  the 
Church,"  and  "  the  Firstborn  from  the 
dead,"  but  also  as  "  the  Image  of  the  in- 
,  visible  God,  the  Firstborn  of  all  crea- 
tion ;  for  in  him  all  things  were  created, 
the  things  in  heaven,  and  the  things  on 
the  earth,  the  things  visible  and  the  things 
invisible ;  all  things  through  him  and  unto 
him  have  been  created."  With  this  may 
be  compared  Phil.  ii.  6 — 12,  where  an 
existence  eV  i^opii-g  ©eoS,  anterior  to  incarna- 
tion, is  undoubtedly  declared,  though  the 
exaltation  after  human  obedience,  and  the 
receiving  then  of  "a  name  that  is  above 
every  name"  (cf.  Heb.  i.  4),  is  spoken  of 
as  well.  One  other  passage  remains  to  be 
noticed,  occurring,  not  in  an  Epistle,  but 
in  the  sermon  at  Antioch  in  Pisidia  (Acts 
xiii.  83),  where  the  view  of  Christ's  Sonship 
which  is  found  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
(no  more  being  expressed)  appears  as  pre- 
sent to  St.  Paul's  mind.  For  there  God  is 
said  to  have  "fulfilled  the  promise  which 
was  made  unto  the  fathers,  in  that  he  hath 
raised  up  Jesus  again ;  as  it  is  also  written 
in  the  psalm.  Thou  art  my  Son;  this  day 
have  I  begotten  thee."  Here  the  Sonship 
assigned  to  "  the  Christ "  in  the  second 
psalm  is  regarded  as  exhibited  in  the  Eesur- 
rection.  From  this  review  of  St.  Paul's 
usage  it  may  be  inferred  that  irepl  toC  vlov 
auToC  in  the  text  befcK  us  carries  with 
it  in  bis  own  mind  the  idea  of  pre-existent 
eternal  Sonship,  though  what  we  may  call 
Messianic  Sonship  may  be  all  he  means  dis- 
tinctly to  intimate  as  declared  by  prophets. 
The  bearing  of  this  distinction  on  the  in- 
terpretation of  ver.  4  will  appear  under  it. 
It  may  be  observed  here  that  the  absence 


of  a  fixed  and  definite  usage  in  the  appli- 
cation of  the  term  "  Son  "  to  Christ,  which 
(as  has  been  seen)  is  found  in  the  New 
Testament,  is  what  might  be  expected  there. 
Formal  definitions  of  theological  conceptions 
by  means  of  language  used  uniformly  in  a 
recognized  definite  sense  had  not  as  yet 
been  made.  Among  such  conceptions  that 
of  the  Holy  Trinity  though  implied,  is 
nowhere  distinctly  formulated  as  a  dogiuii. 
It  was  reserved  for  the  Church,  under  the 
guidance  of  the  Spirit,  to  preclude  miscon- 
ception by  precise  dogmatic  definitions. 

Ver.  3. — Which  was  made ;  or,  wa«  horn. 
But  the  word  in  itself,  yevoiiivou,  need  only 
mean  that  he  became  a  Man  of  the  seed  of 
David  ;  implying,  it  would  seem,  a  pre-ei- 
istence  of  him  who  so  became.  This,  how- 
ever, is  more  evident  from  other  passages,  in 
which  &v,  or  inrdpx^i'i  is  opposed  to  yei/Sfieyos 
(cf.  John  i.  1,  14 ;  Phil.  ii.  6,  7 ;  cf.  also 
Gal.  iv.  4,  'E|a7r60'Te£\e»'  d  ®ehs  tov  vlhp 
avTOVf  yev^fisvov  4k  yvvaucbs).  Of  the  seed 
of  David  according  to  the  flesh.  Kara,  aipxa 
is  here,  as  elsewhere,  contrasted  with  koto 
irfevfia.  Here  Karh  aapKa  denotes  the  merely 
human  descent  of  Jesus  in  distinction  from 
his  Divine  Being  (cf.  Acts  ii.  40;  ch.  ix. 
3,  5 ;  2  Cor.  v.  16).  His  having  come 
humanly  "  of  the  seed  of  David  "  is  suitably 
noted  here,  where  "  the  Son "  is  being  set 
forth  as  fulfilling  the  Old  Teslament  promises; 
for  they  uniformly  represent  the  Messiah 
as  thus  descended,  and  it  was  essential  to 
the  Jewish  conception  of  liim  that  he  should 
be  so  (cf.  Matt.  xxii.  42 ;  John  vii.  42 ; 
and  for  the  stress  laid  by  the  writers  of 
the  Kew  Testament  on  the  fact  that  Jesus 
was  so — of  whiol)  fact  no  doiibt  was  enter- 
tained— cf.  Heb.  vii.  14,  Trp6SriAov  yap,  etc. 
See,  among  many  other  passages,  Matt,  i 
1;  Luke  ii.  4,  5;  Acts  ii.  30;  xiii.  23:  2 
Tim.  ii.  8).  Meyer,  commenting  on  the 
verse  before  us,  goes  somewhat  out  of  his 
way  to  set  forth  that  only  Joseph's,  not 
Mary's,  descent  from  David  was  in  St.  Paul's 
mind,  saying  that  "  the  Davidio  descent  of 
the  mother  of  Jesus  can  by  no  means  be 
established  from  the  New  Testament,"  and 
also  that  "  Paul  nowhere  indiciites  the  view 
of  a  supernatural  generation  of  the  bodily 
nature  of  Jesus."  As  to  the  first  of  these 
assertions,  it  may  be  observed  that,  in  the 
opening  chapters  of  our  Gospel  of  St.  Luke 
(representing  certainly  the  early  beUef  of 
the  Church)  our  Lord  seems  to  be  re- 
garded as  actually  descended  from  David 
— not  legally  so  accounted  only — though,  at 
the  same  time,  his  supernatural  generation 
is  distinctly  asserted  (comp.  Luke  i.  32  with 
i.  35).  Hence  we  arc  led  to  infer  Mary's, 
as  well  as  Joseph's,  descent  from  David, 
whether  or  not  either  of  the  genealogies 
given  in  St.  Matthew's  and  St.  Luke's  Gospels 


THE   EPISTLE   OP  PAUL  TO   THE   EOMANS.      [oh.  i.  1—32. 


repreBents  hers.  Further,  with  respect  to 
those  two  genealogies  (evidently  independ- 
ent one«,  and  both  probably  got  from  genea- 
logical records  preserved  at  Jerusalem),  a 
probable  way  of  accounting  for  the  two 
distinct  linea  of  descent  through  which 
Joseph  seems  to  be  traced  to  David,  is  to 
suppose  one  of  them  to  be  really  Mary's, 
the  legal  representative  of  whose  family 
Joseph  had  become  by  marriage,  so  as  to  be 
entered  in  legal  documents  as  the  son  of  her 
father  (see  art.  on  "  Genealogy  of  Jesus 
Christ,"  in  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  W. 
Smith,  LL.D.).  As  to  Meyer's  second  asser- 
tion above  alluded  to,  it  is  true  that  St.  Paul 
nowhere  refers  to  oiir  Lord's  supernatural 
conception  spoken  of  in  tlie  Gospels  of  St. 
Matthew  and  St.  Luke.  But  it  does  not 
follow  that  it  was  not  already  included  in 
the  Church's  creed,  or  that  St.  Paul  him- 
self was  unaware  of  it  or  disbelieved  it. 
This  is  not  the  place  for  enlarging  on  the 
evidence,  at  the  present  day  iucjeasing  in 
force,  of  the  early  origin  of  our  existing 
Gospels,  and  of  their  being  a  true  embodi- 
ment of  the  Church's  original  belief.  St. 
Paul's  silence  as  to  the  manner  how  the  Son 
of  God  became  incamute  may  be  accounted 
for  by  his  not  having  had  occasion,  in  his 
extant  Epistles,  to  speak  of  it.  He  is 
occupied,  in  accordance  with  his  peculiar 
mission,  in  setting  forth  the  meaning  and 
purpose  of  the  Incarnation  rather  than  its 
mode,  and  in  preaching  rather  than  cateche- 
tical instruction ;  and  on  the  essential  idea 
involved  he  is  sufficiently  explicit,  viz.  the 
peculiar  Divine  paternity  of  Christ,  notwith- 
standing the  human  birth. 

Ver.  4. — Who  was  declared  (so  Autho- 
rized Version)  the  Son  of  God  with  (literally, 
in)  power,  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness, 
by  the  resurrection  of  (not  as  in  Authorized 
Version, /rom)  the  dead.  Supposing  the  in- 
tention here  to  be  to  declare  the  Son's 
essential  Deity,  notwithstanding  lys  human 
birth,  we  might  have  expected  Svtos  after 
the  ytvoiiivov  pri;ceding.  But  the  word 
used  is  SptaBevTos ;  and,  further,  the  Eesurrec- 
tion  is  referred  to,  not  a  pre-existent  state. 
The  verb  ipf^eiv  means  properly  to  "appoint" 
or  "  determine ; "  and  if  this  meaning  be  re- 
tained, the  whole  passage  would  seem  to 
preclude  the  idea  of  Sonship  previous  to  the 
Eesurrection  being  in  view.  Hence  commen- 
tators ancient  and  modem  agree  generally 
in  assigning  an  unusual  meaning  to  ipi<r9sti- 
Toj  here,  making  it  signify  "declared,"  as 
in  the  Authorized  Version.  So  Chrysostom, 
Tl  oSc  ea-Tiv  Spitr9fvrosi  rod  StixfleVros, 
cf7ro(pav6evTos,  KpiBiyros,  iiio\oyri9ivTos,  vapd 
Tris  imcLvrav  yyt&^ijs  Ka\  ^-fitpov  (Hom.  ii.  p. 
432,  D).  It  is  maintained  that  this  use  of 
the  word,  though  unusual,  is  legitimate; 
since  »  person  may  be  said  to  be  appointed. 


or  determined,  to  be  what  he  already  ig, 
when  his  being  such  is  declared  and  mani- 
fested. Thus,  it  may  be  said,  a  king  may 
be  spoken  of  as-  appointed  king  when  he  U 
crowned,  though  he  was  king  before  •  or  a 
saint  determined  a  saint  when  he  is  canon- 
ized; and  the  classical  phrase,  ipl^^iv  rici 
@i6v,  in  the  sense  of  deify,  is  adduced  as 
parallel.  Thus  the  expression  is  made  to 
mean  that  "  the  same  who  ko™  aipxa  was 
known  only  as  the  descendant  of  David,  is 
now  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  "  (Tho- 
luck) ;  "Opiferai  8e  eii  miy  Ka\  Kara  rh 
avepJnrivov"  (Cyril);  and  St.  Paul's  reason 
for  thus  putting  it,  in  pursuance  of  his  course 
of  thought,  is  thus  explained  by  Meyer; 
"Paul  gives  the  two  main  epochs  in  the 
history  of  the  Son  of  God  as  they  had  actually 
occurred,  and  had  been  prophetically  an- 
nounced ; "  also  by  Bengel  thus,  "  Etiam 
ante  exinanitionem  suam  Filius  Dei  is 
quidem  fuit :  sed  exinanitione  filiatio  ocoul- 
tata  fuit,  et  plene  demum  retecta  post  resur- 
reotionem."  This  interpretation  would  be 
more  satisfactory  than  it  is  if  the  verb  dpl^eiv 
were  found  similarly  used  in  any  other  part 
of  the  New  Testament.  It  occurs  in  the 
following  passages,  and  always  in  its  proper 
and  usual  sense:  Luke  xxli.  22;  Acts  ii.  23; 
X.  42  ;  xi.  29  ;  xvii.  26,  31 ;  Heb.  iv.  7.  Of 
these  especially  significant  are  Acts  x.  42 
(^Oti  avT6s  ^ariy  d  wpKr/xevos  inrb  rov  ®€ov 
KpiT^s  iivTiDv  Kol  v(Kpav)  and  Acts  xvii.  31 
(AifJri  iffrriffev  Tj/jLepow  iv  ^  fieWet  Kpiysiv  t^v 
olKovfjLevTiv  iv  StKaLotrvvri  iv  dvSpX  ^  &pitre, 
viartv  irapaffx^v  iraatv,  dyatrr'ftCTas  aiirhv  iK 
v(Kpmv').  In  both  of  these  texts  the  word 
denotes  God's  appointment  or  determination 
of  Christ  to  the  office  of  Judge,  not  merely  a 
declaration  or  manifestation  of  his  already 
being  so;  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  in 
the  second  the  lauguage  is  given  as  that  of 
St.  Paul  himself,  and  that  it  corresponds 
with  the  passage  before  us  in  that  the 
Eesurrectiou  is  spoken  of  as  the  display  to 
the  world  of  Christ  being  so  appointed  or 
determined.  Surely,  then,  there  ought  to 
be  cogent  reason  for  giving  Spur64vTos  a 
different  meaning  here  ;  and,  in  spite  of  the 
weight  of  authority  on  the  other  side,  it  is 
submitted  that  we  are  under  no  necessity  to 
do  so,  if  we  bear  in  mind  "what  appeared 
under  ver.  8  as  to  the  different  senses  in 
which  Christ  is  designated  Xlhi  @eov.  In 
the  sense  apparent  is  Messianic  prophecy, 
and  pervading  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
in  the  sense  which  seems  intended  by  St. 
Paul  himself  in  Acts  xiii.  32,  33,  it  was  not 
till  after  the  Eesurrection  that  Christ  attained 
his  position  of  royal  Sonship ;  it  was  then 
that  the  Divine  ipiaiihs  took  effect  in  that 
regard.  It  is  true  that  St.  Paul  (as  wa« 
seen  vmder  ver.  3)  himself  conceived  of 
Christ  as  essentially  Son  of  God  from  eternity ; 


OH.  r.  1—32.]      THE  EPISTLE   OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS. 


but  here,  while  speaking  of  the  fulfilment 
of  Messianic  prophecy,  and  desiring  to  point 
out  what  was  patent  to  all  wlio  believed 
that  Christ  had  risen,  he  may  fitly  refer  to 
his  exaltation  only,  in  virtue  of  which, 
further,  he  had  himself  received  his  apostolic 
commission,  of  which  he  proceeds  to  spealr, 
and  the  assertion  which  he  has  had  all  along 
in  view.  The  above  interpretation  of  6puT9iv- 
Tos  appears,  further,  to  have  the  weighty 
support  of  Pearson,  who,  speaking  of  Christ's 
fourfold  riglit  unto  the  title  of  "  the  Son  of 
God  " — by  generation,  as  begotten  of  God ; 
by  commission,  as  sent  by  him;  by  resur- 
rection, as  the  Firstborn ;  by  actual  posses- 
sion, as  Heir  of  all— refers  thus  to  ch.  i.  4 ; 
"  Thus  was  he  defined,  or  constituted,  and 
'appointed  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power 
by  the  Resurrection  from  the  dead ' ",  (Poarson 
on  the  Creed,  ait.  ii.).  "Ev  Suviim  (to  be 
connected  with  6pi(rflfi/Tos)  denotes  the  Divine 
power  displayed  in  the  Resurrection  (cf. 
Eph.  i.  19,  "the  exceeding  greatness  of 
his  power,  .  .  .  according  to  the  working  of 
the  strength  of  his  might,  which  he  wrought 
in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  tlie 
dead;"  cf.  also  1  Cor.  vi.  14;  xv.  43 ;  2  Cor. 
xiii.  4).  In  the  last  two  of  these  passages, 
power  evidenced  in  rcsuirectioii  is  con- 
trasted with  human  wealmess  evidenced  in 
death :  SvelpcTai  iv  d<r8ej>et<i,  eyclpeTat  h 
Suvd/iei;  Kol  yhp  et  iffTavptidri  j^  daSe- 
velas,  aAAa  fij  iK  Swd^suts.  To  Kar&  trdpKU 
in  ver.  3  is  opposed,  not  simply  kotA  itvevfia, 
but  Kard  -nv^Lfia  ayioatrvvr]^  ("  the  spirit  of 
holiness"'),  so  as  to  denote  the  Divine  element 
that  was  all  along  in  the  Incarnate  Son,  in 
virtue  of  which  he  rose  triumphant  over 
human  a.<rB4veta,  We  too  are  composed  of 
<r({p|  and  ■Kvevi/.a;  but  the  irnevfjia  in  Christ 
was  one  of  absolute  holiness — the  holiness  of 
Deity ;  not  ayt6T7is,  holiness  in  the  abstract, 
attributed  to  Deity  (Heb.  xii.  10),  nor  07100-- 
fios,  "  sanctiflcation,"  of  which  man  is  ca- 
pable ;  but  ayiaffii/iit  an  inherent  quality  of 
Divine  holiness  ("Quasi  tres  sint  gradus, 
sanctijicatio,  sanctimonia,eanctitas,"  Bengel). 
Because  of  this  "spirit  of  holiness"  that 
was  in  Christ,  "  it  was  not  possible  that  he 
should  be  holden  of"  death  (Acts  li.  24). 
Through  this,  which  was  in  himself— not 
merely  through  a  Divine  power  external  to 
himself  calling  him  from  the  grave,  as  he 
had  called  Lazarus — he  overcame  death  (cf. 
Acts  ii.  27 ;  xiii.  35,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption "). 
It  was  through  this  too  (SnJ  Trfeifiaros 
alavlov)  that  he  "offered  himself  without 
spot  to  God "  (Heb.  ix.  14) ;  and  in  the 
same  sense  may  be  understood  4SiKaui8ri  ir 
iryiiiMTi  (1  Tim.  lii.  16).  Neither  in  these 
passages  nor  in  the  one  before  us  is  tlie 
Holy  Spirit  meant,  in  the  sense  of  a  distinct 
Person  of  the  Holy  Trinity."    Further,  the 


pi'eposition  in  i(  ItvatrTda-ews  does  not  denote 
(as  explained  by  Theodoret,  Luther,  and 
Grotius)  the  time  from  which  the  Spur/itis 
began  in  the  sense  of  If  0?  aviaT-n,  but  the 
source  out  of  which  it  proceeded.  "  'E/c  non 
modo  tempus,  scd  nexum  rerum  denotat" 
(Bengel).  Further,  the  phrase  is  not  "reiur- 
rection /rom  the  dead,"  as  in  the  Autliorized 
Version,  but  "0/  the  dead,"  which  may  be 
purposely  used  so  as  to  point,  nut  only  to 
the  fact  of  Christ's  own  resurrection,  but 
also  to  its  significance  for  mankind.  The 
same  expression  often  occurs  elsewhere 
with  a  comprehensive  meaning  (of.  Acts 
xxiii.  6 ;  xxiv.  21 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  12—21 ;  Phil, 
ill.  11;  also  1  Cor.  xv.  22;  Pliil.  iii. 
10).  The  resurrection  of  Christ  expressed 
"  the  power  of  an  endless  life,"  here  and 
herealter,  for  mankind,  carrying  with  it 
the  possibility  of  the  resurrection  of  all 
from  the  dominion  of  death  in  the  risen  Son. 
One  view  of  the  meaning  of  the  whole  of 
the  above  passage — that  of  Chryeostom  and 
Melanothou — may  be  mentioned  because  of 
the  weight  of  these  authorities,  though  it 
cannot  be  the  true  one.  Thej  take  kotcs 
iri/cByoo  Aymaivi)s,  4v  Svvi/iei,  and  €|  drorrrf- 
(Tiuis  viKpSiv,  as  co-ordinate,  regarding  them 
as  the  three  proofs  of  Christ's  eternal  Son- 
sliip,  i.e.  miracles,  the  communication  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  tlie  resurrection.  Jesus 
Christ  cur  Lord;  thus  in  conclusion  dis- 
tinctly identifying  the  Son  of  prophecy  with 
the  Jesus  who  had  lately  appeared,  and  was 
acknowledged  by  the  Christians  as  the 
Messiah,  and  commonly  by  them  called 
Kipios.  The  force  of  the  passage  is  weakened 
in  the  Authorized  Version  by  the  trans- 
position of  *l7jcrov  XpiffTov  Kvpiov  Tjfiav  to  the 
beginning  of  ver.  3,  as  also  by  the  inclusion 
of  ver.  2  in  a  parenthesis,  so  as  to  separate 
it  from  vfpl  Tov  vtou  which  follows.  (Sea 
explanation  given  above.) 

Ver.  5. — Through  whom  we  received  grace 
and  apostleship,  nnto  obedience  of  faith 
among  all  the  nations,  for  his  Name's  sake. 
"We"  here  means, not  Christians  generally, 
but  Paul  himself  (thougli  probaldy,  as  also 
in  all  other  cases  where  he  similarly  uses 
this  plural,  with  the  intention  of  including 
others,  here  his  fellow-apostles);  for  the 
"  grace  "  spoken  of  is  evidently  from  what 
follows  a,  special  grace  for  the  apostolic 
office  to  which  he  had  been  called.  The 
word  cmoiTToK^  occurs  in  a  like  sense  in 
Acts  i.  25.  Eis  imaKoiiv  tt^ittcibj,  etc.,  denotei 
the  purpose  of  his  apostleship,  viz.  to  bring 
men  everywhere,  of  whatever  race,  to  be- 
lieve and  obey  the  gospel;  not  to  a  belief  in 
it  only,  but  to  the  obedience  which  comes  of 
faith,  or  which  fait  1 1  renders.  "Accepimns 
mandatum  Evangelii  ad  omnes  gentes  pro- 
fKreudi,oui  illso  per  fidem  obediant"(Oalvin> 
Some  take  the  phrase,  uttokoj)?  mIittius,  to 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.      [ch.  1. 1— 32. 


mean  "obedience  to  faith,"  faith  being  re- 
garded, not  as  causa  effiaiens,  but  as  a  com- 
manding principle  exacting  obedience  to  it- 
self. So  Meyer,  who  refers  to  passages  where 
a  genitive  after  inaKoit  has  this  meaning : 
2  Oor.  X.  5  (JnraKo^  tov  XpiffToS);  1  Pet.  i.  22 
(^troKoJ)  Trjj  &Ai)9e/aj) ;  and  also  to  Acts  vi.  7 
{pTri\KovDv  rf  ir/crei).  The  last  of  these 
quotationi  would  have  been  peculiarly  ap- 
posite in  support  of  the  interpretation  con- 
tended for,  were  not  Triareas  in  the  text  now 
before  us  anarthrous,  so  as  to  suggest  euh- 
jective  faith,  rather  than  "  the  faith  delivered 
to  the  saints,"  as  in  Acts  vi.  7.  The  ques- 
tion is,  after  all,  of  no  importance  with  regard 
to  the  essential  idea  intended  to  be  con- 
veyed. 'El-  iraffi  TOis  e6ve<riy  seems  to  point 
especially  to  St.  Paul's  own  apostleship  (of. 
Acts  xxii.  21 ;  Gal.  i.  16;  ii.  8,  9;  Eph.  iii. 
1,  8),  though,  of  course,  the  apostleship  of 
all,  wherever  exercised,  had  a  similar  world- 
wide purpose.  In  using  the  expression  here, 
he  anticipates  what  he  is  about  to  say  as  to 
liis  not  shrinking  from  addressing  even  the 
Romans  with  authority ;  his  mission  being 
to  all  the  nations.  'Tnep  rov  ovdfiaros  aurov 
is  best  connected  with  "  obedience  of  faith." 
The  phrase  is  of  frequent  occurrence  (cf. 
Acts  V.  41 ;  ix,  15 ;  xv.  26 ;  xxi.  13 ;  also 
2  ThesB.  i.  12).  It  is  most  usually  connected 
with  the  idea  of  suffering  in  behalf  of  Christ. 
Ver.  6. — ^Among  whom  are  ye  also,  caUed 
ones  of  Jesus  Christ;  and  tlierefore  included 
in  my  apostolic  mission.  Here  the  paren- 
thetic passage  ends,  ver.  7  being  the 
sequence  of  ver.  1. 

Ver.  7. — To  all  that  be  in  Borne,  beloved 
of  God,  called  to  be  saints  (cf.  kAjjt!is  airitr- 
roXov,  in  ver.  1).  Bengel's  view,  that  by 
&7a«7ToTs  06oC  are  specially  meant  the  Jew- 
ish Christians,  as  being  "beloved  tor  the 
fathers'  sakes  "  (ch.  xi.  28),  and  by  kAjitoij 
a7iois  the  Gentile  converts,  is  untenable. 
Both  phrases  are  applicable  to  all.  The 
word  ayloi,  be  it  observed,  is  elsewhere  used 
to  denote  all  Christians,  vrithout  implying 
eminence  in  personal  holiness  (cf.  1  Pet.  ii. 
9,  v^ils  5e  .  .  .  ^Svos  &yiov).  Grace  to  you 
and  peace  from  God  our  Father  and  the  lord 
JesuB  Christ.  The  union,  here  and  else- 
where, of  Jesus  Christ  with  the  Father  as 
imparting  heavenly  blessing,  implies  his 
Deity  no  leas  than  any  dogmatic  statement 
could  do;  for  it  is  surely  impossible  to  con- 
ceive the  apostle  thus  associating  with  the 
Godhead  one  whom  he  regarded  as  a  mere 
human  being.  The  same  form  of  bene- 
diction is  found  at  the  beginning  of  all  St. 
Paul's  Epistles,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  its  meaning  is  as  given  above.  For, 
though  here,  in  1  and  2  Oorintliians,  Bphe- 
sians,  Fhilippians,  Colossians,  1  and  2  Tbes- 
salonians,  and  Philemon,  this  collocation  of 
words  might  allow  the  rendering,  "Grace 


.  .  .  from  God,  the  Father  of  us  and  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  yet  in  Gulatians,  1  and 
2  Timothy,  and  Titus,  it  is  obviously  in- 
admissible. And  even  without  these  in- 
stances the  true  meaning  would  have  been 
probable  from  iin&v  coming  hefore  'Vqaov 
XpuTTOv.  If  the  apostle  had  intended  to 
express  a  common  Fatherhood  of  God,  he 
would  surely  not  have  written,  "  Gur  Father 
and  Christ's,"  but  rather,  "  Christ's  and 
ours  "  (of.  John  xx.  17). 

Vers.  8 — 17. — B.  Introduetion,  in  which 
the  writer  expresses  hit  strong  interest  in  the 
Boman  Church,  his  long-cherished  desire  to 
visit  it,  and  the  grounds  of  this  desire. 

Ver.  8. — First,  I  thank  my  God  through 
Jesus  Christ  for  you  all,  that  your  faith  is 
spoken  of  (rather,  •proclaimed')  in  the  whole 
world.  "We  observe  here,  as  in  other  Epistles, 
St.  Paul's  way  of  beginning  with  compli- 
mentary language,  and  expression  of  thank- 
fulness for  the  good  he  knew  of  in  his 
readers.  He  thus  intimates  at  the  outset 
his  own  good  feeling  towards  them,  and 
predisposes  them  to  take  in  good  part  any 
animadversions  that  may  follow.  "The 
whole  world  "  is  not,  of  course,  to  be  taken  ~ 
Uterallv,  but  as  a  phrase  denoting  general 
notoriety.  Similarly  in  1  Tliess.  i.  8,  4v 
iravrX  T((jrij).  Aiiy  considerable  number  of 
converts  in  so  important  a  place  as  Rome 
would  be  likely  to  become  notorious  in  all 
Christian  circles,  and  even  outside  them 
might  have  already  begun  to  attract  atten- 
tion. 

Ver.  9. — For  God  is  my  witness,  whom  I 
serve  in  my  spirit  in  the  gospel  of  his  Son, 
that  without  ceasing  I  make  mention  of  you 
in  my  prayers.  A  like  solemn  asseveration 
is  made  with  a  like  intention  (Phil.  i.  8;  cf. 
also  2  Cor.  xi.  31).  It  expresses  the  writer's 
earnestness,  and  is  in  place  for  attestation  of 
a  fact  known  only  to  himself  and  God.  The 
word  AarpeiJw  ("I  serve"),  when  used  in  a 
religious  sense,  most  usually  denotes  "  wor- 
ship," and  speoifioally  the  priestly  services 
of  the  temple  (Heb.  viii.  5;  ix.  9;  x.  2; 
xiii.  10).  St.  Paul's  Km-peia  intended  here 
is  not  ceremonial  function,  but  a  spiritual 
one  {iv  Ttf)  TTfeifiarl  /jlov) — an  inward  de- 
votion of  himself  to  God's  service  in  pro- 
claiming and  furthering  "  the  gospel  of  his 
Son."  A  similar  view  of  tlie  essential 
AoT/jefa  of  Christians  is  found  in  ch.  xii.  1 ; 
XV.  16;  Phil.  iii.  3;  2  Tim.  i.  3;  Heb. 
U.  14. 

Ver.  10. — Always  (to  be  connected  with 
Se6^ievos  following,  not,  as  in  the  Authorized 
Version,  with  the  preceding  fiveiav  iroioStiai) 
in  my  prayers  making  request,  if  by  any 
means  now  at  length  (in  some  way  at  length 
some  day)  I  may  he  prospered  to  come  unt« 


CH.  1. 1— 32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAl^L  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


yon.  The  word  eboSaBiiiriiiai,  translated  in 
the  Authorized  Version,  "  have  a  prosperous 
journey,"  though  rightly  so  rendered  with 
regard  to  its  etymology  and  original  mean- 
ing, does  not  necessarily  imply  being  pros- 
pered in  a  journey.  It  was  commonly  used 
to  denote  being  prospered  generally  (of. 
1  Cor.  xvi.  2  ;  3  John  2). 

Ver.  11.— For  I  long  to  see  you,  that  I 
may  impart  onto  yon  some  spixitnal  gift, 
to  the  end  ye  may  he  established.  Bengel, 
taking  x«'P'<''M'«  as  the  special  gift  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  consequent  on  apostolic  laying 
on  of  hands  (of.  Acts  viiL  17,  18),  argues 
from  this  verse  that  neither  St.  Peter  nor 
any  other  apostle  could  have  been  at  Bome 
so  far.  Though  his  conclusion  is  probably 
true,  it  does  not  follow  from  his  premiss ; 
for  t1  x'^P'^Ma  irvevfiariichv  evidently  means 
generally  any  gift  of  grace.  All  St.  Paul 
implies  is  that  he  hopes  to  do  them  some 
spiritual  good,  so  as  to  settle  and  strengthen 
thorn  ;  and  in  the  next  verse,  with  charac- 
teristic delicacy,  he  even  modifies  what  he 
has  said,  so  as  to  guard  against  being  sup- 
posed to  imply  that  the  benefit  would  be  all 
on  their  side. 

Ver.  12.— That  is,  that  I  with  you  may  be 
comforted  in  yon,  each  of  ns  by  each  other's 
faith,  yours  and  mine.  The  spirit  of  delicate 
courtesy  here  evinced,  in  addressing  persons 
over  whom  one  less  of  a  Christian  gentleman 
than  St.  Paul  was  might  have  assumed  a 
lordly  tone,  is  apparent  elsewhere  in  his 
Epistles  (of.  ch.  xv.  15  ■  xvi.  19 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  3 ; 
iii.  1,  seq  ;  viiL.  8 ;  ii.  2),  and  especially  the 
whole  BpiBiie  to  rnilenion. 

Ver.  13. — But  I  would  not  have  you 
ignorant,  brethren,  that  oftentimes  I  pur- 
posed to  come  unto  you  (and  was  hindered 
hitherto),  that  I  might  have  some  fruit 
among  you  also,  even  as  among  the  rest  of 
the  Gentiles.  Some  take  the  "  but "  at  the 
beginning  of  this  verse  (ou  flcAw  5e)  as 
the  apodosis  to  irpSnov  fnev  in  ver.  8,  with 
the  meaning,  "  I  am  aware,  and  am  thank- 
ful, that  your  faith  is  already  notorious; 
but  still  I  wish  you  to  know  that  I  have 
long  had  a  desire  to  visit  you."  But  the 
/lev  and  Se  are  too  far  separated  to  commend 
this  view.  It  is  more  after  St.  Paul's  style 
that  there  should  be  no  apodosis  to  Tparoy 
luv ;  his  train  of  thought  carries  him  on  so 
that  he  forgets  how  he  began  his  sentence; 
and  ver.  13  comes  naturally  as  the  sequence 
of  ver.  12,  whether  we  render  Si  by  "  but,"  or 
(as  in  the  Authorized  Version)  by  "now," or 
(as  in  the  Kevised  Version)  by  "  and."  The 
long-cherished  intention  here  spoken  of  had 
been  expressed  by  him  when  at  Ephesus, 
before  his  departure  to  Macedonia  (Acts 
^ix.  21).  Feeling  himself  to  be  peculiarly 
the  apostle  to  the  Gentile  world,  and 
having   already  been    the    first    agent  in 


carrying  the  gospel  into  Europe  (Acts  xvi 
9,  10),  and  having  established  it  there  in 
important  centres  of  population,  he  ever 
kept  in  view  an  eventual  visit  to  the 
imperial  city  itself,  in  the  hope  of  its 
thence  permeating  the  whole  western  world. 
What  had  so  far  hindered  him  appears 
from  oh.  xv.  22  to  have  been  principally 
missionary  work  which  had  first  to  be 
aooomolished  elsewhere.  At  last  Provi- 
dencewarried  him  there  m  a  way  not  of 
his  own  choosing.  Thus  man  proposes, 
God  disposes.  In  this  verse  the  Boman 
Church  seems  certainly  to  be  regarded  as 
a  Gentile  one.  What  classes  of  converts 
probably  at  that  time  composed  it  has  been 
considered  in  the  Introduction.  Whatever 
its  nucleus,  St.  Paul  plainly  feels  that,  in 
sending  this  Epistle  to  it,  he  is  carrying 
out  his  especial  mission  of  extending  the 
gospel  to  the  Gentile  world,  though  at 
the  same  time  he  writes  mainly  from  a 
Jewish  standpoint,  appealing  frequently  to 
the  Jewish  Scriptures,  with  which  he  presup- 
poses an  acquaintance  on  the  part  of  his 
readers.  But  the  latter  fact  is  not  inconsis- 
tent with  the  supposition  of  their  bein  g,  either 
then  or  prospectively,  mainly  of  Gentile  race. 
The  gospel  was  everywhere  preached  as 
the  fulfilment  of  Judaism  (see  note  on  ver. 
2) ;  and  for  understanding  both  its  purport 
and  its  evidences,  all  would  have  to  be  to 
some  extent  indoctrinated  in  the  ancient 
Scriptures.  It  is  to  be  observed,  too,  that 
in  the  next  verse  the  apostle  irapliea  a 
sense  of  now  addressing  a  peculiarly 
civilized  and  cultivated  community;  he 
seems  to  have  before  him  the  prospect  of 
his  address  reacliing  the  educated  and 
intelligent  classes  of  society  in  the  imperial 
city.  And  the  Epistle,  as  it  goes  on,  is  in 
accordance  with  such  an  aim.  For  its 
arguments  are  addressed,  not  merely  to 
believers  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  also 
generally  to  philosophieal  thinkers.  The 
state  of  the  world  is  reviewed,  human 
consciousness  is  analyzed,  deep  problems 
which  had  long  exercised  the  minds  of 
philosophers  are  touched  on,  and  the  gos- 
pel is,  in  fact,  commended  to  the  world  as 
God's  answer  to  man's  needs. 

Vers.  14,  15. — Both  to  Greeks  and  Bar- 
barians, both  to  wise  and  unwise,  I  am 
debtor.  So,  as  much  as  is  in  me,  to  you 
also  that  are  at  Bome,  I  am  ready  to  preach 
the  gospel.  The  two  divisions  of  mankind 
into  (1)  "EAAiictt  Kol  Bdpfiapoi,  (2)  (ra</>ai  Kol 
avo^Toi,  are  intended  to  include  all,  inde- 
pendently of  nationality  and  culture,  re- 
garded from  a  Greek  or  Roman  point  of 
view.  The  Greeks,  as  is  well  known, 
called  all  others  than  themselves  BdpPapot, 
BO  that  'EWiives  Koi  Biip$apoi  included  the 
whole   world.      Here  the  Bomang  are  iB> 


THE   EPISTLE   OP   PAUL   TO   THE   ROMANS,      [oh.  1. 1—32. 


tended  to  be  included  among  'E\A.7jy«, 
being  partakers  in  Hellenic  culture,  and 
in  fact  at  that  time  its  prominent  repre- 
Bentatives  (cf.  "Non  solum  Griecia  et 
Italia,  Bed  etiam  omnis  barharia,"  Cicero, 
'  De  Fin.,'  ii.  15).  Of  course,  a-oijioi  also  in- 
cludes them.  The  obvious  intention  of  the 
writer  is  to  place  them  in  each  of  the  higlier 
categories,  and  so,  while  after  his  maimer 
he  p»ya  his  expected  readers  a  delicate 
compliment,  to  insist  tliat  his  missioB  is  to 
the  highest  in  position  and  culture  as  well 
as  the  lowest,  and  that,  bold  in  his  convic- 
tions, he  is  not  ashamed  to  preach  the  cross 
even  to  them.  "  Audax  facinus  ad  crucem 
vocare  terrarum  Dominos"  (Alex.  More, 
quoted  by  Olsliausen). 

Ver.  16. — For  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the 
gosTfel  (of  Christ,  in  the  Authorized  Version, 
is  very  weakly  supporteil  by  manuscripts; 
neither  is  it  required),  for  it  is  the  power 
of  God  onto  salvation  to  every  one  that 
believeth;  to  the  Jew  first,  and  to  the 
Greek.  In  saying  ho  was  "not  ashamed," 
St.  Paul  may  liave  had  in  his  mind  our 
Lord's  own  words  (Mark  viii.  38  and  Lulce 
ix.  26.)  We  are  reminded  in  this  verse  of 
the  passage,  1  Cor.  i.  17—31,  where  the 
idea  here  shortly  intimated  is  enlarged  on. 
Ho  was  fully  aware  that  the  pride  of  Greek 
pliilosopliy  would  be  likely  to  despise  the 
message  of  this  cross  as  "foolishness."  It 
would  be  strange  to  them  at  first,  and  out 
of  accord  with  their  intellectual  speculations. 
But  he  vras  convinced  too  that  in  it  was 
ooutained  the  one  view  of  things  to  meet 
liuman  needs,  and  such  as  to  commend 
itself  in  tlie  end  to  thinkers,  if  their  con- 
sciences could  be  roused.  In  preaching 
to  the  Corinthians  he  had  indeed  purposely 
refrained  from  presenting  the  gospel  to 
them  in  "  words  of  man's  wisdom,"  lest  the 
simple  message,  addressed  alike  to  all, 
should  lose  any  of  its  essential  power,  or 
be  confounded  with  the  human  pliiloso- 
phies  of  the  day.  But  to  them  also,  in  his 
First  Epistle,  he  declares  that  this  was  not 
because  it  was  not  "wisdom,"  as  well  as 
"power,"  to  such  as  could  so  receive  it. 
Among  the  more  advanced,  and  therefore 
more  receptive  (eV  toTs  reKeiou),  he  does, 
he  says,  "speak  wisdom"  (1  Obr.  ii.  6), 
Christianity  having,  in  fuct,  its  own  philo- 
sophy, appreciable  by  them.  As  is  well  said 
in  the  Exposition  of  1  Coriutliiaus  in  the 
'Speaker's  Commentary,'  "No  contrast  is 
here  at  all  between  reason  and  revelation, 
SB  some  think,  but  strictly  between  two 
philosophies— the  philosophy  of  God  and 
the  philosophy  of  the  world."  Therefore 
to  the  Greek,  as  well  as  to  the  Jew,  he  is 
not  ashamed  to  preaoli  the  cross;  and  in 
this  Epistle,  suitably  to  its  purpose — more, 
it   may    be    supposed,  tUau    his    ordinary 


preaching — he  does  set  forth  the  Diyine 
philosophy  of  the  gospel.  But  the  mes- 
sage, he  adds,  is  "  to  the  Jew  first,"  be- 
cause it  was  to  the  people  of  tlie  covenant 
(cf.  oh.  ix.  4,  etc.)  that  the  salvation  in 
Christ  was  in  tlie  first  place  to  be  offered. 
Hence  also,  in  all  his  missionary  work,  he 
first  addressed  himself  to  llie  syuftgogue, 
and  only  when  he  .was  rejected  there, 
turned  exclusively  to  tlie  Gentiles.  So  at 
Rome  too,  when  he  afterwards  went  there 
(Acts  xxviii  17—29). 

Ver.  17— ch.  xi.  36.-11.  The  Doctrinal 
Part  op  the  Epistle. 

Ver.  17— ch.  viii.  39.— 0.  The  doctrine  oj 
ilie  rigliteousness  of  Ood  propounded,  eitab- 
liehed,  and  explained. 

Ver.  17. — This  verse,  though  connected  in 
sequence  of  thought  with  the  preceding 
verse,  may  properly  be  taken  in  conjunction 
with  the  doctrinal  argument  which  follows, 
serving,  in  fact,  as  its  thesis.  For  the 
righteousness  of  God  is  therein  revealed  from 
(or,  by)  faith  unto  faith :  as  it  is  written.  Bat 
the  righteous  by  (or,  from)  faith  shall  live. 
It  is  to  be  observed  that  ix  is  the  preposition 
before  irdrreois  in  both  clauses  of  the  sentence, 
though  our  Authorized  Version  makes  a 
difference.  Pui-ther,  we  render,  with  the 
Authorized  Version,  "  the  righteousness  of 
God,"  rather  than  "  a  righteousness,"  as  in  the 
Revised  Version,  notwithstanding  the  absence 
of  the  article.  For  what  is  meant  is  the 
definite  conception,  pervadmg  the  Epistle,  of 
God's  righteousness.  If  there  were  room  for 
doubt,  it  would  surely  be  removed  by  opy^ 
@€ov,  also  without  the  article,  immediately 
following,  and  with  the  same  verb,  Atoko- 
KiTTTfTat.  The  Revisers,  translating  here 
"  tlie  wrath,"  have  given  in  the  margin  as 
tenable  "  a  wrath,"  apparently  for  the  sake 
of  consistency  with  tliiir  rendering  of  Siicat- 
oaivi).  But  "a  wratli  of  God"  has  no  in- 
telligible  meaning.  The  expressions  seem 
simply  to  mean  God's  righteousness  and 
God's  wrath.  This  expraisicn,  ''the 
righteousness  of  God,"  has  been  discussed 
in  the  Introduction,  to  wliich  the  reader  is 
referred.  Its  intrinsic  meaning  is  there 
taken  to  be  God's  own  eternal  righteous- 
ness, revealed  in  Christ  for  reconciling  the 
world  to  himself,  rather  than  (as  commonly 
interpreted)  the  forensic  righteousness  (so 
called)  imputed  to  man.  Thus  there  is  no 
need  to  understand  the  genitive  ©foC  as 
gen.  auctoris,  or  as  equivalent  to  ivdn:iov 
®eov.  The  phrase  is  understood  in  the 
sense  that  would  be  familiar  to  St.  Paul  and 
his  readers  from  the  Old  Testament;  and 
it  is  conceived  that  this  intrinsic  sens* 
pervades   the   whole  Epistle  even  when  1 


OH.  1.1- -32.]      THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


9 


rigliteoTisness  imputed  to  man  is  spoken 
of;  the  idea  still  being  that  of  the  Divine 
righteousness  embracing  man.  It  is  not 
dear  in  what  exact  sense  e/c  wlffreas  eh 
wiariv  is  to  be  understood.  Most  commen- 
tators, taking  SiKaioirit>Ti  to  denote  man's 
imputed  righteousness,  connect  Ik  vlareas 
with  it,  as  if  ri  ix  had  been  written  (as  e.g. 
in  ch.  X.  6).  But  tlie  absence  of  fi,  as  well 
as  the  collocation  of  words,  seems  rather  to 
connect  it  with  ImoKaKiirTerat.  It  may  be 
meant  to  express  the  subjective  condition 
for  man's  apprehension,  and  appropriation, 
of  God's  righteousness.  Tlie  revelation  of 
it  to  man's  own  soul  is  said  to  be  4k  iriirreas, 
while  els  vtaTiv  expresses  the  result ;  viz. 
faith  unto  salvation.  A  like  use  of  the  pre- 
position CIS  is  found  in  ch.  vi.  19;  2  Oor.  ii. 
15, 16 ;  iii.  18.  In  the  last  of  these  passages 
hrh  S6^r]5  eis  Si^av  lias  a  close  resemblance 
to  the  expression  before  us.  The  quotation 
from  Hab.  ii.  4  seems  mainly  meant  to 
illustrate  what  has  been  said  concerning 
faith,  though  the  word  S^/taios,  which  occurs 
in  it  in  connection  with  faith,  may  have 
also  suggested  it  as  apposite,  as  is  evidently 
tlie  case  in  Gal.  iii.  11,  where  St.  Paul  quotes 
it  in  proof  of  the  position  that  eV  vifio!  oliSels 
SmaiovTai  irapi  t^  Oe^.  The  prophet  liad 
in  immediate  view  the  trials  of  faitli  peculiar 
to  his  own  time,  and  had  cried,  "  Lord,  how 
long  ?  "  But  he  had  stood  upon  Lis  watch  to 
look  out  for  what  the  Loed  would  say  unto 
him ;  and  an  answer  had  come  to  him  to 
the  effect  that,  in  spite  of  appearances,  his 
prophetic  vision  would  ere  long  be  realized, 
.  God's  promises  to  the  faithful  would  certainly 
be  fulfilled,  and  that  faith  meanwhile  must 
be  their  sustaining  principle — "The  just  shall 
live  by  his  faith."  So  in  the  Hebrew.  The 
LXX.  has  *0  5^  Sucai6s  fiov  e/c  iriffrEois  0i(reTat 
(A),  or  'O  Sh  Siicaios  iic  TTLffrews  fiov  0iirerai 
(B).  The  variations  do  not  affect  the  general 
sense  of  the  passage.  Now  some,  supposing 
St.  Paul  to  connect  sk  triaTeus  witli  Slicaios, 
as  part  of  the  subject  of  the  sentence,  would 
accuse  him  of  giving  the  quotation  a  mean- 
ing not  intended' by  the  prophet,  who  evi- 
dently meant  sk  irlcrTeas  to  go  with  f^o'eroi, 
as  part  of  the  predicate.  But  there  is  no 
reason  for  attributing  this  intention  to  St. 
Paul,  except  on  the  supposition  that  ho  had 
previously  connected  ix  iriareies  with  Sikcli- 
oaivi).  In  the  sense  of  ^  ek  iriareas.  But  we 
have  seen  reason  for  concluding  that  this 
was  not  so.  The  quotation,  in  the  sense 
intended  by  the  prophet,  is  suflSciently 
apposite.  For  it  expresses  that  faith  is  the 
life-principle  of  God's  righteous  ones,  while 
the  whole  passage  at  tlie  end  of  which  it 
occurs  declares  the  salvation  of  prophetic 
vision  to  be  entirely  of  God,  to  be  waited 
for  and  apprehended  by  man  through  faith, 
not  brought  about  by  his  own  doings 


Ver.  18— ch.  ii.  29.— (1)  All  mankind, 
liable  to  God's  wrath. 

Vers.  18— 32.— (a)  The  heathen  world  in 
general. 

Ver.  18. — For  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed 
from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and 
unrighteousness  of  men,  who  hold  back  the 
truth  in  unrighteousness.  Here  the  argu- 
mentation of  the  Epistle  begins,  the  first 
position  to  be  establislied  being  that  aU 
mankind'  without  exception  is  guilty  of  sin 
before  God,  and  therefore  unable  of  itself  to 
put  in  a  plea  of  righteousness.  This  being 
proved,  the  need  of  tlie  revelation  of  God'i 
righteousness,  announced  in  ver.  17,  appears. 
"  The  wrath  of  God  "  is  an  expression  with 
which  we  are  familiar  in  the  Bible,  being 
one  of  those  in  which  human  emotions  are 
attributed  to  God  in  accommodation  to  the 
exigencies  of  human  thought.  It  denotes 
his  essential  holiness,  his  antagonism  to 
sin,  to  which  punishment  is  due.  It  ex- 
presses an  idea  as  essential  to  our  conception 
of  the  Divine  righteousness  as  do  the  words, 
"  love"  and  "mercy."  Wrath,  or  indignation, 
against  evil  is  as  necessary  to  our  ideal  of  a 
perfect  human  being  as  is  love  of  good  ;  and 
therefore  we  attribute  wrath  to  the  perfect 
Divine  Being,  using  of  necessity  human 
terms  for  expressing  our  conception  of  the 
Divine  attributes.  When  the  Name  of  the 
Lord  was  proclaimed  before  Moses  (Exnd. 
xxxiv.  5,  etc.),  it  was  of  One  not  only 
"merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering,  and 
abundant  in  goodness  and  truth,"  but  also 
"that  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty." 
This  last  attribute  is  the  saHie  as  what  we 
mean  by  the  Divine  wrath.  This  "wrath 
of  God  "  is  said  in  the  verse  before  us  to  be 
"  revealed  from  heaven.*'  How  so  ?  Is  it 
in  the  gospel,  as  is  God's  righteousness  (ver. 
18)?  Against  this  view  is  the  change  of 
expression — dtr'  oipavov  instead  of  ey  out^ — 
as  well  as  the  fact  that  the  gospel  is  not  in 
itself  a  revelation  of  wrath,  but  the  very 
opposite.  Is  it  in  the  Old  Testament? 
Possibly  in  part ;  but  the  marked  repetition 
of  &7ro/ca\tJ7rT6Tai  in  the  present  tense  seems 
to  point  to  some  obvious  revelation  now, 
and,  further,  the  first  part  of  the  proof,  to 
the  end  of  the  second  chapter,  does  not  rest 
on  the  Old  Testament.  Is  it  what  the 
apostle  proceeds  so  forcibly  to  draw  attention 
to — the  existing,  and  at  that  time  notorious, 
moral  degradation  of  heathen  society,  which 
he  regards  as  evidence  of  Divine  judgment  ? 
This  may  have  been  before  his  view  ;  and, 
as  he  goes  on  at  once  to  speak  of  it,  it  prob* 
ably  was  so  prominently.  But  the  revela- 
tion of  Divine  wrath  against  sin  seemi  to 
imply  more  than  this  as  the  argument  goM 
on,  viz.  the  evident  guilt  before  God  of  all 
mankind  alike,  and  not  only  of  degreided 


10 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,      [ch.  1. 1— 32. 


heatlienism.  It  is  diiSoult  to  decide,  among 
the  variouB  explanations  that  have  been 
offered,  on  any  specific  mode  of  revelation 
which  the  writer  had  in  view.  Perhaps  no 
particular  one  exclusively.  Commentators 
may  be  often  unduly  anxious  to  affix  an 
exact  sense  to  pregnant  words  used  by  St. 
Paul,  who  so  often  indicates  comprehensive 
ideas  by  short  phrases.  He  may  have  had 
belore  his  mind  various  concurrent  signs  of 
human  guilt,  and  the  Divine  wrath  against 
it,  at  that  especial  time  of  the  world's  history; 
all  which,  to  his  mind  at  least,  brought  con- 
viction as  by  a  light  from  heaven.  And  the 
gospel  itself  (though  in  its  essence  a  revela- 
tion of  mercy,  so  that  he  purposely  avoids 
saying  that  wrath  was  in  it  revealed)  still 
had  been  the  most  powerful  means  of  all  for 
bringitjg  home  a  conviction  of  the  Divine 
wrath  to  the  consciences  of  believers.  For  its 
first  office  is  to  convince  of  sin  and  of  judg- 
ment. Of.  the  words  of  the  forerunner,  "  O 
generation  of  vipers,  who  hath  warned  you 
to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come?"  On  all 
such  grounds  we  may  conceive  that  the 
apostle  spoke  of  the  wiath  of  God  against 
human  sin  being  especially  at  that  time 
plainly  revealed  from  heaven;  and  he  desii'es 
to  bring  his  readers  to  perceive  it  as  he  did. 
For  now  was  the  time  of  the  Divine  purpose 
to  briog  it  home  to  all  (cf.  Acts  xvii.  30, 
"The  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked 
at,  but  now  commandeth  all  men  everywhere 
to  repent ").  "  All  ungodliness  and  unright- 
eousness" (hai^eiav  icaX  iSiKlav)  comprehends 
all  evil-doing,  in  whatever  aspect  viewed, 
whether  as  impiety  or  as  wrong.  The  phrase, 
tS}v  t^v  iiK'tidetav  Karsx^vTcayf  is  wrongly 
translated  in  the  Authorized  Version,  "  who 
hold  the  truth."  If  the  verb  Karex^iv 
allowed  this  rendering  here,  it  would  indeed 
be  intelligible  in  reference  to  the  knowledge 
of  God,  even  by  nature,  which  all  men  have 
or  ought  to  have,  though  they  do  not  act 
upon  it,  and  the  very  potential  possession  of 
which  renders  them  gUilty.  This  is  the 
thought  of  what  immediately  follows.  Thus 
the  sense  would  be,  "  They  hold,  i.e.  possess, 
the  truth;  but  they  do  unrighteousness." 
But  whenever  /carex*"'  means  "  to  hold,"  it 
denotes  a  firm  hold,  not  a  loose  hold,  such 
aa  would  bo  thus  implied.  It  occurs  in  this 
sense  in  1  Cor.  xi.  2  ("  I  praise  you  that  ye 
fceep  the  ordinances ") ;  and  1  Thess.  v.  21 
("  Hold  fast  that  which  is  good  ").  We  must, 
therefore,  have  recourse  to  a  second  sense  in 
which  the  verb  is  also  used — that  of"  keeping 
back,"  or  "restraining."  Tlius  Luke  iv.  42 
("The  people  stoj/ed  him,  that  he  should  not 
depart  from  them  ")  and  2  Thess.  ii.  6  ("  Ye 
know  what  withholdeth  ").  The  reference  is 
still  to  the  innate  knowledge  of  God  which 
all  men  are  supposed  to  have  had  originally ; 
but  the  idea  expicaseJ  is  not  their  having  it, 


hnt  iheir  suppressing  it.  "Veritas  in  mente 
nititur  et  urget:  sed  homo  earn  impedit" 
(Beugel). 

Ver.  19. — Beoause  that  which  is  known 
(not,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version,  "  may  be 
known ; "  for,  though  the  force  of  the  word 
yvaxTThv  suggests  this  sense,  it  certainly 
means  known,  not  hnowable,  in  the  many 
passages  of  the  New  Testament  where  it 
elsewhere  occurs)  of  Ood  is  manifest  in 
them ;  for  Ood  manifested  it  to  them ;  rather 
than  hath  manifested,  as  in  the  Authorized 
Version.  He  manifested  it,  as  appears  from 
the  following  verse,  in  creation.  In  it  to 
them  from  the  first  he  manifested  it ;  but  in 
them  (^i»  ouTois)  also,  through  the  capacity 
of  the  hmnan  soul  to  see  Divine  power  in 
creation. 

Ver.  20. — ^For  the  invisible  things  of  him 
from  (i.e.  since,  hirh)  the  creation  of  the  world 
are  clearly  seen,  being  understood  by  the 
things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal  power 
and  Divinity  (flei<iTi)j,  not  SUti\s);  so  that 
they  are  without  excuse.  The  concluding 
clause  is  rendered  in  the  Revised  Version, 
"  that  they  may  be  without  excuse ;  "  and  it 
is  true  that  sis  -rh  etvat  airobs  does  not  ex- 
press the  fact  that  they  now  are  so,  but  the 
subjective  result  of  the  manifestation,  if 
disregarded.  "  Paulus  directe  excusationem 
adimit, non  solum deeventu  aliquo  loquitur" 
(Bengel).  It  is,  however,  a  question  of  im- 
portance, which  has  been  much  discussed, 
whether  (as  the  rendering  of  the  Revised 
Version  might  be  taken  to  imply)  the  idea 
of  Divine  purpose,  and  not  result  only,  is 
involved  in  eis  rh  elyai.  The  difference 
between  the  two  conceptions  is  apparent 
from  the  Vulgate,  ita  ut  sint  inexeusdbiles, 
compared  with  Calvin's  in  hoe  ut.  The 
bearing  of  the  distinction  on  the  doctrine  of 
predestination  is  obvious,  and  it  was  conse- 
quently a  subject  of  contention  between  the 
Lutherans  and  Calvinists.  Meyer  among 
moderns  contends  strongly  that  "  the  view 
which  takes  it  of  the  ptirpnse  is  required  by 
the  prevailing  use  of  «<s  with  the  infinitive," 
referring  in  this  Epistle  to  ch.  i.  11 ;  iii.  26 ; 
iv.  11,  16,  18 ;  vi.  12 ;  vU.  4,  5 ;  viii.  29 ;  xi. 
11 ;  xii.  2,  3 ;  xv.  8,  13,  16.  A  comparison, 
however,  of  these  passages  does  not  seem  to 
boar  out  his  contention,  it  being  apparently 
dependent  on  the  context  in  each  case,  rather 
than  the  phrase  els  rh,  whether  the  idea  ol 
purpose  comes  in.  Ohrysostom  among  the 
ancients  expressly  opposed  this  view,  saying, 
Katroi^e  oil  5ii  toBto  raSra  iirolrifffv,  i 
@ehs,  €(  Kal  TovTo  4^4$ri.  OA  yap  Jj/a  aJroJis 
^.TToKoyias  &.Tro(mp'i\ff'ti  StSaffKoXiay  rotrairriv 
els  fidffoy  wpoSdriKev,  iLKK'  iva  airhy  iinyvany. 
So  that  tkey  should  he  may  be  suggested  at 
an  adequate  rendering,  so  aa  to  avoid  the 
idea  of  God's  manifestation  of  himself  to 
men  having  been  from  the  first  delusive. 


CH.  1. 1— 32.]      THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


H 


haying  condemnation,  and  not  enlighten- 
ment, for  its  purpose. 

These  two  verses,  19  and  20,  carry  out 
the  thought  of  ri)y  ciK'liBeiav  xarex^"'^'"'  ^ 
ver.  18,  their  purport  being  to  show  that  the 
iuriPeia  and  aSiKta  of  men  have  been  in  spite 
of  knowledge,  and  therefore  involve  them 
all  in  dn.  For  «t»  implies  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil;  it  is  nqt  imputed  to  the 
brute  beasts,  who  but  follow  their  natiural 
instincts,  having  no  perception  of  God  or  a 
Divine  law.  Now,  to  man,  even  without 
any  special  revelation,  God  manifesls  him- 
self in  two  ways — outwardly  in  nature,  and 
inwardly  in  conscience.  In  these  verses  the 
outward  manifestation  is  spoken  of,  the 
other  being  more  especially  noted  in  ch.  ii. 
14,  etc.  But  here,  too,  an  inward  manifes- 
tation is  implied  by  the  word  vooifieva,  as 
before  by  4v  airoTs.  To  the  animals  below 
us  tlie  phenomena  of  nature  may  be  but  a 
spectacle  before  their  eyes,  making  no  appeal 
to  a  mind  within.  But  to  man  they  have  a 
language — they  awake  wonder,  awe,  admi- 
ration, a  sense  of  infinite  mysterious  power, 
and,  to  the  receptive  of  such  impressions,  of 
ideal  beauty  indefinable.  To  the  psalmists 
of  old  they  spoke  irresistibly  of  God ;  of  one 
infinite  and  eternal  Being,  above  and  beyond 
all;  and  their  consciences,  owning  the  su- 
premacy of  good  in  the  moral  sphere,  con- 
curred with  their  sense  of  the  evidences  of 
beneficence  in  nature,  so  as  to  convince 
them  also  of  the  rigliteousnest  of  God.  All 
men  (the  apostle  would  say)  were  originally 
endowed  with  a  like  capacity  of  knowing 
God ;  and  their  failure  in  this  regard,  shown 
in  the  various  forms  of  idolatry  prevalent 
throughout  the  world,  he  views  as  the  first 
stage  in  the  development  of  human  sin. 
The  next  stage  is  general  moral  degradation, 
regarded  as  the  judicial  consequence  of  the 
dishonour  done  to  God.  lit  is,  indeed,  a 
necessary  consequence ;  for  low  and  unworthy 
conceptions  of  Deity  bring  with  them  moral 
deterioration ;  when  man's  Divine  ideal  be- 
comes degraded,  with  it  he  becomes  degraded 
too.  Witness,  for  instance,  the  debauches 
and  cruelties  that  so  commonly  accompanied 
idolatrous  worship.  Lastly,  the  final  stage 
of  this  moral  degradation  is  represented  in 
an  unveiled  picture  of  the  utter  wickedness, 
and  even  unnatural  vice,  at  that  time 
prevalent  and  condoned  in  the  heart  of  the 
boasted  civUizatioa  of  the  heathen  world. 
Such  is  the  drift  of  the  remainder  of  this 
first  chapter.  The  argument  suggests  the 
following  thoughts.  (1)  There  is  no  mention 
hero  of  Adams  transgression  as  the  origin 
of  human  sin.  The  reason  is  that  the 
apostle  is  arguing  from  a  philosophical 
rather  than  a  theological  point  of  view, 
having  Gentile  as  weU  as  Jewish  thinkers 
in  his  view  as  readeri.    His  appeal  in  this 


chapter  is  not  to  the  Old  Testament  at  all,  but 
to  facts  by  all  acknowledged.  He  is  offer- 
ing the  world  a  philosophy  of  human  history 
to  account  for  the  present  perplexing  stats 
of  things — for  the  undoubted  discord  be- 
tween conscience  and  performance,  between 
ideal  and  practice, — his  pui-pose  being  to 
show  universal  guilt  on  the  part  of  man. 
But  his  position  here  is  quite  consistent 
with  what  he  says  elsewhere  (as  in  ch.  v.) 
of  Adam's  original  transgression.  For  his 
whole  argument  in  this  chapter  involves  the 
doctrine  of  the  fall  of  man,  who  is  conceived 
to  have  been  originally  endowed  with  Divine 
instincts,  and  to  have  forfeited  his  prerogative 
through  sin ;  and  this  is  the  essential  mean- 
ing of  the  picture  given  us  in  Gen.  iii.  of  tlie 
original  transgression.  (2)  The  entire  drift 
of  the  chapter  is  against  the  view  of  the  con- 
demnation of  mankind  being  due  simply  to 
the  sin  of  the  progenitor  being  imputed  to  the 
race.  For  all  men  are  represented  as  guilty, 
in  that  all  have  sinned  against  light  which 
they  might  have  followed.  This  view  does 
not,  indeed,  preclude  that  of  an  inherited 
infection  of  nature  predisposing  all  to  sin; 
nay,  it  rather  necessitates  it;  for  why  should 
the  sin  have  been  so  imiversal  but  for  such 
predisposing  cause  ?  Still,  the  distinction 
between  the  two  views  is  important  in  regard 
to  our  conception  of  the  Divine  justice.  3. 
It  may,  however,  be  said  that  the  distinction 
is  without  a  real  difference  in  this  regard ; 
for  that,  if  the  inherited  infection  is  such 
that  sin  becomes  inevitable  (as  seems  to  be 
implied  by  its  alleged  universality),  it  may 
appear  as  inconsistent  with  the  Divine 
justice  to  condemn  men  for  it,  as  it  would 
be  to  impute  to  them  their  progenitor's 
transgression.  In  reply  to  this  difficulty,  it 
may  be  said  that  Scripture  nowhere  says 
that  men  are  finally  condemned  for  it.  On 
the  contrary,  the  gospel  reveals  to  us  the 
atonement,  preordained  from  the  first,  for 
the  avoidance  of  such  final  condemnation; 
and  this  retrospective  as  well  as  prospective 
in  its  effects  (ch.  iii.  25,  26),  and  as  far- 
reaching  as  was  the  original  transgression 
(ch.  iv.  12,  etc.).  And  our  apostle  (ch.  ii.  7, 
14,  15,  16)  expressly  asserts  the  salvation 
of  all  who,  according  to  their  light,  have 
done  what  they  could.  The  fact  is,  that 
in  the  argument  before  us  (as  in  other 
passages  of  similar  purport)  it  is  only  the 
principle,  or  the  ground,  of  man's  possible 
justification  before  God  that  is  under  re- 
view. The  intention  is  to  show  that  this 
cannot  be  man's  own  "  works  or  deserriugs," 
as  of  debt,  but  is  another  which  the  gospel 
reveals.  Be  it  observed,  lastly,  that  a  clear 
view  of  this  position  is  important,  not  only 
for  our  apprehension  of  the  truth  of  things 
and  of  the  meaning  of  the  gospel,  but  also 
for  our  right  moral  tone  of  mind  and  atti- 


12 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,      [oh.  i.  1—32. 


tude  before  God.  For  not  to  be  convinced 
of  sin  is  to  belie  the  true  ideal  of  our  con- 
science, and  implies  acquiescence  in  a  moral 
standard  below  that  of  the  Divine  righteous- 
ness to  which  we  are  able  to  aspire. 

Ver.  21. — Because  that,  knowing  God,  they 
glorified  Mm  net  as  God,  neither  were  thank- 
ful (rather,  gave  thanks);  but  became  vain 
in  their  imaginations  {SidKoyKT/iois,  else- 
where more  correctly  rendered  "  thouglits  " 
or  "reasonings;"  cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  20,  "The 
Lord  knoweth  the  thoughts  of  the  wise,  that 
they  are  vain" — fidraiot,  as  here,  ^ixarai- 
iliSi)(rap),  and  their  foolish  heart  was  dark- 
ened. 

Vers.  22, 23. — Professing  themselves  to  be 
wise,  they  became  fools,  and  changed  the 
glory  of  the  incorruptible  God  into  the 
similitude  (literally,  in  similitude;  cf.  Ps. 
cvi.  20,  whence  idea  and  words  are  taken) 
of  an  image  of  corruptible  man,  and  of  birds, 
and  fourfooted  beasts,  and  creeping  things. 
The  expression,  yv6vTes  ric  @eiiy,  refers  to 
what  has  been  said  of  rh  yvioffTlv  rov  @eov, 
having  been  "manifest  in  them."  It  im- 
plies actual  knowledge,  not  mere  capacity 
of  knowledge.  Mankind  is  regarded  as 
having  lost  a  truer  perception  of  God  once 
possessed,  idolatry  being  a  sign  of  culpable 
degi'adation  of  the  human  race — not,  as  some 
would  have  us  now  believe,  a  stage  in  man's 
emergence  from  brutality.  Scripture  ever 
represents  the  human  race  as  having  fallen 
and  become  degraded;  not  as  having  risen 
gradually  to  any  intelligent  conceptions  of 
(jlod  at  all.  And  it  may  well  be  asked 
whether  modern  anthropological  science  has 
really  discovered  anything  to  discredit  the 
scriptural  view  of  the  original  condition 
and  capacity  of  man.  The  view  here  pre- 
sented is  that  obfuscation  of  the  under- 
standing (_aive(ns)  ensued  from  refusal  to 
glorify  and  give  thanks  to  known  Deity. 
"  Gratias  assere  debemus  ob  beneficia ;  glori- 
ficare  ob  ipsas  virtutes  divinas"  (Bengel). 
Hence  came  fiaTatdrris,  a  word,  with  its  cor- 
relatives, constantly  used  with  reference  to 
idolatrv;  cf.  Acts  xiv.  15;  1  Cor.  iii.  20; 
Eph.  iv.  17;  1  Pet.  i.  18;  also  in  the  Old 
Testament,  1  Kings  xvi.  26  (ey  to7s  liaraiois 
avrav,  LXX.);  2  Kings  xvii.  15  (iiropei- 
BrjiTav  oTTiVo)  Tuy  /xaraiwi/,  LXX.)  ;  Jer.  ii.  5 ; 
Jonah  ii.  8  ((pv\air(rdfisvot  fidraia  Kal  \f/euSrj'). 
Two  forms  of  idolatry — both  involving 
unworthy  conceptions  of  the  Divine  Being 
— are  alluded  to,  suggested,  we  may  suppose, 
by  the  anthropomorphism  of  the  Greeks 
and  the  creature-worship  of  Egypt,  which 
were  the  two  notable  and  representntive 
developments  of  heathen  religion.  The 
expression,  <pi(rKovTes  thai  (ro(p'!l,  with  the 
previous  ^v  rots  Sta\oyi(rfioTs,  have  led  some 
to  suppose  in  this  whole  passage  a  special 
reference  to  the  scliools  of  philosophy.    But 


this  is  not  so.  The  degradation  spoken  of 
was  long  anterior  to  them,  nor  is  this  charge, 
as  formulated,  applicable  to  them.  The 
idea  is,  generally,  that  boasted  human  in- 
tellect has  not  preserved  men  from  folly; 
not  even  "  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,"  or 
the  intellectual  culture  of  the  Greeks  (of. 
1  Cor.  i.  19,  etc. ;  iii.  19,  etc.). 

Ver.  24. — Wherefore  God  (kb!,  here  in  the 
Textus  Keceptus,  is  ill  supported)  gave  them 
up  in  the  lusts  of  their  hearts  unto  unclean- 
ness,  to  dishonour  their  own  bodies  between 
(rather,  among)  themselves.  So  rod  aniid- 
Ceo-floi,  etc.,  is  rendered  in  the  Authorized 
Version.  The  verb,  however,  is  probably 
passive,  a  middle  use  of  it  not  being  else- 
where found.  In  either  case  the  general 
meaning  is  the  same.  The  genitive,  toB  Siti- 
fidC^crSat,  seems  most  naturally  taken  as  de- 
noting what  the  aKaBapaia  consisted  in,  rather 
than  either  the  purpose  or  the  results  of 
their  being  given  over  to  it  (of.  ver.  26, 
where  ■wapi^axev  els  irdSri  arL/ilas  is  followed 
by  a  description  of  whnt  these  were).  Here 
is  noticed  a  further  stngo  of  judicial  degra- 
dation ;  the  fiaT!a6Tr]5  of  idolatry,  itself  judi- 
cial, had  its  further  judicial  consequence 
in  the  aKaOapala  of  abominable  sensuality. 
Similarly,  in  Eph.  iv.,  the  epyaa-la  aKoSapaias 
vda-qs  4v  /!r\eove^'ia,  prevalent  among  the 
nations,  is  traced  to  their  /mraiSTris,  in  that 
they  liad  become  "  alionaied  from  the  life  of 
God."  It  is  notorious  ihat  idolatrous  wor- 
ship was  not  uncommonly  accompanied  by 
debauchery ;  notably  that  of  the  Phoenician 
Astarte,  and  of  Aphrodite  and  Dionysus  (see 
Livy,  xxxix.  8,  for  an  account  of  the  Diony- 
sia  at  one  time  in  Rome ;  and  Athen.,  xiii. 
pp.  574, 579,  and  xiv.  p.  659,  for  the  Aphrodi- 
sia  at  Athens  and  Corinth);  cf.  Numb. xxv., 
etc.,  "The  people  joined  themselves  unto 
Baal-peor,"  and  the  allusion  to  it,  1  Cor.  x. 
8.  On  th.at  occasion  no  more  is  intimated 
than  promiscuous  intercourse  between  the 
two  sexes,  sinking  men  in  that  regard  to 
the  level  of  the  brutes ;  but  still  worse  "  un- 
cleanness"  is  in  the  apostle's  view,  such  as 
sinks  them  even  below  thit  Jtvel:  and  how 
common  such  unnat'zml  vices  had  become, 
and  how  lightly  thought  of,  no  one  conver- 
sant with  classical  literature  needs  to  be 
reminded. 

Ver.  25.— Who  (rather,  being  such  as,  the 
word  is  o'lrives,  equivalent  to  quippequi) 
changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie,  and 
worshipped  and  served  the  creature  more 
than  the  Creator,  who  is  blessed  for  ever. 
Amen.  This  verso  repeats  the  source  and 
cause  of  the  moral  degradation  spoken  of, 
which  is  described  without  reserve  in  what 
follows.  "In  peccatis arguoudis  ssepe  scapha 
debet  scapha  dici.  Gravitas  et  ardor  stili 
judicialis  proprietate  verborum  nou  violat 
verecundiam  "  (Bengel). 


OH.  L  1—32.]      THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


13 


Ver.  26. — 7or  this  canse  Ood  gave  them 
up  (irapeSoiKE,  SB  before)  to  vile  affections 
(ircifli)  annias,  i.e.  "passions  of  infamy;"  of. 
above,  toS  oTi/tcifeo-eai)-  For  the  use,  on  the 
other  hand,  of  the  words  niiii  and  T(;aioj  to 
denote  seemly  and  honourable  indulgence  of 
the  sexual  affections,  of.  1  Thess.  iv.  4  (Th 
iavTov  (TKEVos  KTacTflai  iv  ayiaait.m  koI  ti/u^) 
and  Heb.  xiii.  4  (Ti/iios  i  ydiios  iv  iraa-i,  Koi 
fi  koWti  a/iiarros).  For  their  women  changed 
the  natural  use  into  that  which  is  against 
nature. 

Ver.  27. — And  likewise  also  the  men, 
leaving  the  natural  use  of  the  woman, 
burned  in  their  lust  one  toward  another; 
men  with  men  working  that  which  is  un- 
seemly, and  receiving  in  themselves  that 
recompense  of  their  error  which  was  meet. 
By  the  "recompense"  (ai/Tifiia-Stav)  is  mennt 
here,  not  any  further  result,  such  as  disease 
or  physical  prostration,  but  the  very  fact  of 
their  being  given  up  to  a  state  in  wliich 
they  can  crave  and  delight  in  such  odious 
gratifications  of  unnatural  lust.  It  is  the 
ayTifiifrdia  ttjs  irXtii/Tjs  avTuv,  the  final  judg- 
ment on  them  for  going  attray  from  God. 
And  surely  to  the  pme-mimled  there  is  no 
more  evident  token  of  Divine  judgment  than 
the  spectacle  of  the  unnatural  cravings  and 
indulgence  of  the  sated  sensualist. 

Ver.  28. — And  even  as  they  did  not  like  to 
have  God  in  their  knowledge,  God  gave  them 
over  (irape'Su/cey,  as  before)  to  a  reprobate 
mind,  to  do  those  things  which  are  not  con- 
venient (i.e.  unfitting  or  unseemly  things).  It 
is  diificult  to  render  in  English  ovk  iSotcl/Mi.- 
aav  and  h,%6Ki{i.ov  vovv  so  as  to  retain  the 
apparently  intended  correspondence  between 
the  verb  and  the  adjective.  The  verb  Soki- 
)iAifiv  is  capable  of  the  senses  (1)  "to  prove" 
(as  in  assaying  metals),  and,  generally,  "  to 
discern,"  or  "judge;"  (2) "to  approve,"  after 
supposed  proving.  Jowett,  in  his  commen- 
tary on  this  Epistle,  endeavours  to  retain  in 
English  the  correspondence  between  e'So/cf- 
\ia<jav  and  iSiKiinov  by  translating,  "  As  they 
did  not  discern  to  have  God  in  theii'  know- 
ledge, God  gave  them  up  to  an  undiscerning 
mind,"  thus  taking  the  verb  in  sense  (1), 
and  the  adjective  in  the  same  sense  actively. 
But  it  is  at  least  doubtful  whether  aSiKi/ios 
can  be  token  in  an  active  sense,  which  is  not 
its  classical  one.  In  the  New  Testament  it 
occurs  1  Cor.  ix.  27 ;  2  Cor.  xiii  5,  6 ;  2  Tim. 
iii.  8;  Titus  i.  16;  Heb.  vi.  8.  In  the  first 
of  the  above  passages  the  word  obviously 
means  "rejected"  (in  the  Authorized  Version 
a  castaway),  with  reference  to  the  comparison 
of  a  competitor  in  athletic  contests  being 
proved  unworthy  of  the  prize — a  sense  cog- 
nate to  the  common  one  of  the  same  adjec- 
tive as  applied  to  spurious  metals,  rejected 
or  worthless  after  being  tested.  In  2  Cor. 
xiii.  5,  6,  either  sense  seems  admissible — 


iavToiis  SoKi/id^eTt  ,  ,  ,  ci  ju^ri  iSSxtnol  itrrt. 
But  not  so  in  Heb.  vi.  8,  where  the  word  is 
applied  to  barren  laud.  The  passages  from 
2  Timothy  and  Titus  may  in  themselves 
admit  the  sense  of  undiscerning,  but  the  pas- 
sive one  is  more  probable  in  view  of  the 
common  usage  of  the  word.  On  the  other 
hand,  ch.  xii.  2  may  be  adduced  in  favour 
of  the  active  sense;  for  there  the  conse- 
quence of  the  renewal  of  the  mind  in  Chris- 
tians is  said  to  be  that  they  may  prove,  or 
discern  (ew  rb  SoKtfjidCeiv  fijuas),  what  is 
God's  will ;  and  hence  it  may  seem  probable 
that  the  want  of  such  discernment  is  denoted 
here.  The  same  passage  also  favours  the 
verb  SoKi/iiC^iv  being  talten  here  in  sense 
(1)  given  above,  and  Jowett's  rendering  of 
the  whole  passage.  It  is,  after  all,  unoeitain  ; 
nor  does  it  follow  that  the  Greek  parono- 
masia can  be  reproduced  in  English. 

Vers.  29— 31.— Being  fiUed  with  aU  un- 
righteousness, [fornication],  wickedness,  co- 
vetousness,  maliciousness ;  full  of  envy, 
murder,  strife,  deceit,  malignity;  whisperers, 
backbiters,  hated  of  God,  despiteful  (rather, 
insolent),  proud,  boasters,  inventors  of  evil 
things,  disobedient  to  parents,  without 
understanding,  covenant-breakers,  without 
natural  affection  [implacable],  unmerciful. 
Here  not  personal  uncleanness  only,  but 
general  and  utter  disregard  of  moral  re- 
straints and  obligations  (too  prevalent,  doubt- 
less, at  that  time  in  civilized  heatliendom), 
is  pointed  out  as  the  final  judicial  issue. 
The  words  used  do  not  seem  to  be  arriinged 
on  any  exact  system,  but  to  have  been 
written  down  as  they  occurred  to  the  writer, 
being  intended  to  be  as  comprehensive  as 
possible.  Among  them  those  put  above 
within  brackets  rest  on  weak  authority. 
n\eoye|i'a,  translated  here,  as  usually  else- 
where, "  covetousness,"  means  generally  "  in- 
ordinate desire,"  not  necessarily  of  riches ; 
and  St.  Paul  seems  generally  to  use  it  with 
reference  to  inordinate  lust  (cf.  Eph.  iv.  19; 
V.  3;  Col.  iii.  3;  also  1  Thcss.  iv.  6  and  2 
Pet.  ii.  14 ;  and,  for  irAeoye'/cTTjj,  Eph.  v.  5, 
The  word  BioffrvyeTs,  both  frojn  its  formation 
(compare  0eo:pi\iis  and  <j>i\66eos,  with  other 
instances),  and  its  ordinary  use  in  classical 
Greek  (it  occurs  here  only  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment) must  certainly  be  taken  to  mean  "  God- 
hated,"  not  "God-haters."  It  seems  suggested 
here  by  the  previous  KaTa\d\ovs,  being  (we 
may  suppose)  used  commonly  of  the  delalores 
who  are  known  to  have  been  a  special  pest 
of  society  at  that  period  of  Komau  history. 
Alford  quotes  Tacitus,  '  Ann.,'  vi.  7,  where 
they  are  called  "Principi  quidem  grati,  et 
Deo  exosi ; "  also  Philo,  '  Ap  Damascen.,' 
Ai(lPo\oi  Koi  Betas  &ir(yir4fiirT0t  xdptTos,  ol  ri/v 
airriiv  iKeiyo)  SLa0o\tKiji'  voffovvres  KaKoreV' 
vlav,  BfOffTvye7s  re  Koi  Beofinre7s  TrdyrTj.  In 
ver.  31  the  collocation  of  airvviTovs  and  irw 


14 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  1. 1—82. 


iirovs  eeema  to  have  been  suggested  by 
limilarity  of  sound,  there  being  no  apparent 
link  of  ideas.  The  latter  word  is  rightly 
translated  in  the  Authorized  Version,  as  is 
fclso  hff'n6v^ovs ;  hffvvBeTovs  being  one  who 
breaks  treaties,  "  faithless ;  "  airnoySovs,  one 
who  refuses  to  enter  into  a  truce  or  treaty, 
"  implacable." 

Ver.  32. — Who  (o'lripes,  with  its  usual 
gignificance,  as  before)  knowing  the  judg- 
ment of  God,  that  they  which  practise  such 
things  are  worthy  of  death,  not  only  do  the 
same,  but  also  have  pleasure  in  them  that 
practise  them.  In  this  concluding  verse  the 
main  point  of  the  whole  argument,  with 
which  also  it  began  (ver.  19),  is  repeated, 
viz.  that  all  this  sin  was  in  spite  of  better 
knowledge— the  original  knowledge  of  God 
revealed,  as  above  set  forth,  to  the  human 
race,  and  (as  is  implied  further)  an  inward 
witness  of  conscience  still  remaining,  how- 
ever stifled,  even  in  the  most  corrupt  society. 
By  S|ioj  Bavdrov  is  not  meant  "  deserving  of 
capital  punishment ;  "  Divine  judgment  is 
evidently  implied.  There  is  no  need  to 
inquire  what  conception  of  future  retribu- 
tion the  heathen  themselves  may  be  sup- 
posed to  have  had,  or  to  have  been  capable 
of  entertaining.  St.  Paul  constantly  denotes 
by  da.va.Tos,  in  a  general  and  comprehensive 


sense,  the  penal  consequence  of  unatoned 
sin  due  to  the  Divine  Siitaioarivii  (of.  eh.  vt 
21 — 23 ;  viii.  6,  etc.).  It  is  to  be  observed 
that  in  the  latter  part  of  this  verse  the 
distinction  between  irpicrireiv,  meaning  habi- 
tual practice,  and  iroieiv  is  not  shown  in  the 
Authorized  Version.  The  evidence  of  the 
"reprobate  mind"  is  not  simply  that  such 
things  are  done  occasionally  under  tempta- 
tion, but  that  they  are  the  habits  of  people'g 
lives.  And  still  more :  such  habits  are  not 
only  paiticipated  in  by  those  who  have 
knowledge  enough  to  perceive  their  guilt 
(auT&  irotovtriy),  but  even  condoned  and  ap- 
proved (^trvvevSotcova'L  rots  irpdirffova'L) ;  there 
was  no  general  protest  or  indignation  in 
society  against  the  prevalent  abominations ; 
and  those  familiar  with  the  writers  of  the 
Augustan  age  must  be  well  aware  that  this 
was  so.  Here  we  have  the  final  proof  of  the 
prevalence  of  the  aS6Kt/j.os  vovs,  the  climax 
of  the  picture  of  general  moral  degradation. 
"  Ideo  autem  sic  interpretor,  quod  video 
apostolum  voluisse  hie  gravius  aliquid  et 
sceleratius  ipsa  vitiorum  perpetratione  per- 
stringere.  Id  quale  sit  non  intelligo,  nisi 
referamus  ad  istam  nequitiije  summam,  ubi 
miseri  homines  contra  Dei  justitiam,  abjecta 
ve  recundia,  vitiorum  patrooinium  suscipiuut " 
(Calvin). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Apostolic  credentials.  Greetings  are  often  merely  formal,  or  merely  friendly. 
Not  so  this  salutation,  with  which  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  opens  his  Epistle  to  the 
Christians  of  renowned,  imperial  Eome.  It  is  sincere  and  hearty,  and  it  is  also  dignified 
and  authoritative.  St.  Paul  writes  as  one  who  feels  the  responsibility  of  his  position 
and  vocation,  as  one  who  is  justified  in  claiming  from  his  readers  respectful  attention 
and  submissive  obedience.  At  the  same  time,  the  consciousness  of  his  apostleship  does 
not  interfere  with,  but  rather  deepens,  his  prayerful  and  brotherly  interest  in  the 
welfare  of  those  who  are  the  representatives  of  Christ  in  the  world's  metropolis. 

I.  The  apostle's  new  name  is  m  itself  a  credential.  At  the  commencement 
of  his  apostolic  career,  Saul's  name  was  changed  to  Paul ;  and  to  all  who  thought  upon 
the  matter  even  for  one  moment,  this  fact  must  have  been  very  significant.  The  old 
name  had  been  left  behind  with  the  old  nature.  The  Jewish  persecutor  had  become  the 
Christian  preacher.  Whether  or  not  the  apostle  assumed  the  name  of  his  convert,  the 
Proconsul  of  Cyprus,  in  any  case  the  new  name  was  associated  with  the  new  calling, 
the  new  covenant,  the  new  life,  the  new  hope.  The  change  reminds  us  of  the  promise 
of  the  victorious  Eedeemer  to  his  faithful  soldier,  "  I  will  write  upon  him  my  new 
Name." 

II.  The  apostle's  spikitual  sebvicb  is  a  claim  upon  Christian  respect  and 
CONFIDENCE.  The  Open  assertion  by  St.  Paul,  that  he  is  "  bond-servant  of  Jesus 
Christ,"  proves  that  a  fresh  idea  has  been  introduced  into  the  world.  Here  is  a  Jewish 
rabbi,  a  Roman  citizen,  glorying  in  his  subjection,  his  serfdom ;  owning  as  his  Master, 
not  the  emperor,  but  the  Crucified  !  In  inditing  official  letters,  the  great  are  wont  to 
name  their  titles  of  honour.  Observe,  on  the  contrary,  the  lowliness  of  the  apostle's 
attitude,  as  evinced  in  the  "  style  and  title  "  he  here  assumes.  To  him  it  is  an  honour 
to  be  Christ's  slave,—"  whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve."  It  is  the  glorification  of 
spiritual  humanity,  when  a  noble  nature  lilie  St.  Paul's  boasts  of  vassalage  to  Jesus. 
Redeemed  by  Christ's  pity  and  sacrifice  from  the  thraldom  to  sin,  the  first  use  which 
the  emancipated  bondm.m  makes  of  new  freedom  is  to  bind  himself  to  the  service  oi 


OH.  1. 1—32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  16 


his  LiTierator  and  Lord.  Though  the  apostles  put  forward  their  special  claim  to  be 
Christ's  bond-servants,  this  is  a  relation  which  every  Christian  claims  to  hold  toward 
Christ,  a  designation  which  every  Christian  delights  to  appropriate. 

III.  The  apostle  claims  fob  his  ministkt  a  Divine  adthobitt.  Whatever 
men  thought  then,  and  whatever  they  think  now,  about  the  validity  of  the  apostles' 
claim,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  they  advanced  it,  and  it  cannot  reasonably  be 
questioned  that  they  were  sincere  in  their  professions  when  they  asserted  themselves  to 
be  commissioned  by  Divine  authority  and  qualified  by  Divine  inspiration  for  a  special 
service  on  behalf  of  mankind,  Paul  declared  himself  to  be  a  "  called  apostle,"  t.e.  called 
by  the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  none  the  less  really  than  were  those  who  were  summoned 
and  commissioned  during  the  Lord's  ministry  upon  earth.  As  an  apostle,  Paul  was 
"  sent,"  i.e.  selected,  euthorized,  and  made  an  ambassador,  by  the  King  himself.  There 
is  here  a  singular  and  instructive  combination.  Very  lowly,  very  far  from  self-assertion, 
is  Paul's  designation  of  himself  as  "  servant  of  Chiist ;  "  at  the  same  time,  very  bold, 
confident,  and  unhesitating  is  his  demand  (lor  such  it  is)  to  be  received  as  the  minister, 
the  herald,  the  ambassador,  of  the  Lord.  Doubtless,  by  using  such  language  at  the 
outset  of  this  treatise,  Paul  required  his  readers  to  bear  in  mind  what  manner  of 
document  they  were  about  to  peruse  ;  the  fonn  of  it,  indeed,  given  by  the  intellect,  the 
heart,  of  a  man,  yet  the  substance  of  it  proceeding  from  the  mind  of  God  himself. 

IV.  The  apostle  includks  amosq  hib  cbedbntials  the  glorious  and  bene- 
volent occupation  or  his  life.  "  Separated,"  marked  off  from  other  men,  and  even 
from  his  former  self,  St.  Paul  is  conscious  that  he  is  entrusted  with  a  congenial  work 
of  evangelization.  In  a  sense,  he  has  been  "  separated  "  from  his  very  birth ;  but  this 
consecration,  itself  a  Divine  purpose,  has  been  now  actually  effected.  When  Saul  was 
arrested  on  his  way  to  Damascus,  he  was  not  only  enlightened  from  above,  and  so 
brought  to  see  in  the  Jesus  whom  he  had  persecuted  a  Saviour  and  a  Lord,  but  he  was 
assured  of  his  own  selection  by  Christ  as  an  ambassador  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the 
Gentiles.  That  was  the  first  step ;  the  second  followed  after  an  interval  of  years. 
When  Saul  and  Barnabas,  in.connection  with  the  Church  at  Antioch,  were  designated 
for  an  evangelistic  mission,  this  was  at  the  express  instance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who 
directed  the  prophets  and  teachers  to  separate  these  two  for  the  work  whereunto  he 
bad  called  thera.  By  "separation  unto  the  gospel  of  God"  must  be  understood 
complete  and  lifelong  devotion  to  the  work  of  proclaiming  the  good  news  which  was 
from  God,  and  which  regarded  God.  Now,  this  devotion  to  the  publication  of  that 
gospel  which — in  its  doctrines  and  in  its  bearings  upon,  practical  and  social  life — was 
the  theme  of  this  Epistle,  was  more  than  an  introduction  to  the  Boman  Christians;  it 
was  a  commendation  to  their  confidence,  and  a  demand  upon  their  faith  and  obedience. 
Coming  from  such  a  man,  so  specially  and  supematurally  qualified,  this  Epistle  claims 
the  attention,  not  of  the  Romans  only,  but  of  the  world. 

Ver.  2. — A  promised  gospel.  It  sometimes  happens  that  a  blessing  long  promised, 
loudly  heralded,  and  warmly  extolled,  loses  thereby  something  of  its  charm,  and  suffers 
in  the  warmness  of  its  welcome  when  it  appears.  That  must  he  a  vast  and  priceless 
boon  which  will  bear  to  be  promised  and  expected  generation  after  generation.  Expectik- 
tion  is  aroused,  the  flame  of  hope  is  fanned,  desire  stands  on  tip-toe  and  strains  her 
eyes.  And  when  the  gift  comes,  it  must  be  of  surpassing  value,  if  no  disappointment 
follow.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  was  foretold  for  centuries.  It  had  become  "  the 
desire  of  all  nations."  But  when  it  came,  it  was  more  glorious  and  welcome  than  all 
hope,  all  imagination,  could  have  dreamed. 

I.  It  was  taught  bt  Chbist  and  his  apostles  that  the  gospel  was  a 
BLBSsmo  PROMISED  FROM  ANCIENT  TIME.  Here  are  three  direct  proofs  of  this.  1. 
Our  Lm-d,  in  his  conversation  with  the  disciples  on  the  way  to  Emmaus,  reproached 
them  as  "  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  the  prophets  had  spoken ; "  and,  "  beginning 
at  Moses  and  all  the  prophets,  expounded  unto  them  in  all  the  Scriptures  the  things 
concerning  himself."  2.  Upon  the  Day  of  Pentecost  Peter  instanced  the  resurrection 
of  Christ  as  a  fulfilment  of  Hebrew  prophecy ;  David,  being  a  prophet,  and  knowing 
that  God  had  sworn  to  raise  up  his  descendant  to  sit  on  his  throne, "  seeing  this  before, 
spake  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ."  3.  When  before  Agrippa  and  Festus,  Pavl 
affirmed  that,  in  his  witnessing,  he  said  "  none  other  things  than  those  which  the 


10  THE  EPISTI/E  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS,     [oh.  1. 1— 3t. 


prophets  and  Moses  did  say  should  come :  that  Christ  should  suffer,  and  that  he  should 
be  the  first  that  should  rise  from  the  dead,  and  should  show  light  unto  the  people,  »nd 
to  the  Gentiles."  Add  to  these  the  many  instances  in  which  the  writers  of  the  New 
Testament  declare  the  gospel  to  be  the  fulfilment  of  Old  Testament  prophecy,  and  it 
becomes  apparent  that  the  Founder  and  first  preachers  of  Christianity  all  claim  that 
the  Hebrew  Scriptures  testified  beforehand  to  their  glorious  theme. 

II.  The  men  by  whom  the  oospel  was  fobbtold  were  God's  prophets.  They 
were  so  called  because  they  uttered  forth,  as  his  representatives,  the  mind  and  will  o/ 
God.  And  they  fulfilled  this  office,  not  only  with  a  view  to  the  time  then  present,  its 
(iiciunsianoes  and  duties,  but  with  a  view  to  a  time  to  come.  Thus  prophecy  and 
prediction  were  closely  linked  together.  With  God  is  neither  past,  present,  nor  future. 
The  promise  was  first  made  to  our  first  parents,  and  through  Adam  to  his  posterity. 
The  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  Abraham,  in  whom  the 
human  race  took  a  new  departure,  was  assured  that  in  his  seed  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth  should  be  blessed.  This  declaration,  made  to  the  father  of  the  faithful,  was 
believed  by  him,  and  his  faith  was  accounted  as  righteousness.  Through  him  it 
became  the  property  of  his  descendants ;  for  it  was  evidently  so  understood  by  Jacob. 
To  Moita  the  promise  was  given,  and  by  him  it  was  recorded,  that  God  should  raise  up 
a  prophet  like  unto  himself.  But  Moses  prophesied  of  Christ  rather  in  the  ordinances 
he  instituted  than  in  the  words  he  uttered.  The  sacrifices  especially  of  the  Jewish 
dispensation  were  an  earnest  of  him  who  in  due  time  should  die  for  the  ungodly.  In 
the  Psalms  of  David  are  several  passages  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  assured  to  the 
Israelitish  monarch  a  successor  to  more  than  his  own  dignity  -and  dominion.  Isaiah 
spoke  of  a  suffering  and  victorious  Messiah.  And  others  of  -the  goodly  fellowship^ 
especially  Jeremiah,  Zechariah,  Malachi,  and  Daniel,  announced  beforehand  the  advent 
or  Israel's  and  the  world's  Deliverer. 

III.  The  ScEiFrnBEs  wbbe  the  eecobd  in  which  the  pkomise  of  the  <k>spel 
WAS  preserved.  Admire  the  wisdom  of  God  manifested  in  this  provision.  Men  have 
sneered  at  a  "  book-revelation ; "  but  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  only  alternative 
to  this,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  was  trarlition — shifting,  untrustworthy  tradition.  The 
Hebrevifs  valued  their  sacred  writings,  and  they  had  good  reason  for  doing  so.  The 
Lord  Jesus  bade  his  opponents  "  search  the  Scriptures,"  knowing  that  these  testified 
of  him.  The  apostles  always  appealed,  when  reasoning  with  the  Jews,  to  the  books 
they  justly  deemed  inspired.  These  books  contained  a  treasure  which  those  who  knew 
only  their  letter,  not  their  spirit,  often  failed  to  discern  and  value.  "  Holy,"  because 
inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  because  written  by  the  pens  of  holy  men;  because  con- 
taining holy  doctrine;  because  tending  to  foster  a  holy  character  and  life,  to  leaven 
society  with  holy  doctrines  and  principles.  Above  all,  holy  because  witnessing  to 
him  who  was  the  "  Holy  One  and  the  Just,"  God's  "  holy  Child  Jesus."  The  Scrip- 
tures are  the  casket,  and  Christ  the  Divine  Jewel  within. 

IV.  Consider  thb  purposes  for  which  the  gospel  was  thus  foretold  and 
PUBLISHED,  with  growing  clearness  in  the  centuries  before  the  coming  of  the  Christ. 
There  was  Divine  reason  in  this  arrangement ;  and  Paul  saw  this  to  be  so,  or  he  would 
not  have  put  this  forward  in  the  forefront  of  this  document.  Observe  these  three  evident 
intentions.  1.  Thus  the  hopes  of  God's  people  were  sustained.  How  needful  must 
3Spresg  promises  have  been  to  the  godly  who  lived  in  the  twilight  of  Judaism,  sur- 
rounded by  the  dark  night  of  heathenism  1  Often  must  their  hearts  have  sunk  within 
them,  only  to  be  revived  by  the  gracious  declarations  of  the  universal  Lord  and  Kin". 
2.  Thus  were  displayed  the  wisdom  and  the  benevolence  of  God.  He  would  be  known, 
not  only  as  the  moral  Buler,  but  as  the  gracious  Saviour,  of  mankind.  The  glowing 
language  of  inspked  prophets  depicted  the  attributes  of  the  great  Redeemer  in  such 
colours  as  to  inspire  the  nation  with  a  lively  and  a  blessed  hope.  3.  Thus  was  pro- 
vision made  for  establishing  the  credibility  and  authority  of  the  gospel,  when  revealed. 
Much  that  was  written  aforetime  could  not  at  that  period  be  fully  understood.  These 
things  were  written,  not  for  those  who  then  lived,  but  for  us.  Looking  upon  the  pro- 
phecy, and  then  upon  the  fulfilment,  recognizing  the  wonderful  correspondence,  we  see 
the  presence  of  the  same  God  in  the  old  covenant,  and  in  that  new  covenant  which  is 
In  truth  more  ancient  than  the  old. 

Application.    The  great  practical  lesson  conveyed  in  this  passage  is  obvious  enough. 


-•a.i.  1— 32.]      THE   EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  17 

If  the  gospel  wag  the  matter  of  a  Divine  promise,  repeated  by  prophet,  after  prophet 
through  a  long  course  of  ages,  and  if  the  fulfilment  of  that  promise  was  the  greatest 
event  in  the  history  of  mankind, — how  immensely  important  miist  this  gospel  be  to  ubI 
A  stranger  to  the  Christian  religion  might  naturally  think  it  an  unaccountable,  even  an 
unreasonable,  thing,  that  an  assembly  of  English  people  in  the  nineteenth  century 
fchould  spend  an  hour  in  solemnly  meditating  upon  words  spoken  by  religious  teachers 
who,  thousands  of  years  ago,  lived  in  a  remote  strip  of  land  in  Asia,  between  the  desert 
and  the  sea.  He  might  naturally  ask — What  possible  bearing  can  such  words  have  upon 
the  principles  which  govern  your  life,  the  aims  and  hopes  that  inspire  your  heart?  Our 
answer  is  plain.  God,  in  the  ancient  days,  gave  ^io  mankind  a  promise  which  their 
circumstances  rendered  unspeakably  timely,  welcome,  and  precious.  A  sinful  race,  in 
rebellion  against  the  Divine  authority,  deserving  and  daring  punishment, needed  nothing 
so  sorely  as  an  assurance  of  the  King's  compassion,  as  the  revelation  of  a  way  of  salva- 
tion, ol'  reconciliation,  of  loyal  obedience,  of  eternal  life.  Onder  the  prophetic  dispen- 
sation, this  want  was  met ;  this  declaration,  this  promise,  was  given.  In  the  coming 
of  Christ,  in  his  life  of  benevolent  ministry,  his  death  of  sacrifice  and  redemption,  his 
victorious  rising,  his  spiritual  reign,  the  ancient  words  of  prediction  and  promise  found 
an  echo  corresponding  with,  but  stronger  than,  themselves.  And  now  the  gospel  is 
preached — that  the  counsel  of  God  lias  been  fulfilled,  the  grace  of  God  has  been  dis- 
played, the  power  of  God  has  been  put  forth.  We  have  not  to  tell  of  what  God  will 
do,  but  of  what  he  has  done.  We  have  not  now  to  raise  men's  hope,  but  to  require 
their  faith.  To  receive  this  revelation  is  to  come  under  a  new  principle,  a  new  power, 
to  become  a  new  creation,  to  live  a  new  life.  Remember  that  the  promise  refers,  not 
only  to  the  facts  which,  in  one  sense,  constitute  the  gospel,  but  to  the  blessings  which 
the  gospel  secures  to  those  who  accept  it.  If  the  gospel  of  Christ  has,  as  we  believe  and 
teach,  Divine  authority,  then  there  is,  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  forgiveness  for  sins,  renewal 
for  the  heart,  grace  for  all  need,  and  immortal  life  and  joys ;  there  is  all  that  man  can 
ask  and  God  can  give.  In  Christ  provision  is  made  for  every  want  of  sinful,  ignorant, 
and  helpless  man..  All  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  are  offered  of  God's  free  mercy  to 
the  repenting  and  confiding  applicant.  What  spiritual  need  is  there  which  experience 
does  not  show  may  be  satisfied  by  the  gospel  of  Christ,  by  Christ  himself?  None  I 
All  blessings  are  assured  to  his  faithful  people. 

Vers.  3,  4. — The  theme  of  the  gospel.  Obsei-ve  how  the  apostle's  mind  is  burdened 
with  the  one  great  subject  of  his  ministry.  He  has  proceeded  only  a  very  few  word* 
with  his  Epistle,  and  behold !  already  he  is  introducing,  by  the  force  of  an  overmaster- 
ing impulse,  a  full  statement  of  the  main  facts  and  doctrines  regarding  the  Lord  Jesas 
Christ. 

I.  We  have  here  a  complete  and  concise  designation  of  the  Being  who  was  the 
theme  of  the  gospel  which  Paul  preached.  The  human  name,  "Jesus,"  "the  Salvation 
of  the  Eternal,"  is  followed  by  the  official  name  of  the  Mediator,  "Christ,"  "the 
Anointed  of  God,"  and  this  by  the  title  denoting  his  just  relationship  to  his  Church, 
"  our  Lord." 

II.  The  HCTMAN  NATURE  of  Ohiist  18  clearly  asserted.  If,  according  to  the  flesh,  he 
was  bom  of  the  seed  of  David,  he  was  (1)  of  human  descent.  His  humanity  began  to  be 
at  his  birth.  He  was  "  very  man,"  passing  through  human  experiences,  and  undergoing 
human  weaknesses  and  griefs,  though  sinless.  But  we  are  here  reminded  (2)  that  h 
was  of  royal  lineage.  This  was  in  accordance  with  the  predictions  of  Old  Testament 
Scripture.  And,  as  he  himself  assured  the  people,  he  was  not  only  David's  Son,  but 
David's  Lord. 

III.  The  Divine  dignity  of  the  Saviour  is  simply  but  gloriously  affirmed.  In  the 
very  same  sentence  in  which  he  is  called  the  Son  of  an  earthly  king,  he  is  designated 
"  Son  of  God."  This  he  was  manifested,  declared,  as  being.  We  cannot  fathom  this 
mystery ;  but  it  may  be  reasonably  received,  and  cannot  be  reasonably  rejected.  This 
combination  of  the  two  elements  in  our  Redeemer's  nature  renders  him  an  all-sufficient 
Mediator  between  God  and  man. 

IV.  Here  is  supeenatubal  attestation  to  Christ's  nature  and  mission  bo  dly 
isserted.  Resurrection  from  the  dead  was  not  only  a  miracle  wrought  by  him  a  an 
iccompaniment  of  his  mission ;  it  was  exemplified  in  his  own  Person,  for  he  was  the 

B0UAN8.  41 


18  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS,      [ch.  i.  1—32. 


Firstfruits  of  them  that  sleep.  Spiritual  resurrection  is  the  pledge  of  that  which  i« 
bodily;  and  the  lesurrection  was  always  mentioned  by  the  first  preachers  pf  Chris- 
tianity, in  conuection  with  the  authority  and  Lordship  of  Christ.  The  lesson  is  pointed 
by  the  added  clauses,  "  with  power,"  and  "  by  the  Spirit  of  holiness." 

Application.  1.  Let  us  take  a  just  and  complete,  not  a  partial,  inadequate  new 
of  our  Saviour's  wondrous  nature.  2.  What  a  justification  and  encouragement  may  be 
found  in  this  representation  for  the  sinner  to  commit  his  eternal  interests  to  One  st 
qualified,  so  sufficient,  to  care  for  and  to  save  the  believing  soul  1 

Ver.  5. — The  apostolic  aim.  There  was  great  dignity  in  the  character,  demeanour, 
and  language  of  the  Apostle  Paul.  This  was  not  inconsistent  with  the  modesty  and 
humility  which  were  the  ornament  of  his  Christian  character.  But  whilst  he  felt  his 
personal  unworthiness,  feebleness,  and  utter  insufficiency  for  the  vast  and_ arduous  work 
entrusted  to  him,  his  sense  of  the  grandeur  of  the  work  raised  his  conception  of  his  own 
high  vocation.  It  were  well  that  all  Christian  ministers  should  cherish  lowly  views  of 
self,  and,  at  the  same  time,  lofty  views  of  the  ministry  they  have  received  from  G-od. 

I.  Obsebvb;  the  qualifioations  bestowed  upon  Paul.  HeJescribes  these  in  order 
both  to  justify  himself  in  the  tone  of  his  Epistle,  and  to  secure  the  respectful  attention 
of  his  readers.  1.  Whence  were  they  derived  ?  They  were  not  the  ordinary  gifts  which 
Providence  bestows  upon  men  to  fit  them  for  the  work  of  life.  They  were  traced  to 
Christ  ("  by  whom  "),  the  Giver  of  all  blessings  to  his  Church.  It  was  the  prerogative 
of  the  glorified  Redeemer  to  confer  gifts  upon  men.  "  He  gave  some,  apostles,"  etc 
Having  redeemed  his  Church  at  a  cost  so  great,  he  could  not  leave  it  without  providing 
for  the  supply  of  all  its  needs.  2.  In  what  did  they  consist?  Paul  uses  two  terms. 
One  of  these  denotes  the  more  general  gift,  "grace."  By  this  may  be  understood,  not 
only  the  enlightening  and  quickening  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  bring  the 
soul  into  the  enjoyment  of  the  new  and  higher  spiritual  life,  but  all  that  distinguishes 
Christian  character,  and  fits  for  an  effective  and  beneficent  witness  to  the  Saviour.  The 
other  term  is  "  apostleship."  The  apostles  occupied  a  place  so  prominent  and  so 
honourable  among  the  servants  of  Christ,  that  we  cannot  be  surprised  that  a  special 
word  is  here  employed.  Paul  was  "  called  to  be  an  apostle ; "  and  he  often  refers  to  the 
memorable  occasion  when  he  was  arrested  upon  his  errand  of  persecution,  converted 
to  Christ's  faith  ami  service,  and  commissioned  for  the  great  and  holy  work  of  his  life. 
He  claims  to  be  not  behind  the  chiefest  of  the  apostles,  and  glories  in  the  grace  of  Cod 
which  was  manifested  unto  and  in  him. 

II.  Observe  the  end  bought  by  Paul.  "  Spirits  are  not  finely  touched  but  to 
fine  issues ; "  and  such  endowments  as  were  conferred  upon  Paul  must  have  been  in 
preparation  for  no  ordinary  service.  1.  The  character  of  this  end  was  moral,  spiritual. 
It  was  to  overcome  the  disobedience  and  rebellion  of  sinful  men ;  to  vanquish  these  by 
the  grace  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  obedience 
which  our  King  and  Father  requires,  he  has  resolved  to  secure  by  means  devised  by 
infinite  wisdom  and  provided  by  infinite  love.  The  gospel  of  Christ,  received  by  faitl^ 
is  to  be  the  means  of  reconciling  man  to  God.  2.  Faith,  then,  occupied  a  place  of 
immense  importance  in  the  teaching  of  the  apostle.  This  Epistle  to  the  Romans  is, 
in  itself,  sufficient  proof  of  this.  Justification  with  Gtod,  and  subjection  and  consecra- 
tion to  God,  are  secured  by  faith  in  the  Mediator,  Christ.  Christian  obedience  is 
prompted,  not  by  constraint  or  fear,  but  by  this  intelligent  and  lofty  motive.  3.  The 
sphere  of  this  apostolic  mission  was  unlimited,  save  by  the  boundaries  of  humanity. 
"  All  nations "  were  comprehended  within  the  commission  he  received.  A  great 
nodern  preacher,  John  Wesley,  is  said  to  have  claimed  "  the  world  as  his  parish."  It 
was  a  sublime  view  of  his  ministry  which  Paul  took ;  and  it  was  taken,  not  under  the 
mfluence  of  enthusiasm  or  self-importance,  but  upon  the  highest  of  all  authority — that 
of  the  Saviour  and  the  Lord  of  all.  4.  The  ultimate  issue  of  the  apostleship  of  Paul 
seems  to  be  implied  in  the  expression,  "  for  his  Name."  It  was  the  glory  of  the  Son 
of  God  which  his  servant  faithfully  and  consistently  sought;  there  was  nothing  personal 
or  selfish,  nothing  petty  or  unworthy,  in  his  aims.  The  Name  of  Christ  is  in  itself 
above  every  name,  and  at  that  Name  every  knee  shall  bow.  This  assurance  was  enough 
to  animate  and  sustain  the  apostle  in  all  his  labour  and  in  all  his  suffering.  In  all, 
"  Christ  should  be  magnified." 


OH.  1.1— 32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE    EOMANS.  18 

Application.  1.  All  hearers  of  the  gospel  are  summoned  to  the  obedience  of  faith. 
2.  All  who  have  received  the  gospel  have  received  also  some  trust  and  some  grace, 
which  render  them  responsible  for  making  known  the  revealed  means  of  salvation  to 
their  fellow-men. 

Vers.  6,  7. —  T/ie  Boman  Christicms.  In  the  great  capital  of  the  empire  and  of  the 
world  there  was  thus  early  constituted  a  congregation  of  Christian  worshippers  and 
disciples.  Amidst  the  grandeur,  the  opulence,  the  vice,  that  prevailed  in  this,  as  in 
every  metropolis ;  amidst  proud  patricians,  turbulent  plebeians,  and  wretched  slaves, — 
there  existed  already  an  obscure  but,  to  us,  notable  society,  composed  of  Jews,  Romans, 
and  foreigners  resident  in  the  city,  to  whom  Paul,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  wrote 
this  letter.  The  members  of  this  society  were  not  characterized  by  any  outward  marks 
of  distinction  which  would  render  them  interesting  to  the  inhabitants  of  Borne  generally. 
Yet,  whilst  the  great  and  learned  and  wealthy,  who  either  never  heard  of  the  Christian 
Church  in  their  midst,  or  who,  if  they  heard  of  it,  despised  it, — whilst  they,  for  the 
most  part,  are  forgotten,  that  Church  is  still  remembered  with  deepest  interest.  Notice 
the  marks  bj-  which  it  was  distinguished  to  the  view  of  the  inspired  apostle.  He 
wrote  "to  all  that  he  in  Rome,"  who  were  differenced  from  those  around  them  in 
certain  respects. 

I.  Thks  were  called  op  Christ.  They  had,  for  the  most  part,  never  seen  the 
Lord  Jesus;  but  their  souls  had  heard  his  holy,  gracious  call.  1.  They  had  been 
addressed  by  the  audible  voice  of  his  uttered  Word.  The  call  of  the  gospel  had  reached 
their  understanding.  2.  They  had  experienced  the  inner  call  of  his  Spirit.  To  each 
one  of  them  might  the  apostle  say,  "  The  Word  is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  heart."  3. 
They  had  responded  to  the  call  by  their  faith  and  obedience;  they  had  not  received 
the  grace  of  God  in  vain. 

II.  Thet  were  beloved  or  God.  1.  In  common  with  all  mankind,  they  were  the 
objects  of  Divine  pity.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  etc.  2.  But  there  was  a  special 
sense  in  which  they  were  partakers  of  the  love  of  God.  He  had  revealed  his  love  to 
them,  and  they  loved  God,  because  he  first  loved  them.  He  loved  his  own  image 
reflected  in  their  character  and  life.  3.  This  love  was  especially  manifested  in  their 
adoption.  "  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we 
should  be  called  the  children  of  God !  " 

III.  Thet  weeb  separated  unto  holiness.  The  word  "saint"  is  now  appropriated 
to  personages  of  peculiar  and  distinguished  piety.  But  it  serves  to  remind  us  that 
Christians  were  intended  to  be  pure  amidst  a  sinful  world  and  a  sinful  generation — a 
condition  of  the  Divine  favour,  as  well  as  a  result  of  the  privileges  enjoyed  by  the 
people  of  God.  The  term  may  be  thus  unfolded.  Saints  are  (1)  distinguished  from 
sinful  society  by  which  they  are  surrounded;  (2)  distiiiguished  from  their  former 
selves ;  (3)  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  holiness ;  (4;  and  in  character,  as  well  as  by 
profession,  witnesses  unto  a  holy  God  and  Saviour.  Suph  "  notes  "  of  true,  experimental 
Christianity  were,  indeed,  not  peculiar  to  the  Roman  Christians ;  but  their  conspicuous 
presence  in  the  society  addressed  by  the  apostle  was  an  earnest  of  the  fruits  of  true 
religion  which  should  abound  wherever  the  gospel  was  proclaimed  and  received. 

Vers.  13,  14. — A  yearning  heart.  The  ministry  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  may  ba 
jliilfilled  in  either  of  two  ways— by  personal  visitation  and  oral  teaching  and  preaching; 
or  by  written  communications,  in  the  form  of  letter  or  of  treatise.  Paul,  like  many 
since  his  itm%  adopted  both  nlethods,  and  it  would  be  hard  to  say  in  which  he  was 
the  more  effective.  When  he  could  not  himself  visit  a  city  he  could  write  to  those 
who  dwelt  there.  This  difference  between  the  two  methods  is  observable — that  by 
writing  he  could  only  reach  those  already  favourably  disposed  towards  Christian 
doctrine  whilst  by  word  of  mouth  he  often  gained  access  to  the  hearts  of  unbelievers. 

I.  Benevolent  pitbposbs  may  be  providentiallt  hindered.  God  often  in  mercy 
frustrates  the  wicked  counsels  of  malicious  men.  But  not  only  so;  he  sometimet 
hinders  his  servants  from  carrying  out  designs  good  in  their  motives.  It  happened  now 
and  again  to  Paul  that,  wishing  to  visit  some  country  or  city  on  an  errand  of  mercy 
his  way  was  in  that  particular  direction  hedged  up,  and  his  steps  were  turned  else« 
whither.    The  apostle's  wish  to  visit  Rome  was  natural,  disinterested,  and  praiseworthy 


S»  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,      [en.  i.  1—32. 


and,  in  God's  time,  was  fulfilled.  But,  up  to  the  date  of  writing  this  Epistle,  he  had 
been  hindered  from  carrying  that  wish  into  effect.  We  are  taught  that  all  our  plans, 
even  those  of  special  evangelistic  services,  should  be  formed  with  submission  to  the 
wisdom  and  the  will  of  God. 

II.  Spibitdal  effort  is  with  a  view  to  spieitual  fruit.  The  apostle  looked 
forward  to  some  result  of  toil.  He  had  reaped  a  harvest,  more  or  less  abundant,  in 
uther  fields  of  labour,  and  his  purpose  in  visiting  Eome  was  to  gather  fruit  unto  God. 
What  was  this  "fruit"?  The  conversion  of  men  to  the  faith  and  obedience  of  the 
gospel,  and  the  growth  of  Christian  character  in  those  who  professed  to  be  followers  of 
Christ.  In  these  spiritual  results  the  evangelist,  the  pastor,  reaps  the  harvest  of  his 
toil.  To  this  end  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  thrusts  forth  labourers.  "Herein  is  the 
Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit."  Barrenness  and  unfruitfulness  in  the 
spiritual  domain  are  a  source  of  grief  and  distress  and  disapix)intment. 

III.  The  Christian  labourer  is  a  debtor  unto  all  men.  Paul  felt  that,  in 
preaching  the  gospel  to  his  feUow-men,  he  was  paying  them  what  was  their  due — that 
necessity  was  laid  upon  him.  What  was,  and  is,  the  ground  of  this  obligation  ?  In 
the  case  of  Paul,  the  signal  conversion  from  the  career  of  the  persecutor  to  the  life  of 
the  Christian,  and  the  Divine  commission  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  formed 
peculiar  reasons  and  motives  urging  such  devotion.  Yet  every  Christian,  having 
received  spiritual  blessings  through  the  agency  of  his  fellow-men,  is  thereby  bound  to 
transmit  to  others  what  be  himself  has  received.  And  Christ's  own  authority  sanctions 
our  regarding  spiritual  service  rendered  to  men  as  some  fulfilment  of  the  great  debt  we 
all  owe  to  him.  The  extent  of  this  obligation  is  universal.  It  includes  all  nations 
and  races,  Greek  and  barbarian ;  all  classes  and  characters,  wise  and  unwise.  Paul  was 
ready  to  minister  to  Hebrews  and  heathen,  Romans  and  Greeks,  bond  and  free.  He 
knew  that  the  reception  of  his  message  would  bring  the  true  wisdom  and  the  true 
liberty  to  men  of  every  tribe  and  of  every  type,  and  therefore  he  sought  to  discharge 
his  debt  to  all  mankind. 

Application.  The  Christian  labourer  should  seek  that  his  labour  may  be  directed 
by  the  distinctively  Christian  spirit ;  that  it  should  contemplate  the  special  Christian 
aim  and  result ;  and  that  it  should  display  true  Christian  comprehensiveness  and  charity. 

Vers.  15, 16. — Olorying  in  the  gospel.  It  was  not  through  any  shrinking  from  either 
publicity  or  persecution,  criticism  or  cruelty,  that  Paul  had  not,  up  to  the  date  of 
writing  this  letter,  visited  Eome.  Circumstances,  in  which  he  recognized  the  action 
of  Divine  providence,  had  hitherto  hindered  him  from  carrying  his  wish  into  effect. 
And  now  it  was  the  holy  ambition  of  his  daring  and  benevolent  heart  to  publish  the 
gospel  of  Christ  in  the  metropolis  of  the  empire,  of  the  world. 

I.  There  were  reasons  which  would  have  rendered  some  men  ashamed  o» 
THE  gospel  of  Christ.  Now,  indeed,  in  our  day,  when  Christianity  can  point  to  the 
triumphs  of  eighteen  centuriesj  when  Christianity  has  received  the  homage  of  the 
noblest  intellects  and  the  purest  hearts,  when  Christianity  commands  the  reverence 
of  civilized  humanity,  it  is  not  easy  to  understand  how,  at  the  first,  there  should  have 
been  any  temptation  to  be  ashamed  of  the  religion  of  Jesus.  But  let  us  put  ourselves 
in  the  position  of  those  who  lived  in  the  first  century  of  our  era,  and  we  shall  feel  that, 
for  them,  confidence  and  courage  in  no  ordinary  degree  were  needed  in  order  to  profess 
and  promulgate  the  faith.  1.  There  were  such  reasons  connected  with  the  religion  of 
Christ,  in  itself  considered.  Its  origin  in  Palestine ;  the  birth  of  its  Founder  as  a  Jew, 
and  as  the  Offspring  of  lowly  parents  ;  his  ignominious  death  upon  the  cross ;  the  mean 
condition  of  many  of  his  first  adherents  and  missionaries; — these  were  circumstances 
damaging  to  the  religion  in  the  eyes  of  carnal  men.  The  religion  itself,  demanding 
contrition  and  repentance  from  all  men  as  sinners,  demanding  faith  in  a  crucified 
Saviour  as  the  Mediator  of  Divine  mercy,  demanding  a  new  heart,  a  child-like  spirit, 
a  life  of  self-denial,  must  have  been  repugnant  to  human  pride.  To  this  must  be 
added  the  reproach  that  Christianity  did  not  come  among  men  recommended  by  the 
fascinations  of  philosophy,  or  the  persuasiveness  of  eloquence  and  poetry;  and  the 
further  reproach  that  it  provided  no  gorgeous  temples,  no  splendid  ritual,  no  imposing 
priesthood.  2.  There  were  reasons  personal  to  the  Apostle  Paul,  which,  some  mipht 
have  supposed,  would  liave  made  him  ashamed  of  the  gospel.     He  was  a  Hebrew  and 


CH.1. 1— 32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  ^  THE  ROMANS.  Zl 

a  rabbi,  one  held  in  high  esteem  and  repute  among  the  learned  and  the  powerful  of 
his  countrymen :  was  he  likely  to  devote  himself  to  a  doctrine  which  regarded  Judaism 
as  a  preparatory  dispensation,  whose  purpose  was  now  answered,  and  which  was  to 
pass  away;  a  doctrine  which  depressed  the  letter  and  the  form  which  Judaism  so 
dearly  and  so  blindly  prized?  He  was  a  scholar,  versed  to  some  extent  in  Greek 
learning,  and  with  an  intellect  capable  of  expounding  and  adorning  Greek  philosophy  : 
was  ho  likely  to  accept  crude  and  unlettered  instructors  and  colleagues,  and  to  abandon 
as  worthless  the  wisdom  of  this  world?  He  was  a  Soman  citizen,  entitled  to  the 
privileges  and  immunities  attaching  to  that  proud  position:  was  he  likely  to  ally 
himself  with  a  religion  the  profession  of  which  would  be  regarded  with  contempt  by 
the  civic  authorities,  unless,  indeed,  it  might  prove  politically  convenient  to  visit  its 
jiropagation  with  penalties  ? 

II.  Paul  had,  howbvek,  more  powerful  reasons  for  glortino  m  the  gospel 
OF  Christ.  Though  he  simply  said  that  he  was  "  not  ashamed  "  of  it,  the  language 
and  spirit  of  the  passage  imply  that  it  was  his  joy,  his  glory,  his  boast.  And  in  this 
he  was  not  cherishing  fanatical  and  unreasonable  feelings ;  he  had  reas^on  for  his  glory- 
ing. 1.  The  nature  of  the  gospel  was,  to  the  apostle,  sufficient  ground  for  holding  it 
de;ir,  and  for  extolling  its  claims  upon  the  respect  of  men.  The  Divine  means  for  recon- 
ciling rebellious,  guilty  men  to  God,  the  righteous  Judge  and  Ruler ;  the  tidings  of  the 
Redeemer's  advent;  ministry,  sacrifice,  and  glorification,  was  not  only  tidings  to  be 
received  with  devout  thankfulness:  it  was  a  gospel  of  good  news,  to  be  diffused  with  the 
earnestness  of  cordial  benevolence.  A  heart  touched  with  the  spectacle  of  human  sin, 
misery;  and  helplessness,  and  capable  of  appreciating  the  marvellous  provision  of  infinite 
wisdom  and  love,  in  the  redemption  by  Jesus  Christ,  could  not  but  be  filled  with  joy, 
when  entrusted  with  the  privilege  of  offering  to  the  dying  sons  of  men  a  remedy  so 
Divine.  2.  Paul  gloried  in  the  gospel  as  the  highest  exhibition  of  God's  power.  Men 
are  not  wont  to  be  ashamed  of  association  with  power ;  they  rather  pride  themselves  in 
and  boast  of  their  strength  or  the  greatness  of  their  resources,  the  might  of  their  party 
or  of  their  country.  Now,  the  power  of  the  gospel  wore  the  guise  of  weakness ;  yet  the 
jyeakness  of  God  was  stronger  than  men.  A  thinker,  a  philanthropist,  may  have  more 
power  than  a  king  or  warrior.  Certainly,  Christianity  has  shown  how  the  weak  things 
of  the  world  confound  the  mighty.  Spiritual  alike  in  its  origin,  its  instrument,  and  its 
sphere,  the  reality  of  its  power  is  shown  in  its  overcoming  obstacles,  in  its  achieving 
moral  transformations,  in  its  renewing  the  usages  and  principles  of  society.  3.  Paul 
gloried  in  the  special  results  which  proved  the  power  of  the  gospel.  He  saw  in  it  the 
power  of  God  "unto  salvation."  The  prowess  of  the  warrior  is  admired,  as  the  means 
of  human  destruction.  Too  often,  men  most  revere  what  they  most  dread.  It  is  the 
glory  ot  God  that  he  is  "  mighty  to  save ; "  of  Christ  that  he  is  "  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost ; "  of  the  gospel  that  it  brings  "  so  great  salvation."  Bringing  salvation  from 
sin,  from  condemnation,  from  all  that  sin  involves,  of  moral  mischief  and  misery,  the 
gospel  is  emphatically  Divine  power.  The  apostle  had  felt  this  power  in  his  own  heart 
and  life ;  he  had  witnessed  unnumbered  instances  of  this  power,  which  were  only  less 
surprising  and  startling  than  that  which  his  own  life  exhibited.  4.  Another  ground  of 
confidence  and  boasting  in  the  gospel  was,  to  the  mind  of  the  apostle,  its  varied  and 
widespread  efficacy.  In  the  expression  "to  every  one  that  believeth,"  we  have  a  state- 
ment of  the  condition  upon  which  the  delivering  and  healing  power  of  the  gospel  is 
exercised — faith ;  and  we  have  also  an  assertion  of  its  universal  adaptation.  Although 
writing  to  the  Romans,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  puts  prominently  forward  the  fact 
that  the  offer  of  the  gospel  was  first  made  to  the  Jew.  This  was  not  only  the 
obvious  course  pointed  out  by  God's  providence;  it  was  the  express  direction  of 
the  Author  and  Founder  of  Christianity.  Yet  there  was  in  the  gospel  nothing  limited 
or  local ;  it  was,  and  is,  adapted  to  the  spiritual  necessities  of  the  whole  family  of 
man. 

Application.  1.  Every  hearer  of  the  gospel  should  inquire  of  himself  whether  he 
has  experienced  its  power  over  his  heart  and  life.  2.  Christians  should  so  consider  the 
glory  of  Christianity  as  to  keep  themselves  from  all  danger  of  being,  in  any  circum- 
stances or  in  any  society,  ashamed  of  their  religion.  3.  No  opportunity  should  be  lost 
of  commending  the  gospel,  with  its  claims  and  privileges,  to  the  acceptance  of  men, 
without  respect  to  their  race,  their  class,  or  their  character.    Unbelief  nlone  is  impervious 


22  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS.     [oh.  i.  1—32. 

to  the  power  of  the  religion  of  Christ.    All  who  sincerely  helieve  will  experience  ita 
renewing,  delivering,  and  quickening  power. 

Ver.  17. — The  new  righteousness.  The  apostle  was  justified  in  his  boasting  in  the 
gospel,  because  of  the  high  end  it  was  the  means  of  securing — nothing  less  than  the  sal- 
v»tion  of  men.  Tbis  salvation  it  is  his  aim,  in  this  Epistle,  to  set  in  its  true  light.  It 
is  a  moral,  a  spiritual  deliverance;  an  enfranchisement  of  the  soul ;  an  opening  of  the 
prison  doors;  a  healinc;  radical,  thorough,  and  lasting.  A  righteous  God  can  only  be 
reconciled  with  sinful,  disobedient  men  by  communicating  to  them  his  own  righteousness. 
The  inner  nature,  the  spiritual  being,  the  moral  character,  is  the  sphere  of  the  gre'at  salva- 
tion which  Christ  brings,  which  the  gospel  announces.   There  are  in  this  verse  three  ideas. 

I.  Faith.  Like  his  Divine  Master,  Paul  insisted  strenuously  upon  the  importance, 
the  necessity,  of  faith.  This  is  a  sign  of  the  spirituality  of  our  religion,  which  begins 
with  the  heart,  and  works  from  within  outwardly.  But  Scripture  gives  no  countenance 
to  the  mystical  doctrine  that  faith  is  a  mere  sentiment,  having  no  definite  object.  On 
the  contrary,  it  reveals  God  and  his  promises,  and  especially  his  Son  and  the  truth 
relating  to  him,  as  the  objects  of  faith.  Paul's  aim,  like  that  of  every  Christian  teacher, 
was  to  awaken  faith;  and  to  this  end  he  made  known  the  glad  tidings,  that  tliose 
who  heard  them  might  have  an  appropriate  object  upon  which  to  place  their  confidence. 
If  we  are  to  believe,  we  must  have  something  worthy  of  belief;  if  we  are  to  trust,  it 
must  be  in  One  who  has  a  just  claim  upon  our  trust.  Christianity  responds  to  this 
requirement,  and  satisfies  the  desire  of  the  soul  for  a  sufficient  ground  and  a  suitable 
object  for  faith,  in  offering  salvation  through  the  Divine  mercy  extended  through  the 
redemption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 

II.  EiGHTEOusNESS.  This  Epistle  may  be  said  to  be  chiefly  concerned  with  two 
themes — sin  and  righteousness;  the  sin  being  man's,  and  the  righteousness  God's.  It 
shows  us  how  the  Divine  righteousness  becomes  man's.  It  is  faith  which  is  the  link 
that  attaches  the  human  soul  to  the  just  and  holy  Lord ;  the  wing  by  which  man  soars 
from  the  foul  atmosphere  of  sin  into  the  clear  and  upper  air  of  fellowship  with  God. 
The  gospel,  says  the  text,  reveals  the  righteousness  of  God.  It  does  this,  first,  by 
making  known  the  perfect  obedience  of  Christ,  who  "  fulfilled  aU  righteousness,"  and 
was  "  obedient  unto  death."  It  does  this,  further,  by  declaring  the  reason  of  Christ's 
unmerited  sufferings  and  death.  These,  which,  superficially  regarded,  seem  rather 
opposed  to  the  belief  in  the  justice  of  God's  government,  are,  to  the  Christian's  mind, 
the  highest  illustration  of  that  justice.  Though  innocent  and  holy,  our  Lord,  becoming 
the  Eepresentative  and  Eedeemer  of  the  race  whose  nature  he  assumed,  submitted  for 
our  sake  to  the  pains  and  the  death  he  did  not  deserve.  He  thus  displayed,  not  merely 
the  heinousness  of  human  sin,  which  brought  him  to  the  shameful  cross :  not  only 
the  magnitude  of  the  world's  sin,  the  penalty  of  which  he  thus  accepted  and  endured ; 
but  the  righteousness  of  God,  which,  in  the  very  act  of  providing  for  the  pardon  of  the 
sinner,  most  signally  and  effectively  condemned  the  sin  itself.  Nowhere  does  sin 
appear  so  sinful  as  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  where  righteousness  stands  in  striking  and 
sublime  contrast  with  iniquity,  revealing  in  all  its  enormity  the  evil  which  it  van- 
quishes and  slays.  Christ  not  only  revealed,  he  also  imparted,  the  righteousness  of 
God.  And  this  in  two  ways — by  righteously  forgiving,  acquitting,  and  accepting 
the  penitent  believer  in  his  Son ;  and  by  infusing  into  him  a  new  principle  of  righteous- 
ness. Thus  Christianity  at  once  provides  that  man  may  be  right  and  just  with  God 
and  that  he  may  possess  the  righteousness  of  impulse,  habit,  and  principle,  which  will 
produce  righteousness  of  action  in  his  relations  with  his  fellow-men. 

III.  LiPB.  "  The  just  by  faith  "—such  is  the  teaching  alike  of  the  prophet  and  of 
the  apostle—"  shall  live."  This  life  is  opposed  to  spiritual  death  ;  it  is  the  special  gift 
of  God  in  Christ ;  it  is  the  effective  principle  of  renewed  and  hallowed  activity.  It 
includes  within  itself  the  fulness  of  all  spiritual  blessings.  It  is  the  beo-innin"  and 
the  earnest  of  iramortaUty ;  it  is  "  the  eternal  life."  "         ^ 

Peaotioal  lbssonb.  1.  The  highest  good  must  be  sought  from  God,  and  from  him 
only ;  in  him  alone  are  righteousness  and  life.  2.  To  the  revelation  of  God  in  and  by 
Christ  must  correspond  the  approach  of  the  soul  to  him  by  faith.  This  is  the  way  of 
God's  own  appointment,  marked  by  God's  wisdom,  and  proved  by  actual  experience  to 
b«  divinely  efficacious. 


OH.  1. 1—32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  23 

Vers.  24 — 27. — Evil  passion.  A  more  frightful  exhibition  of  sin  and  its  consequences 
than  that  given  by  the  apostle  in  the  latter  pai-t  of  this  chapter  could  not  have  been 
presented ;  yet  to  have  said  less  than  this  would  have  been  to  fall  short  of  the  facts  of 
the  case,  which  needed  to  be  stated  in  order  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  publication  of  a 
gospel  of  pardon  and  of  purity. 

I.  The  root  of  evil  passion,  ob  lust,  is  m  the  wobship  of  the  oreatusb. 
The  beginning  of  all  evil  is  in  departure  from  God.  His  works,  and  especially  the  most 
honourable  and  beautiful  of  all  his  material  constructions — the  human  body — are 
intended  to  lead  the  thoughts  and  aspirations  of  men  to  the  great  Creator  himself, 
whose  attributes  they  in  some  measure  display.  The  symmetry  and  grace  and  beauty 
of  the  human  form  and  features  are  the  crown  of  the  physical  creation.  And  to  the 
Christian  the  body  of  man  has  this  higher  interest — it  was  tenanted  by  the  human 
mind,  it  was  possessed  by  the  Divine  nature,  of  the  Son  of  God  himself.  The  attrac- 
tiveness of  the  body  is  not  only  a  fact  indicative  of  the  Divine  delight  in  form;  within 
lawful  bounds  it  ig  intended  to  subserve  the  high  purposes  of  social  and  especially  of 
conjugal  life.  But  when  the  interest  centres  upon  what  is  corporeal,  and  does  not  past 
beyond  and  above  it,  then  the  Divine  intention  is  frustrated.  Evidently  the  nobility, 
the  enchanting  loveliness  characteristic  of  the  human  body  in  its  grandest  and  fairest 
types,  are  designed  to  suggest  the  infinite  and  eternal  spiritual  excellence. 

•*  Thus  beauty  here  points  up  to  that  above, 
And  loveliness  leads  on  to  perfect  love." 

But  when  this  great  and  precious  lesson  is  missed,  what  follows  ?  Inevitable  degrada- 
tion. The  creature  is  worshipped,  and  the  Creator  is  forgotten  or  despised.  The  mind 
and  heart  seek  to  rest  in  what  can  never  satisfy  them.  The  emblem  is  mistaken  for 
the  reality,  the  shadow  for  the  substance. 

II.  '1'he  feuit  of  evil  passion,  oe  lust,  is  unnatural  and  debasing  vice. 
Headers  of  the  ancient  literature  of  Greece  and  Rome,  students  of  anthropolo|:y,  travel- 
lers and  residents  in  heathen  lauds  in  our  own  time,  are  well  aware  of  the  lengths  to 
which  sinful  passion  can  lead  those  whom  it  masters.  There  is  no  need  to  go  into 
detail,  and  it  is  better  for  Christian  people  to  remain  ignorant  of  corruptions  with  which, 
happily,  they  are  never  brought  into  contact.  But  it  remains  true  that,  with  idolatry, 
the  filthiest  rites  and  orgies  have  often  been,  and  still  are,  associated.  Those  abandoned 
to  "fleshly  lusts"  appear  to  exhaust  their  ingenuity  in  inventing  forms  of  unlawful 
indulgence. 

III.  The  punishment  or  evil  passion,  or  lust,  is  assured  by  the  RoTbibutivb 
action  of  God's  righteous  government.  There  is  a  natural  belief  in  retribution. 
Nemesis  is  no  mere  invention  of  the  human  imagination;  it  springs  from  convictions 
and  fears  from  which  humanity  can  never  free  itself.  Revelation  confirms  the  natural 
utterances  of  human  reason,  assuring  us  that  after  death  is  the  judjjment,  and  that 
every  man  shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God,  when  evil  deeds  shall  not  go 
unpunished.  The  laws  of  nature  to  a  large  extent  ensure  some  measure  of  retribution 
even  here  and  now.  Tribes  and  nations  which  have  practised  debasing  and  unnatural 
vices  have  paid  the  penalty  in  national  deterioration,  and  individual  sinners  have 
reaped  the  bitter  fruit  proper  to  evil  seed.  And  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God  is  not  confined  to  this  present  earthly  state. 

IV.  The  remedy  of  evil  passion,  or  lust,  is  provided  in  the  gospel  of  oub 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  the  purpose  of  the  apostle,  in  this  Epistle  to  the  Romans, 
to  show  that  the  mercy  of  God  our  Father  has  abounded  to  sinful  men,  in  the  provision 
of  (1)  pardon  for  even  heinous  sin,  upon  the  sinner's  repentance  and  faith ;  and  (2) 
purity  of  heart  and  life  such  as  the  Spirit  of  Christ  alone  can  create. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — PauVs  description  of  himself;  or,  the  story  of  a  noble  life.  An  auto- 
biography, the  story  of  our  own  life,  is  a  dangerous  thing  for  a  man  to  write.  We 
are  partisan  judges  of  our  own  character.  We  conceal  our  own  faults  and  exao;gerate 
our  own  virtues.     An  autobiography,  too,  is  often  very  dull  and  very  dry.     But  the 


24  THE  EPISTLE  OF   PAUL  TO   THE   ROMANS,      [en.  1. 1—32. 


autobiography  of  St.  Paul  is  at  once  interesting  and  truthfnl.  As  Paley,  in  hig 
'  Horse  Paulina;,'  has  so  clearly  shown,  Paul's  account  of  his  own  personal  history, 
as  given  in  his  writings,  is  home  out  in  the  fullest  manner  by  the  account  given  of 
him  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  written  by  a  different  person  and  at  a  different  time. 
The  irresistible  truthfulness  of  the  story  of  Paul's  conversion  and  apostleship  is  so 
Btrong,  that  the  study  of  it  led  the  celebrated  Lord  Lyttleton,  who  had  been  for  many 
years  a  sceptic,  to  embrace  the  religion  of  Jesiis  Christ  and  become  one  of  its  ablest 
advocates.  In  these  opening  verses  of  the' Epistle  to  the  Eomans,  St.  Paul  gives  us,  io 
brief  but  weighty  words,  the  story  of  his  life. 

L  An  apostle's  title.  "Paul,  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ"  (ver.  1).  St.  Paul's 
titles  are  not  numerous  or  high-sounding.  He  gloried  in  the  title  of  "servant" — a 
servant  of  Jesus  Christ.  Consider  wJiat  it  meant  jfor  Paul  that  he  became  and  lived  a 
servant  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  meant  to  him  loss  of  worldly  prospects.  "  For  whom  I 
have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things."  It  meant  to  him  bodily  suffering.  "  I  bear  about 
■with  me  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  It  meant  to  him — a  man  of  high 
mental  endowments,  a  man  of  unblemished  character— a  life  spent  largely  ia  the 
prison-cell,  with  the  chains  bound  upon  his  wrists.  It  meant  to  him — and  he  knew  it 
well — a  life  ended  on  the  scaffold,  or,  like  his  Master's,  on  the  cross.  "  I  am  now  readjt 
to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand."  But  he  had  counted  the  cost 
Three  things  sustained  him  as  he  trod  that  lonely  path  of  service  and  suffering.  He 
looked  back  to  the  cross  of  Jesus.  He  had  the  love  of  Jesus  and  the  spirit  of  Jesut 
in  his  heart.  And  he  looked  forward  to  the  crown  of  glory  that  awaited  him.  There- 
fore he  was  able  to  say,  "  But  none  of  these  things  move  me,  neither  count  I  my  life 
dear  unto  myself,  so  that  I  might  finish  my  course  with  joy,  and  the  ministry  which 
I  have  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  It  means  much  the  same  to  be  a  servant  of  Jesus 
Christ  in  our  own  day.  You  may  not  meet  with  bodily  suffering  as  a  consequence  of 
your  faithfulness  to  Jesus.  But  there  are  other  sufferings,  perhaps  just  as  bitter  and 
as  hard  to  bear,  which  must  be  endured  by  the  faithful  servant  of  Jesus  Christ.  Make 
up  your  mind  to  this — that  you  are  not  the  servant  of  the  world,  and  then  what  the 
world  may  say  of  you  will  affect  you  very  little.  A  servant  of  Jesus  Christ.  St.  Paul 
was  what  he  professed  to  be.  The  world  has  confirmed  the  description.  Could  the 
same  be  said  of  us  ?  Could  we  look  up  to  God,  or  look  into  the  laces  of  our  fellow-men, 
and  say,  "  Yes,  I  am  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ "  ? 

U.  An  apostle's  work,  and  how  he  did  it.  "  Ca:lled  to  be  an  apostle,  separated 
nnto  the  gospel  of  God  "  (ver.  1).  The  word  "  apostle  "  means  a  messenger,  or  one 
who  is  sent.  This  was  PauVs  worh,  to  be  an  apostle  or  messenger  of  Jesus  Christ, 
This  was  the  form  of  service  he  rendered  to  his  Master.  His  work,  the  great  ambition 
of  his  life,  was  to  win  men  to  Christ.  General  Lew  Wallace,  in  that  beautiful  story 
of  his, '  Ben  Hur ;  a  Tale  of  the  Christ,'  speaks  of  Jesus  Christ  as  "  the  one  Man  whom 
the  world  could  not  do  without."  That,  too,  was  St.  Paul's  firm  conviction.  This  was 
one  of  the  things  that  carried  him  on  in  his  work.  He  realized  the  power  of  the  gospel. 
He  felt  that  it  was  something  more  than  human.  Heart  and  conscience  and  intellect 
told  him  it  was  Divine.  He,  who  was  so  well  instructed  in  the  Jewish  Scriptures, 
knew  that  the  prophets  spoke  of  Christ.  "Which  he  had  promised  afore  by  hi«. 
prophets  in  the  holy  Scriptures  "  (ver.  2).  He  knew  that  Jesus  had  come.  He  knew 
that  he  had  died  upon  the  cross.  Yes,  and  he  knew  that  he  had  risen  again.  Look  rI 
the  fourth  verse :  "  Declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power,  according  to  the  spirit 
of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead."  Had  he  not  seen  him?  Had  he  not 
heard  his  voice— that  voice  that  spoke  to  him  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  and  changed 
for  ever  the  whole  current  of  his  life  ?  Yes ;  Paul  knew  whom  he  had  believed.  He 
had  no  doubt  about  it.  He  knew  what  Christ  had  done  for  him.  And  he  knew  what 
Christ  could  do  for  the  world.  He  knew  how  much  the  world  needed  Christ.  And  so 
he  went  forth  on  those  great  missionary  journeys  of  his,  burning  with  the  one  over- 
whelniing,  overmastering  desire,  to  preach  Christ  crucified,  and  to  persuade  men  in 
Christ's  stead  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  This  is  one  of  the  great  secrets  of  successful 
work  for  Christ  still.  We  must  have  a  personal  knowledge  of  Jesus  as  our  own 
Baviour.  "  An  educated  ministry  is  desirable,"  said  the  late  Dr.  Cooke,  of  Belfast,  "  but 
«  converted  ministry  is  indispensable."  And  we  must  then  go  forth  in  the  convictioB 
that  men  need  Christ,  and  that  he  will  save  them  if  they  come  to  him. 


ow.T.l— 32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  26 


"I  love  to  tell  the  story. 

Because  I  know  it's  true ; 
It  sotiefies  my  longings 

As  nothing  else  can  do. 
I  love  to  tell  the  story, 

It  did  so  much  for  me ; 
And  that- is  just  the  reason 

I  tell  it  now  to  thee." 

Another  fp-eat  secret  of  Pnul'a  success  was  this.  He  realized  a  DMne  plan  and  pm-post 
in  his  life.  He  lell  that  he  was  "  separated  unto  the  gospel  of  God "  (ver.  1). 
Unknown  to  himself,  the  Divine  hand  had  been  moulding  his  character,  drawing  ont 
and  developing  his  gifts,  from  his  childhood  up.  How  the  various  circumstances  of 
his  life  fitted  him  for  his  great  life-work  1  Born  and  brought  up  in  Tarsus,  he  there 
became  a  Roman  citizen,  thus  receiving  civil  rights  and  privileges  which  were  of  great 
service  to  him  afterwards  in  his  mission.  There  also  he  came  in  contact  with  Greek 
civilization  and  culture — an  acquaintance  useful  to  him  afterwards  at  Athens  and  at 
Corinth.  Then,  coming  to  Jerusalem,  and  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  he  there 
received  a  training  and  a  position  which  were  of  immense  advantage  to  him  in  dealing 
with  the  Jewish  people,  his  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh.  All  this  process  of  training 
and  development  culminated  when  one  day  that  Divine  hand  suddenly  arrested  his 
career  on  the  way  to  Damascus.  The  light  from  heaven  shone  about  him  then,  and 
shone  into  his  heart.  After  those  days  of  outward  blindness,  but  inward  questioning 
and  growing  spiritual  vision,  the  scales  fell  from  his  eyes  indeed.  He  saw  it  all  then. 
Henceforth  there  was  a  new  meaning  and  a  new  purpose  in  his  life.  He  saw  then  that 
he  was  "called  to  be  an  apostle,  separated  unto  the  gospel  of  God."  He  saw  the  unseen 
hand.  He  saw  how  it  had  h'd  him.  He  saw  that  it  was  a  hand  of  power — how  foolish 
to  resist  it  1  He  saw  that  it  was  a  hand  of  love,  moulding  him  for  high  and  holy  and 
eternal  purposes.  From  that  moment  Paul  was  Christ's.  Not  as  a  slave,  but  as  a 
devoted  servant.  Not  in  any  sense  as  a  mere  machine,  but  Christ's  with  all  the 
persuasion  and  conviction  of  bis  mind,  with  all  the  love  of  his  heart — separated  by  his 
own  voluntary  act,  as  he  had  already  been  separated  by  God's  purpose,  unto  the  gospel 
of  Ood.  In  the  seventh  verse  we  see  what  the  message  was  which  Paul  took  with 
him  wherever  he  carried  the  gospel.  It  is  the  message  which  the  gospel  brings  still 
wher  ver  it  finds  an  entrance.  "  Grace  to  you  and  peace  from  God  our  Father,  and  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Grace — the  favour  or  mercy  of  God.  "  Ye  know  the  grace  of 
our  I  ord  Jesus  Christ,  that  though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  poor, 
that  ye  through  his  poverty  might  be  rich"  (2  Cor.  viii.  9).  And  where  the 
gosp  1  comes  with  its  message  of  mercy  and  of  love,  the  result  is  peace — peace  in 
the  conscience,  peace  in  the  home,  peace  in  the  nation.  Such  was  the  character,  such 
wer  the  life  and  uoik  of  St.  Paul.  He  was  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  went 
forth  as  a  messenger  for  Christ,  believing  that  he  had  been  separated  unto  the 
gospel  of  God.  And  the  message  which  he  brought  was  the  message  of  grace  and 
peace.  So  may  it  be  with  every  one  of  us,  if  we  will  only  consecrate  our  lives  to 
God.— C.  H.  L 

Vers.  14 — 17. —  The  gospel  a  message  for  every  one.  Narrow  views  of  the  gospel  are 
very  common.  Amongst  the  very  wealthy,  what  an  erroneous  idea  often  exists  about 
the  gospel  and  its  claims!  They  think  that  religion  may  do  very  well  for  the  poor, 
but  they  ha\e  no  need  of  it.  Amongst  the  very  poor,  on  the  other  hand,  you  will  often 
find  the  idea  that  religion  may  do  very  well  for  respectable  people,  but  that  it  has 
nothing  to  do  with  them.  Then,  again,  you  will  meet  with  a  certain  class  of  intellectual 
men — not  always  the  most  cultured  or  most  thoughtful — who  imagine  that  the  gospel 
may  do  very  well  for  commonplace,  ordinary  people,  but  that  they  have  got  far  beyond 
such  a  childish  belief.  Even  among  Christian  people  what  narrow  views  of  the  gospel 
and  its  scope  !  How  slow  the  Christian  Church  has  been  in  realizing  its  mission  to  the 
heathen  world  1  There  are  many  who  still  think  that  the  heathen  are  well  enough  off; 
that  there  is  no  need  to  send  the  gospel  to  them.  There  are  many  who  will  tell  us 
that  there  is  "no  usei"  in  sending  the  gospel  to  the  Mohammedan  or  the  Jew.  But 
the  Apostle  Paul  took  a  very  Jifferens  view.     In  his  view  the  gospel  is  a  message  for 


26  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,      [oh.  1. 1—32. 


every  one ;  and  it  is  the  work  and  duty  of  the  Christian  Church  to  bring  it  within  the 
reach  of  every  one. 

I.  A  PACT  STATED.  "  The  gospel  of  Christ,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  is  the  power  of  God 
unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth ;  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Greek  " 
(ver.  16).  This  was  the  cause  of  his  readiness  to  go  and  preach  the  gospel  at  Rome 
also  (ver.  15),  just  as  he  had  already  preached  it  to  bigoted  and  fanatical  Jews,  and  to 
the  cultured  and  sceptical  Greeks.  He  knew  no  difference  cf  nation  or  of  language, 
of  creed  or  class,  so  far  as  the  need  of  the  gospel  and  the  power  of  it  were  concerned. 
His  message  was  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  and  he  knew 
that  he  would  find  sinners  everywhere.  1.  The  gospelis  a  message  for  the  rich.  It  tells 
them  of  a  treasure  that  is  incorruptih'e,  that  fadeth  not  away.  It  shows  them  how  to 
become  rich  toward  God — first,  by  having  Christ,  and  having  him,  we  have  all  things; 
and  then,  by  making  a  good  use  of  the  earthly  possessions  which  God  has  given  them. 
2.  The  gospel  is  a  message/or  the  poor.  It  teaches  them  to  be  industrious  and  contented. 
It  shows  them  in  the  earthly  life  of  Jesus  Christ  himself,  and  in  the  lives  of  hundreds 
of  his  followers,  how  a  peaceful  and  happy  mind  may  exist,  and  how  a  useful  life  may 
be  spent,  even  amid  circumstances  of  outward  poverty.  3.  ITie  gospel  is  a  message  for 
the  men  of  intellect  and  learning.  What  sublime  ideas  it  puts  before  us!  with  what 
pure  and  lofty  motives  it  inspires  us !  and  with  what  a  glorious  hope  it  cheers  us  on  ! 
Contrast  the  future  to  which  the  atheist  or  the  agnostic  looks  forward,  with  the  future 
which  is  the  Christian's  hope,  an  eternity  of  conscious  enjoyment  of  what  is  noblest 
and  best.  The  gospel  has  a  claim  upon  the  ignorant  and  poor  because  of  its  simplicity 
and  its  comforts.  But  it  has  just  as  strong  a  claim  upon  men  of  giant  intellect  and 
vigorous  understanding.  And  observe  how  some  of  the  foremost  men  in  science,  in 
literature,  and  in  statesmanship  have  recognized  that  claim,  and  responded  to  it.  What 
names  in  literature  and  science  stand  higher  than  those  of  Newton  and  Faraday, 
Thomas  Chalmers  and  Hugh  Miller,  Sir  John  Herschel  and  Sir  David  Brewster,  all 
humble  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  Or  to  take  one  case  only  from  our  British 
stiitesmen,  that  of  the  late  Lord  Cairns,  Lord  Chancellor  of  England.  During  the  term 
of  office  of  the  last  Conservative  administration  a  Russian  war  was  felt  to  be  imminent, 
and  much  excitement  prevailed  both  within  and  without  the  cabinet.  One  day  the 
wife  of  a  junior  member  of  the  cabinet  inquired  of  Lady  Cairns,  "  What  is  the  secret 
of  the  lord  chancellor's  constant  and  unruffled  calmness,  which  my  husband  tells  me 
pervades  the  whole  place  so  soon  as  Lord  Cairns  appears  ?  "  "  It  is  this,"  was  the 
reply ;  "  he  never  attends  a  cabinet  meeting  without  spending  half  an  hour  immediately 
beforehand  alone  with  his  God."  Upon  young  men  of  education  and  learning,  upon 
young  men  of  thoughtful  minds,  we  would  press  home  the  claims  of  the  gospel ;  yes, 
the  personal  claims  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself.  The  gospel  is  a  message  for 
every  one.  It  is  a  message  for  the  sorrowing.  It  is  a  message  to  the  sinner.  It  has 
melted  the  hardest  heart;  it  has  made  the  impure  man  pure,  the  intemperate  man 
temperate,  the  dishonest  man  honest;  and  changed  the  proud  and  haughty  man  into 
a  man  of  humble  and  gentle  spirit.  Over  and  over  again  it  has  proved  itself  to  be 
"  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  helieveth." 

II.  A  KEASON  GIVEN  AND  AN  bBLiGATiON  FELT.  1.  St.  Paul  givcs  a  reoson  why  the 
gospel  is  a  message  for  eoery  one.  "For  therein  is  the  righteousness  of  God  revealed 
from  faith  to  faith  "  (ver.  17).  A  gospel  that  tells  of  a  perfect  righteousness  is  the 
universal  need  of  the  human  heart.  In  the  opening  chapters  of  this  Epistle  the 
apostle  enlarges  on  that  idea  more  fully.  He  shows  how  the  heathen  needed  • 
righteousness.  Then  he  shows  how  the  Jews  needed  a  righteousness,  condemned  as 
they  were  by  that  holy  Law  whose  requirements  they  failed  to  fulfil.  And  then, 
having  shown  the  universal  need — "  for  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of 
God  "  (ch.  iii.  23) — he  speaks  of  the  universal  righteousness  which  is  unto  and  upon 
all  them  that  believe.  There  is  no  difference  in  the  need.  There  is  no  difference  in 
the  gospel  message.  2.  We  have  here  also  an  obligation  f eft.  "  I  am  debtor  both  to 
the  Greeks,  and  to  the  barbarians;  both  to  the  wise,  and  to  the  unwise"  (ver.  14), 
There  are  few  statements  so  sublime  as  that  from  any  human  pen.  The  old  Latin 
poet  represents  one  of  his  characters  as  saying,  "  Homo  sum,  nihil  humanum  a  me 
alienum  puto "  ("  I  am  a  man,  and  everything  human  has  an  interest  for  me "). 
This  ia  a  fine  sentiment ;  but  here,  in  the  case  of  St.  Paul,  we  have  a  man  expressing 


CH.  L  1—32.]      THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  27 

his  personal  obligation  to  seek  the  spiritual  good  of  every  man  whom  he  could  reach. 
He,  a  Jew,  counted  himself  under  obligation  to  do  something  for  the  barbarians ;  he, 
a  learned  and  intellectual  man,  counted  himself  under  obligation  to  do  something  for 
the  unwise  and  ignorant  as  well  as  for  the  wise  and  the  cultured.  We,  too,  need  to 
think  more  of  our  own  personal  indebtedness  to  Christ.  Then  we  too,  like  St.  Paul, 
shall  be  anxious  to  carry  the  gospel  to  rich  and  poor,  learned  and  unlearned,  Jew  and 
Gentile.— C.  H.  L 

Ver.  16. — "  Not  ashamed  of  the  gospel"  When  these  words  were  written  by  St.  Paul, 
Christianity  did  not  occupy  in  the  world  the  position  that  it  does  now.  In  the  mind 
of  the  ordinary  Soman,  the  Jew  was  regarded  almost  always  with  contempt.  And 
when  the  Christian  was  at  all  distinguished  from  the  Jew,  it  was  only  to  be  the  subject 
of  more  reproachful  terms.  Some  of  the  most  eminent  and  well-informed  of  the 
Roman  writers  speak  of  the  Christian  religion  as  a  pernicious  and  detestable  supersti- 
tion. The  humble  origin,  too,  of  the  early  founders  of  Christianity  was  not  caloulnted 
to  impress  favourably  the  worldly  mind.  If  the  gospel  which  told  of  Christ  crucified 
was  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jew,  it  was  indeed  foolishness  to  the  Greek  and  to  the 
Roman  too.  Yet  Paul  had  not  been  ashamed  of  this  gospel  at  Athens ;  he  was  not 
going  to  be  ashamed  of  it  at  Rome.  He  had  proclaimed  the  message  of  the  Nazaieue 
in  the  city  of  Plato  and  Socrates ;  he  would  preach  it  also  in  the  city  of  Cicero  and 
Seneca.  Paul  is  not  afraid  to  teach  where  they  have  taught.  He  was  right.  The 
name  of  Jesus  is  a  greater  name  than  Plato's.  The  religion  which  Jesus  taught  has 
moulded  and  purified  the  world.  The  apostle  assigns  two  reasons  why  he  is  not  ashamed 
of  the  gospel.    These  are — 

I.  Its  purpose.  This  is  indicated  by  the  words  "  unto  salvation."  The  Greek 
preposition  which  is  translated  "  unto  "  expresses  purpose,  or  tendency,  or  aim.  The 
purpose  of  the  gospel  is  the  salvation  of  all  who  will  receive  its  message.  To  effect 
this  purpose,  the  Son  of  God  left  the  glory  of  the  eternal,  and  descended  into  the  misery 
and  weariness  of  a  life  on  earth.  For  this,  he  suffered  the  assaults  of  the  tempter ; 
for  this,  he  passed  through  the  agony  of  Gethsemane ;  for  this,  he  bore  with  patience 
the  lingering  torments  of  the  cross.  "  The  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save 
that  which  was  lost."  The  purpose  of  the  gospel  is  salvation.  Let  us  understand 
fully  the  meaning  of  that  great  word.  Salvation  is  indeed  deliverance  from  guilt, 
deliverance  from  condemnation.  But  the  purpose  of  the  gospel  is  something  more 
than  this.  It  is  to  save  us  also  from  the  power  of  sin  in  our  hearts  and  lives.  Many 
professing  Christians  forget  this.  They  tihink  that  faith  in  Christ  is  simply  to  deliver 
them  from  punishment  in  the  day  of  judgment,  while  they  do  not  allow  it  to  have 
present,  practical  influence  upon  their  lives.  Let  us  not  deceive  ourselves.  Theie  is 
no  true  salvation  where  there  is  not  an  evidence  of  present  departure  from  sin  and 
present  following  after  holiness.  "By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  Faith,  if  it 
is  real,  will  show  itself.  Salvation  is  a  present  thing.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
God's  Son,  cleanseih  us  from  all  sin."  The  purpose  of  the  gospel  is  to  save  us  now 
There  are  many  who  long  for  some  power  that  might  save  them  from  themselves,  from 
some  evil  propensity  or  passion,  from  the  influence  of  bad  companionships.  This 
salvation  it  is  the  purpose  of  the  gospel  to  effect.  "  Thanks  be  unto  God,  who  giveth 
us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

IL  Its  powee.  The  gospel,  sayB  the  apostle,  is  "  the  power  of  God."  Here  is  an 
encouragement  for  our  faith.  This  is  the  second  reason  why  St.  Paul  was  not  ashamed 
of  the  gospel.  Its  purpose,  no  doubt,  seemed  a  very  difficult  one,  but  the  apostle  had 
no  fear  for  its  success.  Its  earliest  messengers  were  humble  men.  But  the  success  o( 
their  message  was  in  higher  and  mightier  hands  than  theirs.  That  sin  should  b« 
overcome,  and  men  delivered  from  its  power,  was  the  purpose  of  the  Almighty  God, 
and  hib  purpose  never  fails.  In  the  history  of  nations  we  see  the  gospel  proving  itself 
to  be  the  power  of  God.  The  moral  miracles  of  Christianity,  as  Prebendary  Row  has 
•hown,  are  the  strongest  evidence  of  its  Divine  origin  and  power.  It  has  changed 
barbarism  to  civilization.  It  has  emancipated  the  slaves.  It  has  put  an  end  to  the 
cruel  sacrifices  performed  in  honour  of  the  heathen  gods.  It  has  accomplished  moral 
»nd  social  revolutions  that  to  the  human  eye  seemed  utterly  impossible.  So  also  in 
the  history  of  individuals.    Men  who  have  sunk  so  low  beneath  the  power  of  degrading 


28  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS,      [ch.  i.  1—32. 

▼ice  that  their  friends  despaired  of  rescuing  them,  by  the  power  of  the  gospel  hare 
been  brought  from  death  unto  life.  Jesus,  and  Jesus  only,  can  cure  men  of  sing 
power.  If  we  but  touch  his  garment,  we  shall  be  made  whole.  No  one  has  wny  reason 
to  be  ashamed  of  the  gospel.  Its  purpose  is  a  high  and  noble  one,  the  highest  and 
noblest  mission  ever  undertaken.  Its  power  is  not  the  power  of  a  feeble  or  a  puny 
arm.  It  is  the  power  of  the  living  God.  These  are  thoughts  to  inspire,  and  not  to 
make  ashamed. — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  18—32.—  TI>e  inexeusahlmess  of  the  heathen.  In  the  twentieth  verse  the 
npostle  speaks  of  the  heathen  as  "  without  excuse."  I'hese  words  describe  the  condition 
of  those  who  have  wilfully  rejected  light.  They  do  not,  indeed,  describe  their  condition 
from  their  own  standpoint  or  from  the  standpoint  of  men  generally.  Prom  their  own 
standpoint  men  are  seldom  "  without  excuse."  No  matter  how  gross  or  glaring  the 
offence  is,  the  offender  has  usually  some  excuse  to  offer.  Adam  and  Eve  had  their 
excuses  ready  when  the  Lord  God  said,  "What  is  this  that  thou  hast  done?"  Saul 
had  his  excuse  ready  when  he  returned  from  the  slaughter  of  the  Amalekites  without 
having  fully  carried  out  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  when  Samuel  asked  him, 
"  What  meaneth  then  this  bleating  of  the  sheep  in  mine  ears,  and  this  lowing  of  the 
oxen  wliich  I  hear  ? "  It  might  be  taken  as  on  the  whole  a  fair  description  of  the 
human  race  to  say,  "  They  all  with  one  consent  began  to  make  excuse."  However 
slow  we  are  to  excuse  others,  we  are  always  remarkably  ready  to  excuse  ourselves. 
But  these  words  describe  the  condition  of  thiose  who  reject  light  from  the  standpoint 
of  him  who  is  the  great  Searcher  of  hearts.  He  makes  no  mistakes.  He  makes  no 
uncharitable  judgrnvnts.  In  his  sight  those  to  whom  he  has  given  light,  and  who 
liave  chosen  to  reject  it,  are  " without  excuse."  Thiy  are  inexcusable.  They  have 
no  valid  reason  for  their  ignorance  about  the  way  of  salvation  and  the  path  of  duty^ 
if  God  has  given  them  light  about  both.  This  is  the  condition  described  by  Christ  in 
that  parable  where  he  represents  the  king  as  coming  to  one  of  the  guests  at  the 
marriage-feast,  and  saying  to  him,  "  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  hither,  not  having  on 
a  wedding-garment?"  And  the  Saviour  fells  us,  "And  he  was  speechless."  He  knew 
that  he  was  without  excuse.  He  knew  the  laws  of  the  feast ;  he  Knew  that  the  wedding- 
garment  was  provided,  and  he  neglected  to  put  it  on.  So  shall  it  be  in  the  great  day 
of  judgment  with  all  those  who  had  the  opportunity  to  know  God's  will,  but  who 
neglected  to  do  it.  May  we  be  enabled,  in  considering  the  inexousableness  of  the 
heathen,  to  think  of  this  solemn  subject  with  reverence  and  with  fairness. 

I.  LiOHT  GRANTED.  If  God  cxpccts  men  to  know  him,  we  may  be  sure  that  he 
has  given  them  the  means  of  knowing  him.  God  will  judge  every  man  according  to 
the  opportunities  he  has  had.  Paul's  statement  is  definite  and.  clear.  They  are 
without  excuse,  he  says,  "  because  that,  when  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  him  not 
as  God,  neither  were  thankful"  (ver.  21).  They  knew  God,  says  the  apostle.  How, 
then,  did  they  know  him  ?  And  what  did  they  know  about  him  ?  They  knew  him 
by  means  of  his  works,  and  they  knew  at  least  two  things  about  his  character — that 
he  was  a  Being  of  power,  and  that  his  power  was  more  than  human.  It  is  inferred 
also  that  they  knew  themselves  to  be  dependent  upon  his  bountiful  providence  and 
care,  else  they  could  not  have  been  accused  of  being  ungrateful.  "  Because  that  whioh 
may  be  known  of  God  is  manifest  in  them ;  for  God  hath  showed  it  unto  them.  -  For 
the  invisible  things  of  him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  ijeing 
understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  Oodhead;  so  that 
they  are  without  excuse"  (vers.  19,  20).  Here,  then,  it  is  clearly  taught  that  it  is 
possible  to  obtain  a  knowledge  of  God  from  his  works,  and  that  such  knowledge  the 
ancient  heathen  had.  St.  Paul  knew  very  well  what  he  was  talking  about  when  he 
said  that  the  ancient  heathen  had  a  knowledge  of  God.  He  was  well  acquainted  with 
the  literature  of  ancient  Greece.  On  Mars'  Hill  we  find  him  quoting  to  the  philosopheri 
of  Athens  a  statement  from  Aratus,  one  of  their  own  poets.  "As  certain  also  of  your 
own  poets  have  said,  For  we  are  also  his  offspring."  The  light  of  nature — this  is  the 
light  which  was  granted  to  the  ancient  heathen.  Two  things  that  light  of  nature 
taught  them  about  God — his  power  and  his  Godhead.  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory 
of  God,  and  the  firmament  shovveth  his  handiwork."  Behind  the  stars  and  the  sea, 
Ihore  must  bo  some  power  that  made  and  controls  them  all.     The  order  of  the  seasoni, 


OH.  1.1— 32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  29 

the  succession  of  day  and  night,  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tides — all  these  things  require 
a  cobtroUing  force,  and  that  force  must  not  only  have  almighty  power,  but  must  have 
intelligence  and  reason  and  will.  Such  a  being  must  be  a  Person.  Such  a  Person  is 
more  than  human — is  Divine.  The  same  light  of  nature  is  granted  to  us  all.  But 
how  much  more  light  has  been  granted  to  usi  We  have  the  light  of  God's  written  Word. 
What  mysteries  that  Word  opens  up  to  us,  concerning  which  the  voice  oC  nature  is 
silent  I  What  a  light  it  gives  us  about  the  mercy  of  God,  and  the  Saviour's  redeeming 
I'jvel  What  a  light  it  gives  us  about  immortality  and  heaven,  after  which  the  best 
of  the  ancient  heathen  were  groping  and  searching  in  darkness  1  How  thnnkful  we 
should  be,  amid  the  darkness  which  sorrow  brings,  and  as  we  look  forward  to  the 
darkness  of  the  grave,  for  the  light  which  God  in  his  Word  has  mercifully  granted  to 
us!  But  that  great  privilege,  that  unspeakable  blessing,  Irings  with  it  a  solemn 
responsibility.  We  who  have  the  Bible  in  our  hands  are  without  excuse  if  we  live  in 
godlessness  or  unbelief^  if  we  reject  the  offer  of  salvation. 

II.  Light  bbjected.  ".They  are  without  excuse,  because  that,  when  they  knew 
God,  they  glorified  him  not  as  God,  neither  were  thankful "  (vers.  20,  21).  And  then, 
further  on,  the  apostle  says,  "  They  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge" 
(ver.  28).  How  often  have  nations  acted  thus — rejecting  the  light  which  was  their 
best  possession,  their  safety  and  their  shield !  The  Jewish  nation  rejected  the  heavenly 
light,  notwithstanding  God's  repeated  warnings  as  to  the  consequences  of  doing  so. 
France  rejected  the  light  when  it  expelled  the  Huguenots,  the  God-fearing  poition  of 
its  population.  Spain  did  the  same  when,  by  its  Inquisition  and  its  autos-da-fe,  it 
exterminated  all  who  dared  to  prefer  the  pure  light  of  the  Divine  Word  to  the  darkness 
and  superstitions  of  Eome.  Such  nations  were  plainly  without  excuse,  for  they  had 
the  light,  and  deliberately  rejected  and  quenched  it  when  they  could.  So  also  wefijid 
rulers  rejecting  the  light.  That  was  the  case  with  King  Saul.  He  rejected  the  com- 
mandment of  the  Lord,  and  God  rejected  him  from  being  king  over  Israel.  Belshazzar, 
King  of  Babylon,  had  plenty  of  light  given  him  in  the  career  of  Nebuchadnezzar  his 
fattier  about  the  power  and  justice  of  God.  But,  as  Daniel  reminded  him,  he  had 
disregarded  the  solemn  lesson ;  though  he  knew  all  this,  he  had  not  humbled  himself, 
but  had  lifted  himself  up  against  the  Lord  of  heaven  (Dan.  v.  21,  22).  And  so  on 
that  night  of  revelry  the  fingers  of  a  man's  hand  came  forth  and  wrote  upon  the  wall, 
"  Thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  art  found  wanting."  He  was  without  excuse. 
He  had  rejected  the  light  which  Ood  had  given  him.  Do  we  not  see  a  similar  infatuation 
in  the  case  of  the  unhappy  Mary  Queen  of  Scots?  Though  she  had  faithful  men  uf 
God  in  her  capital  and  often  heard  the  truth  from  the  lips  of  John  Knox,  she  chose 
rather  to  be  guided  by  her  own  caprices  and  by  the  influence  of  her  frivolous  courtiers. 
She,  too,  rejected  the  light  which  God  had  placed  within  her  reach.  We  are  not  to 
think  that  it  makes  no  difference  whether  we  accept  the  Divine  light  or  not.  There  is  a 
danger  that  we  njay  become  too  liberal  as  to  the  attitude  men  take  up  regarding  God's 
Holy  Word.  It  is  well  to  be  broad — broad  as  the  mercy  and  the  love  of  God.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  we  may  bo  broader  and  more  indulgent  towards  error  than  God's  Word 
permits  of.  God  deals  with  men  as  intelligent  and  rational  and  moral  beings,  with  a 
free  will,  capable  of  free  choice.  He  puts  before  them  life  and  death.  He  tells  them 
that  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death,  but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord."  He  tells  them  that  there  is  no  other  way  of  salvation  except  through  Jesus 
Christ  alone.  Upon  them  rests  the  responsibility  and  the  guilt  if  they  reject  his 
salvation.  It  is  worse  .than  a  matter  of  indifference;  it  is  a  sin  in  the  sight  of  God,  it 
is  a  sin  against  their  own  soul's  destiny,  for  men  to  reject  or  neglect  the  megsap;e 
which  the  great  Creator  has  mercifully  sent  them.  It  may  be  done  in  the  name  of 
science.  It  may  be  done  in  the  name  of  advanced  thought.  But  it  is  moral  guilt 
nevertheless.     "  They  are  without  excuse." 

III.  Wkath  eevealed.  "  For  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against 
all  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness  of  men,  who  hold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness  " 
(ver.  18).  And  how  could  it  be  otherwise^  If  light  has  bfeen  granted  to  beings  of 
intelligence  and  reason  and  conscience,  and  they  have  deliberately  chosen  to  reject 
it,  is  it  not  fair  and  just  that  they  should  take  the  consequences  ?  It  is  in  the  very 
nature  of  things  that  "  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  A  man 
cannot  violate  a  natural  law  with  impunity.    The  most  liberal-minded  scientific  man 


30  THE   EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS,      [ch.  i.  1—32 

will  see  o  unfairness  in  a  man  suffering  if  he  disregards  or  violates  the  well-known 
laws  of  n  ture.  Fire  will  burn,  water  will  drown,  pitch  will  defile,  bad  air  will  poison. 
If  a  man  acts  in  defiance  of  these  natural  and  elementary  laws,  he  suffers  the  conse- 
quence. No  one  sees  any  unfairness  in  it.  Why  should  there  he  any  more  unfairness 
in  suffering  as  the  result  of  disregarding  and  defying  moral  laws  f  On  the  contrary, 
is  it  not  of  more  importance  that  a  moral  law  should  be  vindicated,  that  men  should 
learn  to  obey  a  moral  law,  than  that  even  a  natural  law  should  be  vindicated  ?  But 
here,  at  any  rate,  is  the  fact,  written  clearly  in  God's  Word,  written  over  and  over  again 
on  the  page  of  history — light  rejected  means  wrath  revealed.  Was  it  not  so  with  ancient 
Israel?  Has  it  not  been  so  with  France  and  Spain  ?  Was  it  not  so  with  Saul  and  Bel- 
shazzar?  It  is  a  terrible  thing  when  men  so  harden  themselves  against  God's  Word, 
60  shut  their  eyes  against  the  light  of  his  commandments,  yes,  even  against  the  light 
of  the  cross,  that  God  says,  "  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols :  let  him  alone."  Let  him 
alone!  Light  granted.  Light  rejected.  Wrath  revealed.  "  Wifhout  excuse."  Such  is 
St.  Paul's  description  of  the  ancient  heathen  world.  To  a,  world  in  such  a  state  Jesus 
came.  He  came  to  reveal  the  righteousness  of  God  in  contrast  to  the  abominable  deities 
of  heathenism.  He  came  also  to  reveal  the  mercy  of  God.  The  trumpet-note  of  judg- 
ment is  loud  and  terrible.  But  the  trumpet-note  of  mercy  is  equally  loud.  "  There  is 
therefor  now  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  walk  not  after 
the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit."— 0.  H.  L 

\ 

Vers.  1,  5 — 7. — Paul's  first  contact  with  tlie  metropolis  of  the  world.  But  its  empire 
and  splendour  and  wealth  are  forgotten  in  the  absorbing  interest  of  his  mission.  For 
he  is  t'le  messenger  of  a  Diviner  empire,  and  his  message  is  one  which  makes  the 
splendour  and  wealth  of  the  world  seem  worthless  things.  They  may  be  few  and  poor, 
and  he  but  a  travelling  tent-maker;  but  they  are  Christ's  people,  and  he  is  Christ's 
servau  ;  there  will,  therefore,  be  words  spoken  to  which  angels  might  hearken.  But 
first  he  introduces  himself,  addresses  them,  and  gives  them  his  greeting.  We  have, 
therefore,  in  these  opening  words,  the  man,  the  Church,  the  message. 

I.  The  man.  1.  We  have  called  him  the  man,  for  as  such  he  steps  frankly  into  the 
foreground :  "  Paul."  The  necessity  for  sympathetic  helpfulness  in  the  work  of  man's 
salvation.  Not  a  voice  from  afar,  but  a  fellow-helper  by  our  side.  So  the  Captain  of 
our  s  .Ivation  :  "  taken  from  among  men."  And  so  the  true  minister — a  man  first,  one 
of  th)  sinful,  struggling  mass  of  men,  and  saved  with  the  common  salvation.  2.  But 
this  wings  us  naturally  to  the  second  characteristic :  "A  servant  of  Jesus  Christ."  The 
word  is  literally,  "  bond-servant."  And  though  the  expression  is  to  be  applied  very 
caut  ously,  lest  the  harsher  suggestions  should  mislead  us,  yet  there  are  elements  of 
meaning  which  are  full  of  force.  Absolute  proprietorship  on  the  one  hand,  and  obliga- 
toriness of  service  on  the  other ;  but  the  relationship  transfused  with  blessedneas,  for 
the  claims  are  claims  of  love,  and  the  service  is  a  service  of  love.  All  true  Christians, 
like  Paul,  bear  about  with  them  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (Gal.  vi.  17  ;  2  Cor.  It. 
10),  and  the  brand-mark  is  this,  "  He  died  for  me  "  (see  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20 ;  vii.  22,  23).  3. 
Christ's  service  is  manifold,  and  to  all  departments  the  true  introduction  is  by  "call." 
Vhat  dignity  this  throws  over  the  humblest  work  1  For  the  meanest  toil  ttiii  is  sanc- 
tified by  Christian  motives  is  a  service  of  Christ,  and  to  that  service  the  toiler  is 
"  called  "  by  Christ.  The  labourer  in  the  field,  and  the  hardworked  wife  in  household 
cares,  as  well  aa  the  man  of  letters,  the  statesman,  or  the  prince,  is  "  called  of  God." 
But  while  such  are  called  to  a  service  which  is  the  exemplification  of  Christian  principle 
in  the  conduct  of  common  life,  others,  nay,  all,  are  called  to  service,  more  or  less,  which 
bears  directly  on  the  extension  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  to  some  the  call  is  an 
exclusive  one ;  their  life  is  to  be  spent  in  the  fulfilmeiit  of  this  mission  from  heaven. 
Such  a  one  was  Paul.  Called  to  Christian  service,  in  common  with  all  his  brethren ; 
called  to  exclusive  service,  in  common  with  many  of  his  brethren ;  called  furthermore 
to  apostolic  service,  in  common  with  a  few  selected  ones,  who  led  the  van  of  the  new 
faith,  and  testified  authoritatively  of  the  crucified  and  risen  Christ.  "By  call  an 
apostle."  The  distinctive  call  was  made  in  connection  with  one  special  crisis  of  his 
life — the  Damascus  journey,  and  the  voice  from  heaven.  But  was  this,  with  its  ratifi- 
cation of  Acts  xiii.  2,  the  only  "separation  unto  the  gospel"  of  which  Paul  goes  on  to 
speak?     Nay,  we  are  rather  led  to  think  of  the  phrase  in  GaL  i.  15,  "separated  .  .  . 


OH.  1. 1— 32.J.    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  81 

from  my  mother's  womb."  For  there  is  a  certain  Divine  fatalism  which  is  in  perfect 
harmony  with  moral  freedom ;  every  one  horn  into  this  world  is  predestined  from  the 
flist  for  some  special  work  for  God.  The  work  may  be  marred,  or  altogether  left 
undone,  by  man's  perverseness ;  but  the  work  is  the  Divine  destiny  of  the  man.  And 
the  after-life  is  an  equipment  for  the  fulfilling  of  this  destiny.  The  circumstances  of 
our  lot,  and  the  events  that  befall  us ;  our  joys  and  our  sorrows ;  and  all  our  natural 
and  moral  education,  combine  with  our  original  constitution  and  temperament  at  once 
to  indicate  God's  purpose  and  to  fit  us  for  its  fulfilment.  And  was  not  Paul  "  a  chosen 
Vessel "  ? — marked  out  from  the  first  for  the  conspicuous  part  which  he  afterwards 
played  in  the  world's  history  ;  "  separated  unto  the  gospel  of  God."  Such  was  the 
man. 

II.  The  Chtjbch.  And  his  apostleship  was  to  "  the  nations ; "  the  Gentile  "  world 
was  his  parish."  Therefore  the  little  Christian  band  at  Borne,  though  not  gathered, 
directly  at  least,  by  his  labours,  might  well  receive  his  message.  They  formed  a  Gentile 
Church,  and  as  such  he  writes  to  them.  They  are  threefoldly  designated.  1.  "  Beloved 
of  God."  "  God's  love  is  the  source  of  all  his  benefits,  and  the  sure  ground  of  our  hope. 
Our  consciousness  of  his  love  is  the  basis  of  the  Christian  life.  Of  this  love  all  men 
are  objects,  but  only  believers  are  conscious  objects.  To  them  it  is  real  and  living.  It 
moulds  their  thoughts  and  life  "  (Beet,  in  lac).  Yes ;  "  we  have  known  and  believed 
the  love  that  God  bath  to  us  "  (1  John  iv.  16)  :  that  is  the  inspiration  of  the  new  life. 
2.  "  Called  to  he  Jesus  Chrisfs  . .  .  called  to  he  saints."  Or,  "Jesus  Christ's  . . .  saints,  by 
call."  For  the  summons  had  been  responded  to;  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  had  changed 
their  hearts.  And  now  they  were  his  people  (see  Titus  ii.  14),  and  for  his  Name's  sake 
they  were  living  consecrated  lives.  For  this  is  our  only  sainthood :  "  Whether  we  live," 
etc.  (ch.  xiv.  8).  3.  And  this  hy  "  ohedience  of  faith."  The  spring  of  the  new  life,  on 
the  human  side,  even  as  God's  love  is  the  spring  of  life  on  the  Divine  side.  We  yield 
to  Christ's  claim,  and  live  to  God  as  saints,  only  in  so  far  as  we  receive  Christ  into  our 
hearts  by  faith,  and  believe  the  love  God  hath  to  us.  And  in  all  the  manifold  depart- 
ments of  the  Chrislian  life,  we  "  live  by  faith."  We  receive,  or  more  actively  we  grasp, 
the  goodness  of  God  and  the  life  which  is  through  Christ.  And  this  "  obedience  of 
faith  "  is  the  end  of  all  apostleship  and  ministry  (John  vi.  29  ;  1  John  iii.  23). 

III.  The  message.  1.  "  Grace."  God's  favour,  and  all  the  saving  help  which  he 
gives  because  he  loves  us.  A  continuous  and  increasing  realization.  2.  "Peace." 
The  abiding  calmness  of  a  conscience  which  has  yielded  to  be  justified  by  faith  (ch.  v. 
1),  accepting  the  grace  of  God's  favour,  rejoicing  in  the  light ;  calmness  of  heart  also, 
in  view  even  of  fierce  conflict  and  trial,  by  reason  of  the  voice  which  says,  "  My  grace 
is  sufficient  for  thee."  "  Grace  and  peace."  So  the  old  Gentile  and  Jewish  salutings 
were  transfigured  by  the  gospel  of  Christ. 

In  conclusion,  the  keynote  is  the  "  call."  God  calls  you,  calb  you  through  Christ, 
calls  you  to  be  Christ's,  calls  you  in  your  own  minor  apostleship  to  be  servants  of  Christ. 
And  the  true  response  to  this  call  is  by  obedience  of  faith ;  for,  from  first  to  last  of  the 
Christian  life,  "  by  grace  are  ye  saved,  through  faith  "  (Eph.  ii.  8).  Oh,  be  it  ours  to 
respond,  "  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy  servant  heareth  " ! — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  2 — i. — The  characterization  of  "  the  gospel  of  God"  to  which  Paul  was  separated. 
The  awfulness  of  a  commission  of  doom.  Jonah.  But  to  herald  forth  God's  good 
tidings  to  a  sorrowing  world  1  This  is  the  crown  of  all  Christian  ministry.  The  angels 
might  well  sing  and  be  glad  when  ushering  this  gospel  into  the  world  (Luke  ii.  9 — 14) ; 
and  Paul  is  rejoiced  that  he  can  strike  this  note  of  gladness.  There  might  well  be 
preludes  to  tins  burst  of  joy :  so  the  words,  "  which  he  promised  afore,"  etc.  For  all 
the  indications  of  God's  purposes  of  love,  from  Gen.  iii.  to  Malachi,  did  but  prepare  the 
way  for  the  completed  announcement  in  "  the  fulness  of  the  time."  And  so  virtually 
they  all  were  Divine  promises  of  a  fuller  gospel.  The  two  main  thoughts — Gbd's  gospel; 
its  contents. 

I.  God's  gospel.  1.  A  gospel  carries  the  implication  of  a  want,  and,  it  may  bo,  of  a 
sorrow  and  a  loss.  So  do  the  good  tidings  of  God  to  man  assume  that  man  has  lost  his 
God,  and  with  God  all  things  good.  (1)  Man  knew  not,  surely,  the  reality  of  his  sin ; 
was  deceived  by  the  tempter;  but  awoke  from  his  dream  to  find  that  God  was  gon^j 
And  thisi  is  the  great  loss  of  the  world.    The  voices  cry,  "  Where  is  thy  God  ?  "    And 


32  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   EOMaNS.      [ch.  u  1—5'a. 

he  ?  The  Good  One — tine  light,  the  Joy,  the  song  of  his  creation.  So  man  has  blotted  out 
his  own  heavens,  and  the  earth  thereby  has  lost  its  lustre  and  its  grace.  (2)  But  the 
estranged  God  is  a  condemning  God.  He  may  not  abdicate  his  essential  relationship 
to  the  world  as  God,  and  if  the  love  be  lost  it  is  replaced  by  wrath  1  So  man's  con- 
science testifies :  stricken,  sore,  and  bleeding.  2.  A  gospel  carries  the  implication  of  • 
desire  to  have  the  want  supplied,  the  sorrow  and  the  loss  removed.  So  man's  sin  has 
not  hopelessly  ruined  him,  else  there  could  he  no  salvation.  Room  for  God  to  work, 
and  God  does  work.  (1)  The  historical  preparation:  God  teaching  the  world  to  desire 
salvation.  The  Jews  by  direct  dealings,  a  positive  discipline;  the  Gentiles  by  indirect, 
«  negative  discipline.  So,  "  the  desire  of  all  nations."  (2)  The  individual  preparation : 
God's  Spirit  in  the  heart.  Only  the  grace  of  Gpd  can  bring  us  to  God.  And  now  God'l 
gospel  means,  in  general,  that  the  condemning  God  will  pardon,  and  the  estranged  God 
be  a  Father  and  a  Friend  again;  that  the  yearnings  towards  himself  which  he  hasr 
called  forth  shall  thus  find  their  full  satisfaction,  which  is  nothing  other  than  the  peace 
of  forgiveness  and  the  joy  of  adopting  love. 

II.  Its  contents.  But  this  general  message  has  special  terms.  God's  love  is  mani- 
fested, proved,  accomplished,  in  his  Son.  1.  "  His  Son."  For  it  is  God's  own  love,  his 
other  self,  which  stoops  to  save  us.  Let  us  hold  fast  to  this,  for  herein  is  the  supreme 
pledge  of  our  salvation.  2.  His  Son  becomes  "Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  (I)  By  the 
assumption  of  human  nature.  "Born  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  flesh." 
That  it  may  be  one  of  ourselves  who  saves  us.  (o)  A  Man,  making  atonement  to  God  for 
men ;  (6)  a  human  High  Priest  and  Captain  of  salvation,  himself  "  perfect  through 
sufferings,"  and  therefore  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities" — ^tho  oneness 
with  human-kind  necessary  for  both  the  Godward  and  the  manward  aspects  of  the 
redeeming  work.  A  Son  of  David,  according  to  mere  historical  lineage  and  local 
appearance :  "  for  salvation  is  of  the  Jews."  But,  grander  and  more  royal  than  this, 
a  Son  of  man — the  Son  of  man,  in  his  true  human  fashioning  and  for  his  world-wide 
work  (Heb.  ii.  14).  (2)  By  the  glorification  of  human  nature.  "  Declared  to  be  the 
Son  of  God  with  power,  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead."  A  Redeemer  of  men  must  assert  their  redemption  in  his  own  Person  first.  "We 
see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  him  [i.e.  man].  But  we  see  Jesus  .  .  .  crowned  with 
glory  and  honour"  (Heb.  ii.  8,  9),  the  archetypal  Man.  His  resurrection,  which  the 
apostle  here  links  on  to  its  world-wide  correlative  and  consequence,  "  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead,"  demonstrates  the  redemptive  power  of  Jesus,  who  is  therefore  the  Christ, 
our  Lord,  and  therefore  Son  of  God ;  for  only  he  who  has  life  in  himself  can  give  life 
to  dying  men — ^life  from  the  death  of  sin,  life  from  all  death  which  sin  has  mora 
indirectly  wrought. 

Oh,  let  us  hearken  to  such  a  gospel  1  God's  good  news  to  a  dying  world,  spoken 
forth  with  all  the  power  of  One  who  was  God's  very  Son,  and  with  all  the  tender 
sympathy  of  One  who  is  our  very  Brother.  And  for  a  proper  hearkening  to  this  good 
news  may  God,  in  his  love,  prepare  our  hearts  1^ — T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  8 — 15. — Ministerial  sympathy.  The  apostolic  commission  has  been  presented ; 
in  this  section  it  is  interfused  with  the  sympathy  and  service  of  a  brother.  He  is  still 
pre-eminently  the  preacher  of  the  gospel  (ver.  15),  but  he  speaks  as  to  those  whose 
faith  is  one  with  his  own,  and  who  are  therefore  brethren  in  a  most  sacred  brotherhood. 
We  may  consider,  as  in  some  sort  distinct  though  mutually  involved — his  prayers, 
and  his  purpose. 

I.  His  pbayebs.  Does  Paul  for  one  moment  here  strike  •  happy  comparison 
between  his  work  and  that  of  the  priestly  intercessor  in  the  elder  covenant?  For  the 
"  service  "  of  which  he  speaks  now  is  the  service  as  of  a  temple,  and  it  is  as  though  he 
said,  "  In  the  gospel,  as  under  the  Law,  there  is  a  holy  of  holies,  and  worshipful  inter- 
cession there.  The  holy  of  holies  is  the  shrine  of  the  innermost  spirit,  where  convers* 
is  held  with  God,  and  the  priestly  worship  is  the  pleading  for  brethren  in  Christ,  and 
concerning  the  things  that  touch  the  kingdom  of  God,"  Yea,  he  "serves"  God  "in 
his  spirit  in  the  gospel  of  his  Son."  1.  A  thanksgiving.  "That  your  faith  is  pro- 
claimed throughout  the  whole  world."  It  was  fitting  that  he  should  use  such  language 
as  this,  hyperbolical  though  it  was,  to  those  who  lived  in  the  world's  metropolis. 
Wherever  he  went  he  heard  of  their  good  name,  and  he  thanked  God  for  it.   He  thanked 


OH.  I  1—32.]      THE   EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  33 

God  for  it?  Yes;  for  was  he  not  spiritually  identified  with  all  who  were  identified  with 
Christ  his  Lord?  (1)  Doubtless  the  faith  itself  which  was  so  eminent  was  the  chief 
cause  of  gratitude.  That  there  should  be  such  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place  filled  his 
heart  with  joy.  They  were  alive  unto  Godl  (2)  That  the  faith  of  the  gospel  should 
have  taken  such  hold  on  the  world's  central  and  imperial  city  was  no  small  cause  for  joy. 
What  visions  of  the  future  might  not  open  up  before  his  mind  1  (3)  The  wide  proclama- 
tion of  their  faith  was  gratifying,  for  if  others  were  stimulated  it  would  be  for  the  further- 
ance of  the  gospel.  2.  A  longing.  "  To  see  you,  that  I  may  impart  unto  you  some 
spiritual  gift,"  etc.  The  grace  of  God  that  was  in  him  was  to  be  operative  towards  others; 
he  lived  not  unto  himself.  And  was  it  not  even  so  with  them  ?  A  mutual  duty,  and 
a  mutual  blessing.  (1)  The  interaction  of  their  common  faith :  intensity  by  contact. 
(2)  The  special  aspects  of  the  common  faith:  "yours  and  mine;"  "some  spiritual 
gift."  Thus  their  establishment.  The  fulfilment  of  what  promised  so  well,  and  the 
supply  of  any  lack-  3.  A  request.  "  If  by  any  means  now  at  length,"  etc.  As  Paul 
taught  the  Philippians  afterwards  (Phil.  iv.  6),  so  he  practised  now.  And  doubtless, 
with  all  the  wrestlings  of  that  impetuous  spirit,  there  was  peace.  For  God's  will  was 
gouvernant.  "By  any  means."  He  learned  in  the  issue  (Acts  xxviii.)  that  his  ways 
are  not  as  our  ways.  But  it  would  still  be  "  prosperity  "  (see  ver.  10),  if  it  were  God's 
doing ;  so  ch.  viii.  28. 

II.  His  purpose.  1.  The  great  constraint  of  the  gospel.  "  I  am  debtor."  Nothing 
in  the  universe  so  free  as  the  spirit  of  Christianity;  nothing,  on  the  other  hand,  which 
lays  so  commanding  a  grasp  on  love  and  life.  A  blessed  yoke.  (1)  All  our  possessions 
and  powers  are  held  in  trust  for  the  world ;  we  all  are  "  debtors,"  according  to  our 
several  capacities  and  circumstances.  (2)  In  an  eminent  degree  are  we  stewards  at 
being  entrusted  with  the  gospel  of  God's  grace.  And  the  law — here,  as  in  the  formei 
case — is,  that  being  unused  it  ceases  to  be  possessed.  2.  2%e  personal  aim.  "  Thai 
I  might  have  some  fruit."  Were  the  words  of  our  Lord  in  mind,  John  xv.  8  ?  Or  was 
he  rather  regarding  the  world  as  a  great  field,  and  himself  as  a  sower  ?  (see  John  iv. 
35 — 38 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  7 — 9).  (1)  The  commission  was  to  the  Gentile  world  (Acts  ix.  15 ; 
xxii.  21 ;  so  vers.  13,  14).  (2)  Must  not  the  central  purpose,  then,  be  the  evangeliza- 
tion of  the  great  metropolis  of  the  Gentile  world  ?  Doubtless  this  filled  his  mind,  and 
hence  his  intense  interest  in  these  Eoman  Christians.  What  visions!  Realized  in  history. 
How?  and  how  may  it  yet  be? 

Let  us  realize  our  stewardship  (1  Pet.  iv.  10);  and  that  the  fulfilment  of  our 
stewardship  may  become  a  freedom  and  gladness,  let  us  realize  our  oneness  with  Christ, 
and  with  Christ's  people. — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  16,  17. — Not  ashamed  1  Why  should  he  be  ashamed  ?  The  great  metropolis 
of  a  world-empire,  with  its  wide-reaching  power  and  permeating  law ;  and  he  and  his 
gospel !  What  a  contrast  it  might  seem !  and  how  the  supercilious  Romans  might 
overwhelm  him  with  contempt!  For  they  were  not,  as  the  Athenians,  ever  desirous  to 
hear  some  new  thing.  And  his  gospel  ?  it  would  be  their  laughing-stock.  Nay,  he 
shall  not  be  ashamed.  He  will  take  his  stand  in  the  very  centre  of  Rome's  power, 
and  at  her  fountain-head  of  righteousness,  and  there  present  his  gospel.  For  it  was  a 
power,  and  in  it  was  revealed  a  righteousness — the  power  of  God,  the  righteousness  of 
God.    Let  us  regard  these  two  aspects  now. 

I.  God's  power.  Man  plumes  himself  with  pride  on  the  possession  of  _might,  but 
how  impotent  he  is  in  the  grasp" of  the  great  God!  So,  too,  the  "great  powers"  of  the 
world's  history :  Daniel's  interpretation  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  vision  (Dan.  ii.  31 — i5). 
And  "  the  powers  that  be  are  ordaineii  of  God."  God's  power  is  manifold.  The  govern- 
ance of  nature,  the  control  of  the  affairs  of  men,  the  influence  on  the  heart.  And  of 
this  manifold  power  of  God  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  a  pre-eminent  display.  1.  Its  aim. 
"  Unto  salvation."  No  narrow  restriction  of  this  term;  coextensive  with  the  loss :  the 
man,  the  life,  the  world.  See  ch.  viii.  for  this  wide  meaning  of  the  word.  Man's 
very  self:  ignorant,  enslaved,  corrupt,  and  withal  estranged  from  God,  and  under  con- 
demnation. The  gospel  of  Christ  works  light  and  liberty  and  love;  it  brings  pardon 
and  God.  Man's  life-history:  the  gospel  of  the  resurrection.  Man's  world:  the  gospel 
of  the  new  creation.  What  splendid  visions  were  these !  and  how,  in  comparison,  the 
iplendour  of  Rome's  power  paled  1     2.  Its  condition.    To  him  "  that  believeth."    (1)  A 

BQKANB.  D 


H  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,      [ch.  i.  1—32 


reception  of  the  power.  Man's  power  of  resisting  God's  grace,  through  sin ;  the  humble 
acceptance  of  God's  grace,  through  faith.  (2)  A  realization  of  the  power.  God's  grace 
not  merely  accepted  by  the  obedient  will,  but  transfused  through  the  whole  conscious- 
ness. 3.  Its  range.  "  To  every  one ; "  "  To  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Greek." 
God's  large  love,  whether  there  had  been  privilege  (the  Jews)  or  non-privilege  (the 
Gentiles),  polity  or  non-polity  (ver.  14),  culture  or  non-culture  (ver.  14).  And  all  had 
been  prepared  of  God.  Oh,  if  he  might  but  help  towards  making  the  potential  into  the 
actual!  Rome's  cosmopolitanism  was  as  nothing  to  tWs-  Was  it  not  a  "power  of 
God  "  that  he  might  be  proud  to  preach  ? 

II.  God'b  righteousness.  The  imperial  law  of  Rome.  It  could  not  command  all 
the  complexities  of  social  intercourse,  nor  the  governance  of  the  man's  self;  much  less 
could  it  lay  its  grasp  on  the  heart.  Nor  can  man  himself  make  himself  righteous ;  he 
lacks  the  heart  and  the  power.  But  what  an  empire's  laws  can  never  do,  what  a  man's 
own  strength  can  never  do,  is  done  by  the  gospel  of  Christ :  "  For  therein  is  revealed," 
etc.  1.  The  Bivmeness  of  the  righteousness.  "  Of  God."  (1)  Divine  in  its  origin.  All 
true  good  from  the  Creator  to  the  creature.  Especially  for  recovery  from  a  fall.  (2) 
Divine  in  its  inspiration.  Only  as  having  God  with  us  can  we  be  right  with  God. 
(3)  Divine  in  its  aim.  God  the  supreme  end  of  all  thoughts,  desires,  purposes,  and 
works.  2.  The  distinctions  of  the  righteousness.  To  be  brought  out  more  fully  in  the 
sequel  of  the  Epistle.  (1)  A  status :  by  the  atonement  of  Christ's  redemption.  Objec- 
tively. (2)  A  state :  by  the  constraining  love  of  the  redemption.  Subjectively.  Man 
seeks  to  work  out  his  righteousness  in  the  reverse  order ;  from  a  state  to  a  status. 
Whole  Epistle  combats  this  false  principle.  3.  The  reception  of  the  righteousness.  "  By 
faith  unto  faith."  (1)  Of  the  prerogative  of  righteousness  through  Christ :  acceptance 
pure  and  simple.  (2)  Of  the  power  of  righteousness  through  Christ :  assiduous,  increas- 
ing, strong.  So  all  is  of  faith  :  the  beginning,  the  progress,  the  perfecting.  "  As  it  is 
written.  The  righteous  shall  live  by  faith : "  by  believing  with  all  his  heart  in  the  saving 
love  of  God.    Was  it  not  a  "  righteousness  of  God  "  that  he  might  be  proud  to  preach  ? 

What  is  God's  gospel  to  us  ?  A  name  ?  so  many  words  ?  so  many  truths  ?  Or  a 
living  power,  already  healing,  and  working  towards  the  perfect  life  ?  "  Not  in  word 
only,  but  in  power "  (1  Thes.s.  i.  5).  Again,  is  it  a  veil,  covering  our  deformity,  and 
a  cloak  for  our  sins?  Or  a  puiilying  power,  making  us  right  that  it  may  make  us 
righteous?  "In  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost"  (1  Thess.  i.  5).  Yes;  a  gospel  of 
holy  power,  so  shall  it  be  a  gospel  of  "  much  assurance ; "  and,  as  Paul  was  not  ashamed 
to  preach  it,  we  also  shall  learn  what  those  words  mean, "  Whosoever  believeth  shall 
not  be  ashamed"  (eh.  ix.  33).— T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  18 — 32. — The  revelation  of  wrath.  "  For.''  Note  the  transition.  The  intro- 
duction into  a  status  of  righteousness  presupposes  a  status  of  unrighteousness,  involving 
wrath.    So,  then,  we  have  here — ^man's  guilt,  God's  wrath. 

I.  Man's  guilt.  Man's  guilt,  which  is  his  obnoxious  relation  to  the  judgment  of 
God,  is  established  by  reference  to  the  well-known  state  of  the  Gentile  world,  branded 
by  its  own  doings  as  "  ungodly  "  and  "  unrighteous."  1.  Ungodliness.  The  deepest 
root  of  man's  corruption.  (1)  A  suppression  of  the  truth  of  God  (vers.  18,  21,  28).  GoM 
may  be  known  by  man ;  this  is  man's  high  prerogative.  Not  comprehended,  but 
apprehended ;  we  comprehend  nothing.  This  knowledge  of  God  is  conditioned  on  two 
facts — man's  God-related  nature  (conscience),  and  God's  self-revealing  will.  And  God 
does  universally  reveal  himself  through  his  works;  let  us  not  minimize  this  fact. 
Again,  the  law  of  the  knowledge  of  God  is — "To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given."  So 
yvSiais  may  become  Myvairtt.  But  the  converse  is  equally  true,  and  is  illustrated  m 
the  history  of  the  world.  "  Hold  down  the  truth  in  unrighteousness."  (2)  A  conversion 
of  the  truth  into  a  lie  (vers.  23,  25).  Man's  God-related  nature  must  work,  even  if 
inversely.  The  essence  of  idolatry — a  self-submersion  in  the  creature.  The  lie  of 
idolatry — a  deification  of  the  lawless,  the  riotous,  the  sensual.  2.  Unrighteousness. 
Cause  and  effect  of  ungodliness.  Catalogued  here  so  terribly  that  merely  to  read  it  is 
enough.  (1)  The  utter  dishonour  of  their  own  nature  (vers.  24,  26,  27).  (2)  The 
extremest  perversion  of  all  social  relations  (vers.  29 — 31).  (3)  The  reprobate  rejoicing 
in  evil  deeds  (ver.  32).  Such  the  sin  which  wrought  guilt ;  guilt,  because  there  wai 
knowledge.    And  so,  "  without  excuse." 


BH.  I.  1—32.]      THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  35 

IL  God's  weath.  This  truth  is  humt  into  the  Bihle,  from  first  to  last,  that  God 
is  angry  with  sin,  and  with  the  sinner  who  identifies  himself  with  sin.  But  it  is  burnt 
into  the  very  history  of  sin  itself,  and  that  is  the  insistence  of  the  apostle  here.  1.  Sin 
working  folly.  (Vers.  21,  22.)  Man  will  not  bow  to  what  is  above  him ;  he  therefore 
bows  to  what  is  beneath  him.  An  efBgy  (Greece)  I  an  eel  (Egypt)!  And  this  with  all 
their  wisdom :  Greece,  Rome,  Egypt  (ver.  22).  2.  Sin  working  shame.  (Vers.  24,  26, 
27.)  Man  realizes  his  dignity  when  he  realizes  his  God ;  loosing  himself  from  God,  he 
sinks  into  a  degradation  degraded  beyond  all  words.  3.  Sin  working  sin.  (Vers.  28 — 32.) 
An  utter  reprobacy,  so  that  the  man  becomes  a  devil!  This  the  ultimate  result  of 
confirmed  apostasy  from  God.  Short  of  this,  there  is  hope.  What  laws  are  these! 
Yes  ;  God's  laws.  The  revelation  of  liis  wratli.  The  heavens  are  speaking  daily  while 
we  sin,  and  this  is  their  voice :  "  Deeper,  deeper,  deeper  1  Folly,  shalne,  sin ! "  And 
the  thrice-told  truth  of  it  all  (vers.  24,  26,  28)  is,  "God  gave  them  up."  And  all 
because  they  gave  up  God.  So  the  ultimate  punishment  of  the  ultimate  sin  is,  "  They 
reprobated  God ;  God  reprobated  them  "  (ver.  28,  literally). 

Let  us  learn,  from  these  sad -words,  our  danger:  the  suppression  of  the  truth  which 
is  in  us,  its  conversion  into  a  lie — for  all  this  is  possible  still ;  and  the  consequent 
wrath  of  God.  And  our  safety  :  for  as  it  is  the  loosing  of  ourselves  from  God  which 
works  folly,  shame,  and  death ;  so  it  is  the  laying  hold  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  that 
works  wisdom,  dignity,  and  life. — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  gospel  a  futfMed  prophecy.  The  apostle  loved  to  dilate  on  the 
characteristics  of  the  gospel,  especially  those  which  he  "  received  by  revelation,"  and  his 
aspect  of  truth  became  so  essentially  a  part  of  his  being  and  preaching,  that  he  speaks 
of  it  as  "  my  "  gospel.  Sometimes  he  terms  it  the  "  gospel  of  Christ,"  whilst  here  the 
title  is  significantly  the  "  gospel  of  God,"  since  he  is  about  to  prove  it  a  design  purposed 
of  God  from  the  beginning  of  revelation. 

I.  The  gospel  as  promised.  1.  He  alleges  as  proof  of  the  promise  the  Scripture 
prophecies.  Note  the  phrase,  "the  holy  writings,"  emphasizing  the  quantity  and 
quality  of  the  literature  of  the  Old  Testament.  2.  Such  a  promise  rebuts  the  charge  of 
novelty.  The  Jews  were  conservative,  and  the  only  way  to  remove  their  prejudice 
against  Christianity  was  by  persuading  them  out  of  the  Scriptures  that  it  was  no  new- 
fangled doctrine  which  the  apostles  preached.  The  diflEiculty  in  controversies  is  to  find 
a  common  court  of  appeal.  The  position  of  the  Jews  as  custodians  of  the  genuineness 
of  the  Old  Testament  has  weight  in  argument  to-day.  3.  Shows  the  gospel  to  have  been 
no  after-thought  in  the  mind  of  Qod.  The  Lamb  was  "  slain  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world."  The  plan  of  Providence  is  gradually  unfolded  as  the  centuries  pass. 
Looking  back,  we  can  see  how  the  beautiful  petals  of  the  mature  flower  were  foretold 
by  the  markings  of  the  bud.  4.  The  predictions  which  animated  the  breasts  of  men  of 
old  have  their  confirmatory  value  for  modern  faith.  The  patiiarchs  "  died  in  faith." 
The  prophets  "  searched  diligently  what  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  them 
did  signify."  And  the  fact  that  they  were  "  heralds  "  proclaiming  the  advent  of  the 
King,  prepares  us  to  receive  him  with  less  fear  of  delusion.  It  is  seemly  that  so  grand 
a  Monarch  and  kingdom  should  not  be  established  without  the  pomp  of  previous  notice. 
The  battle  of  criticism  rages  most  furiously  at  present  around  the  Old  Testament 
prefigurations  of  the  new  covenant,  for  men  discern  the  impregnableness  of  Christianity 
unless  the  outworks  of  Jewish  history  and  expectancy  can  first  be  stormed  and 
demolished, 

II.  The  promise  bedeemed.  1.  In  the  Man  Christ  Jesui.  In  answer  to  the 
inquiry  of  Herod,  the  scribes  were  able  to  give  the  place  where  the  Messiah  should  be 
born,  and  the  royal  house  of  which  he  should  be  a  direct  descendant.  The  genealogies 
of  Matthew  and  of  Luke  alike  accredit  the  claims  of  Jesus  to  be  of  the  stock  of  David. 
At  the  birth  of  Jesus  was  there  great  "joy  that  a  man  was  born  into  the  world." 
Incarnation  is  more  than  temporary  residence  amongst  men  ;  it  is  "  taking  part  of  the 
children's  flesh  and  blood."  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  reasoned  from  the  statement 
respecting  the  "seed  of  David"  that  the  priesthood  was  intended  to  be  transfeiTed  from 
the  tribe  of  Levi  to  that  of  Judah,  and  therefore  changed  in  character.  2.  In  the  risen 
Son  of  Ood.  Here  is  the  true  gospel,  the  Divine  humanity  of  Christ,  the  conjuuciion 
of  heaven  and  earth.    Either  apart  would  have  no  adaptation  to  our  needs. 


36  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.      [oh.  \.  1—32. 

"  'Tis  the  -weakness  in  strength  that  I  cry  for  I  my  flesh,  that  I  seek 
In  the  Godhead  I  I  seek  and  I  find  it." 
Attention  is  directed  to'  the  Resurrection  as  a  proof  of  the  Deity  of  Christ.  The  word 
"  dead  "  is  in  the  plural,  since  Christ's  rising  involves  the  rising  of  his  people.  He  is 
the  "  Firstfruits  "  presaging  the  harvest ;  where  the  "  Head  "  is,  there  must  the  members 
be.  Two  attributes  in  particular  manifested  in  the  Resurrection.  (1)  Power ;  viz.  the 
mighty  opeiation  of  God,  who  outshines  the  glory  of  his  first  creation  in  the  wonders 
of  the  new.  See  the  enthusiasm  and  boldness  of  the  disciples  after  they  realized  the 
meaning  of  that  event,  and  the  force  and  possibilities  opened  up  before  them  byi[the 
triumphing  over  death,  and  the  authority  granted  to  their  once-despised,  now  exalted 
Master.  The  bands  of  the  grave  were  like  "  the  green  withes  "  of  Samson  when  Christ 
awoke  from  his  slumber.  He  "  made  a  show  of  adverse  principalities  and  powers," 
the  eclipse  of  immortality  by  death  but  preluding  a  far  more  effulgent  splendour. 
(2)  Holiness.  The  penalty  of  atonement  was  exhausted,  or  the  Sin-bearer  had  never 
appeared  again  with  lustre  out  of  the  wilderness  of  death.  Christ  tabernacled  in 
"  flesh,"  but  his  "  spirit "  was  not  fleshly.  The  Holy  One  could  not  see  corruption, 
any  more  than  gold  perishes  in  the  fire.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  was  a  great  object- 
lesson,  teaching  the  immutableness  of  all  who,  like  the  "Ever-living  One  "  (Eev.i.  18), 
are  consumed  by  the  zeal  of  God's  house.  Whatever  in  us  is  consecrated,  God  himself 
will  preserve  from  the  fatal  touch  of  time.  The  future  resurrection  shall  he  the  sealing 
testimony  to  the  dignity  of  Christ.  When  his  voice  shall  wake  the  dead,  and  the  last 
enemy  shall  have  been  utterly  abolished,  then,  in  the  fulfilment  of  his  own  declaration 
and  the  consequent  array  of  trophies  to  his  marvellous  grace,  shall  he  be  universally 
adored  as  the  "  strong  Son  of  God,  immortal  Love."  May  each  rejoice  in  the  conscious- 
ness Df  a  personal  relationship  to  this  glorious  gospel ! — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  7. — An  honourable  class.  Describe  Rome,  and  compare  it  with  our  modem 
cities.  The  metropolis  of  the  world,  with  two  millions  of  people  in  about  sixteen 
square  miles ;  every  trade,  nationality,  and  religion  represented  there.  The  apostle  knew 
the  strategic  importance  of  a  Christiau  stronghold  in  Rome.  What  a  mighty  influence 
might  radiate  thence  to  every  quarter  of  the  globe !  To  energize  the  heart  of  the 
empire  was  to  quicken  with  Christian  life  the  whole  world. 

L  A  SPEOIAL  CLASS  SINGLED  OUT.  The  "  all "  ill  Rome  are  restricted  by  the  sub- 
sequent designations.  It  is  useless  to  ignore  the  New  Testament  line  of  distinction. 
Men  are  distinguished  by  their  relationship  to  the  gospel,  not  by  their  social  standing  or 
intellectual  ability,  but  by  their  moral  qualifications,  as  possessors  of  good  hearts  which 
have  received  the  seed  of  the  kingdom.  To  speak  of  Christians  is  to  mark  them  oS 
from  all  besides,  as  a  straight  stick  differentiates  crooked  ones.  Would  Christ  send  his 
messengers  to  our  houses  as  to  those  "  who  are  worthy  "  ?  Tliis  distinction  creates  a 
bond  of  union.  The  superficial  diversities  amongst  the  followers  of  Christ  are  merged 
in  the  one  great  feature  of  similarity.  All  are  "one"  in  Christ  Jesus,  whether  they 
live  in  the  East  or  the  West  End,  in  the  great  rooms  of  a  palace  or  the  attic  of  a 
lodging-house.  And  in  the  primitive  Church,  as  to-day,  the  uniting  power  of  the 
gospel  was  a  striking  proof  of  its  Divine  origin — ^that  he  who  made  the  key  to  fit  so 
many  hearts  was  the  same  who  first  constructed  those  human  wards.  If  Christ 
appeared  to-day,  it  would  be  as  when  a  magnet  is  introduced  into  a  box  of  iron  filings ; 
the  affinity  of  his  people  would  be  discovered  by  their  instant  attraction  to  him,  and  the 
closer  they  pressed  to  him  the  nearer  they  would  draw  to  one  another.  Christianity  is 
healthful  socialism. 

II.  Thbik  happy  condition.  "Beloved  of  God."  The  Almighty  is  good  to  all  his 
creatures ;  he  "  is  great,  and  despiseth  not  any ;  "  his  sunshine  and  rain  benefit  all  indis- 
criminately. Jesus  weeping  over  Jerusalem  exemplified  God's  infinite  pity  towards 
rebellious  subjects,  sorrowing  over  their  distresses  and  grieved  at  their  sins.  But  the 
love  of  the  text  is  that  of  complacency,  where  God  can  rest  in  his  love  with  satisfaction, 
rejoicing  in  the  renewed  nature  and  the  evidences  of  restored  sonship.  Love  must  be 
strongest  and  most  delightful  when  reciprocated  by  its  object,  as  the  mirror  increases 
light  by  reflection.  It  is  an  animating  designation ;  for  men  need  love  as  plants  need 
sunshine  and  warmth.  The  loneliest  heart  may  be  cheered  by  the  assurance  of  the 
Divine  paternal  affection.     It  is  an  ennobling  lovi.     Many  a  man  hag  risen  through 


OH.  1. 1—32.]      THE  EPISTLE-  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  87 

love  to  the  height  of  his  capacity ;  his  powers  have  heen  stimulated  and  developed. 
How  strong  for  noble  deeds  must  those  he  who  think  of  the  mighty  heart  of  God 
pulsating  to  the  rhythm  of  their  feeble  souls  1  Stunted  lives  may  blossom  and  grow 
fruitful  under  the  "  light  of  his  countenance,"  seeking  to  live  worthy  of  his  wondrous 
love.  It  implies  the  well-being  ofiJwse  loved.  Not  necessarily  exemption  from  hardship 
and  trial,  not  miraculous  interposition  every  day ;  but  unfailing  guidance  and  succour, 
and  the  certainty  of  a  blessed  issue  to  all  events.  Our  God  never  intended  us  to  dwell 
all  our  lives  in  suspense  concerning  our  relationship  to  him,  but  to  come  out  into  the 
unclouded  day  by  accepting  his  declarations,  and  we  honour  him  when  we  arm  our 
breasts  with  these  magnificent  truths  as  with  triple  steel  against  all  vexation,  and 
flsiod  our  dwelling  with  the  benignant  splendour  of  his  promises. 

III.  Theik  dignified  vocation.  "Called  to  be  saints."  The  word  " called "  has 
become  so  theological  that  to  enter  into  its  meaning  with  any  freshness  we  must  strip 
it  of  its  technical  clothing.  A  man's  calling  is  his  occupation  in  life — that  by  which 
he  earns  his  livelihood.  The  main  business  of  the  Christian  is  to  cultivate  holiness.  He 
is  set  apart,  like  the  priest,  with  anointing  oil  for  the  service  of  God.  This  aim  is  in 
no  wise  incompatible  with  the  fulfilment  of  his  ordinary  worldly  avocation.  Every 
situation  is  adapted  to  the  pursuit  of  holiness,  disciplining  the  soul,  calling  for  endurance 
or  activity.  The  "saint "  is  "separate  from  sinners,"  not  by  reason  of  bodily  absence, 
but  through  his  consecrated  thought  and  endeavour  and  behaviour.  The  same  action 
may  be  performed  from  higher  motives  and  with  a  regard  to  vaster  issues.  The  saints 
are  furnished  with  all  requisite  aids  to  holiness.  The  written  Word,  the  Spirit,  the 
house  of  prayer, — these  are  all  helps  to  a  godly  life.  We  are  not  set  to  make  biicks 
without  straw.  The  manner  of  our  call  enforces  the  ohligation  to  sainthood.  We  have 
been  called  by  Jesus  Christ,  our  Eedeemer,  our  Pattern  and  Power,  who  called  the 
disciples  by  the  sea-shore,  and  Matthew  at  the  toll-bar ;  and  his  summons  reaches  us 
from  his  cross  of  anguish,  and  from  his  throne  of  victory  on  high.  The  title  of  "  saints  " 
is  expressly  assigned  to  the  followers  of  Christ,  and  it  behoves  us  to  walk  worthy  of  our 
high  calling  and  of  the  name  by  which  we  are  called.  Mistrust  disowns  such  high, 
grand  titles;  faith  claims  and  justifies  them.  Will  not  some  respond  to  Christ's  call 
to-day  ?    "  Harden  not  your  hearts,  if  ye  should  hear  his  voice." — S.  E.  A. 

Ver.  P. — An  appeal  and  a  parenthesis.  To  the  full  and  ardent  mind  the  statement 
of  one  fact  or  thought  calls  up  many  associated  ideas,  and  a  parenthesis  is  the  result. 
In  the  widespread  recognition  of  the  faith  of  the  Eoman  Christians  (ver.  8)  Paul 
discerned  an  answer  to  his  prayers.  How  constant  those  intercessions  were  only  God 
could  know,  and  to  him  the  apostle  appealed,  justifying  the  appeal  by  a  parenthetical 
reference  to  his  life  of  faithful  seiTice.  The  text,  therefore,  suggests  reflection  on  three 
topics. 

I.  The  propriety  of  invoking  the  testimony  op  God.  Too  frequently  have 
public  utterances  and  conversation  been  interlarded  with  the  mention  of  the  Divine 
Name,  violating  the  third  commandment  and  the  Saviour's  instructions.  The  tendency 
of  modern  legislation  to  restrict  the  occasions  on  which  the  taking  of  an  oath  is 
obligatory  should  be  welcomed.  It  is  allowable  to  call  Ood  to  witness  in  solemn 
matters,  befitting  the  dignity  of  the  Most  High.  Especially  in  matters  that  lie  within 
Ood's  cognizance  only,  as  here  respecting  ihe  frequency  of  the  apostle's  petitions  at  the 
mercy-seat.  The  invocation  of  the  Divine  witness  is  seemliest  from  the  lips  of  hit 
se/rvants.  With  what  show  of  reason  can  others  demand  his  presence  to  confirm  their 
statements  ?  Profane  swearers  convict  themselves  of  inconsistency.  Even  a  regard  for 
others'  feelings  will  sometimes  lead  men  to  abstain  from  trifiing  with  the  sacred  Name 
of  our  Father  and  Friend. 

II.  The  importance  of  intercessory  prayer.  Largeness  of  heart  contributes  much 
to  the  enjoyment  and  prevalence  of  our  prayers.  When  we  seem  dull  in  respect  of  our 
own  needs,  the  remembrance  of  another's  wants  may  "  unlock  the  .sealed  fountain." 
Ws  may  gauge  our  interest  in  our  fellows  by  the  regularity  of  our  petitions  on  their 
behalf.  If  we  pray  not  often  for  them,  how  can  we  be  said  to  care  for  their  welfare  ? 
Speak  of  them  where  it  shall  be  of  most  avail. 

"For  what  are  men  better  than  sheep  or  goat», 
That  nourish  a  blind  life  within  the  brain. 


38  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS      L^h.  i.  1—32. 


If,  knowing  God,  they  lift  not  hands  of  prayer 

Both  for  themselves  and  those  who  call  them  friend  ?" 

The  apostle  evidently  thinks  of  praying  as  a  real  part  of  Christian  service.  Like  the 
incense  which  it  was  the  honourable  duty  of  the  priests  to  offer,  so  did  Paul  daily  "  lift 
up  holy  hands  "  as  his  continual  sacrifice  and  ministration.  It  is  a  law  of  God's 
paternal  government  that  his  children's  requests  should,  tiiough  so  simple  and  feeble  in 
themselves,  link  them  with  Omnipotence,  and  achieve  mightiest  effects.  What  ails  us 
that  we  are  so  slow  to  visit  this  "  wishing-gate  "  ?  Ood  measures  the  constancy  and 
fervency  cf  our  prayers.  They  are  not  a  small  performance  soon  forgotten.  They 
constitute  a  revelation  of  our  condition,  a  spiritual  thermometer  whose  readings  arc 
registered. 

III.  The  qualities  that  bender  service  acceptable  to  God.  It  must  he 
spiritual,  that  is,  not  formal  or  ceremonial,  but  an  expression  of  the  inner  life ;  not 
rendered  as  a  burdensome  task,  but  according  to  "  the  spirit  that  giveth  life  rather  than 
tlie  letter  which  killeth."  The  apostle  was  constrained  by  love,  for  Christ  had  laid 
liold  of  his  heart's  affections  and  made  him  conscious  of  a  new  inward  impulse,  which 
transfigured  obedience  and  made  it  liberty,  and  altered  wearisome  duty  into  gladsome 
service.  It  was  the  difference  between  the  mechanical  elevation  and  motion  of  a  kite 
by  the  wind,  and  the  soaring  flight  of  the  bird  joying  in  its  vital  powers.  Spiritual 
service  is  not  blind,  unreasoning  devotion,  but  a  ministration  approved  of  by  the 
noblest  faculties  of  the  soul.  It  is  evangelical,  arising  from  and  moving  in  the  sphere 
of  the  glorious  revelation  of  the  Son  of  God.  Through  Olirist  had  the  apostle 
"  received  grace  and  apo.stleship  for  obedience  to  the  faith  among  all  nations,  for  his 
Name's  sake  "  (ver.  5).  The  knowledge  and  reception  of  the  gospel  imply  privilege  and 
responsibility.  The  true  Christian  life  is  filled  with  gospel  motives  and  aims,  nor  is 
any  condition  inapt  for  gospel  service,  its  priesthood  and  sacrifices. — S.  K.  A. 

Vers.  11,  12. — Longing  to  meet.  The  vehement  desire  of  the  apostle  cherished 
through  many  years  was  at  length  gratified ;  but  the  manner  of  entering  Rome  how 
different  from  the  anticipated  voluntary  visit!  He  was  to  arrive,  after  a  tempestuous, 
perilous  voyage,  ae  a  prisoner  to  plead  for  his' life  before  the  emperor.  It  is  well  that  a 
veil  hides  the  future,  or  our  wishes  for  some  event  might  die  away  in  silence. 

J.  Love  is  not  satisfied  without  a  meeting.  Augustine  would  have  liked  to 
see  Christ  in  the  flesh,  Paul  in  the  pulpit,  and  Rome  in  its  glory.  The  apostle  thought 
little  of  the  outward  magnificence  of  the  metropolis ;  his  heart  turned  to  the  company 
of  Christians  there.  Some  were  his  kinsmen,  others  had  been  his  fellow-workers  and 
prisoners,  yet  all  who  were  knit  in  Christian  fellowship  were  dear  to  him,  and  he  longed 
to  see  them  face  to  face.  The  ties  of  attachment  in  the  early  Church  may  have  been 
cemented  by  the  cold  wind  of  opposition  and  persecution,  which  drove  the  members 
closer  together  for  warmth  and  sympathy.  Still  Christianity  proves  itself  able  to 
banish  worldly  distinctions  to-day,  breaking  down  barriers  of  race  and  caste  and 
language.  The  friends  of  the  Savioiu:  cau  feel  no  jealousy,  since  his  love  is  large 
enough  to  embrace  all,  and  a  regard  for  his  honour  impels  his  friends  to  increase  the 
number  of  his  adherents.  Love  to  Christ  is  the  antithesis  of  narrowness  of  spirit. 
We  may  form  an  opinion  of  our  discipleship  from  observing  the  degree  of  our  longing 
to  "  assemble  ourselves  together."  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto 
life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."  There  is  a  natural  desire  to  look  upon  the  face 
and  form  of  famous  men,  that  names  may  become  persons  to  us,  and  that  our  weak 
imaginations  may  henceforth  be  assisted  in  picturiug  their  voice  and  gesture  and 
appearance.  And  this  yearning  leaps  up  into  a  sacred  hope  of  the  consummation  of 
our  bliss,  when  we  shall  be  permitted  to  behok  the  Saviour  and  "  see  him  as  he  is." 
Christ  is  "with  us"  now,  but  at  death  we  depart  to  be  "with  Christ"  for  ever. 
Proximity  and  affection  are  correlative  ideas. 

XL  The  meeting  op  Ghmstians  has  edification  as  its  object.  Paul  was 
supremely  anxious  to  be  the  medium  of  spiritual  benefit  to  the  Christians  at  Rome. 
He  believed  that  a  spiritual  gift  was  the  most  valuable  present  he  could  bestow  or  they 
could  receive.  It  ranked  higher  than  scientific  communications  or  almsgiving.  Hours 
of  pleasant  chat  and  recreation  are  not  despicable,  but  if  our  societies  set  these  in  the 
foreground  they  miss  their  proper  mark.     'J'no  cross  of  Christ  flashes  solemn  light  upon 


OH.  1. 1—32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS.  89 

a  pleasure-loving  age.  To  this  touchstone  we  must  bring  our  Church  engagements  and 
our  individual  plana  of  living.  Let  congregations  rightly  value  the  ministration  of 
spiritual  things.  We  may  not  suppose  the  apostle  to  care  most  about  miraculous 
endowments,  gifts  of  healing,  and  of  tongues,  but  rather  a  growth  in  grace  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  Christ,  and  in  love,  the  pre-eminent  attainment.  Do  parents  always 
convey  to  their  children  the  impression  that  they  set  greater  store  by  their  progress  in 
the  Divine  life  than  by  their  success  at  the  bar  or  in  the  senate,  in  the  exchange  or  the 
fashionable  world  ?  Note  the  apostle's  desire  to  confirm  the  faith  of  these  Christiana. 
To  establish  them,  not  to  unsettle  their  opinions  and  practices,  was  his  intent.  It  is 
no  light  matter  wantonly  to  disturb,  men's  convictions  and  tear  them  away  from  their 
old  beliefs.  "  Men  "  are  not  to  be  "  carried  about  by  every  wind  of  doctrine,"  but  to 
feel  their  feet  firm  upon  the  unchanging  rook.  The  Greek  word  in  the  text  reminds  us 
that  "  stereotyping  "  is  good  when  we  are  dealing  with  the  first  principles  of  Christianity. 
The  frequently  shifted  plant  grows  with  difSculty.  There  is  a  hint  here  that  oral 
would  he  more  effective  than  written  communications.  In  spite  of  recent  assertions, 
pulpit  and  platform  speech  holds  its  own  as  the  engine  that  moves  the  masses.  Even 
"the  weighty  and  powerftd  letters"  of  the  apostle  could  not  equal  the  effect  of  his 
personal  presence.  Only  enemies  would  ttrm  the  latter  "  weak  and  contemptible."  The 
iScriptures  depict  the  coming  advent  of  Christ  as  giving  a  mighty  impetus  to  the 
perfection  and  triumph  of  his  Church.  He  "  shall  appear  in  his  glory,"  and  "  build  up 
Zion." 

in.   A   MEETING   ENABLES   ALL   TO   CONTRIBUTE   TO   THE   COMMON   GOOD.      The  apOStle 

looked  forward  to  a  mutual  benefit.  He  was  not  so  self-opinionated  or  proud  as  to 
imagine  none  could  enlighten  him  or  comfort  him.  Ministers  need  the  consolation  of 
their  flocJc.  Recall  the  inspiriting  exhortation  of  the  Israelites  to  Joshua,  "  Only  be 
thou  strong  and  of  a  good  courage  :  the  Lord  be  with  thee,"  etc.  (Josh.  i.  17, 18).  Nor 
was  the  apostle  so  selfish  as  to  wish  to  get  all  and  to  give  nothing.  Christian  Churches 
are  designed  to  he  Mutual  Improvement  Societies.  Some  only  inquire — What  good  will 
such  a  gathering  do  us  ?  forgetting  that  their  remarks  or  their  attendance  even  may 
stimulate  their  brethren  and  aid  in  the  success  of  the  meeting.  It  cheers  the  weak  and 
supports  the  wavering  to  witness  the  steadfast  confidence  of  the  strong.  The  faith 
spoken  of  implies  visibility  in  order  to  its  full  effect.  Secret  disciples  unconnected 
with  any  organization  miss  much  comfort  and  work  through  their  isolation.  Come, 
join  our  Church  ranks !  Christians  are  like  the  stones  of  an  arch,  strengthened  in 
position  by  their  joint  presence  and  pressure.  Bunyan  beautifully  portrays  this 
mutual  comforting  in  Christian  and  Hopeful  as  they  ford  the  river  of  death.  What 
a  testimony  to  the  work  of  any  man  that  his  presence  helps,  not  mars,  the  piety  of  hia 
friends  I  Let  not  "  brethren  cause  the  heart  of  the  people  to  melt "  1  (Josh.  liv.  8). 
We  are  responsible  for  the  influence  we  exert. — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  16. — Glorying  in  the  gospel.  For  many  reasons  the  apostle  might  be  supposed 
ashamed  to  preach  the  gospel  at  Rome.  He  had  been  long  delayed  from  fulfilling  his 
purpose  to  visit  that  city.  The  "good  news"  centred  in  the  mission  of  a  Jew, 
belonging  to  a  race  despised  by  their  masterful  conquerors.  The  story  of  the  cross 
could  not  fail  to  excite  ridicule  when  the  Romans  heard  that  this  Messiah  had  been 
rejected  by  his  own  countrymen,  and  handed  over  to  an  ignominious  death,  and  that 
his  disciples  seriously  believed  that  he  had  risen  again  from  the  dead.  A  kingdom 
founded  on  humility  and  love  would  seem  a  fanatical  dream.  Nor  could  the  preachers 
point  to  many  of  the  upper  classes  who  had  imbibed  this  new  "  superstition."  Yet  the 
apostle  wavered  not ;  he  felt  that  the  gospel  could  bear  strictest  scrutiny  and  comparison, 
and  that  it  contained  a  moral  force  worthy  of  recognition  even  by  the  most  slavish 
worshippers  of  power.     He  gloried  in  the  gospel — 

L  As  OVERCOMING  MEN  WITH  MORE  THAN  HUMAN  MIGHT.  The  desire  of  power  is 
innate  in  the  breast,  and  an  exhibition  of  it  is  tagerly  witnessed.  The  apostle  had  the 
intense  conviction  of  the  power  of  the  cross,  which  arose  from  its  mastery  over  himself 
and  the  changes  he  had  seen  it  effect  in  his  converts  everywhere.  As  the  magicians 
said  of  old,  "  This  is  the  finger  of  God,"  and  as  the  Samaritans  said  of  the  sorcerer, 
"  This  man  is  the  great  power  of  God,"  so  the  apostle  still  more  logically  discerned  in 
the  peace  of  mind,  the  spiritual  liberty  and  gladness,  the  lofty  aspirations  and  renewed 


40  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,      [cii.  1. 1— 32. 

nature  which  came  to  Christians,  the  demonstration  of  a  svipernatural  energy,  a 
miraculous  power  whose  source  could  only  be  Divine.  Believing  that  Jesus  Christ  was 
God's  lever  for  raising  men  from  death  to  lile,  how  could  the  apostle  be  ashamed  of 
calling  attention  to  this  mighty  instrument  of  human  elevation?  To  speak  and  teach 
and  live  with  this  consciousness  of  wielding  a  Divine  power  is  to  lose  faint-heartedness, 
and  to  let  the  ring  of  conviction  in  our  tones  beget  acceptance  in  the  listeners.  The 
cure  for  many  doubts  is  to  note  historically  what  Christianity  lias  achieved.  Then  the 
very  peculiarity  of  its  introduction  to  the  world,  of  its  principle  of  operation  and  of 
its  tenets,  will  the  more  strongly  evidence  its  origin  from  above.  It  is  at  every  point 
unlike  the  workmanship  of  man. 

II.  As  SECURINO  AN  EMINENTLY  DESIRABLE  RESULT — the  salvation  of  men.  We 
may  be  terrified  and  disgusted  at  a  force  which  threatens  cruelty  and  oppression.  But 
the  might  of  the  gospel  of  love  is  only  beneficent  in  its  design  and  effects.  It  aims  at 
saving  men  from  the  wiath  to  come,  at  present  deliverance  from  evil  passions,  at  the 
development  of  all  that  is  fairest  and  most  lovely.  Its  triumph  means  the  healing  of  the 
sin-sick  soul,  the  entrance  of  light  into  the  understanding,  and  holy  joy  into  the  heart. 
The  Romans  hated  slavery,  and  proudly  exulted  in  their  freedom.  They  cultivated 
dignity  of  manner,  and  gloried  in  their  world-wide  empire  and  the  privileges  of  their 
citizenship.  Surely  they  too  might  perceive  that  the  gospel  promised  and  procured 
membership  in  a  heavenly  indissoluble  kingdom,  whose  subjects  were  not  only  guarded 
from  instability  of  happiness  and  the  domination  of  mean  desires  in  this  life,  but  should 
also  receive  (what  their  favourite  stoical  philosophy  never  proposed)  a  blissful  immor- 
tality radiant  with  honourable  service  under  the  King  of  kings. 

III.  As    OPBEATINO    BY   A   METHOD    UNIVEESALLY    AVAILABLE,    viz.   by   faith.      It    IB 

essential  to  a  panacea  intended  to  bring  help  and  strength  to  our  race,  that  it  should 
touch  the  plague-spot  of  universal  disease  and  recognize  the  deepest  ne(  d  of  man, 
however  his  customs,  clothing,  and  language  might  differ.  It  is  equally  necessary  that 
the  remedy  should  assume  such  a  form  as  to  permit  of  its  being  received  and  applied 
by  all,  whether  learned  or  uneducated,  wealthy  or  poor,  old  or  young,  civilized  or 
barbarous.  To  hear  of  the  Saviour's  life  and  death  and  resurrection  as  the  revelation 
of  Divine  holiness  seeking  the  reconciliation  of  man,  to  respond  to  the  appeal  by  simple 
trust  in  the  Redeemer, — this  requires  no  more  than  the  use  of  the  common  faculties 
with  which  all  have  been  endowed.  The  news  might  be  long  in  travelling  from 
Jerusalem  to  Rome;  pride,  or  gaiety,  or intellectualism  might  stumble  at  the  tidings; 
but,  the  Spirit  showing  the  things  of  Christ  to  men,  the  responsibility  rested  with 
themselves  if  by  unbelief  they  barred  the  heart  against  the  truth.  "  To  every  one  that 
believeth  "  does  the  gospel  prove  the  spiritual  "  dynamite,"  not  of  destruction,  but  of 
salvation.    Embrace  it,  own  it,  preach  it ! — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  20. — The  revelation  of  God  in  naUtre.  To  come  into  contact  with  the  fearless 
writing  of  the  Apostle  Paul  is  like  inhaling  a  breath  of  mountain  air.  He  was  not 
alarmed  at  the  presence  of  any  inquirer,  though  ancient  as  a  Jew,  learned  as  a  Greek, 
or  imperious  as  a  Roman.  He  held  up  the  gospel  as  a  lamp  whose  rays,  shining  in  all 
directions,  search  every  system,  refusing  to  allow  error  to  pass  for  truth,  vice  for 
righteousness,  or  imperfection  for  completeness.  He  implied  that  what  the  Law  did 
for  the  Jews,  convincing  them  of  sin,  was  effected  for  the  Gentiles  by  the  glories  of 
creation,  taking  away  all  excuse  for  ungodly  immorality,  and  thus  shutting  all  up 
equally  to  the  sense  of  the  need  of  such  a  righteousness,  through  faith  unto  salvarion 
as  the  gospel  of  Christ  proclaims. 

I.  A  PARADOX — INVISIBLE  THINGS  CLEARLY  SEEN.  The  possibility  of  such  a 
seeming  contradiction  is  allowed,  when  we  distinguish  between  the  outer  vision  of 
the  body  and  the  inner  perception  of  the  mind.  Properly  speaking,  it  is  only  the  mind 
that  ever  sees.  The  mind  arranges  and  digests  what  is  carried  to  it  by  the  optic  nerve. 
Iiike  a  chemist,  the  brain  has  its  laboratory,  into  which  the  senses  convey  the  colours, 
sounds,  impressions,  facts,  and  figures  of  the  world  around  us ;  and  there  in  private  it 
analyzes,  synthetizcs,  manipulates,  the  products  till  they  seem  invested  with  new 
attributes.  Think  of  our  abstract  conceptions,  such  as  those  of  beauty,  of  time,  of 
character;  these  have  no  sensible  existence — they  are  qualities  su|  eradded  by  the  mind 
which  gazes.    They  may  arise. necessarily  upon  certain  objects  being  presented  to  our 


3H.1. 1— 32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  41 

view ;  they  affect  us  powerfully,  and,  though  unseen  by  the  bodily  eyes,  become  clear 
to  the  eyes  of  the  soul. 

IL  The  paradox  applied  to  theology.  1.  The  works  of  nature  manifest  a 
mighty  Power.  This  world,  so  wonderlully  fiamed,  exhibiting  such  unity  in  diversity, 
furnishes  to  the  attentive  mind  abundant  traces  of  a  Force  which  has  been  at  work 
other  than  ourselves.  The  declarations  of  past  investifjators,  such  as  Buddha,  Plato, 
(Jicero,  are  amply  confirmed  by  scientists  to-day,  who  confess  themselves  in  the 
presence  of  a  glorious,  awful  Fores,  whose  laws  are  to  be  ascertained  and  obeyed. 
The  attempt  is  made  to  resolve  demonstrably  all  phenomena  into  manifestations  of  the 
one  indivisible  force.  Such  thinkers  we  may  claim  as  buttressing  the  declaration  of 
the  text  that  the  invisible  power  of  God  is  clearly  seen,  being  understood  through  his 
works.  Those  regularities  they  call  "  laws  "  are  his  habits ;  those  numerous  analogies 
indicate  the  one  mind  influencing  similarly  all  realms.  Note  especially  that  epic  of 
natural  theology,  the  Book  of  Job.  2.  This  Power  discerned  to  be  everlasting.  There 
is  the  proper  word  in  the  text  to  denote  "  endless  duration  " — that  which  is  always 
existent.  The  Power  which  originated  the  universe  is  needed  to  sustain  it.  Evolution 
is  perpetual  creation,  whereby  "things  that  are  seen  were  not  made  of  things  that 
do  appear."  Man  has  from  of  old  contrasted  his  brief  life  with  the  everlasting 
mountains,  the  perpetual  hills.  Astronomy  is  making  us  familiar  with  the  countless 
millenniums  of  God's  lifetime,  and  geology  reveals  the  measureless  ages  through  which 
his  power  has  been  working.  The  doctrine  of  the  conservation  of  force,  which  Tyndall 
calls  "  the  gift  of  science  to  the  nineteenth  century,"  echoes  the  same  truth, .  that 
though  the  animals  die,  and  even  the  hills  crumble  and  decay,  yet  the  Power  which 
made  them  continues ;  they  assume  other  shapes  and  do  other  work.  Herbert  Spencer 
writes  of  the  "infinite  and  eternal  energy  whence  all  things  proceed  and  by  which  they 
are  sustained."  3.  Stich  power  reveals  Divinity.  The  "  Divinity  "  of  the  Eevised 
Version  is  preferable,  since  here  the  apostle  is  speaking,  not  of  the  incommunicable 
essence  of  God,  as  in  Col.  ii.  9,  but  of  his  nature  as  distinguished  from  our  mortal 
humanity.  The  works  of  God  show  that  he  can  originate  life;  man  can  only  propagate 
it.  And  reflection  proves  that  this  power  of  God  acts  in  favour  of  righteousness  and 
in  pnnishment  of  wickedness.  He  stands  forth  as  the  Holy  One.  We  do  not  forget 
the  dark  problems  of  life  nor  the  abysses  of  creation,  but  we  must  beware  lest  we 
underrate  the  clearness  with  which  he  has  written  his  autograph  on  the  laws  of  nature, 
and  on  his  chief  product — man.  Froude  says,  "  This  is  the  one  lesson  of  history — the 
moral  law  is  written  on  the  tablets  of  eternity.  .  .  .  Justice  and  truth  alone  endure 
and  live.  Injustice  and  falsehood  may  be  long-lived,  but  doomsday  comes  at  last  to 
tliera." 

III.  The  inevitable  conclusion,  that,  men's  lERBLIGIOtrS,  BINFUIi  PKACTICES 
BEDJQ    INEXCUSABLE,    THET    NEEO    JUST    SUCH   A    GOSPEL    AS    CHRISTIANITY   PROCLAIMS. 

Such  a  revelation  ought  to  have  prevented  all  ungodliness.  A  chief  sin  is  to  ignore 
God,  as  the  greatest  civil  crime  is  treason  against  the  ruler  of  the  state.  Not  to 
worship  and  thank  him  is  flat  rebellion  at  court.  How  clearly  the  apostle  implies 
that  darkened  views  of  the  Creator,  degrading  his  attributes,  lead  men  first  to  base 
ingratitude,  and  then  to  indulge,  unchecked  and  unashamed,  the  worst  fleshly  desires  1 
And  these  flames  of  ungodly  passion,  no  longer  subdued  by  the  rains  of  heavenly  pity, 
leap  up  into  a  fierce  conflagration,  by  which  the  doomed  aie  destroyed.  Yet  he  who 
formed  the  world  and  placed  man  upon  it,  has  remembered  man's  frailty — has  provided 
an  Advocate  for  the  defenceless  criminal,  a  city  of  refuge  for  the  despairing  murdeier. 
It  cannot  be  an  escape  through  our  own  merits,  or  justification  by  works;  but  by  a 
transcendent  exhibition  of  Divine  power  in  its  noblest  garb  of  love,  stooping  to  bear  our 
sins,  and  to  make  his  righteousness  ours,  through  our  contrite,  humble,  joyful  acceptance' 
of  his  mercy  and  help. — S.  E.  A. 

Vers.  22 — 25. — Downward  evolution.  No  charge  more  acutely  stings  a  man  than 
that  of  being  considered  senseless ;  he  would  rather  be  deemed  a  knave  than  a  fool. 
The  apostle  shows  that  man,  whom  God  created  upright  that  he  might  behold  God  and 
heavenly  things,  has  continually  gazed  at  the  earth,  and  become  prone  like  the  beasts. 
Thus  bending,  he  has  wrapped  his  soul  in  shadow,  and  his  religion,  instead  of  a 
blessing,  has  proved  a  curse. 


42  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,      [ch.  i.  1—32. 


L  The  worship  op  images  originates  in  a  natural  craving  for  a  sensible 
EMBODIMENT  OP  Deitt.  Abstract  ideas  have  little  charm  or  power  for  men,  and  the 
worship  of  force  or  hmnanity  can  never  attract  the  multitudes.  The  yearning  for  a 
visible  God  was  answered  in  the  Shechinah,  and  in  the  many  appearances  of  _the  angel 
of  Jehovah,  and  has  received  fullest  recognition  in  the  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ. 
The  spirituality  of  Divine  worship  was  to  be  preserved  in  Israel  by  the  commandment 
not  to  rear  graven  images,  and  the  ascension  of  Christ  to  heaven,  withdrawing  the 
Saviour  from  mortal  eyes,  is  likewise  intended  to  protect  Christianity  from  the  dangeni 
liable  to  a  system  whose  votaries  should  "walk  by  sight"  rather  than  by  faith.  The 
Scriptures  and  universal  history  demonstrate  the  rapidity  with  which,  as  in  the  Eoman 
Catholic  Church  to-day,  men's  homage  and  devotion  are  transferred  from  the  Being 
represented,  to  the  statue  or  figure  which  at  first  stood  innocently  enough  as  his  symbol. 
There  is  a  danger  of  modern  literature  seeking  too  much  "  to  know  Christ  after  the 
flesh,"  instead  of  relying  upon  the  assistance  furnished  by  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit, 
the  invisible  Christ  dwelling  in  the  heart. 

II.  The  tendency  op  image-worship  is  to  degrade  religion.  The  argument 
of  Xenophanes,  ridiculing  the  Homeric  theology  that  if  sheep  and  oxen  were  to  picture 
a.  god,  they  would  imagine  him  like  one  of  themselves,  only  showed  that  natural 
religion,  in  framing  a  notion  of  Deity,  rightly  attributes  to  him  the  highest  attributes 
of  personality  and  intelligence  conceivable.  And  the  Apostle  Paul  accused  the 
Athenians  of  unreasonableness  in  fancying  that  the  great  Father  could  be  supposed  to 
be  less  powerful  and  intelligent  than  his  children.  But  without  supernatural  aid 
man  sinks  lower  and  lower  in  his  conceptions ;  the  direction  of  evolution  in  religion  is 
downward,  not  upward,  except  where  there  is  a  manifest  interposition  of  the  Supreme 
Being.  Note  how  strenuously  the  prophets  had  to  combat  the  desire  of  Israel  to  ally 
themselves  in  worship  with  the  abominable  idolatries  of  the  nations  around.  Man, 
selected  as  God's  representative,  becomes  man  in  his  lowest  moods  ami  merely  animal 
existence ;  the  transition  is  easy  to  the  wise-looking  owl  and  soaring  eagle,  then  to  the 
cow  and  the  dog,  and  finally  to  the  serpent  and  the  fish.  The  unity  of  God  is  lost  in 
the  multiphcity  of  idols,  and  his  power  and  righteousness  swamped  in  bestial  stupidity 
and  depravity.  Religious  rites  became  scenes  of  licentiousness.  "  The  light  that  was 
in  men  has  turned  to  darkness,  and  how  great  is  that  darkness  I  " 

III.  The  worshipper  gradually  assimilates  himself  to  the  object  wob- 
BHIPPED.  Man  does  not  rise  higher  in  thought  and  life  than  the  Deity  before  whom 
he  bows  and  to  whom  he  submits  himself;  but  he  may,  and  too  generally  does,  adopt 
the  worst  features  of  the  character  and  conduct  of  his  gods.  What  we  constantly 
meditate  upon  transforms  us  into  its  own  lineaments.  Where  the  lower  animals  are 
deified,  there  the  passions  of  the  brutes  are  rampant,  and  a  merely  animal  existence  is 
lived.  The  lie  substituted  for  the  truth  shunts  man's  behaviour  on  to  another  line, 
and  a  descending  plane  lands  him  in  moral  ruin.  "  They  that  make  the  gods  are  like 
unto  them ;  so  is  every  one  that  trusteth  in  them."  The  revelation  God  gives  ot 
himself  in  his  Word  operates  reversely  on  a  similar  principle,  so  that  "  we  beholding  as 
in  a  glass  the  true  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed  into  the  same  image ; "  and,  the  image 
of  God  in  man  being  restored,  the  likeness  to  God  to  which  we  are  made  to  attain 
grows  unto  perfection,  till  "  we  shall  be  like  him,  when  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is." — 
SB.  A. 

Ver.  1. — I%e  author.  Before  appreciating  any  important  work,  we  like  to  learn  all 
we  can  of  its  author.  Hence  the  study  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  is  the  best  possible 
preparation  for  the  study  of  this  great  Epistle  to  the  Eomans.  The  history  given  by 
Luke  is  like  the  portrait  of  the  apostle  prefixed  to  his  Epistles ;  it  is  better  indeed  a 
thousand  times  than  any  picture  producible  by  art.  Let  us,  as  a  suggestive  subject, 
begin  with  a  sketch  of  the  apostle's  career,  fitted  as  it  is  to  help  us  in  subsequent 
homilies.    And — 

I.  Paul's  history  before  his  conversion.  In  these  earlier  days  he  did  not  go  by 
the  name  of  Paul,  but  by  that  of  Saul.  The  change  adopted  betokens  the  cosmopolitan 
character  which  he  contracted  as  apostle.  It  was  the  nearest  Greek  word  to  his 
original  Hebrew  name.  While  a  fanatical  Jew,  he  would  have  scorned  any  such 
iccommodation   to   prevailing  custom ;    but    once  he   became  "  the   apustle  of    the 


0H.1. 1— 32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  43 

Gentiles,"  he  was  ready  to  sink  the  Jewish  title  and  adopt  what  was  nearest  to  it  in  the 
language  which  was  more  largely  used.  It  was  a  beautiful  concession  to  the  spirit  of 
the  time.i  But  now  we  must  notice  :  1.  His  hirthplace.  This  was  Tarsus,  "  no  mean 
city,"  as  he  told  the  chief  captain  (Acts  xxi.  39).  It  seems  to  have  been  a  place  of 
culture — what  we  should  now  call  a  "  university  " — which  could  almost  enter  the  lists 
with  Athens  or  Alexandria.  He  enjoyed,  too,  Koman  citizenship  through  some  accident 
of  his  birth  in  this;proconsular  city.  How  his  parents  had  secured  the  privilege  we 
know  not,  but  the  son  made  ample  \ise  of  it  afterwards.^  2.  His  pure  Jewish  descent. 
As  he  said  to  the  Philippians,  he  was  "  an  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews  "  (iii.  5).  Every- 
thing, therefore,  which  pure  "  breeding  "  implies  would  be  his.  The  tribe  of  Benjamin 
had  supplied  the  first  king  to  Israel,  and  now  it  is  supplying  a  move  famous  "  king  of 
qen"  in  the  person  of  this  second  Saul.  His  parents  doubtless  made  him  a  "  child 
of  the  Law  "  at  the  age  of  twelve,  and  later  on  provided  for  his  education  in  the  Jewish 
capital.  8.  His  training  at  the  feet  of  Qamaliel.  This  meant  the  broadest  culture  of 
the  capital,  orthodoxy  of  the  most  prudential  cast,  as  his  master's  conduct  in  the  San- 
hedrin  seems  to  show  (Acts  v.  38).  That  Paul  was  an  apt  scholar  his  own  testimony 
proves,  not  to  speak  of  the  testimony  of  his  great  career ;  for  he  speaks  of  "  pro6ting 
in  the  Jews'  religion  above  many  my  equals  in  mine  own  nation "  (Gal.  i.  14).  4. 
His  enthusiasm  as  a  man  of  action.  It  would  appear  that,  setting  aside  the  prudence  of 
Gamaliel,  he  entered  with  all  the  ardour  of  youth  into  a  crusade  against  the  Christiana. 
The  Jewish  authorities  had  perceived  the  vast  capabilities  of  their  instrument;  and, 
from  the  subsidiary  post  of  holding  the  clothes  of  those  who  stoned  Stephen,  he  rose 
per  saltum  into  the  position  of  arch-persecutor,  and  the  leader  of  the  enterprise  even 
unto  strange  cities.  Not  only  was  he,  then,  an  orthodox,  self-satisfied  Pharisee,  but 
also  he  became  the  chief  man  of  action  in  connection  with  his  party,  the  man  of  most 
abundant  promise. 

II.  Paul's  convkbsion.  Damascus  was  the  goal  to  which  he  and  his  accomplices 
hastened,  when  lo!  he  is  confronted,  not  far  from  the  city,  with  an  overpowering  light, 
and  hears  a  voice  demanding,  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?  "  On  asking  the 
name  of  this  brilliant  and  overpowering  Person,  he  learns  that  it  is  Jesus,  the  risen  and 
glorified  Head  of  the  people  Saul  is  persecuting,  who  has  thus  appeared  to  confound 
and  to  convert  him.  Now,  regarding  this  conversion  let  us  notice :  1.  The  LorcPs 
personal  dealing  ivith  the  sinner.  The  sinner  feels  himself  in  the  hands  of  One  whom 
he  has  wronged  in  his  own  Peison  and  in  the  person  of  his  people.  Conviction  of  sin 
is  just  a  sense  of  injury  done  to  an  innocent  and  loving  Saviour.  Paul  imagined  that 
Jesus  had  passed  out  of  the  category  of  living  factors  in  this  world,  and  now  he  is 
confronted  by  him  with  the  charge  of  persecution.  2.  Paul  dies  immediately  out  of 
all  self-confidence.  As  Adolphe  Monod  has  beautifully  said,  "  Saul  is  converted  from 
the  day,  from  the  hour,  from  the  moment  that,  recognizing  that  he  is  in  himself  wicked, 
unworthy,  lost,  and  for  ever  deprived  of  all  righteousness  before  God,  he  substitutes 
the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  his  own  in  all  his  hopes  of  eternal  life,  and  throws  himself 
without  reserve  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  as  a  poor  sinner  who  has  no  other  resource  in 
the  world  but  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  of  God."^  This  is  what  we  mean  by  his  death 
out  of  self-confidence.  He  recognizes  at  once  the  hoUowness  of  all  his  previous  hopes, 
and  puts  Christ  into  the  place  once  occupied  by  self.  3.  Paul  places  himself  under  the 
command  of  Jesus.  He  cries  out, "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  Henceforth 
he  is  Christ's  slave  (SovKos),  owned  and  ordered  according  to  Christ's  pleasure.  This 
perfect  surrender  of  self  to  the  will  of  the  Saviour  is  the  practical  outcome  of  conversion. 
It  is  a  parallel  to  the  surrender  of  Abraham,  when  he  began  to  be  a  pilgrim  with  God. 
Paul  has  renounced  the  service  of  the  chief  priests  and  accepted  service  under  the 
Nazarene  they  despised.  Arid  :  4.  Paul  receives  from  Jesus  a  new  office.  When  ho 
goes  blind  into  Damascus  and  waits,  he  is  at  length  told  what  he  is  to  do.  He  is  to 
be  admitted  by  baptism  into  the  Christian  Church,  and  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  be  apostle  unto  the  Gentiles  (Acts  ix.  15 — 18).  His  ofiice  is  changed  from  that  of 
Saul  the  persecutor  to  that  of  Paul  thf  apostle.*    And  what  is  it  to  be  an  apostle  ? 

'  Of.  Godet's  'Commentaire  sur  I'Epitre  anx  Komains,'  tome  i.  p.  34 

•  Of.  Lewin's  '  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,'  vol.  i.  p.  11 ;  Conybeare  and  Howson's  '  Life 
and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,'  octavo  edit.,  vol.  i.  p.  27,  etc. 

•  '  Sermons,'  troisifeme  se'rie,  pp.  2C3,  204.  '  Of.  Mnuoil,  ui  nupra,  p.  208. 


44  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL-  TO  THE  ROMANS,     [oh.  i.  1—32. 


It  is  to  found  the  Church  of  God  upon  no  other  basis  than  that  of  the  risen  Jesus.  It 
is  to  be  a  witness  of  Christ's  resurrection,  and  of  all  which  this  cardinal  fact  and 
doctrine  is  to  men.  A  mighty  ofEce,  surely  I  And  notice  how  singular  and  distinct 
Paul  stands.  The  Jews  receive  twelve  apostles,  but  the  Grentiles  only  one ;  yet  Paul 
is  worth  all  the  others  put  together  so  far  as  the  world's  conversion  is  concerned.  Like 
David,  he  was  worth  ten  thousand  common  soldiers. 

III.  Paul's  subsequent  career.  He  began  preaching  Christ  at  once,  just  to  try 
his  hand ;  but  it  was  not  intended  he  should  pass  at  once  from  the  publicity  of 
persecution  to  the  publicity  of  the  apostolic  office.  He  passes  into  the  quiet  of  Arabia, 
and  is  for  about  seven  years  in  an  unobtrusive  sphere  of  probation.  It  is  not  meant 
that  he  spent  seven  years  in  silence ;  doubtless,  wherever  he  was,  he  made  his  neighbours 
feel  his  presence  and  know  his  doctrine.  But  he  was  preparing,  by  earnest  meditation 
and  communion  with  his  Master,  for  his  tremendous  mission.  To  all  in  haste  to  enter 
the  ministerial  office,  Paul's  patient  preparation  is  surely  a  significaDt  lesson !  But 
next  we  find  him  spending  fourteen  years  in  missionary  labours.  Into  the  details  of 
his  joui'neys  we  cannot  here  enter ;  but  they  were  wise  seizing  of  great  centres,  that 
from  these  the  light  of  the  gospel  might  go  abroad.  And  lastly,  Paul  spent  from  five 
to  seven  years — We  cannot  be  quite  certain — in  captivity  at  Cesarea  and  Rome,  enjoying, 
perhaps,  a  short  respite  between  the  two  Roman  captivities,  but  ending  his  career  by 
martyrdom.  It  is  believed  he  was  bom  about  the  year  7  of  our  era ;  was  converted 
when  thirty  years  of  age ;  and  died  when  about  sixty.*  Now,  it  was  as  "  apostle  of 
the  Gentiles  "  that  he  wrote  this  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  He  wrote  it,  as  is  apparent 
from  its  contents,  before  he  had  visited  the  Church.  He  wrote  it  from  Corinth,  to  lay 
before  the  Church  occupying  the  metropolis  of  the  world  "  the  gospel  of  God."  He 
was  not  ashamed  of  that  gospel,  notwithstanding  the  philosophy  and  culture  of  Greece 
or  Rome.  He  knew  the  world's  philosophy,  and  he  felt  that  he  had  found  in  the 
gospel  something  finer  far.  But  we  must  not  anticipate.  Meanwhile  let  Paul's 
conversion  and  apostleship  speak  to  us  of  personal  dealing  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  of 
personal  labour  for  him.  It  has  been  said  that  the  apostolic  race  is  like  a  lost  species. 
Yet  have  we  not  had,  even  in  our  own  time,  men  of  zeal  who  might  even  be  named 
along  with  the  apostles?  David  Livingstone,  William  Chalmers  Burns,  George 
Augustus  Selwyn,  John  Patteson,  and  many  others  have  exhibited  the  long-lost 
apostolic  spirit.  We  want  it  to  come  again ;  and  why  should  it  not,  in  ourselves  ?  Not 
that  we  would  counsel  one  another  to  ambition,  but,  as  Monod  so  well  puts  it,  to 
fidelity.'  Let  us  humble  ourselves,  as  Paul  did  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  through  a 
sense  of  sin  and  shortcoming;  let  us  accept  of  pardon  through  the  Lamb's  precious 
blood ;  and  let  our  cry  be,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  and  the  Saviour 
will  give  each  of  us  a  mission,  as  he  gave  Paul,  and  own  us  as  true  servants  in  the 
accomplishment  of  his  gracious  designs. — R.  M.  E. 

Vera.  2 — 7. — ITie  Ghurch  at  Rome.  We  have  already  got  some  conception  of  the 
author  of  this  Epistle,  of  his  Origin,  training,  conversion,  and  subsequent  career.  And 
now  we  advance  to  the  second  natural  inquiry — Who  were  the  people  composing  the 
Church  at  Rome?  Let  us  fancy,  then,  a  great  city  with,  we  shall  suppose,  about  half 
the  population  of  London — two  millions  of  people  crowded,  of  course,  into  much  smaller 
space  than  in  the  modern  city.  Of  these,  the  half  were  slaves,  the  other  half  citizens. 
But  the  really  influential  or  ruling  class  were  a  small  minority.  The  slaves  catered 
for  their  masters,  so  that  the  opportunities  of  making  a  livelihood  were  nothing  like  so 
numerous  as  in  our  modern  civilization.  A  large  proportion  of  the  citizens  must  have 
been  "  hangers-on  "  to  the  groat,  and  recipients  pf  public  charity.  A  large  city,  there- 
fore, with  vice  and  pauperism  and  a  thousand  evils,  while  the  ameliorations  of  Chris- 
tianity were  not  as  yet  generally  or  widely  known — such  was  Rome.  But,  being  the 
seat  of  government  and  the  metropolis  of  the  world,  it  naturally  attracted  many  from 
the  conquered  provinces,  and  among  these  there  would  be  a  goodly  number  of  Jews. 
With  these  would  associate  "proselytes,"  men  and  women  oi  Gentile  extraction,  who 
were  anxious  to  join  the  Jewish  faith  and  profit  by  the  Jewish  forms.  And  now  let 
us  look  at  OUT  first  fact. 

•  Of.  Godet,  wt  supra,  tome  t.  pp.  74, 75 

*  Mouod'a  '  Sermons,'  ut  iupra,  p.  158. 


OH.  1. 1—32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  46 

L  Jews  and  prosblttes  from  Eomb  weiib  present  at  the  Pentecostal  affu- 
sion OF  THE  Spirit.  This  is  expressly  stated  in  Acts  ii,  10.  Some  of  these,  we  may 
assume,  received  the  truth  as  preached  by  Peter  and  the  other  apostles,  and  were 
converted  to  the  new  faith  (Acts  ii.  41).  If  we  further  suppose  that  the  proselytes, 
rather  than  the  born  Jews,  became  interested  in  Christianity,  then  we  can  understand 
how,  in  the  composition  of  the  Church  at  Borne,  the  Gentile  element  seems  to  have 
been  stronger  than  the  Jewish.  The  new  converts,  in  returning  to  Eome,  would  have 
affinities  with  Gentiles  more  than  with  Jews,  and  so  the  faith  would  be  propagated  in 
the  one  direction  more  than  in  the  other.    We  proceed  to  a  second  important  fact. 

II.  Greek  names  pkedominate  in  the  salutations  of  the  last  chapter  of  this 
Epistle.  TMs  throws  clear  light  upon  the  composition  of  the  Church  when  Paul 
wrote  his  Epistle.  The  Jewish  element  was  in  a  minority,  while  the  Gentile  element 
abounded.  Now,  we  can  easily  understand  how  populations  gravitated  from  the  provinces 
to  Borne,  and  so  converts  would  be  going  up  from  time  to  time  from  the  Gentile 
Churches  to  the  metropolis,  and  so  swelling  the  Gentile  element  in  the  metropolitan 
Church.  This  seems  indicated  by  salutations  in  ch.  xvi.  addressed  to  some  fellow- 
workers  with  Paul,  who  do  not  seem  to  have  come  from  Rome,  like  Aquila  and 
Priscilla,  but  to  have  emigrated  to  it.    A  third  fact  must  be  noted. 

III.  The  Jews  were  expelled  from  Rome  bt  the  Empebob  Claudius.  Now, 
while  this  may  not  have  affected  in  any  great  degree  the  numerical  proportion  in  the 
little  Christian  Church,  we  know  that  it  led  to  some  Jewish  Christians,  e.g.  Aquila  and 
Priscilla  (Acts  xviii.  2),  leaving  the  metropolis  for  other  places.  Upon  this  providence 
Paul's  knowledge  of  the  Church  at  Rome  very  largely  depended.  As  he  wrought  with 
Aquila  and  Prisoilla  at  tent-making,  they  would  have  many  a  long  talk  about  the 
Church  they  had  been  connected  with  in  Rome,  and  to  which  they  subsequently  returned. 

IV.  The  Jews,  when  Paul  at  length  came  to  Rome,  seem  to  have  had  little 
KNOWLEDQB  OF  THE  CHRISTIANS.  This  is  evident  from  Acts  xxviii.  22.  If  we  remember 
the  population  of  ancient  Rome,  also  that  the  Christian  congregation  had  not,  as  far 
as  we  know,  any  church  edifice  giving  notoriety  to  them,  but  were  meeting  appa- 
rently in  the  house  of  Aquila  (oh.  xvi.  5),  then  we  can  understand  the  ignorance  of 
Christianity  the  Jews  possessed  or  pretended  at  Paul's  advent.  The  little  Christian 
conventicle  would  be  easily  hid  in  the  great  city.  The  Church  at  Rome,  then,  from 
the  foregoing  facts,  seems  to  have  been  a  congregation  of  believing  Christians,  occupying 
no  very  commanding  position  in  the  eye  of  the  public,  isolated  in  a  large  measure  from 
other  Churches,  yet  very  influential  through  its  existence  in  the  metropolis.  Its  major 
portion  was  Gentile ;  and  on  this  account  it  received  the  special  attention  of  Paul  as 
"  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles."  Some,  who  went  up  from  provincial  Churches  to  the 
capital,  seem  to  have  carried  Paul's  teaching  with  them,  so  that  he  had  a  kind  of 
spiritual  fatherhood  towards  at  least  some  of  them,  and  a  brotherhood  towards  all. 
How  in  the  Epistle  he  fortifies  them  against  the  errors  by  which  they  should  be  beset, 
will  appear  as  we  proceed.  It  was  a  lady,  Phoebe,  who  carried  up  the  precious 
document.  She  seems  to  have  gone  up  on  some  business  matters,  and  for  her  in  these 
circumstances  Paul  seeks  assistance  and  sympathy  (ch.  xvi.  1,  2). 

V.  Let  us  now  note  the  substance  of  his  opbnino  address  to  this  congrbqa- 
TiON  AT  Rome.  (Vers.  2 — 7.)  And  here  we  notice :  1.  Sis  gospd  is  that  of  the  risen 
Saviour.  This  is  God's  "glad  tidings"  that  his  Son,  who  had  been  made  of  David's 
seed  according  to  the  flesh,  and  delivered  in  human  nature  unto  death  for  us,  had  been 
declared  to  be  his  Son  by  the  powerful,  resistless  demonstration  of  his  resurrection 
from  the  dead.  Paul  and  these  Roman  Christians  were,  therefore,  in  the  hands  of  a 
living,  holy  Being,  no  less  a  Person  than  the  Son  of  God,  whom  death  and  resurrection 
had  denationalized  and  made  Lord  of  all  nations,  who  could  and  would  dispose  of 
them.  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews,  as  he  pleased.  2.  Paul  declares  that  he  had  received 
from  this  risen  Jesus  grace  and  apostleship.  We  saw  in  our  previous  homily  how  he 
was  first  converted,  and  then  was  called  to  the  apostolic  office.  Now,  this  apostleship 
contemplated  the  subjection  of  all  nations  to  the  faith  of  Christ.  It  was  a  mighty 
trust  which  was  thus  committed  to  Paul.  This  Epistle  shows  how  anxiously  he  tried 
to  discharge  it.  3.  These  Roman  Christians  are  also  the  called  of  Jesus  Christ.  For 
though  thera  may  not  be  such  eclat  connected  with  individual  conversion,  as  in  Paul's 
case  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  there  is  yet  as  real  an  interview  between  the  risen 


46  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO    THE  EOMANS.     [ch.  1. 1— 32. 

Saviour  and  the  sinner  he  would  save.  The  words  may  not  be  audible  as  those 
addressed  to  Paul,  but  they  are  heard  within  and  responded  to.  Like  Abraham  and 
like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  we  must  listen  to  the  call  to  come  out  and  follow  Jesus,  if  we  are 
to  be  Christians  indeed.  4.  Their  privilege  is  the  enjoyment  of  Ood's  love,  their  duty 
the  practice  of  holiness.  "  To  all  that  be  in  Rome,  beloved  of  God,  called  to  be  saints." 
This  is  what  we  mean  by  Church-membership;  it  is,  when  real,  an  experience  of  Divine 
love,  and  a  practice  of  holiness.  And,  indeed,  we  have  here  the  whole  plan  of  salvation. 
God's  love  comes  forth  first  to  us,  and  then  we  walk  in  holiness  as  his  grateful  people. 
It  has  been  said  somewhere  by  M.  La  Harpe  that  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  may  be 
summed  up  in  the  words, "  God  has  loved  us,"  and  its  morals  in  the  words,  "  Let  us 
love  God."  1  Of  course,  God  loves  all  men  with  the  love  of  pity,  and  in  consequence  he 
sent  his  Son  into  the  world  to  save  us  (John  iii.  16) ;  but  when  we  respond  to  his  love, 
he  proceeds  to  lavish  on  us  a  particular  love — a  love  of  complacency  and  of  delight 
(John  xiv.  21).  These  Christians  at  Rome  were,  therefore,  the  objects  of  this  special 
love ;  and  they  manifested  the  benefit  ia  holy  lives.  5.  Paul  pronounces  upon  them,  a 
benediction.  Now,  when  we  analyze  it,  we  find  that  "  grace  "  is  the  favour  of  God, 
undeserved,  and  coming  down  in  the  shape  of  pardon.  "  Peace  "  is  the  precious  efi'ect 
produced  in  the  heart  which  receives  the  grace.  The  Source  from  whom  this  benediction 
comes  down  is  "  God  our  Father,"  and  the  Medium  of  communication  is  "  Jesus  Christ." 
In  pronouncing  this  benediction,  the  apostle  desires  that  they  should  have  the  supply 
of  the  grace  as  they  daily  need  it.  The  idea  entertained  by  some,  that  we  receive  in 
conversion  all  the  pardon  we  shall  fever  need,  is  refuted  by  this  benediction  pronounced 
over  the  Roman  "  saints."  The  following  practical  lessons  surely  suggest  themselves  : 
(1)  A  risen  and  living  Saviour  has  entered  upon  the  government  of  the  world.  Paul's 
conversion  and  apostleship,  the  conversion  of  these  Roman  Christians,  the  conversion  of 
men  and  women  still,  all  go  to  prove  this.  We  have  not  in  Christianity  a  dead  man's 
legacy,  like  Buddhism  or  Confucianism,  or  Islamism,  but  a  living  Saviour's  wondrous 
work.  (2)  Its  magnificent  ambition  is  to  bring  all  nations  to  the  obedience  of  faith.  It 
aims  at  world-wide  empire ;  nothing  less  will  content  it.  (3)  Our  sympathy  should 
enlarge  itself  accordingly.  Paul  did  not  restrict  himself  to  Churches  in  the  Orient,  but 
in  sympathy  he  embraced  the  Occident  as  well.  Rome  had  claims  upon  him  just  as 
well  as  Corinth  and  Antiooh.  Let  us  be  large-hearted  too.  (4)  Daily  grace  can  alone 
sustain  us  in  this  sympathy.  The  closer  we  keep  to  the  "  throne  of  grace,"  the  wider 
will  our  sympathies  extend.  There  is  wondrous  power  in  waiting  upon  God.  The 
work  for  him  will  best  advance  when  we  have  waited  on  him  for  his  grace  and 
peace. — E.  M.  B. 

Vers.  8 — 17. — Tlie  policy  to  be  pursued  in  case  Paul  came  to  Borne.  We  tried  tt 
appreciate  in  our  last  homily  the  character  of  the  Church  to  which  Paul  directed  this 
Epistle.  We  now  pass  to  the  policy  he  meant  to  pursue  should  he  ever  reach  Rome ; 
and  which  he  embodies  also  in  this  Epistle.  One  or  two  preliminary  matters,  however, 
will  prepare  us  for  the  climax  in  the  paragraph  before  us.    And — 

I.  Paul  lifts  the  veil  and  shows  himself  at  his  praters.  It  is  a  case  of 
mtercession.  How  noble  and  broad  the  views  contracted  at  the  throne  of  grace !  The 
apostle  becomes  a  statesman  as  he  lies  before  the  Lord.  1.  Se  gives  thanks  for  the 
world-wide  reputation  of  the  Soman  Church.  "  First  I  thank  my  God  through  Jesus 
Christ  for  you  all,  that  your  faith  is  spoken  of  ['  proclaimed,'  Revised  Version]  through- 
out the  whole  world."  Rome,  as  the  metropolis,  had  many  ways  of  communication 
with  its  provinces,  and  the  Church  at  Rome  had  all  the  advantages  of  provincial 
publicity.  In  this  Paul  rejoiced  before  God.  It  led  to  much  discussion  of  the  new 
faith  on  the  part  of  many  who  would  not  otherwise  have  heard  of  it.  Believers  are 
consequently  to  be  witnesses ;  the  world  will  sooner  or  later  hear  of  their  existence. 
2.  Be  presents  ceaseless  intercession  for  the  Roman  Church,  that  he  may  himself  be  sent 
on  a  mission  to  it.  "  For  God  is  my  Witness,  whom  I  serve  with  my  spirit  in  the 
gospel  of  his  Son,"  etc.  (vers.  9 — 12).  Now,  this  intercession  is  not  only  ceaseless,  but 
self-denying.  Oftentimes  intercession  simply  commits  others  to  the  care  of  the  great 
Father,  without  involving  us  in  any  personal  mission.  It  is  different  when  it  con- 
templates such  a  personal  inconvenience  and  sacrifice  as  a  journey  to  Rome  implied  to 
•  Of.  Monsell'a  '  Religion  of  Redemption,'  p.  247, 


CH.  1. 1— 32.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS.  47 

the  apostle.  How  genuine  and  sincere  intercession  proves  when  it  involves  us  in 
arduous  missions !  And  then  this  mission  is  with  a  distinctly  spiritual  purpose — that 
Paul  may,  as  apostle,  communicate  some  "  spiritual  gift "  with  a  view  to  their  estahlish- 
ment  in  the  faith.  How  often  are  missions  undertaken  for  minor  and  temporal  objects, 
a  look  after  Church  organization  and  snoh-like,  instead  of  having  the  revival  and 
establishment  of  saints  steadily  in  view  1  3.  Paul  expects  to  get  good  as  well  os  do  good 
in  visiting  Some.  He  says,  "  that  I  may  be  comforted  together  with  you  by  the 
mutual  faith  both  of  you  and  me  ['  that  1  with  you  may  be  comforted  in  you,  each 
of  us  by  the  other's  faith,  both  yours  and  mine,'  Revised  Version]."  Even  an  apostle 
with  special  gifts  to  convey  expects  reaction  to  follow  his  holy  action ;  he  gets  benefit 
while  giving  it ;  it  is  the  law  of  the  kingdom.  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to 
receive."  ' 

II.  Paul  bevbals  his  missionabt  zeal  towards  Rome  as  a  pubposb  lono 
CHBEISHED,  BUT  HiTHBBTO  HiNDEBBD.  "  Now  I  would  not  havc  you  ignorant,  brethren, 
that  oftentimes  I  purposed  to  come  unto  you  (but  was  let  hitherto),  that  I  might  have 
lome  fruit  among  you  also,  even  as  among  other  Gentiles."  It  was  a  settled  purpose 
pressing  through  long  years  for  accomplishment,  and  the  writing  of  this  Epistle  was  an 
expedient  adopted  amid  the  continued  hindrances.  It  surely  shows  how  determinedly 
sacred  work  should  be  set  about ;  not  as  the  outcome  of  hasty  impulse,  but  as  the 
result  of  deliberate,  prayerful  conviction. 

III.  Paul  pkbsents  us  with  a  wondkous  sense  of  his  indebtedness.  "  I  am 
debtor  both  to  the  Greeks,  and  to  the  barbarians ;  both  to  the  wise,  and  to  the  unwise." 
Writing  in  Greek  to  these  Christians  at  Rome,  he  doubtless,  according  to  custom, 
included  his  correspondents  in  the  term  "  Greeks,"  and  not  in  the  term  "  barbarians."  * 
This  sense  of  universal  indebtedness  arose  out  of  his  commission  as  apostle  to  the 
Gentiles ;  but  it  is  also  a  distinctively  Christian  conviction.  The  genius  of  Christianity 
makes  us  do  good  unto  all  men  as  we  have  opportunity,  and  especially  to  such  as  are 
of  the  household  of  faith  (Gal.  vi.  10).  No  other  system  so  lays  the  burden  of  the 
world's  welfare  on  us.'  Besides,  Paul  did  not  choose  a  certain  class  to  whom  to  minister. 
He  took  men  as  they  came,  "  the  unintelligent "  (Ato^toh)  just  as  readily  as  "  the 
philosophers "  {aoipols).  It  is  noble  to  throw  off  selfishness  so  thoroughly  as  to  feel 
through  Christ  a  debtor  unto  all  men. 

IV.  The  policy  to  be  pursued  was  to  pbeach  the  gospel.  "  So,  as  much  as  in 
me  is,  I  am  ready  to  preach  the  gospel  to  you  that  are  at  Rome  also,"  etc.  (vers. 
16 — 17).  And  here  we  have  to  notice :  1.  The  method  pursued  always  was  preaching 
the  gospel.  It  has  been  said,  "  Preaching  is  an  institute  peculiar  to  the  gospel.  It  is 
an  agency,  previously  unknown,  which  Christianity  has  created  for  itself  to  be  its 
chosen  mode  of  utterance.  Jesus  and  his  messengers  are,  therefore,  the  only  preachers."' 
This  method  of  personal  agency,  this  plan  by  the  pulpit,  not  by  the  press,  is  most 
instructive.  It  secures  a  contact  of  mind  with  mind,  and  heart  with  heart,  which  no 
mechanical  substitute  can  furnish.  Even  if  the  pulpit  had  lost  its  power,  as  is  insinuated 
but  not  proved,  the  one  remedy  for  this  would  be  the  revivifying  of  the  instrumentality.* 
2.  7%e  subject-matter  of  the  preaching  is  the  gospel  of  Christ.  It  is  an  announcement 
of  good  news,  of  which  Christ  is  at  once  Embodiment  and  Author.  Not  a  newspaper, 
with  startling  intelligence  of  a  personal  nature,  but  a  message  with  a  personal  application, 
constitutes  the  subject  of  preaching.  The  good  news  is  this,  that  God,  though  justly 
offended  with  us  because  of  our  sins,  is  yet  prepared  for  Christ's  sake  to  receive  us  into 
his  favour  and  fellowship,  as  if  the  estrangement  had  never  been.  Surely  this  is  what 
each  sinner  needs.  It  suits  the  Roman  and  the  Grecian  and  the  barbarian.'  It  is  a 
message  for  the  whole  human  race.  3.  I%is  gospel  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation 
to  every  one  that  ielieveth."  God  has  many  powers  abroad.  What  destructive  forces 
may  we  see  around  us  I  But  here,  in  contrast,  have  we  his  energy  manifested  fcff  saving 
purposes.     Every  one  who  believes  the  good  news  discovers  that  salvation  is  in  it 

'  Cf.  the  quotation  from  Cicero  given  in  Godet,  in  loc. 

'  For  a  quaint  exposition  of  this  indebtedness,  see  Arnot's  '  Boots  and  Fruits  of  tha 
Christian  Life,'  p.  370. 

•  '  Sermons,'  by  Dr.  J.  O.  Dykes,  p.  34. 

*  Cf.  Rev.  Phillips  Brooks's  '  Lectures  on  Preaching,'  pastfm. 
'  Robertson's  '  Sermons,'  1st  series,  Nos.  xi. — xiii. 


48  THE  EPISTLE  OP   PAUL  TO  THE  R0MAN3,     [oh.  1. 1— 3a. 


The  Jew  got  the  offer  first,  and  then  was  it  given  to  the  Greek ;  bnt  Jew  and  Greek 
alike  experienced  salvation  through  simply  belieyinc;  it,  4.  This  gospel  is  in  addition 
a  revelation  of  God's  righteousness  from  faith  to  faith.  For  the  gospel  is  not  a  promise 
merely,  but  also  an  act  of  judgment.  It  is  God  declaring  from  his  throne  that  he  ia 
prepared  to  pronounce  the  sinner  righteous,  and  to  accept  him  as  if  he  had  faithfully 
kept  his  Law,  because  of  what  Jesus  has  done  and  suffered  in  the  sinner's  room.  It  is 
the  pronunciation  of  a  reprieve  and  the  utterance  of  an  invitation  to  fellowship  all  in 
one.  It  is  God's  public  way  of  burying  our  imperfect  past  and  receiving  iia  into 
immediate  favour.  It  is  only  faith,  of  course,  which  can  take  such  a  revelation  in.  Th» 
condition  of  the  soul  in  sin  leads  sight  to  suppose  that  God's  righteousness  must  be 
always  against  the  sinner ;  but  the  proolamalion  of  the  gospel  leads  faith  to  infer  that 
God's  righteousness  is  now  for  him ;  that  God  somehow  can  maintain  his  character  for 
justice  and  at  the  same  time  be  gracious  to  the  sinner.  The  proclamation  is,  of  course, 
based  upon  the  satisfaction  made  by  our  blessed  Saviour  on  our  behalf.  "  God  can  bo 
just,"  as  we  shall  subsequently  see,  "and  yet  the  Justifier  of  him  who  believeth  in 
Jesus."  5.  The  sinner  so  Justified  lives  hy  his  faith.  Here  we  have  the  grand  con- 
summation. The  faith,  which  simply  receives  God's  offer  of  justification,  becomes  the 
organ  of  life.  We  assure  ourselves  that  we  shall  never  perish  out  of  the  Father's  hand, 
but  continue  through  his  mercy  unto  life  eternal.  Just  as,  under  the  old  covenant,  life 
was  attached  to  obedience,  so,  under  the  new,  life  is  attached  to  justification,  which  in 
its  turn  comes  through  faith.  As  Paul  subsequently  asserts,  "  Being  justified  by  his 
blood,  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through  him.  For  if,  when  we  were  enemies,  we 
were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall 
be  saved  by  his  life  "  (oh.  v.  9, 10).i 

The  practical  bearing  of  this  subject  is  clear.  Have  we  received  the  gracious  message 
by  simple  faith,  "  the  hand  of  the  heart,"  or  have  we  put  it  once  more  from  us?  May 
our  reply  be  satisfactory! — B.  M.  E. 

Vera.  18 — 32. — Ood^s  wrath  as  revealed  among  the  Gentiles.  In  last  homily  we  saw 
that  the  gospel  Paul  meant  to  preach  at  Rome,  if  he  ever  got  there,  was  a  "  revelation 
of  justice"  on  the  part  of  God.  By  his  covenant  arrangements  "  God  can  be  just,  and 
yet  the  Justifier  of  him  who  believeth  in  Jesus."  He  can  proclaim  the  sinner  just  on 
the  ground  of  Christ's  atonement.  But  now  we  are  introduced  to  another  "  revelation  " 
made  in  the  con.stitution  of  the  world — a  revelation  which  is  also  grounded  on  justice, 
but  its  manifestation  is  "  wrath."  The  present  section  deals  with  this  wrath  as  mani- 
fested among  the  Gentiles,  while  the  subsequent  chapter  deals  with  it  as  manifested 
among  the  Jews.  As  we  have  seen  that  the  heathen  element  constituted  the  major 
part  of  the  Church  at  Rome,  and  that  the  Epistle  was  likely  to  touch  at  its  very  centre 
the  heathenism  of  the  world,  we  can  understand  Paul's  purpose  in  placing  the  discussion 
of  the  condition  of  the  heathen  in  the  foreground. 

.  I.  The  state  of  heathen  religion  as  laid  bbfoee  us  hebe  by  Pattl.  (Vers. 
21 — 23.)  In  these  verses  the  apostle  sketches  in  a  very  masterly  manner  the  religious 
situation  of  heathendom.  And  here  we  remark:  1.  2%«  heathen  deities  are  degradations. 
In  some  cases  they  are  "corruptible  men,"  as  the  polytheism  of  Greece  and  of  Rome 
was  the  worship  of  man,  and  the  apotheosis  of  his  evil  propensities.  The  inhabitants 
of  Olympus  and  of  the  Pantheon  were  a  "  free-and-easy  lot."  In  other  cases,  as  in 
Egypt  and  the  East,  they  worshipped  animals  of  all  sorts, — "  birds,  fourfooted  beasts, 
and  creeping  things."  2.  Every  heathen  religion  has  its  rationale.  The  devotees 
imagined  that  they  had  tlie  best  of  reasons  for  their  worship.  They  professed  to  be 
wise  in  the  arrangement,  and  would  have  repudiated  all  charge  of  folly.  The  lowest 
forms  of  fetichism  cam  give  some  account  of  itself,  and  thinks  that  it  rests  on  reason. 

II.  The  state  of  morals  is  degraded  in  pbopobtion  to  the  degradation  of 
RELIGION.  (Vers.  24 — 31.)  It  is  a  natural  transition  from  the  deification  of  human  or 
animal  passions  to  the  practice  of  the  most  frightful  immoralities.  Hence  in  connection 
with  these  degraded  religions  we  find :  1.  Licentiousness  made  religious.  Courtesans 
thronged  the  temples  of  Venu?  as  her  priestesses,  just  as  the  "  nautoh-girls "  in  India 

'  Of.  Llddon's  '  University  Sermons,'  2nd  series,  for  a  good  discussion  of  ver,  16 ;  also 
Moorhonse's  '  Nature  and  Bevelation,'  p.  60 ;  and  Baldwin  Brown's  '  Divine  Life  in  Han.' 
pp.  92—138.  ^^ 


CH.  1. 1— 32.]     THE   EPISTLE   OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  f9 

kave  their  recognized  connection  with  the  Hindoo  temples.  The  moment  man  begins 
to  worship  the  man  of  genius  and  of  passion,  or  begins  to  worship  the  lower  creation, 
as  if  endowed  with  independent  attributes,  by  a  natural  law  he  becomes  lowered  in  the 
scale  of  being.  "  They  that  make  them  [i.e.  '  idols ']  are  like  unto  them ;  so  is  every 
one  that  trusteth  in  them"  (Ps.  cxv.  8).  They  dishonour  themselves  through  licentious- 
ness after  having  dishonoured  God  by  their  ideas  about  divinities.  2.  Bin  tends  still 
further  to  hecome  unnatural.  (Vers.  26, 27.)  In  one  respect,  indeed,  all  sin  is  unnatural ; ' 
its  ultimate  issue  is  against  nature.  It  becomes  a  mystery  how  minds  get  infatuated 
with  it  (Jer.  ii.  12,  13).  But  what  Paul  brings  out  here  is  the  outrageous  lengths  to 
which  unrestrained  licentiousness  will  go.  When  the  sinner  takes  rope  enough,  he 
goes,  as  the  apostle  here  shows,  to  the  most  debasing  and  disgusting  lengths,  being 
worse  in  this  matter  of  lust  than  the  beasts  that  perish.  3,  Sinners  tend  still  further 
to  ie  reprobate  cmd  reckless.  (Vers.  28 — 31.)  The  point  of  the  Greek  is  very  beautiful 
in  ver.  28.  It  might  be  rendered  thus :  "  And  even  as  they  reprobated  (oix  iSoKi/uuray) 
the  idea  of  having  God  in  their  knowledge,  God  gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  (iSiitinoi^ 
mind,"  etc.  The  judicial  element  in  the  reprobate  condition  is  strictly  retributive. 
Since  they  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  God  even  In  idea,  he  must  return  their  indignity 
and  permit  them  to  pass  into  the  reprobate  condition,  i.e.  the  condition  which  he  can- 
not approve  of,  but  must  loathe  with  his  whole  soul.  The  terrible  catalogue  need  not 
be  taken  up  in  detail.  It  is  headed  by  the  generic  term  "unrighteousness"  (iSiiela), 
indicating  that  the  spirit  of  injustice  pervades  the  whole.  Society  is  going  morally  to 
pieces.  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  truth  of  the  dark  picture  in  Greece,  in 
Borne,  and  in  other  heathen  lands.  But  then  the  sinners  become  reckless  as  well  as 
reprobate.  Even  with  the  fate  of  others  staring  them  in  the  face,  they  continue  their 
desperate  game,  and  despise  the  consequences.' 

III.  In  this  degradation  we  mat  becoonizb  a  ebvblation  or  Divinb  wbath. 
This  is  the  point  of  the  passage.  God  is  angry  with  the  heathen  who  so  degrade  him 
in  their  thoughts,  and  all  their  inconvenient  sin  is  his  judgment  against  them.  Paul 
does  not  assert  the  sufficiency  or  finality  of  present  judgment,  but  simply  asks  us  to 
recognize  it  as  clearly  from  God.  It  comes  about  according  to  natural  law,  but  it  is 
not  on  that  account  any  the  less  the  sentence  of  the  Lord  who  ordereth  all.  Sinners 
go  from  bad  to  worse.  They  are  punished  through  their  sins ;  these  sins  are  not  self- 
reformatory,^  but  manifestly  judicial.  It  is  a  vast  subject,  that  of  the  Divine  wrath ; 
we  do  not  understand  it  in  its  vast  proportions  doubtless;  we  may  well  exclaim  with 
Moses,  "Who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  anger?"  yet  of  its  reality  no  impartial 
observer  of  man's  sins  and  their  consequences  can  be  in  doubt.* 

IV.  The  heathen  deserve  to  suffbb  through  their  sins  bboause  op  theib 
MISUSE  OF  THE  LIGHT  OF  NATURE.  (Vers.  18 — 20.)  Now,  what  does  Paul  mean  by 
saying  they  are  inexcusable  ?  Not  certainly  that  "  the  light  of  nature  "  is  sufficient  for 
salvation,  if  properly  used.  But  simply  that  with  "  the  light  of  nature  "  they  have  no 
excuse  for  such  a  degradation  of  Ood,  and  deserve  to  suffer  for  it.  What,  then,  Joes 
nature  teach  us  regarding  God?  Now,  if  you  observe  the  accuracy  of  the  apot tie's 
position,  you  will  find  him  dividing  this  revelation  about  God  into  two  parts — the 
revelation  in  our  own  human  nature  (ver.  19),  and  the  revelation  in  the  natural  world 
without  (ver.  20).  And  he  maintains  that  God  has  been  speaking  to  us  by  both. 
Now,  when  I  look  within  and  analyze  myself,  I  am  conscious  of  the  light  of  intelligence 
and  of  conscience.  Human  nature  is  certain  of  possessing  these,  if  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  certainty  at  all.  When,  then,  human  nature  begins  the  study  of  nature,  it 
expects  to  find  in  nature  the  expression  of  thoughts  like  its  own.  As  it  has  been  very 
accurately  said,  "  God  utters  his  mind  in  his  works,  and  that  mind  is  like  our  own.  In 
fact,  science  would  be  impossible  if  it  were  not  so.  Science  is  the  observation  and 
interpretation  of  nature  by  man.  Clearly  the  world's  Maker  and  the  world's  observer 
must  have  something  in  common,  if  the  observer  is  to  understand  the  Maker's  meaning, 
A  world  put  together  by  a  Being  utterly  unlike  nie,  whose  notions  of  truth,  of  utility, 
of  purpose,  of  beauty,  bore  no  manner  of  relation  to  mine  at  all,  would  be  a  wcrld  I 

'  Of.  Woolsey's  '  Religion  of  the  Present  and  the  Future,'  p.  87,  etc. 

•  On  Tor.  32,  see  a  characteristic  sermon  of  Dr.  South's,  5th  folio  edit ,  vol  i.  p.  22S. 

•  Cf  laa.  i.  5,  and  Dr.  Woolsey's  sermon  upon  it,  ut  tupra,  p.  102. 

•  Of.  Ur   Dykes'  'Sermons,'  p.  205. 

BOUANS.  K 


m 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  a.  1—29. 


conld  never  understand,  and  could  take  no  pleasure  whatever  in  examining.  It  would 
be  a  chaos  where  I  should  fail  to  trace  either  method  or  meaning.  But  the  real  world 
we  know,  search  it  at  what  point  you  please,  answers  the  intellectual  demands  of  its 
human  student;  it  satisfies  the  reason  and  it  gratifies  the  taste  of  its  human  observer. 
In  it  a  man  detects  with  joy  another  mind  at  work  similar  in  its  great  features  to  his 
own ;  and  this  is  at  bottom,  I  expect,  the  secret  of  its  fascination."  ^  Let  us,  then,  take 
up  nature  in  this  way,  and  we  shall  find  it  conveying  to  us  clear  evidence  of  God's 
"  eternal  power  and  Divinity."  The  world  without  and  within  witnesses  to  his  power ; 
it  is  an  effect,  and  he  is  the  first  and  eternal  Cause.  We  also  attribute  to  him  those 
qualities  by  virtue  of  which  he  has  become  Creator  of  such  a  world ;  we  grasp  the  idea 
of  his  Divinity  (of.  Godet,  in  he).  In  degenerating  into  their  polytheisms,  therefore, 
the  heathen  were  misusing  "  the  light  of  nature."  Their  degradation  was  quite 
inexcusable.    They  deserved  the  wrath  to  which  God  subjected  them. 

V.   We  ought  to  consider   OUB  greater  BBSPONSIBILITr  UNDER  THE  LIGHT  OF  OUR 

OREATER  BEVELATIOM.  God  has  added  to  the  light  of  nature.  He  has  given  us  the 
Bible.  Our  conceptions  of  God  should  be  correspondingly  elevated.  But  oh  1  if,  not- 
withstanding all  this  light,  we  degrade  God  in  our  thoughts  and  descend  to  real  idolatry, 
the  idolatry  of  money,  of  ambition,  of  success,  our  judgment  must  be  intensified  in 
comparison  with  that  of  the  pagans.  In  particular,  let  us  remember  how  God  has 
assumed  human  form  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  so  enabled  us  to  know  him 
through  the  mild  radiance  of  a  perfect  life.  Let  such  a  revelation  have  its  full  effect 
upon  us,  leading  us  to  love  God  and  worship  him  and  serve  him  with  our  whole  hearts. 
Jesus  becomes  the  great  Iconoclast,  and  before  him  every  Dagon  falls. — B.  M.  E. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  II. 


Veri.  1 — 29. — (5)  Those  who  judge  othert, 
not  excepting  the  Jews.  Here  a  new  stage 
of  the  argument,  in  proof  of  the  position 
propounded  in  oh.  i.  18,  begins,  and  is  con- 
tinued to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  The 
position  to  be  proved  is  that  all  mankind 
is  gmlty  before  God  (see  note  on  ver.  18). 
So  far  this  has  been  shown  with  regard  to 
the  mass  of  the  heathen  world ;  its  general 
moral  corruption,  prevalent  and  condoned, 
having  been  pointed  out  finally  as  a  glaring 
proof;  the  main  point  of  the  argument 
having  been  to  trace  this  state  of  things 
<K>  man's  own  fault,  in  that  he  had  refused 
to  retain  and  act  on  a  knowledge  of  God 
originally  imparted  to  him  through  nature 
and  through  conscience.  From  such  refusal 
had  ensued  idolatry ;  thence,  as  a  judicial 
consequence,  profligacy ;  thence  a  general 
prevalence  of  abominable  practices ;  and 
at  last  (in  many  at  least)  the  "reprobate 
mind,"  lost  to  moral  restraint,  and  approv- 
ing of  vice  as  well  as  practising  it.  Thus 
it  is  sufiSciently  proved  that  the  heathen 
world,  regarded  as  a  whole,  is  under  sin, 
and  liable  to  the  wrath  of  God. 


But  the  required  proof  that  the  whole  of 
mankind  is  guilty  is  not  yet  complete.  It 
miglit  be  said  that  there  are  many  stiU  who 
disapprove  of  all  this  wickedness,  and  sit 
in  judgment  on  it,  and  who  are,  therefore, 
not  themselves  implicated  in  the  guilt. 
To  such  persons  the  apostle  now  turns,  his 
purpose  being  to  show  that  their  judging 
others  does  not  exempt  themselves,  unless 
they  can  show  that  they  are  themselves  sin- 
less. All,  he  argues,  are  tainted  with  sin, 
and  therefore  implicated  in  the  guilt  of 
the  human  race,  while  the  very  fact  of  their 
judging  others  condemns  them  all  the 
more. 

It  is  usually  said  by  commentators  that, 
the  sin  of  the  heathen  world  having  been 
established  in  the  first  chapter,  the  second 
has  reference  exclusively  to  the  Jews.  But 
this  is  surely  not  so.  Tiie  expressions,  i 
&v6pu)Tre  and  was  &  Kplvotv  (vers.  1,  3),  seem 
evidently  to  include  M  who  judge  others ; 
and  it  is  not  till  ver.  9  that  any  distinction 
between  Jew  and  Gentile  comes  in.  Nor 
would  the  argument  have  been  complete 
without  refutation  of  Gentile  as  well  as 
Jewish  judgers  of  others.  For  the  philo- 
sophical schools  especially  claimed  snperi' 


'  Dr.  Dykes'  'Sermons,'  pp.  102, 103;  see  also  John  Howe's  ''Works'  for  a  sermon  on 
ver.  20;  and  Soutli's  '  Sermons,'  ut  mpm,  vol.  i.  p.  250. 


OH.  n.  1—29.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  R0MAN3. 


61 


oriiy  to  the  mags  of  mankind,  and  would  be 
likely  to  resent  their  own  inolnsion  in  the 
general  condemnation.  Notably  the  Stoics, 
whose  philosophy  was  at  that  time,  as  well 
aa  that  of  the  Epicureans,  extensirely  pro- 
fessed by  educated  Bomans.  Seneca  was 
a  oontemporary  of  St.  Paul.  The  Stoica 
might  be  snitably  designated  as  oi  Kplrovres : 
for  they  affected  to  look  down  from  a  posi- 
tion of  calm  philosophical  superiority  on 
those  who  followed  their  mere  natural  im- 
pulses, professing  to  be  themselves  guided 
by  right  reason,  and  superior  to  the  passions 
of  ordinary  humanity.  It  was  a  home-thrust 
kt  them  to  ask— Are  you,  who  thus  judge 
others,  as  exempt  as  you  profess  to  be  from 
the  vices  you  condemn?  If  the  accounts 
that  have  come  down  to  us  of  Seneca's  own 
life  be  true,  he  certainly  was  not  a  paragon 
of  virtue.  Now,  be  it  observed  that  the  sort 
of  people  now  addressed  are  not  concluded 
to  be  sunk  into  all  the  depths  of  sin  spoken 
of  above;  their  very  affecting  to  judge  others 
implies,  at  any  rate,  theoretic  approval  of  the 
right.  Nor  does  St,  Paul  anywhere  suggest 
that  there  is  no  difference  between  man 
and  man  with  regard  to  moral  worth  before 
God ;  nay,  in  this  very  chapter  he  forcibly 
declares  the  moral  excellence  of  some,  with- 
out the  Law  as  well  as  with  the  Law,  and 
eternal  life  as  its  reward  (vers.  7,  10, 14, 15). 
All  he  implies  of  necessity  is-  that  none 
whatever  are  so  exempt  from  sin  as  to  be 
in  a  position  to  judge  otiiers ;  and  it  is  the 
judgment  of  others  that  he  here  especially 
attacks,  as  increasing,  rather  than  exempt- 
ing from,  condemnation.  For  it  involves  in 
itself  the  sin  of  presumption,  unless  those 
that  judge  are  sinless.  But  it  may  be 
■•id  that  the  universal  sinfulness  of  man- 
kind is  still  not  proved.  For  (1)  it  is  not 
actually  demonstrated  that  all  of  those  who 
judge  "  do  the  same  things."  The  answer 
to  this  objection  is,  that  this  does  not  admit 
of  rigid  proof,  and  that  therefore  the  apostle 
deems  it  enough  to  appeal  to  the  consciences 
of  the  judgers  themselves  as  to  how  the 
matter  stands  with  them.  But  it  may  be 
said  (2)  that  the  sinfulness  of  such  persons 
as  are  spoken  of  in  vers.  7,  10, 14,  15,  29 — 
suoh,  namely,  as  sincerely  strive  after  good 
without  setting  themselves  up  as  judges — ^is 
still  unproved.  So  it  la  in  this  chapter; 
and,  for  logical  completeness,  the  proof  must 


be  taken  as  implied.  It  was,  we  may  suppose 
in  the  writer's  mind,  and  afterwards,  in  eh. 
vii.,  where  the  inner  consciousness  of  even 
the  best  is  analyzed,  the  missing  link  of  th* 
argument  is  supplied. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Therefore  thou  art  inexoni- 
able,  0  man,  whosoever  thou  art  that  judgest : 
for  wherein  thou  judgest  another,  thou  con- 
demnest  thyself;  for  thou  doest  (rather, 
dott  praetUe ;  the  word  is  wpda-ffeis,  see  cb. 
i.  32)  the  same  things.  But  we  know  that 
the  judgment  of  God  is  acoordiug  to  truth 
against  them  which  commit  (or,  practise,  as 
before)  such  things.  At  has  been  observed 
above,  the  fact  that  irSs  6  Kplrtiv  "  does  the 
same  things,"  is  not  proved ;  it  is  incapable 
of  patent  proof,  and  so  the  argument  takes 
the  form  of  an  appeal  to  the  consciences  of 
such  persons.  "  Porro  quia  ipsos  interioiis 
impuritatis  insimulat,  qucs  ut  humanos 
oculos  latet,  redargui  couvinoique  neqneat 
humanis  testimoniis,  ad  Dei  judicium  provo- 
cat,  cui  nee  tenebrse  ip^se  sunt  absconditss, 
et  cujus  sensu  tangi  peocatoribus,  velint  no- 
lint,  necesse  est"  (Calvin).  On  xaTh  aKit- 
Betay,  in  ver.  2,  Calvin  also  remarks, "  Veritas 
porro  hsec  judioii  in  duobus  consistit :  quod 
sine  personarum  respeotu  delictum  puniet, 
in  quoounque  deprehenderit  homine;  deinde 
quod  externam  speoiem  non  moratur,  ueo 
opere  ipso  contentus  est  nisi  a  vera  sinceri- 
tate  animi  prodeat." 

Vers.  3,  4. — And  tMnkest  thou  this,  0 
man,  that  judgest  them  which  practise  such 
things,  and  doest  the  same,  that  thou  (aii, 
emphatic)  Shalt  escape  the  judgment  of 
Qoit  Or  despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his 
goodness  and  forbearance  and  long-suffer- 
ing ;,  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  Ood 
leadeth  thee  to  repentance?  Two  possible 
mental  attitudes  of  i  Kpiray  are  supposed — 
that  of  really  calculating  (Xoy/fj))  on  es- 
caping the  judgment,  or  that  of  obduration, 
consequent  on  God's  long  forbearance  to- 
wards him,  in  that "  sentence  is  not  executed 
speedily."  (For  a  similar  view  of  God's 
merciful  purpose  in  delaying  the  final  judg- 
ment, and  of  man's  abuse  of  his  forbearance, 
of.  2  Pet.  iii.  9.) 

Ver.  5. — But  after  thy  hardness  and  urn- 
penitent  heart  treasurest  up  unto  thyself 
wrath  in  the  day  of  wrath  and  revelation  of 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God.  The  "  day 
of  wrath  "  is  the  day  of  judgment,  the  final 
display  of  eternal  righteousness,  when  the 
"forbearance"  will  be  over;  ever  repre- 
sented, notwithstanding  the  world's  re- 
demption, under  a  terrible  aspect  for  the 
persistentiy  impenitent  (cf.  2  Thess.  i.  9). 
It  may  be  here  observed  again  that  it  is 
6  Kplvav  against  whom  these  indignant 
den'mniations  are  hurled,  and  this  on  the 


52 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  n.  1—29. 


very  ground  of  his  thus  setting  himself  up  to 
judge  while  being  himself  guilty.  Of  him  it 
is  implied,  not  only  that  he  shares  the  guilt 
of  mankind,  but  also  that  he  especially  will 
not  etcape  the  final  judgment.  Of  others 
who,  conscious  of  their  own  failings,  seek 
sincerely  after  good,  this  is  not  said,  however 
liable  to  condemnation  on  their  own  mere 
merits  they  may  be.  Indeed,  the  contrary 
is  emphatically  assorted  in  the  verses  that 
follow ;  nay,  even  eternal  life  is  assured  to 
such,  whoever  tbey  may  be,  and  under  what- 
ever dispensation,  though  it  does  not  tail 
within  the  scope  of  the  :irgument  to  explain 
in  this  place  why  or  how.  It  is  important 
for  us  to  see  this  clearly  for  an  understand- 
ing of  the  drift  of  the  chapter,  and  of  St. 
Paul's  whole  doctrine  with  respect  to  human 
sin  and  its  consequences. 

Ver.  6. — Who  wUl  render  to  every  man 
Booording  to  his  works.  This  assertion  is 
no  contradiction  of  the  main  portion  of  the 
Epistle  as  it  proceeds,  as  to  justification 
being  not  of  works ;  the  phrase  here  being, 
not  on  account  of  his  works,  but  according 
to  them.  "  Nequaquam  tamen  quid  valeant. 
Bed  quid  illis  debeatur  pretU  pronunoiat" 
(Calvin).  The  ground  of  justification  is  not 
here  involved.  All  that  is  asserted  is  what 
is  essuntial  to  any  true  conception  of  God's 
justice,  viz.  that  he  baa  regard  to  what  men 
are  in  assigning  reward  or  punishment;  it 
is  what  is  given  iu  Heb.  xi.  6  as  a  first 
principle  of  faith  about  God,  "  that  he  is  a 
Eewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him." 
It  is  further  evident  from  eKdartp,  and  still 
more  from  all  that  follows,  that  all  such  will 
be  so  rewarded,  whether  before  Christ  or 
aft«r  his  coming,  whether  knowing  him  or 
not  knowing  him.  Nor  is  the  inclusion  of 
the  latter  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine 
that  salvation  is  through  Christ  alone.  For 
the  eifeot  of  his  atonement  is  represented  as 
retrospective  as  well  as  prospective,  and  as 
availing  virtually  for  all  mankind  (of.  ch, 
iii.  25;  v.  15,  18,  20).  Hence  the  narrow 
doctrine  of  some  divines,  who  would  confine 
the  possibility  of  salvation  to  those  who 
have  had  in  some  way  during  life  a  con- 
scious faith  iu  the  atonement,  is  evidently 
not  the  doctrine  of  St.  Paul. 

Vers.  7 — 9. — To  them  who  by  patient 
continnanoe  in  well-doing  (literally,  good 
work,  Ipyov  ayaBod,  with  reference  to  epya 
preceding)  seek  for  glory  and  honour  and 
immortality  (literally,  incorruplion,  &^0ap- 
alav),  eternal  life.  Eat  nuto  them  whioh 
are  contentions  (so  Authorized  Version ;  in 
Kevised  Version,  factiout.  As  to  true  mean- 
ing, see  below),  and  do  not  obey  the  truth, 
but  obey  nnrighteousness,  indignation  and 
wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish,  upon  every 
soul  of  man  that  doeth  (rather,  worJceth, 
ipya{oji4y^,  with  referuuoe  again  to  iy>7a  in 


ver.  6)  evil,  of  the  JTew  first,  and  also  of  the 
Qentile  (literally,  Qreek).  The  expression, 
Tols  4i  ipiSelas,  is  rendered  in  the  Authorized 
Version  "  them  which  are  contentious," 
ipiOela  being  translated  "contention"  also 
in  2  Cor.  xii.  20;  Gal.  v.  20;  Phil.  i.  16; 
ii.  3 ;  Jas.  iii.  14,  16.  So,  too,  the  Vulgate, 
qui  sunt  ex  contentione ;  and  similarly 
Origen,  Chrysostom,  CEcumenius,  Theo- 
phylact,  Erasmui,  Luther,  Beza,  Calvin, 
etc.  This,  however,  is  not  the  classical 
sense  of  the  word,  which  is  not  connected 
with  epis  ("strife"),  but  with  ?pi9oi,  which 
means  originally  a  day  labourer,  or  a  worker 
for  hire,  being  so  used  in  Homer.  Henca 
ipiBsia  meant  (1)  labour  for  wages,  and  came 
to  mean  (2)  canvassing  or  intriguing  for 
office,  and  (3)  faction,  or  party-spirit  (cf. 
Arist., '  Pol.,'  5.  2,  6 ;  3,  9).  Notwithstand- 
ing the  weight  of  ancient  authority  for  its 
bearing  the  sense  of  "contention  "  in  the  New 
Testament,  that  of  "faction"  seems  more 
likely  and  suitable  in  the  passages  where  it 
occurs;  and  certainly  so  here,  the  idea  seem- 
ing to  be  that  the  persons  spoken  of  factiously 
renounced  their  allegiance  to  "the  truth," 
obeying  liStKia  instead.  We  observe  how 
expressions  are  here  heaped  up,  significant 
of  the  Divine  indignation  against  high- 
handed sin,  unrepented  and  unatoned  for, 
of  which  the  apostle,  in  very  virtue  of  his 
view  of  the  eternal  Si/cacoo-rfrrj,  had  an  awful 
sense  (see  above  on  ch.  i.  18;  and  of.  I 
Thess.  i.  8,  etc. ;  and  also  Heb.  x.  27 ;  iii. 
29).  Still,  neither  this  verse  nor  ver.  5 
is  of  necessity  inconsistent  with  other 
well-known  passages,  where  St.  Paul  seems 
to  contemplate  God's  reconciliation  in  the 
end  of  all  things  to  himself  in  Christ 
(see  oh.  v.  15,  et  seq. ;  1  Cor.  xv.  24 — 29 ; 
Eph.  i.  9,  10,  22,  23;  Col.  i.  20).  The 
"  indignation  and  wrath  "  spoken  of  in  the 
passages  before  us  (being,  as  was  said 
under  oh.  i.  18,  inseparable  from  a  full  con- 
ception ot  the  eternal  righteousness)  may 
still  be  conceived  as  having  a  corrective  as 
well  as  a  punitive  purpose.  Nor  is  the 
doctriue  whioh  has  been  called  that  of 
"eternal  hope"  of  necessity  precluded  by 
statements  which  imply  no  more  tlian  that 
sin,  unrepented  and  unatoned  for,  must  in- 
evitably undergo  its  doom  in  the  unknown 
regions  of  eternity.  The  thought,  at  the 
end  of  ver.  9,  for  the  first  time  passes 
distinctly  to  the  Jew's  assumed  exemp- 
tion from  the  condemnation  of  the  rest 
of  mankind;  and  to  this  exclusively  the 
remainder  of  the  chapter  is  devoted.  The 
"indignation,"  etc.,  it  is  said,  will  be  upon 
the  Jew  first  (cf.  ch.  i.  16),  which  may  mean 
either  in  the  first  instance,  or  prinoipally. 
His  priority  in  Divine  favour  involves 
priority  in  retribution,  while  his  pre-eminence 
in  privilege  carnea  with  it  corresponding 


OH.  II.  1—29.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


63 


responsibility  (of.  Luke  xii.  47,  48 ;  also 
Pb.  1.  3—8  and  1  Pet.  iv.  17).  Then  in 
ver.  10  a  like  priority  is  assigned  to  the  Jew 
with  respect  to  reward,  the  general  assertion 
of  ver.  7  being  repeated  (with  aome  differ- 
ence of  expression)  in  order  to  complete  the 
view  of  his  prior  position  in  both  respects. 
For  the  covenant  was  with  the  Jews;  the 
promises  were  to  them :  the  Gentiles  were 
as  the  wild  olive  tree,  graffed  in,  and  made 
partakers  of  the  root  and  fatness  of  the  olive 
tree  (ch.  li.  17).  "  Judssi  partioeps  Grsecus" 
(Bcngel). 

Vera.  10,  11. — But  glory,  honour,  and 
peace,  to  every  man  that  worketh  good, 
to  the  Tew  first,  and  also  to  the  Qentile 
(literally,  Greek,  as  before) :  for  there  is  no 
respect  of  persons  with  God  (cf.  Acts  x. 
34).  Tills,  with  what  follows,  is  important, 
as  bringing  out  in  a  striking  way  the  clear 
doctrine  of  the  New  Testament  that  the 
Jews  had  no  monopoly  of  Divine  favour 
with  respect  to  final  salvation.  Whatever 
advantages  certain  races  of  mankind  seem 
undoubtedly  to  have  above  others  in  this 
world  (and  that  this  has  been,  and  is  so, 
with  other  races  as  well  as  the  Jews  is 
obvious),  all  men  are  described  as  standing 
on  an  exactly  equal  footing  at  the  bar  of 
eternal  equity. 

Ver.  12. — For  as  many  as  have  sinned 
without  Law  {av6ij.us)  shall  also  perish  with- 
out Law  (avdixasy  Their  perdition,  if  it 
ensues,  will  not  be  due  to  transgression 
of  a  code  they  had  not,  but  to  sin  against 
such  liglit  as  they  had ;  if  without  know- 
ledge of  Law  they  sinned,  w  ithout  reference 
to  Law  their  doom  will  be.  And  as  many 
as  have  sinned  in  Law  (or,  under  Law.  'Ej/ 
v6ix(f  denotes  the  condition  in  which  they 
were ;  of.  4i>  irspiro/j-y  and  ev  okpo^vittIii, 
oh.  iv.  10)  shall  be  judged  by  Law.  The 
requirements  of  the  Ijaw  which  they  knew 
they  will  be  held  accountable  for  trans- 
grccsing — Kpi9ii(rovTai  here,  instead  of  h-iro- 
\ovvTtti,  because  a  definite  standard  of 
judgment  is  supposed  (of.  Ps.  1.). 

Ver.  13. — Por  not  the  hearers  of  Law  are 
just  before  Ood,  but  the  doers  of  Law  shall 
be  justified.  In  this  verse,  aa  in  the  previous 
one,  v6fi.ov  is  anarthrous  according  to  the 
best-supported  readings,  though  the  Textus 
Receptus  has  toS  before  it.  It  has,  there- 
fore, been  rendered  above  simply  as  law,  not 
as  either  the  laii\  or  o  law,  as  the  same  word 
will  be  below,  whenever  it  stands  by  itself 
without  either  the  article  or  any  modifying 
genitive.  Much  has  been  written  by  com- 
mentators on  the  senses  iu  which  this  word 
v6na^  is  to  be  understood,  as  used  by  St. 
Paul  with  or  without  the  article.  In  an 
Appendix  to  the  Introduction  to  the  Epistle 
to  the  Romans  in  the  '  Speaker's  Com- 
Mentary '  will  be  found  a  summary  of  the 


views  taken  by  critics  of  repute,  with  ex- 
haustive references  to  the  usage  of  the  word 
in  the  Septuagint,  in  the  Kew  Testament 
generally,  and  in  the  writings  of  St.  PauL 
It  has  not  been  thought  necessary  in  this 
Commentary  to  discuss  further  what  has 
been  so  amply  discussed  already.  It  may 
suffice  to  state  certain  principles  for  the 
reader's  guidance,  which  appear  plainly  to 
commend  themselves  to  acceptance.  (1)  'O 
v6iios,  with  the  article  pretixed,  always 
means  the  Mosaic  Law.  (2)  n6hos,  without 
the  article,  may  have,  and  often  has,  specific 
reference  to  the  Mosaic  Law  ;  but,  if  so,  the 
omission  of  the  article  is  not  arbitrary,  but 
involves  a  diflerence  of  meaning.  The 
article  in  Greek  is  prefixed  to  a  word  when 
the  latter  is  intended  to  convey  some 
definite  idea  already  familiarized  to  the 
mind,  and  "  the  natural  effect  of  its  presence 
is  to  divert  the  thoughts  from  dwelling  on 
the  peculiar  import  of  the  word,  and  is 
adverse  to  its  inherent  notion  standing  out 
as  a  prominent  point  in  the  sense  of  the 
passage"  (quoted  from  'Grammar  of  the 
New  Testament  Dialect,'  by  T.  S.  Green, 
in  Appendix  to  Introduction  to  Romans  in 
the  '  Speaker's  Commentary ').  Hence  the 
omission  of  the  article,  where  it  might  have 
been  used,  before  a  word  has  often  the  effect 
of  empha.sizing  and  drawing  attention  to 
the  inherent  notion  of  the  word.  We  may 
take  as  an  instance  ver.  17  in  this  chapter, 
where  the  Textus  Receptus  has  inavaTvain) 
T$  vS/ia!,  but  where  the  preferable  reading 
omits  the  article.  In  either  case  the  Mosaic 
Law  is  referred  to ;  but  the  omission  of  the 
article  brings  into  prominence  the  principle 
of  justification  on  which  the  Jew  rested — 
viz.  Law,  which  exacts  entire  obedience. 
In  the  following  verse  (the  eighteenth),  in 
the  phrase,  Karrixo^fA^yos  4k  rov  y6fiov,  the 
article  is  inserted,  the  intention  being 
simply  to  say  that  the  Jew  was  instructed 
in  the  well-known  Law  of  Moses.  The  same 
difference  of  meaning  is  intimated  by  the 
omission  or  insertion  of  the  article  in  ver.  23 
and  elsewhere  in  other  parts  of  the  cliapter 
and  of  the  whole  Epistle  (see  especially 
ch.  vii.).  The  apostle,  who,  however  spon- 
taneous and  unstudied  might  be  his  style 
of  writing,  by  no  means  used  phrases  at 
random,  would  not  surely  have  thus  varied 
his  expressions  so  often  in  one  and  the  same 
sentence  without  intended  significance.  (3) 
N6/1.0S  without  the  article  seems  evidently 
in  many  passages  to  be  used  by  St.  Paul 
to  denote  law  in  the  abstract,  without  any 
exclusive  reference  to  the  Mosaic  Law  at  all, 
or  to  any  particular  code  of  law.  Doubtless 
the  Mosaic  Law,  in  which  he  had  been 
educated,  and  which  he  had  painfully  proved 
the  impossibility  of  keeping  perfectly,  hail 
been  to  him  the  grand  embodiment    anJ 


51 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  n.  1— 2a 


representative  of  law;  but  he  had  hence 
been  led  to  an  abstract  conception,  ever 
before  his  mind,  of  law  as  representing  the 
principle  of  exaotiom  of  full  obedience  to 
requirements ;  and  when  he  says,  as  he  so 
often  does,  that  by  law  no  man  can  be 
justified,  he  means  that  none  can  be  so  on 
the  principle  of  complete  conformity  being 
required  to  the  behests  of  Divine  rigliteoua- 
ness,  whether  as  revealed  from  Mount  Sinai 
or  through  the  human  conscience,  or  iu  any 
other  way ;  for  by  law  is  the  knowledge  of 
sin  and  consequent  guilt,  but  not  the  power 
of  avoiding  lin.  Those  who  ignore  the 
distinction  as  above  explained,  saying,  as 
some  do,  that  v6iu>s,  whether  with  or  without 
the  article,  always  means  simply  the  Law 
of  Moses,  fail  to  enter  into  the  depth  and 
generality  of  the  apostle's  argument.  The 
distinction  will  be  observed  in  this  transla- 
tion throughout  the  Epistle  (i  pSfios  being 
translated  "the  Law,"  and  yit/aoj  "law"), 
and  it  will  be  found  always  to  have  a  mean- 
ing. (For  one  instance  in  which  it  is  hardly 
possible  to  suppose  St.  Paul  to  have  omitted 
and  inserted  the  article  in  the  same  sentence 
without  a  meaning,  of.  Gal.  iv.  21.) 

Vers.  14,  15. — For  when  Gentiles,  virhich 
have  not  law,  do  by  nature  (or,  having  not  law 
by  nature,  do ;  cf.  ver.  27,  ri  ix  (jjiffews  ixpo- 
fivffTia)  the  things  of  the  law  (i.e.  the  Mosaic 
Law),  these,  not  having  law,  are  law  unto 
themselves;  which  (^o'h-ives,  with  its  usual 
significance  of  quippequi)  show  the  work  of 
the  Law  written  in  their  hearts,  their  con- 
scieuoe  also  hearing  witness  (or,  hearing 
witness  therewith),  and  their  thoughts  be- 
twixt each  other  accnsing  or  else  excusing 
(not,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version,  meanwhile 
accusing  or  else  excusing  one  another,  |UeToJ{i 
being  used  as  a  preposition,  governing  ItW^i- 
\ar).  The  "  for  "  at  the  beginning  of  ver. 
14  connects  it  with  the  preceding  one  thus : 
"Not  hearers  but  doers  of  law  will  be  justified." 
The  Jew,  therefore,  has  no  advantage  in  the 
way  of  justification  over  the  Gentile  from 
being  in  a  peculiar  sense  a  hearer.  For  Gen- 
tiles also  may  be  doers,  though  not  of  a 
positive  revealed  law,  yet  of  the  law  of  con- 
science. It  is  not,  of  course,  implied  that  on 
the  ground  of  any  such  doing  they  "  shall  be 
justified;"  only  that,  so  far  as  they  do,  they 
will,  equally  with  the  Jews,  be  rewarded. 
Nor  is  it  said  that  any,  in  fact,  do  all  that 
law  enjoins.  We  observe  the  hypothetical 
form  of  expression,  irav  irovg,  and  also,  to 
ToB  v6ixov,  i.e.  any  of  the  Law's  requirements. 
The  Law,  for  instance,  says,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
steal ; "  and  if  a  Gentile,  though  knowing 
nothing  of  the  ten  commandments,  on  prin- 
ciple refrains  from  stealing,  his  conscientious 
honesty  will  have  its  own  reward  as  much 
B8  that  of  the  Jew  who  refrains  in  obedience 
to  the  revealed  commandment.     A  few  of 


the  expressions  in  these  verses  call  for  con. 
sideration.  (1)  What  is  meant  by  t5  epyo* 
ToS  v6noii,  said  to  be  "written  in  their 
hearts "  ?  Th  epyoy  cannot  be  pleonastic,  as 
supposed  by  Tholuck.  One  view  ia  that  it 
is  equivalent  to  rh  epya  toS  v6iiov,  which  is 
an  expression  frequently  used  elsewhere  (ch. 
iii.  27,  28;  ii.  32;  Gal.  ii.  16;  iii  2.  5, 10); 
and  the  singular  number  has  been  explained 
as  collective,  as  in  1  Cor.  iii.  Id  ;  Gal.  vi.  4, 
and  ver.  7  above  (so  Meyer),  or  as  "  applying 
to  each  of  the  particular  cases  supposed  in 
the  iray  .  .  .  ivotaaiv"  (so  Alford).  The 
objection  to  this  view  is  that  it  is  not  the 
worlcs  of  the  Law  that  can  be  said  to  be 
written,  but  rather  the  Law  itself  from  whieh 
the  works  proceed.  Seeing  that  ypaTrrhv 
implies  evident  reference  to  the  tables  of  the 
Law,  it  seems  best  to  take  cpyov  as  denoting 
the  efficacy  of  the  Law,  ea  opposed  to  the 
letter,  which  alone  was  written  on  the  table*. 
So  in  effect  Bengol :  "  Legem  ipsam  cum  sua 
activitate.  Opponitur  literae,  quae  est  acoi- 
dens."  (2)  How  do  they  show  (.ivSeiKvwrai) 
this  ipyov  viiiou  ?  Evidently,  from  the  con- 
text of  ver.  14,  by  doing  tA  toS  vS/jlov;  ie. 
doing  them  (as  is,  ofoourse,  implied)  as  being 
the  right  things  to  do,  and  approving  them. 
The  very  possibility  of  their  doing  this  is 
evidence  of  an  innate  moral  sense  in  tha 
human  heart,  which,  however  it  may  often 
be  obscured  or  perverted,  remains  as  a  cha- 
racteristic of  humanity,  and  is  more  or  less 
operative  in  all  communities.  "  Nulla  enim 
gens  unquam  sic  ab  humanitate  abhorruit 
ut  non  se  intra  leges  aliquas  contineret. 
Constat  absque  dubio  quasdam  justitite  et 
rectitudinis  conceptiones,  quas  Grseoi  nyjo- 
A^i^fis  vocant,  hominum  animis  esse  nata- 
raliter  ingenitas"  (Calvin).  (3)  What  ia 
exactly  meant  by  the  conscience  witnessing, 
and  the  thoughts  accusing  or  else  excusing? 
SvveiSiiffis  is  not  the  Law  in  the  heart,  but 
rather  our  consciotisness,  whereby  wittingly, 
in  accordance  with  that  Law,  we  approvo  or 
condemn.  The  compound  verb  a-vn/iapTu- 
poiffris  seems  to  denote  a  joint  witness  of 
conscience.  In  oh.  viii.  16  and  ix.  1,  where 
alone  the  word  occurs  elsewhere,  it  ia  fol- 
lowed by  a  dative,  and  means  certainly  eon- 
current  witness.  But,  if  so  here,  with  what  ? 
Probably  with  the  evSeif  is  already  spoken  of. 
Right  conduct  on  principle,  and  conscience 
approving,  witness  together  to  the  inward 
law ;  or,  conduct  and  conscience  together 
witness  to  a  man's  merits  or  demerits  in  ao- 
oordanoe  with  that  law.  Then,  what  is  added 
about  the  \oyurii.ol  shows  how  conscience 
operates.  Eeason  comes  into  play,  evoked 
by  conscience,  to  reflect  on  its  witneas,  and 
definitely  condemn  or  approve  what  has  been 
done.  A  kind  of  court  of  judicature  is  sup- 
posed. Man  calls  himself  to  the  bar  of  hit 
own  moral  judgment;  hia  consoienoe  adduoM 


CH.  n.  1—29.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS. 


55 


witness  to  the  character  of  his  deeds,  or 
lather,  with  his  deeds  hears  witness  for  or 
against  himself;  his  thoughts  ara  as  advo- 
cates on  both  sides,  arguing  for  condemnation 
or  acquittal.  "  Observa  quam  erudite  de- 
Boribat  cdnsoientiam,  quum  dioit  nobis  venire 
in  mentem  rationes,  quibus  quod  recte  factum 
est  defendimus;  ruisum  quse  nos  flagitiorum 
■ocusent  et  redarguant"  (Calvin). 

Ver.  16. — ^In  the  day  when  God  shall  judge 
the  secrets  of  men,  according  to  my  gospel, 
by  Jesus  Christ.    About  this  verse  the  main 
question   is,  what   previous  assertion   the 
"when"  refers  to.     The  time  denoted  by 
"when"  (whether  we  suppose  (cpfveior  (cpicel 
— i.e.  the  present  or  future  tense— to  have 
been  intended  by  the  writer)  is  certainly  the 
7iii4pa  of  1  Oor.  iii.  13,  and  other  passages — 
the  day  of  doom,  when  "  every  man's  work 
shall  be  made  manifest."    Hence  immediate 
connection  of  this  verse  with  the  preceding 
one,  which  would  otherwise  have  been  the 
natural  one,  seems  to  be  precluded ;  for  in 
ver.  15  the  present  operation  of  conscience, 
during  this  present  life,  was  described.     One 
way  of  making  the  connection  obvious  is  by 
understanding  ver.  15  as  itself  denoting  the 
manifestation  reserved  for  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, when  all  will   stand   self-convicted. 
But  not  only  the  verb  cKSelKwyrai  in  the 
present  tense,  but  also  the  fact  of  the  whole 
verse  being  so  obvious  a  description  of  pre- 
sent human  consciousness,  seems  to  preclude 
this  view.    Some  would  connect  ver.  16  with 
ver.  12,  of  which  .it  is  in  itself  a  natural 
sequence;  and  this  connection  is  intimated 
in  the  Authorized  Version,  which  includes 
the  three  verses  that  come  between  in  a  pa- 
renthesis. The  objection  to  it  is  the  length 
of  the  parenthesis.    Probably  the  apostle,  in 
his  characteristic  way,  paid  little  regard  to 
precise  logical  sequence ;  he  only  desired  to 
express,  in  this  concluding  verse,  that  in 
the  great  day  full  justice  would  be  done, 
and  all  that  he  had  been  speaking  of  would 
be   made   plain.     My  gospel  means  "  the 
gospel  committed  unto  me  to  preach  "  (cf.  ch. 
xvi.  i25 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  3;  2  Thess.  ii.  14;  2  Tim. 
ii.  8).    The  idea  that  it  means  "  the  Gospel 
according  to  St.  Luke,"  said  to  have  been 
written  under  St.  Paul's  superintendence,  is 
too  improbable  to  call  for  serious  notice. 

Ver.  17.— But  if  (the  true  reading  being 
certaialy  e!  Se,  not  iSe,  as  in  the  Textus 
Receptus)  thou  (ai,  emphatic)  art  named  a 
Jew.  The  Israelites  who  had  remained  in 
Palestine,  or  who  returned  to  it  after  the 
Captivity,  seem  thenceforth  to  have  been 
designated  Jews  Q'lovSatot),  though  they  in- 
cluded some  of  other  tribes  than  that  of 
Judah,  notably  that  of  Benjamin,  of  which 
St.  Paul  himself  was,  aiad  of  course  of  Levi. 
They  are  so  called,  whether  resident  in 
Palestine  or  elsewhere,  throughout  the  New 


Testament,  as  well  as  by  Roman  writers, 
the  term  'E0pa7oi  being  applied  in  the  New 
Testament  (usually  at  least)  to  distinguish 
those  Jews  who  adhered  to  the  Hebrew 
language  in  public  worship,  and  to  national 
customs  and  traditions,  from  those  who  Hel- 
lenized  (^'EWriviffTal).  It  was  the  name  oa 
which  the  people  prided  themselves  at  that 
time,  as  expressing  their  peculiar  privileges. 
The  apostle,  having  at  the  beginning  of 
this  chapter  addressed  himself  generally  to 
"whosoever  thou  art  that  judgest,"  now 
summons  the  Jew  exclusively  to  the  bar  of 
judgment,  whose  claims  to  exemption  from 
the  general  condemnation  have  come  to  the 
front  in  the  preceding  verses.  By  the  em- 
phatio  (rii  he  calls  on  him  now  to  give  an 
account  of  himself,  and  justify  his  preten- 
sions if  he  can.  The  point  of  the  argument 
is  that  the  Jews  were  notoriously  at  that 
time  no  better  than  other  nations  in  moral 
conduct — nay,  their  national  character  was 
such  as  to  bring  their  very  religion  into  dis- 
repute among  the  heathen — and  therefore 
doing,  and  not  either  privilege,  knowledge, 
or  profession,  being  according  to  the  very 
Law  on  which  they  rested  the  test  re- 
quired, their  whole  ground  for  national  ex- 
emption was  taken  away.  And  resteat  on  ' 
law  (y6iji.(f,  here  without  the  article,  so  as  to 
emphasize  the  principle  on  which  the  Jew 
professed  to  rest  for  acceptance),  and  makest 
thy  boast  of  God.  The  Jew  gloried,  as 
against  the  heathen,  in  his  knowledge  and 
worship  of  the  one  true  God. 

Ver.  18. — And  knowest  his  will,  and  ap- 
provest  the  things  that  are  more  excellent 
(SoKijUa^eiy  Tct  SttKpepovraf  a  phrase  capable 
also  of  the  meaning,  "provest  the  things 
which  diifer,"  t.e.  distinguishest  between 
right  and  wrong;  for  SoKtfidCeiv  may  mean 
either  "to  prove,"  or  "to  approve"  after" 
trial,  and  ri  Siatpepovra  either  "  things  which 
differ,"  or  "  things  which  surpass."  Exactly 
the  same  expression  occurs  in  Phil.  i.  10, 
with  the  same  uncertainty  of  meaning.  The 
difference  is  unimportant,  both  interpreta- 
tions coming  to  the  same  thing),  being  in- 
strncted  (KaTjjxou/tcvoj,  which  implies  regu- 
lar training,  whether  cateohetically  in  youth, 
or  through  rabliinical  and  synagogic  teach- 
ing) out  of  the  Law.  So  far  the  Jew's  own 
claims  on  the  ground  of  his  own  position 
have  been  touched  on;  what  follows  ex- 
presses his  attitude  with  regard  to  others. 
We  may  observe  throughout  a  vein  of 
irony. 

Vers.  19,  20. — And  art  confident  that  thou 
thyself  art  a  guide  of  the  blind,  a  light  of 
them  which  are  in  darkness,  an  instructor 
of  the  foolish,  a  teacher  of  babes,  having  the 
form  of  knowledge  and  of  the  truth  in  the 
Law.  Here  the  form  (jtiptpiaais)  does  not 
mean  the  mere  outward  show,  but  the  real 


56 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  ii.  1—29. 


representation  in  concrete  form  of  knowledge 
and  truth.  The  Jew  had  that;  and  the 
Law  itself  is  by  no  means  disparaged  he- 
oause  the  Jew  presumed  on  it  without  keep- 
ing it  (of.  oh.  vii.  12). 

ver.  21. — Thou  therefore  -which  teaohest 
another,  teaohest  thou  not  thyself?  The 
oiy  here  does  not  involve  an  anacoluthon 
after  the  reading  ei  Si  in  ver.  17,  though 
St.  Paul  would  not  have  much  oared  if  it 
had  been  so.  It  serves  only  to  sum  up  tlie 
lengthened  protasis,  and  introduce  the  apo- 
dosis :  "If  .  .  .  dost  thou  then"  etc.  ?  In 
what  follows  it  is  not,  of  course,  implied  that 
all  Jews  who  relied  on  the  Law  were,  in 
fact,  thieves,  adulterers,  etc.,  but  only  that 
the  Jews  as  a  nation  were  no  more  exempt 
from  such  sins  than  others;  and  it  may  be 
that  those  specified  were  not  selected  by  the 
apostle  at  random,  but  as  being  such  as  the 
Jews  had  a  peculiar  evil  notoriety  for  at 
that  time.  Thou  that  preachest  a  man 
should  not  steal,  dost  thou  steal? 

Ver.  22. — Thou  that  sayest  a  man  should 
not  commit  adultery,  dost  thou  commit 
adultery?  thou  that  abhonest  idols,  dost 
thou  commit  sacrilege?  The  word  Qepoffv- 
Kets)  thus  rendered  in  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion means  literally  "robbest  temples," 
though  it  may  bear  also  the  general  mean- 
ing of  "  sacrilege."  Commentators  differ  as 
to  what  is  meant.  Some,  considering  that 
the  word  would  not  have  been  used  except 
to  denote  something  really  sacrilegious — 
some  offence  against  true  sanctity — refer  it 
to  the  withholding  of  gifts  and  offerings 
from  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  or  of  tithes 
from  the  priests,  or  embezzlement  of  the 
temple  revenues.  Mai.  iii.  8,  etc.,  is  adduced 
In  illustration,  "  Will  a  man  rob  God?  Yet 
ye  have  robbed  me.  But  ye  say.  Wherein 
have  we  robbed  thee  ?  In  tithes  and  offer- 
ings," etc.  (of.  also  Mai.  i.  7 — 14).  A  pas- 
sage also  is  quoted  from  Josephus, '  Archssol.,' 
B.  xviii.  0.  5,  where  certain  Jews  are  said  to 
have  appropriated  to  their  own  use  purple 
and  gold  which  had  been  given  to  them  for 
tlie  temple  at  Jerusalem  by  one  Pulvia,  a 
proselyte  of  theirs  at  Kame,  in  consequence 
of  which  the  Emperor  Tiberius,  having  been 
informed  of  the  transaction  by  the  lady's 
husband,  had  banished  all  the  Jews  from 
Eome.  Others  take  the  word  in  a  general 
Bense  to  denote  any  profanation  of  sanctity. 
So  Luther,  Calvin  ("  prolanatio  diviuia  ma- 
jestatis  "),  and  Bengel  ("  saorilegium  com- 
mittis,  quia  Deo  non  das  gloriam,  qusa  pro- 
prie  I)ei  est ").  Inasmuch,  however,  as 
dellnite  malpractices  of  the  Jews  at  that 
time,  on  account  of  which  the  name  of  God 
was  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles  (ver. 
24),  seem  to  be  here  alluded  to,  the  word  may, 
perhaps  more  probably,  be  understood  in  its 
proper  sense  of  plundering  templet,  meaning 


heathen  temples — a  practice  which  Jewish 
zealots,  in  their  professed  abhorrence  of 
idolatry,  might  be  addicted  to  when  they 
had  opportunity.  A  writer,  though  himself 
attaching  no  idea  of  sanctity  to  such  temples, 
might  still  use  the  currenl;  term  hpo<rv\eiv. 
So,  among  the  ancients,  Chrysostom  and 
Theophylact  understand  it ;  the  latter,  how- 
ever, limiting  it  to  taking  away  the  dvaSii- 
liara.  He  says,  "  For  if  they  did  abhor  the 
idols,  yet  nevertheless,  dominated  by  cove- 
tousness,  they  touched  the  idol-offerings  for 
filthy  lucre's  sake."  In  doing  this,  he  seems 
to  imply,  they  broke  the  very  Law  which 
had  enjoined  their  ancestors  to  "  destroy  the 
altars,  and  break  down  the  images"  of  idola- 
ters (Deut.  vii.  5);  for  the  same  Law  had 
forbidden  them  to  "  desire  the  silver  and 
gold  that  is  on  them,"  or  "take  it  unto 
thee,  for  it  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord 
thy  God  "  (Deut.  vii.  25).  A  strong  con- 
firmation of  the  view  that  plundering  of 
heathen  temples  is  denoted  by  UpoavXets 
is  found  in  Acts  xix.  37,  when  the  town- 
clerk  of  EphesuB  defended  the  Christians 
against  the  popular  fury  by  declaring  that 
they  were  not  iepo(r(}Aoi,that  is  (as  he  might 
mean)  not  temple-plunderers,  such  as  ordi- 
nary Jews  had  the  repntation  of  being.  It 
has  been  objected  against  this  view  that 
there  is  a  lack  of  recorded  instances  of  such 
temple-plundering  on  the  part  of  Jews,  and 
that  they  could  not  have  had  much  chance, 
as  things  then  were,  of  thus  displaying  their 
zeal.  But  there  may  have  been  instances, 
notorious  at  the  time,  though  not  recorded ; 
and,  if  so,  the  drift  may  be,  *  Thou  displiiyest 
thy  abhorrence  of  idolatry,  enjoined  by  the 
Law,  by  acts  of  violence  and  greed,  such  as 
the  very  Law  forbids." 

Vers.  23, 24. — Thou  that  makest  thy  boast 
in  law,  through  thy  transgression  of  the 
Law  dishonourest  thou  God?  (or,  thou  dU- 
honourest  God).  For  the  name  of  God  is 
blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles  because  of 
you,  as  it  is  written.  The  reference  is  to 
Isa.  Iii.  5,  where  tlie  LXX.  has  Ai'  lifms  Sta- 
iravrhs  rh  ^vofia  fj-ov  0\a(r<pT]/i€TTat  ev  Tots 
eSvetri.  The  passage  is  not  quoted  as  a 
prophecy  now  fulfilled,  or  as  in  its  original 
reference  exactly  applicable,  but  only  as 
serving  to  express  well  how  the  character  of 
tlie  Jews  had  brought  their  very  religion 
into  disrepute  (of.  TacituSj  '  Hist.,'  v.  4,  etc.). 
The  remainder  of  the  chapter  is  devoted  to  a 
clear  and  final  exposition  of  the  principle, 
involved  throughout  all  the  previous  verses, 
that  Jewish  privileges  were  of  no  profit  in 
themselves,  or  without  their  meaning  and 
purpose  being  understood  and  acted  on. 
The  thought  now  passes  exclusively  to  cir- 
cumcision, as  being  the  original  token  of  tha 
covenant,  and  the  Jew's  rite  of  initiation  into 
his  whole  privileged  position  (Gen.  xvii.) 


OH.n.  1— 29.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


67 


When  Jen  had  come  to  be  the  peculiar  de- 
signation of  the  children  of  the  covenant, 
persons  were  said  to  become  Jews  by  cir- 
oumoision.  Thus  Esth.  viii.  17,  "  And  many 
of  the  people  of  the  land  became  Jews," 
where  the  LXX,  has,  Kai  iroAAo!  rHv  iBywv 
wepicT^livovTO  Kol  'louSdi^oy.  It  may  be 
here  observed  that  the  known  fact  of  other 
races  as  well  as  the  Jews  having  practised, 
and  still  practising,  circumcision  is  not  sub- 
versive of  the  scriptural  view  of  its  being 
a  peculiarly  Jewish  rite.  Foi'  to  the  Jew 
alone  it  bad  a  peculiar  significance. 

Vers.  25,  26. — For  oiroumcision  verily 
profiteth  (not  justijieth,  but  only  profiteth : 
it  is  of  advantage,  and  no  unmeaning  rite, 
If  thou  understandest  and  carriest  out  its 
meaning ;  it  introduces  thee  into  a  state  of 
Icnowledge  and  opportunity,  and  certainty  of 
Divine  favour),  if  thou  keep  the  Law :  but  if 
thou  be  a  transgressor  of  the  Law,  thy  cir- 
oumcision  is  made  uncircumcision.  If  there- 
fore the  uncircumcision  keep  the  oidiuanoes 
of  the  Law,  shall  not  his  uncircumcision  be 
counted  for  circumcision?  Here,  again,  as 
in  vers.  10,  11,  14,  15,  the  impartiality  of 
God's  dealings  with  all  men  alike  is  dis- 
tinctly declared. 

Vers.  27 — 29.— And  shall  not  the  uncir- 
cumcision which  is  by  nature  (i.e.  men  in  a 
state  of  nature,  without  any  distinct  revela- 
tion, or  sign  of  a  peculiar  covenant)  judge 
thee  (thou  presumest,  in  virtue  of  thy  posi- 
tion, to  judge  them ;  nay,  rather,  they  shall 
judge  thee),  who  by  (rather,  with,  i.e.  though 
in  possestum  of)  the  letter  and  circumcision 
dost  transgress  the  Law  ?  For  he  is  not  a 
Jew,  which  is  one  outwardly;  neither  is 
that  circumcision,  which  is  outward  in  the 
flesh:  but  he  is  a  jew,  which  is  one  inwardly; 


and  circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart,  in  tht 
spirit,  not  in  the  letter  (or,  in  spirit,  not  in 
letter.  Both  the  nouns,  miei/^aTt  and  ypi/i- 
fiart,  here  are  without  the  article,  so  as  to 
bring  out  their  inherent  significance.  See 
above  as  to  i  vinos  and  vSjjlos).  Whose  praise 
is  not  of  men,  but  of  Ood.  In  these  two 
concluding  verses  we  observe  the  double 
sense  in  which  the  term  'lovicuos  may  be 
used.  It  denotes  here  one  possessed  of  the 
true  spirit  of  Judaism ;  in  which  sense  the 
Gentile  might  be  the  better  Jew.  In  a  like 
double  sense  we  may  use  the  word  "  Chris- 
tian" (cf.  John  i.  47,  dAijflSs  'liTpari\iTtts ; 
John  viii.  39,  "  If  ye  were  Abraham's  chil- 
dren, ye  would  do  the  works  of  Abraham ;  " 
also  ch.  iv.  and  Gal.  iii.  7).  So,  too,  irepiTopJt 
for  spiritual  circumcision  (wepiTouii  itx^^po- 
voliiTos,  Ool.  ii.  11),  in  the  sense  of  inwiird 
dedication  to  God's  service,  and  "putting  off 
the  body  of  the  sin-s  of  the  flesh  "  (Col.  ii.  1 1  ; 
see  also  Phil.  iii.  2,  3).  Such  ethical  signi-  - 
floance  of  the  rite  appears  even  in  the  Old 
Testament.  We  read  there  of  "uncircum- 
oised  lips"  (Exod.  vi.  12,  80),  or  "ears" 
(Jer.  vi.  10),  or  "hearts"  (Lev.  xivi.  41); 
and  in  Deut.  xxx.  6  we  find  the  significant 
words, "  The  Lokd  thy  God  will  circumcise 
thine  heart,  and  the  heart  of  thy  seed,  to 
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart, 
and  with  all  thy  soul,  that  vhou  mayest 
live;"  and  in  Jer.  iv.  4,  "  Circumcise  your- 
selves to  the  Lord,  and  take  away  the  fore 
skins  of  your  hearts,  ye  men  of  Judah  and 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem."  (Cf.  Isa.  Iii.  1, 
"  Put  on  thy  beautiful  garments,  0  Jerusa- 
lem, the  holy  city :  for  henceforth  there  shall 
no  more  come  into  thee  the  uncircumcised 
and  the  unclean."} 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Judr/meni,  human  and  Divine.  This  sudden  and  impassioned  appeal 
was  made,  in  reality  ihoiigh  not  expressly,  to  the  Jew.  St.  Paul  imagined  himself 
in  the  presence  of  a  Hebrew  fellow-countryman,  whom  he  supposed  to  be  listening  to 
his  burning  denunciation  of  the  vices  and  crimes  of  heatlien  society.  Now,  the 
distinctive  characteristic  of  Christianity  as  a  moral  system  was  its  insistence  upon 
righteousness,  purity,  and  charity  of  heart,  and  not  merely  of  conduct ;  and  no  one 
more  thoroughly  entered  into  this  characteristic  than  did  the  apostle  himself.  With 
quick  perception,  St.  Paul  discerned,  in  the  mind  of  the  Jewish  hearer  or  reader  of  his 
first  chapter,  indignation  and  disgust  springing  up  at  the  picture  of  moral  corruption 
which  fairly  represented  the  state  of  Gentile  society.  But  the  apostle  wished  to  prove 
all  men  under  condemnation — Jew  and  Gentile  alike ;  and  upon  the  Christian  principle 
that  morality  is  of  the  heart,  he  was  able  to  do  this,  and  was  justified  in  doing  it. 
Hence  the  language  of  indignation  with  which  he  turns  upon  the  Pharisee,  who  recoils 
from  Gentile  iniquity,  who  pronounces  upon  those  guilty  of  it  the  sentence  of  con- 
demnation. "  Thou  art  inexcusable ;  thou  that  judgest  doest  the  same  things  I " 
The  appeal  is  instructive,  as  to  judgment  passed  upon  man's  conduct  by  his  fellow-men 
and  by  his  God. 

L  Thb  juoauENT  OF  HAN  BT  MAN.      1.  It  i«  always  fallible.      For  who  has 


THE  EPISTLE  OE  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  it.  1—29. 


Knowledge  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  his  fellow-sinners  V  2.  As 
a  matter  of  feet,  it  is  often  unjust.  For  who  is  so  perfectly  upright  and  impartial 
as  to  be  entrusted,  not  with  judicial  authority  over  men  as  agents,  but  with  moral 
authority  over  them  as  accountable  beings  ?  3.  He  who  judges  his  fellow-man  is  liable 
to  have  his  attention  witL drawn  from  his  own  sins,  errors,  and  ill  deserts.  He  is 
troubled  by  the  mote  in  his  brother's  eye,  and  forgets  the  beam  which  is  in  his  own 
eye.  4.  In  the  case  of  fallible  and  sinful  men,  the  condemnation  of  others  is  always 
condemnation  of  self.  "  Thou  art  the  man  I  "  is  the  response  which  is  suggested. 
The  form  of  wrong-doing  denounced  may  not  be  the  identical  form  by  which  the 
denouncer  is  chiefly  tempted ;  but  the  principle  of  sin  is  one,  though  the  forms  assumed 
be  many. 

II.  The  judgment  op  man  by  God.  1.  This  is  always  and  exactly  just;  for 
justice  is  a  Divine  attribute ;  and  it  would  be  absurd  to  attribute  to  the  infinitely 
perfect  Being,  the  Governor  of  the  universe,  either  imperfection  of  knowledge  or 
partiality  and  respect  of  persons.  2.  It  is  not  to  be  impugned.  "The  judgment  of 
God  is  according  to  truth;"  it  needs  no  court  of  revision,  no  court  of  appeal;  its 
decisions  are  final  and  unquestionable.  3.  It  is  inevitable.  Foolish  and  ignorant 
must  be  the  man  into  whose  mind  the.  thought  can  enter  that  the  Divine  judgment 
can  be  escaped. 

Application.  Let  a  man  judge,  not  his  fellow-men,  but  himself,  lest  he  incur  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — Long-suffering.  It  is  certain  that  we  live  under  a  moral  government 
administered  by  a  holy  and  righteous  Euler,  of  infinite  knowledge  and  irresistible 
power.  Yet  there  are  sinfnl  men  whoj  while  admitting  this  to  be  the  case,  live  as  if 
they  believed  that  government  and  retribution  had  no  reference  to  themselves.  The 
apostle,  in  this  passage,  appeals  to  such  persons,  expo-stulates  with  them,  and  shows 
them  the  guilt  and  folly  of  disregarding  the  Divine  Law  and  authority,  andof  presuming 
too  far  upon  the  Divine  forbearance. 

I.  The  fact  op  God's  lons-supfebino.  This  may  be  traced:  1.  In  human 
history,  which  abounds  with  examples  of  Divine  patience  with  the  sins  of  nations. 
2.  In  the  Christian  dispensation,  which  is  certainly  the  crowning  proof  of  the  long- 
suffering  of  the  Eternal.  3.  In  individual  experience ;  for  no  man  who  will  be  candid 
with  himself  will  question  that  such  forbearance  has  been  exercised  towards  him. 

II.  The  abuse  op  God's  lono-suppbbino.  There  are  many  who,  instead  of  grate- 
fully acknowledging  Divine  forbearance,  and  using  aright  the  opportunity  of  repentance 
and  reformation  which  they  owe  to  it,  despise  the  riches  of  God's  long-sufi'ering  and 
mercy.  1.  The  facts  upon  which- this  abuse  is  founded  are  these:  God  in  his  nature 
is  kind  and  gracious,  delighting  in  the  exercise  of  clemency  and  compassion.  God 
in  his  retributive  action  is  slow  and  patient,  often  withholding  the  condemnation  and 
penalty  threatened  and  deserved.  2.  The  false  inferences  drawn  from  these  facts  may 
be  thus  stated :  Either,  God  will  not  fulfil  the  threats  which  he  has  made,  wUl  not 
enforce  by  the  awful  sanctions  of  his  justice  the  laws  which  he  has  promulgated  ;  or, 
we  are  for  some  reason  exempt  from  the  operations  of  God's  judicial  authority.  This 
last  seems  to  have  been  the  belief  of  many  of  the  Jews,  who,  because  theirs  was  the 
chosen  and  favoured  nation,  believed  themselves  secure  from  the  penalties  which  would 
befall  the  unbelieving  and  impenitent  sinners  of  the  Gentiles. 

III.  The  exhaustion  op  God's  long-suffekinq.  1.  It  must  not  be  forgottea 
that  what  the  apostle  calls  "  wrath,"  and  righteous  retribution,  are  facts  in  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Eternal.  They  do  not  cease  to  be  facts,  because  God  is  forbearing  and 
kind.  He  can  have  no  compromise  with  sin.  He  cannot  overlook  the  distinction 
between  the  rebel  and  the  loyal  subject.  He  cannot  admit  to  his  favour  and  fellowship 
those  who  detest  his  laws  and  defy  his  authority.  2.  And  it  is  equally  important 
to  remember  that  the  government  of  God  is  universal  and  impartial.  It  extends  to  all 
mankind.  There  is  not  one  code  for  the  Jew  and  another  for  the  Gentile ;  one  for 
the  privileged  and  another  for  the  unprivileged.  "  Because  sentence  against  an  evil 
work  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in 
them  to  do  evil."  But  in  this  case  it  is  vain  for  them  to  hope  that  they  shall  escape 
Grid's  just  censure  and  condemnation.    All  alike  are  guilty ;  and  all  alike,  if  saved, 


can.  1—29.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  69 

must  be  saved  upon  the  same  terms — terms  honourable  to  God,  and  beneficial  to  human 
nature  and  human  society. 

IV.  The  purpose  and  use  of  God's  lono-suffbrino.  After  all  that  has  been 
said,  it  must  yet  be  insisted  upon  that  the  attribute  of  Deity  here  referred  to  by  the 
apostle  is  a  glorious  and  blessed  attribute,  and  that  we  cannot  be  sufficiently  grateful 
to  God  for  its  exercise  towards  us,  who  stand  so  sorely  in  need  of  it.  How  shall 
we  BO  use. it  that  it  may  be  for  our  truest  and  eternal  advantage?  1.  Believe  it,  aa 
a  truth  harmonizing  with  Divine  righteousness.  2.  Submit  to  it,  as  an  influence 
inducing  to  repentance.  8.  Act  upon  it,  as  affording  opportunity  for  practical 
reformation. 

Ver.  11. — Divine  impartiality.  The  apostle's  immediate  intention  in  thus  stating 
the  perfect  equity  of  the  Divine  government,  and  the  utter  absence  of  partiality  from 
his  nature  and  from  his  administration,  was  to  remove  from  the  mind  of  any  Jewish 
hearer  or  reader  the  belief  that  his  descent  from  Abraham  could  be  of  any  avail  in 
God's  sight  if  moral  and  spiritual  qualifications  were  lacking.  But,  as  is  so  often 
the  case,  especially  in  St.  Paul's  writings,  local  and  temporary  references  gave  occasion 
for  the  utterance  of  broad,  general,  and  eternal  principles.  The  simplicity  and 
grandeur  of  this  assertion  must  appeal  to  the  moral  nature  of  every  reader  of  the 
Epistle. 

I.  Divine  impaetialitt  contrasts  with  human  partiality.  However  it  may 
be  with  God  and  his  government,  certain  it  is  that,  both  in  private  and  in  public  life, 
men's  treatment  of  their  fellow-men  has  usually  been  marked  by  personal  favouritism. 
No  one  can  read  those  passages  in  the  Old  Testament  referring  to  "  gifts,"  i.e.  bribes, 
and  to  "  regarding  the  face  "or  the  person  of  suitors,  without  perceiving  how  general  was 
judicial  corruption  in  the  Oriental  world.  And  there  are  allusions  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment which  prove  to  us  that  even  the  great  Roman  ofiScials  were  not  free  from  this 
taint.  The  prevalence  of  the  practice  of  bribery,  corruption,  and  favouritism  must 
have  suggested  to  the  minds  of  ordinary  men  the  possibility  that  the  Judge  if  all 
regarded  men's  persons. 

n.  Divine  impartiality  is  supported  by  coNViNciNa  evidbncb.  1.  There  is 
the  testimony  of  the  unsophisticated  conscience  of  man.  Crime,  no  doubt,  exists  and 
flourishes  in  society ;  and  men's  interests  induce  them  to  connive  at  its  presence. 
But,  explain  it  how  we  may,  the  fact  is  undeniable  that  the  inner  voice  of  reason  and 
conscience  bears  witness  to  the  justice  and  impartiality  of  God.  Idolatry  is  indeed 
associated  with  beliefs  and  expedients  based  upon  the  unfairness  and  corruptibility 
of  the  deities  held  in  honour  or  in  dread.  But  let  the  idea  of  one  supreme  God  take 
possession  of  men's  souls,  and  the  moral  nature  with  which  they  are  endowed  refuses 
to  be  satisfied  except  by  a  conviction  that  this  Being  is  far  above  what  are  felt  to  be 
human  infirmities  and  faults.  If  there  be  a  God,  that  God  is  just.  2.  Revelation 
■upports  this  conviction.  There  are  passages  of  Scripture  which  may  seem  to  conflict 
with  it,  but  these  have  been  misunderstood  and  misinterpreted,  or  they  would  have 
been  seen  to  be  in  consistency  with  what  is  the  general  tenor  and  the  express  teaching 
of  the  Word  of  God.  How  many  are  the  passages  in  which  the  offerings  of  the 
insincere  are  indignantly  rejected,  in  which  we  are -taught  that  external  circumstances 
and  hypocritical  pretences  are  valueless  in  the  sight  of  him  who  "  searcheth  the  heart, 
and  trieth  the  reins  of  the  children  of  men  "  I  3.  The  ministry  of  Christ  is  especially 
emphatic  upon  this  point.  It  is  sufficient  to  refer  to  our  Lord's  rebuke  of  those  who 
boasted  that  they  were  Abraham's  seed;  he  bade  them  reflect  npon  God's  ability  to 
raise  up  even  from  the  very  stones  of  the  fields  children  unto  Abraham.  And  he  con- 
strained the  acknowledgment  from  his  enemies  that "  he  regarded  not  the  person  of  man," 

III.  Divine  impartiality  is  exhibited  in  certain  btbikino  particulars. 
1.  In  judgment  God  is  just  to  all.  There  is  one  law  by  which  all  are  judged.  In  the 
application  of  that  standard  a  righteous  regard  is  had  to  the  opportunities  of -knowledge 
and  enlightenment  aftbrded  by  circumstances ;  but  no  other  consideration  is  allowed 
to  enter.  2.  The  salvation  which  is  by  Christ  Jesus  is  provided  for  all  alike.  God 
is  the  "  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  them  that  believe."  Christ  died,  not  for  any 
class,  but  for  the  ungodly,  i.e.  for  all  mankind,  who  alike  needed  redemption  and  salva- 
tion.   And  the  heralds  of  the  cross  preached  the  Saviour  to  Jew  and  Gentile  alike. 


60  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  n.  1—29. 


IV.  Divine  impabtialitt  affobds  most  important  lessons  to  ali.  to  whom 
THE  Word  of  God  is  preached.  1.  Here  is  a  rebuke  addressed  to  the  (iroud,  the  self- 
righteous,  the  self-coafldent,  to  all  who  deem  themselves  the  favourites  uf  Heaven,  and 
who  indulge  the  persuasion  that  they  are  in  possession  of  some  special  recommendation 
to  the  consideration  of  the  Lord  and  Judge  of  all.  2.  Hero  is  encouragement  for  the 
timid  and  the  lowly.  They  have  good  reason  to  believe  that,  if  they  are  viewed  with 
disfavour  by  men,  on  account  of  some  supposed  disadvantage  or  deficiency,  they  will 
not  on  this  account  be  rejected  by  him  who  raiseth  up  those  that  be  bowed  down. 

Ver.  13. — Hearers  and  doers.  It  is  impossible  to  overlook  the  resemblance  which 
this  passage  bears  to  words  of  the  great  Teacher  uttered  towards  the  close  of  the 
sermon  on  the  mount.  In  this,  as  in  so  many  places,  the  apostle  is  evidently  indebted 
for  his  thoughts,  and  almost  his  very  words,  to  the  Divine  Fountain  of  all  the  streams 
of  spiritual  wisdom  and  life. 

I.  A  PRINCIPLE  OF  CONDEMNATION.  1.  It  is  possiblc  to  hear  the  Law,  and  yet  not 
to  obey  it.  2.  In  the  case  of  the  disobedient,  the  continued  hearing  of  the  Law  may 
be  the  occasion  of  continued  and  even  increased  insensibility,  indifference,  and  hostility. 
3.  Thus  the  very  hearing  and  the  familiarity  resulting  from  it  may  become  the  ground 
of  condemnation,  because  an  aggravation  of  the  offence.  Thus  the  abuse  of  what  ii 
best  leads  to  the  worst  results.  The  Law  is  holy,  just,  and  good ;  but  it  is  the 
severest  condemnation  of  the  rebellious  and  impatient. 

II.  A  PRINCIPLE  OF  LIFE.  1.  In  the  case  of  those  who  perfectly  fulfil  the  righteous 
Law  of  God,  the  consequence  of  their  perfect  obedience  is  justification  by  works. 
It  is  needless  to  say  that  no  member  of  the  human  race  has  ever  fulfilled  this  condition. 
There  is  none  whom  the  Law  thus  justifies.  One  only  among  the  sons  of  men  has 
f"ilfilled  all  righteousness — even  the  Son  of  God  himself,  who  came  to  fulfil  the  Law, 
not  only  by  his  teaching,  but  in  his  life.  2.  Yet  the  very  violation  of  the  perfect  Law 
of  God  is  the  means  of  calling  men's  attention  to  the  need  and  the  provision  of  salvation 
by  grace  through  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  3.  And  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  saved 
by  prace,  the  Law  of  God  becomes  the  standard  of  conduct,  to  attain  which  is  the  aim 
ot  all  who  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  whole  moral  life  of  the  true  Christian 
is  an  endeavour  to  fulfil  that  Law  which  was  formerly  the  principle  of  condemnation, 
but  has  now  become  a  principle  of  life. 

Vers.  17 — 27. — Tu  guoquel  Although  himself  a  Jew,  St.  Paul  shows  no  favour 
to  his  fellow-oonntrymen.  No  sooner  has  he  characterized  and  condemned  the  sins 
of  the  heathen,  than  he  turns  upon  the  Israelites  to  include  them  in  the  same 
condemnation  of  sin  and  unbelief.  In  this  passage,  where  close  reasoning  is 
combined  with  vigorous  irony,  he  presses  home  upon  those  Jews  who  censure  the 
flagitious  crimes  of  heathenism  the  sentence  which  justice  compels  them  to  admit 
as  their  due. 

I.  Pbivilbgb  IS  ADMITTED.  1.  Hereditary  advantages  are  undeniable.  The  Jew 
entered  at  birth  into  a  heritage  of  favourable  circumstances,  belonging,  as  he  did,  to  the 
nation  distinguished  by  privileges  at  that  age  of  the  world  unparalleled.  2.  Acquired 
familiarity  with  the  Law  of  God  was  a  natural  result  of  national  privileges.  From 
childhood,  the  Jew  was  trained  to  reverence  God's  Name,  to  recite  God's  Law,  to  listen 
to  the  teaching  of  God's  prophets.  3.  There  resulted  a  position  of  influence  and 
responsibility  in  the  discharge  of  the  obvious  duty  of  communicating  and  inculcating 
the  Divine  will.  The  Jew  was  the  "guide  of  the  blind,"  the  "instructor  of  th» 
foolish,"  the  "  teacher  of  babes."  He  was  the  witness  to  the  truth  and  to  the  com- 
mandments of  the  Eternal.  Reflection  may  show  us  that  we  occupy,  under  the 
Christian  dispensation,  a  similar  position  of  privilege  and  responsibility, 

II.  Unfaithfulness  is  imputed.  1.  Tlie  crimes  condemned  are  committed  by 
those  who  condemn  them.  The  list  is  indeed  appalling.  Upon  the  religious  Jew  are 
charged  offences  which  it  can  hardly  be  supposed  were  all  committed  by  one  person,  in 
one  human  life.  Yet  there  is  no  limit  to  the  possibility  of  man's  hypocrisy.  Theft, 
adultery,  sacrilege,  blasphemy, — such  are  the  awful  crimes  and  sins  which  are  charged 
upon  the  Jews,  who  professed  so  loudly  their  moral  superiority  to  their  Gentile  neigh- 
bours.    2.  The  ungodly  Jew  not  only  commits  the  crimes  he  condemns ;  he  hindert 


OH.  n.  1—29.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  61 

the  cause  it  is  his  professed  business  to  further  and  to  advocate.  To  him  is  committed, 
as  it  were,  the  custody  of  monotheism;  he  is  called  upon  to  -witness  to  the  Divine 
nature  and  character,  as  contrasting  with  the  conceptions  of  their  deities  cherished  by 
the  heathen.  And  lo  I  he  becomes,  by  his  immorality,  the  occasion  of  God  being  dis- 
honoured, of  God's  Name  being  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles.  The  parallelism  may 
be  traced  between  the  unfaithful  Jew  and  the  unfaithful  Christian. 

IIL  Condemnation  is  pbonouncbd.  1.  Privilege  avails  not.  It  is  in  human 
nature  to  rely  upon  the  enjoyment  of  great  advantages.  But  the  truth  is,  that  th« 
possession  of  privileges  heightens  responsibility.  No  man  can  be  saved  because  he 
pleads  that  the  light  shone  brightly  round  about  him ;  the  question  must  be — Did  he 
walk  in  the  light  while  he  had  the  light?  Circumcision  did  not  save  the  Jew; 
similarly,  mere  outward  participation  in  the  sacraments  of  Baptism  and  Lord's  Supper 
will  not  save  the  professing  Christian.  The  possession  of  privileges  is  no  proof  of  their 
due  and  proper  use.  2.  The  less  favoured  may,  in  character  and  life,  excel  the  more 
favoured.  The  uncircumcised  may  keep  the  Law  which  the  circumcised  allows  himself 
to  break.  This  fact  was  seen  and  stated  by  the  Lord  himself,  who  continually  warned 
his  fellow-countrymen  that  many  should  come  from  the  east  and  the  west,  and  should 
■it  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  whilst  they  should  be  thrust  out.  3.  The  highly 
privileged  who  are  unfaithful  to  their  trust  shall,  it  is  foretold,  be  judged  by  those 
whose  advantages  have  been  fewer,  but  who  have  made  a  good  use  of  such  as  they 
enjoyed.  It  must  have  astonished  the  Jew  of  repute  and  standing  to  be  told  that  he 
should  he  judged  by  those  of  the  uncircumcision.  Yet  this  was  quite  in  harmony  with 
the  warning  of  the  Divine  Saviour  that  the  men  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  should  rise  up  in 
the  judgment  against  the  unfaithful  of  his  generation. 

Vers.  28,  29. — The  religion  of  the  flesh  exchanged  for  the  religion  of  the  spirit.  It  is 
difficult  for  us  to  understand  all  that  was  meant  by  this  assertion.  The  apostle  was  a 
Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,  and  we  know,  from  the  general  tenor  of  his  writings,  how 
highly  he  valued  the  religion  in  which  he  had  been  trained,  and  how  warmly  he  was 
•ttached  to  the  race  from  which  he  sprang.  That  those  who  remained  Jews  in  faith, 
who  gloried  in  having  Abraham  as  their  father,  and  who  prized  as  their  own  peculiar 
possession  the  covenant  and  the  oracles  of  God, — that  they  would  experience  a  shook 
of  surprise  and  resentment  upon  reading  such  language  as  this,  is  evident.  And  even 
those  who  had  accepted  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  for  the  most  part  retained  much  of  their 
hereditary  confidence  in  the  special  privileges  of  their  nationality  and  their  religion. 
Such  teaching  as  this  undoubtedly  introduced  a  revolution  into  the  heart  of  religious 
society — a  revolution  in  thought,  and  a  revolution  in  practice. 

I.  A  PROTEST.  There  is  often  no  possibility  of  avoiding  conflict  and  opposition  In 
expounding  and  maintaining  the  truth.  Paul  was  certainly  not  the  man  to  shrink 
from  controversy ;  his  was  the  nature  of  the  warrior,  and  when  he  found  himself  face 
to  face  with  error  and  sin,  his  nature  was  roused  to  its  depths,  his  native  combative- 
ness  found  a  congenial  field  of  battle.  And  although  Christianity  was  indeed  the 
development  and  the  fulfilment  of  Judaism,  it  could  not  but  come  into  conflict  with 
much  which  human  nature  had  ("onnected  with  Judaism  by  bonds  not  easily  to  be 
broken.  Spiritual  as  were  the  intuitions  of  the  inspired  psalmists  and  prophets  in 
whose  writings  the  Hebrew  people  gloried,  it  is  clear  that,  at  the  time  of  our  Lord's 
ministry,  religious  formalism  was  prevalent  among  the  Jewish  leaders  and  the  Jewish 
ppople.  Scribes  and  Pharisees  were  too  often  hypocrites.  Beligion  was  too  much  an 
atfair  of  ritual  and  ceremonial  observance.  Even  those  who  drew  near  unto  God  with 
their  lips  were  deserving  of  censiure,  because  their  hearts  were  far  from  him.  Now,  the 
f?ur  Gospels  make  it  plain  to  us  that  the  ministry  of  Christ  was  a  ministry  of  protest 
against  a  religion  of  form.  He  would  not  have  directed  so  much  of  his  teaching  against 
the  religion  of  the  letter,  had  he  not  seen  and  felt  the  necessity  of  such  an  attitude  of 
opposition,  such  action  of  controversy.  And,  indeed,  he  was  perfectly  aware — for  he 
knew  what  was  in  man — that  the  evil  was  one  not  simply  of  Jewish  habit,  but  of 
human  nature.  Where  is  the  religion,  however  spiritual  in  the  apprehension  of  its 
true  expositor,  which  has  not  degenerated  into  formalism?  Man's  nature  is  bodily  as 
well  as  spiritual ;  his  religion  must  express  itself,  or  it  will  die ;  words  and  outward 
worship,  organization  and  official  action,  all  seem,  if  not  essential,  yet  contributive  to 


«2  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  n.  1— 2». 

religious  life  and  efficiency.  And  it  is  most  natural  that,  in  the  minds  of  the  unthink- 
ing and  the  worldly,  the  symbol  should  take  the  place  of  the  truth  it  symbolizes,  the 
letter  should  overgrow  the  spirit,  and  officialism  should  substitute  ministry.  Certainly 
this  is  what  happened  in  the  case  of  Judaism.  And  against  this  the  apostle  of  the 
Gentiles,  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  raised  the  most  vigorous  proteit  which  has  pro- 
ceeded from  any  disciple  of  Jesus.  The  seed  of  this  protest  was,  indeed,  sown  in  .the 
teaching  of  the  Master ;  but  here  we  find  that  the  seed  was  bearing  fruit.  The  position 
which  So.  Paul  occupied,  the  special  work  to  which  he  was  called,  threw  the  burden 
of  the  protest  and  the  controversy  upon  him.  His  ministry  was  hindered  by  the 
religious  pedantry  and  bigotry  of  those  who  had  been  trained  in  the  same  school  with 
himself.  His  large  heart  resented  with  indignation  the  formality,  the  narrowness,  the 
pettiness,  which  he  encountered  wherever  he  met  his  fellow-countrymen  in  their 
synagogues.  His  commission  was  one  which  admitted  of  no  terms,  of  no  truce,  with  a 
religion  of  "  the  flesh,"  "  the  letter."  If,  as  a  worker,  he  was  called  upon  to  bo  the 
minister  of  Christ  to  the  Gentiles,  as  a  thinker  it  was  his  great  vocation  to  exhibit  the 
spiritual  character  of  Christianity ;  and  the  identity  of  a  spiritual  with  a  universal 
religion  must  be  obvious  to  eveiy  reflecting  mind.  The  apostle's  detestation  of  a 
merely  external  religion  is  evident  all  through  this  Epistle,  equally  in  the  doctrinal  and 
the  practical  sections.  To  no  compromise  upon  this  point  would  he  for  a  moment 
consent.  For  a  Jew  who  was  a  Jew  only  outwardly,  he  had  no  consideration,  and 
circumcision  merely  in  the  flesh  he  held  in  no  esteem.  Even  in  our  own  time  there  is 
need  of  a  protest  against  a  religion  of  forms  and  of  custom;  there  is  no  Church  which 
is  free  from  the  danger  here  intimated ;  for  the  temptation  against  which  the  inspired 
apostle  puts  us  upon  our  guard  is  a  temptation  which  gathers  strength  from  a  principle 
and  habit  deep-seated  in  human  nature  itself. 

II.  A  DOCTRINE.  Over  against  the  protest  contained  in  the  twenty-eighth  verse  is 
the  positive  assertion  of  the  twenty-ninth.  A  man  might  be  a  descendant  of  Israel, 
and  yet  might  not  be  a  Jew,  in  the  deeper  and  spiritual  significance  which  the  apostle 
attached  to  thu  designation.  There  were  many  who  boasted  that  they  were  "  Abraham's 
seed,"  who  had  "Abraham  to  their  father,"  according  to  natural  descent,  who  yet 
lacked  Abraham's  faith,  the  true  "  note  "  of  incorporation  in  the  elect  race.  And,  on 
the  other  hand,  there  were  many  who  were  deemed  by  Hebrews  "sinners  of  the 
Gentiles,"  who  were  "children  of  faithful  Abraham,"  who  were  numbered  among  the 
Israel  of  God.  Circumcision  was  a  badge  of  nationality,  and  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  cove- 
nant which  God  entered  into  with  his  chosen  people ;  but  it  conferred  no  special  grace, 
and  the  grace  which  it  symbolized  was  often  received  in  vain,  for  privilege  and  pre- 
rogative are  in  many  cases  misused.  But,  under  the  new  covenant,  the  only  circum- 
cision which  avails  is  that  of  "  the  heart,"  "  the  spirit."  Such  is  the  peculiar  character 
of  Christianity,  which  commended  it  to  the  reason  and  the  conscience  of  the  apostle. 
There  are  passages  in  abundance  to  be  found  in  the  Old  Testament  which  show  that 
the  enlightened  and  pious  Hebrews  were  fully  aware  of  the  spiritual  nature  of  religion. 
But  the  words  of  our  holy  Saviour  made  these  precious  truths  as  "  current  coin "  to 
pass  amongst  men.  The  conception  of  God  must  be  spiritual ;  the  character  of  worship 
must  be  spiritual ;  the  morality  of  Christ's  disciples  must  be  spiritual ;  the  religious 
life  as  a  whole  must  be  spiritual.  "  The  letter,"  St.  Paul  assures  us,  "  killeth ;  the  spirit 
giveth  life."  The  letter  and  circumcision  were  so  largely  abused  by  being  regarded 
otherwise  than  as  intended,  that  the  apostle  seems  to  have  regarded  them  almost 
with  suspicion,  if  not  with  aversion;  by  them,  he  saw,  men  transgressed  the  Law. 
Hence  his  insisting  so  strenuously,  as  here,  upon  the  purity  of  the  heart  and  the  spirit. 
It  is  with  the  heart  that  man  believes  unto  righteousness,  with  the  spirit  that  he 
worships  God;  accordingly  the  supreme  concern  is  that  all  be  well  here.  Repentance, 
faith,  consecration,  hope,  and  love, — all  are  virtues  of  the  inner  nature.  Where  they  are 
present,  they  will  find  expression  in  deeds  and  words ;  where  they  are  absent,  all  deeds 
•nd  words  are  vain.  Most  beautifully  in  accordance  with  this  positive  teaching  of  the 
apostle  in  this  verse  is  the  petition  which  in  the  Prayer-book  is  placed  at  the  opening 
of  the  Communion  Service,  that  God  would  "  cleanse  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts  by  the 
Inspiration  of  his  Holy  Spirit." 

in.  A  MOTIVE.    How  far  St.  Paul  was  referring  to  his  own  experience  in  speaking 
here  of  the  praise  of  men  as  following  upon  the  practice  of  formal  and  ceremoniaJ 


OH.  II.  1—29.]    THE  EPJSTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  B0MAN8.  63 


religion,  we  cannot  say ;  unquestionably  he  was  influenced  by  his  recollection  of  the 
spirit  and  conduct  of  many  with  whom  he  had  come  in  contact.  The  Lord  himself 
hild  observed  how  those  who  rejected  him  and  his  teaching,  and  clung  to  the  externals 
of  Judaism,  were  influenced  by  their  love  for  the  praise  of  men  rather  than  by  regard 
to  the  honour  which  cometh  from  God  only.  Men  may  praise  those  whose  professions 
are  loud,  whose  conformity  is  rigid,  whose  piety  is  ostentatious,  whose  observances  are 
scrupulous ;  "  they  have  their  reward."  But  those  who  are  taught  by  the  Spirit  of 
God  count  it  "  a  small  thing  to  be  judged  with  men's  judgment."  Such  can  look  away 
from  men's  fallacious  opinions  and  men's  capricious  approval,  and  can  anticipate  tlie 
«cceptance  and  approval  of  him  who  searcheth  the  heart  and  trieth  the  reins  of  the 
children  of  mea.  For  the  "Israelites  indeed,"  the  "children  of  faithful  Abraham," 
there  is  in  re^ierve  a  meed  of  blessed  recompense  when  "  every  man  shall  have  praise 
of  God." 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  goodness  of  God.  The  great  object  of  St.  Panl,  in  these  opening 
chapters  of  Romans,  is  to  show  the  world's  need  of  a  Saviour.  In  the  first  chapter  he 
has  shown  the  inexcusahleness  of  the  heathen,  and  their  fallen  and  lost  condition.  But 
he  remembers  that  he  is  writing  to  Jews  and  Jewish  Christians  at  Rome  as  well  as 
to  Gentiles.  He  knows  well  the  human  heart.  He  can  imagine  some  of  his  Jewish 
readers  saying  to  himself,  "  Yes,  indeed ;  those  heathen  are  certainly  without  excuse." 
But  St.  Paul  does  not  allow  him  to  cherish  this  complacent  spirit  of  self-righteousness 
very  long.  He  seeks  to  bring  home  the  •  truth  to  himself.  "  Therefore  thou  art 
inexcusable,  0  man,  whosoever  thou  art  that  judgest :  for  wherein  thou  condemnest 
another,  thou  judgest  also  thyself;  for  thou  that  judgest  doest  the  same  things" 
(ver.  1).  As  if  he  said,  "  It  is  quite  true  that  the  heathen  are  inexcusable.  So  are 
you.  It  is  quite  true  that  they  have  not  lived  up  to  the  light  they  got.  But  have 
you  lived  up  to  the  light  yoix  have  got?  Have  you  not  come  short  of  the  Law  of 
Moses  just  as  much  as  they  came  short  of  the  law  of  nature  ?  "  Thus  the  Divine  Word 
ever  seeks  to  turn  us  in  upon  ourselves.  Thus  it  puts  its  searching  questions,  and 
lays  down  its  searching  tests.  The  Gentile  is  guilty ;  so  is  the  Jew.  The  Jew  needs 
repentance  as  well  as  the  Gentile.  It  is  this,  as  we  have  seen  above,  that  makes  the 
gospel  a  message  for  every  man.  It  comes  to  our  fallen  humanity  everywhere,  and, 
with  its  message  of  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God,  seeks  to  win  us  from  the  paths  of 
sin  and  death  to  the  way  that  leadeth  to  everlasting  life.  Hence  St.  Paul  emphasizes 
here  the  goodness  of  God. 

I.  The  goodness  of  God,  aitd  how  it  is  shown.  The  goodness  of  God  is  no 
new  idea.  It  is  as  old  as  the  rainbow,  as  old  as  the  seasons,  as  old  as  the  sunshine. 
So  strong  and  deep  is  the  conviction  of  the  human  heart  about  the  goodness  of  the 
Supreme  Being,  that  when  our  Anglo-Saxon  forefathers  were  framing  words  to  express 
their  ideas,  the  word  they  chose  to  describe  the  Almighty  was  this  very  word  "  God," 
which  simply  means  "  The  Good,"  "  The  Good  One."  So  even  in  that  early  age  he  was 
regarded  as  the  personification  of  goodness.  Let  us  consider  how  God's  goodness  is 
shown  to  us.  Thinle  of  what  temporal  blessings  he  bestows  upon  us.  Think  of  his  good- 
ness to  our  souls.  He  has  not  left  us,  here  on  earth,  to  wander  in  the  dark  places  of 
sin  and  sorrow,  of  uncertainty  and  despair.  He  has  not  left  us,  alone  and  helpless,  to 
meet  the  ^ing  of  terrors,  and  to  step  out  from  the  darkness  of  a  hopeless  life  into  the 
darkness  of  an  unavoidable  eternity.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  he  has  given  us  the  light 
of  conscience  and  the  moral  law  to  show  us  our  guilt,  on  the  other  hand  he  has  given 
us  the  light  of  the  gospel,  the  light  of  the  cross  of  Jesus,  to  reveal  to  us  our  hope  of 
safety  and  peace.  And,  then,  how  much  he  has  done  for  each  of  us  personally  I  How 
very  mercifully  God  has  dealt  with  us  I  We  are  ashamed  of  many  things  in  our  own 
lives.  The  memory  of  them  haunts  us  like  an  unbidden  guest,  like  a  ghost  out  of  the 
guilty  past.  Yet  God  did  not  cast  us  away  from  his  presence,  nor  take  his  Holy  Spirit 
from  us.  "  He  hath  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins,  nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our 
iniquities."  Surely  he  must  have  an  inexhaustible  store  of  patience,  of  compassion,  o/ 
mercy.  Ah,  yes  I  Paul  was  right  when  he  spoke  of  "  the  riches  of  his  goodness  aai 
forbearance  and  long-suffering." 


64  THE  BPTSTLB  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS,    [oh.  n.  1— 2ft 

"  I  know  that  blessings  undeserved 
Have  marked  my  erring  track ; 
Tliat  wheresoe'er  my  feet  have  swerved. 
His  chastening  turned  me  back. 

"  That  more  and  more  a  providence 
Of  love  is  understood. 
Making  the  springs  of  time  and  seme 
Sweet  with  eternal  good. 

"  That  death  seems  but  a  covered  way 
Which  opens  into  light, 
Wherein  no  blinded  child  can  stray 
Beyond  the  Father's  sight. 

"That  care  and  trial  seem  at  last. 
Through  memory's  sunset  ais 
Like  mountain-ranges  overpast, 
In  purple  distance  fair. 

"  That  all  the  jarring  notes  of  life 

Seem  blending  in  a  psalm, 

And  all  the  angles  of  its  strife 

Slow  rounding  into  calm." 

Ym, "  the  good  hand  of  God,"  as  the  old  Hebrews  loved  to  call  it,  U  shown  In  eT«ry 
circumstance  and  event  of  life.  "  Oh  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good :  blessed  is  the 
man  that  trusteth  in  him." 

II.  The  ooodness  op  Q-od,  and  how  it  is  beobived.  "Or  despisest  thou  the 
riches  of  his  goodness  and  forbearance  and  long-suffering  ?  "  (ver.  4).  There  are  few 
professing  Christians  who  would  admit  that  the  goodness  of  God  is  thus  received  by 
them.  They  would  not  like  it  to  be  said  that  they  despise  God's  goodness.  Yet  must  we 
not  all  admit  that  we  do  not  think  as  much  of  God's  goodness  as  we  might  ?  We  take 
much  of  it  as  a  matter  of  course.  We  forget  that  we  have  no  claim  on  these  bounties 
of  God's  providence  and  gifts  of  his  grace,  but  rather  the  contrary.  How  little  we 
praise  him  compared  with  what  we  might !  How  poor  a  return  we  make  for  his  goodness 
by  any  effort  or  service  of  our  lives !  How  poor  are  the  offerings  we  make  of  our  wealth 
and  substance  for  God's  cause  1  What  is  all  this  but  in  a  sense  to  despise  God's  good- 
ness? It  is  treating  God's  goodness  with  indifference;  it  is  making  light  of  it;  it  is 
looking  down  upon  it.  How  indifferent  we  are  even  to  Jesus  Christ,  God's  own  Son  I 
What  an  evidence  of  God's  goodness  was  the  coming  of  Christ  into  the  world — ^his  life, 
his  sufferings,  his  death !  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son, 
that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  Yet 
with  what  amazing  indifference  and  coolness  this  message  of  Divine  mercy,  this 
message  of  redeeming  love,  is  received  I  How  cold  and  apathetic  our  hearts  are  to  the 
love  of  Jesus  I  "  He  carae  imto  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not."  From  Jesus, 
the  Crucified  One,  the  King,  who  stands  with  outstretched  hands  waiting  to  receive  and 
bless  us,  we  turn  away  our  hearts  after  the  world  and  the  things  of  it.  Deaf  to  his 
loving  voice,  we  turn  our  back  upon  our  Saviour.  We  stretch  forth  our  hands  after 
money,  and  we  say  to  it,  "  I  will  follow  thee."  We  stretch  out  our  hands  after  pleasure, 
and  we  say  to  it,  "  I  will  follow  thee."  We  stretch  out  our  hands  after  popular 
applause  and  the  favour  of  men,  and  we  say  to  them,  "  I  will  follow  you."  But,  alas  1 
how  few  have  the  gratitude  and  the  courage  to  say,  "  Lord,  I  will  follow  thee  wUther- 
•oever  thou  goest "  1 

III.  The  goodness  of  God,  and  how  it  la  meant.  "TImi  goodness  of  GSod 
leadeth  thee  to  repentance  "  (ver.  4).  God's  goodness  is  intended  to  lead  vb  to  repent- 
ance. And  what  more  potent  influence  could  he  use  than  the  influence  of  mercy  and 
of  love  ?  What  influence  is  so  likely  to  make  us  repent  of  a  wrong  we  have  done  to 
any  person  than  the  kindness  of  that  person  toward  us?  If  you  have  injured  a 
neighbour  or  a  friend  by  word  or  deed,  and  he  meets  you  with  angry  words,  this  only 
tends  to  make  you  more  stubborn,  more  hostile,  than  before.  But  if,  on  the  contrary, 
you  see  him  bear  with  patience  your  attacks,  your  unkind  remarks,  does  it  not  tend  to 
make  you  sorry  for  the  wrong  you  have  done  him  ?     Or  perhaps  he  heaps  coals  of  fire 


OH.  II.  1—29.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  65 

on  your  head,  and  melts  down,  by  deeds  of  kindness  and  a  forgiving  spirit,  the  hardness 
of  your  heart.  Is  it  not  a  picture  of  how  God  deals  with  men  ?  We  have  sinned. 
He  has  borne  with  us.  We  have  stood  condemned  as  guilty  sinners  in  the  presence  of 
a  broken  Law.  He  has  sent  his  own  Son  to  redeem,  to  justify,  to  save  our  souls.  All 
this  God  has  done  that  he  might  draw  our  hearts  from  sin,  that  by  all  his  overflowing 
goodness  he  might  lead  us  to  repentance.  He  puts  before  us  the  guilt  of  sin  and  the 
danger  of  it,  the  terrors  of  the  judgment  and  the  agony  of  the  lost.  But  over  and 
above  all  he  puts  the  message  of  mercy.  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that, 
while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  It  is  this,  the  story  of  a  heavenly 
Father's  mercy ;  it  is  this,  the  story  of  a  Saviour's  love ;  it  is  this,  the  story  of  the 
cross, — that  has  touched  the  blunted  conscience  and  melted  the  hardest  heart,  and  won 
the  most  hardened  sinners  to  repentance.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the 
unrighteous  man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  will  have 
mercy  upon  him ;  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon." — 0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  6 — 16. — "  The  righteous  Judgment  of  Ood."  In  the  previous  verses  we  saw  how 
the  goodness  of  God  is  too  often  received ;  how  there  are  many  who  despise  the  riches 
of  his  goodness  and  forbearance  and  long-suffering.  It  is  especially  to  such  persons 
that  St.  Paul  addresses  his  account  of  God's  righteous  judgment  from  the  fifth  verse  to 
the  sixteenth.  Those  who  despise  God's  goodness  have  a  great  fact  to  face.  Those  who 
live  as  if  there  was  no  God,  who  evade  his  commandments,  who  evade  his  offer  of 
salvation,  cannot  evade  his  righteous  judgment.  As  there  is  one  event  to  all  in  the 
universal  certainty  of  death,  so  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ. 
It  is  good  even  for  Christians  to  be  reminded  of  the  judgment  to  come.  We  live  too 
little  under  its  power.  We  realize  too  imperfectly  that  one  day  we  shall  have  to  give 
an  account  of  our  stewardship.  We  realize  too  imperfectly  our  responsibility  toward 
those  around  us.  How  little  we  enter  into  Paul's  views  of  the  judgment,  when  ho 
said,  "  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men "  (2  Cor.  v.  11)  I 
The  subject  of  God's  righteous  judgment  is  an  important  one  both  for  Christian  and 
for  sinner. 

I.  The  Judoe.  Be  is  a  righteous  Judge.  It  is  most  important  that,  in  thinking  of 
the  judgment,  we  should  think  of  this  aspect  of  God's  character.  "The  righteous 
judgment  of  God "  (ver.  5).  We  are  not  to  think  of  the  judgment  as  necessarily  a 
terror  in  itself.  It  is,  what  the  laws  of  human  society  ought  to  be,  a  terror  to  the 
evil-doer,  but  a  praise  to  them  that  do  well.  If  we  think  of  the  judgment  with  terror, 
the  fault  lies,  not  with  God,  but  in  ourselves.  God  is  a  righteous  Judge.  His  judg- 
ment is  a  righteous  judgment.  There  are  some  who  chetjsh  hard  thoughts  of  God, 
who  think  of  him  as  a  stern  and  relentless  Judge.  For  such  hard  thoughts  there  is  no 
foundation  anywhere  in  God's  dealings  with  men.  His  character  is  what  we  should 
call  a  character  of  perfect  fairness.  His  judgment  will  be  perfectly  fair.  There  may 
be  some  one  who  will  say,  "  I  did  not  know  that  such  a  course  of  action  was  wrong ;  I 
had  not  the  Law  of  God  to  guide  me."  St.  Paul  meets  just  such  a  case :  "  As  many  as 
have  sinned  without  law  shall  also  perish  without  law  "  (ver.  12).  The  judgment  will 
be  entirely  according  to  our  opportunities  and  privileges.  If  God  condemns  is  or 
inflicts  punishment  upon  us,  it  will  only  be  because  we  deserve  it.  Every  vutii  will 
get  a  fair  hearing.  "  There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God  "  (ver.  11).  Every  man 
will  get  a  fair  chance.  Those  who  have  the  Bible  in  their  hands  cannot  say  that  they 
have  not  had  a  fair  chance.  We  have  all  got  the  offer  of  salvation.  We  have  all 
heard  of  the  love  of  Jesus.  We  have  all  heard  the  invitations  of  the  gospel.  What 
could  God  have  done  for  us  that  he  has  not  done  ?  He  has  done  all  he  cotild  do  for  our 
salvation,  when  "  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  He  has  done  all  he  could,  so  long  as  man 
remains  a  free  agent,  to  warn  us  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,  to  win  our  hearts  to 
himself.  He  is  slow  to  anger,  plenteous  in  mercy,  forgiving  iniquity,  transgression, 
and  sin;  and  yet  he  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty.  He  gives,  us  every  chance, 
that  by  his  goodness  he  may  lead  us  to  repentance.  It  may  be  observed  here  that  the 
idea  of  righteousness  is  so  bound  up  in  the  idea  of  the  judgment  of  God,  that  St.  Paul 
uses  one  word  in  the  original  to  express  what  we  describe  by  two  words — "  righteous" 
judgment." 

BOUANS.  B 


(S6  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.    Loh.  n.  1— 29. 

IL  The  persons  judged.  That  judgment  no  one  can  escape.  "  Who  will  render  to 
every  man  according  to  his  deeds  "  (ver.  6).  Many  escape  here  on  earth  the  just 
reward  of  their  deeds.  Gross  crimes  are  perpetrated,  and  the  murderer  escapes  the 
just  sentence  of  the  law ;  the  defrauder  and  the  betrayer  and  the  slanderer  occupy 
positions  of  respectability  in  life.  But  they  go  down  to  the  grave  with  their  lins  upon 
their  soul,  to  pass  on  into  the  presence  of  that  tribunal  from  which  earthly  rank  and 
earthly  wealth  can  purchase  no  escape.  As  the  apostle  tells  us  in  the  eleventh  verse, 
"  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God."  God  looks  upon  the  heart ;  he  looks  upon 
the  motives ;  he  looks  upon  the  character.  Thus  regarding  men,  thus  judging  them,  he 
sees  but  ttuc  classes.  What  are  these  ?  The  rich  and  the  poor  ?  No.  The  learned 
and  the  unlearned?  No.  The  Christian  and  the  heathen ?  No.  The  Protestant  and 
the  Roman  Catholic  ?  No.  In  God's  sight  it  is  character  and  conduct — ^not  country, 
or  class,  or  creed — that  divide  men.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the  two  classes  thus :  "  Every 
soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil"  (ver.  9),  and  "Every  man  that  worketh  good"  (ver.  10). 
Or,  again,  he  describes  them,  "  Those  who  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  seek 
for  glory  and  honour  and  immortality  "  (ver.  7),  and  "  Those  that  are  contentious  [or, 
'self-seeking'],  and  do  not  obey  the  truth,  but  obey  unrighteousness"  (ver.  8).  To 
one  or  other  of  these  classes  every  one  of  us  belongs. 

III.  The  evidence.  Here  again  we  see  how  righteous  will  be  the  judgment  of  God. 
There  will  be  no  circumstantial  evidence  needed,  however  strong  its  chain  of  many 
links  may  often  be.  There  will  be  no  need  to  depend  on  the  testimony  of  others. 
There  will  be  no  danger  of  the  Judge  being  led  astray  by  the  impassioned  pleading  or 
the  fallible  logic  of  a  human  advocate.  Our  own  deeds  will  he  there  to  speak  for  them- 
selves. "  Who  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds."  Ah,  how  solemn  is  the 
thought  that  we  are  now  writing  the  evidence  by  which  we  shall  be  judged  on  the 
judgment-day !  In  the  red  sandstone  there  are  fuund,  in  some  places,  marks  which  are 
clearly  the  impressions  of  showers  of  rain,  and  these  so  perfect  that  it  can  even  bo 
determined  in  what  direction  the  shower  inclined,  and  from' what  quarter  it  proceeded 
— and  this  ages  ago !  So  also  scientific  men  have  been  able  to  trace  out  from  the 
fossil  remains,  buried  for  ages  in  the  earth,  the  shape  and  characteristics  of  animals 
whose  species  are  long  since  extinct.  So  our  deeds  leave  their  record  behind  them,  and 
that  record  in  the  judgment-day  will  testify  to  what  our  cljaracter  was  when  we  were 
here  on  earth.  The  Judgment-day  will  he  a  day  of  revelation  (ver.  5).  It  will  reveal 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God.  It  will  unveil  many  mysteries  in  God's  dealings 
which  we  did  not  understand  before.  It  will  reveal  the  true  character  of  men.  Then 
"  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men  "  (ver.  16).  Then  shall  all  hidden  things  be 
brought  to  light,  all  deceits  discovered,  all  hypocrisies  unmasked.  Then,  too,  shall 
the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father.  Their  character, 
often  here  hidden  under  a  cloud,  often  misunderstood,  often  misrepresented,  shall  then 
be  vindicated  for  all  eternity  and  before  all  the  world.  "  The  fire  shall  try  every  man's 
work  of  what  sort  it  is."  This  also  makes  God's  judgment  a  righteous  judgment,  that 
the  evidence  shall  be  the  evidence  of  men's  own  deeds. 

IV.  The  result  of  the  judgment.  To  some  will  he  given  etemai  life  (ver.  7). 
That  will  be  to  those  who  have  lived  according  to  the  light  they  had.  No  mere  pro- 
fession will  save  us.  Neither  will  our  own  good  works  save  us.  But  our  works  are 
the  evidence  whether  or  not  we  are  believers  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Those  who 
have  washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb ;  those  whom 
God's  goodness  has  led  to  repentance ;  those  who  have  kept  his  commandments ;  those 
who  have  not  been  weary  in  well-doing,  but  "by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing 
seek  for  glory  and  honour  and  immortality ; "  those  who  have  denied  themselves,  and 
taken  up  their  cross  and  followed  Christ; — they  "shall  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life, 
and  shall  enter  through  the  gates  into  the  city  "  (Rev.  xxii.  14).  To  others — oh,  what  a 
dark  future  I  "  Indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish  "  (vers.  8,  9).  God's 
judgment  is  B  righteous  judgment.  "  He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh,  shall  of  the  flesh  reap 
corruption."  The  apostle  speaks  of  "  treasuring  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath  " 
(ver.  5).  That  is  what  every  one  is  doing  who  goes  on  in  the  path  of  unbelief,  iinpeni- 
tence,  disobedience,  godlessness.    What  folly  to  lay  up  a  treasure  like  that  I — 0.  H.  L 

Vers,  17 — 29. — Trti«  religion.    Most  men  want  to  have  a  religion  of  some  sort.    II 


OH.n.  1— 29.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  67 

they  do  not  want  to  have  it  while  they  live,  yet,  recognizino;  the  importance  of  eternity 
and  the  judgment,  they  want  to  have  it  hefore  they  die.  Hence  men  who  never  think 
of  religion  in  their  hours  of  health  and  activity,  will  send  for  the  minister  when  they 
are  on  a  hed  of  sickness.  Hence  you  have  such  oases  as  that  of  the  great  Emperor 
Chailes  V.  of  Germany,  who  had  been  a  man  of  war  and  restless  ambition  almost  all 
his  days,  retiring  into  a  convent  for  the  closing  years  of  his  life,  and  seeking  within  its 
cloistered  walls  that  preparation  for  eternity  which  he  had  so  long  put  off.  But  we 
want  a  religion  not  merely  to  die  with,  but  to  live  by.  After  all,  it  is  but  a  poor 
religion  which  a  man  puts  on  as  if  it  were  to  be  his  shroud.  What,  then,  is  true 
religion  ?  Where  is  it  to  be  found  ?  The  answers  are  so  various  and  so  contradictory 
as  to  perplex  the  earnest  seeker  after  truth.  Old  ecclesiastical  systems  contend  that 
theirs,  and  theirs  only,  is  the  true  religion,  and  in  consequence  of  that  belief,  and  in 
order  to  make  others  conform  to  it,  they  have  persecuted,  and  imprisoned,  and  tortured, 
and  burned  those  who  differed  from  them.  Then,  in  our  own  day,  we  have  little  com- 
panies of  sincere  and  well-meaning  people  breaking  away  from  all  existing  Churches, 
claiming  for  themselves  that  theirs  only  is  the  true  religion,  and  excommunicating  all 
others.  But  we  come  here  as  immortal  souls,  seeking  after  truth,  and  we  turn  from 
all  human  answers  on  the  question  of  religion  to  the  one  infallible  guide  of  faith  and 
practice — the  Word  of  God.  That  Word  is  the  lamp  to  our  feet,  and  the  light  to  our 
path.  I  come,  then,  to  this  Divine  Word;  I  come  to  the  Father  of  my  spirit;  I 
come  to.  Jesus,  the  Saviour  and  the  Teacher  of  the  world  ;  I  come  to  the  Spirit  of  truth ; 
and.asahumble  and  unworthy  sinner.  Task  this  question — WTiatis  true  religionf  The 
.  answer  to  that  question  is  given  by  the  apostle  in  the  verses  now  before  us. 

I.  What  tbue  eeliqion  is  not.  1.  True  religion  is  not  observance  of  the  sacra- 
ments. "  What ! "  some  one  may  say,  "  you  tell  us  that  the  sacraments  are  of  Divine 
appointment,  that  a  sacrament  is  a  holy  ordinance  instituted  by  Christ,  and  yet  you 
tell  uB  that  religion  does  not  consist  in  the  observance  of  the  sacraments  I "  Even  so. 
Christ  instituted  the  sacraments.  But  what  for?  As  a  means  to  an  end.  As  the 
symbols,  the  outward  signs,  of  spiritual  truths.  They  are  helps  to  religion.  They  teach 
us  the  foundation  of  all  true  religion — the  de9,th,  the  sufferings,  the  cross  of  Christ,  as 
set  forth  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  They  teach  us  the  meaning  of  true  religion — the 
cleansing  and  purity  and  change  of  heart,  as  set  forth  in  the  sacrament  of  baptism. 
But  they  are  not  in  themselves  true  religion.  If  they  were,  would  not  more  stress  be 
laid  upon  them  ?  St.  Paul  says  here,  "  Circumcision  verily  profiteth,  if  thou  keep  the 
Law  "  (ver.  25) ;  and  again,  "  Neither  is  that  circumcision,  which  is  outward  in  the 
flesh  "  (ver.  28).  The  outward  ordinance,  though  it  signified,  did  not  create  or  cause  a 
change  of  heart.  Observe  the  attitude  of  our  Saviour  himself  towards  the  sacraments. 
We  read  that  "Jesus  himself  baptized  not,  but  his  disciples"  (John  iv.  2).  If  the 
sacrament  of  baptism  had  such  regenerating  power  as  is  attributed  to  it,  the  Saviour 
would  surely  have  used  it  on  every  possible  occasion.  We  may  notice  also  how  St. 
Paul  speaks  of  baptism  in  the  first  chapter  of  1  Corinthians.  "  I  thank  God  that  I 
baptized  none  of  you,  but  Crispus  and  Gains ;  lest  any  should  say  that  I  had  baptized 
in  my  own  name.  And  I  baptized  also  the  household  of  Stephanas  :  besides,  I  know 
not  whether  I  baptized  any  other.  For  Christ  sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach 
the  gospel."  St.  Paul  did  not  think  that  religion  consisted  in  the  observance  of  the 
sacraments,  or  he  would  have  put  the  sacraments  in  the  very  forefront  of  his  work. 
Yet  how  many  are  resting  entirely  on  the  sacraments  1  They  have  been  baptized.  They 
have  been  regular  communicants  at  the  Lord's  table,  and  therefore  they  think  they  are 
Christians.  Ah  I  religion  is  something  more  than  this.  The  sacraments  will  not  save 
our  souls.  We  need  something  more  than  the  observance  of  sacraments,  if  we  are  to 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  Seliyion  does  not  consist  in  the  observance  of  any 
outward  forms.  "He  is  not  a  Jew,  who  is  one  outwardly"  (ver.  28).  In  the  verses 
from  the  seventeenth  to  the  twenty-fourth,  the  apostle  shows  how  many  who  are  called 
Jews,  and  make  their  boast  in  the  Law,  are  among  the  chief  transgressors  of  the  Law. 
Through  breaking  the  Law  they  had  dishonoured  God;  so  much  so,  that  the  Name  of 
God  was  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles  by  reason  of  their  conduct  (vers.  23,  24), 
Although  St.  Paul  was  a  Jew  himself,  he  was  a  candid  and  impartial  observer  of  human 
life,  and  he  found  that  Jews,  like  other  men,  were  guilty  of  dishonesty  and  impurity 
and  other  sins.    They  had  the  Law,  but  instead  of  living  up  to  it,  they  trusted  to  the 


68  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,     [oh.  n.  1—29. 

f'<rm  of  religion  instead  of  the  reality.  Paul  shows  them  the  useleesness  of  this.  The 
f(vrm  is  us^id  along  with  the  reality.  But  without  the  reality  the  form  is  utterly  use- 
less, "  For  circumcision  verily  profiteth,  if  thou  keep  the  Law :  hut  if  thou  he  a  hreaker 
I'f  the  Law,  thy  circumcision  is  made  unciroumcision"  (ver.  25).  It  is  just  as  if  he  said 
to  a  professing  Christian,  "  Tour  profession  of  religion  is  right,  is  useful,  if  you  show 
the  spirit  and  obey  the  teachings  of  Christianity ;  but  if  your  life  is  in  opposition  to 
that  spirit  and  teaching,  then  your  Christianity  is  no  better  than  heathenism."  "  Faith 
without  works  is  dead."  3.  Religion  is  not  to  he  regulated  hy  the  opinions  of  men. 
"  Whose  praise  is  not  of  men  "  (ver.  29).  The  religion  which  our  Saviour  found  among 
the  Jews  in  his  time  was  very  much  a  worship  of  human  opinion.  Their  leaders 
taught  for  commandments  the  traditions  of  men.  The  Pharisees  and  scribes  gave  their 
alms  and  said  their  prayers  to  be  seen  of  men.  Their  object  was  to  have  praise  of  men. 
And  Christ  tells  us  "  they  have  their  reward."  Such  a  religion  reaches  its  end  in  this 
life.  It  has  no  aim,  and  it  certainly  will  have  but  poor  results,  in  the  life  that  is  to 
come.  It  has  always  been  an  injury  to  true  religion  when  it  has  been  influenced  too 
much  by  the  opinions  of  men.  It  was  so  in  the  history  of  the  Jewish  religion,  when 
the  kings  of  Israel  corrupted  it  by  their  desire  of  imitating  heathen  nations.  It  was  so 
in  the  early  Christian  Church.  The  more  the  Church  came  under  the  control  of  the 
state,  under  the  control  of  human  authorities,  the  more  worldly  it  became,  the  further 
it  departed  from  the  simplicity  and  spirituality  of  apostolic  times.  Th.mk  God  for  the 
clear-headed,  Christian-hearted  men,  who  in  all  ages  have  resisted  the  intrusion  of 
human  authority  and  human  opinion  in  matters  of  religion.  Such  men  were  the 
Waldenses  in  Italy,  the  Eeformers  in  Germany  and  England,  Prance  and  Spain, 
and  the  brave  Covenanters  of  Scotland.  It  is  a  great  principle,  worth  dying  for, 
worth  living  for  too,  that  religion  is  not  to  be  regulated  by  the  opinions  of  men. 
Human  influence,  human  authority,  human  rank,  are  of  little  account  in  this  matter. 
This  is  true  as  regards  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  it  is  true  also  as  regards  the 
individual. 

II.  What  true  keliqion  is.  1.  Beligion  is  a  matter  of  the  heart  and  spirit.  "  He 
is  a  Jew,  who  is  one  inwardly  ;  and  circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit,  and 
not  in  the  letter  "  (ver.  29).  Eeligion,  therefore,  is  a  personal  matter.  The  outward 
form  is  useless  without  the  internal  reality.  We  want  inward  Christians — Christians 
in  heart,  christians  in  spirit.  All  other  Christians  are  useless,  and  worse  than  useless. 
They  are  deceiving  others,  and  perhaps  they  are  deceiving  themselves.  We  want 
Christians  whose  everyday  life  is  a  song  of  praise,  who  meditate  on  God's  Law  day  and 
night,  who  walk  not  in  the  company  of  evil-doers,  who  sit  not  in  the  seat  of  the 
scornful,  and  who  commune  with  God  in  silent  but  earnest  prayer.  As  I  stepped  one 
day  into  the  office  of  a  leading  man  of  business  in  New  York,  I  noticed  over  his  desk  a 
portrait  of  a  citizen  who,  as  he  afterwards  told  me,  had  been  a  dear  friend  of  his  own. 
Beneath  the  portrait  were  words  so  beautiful  that  I  got  the  owner's  permission  to  copy 
them :  "  Whose  face  was  a  thanksgiving  for  his  past  life,  and  a  love-letter  to  all  man- 
kind." It  is  Christians  like  that  we  want,  who  carry  in  their  heart  and  on  their  face 
love  and  gratitude  to  God,  and  also  love  to  men.  Christians  like  that  would  soon 
transform  the  Church.  Christians  like  that  would  soon  transform  the  world.  "  Pure 
religion  and  undefiled  before  God  and  the  Father  is  this.  To  visit  the  fatherless  and  the 
wid  iws  in  their  affliotinn,  and  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world."  2.  Religion 
is  to  be  regulated  by  the  commandments  of  Qod.  There  is  no  true  religion  where  there 
is  not  obedience  to  the  Law  of  God.  "  Thou  that  makest  thy  boast  of  the  Law,  through 
breaking  the  Law  dishonourest  thou  God  ?  "  (ver.  23).  Whether  in  doctrine,  or  worship, 
or  practice,  God's  Word  is  to  be  our  guide,  and  to  please  God  is  to  be  our  aim.  "  Whose 
praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God "  (ver.  29).  We  are  too  much  influenced,  even  in 
matters  of  religion,  by  the  opinions  of  men.  While  our  religion  is  to  influence  us  in 
our  deivlings  with  our  fellow-men,  and  while  we  are  to  influence  them  so  far  as  we  can 
hy  the  power  of  true  religion,  we  are  not  to  permit  men  to  dictate  to  our  conscience,  or 
to  regulate  our  doctrines  or  our  worship.  That  is  a  matter  between  God  and  our  own 
souls.  Whether  men  will  praise  us  or  whether  they  will  blame  us,  matters  very  little,  if 
we  are  »erving  God  as  his  Word  and  our  own  conscience  direct.  From  all  the  clash  and 
conflict  of  hun\an  opinion,  let  us  turn  for  light  and  guidance  to  him  who  is  the  Light 
of  the  world. 


M.n.1— 29.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  «9 

"Some  will  hate  thee,  some  will  love  thee, 
Some  will  flatter,  some  will  slight. 
Cease  from  man,  and  look  above  thee ; 
Trust  in  God,  and  do  the  right." 

May  we  earnestly  and  diligently  cultivate  this  true  religion.  "  For  he  is  not  a  .'ew, 
who  is  one  outwardly ;  neither  is  that  circumcision,  which  is  outward  in  the  flesh  ; 
but  he  is  a  Jew,  who  is  one  inwardly ;  and  circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart,  in  the 
spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter;  whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God." — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — H. — WitTiout  excuse.  Hitherto  Paul  had  carried  his  Jewish  reader  with 
h.m,  for  the  Jews  were  glad  to  conderiin  the  Gentiles.  From  the  high  tribunal  of 
t  jeir  Law  they  "judged"  the  misdeeds  of  the  heathen.  And,  in  the  exercise  of  this 
'  ensoriouB  spirit  of  judgment,  they  would  perhaps  catch  at  the  idea  (ch.  i.  20)  that 
ihe  heathen  were  without  excuse  by  reason  of  their  possihle  knowledge  of  God.  But 
how  quickly  does  the  relentless  logic  of  the  apostle  turn  back  this  truth  upon  them- 
Belvesl  "  Without  excuse,"  because  they  might  have  known  God's  will?  "  Wherefore 
thou  art  without  excuse,  0  man  that  judgest ! "  For  the  very  judging  implied  a 
knowledge  of  the  wrong,  and  by  that  knowledge  they  were  self-condumned.  We  have 
here — the  false  hope  of  the  Jew ;  the  just  judgment  of  God. 

I.  The  false  hope  of  the  Jew.  The  Jew  was  greatly  privileged,  and  God  had 
shown  him  marvellous  mercy.  On  either  of  these  grounds,  or  both,  he  looked  for 
exemption  from  judgment  and  wrath.  1.  The  chief  hope  of  the  Jew  was  fqunded  upon 
the  election  of  grace;  he  was  called  from  among  the  UMtions  to  subserve  a  special 
purpose  of  God,  and  he  fondly  thought  that  he  was  called  to  security  and  bliss.  He 
was  singled  out  for  service ;  he  thought  that  he  was  singled  out  for  inevitable  salvation. 
He  reckoned  to  escape  altogether  the  judgment  of  God ;  he  proudly  deemed  himself 
exempt  by  his  very  birth  even  from  an  inquiry  into  character.  2.  But  if  perchanoiJ 
not  quite  so  blind  to  spiritual  claims,  yet  did  not  God's  very  goodness  and  forbearance 
and  long-suffering,  the  wealth  of  which  had  been  lavished  upon  the  Jew,  incline  him 
to  a  careless  ease,  which  was  virtually  presumptuous  contempt  ?  God  had  taught  his 
wrath  against  unrighteousness,  but  he  had  also  shown  his  mercy.  Why  not  riot  in 
the  mercy.   The  old  apology  of  God  of  the  human  heart, "  God  is  good  ;  he  will  forgive." 

II.  The  just  judgment  of  God.  But  "let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar!  " 
Neither  pride  of  birth,  nor  the  affluence  of  God's  love,  shall  be  security  against  just 
judgment.  1.  QoWs  judgment  is  true.  (Ver.2.)  It  proceeds  upon  the  eternal  principles 
of  right ;  therefore  an  exemption  on  the  ground  of  privilege,  "  respect  of  persons,"  is 
impossible.  "The  righteous  God  trieth  the  hearts"  (Ps.vii.  9).  2.  Oo^s  true  judg- 
ment condemns  the  evil  wnd  rewards  the  good.  (l)Now:  "isagainst  them  that  practise 
such  things."  (2)  "The  day  shall  declare  it:"  manifested  judgment.  There  is  an 
"  end  "  towards  which  all  things  are  tending — an  end  which  shall  also  be  a  beginning. 
Beason  and  revelation  point  to  this.  The  law  of  future  retribution  is  the  same  with 
the  law  of  present  judgment:  "to  every  man  according  to  his  works."  According  to 
what  a  man  is  in  himself  shall  he  be  regarded  by  God.  And  the  deeds  declare  the 
man.  So,  then  :  (a)  To  the  good,  "  eternal  life,"  "  glory,  honour,  peace; "  (6)  to  the 
evil,  "  wrath  and  indignation,  tribulation  and  anguish."  3.  Ood^s  goodness,  therefore, 
does  hut  seek  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  exercise  ^judgment.  He  must  condemn  the 
evil,  both  now  and  then,  and  therefore  he  will  seek  to  lead  men  from  their  evil  that  he 
may  not  condemn.  The  doctrine  of  justification  is  wrapped  up  in  this ;  for  if  God  can 
but  change  a  man's  self,  the  obliteration  of  the  past  is  provided  for  in  Christ.  The 
deep  damnation  of  those  who  think  to  pervert  such  saving  love ;  instead  of  a  wealth  of 
love,  there  shall  be  a  wealth  of  wrath  for  them  I 

Let  us  learn  the  danger :  of  a  blinded  conscience — ^because  we,  forsooth,  are  "  Chris- 
tians," therefore  wo  are  saved  1  and  of  a  hardened  heart — God's  very  love,  if  we  will 
not  read  its  meaning,  may  be  our  death.  Eternally,  and  without  any  exception, "  the 
righteous  Lord  loveth  righteousness  "  (Ps.  xi.  7). — T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  12 — ^24. — Law  and  guUt,  God,  as  the  Judge,  is  utterly  ImpartiaL  But  how, 
then,  shall  the  differences  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  especially  in  respect  of  the  Law, 
be  dealt  with  in  that  day  ?     Sin  shall  be  judged,  condemned,  in  Jew  or  Gentile. 


70  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,     [oh.  n.  1—29, 

The  Gentile  shall  perish  according  to  the  measure  of  his  sin ;  the  Jew  according  to 
the  measure  of  his.  For  law  must  pass  into  life,  otherwise  it  is  void  and  useless,  save 
for  condemnation.  We  have  here — the  Gentiles  and  the  Jews  in  their  respective 
relations  to  Law ;  and  the  supreme  sin  of  the  Jews. 

L  The  Gentiles  and  the  Jews  in  thbib  ebspeottvb  belations  to  Law.  The 
Gentile  might  have  pleaded  that  his  ignorance  should  save  him ;  the  Jew  certainly  did 
assume  that  his  knowledge  would  save  him.  Paul  will  lay  to  their  charge  "  that  they 
are  all  under  sin  "  (ch.  iii.  9),  and  to  this  end  he  now  shows  that  they  are  all  under 
law  hefore  God.  1.  OenfUes.  (1)  The  law  of  instinctive  impulse :  "  by  nature ; "  "  a 
law  unto  themselves."  A  correct  and  complete  philosophy  of  the  religious  nature  and 
relations  of  man  seems  almost  impossible  to  us  now ;  but  doubtless  we  must  reccgnizn 
here  the  fact  that  man  has  still,  more  or  less,  the  native  impulses  of  righteousness 
moving  in  the  heart,  which  Taut  for  the  Fall  would  have  been  perfect  and  all-containing 
in  UB,  and  but  for  the  redemption  would  have  been  altogether  lost.  This,  then,  is  one 
part  of  man's  primal  constitution  as  a  moral  and  religious  being ;  he  is  moved  to  love 
and  serve  God,  and  to  work  righteousness,  by  an  original  instinct  of  his  nature.  Hence 
heroism,  generosity,  etc.,  in  ancient  and  modern  world.  God  works  in  man,  and  so  far 
forth  man  does  not  suppress  God's  working.  (2)  The  law  of  reflective  consciousness  : 
"  their  conscience  bearing  witness  therewith ; "  "  their  thoughts  one  with  another 
accusing  or  else  excusing  them."  Man  does  not  show  his  true  moral  nature  till  the 
instinct  of  the  heart  is  obeyed  with  the  intelligent  approbation  of  the  reflective  con- 
sciousness. The  instincts  of  the  heart,  so  far  as  they  approach  completeness,  afford  the 
essential  contents  of  the  moral  law ;  but  it  is  for  man  to  discern,  embrace,  and  obey. 
And,  till  righteousness  is  wrought  thus  of  deliberate  choice,  it  may  scarcely  be  called 
righteousness.  For  there  are  other  impulses,  which  may  lead  to  wrong;  and,  till  the 
discerning  judgment  has  checked  the  native  impulse,  there  is  hardly  moral  worth  in 
"the  one  more  than  in  the  other.  The  "thoughts" must  excuse  or  accuse;  then  the  will 
may  act.  2.  Jews,  But  man's  heart  is  corrupt  and  man's  mind  is  dark  by  reason  of 
hereditary  sin;  therefore  to  the  Jews  God  gave, in  trust  for  the  world,  a  Law,  to  correct 
and  confirm  the  law  of  the  heart  and  mind.  The  coincidence  of  the  Law  of  Sinai 
with  the  true  law  of  the  heart  and  mind ;  the  convincing  authority  of  that  Law,  in 
its  Divine  power  of  awakening  and  purifying  the  law  within.  Hence  to  the  Jew  there 
was  added  the  Law  of  revelation.     He  was  doubly  taught  his  duty. 

IL  The  stjpkeme  sin  op  the  Jews.  But  to  what  end  was  the  Law  given,  whether 
of  nature  or  of  revelation  ?  To  teach  righteousness.  And  therefore  the  man  who 
wrought  unrighteousness,  according  to  his  knowledge  of  the  Law,  whether  Jew  or 
Gentile,  frustrated  the  purpose  of  God,  was  under  condemnation,  and  would  "perish." 
Yet  the  Jew  gloried  in  his  enlightenment,  oblivious  of  its  purport  and  intent  1  1.  Tlie 
Boast.  (1)  Personal,  (o)  His  name — "  a  Jew."  Called  by  God,  indeed,  but  for  work 
rather  than  privilege.  He  perverted  his  call  by  a  narrow,  selfish  exclusion.  (6)  Best- 
ing upon  the  Law.  Knowledge  was  safety,  he  thought ;  whereas  knowledge  was  duty 
(see  vers.  18,  20).  (c)  Glorying  in  God :  a  merely  national  God  to  him,  and  One  who 
would  merely  "  save."  (2)  Relative,  (a)  Guide  of  the  blind.  (6)  Light  of  them  that 
are  in  darkness,  (c)  Corrector  of  the  foolish,  (d)  Teacher  of  babes.  2.  The  shame. 
(1)  Inconsistency  (vers.  21—23).  (2)  Crime  (vers.  21—23).-  (3)  Blasphemy  (ver.  24). 
Their  God  indeed ;  what  must  he  be ! 

Our  higher  privilege,  in  the  matter  of  law :  Christ,  and  the  Spirit.  Our  graver  peril : 
orthodoxy,  and  the  name  of  Christian.  "  Why  call  ye  me,  Lora,  Lord,  and  do  not  the 
things  which  I  say  ?  "  (Luke  vi.  46).— T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  25 — 29. — Bymlolic  religion.  Closely  involved  in  the  Jew's  boast  of  his  name 
and  Law  and  God  was  his  glorying  in  circumcision,  the  outward  sign  of  the  covenant 
of  the  Law.  This  leads  the  apostle  to  enunciate  the  law  of  symbolic  religion,  and  to 
assert  the  supreme  value  of  a  true  spiritualism. 

^-  Symbolic  religion.  The  law  of  all  symbolism  in  religion  is  wrapped  up  in  the 
words.  Circumcision  indeed  profiteth,  if  thou  be  a  doer  of  the  Law."  That  is  the  sign 
is  of  worth  just  in  so  far  as  it  leads  to,  and  attests,  the  thing  signified.  1.' Personal 
valve.  Mans  nature  is  complex,  and  the  spiritual  and  the  sensuous  react  on  each 
ether.    Hence  a  definite,  tangible  sign  may  help  the  spirit.     So  circumcision  •  God's 


OH.II.  1— 29.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS,  71 

people.  So  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  now.  2.  Relative  value.  An  attestation  of 
Bpiiitual  truths  can  be  emphasized  by  an  outward  sign.  So  circumcision  spoke  force- 
fully to  the  heathen  around,  and  so  perhaps  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  have  such 
use  now. 

IL  A  TRUE  spiKiTnALiSM.  That,  however,  which  is  educative  and  attesting  has  no 
intrinsic  worth.  Hence:!.  2%e  ujivofee  o/ mere  symSoZMjn ;  a  childish  trifling.  Nay, 
worse — a  perpetual  condemnation,  mocking  the  reality  with  the  shadow.  2.  The 
supreme  value  of  true  spiritualism.  If  the  lesson  is  learnt,  and  the  witness  borne,  the 
work  is  done ;  for  "  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  they  that  worship  him,"  etc.  So  the  man  of 
circumcised  heart  was  the  true  Jew ;  the  man  of  baptized  spirit,  and  who  feeds  upon 
Christ  by  faith,  is  the  true  Christian. 

Let  us  learn,  in  the  best  sense,  "  Thou  God  seest  me." — ^T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  4,  5. — Long-suffering  abused.  How  prone  we  are  to  censure  others  for  what  we 
ourselves  are  guilty  of  without  remorse !  Men  delude  themselves,  either  hoping  some- 
how to  escape  condemnation,  though  others  shall  be  judged,  or  else  making  light  of 
judgment  because  it  has  not  fallen  on  them  as  yet.  The  apostle  wonders  at  the  pre- 
valence of  this  strange  alternative.  "  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not 
executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil." 

I.  The  kindness  of  God  to  sinners.  Its  abundance.  The  apostle  uses  his  favourite 
word  to  exhibit  the  munificence  of  God;  his  "riches"  of  every  sort,  and  enough  for  the 
whole  creation,  are  ceaselessly,  profusely  bestowed.  His  temporal  bounties  enrich  their 
lives.  The  children  are  so  engrossed  with  the  enjoyment  of  the  gifts  as  to  forget  to 
uplift  thankful  smiles  to  the  parental  Giver.  His  spiritual  mercies  should  be  remem- 
bered. The  Gentiles  have  the  warning  voice,  the  guiding  light  of  conscience,  to  preserve 
from  error  and  ruin;  yet  is  this  token  of  Divine  care  frequently  slighted  and  even  hated, 
as  Zeohariah  was  slain  by  Joash.  It  was  no  slight  favour  that  blessed  the  Jews  with 
the  "lively  oracles;  "  and  Christians  may  well  prize  the  unsearchable  riches  of  gospel 
truth.  'Tis  when  we  are  anxiously  seeking  the  right  way  we  are  most  sensible  of  our 
helplessness,  and  welcome  the  aid  of  the  Word  and  Spirit.  God's  kindness  is  especially 
visible  in  the  length  of  the  day  of  grace  vouchsafed.  The  apostle  puts  it  negatively  and 
positively — God's  "  forbearance"  in  restraining  his  thunderbolts  of  wrath,  and  his  "long- 
suffering"  in  the  painful  endurance  of  sin  in  his  dominions.  We  have  tried  his  patience. 
He  bears  long  with  an  evil  generation,  suffers  their  manners  to  go  unpunished  all  these 
years.  Even  the  souls  under  the  altar  echo  the  complaint  of  earth,  "How  long,  O  Lord, 
holy  and  true  ?  " 

II.  The  intent  of  this  kikdnbss.  None  of  God's  gifts  is  without  meaning.  To 
use  them  rightly,  to  improve  them,  is  the  recompense  he  seeks.  "Bab  forbearance  is 
designed  to  change  men's  lives.  Beflection  begets  repentance,  the  grieving  over  past 
follies,  the  resolution  to  forsake  them,  and  the  actual  turning  to  a  godly  life.  He  gives 
men  time  to  alter.  He  is  "  long-suS'ering,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish."  See 
this  in  years  while  the  ark  was  a-preparing,  in  the  period  of  prophecy  before  the  Cap- 
tivity, and  in  the  interval  between  the  Day  of  Pentecost  and  the  day  of  judgment. 
Men  have  prayed  God  to  spare  their  lives  in  the  hour  of  peril,  and  the  moments  after 
rescue  have  blotted  out  the  memory  of  his  mercy  and  their  vow.  n«  employs  agencies 
adapted  to  this  end.  His  revelation  and  the  admonitions  of  the  Spirit,  preachers,  and 
providences,  have  been  directed  towards  arousing  the  lethargic,  rebuking  the  careless, 
forcing  them  to  trace  a  connection  between  sin  and  destruction.  He  woos  them  to  a 
better  life  by  his  goodness.  Ho  is  drawing  them  as  with  a  magnet,  so  that  if  they 
repent  not  it  is  because  they  resist  his  "  leading." 

III.  The  treatment  this  kindness  too  often  keobives.  Contempt.  Men  scoff  at 
the  idea  of  retribution  awaiting  them,  arguing  final  impunity  from  thejarrival  of  present 
donations  that  speak  of  the  Creator  and  Preserver's  benevolence.  They  mistake  his 
slowness  to  strike  for  incapacity.  His  unwillingness  to  destroy  is  imputed  to  inability. 
Contempt  is  a  sign  of  ignorance.  "  Not  knowing  that,"  etc.  It  is  the  foolish  who 
display  brazen  hardihood ;  the  wise  man  makes  light  of  no  threatening  storm.  Such 
ignorance  is  blamable.  The  source  of  it  is  the  "hardness  and  impenitence  of  the  heart." 
"  Their  eyes  have  they  closed,  and  their  ears  are  dull  of  hearing,  because  the  heart  of 
this  people  is  waxed  gross."    The  Seriptures  would  drive  us  from  every  refiige  of  lies, 


72  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.     [oh.  n.  1—29, 

would  make  us  ashamed  of  our  behaviour  that  we  may  mourn  and  arnend.  There  is 
no  hope  of  reformation  as  long  as  the  pachyderm  of  self-complacency  is  not  pierced 
with  the  compunction  of  reBponsibility. 

IV.  The  awpdl  coksequencb  to  the  impenitent.  They  aggravate  their  punish- 
ment. The  pent-up  storm  bursts  with  the  greater  fury.  The  more  the  advantages,  the 
weightier  the  account  demanded ;  the  longer  the  time  granted  for  amendment,  the 
severer  the  castigation  for  wasted  opportunities.  Men  "  treasure  up  "  wrath  for  them- 
selves. Character  indurates,  like  the  writing  on  clay  tablets  hardened  in  the  sun.  No 
possible  excuse  can  be  found  where  the  day  of  grace  has  passed  unused.  A  dreadfvl 
contrast,  to  accumulate  a  store  of  wrath  instead  of  profiting  by  the  riches  of  God's  good- 
ness. The  money  of  heaven  was  placed  at  men's  disposal ;  but,  throwing  this  away  aa 
rubbish,  they  made  their  own  counterfeit  coins,  and  are  punished  for  their  treason 
against  the  King's  government.  Trifle  not  with  sin  when  thou  seest  its  present  disas- 
trous results,  but  calculate  thence  the  "  wrath  of  the  Lamb,"  when  gentleness  has  been 
Bpumed  and  maltreated,  and  goodness  must  give  place  to  severity.  The  smoothly 
gliding  river  of  God's  long-suffering,  if  barred  out  of  thy  heart  by  closed  gates,  will  swell 
to  a  mighty  torrent,  sweeping  thy  frail  obstructions  away  to  ruin. — S,  B.  A. 

Vers.  6 — 11,— A  righteous  Judge.  That  the  anticipation  of  a  judgment  rises  naturally 
in  the  mind  is  shown  by  the  present  testimony  of  conscience — a  law  recognized  as  in, 
yet  above  us,  and  by  the  utterances  of  heathen  writers  on  morals.  The  Scriptures. 
conoborate  and  clarify  this  conception.  The  apostle  asserts  of  the  future  what  Abraham 
felt  of  the  present  Providence,  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right?  Will  he 
slay  the  righteous  with  the  wicked  ?  "  Note  some  particulars  confirming  the  righteous- 
ness of  God's  judgment. 

I.  The  recompense  will  be  proportioned  to  men's  deeds.  Not  their  professions, 
but  their  acts,  will  determine  their  destiny.  And  the  character  and  number  of  their 
acts  will  be  reckoned.  There  is  no  conflict  between  this  statement  and  other  Scripture 
passages  which  speak  of  the  reward  as  one  of  grace,  not  of  merit,  and  as  a  gift  bestowed 
on  all  Christians.  For  the  reward  will  be  immensely  greater  than  men's  deeds  deserve, 
and  will  not  be  earned  by  them,  but  conditioned  by  their  conduct.  The  gospel  comes 
not  as  a  substitute  for,  but  as  a  help  to  realizing,  practical  righteousness ;  and  whilst 
every  justified  believer  will  be  saved,  each  will  have  the  praise  that  is  his,  according  to 
his  works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love. 

II.  The  judgment  will  take  account  of  men's  aims  in  life.  The  one  class  seek 
"glory,  honour,  and  incorruption,"  and  also  "peace."  Their  choice  does  them  credit; 
they  selected  what  is  fair  and  lovely  and  permanent,  what  is  opposed  to  the  rule  of  tlie 
flesh,  and  is  unaffected  by  the  ravages  of  time.  Their  goal  is  not  the  "  vain  pomp  and 
glory  of  the  world ; "  not  simply  success,  but  to  reach  a  position  of  pure,  lasting  excel- 
lence. And  they  shall  receive  in  fullest  measure  what  they  desire.  "  Eternal  life  " 
comprehends  all  blessedness — deliverance  from  the  thraldom  of  sin;  no  need  to  gather 
up  the  skirts  lest  defilement  ensue,  for  the  very  streets  of  their  city  shall  be  of  pure 
gold;  enwrapment  with  the  Divine  splendour;  walking  in  the  light  of  God ;  manifested 
as  his  sons  by  the  likeness  they  wear;  elevated  to  princely  emplojmcnts  and  regal 
dignities.  The  objects  for  which  the  other  class  strive  are  not  definitely  stated,  but 
may  be  gathered  from  antithesis  and  from  the  unrighteousness  to  which  they  yield 
themselves.  They  seek  not  "  peace "  and  "  truth,"  and  their  harvest  likewise  is  the 
multiplied  outcome  of  the  seeds  they  have  sown.  No  description  of  hell  can  transcend 
the  awful  picture  of  "  wrath  and  indignation,  tribulation  and  anguish,"  resting  upon 
the  soul;  that,  clasping  unrighteousness  to  its  bosom  as  a  prize  on  earth,  finds  it  sting 
like  a  serpent  and  burn  with  fiercest  remorse  when  allowed  full  sway  in  its  "  own  place." 

III.  Thjs  award  will  bear  relation  to  the  methods  by  which  the  objects  of 
BABTHLT  ENDEAVOUR  HAVE  BEEN  PDRSunD.  A  lighteous  aim  Can  be  permanently 
attained  only  in  righteous  ways.  The  recognition  of  this  stamps  the  government  of 
the  universe  as  moral.  The  "  patient  continuance  "  of  the  one  class  could  only  be 
practised  by  the  well-doing.  It  includes  passive  endurance  and  active  perseverance;  the 
stationary  posture  of  the  caryatides,  and  the  carrying  of  a  burden  in  the  face  of  wind 
and  storm.  The  other  class  are  described  as  "factious,"  quarrelling  with  their  lot, 
ooreting  pleasure  and  notoriety, "  working  evil."    Refusing  to  bow  to  the  yoke  of  truth, 


OB.  n.  1—29.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  73 

they  become  the  slaves  of  unrighteousnesB ;  and  a  hard  master  and  terriWe  paymaster 
does  unrighteousness  prove.  The  judgment  of  God  will  proceed  on  easily  iutelligible 
principles.  It  is  not  difScnlt  for  men  to  decide  whether  they  are  working  good  or 
working  evil.  It  is  not  reaching  a  conclusion  after  abstract  speculation,  nor  holding  a 
creed  with  multitudinous  details.  Only  an  omniscient  Judge,  however,  could  bring  to 
light  the  hidden  deeds  of  darkness,  the  secret  thing,  good  or  bad. 

IV.  The  Judge  will  obbbrvb  riqorous  impaetialitt.  With  hira  "  is  no  respect  of 
persons,"  Jew  and  Greek  shall  be  tried  with  due  regard  to  the  presence  or  absenca  of 
religious  light  (cf.  Acts  x.  35  in  the  history  of  Cornelius).  It  is  impossi'ble  to  bribe  the 
almighty  Arbiter  or  to  overawe  his  tribunal.  The.  anticipation  of' a  Divine  judgment 
has  been  a  comfort  to  the  oppressed,  remembering  that  "  One  highi^r  than  the  high 
regardeth  ; "  and  it  will  be  a  terror  to  the  worker  of  iniquity,  and  an  incentive  to  all  noble 
deeds.  "  Knowing  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men,"  None  can  complain  that 
their  condition  makes  it  impossible  to  be  patient  in  well-doing.  Christ,  our  Pattern 
and  our  Power,  offers  his  "  very  present  help  "  to  all  who  find  the  stress  and  strain  of 
life  too  severe  for  mortal  strength. — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  21. — A  sermon  to  teachers.  The  apostle  supposes  a  Jew  to  have  listened  com- 
placently to  the  long  catalogue  of  crimes  of  which  the  heathen  world  has  been  guilty — 
Climes  which  blacken  the  lip  to  mention.  And  then  the  apostle  turns  strategically 
round  upon  the  self-satisfied  possessor  of  a  Divine  revelation  to  put  the  scathing  inquiry, 
why  he  has  not  been  freer  from  violations  of  the  moral  law.  Advantage  entails  respon- 
sibility ;  it  was  inconsistent  to  eagerly  proselytize  to  a  religion  which  the  preacher 
observed  more  by  precept  than  by  example.  A  lesson  here  for  all  teachers  of  the  Word: 
let  their  instructions  mould  their  own  lives  I 

I.  The  wobk  of  teaching.  1.  Its  possibility.  It  presumes  that  some  are  able  and 
willing  to  teach,  and  that  others  are  equally  in  a  position  to  learn.  Knowledge  begets 
the  desire  of  communication  to  others ;  truth  by  its  dissemination  enriches  all,  leaves 
none  the  poorer.  The  possession  of  the  Scriptures  constitutes  a  capacity  in  those  who 
study  to  explain  their  meaning  lo  others  leas  happily  situated  for  meditation.  Besides 
the  preachers  of  the  gospel  from  the  pulpit,  we  have  a  noble  army  of  volunteers  sacri- 
ficing their  ease  each  Lord's  day  to  impart  to  the  young  what  %hey  themselves  have 
learned  of  Christ.  And  the  youthful  mind  is  plastic,  its  heart  easily  impressed.  2.  Its 
importance.  Education  is  a  work  of  beginnings,  of  seed-sowing,  of  filling  the  pockets 
with  treasure  in  the  shape  of  facts  and  principles  to  be  afterwards  used,  applied,  recog- 
nized, in  fulness  of  meaning.  The  mind  must  be  fed  as  well  as  the  body,  or  we  have 
dwarfed,  stunted  souls,  miserable  and  corrupt.  To  neglect  the  garden  is  to  fill  it  wiih 
weeds.  We  insufficiently  value  acquisitions  whose  worth  cannot  be  tabulated  in  mone- 
tary figures.  Of  what  priceless  value  is  a  new  happy  inspiring  thought  of  God  1  To 
be  led  where  we  can  get  a  better  sight  of  Christ  and  lais  salvation,  is  surely  a  service  for 
which  we  can  in  no  wise  adequately  thank  or  pay  our  guide.  3.  Its  dijlculty.  Some 
hesitate  to  teach  unless  they  can  answer  every  objection  which  may  be  urged  against 
the  truth  they  enforce.  And  on  religious  subjects  there  is  no  end  to  the  queries  which 
may  be  started.  There  are  many  adverse  influences  preventing  the  ready  reception  of 
the  facts  and  doctrines  of  Christianity,  or  checking  the  subsequent  advance  in  learning. 
Eecall  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  sower,  and  its  picture  of  the  multiform  ways  in  which 
sin  works  against  the  leaven  of  the  truth.  There  is  a  roseate  and  there  is  a  practical 
view  of  Sunday  school  work.  Yet,  whilst  we  would  not  forget  the  restlessness  of  the 
young,  and  the  far  aim  of  making  them  "  wise  unto  salvation  "  bo  frequently  hindered 
by  unlovely  homes,  neither  should  any  despair,  but  remember  they  are  wielding  the 
sword  of  the  Spirit,  and  that  to  God  all  hearts  are  open.  Let  preachers  think  of  the 
Lord  and  his  apostles  as  failing  to.  conquer  the  opposition  and  win  the  assent  of  all  their 
hearers,  and,  instead  of  renouncing  toil,  remember  that  they  are  not  responsible  for 
success,  but  only  for  effort. 

II.  The  reflex  inphjenoe  of  teaching  on  thb  tbaohebs.  1.  Incite  to  their 
own  culture.  There  is  the  felt  necessity  of  being  in  advance  of  the  learners.  The  more 
we  know  and  the  more  thoroughly  and  clearly  we  understand  it,  the  greater  the  enjoy- 
ment and  the  success  of  the  work.  We  often  take  pains  for  the  sake  of  others  which 
we  should  reject  for  ourselves.    How  can  we  teach  if  we  do  not  instruct  ourselves  ? 


74  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,      [oh,  ii.  1—29. 

There  ought  to  be  no  sad  hiatus  between  our  declarationi  and  our  spiritual  conduct. 
We  must  not  only  be  finger-posts,  but  guides—"  lest,  having  preached  to  othera,  we 
ourselreB  become  castaways." 

"  The  lore  of  Christ  and  his  apostles  tweWe 
He  taught,  but  first  he  followed  it  hlmeelt" 

If  we  are  the  channels  of  good  to  our  fellows,  it  behoves  us  to  clear  away  all  that  might 
impede  the  flowing,  and  defile  the  purity  of  the  stream  of  truth  from  God.  2.  NeceS' 
sarily  promotes  their  own  improvement.  Earnest  sincere  teaching  not  only  demands 
self-culture  and  progress,  but  is  certain  to  result  therein.  All  Christian  service  is 
lelf-rewarding. 

"  Thou  shalt  be  served  thyself,  by  every  leiiM 
Of  service  which  thou  renderest." 

Teaching  clarifies  our  own  views,  enforces  truth  upon  our  own  souls.  Many  a  teacher 
has  enjoyed  prayer  and  realized  the  sweetness  and  significance  of  the  Scriptures' most 
when  preparing  the  lesson  for  his  scholars.  The  Divine  plan  for  oblivion  of  our  own 
sorrows  is  to  become  saviours  to  the  helpless,  physicians  to  the  sick.  The  outrush  of 
Christian  benevolence  protects  against  the  inflow  of  corroding  cares  or  pleasures. — S.  R.  A. 

Vers.  28,  29. — Heartfelt  religion.  Eeligion  may  be  conceived  of  as  external  or 
internal.  According  to  the  former  view,  we  regard  the  religious  man  as  one  who  in  the 
sight  of  others  obseiTes  the  ceremonies  of  religion,  attends  Divine  service,  and  conforms 
to  the  outward  ordinances  of  Scripture.  According  to  the  latter  view,  we  think  of  the 
heart  of  the  man '  as  moved  by  inward  impulses,  affected  by  certain  sentiments,  form- 
ing religious  resolves,  and  conscious  of  holy  affections. 

I.  A  GBNBBAL   MISTAKE    COBBBOTED  :    THE    PBONENBSS    OF    MANKIND    TO    LAY    THH 

STRESS  OF  BBLiGioN  UPON  ouTWABD  oBSBEVANOES.  The  Jcw  grounded  his  self- 
satisfaction  upon  his  initiation  into  the  covenant  by  circumcision ;  upon  his  religious 
dress,  with  its  phylacteries  and  fringes;  upon  his  prayers,  fasting,  and  tithes.  The 
heathen  religion  consisted  mainly  iu  superstitious  ceremonies,  sacrifices,  and  incantations. 
And  the  people's  query  to  John  the  Baptist,  "  What  shall  we  dof"  like  the  jailor's 
request  of  Paul,  "  What  must  I  cZo  to  be  saved?"  shows  this  natural  tendency,  which 
begets  in  our  day  nominal  Christianity ;  that  contents  itself  with  baptism  and  the 
Lord's  Supper,  reading  the  Bible,  and  subscribing  to  societies.  Their  religion  ends 
there — mere  formalism.  Its  causes  may  be  found  in  the  following  circumstances. 
1.  We  are  under  the  governance  of  the  senses.  We  like,  and  need  to  a  certain  extent, 
the  visible  signs  and, seals  of  religion,  and  thus  run  the  risk  of  exalting  unduly  their 
importance.  Resting  in  the  embodiment,  we  neglect  the  spiritual  significance.  2.  It 
saves  the  trouble  of  investigating  our  spiritual  condition.  Definite  rules  please  us,  by 
relegating  to  codes  or  authorities  the  difficulty  and  weariness  of  understanding  prin- 
ciples, and  deciding  as  to  times  and  degrees  and  dispositions  of  religious  service.  3.  The 
rites  may  be  performed  without  necessarily  renouncing  pleasurable  vices.  There  is 
a  sort  of  compromise  effected,  such  and  such  duties  condoning  such  other  laxities. 
Even  asceticism  is  easier  than  rigorous  inward  control  and  mortification.  To  depreciate 
internal  religion  is  evidently  wrong :  (1)  From  the  whole  tenor  of  Scripture  in  many 
places.  Even  the  Law  of  Moses  affirmed  the  necessity  of  loving  God  with  all  the  heart 
and  soul.  The  prophets  constantly  denounced  sacrifices  which  represented  no  moral 
feejing,  no  inward  confession  of  sin  or  respect  to  the  glory  of  God.  (2)  The  intent  of 
religious  observances  is  as  means  to  an  end,  and  to  stop  at  the  means  is  to  frustrate  the 
aim  of  ceremonies,  which  are  designed  to  purify  our  conceptions  of  righteousness,  to 
strengthen  our  aspirations  after  the  noble  and  the  good,  and  to  leaven  the  whole  life 
with  godliness. 

II.  A   WBONQ  CONCLUSION   OBVIATED  :     THAT   BXTBRNAL   OBSERVANOBS   MAT   BB    DIS- 

KEOABDBD.  It  is  man's  habit,  as  Butler  has  remarked,  when  two  things  are  compared, 
to  fancy  that  the  one  adjudged  less  preferable  may  be  wholly  neglected.  "  These  ought 
ye  to  have  done,  and  not  to  have  left  the  other  undone."  The  practice  of  religion 
demands  some  outward  rites.  1.  Expression  is  helpful  to  our  thoughts.  Singing 
increases  thankfulness;  written  vows  stamp  themselves  on  the  memory.    And  the 


CH.  11.1— 29.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  75 

symbolic  acts  of  a  religion  thus  lend  impressive  deflniteneas  to  our  inward  decisions. 
2.  The  union  of  Christians  is  assisted  by  participation  in  the  same  rites.  Attending 
the  same  gatherings,  affixing  the  same  badge  to  the  breast,  cements  the  conviction  of 
brotherhood,  and  renders  co-operation  possible.  3.  The  honour  of  God  is  subserved  by 
outward  worship  and  confession.  His  glory  is  in  revelation,  and  by  visible  adoration 
the  Church  reflects  his  radiance  and  becomes  the  light  of  the  world.  There  is  a  moral 
obligation  resting  on  the  disciples  of  Christ  to  respect  the  institutions  he  himself 
established. 

IIL  The  trub  relation  of  external  to  internal  religion.  1.  The  external 
observance  must  he  the  outgrowth  of  the  inward  condition.  The  sign  of  a  change 
of  heart  or  disposition.  The  profession  is  designed  as  an  index  to  the  soul,  a  dial-plate 
of  the  inner  workings ;  otherwise  it  is  false  and  worthless,  a  mockery  and  an  injury. 
Hence  the  anxiety  of  the  gospel  method  to  reform  and  renew  the  heart,  that  from 
a  pure  spring  pellucid  rills  may  flow.  "  Make  the  tree  good,  and  its  fruit  will  be  good 
also."  Even  moral  acts  have  no  beauty  in  them  if  performed  from  unworthy  motives. 
To  give  merely  because  we  are  importuned,  or  to  head  a  subscription  list,  is  not 
liberality.  2.  When  there  is  a  conflict  between  moral  duties  and  religious  observances,  then 
only  can  the  latter  be  neglected.  Whilst  both  are  commanded,  the  moral  obligations 
have  the  additional  sanction  of  arising  from  the  light  of  nature.  Our  Saviour  showed 
that  it  was  better  to  rescue  an  ox  or  a  sheep  than  to  keep  the  sabbath.  Hs  declared 
the  Pharisees  not  to  understand  the  statement,  "  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice." 
They  did  not  perceive  that  the  general  spirit  of  religion  consists  in  piety  and  virtue, 
as  distinguished  from  outward  forms  and  regulations.  "  To  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice, 
and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams." 

IV.  The  Divink  approval  which  crowns  a  truly  relioious  life.  "  Whose 
praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  Grod."  The  supreme  object  is  to  please  him  who  alone  can 
really  see  our  thoughts  and  aims,  and  judge  righteous  judgment.  Men  praise  where 
they  should  blame,  and  censure  when  they  ought  to  approve.  As  Paul  cried,  "I  appeal 
unto  Csesar,"  so  we  may  appeal  unto  God.  His  praise  is  worth  having.  The  decrees 
in  his  university  mean  merited  honours.  All  our  inward  strivings  against  temptation 
and  struggles  to  hold  fast  to  faith  in  his  Word  he  has  witnessed.  Human  eyes  can  only 
discern  our  failures  or  our  seeming  successes,  but  Christ's  "eyes  of  flame  "  test  the  gold 
of  our  actions.  And  the  commendation  of  the  Lord  implies  blessed  reward,  to  be 
publicly  conferred  hereafter.  With  him  is  no  inadequacy  of  testimonials  to  express  his 
sense  of  his  people's  services. — S.  R.  A. 

Vers.  1 — 16. — The  leading  principles  regulating  the  general  judgment.  Having  stated 
so  clearly  the  state  of  the  Gentile  world  as  under  God's  wrath,  the  apostle  now  introduces 
to  us  a  critic  who  endorses  the  Divine  dealings.  He  is  a  severe  critic,  as  guilty  men  will 
often  be.  His  spirit  towards  the  heathen  world,  so  manifestly  under  the  Divine  curse, 
is,  "  Serve  them  right."  He  is  evidently  a  Jew  (cf.  ver.  17).  Criticizing  the  heathen 
world  from  the  platform  of  superior  privileges,  the  Jew  concluded  that  they  had  got  no 
more  than  they  deserved.  The  apostle,  however,  ventures  to  tell  him  he  is  as  "inexcus- 
able "  as  his  Gentile  brother.  If  the  Gentile  had  so  misused  "  the  light  of  nature  "  and 
of  "  conscience  "  as  to  become  so  degraded,  why  has  the  Jew  so  misused  the  additional 
light  of  God's  Law  as  to  become  so  self-righteous  ?  God  will  not  judge  the  secrets  of 
men  upon  any  narrow  and  partial  grounds,  but  will  dispense  judgment  fairly.  The 
section  now  before  us  presents  the  leading  principles  of  the  Divine  judgment  in  a  most 
masterly  fashion. 

I.  God's  judgment  is  according  to  truth.  (Ver.  2.)  The  apostle  declares  to 
his  self-righteous  critic  that  he  is  sure — the  Revised  Version  gives  it  "  know  " — that 
God's  judgment  in  the  cases  already  referred  to  is  according  to  truth  (Kara  oA.j)9«oi/). 
By  this  we  are  to  understand  that  it  is  according  to  the  reality  of  the  things  in  question. 
That  is  to  say,  the  Divine  judgment  is  not  based  on  appearances,  it  does  not  rest  on 
superficial  grounds,  but  goes  down  to  the  very  nature  of  things.  And  this  is  a  general 
principle  characterizing  God's  judgment  always.  Men  may  judge  according  to  the 
appearance,  but  God  looketh  on  the  heart,  and  dispenses  to  each  individual  what  he 
deserves.  Now,  we  could  have  confidence  in  no  other  judgment  than  this  one  which 
conforms  to  the  reality  and  nature  of  things.    If  we  jae  able  to  analyze  fairly  God'» 


76  THE  EPISTLlfi  OP  PAtTL  TO  THE  ROMANS.     taa.a        ^. 

dealings  with  sinful  men,  we  shall  find  that  his  severe  judgments  have  alwf.'*'  had 
sufficient  reason.  In  the  present  instance,  the  critic  vindicates  the  Divine  procedure. 
As  he  declares  the  Gentiles  to  have  suffered  rightly,  he  really  becomes  the  champion 
of  God,  although  in  doing  so  he,  as  the  apostle  shows,  condemns  himself. 

II.  God's  jttdgmbnts  mat  bb  pbecbdbd  by  a  dispensation  of  forbeabancb. 
(Vers.  3 — 5.)  While  God's  judgments  when  executed  are  truthful  and  thorough,  they 
may  not  be  executed  immediately.  In  the  case  of  the  Jew  under  review  by  the  apostle, 
God  has  been  exercising  amazing  forbearance.  Although  the  recipient  of  superior 
privileges,  he  has  been  sinning  just  as  really  as  his  Gentile  brother,  and  wholly  mis- 
interpreting  the  Divine  forbearance.  God,  by  his  goodness,  forbearance,  and  long- 
suffering,  has  been  leading  him  to  repentance,  to  a  thorough  change  of  character  and 
heart  (jierivoLo);  but  he  will  not  be  led,  but  insists  on  regarding  all  this  forbearance  as 
merited  on  his  part.  His  heart  still  continues  hard  and  impenitent  (a.nerav6iiTov),  so 
that  he  is  really  treasuring  up  wrath  for  himself  which  shall  be  revealed  at  the  day  of 
judgment.  And  this  solemn  warning  should  be  heeded  by  many.  There  are  many 
stUl  who  interpret  forbearance  as  approval ;  who  think  highly  of  themselves  because 
they  have  been  exempt  from  suffering ;  who  base  upon  their  good  health,  good  fortune, 
and  general  comfort  the  mistaken  conclusion  that  God  must  contemplate  such  people 
with  a  large  amount  of  complacency.  But  it  is  forbearance  he  is  exercising,  and  no 
justification  could  be  extended  to  such  self-righteous  individuals.  • 

III.  Reward  and  pttnishment  will  be  mbtbd  out  bvbntitallt  aocobdino  to 
EACH  man's  deeds.  (Vers.  6 — 10.)  To  the  apostle's  eye  men  resolved  themselves 
into  two  classes :  one  class  was  seeking,  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,  glory  and 
honour  and  immortality;  the  other  class  was  contentious,  not  obeying  the  truth,  but 
obeying  unrighteousness  (iSf/tio).  Now,  to  the  one,  reward  will  be  given  in  the  form  of 
all  that  is  implied  by  "eternal  life;"  while  to  the  other  shall  be  meted  out  in  strict 
pro|X)rtion  "Indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish."  Just  as,  in  a  well-ordered 
state,  the  doer  of  evil  is  punished  and  the  doer  of  good  rewarded,  so  will  it  be,  only 
with  infallible  accuracy,  under  the  government  of  God.  Now,  at  first  sight,  it  seems 
hard  to  reconcile  a  judgment  according  to  works  with  a  justification  by  faith  alone ; 
but  if  we  will  only  consider  the  fruits  of  justification,  in  those  good  works  which  God 
hath  before  ordained  that  his  people  should  walk  in  them  (cf.  Eph.  ii.  8 — 10),  we  can 
see  thsl  the  scheme  of  grace  can  yet  include  a  reward  proportional  to  work.  Let  us 
grant  at  once  that  all  the  work  got  out  of  the  believer  is  divinely  prompted,  that  it  is 
the  outcome  of  grace,  nevertheless  it  has  its  moral  value  in  the  universe  of  God  and 
deserves  reward.  Besides,  as  the  judgment-scene  in  Matt.  xxv.  shows,  the  servants 
that  are  welcomed  and  rewarded  receive  their  reward  with  wonder.  Just  as  magnani- 
mous minds,  when  some  acknowledgment  of  their  valuable  labours  is  offered,  declare 
it  to  be  beyond  their  deserts,  and  feel  what  they  declare,  so  the  rewarded  well-doer  at 
the  last  will  be  the  first  to  acknowledge  that  the  reward  rests,  not  on  any  absolute 
merit,  but  on  abounding  grace.  On  the  other  hand,  the  evil-doers  will  acknowledge 
that  the  "  indignation  and  wrath,  the  tribulation  and  anguish,"  have  been  fully  earned 
and  richly  deserved  (of.  Jonathan  Edwards's  '  Works :  Occasional  Sermons,'  Nos. 
vii.,  viii.).  And  if  we  inquire  how  those  who  have  died  in  infancy,  and  those  who  have 
been  saved  as  by  fire  at  life's  last  moments,  like  the  dying  robber  at  the  side  of  Christ, 
are  to  fare  at  a  judgment  based  upon  works,  we  have  only  to  reply  that  their  history 
after  death,  has  doubtless  attested  the  gracious  Spirit  which  was  given  them,  and  will 
justify  their  reception  into  the  joys  of  eternal  life. 

IV.  God's  judgment  will  bb  without  respect  of  persons.  (Ver.  H.)  In 
speaking  of  this  reward  and  punishment  according  to  works,  the  apostle  is  careful  to 
note  that  each  will  be  "  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Greek  Ceaaiji'i):  for  there  is  no 
respect  of  persons  (itpoamioKii^ld)  with  God."  The  reason  why  the  Jew  comes  first  in 
the  order  of  judgment  is  that  he  has  had  all  along  such  superior  privileges  as  make  his 
judgment  all  the  more  serious  matter.  If  he  has  not  profited  by  these  privileges  his 
judgment  shall  be  all  the  more  severe— he  shall  be  beaten  truly  with  many  stripes;  and 
if  he  profited,  his  reward  shall  be  all  the  more  glorious.  The  Gentile,  or  Greek,  on  the 
other  hand,  with  nothing  but  natural  light,  shall  find  himself  judged  fairly,  although 
it  must  needs  be  a  secondary  matter  under  a  beneficent  government  like  God's.  For 
he  does  not  accept  the  persons  of  men.    He  is  not  influenced  in  his  judgment  by 


CH.  II.  1-29]       THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  77 

personal  claims.  He  puts  away  the  idea  of  merit  in  inrlividuals,  because  all  are 
guilf y  )>i'fore  him,  and  bases  his  judgment  upon  tin'  one  consideration  of  stiiic.  with 
its  resultant  outcome,  either  pood  works  or  luu!.  Now,  this  was  what  a  Jew  found 
it  hard  to  accept.  He  thought,  as  a  thorough-bred  .lew,  he  ougiit  to  be  accepted. 
It  must  have  been  a  great  lumiiliation  to  have  to  take  up  a  position  beside  ordinary 
men.  and  have  no  store  set  by  his  person  at  all. 

V.  God's  judgment  will  be  aocordino  ic>  thk  law,  written  or  unwrittb*;, 
WHICH  EACH  MAN  HAS  RECEIVED.  (Vers.  12—15.)  The  Gentiles  shnll  not  be  held 
accountable  for  an  outward  and  written  revelation  which  has  iiev(  r  come  into  their 
hands,  but  only  for  that  law  of  conscience  wliioh  God  has  written  i.n  their  hearts.  For 
this  law  revealed  in  their  nature,  and  the  use  they  made  of  it,  they  .'.hall  be  justly  hehl 
responsibl.;.  Nor  shall  the  tracing  of  the  law  of  conscience  to  utilitarian  or  animal 
sources  in  the  least  degree  diminish  human  responsibility.  The  question  is  not — flow 
has  this  inward  law  and  monitnr  come  into  existence  ?  but — What  use  has  each  man 
made  of  it,  come  as  it  may?  And  so  the  heathi  n  shall  be  beaten,  though  with  few 
stripes,  for  their  neglect  of  the  inward  law.  They  shall  in  many  cases  perish,  even 
tbc'Ugii  they  had  not  the  privilege  of  a  written  law.  Oonscience  has  had  a  Divine 
source,  no  matter  how  long  it  has  taken  to  develop;  and  God  will  call  all  men  into 
judgment  for  the  use  of  it.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  have  lad  the  Law  written 
and  delivered  shall  be  judge(i  by  it.  For  the  Scri[i(ures  come  to  reinforce  the  conscience, 
and  to  reveal  the  mercy  of  tlie  Loid.  In  such  circumstancis  it  is  surely  just  that 
fhose  who  receive  "  the  oracles  of  God"  should  be  held  responsible  for  the  use  j.nd 
profit  they  have  made  of  them.  If  they  have  l)ien  a  dead  letter  tu  trem,  then  God 
will  justly  punish  their  neglect  of  them.  Such  men  .'shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes, 
because  they  might  have  known  and  ought  to  have  done  their  Lord's  will. 

VI.  The  cenbral  judgment  will  be  conducted  by  Jesus  Christ.  (Ver.  16.) 
God  the  Father  will  commit  to  his  only  begotten  Son  the  dutv  of  judgment.  And 
here  we  see  the  wondrous  equity  of  the  Divine  Being.  This  Second  Person  of  the 
Trinity  has  added  to  his  Divine  knowledge  a  human  experience.  He  has  been  in  all 
points  tempted  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.  He  knows  the  human  nroblem  experi- 
mentally. He  can  consequently  enter  into  our  cas  •  moie  thoroughly  than  if  he  ]jad 
never  assumed  our  nature.  And  so  he  does  not  judge  fr^  m  ahove,  or  from  outside,  but 
from  within,  and  can  enter  into  the  secrets  of  the  human  lieart.  Hence  this  i^eneral 
judgmi  nt  is  to  be  upon  the  most  equitable  principles,  and  by  the  most  capable  of 
judges.  How  impciitant,  then,  thfit  we  cultivate  tlie  acquaintance  of  him  who  is  to 
have  us  at  his  judgment-bar !  Not  that  wc  may  bribe  him,  but  that  he  may  prepare 
us  for  that  tlioroui;h  investigation  which  lies  befnre  us.  If  we  make  a  "clean  breast" 
of  all  to  him,  if'  we  acknowled>:e  our  sin  and  shortcomiiiL',  if  we  a.sk  hiui  for  a  clean 
h<art  and  a  baptism  of  his  Holy  Ghost  to  enabl  ■  ns  to  live  for  his  glory  and  our  fellows' 
good,  then  he  will  help  us  to  a  better  life,  and  enable  us,  so  far  from  dreading  his 
judgment-bar,  to  "  love  his  appearing."  IVIay  the  day  of  judgment  break  brightly  on 
us  all,  for  his  own  Name's  sake! — E.  M.  E. 

Vers.  17 — 29. — I%e  Jewish  world.  In  our  last  section  we  saw  how  the  apostle  takes 
the  Jewish  critic  through  the  leading  prin(i]jl  s  of  the  Divine  judgment.  In  doin-.;  so, 
he  had  a  practical  end- in  view.  He  meant  to  briu'i  home  to  the  Jewish  heart  the  fact 
ol  sin  and  danger,  and  thereby  to  lead  the  censorious,  self-righteous  Jew  to  humiliation 
and  salvation  through  Christ  alone.  The  present  section  contains  the  pointed  applica- 
tion of  the  principles  to  the  Jewish  case.     And  here  we  have  to  notice — 

I.    'I'lIK    POSITION    ASSUMED   BY   THE  JeWS   AS    THE  DIVINELY    ENLIGHTENED   LEADERS 

OF  MANKIND.  (Vers.  17 — 20.)  The  apostle  states  the  Jewish  assumption  admirably. 
They  were  proud  <  if  their  name;  "Thou  bearest  the  name  of  a  Jew"  (Revised  Version^ 
But  this  was  because  they  bad  received  the  Law;  and  so  they  "rested  in"  or  "upon 
the  Law;"  they  made  their  possession  ol  the  Law  the  basis  of  their  confidence  and  tran- 
quillity. Their  notion  was  that  men  entrusted  with  such  a  literature  had  nothing  in 
the  world  to  fear.  Moreover,  it  was  from  God,  and  why  should  they  not  regard  them- 
selves as  his  favourites,  and  "  make  their  boast "  about  him  ?  And  the  book  did  not 
remain  unread ;  they  sought  from  it  a ''  knowledge  of  his  will ; "  were  able,  consequently, 
to  exercise  judgment  "  regarding  things  that  differed  "  (SoKiuiCfts  to  Suuptpayra) ;  and 


78  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAXIL  TO  THE  EOMANS.     [ch.  n.  1— 29. 

received  a  general  enlightenment  through  the  Law.  Not  only  so,  hut  they  believed  in 
their  mission  ;  they  were  to  be  guides  of  the  blind,  lights  to  those  in  (terkness, 
correctors  (iraiSeurV)  of  the  foolish,  teachers  of  babes,  having  at  least  the  form  (/i,6p<j>aMrir) 
of  knowledge  and  of  truth  in  the  Law.  In  short,  the  Jews  set  themselves  at  the  head 
of  humanity  as  the  qualified  leaders  and  instiuctors  of  mankind.  Now,  it  is  a  great 
assumption  for  any  men  to  make.  Yet  the  Jews  were  not  singular  in  their  assumiJtion. 
It  is  made  daily  by  men  with  far  less  reason,  perhaps,  thau  they.  The  leaders  oi 
thought,  "  the  men  of  light  and  leading,"  who  profess  to  know  how  mush  is  given  ils 
to  master,  and  how  much  remains  "unknowable  and  unknown,"  must  accept  of  the 
reasonable  judgment  of  their  less  pretentious  fellows,  and,  as  superior  persons,  must  be 
amenable  to  morals.  By  their  fruits  we  shall  know  them.  By  their  lives  we  shall 
be  able  to  estimate  the  value  of  their  principles.  If  they  are  benefactors  of  their 
species,  if  they  promote  the  real  welfare  of  mankind,  well  and  good.  If  they  are 
hindrances,  then  they  cannot  resist  being  condemned.  It  is  this  line  the  apostle  adopts 
in  this  passage. 

II.  The  pbbtektiods  teachbks  weeb,  as  a  matter  of  tact,  the  grkat  hin- 

DBANOB   TO   THE   DISSEMINATION  OF   DiVINB   KNOWLEDGE.        (Vers.    21 24.)      The   first 

fact  Paul  dwells  on  is  that  these  Jews  preached  too  little  to  themselves.  They  fell  into 
the  error  of  teaching  others  what  they  did  not  feel  inclined  to  practise  themselves. 
And  80  he  catalogues  certain  sins  of  which  he  knew  them  to  be  guilty.  It  would  seem 
that  they  stole,  committed  adultery,  were  guilty  in  heathen  temples  of  sacrilege,  and, 
in  short,  led  such  unworthy  lives  as  to  make  God's  Name  a  reproach  and  grounil  of 
blasphemy  among  the  Gentiles.  The  morality  of  the  teachers  thus  became  the  great 
hindrance  to  the  acceptance  of  Divine  truth.  Now,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  iIjb 
crimes  of  professed  Christians  constitute  in  heathen  lands  to-day  a  chief  obbtacle  to 
the  reception  of  the  gospel;  missionaries  meet  this  difBoulty  constantly.  But  we 
ought  to  apply  the  canon  to  the  pretentious  teachers  of  our  time,  and  it  will  be  found 
that  their  lives  are  morally  defective  when  judged  by  the  standard  of  the  gospel  they 
affect  to  despise.  The  morality  of  a  George  Eliot,  a  G.  H.  Lewes,  or  a  J.  S.  Mill,  who 
affected  to  be  moral  teachers  of  their  time,  will  not  bear  any  very  close  inspection ;  and 
even  those  of  the  same  school,  whose  live.s  are  outwardly  blameless,  fall  far  beneath  the 
self-sacrificing  enthusiasm  which  Christianity  fosters,  and  in  multitudes  of  cases  secures. 
The  test  is  sure  and  infallible.  Men  and  women  that  are  morally  easy-going,  ihat  are 
practically  selfish  and  indifferent  in  large  degree  to  the  circumstances  and  suffering  of 
their  fellows,  are  unfit  to  be  the  teachers  of  their  generation.  And  their  teaching  is  as 
sure  to  prove  a  failure  in  the  end,  as  the  teaching  of  Judaism  was  among  the  Gentiles. 

III.  The  Jews  had  a  false  confidence  in  the  bite  of  oibgdmoision.  (Ver. 
25.)  Their  notion  was  that  circumcision  constituted  something  like  the  "  hall-mark  " 
on  real  silver,  and  distinguished  them  from  all  the  mere  electro-plating  of  the  Gentiles. 
They  thought  that  immoral  conduct  could  not  obliterate  the  value  of  the  fleshly  rite. 
This  is  the  mistake  made  by  all  who  lay  undue  emphasis  upon  rites  and  ceremonies. 
They  fancy  they  have  a  value  altogether  independent  of  moral  states  and  moral  living. 
The  apostle  has  consequently  to  draw  atterjtion  to  the  fact  that  circumcision  only 
profited  one  who  kept  the  Law.  It  was  then  a  sign  of  the  j^oveuant,  and  was  taken 
along  with  the  perfect  obedience  to  the  Law  which  had  been  rendered.  But  if  a  circum- 
cised person  turned  out  a  Law-breaker,  the  circumcision  really  passed  into  uncircum- 
cision.  In  other  words,  the  Jew  could  break  the  covenant  seal  by  breaking  the  Law  of 
the  covenant.  This  is  a  very  solemn  and  weighty  truth.  It  has  its  application  to  the 
covenant  signs  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  It  is  perfectly  possible  for  persons  who 
have  become  members  of  the  visible  Church,  by  a  course  of  reckless  living  to  break  their 
covenant  sign,  and  to  be  in  God's  sight  disfranchised.  Let  no  undue  value  be  assigned 
to  rites  and  ceremonies.     They  cannot  be  separated  from  moral  states  and  conditions. 

IV.  'I'nB  Jews  iqnobed  the  posbibilitt  and  existence  of  the  oxbcumoised 
IN  heart.  (Vers.  26 — 29.)  If  a  circumcised  person  may  forfeit  his  position  as  in 
covenant  with  God  by  breaking  the  Divine  Law,  on  the  other  hand,  an  unoircumcised 
person,  a  Gentile,  may  so  keep  God's  Law  as  to  be  entitled  to  a  position  in  covenant 
with  him.  His  uncircumoision  in  such  a  case,  Paul  maintains,  should  be  counted  or 
"reckoned  for  circumcision."  Here  the  apostle  is  contending  for  the  admission  of 
Gentiles  to  the  visible  Church  without  the  necessity  of  circumcision.    Many  a  Gentile^ 


OH.  in.  1—31.]    THE  EPISTLE  OV  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


79 


like  Cornelius,  or  like  the  centurion  in  the  Gospels,  put  to  shame  the  less  earnest  and 
less  devout  Jews.  The  high  morality  of  such  men  was  a  standing  condemnation 
(itpwet)  of  the  pretentious  Jew.  Accordingly,  Paul  proceeds  to  affirm  that  the  circum- 
cision of  the  heart,  not  the  mere  circumcision  of  the  flesh,  is  the  all-important  matter, 
There  is  a  circumcision  of  the  heart  which  checks  the  unholy  tendencies  within,  and 
secures  the  reality,  of  which  outward  circumcision  is  hut  the  type.  Of  it  God,  the 
Searcher  of  hearts,  is  the  trae  Judge.  He  rejoices  in  it,  and  regards  those  whohavs 
submitted  to  it  as  his  true  people.  The  circumcised  in  flesh  may  secure  praise  from 
men,  but  the  circumcised  in  heart  look  for  approbation  to  God  only.  It  is  for  us  all 
to  seek  the  inward  and  spiritual  circumcision,  the  true  sign  of  membership  in  God's 
invisible  kingdom, — B.  M,  E. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  m. 


Vers.  1 — 8. — (2)  Certain  directions  viith 
regard  to  the  Jews  siiggested  and  met.  In 
this  passage,  before  proceeding  with  bis 
argument,  the  apostle  meets  certain  objec- 
tions that  might  be  made  to  what  has  been 
io  far  said.  Some  difficulty  in  determining 
bis  exact  meaning  arises  from  the  concise 
and  pregnant  form  in  which  the  objections 
are  put  and  answered,  and  from  fiesh  ones 
arising  ont  of  the  answers,  which  have  also 
to  be  met.  The  objections  are  from  the 
Jewish  standpoint,  though  not  put  into  the 
mouth  of  an  objecting  Jew,  but  rather 
suggested  as  likely  ones  by  St.  Paul  him- 
self. To  the  original  readers  of  the  Epistle, 
who  were  familiar  with  the  tone  of  Jewish 
thought,  the  sequence  of  the  ideas  would 
probably  be  more  obvious  than  to  us. 
fieserving  special  consideration  of  succes- 
sive clauses  for  our  exposition  of  each  verse, 
we  may,  in  the  first  place,  exhibit  thus  the 
general  drift. 

Objection  1  (ver.  1).  If  being  a  Jew,  if 
circumcision  itself,  gives  one  no  advantage 
over  the  Gentile,  what  was  the  use  of  tlie 
old  covenant  at  all  1  It  is  thus  shown  to 
have  been  illusory ;  and  GJod's  own  truth 
and  faithfulness  are  impugned,  if  he  is 
supposed  to  have  given,  as  conveying 
advantages,  what  really  conveyed  none. 
(This  last  thought,  though  not  expressed, 
must  be  supposed  to  be  implied  in  the 
objection,  since  it  is  replied  to  in  the 
answer.) 

Anmer  (vers.  2 — 4).  (1)  It  was  not 
illusory;  it  did  convey  great  advantages 
in  the  way  of  privilege  and  opportunity; 
this  advantage  first,  not  to  mention  others, 
that  "the  oracles  of  God"  were  entrusted 


to  the  Jew.  And  (2)  If  some  (more  or 
fewer,  it  matters  not)  have  fiuled  to  realize 
these  advantages,  it  has  been  their  fault, 
not  God's.  It  is  man's  mifaithfulness,  not 
his,  that  has  been  the  cause  of  the  failure. 
Nay,  though,  according  to  the  hasty  saying 
of  the  psalmist,  aU  men  were  false,  God's 
truth  remains ;  nay,  further,  as  is  expressed 
in  another  psalm  (Ps.  li.),  man's  very  un- 
faithfulness is  found  to  commend  his  fai  th- 
fulness  the  more,  and  redound  to  his  greater 
glory. 

Objection  2  (ver.  5).  Based  on  the  last 
assertion.  But  if  man's  unfaithfulness  has 
this  result,  how  can  God,  consistently  with 
his  justice,  be  wrath  with  us  and  punish  us 
for  it?  Surely  the  Jew  (whose  case  we 
are  now  considering)  may  claim  exemption 
from  "  the  wrath  "  of  God  spoken  of  above, 
his  unfaithfulness  being  allowed  to  have 
served  only  to  establish  God's  troth  and 
to  enhance  his  glory. 

Answer  (ver.  6—8).  I  have  suggested 
this  objection  as  though  the  matter  could 
be  regarded  from  a  mere  human  point  of 
view,  as  though  it  were  one  between  man 
and  man ;  for  it  is  true  that  a  man  cannot 
justly  take  vengeance  on  another  who  has 
not  really  harmed  him.  But  such  a  view 
is  inapplicable  to  God  in  his  dealings  with 
man ;  it  does  not  touch  our  doctrine  of  his 
rigliteous  wrath  against  sin  as  such.  I 
can  only  meet  it  with  a  /t^  yirono.  For 
(1)  it  would  preclude  God  from  judging 
the  world  at  all,  as  we  aU  believe  he  will 
do.  Any  heathen  sinner  might  put  in  the 
same  plea,  saying.  Why  am  I  too  (xayiii) 
judged  as  a  sinner?  Kay,  (2)  since  it 
involves  the  principle  of  sin  being  evil,  not 
in  itself,  but  only  with  regard  to  its  con- 
sequences, it  would,  if  carried  out,  justify  the 


60 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  m.  1—31. 


odious  view  (whioli  we  CbristiaQS  are  by 
some  falsely  accused  of  holding)  that  we 
may  do  evil  that  good  may  come. 

Vers.  1,  2.— What  advantage  then  hath 
the  Jew  t  or  what  is  the  profit  of  oironm- 
cisiont  Unch  (woKb,  a  neuter  adjective, 
agreeing  with  rh  v^furahv)  every  way  (not 
hy  all  means;  the  meaning  is  tliat  in  all 
respects  the  position  of  the  Jew  is  an 
advantageous  one) :  first  (rather  than  ehiejiy, 
as  in  the  Authorized  Version.  One  point 
of  udvantage  is  specified,  which  might  liave 
been  followed  by  a  secondly  and  a  thirdly, 
etc.  But  the  writer  stops  here,  the  mention 
of  this  ^rs<  being  sufficient  for  his  purpose. 
Others  are  enumerated,  so  as  to  elucidate 
the  purport  of  kot4  vdvra  rpiirov,  in  oh.  ix. 
4, 5)  for  that  they  (the  Jews)  were  entrusted 
with  the  oracles  of  God.  The  word  \6yia 
(always  used  in  the  plural  in  the  New 
Testament)  occurs  also  in  Acts  vii.  38 ;  Heb. 
V.  12 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  11.  Of  these  passages 
tlie  most  apposite  is  Acts  vii.  38,  where 
tlie  Divine  communications  to  Moses  on 
Mount  Sinai  are  spoken  of  as  \6yia  (avra 
(fit.  Numb.  zxiv.  4,  16,  where  Btdaam 
speaks  of  himself  as  axoiay  Kiyia  0coS). 
Some  (as  Meyer),  in  view  of  the  supposed 
reference  in  the  following  verse  to  the  Jews' 
rejection  of  the  gospel,  take  the  word  \6yM 
here  to  mean  especially  the  revealed  promises 
ot  the  Bedeemer.  But  neither  the  word 
itself  nor  its  use  elsewhere  suggests  any 
such  limited  meaning ;  nor  does  the  context 
really  require  it.  It  may  denote  generally 
tlie  Divine  revelations  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, which,  for  the  eventual  benefit  of 
mankind,  had  been  entrusted  exclusively  to 
the  Jews. 

Ver.  3. — For  what  if  some  (tiwj.  The 
expression  does  not  denote  whether  many 
or  few;  it  only  avoids  assertion  of  univer- 
sality of  unbelief  (cf.  ch.  xi.  17 ;  1  Cor.  x.  7), 
though  it  is  implied  in  the  following  verse 
that,  even  if  it  had  been  universal,  the 
argument  would  stand)  did  not  believe  1 
shall  their  unbelief  make  the  faith  of  Ood 
without  effect?  Alford  renders  iiiriaTtiaav 
"  were  unfaithful,"  taking  it  in  the  sense  of 
being  "  unfaithful  to  the  covenant,  the  very 
condition  of  which  was  to  walk  in  the  ways 
of  the  Ijord,  and  observe  his  statutes ; "  and 
this  on  the  ground  that  the  apostle  is  not 
as  yet  speaking  of  faith  or  the  want  of.ii, 
but,  in  aocurdauce  with  the  idea  of  the 
preocding  chapter,  of  HSIkm  (ver.  5)  and 
moral  guilt.  But  the  meaning  of  words 
must  not  be  forced  to  meet  the  views  of 
interpreters;  and  we  observe  that  atriaretv 
and  ImiaTla  are  ever  elsewhere  used  in  their 
proper  sense  to  denote  want  of  faith  (of. 
Matt.  xiii.  58;  xvii.  20;  Mark  vi.  6;  xvi. 
li,  14,  16;  Luke  xiv.  lit  11;  Acta  xxviii. 


24;  ch.  Iv.  20;  xl.  20,  23;  1  Tim.  I  13, 
2  Tim.  ii.  13).  Still,  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  in  the  passage  before  ns  iiriirWain  man 
is  opposed  to  ulims  in  Ood,  so  as  to  suggest 
a  more  general  sense  of  airurTla  than  mere 
vnbelief.  In  view  of  this  opposition,  we 
may  adopt  the  rendering  of  the  whole 
passage  in  the  Revised  Version :  "  What 
if  some  were  without  faith?  Shall  their 
want  of  faith,"  etc.?  Meyer  and  others, 
understanding  (as  said  above)  by  \iyui  the 
Divine  oracles  which  were  prophetic  of 
Christ,  refer  i\Trlani<rav  exclusively  to  the 
disbelief  in  him  on  the  part  of  the  majority 
of  the  Jews  at  the  time  of  writing.  But 
the  aorlst  tense  of  the  verb,  as  frell  as  the 
context,  is  against  the  idea  of  such  reference, 
at  any  rate  exclusively.  The  context,  both 
in  ch.  ii.  and  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter 
after  ver.  9,  oertaiuly  suggests  rather  refer- 
ence to  the  failure  of  the  Jews  throughout 
their  history  to  realize  the  advantage  of  their 
privileged  position;  and  this  failure  might 
properly  be  attributed  to  their  want  of  faith, 
to  the  KapBia  irovripa  dirurrias  (Heb.  iii.  12); 
cf.  Heb.  iii.  19 ;  iv.  2,  together  with  ch.  iv.  11. 
'/Lirurria  in  these  passages  is  regarded  as  the 
root  of  meMa.  On  the  other  hand,  the  whole 
drift  of  ch.  xi.  in  this  Epistle — where  the 
present  airicrrta  of  the  chosen  people  shown  in 
their  rejection  of  the  gospel  is  spoken  of  as 
not  hindering,  but  furthering,  tlie  righteous 
purpose  of  God,  and  redounding  in  the  end 
to  his  glory — suggests  a  like  reference  here. 
And  it  may  have  been  in  the  apostle's 
mind,  though,  for  the  reasons  above  given, 
it  can  hardly  be  the  only  one  in  the  passage 
before  us. 

Ver.  4. — God  forbid  (there  is  no  better 
English  phrase  for  expressing  the  indignant 
repudiation  of  ^jj  yevoiro) :  yea,  let  God  be 
true  (yiviaeu  AxijAJis;  i.e.  "let  his  truth  be 
established ; "  "  Fiat,  in  judicio,"  Bengel), 
but  every  man  a  liar;  as  it  is  written,  That 
then  mightest  be  justified  in  thy  sayings, 
and  mightest  overcome  when  thoa  ait  judged. 
We  can  hardly  avoid  recognizing  a  refer- 
ence to  Ps.  cxvi.  11  in  "  every  man  a  liar," 
the  words  of  the  LXX.  being  exactly  given, 
though  the  general  purport  of  that  psalm 
does  not  bear  upon  the  present  argument. 
The  apostle  takes  this  phrase  from  it  as 
expressing  well  what  he  wants  to  say,  viz. 
that  though  all  men  were  false  (in  the  sense 
expressed  and  implied  by  the  previous  ^ir((r- 
Tijirw),  yet  God's  truth  stands.  But  it  only 
leads  up  to  the  second  quotation  from  Ps. 
Ii.,  which  is  the  important  one,  introduced 
by  KaBits  yipaiTTai,  In  its  final  words, 
viK^ffrij  iv  Tw  KplnaOai  ire,  the  LXX.  is  fol- 
lowed (so  also  Vulgate,  cum  judiearu), 
though  the  Hebrew  may  be  more  correctly 
rendered,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version,  "  be 
clear  when  thou  judgest."     The  KpiyerSm 


OH.  III.  1—31.]    THE  EPISTLE   OP   PAUL  TO  THB   BOMANS. 


81 


of  the  LZX.  may  be  understood  passively 
in  the  sense  of  God  being  called  to  account, 
as  men  might  be,  for  the  justice  of  his  deal- 
ings ;  Of)  perhaps,  in  a  middle  sense  for 
entering  into  a  suit  or  controversy  with  hia 
people,  KpiveaOat  means  "going  to  law" 
in  1  Cor.  vi.  1,  6  (of.  also  Matt  v.  40),  and 
in  the  LXX.,  with  especial  reference  to  a 
supposed  controvert!)  or  pleading  of  God  with 
men,  Jer.  xxv.  31 ;  Job  ix.  2 ;  xiii.  19.  (See 
also  Hos.  ii.  2,  Kpi9i)re  vphs  riii/  UTirepa 
iliSiv.)  The  meaning  of  this  concluding  ex- 
pression does  not,  however,  affect  the  main 
purport  of  the  verse,  or  its  relevancy  as  here 
quoted.  Occurring  in  what  is  believed  to 
be  David's  penitential  psalm  after  his  sin 
in  the  matter  of  Uriah,  it  declares,  in  oon- 
iunction  with  the  preceding  verse,  that,  sin 
having  been  committed,  man  alone  is  guilty, 
and  that  God's  truth  and  righteousness  can 
never  be  impugned.  But  it  seems  to  imply 
still  more  than  this,  viz.  that  man's  sin  has 
the  establishment  ot  God's  righteousness  as 
its  con$equence,  or  even,  it  may  be,  as  its 
purpoia ;  for  the  conclusion  of  ver.  i  in  the 
psalm,  naturally  connected  with  "against 
thee  only  have  I  sinned"  preceding, is  so  con- 
nected by  Svios  tw  (in  Hebrew,  )gD^) ;  and 

it  is  not  out  of  keeping  with  scriptural 
doctrine  tliat  David  should  have  intended 
to  express  even  Divine  purpose  in  that  he 
had  been  permitted,  for  his  sins,  to  fall  into 
that  deeper  sin  with  the  view  of  establishing 
God's  righteousness  all  the  more.  It  does 
not,  however,  seem  certain  (whatever  some 
grammarians  may  say)  that  the  conjunction 
need  of  necessity  be  understood  as  telio ;  it 
may  be  embatio  only.  However  this  be,  it 
is  the  inference  from  iitws  av  that  suggests 
the  new  objection  of  the  following  verse. 

Vers.  5,  6.— But  if  our  unrighteousness 
commend  the  righteousness  of  Ood,  what 
shall  we  sayt  Is  God  unrighteous  who 
taketh  vengeance  ?  (so  the  Authorized  Yer- 
lion ;  rather,  bringi  the  wrath  upon  <M 
(i  hrupepuv  t^v  offiiv),  with  reference  to  the 
Divine  wrath  against  sin,  spoken  of  above). 
I  speak  after  the  manner  of  men.  Ood  for- 
bid: for  then  how  shall  God  judge  the 
world  ?  The  purport  of  this  reply  appears 
sufficiently  in  the  paraphrase  given  above. 
But  the  intended  bearing  on  the  argument 
of  ver.  7  is  not  at  once  apparent. 

Ver.  7. — For  if  the  truth  of  God  in  my 
lie  abounded  to  his  glory,  why  am  I  also 
still  judged  as  a  sinner  1  One  view  is  that 
this  is  a  continuation  or  resumption  of  the 
question  of  ver.  5  on  the  part  of  the  Jew, 
its  drift  being  the  same.  But  the  word 
K&ycii,  as  well  as  the  position  of  the  verse 
after  iras  xpmL,  eto.,  suggests  ratlier  its 
being  intended  to  express  that  any  one 
throughout  the  world,  as  well  as  the  Jew, 
night  plead  against  deserved  judgment^ 
BOUAKHw 


if  the  Jew's  supposed  plea  were  valid. 
Nay,  in  that  case,  the  apostle  goes  on  to 
say,  he,  or  any  of  us,  might  justify  all  wrong- 
doing for  a  supposed  good  end.  Why  not  ? 
Ver.  8. — And  not  (i.e.  why  should  we  not 
say),  as  we  be  slanderously  reported,  and 
as  some  affirm  that  we  say,  Let  us  do  evil, 
that  good  may  oome  \  Whose  (i.e.  of  those 
who  do  say  so)  oondemnatiou  is  just. 

Vers.  9— aO.— (S)  The  teitimony  of  the  Old 
Teatament  to  human  sinfulness.  Objections 
having  been  thus  raised  and  met,  the  apostle 
now  confirms  his  position,  that  all  mankind, 
Jew  as  well  as  Gentile,  are  under  sin,  by 
adducing  the  Scriptures  of  the  Jews  them- 
selves. 

Ver.  9. — ^What  theni  are  we  better  than 
they  1  No,  in  no  wise :  for  we  have  before 
proved  (or,  oharged,  as  in  the  Vulgate,  causati 
tumui)  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  that  they 
are  all  under  sin.  The  meaning  of  the  first 
part  of  this  verse  has  been  much  discussed. 
We  may  observe :  (1)  T^  oZv  seems  to  be 
rightly  separated  (as  in  Authorized  Version) 
from  vpofx^/i^^a  because  of  the  form  of  the 
answer  to  the  question,  oi  irivTus :  after  tI 
irpoexV^*" ;  ■'^e  should  expect  oiSev.  (2) 
The  Jews,  with  whom  St.  Paul  identifies 
himself,  must  be  supposed  to  put  tlie  ques- 
tion; not  the  Gentiles,  as  some  have  sup- 
posed. For  there  is  nothing  in  the  context 
to  suggest  the  Gentiles  as  the  speakers,  nor 
does  what  follow  suit  the  supposition.  (3) 
The  main  question  is  as  to  the  sense  of 
vpoex^/ieOa,  which  occurs  here  only  in  the 
New  Testament,  and  has,  therefore,  to  be 
interpreted  from  consideration  of  the  sense 
of  which  the  verb  is  capable,  and  the  pro- 
bable drift  of  the  argument.  Some  have 
taken  it  as  a  passive  verb,  with  the  meaning, 
"Are  we  surpassed?"  i.e.  are  we  Jews  in 
wane  case  than  the  Gentiles  on  account  of 
our  greater  privileges?  The  active  verb, 
npodxfiv,  in  the  sense  of  "  to  excel,"  being 
both  transitive  and  intransitive,  its  passive 
may  be  used  in  the  same  sense.  An  instance 
quoted  in  commentaries  is  /car'  oliShv  irpo- 
eXOh^vets  frf^  ToS  Aiifi  (Pint., '  Mor.,'),  "  cum 
Jove  minores  non  sint."  So  the  recent  Be- 
visers,  though  dissented  from  by  the  Ameri- 
can (Committee.  The  strong  objection  to 
this  interpretation  is  that  there  has  been 
nothing  so  far  even  to  suggest  any  superi- 
ority of  the  Gentile  to  the  Jew,  and  that 
what  follows  does  not  bear  upon  any  such 
idea.  Thus  to  interpret  would  be  to  sacri- 
fice the  sense  to  supposed  grammatical  exi- 
gence, which,  after  all,  is  uncertain .  Taking, 
then,  irpoex(i;ue9a  as  the  middle  voice,  we 
have  two  interpretations  before  us;  eitlier, 
with  Meyer,  to  render,  Do  we  put  tor  ward 

a 


82 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  ni.  1—31. 


(anything)  in  our  defenoel — which  he 
maintains  (though  not  conclusively)  to  be 
the  only  proper  sense  of  the  middle  verb— 
or  (as  in  the  Authorized  Version),  Are  we 
letter  (i.e.  in  better  case)  than  they  1  This 
rendering,  though  it  gives  essentially  the 
same  sense  as  if  rpo4x'>M''  (intransitive) 
had  been  written,  is  commended  by  its 
suitableness  to  the  course  of  argument,  and 
the  middle  voice  may,  perhaps,  be  accounted 
for  as  denoting  the  Jews'  supposed  claim  of 
gupuiiority  for  themselves.  Thus  the  oonneo- 
tidPii  of  thought  is  plain.  The  conclusion  of 
eh.  ii.  had  left  the  Jews  on  the  same  footing 
with  the  Gentiles  before  God  in  respect  of 
sinfulness.  But  then  objections  had  been 
raised  on  the  ground  of  the  acknowledged 
privileges  of  the  chosen  people;  and  such 
objections  have  been  met  The  apostle  now 
■ums  up  the  result :  What,  then,  is  the  state 
of  the  case?  Have  we  any  advantage  to 
allege  ?  No,  not  at  all  in  the  sense  intended ; 
the  previous  argument  stands ;  and  he  pro- 
ceeds to  confine  bis  position  from  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Old  Testament  itself. 

Vers.  10— 18.— As  it  is  written,  There 
is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one:  there  is 
none  that  understandeth,  there  is  none  that 
seeketh  after  Ood.  They  are  all  gone  out 
of  the  way,  they  are  altogether  become 
unprofitable ;  there  is  none  that  doeth  good, 
no,  not  one  (Ps.  xiv.  or  liii.).  Their  throat 
is  an  open  sepulchre;  with  their  tongues 
they  have  used  deceit  (Ps.  v.  9) ;  the  poison 
of  asps  is  under  their  lips  (Ps.  cxl.  3): 
whose  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and  bitter- 
ness (Ps.  X.  7) :  their  feet  are  swift  to  shed 
blood:  destruction  and  miisry  are  in  their 
-ways .  and  the  way  of  peaoe  have  they  not 
known  (Prov.  i.  16  and  Isa.  lis.  7):  there 
is  no  fear  of  Ood  before  their  eyes  (Ps. 
xzxvi.  1).  These  texts  are  from  various 
unconnected  passages  of  the  Old  Testament, 
quoted  from  the  LXX.,  though  not  all 
accurately.  They  seem  to  be  put  together 
&om  memory  by  way  of  showing  the  general 
scriptural  view  of  human  depravity.  It 
may  be  said  that  they  do  not  establish  the 
apostle's  position  of  all  men  being  guilty ; 
for  that  they  are  for  the  most  part  rhetorical 
rather  than  dogmatic,  that  most  of  them 
refer  only  to  certain  classes  of  men,  and 
that  the  righteous  are  spoken  of  too,  and 
this  in  the  sequence  of  even  the  most  sweep- 
ing of  them  all  (that  from  Ps.  xiv.  or  liii.), 
which  does,  literally  understood,  assert 
universal  sinfulness.  Any  such  objection 
to  the  cogency  of  the  quotations  may  be 
uiet  by  regarding  them  as  adduced,  not  as 
rigid  proofs,  but  as  only  generally  con- 
firmatory of  the  apostle's  position.  See,  he 
would  say  to  the  Jew,  the  picture  your  own 
Scripturas  give  you ;  observe  their  continued 
icotimony  to  human  depravity ;   and  the 


main  point  of  all  the  qnotationa  is  that 
which  is  brought  out  in  the  next  verse,  viz. 
that  they  had  reference,  not  to  the  Gentila 
world,  but  to  the  chosen  people  themselves. 
Vers.  19,  20. — Now  we  know  that  what 
things  soever  the  Law  (i  vifios  here  for  the 
Old  Testament  generally  as  the  embodiment 
and  exponent  of  the  Law)  saitb,  it  speaketh 
to  them  that  are  under  the  Law  (not  to  the 
world  outside,  but  to  those  within  its  own 
sphere):  that  every  mouth  (the  Jew's  as 
well  as  the  Gentile's)  may  be  stopped,  and 
aU  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  Qod. 
Because  by  works  of  law(i'ii/(as  here  suitably 
without  the  article ;  see  on  cb.  ii.  13)  shall 
no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight :  for  through 
law  is  knowledge  of  sin.  In  this  concluding 
verse  the  apostle  briefly  intimates  the  reason 
of  law's  inefiBcacy  for  justification,  antici- 
pating, after  a  manner  usual  with  him, 
what  is  afterwards  to  be  more  fully  set  forth, 
as  especially  in  ch.  vii.  The  reason  is  that 
law  in  itself  only  defines  sin  and  makes  it 
sinful,  but  does  not  emancipate  from  it. 

Vers.  21 — 31. — (4)  The  righteaaxneu  of 
Ood,  manifested  in  Christ  and  apprehended 
by  faith,  is  the  sole  remedy,  and  available 
for  all.  The  position  enunciated  in  ch.  i. 
18  being  now  sufficiently  established,  the 
apostle  enters  here  on  his  main  argument, 
announced  in  ch.  i.  17. 

Ver.  21. — But  now  (yuA  here  may  have 
either  its  temporal  sense  of  at  the  present 
time,  or  its  logical  sense  of  as  things  are. 
For  its  use  in  the  latter  sense,  cf.  ch.  vii.  17 ; 
1  Cor.  V.  11 ;  xiii.  13 ;  xv.  20)  the  righteous- 
ness of  Ood  without  law  (t.e.  apart  from 
law)  is  (or,  has  been)  manifested,  being 
witnessed  by  the  Law  and  the  prophets. 
On  the  essential  meaning  of  God's  righteous- 
ness (0€oS  SiKoioff^vTi),  see  on  ch.  i.  17,  and 
Introduction.  This  passage,  in  wliioh  the 
thesis  of  ch.  i.  17  is  formally  enunciated, 
is  consistent  with  this  meaning;  in  con- 
firmation of  which  obseiTe  vers.  25,  26, 
where  SMaioain)  outoC  evidently  means 
God's  own  righteousness,  as  also  above,  ver. 
5.  If  this  Tiew  is  correct,  there  is  no  need 
to  follow  commentators  into  their  discussions 
of  the  signiflcauoe  of  x^p's  vd/iou  in  supposed 
connection  with  the  idea  of  man's  imptUed 
righteousness ;  such  as  whether  it  is  meant 
to  declare  justification  through  Christ  to  be 
un'thout  the  aid  of  the  Law — "sine  leg 
adminioulo"  (Calvin) — or  to  exclude  a 
legal  v!orh$,  done  before,  or  even  after 
justification,  &om  any  share  in  the  offloa 
of  justification.  However  true  these  positions 
may  be,  what  is  said  here  seems  simply  to 
mean  that  God's  righteousness  has  been 
manifested  io  Christ  in  a  difieient  way, 


OH.  III.  1—31.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


83 


find  on  a  different  principle,  from  that  of 
law.  Tlie  principle  of  law  is  to  enjoin  and 
foi'bid,  and  to  require  complete  obedience; 
but  law,  even  aa  exhibited  in  the  Divine 
Law  of  the  Jewa,  has  been  shown  to  fail  to 
enable  man  thus  to  attain  to  StKaioaivri ; 
therefore,  apart  from  this  exacting  principle, 
the  righteousness  of  God  is  now  revealed 
to  man,  embracing  him  in  itself.  The 
absence  of  the  article  before  yii/tou  here,  and 
its  insertion  in  the  latter  claase  of  the  same 
Terse,  where  the  Mosaic  Law  is  definitely 
referred  to,  is  fully  explained  by  what  has 
been  said  above  under  ch.  ii.  13.  Being 
witnessed,  etc.,  is  introduced  parenthetically 
by  way  of  intimating  that  this  manifestation 
of  God's  righteousness,  though  "  apart  from 
law,"  is  not  in  any  opposition  to  the  teaching 
of  the  Law  anci  the  prophets,  being,  in  fact, 
anticipated  by  them.  The  proof  of  this 
appears  afterwards  in  ch.  iv. 

Ver.  22. — Even  the  righteousness  of  God 
through  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  all  (and 
upon  all  is  added  in  the  Textua  Keceptus, 
but  ill  supported)  them  that  believe:  for 
there  is  no  distinotion.  We  observe  that 
the  expression  here  used  is  not  ri  Sia  viaTsois, 
but  simply  Sih  iria-Tsas.  Thus  Si&  vtaTeas 
does  not  naturally  connect  itself  with  Si- 
KaioaivT]  0eoS  as  defining  it,  but  rather 
with  els  irdvTos  which  follows,  and  perhaps 
with  reference  to  the  ve^aytfarai  of  ver.  21 
understood.  The  idea,  then,  may  be  still  that 
of  God's  own  righteousness,  manifested  in 
Christ,  unto  or  towards  all  believers,  who 
through  faith  apprehended  it  and  became 
shareis  in  it.  When  St.  Paul  elsewhere 
■peaks  of  the  believer's  imputed  righteous- 
ness, his  language  is  different,  so  as  to 
make  his  meaning  plain.  Thus  ch.  iv.  6, 
^  &  &ebs  \oyt^€Tat  ^iKaioa^i/Tjjf ',  iv.  13,  Sia 
tiKoiofritnts  irlirretosi  v.  17,  t7}s  Scopeas  ttjs 
tiKatoairns ;  ix.  30,  Sixaioffivriy  tV  ^^  "■'o'- 
reiDs;  PhiL  iii.  9,  tV  e/c  ®€oS  SiKaioffivny 
iri  Tij  iriarct.  What  we  contend  for  is 
iimply  this — ^that  the  phrase  SiKaioaivri 
acov  means  God's  own  righteousness,  which, 
manifested  in  the  atoning  Christ,  embraces 
believers,  so  that  to  them  too  righteousness 
may  be  impiited  (ch.  iv.  11). 

Ver.  23. — For  all  have  ainsed,  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God.  The  "glory  of 
God,"  of  which  all  men  are  here  aaid  to  come 
short  (utrTepovvTai),  has  been  taken  to  mean 
(I)  honour  or  praise  from  God.  "Deifavore 
et  approbatione  carent"  (Schleusner).  So 
decidedly  Meyer,  .Tholuck,  Alford,  and 
others.  In  this  case  @eov  would  be  the  gen. 
auatoris,  which  Meyer  argues  is  probable 
from  its  being  so  in  ecoC  SiKotoffiyri.  This 
argument  (which  is  not  worth  much  in  any 
case)  tella  the  other  way  if,  aa  we  hold,  it  ia 
not  so  in  the  latter  phrase.  For  the  New 
T^tament   use   of  S6la   ia  the  s^use    of 


"  praise  "  or   "  honour,"  1  Thess.  ii.  6  i» 
adduced  (O^re  ^TjTovvTes  4v  dvdpcivQis  56^avy, 
also  John  v.  44  (Ait^av  irapi  aMJiKwv  Aa/x;3a- 
vovTes,  (col  T^y  SiS^av  t)]V  iraph  rov  /iSvov  0eov 
ov  ^ijTciTe);   and  especially  Jolm  xii.  18, 
where  S6^a  is,  as  here,  followed  by  the  geni- 
tive OeoC  without  any  connecting  preposi- 
tion :  'HydwTitrav  yhp  t^v  d6^av  twi/  d.tfQpdyiru}v 
uSXKov  ijirep  t^k Srffoj/ toS  0eoB  ("the  praise  of 
God,"  Authorized  Version).    But,  even  apart 
from  thediiferent,  and  in  itself  more  obvious, 
meaning  of  the  phrase,  Si^a  toO  @eov,  where 
it  occurs  elsewhere,  it  is  at  least  a  question 
whether  in  the  last  cited  passage  it  can  be 
taken  to  mean  praise  or  honour  from  God. 
It  comes  immediately  after  the  quotation 
from  Isa.  vi.  9,  etc.,  followed  by   ''These 
things  said  Esaias,  when  he  saw  his  glory 
(ri/y  S6^av  oiroC),  and  spake  of  him."   Hence 
the  meaning  of  John  xii.  43  may  probably 
be  that  the  persons  spoken  of  loved  mundane 
glory  (of.  Matt.  iv.  8;  vi.  29)  rather  than 
the  Divine  glory,  seen  in  the  vision  of  faith, 
manifested  to  the  world  in  Christ  (cf.  John 
i.  14,   "  We  beheld  his   glory,"  etc.),  and 
"loved"  by  those  who  have  not  the  eyus 
blinded  and  the  heart  hardened.    So,  even 
in  the  previous  passage  of  St.  John's  Gospel 
(v.  41,  44),  fi  Si^a  ti  wapai.  rod  &eov  may  denote 
man's  participation  in   the    Divine  glory, 
rather  than  praise  or  honour,  while  SS^a  irapk 
hXKiiKuv  may  mean  the  mundane  gloiy  con- 
ferred by  men  on  each  other.    These  con- 
siderations commend,  in  the  passage  before 
us,    the   interpretation     (2)    "  Significatur 
ipsius  Dei  viventis  gloria,  vitam  tribuens 
(cf.  ch.  vi.  4) ;  ad  quam  homini,  si  non  poo- 
casset,  patuit  aditus :  sed  peccator  ab  illo  line 
suo  excidit,  neque  jam  eum  assequitur,  neque 
gloriam  illam,  quse  in  illo  effuisissct,  uUo 
modo  tolerare  potest :  Heb.  xii.  20,  et  seq. ; 
Ps.  Ixviii.  2 ;  quo  fit  ut  morti  sit  obnoxiud  : 
nam  gloria  et  immortalitas  sunt  synonyma, 
et  sic  mors  et  corruptio.    Absunt  a  gloria  Dei, 
i.e.  a  summo  fine  hominis  aberrarunt.    At 
justificati   recuperant    spem    illius   glorin. 
Vid.  omnino  c.  v.  2,  11,  17;  viii  30,  etc." 
(Bengel).      Further,  the  sense  which  the 
same  expression  seems  evidently  to  bear  in' 
ch.  V.  2  of  this  Epistle  is  of  importance  for 
our  determination  of  its  meaning  here.     We 
are  not  justified  in  understanding,  with  some 
interpreters,  any  specific  reference  to  the 
"image  of  Gtod"  (cf.  1  Cor.  li.  7,  elxihy  koI 
S6(a    0eov    iTripxav)  in   which   man    was 
created,  and  which  luu  been  lost  by  the  Pall, 
there  being  nothing  to  suggest  it,  or,  with 
others,  exclusively  to  the  future  glory,  since 
the  present  icrTepoSvTai  seems  to  denote  a 
present  deficiency.    The  general  conception 
appears  sufficiently  plain  in  Bengel's  exposi- 
tion above  given,  according  to  which  "  tho 
glory  of  God"  means  the  glory  of  the  Pivive 
righteousDeas  ("  seinpiteriui  ejus  virtus  ut 


84 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMAIIS.    [oh.  m.  1—31. 


diTinitas,"  Bengel  on  Eeb.  L  8),  which  man, 
through  Bin,  &Us  ihort  of. 

Vers.  24— 26.— Being  jnstifled  freely  hy 
his  grace  thiongh  the  redemption  that 
is  in  Christ  Jesus :  whom  God  let  f>  rth 
to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  lis 
blood.  ^iKaioi/ifvoi  agrees  with  wdvTes  "n 
ver  23.  "  Eepente  sio  panditur  scena  aiiiee- 
nior"  (Bengel).  AiDpeia/  and  rrj  auroS  x"^ 
piTi  are  opposed  to  the  impossible  theory 
of  justification  by  law.  And,  as  aM  Binned, 
BO  aU  are  so  justified  potentially,  the  re- 
demption being  for  all;  cf.  especially  eh.  v.  18. 
But  potential  justification  only  ig  implied; 
for  the  condition  for  appropriation  is  further 
intimated  by  8iA  rijs  irlcrTeas  following. 
Tiie  means  whereby  it  becomes  cibjectivelg 
possible  is  "  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus."  Here,  as  throughout  St.  Paul's 
Ipistles,  and  in  the  New  Testament  gene- 
rally, the  doctrine  of  atonement  being  re- 
quired for  man's  justification  is  undoubtedly 
taught,  Christ  being  viewed  as  not  only 
manifesting  God's  rigiiteousness  in  his  life, 
and  reconciling  believers  through  his  in- 
fluence on  themselves,  but  as  ejecting  such 
reconciliation  by  an  atoning  sacrifice.  The 
word  itself  (oTro^iirpiixris)  -here  used  may 
indeed  sometimes  denote  deliverance  only 
(ef.  ch.  viii.  23;  Luke  xxi.  28;  Eph.  i.  14; 
iv.  30;  Heb.  xi.  35);  but  certainly,  when 
mod  of  the  redemption  of  man  by  Christ,  it 
implies  atonement  by  the  payment  of  a 
ranmm  (Xi-rpov  or  avrlXurpoy) ;  of.  Eph.  i.  7 ; 
1  Cor.  vi.  20;  Gal.  iii.  13;  1  Tim.  ii.  6; 
Eev.  V.  9 ;  Matt.  xx.  28 ;  the  ransom  paid 
being  said  to  be  himself,  or  (as  in  Matt.  xx. 
28)  his  lifef  T^v  ifivxh^  avrov  xirpov  avri 
voWav.  It  does  not  follow  that  all  con- 
ceptions of  schools  of  theology  as  to  how  the 
atonement  was  efficacious  for  its  purpose  are 
correct  or  adequate.  It  must,  &om  the  very 
nature  of  the  subject,  remain  to  us  a  mystery. 
It  may  be  enough  for  us  to  believe  that 
whatever  need  the  human  conscience  has 
ever  felt  of  atonement  for  sin,  whatever 
human  want  was  expressed  by  world-wide 
riteg  of  Bacrifioe,  whatever  especially  was 
signified  by  tljo  blood  required  for  atone- 
ment in  the  Mosaic  ritual, — all  this  is 
met  and  fulfilled  for  us  in  Christ's  offer- 
ing of  himself,  and  that  in  him  and  through 
him  we  may  now  "  come  boldly  to  tte 
throne  of  grace,"  having  need  of  no  other. 
Upoteero  in  ver.  25  ("set  forth,"  Authorized 
Version),  may  bear  here  its  most  usual 
olassical  sense  of  exhibiting  to  view  ("ante 
omniam  ooulos  possuit,"  Bengel);  i.e.  in  the 
historical  manifestation  of  the  Redeemer.  It 
may,  however,  mean  "  decreed,"  or  "  pur- 
posed "  (cf.  eh.  i.  13 ;  Epli.  i.  9).  The  word 
IXttffTipioy  leems  best  taken  as  a  neuter 
fiiljeotive  n»ed  substantively,  there  being  no 
instance  of  its  application  in  the  masculine 


to  a  person.  Its  ordiosry  nse  in  the  LXX. 
(as  also  Heb.  iz.  5)  is  to  designate  the  lid  ot 
the  ark  (i.e.  the  mercy-seat),  the  noun  Meepa 
(which  is  added  Exod.  xxv.  17 ;  xzxvii.  6) 
being  supposed  to  be  always  understood, 
though  the  usual  designation  is  simply  r^ 
iKaffriipiov,  Hence  most  commentators,  in- 
cluding the  Greek  Fathers  generally,  undei^ 
stood  iXaa-T'lipioy  in  this  sense  here,  Christ 
being  regarded  as  the  antitype  of  the  mercy- 
seat,  ag  being  the  medium  of  atonement  and 
approach  to  God.  The  main  objection  to 
this  view  is  that  it  involves  an  awkward 
oonfiision  of  metaphors,  it  being' difficult  to 
regard  him  who  was  at  once  the  Victim 
whose  blood  was  offered,  and  the  High  Piiest 
who  offered  his  own  blood,  at  the  mercy- 
seat,  as  being  also  the  Mercy-seat  itselC 
(Thus,  however,  Theodoret  explains :  "  The 
mercy-seat  of  old  was  itself  bloodless,  being 
without  life,  but  it  received  the  sprinlding 
of  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice.  But  the  Lord 
Christ  and  God  is  at  once  Mercy-seat,  High 
Priest,  and  Lamb.")  The  difficulty  is 
avoided  if  we  take  the  word  here  in  the 
sense  of  propitiatory  offering,  which  in  itself 
it  will  bear,  a  noun,  such  as  eifia,  being  sup- 
posed to  be  understood  (cf.  4  Maco.  ivii.  22 ; 
Josephus, '  Ant.,'  xvi.  o.  7 ;  Dio  Chrys., '  Orat.,' 
li.  1).  Whatever  its  exact  meaning,  it  evi- 
dently denotes  a  true  fulfilment  in  ChriBt  of 
the  atonement  for  sin  undoubtedly  signified 
by  the  type;  as  does  further  iv  -r^  odroS 
i&jumi,  which  follows.  For  a  distinct  enun- 
ciation of  the  significance  of  blood  under 
the  ancient  ritual,  as  reserved  for  and  ex- 
pressing atonement,  see  especially  Lev.  xvii. 
11.  Tlie  meaning  of  the  whole  saoriflcial 
ritual  is  there  expressed  as  being  that  the 
life  of  man  being  forfeit  to  Divine  justice, 
blood,  representing  life,  must  be  offered 
instead  of  big  life  for  atonement.  Hence, 
in  pursuance  of  this  idea,  the  frequent 
references  in  the  New  Testament  to  the 
physical  \tlA>oA-ihedMng  of  Chrigt  (of.  Heb. 
ix.  22,  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there 
is  no  remission").  It  ig  not,  however, 
implied  that  the  material  blood- of  Christ, 
ghed  on  the  croBs,  in  itself  cleanses  the 
soul  from  sin,  but  only  that  it  signifies  to 
us  the  fulfilment  in  him  of  the  type  of  an 
atoning  sacrifice.  As  to  the  construction 
of  ver.  25,  it  is  a  question  whether  hi  t^ 
auToS  atjuoTi  is  to  be  taken  in  connection 
with  Sick  rflj  ir((rTea)s,  meaning  "through 
faith  in  big  blood  "  (an  unusual  expression, 
though  grammatically  correct,  cf.  Eph. 
i.  15),  or  with  'i.\a<sri\fu>v.  The  emphatic 
position  of  avTov,  such  as  apparently 
to  signify  "in  his  own  blood,"  favours 
the  latter  connection  (of.  Heb.  ix..  12 — 25, 
where  the  offering  of  Christ  ig  digtiuguished 
from  those  of  the  Law  in  being  SiA  toC  Mmm 
at/iiLTos,  not  if  aliMTt  iWoTpl(f^.    Thus  th« 


cH.  in.  1—31.]    TITE  EPISTLE  OF  PAtTL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


8t 


meaniiig  wfll  be  tliftt  he  was  set  forth  (or 
purposed)  as  an  l\airT'lipiov,nvailMe  for  us 
through  faith,  and  consisting  in  the-ofiiering 
of  himself — in  the  shedding  of  his  own  blood. 
For  showing  of  his  righteousness  because  of 
the  passing  over  of  the  sins  done  aforetime 
in  the  forbearance  of  God,  in  order  to  the 
showing  of  his  righteousness  in  the  time 
that  now  is,  so  that  he  may  be  righteous, 
and  justifying  (the  word  is  SocofoCyTo,  cor- 
responding with  SiKamtrivriv  and  StKaiav 
preceding)  him  that  is  of  faith  in  Tesus. 
This  translation  differs  materially  from 
that  of  the  Authorized  Version,  which  is 
evidently  erroneous,  especially  in  the 
rendering  of  SiA  ri/v  Trdpeiriv  by  "for  the 
remission."  Our  translators,  in  a  way  very 
unusual  with  them,  seem  to  have  missed 
the  drift  of  the  passage,  and  so  been  led 
to  give  the  above  untenable  rendering 
in  order  to  suit  their  view  of  it.  It  is 
to  be  observed  that  two  purposes  of  the 
letting  forth  (or  purposing)  of  Christ  Jesus 
as  iKaariipiov  are  here  declared,  both  denoted 
by  the  word  ?y5eijiv,  which  is  repeated, 
being  governed  in  the  first  clause  of  the 
seutpDce  by  els,  and  in  the  second  by  itphs. 
iSome  say  that  the  preposition  is  changed 
with  no  intended  difference  of  meaning. 
But  it  is  not  St.  Paul's  way  to  use  his  pre- 
positions carelessly.  Eiy  in  the  Sxsi  clause 
muy  be  taken  to  denote  the  immediate 
puipose  of  the  propitiation,  and  irpbs  in  the 
second  to  have  its  proper  significance  of  aim 
or  direction,  denoting  a  further  intention 
and  result,  consequent  on  the  first.  The 
first  purpose,  denoted  by  «;,  was  the  vindi- 
cation of -God's  righteousness  with  regard 
to  the  ages  past,  in  that  he  had  so  long 
passed  over,  ot  left  unvisited,  the  sins  of 
mankind.  The  propitiation  of  Christ,  at 
length  set  forth  (or,  as  may  be  expressed  by 
irpoi&tTo,  all  along  purpoted),  showed  that 
he  had  not  been  indifferent  to  these  sins, 
though  in  his  forheararuie  he  had  passed 
them  over.  Cf.  Acts  xvii.  30,  Tabs  niv  oSp 
Xpiyovs  T^i  iryvolas  virepiStiiv  6  @ehs;  bIbo 
Heb.  is.  15,  where  the  death  of  Christ,  as 
the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  is  said 
to  have  been  "for  the  redemption  of  the 
transgressions  that  were  under  the  first 
covenant^"  the  meaning  and  efficacy  of  the 
"death"  being  thus  regarded,  in  the  first 
place,  as  retrospective  (cf.  also  Heb.  ix.  26). 
But  tlien  there  was  a  further  grand  purpose, 
expressed  by  the  rphs  r^v  ^vSei^iy  of  the 
second  clause— that  of  providing  a  way  of 
present  justification  for  believers  now,  with- 
out derogation  of  the  Divine  righteousness. 
Such  appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  this 
passage. 

Ter.  27.— Where  then  Is  the  boasting  1 
(that  of  the  Jew,  referred  to  in  eh.  ii.,  of  his 
■nperiority  to  th«  Gentile  with  regard  to 


justification).  It  is  excluded.  By  what 
manner  of  (Toiov)  law?  Of  works  1  Nay, 
but  by  the  law  of  faith.  Is  it,  then,  here 
implied  that  the  law  of  works  would 
allow  of  boasting?  Not  so  practically. 
But  its  theory  would  leave  room  for  it,  on 
the  supposition  of  its  conditions  being  ful- 
filled; it  is  a  kind  of  law  (observe  irolou 
v6fi.ov ;)  which  does  not  exclude  it ;  for  if  a 
man  could  say,  "I  have  fulfilled  all  the 
righteousness  of  the  Law,"  he  would  have 
something  wherein  to  glory.  But  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  law  of  faith,  which  has  oeen 
shown  to  be  the  only  one  available  for  the 
justification  of  either  Jew  or  Gentile,  in 
itself  excludes  it.  It  will  be  observed  that 
the  strict  sense  oi  the  word  v6ftos,  hitherto 
preserved,  is  extended  in  yd/nos  iria-Teait. 
(For  the  various  applications  of  which  the 
word  is  capable,  see  especially  ch.  vii.) 

Ver.  28. — ^For  (^ctp  here,  rather  than  ovy, 
as  in  the  Textus  Eeceptus;  though  either 
reading  rests  on  good  authority,  yap  suits 
best  the  course  of  thought,  as  introducing 
a  reason  for  the  assertion  of  the  previous 
verse)  we  reckon  that  a  man  is  justified  by 
faith  apart  from  works  of  law;  i.e.  the  law 
of  works,  as  a  principle  of  justification,  is,  in 
fact,  according  to  our  reckoning,  nowhere. 
It  is  to  be  particularly  observed  that  x'"P^' 
ilpyav  vifiov  implies  no  antinomian  doctrine, 
nor  any  opposition  to  James  (ii.  14,  etc.). 
Its  reference  is  not  at  all  to  works  required 
or  not  required  from  man  for  accpptance, 
but  simply  to  the  ground  or  principle  of  his 
justification. 

Ver.  29.— Is  God  the  God  of  the  Jews 
only ;  is  he  not  also  of  the  Gentiles  1  Tes, 
of  the  Gentiles  also.  This  verse  is  in  support 
of  the  doctrine,  already  asserted,  and  per- 
vading the  Epistle,  of  justification  through 
Christ  being  for  all  mankind  alike  without 
distinction  or  partiality ;  and  it  comes  in 
here  in  pursuance  of  the  thought  of  the 
preceding  verse.  In  it  justification  was  said 
to  be  bj  faith,  and  apart  from  works  of  law, 
and  therefore  in  itself  available  for  the 
Gentiles,  who  had  no  revealed  law,  as  well 
as  for  the  Jews,  who  had.  And  why  should 
it  not  be  so?  Is  not  the  God  of  the  Jews 
their  God  too  ?    Yea 

Ver.  30. — ^If  indeed  (rfirep  rather  than 
irelirep,  as  in  the  Textus  Keceptus)  God  is 
one,  who  shall  justify  the  circumcision  by 
faith,  and  the  unoiroumoision  through  faith. 
Here  the  unity  of  God  is  given  as  the  reason 
of  his  being  .the  God  of  the  Gentiles  as  well 
as  of  the  Jews.  So  also,  1  Tim.  ii.  5,  eTs  ykp 
0ebs  is  the  reason  why  he  wills  all  men  to 
be  saved.  It  is  of  importance  to  grasp  St. 
Paul's  idea  in  his  assertions  of  the  unity  of 
God.  It  is  not  that  of  numerical  unity,  but 
what  may  be  called  the  unity  of  quality ; 
i.e.  not  a  mere  assertion  of  monotheism  as 


66 


teE   EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.    t<»- m- 1— ^l- 


against  polytheism,  but  that  the  one  God 
is  one  and  the  same  to  all,  comprehending 
all  in  the  embrace  of  his  own  essential 
unity.  God's  unity  involved  in  St.  Paul's 
mind  the  idea  of  "  One  God,  the  Father,  of 
vfhom  Me  all  things,  and  we  unto  him" 
(1  Cor.  viii.  6);  "who  made  of  one  blood 
every  nation  of  men "  (Acts  xvii.  26) ;  in 
whom  we  (all  of  us)  "live  and  move  and 
have  our  being"  (Acts  xvii.  28).  Thus 
exclusion  of  the  Gentiles  from  the  paternal 
embrace  of  the  one  God  is  incompatible 
with  the  very  idea,  so  conceived,  of  his 
unity.  In  the  latter  part  of  this  verse  it 
is  said  that  God  will  justify  the  circumcision 
4k  iriffreajs,  and  the  uncircumcision  SiA  Trjs 
vla-Teas,  the  preposition  being  changed,  and 
the  second  irio-Tcais  being  preceded  by  the 
article.  The  difference  is  not  of  essential 
importance,  "  faith "  being  the  emphatio 
word.  But  it  is  not  unmeaning.  "E/c  ex- 
presses the  principle  of  justification ;  SA,  the 
medium  through  which  it  may  be  had.  The 
Jew  was  already  in  a  position  for  justification 
through  the  Law  leading  up  to  Christ.  He 
had  only  to  accept  it  as  of  faith,  and  not  of 
works  of  law  (ver.  20).  llie  Gentile  must 
attain  to  it  through  faith ;  i.e.  his  faith  in 
the  gospel  now  revealed  to  him.  "Eirl  rSv 
'lovSalav  rh  "  eK  mWenj"  T^BetKeV  &s  6v 
iySvToiv  nev  Ka\  erepas  iupopfiiis  irphs  diKaiaffiVy 
flu  Svvafiefwy  Sk  aiiTiis  ficT^xfiv  irXj^r  4k  Trjs 
Trftrreais.  'EttI  S^  rav  'SM^vcty  "Sick  t^s 
iria-Tias  "  (Theodoras). 

Ver.  31. — ^Do  we  then  make  law  void 
through  faith  ?  God  forbid  •>  nay,  we  estab- 
liih  law.     The  question    naturally  arises 


after  what  has  been  said  about  justification 
being  xwpU  y6fiot>  Do  we  then  make  out 
our  revealed  Law,  which  we  have  accounted 
■o  holy  and  Divine,  to  be  valueless?  Or, 
rather,  as  the  question  is  more  generally  put 
(v6iior  being  without  the  article,  and  there- 
fore translated  as  above),  "  Do  we  make  of 
none  effect  the  whole  principle  of  law, 
embodied  to  us  in  our  Divine  Law  ?  Ee- 
garded  erroneously  as  a  principle  of  justifi- 
cation, the  apostle  might  have  answered, 
"  Yes,  we  do."  But  any  disparagement  of 
it,  regarded  in  its  true  light  and  as  answer- 
ing its  real  purpose,  he  meets  with  an 
indignant  ju^  yivoiro.  On  the  contrary, 
he  says,  we  establish  it.  Law  means  the 
declaration  of  righteousness,  and  require- 
ment of  conformity  to  it  on  tbe  part  of  man. 
We  establish  this  principle  by  our  doctrine 
of  the  necessity  of  atonement  for  man's 
defect.  We  put  law  on  its  true  base,  and 
so  make  it  the  more  to  stand  (iffrdvoiifv)  by 
showing  its  office  to  be,  not  to  justify — a 
position  untenable — ^but  to  convince  of  sin, 
and  so  lead  up  to  Christ  (cf.  oh.  vii.  12,  etc.; 
Gal.  iii.  24).  In  pur.-raanoe  of  this  thought; 
the  apostle,  in  the  next  chapter,  shows  that 
in  the  Old  Testament  itself  it  is  faith,  and 
not  law,  which  is  regarded  as  justifying; 
as,  is  l^e  first  place  and  notably,  in  tlie 
case  of  Abraham;  thus  proving  the  pre- 
vious assertion  in  oh.  iii.  21,  Maprvpov/i-fyii 
i^h  TOW  jf6fiov  Kal  tSov  vpo(p7iTav.  In  ch. 
vii.  he  treats  the  subject  subjectively, 
analyzing  the  operation  of  law  in  the 
human  soul,  and  so  bringing  out  still  mora 
clearly  ita  true  meaning  and  purpose. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Prerocjative.  The  differences  in  men'«  circumstances  and  advantages 
are  great,  and  are  altogether  inexplicable  by  human  wisdom.  We  may  not,  probably 
we  cannot,  in  all  things  "justify  the  ways  of  God  to  men."  There  is  much  in  the 
inequality  of  the  human  lot  that  is  perplexing  to  the  reflective  and  sensitive  mind, 
which  we  cannot  reconcile  with  our  belief  in  God's  perfect  justice,  and  his  omnipotent 
and  universal  rule.  This,  however,  is  an  insufficient  reason  for  doubting  the  conviction 
of  our  moral  nature,  for  questioning  the  declarations  of  Scripture,  that  the  Judge  of  all 
the  earth  doeth  right. 

I.  It  is  possible  to  ovibbstimate  thb  advantage  of  peculiar  pbivilboes. 
This  wag  the  case  with  many  of  the  Jews,  who  relied  upon  ancestral,  hereditary 
advantages,  and  who  even  believed  that,  as  children  of  Abraham,  they  were  certain  of 
Divine  favour  and  of  eternal  life.  Just  as  many  in  human  society  lay  stress  absurdly 
great  upon  their  family,  the  status  they  enjoy  in  consequence  of  hereditary  title  or 
wealth,  so  is  it  in  religious  life.  Not  »  few,  like  the  Jews,  rely  far  too  much  upon  the 
Church  with  which  they  are  connected,  the  ministry  by  which  they  are  served,  the 
sacraments  to  which  they  are  admitted,  the  opportunities  of  knowledge,  fellowship, 
and  service  with  which  they  are  favoured.  It  is  too  often  forgotten  that  these 
privileges  are  only  means  to  an  end,  and  that  the  right  and  reasonable  use  of  the 
means  is  necessary  in  order  to  the  desired  end. 

II.  It  is  possible  to  dispabaqb  advantages  which,  it  is  discovebbd,  eavb  bkeh 
evxBVAiiUSD.    It  is  a  tendency  of  human  nature  to  fly  from  one  extreme  to  the  other. 


OH.m.  1— 31.j    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  87 

St.  Paul  supposes  some  reader,  convinced  by  what  he  has  said  of  the  possibility  of 
gaining  no  benefit  by  advantages  enjoyed,  to  turn  completely  round  and  to  ask  what 
advantages  accrue  to  those  who  enjoy  what  seem  to  be  remarkable  privileges.  "  What 
•dvantage,  then,  hath  the  Jew?  or  what  is  the  profit  of  circumcision  ?  "  And  it  is  still, 
no  doubt,  often  the  case  that  men,  convinced  that  it  is  vain  to  rely  upon  their  religious 
privileges,  question  whether  they  are  in  any  better  position  for  possessing  such  privileges. 
Social  advantages  are  so  evidently  serviceable,  that  men  suppose  the  same  must  lio  the 
case  with  religious  advantages ;  and  when  they  find  that  the  possession  of  these  last  is 
compatible  with  censure  and  condemnation,  they  are  apt  to  turn  round,  and  to  say, 
"  Better  to  be  without  privileges  which  may  lead  to  nothing  I "  Yet  this  is  an  unreason- 
able way  of  regarding  such  matters.     For — 

III.   It  IB  POSSIBLE  80  TO  USE  RELIOIOTTS  ADVANTAaEB  AS  TO  MAKE  THEM  THE  XRANS 

TO  BPIHITUAL  oooD.  The  apostlo  points  out  that  the  Jew  occupied  a  position  peculiarly 
favourable.  "  First  of  all,  because  they  were  entrusted  with  the  oracles  of  God."  Thui 
was  evidently  a  sacred  prerogative,  and  there  were  many  of  the  favoured  nation  who 
made  so  good  a  use  of  their  opportunities  that  they  became,  not  only  intelligently 
acquainted  with  Divine  truth,  but  penetrated  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  consecrated  to 
the  Divine  service.  Similarly,  although  the  possession  of  the  Scriptures  and  the 
privileges  of  the  Christian  Church  will  be  occasion  of  condemnation  to  those  hearers 
of  the  gospel  who  are  negligent,  imbelieving,  and  impenitent ;  on  the  other  hand,  these 
will  be  means  of  grace,  and  they  actually  are  such,  to  all  who  use  such  opportunities 
of  knowledge,  fellowship,  and  Improvement  in  a  right  spirit  and  method.  There  is 
obvious  justice  in  this  arrangement;  the  greater  the  privilege,  the  greater  the  responsi- 
bility. "  To  whom  much  is  given,  of  him  much  will  be  required."  Those  who  are 
"  entrusted  with  the  oracles  of  God  "  may  well  be  summoned  seriously  to  consider  what 
is  becoming  on  the  part  of  those  so  favoured,  and  diligently  to  use  opportunities  so 
precious,  privileges  and  prerogatives  so  momentous  and  so  unparalleled. 

Vers.  19, 20. —  The  purpose  of  Law.  Although  it  is  the  main  intention  of  the  aposlle, 
in  speaking  of  the  Law,  to  show  its  insuflSoiency  for  the  purpose  with  which  its  intro- 
duction and  publication  were  commonly  credited,  his  teaching  would  be  misunderstood 
were  he  supposed  to  disparage  it ;  for  St.  Paul  held  the  Law  of  God  in  the  highest 
reverence,  although  he  did  not  attribute  to  it  all  with  which  it  was  connected  in  the 
mind  of  the  unchristian  Jew. 

I.  The  pbimabt  purpose  of  the  Law.  This  was  unquestionably  the  revelation  of 
the  Divine  character,  attributes,  and  will.  God  is  not  only  the  perfectly  holy  Being ; 
he  is  also  the  perfectly  righteous  Euler.  Truth  declares  what  he  is ;  Law  declares  what 
he  will  have  his  subjects  to  be.  Accordingly,  revelation  takes  the  form,  not  only  of 
the  indicative,  but  of  the  imperative.  Law  is  the  expression  of  God's  justice,  and  of 
his  will  that  all  the  subjects  of  his  moral  government  should  partake  of  his  holiness, 
and,  in  their  relations  to  one  another  and  to  him,  should  do  those  things  that  please 
him.  His  commandments,  statutes,  ordinances,  are  the  utterance  of  his  judgment  as 
to  what  is  good,  what  is  best,  for  his  intelligent  creatures. 

.  IL  The  secondary  pukposb  op  the  Law.  It  is  upon  this  that  the  inspired  apostle 
lays  stress  in  the  passage  now  before  us.  1.  The  Law  reveals  sin.  It  is  a  standard 
beside  which  the  deficiencies  and  errors  of  men's  conduct  become  plainly  manifest. 
2.  The  Law  condemns  the  sinner.  It  is  not  simply  a  declaration  of  what  is  right ;  it 
exposes  and  censures  what  is  wrong.  It  speaks  the  sentence  against  the  violators  of 
its  rules.  3.  The  Law  siknees  the  sinner.  It  leaves  him  without  justification,  apology, 
or  excuse. 

III.  The  ultimate  pubposb  or  the  Law.  This  is  unquestionably,  in  the  ease  of 
our  humanity,  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  gospel.  The  Law  is  the  pedagogue,  the  slave 
who  attends  and  conducts  the  pupil,  and  it  leads  unto  Christ.  "  By  the  works  of  the 
Law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  God's  sight."  Yet  we  cannot  believe  that  a  merciful 
God  publishes  the  Law  simply  for  the  condemnation  of  men.  It  does  reveal  the 
hi'inousness  of  sin,  making  it  appear  exceedingly  sinfuL  It  does  reveal  the  helplessness 
of  the  sinner.  But  all  this  is  preparatory  to  a  remedial  and  redemptive  intervention. 
What  the  Law  could  not  do,  God  does  by  the  gift  of  his  Son,  who  nbeyed  and  magnified 
the  Law  in  his  own  Person,  and  at  the  same  time  secured  for  sinfi^  men,  upon  com- 


88  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [ch.  m.  1— 31 

pliance  with  the  conditions  of  faith  and  repentance,  their  exemption  from  the  Law's 
penalties,  and  their  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour,  participation  in  the  Divine  nature 
and  life,  and  inheritance  in  the  Divine  and  eternal  blessedness.  Thus  that  which 
appeared  the  instrument  of  wrath  has  been  converted  into  the  occasion  of  salvation. 

Ver.  22. — The  distinctively  Christian  righteousness.  The  apostle  has  clearly  shown 
that  righteousness  by  the  Law  is  not  possessed  by  men,  and  that  in  this  way  is  no  hope 
for  the  salvation  of  the  humaa  race.  Such  is  the  negative  conclusion  to  which  facts  and 
reason  compel  him.  Yet  it  is  not  his  vocation  to  preach  a  doctrine  of  despair.  True, 
without  righteousness  there  can  be  no  salvation.  Therefore,  if  light  is  to  be  cast  upon 
human  darkness,  it  must  come  elsewhither  than  from  the  Law.  So  it  is  that  St.  Paul 
preaches  the  new  and  distinctively  Christian  righteousness,  to  be  secured  by  conditions 
that  may  be  fulfilled  by  men  of  every  race — a  righteousness  that  avails  before  God,  and 
ensures  the  acceptance  and  the  spiritual  welfare  and  elevation  of  men. 

L  The  chaeaotbb  and  designation  op  this  kiqhteousnbbs  :  it  is  op  God,  or 
Divine.  1.  It  has  its  source  in  God.  In  this  it  is  distinguished  from  the  rectitude 
which  is  "by  works;"  that  in  a  sense  is  of  human  origin.  It  is  shown  to  be  "of 
grace,"  i.e.  to  be  the  provision  of  Divine  favour,  free  and  undeserved.  And  fiirthcr, 
this  expression,  "  of  God,"  implies  the  perfection  of  this  righteousness  incomparison 
with  all  beside.  2.  It  is  divinely  adapted  by  God  to  man.  There  is  presupposition 
of  man's  helplessness  and  dependence ;  it  is  presumed — which  is  indeed  the  fact — that 
man  cannot  work  out  a  righteousness  of  his  own.  Hence  there  is  a  ground  for  this 
new  righteousness  in  a  Divine  provision  of  substitution.  The  apostle  would  be  mis- 
understood were  his  teaching  upon  this  point  to  be  interpreted,  as  some  have  interpreted 
it,  as  representing  God  as  indifferent  to  the  person  by  whom  suffering  is  endured 
and  obedience  rendered.  Tet  Christ,  by  his  suffering  the  consequences  of  sin  in  this 
humanity  and  by  his  perfect  obedience  and  holiness,  has  laid  the  foundation  for  the 
acquisition  by  man  of  the  distinctively  Christian  righteousness.  3.  It  avails  and  is 
acceptable  before  God.  According  to  the  representations  of  tSe  context,  it  consists  in 
the  remission  of  sins,  and  acquittal  and  acceptance  before  the  Divine  tribunal,  and  in 
the  manifestation  of  positive  Divine  approval;  which  may  be  regarded  as  the  two  parts 
of  "justification."  It  is  evident  that  such  righteousness  is  imputed,  and  not  inherent — 
a  theological  expression  which  must  not,  however,  be  interpreted  to  imply  its  unreality. 
Thus  the  Divinity  of  the  Christian  righteousness  may  be  made  apparent,  as  an  object 
of  admiration  and  of  aspiration. 

II.  The  means  or  the  attainment  op  this  bighteottsness — theottgh  paith  in 
Jesus  Christ.  In  order  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  condition  upon  which  the  Christian 
righteousness  may  be  attained,  there  must  be :  1.  Belief  in  the  Scripture  testimony 
concerning  Christ,  that  he  is  the  Son  of  God  and  the  appointed  Saviour  of  mankini 
This  is  indispensable ;  for  faith  is  not  a  vague  sentiment— it  has  an  Object,  and  an 
Object  which  justifies  and  deserves  it.  Yet,  though  indispensable,  this  is  not  Sufficient. 
There  must  be  also :  2.  Trust  or  confidence  in  Christ  as  a  personal  Saviour.  Paith  is 
not  merely  intellectual  assent ;  it  is  the  consent  of  the  heart  and  the  will.  It  is  capable 
of  degree,  and  there  is  strong  faith  and  weak  faith.  But  the  important  point  is  that 
the  soul,  in  the  attitude  and  exercise  of  faith,  is  brought  into  personal  relation  with 
the  holy  Saviour. 

III.  The  universality  op  this  bighteottsnebs  :  rr  is  unto  ali,  and  upon  all, 
THEM  that  bbliktb.  The  rectitude  itself  is  a  possession  which  men  may  share,  what- 
ever their  nationality,  their  condition  in  life,  their  individual  history.  And  the  condi- 
tion of  its  attainment  is  equally  universal ;  there  is  nothing  in  faith  which  limits  its 
exercise  to  any  special  members,  or  any  section  of  the  human  race.  In  this  Christianity 
provM  itself  to  be — and  this  is  its  glory,  its  Divinity — ^the  universal  religion. 


HOMILIES  BY  TARIOtJS  AUTHOEa 

Ten.  1 — 8. —  The  difficulties  of  Divine  revelation,  Jewish  unheUef,  and  Divine  Justice. 
The  apostle,  in  tlie  two  preceding  chapters,  has  now  shown  that  both  Jews  and  Gentiles 
■taud  on  the  same  platform  as  regards  their  need  of  a  Saviour,    Both  ore  alike  sinners 


OH.  m.  1—31.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  89 

in  God's  Bight.  The  Gentile,  who  has  not  the  Law,  if  he  does  by  nature  the  things 
contained  in  the  Law,  will  be  justified  before  God.  "  Shall  not  his  uncircumcision  be 
counted  for  circumcision?"  (ch.  ii.  14,  26).  The  Jew's  circumcision  will  profit  him 
if  it  be  a  religion  that  affects  the  heart  and  the  spirit  (ch.  ii.  29).  St.  Paul,  so  quick 
to  see  the  bearings  of  every  statement,  notices  at  once  that  a  difficulty  naturally  arises 
here,  and  he  is  prompt  to  meet  it.  "  What  advantage,  then,  hath  the  Jew  ?  or  what 
profit  is  there  of  circumcision?" 

L  The  Divine  bbvblation  a  great  privilege.  Notwithstanding  all  that  had 
been  said  about  the  sins  and  shortcomings  of  the  Jews,  the  Jews  were  still  a  privileged 
people.  Nothing  could  ever  destroy  the  fact  that  they  were  the  chosen  people  of  God, 
the  people  chosen  to  be  the  channel  of  God's  revelation  to  the  world  by  the  patriarchs 
and  lawgivers  and  prophets,  chosen  also  to  be  the  channel  through  which  the  Divine 
Word  become  flesh  and  tabernacled  among  men — "  of  whom  as  concorning  the  flesh 
Christ  came."  The  chief  privilege  which  Paul  mentions  here  was  that  "  unto  them 
were  committed  the  oracles  of  God "  (ver.  2).  It  is  an  advantage  to  have  a  Divine 
revelation  entrusted  to  us.  The  possession  and  knowledge  of  God's  Word  is  a 
privilege  not  to  be  despised  or  lightly  esteemed.  There  are  degrees  of  nearness  to 
the  kingdom  of  God.  While  the  gospel  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one 
th«t  believeth,"  while  there  are  such  events  as  sudden  coQversions,  yet  there  are  some 
who  are  in  a  more  favourable  condition  for  receiving  the  gospel  than  others.  St.  Paul, 
though  he  was  suddenly  converted,  had  a  long  and  thorough  training  previously  in  the 
Word  of  God.  The  scribe  who  came  to  Christ,  and  whom  the  Saviour  pronounced 
to  be  "  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God,"  was  one  who  had  a  thorough  know- 
ledge of  the  Scriptures,  and  who  had  been  living  a  life  of  obedience  to  the  Law  of 
Gud.  Such  men  were  certainly  more  likely  to  be  influenced  by  the  personal  power  of 
Christ  than  those  who  had  no  previous  knowledge  of  Divine  truth.  God  works  by 
miracles;  but  his  ordinary  method  is  to  work  by  means.  In  these  days  of  sensational 
evangelism  it  is  well  that  we  should  not  undervalue  the  importance  of  a  thorough 
knowledge  of  the  Scriptures*  Paul  wrote  to  Timothy,  "  From  a  child  thou  hast  known 
the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation  through  faith 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  They  who  are  Well  instructed  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  are, 
as  a  rule,  more  likely  to  become  true  and  permanent  Christians  than  those  who,  under 
the  influence  of  sudden  excitement  or  emotion,  without  any  previous  religious  know- 
ledge, profess  their  readiness  to  follow  the  banner  of  Jesus.  There  are  exceptions, 
but  this  would  seem  to  be  the  rule.  And  those  who  are  so  highly  privileged  incur  a 
serious  and  solemn  responsibility.  If  unto  us  are  committed  the  oracles  of  God,  if  we 
have  the  Bible  in  oul-  hands  and  its  truths  treasured  up  in  our  minds,  terrible  indeed 
will  be  our  guilt  if  we  disobey  its  precepts,  reject  its  invitations,  and  neglect  its  warn- 
ings.   "  To  whom  much  is  given,  of  them  shall  much  be  required." 

II.   DlVUrS  FAITHFULNESS  NOT  AFPECTBD  BY  HUMAN  UNBELIEF.      "  Por  what  if  SOme 

did  not  believe?  shall  their  unbelief  make  the  faith  of  God  of  none  effect?  God 
forbid:  yea,  let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar;  as  it  is  written.  That  thou 
mightest  be  justified  in  thy  sayings,  and  mightest  overcome  wheu  thou  art  judged" 
(vers.  3,  4).  The  promises  of  God  wiU  he  fulfilled,  even  though  there  are  some  who  do 
not  believe  on  them.  The  Law  of  God  will  assert  its  claims,  even  though  there  are 
some  who  repudiate  them.  It  will  not  save  men  from  the  punishment  of  their  sin 
that  they  did  not  believe  God's  Word  when  it  says,  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that 
shall  he  also  reap."  God's  faithfulness  is  not  affected  ly  the  unbelief  of  his  own  ptople. 
Some  persons  argue  against  the  Bible  because  of  the  unbelief  of  those  who  profess  to 
regard  it  as  their  guide.  They  argue  against  Christianity  because  of  the  inconsistencies 
of  its  professors.  The  argument  is  false.  Christianity  is  to  be  judged  by  its  own 
teachings  and  spirit,  and  not  by  the  imperfect  way  in  which  even  its  professors  have 
received  and  practised  them.  Christianity  is  the  life  and  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ, 
combined  with  the  influence  of  his  death  upon  the  cross.  No  inconsistency  of  profess- 
ing followers  can  ever  mar  the  beauty  and  sinlessness  of  that  perfect  Example.  No 
nnbelief  can  ever  do  away  with  the  inherent  power  that  is  in  the  cross  of  Jesus  to  save 
•tnners.  The  preaching  of  the  cross  is  to  them  that  perish  foolishness;  but  to  them 
that  are  saved  it  is  thd  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God. 

JXL  DiTIKB  JDBTIOK  IB  NOT  AJrrsOTXO  BT  THK  COKSEQUElirOES  0?  BUKAIT  BUt.     "Bot 


90  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PATTL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  m.  1—31, 


If  our  tinrighteousnegg  commend  the  righteousness  of  God,  what  shall  we  say  ?  Is 
God  unrighteous  who  taketh  vengeance  ?  (I  speak  as  a  man.)  God  forbid  :  for  then 
how  shall  God  judge  the  world  ?  "  (vers.  5,  6).  1.  Ood  judges  not  consequences,  but 
tha/racter.  He  looks  at  the  heart  and  at  the  motives.  The  Jews'  unbelief  was  over- 
ruled by  God  for  his  own  wise  and  gracious  purposes.  He  brought  good  out  of  evil. 
But  that  did  not  make  their  unbelief  the  less  guilty.  In  the  eyes  of  the  law,  the  guilt 
of  a  fraudulent  person  is  not  always  estimated  by  the  consequences  of  his  acts.  A 
man  may  forge  his  employer's  signature  to  cheques ;  but  the  employer  may  receive 
such  information  as  will  enable  him  to  stop  the  cheques  in  time,  and  prevent  the  loss 
which  would  otherwise  have  resulted.  But  the  forger's  guilt  is  not  diminished  because 
the  consequences  of  his  acts  have  been  overruled.  The  law  is  not  considered  unfair  or 
unrighteous  if  it  punishes  him,  though  his  employer  may  not  have  suffered  one  penny 
of  pecuniary  loss.  And  even  though  the  criminal's  conduct  served  in  some  way  to 
bring  out  more^olearly  the  integrity  or  kindness  of  his  employer,  yet  even  this  would 
not  be  regarded  as  any  mitigating  circumstance  in  his  guilt.  So  it  is  right  that  I 
ehould  still  be  judged  as  a  sinner,  even  though  the  truth  of  God  hath  abounded  through 
my  lie  unto  his  glory  (ver.  7).  2.  Man  is  not  justified  in  using  sinful  means  to  gain 
a  good  end.  Prom  the  fact  that  God  overrules  sinful  actions  for  his  own  glory  and  the 
good  of  humanity,  it  might  appear  to  be  a  natural  inference  that  it  matters  not  what  the 
morality  of  the  action  itself  is  so  long  as  its  object  or  result  is  good.  "  Let  us  do  evil, 
that  good  may  come"  (ver.  8).  Stated  in  this  broad  way,  the  immorality  of  the 
principle  is  apparent.  And  yet  it  is  a  principle  which  is  too  commonly  acted -upon. 
If  you  oppose  some  method  of  raising  money  for  religious  or  charitable  purposes,  you 
will  be  constantly  told,  "  Oh !  it  is  for  a  good  purpose."  That  is,  simply,  it  does  not 
matter  liow  you  get  the  money  so  as  you  get  it.  It  does  not  matter  what  the  means 
are  so  long  as  the  end  is  good.  Now,  it  is  time  that  the  Christian  Church  and 
Christian  teachers  should  set  themselves  resolutely  against  such  demoralizing  ideas. 
How  can  the  Christian  Church  rebuke  the  dishonest  practices  too  common  in  the  com- 
mercial world,  money-making  by  unfair  or  questionable  methods,  so  long  as  its  own 
hands  are  not  clean,  so  long  as  almost  any  method  of  making  money  is  considered 
justifiable  if  it  is  in  connection  with  a  Church  bazaar  ?  The  end  does  not  justify  the 
means.    Let  us  not  do  evil,  that  good  may  come. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  9 — 18. — Total  depravity  of  human  nattire.  Here  we  have  a  dark  picture  of 
human  nature  in  its  fallen  and  unregenerate  state.  (Tlie  Bible  view  of  human  nature 
is  more  fully  enlarged  on  below,  on  vers.  21 — 26.)  Here  the  apostle,  as  it  were,  calls 
up  before  him  the  different  parts  of  human  nature,  and  obtains  from  each  of  them  an 
admission  and  an  evidence  of  the  moral  corruption  with  which  they  are  tainted. 

"My  conscience  hath  a  thousand  several  tongues, 
And  every  tongue  brings  in  a  different  tale, 
And  every  tale  convicts  me  for  a  villain. 

All  several  sins,  all  used  in  each  degree. 
Throng  to  the  bar,  crying  all^Guilty  I  guilty  I* 

I.  A  BBPEAVBD  HEABT.  "There  is  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes"  (fer.  18). 
There  is  no  motive-power  to  regulate  the  life.  There  is  no  reverence  for  God's  Law 
within  their  spirit.  There  is  no  fear,  of  offending  the  great  Judge.  There  is  no  filial 
fear  of  grieving  the  heavenly  Father.  The  conscience  and  heart  have  become  seared 
and  blunted.  Eemove  the  fear  of  God  from  heart  and  conscience,  and  what  influence 
remains  to  check  evil  passions  and  to  resist  the  insidious  allurements  of  temptation  ? 
"  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom ;  and  to  depart  from  evil  is  under- 
standing." 

II.  A  DEPBAVBD  mtDBBSTANDiNO.  "There  is  none  that  understandeth"  (ver.  11), 
It  is  fashionable  in  some  circles  to  speak  as  if  it  was  a  sign  of  weak  intellect  to  be  a 
Christian,  to  believe  in  the  Bible,  or  to  regard  with  reverence  the  Law  of  God.  Yet 
assuredly  it  may  be  claimed  without  any  presumption  or  prejudice  that  there  has  been 
at  least  as  much  of  the  world's  best  intellect  arrayed  on  the  side  of  Christianity  as  on 
the  aide  of  its  opponents.    If  there  be  credulity  anywhere,  there  is  credulity  displaywl 


CH.  m.  1—^1.]    tHB  EPISTLE  0?  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  91 

in  accepting  as  scientific  truths  what  very  often  are  pure  speculations.  If  there  is 
weakness  anywhere,  it  would  seem  to  be  in  disregarding  the  evidence  in  nature  that 
points  to  a  great  personal  and  intelligent  First  Cause,  or  the  evidence  in  history  that 
points  to  a  wise  and  overruling  Providence.  "  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  There 
is  no  God."  It  is  sin,  and  not  godliness,  that  is  the  evidence  of  a  weak  and  depraved 
understanding. 

III.  A  DEPRAVED  WILL.  "  There  is  none  that  seeketh  after  God "  (ver.  11). 
Nowhere  is  -the  depravity  of  human  nature  more  painfully  shown  than  in  the  exercise 
of  the  human  will.  How  many  deliberately  choose  evil  rather  than  goodl  How  many, 
with  the  experience  of  others  to  warn  them,  deliberately  choose  impurity  rather  than 
purity,  intemperance  rather  than  temperance  I  Life  and  death  are  put  before  them, 
yet  they  deliberately  choose  death.  They  reject  the  highest  ideal  of  character,  arid 
follow  poor  and  weak  and  wicked  examples.  They  reject  the  inspiring  hope  of  heavon 
and  immortality,  and  only  live  for  worldly  pleasure  or  for  worldly  gain.  They  reject 
the  fountain  of  living  water,  and  seek  out  for  themselves  broken  cisterns  that  can  hold 
no  water.  To  all  such  God  appeals,  in  mercy,  to  make  a  right  exercise  of  their  will. 
"  Turn  ye,  turn  ye;  for  why  will  ye  die?  " 

IV.  Dbpbavbd  speech.  1.  Untruthfulness.  "  With  their  tongues  they  have  used 
deceit "  (ver.  13).  Truth  is  essential  to  the  well-being  and  happiness  of  society,  to 
the  very  existence  of  commercial  dealings.  Yet  how  many  there  are  who  "  use  deceit " 
as  a  means  of  obtaining  advantage  or  profit  in  businesij,  as  a  means  of  obtaining  some 
desirable  object  of  their  ambition  1  We  have  society  deoeitfulness,  commercial  dcci  it- 
fulness,  political  deoeitfulness.  Against  aU  such  deceit  the  Bible  sets  itself.  "  Where- 
fore putting  away  lying,  speak  every  man  truth  with  his  neighbour ;  for  we  are  members 
one  of  another."  2.  Slander.  "  The  poison  of  asps  is  under  their  lips  "  (ver.  13).  The 
sin  of  evil-speaking  is  a  very  widespread  one,  and  it  hardly  receives  sufficient  dis- 
couragement from  Christian  people.  Men  and  women  who  would  shrink  from  doing 
their  neighbour  a  bodily  injury,  who  would  be  shocked  at  the  idea  of  taking  his 
property  dishonestly,  think  it  no  barm  to  injure  bis  character  and  reputation.  "  The 
poison  of  asps  is  under  their  lips."  "  0  my  soul,  come  not  thou  into  their  secret ;  unto 
their  assembly,  mine  honour,  be  not  thou  united."  3.  Profanity.  "  Whose  mouth  is 
full  of  cursing"  (ver.  14).  Here  is  a  widespread  evil  of  the  present  day.  Everywhere 
one  hears  the  profane  use  of  the  sacred  Name.    Just  as  the  suicide  acts 

"As  if  the  Everlasting  had  not  fixed 
His  canon  'gainst  self-slaughter," 

the  profane  person  acts  as  if  it  had  not  been  written  with  the  finger  of  God,  "  The  Lord 
will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his  Name  in  vain." 

V.  Depraved  life.  "  Their  feet  are  swift  to  shed  blood :  destruction  and  misery 
are  in  their  ways :  and  the  way  of  peace  have  they  not  known  "  (vers.  15 — 17).  What 
a  sad  but  true  description  of  human  life  in  its  unregenerate  and  unchristianized  con- 
dition 1  It  is  but  the  ordinary  picture  of  what  heathen  nations  were  before  the  gospel 
entered  into  them.  And  where  large  communities  throw  off  the  restraints  of  religion, 
is  it  not  what  may  be  witnessed  still,  even  in  professedly  Christian  nations  ?  Where 
there  is  no  fear  of  the  Law  of  God,  there  will  be  little  fear  of  the  law  of  man.  Let  the 
heart  and  conscience  be  godless ;  let  the  reason  and  understanding  fail  to  respond  to  the 
claims  of  the  Divine  Being  and  of  his  moral  Law ;  let  the  will  cease  to  be  influenced  by 
heavenly  and  upward  motives ;  let  men  in  their  common  speech  be  accustomed  to 
speak  lightly  of  sacred  things  and  of  their  neighbour's  character  and  reputation ;  and 
the  step  is  but  a  short  one  to  the  disregard  of  human  life  and  the  disregard  of  human 
virtue.  The  nation  that  ceases  to  be  influenced  by  the  fear  of  God  has  entered  on  the 
broad  way  to  its  own  corruption  and  decay. — 0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  21 — ^26. — " No  difference"  The  Bible  presents  us  with  three  pictures  of  man's 
condition  and  character.  They  are  very  different,  and  yet  they  are  all  true  pictures. 
There  is  the  picture  of  man  before  the  Fall,  as  he  walked  with  God  in  primeval  innocence 
of  heart  and  sinless  purity  of  life.  There  is  the  picture  of  man  after  the  FaU,  with  th« 
Divine  image  marred  and  stained  by  sin.  And  then  there  is  the  picture  of  man  renewed 
•gMa— man  an  object  of  Divine  mensy,  man  a  subject  of  Divine  grace,  man  prepared 


»t  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  ni.  1—31. 

for  slinring  once  more  the  Divine  glory.  Two  of  these  views  of  human  nature  concern 
man  as  he  is  now.  The  one  humWes,  the  other  exalts  him.  On  the  one  hand,  man  is 
put  before  us  as  he  is  by  nature — fallen,  sinful,  lost.  On  the  other  hand,  he  is  put  before 
us  as  God  wants  him  to  be,  and  as  God  has  done  all  he  can  to  make  him — a  pardoned 
sinner,  a  holy  character,  an  heir  of  everlasting  life.  These  two  views  are_  brought 
together  in  these  verses.  The  apostle  speaks  of  the  righteousness  of  God.  which  is  by 
faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe  (vers.  21,  22).  And  then 
he  adds,  as  a  reason  for  this  broad,  all-embracing  statement,  "  For  there  is  no  difference : 
for  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God  "  (vers.  22,  23).  There  is  no 
difference  as  to  the  fact  of  universal  sin.  And  there  is  no  difference  as  to  the  feet  of 
universal  mercy :  "  Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  "  (ver.  24).  There  is  no  difference  as  to  the  need  of  salvation.  There  is 
no  difference  in  the  way  of  salvation.  Christ  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men  who  coDU  to 
him  in  faith. 

I.  ThBBE  18   NO  DUTFEEBNCB   IN  THE  FACT  OF  tTNIVBESAL  GUIIiT.      "  Allhsve  Sinned, 

and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  This  is  not  a  mere  cynical  statement.  The  Bible 
is  not  a  cynical  book.  It  does  not  look  down  with  contempt  upon  human  nature.  But 
it  deals  with  facts  as  they  are.  And  yet,  if  it  speaks  of  human  nature  as  sinfiil,  it  is  in 
terms  of  pity  and  compassion  and  desire  to  save.  You  will  often  meet  with  cynical 
view*  of  human  nature.  You  will  meet  some  who  will  tell  you  that  all  men  are  equally 
bad,  or  that  one  man  is  as  good  as  another.  You  will  meet  some  who  will  sneer  at  the 
idea  of  virtue,  or  unselfishness,  or  honesty  being  found  in  any  one.  They  will  tell  you 
that  no  such  thing  exists.  They  will  tell  you  that  selfishness  is  the  ruling  principle  of 
human  nature,  and  that,  if  men  or  women  are  honest,  or  virtuous,  or  charitable,  it  is 
because  it  is  their  interest  to  be  so.  Now,  it  will  generally  be  found  that  those  who 
speak  thus  of  human  nature  have  not  a  very  high  moral  character  of  their  own.  They 
judge  others  from  their  own  standpoint.  They  look  at  everything  from  a  selfish  point 
of  view,  and  they  think  that  every  one  else  does  the  same.  But  this  is  not  the  way  in 
which  the  Bible  speaks  of  human  nature.  It  paints  it  very  black,  it  is  true — because 
it  paints  it  in  its  true  colours.  But  it  speaks  of  human  nature  as  it  is,  not  to  depreciate 
it,  but  to  elevate  it.  Moreover,  it  allows  for  the  good  that  is  in  human  nature.  It 
meets  human  nature  half-way.  It  recognizes  that  there  is  sometimes  even  in  the  most 
fallen  nature  a  desire  for  better  things.  It  represents  the  poor  prodigal  as  coming  to 
himself  and  saying,  "  I  will  arise,  and  go  to  my  Father.  Jesus  says,  "  Him  that 
cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  The  Bible  is  no  cynical  book.  And  yet  it 
says  that  "  all  have  sinned."  This  does  not  mean  that  all  are  equally  bad,  that  all 
have  committed  sins  of  the  deepest  dye.  But  it  does  mean  just  what  is  said,  that  all 
have  sinned — that  there  is  sin  in  some  degree  in  all,  sin  enough  to  condemn,  to  destroy. 
How  humbling  this  is  to  human  pride!  And  this  was  just, how  the  apostle  meant  it. 
His  whole  desire  in  these  opening  chapters  of  Bomans  is  to  show  the  need  of  a  Saviour, 
of  a  perfect  righteousness.  He  first  of  all  showed  that  the  heathen  needed  a  righteous- 
ness. Then,  turning  to  the  Jews,  whom  he  knew  so  well,  he  saw  at  once  their  self- 
righteous  spirit.  They  made  their  boast  in  the  Law,  and  yet  all  the  while  they  were 
transgressors  of  the  Law.  And  so  he  proves  that  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  are  all  under 
sin  (ver.  9).  "  For  there  is  no  difference :  for  all  have  sinned."  It  is  amazing  to  see 
how  one  professing  Christian  can  look  down  upon  another,  just  because  the  other  is  of 
a  humbler  class  in  society  or  wears  a  poorer  dress,  when,  if  they  were  true  Christians, 
they  would  remember  that  they  are  all  sinners  saved  by  grace.  Yes ;  the  Bible  is  a 
very  democratic  book.  It  teaches  that  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men 
to  dwell  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  It  teaches  that  the  rich  and  poor  meet  together, 
and  that  God  is  the  Maker  of  them  all.  But  it  does  not,  like  many  deinocratic  leaden, 
give  the  people  a  Calse  idea  of  themselves.  It  does  not  say,  as  I  once  heard  a  popular 
speaker  say  in  Glasgow,  that  "  the  democracy  is  always  wise  and  true  and  just.  It 
places  all  men  upon  a  common  platform,  as  sinners  in  the  sight  of  God.  It  says, 
"  Tliere  t»  no  difference :  for  all  Jisve  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  Cted." 

II.  Thkbs  m  so  Mrfap.TOO&'  w  the  offer  of  oniveesal  mebot.  *'  Being  justified 
freely  by  his  grace  through  tko  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  It  i»  when  we 
come  to  look  at  the  cross  of  Jesus  that  we  can  see  how  God  looks  at  human  nature. 
It  was  certainly  no  depreciation  of  human  nature  that  caused  the  Sob  of  God  to  eom« 


oi.  HI.  1,^1.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS.  93 

and  die  upon  the  cross.    It  was  no  desire  to  depreciate  hunmn  nature  that  caused  Gud 

to  give  "  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  on  him  should  not  perish,  but 

have  everlasting  life"     Ah  no  1     When  we  speak  of  the  depravity  of  human  nature,  of 

the  &U  of  man,  of  universal  guilt  and  sinfulness,  some  persona  would  charge  us  with 

taking  low  views  of  human  nature.    They  are  Bible  views,  at  any  rate;  and  the  crosd 

of  Jesus  shows  us  that,  if  God  looks  upon  human  nature  as  fallen,  he  does  not  look  upon 

it  with  contempt.    No  1    He  looks  upon  it  with  infinite  compassion.    He  looks  upon 

it  with  redeeming  love.    He' looks  upon  it,  helpless,  sinful,  fallen;  and  as  he  looks,  he 

stretches  down  the  hand  of  mercy  to  save,  to  save  fur  ever  I    On  the  porch  of  an  old 

house  in  England  is  this  inscription  out  in  stone,  " Bextram  eadenti  porrigo"  ("I 

stretch  out  my  right  hand  to  him  that  is  falling  ").    That  is  just  what  God  does.    He 

stretches  out  the  strong  hand  of  mercy,  and  not  only  to  him  that  is  falling,  but  to  him 

that  is  fallen.     He  does  not  exclude  the  profligate,  or  there  would  have  been  no  place 

in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  for  St.  Augustine  or  John  Newton.     He  does  not  offer 

salvation  only  to  his  friends,  or  where  would  the  Apostle  Paul  have  been?     There  is 

no  difference.     "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely.  "    How,  then, 

is  this;  that  the  guilty  sinner  is  an  object  of  Divine  mercy  ?    He  is  guilty,  and  yet  God 

not  merely  pardons,  hui  jvstifies  him,  declares  him  just.   "  Being  justified  freely  by  his 

grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus"  (ver.  34) .     It  is  on  account  of 

what  Jesus  did  and  sufFerrd  that  the  sinner  is  accepted  in  God's  sight.     This  is  to  be 

remembered,  that  Jesus  i  it  only  bore  our  punishment  (which  one  human  being  might 

do  for  another),  but  he  bore  our  guilt.     "The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of 

us  all."    It  is  thus  that  the  sinner  is  looked  upon  as  justified  in  God's  sight.    Thus 

God's  righteousness  is  shown :  "  That  he  might  he  just,  and  the  Justifier  of  him  which 

believeth  in  Jesus"  (ver,  26).  And  hence  there  is  no  difference.    It  is  no  merit  in  man, 

"no  penances,  no  good  works  of  his  own,  that  obtain  his  justification,  his  salvation.    It 

is  free  grace.    It  is  the  righteousness  that  is  in  Jesus  Christ.    What  large-hearted 

charity,  what  universal  brotherhood  of  Christians,  this  large  view  of  God's  universal 

mercy  ought  to  teach  us  I  ■  "  The  same  Lord  over  all  is  rich  unto  all  that  call  upon 

him."    How  this  view  of  the  universal  mercy,  the  universal  love  of  God,  should  break 

down  all  narrow  views  of  creed  and  party  and  class  I    The  day  is  long  in  coming,  but 

surely,  under  the  influence  of  this  Christian  gospel,  it  will  come  at  last— 

"  When  man  to  man,  the  world  o'er, 
Bhall  brithers  be  for  a'  that." 

Yet  it  Is  to  be  observed  that  there  is  a  great  difference  in  man'$  treatment  of  thi» 
universal  offer  of  mercy.  Some  accept  the  message.  The  goodness  of  God  leads  them 
to  repentance.  The  love  of  Christ  melts  their  hearts.  Some  reject  this  message.  They 
put  it  away  from  them.  They  neglect  it.  They  are  too  much  occupied  with  other 
things — with  pleasure,  money-making,  and  the  like.  Now,  this  difference  in  the  way 
in  which  men  receive  the  offer  of  salvation  will  make  avast  difference  in  their  condition 
throughout  eternity.  How  could  it  he  otherwise  ?  If  Christ  died  to  save  those  who 
take  him  as  their  Saviour,  it  must  be  a  sad  but  stern  reality  that  those  who  do  not 
believe  on  him  must  perish.  There  is  no  difference  in  the  universal  guilt.  There  is  no 
difference  in  God's  universal  offer  of  his  mercy.  But  there  is  a  difference  in  man's 
treatment  of  this  offer.  And  there  wUl  be  an  awful  difference  throughout  eternity. 
—0.  H,  L 

yars,  87 — 3X  (with  Jas.  ii.24). — Waith  cmd  works.  One  of  the  most  fruitful  sources 
of  discussion  and  strife  among  Christians  has  been  the  selection  of  particular  passages 
of  Scripture  and  building  doctrines  upon  them,  without  at  all  considering  what  other 
passages  of  Scripture  may  have  to  say  on  the  same  subject.  Truth  is  many-sided. 
Two  views,  which  appear  contradictory,  may  both  be  right.  There  may  be  an  element 
of  truth  in  both;  and  they  may  both  be  different  sides  of  the  same  truth.  The  state- 
ments of  Paul  and  James  on  the  subject  of  justification  are  an  instance  of  this.  They 
appear  at  first  sight  contradictory,  but  they  are  in  reality  two  sides  of  the  same  great 
truth.  This  great  truth  is  Justification  hy  Jesus  Christ.  One  side  of  this  truQi  is 
found  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  "  A  man  is  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the 
Law  "  (ver.  28) ;  that  is  to  say,  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  is  sufficient  to  justifr  a  man  in 


94  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [on.  ni.  1—31. 

God's  sight.  That  is  very  true,  says  James,  but  let  us  he  sure  that  we  have  a  real 
faith.  There  is  no  real  faith  except  works  go  along  with  it.  Thus  James  brings  out 
his  side  of  the  truth :  "  Ye  see  then  how  that  by  works  a  man  is  justified,  and  not  by 
faith  only."  It  is  the  exaggeration  of  this  latter  truth  that  mainly  divides  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church  from  the  Protestant  Church  as  a  whole.  This  exaggeration  was  the 
immediate  origin  of  the  Eeformation.  Instead  of  teaching  men  to  put  their  faith  in 
Christ,  the  Church  of  Borne  taught  them  to  place  their  confidence  in-  their  own  good 
works.  By  the  performance  of  certain  penances  and  mortifications  merit  was  laid  up 
for  them  in  heaven.  By  the  payment  of  certain  sums  of  rnqney  absolution  was  obtained 
for  past  sins.  Clearly  this  was  very  far  from  being  the  teaching  of  Scripture.  Then 
Martin  Luther  arose,  and,  in  words  that  soon  rang  throughout  all  Europe,  proclaimed 
the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  It  was  time  that  a  check  should  be  placed  on  the 
progress  of  error ;  that  men  should  be  taught  to  rest  their  hopes  of  salvation  no  longer 
on  a  priest,  on  works  of  merit,  or  on  sums  of  money,  but  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  has  been  so  much  insisted  on  that 
there  has  sometimes  been  a  neglect  of  good  works.  This  error  has  not  been  committed 
by  any  Protestant  Church  as  a  whole,  in  its  formal  teaching  at  any  rate,  for  all  the 
reformed  Churches  have  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  good  works  and  a  holy  life  as  the 
evidence  and  fruit  of  true  faith.  But  there  has  been  sometimes  an  undue  attention  to 
beliefs  combined  with  an  undue  neglect  of  practice.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  very 
often  the  persons  who  are  most  dogmatic  in  their  assertion  of  certain  doctrines,  and 
most  fierce  in  their  denunciation  of  those  who  differ  from  them,  are  among  the  most 
irreligious  and  most  godless  persons  in  their  parish.  With  them  the  belief  is  every- 
thing; the  practice  is  nothing.  But  this  is  not  Christianity.  To  believe  certain 
doctrines  is  not  true  faith.  If  the  life  is  not  changed,  it  matters  little  what  we  believe.  , 
When  a  man  says  that  he  believes  in  Christ,  meaning  that  he  believes  certain  doctrines 
about  him,  and  is  confident  that  therefore  he  is  justified  and  safe  for  ever,  while  at  the 
same  time  he  lives  in  the  practice  of  sin,  that  man's  justification  is  very  doubtful.  It 
is  important  to  keep  before  us  the  twofold  meaning  and  influence  of  the  doctrine  of 
justification. 

I.  The  TBACHQfa  or  St.  Paul.  "  A  man  Is  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of 
the  Law."  We  are  to  remember  that  Paul,  in  this  Epistle,  was  writing  to  a  Church 
largely  composed  of  Christians  of  a  Jewish  origin.  In  the  Christian  Church  at  Roma 
there  was,  consequently,  a  considerable  tendency  to  magnify  the  importance  of  good 
works — a  tendency  which  was  fostered  by  Judaizing  teachers.  It  is  easy  to  see,  from 
many  expressions  in  the  Epistle,  that  Paul  has  Jewish  Christians  largely  in  his  mind. 
He  speaks,  for  instance,  of  "  Abraham  our  father ; "  he  deals  with  positions  which  were 
peculiarly  Jewish — as,  for  instance,  the  necessity  of  circumcision,  and  the  exclusion  of 
the  Gentiles  from  the  Church  of  God.  "  Is  he  the  God  of  the  Jews  only  ?  is  he  not 
also  of  the  Gentiles?"  (ver.  29).  It  was  natural,  therefore,  for  the  apostle  to  lay 
special  emphasis  on  the  necessity  for  faith  in  Christ.  He  wants  to  show  that  some- 
thing more  than  good  works  was  needed  for  justification.  Abraham,  it  is  true,  was  a 
good  man  ;  but  the  works  he  did  would  not  have  saved  him,  were  it  not  for  the  faith 
that  he  exhibited.  "  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  unto  him  for  righteous- 
ness." We  cannot  be  justified  by  our  own  deeds,  says  Paul,  because  our  best  deeds 
come  far  short  of  the  standard  of  righteousness  which  the  Law  lays  down.  Our  own 
deeds  are  powerless  to  justify  us.  We  need  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  If  we  take 
hold  of  that  righteousness  believingly,  and  trust  in  it,  we  are  justified.  We  are  justified 
by  faith,  is  the  clear  teaching  of  the  apostle.  But  does  he  therefore  do  away  with 
good  works  ?  Certainly  not.  Most  forcibly  he  himself  repudiates  such  an  idea.  "  Do 
we  then  make  void  the  Law  through  faith  ? "  he  asks  (ver.  31).  "  God  forbid :  yea, 
we  establish  the  Law."  That  is  to  say,  the  necessity  for  good  works,  for  holy  life,  is 
still  as  great  as  ever.  So,  also,  in  the  sixth  chapter  he  protests  against  the  idea  that 
any  one  who  professed  faith  in  Christ  should  continue  in  sin.  If  we  are  made  free  from 
the  guilt  of  sin,  because  we  have  believed  on  Christ,  then  we  have  become  the  servants 
of  righteousness  (ch.  vi.  18).  In  the  eighth  chapter  he  brings  out  even  more  fully  the 
duty  of  holy  life.  We  are  not  to  rest  content  in  the  assurance  that  there  is  no  con- 
demnation to  us.  There  must  be  active  life.  The  spirit  is  life  because  of  righteous- 
ness, and  through  the  Spirit  we  must  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body.    Hence  we  b«« 


«H.m.  1— 31.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS.  »S 

that,  by  the  fiuth  which  leads  to  justification,  the  apostle  plainly  means  only  tuch  faith 
as  diiectly  results  in  good  works.    True  justification  implies  sanctification. 

IL  Thb  teachino  or  St.  James.  "  Te  see  then  how  that  by  works  a  man  is 
justified,  and  not  by  faith  only."  From  what  we  have  seen  of  Paul's  teaching,  it  is 
clear  that  this  statement,  which  at  first  sight  appeared  to  contradict  it,  is  really  in 
harmony  with  it.  The  teaching  of  James  is,  in  fact,  the  complement  of  the  teach- 
ing of  Paul.  What  St.  Paul  brings  out  in  the  sixth  and  eighth  chapters  of  Romans, 
namely,  the  necessity  of  good  works  as  the  evidence  and  fruit  of  faith,  that  is  the 
purport  of  the  whole  Epistle  of  St.  James.  James,  noticing  the  inconsistency  which 
prevailed  in  his  time,  and  which  still  prevails  in  the  Christian  Church,  between  the 
pruftission  of  many  Christians  and  their  daily  conduct,  especially  in  regard  to  others, 
in  very  clear  and  forcible  language  calls  attention  to  the  necessary  connection  of  faith 
with  practice.  A  faith  which  does  not  influence  practice  is  useless.  It  is  dead.  Such 
'aith  cannot  save  a  man.  It  may  be  said  that  Abraham  was  justified  by  faith.  That 
IS  true.  But  was  his  faith  a  mere  belief  in  a  particular  doctrine,  such  as  the  mere 
belief  in  the  existence  of  a  God  ?  No.  Even  the  devils  believe  that  j  but  it  brings 
them  no  confidence,  but  rather  fear.  Something  more  than  that  is  necessary,  if  we  are 
to  be  sure  that  we  have  true  faith,  and  that  we  are  therefore  justified.  We  must  act. 
And  so  Abraham's  faith  was  a  faith  that  included  action.  He  ofiered  Isaac  his  son 
upon  the  altar.  Thus  by  works  was  faith  siade  perfect.  In  this  sense  it  is  evident 
that  a  man  is  justified  by  works,  and  not  by  iaith  only  (Jas.  ii.  14 — 26). 

To  sum  up :  Paid  shows  the  wdessness  of  works  urithout  faith ;  Jamet  shows  the 
usdessnesB  of  faith  without  works.  Both  are  agv^sd  that  Christ  alone  can  deliver  us 
from  the  condemnation  which  our  sins  deserve.  BoA  are  agreed  that  he  who  is  truly 
conscious  of  this  salvation  will  strive  against  sin ;  that  ho  iiho  believes  that  Christ  can 
save  him  from  the  guilt  of  sin  must  believe  also  that  Christ  c&a  save  him  from  its 
power  in  his  heart.  Both  are  equally  strong  in  insisting  upon  the  uselessnoss  of  pro- 
fession without  practice.  The  two  sides  of  this  great  truth  both  need  to  be  strongly 
emphasized  in  our  own  day.  On  the  one  hand,  the  necessity  for  a  living,  personal 
.  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  alone,  needs  to  be  emphasized  in  opposition  to  the  substitution  of 
forms  and  ceremonies  for  the  gospel.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  necessity  for  a  life 
of  practical  godliness  needs  to  be  emphasized  where  there  is  so  much  of  barren  pro- 
fession— orthodox  belief,  but  fruitless  and  sometimes  careless  life. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Beligious  advantages,  their  use  and  almse.  If  the  Gentile  and  the  Jew 
shall  alike  come  under  judgment  according  to  their  works,  of  what  profit  was  the 
election  of  the  Jew,  and  his  endowment  with  spiritual  privileges?  This  leads  to 
the  question  of  religious  advantages,  their  use  and  abuse. 

I.  Use.  The  very  name, "  religious  advantage,"  which  springs  so  readily  to  the  lips, 
attests  the  profit  of  being  a  people  called  of  G(^  This  profit  is  manifold,  and  in  the 
forefront  stands  the  fact  that  they  have  the  living  utterances  of  God  amongst  them. 
1.  For  themselijes.  Who  shall  estimate  the  strength  and  sanctity  accruing  to  indi- 
vidual, domestic,  and  national  life  from  the  contact  of  that  living  will  ?  (1)  Indirect 
advantage — to  vitalize  morals,  law,  and  the  manifold  civilization  of  a  people.  So  the 
indirect  advantages  of  Christianity.  (2)  Direct  advantages — the  infinite  felicity  of 
union  with  God.  2.  For  others.  "  Intrusted."  To  grasp  at  our  own  good  not  the 
chiefest  felicity  of  life.  And  the  Jew  was  God's  chosen  messenger  to  the  nations.  Oh, 
the  honour  1  A  nation  of  preachers,  re-uttering  the  words  of  that  living  voice !  But 
how  sadly  they  had  misconceived  their  calling  1 

n.  Abuse.  Instead  of  heralding  God's  will  among  the  nations,  they  learned  to  hate 
all  who  were  not  of  themselves ;  and,  instead  of  embracing  God's  will  for  themselves, 
they  relied  on  mere  knowledge,  and  lived  in  sin.  Then  were  God's  words  made  void  ? 
was  there  no  gospel  for  them  ?  and,  because  of  their  unfaithfulness,  were  the  Gentiles 
to  be  unsaved  ?  1.  Ood^s  truth  in  spite  of  man's  falseness.  They  resisted  his  will, 
but  the  will  remained  finn  and  strong ;  they  neglected  his  promises,  but  the  promises 
remained  faithful ;  they  rejected  his  Christ,  but  he  was  nevertheless  the  Christ  of  the 
Jews  and  of  all  the  world.  Over  against  their  unholy  conduct  the  holiness  of  God 
■hone  spotless  and  supreme.  2.  tfoi's  truth  through  man's  falseness.  If  man  will  not 
yield  to  God,  God  will  make  even  man's  disobedience  ministrant  to  his  own  purposes. 


96  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  B0MAN8.    [oh.  m.  1—81. 

So  they  rejected  the  Christ ;  and  his  death  was  the  world's  life.  Ther  would  not  lire 
by  him ;  and  "  by  their  fall  salvatioa  came  unto  the  Gentiles."  Fernapi  sooner  than 
would  otherwise  have  been ;  perhaps  more  effectually.  So  were  they,  all  unknowing, 
drawing  the  chariot  of  his  kingdom ;  so,  even  now,  is  the  "  wrath  of  man  "  made  to 
"praise"  him.  3.  Ood'a  truth  in  condemnation  of  man's  fahenesi.  Might  they  not 
bay,  "  If  G-od's  holiness  shines  the  more  brightly  in  contrast  with  my  unholiness,  e 
•God's  purposes  are  more  effectually  worked  out  by  reason  of  my  perverseness  and  sin, 
shall  I  not  therefore  be  approved  rather  than  condemned  ?  Nay,  shall  I  not  even  make 
my  lie  to  abound  that  his  truth  may  abound  ?  "  Such  are  the  Jesuitries  of  every  age ; 
such  is  the  utter  untruth  of  the  heart  of  man.  But  man  is  a  witness  against  himself; 
and  therefore  the  apostle  almost  disdains  reply.  "  Man  I  if  the  overruling  of  evil 
for  good  were  ground  of  acquittal,  then  would  all  be  acquitted ;  if  evil  were  thereby 
justified,  it  might  be  therefore  deliberately  wrought  1  Let  the  conscience  of  each 
speak  out  against  such  utter  immorality ;  let  the  acknowledged  fact  of  a  final  judgment 
teach  the  futility  of  such  a  plea.  The  condemnation  of  the  condemned  is  just !  "  So 
does  he  shear  away  their  vain  pleas,  and  the  case  for  their  arraignment  is  complete.  It 
only  remains  that,  for  Jew  and  Gentile,  the  express  testimony  of  God's  Word  be 
addiBsed,  as  supplementary  of  the  moral  considerations  of  ch.  i.  and  ii.,  and  all  the 
world  will  be  siiown  guilty  before  God. 

Our  Christian  privileges,  are  they  used  or  abused  by  us  ?  Oh,  let  us  take  to  heart 
those  ^ords,  "  Not  every  one  that  saith  to  me,"  etc.  (Matt.  vii.  21 — 2S). — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  9 — 20. — Every  mouth  stopped.  The  charge  has  been  made  against  Gentiles 
and  Jews;  it  is  now  forced  home,  and  especially  against  the  self-excusing  Jews,  by 
the  unimpeachable  verdict  of  God's  own  Word.  We  have  her* — universal  sin  and 
universal  guilt. 

I.  Univeesal  bin.  Some  of  the  quotations  referred  in  the  first  instance  more 
particularly  to  Gentiles,  some  to  Jews.  But  the  fact  that  any  of  them  referred  to 
Jews  is  of  itself  sufBcient  for  the  apostle's  purpose,  viz.  to  cut  away  from  under  their 
feet  the  vain  hope  which  they  cherished  on  account  of  their  privileges.  And  further, 
as  the  apostle  urges  in  ver.  19,  all  the  quotations  have  a  very  proper  bearing  on  the  ' 
Jews,  inasmuch  as  the  words  of  the  Law  are  for  those  who  are  under  the  Law,  designed 
to  show  them  their  danger  even  when  speaking  expressly  of  the  sin  of  others.  There 
was  that  in  them  which  might  so  develop  itself,  and  being  so  developed,  it  was  under 
the  same  condemnation.  1.  A  state  of  sin.  (Vers.  10 — 12  ;  Ps.  xiv.  1—3.)  (1)  The 
unrighteousness.  "  None  righteous ;  "  "  none  that  doeth  good."  There  was  (o)  no 
discerning  of  the  will  of  God  (ver.  ll) ;  (6)  no  aspiration  after  God  (ver.  11) ;  (c)  an 
utter  deviation  from  the  right  way — an  utter  corruption  (ver.  12).  Two  positives, 
these  latter,  corresponding  to  the  two  negatives.  (2)  Its  universality.  "  There  existi 
not,"  four  times  repeated ;  "  no,  not  one,"  repeated  twice.  There  is  forcefully  implied 
here  that  the  germ  of  the  same  evil,  which  wrought  itself  out  so  flagrantly  in  special 
cases,  is  in  every  man's  heart ;  ouk  eon — that  is  the  charge  which  comes  home  to  each 
man's  heart,  and  the  truth  of  which  each  man's  conscience  attests.  2.  A  practice  of 
sin.  (Vers.  13—17  ;  Ps.  v.  9 ;  cxl.  3 ;  x.  7  ;  Isa.  lix.  7, 8.)  (1)  Speech.  (Vers.  13, 14.^ 
(o)  Deceit — words  of  suave  beguilement,  but  an  inward  ravening  for  the  prey ;.  (6) 
venom — swift,  cutting  words,  shot  like  the  poison  of  serpents ;  (o)  wrath — blatant  fury 
and  oaths.  (2)  Deeds.  (Vers.  15 — 17.)  (a)  Violence  and  bloodshed  are  their  aim ;  (6) 
desolation  and  calamity  mark  their  path ;  (c)  the  path  of  peace  they  never  tread.  3. 
A  source  of  sin.  (Ver.  18 ;  Ps.  xxxvi.  1.)  The  only  effectual,  permanent  safeguard  of 
morality  is  religion.  Are  the  bonds  not  being  loosened  in  our  day,  even  by  the  apostles 
of  ethics  themselves  ? 

II.  Universal  quilt.  1.  A  fact  of  history — to  every  one  that  has  eyes  to  see. 
But  attested,  as  above  shown,  by  the  verdict  of  the  Law  itself.  2.  A  fact  o/cmiscious- 
ness — wrought  in  the  individual  by  the  Law.  The  Law  cannot  justify ;  a  mirror  in 
which  we  see  ourselves,  and  in  that  mirror  fallen  man  sees  himself  fallen  and  corrupt. 
This  the  intent  for  which  the  Law  was  given,  to  bring  us  to  self-knowledge,  that  then 
we  might  yearn  for  God's  salvation  through  Christ.  For  law  and  promise  are  eyer 
intertwined — in  Judaism,  in  GentUism,  in    Christianity.     The  great  result  then: 

"  every  mouth  stopped" — conscious  guilt  j  "  all  the  world  brought  under  the  judgment 


OT.m.1— 81.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANa  OT 

of  God  "— objective,  historical  guilt.    Before  QroA'a  tribunal,  in  the  heart  and  in  history, 
man  is  condemned. 

Let  us  thank  God  for  his  severe  dealings,  for  they  are  in  love.  As  in  Tennyson's 
'  May  Queen,'  "  He  taught  me  all  the  mercy,  for  he  showed  me  all  the  sin."  When  the 
throne  has  become  to  us  palpably  the  throne  of  judgment,  then,  and  not  tUl  then,  it  is 
transformed  into  the  throne  of  grace. — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  21—26. — Redemption  worMng  righteousness.  A  whole  system  of  theology  is 
compacted  into  these  few  words.  The  keystone  of  the  arch.  We  have  here — redemption ; 
righteousness. 

I.  Ebdemption.  The  redemption  centres  in  Christ ;  It  touches  on  either  side  God 
and  man.  Originating  in  the  purposes  of  God,  and  actualized  in  the  work  of  Christ,  it 
is  appropriated  in  the  consciousness  of  man.  These  verses  deal  with  one  aspect  of 
Christ's  work  and  of  man's  salvation — justification  through  Christ's  atoning  sacrifice. 
Hence  we  have — God's  grace,  Christ's  sacrifice,  man's  faith.  1.  God's  grace.  (Ver.  24.) 
This  is  the  fountain-head,  whence  all  salvation  issues.  Importance  of  holding  forth 
this  truth ;  not  that  God  loves  us  because  Christ  died,  but  that  Christ  died  because 
Gbd  loved  us.  So  John  iii.  16.  And  yet  the  error  has  some  element  of  truth.  It  was 
God's  compassionate  love  which  prompted  the  bestowal  of  the  gift,  and  the  "  setting 
forth  "  of  the  Propitiation  (ver.  25) ;  but  only  when  the  gift  has  been  received,  and  the 
propitiation  made  ours  through  faith,  does  God,  can  God,  love  with  an  intimate,  com- 
placent love.  First  the  pitying  Father,  then  the  forgiving  Father,  and  then  the 
reconciled,  rejoicing  Father.  2.  Christ's  sacrifice.  (Ver.  25.)  We  are  in  the  presence  of 
a  mystery,  which  we  may  not  analyze  too  closely.  In  Christ,  God  and  man  are  one, 
and  therefore  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  represents  a  sacrifice  of  God  and  a  sacrifice  of  man. 
In  him,  man  expiates  his  own  sin ;  in  him,  the  Infinite  Love  stoops  and  suffers  and 
dies.  It  was  a  real  atonement  of  the  race ;  it  was  a  real  atonement  for  the  race ;  and 
what  God  hath  joined  we  may  not  put  asimder.  3.  Man's  faith.  (Vers.  22,  25,  26.) 
To  reduce  it  to  its  simplest,  ultimate  form,  it  is  but  the  acceptance  of  what  God  gives, 
of  what  can  only  come  to  us  from  without,  apart  from  any  efforts  of  our  own  (ver. 
21),  "  freely  "  (ver.  24).  And  such  faith  is  virtually  included  in  true  penitence — the 
penitence  of  the  "  poor  in  spirit ; "  and,  we  doubt  not,  such  true  penitence  is  therefore 
virtually  in  possession  of  the  pardon  which  hovers  round  every  repentant  heart.  But, 
for  a  consciousness  of  pardon,  there  is  required  a  conscious  faith,  i.e.  an  intelligent,  glad 
acceptance  of  the  gift  of  God  in  Christ.  And  the  more  vivid  and  realistic  the  conscious- 
ness of  faith — or,  may  we  say,  the  more  strong  and  energetic  the  laying  hold  of  life  ? — 
the  stronger  and  more  joyous  will  be  the  experience  of  salvation,  and  the  resultant  love 
for  God  through  Christ. 

II.  BioBTEonsNEgs.  Redemption  and  righteousness  are  not  at  variance,  but  rather 
redemption  is  the  great  instrumentality  whereby  the  righteousness  of  God  works  the 
righteousness  of  man.  1.  Man's  righteousness.  Man's  righteousness  is  wrought  by 
the  redemption  of  Christ,  and  therefore  it  is  all  Divine  (vers.  21,  22).  And  yet  it  la 
truly  man's.  The  righteousness  which  is  expressly  spoken  of  here  is  a  relative,  not  an 
actual,  righteousness;  «.«.  a  condition  of  acquittal  in  presence  of  Law  and  judgment. 
Hence  the  specific  teim,  "justification."  Such  relative  righteousness  may  be  the  adjunct 
of  actual  righteousness ;  the  Law  must  acquit  those  who  have  perfectly  fulfilled  the 
Law.  But  can  it  be  so  with  man?  "All  have  sinned."  And  even  one  sin  destroys 
all  possibility  of  acquittal  this  way.  Therefore  only  by  some  extraneous,  some  sub- 
stitutionary satisfaction  of  Law,  can  man  be  justified.  Such  satisfaction  the  redemption 
of  Christ  provides.  He  represents  us  all  in  the  great  atonement  before  God,  and  when 
we  penitently  acknowledge  his  representation  and  accept  it,  the  satisfaction  made  by 
him  is  ours.  Tlie  Law  of  the  Jews  was  the  discipline  by  which  God  was  leading  them 
to  feel  their  neeil  of  a  righteousness  "  apart  from  Law ; "  the  prophets  promised  it.  But 
since  all  need  it.  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews,  it  is  for  all;  "there  is  no  distinction." 
2.  God's  righteousness.  Man's  righteousness  and  God's  are  intervolved.  Mere  pardon 
would  not  set  aside  the  clums  of  Law;  justification  respects  those  claims.  The 
righteousness  of  God  is  his  executive  holiness — the  active  upholding  of  Law.  It  can 
only  be  manifested  in  the  case  of  sin  by  punishment.  This  punishment  must  l>e  of  the 
Individual  offenders,  or  of  some  proper  substitute.    In  Christ  the  great  Head  of  the  race 

BOMAXB.  ■ 


98  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  m.  1—31. 

is  smitten — smitten  that  the  race  may  be  justified.  But  only  a  relative  righteousness, 
as  productive  again  of  actual  righteousness,  can  be  wrought  by  the  righteousness  of 
God ;  and  therefore  the  justification  is  for  penitents,  believing  in  Christ.  And  the 
very  faith  itself  of  penitents  in  a  Christ  who  died  for  sin,  is  the  germ  of  a  new 
righteousness  of  life.  So,  then,  does  God  justify  himself  in  justifying  the  ungodly ; 
and  so  does  be  justify  bis  past  forbearance,  whether  as  respects  the  world  or  the 
individual  offender. 

Thus  in  Christ  is  the  great  problem  solved.  God  is  "just,  and  the  Justifier  of  him 
that  hath  faith  in  Jesus."  u  it  more  than  a  problem  of  the  intellect  to  us  ?  has  it 
wrought  itself  out  in  our  heart  and  life  ? — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  27 — 30. — "  Where  is  the  glorying  t "  The  Jews  were  a  glorying  people ;  they 
gloried  in  God  (see  ch.  ii.  17),  and  they  gloried  in  the  Law  (ch.  ii.  23).  But  now? 
All  glorying  was  shut  out. 

I.  The  false  qlortino.  Man's  almost  universal  perversion  of  religion.  Beligion 
should  humble  him,  but  he  makes  it  the  occasion  of  boasting.  So  eminently  with  the 
Jews.  1.  in  the  Law.  The  Law  was  designed  to  teach  sin,  and  quicken  their 
longings  for  holiness.  It  had  become  an  apparatus  of  self-righteousness.  2.  In  God. 
God  made  himself  known  to  them,  that  through  them  he  might  be  made  known  to 
others.  And  God  was  one.  They,  however, rested  in  him  as  theirs  alone;  and  the 
very  doctrine  of  the  oneness  of  God  was  made  the  badge  of  separataness,  and  an 
instrument  of  bigotry. 

II.  Glorying  excluded.  God  will  teach  man  humility;  as  towards  himself,  as 
towards  man's  fellow-men.  And  the  gospel  is  a  potent  instrumentality  to  this  end. 
So,  "Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit."  1.  The  law  of  faith:  to  which  "the  Law" 
must  logically  lead.  We  receive,  as  suppliants,  on  bended  knee.  "  Not  of  works,  lest 
any  man  should  boast"  (Eph.  ii.  9).  2.  The  Ood  of  all.  The  very  truth  they  held 
beUed  their  pretensions ;  the  God  of  all  must  be  a  God  to  all.  So,  then,  the  gospel  was 
God's  gift  of  grace  to  men,  to  be  accepted  by  man's  faith.  None  could  do  more ;  none 
might  do  less. 

Our  Christian  knowledge  and  belief,  our  name  of  Christ,  an  occasion  of  glorying  ? 
Yes,  in  a  true  sense  (Gal.  vi.  14),  but  not  boastfully.  For  the  one  should  teach  us 
a  deep  humility,  with  faith;  the  other  a  large,  unfailing  charity.  "He  is  Lord  of 
sli."— T.  F.  L. 

Ver.  31. — The  harmony  of  Law  and  faith.  God's  dispensations  cannot  possibly 
disagree ;  they  may  not  have  the  same  immediate  purport,  but  they  must  harmonize. 
This  verse  is  a  triumphant  challenge  at  the  close  of  a  conclusive  argument.  The 
harmony  of  Law  and  faith. 

I.  Law.  The  great  aim  of  the  dispensation  of  Law  was  to  teach  man  his  sin  and 
helplessness.  1.  "  Through  the  Law  cometh  the  knowledge  of  sin "  (ver.  20).  The 
Law  within  man  fades  in  proportion  as  his  disregard  of  it  increases,  and  only  by  an 
objective  Law  can  he  then  be  taught  his  guilt.  So  did  God,  by  a  presentation  of 
righteousness  in  the  demands  of  the  Law,  bring  home  to  man's  conscience  bis  condem- 
nation. 2.  This  objective  holiness,  by  its  claims  upon  man's  endeavours,  not  merely 
wrought  condemnation  in  the  conscience,  but  was  designed  to  produce  an  intensest 
consciousness  of  incapacity.  This  not  so  directly  intend^  by  the  apostle's  words  now, 
but  falls  legitimately  within  their  scope.    We  see,  we  desire;  we  cannot  attain. 

II.  Faith.  When  the  dispensation  of  Law  has  done  its  disciplinary  work,  the 
dispensation  of  faith  shall  take  its  place.  1.  A  universal  condemnation  prepares  for 
the  reception  of  the  gift  of  grace.  The  world  is  brought  to  its  knees  before  God, 
stricken  with  guilt ;  and  now  he  may  speak  words  of  pardon,  to  be  received  by  faith. 
God  the  Giver,  man  the  recipient  at  his  hands ;  this  the  relation  now.  Faith  annulling 
the  Law?  Nay,  supplementing  it,  and  justifying  its  work.  2.  And  so  the  new  life  of 
faith — faith  in  the  forgiving  love  of  God,  a  faith  which  brings  hope  and  inspiration — does 
but  lupjilement,  in  no  wise  contradicts,  the  state  of  helplessness  realized  through  the 
Law.  We  are  at  one  with  God;  the  chasm  is  bridged;  and  by  his  own  loving  help  we 
can  do  his  will. 

To  us  Christians?    Christ's  perfect  life  serves  for  Law.    How  great  our  ^lilt'l  how 


OH.  m.  1—31.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANa  M 

utter  our  impotence  1  But  he  stoops  to  die  for  ns,  and  we  receive  forgiveness  by  faith ; 
and,  being  in  trustful  and  loving  fellowship  with  him,  we  now  can  Uve  by  him.  The 
"Law"  of  his  life  is  established,  not  annulled,  by  faith. — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  1, 2.—^  tacred  trust.  Queitions  break  the  even  flow  of  a  course  of  argumenta- 
tion, and,  by  diversifying  the  stream,  quicken  the  dnggish  interest  of  the  spectators. 
The  catechetical  method  is  characteristic  of  the  Apostle  Paul  in  liis  most  vehement 

moods. 

I,  ExFLAni    THB     BiaNIFICANOE    OF    THB    QUERY    IN    THE    TEXT.       It    might    Seem 

Strange  for  any  to  question  the  unexampled  privileges  enjoyed  by  the  Jews,  but  the 
apostle  has  been  laying  the  axe  to  the  root  of  some  barren  trees  of  Jewish  pretensions. 
He  ruthlessly  exposed  the  pleas  of  those  who  tried  to  shelter  their  non-compliance 
with  God's  statutes  behind  the  fact  that  they  belonged  to  an  elect  race,  as  if  to  be  an 
leraelite  were  in  itself  a  guarantee  of  salvation.  He  showed  that  only  the  doers  (if  the 
Law  are  justified  by  the  Law ;  that  the  initial  rite  of  circumcision  could  only  profit  if  it 
were  followed  up  by  inward  consecration  and  outward  obedience.  The  apostle  affirmed 
that  even  the  heathen  world  had  its  law  of  conduct,  according  to  which  it  would  be 
judged.  Every  man  who  worked  evil  would  be  visited  with  retribution—"  wrath  and 
anguish,"  on  the  Jew  first,  and  also  on  the  Greek.  The  rabbis  would  not  be  absolved 
on  the  ground  of  their  status  and  functions;  let  them  instruct  themselves,  and  abstain 
from  every  violation  of  the  Law.  These  were  plain  statements ;  there  was  no  mincing 
of  the  matter,  and  to  many  readers,  accustomed  with  self-gratulation  to  pride  themselves 
on  their  descent  from  Abraham,  these  remarks  would  prove  highly  offensive.  And 
further  they  would  be  led  to  inquire,  with  complaining  indignation,  "  Well,  then,  what 
has  been  the  good  to  us  of  our  Jewish  religion  ?  If  our  condition  of  national  priority 
is  noi  to  ensure  the  ultimate  favour  of  God,  where  is  our  Ijoasted  advantage  over  the 
Gentile,  who  may  equally  obtain  the  rewards  of  the  judgment-day?"  The  objector 
asks  not  only  what  his  ordinary  profit  has  been,  but  what  hat  been  the  surplus,  the  excess 
of  privUege,  above  other  nations.  Observe  how  easily  the  hearer  of  the  gospel  may 
ad(^t  the  same  line  of  questioning.  Indeed,  this  is  assigned  by  many  as  a  reason  for 
not  preaching  the  gospel  to  the  heathen,  inasmuch  as  they  shall  be  judged  according 
to  the  degree  of  light  they  possess,  and  greater  light  may  increase  their  condemnation. 

II.  Thb  emphatic  bbplt.  The  Jew  had  reason  for  devout  gratitude  in  every 
respect,  answers  the  apostle ;  and  primarily,  that  to  him  it  had  been  given  to  receive 
direct,  unmistakable  communications  from  Heaven.  The  Jewish  nation  were  per- 
mitted to  hear  voices  from  the  shrine,  and  the  record  of  these  Divine  instructions  was 
committed  to  their  care  as  a  valuable  treasure.  There  was  the  Law  from  Mount  Sinai — 
a  political,  priestly,  ethical,  sanitary  code ;  there  were  prophecy  and  history,  and  the 
strains  of  men  who  swept  the  harp  of  religious  feeling  with  divinely  guided  fingers. 
Consider  the  high  honow  implied  in,  such  custodianship.  The  isolation  of  the  land  of 
Palestine  bespoke  a  Divine  library,  whose  contents  were  to  be  guarded  against  contami- 
nating, destructive  touch.  It  is  by  their  possession  of  the  Scriptures  that  the  Jews 
liave  won  their  place  in  the  estimation  of  the  world.  Not  by  their  deeds  or  character, 
but  by  their  writings.  Nor  is  it  that  they  have  displayed  a  special  genius  for  literature ; 
there  is  the  mark  of  the  inspiration  of  God.  The  prophets  were  conscious  that  this  was 
and  would  be  the  glory  of  the  nation,  "Out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  Law,  and  the  Word 

.  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."  Neither  Greece,  nor  Rome,  nor  Babylon  has  embalmed 
like  Israel  the  story  of  its  rise,  its  progress,  and  its  fall.  To-day  the  Jews  are  silent 
witnesses  to  the  truth  of  Scripture — an  unwilling  comment  on  the  tlireats  and  predictions 
of  their  own  Bible.  This  librariomship  was  a  real  help  towards  righteousness  and  the 
obtaining  of  the  blessing  of  God.  Men  will  dare  anything  for  the  attainment  of  njere 
empty  honour,  titles  of  distinction,  or  posthumous  fame.  But  it  was  surely  no  slight 
advantage  to  have  in  these  oracles  such  a  revelation  of  the  nature  of  God.  The  existence 
of  one  God  was  plainly  taught.  And  from  the  conception  of  him  as  almighty  there 
was  an  advance  to  the  conception  of  an  ever-living,  holy,  all-pervading  Spirit.  Them 
he  was  revealed  as  sympathizing  with  the  woes  of  bis  creatures,  and  the  "Angel  of  hii 
face"  was  predicted  as  making  his  soul  an  offering  for  the  sin  of  man.  It  was  na 
small  advantage  to  have  the  searching  requirements  of  morality  so  vividly  enforced,  and 
attested  with  such  august  sanctions.    Tm  lincere  reader  could  say,  **  Thy  Word  is  a 


100  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  in.  1—31. 

lamp  unto  my  feet,"  etc.  They  were  "  lively  oracles,"  as  contrasted  with  the  dim, 
uncertain,  impotent  instructions  of  the  unillumined  world.  They  imparted  hope, 
intimated  the  mercy  of  God,  and  the  possibility  of  pardon  through  sacrifice.  They 
taught  a  future  life,  so  that  Martha  could  say  to  our  Lord,  "I  know  thatmy  brother 
shall  rise  again."  The  very  fact  that  these  oracles  were  committed  to  writing  was  no 
little  aid  towards  their  intelligibleness  and  influence.  Heathendom  questioned  in  its 
childhood,  and  still  doubted  in  its  old  age.  Spiritual  truth  may  be  said  to  have  been 
unknown  except  to  Isiael.  Into  what  lofty  regions  of  spiritual  vision  could  the 
psalmists  and  jirophets  soar,  on  wings  of  knowledge  and  faith  nourished  by  the  writings 
they  possessed ! 

III.  An  appeal  to  modern  beadees.  Analogous  reasoning  may  be  applied  to  our 
condition.  The  cheap  multiplication  of  copies  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  many  seasons 
and  media  of  exposition  available,  vastly  augment  our  advantages.  Besides,  we  have 
the  light  which  the  New  Testament  throws  upon  the  attributes  and  fulfilled  purposes 
of  God.  Our  function,  like  that  of  Israel,  is  twofold — to  learn  and  to  teach.  1.  Let  ut 
utilize  the  written  Word  for  our  own  hehoof.  Picture  the  folly  of  a  sailor  not  consulting 
his  chart,  or  the  traveller  failing  to  guide  his  steps  by  his  manuaL  Too  many  a  sexton 
cares  for  the  material  fabric,  and  overlooks  the  doctrines  and  worship  to  which  the 
temple  is  subservient.  Without  disparaging  other  literature,  how  dark  were  the  world 
of  letters  if  this  sim  were  blotted  out  1  The  following  verse  (ver.  3)  speaks  of  the  chief 
hindrance  to  profiting  hy  the  oracles,  viz.  a  want  of  faith.  Faith  is  the  practical 
employment  of  gospel  truth;  not  the  comprehending  of  all  its  connections  and 
relationships,  or  the  sounding  of  its  fathomless  depths  with  our  tiny  plummet,  but  the 
utilization  of  its  plain  declarations  and  directions.  The  road  to  the  cross  no  wayfaier 
can  mistake.  2.  We  too  have  the  Bible  as  a  sacred  charge  for  the  benefit  of  our  fellows. 
Israel  was  to  serve  all  generations  and  all  races  of  mankind,  and  the  Church  of  Christ 
exists  for  no  exclusive  selfish  ends,  but  for  the  enlightenment  of  every  home  and  land. 
The  very  position  of  Great  Britain  in  the  carrying-trade  of  the  globe  marks  our  glory 
and  responsibility.  To  have  a  deposit  entrusted  to  our  care  involves  vigilance  lest  it 
suffer  damage.  A  mutilated  library  condemns  its  guardians,  and  closed  doors  mean  the 
flight  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  from  the  sanctuary.— -S.  B.  A. 

Vers.  5 — 8. — False  conclusions  concerning  sin.  Like  human  works.  Divine  operations 
are  liable  to  misconstruction.  The  serpent  secretes  poison  from  wholesome  food.  And 
the  redemptive  love  of  God  may  be  perverted  into  a  justification  of  sinful  conduct 
by  those  who  wish  for  an  excuse,  and  fancy  they  find  it  in  the  very  universality  of 
unrighteousness  which  the  apostle  has  demonstrated.  For  this  universality,  tliey 
say,  shows  that  to  sin  is  natural,  and  therefore  not  blameworthy.  And  they  derive 
a  further  reason  for  the  irresponsible  and  inculpable  character  of  man's  sin  in  the 
splendour  of  the  vindication  of  Divine  righteousness,  which  is  the  outcome  of  human 
depravity.    Let  us  state  the  truth  in  three  propositions. 

I.  Sin  18  ovBREUiiBD  BY  GoD  TO  GREATER  GOOD.  The  Work  of  the  Law  evidenc'd 
in  man's  accusing  conscieaoe,  and  in  the  state  of  desradation  and  misery  to  which  a 
sinful  career  reduces  man,  becomes  a  convincing  testimony  that  the  Governor  of  the 
universe  sets  his  face  against  evil.  The  dark  background  throws  into  bright  relief  the 
holiness  of  the  Most  High.  Man  learns  more  of  his  own  nature  through  sin  than 
he  could  otherwise  have  known,  and  perhaps  realizes  better  the  vast  interval  between 
the  creature  and  the  Creator.  But  especially  in  the  gospel  scheme  of  salvation,  and 
in  its  effects  upon  those  who  heartily  receive  its  benefits,  doss  the  righteousness  of  God 
shine  out  conspicuous.  Our  weakness  and  folly  are  the  theatre  for  the  display  of 
his  transcendent  grace  and  power.  The  loss  of  Eden  is  naught  compared  with  the 
gain  of  a  heavenly  paradise.  Like  the  oyster  whose  fretting  at  the  noxious  intrusion 
produces  the  lustrous  pearl,  or  like  the  clouds  which  reflect  and  magnify  the  effulgence 
of  the  setting  sun,  so  has  man's  fall  furnished  scope  for  the  exhibition  of  love  that 
stoops  to  suffering  in  order  to  redeem,  and  righteousness  that  triumphs  over  all  the 
ravages  of  sin  and  death.  Man  redeemed  is  to  be  raised  to  a  higher  plane ;  having 
tasted  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  he  is  thereby  disciplined,  renewed,  through  a 
more  glorious  manifestation  of  his  Maker's  wisdom  and  self-sacrifice,  to  a  nobler  end. 
Like  •  crypt  opened  under  an  organ,  deeper  notes  and  a  richer  harmony  shall  result 


OB.  m.  1—31.]    THB  EPISTLB  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  101 

from  the  pit  of  destruction  that  yawned  beneath  the  feet  of  our  sinful  race.  Holy 
beiugs  who  have  kept  their  first  estate  may  detect  a  wondrous  pathos  in  the  songs 
of  ransomed  saints.  The  sentence,  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread," 
has  become  a  blessing  to  our  fallen  humanity,  for  by  toilsome  effort  we  gain  experience, 
humility,  and  strength.  And  so,  by  the  habit  of  wrestling  against  sinful  impulses,  we 
caa  acquire  a  security  of  position  which  innocent  integrity  could  never  guarantee. 
"Which  justified  believer  could  really  wish  never  to  have  had  the  necessity  for  gazing  at 
the  cross,  which  melts  his  soul  and  transforms  his  being?  Thus  Is  man's  unrighteous- 
ness made  "  to  commend  the  righteousness  of  God." 

II.  Wilful  bin  is  not,  thbbefobb,  to  go  ukpdnishbd.  Mark  the  decpitfiilness 
of  sin,  trying  to  find  a  cloak  for  its  existence,  and  even  a  motive  to  its  further  com- 
mission, in  the  very  method  whereby  God  demonstrates  his  grief  at  its  prevalence,  and 
his  determination  to  root  it  out  of  his  dominions.  No  traitor  could  expect  to  escape 
judgment  on  the  plea  that  his  rebel  designs,  being  detected,  exposed,  and  defeated 
by  his  sovereign,  had  really  only  contributed  to  his  monarch's  glory.  Perhaps  the 
direction  in  which  the  apostle's  argument  needs  chief  application  to-day  is  in  respect 
of  practical  antinomianism.  They  mistake  the  intent  of  the  atonement  who  can  live 
as  if  the  superabounding  grace  of  Christ  gives  liberty  to  the  recipient  to  neglect 
righteousness  of  behaviour.  Full  forgiveness  for  past  conduct  does  not  imply  that 
all  the  natural  consequences  will  he  averted.  The  wound  may  be  healed,  but  the  scar 
shall  remain.  Men  receive  in  themselves  the  harvest  resulting  from  their  seed-crop 
of  thoughts  and  practices.  The  reasoning  of  the  supposed  objector  in  the  text  reminds 
one  of  the  self-justifying  query  of  a  thief  to  the  policeman,  "  What  would  you  do 
for  a  livelihood  if  it  were  not  for  the  likes  of  us?"  Paul  never  hesitates  to  bring 
omplacent  sinners  into  the  presence  of  the  great  white  throne  of  judgment,  in 
whose  searching  light  delusive  pretences  fall  away  and  leave  the  soul  naked  before 
God. 

III.  Nob  IB  SIN  in  ant  form  to  be  fbepetbatbd  with  a  vibw  to  qood  effects. 
The  condemnation  is  just  of  those  who  say,  "  Let  us  do  evil,  that  good  may  come." 
Modem  preachers  should  not  be  surprised  if  their  utterances  get  misinterpreted,  since 
even  the  apostle's  clear  statements  did  not  prevent  opponents  from  twisting  his 
declarations  into  a  proposition  abhorrent  to  his  mind.  To  permit  sin  in  his  children 
would  be  for  God  to  allow  the  roots  of  his  moral  government  to  be  cut.  The  casuistry 
of  the  Middle  Ages  was  a  trifling  with  the  plain  utterances  of  the  inner  judgment.  Our 
only  safe  guide  is  morality.  To  do  what  we  know  to  be  wrong  is  always  hurtful, 
though  sometimes  we  may  do  harm  by  what  we  believe  to  be  right.  Man's  reason 
soon  begins  to  spin  out  of  itself  a  cocoon  wherein  it  lies  in  dark  imprisonment.  The 
prevention  of  sin  is  better  than  its  cure.  An  unrighteous  policy  is  never  expedient. 
Sweet  at  first,  it  turns  to  bitterness  at  the  last.  For  Churches  to  seek  by  unrighteous 
methods  to  further  the  kingdom  of  God  is  like  the  action  of  the  Irish  agent,  who,  when 
ordered  to  take  measures  for  the  preservation  of  a  certain  ancient  ruin,  proceeded  to 
use  the  stones  of  the  ruin  for  a  wall  of  enclosure  to  protect  it  against  further  harm. 
Bighteousness  alone  can  establish  any  throne  and  exalt  any  people.  We  have  need 
of  prayer  and  converse  with  Christ,  that  the  spiritual  vision  may  be  keen  enough  to 
detect  Satan,  though  appearing  as  "  an  angel  of  light." — S.  R.  A, 

Ver.  23. — A  remedy  for- a  wiivenal  nted.  To  assert  that  the  righteousness  of  God 
manifested  in  Christ  was  "  apart  from  the  Law  "  relegated  the  Law  to  its  proper  position, 
as  the  servant,  not  the  master,  of  religion.  And  the  apostle's  substantiation  of  his 
further  assertion,  that  this  new  method  of  righteousness  was  not  so  entirely  unheard 
of  as  that  its  novelty  should  be  a  strong  prejudice  against  its  truth,  but  that,  on 
the  contrary,  the  Law  itself  and  the  prophets  contain  intimations  of  such  a  Divine 
manifestation, — this  cut  the  ground  entirely  from  under  the  feet  of  objectors  jealous 
of  every  innovation  which  could  not  be  justified  by  an  appeal  to  the  sacred  writings. 
And  this  righteousness  through  faith  recognized  Jew  and  Gentile  as  alike  in  their  need 
of  a  gospel,  and  their  freedom  of  access  thereto. 

I.   TOSBE  18  HO   distinction    AMONOST    MEN    IN   EBSPBOT  OF    THEIB    NEED  OF    THH 

ooBFEli.  Men  are  declared  faulty  in  two  respects.  1.  By  positive  transgression. 
They  "  sinned,"  they  hare  done  wrong,  and  they  wander  continually  from  the  right 


l6a  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  tofi  ROMANS,    [oh.  dl  1—31. 


way.    They  are  not  adjudged  criminal  merely  on  the  ground  of  Adam  s  fall,  but  they 

themselves  cross  the  line  which  separates  obedience  from  disobedience.     Scrljiture, 

history,  and  conscience  testify  to  this  fact.    2.  By  defect.    They  "  fall  short  of  the 

glory  of  God."     Their  past  behaviour  has  been  blameworthy,  and  their_  present 

condition  is  far  below  what  was  intended  when  man  was  formed  in  God's  image,  to 

attain  to  his  likeness.    Compare  the  best  of  men  with  the  example  set  by  the  Saviour 

of  love  to  God  and  man,  and  of  conformity  to  the  highest  standard  discernible.    Now, 

unless  perfect,  man  cannot  claim  acquittal  at  the  bar  of  judgment.     Perfection  is 

marred  if  one  feature  be  distorted  or  one  limb  be  missing  or  weak.    This  is  not  to  It 

taken  to  signify  that  all  men  are  equally  tinful,  that  there  are  no  degrees  of  enormity, 

and  that  all  are  equidistant  from  the  kingdom  of  God.    But  it  means  that,  without 

exception,  all  fail  in  the  examination  which  Divine  lighteousnesa  institutes,  though 

some  have  more  marks  than  others.    Left  to  themselves,  all  men  would  drown  in  the 

sea  of  their  iniquity,  though  some  are  nearer  the  surface  than  their  fellows.    The 

misunderstanding  of  this  truth  has  done  grievous  harm  to  tender  minds,  fretting 

because  they  had  not  the  same  sense  of  awful  misdoing  that  has  been  felt  by  notorious 

malefactors.   ~We  need  not  gauge  the  amount  of  contrition  requisite;  it  suffices  if  the 

heart  turn  humbly  to  God  for  forgiveness.     Thus  the  gospel  does  not  flatter  men. 

Soothing  messages  may  comfort  for  a  while  till  the  awakening  comes.     Then  we 

realize  that  it  is  of  no  use  to  be  in  a  richly  decorated  cabin  if  the  ship  is  sinking. 

To  reveal  the  true  state  is  the  necessary  preliminary  to  reformation.    There  is  a  down- 

rightness  about  the  gospel  assertions  which,  like  the  deep  probing  of  the  surgeon's 

lance,  wounds  in  order  to  thorough  healing.    Alas  I  that  the  disease  of  sin  should 

so  frequently  produce  lethargy  in  the  sick  I  they  feel  no  need  of  a  physician !    Lax 

notions  of  sin  lessen  ov/r  sense  of  the  necessity  of  an  atonement.    We  fail  to  discern  a 

rebellion  against  the  government  of  God,  and  an  offence  against  the  moral  universe. 

We  treat  it  as  if  it  only  concerned  ourselves  and  our  neighbors.     No  sprinkling 

of  rose-vrater  can  purge  away  the  evil;  it  can  be  cleansed  only  by  the  blood  of  the 

Lamb. 

II.  There  is  no  distinction  in  bespect  op  the  means  of  salvation.  1.  Justi- 
fication comes  in  every  case  as  a  gift,  not  as  a  prize  discovered  or  earned.  "  Being 
justified  freely."  Part  of  the  beneficial  influence  of  the  gospel  is  the  blow  it  administers 
to  human  notions  of  desert,  and  pride  is  a  chief  obstacle  to  enrichment  by  this  gift 
of  God.  2.  To  all  men  the  kindness  of  Qod  is  the  source  of  their  salvation.  God 
first  loved  and  sought  the  sinner,  not  contrariwise.  His  "grace"  is  the  fountain  of 
redemption.  3.  The  same  Divine  method  of  deliverance  is  employed  for  all.  "  Through 
the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  There  is  but  one  way  to  the  Father,  whether 
men  walk  thereon  consciously  or  unconsciously,  in  heathen  twilight  or  gospel  noon- 
tide, in  Jewish  anticipation  or  Christian  realization.  The  one  atonement  can  cover 
aU  transgression,  4.  The  same  human  mode  of  entrance  into  the  kingdom  i$  open  to 
aU,  viz.  by  faith.  Weakness,  ignorance,  degradation,  cannot  be  pleaded  as  obstacles 
to  salvation.  The  study  of  the  philosopher  is  no  nearer  heaven  than  the  cottage  of  tha 
artisan.  The  capacity  of  trusting  is  possessed  by  every  man ;  the  remedy  is  not  remote, 
therefore,  from  the  reach  of  any  of  the  sin-sick  race. — S.  B.  A. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Jewish  privileges  and  Divine  fudgment  From  a  consideration  ot 
the  attitude  of  the  Jewish  world  to  God,  the  apostle  proceeds  in  this  section  to  state 
the  privileges  enjoyed  by  .Jews,  and  to  point  out  the  corresponding  danger  of  com- 
mensurate condemnation  in  case  the  privileges  were  neglected  or  abused.  The  Jew 
might  be  inclined  to  say,  "  If  circumcision  be  not  a  seal  of  special  privilege,  if  I  am 
not  to  be  accepted  because  of  my  circumcision  and  descent ;  what  possible  advantage 
is  there  in  being  a  Jew?"  Now,  to  this  Paul  answers  that  the  Jew  has  many 
advantages,  but  in  the  mean  time  he  will  only  emphasize  one — he  is  the  custodian 
of  the  Divine  revelation.  It  is  round  this  fact  that  the  thought  of  the  present  section 
circulates.    Let  us  try  to  grasp  the  truths  as  the  apostle  suggests  them. 

L  The  revelation  confided  to  the  garb  of  the  Jews.  (Ver.  2.)  Into  the 
large  subject  of  the  Old  Testament  revelation  we  cannot,  of  course,  enter.  But  it 
may  be  noted  that  the  revelation  is  in  foundation  historical ;  it  gives  the  history  of 
a  peculiar  people ;  it  brings  out  the  meaning  of  their  history — how  they  had  been 


OH,  m.  1—31.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMA.NS.  103 

under  &  Divine  discipline  and  education  from  the  days  of  Abraham  down  to  the  days 
of  Christ.  Not  only  so,  but  the  revelation  turned  the  minds  of  its  possessors  towards 
the  future,  speaking  of  a  suffering  as  well  as  glorified  Messiah,  who  was  coming  to 
set  up  his  kingdom.  The  revelation  was  thus  a  fountain  of  hope  for  all  who  possessed 
it.  Besides,  it  was  a  means  of  self-examination,  for  it  analyzed  the  motives  and 
exposed  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart.  To  say  that  there  was  no  literature 
possessed  by  other  nations  to  be  compared  for  a  moment  with  the  Hebrew  literature 
is  to  state  the  case  tamely.  The  nation  possessing  such  "  holy  oracles "  ought  to 
have  been  the  holiest,  most  humble,  and  most  hopeful  of  all  the  nations.  God  was 
clearly  calling  them  as  a  people  into  an  exceeding  great  and  glorious  inheritance. 
A  pure  and  inspiring  literature  is  a  chief  national  possession.  Beside  this,  all 
other  advantages  are  trifling.  And  so  the  circumcised  Jew  might  well  rejoice  in 
being  the  custodian  of  the  most  splendid  national  literature  existing  in  the  world. 

II.  Some,  while  preserving  the  book,  did  not  believe  the  message  that  it 
BROUGHT.  (Ver.  3.)  It  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  the  Old  Testament  was 
preserved  by  the  Jews  with  scrupulous  care.  Texts  and  even  letters  were  counted, 
and  nothing  was  left  to  be  desired  so  far  as  custody  is  concerned.  But  many,  alas  I 
of  the  custodians  did  not  appreciate  the  message  which  the  book  brought  them.  It 
did  not  undermine  their  pride ;  its  utterances  about  the  deoeitfulness  of  the  human 
heart  were  referred  to  other  people.  Its  statements  also  about  the  sufferings  of 
Messiah  were  largely  ignored,  so  that  when  Messiah  came  as  a  Man  of  sorrows  they 
rejected  him, and  continued  to  look  for  another  Messiah,  who  would  pose  in  triumphant 
majesty  at  the  head  of  an  emancipated  nation.  Accordingly,  they  did  not  believe 
either  in  the  book  or  in  the  Messiah  it  promised.  They  thought,  indeed,  that  they  had 
eternal  life  in  the  book,  but  they  refused  to  come  to  the  Person  the  book  pointed  out, 
and  who  alone  had  eternal  life  to  bestow  (cf.  John  v.  89,  40).  They  thus  gave  the  lie 
to  revelation,  and  took  up  arms  against  God  and  his  Son.  Yet  such  unbelief  did  not 
invalidate  the  Divine  revelation  or  interfere  with  God's  faithfulness.  The  book 
contained  threatenings  as  well  as  promises ;  it  has  its  Ebal  as  well  as  its  Gerizim. 
If,  therefore,  souls  insist  on  disbelieving  God's  promises  and  threatenings,  he  can  still 
abide  faithful,  and  does  not  need  to  deny  himself.  He  can  execute  judgment  on  the 
unbelievers,  and  so  secure  his  glory  in  their  despite. 

III.  The  expediency  docteinb  of  doing  evil  that  good  mat  comb  merits 
THE  strongest  REPROBATION.  (Vcrs.  4 — 8.)  Unbelief  does  not,  as  we  have  seen. 
Invalidate  God's  faithfulness.  God  preserves  his  glory  in  man's  despite.  In  these 
circumstances,  the  objection  is  easily  raised  that  unbelief,  and  indeed  unrighteousness 
in  all  its  forms,  contribute  to  God's  glory ;  his  righteousness  is  seen  to  the  more  advan- 
tage through  this  foil.  The  sjnner  is  consequently  contributing  to  the  Divine  glory, 
and  so  should  not  suffer  for  thus  co-operating.  In  the  light  of  God's  providential 
plan,  every  evil-doer  is  contributing  to  the  display  of  the  Divine  righteousness.  Now, 
this  doctrine  of  expedient  evil,  with  its  resultant  good,  has  been  the  continual  resort  of 
the  unscrupulous.  But  it  is  worthy  of  the  very  strongest  reprobation.  For,  in  the 
first  place,  it  overlooks  the  fact  that  evil-doers  are  not  voluntary  contributors  to  the 
Divine  glory.  Evil-doing  is  really  the  running  counter  to  God's  will  in  all  things.  If 
evil-doers  are  contributors  to  God's  glory,  it  is  in  spite  of  themselves.  They  deserve 
no  consideration,  therefore,  on  this  account.  And,  in  the  second  place,  while  God 
overrules  their  evil-doing  for  his  glory,  he  is  in  no  sense  the  Author  of  sin,  and  so  in 
no  sense  does  evil  that  good  may  come.  For,  in  granting  freedom  to  his  creatures,  God 
was  granting  the  one  condition  of  the  existence  of  virtue,  and  has  no  responsibility 
when  his  creatures  diverted  it  into  the  channel  of  waywardness  and  sin.  The  evil  is 
the  act  of  his  creatures  entirely ;  with  them  the  responsibility  rests ;  all  that  God  does 
is  to  transmute  the  evil  into  good  by  his  wondrous  wisdom,  justice,  and  love.  Conse- 
quently the  doing  of  evil  can  only  be  under  the  pretence  of  good  resulting  from  it 
Evil-doers  wax  worse  and  worse ;  they  may  pretend  to  seek  good,  but  their  spirit  gives 
the  lie  to  their  profession,  and  warrants  their  condemnation.  It  is  diabolical  doctrine, 
and  its  damnation  is  just. 

IV.  God's  eights  as  Judge  cannot  be  disregabdbd.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  A  general 
judgment  is  expected  by  all  impartial  minds.  It  is  seen  by  all  not  blinded  by  good 
fortnne  that  good  and  evil  are  not  distributed  in  this  life  according  to  desert.    We  are 


104  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  in.  1—31, 

in  a  dispensation  where  much  is  reserved,  and  a  judgment  to  come  can  alone  afford  the 
opportunity  of  putting  things  right.  Suppose,  then,  that  the  right  to  punish  evil-doers 
is  denied  on  this  ground  of  their  contributing  to  God's  glory ;  it  is  plain  that  the  whole 
idea  of  judgment,  either  present  or  to  come,  must  fall  to  pieces.  In  these  circumstances 
we  should  have  no  judge  to  appeal  to,  and  no  hope  of  even  checking  triumphant  wrong. 
Faith  in  the  Divine  administration  would  be  lost,  and. society  would  really  relapse  into 
barbarism.  Hence  God's  rights  as  Judge  must  be  respected,  and  evil-doers  prepare 
themselves  for  wrath,  if  they  refuse  to  be  reconciled  to  him.  This  guarantee  of  God's 
rights  as  Judge  is  one  of  the  marks  of  the  Old  Testament  revelation.  There  we  see, 
sooner  or  later,  judgment  overtaking  evil-doing.  Even  when  the  evil-door  is,  like 
David,  an  Oriental  despot,  God's  judgments  search  him  out ;  so  that  the  one  hope  of 
the  sinner  is  to  betake  himself  to  penitence,  and  if  he  can,  as  in  the  fifty-first  psalm, 
acknowledge  his  sin  and  justify  God,  as  he  condemns  and  visits  with  displeasure  the 
sin  (Ps.  li.  4 ;  ch.  iii.  4),  then  the  pardon  and  the  peace  and  the  joy  of  believing  may 
be  his.  But  the  Judge  must  be  recognized  and  his  rights  respected,  else  the  indi* 
vidual  and  society  itself  must  remain  unsaved. — B.  M.  B. 

Vers.  9 — 20. — Knowledge  of  sin  through  the  Law.  Having  described  the  Jewish 
privileges  and  the  Divine  judgment  for  the  abuse  of  these  privileges,  the  apostle  now 
proceeds  to  ask  and  to  answer  the  question,  "  Are  we  [Jews]  preferied  (irpoex^ne0a)i" 
This  means,  in  God's  esteem ;  and  it  is  answered  without  hesitation,  "  No,  in  no  wise." 
And  the  proof  has  already  been  given  :  "  For  we  before  laid  to  the  charge  both  of  Jews 
and  Greeks,  that  they  are  all  under  sin  "  (Revised  Version)'.  We  are,  consequently, 
face  to  face  in  this  section  with  the  truth  of  universal  guilt — a  fact  proclaimed  alike 
by  the  heathen  conscience  and  the  Jewish  Scriptures. 
"  I.  Jews  and  Geebks  are  all  trNDEE  bin.  (Ver.  9.)  It  is  here  that  a  gracious 
work  must  begin  in  the  soul.  All  possibility  of  self-righteous  confidence  must  be  taken 
away ;  the  soul  must  be  brought  low  through  a  sense  of  sin.  Instead,  therefore,  of 
Jews  being  put  into  a  class  of  Divine  favourites,  accepted  because  of  their  descent  or 
circumcision,  they  are  put  by  Paul  into  the  one  universal  class  of  guilty  men.  They 
have  as  little  ground  of  hope  in  themselves  as  the  most  abandoned  heathen.  It  is  here, 
accordingly,  that  we  must  all  come.  We  must  take  our  stand  with  the  race  and  realize 
that  we  are  all  guilty  before  God.  We  come  under  a  law  of  oondenmation,  and  no 
amount  of  Pharisaic  self-righteousness  will  make  any  of  us  an  exception.  God  will 
not  respect  the  persons  of  any ;  all  must  first  humble  themselves  before  him  under  a 
genuine  sense  of  sin. 

II.  Universal  ouilt  is  asserted  in  the  Jewish  Scbiptores.  (Vers.  10 — 18.) 
Paul,  in  making  his  quotations,  gives  us  some  from  the  Psalms,  some  from  Proverbs, 
some  from  the  Prophet  Isaiah ;  but  the  sad  chorus  is  in  perfect  unison  about  human 
guilt  and  its  accompanying  depravity.  The  psalm  from  which  he  quotes  first,  the 
fourteenth,  represents  God  as  looking  down  from  heaven  to  see,  if  possible,  some 
righteous  man ;  but  the  verdict  to  which  he  is  compelled  to  come  is  that  "  there  is 
none  righteous,  no,  not  one."  Instead  of  the  knowledge  of  his  Name,  and  its  corre- 
sponding righteousness,  there  was  nothing  visible  but  guilt  and  corruption.  Human 
history  was  one  long  catalogue  of  selfishness  and  crime.  There  were  no  redeeming 
features  in  humanity,  wherever  left  to  itself.  Hence  the  "  oracles "  possessed  by  the 
Jews  were  no  flattering  unction  for  Jewish  souls.  So  far  from  this,  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures  demonstrated  the  guilt  and  waywardness  of  the  chosen  people,  as  well  as  of 
the  surrounding  heathen,  and  made  the  most  sweeping  charges  against  one  and  all.  If 
Jews  hope  for  consideration  and  acceptance  on  the  ground  of  their  possession  of  the 
book,  they  were  entirely  mistaken,  for  they  were  simply  custodians  of  their  own  con- 
demnation. And,  indeed,  this  is  one  of  the  wonders  of  the  world,  that  a  literature 
which  is  so  fiiithful  with  guilty  men,  that  is  always  knocking  down  their  self-righteous- 
ness, and  flattering  them  never,  should,  notwithstanding,  be  so  popular  among  them. 
The  severest  censor  of  all  has,  nevertheless,  become  the  most  revered.  It  is  in  this 
light  a  great  encouragement  to  all  who  have  the  desire  to  be  faithful  with  their  fellows, 
that  faithfulness  will  sooner  or  later  be  appreciated  I 

III.  No   HOPB   CAN   OONSEQUBNTLT   BE   PLACED  IN   HITMAN   MERIT.       (Ver.    19.)      The 

severe  judgment  expressed  in  the  Jewish  Law  is  not  meant  merely  for  heathens,  but 


OB.  m.  1—31.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  105 

especially  for  Jews  who  had  the  Law,  in  order  that  every  mouth  might  he  stopped,  and 
all  the  world  brought  In  guilty  before  God.  By  the  deeds  of  the  Law,  consequently, 
no  flesh  need  expect  to  be  justified  in  God's  sight.  One  unvarying  tale  it  has  been  of 
guilt  and  condemnation.  All  notion  of  merit  must,  consequently,  be  cast  to  the  winds. 
Now,  this  is  the  greatest  serrice  which  can  he  rendered  to  any  .soul.  If  we  compare 
Phil.  iii.  7,  8,  we  shall  see  that  the  idea  of  merit  cost  the  Apostle  Paul  many  painful 
years.  He  was  going  about  to  establish  his  own  righteousness,  by  asserting  his  pure 
Jewish  descent  and  his  ceremonial  obedience  and  his  headlong  zeal ;  and  he  was  under 
the  delusion  that  by  such  a  record  he  could  claim  as  a  just  right  acceptance  and  honour 
before  Gtod.  But  the  moment  he  met  his  risen  Saviour  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  he 
saw  that  all  these  self-righteous  years  were  lost,  and  that  "  merit "  had  only  kept  him 
away  from  Christ.  In  the  very  same  way,  anxious  souls  are  kept  oftentimes  away 
from  Christ  by  the  delusion  that  they  can  render  themselves,  somehow,  more  acceptable 
unto  him.  Let  us  bless  God  when  he  annihilates  our  delusions  and  leads  us  clear  of  all 
fancied  merit.  It  is  down  in  the  dust  of  guilt  and  felt  unworthiness  that  we  are  sure 
to  receive  our  gracious  exaltation. 

rV.  Bt  the  Law  is  the  knowlbdob  of  sin.  (Ver.  20.)  The  Jews  took  the  cere- 
monial law  as  a  law  of  life,  and  by  keeping  little  rites  and  ceremonies — the  more,  they 
imagined,  the  better — ^they  thought  they  could  earn  the  Divine  favour  and  glory.  Had 
they  looked  into  the  ceremonies  with  proper  care,  they  would  have  seen  in  those  given 
by  Moses  a  constant  note  of  condemnation.  The  moral  Law,  besides,  with  its  magnifi- 
cent ideal  and  standard,  only  intensified  the  sense  of  guilt  in  the  soul  of  the  thoui;htful 
worshipper.  In  consequence  of  human  sin,  the  Law  ceases  to  be  a  way  of  life,  and 
becomes  a  tremendous  indictment  and  condemnation.  It  is  this  use  of  the  Law  which 
we  are  to  recognize.  It  is,  then,  a  most  wholesome  revealer  of  our  real  and  lost  con- 
dition. It  drives  us  out  of  our  refuges  of  lies  and  fancied  merit,  that  we  may  betake 
ourselves  to  Christ  alone.  It  is  the  light  which  exposes  the  dark  chambers  of  our 
souls,  and  brings  us  to  conviction  and  repentance.  Let  us  make  the  proper  use  of  the 
Law,  and  it  will,  as  a  schoolmaster,  bring  us  to  Christ,  that  we  may  be  justified  by 
faith.  It  will  lead  us  to  see  that  until  Christ  came  there  was  no  real  merit  in  the  world 
on  which  God  could  look  with  complacency.  Only  when  Jesus  allied  himself  with  the 
race  was  the  outlook  on  humanity  in  any  wise  redeemed. — B.  M.  E. 

Vers.  21 — 31. — Justification  through  faith  in  Christ.  The  design  of  the  Law,  to 
intensify  our  sense  of  sin,  having  been  made  plain,  the  apostle,  in  the  present  paiagraph, 
proceeds  to  show  where  justification  comes  from.  It  does  not  come  from  the  Law  ;  for 
the  Law  can  only  give  us  condemnation.  It  comes  from  a  source  foretold  in  "  the  Law 
and  the  prophets" — from  Jesus  Christ,  our  Propitiation.  And  more  than  justification, 
as  we  shall  now  see,  proceeds  from  this  marvellous  source.  Three  leading  thoughts  are 
presented  in  this  passage. 

I.  Ante-Christian  sin  was  jitstlt  passed  by  on  the  geouhd  of  Christ's 
PROMISED  PROPITIATION.  The  picture  the  apostle  gives  us  of  the  universal  depravity 
and  guilt  of  mankind  suggests  the  inquiry — How  did  God  deal  with  it?  And  one 
undeniable  fact  was  that  in  Old  Testament  times  man's  wickedness  was  in  many  cases 
"  passed  by."  Instead  of  executing  speedy  vengeance  on  human  sin,  God  only  flamed 
forth  upon  it  occasionally,  and  during  the  intervening  periods,  or  in  the  other  places 
he  seemed  to  "wink  at"  the  wickedness,  and  passed  it  over  in  silence.  The  result  in 
many  cases  was  this,  that  because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  was  not  executed 
speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  was  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil  (Eocles, 
viii.  11).  If  such  was  the  result  in  some  cases,  how  can  we  vindicate  God's  procedure  ? 
Now,  the  apostle's  position  in  this  passage  is  this — that  the  "  passing  by  "  of  sin,  just 
as  well  as  the  pardon  of  sin,  has  its  justification  in  the  atonement  of  Christ.  It  will 
be  well  for  us  to  consider  for  a  moment  what  is  secured  by  the  passing  by  of  ante- 
Christian  sin.  When  we  look  into  ante-Christian  history,  we  see  that,  though  God 
passed  by  a  good  deal  of  sin,  he  did  not  pass  it  all  by.  The  Deluge,  the  vengeance 
taken  on  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  the  trials  of  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  great  and 
howling  wilderness,  the  perils  in  the  conquest  of  Canaan,  the  Egyptian  and  Babylonian 
invasions  of  Palestine,  not  to  mention  other  instances,  showed  that  God  could,  when  ha 
ideased,  execute  fierce  vengeance  upon  man  for  his  sins.    But  a  Tast  amount  of  sin 


106  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  m.  1—31. 

admittedly  went  unpunished.  No»?,  "strange  as  it  may  appear,"  to  quote  from  a 
thoughtful  writer,  "  this  very  imperfection  [in  the  execution  of  justice]  seems  to  be  the 
strongest  possible  proof  that,  in  the  next  world,  vengeance  will  be  fulfilled  to  the 
utmost.  For  observe,  if  we  found  that  every  man  in  this  life  received  just  what  he 
deserved,  and  every  evil  work  always  brought  swift  punishment  along  with  it,  what 
should  we  naturally  conclude?  There  is  no  future  punishment  in  store:  I  see  nothing 
wanting ;  every  man  has  already  received  the  due  reward  of  his  works ;  everything  is 
already  complete,  and,  therefore,  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  in  the  next  world.  Or  if, 
on  the  other  hand,  there  were  no  punishment  visited  upon  sin  at  all  in  the  world,  we 
might  be  inclined  to  say, '  Tush  I  God  hath  forgotten ; '  he  never  interferes  amongst 
us ;  we  have  no  proof  of  his  hatred  of  sin,  or  of  his  determination  to  punish  it ;  he  is 
gone  away  far  from  us,  and  has  left  us  to  follow  our  own  wills  and  imaginations.  So 
that  if  sentence  were  either  perfectly  executed  upon  earth,  or  not  executed  at  dB,  we 
might  have  some  reason  for  saying  that  there  was  a  chance  of  none  in  a  future  world. 
But  now  it  is  imperfectly  executed ;  just  so  much  done,  as  to  say,  '  You  are  watched, — 
my  eye  is  upon  you ;  I  neither  slumber  nor  sleep ;  and  my  vengeance  slumbereth  not.' 
And  yet,  at  the  same  time,  there  is  so  little  done,  that  a  man  has  to  look  into  eternity 
for  the  accomplishment."  *  If  God,  by  passing  over  ante-Christian  sin,  provided  a  chief 
argument  for  a  world  and  judgment  to  come,  then  we  can  see  how  he  could  justly  pass 
by  the  sin  when  he  had  promised  in  the  Law  and  the  prophets  a  propitiation.  It  is  a 
difBculty  with  some  to  see  exactly  how  "  Christ  tasted  death  for  every  man,"  even  for 
those  who  will  not  accept  of  pardon.  But  the  respite,  more  or  less  lengthy,  which  all 
sinners  enjoy  before  the  execution  of  deserved  vengeance  upon  them,  is  owing  to  Christ's 
propitiation.  God  can  justly  stay  his  hand,  since  the  atoning  sacrifice  has  been 
secured.  In  view  of  the  promised  propitiation,  in  ante-Christian  times  God's  righteous- 
ness was  vindicated  in  passing  by  the  sins  of  men  and  postponing  their  punishment. 
God's  justice  was  provided  for,  while  he  indulged  his  forbearance  and  passed  over  the 
sins  of  men. 

II.   JnSTIPIOATION  WAS  ALSO   EXTENDED   TO  FAITH   IN   THE  PBOPITIATION  OF  ChRIST. 

Not  only  does  Christ's  propitiation  justify  the  Divine  forbearance  (ver.  25),  as  we  have 
just  seen,  but  it  also  justifies  the  pardon  and  acc&ptance  of  the  believer.  By  trusting 
in  the  propitiation  of  Christ,  we  find  ourselves  justified  from  all  things,  from  which  we 
could  not  be  justified  by  the  Law  of  Moses.  The  state  of  the  case,  as  Paul  here  puts  it, 
is  this.  There  is  no  difference  between  Jew  and  Gentile  as  far  as  condemnation  is  con- 
cerned. We  are  all  condemned,  for  we  all  sinned  {^fuxprov  is  the  aoiist,  and  refers  to 
a  previous  act,  and  this  was,  doubtless,  man's  fall  in  Eden),  and  were  destitute  of 
God's  glory.  But  we  come  to  see  in  Jesus  Christ  a  divinely  appointed  and  promised 
"  propitiation  "  (iXoa-r^piov),  not  surely  a  mere  "  mercy-seat,"  but  an  "  atoning  sacri- 
fice," in  whose  shed  blood  we  can  trust  (Siet  Trjs  rla-Teas  4y  rf  ofrroC  at/tan) ;  and  on  the 
ground  of  the  satisfaction  thus  rendered  to  Divine  justice  by  a  Divine  Redeemer,  God 
can  be  just,  and  at  the  same  time  justify  the  believer  in  Jesus.  "  Perhaps,"  says  Shedd, 
in  his  '  Critical  and  Doctrinal  Commentary,'  "  the  force  of  the  middle  voice  should  be 
insisted  upon :  '  God  set  forth  for  himself.'  The  atonement  of  Christ  is  a  se^-satis- 
faction  for  the  Triune  God.  It  meets  the  requirements  of  that  Divine  nature  which  is 
equally  in  each  Person.  'God  hath  reconciled  us  to  himself  Qavrf)'  (2  Cor.  v.  18, 
19  ;  Col.  i.  20).  In  the  work  of  vicarious  atonement,  the  Godhead  is  both  subject  and 
object,  active  and  passive.  God  holds  the  claims,  and  God  satisfies  the  claims ;  he  ia 
displeased,  and  he  propitiates  the  displeasure ;  he  demands  the  atonement,  and  he  pro- 
vides the  atonement."  And  here  we  should  be  very  clear  about  the  perfectly  gratuitout 
character  of  our  justification.  We  are  justified  "  freely  "  (SupAr)  by  way  of  gift,  as 
a  matter  of  pure  grace,  our  only  possible  relation  to  it  being  gratitude  for  a  free  gift. 
To  trust  in  our  propitiation,  or  rather  in  our  Propitiator,  is  no  more  a  merit  than  it 
it  is  for  a  beggar  to  hold  out  his  hand  for  alms.  We  do  Christ  the  greatest  injustice, 
we  deny  him  his  rights,  so  long  as  we  refuse  to  trust  him.  Our  pardon  and  acceptance 
as  believers,  therefore,  are  granted  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ. 

IIL   No   BOASTING  CAN   BE  BUILT  ON  THE  LAW  OF   FAITH.       (VcrS.  27 — 31.)      Grattll- 

touB  justification,  the  apostle  proceeds  next  to  show,  excludes  all  boasting.    As  we  have 

seen,  we  have  no  merit  before  the  Law,  but  stand  condemned.    We  escape  condemnation 

>  Wolfe's  '  Bemains,'  6th  edit.,  pp.  825,  S26. 


dH.  IV.  1—25.]    The  El^lSTLE  OP  PAtJL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


107 


by  1  {gratuitous  justification  extended  to  us  on  the  ground  of  our  Redeemer's  merits. 
Our  faith  in  this  loving,  self-sacrificing  Redeemer  is  only  giving  him  his  due  I  All  who 
accept  of  justification,  therefore,  on  these  terms  are  excluded  by  this  "  law  of  faith  " 
from  boasting.  We  realize  that  we  must  make  our  boast  only  in  the  Lord.  He  ig  the 
sole  ground  of  our  confidence.  The  "deeds  of  the  Law  "  do  not  enter  into  the  question 
of  our  justification ;  good  works  come  in  the  Christian  life  as  the  effect  of  our  pardon 
and  acceptance ;  we  are  "  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,  which  God  hath 
before  ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  them  "  (Eph.  ii.  10).  Jew  and  Gentile  have 
alike,  therefore,  to  accept  of  justification  as  God's  free  gift  through  the  propitiation  of 
Christ,  and  as  grateful  penitents  to  set  about  proving  our  gratitude  through  suitable 
good  works.  The  Law  is  thus  established,  first,  through  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Jesus ; 
and,  secondly,  through  the  new  obedience  of  the  grateful  and  lowly  minded  believer. 
The  magnificent  plan  of  salvation,  so  far  from  proving  any  illegality,  is  entirely  in  the 
interests  of  law  and  order.'  What  it  secures  is  a  mighty  multitude  of  meek  and  lowly 
men,  each  one  of  whom  feels  laid  under  everlasting  obligation  through  the  gratuitous 
pardon  and  acceptance  he  has  received  through  Christ,  and  bound  in  consequence  to  do 
all  he  can  to  prove  how  grateful  he  ig.  May  we  all  belong  to  this  self-emptied  and 
low]/  minded  company  1 — R.  M.  E. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Vers.  1 — 25. — (5)  Abraham  himself  shown 
fo  have  been  justified  by  faith,  and  not  by 
worlcs,  believers  being  his  true  heirs. 

The  main  points  of  the  argument  may 
be  summarized  thus  :  When  Abraham  ob- 
tained a  blessing  to  himself  and  to  his  seed 
for  ever,  it  was  by  faith,  and  not  by  works, 
that  he  is  declared  to  have  been  justified  so 
as  to  obtain  it.  Thus  the  promise  to  his 
seed,  as  well  as  to  himself,  rested  on  the 
principle  of  justification  by  faith  only. 
The  Law,  of  which  the  principle  was  es- 
lentially  different,  could  not,  and  did  not, 
in  itself  fulfil  that  promise;  and  that  its 
fulfilment  was  not  dependent  on  circum- 
eision,  or  confined  to  the  circumcised,  is 
further  shown  by  the  fact  that  it  was  before 
his  own  circumcision  that  he  received  the 
blessing  and  the  promise.  Hence  the  seed 
intended  in  the  promise  was  his  spiritual 
seed,  who  are  of  faith  such  as  bis  was ;  and 
in  Christ,  offering  justification  through 
faith  to  all,  the  promise  is  now  fulfilled. 

Ver.  1 ^What  then  shall  we  say  that 

Abraham  our  father  according  to  the  flesh 
hath  found?  The  connection,  denoted  by 
oSy,  with  the  preceding  argument  is  rather 
with  vers.  27,  28  of  ch.  iii.,  than  with  its 
concluding  words,  v6no»  iarivoniv.     This 


appears,  not  only  from  the  drift  of  ch.  iv., 
but  also  from  tlie  word  Ka.vxnii.a  in  ver.  2, 
connecting  the  thought  with  irov  oSy  fi 
Kaixv<riS!  in  ch.  iii.  27.  The  line  of 
thought  is,  in  the  first  place,  this:  We 
have  said  that  all  human  glorying  is  shut 
out,  and  that  no  man  can  be  justified 
except  by  faith :  how,  then  (it  is  important 
to  inquire),  was  it  with  Abraham  our  great 
progenitor?  Did  not  he  at  least  earn  the 
blessing  to  his  seed  by  the  merit  of  his 
works  ?  Had  not  he,  on  that  ground,  whereof 
to  glory  ?  No,  not  even  he ;  Scripture,  in 
what  it  says  of  him,  distinctly  asserts  the 
contrary.  There  is  uncertainty  in  this  verse 
as  to  whether  "acuording  to  the  flesh" 
(kutb  adpKo)  is  to  be  connected  with  "  our 
father"  or  with  "hath  found."  Readings 
vary  in  their  arrangement  of  the  words.  The 
Textus  Reoeptus  has  Ti  ovv  epov/iev  'A$paiin 
rhv  irarepa  fi/iciv  evpriKevai  KaT&  aapxa.  But 
the  great  preponderance  of  authority  is  in 
favour  of  eipriKeyai  'hfipaku  rhv  Irpoirdropa 
TIIJi&v^  Kvrh,  adpKa.  The  first  of  these  readings 
requires  the  connection  of  Karck  ffdpxa  with 
evpriKfvai ;  the  second  allows  it,  but  suggests 
the  other  connection.  Theodoret,  among 
the  aucients,  connecting  with  evprjKevat,  ex- 
plains Karh  irdpKa  thus :  "  What  righteous- 
ness, of  Abraham's,  wrought  before  he  be- 
lieved God,  did  we  ever  hear  of?"  Calvin 
suggests,  as  the  meaning  of  the  phrase 
(though  himself  inclining  to  the  connection 
with  irpoirdropa), "  naturaliter  vel  ex  seipso." 
Bull,  similarly  ('Harmonia  Apostolica,' 
•Disputatio  Posterior,'  o.  xii.  14—17),  "by 


•  See  a  fine  sermon  on  the  "  Union  of  Justice  and  Grace  in  God,"  in  Woolsey's  '  Religion 
of  the  Present  and  of  the  Future,'  No.  x. ;  also  a  fine  discourse  at  a  Reformation  Festivkl 
by  Auberleu,  in  his  '  Das  Geheimnisg  Gottes  in  Ohristo,'  ss.  63 — ^76. 


108 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [on.  iv.  1—25. 


his  natural  powers,  without  the  grace  of 
God."  Alford,  following  Meyer,  says  that 
Karck  aifKa  is  in  contrast  to  /caret  trveiiia, 
and  that  it "  refers  to  that  department  of  our 
being  from  which  spring  works,  in  contrast 
with  that  in  which  is  the  exercise  of  faith." 
Difficulty  is  avoided  if  (as  is  the  most 
natural  inference  from  the  best  authenti- 
cated reading)  we  take  /cari  adpxa  in  con- 
nection with  ndrepa  or  jrpoirdTopa,  in  the 
■ense  of  our  forefather  in  the  way  of  natural 
descent,  the  question  being  put  from  the 
Jewish  standpoint ;  and  this  in  distinction 
from  the  other  conception  of  descent  from 
Abraham,  according  to  which  all  the  faithful 
are  called  his  children  (cF.  ch.  i.  3 ;  ix.  3,  5, 
8 ;  1  Cor.  x.  18).  Among  the  ancients 
Ohrysostom  and  Theophylact  take  this  view. 
For  the  import  of  eiipjixsyai,  cf  Luke  i.  80 
(eSpej  x'^P"'  "■"pi  T^  ®f#)  "nd  Heb.  ix.  12 
(^alwviav  Kirpatffiv  evpdfievos). 

Ver.  2. — For  if  Abraham  was  justified  by 
works,  he  hath  whereof  to  gloiy;  but  not 
before  God.  Many  commentators  take  this 
verse  to  imply  that,  even  if  he  was  justified 
by  works,  he  still  had  no  ground  of  glorying 
before  Oo'd,  though  he  might  have  before 
men.  But  the  drift  of  the  whole  argument 
being  to  uhow  that  he  was  not  justified  by 
works  at  all,  this  interpretation  can  hardly 
stand.  "Not  before  God"  must  therefore 
have  reference  to.  the  whole  of  the  preceding 
sentence,  in  the  sense,  "  It  was  not  so  in  the 
sight  of  God."  Before  God  (as  appears  from 
tlie  text  to  be  quoted)  he  had  not  whereof 
to  glory  on  the  ground  of  being  justified  by 
works,  and  therefore  it  follows  that  it  was 
not  by  works  that  he  was  justified. 

Ver.  3. — For  what  saith  the  Soriptnrel 
Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  reckoned 
unto  him  for  righteonsness.  This  notable 
text  (Gen.  xv.  6),  declaring  the  ground  of 
Abraliam's  acceptance,  is  similarly  quoted 
in  the  cognate  passage,  Gal.  iii.  6.  It  has 
a  peculiar  cogency  in  the  general  argument 
from  being  in  connection  with,  and  with 
reference  to,  one  of  the  Divine  promises  to 
Abraham  of  an  unnumbered  seed;  so  that 
it  may  be  understood  with  an  extended 
application  to  those  who  were  to  inherit  the 
blessin?,  as  well  as  to  the  "father  of  the 
faithful,"  and  so  declaring  the  principle 
of  justification  for  all  the  "  children  of  the 
promise."  Further,  it  would  be  peculiarly 
telling  as  addressed  to  the  Jews,  who  made 
mch  a  point  of  their  descent  from  Abraham 
•s  the  root  ui'  all  their  position  of  privilege 
(ct  Ps.  ov.  6;  Isa.  xll.  8;  li.  2;  Matt  iii. 
9:  Luke  iii.  8;  John  viii.  89).  The  two 
rigniflcant  expressions  in  it  are  Mirretiirt 
(denoting  faith,  not  works)  and  IXoylaBri  ci'j. 
The  whole  phrase,  the  apostle  proceeds  to 
say,  implies  that  the  reward  spoken  of  was 
sot  earned,  but  granted^ 


Vers.  4,  S. — Now  to  him  that  woiketh  is 
the  reward  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but  of 
debt  (literally,  acoording  to  grace,  but  accord- 
ing  to  the  dtbt,  i.e.  according  to  what  is 
due).  But  to  him  that  worketh  not,  but 
believeth  on  him  that  justifleth  the  ungodly, 
his  faith  is  reckoned  for  righteonsness.  The 
expression,  "  him  that  worketh  "  (t#  Ipyci- 
(ofiivif),  evidently  means  him  that  works 
with  a  view  to  a  reward  which  he  can  claim ; 
or,  as  Luther  explains  it,  "  one  who  deals  in 
works ; "  or,  as  we  might  say  with  the  same 
signification,  "  the  worker."  (For  a  like  use 
of  the  present  participle,  cf.  QaL  t.  8,  t$ 
irepnenvoii.iv!p.)  So  also  in  ver.  5,  t$  /ii 
ipyaQoptiv^  means  one  who  does  not  so  work. 
Thus  there  is  here  no  denial  of  the  necessity 
of  good  works.  It  is  the  principle  only  of  justi- 
fication that  is  in  view.  "  Neque  enira  fidelea 
vult  esse  ignavos;  sed  tantum  mercenariaa 
esse  vetat,  qui  »  Deo  quicquam  reposoant 
quasi  jure  debitum  "  (Calvin).  One  view  of 
the  moaning  of  t$  ipya(oii.4vtp  is  that  it  ia 
equivalent  to  t^  ipydr'p,  being  meant  as  an 
illustration,  thus :  The  workman's  wage  is 
due  to  him,  and  not  granted  as  a  favour  (so 
Alford).  But  this  notion  does  not  suit  the 
r^  fii)  ipya^ofievip  in  the  following  verse. 
The  strong  word  d(rcj3i)  ("  ungodly  ")  is  not 
to  be  understood  as  designating  Abraham 
himself,  the  proposition  being  a  general  one. 
Kor  does  it  imply  that  continued  d<r40eia 
is  consistent  with  justification;  only  that 
even  the  dffej8e?s  are  justified  through  faith 
on  their  repentance  and  amendment  (of.  oh. 
V.  6,  inrep  dffePSjv  diredave). 

Vers.  6 — 8. — Even  as  David  also  describeth 
the  blessedness  (\Fyei  rhv  pLaxapuriikv.  The 
noun  means  properly  a  declaring  hleeied 
— beatitatis  prsedicatio — "  Eloquitur  Illnd 
beati  proeconiam"  (Bengel).  We  might 
render,  "  David  tells  of  the  blessing  on  the 
man,"  etc.)  of  the  man  unto  whom  God 
reckoneth  Q^oyi(eTat,  as  before.  Impntefh 
in  the  Authorized  Yersion  suggesia  the 
idea  of  a  diflerent  word  being  used) 
righteousness  apart  from  works,  saying. 
Blessed  are  they  whose  iniquities  are  for- 
given, and  whose  sins  are  covered.  Blessed 
is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will  not 
reckon  (\oylirriTai,  as  before,  and  so 
throughout  the  whole  passage)  sin  (Ps. 
xxxii.  1,  2).  The  introductton  of  this 
testimony  of  David  to  the  same  principle 
of  justification  serves  not  only  to  explain 
it  further,  but  also  to  show  that  under  th« 
Law  too  it  continued  to  be  recognized ;  and 
by  David  himself,  the  typical  king  and 
psalmist  under  the  legal  dispensation.  Bat 
the  argument  from  Abraham  is  not  discon- 
tinued, being  resumed  in  the  next  verse, 
and  continued  to  the  end  of  the  chapter. 
If  it  be  said  that  tliese  verses  from  Ps.  xxxii. 
do   not  in    themselves    declare  a  general 


«W.  IT.  1—26.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  B0MAN8. 


109 


principle  applicable  to  all,  but  only  the 
blessedneas  to  sinnert  of  haying  tlieii  eins 
forgiyen,  it  inay  be  replied,  firstly,  that  the 
way  in  which  the  Terses  are  intiodnced 
does  not  require  more  to  be  implied.  All 
that  need  be  meant  is  that  the  ground  of 
justification  exemplified  in  Abraham's  case 
is  the  same  as  is  spoken  of  by  David  as  still 
available  for  man,  and  crowned  with  blessing. 
But,  secondly,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  tUese 
verses  represent  and  suggest  the  general 
tenor  of  the  Book  of  Psalms,  in  which 
human  righteousness  is  never  asserted  as 
constituting  a  claim  to  reward.  "  My  trust 
is  in  thy  mercy,"  is,  on  the  contrary,  the 
ever-recurring  theme.  St.  Paul's  quotations 
from  the  Old  Testament  are  frequently 
given  as  suggestive  of  the  general  scriptural 
teaching  on  the  subject  in  hand,  rather  than 
as  exhaustive  proofs  in  tliemselves. 

Vers.  9,  10. — Cometh  this  blessedness 
then  (properlj,  ie  then  this  hletsing)  upon 
the  oircomoision  only,  or  upon  the  unoir- 
onmoision  also  1  For  we  say  that  faith  was 
reckoned  to  Abraham  for  righteouGness. 
How  (i.e.,  as  the  context  shows,  wnder  what 
circwmetances)  was  it  then  reckoned  f  when 
he  was  is  oirenmoision,  or  in  nnoir- 
cumoisionl  Not  in  circumcision,  but  in 
nncircnmcision.  Faith,  and  not  works, 
having  been  shown  to  be  the  principle  of 
4,braham's  justification,  and  those  who 
Were  under  the  Mosaic  Law,  represented 
by  David,  having  been  seen  to  have  shared 
the  blessing  of  being  so  justified,  the  ques- 
tion still  remains,  whether  it  may  not  be 
confined  to  them  only,  or  to  Abraham's 
circumcised  descendants  only.  That  this 
cannot  be  is  shown  in  two  ways :  firstly 
(vers.  10 — 13),  from  the  fact  that  Abiaham 
was  himself  wncircwmcised  when  he  was 
spoken  of  as  being  thus  justified,  so  that 
neither  the  capability  nor  the  inheritance 
of  such  jnstification  can  be  viewed  as 
dependent  on  circumcision;  and,  secondly 
(vers.  13 — 16),  it  is  argued  that  the  Law 
oonld  not  appropriate  the  privilege  to  his 
carnal  descendants,  the  very  principle  of 
law  being  the  opposite  of  that  on  which 
Abraham  is  said  to  have  been  justified. 
Thus  the  leed,  innumerable  as  the  stars,  to 
be  understood  as  inheritors  of  the  promise 
made  to  him,  and  sharers  in  liis  blessing, 
are  not  his  circumcised  descendants,  but  a 
spiritual  seed — they  which  are  of  faith  being 
the  true  children  of  Abraham  (Gal.  iii.  7). 

Vers.  11, 12. — ^And  he  received  the  sign  of 
eiroumoision,  a  seal  of  the  righteousness 
of  the  faith  which  he  had  in  nncircumoision 
(this  was  all  that  oircumcision  was — a 
visible  sign  and  seal  to  his  own  descendants 
of  the  righteousness  that  is  of  faith ;  but  not 
confining  it  to  them,  or  in  itself  conferring 
it)    that  he  might  be  the  father  of  aU  them 


that  believe,  though  they  he  in  nnoironm- 
cision,  that  righteousness  might  be  reckoned 
unto  them  also.  And  the  father  of  ciionm- 
oision  to  them  who  are  not  of  circumcision 
only,  but  who  also  walk  in  the  steps  of  that 
faith  of  our  father  Abraham  which  he  had 
in  uncg:onmoisiou.  The  intention  of  ver,  12 
is  to  express  that,  though  the  faithful  who 
are  not  of  Israel  are  Abraham's  children,  yet 
his  circumcised  descendants  have  not  lost 
■their  privilege.  They  are  already  his  chil- 
dren according  to  the  flesh,  and  his  spiritual 
children  too,  if  they  walk  in  the  steps  of 
his  faith  (of.  John  viii.  37,  "I  know  that 
ye  are  Abraham's  seed,"  compared  with 
ver.  89,  "If  ye  were  Abraham's  children, 
ye  would  do  the  works  of  Abraham  "). 

What  now  follows  is  to  show  (as  above 
explained)  that  the  Law  could  not  be  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  to  Abraham,  or 
appropriate  its  blessing  to  the  Jews. 

Vers.  13—15. — For  not  through  law  was 
the  promise  to  Abraham  or  to  his  seed  that 
he  should  be  the  heir  of  the  world,  but 
through  the  righteousness  of  faith.  For  if 
they  which  are  of  law  be  heirs,  faith  is 
made  void,  and  the  promise  made  of  none 
effect.  For  the  Law  worketh  vrrath :  for 
where  no  law  is,  neither  is  there  trans- 
gression. The  point  of  the  argument  is 
that  the  principle  of  law  is  essentially 
different  from  that  on  which  Abraham  was 
justified,  and  which  is  hence  to  be  under- 
stood in  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  to 
him  and  his  seed.  How  this  is  so  is 
shortly  intimated  in  ver.  X5,  the  idea  being 
more  fully  expounded  in  ch.  vii.  The  idea 
is  (as  has  been  already  explained)  that  law 
simply  d^darei  what  is  riglit,  and  requires 
conformity  to  it;  it  does  not  give  either 
power  to  obey,  or  atonement  for  not  obeying. 
Hence,  in  itself,  it  worketh,  not  righteous- 
ness, but  uirath ;  for  man  becomes  fully  liable 
to  wrath  when  he  comes  to  know,  through 
law,  the  difference  between  right  and  wrong 
(of.  John  ix.  41,  "  If  ye  were  blind,  ye  should 
have  no  sin").  Exactly  the  same  view  of 
the  impossibility  of  the  Mosaic  Law  being 
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  to  Abraham 
is  found  in  OaL  iii.,  where  also  the  real 
purpose  of  the  Law,intervening  thus  between 
the  promise  and  its  fulfilment,  is  further 
explained.  The  expression  in  ver.  13, 
"  that  he  should  be  the  heir  of  the  world," 
has  reference  to  the  ultimate  scope  of  the 
Abrahamic  promises  (see  Gen.  xii.  2,  3; 
xiii.  14—16;  xt.  5,  6,  18;  xvii.  2—9; 
xviii.  18;  xxii.  17,  18).  Now,  it  is  true  that 
in  some  of  these  promises  the  langaage 
used  seems  to  denote  no  more  than  the 
temporal  possession  by  Israel  of  the  pro- 
mised land,  with  dominion  (actually  realized 


no 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANa    [oh.  tv.  1—25. 


under  David  and  Solomon)  over  the  whole 
conntry  from  tlie  Mediterranean  to  the 
Euphiates,  aa  in  Gen.  xiii.  14,  15;  %v.  18, 
etc.  But  their  full  scope  transoends  any 
such  limited  fulfilment,  as  wliere  it  is  said 
that  the  promised  seed  should  be  as  the 
Btars  of  heaven,  and  as  the  dust  of  the 
earth  that  cannot  be  numbered,  and  that  in 
it  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should  be 
blessed.  The  prophets  accordingly  recog- 
nized a  far  larger  ultimate  fulfilment  in 
their  frequent  pictures  of  the  Messiah's 
universal  dominion ;  and  there  was  no  need 
for  the  apostle  to  prove  here  what  the  Jews 
already  understood.  The  only  difference 
between  the  view  current  among  them  and 
his  would  be  that  they  would  mostly  have 
in  view  a  universal  worldly  sovereignty 
with  its  local  centre  on  the  throne  of  David 
at  Jerusalem,  while  he  interpreted  spiri- 
tually, seeing  beyond  the  outward  frame- 
work of  prophetic  visions  to  the  ideal  they 
imply.  "Seres  mundi  idem  est  quod  pater 
omnium  gentium,  benedictionem  accipien- 
tium.  Totus  mundus  promissus  est  Abrahee 
et  semini  ejus  per  totam  mundura  conjunc- 
tim.  Abrahamo  obtigit  terra  Canaan,  et 
sic  aliis  alia  pars;  atque  corporalia  lunt 
specimen  epirttunlium.  Ohristus  heres 
mundi,  et  omnium  (Heb.  i.  2 ;  ii.  5 ;  Bev. 
si.  15),  et  qui  in  eum  oredunt  Abrahaa 
exemplo  (Matt.  v.  5)  "  (Bengel).  It  is  to  be 
observed  that,  though  Abraham  himself  in 
Ver.  13  is  spoken  of  as  "the  heir  of  the 
world,"  yet  the  preceding  expression,  "to 
Abraham  or  to  his  seed,"  sufficiently  inti- 
mates that  it  is  in  his  seed,  identified  with 
him,  that  he  is  conceived  as  so  inheriting. 

Vers.  16, 17.— Therefore  it  is  of  iaith,  that 
it  may  be  according  to  grace  (kotA  x^P"''  ®8 
in  ver.  4) ;  to  the  end  the  promise  may  ha 
sure  to  all  the  seed ;  not  to  that  only  which 
is  of  the  Law,  but  to  that  also  which  is  of 
the  faith  of  Abraham,  who  is  the  father  of 
all,  (as  it  is  written,  A  father  of  many 
nations  have  I  made  thee,)  before  him  whom 
be  heUeved,  who  q,uickeneth  the  dead,  and 
caUeth  the  things  that  are  not  as  though 
they  were.  Ver.  16  introduces  no  new 
thought,  being  but  a  Bumming  up  of  what 
has  been  said,  except  that,  in  ver.  17,  the 
text  Gen.  xvii.  5  is  adduced  in  support  of 
the  extended  sense  in  which  "  the  seed  of 
Abraham  "  has  been  understood.  In  ver.  17, 
too,  tlie  thought  is  introduced  of  how  Abra- 
ham evinced  his  faith ;  and  this  with  a  view 
of  showing  it  to  have  been  in  essence  the 
same  as  the  justifying  faith  of  Christians. 

Vers.  18 — 21. — Who  against  hope  in  hope 
beUeved  (irop'  i\TriSa  eV  4\iriSt—  an  oxymo- 
ron. For  a  similar  use  of  It  ^KiriSi,  see 
1  Cor  ix.  10 ;  also  below,  oh.  v.  2.  Its  position 
in  the  Authorized  Version  might  suggest  its 
dependence  on  "believed,"  which  is  gram- 


matically possible  (cf.  ch.  ix.  33 ;  x.  11),  but 
unallowable  here,  since  hope  cannot  well  be 
regarded  as  the  object  of  belief)  to  the  end 
he  might  become  the  father  of  many  nations, 
according  to  that  which  was  spoken,  So  shall 
thy  seed  be  (Gen.  xv.  5,  viz.  "  as  the  stars  "). 
And  being  not  weak  in  faith,  he  considered 
not  («.e.  paid  no  regard  fa  as  a  hindrance  to 
faith.  The  codices  relied  on  by  our  r.  cent 
Bevisers  omit  oi  before  /coTevctijo-cj',  and  they 
accordingly  translate,  "he  considered  bis 
own  body,"  thus  making  the  idea  to  be  that 
he  was  fully  aware  of  the  apparent  impossi- 
bility of  his  having  a  son,  but  believed  not- 
withstanding. But  the  reading  of  the  Textus 
Beceptus  has  good  support,  and  especially 
that  of  the  Greek  Fathers,  and  gives  the 
best  sense)  his  own  body  now  dead  (already 
deadened—vsveKpc^ftevov — i.e.  with  respect  to 
virility.  So,  with  the  same  reference,  Heb. 
xi.  12),  when  he  was  about  an  hundred  years 
old,  neither  yet  the  deadness  of  Sarah'a 
womb ;  but  he  staggered  not  at  the  promiM 
of  God  through  unbelief,  but  was  strong 
(rather,  teas  strengthened)  in  faith,  giving 
glory  to  Ood;  and  being  folly  persuaded 
that  what  he  had  promised  he  was  able  also 
to  perform.  With  regard  to  the  construction 
of  ver.  20,  we  may  observe  that,  though  in 
the  Authorized  Version,  which  is  followed 
above,  the  prepositions  put  before  "un- 
belief" and  "faith"  are  varied,  both  wordg 
are  datives  without  a  preposition  in  the 
Greek,  and  apparently  with  the  same  force 
of  the  dative  in  both  cases,  the  sense  being, 
"  With  regard  to  the  promise,  etc.,  unbelief 
did  not  cause  him  to  waver  (ov  StcKpiBr)  ry 
oirKTrtcf),  hvA  faith  made  him  strong  (IveSwo- 
Ii^Bti  Tp  triffTei)."  The  purport  of  the  whole 
passage  is  to  show,  with  reference  to  Gen. 
xvii.  15 — 22;  xviii.  9 — 16,  how  Abraham's 
faith  in  the  promise  of  a  seed  through  Sarah, 
which  seemed  impossible  in  the  natural 
course  of  things,  corresponded  in  essence  to 
our  faith  in  "  him  that  raised  Jesus  our  Lord 
frOm  the  dead  "  (ver.  24).  It  was  faith  in  • 
Divine  power  above  nature,  able  to  quicken 
into  supernatural  life  that  which  humanly 
is  dead.  And  as  Abraham's  faith  in  this 
promised  birth  of  Isaac  involved  a  further 
faith  in  the  fulfilment  through  him  of  all 
the  promises,  so  our  faith  in  the  resurrection 
of  Christ  involves  faith  in  all  that  is  signified 
and  assured  to  us  thereby — in  "  the  power  of 
a  Divine  life "  in  him,  to  bring  life  out  of 
death,  to  regenerate  and  quicken  the  spiritu- 
ally dead,  and  finally  in  "  eternal  redemp- 
tion "  and  the  "  restitution  of  all  things " 
(cf.  John  iii.  6 ;  v.  25 ;  ch.  vi.  3—12 ;  1  Cor. 
ill.  21—23;  Eph.  i.  18-23;  ii.  4—8;  Bev. 
i.  18 ;  to  which  many  other  similarly  signifi- 
cant passages  might  be  added).  It  may  b* 
observed  that,  not  only  in  the  instance  here 
adduced,  but  in  his  whole  life  as  recorded  ia 


on.  IV.  1—25.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


Ill 


Oeneeis,  Abraham  stands  forth  as  an  ex- 
emplification of  habitual  faith  in  a  Divine 
order  beyond  sight,  and  trust  in  Divine  pro- 
mises. In  this  consists  the  religious  mean- 
ing of  that  record  for  us  all.  Notably  so  (as 
is  especially  set  forth  in  Heb.  xi.  17,  etc.)  in 
his  willingness  to  sacrifice  the  son  through 
whom  the  promise  was  to  be  fulfilled,  retain- 
ing still  his  faith  in  the  fulfilment. 

Vers.  22 — 25. — ^Wherefore  also  it  was 
leokoned  to  him  for  righteousness.  Now  it 
was  not  written  for  his  sake  alone,  that  it 
was  reckoned  to  him ;  bnt  for  onr  sake  also, 


to  whom  it  shall  be  reckoned,  who  believe 
on  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  onr  Lord  from 
the  dead ;  who  was  delivered  for  onr  offences, 
and  was  raised  for  onr  justification.  It  is 
to  be  observed  that  the  word  here  and  else- 
where translated  "justification"  is  Sixal- 
uoTLS,  corresponding  with  SiKaiotriyii,  The 
correspondence  is  lost  in  English.  The  Vul- 
gate preserves  it  hjjustitia  and  justificaMo; 
and  the  Douay  Version  has,  here  as  elsewhere, 
"justice"  ioiZMaioaivTt-  Bufrighteontnesa" 
expresses  the  meaning  better. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  11. —  The  fatherhood  of  Abraham.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  whole  of  this 
chapter  deals  with  Abraham — a  proof,  not  only  of  the  greatness  of  Abraham's  character, 
the  conspicuousness  of  his  position  in  the  history  of  mankind,  and  the  hold  the  grand 
figure  of  the  patriarch  possessed  of  the  imagination  of  the  apostle,  but  also  of 
Abraham's  real  importance  in  the  development  of  the  leading  ideas  of  true  religion. 
We  are  reminded  that  Abraham  was  the  father  of  many  nations — the  father  of  the 
chosen  people  Israel,  the  ancestor  of  the  Messiah,  the  promised  Seed.  But  especially 
is  it  brought  before  us  here  that  Abraham  is  the  father  of  the  faithful,  inasmuch  as  he 
afforded  an  early  and  illustrious  example  of  the  virtue  upon  which  St.  Paul  dilates  at 
length  in  this  Epistle  to  the  Bomans — the  virtue  of  faith. 

I.  Abraham  is  the  father  of  the  faithful  in  that  he  ib  an  example  of 

FAITH  IN   its   SUPBBIORITT   TO   SENSE  AND  TO  HUMAN  JUDGMENT.      The  ancestor  of  the 

Hebrew  nation  received  repeated  assurances  of  the  purpose  of  the  Eternal  with  regard 
to  himself  and  his  posterity.  There  was  no  human  likelihood  of  the  fulfilment  of  these 
assurances ;  in  themselves  they  were  opposed  to  all  reasonable  probability,  and  there 
were  special  circumstances  which  increased  a  hundredfold  their  inherent  unlikelihood. 
But  they  were,  in  Abraham's  belief,  the  assurances  of  God  himself,  and  that  Wiis 
BufiSeient  to  command  his  immediate  and  unquestioning  acceptance.  The  Divine  is 
the  proper  object  of  human  faith.  Let  a  declaration  be  from  God ;  then  it  should  be 
received  with  an  absolute  and  unhesitating  trust. 

II.  Abraham  is  the  father  of  the  faithful  in  that  his  faith  was  indepen- 
dent OF  external  bites  and  pbivileobs.  St.  Paul  lays  great  stress  upon  the  historical 
fact  that  the  exercise  of  Abraham's  faith  in  God  preceded  the  institution  of  the  sym- 
bolic rite  of  circumcision.  This  may  seem  to  us  an  immaterial  consideration;  but 
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  apostle  it  hag  great  importance.  He  is  arguing  against 
an  external,  ceremonial  view  of  religion,  such  as  was  too  customary  among  the  Jews, 
and  indeed  is  too  customary  among  all  people  through  all  time.  And  he  made  a 
"point"  when  he  brought  forward  the  fact  that  Abraham  exercised  faith  in  God 
whilst  stiU  uncircumcised;  for  this  is  a  proof  that  the  essence  of  religion  does  not 
depend  upon  external  privileges,  even  though  they  be  of  Divine  appointment.  A  lesson 
which  we  need  to  learn  to-day,  even  as  did  the  contemporaries  of  St.  Paul. 

m.  Abbahah  is  the  fatheb  of  the  faithful  inasmuch  ab  he  exhibited  thb 
poweb  of  faith  to  fossebb  the  mobal  hatubb  and  to  contbol  thb  life.  The 
patriarch  was  not  a  man  to  yield  the  assent  of  the  lips,  and  to  withhold  the  practical 
acknowledgment  which  is  the  best  proof  of  sincere  profession.  It  is  enough,  in 
support  of  this,  to  remark  that  his  whole  subsequent  life  was  affected  and  governed  by 
his  belief  of  God's  promise.  He  confessed  himself  a  pilgrim  in  the  land,  but  whilst  for 
himself  he  sought  a  heavenly  inheritance,  he  lived  as  one  persuaded  that  Canaan  was 
the  destined  property  of  his  posterity.  Faith  without  works  is  dead ;  Abraham's  faith 
was  living.  As  Christians,  we  are  called  upon,  not  only  to  believe,  but  to  live  by 
faith,  to  show  our  faith  by  our  works,  and,  if  we  believe  God's  promises,  to  give  them 
»  place  so  prominent  in  our  heart  that  they  may  sway  our  conduct  and  govern  our 
actions.  The  life  which  we  live  in  the  flesh  is  to  be  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  Gtoi. 
Only  thuA  can  we  prove  ourselves  to  be  true  children  of  £iithful  Abraham. 


112  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS.    [ot.  nr.  1— 86. 

TV.  Abraham  is  the  father  of  thb  PArrHroL  bsfeciallt  bkoavse  nr  him 
rAiTH  WAS  SHOWN  TO  BE  THE  spBiNO  OF  RiaHTEOUBNKBS.  We  are  told  by  the  apoetle 
that  Abraham's  faith  was  reckoned  to  him  for  righteousnesB.  This  doctrine  of  imputa- 
tion has  been  misunderstood,  when  it  has  been  inferred  from  the  teaching  of  the  apostle 
that,  faith  being  present,  righteousness  may  be  dispensed  with.  The  real  teaching  of 
St.  Paul  aims  at  removing  religion  from  outward  actions  to  inward  dispositions.  The 
righteousness  which  God  values  is  not  the  performance  of  services  or  the  submission 
to  rites,  so  much  as  the  pure  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.  So  for  as  what  is 
external  is  valuable,  it  is  as  an  indication  of  what  is  deep-seated  within.  Faith  brings 
the  soul  into  right  relations  with  God,  and  these  secure  habite  of  obedience  and  sub- 
jection which  display  themselves  in  the  words,  the  deeds,  and  the  course  of  moral  life 
by  which  a  man  is  judged  by  his  fellow-men. 

Ver.  18. — Rope  against  hope.  Faith  and  hope  are  allied,  though  separate,  exeroisei 
and  habits  of  created,  finite  mind.  Neither  of  the  two  is  possible  to  God,  who  is 
independent  and  eternal,  and  can  neither  confide  in  a  superior  nor  anticipate  a  future. 
Man's  highest  welfare  depends  upon  faith,  which  is  the  principle  of  a  high  and  noble 
life.  Hope  is  less  necessary,  yet  it  belongs  to  a  complete  development  of  human 
nature,  which  looks  forward  to  the  future  as  well  as  upward  to  the  unseen.  Faith 
must  have  an  object,  and  hope  must  have  a  ground.  Faith  is  in  a  person ;  hope  has 
respect  to  experience  anticipated.  If  there  be  faith  in  a  Being  who  has  given  definite 
promises,  there  will  be  hope  in  whatever  is  the  matter  of.  those  promises.  He  who 
believes  in  God  will  hopefully  expect  the  fulfilment  of  Divine  assurances. 

I.  There  is  hope  which  is  based  upon  natural  human  exferienoes.  To  some 
extent,  hope  is  a  matter  of  temperament;  circumstances  which  to  a  despondent  man 
seem  to  afford  no  gleam  of  comfort  in  looking  forward  to  the  future,  will  aronse  the 
brightest  expectations  on  the  part  of  the  man  of  sanguine  disposition.  Still,  hope  is 
often  precluded  by  the  stem  teaching  of  constant  experience;  and  a  man  would  prove 
himself  mad  if,  in  certun  circumstances,  he  should  look  forward  hopefully  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  health,  honour,  or  riches.  Abraham,  in  the  circumstances  referred  to  in  the 
context,  might  hope  for  many  blessings ;  but,  if  illumined  only  by  the  experience  of 
his  own  life  and  by  the  experience  of  preceding  generations,  he  could  not  hope  for  • 
posterity  which  should  take  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan  as  their  inheritance. 
And  we,  if  enlightened  only  by  earthly  wisdom,  could  not  venture  to  anticipate  bless- 
ings which  the  gospel,  upon  Divine  authority,  assures  to  the  believing  and  obedient. 
Human  hope  could  not  so  far  delude  us. 

II.  There  is  hope  which  is  based  upon  the  faithful  promises  of  the  Eternal. 
With  God  nothing  is  impossible ;  from  God  nothing  is  concealed.  Therefore,  when  he 
deigns  to  reveal  his  purposes  to  men,  and  when  those  purposes  are  purposes  of  mercy, 
those  to  whom  they  are  made  are  justified  in  embracing  them  and  in  acting  upon 
them.  In  the  case  of  Abraham,  that  which  human  hope  would  have  had  no  ground 
for  anticipating  was  assured  by  the  firm  and  unchanging  promises  of  the  Supreme; 
and  Divine  hope  justly  prevailed.  He  hoped  in  God  against  any  hope  or  failure  of 
hope  which  might  be  natural  to  him  as  man.  And  Abraham  did  not  hope  in  vain. 
He  embraced  and  believed  the  promises.  He  and  his  family,  "  not  having  received  the 
promises,  but  having  seen  them  and  greeted  them  fi:om  afar,  confessed  that  they  were 
strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth."  Hope  triumphed,  even  over  the  bitter  trial  con- 
nected with  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac.  Looking  forward  to  the  future  with  the  bright  and 
piercing  eye  of  hope,  our  father  Abraham  saw  the  day  of  the  Messiah,  and  he  rejoiced 
and  was  glad. 

Applioation.  Often  the  Christian,  if  reduced  to  the  limits  of  earthly  anticipations, 
might  give  way  to  discouragement  and  fear.  But  he  has  hope,  as  "  an  anchor  to  hii 
soi2,"  by  means  of  which  he  may  ride  out  the  storms  of  time.  Let  him  hope  against 
hope,  and  his  confidence  shall  be  justified,  and  his  anticipations  shall  be  realized.  His 
li  a  hope  which,  in  the  beautiful  language  of  the  Apocrypha,  is  "  full  of  immortality." 

Ver.  20. — "  Strong  in  faith.''  There  is  nothing  upon  which  men  are  more  given  to  pride 
themselves  than  upon  their  strength.  The  athlete  boasts  of  his  stoengw  of  muscle 
and  of  bodily  constitution,  the  thinker  of  his  strength  of  Imtelleot,  the  monarch  of  hi* 


OH.  w.  1—26.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  113 

strength  in  war,  the  self-confident  man  of  his  strength  of  character.  Such  boasting  is 
Tain.  Man's  estimate  of  his  own  powers  may  seem  absurd  to  other  beings ;  in  the 
presence  of  the  Eternal  and  Almighty  it  is  profane.  Well  did  the  prophet  speak  the 
familiar  words  of  warning,  "  Let  not  the  strong  man  glory  in  his  strength."  There  is 
one  respect,  however,  in  which  man  raay  be  strong.  Weak  in  body  in  the  presence  of 
natural  laws,  weak  in  mind  before  the  difSc\ilties  of  life,  man  may  nevertheless  be 
"strong  in  faith."     Here  no  limits  can  be  set;  it  is  faith  that 

"  Laughs  at  impoBsibilities, 
And  cries, '  It  shall  be  done ! ' " 

I.  Strong  faith  is  eeqoibed  by  the  exigencies  of  human  natuke  and  human 
ciROUMfcTANOES.  The  apostles  drew  their  examples  of  virtue,  of  practical  religion, 
from  the  history  of  the  fathers  of  their  nation;  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  recounts  the  triumphs  of  faith  as  apparent  in  (he  life  of  their  illustrious  pro- 
genitors ;  and  St.  Paul  in  this  passage,  with  a  view  to  encourage  his  readers  to  the 
exercise  of  a  living  and  mighty  faith,  quotes  the  example  of  Abraham,  whom  he  terms 
"  the  father  of  us  all."  Certainly,  there  seemed,  to  human  judgment,  little  likelihood 
of  the  fulfilment  of  Jehovah's  promise  to  the  patriarch  that  the  land  of  Canaan  should 
be  the  possession  of  his  seed.  There  was  an  antecedent  improbability,  so  far  as  man's 
foresight  could  penetrate.  And  there  were  special  dilficulties  in  the  family  circum- 
stances of  Abraham,  which  seemed  insuperable.  Yet,  St.  Paul  reminds  his  readers, 
Abraham  "staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God  through  unbelief;  but  was  strong  in 
faith,  giving  glory  to  God."  There  is  very  much  in  our  character  and  in  our  life 
which  can  only  be  successfully  dealt  with  by  the  exercise  of  strong  faith.  Our  sins, 
our  sorrows,  our  privations,  our  ignorance  and  uncertainty  with  regard  to  the  future, 
all  call  for  faith.  Intellectual  doubts  stand  in  the  way  of  some  men's  progress  and 
welfare;  temptations  to  worldliness  and  selfishness  are  formidable  obstacles  in  the  way 
of  others.  All  have  occasion  to  complain  that  the  light  of  nature,  of  reason,  is  some- 
times dim.  All  are  tempted  sometimes  to  discouragement  and  to  despondency.  When 
our  hearts  are  weak  and  our  knowledge  is  limited,  and  all  our  resources  fail  us,  as 
must  often  happen  in  our  human  existence,  where  shall  we  look  ?  Experience  is  at 
fault,  reason  hesitates,  man's  help  is  vain.  What  we  need  at  such  times  is  "  strong 
faith." 

II.  Strono  faith  is  justified  by  the  attributes  and  the  PROMISES  OF  God. 
Befiection  and  reason  may  teach  us  something  of  the  Supreme ;  but  the  clearest  light 
is  shed  upon  his  character  and  purposes  by  revelation;  and  it  is  in  Christ  Jesus  that  he 
has  made  himself  most  fully  known  to  us ;  for  "  he  that  hath  seen  the  Son  hath  seen 
the  Father."  If  we  have  the  assurance  that  God  is  wise  and  all-powerful,  much  of  our 
doubt  and  difficulty  will  disappear,  for  we  shall  enjoy  the  conviction  that  our  lot  is  not 
ordered  by  chance  or  fate,  but  by  an  overruling  Providence.  If  we  are  encouraged 
upon  satisfactory  authority  to  believe  that  God  is  good  and  merciful,  faithful  and  com- 
passionate, such  belief  will  relieve  us  from  many  apprehensions  aroused  by  a  feeling  of 
our  own  innumeiable  errors  and  follies.  Such  a  revelation  has  been  vouchsafed  to  us. 
It  should  ever  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  value  of  faith  depends  upon  the  object  of 
faith.  Placed  upon  feeble  and  fallible  men,  faith  may  often  fail  us ;  but  settled  and 
fixed  upon  infinite  wisdom,  righteousness,  and  love,  it  can  sustain,  direct,  and  cheer  us 
throughout  life's  pilgrimage.  To  Abraham  certain  direct  and  personal  promises  were 
given  by  God ;  »nd  Abraham's  faith  is  recorded  by  the  apostle  in  the  statement  that 
he  was  "  fully  persuaded  that  what  he  had  promised  he  was  able  to  perform."  The 
promises  given  to  mankind  through  Jesus  Christ  are  no  less  explicit,  and  are  far  more 
Interesting,  precious,  and  far-reaching.  We  may  have,  and  justly,  a  very  moderate 
measure  of  faith  in  assurances  given  to  us  by  our  fellow-men,  a  very  qualified  confi- 
dence in  themselves.  But  this  ought  not  to  be  the  case  when  the  eternal  and  faithful 
God  and  his  gracious  promises  are  in  question.  Upon  him  and  his  words  we  may 
'  build  an  absolute  trust."    "  Believe  in  God,"  says  Christ ;  "  believe  also  in  me." 

m.  Strong  faith  is  becompbnsed  in  the  bxpebibncb  of  God's  people.  It  waa 
80  in  the  case  of  Abraham,  who  became  the  father  of  many  nations,  whose  posterity 
inherited  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  to  whom  his  personal  faith  was  "imputed  for 
righteousness."    It  has  ever  been  so  with  Christians  who  have  walked,  not  by  sights 

«OMA)ia>  I 


114  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  iv.  1—26. 

but  by  faith.  Confidence  in  an  unseen,  but  ever-present,  Divine,  almighty  Helper,  has 
been  the  principle  of  every  truly  Christian  life.  It  has  brought  pardon  and  peace  to 
the  heart  of  the  penitent ;  it  has  caused  many  "  out  of  weakness  to  wax  strong ; "  it  has 
brought  light  to  those  in  darkness,  and  leading  to  those  in  perplexity,  safety  to  those 
in  danger,  comfort  to  those  in  sorrow,  and  hope  to  those  who  were  ready  to  perish. 
"  This  is  the  victory  which  overcometh  the  world,  even  your  faith."  Nor  is  this  inex- 
plicable ;  for  by  faith  wu  lay  hold  of  the  strength  that  is  irresistible  and  invincible, and 
the  might  of  the  believer  is  not  his  own,  but  God's. 

Ver.  21. — Promise  and  performance.  How  condescendingly  and  graciously  does  our 
heavenly  Father  deign  to  communicate  with  his  children  1  What  proofs  does  he  give  of 
his  interest  in  us,  his  sympathy  with  us  !  No  better  illustration  of  this  ciin  be  found 
than  in  the  promises  of  the  holy  Word.  Stooping,  as  it  were,  to  our  level,  God  addresses 
to  us  not  mersly  precepts  to  direct  our  conduct,  but  promises  to  sustain  our  courage 
and  to  animate  our  hope.  Exceeding  great  and  precious  are  the  Divine  promises 
uticred  and  fulfilled  for  the  benefit  of  the  spiritual  family  dependent  upon  the  bounty, 
forbearance,  and  tender  mercy  of  the  Most  High. 

I.  Divine  pbomisbs.  The  promise  given  to  Abraham  was  of  a  special  character,  but 
both  in  itself,  and  in  the  way  in  which  it  was  received  and  acted  upon,  it  is  peculiarly 
instructive  to  us  as  Christians.  1.  The  Giver  of  the  promises  upon  which  we,  as 
believers  in  God's  Word,  are  called  upon  to  rely,  is  the  Being  whose  infinite  resources, 
omniscient  acquaintance  with  his  people's  needs,  and  unfailing  fidelity,  place  all  his 
assurances  apart  from  and  altogether  above  those  of  others.  2.  The  matter  of  the 
Divine  promises  deserves  our  special  attention;  they  have  regard  rather  to  spiritual 
than  to  temporal  good,  and  whilst  varied  in  their  character,  they  are  singularly  adapted 
to  the  condition  and  necessities  of  men.  3.  The  receiuers  of  these  promises  are  creatures 
dependent  altogether  upon  the  Divine  favour,  with  no  resources  of  their  own,  and  no 
hope  save  that  which  is  based  upon  the  faithfulness  of  God.  4.  The  purpose  of  the 
Divine  promises  is  to  remove  natural  fear  and  depression  concerning  the  future,  and  in 
place  thereof  to  instil  a  calm  confidence,  a  bright  and  peaceful  hope.  If  men  were  left 
to  their  own  forecastings  of  the  future,  gloomy  forebodings  would  often  take  possression 
of  their  souls ;  the  promises  of  God  are  fitted  to  reassure  and  reanimate  the  downcast 
and  cheerless. 

II.  Divine  pebfobmanoe.  1.  This  is  assured  and  certain.  We  read  of  God  that 
"he  cannot- lie."  Abraham's  confidence  was  justified,  when  he  was  "fully  assured 
that,  what  God  had  promised,  he  was  able  also  to  perform."  2.  It  is  complete,  satis- 
factory, and  effectual.  Abraham  was  removed  from  earth  before  the  appointed  time 
arrived  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  made  to  him  and  to  his  seed.  Yet  he  fore- 
saw with  the  clear  vision  of  faith  what  in  due  season  came  to  pass.  His  descendants 
received  and  possessed  "  the  land  of  promise."  It  is  so  with  sdl  the  performances  of 
Eternal  Wisdom  and  Compassion.  Not  one  word  that  God  has  spoken  shall  fail ;  his 
promises  are  "all  Yea  and  Amen  in  Christ  Jesus."  3.  God's  performance  of  his  plighted 
word  of  assurance  is  such  as  to  justify  his  people's  unhesitating  confidence.  How  can 
we  question  either  hia  ability  or  his  willingness? 

"  The  voice  that  rolls  the  stars  along 
Spake  all  the  promises." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 25. — Ahraham's  faith.  We  have  already  seen  how  the  apostle  has  pre- 
pared the  way  for  the  great  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  He  showed  in  the  flrsJ 
two  chapters  that  man  has  no  righteousness  of  his  own,  that  he  could  not  justify  him- 
self, but,  on  the  contrary,  that  both  Jew  and  Gentile  are  all  under  sin.  "  There  is  no 
difference :  for  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  Now,  in  this  fourth 
chapter,  he  shows  that  this  great  fact — the  necessity  for  justification  by  faith — has 
already  been  recognized  by  Abraham  and  David.  He  is  writing  to  Jews,  and  he  takes 
th«  case  of  two  men  of  God  with  whose  lives  they  were  familiar,  and  whom  they  held 
ip  high  respect.  He  shows  that  neither  Abraham  nor  David  rested  iu  his  own  righteous- 


ch.it.  1—25.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  115 

ness.  They  rested  entirely  in  the  sovereign  grace  and  mercy  of  God.  "  Abraham  believed 
God,  and  it  was  counted  unto  him  for  righteousness"  (ver.  3).  So  David  also  describes 
the  blessedness  of  those  whose  iniquities  are  forgiven  and  whose  sins  are  covered;  of  the 
man  to  whom  the  Lord  doth  not  impute  sin  (vers.  6 — 8).  No  two  cases  more  appro- 
priate or  more  telling  could  the  apostle  have  selected  in  illustration  of  man's  universal 
need  of  a  Divine  righteousness.  Here  were  two  saints  of  God,  the  one  called  the  friend 
of  God,  the  other  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel,  and  yet  they  both  rested,  not  on  their  own 
good  works,  but  on  the  mercy  and  free  grace  of  God.  True,  David  had  grievously 
sinned  against  God,  but  he  did  not  trust  for  forgiveness  to  any  penances  or  works  of 
merit  which  he  might  have  done  in  atonement  for  his  sin,  but  solely  to  the  pardoning 
mercy  of  the  Lord.    Abraham's  faith,  however,  is  the  main  subject  of  the  chapter. 

I.  Its  beasonablgness.  The  subject  of  faith  is  not  merely  an  abstract  theologiuil 
question.  Abraham's  faith,  in  particular,  is  not  something  which  concerned  Abraham  but 
has  no  interest  for  us.  We  are  told  in  the  close  of  this  chapter  that  "  it  was  not  written 
for  his  sake  alone,  that  his  faith  was  imputed  to  him  for  righteousness ;  but  for  us  also, 
to  whom  it  shall  be  imputed,  if  we  believe  on  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  our  Lord  from 
the  dead ;  who  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  and  raised  again  for  our  justification " 
(vers.  23—25).  What,  then,  do  we  mean  by  faith  ?  Faith  is  a  strong  inward  persimmon 
manifesting  itself  in  outward  acts.  We  could  have  no  better  illustration  of  it  than  the 
life  of  Abraham.  "  Abraham  believed  God,"  His  life  was  a  life  of  faith  in  God.  He 
trusted  God's  word,  and  he  took  God's  way.  Here,  then,  we  have  a  simple  definition 
of  what  faith  means — trusting  God's  word  and  taking  God's  way.  Is  not  this  an 
eminently  reasonable  course  for  a  human  being  to  take  ?  So  Abraham  thought.  He 
was  a  man  of  experience  when  we  have  the  first  record  of  God  speaking  to  bim.  He 
was  seventy-five  years  old  when  God's  first  command  reached  him — ^the  command  to 
leave  his  country  and  his  father's  house.  It  would  appear  as  if  Abraham  had  begun 
before  that  time  to  look  beyond  the  seen  to  the  unseen.  His  spiritual  instincts  and  his 
reason  told  him  that  those  idols  which  the  people  round  him  worshipped  could  not 
represent  the  great  Creator  of  the  world.  He  had  already  a  conviction  that  there  was 
a  God — a  reasonable  conviction  based  on  the  evidence  of  natural  laws.  He  knew  some- 
thing of  that  almighty  Being's  power,  and  wisdom,  and  immortality,  and  unchaugeable- 
ness.  And  so  he  reached  the  conclusion,  which  became  an  irresistible  conviction,  that 
"  what  God  had  promised  he  was  able  also  to  perform  "  (vers.  18 — 21).  He  was  "  fully 
persuaded."  Upon  this  Abraham  based  his  faith.  For  these  reasons  he  trusted  God's 
word  and  took  God's  way.  Is  it  not  still  more  reasonable  that  we  should  have  faith  in 
God?  We  too  have  had  experience,  and  not  merely  our  own  experience,  but  the 
experience  of  thousands  of  others  from  Abraham's  day  till  now,  who  have  trusted  God, 
and  found  that  what  he  hath  promised  he  is  able  also  to  perform.  The  history  of  the 
ages  teaches  us  that  heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  that  God's  words  do  not  pass 
away ;  that  men  will  change  and  die,  and  mighty  empires  crumble  into  dust,  but  that 
the  mercy  of  the  Lord  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting  upon  them  that  fear  him. 
It  teaches  us  also  this  lesson,  that  God's  way  is  always  best,  and  that  the  fear  of  the 
Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom.  Abraham's  faith  was  a  reasonable  faith.  It  is  • 
reasonable  thing  that  we  also  should  trust  God's  word  and  take  God's  way. 

II.  Its  results.  1.  Abraham'sfaith  led  him  to  unfaltering  obedience.  It  was  a  strange 
and  apparently  a  harsh  command  which  God  gave  to  him,  "Get  thee  out  of  thy  country, 
and  from  thy  kindred,  and  from  thy  father's  house,  unto  a  land  that  I  will  show  thee" 
(Gen.  xii.  1).  But  Abraham  did  not  hesitate.  He  knew  whom  he  had  believed.  It 
was  God,  the  living  God,  his  heavenly  Father,  who  was  speaking  to  him,  and  he  felt 
he  must  obey.  He  knew  that  God  would  provide  for  him ;  he  knew  that  God  would 
lead  him  right.  How  many  of  us  under  similar  circumstances  would  show  such  unhesi- 
tating, unfaltering  obedience  to  God's  command?  How  many  of  us  are  willing  to  trust 
God  to  take  care  of  us  when  we  are  doing  his  will  ?  Alas !  is  it  not  true  that  we  often 
hesitate  to  do  his  will,  just  because  we  cannot  trust  him  to  take  care  of  us,  to  bring  us 
safely  through  the  difficulties  and  to  crown  our  labours  with  success  ?  But,  then,  it 
must  be  admitted  that  there  is  a  real,  practical  difficulty  here  which  sometimes  per- 
plexes  God's  people.  Some  one  may  say,  "  Well,  I  am  quite  willing  to  do  God's  will, 
to  follow  the  path  of  duty,  if  I  could  only  tell  what  it  was.  There  are  so  many  case* 
Inhere  I  qannot  s^e  my  way.    If  I  could  only  hear  God  speaking  to  me  as  he  4i4 1« 


116  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  it.  1—26 

Abraham,  there  would  be  no  difficulty  about  it"  I  think  the  way  to  meet  that  difficulty 
is  this.  Saturate  your  mind  with  the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  with  the  teachings  of  the 
Word  of  God,  with  the  spirit  of  Ohrist.  A  Christian  is  one  who  has  the  spirit  of  Christ. 
And,  while  there  will  be  inconsistencies,  as  a  rule  we  can  depend  upon  the  Christian. 
A  remarkable  illustration  of  this  was  given  in  Abraham's  own  case.  Before  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah  were  destroyed,  the  Lord  said,  "  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham  that  thing 
which  I  do  ?  .  .  .  For  I  know  him,  that  he  will  command  his  children  and  his  house- 
hold after  him,  and  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord"  (Gen.  xviiL  17, 19).  God 
had  confidence  in  Abraham  doing  what  was  right,  although  in  one  case  Abraham  acted 
sinfxdly  and  inconsistently.  So  we  can  trust  the  Christian  to  act  in  a  Christian  way. 
There  will  be  mistakes,  inconsistencies,  in  his  life.  But  there  are  some  things  we  know 
he  win  not  do.  He  will  not  be  among  the  sabbath-breakers,  among  the  profane,  the 
foul  and  filthy  speakers,  among  the  intemperate,  among  those  who  defraud  or  those 
who  defame  their  neighbour.  And  all  this  we  know,  because  we  know  him  to  hare  the 
spirit  of  Christ.  We  must  cultivate  this  spirit,  then,  if  we  would  know  what  the  path 
of  duty  is.  2.  Abraham's  faith  led  him  to  unflinching  self-sacrifice.  There  are  two 
grand  scenes  in  bis  life  that  illustrate  this.  One  was  when  he  gave  Lot  the  permission 
to  choose  what  portion  of  the  land  he  would  have.  Abraham  had  the  right  to  choose, 
but  he  reUnquished  his  own  rights  in  favour  of  his  nephew.  The  other  was  when  God 
called  on  him  to  offer  up  as  a  sacrifice  his  son  Isaac.  What  a  spirit  of  faith  Abraham 
showed  then  I  He  trusted  God,  and  so  he  took  God's  way.  He  had  himself  said  once 
before,  "Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right?"  (Gen.  xviii.  25).  And  now  when 
Gt)(i,  who  gave  him  his  son,  asks  him  to  give  him  back  again,  his  faithM  servant  is  ready 
to  do  what  God  asks.  It  was  enough.  The  Lord  himself  had  provided  a  lamb  for  the 
burnt  ofiering.  But  Abraham  showed  the  greatness  of  hie  faith  by  the  sacrifice  he  was 
ready  to  make.  There  is  a  process  in  mathematics  called  the  elimination  of  factors. 
The  factor  self  had  been  eliminated  from  Abraham's  character  and  life.  So  it  will  be 
with  the  true  Christian.  The  spirit  of  self-sacrifice  is  the  spirit  of  Christ,  the  spirit  of 
Christianity.  "  If  any  man  wiU  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his 
cross  daily,  and  follow  me."  We  must  be  ready  to  make  sacrifice  of  self  for  Christ's 
sake.  Such,  then,  was  Abraham's  faith.  It  was  a  reasonable  faith,  and  a  faith  that 
resulted  in  unfaltering  obedience  and  in  unflinching  self-sacrifice.  He  trusted  God's 
word,  and  he  took  God's  way.  That  is  the  way  of  salvation  for  every  sinner.  Such 
fiiith  is  the  condition  of  all  righteousness.  If  we  are  to  please  God,  if  we  are  to  get 
to  heaven,  we  must  take  God's  way.  The  manner  of  Abraham's  justification  is  an 
encouragement  for  every  sinner,  whether  Jew  or  Oentile.  If  salvation  had  been  by  the 
Law,  only  those  who  had  the  Law,  or  who  kept  it,  could  be  saved.  But  it  is  "  of  faith, 
that  it  might  be  of  grace ;  to  the  end  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed ;  not 
to  that  only  which  is  of  the  Law,  but  to  that  also  which  is  of  the  faith  of  Abraham" 
(yet.  16).  The  Jews'  boast  that  they  were  Abraliam's  seed  showed  a  narrow  idea  of 
what  the  promise  was.  Abraham  was  "  the  father  of  many  nations "  (vers.  17,  18). 
Abraham's  true  spiritual  children  are  those  who  imitate  Abraham's  faith. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 8. — A  test  case.  Abraham  was  their  father  (John  viii.) — this  they  were 
proud  to  acknowledge ;  but  what  was  his  relationship  to  God  ? 

I.  Abraham's  BiaHTEOUSNESs.  Bighteousness  must  be  either  absolute  or  imputed ; 
e.g.  a  servant  in  employ,  on  the  one  hand  tried  and  true,  on  the  other  hand  false,  but 
penitent  and  received  again.  Which  was  Abraham's?  1.  If  of  works,  it  was  absolute, 
and  therefore  he  was  in  a  position  of  proud  integrity  before  God.  Was  it  so  ?  The 
whole  history  proved  the  contrary.  Humble  dependence.  2.  If  imputed,  it  could  only 
be  as  he  accepted  God's  promises,  and  lived  by  faith  in  them.  And  so  saith  the 
Scripture  (ver.  3). 

II,  Abbaeau's  faith.  What  was  the  faith  which  was  reckoned  to  him  for 
righteousness?  l.Benunciationofself.  (Gen.  xv.,  xvii.)  He  could  do  nothing.  2, 
Seliance  on  Ood.    (Gen.  iv.,  and  implied  in  xvii.)    God  could  do  all  things. 

Such  the  general  principle :  faith  is  the  laying  hold  of  all  God's  mighty  love.  Hence 
tiie  spring  of  all  righteousness.  In  Abraham's  case,  faith  in  promises  for  the  future 
pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  Virtually,  it  was  the  faith  of  his  spiritual  salvation. 
WM  not  David's  case  the  same?    There  are  iniquities,  lins;  man  can  never  undf 


oa.  IT.  1—26.]    THE  EPISTLfi  OJ"  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  117 

them  ;  God  can  cover  them.  So  with  ub.  Not  of  debt,  but  of  grace — on  God's  part ; 
therefore,  not  of  works,  but  of  faith — on  man'»  part.  And  hence  no  arbitrary  con- 
dition ;  the  appropriation  of  all  the  wealth  of  good  offered  in  Qod  and  by  God.  Well 
ia  it  said,  "  Blessed  are  they,"  etc.— T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  9 — 22. — All  things  are  of  faith.  The  position  is  now  established  that 
righteousness  is  through  faith.  Bu^  they  might  say,  through  the  faith  of  a  circumcised 
man ;  and  the  promise  of  the  inheritance  was  through  the  Law ;  and  surely  the  posterity 
of  Abraham  came  according  to  the  flesh.  He  answers — Righteousness,  heritage, 
posterity,  by  faith  alone. 

L  KiQHTBOUSNEBB.  1.  The  righteousness  of  faith  without  circumcision.  In  Gen.  xv. 
tfe  have  the  record  of  Abraham's  justification ;  the  institution  of  circtmicision  is  narrated 
in  Gen.  xvii.,  fourteen  years  after.  Abraham,  therefore,  was  justified  "  in  his  Gentile- 
hood  "  (see  Godet).  Therefore,  he  is  the  father  of  Gentile  believers ;  and  in  so  far  as 
he  is  the  father  of  Jewish  believers,  it  is  because  they  are  believers,  not  because  they 
are  Jews.  2.  Circumcision  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  <f  faith.  God  strengthens  man's 
faith  by  visible  signs  and  seals  of  the  faith  and  of  its  results.  So  to  Abraham 
circumcision  was  an  abiding  pledge  that  God  accepted  his  faith  for  righteousness. 
And  likewise  the  existence  of  a  separated  nation  was  a  testimony  to  the  world.  But 
it  was  the  faith  alone  that  was  effectual ;  circumcision  did  but  attest. 

IL  Hebitaqe.  The  whole  world  is  promised  to  the  heirs  of  Abraham  as  a  heritage ; 
this  of  itself  might  suffice  to  show  that  the  heirs  are  not  merely  descendants  accord- 
ing to  the  flesh.  But  the  condition  of  such  inheritance  shaU  show  the  meaning. 
1.  If  the  heritage  were  through  Law,  then  faith  and  the  promise  fail.  (1)  "  Faith  is 
made  void ; "  for  it  cannot  grasp  an  impossibility,  nor  can  it  rightly  lay  hold  of  that 
which  must  be  worked  for.  (2)  "  And  the  promise  is  made  of  none  effect ; "  for  an 
unfulfilled  Law  works  God's  wrath  towards  man,  which  is  in  utter  contrariety  to  the 
fulfilment  of  a  promise  of  love.  2.  Therefore  the  heritage  is  of  faith,  that  it  may  be 
according  to  grace,  etc.  (1)  Faith  the  sole  condition  of  promise,  that  while  God's  grace 
gives  freely,  man  may  freely  receive.  (2)  Faith  the  sole  characteristic  of  the  heirs  of 
the  promise,  that  so  the  seed  may  be,  not  merely  that  which  is  of  the  Law  (even 
combined  with  faith),  but  that  which  is  of  faith  (apart  from  Law),  comprising  both 
Jews  and  Gentiles  who  are  the  spiritual  children  of  the  great  believer. 

in.  PosTBKiTT.  But  it  might  be  objected  that  an  IsraeUaccording  to  the  flesh  was 
necessary,  in  order  that  the  spiritual  Israel  might  be  at  last  accomplished.  Truly.  But, 
to  cut  away  the  last  ground  of  boasting,  even  the  Israel  according  to  the  flesh  was  the 
gift  of  God  through  faith.  1.  ITie  obstacles  to  such  faith.  "  His  own  body,"  etc.  And 
this  all  full  in  view :"  he  considered."  2.  The  warrant  of  faith.  While  viewing  the 
obstacles,  he  staggered  not.  (1)  God's  promise.  "  A  father  of  many  nations ; "  "So 
shall  thy  seed  be."  (2)  God's  power.  "  Able  to  perform ; "  "  quickeneth  the  dead," 
etc.  "  Wherefore  also  it  was  reckoned  unto  him  for  righteousness."  As  before,  it  wm 
virtually  the  faith  of  bis  spiritual  salvation;  yes,  the  very  faith  which  laid  hold  of  th« 
promise  of  posterity — a  posterity  that  they  deemed  according  to  the  flesh. 

Let  us  learn  that  by  faith  we  may  be  righteous,  by  faith  we  may  possess  the  earth, 
by  faith  we  may  impress  for  good  the  generations  following.  What  an  heirship  ia 
possible  through  the  faith  of  one  believer !— -T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  23—25. — Our  faith  and  righteousness.  Abraham's  faith  was  virtnally  fidth  In 
the  saving  love  of  God ;  the  special  manifestation  of  that  love  to  him  was  the  rusing 
up  of  a  holy  seed.  Our  faith  is  a  faith  in  the  ultimate  Seed  of  Abraham  which  has 
been  raised  up  as  the  supreme  Manifestation  of  GK)d's  love. 

L  OnB  FAITH.  Our  faith  and  Abraham's  are  one  in  this — that  they  lay  hold  upon 
Gk)d,  and  God  at  work  for  us.  1.  The  one  tupreme  Olject  of  our  faith,  Godl  What- 
ever God  may  say  to  ns,  whatever  he  may  do  for  us,  the  essential  Object  of  our  faith  is 
himself.  Yes,  himself  in  all  his  saving  love.  And  though  in  successive  ages  he  may 
have  revealed  more  and  more  of  his  purposes  as  men  were  able  to  bear  it,  yet  he  himseu 
has  been  ever  the  same,  the  Object  of  man's  trust.  And  though  now  his  purposes  and 
past  actions  may  be  variously  conceived  by  men,  and  though  indeed  they  may  iae  mor« 
or  les*  misooaceired,  yet  if  ha  himself,  as  the  Good  One,  the  saving  God,  be  trusted, 


lid  tHB  EtISTLB  0#  PATJL  TO  THE  tlOMAN^.    {aB.TV.l—i&. 

all  is  well.  We  "  believe  on  him."  2.  The  special  mbfect-mafter  of  our  faith.  "That 
raised  Jesus,"  etc.  It  was  not  revealed  to  Abraham  how  God  would  eventually  work 
out  salvation  for  mankind,  but  such  salvation  as  he  could  grasp  was  promised — the 
raising  up  of  a  posterity  which  should  possess  the  world.  To  us  the  full  meaning  of 
that  promise  has  been  made  known.  (1)  The  "delivering  up"  of  Jesus  "for  our 
tr«spasses."  Man's  sin  the  necessitating  cause:  "that  he  might  be  just,"  etc.  (ch.  iii. 
26).  God's  love  the  efBcient  cause :  "  so  loved  the  world,"  etc.  (John  iii.  IG).  (2)  The 
"  raising  "  of  Jesus  "  for  our  justification."  The  death  did  its  work ;  man  was  justified 
(i.e.  potentially).  But  if  so,  the  justification  of  man  through  the  death  of  Christ 
demanded  his  resurrection,  just  as  the  trespasses  demanded  his  death.  God  raised  him ; 
our  Lord  of  life  for  evermore.  And  it  is  this  grandly  operative  love  that  claims  our 
faith. 

II.  OuB  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  1.  Ait  objective  righteousness,  complete  now  by  reason  of 
our  faith  in  the  atoning  work  of  Christ.  What  was  potential  for  all  men  is  actual  to  us, 
who  have  received  it  with  humble  hearts — even  justification  through  Christ.  2.  A 
subjective  righteousness,  jiledged  by  the  faith  which  trusts  the  living  Lord.  The  faith 
itself  the  germ  also  of  future  righteousness,  and  therefore  "  reckoned  "  for  what  it  will 
more  and  more  perfectly  bring  forth. 

To  us  ?    Oh,  simple  condition — believe  on  him  I — ^T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — A  happy  man.  It  is  essential  in  argument  to  have  common  ground 
where  the  debate  can  be  carried  on.  The  apostle  could  count  on  the  agreement  of  his 
Jewish  readers  with  his  reference  to  the  Scriptures  as  the  court  of  final  appeal.  And 
whilst  some  modern  hearers  reject  the  claims  of  the  Bible,  the  majority  receive  it  as 
an  inspired  authority,  so  that  the  preacher's  business  generally  is  to  prove  his  case 
therefrom,  and  to  press  home  its  statements  showing  what  is  the  appropriate  action 
they  involve.  Having  mentioned  Abraham  as  an  instance  of  justification  by  faith,  the 
apostle  proceeded  to  summon  David  as  a  witness  to  the  same  truth  in  the  thirty-second 
psalm. 

I.  God's  merciful  treatment  of  penitent  sinners.  1.  Three  expressions  are 
employed  in  the  verses  cited,  respecting  sin.  It  is  said  to  be  forgiven,  like  a  debt 
remitted,  the  score  against  us  being  erased.  It  is  covered,  as  the  mercy-seat  hid  the 
Law  from  view,  or  as  a  stone  flung  into  the  depths  of  the  sea  is  buried  in  its  waters,  or 
as  a  mantle  of  fleecy  snow  conceals  the  defilements  of  a  landscape.  Likewise  it  is 
not  reckoned  against  the  delinquents,  as  if  Gh)d  turned  a  deaf  ear  and  unseeing  eye  when 
complaint  is  lodged  against  him  concerning  the  transgressions  of  the  culprits.  He 
smooths  the  wax  tablets  so  that  none  can  read  the  bill  of  indictment.  2.  These 
expressions  signify  a  complete  pardon.  The  king  may  not  care  much  for  the  presence 
of  the  pardoned  rebel  at  his  court,  but  the  father  is  joyful  at  the  return  of  the  prodigal 
son.  Ko  intermediate  state  of  indifference  is  possible  in  God's  attitude  towards  his 
creatures ;  when  he  forgives,  there  is  full  reconciliation.  No  look,  no  tone,  hints  at 
past  un worthiness  I  3.  These  expressions  teach  plainly  gratuitous  justification.  No 
mention  is  made  of  human  merit.  Man's  repentance  cannot  obliterate  or  atone  for  the 
past ;  forgiveness  means  a  wrong  condoned,  not  undone.  Man  is  a  slave,  who  cannot 
purchase  his  freedom ;  he  hag  thrown  himself  into  bondage,  and  his  only  hope  lies  in 
free  manumission. 

II.  Thb  happiness  of  thb  forgiven.  1.  The  penalties  of  sin  are  averted.  This 
does  not  mean  that  all  the  consequences  of  past  wrong-doing  are  prevented  from 
following,  but  that  the  wrath  of  God  rests  no  longer  upon  the  sinner.  The  future 
sentence  against  evil  is  withheld,  and  the  burden  of  guilt  is  thus  removed.  2.  Justifica- 
tion brings  with  it  admission  into  a  state  of  Divine  favour.  Acquittal  includes  more 
than  a  negative  result,  that  of  no  condemnation ;  there  is  likewise  a  positive  entrance 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  with  all  its  sacred  privileges  and  relationships.  Filial 
love  takes  the  place  of  the  spirit  of  fear.  3.  The  blissful  consciousness  of  a  right 
condition.  Instead  of  slurring  over  sin,  trying  vainly  to  forget  it,  the  fact  has  been 
faced,  the  truth  admitted,  and  the  touch  of  God  has  rolled  the  load  for  ever  from  the 
conscience.  The  Scriptures  assume  the  possibility  of  knowing  ourselves  forgiven. 
Faith  opens  the  inner  hearing  to  rejoice  in  the  assurance,  "  Go  in  peace."  The  devout 
Israelite  had  the  ceremonies  of  the  temple  to  symbolize  God's  plan  of  mercy  as  well  ai 


<3H.  nr.  1— 26.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  tAltL  TO  THE  EOMAI^fS.  119 

the  declarationa  of  inspired  teachers.  The  Christian  has  words  of  Christ  to  rest  upon, 
as  also  ihe  apostolic  commentaries  upon  the  sacrifice  and  mission  of  Christ.  "I'm  in 
s  new  worid,"  said  one  who  realized  his  altered  position  God-wards.  Peaceful  in  mind 
during  life,  serene  in  the  prospect  of  death,  with  God  as  his  Portion  through  eternity, 
surely  this  is  happiness  worthy  of  the  eulogy  of  the  psalmist. — S.  E.  A. 

Ver.  16. — Obtaining  an  inheritance.  An  honourable  lineage  is  not  to  he  despised. 
Many  advantages  accrue  from  the  law  of  heredity,  by  which  progenitors  transmit 
distinguishing  qualities  to  their  descendants.  But  the  text  invites  to  an  unusual 
course  of  begetting  an  ancestry  and  thus  winning  a  noble  inheritance — nothing  less 
than  claiming  Abraham  as  our  father.  The  qualification  is  to  exhibit  like  faith  with 
the  father  of  the  faithful.     Faith  is  thus  like  the  horn  of  Egremont  Castle — 

"  Horn  it  was  which  none  could  sound. 
No  one  upon  living  ground 
Save  he  who  came  as  rightful  heir." 

I.  The  emiLARiTY  of  Abraham's  faith  to  that  required  by  the  oosrEL.  1. 
Each  has  Ood  as  its  supreme  Object,  and  rests  on  someprovii.se  of  God.  As  the  patriarch 
had  respect  to  the  word  and  power  of  the  Almighty,  so  tlie  Christian's  faith  regards 
the  wonder-working  might  of  him  who  "  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead."  That  in  the 
latter  case  we  look  back,  not  forward,  makes  no  difference  as  to  the  essence  of  faith,  and 
this  resurrection  becomes  itself  the  ground  of  believing  expectancy  in  relation  to  our 
own  future  salvation.  2.  The  subject  of  faith  thereby  differentiates  himself  from  his 
fdlowB.  Out  of  a  world  in  a  condition  of  rebellion  and  distrust,  Abraham  stood  forth 
a  monumental  pillar  of  faith.  Sin  first  entered  in  the  guise  of  a  doubt  of  G-od's  Word, 
and  faith  is  the  throwing  off  of  all  suspicion  and  the  adoption  of  a  right  attitude  before 
God.  Men  find  it  hard  to  trust  God's  assurance  of  pardon  and  life.  3.  The  effect  »f 
faith  is  the  same.  The  believer  is  justified,  for  God  rejoices  in  the  altered  state.  The 
implicit  credence  honours  him,  and  is  for  his  creatures'  lasting  good.  Christ's  missinn 
was  to  show  us  the  Father,  revealing  his  displeasure  at  sin,  and  his  self-sacriticing 
sympathy  with  the  sinner. 

II.  The  prominence  of  grace.  1.  That  the  inheritance  is  won  by  faith  involves 
the  absence  of  valid  merit  on  the  part  of  the  recipient.  He  receives  not  the  wages  of 
a  workman,  but  the  free  donation  of  his  King.  Pride  is  pulled  up  by  the  roots  in  this 
manifestation  of  the  kindness  of  God.  Justification  is  an  exercise  of  clemency  for 
established  reasons.  2.  The  same  truth  is  recognized  in  the  use  of  the  term  "  promise." 
We  are  entitled  to  claim  the  heritage  on  the  ground  of  God's  own  declaration,  not  on 
the  score  of  our  personal  worthiness.  3.  Only  by  such  a  method  could  the  promise 
to  Abraham  be  fulfilled,  that  is,  "  made  sure  to  all  the  seed."  If  dependent  on  physical 
connection,  who  but  the  Israelites  could  hope  for  the  inheritance?  If  dependent  on 
obedience  to  the  Law,  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile  could  show  conformity  to  the  conditions. 
A  world-wide  blessing  means  the  removal  of  both  local  and  universal  restrictions. 

III.  This  Divikb  plan  justified  by  its  results.  Complaints  of  arbitrar.ness 
and  indifference  vanish  before  this  apprehended  scheme  of  mercy.  Faith  tend<  to 
produce  a  righteousness  of  life  which  the  stern  threatenings  of  Law  could  never  effect. 
The  despairing  criminal  begins  to  see  that  past  transgressions  and  failures  need  not 
debar  him  from  hope  of  the  prize,  and  with  the  entrance  of  this  thought,  new  energy 
is  infused  into  his  soul.  The  greater  contains  the  less.  If  God  promise  to  save,  he  will 
not  withhold  minor  temporal  blessings.  Let  us,  like  Abraham,  view  the  land  of  promise, 
look  away  from  all  in  our  surroundings  that  would  check  faith  in  God,  and  say,  "  I 
will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid." — S.  R.  A. 

Vers.  23,  24. —  The  gospel  in  Genesis.  The  story  takes  us  hack  to  that  starry  night 
wlien  the  twinkllTig  liiiii|is  of  tlie  fiiniainrnl  were  Abraham's  arithmetical  calculator 
cuncernhig  the  numerous  posterity  that  should  tnce  their  descent  to  him.  His  faith 
triumphed  over  all  the  obstacles  of  sense,  over  all  the  arguments  of  improbability  which 
reason  suggested.  He  was  a  true  servant  of  God,  a  holy  man,  yet  does  the  historian 
speak  of  him  as  justified,  not  on  account  of  his  devoted  life,  his  blameless  conduct,  but 
by  his  unwavering  acceptance  of  the  promise  of  the  Almighty.    Faith  was  indeed  th« 


120  THE  EHSTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh,  ir.  1—26. 

root-grace  out  of  which  his  virtues  sprang ;  it  was  the  secret  sustaining  power  which 
supported  him  under  the  trials  of  a  pilgrim  and  sojourner.  The  significant  statement 
in  Genesis  was  fastened  on  hy  the  apostle  and  triumphantly  wielded  as  a  weapon  to 
slay  all  Jewish  prejudices  against  the  gospel  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  What 
could  he  more  conviacing  than  to  find  the  cardinal  principle  of  Christianity  in  a  place 
where  no  suspicion  could  attach  to  it — in  the  very  account  of  Divine  honour  .conferred 
on  the  great  progenitor  of  the  Hebrew  nation  ?  It  was  like  finding  in  an  old  book  an 
account  of  an  experiment  forestalling  a  modern  discovery. 

I.  The  Scriptdres  a  rbcobd  of  revelation.  The  distinction  between  the  revela- 
tion and  its  history  is  important,  many  theories  of  inspiration  failing  to  recognize  the 
human  side  visible  in  the  record.  The  Bible  contains  the  account  of  the  way  in  which 
God  has  revealed  and  gradually  achieved  his  great  purpose  of  redemption,  selecting  the 
man,  the  family,  the  tribe,  the  nation,  to  be  the  channel  of  blessing  to  the  world,  till  in 
the  fulness  of  time  there  appeared  the  representative  Man,  Christ  Jesus,  consummating 
the  revelation  and  its  gracious  effects.  '  The  Old  Testnment  is  not  to  be  identified 
with  Mosaism ;  it  includes  the  Law,  and  more.  The  patriarchal  dispensation  and  the 
prophetical  teachings  must  be  equally  regarded.  Nor  was  there  any  discrepancy 
between  the  grace  of  the  patriarchal  covenant  and  the  rigour  of  the  Law.  The  Law  was 
a  stern  process  of  education,  necessary  to  the  continuity  of  development,  as  the  green 
fruit  is  acid  prior  to  its  maturity.  And  when  the  Jew  conten.ned  Christianity  as  a 
bastard  growth,  the  apostle  pointed  to  the  prediction  of  the  gospel  clearly  presented  in 
Gtod's  dealings  with  Abraham,  justifying  Christianity  as  a  legitimate  scion  of  Judaism ; 
the  grandchild,  as  often  happens,  displaying  features  of  likeness  to  the  grandparent 
not  80  marked  in  the  intermediate  generation. 

IL  Advantages  of  a  written  becokd.  A  particular  instance  here  of  the  general 
statement  in  ch.  xv.  that  "these  things  were  written  aforetime  for  our  learning." 
Writing  is  the  natural  complement  of  articulate  utterance,  the  chief  instrument  of  the 
progress  of  the  race.  It  perpetuates  the  memory  of  noble  thoughts  and  deeds,  enabling 
each  generation  to  commence  where  its  predecessor  left  oB'.  Printing  is  improved 
writing,  facilitating  the  multiplication  of  copies.  The  impression  of  a  speech  weakens 
and  fades  like  the  water-ripples  caused  by  a  stone,  but  the  written  page  is  powerful  to 
the  last,  like  the  inhaling  of  the  fragrance  of  a  rose.  Latest  readers  may  compare 
their  ideas  with  the  earliest  receivers  of  a  revelation,  and  misunderstandings  are  cor- 
rected. To  peruse  the  story  in  Genesis  is  to  note  how  the  bud  by  its  markings  afforded 
promise  of  the  full-grown  flower.  In  the  child  were  seen  glimpses  of  the  manhood  of 
religion,  when  there  should  be  a  system  freed  from  burdensome  ordinances,  and  adapted 
to  every  clime,  race,  and  age.  And  since  "no. man  liveth  unto  himself,"  the  record 
of  Abialiam's  faith  stimulates  the  faith  of  every  subsequent  reader.  The  patriarchal 
hero  has  bad  posthmnous  glory  from  the  narrative,  beside  the  comfort  of  the  assurance 
divinely  communicated  that  his  faith  was  reckoned  for  righteousness.  The  imity  of 
the  Divine  character  is  atte-'ted  by  the  same  method  of  justification  being  adopted  in 
the  olden  days.  Cf.  with  the  apostle's  appreciation  of  a  written  record  the  puerile 
remarks  of  Peter  Chrysologus,  Archbishop  of  Ea\enna:  "Let  the  mind,  hold  and  the 
memory  guard  this  decree  of  salvation,  this  symbol  of  life  [the  Creed],  lest  vile  paper 
depreciate  the  gift  of  Divinity,  lest  black  ink  obscure  the  mystery  of  light." 

III.  Means  of  pbesonallt  benefiting  by  the  record.  Frequent  perusal  and 
the  application  by  analogy  of  the  principle  implied  in  the  history  will  show  that  the 
Christian,  like  Abraham,  has  demands  made  upon  his  faith  by  the  wonders  of  the 
pospel  narrative,  and  hy  reliance  on  God  can  he  likewise  remain  steadfast  in  obedient 
righteousness.  We  have  a  promise  to  lean  on  as  Abraham  had.  We  have  the  resur- 
rection of  Christ  to  proclaim  God's  power  and  intent  to  save,  his  satisfaction  with  the 
work  of  Christ  and  his  ability  to  give  life  from  the  dead  to  every  sinful  soul  that  trusts 
him.    Humbly  yet  thankfully  and  firmly  clasp  this  declaration  to  your  breast. — S.  R.  A. 

Vers.  1 — 25. — Abraham  justified  by  faith  alone.  We  have  just  seen  in  last  chapter 
the  utility  of  Judaism,  the  universal  depravity  of  the  race,  the  new  channel  for  Divine 
righteousness  which  had  consequently  to  be  found,  and  the  confirmation  of  law  which 
is  secured  by  faith.  The  apostle  in  the  present  chapter  illustrates  his  argument 
from  the  history  of  Abraham.     He  was  reckoned  by  the  Jews  as  "  father  of  the  faith- 


Jfi.  nr.  1—25.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PADL  TO  THE  KOMANS.  121 

ful ; "  his  case  is,  therefore,  a  crucial  one.  Accordingly,  Paul  begins  by  asking,  "  What 
shall  we  then  say  that  Abraham,  our  forefather,  hath  found,  as  peitainlDg  to  the 
flesh?"  By  this  is  meant  virtually  this:  "What  merit  before  God  did  Abraham 
acquire  in  the  use  of  bis  natural  human  faculties,  or,  in  other  words,  by  his  own 
works? "  (cf.  Shedd,  <n  toe.).  Now,  to  this  a  negative  answer  is  expected ;  and,  as  if  it 
had  been  supplied,  Paul  goes  on  to  state  the  case  thus :  "  For  if  Abraham  were  justified 
by  works,  he  has  a  subject  for  glorification ;  but,  vis-Orvia,  of  God,  he  has  no  reason  for 
glorification."  This  he  proceeds  to  show  from  the  history.  Now,  there  are  three  things 
mentioned  in  this  chapter  which  Abraham  got,  and  in  each  case  it  was  by  exercising 
faith.  These  were  righteousness  (vers.  3 — 1'2),  inheritance  (vers.  13 — 17),  and  a  seed 
(vers.  18 — 25).    Let  us  direct  our  attention  to  these  in  their  order. 

I.  Abbahau  EBOBiVED  EiOHTEOTJSNESs  THKOUGH  FAITH.  (Vers.  3 — 12.)  The  apostle 
begins  here  with  a  scriptural  quotation;  it  is  from  Gen.  xv.  6,  to  the  effect  that 
"  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  unto  him  for  righteousness."  We  see 
from  the  context  in  Genesis  that  what  Abraham  believed  was  that  God's  promise  about 
a  Seed  who  would  prove  a  blessing  to  all  nations  would  yet  be  fulfilled.  He  believed 
God's  naked  promise,  and  looked  forward  prophetically  to  his  Seed  as  the  medium  of 
universal  blessing.  His  faith  was  thus  fixed  in  a  Seed  of  promise — in  Christ  to  come. 
Now,  this  act  of  faith  without  works  was  "reckoned  unto  him"  (Revised  Version)  for 
righteousness.  Because  of  this  act  of  faith,  he  was  regarded  by  God  as  having  fulfilled 
the  Law  and  secured  righteousness  through  a  perfect  obedience.  Such  a  reckoning  of 
righteousness  to  Abraham's  credit  was  a  great  act  of  grace  upon  God's  part.  Assuming 
for  the  moment  that  God  could /msW^  reckon  faith  for  righteousness,  it  must  be  regarded 
as  a  gracious  gift  on  the  part  of  God.  But  the  apostle  would  leave  ua  in  no  doubt  as 
to  the  principle  involved.  One  who  trusts  ia  his  works  for  acceptance  claims  reward 
as  a  debt;  he  who  trusts,  not  in  his  works,  but  in  his  Ood  for  justification,  receives 
reward  as  a  matter,  not  of  debt,  but  of  grace.  This  was  Abraham's  exact  position. 
And  David  follows  bis  father  Abraham  in  this  respect,  celebrating  in  the  Psalms  the 
blessedness  of  the  man  unto  whom  God  imputeth  righteousness  u  ithout  works ;  saying, 
"  Blessed  are  they  whose  iniquities  are  forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are  covered.  Blessed 
is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will  not  reckon  sin  "  (Revised  Version).  Abraham  and 
David  had  by  faith  entered  iuto  that  blissful  position  where  God  not  only  was  felt  to 
forgive  them  all  their  iniquities  and  to  cover  all  their  sin,  but  also  would  not  reckon 
sin  unto  them.  It  was  as  if  they  had  been  transfigured  before  God  into  men  innocent 
of  all  sin.  The  past  was  cancelled,  and  they  stood  before  God  accepted  as  righteous  in 
his  sight.  But  this  is  not  all.  The  apostle  peints  out  particularly  that  this  pardon 
and  acceptance  of  Abraham  on  the  ground  of  his  faith  happened  before  his  circum- 
cision. As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  happened  fourteen  years  befpre.  So  that  circumcision 
could  constitute  no  ground  of  acceptance.  It  was  simply  a  divinely  appointed  sign 
and  seal  of  the  previously  imputed  righteousness.  Accordingly,  Abraham  was  in  a 
position  to  be  the  father  of  unciroumcised  believers  or  of  circumcised  believers,  as  the 
case  may  be;  showing  us  at  once  faith  as  exercised  in  uncircumcision  with  its  resultant 
righteousness,  and  faith  also  exercised  after  his  circumcision  with  its  continued 
justification. 

II.  Abraham  beoeived  as  dihebitanob  through  faith.  (Vers.  13 — 17.)  Now 
we  have  to  observe  that  Abraham  received  not  only  righteousness  through  faith,  but 
also  an  inheritance.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  became  "  heir  of  the  world."  We  must 
not  restrict  justification,  therefore,  to  deliverance  from  deserved  penalty,  but  must 
attach  to  it  the  further  idea  of  inheritance.  As  one  writer  has  well  remarked, 
"Justification  is  a  term  applicable  to  something  more  than  the  discharge  of  an  accused 
person  without  condemnation.  As  in  our  courts  of  law  there  are  civil  as  well  as 
criminal  cases ;  so  it  was  in  old  time ;  and  a  large  number  of  the  passages  adduced 
seem  to  refer  to  trials  of  the  latter  description,  in  which  some  question  of  property, 
right,  or  inheritance  was  under  discussion  between  the  two  parties.  The  judge,  by 
justifying  one  of  the  parties,  decided  that  the  property  in  question  was  to  be  regarded 
as  his.  Applying  this  aspect  of  the  matter  to  the  justification  of  man  in  the  sight  of 
God,  we  gather  from  Scripture  that  whilst  through  sin  man  is  to  be  regarded  as  having 
forfeited  legal  claim  to  any  right  or  inheritance  which  God  might  have  to  bestow  upon 
his  creatures,  so  through  justification  he  is  restored  to  his  high  position  and  regarded 


122 


*riB  EPISTLE  ()&  iPAtrii  to  *rHE  ROMANS.     [cb.vA—^I. 


as  an  heir  of  God."*  Now,  this  designation  of  Abraham  to  the  heirship  of  the  world 
was  at  the  same  time  as  the  reckoning  to  him  of  righteousness.  The  Law  afterwards 
given  to  his  posterity  had  nothing  to  do  with  this  inheritance.  It  came  solely  through 
faith.  It  was  the  gift  of  Divine  grace  signalizing  the  patriarch's  trust  in  God  as  faithful 
Promiser.  Hence  the  patriarch  was  called  the  "  father  of  many  nations,"  because  he 
felt  assured  that  God,  who  raiseth  the  dead  and  quickeneth  them,  could  give  him  through 
his  seed  the  inheritance  of  the  world.  In  the  universal  triumph  of  righteousness,  the 
believing  descendants  of  Abiaham,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  should  " inherit  the  earth." 
III.  Abraham  rboeivbd  a  seed  through  faith.  (Vers.  18 — 25.)  Now,  the 
inheritance  centred  itself,  as  the  history  shows  us,  in  a  "seed  of  promise,"  and  for 
years  this  was  unlikely.  Abraham  is  ninety  and  nine,  and  Sarah  ninety,  before  the 
promised  seed  is  given.  For  a  quarter  of  a  century  it  seemed  hopeless;  but  the 
patriarch  hoped  against  hope,  and  eventually  the  God  who  can  raise  the  dead  granted 
to  Sarah's  dead  womb  a  living  son  of  promise.  Here  was  the  strength  of  the  patriarch's 
faith  in  hoping  in  spite  of  all  appearances.  We  have  thus  set  before  us  in  Abraham's 
case,  as  received  through  faith  alone,  righteousness,  inheritance,  and  a  seed  of  promise. 
But  the  apostle  at  once  reminds  us  that  all  this  is  written  for  us  also,  to  whom  the 
same  righteousness  and  the  same  inheritance  shall  be  secured  if  we  exercise  the  same 
faith.  And  the  analogy  he  traces  out  in  the  closing  verses  is  very  striking.  Jesus, 
the  Seed  of  Abraham,  lay  for  a  season  in  Joseph's  tomb.  He  was  to  all  appearances 
hopelessly  dead.  But  God  raised  him  from  the  dead,  just  as  he  had  brought  Isaac 
from  the  dead  womb  of  Sarah.  In  the  God  who  can  thus  "  call  those  things  which  be 
not  as  though  they  were  "we  ought  to  believe.  Let  us  believe  in  the  Father  who 
raised  Christ  from  the  dead;  and  then  we  can  rejoice  in  the  two  great  facts,  that  Jesus 
was  delivered  because  of  our  offences  unto  death,  and  then  raised  out  of  death  as  the 
sign  of  our  justification.  Christ's  resurrection  is  thus  seen  to  be  the  sign  and  pledge 
of  our  personal  justification.  May  we  enter  into  all  these  privileges  through  the 
exercise  of  faith  I — B.  M.  E. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  V. 

Vers.  1 — 21. — (6)  The  resulU  of  the  revela- 
tion of  Hie  righteousneea  of  God,  a$  affecting 
(a)  the  consciousness  and  hopes  of  helievers ; 
(6)  the  position  of  manlcind  before  God. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — (a)  As  to  the  consciousness  of 
individual  helievers. 

Ver.  1. — Therefore,  being  justified  by  faitli, 
we  have  peace  with  Ood  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Instead  of  the  ^x^M"  °f  the 
Textus  Eeceptus,  an  overwhelming  pre- 
ponderance of  authority,  including  uncials, 
versions,  and  Fathers,  supports  ^xai/iev  ("let 
us  have  ").  If  this  be  the  true  reading,  the 
expression  must  be  intended  as  hortatory, 
meaning,  apparently, "  Let  us  appreciate  and 
realize  our  peace  with  God  wliieh  we  have 
in  being  justified  by  faith."  But  hortation 
here  does  not  appear  in  keeping  with  what 
follows.  In  which  the  results  of  our  being 
justified  by  faith  are  described  in  terms 
clearly  corresponding  with  the  idea  of  our 
having  peace  with  God.  The  passage  as  a 
whole  is  not  hortatory,  but  descriptive,  and 


"  we  have  peace  "  comes  in  naturally  as  an 
initiatory  statement  of  what  is  afterwards 
carried  out.  This  being  the  ease,  it  is  a 
question  whether  an  exception  may  not  be 
allowed  in  this  case  to  the  usually  sound 
rule  of  bowing  to  decided  preponderance  of 
authority  with  respect  to  readings.  That 
^X^M-^v  was  an  early  and  widely  accepted 
reading  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  but  still  it 
may  not  have  been  the  original  one,  the 
other  appearing  more  probable.  Scrivener 
is  of  opinion  that  "  the  itacism  of  a  for  o,  so 
familiar  to  all  collators  of  Greek  manu- 
scripts, crept  into  some  very  early  copy, 
from  which  it  was  propagated  among  our 
most  venerable  codices,  even  those  fiom 
which  the  earliest  versions  were  made." 

Ver.  2.— Through  whom  also  we  have 
(rather,  have  had — ia'x'liicaftev — ^referring  to 
the  past  time  of  conversion  and  baptism,  but 
with  the  idea  of  continuance  expressed  by 
the  perfect)  the  (or,  our)  access  by  faith  (the 
words,  "  by  faith,"  which  are  not  required, 
are  absent  from  many  manuscripts)  into  this 
grace  wherein  we  stand,  and  rejoice  (properly, 
ghry,  Kavxiine0a,  the  same  word  as  in  the 
following  verse,  and  most  usually  so  rendered 


•  Girdlestone'*  '  Old  Testament  Synonyms,'  pp.  259,  260. 


te.  V.  1—61.]    IHB  EPISTYLE  OP  PATJL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


123 


elaewhere,  though  sometimes  by  "boast."  Our 
translators  seem  in  this  yerse  to  have  de- 
parted from  their  usual  rendering  because 
of  the  substantive  "glory,"  in  a  different 
sense,  which  folU  ws)  in  hope  of  the  glory  of 
God.  Xlpotrayay^  (translated  "access ")  oc- 
curs in  the  same  sense  in  Eph.  ii.  18  and  iii. 
1 2  ;  in  both  cases,  as  here,  with  the  article^ 
so  as  to  denote  some  well-known  access  or 
approach.  It  means  the  access  to  the  holy 
God,  which  had  been  barred  by  sin,  but 
which  has  been  opened  to  us  through  Christ 
(of.  Heb.  X.  19).  It  is  a  question  whether  ds 
rijv  x'^P'"  ^8  properly  taken  (as  in  the  Autho- 
ized  Version)  in  immediate  connection  with 
irpoirayay^ii,  as  denoting  that  into  which  we 
have  our  access.  In  Eph.  ii.  18  the  word  is 
followed  by  the  more  suitable  preposition 
vphs,  the  phrase  being,  "access  to  the 
Father ; "  and  this  may  be  understood  here, 
the  sense  being,  "We  have  through  Christ 
our  access  (to  the  Father)  unto  (i.e.  so  as  to 
result  in)  the  state  of  grace  and  acceptance 
in  which  we  now  stand."  As  to  "  the  glory 
of  God,"  see  above  on  ch.  iii.  23.  Here  our 
hoped-lor/uiiire  participation  in  the  Divine 
glory  is  more  distinctly  intimated  by  the 
words,  eir'  ihiriSi,  This  last  phrase  bears 
the  same  sense  as  in  1  Cor.  ix.  10,  and 
probably  in  oh.  iv.  18  above.  It  does  not 
mean  that  hope  is  that  wherein  we  glory, 
■  but  that,  being  in  a  state  of  hope,  we  glory.  ■ 
Vers.  3 — f5. — And  not  only  so,  but  we  glory 
in  tribulations  (or,  our  tribulations)  also : 
knowing  that  tribniatiou  worketh  patience ; 
and  patience,  experience;  and  experience, 
hope :  and  hope  maketh  not  ashamed ;  be- 
cause the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our 
hearts  through  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is 
given  to  us.  The  peace,  the  joy,  the  hope, 
that  come  of  faith  might  be  supposed 
unable  to  stand  against  the  facts  of  this 
present  life,  in  which,  to  those  first  believers, 
only  peculiar  tribulations  might  seem  to 
follow  from  their  faith.  Not  so,  says  the 
apustle ;  nay,  their  very  tribulations  tend  to 
confirm  our  hope,  and  so  even  in  them  we 
also  glory.  For  we  perceive  how  they  serve 
for  our  probation  now :  they  test  our  en- 
durance; and  proved  endurance  increases 
hope.  And  this  hope  does  not  shame  us  in 
the  end,  as  being  baseless  and  without  fulfil- 
ment; for  our  inward  experience  of  the 
love  of  God  assures  us  of  the  contrary,  and 
keeps  it  ever  alive.  The  word  So/ciynj)  ("  ex- 
perience," Authorized  Version)  means  pro- 
perly "proof,"  and  is  so  translated  elsewhere. 
The  idea  is  that  tribulations  test,  and  endu> 
ance  under  them  proves,  the  genuineness  of 
faith  ;  and  approved  faithfulness  strengthens 
hope  (cf.  Matt.  xxiv.  13;  Mark  xiii.  13, 
"  He  that  endureth  {vironelvas,  corresponding 
to  intofiov^iv  here)  to  the  end,  the  same  shall 
be  saved").  By  "the  love  of  God"  is  meant 


rather  God's  love  to  us  than  ours  to  God. 
What  follows  in  explanation  requires  this 
sense.  Of  course,  it  kindles  answering  love 
in  ourselves  (cf.  "  We  love  God,  because  he 
first  loved  us");  but  the  idea  here  is  tliat 
of  God's  own  love,  the  sense  of  which  wo 
experience,  flooding  our  hearts  with  itself 
through  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  may 
be  observed  that,  though  assurance  of  the 
fulfilment  of  our  hope  is  here  made  to  rest 
on  inward  feeling,  yet  this  is  legitimately 
convincing  to  those  who  do  so  feel.  As  in 
many  other  matters,  so  especially  in  religion, 
it  is  internal  consciousness  that  carries  the 
strongest  conviction  with  it,  and  induces 
certitude. 

The  verses  that  come  next  set  forth  the 
grounds  of  our  sense  of  God's  exceeding 
love  to  us. 

Vers.  6,  7. — For  when  we  were  yet  with- 
out strength,  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the 
ungodly,  Ttot  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man 
will  one  die :  yet  (literally,/or)  peradventure 
for  the  good  man  some  would  even  dare  to 
die.  The  general  purport  of  ver.  7  is  ob- 
vious, viz.  to  show  how  Christ's  death  for 
the  ungodly  transcends  all  human  instances 
of  self-sacrifice  for  others.  But  the  exact 
Import  of  the  language  used  is  not  equally 
plain.  That  of  the  first  clause,  indeed,  and 
its  connection  with  what  precedes,  presents 
no  difficulty.  The  meaning  is  that  Christ's 
dying  for  the  ungodly  is  a  proof  of  love 
beyond  what  is  common  among  men.  The 
second  clause  seems  to  be  added  as  a  con- 
cession of  what  some  men  may  perhaps 
sometimes  be  capable  of.  It  is  introduced 
by  a  second  yb.p  (this  being  the  reading  of 
all  the  manuscripts),  which  may  be  meant 
as  exceptive,  "I  do  not  press  this  without 
exception,"  being  understood.  So  Alford; 
and  in  this  case  the  "yet"  of  the  Autho- 
rized Version,  or  though,  may  give  its  mean- 
ing. Or  it  may  be  connected  with  iioXis, 
thus :  "  Scarcely,  I  say,  for  there  may  pos- 
sibly be  cases,"  etc.  But  what  is  the  dis- 
tinction between  Si/cafou  in  the  fiist  clause 
and  ToS  &7a0ov  in  the  second  ?  Some  inter- 
preters say  that  there  is  none,  the  intention 
being  simply  to  express  the  possibility  of 
human  self-sacrifice  for  one  that  is  good  or 
righteous  in  some  rare  cases.  But  the  change 
of  the  word,  which  would,  according  to  this 
view,  be  purposeless,  and  still  more  the  in- 
sertion of  the  article  before  ayaSov,  forbids 
this  interpretation.  One  view  is  that  tou 
a7a9ot!  is  neuter,  meaning  that,  though  for 
a  righteous  individual  one  can  hardly  be 
found  to  be  willing  to  die,  yet  for  the  causa 
of  good,  for  what  a  man  regards  as  the  highest 
good,  or  pro  hono  publico  (it  might  be),  such 
self-sacrifice  may  be  possible.    This  view  is 


124 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS.    [«=.  v.  1— 21. 


tennWe,  thotigli  against  it  is  the  fact  that 
death  in  behalf  of  persons  is  being  spoken 
of  all  along.  The  remaining  and  most  com- 
monly accepted  view  ie  that  by  "  the  good 
man  "  (the  article  pointing  him  out  generally 
as  a  well-known  type  of  character)  is  meant 
the  beneficent— one  who  inspires  attach- 
ment and  levotion — as  opposed  to  one  who 
is  merely  just.  Cicero  ('  De  Off.,'  iii.  15) 
is  quoted  in  support  of  this  distinction  be- 
tween the  words :  "  Si  vir  bonus  is  est  qui 
prodest  quibus  potest,  nemini  nocet,  recte 
justum  yirum,  honum  non  facile  reperiemus." 
Tholuck  quotes,  as  a  Greek  instance,  Kvpov 
ivaKoKoivres  Thv  fiepyerriv,  rhv  &vipa  rhv 
ayae6v  (iBlian, '  Var.  Histor.,'  iii.  17).  Pos- 
sibly the  term  i  dyaehs  would  have  a  well- 
nnderstood  meaning  to  the  readers  of  the 
Epistle,  which  is  not  equally  obvious  to  us. 

Ver.  8. — But  God  commendeth  Hs  own  love 
towards  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet 
ginneis,  Christ  died  for  us.  The  emphatic 
"  his  own  "  is  lost  sight  of  in  the  Authorized 
Version.  It  is  not  in  contrast  to  our  love  to 
God,  but  expressive  of  the  thought  that  the 
love  of  God  himself  towards  men  was  dis- 
played in  the  death  of  Christ.  This  is  im- 
portant for  our  true  conception  of  the  light 
in  wliioh  the  mysterious  doctrine  of  the 
atonement  is  regarded  in  Holy  Scripture. 
It  is  not  (as  represented  by  some  schools  of 
theologians)  that  the  Son,  considered  apart 
from  the  Father,  offered  himself  to  appease 
his  wrath — as  seems  to  be  expressed  in  the 
lines,  "  Actus  in  crucem  factus  es  Iriito  Deo 
victima" — ^but  rather  that  the  Divine  love 
itself  purposed  from  eternity  and  provided 
the  atonement,  all  the  Persona  of  the  holy 
and  undivided  Trinity  concurring  to  effect 
it  (of.  oh.  iii.  24;  viii.  32;  Bph.  ii.  4;  2 
Thess.  ii.  16;  John  iii.  16;  1  John  iv.  10, 
et  al.).  If  it  be  asked  how  this  Divine  love, 
displayed  in  the  atonement,  and  therefore 
previous  to  it,  is  consistent  vrith  what  is 
elsewhere  ao  continually  said  of  the  Divine 
wrath,  we  answer  that  the  ideas  are  not 
irreconcilable.  The  wrath  expresses  God's 
necessary  antagonism  to  sin,  and  the  retri- 
bution due  to  it,  inseparable  from  a  true 
conception  of  the  Divine  righteousness ;  and 
as  long  as  men  are  under  the  dominion  of 
sin  they  are  of  necessity  involved  in  it; 
but  this  is  not  inconsistent  with  ever-abiding 
Divine  love  towards  the  persons  of  sinners, 
or  with  an  eternal  purpose  to  redeem  them. 
It  may  be  added  here  that  the  passage 
before  us  intimates  our  Lord's  essential 
Deity ;  for  his  sacrifice  of  himself  is  spoken 
of  as  the  display  of  God's  own  love. 

Vers.  9, 10. — Much  more  then,  being  now 
Justified  by  (literally,  in)  his  blood,  we  shall 
be  saved  from  the  wrath  through  him.  Foi 
if,  when  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reoon- 
eiled  to  Qod  through  the  death  of  his  Son, 


much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be 
saved  by  (literally,  in)  his  Ufe.  In  these 
verses,  the  second  being  an  amplification  of 
the  first,  our  relations  to  God  are  set  forth, 
as  before,  by  the  analogy  of  such  as  may 
snbsist  between  man  and  man.  Men  do  not 
usually  die  for  their  enemies,  but  they  do 
seek  the  good  of  their  friends.  If,  then, 
God's  superhuman  love  reconciled  ns  to 
himself  through  the  deith  of  his  Son  when  wa 
were  still  his  enemies,  what  assurance  may 
we  not  now  feel,  being  no  longer  at  enmity, 
of  being  saved  from  the  wrath  (tijs  opyijs, 
ver.  9)  to  which,  as  sinners  and  enemies,  we 
were  exposed  I  There  is  also  a  significance 
(ver.  10)in  the  words  "deatii"  and  "life." 
Christ's  death  wms  for  atonement,  and  in  it 
we  are  conceived  as  having  died  with  him 
to  our  former  state  of  alienation  from  God. 
His  resurrection  was  the  inauguration  of  a 
new  life  to  God,  in  which  with  him  we  live 
(cf.  ch.  vi.  3,  et  seqq.}.  The  words  "  enemies  " 
{ixSpoV)  and  "reconciled"  (_KaTa\\ilyrifiei>, 
(coTiiA.Aayej'Tej)  invite  attention.  Does  the 
former  word  imply  mutual  enmity,  or  only 
that  we  were  God's  enemies?  We  may 
answer  that,  though  we  cannot  attribute 
enmity  in  its  proper  human  sense  to  God, 
or  properly  speak  of  him  as  under  any  cir- 
cumstances the  enemy  of  man,  yet  the  ex- 
pression might  perhaps  be  used  with  regard 
to  him  in  the  way  of  accommodation  to 
human  ideas,  as  are  anger,  jealousy,  and  the 
like.  There  seems,  liowever,  to  be  no  neces- 
sity for  this  conception  here,  the  idea  being 
rather  that  of  man's  alienation  from  God, 
and  from  peace  with  him,  through  sin ;  as 
in  Col.  i.  21,  "  And  you,  that  were  sometime 
alienated  and  enemies  in  your  mind  by 
wicked  works."  So  Theodoret  interprets: 
Oi  ix^pol  S^  Tofy  ivTo\wv  t^s  fijjSe  {nrotetiKiaffi^ 
yey6/ievoi  &(rirep  (plkoi  ol  fiirwojKo^cs.  So  too, 
Clem.  Alex., '  Strom.,'  1.  iii. :  Kol  /i^  te  ko9i£- 
irep  4wl  ToS  0coD,  ovScvl  /liy  ayrmetirdat 
Atyo/iey  riv  ISAv,  ouSi  ^xSphy  eJyiu  rivir 
irdyTav  yhp  KTiarqs,  /cal  avHv  Icrri  rav  into- 
aT&vriDV  %  liii  e4\ei.  ia/jiey  S^  aiT(p  4x9pobs 
that  Tobs  iireieeis  Ka\  n^i  Kara  tAi  iyroKit 
airoi!  vopevo/ieyovs.  With  regard  to  "  recon- 
ciled," it  may  be  first  observed  that,  how- 
ever orthodox  and  capable  of  a  true  sense 
it  may  be  to  speak  of  God  being  reconciled 
to  man  through  Christ  (as  in  Art.  il.,  "to 
reconcile  his  Father  to  ns"),  the  expres- 
sion is  not  scriptural.  It  is  always  man 
who  is  said  to  be  reconciled  to  God;  and  it 
is  God  who,  in  Christ,  reconciles  the  world 
unto  himself  (2  Cor.  v,  19 ;  of.  also  Eph.  ii 
16 ;  Col.  i.  20,  21).  Still,  more  is  evidently 
implied  than  that  God  reconciles  men  to 
himself  by  changing  their  hearts  and  con- 
verting them  from  sin  by  the  manifestation 
of  his  love  in  Christ.  The  reconoiliation  ia 
apoken  of  as  effected  once  for  all  for  all  man- 


OH.  V.  1—21.]     THE  EPISTLEi  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


125 


kind  in  the  atonement,  independently  of, 
and  pieviously  to,  the  conversion  of  believers. 
Faith  only-appiopiiates,  and  obedience  testi- 
fies, the  appropriation  of  an  accomplished 
reconciliation  available  for  all  mankind. 
That  inch  is  the  view  in  the  passage  before 
us  is  distinctly  evident  from  all  that  follows 
after  ver.  12. 

Yer.  11. — ^And  not  only  lo,  but  we  also 
glory  in  Ood  thl&ngh  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
through  whom  we  have  now  received  the 
reoonoiliation.  We  not  only  have  an  as- 
sured hope;  we  also  glory  already  in  our 
restoration  to  peace  with  God;  our  mental 
state  is  an  exultant  one  even  now.  A  tacit 
reference  may  be  supposed  to  oh.  liL  27  and 
iy.  2,  where  all  human  glorying  was  said  to 
be  shut  out.  Yes,  this  remains  true — in 
ourselves  we  cannot  glory ;  but  in  God,  who 
has  reconciled  us,  we  can  and  do.  It  is  to 
be  observed  that  neither  this  nor  other  pas- 
sages (such  as  ch.  viii.  30,  sej.),  where  an 
exultant  assurance  of  salvation  is  expressed, 
justify  the  doctrine  of  assurance,  as  some- 
times understood;  viz.  in  the  sense  that  an 
individual  beUever  may  and  ought  to  feel 
certain  of  his  own  final  salvation,  on  the 
ground  of  having  once  been  justified.  The 
condition  of  continued  faithfulness  is  all 
along  implied  (cf.,  among  other  texts,  1  Cor. 
ix.  27 ;  Heb.  vi.  4,  etc. ;  x.  26,  etc.). 

Vers.  12 — 21. — (6)  From  consideration  of 
the  blessed  effects  on  believers  of  faith  in 
the  reconciliation  through  Christ,  the  apostle 
now  passes  to  the  effects  of  that  reconeilia- 
tion  as  the  position  of  the  whoh  human  race 
before  Ood.  His  drift  is  that  the  recon- 
ciliation corresponds  to  the  original  trans- 
gression; both  proceeded  from  one,  and  both 
include  all  mankind  in  their  results :  as  the 
one  introdnced  sin  into  the  world,  and,  as 
its  consequence,  death,  so  the  other  intro- 
duced righteoumeas,  and,  as  its  consequence, 
Ufe. 

It  may  be  observed  that  in  ch.  i  also  he 
has  in  one  sense  traced  sin  backward  through 
the  past  ages,  so  as  to  show  how  all  man- 
kind had  come  to  be  under  condemnation 
for  it.  But  the  subject  was  regarded  from 
a  different  point  of  view,  the  purpose  of  the 
argument  being  also  different.  There  he 
was  addressing  the  heathen  world,  his  pur- 
pose being  to  convince  the  whole  of  it  of 
sin,  on  the  score  of  obvious  culpability; 
and,  suitably  to  this  design,  his  argument 
if  based,  not  on  Scripture,  but  on  observa- 
tion of  the  facts  of  human  nature  and  hiuian 
bistory.    It  did  not  fall  vcithin  Jiie  scope  to 


trace  the  evil  to  its  original  cause.  But 
here,  having  shown  Jew  and  Gentile  to  be 
on  the  same  footing  with  respect  to  sin,  and 
having  entered  (at  oh.  iii.  21)  on  the  doc- 
trinal portion  of  his  Epistle,  he  goes  to 
Scripture  for  the  origin  of  the  evil,  and 
finds  it  there  attributed  to  Adam's  original 
transgiession,  which  implicated  the  human 
race  as  an  organic  whole.  This  is  the 
scriptural  solution  of  the  mystery,  w1  ich 
he  here  gives,  not  only  as  accounting  for 
things  being  as  they  are,  but  also,  in  con- 
nection with  the  stage  of  the  argument  at 
which  he  has  now  arrived,  as  explaining 
the  necessity  and  the  purpose  of  the  atone- 
ment for  the  whole  guilty  race,  effected  by 
the  second  Adam,  Christ. 

Ver.  12. — ^Wherefore,  as  through  one  man 
sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death 
through  sin;  and  so  death  passed  upon  all 
men,  for  that  all  sinned.  To  this  sentence, 
introduced  by  Siirirep,  there  is  no  apodosis. 
One  has  been  sought  in  the  course  of  what 
follows,  and  by  some  found  in  ver.  18.  But 
ver.  18  is  a  recapitulation  rather  than  re- 
sumption of  the  argument,  and  is,  further, 
too  far-  removed  to  be  intended  as  a  formal 
apodosis.  It  is  not  really  necessary  to  find 
one.  The  natural  one  to  the  first  clause  of 
the  sentence  would  have  been,  "  So  through 
One  righteousness  entered  into  the  world,  and 
Ufe  through  righteousness ;  "  and  such  may 
be  supposed  to  have  been  in  the  writer's 
mind.  But,  after  his  manner,  he  goes  off  to 
enlarge  on  the  idea  expressed  in  tbe  second 
clause,  and  never  formally  completes  his 
sentence.  A  similar  anacoluthon  is  found 
in  1  Tim.  L  3.  Sin  is  here,  as  elsewhere, 
regarded  as  a  power  antagonistic  to  God, 
which  has  been  introduced  into  the  world 
of  man,  working  and  manifesting  itself  in 
concrete  human  sin  (cf.  ch.  v.  21 ;  vi.  12, 
14  i  vii.  8,  9, 17).  Its  ultimate  origin  is  not 
explained.  Scripture  offers  no  solution  of 
the'  old  insoluble  problem,  7r68€»  rh  KOKhv: 
its  existence  at  all  under  the  sway  of  the 
Omnipotent  Goodness  in  which  we  believe 
is  one  of  the  deep  mysteries  that  have  ever 
baffled  human  reason.  All  that  is  here 
touched  on  is  its  entrance  into  the  world 
of  man,  the  word  ei(rrj\8e  implying  that  it 
already  existed  beyond  this  mund.iue  sphere. 
The  reference  is,  of  course,  to  Gen.  iii.,  as 
the  scriptural  account  of  the  beginning  of 
sin  in  our  own  world.  It  is  there  attributed 
to  "the  serpent,"  whom  we  regard  as  a 
symbol  of  some  mysterious  power  of  evil, 
external  to  man,  to  which  primeval  man,  in 
tbe  exercise  of  his  prerogative  of  free-will, 
succumbed,  ofki  so  let  sin  in.     Through 


126 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL.  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  v.  1—21. 


tin  entered  also  death  as  its  consequence; 
which  (primarily  at  least)  must  mean  here 
physical  death,  this  being  all  that  is  de- 
noted in  Genesis  (comp.  iii.  19  with  ii. 
17),  and  necessary  to  be  understood  in  what 
follows  in  the  chapter  before  us  (see  ver. 
14).  But  here  a  difSculty  presents  itself  to 
modern  thought.  Are  we  to  understand 
that  man  was  originally  so  constituted  as 
not  to  die  ? — that  even  his  bodily  organiza- 
tion was  immortal,  and  would  have  con- 
tinued so  but  for  the  futal  taint  of  sin? 
We  find  it  difficult  at  the  present  day  to 
conceive  this,  however  bound  we  may  feel 
to  submit  our  reason  to  revelation  in  a 
matter  so  remote,  so  unknown,  and  so  mys- 
terious as  the  beginning  of  human  life  on 
the  earth,  iu  whatever  aspect  viewed,  and 
indeed  of  all  conscious  life,  must  ever  be. 
But  St.  Paul  himself,  in  another  place, 
speaks  of  "  the  first  man  "  having  been,  even 
on  his  first  creation,  "  of  the  earth,  earthy  " 
(1  Cor.  XV.  45,  47),  with  a  body,  like 
ours,  of  "  flesh  and  blood,"  in  its  own  nature 
corruptible  (1  Cor.  xT.  50).  Neither  is  the 
narrative  of  Gen.  iii.  inconsistent  with  this 
idea.  For  it  seems  to  imply  that,  but  for 
his  eating  of  the  mystical  "tree  of  life" 
(whatever  may  be  meant  by  it),  the  first 
man  was  in  his  own  nature  mortal,  and  that 
his  liability  to  death  ensued  on  his  being 
debarred  from  it  (Gen.  iii.  22).  It  may  be 
icbpossible  for  us  to  understand  or  explain. 
The  following  considerations,  however,  may 
perhaps  help  us  in  some  degree.  (1)  When 
we  pay  regard  to  man's  spiritual  capabilities 
and  aspirations,  even  as  he  is  now,  death 
does  seem  to  us  an  anomaly — a  contradic- 
tion to  the  ideal  of  his  inner  self.  That  a 
buast  of  the  field  should  die  appears  to  us 
no  such  anomaly ;  for  it  has  done  all  that  it 
seems  to  have  been  meant  to  do,  or  to  be 
capable  of  doing :  it  has  served  as  a  link 
in  the  continuance  of  its  kind,  not  having 
been  conscious,  as  far  as  we  know,  of  any- 
thing beyond  its  surroundings.  But  man 
(i.e.  man  as  he  is  capable  of  being,  so  as  to 
represent  the  capacity  of  humanity)  con- 
nects himself  in  his  inner  self  with  eternity; 
his  mind  resents  the  idea  of  death,  as  an 
unwelcome  stoppage  to  its  development  and 
its  yearnings.  It  goes  on  ev6r  maturing 
its  power,  enlarging  its  range,  thirsting  for 
higher  knowledge,  entertaining  affections 
that  seem  eternal;  and  then  bodily  decay 
and  death  arrest  its  progress  as  it  were  in 
mid-career.  Thus  death,  as  it  comes  to  us 
and  affects  us  now,  seems  to  involve  a  con- 
tradiction between  man's  inner  conscious- 
ness and  the  facts  of  his  existence  at  present; 
it  is  shrunk  from  as  something  that  ought 
not  to  be.  It  is  true  that,  when  faith  has 
once  grasped  the  idea  of  bodily  death  being 
but  a  tzausitioQ  to  a  better  life,  the  anomaly 


disappears:  but  such  is  its  aspect  to  tha 
natural  man:  and  thus  we  can  enter  into 
the  scriptural  idea  of  death,  as  it  comes  to  ua 
so  inevitably  now,  being  something  not  origin- 
ally meant  for  man,  though  we  may  be  un- 
able to  say  how  it  would  have  been  with  him 
had  not  sin  entered.  (2)  Though  physical 
death,  obvious  to  men's  eyes,  and  not  spiri- 
tual death  of  the  soul  either  in  this  world 
or  in  the  world  to  come,  ia  iiere  evidently 
in  view  (see  ver.  14),  yet  we  must  bear  in 
mind  the  general  idea  associated  with  the 
word  "death"  in  the  New  Testament.  It 
is  sometimes  used  so  as  to  imply  more  than 
the  mere  parting  of  the  soul  from  the  body, 
including  in  the  conception  of  what  it  is 
all  the  woes  and  infirmities  that  flesh  is  heir 
to,  which  are  its  precursors  in  the  present 
state  of  things  (of.  1  Cor.  xv.  31 ;  2  Cor.  iv. 
10,  12,  16  ;  vi.  9),  being  thus  regarded  also 
as  the  visible  sign  before  our  eyes  of  man's 
present  alienatiun  from  the  life  that  is  iu 
God.  St.  Paul,  then,  in  the  passage  before 
ns,  though  alleging  mere  natural  death  as 
sufficient  evidence  of  sin,  may  be  conceived 
as  having  in  his  view  Death  armed  as  he 
has  been  vritli  a  peculiar  sting  to  man 
through  all  known  time.  The  main  point 
of  his  argument  is  that  the  doom  recorded 
in  Genesis  as  having  been  pronounced  on 
Adam  had  obviously  remained  in  force 
throughout  the  ages ;  and  there  is  surely 
no  difficulty  in  assenting  to  the  position  that 
the  dominion  of  death,  as  it  bus  been  exer- 
cised since  that  doom,  is  evidence  of  its 
continuance,  and  consequently  of  sin.  "  For 
that  all  sinned"  (more  correctly  so  than, 
as  in  the  Authorized  Version,  "all  have 
sinned")  seems  to  mean,  not  that  all  since 
Adam  in  their  own  persons  committed  sin, 
but  that  aU  sinned  in  him — were  implicated 
in  the  sin  of  the  progenitor  (of.  ver.  15; 
also  1  Cor.  xv.  22,  "in  Adam  all  die;" 
and  2  Cor.  v.  14,  where  all  are  said  to  have 
died  <o  sin  in  the  death  of  Christ).  The 
doctrine  of  original,  as  distinct  &om  actual, 
sin,  thus  inthnated,  has  been,  as  is  well 
known,  the  subject  of  much  controversy 
since  the  time  of  Felagius.  It  does  not  fail 
within  the  proper  scope  of  this  Commentary 
to  discuss  the  theories  of  divines,  but  rather 
to  set  forth  candidly  what  the  language  of 
the  portions  of  Scripture  commented  on  in 
itself  most  obviously  means,  viewed  in  the 
light  afforded  by  general  Scripture  teach- 
ing. With  respect  to  the  passage  before  us, 
it  may  suffice  to  say:  (1)  That  more  must 
be  understood  than  the  mere  imputation  of 
A.dam's  transgression  to  his  descendants, 
irrespectively  of  any  guilt  of  theirs.  This 
notion,  which  jars  on  our  conception  of 
Divine  justice,  is  precluded  by  the  entire 
drift  of  the  earlier  chapters  of  this  Epistle^ 
which  wa«  the  actual  eulpability  of  m  ait 


OT.V.  1— 21.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


127 


kind  at  large,  and  also  by  what  follows  here, 
gin  itself  being  spoken  of — not  the  imputa- 
tion of  it  only — as  being  in  the  world  after 
Adam,  and  universal  too,  as  evidenced  by 
the  continued  reign  of  death.  All  men  are 
Baid  to  have  sinned  in  the  sin  of  the  first 
transgressor,  because  sin  was  thus  intro- 
duced, as  a  power  in  human  nature  antago- 
nistic to  God,  and  because  this  "infection 
of  nature"  has  continued  since.  And  thus 
(2)  the  Pelagian  position  is  also  precluded, 
according  to  which  "original  sin  standeth 
i(mly)  in  the  following  of  Adam  "  (Art.  ix.), 
i.e.  in  actual  imitation  of  his  sin,  which  man 
is  supposed  to  have  still,  as  Adam  had,  the 
power  to  avoid.  For  it  is  expressly  said 
(ver.  14)  that  death  reigned  over — in  proof 
that  sin  infected — even  those  who  had  not 
sinned  after  the  similitude  of  his  transgres- 
sion. But  (3)  we  must  guard  against  con- 
fnsion  between  the  idea  of  man's  natural 
liability  to  condemnation  on  the  ground  of 
transmitted  sinfulness,  and  that  of  God's 
actual  dealing  with  liim.  It  ia  nowhere 
said  or  implied  that  the  natural  infection 
which  they  could  not  help  will  be  visited 
on  individuals  in  the  final  judgment.  All 
that  is  insisted  on  by  St.  Paul  is  that  man, 
in  himself,  as  he  is  now,  falls  short  of  the 
glory  of  God,  and  cannot  put  in  a  plea  for 
acceptance  on  the  ground  of  his  own  right- 
eousness. But  he  no  less  emphatically  de- 
clares that  "  where  sin  abounded,  grace  did 
much  more  abound." 

Vers.  13,  14.  —  For  until  Law  (i.e.  all 
through  the  time  previous  to  the  revelation 
of  law)  sin  was  in  the  world :  but  sin  is 
not  imputed  when  there  Is  no  law.  Never- 
theless death  reigned  from  Adam  to  Hoses, 
even  over  them  that  had  not  siimed  after 
the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgression. 
Though  v6fios,  where  it  first  occurs  in  ver. 
13,  refers  definitely,  as  appears  from  the 
context,  to  the  Law  of  IVIoses,  yet  it  is  with- 
out the  article,  as  denoting  tlie  principle  of 
law,  of  which  the  Mosiiio  code  was  the  em- 
bodiment ;  and  it  has  therefore,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  rule  laid  dovrn  in  this  trans- 
lation, been  rendered  as  above.  The  purport 
of  these  two  verses,  connected  by  yap  with 
rivTes  fj/iaproy  of  ver.  12,  is  to  prove  that 
the  primeval  sin  did  really  infect  and  impli- 
cate tlie  whole  race  of  mankind.  It  might 
be  supposed  that  those  only  would  be  im- 
plicated who  had  themselves  transgressed, 
as  Adam  did,  a  known  command;  it  being 
an  acknowledged  principle  of  Divine  justice 
that  only  sin  against  law  of  which  the  sinner 
U  conscious  is  imputed  to  him  for  con- 
demnation (cf.  ch.  iv.  15 ;  also  John  ix.  41). 
Nay.  but  the  universal  dominion  of  death, 
the  doom  of  ein,  over  all  alike,  whether  or 
not  they  had  themselves  so  ginned,  was 
proof  that  sin  was  aiU  along  dominant  in  the 


world,  infecting  all.  The  Mosaic  Law  {■ 
spoken  of  as  the  distinct  revelation  of  Divine 
Law  to  man ;  and  therefore  attention  ia 
first  drawn  to  the  fact  that  before  that  re- 
velation, no  less  than  after  it,  death  had 
reigned  over  all.  But  is  it  thus  implied 
that  until  the  Law  from  Mount  Sinai  men 
had  been  without  any  kind  of  law,  for  trans- 
gressing which  they  were  responsible  ?  Hot 
so.  That  Law  is  indeed  regarded  as  the 
first  definite  enunciation  of  law  under  evi- 
dent Diviae  sanction,  after  which,  to  those 
that  were  under  it,  sin  became  indubitably 
and  exceeding  sinful;  but  that  men  are 
conceived  as  having  sinned  previously 
against  law  of  some  kind,  appears  from  the 
phrase,  "  Even  over  those  (/co!  ^jrl  roiis)  who 
had  not  sinned  after  the  similitude  of  Adam's 
transgression,"  i.e.  consciously  against  a 
known  command.  This  surely  implies  that 
some  had  so  sinned;  and  thus  the  e.-sential 
point  of  the  argument  is  that  even  over 
those  who  had  not  so  sinned  (sueh  as  the 
unenlightened  and  invincibly  ignorant,  or 
persons  dying  in  infancy)  death  had  equally 
reigned.  Who  is  the  figure  of  him  that  was 
to  come.  This  is  added  so  as  to  bring 
round  the  thought  to  the  main  subject  of 
the  chapter,  viz.  the  reconciliation  of  all 
mankind  through  Christ,  to  which  the 
scriptural  account  of  the  condemnation  of 
all  mankind  through  Adam  had,  at  ver.  12, 
been  adduced  as  analogous.  Who  refers  to 
Adam,  who  has  just  been  for  the  first  time 
named;  he  that  was  to  come  ia  Christ,  who 
is  called,  in  1  Cor.  xv.  45,  "  the  last  Adam." 
Adam  was  a  type  (rra-oj)  of  Christ  in  that 
both  represented  entire  humanity;  one  as 
the  representative  and  author  of  fallen,  the 
other  of  restored,  humanity — the  transgres- 
sion of  the  one  and  the  obedience  of  the 
other  alike  affecting  all  (see  vers.  18,  19). 
But  there  is  a  difl'erence  between  the  two 
cases;  and  this  is  pointed  out  in  vers.  15, 
16,  17,  which  follow. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — But  not  as  the  trespass,  so 
also  is  the  free  gift.  For  if  by  the  trespass 
of  the  one  the  many  died  (not,  he  dead,  as 
in  the  Authorized  Version.  Observe  also 
the  articles  before  "one"  and  "many"), 
much  more  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by 
grace,  of  the  one  Man,  Jesus  Christ,  abonnded 
unto  the  many.  And  not  as  through  one 
that  sinned,  so  ia  the  gift :  for  the  judgment 
was  of  one  (e|  eybi)  unto  condemnation,  but 
the  free  gift  ia  of  (^/c)  many  offences  unto 
justification.  For  if  by  the  offence  of  the 
one  death  reigned  through  the  one,  much 
more  they  which  receive  the  abundance  of 
grace  and  of  the  gift  of  righteousness  shall 
reign  in  life  through  the  One,  Jesus  Christ. 
The  purport  of  these  verses  is  (while  keeping 
up  the  view  of  condemnation  and  justifica- 
tion bein^;  both  de^v^  to  all  fropi  one)  to 


128 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  v.  1-21. 


show  how  the  effects  of  the  latter  for  good 
far  transcend  those  of  the  former  for  evil. 
It    is    not  easy,   however,  to  explain    the 
apostle's  exact  intention  in  the  contrasts 
which  he  draws.    He  seems  to  have  written, 
alter  his  manner,  full  of  ideas  which  he  did 
not  linger  to  arrange  in  clear  form.    In  ver. 
15  the  contrast  between  "  trespass ''  {ttafiir 
Trraiio)  and  "  free  gift "  (x<^pi<r/to)  seems  to 
be   the    leading    idea.      The    suggesting 
thought    seems    to    be— If  (as   has   been 
shown)  one  man's  trespass  had  such  far- 
rcacliing  effects,  much  more  must  the  grace 
of  God  (displayed  also  in  One)  have  no  less 
far-reaching  effects.    God's  grace  must  be 
more  powerful  than  man's  trespass.    And 
it  is  here  asserted  that  it  was  so.    The 
much  more  (TroAAqji  /jloWov)  is  best  taken  (as 
it  must  be  in  ver.  17)  in  a  logical,  not  a 
quantitative  sense;    i.e.  as   enforcing    the 
conclusion,  not   as   intensifying   the  verb 
"  abounded."    So  far  the  effects  are  not  dis- 
tinctly contrasted  in  respect  to  their  extent ; 
all  that  is  implied  in  this  verge  is  that  both 
reach  to  the  many  (oi  iroAAol),  i.e.  tlie  whole 
human  race  collectively ;  unless,  indeed,  the 
verb  iirepi(r<rfv<re  implies  excess  of  effect. 
It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  phrase   oi 
woWol  does  not  here  mean,  as  is  usual  in 
classical  Greek,  the  greater  part,  but  the 
multitude,  mankind  being  regarded  collec- 
tively.   It  depends,  however,  on  the  writer's 
mental  horizon  whether  the  phrase,  taken 
by  itself,  is  to  be  understood  as  compre- 
hending all.    The  consideration  is  of  im- 
portance in  the  case  before  us.     On  the  one 
hand,  it  may  be  contended  that,  in  the  first 
clause  of  the  verse,  "  the  many  "  must  mean 
all,,  for  that  undoubtedly  all  died  (of.  ver. 
12,  eij  TtdvTas  avBpiirrovs  6  Bdvaros  hi.rt\6ev), 
and  that  consequently  all  must  be  intended 
also  in  the  second  clause.    So  also  in  ver. 
19,  where  it  is  said  that  SCxaioi  KaraaTadri- 
ffovTai    oi  TToXAo!.     And  it  may  be   sahi, 
further,  that  the  drift  of  the  whole  argument 
requires  the  view  of  the  effects  of  the  re- 
demption  being  at  least  coextensive  with 
the  effects  of  the  fall.    But,  on  the  other 
band,  it  is  argued  that  St.  Paul  would  not 
have  used  the  phrase  oi  iroWol  in  vers.  15 
and  19  instead  of  TrivTis  as  in  vers.  12  and 
18,  unless  he  had  intended  some  differjince 
of  meaning,  and  that  he  varied  his  eipres- 
Bion  in  order  to  avoid  the   necessary  in- 
ference that  all  would  be  saved  in  fact. 
Certainly  he  teaches  that  the  redemption  is 
available  and  intended  for  all,  as  in  ver.  18, 
where  it  is  said  to  be  els  irai'Tas  avBpdvovs, 
els  Suealaatv  iw'ns  i  and  this,  it  may  be  said, 
is  enongh  to  satisfy  the  view  of  its  effects 
(i.e.  in  purpose  and  potentially)  being  co- 
extensive with  the  effects  of  the  fall.    But 
it  does  not  seem  to  follow  that  man's  resist- 
ance \o  grace  ml^ht  no(  co;ne  in  as  a  bar  to 


the  entire  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  purpoie ; 
and  hence  these  passages  cannot  be  pressed 
as  conclusive  for  the  doctrine  of  universal 
final  salvatioD.  But  in  vers.  16,  IT  (to  be 
taken  together,  ver.  16  being  introduced  by 
Koi,  so  as  to  suggest  a  new  idea,  and  ver.  17 
being  connected  with  it  by  yap)  the  extmtt 
to  which  grace  thus  abounded,  so  as  to 
transcend  the  effects  of  the  original  trans- 
gression, is  distinctly  set  fortb.  The 
thought  of  these  verses  may,  perhaps,  be 
expressed  otherwise,  thus :  The  one  trespass 
of  the  one  original  transgressor  did  indeed 
render  all  mankind  liable  to  condemnation ; 
but  the  free  gift  in  Ohrist  annulled  the  effect, 
not  only  of  that  one  trespass,  but  also  of 
all  subsequent  trespasses  of  mankind;  an 
immense  debt,  accumulating  through  the 
ages  of  human  history,  in  addition  to  the 
original  debt,  was  by  that  one  free  grant 
obliterated.  And  further,  while  the  original 
trespass  introduced  a  temporary  reign  of 
death,  the  free  gift  of  righteousness  intro- 
duced life,  in  which  the  partakers  of  the 
gift  themselves — triumphant  over  Death, 
who  reigned  before — shall  reign;  and,  as 
in  ver.  15  the  idea  was  that  God's  grace 
must  be  more  powerful  than  man's  sin,  so 
here  it  is  implied  that  life  in  Ohrist  must 
be  more  powerful  than  death  in  Adam. 
Life  means  here  (as  elsewhere  when  the 
life  in  Christ  is  spoken  of)  more  than  the 
present  life  in  the  flesh — more  than  the  life 
breathed  into  man  when  he  first  "became 
{lyhert  els)  a  living  soul "  (1  Cor.  xv.  45). 
It  means  the  higher  life  imparted  by  "  the 
last  Adam,"  who  "  became  a  quickening 
Spirit"  (1  Cor.  xv.  45);  eternal  life  with 
God,  in  the  life  of  Christ  risen,  swallowing 
up  mortality  (2  Cor.  v.  4 ;  cf  also  John  xi. 
25).  Thus  the  "  free  gift"  not  only  reverses 
the  far-reaching  effects  of  the  original  trans- 
gression, but  even  transcends  what  is  inti- 
mated in  Genesis  as  given  to  man  in  Para- 
dise before  his  fall. 

The  next  two  verses  (18,  19),  introduced 
by  6.pa  oSy,  are  a  summing  up  of  what  hag 
been  already  said  or  implied. 

Ver.  18. — So  then,  as  through  one  tregpass 
(rather  so  than  "  by  the  offence  of  one,"  um 
in  the  Authorized  Version)  the  judgment 
came  upon  all  men  unto  condemnation,  so 
also  through  one  act  of  righteousness  (so 
Bevised  Version.  The  expression  is  Si'  evhs 
SiKaiiiiiaTos,  contrasted  with  the  preceding 
Si'  iyis  rapaTTto/iaTos)  the  free  gift  came 
upon  all  men  onto  Justification  of  life,  i.e. 
conferring  life.  "Declaratio  Divina  ilia, 
qua  peccator,  mortis  reus,  vit»  adjudicator, 
idque  jure"  (Bengel).  Here,  as  was  ob- 
served under  ver.  15,  the  phrase  used  is  els 
ir4>'TW  av8f)(ijrovs,  no^  els  Toij  »oM»i'»!  tlillS 


OH.  V.  1—21.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS. 


129 


indisputably  denoting  nniveisality  of  effect, 
08  of  the  itap&itTaiM,  so  also  of  IiKafujua. 
But  theie  is  no  Terb  to  make  clear  the  force 
of  the  pieposition  tU.  It  may  denote  the 
result  to  which  a  cause  tends,  without  im- 
ply ing  its  inevitable  accomplish  ment.  Thus 
(ch.  viL  10),  Eupe'flij  lioi  ij  ivToKii  r)  els  fo)))i', 
t&Ti)  CIS  edvaroy,  where  the  same  preposi- 
tion ezpressei  both  the  intended  result  of 
life  and  the  actual  result  of  death. 

Yer.  19. — For  as  through  the  one  man's 
disobedience  the  many  were  made  sinners, 
■0  also  through  the  obedience  of  the  One 
shall  the  many  be  made  righteous.    As  to 
the  significance  of  of  iroXAol,  see  under  ver. 
15,    The  phrase,  if  taken  as  equivalent  to 
irivTfs,  would  seem  here  to  imply  even 
more  than  in  ver.  15 ;  for  there  it  was  only 
said  that  "  the  gift  .  .  .  abounded  unto  the 
many ; "  here  an  actual  result  is  expressed 
by  the  future,  SUaioi  KaTosTaSiiaovTai..    But 
even  so  the  universality  of  final  salvation 
need  not  necessarily  follow.    The  phrase  is, 
"  shall  be  constituted  righteous,"  and  might 
only  mean  that  all  will  be  put  into  the 
position  of  justified  persons,  capable  as  such 
of  salvation,  just  as  all  had,  through  the 
first  transgression,  been  put  into  the  posi- 
tion of  sinners,  liable  as  such  to  condem- 
nation ;  and  the   future    tense   might   be 
taken  to  denote  the  continuance,  through 
all  future  ages,  of  the  availing  effect  of 
the    accomplished    atonement.       Further, 
it    may    be   remarked    that    if   universal 
final   salvation  did   seem   to  follow  from 
the  passage  before  as,  it  would  still  have 
to   be    understood    consistently    with    the 
purport  of  oh.    vi.,  vii.,  and  viii.,  which 
follow.    In  them  the  practical  result  to  the 
believer  of  his  justification  through  Christ 
is  treated ;  and  renunciation  of  sin,  "  living 
after  the  Spirit,"  is  postulated  as  the  con- 
dition for  attaining  the  life  eternal.    Hence, 
if  the  doctrine  of  "  eternal  hope "  be  soimd 
(and  who  can  fail  to  desire  that  it  should  be 
so  ?},  it  must  be  to  some  unknown  reconcilia- 
tion beyond  the  limits  of  the  present  life 
that  we  must  look  in  the  case  of  those  who 
have  not  fulfilled  the  necessary  conditions 
here.     Thus,  fiuther,  the  doctrine  cannot 
legitimately  be  allowed  to  affect  our  view 
of  OUT  responsibilities  now.    To  us  the  only 
doctrine  distinctly  revealed  on  the  subject 
of  salvation  is  that  it  is  in  this  present  life 
that  we   are   to   make  our  "calling   and 
election  sure."    Two  ways  are  put  before 
ua — the  way  of  life,  and  the  way  of  death; 
the  one  leading  to  ^a)i  aldvias,  the  other  to 
Ki\a(rii  aidvios.    In  vers.  6 — 10  (as   else- 
where, see  note  on  ch.  iii.  25)  it  was  through 
the  death,  the  blood,  of  Christ  that  we  were 
said  to  have  been  reconciled  to  God ;  here 
it  is  through  his  obedience,  opposed  to  the 
diaobedienee  of  Adam.    Though  the  doctrine 
ooiuns. 


of  the  atonement,  in  all  its  depth,  Is  beyond 
our  comprehension  now  (see  above  on  ver.  9), 
yet  it  IS  important  for  lu  to  observe  the 
various  aspects  in  which  it  is  presented  to 
us  in  Scripture.  Here  the  idea  suggested 
is  that  of  Christ,  as  the  Bepresentative  of 
humanity,  satisfying  Divine  righteousness 
by  perfect  obedience  to  the  Divine  will,  and 
thus  offering  to  God  for  man  what  man  had 
lost  the  power  of  offering  (of.  Ps.  xl.  10, 
"  Lo,  I  come  to  fulfil  thy  will,  O  my  God ; " 
and  Heb.  ix.  14;  x.  9,  et  leg. ;  also  Phil.  li. 
8,  "  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross  "). 

Vers.  20,  21.  —  Moreover  Law  entered 
(rather,  came  in  betides),  that  the  trespass 
might  abound,  But  where  sin  abounded, 
grace  did  much  more  abound  (or,  did  abound 
exceedingly) :  that  as  sin  reigned  in  death, 
even  so  might  grace  reign  through  right- 
eousness unto  eternal  life  through  Jesui 
Christ  our  Eord.  Here  vS/ios  (though  with- 
out the  article ;  see  under  ver.  13)  refers  to 
the  Mosaic  Law,  the  purpose  of  which  in 
the  economy  of  redemption  is  thus  inti- 
mated, so  as  to  complete  the  view.  It  was 
God's  purpose  from  the  first  that  grace 
should  in  the  end  triumph  over  sin;  but  in 
the  mean  time  law  came  in  (cf.  vpoaereBri 
in  the  cognate  passage.  Gal.  iii.  19).  For 
what  end?  Not  in  itself  to  accomplish  the 
purpose,  not  to  interfere  with  its  accom- 
plishment, but  as  an  intervening  dispensa- 
tion to  prepare  for  its  accomplishment,  by 
convincing  of  sin,  and  making  it  exceeding 
sinful,  and  so  establishing  the  need  of,  and 
exciting  a  craving  for,  redemption.  This 
intervening  preparatory  office  of  the  Mosaic 
Law  is  set  forth  more  at  length  in  Gal.  iii. 
19 — 26 ;  and  the  working  of  the  principle 
of  law  to  this  end  in  the  human  conscious- 
ness is  analyzed  in  ch.  vii.  of  this  Epistle. 

Additional  Note  on  ver.  12. 
The  significance  of  the  words  "  life  "  and 
"  death,"  as  used  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles  and 
elsewhere,  demands  peculiar  attention.  They 
evidently  bear  a  sense  in  many  places  dif- 
ferent from  that  of  ordinary  use ;  and  thi* 
in  accordance  with  our  Lord's  own  recorded 
langoage,  as,  for  instance,  in  his  memorable 
words  to  Martha,  given  in  John  xi  25,  26. 
The  following  considerations  may  aid  our 
comprehension  of  what  is  meant.  The  mys- 
terious principle  or  potency  of  life,  even  in 
the  common  acceptation  of  the  term,  varies 
not  only  in  degree,  but  in  kind;  and  the 
same  living  organism  may  be  at  the  same 
time  alive  with  respect  to  its  own  mode  of 
vitality,  and  dead  with  respect  to  some 
higher  one  which  vivifies  ottien.  The  plant, 
while  alive  with  respect  to  its  own  kind  of 
life,  is  dead  to  the  higher  life  of  sentient 
beings.    The  brute  beast,  while  alive  wUk 

K 


ISO 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  v.  1—21. 


respect  to  mere  animal  life,  is  dead,  as  it 
were,  to  the  higher  life  of  intelligent  man. 
A  whole  world  of  environing  influences  to 
which  the  mind  of  man  responds,  so  as  to  live 
in  them,  are  to  the  hrute  as  nothing ;  it 
may  be  said  to  be  dead  to  them.  Now,  Scrip- 
ture teaches,  and  we  believe,  that  there  is  a 
spiritual  sphere  of  things  above  and  beyond 
tliis  visible  sphere,  which  man  is  capable 
of  apprehending,  being  influenced  by,  and 
living  a  still  liigher  life  than  his  natural 
life  therein.  Ho  is  thus  capable  through 
the  higher  and  diviner  part  of  liis  mys- 
terious being,  called  by  St.  Paul  his  irvivfia 
(cf.  1  Thess.  V.  23,  "tiiJiv  rb  Trvevfjui,  Ka\  t] 
^vxh  Kol  rb  o-S^a),  when  in  touch  with 
the  Divine  irveS/io.  For  man  to  be  in  vital 
correspondence  with  his  spiritual  environ- 
ments is  spiritual  life ;  to  be  out  of  cor- 
respondence with  them  is  spiritual  death. 
And  so,  as  the  plant  is  dead  to  sentient 
life,  though  alive  in  its  own  life;  or  as 
the  brute  may  be  said  to  be  dead  to  the 
higher  life  of  man,  though  alive  in  mere 
animal  life;  so  man  may  be  dead  as  to 
tpiritital  life,  though  alive  as  to  peycMcal 
life ;  and  thus  "  dead  while  he  liveth  "  (cf. 
1  Cor.  ii.  14,  "The  natural  man  (tfivxiichs 
HvBponros')  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the 
Spirit  of  God ;  for  they  are  foolishness  unto 
him :  neither  can  he  know  them,  because 
they  are  spiritually  discerned."  In  otlier 
words,  he  is  dead  to  them).  Further,  this 
spiritual  life,  unlike  the  psychical  life,  is 
ever  spoken  of  as  eternal.  For  it  consists  in 
intercommunion  of  man's  immortal  part 
with  the  spiritual  sphere  of  things  wliich  is 
eternal.  Nor  does  natural  death  interrupt 
it ;  for  it  is  not  dependent  for  its  continu- 
ance, as  is  psychical  lif^,  on  environments 
from  which  we  are  severed  by  the  body's 


death,  but  on  such  as  are  eteinaL  Thus, 
too,  we  see  how  it  is  that  eternal  life  is 
regarded,  not  as  one  that  vrill  have  its  com- 
mencement after  death,  but  as  one  to  be 
enjoyed  at  present,  and  to  which  we  are  to 
rise  in  Christ  even  now.  This  idea  is  notabl  y 
expressed  in  our  Lord's  words  above  referred 
to:  "I  am  the  Resurrection,  and  the  Life: 
he  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he  die,  yet 
shall  he  live;  and  whosoever  liveth  and 
believeth  in  me  shall  never  die"  (John  xi. 
25,  26).  Doubtless  we  are  bidden  to  look 
forward  to  a  fulness  and  perfection  of  tiie 
eternal  life,  of  which  our  present  enjoyment 
of  it  is  but  an  earnest,  in  the  <rSiiia  -irpivfia- 
tm6v  (1  Cor.  XV.  44)  in  store  for  us  here- 
after— cf.  "  Beloved,  now  are  we  children  of 
God,  and  it  is"  not  yet  manifested  what  we 
shall  be,"  etc.  (1  John  iii  2)— but  still  this 
is  regarded  as  but  the  consummation  of  a  life 
already  begun.  On  the  other  hand,  what- 
ever penal  consequences  of  a  state  of  spiritual 
death  may  be  spoken  of  as  in  store  hereafter 
for  the  wicked,  it  is  regarded  as  being  itself 
but  the  continuance  of  a  state  of  death  in 
which  they  are  before  they  pass  away 
(of.  Eev.  xxii.  11).  In  ch.  v.  12,  etc.,  to 
which  this  note  refers,  the  above  view  of 
what  is  often  meant  by  "  death "  ought  to 
be  kept  before  us.  For,  though  the  apostle 
seems  evidently  to  be  speaking  of  the  natural 
death  that  comes  to  all,  he  must  be  taken  as 
regarding  it  as  but  the  symbol  and  evidence 
of  the  sway  of  that  spiritual  death  to  which 
all  men  are  now,  in  their  fallen  nature, 
liable. 

The  thoughts  embodied  in  the  above  note 
have  been  derived  from,  or  suggested  by, 
'Natural  Law  in  the  Spiritual  World,'  by 
Henry  Drummond,  F.E.S.B.,  F.G.S.  (Hod- 
der  and  Stoughton  :  1888). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1,  2, — Christian  'privilege.  There  has  been  laid,  in  the  preceding  chapters,  a 
firm  foundation  for  the  doctrines,  promises,  and  precepts  recorded  here.  The  apostle 
has  depicted  human  sin,  misery,  and  helplessness ;  has  shown  how  impossible  it  is 
that  man  should  be  justified  by  the  works  of  the  Law,  and  that  his  sole  hope  lies  in  the 
free  mercy  of  God;  and  has  set  forth  Christ  Jesus  crucified  and  raised  as  the  ground 
upon  which  Divine  favour  is  extended  to  the  penitent  and  believing,  justifying  this 
method  of  procedure  as  in  harmony  with  the  universal  administration  of  the  Divine 
government.  If  we  take,  with  the  Revised  Version,  the  verbs  in  these  verses  as  in  the 
imperative  mood,  they  then  contain  a  summons  to  all  true  Christians  to  appropriate 
the  spiritual  privileges  secured  to  them  by  the  Author  of  eternal  salvation. 

L  V/e  have  here  a  btatbmekt  op  thb  Cheistian'b  position.  1.  What  is  itf 
Justification;  a  state  of  accepfance  with  Q-od,  who,  for  Christ's  sake,  regards  and 
treats  the  believer  in  Jesus  as  righteous,  and  not  as  guilty.  Until  the  conscience  is 
assured  of  Divine  favour  and  forgiveness  there  is  no  solid  peace.  2.  Who  saourea  it  1 
Jesus  Christ.  Although  Paul  has  already  shown  this  at  length,  he  refers  again  in 
both  these  verses  to  the  Redeemer,  to  whom  we  owe  justification,  and  all  the  blessings 
which  follow  ic  its  train.    It  is  through  him  that  we  "  have  had  our  introduction  into 


OH.  V.  1—21.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  131 

this  grace.''  8.  How  is  ifohtained  f  By  faith.  Christ  has  done  all  that  Is  necessary,  on 
his  part,  to  secure  our  salvation.  But  there  is  needed  something  upon  our  part.  We 
have  to  receive  upon  the  Divine  terms,  as  a  free  gift,  the  greatest  of  all  blessings.  It 
is  a  spiritual  act  and  attitude  and  exercise,  indispensable  to  the  new  life.  4.  By  what 
title  is  it  held  f  By  that  of  grace ;  it  is  gratuitous.  This  is  for  our  advantage ;  for 
no  question  is  raised  as  to  our  fitness.  The  only  question  is  as  to  God's  faithfulness ; 
and  this  is  not  only  pledged,  but  absolutely  sure. 

II.  We  have  here  a  bepbbsbntation  of  the  Christian's  present  pbivileqb.  "  We 
have,"  says  the  apostle, "  [or  rather,  *  let  us  have ']  peace  with  God."  1.  This  is  the  peace 
of  siibmission.  The  sinner  is  at  enmity  with  God.  In  becoming  a  Christian,  he  lays 
down  the  weapons  of  rebellion,  and  ceases  from  his  opposition  to  rightful  authority. 
It  is  a  complete  reversal  of  his  former  attitude.  2.  This  is  also  the  peace  of  reconcilia- 
tion. Concord  is  established.  Divine  rule  is  cordially  accepted.  Divine  principles 
acknowledged,  Divine  precepts  obeyed.  The  Christian  takes  God's  will  for  his  will ; 
and  this  is  true  peace.  3.  It  is,  further,  the  peace  of  confidence.  Nations  are  sometimes 
on  the  footing,  with  respect  to  one  another,  of  an  armed  truce.  Very  different  is  the 
relation  between  the  God  of  peace  and  his  reconciled,  obedient  subjects ;  for  they  can 
rest  in  the  assured  enjoyment  of  his  favour.  Therefore  theirs  is  a  peace  which 
passeth  understanding,  and  a  peace  which  is  never  to  be  violated. 

III.  We  have  here  a  kbvblation  of  the  Christian's  hope  for  the  ruTuitE.  "  Let 
ui  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God."  1.  Observe  what  it  is  we  are  encouraged  to 
hope  for.  The  expression  is  one  which,  in  the  nature  of  things,  we  cannot  now  fully 
comprehend.  God's  glory  is  essentially  moral  and  spiritual.  Yet  we  are  assured  that 
Christians  shall  be  changed  into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory  ;  that  the  Divine 
glory  shall,  in  due  time,  be  revealed  in,  or  rather  unto,  us.  It  is  a  wonderful  pros()ect 
compared  with  which  all  human  and  terrestrial  hopes  are  pale  and  dim.  2.  To  cheiish 
such  a  hope  occasions  present  joy.  Even  though  our  circumstances  are  distinguished 
by  much  that  might  naturally-  depress  and  dishearten  us,  even  in  suffering,  weakness, 
or  persecution,  such  a  prospect  as  is  here  unfolded  may  well  animate  our  hearts  and 
sustain  our  courage.  And  as  the  realization  of  this  hope  grows  nearer  and  nearer,  it 
behoves  the  Christian  to  cherish  this  rejoicing  more  and  more  fondly  and  happily. 
Peace  here,  and  glory  hereafter,  such  is  the  Christian's  privilege  I  What  more  can  he 
desire?    What,  comparable  with  this,  can  this  world  impart  or  proffer? 

Applioation.  Let  those  who  are  without  peace  here,  and  without  hope  for  the 
hereafter,  consider  whether  there  is  any  way  to  these  blessings  save  that  here  pro- 
pounded— the  way  of  justification  through  faith  in  Christ. 

Vers.  2 — 5. — Christian  discipline.  Christianity  is  a  religion  intended  both  for 
heaven  and  for  earth.  It  does  not  lose  sight  of  the  present  when  gazing  into  the 
future,  visible  to  it  alone.  Beginning  with  our  relation  to  God,  it  establishes  thereupon 
our  relation  to  men.  It  unfolds  morality  in  the  act  of  revealing  the  spiritual  and 
Divine.  It  represents  heaven,  not  merely  as  a  compensation  for  the  miseries  of  time 
and  earth,  but  as  a  state  attained  by. the  training  and  the  education  which,  in  the 
order  of  Divine  providence,  time  and  earth  are  primarily  intended  to  provide  for  men. 

I.  This  earthly  life  is  here  depicted  as  a  scene  of  tribulation.  That 
human  existence  is  characterized  by  trouble  and  sorrow  is  a  trite  but  indisputable 
truth.  There  is  no  person  who  has  ever  lived  to  whom  all  things  have  happened  as 
he  would  have  wished.  A£d  with  most  persons  life  has  been,  in  many  respects,  a 
long  contradiction  of  their  natural  tastes  and  preferences.  Whether  in  body  or  in  mind, 
in  circumstances  or  in  relationships,  in  associations  or  employment,  by  bereavement  or 
defections,  all  men  are,  and  have  ever  been,  in  some  way  or  other  afOicted.  This 
condition  of  our  earthly  pilgrimage  is  to  many  an  occasion  of  annoyance,  irritation, 
murmuring,  rebellion.  Others,  of  a  more  reasonable  habit  of  mind,  submit,  with  a 
certain  stolidity,  to  what  they  regard  as  inevitable  evil.  But  true  religion  teaches  a 
better  way  of  accepting  our  lot.  We  are  taught  to  expect  tribulation,  and  we  are  not 
taught  to  regud  piety  as  exempting  from  the  common  discipline.  "  Count  it  not 
strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial  among  you."  Our  great  Leader  passed  through 
worse  tribulation  than  any  of  his  followers;  though  he  did  not  merit  any  of  his 
sorrows,  whilst  we  deserve  more  than  all  of  ours.    He  has  also  given  us  to  understauA 


132  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  v.  1—21. 

what  shall  be  our  experience.  "  In  the  world,"  said  he,  "  ye  shall  have  tribulation." 
There  1s  uo  discharge  from  this  war.  The  Jews,  indeed,  often  expected  prosperity  as  a 
rewaid  of  piety  ;  and  •  great  English  writer  has  said,  "  Prosperity  was  the  blessing  of 
the  old  covenant,  adversity  of  the  new."  The  cup  is  passed  round  in  the  household 
of  God,  and  every  member  of  that  household  must  drink  of  it.  Those  specially  afflicted 
may  be  reminded  that,  though  it  is  no  relief  to  them  to  learn  that  others  suffer,  it  is 
an  indication  of  Divine  providence  that  the  universal  fact  is  a  law  intended  to  work 
purposes  in  harmony  with  the  nature  and  character  of  the  holy  and  benevolent 
Lawgiver. 

II.  The  process  is  hebe  described  bt  which  tkibulation  proves  beneficial. 
The  Apostle  Paul  took  pleasure  in  showing  the  reasonableness  of  religious  belief,  He 
might  have  stood  upon  the  authority  of  his  inspiration,  and  have  required  his  readers 
to  accept  tribulation  as  certain  to  benefit  such  of  them  as  were  true  Christians.  But 
be  chose  rather  to  show  them  how  the  discipline  of  Divine  wisdom  promotes  the  highest 
welfare  of  tjtie  faithful.  There  is  a  ladder,  by  the  several  steps  of  which  tlie  follower 
of  Christ  mounts  from  earthly  trial  to  heavenly  joy.  The  foot  of  the  ladder  may  be 
upon  the  cold  soil  of  earth,  but  its  top  reaches  to  the  clouds.  Let  us  bear  in  mind, 
however,  that  it  is  not  a  natural  and  necessary  result  of  tribulation,  that  the  afflicted 
should  profit  by  it.  It  depends  upon  the  light  in  which  the  sufferer  views  it,  the  spirit 
in  whicu  he  accepts  it,  whether  affliction  is  or  is  not  a  discipline  of  good.  It  must  be 
a  fellowship  with  Christ  to  be  serviceable  to  so  high  an  end ;  and  the  teaching  must 
be  that  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Consider  the  steps  of  the  process.  1.  "  Tribulation 
worketh  patience"  This  assertion  would  be  contested  by  many,  who  are  made 
mpatient  by  this  experience.  Those  who  see  much  of  their  fellow-creatures  know 
that  there  are  many  cases  in  which  affliction  produces  fretfulness  and  moroseness', 
which  grow  as  the  ai&iction  is  protracted.  Yet  in  how  many  instances  is  this  teaching 
of  the  text  verified  1  The  naturally  impetuous,  hasty,  wilful  spirit  is  humbled, 
subdued,  and  curbed.  In  suffering,  or  in  a  position  where  it  is  necessary  to  contend 
with  unreasonable  men,  or  amidst  many  disappointments,  there  may  be~  acquired  a 
habit  of  self-command  and  self-restraint,  which  may  both  tend  to  personal  happiness 
and  may  naturally  increase  influence  over  others.  By  "patience"  here  is  to  be 
understood  something  more  than  passive,  quiet  suffering;  endurance  and  constaiicy 
are  intended.  The  patient  man  is  not  he  who  lies  down  discouraged  under  difficulties, 
but  the  man  who  holds  on  his  way  with  cheerful  resolution  and  perseverance.  Christian  1 
you  are  called  to  patient  continuance  in  well-doing.  2.  "Patience  worketh  experience ;" 
or,  as  in  the  Revised  Version,^rol>a<»om,  or,  as  in  the  'Speaker's  Commentary,' approval. 
The  man  who  endures  affliction  is  put  to  the  proof,  is  tested.  And  this  is  a  true  and 
scriptural  view  of  temptation.  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth  temptation :  for 
when  he  hath  been  approved,  he  shall  receive  the  crown  of  life."  The  sword  is  bent 
to  the  utmost  to  prove  the  temper  of  the  steel ;  the  gun  is  heavily  charged  to  prove 
the  strength  and  soundness  of  the  metal ;  the^  precious  ore  is  cast  into  the  furnace  to 
separate  the  gold  from  the  dross ;  the  wheat  is  threshed  that  the  flail  may,  by  the 
literal  "  tribulation,"  prove  that  there  is  grain  as  well  as  straw.  So  the  good  man  is 
placed  by  a  wise  Providence  in  circumstances  which  bring  out  what  there  is  in  him, 
which  give  him  occasion  to  call  upon  the  Lord  for  help  and  guidance  and  deliverance. 
So  far  from  calamity  being  a  sign  of  God's  displeasure,  let  the  afflicted  be  reminded,  for 
their  consolation,  that  Scripture  represents  human  trou^  in  a  very  different  light. 
"  Whom  he  luveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth."  Call 
to  miud  the  experience  of  the  saints  of  old.  Daniel  is  an  example  of  a  man  who  was 
tried  and  proved,  and  who  was  shown  by  his  afflictions  and  persecutions  to  be  a  true 
and  faithful  servant  of  Jehovah.  Paul  himself  led  a  life  of  labour,  hardship,  suffering, 
harassment,  and  sorrow  ;  but  by  Divine  grace  he  was  thereby  made  strong  for  service, 
quick  to  sympathize.  The  story  of  every  good  man's  life,  if  truly  told,  will  teach  the 
same  lesson,  'i'he  Lord  does  not  willingly  afflict ;  there  is  a  purpose  in  tribulation ;  it 
is  trial  which  brings  out  and  confirms  all  Christian  virtue.  3.  "  Probation  wrrketh 
hope."  Here  we  seem  to  be  getting  out  of  the  shadow  into  the  sunshine.  "  Hope  "  is 
a  pleasant,  cheery  word.  Who  has  not  known,  in  seasons  of  adversity  and  in  moods 
of  depression,  what  it  is  to  be  comforted  by  the  sight  of  the  rainbow  which  spans  the 
cloud?     Tke  " streuglh-inspiriug  aid"  of  hope  has  often  made  the  feeble  mighty. 


dft.  ▼.  1—21.]     THE  EPISTLE  Of  PAtIL  TO  THtJ  ROMAITS.  1S3 

Kow,  of  all  men,  the  Christian  has  most  ground  for  hope.  His  expectation  of  direction, 
guardianship,  and  happiness  rest,  not  upon  the  whisperings  of  fond  imagination,  or 
the  promises  of  fallihle  fellow-men,  but  upon  the  word  of  a  faithful  and  unchanging 
God.  "  Hope  thou  in  God  1 "  is  the  counsel  religion  offers  to  the  downcast  and  the 
Bad.  Such  hope  as  is  based  upon  the  Divine  character,  as  is  directed  towards  objects 
guaranteed  by  Divine  assurances,  is  indeed  "  an  anchor  unto  the  souL"  Trial  may  be 
a,  bitter  medicine ;  but  it  works  •  wondrous,  and  sometimes  a  speedy  and  a  perfect, 
cure  for  spiritual  ills.  Probation  may  seem  a  harsh,  unkindly  soil ;  but  the  crop  of 
hope  it  bears  proves  its  adaptation  and  fertility.  There  have  been  persons  who  in 
prosperity  have  known  little  of  the  brightness  of  the  Christian's  hope,  who  have  then 
been  slow  to  look  upwards  to  the  sunlit  hills,  but  whom  adversity  has  benignh- 
taught  to  turn  their  eyes  away  from  things  seen  and  temporal  to  things  unseen  and 
eternal.  Hope  may  be  despised  by  the  worldly-wise  and  sensual ;  but  it  is  a  Christian 
grace  in  which  the  Lord  of  our  life  takes  pleasure,  and  by  which  he  urges  the  travellers 
onwards  upon  the  road  which  leads  to  the  blessed  vision  of  himself,  i.  "  Hope  maketh 
not  ashamed."  A  common  expression  in  Scripture.  Men  often  cherish  expectations 
which  are  never  fulfilled,  and  those  so  disappointed  are  said  to  be  put  to  shame ;  they 
have  built  on  a  sandy  foundation,  and  in  the  storm  of  trial  the  edifice  they  haVo  reared 
is  swept  away,  and,  as  they  gaze  upon  the  wreck  and  ruin,  they  are  overwhelmed  with 
shame.  But  those  who  have  hoped  in  the  Lord,  and  trusted  in  his  Word,  shall  never 
be  ashamed  or  confounded,  world  without  end.  The  apostle  may  be  understood  to  say, 
"  Bope  worketh  realization."  Not  that  the  hope  fulfils  itself;  but  that  God,  in  his 
wisdom  and  love,  fulfils  it.  We  are  all,  in  many  respects,  in  the  position  of  those  that 
hope — that  hope  in  the  Lord.  We  are  pilgrims,  and  we  look  for  a  city.  We  are 
jwarriors,  and  we  look  for  victory.  We  are  labourers,  and  we  look  for  rest.  We  are 
afflicted,  and  we  look  for  relief  and  release.  We  are  on  earth,  and  we  look  for  heaTen. 
"  If  we  hope  for  that  we  see  not,  then  do  we  with  patience  wait  for  it."  The  best 
and  purest  hopes  of  the  follower  of  Jesus,  those  which  he  inspires  and  warrants,  those 
which  respect  himself,  shall  all  be  realized.  We  shall  see  our  Saviour  "as  he  is." 
We  shall  be  "  like  him."  We  shall  "  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple."  We 
shall  be  "  ever  with  the  Lord."  Such  hopes  as  these  will  not  unfit  us  for  the  common 
duties  of  life;  they  will  assist  us  to  discharge  those  duties  with  diligence  and  cheer- 
fulness. Yet,  being  sons,  we  are  heirs ;  and  the  blessedness  of  inheritance  casts  the 
radiant  light  of  heaven  upon  our  earthly  lot. 

III.  We  aee  hbbk  reminded  op  the  dutt  and  peivileob  of  eejoioino.  In 
the  previous  verse  the  apostle  has  summoned  us  to  "  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of 
God."  This  seems  natural  enough ;  but  it  does  sound  strangely  to  hear  him  add  here, 
"  Let  us  also  rejoice  in  our  tribulations "  I  This  is  paradoxical,  against  all  ordinary 
notions  of  what  is  fitting.  Yet  it  is  just.  If  we  have  followed  the  steps  of  that 
process  of  discipline  here  described  by  St.  Paul,  we  must  see  that  it  is  reasonable 
enough  that  he  should  admonish  us  to  rejoice  in  those  experiences  of  human  life  which 
Divine  providence  so  wisely  and  graciously  overrules  for  our  spiritual  and  eternal  good. 
PauI  himself  exemplified  his  own  lesson.  When  he  and  Silas  were  in  prison  at  Philippi, 
with  their  feet  in  the  stocks,  at  midnight  they  sang  praises  to  God,  and  the  prisoners 
heard  them.  When  imprisoned  in  Eome,  he  could  write,  "  Eejoice  in  the  Lord  alway  : 
again  I  will  say.  Rejoice  I "  We  may  rejoice  in  tribulation,  because  it  is  the  appoint- 
ment of  our  heavenly  Father.  Our  joy  should  be  in  our  Father's  will ;  for  he  will 
support  and  sustain  under  the  burden  which  he  has  imposed.  We  may  rejoice  in 
tribulation,  because  we  are  Christ's  people,  and  we  share  his  lot  when  we  suffer 
with  and  for  him.  "  Insomuch,"  says  Peter,  "  as  ye  are  partakers  of  Christ's  suff-jrings, 
rejoice ;  that  at  the  revelation  of  his  glory  also  ye  may  rejoice  with  exceeding  joy." 
"  If  we  suffer  with  him,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him."  We  may  rejoice  in  tribulation 
ftlso,  because  we  are  assured  that  the  patient  and  submissive  shall,  by  the  help  oi 
God's  Spirit,  reap  the  harvest  of  spiritual  profit  and  eternal  life.  "  I  reckon,"  says 
the  apostle,  "  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  life  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with 
the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  [or, '  unto ']  us." 

Application.  The  tribulations  of  life  are  common  to  all.  But  tbe  profit  ol 
tribulation  is  for  those  only  who  receive  Divine  discipline  in  submission,  and  with 
futh  in  •  Father's  wisdom  and  love.      Sad  is  the  position  of  those  who  have  U 


134  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  V,  1—21. 

endure  the  trials  of  life  without  the  support  of  God's  love,  or  the  prospect  of  eternal 
glory  1 

Ver.  5. — Qod^t  love  in  the  heart.  The  process  of  spiritual  discipline  which  the 
apostle  has  described  is  not  a  process  natural  to  men,  but  one  supernatural  and  special 
to  the  sincere  Christian.  The  tribulations  of  this  life  do  not  work  the  good  of  all 
who  are  visited  by  them ;  on  the  contrary,  many  are  hardened  by  the  trials  which  are 
sent  to  humble  and  soften  and  improve.  But  they  profit  by  earthly  discipline  who 
cordially  receive  the  gos()el  of  Christ,  and  whose  spiritual  nature  is  brought  under  the 
influence  of  the  cross.  For  to  such  God  is  a  loving  Father,  and  all  things  that  happen 
to  them  are  regarded  as  appointed  by  him.  They  are  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
who  brings  before  them  in  their  troubles  the  prospect  of  the  future,  inspiring  hopes 
which  Divine  faithfulness  shall  surely  realize,  "  because  the  love  of  God  hath  been 
shed  abroad  in  their  hearts."    Observe — 

L  The  gift  imparted.  "  The  love  of  God."  This  is  probably  not  our  love  to  God, 
but  his  love  to  us,  which  indeed  ever,  when  recognized  and  felt,  kindles  the  flame  ot 
affection  within  the  breast  of  the  Christian.  1.  This  love  is  properly  part  of  the 
Divine  nature  and  character.  So  distinctive  is  this  gracious  attribute  of  the  Supreme 
Father,  that  we  are  told  that  "  God  is  love."  How  diffisrent  a  representation  of  the 
Deity  from  those  current  among  the  unenlightened  idolaters !  How  fitted  to  comfort 
and  encourage  the  people  of  the  Lordl  2.  This  love  is  regarded  by  Christians  as 
especially  revealed  in  Christ  Jesus.  In  this  Epistle,  whilst  the  inspired  apostle  sets 
forth  the  Christ  as  revealing  the  righteousness  of  God,  he  also  exhibits  the  Divine  love 
as  more  conspicuously  revealed  in  "  the  unspeakable  Gift "  than  by  any  other  means. 
In  this  representation,  indeed,  all  the  apostles  are  agreed.  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that 
we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Propitiation  for  our 
sins."  In  this  language  St.  John  teaches  the  same  precious  lesson.  There  was  love 
in  the  advent,  love  in  the  ministry,  love  in  the  death,  love  in  the  ascension,  of  our 
Saviour ;  and  there  is  love  in  his  intercession  and  his  reign.  3.  This  love  becomes, 
by  Divine  grace,  the  possession  of  the  true  believers  in  Christ.  It  is  not  merely 
something  to  be  admired  for  its  unparalleled  moral  splendour  and  beauty  and  excel- 
lence.   It  is  to  be  appropriated  and  held  and  enjoyed.    This  leads  us  to  consider — 

II.  The  natdeb  that  is  J'Illed  by  this  love.  It  is  "  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts." 
If  we  believe  in  the  love  of  a  fellow-creature,  and  return  that  love,  there  is  in  such 
experience  something  more  than  belief;  there  is  strong  and  joyful  feeling.  The  heart 
is  the  home  of  love.  And  love  constitutes  the  riches  of  the  heart.  It  is  so,  not  only 
in  the  mutual  relations  of  human  beings,  but  in  the  relation  between  the  soul  and  God. 
No  doubt,  mystics  and  sentimentalists,  monks  and  nuns,  saints  in  their  ecstasies  and 
revivalists  in  their  fervour,  have  often  used  language  extravagant,  sickly,  and  senti- 
mental concerning  the  love  of  God  in  the  heart.  But  unquestionably  the  danger  with 
ordinary  English  Christians  lies  in  the  tendency  towards  the  opposite  extreme.  We 
are  in  no  great  danger  from  sentimental  raptures.  But  we  are  in  danger  of  regarding 
religion  too  much  as  an  affair  of  belief  and  of  duty.  Love  is  not,  indeed,  to  begin  and 
end  in  the  heart ;  it  is  to  become  a  motive  to  action,  a  principle  of  endurance,  an 
inspiration  to  cheerfulness  and  content.  But  that  it  may  be  all  this,  it  miist  first 
be  a  feeling,  a  hallowed,  spiritual  emotion.  The  heart  must  contemplate  the  peerless 
love  of  God  revealed  in  Christ,  and  must  rejoice  in  the  revelation.  This  love  must  be 
the  most  welcome  theme  of  meditation,  and  must  be  present  in  the  soul,  not  only  in 
prosperity  and  happiness,  but  in  the  season  of  trial  and  distress.  A  natural  question 
arises — How  can  this  come  to  pass?  How  can  a  nature,  prone  to  sin  and  selfishness, 
come  to  take  such  pleasure  in  the  pure  love  of  a  benevolent  and  mercifid  God?  To 
answer  this  inquiry,  we  must  observe — 

III.  ""he  agency  by  which  the  gift  is  bestowed.  "  By  the  Holy  Ghost  which 
is  given  unto  us."  That  the  Holy  Spirit  should  have  access  to  our  hearts  is  what 
we  might  reasonably  expect  should  be  the  case.  "  The  Spirit  witnesseth  with  our 
spirits."  This  Divine  agency  of  illumination  and  quickening  and  renewal  ever  accom- 
panies the  truths  o!  the  gospel,  and  accounts  for  their  exercising  an  influence  so  great 
over  human  hearts.  It  would  be  dishonouring  to  God  were  we  to  claim  for  ourgelyes 
the  natural  and  moral  power  to  appropriate  or  even  to  appreciate  Divine  love.    It  is 


ca.v.1— 21.]     THE  EPISTLE  OJ  PAUL  OX)  THE  ROMANS.  135 

all  of  grace.  For  observe  "  the  Holy  Q-host  is  given  unto  us."  This  does  not  mean  that 
the  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  capricious  and  arbitrary.  On  the  contrary,  laws — 
though  they  may  not  be  understood  by  us — explain  all  the  Divine  action ;  and  there 
is  reason,  even  in  the  impartation  of  spiritual  influences  and  the  communication  of 
celestial  love.  But  it  must  be  plainly  understood  that  we  have  no  just,  legal  claim 
upon  God  for  his  Spirit.  Wo  may  use  the  means  he  has  appoi'nted.  We  may  ask  the 
Father  for  his  choicest  Gift.  We  may  make  ready  •>  dwelling-place  for  the  heavenly 
Guest.  We  may  await  the  promise  of  the  Father.  Yet,  when  given,  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  given  freely,  and  of  sovereign  clemency  and  favotir.  Let  us  bear  in  mind  our  daily 
need  of  the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  love  in  order  to  our  happiness,  and  in  order  to 
the  efficiency  and  acceptableness  of  our  service.  And  let  our  sense  of  need  lead  us 
to  daily  supplications  for  that  Divine  and  spiritual  influence  that  can  make  real  and 
sweet  to  us  the  love  of  God  in  Christ,  that  we  may  feel  its  constraining  power,  and 
may  learn  to  live,  not  unto  ourselves,  but  unto  our  Lord  I , 

Vers.  9, 10. — Reconciliation  and  salvation.  God's  love  to  man  has  its  expression 
and  proof  in  the  gift  of  Christ.  In  what  way  does  this  gift  enrich  and  bless  those 
for  whom  it  is  intended?  The  apostle  answers  this  question  in  these  two  verses. 
By  Christ's  death  his  people  are  reconciled  to  him,  and  by  Christ's  life  they  are  saved. 

L  The  feivilegbs  op  Christ's  people  in  the  present.  1.  These  are  described 
here,  in  one  verse  as  justification,  and  in  the  other  as  reconciliation.  The  first  term 
implies  that  there  takes  place,  in  the  case  of  those  who  believe,  a  "  reversal "  of  the 
sentence  of  condemnation.  Those  who  Were  guilty  before  God  are  accepted ;  those 
who  were  judged  by  law  are  now  received  into  favour.  The  second  term  implies  that 
a  state  of  enmity  has  been  replaced  by  a  state  of  friendship  and  concord.  Those  who 
were  in  arms  against  God,  and  towards  whom  a  righteous  Euler  could  not  turn  a 
look  of  complacency,  are  now  pardoned,  submissive,  obedient,  and  at  peace  with 
Heaven.  It  is  the  same  change  presented  in  different  lights.  2.  By  what  means  is 
this  state  of  privilege  secured  for  the  people  of  the  Lord?  The  means  are  described 
iu  one  verse  as  the  hlood,  in  the  other  as  the  death,  of  Christ.  The  same  thing  is 
intended  by  the  two  expressions,  the  shedding  of  blood  being  equivalent  to  the  taking 
of  life.  The  language  evidently  points  back  to  those  sacrifices  which  were,  by  Divine 
appointment,  offered  under  the  old  covenant.  Jesus,  the  Mediator,  was  both  the 
Victim  and  the  Priest ;  he  offered  himself  to  the  Father  for  us.  "  Without  shedding 
of  blood  is  no  remission  of  sin  ;  "  a  great  principle  this  in  the  goveirnment  of  God ; 
paidon  and  salvation  are  secured  through  suffering  and  sacrifice  and  devotion.  The 
blood  is  the  emblem  of  the  life,  and  consequently  the  blood-shedding  is  emblematical, 
in  the  case  of  our  Lord,  of  his  willing  surrender  of  himself,  his  life,  with  a  visw  to 
redeem  a  sinful  and  guilty  race. 

II.  The  prospects  op  Christ's  people  ik  the  future.  1.  What  have  they  to  look 
forward  to  ?  The  answer  of  the  text  is  salvation.  Justification  is  an  act  of  God ; 
salvation  seems  to  be  a  process,  to  be  commenced  here  and  perfected  hereafter.  "  Now 
is  salvation  nearer  to  you  than  when  you  first  believed."  There  are  many  ills,  trials, 
temptations,  from  which  Christians  have  yet  to  be  delivered ;  and  only  when  beyond 
this  world  can  their  salvation  (however  now  perfectly  assureS)  be  regarded  as  actually 
accomplished,  2.  From  what  do  Christians  expect  to  be  saved?  From  wrath;  by 
which  is  to  be  understood  the  displeasure  and  indignation  which  the  righteous  Buler 
cannot  but  feel  against  sin  and  sinners,  and  which  will  be  manifested  in  the  future 
punishment  of  the  ungodly,  impenitent,  and  unbelieving.  3.  By  what  means  do 
Christians  hope  to  he  saved  from  wrath?  By  Christ's  life.  His  death  is  represented 
as  the  means  of  present  acceptance,  his  life  as  the  means  of  future  salvation.  By 
Christ's  life  is  to  be  understood  his  life  after  his  crucifixion  and  entombment — the 
life  whieh  now  is  and  will  be  for  ever.  The  connection  between  our  Saviour's  heavenly 
life  and  our  salvation  is  unmistakable  and  binding.  His  resurrection  was  theassurauce 
that  his  mediation  was  accepted.  His  ascension  and  life  above  are  the  condition  of 
his  sympathetic  intercession  and  his  mediatorial  reign.  His  presence  on  the  throne  of 
heaven  is  the  pledge  of  our  immortal  fellowship  with  him.  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall 
live  also." 

IIL  Notice  THE  aroument  prom  the  greater  to  the  less.    It  is  the  greatesi 


136  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  tO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  t.  1—21. 

marvel  of  the  universe,  the  central  mystery  of  revelation,  that  God,  in  Christy  converted 
foes  and  rebels  into  friends  and  subjects.  If  we  can  receive  this,  we  need  have  no 
hesitation  in  receiving  the  supplementary  doctrine  that  God  will  eternally  save  those 
whom  he  has  graciously  justified.  If  enemies  are  reconciled,  surely  friends  shall  be 
mvedl 

Ver,  11. — "Joy  in  Ood."  Men  cherish  the  most  direrse,  varied  feelings  towards  God. 
Some  are  haters  of  God,  regarding  him  as  their  enemy.  Others  are  indifferent  to  God, 
utterly  forgetting  him,  acting  as  though  he  were  not.  Others,  again,  have  so  far  a  just 
apprehension  of  God  that  they  fear  him,  standing  in  awe  of  his  righteous  authority. 
And  there  are  those  who  love  God  and  rejoice  in  him.  These  last  are  they  who  appre- 
ciate the  privileges  which  have  been  prepared  for  the  true  believers  in  Christ,  the  true 
people  of  God. 

I.  Observe  the  element  of  spiritual  jot.  It  is  joy  in  God.  In  God,  as  their 
Father,  their  all-sufficient  and  eternal  Portion.  In  God,  as  faithful  to  his  promises,  as 
gracious  and  benevolent,  as  wise  to  guide  and  strong  to  keep  and  save.  This  is  the 
d^ily  exclamation  of  the  Christian,  "I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord;  my  soul  shall 
be  joyful  in  my  God." 

II.  There  is  mentioned  the  cause  foe  joy.  1.  This  is  to  be  found  in  reconciliation. 
There  is  no  joy  in  hostility  or  estrangement ;  but,  when  those  who  have  been  alienated 
are  brought  into  harmony,  peace  brings  gladness  to  the  souls  of  reunited  friends. 
Remembering  what  momentous  issues  depend  upon  our  friendship  with  our  Creator  and 
Judge,  we  may  well  regard  reconciliation  with  him  as  matter  for  gladness  and  glorying. 
2.  But  this  reconciliation  takes  effect  when  it  is  received.  God  provides  it;  man 
accepts  it.  Man's  acceptance  does  not  procure,  but  it  appropriates,  the  blessing.  Alas ! 
men  may  live  in  a  dispensation  of  peace,  of  reconciliation,  but  may  know  nothing  by 
experience  of  this  joy,  for  want  of  receptive  faith. 

III.  The  text  reminds  us  of  the  Bkingbk  of  bpibitual  jot.  It  is  "through  cur 
Lord  Jesus  Christ"  that  we  have  received  the  reconciliation.  The  Mediator  between 
Ood  and  man  secures  to  us  this  greatest  of  boons,  and,  with  it,  all  other  good  things 
that  can  truly  enrich  and  bless  us.  In  the  context  the  apostle  magnifies  the  grace  of 
Christ.  We  are  summoned  to  recognize  in  him  the  means  through  which  true  joy 
becomes  possible  to  us,  becomes  our  possession  and  inheritance. 

IV.  It  is  well  to  think  of  the  fruits  and  effects  of  jot  in  God.  1.  Joy  is 
strength  for  service.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  2.  Joy  is  comfort  in 
outward  aflBictions  and  tribulation.  "  We  rejoice,  glory,  in  tribulation  also."  It  is  the 
Christian  only  who  can  say  this.  3.  Joy  is  attractive  to  others.  The  happiness  of  the 
Christian  often  produces  a  most  beneficial  impression  upon  those  who  remark  it,  and 
who  ask  for  an  explanation  of  the  fact.  4.  Joy  is  an  anticipation  of  heaven.  For  we 
are  assured  that  the  faithful  servant  shall  be  welcomed  into  "  the  joy  of  his  Lord." 

Vers.  20,  21. — Orace  afiownding.  This  passage  seems  to  trace  the  course  of  two 
mighty  rivers.  The  one  has  its  source  in  the  Law ;  the  stream  is  sin  and  trespass.  As  it 
proceeds  it  is  distinguished  by  abundance  (and  is  said  to  reiftn,  to  dominate  the  land- 
scape), and  it  flows  at  last  into  the  black  ocean  of  death.  Tiie  other  has  its  source  in 
Divine  grace ;  the  stream  is  righteousness.  And  it  becomes  even  more  abundant  than 
tlie  other;  it  flows  irresistibly,  victoriously,  until  it  is  lost  in  the  sea  of  life  eternal. 
There  is  a  well7known  spot  in  Switzerland,  where  the  Rhone,  after  fssuing  from  the  Lake 
of  Geneva,  is  joined  by  the  turbid,  tawny  waters  of  the  Arve,  which,  after  flowing  lor 
some  distance  side  by  side  with  the  blue  waters  from  the  lake,  speedily  stain  and 
spoil  them.  The  verses  before  us  reverse  this  scene,  for  they  represent  the  stream  or 
righteousness  as  overpowering  and  purifying  the  river  oi  sin ;  where  sin  abounded, 
grace  did  abound  more  exceedingly. 

I.  The  abundance  of  bin.  Sin,  in  the  course  of  ages,  multiplied,  abounded, 
exceeded,  overflowed.  We  have  many  instances  of  this  in  the  early  history  of  our  race. 
The  abundance  of  iniquity  occasioned  the  Deluge.  The  exceeding  vileness  of  Sodom 
occasioned  the  overthrow  of  the  cities  of  the  plain.  The  sins  ot  Israel  occasioned  the 
Captivity.  As  for  the  Gentile  world,  the  apostle,  at  the  opening  of  this  Epistle,  exhibits 
&e  crimes,  vices,  and  horrible  sins  of  the  nations  in  snob  au  appalling  mannei  that  w« 


OB.  T,  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  Oi'  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  13? 

do  not  wonder  at  hig  denunciation  of  the  wrath  of  God  against  those  who  do  such 
things.  Yet,  as  Christians,  we  feel  that  there  is  nothing  which  so  amazinily  displays 
the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin  as  the  crucifixion  and  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
The  sin  of  humanity  culminated  when  it  hrought  the  holy  Saviour  to  the  cross.  The 
greatness  of  the  ransom  paid  proved  the  awful  nature  of  the  captivity  from  which  men 
could  only  at  such  a  price  be  delivered.  In  explaining  the  abundance  of  sin,  it  is 
necessary  to  refer  to  the  many  and  various  forms  which  sia  assumes ;  to  the  reproductive 
power  with  which,  as  a  principle  of  action,  it  is  endowed ;  to  its  widespread  dominion; 
to  its  lengthened  sway  over  mankind. 

II.  The  skpebabundanob  of  qbacb.  Mighty  as  is  sin,  the  grace  of  God  is  mightier 
still.  It  is  as  a  breeze  which  overflows  the  pestilential  air  of  a  city ;  as  the  tide  of  the 
ocean,  which  enters  a  vast  harbour  and  overflows  and  sweeps  away  accumulated  pollu- 
tions. Its  victorious  superabundance  must  be  explained  by  referring  to  its  omnipotent 
Author  and  Bestower,  God ;  to  its  Divine  channel,  Christ,  the  Mediator ;  to  its  appointed 
means,  the  gospel,  at  once  the  wisdom  and  the  power  of  God ;  and  to  its  Agent,  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God.  If  we  look  at  gin  alone,  it  appears  invincible,  beyond  all  human 
power  to  deal  with ;  but  when  we  regard  the  Divine  provision  of  grace,  we  can  under- 
stand how  even  sin  may  be  vanquished  and  utterly  overcome. 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEI0U3  AUTHOES. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Justification  and  its  consequences.  Here  side  by  side  are  the  most 
solemn,  the  most  terrible,  and  the  most  glorious  certitudes  of  our  religion.  There  is  a 
God.  With  that  God  we  are  not  naturally  at  peace.  Enmity  toward  God  means  sin ; 
and  the  wages  of  sin  is  death.  But  how  to  make  peace  with  him  ?  Blessed  be  his 
Name,  Christ  has  died  that  we  might  live.  "  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world 
unto  himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them."  Enmity  and  death — the 
results  of  sin,  to  which  all  are  condemned;  for  all  have  sinned.  Reconciliation  and 
life — the  results  of  the  obedience  and  death  of  Christ.  These  verses  put  before  us 
how  this  wondrous  transformation  may  be  effected ;  how,  being  dead,  we  may  be  made 
alive ;  how,  being  enemies  of  God,  we  may  be  reconciled  and  have  peace  with  him. 

I.  The  nature  op  JtrsTiFioATioN.  The  words  in  the  original  mean,  "  being 
reckoned  [or, '  held ']  as  just."  We  do  not  make  ourselves  just.  Neither  by  this  act  are 
we  made  just,  made  perfect  in  holiness.  That  is  the  object  of  sanctification,  and  is  not 
completed  until  we  have  put  off  this  mortal.  If  we  should  say  that  when  we  are 
justilied  we  are  made  perfectly  righteous,  that  would  be  the  same  thing  as  saying  that 
no  Christian  commits  sin — a  doctrine  contrary  to  the  Word  of  God  and  to  the  experience 
of  individuals.  Paul  complained  that  the  evil  he  would  not,  that  he  did.  No ;  justi- 
fication neither  implies  that  we  make  ourselves  just,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  that  we 
are  made  just.  It  implies  that  we  are  reckoned  just  in  God's  sight  so  far  as  regards 
the  penalty  of  the  Law.  He  declares  that  the  Law  is  satisfied  in  regard  to  us.  Manifestly, 
this  is  the  grace  of  God.  How  could  we  satisfy  the  Law  ?  "  By  the  deeds  of  the  Law 
shall  no  flesh  be  justified."  "  In  thy  sight,"  exclaims  David,  "  shall  no  man  living  be 
justified."  It  is  by  grace  alone.  We  can  now  point  to  the  cross  and  say,  "  He  died 
for  me ! "  Christ's  own  words  are,  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness, 
even  so  mast  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up,  that  whosoever  believeth  on  him  should  not 
perish,  but  have  eternal  life."  This  is  the  exact  parallel  of  justification  by  faith.  Just 
as  the  simple  act  of  turning  the  faint  and  weary  eyelids  toward  that  brazen  serpent 
restored  the  dying  Hebrews  in  the  wilderness,  so  it  is  still  possible  for  all  of  us,  even  for 
such  as  are  most  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  to  look  with  the  eye  of  faith  toward 
Calvary  and  say,  "Who  is  he  that  condemneth?  it  is  Christ  that  died."  And  by  that 
death  he  paid  our  debt.  "  He  was  delivered  for  our  offences."  This  is  justification. 
Instead  of  being  debtors  to  do  the  whole  Law,  we  plead  its  fulfilment  by  our  Substitute, 
accepted  by  God,  while  we  become  at  the  same  time  the  servants  of  righteousness.  The 
Law  has  been  fulfilled  by  a  perfect  righteousness,  and  the  penalty  of  a  broken  Law 
cao  no  longer  be  inflicted  upon  those  who  appropriate  that  righteousness  as  theirs. 
Thus  Justification  is  the  free  grace  of  God  shown  in  a  complete  pardon  of  all  our  sin. 
We  ara  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son ;  we  have  received  the  Spirit  of  adop- 


138  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh,  ▼.  1— 2L 

tion,  and  are  made  heirs  of  eternal  life.    All  this  justification  aeoures  for  tu  In  its  T*ry 
oature. 

II.  The  means  ob  inbtbumbnt  op  justification.  In  plain  and  unequivocal 
language  we  are  he's  told  that  by  faith  we  must  be  justiiied  in  order  to  have  peace 
with  God.  This  is  the  grand  central  truth  of  the  New  Testament.  If  it  be  removed, 
what  message  does  the  gospel  bring?  "If  righteousness  come  by  the  Law,"  says  St. 
Paul,  "  then  Christ  is  dead  in  vain "  (Gal.  ii.  21).  Christ's  whole  life  of  doing  and 
suffering,  and  his  awful  death,  would  be  a  cruel  superfluity — the  more  cruel  because 
superfluous,  if  by  any  other  means  fallen  man  could  procure  acceptance  in  God's  sight. 
Paul  cautions  the  Bomans  against  any  other  way  of  justification.  "A  man  ig  justified 
by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the  Law"  (ch.  iii.  28).  And  when  the  Galatians showed  a 
tendency  to  depart  from  this  doctrine,  under  the  influence  of  Judaizing  teachers,  in  the 
strongest  terms  the  apostle  censures  them  :  "  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed 
from  him  that  called  you  into  the  grace  of  Christ  unto  another  gospel "  (Gal.  L  6). 
He  addresses  them  as  foolish  ;  accuses  them  of  returning  to  the  beggarly  elements ;  and 
says  he  is  afraid  lest  he  has  bestowed  upon  them  labour  in  vain.  The  theory  of  justifi- 
cation by  works,  therefore,  is  not  one  on  which  nothing  has  been  said,  or  which  has 
been  left  doubtful.  It  is  distinctly  condemned  by  the  apostle  as  inconsistent  with  and 
prejudicial  to  the  spirit  of  Christianity.  When  Nicodemus,  a  ruler  of  the  Jews^  a  self- 
righteous  Pharisee,  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  how  did  the  great  Master  feed  this  hungry 
soul?  Did  he  tell  him  to  go  and  do  some  work  of  merit?  No.  The  way,  and  the 
only  way,  to  eternal  life  which  Jesus  pointed  out  to  him  was  faith.  If  gciod  works 
were  of  any  avail,  here  was  a  man  whose  training  had  abundantly  fitted  him  for  doing 
good  works.  But  irom  the  Saviour  himself  he  was  to  learn  that  he,  a  master  in  Israel, 
knew  not  the  way  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  Yet  are  there  not  many  professing 
Christians  who  rest  their  hope  of  an  entrance  into  that  kingdom  upon  their  own 
righteousness  ?  Are  there  not  many  the  language  of  whose  heart  is,  "  I  have  kept  all 
the  commandments  from  my  youth  up;  I  have  lived  a  pure  life;  I  have  been  regular 
in  attendance  on  the  ordinances  of  God ;  I  have  no  fear  "  ?  Such  was  the  language  of 
the  rich  young  man ;  and  Jesus  said  to  him,  "  One  thing  thou  lackest."  We  must 
gvard,  too,  against  the  notion  that,  if  we  lelieve,  our  faith  is  the  ground  on  which  we  are 
justified.  It  is  hard,  indeed,  to  see  how  such  a  notion  could  arise,  in  the  face  of  all 
that  the  Scriptures  teach  against  justification  by  works.  For  to  make  faith  the  ground 
of  our  justification — the  propter  quod,  to  use  a  legal  phrase — is  to  put  faith  in  the 
position  of  a  meritorious  work.  And  that  such  has  no  efScacy  for  justification  has  been 
abundantly  shown.  Faith  is  merely  the  means  or  instrument  by  which  we  lay  hold 
on  the  justifying  righteousness  of  Clirist.  Suppose  a  man  owed  you  a  sum  of  money, 
and  that,  in  the  days  when  imprisonment  for  debt  was  legal,  he  had  been  imprisoned 
till  the  debt  should  be  paid.  Another  man  comes  and  pays  the  debt  Ton  give  him 
a  receipt,  and  he  takes  that  to  the  prisoner,  who  is  by  It  set  free.  How  absurd  it 
would  be  for  any  one  to  say  that  it  was  this  debtor's  act  of  taking  the  receipt  that 
cancelled  his  obligation  I  Precisely  similar  is  it  to  say  that  the  act  by  which  wo  take 
hold  of  the  great  atonement  is  that  which  gives  us  acceptance  with  God.  We  are 
justified  hy  means  of  our  faith,  and  not  hecauseof  it.  But  without  that  act  of  believing, 
the  atonement  is  not  ours,  peace  with  God  is  not  ours.  By  faith  we  lay  hold  of 
justification ;  by  faith  we  take  hold  of  the  promises — promises  for  the  life  that  now  is, 
and  the  promise  of  a  better  and  imending  life  in  the  many  mansions  of  the  Father's 
house.  "  We  have  access  by  faith  into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand,  and  rejoice  in 
hope  of  the  glory  of  God  "  (ver.  2). 

III.  The  effect  of  justification.  "  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with 
God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  This  peace  with  God  has  a  twofold  aspect.  It 
concerns  God's  relation  to  us  and  our  relation  to  God.  1.  Peace  mth  Ood  as  it  affecta 
Ood's  relation  to  us.  At  first  God  was  at  peace  with  man,  until  man  sinned  and  thus 
became  at  enmity  with  God.  And  while  God  hates  sin  and  must  reward  it,  he  willeth 
not  the  death  of  the  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  should  turn  from  his  wicked  way  and 
live.  All  through  the  ages,  God,  like  a  loving  Father,  has  been  see"king  to  bring  back 
the  wanderers,  to  reconcile  his  erring  children  to  himself.  At  last  he  sent  his  own  Son. 
"  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be 
ilie  Propitiation  for  our  sing."    If  that  Propitiation  has  any  meaning  at  all,  it  is  that 


oa.  V.  1— 21.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAITL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  139 

Gbd's  attitude  toward  those  who  accept  it  is  one  of  peace.  "  For  the  Father  himself 
loveth  yon,  because  ye  have  loved  me,  and  have  believed  that  I  came  out  from  Qoi" 
(John  xvi.  27).  Thws  faith  is  the  means  by  which  we  take  hold  of  Christ— our  Sub- 
stitute, our  BecoDciliatioD.  And  therefore,  being  clothed  upon  with  his  righteousness, 
we  are  received  into  the  adoption  of  children.  Being  justified,  we  are  restored  to  that 
blissful  state  of  sonship  toward  God  which  made  Eden  the  untroubled  garden  in  which 
the  Father  came  and  walked  at  eventide.  Once  more  God  walks  with  us.  He  will  be 
to  us  a  Father,  and  we  are  to  him  as  his  children.  What  a  gift  this  is  that,  weak  and 
sinful  though  we  are,  yet  we  can  think  of  God  with  calm  assurance,  being  reconciled 
to  him  by  the  death  of  his  Son  I  2.  Peace  mth  God  as  it  concerns  our  relation  to  Ood 
(1)  Peace  with  Ood  means  peace  in  our  own  conscience.  What  a  troubler  of  our  peace 
conscience  is!  In  the  silent  watches  of  the  night  its  voice  is  loud.  The  darkness  dims 
not  its  light ;  nor  is  its  voice  hushed  by  the  din  of  business  or  the  jovial  clamour  of 
revelry.  But  he  who  is  justified  by  faith  has  peace  of  conscience  within.  The  great 
ocean  will  not  wash  away  the  guilt  of  sin.  But  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son, 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  (2)  Peace  with  Ood  means  peace  amid  care  and  sorrow. 
Many  trials  of  body  and  of  mind  may  aiflict  us.  But  If  wo  are  justified  by  faith,  then 
we  have  peace  with  God,  and  we  know  that,  though  no  chastisement  seemeth  to  be 
joyous,  yet  these  our  "  light  afflictions,  which  are  but  for  a  moment,  are  working  for  us 
a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory." 

"  Well  roars  the  storm  to  those  that  hear 
A  deeper  voice  acroes  the  storm." 

To  those  who  rest  their  faith  in  Christ  when  in  trouble,  he  will  appear  as  he  did  to  his 
disciples  on  the  sea,  and  they  will  hear  through  the  gloom  a  voice  calling  to  them,  "  It 
is  I :  be  not  afraid !"  (3)  Peace  with  Ood  means  peace  and  security  from  the  assaults 
of  temptation  and  sin.  "  The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  shall  keep 
your  hearts  and  minds  through  Christ  Jesus  "  (Phil.  iv.  7).  It  is  a  bulwark  of  defence 
round  about  those  who  are  justified  by  faith.  To  them  it  is  given  to  be  strengthened 
with  all  might  according  to  his  glorious  power.  They  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  its 
affections  and  lusts.  Such  is  the  effect  of  being  Justified  hy  faith.  "  Although  my 
house  be  not  so  with  God,  yet  hath  he  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered 
in  all  things  and  sure  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  5).  Here  and  now  peace  and  fellowship  with 
God  ;  access  into  grace  and  strength;  no  fear  of  evil  in  the  dark  valley;  and  afterward 
an  abundant  entrance  into  the  presence  of  the  King. — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  3 — 5.-^Blessed  fruit  off  a  bitter  tree.  The  letters  of  St.  Paul  abound  in  strange 
and  striking  paradoxes.  In  another  place  he  speaks  of  himself  "  as  sorrowful,  yet  alway 
rejoicing ;  as  poor,  yet  making  many  rich ;  as  having  nothing,  and  yet  possessing  all 
things."  Here  he  speaks  of  the  Christian  as  "  glorying  in  tribulation."  He  has  been 
speaking  of  the  eifects  of  justification  by  faith,  and  ends  by  saying,  "  We  rejoice  in 
hope  of  the  glory  of  God  "  (ver.  2).  Our  joy,  however,  is  not  confined  to  the  future. 
True,  there  are  cares  and  sorrows  in  this  present  life.  But  it  does  not  therefore  follow 
that  we  are  to  postpone  all  joy  until  we  reach  the  spirit-land.  "No  1 "  says  the  apostle, 
boldly ;  "  we  glory  even  in  our  tribulations."  The  sorrows  are  there,  'tis  true,  but  the 
light  of  the  cross  of  Jesus  transforms  them  with  a  glory  all  its  own,  even  as  the  sun- 
shine makes  a  rainbow  of  the  shower.  "  Now  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth 
to  be  joyous,  but  grievous ;  nevertheless  afterward  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of 
righteousness  to  them  that  are  exercised  thereby."  Tribulation  is  a  bitter  tree,  but 
look  at  the  fruits  which  it  is  capable  of  yielding.  "  We  glory  in  tribulations  also : 
knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  patience ;  and  patience,  experience  j  and  experience, 
hope." 

I.  The  bittbb  tree.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  speak  of  the  bitterness  of  tribu- 
lation. "  The  heart  knoweth  Its  own  bitterness."  We  all  know  something  of  what 
Borrow  means,  and  how  bitter  it  is.  1.  There  is  the  bitterness  of  bereavement.  What 
agony  of  spirit  when  one  who  has  been  the  light  of  yom-  eyes,  the  joy  and  comfort 
of  your  home,  is  taken  from  you !  What  bitterness  of  sorrow  is  to  bo  compared  with 
the  grief  of  parents  for  their  children  ?  How  heart-rending  is  grief  like  David's, 
when  he  went  up  to  the  chamber  over  the  gate,  and  as  he  went  his  sorrow  over- 


140  THE  EPISTLS  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  v.  1—21. 

came  him,  and  he  cried  aloud,  "0  my  son  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  Absalom! 
would  God  I  had  died  for  thee,  0  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  1 "  And  so,  when  the 
Bible  wants  to  picture  grief  of  the  intensest  kind,  it  speaks  of  mourning  as  one 
mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and  being  in  bitterness  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his 
firstborn  (Zech.  xii.  10).  Parents  who  want  to  avoid  the  greatest  of  all  grief,  mourn- 
ing over  a  child  of  whom  they  have  no  hope  for  eternity,  should  lose  no  opportunity  of 
leading  their  children  to  the  Saviour.  2.  There  is  the  bitterness  of  hodily  suffering. 
Sleepless  nights  and  weary  days  of  tossing  on  a  bed  of  sickness — how  they  tend  to  taks 
the  sunshine  out  of  life  I  And  then  there  are  those  trifling  ailments,  bodily  infirmities, 
for  which,  perhaps,  you  get  little  sympathy,  but  which  keep  your  body  constantly 
feeble  and  your  mind  constantly  depressed.  It  needs  a  Divine  power  to  bear  a  life  of 
constant  pain.  No  human  strength  could  stand  it  unaided  without  giving  way  to 
irritation  or  despondency.  Even  the  Saviour  of  the  world  tasted  how  bitter  is  the  cnp 
of  bodily  suffering.  3.  There  is  the  bitterness  of  disappointment.  Some  cherished 
possession  is  taken  away  from  you,  some  valuable  property  is  lost,  your  earthly  means 
of  support  take  to  themselves  wings  and  flee  away,  some  object  on  which  you  had  set 
your  heart  is  snatched  away  out  of  your  reach,  or  some  friend  whom  you  had  implicitly 
trusted  suddenly  proves  treacherous  and  unfaithful.  The  feeling  of  disappointment 
which  such  circumstances  produce  was  in  Esau's  mind  when  he  came  in  to  receive  his 
father's  blessing,  and  found  that  Jacob  his  brother  had  heartlessly  supplanted  him. 
"  When  Esau  heard  the  words  of  his  father,  he  cried  with  a  great  and  exceeding  bitter 
cry."  Life's  disappointments — ^^how  much  we  all  know  about  this  kind  of  bitterness  I 
Yea ;  tribulation  is  indeed  a  bitter  tree. 

S.  Its  blessed  fedit.  Paul  knew  what  he  was  talking  about  when  he  came  to  the 
_ect  of  tribulation.  He  knew  what  persecution  was..  He  knew  what  bodily  suffer- 
ing was.  Five  times  he  received  thirty-nine  stripes.  Three  times  he  was  beaten  with 
rods.  Once  he  was  stoned.  Three  times  he  suffered  aliipwreck.  He  had  been  "in  weari- 
ness and  painfulness,  in  watchings  often,  in  hunger  and  thirst,  in  cold  and  naked- 
ness." He  knew  what  danger  was.  He  had  been  "  in  perils  of  waters,  in  perils  of 
robbers,  in  perils  by  his  own  cotmtrymen,  in  perils  by  the  heathen,  in  perils  in  the  city, 
in  perils  in  the  wilderness,  in  perils  in  the  sea,  in  perils  among  false  brethren."  He 
knew  what  disappointment  was.  Like  his  Master,  he  too  was  forsaken  in  his  hour  of 
need  by  those  who  made  profession  of  being  his  friends.  He  tells  us  that  at  his  first 
appearance  before  Caesar  no  man  stood  with  him.  But  wliatever  his  trials  had  been 
when  he  wrote  this,  or  whatever  trials  may  yet  be  in  store  for  him,  he  looks  upon 
them  all  with  a  calm  and  peaceful,  nay,  with  an  exultant  mind.  "  We  glory  in  tribula- 
tions also."  He  knew  what  blessed  fruit  could  be  plucked  off  that  bitter  tree.  1.  First 
of  all,  there  was  patience.  "  Tribulation  worketh  patience."  Paiience  means  really  the 
capacity  for  enduring.  If  we  speak  of  a  patient  man,  we  may  mean  one  who  can  endure 
delay,  and  we  say  that  he  can  wait  patiently;  or  we  may  mean  one  who  can  endure 
suffering,  and  we  speak  of  him  as  suffering  patiently.  The  connection,  then,  between 
Buffering  and  patience  it  is  easy  to  see.  It  is  by  suffering  that  one  learns  how  to  suffer, 
that  is,  to  be  patient.  And  if  we  go  into  practical  experience,  we  are  pretty  certain  to 
find  that  the  most  patient  Christian  is  the  one  who  has  suffered  most.  He  was  not 
always  thus.  Perhaps  at  first  he  was  like  the  rough  unpolished  block  of  marble  which 
I  have  seen  in  the  Counemara  marble  works  at  Galway.  He  was  disposed  to  resist  the 
hand  that  was  dealing  with  him  in  chastening.  But  the  suffering  came.  It  was 
repeated  over  and  over  again,  like  the  incessant  process  of  rubbing  to  which  that  rough- 
looking  block  is  subjected.  But  by-and-by  he  came  out  of  the  suffering  with  the 
edges  rubbed  off  his  temper  and  the  rebelliousness  taken  out  of  his  spirit,  even  as  the 
marble  comes  smooth  and  shining  from  the  hard  process  through  which  it  has  to  pass. 
Such  is  the  use  of  suffering,  to  purify,  to  brighten  the  character,  and  produce  patience 
in  the  soul.  Indeed,  the  word  "  tribulation  "  conveys  this  same  idea.  It  is  derived 
from  the  Latin  word  tribulum,  the  threshing-instrument  whereby  the  Boman  husband- 
man separated  the  corn  from  the  husks.  That  process  was  described  as  tribulatio.  So 
it  is  in  the  spiritual  world.  Suffering  and  sorrow  cleanse  away  the  chaff — the  pride,  the 
selfishness,  the  disobedience — which  is  to  be  found  more  or  less  in  all  our  natures.  Let 
ns  think  more  of  the  result  of  the  suffering  than  of  the  suffering  itself,  more  of  the 
patience  it  will  develop  than  of  the  chaff  which  it  will  take  away,  and  then  we  too 


CH.  T.  1— 21.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  141 

•hall  learn,  with  St.  Paul,  to  "glory  in  tribulations  also,  knowing  that  tribulatioD 
worketh  patience."  2.  2%«  second  blessed  fruit  off  this  bitter  tree  is  experience.  "  Tribu- 
lation worketh  patience;  and  patience,  expeiience."  The  word  here  translated  "experi- 
ence" really  means  in  the  original  "proof,"  or  "  trial,"  or  "testing."  In  the  Revised 
Version  it  is  translated  "  probation."  This  does  not,  perhaps,  quite  express  the  full 
meaning  either ;  but  the  point  is  that  the  apostle  had  something  more  in  his  mind  than 
what  we  ordinarily  mean  by  the  word  "  experience."  His  idea  probably  was  that  tribu- 
lation and  our  patience  under  it  give  proof  or  confirmation  of  two  things.  They  afford 
us  p-oof  of  the  character  of  God — his  faithfulness  in  fulfilling  his  promises,  his  love  in 
sustaining  us,  and  his  power  in  giving  us  the  victory  over  trial  and  suffering.  And  they 
•fford  xxi  proof  of  our  own  character  also — proof  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God,  proof  that 
we  have  been  justified  by  faith.  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth."  And  then 
tliere  is  the  precious  promise,  "Blessed  is  the  n)an  that  enilureth  temptation  [or,  'trial '] : 
for  when  he  is  tried,  he  shall  receive  the  crown  of  life,  which  the  Lord  hath  promised 
to  them  that  love  him."  In  such  ways  does  God  confirm  us  by  suffering,  and  by  our 
own  patience  under  it.  So  he  confirms  our  faith  in  him,  and  confirms  our  own  Christian 
character.  This  is  another  blessed  fruit  off  the  bitter  tree  of  tribulation.  3.  The  third 
blessed  fruit  off  this  bitter  tree  is  hope.  "  And  experience,  hope."  The  proof  which  we 
have  received  of  God's  goodness  under  past  trials  leads  us  to  hope  for  still  greater  revela- 
tions of  his  goodness  yet  to  come.  The  proof  we  have  had  of  his  wise  and  gracious 
purpose  in  purifying  us  by  trial  and  suffering  leads  us  to  hope  that  "he  who  hath  begun 
a  good  work  in  us  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  So  the  Christian  is 
ever  looking  forward.  When  he  bears  the  cross,  he  is  looking  forward  to  the  crown. 
When  he  is  suffering  for  his  Master's  sake,  he  is  looking  forward  to  the  time  when  lie 
shall  reign  with  him  in  glory.  This  subject  of  tribulation  and  its  fruit  might  fittingly 
be  closed  with  some  lines  written  by  a  young  lady  in  Nova  Scotia,  who  was  ftn  invalid 
tot  many  years— 

"  My  life  is  a  wearisome  journey ; 

I  am  sick  of  the  dust  and  the  heat; 

The  rays  of  the  sun  beat  upon  me  t 
The  briars  are  wounding  my  feet ; 

But  the  city  to  which  I  am  going 
Will  more  than  my  tiials  repay ; 

All  the  toils  of  the  road  will  seem  nothing 
When  I  get  to  the  end  of  the  way. 

"  There  are  so  many  hills  to  climb  upward, 

I  often  am  longing  for  rest ; 
But  he  who  appoints  me  my  pathway 

Knows  just  what  is  needful  and  best. 
I  know  in  liis  Word  he  has  promised 

That  my  strength  shall  be  as  my  day ; 
And  the  toils  of  the  road  will  seem  nothing 

When  I  get  to  the  end  of  the  way. 

"  He  loves  me  too  well  to  forsake  me. 

Or  give  me  one  trial  too  much : 
All  his  people  have  dearly  been  purchased. 

And  Satan  can  never  claim  such. 
By-and-by  I  shall  see  him  and  praise  him 

In  the  city  of  unending  day ; 
And  the  toils  of  the  road  will  seem  nothing 

When  I  get  to  the  end  of  the  way. 

*  Though  now  I  am  footsore  and  weary, 

I  shall  rest  when  I'm  safely  at  home; 
I  know  I'll  receive  a  glad  welcome. 

For  the  Saviour  himself  has  said, '  Com*. 
So  when  I  am  weary  in  body, 

And  sinking  in  spiiit,  I  say, 
All  the  toils  of  the  road  will  seem  nothing 

'Wbeix  I  g«t  to  the  end  of  the  waj. 


1«  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  ▼.  1— 2L 


•*  Cooling  fountains  nre  tliere  for  the  thirty ; 

There  are  cordials  for  thoBO  who  are  faint; 
There  are  robes  that  are  whiter  and  purer 

Thau  any  that  fancy  can  paint. 
Then  I'll  try  to  press  hopefully  onward, 

Thinking  often  through  each  weary  day. 
The  toils  of  the  road  wUl  seem  nothing 

When  I  geit  to  the  end  of  the  way." 

"  We  glory  in  tribulations  also :  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  patience;  and  patience, 
experience ;  and  experience,  hope." — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  6 — 11. — Th«  love  of  God  commended.  It  is  a  most  remarkable  phrase,  this 
description  which  is  given  in  the  eighth  verse,  of  God  commending  his  own  love.  We 
have,  indeed,  in  other  portions  of  Scripture,  the  Divine  Being  represented  as  a  heavenly 
Merchantman,  setting  forth  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  as  a  merchaiitman  migfit  set 
forth  his  wares.  "  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  that 
hath  no  money ;  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat ;  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money 
and  without  price."  And  again  in  the  Book  of  Bevelation,  "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of 
me  gold  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou  mayest  be  rich;  and  white  raiment,  that  thou  may  est 
be  clothed ;  . . .  and  anoint  thine  eyes  with  eye-salve,  that  thou  mayest  see."  But  here 
God  is  represented  as  commending,  not  merely  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  but  his  own 
love,  to  human  observation  and  admiration.  Tes ;  but  this  is  for  no  selfish  end.  God's 
object  in  commending  his  love  to  us  is  for  our  sakes.  He  sets  it  before  us  in  all  its 
matchless  tenderness  and  grandeur,  that  by  means  of  it  he  may  melt  our  hearts.  He 
sets  it  before  us  in  all  its  attractive  power,  that  he  may  draw  our  hearts  to  holiness  and 
our  souls  to  heaven.  He  sets  it  before  us  in  order  that  we  may  yield  ourselves  to  its 
Influence,  and  that  thus,  by  what  Dr.  Chalmers  calls  "the  expulsive  power  of  a  new 
affection,"  sin  and  the  love  of  it,  with  all  its  withering  blight  and  fatal  grasp,  may  b« 
driven  out  of  our  natures. 

I.  The  love  of  God  is  commekdbd  by  its  objects.  We  have  set  before  us  in  thess 
verses  a  description  of  those  who  are  the  objects  of  the  love  of  God,  as  shown  in  the 
death  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son.  Was  it  the  angels  that  were  the  objects  of  God's 
redeeming  love  ?  Was  it  for  the  angels  that  Jesus  died  ?  No.  They  did  not  need 
his  death.  Was  it  for  the  good  men  and  women  of  the  world  that  Jesus  died  ?  If  it 
was  only  for  the  good,  then  the  love  of  God  would  be  very  limited  in  its  range,  and 
the  great  mass  of  humanity  would  be  still  helpless  and  hopeless.  But  one  perfectly 
good  person  it  would  be  impossible  to  find.  "  All  have  sinned."  Who,  then,  are  the 
objects  of  the  love  of  God?  Just  those  very  men  and  women  of  whom  it  is  said  that 
"there  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one."  1.  The  apostle  describes  ns  as  being  in  a 
state  of  helplessness.  "  When  we  were  yet  without  strength,  in  due  time  Christ  died 
for  the  ungodly  "  (ver.  6).  Surely  here  is  a  commendation  of  Ood's  hve.  Very  often 
in  this  world  the  weak  are  left  to  shift  for  themselves.  But  if  any  of  us  were  left  to 
our  own  unaided  efforts,  what  would  become  of  us  ?  Are  we  not  all  glad,  no  matter 
how  strong  we  are,  of  the  assistance  of  others?  If  any  of  us  were  left  to  our  own 
unaided  efforts  to  get  to  heaven,  which  of  us  could  hope  to  get  there  ?  The  gospel  is  a 
gospel  for  the  weak — that  is  to  say,  for  the  very  strongest  of  us,  physically,  morally, 
and  spiritually.  In  regard  to  God  and  eternity,  how  weak  we  are  in  all  these  aspects ! 
We  cannot  stay  the  hand  of  disease  or  death  ;  we  cannot  in  our  own  strength  main- 
tain a  life  of  an  unswerving  moral  standard ;  we  cannot  work  out  a  salvation  for  our- 
selves. But  listen  to  this  message  :  "  When  we  were  yet  without  strenath,  .  .  .  Christ 
died  for  us."  2.  But  God  loves  more  than  the  weak.  Me  loves  the  ungodly.  "  Christ  ditd 
for  the  ungodly  "  (ver.  6).  The  word  here  used  expresses  the  indifference  of  the  bum;\n 
heart  to  spiritual  things.  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit." 
If  God  only  loved  those  who  turned  to  him  of  their  own  accord,  who  then  could  be 
saved  ?  If  any  of  us  have  an  interest  now  in  spiritual  things,  was  it  not  because  God, 
in  his  mercy,  laid  his  band  upon  us,  and  awakened  our  minds  to  serious  thought  about 
him  and  our  own  souls  ?  If  there  are  those  who  are  godless,  ungodly,  any  who  have  no 
interest  in  spiritual  things,  to  whom  God's  service  is  a  weariness,  let  us  say  to  them, 
"  God  loves  even  you."    "  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."    3,  But  God  goes  a  step  lower 


OH.  T,  1—21.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  143 

than  even  the  ungodly  and  indifferent.  He  goes  down  into  tlie  depths  of  sin.  "  While 
we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us"  (ver.  8).  And  not  merely  sinners,  but 
enemies.  "  When  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his 
Son  "  (ver.  10).  Here  in  the  greatest  of  all  commendations  of  the  Divine  love.  It  was 
a  love,  not  for  the  deserving,  but  for  the  undeserving ;  not  for  the  obedient,  but  for  the 
disobedient ;  not  for  the  just,  but  for  the  unjust ;  not  for  his  friends,  but  for  his  enemies. 
If  you  have  ever  tried  to  love  your  enemies,  those  who  have  done  you  an  injury,  you 
know  how  hard  it  is.  But  God  loved  his  enemies — those  who  had  broken  his  Law  and 
rejected  his  invitations — God  loved  them  so  much  that  he  gave  his  own  Son  to  die  for 
their  salvation,  in  order  that  he  might  bring  those  who  were  his  enemies  to  dwell  for 
ever  with  himself.  What  a  description  it  is  of  the  objects  of  God's  love  I  "  Without 
strength  ; "  "  ungodly ; "  "  sinners ;  "  "  enemies."  Surely  this  ought  to  be  enough  to 
commend  the  love  of  God  to  us.  Surely,  then,  there  is  hope  for  the  guiltiest,  "  This 
is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the 
world  to  save  siuners,  of  whom  I  am  chief." 

"  In  peace  let  me  resign  my  breath. 
And  thy  salvation  see  ; 
My  sins  deserve  eternal  death, 
But  Jesus  died  for  me." 

II.  Thk  love  of  God  is  commended  bt  its  opebation.  1.  On  God's  side  it 
involved  sacrifice,  God's  love  did  not  ezhauut  itself  in  profession.  It  showed  itself 
in  action.  It  showed  itself  in  the  greatest  sacrifice  which  the  world  has  ever  seen. 
That  was  a  genuine  love.  How  it  must  have  grieved  the  Father  to  think  of  his  own 
holy,  innocent  Son,  being  buffeted  and  scourged  and  crucified  by  the  hands  of  wicked 
men,  in  the  frenzy  of  their  passion  and  hatred !  What  a  sacrifice  to  make  for  our  sakes, 
when  God  gave  up  his  own  Son  to  the  death  for  us  all !  Herein  is  the  proof  of  the 
reality  of  God's  love.    Herein  is  its  commendation  to  us. 

"  Love  so  amazing,  so  Divine, 
Demands  my  soul,  my  life,  my  all." 

2.  And  then  look  at  the  operation  of  this  love  on  our  side.  Look  st  the  residts  it 
produces  in  human  hearts.  "  Hope  maketh  not  ashamed,  because  tte  love  of  Ood  it 
shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us"  (ver.  5). 
"  And  not  only  so,  hot  we  also  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom 
we  have  now  received  the  atonement"  (ver.  11).  What  confidence  it  produces,  what 
holy  calm,  what  peace,  what  hope,  what  joy  for  time  and  for  eternity,  when  we  know 
that  God  loves  us  I  Oh  I  there  is  no  power  like  it  to  sustain  the  human  heart.  Temp- 
tations lose  their  power  to  drag  us  down,  when  that  love  is  bound  around  us  like  a 
life-buoy.  Hatred  and  malice  cannot  harm  us,  hidden  in  the  secret  of  his  presence. 
Sorrow  and  suffering  can  bring  no  despair,  when  the  Father's  face  is  bending  over  us 
with  his  everlasting  smile,  and  his  arms  are  underneath  us  with  their  everlasting 
strength.  His  love  is  like  a  path  of  golden  sunlight  across  the  dark  valley.  "  For  I 
am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers, 
nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature, 
shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 
Thus  God  commends  to  u«  hit  love.  He  commends  it  to  us  by  showing  us  our  own 
condition — ^what  we  are  without  it.  He  shows  us  the  character  of  the  objects  of  his  love 
— "  without  strength ; "  "  ungodly ; "  "  sinners ; "  "  enemies."  He  shows  us  the  operation  of 
his  love.  He  points  us  to  the  cross,  and  bids  us  measure  there  the  height  and  depth  of 
his  marvellous  love.  He  shows  us  the  operation  of  his  love  in  human  hearts — ^what 
peace,  what  confidence,  what  hope,  what  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory,  it  produces. 
For  all  these  reasons  it  is  a  love  worth  yielding  to.  For  all  these  reasons  it  is  a  love 
worth  having.  Ghristians  should  com/mend  the  love  of  God.  A  consistent  Christian 
life  is  the  best  testimony  to  the  power  of  the  love  of  God,  By  loving  even  our  enemies, 
by  showing  a  spirit  of  unselfishness  and  self-sacrifice,  let  us  commend  to  those  around 
us  the  love  of  God. 

**  When  one  that  holds  communion  with  the  skies 
Has  filled  his  urn  where  those  pore  waten  liia^ 


144  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  v.  1—21. 

And  once  more  mingles  with  us  meaner  things 
Tie  e'en  as  if  an  angel  ehook  his  vrings ; 
Immortal  firagiance  fills  the  circuit  wide 
That  teUs  us  whence  his  treasures  are  supplied." 

O.H.L 

Vers.  12 — 21. — Grace  abounding.  Here  the  apostle  contrasts  the  reign  of  sin  with 
the  reign  of  grace,  and  shows  that,  whil«  there  is  a  point  of  similarity  between  them, 
there  are  many  points  in  which  they  dififer,  and  in  which  grace  ii  triumphant  over  sin. 
All  this  is  for  the  encouragement  of  the  sinner,  that  he  may  be  led  from  the  captivity 
of  sin  to  hope  and  live  under  the  influence  of  God's  mercy. 

I.  Q-BACE  AND  BIN  BOTH  CAME  BT  ONE  PERSON.  "  By  one  man  Bin  entered  into  the 
world,  and  death  by  sin "  (ver.  12) ;  "  Through  the  offence  of  one  many  died  "  (ver, 
16);  "Death  reigned  by  one"  (ver.  17) j  "By  one  man's  disobedience  many  were 
made  sinners  "  (ver.  19).  So  also  with  the  reign  of  grace.  "  The  grace  of  God,  and 
the  gift  by  grace,  which  is  by  one  Man,  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  15) ;  "  They  who  receive 
abundance  of  grace  and  of  the  gift  of  righteousness  sliall  reign  in  life  by  One,  Jesus 
Christ "  (ver.  17) ;  "  So  by  the  obedience  of  One  shall  many  be  made  righteous  "  (ver. 
19).  Observe  here  the  power  of  the  individuai  for  good  or  evil.  Our  acts  are  wide- 
spread in  their  influences,  perhaps  eternal  in  their  consequences.  "  None  of  us  livcth  to 
himself."  Shall  our  life  be  a  curse  to  those  around  ns,  or  a  blessing  7  Shall  we  b« 
unong  those  whose  aim  and  errand  in  the  world  seem  to  be  to  do  all  the  mischief  or 
•n  the  harm  they  can  ?  Or  shall  we  be  amongst  those  who  try  to  follow  in  the  foot- 
steps of  him  who  "  went  about  every  day  doing  good  "  ? 

IL  I'HE  INFLUENCE  OF  GBACB  IS  TRIUMPHANT  OVER  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  BIN.   1.  Sin 

brought  condemnation ;  grace  triumphant  brings  pardon.  "  The  judgment  was  by  one 
to  oondemnation,  but  the  free  gift  ia  of  many  offences  unto  justiflcation "  (ver.  16); 
"As  by  the  offence  of  one  judgment  capae  upon  all  men  to  condemnation;  even  so  by 
the  righteousness  of  One  the  free  gift  came  upon  all  men  to  justification  of  life  "  (ver. 
18).  Grace  and  mercy  triumph  over  the  guilt  of  sin.  2.  Sin  brought  tin/ulness ; 
grace  brings  righteousness.  "As  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made,  sinners, 
so  by  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous  "  (ver.  19).  One  man's  sin 
imposed  upon  the  race  an  hereditary  taint  of  sin.  The  depravity  of  human  nature,  ai 
already  shown,  is  universal.  "All  have  sinned."  But  here,  too,  grace  can  triumph. 
Grace  can  change  the  corrupt  and  unregenerate  heart.  Grace  reigns  through  righteous- 
ness. God's  purpose  in  justification  is  not  merely  that  his  people  may  be  (aved  from 
sin's  guilt,  but  also  that  they  may  be  delivered  from  its  power.  As  St.  Paul  elsewhere 
says,  "  According  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  that 
we  should  be  holy  and  without  blame  before  him  in  love  "  (Eph.  L  4).  The  experience 
of  many  a  true  child  of  God  has  shown  how  grace  can  triumph  over  the  hereditary  sin- 
fulness of  human  nature,  and  over  the  special  temptations  to  which  some  natures  are 
exposed.  3.  Sin  brought  death ;  grace  brings  life.  "  That  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto 
death,  even  so  might  grace  reign  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life  by  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord"  (ver.  21).  It  is  sin  which  has  oast  the  gloom  over  the  dark  valley. 
"  The  sting  of  death  is  sin."  But  Jesus  has  come  to  give  us  light.  "  Thanks  be  to 
God,  who  ^veth  ub  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (1  Cor.  xv.  57).  Truly, 
if  sin  has  abounded  to  the  corruption  and  despair  and  death  of  human  nature,  grace  has 
much  more  kbouuded  to  Its  regeneration  and  hope  and  everlasting  life.— 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  1,  2.-2^  Christian  privilege.  Justification  by  faith  being  assumed  as  now 
established,  the  Christian's  consequent  attitude  towards  God  and  hope  in  him  are  next 
set  forth.  Salvation  is  but  begun;  and  the  process?  the  goal?  May  there  not  be 
failure  by  the  way,  and  catastrophe  at  last  ?  The  apostle,  in  the  first  half  of  this 
chapter,  sets  forth  the  ground.'<  of  Christian  assurance.  In  these  two  verses  he  exhorts 
to  peace  and  joyful  hope. 

L  Peace.  Even  the  justified  Christian  may  be  difSdent,  and  may  Bometimea  regard 
Gk)d  with  dread.  Many  causes  may  contribute  to  this — constitutional  difiSdenoe ;  ill 
health;  partial  and  imperfect  views  of  religious  truth;  intense  self-consciousness; 
failure  to  realize  the  ideaL    Paul  knew  it,  allowed  for  it,  prescribed  for  it.    "  Let  u* 


OH.V.  1— 21.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  141 


have  peace."  1.  The  nature  rf  peace  toward  Ood.  (1)  A  quiet  mind  in  view  of  God** 
new  relation  to  us  in  GhriBt.  (2)  A  calm  assurance  of  God's  help  in  all  our  growtk 
and  fight  with  sin.  (3)  A  confidence  that  all  our  relations  to  the  world  shall  be 
rightly  ordered  by  him.  2.  The  grounds  of  peace  toward  Ood.  "  Through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  (1)  We  have  found  favour  through  him  (ver.  2).  '  (2)  We  five  through 
him.  (3)  We  and  our  interests  are  controlled  and  governed  by  him.  So,  then,  peace 
in  all  things  toward  God,  by  reason  of  the  great  mediation  between  God  and  men. 

II.  GiiOBTQia.  It  is  much  to  have  peace ;  a  quiet  heart ;  freedom  from  all  fear  of 
evil.  But  it  is  better  to  have  joy ;  an  eager  heart ;  the  exultant  anticipation  of  all 
good.  This  joy  is  oun — a  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  1.  The  hope  of  glory.  Called 
God's  glory.  Because  he,  the  Perfect  One,  is  perfectly  blessed.  And  as  we  approxi- 
mate towards  hii  holiness,  we  shall  approximate  towards  his  happiness.  He  is 
enswathed  in  light ;  he  is  leading  us  into  light.  "  The  glory  of  God."  More  than 
imagination  can  conceive  or  heart  desire,  he  is  preparing  for  them  that  love  him.  2. 
The  Joy  of  the  h<^e.  The  brightness  already  irradiates  us;  the  new  life  bounds  in  our 
veins.  What  vigour  and  hopefulness  this  lends  to  the  doing  of  duties  now  !  We  are 
the  heirs  of  a  boundless  future.  What  power  to  ignore  the  imperfectness  and  despair 
of  life  I    Despair  ?  with  such  a  hope  1    "  Let  us  rejoice  I " 

Are  we  justi&ed?  Then  it  is  our  privilege  to  have  peace  and  joy.  What  God  has 
done,  is  doing  for  us.  It  if  our  duty  also;  for  then  what  may  we  do  for  God  I — 
T.  F.L. 

Vers.  3—6. — The  Joy  of  tribulation.  Paul  has  taught  n»  that  peace,  nay  glorying, 
may  be  ours,  though  this  be  a  world  of  trial.  He  now  teaches  that  we  may  glory  in 
the  very  trials  themselves.  And  this  teaching  he  enforces  by  a  chain  of  arguments. 
In  other  words,  he  taught  in  the  previous  verses  that  we  are  conquerors ;  now  he  teaches 
that  we  are  "  more  than  conquerors." 

I.  Tbibulation  wobeeth  patiknob.  No  character  can  be  truly  formed  without 
the  opportunity  of  endurance ;  we  must  learn  to  resist  Tribulation  affords  this  oppor- 
tunity ;  it  calls  us  to  resist. 

n.  Patibnob  wokkbth  pkobation.  Or,  as  the  word  means  literally,  "  triedness." 
We  must  be  as  the  genuine  metal,  which  rings  true.  This  can  only  be,  in  the  case  of 
character,  as  we  have  become  true. 

III.  Pbobatiom  wobebth  bope.  Triedness  works  hope  in  a  double  sense :  the  tested 
strength  we  have  warrants  confidence ;  and  past  triumphs  are  pledges  of  future.  So  a 
veteran  soldier,  by  reason  of  victories  that  he  has  won,  and  because  he  is  a  veteran, 
looks  forward  to  future  victory. 

lY.  Hope  putteth  not  to  shauk.  The  hope  of  victories  to  come  is  merged  in 
the  great  hope  of  the  crowning  victory,  the  standing  approved  in  God's  prescoce  at 
last.  But  shall  this  be  ?  Are  we  not  most  unfit  for  such  a  presence  ?  And  may  we 
not,  therefore,  when  we  confront  him  at  last,  confront  his  wrath  ?  So  would  our  hopes 
belie  themselves,  and  by  them  we  should  be  put  to  shame  1  Nay,  but  this  cannot  be. 
For  is  not  all  the  spiritual  education,  upon  which  partly  we  build  our  hope,  an  educa- 
tion of  God?  Does  not  he  mercifully  suffer  tribulation  to  befall  us,  that  we  may 
endure  ?  and  that,  enduring,  we  may  be  approved  ?  and  that,  being  approved,  we  may 
have  hope  ?  This  hope  is  of  him.  But,  beyond  all  this,  does  not  he  himself  now  assure 
OS  of  his  love  T  Is  it  not  shown  to  us  by  the  Spirit,  which  searcheth  all  things,  yea, 
the  deep  things  of  God  ?  Nay,  is  it  not  transfused  through  all  our  nature,  "  shed 
•broad "  by  the  Spirit  given  to  ni  ?  Yes,  truly,  all  our  consciousness  pulsates  with 
the  assurance  of  the  tender  meiey  of  our  God ;  all  the  voices  of  our  experience  say  to 
ua,  "  God  loves  you."  And  ean  such  a  hope  be  put  to  shame  ?  Never,  while  QtoA't 
Word  lasts  I 

God  is  educating  us ;  bat  in  and  throueh  all,  and  above  all,  Gk)d  loves  ml  Let  us 
hold  fast  to  this  blessed  Cust.  While  yielding  to  the  discipline,  let  us  %t  the  same  time 
hold  his  hand,  and  be  strong  in  his  mighty  love. — ^T.  F.  L. 

Yen.  Q—S. — The  great  love.    The  realization  of  the  love  of  Ood  la  the  Christian 
oonsciousness  is  the  crowning  Christian  evidence;  and  it  is  the  work  of  God  himself 
by  his  Spirit.    But  an  historwal  fact  k  used  by  the  Spirit  of  God  la  lUm  iostrumeBtality 
matuxa,  h 


146  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  fiOMANS.     [oh.  v.  1— 2L 

of  Mb  work  of  love ;  and  it  is  because  we  believe  in  the  fact  that  we  realize  the  love 
which  give*  us  such  a  blessed  life.  Yes,  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us; "  and 
the  great  fact  of  commendation  is  this,  "  Christ  died  for  us." 

L  Thb  lovk.  We  may  never  forget  that  it  was  because  God  loved  us  we  were 
saved.  The  originating  impulse  to  salvation  was  in  him.  Wrath  and  love  were  mingled, 
but  the  love  strove  so  to  act  that  the  wrath  should  be  put  away.  The  claims  of 
righteousness  on  account  of  sins  that  were  past  were  strong ;  but  what  if,  by  a  supreme 
self-sacrifice,  he  himself  should  meet  those  claims  ?  Even  so  it  was ;  thus  God's  love 
vorketh  all  in  all. 

IL  Thb  self-saobifioe.  Some  object  to  the  doctrine  of  a  vicarioE2  atonement,  that 
to  punish  the  innocent  for  the  guilty  is  not  just.  But  here  we  behold  God  himself 
stooping  to  death  for  man  I  And  may  not  love  make  such  a  sacrifice  ?  Nay,  this  is 
the  only  sacrifice  which  true  love  can  make — to  sacrifice  itself.  "  God  commendeth  his 
own  love  toward  us,  in  that  Christ  died  for  us."  The  son  of  a  father,  dearer  than  self: 
Abraham ;  William  TelL  But  such  illustrations  utterly  fail ;  for  God's  Son  is  indis- 
solubly  One  with  him — the  Communication  of  himself. 

III.  The  8ACBIFICE  FOB  BiNNEBS.  Suchlove  the  great  prototype  of  all  self-sacrificing 
human  love.  There  may  be  the  sacrifice  of  husband  for  wife,  of  mother  for  child. 
But  this,  in  a  sense,  is  self  for  self;  God's  was  Qoi  for  man.  There  may  be  more 
disinterested  saorifice :  subject  for  monarch.  Mend  for  friend.  Yes,  there  may  be  self- 
sacrifice  even  unto  death  "for  a  righteous  man,"  "  for  the  good  man  " — there  may  he : 
" peradventure,"  "scarcely."  But  God's  love — for  the  weak,  for  the  ungodly,  for 
sinners  I  For  such  as  were  averse  from  himself,  transgressing  the  laws  of  holiness, 
impotent  to  attempt  or  desire  the  good — for  such  he  died!  A  love  which  not  merely 
pitied  the  victims  of  weakness,  but  gave  itself  for  those  who  were  most  repulsiv  e  in 
tbeir  love  of  sin,  most  unblushing  in  their  hate  of  God:  herein  is  love  indeed  I  And 
such  was  bis  love  to  us,  in  Christ. 

Our  faith  in  him,  then,  must  be  a  faith  which  shall  never  let  go  its  hold,  which 
shall  trust  unto  the  uttermost.  Also,  our  love  must  be  a  reflex  of  his.  Even  for  those 
who  are  most  distasteful  in  their  sin,  a  redeeming  love  must  be  felt  and  shown. — 
r.  F.  L, 

Vers.  9 — 11. — The  assurance  of  redemption.  But  what  an  argument  of  assurance  is 
<uch  a  love  I  If  the  love  itself  works  hope,  how  does  this  assured  love  work  an  assured 
hope  I     It  is  an  A  fortiori  of  the  strongest  kind. 

L  The  becongiliation.  1.  We  were  enemiei.  God  was  opposed  to  us ;  we  were 
opposed  to  God.  Something  terribly  real  in  this  twofold  opposition.  We  know  its 
reality  on  our  side ;  conscience,  nature,  revelation  testify  to  its  reality  on  God's  side. 
The  wrath  of  God.  2.  Christ  died  for  us.  Justifying  us  by  his  blood,  reconciling  us 
to  God  through  his  death.  The  great  demonstration  of  righteousness;  the  Divine 
concession  to  its  claims.  Also  a  great  demonstration  of  love  ;  the  Divine  provision  for 
its  claims.  Yes ;  Gk>d  sacrificing  himself  for  man.  3.  We  are  recoticiled.  God's  love 
has  free  course  now  through  Christ ;  our  love  is  won  for  God  in  Christ.  So  then  peace, 
amity,  mutual  love ;  identification  in  Christ  1  "  Behold,  what  manner  of  love,"  etc. 
(1  John  iii.  1). 

II.  The  BEJOicma.  A  reversion  to  argument  with  which  chapter  opened,  and  which 
is  more  or  less  maintained  through  all  these  verses.  We  look  forward  and  fear.  Kay, 
says  the  apostle,  look  to  the  past;  think  how  great  things  God  hath  done  for  you; 
think  of  the  conditions  under  which  all  that  deliverance  was  wrought.  And  now 
contrast :  see  conditions  of  present  salvation,  and  be  glad  as  you  look  to  the  future, 
assured  that  your  salvation  shall  be  unto  the  uttermost.  Follow  the  d  fortiori.  1. 
Not  enemies,  but  friends.  What  we  were  I  But  he  loved  us  then,  laid  down  his  lift 
for  ui  then.  What  we  are  1  how  much  more  shall  he  save  us  now  1  "  Thou  art 
mine  1 "  2.  Not  his  death,  but  his  life.  Two  sides  of  Christ's  saving  work.  Think 
of  the  suffering  and  death :  that  did  so  much  1  Think  of  the  exaltation  and  life  :  how 
much  shall  not  that  dot  3.  Not  only  reconciled,  but  rejoicing.  The  new-found  love ; 
tke  Uving  Friend. 

Let  us  take  this  Divine  "  much  more "  into  all  our  life.  The  dark  background  of 
rebellion  and  death ;  the  present  love  and  life :  much  more  1    The  oreicoming  of  t)M 


OB.  T.  1—21.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  141 

great  evil  once  for  all ;  the  overcoming  of  our  temptations  now :  muoli  more  I  Th« 
gift  of  the  Sou ;  and  now  the  gift  of  ^1  gnuw  through  him :  much  more  I  And  so, 
"  saved  from  wrath  through  him." — ^T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  12 — 1^—The  reign  of  death.  The  summing  up  of  this  first  division  of  the 
Epistle :  Christ  has  undone  what  sin  has  done,  as  regards  our  objective  relation  to  God. 
In  these  three  verses — Sin  through  one  works  death  to  alL 

I.  Sin  wobkinq  death.  "Death"  a  word  with  many  meanings  in  Scripture. 
Dissolution  of  complex  nature;  corruption  of  spiritual  nature;  and  final  abandonment 
by  God.  Here  the  first.  An  objective  punishment  of  an  objective  transgression ;  a 
manifest  sentence  of  condemnation.  Henee  symbolic  of  condemnation  itself,  showing 
forth  God's  wrath.  May  well  lead  thoughts  to  death  that  must  reign  in  the  inner  man, 
through  the  withdrawal  of  God's  favour — a  spiritual  paralyds.  Also  might  well  be 
premonitory  of  the  total  casting-off.  Such,  then,  the  triple  death — condemnation, 
helplessness,  and  the  culmination  of  both  in  the  hereafter.  And  this  the  death  which 
"  entered  into  the  world  "  through  sin. 

IL  Death  beionino  oteb  all.  But  this  sin  the  sin  of  one.  How,  then,  th« 
uaiversal  death?  Look  around — death,  death,  death!  Yes,  might  answer,  because 
sin,  sin,  sin  1  True ;  but  carry  thought  back  to  time  anterior  to  Law.  Death  still  I 
And  no  sin  then  such  as  Adam's  was,  such  as  yours  is — so  conscious,  so  deliberate. 
There  was  the  presence  and  working  of  sin,  indeed,  but  the  working  was  the  spontaneous 
working  of  a  corrupt  nature.  No  law,  and  therefore,  strictly,  no  transgression.  Argu- 
ment might  be  reinforced  by  similar  consideration  of  heathen  now,  and  infants :  death 
reigns !  So,  then,  the  death  even  of  those  who  have  the  Law  is  not  on  account  of  their 
individual  transgressions  of  the  Law,  but  must  be  traced  to  the  same  cause  as  operates 
in  the  case  of  those  who  have  "not  sinned  after  the  likeness  of  Adam's  transgression." 

III.  The  bin  of  one  thk  bin  of  all.  Therefore,  if  death  be  an  objective  punish- 
ment for  an  objective  ofience,  it  can  be  for  none  other's  than  his  ofience  who  first  trans- 
gressed God's  manifested  will.  And  therefore,  if  the  condemnation  be  imputed  to  all, 
the  sin  was  imputed  to  all.  Or,  in  other  words,  in  him  "  all  sinned  "  (ver.  12).  The 
marvellous  solidarity  of  all  things — species,  genus,  world,  system,  universe.  So  in 
respect  of  mankind,  and  the  spiritual  history  of  mankind :  the  act  of  one,  the  act  of  all. 

So,  then,  all  rest  under  a  shadow — the  shadow  cast  by  Adam's  sin  1  All  bear  a  brand 
— the  brand  of  his  punishment  I  Where  is  the  path  from  darkness  into  light  ?  Justifi- 
cation through  Christ  1  Can  this  be  coextensive  in  its  range  with  the  results  of  sin  ? 
Is  there  a  solidarity  here  also  ?  Yes ;  for  Adam  was  "  a  figure  of  him  that  was  to 
come."    We  have  another  Head,  a  second  Adam ! — ^T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  16 — 17. — The  abounding  life.  It  is  evident  that  all  are  condemned,  because 
death  reigns ;  and  it  is  proved  that  the  condemnation  of  all  is  through  the  sin  of  one, 
because  even  where  no  express  law  is,  there  is  death.  But  we  have  hope  in  Christ. 
Is  our  hope  valid  ?  Does  the  justificatiun  through  Christ  reach  over  as  wide  a  ran|;;e  as 
the  condemnation  through  Adam  ?  And  is  the  consequent  life  to  prevail  coextensively 
with  the  death  ?    The  argument  here  is  to  prove  the  certainty  of  each  coextension. 

I.  An  aboundino  asAOB.  1.  The  originating  cause  of  the  condemnation  was  the 
(1)  severity  of  God  ;  (2)  working  because  of  trespass — a  trespass  which  was  (literally) 
a  fall  through  weakness ;  (3)  and  working,  for  one  trespass,  death  to  all.  2.  'Ae 
originating  cause  of  the  justification  is  the  (1)  grace  of  God ;  (2)  working  by  a  gift  of 
grace— viz.  Christ ;  and  by  the  grace  of  this  Christ — a  love  unto  death ;  (3)  and  working 
because  many  trespasses  call  forth  compassion.  Sturdy,  "  not  as  the  trespass,  so  also 
is  the  free  gift." 

IL  An  iNDivioaAL  apfbofbiation  of  the  ABOCNOiNa  OBACE.  1.  The  participatioB 
in  the  sentence  of  condemnation  was  passive  on  the  part  of  the  many,  for  the  sin  of  on* 
— ^the  unchoosing  heirs  of  a  sad  inheritance.  2.  The  participation  in  the  decree  of  life 
is  active  on  the  part  of  many,  for  the  sacrifice  of  the  One — they  "  receive  "  the  grace 
of  righteousness,  laying  hold  of  it  by  the  voluntary  activity  of  faith. 

Infinite  love  is  the  fount  of  our  life ;  and  Jesus  Christ,  a  Man,  is  he  in  whom  sU 
fulness  dwells.  The  certainty  is  irrefragable.  Do  we  make  it  ours?  "As  many  m 
MceiveJ  him  "  (John  L 12).— 7.  F.  L. 


140  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  t.  1— 2X 

Vers.  18, 19. — The  two  antUheset.  The  equal  solidarity  with  Christ  as  with  Adam 
reaffirmed,  from  the  implication  of  vers.  12 — 14,  In  the  atrength  of  the  arguments  of 
vers.  15 — 17.  Affirmed  in  two  antitheses,  the  one  pointing  in  either  case  more  to 
historical  events,  the  other  to  moral  causes. 

L  Ths  HiBTOBiOAii  ANTITHESIS.  1.  One  trespass  unto  condemnation — the  con- 
demnation that  is  marked  by  death.  2.  One  act  of  righteousness  (i.e.  one  decree  of 
righteousness)  unto  justification— the  justification  that  brings  life. 

II.  Thb  MOBAI4  ANTiTHEiBis.  1.  One  man's  disobedience  making  the  many  sinners : 
it  being  imputed  to  them  for  sin.  The  sinfulness  of  perverted  will  also  bound  up  in 
the  same  sad  heritage.  2.  One  Man's  obedience — obedience"  unto  death  "(PhiL  u.  8) — 
making  the  many  righteous :  it  being  imputed  to  them  for  righteousness.  The  power 
of  a  holy  will  also  involved  in  the  restored  heritage. 

We  see  here  the  immense  importance  of  moral  acts ;  the  immense  influence  also  of 
moral  factors.  Never  to  be  repeated  on  such  a  scale :  but  not  on  a  lesser  scale ?  "If 
one  member  suffer,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it ;  if  one  member  is  honoured,  all  the 
members  rejoice  with  it." — ^T.  F.  L. 

Ters.  20,  21. — Tlie  ecotwmy  of  lav>.  A  return  to  the  mention  of  the  Mosaic  Law, 
and  its  part  in  the  great  economy  of  the  world's  history.  Its  immediate,  remoter,  and 
ultimate  effects. 

I.  Immediate  effeot.  1.  A  side-economy :  among  one  people,  for  disciplinary 
purposes.  2.  "  That  the  trespass  might  abound,"  i.e.  that  men  nught  be  compelled  to 
the  consciousness  of  that  which  wrought  in  them  unconsciously.  Working  thus  two- 
foldly — as  revelation,  and  as  repression.  In  the  latter  way,  obviously  to  the  intensifying 
of  the  consciousness  of  sin,  as  when  a  torrent  is  dammed.  The  former  has  an  analogue 
in  the  growing  knowledge  of  the  Christian  life,  and  the  increased  arduousness  of  Chriscian 
effort  which  is  consequent  upon  it.  So  the  moral  law,  the  ceremonial,  the  prophets, 
and  John  Baptist.  The  climax  of  its  effect  towards  sin  in  the  crucifixion  of  Christ,  in 
which  man's  wiokedness,  driven  to  desperation  by  the  holy  law  of  the  life  of  Christ, 
■bowed  its  utmost  eviL    Truly,  "  the  Law  came  in,  that  the  trespass  might  abound." 

II.  Kemotbb  effect.  "Grace  did  abound  more  exceedingly."  1.  The  very 
economy  of  law  was  an  economy  of  mercy,  in  all  its  parts :  so  the  "  This  do,  and  live," 
which  in  some  sense  was  verified  even  to  their  imperfect  doings ;  and  so  the  double 
significance  of  their  sacrifices,  revealing  indeed  their  guUt,  but  prophetic  of  expiation. 
2.  The  climax  of  sin,  wrought  through  the  Law,  was  a  climax  of  grace :  the  death  of 
kim  who  must  die  to  take  away  sin.     "  More  exceedingly  ?  "    Ah,  yes  I 

III.  Ultimate  effect.  Extension  of  effects,  to  all  the  world :  and  they  ?  A 
contrast  once  again.  1.  "  Sin  reigned  in  death  " — ^the  dread  sign  of  its  sovereignty. 
Seen  everywhere — the  dark  sign-manual  stamped  on  all  the  world.  2.  "  That  even 
so  might  grace  reign,"  etc.  (1)  Orac*.  God's  favour  shown  in  spite  of  sin.  (2) 
Through  righteousness.  The  favour  being  shown  through  Christ,  and  through  the 
justification  which  is  by  him.  God's  favour  at  once  the  originating  cause,  and  the 
realized  effect,  of  the  "  righteousness."  (3)  Vnto  eternal  life.  The  everlasting  sign 
of  the  sovereignty  of  love,  as  contrasted  with  that  death  which  was  the  sign  of  the 
■overeignty  of  sin. 

This,  then,  the  paean  which  shall  reeound  through  all  the  ages — "  Death  ii  iwallowed 
vp  in  victory  1 "    Shall  we  have  part  in  that  immortal  song  ? — ^T.  F.  L. 

Yer.  2. — A  state  of  privilege.  It  seems  as  if  the  apostle  was  delighted  to  turn  from 
demonstrations  of  the  credibility  of  the  gospel  plan  to  consider  the  happiness  of  those 
who  had  embraced  it  and  were  realizing  its  privileges.  His  pen  glows  as  he  exhorts 
himself  and  his  readers  to  taste  the  full  comforts  of  the  condition  of  reconciliation 
towards  God.  When  our  right  to  the  estate  is  challenged,  we  may  spend  time  in 
examining  the  title-deeds  and  verifying  our  claims;  but  in  general  it  is  healthier  and 
more  satisfactory  to  settle  down  calmly  on  the  property  and  reap  the  benefit  of  iti 
treasures.  Let  us  confidently  enter  the  dwelling  which  Divine  love  has  secured  us, 
aikd  not  alwi»ys  stay  justifying  the  scheme  of  its  foundation  and  architecture. 

L  Thb  palaob  into  which  wb  abb  admitted.  It  is  a  house  of  grace,  where  the 
&TWir  of  God  is  enjoyed,  and  which  is  furnished  from  the  stores  of  Divine  goodueis. 


ott.  V.  1-21.3    TflE  EPISTLE  Oi*  PAtJL  TO  THE  IIOMAIJS,  149 

He  saw  the  needs  of  his  creatures,  pitied  their  forlora  wretchedness,  wouH  shelter  them 
from  the  storm,  and  lavish  on  them  proofs  of  kindness.  Peace  feigns  there,  a  sense  of 
blissful  security.  Every  article  of  furniture,  every  picture  on  the  walls,  eveiy  robe 
worn,  eveiy  meal  provided,  speaks  of  Divine  mercy,  of  a  changed  attitude  towards 
those  received  within  the  sacred  precincts.  It  is  a  permanent  home,  which  we  enter 
to  go  out  no  more  for  ever.  Grace  alters  not,  is  not  fickle;  therefore  "we  stand" 
(abide)  therein  without  fear  of  one  day  losing  our  situation  from  the  arbitrariness  of 
the  Master. 

n.  The  gate  of  entbancb.  "Through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  He  is  "the 
Door  of  the  sheep,"  a  liying  Way  to  the  holiest  of  all.  He  is  our  introduction  ('•  access  ") 
to  the  court  of  the  King.  His  work  of  mercy  and  righteousness  has  availed  to  procure 
free  entry  into  the  inheritance.  The  cherubim  and  flaming  sword  no  longer  bar  the 
way  to  the  Paradise  of  God.  Man's  own  moral  power  availed  naught  to  force  a  w»y 
into  the  temple.    He  could  make  no  breach  in  the  Walls  of  governmental  Justice. 

III,  The  only  passpobt  REQtriBGfi,  "  By  faith  "  we  enter  into  this  state  of  grace. 
The  inquiry  at  the  gate  is,  "Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God?"  To  trust  in 
Christ  is  to  feel  the  longing  for  a  renewed  heart,  for  Divine  forgiveness,  and  to  recognize 
in  Mm  "  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life."  Scepticism  may  keep  men  at  a  distance, 
unbelief  may  turn  the  back  upon  the  mansion,  timid  doubt  may  remain  gazing  wistfully 
at  the  portico,  but  the  believer  is  impelled  to  march  humbly  yet  fearlessly  through  the 
appointed  entrance  into  the  halls  of  light  and  song, 

IV,  The  jot  of  the  inmates.  They  are  filled  with  exultation  because  of  their 
present  condition ;  they  are  already  encompassed  with  so  many  marks  of  Divine  favour. 
They  are  constantly  finding  new  beauties  in  the  construction  of  the  rooms,  and  new 
evidences  of  Divine  skill,  forethought,  and  love.  But  they  know  that  this  is  but  the 
foretaste  of  further  bliss;  they  triumph  in  the  expectation  of  coming  glory.  They  have 
the  promise  and  many  a  sign  of  a  fuller  revealing  of  the  character  and  purpose  of  God. 
He  comes  nearer  to  his  guests,  till  at  last  the  veil  of  sense  shall  be  removed,  and  every 
occupant  of  the  palace  be  enwrapped  in  the  radiance  of  his  throne.  All  the  dust  of 
the  journey  to  the  home,  every  vestige.of  defilement,  vanishes  from  the  pilgrims  crowned 
with  the  brightness  of  God's  heavenly  presence, — S.  B.  A. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — Tribulation  made  subsidiary  to  hope.  Trouble  is  usually  considered 
antagonistic  to  joy.  A  ready  objection  might  occur,  therefore,  to  the  apostle's  decla- 
ration of  Christian  rejoicing.  How  was  this  possible,  seeing  the  many  hardships  to 
which  the  profession  of  Christianity  exposed  its  votaries  ?  The  text  refutes  such  an 
objection. 

I.  The  Christian  factory.  Tribulation  is  God's  method  of  disciplining  his  people. 
Sin  having  entered  the  world,  bringing  sorrow  in  its  train,  the  Very  afflictions  of  life 
are  forced  by  Divine  grace  to  contribute  to  the  improvement  of  those  who  undergo 
it  religiously.  This  was  evident  in  Old  Testament  times,  but  is  still  more  visible 
under  the  dispensation  of  tiie  Spirit,  where  chief  stress  is  laid  upon  graces  of  character. 
The  faith  of  the  Christian  is  the  material  on  which  the  machinery  of  trouble  operates, 
spinning  out  of  it  the  thread  of  patience.  In  the  school  of  trouble  are  the  meaning  and 
the  mercy  of  pain  learnt ;  only  those  who  have  experienced  opposition  have  been  taught 
trae  resignation  to  God's  will,  content  not  to  hurry  events  or  to  quarrel  with  them,  but 
confidently  to  await  his  time  and  issue.  With  the  threads  of  patience  is  woven  the  doth 
o/probatum.  He  who  continues  steadfast  in  the  will  of  God  proves  for  himself  the 
truth  of  the  promises,  the  accuracy  of  the  Divine  forecasts,  and  the  success  of  the 
Divine  methods.  The  long  succession  of  days  and  nights  produces  its  glad  harvest, 
when  the  fruits  of  patience  attest  that  not  in  vain  did  the  sower  sow.  And  the  mill 
of  God's  training  ceases  not  its  work,  till  out  of  probation  is  constructed  the  beautiful 
garment  of  hope,  in  which  the  Christian  is  gloriously  arrayed.  What  can  he  do  who 
has  tested  the  faithfulness  of  God,  but  entertain  Unshaken  confidence  respecting  all 
that  yet  awaits  him  ?  The  evolution  of  grace  is  seen  to  produce  ever  better  results  as 
time  passes,  and  the  sure  expectation  is  begotten  of  a  grandeur  of  glory  casting  all 
past  experience  into  the  shade.  Thus  the  apostle  has  returned  to  and  demonstrated 
his  previous  statement.  1.  Observe  that  tribulation  is  not  in  itself  the  object  of 
fcjoicing.    The  machinery  seems  often  hard  and  cruel  apart  from  its  aim.    Only  whea 


160  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  HOMANS.     [oh.  ▼.  I— 21. 

we  look  through  the  things  seen  to  the  unseen  and  eternal  can  we  welcome  trouble  ai 
working  out  a  weight  of  glory,  and  it  loses  its  fearsome  aspect.  2.  Then  tribulation 
must  have  the  Christian  spirit  to  work  upon,  or  its  results  may  be  disastrous.  Not 
every  substance  will  pass  unharmed  through  the  wheels  and  rollers,  the  spindles  and 
shuttles.  It  may  be  torn  in  the  process,  or  reduced  to  pulp.  Trouble  does  not  neces- 
sarily improve  the  worldly  minded.  Instead  of  softening,  it  may  harden  the  heart ;  the 
man  may  become  peevish  and  morose,  soured  by  disappointment.  3.  And  the  Christian 
may  dread  the  allurement  of  prosperity  more  than  the  endurance  of  hardship.  The 
chilling  blast  causes  the  traveller  to  wrap  his  cloak  the  closer  around  him ;  it  is  the 
heat  which  leads  to  throwing  off  his  garment.  Troubles  drive  us  to  the  appointed 
Refuge ;  in  our  joys  we  are  like  Hannibal's  soldiers  at  Cannas,  relaxing  the  bonds  of 
vigilance  and  soberness.  Times  of  persecution  have  often  proved  an  invigorating, 
bracing  season  to  the  Church.  Perhaps  the  hope  of  future  glory  appears  more  lustrous 
•nd  enviable  when  in  contrast  with  present  danger. 

II.  The  value  of  the  product.  Hope  is  cheerful,  like  the  light  wherewith  God 
decks  himself  and  adorns  the  landscape.  Hope  is  the  eye  of  the  soul ;  its  clearness  and 
brightness  toll  of  good  health.  But  the  point  on  which  the  apostle  here  insists  is  the 
reliable  character  of  Christian  hope.  It  is  a  robe  of  which  the  wearer  will  never  have 
cause  to  be  ashamed.  It  suits  the  wearer.  There  has  been  an  inward  preparation  for 
the  outward  adornment.  God's  love  has  been  diffused  through  his  breast.  Assured 
that  he  is  a  beloved  child,  the  anticipation  of  bliss  and  perfection  is  an  appropriate 
vesture  for  his  peaceful,  happy  spirit.  The  man  excluded  from  the  wedding-feast 
because  of  an  unsuitable  dress  showed  thereby  that  his  heart  was  not  right ;  pride  or 
obstinacy  had  rejected  the  garment  freely  offered.  The  workmanship  of  the  robe  dis- 
plays the  same  gracious  design  that  has  filled  the  heart  already  with  assurances  of  recon- 
ciling, redeeming  love.  The  Spirit  showing  to  the  believer  the  things  of  Christ  reveals 
the  character  and  purpose  of  God,  and  the  hope  of  glory  is  recognized  as  corresponding 
in  every  particular  to  this  experience  of  the  wondrous  love  of  God.  It  is  a  durable 
garment,  not  flimsy  in  texture,  looking  well  for  a  season,  then  suddenly  giving  way. 
The  hope  of  many  is  like  a  palace  of  ice,  glittering,  but  yielding  to  the  rays  of 
increasing  light,  or  like  a  torch  extinguished  by  the  wind  of  death.  But  this  hope, 
amid  every  change  of  circumstance,'  shall  subsist  in  undecaying,  yea,  growing,  splendour. 
— S.  R.  A. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  certainty  of  salvation.  The  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  may 
be  said  to  be  hinted  at  in  the  first  chapter,  implied  in  the  second,  distinctly  proclaimed 
in  the  third,  proved  scriptural  in  the  fomth,  and  openly  exulted  in  in  this  present 
chapter.    Its  consequences  are  now  being  emphasized  by  the  apostle. 

I.  The  appeal  to  a  fact.  The  "  if"  of  the  tenth  verse  does  not  signify  doubt, 
but  introduces  the  major  premiss  of  the  proposition,  and  one  which  is  matter  of  instant 
acknowledgment.  Translate  it  "  since,"  or  "  seeing  that."  1.  The  previous  state,  ooa 
of  enmity  against  God.  The  human  race  as  such  had  revolted  against  its  Sovereign. 
The  apostle  considers  Christ's  work  as  effected  for  all  generations,  the  ancient  saints 
profiting  by  anticipatory  faith,  and  subsequent  believers  being  attracted  by  the  plain 
preaching  of  the  cross.  Modern  experience  attests  the  reality  of  this  unnatural  con- 
dition, the  hostility  being  evident  both  in  thought  and  word  and  deed.  What  a  blight 
must  have  fallen  upon  the  creation,  for  the  creatures  to  set  themselves  against  their 
Creator,  the  children  against  their  Parent!  The  remembrance  of  a  God  in  heaven, 
instead  of  inspiring  delight,  is  excluded  as  far  and  as  long  as  possible.  Witness  the 
exclamation  of  the  woman  by  the  dying-bed  of  Falstaff,  "  Now  I,  to  comfort  him,  bid 
him  'a  should  not  think  of  God ;  I  hoped  there  was  no  need  to  trouble  himself  with 
any  such  thoughts  yet."  2.  Tlie  change  effected.  Reconciliation  means  the  bringing 
together  in  happy  agreement  of  parties  formerly  at  variance.  It  matters  not  whether 
we  can  definitely  state  the  time  and  manner  of  our  indiridual  conversion,  provided  we 
are  conscious  that  there  is  now  no  estrangement,  that  we  are  not  "  alienated  in  our 
mind  "  from  the  almighty  Author  of  our  being.  Does  peace  reign  ?  Do  we  love  and 
not  dread  God,  desiring  to  serve  him  as  our  chief  glory  ?  3.  The  instrument.  The 
death  of  Christ  is  declared  by  the  apostle  to  have  removed  every  barrier  to  man's 
raturn  to  fellowship  with  God.     We  are  "justified  by  his  blood,"  which  allays  th« 


CH.T.  1— 21.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  161 

fears  of  conscience  and  inspires  us  with  new  motives  and  desires.  The  law  of  condem- 
nation was  nailed  to  the  cross.  Sinners  recognize  in  the  Father's  surrender  of  hii 
heloved  Son  his  intention  and  willingness  to  forgive  the  penitent. 

II.  The  argument  based  thereon.  l.Ifa  dying  Christ  reconciled  us,  surely  a 
living  Redeemer  will  avert  from  us  Divine  wrath.  The  contrast  was  great  between 
the  lifeless  form  taken  down  by  the  disciples  from  the  cross,  and  the  risen  Saviour 
declaring,  "  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  earth."  And  in  proportion  did 
the  disciples  rise  from  chilling  despair  into  a  condition  of  fearless  triumph.  The  resur- 
rection was  the  seal  of  the  pleasure  of  God  in  the  obedience  of  his  Son,  and  an  ascen- 
sion to  honour  could  mean  nothing  less  than  continued  aid  and  blessing  for  those  on 
whose  behalf  the  Son  had  suffered.  2.  If  Christ  endured  the  cross  for  the  sake  of  hit 
enemies,  surely  he  will  now  save  his  friends.  By  his  death  he  transmuted  foes  into 
friends,  and  friendship  involves  help  in  every  time  of  need.  The  exalted  Saviour 
places  his  priestly  resources  at  the  disposal  of  his  weak  and  tempted  followers.  His 
perpetual  intercession  is  a  guarantee  of  their  full,  complete  salvation.  "  Having  loved 
his  own  who  were  in  the  world,  he  loves  them  unto  the  end."  3.  ^  Christ  overcame 
the  initial  di^fflculty  in  salvation,  no  other  obstacle  can  arrest  hit  redemptive  career.  It 
might  well  seem  the  crux  of  the  problem  to  bring  man  into  the  way  of  salvation  ;  but 
once  his  feet  are  guided  into  the  way  of  peace,  to  sustain  him  therein  is  the  joyful 
function  of  him  who  "  ever  lives  to  save.'  The  bridging  of  the  chasm  between  sin  and 
righteousness,  love  and  holy  indignation,  having  been  accomplished,  none  can  doubt  the 
ability  of  the  Divine  Architect  to  lead  the  wayfarer  across  in  safety.  Our  Shepherd 
trains  and  feeds  his  flock.  The  angel  with  the  golden  censer  perfumes  and  offers  our 
prayers  before  the  throne.  The  living  Saviour  is  "  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life  " 
of  his  people. — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  19. — Suin  and  redemption.  By  itself  the  first  clause  expresses  a  fact  of 
deepest  gloom.  It  calls  attention  to  the  prevalence  of  sin  and  death.  The  bistoiy  of 
the  world  is.  traced  in  darkest  colours.  We  see  the  race  from  Adam  till  now  marching 
to  the  grave,  with  the  taint  of  corruption  upon  all.  We  are  confronted  by  that  pro- 
found mystery,  the  existence  of  moral  evil,  with  its  widespread,  deep-seated  effects. 
The  possibility  of  man  made  upright  and  free  yielding  to  temptation  does  not  exhaust 
the  explanation  of  the  actual  Fall.  And  when  the  Scriptures  point  to  the  influence  of 
an  external  agent,  the  serpent,  employed  to  bring  about  the  downfall  of  the  first  pair, 
the  pall  of  mystery  is  not  removed ;  its  corner  is  lifted  a  little  that  we  may  see  how 
our  difficulties  relate  to  questionings  concerning  the  origin  and  continuance  of  evil  in 
beings  superior  to  man.  This  appears  to  be  God's  mode  of  dealing  with  us.  Enough 
is  said  to  allow  faith  a  foothold,  not  enough  to  place  the  whole  territory  at  our  dis- 
posal. Instead  of  unlocking  the  house  of  previous  being  and  inviting  us  to  its  darkened 
halls,  to  explore  for  ourselves  the  tragedy  with  which  our  own  world-tragedy  is  con- 
nected, the  Scriptures  point  to  a  Sun  that  has  risen  to  shine  upon  our  moral  firmament, 
and  bid  us  note  its  blissful  tendencies,  kindling  fresh  life  and  beauty,  arresting  decay, 
reviving  hope,  attesting  the  interest  of  the  Almighty  in  his  creatures,  and  showing 
that  the  permission  of  evil  is  not  to  be  ascribed  to  any  lack  of  Divine  love.  The 
subject  of  sin  cannot  be  beneficially  studied  unless  combined  with  the  antidote  which 
the  wisdom  and  affection  of  the  Most  High  have  provided.  Faith  may  waver  as  it 
contemplates  the  inroads  made  by  sin  upon  the  iutelligence  and  happiness  of  the 
human  family,  and  faith  must  be  strengthened  by  meditation  on  the  remedial  work 
of  Christ.  Do  you  wonder  at  the  transmission  of  contagion  from  generation  to  gene- 
ration, at  the  long-drawn-out  penalty  of  the  race?  and  does  the  law  seem  inequi- 
table that  lays  many  of  the  acts  of  the  guilty  as  a  burden  on  the  shoulders  of  the 
innocent  ?  Then  notice  the  operation  of  the  same  law  in  redemption,  where  the  Son  of 
God  sheds  his  blood  to  save  sinners,  and  observe  how  from  him  is  perpetuated  the 
blessing  of  peace  and  godliness.  Separate  the  two  hemispheres,  and  the  mind  becomes 
»  prey  to  chilling  doubts  and  oppressive  fears ;  unite  them,  and  hope  asserts  its  beneficent 
▼ivifying  power.  Whilst  we  declare  in  amazement,  "  How  unsearchable  are  his  judg- 
ment!, and  his  ways  past  finding  out ! "  we  can  add,  "  To  whom  be  glory  for  ever ; " 
"  Juat  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  saints." 

L  Thk  oontbast  between  the  sin  of  Adam  and  thx  BiaHTEouBHEBS  of  Csasgr 


i62  THE  BPIStLfe  0*-  PAtJL  TO  THt!  ROMAlJB.    [oa.  v.  i—A. 

To  diaoliey  the  particular  prohibition  was  to  listen  to  the  tempter,  and  to  substitute 
human  will  for  the  Divine.  Therein  was  contained  the  germ  of  the  worst  vices.  To 
Jesus  was  assigned  the  more  difScult  taslc  of  remaining  holy  amid  a  world  of  evil,  and 
the  slightest  deviation  from  rectitude  had  marred  his  perfect  offering.  Our  sin  is  dis- 
obedience, and  we  are  righteous  in  proportion  as  we  obey  the  dictates  of  God  from  the 
heart.  Disobedience,  as  Adam  found,  does  not  enlarge,  but  restricts  our  liberty.  Not 
knowledge,  but  obedience,  saves  the  soul. 

II.  The  contkabt  fubtheb  shown  in  th«  ErrEors  weotjoht  bt  each.  The 
apostle  assumes  the  truth  of  the  story  in  Genesis.  He  proves  the  universality  of  sin 
by  a  reference  to  the  fact  that  all  have  died,  showing  that  even  the  ancients  prior  to 
Moses  must  have  transgressed  some  law,  and  so  incurred  the  penalty  for  disobedience. 
The  principle  of  heredity  confirms  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  that  our  progenitors  have 
transmitted  a  vitiated  nature  to  their  descendants.  Jesus,  the  second  Adam,  is  the 
Head  of  a  new  race,  to  whom  he  imparts  a  new  birth,  with  its  issue  sanctification.  By 
the  model  of  his  flawless  obedience,  and  by  the  grace  which  flows  into  us  from  that 
spring  of  obedience,  the  curse  is  removed  from  believers,  and  righteousness  is  imputed 
and  imparted. 

III.  The  C0MPABI80N  OF  THE  NUMBBBB  rNPLUBNCBD.  This  passage  should  enlarge 
our  estimate  of  the  iiingdom  of  the  saved.  In  each  case  it  is  "the  many"  who  are 
affected.  The  obedience  of  Christ  is  sufficient  as  a  meritorious  cause  to  justify  the 
whole  world,  though  only  those  who  "  receive  the  Word "  are  consciously  gladdened 
and  sanctified  thereby.  No  man  is  condemned  on  account  of  Adam's  transgression ;  it 
is  his  own  disobedience  to  the  written  or  innate  law  which  determines  his  sentence. 
The  millions  who  have  died  in  infancy  are  redeemed  by  Christ ;  multitudes  in  the 
Jewish  and  heathen  world  were  saved  by  virtue  of  his  atonement,  though  not  explicitly 
revealed  to  them,  and  the  Apostle  John  saw  in  heaven  a  number  beyond  the  arithmetic 
of  earth  to  calculate. — S.  E.  A. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — TJie  state  of  the  Justified.  We  saw  in  last  chapter  how  Abraham  was 
justified  by  faith  alone,  arid  how  his  case  really  covers  ours.  The  promise  of  blessing 
through  a  seed,  which  Abraham  believed  so  implicitly,  has  been  fulfilled  in  Christ. 
We  accordingly  believe  in  the  faithful  Promiser  who  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead, 
and  we  regard  his  death  and  resurrection  as  being  a  deliverance  to  death  for  our 
offences,  and  a  deliverance /rom  death  for  our  justification.  Faith  enables  us  to  draw 
the  assurance  of  our  justification  from  the  resurrection  of  our  Saviour.  But  now  we 
pass  under  the  guidance  of  the  apostle  to  the  consideration  of  the  delightful  state  into 
which  the  justified  come.     And  here  we  notice — 

I.  The  assurance  that  we  are  the  objects  of  the  Divhtb  love.  (Vers. 
1 — 5.)  By  nature  and  by  reason  of  our  sin  we  are  the  objects  of  God's  righteous 
wrath ;  but  when  we  are  enabled  to  believe  in  a  Saviour  who  died  for  us  and  rose 
again,  we  find  ourselves  passing  out  of  the  condemned  condition  into  an  assurance  of 
God's  love.  And  the  apostle  here  gives  us  the  stages  in  the  blessed  process.  1.  We 
pass  into  a  state  of  peace  with  God.  We  prefer  the  indicative  (Ix"/"")  adopted  in  the 
Authorized  Version  to  the  subjunctive  (^xw/t^O  adopted  by  the  Revised  Version  after 
Westcott  and  Hort.  For  the  state  of  peace  is  not  some  uncertainty  into  which  we  may 
come,  but  it  is  a  state  which  results  from  justification  if  it  has  really  taken  place. 
We  cease  from  war,  we  are  no  longer  enemies,  we  have  entered  into  a  state  of  peace. 
The  believer,  as  he  calmly  meditates  on  the  atoning  work  of  Jesus  Christ,  sees  that  he 
has  been  led  thereby  out  of  the  storm  into  the  calm,  out  of  war  into  peace.  Enmity 
is  over  and  peace  is  proclaimed.  2.  We  realize  that  Christ  conducts  us  into  a  standing 
in  grace.  By  his  gracious  mediation  we  pass  into  a  new  relation  to  God ;  we  realize 
that  we  are  justified,  as  believers,  from  all  things  from  which  we  could  not  be  justified 
by  the  Law  of  Moses.  We  can  now  stand  before  God,  and  realize  our  pardon  and 
acceptance  in  the  Beloved.  3.  We  are  enabled  to  rejoice  in  hope  of  Qovt  heavenly 
fJory.  For  the  justified  condition  into  which  we  have  come  through  Christ  is  intended 
to  reach  through  the  present  life  and  issue  in  the  glory  of  the  life  to  come.  It  is  no 
mere  temporary  frame  of  mind,  but  a  permanent  state,  into  which  our  Saviour  has 
brought  us.  4.  We  are  enabled  to  projit  hy  life's  tribulations.  So  much  is  this  the 
case  tluit  we  are  enabled  to  congratulate  ourselves  upon  (xsuxiijucfa)  our  tribnlations ; 


d*.  V.  1— 2iJ    TfiH  EPISTLE  OF  t»AtJL  TO  THE  ROMAiJS.  161 

for  throjgh  these  we  reach  the  power  of  patient  endurance  (imonovii),  and  through  the 
power  of  patient  endurance  we  reach  experience  (Soki/u^,  which  means  the  result  of  the 
probation,  as  well  as  the  "  probation  "  itself,  and  the  former  gives  here,  notwithstanding 
the  Revisers,  the  better  sense) ;  *  and  through  experience  we  reach  hope — the  hope  of 
heavenly  glory,  since  as  its  earnest  there  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  a  consciousness  that  we  are  the  objects  of  the  Divine  love.  The  hope  can  never 
be  disappointed.  We  have  a  "  present  heaven  "  in  our  happy  assurance  of  God's  love. 
We  have  passed  out  of  the  gloom  into  the  gladness,  and  beyond  us  and  awaiting  us 
there  lies  the  glory.  Thus  our  tribulations  conduct  us  to  assurances  of  Divine  wve 
Buch  as  we  could  not  otherwise  enjoy. 

II.  The  natural  history  of  the  Divine  love.  (Vers.  6—10.)  The  apostle,  to 
confirm  believers  in  the  assurance  of  God's  love,  proceeds  to  exhibit  its  history.  1. 
An  he  shows  its  sovereign  character.  That  is  to  say,  it  was  when  we  were  without 
strength,  when  we  were  helpless  and  hopeless  in  our  guilt,  that  God  gave  love's  greatest 
proof  in  Christ  dying  for  the  ungodly.  It  was,  therefore,  no  reason  in  us,  but  solely 
the  exercise  of  God's  sovereign  love,  which  led  to- the  death  of  Jesus  for' the  ungodly. 
2.  The  death  of  Jesus  is  the  great  demonstration  of  God^s  love.  Men  have  occasionally 
sacrificed  their  lives  for  good  men,  never  for  a  merely  just  one;  but  God  in  Christ 
sacrificed  his  life  for  those  who  are  yet  sinners.  No  mightier  demonstration  of  Divine 
love  oante  imagined  than  this  dying  of  God's  Son  for  sinners.  And  it  is  well  here  to 
notice  that  as  a  "  trinitarian  transaction,"  as  Shedd  has  happily  put  it,  God  in  Christ's 
death  exhibits  "his  own  love"  (Revised  Version).  Through  the  unity  of  Father  and 
Son  in  the  Divine  essence,  the  death  of  Jesus  is  really  the  self-sacrifice  of  God.  It  is, 
therefore,  the  most  marvellous  of  all  exhibitions  of  love.  3.  The  resurrection-life  of 
Jesus  is  the  great  guarantee  of  our  salvation  from,  Divine  wrath.  Jesus  died  to  secure 
our  justification.  We  are  justified  by  his  blood.  In  this  God  has  reconciled  us  to 
himself.  The  resnrrection  of  Jesus  is  accordingly  the  proof  that  God  is  satisfied  with 
his  own  self-sacrifice  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  so  his  wrath  is  turned  away  from  us  through 
the  spectacle  of  a  risen  Saviour.  "The  highest  form  of  love,"  says  Shedd,  "that, 
namely,  of  self-sacrifice,  prompts  the  triune  God  to  satisfy  his  own  justice,  in  the  room 
and  place  of  the  sinner  who  has  incurred  the  penalty  of  justice.  In  the  work  of 
vicarious  atonement,  God  himself  is  both  the  offended  and  the  propitiating  party. 
This  is  taught  in  2  Cor.  v.  18,  'God  hath  reconciled  us  to  himself;'  Col.  i.  20,  "To 
reconcik  all  things  to  himself,'  God,  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  Judge,  Priest, 
and  Sacrifice,  all  in  one  Being.  The  common  objections  to  the  doctrine  of  the  pro- 
pitiation of  the  Divine  anger  rest  upon  the  unitarian  idea  of  the  Deity.  According  to 
this  view,  which  denies  personal  distinctions  in  the  essence,  God,  if  propitiated,  must 
be  propitiated  by  another  being  than  God.  Christ  is  merely  a  creature.  The  influence 
of  the  atonement  upon  God  is,  therefore,  a  foreign  influence  from  the  sphere  of  the 
finite.  But,  according  to  the  trinitarian  idea  of  the  Supreme  Being,  it  is  God  who 
propitiates  God.  Both  the  origin  and  the  influence  of  the  atonement  are  personal,  and 
not  foreign,"  to  the  Deity.  The  transaction  is  wholly  in  the  Divine  Essence.  The 
satisfactiiin  of  justice,  or  the  propitiation  of  anger  (whichever  terms  be  employed,  and 
both  are  employed  in  Scripture)  is  required  by  God,  and  made  by  God."  It  is  a  risen 
Saviour,  living  and  reigning,  who  saves  us  from  fear  of  Divine  wrath  and  assures  us  of 
acceptance. 

III.  Jot  THEotroH  receiving  the  eeconciltation.  (Ver.  11.)  Now,  when  we 
appreciate  God's  wondrous  love  in  providing  a  reconciliation,  thea  we  receive  it  by 
faith,  and  find  ourselves  constrained  to  rejoice  in  God  who  could  so  provide  for  us. 
Moreover,  it  is  clear  from  the  term  "  received "  (i\d0onev)  that  the  "  reconciliation " 
(kotoXAot^)  is  not  something  paid  by  the  sinner,  but  something  divinely  provided 
which  has  to  be  accepted.  It  is  an  additional  obligation  imposed,  not  a  price  paid. 
God  is  so  regal  as  to  "  reconcile  himself,"  and  then  ask  us  to  receive  the  benefit  thereof. 
We  ought  to  rejoice  in  such  a  God.  Verily  his  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts,  nor 
his  ways  our  ways.    The  justified  have  every  reason  to  be  joyful  in  their  King. — R.  M.  B. 

Vers.  12 — 21. — Representative  responsibility.  In  last  section  we  saw  the  blesseij 
state  into  which  the  justified  believer  comes — a  state  of  peace,  of  gracious  acceptance, 

'  See  Shedd,  in  he. 


154  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS.     [oh.  t.  1—21. 

of  glorious  hope,  of  joy  in  God.  The  apostle  in  the  present  section  expounds  the 
relation  in  which  mankind  stands  to  the  two  great  representatives,  Adam  and  Christ. 
We  cannot  do  better  than  consider  the»e  two  representatives  in  the  order  named,  and 
how  they  are  related  to  the  race. 

I.  The  fibst  Adam  as  bbpresentativb  of  the  baoe.  Now,  the  apostle  distinctly 
declares  in  this  passage  that  death  entered  into  our  world  through  one  man's  sin. 
The  one  man  in  his  sin  must,  therefore,  have  been  acting  for  the  race ;  and  it  is  for  us 
to  get  a  clear  view  of  his  representative  position.  Now,  the  usual  mistake  made  in  this 
subject  is  in  supposing  that  representatives  must  be  voluntarily  selected  by  those  they 
represent.  This  is  not  always  the  case.  A  representative  may  occupy  his  position  of 
necessity.  This  was  the  case  with  our  first  parent.  The  human  race  is  luot  made  up 
of  a  number  of  independent  units,  but  of  a  series  of  dependent  generations.  Conse- 
quently, as  first  parent,  Adam  was  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case  representative  of  the 
race.  "  The  imrcasouing  flippancy,"  says  an  able  writer,  "  with  which  some  object  to 
their  responsibility  for  the  act  of  Adam,  because  they  had  no  part  in  choosing  him  as 
their  representative,  shows  singular  want  of  thought  and  of  discriminating  observation 
of  the  settled  order  of  God's  providence.  It  is  evident  that  when  God  himself  directly 
institutes  a  social  organization,  he  always  appoints,  either  by  special  act  or  by  an 
invariable  natural  order,  the  ruling  and  representative  head.  .  .  .  The  unity  of  the 
human  race  is  his  own  immediate  institution,  and  he  appointed  Adam  its  ancestor  to 
be  its  representative  and  federal  head.  And  in  this  case  also  he  rendered  an  elective 
appointment  by  man  impossible,  by  the  constitution  which  brought  man  into  being  in 
successive  generations.  Not  having  from  the  beginning  contemporaneous  existence, 
consentaneous  action  was  impossible.  Their  unity,  therefore,  was  made  to  depend  upon 
a  common  head  and  upon  his  representative  action.  .  .  .  The  constitution  of  nature 
and  the  course  of  providence  render  it  a  matter  of  social  justice  that  one  generation 
shall  bind  the  succeeding,  however  remote,  for  good  or  evil.  All  legislation  and  all 
government  proceeds  upon  this  principle,  and  cannot  avoid  it.  The  evil  entailed  upon 
the  race  has  come  upon  us  by  the  selfsame  principle,  and  its  repudiation  is  impossible 
without  the  violation  of  the  moral  order  upon  which  the  stability  of  society  depends. 
Our  responsible  relation  to  the  first  sin  of  Adam  in  no  way  depends  upon  our  consent 
to  his  appointment  as  our  covenant  head,  any  more  than  our  responsible  relation  to  the 
national  debt  of  Great  Britain  is  affected  by  the  fact  that  it  was  contracted  without 
our  personal  consent,  and  before  we  were  born."  •  It  will  be  found  also  that  Adam's 
parental  authority  carries  with  it  the  idea  of  Mngship ;  he  was  in  a  regal  as  well  as 
representative  position ;  he  had  dominion  not  only  over  the  creatures,  but  also  over  his 
own  posterity.  His  acts  were  consequently  of  a  regal  and  representative  character. 
Carrying  these  necessary  principles  with  us,  we  can  see  how  his  sin  in  eating  the  for- 
bidden fruit  was  a  representative  act.  In  this  the  race  was  represented,  by  it  the  race 
was  bound;  he  was  acting  in  his  representative  capacity,  and  there  is  no  good  gained 
by  repudiating  it.  But,  further,  we  can  understand  in  some  measure  how  a  sin  like 
Adam's  affected  his  constitution,  so  that  he  became  with  his  wife  tainted,  and  so  trans- 
mitted the  sin  to  succeeding  generations.  The  death  of  infants  is  the  positive  proof 
that  the  race  has  been  treated  as  an  organic  unity,  and  that  the  taint  of  sin  has  been 
transmitted  by  ordinary  generation.  The  whole  subject  of  "  heredity,"  as  now 
scientifically  treated,  bears  upon  this  relation  of  Adam  to  his  posterity.  It  is  evident 
that  the  generations  have  been  linked  each  to  each.  Representative  responsibility  has 
been  in  operation  from  the  first.  Instead  of  quarrelling  with  the  arrangement,  our 
duty  ii  to  recognize  it,  and  to  see  how  out  of  the  same  principle  we  may  receive 
blessing  as  a  glorious  set-off  to  the  curse  which  has  been  transmitted  to  us. 

IL  The  second  Adau  ab  Befbebentative  of  the  justified.  We  have  seen  how 
the  first  Adam  was  constituted  the  representative  of  the  race,  and  by  his  sin  involved 
the  whole  race  in  trespass  and  condemnation.  Death  passed  unto  all  men,  for  that 
all  in  him  have  sinned.  But  now  the  apostle  shows  us  the  glorious  set-off  to  this 
inheritance  of  guilt  and  death.  God  has  given  a  new  Representative  to  the  race,  even 
Jeaus  Christ  his  Son.  By  his  obedience  the  representative  principle  is  transmuted  into 
an  organ  of  grace  instead  of  an  organ  of  condemnation.  But  let  us  carefully  note  the 
natura  of  the  relation  set  up  between  us  and  Christ.  And  here  let  us  observe:  L 
■  Of.  Wallaoo'i  *  Bepresentative  KesponBibillty,'  pp.  40 — 42, 


OH.  Ti.  1—23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


155 


While  we  an  united  to  the  fint  Adam,  hy  ordinary  generation,  we  get  united  to  the 
second  Adam  ly  regeneration.  The  first  union  is  involuntary ;  we  cannot  determine 
who  our  parents  shall  be.  But  union  to  Christ  partakes  of  a  voluntary  character. 
When  the  Spirit  is  received  and  regenerates  us,  he  makes  us  willing  in  the  day  of  his 
power.  Freedom  of  the  will  has  its  place  in  the  relation  into  which  we  enter  towards 
the  second  Adam.  We  may  reject  the  union  or  close  with  it.  Hence  the  whole  race 
is  not  necessarily  embraced  in  Christ's  vicarious  work,  simply  because  the  whole  race 
will  not  be.  All  will  not  come  to  Jesus  that  they  may  have  life  (John  v.  40).  2. 
Jems  proposes  to  quetuih  the  fire,  not  only  of  original  sin,  hut  also  of  actual  sin,  in  those 
wlw  receive  his  grace.  This  is  the  apostolic  idea  in  this  passage.  The  arrangement 
might  have  been  to  checkmate  merely  the  original  sin ;  that  is,  to  put  the  race  upon 
as  good  a  platform  as  our  first  parent  occupied  before  the  Fall.  Christ's  obedience 
might  thus  have  been  the  mere  equivalent  for  Adam's  disobedience.  But  the  free  gift 
of  justification  through  Christ  embraces  our  actual  sins  as  well  as  our  original  sin. 
Grace  is  thus  seen  to  abound.  All  sin  in  which  we  have  been  involved  gets  cancelled 
and -put  away  through  the  obedience  of  our  Representative.    And:  3.  Jesus  proposes 

jiot  only  to  ccmnteract  the  sin,  hut  also  to  secure  a  reign  of  grace  unto  eternal  life.  The 
abounding  grace  of  the  second  Adam  raises  its  recipients  into  an  eternal  life  in  the 
favour  and  society  of  God.  Thus  is  it  that  the  representative  principle  provides  the 
most  magnificent  compensation  for  all  that  it  entails  through  our  first  parent's  fall. 
If  we  by  faith  are  united  to  the  second  Adam,  then  we  get  the  benefit  of  his  obedience ; 
his  endurance  of  the  penalty  we  deserved  is  accepted  as  ours ;  his  perfect  obedience  to 

,the  requirements  of  the  Divine  Law  is  imputed  to  us ;  and  his  gracious  Spirit  comes 
to  abide  within  us.  The  result  is  that  the  grace  so  abounds  as  to  overmaster  the  sin 
and  to  raise  us  into  that  fellowship  with  God  which  is  )ife  eternal.  The  second  Adam 
thus  more  than  redeems  us  from  our  relation  to  the  first  Adam. 

IIL  The  administration  of  grace  thbodoh  Jescs  Christ  makes  ample  com- 
pensation FOB  ALL  APPARENT  ANOMALIES  IN  THE  PBEVIOnS  COVENANT.     NoW,  OnC  of 

the  facts  referred  to  by  the  apostle  in  this  passage  is,  on  the  admission  of  almost  all 
the  commentators,  the  death  of  infants  in  consequence  of  their  relation  to  Adam.  It 
may,  of  course,  be  said  that  these  infants  were  in  the  loins  of  Adam  when  he  sinned, 
as  Levi  was  in  the  loins  of  Abraham  when  he  paid  tithes  to  Melchizedek.  Still,  the 
fate  of  infants  would  seem  an  anomaly  in  the  government  of  God  if  they  are  to  receive 
no  compensation  through  relation  to  the  second  Adam.  But  if  it  is  scriptural  to  believe 
that  all  infants  who  die  because  of  their  relation  to  the  first  Adam  inherit  everlasting 
life  because  of  their  relation  to  the  second  Adam,  then  all  harshness  disappears  and 
the  anomaly  is  overborne.  Now,  this  is,  as  we  believe,  the  proper  doctrine.  All  who 
die  in  infancy  are,  through  the  all-abounding  grace  of  the  second  Adam,  saved.  We 
need  have  no  fears  for  them,  wherever  they  have  passed  away.  Their  suffering  unto 
death  is  a  cheap  price  to  pay  for  exemption  from  the  temptations  of  the  present  world ; 
and  each  of  them  in  the  glory  will  accept  the  painful  passage  to  it  as,  after  all,  • 
merciful  arrangement,  seeing  that  glory  lay  beyond  it. — R.  M.  K. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VL 


Ver.  1 — oh.  viii.  39. — (7)  Moral  results  to 
true  believers  of  the  revelation  to  them  of  the 
righteoutness  of  Ood.  The  righteousness  of 
Ood  having  been  announced  as  revealed  in 
the  gospel  (oh.  i,  17),  set  forth  as  available 
for  all  mankind  (oh.  iii.  21 — 31),  shown  to 
be  in  accordance  with  the  teaoliing  of  the 
Old  Testament  (eh.  iv.  1—25),  viewed  with 
regard  to  the  feelings  and  hopes  of  believers 
foh.  r.  I — 11)  and  to  the  position  of  the 


human  raoe  before  God  (ch.  t.  12 — ^21),  the 
necessary  moral  results  of  a  true  apprehen- 
sion of  the  doctrine  are  treated  in  this  sec- 
tion of  the  Epistle.  And  first  is  shown 
from  various  points  of  view — 

Ver.  1— ch.  vii.  6. — (o)  The  obligation  on 
believers  of  holiness  of  life.  The  subject  is 
led  up  to  by  meeting  certain  supposed 
erroneous  conclusions  from  what  has  been 
said  in  the  preceding  chapter.  It  might 
be  said  that,  if  where  sin  abounded  grace 
did  much  more  abound — ^if  in  the  obedieno* 


m 


tfiS  feMSTLE  0&  PAHt.  -to  tHi:  ROMAlfa    laB.-n.l~ik 


of  tLe  one  Obriit  all  believers  are  juBtlfled 
— human  ein  must  be  a  matter  of  indif- 
feienoe;  it  cannot  nullify  the  free  gift;  nay, 
grace  trill  be  eren  the  more  enhanced,  in 
that  it  abounds  the  more.  The  apostle  le- 
bnti  Such  antiiiomian  oonolusionsby  ehowing 
that  they  imply  a  total  misunderstanding 
of  the  doctrine  which  was  supposed  to 
justify  them ;  for  that  our  partaking  in  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  Christ  means  our 
actually  partaking  in  it — our  being  in- 
fluenced by  it,  loving  it  and  following  it, 
not  merely  our  having  it  imputed  to  us 
while  we  remain  aloof  from  it;  that  justi- 
fying faith  in  Christ  means  spiritual  union 
with  Christ,  a  dying  with  him  to  sin  and 
a  rising  with  him  to  a  new  life,  in  which  sin 
shall  110  longer  have  dominion  over  us.  He 
refers  to  our  baptism  as  having  this  only 
meaning,  and  he  enforces  his  argument  by 
three  illustrations :  firstly,  as  aforcsaiil,  that 
of  dying  and  rising  again,  which  is  signified 
in  baptism  (vers.  1 — 14) ;  secondly,  that  of 
service  to  a  master  (vers.  15—23);  thirdly, 
that  of  the  relation  of  a  wife  to  a  husband 
(oh.  vii.  1 — 16).  It  will  be  seen,  when  we  come 
to  it,  that  the  third  of  these  illustrations  is 
a  oanrying  out  of  the  same  idea,  though  it  is 
there  law,  and  not  tin,  that  we  are  said  to 
be  emancipated  from. 

Ver.  1. — What  shall  we  say  theni  8o 
St.  Paul  introduces  a  difficulty  or  objection 
arising  out  of  the  preceding  argument  (cf. 
oh.  iil.  5).  Shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that 
grace  may  abound  1  Beferring  to  the  whole 
preceding  argument,  and  especially  to  the 
concluding  verses  (ch.  ▼.  20,  21). 

Ver.  2. — God  forbid!  (MJ)  yevono:  St. 
Paul's  usual  way  of  rejecting  an  idea  in- 
dignantly). We  who  (jah-ivis,  with  its  pro- 
per meaning  of  ieing  $uch  cu)  died  (not,  as 
in  the  Authorized  Version,  "  are  dead."  Tbe 
reference  is  to  the  time  of  baptism,  as 
appears  from  what  follows)  to  sin,  how  shall 
we  live  any  longer  therein!  The  idea  of 
dying  to  sin  in  the  sense  of  having  done 
with  it,  ia  found  also  in  Macrob.,  '  Somn, 
Scip.,'  i.  13  (quoted  by  Meyer),  "  Mori  etiaiu 
dicitur,  cum  anima  adhuo  in  corpora  con- 
stituta  corporeas  illecebras  philosophia 
docente  ooutemnit  et  cupiditatum  dulces 
insidias  reliquasque  omnes  exult  passiones." 

Ver.  3. — Or  know  ye  not  that  so  many  of 
US  as  were  baptized  into  Christ  Jesns  were 
baptized  into  his  death  1  *H,  if  taken  In  the 
sense  of  "or,"  at  the  beginning  of  ver.  3, 
wUl  b*  understood  if  we  pvt  what  is  meant 


thus :  Do  yon  not  know  that  we  have  all 
died  to  sin  7  Or  are  you  really  ignorant  of 
what  your  very  baptism  meant?  But  of. 
ch.  tIL  1,  where  the  same  expression  ooonrs, 
and  where  1)  appears  only  to  imply  a  ques- 
tion. The  expression  $aTTi(ir0ai  cis  occurs 
also  in  1  (3or.  x.  2  and  OaL  iii.  27 ;  in  the 
first  of  these  texts  with  reference  to  the 
Israelites  and  Moses.  It  denotes  the  enter- 
ing by  baptism  into  close  union  with  a 
person,  coming  to  belong  to  him,  so  as  to  be 
in  a  sense  identified  with  him.  In  Gal. 
iii.  27  being  baptiztd  into  Christ  is  under- 
stood as  implying  putting  him  on  (iveSivav- 
Se).  The  phrases,  fiairTi(e7r  M  T<f  iv6naTi,  or 
ev  Tfi  bfiiiari,  or  €i;  rh  Syo/io,  Xpiarov,  were 
understood  to  imply  the  same  idea,  though 
not  so  plainly  expressing  it.  Thus  St.  Paul 
rejoiced  that  he  had  not  himself  baptized 
many  at  Corinth,  lest  it  might  have  been 
said  that  he  had  baptized  them  into  his  own 
name  (cii  rb  i/ihy  Svoiia),  i.e.  into  such  con- 
nection with  himself  as  baptism  implied 
with  Christ  alone.  Doubtless  in  the  in- 
struction which  preceded  baptism  this  signi* 
ficance  of  the  sacrament  woTud  be  explained 
And  if  "into  Christ,"  then  "into  his  death." 
"In  Christum,  inc^uam,  totnm,  adeoqne  in 
mortem  ejus  baptizatur"  (Bengel).  The 
whole  experience  of  Christ  was  understood 
to  have  its  counterpart  in  those  who  were 
baptized  into  him  ;  in  them  was  understood 
a  death  to  sin,  corresponding  to  his  actual 
death.  This,  too,  would  form  part  of  the 
instruction  of  catechumens.  St.  Paul  often 
presses  it  as  what  he  conceives  to  be  well 
understood  ;  and  in  subsequent  Tcrses  of 
this  chapter  he  further  explains  what  ha 
means. 

Ver.  4. — Therefore  we  were  boned  (not 
are,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version)  with  him 
by  baptism  into  death:  that  like  as  Christ 
was  raised  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness 
of  Ufe.  The  mention  here  of  burial  as  well 
as  death  does  not  appear  to  be  meant  as  a 
further  carrying  out  of  the  idea  of  a  fulfil- 
ment in  us  of  the  whole  of  Christ's  ex- 
perience, in  the  sense — As  he  died  and  was 
buried,  so  wo  die  and  are  even  buried  too. 
Such  a  conception  of  burial  being  in  our  case 
a  further  process  subsequent  to  our  death 
in  baptism,  is  indeed  well  expressed  in  our 
Collect  for  Easter  Eve:  but  the  form  of 
expression,  "  buried  into  death,"  does  not 
suit  it  here.  The  reference  rather  is  to  the 
form  of  baptism,  viz.  by  immersion,  which 
was  understood  to  signify  burial,  and  there- 
fore death.  So  Ohrysostom,  on  John  iii., 
KaBiitfp  yh,p  iv  rtvi  riipif,  r^  SSsti  icaraS^ 
ovraiv  rifiav  tos  KC^a\^f,  I  ra\dios  HvSpairos 
Bdirrerai,  Kal  Karatbs  KtLfd)  KpimrfTai  i\os 
KoBiira^.  The  main  intention  of  the  versa 
is  to  bring  out   the  idea  of  resurreotion 


OH.  Ti.  1—23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


167 


following  death  in  oiir  case  as  in  Christ's. 
The  aenso,  therefore,  is— As  our  burial  (or 
total  immersiou)  in  the  baptismal  water  was 
followed  by  entire  emergence,  so  our  death 
with  Ohiist  to  sin,  which  that  immersion 
symbolized,  is  to  be  followed  by  our  resur- 
rection with  him  to  a  new  life.  As  to  the 
S6^a  rod  irarphs,  through  which  Christ  is 
here  said  to  have  been  raised,  see  what  was 
said  under  ch.  iii.  23.  "Ao'fa  est  gloria 
divrnsa  vitse,  inoorruptibilitatis,  potentiss, 
et  virtutis,  per  quam  et  Christus  resusci- 
tatus  est,  et  nos  vitsa  novse  restituimur, 
Deoque  conformamur.  Bpli.  i.  19,  teqq." 
(Bengel).  In  some  passages  our  Lord  is 
regarded  as  having  been  raised  from  the 
dead  in  virtue  of  the  Divine  life  that  was 
In  himself,  whereby  it  was  impossible  that 
he  should  be  holden  of  death  (see  under 
ch.  i.  4).  And  he  said  of  his  own  ^ux^> 
"  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have 
power  to  take  it  again  "  (John  x.  18).  But 
here,  as  most  commonly  elsewhere,  liis  resur- 
rection is  attributed  to  the  operation  of  the 
glory  of  the  Father — the  same  Divine  power 
that  regenerates  us  in  him  (of.  1  Cor.  vi. 
14 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  4 ;  Eph.  i.  19,  etc. ;  Col.  ii. 
12 ;  also  our  Lord's  own  prayers  to  the 
Father  previously  to  his  suffering,  as  given 
by  St.  John).  The  two  views  aie  not  incon- 
sistent, and  may  serve  to  show  Christ's  one- 
ness with  the  Father  as  touching  his  God- 
head. The  marked  association  here  and 
elsewhere  of  union  with  Christ,  so  as  to  die 
and  rise  again  with  him,  with  the  rite  of 
baptism,  supports  the  ortliodoi  view  of  that 
sacrament  being  not  only  a  lignum  signifl- 
ean$,  but  a  lignum  efficax;  as  not  only 
representing,  but  being  "  a  means  whereby 
we  receive"  regeneration.  The  beginning 
of  the  new  life  of  believers,  with  the  power 
as  well  as  the  obligation  to  lead  suoh  a  life, 
is  ever  regarded  as  dating  from  their  bap- 
tism (of.  Gal.  iii.  27;  Col.  ii.  12).  It  is 
true,  however,  that  in  all  such  passages  in 
the  New  Testament  the  baptism  of  adults 
is  referred  to;  that  is,  of  persons  who  at 
the  time  of  baptism  were  capable  of  actual 
repentance  and  faith,  and  hence  of  actutd 
moral  regeneration,  and  they  are  supposed 
to  have  understood  tlie  significance  of  the 
rite,  and  to  have  been  sincere  in  seeking  it. 
Hence  what  is  said  or  implied  cannot  fairly 
be  pressed  as  applicable  in  all  respects  to 
infant  baptism.  This,  however,  is  not  the 
place  for  discussing  the  propriety  of  infant 
baptism,  or  the  sense  in  which  all  baptized 
persons  are  regarded  by  the  Church  as  in 
their  very  baptism  regenerate. 

Ver.  5. — For  if  we  have'  been  planted 
together  in  the  likeness  of  his  death,  we 
■hall  be  also  in  the  likeness  of  his  resurreo- 
tion.  So  the  Authorized  Version.  But  the 
EngUsb  word  "planted"  (though  the  idea 


expressed  by  it  has  the  support  of  Origen, 
Cbrysostom,  and  other  ancient  Fathers ;  also 
of  the  Vulgate,  and,  among  moderns,  Beza, 
Luther,  and  others;  while  some,  including 
Erasmus,  Calvin,  Estius,  Gomeliua  &  Lapide, 
understand  "  engrafted  ")  probably  suggests 
what  was  not  intended.    Hfupuros  is  from 
ffvfujy^a  (not  irvfupvTG^Q)),  and  need  only  ex- 
press being  made  to  glow  together  in  close 
association.    In  classic  authors  it  commonly 
means  innate.    It  seems  here  used,  not  to 
introduce  a  new  figure,  whether  of  planting 
or  grafting,  but  only  to  express  the  close 
union  with  Christ,  already  intunated,  into 
which  we  entered  in  baptism.    The  Kevised 
Veraion  has  "have  become  united  with  him," 
which  may  perhaps  sufficiently  express  what 
is  meant,  though  hardly  a  satisfactory  ren- 
dering of  avfi.ct>vrot,    Tyndale  and  Cranmer 
translate  "  graft  in  deeth  lyke  unto  him ;  " 
and  perhaps  "  graft  into "  may  be  as  good  a 
rendering  as  any  other.-  Meyer,  Tholuck; 
Alford,  and  others  take  the  dative  t^  i/ioi- 
d/iaTt  as  governed  by  ai/ipuTot,  equivalent 
to  d/iolas  airidavonfv  Sxnep  airhs  (Tholuuk). 
But  it  may  be  better  to  understand  XpitTrij! : 
"Graft  into  Christ,  in  the  likeness  of  his 
death,"  Ti|i>   S/ioidiiari  being  added  because 
Christ's  death  and  ours,  in  the  senses  in- 
tended, are  not  the  same  kind  of  dealh 
literally,  ours  only  corresponding  to,  and 
in  a  certain  sense  like  his.    The  main  pur- 
pose of  this  verse,  as  of  ver.  1,  is  to  presa 
resurrection  with  Christ  as  following  death 
with  him.  But  why  here  the  future  ici/xeSa? 
Did  we  not  rise  with  Christ  to  a  new  life 
when    we    emerged    from    our    baptismal 
burial?    Future  verbs  are  used  also  with 
a  similar  reference  in  ver.  8  and  ver.  14. 
Now,  there  are  three  senses  in  which  our 
resurrection  with  Christ  may  be  underbtood. 
(1)   As  above  (cf.  Col.  ii.  12,  etc.,  where 
the   expression  is  auvTyyepBTiTi).    (2)    Our 
realization  of  our  position  of  power   and 
obligation  in  subsequent   life — actually  in 
practice  "dying  from  sin  and  rising  agaui 
unto  righteousness"  (cf.  below,  vers.  12^ 
14).     (3)  The  resurrection  of  the  dead  here- 
after.   Some  (including  TertuUian,  Ohjysos- 
tom,  (Ecumenius)  have  taken  sense  (3)  to 
be  here  intended;  but,  though  the  words 
themselves,  eir<(^eflo  and  o-uf^fjiro/iei'  in  ver.  8, 
suggest  this  sense,  it  can  hardly  be  intended 
here,  at  any  rate  exclusively  or  prominently, 
since  the  drift  of  tlie  whole  passage  is  to 
insist  on  the  necessity  of  an  ethical  resur- 
rection now ;    and  it  is  evident  that  the 
clause  before  us  corresponds  with  ovrm  xaX 
%6is,  etc.,  in  the  previous  verse,  and  to  ver. 
11,  et  teq.    The  future  iffS/xeBa  is  under- 
stood by  some  as  only  expressing   conse- 
quenoe — a    necessary    conclusion    from    a 
premiss,  thus :  If  such  a  thing  is  the  case, 
such  other  thing  will  follow.    If  so,  sense 


158 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vl  1—23, 


(1)  might  Btill  be  understood ;  eo  thai  the 
idea  would  be  the  same  as  in  Col.  ii.  12,  etc., 
viz.  that  of  our  rising  in  baptism  itself  to  a 
new  life  with  Christ,  in  which  gin  need  not, 
and  ought  not  to,  have  dominion.  But  still 
the  repeated  nse  of  the  future  tense  (espe- 
cially a/iaprla  i/iSv  ov  Kvpievaei  in  ver.  11), 
together  with  the  whole  drift  of  what  fol- 
lows, seems  rather  to  imply  sense  (2) ;  that 
is,  our  realization  of  our  position  in  our 
actual  lives  subsequent  to  baptism.  If  it 
be  objected  that  in  this  case  we  should 
expect  "  we  ought  to  be  "  rather  than  "  we 
shall  be,"  it  may  be  replied  that  it  is  what 
God  will  do  for  ns,  rather  than  what  we 
shall  do  for  ourselves,  that  the  apostle  has 
in  view.  If  he  has  made  ub  partakers  in  the 
atoning  death  of  Christ,  having  forgiven  us 
all  trespasses,  etc.  (OoL  ii.  13,  eeq.'),  he  will 
also  make  us  partakers,  as  our  life  goes  on, 
in  the  power  of  his  reeurrection  too,  deliver- 
ing ns  &om  sin's  dominion.  Further,  if  this 
be  so,  the  thought  may  also  include  sense  (3). 
For  elsewhere  the  future  resurrection  seems 
to  be  regarded  as  only  the  consummation  of 
a  spiritual  resurrection  which  is  begun  in 
the  present  life,  Christians  being  already 
partakers  in  the  eternal  life  of  God,  of  which 
the  iBsue  is  immortality;  cf.  Eph.  i.  5,  6; 
Col  iii.  3,  4;  Gal.  ii.  20;  also  oni  Lord's 
own  words,  which  are  peculiarly  significant 
in  this  regard,  "  He  that  heareth  my  word, 
and  believeth  on  him  that  sent  me,  hath 
everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come  into 
condemnation ;  but  is  passed  from  death 
unto  life.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you. 
The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is,  when  the 
dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God: 
and  they  that  hear  shall  live  "  (John  v.  24, 
25).  Again,  "I  am  the  Besurreotion,  and 
the  Life :  he  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he 
were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live :  and  whosoever 
liveth  and  believeth  in  me  shall  never  die  " 
(John  xi.  25,  26). 

Vers.  6,  7. — Knowing  this  (cf.  ^  iyyoeire, 
ver.  3),  that  our  old  man  was  (not  is,  as  in 
the  Authorized  Version)  ornoified  with  him, 
that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed  (or 
abolished,  or  done  away,  KarapyiiBri'),  that 
henceforUi  we  should  not  serve  {Sov\iieiif, 
expressing  bondage,  or  slavery}  and  so 
throughout  the  chapter  in  the  word  Sav\oi, 
translated  "servants")  sin.  For  he  that 
hath  died  is  freed  from  sin.  The  word 
"  crucified  "  has,  of  course,  reference  to  the 
mode  of  Christ's  death  into  which  we  were 
baptized.  It  does  not  imply  anything  fur- 
ther (as  some  have  supposed)  as  to  the 
manner  of  onr  own  spiritual  dying,  such  as 
painfxilness  or  lingering;  it  merely  means 
that  in  bis  death  our  old  man  died  (of.  Col. 
ii.  14,  wpoirTiKciaas  ainh  -r^  aTaup^),  The 
term  "  old  man  "  (iraKalos  tivSpumos)  occurs 
also  Eph.  IT.  82;  (^L  iii.  9.     It  denotes 


man's  nnregenerate  seli^  when  nnder  sin 
and  condemnation ;  the  xatvis  or  yios  Hnlptt- 
■Kos  being  his  regenerate  self.  It  is,  ol 
course,  a  different  conception  &om  that  of  i 
l(a  and  i  fffaSty  ivOpairos  of  2  Cor.  iv.  16. 
In  Ephesians  and  Colossians  the  old  man  is 
said  to  be  put  away,  or  put  off,  and  the  new 
one  put  on, as  though  they  were  two  clothings, 
or  investments,  of  his  personality,  deter- 
mining its  character.  Here,  by  a  bolder 
figure,  they  are  viewed  as  an  old  self  that 
had  died  and  a  new  one  that  had  come  to 
life  in  its  place  (cf.  2  Cor.  v.  17,  Elf  th  tv 
XpuTT^,  Kaiv^  KrliTiS'  7-^  ifvata  rapri^Sfv). 
The  idea  of  a  new  man  being  bom  into  a 
new  life  in  baptism  was  already  familiar  to 
the  Jews  in  their  baptism  of  proselytes  (see 
Lightfoot, on  John  iii.);  and  our  Lord,  dis- 
coursing to  Nioodemus  of  the  new  birth, 
supposes  him  to  understand  the  figure ;  but 
he  teaches  him  that  the  change  thns  ex- 
pressed should  be  no  mere  change  of  pro- 
fession and  habits  of  life,  but  a  radical 
inward  change,  which  could  only  be  wrought 
by  the  regenerating  Spirit.  Such  a  change 
St.  Paul  teaches  to  be  signified  by  Christian 
baptism ;  not  only  deliverance  from  con- 
demnation through  participation  in  the 
benefits  of  the  death  of  Christ,  but  also  the 
birth  or  creation  of  a  new  self  corresponding 
to  his  risen  body,  which  will  not  be,  like  the 
old  self,  under  the  thraldom  of  sin.  "  The 
body  of  sin  "  may  be  taken  as  meaning  much 
the  same  as  "  our  old  man ; "  sin  being  con- 
ceived as  embodied  in  our  former  selves, 
and  so  possessing  them  and  keeping  them 
in  bondage.  It  certainly  does  not  mciin 
simply  our  bodies  as  distinct  from  our  souU, 
so  as  lo  imply  the  idea  that  the  former  must 
be  maceiated  that  the  latter  may  live.  The 
asceticism  inculcated  elsewhere  in  the  New 
Testament  is  in  no  contradiction  to  the  ideal 
of  mens  sana  in  corpore  sano.  Our  former 
sin-possessed  and  sin-dominated  personality 
being  now  crucified  with  Christ,  dead,  and 
done  away  with,  we  are  no  longer,  in  our 
new  personality,  in  slavery  to  sin,  and  are 
both  bound  and  able  to  renouuce  it ;  "  for 
he  that  hath  died  is  freed  [SfSiWaiTai, 
literally, '  is  justified ']  from  sin."  In  Scot- 
land, one  who  is  executed  is  said  to  be 
justified,  the  idea  apparently  being  that  he 
has  satisfied  the  claims  of  law.  So  here  — 
$E5i/ca(ci)Tai.  The  word  iovKeiav,  be  it  ob- 
served, in  ver.  6  introduces  by  the  way  the 
second  figure  nnder  which,  as  above  said, 
the  apostle  regards  his  subject,  though  it  is 
not  taken  up  till  ver.  16. 

Ver.  8. — Kow  if  we  died  with  Christ,  wa 
believe  that  we  shall  also  live  with  him ;  i.e. 
as  explained  irith  regard  to  the  fotun 
iai/ieSa  under  ver.  5.  The  explanation 
there  given  accounts  for  the  phrase  here, 
irumio/iev  8ti,  without  its  being  necessary 


OH.  TL  1—23,]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


159 


to  refer  our  living  with  Christ  ezolugively 
to  the  future  resurrection.  For  the  con- 
tinuanoe  of  God's  vivifying  grace  during 
life  after  baptism  is  a  subject  of  bdief. 

Yer.  9. — Knowing  that  Christ  being  raised 
from  the  dead  dieth  no  more ;  death  hath  no 
more  dominion  over  him.  When  it  is  implied 
here  that  death  had  once  dominion  over  him, 
it  is  not,  of  course,  meant  that  he  was  in  his 
own  Divine  nature  subject  to  death,  or  that 
"it  was  possible  that  he  should  be  holden 
of  it."  All  that  ia  implied  is  that  he  had 
made  himself  subject  to  it  by  taking  on  him 
our  nature,  and  voluntarily  submitted  to  it, 
once  for  all,  as  repreaeuting  us  (of.  John 
1. 17;  Acts  a.  24). 

Ter.  10.— For  in  that  he  died,  he  died 
unto  sin  once :  but  in  that  he  liveth,  he  liveth 
unto  God.  "  Died  unto  sin  "  certainly  does 
not  mean  here,  as  some  have  taken  i^  died 
by  reason  of  ain,  or  to  atone  for  tin,  but  has 
the  sense,  elsewhere  obvious  in  this  chapter, 
of  avoSyiiaKeiy,  followed  by  a  dative,  which 
was  explained  under  ver.  2.  Christ  was,  in- 
deed, never  subject  to  sin,  or  himself  infected 
with  it,  as  we  are ;  but  he  "  bore  the  sins  of 
many ;  "  "  the  Lord  laid  on  him  the  iniquity 
of  us  all."  He  submitted  for  us  to  the 
condition  and  penalty  of  human  sin;  but, 
when  he  died,  he  threw  off  its  burden,  and 
was  done  with  it  for  ever  (of.  Heb.  ix.  28, 
"Unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he 
appeair  the  second  time  without  tin  unto 
salvation  ").  The  purpose  of  thus  describing 
the  permanent  life  to  God  of  the  risen  Christ 
is,  of  course,  to  show  that  the  new  life  of  us 
who  are  accounted  to  have  risen  with  Christ 
must  in  like  manner  be  permanent  and  free 
from  sin.  "  Quo  docere  vult  banc  vitsB 
novitatem  tota  vita  esse  Christianis  perse- 
quendam.  Nam  si  Obristi  imaginem  in  se 
reprajsentare  debent,  banc  perpetiio  durare 
necesse  est.  Non  quod  uno  momento  emo- 
riatur  caro  in  nobis,  sicuti  nuper  diximus : 
sed  quia  retrocedere  in  ea  mortificanda  non 
liceat.  Si  euim  in  coenura  nostrum  revol- 
vimur,  Christum  abnegamus;  cujus  nisi  per 
vitse  novitatem  consortes  esse  non  possumus, 
■icut  ipse  vitam  incorruptibilem  agit" 
(Calvin).  The  next  verse  expresses  this 
clearly. 

Ver.  11. — Even  so  reckon  ye  also  your- 
telves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive 
nnto  Bod  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  In 
the  verses  which  follow  (12 — 14)  the  apostle 
exhorts  his  readers  to  do  their  own  part  in 
realizing  this  their  union  with  the  risen 
Christ,  to  give  effect  to  the  regenerating 
grace  of  God.  For  their  baptism  had  been 
but  the  beginning  of  their  new  life ;  it  de- 
pended on  themselves  whether  sanctification 
should  follow  on  regeneration,  aa  it  needs 
nust  do  in  order  to  salvation. 
V«r.  12.— Ii«t  not  sin  therafors  reign  in 


yonr  mortal  body,  that  ye  should  obey  th« 
lasts  thereot  (The  reading  of  the  Textiu 
Beceptus,  **obey  it  in  the  lusts  thereof," 
has  but  weak  support.)  Though  our  "old 
man"  is  conceived  of  as  crucified  with 
Christ — though  this  is  theoretically  and 
potentially  our  position — ^yet  our  actual  lives 
may  be  at  variance  with  it ;  for  we  are  still 
in  our  present  "  mortal  body,"  with  its  lusts 
remaining ;  and  gin  is  still  a  power,  not  yet 
destroyed,  which  may,  if  we  let  it,  have 
domination  over  us  still.  Begeneration  ia 
not  regarded  as  having  changed  our  nature, 
or  eradicated  all  our  evil  propensions,  but 
as  having  introduced  into  us  a  higher  power 
— ^"the  power  of  his  resurrection"  (Phil, 
iii.  10) — in  virtue  of  which  we  may  resist 
the  attempted  domination  of  sin.  But  it 
atill  rests  with  ns  whether  we  will  give  our 
allegiance  to  sin  or  to  Christ.  Ov  ylip  ri/y 
^iffiv  ^\9ey  &ve\eiy,  &AA&  rijy  npoaipeaiv  Stop^ 
0u(rai  (Cbrysostom).  The  lusts,  obedience 
to  which  is  equivalent  to  letting  sin  reign, 
are  said  to  be  those  of  our  "  mortal  body," 
because  it  is  in  our  present  bodily  organiza- 
tion that  the  lusts  tempting  us  to  evil  rise. 
But  it  is  not  in  their  soliciting  us,  but  in 
the  will  assenting  to  them,  that  the  sin  lies. 
"  Quia  non  consentimua  desideriis  pravis  in ' 
gratia  sumus"  (Augustine,  'Prop.,'  35). 
''  Cupiditates  corporis  sunt  femes,  peccatum 
ignis"  (Bengel).  The  epithet  eyriTip  ("  """■ 
tal")  is  fitly  used  as  distinguishing  our 
present  perishable  framework — the  eartlien 
vessels  in  which  we  have  our  treasure  (2  Cor. 
iv.  7) — from  our  real  inward  personality,  d 
eauBsy  &v6pioiros  (2  Cor.  IV.  16),  which  is 
regarded  as  having  risen  with  Christ,  so  as  to 
live  to  God  for  ever.  "  Vos  enim,  viventes, 
abalienati  estis  a  corpore  vestro  (cf.  ch.  viii. 
10)"  (Bengel). 

Ver.  13. — Neither  yield  ye  your  membera 
as  instruments  of  unrighteousness  nnto  sin : 
but  yield  yourselves  unto  God,  as  being 
alive  from  the  dead,  and  your  members  aa 
instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God.  By 
our  memberg  seem  to  be  meant,  not  merely 
the  several  parts  of  our  bodily  frame — eye, 
tongue,  hand,  foot,  etc. — but  generally  all 
the  parts  or  constituents  of  our  present 
human  nature,  which  sin  may  use  aa  ita 
instruments,  but  which  ought  to  be  devoted 
to  God  (cf .  Ol.  iii.  5).  Many  commentatora 
would  translate  SirXo  "weapons"  rather 
than  "  instruments,"  on  the  ground  that  St. 
Paul  usually  uses  the  word  in  this  sense 
(oh.  xiii.  12;  2  Cor.  vi.  7;  x.  4;  Eph.  vi. 
11,  13);  and  also  that  orfidyia  in  ver.  23, 
taken  in  the  sense  of  the  pay  of  a  soldier 
(as  in  Luke  iii.  14 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  7),  is  supposed 
to  imply  that  the  apostle  has  had  all  along 
the  idea  of  warfare  in  view.  The  aecond  of 
these  reasons  really  proves  nothing.  What- 
ever the  meaning  of  oi^^yia  in  ver.  23,  it  ia 


1«0 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vi.  1—28. 


too  far  removed  from  the  passage  before 
OS  to  be  taken  In  any  oonneotion  with  it. 
Neither  ia  the  first  reason  at  all  cogent, 
'Oir\a  bears  the  sense  of  irutrumenta  as  well 
as  of  weaponi,  and  may  more  suitably  bear 
it  here.  When  St.  Paul  elsewhere  speaks 
of  armour,  it  is  the  armour  of  light,  or  of 
righteousness,  which  we  are  told  to  take  up, 
and  to  put  on,  in  order  to  fight  against  ou; 
spiritual  enemies.  Such  a  conception  is 
inapplicable  to  our  own  members,  which  we 
have  alrtady,  which  we  may  use  either  for 
good  or  evil,  and  which  require  the  pro- 
tection of  heavenly  armour  rather  than 
being  themselves  armour;  and  we  certainly 
could  not  be  told  to  take  them  up  or  put 
them  on.  We  may,  in  the  next  place,  observe 
that  the  two  clauses  of  this  verse  are 
differently  expressed  in  two  respects.  (1)  It 
is  our  members  only  that  we  are  forbidden 
to  yield  to  sin ;  but  ourselves,  with  our 
members,  we  are  bidden  to  yield  to  God. 
For  few  of  the  persons  addressed,  if  even 
any,  could  be  supposed,  deliberately  and  of 
choice,  to  offer  their  wliole  being  to  tlie 
lerrioe  of  sin  as  such;  they  were  only  liable 
to  succumb  to  sin,  in  this  or  that  way, 
through  soliciting  lusts.  But  the  regenerate 
Christian  offers  and  presents  his  whole  self 
to  God,  and  desires  to  be  his  entirely.  (2)  In 
the  first  clause  we  find  the  present  impera- 
tive, ■Kopta'TivtTe ;  but  in  the  second  the 
aorist  imperative,  TraparT^ffaTe.  The  dis- 
tinction between  the  two  tenses  in  the  im- 
perative is  thus  expressed  in  Hatthite's 
'  Greek  Grammar : '  "  that  the  aorist  desia;- 
nates  an  action  passing  by,  and  considered 
abstractedly  in  its  completion,  but  the 
present  a  continued  and  frequently  repeated 
action."  Our  giving  ourselves  to  God  is 
something  dune  once  for  all;  our  yielding 
our  members  as  instruments  of  sin  is  a 
succession  of  acta  of  yielding. 

Yer.  11. — ^For  sin  shall  not  have  dominion 
over  you:  for  ye  are  not  under  law,  but 
under -grace.  As  to  the  force  of  the  future 
here,  ou  Kvpieiffei,  see  what  was  said  under 
ver.  5.  Here  also  no  more  seems,  at  first 
sights  to  be  meant  than  that  God,  if  w* 
respond  to  his  grace,  will  not  let  sin  have 
dominion  over  ns;  we  shall,  in  fact,  if 
we  are  willing,  be  enabled  to  resist  it. 
"Invitos  nos  non  coget  [pecoatum]  ad  ser- 
Tiendum  tibi"  (Bengel).  And  the  reason 
given  is  suitable  to  this  meaning:  "For 
ye  are  not  under  law"  (which,  while  it 
makes  sin  sinful  and  exacts  its  full  penalty, 
imparts  no  power  to  overcome  it),  "but 
under  grace"  (which  does  communicate 
such  power).  Thus  understanding  the  verse, 
we  see  the  distinction  between  fiariXcverai  in 
ver.  12  and  xvpifiaei  here.  In  ver.  12  we 
are  exhwted  not  to  let  sin  reign ;  we  are  to 
own  DA  allegianoe  to  it  as  a  king  whose 


rule  we  must  obey.  But  it  still  will  try  to 
usurp  lordship  over  us — ^in  vain,  however, 
if  we  resist  the  usurpation :  ob  Kvpieirei 
ilH&v.  The  sense  thus  given  to  the  verse  is 
what  its  own  language  and  the  previouB 
context  suggest.  But  ver.  15,  whiuh  follows, 
suggests  a  different  meaning.  "  What  then  ? 
shall  we  sin,  because  we  are  not  under  law, 
but  under  grace  ?  "  Such  a  question  could 
not  arise  on  the  statement  of  the  preceding 
verse,  if  its  meaning  were  understood  to 
be  tliat  grace  will  enable  us  to  avoid  sin ; 
it  rather  supposes  the  meaning  that  grace 
condones  sin.  Hence,  in  ver.  15  at  least, 
a  different  aspect  of  the  difference  between 
being  under  law  and  being  under  grace 
seems  evidently  to  come  in ;  namely,  this^ 
that  the  principle  of  law  is  to  exact  complete 
obedience  to  ite  behests ;  but  the  principle 
of  grace  is  to  accept  faith  in  lieu  of  com- 
plete obedience..  If,  then,  a/topria  ditav  ob 
Kupuitra  in  ver.  14  is  to  be  understood  in 
agreement  with  this  idea,  it  must  mean, 
"  Sin,  though  it  still  infects  you,  shall  not 
lord  it  over  you  so  as  to  bring  yon  into  con- 
demnation." Calvin  has  a  good  note  on  the 
verse.  He  allows  the  first  of  the  expositions 
of  it  giron  above  to  be  "  una  quss  omteris 
prohabilius  sustineri.queat."  But  he  thinks 
that  ver.  15,  following,  requires  the  other, 
and  he  concludes  thus :  "  Vult  euim  nos 
consolari  apostolus,  ne  animis  fatiscamus 
in  studio  bene  agendi,  propterea  quod  mnltas 
imperfectiones  adhuo  in  nobis  sentiamua. 
Utounque  enim  peccati  aculeis  vexemur, 
non  potest  tamen  nos  subigere,  quia  Spiritn 
Dei  Buperiores  reddimur :  deinde  in  gratia 
constituti,  sumus  liberati  a  rigida  Legis 
exactione."  It  may  be  that  the  apostle, 
when  he  wrote  ver.  14,  meant  what  the 
previous  context  suggests,  but  passed  on  in 
ver.  15  to  the  other  idea  in  view  of  the  way 
in  which  his  words  might  be  nnderstood. 
In  what  follows  next  (vers.  15 — ^28)  ig 
introduced  the  second  illustration  (see 
former  note),  drawn  from  the  human  rela- 
tions between  masters  and  slaves.  It  oomes 
in  by  way  of  meeting  the  supposed  abuse 
of  the  statement  of  ver.  14 ;  but  it  serves 
as  a  further  proof  of  the  general  position 
that  is  being  upheld.  The  word  Kvpuiati 
in  ver.  14  suggests  this  particular  illustra- 
tion. We  being  under  grace,  it  had  been 
said,  sin  will  not  be  our  master,  wlience  the 
inference  was  supposed  to  be  dntwn  that  we 
ma^r  sin  with  impunity,  and  without  thereby 
subjecting  ourselves  to  the  mastery  of  lin. 
Nay,  it  is  replied,  but  it  wt2{  be  our  master, 
if  in  practice  we  consent  to  be  its  servant*. 
Vers.  IS,  16.— What  theni  shall  we  lia, 
beoanse  we  are  not  under  law,  but  nnder 
grace !  (Does  being  nnder  grace  mean  that 
we  may  allow  ourselves  in  sin  without  being 
under  sin's  thraldom?)   Qod  forbid.    Kaov 


CH.  Ti.  1— 23.]    THE  BHSTLE  OP   PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS. 


IRt 


yb  not,  that  tn  whom  ye  yield  yonrBelves 
Bervants  to  obey  (literally,  unto  obedience), 
his  Bervants  ye  are  to  whom  ye  obey; 
whether  of  sin  unto  death,  or  of  obediene* 
nnto  righteoosneBS  %  This  iB  not  a  truism, 
as  it  would  seem  to  be  if  It  only  meant, 
"  whoge  eervanta  ye  become,  his  servants  ye 
are."  "Ye  yield  yourselves"  (Trapiardyfre, 
of.  ver.  13)  denotes  acts  of  yielding.  "  Ye 
are"  (eo-rc)  denotes  condition.  The  mean- 
ing is  that  by  our  conduct  we  Bhow  which 
master  we  are  under ;  and  we  cannot  serre 
two  (Matt.  Ti.  24 ;  Luke  xvi.  13 ;  cf.  John 
viii.  34,  "  WhoBoever  committeth  sin  is  the 
servant  of  sin;"  and  1  John  iii.  7,  "He 
that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous").  The 
two  incompatible  Bervices  are  here  said  to 
be  of  tin  and  of  obedience,  with  their  re- 
Bpeotive  tendencies  or  results,  death  and 
righteoumese.  A  more  exact  antithesis  to  the 
first  clause  would  have  been  "  of  righteous- 
ness unto  life ; "  life  being  the  proper  anti- 
thesis of  death,  and  righteousnesB  being 
afterwards  said,  in  vers.  18  and  19,  to  be 
what  we  ought  to  be  in  bondage  to.  But 
though  the  sentence  seems  thus  defective 
in  form,  its  meaning  is  plain.  'Tn-aKo^s 
means  here  gpecifioally  obedience  to  God, 
not  obedience  to  any  master  as  in  ver.  16 ; 
and  though  in  English  "  servants  of  obedi- 
ence," as  though  obedience  were  a  master,  is 
an  awkward  phrase,  yet  we  might  properly 
say,  "servants  of  duty,"  in  opposition  to 
"  servants  of  sin;"  and  this  is  what  is  meant. 
It  may  be  that  the  apostle  purposely  avoided 
here  speaking  of  believers  being  slave*  of 
righteousness  in  the  sense  in  which  they 
had  been  slaves  of  sin,  because  subjection 
to  righteousness  is  not  properly  slavery, 
but  willing  obedience.  He  uses  the  ex- 
pression, indeed,  afterwards  (ver.  18),  but 
adds  at  once,  ivBpdirivov  \(yii,  etc.  (see  note 
on  this  last  expression).  Death,  "unto" 
which  the  service  of  sin  is  here  said  to  be, 
cannot  be  mere  natural  death,  to  which  all 
are  subject.  Meyer  (with  ChryBostom,  Theo- 
phylact,  and  other  ancients)  takes  it  to 
mean  eternal  death,  as  the^nal  result  of 
bondage  to  sin;  SiKatoaivri,  antithetically 
corjelative,  being  regarded  aB  applying  to 
the  time  of  final  perfection  of  the  faithful 
in  the  world  to  come — "  the  righteousness 
which  is  awarded  to  them  in  the  judgment." 
Seeing,  however,  that  the  word  SixaioirvvTi 
is  used  throughout  the  Epistle  to  denote 
what  is  attainable  in  this  present  life,  and 
that  edvaros  IB  often  used  to  express  a  state 
of  spiritual  death,  which  men  may  be  in  at 
any  time  (see  additional  note  on  ver.  12; 
and  of.  oh.  tU.  9, 10,  13,  24;  viii.  6,  13; 
also  John  v.  24 ;  1  John  iii.  14),  it  ia  at 
least  a  question  whether  the  final  doom  of 
the  last  judgment  is  here  at  all  exclusively 
in  the  apostle's  view. 


Vers.  17, 18. — But  thanks  be  to  Ood,  that 
ye  were  the  servants  of  sin,  but  ye  obeyed 
from  the  heart  that  form  of  dootrina  wh«r»- 
nnto  ye  were  delivered.  (Xot,  as  in  the 
Authorized  Version,  which  leat  delivered  you). 
Being  then  made  free  from  Bin,  ye  beoama 
the  servants  of  righteousness.  There  is  no 
contradiction  between  what  is  here  said 
and  the  fear  previously  implied  lest  the 
persons  addressed  might  still  serve  sin.  He 
refers  them  back  to  the  time  of  their  baptism, 
when  he  oonceives  them  both  to  have  under- 
stood their  obligation  (cf.  ver.  3),  and  also 
to  have  been  heartily  sincere.  The  fear 
was  lest  they  might  have  relaxed  since, 
perhaps  through  infection  with  antinomian 
teaching.  By  the  "  form  of  doctrine "  or 
"of  instruction"  (jimov  SiSax^O  "  not  at 
all  likely  to  be  meant  (aa  some  have  sup- 
posed) any  distinctive  type  of  Christian 
teaching,  such  as  the  Pauline  (so  Meyer). 
Usually  elsewhere,  where  St.  Paul  uses  the 
word  rinros,  it  is  of  persona  being  examples 
or  patterns  to  others  (1  Oor.  x.  6;  Phil.  iii. 
17;  1  Theaa.  i.  7;  2  Thess.  iii.  9;  1  Tim. 
iv.  12 ;  Titua  ii.  7).  Somewhat  similarly, 
in  oh.  V.  14,  Adam  is  rivos  tov  /leKAovTos ; 
and  in  1  Cor.  x.  6  the  things  which  happened 
to  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  were 
riroi  to  us.  These  are  all  the  instances  of 
the  use  of  the  word  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles. 
Here,  therefore,  it  may  be  best  to  understand 
it  (so  as  to  retain  the  idea  o{  pattern)  as  the 
general  Ohristian  code  into  which  converts 
had  been  indoctrinated,  regarded  as  a  norma 
agendi.  "Norma  ilia  et  regula,  ad  quam  se 
oonformat  servus,  tantum  ei  per  doctrinam 
ostenditur;  urged  eum  non  opus  est "  (Bengel 
on  SiSaxv^)' 

Ver.  19. — I  speak  after  the  manner  of 
men  beoanse  of  the  infirmity  of  your  flesh. 
Here  iyBpdnriyoy  Keya  ("  I  speak  humanly  ") 
may  be  taken  as  referring  to  the  expression 
immediately  precediug,  viz.  iSov\<iSriTe  rp 
Sutatoaiyp.  St.  Paul  may  mean,  "  la  saying 
you  were  made  slaves  to  righteousness,  I  am 
using  human  language  not  properW  appli- 
cable to  your  spiritual  relations.  For  you 
are  not  really  in  bondage  now ;  you  have 
been  emancipated  from  your  former  bondage 
to  sin,  and  are  now  called  upon  to  render  a 
free  willing  allegiance  to  righteousness; 
being,  in  fact,  sons,  not  slaves."  This  view 
of  the  true  position  of  the  Christian  being 
one  of  freedom  recurs  so  often  and  so  forcibly 
with  St.  Panl  that  it  is  peculiarly  likely  to 
be  the  thought  before  him  here ;  the  very 
word  ^5oi\<i9ijTe  would  be  likely  to  suggest 
it  (cf.  oh  viii.  15,  teq. ;  2  Cor.  iii.  17 ;  Gal. 
iv.  4 — 7 ;  V.  1, 13).  If  (he  would  say)  you 
fully  realized  your  position  as  tons  oi  God, 
you  would  feel  it  impossible  even  to  think 
of  Binning  willingly ;  but,  in  accommodatior, 
to  yoiir  buman  weakness,  I  put  the  case 


162 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,     [om.  vi.  1— 23. 


aa  if  you  Iiad  only  been  transreired  from 
one  bondage  to  another,  so  as  to  show  that, 
even  so,  you  are  under  an  obligation  not  to 
sin.  Aecoiding  to  this  view  of  the  mean- 
ing of  the  passage,  "the  iniirmity  of  your 
flesh  "  has  reference  to  dulness  of  spiritual 
perception,  o-dpl  being  opposed  in  a  general 
sense  to  xyev/ia.  Had  they  been  irvev/iw 
TiKo!,  they  would  have  discerned  t4  rod 
•KVevfiaTos  Tov  &eov  without  need  of  any 
such  human  view  of  the  matter  being  put 
before  them  (cf.  1  Cor.  ii.  14).  Borne, 
however,  taking  oaBivnav  t^i  (rapxhs  to 
denote  moral  weakness,  which  renders  the 
attainment  of  holiness  difficult  for  man 
(cf.  Mark  xiv.  88),  understand  avOpdirivov 
Keym  as  meaning,  "  I  require  of  you  no  more 
than  is  possible  for  your  frail  humanity ;  for 
I  call  on  you  only  to  render  to  righteousness 
the  same  allegiance  you  once  rendered  to 
sin."  This  interpretation  gives  a  totally 
different  meaning  to  the  clause.  It  has 
the  support  of  Origen,  Ghrysostom,  Tbeo- 
doret,  Calvin,  Estius,  Wetstein,  and  others ; 
but  it  does  not  appear  so  natural  or  probable 
•8  the  other,  which  is  accepted  Dy  most 
modern  commentators.  For  as  ye  yielded 
your  members  servants  to  unoleanness  and 
to  iniquity  unto  iniquity;  even  so  now 
yield  your  members  servants  to  righteous- 
ness onto  sanctifloation  (rather  than  holinesi, 
as  in  the  Authorized  Version ;  the  word  is 
ayiaa/iis,  always  so  translated  elsewhere). 
This  is  a  setting  forth  of  what  must  follow 
in  practice  from  the  view  that  has  been 
taken  of  the  change  in  the  Christian's  posi- 
tion resembling  the  transference  of  bond- 
servants from  one  master  to  another.  They 
must  devote  their  memheri  (see  above  on 
ver.  13)  to  the  service  of  the  new  master 
in  the  same  way  as  they  had  done  to  that 
of  the  old  one ;  the  aims  or  results  of  the 
two  services  being  also  intimated.  The  old 
service  was  in  giving  themselves  up  to 
uncleannesa  (with  reference  to  sins  of  sensu- 
ality), and  generally  to  ivo/tf; ,  t.e.  lawlees- 
ness,  or  disregard  of  duty;  and  its  result 
is  expressed  by  a  repetition  of  the  latter 
word.  For  sin  leads  to  nothing  positive; 
lawless  conduct  only  results  in  a  habit  or 
state  of  lawlessness;  whereas  the  service 
of  righteousness  in  itself  leads  to  sanctifl- 
cation — to  tho  abiding  result  of  participa- 
tion in  the  holiness  of  Ood.  "  Qui  justitiee 
serviunt,  profioiunt;  fico/toi,  iniqui,  sunt 
iniqui,  nil  amplius  "  (Bengel). 

Vers.  20—23. — For  when  ye  were  the 
servants  of  sin,  ye  were  free  from  righteous- 
ness (more  literally,  to  righteoutnen  ;  i.e.  ye 
were  not  in  any  bondage  to  righteousness). 
What  fniit  had  ye  then  (i.e.  when  you 
were  formerly  slaves  of  sin)  in  those  things 
whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed?  for  the  end 
gf  tbose  things  is  death.    But  now  being 


made  free  from  sin,  and  made  servants  t« 
Ood,  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  sanotification; 
and  the  end  life  eternal.  For  the  wages  of 
sin  is  death;  but  the  free  gift  of  Ood  is  life 
eternal  in  Christ  Jesns  our  Lord.  The 
logical  connection  with  the  previous  context 
of  the  above  series  of  verses,  beginning  with 
ver.  20,  as  well  as  the  sequence  of  thought 
running  through  them  (intimated  by  the 
particles  yhip,  ovu,  and  Se),  is  not  at  onee 
obvious.  It  seems  to  be  aa  follows :  the 
T-Ap  in  ver.  20  introduces  a  reason  for  the 
exhortation  of  ver.  19,  irapcurr/iaare,  etc. 
But  ver.  20  is  not  in  itself  the  reason,  being 
only  an  introduc^tion  to  the  statement  of  it 
in  the  verses  that  follow.  The  drift  of  the 
whole  passage  seems  to  be  this :  Yield  ye 
your  members  to  the  sole  service  of  righteous- 
ness ;  for  (ver.  20)  ye  were  once  in  the  sole 
service  of  sin,  owning  no  allegiance  to 
righteousness  at  all;  and  (ver.  21)  what 
fruit  had  ye  from  that  service?  None  at 
all ;  for  ye  know  that  the  only  end  of  the 
things  ye  did  then,  and  of  which  ye  are  now 
ashamed,  is  death.  Bui  (ver.  22)  your  new 
service  ha$  its  fruit :  it  leads  to  your  sancti- 
fication  now,  and  in  the  end  eternal  life. 
Authorities,  however,  both  ancient  and 
modem,  are  divided  as  to  the  punctuation, 
and  consequent  construction,  of  ver.  21.  In 
the  Vulgate  and  the  Authorized  Version 
(as  in  the  interpretation  given  above) 
the  stop  of  interrogation  is  placed  after 
"  ashamed ; "  the  answer,  none,  being  under- 
stood, and  "for  the  end,"  etc.,  being  the 
reason  why  there  is  no  fruit.  The  other 
way  is  to  take  the  question  as  ending  at 
"  hid  ye  then,"  and  "  those  things  whereof," 
etc.,  as  the  answer  to  it,  and  "  for  the  end," 
etc.,  as  the  reason  why  they  are  ashamed. 
Thus :  "  What  fruit  had  ye  then  (when  you 
were  free  from  righteousness)?  The  works 
(or  pleasures)  of  which  you  are  now  ashamed 
were  the  only  fruit ;  you  are  ashamed  of  ' 
them  now;  for  their  end  is  death."  The 
latter  interpretation  is  defended  by  Alford 
on  the  ground  that  it  is  more  consistent 
"  with  the  New  Testament  meaning  of 
KopirSs,  which  is  '  actions,'  the  '  fruit  of  the 
man '  considered  as  the  tree,  not '  wages '  or 
'  reward,'  the  '  fruit  of  his  actions.' "  This 
is  true.  But,  on  the  other  band,  it  may  be 
argued  that  such  use  of  the  word  napirds 
by  St.  Paul  is  always  in  a  good  sense;  he 
usually  regards  otn  as  having  no  fruits  at 
all ;  to  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  opposed, 
not  any  fruit  of  a  different  character,  but 
the  worki  (.epya)  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  19, 
22);  and  in  Eph.  v.  11  (again  in  opposition 
to  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit)  he  speaks  of  the 
unfruitful  works  (^Ipyois  rots  ixipirois)  of 
darkness.  Thus  the  idea  of  ver.  21,  under- 
stood as  in  the  Authorized  Version,  seems 
closely    to    correspond    with    that    of   tho 


en.  VI.  1—23.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


163 


passage  last  cited,  "  The  things  of  which 
ye  are  now  ashamed,"  in  ver.  21,  are  "  the 
works  of  darkness"  of  Eph.  v.  llj  and  in 
both  places  they  are  declared  to  have  no 
fruit.  Sin  is  a  barren  tree,  and  only  ends 
in  death.  Of.  what  was  eaid  above  with 
respect  to  els  t^v  ayo/iiav  and  els  ayiaafiSy 
in  ver.  19.  It  is  true,  however,  that  the 
expression  in  the  next  chapter,  Kapiro<l>opriaat 
Tif  9aj/oTij)(ch.  vii.  5),  in  opposition  tOKapiro- 
tf/opiiaan^v  r^  ®e^,  in  some  degree  weakens 
the  force  of  the  above  argument.  We 
observe,  lastly,  on  ver.  23,  that  to  the  "  wages  " 
of  sin  (otliiivia,  used  usually  to  denote  a 
soldier's  pay)  is  opposed  "  free  gift "  (xtipic- 
lia) ;  for  sin  earns  death  as  its  due  reward ; 
but  eternal  life  is  not  earned  by  us,  but 
granted  us  by  the  grace  of  God.  As  to  the 
plirase,  SovKaBevres  T(f  ®€^,  in  ver.  22,  it 
can  be  wed  without  the  need  of  any  such 


apology  as  seems  to  be  implied  in  ver.  19 
(accoriiing  to  the  meaning  of  the  verse  that 
has  been  preferred)  for  speaking  of  our 
becoming  slavet  to  righteousness.  For  we 
do  belong  to  God  as  his  SovKoi,  and  to 
Christ,  having  been  "  bought  with  a  price  " 
(of.  1  Cor.  vii.  23);  and  St.  Paul  at  the 
beginning  of  his  Epistles  often  calls  himself 
SovKos  XpuHTov  (of.  also  Luke  xvii.  10).  But 
it  does  not  follow  that  our  service  should 
be  the  service  of  slaves ;  it  may  be  a  free, 
willing,  enthusiastic  obedience  notwith- 
standing; we  obey,  not  because  we  are 
under  bondage  to  obey,  but  because  love 
inspires  ug  (cf.  Gal.  iv.  6,  etc.,  "  Because 
ye  are  sons,  God  sent  the  Spirit  of  his  Son 
into  your  hearts,  crying,  Abha,  Father, 
Wherefore  thou  art  no  longer  a  servant, 
but  a  son  "}. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  meaning  of  Ghrisfs  reswrrection.  The  prominent  position 
occupied  by  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  in  the  apostolic  writings  and  preaching 
need  occasion  no  surprise ;  an  event  in  itself  so  wonderful,  and  in  its  consequences 
80  momentous,  could  not  but  be  constantly  in  the  minds  and  upon  the  lips  of  those 
to  whom  it  was  the  supreme  revelation  of  God.  It  may  be  well  to  gather  up  in  a 
few  sentences  the  import  and  significance  of  this  central  fact  of  Christianity. 

I.  Ab   a    fact,   the    BE8UBBE0TI0N    OF  ChBIST    HAS   A  GENEBAL    AND  WOBLD-WIDB 

IHTBEEST.  The  historian  of  humanity,  the  philosopher  reflecting  upon  the  most 
important  factors  in  human  life,  is  constrained  to  acknowledge  the  central  and  universal 
interest  of  our  Lord'*  rising  from  the  dead.  1.  It  was  a  fulfilment  of  predictions, 
and  a  realization  of  hopes  sometimes  dim  and  sometimes  bright.  2.  It  was  the 
Btarting-point  of  the  Christian  religion.  The  existence  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is 
only  to  be  explained  by  remembering  how  firmly  the  first  promulgators  of  the  new 
faith  held  the  belief  that  their  Lord  had  risen  from  the  dead.  3.  It  was,  in  the  view 
of  the  Christian  community,  the  pledge  of  the  general  resurrection  of  all  men  to 
another  life ;  it  gave  definitenesg  and  power  to  the  belief  in  personal  immortality. 

II.  Ab    A     DOCTRINE,    THE    BBSUEBECTION    OF    ChBIST    HAS    A    SPECIAL    ChBISTIAN 

INTEBB8T.  1.  It  is  the  chief  external  evidence  of  the  Messiahship  and  Divinity  of 
Jesus  of  Nazareth.  It  was  in  fulfilment  of  his  own  express  declarations  that,  after 
enduring  a  death  of  violence,  he  rose  victorious  from  the  grave.  His  resurrection  is 
in  harmony  with  his  claim  to  a  nature  and  character  altogether  unique.  2.  It  is  the 
seal  of  the  efficacy  of  his  mediatorial  sufferings.  However  the  humiliation  and 
sacrifice  of  the  Bedeemer  were  related  to  the  forgiveness  and  justification  of  men,  it 
is  certain  that  Christ's  rising  from  the  dead  was  the  completion  of  his  redemptive 
undertaking  on  man's  behalf. 

III.  As  A  POWEB,   THE   BBSUBRBOTION  OF   ChBIST  HAS   A   PBBSONAL    AND   BPIEIT0AL 

INTEBE8T.  This  is  the  aspect  of  this  great  fact  which  is  insisted  upon  most  strenuously 
in  this  passage,  and  its  practical  importance  to  every  individual  Christian  is  manifest. 
The  true  believer  in  Christ  shares  in  his  Lord'B  resurrection.  1.  Our  sins  were  crucified 
in  Christ's  death  upon  the  cross,  and  in  his  resurrection  we  were  delivered  from  their 
power.  2.  Our  past  sinful  life  became  dead  to  us  as  Christ  died ;  and  our  newness 
of  life  began  in  his  rising  from  the  tomb.  We  have  the  sign  of  this,  the  apostle 
tsaches  us,  in  baptism,  with  its  teaching  regarding  renewal  and  consecration.  3,  By 
our  faith  in  the  resurrection  of  our  Saviour,  we  are  raised  above  trial,  doubt,  temptation, 
darkness,  and  fear.  The  cross  tells  us  that  it  may  consist  with  the  wisdom  and  the 
goodness  of  God  that  for  a  season  we  should  endure  trouble,  disappointment,  and 
Beeming  failure.    Bm  the  empty  tpmb  assures  us  th^t  for  every  good  man  and  iot 


164  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,     [ch.  vi.  1—23. 

•very  good  work  there  is  a  resurrection  appointed.  Death  is  for  a  season  ;  God's 
people  cannot  be  "  holden  of  it."  The  corn  of  wheat  dies,  but  it  dies  to  live,  and 
to  bring  forth  much  fruit.  4.  In  Christ's  resurrection  tlie  Christian  is  begotten  to 
a  living  hope  of  an  immortal  inheritance.  His  people  are  appointed  to  share  hia 
triumph  and  his  glory. 

Ver.  4. — "  Newness  of  life :"  a  New  Year's  sermon.  Things  new  and  old  make  up 
the  sum  of  human  experiences.  All  tliat  is  new  becomes  old,  and  the  old  disappears 
to  come  bi'fore  us  again  in  new  combinations,  in  new  shapes.  The  mind  of  man  sepms 
to  have  a  natural  leaning  in  both  directions ;  we  like  the  old  because  it  is  old,  and  the 
new  because  it  is  new.  This  is  one  of  the  contradictions  inseparable  from  human 
nature.  There  is  some  truth  in  the  common  saying  that  the  young  prefer  novelty 
and  the  aged  cling  to  "use  and  wont."  It  is  easy  to  see  how,  to  the  youthful,  change 
should  be  welcome,  for  their  knowledge  is  yet  very  limited,  and  new  experiences  are  the 
appointed  means  of  furnishing  and  equipping  the  mind.  It  is  less  easy  to  explain 
the  conservatism  of  age  and  its  dread  of  innovation,  for  experience  must  have  taught 
the  old  how  imperfect  is  everything  that  concerns  man's  culture  and  condition ;  this 
trait  of  character  may  be  largely  owing  to  the  increasing  feebleness  which  indisposes 
to  the  unwonted  exertion  of  the  faculties,  or  to  a  coramodation  to  new  circumstances. 
True  rehgion  takes  advantage  of  both  these  tendencies  of  human  nature.  It  apiieals 
to  the  natural  attachment  we  feel  to  what  is  ancient  and  sanctioned  by  prolonged 
existence ;  and  it  appeals  also  to  the  yearning  for  progress  and  for  fresh  experiences, 
which  we  all  either  have  felt  in  the  past  or  feel  to-day.  But  observe  in  what  way 
revelation  makes  use  of  these  natural  tendencies,  and  remark  the  harmony  there  is 
between  the  moral  necessities  of  man  and  the  Divine  communications  of  Scripture. 
Broadly  speaking,  whatever  concerns  God  is  commended  by  its  antiquity  and 
unchangeableness ;  whilst  that  which  refers  to  man  approaches  us  with  the  charm 
and  the  allurement  of  novelty.  A  moment's  reflection  will  show  us  why  this  should 
be  so  with  true  religion.  Man,  in  his  brief  life,  with  his  feeble  purposes  and  his  jietty 
achievements,  looks  away  from  himself  for  the  eternal  and  the  unchanging.  This 
he  knows  is  not  in  himself  or  in  his  race ;  and  he  seeks  it  in  the  unseen  God.  And 
herein  he  is  right.  He  does  not  seek  these  attributes  in  vain.  For,  knowing  God, 
he  knows  that  in  him  there  is  absolute  being,  unaffected  by  the  changes  to  which  all 
creation  is  subject.  Man  can  find  his  true  stability  and  his  true  peace  only  when  he 
rests  in  the  care  and  love  of  "  the  Father  of  lights,  who  is  without  variableness  and 
shadow  of  turning."  But,  on  the  other  hand,  man,  when  he  knows  himself,  is  aware 
that  his  past  has  been  a  past  unsatisfactory  to  himself,  and  blamable  by  his  Creator 
and  Judge.  His  changes  have  often  been  from  evil  to  evil ;  and  he  looks  forward, 
rather  than  behind  him,  for  relief.  His  only  hope  is  in  his  future.  The  old  he  can 
regard  only  with  pain,  with  regret,  with  distress.  If  there  is  improvement,  it  must 
bo  in  what  is  new — in  a  new  condition,  new  impulses,  new  principles  of  the  soul,  in 
new  associations  and  new  help.  Accordingly,  Christianity  comes  to  man  with  gifts 
of  heavenly  newness  in  her  hand.  Christianity  establishes  with  man  a  "new 
covenant,"  and  gives  to  him  a  "  new  commandu^ent ; "  makes  o£  him  a  "  new  creation," 
transforms  him  into  a  "  new  man."  It  opens  up  to  him  a  "  new  way"  unto  the  Father 
by  the  Mediator  of  a  "  new  testament,"  gives  him  a  "  new  name,"  and  teaches  him  a 
'*  new  song,"  and  inspires  him  with  the  hope  of  a  "  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth."  In 
short,  it  enables  him  to  serve  in  "newness  of  spirit,"  and  to  walk  in  "  newness  of  life." 
"  Life  "  is,  in  the  New  Testament,  used  as  equivalent  to  the  history  of  the  spiritual 
nature.  The  Lord  Jesus  professed  to  be  "  the  Life,"  "  the  Life  of  men ; "  he  came  that 
"  we  might  have  life,  and  that  more  abundantly,"  and  the  acceptance  of  him  as  the 
Divine  Saviour  is  designated  the  "  passing  from  death  unto  life."  This  being  under- 
stood, it  will  not  be  supposed  that  by  "  newness  of  life  "  the  Apostle  Paul  refers  to  the 
life  of  the  body,  or  to  the  outward  circumstances  in  which  physical  life  may  be  passed. 
And  yet  the  context  shows  that  he  is  not  treating  of  the  future  and  blessed  life  in  the 
nearer  presence  of  God.  Accordingly,  we  understand  by  "newness  of  life"  that  which 
contrasts  with  the  spiritual  deadness  which  hung  as  a  cloud  of  darkness  over  heathen 
humanity,  and  which  contrasts  also  with  the  earlier  and  imperfect  developments  of 
(piritual  vitality.    It  is  a  newness  of  life  which  is  pecul^r  to  the  Christian  dispeQg^ 


te.  VI.  1—23.]     THE  EPISTLE  Of  PAtL  tO  THE)  ftOJtANS.  1^ 

tion,  but  is  yet  found  wherever  Ohrist  is  known,  trusted,  and  loved.  We  greet  the 
new  year  with  gladness  and  with  hope,  because  it  seems  to  offer  us  the  opportunity 
to  begin  life  anew.  We  are  thankful  for  the  relief  of  leaving  the  past  behind,  and  we 
cherish  the  hope  that  each  new  year  will  be  one  of  greater  spiritual  progress  and 
happiness  than  the  years  that  are  past.  Christians  wish  to  forget  the  things  that  are 
behind,  and  to  reach  forth  to  those  things  that  are  before.  Some  who  have  been 
undecided  as  to  their  course  have  resolved  with  the  new  year  to  make  a  fresh  begin- 
ning in  life,  and  henceforth  to  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  his  service 
and  glory.  The  subject  ought,  therefore,  to  be  appropriate  and  welcome  to  such  as  are 
hopefully  and  prayerfully  aspiring  unto  "  newness  of  life." 

I.  The  newness  of  the  Christian  life  will  appear  from  the  consideration  that  it  is 
A  LIFE  IN  Chbist.  This  very  language  must  be  at  first  unintelligible  to  a  person 
unacquainted  with  the  gospel.  That  life  should  be  in  a  person  seems  monstrous  and 
meaningless.  Yet  Christ  himself  has  said,  "  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you ;  "  and  his 
Apostle  Paul  has  taught  us  that  "  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creation." 
Christ  is  the  Basis  upon  which  the  Christian  builds,  the  Foimdation  of  the  edifice  of  his 
new  and  higher  life.  Christ  is  the  Vine-stem  into  which  the  Christian  is  grafted,  and 
from  which  he  draws  all  his  vitality,  his  vigour,  and  his  fruitfulness.  Christ  is  the 
Head,  in  dependence  upon  whom  the  Christian  is  a  living,  active,  and  obedient 
member.  The  signs  and  evidences  of  this  life  are  these :  1.  The  renewed  man  learns 
who  Christ  is,  and  what  Christ  has  done  and  suffered  for  him.  2.  The  renewed 
man  admits  the  claim  Christ  has  upon  his  gratitude,  his  faith,  his  love ;  and  trusts 
in  him.  3.  The  renewed  man  consciously  accepts  life  as  the  gift  of  God  in  Christ. 
4,  The  renewed  man,  by  maintaining  fellowship  with  Christ,  advances  in  the  new  and 
higher  life. 

II.  The  newness  of  the  Christian  life  is  manifest  from  the  agency  bt  which  it 
IS  EFFECTED.  1.  A  spiritrial  agency.  2.  A  Divine  agency.  3.  A  freely  acting 
and  gracious  agency.  4.  A  transforming  agency.  6.  A  ceaseless  and  progressiva 
agency. 

III.  The  newness  of  the  Christian  life  is  displayed  in  the  motives  and  prinoiples 
BY  which  it  is  govebnbd.  1.  The  love  of  Christ  revealed  and  responded  to  is  the 
motive  power  of  this  life.  2.  The  law  of  Christ  becomes  a  law  of  friendship.  3.  The 
approval  of  Christ  is  an  animating  and  cheering  power  in  the  heart.  4.  Thus  self  and 
the  world,  the  common  motives  to  action,  fall  into  their  proper  place,  or  are  banished 
from  the  Christian's  soul. 

IV.  New  ASS00IATI0N8  are  a  feature  of  the  Christian's  new  life. 

V.  The  Christian  life  tends  and  points  to  a  fubtheb  and  higheb  bkobnkbatiox 

nr  THE  PUTtJBB. 

Application.  Newness  of  life  depends  comparatively  little  upon  outward  circum- 
stances. There  is  nothing  in  the  colour  of  a  man's  skin,  the  climate  of  a  man's  birth- 
place, the  nature  of  a  man's  occupation,  his  condition  whether  of  poverty  or  wealth, 
his  education  whether  scanty  or  liberal,  his  age  or  his  station, — ^there  is  nothing  in  all 
these  things  which  can  interfere  with  or  hinder  him  from  becoming  a  new  man  in 
Christ.  Does  it  seem  to  any  one  that  for  him  this  is  an  impossibility,  because  of  the 
unfavourable  circumstances  in  which  he  finds  himself?  Disabuse  yourself  of  this 
illusion,  for  illusion  it  is.  It  may  not  be  within  your  power  to  become  a  learned  man, 
or  an  eloquent  man,  a  rich  man,  or  a  powerfiil  man ;  but  the  oircuinstances  which  may 
prevent  you  from  becoming  learned  or  wealthy,  mighty  or  persuasive,  have  no  force 
to  hinder  you  from  becoming  "  a  new  man."  The  obstacles  to  this  renewal  are  to  be 
■ought  within,  not  without ;  they  are  to  be  found  in  the  will,  which  is  often  resolved 
to  resist  the  authority,  to  reject  the  truth,  and  to  ignore  the  love  of  God.  If  you  take 
a  savage  from  his  native  woods,  clothe  him  in  civilized  attire,  place  him  in  a  lordly 

Salace,  surround  him  with  books  and  with  music,  with  paintings  and  with  flowers, 
oes  he  cease  to  be  a  savage?  Not  until  the  mind  is  changed.  -  "The  man  himself  may 
remain  the  same,  whilst  all  his  surroundings  are  altered.  These  external  changes  do 
not  make  of  him  a  new  man,  and  his  life  has  not  in  virtue  of  them  become  a  new  life. 
So  is  it  with  man  in  relation  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Deprive  a  human  being  of 
the  liberty  which  he  has  abused,  remove  him  from  his  evil  companionships,  shut  out 
from  him  the  temptations  to  which  he  has  been  wont  to  yield,  introduce  him  into 


166  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,     [oh.  n.  1—23. 

Christian  society,  constrain  him  to  frequent  the  means  of  religious  instruction ;  yet 
his  life  has  not  thereby  become  a  new  life.  The  old  nature  is  still  there.  The 
Ethiopian  has  not  changed  his  skin,  nor  the  leopard  his  spots.  The  man's  true  life 
lies  in  the  bent  of  his  thoughts,  the  affections  of  his  heart,  the  bias  of  his  will;  and 
whilst  all  these  are  toward  evil,  the  :?'d  nature  is  supreme,  and  the  new  life  is  not  yet. 
Love  is  the  one  only  potentate  at  whose  master-bidding  old  things  will  pass  away. 
BefDre's  Love's  wizard  wand  alone,  the  ancient  shadows  will  depart  from  the  gloomy 
cave  of  the  unregenerated  soul,  and  that  cave  will  become  a  temple  peopled  with  the 
forms  of  the  holy,  and  echoing  with  the  songs  of  heaven.  Divine  love  can  make  the 
wilderness  a  paradise,  can  change  each  thorn  into  a  flower,  and  all  the  thistles  into 
fruits.  When  Love  smites  the  rock,  the  spring  of  health  and  of  refreshing  will  gush  forth. 
He  who  hears  Love's  voice  shall  forget  the  weakness  and  the  weariness  of  the  pilgrimage ; 
and  his  footstep,  erst  so  heavy  and  so  dull,  shall  bound  elastic  onwards. 

Ver.  14. — The  enfranchisement  hy  grace.  The  Law,  by  exhibiting  the  heinousi^ess 
of  sin  and  its  awful  consequences,  was  the  occasion  of  the  Intrnduction  of  the  gospel 
and  of  the  victories  of  God's  grace.  If,  then,  where  sin  abounds,  grace  much  more 
abounds,  some  sophistical  reasoner  may  propose  to  continue  in  sin.  It  is  against  this 
wretched  argument  that  the  apostle  appeals  in  the  language  of  the  text.  "  Sin  shall 
not  have  dominion  over  you ;  for  ye  are  not  under  law,  but  under  grace."  The  very 
fact  which  was  adduced  by  some  as  an  excuse  for  sin  is  shown  to  be  the  chief  reason 
for  freedom  from  sin. 

I.  Sin  has  had,  and  has,  mastery  over  men.  Sinners  are  under  the  rule  and 
bondage  of  a  tyrannical  and  wicked  lord.  Turning  away  in  a  rebellious  spirit  from 
their  rightful  King  and  Ruler,  they  have  submitted  themselves  to  the  usurper's  sway. 
Sin  takes  possession  of  their  affections,  their  judgment,  and  their  will. 

II.  Under  the  Law,  men  were  commonly  and  habitually  under  the  mastery 
OF  SIN.  By  the  Law,  the  apostle  means  chiefly  the  Jewish  Law;  yet  not  this 
exclusively;  for  it  appears  that  the  unwritten  law  generally  is  intended  in  the 
argument  of  the  Epistle,  They  vi&re  "under  the  Law"  who  lived  under  legal 
ordinances  and  sanctions,  and  who,  in  theory  at  all  events,  acknowledged  its  claim. 
Sin  to  them  was  transgression,  and  the  motive  for  avoiding  transgression  was  the  fear 
of  penalty  to  be  inflicted  by  the  Lawgiver  and  Judge.  Now,  it  is  urged  that  those 
imder  the  Law  were  in  very  many  cases  the  slaves  of  sin;  for  the  Law  entered  that 
the  offence  might  abound.  History,  sacred  and  profane,  bears  out  these  assertions. 
The  standard  of  morality  by  which  men  judged  themselves  was  low,  and  even  to  this 
thpy  did  not  generally  approach,  much  less  attain.  This  was  so  with  the  Jews,  and 
more  conspicuously  with  the  Gentiles. 

III.  It  is  the  effect  of  the  dispensation  op  grace  to  set  men  free  from 
the  mastery  of  sin.  1.  What  Is  it  to  be  "  under  grace "  ?  It  is  voluntarily  and 
consciously  to  receive  the  free  favour  of  God  bestowed  through  Jesus  Christ  upon  all 
who  believe.  It  is  to  participate  in  the  new  and  distinctively  Christian  righteousness. 
It  is  in  the  exercise  of  faith  to  be  brought  into  harmony  with  God's  government  and 
purposes.  It  is  to  come  imder  the  influence  of  a  new.  Divine,  and  powerful  motive, 
furnished  by  the  infinite  love  and  clemency  of  God.  2.  How  does  being  "under 
grace "  set  and  keep  a  man  free  from  sin  ?  The  apostle  explains  the  process  by 
employing  three  figures.  According  to  the  first,  by  baptism,  the  initiative  act  of  faith 
and  consecration,  the  Christian  is  joined  to  his  Saviour  in  his  death  upon  the  cross, 
and,  thus  being  united  to  an  almighty  Saviour,  must  consequently  rise  in  the  likeness 
of  his  resurrection  to  a  now  and  holy  life.  According  to  the  second,  tlie  Christian, 
forsaking  the  service  of  sin,  yields  himself  by  faith  to  the  service  of  Christ,  and  ia 
therefore  bound  to  fulfil  the  obligations  which  ho  has  undertaken.  The  third  figure 
represents  his  state  under  the  Law  as  abolished  by  faith  in  Christ,  just  as  a  woman  is 
released  from  her  husband  by  his  death ;  fidelity  to  Christ's  service  and  law  are  as 
binding  upon  the  Christian  as  is  fidelity  to  her  second  husband  on  the  part  of  the 
newly  married  woman.  Duty  and  love  combine  to  render  the  obligation  to  holiness 
stringent  and  effective. 

IV.  The  power  of  grace  exceeds  the  power  of  the  Law.  In  explaining  how 
this  is  we  may  observe:  1.  The  principles  appealed  to  are  higher;  love  and  gratitude 


oa.  VI.  1—23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OB"  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMAiTS.  167 

are  higher  than  fear  and  interest.  2.  The  aid  afforded  is  greater;  it  ia  the  aid  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God.  3.  The  example  set  before  the  Christian  is  more  stimulating  and 
inspiring.    4.  The  prospects  presented  are  more  alluring  and  glorious. 

Ver.  17. —  The  mould  of  Christian  doctrine.  The  Christian,  in  remembering  what  h« 
was,  deepens  his  impression  of  Divine  grace,  to  which  he  owes  it  that  the  change  has 
been  eilected  in  which  he  now  rejoices.  St.  Paul  took  a  peculiar  satisfaction  in 
reviewing  his  own  experience,  and  acknowledging  his  indebtedness  to  that  Divine  grace 
which  had  fashioned  his  character  anew.  And  if  the  Christian  will  consider  the  state 
in  which  he  would  have  been  apart  from  the  supernatural  doctrine  and  influences  of 
Christianity,  he  will  see  reason  for  gratitude  in  the  provision  made  for  the  transformation 
and  renewal  of  his  character.  In  this  verse  the  change  is  attributed,  instnimentally, 
to  the  power  of  Christian  doctrine,  which  is,  as  it  were,  a  pattern  by  which  he  is 
reconstructed,  or  a  mould  into  which  the  metal  of  his  nature  has  been  oast,  in  order  to 
its  taking  a  new  and  divinely  ordered  shape  and  form. 

L  The  Cheibtian  doctrine  ib  as  a  mould  peepaeed  in  oedee  to  give  a  new 
SHAPE  AND  FOEM  TO  THE  HUMAN  OHAEAOTEE.  When  iron  is  "  cast,"  it  is  run,  in  a 
liquid  state,  into  a  shape  or  mould  of  earth  or  sand  of  the  desired  form  ;  and  thus  the 
artificer  produces  a  bolt  or  a  cannon.  Thus,  in  the  intellectual  and  spiritual  realm, 
ideas  govern  men ;  and  the  character  and  life  are  largely  owing  to  the  thoughts  which 
are  familiar  and  congenial.  And  Christian  doctrine  is  not  an  end,  but  a  means ;  the 
righteousness  and  love  of  God,  revealed  in  Christ,  having  power  to  reconstruct  the 
character  and  to  renew  the  life.  .  The  doctrine  is  alive  with  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God. 

II.  The  Gheistian  disoiplb  is  oast  into  this  spiritual  mould,  that  he  mat 
TAKE  its  new  SHAPE  AND  FOEM.  The  old  elements  of  human  nature,  old  errors  and 
old  sins,  are  dissolved  and  melted  down  when  brought  into  contact  with  the  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Old  things  pass  away,  in  order  that  all  things  may  become  new.  We 
may  fancy  that  the  doctrine  is  delivered  unto  us,  to  do  what  we  like  with  it ;  but 
the  reverse  is  the  case.  We  are  delivered  unto  it,  in  order  that  it  may  do  its  work  upon 
us.  So  it  is  with  the  Christian  education  of  the  young,  and  with  the  evangelization 
of  the  heathen.  The  mould  of  Christian  doctrine  impaits  to  him  who  is  brought  into 
living  contact  with  it  a  new  motive  to  holiness,  in  the  redeeming  and  sacrificial  lore  of 
the  Saviour ;  a  new  rule  of  holiness,  in  his  law  and  life ;  and  new  help  towards 
holiness,  in  the  provision  of  the  Spirit's  help  and  grace.  A  moral  transfiguration  is 
effected,  as  the  natural  result  of  intelligent  acceptance  and  voluntary  allegiance.  For 
if  faith  is  the  soul  of  obedience,  obedience  is  the  body  of  faith.  There  is  no  change  lo 
wonderful  and  so  admirable  as  that  which  is  wrought  in  human  character  by  the 
moulding  power  of  Christian  doctrine. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — Th«  practical  power  of  the  Resurrection.  Here  the  apostle  enlarge* 
still  more  fully  upon  the  truth  that  the  Christian's  faith  leads  not  merely  to  the  parthm 
of  sin,  but  also  to  deliverance  from  its  power.  Because  grace  has  abounded  over  sin, 
and  our  unrighteousness  has  commended  the  righteousness  of  God,  it  does  not  therefore 
follow  that  we  are  to  continue  in  sin.  If  we  have  a  real  union  with  Christ,  we  have 
been  baptized  into  his  death.  We  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death ;  "  that 
like  as  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also 
should  walk  in  newness  of  life  "  (ver.  4). 

I.  The  fact  of  the  Ebsubregtion.  That  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  surrounded 
with  mystery,  no  one  will  deny.  But  the  evidence  by  which  the  great  central  fact 
itself  is  established  is  so  strong,  so  clear,  so  decisive,  that  even  scepticism  has  some- 
times to  admit  itself  convinced.  The  effect  of  the  most  able  and  adverse  criticism 
has  only  been  to  establish  more  and  more  certainly  the  fact  of  the  Resurrection,  and 
thus  to  confirm  more  strongly  the  Christian's  faith.  It  is  remarkable  that  two  of  the 
greatest  rationalists  of  the  present  century,  who  doubted  almost  every  fact  of  the  New 
Testiiment  history,  admitted  that  the  Resusrection  was  a  fact  which  they  could  not 


168  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  TfiB  ROMANS,    [oh.  vi.  1—25. 

doubt.  Ewald,  who  deals  destructively  with  most  of  the  gospel  incidents,  "  regarding 
lome  as  mythical,  some  as  admitting  «f  a  rationalistic  interpretation,  aad  some  as 
combining  the  elements  of  both,"  is  unable  to  destroy  or  explain  away  the  Resurrection. 
"  Rejecting  all  attempts  to  explain  it,  be  accepts  the  great  fact  of  the  Resurrection  on 
the  evidence  of  history,  and  declares  that  nothing  can  be  more  historical."  The 
testimony  of  De  Wette  is  even  more  remarkable.  He  was  more  sceptical  than  Ewald ; 
so  much  so  that  he  was  called  "  The  Universal  Doubter."  Nevertheless,  such  is  the 
force  of  the  evidence,  that  this  great  rationalistic  critic,  in  his  last  work,  published  in 
1818,  said  that  the  fact  of  the  Resurrection,  although  a  darkness  which  cannot  be 
dissipated  rests  on  the  way  and  manner  of  it,  cannot  itself  be  called  in  question  any 
more  than  the  historical  certainty  of  the  assassination  of  Julius  Ciesar.  1.  The  fact  of 
the  Resurrection  is  attested  by  the  four  evangelists.  The  four  Gospels  were  written  by 
men  widely  separated  both  in  time  and  place.  Their  very  variations  are  a  proof  of 
their  substantial  truth.  They  give  varying  accounts  of  the  Resurrection,  as  would 
naturally  be  expected  from  men  whom  so  great  an  event  impressed  in  different  ways, 
but  they  all  agree  in  testifying  that  the  event  occurred.  2.  ITie  narrative  of  the 
Besurrection  was  accepted  hy  the  early  Christians  who  lived  at  the  time  when  the  event 
took  place.  It  is  spoken  of  constantly  in  the  Epistles  to  the  various  Churches  as  an 
event  with  which  they  were  all  familiar,  and  about  which  there  was  not  the  slightest 
doubt.  When  Peter  is  proposing  the  appointment  of  a  successor  to  Judas,  he  speaks 
of  the  Resurrection  as  one  of  the  great  subjects  of  apostolic  preaching.  Indeed,  it 
would  appear  that  he  regarded  the  preaching  of  the  Resurrection  as  the  great  subject 
for  which  the  apostle  should  be  chosen.  His  words  were,  "  Wherefore  of  these  men 
who  have  compauied  with  us  all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out 
amongst  us,  must  one  be  ordained  to  be  a  witness  with  us  of  his  resurrection."  3.  Tha 
conversion  of  St.  Paul,  cmd  his  tubseqiient  advocacy  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Besurrection, 
are  perhaps  the  strengest  proofs  of  its  truth.  Paul  was  a  jpersecutor  and  a  bigoted 
Pharisee.  He  suddenly  became  a  member  of  the  sect  that  was  so  hated  and  despised. 
The  explanation  that  he  himself  gave  of  this  change  was  that  Jesus  Christ  Iiad  appeared 
unto  him.  It  was  not  likely  that  Paul,  a  clear-headed  man,  accustomed  to  weigh 
evidence,  would  be  deceived  as  to  Christ's  appearance.  He  could  not  be  lightly  led  to 
take  a  step  of  such  immense  importance  to  his  whole  life.  Something  more  than  a 
mere  dream  or  hallucination  must  be  found  to  account  for  his  whole  subsequent  career. 
He  was  not  likely  to  undertake  those  missionary  journeys  through  Asia  Minor,  through 
Macedonia,  and  through  Crreece,  and  to  persevere  in  them,  in  the  face  of  much  opposition, 
ridicule,  persecution,  and  many  hardships  and  dangers,  for  xhe  sake  of  a  mere  fancy. 
He  was  not  a  mere  visionary  or  fanatic.  His  Epistles  show  him  to  have  been  a  man  of 
rubust  mind,  great  reasoning  power,  and  soberness  of  judgment.  And  yet,  in  every 
instance  in  which  a  public  speech  of  his  is  recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles ;  in  his 
address  at  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  in  his  address  at  Athens,  in  his  address  to  the  multitude 
when  he  was  taken  prisoner  at  Jerusalem ;  whether  he  is  in  the  presence  of  the  high 
priest,  of  Felix,  or  of  Pestus  and  Agrippa,  he  most  distinctly  proclaims  the  fact  of  the 
resurrection  of  Christ.  4.  As  the  life  of  the  Apostle  Paul  was  changed,  so  the  lives  of 
all  the  apostles  were  changed  from  the  moment  that  the  risen  Christ  appeared  to  them. 
Before  that  they  were  timid  and  frightened.  The  boldest  of  them  became  so  cowardly 
as  to  deny  that  he  knew  Christ  at  all.  They  had  all  forsaken  him  and  fled  when  the 
time  of  crucifixion  drew  near.  After  the  crucifixion  they  became  disheartened  and 
depressed.  We  can  easily  see  what  would  have  become  of  Oiiristianity  had  there  been 
no  resurrection,  as  we  study  the  conduct  and  words  of  tlie  disciples  when  they  knew 
that  their  Master  was  so  soon  to  be  taken  from  them,  and  when  they  thought  he  was 
still  in  the  grave.  But  the  Besurrection  altered  everything.  The  change  that  occurred 
can  only  be  explained  by  the  actual  reappearance  of  Christ  to  them.  The  timid 
became  brave  again.  They  cannot  but  speak  the  things  which  they  have  seen  and 
heard.  Tiiey  endure  persecution  and  suffering  and  martyrdom  now,  for  the  grave  is 
no  longer  dark,  and  the  crown  of  life  is  beyond  the  struggle  and  the  pain. 

II.  The  nooTUiNES  which  it  teaches.  1.  That  tiere  shall  he  a  general  resurrection 
of  the  dead.  "  Because  he  hath  aiipointed  a  day,  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in 
righteousness  by  that  Man  whom  he  hath  ordained ;  whereof  lie  hath  given  assurance 
unto  all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead  "  (Acts  xvii.  31).     2.  That 


ea.  ltt.l— S3.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  tAOL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  169 

those  who  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  live  with  him,  for  ever.  "  I  am  the  Resurrec- 
tion, and  the  Life  :  he  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  lire  " 
(John  xi.  25).  And  here  the  apostle  says,  "  Now  if  we  be  dead  with  Christ,  we 
believe  that  we  shall  also  live  with  him"  (ver.  8).  Christ  has  brought  life  and 
immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel.  He  has  satisfied  the  yearning  of  the  human 
heart  for  a  life  beyond  the  present— a'  yearning  so  strong  that  one  of  the  greatest 
thinkers  of  our  own  time,  though  the  logical  conclusion  of  his  system  is  universal 
death,  nevertheless  tries  to  avoid  or  overcome  this  dreary  prospect  by  the  suggestion 
that  out  of  this  death  another  life  may  spring.  Our  poet-laureate  has  expressed  that 
yearning  thus.    Speaking  of  love,  he  says — 

"  He  geeki  at  last 
Upon  the  last  and  sharpest  height 
Before  the  spirits  fade  away, 
Some  landing-place,  to  clasp  and  say, 
'Farewell  I     We  lose  ourselves  in  light  1 '  " 

Yes,  it  Is  when  the  grave  is.  near,  it  is  when  our  loved  ones  are  suddenly  taken  from  us 
by  death,  that  we  learn  what  a  precious  truth  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  is  to  rest  on. 

in.  The  praotioal  lessons  which  it  conveys.  "That  like  as  Christ  was  raised 
from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of 
life  "  (ver.  4) ;  "  Let  not  sin  therefore  reign  in  your  mortal  body,  that  ye  should  obey 
it  in  the  lusts  thereof"  (ver.  12).  Elsewhere  the  apostle  expresses  the  same  truth. 
"If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ 
sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  "  (Col.  ill.  1).  This  is  the  practical  power  of  the  fact 
and  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection.  If  we  have  in  our  hearts  the  hope  of  being  with 
Christ,  what  a  transforming  influence  that  hope  should  exercise  upon  our  lives  1  We 
should  "  yield  ourselves  unto  God,  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dea4,  and  our 
members  as  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God  "  (ver.  13).  Thus  the  risen  life  of 
Christ  enters  into  and  becomes  part  of  the  present  life  of  his  people.  Thus  their  life 
enters  into  and  becomes  part  of  his.    "  Our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God." — 0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  16 — 23. — 2^  two  services  and  their  rewards.  In  the  closing  part  of  the  fifth 
chapter,  and  throughout  this  chapter,  the  apostle  is  contrasting  the  operation  of  two 
great  principles.  The  one  is  the  principle  of  sin ;  the  other  is  the  principle  of 
righteousness.  He  compares  them  to  two  kings  reigning  in  the  world,  controlling 
men's  lives,  and  influencing  men  in  certain  directions  and  to  certain  actions.  Sin 
reigns  unto  death.  That  has  been  its  operation  all  through  human  history.  But  a 
new  power  has  entered  to  dispute  its  influence.  That  power  is  the  free  grace  of  God, 
exhibited  in  Christ,  God's  Son.  That  power  operates  in  righteousness.  It  provides 
a  righteousness /or  men  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  It  produces  a  righteousness  in  men. 
"  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound :  that  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto 
death,  even  so  might  grace  reign  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life  by  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord."  And  now  in  these  immediate  verses  St.  Paul  is  making  an  appeal  • 
to  his  readers.  He  has  set  before  them  the  two  great  principles.  He  has  contrasted 
them  in  their  operation  and  their  results.  Now  he  makes  the  matter  personal.  He 
enforces  his  appeal  by  the  question  of  the  sixteenth  verse,  "  Know  ye  not,  that  to 
whom  ye  yield  yourselves  servants  to  obey,  his  servants  ye  are  to  whom  ye  obey ; 
whether  of  sin  unto  death,  or  of  obedience  unto  righteousness?  "  And  then  ho  says, 
"As  ye  have  yielded  your  members  servants  to  unoleanness  and  to  iniquitjr  unto 
iniquity ;  even  so  now  yield  your  members  servants  to  righteousness  unto  holiness " 
(ver.  19). 

L  Evert  lifb  is  a  sebvicb  of  some  bobt.  1.  Some  are  servants  of  the  love  of 
money.  Of  money  and  how  to  make  it  they  are  always  thinking ;  for  the  sake  of  it 
they  will  go  through  many  risks  and  toils  and  hardships.  Their  first  question  about 
everything  is,  "  Will  it  pay  ?"  and  all  their  money-grasping  does  not  pay  them  In  the 
end.  They  may  have  much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years ;  they  may  have  good 
securities  for  their  investments ;  but  they  have  made  no  provision  for  their  immortal 
souls ;  they  have  laid  up  no  treasure  that  will  he  of  use  to  them  beyond  the  grave. 
That  is  a  poor  service  for  a  being  who  must  soon  go  into  the  presence  of  the  eternal 


1?0  THE  EWSTLE  0^  PAtJL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vi.  1—23. 

God,  2.  Some  are  servants  of  the  love  of  dress.  Even  in  our  Lord's  time,  he  found  it 
necessary  to  warn  his  liearers  against  thinking  too  much  about  their  dress.  Even- 
Christian  people,  who  profess  to  be  the  servants  of  Christ,  are  too  frequently  the  servant« 
of  fashion.  There  is  sometimes  more  attention  given  to  the  dress  of  our  neighbours  or 
of  ourselves  in  the  house  of  God  than  tliere  is  to  the  voice  of  our  Creator  and  our 
Saviour,  or  than  there  is  to  the  question  whether  we  hare  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and 
quiet  spirit,  or  the  spotless  robe  of  Christ's  righteousnesi.  It  is  said  that  St.  Bernard 
of  Clairvaux,  who  rebuked  princes,  and  fired  all  Europe  with  a  new  crusade,  all  the 
while  living  himself  in  utter  poverty,  used  to  ask  himself  every  day  the  stern  question, 
"  Bemarde,  ad  quid  venisti  ?  " — "  Bernard,  where/ore  art  thou  here  t "  So  it  would  be 
well  if  we  would  ask  ourselves  more  frequently  what  is  the  purpose  of  our  lives.  3. 
Others,  again,  are  the  servants  of  ambition.  To  be  higher  than  their  fellow-men,  to  be 
fawned  upon  and  flattered,  to  receive  the  homage  of  the  poor  and  the  favour  of  the 
rich,  to  be  talked  about  in  the  gossip  of  society, — that  is  the  object  for  which  many 
persons  live.  Yet,  when  attained,  it  brings  no  lasting  peace  or  contentment  to  the 
mind.  The  praise  of  men,  moreover,  is  a  very  fickle  and  uncertain  thing.  The  hero 
of  to-day  will  be  forgotten  to-morrow.     Earthly  fame  has  ever  been — 

"  Lik«  a  snow-flake  on  the  river, 
A  moment  seen,  then  lost  for  ever." 

Such  are  some  of  the  services  to  which  men  devote  their  thoughts,  their  time,  their 
energies.  How  vain  and  profitless  are  they  all  I  When  the  hour  of  death  draws  nigh, 
let  any  one  who  has  spent  his  life  in  the  service  of  any  of  these  masters  ask  them  to 
help  him  in  the  death-struggle,  to  give  him  hope  for  the  future :  will  they  be  able 
to  give  him  any  assistance  ?  They  cannot  even  keep  his  poor  mortal  body  from  the 
dust;  much  less  can  they  give  life  to  the  soul.  They  have  already  helped  to  produce 
death  in  the  soul.  They  have  dragged  him  downwards  to  the  earth.  And  so  it  is  that, 
when  the  soul  must  go  from  this  world  into  the  unseen,  it  is  earthly  still.  There  is  no 
fitness  for  heaven  in  it  at  all.  The  pleasures  and  possessions  of  the  world,  innocent  in 
themselves,  become  positively  harmful  to  many.  They  become  sinful  to  them,  because 
they  keep  the  soul  away  from  God. 

II.  The  service  of  bin  and  its  besults.  Even  what  we  call  the  more  innocent 
service  of  the  world  results  in  death  at  last.  The  death  of  the  body  is  accompanied  by 
the  death  of  the  soul.  Much  more  is  this  true  of  all  kinds  of  positive  sin.  The  apostle 
seeks  to  point  out  here  the  result  of  being  the  Servant  of  sin.  "  His  servants  ye  are  to 
whom  ye  obey,  whether  (^  sin  unto  death,  or  of  obedience  unto  righteousness "  (ver. 
16);  "The  end  of  those  things  is  death "  (ver.  21);  "The  wages  of  sin  is  death" 
(ver.  23).  Even  in  this  life  there  is  a  clear  connection  between  sin  and  death.  The 
service  of  sin  is  a  fatal  service.  Take,  for  instance,  those  who  are  the  servants  of  the 
craving  for  intoxicating  drink.  A  special  committee  of  the  British  Medical  Associa- 
tion brought  in  a  report  at  the  meeting  of  1887  on  the  relation  of  alcohol  to  disease, 
which  stated  that,  after  careful  and  prolonged  examination  of  the  subject  from  a 
scientific  point  of  view,  they  came  to  the  conclusion  that  every  man  who  indulged  in 
alcohol  beyond  the  most  moderate  amounts  shortened  his  life  by  at  least  ten  years. 
The  President  of  the  United  States,  General  Harrison,  has  testified  that  of  a  class 
of  sixteen  young  men  who  graduated  with  him,  almost  all  had  gone  to  early  graves 
through  intemperate  habits.  Even  in  this  world  the  sin  of  intemperance  leads  to 
death.  But  it  brings  a  more  lasting  and  more  terrible  death  than  this.  The  besotted 
mind,  the  darkened  intellect,  is  but  a  beginning  of  blackness  of  darkness  in  the  future. 
"No  drunkard  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Wlien  drink  becomes  the  master, 
how  terrible  are  the  results  for  time  and  for  eternity  1  In  like  manner  it  is  true  of  all 
other  sinful  services,  that  they  lead  to  death,  "  He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh,  shall  of  the 
flesh  reap  corruption; "  "  The  wi^es  of  sin  is  death." 

III.  Thb  bervioe  of  Christ.  "Being  then  made  free  from  sin,  ye  became  the 
servants  of  righteousness"  (ver.  18) ;  "  But  now,  being  made  free  from  sin,  and  become 
servants  to  God,  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  holiness,  and  tlie  end  everlastii>g  life  "  (ver. 
22).  This  is  the  only  service  that  leads  to  everlasting  life.  It  is  the  only  service  which 
is  not  slaver;/.  It  is  the  only  service  which  men  never  regret  entering  into.  It  is  the 
»nly  service  which  can  be  called  an  unmixed  good,  the  only  service  that  brings  perfect 


OH.VI.  1— 23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE    ROMANS.  Ifl 

peace  to  heart  and  mind  and  conscience.  It  is  an  easy  service,  for  it  is  a  service  of 
love.  Instead  of  growing  weaker  by.  our  efforts  in  the  service  of  Christ,  as  we  do  by 
our  efforts  to  serve  sin,  we  grow  stronger;  for  the  true  Christian  is  a  better  man, 
a  stronger  man  spiritually,  every  day  he  lives.  It  is  the  only  service  that  has  a  hope 
beyond  the  grave.  It  was  because  Christ  saw  us  perishing  in  the  service  of  sin,  guilty, 
lost,  and  helpless,  that  he  came  to  save  us.  He  calls  us  now  to  believe  on  him,  to 
follow  him,  and  he  promises  to  all  who  do  so  the  gift  of  everlasting  life.  "  The  gift  of 
God  is  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." 

"  How  long  to  streams  of  false  delight 
Will  ye  in  crowds  repair  ? 
How  long  your  strength  and  substance  waste 
On  tiiflea  light  as  all  ?  " 

Over  the  triple  doorways  of  the  Cathedral  of  Milan  there  are  three  inscriptions  spanning 
the  beautiful  arches.  Over  one  is  carved  a  beautiful  wreath  of  roses,  and  underneath 
is  the  legend,  "All  that  which  pleases  is  but  for  a  moment."  Over  the  other  is 
sculptured  a  cross,  and  there  are  the  words,  "  All  that  which  troubles  us  is  but  for  a 
moment."  But  underneath  the  great  central  entrance  to  the  main  aisle  is  the  inaorip- 
tion,  "  That  only  is  important  which  is  eternal."  If  we  would  only  realize  these  three 
truths,  we  should  not  let  the  world  or  its  pleasures  keep  us  from  Christ,  we  should  not 
let  trifles  trouble  us,  we  should  not  hesitate  long  about  making  our  choice.  "  Ohooie 
ye  this  day  ivhom  ye  will  serve." — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Buried  and  risen  with  Christ.  Attaching  to  almost  all  privileges  and 
blessings  there  are  dangerous  possibilities  of  abuse.  So  with  the  blessed  doctrine  of 
justification  by  faith,  which  has  been  so  largely  dwelt  on  hitherto.  So  especially  with 
that  aspect  of  it  just  referred  ta(ch.  v.  20).  How  readily  the  question  might  spring  to 
the  lip,  "  Shall  we  continue  in  gin,  that  grace  may  abound  ?  "  But  how  readily,  from 
every  Christian  heart,  would  spring  the  response,  "  God  forbid  I  How  shall  we  ?"  This 
answer  amplified  in  the  followiiig  verses :  The  relation  of  the  believer,  through  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  to  sin  and  holiness. 

I.  Thb  death.  1.  TAe  relation  of  the  death  of  Christ  to  tin.  Two  elementi 
entering  into  the  atoning  work  of  Christ,  each  of  which,  in  its  bearings,  must  be 
distinguished  from  the  other — the  Divine,  and  the  human.  (1)  As  to  guilt.  The 
guilt  of  the  race  an  accomplished  fact ;  the  stain  inefTaceable ;  the  white  purity  of  the 
infinite  Law  blotted.  What  are  the  bearings  of  Christ's  atonement,  divinely  and 
humanly,  on  this  guilt  of  the  past  ?  (a)  Divinely :  condemnation  for  ever ;  (6) 
humanly:  expiation  for  ever.  (2)  As  to  sin.  An  existent,  a  persistent  fact;  a 
possibility  always ;  a  strong  power  of  evil  What  are  the  bearings  of  Christ's  atone- 
ment on  this  sin  of  the  present  ?  (a)  Divinely :  stamp  of  condemnation ;  the  thing 
which  has  brought  guilt  that  must  be  expiated  by  death,  is  by  that  very  death  a 
branded  thing ;  ( J)  humanly :  renunciation  and  conflict ;  the  thing  which  is  branded, 
in  the  atonement,  on  the  part  of  God,  is  forsworn  on  the  part  of  man.  2.  Our  relation 
through  the  death  of  Christ  to  sin.  A  natural  identification  of  Christ  with  us,  as 
federal  Head  of  the  race;  and  a  spiritual — this  latter  of  voluntary,  sympathetic 
oneness.  So  a  corresponding  identification  of  ourselves  with  Christ :  natural  and 
spiritual.  This  latter,  by  faith ;  the  spiritual  analogue  corresponding  with  the 
historical  fact,  or,  in  other  words,  our  voluntary  spiritual  sympathy  with  Christ's  own 
work.  (1)  As  to  guilt,  (a)  Acquiescence  in  the  condemnation :  every  mouth  stopped ; 
(6)  acquiescence  in  the  expiation :  for  me !  (2)  As  to  sin.  (a)  A  thin"  condemned 
of  God:  so  we  regard  it  henceforth,  as  bearing  a  stigma  of  evil ;  (6)  a  thing  forsworn 
by  us:  so  we  regard  it  henceforth;  perpetual  war.  Therefore  our  faith  in  Christ  not 
merely  gives  us  pardon  and  peace  with  God,  but  commits  us  to  a  stern  and  uncom- 
promising battle  with  all  that  is  opposed  to  God.  "  Yo  see  your  calling,  brethren  I  " 
Your  very  baptism  is  your  pledge  to  wage  such  warfare. 

II.  The  life.  1.  The  relation  of  the  life  of  Christ  to  Ood.  Two  elements  entering 
into  the  resurrection-life  of  Christ :  raised  by  God,  raised  as  Man.  (1)  As  to  favour 
vrith  Ood.  (o)  Divinely :  the  accepted  sacrifice ;  "  through  the  glory  of  the  Father ; " 
(6)  humanly :  from  darkness  into  light ;  "  Ought  not  Christ  to  have  sxiffered  these 


an  THte  fiPlSTLE  Oi*  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMAi^S.    [oh.  vi.  1—25. 

things,  and  to  enter  into  hia  glory  ? "  (Luke  xxiv.  26).  (2)  As  to  devotion  to  Qod. 
(a)  Divinely :  God  could  not  suffer  his  Eoly  OrCe  to  see  corruption ;  "  having  received 
of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Acts  ii.  33) ;  (6)  humanly :  "  he  liveth 
unto  God ; "  for  us.  2.  Our  relation  through  the  life  of  Christ  to  God.  Identification 
as  before — ^potential  for  all,  actual  through  faith.  (1)  As  to  favonr  with  Qod.  (a) 
Acquiescence  in  the  approval :  gratitude ;  (6)  acquiescence  in  the  joy  :  for  me !  (2; 
As  to  devotion  to  Qod.  (o)  A  life  claimed  by  Qod:  henceforth  we  bear  these  "  marks ; " 
(6)  a  life  yielded  to  God :  "  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection."  So  our  faith  in  Christ 
has  regard,  not  only  negatively  to  sin,  but  positively  to  God.  We  are  his ;  freemen 
in  Christ ;  risen  ones  I 

"  Beckon  ye  "  this  I  The  potential  fact  will  but  aggravate  our  condemnation  and  our 
woe,  if  it  be  not  actualized  through  faith.  Enter  into  spiritual  sympathy  with  the 
work  of  the  Redeemer ;  be  dead  to  the  past,  be  alive  to  all  the  glorious  future  of  an 
immortality  in  God.— T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — The  two  dominions.  A  renewed  application  of  the  subject  just 
discussed.    The  reign  of  sin  ;  the  reign  of  grace. 

I.  Thb  eeign  op  sin.  1.  The  self  yielded  to  iin.  Man's  higher  self — reason, 
conscience,  and  will — should  dominate  over  the  "soul"  and  the  "flesh,"  the  mere 
passions  and  lusta ;  man's  spirit  should  beking.  But  the  true  self  has  been  discrowned, 
and  the  lower  self — the  lusts — has  gained  the  mastery.  And  in  this  false  mastery  of 
the  flesh,  sin  reigns.  Oh,  degradation  1  we  are  led  in  chains,  and  sin  lords  it  over  us ! 
2.  2%e  memlers  yielded  to  unrighteousness.  Man's  lower  nature  should  be  the  instru- 
ment of  the  higher,  for  the  working  of  all  that  is  just  and  good.  In  Paul's  philosophy 
of  human  nature,  the  "  body  "  is  synonymous  with  all  the  active  life ;  and  is  not  the 
activity  of  our  whole  life  to  be  used  subordinately  to  the  dictates  of  the  enlightened 
will?  But  the  activity  of  life  is  yielded  to  the  usurping  power  of  sin,  instrumental  to 
unrighteousness. 

II.  The  BEiaH  of  obaob.  1.  The  self  yielded  to  Ood.  Man  is  not  an  irresponsible 
ruler  of  his  own  nature ;  his  sovereignty  is  delegated  by  God.  And  only  in  absolute 
devotion  to  God  does  he  realize  a  true  self-conquest  God  claims  again  possession  of  the 
spirit  which  has  been  torn  from  him  by  the  power  of  sin.  The  claim  is  one  of 
authority;  but  the  authority  is  the  authority  of  love.  2.  The  members  yielded  to 
righteousness.  God  requires  the  homage  of  the  heart;  he  also  requires  the  service 
of  the  life.    Only  through  the  heart  can  the  life  be  rightly  swayed.  "  Not  under  law." 

A  re^iiTBction,  and  a  resurrection-power.  Yes,  because  he  lives,  we  may  live  also  I 
But  the  appropriation  of  this  power  is  of  man:  "Present  yourselves."  Here  is  the 
marvellous  gift  of  human  freedom,  which  may  be  a  freedom  unto  death ;  but  there  is  the 
boundless  power  of  love  and  life  1    Therefore  choose  life,  that  thou  mayest  live  I — T.  F,  L. 

Vers.  15 — 23. — Servants  to  obey.  A  slight  but  suggestive  difference  between  the 
question  pf  ver.  15  and  that  with  which  the  chapter  opens.  "  Shall  we  continue 
in  sin,"  the  apostle  had  asked,  "  that  grace  may  abound  ?  "  And  he  had  flung  away 
such  a  thought  by  the  presentation  of  the  beUever'g  new  life  as  a  life  pledged  to 
God  through  Christ.  In  vers.  12 — 14  also  he  had  insisted  on  the  consistent  fulfilment 
of  the  pledge.  But  now  he  supposes  another  and  more  subtle  question — Shall  we,  not 
"  continue  "  in  sin,  but  sin,  once  and  again,  as  we  may  please,  presuming  on  the  easily 
procured  pardon  of  a  gracious  Qod?  Alas  I  how  this  question  insinuates  itself  into  the 
Christian  consciousness!  how  readily  we  condone  our  carelessness  by  thoughts  of  Tie 
restoring  mercy  of  God  1  But  we  are  grievously  wrong  if  we  think  to  om-selves  IL  at 
sin  and  obedience  may  be  played  with.  We  have  the  dread  power  to  choose  our  master; 
but  he  is  a  master,  and  our  choice  in  either  case  commits  us  to  a  course,  and  to  a 
consequence.  The  train  may  be  turned  on  to  this  line  or  that,  but  the  line  must  be 
followed,  and  the  destinations  are  wide  as  the  poles  apart.  Let  us  look  at  these  three 
thoughts — A  choice,  a  course,  a  consequence. 

I.  A  OHOIOE.  The  false  doctrine  of  law  in  the  necessarian  scheme  of  morals — so 
many  weights  upon  the  scale.  But  man's  will  is  not  a  dead  scale,  determined  by 
weights ;  it  is  a  living  thing,  and  unless  its  peculiar  life  be  taken  into  account  all 
calculations  must  be  wrong.    True,  if  we  know  the  causes,  we  can  predict  the  result. 


(TH.  VI.  1—23.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  173 

And  cei tain, teacher*  have  said — These  are  the  causes:  man's  own  susceptihle  nature, 
and  the  divers  influences  which  play  upon  it.  Therefore,  given  the  temperament  and 
the  influences,  we  can  predict  the  result.  Very  plausible.  True,  if  these  are  the  only 
Cftuses,  the  result  may  thus  he  known.  But  the  cause  of  causes  is  the  vrill  itself.  This 
is  the  great  factor  in  the  problem.  And,  after  all,  when  the  most  scientific  calculations 
have  been  made,  this  self-determining  power  in  man  may  defy  all  your  calculations  to 
predict  a  right  result.  Let  us  not  attempt  to  prove  this  freedom  by  elaborate  arguments; 
we  need  but  appeal  to  each  one's  consciousness.  "  I  know  that  I  am  free ;  I  have  power 
of  choice;  when  I  have  willed,  I  know  that  I  might  have  willed  otherwise."  This 
must  be  each  one's  true  confession.  Just  as  surely  as  we  know  that  we  exist,  by  the 
s  uTie  intuition,  which  is  deeper  and  truer  than  all  reasoning,  do  we  know  that  we  can 
yield  ourselves  to  any  one  of  all  the  manifold  motives  that  are  playing  upon  our  will. 
Dot  s  not  the  history  of  the  Fall  illustrate  this  freedom  ?  For  what  is  the  essential 
truth  of  that  history,  but  that  man  had  it  in  his  power,  either  to  obey  God  or  ito  gratify 
himself,  and  that  he  chose  .';olf-gratification  rather  than  obedience  ?  But  the  results 
were  not  by  any  means  so  transient  as  the  choice  itself  might  seem  to  be.  In  the 
highest  sense,  freedom  was  gone.  There  still  remained  freedom  of  choice  among  the 
various  obji  cts  of  self-gratifiiation,  but  there  was  no  longer  the  power  to  serve  Gud 
as  before.  A  great  gulf  was  fixed  between  man  and  God.  And  in  this  consists  what 
is  called  the  total  depravity  of  man :  totally  separated  from  God,  and  without  the 
power  to  return.  And  en  l:\in,  moreover,  to  drift  from  bad  to  worse.  But  under  the 
redeeming  influences  with  which  God  visits  the  heart  of  man,  and  more  especially 
in  view  of  the  great  redeeming  fact  with  which  God  has  visited  the  world,  this  total 
depravity  becomes  in  some  Sense  neutralized,  man's  enfeebled  will  receives  new  power, 
and  it  is  once  more  possible  for  him  to  place  his  choice  on  God.  The  freedom  of  true 
duty  is  once  more  within  his  reach ;  from  the  depths  he  may  yet  climb  back  to  God. 
So,  then,  taking  men  as  they  now  are,  and  especially  taking  them  as  we  find  them  in 
contact  with  the  redeeming  truths  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  we  see  that  each  has  his 
alternative  choice  between  godliness  and  ungodliness,  truth  and  falseness,  the  right  and 
good,  and  the  wrong  and  bad,  or,  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  between  obedience  and  .sin. 
"  Ye  yield  yourselves : "  the  supreme  fact  of  every  one's  life  is  wrapped  up  in  those 
words.  From  childhood  upwards  good  and  bad  influences  contend  for  the  mastery. 
God  and  sin  ask  for  our  service,  and  we  cannot  but  "  yield  ourselves  "  to  the  one  or  the 
Other.  We  make  our  choice,  whether  consciously  and  with  full  deliberatenes  of  purpose, 
or  well-nigh  unconsciously  and  with  careless  neglect.  We  choose  sin,  and  thereby  set 
the  seal  on  our  own  death  ;  or  we  choose  God,  and  thereby  rise  to  newness  of  life.  But 
in  either  case  our  own  choice  determines  our  course,  and  the  course  to  which  we  commit 
ourselves  works  out  its  inevitable  consequence. 

IL  A  COURSE.  Let  us  now  consider  the  course  to  which  our  choice  in  either  case 
commits  us.  1.  In  the  one  case  we  become  servants,  or  slaves,  of  sin.  Our  Lord's  words 
(John  viii.  32 — 36).  Man  may  refuse  to  bow  to  sin ;  but  when  he  does  bow,  sin  holds 
him  fast.  Nay,  he  may  yet  rise"  from  his  thraldom  and  be  free ;  but  every  yielding  is 
the  taking  on  of  a  new  chain,  and  every  continuance  in  sin  is  the  rivetting  of  the 
chain.  The  slave  of  sin?  Oh,  it  is  no  fiction!  The  man  who  yields  to  sin  is  led 
captive  by  a  master  stronger  than  himself.  So  with  the  inebriate,  the  man  of  passion, 
the  miser.  Yes  ;  dragged  in  chains.  And  yet  it  is  a  "  free  "  man,  forsooth,  who  has 
thus  sold  himself  to  serve  sin  !  2.  In  the  other  case  we  become  servants,  or  slaves,  of 
obedience.  The  same  law  works,  whatever  the  material  of  its  working.  Hence  the 
degrading  slavery  of  the  servant  of  sin  is  but  the  dark  side  of  the  result  of  thai;  same 
law  which,  in  its  brighter  results;  is  the  safeguard  and  glory  of  our  righteousness.  But 
is  not  the  result  slavery  still  ?  Ah  1  let  us  ask,  what  is  slavery  ?  Mere  service — intent, 
earnest,  unremitting  service — is  not.  Service  is  slavery  when  it  is  forced.  Contrast 
the  service  of  a  Crusader,  and  that  of  a  captive  among  the  Moors.  It  is  slavery  also 
when,  even  if  not  forced,  it  is  degrading  and  low.  Contrast  slave-trader,  and  pure, 
virtuous  man  enthralled.  So  Bpictetus.  The  service  of  sin,  then,  is  slavery  because 
it  is  degrading  and  base;  whereas,  to  yield  obedience  to  God,  and  thenceforth  to  serve 
him  with  unremitting  ardour  and  with  the  enthusiasm  of  lolty  joy,  that  is  not  slavery, 
that  is  freedom  of  the  highest  kind  (so  John  viii.  36).  Yesj  this  the  secret  of  Ubfrty; 
t|i9  "  spirit  ol- a  soil  "  (Gal.  iy.  6,  7). 


174  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,     [oh.  vi.  1—23. 

III.  A  CONSEQUBNCB.  But  DOW  let  US  Consider  the  consequence  to  which  such  a 
course  of  conduct  in  eithei'  case  must  lead.  1.  "  Sin  unto  death."  Yes,  towards  this 
inevitable  result  the  service  of  sin  must  tend.  A  fixity  of  corrupt  character.  Eecovery 
of  freedom  possible  now ;  not  always.  Death — the  death  of  man's  best  nature, — this 
the  doom  which  the  service  of  sin  ensures.  The  victims  of  Circe :  so  the  slaves  of  sin. 
But  no  wizardry  can  undo  that  death !  2.  "  Ohedience  unto  righteousness''  A  fixity 
again.  This  the  process  of  all  true  moral  life.  So  was  it  to  have  been  with  the  first 
man ;  so  was  it  vidth  the  second  ("  yet  learned  he  obedience  ").  So,  doubtless,  with  the 
angels.  And  so  with  us :  we  are  fighting  towards  the  crown  which  Paul  desired  (Phil. 
iii.  12;  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8),  the  crown  of  a  consummate  righteousness,  or,  in  other  words 
(Rev.  ii.  10),  "  the  crown  of  life."  Such  the  two  consequences  of  the  two  courses,  to 
one  or  other  of  which  each  man,  by  his  free  choice,  commits  himself.  But  whereas 
death  is  the  wages  of  sin,  the  eternal  life  is  God's  free  gift. 

And  to  all  of  us,  in  words  of  hope,  the  voice  from  heaven  says,  "  Fight  the  good  fight 
of  faith ;  lay  hold  on  eternal  life  I "— T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  3,  4. — The  significance  of  baptism.  To  suppose  that  the  acceptance  of  the 
grace  of  God  in  Christ  renders  us  careless  about  the  further  committal  of  sin  is  to  mis- 
apprehend the  nature  of  redemption.  We  cannot  dissociate  the  external  results  of 
Christ's  work  from  a  consideration  of  its  inward  effects  upon  the  mind  and  heart  of  the 
man  who  profits  by  it.  For  a  practical  refutation  of  the  supposition,  the  apostle  points 
to  the  acknowledged  meaning  of  the  ceremony  wherein  each  believer  indicates  his  close 
relationship  to  the  Saviour. 

I.  Baptism  the  symbol  of  an  altered  lifb.  What  can  more  forcibly  set  forth 
an  abandonment  of  former  feelings  and  behaviour  than  being  "  dead  and  buried "  ? 
The  allusion  here  to  immersion  is  questioned  by  none,  and  a  water  grave  speaks  elo- 
quently of  a  changed  attitude  to  sin  and  the  world.  We  are  so  constituted  that  this 
appeal  to  the  senses  powerfully  impresses  both  the  actual  participator  in  the  act  and 
the  spectators  of  the  living  picture. 

II.  A  SYMBOL  or  COMPLETE  FELLOWSHIP  WITH  Chbist.  The  follower  of  Christ 
repeats  in  his  inward  experience  the  death,  the  burial,  and  the  resurrection  of  Christ. 
These  were  necessitated  by  the  presence  and  enormity  of  sin,  and  to  "put  on  Christ" 
as  our  Redeemer  is  to  adopt  his  crucifixion  and  subsequent  triumph  as  our  expression 
of  hatred  against  all  that  perverts  the  moral  order  of  the  world.  To  be  immersed  into 
thu  death  of  Christ  is  to  be  completely  surrendered  to  the  claims  of  the  Son  of  God, 
and  to  share  his  hostility  to  evil,  rejoicing  in  his  conquest  over  death  and  the  grave, 
and  the  adversary  of  mankind.  By  compliance  with  hii  commandment  does  the  dis- 
ciple signify  his  entire  dedication  to  his  Master's  service. 

III.  Characteristics  op  this  new  life.  Emerging  from  the  burial,  the  candi- 
date rises  with  Christ  as  his  Example  and  Companion.  His  is  to  be  an  active  life,  "  a 
walk,"  not  a  dreamy  repose  of  self-absorption  into  the  bliss  of  Nirvana.  The  contrast 
to  the  old  career  was  exemplified  in  the  resurrection  gladness  and  glory  of  the  Lord. 
No  more  was  sin  to  exert  its  baleful  influence;  the  body  of  the  risen  Lord  no  longer 
could  be  tortured  with  hunger  and  thirst  and  suffering.  The  Saviour  was  limited  no 
longer  by  material  barriers ;  he  was  endowed  with  full  authority  from  on  high,  and 
crowned  with  ever-increasing  splendour.  When  the  Apostle  Paul  saw  his  Lord,  the 
brightness  excelled  the  noonday  sun.  These  triumphs  are  in  their  degree  repeated  in 
the  spiritual  life  of  the  baptized  believer.  He  casts  off  the  works  of  darkness  and  puts 
on  the  armour  of  light.  He  keeps  his  body  under,  so  that  the  spirit  rules.  The  voice 
from  heaven  proclaims  him  God's  beloved  son.  Instead  of  anguish  there  is  peace  and 
joy.  He  sits  in  heavenly  places,  and  God  causeth  him  always  to  triumph  in  Christ 
Jesus.  Such  is  the  ideal  life  of  fellowship  with  Christ  iu  his  resurrection,  shadowed 
forth  by  the  ascent  from  the  baptismal  waters. — S.  R.  A. 

Ter.  19.— Not  masters,  but  servants.  The  knowledge  of  a  truth  is  not  synonymous 
with  its  practical  recognition  in  our  daily  life.  "  Know  ye  not  ?  "  calls  plain  attention  to 
the  consequences  of  behaviotir.  It  is  the  business  of  Scripture  and  preaching  to  emphasizi 
the  importance  of  our  personal  acts.  We  are  not  really  masters  in  any  condition.  The 
curbed  or  uncurbed  stee4  of  our  desires  is  working  in  some  service,  be  it  of  sin  or  of  God. 


OH.  VI.  1—23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS.  176 

I.  The  alteenative.  We  yield  to  the  motions  either  of  "  sin  unto  death  "  or  of 
"obedience  unto  righteousness."  No  middle  course  is  possible.  Though  the  notorious 
transgressor  may  do  a  kind  action,  and  the  distinguished  saint  disappointingly  err,  yet 
the  distinction  is  real.  Characters  are  only  of  two  sorts ;  they  verge  to  good  or  evil. 
It  is  not  for  others,  but  ourselves,  to  estimate  our  position  and  tendency.  Men  are 
deluded  by  the  imaginary  difBoulty  of  drawing  a  boundary-line  because  of  the  way  ia 
which  apparently  the  good  shades  off  into  evil.  In  the  one  service  or  the  other  we  are 
actually  enlisted. 

II.  The  freedom  of  choice.  There  is  the  option  of  the  two  careers ;  we  are  not 
compelled  to  either.  Motives,  longings,  circumstances,  do  not  amount  to  constraint. 
The  apostle  pictures  men  as  voluntarily  yielding  themselves,  presenting  themselves  to 
the  chosen  employer.  This  does  not  mean  that  men  willingly  elect  sin  as  such.  The 
moral  bent,  the  image  of  God,  is  shown  in  their  use  of  terms  to  hide  the  viciousness  of 
actions ;  "  a  gay  life  "  instead  of  debauchery ;  "  embellishing  a  story  "  instead  of  a  per- 
version of  the  truth.  Milton  describes  sin  as  leaping  from  the  head  of  the  arch-fiend, 
a  form  that  struck  the  rebel  host  at  first  with  horror,  "  but  familiar  grown  she  pleased." 
That  is  the  death  of  the  soul  when  evil  is  deliberately  selected :  "  Evil,  be  thou  my 
good."  And  the  freedom  of  choice  does  not  imply  the  absence  of  obligations  to  serve 
God.    To  delay  is  to  adhere  to  sin. 

III.  The  service  of  sin  a  dibobedienoe  to  God.  The  statement  of  the  alter- 
native, by  its  sharp  antithesis  of  "  sin  "  and  "  obedience,"  indicates  the  essential  nature 
of  sin.  Disobedience  is  the  wanting  our  own  way  in  opposition  to  some  command  oi 
a  rightful  authority.  God's  government  being  moral,  to  elect  a  course  of  life  which 
violates  his  laws  is  to  give  one's  self  to  the  service  of  God's  enemy.  As  compliance 
with  some-  small  order  evinces  the  loyalty  of  the  soldiers ;  so  with  us,  like  our  first 
parents,  it  may  be  a  so-called  trilling  matt-er  which  tests  our  disposition.  To  sin  is  to 
disobey  a  physical,  moral,  or  religious  commandment,  and  this  transgression  is  not 
merely  an  individual  concern ;  it  affects  the  Euler  of  the  universe.  Treason  is  the 
worst  crime  against  the  state,  and  no  man  can  be  allowed  to  become  a  centre  of  infec- 
tion to  the  body  politic.  The  disobedience  may  be  in  thought,  affection,  or  will,  apart 
from  any  outward  act.  Human  laws  can  rarely  take  note  of  the  inner  man ;  but  it  is 
the  perfection  of  Divine  laws  to  regard  the  heart  of  the  agent. 

IV.  The  happt  result  of  obedience.  Obedience  to  "  the  highest  we  know  "  is 
justified  by  its  consequences,  "righteousness  "  and  "  life."  Men  are  often  afraid  lest, 
by  keeping  the  commandments,  they  may  be  debarred  from  gain  and  enjoyment ;  yet 
is  it  obedience  which  augments  true  power  and  satisfaction.  The  laws  of  God  were 
framed  and  written  upon  the  heart  of  man  to  secure  his  well-being ;  to  break  them  is 
to  mar  the  working  of  the  beautiful  machine.  If  conscience  warn  you  of  danger,  only 
folly  will  silence  the  monitory  voice  and  darken  the  beacon-light.  Note  the  work  of 
Christ  in  removing  hard  thoughts  of  tlie  Lawgiver,  and  exhibiting  the  beauty  of  a 
blamelessly  obedient  life.  He  manifested  the  goal  of  obedience  to  bo  peace,  joy, 
triumph.  Our  obedience  is  not  the  life  of  despotism,  where  to  reason  is  illegal ;  nor  of 
slavery,  where  is  work  without  a  recompense ;  nor  of  penance,  where  merit  is  sought  by 
righteous  deeds  as  a  title  to  heaven;  but  Christian  obedience  is  rendered  as  the  joyoua 
intelligent  outcome  of  salvation  through  Christ,  bringing  ua  righteousness  and  life. 
Persevering  obedience  begets  a  habit  of  virtue,  and  surrounds  us  with  a  holy  environ- 
ment, wherein  it  is  easier  to  do  right  than  wrong.  Conscience  as  the  approving  faculty 
ministers  constant  delight.  This,  at  Itast,  is  the  ideal,  to  which  we  may  increasingly 
conform.     Compare  the  lines,  spoken  by  Adam  to  Michael,  in  the  '  Paradise  Lost' — 

"  Henceforth  I  learn  that  to  obey  is  best, 
And  love,  with  fear,  the  only  God,"  etc. ; 

and  the  angel's  reply — 

"This  having  learut,  thou  hast  attained  the  lum 
Of  wisdom :  hope  no  higher,"  etc. 

S.B.  A, 

Ver.  17. — The  gospel  a  mould  of  obedience.  Some  memories  are  best  forgotten,  like 
s  horrid  dream.    Not  so  the  Ohrigtiaji's  recollection  of  his  copversion.    As  the  Cori^- 


176  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.     [en.  vi.  1—23. 

thiang  were  reminded  of  their  previous  wretched  career — "  such  were  some  of  you  " — so 
here  the  Eomans.  In  reading  the  Authorized  Version  stress  must  he  laid  on  the  past 
tense,  "  were ; "  then  it  suggests  the  clearer  translation  of  the  Eevised  edition. 

I.  The  FORMEn  slavebt.  Absolute  freedom  is  impossible  to  man,  who  is  sur- 
rounded by  higher  powers,  and  has  a  Divine  law  impressed  on  his  nature.  The  head- 
strong youth  is  really  in  bondage  to  sin ;  and  the  recluse  in  his  solitude,  whilst  free 
from  some  of  the  restrictions  of  civilization,  yet  deprives  himself  of  some  advantages, 
and  thereby  imposes  on  himself  certain  limits.  The  description  of  sin  as  bond-service 
is  just  when  we  think  of  the  manner  in  which  men  are  worn  out  by  vice.  The  silken 
cords  of  pleasure  become  adamantine  bonds.  The  man  who  delavs  to  reform  his  life 
becomes  a  prisoner,  unable  to  turn  the  key  in  the  rusty  lock.  Dislike  of  the  epithet, 
"  servauts  of  sin,"  must  not  blind  us  to  its  accuracy,  in  spite  of  the  euphemistic  terms 
which  would  hide  the  flagrancy  of  our  transgressions.  Without  supposing  that  sta- 
tistics of  the  members  of  Churches  accurately  embrace  all  servants  of  righteousness, 
the  condition  of  slavery  is  all  too  common,  even  in  Christian  England.  Press  home 
this  fact,  and  remember  that  the  great  question  is  not  whether  we  can  fix  the  date  and 
enumerate  the  details  of  otxr  conversion,  but  whether  we  are  conscious  of  a  renewed 
heart  and  life. 

II.  The  new  behvioe.  The  text  speaks  of  a  changed  state  of  obedience  to  Ood  and 
adoption  of  righteousness — a  state  sanctioned  by  conscience,  ratified  by  the  judgment, 
pleasing  to  the  Almighty,  and  every  way  beneficial  to  ourselves  and  others.  Its  cause 
is  the  new  teaching  concerning  Jesus  Christ.  The  tense  is  definite ;  these  Christians 
had  received  the  doctrine  and  embraced  it  gladly.  Perhaps  the  good  news  is  to-dny 
too  much  encumbered  with  technical  phraseology,  or,  having  been  frequently  listened 
to  from  infancy,  fails  to  excite  in  us  the  glad  wonder  which  it  evoked  when  fresh  to  the 
ear.  To  the  Bomaus  it  brought  tidings  of  the  abrogation  of  the  Sinaitio  Law  as  a 
covenant  of  life ;  it  told  of  the  one  perfect  Offering  whereby  those  that  believe  are 
sanctified;  it  spoke  of  the  all-providing  love  of  the  Father  for  his  erring  children. 
The  gospel  comes  as  a  law  to  be  obeyed,  but  supplies  adequate  motives  and  spiritual 
power  for  its  Tulfilment.  The  code  is  discipleship  to  Christ,  hearkening  to  his  preaching 
and  copying  his  life.  This  doctrine  is  represented  in  the  text  as  "a  mould"  into 
which  the  life  of  the  obedient  is  cast,  imparting  to  them  a  righteous  form — •  likeness  to 
their  teacher — Christ.  And  in  hearty  obedience  true  freedom  is  realized.  The  father, 
toiling  home  laden  with  gifts  for  his  children,  does  not  look  upon  his  load  as  a  wearisome 
burden.  The  mother,  with  her  fresh  responsibilities  and  cares,  delights  in  the  maternal 
yoke.  Love  alters  the  bias,  oils  the  wheels  of  duty.  Christ  has  won  the  hearts  of  his 
people,  and  to  serve  him  is  an  honour  and  a  joy.  He  strikes  off  the  shackles  of  sin, 
and  we  welcome  the  golden  chains  of  righteous  obedience.  We  do  not  deny  that  sin 
has  its  pleasures ;  but,  in  comparison  with  the  sense  of  purity  and  elevation  which  the 
service  of  Christ  furnishes,  there  is  the  difference  between  the  hot,  stifling  atmosphere 
of  the  music-hall  and  the  sweet  bracing  air  of  the  mountain-top. 

III.  The  THANKsaiviKo  fob  tub  dblivkranob.  None  could  think  that  the  render- 
ing of  the  Authorized  Version  implied  Paul's  delight  at  the  former  unrighteousness ;  but 
the  Revised  rendering  is  less  ambiguous  to  the  hurried  reader.  The  phrase,  "  thank 
God,"  used  to  be  a  stock  insertion  in  ordinary  letters.  Here  it  is  no  unmeaning  ascrip- 
tion, filling  up  the  interstices  of  speech,  but  a  devout  acknowledgment  of  sincere 
gratitude  to  him  who  instituted  the  gracious  plan  of  salvation,  giving  up  his  beloved 
Son,  and  by  his  Spirit  opens  the  hearts  of  an  audience  to  attend  to  the  messa>;e  of 
everlasting  life.  It  is  the  outpouring  of  the  heart  for  the  safety  and  honourable  oliedl- 
ence  of  fellow-Christians.  A  pastor  may  offer  it  for  his  flock,  a  teacher  for  her  scholars. 
Give  glory  to  God  1  thank  him  with  lip  and  life,  by  seeking  to  understand  and  obey 
the  statutes  and  principles  of  the  Word  of  truth,  »nd  by  leading  others  to  know  the  joyi 
of  redemptive  obedience. — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  23. — Oovet  the  best  gift  I  Contrast  heightens  effect,  as  artists  by  a  dark  back- 
ground throw  the  foreground  into  brighter  relief.  So  the  apostle  places  two  careers  in 
close  proximity.  He  will  not  allow  that  it  makes  little  difference  which  path  men  tread, 
'n  which  condition  they  are  found,  or  what  qualifications  they  seek. 

I,  A  MOMENTOUS  blessino.    "  Bterij£>l  life,"    All  life  is  wonderfuj.    Easy  is  1^  49 


OH.vr.  1— 23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  Ill 

destroy  the  ephemeral  life  of  a  moth,  but  to  restore  it  is  beyond  human  skill.  The  dis- 
ciples were  assured  of  eternal  life,  yet  they  died ;  consequently  the  life  they  received 
was  not  to  be  measured  in  ordinary  scales,  nor  to  be  probed  by  a  material  dissecting 
kuife.  Eternal  life  is  a  different  kind  of  life  from  mere  transitory  existence ;  it  passes 
unharmed  through  the  crucible  of  animal  death,  for  spiritual  powers  are  untouched  by 
earthly  decay  and  corruption.  Eternal  life  means  the  quickening  of  the  moral  nature, 
its  resuscitation  from  the  sleep  of  trespasses  and  sins.  And  as  ordinary  life  in  its 
fulness  involves  freedom  from  pain  and  sickness,  and  a  vigorous  activity,  so  spiritual 
life,  when  fully  realized,  implies  peace  of  mind  and  the  power  to  do  right.  They  are 
feeble  Christians  who  do  not  know  the  joyous  energy  of  children  "  with  quicksilver  in 
their  veins,"  delighting  to  exercise  their  limbs  and  thus  to  develop  their  growing 
faculties. 

IL  This  blbssino  beobivbd  as  a  gift.  By  a  sinful  course  of  action  we  merit 
death,  as  a  soldier  by  his  service  earns  his  rations  and  his  pay.  We  disobey  tlie 
Law,  and  bring  the  sentence  upon  ourselves.  But  we  have  no  power  available  to  procu  re 
for  ourselves  acquittal  and  favour.  Much  as  the  youth  joys  to  see  bis  first-earned 
sovereign  glittering  in  his  palm,  he  could  take  no  delight  in  the  stripes  which  his 
disobedience  brings  upon  him.  Human  weakness  has  been  provided  for  in  God's  jjlan 
of  salvation.  He  who  breathed  natural  life  into  man  comes  again  graciously  to  ins; 'ire 
his  creatures  with  spiritual  life.  God  knows  the  needs  of  his  creatures,  and  the  gift 
is  pre-eminently  suitable.  The  Romans  loved  the  games  of  the  amphitheatre ;  but 
when  famine  threatened  the  city,  the  curses  were  loud  and  deep  against  Nero 
because  the  Alexandrian  ships  expected  with  corn  arrived  instead  with  sand  for  the 
arena.  And  men  like  a  beautiful  present;  let  us  not,  therefore,  hang  back  from 
accepting  the  royal  bounty  so  adapted  to  our  wants.  Treat  the  gift  with  care,  prize 
and  use  the  treasure. 

III.  The  Beabee  of  thb  airr.  It  comes  "  through  Jesus  Christ  our.  Lord."  He 
is  the  Channel  through  which  new  life  streams  into  us,  the  envelope  containing;  the 
promise  of  life.  Life  in  the  abstract  we  cannot  comprehend ;  it  is  ever  connected  with 
some  person  or  organism.  "  In  him  was  life ; "  "  Your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God." 
Life  has  been  scientifically  declared  to  consist  in  the  harmonizing  of  our  external  and 
internal  comlitions.  The  chief  condition  on  our  part  is  sinfulness,  on  God's  part 
righteousness ;  and  it  is  Christ  who  reconciles  us  unto  God,  putting  away  sin  by  the 
cross,  and  investing  us  with  the  righteousness  of  the  Holy  One.  In  his  words,  example, 
and  offices  we  find  all  help  and  blessedness.  As  the  navigator  passing  through  the 
Straits  of  Magellan  into  the  Pacific  connected  its  tranquillity  with  the  southern  cross 
gleaming  in  the  sky  above,  so  can  we  rejoice  in  the  peace  which  Christ  brings.  It  is 
not  a  creed  we  are  invited  to  accept,  but  a  living  Person,  with  whom  we  may  hold 
converse,  and  be  instructed  in  perplexity  and  cheered  when  despondent.  We  have  this 
earthly  life  as  the  period  and  opportunity  of  "  laying  hold  on  eternal  life." — S.  E.  A. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Justification  securing  sanctification.  St.  Paul  has  been  speaking  in 
the  previous  paragraph  of  "  grace  abounding,"  and  a  very  natural  insinuation  might 
he  made  that  continuance,  permanent  abiding,  in  sin  would  be  the  condition  of  tiie 
most  abounding  grace.  If,  therefore,  our  pardon  and  acceptance  are  secured  through 
Christ's  obedience  unto  death,  what  motive  can  the  justified  have  in  warring  with  sin  ? 
Why  not  sin  up  to  our  bent,  that  grace  may  abound  ?  It  is  this  immoral  insinuation 
that  the  apostle  combats,  and  combats  successfully,  in  the  present  section.  He  docs 
BO  by  bringing  out  the  full  significance  of  Christ's  death  to  the  believer.  Now,  tha 
l)eculiar  beauty  of  our  Lord's  history  lies  in  this,  that,  as  Pascal  long  ago  pointed  out, 
it  may  have,  and  is  intended  to  have,  its  reproduction  in  the  experience  of  the  soul, 
The  salient  facts  of  Christ's  history — for  example,  his  death,  burial,  and  resurrection — • 
get  copied  into  the  expeiience  of  the  regenerate!  soul.  The  apostle  had  experienced 
this  himself.  At  Damascus  he  had  experienced  (1)  a  burial  of  the  past ;  (2)  a  resur- 
rection into  a  new  life;  (3)  a  walking  in  newness  of  life.'  This  he  believes  to  be  the 
normal  experience  of  the  believer  in  Jesus.  Let  us  see  how  these  facts  of  Christ's 
history,  death,  burial,  and  resurrection,  get  duplicated  in  our  experience. 

I.   OUB   BAPTISM   INTO   ChBIST   IMPLIES   A    BAPTISM  INTO    HIB  DEATH.        The    apOStle 

1  Of.  Eougbmonfs  'La  Vie  Humaine,'  pp.  88—93. 


178  THE  EPISTLE  OF   PAUL  TO  THE   EOMANS.     [oh.  vi.  1—23. 

speaks  to  the  baptized  Boman  Christians  in  these  terms :  "  Are  ye  ignorant  that  all 
we  who  were  baptized  into  Christ  Jesus  were  baptized  into  his  death?  We  were 
buried  therefore  with  him  through  baptism  into  death "  (Revised  Version).  What 
we  have  got  first  to  determine  here  is  the  exact  meaning  of  being  baptized  in  or  into 
the  name  of  a  Person.  In  a  remarkable  essay  on  '  Baptism  and  the  Third  Command- 
ment,' a  thoughtful  writer  says,  "  There  is  an  evident  connection  between  these  two. 
We  are  baptized  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  our  God.  And  that  is  the  Name  which  we 
are  commanded  not  to  take  in  vain.  ...  It  is  to  tell  that  we  are  the  Lord's,  claimed 
by  him  for  his  service,  called  to  be  followers  of  him  'as  dear  children'  (Eph.  v.  1). 
This  is  the  real  meaning  of  a  phrase,  much  used  but  little  reflected  on — a  Christian 
name.  Such  are  the  names,  John,  James,  Thomas,  among  men ;  Jane,  Mary,  Elizabeth, 
among  women.  They  tell  that  the  bearers  belong  to  Christ.  We  have  two  names. 
The  latter  of  these,  our  surname,  distinguishes  us  as  the  children  of  our  earthly  father ; 
the  former  avouches  us  as  the  children  of  a  Father  in  heaven.  And  let  us  mark  weU 
what  comes  out  of  this  solemn  verity.  If  we  have  upon  us  the  name  of  the  God  of 
gentleness  while  we  ourselves  are  men  of  strife,  or  the  name  of  the  God  of  purity  while 
our  own  lives  are  impure,  or  the  name  of  the  God  of  truth  while  we  are  given  to 
lying,  we  are  taking  that  name  in  vain."  '  Following  ont  this  clue,  let  us  notice  that 
baptism  into  Christ  implies  a  baptism  into  his  death.  For  Jesus  "died  onto  sin 
once ;  "  "  he  died  for  the  ungodly ; ""  he  died  for  us ; "  that  is,  he  passed  through  the 
experience  of  crucifixion  to  save  the  lost.  Now,  the  counterpart  of  this  death  for  sin 
is  found  in  us  if  we  believe  upon  him.  We  realize  that  we  have  died  in  him  imto  or 
for  sin.  "  If  One  died  for  all,  then  all  died  "  (2  Cor.  v.  14).  Accordingly,  we  are  to 
*'  reckon  ourselves  to  be  dead"  in  Jesus  Christ "  unto  sin."  Coleridge  has  rightly  remarked, 
in  his  '  Literary  Bem^ns,'  that "  in  the  imagination  of  man  exist  the  seeds  of  all  moral 
and  scientific  improvement ; "  and  it  is  by  placing  ourselves  imaginatively  on  the  cross 
with  Christ,  and  realizing  in  his  atoning  sacrifice  our  death  for  sin,  that  we  come  to 
appreciate  our  individual  justification  before  God.  We  are  thus  baptized  into  his 
death, 

II.   OUB   BAPTIBM    INTO  DEATH    IMPLIES  A   BURIAL    WITH   JeSUB.       For    OUr  blcSScd 

Lord  not  only  died  upon  the  cross ;  he  was  also  buried  in  the  tomb.  Friends  begged 
the  body,  took  it  down  tenderly  from  the  accursed  tree,  wrapped  it  in  spices,  and  laid 
jt  in  Joseph's  well-known  sepulchre.  Now,  in  burial  one  thought  overpowers  all  others ; 
it  is  the  putting  of  the  dead  out  of  sight,  out  of  all  relation  to  the  struggling  world 
around.    As  long  as  a  man's  body  remains  in  the  tomb 

"He  has  no  share  in  aU  thafs  done 
Beneath  the  circuit  of  the  sun." 

Such  •  separation  took  place  through  burial  between  the  once-living  Christ  and  the 
bustling  world.  The  throngs  might  seethe  around  the  temple  court  and  settle  down 
to  ijelfishness  again,  but  the  Master-spirit  who  had  been  among  them  is  now  withdrawn, 
and  sleeping  for  a  season  in  his  tomb.  Now,  the  apostle  implies  in  this  passage  that 
a  similar  sharp  separation  is  experienced  by  the  truly  Christian  soul  from  the  world. 
In  casting  in  bis  lot  with  Christ,  he  is  buried  out  of  sight,  so  to  speak,  and  becomes 
a  stranger  in  the  world.  His  reception  by  baptism  into  the  Christian  community 
implies  his  withdrawal  from  the  previous  worldly  relations  in  which  he  stood  to  other 
men.  And  here  it  is  only  right  to  guard  against  the  superficial  use  made  of  the  burial 
reference,  as  if  it  implied  a  mode  in  baptism.  "  This  word  (o-uMTrf^jj^a/), '  we  were 
entombed,'  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  many  commentators,"  says  Dr.  Shedd,  "  has  no 
reference  to  the  rite  of  baptism,  because  the  burial  spoken  of  is  not  in  water,  but  in 
a  sepulchre.  .  .  .  Burial  and  baptism  are  totally  diverse  ideas,  and  have  nothing  in 
common.  In  order  to  baptism,  the  element  of  water  must  come  into  contact  with  the 
body  baptized ;  but  in  a  burial,  the  surrounding  element  of  earth  comes  into  no  contact 
at  all  with  the  body  buried.  The  corpse  is  carefully  protected  from  the  earth  in  which 
it  is  laid.  Entombment,  consequently,  is  not  the  emblem  of  baptism,  but  of  death." 
Consequently,  the  idea  of  the  apostle  is  that  we  are  spiritually  separated  from  the  world 
by  our  reception  into  the  Christian  community  by  baptism,  just  as  Jesus  was  physically 

>  Taif  I  '  Thoughts  for  the  Tbonghtful  on  the  Blessed  God,  ai^d  en  Christ  and  Chri9> 
tianity,'  pp.  186—195, 


CH.  VI.  1—23.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  178 

separated  through  his  burial  in  the  tomb.  Godet,  in  a  note  to  his  comment  upon  this 
passage,  gives  a  beautiful  illustration  of  the  truth  from  what  a  Bechiiana  convert  said 
to  the  misBionary  Casalis  some  years  ago.  The  convert  was  a  shi  pherd,  and  thus 
expressed  himself:  "Very  soon  I  shall  be  dead,  and  they  will  bury  me  in  my  field. 
My  sheep  will  come  and  pasture  above  me.  But  I  shall  no  more  atttnil  to  them,  nor 
SO  out  of  my  tomb  to  seize  them  and  carry  them  back  with  me  inco  the  sepulchre. 
They  will  be  strange  to  me  and  I  to  them.  Behold  the  image  of  my  life  in  the  midst 
of  the  world,  from  the  time  that  I  have  believed  in  Christ."  The  idea,  therefore,  is 
that  by  our  baptism,  i.e.  by  our  union  with  the  Christian  Church,  we  are  buried  out 
of'the  world.  The  Church  proves,  so  to  speak,  the  cemetery  where,  in  holy  peace  and 
blissful  fellowship,  God's  people  rest.  And  so,  as  we  manfully  throw  in  our  lot  with 
Christ,  wo  pass  into  the  grave-lilje  peace  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  enjoy  therein 
fellowship  with  Christ  and  his  peaceful  people.  It  is  to  this  burial  out  of  the  world 
and  into  the  kingdom  of  God  we  are  called. 

III.  Along  with  this  death  and  bubial  with  Christ  thebb  ib  bxpeiubnoed 
A  OBUCiPixiON  OP  OUB  OLD  NATUBB.  Historically  the  crucifixion  precedes  the  death, 
but  experimentally  we  shall  find  that,  as  the  apostle  here  puts  it,  it  succeeds  it  (ver.  6). 
It  is  when  we  have  realized  our  death  in  Jesus  for  sin,  and  our  burial  with  Jesus  out 
of  the  world,  that  the  crucifixion  and  mortification  of  our  old  nature  begin.  A  counter- 
part of  the  crucifixion  is  realized  within  us.  The  "  body  of  sin,"  elsewhere  called  "  the 
flesh"  (o-rfpf), must  be  destroyed,  and  we  nail  it  to  the  cross,  so  to  speak,  with  as  much 
alacrity  as  the  Roman  soldiers  crucified  Christ.  We  "  crucify  the  flesh  with  the 
affections  and  lusts ; "  we  "  mortify  our  members  which  are  upon  the  earth  "  (Gal.  v. 
24 ;  Col.  iii.  5).  We  feel  that  "  our  old  mau  "  is  incapable  of  amendment ;  that  the 
only  way  in  which  to  Improve  him  is  to  improve  him  off'  the  face  of  the  earth  and  out 
of  existence.  This  is,  consequently,  the  steady  effort  of  the  regenerate  soul  to  kill,  by 
patient  crucifixion,  the  old  nature  within.  As  the  Saviour  was  several  hours  on  the 
cross,  as  crucifixion,  though  in  his  case  comparatively  speedy,  is  yet  a  tardy  ordeal,  not 
6  momentary  execution;  so  the  death  of  our  old  nature  takes  time  for  its  accomplish- 
ment, and  must  be  patiently  passed  through.  We  must  be  crucified  with  Christ,  as 
well  as  feel  that  we  have  died  in  Christ  for  sin  (Gal.  ii.  20). 

IV.  OUB   BUEIAL    WITH   JeSXJB   IS    WITH   A   VIEW   TO    OUR   EESDRRECTION    WITH   HIM 

INTO  NEWNESS  OP  LiPE.  After  death  and  burial  there  came  to  Jesus,  as  the  Father's 
glorious  gift,  resurrection  to  a  new  life.  Let  us  consider  what  resurrection  as  an 
experience  brought  to  Jesus.  From  the  cradle  to  the  cross  Christ  had  been  the  "  Man 
of  sorrows."  The  weary  weight  of  all  this  sinful,  sorrow-stricken  world  lay  on  him  ; 
the  Father  had  laid  on  his  strong  and  willing  shoulders  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  It  was 
not  wonderful,  then,  that  his  life  was  one  long  burden,  taking  end  only  on  the  cross. 
But  the  first  glimiise  we  get  of  the  risen  Saviour  conveys  the  notion  of  sturdy,  stalwart 
strength,  for  the  Magdalene  mistakes  him  for  the  gardener.  And  all  that  we  can  gather 
from  subsequent  interviews  with  his  disciples  goes  to  show  that  life  has  ceased  to  be 
the  burden  it  was  once,  and  is  now  free,  joyous,  triumphant.  All  sense  of  sin-bearing 
is  gone  like  a  dream  of  the  night ;  he  is  out  in  the  glad  morning  of  the  resurrection 
with  everlasting  joy  upon  his  head.  Now,  such  a  joyful  experience  should  be  the 
possession  of  every  regenerate  soul..  We  should  feel  not  only  that  guilt  is  cancelled 
through  the  death  of  Jesus  for  us,  and  that  we  are  "accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  but 
also  that  a  new  life  is  ours — a  life  of  fellowship  with  God.  For  judt  as  Jesus  during 
"  the  great  forty  days  "  was  more  in  the  unsien  with  the  Father  than  in  the  seen  with 
the  disciples,  so  in  our  new  life  we  shall  largely  cultivate  fellowship  with  the  Father. 

V.  The  new  life  we  lead  will  be  like  oub  Lord's,  one  of  entire  consbcea- 
TioN  to  God.  Now,  of  the  risen  Saviour  it  may  well  be  said  tliat  he  lived  unto  God. 
All  his  faculties  and  powers  were  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God.  So  it  is  in 
the  Christian  life.  It  is  one  of  entire  consecration.  In  this  way  it  will  be  seen  that 
justification  leads  necessarily  to  sanctification.  The  leading  facts  of  our  Lord's  history 
get  duplicated  in  our  experience,  and  death,  burial,  resurrection,  and  consecration 
become  ours. — B.  M.  E. 

Vers,  12 — 23. — 2%e  reign  of  grace.  We  saw  in  last  section  how  the  leading  facts  of 
OUT  Lord's  life  get  copied  into  the  experience  of  the  regenerate ;  bo  ths^t  we  have  a  death, 


180  THE  EPISTLE  OP   PAUL  TO  THE  KOMANS.    [oh.  vi.  1—23. 

ali<i  burial,  and  crucifixion,  and  resurrection,  and  new  life  along  with  Christ.  Sanctifica* 
tion  in  this  way  naturally  issues  out  of  justification.*  The  apostle  consequently  proceed! 
to  show  that  the  dominion  of  sin  is  broken  by  the  same  means  as  the  removiU  of  our 
condemnation,  viz.  by  outlook  to  Jesus.  We  find  ourselves  to  be  no  longer  under  law 
as  a  condemoing  power,  but  under  a  reign  of  grace.  But  if  we  are  under  a  reign  of 
grace,  and  not  under  a  condemning  law,  might  we  not  be  tempted  to  think  lightly  of 
sin ;  nay,  more,  to  sin  that  grace  may  abound  ?  To  meet  this  objection,  the  apostle 
discusses  the  reign  of  sin,  and  contrasts  it  with  the  reign  of  grace.  Sin  may  be  our 
master,  but  as  the  slave  of  sin  we  shall  get  rewarded  in  shame  and  death ;  or  righteous- 
ness, that  is,  the  Q-od  of  grace  himself  may  be  our  Master,  and,  as  the  slave  of 
righteousness  or  slave  of  God,  we  shall  have  our  reward — ^a  reward  of  grace,  in  the 
development  of  holiness,  and  in  the  gift  of  eternal  life.  We  cannot  do  better,  then, 
than  contrast  the  reign  of  sin  with  the  reign  of  grace. 

I.  The  bbign  of  sin.  (Vers.  12, 13,  21.)  And  in  this  connection  let  us  notice : 
1.  Sin  is  a  very  exacting  tyrant.  In  fact,  when  we  become  slaves  of  sin,  we  cease 
being  our  own  masters.  We  lose  the  dignity  of  our  nature ;  we  lose  self-command ; 
we  lose  will-power  and  decision  of  character.  Our  bodies  become  the  instruments  of 
unrighteousness,  and  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  are  obeyed.  The  prodigal  in  the  parable 
presents  vividly  the  condition  of  one  under  the  tyranny  of  sin  (Luke  xv.  11 — 25).* 
Then  we  notice :  2.  Sin  is  a  very  poor  paymaster.  For  even  allowing  that  it  has  pleasures 
to  bestow,  these  are  found  to  be  only  for  a  season  (Heb.  li.  25).  After  these  come 
shame,  remorse,  and  the  horrible  tempest  which  infuriated  sin  entails.  Then  comes 
death,  the  real  wages,  or  rations  (pipdvia  from  i(pov,  "  cooked  meat,"  see  Shedd,  in  he). 
This  means,  of  course,  alienation  from  God,  and,  when  it  sets  finally  into  the  experience, 
proves  a  hojieless  and  helpless  condition.  3.  The  sooner  all  slaves  of  sin  change  their 
master  the  better.  The  reign  of  sin  only  tends  to  torment.  The  soul  that  sells  itself 
to  such  a  tyrant  is  a  fool.  He  is  beside  himself,  like  the  prodigal,  when  he  does  so. 
He  comes  to  himself  when  he  renpunoes  the  tyranny  and  transfers  his  allegiance. 

II.  The  keign  of  qbaob.  (Vers.  16 — 23.)  Now,  in  this  passage  the  apostle 
uses  no  less  than  three  terms  to  express  the  new  and  better  reign.  These  are  "  grace," 
"  obedience,"  "  righteousness."  And  then,  dropping  personification  altogether,  he  shows 
how  we  become  subjects  and  slaves  of  God.  From  the  slavery  of  sin  it  is  possible  to 
pass  into  the  service  and  slavery  of  God.  We  may  get  free  from  sin,  and  then  shall 
we  be  at  liberty  to  serve  God  and  be  his  slaves.  We  shall  not  make  much  mistake 
if  we  take  up  Paul's  teaching  under  the  idea  of  a  reign  of  grace.'  And  here  we  have 
to  notice :  1.  We  enter  of  our  own  free-will  into  the  slavery  of  the  God  of  grace.  We 
are  not  forced  into  it ;  we  are  "  made  willing  in  the  day  of  God's  power  "  (Ps.  ex.  3). 
Tlie  slavery  to  God  is  voluntary.  It  is  a  yielding  of  ourselves.  In  both  slaveries  we 
must  remember  that  the  will  is  not  forced,  but  free.  We  are  free  in  our  slavery  to 
sin ;  we  are  free  when  we  turn  from  it  to  the  slavery  of  a  God  of  grace.  No  one  forces 
our  hand.  2.  We  enter  our  state  of  grace  through  obeying  from  the  heart  "■that  form 
of  teathing  whereunto  toe  were  delivered"  (Revised  Version).  This  refers  clearly  to 
the  all-important  doctrine  of  justification  by  faitli,  through  the  reception  of  which  we 
get  delivered  from  condemnation,  and  started  on  om-  course  of  sanctification.  It  is 
most  important,  therefore,  that  that  doctrine  should  be  faithfully  and  clearly  stated  to 
the  soul  which  is  enslaved  through  sin.  It  is  the  very  cliarter  of  its  spiritual  freedom. 
3.  We  find  t?iat  in  serving  a  God  of  grace  we  secure  holiness  of  character.  For  this 
voluntary  and  gracious  slavery  implies  the  dedication  of  all  our  powers  to  God.  We 
lay  ourselves  as  "  living  sacrifici.s"  on  God's  altar.  We  find  ourselves  in  consequeiioe 
visited  by  an  increasing  sense  of  consecration.  We  learn  to  live  not  unto  ourselves, 
but  unto  him  who  died  for  us  and  rose  again  (2  Cor.  v.  14).  This  sense  of  consecratioo 
becomes  habitual.  We  feel  that  we  are  not  our  own,  but  bought  with  a  price,  and 
therefore  bound  to  glorify  God  with  our  bodies  as  well  as  spirits,  which  are  God's 

*  See  a  fine  sermon  by  Adolphe  Monod,  on  "  La  Sanotifioatlon  par  le  Salut  Gratult,"  in  l!i« 
liyona  '  Sermons,'  quatrifeme  Edition,  p.  107,  eto. 

'  See  Hofacker's  '  Predigten,'  Ko.  51,  upon  "Der  Kueohtschaft  der  Siiude  und  dec 
Kiieohtsehaft  der  Gereohtigkeit." 

'  See  Booth's  instructive  yolume, '  The  Beign  of  Grace  from  its  Bise  to  its  Oonsvunmatioii,' 


OH.  VII.  1—25.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAtTL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


16x 


(1  Cor.  vi.  20).  4.  We  find  this  service  of  grace  happy  as  well  as  holy.  In  other 
words,  we  find  in  God  an  excellent  Paymaster.  His  service  is  delightful.  Feeling  that 
we  are  less  than  the  least  of  all  his  mercies,  feeling  that  we  are  at  best  but  unprofitable 
servants,  we  accept  joyfully  whatever  he  sends ;  we  feel  that  he  daily  loadeth  us  with 
his  benefits,  and  then,  regarding  the  great  future,  he  gives  us  therein  "  eternal  life." 
Doubtless  we  do  not,  strictly  speaking,  deserve  such  rewards ;  they  are  rewards  of  grace, 
not  of  debt ;  they  are  free  "  gifts  "  from  a  gracious  Master.  Tet  they  are  none  the  less 
welcome.  Let  us,  then,  renounce  the  reign  of  sin,  and  accept  the  reign  of  grace.  Its 
fruit,  increasing  with  the  consistent  years,  is  unto  holiness,  and  its  end  is  everlasting 
lire.i  We  are  real  freemen  only  when  we  have  become  the  slaves  of  a  gracious  God. — 
E.M.  E. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


Vers.  1 — 6.— Here  comes  in  the  third 
illustration  of  the  moral  obligation  of  the 
baptized.  It  rests  on  the  recognized  prin- 
ciple that  death  cancels  the  claims  of  human 
law  on  a  person  (cf.  oh.  vi.  7);  and  this 
with  especial  reference  to  the  law  of 
mai liage,  as  being  peculiarly  applicable  to 
the  subject  to  be  illustrated,  since  the 
Church  ia  elsewhere  regarded  as  married 
to  Christ.  As  hns  been  observed  above,  it 
Is  from  the  Law  that  Christians  are  now 
said  to  be  emancipated  in  the  death  of 
Clirist;  not  from  sin,  as  in  the  previous 
sections.  Hence  this  section  might  at  first 
sight  seem  to  introduce  a  new  line  of 
tliougbt.  But  it  is  really  a  continuation 
of  the  same,  thoagh  differently  viewed ;  for, 
in  the  sense  intended  by  St.  Paul,  l)eing 
under  the  Law  is  equivalent  to  being  under 
sin.  How  this  is  has  already  more  or  less  ap- 
peared ;  and  it  will  he  shown  further  in  the 
latter  part  of  this  chapter.  For  elucidating 
the  connection  of  thought  between  this 
and  the  preceding  sections,  it  may  be  here 
briefly  stated  thus :  A  fundamental  axiom 
with  the  apostle  is  that  "  wheie  no  law  is, 
there  is  no  transgression"  (ch.  iv.  15;  of. 
V.  13;  vii.  9);  <.e;  without  law  of  some 
kind  (including  in  the  idea  both  external 
law  and  the  law  of  conscience)  to  reveal 
to  man  the  difference  between  right  and 
wrong,  he  ia  not  held  responsible ;  to  be  a 
sinner  before  God  he  must  know  what  sin 
is.  Human  sin  consists  in  a  man  doing 
wrong,  knowing  it  to  be  wrong ;  or,  at  any 


rate,  with  an  original  power  and  opportunity 
of  knowing  it  to  be  so.  (Xhis,  be  it  observed, 
is  the  idea  running  through  the  whole  of 
oh.  i.,  in  which  all  mankind  are  convicted 
of  sin;  the  whole  drift  of  the  argument 
being  that  they  had  sinned  against  know- 
ledge.) Law,  then,  in  making  sin  known 
to  man,  subjects  him  to  its  guilt,  and  con- 
sequently to  its  condemnation.  But  this  id 
all  it  does ;  it  is  all  that,  in  itself,  it  can  do. 
It  can  remove  neither  the  guilt  nor  the  do- 
minion of  sin.  Its  principle  is  simply  to  exact 
entire  obedieuee  to  its  requirements;  and 
there  it  leaves  the  sinner.  The  above  view 
applies  to  all  law,  and  of  course  peculiarly 
to  the  Mosaic  Law  (which  the  writer  has  all 
along  mainly  in  view)  in  proportion  to  the 
authority  of  its  source  and  the  strictness  of 
its  requirements.  Thus  it  is  that  Bt.  Paul 
regards  being  under  the  Law  as  the  same 
thing  as  being  under  sin,  and  dying  to  the 
Law  as  the  same  thing  as  dying  to  sin. 
Grape,  on  the  other  hand,  under  which  we 
pass  in  rising  again  with  Christ,  does  both 
the  things  which  law  cannot  do:  it  both 
cancels  the  guilt  of  sin  (repentance  and 
faith  presumed),  and  also  imparts  power  to 
overcome  it. 

Ver.  1. — Are  ye  ignorant,  brethren  (for  I 
speak  to  persons  knowing  law),  how  that  the 
law  hath  dominion  over  a  man  for  so  long 
time  as  he  Uvethi  i.a.  so  long  as  the  man 
liveth;  not  so  long  as  the  Lava  liveth  in 
the  sense  of  vig^,  or  "  remains  in  force," 
though  Origon,  Ambrose,  Grotius,  Erasmus, 
and  others,- for  reasons  that  will  appear, 
understood  the  latter  sense.  It  is  not  the 
natural  one. 


•  Dr.  Alexander's  '  Christian  Thought  and  Work,'  p.  213,  on  "  Progressive  Piety ; "  and 
Caspari's  *  Von  Jenseit  des  Grabes,'  ii.  s.  149,  on  the  "  Dienst  der  Gerechtigkeit,"  where  he 
shows  it  i»  "  ein  heiliger,"  "  ein  herrlicher,"  and  "  ein  ^eliger  Dienst." 


182 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vii.  1— is. 


Vers.  2 — 4. — For  (this  is  an  instance  of  the 
application  of  the  general  principle,  adduced 
as  suiting  the  subject  in  hand)  the  woman 
that  hath  an  husband  (SwavSpas,  implying 
subjection,  meaning  properly,  that  is  under 
an  husband)  is  bound  to  her  living  husband ; 
hut  if  the  husband  die,  she  is  loosed 
(_KaTiipyrirai ;  of.  ver.  6  and  Gal.  v.  4.  The 
word  expresses  the  entire  abolition  of  the 
claim  of  the  husband's  law  over  her)  from 
the  law  of  the  husband.  So  then  if,  while  the 
husband  liveth,  she  be  married  to  another 
man,  she  shall  be  called  an  adulteress :  but 
if  the  husband  die,  she  is  free  from  the  Law, 
so  that  she  is  no  adulteress,  though  she  be 
married  to  another  man.  Wherefore,  my 
brethren,  ye  also  were  made  dead  to  the 
Law  through  the  body  of  Christ;  that  ye 
should  be  married  to  another,  even  to  hun 
who  was  raised  from  the  dead,  that  we  may 
bring  forth  fruit  unto  God.  The  general 
drift  of  the  above  verses  is  plain  enough ; 
namely,  that,  as  in  all  cases  death  frees  a 
man  from  the  claims  of  human  law,  and, 
in  particular,  as  death  frees  the  wife  from 
the  claims  of  marital  law,  so  that  she  may 
marry  again,  so  the  death  of  Christ,  into 
which  we  were  baptized,  frees  ns  from  the 
claims  of  the  law  which  formerly  bound  us, 
so  that  we  may  be  married  spiritually  to 
the  risen  Saviour,  apart  from  the  old 
dominion  of  law,  and  consequently  of  sin. 
But  it  is  not  so  easy  to  explain  the  intended 
analogy  in  precise  terms,  there  being  an 
apparent  discrepance  between  the  illustra- 
tion and  the  application  with  regard  to  the 
parties  supposed  to  die.  Even  before  the 
application  there  is  a  seeming  discrepance 
of  this  kind  between  the  general  statement 
of  ver.  1  and  the  instance  given  in  ver.  2. 
For  in  ver.  1  it  is  (according  to  the  view  we 
have  taken  of  it)  tlie  death  of  the  person 
who  had  been  under  law  that  frees  him 
from  it,  whereas  in  ver.  2  it  is  the  death  of 
the  husband  (representing  law)  that  frees 
the  wife  from  the  law  she  had  been  under. 
Hence  the  interpretation  of  ver.  1  above 
referred  to,  according  to  which  law,  and 
not  a  man,  is  the  understood  nominative  to 
liveth.  But,  even  if  this  interpretation  were 
considered  tenable,  we  should  not  thus 
get  rid  of  the  subsequent  apparent  dis- 
crepance between  the  illustration  and  the 
application.  For  in  the  former  it  is  the 
death  of  the  husband  that  frees  the  wife; 
whereas  in  the  latter  it  seems  to  be  the 
death  of  ourselves,  who  answer  to  the  wife, 
in  the  death  of  Christ,  that  frees  us.  For 
that  it  is  ourselves  that  are  regarded  as 
having  died  to  the  Law  with  Christ  appears 
not  only  from  other  passages  (e.g.  vers.  2,  3, 
4,  7,  8,  11,  in  oh.  vi.),  but  also,  in  the  passage 
before  us,  from  ddavariiBiiTe  in  ver.  4,  and  iwo- 
Savivm  in  ver.  6.    (The  reading  airoSia'6vros 


of  the  Textus  Receptus  rests  on  no  authority, 
being  apparently  only  a  conjecture  of  Beza's.) 
There  are  various  ways  of  explaining.  (1) 
That  (notwithstanding  the  reasons  against 
the  supposition  that  have  just  been  given) 
it  is  the  Lam,  and  not  the  man,  that  is  con- 
ceived as  having  died  in  the  death,  of 
Christ.  Eph.  ii.  15  and  Col.  ii.  14  may  be 
referred  to  as  supporting  this  conception. 
Thus  the  illustration  and  the  application 
are  made  to  hang  together,  the  law  of  the 
husband  being  regarded  as  having  died  in 
the  husband's  death,  as  the  Law  generally 
to  us  in  Christ's  de.ath  ;  and  we  have  already 
seen  how  ver.  1  may  be  forced  into  corre- 
spondence. This  view  of  the  Law  itself 
being  regarded  as  having  died  has  the 
weiglity  support  of  Origen,  Chrysostom, 
Theophylact,  Ambrose,  and  other  Greek 
Fathers.  Chrysostom  accounts  for  the  apostle 
introducing  a  different  conception  in  vei.  4 
by  suggesting  that  he  avoided  saying  eji- 
plicitly  that  the  Law  had  died,  for  fear  uf 
wounding  the  Jews :  T6  aic6\ov0ov  ^v  ciVeTf, 
''flo'Te,  a^eXtpol,  oh  Kvpieiei  vfiioy  &  ySfios'  hnri- 
0ave  yip.  'AAX*  ovK  elirev  oSras,  tva  /iii  irX^fi; 
robs  'lovSalovs.  This  explanation  hardly 
commends  itself  as  satisfactory ;"  and  be- 
sides, in  addition  to  what  has  been  already 
said,  it  may  be  observed  that  throughout 
the  whole  passage  there  is  no  phrase  to  sug- 
gest in  itself  the  idea  of  the  Law's  death, 
but  only  of  some  death  which  emancipates 
from  law  (ver.  1  being  taken  in  its  natural 
sense,  and  ivoBdvovTes,  in  ver.  4,  being  ac- 
cepted as  the  undoubtedly  true  reading). 
(2)  That  in  the  illustration  the  wife  is  really 
supposed  to  die  when  the  husband  dies. 
The  death  of  either  party  to  the  marriage- 
bond  cancels  it;  and  when  one  dies,  the 
other  virtually  dies  to  the  law  that  both 
were  under.  Thus  the  statement  of  prin- 
ciple in  ver.  1,  the  particular  illustration 
in  vers.  2,  3,  and  the  application  are  made 
to  hang  together.  Meyer  takes  this  view 
decidedly,  and  cites  Eph.  v.  28,  seq.,  to  show 
that  the  husband's  death  maybe  considered 
as  implying  the  wife's  death  also.  (3)  That 
there  is  a  discrepance  between  the  illustra^ 
tion  and  the  application,  the  husband  being 
regarded  as  dying  in  the  former,  and  our- 
selves, who  represent  the  wife,  in  the  latter ; 
but  that  this  is  of  no  consequence ;  the  idea, 
common  to  both,  of  death  abrogating  the 
claims  of  law  being  sufficient  for  the  apostle's 
argument.  Death,  It  may  be  said,  however 
regarded  in  the  application,  is  an  ideal  con- 
ception,  and  not  an  actual  fact  with  respect 
to  ourselves ;  and  it  is  immaterial  how  it  is 
regarded,  as  long  as  the  idea  comes  out  that 
through  death,  t.«.  ours  in  the  death  of 
Christ,  we  are  freed  from  the  dominion  of 
law.  (So,  in  effect,  De  Wette,  and  also 
Alford.)    (4)  That  the  former  husband  ut 


eH.  vn.  1— 25.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMiNS. 


183 


not  the  law,  but  the  lust  of  sin  (rek  iro9^/taTo 
rmv  aiinpriZi',  ver.  5);  the  wife,  the  soul; 
the  new  husband,  Chriit.  Augustine,  who 
is  the  author  of  this  Tiev,  puts  it  thus : 
"  Cum  ergo  tria  sint,  anima,  tanquam  mulier; 
passiones  peccatorum  tanquam  vir ;  et  lex 
tanquam  lex  viri;  non  ibi  peccatis  mortuis, 
tanquam  viio  mortuo  liborari  auimam  dioit, 
Bed  ipsam  animam  mori  peccato,  et  liborari 
tt  lege,  ut  lit  alteriuB  viri,  i.e.  Christi,  cum 
mortua  fuerlt  peccato,  quod  fit,  cum  adhuo 
mauentibus  in  nobis  desideriis  et  incita- 
mentis  quibusdam  ad  poccandum,  non  obedi- 
nius  tamen,  nee  consentimus,  mente  aervi- 
entes  legi  Dei  "  (Aug., '  Prop.,'  33).  Beza, 
taking  up  the  view  of  Augustine,  puts  it 
somewhat  differently,  and  more  clearly,  thus : 
"  There  are  two  marriages.  In  the  first,  the 
old  man  is  the  wife ;  predominating  sinful 
desires,  the  hushand';  transgressions  of  every 
kind,  the  offspring.  In  the  second,  the  new 
man  is  the  wife ;  Christ,  the  Husband  ;  and 
the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22)  are  the 
children"  This  explanation  being  still 
apparently  open  to  the  objection  that,  in  the 
illustration,  the  wife  continues  the  same,  but 
not  so  that  which  corresponds  to  her  in  the 
application,  Olshausen  explains  thus:  "In 
man  the  old  man  is  distinguished  from  the 
new  without  prejudice  to  the  unity  of  his  per- 
sonality, which  Paul  subsequently  (ver.  20) 
gignifies  by  4y6.  This  true  personality,  the 
proper  self  of  man,  is  the  wife,  who  in  the 
natural  state  appears  in  marriage  with  the  old 
man,  and,  in  intercourse  with  him,  generates 
sins,  the  end  of  which  is  death  (ch.  vi.  21, 22). 
But  in  the  death  of  the  mortal  Christ  this 
old  man  is  dead  with  him ;  and,  as  the  indi- 
vidual man  is  grafted  by  faith  into  Christ, 
his  old  man  dies,  by  whose  life  he  was 
holden  under  the  Law."  The  commentator 
on  the  Epistle  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commen- 
tary' adopts  this  explanation,  with  the  re- 
mark that  "  St.  Paul's  application  of  the 
figure  is  quite  clear,  if  we  follow  his  own 
guidance."  The  view  rests  mainly  on,  and 
certainly  derives  some  support  from,  vers. 
5  and  6,  if  regarded  as  carrying  out  the  ap- 
plication of  tlie  figure.  Others,  however,  in 
view  of  the  difficulties  of  the  whole  passage, 
may  prefer  to  content  themselves  with  ex- 
planation (3),  as  conveying  as  precise  an 
idea  as  may  possibly  have  been  even  in  the 
apostle's  mind  when  he  wrote.  Commen- 
tators may  sometimes  go  beyond  their  office 
in  attributing  to  their  author  more  exact- 
ness of  thought  than  his  words  in  themselves 
imply.  It  is  to  be  ohgorved  that  the  fnn- 
"ilafllngexia'cssion  iu  vc/.  4,  "tliut  we  shiinid 
uiLMg  forth  fiuit  unto  Goil,"  brings  us  b iclf 
to  the  main  purport  of  this  whole  section, 
which  begins  at  ch.  vi.  1,  viz.  the  obligation 
of  a  holy  life  on  Christians.  In  vers.  5,  6, 
which  follow,  the  hindrance  to  our  living 


such  a  life  "  when  we  were  in  tlie  flesh," 
and  our  power  of  doing  so  now,  are  briefly 
intimated  in  preparation  for  what  follows. 
It  does  not  seem  necessary  to  conclnde — as 
is  done  by  those  who  adopt  interpretation 
(4)  of  what  precedes — that  the  illustration 
of  the  marriage  bond  is  meant  to  be  kept  up 
iu  these  two  verses. 

Ver.  5. — For  when  we  were  in  the  flesh, 
the  passions  of  sins  which  were  through  the 
Law  did  work  in  our  members  to  bring 
forth  fruit  unto  death.  In  the  flesh,  to  whicli 
might  be  opposed  in  the  Spirit  (cf.  ch.  viii. 
9),  denotes  our  state  when  under  the  power 
of  sin,  before  we  had  risen  to  a  new  life  in 
Christ ;  it  is  virtually  the  same  as  wiiat  is 
meant  by  being  under  the  Law,  as  is  shown 
by  the  opposed  expression  in  ver.  6,  Karrip- 
yl]9riii.6v  a-irb  rod  y6/j.ov.  What  is  signified 
by  "  the  passions  of  sins  "  being  "  through 
the  Law  "  will  be  considered  under  vers.  7 
and  8. 

Ver.  6. — But  now  (meaning,  as  things  are, 
not  at  the  present  time,  as  is  shown  by  tlie 
aorist  following)  we  have  been  (properly, 
we  were)  delivered  (^KarnpySfdrnjiev,  the  same 
verb  as  in  ver.  2 ;  see  note  on  that  verso) 
from  the  Law,  having  died  to  that  wherein 
we  were  held ;  so  that  we  serve  in  newness 
of  the  Spirit,  and  not  in  oldness  of  the  letter. 
In  the  word  "  serve  "  (SouXeietv)  wo  observe 
a  resumption  of  the  idea  of  ch.  vi.  16,  seq  , 
where  we  were  regarded  under  the  aspect  of 
being  still  bond-servants,  though  to  a  new 
master.  There  the  apostle  intimated  that 
he  was  but  speaking  humanly  in  describing 
our  new  allegiance  to  righteousness  as  bond- 
service, such  as  we  had  once  been  under. 
Here  he  intimates  the  true  character  of  oiir 
new  service  by  the  addition  of  the  words, 
^v  Katv6T7]Tt  jrve^/xaros,  leal  oit  iraKatSrTjTi 
ypdfifiaros.  These  are  characteristic  and  sig- 
nificant expressions.  "Spirit"  and  "letter" 
are  similarly  contrasted  (eh.  ii.  29 ;  2  Cor. 
iii.  6).  "  Spirltum  literse  opponit, quia  ante- 
quam  ad  Dei  voluntatem  voluntas  nostra 
per  Spirituni  sanctum  formata  sit,  non  habe- 
mus  iu  Lege  nisi  exttrnam  literara;  quae 
froenum  quidem  externis  nostris  actionibus 
injicit,  concupiscientise  aufem  nostrse  fnro- 
rera  minime  cohibet.  Novitatem  vero  Spiri- 
tui  attribuit,  quia  in  looura  veteris  hominis 
Buccedit;  ut  litera  vetus  dicitur  quas  in- 
terit  per  Spiritus  regenerationem  "  (Calvin). 
Otherwise,  with  regard  to  newness  and  old- 
ness, "Vetustatis  et  novitatis  vocabulo 
Paulus  spectat  duo  testamenta"  (Bengel). 
Tliaf  the  latter  idea  may  have  suggested 
tile  e.>i|iressions  seems  not  unlikely  from  2 
Cnr.  iii.  6—18  (cf.  also  Heb.  viu.  6—13). 
For  in  both  these  passages  the  idea  of  the 
verse  betore  us  enters,  and  in  both  the  old 
and  new  covenants  are  contrasted  with 
regard  to  it.    It  may  be  enough  here  to  say 


I8i 


t&E  EPISTLte  OF  PAUL  TO  ttifi  ROMANS,    [ch.  vti.  1— 2S. 


that  the  contrast  in  iU  eesenoe  is  between 
exacted  conformity  to  an  external  code 
(which  was  the  characteristic  of  the  old 
covenant)  and  inspired  allegiance  to  the 
Law  of  God  written  on  the  heart  (which  is 
the  cbaracterietio  of  the  new). 

Vers.  7— 25.— (6)  The  reUtion  of  law  to 
tin,  and  how  law  prepares  the  soul  for  eman- 
cipation in  Chrietfrom  the  dominion  of  tin- 
la  the  section  of  the  argument  which  begins 
at  ch.  vii.  1  we  have  seen  that  the  idea  of 
being  under  tin  has  passed  into  that  of  being 
under  law,  in  such  apparent  connection  of 
thought  as  to  identify  the  positione.  The 
apostle,  seeing  that  readers  might  be  per- 
plexed by  such  identification,  now,  in  the 
first  place,  explains  what  he  has  meant  by 
it.  Is  the  Law,  then,  sin?  No,  replies  the 
apostle ;  the  Law  itself  (with  especial  re- 
ference to  the  Mosaic  Law  as  the  great  and 
authentic  expression  of  Divine  law)  is 
holy;  and  its  connection  with  sin  is  only 
this — that,  in  virtue  of  its  very  holiness,  it 
convinces  of  sin,  and  makes  it  sinful.  And 
then,  to  the  end  of  ch.  vii.,  he  goes  on  to 
show  how  this  is  by  an  analysis  of  the  opera- 
tion of  law  on  human  consciousness.  He 
presents  to  us  a  vivid  picture  of  a  man  sup- 
posed at  first  to  be  without  law,  and  there- 
fore unconscious  of  sin ;  but  then,  through 
law  coming  in,  acquiring  a  sense  of  it,  and 
yet  unable  to  avoid  it.  The  man  assents  in 
his  conscience  to  the  good,  but  is  dragged 
down  by  the  infection  of  his  nature  to  the  evil. 
He  seems  to  have,  as  it  were,  two  contrary 
laws  within  himself,  distracting  him.  And 
so  the  external  Law,  appealing  to  the  higher 
law  within  himself,  good  and  holy  though  it 
be,  is,  in  a  sense,  killing  him ;  for  it  reveals 
sin  to  him,  and  makes  it  deadly,  but  doei 
not  deliver  him  from  it,  till  the  crisis  comes 
in  the  desperate  cry,  "  0  wretched  man  that 
I  am  1  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body 
of  this  death  ?  "  (ver.  24).  But  this  crisis  is 
tlie  precursor  of  deliverance ;  it  is  the  last 
throe  preceding  the  new  birth ;  the  Law  has 
now  done  its  work,  having  fully  convinced 
of  sin,  and  excited  the  yearning  for  deliver- 
ance, and  in  "  the  lasv  of  the  Spirit  of  life 
in  Olirist  Jesus "  the  deliverance  comes. 
How  it  comes  is  set  forth  in  ch.  viii.,  where 
the  state  of  peace  and  hope,  consequent  on 
deliverance  through  faith  in  Christ,  ia  por- 
trayed in  glowing  terms,  so  as  thus  to  com- 


plete the  subject  which  we  announced  as 
being  that  of  the  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth 
chapters,  viz.  "the  moral  results  to  be- 
lievers of  the  revealed  righteousness  of 
God." 

Two  questions  have  been  raised  and  dis- 
cussed with  regard  to  vers.  7 — 2S.  (1) 
Whether  St.  Paul,  who  writes  throughout 
the  passage  in  the  first  person  singular,  is 
describing  his  own  personal  experience,  or 
only  so  writing  in  order  to  give  vividness 
and  reality  to  his  picture  of  the  experience, 
of  any  human  soul.  (2)  Whether  he  is 
describing  the  mental  experience  of  an  un- 
regenerate  or  of  a  regenerate  man. 

As  to  (1),  his  purpose  undoubtedly  is  not 
(like  that  of  Augustine  in  his '  Confessions ') 
to  tell  us  about  himself,  but  to  depict  gene- 
rally the  throes  of  the  human  soul  when 
convinced  of  sin.  But,  in  doing  this,  he 
as  undoubtedly  draws  on  his  own  past  ex- 
perience ;  recollections  of  the  struggle  he 
had  himself  gone  through  gleam  evidently 
throughout  the  picture ;  he  paints  so  vividly 
because  he  has  felt  so  keenly.  This  makes 
the  passage  so  peculiarly  interesting,  as 
being  not  only  a  striking  analysis  of  human 
consciousness,  but  also  an  opening  out  to  us 
of  the  great  apostle's  inner  self;  of  the  inward 
pangs  and  dissatisfaction  with  himself  which 
had,  we  may  well  believe,  distracted  him 
through  the  many  years  when  he  had  been  a 
zealot  for  the  Law  and  apparently  satisfied 
with  it,  and  when — ^perhaps  partly  to  stifle 
disturbing  thoughts — he  had  thrown  himself 
into  the  work  of  persecution. 

Then,  further,  the  sudden  change  of  tone 
observable  in  the  eighth  chapter,  which  is 
like  calm  and  sunshine  after  storm,  reveals 
to  us  the  change  that  had  come  over  him 
(to  which  he  often  elsewhere  refers),  when 
"  the  light  from  heaven  "  had  shown  him  an 
escape  from  his  mental  chaos.  He  was  then 
"a  new  creature:  old  things  had  passed 
away ;  behold,  all  things  had  become  new  " 
(2  Cor.  V.  17). 

As  to  question  (2),  an  answer  has  been 
already  virtually  given ;  viz.  that  the  condi- 
tion describeJ  is  that  of  the  unregenerate ; 
in  this  sense— that  it  is  of  one  still  under  the 
bondage  of  sin  and  law,  before  the  revela- 
lation  to  the  soul  of  the  righteousness  of 
God,  and  the  consequent  rising  to  a  new  life 
in  Christ.     This   seems  obvious    from    its 


OH.  vn.  1—2^.]    THte  ^PtSTLB  Ot"  PAtL  TO  tHE  EOMAlTS. 


i8§ 


being  the  thought  of  law  Bubjecting  to  Bin 
that  introduoea  the  whole  paBsage,  and  runs 
through  it — the  yhp  which  oonneotB  ver.  14 
with  what  precedes  denoting  a  continnance 
throughout  of  the  same  line  of  thought — and 
also  from  the  marked  change  of  tone  in  ch. 
viii.,  where  the  state  of  the  regenerate  is 
andonbtedly  described. 

Further,  we  find,  in  vera.  5  and  6  of  ch.  vii., 
the  obvious  theses  of  the  two  sections  that 
follow,  in  the  remainder  of  ch.  Tii.  and  in  ch. 
viii.  respectively.  Tlieir  wording  exactly 
corruponds  to  the  subject-matter  of  these 
sections ;  and  ver.  5  distinctly  expresses  the 
state  of  being  under  law,  ver.  6  the  state  of 
deliverance  from  it.  Further,  particular 
expressions  in  the  two  sections  seem  to  be 
in  intended  contrast  with  each  other,  so  as 
to  denote  contrasted  states.  In  ch.  vii.  9, 
11,  13,  sin,  tlirough  the  Law,  MIU ;  in  ch. 
viii.  2  we  have  "the  law  of  the  Spirit  of 
life."  In  oh.  vii.  23  the  man  is  brought  into 
captivity;  in  ch.  viii.  2  he  is  made  free. 
In  ch.  vii.  14,  18  there  is  invincible  strife 
between  the  holy  Law  and  the  carnal  mind ; 
in  ch.  viii.  4  the  righteousness  of  the  Law  is 
fulfilled.  In  ch.  vii.  5  we  were  in  the^esA; 
in  ch.  viii.  9  not  in  the  fleah,  but  in  tlie 
Spirit.  And,  further,  could  St.  Paul  pos- 
sibly have  spoken  of  the  regenerate  Christian 
ai  "  sold  under  sin  "  (ver.  14)  ?  His  state 
is  one  of  redemption  from  it.  We  do  not 
mean  that  the  state  which  begins  to  be 
described  at  ver.  14  is  one  devoid  of  grace. 
A  condition  of  progress  towards  regenera- 
tion is  described;  and  the  final  utter  dis- 
satisfaction with  self,  and  the  keen  yearning 
after  good,  imply  a  roused  and  enlightened 
conscience:  it  is  the  state  of  one  who  is 
being  prepared  for  deliverance,  and  is  not 
far  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  All,  in  fact, 
we  say  is  that  it  is  not  till  ch.  viii.  that  the 
picture  of  a  soul  emancipated  by  a  living 
faith  in  Christ  begins.  We  may  observe, 
further,  that  the  mere  use  of  the  present 
tense  in  ver.  14  and  afterwards  by  no  means 
necessitates  our  supposing  the  apostle  to  be 
speaking  of  his  own  state  at  the  time  of 
writing,  and  therefore  of  the  state  of  a  re- 
generate Christian.  He  uses  the  present  to 
add  vividness  and  reality  to  the  picture ;  he 
throws  himself  back  into,  and  realizes  to 
himself  again,  his  own  former  feebleness; 
auJ  he  thus  also  more  clearly  distinguishes 


between  the  state  described  and  the 
imagined  previous  one  before  law  had 
begun  to  operate. 

The  view  which  we  thus  confidently  advo- 
cate is  that  of  the  Greek  Fathers  generally, 
the  application  of  the  passage  to  the  regene- 
rate Christian  being  apparently  due  to  Au- 
gustine in  his  opposition  to  Pelagianism  ;  i.e. 
according  to  liis  later  view  ;  for  in  his  earlier 
days  (Prop.  45  in  '  Ep.  ad  Eom. ; '  •  Ad  Sini- 
plic.,'  i.  91  ;  '  Conf.,'  vii.  21)  he  had  held  with 
theOreek  Fathers.  Jerome  also  seems  to  have 
similarly  changed  his  mind  about  it ;  and 
the  later  view  of  both  these  Fathers  has  been 
adopted  by  Anaelm,  Thomas  Aquinas,  Corn, 
k  Lapide,  and  by  Luther,  Melancthon, 
Calvin,  Beza,  and  others  among  the  Pro- 
testants. What  weighed  with  Augustine 
was  that  in  vers.  17, 20,  22,  more  propension 
to  good  is  implied  than  his  doctrinal  theory 
allowed  to  the  natural  man.  Under  a 
similar  impression,  Calvin  says,  commenting 
on  ver.  17,  "  Porro  hie  locus  palam  evinoit 
non  nisi  de  piis  qui  jam  regeniti  sunt 
Panlum  disputare.  Quamdiu  enim  manet 
homo  sui  similis,  quaiitus  quantus  est,  merito 
censetur  vitiosus."  If,  however,  St.  Paul's 
intention,  obvious  from  his  own  writing, 
does  not  fit  in  with  Augustinian  or  Oalvin- 
istio  theology,  so  mucli  the  worse  for  the 
latter.  The  verses  in  question  do  not,  in 
fact,  express  more  than  the  apostle  else- 
where allows  man  to  be  capable  of,  and  what 
observation  of  fact  shows  him  to  be  capable 
of,  though  not  having  yet  attained  to  Chris- 
tian faith ;  viz.  approval  of,  longing  for,  and 
even  striving  for,  what  is  good.  It  is  not 
more  than  the  sincere  and  earnest,  even  in 
the  Gentile  world,  have  been  alreaiy  cre- 
dited with  in  oh.  ii.  of  this  Epistle  (vers.  7, 
10,  14, 15,  26,  29).  It  does  not  follow  that 
such  moral  earnestness  is  independent  of 
Divine  grace ;  but  there  is  a  true  and  effec- 
tive operation  of  Divine  grace,  suitable  to 
men's  needs  and  capacities,  before  the  ful- 
ness of  Pentecostal  grace. 

And  further,  however  "far  gone  from 
original  righteousness"  man  in  his  natural 
state  may  be,  still  that  utter  depravity  at- 
tributed to  him  by  some  theologians  is 
neither  consonant  with  observed  fact  noi 
declared  in  Holy  Writ.  The  image  of  God 
in  which  he  was  made  is  rejiresented  as  de- 
faced, but  not  obliterated.    Be  it  observed, 


I8d 


THE  BPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMaNS.    [oh.  rn.  1—25. 


lastly,  with  regard  to  the  whole  question  of 
the  iutention  of  this  chapter,  that  its  refer- 
eace  to  the  unregenerate  precludes  the 
wresting  of  some  parts  of  it  to  support 
antinomianism.  Calvin,  though  applying 
it,  as  said  above,  to  the  regenerate,  thus 
alludes  to  and  guards  against  any  such 
abuse  of  ver.  17:  "Non  est  deprecalio  se 
ezcusantig,  ac  si  culpa  vacaret;  quomodo 
multi  nugatores  justam  defensionem  habere 
se  putant,  qua  tegant  sua  flagitia  dum  in 
carnem  ea  rejiciunt." 

It  was  observed  in  the  note  at  the  head 
of  ch.  ii.  that,  though  the  thesis  to  be  then 
proved  was  the  sinfulness  of  all  men  without 
exception  before  God,  this  did  not  seem  to 
be  in  that  chapter  rigorously  proved  with 
regard  to  those — and  such  it  was  allowed 
there  were — who  sincerely  sought  after 
rigliteougness,  and  refrained  from  judging 
others ;  and  it  was  said  that  this  apparent 
deficiency  in  the  proof  would  be  supplied 
in  ch.  vii.  And  so  it  is  in  this  analysis  of 
the  inward  conscloxisuess  of  even  the  best 
ic  tlieir  natural  state ;  recognizable  by  all 
as  a  true  one  in  proportion  to  their  own 
moral  enlightenment  and  moral  earnestness. 
This  consideration  is  an  additional  reason 
for  regarding  ch.  vii.  as  referring  to  the 
unregenerate ;  since  otherwise  a  link  in  the 
argument  on  which  the  whole  treatise  rests 
would  seem  to  be  wanting. 

We  may  remark  also,  before  proceeding 
with  our  exposition,  that,  though  we  hold 
ch.  vii.  to  refer  to  the  unregenerate,  and  ch. 
Tiii.  to  the  regenerate  state,  between  which 
a  sharp  line  is  here  drawn,  yet  it  need  not 
follow  that  either  the  sense  of  having  passed 
at  a  definite  time  from  one  to  the  other  as 
represented  in  this  ideal  picture,  or  the  oon- 
BciousnesB  of  entire  blessedness  as  portrayed 
in  oh.  viii.,  will  be  realized  by  all,  who  may 
still  be  regenerate  and  have  undergone  a  true 
conversion.  Owing  to  the  weakness  of  the 
human  will,  which  has  to  work  with  grace, 
and  to  the  infection  of  nature  that  remains 
in  the  regenerate,  the  triumph  of  the  grace 
of  the  new  birth  is  seldom,  in  fact,  complete ; 
and  so  even  saints  may  often  be  still  painfully 
coneoious  of  the  confiict  described  in  ch.  vii. 
Tliey  will,  indeed,  have  the  peace  and  as- 
surance of  ch.  viii.  in  proportion  as  "the 
law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  "  is 
potent  and  paramount  in  them ;   but  still 


they  may  not  attain  all  at  once  to  the  ideal 
of  their  regenerate  condition. 

Similarly,  in  St.  John's  Bpislles  the 
kingdoms  of  darkness  and  of  light  are  set 
forth  as  totally  distinct,  and  the  regenerate 
are  regarded  as  having  passed  entirely  from 
the  one  into  the  other,  so  as  to  have  the 
perfect  love  which  casteth  out  fear ;  and  it 
ii  of  importance  that  the  essential  distinc- 
tion between  the  two  kingdoms  should  be 
kept  in  view.  But  still  in  actual  life,  as  we 
cannot  but  feel,  the  majority  of  believing 
Christians  have  not  so  passed  entirely; 
clouds  from  the  old  kingdom  of  darkness 
still  partially  overshadow  most  of  those  who, 
in  the  main,  have  passed  into  the  light, 
and  it  may  be  difficult  for  us  to  determine 
to  which  kingdom  some  belong.  Such 
would  be  the  case  even  with  those  whom  the 
apostle  addressed — persons  who  had  con- 
sciously, in  adult  life,  risen  to  a  new  life  in 
baptism ;  and  still  more  will  it  be  so  with 
us,  who  were  baptized  in  infancy,  and  may 
have  grown  up  more  or  loss,  but  few  en- 
tirely, under  the  infiuence  of  the  regenerating 
Spirit.  Further,  it  is  to  be  observed  tliat, 
tliough  the  peace  and  confidence  of  oh.  viii. 
be  tlie  growing  result  and  reward  of  a  true 
conversion,  yet  the  practical  tests  of  one  are 
ever  said  by  both  St.  Paul  and  St.  John  not 
to  be  feelings  only,  but  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit  in  character  and  life. 

Ver.  7.— What  shall  we  say  then'  (St. 
Paul's  usual  phrase,  with  /ii)  yevoiro  follow- 
ing, for  meeting  and  rejecting  a  possible 
misunderstanding  of  his  meaning ;  cf.  ch.  vi. 
1.)  Is  the  Law  sin  t  Ood  forbid.  Nay,  I  had 
not  known  sin,  but  through  law.  'Awli, 
translated  "  nay,"  being  thus  taken,  as  in 
the  Authorized  Version,  adversatively  to 
the  supposition  of  the  Law  being  sin,  and  so 
a  continuation  of  what  is  expressed  by  fii/ 
yivoiTo.  So  far  from  the  Law  being  sin, 
it  exposes  sin.  Or  it  may  be  in  the  sense  of 
"  howbeit,"  as  in  thi^  Revised  Version,  mean- 
ing— still,  law  has  to  do  with  sin  so  far  as 
this,  that  it  brings  it  out.  For  I  had  not 
known  lust,  except  the  Law  had  said,  Thou 
shalt  not  covet ;  or  rather,  thou  ihalt  not  liist, 
so  as  to  retain  the  correspondence  of  the  verb 
with  the  preceding  substantive.  Observe, 
here  as  elsewhere,  the  significance  of  v6/m>s 
with  and  without  the  article.  In  the  preced- 
ing section  it  was  the  Mosaic  Law  that  was 
specially  in  view,  and  it  is  the  idea  of  it 
being  sin  that  is  so  indignantly  repudiated 
at  the  beginning  of  this  verse.     So  al8(\ 


3ti.  vn.  i— 25.]    THE  EPISTLE  OJP  PAttL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


ist 


at  the  end,  the  Law  of  Moses  is  referred  to 
as  forbidding  lust.  Hence  the  article  in 
both  cases.  But  in  the  intervening  phrase, 
€1  n^i  Bi4  v6fiov,  it  is  the  principle  of  law 
generally  that  is  regarding  as  making  sin 
known.  The  adducing  of  iviBvuia  as  being 
made  known  by  the  Law  seems  to  have  a 
significance  beyond  tliat  of  its  being  one 
particular  instance  of  sin  being  so  made 
known.  It  may  imply  that  the  very  pro- 
pension  to  evil,  which  is  the  root  of  sin,  is 
thus  only  made  known  as  sinful.  The  re- 
feronce  is,  of  course,  to  the  tenth  com- 
mandment. Without  it  men  might  not 
have  been  aware  of  the  sinfulness  of  desires 
as  well  as  of  deeds,  and  thus,  after  all, 
been  unacquainted  with  the  essence  of  sin. 
Further,  we  may  suppose  it  to  be  not  with- 
out a  purpose  that  the  apostle  varies  his 
verbs  expressive  of  knowing,  tV  a/mpTlav 
QvK  eyytovj  and  iTriOvfiiav  ovK  "^Seij/.  '* ''Eyi'wj' 
majus  est,  ^Setv  minus.  Sine  posterius, 
cum  etiam  minor  gradus  negatur,  est  in 
incremento  "  (Bengel).  '£71/(0^  may  express 
personal  acquaintance  with  the  working 
and  power  of  sin ;  ^Stiv,  no  more  than  know- 
ing lust  as  being  sin  at  all.  If  so,  it  does 
not  in  itself  imply  (whatever  may  seem  to  be 
the  case  in  ver.  8,  of  which  below)  that  the 
Law  excites  lust,  in  the  sense  that  I  should 
not  have  lusted  as  I  do  had  not  the  Law 
forbidden  me  to  lust. 

Ver.  8. — Bat  sin,  taking  occasion,  through 
the  commandment  wrought  in  me  all  manner 
of  concupiscence  (or,  0/  lusf):  for  without 
(or,  apart  from)  law  sin  is  dead.  Here,  as  in 
ch.  V.  12,  seq,,  sin  is  personified  as  a  power, 
antagonistic  to  the  Law  of  God,  that  has 
been  introduced  into  the  world  of  man, 
causing  death.  In  ch.  v.  its  first  introduc- 
tion was  found  in  the  scriptural  account  of 
Adam's  transgression.  It  has  ever  since 
been  in  the  world,  as  is  evidenced  by  the 
continuance  of  the  reign  of  death  as  it  comes 
to  all  men  now  (vers.  13, 14).  But  it  is  only 
when  men,  through  law,  know  it  to  be  sin, 
that  it  is  imputed  (ver.  13),  and  so  slays 
them  spiritually.  Apart  from  law,  it  is  as 
it  were  dead  with  respect  to  its  power  over 
the  soul  to  kill.  It  is  regarded  here  as  an 
enemy  on  the  watch,  seizing  its  occasion  to 
kill  which  is  ofiered  it  when  law  comes  in. 
It  may  be  observed  here  that,  though  it  is 
not  easy  to  define  exactly  in  all  cases  what 
St.  Paul  means  by  death,  it  is  evident  that 
he  means  in  this  place  more  than  the  phy- 
sical death  which  seemed,  at  first  sight  at 
least,  to  be  exclusively  referred  to  in  ch.  v. 
For  all  die  in  the  latter  sense  of  the  word ; 
but  only  those  who  sin  with  knowledge  of 
law  in  the  sense  intended  here  (see  also 
note  on  eh.  v.  12).  It  is  supposed  by  most 
commentators  that  the  expression  Kareipyd- 
rsro  in  thia  verse  means,  not  only  that  "  the 


commandment "  brought  out  lust  as  sin, 
but  further  that  it  provoked  it,  according  to 
the  alleged  tendency  of  human  nature  to 
long  all  the  more  for  what  is  forbidden ; 
Nitimwr  in  vetitum  semper,  cupimusque  ne- 
gata.  Whether  or  not  we  have  this  ten- 
dency to  the  extent  sometimes  supposed, 
the  context  certainly  neither  requiies  nor 
suggests  the  conception,  either  here  or  in 
vers.  5  and  7.  It  is  true,  however,  that  Ihe 
language  of  vers.  5  and  8  does"  in  itself  sug- 
gest it.  Against  it  is  the  reason  which  fol- 
lows ;  "  for  without  law  sin  ia  dead,"  which 
can  hardly  mean  (as  the  strong  word  veKpd 
would  seem  in  such  case  to  require)  that 
lust  itself  is  altogether  dormant  until  pro- 
hibition excites  it.  Calvin  interprets  /co- 
TcipydffaTo  thus:  "Detexit  in  me  omnem 
concupisoentiam ;  quje,  dum  lateret,  quo- 
dammodo  nulla  esse  videbatur;"  and  on 
afiapria  veKpd  remarks,  "  Clarissime  exprimit 
quern  sensum  habeant  superiora.  Ferinde 
enim^  est  ac  si  diceret,  sepultam  esse  sine 
Lege  peccati  notitiam." 

Vers.  9 — 11. — For  I  was  alive  without  (or, 
apart  from)  law  onoe ;  but  when  the  com- 
mandment came,  sin  revived  (or,  sprang  into 
life),  and  I  died.  And  the  commandment, 
which  was  unto  life,  this  I  found  to  be  unto 
death,  7or  sin,  taking  occasion,  through  the 
oommandment  deceived  me,  and  through  it 
slew  me.  If,  in  saying,  "  I  was  alive  once," 
the  writer  is  at  all  remembering  his  own 
experience,  the  reference  may  be  to  the  time 
of  the  innocence  of  childhood,  before  lie  had 
any  distinct  consciousness  of  the  behests  of 
law.  Or  it  may  be  that  he  is  only  imagin- 
ing a  possible  state  without  any  conscious- 
ness of  law,  so  as  to  bring  out  more  forcibly 
the  operation  of  law.  On  the  general  drift 
of  ver.  9,  Calvin  says  tersely,  "  Mors  peccati 
vita  est  hominis :  rursum  vita  peccati  mora 
hominis."  In  ver.  11  the  conception  of  sin's 
action  is  the  same  as  in  ver.  8 ;  but  the  verb 
now  used  is  ^{TjirifTTjo-e,  with  obvious  refer- 
ence to  Eve's  temptation,  which  is  regarded 
as  representing  ours  (cf  2  Cor.  xi.  3).  The 
view  of  the  origin  of  human  sin  presented 
to  us  in  Genesis  is  that  man  at  first  lived 
at  peace  with  God  ;  but  that  ihe  command- 
ment, "  Thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it,  lest  thou 
die,"  was  taken  advantage  of  by  the  "  ser- 
pent"- (answering  to  personified  a/iopTia 
in  the  passage  before  us),  inspiring  sinful 
lust;  and  that  so  the  commandment  (i.e. 
law),  though  in  itself  holy,  became  the 
occasion  of  sin,  and  of  death  as  its  conse- 
quence ;  and  further,  that  all  this  cama 
about  through  delusion  (e'lrjirifTiio-f).  The 
thing  desired  was  not  really  good  for  man; 
but  the  4vtBv/ila  inspired  by  the  tempter 
caused  it  to  seem  so.  One  great  purpose  of 
regenerating  grace  is  to  dispel  this  delusion ; 
to  bring  us  back  to  the  true  view  of  thing* 


l88 


THE  EtISTLE  OE  tAUL  TO  TflE  ROMANS,     [oh.  vii.  1-25. 


as  they  are,  and  so  to  peace  with  God.  Thus, 
in  part,  does  the  apostle  teach  us  to  regard 
the  inscrutable  mystery  of  sin,  and  the 
remedy  for  it  in  Christ. 

Vers.  12,  13.-So  that  the  Law  is  holy, 
and  the  commandment  holy,  and  just,  and 
good.    Has  then  that  which  is  good  become 
death  unto  me  ?    God  forbid.    But  sin,  that 
It  might  appear  sin,  through  that  which  is 
good  working  death  unto  me  j  that  sin  might 
become  exceeding  sinful  through  the  com- 
mandment.   The  question  of  ver.  7,  "  Is  the 
Law  sin  ?  "  has  now  been  answered  so  far  as 
tins— that,  far  from  being  so,  the  command- 
ment was  in  itself  "  unto  life "  (cf.  Lev 
xvm.  5;_ch.  x.  5),  only  that  sin  took  occa- 
sion by  It,  and  so  got  power  to  slay.    But 
still  it  would  appear  that  law  was  ultimately 
tlie  cause  of  death.     Was,  then,  its  purpose 
and  eifect,  after  all,  deadly  ?  for,  though  not 
nn,  it  seems  to  have  been  death  to  us.     No 
It  IS  replied ;  awny  with  the  thought  I    Its 
effect  was  only  to  reveal  sin  in  its  true  light  ■ 
it  waa  only  an  Ithuriel's  spear  ('  Par.  Lost ' 
bk.  IV.), bringing  out  and  exposing  thedeadly 
thing  that  before  was  latent.    And  (aa  is 
elsewhere  set  forth  in  pursuance  of  the  line 
of  thought)  its  effect  in  the  end  was  really 
'unto  life ;  "  for  its  awakening  of  the  sense 
ot  sm,  and  of  a  craving  for  rerlemption  from 
It,  was  the  necessary  preparation  for  such 
redemption  (of.  Gal.  iii.  19,  seg.y 

Ver.  14.— For  we  know  (we  are  all  already 
aware  of  this ;  we  recognize  it  as  a  prin- 
ciple;  we  can  surely  have  no  doubt  of  it : 
•  cf.  ch   11.  2;  lii.  10)  that  the  law  is  spiri- 
tual :  but  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin     The 
statement  of  ver.  12  is  here  in  effect  re- 
peated as  being  one  that  cannot  be  gain- 
said with  respect  to  tlie  Law,  but  with  use 
now  of  the  epithet  iry^vfjiariicis;  and  this  in 
opposition  to  mygelf  being   a-apRip6s.      The 
new  word,  Tr^iv/taTiKis,  is  obyiously  meant 
to  express  a  further  idea  with  respect  to  law 
suitable  to  the  line  of  thought  now  about 
to  be  pursued.    Without  lingering  to  men- 
tion varying  suggestions  of  various  commen- 
tators as  to  the  sense  in  which  the  Law  is 
here  called  spiritual,  we  may  offer  the  fol- 
lowing considerations  in  elucidation.  nyeS/ia 
and  a-dpi  are,  as  is  well  known,  constantly 
contrasted  in  the  New  Testament.      The 
tormer  sometimes  denotes  the  "  Holy  Spirit 
<if  God,"  and  sometimes  tliat  highest  part 
in   ourselves    which  is  in  touch  with  the 
Divine  Spirit.     Sdp^,  though  it  may,  in  ao- 
cordance  with  its  original  meaning,  some- 
times denote  our  mere  bo.lily  organization, 
18  usually  used  to  express  our  whole  present 
human    constitution,   menial    as  well    as 
bodily,  considered  aa  apart  from  the  nyeSua. 

I^T  ^/•■/"'i'  ?  ""^  Pl^°«  distinguishes 
the  constituent  elements  of  liuman  nature 
he  speaks  of  TrytC/io,  i,vxii,  and  o-a/.a  (1 


Thess.  V.  23)  There  ^^x^l  seems  to  denote 
the  animal  hfe  or  soul  animating  the  crSua  for 
the  purposes  of  mere  human  life,  but  distin- 
guished  from  the  T,>,v/xa,  which  associates 
him  with  the  Divine  life.  Usually,  how- 
ever, Twi/^a  and  irdpi  alone  are  spoken  of  ■ 
so  tliat  the  term  adp^  seems  to  include  the 
i^wx*.  expressing  our  whole  weak  human 
nature  now,  apart  from  the  T«S,.a,  which 
connects  us  with  God  (see  Gal.  v.  17,  etc.). 
Ihat  in  this  and  other  passages  ,rdpf  does 
not  moan  our  mere  bodily  organizatira  only, 
IS  further  evident  from  sins  not  due  to  mere 
bodily  lusts-such  as  want  of  affection, 
thl%t?!'Jl'  pride-being  called  "works  o 

a).  What,  then,  is  meant  by  the  adjective 
jr««/;ar,«&?  Applied  to  man,  it  is,  in  I 
t-or.  HI    2  3,  opposed  to  aap^t^hs  (or  aapicc 

on«'in^i,  ^^''""^  apparently  meaning 
ZJ^  ^^°°'.  i?*  ''"'^*  ("8  ato^e  under- 
stood), and  not  the  ^y,vi.a,  dominates.  Fur- 
ther, St.  Paul  (1  Oor.  xv.  44)  speaks  of  » 
irw^a  J„X,Khy  and  s  aS/ia  wyeviMTiKhv. 
meaning  by  the  former  a  tenement  fitted 

an^  hi  +h  ?"!*'^  **•  "'^  "««  P'y^^"  life, 
fnAh/K^\''''v?  *  °^^  organism  adapted 

hope  to  have  hereafter;  and  in  the  sam« 
passage  he  uses  the  neuters,  rh  ^vx^^hy  and 
rb  iry.vfuiTiKhy,  with  reference  to  "the  first 
Adam,_    who  was  made,  or  became  (.W- 
ytTo)  «s  ^„xV  fi><rw,  and  « the  last  Adam  " 
who  was  made  eh  wyeSfui  C<»owoiovy.    Thus 
we«/.a,  generally,  denotes  the  Divine,  which 
man  apprehends    and  aspires  to,  nay,  in 
which  he  has  himself  a  part  in  virtue  of 
*'',?J'gi°'»\  breathing  into  him  of  the  breath 
ot  me  {wyoiiy  (.aris)  directly  from  God  (Gen. 
111.  7),  whereby  he  became  a  living  soul  (hi- 
«To  «y  <l,vxhyJS^ay)  for  the  purposes  of  his 
mundane  hfe  (itself  above  that  of  the  brutes) 
but  retained  also  a  share  of  the  Divine 
■wyevfLu  connecting  him  with  God,and  capable 
of  being  quickened  so  as  to  be  the  dominant 
principle  of  his  being  through  contact  with 
tne  vyevna  ("owotovy.    It  would  seem  that 
the  Law  is  here  called  nyevfiariKhs,  as  be- 
longing to  the  Divine  sphere  of  things,  and 
expressive  of  the  Divine  order.    "  The  Law 
both  the  moral  law  in  the  bosom  of  man,' 
and  the  expression  of  that  law  in  the  Deoa- 
Jogue,  18,  as  Augustine  profoundly  expresses 
It,  a  revelation  of  tlie  higher  order  of  thingi 
founded  in  the  being  of  God.    It  is  henie 
a  ^^^^arW:,  ■  (Tholuck).      But  man  (iyi. 
«).  though  still  able  to  admire,  nay,  to  de- 
light in  and  aspire  to,  this  higher  order, 
cannot  yet  conform  himself  to  it  because  of 
the  trrfpf,  infected  with  sin,  which  at  present 
enthrals  him :  'Eyi,  Sh  craptctyhs,  weipau^yos 
vTTb  Ti,y  a^aprlav.    Thus  is  fitly  introduced 
the  analysis  of  human  consciousnes*  with 


OH.  VII.  1— 25.J    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


189 


reference  to  law  which  follows.  The  word 
aapKivis  (which,  rather  than  trapKiichs,  iethe 
best-supported  reading)  may  be  used  to  ox- 
press  merely  our  present  constitution — our 
being  of  flesh — so  as  to  account  for  our  in- 
ability, rattier  than  our  being  fleshly,  or 
carnally  minded,  as  aapKiKbs  would  imply. 
In  two  other  passages  (1  Cor.  iii.  1  and  Heb. 
vii.  16)  authority  is  also  in  fayour  of  aaf 
Kivtts  instead  of  aapKixhs  as  in  the  Textus  Ee- 
ceptus.  Tholuck,  however,  doubts  whether 
there  wob,  in  common  usage,  a  distinction 
between  tlie  meaning  of  the  two  forms.  The 
word  Ttewpanivos  is  significant.  It  denotes, 
not  our  having  been  originally  elaves(rern»), 
but  our  having  been  sold  into  slavery  {capH). 
Slavery  to  sin  is  not  tlie  rightful  condition 
of  our  nature.  We  are  as  the  Israelites  in 
Egypt,  or  aa  the  captives  in  Babylon  who 
remembered  Zion.  Hence  the  possibility  of 
deliverance,  if  we  feel  the  burden  of  our 
slavery  and  long  to  be  free,  when  the  De- 
liverer comes. 

Vers.  15 — 25. — For  that  which  I  do  (rather, 
work,  or  perform,  or  accomplish,  Karepyd- 
io/iai)  I  know  not  (ratlier  than  I  allow  not, 
as  in  the  English  Version,  this  being  the 
proper  meaning  of  the  verb  yiviffKtu.  The 
idea  may  be  that,  when  under  the  delusion 
of  sin  1  do  wrong,  I  do  not  kuow  wliat  I  am 
accomplishing) :  for  not  what  I  would,  that 
I  do  (rather,  practise;  the  verb  here  is 
trpdacru) ;  hut  what  I  hate,  that  I  do  (iroiu). 
But  if  what  I  wonld  not  that  I  do,  I  consent 
onto  the  Law  that  it  is  good  {Ka\6s).  Now 
then  (ywl  Si,  not  in  temporal  sense,  but 
meaning,  as  the  ease  is)  it  is  no  more  I  that 
work  (KaTepyd^o/icu,  as  before)  it,  but  sin 
that  dwelleth  in  me.  Tor  I  know  that  in 
me  (that  is,  in  my  flesh,)  dwelleth  not  good 
(ayafif!;/):  for  to  will  is  present  with  me; 
but  to  perform  (KarepydCeaBai)  that  which 
is  good  (rh  KoKhv)  is  not  {ov,  rather  than 
o&x  ^vpiffsa  as  in  the  Textus  Eeccptus,  is 
the  best-supported  reading).  For  the  good 
{i,yaB6v)  that  I  would  I  dp  not  (ai  ■KoiSi): 
but  the  evil  which  I  wonld  not,  that  I 
practise  (rpda-ffa).  But  if  what  I  (e^ct),  . 
emphatic)  would  not,  that  I  do  (iraiu),  it  is 
no  longer  I  (e'y^,  again  emphatic)  that  work 
(KorepydCofiai)  it,  but  sin  that  dwelleth  in 
me.  I  find  tiien  the  law,  that  to  me  who 
would  do  good,  evil  is  present.  For  I  delight 
in  the  law  of  Ood  after  the  inward  man. 
But  I  see  a  different  law  in  my  members  (on 
what  is  meant  by  "  members "  (/leAco-i)  see 
note  under  oh.  vi.  13)  warring  against  the 
law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into  cap- 
tivity to  (or,  according  to  some  readings,  by) 
the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members.  0 
wretched  man  that  I  am !  who  shall  deliver 
me  from  the  body  of  this  death!  (probably 
in  the  same  sense  as  "the  body  of  sin"  in 
^h.  vi.  @:    see   iiote   thereon.     Translate 


certainly  as  in  the  English  Version;  not 
this  body  of  death,  as  if  it  meant  this  mortal 
body)  Thanks  be  to  God  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord,  So  then  with  the  mind  I 
myself  serve  the  Law  of  Ood ;  but  with  the 
flesh  the  law  of  sin.  In  the  note  intro- 
ducing this  whole  section  (vers.  7 — 25)  its 
general  drift  has  been  intimated.  The 
following  additional  comments  may  further 
explain  the  part  of  it  which  begins  at  ver. 
15.  (1)  The  initial  yi^)  introduces  proof  of 
tlie  4yii  being  in  the  condition  spoken  of  in 
the  preceding  clause,  viz.  "  sold  under  sin." 
For  (the  meaning  is)  am  I  not  a  bond-slave, 
when,  as  I  feel  is  the  case  with  me,  I  am 
not  my  own  master  ?  But,  observe,  the  state 
that  goes  on  to  be  described  is  that  of  an 
unwilling  bond-slave ;  not  of  one  who  likes 
his  bondage,  and  has  no  desire  to  be  frue. 
The  conscience  is  supposed  already,  through 
the  operation  of  law,  to  protest  against  sin ; 
to  hate  its  thraldom ;  not  willingly  to 
acquiesce  in  it.  (2)  The  distinction  be- 
tween the  verbs  iroi£,  trpdatra,  Kartpyd^o/iai, 
not  observed  in  the  English  Version,  but 
to  which  attention  has  been  drawn  in  the 
above  translation,  has  its  meaning.  Atten- 
tion to  the  places  where  they  occur  will 
show  their  appropriateness  in  each  case, 
denoting  severally  single  acts,  habitual 
practice,  and  general  working,  performance, 
or  accomplishment.  (3)  The  English  Ver- 
sion is  vfrong  in  rendering,  in  ver.  ]  5, "  What 
I  would,  that  I  do  not,"  so  as  to  make  the 
idea  the  same  as  that  in  ver.  19.  There  are 
really  two  different  statements  in  the  two 
verses — the  first,  of  our  doing  what  we  wish 
not  to  do ;  the  second,  of  our  not  doing  what 
we  wish  to  do ;  and  after  each  the  SLime 
conclusion  is  dravsrn  in  the  same  words,  viz. 
that  sin  is  the  real  worker  Qcarepyd^ofuu 
being  here  the  word  appropriately  used). 
(4)  The  conflicting  principles,  or  energies, 
of  human  nature,  between  which  the  indi- 
vidual iyii,  which  wills  and  acts,  is  here 
regarded  as  being  distracted,  are  the  <rc£p{ 
in  which  sin  dwells  (which  has  been  ex- 
plained above;  see  note  under  ver.  14)  on 
the  one  hand,  and  the  vovs  (ver.  23)  of  the 
%aa  dviparros  (ver.  22)  on  the  other.  The 
4yii)  is  identified  with  the  earn  &vepmros, 
rather  than  regarded  as  an  intermediate 
personality  between  the  two.  For  it  is 
spoken  of  throughout  as  willing  what  is 
good ;  and,  though  in  ver.  14  it  is  said  to 
be  irapKiy6s,  and  though,  in  ver.  18,  good 
dwells  not  in  it,  yet  the  first  of  these  ex- 
pressions only  means  that  it  is  in  the  flesh 
at  present,  and  therefore  in  bondage ;  and 
the  latter  is  at  once  qualified  by  the  addition, 
TovreffTty  ef  rrj  ffapKi  fMv;  it  does  not  identify 
the  ^i  with  the  trdpi.  It  is,  we  may 
remark  in  passing,  this  ^ib — 6  iaa  &vBpairos 
— that  is  regardpd  as  rifling  ^o  a  new  life 


100 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ou.  vii.  1—25. 


with  Christ,  bo  as  to  become  a  new  man, 
delivered  from  bondage;  thia  last  expres- 
sion, of  course,  involving  a  different  idea 
from  that  of  the  inward  man).  It  is  to 
be  observed,  further,  that  throughout  this 
eeotion  beginning  at  ver.  7,  there  is  no 
distinction  diawn  (as  elsewhere  by  St.  Paul) 
between  -irvevim  and  aip^;  the  idea  of  TreeS/jo, 
in  fuct,  does  not  come  in  at  all,  except  with 
regard  to  the  Law,  which  is  called  irvevim- 
riK6s.  The  reason  is  that  the  apostle  is 
confining  himself  here  to  an  examination  of 
whut  man,  even  at  his  beet,  is  in  his  mere 
human  nature;  of  what  thoughtful  observers, 
though  not  theologians,  may  perceive  him  to 
be.  It  is  a  philosophical  rather  than  a 
theological  analysis.  It  is  one  that  might 
commend  itself  to  heathen  philosophers, 
some  of  whom  have,  in  fact,  expressed  them- 
selves much  to  the  same  effect.  Hence  it 
is  not  till  oh.  viii.,  where  man's  regeneration 
by  the  Divine  wyeSiut  is  portrayed,  that  the 
spiritual  principle  In  himself,  through  which 
he  is  capable  of  such  regeneration,  comes 
into  view.  And  it  will  be  seen  that  it  is 
this  very  idea  of  itj/evna  that  pervades  that 
whole  chapter.  This  essential  distinction 
between  the  two  chapters  ia  sufficient  in 
itself  to  disprove  the  theory  that  the  re- 
generate state  is  described  in  ch.  vii.  (5) 
The  senses  in  which  the  word  vS/ios  is  used 
in  this  chapter  require  to  be  perceived  and 
distinguished,  its  usual  sense  (see  under 
cb.  ii.  13)  not  being  uniformly  retained. 
There  is,  however,  always  some  appended 
expression  to  indicate  any  new  application 
of  the  word.  We  find  it  (a)  in  its  usual 
sense,  with  the  usual  significance  of  the 
absence  or  the  presence  of  the  article,  in 
vers.  7,  9,  12,  14,  16 ;  and  in  ver.  22,  still  in 
the  same  sense,  we  have  "  the  Law  of  God." 
We  find  also,  (5)  in  ver.  23,  "  the  law  of  my 
mind,"  whereby  I  delight  in  the  "  Law  of 
God."  Here  "  law"  assumes  a  different  sense 
from  the  other,  but  one  in  which  the  word 
is  often  used;  as  when  we  speak  of  the 
laws  of  nature,  haying  in  view,  not  so  much 
a  fiat  external  to  nature  which  nature  must 
obey,  as  the  uniform  rule  according  to 
which  nature  is  found  to  work.  The  Latin 
word  norma  expresses  the  idea.  Thus  "  the 
law  of  my  mind"  means  the  normal  con- 
stitution of  my  higher  and  better  self, 
whereby  it  cannot  but  assent  to  "  the  Law 
of  God.  Then  (c)  we  have  "  the  law  of  sin 
in  my  members;"  i.e.,  in  a  similar  sense, 
an  antagonistic  rule  or  constitution  dominant 
in  my  <rdpi.     Lastly,  (d)  in  vex.  21,  the 


general  law  (in  like  sense)  of  my  complex 
human  nature,  wliich  necessitates  this  an- 
tagonism :  "  the  law,  that  when  I  would  do 
good "  (in  accordance  with  the  law  of  the 
mind),  "  evil  is  present  with  me  "  (in  virtue 
of  the  other  law).  Ancient  and  other  com- 
mentators have  been  much  puzzled  as  to 
the  meaning  of  ver.  21,  from  taking  rhv 
v6fjiov  at  the  beginning  to  denote  the  Mosaic 
Law,  as  v6iios  usually  does  when  preceded 
by  the  article.  But  not  so  when  there  is 
something  after  it  to  denote  a  different 
meaning ;  as  there  is  here  in  the  3ti  at  the 
end  of  the  Terse,  meaning  that,  not  (as  some 
have  understood  it)  because.  (6)  DifBculty 
has  been  found  in  the  concluding  clause  of 
ver.  25,  &pa  tiv,  etc.  It  follows  the  expres- 
sion of  thanksgiving,  "  Thanks  be  to  God," 
etc.,  which  certainly  introduced  the  thought 
of  deliverance  from  the  state  that  had  been 
described ;  and  hence  it  is  supposed  by  some 
that  this  clause  must  be  a  continuance  of 
that  thought,  and  so  to  be  taken  as  an  intro- 
duction to  cb.  viii.  rather  than  a  summing 
up  of  the  preceding  argument.  It  is  said 
also,  in  support  of  this  view,  that  more 
entire  association  of  the  iy&i  with  the  Law 
of  God  than  was  before  intimated  is  hero 
expressed ;  aiirhs  eyii  being  written  instead 
of  simply  ^71^1,  and  SouKeicD  being  a  stronger 
word  than  o-uv^So/toi  (ver.  22).  Thus  the 
meaning  would  be,  "  Though  in  my  flesh  I 
still  serve  the  law  of  sin  (the  tjipSurnia  <rdpKos 
still  remains  in  me,  notwithstanding  my 
regeneration),  yet  now  in  my  very  real  self 
I  not  only  approve,  but  am  in  subjection  to, 
the  Law  of  God."  It  is,  however,  at  least  a 
question  whether  these  slight  differences  of 
expression  come  to  much;  and  both  the 
introductory  Upa  oiy  and  the  form  of  the 
clause  suggest  rather  its  being  the  sum- 
marized result  of  ch.  vii.  The  additional 
emphasis  added  to  4yi)  (which  had,  indeed, 
already  been  emphatic),  and  the  substitution 
of  SovXevoi  for  avvifSopMi,  may  servo  only  to 
bring  out  all  the  more  strongly  in  the  end 
what  it  had  been  the  purpose  of  the  whole 
passage  to  lead  up  to,  viz.  that  man's  real 
self,  when  conscience  is  fully  aroused,  yearns 
for  and  is  ready  for  redemption.  There  is 
no  difficulty  in  so  understanding  the  clause 
(as  we  should  surely  understand  it  natu- 
rally but  for  the  preceding  thanksgiving), 
if  we  regard  the  thanksgiving  as  a  paren- 
thetical exclamation,  anticipating  for  a 
moment  the  purport  of  oh.  viii.  Such  an 
exclamation  ia  characteristic  of  St.  Paul, 
and  it  adds  life  to  the  passage. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  6. — The  new  spirit  of  Christian  service.    What  God  creates  he  creates  for  a 
purpose.    When  he  gives  life,  there  is  a  special  career  before  the  living  creature ;  thus 


OH.  VII.  1—25.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  191 

the  fish  is  for  the  water,  the  bird  for  the  air.  When  he  imparts  spiritual  renewal,  it  is 
with  a  view  to  a  new  spiritual  life.  In  re-creating  human  natures  in  the  likeness  of 
his  own  Son,  God  has  it,  so  to  speak,  in  his  purpose  that  they  should  serve  him,  and 
that  in  "  newness  of  the  spirit." 

I.  Cheistians  have  a  new  Loud  to  serve.  They  are  freed  from  the  dominion  of 
gin,  from  their  state  of  bondage  to  the  tyrant ;  they  are  endowed  with  spiritual  liberty. 
And  they  are  devoted  to  the  personal  service  of  Christ,  that  they  may  do  his  will,  advance 
his  cause,  promote  his  glory. 

II.  Christians  have  a  new  motive  to  service.  1.  The  ground  of  their  service 
is  redemption,  the  distinctive  fact  and  doctrine  of  the  new  economy.  2.  The  impulse 
to  their  service  is  grateful  love,  awakened  by  the  experience  of  Christ's  redeeming  power 
and  grace. 

III.  Ohbistianb  have  a  new  law  of  service.  This  law  is  widely  different  from 
the  "  oldness  of  the  letter."  It  extends  to  the  spiritual  realm,  beginning  in  fact  within, 
and  working  outwardly. 

IV.  Christians  have  a  new  Example  op  sebvicb.  In  the  Lord  Jesus  they  see 
the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  assuming  the  form,  the  guise  of  a 
servant,  ministering  unto  God  and  unto  man,  and  in  both  relations  fulfiUing  a  perfect, 
flawless  ministry. 

v.  Christians  hate  a.  kew  fowib  fob  service.  This  is  the  help  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  as  the  Spirit  of  zeal  and  holiness,  of  patience  and  of  devotion. 

YI.  Cbbistians  have  a  new  manner  of  service.  They  are  not  as  the  hireling 
who  serves  for  wages,  or  as  the  bondman  who  serves  from  fear;  but  rather  as  the 
freedman  who  serves  willingly  and  gratefully,  as  the  child  who  serves  from  love. 
Christ  introduced  into  the  world  a  new  style  and  tone  of  service;  taught  men  the 
dignity  and  beauty  of  consecrated  ministration.  How  precious  and  powerful  this 
impulse  and  example  have  proved  is  known  to  every  student  of  the  history  of  Christ's 
Church. 

VII.  Christians  have  a  new  scope  foe  serviob.  1.  Mutval  service  is  an 
obligation  in  the  Church  springing  from  mutual  love.  The  great  are  to  serve  the 
lowly,  and  the  lowly  the  great.  2.  Universal  service  is  enjoined  upon  all  who  wnuld 
do  the  will  of  the  Divine  Master.  In  botb  directions  the  service  of  those  for  whum 
Christ  died  is  the  service  of  Christ  himself. 

VIII.  Christians  have  a  new  reward  for  service.  Nothing  adventitious  or 
external  attracts  those  who  are  in  sympathy  with  him  who  is  at  once  the  Servant  and 
the  Lord  of  all.  Of  all  privileges,  that  most  alluring  and  dear  to  their  hearts  is  the 
favour  of  their  Master,  the  joy  of  their  Lord. 

Ver.  7. — Knowledge  of  sin  hy  the  Law.  Although  the  apostle  aimed  in  this  Epistle 
to  show  that  the  Law  by  itself  was  unable  and  unfitted  to  secure  men's  salvation,  it  is 
evident,  both  that  he  honoured  the  Law  as  an  expression  of  the  Divine  character  and 
will,  and  that  he  considered  it,  from  a  Christian  point  of  view,  to  fulfil  a  most  important 
purpose.  Especially  in  this  verse  does  he  set  forth  the  Law  as  awakening  conscience 
of  sin,  and  so  preparing  the  way  for  the  introduction  of  the  gospel,  both  in  the  order  of 
the  Divine  dispensations  and  in  the  course  of  individual  experience.  His  own  spiritual 
history  is  represented  as  typical :  "  I  had  not  known  sin,  but  by  the  Law." 

I.  Law  is  the  revelation  of  the  supbbige  will  to  the  subject  and  inferior 
will.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  word  "  law  "  is  commpnly  used  in  the  exposition 
of  physical  science ;  it  is  in  such  connections  equivalent  to  uniformity  of  antecedence 
and  sequence.  But  this,  though  a  proper  employment  of  the  term,  is  secondary  and 
figurative ;  part  of  the  connotation  is  intentionally  abandoned.  The  fuller  meaning  of 
law  is  seen  when  the  reference  is  to  requirement  of  certain  modes  of  action ;  and  when 
the  requirement  is  made  by  one  who  has  a  just  right  to  make  it,  a  just  claim  upon 
the  submission  and  obedience  of  those  to  whom  the  command  is  addressed.  The 
superiority  in  the  Lawgiver  does  not  lie  simply  in  physical  power,  but  in  moral 
oharacter  and  authority. 

II.  Being  under  buoh  law  implies  the  possession  of  intelligent  and 
▼oluntaby  nature.  The  inferior  animals  are  not,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term, 
under  law.     !Nor  are  babes,  or  idiots,  or  auy  whose  ipors^  nature  i^  undeveloped. 


192  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,      [oh.  vii.  1— 25. 

Man,  as  an  intelligent  being,  can  apprehend  law ;  as  an  active  and  voluntary  being,  can 
obey  law.  Kant  has  put  the  matter  in  a  very  striking  and  a  very  just  light,  in  saying 
that,  whilst  the  unintelligent  creation  acts  according  to  law,  an  intelligent  being  has  the 
prerogative  of  acting  according  to  the  representation  of  law ;  i.e.  he  can  understand, 
consciously  adopt',  and  willingly  and  without  constraint  obey  the  law.  Freedom  is  the 
power  to  obey  or  to  disobey. 

III.  In    proportion  to  the    definitbnbss  or   the    law  is  the  measube  of 

RESPONSIBILITY   ATTACHING  TO   THOSE   WHO   ARE   SUBJECT   TO   IT.       Conflnillg   attention 

to  human  beings  possessed  of  thought,  reason,  and  will,  we  cannot  fail  to  detect 
degrees  of  acquaintance  with  the  revelation  which  in  various  ways  is  vouchsafed  to  the 
race.  There  are  those,  as  for  example  untutored  savages,  and  the  "  waifs  and  strays  " 
of  a  civilized  community,  whose  knowledge  of  the  Divine  will  is  both  very  imperfect 
and  very  indistinct.  Such  in  former  ages  was  the  case  of  the  Gentiles  as  compared  with 
the  highly  favoured  Jews.  Now,  our  Saviour  himself,  and,  following  his  teaching,  the 
inspired  apostles,  have  plainly  taught  that  responsibility  varies  with  knowledge  and 
opportunity. 

IV.  On  THE  OTHER   HAND,  THE   POSSESSION   OV   EXPRESS   AND   VERBAL   LAW  INVOLVES 

HEIGHTENED  RE8P0NSIBILITT.  When  the  knowledge  of  duty  is  clear,  defection  and 
rebellion  are  aggravated  in  guilt.  The  sin  of  transgression  is  increased  as  the  light 
sinned  against  is  brighter.  Such  was  the  case  with  the  Jews,  who  were  worthy  of 
sorer  condemnation  than  the  Gentiles,  where  both  were  disobedient.  Comparatively, 
they  only  knew  sin  who  knew  the  Law  by  which  sin  is  prohibited.  True,  there  is  a 
geneial  conscience,  against  which  even  the  unenlightened  transgressors  are  offenders ; 
but  they  are  the  worse  culprits  who,  having  the  light,  walk  not  in  it. 

V.  Thus  the  Law,  bt  revealing  a  higher  standard  of  dutt,  and  bt  makin* 

SIN  "  EXCEEDING  SINFUL,"   PREPARES  THE  WAT  FOR  THE  INTRODUCTION   OF  THE  DiVINB 

GOSPEL  OF  SALVATION  AND  LIFE.  The  apostlc  avcrs  that,  but  for  the  Law,  he  had  not 
known  sin,  i.e.  comparatively.  If  this  had  been  all,  he  would  have  had  little  reason 
to  thank  the  Law.  But,  in  fact,  the  Law,  proving  the  holiness  and  righteousness  of  God, 
and  the  powerlessness  of  man  to  obey,  served  to  make  the  introduction  of  a  new 
dispensation — that  of  grace — doubly  welcome.  Men  were  brought  to  feel  their  need  of 
a  Saviour,  and,  when  that  Saviour  came,  to  receive  him  with  alacrity  and  gratitude,  and 
to  use  the  means  prescribed  by  which  the  penaltie*  of  the  Law  may  be  escaped,  and  the 
blessings  of  eternal  salvation  enjoyed. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 17. — The  position  of  th«  Law  under  the  New  Testament.  The  apostle  is 
here  continuing  his  discussion  of  the  immoral  suggestion  to  which  he  alluded  in  the 
previous  chapter  (ver.  15),  "  What  then  ?  shall  we  sin,  because  we  are  not  under  the 
Law,  but  under  grace?" 

I.  The  RELATION  OF  THE  Law  TO  THE  CHRISTIAN.  1.  The  Christian's  union  with 
Christ  involves  his  freedom  from  the  Law.  (1)  From  the  Law  as  condemning  him. 
"  Ye  are  become  dead  to  the  Law  by  the  body  of  Christ"  (ver.  4).  The  Christian,  by 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  becomes  a  participator  in  his  death.  "Who  is  he  that  con- 
demneth?  It  is  Christ  that  died;"  "There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to 
them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  (2)  From  the  Law  as  a  motive-power.  "  But  now 
we  are  delivered  from  the  Law,  having  died  to  that  wherein  we  were  held  [Revised 
Version] ;  that  we  should  serve  in  newness  of  spirit,  and  not  in  the  oldness  of  the 
letter  "  (ver.  6).  The  Authorized  Version  is  here  misleading  when  it  translates,  "  that 
being  dead  wherein  we  were  held."  The  apostle  does  not  speak  of  the  Law  as  being 
dead,  but  of  Christians  as  being  dead  to  the  Law.  3%e  Law  it  not  dead,  but  we  are 
dead  to  it.  We  have  a  higher  and  a  better  life.  2.  But  this  union  with  Christ  and 
freedom  from  the  Law  do  not  imply  that  he  is  free  to  commit  sin.  The  principles  of 
the  Law  remain,  though  the  power  of  it  is  gone,  so  far  as  justification  or  condemnation 
of  the  Christian  is  concerned.  The  Law  was  powerless  to  give  life.  Through  the 
sinfulness  of  our  nature  it  brought  forth  fruit  unto  death  (ver.  6).  But  our  very 
freedoiQ  from  th^  Law  is  in  itself  a  reason  for  holy  living.    Christ  implants  in  us  a  new 


OH.  VII.  1—25.]    THE   EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  193 

principle.  We  now  "serve  in  newness  of  spirit."  Professor  Croskery  ('Plymouth 
Brethrenism ')  deals  with  this  subject  very  fully  in  a  chapter  on  "  The  Law  as  a  Eule 
of  Life."  "  If  Old  Testament  saints,"  he  says,  "  could  be  under  the  Law  and  yet  not 
under  curse,  because  they  were  under  the  promise — that  is,  under  the  covenant  of  grace 
— why  should  not  New  Testament  saints,  saved  by  grace,  be  under  Law  likewise,  as  a 
rule  of  life,  without  being  overtaken  by  the  curse?  What  difference  was  there  between 
David's  sin  and  Peter's  sin,  in  relation  to  the  Law  ?  If  David  was  bound  to  keep  the 
ten  commandments,  including  the  seventh,  are  not  New  Testament  saints  similarly 
bound?  Does  not  James  settle  this  point  when  he  says,  '  He  that  said.  Do  not  commit 
adultery,  said  also,  Do  not  kill'  (Jaa.  ii.  11),  and  says  this,  too,  to  Christians?  The 
passage  [ch.  vi.  14]  means,  '  Ye  are  not  under  the  Law  as  a  condition  of  salvation,  but 
under  a  system  of  free  grace.' "  The  Law  still  remains  as  the  rule  of  life,  the  standard 
of  obedience.  St.  Paul  himself  says  in  'this  same  chapter,  "  With  the  mind  I  myself 
serve  the  Law  of  God"  (ver.  25).  And  our  Lord  himself  said,  "Think  not  that  I  am 
come  to  destroy  the  Law  or  the  prophets ;  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil " 
(Matt.  V.  17). 

U. -The  bblation  op  the  Law  to  the  sinner.  1.  The  Law  revtah  to  himtht 
depths  and  power  of  his  own  sinfulness.  After  the  apostle  has  shown  how,  in  the 
umej,enerate  nature,  "the  motions  of  sins,  which  were  by  the  Law,  did  work  in  our 
members  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death,"  he  asks,  "  What  shall  we  say  then  ?  Is  the 
Law  sin?"  (ver.  7).  That  is  to  say — Is  the  Law  therefore  in  itself  sinful?  does  it 
encourage  sin?  Par  from  it,  he  says.  "  Nay,  I  had  not  known  sin,  but  by  the  Law." 
That  is — I  had  not  known  the  force  or  power  of  sin  but  by  the  law.  "  Sin,  that  it 
might  appear  sin,  working  death  in  me  by  that  which  is  good;  that  sin  by  the 
commandment  might  become  exceeding  sinful"  (ver.  13).  Borne  would  condemn 
the  Bible  because  it  describes  sin,  and  pictures  some  of  its  best  characters  as  falling 
into  sins  of  gross  desciiption.  But  this,  so  far  from  being  a  defect  of  the  Bible,  is  at 
once  an  evidence  of  ita  truthfulness,  and  an  element  in  its  purifying  power  upon 
1]  umanity.  The  Bible  does  not  describe  sin  to  make  us  love  it,  but  to  turn  us  from  it. 
So  it  is  with  the  Law  of  God.  It  may  awaken  in  our  minds  suggestions  of  sins  that  we 
would  not  otherwise  have  thought  of  (vers.  7,  8),  but  conscience  at  once  recognizes 
that  this  is  due,  not  to  the  Law  itself,  but  to  the  sinfulness  of  our  nature.  2.  The  Law 
remains  as  the  standard  of  right  life.  "  The  Law  is  holy,  and  the  commandment  holy, 
and  just,  and  good"  (ver.  12)  ;  "The  Law  is  spiritual"  (ver.  14).  Here  is  the  answer 
to  those  who  regard  the  Law  as  abrogated.  The  Law  is  still  binding  as  the  rule  of  life, 
the  standard  of  morality.  It  therefore  condemns  the  sinner.  Thus  still  it  becomes  our 
schoolmaster,  to  bring  us  to  Christ. — 0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  18 — 25. — The  inward  conflict  of  the  Christian  heart.  Two  forces  are  for  ever 
struggling  for  the  soul  of  man.  Qpethe,  the  German  poet,  has  immortalized  that  for  us 
in  his  great  drama  of  'Paust,'  where  Mephistopheles,  the  prince  of  evil,  tempts  a 
human  being  too  successfully  into  the  paths  of  destruction.  Milton  has  immortalized 
it  for  us  in  his  great  epic,  '  Paradise  Lost.'  But  these  great  poems  are,  after  all,  but 
echoes  of  the  story  of  the  Pall  as  told  us  in  the  Bible.  These  words  of  St.  Paul  are 
another  echo  of  that  story  of  the  Pall.  They  might  have  been  spoken  by  any  of  us. 
What  folly  to  discuss  the  doctrine  of  human  depravity  as  the  result  of  the  Fall,  when 
every  man  carries  the  proof  of  it  in  his  own  breast  I  Thank  God,  there  is  a  Paradise 
Regained  as  well  as  a  Paradise  Lost.  There  is  a  power  of  good  as  well  as  of  evil 
working  on  the  human  heart.  There  is  "a  power,  not  ourselves,  that  makes  for 
righteousness,"  and — something  more  than  he  who  used  those  famous  words  meant  by 
them — there  is  the  personal  power  of  a  personal  Saviour,  coming  down  into  this  sinful 
world,  and  trying  to  lift  men  up  again  from  their  fallen  and  lost  condition,  by  the 
power  of  his  cross,  by  the  power  of  his  Divine  love  and  mercy,  by  the  power  of  his 
resurrection,  by  the  power  of  his  Spirit  working  upon  their  hearts. 

I.  A  DESIEB  AND  A  DELIGHT.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  himself  as  having  a  desire  for  what 
is  good.  "  When  I  would  do  good "  (ver.  21),  that  is,  "  when  I  want  to  do  good," 
"  when  I  wish  to  do  what  is  right."  That  in  itself  is  a  step  on  the  upward  path.  But 
you  might  have  a  desire  for  what  is  right,  and  yet  not  be  a  Christian.  Paul  had  some- 
thin,.;  more  than  this  desire  for  what  was  right;  he  had  a  delight  in  it.     "I  delight  in 

ItOMANS.  o 


194  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  vii.  1—25. 

the  Law  of  God  after  the  inward  man  "  (ver.  22).  That  in  itself  marks  him  out  as  a 
true  Christian.  He  takes  pleasure  in  the  Divine  Word,  although  it  reveals  to  him  the 
sinfulness  of  his  own  heart.  He  delights  in  the  Law  of  God,  because  it  shows  to  him 
his  Father's  will.  He  delights  in  the  Law  of  God,  because  it  shows  to  him  the  ideal 
of  human  character,  the  standard  of  good  to  which  he  desires  to  attain.  Here,  then,  is 
the  test,  the  evidence,  of  a  true  Christian.  When  we  delight  in  the  Law  of  G-od  after 
the  inward  man,  making  it  our  constant  study ;  when  we  humbly,  but  with  earnest 
resolution,  set  ourselves  to  obey  its  precepts ;  this  is  evidence  of  the  renewed  nature 
and  the  regenerate  spirit.  Do  we  delight  in  the  Law  of  God,  or  do  we  find  God's 
commands  a  burden?  Is  the  sabbath  a  delight,  or  is  it  wearisome?  Are  the  services 
of  God's  house  a  pleasure  which  we  would  not  miss  if  it  were  possible,  a  pleasure  into 
which  we  throw  all  our  capacities  and  energies ;  or  are  they  a  routine  form  which  we 
go  through  because  we  think  we  must — a  kind  of  cold,  uninteresting  task,  which  we 
are  anxious  to  get  over  just  as  soon  as  possible?  And  how  is  it  with  the  duties  of  the 
Christian  life — with  the  duty  of  charity,  the  duty  of  forgiveness,  the  duty  of  liberality  ? 
If  you  do  not  delight  in  these  things,  then  there  is  much  reason  to  doubt  if  you  are  a 
Christian  at  all. 

II.  Conflict  and  oaptivitt.  Paul  was  making  an  analysis  of  his  own  mind.  It 
was  a  complete  analysis,  and  he  has  left  behind  a  true  record  of  it.  "  But  I  see  another 
law  in  my  members,  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into 
captivity  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members  "  (ver.  23).  We  know  what  is 
right,  but  we  often  fail  to  do  it.  Prdbo  meliora,  deteriora  sequor.  But  some  one 
may  say — This  conflict  with  sin  and  captivity  to  it  were  not  the  experience  of  a  truly 
regenerate  man.  Are  we  not  told  that  "  he  that  is  horn  of  God  sinneth  not "  ?  The 
previous  statements  of  the  apostle  are  an  answer  to  this.  He  tells  us  that  he  delights 
in  the  Law  of  God  after  the  inward  man — a  statement  which  none  but  a  true  Christian 
could  make.  The  fact  is,  the  Apostle  Paul  was  no  perfectionist.  He  did  not  believe 
in  sinless  perfection.  Like  every  true  saint  of  God,  the  older  he  grew  and  the  holier 
he  became,  the  more  he  felt  his  own  sinfulness.  The  more  he  knew  of  Christ,  the  less 
he  thought  of  self.  It  was  a  humbling  experience,  this  conflict  with  sin  and  subjection 
to  its  power.  Yet  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  when  the  apostle  said,  "  When  I  would 
do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me,"  he  meant  that  in  every  instance  when  he  wanted  to 
do  good  he  was  absolutely  prevented  from  accomplishing  his  purpose,  and  drawn  away 
into  positive  sin  by  the  corruption  which  still  adhered  to  him.  What  he  means  is 
evidently  this — that  in  all  his  endeavours  to  do  the  will  of  God,  the  power  of  sin  so 
interfered  with  his  efforts  that  he  could  not  do  anything  as  he  wished  to  do  it;  that 
the  power  of  evil  seemed  to  pervade  his  whole  life,  and  to  taint  all  his  actions,  even 
the  best  of  them.  Is  not  this  the  experience  of  every  child  of  God  t  Let  any  one  who 
really  loves  and  fears  God,  and  desires  to  serve  him,  form  a  purpose,  any  one  morning 
of  his  life,  to  repress  all  sinful  influences,  and  to  set  such  a  guard  upon  feeling,  and 
temper,  and  word,  and  action  throughout  the  day  as  that  there  shall  be  no  cause  for 
regret  or  repentance  in  the  evening;  and  I  think  it  will  be  found  that,  if  the  work  of 
self-examination  he  faithfully  and  honestly  performed  at  night,  the  language  of  the 
apostle  will  accurately  describe  the  experience  of  such  a  one:  "I  find  a  law,  that, 
when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me." 

III.  Trial  and  triumph.  It  was  a  great  trial  to  the  apostle,  this  indwelling 
presence  and  power  of  sin.  Under  its  power,  clinging  constantly  to  him,  as  the  dead 
body  which  the  ancients  used  sometimes  to  fasten  to  their  prisoners,  he  cried  out,  "  0 
wretched  man  that  I  am!  who  shall  deliver  me  from  this  body  of  death?"  (ver.  24). 
This  very  agony  of  spirit  was  a  further  proof  that  he  was  a  child  of  God.  Had  he 
been  an  unregenerate  mnn,  sin  would  have  been  a  delight  to  him,  instead  of  a  wearisome 
and  loathsome  burden,  from  which  he  is  anxious  to  be  delivered.  Here  again  is  a  test 
whether  you  are  a  Christian  or  not.  What  are  your  feelings  in  regard  to  sin  ?  Is  it 
a  source  of  shame  and  grief  to  you  when  you  yield  to  sin  ?  Or  do  you  see  no  harm  in 
doing  those  things  which  God's  Word  forbids  ?  Dr.  Arnold,  of  Bugby,  once  said  in 
that  famous  school,  as  is  recorded  in  his  life,  "  What  I  want  to  see  in  the  school,  and 
what  I  cannot  find,  is  abhorrence  of  evil.  I  always  think  of  the  psalm, '  Neither  doth 
he  abhor  that  which  is  evil.' "  The  true  Christian  will  abhor  sin.  It  is  in  this  sense 
that  "  he  that  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not " — does  not  love  »in.    He  will  look  upon  it  as 


OH.  vn.  1—25,]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  195 

the  abominable  thing  which  God  hates.  Its  presence  in  his  own  heart,  manifesting 
itself  in  his  best  services  and  in  his  dealings  with  his  fellow-men,  will  be  a  sore  trial  to 
him.  It  will  lead  him  to  cry  out,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  1  who  shall  deliver  me 
from  this  body  of  death?"  But  no  one  need  despair  of  deliverance,  no  matter  how 
strong  is  the  force  of  temptation  from  within  or  from  without.  Even  as  Paul  asked 
the  question,  he  answered  it  himself:  "I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." 
This  story  of  the  inward  conflict  teaches  us  many  lessons.  It  should  teach  us  all  watch- 
fulness and  prayerfulness.  It  should  teach  us  all  to  cultivate  the  higher,  the  better, 
the  heavenly  side  of  our  nature.  It  should  teach  us  humility.  It  should  teach  us 
charity  toward  others,  when  we  remeinber  the  faults  and  failings  and  frailties  of  our 
own  nature.  It  should  teach  us  to  look  for  and  to  depend  upon,  more  than  ever  we 
have  done  before,  the  Divine  strength  of  the  mighty  Saviour,  and  the  sanctifying 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  two  unions.  The  apostle  has  spoken  of  freedom  from  the  Law, 
and  of  the  new  reigu  of  grace;  but  lest  this  freedom  should  be  disputed,  he  here 
establishes  it.  The  Mosaic  Law,  as  such,  touches  only  this  present  life ;  death  does 
away  with  its  claims.  Christ,  therefore,  by  his  death,  is  freed  from  its  demands ;  and 
we,  by  our  spiritual  fellowship  with  him,  are  likewise  free.  Free  from  the  old  union, 
to  enter  on  the  new.     Such  is  the  arguraent  of  these  verses. 

I.  Dead  to  the  Law.  Law  is  not  spoken  of  here  in  its  Divine  perfection,  but  in 
its  partial,  external  character  as  revealed  through  Moses.  A  law  of  rigid  retribution : 
"  Do  this,  and  live ; "  "  Do  that,  and  die."  A  law  of  mere  restraints,  not  of  renewal. 
1.  Of  this  law,  death  was  the  annulment,  even  as  the  penalties  did  not  extend  beyond 
the  grave.  It  laid  "its  sanctions  on  the  whole  of  life;  further  than  life  it  did  not  go. 
An  example  of  this  is  found  in  the  Jewish  law  of  marriage,  which,  like  all  mere  national 
laws  of  marriage,  can  only  touch  this  present  life.  The  law  of  the  union,  in  such 
external  legislation,  is  only  until  death.  The  death  of  either  destroys  the  law.  2.  Has 
not  Christ,  then,  by  his  death,  escaped  the  claims  of  all  such  legislation  ?  Dying,  he 
has  died  unto  the  dispensation  of  Moses;  he  is  now  no  longer  the  Jew;  the  Law  has 
no  authority  over  him.  He  is  now  only  the  Divine  Man ;  he  has  risen  into  all  the 
spiritual  freedom  and  power  of  the  life  of  God.  No  narrow,  prohibitive  Law  is  the  law 
of  his  risen  life ;  but  the  perfect,  quickening  law  of  God.  And  are  not  we  dead,  in 
him,  to  all  the  limitations  and  restraints  of  the  Law?  Our  very  union  with  him,  by 
faith,  releases  us  now  from  all  its  claims.  It  is  as  though  we  were  dead.  The  unhappy 
marriage-bond  is  broken. 

II.  Alive  to  Christ.  But  if  so,  a  new  marriage-bond  is  formed.  Dead  to  the  Law, 
we  live  to  Christ.  The  one  has  no  more  claim ;  the  other  has  every  claim.  We  are 
joined  to  him  now,  indissolubly  one.  1.  The  plenitude  of  spiritual  power  is  ours  in 
him.  No  law  of  the  letter  restrains,  but  a  law  of  the  Spirit  inspires.  His  Spirit  I 
which  he  hath  "poured  forth"  (Acts  ii.  33),  which  he  hath  "poured  out  upon  us 
richly  "  (Titus  iii.  6).  Is  it  not  so  ?  a  law  written  on  the  heart — the  law  of  liberty,  the 
law  of  love.  2.  And  being  thus  filled  with  power,  through  faith  in  him,  we  bring 
forth  fruit  unto  God.  The  old  union,  with  the  Law,  wrought  fruit,  but  it  was  fruit 
unto  death.  Its  very  holiness,  as  a  mere  exterior  restraint  in  contact  with  our  oarnal 
nature,  was  an  excitant  to  sin.  Fruit  unto  death!  yes;  for,  sowing  to  the  flesh,  we 
reaped  corruption.  But  now,  God's  law  works  in  us,  as  a  quickening  power.  God's 
love  is  our  very  life ;  and  the  fruit  is  unto  life,  unto  God ! 

Have  we  such  union  with  Christ?  an  indefeasible  union,  utter  and  for  evermore? 
For  such  is  truly  the  new  life  of  faith.  " Christ  liveth  in  me"  (Gah  ii.  20) :  we  must 
be  satisfied  with  nothing  short  of  this. — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  7 — 13. — Is  the  Law  sinf  "The  sinful  passions,  which  were  through  the 
Law  "  (ver.  5).  "What !  does  the  Law  bring  forth  such  fruit  ?  Is  the  Law  bin  ?  Nay, 
that  cannot  be ;  on  the  contrary,  we  all  acknowledge  it,  without  dispute,  as  "  holy," 
and  every  separate  commandment  which  it  gives  as  "  holy,  and  righteous,  and  good." 
Nevertheless,  even  the  holy  Law  has  peculiar  relations  to  the  development  of  sin ;  and 
they  are  these:  the  Law  reveals  sin;  the  Ijaw  becomes,  to  a  sinful  man,  an  excitant  to 
further  sin. 


196  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [on.  vii.  1— 25 

I.  The  Law  as  ebvealing  sin.  "  For,"  says  the  apostle,  "  I  had  not  known  sin, 
except  through  the  Law ;  I  had  not  known  coveting,  except  the  Law  had  said.  Thou  shalt 
not  covet."  Here  we  have  a  general  principle,  and  a  special  instance.  Law,  by  saying, 
"  Thou  shalt  not,"  brings  home  to  our  conscience  the  knowledge  that  certain  tendencies, 
which  we  had  followed  unconsciously  before,  are  wrong;  the  separate  commandments 
of  the  Law  stamp  this  character  of  wrongness  on  each  separate  tendency  respectively. 
Thus  we  learn  the  great  distinctions  of  right  and  wrong ;  the  particular  distinctions 
in  particular  cases.  To  us,  then,  as  fallen  creatures,  there  is  a  great  revelation  of 
wrung.  When  Law  first  speaks,  we  awake  to  find  ourselves  sinful,  i.e.  dead!  Till 
then?  Alive,  without  law;  yes,  even  as  the  brute  beasts  are  alive,  not  being  conscious 
of  any  moral  disharmony  or  disorder.  They  may  covet  and  strive  and  fight,  but  to 
them  this  is  not  wrong.  Law  is  silent,  and  therefore  sin,  in  its  recognized  character,  is 
not — it  is  dead.     So  with  us.     But  Law  comes;  sin  revives;  we  die! 

II.  The  Law  as  ak  excitant  to  sin.  To  innocent  creatures  law  would  bo 
directive,  and  restraining;  to  coirupt  creatures  it  is  galling,  and  incentive  to  yet  worse 
outbreaks.  Illustrate,  unruly  horse.  The  very  curbing  makes  it  spring  forth  more 
furiously.  So  sin  works  in  us,  throngh  the  commandment,  all  manner  of  coveting.- 
And  surely  nothing  shows  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin  more, strikingly  than  this, 
that  a  Law  which  is  acknowledged  as  holy  and  good  should  be  the  means  of  making 
it  more  rampant  and  riotous !  Sin  works  death  "  throngh  that  which  is  good."  And 
we,  meanwhile?  Slain!  slain,  that  we  may  ciesire  a  better  life.  Law  the  necessary 
preparative  for  redemption. 

But  when  are  these  successive  experiences  realized?  When  are  we  " alive  without 
law"?  In  the  days  of  irresponsible  infancy,  when  we  are  sinful  indeed,  but  uncon- 
sciously sinful,  yielding  to  the  wrong  tendency  even  as  we  yield  to  the  right,  not 
knowing,  not  reflecting.  More  or  less,  though  only  partially,  this  is  the  case  among 
the  untaught  heathen  also;  only  partially,  for  there  is  law  written  on  the  heart. 
To  some  extent  the  case  even  amongst  the  enlightened,  even  amongst  the  regenerate ; 
for  it  is  only  by  degrees  that  the  Law  of  Ch'^ist  unfolds  to  us  its  sublime  perfection. 
And  when,  and  to  what  extent,  are  we  dead,  when  sin  revives  ?  As  childhood  develops 
into  fuller  life,  and  the  Law  without  awakes  the  law  within.  Also,  as  the  heathen, 
the  uninstructcd,  are  taught  the  fuller  truth.  And,  in  accordance  with  above,  as  tts 
Christ  unfolds  to  us  his  perfection,  and  we  do  not  at  once  respond.     And  so  it  is  that 

"They  who  fain  would  serve  thee  beat 
Are  conscious  most  of  wrong  within." 

But  "he  giyeth  more  grace ! " — T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  14 — 25. — "  Sold  wider  sin  \ "  Such  is  the  deplorable  result  of  the  action  of 
God's  Law  on  man :  sin  is  made  to  stand  out  blackly,  in  all  its  hideous  evil ;  nay,  it 
seems  even  stimulated  to  increased  malignity  of  working.  How  so?  Because  of  the 
intense  opposition  between  the  holy  Law  and  an  unholy  nature:  "For  we  know  that 
the  Law  is  spiritual ;  but  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin."  But  man's  nature  is  not  with- 
out its  witness  for  the  Divine ;  the  spiritual  is  captive, but  not  destroyed;  it  is  capable 
of  apprehending  and  desiring,  though  not  of  really  purposing  and  performing  the  good : 
and  therefore,  not  merely  is  there  a  conflict  between  the  spiritual  Law  and  man's  carnal ' 
nature,  as  desciibed  above,  but  between  the  spiritual  nature  of  man  himself,  when 
quickened  by  the  spiritual  Law,  and  that  carnal  nature  to  which  it  is  enslaved.  These 
rerses  depict  this  opposition,  ami  we  have  therefore — the  desire  for  the  good;  the 
subjection  to  tlie  evil;  the  hopeless  conflict. 

I.  The  desire  fob  the  oood.  Repeatedly,  through  this  whole  passa.^e,  the  apostle 
speaks  of  those  who  are  touched  by  the  quickening  action  of  the  Law  as  desiring,  and 
half  purpo.sing,  the  goud.  Thus,  "  I  consent  unto  the  Law  that  it  is  good ; "  "  To  will  is 
present  with  me;"  "I  delight  in  the  Law  of  Grod  after  the  inward  mnn;"  "With  the 
uiind  I  serve  the  Law  of  Uod."  And  is  nut  this  verified  by  our  experience?  Our 
very  nature  constrains  us  to  approve,  to  admire,  the  good.  We  have  the  witness  in 
ourselves.  The  spirit  made  after  God's  image  recognizes  God.  The  light  of  conscience 
struggles  upwards  to  its  kindred  light.  Nay,  more  than  this.  If  we  do  not  stubbornly 
resist,  tljO  fair  image  of  goodness  commands,  not  merely  our  approval,  but  our  desires. 


CH.  vn.  I— 25.]    THE  Bl'ISTLB  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  197 

The  will,  bond-slave  as  it  is,  covets  freedom.  The  subjected  spirit  craves  to  be  once 
again  in  harmony  with  tbe  spiritual  Law.  Is  not  this  verified  likewise  by  the  history 
of  mankind?  In  the  ancient  world,  amid  all  the  corruptions  of  heathendom,  there 
were  those  who  approved  and  desired  the  good.  It  shone  before  them  in  its  fascinating 
beauty,  and  their  eyes  were  fixed  upon  its  fairness,  and  their  souls  were  drawn  in 
Icngiug  towards  it.  So  is  it  still.  Does  not  the  Christ  attract  the  gaze,  the  admiration 
even,  of  sinful  men?  And  is  there  not  stirred  in  many  a  sinful  heart  the  longing  to 
be  at  one  with  Christ?  Yes; 'the  spiritual  Law  attracts  the  approbation  and  desire  of 
the  spiritual  in  njan.     The  Ego,  the  Self,  the  I,  desires  the  good. 

II.  The  SUBJECTION  TO  THE  EVIL.  But  is  the  dcsire  accomplished?  Alas!  to  desire 
the  good  is  only  to  realize  more  intensely  the  utter  subjeciiou  to  evil.  Man's  spirit  is 
enslaved  to  the  flesh,  and,  through  the  flesh,  to  sin :  "  sold  under  sin."  This  thought 
also  runs  through  the  passage.  And  so  abject  is  the  enslavement,  that  the  Ego  is  but 
the  impotent  instrument  in  the  hands  of  sin.  "  It  is  no  more  I  that  do  it,  but  sin 
which  dwelleth  in  me,"  is  the  thrice-uttered  plaint  of  the  captive  man.  And  thus  the 
very  motions  of  the  will  are  made  in  blind  submission  :  "  that  which  I  do  I  know  not." 
Yea,  even  when  the  will  would  make  some  show  of  resistance,  it  is  all  in  vain.  For 
the  rigid  law  which  governs  the  whole  nature,  made  to  seem  the  more  rigid  in  its 
defiance  of  that  other  holy  Law  of  God,  is — "to  me  who  would  do  good,  evil  is 
present ; "  yes,  present  always,  as  an  absolute,  a  mocking  lord.  Has  not  the  world's 
history  verified  these  things  ?  Listen  to  its  confessions  :  Video  melwra  prdboque, 
deteriora  sequor ;  Nitimur  in  vetitum  semper,  cupimusque  negata  ("  I  see  the  better 
things,  and  approve  them;  I  follow  the  worse;"  "We  strive  ever  after  what  is  for- 
bidden, and  desire  the  things  denied  to  us"):  so  spake  the  heathen,  in  the  ancient 
world.  And  is  not  this  our  experience  still?  We  are  "in  the  flesh,"  and  in  our  flesh 
"dwelleth  no  good  thing."    Such  is  our  natural  state. 

III.  The  hopeless  cokfliot.  And,  this  being  so,  is  not  our  condition  one  of 
wretchedness,  of  despair?  Perpetual  war  between  the  law  of  the  mind  and  the  law  of 
the  members;  between  the  spirit  and  the  flesh.  But  hopelesg  war;  sin,  thiough  the 
flesh,  triumphant  always,  mockingly  triumphant.  Yes,  we  may  look,  we  may  writhe 
in  our  efforts  to  escape ;  but  we  are  bound — bound  hand  and  foot.  And  so  our  own 
very  body,  intended  to  be  the  obedient  instrument  of  the  governing  spirit,  has  become, 
by  the  supremacy  of  sin,  a  brute  lord,  and  is  a  "  body  of  death."  Deatli  unto  death ; 
darkness  ever  darker:  is  not  the  conflict  hopeless?  may  we  not  well  cry,  "0  wretched 
man  that  I  am!  who  shall  deliver  me?" 

Yes,  hopeless  in  itself;  no  victory  in  us.  But,  thanks  be  to  God,  there  is  a  mightier 
One,  even  Jesus ;  and  he  is  our  Helper,  "  mighty  to  save  "  1 — T.  F.  L. 

Ver.  6. — "  Newness  (^  spirit."  The  apostle  never  tires  of  contrasting  the  Sinaitic 
with  the  gospel  dispensation,  to  the  exaltation  of  the  latter.  He  thinks  of  the  former 
as  a  thraldom.     "  We  were  holden,"  that  is,  cribbed,  confined  by  the  Law. 

I.  An  essential  to  delivekanoe  from  Law.  1.  Death  must  have  intervened. 
Death  is  the  great  liberator,  exhausting  the  penalty  of  the  Law,  and  giving  quittance 
from  its  captivity.  The  wife  is  released  from  spousal  obligations  by  the  death  of  her 
husband,  and  is  free,  therefore,  to  enter  into  a  new  covenant.  2.  The  death  of  Olirist 
affords  the  necessary  liberation.  Prior  to  full  obedience  and  reception  of  the  utmost 
penalty  of  Mosaism,  a  fresh  dispensation  had  been  like  adultery;  but  when  the  Law 
had  been  fulfilled  to  its  extreme  requirement,  the  death  of  the  victim  abrogated  the 
authority  of  the  Law.  3.  2%e  death  of  Christ  is  spiritucHly  enacted  in  his  folhwers. 
They  repeat  in  essence  his  crucifixion  of  sin.  His  atonement  is  realized  in  their  heart, 
and  their  baptism  is  the  outward  emblem  of  release  by  death  and  burial  from  a 
covenant  of  works.  "He  died  unto  sin  once,  but  livelh  unto  God."  Henceforth  with 
Christians  "  the  terrors  of  law  and  of  death  can  have  nothing  to  do." 

II.  The  excellence  of  the  new  condition.  We  are  not  set  free  to  please  our- 
ielves,  but  belong  to  him  "who  died  for  us  and  rose  again."  We  enter  into  a  fresh 
service.  1.  The  fact  that  it  is  new  is  a  guarantee  of-  improvement.  Not  everything 
new  is  better  than  the  old.~  Man  frequently  retrogrades  by  his  changes  of  custom. 
But  when  the  alteration  is  a  direct  consequence  of  Divine  intervention,  there  must  be 
fta  advance.     We  cannot  conceive  of  God  taking  a  backward  step.    2.  Tlie  new  tervic* 


198  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS,    [oh.  vn.  1—25. 

Ms  the  dewy  freshness  of  youth  ahmt  it.  The  resurrection-life  is  an  awaltening  out  of 
sleep,  with  the  vigour  of  a  glad  new  morning.  The  Christian  sloughs  off  the  old  skin, 
to  be  anired  in  a  vesture  of  beauty,  and,  like  the  winged  butterfly  emerging  from  the 
chrysalis  state,  he  enters  into  an  enlarged  sphere  of  existence  with  corresponding 
capacities.  3.  Voluntary  service  is  substUuted  for  compulsion.  "  Live  and  do  "  takes 
the  place  of  "  Do  and  live."  The  heart  has  been  won  to  God,  to  obedience  and  holiness, 
and  "love's  labour  is  light."  The  renewed  spirit  delights  to  exert  itself  in  loving 
activity.  Gratitude  Is  a  sweeter  and  stronger  motive  than  authority.  4.  Bules  are 
exchanged  for  principles.  Not  the  definite  limiting  letter  governs  the  service,  but  a 
code  of  action  which  leaves  much  to  be  ascertained  and  applied  by  the  enlightened 
judgment.  It  is  the  obedience  of  the  instructed  manhood,  not  the  strict  and  rigid 
enforcement  of  precepts  on  children  in  their  pupilage.  The  Law  lay  as  a  burden  on 
men's  souls;  the  gospel  is  a  "reasonable  service,"  claiifying  the  vision  and  guiding 
men  as  "  with  the  eye "  of  God.  We  serve  not  to  gain  heaven,  but  because  Christ 
has  opened  to  us  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  As  pilgrims  relieved  of  a  heavy  load,  we 
journey  joyously  to  the  city  of  the  King.  A  bird  must  sing,  and  a  Christian  must 
sei've. — S.  E.  A. 

Vers.  7 — 11. — Knowledge  of  sin  through  Law.  The  strong  lanpjuage  in  which  the 
apostle  exulted  in  the  believer's  discharge  from  the  Law  might  easily  be  misunder- 
stood, and  give  oifenoe  to  Jewish  readers.  It  seemed  to  throw  the  onus  of  man's 
bondage  and  death  entirely  upon  the  Sinaitio  Law.  To  obviate  misconception,  he 
therefore  enters  into  a  detailed  examination  of  the  relationship  of  sin  and  Law.  He 
insists  on  the  function  of  Law  as  revealing  sin — the  secondary,  not  the  primary  cause 
of  sin. 

I.  The  Law  manifests  the  existence  of  sin.  "I  had  not  known  sin,  except 
through  the  Law."  The  tenth  commandment  is  selected  as  a  particular  instance  of 
law.  The  prohibition  against  coveting  brings  to  light  the  perversity  of  human  nature, 
which  rebels  against  the  idea  of  a  thing  forbidden,  and  longs  to  do  the  action  repro- 
bated. We  know  not  the  existence  of  the  current  till  we  put  some  barrier  in  the  way ; 
then  the  stream  rages  to  overcome  the  obstacle.  A  precept  provokes  into  activity  the 
dormant  selfishness ;  sin  "  revives."  Apart  from  a  law,  we  had  sinned  without  realizing 
that  it  was  sin. 

II.  The  Law  displats  the  strength  of  sin.  We  must  distinguish  between  the 
agent  and  the  pcoasion.  The  commandment  furnishes  an  opportunity  of  which  the 
sinful  appetites  readily  avail  themselves  to  suggest  disobedience.  And  we  gauge  best 
the  power  of  the  tide  when  we  try  to  swim  against  it.  Sin  hurries  us  onward  against 
the  bounds  which  law  has  set  up,  and  in  our  vain  struggles  to  check  the  sinful 
impulse  we  learn  how  mighty  sin  is  within.  We  had  thought  it  easy  to  control  our 
inclinations  till  the  conflict  began. 

III.  The  Law  exposes  the  deceitfulness  op  sin.  "  Sin  beguiled  me  through 
the  commandment "  (Revised  Versiou).  The  promises  of  sin  are  ever  fair  to  the  eye 
and  ear :  "  Ye  shall  be  as  gods."  But  experience  reveals  the  fact  that  sin  works  evil  to 
us.  It  is  a  treacherous  monster  dealing  with  us  as  Joab  did  with  Amnsa ;  it  kisses  us 
and  stabs  our  souls.  The  fruit,  so  sweet  and  pleasant,  turns  to  gall  and  wormwood. 
Sin  pretends  to  fasten  wings  to  the  soul,  but  is  really  loading  it  with  fetters.  The 
operation  that  was  to  purge  our  vision  has  destroyed  it.  All  sin  is  not  ugly  on  the 
surface.  Like  some  diseases  and  parasitical  growths,  it  appears  with  an  illusory  bright- 
ness to  mock  our  hopes. 

IV.  The  Law  exhibits  the  fatal  effects  of  sin.  "Slew  me.''  "The  com- 
niandment  which  was  intended  for  life,  I  found  to  be  nnto  death."  Learn  the  abomi- 
nableness  of  sin  which  pollutes  the  pure  stream  of  holy  injunction  into  a  poisoning 
river,  and  turns  the  inspiriting  fire  of  the  Divine  Word  into  a  destructive  conflagration. 
In  the  physical  death  which  attends  so  many  vicious  courses,  we  see  an  analogue  of 
the  moral  death  with  which  sin  visits  humanity.  As  a  ray  of  light  makes  visible  the 
motes  in  the  atmosphere,  so  the  commandment  of  God  discovers  to  us  the  sinful 
miasmatic  motions  of  the  flesh.  We  confess  the  loss  of  a  sense  of  God's  favour  and  of 
righteous  peace  in  the  soul.  Push  sin  to  its  final  consequences  to  judge  of  the 
enormity  of  a  single  act.     By  its  fruits  we  know  sin.     It  enslaves  the  soul  and  forces 


OB.  vti.  1— 25.]    taB  EPISTPLE  OB*  PAUL  TO  THE  KOSlANS.  199 

it  to  do  what  it  would  not,  so  that  men  groan  nnder  the  desperate  oppression.  Thus 
the  Law  fulfils  its  purpose  in  the  manifestation  of  sin,  and  ultimately  leads  to  the 
deliverance  of  the  believer.  Sin  overreaches  itself,  and  is  hoist  with  its  own  petard. 
Feeling  the  woiking  of  death  and  dreading  the  issue,  we  cry  to  him  who  "was 
manifested  that  he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  The  Law  being  impotent 
to  produce  holiness,  another  dispensation  was  requisite,  ushered  in  by  Christ,  who  brings 
the  "law  of  the  Spirit  of  life"  and  peace. — S.  R.  A. 

Vers.  22,  23. — The  inner  warfare.  Even  prior  to  their  self-dedication  to  the  service 
of  God,  men  are  conscious  of  the  two  opposing  laws  of  which  the  text  speaks.  The 
conflict  is  intensified  and  its  issue  rendered  certain  by  the  saving  knowledge  of  the 
truth,  but  it  is  not  entirely  abolished.  All  men  can  therefore  echo  in  some  degree  the 
utterance  of  the  apostle. 

I.  Obedience  to  the  Law  of  God  means  a  viotoet  won  oveb  a  part  of  self. 
There  is  a  dualism  in  man ;  the  lower  appetites  strive  to  subjugate  the  higher  and 
nobler  desires.  However  powerful  the  "  law  of  the  members,"  it  cannot  obliterate  the 
reniembiance  of  a  superior  Law.  But  the  carnal  inclinations  may  be  so  readily 
followed  that  there  is  hardly  any  fighting  at  all.  Howbeit,  when  the  "  inward  man  " 
asserts  his  sway,  ami  the  fleshy  impulse  is  denied,  this  implies  that  a  battle  has  been 
waged.  It  is  not  natural  to  us  nor  easy  to  do  right  and  to  conquer  evil.  Sin 
struggles  hard ;  the  spirit  may  be  willing  to  comply  with  the  Divine  dictate,  but  the 
flesh  is  weak  unto  good,  and  often  refuses  to  follow  the  lead  of  the  spirit.  Eecall  the 
temptation  and  conflict  of  Jesus  Christ  in  Gethsemane.  The  law  of  the  members,  our 
corporeal  frame,  often  pleads  speciously  for  the  indulgence  of  a  longing  legitimate 
enough  at  another  time  or  place,  and  this  fact  augments  the  severity  of  the  warfare. 

II.  CONSIDBBATIONS  ADAPTED  TO  BTRENQTHEN  THE  COMBATANT  AGAINST  SURRENDER 

TO  THE  LOWER  PRINCIPLE.  1.  The  Imw  of  Ood  has  authority  on  its  side.  The  law  of 
the  mind  is  the  genuine  law ;  the  other  is  a  usurped  dominion,  promulgating  an 
unlawful  edict.  Obedience  to  properly  constituted  authorities  is  the  path  of  safety 
and  honour  for  communities  and  individuals.  Eecollect,  therefore,  that  what  you  are 
urged  to  do  by  the  law  of  the  members  is  flat  rebellion  against  your  King.  Its  force 
has  no  sovereignty  behind  it.  2.  To  succumb  to  the  law  of  the  members  is  to  yield  to 
sin  and  death.  Reflect  on  the  consequence  of  a  defeat  of  the  higher  self.  It  implies 
slavery  and  destruction.  None  but  the  conquerors  can  taste  life  here  and  receive  its 
crown  hereafter.  3.  Only  the  Law  of  Ood  can  excite  true  delight.  It  is  called  "  the 
law  of  the  mind,"  because  it  is  that  which  the  clarified  vision  discerns  as  beautiful, 
and  to  which  the  purified  judgment  yields  complete  and  lasting  assent.  To  allow  the 
body  to  govern  the  soul  is  to  mar  the  plan  of  our  being.  For  the  sake  of  ease  and 
pleasure  to  gratify  a  present  inclination  is  to  prefer  the  temporal  to  the  eternal,  and 
shadows  to  the  substance.  Subsequent  reaction  testifies  to  the  short-lived  gratification 
of  sensual  appetites.  This  is  true  of  every  case  in  which  ignoble  pursuits  and  aims 
have  overridden  the  suggestions  of  a  lofty  self-sacrificing  career.  4.  The  Ood  who  has 
written  his  Law  on  the  pages  of  Scripture,  and  graven  it  on  the  tablets  of  the  mind, 
assures  us  of  his  unfailing  support  in  the  warfare.  He  has  given  us  his  Son  as  the 
Captain  of  our  salvation.  "By  death  he  death's  dark  king  defeated,"  and  by  his 
triumph  and  exaltation  exhibited  the  superiority  of  goodness  to  every  other  method  of 
obtaining  solid  peace  and  honour.  We  may  fight  with  confidence,  for  our  emancipation 
from  evil  is  sure.  He  turns  our  folly  into  wisdom  and  our  weakness  into  strength 
through  his  indwelling  Spirit,  the  ever-present  Christ. — S.  R.  A. 

Vers.  24,  25. — A  cry  and  its  answer.  Strange  language  to  issue  from  the  lips  of  the 
great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles !  from  a  chosen  vessel  unto  honour,  a  man  in  labours 
abundant  and  most  blessed,  with  joy  often  rising  to  transport.  Nor  was  it  forced  from 
him  by  some  momentary  excitement  or  the  pressure  of  some  temporary  trouble.  Nor 
is  there  any  reference  to  outward  afflictions  and  persecutions.  Had  he  cried  out  when 
under  the  agonizing  scourge  or  in  the  dismal  dungeon,  we  had  not  been  so  surpiised. 
But  it  is  while  he  is  enforcing  truth  drawn  &om  bis  own  inward  experience  he  so 
realizes  the  bitterness  of  the  spiritual  conflict,  that  his  language  cannot  be  restrained 
within  the  limits  of  calm  reasoning,  and  he  bursts  forth  with  the  exclamation,  "  0 


200  THE   EPISTLE   OP   PAUL   TO   THE   ROMANS,     [ch.  vii.  1— 25. 

wretched  man,"  etc.l  Some  have  been  so  shocked  as  to  call  this  a  miserable  chapter, 
and  have  shifted  the  difficulty  by  passing  it  on  one  side.  Others  have  adopted  the 
notion  that  he  is  here  describing,  not  his  actual  state,  but  the  condition  of  an 
unregenerate  man  such  as  he  was  once.  Yet  the  expression  of  the  preceding  verse, 
"I  delight  in  the  Law  of  Grod,"  and  the  change  of  tense  from  the  past  to  the  present 
after  the  thirteenth  verse,  indicate  that  we  have  here  a  vivid  description  of  the  struggle 
that  continues,  though  with  better  success,  even  in  the  Christian  who  is  justified,  but 
not  wholly  sanctified,  whilst  he  is  im|irisoned  in  this  "  body  of  death." 

I.   iNQniBli    MORE  CLOSELY  INTO  THE  GROTTND  OF  THIS   EXCLAMATION.      What  is   it  of 

which  such  grievous  complaint  is  made?  He  appeals  for  aid  against  a  strong  foe  whose 
grasp  is  on  his  throat.  The  eyes  of  the  warrior  grow  dim,  his  heart  is  faint,  and,  fearful 
of  utter  defeat,  ho.  cries,  "  Who  will  deliver  me  ?  "  We  may  explain  "  the  body  of  this 
death  "  as  meaning  this  mortal  body,  the  coffin  of  the  soul,  the  seat  and  instrument 
of  sin.  But  the  apostle  includes  still  more  in  the  phrase.  It  denotes  sin  itself,  this 
carnal  mass,  all  the  imperfections,  the  corrupt  and  evil  passions  of  the  soul.  It  is  a 
body  of  death,  because  it  tends  to  death ;  it  infects  us,  and  brings  us  down  to  death. 
The  old  man  tries  to  strangle  the  new  man,  and,  unlike  the  infant  Hercules,  the 
Christian  is  in  danger  of  being  overcome  by  the  snakes  that  attack  his  feebleness. 
How  afflicting  to  one  who  loves  God  and  desires  to  do  his  will,  to  find  himself  thwarted 
at  every  turn,  and  that  to  succeed  means  a  desperate  conflict  1  Attainments  in  the 
Divine  life  are  not  reached  without  a  struggle,  and  non-success  is  not  simply  imper- 
fection; it  is  faihire,  defeat,  sin  gaining  the  mastery.  This  evil  is  grievous  because  it 
is  so  near  and  so  constant.  The  man  is  chained  to  a  dead  body.  Where  we  go  our 
enemy  accompanies  us,  ever  ready  to  assault  us,  especially  when  we  are  at  a  disadvan- 
t»ge  from  fatigue  or  delusive  security.  Distant  evils  might  be  borne  with  some 
measure  cf  equanimity;  we  might  have  a  signal  of  their  approach,  and  be  pre|)ared,  and 
Woe  that,  alter  a  sharp  bout,  they  would  retire.  But  like  a  sick  man  tormented  with 
1  diseased  frame,  so  the  "law  of  sin  in  the  members"  manifests  its  force  and  uniform 
.lostility  in  every  place. 

II.  Derive  consolation  from  the  exclamation  itself — from  the  fact  of  its  utter- 
ance, its  vehemency,  etc.  1.  Such  a  cry  indicates  the  stirrings  of  Divine  life  within 
the  soul.  The  man  must  be  visited  with  God's  grace  who  is  thus  conscious  of  his 
spiritual  nature,  and  of  a  longing  to  shake  off  his  unworthy  bondage  to  evil.  It  may 
be  the  beginning  of  better  things  if  the  impressioii  be  yielded  to.  Do  not  quit  the 
fight,  lest  you  become  like  men  who  have  been  temporarily  aroused  and  warned,  and 
have  made  vows  of  reformation,  and  then  returned  to  their  old  apathy  and  sleep  in 
sin.  And  this  attitude  of  watchfulness  should  never  be  abandoned  during  your  whole 
career.  2.  The  intensity  of  the  cry  discovers  a  thorough  hatred  of  siti  and  a  thirst  after 
holiness.  It  is  a  passionate  outburst  revealing  the  central  depths.  Such  a  disclosure 
is  not  fit  for  all  scenes  and  limes;  the  conflict  of  the  soul  is  too  solemn  to  be  profaned 
by  casual  spectators.  Yet  what  a  mark  of  a  renewed  nature  is  here  displayed  1  Wliat 
loathing  of  corruption,  as  offensive  to  the  spiritual  sense  1  Sin  may  still  ilog  the  feet 
of  the  Christian  and  sometimes  cause  him  to  stumble,  but  he  is  never  satisfied  with 
such  a  condition,  and  calls  aloud  for  aid.  Would  that  this  sense  of  the  enormity  of 
sin  were  moie  prevalent;  that,  like  a  speck  of  dust  in  the  eye,  there  could  be  no  ease 
till  it  be  removed!  Sin  is  a  foreign  body,  a  disturbing  element,  an  intruder.  3.  ITiere 
is  comfort  in  the  very  conviction  of  helplessness.  The  apostle  sums  up  his  experience 
as  if  to  say,  "  My  human  purposes  come  to  nought.  Between  my  will  and  the  per- 
formance there  is  a  sad  hiatus.  I  find  no  help  in  myself."  A  lesson  which  has  to  be 
learnt  ere  we  really  cry  for  a  Deliverer,  aiid  value  the  Saviour's  intervention.  Peter, 
by  his  threefold  denial,  was  taught  his  weakness,  and  then  came  the  command, 
"F^ed  my  lambs."  We  are  not  prepared  for  service  in  the  kingdom  until  we  confess 
our  dependence  on  superhuman  succour. 

III.  The  CRT  admits  of  a  satisfactory  answer.  A  Liberator  has  been  found, 
60  that  the  apostle  is  not  in  dcsp  dr ;  he  adds,  "  1  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord."  Christ  assumed  our  body  of  death,  criidfied  it,  and  glorified  it.  Thus  he 
"  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh."  He  bruiiied  the  serpent's  head,  Since  our  Leader  has 
conquered,  we  shall  share  his  triumph.  He  quickens  and  sustains  his  followers  by  his 
Spirit.     Stronger  is  he  who  is  for  us  than  all  against  us.     His  grace  is  the  antiuoiie  to 


OH.  VII.  1—25.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS.  201 

moral  evil;  by  its  power  we  may  contend  victoriously.  The  indwelling  Christ  is  th« 
prophecy  of  ultimate,  complete  victory.  Eventually  we  shall  quit  this  tabernacle  of  day, 
and  leave  behind  iis  all  the  avenues  to  temptation,  and  the  stings  and  infirmities  of 
vfhict  the  body  is  the  synonym.  Clothed  with  a  house  from  heaven,  there  shall  be  no 
obstacle  to  perfect  obedience — a  service  without  weariness  and  without  interruption. — 
S.  R.  A. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  two  marriages  of  the  soul.  In  the  preceding  chapter  we  saw  how 
justification  leads  of  necessity  to  sanctification.  Once  we  realize  that  we  have  died 
in  Jesus  for  sin,  we  are  spiritually  prompted  to  enter  with  a  risen  Saviour  into  newness 
of  life.  We  realize  our  consecration  to  God.  We  give  up  the  slavery  to  sin,  and 
become  slaves  to  God ;  and  our  fruit  is  found  unto  holiness,  and  our  end  everlasting 
life.  The  apostle,  moreover,  has  affirmed  that "  we  are  not  under  Law,  but  under  grace 
(oh.  vi.  14).  This  he  proceeds  more  fully  to  explain.  "  Slavery  "  may  be  the  idea 
under  sin,  but  "  marriage  "  becomes  the  idea  about  Law.  Under  the  Law  provision 
was  always  made  for  a  second  marriage.  If  death  took  one  of  the  married  persons 
away,  the  survivor  was  at  liberty  to  contract  a  second  marriagre.  It  is  this  figure  which 
the  apostle  employs  in  the  present  section.  He  repiesents  the  soul  as  first  wedded  to 
Law ;  then,  through  death  with  Cliiist  for  sin  and  unto  Law  and  resurrection  with  Christ 
to  newness  of  life,  the  soul  is  legally  warranted  in  contracting  a  second  marriage,  and 
this  time  with  Christ  himself.  The  Law  is  the  soul's  first  husband ;  and  Christ  becomes 
the  second.  We  cannot  do  better,  then,  than  consider,  in  the,first  place,  the  soul's  first 
marriage  to  the  Law ;  in  the  second  place,  how  this  unhappy  marriage  is  dissolved ; 
and  in  the  third  place,  the  soul's  second"  marriage  to  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  The  soul's  fibst  makriaqe  to  the  Law.  It  has  been  thought  by  some  that 
this  seventh  chapter  comes  in  strangely  after  the  third ;  but  if  we  will  bear  in  mind 
tiat  in  the  third  chapter  the  apostle  is  showing  the  Law  to  be  unequal  to  man's 
fuiUfltation;  while  here  he  is  showing  it  to  be  unequal  to  man's  sanctification,  all 
difficulty  about  his  line  of  thought  will  disappear.  The  point  inasted  upon  in  the 
present  chapter  is  that,  although  the  Law  is  in  itself  holy,  it  cannot  maJce  men  holy. 
Its  sanctification  does  not  pass  over  to  the  legal  soul.  Now,  in  an  unhappy  marriage 
the  husband  may  be  quite  blameless ;  he  may,  poor  man,  be  d.  ing  his  very  best ;  bat 
the  wife  proves  so  incorrigibly  bad  that  nothing  but  wretchedness  results.  This,  then, 
is  the  Pauline  idea.  The  Law  is  holy,  just,  and  good  ;  but  the  soul  wedded  to  the 
law  is  sinful,  so  that  there  is  nothing  but  irritation  and  unhappiuess  as  the  result.  In 
fact,  the  sinful  soul  gets  provoked  by  the  demands  of  Law,  and  acts  more  lecklessly  than 
if  no  such  demands  were  made.  This  will  come  out  more  clearly  as  we  proceed  with 
the  chapter.  It  is  sufficient  here  to  insist  that  the  soul  which  is  wedded  to  legalism 
is  sure  to  experience  an  unhappy  union ;  the  legal  soul  finds  the  union  with  Law 
exacting  and  exasperating,  and  the  only  hope  for  it  is  in  getting  the  union  dissolved. 

II.  How  THIS  UNHAPPY  MAKRiAGE  IS  DISSOLVED.  Now,  it  is  important  here  to 
notice  that  the  apostle  does  not  represent  the  Law  as  having  died.  This  would  have 
been  the  natural  use  of  the  marriage  figure.  If  Law  be  the  husband,  and  if  the  soul, 
wedded  to  the  Law,  is  to  contract  another  union,  must  not  the  husband  first  die  ?  The 
apostle  takes  another  line  altogether.  The  Law  does  not  die;  but  the  soul  may  "die 
to  the  Law,"  and  so  die  out  of  the  legal  union.  If,  then,  having  died  out  of  the  one 
relation,  it  is  raised  into  a  new  life,  then  it  is  in  a  position  to  contract  a  second  marriage. 
This,  accordintrly,  is  the  ground  taken  up  by  Paul  in  this  passage.  The  soul  dies  to 
the  Law  in  the  Person  of  Christ,  and  so  the  unhappy  union  gets  dissolved.  This  is 
what  is  expressed  in  ver.  4,  "  Wlieref  ire,  my  brethren,  ye  also  were  made  dead  to  the 
Law  through  the  body  of  Christ ;  that  ye  should  be  joined  to  another,  even  to  him 
who  was  raised  from  the  dead"  (Revised  Version).  That  is  to  say,  Christ  died;  we 
die  by  faith  in  him  to  the  Law's  claims.  All  are  met.  Law,  accordingly,  has  no 
further  right  over  us.  We  are  no  longer  its  wife.  We  have  died  in  our  spiritual 
experience  out  of  our  old  relation ;  that  state  is  past.  It  is  most  important  that  we 
should  see  that  legalism  can  exercise  no  sanctifying  'power.  Its  only  fruit  is  pride  and 
death  (ver.  5).  There  is  no  hope  for  the  soul  but  surrendering  its  legalism,  and  betakin,' 
itself  through  death  and  resurrection  to  a  better  union  and  a  happier  life. 

III.  The  soul's  secokd  maruiage  to  Jesus  Christ.    The  apostle's  idea  is  thai 


202  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vd.  1—25 

the  soul,  having  died  in  Jesus  to  the  Law,  and  having  thus  dissolved  the  unhappy 
union,  gets  raised  along  with  Christ  and  is  united  to  him  as  the  second  and  better 
husband.  It  is  to  a  risen  Saviour  that  the  risen  soul  is  united.  Jesus  is  the  Bride- 
groom, and  the  soul  the  bride  (cf.  John  iii.  29).  And  regarding  this  second  marriage 
of  the  soul,  it  is  a  happy  one ;  for :  1.  The  soul  receives  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  «a 
lecomes  one  with  him.  There  can  be  in  this  case  no  ill-assorted  union.  Christ  can 
make  his  bride  one  in  spirit  with  himself,  and  so  the  sweetest  unity  of  spirit  prevails. 
2.  As  the  risen  Saviour,  he  secures  the  devotion  of  the  soul  in  a  way  that  abstract  law 
never  could.  The  devotion  of  a  true  wife  to  her  husband  is  something  essentially 
different  from  and  infinitely  higher  than  obedience  to  a  code  of  laws.  It  is  here  that 
sanotificatiou  is  secured.  The  soul  is  led  to  feel  that  a  Saviour,  who  has  lived  and  died 
for  its  redemption,  deserves  the  homage  of  the  heart.  In  this  way  obedience  passes 
into  the  enthusiastic  devotion  of  the  whole  nature,  and  becomes  a  passion  of  the  soul. 
This  is  the  "  newness  of  the  spirit,"  as  distinguished  from  the  "  oldness  of  the  letter," 
to  which  the  apostle  declares  the  renewed  soul  comes.  3.  The  fruit  of  this  marriage 
with  Christ  it  consecration  to  Ood.  The  soul  is  joined  to  the  risen  Saviour  that  "  we 
might  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God."  Now,  just  as  in  married  life,  when  children  come, 
they  are  consecrated  unto  God,  so  the  fruits  of  our  union  with  Christ  consist  in  those 
"  good  works  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God."  Good  works 
are  the  united  product  of  Christ  and  the  believing  soul.  "  Without  me  ye  can  do 
nothing,"  he  tells  us.  And  so  we  are  to  rejoice  in  them  as  the  fruit  of  that  spiritual 
union  existing  between  the  Saviour  and  the  soul.  It  is  for  us  to  test  ourselves 
by  these  facts,  and  see  to  it  that  we  are  united  to  Christ,  as  the  bride  is  to  her 
husband.' — E.  M.  B. 

Vers.  7 — 13. — The  work  of  the  Law  in  awakening  the  soul.  After  the  general 
statement  about  the  two  marriages  of  the  soul,  the  apostle  proceeds  to  exhibit  the  soul 
in  its  unrsgenerate  state,  and  how  it  is  awakened  through  Law  to  a  sense  of  its  guilt 
and  danger.  In  the  section  now  before  us  we  have  the  soul  presented  in  its  state  of 
security,  and  then  passing  into  its  state  of  alarm.  The  subsequent  section,  as  we  shall 
see,  presents  the  soul  in  its  regenerate  condition  contending  successfully  against  its 
remaining  corruption.     Let  us,  then,  look  at — 

I.  The  soul's  seoueitt  tjndbb  sin.  Two  distinct  ideas  are  suggested  about  this 
state — first,  that  sin  without  Law  is  "  dtad,"  by  which  the  apostle  means  that  it  lies 
ia  a  state  of  latency  or  dormancy,  and  is  not  roused  into  active  struggle ;  secondly, 
the  soul  before  the  advent  of  Law  is  "  alive,"  that  is,  apparently  alive,  fancying  itself 
quite  as  good  and  well-to-do  as  its  fellows.  It  lives  by  its  instincts,  and  yet  has  no 
idea  of  the  guilt  of  doing  so.  "  The  child  or  savage,"  to  take  an  illustration  from 
De  Rougemont,  "is  selfish,  addicted  to  ap|jetite  (gourmand),  cruel,  hateful,  freely  and 
naively  ;  he  does  not  imagine  that  he  is  doing  wrong  in  following  his  natural  instincts, 
and  as  he  satisfies  his  passions  without  remorse,  he  is  content,  he  lives."  *  It  has  "been 
very  properly  said,  "  Unbelief  in  the  Law  is  as  common  as  unbelief  in  the  gospel.  If 
men  believe  the  gospel,  they  soon  feel  the  power  of  it.  So  of  the  Law ;  if  they  truly 
believe  it,  they  will  feel  the  power  of  its  condemning  voice.  No  man  can  be  found 
who  will  deny  that  he  has  sinneii.  Let  a  man,  then,  only  believe,  in  reality,  that  death 
eternal  is,  according  to  the  Law  of  God,  annexed  to  his  sin  as  a  punishment,  and  he 
will  be  afraid — his  heart  will  sink  within  him.  He  will  have  no  rest,  he  will  have 
fearful  forebodings  of  wrath  ;  and  if  this  be  not  the  case,  then  plainly  he  does  not 
believe  the  Law.  ...  To  hear  the  Law,  and  yet  be  as  hopeful  and  merry-hearted  and 
unconcerned  as  if  the  Law  were  an  idle  tale  or  a  mere  man  of  straw,  that  shows  a  most 
miserable  state  of  blindness  and  want  of  feeling — a  state  which  can  be  accounted  for 
only  by  the  fact  that  the  Law  is  not  credited,  tliat  its  threatenings  are  not  believed  at 
all."  •    Now,  this  state  of  security  under  sin  is  one  of  danger  as  well  as  guilt.     It  is  a 

'  On  fruit-bearing  through  union  with  Christ,  of.  Moule's  '  Union  with  Christ,'  p.  57 ;  also 
Archer  Butler's  '  Sermons,'  ii,  p.  121. 

'  (Jf.  '  La  Vie  Humaine  aveo  et  Sans  la  Foi,'  p.  108. 

'  Cf.  Hewitson's  '  Remains,'  vol  ii.  pp.  93,  94 ;  see  also  Griffith's  '  From  Sin  to  Salvation, 
pp.  13—58. 


CH.  VII.  1—25.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  203 

sleep  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice,  a  sleep  over  a  mine,  a  mere  dance  of  death.    The 
sooner  it  ends  the  better.     Let  us,  therefore,  consider — 

II.  The  boul's  awakening  theough  the  Law.  The  Law  comes  claiming  con- 
sideration and  belief,  and  the  moment  we  receive  it  in  good  faith,  the  sense  of  security 
is  at  an  end.  Now,  by  the  Law  the  apostle  has  in  view  the  Decalogue,  and  he  here 
directs  special  attention  to  the  tenth  commandment  and  its  forbidding  covetousness  or 
"lust"  (^iriflu/ifo).  It  is,  in  fact,  the  spiritual  rider  to  the  whole  Law,  carrying  the 
receiver  of  the  Law  into  the  region  of  the  heart,  and  inquiring  how  its  desires  and 
passions  are  regulated.  A  Pharisee,  such  as  St.  Paul  had  been,  could  complacently 
contemplate  the  other  commandments  and  regard  himself  as  having  kept  them  from  his 
youth  up — that  is,  of  course,  so  far  as  outward,  overt  act  is  concerned.  But  the  moment 
the  tenth  commandment  comes  in  to  forbid  "  desire  "  of  a  selfish  character,  the  self- 
(iomplacency  is  levelled  to  the  dust  and  genuine  conviction  begins.  Here,  then,  we 
have  the  first  step  in  the  awakening  of  the  soul,  when  the  Law  searches  the  heart  with 
its  lighted  candle  and  exposes  the  selfish  "desires"  which  lay  behind  all  the  overt  acts. 
Not  only  so,  but,  secondly,  the  Law  becomes  the  occasion,  not  the  cause,  of  intensified 
lust — "all  manner  of  coveting"  (vaa-av  ImBvitiav).  By  contrariety,  the  soul  becomes 
more  disposed  to  the  "desires"  which  have  been  forbidden.  The  holy  command 
evokes  unholy  resistance.  Sin  is  intensified  through  the  very  denunciation  which  the 
Law  contains.  And  then,  thirdly,  the  soul  realizes  through  the  Law  its  death  in  sin. 
For,  as  one  already  quoted  has  further  observed,  "  the  Law  not  only  shows  us  our 
sin,  but  makes  us  feel  that  we  are  lost — as  good  as  dead.  A  man  is  in  a  room  during 
the  dark ;  he  sees  nothing,  but  imagines  that  he  is  safe.  At  length  the  day  breaks. 
Through  the  window  of  his  apartment  sunlight  enters ;  and  behold,  he  is,  though  be 
knew  not  till  now,  in  the  midst  of  wild  beasts  which,  like  himself,  have  been  asleep. 
They  awake,  and  put  on  a  threatening  aspect.  There  is  a  serpent,  uncoiling  its  horrid 
length,  and  there  a  tiger,  watching  its  opportunity  for  a  fatal  spring.  The  light  has 
come,  and  the  man  now  sees  his  danger — he  is  but  a  dead  man.  So,  when  the  Law 
comes,  there  is  seen  guilt  now  in  the  past  life,  in  every  part  of  it.  There  is  felt  now 
tm  in  the  present  condition  of  the  heart.  Every  moment  there  is  a  discovery  of  sin. 
Everything  past  and  present  eries,  as  it  were,  for  vengeance.  Death  everywhere  stares 
him  in  the  face." 

III.  The  Law  thus  reveals  the  ebal  natueb  op  sin.  As  a  selfish  disposition, 
it  seems  to  the  unawakened  soul  a  simple  "  taking  care  of  noimber  one,"  as  the  world 
puts  it.  But  the  Law  comes  with  its  searching  light,  and  lo,  sin  is  found  to  be  an 
enemy  of  our  real  interests.  It  antagonizes  our  welfare ;  it  takes  the  Law  and  uses 
it  as  a  weapon  against  us.  In  short,  we  discover  that  self-seeking  in  any  form  is 
mutiny  against  the  real  welfare  of  the  soul.  We  discover  that  we  are  beguiled  and 
deluded  by  sin;  that  all  this  self-ceutring  is  treason  to  the  true  interests  within. 
Not  only  so,  but  the  intensification  of  sin  through  the  Law's  advent  leads  us  to  rightly 
regard  it  as  "  exceeding  sinful "  (koS'  imipPoX^v  a/iapTaKhs).  How  dreadful  and  malignant 
sin  must  be  when  it  takes  a  good  and  holy  Law  and  works  death  in  the  soul  thereby  I 

We  have  thus  set  before  us  what  the  Law  can  do.  It  can  break  up  our  refuge  of  lies 
in  which  we  were  trusting;  it  can  awaken  the  soul  to  a  sense  of  its  sin  and  danger ; 
but  it  cannot  give  us  either  "  the  remission  of  our  sins  or  the  Holy  Spirit."  The 
salvation  must  come  from  a  hi^ther  source  than  Law.  It  comes  from  the  Saviour,  who 
has  satisfied  the  demands  of  Law  and  offers  us  deliverance  in  himself.  The  Law 
serves  its  purpose,  then,  when  as  a  schoolmaster  it  conducts  us  to  Christ  that  we  may 
be  justified  by  faith.*  May  we  be  led  by  Law  to  him  who  can  save  us  from  all  our 
sin  1— R.  M.  B. 

Vers.  14 — 25. — TTie  principle  of  progress  through  antagonism.  In  last  section  we 
saw  how  the  soul  is  awakened  through  the  Law.  This  Law-work  is  a  necessity  of  our 
times.  And  now  we  have  to  notice  how  the  soul  is  kept  awake  by  the  antagonism 
going  on  within.  For  the  gospel  is  not  intended  to  promote  at  any  time  satisfaction 
with  self.     So  far  from  this,  it  is  a  plan  for  subordinating  self  to  its  rightful  Sovereign, 

*  Arnot's  '  Boots  and  Fruits,'  on  "  The  Place  of  Law  in  the  Salvation  ef  Sinnera ; "  also 
Bougemont  and  Hewitson,  ut  eupra. 


204  THE  EPISTLE  GF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vii.  1—25. 

the  Saviour.  And  so  we  are  not  only  put  out  of  conceit  with  ourselves  in  conviction 
and  conversion,  but  kept  out  of  self-conceit  by  the  law  of  Christian  progress.  In  this 
section,  as  in  other  portions  of  his  Epistles,  the  apostle  reveals  this  law  as  that  of 
antagonism.  The  imparted  Spirit  proves  himself  a  militant  Spirit.  The  special 
tendencies  in  the  wild  heart  of  man  are  met  and  controlled  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  to 
this  war  within  the  Christian  has  to  reconcile  himself.  In  fact,  he  is  not  right  until 
this  campaign  of  the  Spirit  is  begun.  It  will  help  us  to  the  proper  idea  to  look  at  the 
law  of  antagonism  as  it  obtains  in  the  larger  sphere  of  Christianity.  To  special  and 
undesirable  temiencies  on  the  part  of  men,  Christianity  vidll  be  found  to  have  presented 
such  opposition  as  proved  in  due  season  victorious.  A  few  leading  illustrations  must 
suffice.  Take,  for  example,  the  case  of  those  rude  invaders  who  broke  the  power  of 
imperial  Rome  to  pieces.  We  call  them  "  Vandals."  Now,  they  were  wandering  soldiers, 
who  loved  war,  but  hated  work.  They  were  attached  to  military  chiefs,  and  so  were 
a  constant  menace  to  the  peace  of  Europe.  The  problem  for  the  Christianity  of  that 
early  age  was  how  to  curb  this  wandering  and  idle  disposition  and  settle  the  nomads 
in  Europe.  And  the  needful  antagonism  was  supplied  in  feudalism,  by  which  the 
soldiers  were  transformed  into  serfs  and  united  to  their  chiefs  by  the  mutual  ownersliip 
of  land.  And  it  can  be  shown  that  from  this  feudalism  modern  patriotism  properly 
so  called  has  sprung.  In  Greece,  for  example,  in  pagan  times  all  that  passed  for 
patriotism  was  love  of  a  city.  No  man  apparently  had  the  comprehensive  love  which 
can  embrace  a  whole  land.  They  were  Spartans,  or  Athenians,  but  not  patriots  in  the 
wider  sense.  But  in  the  wake  of  feudalism  true  patriotism  came,  and  vast  nations 
were  formed  at  last  who  were  ready  to  die  for  their  fatherlands.  Thus  Christianity 
antagonized  the  selfishness  which  was  so  rampant  in  pagan  times.  But  under  feudalism 
arose  serfdom,  which  proved  to  be  only  a  shade  better  than  pagan  slavery.  How  did 
Christianity  antagonize  these  evils?  Now,  the  necessity  for  serfs  under  feudalism  and 
of  slavery  under  paganism  arose  from  the  mischievous  and  mistaken  idea  that  work  is 
degrading.  Christianity,  accordingly,  in  the  dark  ages,  which  were  not  nearly  so  dark 
as  some  men  make  them,*  set  itself  to  consecrate  manual  labour  by  the  example  of  the 
monks.  Devoted  men  in  religious  houses  made  manual  labour,  agriculture,  and  work 
of  all  kinds  a  holy  thing,  and  so  prepared  the  way  for  the  industrial  movement  of  later 
times.  Gradually  it  dawned  on  the  European  mind  that  it  is  not  a  noLile  thing  to 
have  nothing  in  the  world  to  do ;  that  it  is  not  a  degrading  thing  to  'have  to  work ; 
and  that  work  may  and  ought  to  be  a  consecrated  and  noble  thing.  Having  thus 
antagonized  the  natural  indolence  of  men,  Christianity  had  next  to  combat  his  unwill- 
ingness to  think  for  himsell,  and  this  was  through  the  Reformation  of  the  sixteenth 
century  under  Luther.  The  problem  of  the  sixteenth  century  was  to  get  men,  instead 
of  leaving  to  others  to  think  out  the  plan  of  salvation  for  them,  and  as  priest.s  to 
undertake  their  salvation,  to  think  the  question  out  for  themselves,  and  to  have  as 
their  Advocate  and  Mediator  the  one  great  High  Priest,  Christ  Jesus.  Luther,  in  his 
stirring  treatise  on  the  freedom  of  a,  Christian  man  ('Von  der  Preiheit  einer  Christen- 
Menschcn '),  brought  out  in  his  admirable  way  that  every  believing  Christian  is 
himself  a  priest;  and  so  he  eul'rancliised  human  minds  and  gave  dignity  to  the  race.' 
Now,  this  law  of  antagonism,  which  we  have  seen  on  the  larger  sc.Je  in  Christianity, 
will  be  found  in  individual  experience.  This  is  evidently  the  idea  of  the  present 
section  ol  the  Epistle.     And  here  let  us  notice — 

I.  The  Law  of  God  proving  dbliohtful  to  Tiiii:  converted  soul.  (Vers.  14,  22.) 
The  apostle  shows  that  he  had  attained  to  the  conviciion  that  "  the  Law  is  spiritual ; " 
and  he  could  say  with  simple  truth,  "  I  delight  in  the  Law  of  God  after  the  inward 
man."  This  is  a  grand  attainment.  The  renewed  soul  alone  can  say  so.  God's  Law 
is  seen  to  enter  into  the  very  secrets  of  the  soul,  to  discern  the  desires  and  motives  of 
the  heart,  and  to  furnish  the  perfect  standard.  It  supplies  the  ideal.  Like  the  coi)per- 
plate  copy  at  the  head  of  the  schoolboy's  writing-book,  God's  Law  is  a  perfect  ideal 
set  to  each  struggling  soul  to  stimulate  attainment.  The  secret  of  progress  in  penman- 
ship is  in  having  the  perfect  copy  set,  not  in  having  the  standard  lowered.  And  so 
God  supplies  us  in  his  Law  with  a,  perfect  and  ideal  standard  of  attainment,  and  it 

'  Of.  Maitland's  '  Dark  Ages,'  passim. 

'  See  ou  this  interesting  subject  Hebberd's  '  Secret  of  Christianity,'  passim. 


CH.  vra.  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


205 


Is  a  great  thing  gained  when  we  have  been  led  to  delight  in  the  spirituality  and 
thoroughness  and  perfection  of  God's  Law. 

IL  The  constant  sense  of  falling  short  of  the  ideal.  The  renewed  soul 
feels  that  it  somehow  cannot  do  what  it  would.  It  never  hits  the  bull's-eye.  The  good 
that  it  had  hoped  to  do  is  never  reached ;  the  evil  it  had  hoped  to  avoid  somehow  gets 
accomplished.  There  is  a  sense  of  failure  all  through.  To  recur  to  the  illustration 
from  penmanship,  the  copy  is  found  to  be  always  very  different  indeed  from  the  original. 
But  the  schoolboy  does  not,  in  consequence,  insist  on  lowering  the  standard.  He  does 
not  insist  that  the  master  will  write  him  a  head-line  only  a  little  better  than  he  can 
write  himself,  and  thus  let  liim  improve  by  easy  stages.  He  wisely  accepts  the  perfect 
pattern  of  what  penmanship  should  be,  and  laments  that  he  is  coming  towards  it  only 
by  very  tardy  steps.  In  the  same  way,  the  wholesome  sense  of  failure  abides  in  the 
soul ;  the  perfect  Law  antagonizes  imperfect  attainment,  and  the  soul  walks  very 
softly  before  the  Lord,  and  strives  to  please  him. 

III.  The  cause  of  the  faildbb  is  found  in  the  body  of  death.  The  delight 
in  the  perfect  Law  and  the  desire  after  it  is  accompanied  by  a  painful  sense  of 
another  law  counter-working  what  is  good.  It  is  called  "  sin,"  that  is,  indwelling  sin. 
It  is  called  the  "flesh,"  that  carnal  part  of  man  which  militates  against  what  is 
spiritual.  It  is  called  " a  law  in  our  members  waning  against  the  law  of  our  mind." 
It  is  called  "  the  law  of  sin ; "  it  is  called  "  the  body  of  this  death,"  or  "  this  body  of 
death."  Now,  what  a  gain  it  is  for  us  to  rise  against  this  old  nature  within,  to  take 
God's  side  against  it,  to  take  tlie  field  against  this  old  self!  We  are  never  right  till  by 
repentance  we  take  God's  side  against  ourselves.  The  old  nature  has  to  be  crucified, 
slain,  overcome.  Antagonism  is  thus  begun.  We  find  there  is  no  use  in  blaming  our 
progenitors,  or  circumstances,  or  environment.  What  we  have  got  to  do  is  to  fight  the 
old  self  in  the  interests  of  God  and  of  that  "  better  self"  which  he  has  given  us. 

IV.  In  this  holy  war  Jesus  Ohkist  is  the  only  Dblivbebb.  The  apostle  was 
ready  to  cry  in  his  antagonism  to  indwelling  sin,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  1  who 
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  The  more  progress  made,  the  more 
intense  the  antipathy  to  the  evil  nature  within !  But  the  Deliverer  is  found  in  Jesus. 
He  comes  to  dwell  within  us  and  be  a  "  better  self."  Ho  dwells  within  us  by  his  Holy 
Spirit,  and  this  Spirit  is  not  only  militant,  but  victorious.  The  mind  is  reinforced,  and 
the  flesh  is  combated,  and  the  result  is  progress  through  antagonism.  We  follow  Christ 
to  victory  over  ourselves.' — E.  M.  E. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VIIL 

Vers.  1 — 39. — (c)  The  hlessed  condition 
and  assured  hope  of  such  as  are  in  Christ 
Jesus.  The  summary  of  the  contents  of 
this  chapter,  which  follows  the  Exposition, 
may  be  referred  to  in  the  first  place  by  the 
student,  so  as  to  assist  comprehension  of 
the  line  of  thought. 

Ver.  1. — There  is  therefore  now  no  con- 
demnation to  them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus. 
(The  additional  words  of  this  verse  in  the 
Textus  Receptus  have  but  sliglit  support, 
having  probably  been  supplied  from  ver.  4. 
They  are  out  of  place  here.)  "  Nunc  venit 
ad  liberationem  et  libertatem.  Non  autem 
ponit  adversativam  Si,  autem,  sed  oonclu- 
sivam  &pa,  ergo;   quia  jam  in  fine  capitis 


vii.  confinia  hujus  status  attigit.  Nunc 
etiam  plane  ex  dlverticulo  eximio  in  viam 
redit  quse  habetur  cap.  vii.  6  "  (Bengel). 

Ver.  2.— For  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life 
in  Christ  Jesus  made  me  free  (not  hath  made 
me ;  the  aorist  refers  to  the  time  when  the 
Christian  became  possessed  of  the  Spirit  of 
life  in  Christ)  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death. 
Here  is  a  distinct  contrast  to  the  state  de- 
scribed in  vers.  14,  23  of  ch.  vii.,  and  a 
realization  of  what  was  yearned  for  in  ver. 
24,  "  the  law  of  sin  andi  of  death "  being 
evidently  ."  the  law  of  sin  in  the  members  " 
previously  spoken  of.  The  iyii,  before  in 
captivity  to  this  law,  is  now  freed  from  it. 
And  how  ?  Not  by  its  becoming  a  different 
iyiii ;  not  by  a  change  of  the  constituent 
elements  of  human  nature ;  but  by  the  in- 
troduction of  a  new  law — the  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  life — which  has  emancipated  the 


'  Cf.  Beck's  'Christliclie  Reden,'  i.  s.  32lj ;  Hewitson's  'Remains,'  ii.  p.  250;  A.  W. 

Hare's  '  Sermons,'  vjl.  i.  p.  209. 


206 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  viii.  1—39, 


4yi>  from  its  old  tinweloome  thialdom.  In 
virtue  of  this  new  law,  introduced  into  my 
being,  I  am  now  free  to  give  my  entire 
allegiance  to  the  law  of  God.  Nif/itoj,  be  it 
observed,  is  here  again  used  in  a  sense  differ- 
ent from  its  usual  one,  and  we  thus  liave  a 
still  further  vi/ios,  in  addition  to  those  de- 
fined in  the  note  after  ch.  vii.  25.  The 
designation  of  this  new  law  is  in  marked 
opposition  to  tliat  in  which  the  eyii  was 
before  said  to  be  held;  we  liave  life  in 
opposition  to  death,  and  the  Spirit  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  flesh,  as  well  as  freedom  in 
opposition  to  captivity.  The  Spirit  is,  in 
fact,  the  Divine  Spirit,  taking  possession  of 
what  is  spiritual  (now  at  lengtli  brought 
into  view)  in  the  inward  man,  making  him 
partaker  in  the  Divine  life,  and  able  to 
serve  God  freely.  The  expressions  used 
bring  out  strikingly  one  essential  distinc- 
tion between  Law  and  Gospel,  viz.  that 
the  principle  of  the  former  is  to  control 
and  discipline  conduct  by  requirements  and 
threats;  but  of  the  latter  to  introduce  into 
man's  inner  being  a  new  principle  of  life, 
whence  right  conduct  may  spontaneously 
flow.  Coercion  is  the  principle  of  the  one ; 
inspiration  of  the  other.  An  illustration 
may  be  found  in  the  treatment  of  disease — 
on  the  one  hand  by  attempted  repressiun  of 
specific  ailments,  and  on  the  other  by  im- 
parting a  new  vitality  to  the  system,  which 
may  of  itself  dispel  disease.  It  is  shown 
next  how  this  new  state  of  freedom  has 
been  brought  about.  First,  by  what  God 
in  Clirist  has  done  for  us  apart  from  our- 
selves; the  subjective  condition  in  oiu:selves 
being  introduced  at  the  end  of  ver.  4,  toTs 
nil,  etc. 

Ver.  3. — For  what  the  law  could  not  do 
(this  is  certainly  what  is  meant  by  rb  aSi- 
vwTov  rov  v6fiov),  in  that  it  was  weak  through 
the  flesh,  God  sending  his  own  Sou  in  like- 
ness of  flesh  of  sin,  and  for  sin,  condemned 
Bin  in  the  flesh.  The  Law  could  not  deliver 
from  the  domination  of  sin;  it  was  weak 
for  such  a  purpose  (cf.  Heb.  vii.  18,  19) ; 
but  this  not  through  any  defect  in  itself, 
but  as  having  to  work  through  our  sinful 
flesh  which  refused  obedience.  And  it  was 
Bot  the  office  of  law  to  regenerate ;  it  could 
only  command  and  threaten.  Hence  the 
duliverance  came,  and  could  only  come,  from 
God  himself  (and  this  in  accordance  with 
the  grand  idea  of  the  whole  Epistle,  ex- 
pressed by  the  phrase,  "  the  righteousness 
of  God");  and  so  he  sent  his  own  Bon  (te. 
his  Sou  essentially — in  a  sense  in  which 
none  of  us  can  be  called  sons,  himself 
Divine.  The  whole  drift  of  the  passage, 
as  well  as  eavrov,  requires  this  conception)  ; 
and  he  sent  him  into  the  very  sphere  of 
things  that  requii'ed  redemption,  that  by 
actual  participation  in  it  he  might  person- 


ally redeem  it ;  for  he  sent  him  in  likeness 
of  our  "  flesh  of  sin."  It  is  not  said  in  flesh 
of  sin;  for  that  might  imply  sin  in  Christ's 
individual  humanity:  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  "in  likeness"  (^k  d/ioid/xaTi)  does  not 
imply  docetism,  as  though  Christ's  humanity 
were  not  real ;  for  stress  is  evidently  laid  on 
the  fact  that  it  was  in  our  actual  human 
flesh  that  he  "  condemned "  sin.  The 
phrnse  appears  to  mean  the  same  as  what 
is  expressed  iu  Heb,  ii.  17  and  iv.  15 : 
"fli^etAe  KwrSi  itavra  to7s  aSeAtpols  dfiotadijyat, 
and  neTeipttfi,ivov  Karh  wdvra  xaB'  i/iodTiiTa 
X^p^s  ctfiaprlas.  The  addition  of  irepl  a^ttop- 
Ti'as  "  adds  to  the  how  the  wherefore " 
(Meyer).  Both  this  and  the  preceding  ex- 
pression are  most  naturally  and  intelligibly 
connected  with  Tre/iif/or;  not,  as  some  say, 
with  Kureicpiye.  Uepl  comes  suitably  after 
the  former  verb,  as  denoting  the  occasion 
and  purpose  of  the  sending  (cf.  ■7rpo<r4yeyKf 
irepl  Tov  KaOapifffiov  (rov,  Luke  v.  14).  In 
Heb.  X.  8  (quoting  from  Ps.  xl.  7  iu  the 
LXX.)  we  find  6v(rlay  Ka\  ■irpo(r<l)opav  Koi 
&KoKa.vT&fiaTa,  KaX  irepl  a/xaprtas,  where  the 
expression  signifies  offerings  for  sin ;  and  iu 
Heb.  X.  18  we  have  vpoffipoph.  tr^pX  afiaprlas. 
The  correspondence  of  phrase  here  suggests 
decidedly  the  idea  of  the  purpose  of  atone- 
ment being  intended  to  be  expressed  by  it, 
though  it  does  not  follow  that  irep!  aixaprlas 
is  used  here  substantively  as  it  seems  to  be 
in  Heb.  x.  8.  But  in  what  sense  are  we  to 
understand  condemned  (KareKpive)  sin?  We 
observe  first  that  the  verb  appears  to  be 
suggested  by  Kardxpt/ia  in  ver.  1,  the  con- 
nection being  that  formerly  sin  condemned 
us,  but  now  sin  itself  has  been  condemnud ; 
that  is  (as  Meyer  expresses  it),  deposed  from 
its  rule  in  the  flesh — "jure  suo  dejeotum" 
(Calvin).  (Perhaps  similarly,  John  xvi.  11, 
d  6,px^v  TOV  Kdfffiov  rovTov  KeKpiTai.')  One 
view  of  the  force  of  KareKpive  (found  in 
Origen,  and  taken  by  Erasmus  and  others), 
that  it  denotes  the  punishment  of  sin  endured 
by  Christ  vicariously  on  the  cross,  is  not  only 
not  obvious,  but  inconsistent  also  with  rb 
abiyaroy  tov  v6fiov  preceding ;  for  what  the 
Law  could  not  do,  was  not  to  punish  sin,  but 
to  deliver  from  it.  Nor  is  there,  further, 
anything  in  the  language  used  to  confine 
the  condemnation  of  sin,  in  whatever  sense 
intended,  to  the  atonement  made  for  it  on 
the  cross  itself.  It  was  iu  the  whole  mis- 
sion of  the  Saviour  (expressed  by  xe^ij/as) 
that  sin  was  "  condemned ; "  and  the  idea 
may  include  his  triumph  over  it  in  his 
human  life  no  less  than  the  penalty  paid 
for  it  on  the  cross  in  behalf  of  man.  "  In  the 
flesh  "  (connected  with  condemned,  not  with 
sin)  does  not  mean  Christ's  own  flesh,  but 
human  nature  generally.  He  represented 
man,  having  become  for  our  sake  llie  Son 
of  man :  and  we  share  his  triumph  over  siq. 


CH.  VIII.  1— 39.J    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS. 


207 


made  in  our  very  human  flesh,  when  we 
are  baptized  into  his  death,  and  become 
thereupon  partalcers  of  his  resurrection.  This 
idea,  ever  present  to  St.  Paul's  mind,  is  ex- 
pressed in  the  next  verse,  where  our  own 
appropriation  of  the  condemnation  of  sin  in 
Christ  is  declared. 

Ver.  4. — That  the  ordinance  (or,  rigUeous 
requirement,  rather  than  righteousness,  as  in 
the  Aathorized  Version.  The  word  is  Smal- 
tDfua^  not  SiKcuoa-vvr).  It  occuis  elsewhere  in 
the  New  Tostameut,  Luke  i.  6 ;  ch.  i.  32 ;  ii. 
26 ;  Heb.  ix.  1 ;  and  in  a  lilse  sense  often  in 
the  LXX. ;  also,  though  with  a  difference  of 
meaning,  ch.  v.  16,  18)  of  the  Law  may  be 
fal£lled  in  ns,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh, 
bnt  after  the  Spirit.  This,  then,  is  the 
purpose  of  Christ's  victory  over  sin — that 
the  reqtiirement  of  the  Law  in  us  too  may 
be  fulfilled;  which  evidently  means  more 
than  that  his  victory  may  be  imputed  to  us, 
on  the  ground  of  our  faith  only,  while  we 
remain  as  we  were.  The  expression,  Sixal- 
ufia  irKripuOri,  and  also  the  condition  ap- 
pended at  the  end  of  the  verse,  imply  that 
the  "Spirit  of  life"  must  so  dominate  over 
the  flesh  in  ourselves  that  the  Law  may 
forfeit  its  claims  over  us.  The  sinful  pro- 
pensions  of  the  flesh  remain  in  us  still  (as 
the  verses  that  follow  distinctly  show) ;  but 
the  Spirit  that  is  in  us  is  strong  enough  to 
overcome  them  now  (of.  Gal.  v.  16—18). 
It  does  not  follow  from  this  that  any  Chris- 
tians will  actually  avoid  all  sin,  or  that 
they  can  be  accepted  on  the  ground  of  their 
own  performance :  to  say  this  would  be  to 
contradict  other  Scripture  (cf.  Jas.  ii.  10; 
1  Jobn  i.  8);  and  Paul  confessed  himself  to 
be  not  already  perfected  (Phil.  iii.  12).  But 
perfection,  through  Christ  who  lives  in  them, 
is  put  before  us  as,  at  any  rate,  the  aim  of 
the  regenerate  (of.  Matt.  v.  48);  and  by 
actual  and  progressive  holiness  they  are  to 
show  that  their  union  with  Christ  is  real. 
His  Spirit  within  them  must,  at  any  rate, 
give  a  new  direction  and  tone  to  their 
characters  and  lives. 

Vers.  5 — 8. — ^For  they  that  are  after  the 
flesh  do  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh;  but 
they  that  are  after  the  Spirit  the  things  of 
the  Spirit.  For  the  mind  of  the  flesh  is 
death ;  but  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  is  life  and 
]^eaoe.  Because  the  mind  of  the  flesh  is 
enmity  against  God ;  for  it  is  not  subject  to 
the  Law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be.  So 
then  they  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please 
God.  These  verses  are  added  for  explana- 
tion and  enforcement  of  the  condition  de- 
manded at  the  end  of  ver.  4;  pressing  the 
fact  that  "the  infection  of  oiu-  nature" — 
"  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  called  in  Greek  phro- 
nema  tarkos"  (Art.  ix".) — with  its  antagon- 
ism  to  the  Law  of  God,  and  its  deadly 
tendency,  remains  even  in  the  regenerate, 


and  that  hence  we  are  still  in  danger  of 
succumbing  to  it ;  but  that  if  we  do— unless 
the  Spirit  within  us  prove  in  practice  the 
stronger  power — the  condition  required  for 
our  individual  redemption  is  not  fuliilled. 
Ot  Iv  o-op/c!  Svres,  in  ver.  7,  evidently  does 
not  mean  those  who  are  still  in  the  body, 
but  the  same  essentially  as  oi  Karh  irdpKa 
Svres  in  ver.  5 ;  4v  denotes  the  element  in 
which  they  live  (see  verse  following).  The 
!c  which  connects  ver.  8  with  the  foregoing 
has  its  eebatie,  not  its  adversative  sense.  So 
then,  in  the  Authorized  Version,  though  not 
strictly  equivalent,  seems  sufficiently  to  ex- 
press the  general  idea. 

Ver.  9. — But  ye  are  not  in  the  flesh,  bnt 
in  the  Spirit,  if  so  be  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  dwelleth  in  yon.  Bnt  (not  nme,  as  in 
the  Authorized  Version)  if  any  man  hath 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his. 
That  is — Though  I  imply  the  possibility  of 
even  the  baptized  being  still  in  the  flesh, 
80  as  to  be  unable  to  please  God,  this  is 
certainly  not  your  condition ;  if,  indeed  (as 
is  surely  the  case),  your  conversion  was  a 
reality,  so  that  you  have  become  really 
Christ's ;  for  the  Spirit  of  Christ  (which  is 
the  Spirit  of  Gorl)  of  necessity  dwells  (so 
as  to  be  the  ruling  power)  in  all  such  as 
are  really  his  (cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  16).  We  observe 
here  how  "  the  Spirit  of  Christ "  is  identified 
with  "  the  Spirit  of  God,"  so  as  to  imply  the 
essential  Deity  of  Christ,  and  also  to  lend  sup- 
port to  the  doctrine  of  the  double  procession 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  (cf.  1  Pet.  i.  11).  Observe, 
too,  how  persistently  and  continually  the 
apostle  presses  his  protest  against  antinomian 
abuse  of  the  doctrine  of  grace,  with  which 
he  began  this  section  of  his  Epistle,  at  ch.  vi. 
1.  He  never  loses  sight  of  it ;  it  pervades 
the  whole.  If  St.  Paul,  especially  in  this 
Epistle,  is,  on  the  one  hand,  the  great  ex- 
ponent of  the  doctrine  of  justification  by 
faith  only,  he  is,  on  the  other,  no  less  the 
persistent  preacher  of  the  necessity  of  works. 
Saiictification  is  continually  pressed  as  the 
necussary  result,  as  well  as  evidence,  of 
justification.  He  only  shuts  out  human 
works  from  the  office  of  justilyiug. 

Vers.  10,  11.— But  (or,  and)  if  Christ  be 
in  yon,  the  body  is  dead  because  of  sin ;  btlt 
the  Spirit  is  life  because  of  righteousness. 
Bnt  if  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus 
from  the  dead  dwelleth  in  yon,  it  that 
raised  up  Christ  (the  previous  'IqtraSt  de- 
notes the  human  person  of  our  Lord; 
Xpio-rhv  his  office,  fitly  used  here  in  con- 
nection with  the  thought  of  his  resurrection 
ensuring  ours.  Some  readings  give  rhv 
before,  and  'IijcroSi'  after,  Xpurrhv)  from  the 
dead  shall  quicken  also  your  mortal  bodies, 
through  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  yon. 
These  verses  have  been  variously  under- 
stood.   It  has  been  supposed  by  some  that 


208 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vni.  1-39, 


ver.  10  continues  the  thought  of  ver.  9 ;  "the 
body"  (i-i  trUfia)  meaning  the  same  as  "  the 
flesh"  (ffrfpf), and  "dead"  (yefcpbc)  meaning 
vtrexpa/iivov,  i.e.  mortified,  or  lifeless  with 
respect  to  the  power  of  sin  tliat  was  in  it  (of. 
ch.  vi.  6,  lya  KwrapyoS'f  rh  (Ta/ia  Trjs  a/iap- 
Ti'aj).  Thus  the  meaning  of  tlie  first  clause 
of  ver.  10  would  be,  "If  Christ  be  in  you, 
the  body  of  sin  in  you  is  dead ;  but  you  are 
alivo  in  the  Spirit."  Decisive  objections  to 
this  view  are,  (1)  that  the  word  iriu^a  by 
itself  is  not  elsewhere  used  as  an  equivalent 

10  (Tdp(,  but  as  denoting  our  mere  bodily 
organization.  This  statement  is  consistent 
with  the  metaphorical  application  of  the 
word  sometimtss  in  a  different  verse,  as  in 
oh.  vi.  6,  above  quoted,  and  in  oh.  vii.  24. 
Observe  also  rci  flyijr^  o-d/toTo  u^Sj/in  ver.  11, 
which  can  hardly  be  taken  but  as  express- 
ing what  is  intended  here ;  (2)  that  SiA  with 
the  accusative  (5m  riiv  a/iapTlav)  cannot  be 
forced  out  of  its  proper  meaning  of  "  because 
of,"  which,  according  to  the  view  we  are 
considering,  would  be  unintelligible;  (3) 
that  ver.  11,  which  is  obviously  connected  in 
thouglit  with  ver.  10,  cannot  well  be  brought 
into  tune  with  it  according  to  the  view  pro- 
posed. All  is  made  clear,  in  view  both  of 
language  and  of  context,  by  taking  these  two 
verses  as  introducing  a  new  thought,  which 
is  carried  out  afterwards  in  ver.  18,  viz.  that 
of  the  drawback  to  the  full  enjoyment  and 
development  of  our  spiritual  Ufe  owing  to 
tljc  mortal  bodies  which  dome  us  now; 
and  the  purpose  is  to  bid  us  believe  in  the 
reality  of  our  redemption,  and  persevere 
in  correspondent  life,  notwithstanding  such 
present  drawback.  Thus  the  idea  is  that, 
though  in  onr  present  earthly  stitte  the 
mortal  body  is  death-stricken  in  consequence 
of  Bin  (Si'  aiiapriav) — subject  to  the  doom  of 
Adam,  that  extended  to  all  his  race  (cf.  oh. 
V.  12,  etc.) — yet,  Christ  being  in  us  now,  tho 
same  Divine  Spirit  that  raised  him  from  the 
dead  will  in  us  too  at  last  overcome  mor- 
tality. Cf  1  Cor.  XV.  22,  "  As  in  Adam  all 
die,  even  so  in  Christ  sh  all  all  be  made  alive  " 
(XoioTroii)ii)(rovrai,  the  same  word  as  in  ver. 

11  here);  and  compare  also  all  that  follows 
in  that  chapter.  This  view  of  the  meaning 
of  the  passage  before  us  is  strongly  con- 
firmed by  our  finding,  in  2  Cor.  iv.  7  — v.  6, 
exactly  the  same  idea  carried  out  at  length, 
with  a  correspondence  also  of  the  language 
used.  The  frail,  morlal,  ever-dying  earthen 
vessels,  in  which  we  have  now  the  treasure 
of  our  life  in  Clirist,  aru  there  regarded  as 
crippling  the  expansion  of  our  spiritual  life, 
and  causing  us  to  "  groan,  being  burdened  " 
(of.  in  the  chapter  before  us,  ver.  23,  iv 
iauTois  (rTefd^ofxev) ;  but  the  very  conscious- 
ness of  this  higher  life  within  him,  ytarning 
»o  for  an  adequate  and  deathless  organism, 
KssurcB  the  afostle  tliat  God  has  one  in  store 


for  Jim,  having  already  giren  him  "  the 
earnest  of  the  Spirit."  And  this  seems  to 
be  what  is  meant  here  by  "  shall  also  quicken 
your  mortal  bodioi  by  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth 
in  you."  As  to  particular  expressions  in  the 
verses  before  us,  i/eKpij',appliod  to  "the  body," 
may  bo  taken  to  mean  infected  with  death, 
and  doomed  to  it  (cf.  1  Cor.  iv.  31 ;  2  Cor.  j. 
9;  iv.  10 — Am  Smaioffivriv,  in  Opposition  ta 
Si'  afiopriav,  given  as  the  reason  for  the 
Spirit  being  life,  may  be  explained  with 
reference  to  the  essential  conception  of 
righteouinesa  throughout  the  Epistle,  as 
God's  rightoousnCBS,  revealed  in  Christ,  and 
made  over  to  man  as  the  remedy  of  human 
sin.  Before  carrying  out  the  thought  pecu- 
liarly suggested  by  the  last  two  verses  (as 
is  done  at  ver.  18),  the  apostle  now  draws  a 
conclusion  (expressed  by  &pa  oSv)  from  what 
has  been  so  far  said,  so  as  to  press  the  more 
the  obligation  of  a  spiritual  life  in  Christians. 

Vers.  12,  13. — So  then,  brethren,  we  are 
debtors,  not  to  the  flesh,  to  live  after  the 
flesh ;  for  if  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  must 
(ueAAeTc,  expressing  here  a  result  that  must 
follow.  The  Authorized  Version  has  "shall," 
not  distinguishing  the  force  of  the  phrase 
from  that  of  (he  simple  future  f^<re<rfle 
which  follows),  die ;  but  if  by  the  Spirit  ye 
do  mortify  (ratlier,  do  to  death,  or  make  to 
die,  BO  as  to  correspond  to  the  die  preceding) 
the  deeds  of  the  body,  ye  shall  live.  Here 
"  the  body  "  (toC  ati/iaTos)  must  be  taken  in 
the  same  sense  as  in  vers.  10,  11.  True,  the 
"  deeds  "  spoken  of  are,  in  fact,  those  of  the 
flesh  ;  but  the  body  is  regarded  as  the  organ 
of  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  it  is  fitly  named 
here  in  connection  with  the  thought  of  th» 
preceding  verses.  The  word  translated 
"deeds"  is  irp^ifcu, denoting, not  single  acts, 
but  rather  doings — the  general  outcome  in 
action  of  fieshly  lusts  using  the  body  as  their 
organ,  MfWere  oirofl^o'Keii'  and  (l)(re<rBf, 
viewed  in  connection  with  fmoiroi^irei  in  ver. 
11,  seem  to  point  ultimately  to  the  result 
hereafter  of  the  two  courses  of  life  denoted : 
but  not,  it  would  seem,  exclusively;  for  oui 
future  state  is  cotistantly  regarded  by  the 
apostle  as  the  continuauce  and  sequence  of 
what  is  begun  in  us  already — whether  of 
life  in  Christ  now  unto  life  eternal,  or 
of  death  in  sin  now  unto  death  beyond  the 
grave.  The  geneial  idea  may  be  stated 
thus :  If  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  the  power 
in  you  to  which  you  give  your  allegiance 
and  adhesion  will  involve  you  in  its  own 
doom,  death  ;  but  if  ye  live  after  the  Spirit, 
you  identify  yourselves  with  the  Spirit  of 
life  that  is  in  you,  wliereby  you  will  be 
emancipated  at  last  even  from  these  your 
mortal  bodies,  whose  doings  you  already 
slay. 

Vers.  14 — 17. — For  as  many  as  are  led  by 
the  Spirit  of  Qod,  these  are  sons  of  God. 


CH.  VIII.  1—39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO   THE  ROMANS. 


209 


For  ye  received  not  the  spirit  of  bondage 
again  unto  fear;  but  ye  received  the  Spirit 
of  adoption,  wherein  we  ory,  Abba,  Father. 
The  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  with  onr 
spirit,  that  we  are  children  of  God :  and  if 
children,  then  heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint- 
heirs  with  Christ ;  if  so  be  that  we  suffer 
with  him,  that  we  may  be  also  glorified  with 
him.  In  ver.  14  is  introJuoed  a  further  ground 
for  the  assertion  in  ver.  13,  f^o-eo-fle;  viz. 
the  felt  sonship  to  God  of  those  who  have  so 
receiveil  his  Spirit  as  to  be  led  (i.e.  practi- 
cally actuated)  by  it.  We  say  "  felt"  because, 
though  in  this  verse  the  sonahip  is  alleged 
as  a  fact,  yet,  in  the  following  verses  (15, 16) 
the  inward  expeiience  of  true  Christians  is 
appealed  to  as  evidence  of  such  sonship. 
Then,  in  ver.  17,  the  thought  is  carried  out, 
that  eonship  implies  inheritance,  and  hence 
a  share  in  the  glorified  etornal  life  of  Christ. 
(TLiis  conclusion  makes  further  evident  wliat 
was  meant  to  be  implied  above  in  the  ex- 
pression f^ereo-ee.)  "  When,  after  your  con- 
version," tlie  apostle  would  say,  "ye  received 
the  Spirit,  it  did  not  inspire  you  with  the 
fear  of  slaves,  but  with  filial  love  and  trust. 
And  this  you  know  also  is  the  feeling  that 
we  give  vent  to  in  the  congregation,  when 
we  cry  out  [Kpi.io^l^v,  denoting  emotional 
utterance],  Abba,  Father."  This  last  ex- 
pression is  given  by  St.  Mark  as  our  Lord's 
own  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane  (xiv.  36). 
We  may  conclude  that  the  Aramaic  word 
kpps.  was  the  one  used  by  him,  and  heard 
by  St.  Peter,  who  is  said  to  have  been  St. 
Mark's  informant  in  the  composition  of  his 
Gospel ;  the  equivalent  Greek  word,  &  irariip, 
having  been  added  originally  by  the  evange- 
list in  explanation  (of.  Mark  v.  41  and 
vii.  34  for  similar  instances  of  St.  Mark 
giving  Clirist's  own  expressions,  with  their 
Greek  equivalents).  Afterwards  it  may  be 
further  supposed  that  the  Greek-speaking 
Christians  came  to  use  the  whole  phrase,  as 
it  had  been  delivered  to  them,  in  their  own 
devotions,  as  representing  our  Lord's  own 
mode  of  addressing  the  Father,  and  so  as  ex- 
pressing peculiarly  tlieir  union  with  Christ, 
and  their  filial  relation  to  God  in  him.  It 
is  probable  also,  from  the  way  St.  Paul 
here  introi  luces  the  expression  (wpd^o^ev, 
chaugiug  from  the  second  to  tlie  first  persgn 
plural);  that  it  was  in  customary  use,  perhaps 
at  some  special  parts  of  the  service,  in  con- 
gregational worship.  It  occurs  once  more 
in  a  passage  closely  corresponding  with  the 
one  hefure  us,  and  which  should  be  studied 
in  connection  with  it  (Gal.  iv.  6).  It  is  to 
be  observed  how,  in  ver.  17,  tlie  idea  of  our 
sonship  now,  and  consequently  of  our  being 
joint-heirs  with  Christ,  leads  up  to  a  resump- 
tion of  the  now  prevailing  thought  of  our 
pri-gent  condition  in  the  mortal  body  being 
uu  bar  to  our  final  iuheritausu  of  life.    It  is 


our  being  as  yet  in  these  morlal  bodies  that 
is  the  cause  of  our  preseut  suffering;  but  he 
also  was  in  the  body,  and  he  also  so  suflered ; 
and  our  sharing  in  his  sufferings  really 
unites  us  the  more  to  him,  and  the  more 
ensures  our  final  inheritance  with  him  (of. 
2Cor.  i.  5,7;  Phil.  iii.  10). 

The  apostle  introduces  next  a  deep  and 
suggestive  view,  both  in  explanation  of  onr 
now  lieiug  subject  to  suffering,  and  in  con- 
firmation of  our  expectation  of  futare  glory 
notwithstanding.  He  points  to  nature  gene- 
rally, to  God's  whole  creation,  lo  far  as  it  is 
under  our  view  iu  this  mundane  sphere,  a* 
being  at  present  "subject  to  vanity,"  and, 
as  it  were,  groaning  under  some  power  of 
evil,  which  is  at  variance  with  onr  ideal 
of  what  it  should  be,  and  from  which  thera 
is  a  general  and  instinctive  yearning  for 
deliverance.  Our  present  sufferings — all 
those  drawbacks  to  the  full  enjoyment  of 
our  spiritual  life — are  due  to  our  being  at 
present  in  the  body,  and  so  forming  part  of 
the  present  system  of  things.  But  that 
general  yearning  is  in  itself  significant  of  a 
deliverance ;  and  so  the  sympathetio  witness 
of  nature  confirms  the  hope  of  oui  higher 
spiritual  yearnings,  and  encourages  us  to 
endure  and  wait.  Such  is  the  general  drift 
of  the  passage,  continued  to  the  end  of  ver. 
25.  Particular  thoughts  and  expressions 
will  be  noticed  in  the  course  of  it. 

Vers.  18,  19. — For  I  reckon  that  the 
Bufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not 
worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory 
which  shall  be  revealed  to  ns-ward,  (So^ 
as  in  the  Bevised  Version,  or  upon  «■,  as 
Tyndale  and  Cranmer,  rather  than  in  u(, 
as  in  the  Authorized  Version.  The  ex- 
pression is  ih  i]/ji.tts,  and  the  idea  is  of 
Olirist  appearing  in  glory,  and  shedding 
his  glory  on  us,  of.  1  John  iii.  2.)  For  the 
earnest  expectation  of  the  creature  (or, 
creation)  waiteth  for  the  revelation  of  the 
sons  of  God.  "Bevelatur  gloria:  et  turn 
revelantur  etiam  filii  Dei "  (Bengel),  God's 
sons  will  bo  revealed  as  being  such,  and 
glorified  (of.  1  Cor.  iv.  5 ;  also  1  John  iii.  2). 
'H  KTiVir,  in  this  verse  and  afterwarfs,  has 
been  variously  understood.  The  word  pro- 
perly means  actus  creationis,  and  is  so  used 
in  ch.  i.  20 ;  but  usually  iu  the  Kew  Testa- 
ment denotes  what  has  been  created,  as,  in 
English,  oreation.  Sometimes,  where  the 
context  limits  its  application,  it  denotes 
mankind,  as  Mark  xvi.  15  and  Col.  i.  23 ; 
or    it    may    be    used    for    an    individual 


210 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  vni.  1— 39, 


cieatnre(of.  ch.  viii.  39 ;  Heb.iv.  13).  Where 
there  is  nothing  to  limit  its  meaDing,  it  must 
be  understood  of  the  whole  visible  creatiim,  at 
any  rate  in  the  world  of  man.  Thus  in  Mark 
X.  6 ;  xiii.  19 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  4.  And  bo  here, 
except  so  far  as  the  context  limits  it;  for 
see  especially  Traa-ri  t)  Krltris  in  ver.  22. 
It  is,  indeed,  apparently  so  limited  to  the 
part  of  creation  of  which  we  have  cognizance 
at  present ;  for  see  olSa/jLei/  in  ver.  22,  which 
denotes  a  known  fact.  But  is  there  any 
further  hmitation,  as  many  commentators 
contend?  Putting  aside  as  untenable,  in 
view  of  the  whole  context  (see  especially 
ver.  23),  the  view  of  those  who  understand 
the  new  spiritual  creation  of  the  regenerate 
to  be  meant,  we  may  remark  as  follows: 

(1)  That  71  Krlffis  includes  certainly  aH 
manldnd,  not  excepting  the  regenerate. 
Kol  ri/jiets  aurol  in  ver.  23  means  that  "  we 
who  have  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spiiit"  are 
included,  not  that  we  are  a  class  apart. 

(2)  The  whole  animal  creation,  is  included 
too.  So  general  a  term  as  vaa-a  i]  ktIitis 
could  not  surely  have  been  used  if  man 
only  had  been  meant.  And  it  is  obviously 
true  that  the  whole  sentient  creation,  as 
well  as  man,  has  a  share  now  in  the 
general  suffering.  To  the  objection  that 
the  irrational  creatures  cannot  be  conceived 
as  Bliaring  in  the  "  hope "  and  "  earnest 
expectation "  spoken  of,  it  may  be  replied 
that,  so  far  as  it  seems  to  be  implied  that 
they  do,  it  may  only  be  that  the  apostle, 
by  a  fine  prosopopeia,  conceives  them  as 
feeling  even  as  the  human  mind  feels  con- 
cerning them.  But,  further,  conscious  hope 
and  expectation  does  not  seem,  if  the 
language  of  the  passage  be  examined,  to 
be  distinctly  attributed  to  them.  All 
that  is  of  necessity  implied  is  that  they 
share  in  the  groaning  from  which  we  crave 
deliverance.  (3)  Inanimate  nature  too  may 
be  included  in  the  idea,  it  also  seeming  to 
share  in  the  present  mystery  of  evil,  and 
falling  short  of  our  ideal  of  a  terrestrial 
paradise.  Tholuck  appositely  quotes  Philo 
as  saying  that  all  nature  arrSiveiav  ivSexerai 
Kal  Kd/aiei.  It  may  be  that  St.  Paul  had  in 
kis  mind  what  is  said  in  Genesis  of  the 
cursing  of  the  ground  for  man's  sake,  and 
ef  the  thorns  and  thistles;  and  also  the 
pictures  found  in  the  prophets  of  a  renovated 
earth,  in  which  the  desert  should  rejoice 
and  blossom  as  the  rose.  Calvin  comments 
on  the  whole  passage  thus:  "Omissa  ex- 
positionum  varietate,  hunc  locum  aocipio, 
nullum  esse  elementum,  nullamque  mundi 
partem,  qura  non,  veluti  prtesentis  miseriffl 
agnitione  tacta,  in  spem  resurrectionis  in- 
tenta  sit."  Again,  "Spem  creaturis  quse 
sensu  carent  ideo  tribuit,  ut  fideles  oculos 
apcriaut  ad  conspectum  invisibilis  vitas, 
Quamvis  adliuo  sub  deformi  habitu  latcat." 


Vers.  20,  21. — For  the  creature  (or,  area- 
lion,  as  before)  was  subjected  to  vanity,  not 
willingly,  but  by  reason  of  him  who  sub- 
jected it  in  hope.  Because  (or,  that;  i.e.  in 
hope  that)  the  creature  (or,  creation)  also 
shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of 
corruption  into  the  liberty  of  the  glory 
of  the  sons  of  God.  The  aorist  imeriyri 
("was  subjected")  seems  to  imply  that  the 
present  "vanity"  and  "bondage  of  cor- 
ruption "  were  not  inherent  in  the  original 
creation,  or  of  necessity  to  last  for  ever. 
Thus  the  assertions  of  G-en.  i.  1  and  31, 
stand  unshaken,  viz.  that  in  the  beginning 
Gud  created  all  things,  and  tliat  all  at  first 
was  "  very  good."  The  ideas,  resorted  to 
in  order  to  account  for  existing  evil,  of 
matter  (Sa.?))  being  essentially  evil,  and 
of  a  Sr]niovpy6s,  other  than  the  Supreme 
God,  having  made  the  world,  are  alike 
precluded.  It  might  serve  as  an  answir  to 
the  argument  of  Lucretius  against  a  Divine 
origin  of  things — 

"  Nequaquam  nobis  divinius  ease  paratam 
Naturam  rerum,  tanta  stat  praedita  culpii.'' 

Why  the  "  creature  "  was  thus  "  subjected  " 
is  not  here  explained.  No  solution  of  the  old 
insoluble  problem  of  to ffey  rh  KaKbv  is  given. 
All  that  is,  or  could  be,  said  is  that  it  was 
Sik  -rhv  uTTOToJaj'Ta,  meaning  God.  It  was 
his  vfill  that  it  should  be  so ;  this  is  all  we 
know ;  except  that  we  find  the  beginning  of 
evil,  so  far  as  it  affects  man,  attributed  in 
Scripture  to  human  sin.  But  he  so  subjected 
his  creation  in  hope.  This  expression  may 
refer  to  the  protoevangelium  of  Gen.  iii.  15, 
or  to  the  never-dying  hope  in  the  human 
heart ;  to  either  or  to  both.  The  latter  idea 
is  expressed  in  the  myth  of  Pandora's  box. 
Further,  the  creature  is  said  to  have  been 
so  subjected  "not  willingly"  (o4x  iKova-a). 
No  sentient  beings  acquiesce  in  suffering; 
they  resent  evil,  and  would  fain  flee  from  it. 
Man  especially  unwillingly  submits  to  his 
present  bonduge.  When  in  ver.  21  the 
hope  is  expressed  of  the  creature  (or  crea- 
tion) itself  being  evontually  freed  from  the 
present  bondage  of  corruption,  it  may  be 
that  the  human  part  of  creation  only  it  in 
the  writer's  eye ;  but  it  may  be  also  (there 
being  still  no  expressed  limitation  of  the 
word  Krltris)  that  he  conceives  a  final 
emancipation  of  the  whole  creation  from 
evil  (cf.  Eph.  i.  10;  1  Cor.  xv.  23—27; 
2  Pet.  iii.  13).  But  if  so,  it  is  not  said  that 
the  peculiar  glory  of  the  sons  of  God  will 
extend  to  all  creation,  but  only  that  all 
will  be  freed  into  the  freedom  of  their 
glory;  which  may  mean  that  the  day  of 
the  revelation  of  the  sons  of  God  in  glory 
will  bring  with  it  a  general  emancipation 
of   ^1  creation  from  ita  present  bondage. 


OH.  vin.  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS. 


211 


Such  a  great  final  hope  finds  exproBsion  in 
the  verse — 

"That  God,  which  ever  lives  and  Invog, 
One  God,  one  law,  one  element, 
Andone  far-off  Divine  event, 
To  which  the  whole  creation  moves." 
('  In  Memoriam.') 

The  present  condition  of  tljinga  is  in  ver. 
20  denoted  by  naraUrTis,  and  in  ver.  21  by 
T^s  5ou\eicis  t^s  ipBopas.  The  first  of  these 
words  is  the  equivalent  in  the  LXX.  of 
the  Hebrew  h^n,  which  means  projieily 
"breath,"  or  "vapour,"  and  is  used  meta- 
phoiically  for  anything  frail,  fruitless, 
evanescent,  vain.  It  is  often  applied  to 
idols,  and  it  is  the  word  in  Ecclesiastes 
where  it  is  said  that  "all  is  vanity"  (cf. 
also  Ps.  xxxix,  5,  6).  It  seems  here  to 
denote  the  frailty,  incompleteness,  transi- 
toriness,  to  which  all  things  are  now  subject. 
"MoTaHfTjjj  sonat  frustratio,  quod  creatura 
interim  non  assequatur  quod  utounque 
contendit  effioere"  (Erasmus).  iBopas  in- 
timates corruption  and  decay. 

Vers.  22,  23. — For  we  know  that  the 
whole  creation  groaueth  and  travaileth  in 
pain  together  until  now.  And  not  only  so, 
but  ourselves  also,  which  have  the  firstfruits 
of  the  Spirit,  even  we  ourselves  groan  within 
ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit, 
the  redemption  of  our  body.  The  present 
unwilling  subjection  of  the  whole  visible 
creation  to  evil  is  here  still  more  forcibly 
expressed,  and  spoken  of  as  being  what  is 
known — a  subject  of  experience  to  all  who 
observe  and  think ;  and  it  is  added  that  this 
•tate  of  things  continues  still— it  is  "  until 
now."  The  ycarned-for  deliverance  has  not 
yet  come ;  and  therefore  we  should  not  be 
surprised  if  we  too,  the  regenerate,  while  in 
the  body,  are  not  yet  exempt  from  our  share 
in  the  universal  groaning.  For  we  have 
but  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit  as  yet,  not 
its  full  triumph ;  cf.  "  the  earnest  of  the 
Spirit"  (2  Cor.  i.  22),  and  "the  earnest  of 
our  inheritance  "  (Eph.  i.  14).  Its  being  said 
that  we  still  wait  for  our  adoption  as  sons 
is  not  inconsistent  with  other  statements  (as 
in  Eph.  iv.  5 — 7,  and  above,  ver.  14,  etc.),  to 
the  effect  that  we  are  already  adopted,  and 
are  already  sons ;  for  vioBiaia  here  denotes 
the  final  realization'  of  our  present  sonship, 
when  the  sons  of  God  shall  be  revealed  (ver. 
19).  Similarly,  our  redemption  (oiroAuTpaicns) 
is  here  regarded  as  future.  In  one  sense  we 
are  redeemed  already ;  in  ariotlier  we  await 
our  redemption,  i.e.  the  full  accomplishment 
thereof.  It  is  the  consummation  called  by 
our  Lord  ^  iraXiYyiViaia  (Matt.  xix.  28), 
and  by  St.  Peter,  aTroKardtrToffis  irdj/ray 
(Acts  iii.  21).  Of.  2  Pet.  iii.  1.3,  and  Beve- 
lation  generally.  "  Of  our  body  "  seems  to 
be  added  with  reference  to  what  has  been 


seen  above  as  to  our  present  "mortal  bodies" 
being  both  the  organs  of  the  lust  of  the 
flesh  and  the  hindrances  to  the  proper  deve- 
lopment of  our  inward  spiritual  life. 

"Vers.  24,  25.— Por  by  (or,  in)  hope  we 
were  saved;  not  are  saved,  as  in  the  Autho- 
rized Version.  The  aorist  itrdBriiify,  like 
i\d&iTe  in  ver.  15,  points  to  the  time  of 
conversion.^  The  dative  i\iriSi,  which  has 
no  preposition  before  it,  seems  here  to  have 
a  modal  rather  than  medial  sense ;  for  faith, 
not  hope,  is  that  whereby  we  are  ever  said 
to  be  saved.  The  meaning  is  that  when 
the  state  of  salvation  was  entered  upon, 
hope  was  an  essential  element  in  its  appro- 
piiation.  A  condition,  not  of  attainment, 
but  of  hope,  is  therefore  the  normal  con- 
dition of  the  regenerate  now ;  and  so,  after 
shortly  pointing  out  the  very  meaning  of 
hope,  the  apostle  enforces  his  previous 
conclusion,  that  they  must  be  content  at 
present  to  wait  with  patiencei  But  hope  that 
is  seen  is  not  hope :  for  what  a  man  seeth, 
why  doth  he  yet  hope  for?  But  if  we  hope 
for  that  we  see  not,  then  do  we  with  patience 
wait  for  it. 

Now  comes  in  a  farther  thought,  and  a 
very  interesting  one. 

Vers.  26,  27. — Likewise  the  Spirit  also 
helpeth  our  infirmities :  for  what  we  should 
pray  for  as  we  ought  we  know  not :  but  the 
Spirit  itself  maketh  intercession  for  us  with 
groanings  which  cannot  he  uttered.  And 
he  that  searoheth  the  hearts  knoweth  what 
is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  because  (or,  that) 
he  maketh  intercession  for  the  saints  accord-  , 
ing  to  the  will  of  God.  Here,  then,  is  a 
further  source  of  help  and  comfort  to  Chris- 
tians under  present  trials.  Of  themselves 
they  know  not  what  relief  to  crave.  St. 
Paul  himself  knew  not  what  to  pray  for  as 
he  ought,  when  he  asked  for  removal  of  his 
thorn  in  the  flesh;  if  left  to  themselves, 
their  long  waiting  and  their  manifold  per- 
plexities might  damp  their  hope ;  but  a 
Helper  beyond  themselves  comes  in  to  suc- 
cour them,  viz.  the  Holy  Spirit  himself,  who 
intercedes  (Jm^pevTvyx'^vei)  for  tliem.  But 
how?  -Not  as  the  Son  intercedes  for  them, 
apart  from  themselves,  at  the  mercy-seat; 
but  within  themselves,  by  inspiring  them 
with  these  unutterable  (or,  unuttered)  groan- 
ings ;  and  they  are  conscious  that  such  deep 
and  intense  yearnings  are  from  the  Divine 
Spirit  moving  them,  and  teaching  them  to 
pray.  They  may  not  still  be  able  to  put 
their  requests  of  God  into  definite  form,  or 
even  express  them  in  words ;  but  they  know 
that  God  knows  the  meaning  of  what  hia 
own  Spirit  has  inspired.  This  is  a  deep 
and  pregnant  thought.  Even  apart  from 
the  peculiar  faith  and  inspiration  of  the 


212 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.      [oh.  viii.  1—39. 


gospel,  the  internal  oonsciousaesa  of  the 
human  soul,  with  its  yearnings  after  some- 
thing as  yet  unrealized,  affords  one  of  the 
most  cogent  evidences  of  a  life  to  come  to 
those  who  feel  such  yearnings.  For  ideals 
seem  to  postulate  corresponding  realities ; 
instinctive  longings  seem  to  postulate  ful- 
filment. Else  were  human  nature  a  strange 
riddle  indeed.  But  Christian  faith  vivifies 
the  ideal,  and  intensifies  the  longing;  and 
thus  the  prophecy  of  internal  consciousness 
acquires  a  new  force  to  the  Christian  be- 
liever; and  this  all  the  more  from  his  being 
convinced  that  the  quickening  of  spiritual 
life  of  which  he  is  conscious  is  Divine.  Tlie 
psalmist  of  old,  when  he  sang,  "  As  the  hurt 
panteth  after  the  waterbrooks,  bo  panteth 
my  soul  after  thee,  O  God,"  felt  in  these 
ardent  though  inarticulate  pantings  a 
presage  of  fulfilment  of  his  "  hope  in  God." 
So  the  devout  Christian ;  and  all  the  more 
in  proportion  to  the  intenseness  and  deflnite- 
ness  of  his  yearnings,  and  his  conviction 
that  they  are  from  God. 

Ver.  28. — And  we  know  that  to  them  that 
love  God  all  things  work  together  for  good, 
to  them  that  are  called  according  to  his  pur- 
pose. A  still  further  reason  fur  endurance. 
Not  only  do  these  inspired  groanings 
strengthen  our  hope  of  deliverance;  nay, 
also  we  know  (whether  from  God's  Word,  or 
inspired  conviction,  or  experience  of  their 
effects)  that  these  very  trials  that  seem  to 
hinder  us  are  so  overruled  as  to  further  tlie 
consummation  to  them  thttt  love  God  (cf. 
above,  ch.  v.  3,  etc.) ;  and  at  the  end  of  the 
verse  there  is  added,  as  introducing  a  still 
,  further  ground  of  assurance,  toij  Kara 
irpoBscriv  k^tjtoIj;  the  significance  of  which 
expression  is  shown  in  the  following  verses, 
which  carry  out  the  thought  of  it. 

Vers.  29,  30. — For  whom  he  did  foreknow, 
ne  also  did  predestinate  to  be  conformed  to 
the  image  of  his  Son,  that  he  might  be  the 
firstborn  among  many  brethren.  And  whom 
he  did  predestinate,  them  he  also  called: 
and  whom  he  called,  them  he  also  justified : 
and  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  glorified. 
Thus  is  introduced  the  doctrine  of  predesti- 
nation. This  is  indeed  -^  principal  passage 
on  whicli  theological  theories  with  regvd  to  it 
have  been  built.  It,  with  the  context,  is  the 
basis  of  the  definition  of  predestination  in 
Art.  xvii.  It  is,  therefore,  of  great  impor- 
tance to  consider  carefully  what  the  apostle 
here  really  says,  and  api)ears  most  obviously 
to  mean  ;  it  being  the  duty  of  the  expositor 
to  pay  regard  to  this  only,  in  view  of  the 
language  used,  the  way  it  is  introduced,  and 
any  cognate  passages  that  may  thruw  light 
upon  it.  We  may  observe,  in  tiie  first  place, 
that  it  is  plain  that  more  is  spoken  of  here 
than  national  election,  or  predestination  to  a 
statu  of  privilege,  which  is  the  Buljject  espe- 


cially treated  in  ch.  ii.  Individual  predes- 
tination is  in  view;  and  this  not  to  gospel 
privileges  only,  but  also  carrying  vfith  it  the 
result  of  glory.  But  it  still  remains  to  be 
seen  whether  such  predestination  is  regarded 
as  (1)  abeolute,  i.e.  irrespective,  with  regard 
to  its  final  result,  of  the  condition  of  man's 
use  of  grace  given ;  and,  if  so,  whether  (2) 
arbitrary,  i.e.  irrespective  of  the  Divine /ore- 
knowledge  of  what  men  would  be,  and  them- 
selves deserve.  The  Calvin  istic  view  is  that 
God  from  all  eternity,  of  the  mere  good 
pleasure  of  his  will,  selected  certain  person! 
out  of  mankind  to  be  the  heirs  of  glory;  the 
Arrainian  is  that  he  foresaw  from  all  eter- 
nity who  would,  in  the  exercise  of  their 
own  free-will,  respimd  to  his  purpose,  and, 
in  virtue  of  such  foreknowledge,  pre- 
ordained them  to  glory.  It  is  hardly 
necessary  to  consider  whether  there  is  any 
countenance  given  to  the  view  that  pre- 
destination ensures  salvation,  however  a 
man  may  live ;  the  obligation  of  actual 
holiness  in  Christians  being  (as  we  have 
seen)  so  strongly  insisted  on  all  along.  If, 
then,  the  Oalvinistic  theory  should  appear 
to  be  supported,  it  must  be  with  the  proviso 
that  predestination  of  necessity  carries  with 
it  the  grace  of  perseverance  in  good  works, 
or  at  any  rate  a  true  conversion  before  the 
end,  as  well  as  final  glory.  Let  us,  in  the 
first  place,  observe  the  way  in  which  St. 
Paul  introduces  the  subject,  so  as  better  to 
understand  his  drift.  Ue  has  been  speak- 
ing of  the  trials  and  imperfections  of  the 
E resent  life,  and  urging  his  readers  not  to 
e  discouraged  by  them,  on  the  ground  that, 
if  they  continue  to  "  live  after  the  Spirit," 
these  things  will  by  no  means  binder,  but 
rather  further,  the  final  issue.  To  strengthen 
this  position  he  iutroduces  the  thought  of 
God's  eternal  purpose ;  in  eftect  thus : 
Your  being  in  the  state  of  grace  in  which 
you  now  feel  yourselves  to  be,  is  due  to 
God's  eternal  purpose  to  call  you  to  this 
state,  and  tlius  in  the  end  to  save  you.  It 
is  impossible  that  the  circumstances  in 
which  he  places  you  now,  or  any  power 
whatever,  slionld  thwart  God's  eternal  pur- 
pose. But  it  is  not  of  necessity  implied  by 
anything  that  is  actually  said  that  the 
persons  addiessed  might  not  themselves 
resist  the  Divine  purpose.  In  fact,  their 
own  perseverance  appears  to  be  presupposed 
already,  and  tliey  have  been  urged  to  it  all 
along,  as  though  their  use  of  grace  depended 
on  themselves.  Hence  the  apostle  in  this 
passage  does  not  really  touch  the  theoretic 
questions  that  have  been  raised  by  then- 
logiaas,  his  purpose  being  simply  tlie 
practical  one  of  encouraging  his  readers  to 
persevere  and  hope.  We  may  now  examine 
tlie  successive  expressions  in  the  jiassage, 
and  see  wiiat  they  imply     In  ver.  28  the 


CH.  vin.  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


213 


context  shows  nixTa  to  have  especial  refer- 
ence to  external  circumstances  of  trial,  and 
not  at  all  to  men's  own  sins.     Oalviii,  com- 
menting on    it,  quotes   St.   Augustine  as 
Baying,  "Peccata  quoqne  sua,  ordinante  Dei 
providentia,  saiictis  ideo  non  nucero  ut  potins 
corum  saluti  inacrviant ; "   but  while   he 
assents  to  this  pro|iosition,  he  denies,  with 
truth,  that  any  sucli  meaning  is  intended 
here.    It  may  be  observed,  in  passing,  that 
Augustine's  proposition,  though  it  sounds 
strange,  may,  in  a  cei  tain  sense,  be  accepted 
as  true :  "  We  must  continually  err  in  order 
to  be  humble ;  our  frailty  and  sins  are  the 
tools   that  God   uses "  (General  Gordon's 
'  Letters  to  his  Sister,'  p.  37 1).    Further,  to?s 
KKi\rois  cannot   be   imilerstond  as   limiting 
ToTs  ayairaa-i   rhv   @(hy,  as    though    among 
those  tliat  love  God  only  some  are  "  the 
called ; "  nor  can  /caro  irp6Be<ni'  be  under- 
stood  as  limiting'  /cArjTo!,  as   though   even 
of  the  called  not  all  are  calleil  witli  the 
purpose  of  saving  them.     Only  a  preeon- 
ceived   idea  couM   surely  have  suggested 
such  an  interpretation  of  the  verse.    In  ver. 
29  (yiyviiffKeiv  bearing   the   sense   of   "  to 
determine,"    as  well    as   of   "to  know") 
irpoiyva    may    possibly    mean    "  predeter- 
mined"   rather    Ihiin    "foreknew."     Else- 
where in  tlie  New  Te.-tament,  when  used  of 
men,  it  has  the  latter  sense  (Acts  xxvi.  5 ; 
2  Pet.  iii.  17).    When  used  of  God,  it  may, 
as  liere,  have  either  meaning  (of.  ch.  xi.  2; 
1  Pl  t.  i.  20) ;  but  in  the  text  last  referred  to 
the  first  meaning  seems  more  probable.    So 
also  of  TrpSyyao-is  in  Acts  ii.  23  and  1  Pet. 
i.  2.    The  distinction  would  not  be  of  much 
importance  but  for  the  fact  that  the  sense 
of  "  Rireknew"  has  been  pressed  in  support  of 
the  Arminian  view ;  viz.  that  Divine  predes- 
tiuiition  was  consequent  on  the  Divine  fore- 
kuowledge  of  what  men  would  be.    It  would 
not,  indeed,  really  prove  this  view,  since  it 
might  only  mean  that  God  knew  beforehand 
the  objects  of  his  intended  mercy.    Calvin, 
though    translating    prsscognovit,    strongly 
rebuts    the    Arminian    inference,    saying, 
"Insulsi  ooUigunt  illi,  quos  dixi,  Deum  non 
alios  elegisse  nisi  quos  sua  gratia  dignos  fore 
prajvidit."   Again, "  Scquitur  notitiam  banc 
a  bene  placlto  pendere,  quia  Deus  nihil  extra 
seipsum  priEscivlt  quos   voluit  adoptando, 
sed  tantum  signavit  quos  eligere  volebat." 
npodpuTs  (wliich  might,  perhaps,  be  better 
rendered  preordained,  which  is  its  proper 
meaning,  so  as  to  avoid  the  necessary  idea 
of  irresistible  destiny  which  is  commonly 
associated  with  the  word  predestinate)  must 
be  taken,  not  absolutely,  but  in  ooimection 
with  <TviJ.ii6p<j>ous.    That  the  elect  should  in 
the  first  place  be  "conformed  to  the  image 
of  Christ "  is  all  that  is,  here  at  least,  denoted 
as  preordained  by  God.     The  .  expression, 
«ru^(((j(j>oui  Trjs  eMvos,  etc.,  may  be  under- 


stood, from  the  preceding  context,  to  refer, 
primarily  at  least,  to  participation  in  Christ's 
sufferings  (cf.  Heb.  ii.  10).  Coming  to  ver. 
30,  we  find  the  following  sequence:  (1) 
eternal  foreknowledge  (or  eternal_  purpose), 

(2)  preordination  to  fellowship  with  Christ, 

(3)  calling  (to  acceptance  of  the  gospel),  (4) 
justification,  (5)  glorification.  'ESmaioKre 
(i)  means  the  participation  in  God's  5i/coio- 
ffuj/jj,  the  passing  into  a  "  state  of  salvation  " 
through  faith  in  baptism.  But  what  ia 
meant  by  iSo^aa-e  (5)  has  been  a  subject  of 
discussion.  Some,  in  view  of  the  aorist,  not 
future,  tense  of  the  verb,  understand  it  of 
sanctification  subsequent  to  juetificaticm, 
regarded  as  participation  in  the  ghry  of  the 
Divine  holiness.  Others,  in  view  of  the 
sinnifioance  of  the  word  itself,  understand 
fuiure  glory,  the  aorist  being  acoountedj for 
by  the  apostle's  taking  in  one  view  the 
whole  process  of  salvation  with  its  final 
result,  which  is  contemplated  as  accom- 
plished. Perhaps  both  ideas  are  included, 
present  sanctification  being  regarded  as  the 
eommeucement  and  earnest  of  the  full  glory 
to  be  revealed  in  "the  sous  of  God"here- 
alter.  In  any  case,  we  are  not  bound  by 
what  is  here  said  to  conclude  that  final 
glory  of  necessity  follows  the  previous  stages. 
Fur  the  apostle  may  be  only  setting  forth 
the  process  and  result  when  grace  is  not 
resisted.  But  certainly  he  implies  that, 
when  the  result  is  glory,  all  is  to  be  traced, 
not  to  man's  initiation  or  deservings,  but  to 
Divine  grace,  and  the  Divine  purpose  of 
mercy  frojn  eternity. 

In  the  remainder  of  this  chapter  the 
apostle  rises  into  a  strain  of  glowing 
eloquence,  into  a  very  song  of  triumph, 
in  view  of  the  assured  hope  of  faithful 
Christians.  Faithfulness,  be  it  once  more 
observed,  is  presupposed  throughout  the 
passage,  which  ia  quite  wrongly  understood 
as  encouraging  confldenoe  in  any  on  the 
ground  of  their  conviction  that  they  are 
certainly,  even  in  spite  of  themselves,  pre- 
destinated to  glory:  it  only  encourages 
perseverance  in  spite  of  trial  on  the  ground 
of  our  feeling  that,  if  we  do  persevere,  we 
cannot  fail,  because  God  is  on  our  side,  and 
it  is  his  eternal  purpose  to  save  us. 

Vers.  81 — 34. — What  shall  we  then  say  to 
these  things?  (Trpbs  toSto,  meaning  "with 
respect  to,"  not  "  against ").  If  God  be  for 
us,  who  can  be  against  us  1  (ris,  not  t1,  in 
opposition  to  6  Oebs :  who — what  adverse 
power  —  can  there  possibly  be,  stronger 
than  God  ?).  He  that  spared  not  his  own 
Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all  (evidem  Ij 


214 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  vm.  1—39 


not  for  the  elect  only,  but  for  all  mankind ; 
of.  on  oh.  V.  18),  how  shall  lie  not  with 
him  also  freely  give  us  (i.e.  grant  us  of  his 
free  grace)  all  things  1  (wiyTo,  corresponding 
to  inrip  TtAvrav).  Who  shall  lay  anything 
to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  t  (Not,  of  course, 
meaning  that  the  elect,  in  -virtue  of  Grod's 
choice  of  them,  cannot,  though  sinful,  be 
charged  with  sin;  but  that  no  possible 
adversary — again  t/s — can  be  conceived  as 
arraigning  those  whom  God  himself  accepts 
as  justified.  Observe  that  the  word  here  is 
iiAeKTmv,  not  KKnTuv  as  in  ver.  28.  Of.  Matt. 
XX.  16 ;  ixii.  14 ;  noWol  yap  eltrt  k\t)to1, 
i\[yoi  Sh  iK\fKTol.  Many  may  be  called  to 
a  state  of  salvation,  but  not  all  of  them 
chosen  finally,  as  fulfilling  the  purpose  of 
their  calling.)  It  is  Ood  that  justifieth, 
Who  is  he  that  oondemneth?  It  is  Christ 
that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is  risen  again, 
who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who 
alsomaketh  intercession  for  ns.  A  different 
punctuation  of  these  two  verses  is  preferred 
by  some,  and  seems  more  natural  and  more 
forcible ;  thus :  Who  shall  charge  God's  elect  ? 
God  who  justifieth  i  Who  is  he  that  con- 
demneth  i  Christ  who  died  1  etc.  A  similar 
answering  a  question  by  asking  another  is 
found  below  in  ver.  35.  The  further  thought 
is  thus  implied  that,  if  neither  God  charges, 
nor  Christ,  the  Judge,  condemns,  who  can 
do  either  ?  Tlie  apostle  next  goes  on  to 
say  that,  there  being  none  to  charge  and 
condemn  us  at  last,  so  also  there  is  none 
that  can  remove  us  from  our  state  of  accept- 
ance now.  For  who  or  what  can  possibly 
prove  stronger  than  Christ's  love,  which  has 
called  us  to  it?  The  enumeration  that 
follows  of  things  that  might  possibly  be 
supposed  to  remove  us  shows  again  that  it 
is  not  our  own  sins,  but  external  circum- 
stances of  trial,  that  are  being  viewed  all 
along  as  powerless  to  hinder  our  salvation. 

Vers.  35—39. — Who  shall  separate  ns  from 
the  love  of  Christ  1  (i.e.  the  love  of  Christ  to 
u»,  and  in  the  same  sense  "  the  love  of  God  " 
below ;  of.  toS  aya/irijtravros  tj/jms  in  ver.  37). 
Shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution, 
or  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  1 
As  it  is  written,  For  thy  sake  we  are  killed 
all  the  day  long ;  we  are  accounted  as  sheep 
for  the  slaughter.  (This  quotation  of  Ps. 
xliv.  22  may  be  introduced  as  showing  that 
such  trials  have  ever  been  the  lot  of  God's 
servants,  and  did  not  separate  the  saints  of 
old  from  God.)  Nay,  in  all  these  things  we 
are  more  than  conquerors  (uTrepvi/cS^ev— we 
not  only  conquer  in  spite  of  them ;  we  con- 
quer all  the  more  because  of  them ;  ef.  oh. 
V.  3,  etc.,  and  oh.  viii.  28)  through  him  that 
loved  us.  Tor  I  am  persuaded,  that  neither 
death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities, 
nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things 
to  oome,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any 


other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  ns 
from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord.  In  these  two  concluding 
verses  the  thought  is  distinctly  extended 
from  circumstances  of  trial  to  all  powers, 
human  or  superhumfiu,  that  may  be  con- 
ceived as  assaulting  us  through  them,  or  In 
any  way  opposing  us.  But  it  is  still  adverse 
powers  and  influences,  not  our  own  failure 
in  perseverance,  that  are  in  view.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  define  what  is  exactly  meant 
by  each  of  the  expressions  in  these  verses. 
Enough  to  say  that  what  is  meant  is,  that 
nothing  whatever,  in  heaven  or  earth,  or 
under  the  earth,  can  thwart  God's  good 
purpose  for  us,  or  separate  us  from  his  love. 

The  following  paraphrastic  summary  of 
this  important  cliapter,  free  from  the  en- 
cumbrance of  notes,  may  help  to  a  clearer 
perception  of  its  drift  and  sequence  of 
thought : — 

Ver.  1. — There  is  then  no  condemnation 
to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Ver.  2. — For  a  new  law — the  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  life — is  introduced  into  their  being, 
by  virtue  of  which  they  are  freed  from  their 
old  state  of  bondage  to  the  law  of  sin  and 
death. 

Ver.  3. — And  this  because  of  what  God 
himself  did  for  mankind  in  his  own  Son, 
Christ,  who,  in  our  very  flesh,  and  in  behalf 
of  mankind,  did  what  man  himself  was 
powerless  to  do — triumphed  over  sin  and 
condemned  it. 

Ver.  4. — And  in  us  too  (united  to  him  by 
faith,  and  having  spiritually  died  and  risen 
again  with  him)  the  requirement  of  the  Law 
is  fulfilled,  so  that  it  forfeits  its  claim  to 
condemn  us  now ;  but  only  on  this  condition 
in  ourselves,  that  we  walk  not  after  the 
flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit. 

Vers.  5—8. — For  there  are  two  (ppoviiiMTa 
in  us  still,  of  the  flesh  as  woU  as  of  the 
Spirit;  the  one  tending  to  death  and  the 
other  to  life ;  and  it  is  only  those  who  give 
tliemselves  to  the  latter  that  can  share  in 
the  life  to  which  it  tends. 

Ver.  9. — And  you  can  give  yourselves  to 
this,  if  you  are  true  Christians;  if  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  dwells  in  you,  without  which  you 
are  not  his. 

Ver.  10. — So  our  condition  is  this :  We 
have  within  us  the  Spirit,  which  is  life ; 
but  we  have  the  body  cliuging  to  us  still, 
which  is  death-stricken  beeause  of  sin. 

Ver.  H.— But  if  the  Spirit  of  him  who 
raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead  be  in  us,  he 
will  quicken  our  mortal  bodies  too,  delivering 
us  at  last,  through  the  same  vivifying  Spirit, 
from  all  lingering  power  of  death  over  us. 

Ver.  12. — The  conclusion  is  (as  has  been 


CH.  vm.  1—39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


215 


insisted  on  all  along),  that  we  are  bound,  aa 
Christians,  in  our  present  lives,  to  live,  not 
after  tlie  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit. 

Ver.  13. — If  we  do  not,  then  (notwith- 
standing our  redemption)  we  must  needs 
die — yea,  die  the  death  beyond  the  grave 
(whatever  it  may  be),  which  is  the  doom  of 
Bin ;  but  if  we  do,  then  we  shall  live — yea, 
live  at  last  (as  the  sequul  shows  to  be 
implied)  in  the  eternal  life  of  Christ  with 
God. 

Vers.  14 — 17. — For  the  Spirit  you  received 
when  you  became  Christians  was  one  of 
Bonsliip ;  our  habitual  eainest  cry  of  "  Abba, 
Fatlier,"  expresses  our  feeling  of  it;  the 
Spirit  still  witnesses  with  our  spirit  that  we 
are  God's  children;  and  souship  implies 
heirship — heirship  with  Christ,  through  our 
union  with  whom  we  feel  ourselves  to  be 
sons ;  and,  if  we  have  to  share  in  his 
suiferings  now,  tiiis  only  unites  us  the  more 
to  him,  and  fits  us  the  more  for  our  inheri- 
tance of  eternal  life  with  him. 

Ver.  18. — For  what  of  all  these  present 
sufferings,  these  present  drawbacks  to  the 
full  triumph  of  the  mev/ia  (arjs  in  you, 
these  present  evidences  that  the  (rS/i-a  venphv 
still  clings  to  you  ?  They  are  nothing  to 
the  destined  glory ;  they  are  not  worth  con- 
sideration in  comparison  with  it. 

Vers.  19  —22.— Anil,  after  all,  these  prestnt 
drawbacks  are  but  our  inevitable  share  in 
the  condition  of  imperfection  under  which 
all  creation,  as  we  see  it  now,  is  labouring. 
The  whole  world  presents  to  us  the  picture 
of  an  ideal  not  realized,  but  ever  yearned 
for.  All  we  can  say  about  it  is  that  it  has 
pleased  God  to  subject  it  for  a  time  to 
vanity  and  the  bondage  of  corruption,  but 
so  as  to  leave  hope  alive. 

Ver.  23. — And  we  too,  while  in  this 
mortal  body,  must  needs  share  in  this 
universal  groaning;  but,  having  already 
the  firstfiuits  of  the  Spirit — the  earnest 
already  of  a  diviner  life — we  especially 
yearn  all  the  more  for  deliverance,  and 
expect  it  hopefully. 

Vers.  24,  25. — When  we  entered  on  our 
state  of  salvation  as  Christians,  it  was  in 
hope;  our  essential  condition  became  then 
one  of  hope,  which  is  incompatible  with 
present  attainment  of  our  hope ;  we  must, 
therefore,  needs  endure  and  wait,  bearing 
these  present  trials. 

Vers.  26,  27. — And  if  our  trials  are  great, 
and  we  know  not  ourselves  what  relief  to 
pray  for,  we  have  the  comfort  of  believing 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  intercedes  for  us  within 
ourselves  by  inspiring  all  these  unutterable 
yearnings,  which  he  that  seaicheth  the 
heart  knows  the  meaning  of,  and  will  answer 
according  to  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  who 
inspired  them. 

Ver.  28. — We  know,  too,  that  all  things, 


even  all  these  present  trials,  far  from 
harming  us,  work  together  fur  good  to  them 
that  love  God,  being  called  according  to  hi» 
purpose. 

Vers.  29,  30. — Yes,  called  according  to 
his  purpose;  here  is  a  further  ground  of 
hopcfnl  assurance.  For  his  having  called 
us  to  be  Christians  at  all,  and  justified  us 
through  faith,  shows  that  it  was  his  eternal 
purpose  in  so  calling  us,  to  conform  us  to 
the  image  of  his  Son,  that  he  might  be  the 
Firstborn  among  many  brethren ;  and  that 
so  we,  being  tlius  made  his  brethren,  might 
inherit  with  him.  In  short,  his  having  pre- 
ordained us  to  our  present  state  of  salvation 
carries  with  it  his  preordaining  us  also  to 
its  end  and  purpose,  which  is  glory. 

Vers.  31 — 34. — If  God  be  thus  for  us,  who 
can  be  against  us?  He  who  has  already 
given  up  his  own  Son  for  us  all  will  surely 
grant  us  all.  And,  if  God  has  chosen  us, 
who  shall  arraign  us?  God  himself,  who 
already  justifies  us?  No.  Christ,  who 
died,  rose,  again,  ascended  to  the  right  hand 
of  God,  and  now  intercedes  for  us?  No. 
And  against  them  what  other  power  can 
pessibly  prevail  ? 

Vers.  35 — 37. — Certainly  not  these  present 
trials  and  calamities,  however  severe ;  though 
"we  are  killed  all  day  long,  and  are  ap- 
pointed as  sheep  for  the  slaughter."  Through 
Christ,  who  so  loved  us  as  to  share  them,  we 
are  conquerors  all  the  more  by  means  of  them. 

Vers.  38,  39.  -  For  I  am  persuaded  that 
no  powers  or  circumstances  whatever,  ex- 
ternal to  ourselves,  will  ever  separate  us 
from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord,  or  consequently  bar  our 
attainment  of  onr  final  inheritance. 

Additicmal  Note  on  ver.  29,  seq. 

The  view  given  above  of  St.  Paul's 
intention  and  meaning  is  by  no  means 
meant  as  ignoring  the  essential  mystery  of 
predestination,  however  regarded.  Divine 
omnipotence  combined  with  omniscience 
on  the  one  hand,  and  human  free-will  on 
the  other,  seem  indeed  to  human  reason  to 
be  incompatible  ideas ;  yet  we  are  compelled 
to  entertain  both — the  one  on  the  ground, 
not  only  of  scriptural  teaching,  but  also  of 
our  conception  of  theDivineBeing;  the  other 
on  tlie  ground,  not  only  of  our  conception  of 
Divine  justice,  but  also  of  our  own  irre- 
sistible consciousness,  and  of  scriptural 
teaching  too.  Such  difficulty  of  reconcilia- 
tion between  two  apparently  necessary  ideas 
is  not  peculiar  to  theology;  philosophy  has 
it  too ;  and  there  are  necessitarians  among 
philosophers,  as  well  as  predestinarians 
among  theologians,  equally  contradicting 
man's  irresistible  consciousness  of  having 
the  power  of  choice.     We  can  only  regard 


216 


THE  EPISTLE   OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  viii.  1—39. 


the  conflicting  eonceptiong  as  partial  appre- 
henBiona  of  a  giesit  truth  which  as  a  whole 
is  beyond  us.  The  apparent  contradiction  be- 
tween them  may  be  due  to  the  failure  of  finite 
beings  to  comprehend  infinity.  Thuy  have 
been  compared  to  two  parallel  straight  lines, 
which,  according  to  geometrical  definition, 
can  never  meet,  and  yet,  according  to  the 
higher  mathematical  theory,  meet  iu  in- 
finity ;  or  we  may  take  the  illustration  of 
an  asymptote,  which  from  i  finite  point  of 
view  oau  never  possibly  'ouch  a  curve,  and 
yet,  in  analytical  geometry,  is  found  to  cross 
it  at  an  iufinite  distance.  For  the  practical 
purposes  of  life  botli  ideas  may  be  enter- 
tained; and  it  is  only  human  attempts  to 
reconcile  them  in  theory,  or  to  escape  the 
difficulty  by  denying  free-will  altogether, 
that  have  given  rise  to  the  endless  conti-o- 


versies  on  the  subject.  It  is  impoi'tant  to 
observe  how  St.  Paul,  though  he  distinctly 
intimates  both  conceptions  (as  he  must 
needs  do  as  a  preacher  of  God's  truth  in 
all  its  aspects),  and  though  his  allusions  to 
predestination  have  been  made  a  main 
support  of  Calvinistic  views,  never  really 
propounds  a  theory.  When  he  alludes  to 
the  subject,  it  is  with  a  practical  purpose; 
and  when  (as  in  this  chapter)  he  speaks  of 
God's  predestination  of  believers  to  glory, 
his  purpose  is  to  encourage  them  to  persevere 
in  holiuess  on  the  ground  of  their  assurance 
of  Goli's  eternal  purpose  concerning  them, 
the  essential  human  conditions  being  all 
along  supposed  to  be  fulfilled  (see  also 
note  on  Heb.  vi.  16—20,  iu  '  Pulpit  Com- 
mentary '). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — "  No  eondemnation."  In  reading  this  chapter,  it  cannot  but  be  felt  that 
there  was,  in  the  mind  of  the  apostle,  a  very  vivid  sense  of  the  contrast  between  the 
character,  the  poaition,  and  the  prospects  of  the  true  Christian,  and  those  of  unbelievers, 
whether  Jews  or  Gentiles.  This  contrast  is  kept  up,  either  verbally  or  implicitly, 
from  the  beginning  to  the  close  of  w  hat  is  felt  to  be  one  of  the  most  encouraging  and 
precious  portions  of  the  apostle's  writings. 

I.  The  Christian's  condition  and  chabacteh.  It  is  plain  that,  in  the  view 
of  St.  Paul,  personal  religion  did  not  consist  in  external  condition  or  relationships,  in 
association  with  any  family,  or  nation,  or  visible  society.  Christians  are  those  who 
are  "  in  Christ  Jesus."  1.  The  language  is  instructive  as  to  the  Divine  provision  for 
man's  spiritual  welfare  made  in  the  incarnation,  ministry,  and  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of 
God.  To  be  accepted  and  approved  by  the  great  Euler  and  Lord  of  all  is  a  condition 
made  dependent  upon  association  with  that  Being  in  whom  God  at  once  revealed  his 
character  and  purposes,  and  reconciled  the -world  to  himself.  2.  A  spiritual  union 
is  implied.  To  be  "  in  Christ  Jesus  "  is  what  he  himself  has  enjoined :  "  Abide  in  me." 
And  the  New  Testament  represents  Christ's  jjeople  as  "  in  him,"  "  found  in  him," 
"  standing  in  him,"  "  walking  in  him  ; "  and  after  this  life  as  "  sleeping  in  him,"  and 
"  dead  in  him."  3.  The  purposes  of  union  with  Christ  are  involved  in  this  descrip- 
tion. (1)  Christians  are  hidden  in  Christ  for  safety;  as  in  the  cleft  of  a  rock 
which  affords  shelter  from  the  storm,  as  in  the  city  of  refuge  whither  the  fugitive 
flees,  and  in  which  he  finds  himself  safe  from  the  pursuer.  (2)  Christians  are  grafted 
in  Christ  for  life ;  they  are  branches  in  the  living  Vine.  (3)  They  are  joined  to  him 
for  guidance,  as  members  of  the  mystical  body.  4.  The  power  and  principle  of  union 
witli  Christ  are  assumed.  On  the  human  side  the  union  is  effected  hy  faith;  on  the 
Divine  side  it  is  rendered  possible  by  the  impartation  of  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

II.  The  Christian's  exemption  and  immunity.  1.  What  is  the  condemnation 
from  which  those  who  are  in  Christ  are  relieved  ?  Doubtless,  the  penal  consequences 
of  sin,  the  Divine  displeasure  and  judicial  anger,  the  present  punishment  of  remorse 
and  fear,  the  future  punishment  of  destruction  and  death.  2.  Who  removes  it?  The 
Lord  and  Judge,  whose  prerogative  it  is  to  pass  sentence  of  condemnation,  retains  in 
his  own  hands  the  right  to  remit  the  punishment  of  those  sentenced,  and  to  set 
guilty  but  repentant  criminals  free  to  enjoy  a  spiritual  liberty.  3.  On  what  grounds, 
and  in  virtue  of  what  provision,  does  the  righteous  Lord  remove  the  condemnatitm  ? 
For  his  own  mercy's  sake,  and  in  virtue  of  the  redemption  which  was  wrought  by- 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  so  fully  stated  and  explained  in  this  Epistle.  4.  With  what 
results?  The  conscience  of  the  sinner  is  relieved;  the  favour  of  the  holy  God  is 
vouchsafed;  the  privileges  and  pleasures  of  the  Christian  life  are  opened  up,  and  final 
acquittal  is  definitely  and  certainly  assured. 


OH.  VIII.  1—39.]    THE -EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  217 

Application.  1.  Let  the  Christian  rest  in  no  inferior  view  of  his  position;  for  this 
assurance  of  liberty  is  one  which  every  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  is  invited  and  is 
warranted  to  take  to  himself.  2.  Let  those  who  are  under  condemnation  by  reason  of 
sin  remember  that  there  is  one  way  of  escape  and  acquittal,  and  only  one ;  and  let 
this  be  80iight  and  found  without  delay. 

Ver.  2, — "The  Spirit  of  life''  What  interest  we  always  feel  in  life !  Among  things 
earthly,  the  mnin  distinction,  to  our  minds,  is  that  between  the  living  and  the  lifeless. 
Among  the  snows  of  Alpine  heights,  the  blue  gentian  flower  is  welcome  to  the  eye  of 
the  mountaineer.  Amid  the  hot  wastes  of  the  sandy  deserts,  sweet  is  the  oasis  of 
green  shrubs  and  shady  palm  trees  which  spring  up  around  the  solitary  fountain. 
The  child  lovea  to  watch  the  butterfly  fluttering  from  bush  to  bush,  the  lizard  peeping 
out  and  darting  in  among  the  heather  and  the  ling  of  the  common,  the  dragon-fly 
weaving  its  graceful  dances  over  the  sunny  waters  of  the  secluded  pool.  Who  does 
not  find  a  calm  delight  in  marking  the  grayling  leap  from  the  silvery  brook,  the  heron 
lift  itself  in  slow  flight  from  the  reedy  banks  of  the  tidal  river,  the  hawk  circle  in  the 
blue  sky,  the  antlered  deer  bound  into  the  lake  and  fleet  through  the  glades  of  the 
forest?  Amidst  the  loneliness  of  the  ocean,  what  a  relief  to  the  mariner  to  witness 
the  gambol  of  the  sea-monster,  or  even  to  hear  the  cry  of  the  wild  storm-bird  I  And, 
to  the  thoughtful  mind,  how  far  deeper  the  interest  felt  iu  the  more  complex,  the  more 
varied — the  moral — life  of  men !  Whether  in  the  mountain  or  the  plain,  by  the  sea,  in 
the  well-tilled  fields,  or  in  the  busy  city  where  myriads  throng  and  jostle,  wherever 
human  life  meets  the  eye  and  ear,  w6  feel  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  God's  greatest 
works.  Here  is  the  spiritual  realm  ;  here  the  moral  conflict ;  here  the  probation,  the 
discipline,  which  regard  eternity.  For  the  interest  of  the  life  of  mati  lies  not  in  its 
picturesque  or  its  pathetic  aspect,  but  in  the  working  of  great  principles,  to  issues 
dear  to  the  very  heart  of  God.  The  life  of  the  body  engrosses  indeed  much  of  men's 
energies  and  cares.  Yet  we  all  feel  that  it  is  the  higher  life — the  soul-life — that  is  of 
supreme  moment  and  deathless  interest  to  man.  There  is  a  life  of  the  spirit,  which 
multitudes  may  disregard,  but  which  to  the  Creator,  and  to  all  enlightened  minds,  seems 
the  one  great  end  for  which  worlds  were  made  and  man  was  fashioned.  It  is  the 
ofScs  of  religion  to  summon  men's  attention  to  this  life,  precious,  beautiful,  and 
immortal ;  to  tell  men  that,  unless  they  live  this  life,  they  live  in  vain ;  to  assure 
them  that  the  privileges  and  the  probation  of  earth  have  a  view  to  this  higher 
conscious,  spiritual  existence  and  growth.  And  Christianity  comes  to  men,  telling 
them  of  a  Divine  Saviour,  in  whom  "  was  life,"  and  who  came  "that  we  might  have 
life,  and  that  we  might  have  it  more  abundanliy ;"  telling  them  of  a  spiritual  agency 
provided  by  God  to  awaken  them  from  the  death  of  sin  unto  the  life  of  righteousness ; 
telling  them  of  the  presence  and  the  power  among  men  of  "  the  Spirit  of  life."  It  i« 
the  spiritual  life,  enkindled  and  sustained  by  this  Divine  Spirit,  which  is  the  aim  and 
the  reward  of  a  Father's  pity  and  a  Saviour's  love.  Contrasting  with  that  death  from 
which  it  is  a  deliverance,  it  is  a  preparation  for  that  eternity  which  is  the  infinite 
scope  for  its  development.  Consisting  in  the  exercise  and  growth  of  the  highest 
and  noblest  powers  with  which  the  Creator  has  endowed  mankind,  amidst  the 
circumstances  which  Providence  has  arranged  for  their  manifestation,  it  brings 
the  dependent  being  to  share  the  Divine  nature,  and  fits  it  to  inherit  the  heavenly 
kingdom. 

I.  The  apostle  speaks  of  the  living  Spirit — the  Spirit  in  whom  is  life.  God 
is  spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures  as  "  the  living  God."  The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  hving  Agent ; 
not  merely  conscious,  but  energetic.  He  has  knowledge :  "  The  things  of  God  knoweth 
no  man,  but  the  Spirit  of  God."  He  works  the  work  of  God  in  the  material  world : 
"By  his  Spirit  God  hath  garnished  the  heavens;"  "Thou  sendest  forth  thy  Spirit; 
they  are  created."  He  is  the  Author  of  our  conscious  being :  "  The  Spirit  of  God  hath 
made  me,  and  the  breath  of  the  Almighty  hath  given  me  life."  He  is  the  universal 
Presence  of  omniscient  Deity:  "Whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  Spirit?"  He  is  the 
power  that  raised  the  Redeemer,  who  was  "  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened 
by  the  Spirit."  He  is  the  Divine  Force  of  life  to  Christ's  followers :  "  He  that  raised 
up  Christ  from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies,  by  his  Spirit  that 
dwelleth  in  you."    In  so  much  of  nature  as  is  accessible  to  our  observation,  life  springi 


218  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  TtIB  ROMANS,    [ch.  vm.  1—38, 

from  life.  So  is  it  in  the  spiritual  realm.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  spoken  of  as  the  Source 
and  Imparter  of  the  new  and  holy  life ;  because  he  himself  possesses,  in  infiuite  fulness, 
that  which  we  receive  ascording  to  measure.  We  recognize  the  presence  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  in  all  God's  works  and  methods,  in  what  are  called  nature  and  nature's  laws. 
But  not  simply  the  lower  life — the  highest  and  the  best  also  is  his  ;  his  also  is  the 
life  which  is  emphatically  Divine.  The  Spirit  of  God  is,  accordingly,  the  Spirit  of 
truth,  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  the  Spirit  (jf  wisdom,  the  Spirit  of  grace,  the  Spirit  of  life. 
Far  from  being  merely  contemplative,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  emiihatically  energetic. 
Hia  omnipresence  and  universal  activity  bear  witness  to  the  justice  and  the  beauty  of 
the  designalion  applied  to  him — "  the  Spirit  of  life." 

II.  The  livinq  Spirit  is  also  the  LiFB-iMPAaTiNa  Spirit.  In  the  Nicene  Creed, 
which  has  been  in  use  in  Christian  Cliurches  for  fifteeu  liundred  years,  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  termed  "the  Lord  and  Giver  of  life."  Not  nuly  is  life  in  him;  it  is  from  him. 
"Wherever  we  observe  the  signs  of  spiritual  life,  we  are  justified  in  attributing  them 
to  the  Divine  influences.  That  life  from  the  dead  should  result  from  the  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit  appears  to  have  been  constantly  taught  by  the  Hebrew  prophets :  "  I 
will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the  dry  f;round  :  I  will  pour 
my  Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and  my  blessing  upon  thine  offspring :  and  they  shall  spring 
up  as  among  tie  grass,  as  willows  by  the  water-courses ;  "  and  again,  "  The  Spirit 
shall  be  poured  upon  us  from  on  high,  and  the  wilderness  shall  be  a  fruitful  field,  and 
the  fruitful  field  be  counted  for  a  forest."  And  when  our  Lord  Jesus  taught  the  great 
truths  of  his  kingdom,  he  expressly  referred  to  this  same  Divine  agency  the  new  life 
which  was  to  be  distinctive  of  his  subjects.  Using  figurative  language,  drawn  from 
the  history  of  the  bodily  life,  he  said  to  Nicodemus,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water 
and  of  the  Spirit,  be  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God ;"  "  That  which  is  bom 
of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  Examples  of  spiritual  death  are  too  common  all  around.  A 
person  may  have  abundance  of  life  and  health  and  strength  of  body,  he  may  even 
be  alive  intellectually;  yet  he  may  be  as  dead  in  the  sight  of  God.  If  there  be  in  him 
DO  interest  in  the  Divine  presence,  no  reverence  for  the  Divine  Law,  no  submission 
to  the  Divine  Word,  no  devotion  to  the  Divine  service,  no  faith  in  the  Divine  promises, 
the  man  is  dead — "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ;  "  there  is  "  no  life  in  him."  A  most 
striking  picture  of  the  condition  of  dead  souls  is  given  by  the  piophet  who  records 
the  vision  of  the  valley  of  dry  bones :  "  There  was  no  life  in  them."  On  the  other 
hand,  what  is  meant  by  spiritual  Kfel  A  truly  living  Christian  is  alive  to  the 
presence  and  favour  of  God,  is  under  the  constraint  of  the  love  of  Christ,  delights  in 
the  Divine  Word,  and  treasures  up  its  precepts  and  its  promises,  is  obedient  to  the 
commands  of  Jesus  the  Lord,  and  is  devoted,  gratefully  and  joyfully,  to  his  service 
and  glory.  The  things  of  earth,  which  are  everything  to  the  worldly,  have  com- 
paratively little  interest  for  such,  except  as  they  are  connected  with  Christ's  kinsidom. 
They  "  have  puiified  their  souls  in  obeying  the  truth  through  the  Si)irit."  That  a 
great  change  has  passed  over  those  who  were  spiritually  dead,  but  are  now  "alive 
unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,"  cannot  be  questioned.  No  change  in 
condition,  from  beggary  to  opuleni'e,  from  a  dunghill  to  a  throne,  can  for  a  moment 
be  compared  with  this  change.  This  is  indeed  "  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and 
renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  "  the  "  new  creation  ;  old  things  are  passed  away;  behold, 
all  things  are  become  new."  No  explanation  of  this  change  is  reasonable  and  sufficient 
which  does  not  refer  it  to  the  Spiiit  of  God.  To  those  spiritually  awakened,  brought 
to  newness  of  life,  the  words  of  the  apostle  may  be  addressed  :  "  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are 
sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our 
God."  If  we  can  say,  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  tin  to  life,  because 
we  love  the  brethren,"  we  shall  certainly  be  found  forward  to  acknowledge,  "  GJod, 
who  is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,  even  when  we  were 
dead  in  sins,  hath  quickened  us  together  with  Clirist."  It  is  by  the  grace  and  energy 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  human  souls  are  born  anew,  are  horn  from  above.  That  this 
scriptural  teaching  is  most  reasonable  seems  as  jilain  as  can  be.  If  we  believe  in  the 
existence  of  human  spirits,  we  must  acknowledge  their  influence  over  our  nature  and 
character.  The  uprightness  and  magnanimity  of  a  father,  the  tenderness  and  unselfish- 
ness of  a  mother,  the  ennobling  and  inspiring  influence  of  a  true  friend,  have  all 
'•  told  "  upon  us,  and  helped  to  make  us  what  we  are  that  is  good.     Is  it  credible  that 


CH.  VIII.  I— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  219 

we  owe  so  mucla  to  human  spirits,  and  yet  owe  nothing  to  him  who  is  "  the  Father 
of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  " — in  whom  is  all  moral  excellence,  and  whose  benevolence 
is  equal  to  his  holiness?  Do  we  behold  his  handywork  in  the  vaulted  heavens  and 
the  verdant  eai  th ;  and  shall  we  not  recognize  Ms  mighty  working  in  the  spiritual 
realm,  and  admire  his  grace  and  love  in  all  that  is  pure  in  human  character,  true  in 
human  speech,  and  beautiful  in  human  life  ?  If  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  that  "  renews 
the  face  of  the  earth,"  that  turns  the  winter  into  spring,  calling  forth  life  and  beauty, 
fragrance  and  song,  where  sterility  and  death  have  reigned ;  surely  it  is  not  enthusiasm 
to  attribute  to  "  the  Spirit  of  life"  the  transformation  of  tlie  human  soul,  the  enkind- 
ling of  the  spiritual  vitality  and  energy,  that  mark  the  new  creation  1  The  Spirit 
of  life  does  not  act  independently  of  means.  The  human  soul  is  affected  by  power, 
in  accordance  with  its  own  laws.  la  order  to  live  unto  God,  a  soul  must  have  some 
knowledge  of  God  and  of  God's  purposes,  must  be  awakened  to  a  sense  of  sin  and 
need,  must  understand  and  aorept  the  gospel  of  Divine  grace,  must  receive  in  faith 
the  promises  of  pardon,  of  help,  of  guidance,  of  salvaiion.  Now,  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God  acts  in  connection  with  these  means ;  for  he  is  the  Spirit  of  truth,  as  well  as 
of  power.  He  takes  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  reveals  thoin  unto  us.  Tliis  is  why 
we  are  especially  encouraged  to  seek  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  when  we  are 
using  the  means  which  Divine  wisdom  has  appointed  for  the  conversion  of  sinners. 
The  Spirit  works  with  the  Word,  brings  the  gospel  home  with  power  to  the  heart  cf 
the  hearer,  at  once  gives  energy  to  the  truth  itself  and  to  the  appeal  of  the  heavenly 
message,  and  enlightenment  and  quickening  grace  to  the  nature  of  the  hearer.  The 
"Word,  alone,  is  lifeless ;  the  soul,  alone,  is  dead  ;  but  the  Spirit  imparts  efScaoy  to  the 
Word,  and,  so,  vitality  to  the  soul.  Thus  God  accompanies  the  Word  "  with  the 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  with  power."  There  is  a  shaking  among  the  dry 
bones ;  the  Spirit  is  breathed  into  them,  and  they  live,  they  stand  upon  their  feet,  an 
exceeding  great  army.  What  encouragement  this  doctrine  should  give  to  all  who  are 
labouring  for  the  salvation  of  souls !  They  may  be  very  ignorant  and  very  weak,  for 
they  are  but  human.  But  the  work  is  to  he  effected,  not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but 
by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  We  do  but  comply  with  the  directions  of  him  who  alike 
reveals  the  truth  and  imparts  the  Spirit.  Yes,  we  may  be  assured  that  he  will  honour 
his  own  agency,  that  he  will  not  forsake  his  own  servants,  that  he  will  prosper  his  own 
work,  and  so  glorify  his  own  Name,  and  hasten  his  own  kingdom. 

III.  It  is  the  office  of  the  Spirit  op  life,  not  only  to  awaken,  but  to 
SUSTAIN  LIFE.  Life  is  not  a  thing  which  is  perfected  at  once.  The  blossom  of  the 
spring  is  fair  and  fragrant ;  yet  months  must  pass,  and  all  seasonable  influences  must 
have  play,  before  the  luscious  fruit  shall  be  found,  where  the  bloom  of  promise  cheered 
the  eye  and  roused  the  hope.  The  child,  in  his  helplessness  and  speechlessness,  must 
be  nurtured  and  taught  through  long,  years  before  the  infantile  nature  shall  develop 
into  that  of  the  philosopher  or  the  statesman.  Life  is  a  thing  of  progress,  a  thing  of 
growth ;  has  its  own  divinely  appointed  order  and  processes  and  laws.  So  is  it  vrith 
the  spiritual  life.  It  is  no  dishonour  to  the  Divine  Spirit  that  the  work  of  renewal 
is  not  an  instantaneons  and  perfect  work,  leaving  nothing  further  to  be  done.  The 
new  birth  is,  as  a  birth,  complete ;  but  it  is  only  the  commencement  of  a  new  life.  To 
be  "born  again"  is  to  begin  to  live  anew,  with  higher  principles  and  purer  motives 
and  nobler  aims.  Here,  upon  earth,  the  path  of  the  Christian  is  one  of  progress ;  he 
is  introduced  to  the  right  way  in  order  that  he  may  follow  it — that  he  may  make 
progress  therein,  year  by  year,  and  day  by  day.  It  is  not  the  will,  the  plan,  of 
God  that  there  should  be  either  pause  or  (far  less)  retrogression.  Two  things  are 
needful — first,  growth,  always ;  and  secondly,  revival,  sometimes.  It  wire  to  be  wished 
that  young  Christians  were  more  conscious  of  the  requirement  of  growth  in  the  Divine 
life.  To  be  brought  into  a  right  relation  with  God  is  the  first  step  in  the  spiritual 
life ;  but  it  remains  to  learn  God's  truth,  to  do  God's  will,  to  serve  Christ's  people,  and 
to  promote  Christ's  cause.  It  will  take  the  whole  of  life  to  fulfil  the  "high  calling  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus."  Character  and  usefulness, — these,  to  use  ordinary  language, 
are  the  great  ends  of  life.  They  who  fail  here  fail  altogether.  Coming  to  religious 
serviices,  reading  the  Bible,  prayer,  fellowship, — these  are  means  to  an  end ;  and  that 
end  is  that  men  may  be  more  like  Christ.  Aspire  to  this;  be  not  satisfied  unless  you 
are  making  progress  in  this  direction ;  let  the  fruit  be  seen,  which  is  the  effect  and  the 


220  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vm.  1—39. 

evidence  of  life.  It  is  by  the  Spirit  of  life  that  this  result  is  to  be  effected — ^by  the 
Spirit  of  life  working  ia  the  heart,  and  changing  the  character  into  the  likeness  of 
the  Lord,  and  assisting  to  conquer  sin,  to  resist  Satan,  to  acquire  a  character  congenial 
and  akin  to  Christ's.  This  is  the  Holy  Spirit's  choicest,  holiest  work ;  to  foster  ami 
liromote  the  spiritual  life,  that  it  may  be  growingly  vigorous  and  fruitful,  to  the  praise 
and  glory  of  the  ever-living  God.  And  it  is  the  office  of  the  same  Spirit  to  revive  the 
Ufe  that  is  feeble  ami  sluggish.  If,  by  negligence  and  sloth,  the  Christian  has  become 
cold  to  spiritual  realities,  and  is  not  living  in  constant  communion  with  the  Unseen, 
there  is  but  one  power  that  can  reanimate  the  slumbering  soul,  that  can  again  enkindle 
the  dying  flame  of  devotion,  that  can  save  from  selfishness  and  worldliness,  that  cm 
make  a  man  truly  live  unto  God.  Ee-vWal  presumes  that  life  is  already  in  existence, 
but  is,  as  it  were,  in  abeyance  or  in  a  dormant  state.  In  the  use  of  divinely  appointed 
means  this  condition  may  be  escaped,  this  mischief  may  be  remedied ;  but  the  power 
that  alone  can  accomplish  this  good  work  is  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  It 
is  the  Spirit  that  awakens  first  to  the  sense  of  deadness,  so  to  speak,  and  then  leads 
to  the  employment  of  those  means  by  which  the  soul  can  be  reanimated  and  refreshed. 
A  little  reflection  will  show  that  only  the  same  Spirit  can  perfect  life  in  immortality. 
The  life  which  is  awakened  by  this  Divine  agency  is  a  life  which  knows  no  death.  The 
chiuige  which  passes  upon  the  body  at  its  dissolution  does  not  affect  the  spiritual  life ; 
for  this,  begun  in  time,  is  perfected  in  eternity,  "  The  Spirit  that  raised  up  Jesus 
from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies."  In  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  we  have  the  pledge  and  earnest  of  a  blessed  immortality.  "  We  through  the 
Spirit  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith ; "  "  Ye  were  sealed  with  that  Holy 
Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the  Earnest  of  our  inheritance,  until  the  redemption  of  the 
purchased  possession,  tmto  the  praise  of  his  glory ; "  "  Now  the  God  of  hope  fill  you 
with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  that  ye  may  abound  in  hope,  through  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost." 

Vers.  15,  16. — T%e  Spirit  received  ly  Christians.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  gift  of  God 
to  his  people  in  Christ — "  the  promise  of  the  Father ; "  the  Comforter  whose  advent  was 
foretold  by  Cftirist,  accompanying  Divine  truth,  and  characterizing  the  new  dispensation 
of  God's  mercy  and  love.  In  this  passage  the  Spirit  is  mentioned,  not  so  much  as  the 
Gift  of  God,  as  in  the  aspects  he  assumes  in  the  conscious  experience  of  God's  people. 

I.  The  Holt  Spirit  is  thb  Spibit  of  libebtt.  Man  in  a  state  of  sin  is  under 
bondage  to  the  Law,  to  sin,  to  fear,  and  slavishness.  But  by  the  emancipating  power 
of  the  Spirit,  the  disciple  and  friend  of  the  Divine  Saviour  is  set  at  liberty,  is  freed  from 
the  dominion  of  sin,  from  the  trammels  of  the  world,  from  the  inner  bondage  of  fear  and 
distrust.    He  possesses  "  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God." 

n.  The  Holt  Spibit  is  the  Spirit  of  adoption.  This  is  indeed  a  marvellous 
truth,  a  marvellous  privilege.  All  mankind  are  the  creatures  of  Divine  power,  and  it 
is  in  this  sense  the  poet  afiirmed,  "We  are  all  his  offspring.''  The  reflective  man 
perceives  that  in  a  higher  sense  we  are  children  of  God,  inasmuch  as  our  reason  and 
conscience  are  the  reflection  of  the  Divine  nature.  But  it  was  reserved  for  Christianity, 
as  the  highest  form  of  revelation,  to  introduce  the  conception  of  man's  spiritual  sonship 
in  Jesus  Christ.  The  establishment  of  this  relation  is  a  proof  of  God's  condescending 
kindness.  "  Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we 
should  be  called  the  children  of  God  I "  Here  is  no  question  of  a  merely  external 
relationship;  a  change  of  heart,  of  character,  of  life,  is  here  implied.  Where  this 
relation  is  realized,  the  cry,  "  Abba,  Father  1 "  ascends  from  the  affectionate  and  filial 
heart. 

III.  The  Holt  Spirit  is  the  Spibit  op  witness.  The  personality  of  the  Spirit 
is  compatible  with  the  personality  of  the  human  recipient  of  his  blessed  influences. 
There  is  a  unity,  and  yet  a  diversity.  God's  Spirit  is  in  contact  with  the  spirit  of 
Christ's  disciple,  and  witnesses  vrith  it,  assures  of  Divine  favour  and  fatherhood.  The 
Word  is  revealed  to  the  soul ;  the  soul  is  enlightened  to  apprehend  the  Wonl ;  the  truth 
is  realized,  the  privilege  appropriated;  the  response  is  rendered.  The  same  Spirit  gives 
power  to  the  Word  and  reoeptiveness  to  the  heart,  and  brings  the  two  into  exquisite 
sympathy  and  harmony.  And  this  witness  is  effected,  not  by  a  vision  or  a  voice,  not 
by  fancy  or  enthusiasm,  but  by  Divine,  conclusive  evidence.    The  Spirit  of  truth  and 


OH.  vm.  1-39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  221 

holiness  manifests  his  presence  and  his  power,  by  calling  into  existence  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit,  whose  quality  and  aWndance  leave  no  room  for  doubting  the  Divinity  of  the 
agency  to  which  they  owe  their  existence. 

Ver.  17. — The  twofold  fellowship.  A  person  may  be  the  heir  to  a  title  and  to  a 
great  estate,  and  yet,  in  some  circumstances,  he  may  in  his  minority  and  even  after- 
wards be  exposed  to  some  privations.  He  may  even  be  a  homeless  wanderer,  thrown 
into  uncongenial  society  and  unfamiliar  scenes  and  undesirable  occupations.  If  such 
be  the  case,  it  may  well  happen  that  his  experience  may  be  profitable  and  serviceable. 
He  may  taste  "  adversity's  sweet  milk,  philosophy."  He  may  learn  many  a  lesson  of 
self-control  and  self-denial,  of  forbearance,  patience,  and  considerateness.  His  character 
may  mature,  his  best  qualities  may  be  called  out.  He  may  learn  to  sympathize  with 
the  afflicted,  and  to  make  allowances  for  the  tempted.  And  when  the  time  comes  for 
him  to  enter  upon  his  inheritance,  he  may  falfll  the  duties  of  his  exalted  position  all 
the  more  wisely  and  faithfully  for  the  discipline  he  has  passed  through,  stern  and  harsh 
though  that  experience  may  have  been.  In  like  manner,  the  Christian,  who  is  a  joint- 
heir  with  Christ,  has  appointed  for  him  a  period  of  probation,  of  humiliation,  of  spiritual 
conflict  and  suffering.  This  is  the  decree  of  infinite  wisdom  and  love.  Our  Father 
would,  by  subjecting  us  to  earth's  discipline,  fit  us  for  the  heavenly  inheritance,  the 
eternal  glory.  The  Christian's  exile  is  the  preparation  for  his  home,  his  inheritance, 
his  crown. 

I.  Christians  have  fellowship  with  Chbist  in  suffbmng.  They  may  suffer 
for  Christ.  Doubtless,  to  Paul  and  to  the  early  Christians,  this  was  a  familiar  thought 
and  a  not  infrequent  experience.  The  apostles,  the  martyrs,  and  confessors,  all  in  the 
primitive  Church  who  by  their  steadfastness  in  the  faith  incurred  men's  displeasure  and 
hostility,  were  partakers  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  And  in  our  own  time,  and  amongst 
ourselves,  there  are  those  whose  witness  to  the  Saviour  is  borne  amidst  petty  persecution 
aud  half-concealed  hostility  from  their  unbelieving  and  scoffing  companions.  And, 
even  amongst  professing  Christians,  those  who  prefer  fidelity  to  Christ  and  his  gospel 
to  compliance  with  current  fashions  and  opinions  must  make  up  their  minds  to  endure 
much  for  the  Lord's  sake.  There  are,  however,  other  senses  in  which  Christians  may 
be  justly  said  to  share  Christ's  sufferings,  to  suffer  with  their  Master.  1.  There  was 
anguish  and  distress  peculiar  to  the  Son  of  God.  The  burden  of  our  sins  he  bore  in 
his  own  Person  ;  he  "  trod  the  wine-press  alone ;  "  he  "  bore  our  sins  and  carried  otir 
sorrows;"  he  "tasted  death  for  every  man."  His  sacrifice  was  his  alone.  But  there 
was  suffering  which  he  endured  because  he  lived  in  a  sinful  world,  because  he  submitted 
to  the  buffetings  of  Satan  and  endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners.  To  Christ's  people 
their  necessary  contact  with  a  sinful  world  is  painful,  even  as  such  contact  was 
conspicuously  painful  to  the  holy  Saviour  himself,  who  in  character  and  conduct 
was  emphatically  "  separate  from  sinners."  As  he  also  sorrowed  over  this  sinful  race, 
coulil  not  look  upon  the  multitudes  without  grief  and  commiseration,  could  not  gaze 
upun  the  guilty  Jerusalem  without  weeping  over  it ;  so  true  Christians  are  constrained 
to  sigh  and  cry  for  the  abominations  that  abound  in  the  world,  for  they  have  learned 
to  look  upon  humanity  with  the  eyes  of  their  Lord  himself.  2.  Yet  again,  we  are 
called  to  share  our  Master's  sufferings  by  reason  of  the  temptations  to  which  we  are 
exposed.  What  Christ  endured  from  the  assaults  of  the  tempter,  the  adversary,  we 
can  never  know ;  yet  the  record  of  his  temptation  implies  that  it  was  the  occasion  to 
hiui  of  sere  distress;  "he  suffered,  being  tempted."  He  only  overcame  through  resist- 
ance and  bitter  strife.  That  this  must  be  our  experience  is  well  known  to  every 
follower  of  the  Lamb.     "  We  wrestle  not  with,"  etc. 

'  He  knows  what  sore  temptations  mean. 
For  he  has  felt  the  same." 

In  this  matter  all  the  Lord's  servants  must,  in  his  own  language,  "  deny  themselves,  take 
up  the  cross,  and  follow  him."  Their  path  is  one  not  of  compliance  with  the  tempter, 
but  of  opposition  to  him.  They  die  with  their  Lord  unto  sin ;  in  this  respect  being 
crucified  with  him  unto  the  world,  knowing  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings,  and  being 
planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  his  death.  3.  There  is  a  wider  and  more  general 
sense  in  which  we  may  be  said  to  suffer  with  Christ.     There  are  afflictions  which  are 


222  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  viii.  1— 39, 

common  to  men  as  men,  but  which  have  to  Christians  a  signification  different  from 
that  which  they  have  to  others.  All  men  have  to  endure,  more  or  less,  weakness  and 
suffering  of  body,  depression  of  mind,  bi  reavetnents,  changes  in  outward  circumstances, 
and  other  afflictions  providentially  appointed  or  permitted.  But  to  Christians  these 
come  as  messages  and  monitions  from  the  heavenly  Father,  and  they  have  to  be 
accepted  in  the  spirit  which  the  Lord  Jesus  has  displayed  and  exemplified.  When 
suffering  and  sorrow  are  borne  in  the  spirit  of  him  who  said,  "  Not  my  will,  O  my 
Father,  but  thine  be  done,"  then  there  is  evidence  of  fellouship  with  the  Lord. 

IL  Christians  shall  have  fellowship  with  Christ  in  glory.  It  is  a  sign  of 
God's  great  condescension  and  fatherly  kindness  that  he,  in  his  Word,  deigns  to  cheer 
and  encourage  his  poor,  suffering,  struggling  children,  in  their  encounter  with  life's 
ills,  by  the  assurance  that  in  due  time  the  shadows  shall  flee  away,  and  the  bright 
morning  shall  break  upon  their  sight.  He  does  not  even  say  merely,  "  Your  sufferings 
shall  come  to  an  end;  your  toil  and  conflict  shall  be  followed  by  repose."  This  is 
said  ;  but,  with  it,  Bomething  more.  Victory,  triumph,  glory,  festive  joy, — such  is  the 
prospect  held  out  to  us.  To  be  told  that  we  shall  be  glorified  with  Christ  seems 
too  much ;  it  is  only  credible  because  it  is  the  assurance  of  him  who  cannot  lie. 
With  regard  to  the  glory  of  our  Saviour,  we  have  material  for  judging.  Something 
of  his  proper  outward  glory  appeared  when  he  was  transfigured;  more  when  he 
was  raised  from  the  dead,  and  when  he  ascended  on  high.  Yet  his  real  glory  was, 
and  surely  ever  must  be,  spiritual.  Exalted  to  the  throne  of  heaven,  our  Saviour's 
glory  is  to  be  discerned  in  the  loyalty  and  affection  with  which  he  is  regarded  by 
human  hearts,  the  joy  with  which  his  authority  is  practically  acknowledged  by  the 
natures  which  have  felt  his  love  and  holiness.  Christ  was,  when  here  upon  earth,  in 
his  humiliation,  the  same  in  character  and  in  nature  as  now,  but  the  hindrances  to  his 
recognition  have  been  removed,  and  his  glory  is  now  apparent.  Our  Saviour  himself 
intimated  that  his  faithful  people  should  participate  in  his  approaching  glory.  They 
should  sit  on  thrones  of  judgment.  Having  been  with  him  in  iiis  tribulations,  having 
drunk  of  his  cup  and  received  his  baptism,  they  were  appointed  to  reign  with  him 
■  and  to  see  his  glory.  It  was  a  lesson  deeply  impressed  upon  the  minds  of  Christ's 
companions.  "  If  we  suffer  with  him,"  s:iid  one,  "  we  shall  also  reign  with  him." 
They  spoke  of  a  crown  which  they  believed  to  be  reserved  for  them.  They  looked  for 
an  inheritance  incorruptible  and  unfading.  And  the  chief  element  in  future  blessedness 
and  glory  they  deemed  to  be  union  and  association  with  their  Lord.  To  be  ever  with 
him,  to  see  him  as  he  is, — this  was  all  their  desire  and  hope.  There  seems  something 
so  utterly  alien  to  our  poor,  feeble,  sinful  humanity  in  the  "  glory  "  which  is  revealed 
as  the  future  lot  and  life  of  the  Christian,  that  it  is  not  easy  for  a  sober  mind  to  take  in 
the  thought.  Yet  it  is  plainly  taught  that  Christians  shall  appear  with  their  Lord 
in  glory,  that  they  are  called  to  eternal  glory.  This  may  be  explained  by  two  remarks. 
First,  the  chief  glory  is  moral  and  spiritual;  to  be  delivered  from  sin,  and  to  be 
changed  into  the  same  image  with  Christ, — that  is  glory.  Secondly,  whatever  glory 
may  attend  the  Lord's  people  in  the  future  life  is  simply  that  which  he  sheds.  To  be 
near  Jesus  is  to  receive  from  him  something  of  that  holy  radiance  which  is  native  and 
proper  to  him,  and  ever  streams  from  him. 

Pbactical  lessons.  1.  Let  those  who  have  been  bereaved  of  Christian  kindred  and 
friends  learn  to  submit  with  resignation  to  the  will  of  God.  Concerning  those  wha 
sleep  in  Jesus,  we  may  well  believe  that  their  sufferings  are  over  and  their  glory  has 
begun.  2.  Let  those  to  whom  the  Christian  life  is  a  scene  of  trial  and  conflict 
cultivate  patience  and  fortitude.  Think  not  of  your  experience  as  something  strange 
happening  to  you.  It  is  the  path  which  our  Lord  and  all  his  followers  have  trodden 
before  you.  3.  Let  those  whose  conflict  has  been  protracted,  and  who  must  soon  lay 
down  the  weapons  of  the  earthly  warfare,  cherisli  the  hopes  which  are  justifled  by  God's 
Word,  and  look  forward  with  lowly  faith  to  the  glory  of  the  heavenly  inheritance. 

Ver.  18, — Suffering  quemhed  in  glory.  It  is  not  easy  to  weigh  the  futuijp  against 
the  present.  To  children,  and  to  the  imreflecting,  the  present  seems  so  real,  and  the 
future  so  shadowy,  that  the  least  advantage  or  relief  to-day  seems  immensely  preferable 
to  something  in  itself  more  <lesirable,  but  which  is  deferred  to  a  distant  date.  As 
knowledge  and  thought  advance,  the  power  of  realizing  the  future  increases.     Hench 


OH.  vm.  1—39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  223 

in  worldly  affairs  the  useful  virtue  of  prudence  emerges,  and  men  deny  themselves 
now  in  order  to  make  provision  for  the  coming  years.  •  The  same  principle  is  applioahle 
in  religion.  Those  who  believe  themselves  destined  to  a  future  and  immortal  existence 
are  capable  of  looking  forward  to  the  life  tu  come,  and  of  allowing  that  life  to  exercise 
upon  their  minds  a  mighty  influence,  so  that  their  present  attitude  of  spirit  is  largely 
governed  and  controlled  by  their  expectations  of  the  future.  It  is,  indeed,  far  from 
being  the  highest  of  motives  that  influences  men,  if  they  do  good  to  avoid  future 
misery  and  secure  future  happiness.  For  religion  consists  in  the  love  of  truth  and 
right  for  their  own  sake,  as  supremely  desirable,  in  the  love  of  God  as  supremely 
excellent.  Yet,  as  the  text  shows,  Christianity  holds  out  the  prospect  of  immortal 
happiness  as  fitted  to  cheer  and  encourage  the  pilgrims  of  the  night  amidst  the  difBcul- 
ties  and  darkness  of  time. 

L  This  is  a  oalcui.a.tion  which  is  not  intended  to  dispabaqb  the  pbesent 
sorFERiNes  of  Christians.  Paul  does  not  mean  to  say  the  sufferings  to  be  endured 
here  are  in  themselves  inconsiderable.  For  the  fact  is  otherwise ;  every  man,  and 
much  more  every  Christian,  has  much  to  bear.  "They  that  will  live  godly  must 
suffer  persecution."  In  some  cases,  the  amount  of  opposition  and  calumny  and  neglect 
involved  in  fidelity  to  the  Saviour  is  far  from  trifling.  But  the  apostle  means  to 
affirm  that  so  vast  is  the  recompense,  so  exceeding  and  eternal  the  weight  of  glory 
hereafter,  that  even  the  direst  persecution,  the  fiercest  conflict,  the  keenest  self-denial, 
are  all  extinguished  in  the  lustre,  the  blaze,  of  heavenly  day. 

II.  This  is  a  calculation  based  cpon  the  eevelations  of  Scbiptuee.  Reason 
unaided  could  never  have  arrived  at  this  result.  For  one  of  the  members  of  the 
comparison  is  beyond  the  range  of  reason.  We  know  by  experience  the  sufferings  of 
the  present ;  but  only  Divine  foresight  can  acquaint  us  with  the  glory  of  the  future. 
It  is  granted  that  in  the  present  condition  of  Christians  is  nothing  which  can  justify  an 
expectation  so  glowing.  The  star  is  in  its  station  in  the  heavens,  although  bidden 
beneath  a  cloud ;  when  the  sky  is  cleared,  the  star  shines  out  in  its  brilliancy.  So,  for 
the  present,  our  life  is  "  hid  with  Christ  in  God ; "  and  "  we  know  not  what  we  shall  be." 
Our  capacities  and  circumstances  do  not  allow  of  our  comprehension  of  a  state  which 
only  the  glorified  nature  can  take  in.  The  coming  glory  is  spiritual,  consists  in  closer 
fellowship  with  the  Saviour  and  in  perfect  harmony  with  God  himself.  "  When  Christ, 
who  is  our  Life,  shall  appear,  we  also  shall  appear  with  him  in  glory."  This  is  the 
prospect  of  the  sons  of  God,  the  joint-heirs  with  Christ,  the  partakers  of  their  Lord's 
character  and  spirit.  It  is  the  prospect  of  an  endless  blessedness;  for  its  eternity  is 
part  of  its  Divine  perfection.  Nothing  less  than  a  glory  which  never  wanes  is  worthy 
of  the  Giver,  or  satisfying  to  the  recipient.  The  quality  and  the  immortality  of  the 
glory  of  heaven,  when  taken  together,  manifestly  outweigh  all  the  piivations,  the 
conflicts,  the  temptations,  in  a  word,  the  "  much  tribulation  "  through  which  we  must 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

III.  This  is  a  calculation  which  governed  the  apostle's  personal  life. 
Observe  that  he  says,  "I  reckon."  It  was  his  own  deliberately  reached  conclusion. 
He  had  adopted  this  opinion  long  ago,  and  he  retained  it  still.  Otherwise  he  would 
not  have  continued  to  lead  the  life  of  a  Christian  and  an  apostle.  His  choice  had 
brought  him  much  outward  suffering  and  adversity.  From  the  first,  he  had  been 
exposed  to  persecution  from  Jews  and  Gentiles ;  he  had  endured  many  hardships  and 
dangers  in  his  missionary  life ;  he  had  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things.  His  choice  had 
occasioned  him  much  spiritual  conflict.  The  stiife  between  the  old  nature  and  the 
new,  the  anxiety  he  felt  as  to  his  own  fidelity,  the  buffetings  of  Satan  he  encountered, — 
all  these  were  sufferings  strictly  consequent  upon  his  union  with  Christ.  Yet  it  is 
clear  that  Paul  did  not  repent  his  choice.  Even  to  the  end  he  "  counted  all  things  as 
loss,  that  he  might  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him,  ...  for  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord."  He  had  present  consolations,  very  precious  and 
sustaining ;  for  he  was  supported  by  the  grace  which  ever  proved  sufficient  for  him,  and, 
knowing  whom  he  trusted,  he  was  persuaded  that  he  was  able  to  keep  that  which  was 
committed  unto  him  against  that  day.  And  when  the  mercy  and  favour  of  the 
present  were  added  to  the  glorious  prospects  of  a  heavenly  inheritance,  how  could 
the  sufferini;s  of  life  be  allowed  to  counterbalance  privileges  so  precious  and  hopes  so 
blight? 


224  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS,    [oh.  viii.  1— 59. 

IV.  This  is  a  calculation  which  has  sustained  the  faith  and  coubaqb 
OF  MCLTiTtTDES  OP  BBLIBVEK8  IN  Christ  IN  EVERY  AGE.  TMs  has  been  the  case, 
not  only  with  those  who  have  been  called  upon  to  witness  to  their  Saviour  by  public 
labours  and  by  public  sufferings,  with  those  who  have  contended  upon  the  high  places 
of  the  field;  but  also  with  myriads  of  lowly,  faithful,  patient  hearts,  that  have  endured 
in  silence  the  reproach  of  Christ,  that  have  borne  in  silence  the  cross  of  Christ,  The 
well-founded  hope  of  glory  has  animated  and  sustained  such  amidst  petty  persecutions, 
amidst  galling  misrepresentations,  amidst  spiritual  conflicts,  fightings  without  and  fears 
within.  The  hymns  of  the  Church  are  a  witness  to  this ;  in  every  land  and  in  every 
age  these  hymns  have  expressed  the  longings  of  the  universal  heart  of  Christendom 
for  the  repose,  the  fellowship,  the  delights,  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  And  they  have 
been  wont  to  make  these  longings  centre  in  that  Divine  Redeemer  who  is  the  Sun  of 
the  eternal  city,  and  whose  presence  makes  it  light  and  glorious. 

V.  This  is  a  oaloulation  which  mat  be  commended  to  all  Christians  who 

ARE   cast  down   AND   DISTRESSED   BY   THE  DIFFICULTIES  OF  THE  WAY.      Some  are  tried 

by  adversity,  and  are  tempted  to  say  of  the  circumstances  surrounding  them,  "All 
these  things  are  against  me."  Others  are  smitten  by  bereavement;  theii-  dear  and 
trusted  Mends  are  taken  from  their  side  by  death.  Others  are  persecuted  for  right- 
eousness' sake.  Others  endure  great  spiritual  conflicts,  and  sometimes  know  not  how 
to  bear  up  against  the  assaults  of  the  adversary.  Others  are  weary,  in  body  and  in 
mind,  under  the  pressure  of  cares  and  responsibilities.  To  all  such  it  is  lawful  to  say, 
" '  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand.'  The  period  of  probation  is  nearly  over.  Hold 
on  a  little  longer.  'Be  faithful  unto  death.'  There  awaits  you  rest  after  your 
pilgrimage,  and  triumph  after  your  warfare,  songs  after  your  tears,  and  glory  after 
your  depression.  The  revelation  of  which  the  text  speaks  is  not  far  off.  And,  in  the 
glory  it  shall  manifest,  all  your  weariness  and  woes  shall  be  forgotten.  You  shall  see 
Jesus,  and  in  his  presence  no  darkness  is." 

Vers.  24,  25. — "  Saved  hy  hope."  Hope  is  an  emotion  compounded  of  expectation 
and  desire.  We  may  expect  what  we  dread,  we  may  desire  what  we  are  sure  ii 
beyond  our  reach ;  in  either  case  hope  is  impossible.  Faith  is  in  the  unseen  present ; 
hope  is  of  the  unseen  future.  As  a  feeling,  and  consequently  as  a  motive  power,  hope 
is  taken  up,  heightened,  and  hallowed  by  religion.  In  the  New  Testament,  great 
stress  is  laid  upon,  and  great  virtue  is  attributed  to,  hope;  it  ranks  with  faith 
and  love. 

I.  The  objects  of  the  Christian's  hope.  1.  God  himself;  his  favour  and 
fellowship.  "Hope  thou  in  God"  is  the  admonition  given,  to  which  the  suitable 
response  is,  "My  hope  is  in  thee."  Hope  in  God  is  distinguished  from  hope  in  man, 
in  being  always  secure.  2.  Especially  God  in  Christ,  who  is  spoken  of  as  the  "  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  our  Hope."  We  are  enjoined  to  "  hope  in  Christ ; "  and  his  character  and 
promises  justify  compliance  with  such  injunction.  3.  To  particularize,  the  object  of 
hope  is  stated  to  be  Christ's  future  appearance;  the  Christian  looks  for  "the  blessed 
hope,  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ."  Has  not 
our  Lord  expressly  said,  "I  will  come  again"?  Now,  "he  that  hath  this  hope, 
purifieth  himself."  4.  The  Christian's  hope  extends  both  to  the  future  of  this  life  and 
to  immortal  blessedness.  This  earthly  existence  is  brightened  by  the  prospects  opened 
up  to  us  of  Divine  aid  and  guidance,  protection  and  comfort ;  and  such  hope  is  fitted  to 
strengthen  and  to  cheer.  Whilst  Christianity  is  es^jeoially  distinct  and  emphatic  in  its 
revelation  of  the  glories  of  the  future  state ;  telling  of  the  "  hope  of  eternal  life,"  "  the 
hope  laid  up  in  heaven,"  and  imparting  a  "  living  hope  of  an  inheritance." 

II.  The  grounds  of  the  Christian's  hope.  1.  2%e  promise  of  Ood.  Here  is 
a  sure  and  stable  foundation  which  it  would  be  folly  and  sin  to  distrust.  "  I  hope,"  is 
the  godly  man's  exclamation,  "  in  thy  Word."  His  is  the  "  hope  of  eternal  life,  which 
God,  who  cannot  lie,  promised  before  the  world  began."  In  giving  us  his  revelation, 
the  design  of  infinite  love  was  that  we,  "  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures 
might  have  hope."  2.  2%e  teaching  of  the  Eoly  Hpirit.  He  is  the  Inspirer  of  all  good 
affections  and  desires;  one  purpose  of  his  bestowal  upon  Christians  being  that  they 
"  might  abound  in  hope,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  3.  Our  experience  uf 
the  Lord,' i  faithfulness.    "  Experience  worketh  hope."    It  is  not  a  matter  of  conjcctuie 


OH.  vni,  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL   TO  THE  EOMANS.  !!25 

OB  the  part  of  Christ's  people  whether  or  not  the  promises  of  God  will  be  fulfilled; 
they  have  already  been  fulfilled  in  such  measure  as  to  justify  our  hope  concerning  the 
future.  Ours  is  a  hope  which  "maketh  not  ashamed,"  which  will  not  disappoint 
those  who  cleave  to  it. 

IIL  The  fruits  of  the  Ohbistian'b  hope.  1.  Calmness  and  confidence  <f  dis- 
position. In  this,  hope  is  as  "  an  anchor  unto  the  soul ; "  for  whilst  fear  disturbs,  hope 
pacifies.  2.  Cheerfulness  and  joy.  They  are  bright  and  glad  who  have  something  to 
which  they  can  look  forward,  even  when  the  present  is  cheerless  and  discouraging. 
Such  is  the  case  with  Christians,  who  "  rejoice  in  hope."  "  Happy  is  he  whose  hope  is 
in  the  Lord  bis  God."  3.  Spirituality  and  purity  of  heart  and  life.  The  purifying 
power  of  hope  is  especially  described  by  St.  John;  it  is  by  its  influence  that  Christians 
are  meetened  for  their  inheritance.  4.  Patience  and  endurance.  In  this  respect  hope 
is  as  a  helmet  to  the  soul.  "  If  we  hope  for  that  we  see  uot,  then  do  we  with  patience 
wait  for  it."  The  Thessalonians  were  commended  by  St.  Paul  for  their  "  patience  of 
hope."  5.  Salvation.  This  is  the  ultimate  aim,  issue,  and  end.  The  hope  of  the 
Christian  shall  at  last  be  realized,  when  he  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  the 
body,  the  harassing  of  temptation,  the  wounds  of  sorrow,  the  pressure  of  sin. 

Ver.  28. — Overruling  providence.  Perplexity  and  mystery  are  part  of  the  experience 
to  be  shared  by  all  reflecting  men.  The  world,  and  especially  human  life,  furnish, 
enigmas  which  the  understanding  cannot  solve,  which  can  only  he  dealt  with  by  the 
higher  principle  of  faith.  The  groans  of  creation  mingle  with  the  groans  of  men,  and 
the  discerning  mind  detects  also  the  groaning  of  the  Spirit.  But,  above  all,  is  a  harmony 
which  overcomes  and  silences  earth's  discords.  The  apostle  heard  this  harmony,  and 
summoned  his  disciples  to  recognize  the  operations  of  that  providence  which  constrains 
all  things  to  work  together  for  good. 

I.  The  principle  peopoundbd.  1.  There  is  purpose  in  all  things.  Modem  teleo- 
logy lays  less  stress  upon  the  traces  of  intention  and  design  in  individual  instances, 
in  organs  and  organisms,  than  upon  the  striking  evidence  of  purpose  manifest  upon 
the  largest  scale,  in  the  vast  arrangements  and  adaptations,  in  the  wonderful  chemical 
and  mathematical  laws  which  pervade  the  whole  universe.  The  more  the  universe,  as 
accessible  to  our  observation,  is  studied,  the  more  will  it  appear  a  system.  Signs  of 
order,  of  adaptation,  of  prearrangement,  are  obvious  to  every  careful  student.  There 
is  nothing  too  great,  nothing  too  small,  to  illustrate  the  presence  of  mind.  Human 
life  is  not  exempt  from  the  tokens  of  Divine  foresight  and  adaptation. 

"  There's  a  Divinity  that  shapes  our  ends, 
Kough-hew  them  how  we  will." 

It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  establishment  of  the  reign  of  law,  of  physical  cau- 
sation, conflicts  with  the  operation  of  purpose ;  that  evolution  and  design  are  in  any 
way  opposed.  2.  The  purpose  which  may  be  detected  in  all  things  is  a  good  purpose. 
A  moral  aim  is  discoverable  throughout  the  universe,  and  emphatically  in  human  life. 
All  things  work  together,  not  indeed  for  the  promotion  of  pleasure,  but  for  moral  good 

the  highest  and  worthiest  of  all  aims.     This  conviction  is  the  key  to  many  difiSculties 

by  which  observant  and  reflecting  minds  have  been  distressed.  3.  This  moral  purpose 
is  secured  so  far  as  spiritual  beings  voluntarily  conform  to  God's  will.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  order  of  things  does  not  actually  secure  the  good  of  all  beings;  many  will  not 
receive  the  benefits  which  nature  and  life  are  intended  to  convey.  But  Christians  who 
love  God,  and  who  respond  to  his  call  in  Christ's  gospel,  do  really  reap  advantages^  to 
which  others  are  strangers.  These  are  the  obedient,  who  are  attentive  to  the  Divine 
summons  and  accomplish  the  Divine  purpose.  For  these  all  circumstances  are  ordained 
and  overruled,  that  they  may  minister  to  the  true  well-being  of  God's_ people. 

II.  The  wobkinq  of  the  principle  illtjstbated.  1.  Men's  circumstanceit  may 
contribute  to  their  true  well-being.  Thus  poverty  may  be  as  spiritually  serviceable  lo 
those  who  experience  it  as  competence  or  wealth;  obscurity  as  honour,  etc.  2.  Men's 
own  more  personal  experience  is  also  overruled  -by  God's  providence  for  their  highest 
good.  Thus  even  doubts  of  intellect,  and  sorrows  of  heart — two  of  the  most  painfcd 
form's  of  moral  discipline — are  both,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  caused  to  subserve  purposes  of 
supreme  value  in  the  development  of  character  and  in  the  acquisition  of  influence. 

B0MAK8.  1 


226  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  viu.  1—39. 

HL  Peactical  t.bssons  drawn  from  a  consideration  of  this  principle.  1. 
The  Christian  may  learn  to  avoid  tnarmuring,  when  he  remembers  that  even  untoward 
circumstances  are  intended  to  work  out  his  highest  good.  Such  a  conviction  casts  a 
new  light  upon  daily  experiences ;  and  what  otherwise  might  be  regarded  as  annoy- 
ances, calling  forth  resentment,  are  now  looked  upon  as  ministrations  of  Divine  love 
and  mercy.  2.  The  Christian  may  seek  to  profit  by  all  God's  providential  dealings. 
It  is  the  spirit  in  which  these  are  received  which  determines  whether  or  not  they  shall 
be  means  of  blessing ;  and  the  proper  spirit  is  one  of  submission  and  teachableness. 
3.  The  Christian  will  cherish  the  expectation  that  the  day  will  come  when,  looking 
back  upon  the  path  by  which  he  has  been  led,  and  the  discipline  through  which  he  has 
passed,  he  shall  be  able  gratefully  to  acknowledge  that  &od  "hath  done  all  things 
well." 

Ver.  32. — The  Oift  which  implies  all  gifts.  One  very  desirable  habit  of  Christian 
exjjerience  is  the  habit  of  connecting  all  spiritual  privileges  and  all  providential  favours 
with  the  supreme  Gift  which  God  has  conferred  upon  us  in  the  bestowal  of  his  own  Son. 
It  is  this  habit  which  the  apostle  encourages  by  the  appeal  of  the  text. 

L  The  one  Gift  God  onoe  gave.  1.  The  Person  given  was  his  own  Son — the  Only 
Begotten,  the  Well-beloved.  2.  The  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the  Giver  involved  in  the 
Gift.  The  use  of  the  word  "  spared  "  implies  "  withheld  "  not,  which  suggests  that  the 
Divine  heart  felt  the  sacrifice  and  surrender,  yet  that  its  pity  devised  it  and  consented 
to  it  as  the  greatest  revelation  of  the  nature  of  Deity.  3.  The  Gift  was  more  than  a 
gift;  it  was  a  delivering  up,  i.e.  to  earth,  to  the  society  of  sinners,  with  the  knowledge ■ 
that  he  who  was  thus  surrendered  would  meet  with  misunderstanding  and  misrepresen- 
tation, would  be  maligned  and  insulted,  rejected  and  persecuted,  cruelly  abused,  and 
unjustly  slain.  4.  The  Gift  was  intended  for  all ;  not  for  a  select  few,  but  for  Jews  and 
Gentiles  alike,  for  sinners  of  every  grade,  of  every  nation. 

II.  The  many  gifts  God  is  always  givino.  1.  Every  possession  and  privilege  is, 
in  fact,  the  gift  of  God ;  all  "  oome  down  from  above."  However  we  may  forget  that 
we  are  needy  and  dependent  recipients,  the  truth  is  that  we  have  nothing  which  we 
have  not  received.  2.  Spiritual  gifts  are  chiefly  intended,  such  as  are  so  fully  enume- 
rated and  characterized  in  this  chapter ;  spiritual  life  in  all  its  stages,  from  deliverance 
from  condemnation,  on  to  eternal,  inseparable  fellowship  with  Christ.  3.  Yet,  without 
question,  temporal  gifts  are  included.  Of  these  we  sometimes  say  they  come  through 
natural  law ;  and  this  is  so.  Yet  we,  in  so  speaking  of  them,  only  describe  the  process, 
whilst  the  origin  is  in  God  alone.  4.  These  gifts  are  bountifully  and  generously 
bestowed.  God  bestows  munificently  as  a  Kins,  tenderly  as  a  Father ;  and  we  receive 
without  any  possibility  of  rendering  repayment  or  recompense. 

III.  The  inolusion  of  the  many  gifts  in  the  one.  1.  A  doctrinal  explanation 
of  the  inclusion  here  affirmed.  The  greater  includes  the  less;  and,  as  Christ  is  the 
unspeakable  Gift,  his  bestowal  involves  all  other  evidences  of  Divine  generosity.  The 
power  which  can  give  one,  can  give  all ;  the  disposition  which  could  plan  the  one,  can 
bestow  all ;  and  the  mediation  and  advocacy  of  Christ  are  such  that  they  are  to  be 
regarded  as  the  channels  by  which  the  bounty  of  the  Eternal  flows  copiously  inte 
human  hearts  and  lives.  2.  A  praiAical  explanation.  Dwell  upon  the  wonderful^ 
significant,  and  precious  phrase  here  employed  by  the  apostle,  "  with  him  1 "  "  With 
him  "  God  gives  his  people  pardon  for  their  sins,  a  perfect  model  of  goodness,  a  higher 
conception  of  human  viitue,  a  powerful  motive  of  obedience,  a  holy  bond  of  brother- 
hood, a  bright  hope  of  everlasting  life.  As  a  matter  of  practical  experience,  this  is  so 
in  the  history  alike  of  individual  Christians  and  of  the  world. 

Ver.  37. — Spiritual  victory.  It  is  not  every  good  cause  which,  as  far  as  we  can  see 
upon  earth,  when  opposed  with  human  hostility,  prospers  and  triumphs,  at  once,  mani- 
festly, and  for  ever.  This  only  proves  that  Providence  takes  a  wider  view  than  is  pos- 
sible to  us,  and  has  purposes  extending  far  beyond  this  world.  But  the  one  great  cause 
of  moral  goodness,  the  cause  of  Christ,  is  always  really  victorious.  The  warfare  is 
just,  the  weapons  sound,  the  Captain  skilful,  and  victory  certain. 

I.  What  constitutes  the  Christian's  victory.  In  the  first  age  the  conflict  was 
to  a  large  extent  with  open  persecution.    Jesus  liimself  endured  "  the  contradiction  of 


CH.  vm.  1—39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  227 

sinners,"  and  warned  his  apostles  to  expect  the  same.  Li  our  time  there  is  indeed  per- 
•ecution  for  Christ's  sake  to  be  endured,  both  open  and  secret ;  but  perhaps  the  dangers 
now  to  be  dreaded  are  those  of  prosperity  rather  than  of  adversity.  Pure  Christianity 
has  to  combat  scepticism,  materialism,  the  self-indulgent  habits  of  the  age.  Pure 
Cliiistianity  has  to  be  upon  its  guard  against  superstitious  views  and  habits,  and  mere 
outward  compliance  with  public  opinion.  Such  influences  openly  or  insidiously  threaten 
the  religious  life,  especially  of  the  young  and  the  unwary.  Hence  the  necessity  of 
watchfulness,  of  preparation,  of  the  Divine  panoply,  of  courage  and  endurance.  For 
the  promise  is  to  "  him  that  overcometh,"  and  the  true  soldier  is  ever  the  true 
conqueror. 

II.  What  enhances  the  Christian's  victory.  Christians  are  assured  that  they 
shall  be  "more  than  conquerors" — exceeding  or  triumphant  conquerors.  1.  Th» 
severity  of  the  conflict.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  admitted  power  of  the  enemy  and 
the  variety  of  his  attacks,  by  the  number  who  in  the  past  have  been  defeated  by  the 
foe  of  Christ,  by  the  defection  of  many  faint-hearted  or  disloyal  combatants,  and  by 
the  protraction  of  the  conflict.  2.  In  contrast  with  all  this  has  to  be  considered  the 
thoroughness  of  the  conquest.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  magnificence  of  the  reward 
to  the  victors,  by  the  vast  number  of  those  who  shall  share  the  honours  of  the  victory, 
and  by  the  glory  and  perpetuity  of  the  triumph  which  shall  follow. 

III.  What  sbcuees  the  Chbistian's  victory.  At  first  there  may  appear  to  be 
some  incongruity  in  the  expression,  "  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved  us." 
Yet  upon  reflection  it  will  appear  that  he  must  indeed  havg  loved  us,  to  mingle  in 
such  a  fray  and  to  lead  his  soldiers  and  followers  even  unto  his  own  death.  And  the 
teaching  alike  of  Scripture  and  of  individual  experience  assures  us  (1)  that  Jesus 
conquered  the  foe  for  us,  when  he  really  overcame  the  world  and  Satan,  by  whom  he 
seemed,  to  superficial  observers,  himself  to  be  vanquished ;  and  (2)  that  Jesus  conquers 
the  foe  in  us,  giving  us  the  example,  the  motive,  the  spiritual  power  and  principle 
which  ensure  to  us  immortal  victory. 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  judgment-day,  and  how  to  prepare  for  it.  The  apostle  speaks 
much  in  the  language  of  the  Law.  He  himself  was  not  only  acquainted  with  the  useful 
handicraft  of  tent-making  or  sail-making,  but  he  was  also  trained  in  the  profession  of 
the  Law — brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel.  He  had  a  considerable  acquaintance,  too, 
with  the  practice  of  the  law-courts.  Prom  the  brief  references  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  to  his  personal  history  before  his  conversion,  it  would  appear  as  if  previous  to 
that  time  he  had  been  engaged  as  a  public  prosecutor  of  the  Christians.  After  he 
became  a  Christian,  he  was  frequently  called  upon,  for  Christ's  sake,  to  appear  at  the 
bar  of  Jewish  and  Soman  courts  of  justice.  On  his  first  missionary  visit  to  Europe 
he  was  dragged  before  the  magistrates  at  Philippi,  and  again  before  Gallic  at  Corinth. 
Then,  again,  he  stood  before  the  Jewish  council  at  Jerusalem ;  before  Pelix,  Pestus,  and 
Agrippa  at  Csesarea ;  and,  finally,  before  Nero  himself  at  Borne.  On  the  present 
occasion  he  is  writing  to  residents  at  Eome.  Eome  at  the  time  was  the  metropolis  of 
the  world,  the  centre  of  the  world's  legislation.  To  stand  at  Csesar's  judgment-seat 
was  to  stand  before  the  highest  earthly  authority  then  in  existence,  and  to  be  tried  by 
the  greatest  code  of  laws  which,  with  the  exception  of  British  law,  the  world  has  ever 
known.  The  laws  of  the  XII.  Tables,  as  they  were  called,  which  were  the  basi^  of 
»11  the  Eoman  laws,  were  engraved  upon  twelve  tables  of  brass,  and  set  up  in  the 
coraitium,  or  public  meeting-place,  so  that  every  one  might  be  able  to  read  them. 
Every  educated  Koman  youth  learned  by  heart  these  XII.  Tables.  It  was  to  a  people 
thus  familiar  with  the  ideas  and  the  practice  of  courts  of  justice  that  Paul,  himself 
a  well-trained  lawyer,  was  writing.  He  keepi  before  their  minds  and  his  own  the 
thought  that  there  is  a  higher  than  all  human  authority ;  that  there  is  a  judgment-seat 
more  terrible  than  that  of  Cjesar;  and  that  the  great  concern  of  every  human  being  is 
how  he  or  she  shall  fare  in  that  great  day  of  reckoning — that  day  which  bulks  so 
largely  in  St.  Paul's  mind,  which  stands  out  so  prominently  before  his  mental  vision, 
that  he  constantly  speaks  of  it  as  "  that  day."  It  is  an  important  subject,  how  to  pre- 
pare for  meeting  God  in  the  judgment. 


228  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS,    [oh.  vm,  1—39, 

L  The  peepakation  op  the  Christian.  Tlie  apostle  speahs  of  the  Christian  at 
heing  prepared  for  a  judgment-day.  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them 
that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  That  day  needs  a  preparation.  "  For  we  must  all  appear 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his 
body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad."  The  thought  of 
that  judgment  makes  strong  men  tremble.  Felix  trembled  as  Paul  the  prisoner 
reasoned  with  him  of  righteousness,  temperance,  and  the  judgment  to  come.  It  is 
that  dread  of  something  after  death  that  makes  the  murderer's  sleep  so  restless,  and 
that  makes  the  dishonest  man's  gains  like  a  weight  of  lead  upon  his  mind.  Conscience 
does,  indeed,  make  cowards  of  us  all.  The  Christian  recognizes  that  there  is  a  terror 
in  the  judgment,  as  Paul  did  when  he  spoke  of  "  the  tenor  of  the  Lord "  (2  Cor.  v. 
11) ;  but  the  judgment  brings  no  terror  to  him.  He  knows  that  he  too  will  be  judged 
according  to  his  deeds,  that  the  fire  will  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is,  and, 
therefore,  he  will  realize  his  responsibilities  and  privileges.  But  he  kuows  that  one 
thing  is  certain,  and  that  is  that  he  is  safe  from  condemnation.  He  carries  his  pardon 
in  his  hand.  I'he  Cliristian's  confidence  comes  from  the  very  Judge  himself  who  sits 
upon  the  throne.  That  Judge  is  Jesus  Christ  himself.  But  before  he  would  sit  to 
judge  men,  he  came  into  the  world  to  die  for  them  as  their  Saviour.  To  every  one  who 
receives  him  and  accepts  his  salvation  he  gives  the  white  stone  (Rev.  ii.  17),  the  token 
of  acceptance  and  pardon.  He  beo'^mes  their  High  Priest,  their  Advocate  with  the 
Father.  "There  is  therefora  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that -are  in  Christ  Jesus." 
In  Christ  I  What  a  sense  of  security  that  brings  with  it  1  In  Christ  I  Not  till  we 
stand  before  the  great  white  throne,  and  our  names  are  found  written  in  the  Lamb's 
book  of  life,  shall  we  fully  realize  what  that  means.  In  Christ !  That  was  Paul's 
great  wish  for  himself.  "  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord :  for  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things,  and 
do  count  them  but  dung,  that  I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him."  In  Christ! 
Yes.,  Jesus  is  the  Ark,  into  which  we  may  betake  ourselves  from  the  dangers  of  temp- 
tation and  destruction.  He  is  the  City  of  Refuge,  to  which  we  may  flee  from  death, 
the  avenger  of  blood.  He  is  the  sure  Foundation,  on  which  we  may  build  with  perfect 
confidence  all  our  hopes  for  eternity.  He  is  the  Rock,  in  the  clefts  of  which  we  may 
hide  ourselves,  and  feel  that  all  that  coucerns  us  is  safe.  Your  pledge  of  safety  at  the 
judgment-day  is  the  character  and  promise  of  the  Judge  himself.  "  Grod  so  loved  the 
world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  per- 
suaded that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  him  against  that 
day."  Let  it  not  be  said  that  this  confidence  leads  to  carelessness ;  that  because  we  are 
delivered  from  condemnation,  therefore  it  does  not  matter  how  we  live.  The  verses 
which  follow  the  declaration  that  there  is  no  condetiination  are  the  answer  to  this  sug- 
gestion. "  God  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  con- 
demned sin  in  the  flesh :  that  the  righteousness  of  the  Law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who 
walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit "  (vers.  3, 4).  No  true  Christian  ever  thought 
or  acted  as  if,  because  he  was  delivered  from  condemnation,  he  was  thenceforth  free  to 
commit  sin.  If  we  are  Christ's,  we  have  no  longer  a  guilty  fear  of  death  and  condem- 
nation, but  we  have  a  filial  fear  that  shrinks  from  offending  and  grieving  our  heavenly 
Father.  We  are  constrained  by  the  love  of  Christ  in  our  hearts  to  love  what  he  loves, 
and  to  hate  what  he  hates.  We  are  constramed  by  a  feeling  of  gratitude.  We  have 
been  bought  with  a  piice ;  therefore  we  will  strive  to  glorify  God  in  our  bodies  and 
spirits,  which  are  his.  We  have  the  hope  of  heaven  in  our  hearts ;  and  therefore  we 
seek  to  walk  worthy  of  our  high  calling,  to  purify  ourselves,  to  keep  ourselves 
unspotted  from  the  world.  So  far  from  beinr/  a  motive  to  carelessness,  the  Christian's 
safety  in  Christ  is  the  grandest  motive  to  holiness  and  usefulness  of  life. 

II.  The  preparation  op  the  Christless.  At  the  judgment-day  there  will  be 
just  two  classes — those  whose  names  are  found  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  lite,  and 
those  whose  names  are  not  there  ;  the  Christian  and  the  Christless ;  those  who  are  "  in 
Christ,"  and  those  who  are  not.  Many  are  relying  upon  their  moral  life,  though  it  may 
be  utterly  worldly  and  godless,  as  their  hope  for  eternity.  But  whatever  human  expecta- 
tions may  be,  God's  Word  makes  it  very  plain  how  it  will  fare  on  the  judgment-day 
with  all  who  are  out  of  Christ.    It  is  not  the  faidt  of  God  the  Father.    Ue  so  loved 


CH.  vni.  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  229 

the  world  that  he  gave  his  own  Soa  for  our  salvation.  It  is  not  the  fault  of  the  Son. 
Christ  says,  "  I  am  come  that  ye  might  have  life."  It  is  not  the  fault  of  the  Spirit, 
who  is  constantly  striving  with  us.  If  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save 
sinners,  surely  it  is  clear  that  there  is  no  salvation  in  any  other.  "  He  that  believeth 
on  him  is  not  condemned ;  but  he  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already,  because 
he  hath  not  believed  in  the  Name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God  "  (John  iii.  18). 
—0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  12 — 30. — The  privileges  and  responsibilities  of  the  children  of  Qod.  Th« 
apostle  in  these  verses  makes  a  high  claim  for  believers — the  claim  of  being  children  ol 
God.  In  this  eighth  chapter  he  unfolds,  as  in  a  panoramic  view,  the  whole  plan  of 
salvation.  He  begins  with  the  idea  that  those  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus  are  delivered 
from  condemnation.  But  salvation  is  something  more  than  that.  It  means  sonship 
also.  And  step  by  step,  verse  by  verse,  the  apostle  advances,  at  each  step  unfolding 
some  fresh  view  of  the  Christian's  privileges,  till  at  last,  as  he  surveys  the  whole  field 
of  sin  and  sorrow,  of  joy  and  suffering,  of  trials  and  temptations,  of  time  and  eternity, 
he  grows  stronger  in  the  confidence  of  his  sonship,  and  exclaims,  "  For  I  am  persuaded, 
that  neither  death  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present, 
nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to 
separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

I.  The  PEiviLBaES  of  the  childebn  of  God.  1.  Ood  is  their  Father.  They  can 
say  that  in  a  special  and  spiritual  sense.  In  one  sense  all  human  beings  are  the 
offspring  of  God.  We  are  all  the  creatures  of  his  hand,  and  are  dependent  continually 
upon  his  bountiful  care.  But  sin  has  come  in  and  separated  us  from  him.  It  has 
made  us  prone  to  disobey  rather  than  to  fulfil  our  Father's  commands.  Jesus  came 
into  this  world  that  he  might  bring  us  back  again  into  the  relationship  of  God's 
spiritual  children.  He  became  a  child  of  humanity  that  we  might  become  children  of 
God.  He  became  "  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  in  him."  All  who  believe  on  him  are  born  again.  They  are  by  creation 
God's  children ;  now  they  are  his  by  a  spiritual  birth.  Now  they  receive  "  the  Spirit 
of  adoption,  whereby  they  cry,  Abba,  Father"  (ver.  15).  Oh,  the  greatness  of  our 
heavenly  Father's  love  I  He  has  not  cast  us  off.  He  has  sent  his  own  Son  to  bring  us 
back,  to  restore  his  image  in  our  hearts,  and  by-and-by  to  have  us  tit  down  with  him 
in  his  everlasting  kingdom.  2.  Jesus  Christ  is  their  elder  Brother.  "  If  children,  then 
heirs;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ"  (ver.  17).  The  inheritance  which 
Christ  has  we  have,  if  by  receiving  him  we  become  children  of  God.  It  is  almost  too 
great  a  privilege  to  conceive,  but  it  is  plainly  revealed  to  us  by  God.  If  we  are  Christ's, 
all  things  are  ours ;  for  we  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's.  Christ's  own  prayer  was, 
"  Father,  I  will  that, those  whom  thou  hast  given  me  be  with  me  where  I  am."  And 
then  there  is  a  family  likeness  between  the  children  of  God  by  adoption  and  their 
elder  Brother.  If  children  of  some  humble  rank  were  adopted  into  a  noble  or  royal 
family,  there  would  be  a  great  dissimilarity  between  them  and  the  children  of  that 
family.  There  would  not  be  community  of  feeling.  It  seems  a  wonderfnl  thing  that 
we,  poor,  weak,  sinful  creatures,  should  be  adopted  into  the  family  of  God,  and  made 
the  brothers  and  sisters  of  Jesus  Christ.  How  can  there  be  any  likeness  between  us 
and  him  ?  But  God  has  provided  for  this.  Those  are  remarkable  words,  "  For  whom 
he  did  foreknow,  he  also  did  predestinate  to  he  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son,  that 
he  might  be  the  Firstborn  among  many  brethren"  (ver.  29).  Thus  God  has  provided 
that  as  we  are  to  be  the  brethren  of  Christ,  we  shall  be  like  him.  "  Beloved,  now 
are  we  the  sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be :  but  we  know 
that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him :  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  This 
likeness  to  Christ  is  a  gradual  growth.  It  is  the  development  of  the  Christian  character. 
It  is  not  in  the  infant  lying  in  the  cradle  that  much  likeness  to  its  parent  can 'be 
detected.  But  as  the  body  matures,  as  the  features  become  more  marked,  as  the 
individuality  of  character  begins  to  show  itself,  then  we  see  the  likeness,  and  we  say, 
"  He  is  his  father's  son,"  "  She  is  her  mother's  daughter."  Those  beautiful  statues  of  the 
Louvre  or  of  Florence,  which  are  the  admiration  of  the  world,  did  not  spring  by  magio 
from  the  sculptor's  hands.  He  had  his  ideal.  He  had  his  plan.  With  that  ideal 
before  him,  he  took  the  rough  material,  and  on  it  he  gradually  worked  out  hia  plans. 


230  THE  BPISTLTS  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [ch.  viii.  1— 39. 

He  first  modelled  his  figure  in  clay,  and  then  took  the  rough,  shapeless  mass  of  marble, 
in  which  no  one  could  see  any  traces  of  the  future  statue's  loveliness  or  symmetry  of 
form.  But  the  sculptor's  love  for  his  work,  the  skill  of  his  hand,  the  patience  and 
perseverance  of  his  mind,  the  hammer  and  chisel  which  he  wielded,  slowly  but  surely 
accomplished  his  purpose,  until  at  last  the  statue  stood  forth  in  all  its  beauty.  So  Grod 
has  his  ideal  for  the  Christian — likeness  to  Christ,  the  image  of  his  Son.  He  has  his 
plan,  the  plan  of  redemption,  of  sanctiflcation.  With  that  ideal  before  him  he  takes 
our  human  nature,  and,  by  the  slow  and  sometimes  painful  discipline  of  Christian 
experience,  he  develops  the  Christian  character,  until  at  last  the  believer  is  found  meet 
to  be  a  partaker  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.  3.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  their 
Hdper.  There  are  three  ways  mentioned  by  the  apostle  in  which  the  Spirit  helps  us. 
(1)  He  shows  us  the  path  of  duty.  "  As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are 
the  sons  of  God"  (ver.  14).  The  Spirit  uses  the  Word  of  God,  and  applies  it  to  our 
conscience  and  our  heart.  (2)  He  gives  us  assurance  of  our  sonship.  "  The  Spirit 
itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God  "  (ver.  16).  How 
does  he  give  us  that  assurance  ?  By  producing  in  us  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  "  Hereby 
do  we  know  that  we  know  him,  if  we  keep  his  commandments  "  (1  John  ii.  3).  If  our 
delight  is  in  the  Law  of  the  Lord,  if  we  are  striving,  however  imperfectly,  to  walk  in 
his  ways,  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  Christ,  then  this  is  the  Spirit's  testimony  to  us 
that  we  are  the  children  of  God.  (3)  The  Spirit  also  makes  intercession  for  us  in 
prayer.  We  are  more  accustomed  to  think  of  Jesus  as  interceding  for  us.  But  the 
Spirit's  work  of  intercession  is  here  described  in  very  forcible  words.  "Likewise  the 
Spirit  also  helpeth  our  infirmities :  for  we  know  not  wiiat  to  pray  for  as  we  ought:  but 
the  Spirit  itself  maketh  intercession  for  us  with  groanings  wluch  cannot  be  uttered. 
And  he  that  searcheth  the  hearts  knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  for  he 
maketh  intercession  for  the  saints  according  to  the  will  of  God"  (vers.  26,  27).  Christ 
intercedes  for  us  in  heaven ;  the  Holy  Spirit  intercedes  in  us  on  earth.  We  know  not 
what  we  should  pray  for  aright.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  reveals  to  us  our  need.  He  helps 
our  infirmities.  He  creates  within  us  high  and  holy  aspirations ;  and  even  when  we 
cannot  rightly  express  our  wants,  he  that  searcheth  the  hearts  knows  what  our  desires 
are ;  for  the  Spirit  expresses  them  better  than  we  can.  Let  us  avail  ourselves  more  of 
this  threefold  help  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  we  may  be  guided  in  the  path  of  duty, 
that  we  may  receive  a  stronger  and  clearer  assurance  of  our  relationship  as  children  ot 
God,  and  that  we  may  be  assisted  in  the  prayers  we  offer  at  the  throne  of  heavenly 
grace.  4.  Heaven  is  their  home.  "For  I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present 
time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us  "  (ver. 
18).  While  enjoying  the  fellowship  of  our  earthly  homos,  let  us  think  of  the  better 
home  on  high,  the  only  home  that  shall  never  be  broken  up. 

II.  The  bespoksibilities  op  the  ohildken  op  God.  They  are  summed  up  in 
the  apostle's  brief  words,  "  Therefore,  brethren,  we  are  debtors,  not  to  the  flesh,  to  live 
after  the  flesh  "  (ver.  12).  "  If  ye  through  the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  tlie  body, 
ye  shall  live  "  (ver.  13).  We  are  to  remember  that  we  are  debtors.  We  are  to  reflect 
how  much  we  owe.  We  are  to  realize  God's  clainas  upon  us.  We  are  to  think  of  the 
claims  of  that  heavenly  Father  who  has  condescended  to  adopt  us  as  his  children,  and 
who  is  constantly  caring  for  us.  We  are  to  think  of  the  claims  of  that  loving  Saviour 
who  gave  himself  for  us.  We  are  to  think  of  the  claims  of  that  Spirit  who  has  quickened 
us  from  the  dead,  who  has  been  enlightening  our  minds,  and  who  is  renewing  us  after 
the  image  of  God. 

"AH  that  I  am,  e'en  here  on  earth, 
All  that  I  hope  to  be 
When  Jesus  comes,  and  glory  dawns, 
I  owe  it.  Lord,  to  thee." 

C.  H.  L 

Ver.  28. — God's  mingled  providences.  "And  we  know  that  all  things  work  together 
for  good  to  them  that  love  God,"  This  was  a  remarkable  statement  for  the  Apostle 
Paul  to  make,  especially  when  we  consider  how  much  he  had  sufiiared  because  of  his 
love  to  God  and  his  truth.  He  had  been  imprisoned,  he  had  been  stoned,  he  had  been 
beaten  with  stripes ;  and  yet,  after  all  this,  he  is  able  to  say  that  "  all  things  work 


oa.  vm.  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  231 

together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  Some  might  be  disposed  to  doubt  such  a 
Btatement  with  regard  to  the  experience  even  of  the  Christian.  Yet  many  others 
besides  Paul  have  borne  similar  testimony.  David  said,  "  I  liave  been  young,  and  now 
am  old ;  yet  never  have  I  seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging  bread  " 
(Ps.  xxxvii.  25).  And  again,  "  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray ;  but  now  have  I 
kept  thy  Word.  ...  It  is  good  lor  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted ;  that  I  might  learn 
thy  statutes  "  (Ps.  cxix.  67,  71). 

I.  There  is  good  in  all  the  providbnobs  op  God.  Many  persons  think  there 
is  good  only  in  those  things  that  give  pleasure  or  delight  to  body  or  mind.  They  will 
admit  that  there  is  good  in  health  and  prosperity.  But  they  find  it  hard  to  see  what 
good  there  can  be  in  sickness,  in  adversity,  in  poverty,  or  in  sorrow.  The  apostle  takes 
a  wider  view  of  life's  experiences.  He  holds  that  "  all  things  work  together  for  good." 
He  could  appreciate  the  joys  of  life,  but  he  felt  that  there  was  a  wise  purpose  and 
blessing  in  life's  sorrows  and  trials  also.  Our  human  nature  is  in  itself  unholy,  alienated 
from  God,  easily  absorbed  by  the  influences  of  this  present  world,  and  easily  led  away 
by  temptation  and  sin.  What  a  proof  of  the  ungodliness  of  man's  nature  is  afforded 
by  the  fact  that  many  are  as  little  affected  by  the  most  certain  and  most  important 
religious  truths,  which  they  profess  to  believe  in,  as  if  they  did  not  believe  them  at 
all!  There  are  no  truths  more  universally  admitted  than  the  existence  and  moral 
government  of  God,  the  certainty  of  death  and  of  a  future  state  of  rewards  and  punish- 
ments. Yet  how  many  do  we  see  around  us  whose  character  and  conduct  afford  almost 
no  evidence  that  they  believe  in  these  truths  at  all !  How,  then,  are  men  to  be  roused 
from  their  indifference?  How  are  they  to  be  led  to  think  seriously  of  their  own  souls 
and  that  eternity  that  awaits  them?  Some  might  be  disposed  to  answer — By  what  we 
ordinarily  call  exhibitions  of  God's  love  and  goodness.  But  we  are  having  exhibitions 
of  God's  love  and  goodness  supplied  to  us  every  day  in  our  daily  food,  in  health  and 
strength,  and  all  the  other  blessings  and  comforts  which  we  enjoy.  Tet  these,  instead 
of  making  men  think  of  eteruity,  seem  to  make  them  think  more  of  this  present  world. 
God's  goodness,  instead  of  leading  them  to  repentance,  hardens  their  hearts.  The 
discipline  and  awakening  of  suffering  and  trial  are  needed.  These  trials,  breaking  in 
upon  the  routine  of  our  daily  business  and  enjoyments,  help  to  withdraw  our  desires 
from  the  things  of  this  perishing  world,  and  to  fix  them  upon  a  more  enduring  sub- 
stance. They  remind  us  that  this  is  not  our  rest ;  that  we  are  entirely  dependent 
upon  a  power  that  is  above  us  for  all  our  happiness  and  comforts ;  and  that  there  is 
indeed  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth.  There  is  nothing  more  calculated  to  show  a 
man  his  own  weakness  and  his  depeniience  upon  a  higher  Power,  and  to  lead  him  to 
reflect  seriously  upon  his  future  prospects,  than  to  find  himself,  in  the  midst  of  important 
and  perhaps  pressing  dulies,  suddenly  laid  aside,  stretched  upon  a  bed  of  sickness, 
racked,  it  may  be,  with  pain,  and  unable  to  do  anything  for  himself.  In  such  circum- 
stances we  must  feel  that  "it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  There  are 
many  Christians  everywhere  who,  with  feelings  of  deep  humility  and  gratitude,  are 
ready  to  acknowledge  that  they  never  had  any  serious  thought  of  eternity,  that  they 
never  knew  the  power  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  that  they  were  never  led  to  seek  him 
as  their  Saviour,  until  the  day  of  adversity  made  them  consider;  until  they  were 
stripped  of  their  dearest  possessions ;  until  they  were  warned  by  the  sudden  death  of 
some  one  who  was  dear  to  them ;  or  until  they  themselves  were  laid  upou  a  bed  of 
sickness,  and  brought  nigh  unto  the  gates  of  death.  "  Lo,  all  these  things  worketh 
God  oftentimes  with  men,  to  bring  back  his  soul  from  the  pit,  to  be  enlightened  with 
the  light  of  the  living  "  (Job  xxxiii.  29,  30).  And  through  all  the  Christian  life,  how 
many  times  we  have  to  thank  God  for  the  discipline  of  trial !  Our  trials  have  often 
proved  to  be  our  greatest  blessings  (see  also  on  ch.  v.  3 — 6). 

II.  Who  are  those  that  experience  this  good  in  all  God's  providences  ?  "  All 
things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  Ood."  It  is  not  all  men,  therefore, 
who  are  entitled  to  such  a  happy  way  of  looking  at  the  events  of  life.  There  are  many 
in  whose  case  everything  that  God  gives  them  seems  to  be  turned  into  evil.  Not 
merely  the  trials  which  harden  their  hearts,  but  also  his  blessings  which  they  abuse 
and  are  ungrateful  for,  and  the  life  he  gives  them,  which  they  misspend.  The  more 
they  have  prospered,  the  more  they  have  forgotten  God.  Those  things  that  might  be 
a  blessing  if  rightly  used,  become  their  greatest  curse.    Love  to  Ood  is  the  quaUti/ 


232  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  TEE  ROMANS,    [ch.  vin.  1—39. 

that  makes  all  life  happy  and  llessed.  Love  to  God  sweetens  every  bitter  cup,  and 
lightens  every  heavy  burden.  Fur  if  we  love  him,  we  must  know  him,  we  must  trust 
him.  That  is  the  threefold  cord  that  binds  the  Christian  unto  God,  and  that  keeps 
him  safe  in  all  the  changes  and  circumstances  of  life.  In  order  to  love  God,  we  must 
know  him  and  trust  him.  This  knowledge  and  this  trust  can  only  come  by  the  study 
of  God's  Word.  This  love  can  only  come  from  a  heart  that  has  experienced  the 
regenerating  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  natiiral  man  is  enmity  against  God.  Cul- 
tivate the  love  of  God  if  you  would  have  light  for  the  dark  places  of  life,  if  you  would 
have  strength  for  its  hours  of  weakness,  and  comfort  for  its  hours  of  trial  and  sorrow. 
Then  you  will  experience  that "  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God."— C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  31 — 39. — The  vncertainties  and  certainties  of  a  new  year:  a  new  year'i 
termon.  St.  Paul  w  as  no  narrow  dogmatist.  He  was  a  man  of  profound  sympathy 
and  charity  even  for  those  from  whom  he  differed.  Yet  there  are  some  strong  asser- 
tions in  his  writings.  Nowadays  it  is  almost  considered  a  virtue  to  be  in  doubt,  and  a 
rash  presumption  to  be  sure  of  anything.  In  the  revolt  from  superstition,  men  have  • 
gone  into  an  unbelief  that  almost  amounts  to  a  superstition  in  itself.  There  was  no 
superstition  about  St.  Paul.  He  was  a  man  of  thoughtful  mind,  of  wise  judgment. 
But  he  did  not  think  it  either  presumption  or  dogmatism  to  be  firmly  persuaded  and 
convinced  of  certain  things.  It  is  no  dogmatism  to  assert  that  the  sun  is  shining,  when 
its  warm  bright  rays  are  flashing  down  upon  us  and  around  us.  It  is  no  dogmatism  to 
assert  the  existence  of  frost,  when  the  earth  grows  hard  beneath  its  grasp,  and  we  feel 
its  icy  breath  upon  our  faces  and  in  our  throats.  With  all  the  uncertainties  and 
unrealities  of  life,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  certainty  and  truth.  To  St.  Paul  the  love 
of  Christ  was  such  a  certainty.  He  had  felt  it,  not  as  the  frost,  but  as  the  warm  sun- 
•hine  in  his  heart.  He  had  yielded  himself  to  its  influence,  till  it  became  to  him 
what  the  steam  is  to  the  steam-engine,  till  he  could  say,  "  The  love  of  Christ  con- 
straineth  me  ; "  or  again,  "  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  There  are  few 
finer  or  more  complete  pictures  of  that  love  and  its  power  than  this  eighth  chapter  of 
Romans  presents  to  us.  Here  St.  Paul  shows  us  the  Christian,  under  the  influence  of 
that  love,  gaining  the  victory  over  sin  and  temptation,  glorying  in  tribulation,  receiving 
the  Spirit  of  adoption,  standing  fearlessly  before  the  judgment-seat  in  the  irresistible 
conviction  that  he  is  a  child  of  God,  shielded  and  strengthened  by  the  love  of  Christ ; 
and,  as  he  gazes  from  point  to  point,  from  time  to  eternity,  and  sees  the  Christian 
secure  and  safe  at  every  point,  his  conviction,  his  rapture,  increase  in  intensity  till  they 
carry  him  away  in  .that  grand  outburst,  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
Christ  ?  .  .  .  For  I  am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  prin- 
oipalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth, 
nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  Here  are  the  uncertainties  and  the  certainties  of  life  con- 
trasted. 

I.  The  uncektainties  or  a  new  tear.  1.  The  new  year  may  he  a  time  of  pros- 
perity. If  it  is  God's  will  to  give  us  worldly  prosperity  and  wealth,  let  us  pray  for 
grace  and  wisdom  to  use  them  aright.  Prosperity  has  its  dangers.  It  comes  in  as  a 
separating  barrier  between  the  soul  and  God.  Our  Saviour,  in  one  of  his  parables, 
speaks  of  the  doceitfulness  ol  riches,  and  tells  us  that,  along  with  the  cares  of  this 
world,  it  is  like  thorns  that  choke  the  good  seed  of  Divine  truth,  so  that  it  becomes 
unfruitful.  Let  not  riches  "separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ."  2.  The  new  year 
may  be  a  time  of  trial.  St.  Paul  felt  convinced  that  no  trials  could  separate  him  from 
that  wondrous  love.  "  Shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution,  or  famine,  or  naked- 
ness, or  peril,  or  sword  ?  .  .  .  Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors 
through  him  that  loved  us"  (vers.  35,  37).  No  trial,  or  the  prospect  of  it,  brings 
dismay  or  terror  to  the  apostle's  heart. 

"  Come  one,  come  all  I  this  rook  shall  fly 
From  its  firm  base  as  soon  as  I." 

Conquerors  I  Yes,  and  more  than  conquerors  of  our  trials !  We  do  more  than  van- 
quish them.     We  turn  them,  or  rather  the  love  of  Christ  turns  them  for  us,  into  out 


OH.  vin.  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  233 

friends.  So  Paul  found  it  in  his  experience.  So  did  many  a  child  of  God.  Martin 
Luther  was  sent  to  prison  in  the  Wartburg,  apparently  a  heavy  hlow  to  himself  and 
his  friends,  and  the  cause  of  the  Eeformation.  But  the  love  of  Christ  was  stronger 
than  the  castle  walls.  They  could  not  keep  Christ  out.  Luther  was  more  than  con- 
queror. He  not  only  endured  his  iinprisonment,  hut  while  he  was  a  prisoner  he  trans- 
lated the  Scriptures  into  that  great  German  version  of  his,  and  wrote  besides  some  of 
his  great  commentaries.  The  walls  of  Bedford  Jail  could  not  separate  John  Bunyan 
from  the  love  of  Christ,  and  during  his  imprisonment  for  conscience'  sake  he  wrote 
that  matchless  allegory,  'The  Pilgrim's  Progress.'  Samuel  Euthei-ford,  a  prisoner  in 
Aberdeen  Castle,  wrote  his  beautiful  'Letters,'  of  which  Eichard  Baxter  said  that, 
after  the  Bible,  such  a  book  the  world  never  saw.  All  of  these  were  more  than  con- 
querors through  him  that  loved  them.  Whatever  trials  we  may  meet  with,  there  is 
the  great  certainty  of  the  love  of  Christ.  "Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
Christ?  "  "If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?"  (ver.  31).  We  may  lose  our 
earthly  friends,  but  Jesus  remains — the  Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother.  3. 
The  new  year  may  he  to  some  of  us  a  year  of  death.  Philip  Henry,  father  of  Matthew 
Henry  the  commentator,  used  frequently  to  pray  this  prayer,  "Fit  us  to  leave  or  to 
be  left."  Whatever  uncertainty  we  may  feel  about  the  earthly  lot  that  is  in  store  for 
us,  whether  our  days  may  be  many  or  few,  let  us  make  sure  that  we  are  clinging  to 
the  cross  of  Jesus,  and  then  we  have  a  safety  and  a  security  which  no  trials  can  ever 
shake. 

IL  The  certainties  op  a  new  tear.  While  there  is  much  that  is  uncertain  about 
each  new  year,  there  is  much  also  that  we  may  with  confidence  expect.  1.  The  new 
year  will  he  a  time  of  opportunities.  This  is  as  certain  as  that  the  sun  will  shine, 
and  the  seasons  come,  and  the  ocean  ebb  and  flow.  Every  day  will  bring  to  each  of  us 
its  opportunities.  Opportunities  save  souls.  John  Williams,  a  careless  young  man,  was 
persuaded  by  a  friend  to  go  one  sabbath  evening  to  a  place  of  worship,  and  there  he 
heard  a  sermon  on  the  words,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole 
world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  That  opportunity,  availed  of,  saved  his  soul  and  led 
him  to  decide  for  Christ,  and  he  became  the  famous  missionary  and  martyr  of  Erro- 
manga.  Had  he  refused  that  invitation,  rejected  that  opportunity,  a  similar  oppor- 
tunity might  never  have  returned.  Opportunities  test  character.  Some  one  has  said 
that  "  opportunities  are  importunities."  Every  opportunity  appeals  tons.  It  appeals 
to  us  to  avail  ourselves  of  it,  to  show  what  side  we  are  on,  to  make  our  choice  for  time 
and  eternity.  Abraham  had  his  opportunity  when  the  call  came  to  him  to  leave  his 
father's  house,  and  he  used  it  well.  It  showed  him  to  be  a  man  of  faith,  a  man  who 
would  do  God's  bidding  at  any  cost.  Joseph,  Joshua,  Daniel — each  of  these  had  his 
opportunity,  and  well  he  used  it.  Herod  had  his  opportunity,  and  seemed  to  be 
impressed  by  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist,  for  "  he  did  many  things,  and  heard 
him  gladly ; "  but  when  the  critical  and  testing  opportunity  came  of  making  his  choice, 
of  choosing  good  rather  than  evil,  he  lost  it.  So  it  was  with  Felix  and  Agrippa.  But 
let  our  life  he  dominated  by  the  constraining  influence  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  then 
the  opportunities  which  the  passing  hours  are  sure  to  bring  will  only  show  more  and 
more  clearly  that  we  are  on  the  Lord's  side.  2.  The  new  y^ar  will  he  a  time  of  duties. 
It  is  well  to  begin  the  year  with  a  high  sense  of  our  obligations  and  responsibilities. 
Duties  are  a  certainty  which  every  day  brings  with  it.  There  are  the  duties  of  daily 
prayer  and  daily  thanksgiving  to  God ;  the  duties  of  parents  to  their  children,  of 
employers  to  their  servants,  of  all  Christians  to  those  who  are  around  them.  Here, 
again,  let  every  duty  be  discharged  in  the  spirit  of  love  to  Christ,  and  there  will  be  no 
uncertainty  about  our  faithfulness.  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  " 
—0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  1 — 5. —  What  the  Law  could  not  do.  The  perpetual  conscience-cry  that  rings 
through  all  the  struggles  of  ch.  vii.  is,  "  Condemnation ! "  But  "  to  them  that  are  in 
Christ  Jesus  "  ?  "  No  condemnation  now ! "  The  heavens  smile,  the  earth  is  glad.  All 
things  are  made  new.  Such  is  the  opening  note  of  this  eighth  chapter ;  a  sweet  song 
of  joy  in  place  of  the  old  cry  of  despair.  And  we  have  here  following — God's  work 
in  Christ ;  Christ's  work  in  us. 

I.  Gon's  WOBK  IN  Chkist.     The  great  work  referred  to  here  is-  the  practical  con 


234  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vm.  1—39. 

demnation  of  sin.  And  it  is  set  forth,  in  regard  to  Christ  and  in  regard  to  ourselves, 
negatively  and  positively.  1.  Negatively,  by  contrast  with  the  impotence  of  mere  Law : 
"  What  the  Law  could  not  do."  The  Law  of  God,  whether  inwardly  in  conscience,  or 
outwardly  as  through  Moses,  sufficiently  condemns  sin  theoretically ;  but  practically  ? — 
"  weak  through  the  flesh."  All  this  has  been  emphatically  demonstrated  in  the  previous 
chapter :  "  1  deli;/ht  in  the  Law  of  God  after  the  inward  man ;  but  I  see  a  different  law 
in  my  members,  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind,"  etc.  (vers.  22,  23).  The  flesh 
dominates,  and  there  is  no  power  to  render  efifectual  the  better  aspirations.  2.  Posi- 
tively, iu  the  holy,  loving  life  of  Christ :  "  God,  sending  his  own  Son,"  etc.  He  came 
into  the  realms  of  sin,  and  wearing  the  nature  which  sin  had  weakened  and  destroyed, 
but  resolutely  resisting  sin's  power,  defying  sin's  assaults.  "  The  flesh  in  him  was  like 
a  door  constantly  open  to  the  temptations  both  of  pleasure  and  pain  ;  and  yet  he  con- 
stantly refused  sin  any  entrance  into  his  will  and  action.  By  this  persevering  and 
absolute  exclusion  he  declared  it  evil  and  unworthy  of  existing  in  humanity  "  (Godet). 
Yes ;  God  in  Christ  "  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,"  by  practically  casting  it  out  from 
that  humanity.  Casting  it  out  ?  nay,  it  was  not  suffered  to  intrude.  The  history  of 
the  temptation,  and  of  the  last  agony,  is  the  emphatic  illustration  of  these  words. 

II.  Christ's  wokk  in  us.  In  Christ,  then,  there  is  a  practical  and  immediate  con- 
demnation of  sin,  by  its  utter  exclusion  from  his  life.  But  is  there  not  in  this  a  pledge 
of  the  like  condemnation  in  those  who  are  joined  to  him  by  faith?  And  is  not  this 
pledge  fulfilled  to  those  who  are  "  in  Christ  Jesus  "  ?  "When  we  see  the  king's  son 
enter  the  revolted  province  without  opposition,  and  know  that  he  has  come  because  of 
the  revolt,  we  are  sure  that  the  king  is  both  able  and  determined  to  overthrow  the  rule 
of  the  usurper  "  (Beet).  And  in  us  who  believe,  and  who  therefore  "  walk  not  after 
the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit,"  the  usurper  is  dethroned,  and  "  the  ordinance  of  the 
Law  "  is  "  fulfilled."  1.  Negatively.  Not  "  after  the  flesh,"  to  "  mind  the  things  of 
the  flesh."  As  above,  our  state  by  nature  is  one  of  bondage  to  "  the  flesh ; "  the  lower 
impulses  master  us.  And  though  the  aspirations  of  the  spirit  may  be  quickened,  yet 
we  sigh  vainly  for  freedom  and  strength.  We  do  but  realize  the  more  bitterly  our 
bondage  to  sin.  How  shall  the  bondage  be  destroyed  ?  "  Through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord."  He  has  broken  the  condemnation  of  the  past  by  the  offering  of  himself,  once 
for  all ;  he  destroys  our  present  captivity  by  the  incoming  of  his  Spirit,  received  by 
faith  in  that  same  sacrificial  love.  Thus  the  aspirations  are  realized  by  this  blessed 
inspiration.  2.  Positively.  "  After  the  Spirit,"  to  "  mind  the  things  of  the  Spirit." 
Christ,  who  conquered  for  us,  conquers  in  us.  We  are  joined  to  him,  and  "he  that  is 
joined  unto  the  Lord  is  one  spirit "  (1  Cor.  vi.  17).  Thus  "  we  are  transformed  into 
the  same  image,"  and  "  walk  even  as  he  walked."  Now,  then,  we  more  than  realize  our 
first  estate ;  our  manhood  is  redeemed ;  "  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus "  makes  us 
"  free."  Our  service  is  the  glad,  spontaneous  service  of  sonship ;  we  are  not  com- 
manded to  an  impossible  obedience  from  without,  but  animated  by  the  impulse  of  a 
boundless  love  within ;  and  this  love,  with  the  free  obedience  which  it  begets,  is 
nourished  and  strengthened  evermore  by  our  fellowship  with  God  in  Christ.  "  What- 
soever things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are  honourable,  whatsoever  things  are  just, 
whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good 
report " — we  "  think  on  these  things ; "  and  "  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all 
understanding,  guards  our  hearts  and  our  thoughts  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Phil.  iv.  7,  8). 

The  one  supreme  question  for  us  is — Are  we  in  Christ?  If  so,  the  determining 
element  of  our  life  is  new,  all  things  are  new.  But  if  not,  we  abide  in  death  !  And 
how  shall  Christ  be  received?  By  simplest  faith.  He  offers  himself  freely,  we  are  to 
receive  him  freely.  Believe !  yes,  believe  with  the  heart  in  all  his  boundless  love,  and 
live  by  it.— T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  6 — Qa. — The  flesh  and  the  Spirit.  Being  free  from  sin  in  Christ  Jesus,  we  are 
also  free  from  its  results— condemnation  and  death ;  or  rather — for  the  result  is  one — 
the  death,  of  which  condemnation  is  but  one  aspect. 

I.  The  mind  of  the  flesh.  In  a  state  of  sin,  as  in  a  state  of  holiness,  there  is 
activity,  though  the  activity  be  abnormal.  The  "  flesh,"  equally  with  the  "  spirit," 
has  its  "mind,"  i.e.  its  purpose,  its  aspiration;  an  activity  which  tends  to  a  goal. 
And  what  is  the  dread  goal  to  which  the  activity  of  sin  must  lead?    Death  I    Yea, 


OH.  vm.  1—39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF   PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  235 

"the  mind  of  the  flesli  is  death ; "  this  is  as  surely  the  result  of  such  a  perverse  activity 
of  our  nature  as  though  it  were  consciously  designed  and  sought  after.  What  is  death, 
to  such  a  one  as  man  ?  The  complete  separation  of  the  soul  from  God !  And  how  ia 
such  death  wrought  by  the  "  mind  of  the  flesh  "  ?  By  the  reciprocal  hostility  between 
sin  and  God,  which  must  work  an  utter  mutual  exclusion.  1.  Sin's  hostility  to  Ood. 
(Ver.  7.)  The  very  essence  of  sin  is  rebellion  against  the  Diviue  authority.  The 
"flesh,"  viz.  all  the  lower  desires  and  passions  of  man's  nature,  broken  loose  from  their 
proper  governance,  together  with  the  move  spiritual  faculties  which  have  been  dragged 
down  by  the  riotous  animal  impulses  into  a  kindred  perversion  and  anarchy — the  flesh 
is  "  enmity  against  God."  And,  this  being  so,  man's  very  sin,  by  its  own  action,  shuts 
out  God.  Oh,  what  a  suicide  is  here !  For,  with  God,  all  good  must  ultimately  be 
gone.  The  rebel  rioters  bar  every  avenue  to  shut  out  God ;  they  darken  the  windows 
that  the  light  of  heaven  may  not  shine ;  they  exclude  every  breath  of  life  and  liberty. 
2.  God's  hostility  to  sin.  (Ver.  8.)  But  God  is  not  a  mere  passive  influence,  whose 
exclusion  from  sinful  man  is  determined  solely  by  the  express  action  of  man's  sin  itself. 
God  is  a  Spirit!  Yes,  no  mere  influence,  but  a  living  Person;  a  living  Will!  And 
God  were  no  God,  if  he  were  not  a  holy  God;  and,  beinc;  holy,  ever  hostile  to  all  sin. 
It  must  be  so.  And  therefore,  when  man  erects  his  own  rebellious  will  against  hig 
Maker,  God's  presence  is  not  merely  shut  out  from  the  soul  by  sin,  but  God  in  grief — 
yea,  and  in  wrath,  in  holy  wrath — ^withdraws  himself.  "  They  that  are  in  the  flesh 
cannot  please  God."  So,  then,  on  these  two  grounds,  "  the  mind  of  the  flesh  is  death." 
Both  by  the  repugnant  action  of  sin  to  God,  and  by  the  repugnant  action  of  God  to 
sin,  all  the  favour  and  love  and  life  of  God  are  banished  from  the  heart. 

II.  Thb  mind  of  the  spirit.  But  if  the  inevitable  result,  and  in  some  sense  the 
conscious  choice,  of  sin  is  the  loss  of  God,  what  is  the  result  of  the  true  and  right 
activity  of  the  renewed  nature,  when  the  "  spirit "  is  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and 
restored  to  its  proper  ascendancy  over  the  "  flesli "  ?  "  'ITie  mind  of  the  spirit  is  life 
and  peace : "  this  is  the  necessary  result ;  this  is  the  result  which  is  consciously  sought 
after  and  desired.  What  is  this  life?  The  perfect  possession  and  enjoyment  of  God, 
and  of  all  good  in  God.  And  how  is  it  wrought  by  the  "  mind  of  the  spirit "  ?  As  in 
the  former  case,  by  the  reciprocal  action  between  the  renewed  spirit  and  God ;  though 
here,  not  reciprocal  enmity,  but  reciprocal  love.  1.  The  craving  for  Qod.  "  The  spirit 
thirsts  for  life  in  God,  which  is  its  element,  and  sacrifices  everything  to  succeed  in 
enjoying  it  perfectly  "  (Godet).  This  is  the  very  essence  of  the  new  life,  as  of  all  true 
spiritual  life,  a  desire  for  God  (see  the  Psalms,  passim).  And,  by  the  appropriating 
power  of  faith,  the  spirit  possesses  itself  of  that  which  it  desires.  It  hungers,  and  is 
fed.  2.  The  response  of  Ood.  As  above,  God  is  not  a  mere  atmosphere  to  be  breathed, 
but  a  living  God  to  give  or  withhold  himself.  And  just  as  he  withdraws  in  holy 
wrath  from  sinful  man,  so  he  imparts  himself  in  gracious  love  to  the  humble,  believing 
soul  (see  John  xiv. — xVii., passim).  So  then  "  the  mind  of  the  spirit  is  life" — life  which 
consists  in  the  full  possession  of  God,  and,  with  him,  of  peace,  joy,  strength,  and  perfect 
liberty.  Yes,  "  this  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ 
whom  thou  hast  sent"  (John  xvii.  3). 

Wliich  shall  be  our  portion,  our  destiny?  Life?  or  death?  We  answer,  practically, 
by  living  according  to  the  flesh  or  the  spirit.  But  this  latter  is  possible  only  in  one 
way :  does  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  us? — T.  F.  L, 

Ver.  95. — The  Spirit  of  Ghrist.  Let  us  resume  a  little.  The  "flesh"  and  the 
"spirit,"  as  elements  of  man's  complex  nature.  Latter  controlling  power,  itself  God- 
controlled.  There  was  to  be  a  supreme  and  established  domination  of  spirit  over  flesh, 
according  to  God's  design.  But  reverse  took  place ;  spirit  sunk  in  flesh.  But  God's 
Spirit  has  not  forsaken  the  spirit  of  man.  Cannot  reassert  its  own  supremacy,  but 
his  help  is  nigh.  For  though  he  cannot  enter  into  fellowship  with  sinful  man,  and  if 
man  persist  in  sin  must  ultimately  withdraw  altogether,  yet  now  he  seeks  to  save. 
And  so  the  dualism  of  man's  own  nature,  which  is  hopeless,  gives  way  to  this  higher 
and  better  dualism,  which  is  essentially  full  of  hope.  God^s  contact  with  man  is  in 
conscience ;  man's  appropriation  of  God  is  in  Christ.  Hence  a  true  faith  in  Christ  ii 
inevitably  followed  by  the  reigning  influence  of  Christ's  Spirit  in  the  heart.  The  true, 
attractive  doctrine  of  the  Spirit :  not  a  something  antagonistic  to  everything  that  ii 


236  THE  EPISTLE  OF   PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vm,  1—39. 

human,  but  a  sweetly  moulding  and  formative  influence  towards  all  that  is  truly, 
divinely  human,  all  that  ia  noble  and  pure  anii  good.  A  Liberator  from  bojidage — a 
bondage  which  all  feel — and  One  who  lifts  ua  froui  the  murky  mists  of  self  and  sin  into 
a  tranquil,  sunny  air.  The  true  sign  of  true  conversion — as  we  have  already  seen. 
But  a  danger  pi  the  mystical  fostering  of  some  supposed  interior  life  of  ecstasy  arid 
transport,  to  the  great  detriment  of  a  sober,  useful  godliness,  and  even  perhaps  to  the 
disparagement  of  a  carelul,  conscientious  righteousness.  Therefore  the  text  needs  to 
be  interpreted  in  such  a  way  as  to  check  and  prevent  such  perversion.  And  it  may 
well  be.  Christ's  Spirit  was  certainly  the  Informer  and  Moulder  of  his  human  life  nf 
humiliation,  as  it  is  the  effluence  now  of  his  Divine-human  life  of  glorification.  And 
as  he  informed  and  moulded  his  human  life,  in  the  flesh,  so  he  will  inform  and  mould 
our  human  life  likewise.  Therefore,  to  know  whether  we  have  Christ's  Spirit,  we  have 
but  to  inquire  whether  we  reflect  Christ's  cliaraoter.  And  so  our  Lord's  words  will 
have  their  application,  "By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  That  character,  then, 
the  test.  But  the  manifolrlness  of  that  perfect  character  makes  delineation  impossible, 
in  detail.  Let  us  content  ourselves  now  with  the  contemplation  of  two  generic  qualitie* 
of  character,  as  illustrated  in  bira,  which  spring  from  the  inspiring  Spirit  of  God.  For 
the  rest,  we  all  must  make  comparison  continually.  We  may  consider,  then,  his 
intense  godliness,  and  intense  humanness. 

I.  Intense  godliness.  The  quarrel  of  Christianity  with  the  mere  ethioists  of  the 
day.  Depths  of  man's  nature;  its  heights.  The  two  relationships,  towards  G-od  and 
towards  man ;  and  shall  that  higher  one  be  disregarded  ?  Let  us  look  at  the  elements 
of  Christ's  godliness.  1.  Conscious  contact  with  God.  The  "angels  ascending  and 
descending ; "  "  the  Son  of  man  which  is  in  heaven."  The  baptism ;  the  Mount  of 
Transfiguration.  We  want  this  contact  with  God.  A  present  God,  face  to  face,  heart 
to  heart,  breath  to  breath.  This  the  inspiring  power  of  a  godly,  righteous,  and  sober 
life.  And  this  everywhere,  and  always.  Meetings  and  means  are  but  to  express,  and 
in  turn  to  foster.  But  the  real  presence  should  be  a  constant  factor  of  our  life;  every- 
where heaven  about  us.  2.  Complete  obedience  to  Ood.  The  temptation,  and  the 
agony.  A  spotless  life  the  sequel  of  the  former;  a  patiently  submissive  life  the 
precursor  of  the  latter.  So,  "  Thy  will  be  done"  must  be  the  motto  of  our  life.  Not 
in  one  narrow  sense ;  for  activity  as  well  as  passivity.  "  I  do  a,lways  those  things  that 
please  him :"  shall  not  we  seek  to  say  that?  3.  Enthusiastic  devotion  for  Cod.  From 
"Wist  ye  not,"  etc.?  (Luke  ii.  49),  to  "  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with,"  etc. 
(Luke  xii.  50).  So  John  iv.  34.  And  we  must  cherish  a  like  devotion.  For  we  have 
a  special  life-work  to  do  for  God :  let  the  doing  of  it  be  our  bread  of  life  1  Such  the 
goi  Illness. 

II.  Intense  humanness.  1.  A  tremulous,  burning  sympathy  with  all  that  was  truly 
human.  Had  he  been  amongst  us  now,  he  would  have  been  the  Inspiration  of  all 
educational,  social,  and  philanthropic  enterprise.  We  must  catch  this  spirit.  (1)  Be 
truly  human:  sentiments,  pleasures,  pains,  work.  (2)  Respect  the  human:  be  right, 
in  action — doing  justice ;  in  words — speaking  truth  ;  in  demeanour — showing  courtesy. 
(3) -Love  and  aid  the  human.  2.  A  stern,  unsparing  hatred  of  all  that  was  false  in 
man.  The  Pharisees:  "Woe  unto  you  I"  So  we.  No  false  tenderness.  Know  how 
to  hate,  as  well  as  how  to  love.  And  so  hate  unsparingly  all  falseness,  hypocrisy, 
badness,  in  ourselves  and  in  others — but  most  in  ourselves.  Some  sins  too  leniently 
dealt  with;  and  they  damning  sins!  Oh,  let  the  fiery,  scorching  indignation  of 
Christian  society  burn  them  up!     Such  the  humanness. 

In  the  light  of  all  this  read  again,  "  If  any  man  hath  not,"  etc.  Begin  beneath  the 
shadow  of  the  cross,  advance  by  drinking  daily  into  his  Spirit,  and  so  shall  you  end  by 
being  transformed  into  his  perfect  likeness.  We  all  know  that  Christ  died  for  us;  let 
us  be  quite  as  sure  that  Christ  lives  in  us. — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  10,  11. — The  redemption  of  the  body.  He  has  said  (ver.  6)  that  the  "mind  of 
the  spirit  is  life."  We  have  seen  in  what  a  large,  rich  sense  these  words  are  true. 
But  it  might  be  objected — and  our  special  familiarity  with  one  aspect  of  the  meaning 
of  "life"  would  lead  to  this — that  after  all,  we  die;  that,  in  Solomon's  language,  "all 
things  oomo  alike  to  all ;  there  is  one  event  to  the  righteous,  and  to  the  wicked."  And 
at  first  sight  this  would  seem  to  be  a  formidable  objection.   The  brand  of  condemnation 


OH.  vin.  1— 39.]    THE   EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  237 

is  upon  us  to  the  last:  we  die!  Of  what  validity,  then,  is  the  justification  through 
Christ?  and  of  what  reality  the  renewal  by  the  Spirit?  The  objection  is  answered  in 
these  verses,  in  which  are  set  forth — the  persistence  of  death,  the  triumph  of  life. 

L  The  persistence  of  death.  It  is,  indeed,  true  that,  in  spite  of  our  justification 
and  renewal,  death  seems  to  have  dominion  over  us  in  our  physical  relations :  "  the 
body  is  deaii."  This  needs  no  proving ;  no  human  fact  can  be  more  patent.  We  die 
daily,  and  at  last  yield  to  the  final  triumph  of  the  foe.  How  is  this  recoucilable  with 
the  new  life  ?  The  body  is  dead  "  because  of  sin,"  viz.  the  sin  of  the  first  man,  our 
federal  head.  This  is  the  sad  heritage  which  descends  to  the  race  on  account  of  the 
transgression.  1.  And  one  main  secret  of  the  persistence  of  death  consists  in  this,  that 
mankind,  in  all  its  natural  relations,  is  one  organism.  If  one  member  sufier,  the  other 
mcnibers  suffer  with  it.  More  especially  do  ancestral  actions,  entailing  physical  conse- 
quences, affect  the  condition  of  succeeding  generations.  Therefore,  as  above  (ver.  15 
of  ch.  v.),  "  by  the  trespass  of  the  one  the  many  died."  The  complex  unity  of  man's 
natural  relations  necessitated  this  permanent  consequence  to  the  race.  2.  Yes,  each 
one's  mortality  is  linked  on  to  the  moi  tality  of  the  race ;  man,  by  necessary  natural 
entailment,  is  "horn  to  die."  But  why,  it  may  be  asked,  does  uot  the  individual, 
volitional  agency  by  which  the  Oiiristian  believer  is  linked  on  to  a  new  federation,  and 
made  partaker  of  the  power  of  life,  involve  of  equal  necessity  the  reversal  of  the 
original  cause  ?  The  answer  in  part  is  this :  that,  for  reasons  which  we  may  or  may 
not  partially  discern,  in  the  present  economy  of  things  there  is  a  permanence  of  natural 
causation  even  in  spite  of  altered  spiritual  conditions.  It  is  this  principle  which 
effectuates  the  ordained  unity  of  the  race,  as  above  set  forth ;  and  the  same  principle 
involves  that,  not  merely  must  each  member  of  the  race  accept  at  birth  his  natural 
heritage,  but  even  his  own  &ee  spiritual  choice  and  action  may  not,  at  least  now,  effect 
a  change  in  the  sequence  of  natural  causation.  This  is  true  of  such  natural  conse- 
quences as  may  have  resulted  from  each  one's  individual  transgressions ;  it  is  equally 
true  of  the  inherited  consequences  of  the  first  transgression ;  it  is  eminently  true  of  the 
unique  entailment  of  mortality.  3.  And  one  special  reason  for  this  permanence  of 
natural  causation,  in  addition  to  the  economic  considerations  requiring  the  organic 
unity  of  the  race,  is  the  necessity  that  man,  under  a  process  of  redemptive  recovery 
from  sin,  should  be  subjected  to  the  chastening  influence  which  only  an  experience  of 
the  evil  of  sin's  effects  can  supply.  Illustrate  by  continuance  of  penalty  resulting  from 
individual  transgression;  as,  e.g.,  drunkenness,  dishonesty.  So,  generally,  the  con- 
tinuance of  all  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to,  on  account  of  human  sin.  In  this  twofold 
sense,  then,  "  the  body  is  dead  because  of  sin : "  the  transgression  involved  it  as  a 
natural  consequence ;  also,  in  view  of  redemption,  as  a  remedial  discipline. 

II.  The  tkiumph  of  life.  "But"— oh,  what  a  "but"  is  this! — "the  spirit  is  life 
because  of  righteousness."  Observe,  not  living,  as  the  body  is  said  to  be  dead,  i.e, 
not  merely  possessed  of  an  attribute ;  but  life ! — itself,  througii  the  inhabitation  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  a  living  power,  which  shall  eventually  penetrate  with  its  vitality  all 
man's  psychical  and  even  bodily  nature  (see  Godet).  All  this  is  involved  in  the 
peculiar  phraseology  of  the  tenth  verse,  and  is  plainly  set  forth  in  the  eleventh.  1.  A 
new  organic  unity  of  the  race,  with  its  own  laws  of  natural  causation,  is  established  in 
Christ.  He  is  the  second  Adam,  the  "  greater  Man."  And  as  by  the  "  sin  "  of  the 
former  came  death,  so  by  the  "righteousness" — the  justification — which  is  through 
the  latter  comes  life.  2.  "  With  its  own  laws  of  natural  causation : "  yes ;  for,  though 
we  may  not  trace  their  working,  they  are  at  work,  and  shall  eventuate  in  our  triumph, 
througii  Christ,  over  even  the  mortality' to  which  we  now  must  submit.  The  case  is 
complex;  the  two  humanities  are  as  yet  commingled;  the  two  trains  of  causation  are 
jointly  at  work.  But  of  the  triumph  of  life,  we  have  the  pledge  in  that  he  was  raised 
from  the  dead;  himself  submitted  to  the  old  law,  and  rose  by  the  power  of  the  new. 
"Christ  the  Firstfruits,  afterward  they  that  are  Christ's  at  his  coming."  3.  "After- 
ward ; "  yes,  when  the  remedial  discipline  shall  have  done  its  work,  and  from  a  restored 
world,  from  a  renewed  mankind,  the  curse  shall  be  utterly  removed.  For  this  we 
wait,  for  this  we  work ;  and  we  do  not  work  and  wait  in  vain.  "  The  Spirit  of  him 
that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  shall  quicken  also  your  mortal  bodies." 

Such,  then,  is  our  assuiaiiCL',  such  is  our  hope.  But  on  what  is  it  conditioned?  "If 
Christ  be  in  you ; "  "  If  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  ir 


238  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vjii.  1— 39. 

you."    Oh,  let  us  hasten  to  him  who  is  the  Source  of  the  new  life,  the  Giver  of  the 
living  Spirit!— T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  12 — 17. — The  adoption  in  Christ.  Is  our  desire,  is  our  vocation,  life?  Then 
we  are  bound  in  honour,  bound  by  the  necessity  of  the  case,  to  live,  not  after  the  flesh, 
but  after  the  Spirit.  But  are  we  even  tlien  sure  of  the  destiny  of  life?  We  are  walk- 
ing in  a  way;  whither  does  the  way  lead?  The  answer  to  this  question  lies  in  the 
prevailing  characteristic  of  the  life  we  live  now — a  life  that  is  "  led  by  the  Spirit  of 
God."  These  are  sons !  Survey  the  life:  only  "sons"  could  live  a  life  like  that.  And 
the  life,  being  of  God,  is  to  God ;  "  If  children,  then  heirs."  We  have,  then,  to  consider 
— sonship,  heirship. 

I.  The  sonbhip.  In  ver.  15  he  leads  them  back  to  the  commencement  of  this  new 
life.  What  was  the  change  which  then  passed  over  them  ?  They  were  in  bondage  once 
— such  bondage  as  he  has  described  in  ch.  vii.  And  this  bondage  might  be  said  to  be 
of  God,  for  it  was  the  transition  to  liberty.  God  showed  them  the  infinite  claims  of 
bis  holy  Law,  and  thereby  revealed  to  them  thisir  guilt,  their  helplessness,  their  doom. 
Oh,  what  bondage  was  theirs  then !  The  whole  purport  of  that  period  of  their  spiritual 
discipline  was  "unto  fear."  Nay,  not  the  whole  purport;  they  were  but  wounded 
that  they  might  be  made  whole.  God  hn,d  prepared  some  better  things  for  them.  "  In 
me  dwelleth  no  good  thing : "  yes,  this  they  learned.  But,  in  Christ,  they  "  received 
the  Spirit  of  adoption; "  in  him  they  saw  their  sin  forgiven,  and  in  the  power  of  God's 
boundless  love  they  mounted  upward  as  on  engles'  wings.  Accepted  in  the  Beloved  I 
1.  The  adoption.  An  alienation  is  here  implied  from  the  original  sonship.  Man's  fall ; 
each  one's  sin  and  wicked  works.  The  potential  adoption  of  all  in  Christ  Jesus:  hold 
fast  to  this  great  fact.  But  not  this  alone:  each  one's  individuality  respected,  and 
hence  the  actual  adoption  only  of  those  who  voluntarily  attach  themselves  to  the  new 
Headship  of  Christ  Jesus.  This  the  blessed  concomitant  of  pardon  ;  and  love  working 
by  law  (Roman  custom),  that  in  this  also  "  he  might  be  just."  2.  The  witness.  Each 
one  who  unfeignedly  believes  in  Christ  Jesus  is  adopted  into  the  family  of  God.  But 
may  not  this  blessed  adoption  he  realized  ?  Thank  God,  it  may :  "  The  Spirit  witnesseth 
with  our  spirit."  "  All  things  are  of  God "  (2  Cor.  v.  18),  and  so  the  whole  of  the 
great  work  of  salvation  is  his  work,  and  when  every  holy  confidence  towards  himself 
is  inspired  in  the  believer's  mind,  it  is  his  inspiration.  But  he  deals  with  men  in 
harmony  with  the  laws  of  their  own  minds,  and  guides  and  inspires  them  through  the 
processes  of  their  own  thought.  Hence  the  expression,  "  witnesseth  with  our  spirit." 
Our  consciousness  of  God's  forgiveness,  our  conviction  of  his  love,  are  produced  instru- 
mentally  by  our  apprehension  of  his  purposes  and  promises  in  Christ ;  but  in  and 
through  the  working  of  our  own  spirit  his  Spirit  works.  We  are  prompted  by  our 
perception  of  God's  love  in  Christ  to  cry,  "  Abba,  Father ; "  but  it  is  also  by  him  that 
we  thus  cry.  He  works  the  assurance  in  and  through  the  working  of  our  thought  and 
feeling :  "  witnesseth  with  our  spirit."  And  thus  is  explained  the  failure,  where  there 
is  failure,  to  realize  this  assurance.  God's  inspiration  is  not  wanting,  but  the  instru- 
mentality is  at  fault.  Perceptions,  tone,  temperament — these  constitute  the  hindrance. 
And  remediable  by  proper  means.  Such,  then,  the  sonship  which  is  the  secret  of  the 
new  life :  adoption,  and  the  realization  of  that  adoption — all  of  God.  His  children  I 
His  beloved  ones !     Therefore  we  love  him ;  therefore  we  live  to  him. 

II.  The  heirship.  But  if  sonship  be  the  inspiration  of  this  new  life,  what  must  its 
destiny  be?  We  are  heirs — "heirs  of  God;  joint-heirs  with  Christ."  1.  Eeirs  of  God. 
The  idea  of  fatherhood  is  the  bestowal  of  all  benediction  on  the  child.  And  "of  him 
every  fatherhood  in  heaven  and  on  earth  is  named"  (Eph.  iii.  15).  Therefore  he  bim- 
self,  and  all  that  he  can  give,  shall  constitute  our  heritage.  Now,  in  this  world,  God 
is  ours ;  this  is  the  great  possession :  his  presence,  his  power,  his  love.  And  thus  the 
world  itself  is  transmuted  into  an  inheritance  of  joy,  even  sorrows  yielding  blessing. 
But  we  are  not  yet  of  age;  our  manhood  then!  And  oh,  the  inheritance  that  shall  be! 
God  himself  we  shall  see  face  to  face,  knowing  even  as  we  are  known.  And  God's 
creation  shall  be  made — how  fair  and  beautiful  to  us,  who  shall  say  ?  "  In  thy 
presence  is  fulness  of  joy;  at  thy  right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore"  (Ps. 
XTi.  11).  And  that  "path  of  life"  shall  be  "shown"  us  by  God.  2.  Joint-heirs  with 
Christ.     Christ,  the  Anointed  One,  the  Son  of  man — God  has  adopted  us  in  him ;  God 


OH.  vm.  1—39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  239 

has  made  us  heirs  in  him  I  And  his  apfiropriation  of  the  heritage  is  our  pledge.  His 
life  in  the  world :  the  Father,  the  Father's  gifts ;  yea,  even  the  cross.  His  risen  and 
ascended  life :  "  the  Firstfruits  of  them  that  slept ; "  "  whither  the  Forerunner  is  for  us 
entered"  (1  Cor.  xt.  20;  Heb.  vi.  20).  See  John  xvii.,  where  the  co-iieirship  is  so 
set  forth. 

But  meanwhile,  "  if  so  be  that  we  suifer  with  him "  I  The  process  of  recovery  to 
sonship,  heirship.  We  drink  of  that  cup,  we  bear  that  cross ;  but  so  we  shall  wear 
that  crown.— T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  18 — 25. — The  redemption  of  the  creation.  "If  so  he  that  we  suffer  with  him." 
Then  we  do  suffer?  Yes,  even  as  he  did.  For  ours  is  a  redemptive  history,  and 
redemption  is  not  without  pain.  But  the  future — oh,  how  the  glory  eclipses  all  the 
momentary  trial  I  So  was  it  with  himself.  "  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him," 
he  "  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame "  (Heb.  xii.  2).  And  so  shall  it  be  with 
us.  We  may  well  join  the  apostle  in  his  triumphant  outburst  of  hope,  "  For  I  reckon," 
etc.  Ours  is  the  hope  of  an  immortal  glory ;  nay,  the  hope  is  the  hope  of  the  world : 
"  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creation,"  etc.  So,  then,  we  have  for  our  consideration — 
the  present  pains,  the  future  glory. 

I.  The  pbesent  pains.  1.  Of  the  creation.  This  expression  must  not  be  toned 
down.  It  refers  to  all  the  creation,  outside  of  man  himself,  with  which  man  has  to  do; 
our  "world,"  which  is  connected  by  a  mysterious  solidarity  with  ourselves,  sorrowing 
in  our  sorrow,  rejoicing  in  our  joy.  Once  ?  It  was  "  very  good ; "  all  was  harmony, 
beauty,  peace.  We  may  not  tell  what  were  the  joys  of  the  early  creation,  but  it  was 
the  garden  of  the  Lord,  the  paradise  of  man.  The  ravages  of  the  storm,  the  desolations 
of  the  wilderness,  were  then  imlinown ;  the  creatures  preyed  not  one  upon  another 
then ;  love,  liberty,  and  life  were  all  in  all.  But  man's  fall  drew  a  shadow — oh,  how 
dark ! — across  the  beauty ;  and  for  love,  liberty,  and  life,  there  were  then  strife,  bondage, 
death  1  "  The  creation  was  subjected  to  vanity ; "  yes,  cursed  was  the  world  for  man's 
sake.  And  now?  Look  around  you:  "the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth 
in  pain  together."  The  earthquake  and  storm,  the  arid  desert  and  dreary  seas,  the 
inhospitable  clime,  the  unfriendly  skies,  the  blighted  harvests — the  shadow  of  the  cross  1 
And  the  ravages  of  the  animal  world:  destruction,  pain,  death.  And  at  last?  "The 
fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away ! "  2.  Of  ourselves.  The  nature-part  of  us  is  like- 
wise "  subject  to  vanity : "  we  groan.  Disease,  death — of  our  own  frame  and  organio 
life ;  of  our  relationships.    Oh,  how  we  are  mocked :  dust,  dust,  dust ! 

II.  The  futukb  globt.  1.  Of  ourselves.  We  are  God's  children  by  faith  in  Christ ; 
his  adopted  ones.  But  though  the  adoption  is  real,  it  is  not  yet  manifest  to  the 
universe.  No,  nor  to  ourselves  in  its  fulness.  As  though  a  beggar-child  were  adopted 
by  a  king,  but  for  a  while  must  still  appear  in  beggar-garments.  Oh,  it  shall  not  be 
always  so  I  The  beggar-garments  shall  be  cast  away,  and  the  roj'al  robe  assumed ;  our 
sonship  shall  be  made  manifest  to  all:  we  wait  "for  the  redemption  of  our  body." 
Yes,  God's  purposes  shall  be  accomplished ;  in  the  resurrection  of  the  Son  they  are 
pledged  to  fulfilment;  the  body  of  our  humiliation  shall  be  made  like  to  the  body  of 
his  glory,  and  "  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying  that  is  written.  Death  is 
swallowed  up  in  victory."  2.  Of  the  creation.  But  if  we  wait,  and  wait  in  hope,  so 
does  our  creation  wait,  groan,  yearn  for  the  revealing  of  the  sons  of  God.  The  hroKapct- 
Soxta !  The  decay  and  death  not  intrinsically  pertaining  to  it ;  no,  not  if  God's  woild. 
The  vanity  to  which  it  was  subjected,  the  mockery  of  aim,  the  frustration  of  purpose, 
this  was  all  "  in  hope."  And  as  by  man  came  the  curse,  by  man  comes  the  blessing. 
Bondage,  corruption,  through  the  sin?  Yes;  and  liberty,  glory,  through  the  great 
redemption !  Whatever  of  evil  was  done,  shall  be  undone ;  the  blot  shall  he  wiped 
away ;  the  shadow  shall  pass  that  the  eternal  light  may  shine.  And  all  our  relation- 
ships with  the  world,  and  with  one  another,  these  shall  be  remade  then ;  delivered 
glorified  1  Oh,  how  the  heart  has  bled — bled  because  of  the  frustrations  and  rendings 
of  this  world.  Oh,  how  the  heart  shall  bound — bound  with  the  fulness  of  the  blessing 
of  the  gospel  of  Christ ;  a  gospel,  not  in  word  only,  but  in  power,  delivering  power — 
power  that  shall  work  its  deliverance  on  man's  whole  nature,  all  man's  relationships, 
man's  whole  world  1 

Shall  ours,  then,  not  be  the  patience — "  we  wait  for  it "  ?    Yes  j  for  he  giveth  graco. 


240  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vin.  1—39, 

But  shall  we  not  know  something  of  the  triumph  too  ?  Shall  we  not  grasp  the  future, 
and  almost  live  in  it  as  thougli  the  present  were  not?  Yes;  for  ourselves,  for  our 
dear  ones,  for  our  dear  world,  "  I  reckon,"  etc.—  T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  26,  27. — Helping  our  infirmity.  In  the  previous  verses  the  twofold  "  groaning  " 
has  been  set  forth — of  nature  as  subjected  to  vanity,  and  of  redeemed  man  as  still 
sharing  the  heritage  of  vanity  in  himself  and  in  his  relation  to  the  world  around.  "  We 
hope  for  that  we  see  not : "  and  this  hope,  though  it  be  of  the  character  of  patient 
waiting,  is  yet  also  of  the  character  of  intense  desire.  But  are  our  desires  merely 
vague,  unauthorized  wishes  for  some  fancied  good,  which  God  may  not  be  purposed 
ever  to  grant?  Nay;  for  what  might  be  otherwise  but  the  vague  wishes  of  our 
burdened  hearts  are  intensified  and  authorized  by  the  B|iiritual  life  which  is  in  us — are, 
indeed,  the  promptings,  the  groanings,  of  that  very  Spirit  of  God  who  is  the  Author 
and  Sustainer  of  our  spiritual  life.  And  as  such  they  are  according  to  God's  will,  and, 
being  according  to  his  will,  are  the  sure  pledge  of  their  own  realization.  The  general 
truth  here  set  forth  is  that,  in  all  our  times  of  weakness  in  this  mortal  life,  when  we 
are  ready  to  faint,  the  Spirit  sustains  us ;  the  special  application  of  the  truth  is  that, 
when  "  ill  praying  we  cannot  express  to  God  what  the  blessing  is  which  would  allay 
the  distress  of  our  heart "  (Godet),  the  Spirit  of  God  inspires  us  with  holy  aspirations, 
which  are  not  indeed  to  be  formulated  in  human  words,  seeing  that  they  are  touched 
with  something  of  the  infinite,  but  which  react  in  comfort  on  the  heart,  as  conveying 
in  themselves  an  assurance  that  the  almost  infinite  craving  shall  be  infinitely  satisfied. 

I.  Que  ikfibmit t.  1.  In  this  life  of  trial,  in  which  evil  is  so  largely  mingled  with 
good,  and  in  which,  therefore,  as  regards  our  perfect  redemption,  we  have  to  "  hope  for 
that  which  we  see  not,"  we  are  called  to  exercise  both  a  passive  and  an  active  waiting. 
(1)  Passively,  we  are  to  wait  until  the  day  dawn  and  the  shadows  flee  away.  (2) 
Actively,  we  are  to  do  God's  will  in  this  present  world,  and  by  so  doing  to  hasten  the 
advent  of  that  day.  But  how  often  we  prove  our  "  infirmity  " !  our  strength  is  weak- 
ness. How  sometimes  the  heart  is  well-nigh  crushed  beneath  the  load,  and  we  are 
tempted  to  say  impatiently,  "  Would  that  it  were  morning ! "  And  how  dispirited  we 
are  then  for  the  work  of  the  kingdom !  2.  And  this  general  infirmity  manifests  itself 
specially  in  our  inability  to  pray  aright  for  the  good  which  we  confusedly  desire.  Oh, 
who  has  not  proved  this  ?  The  evils  and  mysteries  of  life  almost  daze  our  spirits ;  we 
strive  in  vain  with  our  vision  to  pierce  the  impenetrable  darkness.  "  Who  shall  show 
us  any  good?"  So,  coming  before  God,  we  do  not  find  our  accustomed  relief:  "  we 
know  not  how  to  pray  as  we  ought." 

II.  Otjb  help.  1.  Amid  all  our  weakness,  howjever  manifesting  itself,  the  Spirit 
helps  us.  He  gives  us  the  patience  to  wait,  and  the  strength  to  bear  the  burden  and 
to  do  the  work.  Yes,  that  which  of  all  things  else  is  hardest,  "  to  labour  and  to  wait," 
earnestly  to  pursue  our  appointed  task  in  spite  of  the  mystery  and  distress  of  life,  that 
is  made  possible  by  the  good  Spirit's  help.  Nay,  even  more,  an  inspiration  comes  from 
him  which  makes  us  zealous  for  the  extension  of  his  kingdom,  and  we  urge  our  way 
with  strength  renewed ;  for  our  way  is  his  way,  and  it  tends  to  the  accomplishment  of 
his  perfect  will.  2.  But  especially,  as  these  verses  teach  us,  the  S|iirit  helpeth  our 
infirmity  when  "  we  know  not  how  to  pray  as  we  ought."  Oppressed  by  the  mystery 
of  life,  torn  by  its  cruel-seeming  evils,  knowing  that  these  things  ought  not  so  to  be, 
that  they  will  not  so  be  in  a  perfect  state,  we  yet  can  scarcely  realize  our  own  desires, 
and  cannot  pray  for  the  things  we  need.  Then  comes  the  inspiration  from  on  high, 
and  our  heart  goes  forth  towards  God  in  aspirations  prompted,  and  therefore  warranted, 
by  God,  And  the  very  desire,  so  born,  gives  rest.  We  may  not  know  its  full 
meaning;  we  are  but  partly  conscious  of  our  true  need  as  regards  that  future  for 
which  we  sigh.  And  therefore  we  may  certainly  not  articulate  all  our  desire  in 
syllables  of  human  speech  to  God :  the  groanings  "  cannot  be  uttered."  But  they  are 
heard;  they  are  understood;  they  shall  be  answered.  For  the  Spirit  that  is  in  us  is 
the  Spirit  who  "gearoheth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God"  (1  Cor.  ii.  10);  and 
he  therefore  "maketh  interctission  for  the  saints  according  to  the  will  of  God."  Oh, 
what  a  pledge  is  here  of  our  sure  fruition  of  all  good !  We  do  not  vainly  and  wrongly 
sigh  for  the  perfectness  of  the  new  world;  God  himself  sighs  in  us,  with  us,  for  thii 
consummatiuQ.     There  is  trul}'  a  groaning  in  nature  itself  for  deliverance ;  there  is  > 


CH.  vm.  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  241 

groaning  in  ourselves  for  "the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  our  body;"  and 
there  is  a  groaning,  in  and  with  ours,  of  God's  Spirit  likewise,  for  the  doing  away  of 
all  contradictions  such  as  now  are,  and  the  ushering  in  of  the  day  of  God,  the  perfect 
day.  Here,  then,  is  the  law  of  a  spiritual  instinct,  which,  like  all  true  instinct,  how- 
ever vaguely  it  may  be  conscious  of  its  exact  purport,  is  yet  the  pledge  of  its  own 
realization. 

Let  us,  then,  not  be  ashamed  to  hope,  to  intensely  hope,  for  that  we  see  not,  for  the 
hope  is  heaven-born.  But  because  of  the  very  divineness  of  the  hope  itself,  and  the 
consequent  certainty  of  realization,  let  us  with  patience  wait  for  it. — ^T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  28 — 30. — Qo^s purpose  in  Christ.  The  apostle  has  indicated  the  hope  of  the 
future  glory,  in  comparison  with  which  all  suffering  now  is  as  nought.  He  lias  also 
shown  how  this  hope  is  no  vain  imagining  of  a  diseased  mind,  but  the  inspiration  of 
God's  Spirit.  And  now  he  goes  on  to  show  that,  since  this  divinely  inspired  hope 
corresponds  with  the  great  purpose  of  God  concerning  us,  all  things  which  enter  into 
God's  plan  for  our  governance,  including  apparently  evil  things  which  are  suffered  by 
him  to  befall  us,  must  ultimately  subserve  his  purpose  and  be  for  the  fulfilling  of  our 
hope.  All  this,  assuming  that  we  "  love  God ; "  thus  any  carelessness  or  sin  of  ours  is 
utterly  excluded  from  the  reckoning.  It  is,  indeed,  this  inward  principle  of  love  which 
transmutes  the  evil  into  good,  and  prepares  for  the  final  glorifying.  We  have,  then — 
the  purpose ;  the  process. 

I.  The  puepose.  God's  purpose  concerning  man  dates  back  to  the  eternal  past,  for 
to  God's  mind  all  things  are  ever  present.  But,  objectively,  it  dates  back  to  the  wreck 
of  the  primal  purpose  in  man's  transgression  and  death.  On  the  first  purpose  a  second 
purpose  was  built ;  out  of  the  wreck  of  the  old  race  a  new  race  should  be  formed.  1. 
The  Firstborn.  Since  the  first  man  had  betrayed  his  trust,  and  become  the  progenitor 
of  a  fallen  race,  there  should  be  a  second  Man,  the  Lord  from  heaven.  He  should  be 
God's  own  Son,  for  the  redemption-work  was  one  which  needed  the  powers  of  Divinity ; 
he  should  be  man's  Son  also,  one  in  whom  the  nature  of  the  race  might  be  concentrated, 
who  might  therefore  redeem  men,.as  God,  but  through  the  medium  of  a  true  humanity. 
He  should  humble  himself,  be  shorn  of  his  splendour,  suffer  and  die,  being  baptized 
with  blood  for  the  remission  of  our  sins ;  he  should  also,  "  dying,  draw  the  sting  of 
death,"  and,  rising  as  the  Pirstfruits  of  a  justified  race,  pass  into  the  heavens  as  our 
Forerunner.  Being  perfect  in  all  things  as  Son  of  man,  obedient  to  the  Father,  and 
having  performed  a  perfect  work,  he  should  enter  perfected  into  life,  glorified  with  the 
glory  which  he  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was.  2.  T/ie  many  brethren. 
Such  was  God's  purpose  in  his  Son.  But,  glorifying  his  Son,  he  should  also  "  bring 
many  sons  unto  glory  "  (Heb.  ii.  10) ;  for  the  Son,  "  having  been  made  perfect,"  should 
become  "unto  all  them  that  obey  him  the  Author  of  eternal  salvation"  (Heb.  v.  9). 
For  them  he  suffered,  and  therefore  they  also  must  suffer,  "  becoming  conformed  unto 
his  death"  (Phil.  iii.  10) ;  but,  just  as  he  passed  through  death  unto  life,  so  they  also, 
dying  with  him,  should  with  him  "attain  unto  the  resurrection  from  the  dead"  (Phil, 
iii.  11).  "  Conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son : "  yes,  this  was  God's  purpose  in  Christ 
for  man,  the  inward  conformation  of  consummate  holiness,  and  the  outward  confor- 
mation of  coi>summate  happiness. 

II.  Thb  pruCBSS.  Those,  then,  who  by  their  own  free  choice  should  become  Christ's 
people — for  all  others  are  here  left  out  of  account — were  foreknown  and  foreordained 
by  God,  "  according  to  the  eternal  purpose  which  he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus,"  as 
sharers  together  with  him  in  the  perfect  adoption  of  sons  of  God.  Now,  such  a 
purpose,  formed  by  God,  and  formed  in  the  eternal  past — such  a  purpose  concerning 
believers  and  faithful  ones  (for,  as  above,  all  possible  misuse  of  freedom  on  the  part  of 
man,  whether  for  rejecting  God's  grace,  or  for  casting  away  a  grace  received,  is  here 
waived,  and  it  is  assumed  that  the  purpose  formed  by  God  is  embraced  and  adliered  to 
by  man) — such  a  purpose  cannot  fail  of  its  result,  but  the  process  of  God's  working 
must  issue  in  its  complete  accomplishment.  1.  Called.  The  summons  in  accordance 
with  the  purpose.  God  calls  his  people,  by  the  outward  Word,  by  the  inward  Spirit ; 
or,  in  other  words,  invites  them,  summons  them,  to  enter  into  life.  Can  his  Word  be 
broken  T  Can  his  Spirit  deceive?  He  means  what  he  says,  and,  responding  to  his  call, 
his  people  have  a  guarantee  which  is  more  sure  than  the  pillars  of  the  universe  (Matt. 

B(<UANS.  K 


242  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vm.  1—39. 

xxiv.  35).  2.  Justified.  The  virtual  instatement  in  accordance  with  the  purpose. 
Calling  them,  he  justifies  them.  There  is  a  Name  which  destroys  all  guilt,  and  acquits 
for  ever,  and  upon  them  this  Name  is  named.  They  are  "  in  Christ  Jesus,"  and  "  there 
is  therefore  now  no  condemnation."  From  darkness  into  light ;  from  death  unto  life. 
And  the  justification  is  the  pledge  and  beginning  of  all  blessings^  in  Christ  that  shall 
tend  to  the  consummation  of  the  life.  It  carries  with  it  the  regeneration  of  our  nature ; 
it  supplies  the  power  that  shall  issue  in  our  complete  sanctification ;  and  it  points 
unfalteringly  through  all  the  tears  and  darknesses  of  the  intermediate  discipline  to  "  the 
revealing  of  the  sons  of  God."  8.  Olorifled.  The  actual  instatement  in  accordance 
with  the  purpose.  This  "  revealing  of  the  sons  of  God"  is  so  assured  to  us,  that  it  is 
spoken  of  here  as  though  already  an  accomplished  fact.  Yes,  all  things  must  be  ra^de 
consistent  and  harmonious  at  last;  the  discord  must  be  done  away ;  the  blessedness  of 
the  saved  spirit  must  be  wedded  to  the  blessedness  of  a  saved  world,  and  so  "  all  things 
be  made  new."  Such  shall  be  the  culmination  of  the  process  by  which  God's  purpose 
shall  be  fulfilled. 

The  lesson  insisted  on  is  this  :  God  will  let  nothing  thwart  him.  Only  love  him, 
throw  yourself  into  the  current  of  his  good  pui-pose,  and  all  things  shall  be  made  good 
to  you.  Opposition  there  may  be,  affliction  there  may  be ;  but  God  in  Christ  shall 
triumph — ^triumph  in  you.  The  very  hindrances  shall  become  helps,  the  enemies  unwit- 
ting friends.    Yes,  "  we  know  that  all  things,"  etc. — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  31,  2,2.— Supplying  all  our  need.  The  argument  of  vers.  28 — 30,  and,  indeed, 
of  the  entire  chapter,  is  now  summed  up  in  a  triumphant  hymn — the  victorious  battle- 
cry  with  which  the  conqueror  surveys  the  vacated  field  (Godet).  Vers.  31  and  32 
refer  to  God's  call  according  to  purpose ;  vers.  33  and  34  to  the  solemn  justification 
of  believers  by  God ;  and  vers.  35 — 39  to  their  final  glorifying  as  involved  in  the  justi- 
fication. Here  the  reference  is  to  God's  great  purpose  in  Christ,  and  the  apostle 
challenges  an  answer  to  his  question,  "  If  God  is  for  us,  who  is  against  us  ?  "  Nay, 
God's  purpose  is  irrefragable.  And  what  a  pledge  has  he  given  of  his  intent  to  carry 
out  that  purpose  to  the  uttermost !  "  He  spared  not  his  own  Son  "  Surely,  therefore, 
in  him  all  things  are  ours.  Let  us  consider,  then,  what  are  the  "  all  things  "  that  we 
needj  and  what  is  our  assurance  that  God  wiU  give  them. 

I.  Ouit  NEED.  Ours  is  a  triple  need — of  guidance,  grace,  and  glory.  1.  Guidance. 
A  venture  has  been  made  upon  a  new  career.  Is  it  a  venture  ?  and  may  we  possibly 
find  ourselves  in  endless  mazes  lost  ?  Or  are  we  not  sure,  rather,  of  the  leading  of  an 
unseen  hand  ?  "  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  thy  counsel."  (1)  Belief.  As  an  essential 
requisite  of  advancement  in  salvation,  God  will  give  knowledge  of  his  truth.  How 
immense  is  the  potency  of  ideas !  A  false  idea  will  sway  a  world  to  its  destruction ; 
a  true  idea  will  impel  men  with  mighty  progress  in  the  way  of  life.  So  is  it  in  the 
way  of  the  Christian  life :  zeal  may  hasten  men  to  all  vigorous  endeavour,  but  zeal 
without  knowledge  may  make  their  endeavours  futile,  or  even  ruinous.  A  prejudice, 
an  error,  may  dwarf,  or  even  vitiate,  our  Christian  character  and  work  ;  a  true  belief,  a 
real  knowledge,  will  be  our  strength  and  conquest.  But  how  liable  we  are  to  prejudice 
and  error!  How  insuflicient  is  our  intellect  for  grasping  truth!  We  may  so  easily 
follow  false  lights.  No  ;  "  Thou  ehalt  guide  me."  The  God  who  calls  will  lead,  and 
he  will  lead  our  thought,  our  knowledge,  our  belief,  if  we  rightly  seek  his  help.  Use  of 
•11  available  means  presupposed — self-training,  experience,  God's  Word.  A  right  spirit 
also — ^humble,  teachable,  true.  Then  not  far  astray.  (2)  Growth.  The  truth  is  as 
food,  and  our  appropriation  of  it  must  be  followed  by  true  growth  of  Christian  cha- 
racter. But  the  growth  needs  to  be  watched  and  tended ;  the  application  of  the  truth 
to  our  own  hearts  needs  care.  Illustrate  food  and  bodily  health ;  but  how  much  more 
the  spiritual!  God  gives  wisdom  to  use  knowledge,  and  above  all  he  himaelf  guides 
the  upward  growth.  (3)  Life.  As  with  the  character,  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart, 
so  with  the  life,  the  outer  man.  Principles  may  be  formed ;  but  the  application  of 
principles  in  practice  yet  remains.  And  how  multifarious  the  applications!  how  com- 
plex! how  sometimes  conflicting!  We  need  to  seek  all  help  that  right  knowledge 
affords,  a  well-informed  conscience.  But  also  we  need  the  intuitive  perception,  the  pure 
intent,  which  itself  is  often  the  surest  guide ;  the  right  spiritual  instinct.  In  either 
wav  the  life  shall  have  guidance  of  the  God  that  leads  us.    2.  Orace.    If  we  neeo 


CH.  vra.  1—39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  243 

direction,  do  we  cot  also  need  active  help  ?  for  we  are  not  only  fallible,  but  frail.  (1) 
The  grace  of  life  shall  be  given.  All  the  power  of  love  which  constitutes  oar  spiritual 
life  shall  be  supplied  by  him.  His  Spirit  is  within  us;  we  are  led  by  himself  to  him- 
self. (2)  The  grace  of  conquest  also.  All  power,  as  well  negatively  towards  evil  as 
positively  towards  good.  Whatever  oppositions  there  may  be  to  our  spiritual  well- 
being,  we  shall  conquer  through  his  love,  (a)  Actively :  as  pressing  our  way  through 
temptation;  (b)  passively:  we  learn  to  suffer  and  be  strong.  3.  Qlory.  While 
guidance  and  grace  are  given  to  conduct  us  to  the  glory,  the  glory  itself  is  sure.  (1) 
Perfect  purity :  all  possibility  of  sin  then  done  away ;  all  fulness  of  good.  (2)  Perfect 
manhood :  our  outward  and  inward  nature  harmonized.  (3)  A  perfect  world :  our 
habitation  and  our  nature  then  at  one. 

II.  Our  pledge.  But  how  know  we  that  these  things  shall  be  given  ?  The  pledge 
is  twofold :  God's  purpose — "  Grod  is  for  us ; "  God's  gift — "  He  spared  not  his  own 
Son."  1.  Ood  initiates  salvation.  Not  begged  of  him  by  us ;  not  procured  by  a  third. 
"  Of  his  own  will."  If  he  begins  to  work,  he  will  finish.  2.  Ood  gives  the  supreme 
Oift.  The  very  life  :  his  Son ;  himself.  Hence  all  suhordinate  gifts  will  be  given.  "Is 
not  the  life  more  than  meat  ?  "  3.  Ood  loves  with  such  a  love.  Beyond  our  thought. 
But  more  than  all  which  the  analogy  suggests :  "  his  own  Son." 

"  How  then  shall  he  not,"  etc.  ?  Argue  the  matter  to  yourselves.  He  gave  his  Son 
for  me  1    And  then — 

"  All,  all  he  hath  for  mine  I  claim ; 
I  dare  believe  in  Jesu's  Name  I " 

T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  33,  84. — The  triumphant  challenge.  He  has  asked  the  general  question,  chal- 
lenging an  answer :  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  He  now  proceeds  to 
two  special  questions,  the  first  of  which  has  reference  to  the  justification  of  believers  by 
God.  In  view  of  that  he  asks,  "Who  shall  lay  anything  to  their  charge?  who  shall 
condemn  ?  "  And  again,  amplifying  the  fact  of  their  justification,  he  tells  of  the  death, 
the  resurrection,  the  ascension,  the  intercession,  of  Christ  Je.sus,  as  the  pledge  and 
declaration  of  their  acquittal.  We  may  consider  the  possible  sources  of  charge  against 
God's  people,  and  their  triumphant  vindication. 

I.  The  charge.  To  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  now  no  condemnation, 
and  yet  whispers  of  condemnation  may  again  and  again  be  heard.  1.  The  transgres- 
sions of  the  past  may  come  to  mind  with  such  force  as  to  destroy  our  joy  in  God.  Past 
irreparable,  and  though  first  consciousness  of  free  forgiveness  of  God  may  almost  blot 
it  from  our  memory  for  the  time,  yet  there  are  times  when  it  seems  to  live  again,  and 
so  vividly  that  we  can  hardly  detach  the  thought  of  overwhelming  guilt  as  still  upon 
us.  2.  The  imperfections  of  the  present.  How  far  from  the  perfectness  of  the  ideal ! 
And  how  the  very  growth  of  earnestness  and  increase  of  endeavour  seem  to  make  the 
ideal  more  distant  still!  So  conscience,  the  Law,  the  adversary,  and  accusing  men 
(see  Beet,  in  loc.)  may  make  us  feel  condemned. 

II.  The  vindication.  But  the  condemnation  is  not  real;  it  exists  only  in  the 
diseased  imagination.  Let  it  be  brought  face  to  face  with  the  great  facts  of  the  gospel, 
and  it  must  vanish  quite  away.  What  are  these  facts  ?  1.  The  great  central  fact  is 
that  we  are  God's  chosen  ones ;  and  who  shall  dispute  God's  choice  ?  Not  that  he  ever 
can  act  without  reason ;  but,  whether  we  see  the  reason  or  not,  we  are  elect,  the  elect  ot 
God,  as  being  his  people,  and  who  shall  gainsay  it  ?  2.  This  great  election  is  declared 
by  his  justification  of  the  believer,  which  has  gone  abroad  in  the  gospel  to  all  the 
world  :  "  He  that  believeth  is  not  condemned."  3.  And  even  the  reasons  of  the  election 
of  believers  are  graciously  made  known,  and  graciously  confirmed:  Christ's  death, 
resurrection,  exaltation,  and  intercession.  (1)  The  death  of  Christ,  as  the  great  Pro- 
pitiation for  the  sins  of  the  world,  utterly  does  away  all  guilt  to  those  who  sincerely 
receive  it  by  faith.  As  the  Son  of  God,  he  thus  sets  forth  the  infinite  love  of  a  GKxi 
who  laid  down  his  life  for  our  sake ;  as  Son  of  man,  making  reconciliation  for  the  sins 
of  the  people,  he  appeals  on  our  behalf  even  to  the  infinite  justice  for  our  acquittal. 
And  though  we  may  still  be  frail,  and  sin  may  cleave  to  us,  yet,  if  we  are  sincere  in 
our  faith,  that  atonement  avails  for  all  things  and  for  ever.  (2)  The  resurrection  n 
Christ,  following  after  the  expiation,  is  God's  sure  aetting-forlh  of  the  value  of  t' 


244  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS,    [oh.  viii.  1—39. 

expiation,  and  the  effectiveness  of  the  finished  sacrifice.  "  Kaised  for  [i.e.  because  of] 
our  justification  "  (ch.  iv.  25).  (3)  The  exaltation,  as  the  resurrection  completed,  is 
the  completing  of  the  guarantee  that  we  are  accepted  in  him.  '  And  he  is  our  Fore- 
runner. (4)  The  intercession,  as  the  work  of  the  exalted  High  Priest,  is  the  continuous 
application  of  the  atoning  work,  in  itself  for  ever  finished  and  for  ever  guaranteed. . 
For  returning  prodigals,  and  for  us  with  our  frailties  who  have  believed,  he  "  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession,"  and  is  therefore  "  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost." 

Oh,  then,  whether  we  look  to  God  who  has  chosen  and  justified  us,  or  to  him  whom 
God  hath  set  forth  as  a  Propitiation,  and  again  declared  to  be  his  Son,  well-pleasing 
and  beloved,  by  the  raising  from  the  dead ;  whether  we  regard  God  in  Christ  as  the 
Source  of  our  salvation,  as  the  Bfiecter  of  salvation,  or  as  the  Mauifester  of  salvation  ; 
whether  we  think  of  the  past,  the  present,  or  the  future  in  Christ ; — in  any  case  we  can 
take  up  the  triumphant  challenge  given  us  by  Paul,  "  It  is  God  that  justifleth ;  who  is 
he  that  shall  condemn  ?    It  is  Christ  Jesus,"  etc. — T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  35 — 39. — The  great  persuasion.  This  second  special  question  which  Paul  asks 
has  reference  to  that  final  glorifying  of  believers  by  God,  that  perfect  conformation  to 
the  image  of  his  Son,  which  is  the  import  of  his  purpose  concerning  them,  the  goal 
of  all  his  working.  The  "  love  of  Christ,"  or  the  "love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord,"  is  represented  as  laying  hold  of  them  with  a  firm  grasp,  to  rescue  them, 
from  death,  and  to  raise  them  to  perfect  newness  of  life ;  and  the  apostle  asks,  in  view 
of  all  possible  evils  which  might  seem  to  threaten  the  accomplishment  of  such  purpose, 
assuming,  of  course,  their  own  continued  loyalty  of  heart,  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from 
the  love  of  Christ  ?  "  and,  as  he  recapitulates  all  actual  or  imagined  perils,  the  ready 
answer  still  breaks  forth  from  his  lips, "  Nought,  nought  shall  separate  us  from  the  love 
of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord ! "  We  have,  then,  here  for  our  consideration 
— love ;  love's  hindrances ;  love's  triumph. 

I.  Love.  The  great  truth,  great  beyond  all  others,  fundamental  to  all  others ;  the 
truth  to  which  all  the  revelations  were  designed  t&  lead,  and  in  which  they  culminate ; 
the  truth  set  forth  so  wondrously  in  the  life  and  death  ot  Christ,  is  this,  that  "God  is 
love."  This  love  was  manifest  in  man's  creation,  and  in  the  rich  resources  of  man's 
world,  furnished  for  man's  sake  with  such  liberal  lavishment ;  it  was  manifest  yet  more 
in  man's  retlemption,  and  in  the  rich  resources  of  man's  spiritual  world,  prepared  and 
furnished  for  man  with  infinite  tenderness.  And  how  has  it  not  been  manifest  to  each 
of  the  called  ones,  laying  hold  of  them,  lifting  them  from  the  depths,  setting  them 
even  now  in  heavenly  places,  and  destining  them,  as  joint-heira  with  Christ,  to  all  the 
hi  ssedness  of  an  immortal  future ! 

II.  Love's  hindbabcbs.  But  this  love  has  its  seeming  hindrances;  shall  they 
obstruct  the  accom|)lishment  of  its  designs?  1.  Death  and  life.  (1)  Death  was  no 
fancied  evil  then ;  for,  as  he  tells  us,  it  was  only  too  true  that  "  for  God's  sake  they  were 
killed  all  the  day  long,  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter."  And  in  another  place 
he  speaks  of  being,  as  it  were,  "  appointed  to  death  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  9).  And  again  (1  Cor. 
XV.  31)  he  says,  "  I  die  daily."  Not  mere  talk,  for  we  know  how  in  reality  this  was  the 
seal  of  their  witness-bearing.  The  Roman  Christians,  in  after-times — in  what  terrors 
was  not  death  arrayed  to  them  ?  As  under  Nero.  And  so  whenever  the  beast — the  brute 
power  of  ungodliness — has  made  war  with  the  saints  (Rev.  xiii.  7).  And  even  now  in 
the  forefront  of  the  conflict  there  is  death  for  Christ's  sake ;  and  to  all  there  is  the  dread 
dying  that  sooner  or  later  must  end  this  mortal  strife.  (2)  But  the  life  itself  is  filled 
with  jeopardy.  Perhaps  really  more  trying  test  than  any  martyrdom :  latter  once  for 
all,  and  glory  round  it ;  former  protracted  and  commonplace,  (o)  Positively :  dangers 
and  diflScultles  of  circumstance  and  event ;  moral  diflSculties,  as  world's  reproach,  and 
opposing  one's  self  to  stream  of  custom ;  and  difiiculties  relating  to  one's  own  patient 
continuance  in  well-doing.  (6)  Negatively:  the  allurements  of  temptation;  repetition 
of  primal  fall.  Thus  life  perpetually  tries  us.  2.  Angels  and  principalities.  Eph.  vi. 
opens  our  eyes  to  the  tremendous  forces  arrayed  against  us.  So  Bunyan's  allegory  no 
fiction.  There  is  a  real,  objective  opposition  of  "  spiritual  wickedness"  against  us,  and 
of  what  strength  and  subtlety  who  shall  say  ?  And  through  the  medium  of  the  strength 
and  authority  of  the  "powers"  of  this  world;  as  Roman  emperors.  3.  Height  and 
depth.    Great  exaltation,  of  this  life  or  of  the  spiritual  life,  has  its  besetting  teuipta- 


OH.  vni.  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  'JHE  ROMANS.  845 

tions :  so  Paul  himself  (2  Cor.  xii.)  in  danger  of  being  "  exalted  above  measure."  Great 
depression  or  abasement  has  likewise  its  perils :  rebellion,  or  despair.  4.  Things  present 
and  things  to  come.  Boding  fears  often  worse  than  actual  fightings.  So  we  may  "  die 
a  thousand  deaths  in  fearing  one."  5.  Any  other  creation.  The  apostle  has  been  hint- 
incr  at  a  new  creation,  when  the  true  Paradise  shall  be  restored.  But  if  the  former 
Paradise  was  so  perilous,  and  this  creation  now  has  so  many  perils,  what  may  not  the 
new  creation  bring  ?     Shall  t^at  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ? 

IIL  Love's  triumph.  Shall  these  things  separate  us  from  God's  love  ?  Nay,  God's 
love  is  too  strong ;  and  God's  gifts,  already  given,  are  too  great.  And,  indeed,  those 
things  all  enter  into  the  working  of  God's  purpose,  and  therefore  cannot  break  it.  Nay, 
more :  if  they  enter  into  the  working  of  that  purpose,  they  shall  actually  subserve  it ; 
and  so  we  shall  not  only  conquer,  but  more  than  conquer  (ver.  28) ;  for  that  which  is 
against  us  shall  become  for  us,  evil  shall  be  transformed  to  good,  our  enemies  shall 
become  unwitting  friends.  "  More  than  conquerors  I "  Of  our  entry  into  life  they  sweP 
the  triumph  (illustrate  by  triumph  of  Roman  generals),  and  so  an  entrance  is  ministered 
to  us  abundantly  into  the  everlasting  kingdom. 

Let  this  be  our  persuasion,  our  faith ;  so  shall  we  be  strong,  and  at  last  we  shall 
realize  the  victory  which  is  even  now  assured. — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  1 — 4, — "No  condemnation."  This  is  a  glorious  beginning  to  a  glorious  chapter. 
As  in  some  great  musical  work,  we  can  tell  its  character  from  the  opening  ban.  The 
apostle,  having  been  treating  some  of  the  darkest  human  problems,  delights  to  emerge 
into  the  brightness  of  the  new  condition  achieved  for  our  fallen  humanity  by  Christ 
Jesus. 

I.  How  CLOSE  IS  THE  UNION  BETWEEN  Chbibt  AND  HIS  PEOPLE  I  The  preposition 
"in  "  denotes  an  altered  state,  men  no  longer  reckoning  themselves  accovding  to  their 
genealogy  from  Adam,  but  as  grafted  into  the  stock  of  Christ.  It  is  not  hearing  merely 
of  the  gospel,  but  being  vitally  united  to  its  Author,  deriving  life  from  him,  as  the 
branches  in  the  vine  are  nourished  by  its  sap.  Or,  as  the  apostle  puts  it  in  ch.  vii.,  we 
are  "married  to"  Christ,  made  "members  of  his  flesh,  of  his  body  and  of  his  bones." 
The  relationship  is  effected  on  God's  side  by  his  Spirit,  on  man's  side  by  repentance 
and  faith.  No  other  religion  claims  such  an  intimate  association  to  exist  between  its 
founder  and  its  votaries.  The  union  is  mystical,  but  very  real.  Christ  is  our  City  of 
refuge  from  the  avenger,  our  Aik  of  salvation,  our  Haven  of  peace.  "  Abide  in  me  "  is 
his  cheering  counsel  to  all  his  disciples. 

II.  It   IB   IMPOSSIBLE   FOB    QoD   TO   CONDEMN   THOSE    WHO   ABB   THUS    UNITED   TO  HIS 

Son.  This  would  mean  severing  himself  from  the  Son  of  his  love.  He  did  conceal  his 
presence  from  the  crucified  One,  but  only  for  a  season.  "  God  hid  his  face,  but  held  him 
by  the  hand."  The  Saviour  said,  "Father,  into  thy  hands,"  etc.  The  resurrection  was 
the  seal  of  God's  approbation  of  the  Messiah's  career.  And  Christ's  people,  by  their 
faith  in  the  Redeemer,  virtually  place  his  Person  and  work  between  themselves  and  the 
condemnatory  Law.  Though  metaphors  are  inadequate,  we  may  assert  that  justice 
cannot  demand  a  double  payment.  If  Christ  our  Representative  was  accepted  and 
glorified,  we  may  triumphantly  await  the  judgment.  The  very  "weakness  of  the 
flesh  "  which  made  the  Law  unable  to  condemn  sin  was  compelled,  in  the  incarnation 
of  Jesus  Christ,  to  show  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  which  tried  to  seduce  him  ftom 
holiness,  and,  failing,  wounded  him  unto  death.  In  the  flesh  was  an  offering  made  for 
sin,  demonstrating  the  guilt  of  human  nature,  and  yet  redeeming  it  from  the  deserved 
penalty.  As  the  "  hue  and  cry,"  or  the  preparation  of  the  scaffold  for  the  execution  of 
some  sentenced  wretch,  does  not  alarm  the  innocent,  so  the  threatenings  of  the  law  of 
sin  and  death  do  not  concern  or  terrify  those  who  have  received  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of 
life.  We  are  not  saved  by  understanding  accurately  the  rationale  of  the  plan  of  Divine 
mercy ;  but  to  be  able,  like  the  apostle,  to  see  the  truth  grounded  on  an  adequate  founda- 
tion, is  to  feel  our  feet  on  the  granite  rock  which  no  wave  of  wrath's  sea  can  shake. 

IIL  The  eightbousness  of  life  secured  by  union  with  Christ  renders  con- 
demnation IMPOSSIBLE.  The  apostle  spealis  .strongly  of  the  requirements  of  the  moral 
law  being  "fulfilled"  in  Christians.  They  walk  no  longer  "after  the  flesh,  but  after 
the  Spirit."  Thus  the  Law  sees  its  end  accomplished,  its  goal  reached.  The  affections 
are  placed  on  things  above,  the  thoughts  are  cleansed,  the  will  is  submissive  to  tlie 


246  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  viii.  1—39. 

dictates  of  God.  The  most  rigid  code  could  not  produce  holiness.  But  to  love  Christ, 
to  learn  of  him,  to  walk  in  him,  is  to  cut  up  sin  at  the  roots.  Christ  is  not  only  a 
Pattern  of  obedience,  but  a  Powjar  to  his  associates,  enabling  them  to  become  like 
him,  "fulfilling  all  righteousness.'  The  husk  of  the  Law  being  stript  off,  the  kernel 
is  acknowledged  to  be  "  just  and  good."  If  the  Law  ventured  to  prefer  a  complaint 
against  the  infirmities  and  failings  of  Christians,  all  objection  is  banished  by  the  assur- 
ance of  the  Master  that  his  scholars  shall  grow  in  grace  and  knowledge  till  they  are 
not  only  saints  in  name,  but  in  character  and  deed.  They  shall  be  presented  faultless 
before  the  throne  of  judgment. — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  6. — Tlie  spiritual  and  the  carnal  man.  Religion  may  be  judged  of  from  within 
or  without — from  the  character  it  forms  or  the  actions  to  which  it  gives  rise.  Only 
the  latter  can  properly  come  under  the  survey  of  our  fellows,  whilst  we  may  discern 
the  inward  effects.  Besides  ourselves,  only  Grod  can  determine  our  inner  condition. 
The  Searcher  of  hearts  can  unlock  the  private  door  of  the  heart.  It  is  well  for  us,  with- 
out self-flattery  or  self-depreciation,  to  anticipate  the  disclosures  of  the  last  day.  No 
■njise  man  wishes  to  deceive  himself. 

I.  Two  MAMETEicALLT  OPPOSITE  DISPOSITIONS.  We  may  be  spiritually  or  carnally 
minded.  The  "mind"  of  the  Revised  Version  suggests  too  much  the  rational  part  of 
our  nature ;  "  mindedness  "  would  perhaps  be  preferable. "  We  are  to  think  of  what  the 
Spirit  has  a  mind  to,  and  what  the  flesh.  The  "  minding"  is  what  a  man  thinks  of, 
aims  at,  cares  for.  The  spiritually  minded  man  is  one  in  whom  the  Spirit  is.supreme. 
The  Holy  Spirit  has  breathed  upon  the  soul,  giving  a  new  impulse  from  God,  so  that 
the  spirit  of  man  asserts  its  rightful  position,  bringing  the  lower  passions  under  control. 
Though  not  without  a  struggle,  the  flesh  has  to  yield.  He  discerns  the  excellence  of 
spiritual  ohjects.  He  recognizes  in  the  Scriptures  a  message  from  the  Most  High.  He 
thinks  of  God  with  veneration  and  affection ;  he  respects  the  blessings  of  salvation  and 
of  the  life  to  come.  Be  delights  in  spiritual  exercises,  deeming  them  not  a  round  of 
duties,  but  of  enjoyments.  He  flies  to  them  as  »  refuge  from  cares  and  anxieties. 
Whilst  he  meditates,  the  dove  of  peace  broods  over  the  turbulent  waters,  and  there  is 
a  great  calm.  The  fleshly  man  is  deaf  to  the  charms  of  spiritual  melody,  and  blind 
to  the  glory  of  the  spiritual  sunrise.  He  turns  all  the  events  of  life  to  spiritual  pur- 
poses. Plasts  may  have  the  same  air  and  moisture  and  soil,  yet  they  embody  the  results 
according  to  their  separate  individuality ;  as  animals  from  similar  food  produce  hair  or 
wool,  or  bodies  of  diverse  structure  and  capability.  So  two  men  may  witness  the  same 
scene  or  road,  the  same  paragraph ;  yet  how  different  the  emotions !  The  one  loathes 
wickedness,  the  other  gloats  over  the  garbage.  To  mind  the  things  of  the  Spirit  is  to 
draw  instruction  from  every  event,  to  turn  the  mercies  of  God  into  praise,  and  his 
judgments  into  matter  for  humiliation.  Temptations  make  such  a  man  more  watchful, 
afflictions  contribute  to  his -advancement,  as  the  flower  climbs  even  by  a  thorn.  We 
do  not  deny  that  worldly  minded  men  occasionally  turn  their  thoughts  to  the  spiritual 
realm ;  but  this  is  accidental,  and  does  not  accord  with  their  ordinary  behaviour,  so  as  to 
flow  spontaneously  from  the  inner  life.  What  makes  men  doubt  the  contrariety  is  that 
dispositions  and  actions  shade  into  one  another,  constituting  at  times  a  sort  of  neutral 
borderland,  where  it  is  difficult  to  say  which  is  flesh  and  which  Spirit.  Yet  darkness 
is  not  light,  nor  poverty  riches,  nor  is  vice  an  infiuitesimal  degree  of  virtue ;  there  is  a 
radical  distinction. 

II.  The  certain  misbbt  op  the  one  state.  "  The  minding  of  the  flesh  is  death." 
It  overturns  all  proper  order.  The  lower  appetites  are  ruling ;  the  pyramid  is  inverted, 
and  a  fall  is  certain.  Wheie  the  rabble  revolt  and  reign,  anarchy  liads  to  dissolution 
of  all  prosperity.  It  fights  against  Divine  Law.  "The  carnal  mind  is  not  subject  to 
the  Law  of  God ; "  it  may  prudently  regard  the  Law  so  as  to  secure  greater  indulgence, 
but  it  docs  not  voluntaiily  submit  or  embrace  the  Law  gladly.  All  the  laws  of  God 
are  for  the  good  of  his  creatures ;  they  are  for,  not  against,  the  spiritual  life.  Men  can- 
not come  into  conflict  with  the  laws  of  their  being  without  harm  and  loss.  Death  is 
the  visible  effect  in  all  departments.  Vice  ruins  the  physical  constitution;  unjust  acts 
disintegrate  civil  society ;  the  pursuance  of  evil  blunts  the  perception  of  moral  good,  and 
(leadens  the  conscience ;  and  even  Christians,  through  sin,  may  become  callous  to  the 
spiritual — "  having  a  name  to  live,  and  being  dead."     These  are  the  beginnings,  quite 


OH.  VIII.  1—39.]    THE  EPISl'LE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  247 

8u£5cient  to  show  the  terrible  possibility  of  becoming  altogether  fleshly,  choosing  evil 
deliberately  as  good.  As  men  long  immm'ed  in  prison  may  lose  all  desire  for  liberty, 
deeming  the  light  of  day  painful  and  fellowship  irksome,  so  does  it  kill  all  the  rational 
longings  and  stifle  the  highest  faculties  of  the  soul  to  be  continually  in  bondage  to  the 
bodily  appetites. 

III.  The  necessary  blessedness  op  the  otheb  state.  To  be  in  Christ  is  to  be 
a  new  creation,  where  the  thrill  of  young  life  fills  the  being  with  joyous  hope  of  yet 
better  things  to  come.  There  are  new  desires,  new  resolves  made,  new  occupations 
entered  upon.  The  boy  that  refuses  to  tell  a  lie  may  suffer,  yet  is  glad  within ;  and 
the  victor  over  temptation  knows  what  it  is  for  the  angels  to  minister  to  him.  There 
is  a  happy  consciousness  that  we  are  on  the  right  path,  that  there  is  harmony  between 
us  and  our  Maker.  The  reality  of  life  is  manifested  by  its  fruits,  against  which  there 
is  no  law,  no  nentence  of  death.  This  life  is  accompanied  by  the  tranquil  satisfaction 
of  peace,  the  panacea  for  daily  irritations.  Not  the  deceitful  calm  of  opiate  slumber, 
nor  the  stagnation  of  a  festering  pool ;  but  a  flowing  stream,  gliding  by  smiling  orchards 
and  productive  industries.  He  has  "  life  and  peace  "  whose  "  conversation  is  in  heaven," 
for  such  is  not  swayed  by  the  customs  of  the  hour,  nor  ruffled  by  the  accidents  of  the 
dav.  Take  from  the  Christian  what  you  please,  you  cannot  rob  him  of  this  holy 
serenity.  Not  death  can  strip  him  of  his  comfort ;  he  has  "  a  house  not  made  with 
hands,"  his  honour  stands  npt  in  the  breath  of  man,  his  treasure  is  not  dug  out  of  the 
bowels  of  theearth.  He  receives  " a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved."  He  lives  when 
all  the  world  is  dead,  is  happy  when  all  the  fountains  of  earthly  pleasure  are  dried  up. 
— S.  E.  A. 

Ver.  10. — An  indweUing  Saviour.  Awe-struck  must  Israel  have  been  when  the 
cloud  of  the  Lord  rested  upon  the  tabernacle,  the  sign  of  the  interest  of  Jehovah  in  his 
people  and  of  his  intention  to  dwell  amongst  them.  And  when  the  dedication  of  the 
temple  of  Solomon  was  completed,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house,  the  near- 
ness and  condescension  of  their  God  caused  the  Israelites  to  bow  wjth  their  faces  to  the 
ground,  and  to  praise  the  Lord,  saying,  "  For  he  is  good  :  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever." 
It  was  much  when  the  angelic  messengers  appeared  to  patriarchs  and  prophets,  brighten- 
ing their  homes  for  a  space.  But  how  vast  the  honour  conferred  upon  the  humblest 
Christian  when  the  Son  of  God  fulfils  his  promise  by  not  only  visiting  him,  but  taking 
up  his  abode  in  his  heart  I  The  visit  of  a  sovereign  invests  the  meanest  domicile  with 
interest.  Look  with  wonder,  therefore,  on  the  man  with  whom  the  Deity  is  a  constant 
Guest. 

I.  The  intimacy  of  the  union.  Jesus  employed  the  figure  of  a  vine  to  set  it 
forth.  He  used  the  same  way  of  speaking  as  with  reference  to  the  v/nion  between  hit 
Father  and  himself.  "  At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  ye  in 
me,  and  I  in  you."  Paul,  alluding  to  his  conversion,  said,  "  It  pleased  God  to  reveal  his 
Sion  in  me."  The  heart  of  man  is  pictured  in  Scripture  as  a  house  at  which  the  Saviour 
knocks  for  admission.  Thus  is  the  question  answered,  that  God  will  "  dwell  with  man 
upon  the  earth."  Christ  is  said  to  abide  in  us  when  his  words  are  retained  in  the 
memory  and  acted  upon  in  the  life,  becoming  a  source  of  inspiration  for  high  and  holy 
thoughts  and  deeds.  "  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,"  etc.  Christ 
bestows  upon  his  people  the  gift  of  his  Spirit,  to  be  his  Eepresentative,  the  living,  pre- 
sent Comforter,  "  Hereby  know  we  that  he  abideth  in  us,  by  his  Spirit  which  he  hath 
given  us."  To  aspire  to  such  a  relationship  we  had  never  dared  of  ourselves ;  the  con- 
ception is  manifestly  Divine. 

II.  Some  efeects  op  the  indwellino  of  Christ.  1.  It  is  not  intended  to  nullify 
all  the  natural  results  upon  the  body  of  the  fall  of  man.  "  The  body  is  dead  because  of 
sin."  The  reception  of  Christ  by  faith,  and  the  consequent  obedience  to  his  teachings, 
does  indeed  tend  to  produce  such  temperateness,  industry,  and  contentment  as  are  most 
fitted  to  preserve  the  corporeal  frame  in  pure  and  wholesome  condition  and  to  prolong 
its  existence.  Nevertheless,  the  gospel  does  not  avert  the  operation  of  physical  laws, 
and  longevity  is  not  the  Christian's  chief  aim.  The  youthful  may  pass  away  because 
of  inheriting  a  weak  constitution,  and  their  early  decease  is  not  to  be  regarded  aa 
mysterious,  and  as  a  scourge  from  God's  hand  to  the  sorrowing  relatives.  Every  death 
does  speak  to  us  of  the  evil  of  sin  in  the  race.    The  forcible  wrenching  asunder  of  soul 


248  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  vin.  1— 39. 

and  body  can  never  be  beautiful  to  contemplate.  God  writes  in  dreadful  chnracter  his 
opinion  of  sin.  2.  It  leads  to  the  mortification  of  wrong  desires.  As  the  Messiah  drove 
out  from  his  Father's  house  the  thieves  and  law-breakers  who  polluted  the  sanctuary,  so  he 
cannot  enter  the  temple  of  the  soul  without  vindicating  it  against  profanation  by  unholy 
passions.  "  They  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh."  There  is  a  spiritual  death 
of  the  body  in  the  sense  that  the  Shechinah  of  the  Divine  presence  involves  a  restraint 
upon  corrupt  longings,  a  controlling  of  rebellion  against  the  laws  of  God,  against  unruly 
will  and  envious,  impure  affections.  Inclinations  contrary  to  righteousness  are  not 
henceforth  to  have  their  way,  but  to  be  as  if  dead.  3.  It  vivifies  the  spirit  of  man. 
As  the  sap  invigorates  the  branches,  so  the  power  of  Christ  works  in  us  mightily. 
"  The  Spirit  is  life  because  of  righteousness."  Man's  good  purposes  and  feelings  are 
strengthened,  the  seed  of  life  fructifies,  the  dethroned  spirit  restored  to  supremacy  is 
aided  in  the  government  of  the  kingdom  by  the  auxiliary  forces  of  the  King  of  kings. 
No  unrighteous  confederacy  is  permanent ;  its  union  is  external,  not  internal ;  it  carries 
within  itself  the  germs  of  its  own  decay.  Eighteousness  alone  imites  a  people  in 
strength,  forbidding  discord  and  promoting  progress  and  prosperity.  The  presence  of 
Jesus  conforms  us  to  his  image,  as  friends  grow  like  one  another.  Having  Christ,  we 
have  the  principle  of  life,  of  holiness,  of  perfection ;  work  it  must,  until  it  attains  the 
designed  development.  The  acorn  prophesies  the  oak,  and  the  stainless  spirits  of 
heaven  are  predicted  in  the  saints  of  this  earthly  sphere.  4.  It  promises  a  quickening 
of  the  mortal  body.  In  view  of  the  comparison  instituted  in  ver.  11,  it. is  impossible 
to  restrict  the  interpretation  to  a  merely  spiritual  resurrection.  The  triumph  of  our 
Deliverer  is  not  consummated  till  these  frail  tenements  of  clay  are  freed  from  corruption 
and  glorified.  In  what  the  exact  relationship  or  identity  consists,  we  may  not  know. 
"  Thou  Bowest  not  that  body  that  shall  be,  but  bare  grain.  But  God  giveth  it  a  body 
as  it  pleased  him."  Look  not  on  the  graveyards  as  charnel-houses  of  the  dead,  but  as 
nurseries  where  seeds  of  immortal  plants  are  deposited,  to  bloom  with  undying  vigour 
in  the  heavenly  garden. 

Conclusion.  It  is  our  connection  with  Christ  which  alleviates  affliction.  Through 
him  does  God  educe  good  out  of  evil,  triumphing  over  opposing  forces,  and  making 
sin  to  contribute  to  righteousness,  and  death  to  be  the  gate  of  life.  But  .if  there  be  no 
loving  communion  between  us  and  Christ,  if  we  stand  aloof  from  him,  we  cut  ourselves 
off  from  salvation  and  glory.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  hear  of  the  Saviour ;  we  must 
entrust  ourselves  to  him ;  we  must  entreat  him  to  "  come  in  and  tarry  with  us." 
— S.  B.  A. 

Ver.  14. — The  guidance  of  the  Spirit.  Moses  displayed  a  beautiful  absence  of 
jealousy  when  he  cried,  "  Would  to  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people  were  prophets,  and 
that  the  Lord  would  put  his  Spirit  upon  them!"  His  wish  is  realized  under  the 
Christian  dispensation,  where  "the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal." 
This  gift  is  the  fulfilment  of  Christ's  promise  that  his  disciples  should  not  be  left 
"orphans,"  and  our  investiture  with  his  Spirit  is  a  testimony  to  the  efficacy  of  the 
work  of  Christ.  The  Spirit  operates  silently  but  powerfully  on  the  heart;  though 
unseen,  his  presence  is  most  real.  Science  acquaints  us  with  subtle  forces  that  work  on 
matter.  Place  a  bar  of  steel  in  the  magnetic  meridian  with  the  north  end  downward, 
and,  if  struck  with  a  wooden  mullet,  the  bar  will  be  magnetized.  No  outward  difference 
is  perceptible,  yet  the  particles  have  assmned  a  uniform  direction,  have  acquired  new 
properties.  So  does  the  Spirit  impart  a  new  tendency,  a  new  nature,  and  the  whole 
man  is  changed.  The  Spirit  works  not  like  the  influences  of  our  environment  from 
without  inwardly,  but  from  within  outwardly. 

I.  Tub  leading  for  which  that  op  the  Spirit  is  substituted.  It  is  called 
"  self,"  or  "  the  flesh,"  where  the  inimical  power  of  the  great  adversary  is  the  chief 
factor.  The  aim  of  the  life  may  not  be  clear  to  the  man  possessed.  He  may  seem  to 
have  no  definable  object  of  pursuit;  led  on  now  by  one  impulse,  now  by  another,  its 
force  and  persistency  varying  in  all  degrees.  Some  rely  on  their  own'  native  wisdom 
for  the  steerage  of  their  course,  others  are  governed  by  the  maxims  and  customs  of  the 
Bociety  in  which  they  move.  The  "  spirit  of  the  age  "  is  a  prevalent  controlling  force. 
In  proportion  as  any  one  goal  is  kept  in  view,  and  "  reached  forth  to  "  perseveringly, 
is  the  man  estec.nic  d  strung  aud  successful.     And  the  Christian  in  strong  according  to 


CH.  vin.  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  249 

the  heartiness  and  fidelity  with  which  he  surrenders  himself  to  the  guidance  of  the 
Spirit.     He  acknowledges  that  "  it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps." 

II.  The  koad  travelled  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  a  heaven- 
ward journey ;  the  affections  are  "  set  on  things  above."  It  begins  with  taking  up  the 
cross  to  follow  Christ,  and  implies  self-denial  in  order  to  please  God.  It  is  a  pilgrim- 
age. This  world  is  not  our  rest,  or  our  final  home.  It  involves  a  warfare,  for  many  foes 
beset  our  path,  and  there  is  no  turning  aside  to  By-path  Meadows  for  the  man  under 
the  influence  of  the  Spirit.  How  the  natural  life  is  glorified  and  transfigured  by  this 
conception  of  the  unseen  hand  impelling  us  1  No  man  is  ever  harmed  by  the  Spirit's 
leading,  and  if  he  falls  into  a  snare  it  is  because  he  has  mistaken  the  Divine  indications 
of  his  route. 

III.  AscEBTAiNiNG  THE  MIND  OP  THE  SpiKiT.  We  are  not  led  blindfold  and 
irresistibly;  the  reason  is  illumined,  the  emotions  are  quickened.  All  that  strengthens 
the  spiritual  life  contributes  to  the  clearness  with  which  we  recognize  the  Spirit's 
prompting,  and  to  the  readiness  with  which  we  yield  to  his  gentlest  touch.  Prayer 
keeps  open  the  communication  with  the  spiritual  realm.  Ask  for  guidance  before,  not 
after,  commencing  an  enterprise;  nor  expect  the  Holy  Spirit  to  come  in  as  a  deus  ex 
machind  to  rectify  your  errors.  Compare  your  judgment  and  conduct  with  the 
precepts  and  principles  of  Scripture,  and  with  the  example  of  good  men,  especially  of 
Jesus  Christ.  We  are  taught  in  his  school.  Like  an  artist  intently  studying  some 
work  of  genius  and  imbibing  its  spirit,  so  meditate  on  Christ  till  you  catch  his  enthu- 
siasm for  goodness  and  consecration  to  the  will  of  God.  Make  the  most  of  the  seasons 
when  you  are  blessedly  conscious  that  you  are  "  in  the  Spirit,"  be  it  on  "  the  Lord's 
day  "  or  any  other.  It  is  sin  that  darkens  our  spiritual  perceptions,  as  some  accident 
to  the  body  may  blunt  the  finer  sensations,  may  dull  the  hearing  and  dim  the  sight. 

IV.  The  family  likeness  which  this  guidance  impabtb.  The  Spirit  of  God  enables 
us  to  realize  our  sonship.  Hatred  and  disobedience  and  fear  are  exchanged  for  glad  com- 
munion and  willing  service.  We  become  increasingly  like  our  Father,  like  our  elder 
Brother  Christ,  and  like  the  rest  of  the  redeemed  children.  It  is  not  identical  same- 
ness, but  similarity,  which  results.  Members  of  the  same  home  may  differ  much  in 
exact  lineaments,  yet  the  stranger  can  discern  a  family  likeness.  By  his  Spirit  is  the 
Saviour  preparing  his  brethren  for  their  heavenly  home,  to  enter  with  intelligent  zest 
into  its  enjoyments,  the  society  of  the  angels  and  of  the  blest,  into  holier  worship  and 
higher  service  than  we  can  render  here. — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  19. — 3%e  Christian  apocalypse.  The  kin<;dom  of  God  is  a  kingdom  of  progress ; 
"  forward  "  is  its  wa'chword.  That  outgoing  of  (he  character  of  God  which  constitutes 
big  works  and  laws  cannot  be  other  than  an  advance.  For  God  to  retrograde  is  impos- 
sible. In  Judaism  at  its  brightest  period,  the  eyes  of  the  noblest  men  directed  their  vision 
to  better  days  to  come.  The  saints  "died  in  faith,"  not  having  received  the  promises, 
but  embracing  them  afar  off.  And  to-day  the  Christian,  much  as  he  loves  to  read  of  the 
illustrious  sacrifice  of  himself  on  earth  of  the  Son  of  God,  regarding  the  events  of  that 
earthly  sojourn  as  the  foundation  of  his  hope  and  religion,  yet  st^hs  not  for  a  return 
of  past  wonders,  but  believes  in  a  more  glorious  unveiling  of  the  plan  of  God.  Times 
of  apparent  defeat  and  huniiliation  are  but  valleys  to  be  traversed  in  ascending  to  the 
topmost  mountain-peak. 

I.  The  goal  of  expectation.  "Tlie  revealing  of  the  sons  of  God."  The  sons  are 
at  present  in  obscurity.  The  statue  is  partially  hidden,  its  proportions  are  visible,  but 
we  shall  hereafter  discern  its  lustrous  beauty  and  perfection,  complete,  unstained. 
Princes,  heirs  to  the  throne,  may  be  for  a  season  in  poor  habiliments  and  amid  mean 
surroundings;  but  they  are  to  be  brought  forth  like  Joash,  to  be  crowned  as  kings  and 
priests  unto  God.  God  has  given  us  "the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit."  As  when  a 
friend  despatches  his  carriage  and  servants  and  son  to  conduct  us  with  all  honour  to  his 
house,  so  God  has  sent  his  Spirit  into  the  hearts  of  his  children — the  earnest  of  the 
joys  of  heaven.  Sweet  voices  whisper  a  coming  state  of  larger  possibilities  and  nobler 
felicity.  The  davra  heralds  a  cloudless  day.  We  "  wait  for  the  redemption  of  the 
body,"  the  removal  of  every  trace  of  sin,  the  deliverance  from  every  yoke,  the  com- 
plete abolition  of  death.  Here  a  mean  presence  may  conceal  a  beautiful  personality ; 
there  the  body  shall  be  the  out-flashing  glory  of  the  perfected  spirit,  as  at  the  Trans- 


250  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  vui.  1— 39. 

figuration  the  soul  of  Christ  in  its  intensity  tinged  with  splendour  the  very  skirts  of 
his  garments. 

II.  The  wholb  oebation  is  intbkbsted  in  this  unvbilino.  With  uplifted  and 
outstretched  head  does  the  "creature"  wait  to  decry  the  long-desired  event.  Genesis 
tells  us  of  the  ground  cursed  for  man's  sake.  Man  was  formed  to  rule  over  the  world, 
but,  unable  to  control  himself,  his  dominion  has  been  broken  in  upon  by  disorder.  And 
the  beasts  have  suffered  through  the  degradation  of  man.  If  the  master  deteriorate,  so 
will  Viis  household.  The  bowling  of  the  dog,  the  moaning  of  the  lion,  the  writhing  of  the 
worm,  the  fluttering  of  the  imprisoned  bird,  all  confirm  the  assertion  of  "  subjection  to 
vanity  unwillingly."  The  poor  brutes  at  the  mercy  of  rough  men  may  well  pant  for  the 
redemption  of  the  sons  of  Grod.  Had  man  continued  upright  and  grown  in  true  wisdom, 
doubtless  the  very  character  of  nature  had  changed  for  the  better.  Then  had  the 
glowing  language  of  Isaiah  been  descriptive  of  common  occurrences :  "  The  wolf  and 
the  lamb  shall  feed  together,  .  .  .  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them."  All  things  in 
God's  universe  are  linked  together.  Man  was  formed  out  of  the  dust  of  the  ground, 
and  we  must  despise  nothing. 

III.  It  is  already  observable  that  the  prevalence  op  Christianity  alle- 
viates THE  hardest  lot.  Many  are  the  philantliropic  agencies  which  owe  their 
origin  to  the  diffusion  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  First  deemed  quixotic,  sentimental,  then 
plausible  and  possible,  and  further  becoming  actual,  the  contrary  has  at  last  come  to 
be  thought  disgraceful  and  unnatural.  More  consideration  is  shown  to  the  lower 
animals.  Earth  yields  up  her  stores  to  investigation,  rejoices  in  the  augmenting  power 
of  man  to  use  her  forces  and  bring  her  marvels  to  light.  That  sympathy  with  nature 
which  modem  poetry  exhibits  was  almost  unknuwn  to  the  ancients.  We  are  learning 
the  language  of  Creation,  interpreting  her  smiles  and  tears.  At  the  death  of  Christ, 
the  association  with  nature's  pangs  was  made  visible  by  the  rending  of  the  rocks  and  the 
darkening  of  the  sun. 

IV.  If  this  tendency  to  amelioration  is  even  now  patent,  what  shall  be  the 
EFFECT  OF  THE  ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  God's  PURPOSES  I  Then  shall  "  parth  be  delivered 
from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God." 
Moses  in  his  song  called  the  "  heavens  to  hear,  and  the  earth  to  give  ear."  Our 
Saviour  showed  his  command  of  the  elements.  Winds  and  waves,  trees,  sickness,  and 
evil  spirits  obeyed  his  word.  In  the  desert  the  wild  beasts  hurt  him  not.  In  anticipa- 
tion of  the  day  when  men  shall  be  like  the  Saviour,  the  psalmist  called  upon  earth  to 
"  make  a  joyful  noise  before  the  Lord.  Let  the  floods  clap  their  hands,  for  lie  cometh 
to  judge  the  earth."  Isaiah  predicted  that  in  Israel's  millennium  "  the  mountains  and 
hills  shall  break  forth  into  singing."  And  in  the  Book  of  Revelation  we  hear  the 
chorus  ot  redeemed  creation :  "  Every  creature  which  is  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and 
under  the  earth,  heard  I  saying.  Blessing  ...  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne, 
and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever."  The  cross  of  Christ  is  the  great  rectifier,  reconciling 
all  things  unto  God.  If  we  cannot  fathom  the  deep  secrets  of  God,  it  is  good,  however, 
for  us  to  meditate  on  the  hints  of  a  widespread  redemption.  There  is  something  in 
the  prospect  which  dwarfs  our  selfish  earthly  plans,  and  ennobles  all  that  is  linked  on 
to  God  and  his  kingdom.  It  makes  the  pains  and  strifes  and  aches  of  the  world 
bearable,  becau-'^e  "  our  redemption  draweth  nigh."  Are  we  doing  aught  as  the  sons 
of  God  to  quicken  the  approach  of  the  apocalypse?  May  our  awaking  be  not  to 
shame  and  everlasting  contempt,  but  to  the  glorious  emancipation  of  redeemed 
humanity ! — S.  R.  A. 

Vers.  24,  25. — Hopeful  patience.  The  Christian,  like  the  rest  of  the  creation,  waits 
for  full  redemption,  but  consciously  and  aspiringly.  He  is  an  heir  who  has  not  yet 
entered  into  the  possession  of  his  inheritance.  He  is  saved  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  and 
is  being  released  from  its  power  His  sun  is  veiled  under  morning  clouds,  and  he 
shall  soon  rejoice  in  cloudless  splendour.  A  state  of  hope  is  the  condition  in  which 
and  the  instrument  by  which  he  works  out  his  complete  salvation. 

I.  Hope  is  exeboised  on  the  dnseen.  What  we  see  is  here  before  us;  what  we 
hope  for  is  still  in  the  future — the  invisible  womb  of  time.  Faith  and  hope  are 
insi^parable  companions ;  where  the  former  is,  the  latter  is  nigh.  Hope  is  faith  in  the 
attitude  of  looking  towards  better  things  to  come.    It  vividly  pictures  the  approaching 


OH.  vin.  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  251 

glory,  and  is  "  the  present  enjoyment  of  future  good."  Christian  hope  is  not  a  mirage 
that  mocks  the  heart,  but  is  surely  grounded  on  the  work  of  Christ,  who  has  revealed 
the  character  of  Groil  and  his  far-reaching  purpose  of  love.  Many  a  man  depending  on 
high  expectations  has  found  them  baseless ;  the  legacy  is  absent,  the  coveted  post  is 
given  to  another.  When  the  sceptic  talks  of  a  bird  in  the  hand  being  preferable  to 
two  in  the  bush,  we  reply  that  by  the  very  nature  of  the  case  Christian  anticipation 
is  precluded  from  being  satisfied  with  the  temporal.  "  We  look  for  new  heavens  and 
a  new  earth." 

IL  Hope  drives  out  dbspaib,  the  fob  of  patibnob.  Where  despondency  grows, 
there  activity  ceases.  What  means  that  sudden  splash,  that  piercing  cry,  except  that 
life  has  been  quenched  because  the  light  of  hope  had  vanished  first?  The  gospel,  by 
its  promise  of  a  free  pardon  for  the  penitent  sinner,  rolls  away  the  burden  from  the 
back,  enables  the  criminal  to  take  heart  of  grace,  and  to  exchange  the  dungeon  of 
dreary  fate  for  the  glad  sunlight  of  a  new  lease  of  endeavour  after  righteousness. 
There  is  a  danger  of  succumbing  to  the  weariness  of  the  long  Christian  journey,  but 
hope  grasps  the  future  and  draws  us  thereto.  Hopeful,  in  the  '  Pilgrim's  Pro<;ress,'  had 
much  ado  to  keep  his  brother's  head  above  the  water ;  but  he  comforted  him  saying, 
"Brother,  I  see  the  gate,  and  men  standing  by  to  receive  us." 

"Hope,  like  the  glimmering  taper's  light, 
Adorns  and  cheers  tlie  way ; 
And  still,  as  darker  gruws  the  night. 
Emits  a  brighter  ray." 

We  are  not  as  Bhipwreoked  mariners,  uncertain  if  any  vessel  shall  pass  near  enough 
to  succour  us ;  we  know  that,  if  we  wait  patiently,  "  he  that  cometh  will  come,  and  will 
not  tarry." 

III.  Hope  fits  the  soul  for  its  futdrb  aebna  of  glort.  For  every  state 
certain  qualifications  are  requisite,  if  we  would  play  a  proper  part  therein.  Dr.  Johnson 
would  like  due  notice  of  Burke's  visits,  that  he  might  prepare  himself  for  the  lofty 
conversation  certain  to  ensue.  The  yonng  lady  prepares  herself  for  the  engagements 
of  society,  and  to  acquit  herself  gracefully  on  her  presentation  at  court.  It  is  the 
hope  of  after-practice  that  inspires  the  labour  of  the  student  barristers  and  doctors. 
The  necessary  waiting  is  a  beneficial  discipline  testing  perseverance  and  fidelity.  The 
disciple  of  Christ  can  abstain  from  worldly  indulgences  because  of  more  cherished 
longings.  He  will  not  barter  away  his  birthright  even  though  faint  with  hunger. 
"  Every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself."  Hope  is  the  great  engine 
of  progress  and  reformation.  Israel  under  Ezra  could  ratify  a  covenant  of  amendment, 
because  "  there  was  hope  for  Israel  concerning  this  thing." — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  26. — Inarticulate  prayer.  One  reason  for  the  lasting  power  of  the  Bible  is  its 
wide-ranging  view  of  life.  It  rims  through  the  whole  gamut  of  feeling,  touches  every 
Btate.  In  this  passage  the  apostle  has  brought  heaven  and  earth  together — has  shown 
that  creation  is  a  unity  waiting  for  a  glorious  consummation.  He  gives  us  truth  fit  to 
be  "  the  master-light  of  all  our  Christian  seeing,  the  guardian  light  of  all  our  doing." 

I.  Our  human  weakness.  "Infirmity"  suggests  not  so  much  the  feebleness  of  the 
babe  from  a  want  of  development,  as  the  prostration  of  illness  through  the  inroad  of 
disease.  Sin  wastes  the  constitution,  and  we  perceive  our  weakness  when  we  proceed 
to  act.  This  is  the  first  stage  of  enlightenment,  to  be  made  conscious  of  helplessness. 
Ours  is  a  condition  of  sighing.  Like  the  rest  of  creation.  Christians  "groan  within" 
themselves.  They  are  subject  to  vanity,  corruption,  and  sorrow.  Afflictions  deceive, 
comforts  disappoint.  At  Marah  the  waters  are  bitter,  and  at  Nineveh  the  gourd  of  one 
day  withers  the  next.  With  what  pain  is  thought  exercised!  Sin  weighs  us  down;  a 
cloud  of  passion  obscures  the  Saviour's  love ;  we  toil,  and  "  catch  nothing."  Deliverance 
is  our  cry.  We  stretch  the  head  and  crane  the  neck  to  hail  the  day  of  redemption. 
"We  that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan,  being  burdened."  A  notable  instance  of 
tvealeness  is  furnished  by  our  prayers.  We  are  ignorant  of  the  fit  requests  to  make, 
and  the  proper  manner  in  which  to  present  them.  There  is  a  danger  of  our  asking 
unwisely,  too  impetuously,  for  a  hurtful  gratification.  The  most  needful  obji.ct,  what 
"we  ought"  to  supplicate,  we  are  not  earnest  enough  about;  we  scarce  kuuw  what  it 


252  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  vra.  1— 39. 

is.  We  look  throngli  eyes  of  flesh,  and  our  vision  is  limited.  We  dislike  a  burden 
and  all  suffering.  Like  Paul,  we  have  "tlirice  besought  the  Lord"  to  remove  what  ia 
designed  for  beneficial  discipline.  Like  sufferers  under  the  surgeon's  knife,  we  long  for 
present  ease  rather  than  the  removal  of  the  real  cause  of  disorder.  Amid  the  whirl  of 
life  "bound  to  its  wheel,"  we  are  liable  to  "mistake  its  end ;"  would  fain  arrest  the 
machinery  ere  the  clay  is  sufficiently  impressed  to  make  a  "vessel  meet  for  the 
Master's  use." 

XL  The  Divine  pbovision.  Help  is  afforded  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  very  sense 
of  dissatisfaction  is  a  sign  of  the  indwelling  Spirit.  The  world  wonders  at  the  lamenta- 
tion so  frequent  in  religious  biography.  But  to  be  quite  content  ar^iueB  deadness  of 
gool.  To  deem  one's  self  perfectly  wise  is  a  sure  token  of  self-deceit.  The  Spirit  breaks 
up  the  deeps  of  an  undisturbed  monotony.  The  Emperor  Augustus  desired  to  see  the 
wonderful  couch  on  which  a  man  slept  serenely  in  spite  of  his  heavy  indebtedness. 
The  groaning  of  the  Christian  is  an  advance  upon  that  of  the  natural  creation.  It  is 
not  merely  bewailing  and  murmuring ;  it  is  for  spiritual  reasons.  He  is  made  aware 
of  his  Divine  sonship,  and  has  to  reconcile  his  confidence  iu  the  Father  with  his  present 
irksome  boniiage.  Creation  longs  for  development;  the  Christian  feels  his  sinfulness 
and  sif^lis  for  salvation.  His  groaning  proves  a  longing  lor  infinitude;  that  he  was 
made  for  God,  and  nothing  less  can  satisfy.  Like  the  hart  chased  by  pursuers,  till  big 
tears  are  rolling  from  the  eyes  and  the  moisture  is  black  upon  its  sides,  so  the 
Christian  "thirsts  for  the  living  God."  For  him,  to  cease  to  aspire  is  to  die,  as  the 
cessation  of  activity  in  extreme  cold  means  a  fatal  rest.  The  unwilling  bondage  is  an 
"  incipient  liberty."  This  groaning  is  an  intercession  of  the  Spirit,  an  utterance  too  hig 
for  words,  a  powerful  plea  with  God.  We  have  the  advocacy  of  Christ  without  us, 
and  the  intercession  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within.  "  I  will  send  you  another  Advocate." 
Such  an  advocacy  assures  us  of  good.  The  Spirit  is  "  the  Pirstfruits,"  and  the  golden 
harvest  shall  surely  follow  to  the  garner.  These  yearnings  are  the  earnest  of  the 
fulfilment  of  our  largest  hopes,  a  pledge  that  the  Father  does  not  mean  us  always 
to  remain  down-trodden  and  stained  and  imperfect  in  knowledge.  How  great  the 
encouragement  to  pray  1  Even  though  we  are  uncertain  what  exactly  we  want,  our 
vague  aspirations  are  not  useless.  We  are  lifted  higher  by  them.  Prayer  is  God's 
law,  though  how  it  acts  on  God  we  cannot  tell.  We  know  that  in  the  human  sphere 
a  father  exerts  his  power  of  loving  aid  when  his  child  cries  in  trouble.  And  God  reads 
the  mind  of  his  own  Spirit,  urging  us  to  pour  out  our  hearts  before  his  throne  of  grace. 
We  may  pray,  then,  even  though  we  realize  our  inability  to  express  our  needs.  We 
can  interpret  the  dumb  animal's  pleading  look,  or  the  babe's  expression  of  suffering ; 
we  project  our  spirit  to  them,  and  by  sympathy  understand  their  wants.  And  our 
broken  utterances,  or  the  stereotyped  phrases  of  the  Liturgy,  are  multiplied  by  the 
Spirit  into  a  mighty  intercession  on  our  b(-'half.  Though  we  fear  lest  we  ask  amiss, 
God  will  nnderstund  aright,  nor  grant  an  injurious  boon.  The  direction  of  the  Spirit's 
longing  stimulated  within  us  is  ever  in  accordance  with  the  judgment  of  the  All-wise. 
— S.  K.  A. 

Ver.  32. — A  consolatory  argument.  This  is  one  of  the  most  wonderful  chapters  in 
all  Scripture,  for  the  height  to  which  it  soars  and  the  breadth  of  its  conceptions.  It 
is  rich  in  doctrine,  in  promise,  and  in  consuktion.  Having  climbed,  as  it  were,  the 
mount  of  God,  the  apostle  reaches  the  summit,  stands  bathed  in  the  very  light;  of  God. 

I.  A  GLOKIODS  AND  SOLEMN  TRUTH  COMMEMORATED.  "  God  Spared  not  Ms  own  Son." 
God  has  known  what  it  is  to  be  bereaved  by  the  departure  and  death  of  his  best- 
beloved.  No  need  now  to  dwell  upon  those  sufferings  of  Christ  at  the  crucifixion — the 
baptism  of  horror,  darkness,  and  blood  in  which  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  set  for  two 
days.  The  God  who  in  his  tender  mercy  steps  in  and  spares  offenders  taken  in  arms 
against  him,  then  seemed  deaf  to  the  cries  of  his  only  begotten  Son.  He  must  drink 
the  bitter  cup  to  its  dregs.  Hagar  in  the  wilderness  turned  iiway  that  she  might  not 
see  her  child  die.  She  prayed,  and  Ishmael  lived.  Yet  God  beheld  his  Son  prostrate 
in  the  garden,  and  yet  yielded  him  up  for  us  all.  What  can  give  such  views  of  the 
enormity  of  sin  as  the  sacrifice  of  Christ !  When  hard  iron  laws  tempt  us  to  disbeliev« 
the  compassion  of  our  Maker,  we  are  reassured  by  the  spectacle  of  the  suffering  Christ. 
There  is  no  lack  of  wisdom,  power,  or  love,  however  stern  the  necessity  which  compeh 


CH. Viii.  1—39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  255 

our  anguish.  "A  man  spareth  his  own  son  that  serveth  him"  all  needless  toil,  but  the 
grandest  service  may  entail  the  severest  labour.  "  Though  he  were  a  Son,  yet  learned 
he  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  suffered ;  and  being  made  perfect,  he  became  the 
Author  of  eternal  salvation." 

IL  The  akqument  which  this  tbcth  is  used  to  enfokob.  If  God  bestows  such 
a  gift,  what  will  he  withhold  ?  1.  When  we  were  enemies  he  surrendered  his  Son  on 
our  behalf;  how  much  will  he  not  do  for  us  now  we  are  friends  f  The  mediation  of 
Christ  hath  restored  us  to  a  covenant  position.  2.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  sum  of  all  good 
gifts,  inestimable,  unspeakable.  Nothing  more  precious  in  the  eyes  of  God  than  his 
dear  Son !  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  he  will  refuse  us  a  lesser  gift.  All  good  is 
embodied  in  Christ ;  other  blessings  are  fruits  of  his  tree  of  life.  He  is  the  Sun ;  other 
brightness  is  but  beams  from  that  Sun.  3.  The  gift  of  Christ  was  for  the  express 
purpose  of  opening  a  door  through  which  all  other  good  things  might  pass  to  us.  He  is 
the  great  Charter  of  Christian  privilege,  the  Preacher  of  peace,  the  Ambassador  of 
rsconciliation,  the  Channel  of  Divine  grace.  "All  things  are  yours."  4.  As  we  did 
frothing  to  deserve  the  gift  of  Christ,  so  the  lesser  blessings  to  enrich  our  lives  are  bestowed 
not  according  to  our  deserts,  but  according  to  Ood's/ree  bounty.  He  gives  abundantly 
"  without  money  and  without  price."  5.  The  one  condition  is  to  receive  Christ.  These 
gifts  are  to  be  had  "  with  Christ,"  or  not  at  all.  What  is  to  be  said  for  him  who  can 
treat  lightly  this  stupendous  boon  ?  If  God  spared  not  his  own  Son,  what  must  the 
impenitent  expect  who  refuse  to  obey  the  will  of  God,  and  harden  themselves  in 
unbelief?  Turn  to  him  in  prayer,  and  employ  the  persuasive  petition,  "for  Christ's 
sake."— S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  35. — Victorious  love.  This  chapter  is  like  a  stream  that  gathers  strength  and 
volume  as  it  flows.  Beginning  with  the  Christian's  state  as  one  of  freedom  from 
condemnation,  it  ends  by  placing  him  on  the  summit  of  victory,  radiant  with  the  love 
of  God.  It  is  a  chapter  full  of  Christ.  Christ  in  humiliation  and  triumplj ;  Christ  as 
the  Sacrifice  in  whom  sin  was  condemned,  and,  as  the  risen  Redeemer,  the  Firstborn 
of  many  brethren ;  Christ  as  the  present  Strength  of  his  people  by  his  indwelling 
Spirit,  and,  as  seated  upon  the  throne,  the  perfect  Son  of  God,  to  whose  lineage  all  the 
sons  are  to  be  conformed.  The  earnest  rhetoric  of  the  apostle  leads  him  to  summon 
all  adversaries  to  the  bar,  and  challenge  them  to  prove  their  ability  to  upswl  his 
reasonings  and  destroy  the  hopes  of  the  followers  of  Christ.  Who  or  what  shall  sever 
the  tie  that  binds  them  to  their  Lord? 

I.  The  significance  of  the  challenge.  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love 
of  Christ?"  The  passage  requires  us  to  understand  the  expression  as  referring  rather 
to  Christ's  love  for  us  than  to  our  response  to  his  love.  See  the  parallelism  with  ver. 
37,  "  through  him  that  loved  us."  And  ver.  39  speaks  of  "  the  love  of  God,  which  is 
iu  Oiirist  Jesus  our  Lord."  This  interpretation  loses  no  shade  of  meauing,  since  Christ's 
affection  involves  our  love  in  return,  as  its  natural  outcome.  The  ex|iression  is,  in 
truth,  a  description  of  our  religion.  To  be  severed  from  Christ's  love  means  utter  loss. 
1.  Christianity  is  founded  upon  the  love  of  Christ.  This  looked  down  pityingly  upon 
our  dark  aud  helpless  world.  It  shone  through  all  the  symbols  of  the  Law,  pointing 
the  worshippers  to  the  coming  Saviour.  It  nerved  him  to  endure  his  an.i^uish  in  the 
garden  and  ou  the  cross.  It  has  provided  for  man  a  day  of  grace,  and  the  endowment 
of  the  Spirit  to  renew  and  sanctify.  2.  TTie  new  life  is  dependent  on  the  continued 
manifestation  of  this  love.  Remove  the  sunlight,  and  the  plant  sickens  and  dies.  Let 
the  supply  of  the  air  above  be  stopped,  and  the  diver  cannot  breathe.  Without  the 
love  of  Christ  operating  on  the  heart,  the  sweetest  ordinances  lose  their  savour, 
couimunion  by  reading  and  prayer  is  eclipsed,  no  rainbow  brightens  the  tears  of 
penitence.  The  love  of  Christ  shed  abroad  is  the  root  of  obedience.  From  it  we  draw 
our  most  influential  motives  to  holiness  and  service.  The  lustre  of  our  deeds  is  marred 
unless  encircled  by  this  golden  band.  3.  The  love  of  Christ  is  the  love  of  God  herein 
revealed.  Christ  is  the  Horn  of  plenty  by  which  the  Father  would  pour  into  the  lap 
of  his  children  all  good  things.  To  be  sundered  from  this  love  must  signify,  therefore, 
our  estrangement  from  all  that  lifts  us  heavenward.  Could  this  happen,  Christianity 
were  stilled  into  a  frozen  sea,  the  ripples  and  waves  remaining  in  form,  but  not  ia 
motion  and  mi-ht — a  waste  of  desert  ice.  The  query  is  not  merely  oratorical.   Endeavourt 


254  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  vin.  1—39. 

to  intercept  the  love  of  Christ  are  reiterated  and  prolonged.  The  words  that  follow  are 
not  empty  terms,  not  visions  of  the  night,  but  stern  foes,  combatants  to  be  encountered 
by  day. 

II.  The  confident  eeply.  The  apostle  answers  his  own  query.  Look  at  the 
particular  things  eaumerated,  and  then  appreciate  the  apostolic  assurance.  1.  The 
trials  of  life  cannot  defeat  the  purposes  of  Christ's  love.  "Tribulation,  anguish, 
famine,  nakedness,"  though  they  may  becloud  our  path  and  awaken  a  bitter  cry,  yet, 
instead  of  being  regarded  as  indications  of  abandonment,  are  rather  signs  of  the 
providential  discipline  which  perfects  sanctification.  The  good  Shepherd  is  moved  to 
greater  compassion  at  the  sight  of  the  wounds  of  his  flock.  2.  2%e  hostility  of  an 
unbelieving  world  cannot  dissolve  this  union.  "  Persecution,  peril,  and  the  sword  "  do 
but  liken  the  servant  to  the  Master.  Piety  has  thriven  most  in  days  of  ridicule  and 
torment.  Christian  heroism  cheerfully  underwent  the  loss  of  goods,  stripeS,  and 
imprisonment;  it  converted  jails  into  holy  fanes  resoimding  with  praise  and  prayer. 
"  In  that  he  suffered  being  tempted,"  he  has  proved  himself  "  able  to  succour  those 
that  are  tempted."  3.  The  apvstle  advances  in  his  enumeration.  Neither  "death," 
however  grim  its  aspect,  nor  "  life,"  with  its  snares  and  bewitchments,  its  competitions, 
its  trifles,  can  succeed  in  detaching  the  pilgrim  from  the  protecting  love  of  his  Gruide. 
Nor  can  the  ranged  battalions  of  evil  win  the  victory.  Christ  triumphed  over  them, 
and  conquers  still.  4.  So  finally  the  apostle  sums  up  in  the  emphatic  comprehensive 
assertion  that  neither  the  forces  of  time,  "  things  present  and  to  come,"  nor  the  forces 
of  space,  "  height  and  depth,"  bewildering  the  imagination  or  depressing  the  soul,  no, 
"nor  any  other  created  thing,"  above  or  below,  personal  or  impersonal,  animate  or 
inanimate,  known  or  unkcown,  shall  defeat  the  loving  purpose  of  Christ  in  the  salvation 
of  his  people.     "  Many  waters  cannot  drown  his  love,  nor  the  floods  quench  it." 

III.  This  confidence  justifiable.  1.  ITie  dignity  of  Christ's  Person  and  the 
perfection  of  his  character  furhid  fear.  His  love  falters  not,  is  not  fickle ;  it  waxes,  but 
never  wanes.  He  does  not  undertake  what  he  cannot  accomplish,  nor  begin  what  is 
beyond  his  power  to  finish.  The  foes  to  our  salvation  were  foreseen  and  measured 
from  the  first.  To  doubt  it  is  to  dishonour  him.  2.  The  whole  trend  of  the  redemptive 
scheme  is  against  any  supposition  of  abandonment  hy  Christ.  How  infinite  the  price 
already  paid !  how  steadily  and  surely  the  great  design  of  salvation  has  marched  through 
the  ages,  developing  ever  deeper  wisdom  and  unfailing  resources !  We  might  wonder 
that  man  had  not  been  left  to  himself  in  his  rebellion  and  a  new  race  created ;  but 
man's  elevation  having  been  promised  and  begun,  every  indication  points  to  the 
ultimate  fulfilment  of  our  purest  and  brightest  hopes.  3.  Innumerable  biographies 
confirm  the  apostle's  declaration.  May  our  life  add  another  testimony  1  Look  at  the 
forces  opposed  to  our  steadfastness,  and  then,  like  Peter,  we  lose  heart  and  begin  to 
sink.  Fix  the  fiaze  upon  Christ,  and  our  cheerful  courage,  our  triumphant  conviction 
of  his  unshakable  love,  will  of  itself  lend  such  vigour  to  our  loyalty  that  every  appre- 
hension of  disaster  shall  vanish. — S.  E.  A. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — "  Paradise  regained."  The  last  chapter,  after  bringing  out  the 
insufBciency  of  Law  to  sanctify,  ends  by  declaring  the  sufficiency  of  Christ.  Through 
him,  as  our  Deliverer  from  the  body  of  death,  we  are  enabled  to  enter  upon  an  experience 
which  has  been  rightl)  denominated  "  Paradise  regained."  *  In  the  first  section,  which 
we  are  now  to  consider,  we  have  the  victory  set  before  us  which  the  Holy  Spirit  secures 
over  sin  and  over  death. 

I.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  establishes  the  soul  in  holiness.  (Vers.  1 — 4.)  After 
what  has  been  stated  in  ch.  vii.,  it  is  seen  that  "  there  is  not  now  any  condemnation 
to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  soul  has  died  to  Law  in  the  death  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and,  now  risen,  is  married  to  another,  even  the  risen  Christ.  And  this  better 
Husband  has  put  the  soul  under  another  and  better  law  of  life,  what  is  called  in  thi» 
passage  "  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life,"  and  we  are  enabled  by  Paul's  statements  to 
see  how  it  operates.  And  here  it  is  well  to  premise  that  law  and  Spirit  are  not 
antitheses.  The  Spirit  has,  in  fact,  his  law  of  operation,  and  it  is  this  wu  have  here  set 
before  us.  1.  The  Spirit  emancipates  the  soul  from  the  law  of  sin.  Law,  that  is,  the 
Law  of  Moses,  could  never  do  this.     It  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  and  had  not  the 

'  Cf.  De  Eougemont's  '  La  Vie  Humaine  aveo  et  sans  Foi,'  p.  164. 


OH.  VIII,  1—39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  255 

necessary  power.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Spirit  takes  Christ's  life,  applies  it,  and 
produces  the  emancipation  through  it.  The  grace  of  God  is  seen  in  "  sending  his  own 
Son,"  that  is,  "  the  Son  of  himself; "  and  he  made  his  advent  "  in  the  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh,"  that  is,  he  came  not  as  an  apparition,  but  in  a  real  body,  yet  it  differed  from 
other  human  bodies  in  that  it  was  not  "  sinful  flesh."  And  his  purpose  in  assuming 
sinless  flesh  was  that  he  might  be  "an  Offering  for  sin"  (Revised  Version),  and  thereby 
might  "  coudeiiiii  hin  in  the  flesh."  His  whole  life  in  the  flesh  was,  indeed,  a  condemna- 
tion of  gin ;  but  the  condemnation  reached  its  climax  when  on  the  cross  Jesus  expiated 
human  guilt.  As  a  powerful  writer  has  well  stated  the  truth  of  the  passage,  "  believers 
are  made  '  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.'  The  nature  of  the  Father  through  the 
Son  is  made  known  unto  them — and  as  the  rays  of  light  which  pass  through  a  coloured 
medium  take  the  hues  of  the  medium  through  which  they  come,  so  the  Spirit  of  God, 
coming  to  us  through  Christ  incarnate,  is  baptized  in  the  humanities  of  his  Person, 
and  hence  becomes  the  Dispenser  of  the  Divine  mercy,  as  that  mercy  was  revealed  in 
the  flesh.  So  that '  what  the  Law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh 
[had  no  sympathetic  power  to  touch  the  emotional  nature],  God  sending  his  own  Sou 
in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh ;  that  the 
righteousness  of  the  Law  [which  requires  love,  but  cannot  produce  it]  might  be  fulfilled 
in  us,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit.'  * '  2.  The  Spirit  enables  the 
soul  to  fulfil  the  riyhteousness  of  the  Law  by  walking,  not  after  the  flesh,  hut  after  the 
Spirit.  "  The  righteousness  of  the  Law,"  in  ver.  4,  is  given  in  the  Revised  Version  as 
"the  ordinance  of  the  Law"  (SiKa(ai/ta,  not  Sixaloirvyri).  But  the  idea  is  clear.  The 
perfect  life  is  the  ideal  of  the  Spirit.  He  accordingly  comes  to  inspire  as  well  as  to 
condemn.  He  prompts  us  to  "walk  after  the  Spirit,"  in  the  spiritual  path  our  Saviour 
trod,  and  so  we  find  ourselves,  through  the  appreciation  of  the  life  of  Jesus,  becoming 
progressively  holy  in  character,  approximating  steadily  towards  the  perfect  righteous- 
ness which  dwelt  in  him.  It  is  this  inspiration  to  holy  living  which  defeats  the  law 
of  sin.  This  is  the  real  victory.  Salvation  is  not  so  much  from  the  uncomfortableness 
of  hell,  as  from  the  greater  misfortune  of  sin.  As  one  has  very  properly  said,  "  If  my 
religion  is  to  make  me  comfortable  in  spite  of  ill  temper,  and  slipshod  ways  of  business, 
and  words  that  are  not  exactly  true, — then  I  say  deliberately,  better  the  very  flres  of 
hell  than  that  comfort,  if  they  could  only  burn  into  me  and  through  and  through  me 
a  great  abhorrence  of  all  that  is  evil." 

n.  Thkouqh  destboting  sin,  the  Spirit  destroys  death.  (Vers.  5 — 11.)  For  as 
long  as  we  "  mind  ihe  things  of  the  flesh,"  that  is,  are  occupied  with  them  to  the 
exclusion  or  subordination  of  spiritual  things,  we  are,  as  "  carnally  minded,"  in  a  state 
of  spiritual  death.  This  "  mind  of  the  flesh  is  death ''  (so  Revised  Version).  And 
when  we  analyze  this  death  of  the  sout,  we  find  it  cousists  in  at  least  these  three  things : 
(1)  Enmity  to  Ood  (ver.  7) ;  (2)  rebellion  against  his  Law ;  and  (3)  separation  from 
him  as  those  that  are  not  pleasing  in  his  sight  (ver.  8).  The  result  of  such  a  state  is 
misery.  "  Paradise  lost "  is  the  true  expression  for  the  carnal  state.  It  is  into  this 
state  of  misery,  then,  that  God's  Spirit  inserts  himself,  and  proposes :  1.  To  destroy  thit 
spiritual  death  by  destroying  sin.  The  moment  we  become  "  spiritually  minded,"  we 
have  passed  the  boundary  between  "Paradise  lust"  and  "Paradise  regained."  We 
find  that  both  "  life  and  peace  "  result  from  spiritual-mindedness.  "  Here,"  says  De 
Bougemont,  "we  are  in  lull  life  and  in  full  peace;  there  is  in  some  way  upon  the 
mountain  of  God  the  terrestrial  paradise  of  faith  and  of  hope ;  there  is  the  sweet  sun 
of  Eden,  there  are  its  sweet  shades,  there  are  its  limpid  waters  which  murmur,  there 
is  its  tree  of  life  whose  fruits  are  the  envy  of  the  angels,  if  they  have  not  similar  ones 
in  abundance.  No  one  before  Jesus  Christ  had  known  the  way  and  passed  the  portal 
of  this  garden  of  delight.  The  Son  of  God  descended  to  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth, 
and  tauglit  the  existence  of  it  to  his  disciples.  They  were  suddenly  transported  there 
on  the  Day  of  Pentec  st  by  the  impetuous  breath  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  2.  The  Spirit 
ofei)  proposes  to  destroy  ihe  mortality  of  the  body  by  resurrection.  Alas !  at  conversion 
we  do  not  become  immortal.  The  change  of  heart  has  doubtless  its  good  effect  on  ths 
body,  but  it  does  not  replace  a  bad  constitution  by  a  good  one,  nor  rehabilitate  the 
body.     The  body  remains  dead  because  of  sin,  even  when  the  spirit  has  become  life 

>  Of.  Walker's '  Philosophy  of  the  Divine  Operation,'  pp.  84,  85 ;  gee  also  Julius  Huller** 
ZeugnioB  von  Christo,'  gg.  142—170. 


256  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL.  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  vni.  1—39. 


because  of  righteousness.  But  the  justified  and  sanctified  spirit  within  man  is  not 
going  to  be  perpetually  chained  to  a  dying  body.  The  Spirit  of  God,  who  has  effected 
the  vital  change  within,  is  the  Spirit  who  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead.  That 
resurrection  of  our  Lord  is  the  pledge  of  our  bodily  resurrection.  God  is  not  going  to 
leave  his  work  half-done.  Having  raised  our  dead  hearts  out  of  the  grave  of  trespass 
and  of  sin,  he  is  not  going  to  leave  us  in  a  state  of  physical  mortality.  The  Head 
having  been  raised,  the  members  shall  be  also  "  resurrected."  The  cemeteries  shall  nut 
be  left  as  trophies  of  the  king  of  terrors.  They..»hall  be  despoiled  of  their  prey  by  the 
quickening  power  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  God  means  to  save  his  people  out  and  out, 
body  as  well  as  soul.  Thus  our  gospel  is  that  of  the  Resurrection.  The  tree  of  life  in 
ilic  midst  of  Paradise  regained  shall  prove  victorious  over  our  mortality,  and  we  shall 
b&Tu  conferred  upon  us  in  body  as  well  as  soul  an  immortality  like  our  Master'iw 

"  No  longer  must  the  mourners  weep. 
Nor  call  departed  Christians  dead ; 
For  death  is  hallowed  into  sleep. 
And  every  grave  becomes  a  beid. 
Now  once  more 
Eden's  door 
Open  stand's  to  mortal  eyes ; 
For  Christ  hath  risen,  and  man  ahull  rite  I 
Now  at  last, 
All  things  past, 
Hope  and  joy  and  peace  begin ; 
For  Christ  hath  won,  and  man  shall  win  I 
It  is  not  exUe,  rest  on  high  ; 

It  is  not  sadness,  peace  from  strife ; 
To  fall  asleep  is  not  to  die  ; 

To  dwell  with  Christ  is  better  life. 
Where  our  banner  leads  us 

We  may  safely  go ; 
Wliere  our  Chief  precedes  ui. 

We  may  face  the  foe. 
His  right  arm  is  o'er  us. 

He  will  guide  us  through ; 
Clirist  hatli  gone  before  us; 
Christiana  I  follow  you  I  " 

(John  Mason  Keale.) 

R.M.  B. 

Ters.  12 — 17. — The  Spirit  of  adoption.  In  the  previous  section  we  have  found 
"Pamdise  restored,"  through  the  Spirit  destroying  sin  and  thereby  death  within  us, 
first  in  the  soul  and  then  in  the  body.  But  this  experience  of  spiritnal-mindedness  is 
realized  on  the  line  of  God's  adopting  love.  The  emancipating  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  ol 
adoption.    Let  us  notice  the  stages  as  here  presented  by  the  apostle. 

L   OUB  OBLIOATION  IS  NOW  TO  THB   SPIBIT,  AND  NOT   TO   THE  FLESH.      (Vers.  12,  13.) 

The  Spirit  of  Christ  has  freed  us  from  every  condemnation ;  he  has  secured  a  measure 
of  sanctification,  and  death  is  defeated  in  soul  and  will  be  in  body.  Such  a  work  carries 
clearly  obligation  with  it.  We  are  his  debtors.  We  realize  accordingly:  1.  That  we 
are  not  bound  to  live  after  the  flesh.  To  do  so  would  only  be  to  court  death.  It  would 
be  to  return  to  our  vomit,  like  the  filthy  dog ;  it  would  be  to  wallow  once  more  in  the 
mire,  like  the  once-washed  swine.  2.  We  are  bound  to  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  and 
•0  live.  Mortification  of  fleshly  desires  and  lusts  is  the  great  duty  the  Christian  owes 
to  the  Spirit  who  condescends  to  dwell  within  him.  It  is  a  painful  process,  but  passes 
into  a  painless  one.  When  we  earnestly  set  about  it,  it  abundantly  rewards  us.  And 
we  find  that  mortification  of  the  deeds  of  the  body  is  the  very  secret  of  life.  It  is  thus 
evident  that  the  struggle  of  the  latter  part  of  the  seventh  chapter  is  also  found  in  the 
eighth.  Christian  progress,  as  we  have  seen,  is  through  antagonizing  our  sinful  desires 
«nd  tendencies,  and  so  largely  discharging  our  obligation  to  the  pure  Spirit  who  conde- 
scends to  dwell  within  us  (of.  Shedd's  '  Commentary,'  in  loc). 

IL   SoKBUIP    IS   BEALIZED    IN    THIS   SUBMISSION    TO    TUK    SpiBIT.       (Vef.  14.)       Gud's 


DH.  viiT.  1-39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS.  257 

adopting  love  is  realized  within.  He  can  give  the  family  spirit  as  well  as  the  legal 
standing  as  sons.  Sonship  among  men,  and  especially  adoption,  may  be  destitute  of 
the  becoming  spirit.  The  children  may  despise  their  parents  or  their  foster-parents, 
and  treat  them  inconsiderately.  But  in  God-given  sonship  there  is  as  its  essence 
submission  to  God's  Spirit.  The  adopted  soul  abandons  himself  to  the  Divine  inspirar 
tion;  the  right  filial  attitude  is  reached;  and  life  becomes  the  outcome  of  inspiration. 
They  only  are  sons  of  God  who  are  led  by  his  Spirit. 

III.  All  God's  true  cHrLOBBN  prove  pbaybrfui..  (Ver.  15.)  The  spirit  of 
bondage  which  leads  souls  to  fear  like  stricken  slaves  before  God  gets  cast  out  by  the 
Spirit  of  adoption,  and  there  is  within  us  the  divinely  prompted  cry,  "  Abba,  Father." 
Just  as  true  children  love  to  have  fellowship  with  their  earthly  parents,  so  God's 
children  love  to  hold  fellowship  with  their  heavenly  Parent.  Prayerfulness  is  one  of 
the  best  tests  of  our  relation  to  God.  It  is  the  instinct  of  an  {tdopted  child.  In  this 
way  the  spiritual  relationship  is  realized.  Just  as  fellowship  is  the  essence  of  family 
relationship,  so  is  it  with  the  family  of  God. 

IV.  Thb  prayerful  children  rbobivb  the  Spirit's  witness  to  their  bonship. 
(Ver.  16.)  The  witness  of  the  Spirit  is  something  distinct  from  the  testimony  of  our 
own  consciousness,  as  the  verse  implies.  The  latter  concurs  with  the  former.  What 
is  it,  then?  If  we  consider  Jesus  in  his  baptismal  prayer,  we  shall  find  that  he 
received  not  only  the  gift  of  the  opened  heaven,  that  is,  all  needful  revelation,  and  tha 
gift  of  the  descending  dove,  that  is,  the  perfect  inspiration,  but  also  the  audible 
assurance  of  his  Sonship,  when  the  voice  came  from  heaven  to  say,  "  Thou  art  my 
bi'loved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  The  Father  assures  the  Son  of  his  ineffable 
relation.  Now,  this  passage  shows  that  there  is  something  corresponding  to  this 
assurance  granted  to  God's  sons.  They  aro  enabled  to  hear  the  Father's  voice,  and  are 
reassured  thereby.  It  is  not,  of  course,  an  audible  voice,  as  when  they  said,  "  It 
thundered;"  yet  a  voice  which  speaks  home  to  the  spirit  within.  It  comes  through 
God's  Word.  Up  to  a  certain  point  the  Bible  is  a  splendid  literary  treasure ;  but  the 
Spirit  comes,  and  the  Bible  becomes  a  chilcPs  hook,  with  a  Father's  voice  ringing  lovingly 
through  it  all.  These  spiritual  tones  are  found  to  coincide  with  experience,  and  we 
have  the  witness  within.  It  is  thus  that  we  are  enabled  to  examine  ourselves  through 
God's  Word.  We  begin  to  read  it  as  children  should  to  whom  a  father  is  faithfully 
speaking,  and  we  are  reassured  and  comforted  thereby.^ 

V.  The  prayerful  children  through  listening!  to  the  Father's  voice  comb 

TO  REALIZE  THAT  THEY  ARE  HEIRS  OF  GoD,  AND  JOINT-HEIES  WITH   GhRIST.      (Ver.  17.) 

Heirship  succeeds  the  sense  of  sonship.  Now,  in  earthly  inheritances  the  sad  condition 
now  is  the  parent's  death;  but  it  was  not  so  under  the  ancient  law.  Then,  as  in  the 
parable  of  the  prodigal  son,  the  inheritance  could  be  divided  in  the  father's  lifetime, 
and  either  enjoyed  with  the  father  or  away  from  him."  Thus  the  father  says  to  the 
elder  son,  "All  that  I  have  is  thine;"  and  the  promise  to  God's  children  is  clear,  "All 
things  are  yours ;  whether  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life,  or  death, 
or  things  present,  or  things  to  come ;  all  are  yours ;  and  ye  are  Christ's ;  and  Christ  is 
God's  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  21—23).  When  we  realize,  therefore,  that  God  is  to  us  "  all  in  all," 
then  have  we  entered  into  our  inheritance  with  him.  And  what  adds  to  its  precious- 
ness  is  the  fact  that  it  is  a  Joint-inheritance  with  Christ.  It  is  through  him  that  it 
has  become  ours.  What  he  gets  we  get.  He  has  raised  hi»  brothers  and  sisters 
through  adoption  to  the  platform  of  his  own  inheritance. 

VI.  Fellowship  in  buffebins  ib  the  sign  and  pledge  of  fellowship  in  thb 
COMING  glory.  (Ver.  17.)  Now,  we  must  remember  that  fellowship  through  suffering 
is  the  closest  fellowship  of  all.  It  is  when  hearts  are  together  in  the  fires  that  they  are 
welded  or  rather  melted  into  one.  Now,  life  gets  sooner  or  later  for  the  true  son  of  God 
like  Nebuchadnezzar's  fiery  furnace,  with  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  God  in  the  fire  along 
with  him.  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he 
receiveth  "  (Heb.  xi.  6,  7).  It  is  to  this  fellowship  in  his  sufferings  that  we  are 
jirovidentially  called,  that  so  we  may  become  in  due  season  conformable  unto  his  death 
(Phil.  iii.  11).    We  should  reconcile  ourselves  to  our  inheritance  of  suffering,  seeini; 

•  Of.  Tholuck's  'Werke,'  band  U.  s.  22,  etc. 

•  Cf.  Maine's  'Ancient  Law,'  oh-  fu,  "On  the  Early  History  of  Testamentary 
Buccession." 

ROMANS.  a 


258  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  viii.  1—39, 

that  it  is  through  it  we,  as  a  rule,  reach  our  inheritance  of  wisdom.*  And  as  s 
suffering  tuith  Christ  is  the  sign  and  pledge  of  being  glorified  together  with  him,  we 
should  hail  it  as  the  birthright  mark,  and  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory. — B.  M,  E. 

Vers.  18 — 30. — Salvation  in  spite  of  suffering.  "Paradise  regained"  in  this  life  is 
not  a  sorrowless  and  painless  condition.  The  sons  of  God  are  chastened.  They  know 
what  suffering  is.  And  there  is  here  the  great  religious  evidence.  When  the  world 
sees  men  and  women  composed  and  even  cheerful  amid  untold  tribulation,  then  it  sees 
a  reality  in  religion.  Job,  for  instance,  was  an  evidence  for  the  reality  of  religion  that 
even  Satan  himself  could  not  gainsay  or  deny.  How  is  it  that  the  Christian  spirit  can 
assert  its  supremacy  amid  suffering  of  the  most  intense  character?  It  is  because  it  is 
enabled  to  keep  its  eye  on  the  hidden  good,  and  bless  God  for  it.  And  so  in  this 
section  we  have  the  spirit  of  the  apostle  asserting  itself  upon  this  important  subject. 

I.  Thbbe  is  the  contrast  between  peeoent  suffekinqs  and  the  peefeotbd 
BANOTiFiOATioN.  (Ver.  18.)  God's  end  in  his  dispensations  is  to  create  a  glory  in  us 
of  an  eternal  character — the  glory  of  saactification  when  it  comes  in  fulness.  W«  may 
we  the  price  we  pay  in  the  stanzas  of  the  poetess. 

"  Through  long  days  did  Anguish, 
And  sad  nights  did  Fain, 
Forge  my  shield.  Endurance, 
Bright  and  free  from  stain  t 

'  Doubt,  in  misty  caverns, 

'Mid  dark  horrors  aoughtj 
jTill  my  peerless  jewel. 
Faith,  to  me  she  brought. 

"Sorrow  that  I  wearied 
Should  remain  so  long; 
Wreathed  my  starry  glory 
The  bright  crown  of  Song. 

"  Strife  that  racked  my  spirit 
Without  hope  or  rest. 
Left  the  blooming  flower, 
Fatienee,  in  my  breast." 

(Miss  Procter's  'Legends  and  LyrloB.") 

Kow,  when  we  look  at  what  is  paid  and  what  is  bought,  we  must  admit  that  the 
bargain  is  a  good  one,  for  the  glory  of  sanctification  is  weighty  and  eternal.  "  The 
light  afdiction,"  says  the  apostle  elsewhere,  "  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for 
us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  17). 

II.  In  buffekino  we  abb  in  fellowship  with  the  whole  creation.  (Vers. 
19 — 22.)  When  we  look  into  the  Book  of  Job  we  see  that  the  man.  of  God  is  a  special 
sufferer.  But  God  points  out  in  the  sequel  of  the  book  that  the  perplexity  in  Job's 
experience  is  matched  by  the  perplexity  which  pervades  all  nature.  So  is  it  with 
suffering.  We  may  see  it  all  through  nature.  Suffering  human  nature  is  only  in  line 
with  suffering  nature.  And  here  we  have  to  remark  that :  1.  The  study  of  nature  shows 
long  progress  through  suffering  towards  higher  forms.  This  is  the  lesson  of  evolution 
BO  far  as  it  is  a  truth.  The  "  struggle  for  existence  "  is  painful  progress  towards  more 
perfect  forms.  It  may  seem  to  our  philosophic  laureate  a  mystery  that  nature  should 
be  "  so  careful  of  the  type,"  and  "  so  careless  of  the  single  life ; "  nay,  he  goes  on  to  see 
that  she  lets  "  a  thousand  types  "  go,  and  seeiiis  to  care  for  nothing.'  But  if  we  take 
the  great  procession  as  a  whole,  we  may  see  that  it  embodies  progress  through  pain  to 
more  perfect  form.  The  groaning  creation  thus  sheds  light  on  sanctification  through 
Buffering  and  pain.  2.  Out  of  the  present  is  to  le  lorn  a  new  state  of  things  in  which 
nature  shall  share  in  the  restoration  of  the  sons  of  Ood.  The  very  word  "  nature," 
which  signifies  "  something  about  to  be  born,"  is  a  prophecy  similar  to  what  the 
apostle  here  gives.    If  Nature,  without  any  moral  fault,  has  been  subjected  to  vaniLy ;  H 

'  Sir  Henry  Taylor's  '  Notes  from  Life,'  p.  104. 
•  Of.  Tennyson's  '  In  Memoriam,'  liv.,  Iv. 


CH.  vm.  1— 39.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  ?AUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  259 

it  has,  witTiont  consent  on  Tier  part,  been  made  the  painful  illustration  of  moral  and 
spiritual  truth;  then  we  may  expect  a  junt  Governor  like  God  to  give  Nature  compen- 
sation, and  allow  her  to  share  in  the  glorious  liberty  of  his  children.*  It  is  surely 
significant  that  that  manly  Christian,  Prank  Buckland,  when  he  was  dying,  said,  "  I 
am  going  a  long  journey  where  I  think  I  shall  see  a  great  many  curious  animals.  This 
journey  I  must  go  alone." "  As  animals  were  saved  in  the  ark  with  Noah,  and  in 
Nineveh  with  the  penitent  Ninevites,  is  it  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they  shall 
have  some  share  in  the  regeneration  of  all  things  ? 

III.  Man  as  the  soul  op  the  wokld  intbbpeets  the  travail  of  the  obeation. 
(Vers.  23 — 27.)  And  here  we  cannot  do  better  than  take  up  the  points  as  St.  Paul 
gives  them.  1.  Man's  aspiration  about  the  hody.  (Ver.  23.)  For  the  body  is  to  be 
redeemed,  not  discarded.  It  is  this  "hope"  which  saves  us  in  our  present  distresses 
(ver.  24).'  If  we  had  not  this  hope,  we  should  inevitably  despair.  And  along  with 
hope  comes  patience,  so  that  "  the  patience  of  hope  "  becomes  the  attitude  of  all  faithful 
souls.*  Then :  2. » The  Holy  Spirit  endorses  our  groaning  aftet  the  better  bodies. 
(Ver.  26.)  Prayer  is  not  all  articulate.  A  groan,  a  sigh,  a  tear,  may  have  all  the 
elements  of  prayer  addressed  to  the  heart  of  the  Most  High.  Now,  some  saints  have 
had  such  suffering  communicated  to  them  as  compelled  them  to  groan  with  desire  after 
a  better,  because  promised  condition.  These  groans,  that  are  too  deep  to  be  articulate, 
are  Spirit-prompted.  He  pressed  from  tried  spirits  these  unutterable  longings.  3.  Ood, 
the  Heart-searcher,  responds  to  these  unutterable  groans.  (Ver.  27.)  We  have  here  the 
whole  philosophy  of  prayer.  It  is  the  inspired  expression,  articulately  or  otherwise,  of 
what  is  agreeable  to  the  Divine  will,  and  the  Heart-searcher  recognizes  in  the  prompted 
prayer  the  return  to  him  of  his  own  vvill,  and  so  can  answer  it.*, 

IV.  This  is  the  best  possible  woeld  foe  one  who  loves  God.  (Ver.  28.) 
There  is  a  certain  idealism  which  inspires  us  all.  According  to  our  inward  state  is 
our  outward  world.  "'Tis  in  ourselves  that  we  are  thus  or  thus."  Consequently,  if 
we  have  learned  to  love  God,  we  take  all  things  as  animated  by  a  Divine  purpose  of 
good  to  us.  Suffering  may  come,  but  it  comes  to  sanctify.  Faith  thus  becomes 
optimistic.  It  lifts  up  its  bead,  knowing  that  its  redemption  draweth  nigh.  It  refuses 
to  be  pessimistic.  la  spite  of  all  drawbacks,  the  glory  of  sanctlQcation  is  on  its  way. 
And  so  those  who  have  been  called  by  a  loving  God  to  the  exercise  of  love,  find  as  they 
look  about  them  that  all  things  are  co-operating  for  God's  holy  end  of  making  his 
children  holier  and  fitter  for  his  fellowship.  We  could  not  be  better  situated  than  we 
are  for  sanctification.     A  poet  on  the  subject  "  It  is  well "  has  thus  written — 

"  So  they  said,  who  saw  the  wonders 

Of  Messiah's  power  and  love ; 
So  they  sing,  who  see  his  glory 

In  the  Father's  house  above : 
Ever  reading  in  each  record 

Of  the  strangely  varied  past, 
•All  was  well  which  God  appointed. 

All  has  wrought  for  good  at  last.* 

**  And  thus,  while  years  are  fleeting. 
Though  our  joys  are  with  them  gona, 
In  thy  changeless  love  lejoicing 
We  shall  journey  calmly  on ; 
Till  at  last,  all  sorrow  over. 

Each  our  tale  of  grace  shall  tell. 
In  the  heavenly  chorus  joining : 
*  Lord,  thou  hast  done  all  things  well  I ' " 

(Of.  Randolph's  '  Changed  Oross,  and  other  Poems.') 

'  Of.  Bishop  EUieott's  'Destiny  of  the  Creature;'  also  'Animal  Futurity,'  by  Joiapli 
Hamilton. 
'  Of.  '  Life  of  Frank  Bnokland,'  by  Bompas,  p.  423. 
■  Of.  Mozley's  •  University  Sermons,'  p.  46. 

♦  Of  Dor*  Qreenwell's  remarkable  little  volume  on  •  The  Patience  of  Hope^'  pauim. 
'  Of.  the  writer's  volome,  'Does  Qod.  answer  Fca,yei1'  passim. 


260  THE  EPISTLE  OF   PAUL  TO  THK   ROMANS,    [oh.  viii.  1— 39. 

V.    CoSrORMITT    TO    ChRIST'b    glorious    image    18    WHAT    GoD    HAS    IH    VIEW    TOR 

THOSE  HE  0ALL8.  (Vcrs.  29, 30.)  The  gospel  is  God's  plan  for  securing  a  multitude  of 
children  who  shall  all  become  Ohrist-like.  He  sent  his  only  Child,  "the  only  begotten 
Sou,"  into  the  world  to  secure  many  brethren,  and  be  the  Firstborn  among  them.  No 
narrow  jealousies  '.lerel  In  the  holiest  sense  it  is  true  regarding  God's  family  that  "  the 
more"  there  are  in  it,  "  the  merrier"  will  all  be.  Now,  God's  purpose,  foreknowledge, 
and  prcdi  stination  are  robbed  of  every  repulsive  feature,  when  we  bear  in  mind  that 
individuals  are  not  predestinated  to  salvation  without  regard  to  their  moral  state. 
They  are  piedestinated  to  become  Ohrist-like.  Men  may  reject  the  call  of  God  to 
Chritt-likeness,  but  his  purpose  is  not  nullified  by  such  wickedness.  His  purpose  was 
pure  in  calling  them,  even  though  they  reject  the  call.  And  so  it  is  in  the  light  of 
this  holy  purpose  to  make  men  Ohrist-like  that  wo  are  to  regard  the  predestination, 
and  the  call,  and  the  justification,  and  the  glorification.  The  glory  when  reached,  the 
glory  of  Christ-likeness,  sheds  its  heavetily  halo  over  all.  May  we  all  reach  that  paradise 
of  experience,  likeness  to  our  blessed  Lord ! — K.  M.  E. 

Vers.  31 — 39. — Faith  rising  into  assurance.  We  have  appreciated  the  paradise  ot 
pardon,  of  afceptance,  of  sanctifloation,  into  which,  in  spite  of  this  life's  sufferings, 
believers  in  Jesus  come.  And  now  we  are  to  study  that  hymn  of  courageous  a-isuranoe, 
into  which  the  apostle  rises  at  the  close  of  the  chapter.  Nowhere  does  St.  Paul  rise  into 
■obler  eloquence  than  here. 

I.  The  belibvub's  soliloquy.  (Vers.  31,  32.)  In  this  soliloquy  the  apostle 
reviews  the  whole  previous  argument.  Ch.  i. — v.  is  God  for  us — justification  by  faith ; 
ch.  vi. — viii.  is  God  in  us— sanctifloation  through  the  Spirit  of  Chiist.  Wliat  can  be 
said  to  these  things?  If  God  be  for  us,  then  we  ask  naturally  and  logically:  1.  Who 
can  he  against  usf  With  God  as  our  Ally,  we  may  safely  face  the  world  in  arms. 
Assurance  is  thus  traced  to  its  Divine  Source.  It  is  not  boasijuliioss,  but  humble 
dependence  upon  the  almighty  strength  of  God.  The  One  is  more  than  a  match  for 
all  his  and  our  foes.  2.  In  sparing  not  his  own  Son,  he  has  given  us  the  greatest  pledge 
of  his  good  will.  In  delivering  up  his  Son  to  the  death  for  us  all,  Gul  was  giving  to 
man  his  very  greatest  Gift.  It  implies  that  the  lesser  gifts  of  the  Spirit  and  of  providence 
shall  not  be  wanting. 

"  He  who  his  Son,  most  dear  and  loved. 
Gave  up  for  us  to  die. 
Shall  he  not  all  things  freely  give 
That  goodness  can  supply  ?  " 

It  was  a  similar  argument  through  which  Abraham  pfissed.  He  journeyed  to. Mount 
Moriah  to  offer  Isaac  as  a  burnt  offering.  He  found  there  that  God  had  provided  a 
substitute  in  the  ram  caught  in  the  thicket,  and  that,  therefore,  Isaac  could  go  free. 
He  accordingly  called  the  place  "  Jehovah-jireh  " — the  Lord  will  look  after  everything, 
and  I  shall  not  want  any  really  good  thing  from  his  hands  (Gen.  xxii.).  Christ  crucified 
is  thus  the  foundation  of  the  believer's  assurance. 

II.  The  believer's  challenge.  (Vers.  33 — 36.)  And  here  we  have  a  challenge; 
1.  To  all  who  may  dispute  his  right  to  salvation.  (Vers.  33, 34.)  For  :  (1)  Justification  is 
from  Ood.  And  he  has  taken  every  possible  charge  into  account.  (2)  The  ground  of 
the  justification  is  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  (3)  The  guarantee  of  it  is  the  resurrection, 
reign,  and  intercession  of  Jesus.  With  a  risen  Saviour  on  the  throne,  making  intercession 
for  us,  who  will  dare  to  dispute,  and  who  will  succeed  in  preventing,  our  pardon  and 
acceptance?  It  is  thus  that  the  apostle  works  the  great  facts  of  our  Saviour's  history 
into  the  experience  of  the  believer.  2.  We  have  a  challenge  to  all  adverse  circumstances. 
(Vers.  35 — 37.)  The  believer  can  defy  his  environment,  as  it  is  now  called,  as  well  as 
his  enemies.  Tribulntinn,  distress,  persecution,  famine,  nakedness,  peril,  swonl, — one 
and  all  shall  be  found  to  be  powerless  in  separating  him  from  the  love  of  Christ,  Jesus, 
with  his  loving  and  almighty  arm,  can  hold  his  pople  safe  in  every  trial  and  dilBculty. 
What  have  these  adverse  circumstances  been  but  opportunities  for  the  exercise  of 
preserving  power?  They  are  golden  opportunities  which  Christ  embraces  for  exhibiting 
his  power  to  save.  And  so  here  we  have  the  true  Christian  evidence,  that  Jesus  can 
preserve  his  people  in  spite  of  all  apparently  adverse  things. 


OH.  IX.  1-33.]    THE  .EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


261 


nL  The  bblibvbr's  buprbmb  persuasion.  (Vers.  38,  39.)  In  these  verses  the 
apostle  exhausts  the  category  and  declares  his  persuasion  that  not  one  of  the  things  or 
persons  embraced  shall  be  able  to  separate  the  believer  from  the  Divine  Igve.  Let  us 
glance  at  them  in  order.  1.  Death  shall  be  no  separating  power.  So  far  from  this,  the 
believer  is  enabled  to  rejoice  in  the  fact  that  to  die  shall  be  gain ;  absent  from  the  body, 
present  with  the  Lord.  The  king  of  terrors  will  only  usher  the  emancipated  spirit  into 
the  near  presence  of  his  Lord.  2.  Life  shall  prove  no  separating  power.  Even  when 
it  is  flowing  full  and  free,  with  all  its  garish  and  distracting  shows,  it  will  not  be 
allowed  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ.  Of  the  two  dangers  to  our  union  with 
Christ,  life  is  greater  than  death,  but  not  so  great  as  to  defeat  the  loving  jiower  of  Jesus. 

3.  Angels,  principalities,  powers,  shall  prove  no  separating  power.  This  must  refer 
to  the  evil  angels,  to  Satan  and  his  hosts ;  for  the  good  angels  are  our  helpers  (Heb.  i. 
14).      A  risen  Saviour  is  more   than  sufficient  to  meet-  and  overthrow  them  all. 

4.  Things  present,  appealing  to  sense,  shall  also  be  unable  to  separate  us  from  Christ's 
love.  They  are  subtle  and  powerful  foes,  yet  Christ  can  vanquish  them.  He  can 
conquer  the  inclination  to  be  over-occupied  with  such  things.  5.  Things  to  come, 
appealing  to  fear,  shall  be  unable  to  separate  us  from  Christ.  No  possible  combination 
of  circumstances  can  perplex  him.  He  is  more  than  a  match  for  all.  6.  Height,  depth, 
or  any  other  creature,  shall  likewise  be  unable  to  separate  us  from  the  Lord's  love. 
Neither  space  nor  time,  things  physical  or  things  metaphysical,  shall  be  able  to 
endanger  oui  union  with  Christ.^ — B.  M.  E, 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Ver.  1 — ch.  xi.  36. — 2.  The  present  posi- 
tion and  prospects  of  the  Jewish  nation  con- 
sidered. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — (1)  Veep  regret  expressed  for 
the  present  exclusion  of  the  Jewish  nation 
from  inheritance  of  the  promises.  This  sec- 
tion is  not  necessary  for  the  main  argument 
of  the  Epistle,  which  would  have  been  com- 
plete without  it  for  an  exposition  of  God's 
righteousnesa,  ch.  xii.  following  naturally 
the  conclusion  of  ch.  viii.,  and  these  inter- 
vening chapters  having  no  immediate  con- 
nection with  the  preceding  or  succeeding 
context.  But  it  was  a  subject  too  deeply 
fixed  in  St.  Paul's  mind  to  be  left  un- 
noticed. And  besides,  what  he  had  said  at 
the  beginning  of  his  treatise,  and  afterwards 
implied,  seemed  to  call  for  some  explanation 
in  the  face  of  existing  facts.  For  he  had  said 
(ch.  i.  16),  that  the  gospel  "  was  the  power 
of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that 
believeth ;  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the 
Gentile;"  and  throughout  he  has  regarded  it 
as  the  fulfilment  of  the  peculiar  promises 
made  to  the  Jews  themselves,  who  were  to 
have  precedence,  thougli  not  monopoly,  in 
the  inheritance  of  its  blessings.  How,  then, 
was  this  view  consistent  with  the  fact  tliat 


the  Jews  in  general,  even  more  than  any 
others,  were  now  excluded  from  this  inheri- 
tance? The  apostle  has  already,  even  in 
the  course  of  his  argument,  paused  to  meet 
certain  supposed  difficulties  of  this  kind  in 
the  short  section,  ch.  iii.  1 — 8  ;  but  now  he 
takes  up  the  whole  subject  formally,  and 
considers  it  in  all  its  bearings. 

First,  in  oh.  ix.,  he  expresses  his  deep 
sorrow  for  the  fact ;  but  shows  it  to  be  not 
inconsistent  either  with  God's  faithfulness 
to  his  promise,  or  with  his  justice,  or  with 
the  Word  of  prophecy. 

Ver.  1. — ^I  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie 
not,  my  conscience  also  bearing  witness 
with  me  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  For  similar 
solemn  asseverations  by  St.  Paul  of  the  truth 
of  what  was  known  to  himself  alone,  of.  ch. 
i.  9 ;  2  Cor.-xi.  31 ;  Phil.  i.  8  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  7. 
The  peculiar  solemnity  of  this  may  be  due 
to  the  peculiar  depth  of  his  feelings  on  the 
subject.  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  him 
to  be  moved  by  a  fear  of  Iris  patriotic  en- 
thusiasm being  doubted,  now  that  lie  had 
turned  Christian,  and  argued  so  strongly 
against  Jewish  monopoly  of  privilege  But 
it  may  have  been  so.  For  the  force  of  iy 
XpiffTo),  cf..2  Cor.  ii.  17;  ch.  xii.  19;  Eph. 
iv.  17 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  1.  It  is  not  an  adjura- 
tion,  but  d(tfiotes  the  element  in  which  h« 
moves  and  speaks.    Similarly,  iv  Tlytiiiari 


'  Cf.  Sauriu's  'Sermons,'  tome  iii.  p.  1 


262 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.    itSB.  tk.  1—dS. 


irylti)  following  (cf.  1  Cot.  xiL  3),  which,  of 
course,  could  not  he  on  oath. 

Vers.  2,  S.^rThat  I  have  great  heaviness 
and  continual  sorrow  in  my  heart.  He  does 
not  say  what  for,  leaving  it  to  appear  in 
what  follows.  The  broken  sentence  is  signi- 
ficant of  emotion.  For  I  could  wish  that  I 
myself  were  accursed  from  Christ  for  my 
brethren,  my  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh. 
None  of  the  ways  that  have  been  suggested 
for  evading  the  obvious  meaning  of  this 
assertion  aie  tenable.  One  such  way  is  to 
take  the  imperfect  TiixiM"  "^  expressing 
what  he  once  wished,  viz.  before  his  con- 
version ;  so  that  the  meaning  would  be, 
"  My  interest  in  my  own  people  is  such  that, 
in  my  zeal  for  them,  I  once  myself  desired  to 
be  entirely  apart  from  Christ ;  I  myself  said, 
"ATOfle/io  'l-ri<rovy  (1  Oor.  xii.  3),  and  perse- 
cuted his  followers."  Neither  the  natural 
force  of  the  imperfect  here  (as  to  which  cf. 
Acts  XXV.  22 ;  Gal.  iv.  20),  nor  that  of 
kvdeeiia  elyai,  nor  the  context,  allow  this 
subterfuge.  Another  way  is  to  understand 
ivdeefm  elvai  as  implying  only  devotion  to 
temporal  destruction,  i.e.  to  a  violent  death. 
In  Lev.  xxvii.  every  animal  devoted  to  the 
Lord  (in  the  LXX.  StviBefia)  is  surely  to  be 
put  to  death ;  and  this  has  been  conceived 
as  all  that  is  implied  here.  So  Jerome, 
'  Qusest.  9,  ad  Algas.,'  and  Hilary,  'Ad  Ps. 
8.'  But  how  then  about  Att!)  Xpio-ToS?  The 
words  hvdQ^iia  and  avdBiqfiaj  from  avariOrifiif 
both  denote  primarily  what  is  offered  or  set 
apart;  the  latter  being  applied  to  things 
devoted  to  God's  honour  and  service  (cf 
Luke  xxi.  5),  the  latter  always  in  the  New 
Testament  used  to  denote  rejection  or  devo- 
tion to  evil.  It  occurs  in  Acts  xxiii.  14 ;  1 
Oor.  xii.  3 ;  xvi.  22  ;  Gal.  i.  8,  9.  It  cer- 
tainly means  here  separation  from  the  com- 
munion of  Christ,  in  the  same  sense  as 
KaTTjpy^Bsre  airh  tov  XptffTOv  (Gal.  V.  4), 
Even  if  the  expression  dvdBe/ia  elvat  be  under- 
stood as  meaning  in  itself  excommunication 
only  (as  avdSe/ia  icrrai  in  ecclesiastical  usage), 
the  addition  of  dirh  rov  XpurroS  evidently 
implies  more  than  mere  separation  from 
outward  Church  communion.  The  apostle 
can  hardly  mean  otherwise  than  that  he 
would  forfeit  his  own  communion  with 
Christ  on  behalf  of  (uirip)  his  countrymen, 
if  so  they  as  a  nation  could  be  brought  to 
accept  the  gospel.  This  certainly  was  a 
strong  thing  to  say,  and  it  may  seem  to  us 
to  imply  an  impossibility,  if  wo  compare  it, 
for  instance,  with  cli.  viii.  38,  "  I  am  per- 
suaded," etc.  But  we  need  not  understand 
a  passing  expression  of  feeling,  however 
real,  as  a  deliberate  utterance.  The  imper- 
fect nvx^nvv  implies  only  that  the  fact  had 
passed  through  his  mind  in  the  intensity  of 
his  desire  for  the  salvation  of  liis  brethren. 
It  corresponds  with  the  saying  of  Moses 


under  the  like  strong  emotion,  "Yet  now, 
if  thou  wilt  forgive  tlieir  sin — ;  and  if  not, 
blot  me,  I  pray  thee,  out  of  the  book  which 
thou  hast  written  "  (Exod.  xxxii.  32).  Bengel 
remarks  well, "  Ex  summa  fide  (cap.  8)  nunc 
summum  ostendit  amorem,  ex  amore  divino 
Dccensum.  Kes  non  poterat  fieri,  quam 
optarat:  sed  votum  erat  pium  et  solidum, 
quamlibet  cum  tacita  oonditione,  H  fieri 
postet."  Also,  "  De  raensura  amoris  in  Mose 
et  Paulo  non  facile  est  existimare.  Eum 
enim  modulus  ratiocinationum  nostrarum 
noncapit;  sicut  heroum  bellicorum  animos 
non  capit  parvulus." 

St.  Paul  proceeds,  in  the  spirit  of  a 
patriotic  Jew,  which  he  ever  retained,  to 
enumerate  the  peculiar  privileges  of  the 
chosen  people,  their  possession  of  which 
rendered  their  pre-sent  failure  to  realize  their 
purpose  so  peculiarly  disappointing  and 
distressing. 

Vers.  4,  5. — Who  {oXtiv^s,  with  its  usual 
sense  of  quippe  qui)  are  Israelites;  whose 
is  the  adaption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  cove- 
nants, and  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  the 
service  of  God,  and  the  promises ;  whose  are 
the  fathers,  and  from  whom  is  Christ  as  con- 
cerning the  flesh,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed 
forever.  Amen.  Here  "  the  adoption  "(wo- 
eecria)  means  the  selection  of  Israel  to  be 
God's  peculiar  people  (of.  Exod.  iv.  22, 
"  Israel  is  my  son,  even  my  firstborn ; " 
Dent.  xiv.  1,  "  Ye  are  the  children  of  the 
Lord  your  God ; "  Hos.  xi.  1,  "  When  Israel 
was  a  child,  I  loved  him,  and  called  my  son 
out  of  Egypt ; "  also  Exod.  xix.  5.  Cf.  also 
TM^/a  TOV  0coS  in  ver.  8  below).  It  is,  of 
course,  a  different  idea  from  that  of  the 
spiritual  vloSio-la  of  believers  (at  present  as 
in  ch.  viii.  15,  or  to  come  as  in  ch.  viii.  23), 
though  it  might  be  typical  of  it.  "The 
glory  "  (ji  5(i|a)  seems  best  explained  by  re- 
ference to  2  Cor.  iii.  7 — 18,  where  the  visible 
glory,  said  to  have  rested  on  the  mercy-seat 
and  to  have  illuminated  for  a  time  the  face 
of  Moses,  is  regarded  as  expressing  the  glory, 
in  a  higher  sense,  of  the  old  dispensation, 
which,  however,  was  destined  to  fade  away 
in  the  greater  glory  of  the  revelation  of  God 
in  Christ.  The  word  may  be  thus  taken  to 
denote,  not  simply  the  Shechinah,  or  the 
glory  on  Mount  Sinai,  but  rather  what  was 
si!>;nified  by  these  manifestations.  It  was 
probably  a  recognized  term  in  use  with 
reference  to  the  giving  of  the  Law.  "  The 
covenants "  (at  SiaBrJKai),  and  "  the  pro- 
mises "  (oi  ^5ro77EA.(ai),  both  in  the  plural, 
include  those  made  with  and  given  to  Abra- 
ham and  the  other  patriarchs,  as  well  as  the 
Mosaic  ones.  The  former  word  is  wrongly 
taken  by  some  as  denoting  the  tablet  of  the 


OH.  IX  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


263 


covenant.  'H  Aarpeta  is  obYiously  the  di- 
vinely appointed  ceremonial  vrorsliip,  the 
typical  significance  of  which  is  explained  at 
length  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  where 
the  same  word  is  used."  "  The  fathers  "  (oi 
iraT€p6s)  are  the  patriarchs,  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  the  original  recipients  of  the 
promises,  descent  from  whom  was  made 
such  account  of  by  the  Jews,  as  being  the 
foundation  of  their  privileges  (cf.  Matt.  iii. 
9  ;  Luke  iii.  8 ;  xiil.  28 ;  John  viii.  39 ;  and, 
for  the  use  of  varep^s  in  this  sense,  cf.  Acta 
iii.  22  ;  xiii.  32  ;  ch.  xv.  8 ;  Heb.  i.  1).  The 
last  and  crowning  distinction  of  the  Jewish 
race  is  mentioned  last,  viz.  the  fleshly  de- 
scent therefrom  of  Christ,  even  of  him  who 
in  his  higher  nature  is  "  over  all,  God  blessed 
for  ever."  This  is  certainly  the  most  ob- 
vious meaning  of  the  conclusion  of  ver.  5, 
as  far  as  the  language  is  concerned,  and  the 
one  understood  by  all  ancient  commentators. 
Some  modems,  however,  as  is  well  known, 
have  raised  objections  to  this  interpretation 
of  the  clause,  ba=ed  solely  on  the  supposed 
improbability  that  St.  Paul  would  have  so 
designated  Christ.  Some  would,  therefore, 
get  over  this  imagined  difficulty  by  putting 
a  full  stop  after  Kath,  ffipxa,  and  taking 
what  follows  as  a  doxology  to  God  the 
Father,  thus :  •  God,  who  is  over  all,  be 
blessed  for  ever."  The  apostle  is  supposed, 
according  to  this  interpretation,  to  have 
been  moved  to  this  parenthetical  utterance 
by  his  contemplation  of  the  Divine  favours 
to  Israel,  which  he  had  been  recounting. 
Some  have  suggested  the  full  stop  being 
put  after  irivTuv,  so  as  to  refer  &  &v  iTti  irdv- 
Twv  to  Christ,  and  take  only  what  follows  as 
a  doxology,  or,  as  some  would  have  it,  as  a 
statement.  But,  in  either  case,  the  idea  of 
so  unlikely  a  breaking  up  of  the  sentence 
may  be  dismissed  as  untenable.  Others, 
without  thus  breaking  up  the  sentence,  take 
the  whole  of  it,  beginning  with  b  tbv,  to  be, 
not  a  doxology,  but  a  statement,  thus  at- 
tempting to  meet  the  objection  to  its  being 
a  doxology  (to  be  noticed  presently),  arising 
from  the  collocation  of  the  words.  But  a 
mere  assertion  that  God  is  blessed  for  ever 
would  seem  peculiarly  uncalled  for  and  pur- 
poseless here.  Meyer,  being  a  critic  of  de- 
served repute,  and  an  upholder  of  the  modern 
interpretation  of  the  clause,  taking  the 
whole  of  it  together  as  a  doxology  to  the 
Father,  it  may  sufflce  to  state  his  argu- 
ments. (1)  Tljat  St.  Paul,  though  regard- 
ing the.  Son  of  God  as  the  image  of  God,  of 
the  essence  of  God,  the  agent  in  creation 
and  preservation,  tlie  judge  of  all,  the  object 
of  prayer,  and  the  possessor  of  Divine  glory 
and  fulness  of  grace  (ch.  i.  4 ;  x.  12 ;  Phil 
ii.  6;  Col.  i.  15,  etc.;  ii.  9;  Eph.  i.  20,  etc.; 
1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4 ;  viii.  9),  never 
expressly  calls  him  @e&s,  but  always  clearly 


distinguishes  him  as  the  Kipios  from  0eiri 
and  that  the  passages  in  which  @sh  hai 
been  supposed  by  some  to  apply  to  him  (ag 
in  2  Thess.  i.  12,  Kara  r^i/  x'^P^^  '^'^^  &eov 
Vfiav  Kol  Kvplov  'ItjctoS  Xpurroi ;  and  Eph.  v. 
5 ;  Titus  i.  4)  are  wrongly  so  understood ; 
3r,  not  0eij,  being  also  undoubtedly  the 
original  reading  in  1  Tim.  iii.  16.  (Of  St. 
Paul's  usual  distinction  between  ®€hs  and 
Kiptos,  when  he  is  referring  to  the  economy 
of  redemption,  other  instances  a«e  found  in 
1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  xii.  4,  5,  6 ;  Eph.  iv.  4,  5,  6. 
That  he  does  usually  so  distinguish  is  un- 
doubted.) (2)  That,  according  to  the  old 
ecclesiastical  interpretation,  "  Christ  would 
be  called  here,  not  only  God,  but  even  God 
over  all,  and  consequently  would  be  desig- 
nated as  Be6s  iravTOKpAtapy  which  is  abso- 
lutely incompatible  with  the  entire  view  of 
the  New  Testament  as  to  the  dependence  of 
the  Son  on  the  Father."  (,S)  That "  in  the  pro- 
perly apostolical  writings  (2  Pet.  iii.  18  does 
not  belong  to  them,  nor  does  Heb.  xiii.  21) 
we  never  meet  with  a  doxology  to  Christ 
in  the  form  which  is  usual  in  doxologies  to 
God."  Meyer  adds  in  a  note,  "  2  Tim.  iv. 
18  certainly  refers  to  Christ ;  but  this  is  just 
one  of  the  traces  of  post-apostolic  composi- 
tion." Now,  to  these  arguments  it  may  be 
replied  as  follows  :  To  (1)  that,  though  it 
may  be  true  that  St.  Paul  in  no  other  pas- 
sage expressly  calls  Christ  @sds,  yet  his 
doctrine  with  respect  to  his  Divine  nature  is 
in  accordance  with  the  expression ;  for  surely 
the  term  eejs  is  applicable  to  him  who  is 
spoken  of,  as  e.g.  in  Phil.  ii.  6  and  Col.  i.  15, 
etc. ;  that  his  usual  distinction  between  the 
supreme  God  and  Christ  as  Mediator  by  no 
means  precludes  his  declaring  in  express 
terms  Christ's  essential  Deity  in  a  passage 
where  such  a  declaration  is  suitable  and 
called  for;  that  even  St.  John,  who  is  ac- 
knowledged by  all  to  have  peculiarly  set 
forth  the  Divine  essence  of  Christ,  only 
once  uses  the  expression,  0e!>s  ^v  6  A6yos, 
or  any  exactly  equivalent  to  it.  To  argu- 
ment (2)  it  may  be  replied  that  the  language 
used  does  not  identify  Christ  with  the 
Father  as  S  iravToKpirup  @ehs,  especially 
if  we  suppose  a  comma  after  iriiiTwv,  so  that 
the  meaning  would  be,  "  Christ  who  is  over 
all,  God  blessed  for  ever."  That  Christ  is 
"over  all"  is  what  is  distinctly  declared  else- 
where by  St.  Pavd,  and  ©eis,  etc.,  may  bo 
appended  predicatively  to  denote  his  Divine 
essence.  As  to  argument  (3),  it  is  neces- 
sary to  exclude  not  only  2  Peter  and  He- 
brews, but  also  2  Timothy  from  the  list  of 
apostolical  writings  in  order  to  givo  it  any 
force.  But  even  so  it  would  be  irrelevant ; 
for  the  sentence  before  us  is  not  a  doxology, 
but  an  assertion :  it  is,  according  to  the 
ancient  interpretation,  not  "  Blessed  fc« 
Christ  as  God  for  ever;  "  but  "  Christ,  who 


264 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  E0MAN8.    [oh.  ix.  1—33. 


i»  God  blessed  for  ever."  The  positive 
reasons  for  retaining  the  ancient  interpreta- 
tions may  be  stated  as  follows :  (1)  Not 
one  of  the  Greek  or  other  Fathers,  or  any 
interpreter  before  Erasmus,  is  known  to 
have  understood  it  otherwise.  (2)  It  gives 
the  most  obvious  sense  of  the  words  them- 
selves. It  may  well  be  contended  that  no 
other  would  have  been  thought  of,  but  for 
the  supposed  discrepimoe  with  the  apostle's 
usual  way  of  speaking  of  Christ.  (3)  Where- 
as a  doxology  to  God  the  Father  does  not 
seem  called  for  here,  or  to  have  any  very  ob- 
vious bearing  on  the  writer's  train  of  thought, 
some  assertion  of  the  Divine  greatness  of 
Christ  seems  wanted  to  complete  the  repre- 
sentation of  the  final  and  crowning  privilege 
of  the  race  of  Israel.  'O  S>y  eVl  TroWmr 
would  indeed  suffice  for  this  purpose,  if  it 
could  be  dissevered  from  what  follows.  But, 
as  has  been  said  above,  it  is  not  allowable  so 
to  break  np  the  sentence.  Cf.  also  ch.  i.  4, 
where  the  statement  that  Christ  had  been 
bom  of  the  seed  of  David,  acaorcling  to  the 
flesh,  is  followed  by  an  assertion  also  of  his 
Divine  Sonship.  (4)  If  the  sentence  liad 
been  intended  as  a  doxology,  etiKoyriThs  ought 
property  to  have  preceded  @eis  (of.  Luke  i. 
68,  EvKoyriTits  Kupios  6  0edj  rov  'Iffpa^h ; 
Eph.  i.  3,  Ev\oy7iThs  i  0fir  xal  IIj  'rjp,  etc. ; 
1  Pet.  i.  3,  where  the  same  expression 
occurs);  whereas  in  every  other  passage 
where  eii\oyrirhs  follows  the  subject  of  the 
aentence,  it  is  an  assertion,  and  not  a 
doxology  (cf.  ch.  i.  25;  2  Cor.  xi.  31).  (5) 
The  whole  objection  to  the  ancient  interpre- 
tation rests  solely  on  the  views  of  modem 
critics  as  to  what  they  think  St.  Paul  was 
likely  to  mean — net  on  what  his  language 
most  obviously  intimates  that  he  did  mean 
— a  very  unsafe  principle  of  interpretation. 
Our  safe  conclusion  seems  to  be  that  modern 
criticism  has  not  made  out  a  suiBcient  case 
for  departing  from  the  unanimous  ancient 
interpretation  of  this  passage. 

Vers.  6— 13.— (2)  (o)  After  this  avowal 
of  his  deep  sorrow,  and  his  reasons  for  feeling 
it,  the  apostle  now  proceeds  to  deal  with  the 
subject.  First  (as  has  been  said  above)  he 
shows  (vers.  6 — 13)  that  the  present  ei.- 
olusion  of  the  great  majority  of  the  Jews 
from  Christian  privileges  does  not  imply 
any  unfaithfulneea  on  God's  part  to  his 
ancient  f)romises;  and  thus  it  follows  that 
the  fact  of  their  exclusion  is  no  proof  of 
the  gospel  not  being  the  true  fulfilment  of 
those  promises. 

Vers.  C,  7.— But  it  is  not  as  though  the 
Word  of  God  hath  taken  none  effect  (or,  hath 
enmp  to  naught,  iKirewTaKev).    For  they  are 


not  all  Israel  who  are  of  Israel;  neither, 
becanse  they  are  the  seed  of  Abraham,  are 
they  all  children :  bnt.  In  Isaac  shall  thy. 
seed  be  called.  The  promises  to  the  patri- 
archs never,  from  -the  first,  implied  the 
inheritance  of  them  by  all  the  physical 
descendants  of  those  patriarchs ;  even  in 
Israel  there  is  a  recognized  distinction 
between  being  of  the  race  of  Israel  and 
bt^ing  the  tnie  Israel  of  God  ;  in  the  original 
promise  to  Abraham  the  descendants  of 
Ishmael  (though  equally  with  those  of  Isaac, 
his  physical  seed)  were  excluded.  And  bo 
even  the  race  of  Israel  is  but  a  part  of  the 
whole  seed  of  Abraham,  to  whom  the 
promise  was  made.  Hence  it  follows  that 
the  present  exclusion  of  the  majority  of 
even  the  race  of  Israel  from  the  inheritance 
of  the  promises  is  not  inconsistent  with  the 
original  purport  of  those  promises.  The 
quotation  from  Gen.  xxi.  12,  "  In  Isaac," 
etc.,  is  properly  (as  in  the  original  Hebrew) 
"  In  Isaac  shall  a  seed  be  named  to  thee ;  " 
i.e.  "  In  Isaac  it  shall  come  to  pass  that 
posterity  of  thine  shall  have  the  name  and 
position  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and  be  re- 
cognized as  the  inheritors  of  the  promise  " 
(Meyer). 

Vers.  8,  9. — That  is,  They  whioh  are  the 
children  of  the  flesh,  these  are  not  the  chil- 
dren of  Ood :  bnt  the  children  of  the  promise 
are  counted  for  seed.  For  the  word  of 
promise  is  this.  At  this  time  wiU  I  come, 
and  Sarah  shall  have  a  son  (Gen.  xviii.  10). 
In  other  words,  it  is  not  in  virtue  of  mere 
carnal  descent,  but  of  the  promise,  that 
any  are  so  counted;  meie  carnal  descent 
establishes  no  claim.  It  is  io  be  observed 
tliat  in  the  first  recorded  promises  to 
Abraham  (Gen.  xiii.  15 ;  xv.  5 ;  xvii.  7) 
there  was  no  restriction;  and  so  through 
Ishmael,  who  is  also  called  Abraham's 
seed  (Gen.  xxi.  13),  as  well  as  through 
Isaac,  the  fulfilment  might  have  been. 
But  the  subsequent  promise  (Gen.  xvii.  19, 
21 ;  xviii.  10,  14)  limited  it  to  Isaac;  whioh 
limiting  promise  is,  therefore,  in  ver.  9,  re- 
ferred to.  With  Teicva  rov  0eoC  in  ver.  8 
compare  t)  vtoBea-la  (ver.  4),  and  also  Isa. 
Ixiii.  16.  The  apostle  may  have  been  led 
to  use  the  expression  here  in  view  of  the 
spiritual  sonship  to  God  of  Christians  (cf. 
ch.  viii.  15,  etc.)  which  was  typified  and  pre- 
pared for  by  the  vtoBe<ria  of  the  chosen  seed. 
A  still  further  limitation  of  "  the  children  of 
the  promise  "  is  next  referred  to ;  and  one 
still  more  telling  for  the  apostle's  argument. 
It  might  be  said  that  Ishmael  was  not,  even 
carnally,  the  true  seed,  as  being  horn,  not  of 
the  wile,  but  of  the  bondwoman ;  or  per- 
haps that  he  had  forfeited  any  claim  he 
might  have  had  by  his  proved  unwortliinesa 
(Gen.  xxi.  9,  etc.).  But  Esau  and  Jacob 
were  twin  children,  not  only  of  the  same 


OH.IX.  1— 33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS. 


265 


patriaich  (i(  evhi),  but  also  of  the  same 
wedded  wife ;  and  yet  one  was  chosen  and 
the  other  rejected,  and  this  even  before 
birth  ;  eo  that,  as  the  seleclion  was  not  due 
to  oamal  descent,  so  neither  could  it  be 
due  to  proved  desert.  Thus  by  this  second 
consideration  is  disposed  of  the  Jew's 
assertion  of  an  indefeasible  claim  to  in- 
heritance of  the  promises  on  the  ground  of 
his  boasted  works,  as  by  the  other  is  dis- 
posed of  his  cluim  on  tlie  ground  of  his  race. 
St.  Paul's  argument  to  tlie  Jews  of  his  own 
day  would  be — You  cannot  set  up  a  claim  to 
be  all  of  you  the  necessary  inheritors  of  the 
promises  for  all  time  on  the  ground  either  of 
your  carnal  descent  or  of  your  works,  since 
the  selection  of  Israel  hiiuself  did  not  depend 
on  either  of  those  grounils ;  nor  can  you 
say  that  my  position  (viz.  that  Christian 
believers,  to  the  exclusion  of  most  of  you, 
are  now  the  true  Inheritors  of  the  promises) 
implies  unfaithfulness  in  God  to  his  ancient 
promises;  for  it  is  in  accordance  with  the 
principle  oh  which,  according  to  your  own 
Scriptures,  he  fulfilled  of  old  his  promises  to 
the  pati  iarchi.  St.  Paul,  however,  is  not  to 
be  understood  here  as  writing  with  a  direct 
polemical  intention,  but  rather  as  discussing 
a  problem  which  had  at  one  time  perplexed 
himself,  and  which  seemed  to  him  to  call 
for  solution. 

Ver.  10.— But  not  only  this  ;  but  Eebecca 
also,  when  she  had  conceived  by  one,  even 
by  Isaac  onr  father.  The  sentence  thus 
begun  is  not  formally  completed,  being 
taken  up — after  tlie  parenthetical  ver.  11 — 
by  "  It  was  said  unto  her  "  in  ver.  1 2. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — For  the  children  being  not 
yet  bom,  neither  having  done  any  good  or 
evil,  that  the  purrose  of  God  according  to 
election  (i.e.  ihe  principle  of  his  electing  to 
privileges  of  his  own  godU  will  and  purpose, 
and  not  on  the  ground  of  any  fancied  human 
claims)  might  stand  (iieyri>  *-^-  should  re- 
main in  foree,  ever  applicable),  not  of  works, 
but  of  him  that  calleth;  it  was  said  unto 
her,  The  elder  shall  serve  the  younger  (Gen. 
XXV.  23).  As  it  is  written,  Jacob  I  loved, 
but  Esau  I  hated  (Mai.  i.  2,  3).  It  is  here  to 
be  carefully  observeii  that,  though  Jacob  and 
Esau  were  individuals,  yet  it  is  not  as  such, 
but  as  the  progenitors  and  representatives 
of  races,  that  they  are  here  spoken  of.  So 
it  was,  too,  in  botli  the  passages  quoted  from 
the  Old  Testament.  In  Gen.  xxv.  23  the 
words  are,  "  Two  nations  are  iu  thy  womb, 
and  two  manner  of  people  shall  be  separated 
from  thy  bowels ;  und  the  one  people  shall 
be  stronger  than  the  other  people ;  and  the 
elder  shall  serve  the  j'ouuger."  In  Mai.  i. 
2  the  prophet's  entire  drift  is  to  set  forth 
the  Divine  favour  shown,  from  the  first  and 
Btill,  to  the  race  of  Israel  as  compared  with 
the  ra-;e  of  Edom.     Hence,  as  well  as  from 


the  purport  of  the  chapter  as  announced  at 
its  beginning,  it  is  evident  that  the  subject 
of  individual  predestination  does  not  really 
come  in,  as  it  did  in  ch.  viii.,  but  only  that 
of  nations  or  races  of  men  to  a  position 
of  privilege  as  inheritors  of  promises.  It 
will  be  seen,  also,  as  we  go  on,  that  the 
introduction  in  illustration  of  tlie  case  of 
the  individual  Phai  aoli  does  not  really  affect 
the  drift  of  the  chapter  as  above  explained. 
The  strong  expression,  "  Esau  I  hated " 
(applicable,  as  shown  above,  not  to  the  in- 
dividual Esau,  but  to  tlie  race  of  Edom)  is 
capable  of  being  explained  as  meaning,  "  I 
excluded  him  Irom  the  love  I  showed  to 
Israel."  The  evidence  of  such  alleged  hatred 
the  prophet  expresses  thus;  "and  laid  his 
mountains  and  his  heritage  waste  for  the 
dragons  of  the  wilderness  ; "  whereas  Israel, 
it  is  implied,  had  been  protected  from  such 
desolation.  As  to  the  necessary  force  of 
the  word  in  the  Hebrew  (jn^m),  we  may 
compare  Gen.  xxix.  30,  31,  where  in  ver. 
30  it  is  said  that  Jacob  loved  Bachel  more 
than  Leah,  and  in  ver.  31,  as  meaning  the 
same  thing,  that  Leah  was  hated;  and 
Heut.  xxi.  15,  "  If  a  man  have  two  wives, 
one  beloved  and  another  hated."  In  both 
these  passages  the  same  verb  is  used  as  in 
Malachi,  and  need  not,  in  either  case,  mean 
more  than  disregarding  one  in  comparison 
with  another  who  is  loved.  For  the  use,  in 
the  New  Te-stament,  of  the  Greek  word 
/iuTfiv  in  a  sense  for  the  expression  of  which 
our  English  "  to  hate,"  in  its  usual  accepta- 
tion, is  evidently  too  strong,  cf.  Luke  xiv. 
26  (to  be  compared  with  Matt.  x.  37)  and 
John  xii.  25;  so  also,  though  not  so  dis- 
tinctly, Matt.  vi.  2-t  and  Luke  xvi.  13. 
It  is,  moreover,  not  improbable  that  the 
Prophet  Malachi,  in  his  patriotic  ardour, 
had  in  his  mind  the  idea  of  wrath  against 
the  race  of  Edom  on  the  part  of  the  Lobd, 
as  "  the  people,"  as  he  afterwards  says, 
"against  whom  the  Lord  hath  indignation 
for  ever."  But  even  so,  the  glowing  lan- 
guage of  prophets  need  not  be  taken  as  dog- 
matic assertion ;  and  certainly  not  as  bind- 
ing us  to  believe  that  any  race  of  men  is,  in 
the  literal  sense  of  the  expression,  hated  of 
God.  Such  a  view  is  in  evident  contradiction 
to  the  general  teaching  of  Scripture,  and 
notably  so  to  that  of  St.  Paul,  who  has  so 
emphatically  declared  that  God  "  made  of 
one  blood  all  nations  of  men,"  and  is  One  to 
all. 

Vers.  14 — 24. — (6)  In  the  next  section 
injustiee  on  the  part  of  God,  in  thus  electing 
the  objects  of  his  mercy  according  to  the 
good  pleasure  of  his  will,  is  repudiated. 
As  in  ch.  vi.  1  and  vii.  7,  a  false  inlerence 
from  what  has  been  said  is  introduced  by 


266 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  ix.  1— 33. 


rl  otv  ^poSi'E)/,  end  indignantly  rejected  by 
liil  yevoiTo,  followed  by  reasons  against  the 
inference. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — What  shall  we  say  then  1 
Unrighteousness  with  God?  ("Is  there"  sup- 
plied in  the  Authorized  Version  somewhat 
wealcens  the  force  of  the  expression.)  God 
forbid !  For  to  Hoses  he  saith,  I  will  have 
mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy,  and  1  will 
have  compassion  on  whom  I  will  have  com- 
passion. So  then  it  is  not  of  him  that  willeth, 
nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that 
showeth  mercy.  The  argument  (thus  in- 
troduced by  yap)  lequires  two  understood 
premisses — that  God  cannot  possibly  be 
unrighteous,  and  that  what  he  himself  said 
to  Moses  must  be  true.  These  premisses 
assumed,  the  apostle  reasons  thus  :  "  What 
I  have  said  of  God's  way  of  dealing  with 
men  does  not  imply  unrighteousness  in 
him;  for  ib  agrees  with  what  he  said  of 
himself  to  Moses."  The  quotation  is  from 
Exod.  xxxiii.  19.  Moses  had  besought  the 
LoKD  to  show  him  his  glory,  as  a  token  that 
he  and  the  people  had  found  grace  in  his 
sight  (vers.  16,  18).  The  Lord,  in  answer 
to  his  prayer,  makes  "  all  his  goodness  pass 
before  him,"  in  token  that  such  grace  had 
been  found ;  but  declares,  in  the  words 
quoted,  that  all  such  grace  accorded  was 
not  due  to  any  claim  on  the  part  of  man, 
but  to  his  own  good  pleasure. 

In  the  verses  that  follow  (17,  18)  it  is 
further  shown,  by  the  same  kind  of  argu- 
ment, that,  as  God  declares  himself  to  accept 
whom  he  will,  so  he  also  declares  himself 
to  reject  whom  he  will ;  and  hence,  as  his 
power  is  absolute,  so  is  his  justice  unim- 
peachable, in  himself  determining  the 
objects  of  his  reprobation  no  less  than  the 
objects  of  his  mercy.  This  appears  from 
what  he  is  recorded  (Exod.  ix.  16)  to  have 
eaid  through  Moses  to  Pharaoh. 

Vers.  17, 18.— For  the  Scripture  saith  unto 
Pharaoh,  Even  for  this  same  purpose  (rather, 
for  this  very  purpose)  did  I  raise  thee  up, 
that  I  might  show  in  thee  my  power,  and 
that  my  Name  might  be  declared  throughout 
all  the  earth.  The  conclusion  follows  :  So 
then  he  hath  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have 
mercy,  and  whom  he  will  he  hardeneth. 
The  passage  quoted  in  ver.  17,  taken  (as  it 
is  intended  to  be)  in  conjunction  with  the 
whole  history  as  given  in  Exodus  —  and 
especially  with  the  passages  in  which  God 
himself  is  said  to  have  hardened  Pharaoh's 
heart,  so  that  he  would  not  let  the  chiMrea 
of  Israel  go  — shows  tliat  not  only  the 
deliverance  of  Israel,  but  also  the  obdura- 


tion  of  Pharaoh,  was  due  to  the  deter- 
mination of  God  that  it  should  be  so,  in 
accordance  with  his  own  righteous  purpose, 
which  cannot  be  called  in  question  by  man. 
The  particular  declaration  of  Exod.  ix.  16 
appears  to  be  selected  for  quotation  be- 
cause of  its  relevancy  to  the  case  in  hand, 
which  it  is  intended  to  illustrate ;  viz.  the 
present  rejection  of  the  majority  of  the  Jews 
from  gospel  privileges.  How  this  is  will 
appear  below.  Now,  this  whole  passage  has 
been  used  in  support  of  Calvinistic  views 
of  the  original  absolute  reprobation  of  in- 
dividuals irrespectively  of  their  deserts. 
Calvin  himself  draws  this  conclusion  from 
it,  very  decidedly,  thus :  "  Neqne  enim  prse- 
videri  ruinam  impiorum  a  Domino  Paulns 
tradit,  sed  ejus  consilio  et  voluntate  ordinari; 
quemadmodum  et  Solomon  docet  (Prov.  xvi. 
4)  non  modo  prsecognitum  tuisse  impiorum 
interitum,  sed  impios  ipsos  I'uisse  destinato 
creates,  ut  perirent"  ('In  Epist.  Pauli  ad 
Bom.,'  on  ch.  ix.  18).  It  is,  therefore,  impor- 
tant to  consider  carefully  both  the  original 
meaning  of  the  verse,  quoted  from  Exodus, 
and  the  apostle's  application  of  it.  First, 
with  reference  to  Pharaoh  himself,  what  is 
meant  by  "I  raised  thee  up  (f'l^ycipa)"? 
Not  "  created  thee ; "  nor  (as  in  the  Vulgate, 
and  as  Augustine,  Calvin,  and  some  others 
interpret)  excitavi  te,  i.e.  "  stirred  thee  up  " 
to  resist  my  will,  that  I  might  exhibit  my 
power  in  confounding  thee.  Whether  or 
not  St.  Paul's  i^jiyeipa  would  bear  this 
sense,  it  is  quite  inadmissible  in  the  LXX. 
(from  which,  in  this  expression,  he  varie.'i), 
and  also  in  the  Hebrew,  of  which  the  proper 
rendering  is,  "  1  made  thee  to  stand."  The 
LXX.  lias  eVe/cev  toutou  SieT'qp^Bjjs,  meaning 
that  Pharaoh  had  been  kept  alive  instead 
of  being  at  once  cut  off,  that  God's  powrar 
might  be  displayed'  in  him.  (The  idea  thus 
expressed,  it  may  be  observed,  accords  closely 
with  that  of  ver.  22  below,  where  the  case 
of  Pharaoh  is  still  in  view;  "endured  with 
much  long-suffering,"  etc.  Thus,  though 
the  rendering  StfTnpiiBris  may  be  incorrect, 
and  varied  by  St.  Paul,  yet  he  still  seems  to 
recognize  the  idea  which  it  expresses.)  St. 
Paul's  rendering,  which  is  closer  to  the 
Hebrew  than  the  LXX.,  seems  to  mean, 
"  laised  thee  to  thy  present  position  of 
power  and  greatness"  (or  possibly,  as  Meyer 
explains,  "caused  thee  to  emerge,"  i.e.  in 
history:  "Thy  whole  historical  appearance 
has  been  brought  about  by  me,  in  order 
that,"  etc.).  Thus  the  expression  cannot 
mean,  either  that  God  had  brought  Pharaoh 
originally  into  existence  for  the  sole  purpose 
of  destroying  him,  or  that  he  had  from  the 
first  irresistibly  incited  him  to  obduracy  in 
order  to  condemn  him,  and  so  destroy  him. 
The  Lord  says  in  effect  to  him,  "  Tliou  art 
now  great  and  powerful ;  but  it  is  I  that 


CH.  IX.  1—33.]     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


267 


made  thee  so,  or  still  keep  thee  so:  and 
.  thia,  not  that  thou  mayest  accomplish  tliine 
own  will,  but  subserve  mine,  and  that  my 
power  to  work  out  my  own  purposes  of 
mercy  or  of  judgment  may  be  the  more 
notably  displayed."  For  how  is  God's  pur- 
pose in  so  raising  Pharaoh  up  defined? 
"  That  I  might  show  in  thee  my  power,  and 
that  my  Name  might  be  declared  through- 
out all  the  earth ;  "  i.e.,  as  is  evident  from 
the  history,  by  the  deliverance  of  Israel  in 
spite  of  Pharaoh's  opposition  through  the 
judgments  sent  on  him  and  his  people  to 
that  end.  There  is  plainly  nothing  in  the 
original  history  to  imply  Pharaoh's  indi- 
vidual ,reprobation  with  regard  to  hi  a  own 
eternal  salvation,  but  only  liie  discomfiture 
in  his  opposition  to  the  Divine  purpose"  of 
mercy  to  Israel.  But  still,  with  a  view  to 
such  execution  of  his  purposes,  God  him- 
self is  said  to  have  hardened  Pharaoh's 
heart;  and  it  is  to  this  that  the  apostle 
draws  special  attention  In  conclusion,  as 
denoting  that  which  it  is  his  design  to  sliow. 
Itis  thus  certainly  declared  that  this  harden- 
ing was  from  God.  But  even  so,  it  is  no- 
where said  that  God  had  made  Pharaoh's 
heart  hard  from  the  first,  so  that  he  had 
been  all  along  incapable  of  acting  otherwise 
than  he  did.  Tlie  inference  rather  is  that, 
after  wilful  resistance  to  appeals,  final 
obduracy  was  sent  on  him  as  a  judgment. 
And  it  is  further  to  be  observed  that  in  some 
verses  in  Exodus  (viii.  15,  19,  32 ;  ix.  34) 
Pharaoh  is  said  to  have  hardened  his  own 
heart,  with  the  addition,  in  Exod.  ix.  34,  of 
"he  sinned  yet  more;"  while  in  otliers 
(Exod.  vii.  14,  22;  ix.  7,  35)  it  is  only  said 
generally  that  "hia  heart  was  hardened." 
The  two  forms  of  expression  seem  to  denote 
two  aspects  of  final  obduracy  in  man — 
according  to  one  as  being  self-induced, 
according  to  the  other  as  judicial.  Thus 
also  in  1  Kings  xxii.  the  Lokd  himself  is 
said  to  have  sent  the  lying  spirit  into  the 
-heart  of  Ahab's  prophets,  in  order  that  he 
might  rush  to  his  ruin,  though  it  was 
obviously  due  to  his  own  sins  that  he  was 
thus  finally  doomed.  A  striking  instance 
of  the  two  aspects  of  human  obduracy  is 
found  in  Isa.  vi.  9,  etc.,  and  the  reference 
to  the  passage  by  our  Lord  in  Matt.  xiii. 
15.  In  Isaiah  it  is,  "Make  the  heart  of 
thia  people  fat,"  etc.;  but  in  our  Lord's 
reference,  "For  this  people's  heart  is  waxed 
gross,  and  their  ears  are  dull  of  hearing, 
and  their  eyes  have  they  closed ;  "  as  if  the 
closing  hnd  been  tlieir  own  doing  (cf.  Mark 
iv.  12  ;  Luke  viii.  10).  The  following  lines 
express  a  like  conception  of  judicial  blind- 
ness— 

"  For  when  we  in  our  viciousness  grow  hard 
(O  misery  on't  I),  the  wise  gods  seal  our 
eyes. 


In  OUT  own  fllth  drop  our  clear  judgments, 

make  us 
Adore  our  errors,  laugh  at  ui  while  wa 

strut 
To  our  confusion." 

We  may  compare  also  the  Latin  saying. 
Quern  Deus  vult,  perdere  prius  demeutal, 
which  by  no  means  implies  that  the  divinely 
dementated  persons  have  not  deserved 
destruction.  Such,  then,  seems  the  view  to 
be  taken  of  what  is  said  about  Pharaoh 
himself.  But  the  important  thing  to  be 
kept  in  view  for  a  proper  understanding 
of  the  drift  of  the  passage  is  that,  though 
Pharaoh  was  himself  an  individual,  his 
case  is  adduced  in  no  connection  witli  the 
question  of  individual  predestination,  but 
in  illustration  of  the  principle  on  which 
nations,  or  races  of  men,  are  elected  to  or 
rejected  from  the  enjoyment  of  Divine  favour. 
This  is  the  real  subject  of  the  whole  cliapter ; 
and  hence  to  build  on  thia  part  of  it  a  doc- 
trine of  individual  election  or  reprobution 
is  to  bring  into  it  what  is  not  there.  The 
drift  of  the  passage  before  us  is  this : 
Moses  and  the  Israelites  of  old  illustrate 
the  position  of  the  faithful  remnant  of  the 
Jews  together  with  all  Christian  believers 
now.  Pharaoh  illustrates  the  position  of 
the  obdurate  majority  of  the  Jewish  nation 
now.  As  he,  in  setting  himself  against  the 
Divine  purpose,  and  relying  on  his  own 
strength,  was  unable  to  thwart  God's  design 
of  mercy  to  his  chosen,  and  was  himself 
hardened  and  rejected,  so  the  Jews  as  a 
nation  now.  And  aa  then,  so  vow.j  both 
the  election  and  the  rejection  are  to  be 
referred  entirely  to  the  will  of  God,  having 
mercy  on  whom  he  will  and  hardening 
whom  he  will,  hia  justice  in  doing  both 
being  nevertheless  unimpeachable. 

Ver.  19. — Thou  wilt  say  then  unto  me, 
Why  doth  he  yet  find  fault  I  Tor  who 
resisteth  his  wiHI  Having  shown  that 
injustice  cannot  be  imputed  to  God  in 
hardening  as  well  as  having  mercy  on  whom 
he  will,  the  apostle  now  meets  the  supposed 
difficulty  of  understanding  why  men  should 
be  held  guilty  before  God  for  but  being  a? 
he  wills  them  to  be.  It  is  immediately 
suggested  by  Pharaoh's  case,  which  led  to 
the  conclusion,  Sv  6e\ei  irK\ripvvsi;  but  the 
apostle  foresees  that  an  objection  might  be 
raised  on  this  ground  to  his  finding  fault 
with  the  Jews  for  rejecting  Christ,  and 
them  he  especially  has  in  view  in  what 
follows.  It  may  be  observed  here  that 
there  is  undoubtedly  a  difficulty  to  the 
human  mind  in  reconciling  theoretically 
Divine  omnipotence-  with  human  free-will 
and  resppnsibility.  (On  the  general  question, 
see  notes  on  ch.  viii.)  St.  Paul  here,  aftei 
his  manner,  does  not  attempt  to  solve  the 
general  problum,  couSuiag  himself  for  the 


268 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  ix.  1—33. 


present  to  the  Diyine  side  of  it.  His  answer, 
in  vers.  20,  21,  is  simply  to  the  effect  that 
God  has  tlie  absolute  right  as  well  as  power 
to  deal  with  his  own  creation  as  he  pleases, 
and  that  man  is  in  no  position  to  "contend 
with  the  Almighty"  (see  Job  xl.  2).  He 
brings  in  from  tlie  prophets  the  Illustration 
of  the  potter's  power  and  right  over  the 
clay,  which  he  fashions  and  deals  with  as 
he  chooses.  It  will  be  seen,  however,  as  we 
go  on,  that  this  illustration  by  no  means 
involves,  as  by  some  it  has  been  supposed 
to  do,  the  idea  of  rejection  and  condemnation 
irrespectively  of  desrrt. 

Vers.  20,  21. — Nay  but,  0  man,  who  art 
thou  that  repliest  against  God  ?  Shall  the 
thing  formed  say  to  him  that  formed  it. 
Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus  ?  (Isa.  xxix. 
16;  xlv.  9).  Hath  not  the  potter  power 
(rather,  authority)  over  the  clay,  of  the 
same  lump  to  make  one  vessel  unto  honour, 
and  another  unto  dishonour?  (Jer.  xviii. 
1—10).  The  figure  of  the  clay,  first  intro- 
duced from  Isaiah,  is  carried  out  at  lengtli 
in  the  passage  from  Jeremiah  which  is  re- 
ferred to.  It  is  important,  for  understanding 
St.  Paul's  drift,  to  examine  this  passage. 
The  prophet,  in  order  that  he  might  under- 
stand God's  way  of  dealing  with  nations, 
is  directed  to  go  down  to  the  potter's  house, 
and  watch  the  potter  at  his  work.  The 
potter  is  at  work  with  a  lump  of  clay,,  with 
the  view  of  making  a  vessel  of  it ;  but  it  is 
"  marred  in  the  hand  of  the  potter;"  it  does 
not  come  out  into  the  form  intended  ;  so  he 
rejects  it,  and  makes  anew  another  vessel 
after  his  mind,  "  as  seemed  good  to  the 
potter  to  make  it."  The  prophet's  applica- 
tion of  the  illustration  is  that,  "  as  the  clay 
is  in  the  potter's  hands,  so  are  ye  in  mine 
hand,  O  house  of  Israel,  saith  the  Lord  ; " 
meaning  that  if  the  house  of  Israel  failed 
to  answer  to  the  Lobd's  purpose,  he  could 
reject  it  at  his  pleasure,  as  the  potter  did 
the  marred  vessel ;  and  in  vers.  7 — 10  the 
view  is  extended  to  God's  power  over,  and 
way  of  dealing  with,  all  nations  of  man- 
kind ;  and  then,  in  ver.  11,  the  men  of 
Juilah  are  warned  to  return  from  their  evil 
ways,  lest  the  Lokd  should  so  do  unto  them. 
Thus  it  is  by  no  means  implied  by  the 
illustration  that  Israel,  or  any  other  nation, 
has  been  formed  with  the  primary  and  irre- 
siotible  purpose  of  rejecting  it  as  a  "  vessel 
unto  dishonour,"  or  that,  when  rejected,  it 
has  not  had  opportunity  of  being  otherwise ; 
but  only  that  God  hns  absolute  power  and 
right  over  it,  to  reject  it  if  proved  unworthy. 
It  cannot  then  resist  his  will  (fioiKrujia,  i.e. 
determination  or  resolve  ;  not  here  B^Kima. 
Tlie  primary  Divine  e4\t}fM  is  "  that  all 
men  should  be  saved,  and  come  to  a  know- 
ledge of  the  tfuth  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  4) ;  and  this 
meu   do  resist.      For    distinction  between 


fleAeo'  and  $oi\e<r8ai,  cf.  Matt.  i.  19) ;  but 
yet  he  may  "  find  fault "  with  justice.  It  is 
here  again  evident  that  it  is  not  individuals, 
but  nations,  that  are  in  view  all  along. 
The  apostle  goes  on  next  to  consider  whether, 
in  God's  actual  dealings  with  the  "  vessels 
unto  dishonour,"  there  may  not  be,  not 
only  great  forbearance,  but  also  a  merciful 
purpose. 

Vers.  22— 24.— What  if  (literallj',  but  if, 
involving  an  anacoluthon)  God,  williiig  to 
show  his  wrath,  and  to  make  Ms  power 
known,  endured  with  much  long-suffering 
vessels  (not,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version, 
the  vessels)  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction : 
and  that  he  might  make  known  the  richies 
of  his  glory  on  vessels  of  mercy  which  he 
afore  prepared  unto  glory;  whom  he  also 
called,  even  us,  not  of  the  Jews  only,  but 
also  of  the  Gentiles.  "  And  "  at  the  begin- 
ning of  ver.  23  is  omitted  in  the  uncial  B, 
and  there  is  considerable  authority  of  ver- 
sions and  Fathers  for  rejecting  it.  Without 
it  the  sentence  runs  better,  and  its  drift 
becomes  more  apparent.  The  purpose  ex- 
pressed in  ver.  23  thus  comes  out  distinctly 
as  the  grand  ultimate  Divine  purpose,  to 
which  the  display  of  wrath  and  power 
spoken  of  in  the  previous  verse  is  but  sub- 
sidiary; and  this  drift  becomes  the  more 
apparent,  if  we  supply  in  English,  as  we  may 
do,  "while"  before  "willing"  in  ver.  22. 
Thus  the  drift  would  be,  "What  if  God, 
while  willing  to  exhibit  his  wrath  and  mani- 
fest his  power,  endured  with  much  long- 
suffering  vessels  of  wrath  that  had  become 
fitted  for  destruction,  in  order  that  he  might 
manifest  the  riches  of  his  glory,"  etc.  The 
idea  expresseil  by  "endured,"  etc.,  seems 
suggested  by  Pharaoh's  case  (see  on  ver.  17 
with  regard  to  the  word  Si£Tripi]8r]S  in  the 
LXX.,  which  the  apostle  appears  here  to  re- 
tain the  idea  of,  though  he  varied  from  it); 
but  it  is  the  Jewish  nation  of  his  own  day 
that  he  has  now  in  view.  They  were  rejected 
from  inheritance' of  the  promises,  and  under 
Divine  wrath  ;  as  he  says  in  another  place, 
"  The  wrath  had  come  upon  them  to  tlie 
uttermost"  (1  Thess.  ii.  16).  But  they  were 
still  borne  with;  they  were  not  ■  finally  cut 
off;  and  what  if  their  present  rejection  were 
but  subservient  to  the  great  purpose  of  mercy 
to  the  true  Israel?  The  tliought,  hinted 
here,  is  carried  out  in  oh.  xi.,  where  even  the 
idea  is  further  entertained  of  Israel  itself 
as  a  nation,  after  judgment  endured,  coming 
into  God's  true  fold  at  last,  according  ta 
the  design  of  God,  through  ways  inscrutable 
by  us,  to  "  have  mercy  upon  all."  The 
forms  of  expression  used  in  the  passagj 
before  us  are  to  be  noted  in  support  of  the 
view  we  have  taken  of  St.  Paul's  general 
meaning.  "  The  vessels  of  wrath  "  are  said 
to  be  "  fitted  to  destruction  "  (^tcar-npTurfiim 


CH.  IX.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS. 


269 


(It  air<i\(iav) ;  of  the  "  vessels  of  mercy  "  it 
is  said  that  God  "afore  prepared"  them 
unto  glory.  Predestination  to  salvation  is 
certainly  a  doctrine  of  St.  Piiul,  but  he  no- 
where intimates  predestination  to  reproba- 
tion. Further, "  Non  dicit  qusa  TrpoKOT^pTKre, 
Bed  icaTripTitriifva.:  prsescinditur  a  causa  efflci- 
ente:  tantum  dicitur  quales  inveniat  Deus 
quibus  iram  infert"  (Bengel).  Lastly,  it 
may  be  observed  tliat,  though  h  wporiroinwnv 
eU  8((|o»  carries  with  it  the  idea  of  individual 
salvation,  yet  this  only  comes  in  as  the  out- 
come and  ultimate  purpose  of  the  calling 
of  nations  or  races  of  men.  The  drift  of 
the  preceding  argument  remains  still  what 
it  has  been  stated  to  be. 

Vers.  25 — ^9. — (c)  The  inheritance  of  the 
promises  by  the  Gentiles,  with  a  remnant 
only  of  the  Jews,  shown  to  he  in  accordance 
with  prophecy.  This  is  really  a  new  section 
of  the  argument,  though  the  writer,  in  a 
way  usual  with  him,  does  not  mark  it  as 
such,  ver.  25  being  in  logical  connection 
with  the  preceding  one,  suggested  by  the 
concluding  expression,  "Not  of  the  Jews 
only,  but  also  of  the  Gentiles."  So  far 
nothing  iias  been  adduced  to  support  the 
idea  of  Gentiles,  to  whom  no  original 
promises  had  been  made,  superseding  the 
Jewish  nation  in  the  inheritance,  though 
it  had  been  shown  generally  that  God  may 
have  mercy  on  whom  he  will ;  and  in  the 
earlier  part  of  the  argument  (vers.  6 — 13) 
all  that  appeared 'plainly  from  the  Old  Tes- 
tament was  selection  out  of  the  total  seed  of 
Abraham — not  the  calling  of  a  new  one 
apart  from  his  stools.  Hence  this  section 
is  necessary  for  completing  the  whole  argu- 
ment. 

Vers.  25,  26. — As  he  saith  also  in  Osee,  I 
will  call  my  people  that  which  was  not  my 
people,  and  beloved,  her  who  was  not  be- 
loved. And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  in  the 
place  where  it  was  said  unto  them,  Te  are 
not  my  people,  there  shall  they  be  called 
the  children  of  the  living  God.  The  quo- 
tation in  ver.  26  is  from  Hos.  i.  10,  and  is 
correctly  cited ;  that  in  ver.  25  is  from  Hog. 
ii.  23,  and  varies  from  both  the  Hebrew  and 
the  LXX.,  but  not  so  as  to  affect  the  mean- 
ing. Both  refer  to  the  same  subject.  The 
prophet  had  been  directed  to  "take  unto 
him  a  wife  of  whoredoms."  He  had  so 
taken  "Gomer  the  daughter  of  Diblaim," 
who  had  home  him  a  daughter,  to  whom 
was  given  the  symbolical  name  Lo-ruhamah 
("  Not  beloved ; "  or,  as  it  ia  interpreted  in 
1  Pet.  ii.  10,  "  Hatb  not  obtained  meroy." 


"  Love  and  meroy  are  both  contained  in  the 
full  meaning  of  the  intensive  form  of  the 
Hebrew  word,"  Pusey  on  'Hosea');  and 
afterwards  a  son,  who  received  the  name 
Loammi  (" Not  my  people ").  Both  are 
symbols  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel  as  dis- 
tinct from  Judah  ;  the  two  names  denoting 
(as  Pusey  explains)  successive  stages  of 
God's  repudiation  of  the  people,  and  the  last 
implying  entire  rejection.  But  in  Hos.  i. 
10,  after  the  naming  of  Lo-ammi,  it  is  said, 
"  Yet  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel 
shall  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  which  can- 
not be  measured  nor  numbered ;  and  it  shall 
come  to  pass,  that  in  the  place  where  it  was 
said  unto  them.  Ye  are  Lo-ammi,  it  shall 
be  said  unto  them.  Ye  are  tbe  children  of 
the  living  God."  The  subject  is  pursued 
through  Hos.  ii.,  at  the  end  of  which  (ver.  28) 
comes  the  other  passage  quoted :  "  And  I 
will  sow  her  unto  me  in  the  earth ;  and  I 
will  have  meroy  on  Lo-ruhamah;  and  I  will 
say  to  Lo-ammi,  Ammi  ['  My  people '],  and 
they  shall  say.  My  God."  It  might  seem 
that  these  quotations  are  not  apposite,  since 
they  referred  originally,  not  to  the  Gentiles, 
but  to  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel.  It  is  to  be 
observed,  however,  that  the  words  were 
spoken  after  these  tribes  had  been  declared 
to  be  cut  off  from  being  God's  people  at  all, 
so  that  a  principle  of  Divine  dealing  is  ex- 
pressed which  is  applicable  to  the  Gentile 
world.  "  Tills,  which  was  true  of  Israel  in 
its  dispersion,  was  much  more  true  of  the 
Gentiles.  These,  too,  the  descendants  of 
righteous  Noah,  God  had  cast  off  for  the 
time,  that  they  should  be  no  more  his  people, 
when  he  chose  Israel  out  of  them,  to  make 
known  to  them  his  Being,  and  his  will,  and 
his  laws,  and  (althougli  in  shadow  and 
mystery)  Christ  who  was  to  come.  He  had 
threatened  to  Israel  that  he  should  be  un- 
pitied,  and  no  more  his  people;  in  reversing 
his  sentence,  he  embraces  in  the  arms  of 
his  meroy  all  who  were  not  his  people,  and 
says  to  them  all,  that  they  should  be  my 
people  and  beloved  "  (Pusey  on '  Hosea,'  ii.  23). 
In  1  Pet.  ii.  10  the  same  text  from  Hosea  is 
quoted  as  applying  to  those  who  wure  ad- 
dressed in  the  Epistle,  and  then  with  more 
obvious  applicability  ;  for  it  appears  to  have 
been  written,  mainly  at  least,  to  Israelites 
of  the  dispersion  (see  ch.  i.  1).  Still,  Gentils 
converts  may  be  concluded  to  have  been 
included  (of.  ch.  i  14 ;  iv.  3).  It  is  to  be 
observed  that  in  ver.  25  the  feminine  riyjiirn- 
ixirnv  has  reference  to  the  daughter  of  the 
prophet,  Lo-ruhamah ;  and  that  in  ver.  26 
"  in  the  place  where  "  must  be  understood, 
both  in  the  original  prophecy  and  the  appli- 
cation, as  meaning  any  region  where  those 
who  were  to  be  called  my  people  might  be. 
"  And  so  St.  Peter  says  that  this  Scripture 
was  fulfilled  in  them,  while  itill  teaCtered 


270 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  ix.  1— 33. 


ahroad  through  Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia, 
Alia,  and  Bithynia.  The  place,  then,  where 
they  should  be  called  the  sons  of  the  living 
God  18  wheresoever  they  should  believe  in 
Christ"  (Pusey). 

"  'Tis  Zion,  wJieresoe'er  they  dwell, 
Wiio,  with  his  own  true  Israel, 
Shall  own  him  strong  to  save." 
(•Christian  Year:  Fifth  Sunday  in  Lent.') 

The  texts  from  Isaiah  which  follow  are  in- 
tended to  show  that,  according  to  prophetic 
utterance,  while  those  who  were  not  God's 
people,  in  large  numbers,  would  be  called 
his  people,  a  lemnant  only  of  the  Jews  would 
be  so. 

Vers.  27,  28. — Esaias  also  crieth  (/cpafei, 
denoting  loud  and  earnest  utterance;  of. 
John  i.  15 ;  vii.  28,  37  ;  xii.  44 ;  Acts  xxiii. 
6;  xxiv.  21)  concerning  Israel,  Though  the 
number  of  the  children  of  Israel  be  as  the 
sand  of  the  sea,  the  remuaiit  (not,  as  in  the 
Authorized  Version,  "  a  remnant."  The 
idea  seems  to  be,  as  it  is  in  the  original, 
that  it  is  the  remnant  only  that)  shall  be 
saved :  for  he  will  finish  a  word  (not  the 
toorfc,  at  in  the  Authorized  Version)  and  out 
it  short :  because  a  short  (rather,  cut-short) 
word  (again,  not  work)  will  the  Lord  make 
(i.e.  accomplish)  upon  the  earth.  The 
Greek  of  ver.  28,  according  to  the  Textus 
Beceptus,  is  difficult,  so  as  to  have  com- 
pelled our  translators  to  render  the  par- 
ticiples (TvvreXiiov  KoX  trvvTcfivutf  by  futures, 
"  will  finish,"  etc.  But  we  have  the  high 
and  early  authority  of  the  uncials  (t,  A,  B, 
for  omitting  part  of  the  sentence,  so  as  to 
mLike  it  read  more  intelligibly,  thus :  The 
Lord  will  make  (i.e.  accomplish)  o  u>ord  upon 
the  earth,  finishing  it  and  cutting  it  short. 
The  longer  form,  however,  agrees,  though 
not  quite  exactly,  with  the  LXX.,  which 
differs  itself  greatly  from  the  Hebrew, 
though  not  so  as  to  affect  the  main  drift  of 
the  passage  as  a  whole.  The  passage  is 
from  Isa.  x.  22,  which  had  primary  reference 
to  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Israel  that 
should  "return  unto  the  mighty  God  "  (Isa. 
I.  21)  after  the  then  predicted  devastation  of 
the  nation  by  the  Assyrian  king.  The  series 
of  prophecies  with  which  this  is  connected 
begins  at  Isa.  vii.,  which  gives  an  account 
of  Isaiah's  memorable  visit  to  Ahaz  King 
of  Judah,  on  the  occasion  of  the  combi- 
nation of  Pekah  King  of  Israel,  and  Rezin 
King  of  Syria,  against  Jerusalem,  in  the 
course  of  which  visit  he  predicts  the  birth 
of  Immanuel.  He  took  with  him  his  son, 
who  bore  the  symbolical  name  of  Shear- 
jashub  ("  A  remnant  shall  return  ").  Subse- 
quently another  son  was  born  to  the  prophet, 
to  whom  was  given  the  name  Maher-shalal- 
hash-baz  ("Swift  of  spoil,  hasty  of  prey," 
u  Ewald  renders ;  or,  "  The  spoil  speedeth, 


the  prey  hasteth,"  as  in  margin  of  the  Revised 
Version) ;  the  latter  name  having  been  pre- 
viously written  on  a  great  roll  (Isa.  viii.  1). 
The  primary  drift  of  the  prophecies  in  Isa. 
vii.  and  the  following  chapters  is  that  the 
confederacy  of  Pekah  and  Rezin  against 
Jerusalem  shall  fail,  that  their  own  lands 
would  ere  long  be  devastated  by  the  As- 
syrian king,  who  would  sweep  irresistibly 
over  Judah  too;  but  that  God's  people  may 
still  trust  in  the  Lobd's  protection,  who  would 
preserve  and  bring  back  a  remnant,  tliough 
a  remnant  only.  The  three  names,  Maher- 
sbalal-hash-baz,  Shear-jashub,  and  Imma- 
nuel ("  God  with  us  "),  are  throughout  sig- 
nificant of  the  leading  ideas  of  the  whole 
series  of  predictions;  the  first  expressing 
the  certainty  of  coming  judgment,  the  second 
tlie  return  of  the  remnant,  and  the  third 
God's  own  presence  with  his  people.  Now, 
without  pausing  to  consider  what  primary 
historical  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  about 
Immanuel  there  might  be  in  the  way  of 
type,  we  cannot  but  perceive,  in  the  language 
and  tone  of  much  in  this  series  of  prophe- 
cies, a  distinct  Messianic  reference.  Wo 
cannot,  for  instance,  otherwise  understand 
Isa.  ix.  6,  7 ;  and  in  Isa.  xi.  there  succeeds 
an  ideal  picture  of  peace  and  blessing  under 
the  "  tod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse,"  which 
is  undoubtedly  Messianic.  Hence  the  rele- 
vance of  the  passage,  not  only  as  showing 
God's  way  of  deaUng  with  his  people  in 
times  of  old,  but  also  as  an  intimation  of 
how  it  should  be  when  the  Messiah  should 
come. 

Ver.  29. — And  as  Esaias  hath  said  befor* 
(t.e.  in  an  earlier  chapter),  Except  the  Lord  of 
sabaoth  had  left  us  a  seed,  we  should  have 
been  as  Sodom,  and  been  made  like  nnto 
Gomorrah.  This  quotation  is  from  Isa.  i.  9, 
and,  though  it  seems  to  have  no  obvious 
reference  to  the  Messianic  age,  it  expresses 
the  same  idea  as  the  other,  of  a  remnant 
only  being  saved ;  and  it  is  quoted  suitably, 
occurring  as  it  does  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Book  of  Isaiah,  and  being  a  sort  of  key-note 
of  the  prevailing  purport  of  his  prophecies. 
The  force  of  all  the  above  quotations  is 
much  enhanced,  if  we  remember  that  they 
are  not  mere  isolated  texts,  but  suggestive 
specimens  of  many  prophetic  utterances  to 
the  same  effect.  All  familiar  with  the 
prophetic  writings  are  aware  that  main 
ideas  constantly  recurring  are :  First,  judg- 
ments to  come  upon  the  chosen  people, 
painted  often  in  many  consecutive  verses 
witliout  relief;  but  secondly,  after  such 
denunciations,  a  dawn  of  hope  and  comfort 
appearing,  and  culminating  in  unutterable 
blessing  under  the  Messiah's  kingdom  ;  and 
thirdly,  this  dawn  of  hope  being  for  a  rem- 
nant only  of  tlie  race,  compared  in  one  place 
to    a    gleaning  of   the    grapes  when  the 


CH.IX.  1— 33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


271 


vintage  is  done  (Isa.  xxiv.  13) ;  and  fourthly, 
the  association  with  this  remnant,  not  only 
of  the  "  outcasts  of  Israel "  gathered  from 
all  lands,  but  also  of  a  multitude  of  Gentiles, 
who  should  be  gathered  into  the  Messiah's 
kingdom  (of.  Zeph.  iii.  12,  etc. ;  Zech.  xiii.  9 ; 
Amos  ix.  9 ;  Joel  ii.  32 ;  Isa.  vi.  13 ; 
Ki.  6;  Ix.). 

"Ver.  30— oh.  x.  2t— (3)  The  cause  is  in 
the  fault  of  the  Jews  themselves.  Hitherto 
the  apostle  has  viewed  his  subject  from  the 
side  of  the  Divine  will  and  purpose  (see 
note  on  ver.  19).  He  now  views  it  from 
the  side  of  human  responsibility.  The 
rejection  of  the  Jews  is  now  attributed, 
not  to  God's  purpose  to  reject  them,  but 
to  their  own  fault,  in  that  they  would  not 
accept  God's  terms.  "Hie  expresse  ponit 
causam  reprobationis,  quia  scilicet  nolint 
eredere  Evangelio.  Ideo  supra  dixi,  simili- 
tudinem  de  Into  non  ita  accipiendam  esse 
quasi  non  sit  in  ipsa  voluutate  hominia 
causa  reprobationis  "  (Melancthon). 

Vers.  30,  31.— What  shall  we  say  then? 
That  the  Gentiles,  which  followed  not  after 
righteousness,  attained  to  righteousness, 
even  the  righteousness  which  is  of  faith. 
Bat  Israel,  following  after  a  law  of  righteous- 
ness, attained  not  to  (or,  arrived  not  at,  so 
as  to  distinguish  s(f>B(ure  els,  used  here,  from 
KaTe\afi€,  previously  used  of  the  Gentiles. 
It  expresses  the  idea  of  failing  to  reach 
what  is  being  pursued)  a  law  of  righteous- 
ness. The  Gentiles  are  liere  said  to  have 
attained  righteousness  (i.e.  the  rigliteousness 
of  God,  appropriated  by  faith,  as  previously 
explained);  but  Israel  to  have  pursued, 
vfithout  reaching  it,  a  law  (not,  as  in  the 
Authorized  Version,  the  Law)  of  righteous- 
ness ;  because  in  the  Law  of  Moses  they 
■ought  a  justifying  law,  which  in  itself 
it  could  not  be.  The  idea  is  resumed  in 
ch.  X.  3.  The  concluding  SiKiuoiriirns  in 
ver.  31,  which  may  have  been  introduced 
into  the  text  to  make  the  meaning  plain, 
is  ill  supported ;  but  the  sense  requires  it 
to  be  understood.  So  far  we  have  a  state- 
ment of  the  facts  of  the  case.  The  reason 
follows. 

Vera.  32,  33.— Wherefore  1  Because  they 
Bought  it  not  of  faith,  but  as  of  works  of 
law.  The  genuineness  of  the  concluding 
word  v6ii.ov  here  is  doubtful.  Its  omission 
does  not  affect  the  sense.  If  retained,  it 
■uust,  according  to  the  rule  obaerved  in  this 


Exposition,  be  translated  law,  not  (he  Law. 
For  they  stumbled  at  the  stone  of  stumbling ; 
as  it  is  written,  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  a  stone 
of  stumbling  and  rook  of  oifence  :  and  hs 
that  (ttSs  before  &  irurTeiav,  expressed  in  the 
Authorized  Version  by  "  whosoever,"  has 
no  good  support,  having  probably  been 
supplied  from  ch,  x.  11)  helieveth  on  him 
shall  not  be  ashamed.  Here,  as  throughout 
the  Epistle,  the  apostle's  position  is  supported 
by  an  Old  Testament  reference.  In  this 
instance  it  is  to  two  passages  of  Isaiah  inter- 
mingled (xxviii.  16  and  viii.  14).  The  way 
in  which  they  are  fused  is  illustrative  of  St. 
Paul's  way,  elsewhere  apparent,  of  referring 
to  Scripture.  As  a  rule,  he  quotes  the 
LXX.,  but  often  varies  from  it,  and  some- 
times so  as  to  be  closer  to  the  Hebrew, 
Sometimes  he  seems  to  be  quoting  from 
memory,  as  one  who  is  familiar  with  the 
general  drift  of  prophecy  on  the  subject  in 
hand,  and  satisfied  if  the  form  of  his 
quotation  expresses  such  general  drift.  In 
the  case  before  us,  he  follows  the  Hebrew 
in  Isa.  viii.  14,  and  the  LXX.  in  xxviii.  16, 
where  for  the  Hebrew  expression  rendered 
"  shall  not  make  haste,"  the  LXX.  haa  cS 
ju^  Karaiffxvv&ri,  apparently  with  the  same 
essential  meaning;  for  "make  haste"  seems 
to  signify  "  haste  away  in  terror  and  con- 
fusion." The  two  texts  combined  express 
the  idea  of  a  stone  being  laid  by  the  Lord 
in  Zion,  which  should  be  the  support  of  the 
faithful,  but  a  stumbling-block  to  others. 
It  is  not  necessary  to  inquire  whether  the 
texts  themselves  have  in  the  original  any 
obvious  Messianic  reference.  Enough  that 
they  denote  God's  plan  of  dealing  with  hia 
people.  But  to  understand  the  full  idea  iu 
the  apostle's  mind,  when  he  speaks  of  "  the 
stone  of  stumbling,"  we  must  take  into 
account  also  Ps.  cxviii.  22,  and  our  Lord's 
language,  as  recorded  in  Matt.  xxi.  42,  44 
and  Luke  xx.  17, 18.  In  the  Psalms  we  find 
the  figure  of  "  the  stone  "  used  thus :  "  The 
stone  which  the  builders  refused  is  become 
the  head  stone  of  the  comer ; "  and  in  the 
Gospels  our  Lord  refers  to  this  text  as  de- 
noting himself,  and  subjoins,  with  reference 
to  Isaiah,  the  idea  of  the  same  stone  being 
one  on  which  some  should  fall  and  be  broken, 
with  the  additional  conception  of  its  crusli- 
ing  those  on  whom  itself  should  fall.  The 
same  view  essentially  is  expressed  in 
Simeon's  words  (Luke  ii.  34),  that  "  this 
Child  "  should  be  for  the  fall  as  well  as  for 
the  rising  again  of  many  in  Israel ;  and  it 
is  repeated  definitely  in  1  Pet.  ii.  7  (ot  also 
Acts  iv.  11 ;  1  Cor.  i.  23). 


272  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  ix.  1—33. 


HOMILETICa 

Ver.  6. — The  true  Jsrctd.  Since  one  great  aim  of  the  apostle  in  this  Epistle  is  to 
combat  the  view  of  religion  which  regarJs  the  external  as  of  main  interest  and  impor- 
tance, he  finds  it  necessary  to  disabuse  of  their  prejudice  and  error  those  Israelites  who 
not  only  prided  themselves  upon  their  descent  from  Abraham  but  who  relied  upon  that 
descent  for  their  acceptance  with  God.  He  points  out  that  it  is  one  thing  to  be  "  of 
Israel,"  i.e,  sprnng  from  the  patriarchs  in  the  way  of  natural  lineage,  and  quite  another 
thing  to  be  "  Israel,"  i.e.  to  possess  the  ideal  character  of  the  true  Israelite.  Even  some 
of  Abraham's  posterity  were  not  included  in  the  covenant,  but  only  the  offspring  of 
Isaac.  This  was  in  itself  a  limitation ;  and  if  God  appointed  a  limitation  of  an  external 
and  racial  kind,  how  far  more  obviously  did  it  consist  with  Divine  wisdom  and  justice 
to  confine  spiritual  blessings  to  those  spiritually  preparer!  and  qualified  to  enjoy  them  1 

I.  Light  is  herb  oast  upon  the  ohabaotbr  and  pubposbs  of  God.  1.  God  is 
faithful  to  his  promises,  but  not  to  men's  misunderstanding  of  these  promises.  2.  GKxl 
is  just,  and  not  partial,  in  his  treatment  of  the  subjects  of  his  kingdom  upon  earth.  3. 
God  does  not  look  upon  men's  outward  relations  and  position,  but  upon  the  character 
and  heart. 

II.  Light  is  cast  upon  the  moeal  condition  and  responsibilities  of  men.  1. 
Men  are  blamable  and  foolish  if  they  rely  upon  adventitious  advantages;  as  e.g.  upon 
parentage,  ancestry,  associations,  acquired  knowledge,  religious  privileges.  2.  Men  are 
wise  if  they  remember,  and  act  upon  their  remembrance,  that  it  is  God's  prerogative 
and  method  to  search  the  heart.  3.  Men  should  use  diligently  the  opportunities  they 
enjoy,  knowing  that  it  is  not  their  advantages,  but  the  use  they  make  of  them,  that  is 
all-important.  4.  Men  should  look  forward  to  the  individual  account  to  be  rendered 
at  the  last  to  the  supreme  Judge  of  all. 

Vers.  25,  26. — A  great  reversal.  Whether  the  original  reference  of  the  prophet  here 
quoted  was  to  the  "  ten  tribes  "  or  to  the  Gentile  world  is,  for  our  purposes,  immaterial, 
since  it  is  unquestionable  that  the  Apostle  Paul  employs  the  quotation  to  illustrate  and, 
in  a  sense,  to  prove  his  contention — that  it  is  the  purpose  of  him,  who  is  Eternal  Wisdom 
and  Unchanging  Righteousness,  to  transfer  privilege  and  blessing  from  those  who  con- 
sidered themselves  to  possess  an  ancestral  claim  to  them,  unto  those  who  had  usually 
been  regarded  as  aliens  and  reprobate — even  the  "  sinners  of  the  Gentiles."  If  this 
phase  of  Divine  action  has  to  some  extent  lost  its  interest  for  us,  the  principle  which  it 
illustrates  is  ever  important. 

I.  The  highly  if avoubed  and  peivilbqbd  mat  abuse  their  advantages,  and  may 
LOiB  them.  Consider  the  case  of  the  Hebrews.  1.  Their  special  prerogatives  in  the 
possession  of  religious  knowledge  and  means  of  spiritual  improvement.  2.  Their  rebel- 
lion and  apostasy  in  yielding  in  the-  earlier  periods  of  their  history  tojemptations  to 
idolatry.  3.  Their  frequent  chastisement,  especially  in  the  Captivity  in  the  East,  and 
in  their  subsequent  national  humiliations.  4.  The  repetition  of  their  insensibility  and 
disobedience  in  the  rejection  of  Jesus,  the  true  Messiah.  5.  The  final  catastrophe  which 
overtook  the  nation,  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  in  the  dispersion  of  the  people 
throughout  the  earth. 

II.  The  less  pavocbed  mat  be,  in  God'b  pbovidenoe,  exalted  to  pbivilege,  and, 

BT   A   RIGHT   USE   OF   IT,  MAY   BECOME   PAKTAKERB   OF   PEIOELESS   SPIBITUAL   BLESSINGS. 

Consider  the  case  of  the  Gentiles.  1.  The  publication  of  the  gospel  to  them  by  St.  Paul 
upon  its  rejection  by  his  own  fellow-countrymen.  2.  The  acceptance  by  many  of  the 
glad  tidings  intended  for  the  enlightenment  and  salvation  of  men.  3.  The  position 
taken  by  Gentile  converts  in  the  diffusion  of  Chriftianity.  4.  The  consequent  con\er- 
sion  of  the  Roman  empire  to  the  faith  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  6.  And  the  course  i>{  th« 
history  of  Christendom,  which  may  all  be  traced  to  the  operation  of  this  wonderful 
principle. 

Application.  1,  They  act  foolishly  who  rely  upon  their  privilegeB.  2.  They  are 
wise  who,  grateful  for  privileges,  are  concerned  so.  to  use  them  that  they  may  not 
lose  them,  so  to  use  them  that  they  may  become  the  vehicles  of  the  highest  spiritual 
blessing  to  themselves  and  to  those  associated  with  them,  over  whom  their  influence 


OH.  IX.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO   THE   ROMANS.  273 

may  extend.  3.  They  who  are  cast  down  because  their  oiroumatanees  seem  unfavour- 
able should  not  forget  that  the  people  who  were  "  not  God's  people  "  became  "  his 
people,"  "beloved,"  "children  of  tiie  living  God." 

Vers.  32,  33. — The  rock  of  offence.  In  one  point  of  view  it  would  seem  all  but 
incredible  that  the  highest  display  of  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness  should  be  regarded, 
by  those  for  whose  benefit  it  was  providi^d,  with  indiffaience  and  even  hostility.  But 
in  order  to  understand  how  this  should  be,  it  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  the  distort- 
ing influence  of  sin  upon  the  minds  of  men.  True  religion  comes  into  conflict  with 
men's  errors,  prejudices,  and  guilty  conscience ;  and  is  a  stone  of  stumbling,  and  rock 
of  offence. 

I.  Chbistianitt  has  no  respect  fob  national  prejcdioes  and  pbidb.  Jew  and 
Gentile,  civilized  and  barbarian,  stand  before  God,  and  his  Law  and  gospel,  upon  the 
same  footing.    All  alike  are  treated  as  guilty,  as  needing  to  repent  in  order  to  salvation. 

II.  ChKISTIANITT  has  no  respect  for  personal  rank  OB  family  REPUTATION.      In 

the  first  age  it  was  especially  observed  that  not  many  great,  or  mighty,  or  noble  were 
chosen.  Such  as  were  chosen  were  accepted  upon  the  same  terms  as  the  lowly  and  the 
obscure. 

III.  OhBISTIANIT?     dobs    not    make    SPIRITUAL   BLES8IN8    DEPEND   UPON    EXTERNAL 

PBiviLEOE.  Such  advantages  were  enjoyed  in  abundance  by  the  Jews ;  but  the 
preachers  of  Christianity  made  no  account  of  them.  When  Israelites  counted  them- 
selves unworthy  of  everlasting  life,  the  heralds  of  salvation  turned  to  the  Gentiles.  No 
wonder  that  such  a  reversal  of  customary  methods  angered  those  who  prided  themselves 
upon  their  position  of  advantage. 

IV.  Christianity  disparages  mere  external  conformity  and  obedience.  Most 
religions  are  content  with  words,  gestures,  gifts,  etc.  The  new  faith  repudiated  all  such 
observances  as  in  themselves  valueless,  laying  stress  upon  the  thoughts  and  intents 
of  the  heart.  This  was  a  paradox  which  was  not  unnaturally  encountered  with 
resentment. 

V.  Christianity  prescribes  humiliation  and  repentance  as  the  indispensablb 
conditions  of  pardon.  And  this  in  every  case — a  provision  which  is  galling  to  the  self- 
righteous  and  self-confident,  who  have  little  conscience  of  sin,  and  Uttle  pining  for  for- 
giveness. "  The  natural  man  "  stumbles  at  this  condition,  which  may,  he  thinks,  be 
applicable  to  others,  but  has  no  appropriateness  to  him. 

VI.  Christianity  inculcates  spmiTUALiTY  of  character  as  alone  sufficient 
AKD  acceptable  IN  THE  8I0HT  OF  GoD.  Christ's  own  commands  and  counsels  appeal 
to  the  heart — the  inmost  nature  of  man.  A  new  nature,  renewed  dispositions,  heavunly 
desires, — nothing  less  avails  in  his  sight.  "  It  is  a  hard  saying,"  is  the  objection ;  "  who 
can  hear  it  ?  " 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  sympathy  of  a  Ghristian  patriot.  If  our  Christianity  is  genuine,  it 
will  not  destroy  our  natural  affections,  but  will  purify  and  ennoble  them.  Domestic 
affection  is  all  the  stronger  and  the  brighter  under  the  influence  of  Christianity.  The 
Christian  patriot  is  the  truest  patriot.  So  it  was  with  St.  Paul.  Because  he  had 
embraced,  so  to  speak,  a  new  religion,  he  does  not  turn  in  bitterness  against  his  former 
co-religionists.  Becauso  he  has  become  wiser  than  they,  he  dojs  not  look  down  upon 
them  with  scorn  and  contempt. 

I.  His  sobbow  fob  the  lost.  He  says  that  he  has  "  great  heaviness  and  continual 
sorrow "  for  Israel,  his  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh.  This  sorrow  is  intensified  by 
many  considerations.  1.  He  thinks  of  their  great  privileges.  "  To  whom  pertiiineth  the 
adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  of  the  Law,  and  the  service 
of  God,  and  the  promises ;  whose  are  the  fathers,  and  of  whom  as  concerning  the  flesh 
Christ  came"  (vers.  4,  5).  It  was  indeed  a  saddening  reflection  to  think  that  a  people 
so  highly  honoured  by  God  should  depart  from  him.  They  had  the  Law  for  their 
truidanoe;  the  fathers  for  their  example;  Christ  Jesus, God's  own  "^on, for  their  Messiah 
and  Delivirer ;  and  the  adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covcu.iuts,  and  the  promises^ 

BOMAJSb.  T 


274  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  ix.  1—33. 

for  their  encouragement  and  inspiration.  Yet  they  crucified  their  King,  and  hardened 
their  hearts  against  God's  messages  of  mercy.  Great  privileges  make  our  guilt  the 
greater  if  we  reject  Christ.  2.  He  thinks  of  the  world's  obligation  to  tliem.  The 
Jewish  people  have  been  the  benefactors  of  the  whole  world.  They  have  been  the 
channel  through  which  blessings  have  come  to  other  nations.  How  sad  that  they 
themselves  should  forfeit  the  Divine  blessing  by  their-impenitence  and  unbelief!  So 
also  it  would  be  sad  if  our  British  nation,  which  by  its  missionary  enterprise  has 
brought  so  many  blessings  to  other  nations,  should  itself  depart  from  the  truth  as  it 
is  in  Jesus,  and  fall  into  the  depths  ot  materialism  and  infidelity.  3.  He  thinks  of  his 
own  relation  to  them.  "  My  brethren,  my  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh."  Those  who 
a)  e  connected  with  us  by  ties  of  blood  or  common  nationality  should  be  the  objects  of 
our  special  solicitude  and  sympathy.  Many  Christian  people  are  full  of  sympathy  for 
the  heathen  in  India,  or  China,  or  Africa,  who  never  think — except,  perhaps,  with  indif- 
ference or  contempt^of  the  poor  and  ignorant  and  oppressed  among  their  own  country- 
men at  home.  The  strikes  among  working  men  in  England,  the  discontent  among  the 
crofters  of  Scotland,  disaffection  and  outrage  in  Ireland,— -does  not  much  of  the  responsi- 
bility for  these  things  lie  at  the  door  of  the  Christian  people  of  these  nations  ?  Thought- 
lessness and  indifference  with  regard  to  those  around  us  bring  their  own  retributioii. 

II.  His  SBLF-SACEiFioiNO  SPIRIT.  St.  Paul  did  not  confine  himself  to  mere  senti- 
ments or  words.  "  I  could  wish  that  myself  were  accursed  from  Christ  for  my  brethren, 
my  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh  "  (ver.  3).  He  had  already  given  proof,  in  a  very 
practical  way,  of  his  desire  for  the  salvation  of  Israel.  Wherever  he  went,  "he  preached 
Christ  in  the  synagogues"  (Acts  ix.  20)  as  he  had  opportunity,  thereby  subjecting 
himself  more  than  once  to  bitter  persecution  and  attack.  The  true  Christian  patriot 
will  sawifice  himself  for  the  good  of  his  country  and  fellow-countrymen.  He  will 
sacrifice  his  prejudices  of  class  and  creed,  he  will  sacrifice  even  the  favour  and  friend 
ship  of  those  of  his  own  rank,  if  by  so  doing  he  may  better  reach  the  poor  and  degraded 
and  ignorant.  Have  we  ever  known  what  it  is  to  have  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow 
of  heart  for  our  fellow-countrymen,  and  to  bear  reproach  and  opposition  in  our  efforts 
to  do  them  good? — 0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  6 — 13  with  24 — 32. — Israels  rejection  no  violation  of  the  Divine  promise.  The 
natural  question  suggests  itself  to  the  mind,  on  thinking  of  the  rejection  of  the  Jewish 
people — What,  then,  becomes  of  the  promises  of  God  ?  Has  the  Word  of  God,  then, 
become  of  no  effect  ?  The  apostle  answers  this  question  in  the  negative  (ver.  6),  and 
proceeds  to  give  his  reasons. 

I.  Thb  peomisb  was  a  spieitual  peomise.  1.  It  was  a  promise  of  spiritual  blessinr/. 
"In  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  2.  It  was  a  promise  made 
on  spiritual  conditions.  It  was  not  a  promise  made  to  Abraham's  children  according  to 
the  flesh,  for  then  Ishmael  and  bis  children  would  have  been  partakers  of  it.  "  In 
Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called.  That  is.  They  who  are  the  children  of  the  flesh,  these 
are  not  the  children  of  God  :  but  the  children  of  the  promise  are  counted  for  the  seed" 
(vers.  7,  8).  Isaac  was  Abraham's  son,  not  in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  but  by 
reason  of  the  special  promise  of  God,  and  Abraham's  faith  in  it.  Many  think  they 
have  a  claim  on  God's  promises  who  forget  that  every  promise  has  a  condition  attached 
to  it,  and  who  fail  to  fulfil  that  condition. 

n.  Abraham's  true  children  aee  those  who  exhibit  Abbaham's  faith.  "  For 
they  are  not  all  Israel,  who  are  of  Israel :  neither,  because  they  are  the  seed  of  Abraham, 
are  they  all  children"  (vers.  6,  7) ;  "The  Gentiles,  which  followed  not  after  righteousness, 
have  attained  to  righteousness,  even  the  righteousness  which  is  of  faith "  (ver.  30). 
The  same  thought  is  brought  out  in  ch.  iv.  9 — 17.  Abraham's  righteousness  was  the 
righteousness  ol  faith.  He  had  this  faith  when  he  was  yet  uncircumcised,  "that  he 
might  be  the  father  of  all  them  that  believe,  though  they  be  not  circumcised  "  (oh.  iv.  11). 
Hence  the  Gentiles  who  exhibit  Abraham's  faith  are  heirs  of  the  same  promise  and 
partakers  of  the  same  righteousness.  There  is  no  violation  of  the  Divine  promise  in 
rejecting  those  who  are  Abraham's  seed  according  to  the  flesh,  but  who  do  not  exhibit 
Abraham's  faith,  and  in  including  those  who  are  Abraham's  true  spiritual  children, 
because  they  exhibit  Abraham's  faith,  though  they  Are  not  his  seed  according  to  the 
flesh.     God  looketh  on  the  heart.    "  In  every  nation  he  that  feftreth  him,  and  worketh 


OH.  IX.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  275 

righteousness,  is  accepted  of  him."  External  forms  and  outward  privileges  will  not  save 
us  unless  we  have  the  change  of  heart  which  is  required  of  all  who  would  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  God.  "  In  Christ  Jesus  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything,  nor  uncir- 
cumoision,  but  a  new  creature." 

III.  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews  were  included  in  the  pbomisb.  The  apostle  not 
onlj'  argues  by  inference,  but  also  from  God's  specific  statements.  "  As  he  saith  also  in 
Hosea,  I  will  call  them  my  people,  which  were  not  my  people;  and  her  beloved,  which 
was  not  beloved  "  (ver.  25).  The  Jews  were  too  much  inclined  to  limit  the  Divine 
promises  to  themselves  only,  though  there  were  many  clear  indications  in  the  Divine 
Word  that,  while  they  were  God's  chosen  people,  other  nations  also  were  to  be  partakers 
of  the  blessing  conveyed  through  them.  We  may  so  pride  ourselves  upon  our  privileges, 
while  we  neglect  oui-  duties,  that  at  last  even  the  privileges  themselves  shall  be  taken 
away. — U.  H.  I. 

Vers.  13 — 24. — GotCs  sovereignty  and  man's  responsibility.  Here  is  one  of  the  most 
difiBcult  problems  touched  on  in  the  whole  of  this  Epistle,  and  one  of  the  most  diflScult 
problems  in  the  whole  range  of  human  thought.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the  apostle 
fully  explains  it.  He  does  indeed  suggest  arguments  which  are  sufficient  to  meet  some 
of  its  difficulties.  But  how  to  reconcile  human  responsibility  with  Divine  sovereignty 
remains  a  problem  as  difficult  as  that  of  reconciling  the  existence  of  evil  with  the  power 
and  righteousness  and  benevolence  of  a  merciful  God.  Our  wisdom  is  to  bow  with 
reverence  in  presence  of  these  great  mysteries,  and  to  say,  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all 
the  earth  do  right?" 

I.  God's  sovereignty.  1.  Qo(Fs  sovereignty  it  exercised  in  righteousness.  The 
objection  is  commonly  made  that  to  choose  some  and  reject  others  would  be  an 
unrighteous  act  on  the  part  of  the  Almighty.  But  God's  choice  of  any  one  is  not  on 
the  ground  of  deserving  at  all,  but  on  the  ground  of  his  own  mercy.  It  is  not  of  works, 
but  of  grace.  "  For  he  saith  to  Moses,  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy, 
and  I  will  have  compassion  on  whom  I  will  have  compassion.  So  then  it  is  not  of  him 
that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy  "  (vers.  15, 16). 
God's  choice  of  the  Jews  was  free,  and  therefore  he  was  free  to  reject  them  and  to  choose 
others.  But  if  the  Jews  were  rejected,  they  were  rejected  because  of  their  own  unbelief. 
2.  OocFs  sovereignty  is  exercised  in  mercy.  While  the  apostle  takes  a  high  view  of  the 
sovereignty  of  God,  and  asks,  "  Hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the  clay?"  (ver.  21), 
yet  at  the  same  time  he  shows  that  God  uses  that  sovereignty,  not  with  arbitrary 
power,  but  with  mercy.  "  What  if  God,  willing  to  show  his  wrath,  and  to  make  his 
power  known  " — that  is,  God  who  must  vindicate  his  own  character,  who  will  by  no 
means  clear  the  guilty,  who  must  punish  sin,  what  if  he  nevertheless — ^"endured  with 
much  long-suffering  the  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction  ?  "  In  other  words,  "  You 
who  would  question  the  justice  of  God's  dealings  with  Israel  forget  how  much  endurance 
and  patience  and  forbearance  he  exhibited  towards  them."  If  we  consider  God's  deal- 
ings with  ourselves  must  we  not  all  admit  that  he  has  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins, 
nor  rewarded  us  according  to  onr  iniquities  ? 

II.  Man's  kesponsibilitt.  Another  very  common  objection  to  the  doctrines  of 
Divine  sovereignty  and  election  is  that,  if  these  be  true,  man  is  not  responsible.  "  Why 
doth  he  yet  find  fault  ?  For  who  hath  resisted  his  will  ?  "  (ver.  19).  But  here  comes 
in  the  great  truth  of  the  freedom  of  the  will.  Human  responsibility  is  there,  whether 
we  admit  it  or  not.  We  are  free  agents,  to  choose  between  the  good  and  the  eviL  Our 
conscience  tells  us  this  when  it  accuses  us  of  guilt.  The  very  condemnation  of  con- 
science is  in  itself  a  testimony  to  the  freedom  of  the  will  and  human  responsibility. 
There  would  be  no  accusing  voice  within  if  we  did  not  feel  that  we  were  free  agents. 
Daniel  Webster,  the  great  American  statesman,  was  once  dining  with  a  few  friends  in 
New  York.  In  the  course  of  the  evening  he  was  asked  by  the  gentleman  who  sat  next 
to  him,  "Mr.  Webster,  what  is  the  greatest  thought  that  has  ever  occupied  your 
mind? "  Pausing  for  a  moment,  he  replied,  "The  most  solemn  thought  that  ever  occu- 
pied my  mind  is  the  thought  of  man's  responsibility  to  God." — 0.  H.  I. 

Ver.  33. — Jesvx  as  the  Stambting-stone.  "  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  a  Stumbling-stone 
»nd  Rock  of  oifence :  and  whpsoever  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be  ashamed."  It  seema 


276  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [ch.  ix.  1— 33, 

a  strange  thing  that  Jesus,  the  Saviour  of  men,  should  at  all  be  set  before  us  in  this 
way.  But  the  truth,  is,  the  great  object  is  to  cause  us  to  consider  what  our  own  atti- 
tude is  toward  Christ.  Have  I  accepted  Jesus  as  my  Saviour,  or  am  I  hesitating  to 
commit  myself  to  him  ?  Am  I  clinging  to  him  as  my  Eock  of  safety,  or  am  I  being 
repelled  from  him  as  from  a  rock  of  offence?  It  was  no  new  idea,  this  which  St.  Paul 
brings  forward  here,  of  Christ  being  a  Stumbling-stone.  It  was  spoken  of  by  Isaiah, 
when  he  said,  "And  he  shall  be  for  a  Sanctuary;  but  for  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  for 
a  Eock  of  offence  to  both  the  houses  of  Israel "  (Isa.  viii.  14).  Jesus  himself  alluded 
to  the  same  idea  when  he  said  to  the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees,  "  Did  ye  never  read 
in  the  Scriptures,  The  Stone  which  the  builders  rejected,  the  same  is  become  the  Head 
of  the  corner?"  And  then  he  added,  to  show  the  evil  results  of  rejecting  him,  "  And 
whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  Stone  shall  be  broken  :  but  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fill,  it 
■will  grind  him  to  powder"  (Matt.  xxi.  42,  44).  The  Stone  of  stumbling,  the  Eock  oi 
offence,  and  the  Stone  against  which  iiiea  fall  to  their  own  destruction, — rail  these 
convey  the  same  truth.  It  is  a  truth  which  conveys  a  solemn  warning — the  danger 
of  rejecting  Christ.     How  is  it,  then,  tliat  men  stumble  at  Christ? 

I.  There  akb  some  things  in  Chkibt's  life  and  work  at  which  men  stumble. 
I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  there  is  anything  in  the  life  and  work  of  Jesus  Christ  at 
which  men  ought  to  stumble,  but  such  is  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart,  siicli  is 
the  power  of  the  great  enemy  of  souls,  that  men  find  difficulties  even  in  the  way  of 
salvation.  They  raise  mental  objections  to  the  very  way  in  which  the  Cieator  of  the 
world  wants  to  give  them  a  share  in  his  heavenly  inheritance,  and  have  their  doubts 
as  to  whether  there  might  not  be  some  other  way,  some  other  Teacher,  some  other 
Saviour,  just  as  good  as  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  who,  in  his  matchless  love,  gave  himseli 
to  die  for  the  redemption  of  their  souls.  1.  Christ  is  a  Stumbling-stone  to  many  because 
of  the  way  in  which  he  came  into  the  world.  So  it  was  when  he  was  on  earth.  Men  asked 
the  question,  "  Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?  "  And  when  he  was  come 
into  his  own  country,  they  said,  "  Whence  hath  this  Man  this  Wisdom,  and  these  mighty 
works  ?  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  Son  ?  .  .  .  And  they  were  offended  in  him  "  (Matt, 
xii.  64 — 57),  or  stumbled  at  this  difBculty  of  his  lowly  parentage.  And  yet  there 
should  be  no  difBculty,  no  stumbling-block  in  this;  for  Jesus  came  in  the  very  way 
and  in  the  very  place  it  had  been  predicted  several  hundred  years  before  that  he  would 
come.  Micah  had  predicted  the  place  of  his  birth  when  he  spoke  of  Bethlehem,  and 
Isaiah  the  manner  of  his  birth  when  he  spoke  of  the  miraculous  event  of  a  virgin  who 
should  conceive  and  bear  a  son,  and  call  his  name  Immanuel.  That  which  is  a 
stumbling-block  to  many  ought  to  be  a  strength  and  confirmation  of  faith  in  the  Son 
of  God.  2.  Others,  again,  find  a  difficulty  in  the  surroundings  of  his  daily  life.  It 
was  with  the  poor  and  lowly  that  he  chiefly  mingled;  he  ate  and  drank  with  publicans- 
and  sinners,  and  his  intimate  followers  and  disciples  were  chosen  mainly  from  the 
humbler  walks  of  life.  Here,  however,  is  the  very  proof  that  Christ  was  indeed  Divine. 
God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  Had  Christ  been  a  mere  man,  with  an  ambition  to 
found  an  earthly  kingdom,  he  would  have  sought  the  society  of  the  great ;  he  would  not 
have  put  away  from  him  all  the  attempts  to  make  him  a  King.  But  his  kingdom  was 
not  of  this  world.  The  very  persons  whom  he  chose  to  be  its  first  ambassadors  and 
founders  were  in  themselves  a  proof  that  their  religion  was  Divine.  Without  earthly 
rank  or  riches,  without  learning  or  worldly  influence,  they  went  forth  from  an  obscure 
province  of  the  Eoman  empire,  and,  only  by  the  power  of  the  words  they  spoke,  founded 
a  religion  which  to-day  is  placing  a  girdle  round  the  world,  and  before  whose  mighty 
power  the  temples  of  heathenism  and  the  mosques  of  the  Mohammedan  are  destined 
yet  to  fall.  God  hath  indeed  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the 
wise,  and  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty. 
This  fact  also  about  Jesus  Christ,  his  lowly  surroundings  and  his  humble  followers, 
instead  of  being  a  stumbling-block,  should  bo  a  strength  to  faith.  3.  '1  here  are  many 
who  find  a  great  difficulty  in  the  death  of  Christ.  St.  Paul  said  that  in  his  day  Christ 
crucified  was  to  the  Jews  a  stumMin'.;-block,  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness.  And  it  is 
the  cross  of  Christ  that  is  the  stumbling-block  to  many  at  the  present  day.  They  are 
willing  to  regard  Christ  as  the  greatest  of  all  teachers,  as  a  beautiful  and  holy  example, 
but  they  can  see  no  meaning  in  the  atonement.  They  stumble  at  the  cross.  They 
call  the  preaching  of  salvation  by  the  sufferings  of  Christ  "  a  doctrine  of  blood."    Be 


OH.IX.  1— 33.]    THE   EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  277 

it  so.  And  if  you  talce  the  doctrine  of  blood  out  of  the  Bible,  how  much  of  it  have 
you  left?  Was  it  not  the  shedding  of  blood  that  was  the  feature  of  Abel's  sacrifice, 
which,  because  it  foreshadowed  the  need  of  an  atonement  for  sin,  was  preferred  to  that 
of  Cain,  in  which  there  was  no  recognition  of  guilt  or  unworthiness  ?  The  lamb  which 
God  himself  provided  for  a  burnt  offering  in  lieu  of  Abraham's  intended  sacrifice ;  the 
lamb  slain,  and  the  blood  sprinkled  on  the  door-posts  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt;  the 
saciificial  offerings  of  the  Mosaic  Law ; — were  not  all  these  but  types,  pointing  to  the 
great  Saciiflce,  and  teaching  the  children  of  Israel  their  need  for  his  atonement?  But 
those  who  accept  Christ  as  a  great  Teacher,  and  reject  the  doctrine  of  his  atonement, 
are  hardly  consistent.  It  seems  incredible  how  any  one  can  accept  the  gospel  narra- 
tive of  Christ's  own  teaching,  without  believing  that  he  taught  that  his  death  was  a 
sacrifice.  Just  immediately  after  he  entered  on  his  ministry,  he  permitted  John  the 
Baptist  to  say  of  him,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world."  He^  himself  said,  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so 
must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up :  that  whosoever  believeth  on  him  should  not  perish, 
but  have  eternal  life."  Such  words  plainly  convey  that  not  only  would  there  be  the 
power  of  a  good  example  in  the  life  of  Christ,  but  that  there  would  be  a  healing,  saving 
power  in  his  death  when  he  was  lifted  up  upon  the  cross.  He  speaks  of  laying  down 
his  life  for  the  sheep ;  and  when  he  instituted  the  Lord's  Supper,  he  clearly  indicated 
that  his  sufferings  on  the  cross  were  to  be  the  leadiug  thought  in  that  commemoration, 
and  that  those  sufferings  were  endured  on  behalf  of  his  people.  "  This  is  my  body, 
broken  for  you ;  "  "  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood,  shed  for  the  remission 
of  sins."  If  men  stumble  at  the  cross,  they  stumble  at  the  very  threshold  of  the 
gospel.  "  Without  the  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission."  If  men  find  a  difficulty 
in  the  cross,  they  find  a  difBculty  in  the  most  convincing  evidence  given  to  men  of 
God's  love  for  the  world  and  of  the  desire  of  Jesus  Christ  for  their  salvation.  "  God 
forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Instead  of 
gtitmbling  at  it,  let  me  cling  to  it,  let  me  live  under  its  power.  "  For  the  preaching  of 
the  cross  is  to  them  that  perish  foolishness,  but  unto  us  who  are  saved  it  is  the  power 
of  God." 

II.  Thebe  abb  some  things  in  themselves  whioh  oattsb  men  to  stumble  at 
Cheist.  1.  Christ  is  a  Htumbling-hlock  to  human  pride.  If  we  are  to  be  saved  by  Jesus 
Christ,  then  we  must  confess  ourselves  to  be.  guilty  sinners,  we  must  lay  aside  all  trust 
in  any  merit  of  our  own,  all  hope  of  heaven  because  of  our  own  good  works.  This  is 
a  stumbling-block  to  many.  Penances  are  no  stumbling-block.  Men  .will  freely  inflict 
on  themselves  fastings  and  bodily  sufferings,  to  purchase  for  themselves,  as  they  think, 
the  pardon  of  their  sins  and  the  hope  of  heaven;  but  simply  to  accept  the  salvation 
provided  by  Jesus  Christ — ivhen  they  are  ashed  to  do  this,  they  hesitate,  they  raise  diffi- 
culties, they  entertain  doubts.  God's  way  of  salvation  is  too  simple  for  many.  If  he 
would  bid  us  do  "some  great  thing  "  we  would  gladly  do  it.  Here,  again,  is  it  not 
plain  that  such  a  cause  of  stumbling  is  unreasonable?  If  I  will  not  take  God's  way 
of  getting  to  heaven,  how  can  I  expect  to  get  there  by  any  other  ?  And  if  there  could 
be  any  other  way,  what  necessity  was  there  for  God  to  give  up  his  own  Son  to  death 
for  us  all  ?  2.  Christ  is  a  Stumbling-block  to  human  sins.  Many  would  like  to  get  to 
heaven,  but  they  do  not  like  to  give  up  their  sins.  Many  are  inclined  to  ask,  "  May 
one  be  pardoned,  and  retain  the  offence  ?  "  How  unreasonable  to  choose  a  few  hours 
of  sin  and  to  destroy  both  body  and  soul,  rather  than  to  follow  that  Saviour  whose 
service  is  perfect  peacd,  and  at  whose  right  hand  are  pleasures  for  evermore  I  3.  Christ 
is  a  Stumbling-block  to  human  selfishness.  Many  who  are  not  the  slaves  of  grosser  sins 
ate  nevertheless  the  slaves  of  worldliness  and  self.  They  fear  that  Christ's  service 
would  be  too  much  of  a  restraint  upon  them.  They  know  that  they  cannot  serve  God 
and  mammon.  Their  conscience  tells  them  that  if  they  would  be  conformed  to  this 
world  and  imitate  the  customs  and  fashions  of  those  around  them,  they  must  violate 
the  precepts  and  incur  the  displeasure  of  Christ.  And  so  they  make  their  choice,  like 
Esau,  who  for  one' morsel  of  meat  sold  his  birthright.  They  are  not  prepared  for  the 
service  of  him  who  said,  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and 
take  up  his  cross  daily,  and  follow  me."  But  how  great  is  the  loss  of  those  who  for 
any  of  these  reasons  reject  Christ ! — 0.  H.  I. 


278  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  ix.  1—33. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  honour  of  Israel.  These  verses  open  up  to  U8  the  great 
problem  discussed  in  the  three  following  chapters,  "  the  rejection  of  the  elect  people " 
(Godet).  God  had  chosen  his  people ;  he  now  repudiates  them.  And  as  the  apostle 
in  the  previous  chapter  has  been  transported  into  an  ecstasy  of  exultation  in  contem- 
plating the  final  victory  of  God's  true  people,  he  is  now  brought  back  to  sorrow  and 
pain  of  heart  by  a  thought  of  the  contrasted  lot  of  Israel.  "  Who  shall  separate  us 
from  the  love  of  Christ?"  he  had  asked.  But  they  have  not  known  this  love!  He 
could  well-nigh  wish  himself  deprived  of  these  high  blessings  that  his  people  might 
possess  them.  For  they  are  his  beloved  brethren,  and  the  new  spiritual  endowments 
on  his  part  do  but  intensify  the  claims  of  natural  affinity.  But  in  themselves,  who 
are  they,  this  people  ?  In  vers.  4  and  5  he  sets  forth  their  lofty  clnims  ;  and  we  have 
in  this  shining  catalogue — their  ancestry ;  their  dignities ;  and  their  boon  to  the 
world. 

I.  Theib  akcestrt.  "  Whose  are  the  fathers ; "  "  Who  are  Israelites."  Nations 
pride  themselves  most  on  the  heroes  of  their  history,  and  they  delight  to  trace  their 
descent  from  men  of  renown.  How  is  it  with  this  nation  ?  They  are  sprung  from  the 
patriarchs,  of  more  than  heroic  fame.  Abraham,  God's  fiiend,  the  man  of  whom  in 
his  communings  with  God  amidst  the  corruptions  of  the  world  it  might  be  said,  "  His 
ioul  was  like  a  star,  and  dwelt  apart; "  Isaac,  the  quiet,  meditative  man,  whose  deeds 
m:ide  no  blaze  of  excitement  among  men,  hut  with  whom  was  "  the  secret  of  the 
Lord ; "  and  Jacob,  whose  day  rose  so  murky  and  dark,  but  whose  sunset  was  of  the 
most  glorious — so  mean,  yet  afterwards  so  strong  ;  a  snpplanter  and  deceiver  among  men, 
who  yet  became  a  prince  of  God,  one  around  whom  the  heavens  opened,  and  whom  God 
touched : — ^these  were  the  fathers  of  the  race  I  They,  then,  themselves  were  Israelites, 
princely  ones  with  God. 

n.  Theik  dignities.  1.  The  adoption.  According  to  God's  message  to  Pharaoh 
(Exod.  iv.  22),  "  Israel  is  my  son,  even  my  firstborn."  God  is  dealing  with  nationali- 
ties as  with  individual  men,  and  in  calling  the  nations  to  himself  he  summons  Israel 
as  the  firstfruits  from  among  the  peoples.  2.  The  glory.  To  Jacob  in  his  dream  the 
glory  of  the  opened  heavens  had  appeared  ;  the  Israelites  in  their  journeyings  were  led 
by  a  cloud  that  from  its  dark  depths  .<!hot  radiance ;  the  same  glory,  as  of  God,  shone 
in  the  Shechinah  of  the  holiest  place.  Theirs  was  this  symbol  of  an  ever-present  Deity. 
3.  The  covenants.  How  many  times  had  God  said  to  the  patriarchs,  "  Surely  blessing 
I  will  bless  thee"!  And  these  covenants  were  perpetuated  in  the  abiding  covenant 
with  the  chosen  people.  4.  The  giving  of  the  Law.  Having  adopted  them  as  his  first- 
born son,  and  shown  them  his  glory,  and  made  with  them  a  covenant,  he  had  trained 
them,  in  fatherly  wisdom,  by  the  Law,  which  was  designed  to  be  their  schoolmaster  in  all 
high  and  holy  things.  6.  The  service.  And  trained  in  righteousness,  they  were  trained 
likewise  in  godliness — priests  of  the  most  high  God.  6.  The  promises.  They  were 
emphatically  a  people  of  hope ;  their  whole  history  pointed  towards  better  things  to 
come. 

III.  Theie  boon  to  the  wokld.  "  Of  whom  is  Christ  as  concerning  the  flesh,  who 
is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever.  Amen."  "  The  patriarchs,  from  whom  the  people 
sprang,  are  as  it  were  its  root ;  the  Messiah,  who  spran  >  from  the  people,  is  as  it  were 
its  flower  "  (Godet).  But  let  us  notice  two  antitheses.  1.  "  Of  whom  is  Christ." 
This  people  was  called  and  trained  that  it  might  give  birth,  humanly,  to  the  world's 
Deliverer.  A  high  calling!  But  though  from  them,  he  is  not  to  be  their  excUisive 
possession :  "  Over  all."  Prom  them  springs  the  world's  Christ.  Oh  that  they  had 
known  their  high  destiny  !  why  it  was  that  they  were  a  nation  of  priests  !  2.  "  As 
concerning  the  flesh."  Humanly  his  origin  was  from  them.  Not  a  Jew,  but  a  true, 
perfect  Man,  fashioned  from  Jewish  human  nature.  All  tender  human  sympathies  of 
soul,  as  well  as  faculties  of  human  body,  were  his  to  link  him  tc  bis  brethren  among 
men.  But  in  him,  the  Man,  was  an  inhabitation,  an  incarnation  of  the  Divine  :  "  Ood 
llessedfor  ever."  Oh,  wondrous  truth !  Here  was  the  truest  Shechinah,  tabernacling  in 
the  world  and  for  the  world !  the  "  Word  made  flesh  "!  Here  the  truest  fulfilment  of 
Israel's  dream — the  heavens  opened,  and  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending  on 
man.     Such  the  world's  heritage :  God  is  ours ! 

But  this  inheritance  the  ancient  Israelites  have  given  to  the  world.  May  he  not 
v\cll  grieve  that  they  have  despised  their  own  boon  ?    And  may  he  not  well  sot  him- 


OH.  IX.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMAKS.  279 

self  to  grapple  witli  the  problem — How  can  such  an  elect  people  be  rejected  of  God? 
— T.  F.  L. 

Versi.  6 — 13. — Tlie  freedom  of  OocPs  election.  They  had  been  so  highly  privileged, 
and  were  yet  cast  out.  Oh,  what  a  fall  was  there !  But  had  Grod's  promise  come  to 
naught?  Nay,  verily.  For,  as  the  liistory  of  their  ancestry  showed,  the  purposed 
working  out  of  God's  plans  for  the  salvation  of  the  world — for  which  alone  Israel  had 
been  chosen — was  not  committed  rigidly  to  all  Israel,  but  only  to  such  of  them  as  God 
•hould  choose.  And,  in  this  matter  of  choosing,  God  was  perfectly  free.  This  freedom 
is  illustrated  by  the  apostle  from  the  election  of  former  times. 

I.  God's  purpose  fob  the  woeld.  A  Creator's  love  must  embrace  his  whole  creation ; 
a  Father's  must  go  forth  towards  all  his  children.  God  is  the  Father  of  mankind,  even 
though  all  have  fallen  away  from  him ;  any  purpose  of  salvation  must,  therefore,  com- 
prehend all  men  in  its  wide  scope,  and  only  the  wilfulness  of  man  can  prevent  the 
perfect  accomplishment  of  the  purpose.  God  has  purposed  the  redemption  of  the  world 
in  Christ  Jesus  (Eph.  iii.  11),  but  by  reason  of  man's  debasement  through  sin  the 
accomplishment  of  the  purpose  must  needs  be  gradual.  One  great  central  work' shall 
be  wrought — God's  work  through  Christ ;  but  up  towards  this  the  avenue  of  preparatory 
work  must  lead,  and  away  from  this  the  avenue  of  fulfilment  must  conduct.  An 
education  of  the  world;  a  great  power  of  salvation;  a  world-wide  application  of  the 
power. 

n.  An  elect  people.  The  election  dealt  with  in  these  chapters,  which  has  no 
reference  whatever  to  the  election  of  individuals  for  eternal  salvation,  was  the  election 
of  a  people  who  should  conduct  the  world  towards  Christ  by  way  of  preparation,  and 
afterwards  conduct  Christ's  power  to  the  world  by  way  of  application.  In  the  matter 
of  preparation,  an  exclusion  of  this  people  from  others  was  needful  first,  because  of 
the  abounding  corruptions  of  the  world.  Sometimes  this  is  the  only  safety  :  "  Come 
out,  and  be  separate!"  But  a  scattering  was  needful  afterwards.  So  the  captivities, 
overruled  by  God ;  so  the  dispersion  in  later  times.  In  the  subsequent  evangelization 
there  must  be  concentration  first,  that  the  new  power  of  life  might  be  fuUy  realized ; 
a  scattering  afterwards,  that  the  new  power  might  touch  the  uttermost  ends  of  the 
earth  (^vide  Acts  viii.  4). 

III.  The  pkeedom  of  the  election.  But  surely,  in  such  a  work  of  grace,  God*« 
hands  cannot  be  tied  ?  surely  he  may  choose  whom  he  will  for  the  great  purpose  of  the 
world's  salvation  ?  Even  so.  We  can  conceive  nothing  other ;  and  the  history  of  the 
past  abundantly  illustrates  the  freedom  with  which  God  has  worked.  First,  God 
chose  Abraham ;  the  Jews  would  not  complain  of  his  freedom  of  election  here.  Again, 
of  Abraham's  sons  he  chose  the  later-born,  showing  that  the  matter  of  priority  of 
natural  claims  could  not  weigh  with  him.  And  of  Isaac's  twin-sons,  before  their  birth, 
he  chose  again  the  later-born,  Jacob,  showing  that  nothing  done  by  the  elected  one  con- 
stituted a  claim  on  his  electing  grace.  Neither  the  Ishmaelites  nor  the  Edomites  were 
rejected  of  God  from  personal  salvation,  but  as  regarded  taking  a  special  part  in  the 
work  of  the  world's  salvation  they  were  reprobate.  So,  then,  God  had  acted  freely  in 
the  choice  of  Abraham,  and  in  the  narrowing  down  of  the  election  among  Abraham's 
seed.  Was  it  to  be  wondered  at  that,  in  the  fulness  of  the  times,  he  should  act  freely 
stillj  and  elect  only  a  remnant  of  the  people  to  the  work  of  evangelizing  the  world  ? 
This  work  so  soon  to  be  entrusted  also  to  Gtntile  workers  themselves. 

The  same  principle  still  holds  good :  God  elects  us,  according  to  his  sovereign  will, 
for  work  in  his  kingdom.  Let  us  learn,  as  the  first  lesson,  absolute  submission ;  nay, 
the  unquestioning  fealty  of  love. — T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  14 — 18. — Moses  and  Pharaoh.  But  was  not  this  free  election  of  God  an 
unrighteous  thing  ?  Nay,  verily.  For,  if  they  would  think  of  it,  the  very  antithesis 
of  character  which  stood  out  so  boldly  at  the  threshold  of  their  natural  history,  and  in 
its  results  had  made  them  what  they  were,  was  a  conspicuous  example,  even  according 
to  God's  own  showing,  of  this  electing  liberty.  Moses,  the  man  after  God's  own  heart, 
was  chosen  by  God  freely  for  the  salvation  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  and  the  consequent 
salvation  of  the  world ;  and .  Pharaoh,  the  great  antagonist  of  Moses,  was  chosen  an 
freely  by  God  for  the  working  out  of  his  purposes. 


280  THE   EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS,    [ch.  tx.  1—33, 

I.  Moses.  Next  to  the  Christ,  perhaps  none  has  played  so  conspicuous  a  part  in 
the  history  cf  the  world's  salvation  as  Moses.  Prepared  from  his  hirth  for  the  great 
work  of  his  life :  tiace  his  history  with  this  in  view.  Called  forth  at  last  to  step  into 
the  arena ;  and,  when  the  antagonism  was  past,  set  forth  by  God  as  the  great  legislator 
for  his  race.  And  here,  for  his  inauguration  into  the  great  work,  the  vision  of  God's 
goodness  (Exod.  xxxiii.  19).  But,  while  God  would  thus  equip  him  and  make  him 
strong,  had  he  a  claim  upon  God's  call  and  fashioning  and  favour?  No;  it  was  all 
of  God's  free  (holce.  Another  might  have  been  chosen — another  called,  equipped,  and 
blessed.  God  had  his  reasons,  doubtless,  but  these  are  in  the  background  here.  The 
((uestion  is  one  of  freedom.  Can  God  select  whom  he  will  for  his  saving  purposes,  or  it 
he  tied  by  any  supposed  claims  on  the  part  of  individuals  or  of  peoples  ?  There  is  only 
one  answer — that  God  is  perfectly  free  in  this  matter :  "  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I 
will  have  mercy,"  etc.  Surely,  if  God  showed"  this  freedom  in  the  case  of  Moses,  he 
might  show  it  equally  in  the  case  of  the  "  remnant,"  and  of  the  Gentiles. 

IL  Phabaoh.  God's  great  purposes  were  to  be  wrought  out  the  more  effectuallj 
by  antithesis ;  even  as  all  his  purposes  are  wrought  out  by  the  antithesis  of  good  and 
evil.  Moses  was  the  great  deliverer ;  Pharaoh  was  the  great  resister.  And  as  Moses 
set  forth  judgment  and  mercy  from  God,  Pharaoh  set  himself  against  God,  and  hardened 
his  heart  yet  more  and  more.  And  at  last  his  own  conspicuous  overthrow  must  publish 
abroad  to  all  nations  and  all  time  that  with  a  mighty  hand  God  had  set  his  people 
free.  And  could  Pharaoh  rightly  complain  that  God  made  him  play  this  conspicuoua 
part,  against  his  own  will,  in  the  salvation-purposes  of  God  for  the  world  ?  No,  in 
truth.  As  an  individual ,  he  had  perfect  liberty  of  choice,  and  God  undoubtedly  willed 
his  salvation ;  his  sinful  resistance  of  God  was  not  ordained  by  God.  But  God,  fore- 
seeing the  sin,  determined  to  make  even  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him  ;  and  though 
Pharaoh's  co-operation  with  Moses  would  have  achieved  the  object  well,  yet  his 
resistance  of  Moses,  as  God's  messenger,  was  so  overruled  as  to  redound  to  the  effectua- 
tion of  God's  will.  God  certainly  had  the  liberty  to  make  his  self-hardening  tributary 
to  the  fulfilling  of  his  own  designs.  And  if  he  had  the  right  to  reprobate  Pharaoh 
from  a  voluntary  co-operation,  and  yet  control  his  resistance  to  the  same  end,  might 
he  not  equally  reprobate  unbelieving  Israel  from  a  voluntary  co-operation  now,  and — 
for  this  truth  now  comes  into  the  foreground  in  their  case — make  even  their  reprobation 
to  subserve  his  designs  ? 

Let  us  remember  that  God  will  use  us,  whether  we  will  or  not,  for  the  work  of  his 
kingdom.  But  let  us  seek  to  be  used  as  willing  instruments,  and,  as  we  have  no  claim 
to  be  used  in  this  way  or  that,  seeing  that  God's  purposes  are  sovereign,  let  us  pray, 
"  What  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "— T.  P.  L, 

Vers.  19 — 29. — The  rebuke  of  presumption.  The  objectors  might  say — If  God  over- 
rules all  the  conduct  of  men  by  such  sovereign  power,  why  does  he  reprobate  any  ? 
Is  not  the  very  idea  of  the  reprobation  inconsistent  with  itself?  He  sets  himself 
against  some  that  he  may  glorify  his  Name ;  but  if  this  tends  to  the  working  of  his 
will,  and  they  cannot  resist,  why  does  he  set  himself  against  them  ?  The  apostle,  in 
reply,  will  indeed  vindicate  to  them  the  reasons  which  enter  into  the  working  of  the 
ell-righteous  God ;  hut,  hrst,  he  will  question  their  competency  to  object  to  the  working 
of  such  a  One  as  God.  They  ask  in  a  spirit  of  self-complacent  Pharisaism ;  he  will 
ask  them  how  they  dare  presume  to  sit  in  judgment  on  their  Maker.  He  shows,  then, 
the  unreasonableness  and  the  unscripturalness  of  such  presumptuous  questioning  of 
the  ways  of  God. 

I.  An  dnbbasonable  pbesdmption.  If  it  be  regarded  on  the  ground  of  mere  right, 
has  not  God  a  right  to  do  what  he  will  with  his  own?  It  is  certain  that  his  will  is 
wise,  righteous,  and  merciful ;  but  the  question  now  is  one  of  prerogative.  And  God, 
the  Absolute  One  of  the  universe,  is  surely  not  to  come  to  the  tribunal  of  creaturely 
judgment  ?  It  is  even  as  though  the  clay  were  to  judge  the  action  of  the  man  that 
fashions  it,  and  say,  "  Why  didst  thou  make  me  thus  ?  "  The  potter  has  a  right  over 
the  clay  ;  he  may  do  as  he  will.  He  may'  make  the  vessels,  some  for  meaner  use,  some 
for  nobler;  and  the  clay  cannot  question  his  deeds.  So  cannot  man  question  God. 
He  deals  with  mankind  for  historical  purposes  as  the  potter  with  the  clay.  God  takes 
clay,  begins  to  fashion  it  for  purposes  of  honour,  casts  it  aside,  takes  other  clay  and 


OH.  IX.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF   PAQL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  281 

puts  it  to  the  use  for  which  the  former  portion  was  first  iatendcd :  are  we  in  a  position 
to  say,  "  Why  ? "  God  knows  best !  The  race  of  mankind  is  dealt  witli  by  God 
according  to  his  own  wisdom,  and  there  are.vessels  of  mercy  unto  glory,  and  vessels  of 
wrath  unto  deatruction.  Egypt  was  a  vessel  of  wrath,  while  Israel  was  taken  for 
fashioning  into  a  vessel  of  mercy ;  by-and-by  Israel,  as  a  nation,  becomes  a  vessel  of 
wrath,  and  a  new  people,  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  is  the  vessel  unto  honour.  God  knows 
what  he  is  doing  best.  But  all  shall  subserve  his  glory.  Just  as  Pharaoh's  stubborn- 
ness was  made  by  God  the  occasion  for  a  greater  display  of  delivering  power,  so  the 
stubbornness  of  the  Jews,  and  their  wickedness  even  unto  the  crucifixion  of  their  Lord, 
were  made  subservient  to  the  world's  salvation.  And  while  the  wrath  towards  some  • 
was  for  mercy  towards  others,  yet  towards  the  children  of  wrath  long-suffering  was 
shown,  not  merely  that  the  purpose  of  mercy  towards  others  might  be  moie  con- 
spicuously and  effectually  fulfilled,  but  that  they,  had  they  repented,  might  have 
mercy  shown  them.     The  very  wrath  is  in  love. 

II.  An  UNBOBiPTirRAii  PEBSUMPTioN.  The  presumption  was  not  only  unreasonable 
in  itself,  but  according  to  their  own  Scriptures  it  was  altogether  unwarranted.  Hosea 
(ii.  23  ;  i.  10)  had  spoken  words  of  prophecy  concerning  the  ten  scattered  tribes,  which 
involved  the  same  principle  as  that  on  which  God  was  acting  now — the  right  to 
reprobate  for  idolatry,  and  the  right  to  restore.  And,  as  they  had  lapsed  into  idolatry, 
and  as  they  were  furthermore  so  intermingled  with  the  Gentiles  that  a  definite 
separation  might  be  impossible,  theirs  was  not  only  a  new  election,  as  of  Gentiles 
themselves,  but  actually  involved  the  election  of  Gentiles  also.  Isaiah,  too  (x.  22, 
23),  speaking  of  Israel,  sets  forth  the  other  principle,  or  another  aspect  of  the  same, 
on  which  God  was  dealing  with  the  world  now — his  right,  while  reprobating  Israel 
from  the  gj'eat  work  of  the  world's  salvation,  to  spare  a  remnant,  with  whom  the 
Gentiles  should  be  joined,  and  who  with  the  Gentiles  should  form  the  new  Church  for 
the  extension  of  the  kingifom  of  God.  So,  then,  their  Scriptures  pointed  to  this  very 
selfsame,  twofold  principle  for  the  formation  of  the  now  society.  And  all  their  history, 
as  recorded  in  the  Scriptures,  had  been  one  repeated  manifestation  of  the  same.  Yes, 
God  had  the  righ£,  and  he  had, already  used  it  from  the  beginning,  to  take  or  set  aside, 
as  he  would,  nations  or  individuals,  in  the  great  economy  of  the  redemption  of  the 
world.  The  apostle  goes  on  to  show  (ver.  30 — ch.  x.  21)  that  there  were  reasons  for 
God's  dealings  in  all  cases,  and  what,  in  the  main,  these  reasons  were ;  also  (ch.  xi.)  that 
the  very  reprobation  of  Israel  now,  in  accordance  with  such  reasons,  should  ultimately 
redound  to  the  good  of  the  world. 

Let  us  remember  this  for  ourselves  as  a  nation.  We  may  think,  "  God  hath  not  so 
dealt  with  any  people."  But — he  does  not  pledge  himself  rigidly  to  deal  so  with  us 
to  the  end.  Our  earnest  question  must  be — not  captiously,  or  he  would  not  answer, 
but  devoutly,  and  he  will  answer — Why  are  we  now  exalted?  and  how  may  we  secnre 
a  continuance  of  his  blessing  which  maketh  rich  ?  And  so  for  ourselves,  as  individuals, 
we  can  ask  no  more  important  question  than — How  may  I  become  "  a  chosen  vessel," 
"a  vessel  unto  honoiu-,  meet  for  the  Master's. use "  (Acts  ix.  15;  2  Tim.  ii.  21)? — 
T.  F.  L. 

Vol  s.  30 — 33. — The  reasonableness  of  Oo^i  working.  The  question  hitherto  has  been 
— How  can  God  set  aside  an  elect  people  ?  And  the  answer — God  chooses  whom  he  will 
for  the  carrying  on  of  his  saving  work.  But  now  a  reason  is  adduced.  For  though  God 
does  what  he  will,  yet  we  may  be  sure  he  never  wills  what  is  not  right.  And  here  the 
great  reason  of  the  rejection  of  Israel,  and  the  choice  of  the  Gentiles,  for  the  carrying  out  of 
God's  purposes,  is  this — that  the  former  have  altogether  failed  to  apprehend  the  nature 
of  salvation,  when  all  has  been  done  by  God  to  teach  them  its  true  character ;  whereas 
the  latter,  left,  it  might  seem,  to  themselves,  have  eagerly  received  the  proffered  gift 
when  once  it  was  presented.  Needs  it  any  arguing  to  show  that  they  are  better  fitted 
to  work  for  God  than  the  others  ? 

I.  Gentiles.  1.  The  previous  history  of  the  Gentiles,  from  the  religious  point  of  view, 
is  set  forth  in  this — that  they  "  followed  not  after  righteousness."  That  is,  they  sought 
not  justification  with  God.  For  a  subjective  righteousness  they  did  seek  after,  as  is 
witnessed  by  the  earnest  inquiries  of  the  great  ethical  leaders,  e.g.  Socrates,  Plato, 
Aristotle;  and  of  their  poets  and  historians,  who  also  sought  to  set  forth  the  principles 


282  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  tx  1—33. 

of  right.  But  as  to  an  objective  righteousness,  a  being  right  with  God,  this  was  not 
in  all  their  thoughts.  They  regarded  God  as  not  much  troubling  himself  with  human 
conduct,  and  sin  itself  as  rather  a  delect,  an  ignorance,  than  something  for  which  man 
is  gravely  culpable.  So,  in  this  sense,  it  was  emphatically  true  that  they  "  followed 
not  after  righteousness."  2.  But  of  the  same  Gentiles  it  is  said,  of  their  acceptance 
of  Christ's  gospel,  that  they  "  attained  to  righteousness,  even  the  righteousness  which 
is  of  faith."  The  dormant  conscience  awoke ;  the  weakness  of  their  ethical  systems 
was  revealed;  the  exceeding  guilt  of  sin,  as  well  as  the  exceeding  love  of  God,  was  sat 
forth  in  the  cross  of  Christ ;  and  being  stricken  to  the  heart,  and  crying,  "  What  must 
I  do  to  be  saved?"  they  were  ready,  nay,  eager,  to  respond  to  the  blessed  coramand, 
"  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalfc  be  saved."  And,  accepting  the 
great  salvation,  they  stood  as  justified  in  the  presence  of  him  who  forgiveth  for  the 
sake  of  Christ.     They  "  attained  to  righteousness." 

IL  Jkws.  1.  The  history  of  the  Jews  is  stated,  by  way  of  contrast  to  that  of  the 
Gentiles,  as  consisting  in  this — that  they  "  followed  after  a  Law  of  righteousness." 
The  wording  is  most  accurate.  They  followed  a  Law,  which  was  designed  by  God  to 
teach  them  their  sin,  and  lead  them  to  look  to  his  free  grace,  through  Christ,  for  pardon ; ' 
but  it  was  not  this  "  end  of  the  Law  "  which  they  in  reality  followed,  but  rather  the 
Law  itself.  They  made  an  end  of  the  means,  and  thus  entirely  subverted  its  design  ; 
for  instead  of  learning  by  the  Law  their  sin,  they  sou^jht,  by  a  supposed  fulfilment  of 
its  precepts,  to  make  themselves  just  before  God.  So,  instead  of  learning  to  be  poor  in 
spirit,  they  learned  an  arrogant  self-complacency ;  instead  of  coming  to  God's  grace 
for  pardon,  they  thanked  God  they  were  not  as  other  men,  and  stood  before  him  self- 
justified.  2.  What  was  the  result?  They  "did  not  arrive  at  that  Law;"  not  at  its 
true  purport,  its  ultimate  design.  And  so  the  real  law  of  justification,  the  being  saved 
by  grace  through  faith,  was  hidden  from  their  eyes.  To  them  the  Rock  of  Ages  was 
"  a  Stone  of  stumbling,  a  Eock  of  offence." 

Oh,  let  us  learn,  from  the  history  of  the  past,  that  there  is  shame  for  us,  and  shame 
only,  if  we  seek  to  make  ourselves  just  before  God.  But,  accepting  freely  the  grace 
which  is  freely  given,  we  shall  prove,  "  He  that  believisth  on  him  shall  not  be  pat  to 
shame."— T.  1".  L. 

Ver.  4. — The  right  use  of  privileges.  The  apostle  turned  from  his  rapt  meditation 
on  the  present  and  future  glory  of  the  Christian  dispensation,  to  think  of  the  race  of 
Israel  excluding  themselves  from  participation  in  its  benefits,  and  he  felt  his  soul 
charged  with  heaviness  on  their  behalf.  They  hated  hlfn  as  overturning  venerable 
customs,  and  as  lowering  their  dignity  by  admitting  the  Gentiles  to  the  blessings  of 
the  covenant  on  such  easy  terms.  But  in  reply  he  vehemently  asserted  his  still 
subsisting  love  for  his  "  kinsmen,"  and  for  those  whom  in  the  past  God  had  so  signally 
honoured.  None  can  look  without  emotion  on  the  face  and  form  of  a  Jew,  who  consider 
his  history  and  destiny. 

I.  The  supreme  distinctions  op  life  are  those  which  ooncebn  o0k  eblationship 
TO  God.  All  the  items  particularized  are  connected  with  the  Divine  manifestations 
granted  to  Israel.  The  apostle  cares  little  for  the  story  of  military  prowess,  or  even  of 
skill  in  literature;  but  all  that  appertained  to  the  knowledge  and  worship  of  God, 
this  was  worth  dwelling  upon.  It  becomes  a  speedy  test  of  judgment  when  we  know 
the  things  on  which  a  man  prides  himself.  Does  he  point  with  chief  delight  to  his 
acquisition  of  lands  or  goods,  or  to  his  rank  in  society,  or  to  his  fame  in  science  or  art 
circlij?  or  does  he  account  his  position  in  the  family  of  the  Most  High,  and  the 
revelation  vouchsafed  of  Divine  mercy  and  grace,  as  his  possession  of  greatest  worth  ? 
Which  in  our  hearts  do  we  deem  the  most  highly  favoured  nation — Greece,  or  Rome, 
or  Israel  ?  The  true  wealth  and  place  of  a  modern  empire  should  be  reckoned,  not 
according  to  its  material  resources  and  fighting  strength,  but  rather  by  its  widespread 
distribution  of  moral  and  religious  truth.  This  means  real  refinement  and  enduring 
prospeiity.  Many  opportunities  occur  to  all  of  us  to  exhibit  our  genuine  opiniori  in 
the  lives  we  lead,  the  money  and  time  devoted  to  the  highest  pursuits,  the  notions 
cherished  in  the  family,  the  books  read,  and  the  amusements  indulged  in.  Missionary 
enthusiasm  rests  on  a  sure  basis  when  the  value  is  perceived  of  a  a  acquaintance  with  the 
things  of  God.    Such  a  knowledge  is  the  best  legacy  that  can  be  bequeathed  to  children. 


OH.  IX.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS.  283 

II.  The  highest  kbligious  puivilkghs  will  not  pbofit  unless  used  aeight.  Iu 
spite  of  their  advautages,  the  Jews  were  found  wanting,  and,  like  unfruitful  branches, 
were  broken  off.  Before  the  exile  they  fell  into  idolatry,  and  sought  to  nullify  their 
glory  by  equalling  the  abominations  of  the  heathen.  Could  a  stronger  proof  be 
furnisbeil  of  the  seductiveness  of  sinful  practices  and  the  blindness  of  man?  And  the 
coming  of  Christ  was  a  further  testing  season.  Their  "  zeal  of  Grod  "  was  shown  to  be 
unintelligent,  depending  upon  external  rather  than  spiritual  views  of  religious  grandeur 
and  service.  It  behoves  us  not  only  to  enjoy  but  to  improve  our  privileges.  Atttticiance 
at  the  sanctuary,  the  public  prayers  and  reading,  unless  they  exert  a  living  influence 
upon  us,  increase  our  condemnation,  as  the  presence  and  works  of  Christ  multiplied 
woes  upon  the  cities  of  the  sea.  The  tendency  is  strong  that  would  lull  our  souls  into 
comfortable  dreams  of  security,  from  which  there  could  only  be  a  terrible  awakening. 
The  religious  pride  of  the  Jews  hardened  into  fossilism — an  unreceptive  soil  for  new 
truth.  Instead  of  guiding  their  steps  by  the  Law,  they  looked  at  it  till  they  were 
dazzled  by  its  glare,  and  could  not  recognize  the  coming  of  the  "  Light  of  the 
world." 

III.  The  advantages  enjoyed  bt  nations  oe  individuals  abe  not  conferred 
FOB  THEIR  OWN  EXCLUSIVE  BENEFIT.  The  Israelites  were  stewards  of  the  mysteries 
for  the  world  around  and  the  times  to  follow.  Very  important  functions  they  discharged, 
keeping  the  lamp  of  truth  alight,  preventing  the  world  from  lapsing  into  barbaric 
atheism.  Especially  in  relation  to  Christianity  do  we  discern  these  advantag;es  as 
preparatory.  The  "  sacrifices  "  had  respect  to  the  offering  of  Christ,  and  in  part  explain 
its  meaning.  Tlie  "Law  "  acted  as  a  pedagogue  to  bring  us  to  the  school  of  Christ. 
The  temple  "  service "  illustrates  the  obedience  of  the  Christian  priests,  and  the 
promises  fulfilled  confirm  our  faith.  Israel  was  a  nursery  where  choicest  plants  were 
reared  with  which  to  stock  the  wilderness  till  it  should  blossom  as  the  rose.  And  the 
same  principle  holds  good  of  every  advantage  the  goodness  of  our  God  bestows. 
The  Christian  Church  is  to  be  as  a  city  set  on  a  hill ;  its  members  are  lights  in  the 
world,  pilgrim-soldiers,  ambassadors  for  Christ.  It  is  ours  to  guard  the  gift  entrusted, 
to  transmit  to  others  the  revelation  received,  the  spiritual  heirlooms  of  liberty  and 
intelligence,  lest  we  fail  to  deliver  up  a  proper  account  of  oar  stewardship. —  S.  B.  A. 

Ver.  21. — The  sovereign  right  of  Ood.  Some  aspects  of  the  Deity  may  be  less 
pleasing  to  contemplate  than  others.  The  pride  of  man  rejoices  not  at  first  in  the 
thought  of  the  majesty  which  overawes  his  littleness  and  compels  him  to  submission. 
Yet  as  a  hard  flint  forcibly  struck  emits  a  bright  spark,  and  as  a  rough  husk  often 
covers  a  sweet  kernel,  so  these  stern  views  of  the  Almighty  may,  if  reverently  faced 
and  meditated  upon,  yield  salutary,  ennobling,  and  even  comforting  reflections. 

I.  The  potter  claims  absolute  bight  to  deal  with  the  olat  as  he  thinks  fit. 
His  arbitrary  power  does  not  signify  the  absence  of  proper  reasons  for  his  selection. 
As  in  the  callins  of  Israel  to  peculiar  service  and  responsibility  and  honour,  so  every- 
where can  an  election  be  discerned.  We  do  not  start  in  the  race  of  life  with  exactly 
similar  equipmenf,  though  we  live  in  tabernacles  of  clay.  If  the  physical  and  spiritual 
powers  are  the  same  in  essence,  like  the  particles  of  "  the  same  lump,"  yet  the  faculties 
of  some  have  been  well  trained  from  the  beginning,  and  their  natures  have  developed 
under  favourable  conditions.  Here  is  a  lesson  of  resignation.  He  is  happiest  who 
accepts  the  will  of  God  as  revealed  in  his  lot,  assured  that  God's  decision  has  ample 
justification.  Even  the  Stoic  philosophy  could  declare  that  if  man  knew  the  plans 
of  the  Superintendent  of  the  universe,  and  saw  them  in  their  completeness,  he  would 
at  once  acquiesce  in  the  determinations  of  the  Arbiter  of  his  destiny.  This  is  the  truth 
which  mingles  with  the  error  of  Mohammedan  fatalism.  We  have  to  do  all  that  lies 
within  our  power,  and  leave  the  result  with  him  who  is  wise  and  merciful.  For  the 
Potter  is  our  Father  in  heaven.  How  much  of  the  vex»tion  and  worry  of  life  is  due 
to  a  conceit  of  our  capacity,  and  perhaps  to  a  jealousy  of  the  position  and  attainments 
of  our  neighbours!  Be  content  to  fill  a  lowly  place.  And  the  time  is  at  hand  when 
"  the  pots  in  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  like  the  bowls  before  the  altar." 

II.  The  potter  has  no  desire  fob  the  destruction  of  his  workmanship.  He 
cares  not  to  waste  his  clay,  nor  to  employ  it  in  a  manner  to  secure  its  speedy 
extinction.    It  is  a  pain  to  God  to  see  his  gifts  abused,  his  image  degraded,  his  work 


284  THE   EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  ix.  1-33. 

marred.  He  is  said  in  ver.  22  to  "endure  with  mucli  long-suffering  the  vessels  of 
wrath."  A  lesson  of  hopefulness  is  here.  Tlie  Most  High  will  not  break  his  vessels 
in  pieces  as  Ion"  as  they  are  fit  for  any  use,  for  any  post,  though  humble  and 
insignificant.  "Potter  and  clay  endure,"  howe'er  the  wheel  of  life  may  turn  and 
fashion  the  material  into  altered  shapes.  If  the  light  of  God  shines  in  a  vacuum,  no 
brightness  is  observable.  An  empty  heaven  were  a  dreary  home  for  a  God  of  love,  a 
gilent  temple  for  him  who  glories  in  the  praises  of  his  people  and  his  works. 

III.  The  pottkb  prefers  to  ooNSTitncT  the  choicest  vessels.  The  noblest  wart 
pays  him  best,  and  he  lovingly  exerts  his  skill  on  specimens  of  highest  art.  Deny 
not  to  God  the  delight  which  every  artist  feels  in  the  finest  productions  of  his  genius ! 
The  most  polished  mirrors  best  reflect  his  glory.  A  lesson  of  aspiration  therefore. 
"  Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts."  God  has  made  his  clay  instinct  with  will  and  energy  j 
he  tal^es  pleasure  in  the  improvement  of  the  vessels,  that  they  may  be  brought  into 
his  sanctuary.  It  will  mightily  assist  our  struggles  to  be  sure  that  the  Captain  longs 
"  to  biing  many  sons  unto  glory." — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  33. — Either  an  offence  or  a  refuge.  An  offence  is  caused  by  soma  obstacle 
npon  the  road,  something  that  trips  up  the  feet  or  bars  our  progress,  or  some  stone 
pillar  that  overthrows  the  unwary  charioteer  in  his  course.  The  apostle  combines  two 
pissages  from  Isaiah  to  prove  that  the  rejection  of  Christ  by  the  Jews  was  long  ago 
foretold ;  nothing,  therefore,  to  be  wondered  at,  much  less  a  reason  for  abandoning 
Christianity.  To  John  the  Baptist,  encompassed  with  doubts  born  of  the  shadows  of 
a  prison,  the  stirring  assurance  was  sent,  "  Blessed  is  he  who  shall  not  be  offended 
in  me." 

I.  The  work  of  Christ  a  Divine  appointment.  "  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion,"  etc. 
There  were  hints  and  predictions  of  the  gospel  in  nature,  providence,  and  Jewish 
symbolism.  And  now  that  the  purpose  of  grace  has  been  clearly  manifested,  we  can 
everywhere  trace  intimations  corroborative  of  the  significance  of  the  Saviour's  mission, 
though  we  might  not  without  this  key  in  our  hands  have  discovered  the  opening  of 
the  locks.  Much  in  the  mystery  of  redemption  transcends  expectation.  Who  could 
have  invented  a  narrative  of  such  Divine  condescension  ?  And  many  things  connected 
with  the  intercession  of  Christ  recall  the  language  of  Leviticus,  "  I  have  given  it  you 
to  make  atonement  for  your  souls."  Christ  is  God's  Gift  to  our  fallen  world.  He  came 
according  to  the  flesh  an  Israelite ;  he  came  to  Zion,  and  in  the  midst  of  his  own  people 
made  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin. 

II.  This  work  a  stumbling-block  to  some.  The  people  in  Zion  could  not  under- 
stand how  a  Graliljean  Prophet  could  become  a  Corner-stone  of  a  nobler  edifice  than  they 
had  ever  beheld.  They  had  respect  to  the  outward  meanness  of  the  Messi^ih,  and 
could  not  comprehend  his  spiritual  glory.  They  were  unprepared  for  a,  system  that 
secured  righteousness,  not  by  human  merit  and  obedience  to  statutory  and  ceremonial 
regulations,  but  by  faith  in  the  Righteous  One.  A  Messiah  cruciSed  was  the  reversal 
of  every  hope.  And  when  the  gospel  was  proclaimed  to  the  Gentiles,  multitudes  could 
see  in  it  naught  to  evoke  their  admiration  or  claim  their  iniellectual  homage.  It 
humbles  pride,  makes  severe  demands  upon  our  power  of  credence.  The  facts  are 
extraordinary,  and  the  doctrines  based  thereon  run  couoter  to  many  a  deep-rooted, 
warmly  cherished  prejudice.  And  thus  the  preaching  of  Christ  b^-oomes  "  a  savour 
of  death." 

HI.  A  SURE  foundation  to  believers.  Three  translations  of  the  original  word 
are  found  in  the  Authorized  Version — "shall  not  make  haste,"  "shall  not  be  con- 
founded," "  shall  not  be  ashamed."  These  terms  all  lay  stress  on  the  diirableness  of 
Christian  hope.  When  the  hail  "  sweeps  away  the  refuges  of  lies,"  he  that  trusteth 
in  the  Lord  shall  find  ho  has  not  believed  in  vain  ;  his  Ark  survives  the  flood,  his  Tower 
withstands  the  assault  of  the  foe.  The  consciousness  of  peace  and  satisfaction  which 
the  disciple  of  Christ  enjoys  must  ultimately  be  accepted  as  the  strongest  weapon  in 
the  controversy,  the  plainest  iu'lication  of  the  reconcilement  of  the  natural  and  the 
■upernatural.  A  foundation  which  bears  unmoved  the  strain  of  a  heavy  superstructure 
cannot  be  treated  as  worthless.  According  to  our  position,  thru,  as  in  the  camp  of 
Israel  or  of  Egypt,  will  the  Divine  cloud  minister  light  or  darkness,  succour  or 
bewilderment. — S.  R.  A. 


CH.  IX.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  285 

Vers.  1 — 5. —  Christian  patriotism.  We  saw  in  last  chapter  how  a  "  Paradise  "  may 
really  be  experimentally  "  regained,"  and  how  Christian  experience  culminates  in  a 
triumphant  assurance.  But  the  apostle  could  not  contemplate  this  as  a  mere  personal 
matter.  He  could  not  rejoice  in  personal  salvation  and  be  indifferent  to  the  salvation 
of  his  brethren.  The  case  of  his  countrymen  accordingly  comes  forward  for  review,  and 
in  the  review  of  it  the  apostle  is  seen  as  the  Christian  patriot.  Though  the  "  apostle 
of  the  Gentiles,"  he  has  lost  no  interest  in  his  Jewish  countrymen.  The  subji;ct  raised 
in  this  section  is,  consequently,  the  important  one  of  Christian  patriotism.  Now,  there 
are  some  who  imagine  that  we  have  in  these  terms  a  real  contradiction.  Their  notion 
is  that  the  true  Christian  is  so  occupied  with  a  future  world  as  to  have  little  interest 
in  a  present  oue.  Is  not  heaven  the  fatherland  of  the  believer  ?  is  he  not  taught  to 
regard  himself  as  a  citizen  of  the  better  country  ?  is  he  not  to  live  as  if  already  within 
its  pearly  gates  ?  and  will  he  not  in  consequence  lose  real  interest  in  the  world  that 
now  is,  and  pass  through  it  as  a  mere  "  pilgrim  and  stranger  "  ?  While  this  is  perfectly 
true,  it  is  also  true  that  the  Christian  may  and  ought  to  be  the  very  best  of  patriots, 
and  Christian  patriotism  the  very  best  form  of  patriotism.  .  St.  Faul's  case  is  one  in 
point.  He  was  the  very  finest  specimen  of  a  Christian  which  our  era  has  produced. 
He  laid  the  emphasis  on  the  future  world  as  few  have  ever  done.  He  lived  as  if  within 
the  gates  of  the  eternal  city.  And  yet,  in  his  relations  to  his  fellow-countrymen,  he 
was  the  truest  and  wisest  of  patriots.  Up  to  a  certain  period  Saul  of  Tarsus  had  been 
a  trusted  national  leader.  It  vvas  to  him  the  chief  priests  committed  their  policy  of 
persecution ;  and  right  zealously  had  he  carried  it  out.  Under  the  notion  that  the 
Christians  were  the  enemies  of  their  country  and  religion,  the  Jews,  and  Saul  as  their 
chosen  instrument,  thought  that  they  diil  God  service  when  they  imprisoned  and  mur- 
dered them.  Had  it  been  asked  who  was  the  greatest  patriot  among  all  the  Jews,  the 
reply  would  have  been  imanimous — Saul  of  Tarsus.  His  patriotism  was  thoroughly 
unscrupulous ;  it  stuck  at  nothing.  But  when  the  risen  Siviour  meets  and  conquers 
him  on  the  road  to  Damascus,  the  arch-persecutor  becomes  a  meek  and  lowly  Christian. 
And  now  he  seeks  out  Jews  instead  of  Christians,  not  to  persecute  them,  however,' but 
if  possible  to  persuade  them  to  become  Christians  too.  The  result  is  he  is  persecuted, 
and  has  to  flee ;  yet  the  process  is  repeated  in  the  mistiouary  tours  which  characterize 
his  life.  To  the  Jews  first,  and  then,  when  they  reject  his  message,  he  turns  to  the 
Gentiles.  He  might,  indeed,  have  given  up  the  Jews  with  good  reason.  "  Surely,"  says 
Colani,  "if  the  Christian' was  held  to  break  the  chains  which  bound  him  naturally  to  a 
nation,  never,  to  a  certainty,  had  any  man  been  so  completely  delivered  therefrom  as 
the  apostle."  *  He  might  have  said,  moreover,  that  he  was  set  apart  for  the  mission  to 
the  Gentiles.  Yet,  in  spite  of  all  their  persecutions,  he  will  give  them  the  first  place  in 
his  affections  and  in  his  evangelistic  work.  Indeed,  he  seems  to  gravitate  instinctively 
and  at  all  hazards  to  Jerusalem,  prepared  to  sacrifice  life  and,  as  it  would  seem,  ever- 
lasting happiness,  if  it  would  save  them.  And  indeed,  when  we  look  into  Paul's  life 
we  see  at  once  a  cosmopolitanism  and  a  patriotism — a  cosmopolitanism  which  embraced 
all  Gentile  nations,  and  a  patriotism  which  would  have  made  any  sacrifice  for  his  own 
beloved  Jews.  In  contrast  with  this,  pagan  patriotism  will  be  found  to  be  politic 
rather  than  patriotic.  Cities,  not  broad  fatherlands,  were  the  tiny  footholds  for  which 
the  citizens  were  ready  to  make  sacrifices.  They  had  not  under  paganism  any  broad 
or  liberal  views  such  as  Christi.inity  produced.  Christianity  transformed  selfish  dtisxn- 
ship  into  disinterested  patriotism. 

I.  The  Cumstian  paieiox  will  emphasize  the  good  qualities  of  his  oountey- 
HEN.  (Vera.  4,  5.)  Puul  is  particular  in  bringing  out  the  good  qualities  of  the  Jews. 
Though  they  had  persecuted  him,  his  only  revenge  was  in  doing  them  service  by 
preaching  to  them  Christ  as  their  true  Messiah.  And  when  he  found  them  unwilling 
to  receive  his  message,  "great  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow"  seem  to  have  settled 
in  his  heart.  This  consuming  interest,  moreover,  was  kept  alive  by  the  consideration 
of  the  good  qualities  of  his  countrymen.  To  them,  as  he  rejoiced  to  think,  pertained 
"  the  adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  gi'ving  of  the  Law,  and  the 
service  of  God,  and  the  promises ;  whose  are  the  fathers,  and  of  whom  as  concerning 
the  flesh  Christ  came,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever."    He  looked  into  Jewish 

'  Cf.  Colani's  sermon  on  "  Le  Patriotisme,"  in  his  second  volume,  p.  314 ;  alio  Dean 
Qoulbom's  sermon  on  "  The  Grounds  of  True  Patriotism,"  '  Sermons,'  p.  227. 


286  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  ix.  1—33. 

history  and  noted  with  satisfaction  how  his  nation  had  been  acknowledged  and  honoured 
in  connection  with  God's  revelation  of  himself.  The  Jewish  genius  was  in  the  sphere 
of  religion.  He  studied  also  the  great  capacities  of  his  countrymen,  and  it  was  his 
downright  conviction  that  if  they  were  once  won  to  Christ,  their  advent  to  the  Christian 
cause  would  be  as  "  life  from  the  dead."  His  fellow-countrymen  seemed  to  him  the 
most  magnificent  of  latent  possibilities,  embodiments  of  great  and  noble  qualities  which 
simply  were  waiting  to  be  consecrated  to  Christ.  And  it  is  here  that  enlightened 
Christian  patriotism  must  begin.  Let  us  take  the  good  points,  not  the  bad,  in  our 
fellow-countrymen.  Let  us  consider  what  splendid  possibilities  they  are,  and  then  let 
us  try,  by  God's  blessing,  to  have  these  qualities  consecrated  to  our  Lord  and  Master. 

II.  The  Chbistian  patriot  wili,  not  excuse  himself  from  sekving  his  countrt- 
MEN  TJKDEB  THE  PRETENCE  OF  SOME  SPECIAL  MISSION.  There  are  somB  people  who 
are  so  occupied  with  special  work  as  to  have  no  time,  as  they  certainly  show  little 
taste,  for  what  is  patriotic.  They  imagine  they  have  got  a  dispensation  from  all 
patriotic  service.  But  if  any  one  ever  had  such  a  dispensation,  it  was  assuredly  the 
Apostle  Paul.  As  soon  as  he  was  converted,  he  was  told  he  was  to  be  the  apostle  of 
the  Gentiles.  Immediately  he  blooms  into  a  man  of  cosmopolitan  aims  and  desires. 
The  whole  world  becomes  his  parish,  and  all  men  his  charge.  Might  he  not,  in  such 
circumstances^  plead  for  a  division  of  labour,  and  leave  the  Jews  to  the  care  of  Peter 
and  of  the  eleven?  Especially  when  he  had  tasted  the  bitterness  of  their  per^eoution 
against  him,  might  he  not  have  well  excused  himself  on  the  plea  of  his  special  mission  ? 
He  might — but,  blessed  be  God,  he  did  not.  Though  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  he 
was  so  patriotic  as  to  have  the  Jews  and  their  interests  always  on  his  heart.  It  pained 
him  evermore  to  think  that  these  splendid  possibilities  were  being  wasted  in  a  vain 
endeavour  to  stem  the  tide  of  Christianity  that  he  knew  was  on  the  flood,  and  would 
reach,  in  spite  of  all  opposition,  its  fulness.  And  so  we  see  this  Christian  patriot  laying 
siege  of  set  purpose  to  the  Jewish  synagogues  on  his  way ;  preaching  the  gospel  to  the 
Jews  until  they  would  hear  no  longer ;  praying  for  them,  writing  Epistles  about  them, 
and  perhaps  one  to  them;  in  short,  doing  anything  that  a  patient,  pertinacious,  per- 
severing, converted  Jew  could  do  for  his  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh.  In  view  of 
Paul's  special  mission,  then,  no  man  has  any  right  to  excuse  himself,  as  some  indeed 
dii,  from  patriotic  service. 

III.  The  Christian  patriot  will  recognize  the  salvation  of  his  countrymen 
AS  THE  MOST  IMPORTANT  BENEFIT  THEY  CAN  RECEIVE.  It  IS  certainly  remarkable 
that  St.  Paul,  in  all  his  work  among  the  Jews  and  references  in  his  writings  to  them, 
keeps  steadily  before  his  mind  and  theirs  that  their  conversion  to  Christ  would  be  the 
greatest  boon  they  could  possibly  receive.  He  gets  involved  in  no  controversy  about 
patriotic  politics,  but  devotes  himself  to  the  promulgation  of  what  he  believes  to  be  the 
best  religion  for  the  Jews  and  for  any  man.  He  tried,  accordingly,  to  bring  them  into 
sympathy  with  Christ.  He  preached  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  on  the  ground  of  the 
Jewish  Scriptures.  He  showed  that  there  was  promised  first  a  suffering  and  then  a 
glorified  Messiah ;  and  that  Jesus,  now  risen  and  reigning,  embodied  all  their  hopes. 
He  understood  their  prejudices,  for  he  had  himself  shared  them ;  he  met  them  manfuUy^, 
and  tried  to  carry  conviction  to  their  hearts.  The  result  may  have  been  and  often  was 
disappointing.  The  patriot  was  misunderstood,  was  despised,  was  rejected,  was  forced 
to  flee  from  city  to  city,  was  mobbed,  stoned,  imprisoned,  and  at  last  martyred,  all 
because  bright  as  a  star  above  him  all  the  time  shone  the  single  purpose  of  getting  his 
countrymen  converted  to  Christ.  Now,  the  same  duty  lies  before  all  of  us.  The  most 
patriotic  effort  any  one  can  put  forth  is  to  get  all  one's  fellow-countrymen  brought 
into  fellowship  with  Christ.  Other  policies  may  be  questioned  and  questionable,  but 
the  one  about  which  there  can  be  no  question  is  the  patriotic  one  of  getting  all  we 
can  influence  in  our  country  converted  to  the  faith  in  Christ.  Let  us  be  his  "  living 
epistles,"  and  we  shall  be  "  known  and  read  of  all  men." 

IV.  The  Christian  patriot  will  be  beady  fob  ant  saobifiob  to  seoube  his 
kinsmen's  salvation.  We  have  seen  how  Paul  exposed  himself  for  his  Jewish 
countrymen.  He  was  prepared  for  risks.  His  poor  body  might  be  battered,  stoned, 
killed,  but  Paul  was  quite  ready  for  such  eventualities.  Nay,  the  passage  before  us 
shows  that  he  was  ready  for  a  still  greater  sacrifice.  If  it  had  been  possible  for  him  to 
senure  their  salvation  by  becoming  "  anathema."  that  is,  separated  from  Christ,  he  was 


OH.  IX.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP   PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  287 

patriotic  enough  for  this.  In  other  words,  Paul  was  ready  to  forego  his  own  heaven  if 
by  doing  so  he  could  bring  his  brethren  to  it.  How  many  Christians  have  risen  to 
such  a  patriotism?  Self-sacrifice  for  their  country  may  have  been  faced — but  self- 
sacrifice  only  for  a  time.  Glory  beyond  the  shadows  makes  compensation  for  the  pain 
and  the  parting  here.  But  self-sacrifice  for  eternity — this  is  no  less  than  Paul's  idea. 
Let  us  be  patriotic  as  Paul  was,  and  our  country  shall  be  every  way  the  better  for  our 
being  reckoned  among  her  sons. — R.  M.  E. 

Vers.  6 — 18. — The  children  of  the  promise.  We  have  seen  St.  Paul  as  a  Christian 
patriot  ready  to  sacrifice  his  everlasting  fellowship  with  Christ  if  it  could  ensure  the 
salvation  of  his  fellow-countrymen.  But,  alas !  the  fact  of  the  rejection  of  Jesus  and 
his  gospel  by  many  of  the  Jews  must  be  accepted.  And  when  the  apostle  turns  to 
history,  he  finds  that  there  has  been  no  wholesale  salvation  of  cither  the  descendants  of 
Abraham  or  of  Israel,  but  a  certain  proportion  only  became  children  of  promise.  How 
can  these  facts  be  dealt  with  under  the  Divine  government  ?  It  is  to  this  the  apostle 
devotes  himself  in  the  present  passage. 

I.  God's  judgment  upon  ant  man  'is  not  determined  by  the  qualities  of  his 
NATURAL  disposition.  When  we  take  up  the  oases  here  given,  we  see  that  God  did 
not  elect  to  privilege  either  all  the  children  of  the  patriarchs,  or  even  those  we  would 
incline  to  elect  ourselves.  St.  Paul  mentions  the  children  of  Abraham ;  and,  as  the 
history  shows,  he  had  eight  (Gen.  xxv.  2),  yet  only  one  becomes  the  "  child  of  pro- 
mise." Isaac  also  had  two  sons,  but  the  younger,  not  the  elder,  becomes  in  his  turn  the 
"  child  of  promise."  Moreover,  when  we  consider  Ishmael  and  Esau,  who  are  apparently 
both  before  Paul's  mind,  we  are  inclined  to  regard  them  as  more  manly  and  noble  men 
than  their  brothers  Isaac  and  Jacob.  They  may  have  become  "  sons  of  the  desert," 
yet  there  is  something  in  both  the  rejected  men  which  commands  our  admiration.  Of 
course,  we  see  in  them  purely  natural  endowments.  They  live  lives  of  sense  and  sight 
rather  than  of  faith.  They  live  solely  under  the  power  of  things  seen,  and  are  what 
we  now  call  worldly  men.  Their  natures  are  as  interesting  and  as  noble  as  pure 
worldliness  of  spirit  will  allow.  Now  let  us  suppose  for  a  moment  that  God's  electing 
love  had  laid  hold  on  these  well-made  "  noblemen  of  nature,"  with  all  their  physical 
force  and  muscular  power,  and  had  passed  by  their  feebler  brothers,  the  meditative 
Isaac  and  the  cowardly  Jacob ;  would  not  violent  outcry  have  surely  resulted  against  a 
God  who  professed  to  be  a  Father,  and  yet  could  favour  the  strong  and  pass  by  the 
weak  ?  It  is  plain  that  an  electing  love  which  moved  along  such  lines  as  these  would 
have  been  denounced  by  all  serious  and  thoughtful  men.  But,  as  a  recent  preacher  has 
said,  "  the  Father  in  heaven  is  a  considerate  Father.  He  does  not  cast  out  his  crippled 
and  deformed  children  to  perish.  He  holds  to  a  stricter  and  sterner  responsibility  the 
sons  that  are  nobly  endowed  by  birth  and  nature.  He  is  not  the  gentleman's  God,  nor 
the  Redeemer  and  Saviour  of  persons  of  fine  culture  and  beautiful  instincts.  He  is, 
and  from  the  beginning  has  been,  the  Saviour  of  the  lost.  And  by  many  a  story  as 
•trange  as  this  of  Jacob  and  Esau  he  has  shown  to  the  honourable  and  generous  and 
high-minded  that  there  is  a  possible  way  of  ruin  for  them ;  and  to  those  who  know  in 
their  own  sorrowful  consciousness,  and  by  the  scornful  words  or  looks  of  others,  that 
they  are  not  of  noble  or  generous  strain,  that  there  is  a  way  by  which  such  as  they 
may  find  salvation  and  the  eternal  favour  of  God." ' 

II.  The  children  of  the  promise  have  been  led  to  prize  it  and  to  trust  the 
FAITHFUL  Promisbr.  Bothlsaac  and  Jacob  were  children  of  the  promise  in  this  sense, 
that  their  mothers  would  never  have  borne  them  had  not  God  sustained  their  hope  of 
children  by  the  promise  of  a  seed.  But  Esau  was  included  in  this  promise  as  well  as 
Jacob.  There  was,  however,  another  aud  a  better  promise — a  promise  about  all  the 
families  of  the  earth  being  blessed  through  a  particular  seed.  In  other  words,  the 
promise  of  a  Messiah  was  held  before  them  as  their  highest  hope.  Now,  Ishmael  and 
Esau  despised  this  arrangement ;  they  did  not  feel  indebted  to  posterity,  as  many  a 
worldly  mind  thinks  still.  But  Isaac  and  Jacob  got  interested  in  the  promised  bless- 
ing, aud  were  led  to  trust  him  who  uttered  it.  Their  very  weakness  and  cowardice  led 
them  to  lean  upon  One  mighty  to  save,  and  they  were  pardoned,  accepted,  and  in  due 

'  Leonard  Woolgey  Bacon's  'Simplicity  that  is  in  Christ,'  Sermon  xxv.  on  "  J»cob  and 
Eoan." 


288  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  DC  1—33. 

•eason  sanctified.  God's  electing  love  thus  moves  along  lines  where  there  is  the  likelihood 
that  the  poor,  crippled,  crushed  souls  will  learn  to  trust  God  who  is  mighty  to  sav«. 
It  is  harder  for  a  rich  man,  for  example,  to  trust  God  than  it  is  for  a  poor  man  ;  hence 
God  has  "  chosen  the  poor  in  this  world,  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  "  (Jas. 
ii.  5).  It  is  harder  to  get  ahle-bodied  men,  who  never  knew  what  a  day's  sickness  ii, 
to  trust  God  than  it  is  to  get  the  sick  and  the  sorrowing;  and  hence  we  find  that  Jobs 
and  Aaaphs,  who  have  been  plagued  all  the  day,  and  who  are  in  deep  waters  almost 
constantly,  are  made  by  Divine  grace  to  show  to  the  oinhelieving  world  that  they  can 
serve  God  for  naught,  that  even  though  he  slays  them,  yet  will  they  trust  in  him  (Job 
i.  9 ;  xiii.  15 ;  Ps.  Ixxiii.).  And  so,  as  the  writer  already  quoted  says,  "  Be  of  good 
comfort,  all  whose  need  of  salvation  is  deepest  and  most  inward.  You  shall  be  saved, 
not  only  in  spite  of  these  shameful  faults  and  infirmities  which  you  abhor  in  yourself 
and  which  God  abhors;  you  shall  not  only  be  saved,  blessed,  loved,  in  spite  of  them ; — 
you  shall  be  saved/rom  them — and  that  is  a  greater  thing.  Faith  in  God  is  the  vital 
air  of  all  true  human  nobleness.  In  this  air  the  stunted  germs  of  human  virtue  unfold 
and  blossom.  Without  faith,  their  fairest,  strongest  growths  tend  to  shrivel  and  decay. 
For  la(;k  of  faith  in  God,  the  noble  gifts  of  Esau  are  of  no  avail.  He  shuts  himself  out, 
a  willing  stranger  to  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  without  God  in  the 
world.  He  moves,  a  "wandering  star,  in  a  track  without  a  centre,  on  towards  blackness 
of  darkness.  By  faith,  the  low  nature  of  that  '  worm  Jacob '  is  by-and-by  redeemed 
from  the  power  of  evil,  and,  transformed  in  character  and  in  name,  Jacob  the  sup- 
planter  is  changed  to  Israel  the  prince  that  hath  power  with  God  "  (Bacon,  ut  supra). 

III.    God's  ELECTIKS   IjOVE  and  BBPEOBATINQ  hate   OANNOT  be   OUAKqED    WITH  ANT 

INJUSTICE.  Now,  in  analyzing  God's  love  for  the  children  of  promise,  the  apostle  dis- 
tinctly traces  their  election  to  God's  good  pleasure.  He  has  mercy  on  whom  he  will 
have  mercy,  and  ccmpassion  on  whom  he  will  have  compassion.  And  if  mercy  be 
"undeserved  favour,"  that  is  to  say,  if  no  one  deserves  it  or  is  entitled  to  it,  then 
he  may  justly  give  it  to  whomsoever  he  pleaseth.  On  the  other  band,  those  who  are 
passed  by  and  hardened,  having  no  claim  to  better  treatment,  receive  simply  the  due 
reward  of  their  deeds.  And  here  it  may  be  well  to  guard  against  a  false  view  of  the 
■tatement  about  God's  hatred  of  Esau.  It  is  not  to  be  inferred  that  God  hated  Esau 
before  he  was  bom  and  had  any  opportunity  of  doing  evil.  When  we  consult  the 
passage  here  quoted  by  Paul,  we  find  it  refers  to  the  judgment  of  Edom  in  the  time  of 
Nebuchadnezzar.  It  is  in  Mai.  i.  2 :  "  Was  not  Esau  Jacob's  brother  ?  saith  the  Lord ; 
yet  I  loved  Jacob,  and  I  hated  Esau,  and  laid  his  mountains  and  his  heritage  waste  for 
the  dragons  of  the  wilderness."  To  quote  an  acute  writer  upon  this  very  subject, 
"  Esau  is  left  in  his  inferiority  before  his  birth,  but  he  is  not  hated,  in  the  sense  of  the 
prophet,  until  nine  hundred  and  ninety-six  years  later,  when  King  Nebuchadnezzar 
put  his  mountains  to  desolation.  Without  being  blessed  like  his  brother,  Esau  received 
his  home  '  in  the  fatness  of  the  earth,  and  of  the  dew  of  heaven  from  above.'  His 
indifference  had  cost  him  his  right  of  primogeniture,  and  he  could  no  more  receive  it 
back  (Gen.  xiv.  32 ;  xxvii.  33 — 37 ;  Heb.  xii.  16, 17) ;  yet  the  Law  prescribed  respect 
for  him,  '  Thou  shalt  not  have  the  Idumsean  in  abomination,  for  he  is  thy  brother; ' 
and  God  endured  ten  centuries  of  hardness  of  heart  before  he  said,  'I  have  hated 
Esau.'"*  That  is  to  say,  God's  reprobation  of  Esau  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  hia 
election  of  Jacob.  The  mistake  made  by  many  in  thinking  of  these  subjects  is  in 
taking  reprobation  as  the  opposite  of  election — as  if  God  decreed  men's  reprobation  in 
the  exercise  of  the  same  pure  sovereignty  in  which  he  decrees  the  election  of  others. 
But  so  far  from  this  being  the  case,  election  and  reprobation  rest  upon  two  distinct 
portions  of  the  Divine  nature.  The  opposite  of  election  is  not  reprobation,  but  non- 
election  ;  and  no  human  being  has  any  evidence  that  he  is  not  elected.  The  opposite 
of  r^obation  is  approbation,  and  we  are  all  reprobated  by  God  so  long  as  we  do 
not  accept  of  Christ,  and  have  him  in  us,  our  Hope  of  glory.  Election  rests 
on  the  good  pleasure  of  God ;  reprobation  on  his  holiness,  which  leads  him  to  anta- 
gonize and  loathe  what  is  unholy.  I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  the  elder  Robert 
Hall,  in  his  admirable  little  treatise,  'Help  to  Zion's  Travellers.'  He  says, 
"  Eeprdbation  in  Scripture  always  stands  opposed  to,  and  is  the  natural  negative  of, 

'  Cf.  Monscll's  '  La  Predestination,'  p.  26 ;  see  also  on  this  whole  passage  Beyschlag*! 
•  Die  Paulinisclie  Theodioee,'  Eomer  ix.-^zi. 


CH.ES.  1-33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  289 


approbation,  whether  it  respects  the  state  of  a  person,  the  frame  of  his  mind,  or  the 
natvi-e  of  his  actions.  Hence,  vile  professors  are  compared  to  the  alloy  or  dross  fre- 
quently mixed  with  metal,  which  on  trial  is  found  to  be  base  or  deficient  in  quality ; 
therefore  reprobate  silver  shall  men  call  them,  because  God  has  rejected  them  (Jer.  vi. 
30).  So  in  the  text, '  Know  ye  not  that  Christ  is  in  you,  except  ye  be  reprobates  ? ' 
the  apostle's  obvious  meaning  is  that  such  are  destitute  of  real  worth.  For  however 
splendid  a  profession  be,  yet,  without  Christ,  all  will  be  found  mere  refuse  at  last : 
therefore  he  puts  them  upon  close  examination,  lest  they  should  be  deceived  by  appear- 
ances, thinking  themselves  something,  while  in  fact  they  are  nothing.  Hence  in  the 
next  verse  he  adds,  '  But  1  trust  that  ye  shall  know  that  we  are  not  reprobates' (2 
Cor.  xiii.  5,  6) ;  and  in  vev.  7  he  says,  '  Now  I  pray  to  God  that  ye  do  no  evil ;  not 
that  we  should  appear  approved,  but  that  ye  should  do  that  which  is  honest,  though 
we  be  as  reprobates.'  Thus  he  considers  reprobation  and  approbation  as  natural 
opposites.  Again,  men  of  corrvpt  minds  are  said  to  be  reprobates  concerning  the  faith, 
i.e.  destitute  of  a  true  understanding  of  the  truth  (2  Tim.  iii.  8).  And  the  abominable 
and  disobedient  are  unto  every  good  work  reprobate  (Titus  i.  16).  Agreeably,  therefore, 
to  this  view  of  reprobation,  those  vile  affections  Jo  which  the  Gentiles  were  given  up 
are  called  a  reprobate  mind  (Rom.  i.  26,  28,  29).  Meaning  that  their  dispositions  and 
conduct  were  odious,  and  could  not  possibly  be  approved  of,  either  by  God  or  good  men. 
From  the  above  considerations,  it  evidently  appears  that  election  and  reprobation  are 
not  inseparably  connected,  nor  even  so  much  as  related  as  kindred  ideas,  and  that 
reprobation  does  not  iutend  an  absolute  appointment  to  eternal  misery,  for  such  may 
still  find  uit-rcy  as  Paul  did  ;  but  that  it  is  the  awful  opposite  to  Divine  approbation, 
whether  't  respect  persons,  principles,  or  proceedings."  Hence  we  are  not  to  think 
that  eithei  Esau  or  Pharaoh  was  unfairly  dealt  with.  Their  histories  show  that  they 
had  their  fair  chance  of  accepting  God's  plan  and  submitting  to.  him.  But  preferring 
their  own  course,  and  to  fight  rather  than  submit,  they  became  the  object  of  God's 
righteous  reprobation  and  leisurely  wrath.  God  is  slow  to  anger;  but  when  it  comes 
about,  it  \s  seen  to  be  well  deserved.  At  close  quarters,  the  injustice  charged  against 
God  is  seen  ai*.>.'gether  to  disappear. — R.  M.  E. 

Vers.  19 — 33,—  Vessels  of  wrath  and  vessels  of  mercy.  We  have  already  seen  that 
God's  hatred  of  Esau  was  after  a  millennium  of  patience.  This  fact  of  God's  long-suffer- 
ing with  Esau's  seed  carries  the  light  we  need  into  the  difiBcult  section  now  before  us. 
It  is  a  specious  objection  that  the  Divine  wilt 's  resistless,  and  so,  as  each  one  finds  he 
cannot  resist  God  successfully,  what  reason  has  the  Most  High  to  find  fault  with  his 
helpless  creatures  ?  But  a  little  fair  thinking  on  the  whole  subject  of  God's  sovereignty 
will  show  that  he  has  every  right  to  complain.  Assume  that  we  are  all  clay  in  the 
hands  of  the  potter:  what  then?  Is  the  potter  responsible  for  the  composition  of  the 
clay  ?  If  one  lump  is  most  common  clay,  out  of  which  no  glorious  vessel  could  be 
fashioned,  surely  the  potter  can  be  held  responsible  only  for  the  use  to  which  ha 
puts  the  base  lump  supplied  him,  and  not  for  the  common  character  of  the  clay? 
It  is  the  unfair  vmh  '>f  the  figure  which  has  led  to  exegetical  difficulty.  Let  us,  then, 
take  up  the  two  kinds  of  vessels  here  referred  to,  and  see  what  truths  are  actually 
communicated  by  them. 

I.  The  vessels  or  wrats  fitted  unto  destkuction.  And  here  I  cannot  do 
better  than  tniuslate  from  a  writer  already  quoted.  In  his  little-known  work,  '  La 
Predestination,'  Monsell  says,  "The  all-important  point  for  the  interpretation  of  these 
verses  is  to  decide  when  the  act  of  forming  the  vessels  took  place ;  does  this  operation 
represent  the  predestination,  or  the  moral  government  of , God  in  actual  time  ?  A  word 
of  ver.  23  deciiles  this  question,  without  giving  ground  for  the  least  hesitation;  this 
word  is  the  key  of  the  whole  passage,  and,  strange  to  say,  it  is  omitted  by  Luther  and 
by  the  French  translations  anterior  to  that  of  Lausanne.  It  is  the  word  'afore ' — 'which 
he  has  prepared  afore  for  his  glory.'  The  predestination  of  the  vessel,  then,  is  not 
its  fabrication ;  it  precedes  it.  Thus,  then,  when  God  is  compared  to  a  potter  who 
fashions  the  clay,  the  question  is  about  his  actual  treatment  of  sinners.  They  aie 
before  him  one  identical  mass,  vile  and  shapeless ;  to  make  the  one  portion  vessels 
unto  dishonour,  to  make  them  promote  his  glory  without  bettering  their  condition,  is 
*«  treat  them  according  to  their  nature;  to  make  the  other  portion  vessels  unto  honour 

BOUANIk  1 


290  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  ix.  1— 33. 

i«  to  treat  them  according  to  his  grace  which  has  been  given  them  in  Christ  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world.  As  to  the  vessels  of  wrath,  God  is  not  the  Author  of  their 
nature,  but  only  of  their  form ;  he  has  fashioned  them,  but  he  has  not  '  prepared ' 
them ;  their  form  is  already  a  merited  punishment ;  he  shows  therein  his  wrath.  Could 
one  believe  that  God  was  irritated  against  those  who  would  be  such  as  he  had  wished 
them  to  be  ?  Would  he  need  '  a  grand  long-suffering '  to  endure  his  own  work  in  the 
state  which  he  had  himself  determined  ?  Has  he  raised  with  one  hand  what  he  has 
overturned  with  the  other  ?  Such  a  doctrine  ends  by  doing  violence  to  that  reason  in 
the  name  of  which  it  has  outraged  our  moral  sentiments."  It  is  clear,  then,  that  the 
potter's  relation  to  the  vessels  of  wrath  is  that  of  the  fashioner  of  material  made  ready 
to  his  baud.  He  is  not  to  be  blamed  if  the  coarse  clay  will  only  make  a  dishonoured 
vessel.  The  preparation  of  the  clay,  the  contraction  of  its  coarse  character,  has  been 
anterior  to  the  potter's  disposal  of  it.  All  he  can  do  is  to  determine  the  destination 
which  suits  the  nature  of  the  provided  clay.  In  the  very  same  way,  God  is  not  to  be 
held  responsible  for  the  coarse  characters  sinners  contract  in  the  process  of  their 
development.  They  have  exercised  their  freedom  in  reaching  the  condition  when,  like 
clay,  they  lie  before  the  great  Potter's  wheel.  All  that  God  can  be  held  responsible 
for  is  the  form  as  vessels  of  dishonour  they  are  to  take ;  and  if  he  shows  his  deserved 
wrath  in  disposing  of  them  as  dishonoured  vessels,  he  is  acting  well  within  his  rights. 
It  is  in  the  disposal  of  incorrigible  sinners,  in  suffering  long  with  them,  and  in  at  last 
dooming  them  to  destruction,  that  he  displays  the  severe  side  of  his  character — that 
side  without  which  he  could  not  ensure  our  respect.  As  for  this  wrath  of  God,  it  has 
been  very  happily  denominated  by  some  of  the  Germans  "  the  love-pain  (Liebesschmerz) 
of  God."  *  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  with  his  long-suffering  there  enters  a  large 
element  of  pain.  These  wrecked  lives  are  not  disposed  of  by  God  without  due  sensi- 
bility.    He  grieves  over  them  as  in  human  form  he  grieved  over  doomed  Jerusalem. 

II.  The  vessels  of  mercy  pkbpaeed  afore  unto  qloet.  It  is  much  pleasanter, 
however,  to  turn  to  the  vessels  of  mercy — the  vessels  which  God  fashions  into  "  vessels 
.unto  honour,  fitted  and  prepared  for  the  Master's  use."  He  can  and  does  take  men 
like  Isaac  and  Jacob,  whose  natural  qualities  are  not  of  the  highest  and  noblest,  and 
out  of  their  unlikely  characters  he  can  by  his  grace  make  what  is  pure  and  holy.  Of 
Jews  and  Gentiles  he  has  called  a  proportion,  and  they  have  become  Christ-like,  and 
BO  glorious.  And  here  we  have  to  notice :  1.  That  in  this  way  Ood  has  made  known 
the  riches  of  his  glory.  For  if  these  elect  ones  had  not  become  the  subjects  of  God's 
grace,  much  of  God's  rich  glory  would  have  remained  unknown.  The  fall  of  man  and 
his  deterioration  have  furnished  God  with  splendid  opportunities  for  the  revelation  of 
his  glorious  love  and  transforming  power.  The  whole  universe  has  profited  by  the 
manifestation  of  the  riches  of  God's  glory  in  the  vessels  of  mercy.  2,  In  the  forma- 
Uon  of  the  vessds  of  mercy  Ood  was  not  working  without  a  plan.  Just  as  a  skilful 
potter,  in  the  formation  of  some  specially  fine  piece  of  porcelain,  spends  anxious  thought 
upon  its  form  and  ornamentation,  so  God  afore  prepared  the  vessels  of  mercy  unto 
glory.  The  predestination  of  grace  is  simply  the  due  foresight  and  prearrangement  of 
God.  There  is  nothing  fortuitous;  nothing  of  chance- work  about  God's  acts  of  grace. 
"  There  is,"  says  Monsell,  "  in  our  chapter  only  one  predestination,  that  of  grace;  and 
not  only  that,  but  the  words  of  the  apostle  are  weighed  and  chosen  to  prevent  all 
misapprehension :  the  one  are  ready  or  fit  for  perdition,  the  other  are  prepared  for 
glory ;  the  first,  it  is  not  God  who  has  made  them  ready — on  the  contrary,  he  endures 
them  '  with  a  .grand  long-suffering ; '  the  latter,  it  is  God  who  has  prepared  them.^ 
still  more,  he  has  prepared  them  afore.  Were  it  not  for  the  care  with  which  the  idea 
of  reprobation  is  here  put  aside),  I  should  never  have  supposed  that  such  a  dogma  had 
presented  itself  to  the  spirit  of  a  sacred  writer.  Paul  makes  on  purpose  an  antithetic 
parallelism,  as  he  had  done  (ch.  vi.  23)  between  wages  and  gift,  and  this  parallelism 
finds  itself  in  all  the  members  of  the  sentence.  God  shows  his  anger  towards  the 
wicked,  and  the  riches  of  his  glory  towards  the  saved;  but  the  latter,  the  mercy,  is 
altogether  gratuitous.  If  he  wishes  to  make  his  power  known  (ver.  22),  it  is  not  his 
power  to  create  evil,  but  to  punish  it ;  and  how  to  punish  evil  if  not  by  evil,  how 
to  show  his  anger  towards  the  clay  unless  by  making  the  vessels  unto  dishonour  ?  "  • 
8.  It  is  faith  which  makes  the  vessels  glorious.  After  quoting  several  prophecies 
'  Cf  Weber's  '  Vom  Zorne  Gottes,"  B.  82.  ■  '  La  Predestination,'  pp.  28,  29. 


CH.  X.  1— 21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


291 


about  the  elect  remnant,  the  apostle  prooeedg  to  point  out  that  faith  In  the  one  case, 
and  the  lack  of  it  in  the  other,  made  all  the  difference.  The  Jews  for  the  most  part 
stumbled  at  the  idea  of  a  crucified  Messiah.  They  would  not  trust  him,  but  busied 
themselves  about  building  up  their  own  righteousness.  Self-righteousness  became  their 
ruin.  But  the  Gentiles,  on  the  other  hand,  not  seeking  self-righteousness,  went 
forward  and  believei  in  Jesns,  and  the  faith  transfigured  them.  They  found  that 
"whosoever  believeth  on  Jesus  shall  not  be  ashamed."^  And  faith  in  the  risen  Lord, 
aver  present  with  them  according  to  his  promise,  made  them  noble  men  and  women, 
ready  to  witness  for  Christ  even  unto  the  death.  It  is  thus  that  God  in  his  sovereign 
mercy  makes  men  and  women  "vessels  unto  honour,"  fitting  them  by  the  gift  of 
faith  for  service  here  on  earth,  and  preparing  them  for  still  more  glorious  service  in  the 
life  to  come.    As  Ray  Palmer  sweetly  sang,  so  may  we — 

"My  faith  loolrs  up  to  thee. 
Thou  Lamb  of  Calvary, 

Saviour  Divine : 
Now  hear  me  while  I  pray ; 
Take  all  my  guilt  away ; 
Oh,  let  me  from  this  day 

Be  wholly  thine  I 


•  When  ends  life's  transient  dream. 
When  death's  cold,  sullen  stream 

Shall  o'er  me  roll ; 
Blest  Saviour,  then,  in  love. 
Fear  and  distrust  remove  ; 
Oh,  bear  me  safe  above, 
A  ransomed  soul  I " 


E.M.E. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  X. 


In  this  chapter  the  view  of  the  whole 
subject  introduced  at  eh.  ix.  30  is  continued 
and  carried  out,  according  to  which  the 
present  rejection  of  the  Jews  as  a  nation  is 
traced  to  no  absolute  and  irreversible  Divine 
decree,  but  to  their  own  refusal  to  accept 
God's  plan  of  mercy  to  all  mankind ;  testi- 
monies being,  as  usual,  adduced  from  the 
Old  Testament  in  support  of  the  argument. 
But,  before  proceeding,  the  apostle  renews 
expression  of  his  regret  (cf.  ch.  ix.  1,  seg.) 
at  the  present  position  of  his  countrymen, 
and  his  earnest  desire  that  it  should  be 
otherwise. 

Ver.  1.  —  Brethren,  my  heart's  desire 
((vSokIo,  expressing  good  wiU)  and  prayer  to 
Bod  for  them  (for  Israel,  as  in  the  Textus 
Beceptus,  has  no  good  support)  is,  that  they 
may  be  saved  (literally,  is  unto  salvation). 
"  Non  orassot  Paulus,  si  absolute  repiobati 
essent "  (Bengel). 

Vers.  2,  3. — For  I  bear  them  record  that 
they  have  a  zeal  of  God.  For  C^Xop  eeoS, 
meaning  zeal  for  God,  cf.  John  ii.  17 ;  Acts 
xxii  S;  Gal.  L  14.     The  word  ^\os  was 


commonly  used  for  the  religious  ardour  of 
the  Jews  at  that  time  (cf.  Acts  xxi.  20, 
TliivTes  ^7j\wTal  tov  v6^ov  {nrdpxovfft)^  and 
there  was  a  faction  among  them  called  dis- 
tinctively ZijXajTo!,  to  which  Simon  Zelotea 
(Luke  vi.  15;  Acts  i.  13)  is  supposed  to 
have  belonged  originally.  St.  Paul's  men- 
tion of  the  religious  zeal  of  the  Jews  of  his 
day  is  apposite  in  this  place.  In  ch.  ix. 
1 — 5,  where  he  was  about  to  speak  of 
their  rejection  from  the  inheritance  of  the 
promises,  he  appropriately  dwelt  on  their 
ancient  privileges;  here,  where  he  has  in 
view  their  own  failure  to  respond  to  God's 
purpose  for  them,  he  as  appropriately  refers 
to  their  undoubted  zeal,  which  he  regrets 
should  be  misdirected.  But  not  according 
to  knowledge.  For  being  ignorant  of 
(iyyoovvTes,  in  explanation  of  ov  Kar  iwiyvtf 
aiv  preceding)  Qod's  righteousness,  and 
seeking  to  establish  their  owa  (righteoutneai, 
repeated  here,  is  ill  supported),  tkey  hav« 
not  submitted  themselves  to  the  righteous- 
ness of  God.  For  the  meaning  of  God's 
righteousness,  opposed  to  man's  own  right- 
eousness, see  on  ch.  iii.  19,  20 ;  also  on  ch. 
i.  17,  and  Introduction. 

Yer.  4. — For  Christ  is  the  end  of  Law  unto 
righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth. 
The  word  "end"  (reAoj)  might  in  itself 
mean  (1)  termination,  (2)  fulfilment,  (3)  aim 


292 


THB  EPISTLE  OP   PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  x.  1—21, 


01  purpose,  which  is  the  evident  meaning  of 
the  word  in  1  Tim.  i.  5  imd  1  Pet.  i.  9.  This 
last  seems  best  to  suit  the  line  of  thought 
in  this  place.  The  Jews  evinced  ignorance, 
i.e.  of  the  real  meaning  and  purpose  of  Law, 
in  resting  on  it  for  justification.  This  is 
St.  Paul's  constant  position  in  speaking  of 
the  office  of  Law— that  it  could  not  and  wtis 
never  meant  to  justify,  but  ratljer  to  con- 
vince of  sin  ;  to  establish  the  need  of,  and 
excite  a  craving  for,  redemption;  and  so 
prepare  men  to  appreciate  and  accept  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  Christ  which  was  its 
teAos  (see  especially  ch.  vii. ;  and  cf.  Gfal. 
iii.  24,  "fltTTe  d  fSfios  TraLSayoyyhs  rj/xcov  y^yovev 
eis  XptffThv,  tva  ^k  iriffrecos  5iKai(odaiiA€vy 
y6fi.o!  being  here  anarthrous,  we  translate  it 
according  to  the  rule  observed  in  this  Com- 
mentary. The  apostle  has,  indeed,  in  view 
the  Mosaic  Law ;  but  it  is  the  principle  of 
law,  as  such,  that  he  is  speaking  of.  He 
next  proceeds,  as  elsewhere  throughout  the 
Epistle,  to  quote  from  the  Old  Testament  in 
illustration  of  the  contrast  between  the  two 
principles  of  justification,  and  this  with  the 
intention  of  showing  that  even  in  the 
Pentateuch  that  of  justification  by  faith 
was  intimated,  and  thus  that  it  was  all 
along  the  real  t4\os  of  the  Law.  "  Nam  si 
propbetas  susa  sententies  testes  citasset, 
hserebat  tamen  hie  scrupulus,  cum  Lex 
aliam  justitiae  formam  praescriberet.  Hunc 
ergo  optime  discutit,  quum  ex  ipsa  Legis 
doctrina  stabilit  fidei  justitiam  "  (Calvin). 

Ver.  5. — For  Moses  desoribeth  the  right- 
eousness which  is  of  the  law.  That  the  man 
which  doeth  those  things  shall  live  by 
(literally,  in)  them  (Lev.  xviii.  5).  This 
quotation  is  intended  to  express,  in  the 
words  of  Moses  himself,  the  principle  of 
Law,  viz.  the  requirement  of  entire  observ- 
ance of  it,  such  as  the  apostle  elsewhere 
contends  is  impossible  (cf.  Gal.  iii.  10 — 12). 
It  may  be  objected  that  Moses  himself,  in 
the  original  passage,  does  not  seem  to  be 
setting  forth  any  such  impossible  require- 
ment. He  says,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord, "  Ye 
shall  therrfore  keep  my  statutes  and  my 
judgments,  which,  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live 
in  them  ; "  implying,  it  would  seem,  that  a 
man  might  so  keep  them  as  to  live  in  them ; 
else  were  the  injunction  delusive.  In  the 
quotation  also  of  the  same  text  in  Ezek.  xx. 

11,  13,  21  and  Neh.  ix.  29,  only  such  a  re- 
quirement as  migljt  have  boon  fulfilled 
appears  to  be  understood.  But  St.  Paul  (as 
apijears  from  the  context,  and  from  Gal.  iii. 

12,  vhore  the  text  is  similarly  cited)  refers  to 
it  as  expressing  the  strict  principle  of  law, 
as  above  defined.  If,  then,  the  text,  in  its 
original  connection,  seems  to  full  short  of 
the  sense  put  upon  it,  we  may  understand 
the  •postle  to  quote  it  as  a  well-known 
one,  sufficiently  suggestive,  if  taken,  as  he 


intends  it  to  be,  in  connection  with  others, 
such  as  Deut.  xxvii.  26,  cited  with  it  in 
Gal.  iii.  10,  "Cursed  is  every  one  that  con- 
tfnueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written 
in  the  book  of  the  Law  to  do  them."  It  ia 
bis  way  to  refer  to  familiar  texts,  or  such  as 
most  readily  occur  to  him,  as  suggestive  of 
Old  Testament  ideas  which  he  expects  his 
readers  to  be  acquainted  with.  Calvin's 
remarks  on  this  whole  passage  deserve 
attention :  "  Lex  bifariam  aceipitur.  Nunc 
enini  significat  universam  dnctnnam  a  Mose 
proditam,  nunc  partem  illam  quse  ministerii 
ejus  propria  erat;  quae  scilicet  prssceptis, 
prssmis,  et  poenis  continetur.  .  .  .  Quod  ergo 
hie  de  justitia  Legis  dicitur  referre  convenit 
uon  ad  totam  Mosis  fuuctionem,  sed  ad 
partem  istam  quse  peculiariter  quodammodo 
ei  commissa  fuit."  His  drift  is,  that  the 
passage  before  us  intimates  the  strict 
principle  of  law,  which  it  was  the  peculiar 
function  of  Moses  to  promulgate,  whereas 
the  passage  which  follows  from  Deuteronomy 
is  significant  of  its  universa  doctrina.  This 
distinction  may  help  us  to  understand  St. 
Paul's  drift,  in  referring,  as  he  proceeds 
to  do,  to  Deut.  XXX.  11 — 14.  The  deter- 
mination of  this  drift  is  attended  with  some 
difficulty.  First,  we  observe  that,  whereas 
the  original  passage  certainly  refers  to  the 
Law  given  to  the  Israelites  through  Moses — 
to  the  same  "  statutes  and  judgments "  that 
were  the  subject  of  the  previous  quotation — 
St.  Paul  applies  it  to  describe  justification 
through  faith  in  Christ ;  and,  secondly,  that, 
in  order  to  apply  it,  he  alters  some  parts 
of  it,  and  interposes  comments  of  his  own. 
One  view  is  that  he  is  only  making  a  free 
use  of  the  words  of  the  passage  to  clothe 
his  own  thoughts.  So  Bengel:  "Ad  huuo 
locum  quasi  parodia  suavissime  alludit,  sine 
expressa  allegatioue."  But  his  obvious 
intention,  here  as  elsewhere,  to  support  his 
positions  from  the  old  Scriptures  surely 
precludes  this  view.  Nor  can  he  be  sup- 
posed to  cite  the  passage  as  simply  pro- 
phetical of  the  gospel  which  was  to  supersede 
the  Law,  since-  it  evidently  was  not  so. 
The  proper  view  seems  to  be  that  he 
adduces  it  as  illustrating,  in  the  first  place, 
what  Calvin  calls  the  universa  doctrina  of 
the  Law  itself,  with  regard  to  its  actual 
application  as  a  norma  vivendi  to  the  needs 
of  man.  Here,  he  would  say,  the  very 
Mosaic  dispensation  is  presented  to  us,  not 
as  exacting  any  impossible  obedience  to  the 
strict  behests  of  law,  but  only  such  as  the 
"  circumcised  in  heart "  could  render,  and 
be  accepted  still ;  it  is  presented  to  us,  not 
as  a  rigid  external  code,  enjoining  and 
tlireatening,  but  as  a  word  very  nigh  unto 
us,  even  in  our  heart,  that  we  may  do  it ;  it 
is,  in  fact,  an  anticipation  and  foreshadow- 
ing of  gospel  salvation.    In  confirmation  of 


OK.X.  1— 21]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS. 


r^i 


thia  view  of  the  apostle's  meaning,  it  is  to 
be  observed  that  the  passage  occuis,  not  in 
the  earlier  books  of  Moses,  but  in  Deutero- 
nomy, which  appears  as  an  appendix  to 
them,  containing  for  the  most  part  long  dis- 
courses in  the  style  of  the  prophets,  wherein 
the  Law  is,  as  it  were,  spiritualized,  and  its 
universa  doetrina  opened  out.  In  it  we  feel 
ourselves  as  rising  out  of  the  region  of  strict 
legal  exaction  into  a  higher  arii  aiovfj 
spiritual  one.  Observe  also  that  thf  passage 
before  us  if  based  on  the  idea  of  a  people 
ciroumoijud  in  heart,  and  loving  the  Lord 
with  nil  ihe  heart  and  all  the  soul  (vers.  6, 
20);  or.  an  ideal  view  of  a  state  of  favour 
./nd  acceptance  never  realized  in  Jewish 
lustory,  but  such  as  we  find  often  in  the 
prophetic  writings  (of.  Jer.  xxxi.  31— 3i, 
the  famous  passage  referred  to  more  than 
once  in  the  New  Testament  as  having  its 
eventual  fulfilment  in  Ohri.-.t).  Thus  the 
passage  before  us  is  legitimately  referred 
to  by  St.  Paul,  as  an  intimation  in  the 
Pentateuch  itself  of  the  "  righteousness 
which  is  of  faith." 

Vers.  6 — 10. — But  the  righteousness  which 
is  of  faith  speaketh  on  this  wise,  Say  not  in 
thine  heart  (in  the  original,  It  is  not  in 
heaven,  that  Ihou  shouldest  say).  Who  shall 
ascend  Into  heaven  1  (that  is,  to  bring  Christ 
down),  The  parenthesis  is  St.  Paul's  own  ; 
the  original  has,  after  "  heaven,"  and  bring 
it  unto  us,  that  we  may  hear  it  and  do  it  t 
Or,  Who  shall  descend  into  the  deep  t  (that 
is,  to  bring  up  Christ  again  from  the  dead). 
Again  the  parenilieEi.M  iu  St,  Paul's;  and  he 
■.tttf  substituted  ''into  'he  deep"  («ii  tV 
V./ciTi.;")  for  "beyond  the  sea."  The  original 
is,  HeitUti  is  it  beyond  the  sea,  thai  thou 
ehouldest  say.  Who  shall  go  over  the  sea  for 
lu,  and  bring  it  unto  us,  that  we  may  hear 
it,  and  do  iti  But  what  saith  it?  The 
word  is  nigh  thee,  in  thy  month,  and  in  thy 
heart  (the  original  adds,  that  ihou  mayest 
do  it;  and  the  LXX.,  after  "heart,"  has,  and 
in  thy  hands'):  that  is,  the  word  of  faith, 
which  we  preach ;  that  (or,  because)  if  thou 
Shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  Shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God 
raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be 
saved.  For  with  the  heart  man  believeth 
unto  righteousness;  and  with  the  mouth 
confession  is  made  unto  salvation.  The 
apostle's  purpose  in  varying  from  the  original 
is  obvious  from  his  interposed  comments, 
and  from  the  application  that  follows.  It 
seems  to  be  as  though  he  had  said,  "  See 
now,  with  a,  slight  alteration,  the  passage 
in  Deuteronomy  becomes  an  exact  descrip- 
tion of  our  Christian  doctrine."  The  most 
marked  alteration  is  the  substitution  of 
"  into  the  deep "  for  "  beyond  tlie  sea." 
The  "  sea "  in  the  original,  to  which  the 
term  "abyss"  is  applicable  (of.  Job  xxviii. 


14;  Pa.  cyii.  26),  may  have  supgested  the 
word;  but  St.  Paul  here  evidently  means 
by  it  the  regions  of  the  dead,  imagined  as 
subterranean,  equivalent  to  the  Hebrew 
Sheol,  and  the  Greek  "ASijj.  For  use  of 
the  word  in  this  sense,  of.  Ps.  Ixxi.  20 
(which  may  have  been  present  to  his  mind), 
*E/c  Twu  a^^KfoMv  TTJs  7^5  trdXtv  Sur/jyayes  u.e; 
cf  also  Luke  vili.  31  and  Eev.  ix.  1,  2,  11  ; 
xi.  7 ;  xvii.  8  ;  xx.  1,  3 ;  in  which  passages 
i)  &$v(r<ros  seems  to  denote  the  penal  abode, 
corresponding  to  the  Grreek  idea  of  Tartarus ; 
but  the  word  itself  does  not  contain  this 
idea,  which  is  by  no  means  intimated  here. 
It  may  be  taken  to  denote  Hades,  into  which 
Christ  "descended."  Some  commentators 
suppose  the  previous  expression,  "  ascend 
into  heaven  to  bring  Christ  down,"  to  mean 
bringing  him  back  to  earth  from  heaven, 
whither  he  has  ascended  now.  But  the 
mere  fact  of  its  coming  first,  as  well  as  the 
general  sense  of  the  passage,  shows  it  to 
refer  rather  to  the  Incarnation,  and  what 
follows  to  the  Resurrection.  These  were 
the  two  grand  stages  in  the  great  work  of 
redemption ;  both  were  required  that  "  the 
righteousness  which  is  of  faith "  might 
effectually  be  brought  "  nigh  unto  us." 
The  impossible  task  of  effecting  either  was 
not  required  of  man ;  God  has  done  both 
for  us,  anil  we  have  but  to  "  believe  in  our 
hearts,"  that  "  the  word  "  of  his  grace  may 
be  nigh  us,  in  our  inouth  and  in  our  heart, 
that  we  may  do  it.  Thus  all  that  was 
intimated  or  foreshadowed  by  that  old 
passage  in  Deuteronomy  is  in  its  fullert 
sense  to  us  fulfilled.  (It  may  be  observed, 
in  passing,  that  the  application  to  the  In- 
carnation of  KcLTayayeiv,  etc.,  is,  if  correct, 
one  of  the  instances  of  St.  Paul's  recognition 
Df  the  Divinr  ;«•?:  existence  of  our  Lord.) 
In  ver.  9  i'^u  appni'ability  of  the  words, 
"  in  thy  mouth,  and  in  '.biiie  heart,"  to  the 
gospel  dispensatiun  is  sno'.vTi ;  the  two  ex- 
pressions, properly  understood,  denoting  all 
that  is  required  of  us.  Confession  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  with  the  mouth  must  be  taken 
to  express  generally,  not  only  fearless  avowal 
of  the  Christian  faith,  but  also  consistent 
life,  according  to  the  full  meaning  of  our 
Lord's  words  in  Matt.  x.  32  ;  Maik  viii.  38  ; 
Luke  X.  26 ;  xii.  8,  etc.  Confession  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  with  the  mouth,  too,  would  have 
a  peculiar  significance  then,  when  Christians 
were  often  so  sorely  tempted  to  deny  him 
under  persecution  (of.  1  Cor.  xii.  3).  We 
may  observe  also  how  "  the  mouth  "  is  else- 
where regarded  as  the  index  of  the  heart ; 
as  the  main  bodily  organ  whereby  character 
is  evinced  and  expressed  (of.  Matt.  xii.  34, 
37 ;  XV.  11,  etc.).  Further,  the  belief  spoken 
of  is  belief  in  the  heart — a  living  operative 
faith,  not  intellectual  conviction  only.  Nor 
is  belief  that  God  raised  the  Lord  Jesus 


294 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  x  1—21. 


from  the  dead  to  be  taken  as  meaning  belief 
«f  this  one  article  of  the  Creed  alone;  it 
carries  with  it  belief  in  the  gospel  generally, 
the  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection  being  here, 
as  elsewhere,  regarded  as  the  central  doctrine 
on  which  all  the  rest  depends  (cf.  1  Cor.  xv. 
17 ;  1  Pet.  i.  21).  "  Hsec  summa  Evangelii 
est.  Nam,  cum  credimus  Christum  excitatum 
esse  e  mortuis,  credimus  eum  pro  peccatis 
satisfecisse,  et  in  coelis  regnare,  ut  nos  ad 
imaginem  suam  perficiat  "  (Bucer).  In 
ver.  10,  where  the  offices  of  the  heart  and 
of  the  mouth  are  denoted  in  general  terms, 
the  distinction  between  "  unto  righteous- 
ness" with  respect  to  the  one,  and  "unto 
salvation"  with  respect  to  the  other,  is 
significant.  By  faith  alone  we  are  justified ; 
but  by  confession  in  actual  life,  which  is 
the  fi-uit  of  faith,  our  salvation  is  secured. 

Vers.  11— 21.— What  follows  to  the  end 
of  the  chapter  is  abruptly  expressed,  in 
such  wise  as  to  render  difficult  a  clear 
exposition  of  the  intended  argument.  It 
seems  (as  in  other  parts  of  the  Epistle)  as 
if  St.  Paul  had  dictated  rapidly,  and  without 
pausing  to  consider  whether  readers  would 
easily  follow  the  thoughts  of  which  his  own 
mind  was  full.  First,  having  done  with 
his  illustrations  from  the  Pentateuch  (which 
may  be  regarded  as  parenthetical),  he  re- 
sumes the  line  of  thought  expressed  at  the 
end  of  ver.  4,  by  toktI  t^  iriaTfiovTi.  For, 
though  ver.  11  is  logically  connected  (in 
a  way  usual  with  St.  Paul)  with  the  pre- 
ceding one — the  quotation  from  Isaiah  being 
adduced  in  proof  of  ■jriffTc^eTai  ets  SLuatoavj/irjv 
in  ver.  10 — yet  what  follows  is  really  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  thought  of  ver.  4,  viz.  that 
the  "righteousness  of  God,"  spoken  of  in 
ver.  3,  is  of  faith,  and  also  for  all.  In 
evidence  of  this  he  returns  to  the  text  from 
Isa.  xxviii.  16,  already  cited  in  oh.  ix.  33, 
and  himself  supplies  iras  at  the  beginning 
of  it,  so  as  to  bring  out  its  universal  appli- 
cation. It  may  be  that,  quoting  from 
memory,  he  had  forgotten  that  this  word 
was  not  in  the  original,  or  he  may  have 
purposely  added  it  in  order  to  express  more 
Blearly  what  the  original — in  which  there  is 
no  limitation  of  &  irumiiap — really  implied. 
The  latter  supposition  is  probable,  inasmuch 
as  (according  to  the  best-supported  readings) 
he  had  previously  (oh.  ix.  33)  quoted  the 
text  without  this  addition,  and  now  follows 
out  the  idea  of  irSs  by  giving  a  reason  for 
it,  and  then,  in  ver.  13,  adds  a  text  from 


Joel  in  which  itas  does  occur,  so  as  to 
intimate  that  the  "  calling  on  the  Name  of 
the  Lord,"  spoken  of  by  Joel,  implies  the 
"  believing  "  spoken  of  by  Isaiah,  and  hence 
that  the  two  texts  must  be  equally  universal 
in  their  application. 

Vers.  11,  12. — Tor  the  Scriptnre  saith, 
Whosoever  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be 
ashamed  (see  above,  on  oh.  ix.  33).  For 
there  is  no  difference  (rather,  distinction) 
between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek:  for  the 
same  is  Lord  of  aU,  being  rich  nnto  all  that 
oaU  upon  him.  Here,  in  ver.  12,  the  apostle 
comments  on  the  text  from  Isaiah,  so  as  to 
show  the  universality  of  its  appUoation  (see 
previous  note).  It  is  (he  would  say)  in  itself 
applicable  to  Jew  and  Gentile  alike,  and  it 
must  needs  be  so,  since  the  one  God  is  the 
same  to  all  that  call  upon  him,  even  as  the 
Prophet  Joel  also  testified.  The  thought 
thus  expressed  was  one  deeply  fixed  in  St 
Paul's  mind.  He  elsewhere  speaks  of  the 
very  unity  of  God  as  implying  of  necessity 
that  he  is  the  same  alike  to  Jews  and 
Gentiles  (see  above,  on  ch.  iii.  29). 

Ver.  13. — For  whosoever  shall  call  upon 
the  Name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved  (Joel 
ii.  32).  The  text  from  Joel  is  in  a  passage 
which  is  distinctly  Messianic ;  the  same  that 
is  quoted  by  St.  Peter  (Acts  ii.  16)  as 
fulfilled  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  Hence, 
and  from  the  fact  of  irSs  hs  hv  being  emphatic 
in  the  original,  it  is  well  quoted  by  the 
apostle  as  supplementing  the  previous  one 
from  Isaiah,  and  as  conclusive  for  his 
argument. 

Vers.  14,  15. — How  then  shall  they  call 
on  him  in  whom  they  have  not  believed  1 
This  question  may  be  taken,  in  the  first 
place,  as  serving  to  connect  the  two  passages 
from  Joel  and  from  Isaiah  (see  previous 
note).  But  it  is  further  the  beginning  ot  a 
sorites,  suggested  by  a  new  thought,  which 
is  carried  out  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  The 
course  of  this  new  thought  through  the  rest 
of  the  chapter  may  be  expounded  as  follows : 
It  might  be  pleaded,  in  behalf  of  the  unbeliev- 
ing Jews,  that  they  had  never  really  heard, 
through  preachers  duly  sent  to  them,  the 
gospel  message;  and  hence  that  they  were 
not  to  be  blamed  for  rejecting  it.  With  this 
idea  before  him,  the  apostle  first  (vers.  14, 15) 
allows  generally,  in  the  form  of  a  series  of 
questions,  that,  as  before  calling  on  the  Lord 
there  must  be  faith,  so  before  faith  there 
must  be  hearing,  before  hearing  there  must 
be  preaching,  and  for  preaching  there  must 
be  authorizing  mission;  and  he  quotes,  in 
illustration,  a  passage  from  Isaiah,  which 
describes  beautifully  the  preaching  of  good 
tidings  of  peace  by  commissioned  messengers 
to  all  the  world.    But  he  is  careful  to  add 


OH.  X.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


295 


(vora  10,  17)  that,  Recording  to  the  same 
prophet,  such  universal  preaching,  and  con- 
sequent hearing,  does  not  involve  universal 
hearkening;  thus  showing,  in  view  of  the 
main  purpose  of  his  argument,  that  the  fact 
of  the  Jews  not  hearlcening  now  is  no  evidence 
that  they  Imd  not  heard.  Then  he  goes 
on  to  ask  whether  any  could  plead  the 
excuse  of  not  having  heard,  so  as  to  justify 
want  of  the  faith  that  oometh  of  hearing. 
Nay,  he  replies  (ver.  18),  the  sound  of  the 
good  tidings  has  gone  forth  to  all  the  earth, 
even  like  the  language  of  nature  spoken  of 
in  Ps.  six.  Then  (ver.  19),  pressing  his 
Bignment  home  to  the  Jews,  who  have  been 
all  along  in  view,  he  asks,  "  But  I  say.  Did 
not  Israel  know?"  The  word  eyvio,  being 
dififereat  from  iJKova-av  previously  used,  must 
express  some  different  meaning.  But  what 
St.  Paul  exactly  meant  by  it  is  not  quite 
clear.  The  quotations  from  the  Old  Testa- 
ment that  follow  in  proof  of  knowledge  (vers. 
19,  20)  seem  to  support  the  view  that  what 
Israel  knew,  or  ought  to  have  known,  was 
the  Divine  design  of  the  proinulgation  of  the 
"good  tidings"  to  all  the  world,  which  has 
just  been  spoken  of.  Such  promulgation 
should  have  been  to  them  no  stumbling- 
block;  for  it  had  been  told  to  them  from 
Moses  downwards,  and  they  had  full  oppor- 
tunity of  knowing  it.  Lastly  (ver.  21),  the 
apostle  intimates  that  the  present  state  of 
things,  in  which  Gentiles  accept  the  gospel 
while  Israel  in  the  main  rejects  it,  far  from 
being  an  objection  to  it,  is  but  a  further  ful- 
filment of  Isaiah's  prophecies,  which  repre- 
sent God  as  making  himself  known  to  those 
who  had  not  known  him,  while  pleading 
with  Israel  in  vain.  This  exposition  of  the 
supposed  course  of  thought  being  borne  in 
mind,  the  passage  (with  the  further  aid  of 
some  interposed  comments)  may  become  in- 
telligible. It  continues:  And  how  shallthey 
believe  in  him  of  whom  they  have  not  heard  1 
and  how  shall  they  hear  without  a  preacher  1 
and  how  shall  they  preach,  except  they  be 
sent?  as  it  is  written.  How  beautiful  are  the 
feet  of  them  that  [preach  the  gospel  (or,  good 
tidings)  of  peace,  and]  bring  glad  tidings  of 
good  things !  (Isa.  lii.  7).  The  genuineness 
ci  the  words  within  brackets  is  at  least 
doubtful.  Even  with  them  the  text  is  not 
quoted  in  full,  though  sufficiently  to  remind 
of  its  purport. 

Vers.  16—18. — But  not  all  obeyed  (or, 
hearkened  to)  the  gospel  (or,  good  tidings). 
This  means,  apparently,  that  in  the  prophet's 
representation  of  the  proclamation  of  the 
good  tidings  all  were  said  to  hear,  but  not 
all  to  hearken,  yor  £saias  saith,  Lord,  who 
believed  our  report  1  (The  Greek  word  here 
is  aKof,  the  same  as  in  ver.  17,  there  rendered 
"hearing,"  and  corresponding  to  the  verb 
iuiovtiym  vers.  14, 18.)  So  then  faith  cometh 


of  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God 
(pilHaros  ®eov,  God's  own  Word,  committed 
to,  and  spoken  by,  preachers  duly  sent).  But 
I  say.  Did  they  not  hear?  The  previous 
aorist,  MiKovcrav,  in  ver.  16  having  been 
understood  as  referring  to  the  prophetic  re- 
presentations rather  than  to  present  known 
facts,  the  aoriat  ijicova-av  here  must,  for  con- 
sistency, be  similarly  uiitlerstood,  though 
with  a  view  also  to  the  actual  universality  of 
the  gospel  message.  The  unexpressed  nomi- 
native to  ^Kova-av  appears  from  the  context  to 
be  men  in  general,  not  the  Jews  in  particular. 
Israel  is  not  specified  till  ver.  19.  Yea, 
▼erily,  their  sound  went  into  aU  the  earth, 
and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  world 
(Ps.  xix.4).  The  "sound"  and  the  "words" 
in  the  psalm  are  those  of  the  heavens  and 
the  firmament.  But  in  the  second  part  of 
the  psalm,  beginning  at  ver.  7,  the  psalmist 
passes  from  God's  revelation  of  himself  in 
nature  to  his  revelation  of  himself  in  his 
Word.  Still  the  psalm  itself  cannot  well  be 
understood  as  intimating  the  universal  pro- 
clamation of  the  gospel.  Nor  is  it  necessary 
to  suppose  that  St.  Paul  so  understood  it. 
Enough  for  him  that  the  words  he  quotes 
express  admirably  what  he  desires  to  say. 

Ver.  19.— But  I  say,  Did  not  Israel  know? 
(see  explanation  given  above).  First,  Moses 
saith,  I  will  provoke  you  to  jealousy  by  them 
that  are  no  nation ;  by  a  foolish  nation  I  will 
anger  you.  It  may  be  observed  that  in  the 
Greek  we  have  the  same  word,  cByei,  in  both 
classes  of  the  sentence,  though,  in  order  to 
bring  out  the  supposed  meaning  in  the  first 
clause,  it  is  there,  in  the  Authorized  Version, 
rendered  "  people,"  and  in  the  second, 
"  nation."  The  passage  occurs  in  the  song 
attributed  to  Moses  in  Deuteronomy  (xxxii. 
21),  and  expresses  the  idea  of  God,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  defaults  of  Israel,  favouring 
those  who  were  so  far,  as  it  were,  no  nation 
at  all,  so  as  to  provoke  Israel  to  jealousy. 
It  is  therefore  aptly  cited  as  an  intimation  in 
the  Pentateuch  itself  of  the  calling  of  the 
Gentiles  in  place  of  unbelieving  Israel.  The 
idea  involved  in  "  provoke  you  to  jealousy  " — 
in  the  sense  of  moving  to  emulation,  so  that 
Israel  itself  as  a  nation  might,  through  tlie 
calling  of  the  Gentiles,  in  the  end  be  saved 
— is  pursued,  as  will  be  seen,  in  the  chapter 
that  follows. 

Ver.  20. — But  Esaias  is  very  bold,  and 
saith,  I  was  found  of  them  that  sought  me 
not ;  I  was  made  manifest  unto  them  that 
asked  not  after  me  (Isa.  Ixv.  1).  The  pecu- 
liar holdness  of  Isaiah's  utterance  consists  in 
this — that,  at  a  time  when  Israel  was  recog- 
nized as  God's  one  chosen  people,  he  is  said 
to  make  himself  known  even  to  those  who 
sought  him  not  at  all. 

Ver.  21. — But  to  Israel  he  saith.  All  day 
long  I  stretched  out  my  hands  unto  a  dis- 


29« 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,     [ch.  x.  1—21. 


obedient  and  gainsaying  people  (Isa.  Ixt.  2). 
Tholuok  remarks,  "  If  from  this  passage  we 
once  more  look  back  upon  the  tenth  and 
ninth  chapters,  it  is  manifest   how  little 


Paul  ever  designed  to  revert  to  a  deeretum 
abaolutum,  but  meant  to  cast  all  blame  upon 
the  want  of  will  in  men,  lesisting  the  gra- 
cious will  of  God. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Solicitude  and  supplication  for  the  salvation  of  sinners.  Paul  was  himself 
1  Jew,  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews.  His  iirst  ministry  was  to  Israelites,  and,  when 
upon  his  missionary  tours,  he  made  it  his  first  business  to  address  the  frequenterg  of 
the  synagogues.  By  his  training  and  by  his  associations,  and  also  by  his  evangelistic 
intercourse  with  his  countrymen,  he  understood  the  Jewish  mind,  and  how  to  deal 
with  it.  From  the  Jews  he  met  with  obstacles,  opposition,  and  persecution ;  and  he 
could  not  be  blind  to  their  faults  and  errors.  This,  however,  did  not  prompt  him  to 
anger  or  to  neglect ;  he  loved  his  nation,  and  felt  the  claim  of  kindred  and  nationality. 
He  laboured,  spoke,  wrote,  and  prayed  for  his  Jewish  kin ;  he  sought  above  all  things 
their  salvation.  Looking  away  from  the  special  reference,  let  us  consider  the  wordi 
of  the  apostle  as  supplying  an  example  of  the  benevolent  spirit  of  Christianity. 

L  We  must  be  aware  that  thbeb  is  a  widespread  need  op  salvation.  Many 
of  our  neighbours  need  saving  from  debasing  vice  and  unjustifiable,  inexcusable  crime; 
many  have  fallen  into  dangerous  errors,  from  which  they  need  to  be  delivered:  many 
need  to  be  awakened  from  the  densest  ignorance  and  carelessness  u-ith  regard  w 
spiritual  realities.  Some  are  sensible  of  their  need  ;  multitudes  are  utterly  inrtiftereot 
to  it.  Go  to  a  hospital,  and  you  will  see  many  and  varied  forms  of  disease,  i,'.'H(H.nj 
privation,  affecting  men's  bodily  state — ^all  want  healing.  So  is  it  with  siniul  society  t 
salvation,  and  nothing  leas  than  salvation,  is  the  world's  great  want. 

II.  Wk  know  that  there  is  SALVATioir  roR  THOSE  WHO  NEED  IT.  As  Christians, 
we  are  assured  that  our  Redeemer  is  a  mighty,  all-sufficient  Saviour ;  we  believe  that 
he  came  that  the  world  should  be  saved  through  him ;  we  have  been  authoritatively 
told  that  he  is  "  the  Propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world ; "  that  God  is  "the 
Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  those  who  believe."  Further,  we  have  ourselves 
experienced  the  grace  and  power  of  Jesus  to  pardon,  purify,  and  bless ;  and  what  he 
has  done  for  us  he  can  do  for  others.  The  offers  and  promises  of  his  gospel  are  free 
and  valid.    He  saves  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come  unto  God  by  him. 

III.  Christians  should  be  anxious  and  prayerful  on  behalf  op  sinners  that 
they  may  be  saved.  In  this  tlie  apostle  is  an  example  to  all  who  have  themselves 
tasted  and  seen  that  the  Lord  is  good.  1.  It  should  be  our  heart's  "  good  pleasure"  (for 
such  is  the  literal  rendering).  A  benevolent  mind,  in  sympathy  with  the  Saviour, 
who  pitied,  wept  over,  expostulated  with  sinners,  will  find  pleasure  in  witnessing  the 
power  of  the  gospel  to  rescue  and  to  save  the  lost.  2.  Supplication  should  be  offered 
with  a  view  to  the  same  end.  We  know  that  such  prayer  is  acceptable;  for  Christ 
lias  said,  "It  is  not  the  pleasure  of  my  Father  that  one  of  these  should  perish." 
Supplication  should  not  be  selfish ;  it  should  be  intercessory  and  benevolent. 

IV.  Christians  should  use  the  appointed  means  for  the  salvation  of  their 
FELLOW-MEN.  Sympathy  and  prayer,  unaccompanied  by  effort,  would  be  a  mockery. 
Certainly,  Paul  was  not  the  man  to  grieve  over  his  erring  countrymen,  and  at  the 
Siinie  time  to  neglect  endeavours  for  their  recovery.  Some  of  us  may  preach  the  gospel, 
others  may  "  send  "  the  preachers,  others  may  invite  their  neighbours  to  hear  the 
gospel ;  sympathy  and  prayer  will  lead  to  some  form  of  practical  effort. 

Application.  1.  Whilst  others  are  concerned  for  your  salvation,  are  you  seeking 
this  salvation  for  yourself?  2.  Are  you  manifesting  practically  solicitude  for  the 
spiritual  good  of  your  neighbours  and  fellow-men? 

Vers.  2 — 4. — False  righteousness  and  trite.  Paul's  desire  for  the  salvation  of  his 
countrymen  and  kinsmen  arose  from  his  clear  perception  of  their  spiritual  destitution 
and  need.  They  might  hide  their  condition  from  themselves,  but  it  was  clear  enough 
to  him.  The  measure  of  true  light  which  they  enjoyed  made  it  the  sadiler  that  many 
cjf  them  refused  to  accept  and  to  walk  in  the  full  light  of  the  Suu  of  Kighteousness. 


(II.  X.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  297 

And  the  apostle's  sympathy  was  excited  on  their  behalf  all  the  more  because  he  under- 
stood their  case  so  well. 

I.  Zealous  belioiousness  mat  be  misdirected  bt  ionoranob.  The  apostle  does 
not  charge  the  Jews  with  neglecting,  far  less  with  despising,  religion.  In  their  own 
way  they  were  very  religious,  and  many  of  them  were  found  willing  to  put  forth 
frreat  efforts  and  endure  many  sacrifices  for  their  religion.  They  had  "a  zeal  for 
God."  They  hated  idolatry ;  they  revered  their  Scriptures,  their  temple,  their  priest- 
hood, their  sacrifices  and  festivals;  they  prided  themselves  upon  their  ceremonial 
purity  and  their  scrupulous  observances.  Yet,  with  all  this,  they  were  not  commended 
by  the  apostle.  Their  zeal  was  without  knowledge.  We  meet  with  similar  characteig 
in  our  own  time.  Some  persons  consider  that  if  there  is  religiousness  with  sincerity, 
that  is  sufficient.  It  is  a  great  mistake.  We  need  light  as  well  as  warmth,  knowledge 
as  well  as  zeal.     If  truth  has  been  revealed,  our  first  duty  is  to  learn  and  receive  it. 

II.  There  is  a  false  and  unchbistiak  conception  or  righteotjsnbss.  The  Jews 
are  censured  for  seeking  to  establish  "their own  ri'ghteousness."  The  Law,  indeed,  was 
good  in  itself.  For  those  who  perfectly  obeyed  it,  it  was  a  means  of  salvation.  But 
the  Law  is  condemnation  to  those  who  trust  in  it  and  yet  do  not  conform  to  it.  And, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Law  was  "  weak  through  the  flesh,"  was  insufBcient  for  the 
salvation  of  sinful  men.  It  is  no  foundation  for  a  sinner's  hopes.  Further,  the 
Hebrews  were  too  much  accustomed  to  regard  their  religious  acts  as  services  rendered, 
for  which  Divine  recompense  and  payment  are  due.  This  is  a  notion  still  prevalent,  but 
it  is  radically  unsoriptural  and  unreasonable.  We  cannot  be  justified  by  the  works  of 
the  Law,  and  we  can  earn  nothing  as  a  right  from  Grod. 

III.  The  true  righteousness  is  that  which  is  through  Christ  Jesus.    Observe : 

1.  The  relation  between  Christ  and  the  Law.  The  word  "  end  ".may  be  taken  literally. 
The  Law,  as  s  dispensation,  came  to  an  end  when  Christ  appeared.  The  Law  was  to 
the  Israelites  a  conductor  to  lead  them  to  Jesus.  But  the  word  "  end "  may  mean 
uore  than  this ;  it  may  mean  the  purpose  and  design  of  the  Law.  The  Law  was  given 
m  ttfder  to  reveal  both  the  righteousness  of  God  and  the  sintuJuesi!  of  miro  It  th'ir 
prepared. the  way  for  the  coming  of  him  whose  obedience  fulfilled  the  Law,  nnd  whowt 
redemption  secured  pardon  and  liberty  for  those  whom  the  Law  was  powerless  tit  save. 

2.  Observe  the  way  in  which  the  higher  righteousness  is  secured  through  Christ.  This 
is  described  by  three  several  expressions  in  this  passage — ^knowledge,  subjection,  belief. 
The  ignorant  are  without  the  means  of  obtaining  justification;  the  unsubmissive  rebel 
against  the  means ;  the  unbelieving  reject  the  means.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that  faith 
should  bo  accounted  for  righteousness.  This  is  a  principle  as  old  as  Abiahaio ;  yet  its 
most  mighty  working  is  apparent  in  the  case  of  those  who  believe  'i\  Jesus.  The 
doctrine lof  justification  by  faith  is  here  plainly  revealed,  and  its  superiority  lo  all  rival 
doctrines  plainly  exhibited. 

Vers.  5 — 10. — Gracious  terms  of  salvation.  The  blessings  of  the  gospel  were  designed 
for,  and  were  off'en'd  to,  Jews  and  Gentiles  alike,  with  the  most  perfect  impartiality. 
The  descendants  of  Abraham,  the  disciples  of  Moses,  did  indeed  enjoy  an  advantage ; 
but,  instead  of  profiting  by  it,  they  turned  it  against  themselves.  The  apostle  hero 
teaches  that  if  any  of  his  kinsmen  and  countrymen  come  short  of  Christian  privilege, 
the  fault  is  their  own,  and  cannot  be  laid  to  the  Divine  Author.  St.  Paul  so  presents 
the  gospel  as  to  exhibit — 

L  Its  contrast  to  the  Law.  The  former  dispensation  promised  life  to  those  who 
obeyed  the  Law.  By  life  is  meant  more  than  continuance  of  existence  and  national 
and  territorial  advantages ;  the  expression  conveys  the  promise  of  Divine  favour  snd 
acceptance.  Perfect  obedience  would  secure  life ;  but  such  obedience  no  Hebrew, 
and  indeed  no  mortal  man,  has  rendered.  The  old  covenant  did  indeed  assure  to  the 
upright  and  pious  Jew  the  blessings  of  salvation,  and  enjoined  obedience  upon  all  its 
sons.  But  it  was  only  human  pride  and  self-righteousness  which  could  deem  the  life 
of  even  the  holiest  such  as  to  merit  the  favour  and  fellowship  of  God.  Christianity, 
on  the  other  hand,  provides  all  spiritual  blessings  as  a  free  gift — the  gift  of  grace. 

II.  Its  simplicity  and  accessibility.  To  exhibit  this,  the  apostle  borrows  language 
from  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.  What  the  Lord,  by  Moses,  snid  of  the  commandment 
published  to  Israel,  that  Paul  says  of  the  gospel.     The  Divine  righteousness  speaks; 


898  ms  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  x.  1—21. 

and  what  is  its  message  to  men?  1.  It  is  a  message  which  gently  reproaches  those 
who  complain  of  the  difficulty  of  understanding  and  realizing  the  will  of  God.  How 
especially  does  this  apply  to  Christianity  1  We  have  not  to  soar  to  heaven,  or  to 
plunge  into  the  ahyss ;  for  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  hag  condescended  to  come  down 
from  the  celestial  heights  that  he  might  dwell  among  us ;  he  has  risen  from  the  dead, 
conquering  sin  and  death  for  us,  and  leading  us  in  the  way  to  God.  Thus  the  Lord 
has  deigned  to  make  the  truth  of  God  intelligible,  and  the  grace  of  God  real  and  near. 
2.  But  the  Divine  righteousness,  speaking,  assures  us  of  the  nearness  of  the  Word  of 
life  to  the  hearers  of  the  gospel,  personally  and  individually.  How  could  the  word 
which  quickeneth  be  nearer,  more  accessible?  It  is  "in  the  mouth,  and  in  the  heart," 
of  every  Christian.  Pause  to  think  how  true  this  is.  Your  English  Bible  is  in  your 
hands ;  the  gospel  is  preached  at  your  own  doors ;  the  creeds,  the  prayers,  the  thanks- 
givings, are  framed  and  uttered  in  yOur  own  familiar  speech ;  the  name  of  Jesus  is  a 
household  word ;  the  simplest  can  understand  the  message  of  the  gospel,  the  terms  of 
life  eternal ;  the  child,  the  unlearned,  the  feeble,  the  aged,  appreciate  the  truth  as  it 
is  in  Jesus ;  Christianity  gains  many  a  convert  from  among  the  poor,  the  vicious,  the 
very  heathen.  All  this  is  a  testimony  to  the  Divine  adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  human 
nature;  it  meets  our  deepest  wants  and  supplies  them,  it  creates  its  own  witness  by 
its  own  success. 

III.  The  teems  it  peopounds.  They  are  two.  1.  Faith — as  this  whole  Epistle 
tells,  and  tells  again  and  yet  again.  The  righteousness  is  of  faith  ;  "  with  the  heart  man 
believeth."  A  provision  which  attests  the  infinite  wisdom  of  him  who  made  it.  The 
condition  is  one  which  can  be  fulfilled  by  men  ot  every  rank  and  age  and  culture ;  yet 
it  is  one  profoundly  affecting  the  moral  and  spiritual  nature.  It  is  profitable  to  man 
and  honouring  to  God.  2.  Confession — a  condition,  doubtless,  very  different  in  the 
apostles'  days  from  our  own,  but,  as  the  Lord  teaches  us,'  ever  indispensable.  Men 
have  not  the  right  to  say  in  what  way  ixinfession  shall  be  made.  But  it  must  not  be 
withhelcl. 

IV.  The  blessings  it  SBctiBES.  These  also  are  two.  1.  Righteousness — the  new. 
Divine,  Christian  righteousness,  that  which  is  the  gift  of  God  ;  a  righteousness  which 
is  by  grace,  but  which  is  real,  genuine,  and  eternal.  2.  Salvation^— hj  which  we  are 
to  understand  the  final  and  complete  enjoyment  of  what  the  gospel  brings  and  promises. 
The  end  of  your  faith  is  the  salvation  of  your  souls.  It  is  not  only  deliverance  from 
gin  and  danger  ;  it  is  the  participation  in  the  Divine  nature,  and  in  the  eternal  life. 

Application.  Let  the  hearer  of  the  gospel  think,  not  merely  of  the  mysteries  which 
belong  to  religion,  but  of  the  simplicity  of  what  is  most  essential  for  him  to  believe.  You 
have  not  to  climb  a  lofty  tree  in  order  to  pluck  the  fruit ;  the  bough  hangs  low,  and 
you  have  but  to  reach  out  your  hand.  You  have  not  to  climb  the  mountain  crag, 
and  cross  the  dangerous  bog,  in  order  to  come  at  the  water  of  life;  the  stream  flows 
by  your  side,  and  you  have  but  to  stoop  and  drink. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — Lordship  and  riches.  This  passage  exhibits  the  identity  of  the  old 
covenant  and  the  new.  Paul  quotes  from  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  and  Joel,  in  such 
a  manner  as  tfl  show,  not  only  that  he  acknowledged  the  inspired  authority  of  those 
virriters,  but  also  that  he  regarded  words  of  promise  uttered  in  the  former  dispensatiou 
as  valid  in  the  later.  The  language  quoted  harmonizes  with  the  widest  conceptions 
of  the  Divine  benevolence,  and  mast  have  been  adduced  with  especial  satisfaction  by 
one  so  broad  in  his  sympathies  as  was  the  large-hearted  apostle  of  the  Gentiles. 

I.  The  Lokdship  and  wealth  op  Chbist.  In  speaking  of  the  blessings  of  salvation, 
it  was  very  natural  that  Paul  should  be  led  to  refer  to  the  glory  of  the  Saviour,  in 
order  that  it  might  be  understood  how  vast  was  his  power  aliV-e  to  deliver  and  to 
protect  his  people,  and  to  confer  upon  them  priceless  favours.  1.  As  Lord  of  all, 
Christ  is  Possessor  of  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  He  is  of  right  Euler  of  all ; 
and  the  application  of  this  language,  referring  to  Jehovah,  to  the  Son  of  man,  is  proof 
that  he  was  regarded  by  St.  Paul  as  Son  of  God.  To  Christians,  however,  it  is  delightful 
to  reflect  upon  Christ's  authority,  exercised  over  them,  benignantly  on  his  part,  and 
gratefully  and  practically  acknowledged  and  submitted  to  by  themselves.  A  rebel 
and  a  loyal  subject  think  very  differently  of  their  sovereign.  To  us  Jesus  is  the  Kinj, 
because  be  is  the  Prophet  and  the  Priest,  who  has  come  to  us  with  the  voice  of  God, 


CHX.  I— 21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  299 

and  has  bought  us  with  his  precious  blood.  He  is  enthroned  in  our  hearts ;  he  gives 
laws  to  our  life.  2.  Jesus  is  rich  unto  all.  We  are  assured  of  "  the  unspeakable  riches 
of  Christ,"  and  are  counselled  to  buy  of  him  "  gold  tried  in  the  fire,  that  we  may  be 
rich."  If  "all  things  are  ours,"  it  is  because  we  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's.  He 
who  redeems  and  rules,  supplies  the  wants  of  his  ransomed  ones.  He  is  not,  like  some 
of  the  wealthy  of  this  world,  rich  for  himself;  he  is  rich  for  us,  rich  boundlessly  and 
inexhaustibly,  rich  benevolently  and  for  ever. 

II.  The  conditions  upon  which  the  LoBDSHrp  and  the  wealth  of  Christ  mat  bb 
ENJOYED.  These  are  stated  in  two  modes.  1.  Believing  on  him  is  essential  to  partici- 
pating in  the  blessings  Christ  offers  to  men.  The  apostle  has  previously  been  insisting 
upon  faith  as  the  means  of  obtaining  the  true  and  Divine  righteousness,  as  God's  way 
for  man  to  come  to  himself  and  to  enjoy  his  favour.  They  who  have  faith  shall  not 
be  put  to  shame,  shall  surely  and  eternally  be  saved.  2.  Calling  upon  him  would 
seem  to  be  a  natural  result  of  faith.  They  who  believe  in  the  heart  will  give  their  faith 
utterance  by  the  lips.  By  this  Hebrew  expression  we  may  understand  both  open  con- 
fession and  earnest  prayer.  By  calling  upon  the  Lord's  Name,  no  vain  and  superstitiou* 
Invocations  or  repetitions  are  to  be  understood,  but  the  sincere  entreaty  of  the  soul  for 
deliverance,  guidance,  or  help. 

III.  For  whose  benefit  Christ's  Lordship  and  wealth  are  designed.  1.  The 
limitations  of  nationality  are  abolished.  The  religions  of  heathenism  are  local ;  the 
deities  of  heathenism  are  national  and  tutelary.  Under  the  older  dispensation,  Jehovah 
was  revealed  as  the  one  God,  the  God  of  all  the  earth;  yet  the  Hebrews  too  often 
regarded  the  Lord  as  their  God,  and  theirs  only.  The  distinction  between  Jew  and 
Gentile  was,  to  the  Hebrew  mind,  deep  and  ineffaceable.  To  St.  Paul  largely  belongs 
the  honour  of  giving  currency  to  the  true  doctrine  of  Christianity,  that  religion  is  one 
and  universal ;  that  God  is  the  Father  of  mankind ;  that  Christ  is  Saviour  and  Lord  of 
all  men ;  that  the  middle  wall  of  partition  is  broken  down ;  that  in  Christ  there  is 
neither  Jew  nor  Gentile.  2.  The  offers  of  Christianity  are  made  to  all,  and  its  terms 
and  conditions  are  adapted  to  all.  He  is  "rich  unto  all,"  and  his  riches  are  for 
"whomsoever  believetb,"  for  "  whomsoever  calleth  upon  his  Name."  What  language 
could  be  used  more  fitted  to  encourage  every  hearer  of  the  gospel  to  submit  to  the 
Lordship  and  to  seek  the  true  riches  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  ? 

Ver.  12. — Spiritual  enrichment.  The  experience  of  the  apostle  was  sufSoiently  large 
to  enable  him  with  confidence  to  make  this  sweeping  assertion.  And  the  experience  of 
the  Church  of  Christ,  through  the  many  centuries  which  have  elapsed  since  St.  Paul 
thus  wrote,  enables  Christians  to  make  the  same  assertion  with  undiminished  confi- 
dence. In  fact,  the  actual  proofs,  at  our  disposal  and  command  are  overwhelming,  both 
In  number  and  in  appropriateness ;  for,  whilst  the  bestowal  of  Divine  and  spiritual 
wealth  has  been  incessantly  proceeding,  the  resources  are  unexhausted  and  inexhaustible. 

I.  The  riches  of  the  Lord.  In  Christ  is  wealth  adapted  to  the  enrichment  of 
dependent,  needy  men.  He  has  in  himself:  1.  Riches  of  revelation.  2.  Riches  of 
redemption.  3.  Riches  of  replenishment,  owing  to  the  nature  and  perpetuity  of  the 
spiritual  dispensation  of  grace.  4.  Riches  of  resurrection,  inasmuch  as  the  true  riches 
endure  unto  life  eternal. 

II.  The  liberality  with  which  these  spiritual  riches  are  dispensed.  1.  It  is 
because  Christ  is  Lord  over  all,  that  he  is  rich  unto  all.  2.  The  riches  of  redeeming 
love  are  conferred  upon  men  of  every  nationality.  In  the  apostolic  age,  the  great  dis- 
tinction which  Christianity  transcended  was  that  between  Jew  and  Gentile ;  but,  in 
subsequent  times,  it  has  been  proved  by  experience  that  there  is  no  nation,  no  class, 
and  no  condition  incajiable  of  this  Divine  enrichment. 

III.  The  condition  upon  which  spiritual  riches  have  been,  and  still  mat  be, 
APPROPRIATED.  As  throughout  this  chapter,  the  apostle  here  insists  upon  that  spiritual 
comlition  of  receptivity  and  aj^lication  by  which  all  that  is  good  may  enter  the  nature 
of  man.  Calling  upon  him  is  an  act  (1)  of  repentance,  (2)  of  faith,  (3)  of  prayer,  and 
(4)  of  aspiration.     As  we  exercise  this  means  of  communion,  all  things  are  ours. 

Vers.  14,  15. — Preaching.  Paul  was  himself  brought  to  the  Saviour  by  that  Saviour's 
immediate  interposition.     Doubtless  he  had  heard  much  of  Jesus  ;  yet  he  had  never 


300  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,      [ch.  x.  1—31. 

truly  known  him  during  his  career  of  unbelief  and  persecution.  It  was  when  Jesu* 
met  him  by  the  way  that  his  hostility  was  overcome,  that  his  heart  was  melted,  that 
his  nature  was  changed.  But  this  was  exceptional  treatment.  The  Lord  who,  by  a 
supernatural  appearance  and  voice,  called  Saul  to  the  knowledge  of  himself,  com- 
missioned him  to  preach  the  gospel  to  his  fellow -men,  and  made  him  one  of  the  first, 
and  perhaps  the  most  successful,  of  the  innumerable  band  of  preachers  of  the  cross. 
We  have  here — 

I.  A  DrviNE  PROVisioif.  All  good  is  from  God.  No  apostle  more  constantly  insists 
upon  this  great  truth  than  does  Paul ;  and  in  no  treatise  is  it  more  prominently  set 
before  the  mind  of  the  reader  than  in  this  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  1.  We  are  told 
what  the  ultimate  blessing  is  which  Christianity  proffers.  It  is  salvation.  Righteous- 
ness has  reference  rather  to  what  is  positively  given  ;  salvation,  rather  to  the  state  from 
which  men  are  rescued  by  the  Redeemer.  A  worthy  end  ! — worthy  even  of  the  inter- 
position of  Heaven,  of  the  benevolence  of  God  the  Father,  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  of 
the  grace  of  the  Spirit.  A  deliverance  of  the  spiritual  nature  from  condemnation  and 
from  all  evil,  and  the  provision  for  the  saved  of  new  associations,  a  new  lot,  a  new  hope 
— a  salvation  which  is  final  and  eternal.  3.  We  have  brought  before  us  the  extentto 
which  salvation  may  be  enj  eyed,  the  persons  for  whose  benefit  it  is  proposed.  All  man- 
kind are  qualified  to  be  recipients  of  this  boon  upon  compliance  with  the  terms  pre- 
scribed. There  is  no  difference  in  the  view  of  God.  The  comprehensive  term  '  ■  who- 
soever"is  conclusive  upon  this  point.  Jews  are  not  excluded;  Gentiles  are  welcomed; 
the  provision  is  for  humanity.  3.  The  text  sets  before  us  the  conditions  upon  which 
this  blessing  may  be  en j  oyed.  It  is  required  (1)  that  men  should  call  upon  the  Name 
of  the  Lord,  i.  e.  Christ  Jesus ;  and  (3)  that  they  should  do  this  in  intelligent  and 
cordial  faith :  for  ' '  how  shall  they  call  on  him  in  whom  they  have  not  believed  ?  "  The 
expression,  "  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord,"  is  full  of  meaning  and  beauty.  It 
reminds  us  whence  tlie  blessing  of  salvation  proceeds;  and  as  the  voice,  the  call,  tlie  cry, 
come  from  a  heart  conscious  of  need  and  longing  for  deliverance,  it  speaks  of  the  spiri- 
tual state  which  prepares  for  receiving  salvation.  Thus  Christians  are  spoken  of  as  "all 
wlio  in  every  place  call  upon  the  Lord. "  They  who  act  thus  glorify  God  and  his  prom- 
ises of  faithfulness.  They  seek  what  he  has  promised  to  bestow,  and  they  seek  with 
earnestness  and  confidence.  ' '  He  is  near  to  all  that  call  upon  him  in  truth."  In  order  to 
intelligent  calling  upon  the  Lord,  the  apostle  reasons,  there  must  be  faith.  "He  that 
Cometh  unto  him  must  believe  that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  Rewarder  of  them  that 
seek  after  him."  Faith  is  the  first  requirement  of  the  gospel ;  faith  in  the  glad  tidings 
proclaimed ;  faith  in  that  Divine  Saviour  to  whom  those  tidings  relate,  and  who,  in- 
deed, is  himself  the  Gospel.  "Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved."  An  arrangement  this  in  harmony  with  the  wisdom  of  God,  and  with  the  moral 
nature  of  man.  Dead  in  unbelief  and  unspirituality ,  the  sinner  rises  in  faith  into  new  - 
ness  of  life,  for  he  lays  hold  of  the  grace  of  God  revealed  in  the  Saviour  Christ.  Con 
sider  how  unspeakably  rich  is  the  provision  here  made,  and  how  unspeakably  gracious 
the  conditions  here  proposed.  Hearers  of  the  gospel,  how  can  you  remain  without 
such  a  blessing  as  this  when  it  is  put  within  your  reach,  and  when  you  are  invited 
to  take  it,  and  when  the  terms  upon  which  you  may  enjoy  it  are  such  that  you  can- 
not cavil  at  them  ?  How  can  you  think  ot  such  a'  Saviour  and  such  a  gospel,  and 
remain  faithless  and  unmoved  ?  How  can  you  do  other  than,  from  your  sin  and 
danger  and  helplessness,  call  upon  One  who  is  "mighty  to  save" — to  "save  to  the 
uttermost  all  that  come  unto  God  by  him  "  ?  This  is  the  day  of  visitation.  "To- 
day," says  Christ,  "if  ye  will  hear  my  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts." 

II.  A  HUMAN  AGENCY.  The  apostle  brings  before  us  two  classes  of  agents— those 
who,  by  the  publication  of  the  gospel,  are  ihe  means  of  leading  their  fellow-men  to 
faith  ;  and  those  who  send  forth  such  preachers  upon  such  a  mission.  1.  God  employs 
preachers  in  bringing  men  to  salvation.  They  have  glad  tidings  of  peace,  of  good 
things  to  communicate.  As  the  first  bands  of  returning-exiles,  bringing  good  news  of 
a  larger  company  following  in  their  train,  wore  welcome  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
who  hailed  their  approach  by  the  mountains  of  Judtea;  so  the  preachers  of  Christianity 
may  well  have  been  welcomed  by  the  spiritually  captive  tribes  and  nations  whom  they 
visited  on  their  errands  of  grace  and  evangelization.  This  method  of  promulgating  truth 
though  not  peculiar  to  our  religion,  is  very  distinctive  of  it.  Christ  chose  twelve  apostlM 


CH.  X.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  801 

he  sent  out  other  seventy  also.  Before  he  left  the  world  Ke  directed  and  sanctioned  per- 
sonal agency  in  the  ministry  of  the  gospel.  Paul  instructed  Timothy  to  commit  the 
things  he  had  received  to  faithful  men,  who  should  be  able  to  teach  others  also;  thus 
arranging  for  a  succession,  not  of  a  priesthood,  but  ol'  a  teaching  ministry.  Christ  calU 
out,  sanctifies,  and  blesses  the  ministiy  of  man  to  man.  Would  that  there  were  a  more 
general  disposition  to  listen  to  his  voice  and  to  respond  to  his  summons, "  Whom  shall  I 
send?  "  in  the  aocient  language,  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me."  The  success  which  attended 
ihe  ministry  of  the  apostles  and  first  evungeiists  was  such  as  to  confirm  faith  in  cbc 
Divine  ap|ointment.  God  was  pleased  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them 
that  belitved.  And  every  succeeding  age  has  witnessed,  in  greater  or  less  measure,  to 
the  efficacy  of  this  wise  provision.  In  our  own  day  literature  is  so  vigorous,  and  educa- 
tion so  general,  that  the  press  has  become  a  mighty  auxiliary  and  ally  to  the  ministry. 
Every  preacher  who  has  confidence  in  the  Divine  origin  of  his  message,  and  in  his  own 
sincerity,  will  welcome  the  aids  to  general  intelligence  which  are  afforded  by  the  able 
«nd  varied  literature  of  these  enlightened  days.  Amongst  a  Christian  community, 
preaching  becomes  naturally  something  more  than  the  publication  of  the  great  funda- 
mental facts  of  the  gospel.  But  whilst  there  is  abundant  room  for  instruction,  by 
which  the  Word  of  God  may  be  expounded,  and  the  application  of  religion  be  shown 
to  all  spheres  and  relationships  of  life,  there  is  still  a  pressing  need  for  evangelization. 
The  young  have  to  learn  afresh  "the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of  God;"  the  inatten- 
tive and  careless  have  to  be  aroused  by  the  Word  which  is  as  '  a  fire,  and  as  a  hammer 
that  breaketh  the  rock  in  pieces;"  the  re?ioas  arouiul  have  to  be  enlightened  by  the 
gospel,  which  is  the  true  light  j  the  worjd  nits  yet  f)  vitj  gladdened  by  the  good  news  of 
■alvation  and  eternal  life.  3.  God  empioys  his  Ohurch  to  send  forth  preachers  of  the 
gospel.  All  are  not  caried  upon  to  preach,  but,  in  a  sense,  all  are  called  upon  to  send. 
True,  the  one  great  Sender  is  the  Divine  Head  of  the  Church  ;  and  they  who  are  not 
commissioned  by  him  are  without  authority,  whatever  human  sanction,  credentials,  and 
approval  they -may  enjoy.  "  The  Lord  gave  the  Word,  and  great  was  the  company  of 
those  that  published  it."  We  have  an  instructive  instance  of  the  way  in  which  the 
Lord  inspires  his  people  to  send  forth  his  servants  upon  a  benevolent  mission,  in  the 
narrative  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Church  at  Antiooh,  when  that  Church  became 
the  second  great  centre  of  missionary  enterprise.  "  How  shall  they  preach,  except  they 
be  sent  ?  " — a  query  little  regarded  by  very  many  of  the  congregations  named  after 
Christ.  It  is  thought  enough  to  leave  the  matter  to  individual  impulse,  wise  or  unwise, 
or  to  consider  it  the  vocation  of  the  pastorate  to  call  out  living  agencies.  Yet,  look  at 
the  vast  demands  of  our  own  day.  Clergy  of  all  variety  of  gift ;  pastors  for  congrega- 
tions; evanj^elists  for  our  rural  districts;  city  missionaries  for  our  great  towns;  popular 
itinerant  preachers ;  colonial  missionaries ;  labourers,  by  voice  and  pen  and  press, 
among  the  heathen ;  defenders  and  promulgators  of  Christian  truth  in  all  the  depart- 
ments of  literature; — we  need  all  these,  of  the  best  and  most  varied  quality,  and  in 
increased  numbers.  In  order  that  Christian  society  may  send  out  into  the  world  those 
who  shall  diffuse  the  faith  of  Christ,  it  is  first  of  all  necessary  that  that  society  should 
be  in  such  a  condition  that  from  among  its  menibers  such  agencies  shall  naturally 
emerge.  Mechanical  means  are  of  little  avail  in  this  matter.  Where  there  is  little  life 
there  will  be  little  movement.  If  love  to  Christ  be  chilled  by  worldliness,  no  place  will 
be  found  for  love  of  souls.  Out  of  the  fulness  of  the  heart  the  mouth  will  speak ;  when 
the  feeling  of  the  Christian  community  is  strong,  its  voice  will  not  be  silent.  The  use 
of  any  and  every  means  will  depend  for  efficacy  upon  the  sound  and  living  condition  of 
the  society  in  which  such  means  may  be  employed.  It  should  be  habitual  with  Christian 
congregations  to  call  out  and  encourage  the  exercise  of  gifts  divinely  imparted.  There 
are  many  other  gifts  beside  that  of  religious  instruction  and  persuasion,  and  gifts  equally 
precious  to  God  and  useful  to  man.  But  there  are  reasons  why  speech  for  Christ  needa 
special  culture.  Natural  timidity  has  to  be  overcome,  and  formidable  difficulties  have 
to  be  encountered.  It  is  here  that  wise  counsel  and  affectionate  encouragement  come 
In  with  especial  appropriateness.  Almost  every  youthful  speaker  has  been  tempted  to 
renounce  this  means  of  usefulness ;  and  often  it  has  happened  that  a  word,  providen- 
tially spoken,  has  cheered  the  diffident  and  discouraged.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that, 
if  there  are  to  be  learners,  there  must  be  teachers.  If  the  Christian  Church  is  to  send 
out  preachers  and  instructors,  it  must  do  something  more  and  better  than  fling  them 


302  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  x.  1—21. 

unfurnished  on  the  world.  Those  who  are  to  influence  men  must  in  the  first  place  he 
influenced  by  men.  That  community  is  rich  which  contains  a  large  amount  of  teach- 
ing, quickening  power.  One  of  our  cl)ief  dangers  is  lest  we  should  overestimate  the 
power  of  money.  There  is  much  which  cannot  be  purchased  by  material  wealth.  It 
is  in  the  abundance  of  the  highest  type  of  Christian  character  that  spiritual  wealth  con- 
sists. Where  there  are  found  the  lofty,  noble-minded,  the  holy  and  the  learned,  the 
spiritual  and  benevolent,  among  the  leading  spirits  of  a  Church,  there  the  young  amd 
ardent  and  devoted  will  gather  by  a  subtle  magnetism,  and  thence  they  will  derive  in 
turn,  by  God's  grace,  the  power  of  Divine  attraction.  Hence  the  importance  of  seeking 
a  high  standard  of  biblical  knowledge  and  Christian  intelligence  among  all  classes  in 
our  congregations.  And  hence,  too,  the  importance  of  seeking  out,  and  wisely  employ- 
ing, all  the  ability  and  culture  which  are  devoted  to  Christ  and  sanctified  to  his  glory. 
Can  they  be  said  to  be  truly  sent  who  are  thrust  forth  and  then  forgotten  ?  Or,  rather, 
does  not  that  Church  truly  send  which  follows  its  agents,  whether  near  or  far,  with 
kindly  interest,  with  watchful  sympathy,  with  fervent  prayer?  Sympathy  is  invaluable 
to  those  who  labour,  as  all  Christian  servants  must  do,  amid  many  diffionlties  and  much 
opposition.  Prayer  of  intercession  is  due  from  every  member  of  the  universal  Church, 
and  is  especially  required  on  behalf  of  Christian  labourers.  "Brethren,  pray  for  us, 
that  the  Word  of  God  may  have  free  course,  and  be  glorified."  In  order  that  the 
Churches  may  more  adequately  fulfil  their  ofBce  as  illuminators  of  a  dark  world,  it  is 
necessary  that  there  should  be  a  sincerer  pity  for  the  multitudes  who  are  in  darkness, 
and  a  firmer  faith  in  the  light  which  is  from  heaven.  A  Church  which  hesitates  as  to 
whether  or  not  it  possesses  the  truth,  and  has  a  gospel  for  mankind ;  a  Church  wiiich 
can  look  with  unconcern  upon  the  prevalence  of  sin  and  misery  in  the  world,  is  not 
likely  to  send  forth  heralds  of  Christ  and  tidings  of  salvation.  Faith  in  the  Eedeemer, 
pity  for  those  whom  he  died  to  redeem,  forgetfulneas  and  denial  of  self, — these  are  the 
conditions  of  true  evangelization.  It  is  for  us,  then,  to  look  up  for  a  renewed  baptism  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  as  a  Spirit  of  life  and  of  power.  How  otherwise  can  we  rise  to  fulfil 
responsibilities  so  sacred,  to  discharge  duties  so  momentous  ?  Hearers  of  the  gospel, 
geek  the  Spirit  of  faith  and  prayer,  that  you  may  be  not  hearers  of  the  Word  only,  but 
doers  also !  Preachers  of  the  gospel,  seek  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  fervour,  that  your 
words  may  be  with  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power  1  Churches  of  Christ, 
seek  the  Spirit  of  your  Master,  that  you  may,  feeling  your  own  debt  to  the  Divine, 
immortal  Saviour,  act  in  the  spirit  of  his  lesson,  "  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely 
give"! 

Vers.  16 — 21. — JsroePs  uribeUef.  The  more  highly  the  apostle  prized  the  gospel,  the 
more  sincerely  and  compassionately  did  he  lament  the  folly  and  the  guilt  of  those  who 
deliberately  or  carelessly  rejected  it.  Especially  was  his  heart  stirred  to  sorrow,  when 
he  observed  how  generally  the  glad  tidings  of  life  in  Christ  were  rejected  by  his  "  kins- 
men according  to  the  flesh."  Both  upon  the  personal  ground  of  relationship  and  asso- 
ciation, and  upon  the  general  ground  that  Israel's  greater  privileges  involved  greater 
responsibilities,  Paul  grieved  over  the  want  of  faith  in  Christ  manifested  by  so  many 
of  his  countrymen. 

I.  The  fact  of  Isbabl'b  ijnbblief.  1.  It  had  heen  predicted.  In  that  remarkable 
anticipation  of  the  sufferings  and  the  glory  of  the  Messiah  which  has  won  for  Isaiah 
the  designation  "  the  evangelical  prophet,"  there  occurs  an  intimation  that  the  Messiah 
should  himself  be  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  and  that  the  news  of  his  salvation 
should  be  disregarded  by  many  for  whose  benefit  it  was  intended.  2.  Fact  agreed  with 
pr<^hecy.  Many  sons  of  Abraham  manifested  Abraham's  faith.  Of  the  early  pro- 
fessors and  preachers  of  Christianity,  a  large  proportion  were  Hebrews.  Yet,  although 
individuals  welcomed  the  gospel,  the  nation  as  a  whole,  who  by  their  leaders  and  repre- 
•entativea  had  crucified  and  slain  the  Lord  Jesus,  certainly  turned  away  from  the 
message  of  salvation,  which,  after  his  ascension,  his  apostles  urgently  and  faithfully 
proclaimed.     They  did  not  all  hearken  to  the  report  and  obey  its  summons. 

IL  The  inexo0sable  guilt  of  Israel's  unbelief.  This  is  made  apparent  by 
Mveral  considerations.  It  appears :  1.  From  the  terms  of  salvation.  "  Belief  cometh 
of  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  Christ."  No  teims  could  be  more  righteoui, 
mora  reasonable,  more  in  accordanco  with  the  character  of  God  or  the  necessities  of 


0H.X.1— 2L]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  303 

men.  Compliance  \nth  them  involves  no  mental  or  social  eminence,  and  is  equally 
possible  to  those  of  all  nations  among  men.  2.  From  the  general  diffusion  of  the 
tidings.  Like  the  very  light  of  the  sun,  like  the  voiceless  witness  of  the  heavens,  the 
good  news  of  salvation  soon  penetrated  into  the  remotest  and  darkest  places.  Even  the 
distant  "  sons  of  the  dispersion "  could  not  complain  that  they  had  been  neglected. 
For  the  disciples  of  Christ,  so  far  from  keeping  the  good  news  to  themselves,  made  it  a 
point  of  conscience  and  religion  to  communicate  to  their  neighbours  the  tidings  of  the 
advent  and  the  mediation  of  the  Son  of  God;  whilst  many,  devoting  themselves  to  the 
work  of  evangelization,  deemed  no  journey  too  long  to  undertake  and  no  perils  too 
formidable  to  endure  in  the  fulfilment  of  this  sacred  commission.  3.  Even /rom  the  fact 
that  many  of  the  less-favoured  OeniUes  came  to  believe.  It  had  been  foretold  by  Moses 
and  by  the  prophet  Isaiah  that  the  privileges  which  the  Jews  would  despise  and  refuse 
should  be  offered  to  and  accepted  by  the  Gentiles.  This  came  to  pass.  And  it  cut  the 
apostle  to  the  heart  to  remark  that  his  kinsmen  were  rejecting  blessings  which  the 
heathen  to  whom  he  preached  were  eagerly  welcoming  and  receiving.  4.  From  thefor- 
iea/rance  amd  gracious  invitations  of  a  heavenly  Father.  Again  the  apostle  has  recourse 
to  the  language  of  prophecy.  How  affecting  is  the  representation  here  given  of  the 
patience,  long-suffering,  and  kindness  of  God  I  He  "  willeth  not  that  any  should 
perish."  Although  the  people  oppose  themselves,  he  does  not  soon  weary  of  his  invi- 
tations. He  spreads  forth  his  arms,  as  willing  to  welcome  those  who  will  return  from 
their  wanderings  and  be  reconciled  to  him.  So  he  stands,  as  it  were,  all  the  day  long. 
Still,  though  he  has  long  proffered  grace  in  vain,  the  hands  which  might  have  been 
raised  to  smite  are  extended  to  rescue  and  to  bless. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Israel's  strength  and  weakness.  The  apostle  returns  again  to  the  tender 
solicitude  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  Israel  which  he  had  already  expressed  in  the 
beginning  of  the  ninth  chapter.  He  was  no  blind  bigot.  He  could  recognize  the  good 
qualities  even  of  those  from  whom  he  differed.  He  knew  how  far  Israel  had  departed 
from  the  truth  of  God,  and  yet  he  is  quick  to  perceive  that,  even  amid  their  errors  and 
sins,  there  is  much  that  is  commendable  in  their  character.  What  an  example  for 
every  Christian,  and  especially  in  these  days,  when  ecclesiastical  divisions  are  so 
numerous  and  so  sharply  defined,  to  recognize  what  is  good  even  in  those  from  whom 
we  differ  most  widely  1 

I.  Zeal  without  knowledge.  1.  IsraeVs  zeal  was  an  element  of  strength.  "  I  bear 
them  record  that  they  have  a  zeal  of  God  "  (ver.  2).  The  apostle  does  them  the 
justice  of  recognizing  their  zeal  for  God.  Here  he  could  speak  with  sympathy,  the 
sympathy  of  personal  experience.  He  knew  how,  before  bis  conversion  to  Christianity, 
he  himself  had  been  influenced  by  the  same  sincere,  though  mistaken,  desire  for  God's 
glory.  "  I  am  verily  a  man  which  am  a  Jew,  bom  in  Tarsus,  a  city  in  Oilicia,  yet 
brought  up  in  this  city  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  and  taught  according  to  the  perfect 
manner  of  the  Law  of  the  fathers,  and  was  zealous  toward  God,  as  ye  all  are  this  day  " 
(Acts  xxii.  3).  Here  is  the  same  sympathetic  recognition  of  Jewish  zeal.  This 
quality,  when  rightly  applied,  was  their  strength.  It  well  fitted  them  to  be  the  bearers 
of  God's  message,  and  the  channel  of  his  blessings,  to  the  world.  A  people  without 
zeal  will  never  accomplish  anything  permanent  or  great.  2.  Zeal  without  knowledge 
was  their  weakness.  They  had  a  zeal  of  God,  "  but  not  according  to  knowledge." 
Zeal  is  not  necessarily  an  unmixed  blessing.  Yet  there  are  many  who  commend  earnest- 
ness, utterly  irrespective  of  the  motives  from  which  it  proceeds,  the  methods  it  adopts, 
or  the  ends  it  has  in  view.  On  this  principle  the  doctrines  held  or  the  character 
exhibited  are  of  small  importance,  provided  only  there  is  earnestness  and  zeaL  Moham- 
medanism and  the  Inquisition  would  therefore  be  both  laudable,  because  they  exhibited 
zeal.  Zeal  without  knowledge  may  become  the  opened  floodgate  for  a  torrent  of  evil. 
Zeal  in  religion  may  lead  to  any  excesses  if  it  is  not  restrained  and  tempered  by  the 
wisdom  which  God's  Word  imparts. 

II.  WoKKS  WITHOUT  FAITH.  "  Por  they  being  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,  and 
going  about  to  establish  their  own  righteousness,  have  not  submitted  themselves  unto 


804  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,      [ch.  x,  1—31. 

the  righteousness  of  God  "  (ver.  3).  Thus  it  is  plain  that  sincerity  and  morality  will 
not  save  the  human  soul  or  procure  acceptance  with  God.  The  essential  condition  of 
salvation  is  faith.  Faith  will  lead  us  to  accept  God's  plan  of  salvation,  and  to  be 
guided  by  his  word  in  our  efforts  to  obtain  it.  St.  Paul's  description  of  the  Jews  here 
might  be  appropriately  applied  to  our  Roman  Catholic  and  ritualistic  brethren.  They 
too  have  a  zeal  for  God.  Their  zeal  and  earnestness  cannot  be  questioned.  But  their 
zeal  is  often  not  according  to  knowledge.  They  too  are  "  going  about  to  establish 
their  own  righteousness."  They  substitute  works  for  faith,  and  by  legal  observances, 
by  rites  and  ceremonies,  by  fastings  and  penances,  they  seek  to  work  out  a  right- 
eousness for  themselves.  Christ  and  his  Woi-d  are  too  much  set  aside,  and  Church 
and  priest  and  the  commandments-of  men  are  set  up  in  their  place.  Let  ns  admit 
their  strength,  let  us  imitate  their  zeal,  while  affectionately  "speaking  the  truth  in 
love  "  we  point  out  and  avoid  their  weakness. — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  5 — 13. — The  simplicity  of  the  gospel.  The  apostle  here  contrasts  the  sim- 
plicity of  God's  plan  of  salvation  with  the  efforts  which  men  have  made  to  work 
out  a  righteousness  for  themselves.     Salvation  is  gained — 

I.  Not  by  aim,  own  good  works,  "  Moses  describeth  the  righteousness  which  is 
of  the  Law,  That  the  man  who  doeth  those  things  shall  live  by  them  "  (ver.  5).  If  this 
were  the  condition  of  salvation,  how  hopeless  would  our  condition,  be  !  None  of  us 
could  say  that  we  had  made  ourselves  free  from  sin,  or  that  our  works  were  perfect 
and  faultless,  or  that  we  had  fully  and  faithfully  kept  all  the  commandments  of  God. 

"  Not  what  these  handa  have  done 

Could  save  this  guilty  soul  ; 
Not  what  this  toiling  flesh  hath  borne 

Conld  make  my  spirit  whole." 

II.  Nor  by  mieaotjlotjs  intervention.  "  Say  not  in  thine  heart,  Who  shall  ascend 
into  heaven  ?  (th.it  is,  to  bring  Christ  down  from  above :)  or.  Who  shall  descend  into  the 
deep  ?  "  (vers.  6,  7).  The  desire  which  is  here  expressed  still  survives.  Not  content 
with  the  Word  of  God  and  the  invisible,  but  real,  spiritual  presence  of  Jesus  with  his 
Church,  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  many  zealous  Christians  think  it  is  necessary 
to  have  a  more  visible  manifestation  of  the  supernatural.  Hence  we  have  the  doctrine 
of  the  real  presence;  alleged  appearances  of  the  blessed  Virgin  at  Lourdes  and  at 
Knock ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  an  undue  stress  laid  upon  the  second  coming  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be 
persuaded,  though  one  rose  from  the  dead." 

III.  But  by  the  personal  reception  and  confession  as  Jesub  Christ.  1.  The 
Holy  Scriptures  are  the  means  used  to  bring  this  salvation  near  to  us.  "  The  word  is 
nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth,  and  in  thy  heart :  that  is,  the  word  of  faith,  which  we 
preach  "  (ver.  8).  In  contrast  with  ceremonial  or  legal  observances,  in  contrast  with  all 
miraculous  appearances,  the  apostle  here  magnifies  the  reading  and  preaching  of  the 
gospel  as  the  Divine  method  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  "  The  Spirit  of  God  maketh 
the  reading,  but  especially  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  an  effectual  means  of  convincing 
and  converting  sinners,  and  of  building  them  up  in  holiness  and  comfort,  through  faith 
unto  salvation."  2.  Fadth,  which  is  the  condition  of  salvation,  is  an  act  of  the  human 
mind.  Not  by  bodily  labours  or  sufferings,  not  by  appearances  to  our  bodily  senses, 
but  by  the  Spirit  of  God  and  the  Word  of  God  working  upon  our  spirits,  and  producing 
faith  in  us,  do  we  receive  salvation.  *'  With  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteous- 
ness "  (ver.  10).  It  is  to  the  spiritual  and  not  to  the  bodily  nature  that  the  appeal  of 
religion  is  to  be  made.  It  is  the  spiritual  and  not  the  bodily  nature  that  we  must  cul- 
tivate if  we  would  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  3.  Yet  this  faith'will  have  an  outward 
manifestation.  "With  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation "  (ver,  10).  If 
our  faith  in  Christ  is  real,  it  will  show  itself.  We  shall  not  be  ashamed  to  make  public 
acknowledgment  of  him.  4.  Thus  salvation  is  brought  within  the  reach  of  every  one. 
"  The  same  Lord  over  all  is  rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  him.  For  whosoever  shall  call 
upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved  "  (vers.  12,  13).  This  plan  of  salvation 
brings  the  gospel  to  the  Gentile  as  well  as  to  the  Jew.  "  For  there  is  no  diti'erence 
between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek"  (ver.  12).    Wherever  there  is  a  heart  seeking  after 


OH.  X.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  305 

God,  that  soul  need  not  wait  to  work  out  a  righteousness  for  itself.  "  Whosoever  shall 
call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  What  a  contrast  the  simplicity  of 
the  gospel  is  to  all  human  systems  of  religion  and  all  man-made  methods  of  salvation  I 
The  more  we  keep  to  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  less  we  mingle  with  it  human  tradition 
and  ecclesiastical  shibboleths,  the  more  shall  we  be  blessud  in  bringing  souls  to  Christ. 
—0.  H.  L 

Vers.  14-,  15. — Four  questions  for  every  Gkristian.  When  the  great  heart  of  the 
A  postle  Paul  burned  within  him  as  he  wrote  his  Epistles  to  the  Churches,  he  threw  aside, 
as  it  were,  the  calm  and  stately  prose  of  the  quiet  thinker  and  careful  writer.-  He  became 
an  orator.  He  saw  before  him — even  in  his  prison  cell — immortal  souls,  whom  he 
wanted  to  awaken  and  arouse.  He  asked  questions,  as  if  he  expected  an  answer  to  them 
all.  Such  questions  are  frequent  in  this  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  and  on  looking  care- 
fully over  them  we  see  that  they  are  not  only  full  of  eager  earnestness,  but  also  of  pro- 
fitable instruction.  In  the  four  questions  before  us  the  apostle  seeks  to  press  home 
upon  Christians  the  absolute  necessity  of  mission  work.  In  the  previous  chapter  he  is 
sorrowing  for  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews,  and  he  begins  this  chapter  by  saying  that  his 
heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is  that  they  might  be  saved.  Then,  as  he 
goes  on,  he  is  led  to  think  of  the  salvation,  not  only  of  the  Jews,  but  also  of  the  whole 
world.  He  says,  "  There  is  no  difference  between  the  Jew  and  the  Gentile :  for  the 
same  fjord  over  all  is  rich  jinto  all  that  calf  upon  him.  Pur  whosoever  shall  call  upon 
the  Name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  And  then,  as  he  thinks  of  the  heathen  world 
lying  in  darkness,  he  asks  these  four  questions. 

I.  "  How    SHALL   THEY    CALL  ON    HIM    IN    WHOM  THEY    HAVE    NOT    BELIEVED  ? "      In 

the  ordinary  dealings  of  daily  life  a  certain  amount  of  faith  in  another  person  is  neces- 
sary before  we  can  make  any  request  of  him.  Unless  we  believe  that  he  hears  us, 
unless  we  believe  that  he  is  both  able  and  willing  to  give  us  what  we  want,  we  are  not 
likely  to  ask  anything  of  him.  So  in  spiritual  matters,  faith  in  God — the  belief  that  he 
is,  that  he  hears  us,  and  that  he  is  able  and  willing  to  help  us — is  necessary  to  successful 
prayer.  It  is  necessary  to  salvation.  But  the  heathen  cannot  call  upon  this  gracious 
God  of  ours.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  they  do  not.  No  doubt,  even  amid  heathen  darkness, 
there  are  some  earnest  seekers  after  God.  Certainly,  if  they  call  upon  him,  they  shall 
be  saved.  But  the  vast  majority  of  the  heathen  are  without  the  knowledge  of  the  true 
God.  They  are  bowing  down  to  pieces  of  silver  and  gold,  of- wood  and  stone,  which 
c  innot  hear,  or  help,  or  save.  Their  very  worship  is  a  degradation  in  itselt  Their 
religious  rites  are  for  the  most  part  horrid  cruelties,  or  foul  and  unspeakable  lusts. 
And  as  for  Buddhism,  to  quote  only  one  authority,  Sir  Richard  Temple,  lately  Governor 
of  Bombay,  tells  us  that  however  excellent  and  attractive  the  poetic  accounts  of  it  may 
be,  as  in  the  well-known  poem,  'The  Light  of  Asia,'  the  actual  Buddhism  of  India  is 
as  degrading  as  can  well  be  imagined.  What  they  need  to  know  is  that  there  is  a  God 
who  will  hear  them  when  they  call  upon  him.  They  need  to  know  that  God  is  of 
purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  that  the  abominations  of  their  land  may  be  put  away. 
They  need  to  know  of  the  Lamb  of  God  who  beareth  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  that 
they  may  turn  from  their  useless  ceremonies  and  cruel  penances.  They  need  to  know 
of  a  Saviour  who  gives  to  all  who  call  on  him  salvation,  holiness,  everlasting  life.  But 
"  how  shall  they  call  on  him  in,  whom  they  have  not  helieved  ?  " 

II.  "How  SHALL  THEY  BELIEVE  IN  HIM  OP  WHOM  THEY  HAVE  HOT  HEAED?" 

Even  Christians  need  to  have  the  importance  of  hearing  about  God  more  impressed 
upon  them.  Some  professing  Christians  seem  to  imagine  that  the  heart  instinctively 
turns  to  God,  and  that  in  some  mysterious  way  the  heathen  who  have  never  heard  of 
God  will  come  to  him.  This  mistake  is  fallen  into  because  in  Christian  lands  we  have 
been  so  accustomed  to  hear  about  God  from  our  childhood  that  we  can  hardly  imagine 
it  possible  not  to  know  about  him.  But  the  simple  refutation  of  this  idea  is  the  actual 
state  of  heathen  nations.  St.  Paul,  in  this  very  Epistle  (ch.  i.  21,  25,  28),  assures  us 
that  though  the  heathen  had  at  one  time  a  knowledge  of  God  from  his  works  of  nature, 
yet  they  glorified  him  not  as  God,  but  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie,  and  there- 
fore lost  the  knowledge  of  God.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  travellers  in 
bpathen  lands.  Missionaries  often  find  it  very  difficult  to  convey  to  heathen  minds  an 
idea  of  what  God  is,  so  degraded  have  been  their  notions.     It  is  a  long  time  before 

ROMASM.  t 


306  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  x.  1—21. 

a  heathen  can  grasp  the  ideas  of  God's  holiness  and  truth  and  purity,  so  accustomed  is 
he  to  think  of  gods  whose  qualities  are  the  very  opposite  of  these.  Even  in  our 
Christian  land,  unhappily,  there  are  places  in  our  large  cities  so  neglected  and  degraded 
that  children  have  grown  up  without  hearing  about  God.  And  in  such  cases  it  has 
been  found  very  difficult  to  convey  at  first  an  idea  of  God's  being — his  greatness,  his 
holiness,  his  mercy,  and  his  love.  "  How  shall  they  believe  in  him  of  whom  they  have 
not  heard  f"  Hence,  when  the  heathen  learn  of  the  love  of  God  and  the  salvation 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  they  often  ask  the  question,  "  Why  did  you  not  send  and  tell 
ns  sooner  ?  "  No  wonder  that  with  sorrowful  hearts  they  ask  the  question,  as  they  think 
of  loved  ones  who  have  passed  away  without  hearing  the  glad  tidings.  How  sad  is 
the  condition  of  millions  of  the  heathen  without  the  knowledge  of  the  crucified 
Saviour ! 

IIL  "  How  SHALL  THBT  HEAR  WITHOUT  A  PREACHER  ?  "  Tes,  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  is  still  the  agency  that  is  to  regenerate  the  world.  It  was  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  that  was  the  means  of  converting  thousands  upon  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  It  was 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  which  overthrew  the  idols  of  ancient  Home.  It  was  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  which  brought  about  the  Protestant  Keformation.  "  The  Word," 
said  Martin  Luther  over  and  over  again,  "  it  was  the  Word  that  did  it  all."  It  was  tlie 
preaching  of  the  gospel  that  overthrew  the  idols  of  Madagascar,  and  that  has  already 
brought  civilization  and  peace  and  contentment  into  many  of  the  islands  of  the  sea. 
It  is  good  to  circulate  the  Word  of  God  in  every  language.  But  it  is  necessary  also  to 
have  the  living  preachers.  "  Go  ye  therefore  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel 
to  every  creature."  It  needs  the  living  preacher  to  be  a  living  witness  to  the  truth  and 
power  of  the  gospel — the  full  heart  overflowing  with  love  to  Christ  and  love  to  souls ; 
the  ripe  experience ;  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit.  The  Ethiopian  treasurer  had  the  Word 
of  God  in  his  hand  as  he  returned  in  his  chariot  from  Jerusalem.  But  he  was  not 
savingly  converted  until  Philip  began  at  the  Scriptures  which  he  was  reading,  and 
"preached  unto  him  Jesus"  (Acts  viii.  36).  But  the  number  of  missionaries  is  still 
very  small  in  comparison  with  the  millions  of  heathen  who  have  not  yet  heard  the 
gospel  message.     "  How  shall  they  hear  without  a  preacher  ?  " 

IV.  "  How  SHALL  THEY  PBEAOH,  EXCEPT  THEY  BE  SENT  ? "  This  is  the  inteiisely 
practical  question.  If  we  realize  the  darkness  and  misery  of  heathen  lands,  if  we  are 
really  thankful  for  the  unspeakable  blessings  which  the  gospel  has  brought  to  us,  what 
are  we  doing  to  send  the  message  of  salvation  to  those  who  sit  in  darkness  ?  1.  We 
can  help  to  send  out  missionaries  by  our  prayers.  "  The  harvest  truly  is  plenteous,  but 
the  labourers  are  few ;  pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  he  will  send  forth 
labourers  into  his  harvest."  2.  We  can  help  to  send  out  missionaries  by  our  gifts.  We 
need  to  understand,  not  merely  the  duty  of  giving,  but  the  privilege  of  giving.  Surely 
it  is  a  glorious  privilege  to  be  a  labourer  together  with  God.  Upon  the  Christian 
Church  is  laid  the  responsibility  of  preaching  the  gospel  to  all  nations.  And  there  is 
this  blessed  encouragement :  3.  Jf  the  last  of  these  parts  of  mission  work,  of  which  the 
apostle  speaks,  is  fulfilled,  the  rest  are  all  sure  to  follow.  If  missionaries  are  sent,  then 
there  wDl  be  the  preaching,  the  hearing,  and,  in  God's  own  good  time,  the  believing 
and  the  salvation  of  souls.  His  Word  shall  not  return  unto  him  void.  Thus  by  our 
sending  we  may  be  the  means  of  saving. — C.  H.  I. 

Vor.  15. — The  beauty  of  the  gospel.  The  words,  "  How  beautiful  are  the  feet!"  are 
plainly  a  figurative  expression.  This'  expression  signifies  the  delight  with  which  the 
messenger  of  peace  is  hailed,  or,  in  other  words,  how  welcome  is  the  message  which  he 
brings.  In  Isaiah  (lii.  7)  it  reads,  "  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet 
of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings,  that  publisheth  peace!"  as  if  the  reference  was 
to  the  inhabitants  of  some  beleaguered  city  looking  out  for  the  messengers  of  peace, 
and  as  they  behold  them  appearing,  fleet  of  foot,  upon  the  mountain-top,  they  exclaim, 
"  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings, 
that  publisheth  peace  1 "  Such  a  description  the  apostle  here  applies  to  the  messengers 
of  the  gospel. 

I.  The  gospel  is  beautiful  in  the  truths  it  teaches.  The  truths  of  the  gospel 
are  here  called  "  glad  tidings  of  good  things."  This,  in  fact,  is  the  very  meaning  of  the 
word  "gospel" — glad  tidings  or  good  news.     1.  Think  what  the gosp^  teaches  us  about 


CH.  X.  1— 21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  307 

the  one  true  God.  What  a  contrast  to  the  helpless  idols  of  heathenism  1  How  beautiful 
to  think  that  God  is  a  Spirit  who  is  everywhere  present,  who  knows  all  our  circum- 
stances, and  to  whom  we  can  always  draw  near  in  the  assurance  that  he  hears  us,  and 
is  able  and  willing  to  help  usl  What  a  contrast  to  the  unknown  god  of  even  the  best 
forpis  of  heathenism,  to  the  unconscious  and  unsympathetic  Brahm,  the  god  of  Hindu- 
ism! I  heard  a  missionary  to  the  Red  Indians,  speaking  in  Dr.  Storrs'  church  in 
Brooklyn,  mention  how  the  chief  of  an  old  Indian  tribe,  seven  thousand  in  number, 
had  come  seven  times  in  fifteen  months  a  distance  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles  to  a 
mission  station,  to  ask  that  a  missionary  might  be  sent  to  tell  them  of  "  the  white 
man's  Grod."  How  beautiful  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness  is  the  glad  tidings  of  the 
true  God,  the  loving  and  merciful  Father  in  heaven  1  2.  Thinh  what  the  gospel  teaches 
us  about  the  human  soul.  The  gospel  does  not  permit  us  to  regard  man  as  one  of  the 
beasts  that  perish,  as  he  is  under  so  many  of  the  heathen  religions.  Some  of  these 
have  no  idea  of  the  existence  of  a  soul  at  all ;  but  in  the  best  of  tht  m  the  soul  is  either 
annihilated  at  death,  or  transferred  to  some  other  creature,  or  absorbed  into  the  uni- 
versal being  as  a  drop  into  the  ocean.  The  gospel,  on  the  other  band,  teaches  that  man 
was  made  in  the  image  of  God ;  that  he  has  an  immortal  destiny ;  and  that,  when  he 
had  destroyed  his  own  present  happiness  and  future  prospects  by  his  own  sin,  so  great 
value  did  God  place  upon  him,  so  great  love  did  his  heavenly  Father  cherish  for  him, 
that  he  sent  his  own  beloved  Son  to  live  and  die  for  man's  salvation.  The  gospel  which 
proclaims  the  greatness,  the  majesty,  the  holiness,  the  glory  of  God,  proclaims  also  the 
dignity  and  the  immortality  of  man. 

II.  The  gospel  is  beautiful  in  the  influence  it  exercises.  This  we  might 
expect  from  the  beauty  and  grandeur  of  the  truths  it  teaches.  There  is  nothing  very 
elevating  about  the  worship  of  an  idol  of  wood  or  stone.  There  is  nothing  very  inspir- 
ing in  the  thought  that  life  must  end  at  the  grave,  or  that  I  shall  be  absorbed  into  the 
vmiverse.     It  may  be  very  poetic  to  sing,  as  Shelley  did  of  his  departed  friend  Keats — 

**  He  is  made  one  with  Nature.    There  is  heard 
His  voice  in  all  her  music,  from  the  moan 
Of  thunder  to  the  song  of  night's  sweet  bird. 
He  is  a  presence  to  be  felt  and  known 
In  darkness  and  in  light,  in  herb  and  stone ; 
Spreading  itself  where'er  that  Power  may  move 
Which  has  withdrawn  his  being  to  its  own." 

But  such  a  thought  would  bring -little  comfort  to  the  bereaved  parent  or  sorrowing 
widow ;  and  how  very  slight  would  be  its  influence  upon  character  and  life,  compared 
with  the  thought  that  I  am  a  responsible  being,  that  I  must  appear  before  the  judg- 
ment-seat of  Chi'ist,  and  that  my  life  as  an  immortal  being  hereafter  will  be  determined 
largely  by  my  life  as  an  individual  now !  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ 
has  exercised  an  elevating,  purifying,  beautifying  influence  wherever  its  power  has  been 
felt.  Take,  for  instance,  the  treatment  of  woma/n.  Mohammedanism  and  heathenism 
haTe  both  kept  woman  in  humiliation  and  degradation.  By  keeping  her  in  seclusion,  they 
Ijave  at  once  injured  her  own  moral  and  spiritual  being,  and  deprived  the  community 
of  the  healthful  influence  which  good  women  can  exercise.  Christianity  has  raised 
woman  to  respect  and  honour;  it  has  promoted  her  own  personal  happiness ;  and  it  has 
enabled  her  to  exercise  a  mighty  power  for  good  in  the  family,  and  in  society  at  large. 
Mohammedanism  and  heathenism  are  the  props  of  slavery.  It  was  Christian  missions 
that  first  aroused  the  Christian  conscience  on  this  subject.  Sir  William  Hunter,  one 
of  the  most  distinguished  scholars  and  statesmen  of  our  day,  speaking  at  the  great 
Missionary  Conference  in  London,  June,  1888,  said,  "  I  recognize  in  missionary  work 
a  great  expiation  for  the  wrong  which  the  white  man  has  done  to  the  dark  man  in  the 
past;  and  I  recognize  also  a  pledge  of  national  right-doing  in  future.  During  the  past 
century  missionaries  have  marched  in  the  vap  of  all  our  noblest  national  movements. 
When  the  time  came  for  the  great  wrong  of  slavery  to  be  redressed,  it  was  the  mission- 
ary voice  which  first  stirred  up  the  nation  against  the  slave  trade.  That  voice  is  now 
awakening  the  national  conscience  against  the  terrible  evil  which  is  being  done  by  our 
liquor  traffic  among  the  darker  and  less  civilized  races."  How  long  shall  the  Christian 
jrublic  of  mighty  England  stand  meekly  by,  while  slavery's  chain  is  still  clanking,  and 


308  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  x.  1—21, 

slavery's  lash  still  falls?  How  beautiful  is  that  gospel  which  has  lifted  woman  ont  of 
her  degradation ;  which  has  emancipated  already  so  many  millions  of  slaves;  which  has 
abolished  cannibalism  in  so  many  islands  of  the  sea;  which  has  pnt  an  end  to  the 
suttee  and  other  cruel  ceremonies  in  India ;  and  which  is  drawing  the  nations  of  the 
earth  together  in  a  universal  brotherhood  of  good  will  and  peace! 

III.  It  is  a  beautiful  thing  to  be  a  beaker  of  this  MEasAOB.  "  How  beautfful 
are  the  feet  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  of  peace!"  What  share  are  we  taking  in 
this  glorious  work?  "Consecrated  capital,"  says  Dr.  A.  T.  Pierson,  "is  not  only 
potent;  it  is  well-nigh  omnipotent.  To  have  and  to  use  money  well  is  to  multiply 
personal  power  a  thousandfold,  nay,  to  multiply  one's  self  a  thousandfold.  The  giver  is 
potentially  wherever  his  gift  is.  Sarah  Hosmer's  frugal  savings  educated  six  young  men 
to  preach  the  gospel  in  Oriental  lands,  and  where  they  were,  she  had  her.  representatives 
and  preached  through  them.  A  man  recently  died  in  New  York  whose  noble  bene- 
factions had  spread  so  far,  that  in  not  less  than  two  hundred  and  fifty  different  places 
he  was  represented  by  a  mission  Sunday  school,  a  church,  an  asylum,  a  hospital,  a 
college  or  seminary,  or  some  other  form  of  beneficence :  his  money  made  him  virtually 
omnipresent  as  a  benefactor."  Oh  that  individual  Christians  would  awake  to  their 
opportunities!  Oh!  that  they  would  realize  the  moral  grandeur  and  glory  of  being  a 
bearer  of  the  gospel  message,  and  a  helper  in  the  gospel  cause ! — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  16 — 21. — The  lesson  of  neglected  opportunities.  I.  It  is  God's  pabt  to  pro- 
vide THE  OPPOETUNITIES.  "  FaitliL  oometh  by  hearing,  and  hea)  ing  by  the  Word  of 
God "  (ver.  17).  The  apostle  recognizes  that  men  cannot  be  condemned  for  unbelief, 
if  they  have  not  had  the  opportunity  of  hearing  the  gospel.  No  person  will  be  con- 
demned in  the  day  of  judgment  who  has  not  had  the  op|)ortunity  of  salvation.  And 
lest  any  one,  applying  this  rule  to  the  case  of  Israel,  should  suggest  that  they  had  not 
such  an  opportunity,  he  asks  the  question,  "But  I  say.  Have  they  not  heard?"  Can 
the  plea  of  ignorance  be  put  in  on  their  behalf?  Nay.  "  Their  sound  "  (that  is,  the 
voice  of  God's  messengers,  referred  to  in  ver.  15)  "went  into  all  the  eaith,  and  their 
words  unto  the  ends  of  the  world."  God  has  done  his  part  for  the  enlightenment  and 
salvation  of  men.  He  has  revealed  himself  in  his  works  of  nature.  He  has  revealed 
himself  in  his  Word.  He  has  revealed  himself  in  his  Sou.  Jesus  is  the  Emmanuel, 
"  God  with  us." 

II.  It  IS  man's  part  to  avail  himself  op  them.  The  mere  possession  of  gospel 
pnvileges  is  no  guarantee  of  salvation.  "  But  they  have  not  all  obeyed  the  gospel " 
(ver.  16).  Israel  had  the  Law,  with  its  types  and  ceremonies,  pointing  to  Christ ;  their 
prophets,  who  spoke  of  him.  Yet,  with  all  their  privileges,  they  rejected  Christ.  "  He 
came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not."  It  will  not  profit  us  that  we  have 
been  brought  up  in  a  Christian  home,  in  a  Christian  Church,  or  that  we  have  bad  the 
Bible  iu  our  hands,  unless  we  ourselves  "obey  the  gospel,"  accept  its  invitations, 
respect  its  precepts,  and  submit  ourselves  to  Jesus  as  our  Saviour  and  our  King.  Yet 
there  are  many  who  are  resting  entirely  upon  their  privileges,  without  exercising  that 
living  personal  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  for  which  these  privileges  afford  the  opportunity 
and  the  help. 

HI.  Opportunities  neglected  will  be  taken  awat.  Israel  had  been  from  the 
beginning  forewarned  of  this.  So  long  ago  as  the  time  of  Moses  it  had  been  said  to 
them,  "  I  will  provoke  you  to  jealousy  by  them  that  are  no  people,  and  by  a  foolish 
nation  I  will  anger  you  "  (ver.  19).  Then  Isaiah  repeated  a  similar  warning,  "  I  was 
found  of  them  that  sought  me  not ;  I  was  made  manifest  unto  them  that  asked  not 
after  me  "  (ver.  20).  The  same  lesson  in  the  history  of  Israel-  is  repeated  by  Christ 
more  than  once  in  his  parables.  In  the  parable  of  the  wicked  husbandmen,  the  lord  of 
the  vineyard  is  represented  as  letting  out  his  vineyard  "unto  other  husbandmen,  who 
shall  render  him  the  fruits  in  their  seasons  "  (Matt.  xxi.  41).  The  same  lesson  is  taught 
in  the  parable  of  the  we^iding-feast,  whore  the  inviation,  rejected  by  the  regularly 
invited  guests,  is  sent  out  to  the  highways  and  hedges.  We  have  the  same  truth  in 
the  parable  of  the  talents.  "  Unto  every  one  that  hath  shall  be  given  .  .  .  but  from 
him  that  hath  not  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he  hath  "*  (Matt.  xxv.  29). 
The  history  of  the  Jews  is  a  solemn  warning  against  the  neglect  of  opportunities.  It  .is 
a  solemn  warning  to  all  those  who,  though  brought  up  in  Christian  homes  and  in  a 


OB.X.  1— 21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  309 

Christian  land,  make  light  of  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  resist  its  invitations,  and  set 
at  naught  its  counsels. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  freenett  of  satvation.  The  apostle's  heart  yearns  for  his  people. 
For  he  recognizes  their  sincerity  in  much  of  their  grievous  mistaking  of  the  ways  of 
God.  They  had  zeal  for  God,  though  the  zeal  was  unreasonable  and  irreligious. 
Unreasonable ;  for  how  can  man  make  himself  just  before  God,  guilty  and  sinful  as  he 
is  ?  and  why  should  the  Jew  think  that,  if  this  were  possible,  only  one  small  portion 
of  the  race  should  be  suffered  to  woik  out  its  righteousness?  Irreligious;  for  instead 
of  the  humility  as  regards  one's  self,  ahd  the  charity  as  regards  others,  which  are  two 
essentials  of  the  life  in  God,  there  was  a  proud  self-assertiveness,  and  a  narrow  bigotry. 
They  must  learn  that  God's  favour  is  by  grace  (vers.  6 — 11),  and  for  all  (vers.  12 — 21). 
We  have  here — the  freeness  of  salvation. 

I.  The  erkob  of  the  Jews.  1.  Ignorance.  "  Of  God's  righteousness."  That  is,  of 
the  fact  that  the  justification  of  a  siimer  can  only  come  of  God's  free  grace.  Surely  their 
Law  might  have  taught  them  this :  negatively,  for  it  should  have  made  them  realize 
their  own  utter  imperfectness  and  impotence;  positively,  Tor  had  they  not  read  (Gen. 
w.  6)  that  Abraham  was  counted  righteous  through  faith  in  God  ?  and  (Hab.  ii.  4) 
that  all  just  ones  shall  live  by  faith  ?  2.  Self-sufficiency.  "  Seeking  to  establish  their 
own."  That  is  (see  Godet),  as  a  monument,  raised,  not  to  God's  glory,  but  to  show 
forth  their  own  achievements.  Here  was  the  pride  of  man,  which  must  be  brought 
down  before  any  way  can  be  made  towards  God  (Matt.  v.  3).  3.  Disobedience.  "  ]3id 
not  subject  themselves."  For  the  very  faith  whereby  we  receive  God's  free  forgiveness 
is  an  act  of  submission,  an  abnegating  of  our  false  pride,  a  yielding  to  a  way  which  is 
higher  and  better  than  our  own  (see  ch.  i.  5  ;  vi.  17).  4.  Frustration  of  the  very  pur- 
port of  their  own  Law.  "  For  Christ  is  the  End  of  the  Law."  All  was  designed  to  lead 
to  him  ;  the  holy  commands  were  to  make  them  know  their  guilt  and  weakness^and 
crave  for  pardon  and  grace;  the  sacrifices  and  ceremonies  were  at  once  to  stamp  tlie 
fact  of  sin  more  deeply  into  their  consciousness,  and  to  give  them  a  glimmering  hope  of 
propitiation  and  purifying.  To  Christ  all  these  things  directly  and  indirectly  tended ; 
but  the  veil  was  on  their  eyes,  that  they  "should  not  look  steadfastly  on  the  end  of 
that  which  was  passing  away  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  13). 

IL  The  truth  op  God.  1.  "  The  righteousness  which  is  of  the  Law"  was,  that  it 
should  be  done  by  man's  efforts,  conjoined  with  the  grace  of  God.  For,  according  to  God's 
intent,  grace  was  with  the  giving  of  the  Law :  pardon,  for  realized  imperfection ;  help, 
for  realized  frailty ;  the  coming  of  Christ,  as  the  end  of  all  its  precepts  and  ceremonial. 
But  if  man  would  ignore  this  element  of  grace,  there  was  nothing  for  him  but  a  perfect 
fulfilling  of  an  impossible  righteousness!  Doing  it,  he  should  live  by  it.  They  tried; 
the  world  has  tried :  the  end  thereof  is  death !  2.  "  The  righteousness  which  is  of 
faith  "  hath  taught  us  better  things.  (1)  Not  the  severe  effort  of  the  soul,  by  ecstatic 
contemplation,  to  attain  to  communion  with  Heaven :  the  Buddhist,  the  Christian 
mystic.  For  Heaven  has  come  down  to  earth  ;  we  have  but  to  confess  the  Sonship  of 
Jesus,  and  live  a  life  in  him  who  has  hallowed  all  life.  (Consider  the  Incarnation,  and 
the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  as  illustrating  "  tlie  Word  is  nigh  thee.")  So,  "  the  trivial  round," 
etc.  (2)  Not  the  painful  anguish  of  the  soul,  as  by  a  crucifixion,  to  make  atonement 
for  its  guilt :  the  devotee,  the  ascetic.  For  the  atonement  is  made,  and,  to  testify  its 
completeness,  he  has  risen  from  the  dead.  We  have  but  to  believe  this  in  our  heart, 
and  then,  "  there  is  now  no  condemnation." 

Yes,  the  faith  which  works  by  love :  accepting  with  all  our  heart  the  free  forgiveness 
which  is  through  Christ's  death,  and  acknowledging  him  with  our  whole  life  as  our 
true  Lord  and  King.     So  no  shame,  but  perfect  liberty  and  perfect  love. — ^T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  12 — 21. — 7%e  universality  of  the  gospel.  The  favour  of  God  is  free.  But  the 
apostle  has  already  indicated  another  antagonism  to  the  ignorant  zeal  of  his  people : 
the  favour  of  God,  being  free,  is  free  for  all  (vers.  4,  11).  As  Godet  says,  "  Paul  has 
justified  the  matter  of  his  preaching,  salvation  by  grace;  he  now  justifies  its  exten- 
sion." He  here  sets  forth  the  universality  of  the  gosjiel  as  evident  from  its  -very  free- 
ness, as  anticipated  by  the  Law,  as  consistent  with  the  exclusion  of  Israel  from  its 
blessedness. 


310  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  x.  1—21. 

I.  The  univbrsalitt  ot  the  gospel  is  evident  from  its  vbbt  fbbenbss.  If 
the  Law  had  been  able  of  itself  to  justify,  it  might  have  seemed  as  though  the  dentiles 
were  without  hope.  But  when  it  is  perceived  that  the  Law  only  leads  to  Christ,  and 
that  in  Christ  a  free  forgiveness  is  granted  to  sinful  man,  at  once  the  conclusion  is 
forced  upon  us — then  to  every  sinful  man.  And  the  conclusion  is  just ;  even  as  Joel 
had  foreseen,  "  Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  There 
needs  but  that  faith  which  is  involved  in  true  repentance,  a  willingness  to  be  saved 
by  grace  alone,  and  the  salvation  is  ours.  Let,  then,  Ihe  true  cry  for  help  go  up  from 
any  human  heart,  and  it  is  answered.  But  it  follows  that  if,  according  to  God's  grace, 
salvation  is  such  that  it  is,  in  itself,  possible  to  every  man,  he  must  design  that  it 
shall  be  brought  within  the  reach  of  every  man.  Hence  the  succession  of  questions 
which  Paul  a^-ks,  arguing  that  God's  design  to  save  sinful  man,  when  calling  upon  him 
in  truth,  implies  a  design  that  it  should  be  possible  for  man  to  believe  in  him  as  God 
the  Saviour,  which  again  implies  the  hearing  him  proclaimed,  which  again  implies  a 
preacher  cff  the  glad  tidings,  which  again  implies  the  sending  of  the  preachers.  Yes,  if 
such  is  the  salvation  for  sinful  man,  God  must  have  instituted  a  universal  apostolate 
for  the  nations.  This  indeed  was  so  (Matt,  xxviii.  19 ;  Acts  i.  8).  But  Paul  argues 
it,  that  he  may  justify  his  own  mission,  partly;  and  partly  also,  we  may  suppose,  to 
remind  them  that  they,  the  Jews,  should  have  been  the  nation  of  apostles,  that  this 
was  indeed  the  very  intent  of  their  election,  had  they  not  made  the  counsel  of  God  of 
none  effect.     0  glorious  calling !     0  grievous  forfeiture  of  high  blessing  I 

IT.  This  tUfiVBESALiTY  op  the  gospel  was  anticipated  by  the  Law.  What 
had  Moses  said  to  them ?  "I  will  provoke  you  to  jealousy,"  etc.  They  had  provoked 
God  by  following  after  other  gods ;  God  would  provoke  his  people  by  seeking  other 
peoples  (see  Deut.  xxxii.  21).  Isaiah  stated  boldly  what  in  the  earlier  words  was  more 
obscurely  hinted  at,  "  I  was  found  of  them,"  etc.  (see  Isa.  Ixvi.).  Here  also  a  repetition 
of  ch.  ix.  30 — 33.  These,  however,  are  but  samples ;  there  was  enough  in  their  Law, 
had  not  the  veil  been  on  their  eyes,  to  show  that  they  were  but  trustees  for  the  world, 
and  that  one  of  their  peculiar  glories  was  that  the  Gentiles  should  come  in  the  fulness 
of  time  te  do  homage  to  their  God  (see  Isa.  Ix.).  Israel  "  did  know,"  or  at  least  might 
have  known. 

III.  This  universalttt  of  the  gospel  was  not  inconsistent  with  the  bxcld- 
sioN  of  Israel  from  its  blessedness.  The  terms  were,  for  them  as  for  all,  "  Who- 
soever shall  call,"  etc.  And,  it  being  impossible  to  call  on  One  whom  they  had  not 
heard,  the  hearing  was  certainly  not  withheld  from  them.  It  was  true  even  of  gospel 
preaching,  as  of  the  voices  of  the  heavens  (Ps.  xix.),  that  the  sound  had  gone  into  all 
the  earth.  For  everywhere  the  gospel  had  been  preached  "  to  the  Jew  first."  Yes, 
God  had  not  cut  them  off  from  the  blessing,  but  they  had  cut  themselves  off.  It  was 
true,  as  Isaiah  had  said,  "  All  the  day  long,"  etc.  So  the  parables  of  Jesus  (Matt,  xxi., 
xxii.).  They  might  have  been  the  chosen  people  for  the  glorious  work  of  the  world's 
salvation ;  but  the  election  was  broken  by  their  unbelief. 

So,  then,  though  God  might  surely  choose  or  lay  aside  instruments  as  he  would,  in 
the  carrying  on  of  his  work,  he  did  not  act  without  reason.  It  was  because  the  Jews, 
being  exalted  to  heaven,  cast  themselves  down  to  hell,  that  they  might  not  be  the 
heralds  of  his  grace.  They  would  not  receive  it ;  therefore  they  could  not  show  it 
forth.— T.  F.  L. 

Ver.  1. — Anxiety  fw  the  salvation  of  our  fellows.  It  is  the  lot  of  reformers  to  be 
twitted  as  renegades,  and  to  be  exposed  to  the  taunt  of  indifference  to  the  welfare  of 
their  old  companions.  So  the  apostle  was  charged  with  noxiously  subverting  ancient 
customs,  and  he  found  it  necessary  to  justify  himself  even  to  Jewish  Christians  atrainst 
the  reproach  of  wanton  molestation  of  the  hopes  of  Israel.  It  is  difficult  for  prejudice 
in  its  blind  conservatism  to  see  that  the  change  proposed  is  intended  for  the  further- 
ance, not  the  injury,  of  what  is  held  most  dear — the  emancipation  of  the  spirit  by  the 
transformation  of  the  body.  The  apostle  lays  bare  his  heart  to  attest  his  intense 
yearning  for  the  spiritual  good  of  his  traducers. 

I.  Why  did  the  apostle  long  bo  ardently  for  thrir  salvation  ?  He  could  not 
forget  that  the  Saviour  died  to  draw  all  men  unto  himself.  A  sinner  unsaved  lessens 
the  reward  of  the  "travail  of  his  soul  "and  detracts  from  the  possible  glory  of  th» 


OH.  X.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE   IP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  311 

atcnement.  But  further,  thene  men  were  his  fellow-countrymen.  Surely  the  condition 
of  our  "  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh  "  must  be  uppermost  in  our  thoughts,  and  each 
man's  efforts  naturally  commence  at  his  own  house,  his  own  neighbourhood,  his  own 
nation.  Then,  they  were  the  dptcendants  of  men  signally  honoured  in  the  past.  Their 
lineage  was  so  distinguished,  that  Paul  could  not  calmly  witness  the  exclusion  from 
the  kingdom  of  God  of  these  sons  of  patriarchs  and  prophets.  They  were  in  a  special 
sense  the  "brethren"  for  whom  Christ  died.  "What  more  affecting  to-day  than  to 
witness  religious  apathy  in  the  families  of  the  godly,  to  see  the  place  of  the  fathers 
unoccupied  by  the  children  in  the  house  of  faith?  And  the  apostle  had  visions  of  the 
splendid  results  that  would  ensue  if  the  veil  were  removed  from  their  hearts,  and  they 
should  recognize  in  the  Nazarene  their  wished-for  Messiah.  What  should  the  receiving 
of  them  into  the  Church  be  but  "  life  from  the  dead "  ?  The  same  reason  impels  us 
to  seek  the  conversion  of  many  around,  whose  talents  and  earnestness  might  be  of  such 
signal  service  in  our  ranks.  As  Saul  the  persecutor  became  Paul  the  missionary,  so 
we  may  look  upon  a  bigoted  opponent  aa  a  potential  future  enthusiast  in  the  cause  of 
Christ. 

II.  How  DID  THE  apostle's  conobbn  EXPRESS  ITSELF  ?  We  answcr — In  his  preach- 
ing. He  ever  visited  first  the  Jews  and  the  synagogue  in  his  tours.  It  was  God's 
design  that  the  gospel  should  he  first  preached  to  his  ancient  people,  that  by  rejecting 
or  receiving  the  message  they  might  either  fill  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity  and 
crucify  the  Saviour  afiesh,  or  free  themselves  from  the  guilt  of  their  nation  and 
welcome  the  breaking  down  of  the  partition  wall  between  Jew  and  Gentile.  And  <Ae 
writirigs  of  the  apostle  evince  his  unabated  regard  and  anxiety  for  the  Jews.  He 
declared  that  he  could  wish  himself  "anathema"  from  Christ,  if  that  self-sacrifice 
could  procure  their  redemption.  We  are  reminded  of  the  supreme  act  of  self-abnegation 
by  Moses  on  the  mount,  when  rejecting  Jehovah's  offer  to  create  from  him  a  new 
people  in  the  stead  of  that  corrupt  and  obstinate  generation.  The  apostle's  language 
breathes  the  spirit  of  the  cross  of  Christ — it  is  an  emanation  to  the  disciple  from  the 
Master's  self-immolation  for  the  good  of  men.  The  prayers  of  the  apostle  showed  the 
genuineness  of  his  affectionate  solicitude.  Pra3'er  is  a  thermometer  that  gauges 
the'  warmth  of  our  desire  to  save  men  from  misery  and  ruin.  Does  not  the  teacher 
bring  the  members  of  the  class  before  God  in  earnest  petitions,  and  the  parent  his 
children?  We  care  little  for  those  who  are  never  mentioned  in  our  supplications. 
Let  us  remember  them  where  it  most  avails. 

III.  What  contributed  to  make  this  deep  concern  so  noteworthy?  It  was 
prayer  for  msn  who  hated  and  maltreated  him.  With  rancorous  unceasing  enmity  did 
the  Jews  pursue  the  apostle.  They  were  the  chief  cause  of  his  imprisonments  and 
tortures,  they  did  their  utmost  to  mar  his  success  and  embitter  his  labours,  and  at 
last  secured  his  death.  Thinking  of  their  attempts  to  overthrow  the  faith  of  Christian 
converts,  the  apostle  could  use  strong  language  for  their  discomfiture;  but  on  his 
knees,  in  the  solemn  presence  of  the  God  and  Father  of  all,  larger  and  more  generous 
thoughts  possessed  bis  soul,  and  he  forgot  all  his  personal  annoyances  in  the  o'ermaster- 
ing  impulse  to  seek  their  salvation.  If  wronged  by  any,  take  the  matter  to  the  throne 
of  grace,  and  you  shall  begin  to  pity  and  then  pray  for  him  that  did  the  wrong.  It 
was  prayer  for  those  v)ho  had  proved  obstinate,  and  whose  salvation  seemed  little  likely. 
No  acquaintance  with  the  decrees  of  God,  nor  the  fact  of  God's  forethought  and  fore- 
ordination,  could  hinder  the  apostle's  entreaties.  What  a  lesson  for  us  not  to  despair, 
not  to  faint !  Our  mistrust  too  often  paralyzes  our  intercessions,  our  human  reasonings 
"limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  This  was  a  benefit  conferred  which  they  had  no  power 
to  refuse.  Prayer  is  a  kind  ofBce  which  we  may  render  to  men  who  would  accept 
nothing  else  at  our  hands.     This  they  cannot  hinder. — S.  R.  A. 

Yer.  4. — 2^e  end  of  the  Law.  The  desire  for  righteousness  has  embodied  itself  in 
diverse  and  some  of  them  grotesque  forms.  Gather  together  the  Pharisee  with  his 
phylacteries  anri  ablutions ;  the  Chinaman  burning  his  bits  of  paper  for  ancestral 
worship;  the  Hindoo  bathing  in  the  sacred  river,  or  prostrating  himself  under  the  idol- 
car;  the  Roman  Catholic  teiling  his  bea'ls  and  performing  his  penance;  and  the  moral 
youth,  who  never  omits  his  daily  portion  of  Scripture,  or  his  morning  and  evening 
pi  avers,  and  would  scorn  to  tell  an  untruth;  and  one  would  scarce  imagine  that  th« 


312  THE   EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  x.  1—21. 

aame  n  otive  actuates  all  these.  Yet  they  all  bear  witness  to  man's  anxiety  to  be 
righteous  in  the  sight  of  the  Supreme  Being,  and  those  are  abnormally  constituted 
who  are  never  conscious  ol  t^is  yearning.  It  was  not  this  strung  desire  for  righteous- 
ness which  the  apostle  tried  to  alter  in  the  Jews,  hut  the  antiquated  imperfect  method 
to  which  they  still  clung  after  the  one  sure  way  of  justification  through  faith  in  Christ 
had  been  proclaimed,  , 

I.  Cheist  the  termination  of  the  legal  economy.  The  rending  of  the  veil  at 
the  Crucifixion  indicated  th«  [lassing  away  of  the  old  dispensation,  with  all  its  ojorseous 
rites  and  external  splendour.  There  arose  another  order  of  priesthood,  from  which  the 
exclusivenesa  of  thu  former  caste  was  absent.  Jesus  the  High  Priest  came  not  of  the 
tribe  of  Levi.  It  is  no  longer  necessary  to  become  a  Jew  in  order  to  reap  the  piivileges 
of  access  to  Grod.  Christ  has  released  men  from  the  yoke  of  the  Law,  with  its  fasts 
and  feasts,  its  observance  of  days  and  seasons.  He  has  clianged  our  state  from  pupilage 
to  manhood;  from  slavery  to  a  "  reasonable  service."  Wherever  a  Christian  is  fouud, 
there  is  a  spiritual  priest  and  a  living  temple;  wherever  Ohiistian-i  meet,  there  is  a 
holy  convocation.  The  tabernacle  disappeared  when  the  temple  was  erected,  and  the 
earthly  temple  is  no  longer  needed  when  the  glorious  building  ;ises,  reared  without 
hands.  The  Jews  who  would  not  receive  this  teaching  had  to  be  convinced,  by  the 
capture  of  Jerusalem  and  the  burning  of  tlieir  "  beautiful  house,"  that  "  the  old  order 
changed,  giving  place  to  new.''  The  forerunner  of  Christ  was  the  last  of  the  Old 
Testament  prophets. 

II.  Christ  the  desion  and  scope  of  the  Levitical  dispensation.  We  cannot 
understand  the  Law  unless  we  regard  it  as  pointing  unmistakably  to  the  coming 
Messiah,  preparing  his  way ;  a  preliminary  education  of  mankind  and  of  one  nation  in 
particular;  like  a  stock  ou  which  a  new  rose  is  to  be  grafted.  The  sacrifices,  tlie 
moral  and  ceremonial  precepts,  were  predictive,  were  prophecy  acted  in  symbol  and 
type.  The  chrysalis  displays  tokens  of  the  winged  perfect  insect.  "  The  Law  hath 
been  our  tutor  to  bring  us  unto  Christ."  So  that  when  men  inquire,  "To  what 
purpose  was  all  this  cost  of  legislation  and  ritual?"  the  reply  is  that  it  paved  the  way 
for  something  better ;  it  was  the  "  shadow  of  good  things  to  come." 

III.  Chbibt  the  realization  of  the  Mosaic  ideal.  The  holiness  which  the  Law 
ever  kept  in  view,  endeavouring  to  raise  men  to  its  standard  of  righteousness,  has  been 
exemplified  in  Jesus  Christ.  Wherein  the  Law  was  weak,  Christ  was  strong.  His 
condemnation  of  sin  was  thorough  and  effective,  and  the  perfection  of  his  sacrifice 
renders  any  subsequent  atonement  needless.  To  enter  into  the  spirit  of  his  offering  is 
to  "purge  the  conscience  from  dead  works  "  and  to  give  rest  and  peace  to  the  troubled 
— the  region  in  which  the  Law  v\  as  inoperative.  The  message  of  Divine  love  sounding 
from  the  cross  has  a  constraining  influence  over  the  affections  and  life  of  the  Christian, 
which  the  Law  aimed  at  and  failed  to  achieve.  New  Testament  saints  have  frequently 
attained  to  an  enlightenn  ent  of  mind  and  conl'orinity  to  the  Divine  will  which  was 
sighed  after  in  vain  by  patr.arch,  psalmist,- and  prophet.  Christ  brings  his  followers 
into  communion  with  God,  and  by  faith  in  him  are  they  sanctified.  Love  is  proved  a 
stronger  principle  than  terror,  knowledge  than  ignorance,  example  than  precept.  In 
abrogating,  Christ  fulfils  the  Law. 

Conclusion.  See,  then,  what  faith  does.  It  loohs  at  Christ  instead  of  a  Law  of 
ordinances.  It  is  no  longer  tied  by  enactments  and  fearful  of  non-compliance,  for  it 
beholds  the  face  of  Jesus,  "  the  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain."  We  may  trust  Christ  as 
our  Redeemer  and  Guide,  without  understanding  or  acknowledging  all  the-e  points  of 
superiority  over  the  former  covenant ;  as  a  woman  knows  she  will  be  benefited  by  a 
certain  medicine,  though  she  could  nut  name  its  ingredients,  nor  state  tlie  method  of 
its  working;  or  as  a  man  may  journey  on  the  railway  who  comprehends  little  of  the 
application  of  steam  to  locomotives,  etc.  And  faith  is  content  tc  iubmit  to  QooL's 
righteotisness,  instead  of  seeking  to  establish  its  own.  It  relies  not  upon  personal 
desert,  but  upon  the  provisinns  of  niercy  furnished  in  Christ.  It  is  humble,  and  tries 
not  to  patch  together  a  human  garment  to  hide  delurmities  and  deficiencies.  Accepting 
the  gracious  offer  of  God,  laith  discovers  new  elements  of  strength  and  joy  in  the  very 
position  asaumed. — S.  R,  A. 

Vers,  8 — 10. — The  word  of  faith.    Men  are  quick  to  excuse  their  non-acceptance  ot 


CH.  X.  1— 21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  313 

Christianity.  In  order  to  obviate  the  pretence  of  the  gospel  being  a  system  complicated 
tu  examine  and  conform  to,  tbe  apo»tle  quotes  from  Deuteronomy  (using  the  passage 
in  a  justifiable,  though  altered  signification)  to  exhibit  the  simplicity  and  brevity  of 
the  gospel  requirements.  Nothing  impracticable  is  demanded  of  would-be  converts. 
Tiie  "  word  of  faith  "  is  close  at  hand  and  intelligible,  ready  to  be  uttered  and  trusted. 

I.  The  two  essentials  to  enjoyment  op  the  benefits  of  the  gospel.  Belief 
and  confession.  1.  Belief  naturally  precedes  confetp'ton,  if  the  latter  is  not  hypocrisy. 
Speech  on  religious  questions  that  is  not  the  utterijuce  of  a  deep-seated  conviction  is 
like  Aliimaaa  running  without  tidings  to  deliver.  An  untimely  avowal  should  be 
deprecated;  the  cpnfession  should  stream  forth  fiom  the  fountain  of  belief;  otherwise 
the  want  of  correspondence  between  the  outward  declaration  and  the  inward  assurance 
will  work  deadly  mischief.  Let  not  the  child's  Catechism  be  heavily  laden.  To 
sensitive  minds  the  gap  will  seem  to  widen  with  growing  intelligence,  and  they  will 
deem  the  alienation  from  the  early  standard  greater  than  it  is,  leading  perhaps  to  a 
position  of  ultimate  antagonism.  2.  The  essentials  are  few  in  numher.  Unlike  the 
minute  details  of  the  Mos;iic  ritufil,  the  law  of  Christ  is  short  and  easily  oompreheniled. 
This  apostolic  declaration  judges  oar  own  preaching  and  creed,  showing  that  we  are  in 
danger  uf  making  the  gate  ninower  and  the  road  longer  to  the  kingdom  than  Christ 
ordained  them.  The  tendency  of  hoary  Christianity  is  to  multiply  the  requisite 
articles  of  doctrine  and  observance,  making  the  initiation  burdensome,  the  novitiate 
cumbrous.  3.  On  the  other  hand,  less  than  the  apostle  insists  on  cannot  prove  a  bond 
of  Christian  fellowship.  Occasional  communion  there  may  be  between  those  who 
differ  respecting  the  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection,  each  recognizing  the  other's  sincerity 
and  desire  to  press  forward  to  the  light ;  but  experience  attests  the  impossibility  of 
enduring  religious  co-operation  on  a  slighter  basis  than  that  laid  down  in  the  text. 
Fundamental  divergence  of  ojiinion  curbs  free  utterance,  checks  the  fervour  of  prayer, 
makes  all  parties  uncomfortable  in  their  association. 

II.  The  fkoduct  op  FAiTa.  "  Eighteousness."  -Distinguish  between  the  assent  of 
the  understanding  and  the  trust  of  the  heart.  "  Believing  wilh  "  or  "  in  the  heart " 
not  only  accepts  the  resurrection  of  Christ  as  an  historical  fact,  but  sees  in  this  a 
spiritual  truth,  that  Christ  is  the  Mediator,  the  Redeemer,  able  and  willing  to  work  an 
ethical  resurrection  in  all  who  commit  themselves  to  his  care  and  tuition.  Such  a 
faith  rejoices  in  the  great  verity ;  the  will  gladly  submits  to  Jesus  Christ  as  Grod's 
approved  Agent  of  reconciliation.  And  thus  faith  imparts  righteousness,  connecting ' 
the  sinner  with  the  Saviour,  the  weak  with  the  Strong  One,  the  ignorant  with  the 
All-wise. 

III.  The  eesult  op  cokfession.  "Salvation."  As  human  nature  is  constituted, 
the  expression  of  a  sentiment  in  word  or  deed  lends  it  distinctness  and  potency.  What 
the  orator  does  for  the  multitude,  when  he  translates  into  glowing  language  their  vague 
aspirations  and  inarticulate  feelings,  clothing,  fixing,  clarifying,  and  intensifying  them, 
is  what  an  open  avowal  of  his  religious  faith  often  effects  for  the  individual.  It  dis- 
closes what  was  wrapped  up  in  the  inner  beino:,  and  the  embodiment  gives  place  and 
form  to  the  idea.  Sentiment  unexpressed  is  liable  to  fade  away  like  vapour  uncon- 
densed.  Confession  is  a  real  act;  it  makes  the  man  commit  himself  definitely  to  a 
certain  course  of  behaviour,  and  assists  him  to  realize  his  ideal.  Most  are  deficient  in 
moral  courage,  and  all  that  strengthens  determination  makes  for  salvation.  It  is 
easier  for  an  avowed  than  for  a  secret  disciple  of  Christ  to  refuse  to  yield  to  the 
solicitations  of  the  worldly,  to  join  them  in  unprofitable  amusements  and  practices. 
Then,  too,  confession  redounds  to  the  glory  of  God,  who  honours  them  that  honour  him. 
In  heaven  it  will  be  no  signal  tribute  to  own  him,  for  all  there  sing  his  praise.  On 
earth  is  a  sphere  of  distinction  possible  by  standing  up  for  the  true,  the  right,  the  good. 
And  so  Christ  promit.es  to  confess  those  who  have  confessed  him.  A  manly  declaration 
may  confirm  the  faith  of  wavering  brethren,  and  thus  save  ourselves  and  others. 
Timidity  which  seals  the  lips  is  a  sower  retaining  the  seed  in  his  bag,  and  allowing 
the  waiting  soil  to  go  unblessed  with  golden  crops. — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  12. — The  nature  and  beneficence  of  Ood.  Many  surface-distinctions  between 
llie  Jew  and  Greek  may  be  drawn  by  men,  but  none  are  recognized  by  God  in  such 
itise  as  to  incapacitate  some  members  of  the  race  for  seeking  salvation  at  hie  hands. 


314  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [ch.  x.  1— 21. 

The  text  furnishes  the  basis  for  such  a  statement  of  universal  salvability,  in  its  clear 
enunciation  of  the  nature  of  Gcd.  By  implication  it  negatives  many  theories  when  it 
asserts  that  "  the  same  Lord  is  Lord  of  all,"  and  the  following  clause  contains  measure- 
less comfort  for  every  anxious  praying  heart.    He  is  "  rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  him." 

I.  Some  ebrobs  cobbboted.  1.  Polytheism.  We  might  infer  the  truth  of 
monotheism  from  the  unity  of  structure  visible  in  the  world — ^its  inhabitants,  animals, 
and  plants ;  from  the  analogy  observable  in  different  kingdoms  of  nature ;  and  from 
the  existence  of  the  same  laws  operating  to  the  remotest  star.  And  the  Mosaic  Law 
distinctly  enforced  the  truth,  "  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord."  Nor  is  the  doctrine 
of  the  Trinity  in  unity  contradictory.  There  is  the  historical  fact  that  wherever 
Christianity  has  prevailed,  idolatry  has  been  doomed.  The  preaching  of  the  fishermen 
effected  whi^t  the  most  potent  arguments  of  Greek  philosophy  and  the  keenest  shafts 
of  ridicule  failed  to  accomplish.  2.  .Atheism.  This  is  the  other  extreme ;  instead  of 
many  gods,  no  God.  To  attribute  to  blind  force  and  fortuitous  collocation  of  atoms 
the  order  and  benuty  of  design  evident  in  nature  and  history,  is  to  posit  an  inefScient 
cause  for  the  effects  noted.  So  clearly  is  this  seen,  that  the  favourite  attitude  of 
many  is  to  avoid  definite  assertions,  and  content  themselves  with  saying,  "  We  cannot 
be  sure ;  we  cannot  attain  to  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  Unknowable  to  prompt  our 
worship."  This  is  practical  atheism,  imitated,  by  multitudes  who  do  not  deny  the 
authority  of  the  Scriptures,  or  reject  religion  on  speculati-ve  grounds,  yet  live  "  without 
God  in  the  world."  Remember  that  the  non-recognition  of  the  Deity  does  not  absolve 
from  religious  responsibility.  If  there  be  a  "  Lord  of  all,"  he  has  claims  upon  your 
service  which  will  not  vanish  because  of  your  pleasant  dreams  and  guilty  unconcern. 
3.  Pantheism.  He  is  Lord  "of,"  i.e.  "over"  all — a  living,  personal  God,  above  as  well 
as  in  nature.  He  is  not  to  be  identified  with  the  universe,  nor  with  his  operations. 
He  is  different  from  his  acts,  as  we  are  not  our  limbs,  our  deeds,  but  are  conscious  of 
a  living  will  behind  these  manifestations.  The  instinct  of  prayer  would  be  checked  at 
once  by  the  thought  of  "calling  upon"  an  abstraction  of  humanity  or  unintelligent 
matter.  4.  Socinianiam,  or  the  denial  of  the  Deity  of  Christ.  Few  stronger  passages 
could  be  adduced  than  those  in  the  context  to  assure  us  of  the  apostle's  conviction  of 
the  dignity  of  the  Saviour.  In  the  ninth  verse  we  are  taught  to  "confess  Jesus  as 
Lord,"  and  following  the  emphatic  language  of  the  text  comes  the  thirteenth  verse, 
where  the  prophecy  of  Joel  and  the  title  Jehovah  are  applied  to  Christ,  the  express 
subject  of  this  chapter.  All  doubt  as  to  the  reference  is  removed  by  the  question, 
"  How  shall  they  call  on  him  in  whom  they  have  not  believed  ? "  since  the  object  of 
our  faith  is  ever  represented  as  Christ,  the  manifested  God.  The  only  refuge  is  to 
deny  the  competency  and  inspiration  of  the  apostle,  and  then  we  do  not  get  rid  of  the 
other  Scripture  texts  which  speak  of  him  as  the  Creator  "  by  whom  all  things  were 
made,"  and  the  Judge  "  to  whom  all  authority  is  committed."  No  declaration  of  the 
relationship  of  the  Son  to  the  Father,  more  available  for  explanation  of  the  mystery, 
can  we  have  than  "  he  is  the  Image  of  the  invisible  God."  5.  Sectarianism,  or  Judaism 
as  a  system  of  rites,  the  embodiment  of  the  narrow  bigoted  spirit  which  will  admit 
only  certain  classes  within  its  pale.  Most  scornful  epithets  did  the  Jews  employ  with 
respect  to  the  unprivileged  state  of  the  rest  of  mankind ;  they  were  "  the  drops  of  the 
bucket,  the  offscouring  of  all  things."  But  if  the  whole  world  may  claim  the  same 
Lord,  one  family  dares  not  arrogate  to  itself  all  the  Divine  love  and  blessing.  What 
is  the  miserable  superiority  of  the  giant  to  the  dwarf  in  the  view  of  him  who  gazes 
from  the  mountain- top ?  The  regard  of  God  is  to  quality,  not  quantity;  he  wants  tk« 
pure  gold  of  repentance  and  obedience,  no  matter  with  what  ingredients  or  a.nid  what 
surroundings  it  may  be  found.  Jesus  Christ  taught  us  to  abolish  caste  by  the  petition, 
"  Our  Father."  In  the  present  condition  of  religious  knowledge  and  feeling,  sects  may 
be  convenient,  almost  necessary,  but  we  need  not  unchristianize  those  without  our 
borders,  nor  confine  our  view  of  salvation  to  those  who  utter  the  same  party  shibboleth. 

II.  A  TRUTH   OF   COMFORTABLE   IMPORT — THE   BEKEFICENCE  OF   GoD.      1.   Eis  Wealth 

permits  him  to  do  good  to  all.  The  slowly  passing  centuries  have  not  enabled  men  to 
find  out  the  extent  of  the  Divine  riches.  The  catalogue  is  exhaustless  that  is  being 
compiled  of  the  adaptations,  combinations,  resources,  with  which  the  Creator  has 
furnished  man's  hoSie.  Then,  whilst  the  microscope  reveals  innumerable  infinitesimal 
wonders,  the  telescope  discovers  countless  worlds.     And  the  apostle  delighted  in  the 


OH.  X.  1— 21.J    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  315 

use  of  the  word  "riches'"  to  describe  the  mercies  of  God  in  redemption.  He  felt  he 
had  to  publish  a  purpose  of  God  rich  in  wisdom,  love,  and  power,  dwarfing  all  human 
systems  of  reform.  The  Lord  of  Christianity  is  so  supremely  glorious,  that  it  was  a 
relief  to  turn  away  from  human  poverty  in  thought  and  means,  to  contemplate  "  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  hidden  in  Christ."  2.  He  is  rich  in  all  that  his 
oreaiv/rea  need.  Circumlocution  offices  abound  on  earth.  The  king  cannot  heal  the 
leper,  nor  the  doctor  give  legal  information  to  the  suitor,  nor  the  lawyer  be  expected 
to  head  the  subscription  list.  But  none  can  seek  Christ  in  vain  for  spiritual  wants. 
He  ii  rich  in  merqy  to  the  penitent  sinner,  and  to  the  believer  forgetful  of  his  early 
vows  he  is  rich  in  the  assurance  of  forgiveness  and  succour.  .The  disappointed  may 
find  him  an  unfailing  Hope,  the  bereaved  a  "God  of  all  consolation;"  to  the  tempted 
he  is  the  "  Way  of  escape,"  and  to  the  heated  with  the  struggle  of  life,  "  the  Shadow  of 
a  great  rock."  3.  A  benevolent  Lord.  "  Eich  unto  all."  Many  a  wealthy  man  is  not 
"  rich  unto  "  anybody  else — not  oven  unto  himself,  poor  niggardly  soul.  God  sits  not 
as  a  miser  gloating  over  his  goods,  or  as  a  king  ensconced  in  the  palace,  where  no  orj 
of  the  poor  or  of  the  anguished  can  reach  him.  He  delights  to  give ;  the  glory  of  God 
is  revealed  in  blessing  his  creatures.  Love  created,  sustains,  enriches,  the  universe. 
We  need  not  fear  coming  too  often  or  asking  too  largely.  We  shall  not  weary  his 
generosity,  or  appeal  too  late  to  his  exchequer  because  a  more  fortunate  applicant 
anticipated  our  request.  Invited  to  his  banquet,  he  will  not  thank  you  for  partaking 
scantily  of  the  rich  fare,  lest  you  should  trespass  on  his  bounty.  4.  The  one  restric- 
tion. Only  one  condition  is  to  be  fulfilled — that  we  "  call  upon  him."  This  is  but 
reasonable.  We  receive  daily  benefits  unasked,  but  in  the  concerns  of  the  soul  we  are 
treated  as  intelligent  beings,  as  children  whose  voice  the  Father  loves  to  hear.  The 
prayer  of  mingled  contrition  and  trust  purifies  and  exalts  the  suppliants,  honours  and 
gratifies  the  Donor  of  good.  The  character  of  the  petition  manifests  the  spiritual  state 
of  the  petitioner.  Set  the  desires  not  so  much  upon  the  promises  of  physical  relief  as 
of  spiritual  blessing,  not  so  much  the  removal  of  the  trial  as  strength  to  bear  it,  not  so 
much  the  extraction  of  the  thorn  as  grace  to  submit  patiently  and  to  see  wise  purposes 
subserved  by  the  infliction.  What  simpler  counsel  could  be  given  to  the  heavy-laden 
sinner  than  this,  "  call  upon  him  "  ?  Like  Peter  amid  the  waves,  cry  out,  "  Lord,  save 
me!"  and  Divine  help  shall  respond,  and  you  "shall  be  saved."  And  when  the  hour  of 
death  draws  nigh,  though  we  may  not  be  surrounded  by  taunting  foes,  and  no  cruel 
blows  may  hasten  our  departure,  yet,  like  the  dying  martyr,  we  may  pass  "  calling 
upon  the  Lord,  and  saying.  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit." — S.  B.  A. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Covfession  of  a  rinen  Savioitr.  In  the  previous  chapter  we  saw  a 
Christian  patriot  lamenting  that  so  many  of  his  fellow-countrymen,  through  rejecting 
God's  mercy  manifested  in  Christ  Jesus,  were  becoming  mere  vessels  of  wrath  fitted 
for  destruction.  At  the  same  time,  he  sees  in  Divine  sovereignty,  its  incidence  and 
its  justice,  the  real  clue  to  the  philosophy  of  history  and  the  progress  of  the  world. 
In  the  present  chapter  he  discusses  the  rejection  of  Israel  and  its  reasons,  and  the 
nature  of  that  acceptance  and  salvation  which  the  Gentiles  received  after  the  Jews  had 
despised  them.  In  the  verses  now  claiming  attention  we  have  the  apostle  leading  nds 
readers  up  to  faith  in  and  confession  of  a  risen  Saviour. 

I.  The  misdirected  zeal  op  the  apostle's  countetmen.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  The 
apostle's  desire  and  "  supplication "  (so  Revised  Version)  for  the  Jews  was  that  they 
might  be  saved.  But,  alas  1  their  misdirected  zeal  was  preventing  their  salvation.  For 
instead  of  submitting  to  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God,  instead  of  making  their 
way  to  Christ,  who  is  the  End  to  whom  the  Law  when  properly  understood  leads,  they 
were  going  about  with  the  one  object  of  establishing  their  own  righteousness.  This 
zeal  Paul  knew  himself  experimentally  For  years  he  also  had  aimed  at  Law-keeping, 
and  in  his  self-ignorance  he  thought  that  "  touching  the  righteousness  which  is  in  the 
Law"  he  was  "  blameless ''(Phil.  iii.  6).  But  the  Law-keeping  may  be  in  the  letter 
and  not  in  the  spirit.  The  spirit  of  the  Law  is  love;  yet  Paul  and  the  Pharisees  tithed 
mint  and  anise  and  cummin,  while  they  lived  lives  of  hate,  and  hesitated  not  to 
persecute  Christ-like  people  even  to  the  death.  To  keep  self-righteousness  before  the 
Boul  as  the  end  of  life  is  simply  misdirected  zeal.  It  keeps  us  away  from  Christ  and 
all  the  bliss  which  his  fellow  hip  implies.    And  so  a  day  came  when  Paul  saw  that 


316  THE   EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh,  x.  1—21 

his  roundabout  way,  going  about  to  establish  bis  own  righteousness,  was  a  delusion,  a 
snare,  a  loss,  and  not  a  gain,  for  it  kept  him  long  years  from  Christ.  Let  ua  be  clear 
that  we  are  not  under  a  similar  delusion.  Let  us  give  up  self-righteousness  and  take 
Gtod's  better  way. 

II.  A  RISEN  Saviour  is  the  End  or  the  Law  and  Object  of  faith.  (Ver.  4.) 
Now,  the  moment  we  are  led  to  take  a  spiritual  view  of  God's  Law,  to  see  that  it 
demands  perfect  motive  as  well  as  decent  outward  morality,  we  see  that  we  cannot 
beep  it  in  its  length  and  breadth ;  and  therefore,  instead  of  living  by  Law-keeping,  we 
are  condemned  by  the  Law  as  its  transgressors.  Self-righteousness  is  seen  to  bu  self- 
deception.  Condemnation  is  seen  to  be  our  natural  state.  Then  is  it  that  Christ  and 
his  perfect  righteousness  dawn  upon  our  condemned  and  polluted  souls.  We  see  that 
he  has  done  for  us  wliat  we  cannot  do  for  ourselves,  and  so  the  Law  serves  its  purpose 
when  it  lays  us  down  at  the  feet  of  Christ,  to  be  justified  by  faith.  Instead  of  trusting 
our  own  righteousness,  we  see  in  our  risen  Saviour  the  true  Object  of  faith  and  Source 
of  righteousness.     We  pass  out  of  shame  into  confidenice  in  his  finished  work.* 

III.  This  eisen  Saviouk  is  easily  found.  (Vers.  6 — 9.)  The  idea  of  the  human 
heart  is  that  by  some  prodigious  effort  salvation  must  be  secured.  Abana  and  Pharpar 
are  further  off,  as  well  as  likelier  livers,  than  this  brawling  Jordan  hard  by,  and  so 
Naaman  cries  out,  "  May  I  not  wash  in  them,  and  be  clean  ? "  Only  ask  us  to  do 
soiiic  great  thing  in  order  to  salvation,  and  our  self-righteousness  will  be  secured,  and 
we  shall  be  satisfied  (of.  2  Kings  v.  12, 13).  A  far-off  salvation  suits  man's  taste  the 
best.  Set  it  in  heaven,  and  he  will  rack  his  brains  for  some  ingtuious  device  by 
which  he  will  fly  away  and  be  at  rest.  Set  it  beyond  the  sea,  and  boats  will  be  built 
and  the  voyage  imdertaken  with  alacrity  (cf.  Deut.  xxx.  11 — 13).  Make  salvation  to 
consist  in  a  bringing  of  Christ  down  from  above,  and  men  like  'Titans  will  try  to  scale 
Olympus.  Make  salvation  to  consist  in  a  descent  to  the  lower  world  to  bring  Christ 
up  from  the  dead,  and  many  will  try  a  journey  like  Orpheus  after  the  lost  Burydice, 
to  bring  the  Saviour  from  the  shadows.  But  we  have  got  to  see  that  the  risen  Saviour 
is  not  so  far  away  or  so  hard  to  find  as  this.  As  Charles  Kingsley  once  wrote  to  a 
lady,  "  My  object  has  been  and  is,  and  I  trust  in  God  ever  will  be,  to  make  people  see 
that  they  need  not,  as  St.  Paul  says,  go  up  into  heaven,  or  go  down  to  the  deep,  to 
find  Christ ;  because  he,  the  Word  whom  we  preach,  is  very  near  them,  in  their  hearts 
and  on  their  lips,  if  they  would  but  believe  it ;  and  ready,  not  to  set  them  afloat  on 
new  and  untried  oceans  of  schemes  and  projects,  but  ready  to  inspire  them  to  do  their 
duty  humbly  and  simply  where  he  has  put  them — and,  believe  me,  the  only  way  to 
regenerate  the  world  is  to  do  the  duty  which  lies  nearest  us,  and  not  to  hunt  after 
grand,  far-fetched  ones  for  ourselves."  '  In  the  Word  of  the  gospel  the  risen  Saviour 
comes  near  to  every  one  of  us.  We  do  not  require  any  prodigious  effort  to  reach  him. 
We  have  simply  to  open  the  eye  of  faith,  and  there  he  is. 

IV.  The  risen  Saviour  must  be  confessed  when  found.  (Vers.  10,  11.)  Faith 
in  a  risen  Saviour  who  is  waiting  to  be  found  of  us  must  prove  its  genuineness  by  the 
confession  of  his  Name.  It  is  when  we  take  the  Lord's  side  deliberately  that  we  have 
tested  the  reality  of  our  faith.  There  is  a  qowardly  tendency  to  believe,  but  not  con- 
fess ;  to  get  the  benefits  of  salvation  without  running  a  single  risk  for  our  Saviour. 
But  such  a  selfish,  easy-going  faith  is  mere  delusion.  Whoever  really  believes  in 
Jesus  will  not  be  ashamed  to  coufess  him.  And  consequently  we  are  encouraged  first 
to  believe  that  God  raised  Jesus  from  the  dead,  and  then  to  coufess  him  as  our  risen 
Saviour  before  men.  There  is  undoubtedly  a  disposition  to  separate  salvation  from 
confession  of  Christ.  It  is  thought  to  be  wise  and  [)riideiit  to  accept  of  the  benefits 
Christ  can  offer,  and  at  the  same  time  to  be  silent  about  them.  "  Secret  disoipleship  " 
is  thought  to  be  a  masterpiece  of  wisdom.  Everything  is  thus  gained,  and  nothing 
risked  or  lost.  But  is  everything  gained  ?  Is  nothiiig  risked  or  lost  ?  Is  the  secret 
disciple  ever  likely  to  become  a  man  of  nobility  and  courage  ?  Does  he  secure  even 
self-respect  ?  Must  he  not  feel  very  much  as  a  debtor  who  is  always  trying  to  shirk 
bis  obligations  and  ignore  the  debt?  Or  take  the  matter  in  the  concrete.  Was 
Nicodemus  noble  as  he  visited  Jesus  by  night,  and  kept  his  disoipleship  a  secret  from 

'  See  Kingsley's  striking  sermon  on  "Shame,"  in  hig  'Sermons  for  the  Times,'  2ad  edit, 
p.  231,  etc. 
»  Cf.  Charles  Kingsley's  'Life,'  i.  p.  431. 


CH.  X.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMAKS.  817 

the  Sanhedrin  ?  Was  Joseph  of  Arimathsea  nohle  as  he  gave  his  heart  to  the  despised 
Saviour,  but  continued  afraid  to  confess  him ?  Neithei  man  became  noble  until  the 
Crucifixion  brought  decision,  and  they  vied  with  each  other  what  respect  they  could 
show  to  the  remains  of  their  great  Master.  Or  would  Sanl  of  Tarsus  have  ever  become 
.  the  noble  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  if  he  had  sneaked  into  Damascus  after  his  conversion, 
and  resolved  to  risk  nothing  for  his  new-found  Saviour?  The  manly  character  which 
Saul  cultivated  by  confessing  Christ  was  an  infinite  gain.  It  thus  appears  that  con- 
fession of  Christ  is  the  wise  test  of  the  reality  of  our  faith  in  him.  May  we  all  Btand 
the  test,  and  not  be  asliamed  of  him  ! — R.  M.  E. 

Vera.  12^21. —  The  natural  history  of  faith.  From  an  account  of  the  plan  of 
salvation  as  faith  in  and  confession  of  a  risen  Saviour,  the  apostle,  in  the  verses  now 
before  us,  proceeds  to  consider  the  natural  history  of  the  faith  which  Jew  and  Gentile 
are  led  to  place  in  the  one  Lord.  For  it  is  most  important  to  know  how  faith  is 
induced.     And  here  we  notice — 

I.  The  risen  Loed  is  within  bveey  one's  call.  (Vers.  12,  13.)  There  is  no 
difference  in  his  accessibility  to  both  Jew  and  Gentile.  "He  is  rich  unto  all  that  call 
upon  him."  With  the  sovereigns  -of  this  world  court-favourites  are  the  rule,  and  I 
suppose  there  is  no  exception.  Only  certain  individuals  get  near  the  king,  and  are 
favoured  with  an  audience.  But  this  risen  Lord  over  all  can  be  rich  unto  every  one 
that  cares  to-call  upon  him.  Let  Jew  or  Greek  only  cry  to  him,  and  the  needful  help 
will  come.  This  suggests  the  following  comforting  thoughts.  1.  The  throne  on  which 
our  Lord  now  sits  is  a  throne  of  grace.  He  is  to  sit,  indeed,  one  day  on  a  throne  of 
judgment;  meanwhile  let  us  rejoice  that  he  sits  on  a  "  throne  of  grace."  It  is  to  help 
the  needy  and  the  lost  that  he  now  sits  enthroned.  We  are  now  under  a  "  reign  of 
fi;race."  We  hear  a  good  deal  in  the  present  day  of  a  "  reign  of  law : "  what  consolation 
it  is  to  think  that,  so  far  as  Christ  is  concerned,  we  are  all  under  a  "  reign  of  grace  " ! 

2.  He  can  hear  directly  every  one  that  calls  upon  him.  Of  course,  such  a  fact  implies 
that  our  risen  Saviour  is  indeed  Divine.  By  virtue  of  his  Divinity,  he  can  hear 
everybody,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  who  cares  to  call  upon  him,  and  can  deal 
directly  with  them.  The  many-voiced  cry  of  lost  and  tempted  souls  reaches  his  ear 
and  is  all  interpreted.  It  is  easy  to  state  the  case  of  Christ  hearing  prayer,  but  it  is 
overwhelming  to  imagine  what  such  an  arrangement  demands  from  the  blessed  Being 
u[on  the  throne.  Yet  it  is  sober  fact — the  whole  cry  of  the  race,  the  bitter  cry  of 
lost  and  tried  souls,  enters  the  sympathizing  mind  of  our  Divine  Saviour  and  King. 

3.  Be  is  rich  to  all  the  petitioners.  Just  as  when  on  earth  he  allowed  no  one  to  go 
empty  away,  so  from  his  throne  of  grace  on  high  theie  is  no  real  petitioner  dismissed 
without  relief.  He  encourages  Jew  and  Gentile  alike  to  call  upon  him,  and  then  treats 
us  in  a  way  that  becomes  a  King.  He  does  far  more  "  exceeding  abundantly  for  us 
above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,  according  to  the  power  that  worketh  in  us."  If  we  ask 
him  to  save  us,  he  does  so  with  an  everlasting  salvation.  If  we  ask  him  to  pardon  us, 
he  does  so  with  overflowing  love.  If  we  ask  him  to  sanctify  us,  he  enables  us  to  die 
daily  unto  sin  and  to  live  unto  righteousness.  If  we  ask  him  to  make  us  useful,  he 
opens  doors  of  usefulness  for  us  of  the  most  surprising  character.  In  short,  "  Bye  hath 
not  seen,  nor  ear  heaid,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which 
God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him.  But  he  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by 
kig  Spirit "  (1  Cor.  ii.  9,  10). 

II.  But  an  omnipresent  Saviour  needs  the  beautiful  feet  or  his  hebalds 

TO  BE  UPON  ALL  THE  MOUNTAINS  IF  MEN  ARE  TO  KNOW  HIS  NEARNESS.      (VerS.  14,  15.) 

We  have  seen  that  the  risen  Saviour  is  within  every  one's  call.  But  he  is  not  palpable 
to  sense.  He  is  unseen.  His  presence  is  spiritual.  Only  by  heralds  going  forth  to 
proclaim  the  glad  tidings  of  his  presence  are  men  led  to  call  upon  him.  And  the 
heralds  address  the  ears  of  men.  By  this  particular  avenue  of  hearing  does  the 
message  come.  If  men  never  hear  of  Jesus,  they  cannot  be  expected  to  realize  his 
presence  or  to  trust  him.  And  so  a  propaganda  is  necessary,  and  the  missionary 
enterprise  is  just  such  a  propaganda  to  bring  before  Jew  and  Gentile  the  splendid  fact 
that  a  risen  Saviour  is  within  each  man's  call.  The  natural  history  of  faith  is,  then, 
this :  "'  Faith '-^tbe  faith  which,  overcoming  the  world,  justifies  and  purifies  and  saves 
— '  Cometh  by  hearing,'  comrith  in  the  way  of  communication  from  man  to  man,  aa 


318  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  x.  1—21. 


distinguished  from  any  natural  reflective  enlightenment ;  while  that  '  hearing  cometh 
by  the  Word  of  God,'  ariseth  out  of  an  express  revelation  uttered  from  heaven,  in  con- 
trast to  every  system,  device,  or  imagiuation  of  unassisted  human  reason."*  This 
being  so,  we  can  understand  how  the  apostle  quotes  the  rapturous  words  of  the  prophet 
about  the  beautiful  feet  of  the  heralds  of  glad  tidings.  The  institution  of  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  is  the  most  beautiful  now  existing  among  men. 

III.  The  glad  tidings  have  not  had  a  univbbsai,  keception.  (Vers.  16 — 18.) 
In  some  cases  the  heralds  have  had  small  success.  As  Esaias  cries,  "  Lord,  who  hath 
believed  our  report?"  bo  has  many  a  minister  lamented  his  scant  success.  For,  amid 
the  multitude  of  competing  things  and  persons  palpable  to  sense,  an  unseen  Saviour 
gets  ignored  by  many.  The  problem  was  not,  in  the  missionary  age  of  Paul,  as  to  many 
not  hearing  of  a  Saviour  at  all — rather  was  it  that  so  many  heard  of  him,  yet  gave  no 
heed.  For  the  apostle  in  this  passage  quotes  what  in  the  nineteenth  psalm  is  applied 
to  nature,  as  if  the  gospel  message,  at  least  in  his  day,  had  been  as  widely  proclaimed  as 
the  limits  of  the  world  allowed.  And  when  we  consider  the  population  of  the  world 
in  Paul's  time,  and  how  it  was  practically  within  the  grasp  of  the  Eoman  empire,  and 
that  information  filtered  down  to  the  distant  colonies  more  surely  perhaps  than,  though 
not  so  speedily  as,  news  does  nowadays;  and  when  we  add  to  this  the  magnificent 
missionary  spirit  which  animated  Paul  and  his  associates,  he  had  reason  to  take  up 
the  universal  terms  and  apply  them  to  the  propagation  of  the  gospel.  So  that  the 
gospel  was  more  .widely  proclaimed  in  the  first  century  in  proportion  to  the  population 
of  the  globe  than  it  is  as  yet  in  the  nineteenth.  The  contrast  which  now  obtains 
between  the  revelation  of  God  in  nature  and  the  revelation  of  God  in  the  gospel  in 
their  respective  relations  to  mankind — the  one  being  universal,  the  other  partial  in  its 
application — ^has  been  largely,  if  not  entirely,  due  to  the  lack  of  enterprise  and  mis- 
sionary spirit  on  the  part  of  the  Church.  And  yet  too  much  may  be  made  of  this 
contrast,  and  men  may  fail  to  see  that  the  proclamation  of  a  revealed  religion  is  tL« 
one  way  in  which  God  is  likely  to  receive  attention  from  his  creatures.  The  following 
quotation  from  Archer  Butler  upon  the  point  will  be  welcome.  "If  God  were  to 
interfere  at  all,  they  [the  deists]  maintain,  it  wotdi  be  by  some  universal  agency, 
simple,  general,  and  obvious,  as  the  laws  of  his  visible  creation.  They  smUe  at  the 
notion  of  God's  greatest  exhibition  of  his  will  to  man  being  acted  upon  the  reduced 
theatre  of  a  petty  province,  and  made  dependent  on  the  chances  of  human  testimony. 
'  In  the  moral  as  in  the  physical  world,'  exclaims  the  leader  of  the  sentimental  school 
of  deism, '  it  is  ever  on  a  great  scale,  and  by  simple  means,  that  Deity  operates.'  But 
what  if  we  retort  that  it  is  those  very  laws  of  nature  '  on  a  great  scale ' — those  very 
'simple  means' — that  have  caused  God  to  be  forgotten?  Not  justly,  we  admit;  for 
they  ought  eminently  to  have  convinced  men  of  his  presence  and  power :  but  what  of 
that  ?  We  are  not  now  speaking  of  argumentative  propriety,  but  of  actual  fact ;  not 
of  man  as  he  ought  to  be,  but  of  man  as  he  is.  And  it  is  an  undeniable  fact  that  it  is 
the  peimanence  and  uniformity  of  the  natural  laws  of  the  creation  that  have  beguiled 
men  into  speculative,  and,  still  more,  into  practical  atheism ;  that  it  is  the  very  per- 
fection of  the  laws  which  has  hidden  the  Legislator.  The  hand  that  God  has  constructed 
so  wondrously  can  write,  '  There  is  no  God  ; '  let  it  be  smit  with  sudden  paralysis,  and 
the  notion  of  an  intervening  Avenger  will  arise ;  nay,  let  us  at  any  timy  behold  some 
strange  unique  in  any  of  the  departments  of  expeiience,  and  it  startles  our  habitual 
slumber.  That  is  to  say,  as  long  as  the  work  is  perfect,  we  recognize  no  worker  ;  but 
the  moment  it  becomes  deficient  (the  very  thing  which  ought  logically  to  produce  the 
doubt),  we  begin  to  conceive  and  admit  his  reality.  The  more  apparently  capricious 
the  works  of  nature,  the  more  they  resemble  man's ;  and  the  more  they  remind  us  of 
direct  agency  analogous  to  the  human.  N«w,  if  this  be  so,  could  it  be  expected  that, 
to  produce  an  acknowledgment  of  his  being  and  attributes,  the  Deity  would  continue 
to  employ  the  same  medium  of  regular  and  ordinary  laws,  the  same  vast  and  uniform 
processes  in  the  physical  and  moral  world,  which  in  all  ages  have  tended  (such  the 
miserable  subjection  of  man  to  an  unreasoning  imagination)  to  render  his  agency 
suspected  by  some,  and  practically  forgotten  by  the  many  ?  To  make  himself  felt 
he  must  distivrh  his  laws;  in  other  words,  he  must  perform  or  permit '  miracles.'  But 
then  he  must  likewise  exhibit  them  sparingly,  as,  if  they  continued  to  appear  on 

•  Cf.  Archer  Butler's  '  Sermons,'  vol.  i.  p.  393. 


CH.  xtl— 36.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


319 


assignable  principles  of  stated  recurrence,  and  in  definite  cycles,  nay,  if  they  appeared 
freqiiently,  though  unfixedly, — they  would  enter,  or  seem  to  enter,  into  the  procession 
of  the  laws  of  nature,  and  thus  lose  their  proper  use  and  character.  What  follows  1 
It  follows  that  miracles  cannot'  be  presented  to  every  successive  age,  far  less  to  each 
individual  person ;  they  must,  then,  be  presented  only  to  some  particular  age  or  ages, 
and  to  some  particular  personal  witnesses.  But  we  have  seen  that  they  ought  to  be 
publicly  and  continually  known;  therefore  (there  being  but  one  way  of  transmitting 
past  events  to  present  times)  revealed  religion  and  the  knowledge  of  God,  which  we 
have  seen  is  only  thus  to  be  practically  and  influentially  attained,  must  be  dependent 
upon  human  testimony.  There  is  no  step  of  this  deduction  which  might  not  be  made 
by  a  man  who  had  never  heard  of  any  actual  revelation  having  been  given  to  man ;  it 
is  purposely  built  upon  the  simplest  principles  of  our  common  nature.  .  .  .  This  seems 
to  me  to  amount  to  something  not  unlike  demonstration,  that  a  traditional  revelation, 
built  on  testimony  transmitted  from  man  to  man — that  is,  of  a  Bible  and  sermon 
religioiji — far  from  being  improbable  (as  the  impugners  of  an  '  historical  creed '  so 
eloquently  insist),  is  actually  the  form  of  religion  imperatively  demanded  by  the  very 
structure  of  human  nature." ' 

IV.  The  eecbption  of  the  gospel  bt  the  Gentiles  has  been  providentially 
ORDERED  AS  A  STIMULUS  TO  THE  Jews.  (Vers.  19 — 21.)  The  faith  which  has  come 
by  hearing  the  gospel  to  the  Gentile  nations  was  intended  to  rouse  to  holy  jealouSy 
the  unbelieving  Jews.  The  one  section  of  mankind  has  been  and  is  being  played  off 
against  the  other  in  the  all-wise  providence  of  God.  And  nothing  is  more  certain  than 
that  the  Jews  shall  yet  surrender  to  the  claims  of  our  risen  Saviour,  and  enter  the 
Christian  Church  as  obedient  followers  of  the  once  crucified  but  now  exalted  Messiah. 
Let  us,  then,  have  confidence  in  our  Lord,  not  only  regarding  our  personal  salvation, 
but  also  regarding  the  ingathering  of  the  nations. — B.  M.  E, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XI. 


Vers.  I — 36. — (4)  The  Jews  are  not  finally 
rejected,  but,  through  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles, 
will  he  brought  into  the  Church  ai  last.  St. 
Paul,  painfully  recognizing  the  fact  of  the 
present  exclusion  of  Israel  as  a  nation  from 
the  inheritance  of  the  promises  made  to 
their  fathers,  and  having  in  ch.  ix.  and  x. 
accounted  for  and  justified  such  exclusion, 
proceeds  now  to  the  question — But  is  Israel 
as  a  nation  finally  rejected  after  all?  He 
answers— No;  impossible!  God's  ancient 
covenant  with  his  people  stands ;  the  rem- 
nant of  believers  even  now  is  a  sign  of  his 
continued  favour  to  his  ancient  people,  as 
was,  in  the  time  of  Elijah,  the  remnant  that 
had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal ;  nor  does 
the  fact  of  its  being  a  remnant  only  imply 
now,  any  more  than  then,  that  the  nation  as 
such  is  cast  off;  and  further,  the  calling  of 
the  Gentiles,  far  from  being  intended  to  ex- 
clude God's  ancient  people,  will  be  the 
means  eventually  of  bringing  it  wholly  In. 
Buch  is  the  apostle's  prophetic  vision  of  the 


future,  in  view  of  which  he  bursts  at  the 
end  of  the  chapter  into  glowing  admiration 
of  the  inscrutable  ways  of  God.  In  the 
course  of  it  also  (vers.  17 — 25)  he  introduces 
a  warning  to  Gentile  believers  not  to  pride 
themselves  against  the  Jews  because  of  pre- 
sent preference  to  them,  or  to  regard  their 
own  position  of  privilege  as  indefeasible. 
It  must  still  be  borne  in  mind  that  it  is  the 
position  before  God  of  Israel  as  u  nation 
that  is  all  along  in  view. 

Vers.  1 — 6.— I  say  then,  Hath  God  oast 
away  his  people  ?  God  forbid.  Tor  I  also 
am  an  IsraeUte,  of  the  seed  of  Abraham, 
of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  God  hath  not 
oast  away  his  people  which  he  foreknew  (or, 
predetermined.  See  the  same  word,  oh.  viii. 
29).  Wot  ye  not  what  the  Scripture  saith 
of  (rather,  in;  I.e.  in  the  passage  concern- 
ing) Ellas  1  how  he  maketh  intercession  to 
God  against  Israel  saying,  lord,  they  have 
killed  thy  prophets,  and  digged  down  thine 
altars ;  and  I  am  left  alone,  and  they  seek 
my  life.  But  what  saith  the  answer  of  God 
(i  xpw'''"''l"'s)  denoting  a  Divine  communi" 
cation  to  man ;  in  this  case  by  the  "  still 
small  voice."    Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 


'  '  Sermons,'  vol.  i.  pp.  395—397. 


S20 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS,    [oh.  xi.  1—36, 


ment;  bnt  cf.  Matt.  ii.  12,  XptiiMTtaeevTet 
KWT  ivaa  ;  also  Luke  ii.  26;  Aots  x.  22; 
Heb.  viii.  5 ;  zi.  7)  unto  him  %  I  have  left 
to  myself  seven  thousand  men,  who  have 
not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal.  Even  so  at 
this  present  time  also  there  is  a  remnant 
acoordingr  to  the  election  of  grace.  The 
usual  interpretation  of  this  whole  passage, 
and  notably  that  of  the  ancients,  has  been  to 
take  the  proof  of  God  not  having  cast  off 
his  people  as  beginning  in  ver.  1,  with  "  for 
I  also,"  etc.,  and  all  the  rest  to  be  in  se- 
quence. Chrysostom's  explanation  of  the 
argument  is  to  the  following  effect :  God 
has  not  rejected  his  ancient  people;  for  I 
myself  am  eminently  of  it;  and  I  have  been 
selected  as  a  chief  proolaimer  and  expounder 
of  the  gospel  to  the  world ;  this  would  not 
have  been  the  case  if  the  nation  had  been 
cast  off.  But  it  may  be  said  to  me,  "  You  are 
only  one  of  the  ancient  people ;  you  are  not 
the  people."  Nay,  but  I  do  not  stand  alone ; 
there  are  thousands  of  Israelite  believers  as 
well  as  myself;  and  these  are  God's  true 
people,  the  people  whom  he  foreknew.  And 
of  them  there  may  be  more  than  we  are  aware 
of ;  it  is  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Blias ;  he 
had  supposed  himself  to  be  left  alone ;'  but  he 
was  told  that  there  were  seven  thousand  with 
liim  who  were  God's  true  people  still.  And  so 
now,  there  is  a  faithful  remnant,  the  number 
of  which  is  known  to  God  alone,  which  is 
his  people  still,  according  to  the  election  of 
grace.  The  same  Father  further  understands 
the  citation  of  the  whole  of  the  passage 
from  1  Kings  xix.  14,  though  not  required 
for  the  apostle's  proof,  to  be  intended  as  sig- 
nificant. It  would  have  sufficed,  he  says, 
to  cite  only  what  was  said  about  a  remnant 
being  left ;  but  the  whole  complaint  of  Elias 
is  cited,  so  as  to  show  by  the  way  that  the 
present  rejection  of  Christ  and  persecution 
of  the  Church  by  the  majority  of  the  Jews 
had  also  its  counteipart  in  ancient  times; 
and  thus  the  apostle,  he  says,  \av9av6vTas 
riiv  KaTTijoplav  alrav  (i.e.  of  the  unbeliev- 
ing Jews)  oCJei.  It  is  to  be  observed  that 
the  above  interpretation  of  the  passage, 
which  in  its  main  points  has  been  most 
generally  adopted,  goes  on  two  supposi- 
tions; viz.  that  "for  I  also,"  in  ver.  1,  is 
the  first  part  of  the  proof  that  Israel  is  not 
cast  off;  and  that  "which  he  foreknew," 
in  ver.  2,  is  intended  as  a  limitation  of  the 
meaning  of  "his  people."  According  to 
another  view,  decidedly  upheld  by  Meyer, 
"for  I  also  "  is  not  part  of  the  proof,  but 
connected  f)\t\i  i).^  jiyon  o:  "I  must  needs  say, 
God  forbid  1  being  myself  a  Hebrew  of  the 
Hebrews."  Then,  according  to  this  view, 
comes  the  positive  statement  that  God  Aog 
not  cast  off  his  people  in  the  game  general 
sense  as  before,  after  which  the  proof  begins ; 
the  addition  of  tv  iipocypai  nut  being  a  limi- 


tation of  t6v  \air  aiirav,  but  intended  to 
enforce  the  idea  of  the  impossibility  of 
the  final  rejection  of  the  race  of  Israel 
(of.  ver.  29 ;  also  Ps.  xciv.  14  and  1  Sam. 
xii.  22).  The  fact  that,  throughout  the 
chapter,  it  is  Israel  as  a  nation  that  is  in 
view,  and  that  the  coming  of  the  whole 
nation  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  con- 
templated iu  the  end,  adds  decided  pro- 
bability to  this  view  of  the  significance  of  bv 
irpoiyiiu,  though  koI  yap  4yi>,  etc.,  in  ver.  1, 
may  still  be  regarded  as  possibly  part  of  the 
proof.  St.  Paul's  designation  of  himself  as 
"  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  "  seems  meant  to 
express  that  he  was  an  Israelite  of  pure  de- 
scent, not  a  proselyte  or  descended  from 
proselytes.  In  Phil.  iii.  5,  as  well  as  here, 
lie  specifies  his  tribe  as  that  of  Benjamiu, 
the  2ribe  that  with  Judah  had  clung  to  the 
house  of  David,  and  had  shared  the  privi- 
leges of  Judah.  The  quotation  &om  1 
Kings  xix.  is  given  freely  from  the  LXX., 
varying  a  little,  but  not  so  as  to  affect  the 
meaning.  One  variation  is  in  the  feminine, 
instead  of  masculine,  article  before  BdaK, 
which  has  been  explained  by  supposing 
e(K(fvi  understood  (so  in  the  Authorized 
Version,  "  the  image  of  Baal "),  or  by  there 
having  been  a  female  Baal,  or  by  the  god 
having  been  supposed  androgynous,  or  by 
the  feminine  being  used  of  idols  in  con- 
tempt. St.  Paul  may  possibly  have  found 
this  reading  in  his  copy  of  the  LXX.  The 
variation  is  of  no  importance  with  regard  to 
the  drift  of  the  passage.  "  According  to  the 
election  of  grace,"  at  the  end  of  ver.  5,  does 
not  seem  to  be  directly  suggested  by  the 
passage  cited,  but  added  by  St.  Paul  so  as 
to  make  plain  his  position — maintained 
throughout  the  Epistle,  and  about  to  be 
pressed  in  this  chapter  on  the  consideration 
of  Gentile  Christians — that  the  calling  of 
all,  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles, is  "of  grace," 
and  not  claimable  as  of  right  by  any  on  the 
ground  of  the  merit  of  their  own  works.  And 
iu  order  to  enforce  tliis  position,  he  adds.  And 
if  by  grace,  then  is  it  no  more  of  works :  other- 
wise grace  is  no  more  grace ;  i.e._  the  word 
"  gruoe  "  loses  its  essential  meaning.  [But  if 
of  works,  then  is  it  no  more  grace :  otherwise 
work  is  no  more  work,]  The  preponderance 
of  ancient  authorities  is  against  the  retention 
of  the  clause  within  brackets,  which  does  not 
seem  required.  It  is  the  same  as  in  ch.  iv.  4. 
Ver.  7.— What  then?  (What  is  the  present 
state  of  things  ?)  That  which  Israel  seeketh 
for  (t.e.  SiKaia(7^»)i< ;  cf.  ch.  ix.  30,  31)  he 
hath  not  obtained;  but  the  election  {i.e.  the 
elect  of  the  Gentiles,  with  a  remnant  only 
of  the  Jews — ^  ixXoy^  being  abstr.  pro 
conoret.,  like  ^  trepiToni),  i)  aKpopuaria,  else- 
where) hath  obtained  it,  and  the  rest  were 
hardened  (iirapiie-nirav).  The  verb  denotes 
callousness   rather  than  blindness,  usually 


DH.  XI.  1—36.]    THE  EPISTLE  OB    PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


321 


in  the  New  Testament  referring  to  the  heart 
(of.  especially  John  xii.  40,  liTiipKaKev 
ai/Tat>  Tobs  6(l>6a\/jLobSi  Koi  TreTrdpwKev  avrccv 
tV  KaoSiav').  And  such  hardening  is  no 
new  and  strange  thing,  or  to  be  taken  ns 
implying  failure  of  God's  promises  to  his 
people ;  for  it '  is  but  what  Scripture  tells 
us  of. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — According  as  it  is  written, 
God  gave  them  a  spirit  of  slumber  (rather, 
stupor.  The  word  is  Karavu^is,  cited  from 
Isa.  xxix.  10  in  the  LXX.  Of.  Ps.  Ix.  3, 
where  the  LXX.  has  ohoi/  KaravJ^eois.  It 
is  from  the  verb  KaTuvitrcreiv,  which  means 
properly  "  to  prick  "  (see  Acts  ii.  37,  kote- 
vuyr]iTav  rp  KapSi^).  The  noun  seems  to  have 
got  its  sense  as  above  from  the  idea  of 
a  pricking  shook,  causing  stupefaction), 
eyes  that  they  should  not  see,  and  ears 
that  they  should  not  hear,  unto  this  day. 
And  David  saith,  Let  their  table  be  made 
a  snare,  and  a  trap,  and  a  stumbling-block, 
and  a  recompense  unto  them.  Let  their  eyes 
be  darkened,  that  they  may  not  see,  and  bow 
down  their  back  alway.  The  references  in 
ver.  8  are  a  combination  of  Dent.  xxix.  3 
and  Isa.  xxix.  10,  quoted  freely  from  tlie 
LXX. ;  that  in  ver.  9  is  to  Ps.  Ixix.  23,  24, 
also  quoteil  freely.  (For  similar  combination 
and  free  quotation  of  texts,  so  as  to  bring 
out  Old  Testament  ideas,  cf.  ch.  iii.  10 — 19; 
ix.  32,  33.)  It  is  not  necessary  that  -tlie 
passages  here  referred  to  should  be  regarded 
as  directly  prophetic  of  the  time  of  Christ. 
It  is  enough  for  the  purpose  of  the  argument 
that  God's  people  should  be  shown  to  be 
liable  to  the  state  of  stupefaction  desoribel, 
without  ceasing  to  be  his  people.  And  so 
the  thought,  which  has  been  in  view  all 
along,  is  now  taken  up,  of  the  present 
hardening  of  Israel  as  a  nation  not  being 
intended  to  be  permanent. 

Vers.  11,  12. — I  say  then,  Have  they 
stumbled  that  they  should  fall }  i.e.  in  such 
wise  as  to  fall,  rightly  given  in  the  Vulgate 
as  sic  ut  caderent.  There  is  no  need  here 
to  press  the  lelic  use  of  'Iva  in  'ha  iriaaai, 
so  as  to  require  the  translation,  "  that  they 
might  fall."  It  is  rather  the  use  of  oon- 
teiti'pla.led  result.^  God  forbid.  But  by  their 
fall  (rather,  trip,  or  false  step).  The  word  is 
TrapiiiTTiD/ia,  suitably  used  here  in  view  of  the 
figure  of  stumbling.  The  idea  is  that 
they  had  stumbled  over  the  "stumbling- 
block"  above  spoken  of,  but  not  so  as  to 
lie  hopelessly  prostrate.  Calvin  translates 
well,  "  Num  impegerunt  ut  corruerent  ?  " 
and  "  eorum  lapsu."   Alford  adopts  "  lapse'' 

'  The  various  uses  of  'Cva  are  well  ex- 
plained in  one  of  a  series  of  articles  on  the 
translation  of  the  Revised  Version  by  Pro- 
fessor Evans  of  Durham,  publis/ied  in  4iie 
Expositor  (see  No.  xviii.,  for  July,  1882). 

B0MAN8. 


for  7rapdwTa)fji.a,  But  the  word,  as  used  in 
English,  is  not  equivalent.  If  we  retain 
the  rendering  "  fail,"  we  must  understand 
a  partial  or  temporary  fall,  not  prostration 
from  which  there  is  no  recovery.  Salvation 
is  come  unto  the'  Gentiles,  for  to  provoke 
them  to  jealousy.  (The  word  impaOnXaia-ai, 
with  the  idea  conveyed  by  it,  is  from 
Deut.  xxxii.  21,  which  see.)  Now  if  the 
fall  (vpairTajia,  as  above)  of  them  be  the 
riches  of  the  world,  and  the  diminishing 
of  them  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles,  how 
much  more  their  fulness?  The  words  fiTTrina 
and  irK-tipa/ia,  rendered  in  the  Authorized 
Version  "  diminishing  "  and  "  fulne.s3,"  I  lave 
been  variously  understood.  They  are  in 
contrast  with  each  other,  and  must  evidently 
be  understood  with  reference  to  the  same 
idea.  Now,  irA^/ioj/ia,  as  used  afterwards  in 
ver.  25  (&XP^^  ^^  "^^  'n\-i]pwfxa  tSjv  iOvuv 
i<Te\dji),  seems  plainly  tn  mean  the  full 
complement  of  the  Gentiles;  and  so  here 
must  surely  be  meant  the  full  complement 
of  the  Jews,  pointing  to  the  same  idea  as  irSj 
'l(rpaij\  in  ver.  26.  If  so,  TjTTrifia  must  mean 
the  defect  from  such  full  complement — not, 
indeed  (as  some  have  explained),  the  small 
number  (i.e.  of  believers)  now  opposed  to 
the  full  number  in  the  future,  but  abstrac- 
tedly, defect,  or  fewness,  as  opposed  to  ful- 
ness. This  interpretation  agrees  with  the 
meaning  of  %Trriii.a.  in  the  only  other  place 
where  it  occurs  in  the  New  Testament,  viz. 
1  Cor.  vi.  7,  where  it  seems  to  signify 
"  defect,"  though  used  in  that  passage  with 
a  moral  reference.  The  reason  why  the 
present  iJTTjj/ia  of  the  Jews  is  tlie  riches  of 
the  Gentiles  Is  that  the  refusal  of  the  Jews 
to  accept  the  gospel  had  been  the  occasion 
of  its  being  offered  to  the  Gentiles  (cf.  Acts 
xiii.  46 ;  xxviii.  28 ;  also  Matt.  xv.  24 ; 
xxii.  9).  It  is  not,  of  course,  meant  that  the 
gospel  was  not  originally  intended  for  all 
the  world, "  but  only  that  the  present  and 
immediate  promulgation  of  it  to  the  Gentiles 
had  been  due  to  the  Jews'  refu.-al.  Other- 
wise, we  may  conceive,  it  would  have  been 
after  the  fulness  of  the  Jews  had  come  in 
that  jt  would  have  been  extended  through 
them  to  the  Gentiles  (cf.  ch.  xv.  8, 9).  Cf. 
Isa.  Ix.,  where,  as  in  other  prophetic  passages, 
the  vision  presented  is  that  of  the  scattered 
sons  of  Israel  being  first  brought  into  the 
glorified  holy  city,  and  the  Gentiles  gather- 
ing round  them  through  the  ever -open 
gates. 

Vers.  13,  14. — But  (Se  is  better  supported 
than  yap)  I  speak  to  youths  Gentiles.  Inas- 
much (or,  so  far)  then  (oSv,  which  is  not  in  the 
Textus  Eeceptus,  being  read,  and  so  connect- 
ing this  clause  with  what  follows)  as  I  am  an 
apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  I  glorify  my  ministry, 
if  by  any  means  I  may  provoke  to  jealousy 
Cin  the  Authorized  Version,  erauJaHnn,  but,  it 

T 


322 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  xt.  1-36. 


is  the  same  word  as  in  ver.  11)  my  flesh  (i.e. 
my  kindred),  and  may  save  some  of  them. 
To  the  Gentiles,  whom  he  now  directly 
addresses,  he  thus  intimates  that,  though 
he  is  especially  their  apostle,  yet  beyond 
them  he  has  his  own  countrymen  still  in 
view,  whose  conversion,  through  theirs,  he 
has  ever  close  to  his  heart.  J  glorify 
(Sofafw)  my  ministry — ^i.e.  my  apostleship 
to  the  Gentiles — may  mean  that  I  add  glory 
to  it,  if  I  may,  through  it,  attain  that  further 
purpose. 

Ver.  1 5. — For  if  the  casting  away  of  them 
be  the  reconciling  of  the  world,  what  shall 
the  receiving  of  them  be,  but  life  from  the 
dead?  The  vivid  force  of  this  concluding 
expression  is  weakened  by  attempts  to 
define  what  is  exactly  meant  by  it ;  as,  for 
instance  (as  some  interpret),  that  the  general 
resurrection  will  come  wiJeu  the  fulness 
of  the  Jews  as  well  as  the  Gentiles  has 
come  in.  It  is  best  to  leave  the  grandeur 
of  the  conception  to  be  felt  rather  than 
explained. 

"Ver.  16. — And  if  the  firstfruit  be  holy,  so 
also  is  the  lump ;  and  if  the  root  be  holy,  so 
also  are  the  branches.  By  the  firstfruit  and 
the  rooi  is  signified  the  original  stock  of 
Israel,  the  patriarchs ;  by  the  lump  and  the 
branches,  the  subsequent  nation  through  all 
time.  The  word  imapxh,  being  here  con- 
nected with  (pvpaiia,  may  be  understood  as 
referring  to  Numb.  xv.  19 — 22.  The  people 
are  there  enjoined  to  take  of  the  first  dough 
(t/)i!po;ua)  kueaded  after  harvest  a  cake  for 
a  heave  offeriug,  called  airapxh  t^ypa/iaroy 
(LXX.).  This  consecrated  knapxh  sanctified 
the  wliole  <\>iipaaa. 

Vers.  17,  18. — But  if  some  of  the  branches 
were  broken  off,  and  thou,  being  a  wild  olive 
tree  (i.e.  of  the  stock  of  a  wild  olive  tree ; 
of.  ch.  V.  34)  wast  graffed  in  among  them, 
and  wast  made  partaker  with  them  of  the 
root  and  the  fatness  of  the  olive  tree,  boast 
not  against  the  branches.  But  if  thou 
boastest,  then  bearest  not  the  root,  hut  the 
root  thee.  In  thus  addressing  the  Gentile 
in  the  second  person  singular,  the  apoatle 
brings  his  warning  home  to  any  individual 
Gentile  Christian  who  might  be  inclined  to 
boast ;  tliough  regarding  him  still  as  repie- 
senting  Gentile  believers  generally.  They 
are  compared  to  slips  of  the  wild  olive  tree 
(i)  AjpieKaios,  oleaster'),  which  was  unpro- 
ductive (cf.  "Iiifelix  superat  foliis  oleaster 
amaris"),  acquiring  richness  and  fertility 
by  being  graffud  into  the  cultivated  tree 
(fi  Ka^.\i€\aios,  olea).  Whether  or  not  such 
a  reversal  of  the  usual  system  of  grafting 
would  have  the  imagined  effect  does  not 
matter,  as  long  as  the  illustration  serves 
St.  Paul's  purpose  well,  and  helps  us  to 
grasp  hie  conception.  The  oommou  pro- 
cess ia 


"...  to  marry 
A  gentle  scion  to  the  wildest  stock. 
And  make  conceive  a  bark  of  baser  kind, 
By  bud  of  nobler  race." 

In  the  illustration  before  us  a  Bcion  of 
wildest  stock  is  supposed  to  be  made  to 
conceive  through  the  stock  of  nobler  race 
to  which  it  is  united.  The  selecting  the 
olive  tree  for  illustration  is  happy,  inas- 
much as  it  was  not  only  a  characteristic 
produce  of  Palestine,  but  also  regarded  as 
symbolical  of  a  plant  of  grace ;  cf.  Ps.  lii. 
8,  "  I  am  a  green  olive  tree  in  the  house  of 
God ; "  also  Jer.  xi.  16 ;  Hos.  xiv.  6.  See 
also  the  parable  of  Jotham  (Judg.  is..  8,  9), 
where  the  trees  apply  first  to  the  olive  tree 
to  be  their  king;  and  observe  also  there 
the  word  "  fatness,"  used  here  also  by  St. 
Paul:  M^  atroXeiipaffa  t^v  iriirriTa  fxov  ey  ^ 
So^affovtrt  rhv  ®ehv  &i^Spes  wopeinro^ai  Ktye'ia''' 
6ai  iirl  Tuv ^v\av ;  (LXX.).  The  ''branches" 
against  which  the  ingrafted  scion  is  warned 
not  to  boast  are  not  exclusively  either  the 
broken-off  or  the  remaining  ones,  but,  as 
the  sequel  shows,  the  natural  branches  of 
the  tree  generally.  The  Gentile  Christian 
is  not  to  contemn  the  race  of  Israel  because 
BO  large  a  portion  of  it  is  at  present  apart 
from  the  Church  and  under  judgment ;  for 
it  is,  after  all,  from  the  stock  of  Israel,  into 
which  he  has  been  engrafted,  that  he  derives 
all  his  own  fertility.  As  to  the  Christian 
Church  being  ever  regarded  as  derived  from 
that  of  Israel,  the  fulfilment  and  outcome 
of  the  ancient  covenant,  see  note  on  ch.  i. 
2 ;  and  cf.  John  iv.  22,  "  For  salvation  is  of 
the  Jews." 

Ver.  19. — Thou  wilt  say  then,  The  branches 
were  broken  off,  that  I  might  be  graffed  in. 
Though  I  might  not  boast  against  the 
original  branches  that  remain,  and  among 
whom  I  have  been  graffed,  yet  I  may  against 
those  which,  for  their  unworthiness,  have 
been  broken  off  to  make  room  for  me  : 
though  not  boasting  against  the  faithful 
Jews,  1  surely  may  against  the  unfaithful 
and  rejected  ones. 

Vers.  20,  21.— Well— the  fact  of  the  case 
is  as  you  say ;  but  why  ? — because  of  unbelief 
they  were  broken  off,  and  thou  standest  by 
faith,  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear :  for 
if  God  spared  not  the  natural  branches, 
neither  will  he  spare  thee.  (So,  rather  than  ms 
in  the  Authorized  Version,  according  to  the 
best-supported  readings.)  Thou  art  on  thy 
trial,  as  they  were,  and  alike  liable  to  be 
broken  off  for  the  like  cause;  their  present 
rejection  should  inspire  in  thee,  not  boast- 
fulness,  but  fear.  The  question  has  been 
raised  whether  St.  Paul  (using,  as  he  does, 
the  terras  trii  and  rives 'rav  KXdSav)  has  now 
the  election  and  final  salvation  of  indj- 
riduals  in  view,  or  still  only  the  calling  to 


OH.  XI.  1—36.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


323 


a  state  of  salvation  of  races  or  communities 
of  men — of  the  Jewish  lace  on  the  one 
hand,  and  Gentile  Churches  on  the  other. 
The  whole  purport  of  this  section  of  the 
Epistle  (oh.  ix.,  x.,  xi.)  seems  to  demand  the 
latter  view.  (As  to  o-u,  see  on  ver.  17.)  Be- 
sides, if  by  the  broken -off  branches  were 
meant  simply  individual  unbelievers,  how 
could  we  explain  their  being  "  grafFed  in 
again  "  (vers.  23, 24),  seeing  that  the  con  tern-, 
plated  restoration  is  regarded  in  vers.  25,  26 
as  something  that  is  to  take  place  in  the 
possibly  distant  future,  after  "the  fulness 
of  the  G  entiles "  has"  come  in  ?  Thus  this 
passage  is  really  irrelevant  to  any  doctrines 
about  individual  eleotign  and  salvation  that 
may  have  been  built  upon  it.  It  is,  how- 
ever, important  as  confirming  the  general 
view  of  Divine  election  not  being  irrespec- 
tive of  the  conditions  of  human  faith  and 
perseverance. 

Vers.  22,  23. — Behold  therefore  the  good- 
ness and  severity  of  God:  toward  them  that 
fell,  severity  (to  be  a  warning  to  thee) ;  but 
toward  thee,  God's  goodness,  if  thou  con- 
tinue in  his  goodness :  otherwise  then  also 
■halt  be  cut  off.  And  they,  if  they  abide 
not  still  in  their  unbelief,  shall  be  graffed 
in :  for  God  is  able  to  graff  them  in  again. 
The  reference  here  to  God's  power  to  graff 
thum  in  again  may  be  suggested  by  the 
apparent  impossibility,  from  a  human  point 
of  view,  of  the  Jews  as  a  nation,  having 
rejected  Christ  in  person,  and  being  so  in- 
veterately  set  against  tlie  gospel  as  they 
were,  ever  coming  into  the  Cliuroh.  But 
"  with  God  all  things  are  possible  "  (cf.  Matt. 
xix.  26 !  Mark  x.  27 ;  Luke  xviii.  27).  Nay 
— so  the  thought  goes  on — it  would  seem 
in  itself  more  likely,  and  according  to  the 
nature  of  things,  that  the  Jews  should  be 
brought  into  tiie  Churoh,  which  is  really 
their  own,  and  the  true  fulfilment  of  their 
own  oracles,  than  that  Gentiles,  who  had 
had  no  similar  preparation,  should  have 
been  so. 

Ver.  24. — ^For  if  thou  wast  out  out  of  that 
which  was  by  nature  a  wild  olive  tree 
QaypieKatov),  and  wast  graffed  oontrary  to 
natnre  into  a  good  olive  tree  (/coWif  Aafov) : 
how  much  rather  shall  these,  which  be 
branches  by  nature,  be  graffed  into  their 
own  olive  tree  t  In  what  fallows  next  the 
eventual  coming  of  the  Jewish  nation  into 
the  Church  is  not  only  anticipated  as  pos- 
sible or  probable,  but  foretold  prophetically. 
St.  Paul  announces  it  as  a  "  mystery,"  which 
his  readers  may  be  ignorant  of,  but  which 
he  wishes  them  to  know.  By  the  word 
livtrritinov,  as  used  by  St.  Paul,  is  meant 
something  hidden  from  man  in  the  Divine 
counsels  till  made  known  by  revelation  (see  1 
Cor.  ii.  7,  10 ;  xv.  51 ;  and,  in  this  Epistle,  ch. 
(vi.  25, 26 — a  passage  which  expresses  clearly 


the  apostle's  meaning  in  his  use  of  the  word). 
In  the  LXX.  it  denotes  any  Divine  secret, 
which  may  or  may  not  be  made  known  to 
man  (cf.  Dan.  ii.  18,  19,  etc. ;  Job  xi.  8 ; 
Wisd.  ii.  22;  Bcolns.  xiii.  22;  ixvii.  16). 
So  also  in  the  Gospels  (Matt.  xiii.  II ;  Mark 
iv.  11 ;  Luke  viii.  10)  it  is  said  to  be  given 
to  the  disciples  to  know  the  mytieriet  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  to  others  in 
parables.  In  classical  Greek  nvariipia  were 
Divine  secrets  (as  in  the  Eleusinian  Mys- 
teries) which  were  revealed  to  the  initiated 
alone.  St.  Paul  uses  the  word  with  the 
same  essential  meaning;  only  he  speaks  of 
mysteries  which  had  already  been  revealed 
to  himself  and  others  by  the  Spirit,  and  has 
ever  in  view  the  Divine  purposes,  previously 
unknown,  for  the  salvation  of  mankind. 
Thus  in  Eph.  i.  9,  teq.;  and  iiL  3,  teq.,  he 
speaks  of  the  Divine  purpose  to  "  gather  in 
one  all  things  in  Christ,"  and  that  "the 
Gentiles  should  be  fellow-heirs^"  etc.,  as  a 
mystery,  "not  made  known  in  other  ages 
unto  the  sons  of  men,"  but  now  revealed  to 
the  "holy  apostles  and  prophets  by  the 
Spirit."  (The  other  passages  in  which  St. 
Paul  uses  the  word  are  1  Cor.  iv.  1 ;  xiii.  2 ; 
Bph.  V.  32;  vi.  19;  Col.  i.  26,  27;  ii.  2;  iv. 
3 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  9, 16;  2  Thess.  ii.  7.)  Here 
he  announces  the  Divine  purpose  to  save 
"  all  Israel "  at  last  through  the  calling  of 
the  Gentiles  as  a  mystery  which  has  been 
revealed  to  himself  and  others,  and  which 
he  desires  the  Gentile  Christians  to  be  aware 
of,  lest  they  should  be  "  wise  in  their  own 
conceits,"  i.e.  presume  on  their  present  posi- 
tion of  privilege  through  ignorance  of  what 
is  in  store  for  Israel. 

Vers.  25—27. — For  I  would  not,  brethren, 
that  ye  should  be  ignorant  of  this  mystery, 
lest  ye  should  be  wise  in  your  own  oonceits; 
that  hardness  (jripairis ;  see  ver.  8)  in  part 
is  happened  to  Israel,  until  the  fulness  of  the 
GentUes  be  oome  in.  And  so  all  Israel  shall 
be  saved.  nSi  'lapa^X  here  must  mean  tlie 
whole  nation;  not,  as  Calvin  explains,  "com- 
plebitur  sains  totius  Israel  Dei  [t.«.  of  the 
spiritual  Israel,  as  in  Gal.  vi.  16]  quam  ex 
utrisque  [t.«.  with  Jews  and  Gentiles]  ool- 
ligi  oportet ; "  for  "  Israel "  must  surely  be 
understood  in  the  same  sense  as  in  the  pre- 
ceding verse,  where  it  denotes  the  Jewish 
nation  as  opposed  to  the  Gentiles.  ^Bif 
(TsTai,  as  seems  required  by  the  whole  con- 
text, means  coming  into  the  Chuioh  (cf. 
Acts  ii.  17,  'O  S^  Kipios  Tfoatriiei  rohs 
traio/iivovs  Kaff  f}Hf pav  ry  iKK\rial<f).  Ab  it 
is  written.  There  shall  oome  out  of'  Zion  the 
Deliverer,  and  shall  turn  away  ungodlineu 
from  Jacob ;  and  this  is  my  oovenant  unto 
them,  when  I  shall  take  away  their  lini. 
Eeferring,  as  throughout  the  Epistle,  to  the 
Old  Testament  for  confirmation,  St.  Panl 
here,  as  in  former  instance*,  combine*  |>a»> 


324 


TfIB   KPISTLB  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xi.  1—36. 


sages,  and  quotes  freely,  perhaps  from 
memory.  The  main  citation  is  from  Isa. 
lix.  20,  21,  with  an  addition  from  Isa.  xvii. 
9,  the  LXX.  being  followed.  The  citations 
are  relevant,  being  speoiiuene  of  many  others 
that  might  have  been  arlduced,  predicting 
the  final  pardon  and  restitution  of  the  house 
of  Israel  itself,  notwithstanding  judgments, 
through  the  Redeemer  who  was  to  come. 

What  follows,  to  ver.  38,  is  in  the  way  of 
summary  and  further  comment. 

Vers.  28,  29. — As  touching  the  gospel  in- 
deed (with  regaid  to  acceptance  of  the  gospel 
now)  they  are  enemies  for  your  sakes  (for 
their  having  become  God's  enemies  by  re- 
jecting and  opposing  it  has  been  the  occa- 
sion of  your  having  been  now  called  in) : 
but  as  touching  the  election  (God's  original 
choice  of  Israel  to  be  his  people.  'EK\oyii 
here  cannot  well  have  a  concrete  sense,  as  in 
ver.  7),  they  are  beloved  for  the  fathers' 
sakes.  For  the  gifts  (xapfirjuoTo,  meaning 
"  free  gifts,"  or  "  gifts  of  grace ; "  the  word 
used  to  denote  the  special  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  showered  after  Pentecost  in  the  apos- 
tolic Church;  but  expressing  generally,  as 
here,  whatever  God,  of  his  own  good  will, 
gran  ts  freely )  and  the  calling  of  God  are  with- 
out repentance  (i.e.  uurepented  of  by  him  and 
irrevocable;  of.  Numb,  xxiii.  19,  20;  also 
1  Sam.  XV.  29).  This  denial  of  authropopathy 
in  God  is  asserted  as  a  general  truth,  to 
be  applied  to  liis  calling  of  "  the  fathers," 
i.e.  the  patriarchs,  and  their  seed  after  them, 
to  be  his  people.  It  is  true  that,  as  is  shown 
in  oh.  iv.,  there  is  a  spiritual  seed  of  Abra- 
ham, not  necessarily  of  the  house  of  Israel, 
to  whom  the  promises  in  their  ultimate 
scope  were  to  be  fulfilled  ;  but  the  apostle 
regards  it  as  impossible  that  the  promises 
made  primarily  to  the  chosen  people  them- 
selves shouhl  be  revoked  or  fail  of  eventual 
fulfilment  to  them. 

Vers.  30,  31. — For  as  ye  in  times  past 
believed  not  God  (so,  except  that  tlie  aorist 
^Tretfl^croTe  is  translated  "have  not  believed," 
in  the  Authorized  Version ;  but  with  an 
alternative  in  the  margin  of  "  obeyed  "  for 
"  believed."  The  substantive  direi9e(a, 
which  follows  twice,  should  be  translated 
"disobedience"  rather  than  "  uubelief,"  if 
r(7r6ifl^rraT€  is  translated  "  disobeyed."  Pro- 
perly and  usual  y  ursiflei'a  conveys  a  different 
idea  from  oTriuT...,  denoting  "disobedience  " 
or  "contumacy,"  and  not  merely  want  of 
faith.  But  it  appears  to  be  sometimes  used 
in  the  sense  of  airtaTta.  For  instance,  in 
John  iii.  36,  li  avfiBtSv  t$  vl$  is  opposed  to 
TO)  iricrTtiafTi  ei'l  rhv  v!6y.  Most  modern 
commentators, with  reason, understnnd  "dis- 
obedience "  here.  The  difference  does  not 
affect  the  drift  of  tho  argun .  en  t),  hut  now  have 


obtained  mercy  through  their  unbelief  (or, 
ditohedienee) :  even  so  have  these  also  now 
not  believed  (or,  obeyed),  that  through  your 
mercy  (i.e.  the  mercy  shown  to  you)  they 
also  may  obtain  mercy.  The  position  of  iva 
after  r^  ujucTt'pijj  iKeei  has  led  commentators, 
ancient  and  modern,  to  connect  t<p  ifuTeptf 
i\4ei  with  the  preceding  ^ireWrjo-oc,  and  to 
try  to  hit  upon  a  meaning  in  this  connection. 
But  tlie  sense  of  the  passage,  as  well  as  the 
parallelism  of  the  preceding  clause,  favours 
the  connection  of  the  Authorized  Version, 
as  given  above.  (For  a  similar  position  of 
Tra,  pf.  2  Cor.  xii.  7.) 

Ver.  32. — For  God  hath  concluded  them 
all  in  (literally,  shut  them  all  up  into)  un- 
belief (or,  diiobedience),  that  he  might  have 
mercy  upon  them  all.    Chrysostom  and  other 
Greek   Fathers    understood    <Tvv4KKeiai    to 
mean  only  declared  them  to  he  unbelieving 
(or,  disobedient),  or  convicted  them  of  being 
so.     Thus  Chrysostom,  toutcVtij',  ^Xeyt^iv, 
eireSei^ev  aTreidovyras.     So,  it  may  be  said, 
must  the  verb  be  understood  where  St.  Paul 
elsewhere  uses  it  with  a  similar  reference 
in  Gal.  iii.  22,  ^  7pai|)))  being  there  the 
nominative  to  the  verb.    But  i  ©ebs  being 
the  nominative  here,  the  more  obvious  mean- 
ing seems  to  be  that  the  shutting  up  was 
God's  doing.     Some,  understanding  it  so, 
would  soften  the  expression  by  explaining 
that  God  allowed  them  to  become  so  shut 
up.     T^  <rvyeK\ei(re  voijTeov  Hti  tous  j8oj^^- 
fle'vTos   liTreiBeiv   ilaOiV   a.Trii9eiv  (Diodorus). 
But  we  need  not  shrink  from  the  plain 
meaning  of  the  expression,  viz.  that  it  was 
God's  own  act.     He  is  not  thus  represented 
as  plunging  men  into  inevitable  infidelity, 
having  given  them  no  choice.    As  in  tlio 
case  of  the  hardening  spoken  of  above,  his 
dealings  prejudicial;  the  state  into  which 
they  are  now  by  him  sliut  up  hns  not  been 
undeserved.     And,  further,  his   ultimate 
purpose  is   here  distinctly  declared  to  be 
one  of   mercy.      The    way  in  which  the 
apostle  regards  such  present  judicial  dealing 
as  cimducive  to  final  mercy  appears  to  be 
such  as  this.    It  is  the  doctrine  of  the  whole 
Epistle  that  salvation  is  to  be  attained  by 
man's  renouncing  his  own  imagined  right- 
eousness, and  submitting  himself   to  the 
righteousness  of  God.     It  conduces  to  this 
I  end  that  his  wiretBeia  should  have  its  course 
I  and  consequences ;  so  thnt,  conscience  being 
at  length  awakened,  he  may  long  for  de- 
liverance from  his  hopeless  state,  and  appre- 
ciate the  offered  salvation  (see  ch.   vii.). 
So  tho  Gentile  world  was  long  shut  up  in 
its  self-induced,  but  also  judicial,  oireiee(a 
(ch.  i.  18,  seq.);  that,  "the  wrath  of  God" 
being  at  length  revealed  to  it  from  heaven, 
the  "  righteousness  of  God  "  might  also  bo 
revealed  to  it  and  laid  hold  of.     In  like 
manner  God  deals  now  with  the  Jews,  whc 


OH.  XI.  1—36.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS. 


32S 


Btill  persist  in  going  about  to  establish  their 
own  righteousness  insteiid  of  submitting 
themselves  to  the  righteousness  of  God.  He 
shuts  them  up  for  the  present  in  (heir 
oTreiBeia,  to  the  STid  that  at  length,  after 
their  long  judgment,  and  stirred  up  by  the 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  coming  in,  they  may 
feel  their  need,  and  accept  salvation.  Tabs 
irovTos  ill  the  concluding  clause  seems  to 
mean  generally  all  mankind,  Jews  as  well 
aa  Gentiles;  and  Vj'a  robs  iravras  4\fijtrri 
(ag  ffiaSijcreTai  was  understood  above  with 
respect  to  "all  Israel,"  as  suggested  by 
the  context  and  the  general  drift  of  the 
chaptei)  God's  embracing  all  races  of  man- 
Itind  at  last  in  the  arms  of  his  mercy  by 
calling  them  into  the  Church.  Thus  tlie 
latter  expression  is  not  in  itself  adducible 
in  support  of  the  doctrine  of  universalism. 
Certainly  the  prospect  of  a  universal  triumph 
of  the  gospel  before  thw  end  rises  here  before 
the  apostle  in  pmphetic  vision  ;  and  it  may 
be  that  it  cariies  with  it  to  his  mind  further 
glories  of  eternal  salvation  for  all,  casting 
their  rays  backward  over  all  past  ages,  so 
as  to  inspire  an  unbounded  hope.  Such  a 
hope,  which  seems  elsewhere  intimated  (cf. 
1  Cor.  XV.  24—29 ;  Eph.  i.  9,  10,  20—23 ; 
Col.  i.  15 — 21),  would  justify  the  glowing 
rhapsody  of  admiration  and  thanksgiving 
that  follows  more  fully  than  if  we  supposed 
the  npostle  to  contemplate  still  the  eternal 
perdition  of  the  multitudes  who  in  all  the 
nges  have  not  on  earth  found  mercy. 

Verg..33— .S5.— 0  the  depth  of  the  riches 
both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  (or,  of  the 
riches  and  wisdom  and  knowledge)  of  God ! 
By  yrcio'etos  is  signified  God's  omniscience  ; 
by  troipias,  his  wisdom  in  ordering  events ; 
by  vKoirov,  if  it  be  taken  as  a  co-ordinate 
substantive,  the  abuudanceof  his  gooduess 


(cf  ch.  ii.  4,  'ir\o^os  T^s  xpV'^'^^V'os  I  Eph. 
i.  7,  Thy  ttXovtov  rris  xtiptros  ainov.  Co-ordi- 
nation of  the  three  substantives  is  suggested 
by  the  hoI  before  irocpias;  but  St.  Paul's 
prevailing  usage  may  rather  commend  the 
dependence  of  <ro<(iias  and  yvianas  or  itKavTov, 
as  in  the  Authorized  "Version).  Bow  un- 
searchable are  his  judgments,  and  his  waya 
past  finding  (rather,  traelng)  out !  (cf  Ps. 
xxvi.  6 ;  Job  ix.  10 ;  xi.  7).  For  who  hath 
known  the  mind  of  the  Lord  t  or  who  hath 
been  his  oounssllor?  (Isa.  xl.  13,  quoted 
accurately  fn  im  the  L  XX.).  Or  who  hath  first 
given  to  him,  and  it  shall  be  recompensed 
unto  him  again?  (of.  Job  xli.  11,  where 
the  Hebrew  has  (Revised  Version),  *'  Who 
hath  first  given  unto  me,  that  I  should  re- 
pay him  ?  "  The  LXX.  (Job  xli.  2)  gives  an 
entirely  diflerent  sense  of  the  passage;  and 
it  would  thus  appear,  as  may  be  seeu  also 
in  other  cases,  that  St.  Paul,  though  usually 
quoting  more  or  less  freely  from  the  LXX., 
was  familiar  also  with  the  Hebrew  text, 
and  exercised  judgment  in  his  citations. 

Ver.  36.— For  of  Mm,  and  through  him, 
and  unto  him,  are  all  things.  The  view 
advanced  by  some,  that  we  liave  here  an 
intimation  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy 
Trinity,  cannot  fairly  be  niaintiiined.  But 
it  is  strikingly  significant  of  the  apostle's 
view  of  the  essential  Deity  of  Christ,  that 
in  1  Cor.  viii.  0  and  Col.  i.  16,  17,  similar 
language  is  applied  ts  him.  In  tiie  first  of 
these  texts  it  is  said  of  the  Father,  ej  o5  tA 
Trdyra,  and  .of  the  "  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  Si' 
o5  TO  irdvTa ;  and  in  the  second,  of  "  the  Sou 
of  the  Father's  love,"  iv  mr^  iKrta-er)  xi 
irdvTay  and  t"^  irdvTa  Si'  aiirov  Koi  els  abrdy 
^KTiffrai,  and  also  ri  ■Trdi/ra  iv  outoT  (tui/c- 
a-rfiKer.  To  hiai  be  the  glory  for  ever. 
Amen. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  15. — "  Life- from  the  dead."  The  new  wine  of  Christianity  burst  the  old,  worn 
skin  of  Judaism.  Isiaelites  were  indeed  the  first  preachers  of  the  faitli,  and  its  first 
adherents  were  largely  recruited  from  the  synagogues.  Still,  as  years  passed  on,  it 
became  apparent  that,  as  a  whole,  the  favoured  nation  was  unprepared  for  a  religion  so 
spiritual,  so  universal,  as  Christianity.  The  rejection  of  the  gospel  by  the  Jews  was 
the  occasion  of  the  progress  of  the  gospel  in  the  larger,  the  Gentile  world.  And  the 
apostle,  himself  a  Hebrew,  yet  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  recognizing  this  fact  as 
included  in  the  plans  of  Providence,  yet  looked  beyond  the  present  into  the  future,  and 
saw,  in  the  predicted  ingathering  of  the  sons  of  Abraham,  the  destined  revival  of  true 
religion  throughout  the  world.  When  an  event  so  remarkable,  so  imlikely,  yet  so 
clearly  foretold,  shall  occur,  its  efleot  shall  be  prodigious ;  it  shall  be  nothing  less 
than  " life  fi'om  the  dead."  These  words  contain  a  principle  truly  and  emphatically 
Christian.     Let  them  be  regarded  in  this  light. 

I.  The  foundation  of  this  pkinciplb  is  laid  in  the  death  and  eesurreotion  of 
odh  Savioob.  From  the  throne  of  his  glory  Christ  describes  himself  as  the  Being  who 
"was  dead,  and  is  alive  again."  He  must  needs  suffer,  and  taste  death  for  every  man; 
but  it  was  not  possible  that  he  should  be  holden  of  it.     His  rising  was  more  than  a  sign 


32«  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xi.  l-SS. 

of  his  authority  and  of  his  acceptance  with  the  Father.     He  rose  as  the  Mediator  and 
the  Representative  and  the  Forerunner  of  his  people. 

II.  The  application  op  this  prinoiplb  is  bbcurbd  by  the  operations  of  the 
Holt  Spirit.  The  Church  professes,  in  the  ancient  Creed,  to  "  believe  in  the  Holy 
Grhoat,  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  life."  Without  the  influences  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  the 
moral  results  secured  by  Christianity  could  not  have  been  realized.  Like  the  sunshine 
and  the  showers  of  spring,  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  his  descent  and  by  his  shining,  fertilizes 
the  barren  soil  of  humanity.  Like  the  breath  which  came  from  the  four  winds,  and 
breathed  upon  the  slain  so  that  they  lived,  is  the  influence  which  awakens  the  dead 
bones  of  the  valley,  and  makes  of  them  an  exceeding  great  army.  All  spiritual  life  is 
evoked  and  sustained  by  the  living  Spirit  of  God. 

III.  The  principle  reveals  itself  in  the  newness  of  individual  life  which  is 
THE  distinotivblt  CHRISTIAN  CHARACTER.  The  transforming  power  of  the  new  faith 
was  at  once  revealed,  and  has  ever  continued  to  be  revealed,  in  the  heart  and  life  of  the 
individuals  who  have  received  Christ.  The  former  state,  the  state  of  heathenism  and 
irreligiousness,  the  state  of  sensuality,  or  worldliness,  or  unbelief,  may  well  be  desig- 
nated, and  by  the  inspired  writers  was  designated, "  death."  And  the  contrast  between 
that  and  the  state  of  fellowship  with  God  and  of  obedience  to  Christ  could  not  be  more 
strikingly  described  than  in  the  language  of  the  text,  "  Life  from  the  dead."  It  is 
nothing  less  than  this  that  Christianity  is  intended  to  effect — a  change  moral,  radical, 
extensive,  and  enduring. 

IV.  The  prinoiplb  is  manifested  on  a  larger,  a  social  scale.  It  is  thus  that  it 
is  represented  in  the  text  as  operating ;  it  effects  a  transformation  in  human  society. 
To  many  cities  and  communities  in  the  primitive  times,  the  religion  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
proved  an  impulse  of  regeneration.  And  by  it  ancient  society  seems  to  have  been 
saved  from  threatening  corruption  and  dissolution.  When  death  was  to  all  appearance 
imminent,  the  gospel  entered  into  the  heart  of  humanity  as  a  new  vital  principle, 
renewing  that  which  was  old,  healing  that  which  was  sick,  and  reviving  that  which 
was  dead.    It  is  still  the  one,  the  only,  hope  for  a  race  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins." 

V.  The  principle  will  be  exemplified  in  the  eternal  life  of  Christ's  people. 
Both  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead,  and  that  transformation  of  spiritual 
character  which  is  called  "  the  first  resurrection,"  are  the  pledge  and  earnest  of  the 
immortal  life  of  the  Lord's  people.  It  is  distinctive  of  our  religion  that  it  holds  out  a 
definite  and  assured  prospect  of  a  life  beyond  the  present — a  life  holy,  imperishable,  and 
Divine.  The  prospect  of  bright  and  blessed  immortality  has  strengthened  the  arms  of 
every  true  Christian  labourer,  and  has  cheered  the  heart  of  every  Christian  sufferer. 
It  has  been  the  joy  of  the  living  and  the  hope  of.the  dying. 

Application.  1.  The  words  are  a  summons  to  the  spiritually  dead.  There  is  life 
in  Christ  even  for  such.  2.  They  are  an  encouragement  to  Christian  toil.  Those  who 
-in  their  service  of  benevolence  are  oppressed  by  the  deadness  which  encounters  them, 
should  recur  to  first  principles,  and  consider  the  purposes  of  infinite  grace  and  power, 
and  the  promises  of  spiritual  revival.  3.  They  are  a  consolation  and  inspiration  to 
Christians  when  drawing  near  to  the  death  of  the  body. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Israel  not  utterly  rejected.  Here  the  apostle,  reflecting  on  the  dis- 
obedience of  the  great  majority  of  the  Jewish  people,  and  their  consequent  rejection, 
returns  to  the  thought  already  expressed  (ch.  ix.  27),  that  "a  remnant  shall  be  saved." 
He  himself  is  a  living  proof,  he  says,  that  God  hath  not  utterly  cast  away  his  people. 
"For  I  also  am  an  Israelite,  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin"  (ver. 
1).  But  those  who  have  been  rejected  have  suffered  the  just  and  natural  punishment 
of  their  own  unbelief.    Two  practical  lessons  are  here  taught. 

I.  A  WARNING  TO  THE  UNCHARITABLE.  Even  in  the  most  corrupt  Churches  there 
may  be  true  believers.  This  lesson  is  practically  illustrated  by  Elijah's  mistaken  or 
ozaggeratfld  view  of- the  state  of  Israel  in  his  time.  "Lord,  they  have  killed  thy 
prophets,  and  digged  down  thine  altars ;  and  I  am  left  alone,  and  they  seek  my  life. 
But  what  saith  the  answer  of  God  unto  him  ?    I  have  reserved  to  myself  seven  thousand 


OH.  XI.  i— 36.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  1*0  tMb  ROMANS.  327 

inpn,  who  have  not  bowed  the  knee  to  the  image  of  Baal "  (vers.  3,  4).  How  little 
Elijah  knew  of  the  true  state  of  affairs !  There  is  always  a  great  danger,  even  amongst 
those  who  are  most  zealous  for  the  truth,  of  depreciating  or  under-eatimating  the  good 
that  is  in  others.  Want  of  charity  to  others  may  sometimes  be  found  even  in  good 
men.  Their  very  zeal  leads  them  to  depreciate  others.  If  others  do  not  come  up  to 
our  standard  of  Christian  doctrine,  or  Christian  character,  or  Christian  work,  we  are  apt 
to  imagine  that  they  are  not  Christians  at  all.  No  doubt  these  other  seven  thousand 
servants  of  Grod  were  to  blame  for  not  having  declared  themselves  more  openly  on  the 
Lord's  side.  Had  they  taken  their  proper  place,  and  done  their  duty,  they  would  have 
encouraged  Elijah's  heart  and  sustained  his  hands ;  they  would  have  made  him  feel  that 
he  was  not  alone  in  his  efforts  for  the  true  and  right ;  and  they  might  even  have  pre- 
vented his  flight.  But  there  was  no  excuse  for  Elijah's  wholesale  condemnation  of 
every  one  in  Israel  except  himself.  "Man  looketh  on  the  outward  appearance,  but 
Grod  looketh  on  the  heart."  Especially  in  these  latter  days,  when  there  are  bo  many 
divisions  amongst  Christians,  we  need  to  cultivate  that  charity  "  which  thinketh  no 
evil,"  which  "  beareth  all  things,  believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all 
things." 

II.  A  WARNIN8  TO  THE  0ABELES3.  One  of  the  great  dangers  of  our  time  is  indif- 
ference. Many  who  regularly  attend  our  churches  do  so  as  a  mere  matter  of  custom 
or  respectability.  They  hear  the  Word  of  God,  but  it  has  no  power  on  their  hearts,  no 
influence  upon  their  lives.  The  fate  of  rejected  Israel  is  a  solemn  warning  to  the  care- 
less and  indifferent  (vers.  7 — 10).  If  we  do  not  use  our  privileges,  they  will  one  day 
be  taken  from  us.  The  neglect  of  talents  or  opportunities  is  as  much  a  sin  as  the 
abuse  of  them.  Men  very  soon  become  gospel-hardened.  Hence  the  "  more  con- 
venient season "  to  which  they  look  forward  never  comes.  They  cease  to  think 
seriously  abont  their  souls;  they  cease  to  have  any  desire  for  salvation.  The  spirit  of 
slumber  comes  upon  them — that  fatal  sleep  of  spiritual  indifference.  Their  eyes  are 
darkened,  and  they  do  not  see  how  fast  they  are  hurrying  to  their  own  destruction. 
Oh,,  how  it  becomes  us  to  urge  upon  men  the  present  acceptance  of  the  present  ofler 
of  salvation,  the  present  performance  of  the  duties  that  lie  at  their  door  1 — 0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  11 — 32. — The  Jewish  'people:  their  past  history  and  their  future  prospects. 
The  Jew  is  the  greatest  modern  miracle.  He  is  an  ab-solutely  unique  figure  in  the 
history  of  the  world.  In  every  nation  you  find  him,  an  exile  and  a  fugitive,  a  stranger 
and  a  foreigner.  Whence  came  he?  how  came  he  hither?  He  claims  our  respict,  our 
attention,  our  pity,  our  Christian  sympathy.  These  verses  are  a  strong  enforcement 
of  the  lessons  of  Israel's  history  and  a  stirring  appeal  on  Israel's  behalf. 

I.  Theib  past  history.  1.  They  were  the  chosen  people  of  Ood.  This  is  an  abso- 
lutely unique  distinction  so  far  as  races  of  men  are  concerned.  All  who  are  believers 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  of  whatever  nation  they  may  be,  are  in  that  sense  the  chosen 
people  of  God.  But  no  single  nation  can  ever  claim  to  be  the  chosen  people  of  God, 
except  the  Jews.  2.  They  were  chosen  to  he  a  hlessing  to  the  world.  The  promise  to 
Abraham  was,  "  In  thee  shall  all  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  Wherever  they 
went  they  carried  with  them  the  knowledge  of  the  one  true  God ;  they  have  been  a 
testimony  to  the  nations  of  God's  faithfulness  and  justice;  and  at  the  same  time  they 
executed  God's  judgments  upon  the  nations  for  the  preserving  and  purifying  of  the 
world.  The  Jews  have  been  the  historians  of  the  world.  A  Jewish  hand  wrote  the 
history  of  the  creation.  Jewish  hands  wrote  the  history  of  Israel's  connection  with 
Egypt  and  Assyria  and  other  great  nations,  which  modern  discoveries  of  ancient  monu- 
ments and  relics  are  confirming  more  strongly  every  day.  When  the  Greek  historian 
Herodotus,  who  has  been  called  "  the  father  of  history,"  was  only  beginning  to  write, 
Nehemiah,  the  last  of  the  Old  Testament  historians,  was  already  beginning  to  write. 
The  Jews  have  been  the  teachers  of  the  world.  Unto  them  were  committed  the  oracles 
of  God.  They  prepared  the  way,  too,  for  the  coming  of  the  Saviour.  3.  Even  in  their 
humiliation  and  dispersion  they  have  Irought  hlessing  to  the  world.  "  The  fall  o( 
them  "  has  been  "  the  riches  of  the  world,  and  the  diminishing  of  them  the  riches  of  the 
n entiles  "(ver.  12).  "  Through  their  fall  salvation  has  come  to  the  Gentiles"  (ver.  11). 
"  God  hath  not  cast  away  his  people  whom  he  foreknew."  He  is  still  thuGi'd  of  Israel. 
The  Jewg  may  be  despised,  they  may  be  hated  by  men,  they  may  be  neglected  even 


328  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO   THE   ROMANS,    [oh.  xi.  1—36. 

by  Christians  who  owe  so  much  to  them  ;  but  they  are  still  the  chosen  people  of  God, 
bringing  blessings  even  in  their  fall  to  those  that  despise  them. 

IL  Their  ftjtubb  pbobpeots.  1.  There  is  hope  for  Israelin  the  promises  of  Ood. 
As  surely  as  God  predicted  the  dispersion  of  the  Jews,  and  that  came  to  pass,  so  surely 
has  he  predicted  a  restoration  of  the  Jews,  and  this  also  will  come  to  pass.  Many 
eminent  Christians  believe  that  there  will  be  a  literal  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  Pales- 
tine. It  is  remarkable  that  the  late  Mr.  Lawrence  Oliphant,  in  his  book  '  The  Land 
of  Gilead,'  advocates,  not  for  Christian  reasons  at  all,  but  as  a  mercantile  man,  the 
colonization  of  Palestine  by  Jews,  on  the  ground  that  they  are  the  natural  cultivators 
of  the  land,  and  that  the  country  has  never  prospered  except  under  Jewish  proprietor- 
ship. But  we  are  more  specially  concerned  with  the  promises  of  their  spiritual  restora- 
don.  The  Old  Testament  prophecies  are  full  of  these.  "  But  Zion  said.  The  Lord 
hath  forsaken  nie,  and  my  Lord  hath  forgotten  me.  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking 
child,  that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on  the  son  of  her  womb?  yea,  they  may 
forget,  yet  will  I  not  forget  thee.  Behold,  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of  my 
hands ;  thy  walls  are  continually  before  me  "  (Isa.  xlix.  14—16).  Again,  we  are  told 
that  it  is  but  for  a  moment  that  God's  face  is  hidden  from  his  people ;  and  that  in 
Israel's  restoration  "  all  flesh  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  am  thy  Saviour  and  thy 
Redeemer,  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob  "  (Isa.  xlix.  26).  And  here  in  the  Nev?  Testa- 
ment, even  after  Israel's  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  St.  Paul  emphatically  reasserts  the 
_  certainty  of  Israel's  restoration.  Though  they,  the  natural  branches,  were  broken  ofif 
foi  a  time,  "  God  is  able  to  graff  tliem  in  again  "  (ver.  23).  "  Blindness  in  part  is  hap- 
pened to  Israel,  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be  come  in  "  (ver.  25).  But  when 
that  time  cumes  "all  Israel  shall  be  saved"  (ver.  26).  God  will  yet  be  as  the  dew 
unto  Israel.  2.  In  the  present  position  of  the  Jews  there  are  man%  things  that  point  to 
a  hriyht  future  for  Qocfs  ancient  people.  Though  scattered  among  the  nations,  they 
still  preserve  their  identity  and  individuality.  They  have  not  been  absorbed  or 
assimilated  by  the  larger  and  stronger  races  among  whom  they  are  [ilaced.  This  in 
itself  would  seem  to  point  to  a  great  future  in  store  for  them.  Not  only  so,  but  it 
points  to  a  great  blessing  in  store  for  the  nations  by  means  of  them.  "  If  the  casting 
away  of  them  bo  the  reconciling  of  the  world,  what  shall  the  receiving  of  them  be,  but 
life  from  the  dead  ?  "  (ver.  15).  When  M'Cheyne  returned  from  Palestine,  he  preached 
a  sermon  from  the  words,  "To  the  Jew  first,"  advocating  Christian  mi.-sions  to  the 
Jews  on  the  ground  that  judgment  will  begin  with  the  Jews,  on  the  ground  of  God's 
special  love  for  the  Jews,  on  the  ground  of  peculiar  access  to  the  Jews,  and  on  the 
ground  that  the  Jews,  if  converted,  will  give  life  to  the  whole  world.  This  last  is  a 
point  which  deserves  more  attention  than  it  receives.  From  their  peculiar  position, 
scattered  throughout  tlie  nations,  and  being  of  an  industrious'  and  commercial  dis- 
position, the  Jews  are  specially  fitted  to  do  missionary  work.  Reach  the  Jews  as  a 
people,  bring  them  under  the  influence  of  the  gospel,  and  through  them  you  reach  the 
whole  world.  Many  writers  who  have  given  careful  attention  to  this  subject  are  of 
opinion  that  the  success  of  missions  to  the  heathen  will  be  comparatively  small  until 
the  Holy  Spirit  will  enable  the  Jews  to  acknowledge  Jesus  as  their  Messiah,  until  he 
employs  them  as  his  instrument  in  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  among  the  nations. 
The  Prophet  Zechariah  seems  to  favour  that  view  when  he  says,  "In  those  days  it 
shall  come  to  jiass,  that  ten  men  shall  fake  hold  out  of  all  languages  of  the  nations, 
even  shall  take  hold  of  the  skirt  of  him  that  is  a  Jew,  saying,  We  will  go  with  you : 
for  we  have  heard  that  God  is  with  you  "  (Zeoh.  viii.  23). 

III.  Pbactioal  lessons  enforced  by  this  subject.  1.  2%8  necessity  of  personal 
faith.  While  we  consider  Gud's  dealings  with  Israel  for  their  unbelief  and  disobedience, 
let  us  consider  our  own  relationship  to  Gud.  "Be  not  highminded,  but  fear:  for  if 
God  spared  not  the  natural  liranohes,  take  heed  lest  he  also  spare  not  thee"  (vers.  20, 
21).  Christian  profession  and  Chiistian  privileges  will  not  save  us,  unless  we  have 
a  personal  and  living  union  with  Jesus  Christ  the  Saviour.  2.  Tlie  duty  of  sympathetic 
efforts  on  hehalf  of  Israel.  "  For  as  ye  in  times  past  have  not  believed  God,  yet  have 
now  obtained  mercy  through  their  unbelief:  even  so  have  these  also  now  not  believed, 
that  through  your  mercy  they  also  may  obtain  mercy  "  (vers.  30,  31).  God  will  fulfil 
his  promises  of  the  conversion  of  Israel  just  as  he  fulfils  all  his  promises — by  the  usa 
of  ineansj  by  the  missionary  eflbrts  of  the  Christian  Church. — C.  H.  I, 


OH.  XI.  1-36.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  829 

Vers.  33 — Sfy.— The  umtearchabU  things  of  Ood.  These  words  may  be  taken  as  a 
fitting  conclusion  to  the  doctrinal  or  argumentative  part  of  the  Epistle.  As  we  see 
how  the  apostle  shows  first  of  all,  in  the  condition  of  both  the  heathen  and  the  Jewish 
world,  that  all  have  sinned,  and  that  all  needed  a  Divine  Saviour ;  and  how  he  then 
unfolds  the  great  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  and  its  results ;  as  we  see  also  the 
great  privileges  for  time  and  eternity  which  are  bestowed  upon  the  children  of  God ; 
may  \ye  not  also  exclaim,  "  Oh  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge of  God !  how  unsearchable  are  his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  finding  out  I  " 

I.  His  unsearohablb  wisdom.  "  Oh  the  depth  of  the  riches  of  the  wisdom  of  God  I  " 
nays  the  apostle  (ver.  33);  and  again  he  asks,  "  Who  bath  been  his  counsellor?"  (ver. 
34).  Beyond  ail  human  vyisdom  is  the  wisdom  of  G(>d — a  wisdom  self-sufficient; 
derived  from  no  other  source ;  a  wisdom  of  which,  indeed,  all  human  wisdom  is  but  the 
faint  reflection,  the  outcome  and  the  overflow.  Take  the  very  wisest  of  men — men 
like  Socrates,  Plato,  Seneca,  or  Bacon :  how  foolish  were  some  of  their  thoughts,  their 
proposals,  or  their  actions!  Take  the  very  wisest  man  whom  you  know,  and  he  will 
be  glad  sometimes  to  take  counsel  of  some  one  else.  Indeed,  in  this  the  wise  man  shows 
his  wisdom.  It  is  fools  who  despise  reproof,  and  who  will  not  take  advice.  Bat  God 
needs  no  advice.  He  makes  no  mistakes.  This  thought  of  the  unsearchable  wisdom  of 
Ood  tfaches  us  a  lesson  of  faith  and  trust.  G  'd's  dealings  are  often  mysterious  to  us, 
but  there  is  an  infinite  wisdom  behind  them  all.  He  doeth  all  things  well.  It  teaches 
us  also  a  lesson  of  oiedience.  God's  way  is  always  wisest,  safest,  best,  happiest.  It 
might  be  said  to  us  as  Moses  said  to  the  children  df  Israel,  "  Behold,  I  have  taught 
yon  statutes  and  judgments,  even  as  the  Lord  my  God  commanded  me.  Keep  there- 
fore and  do  them,  for  this  is  your  wisdom  and  your  understanding  in  the  sight  of  the 
nations,  which  shall  hear  all  these  statutes,  and  say.  Surely  this  great  nation  is  a  wise 
and  understanding  people." 

II.  His  unsearchable  knowledob.  We  have  made  much  progress  in  scientific 
knowledge  in  this  nineteenlli  century,  and  yet  how  very  limited,  after  all,  is  human 
knowledge!  How  many  things  in  chemistry,  in  geology,  in  astronomy, ' are  still 
unrevealed !  Even  of  a  single  science  no  man  can  say  that  he  knows  all  about  it, 
though  he  may  have  given  a  lifetime  to  the  study  of  it.  And  then  few  men  are 
masters  of  more  than  one  branch  of  knowledge.  Life  is  too  short  to  do  more  than 
touch  the  surface  of  things.  But  the  knowledge  of  God  is  unsearchable.  "  Oh  the 
depth  of  the  riches  of  the  knowledge  of  God !  .  .  .  Who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the 
Lord?  "  (vers.  33,  34).  Nothing  is  hidden  from  him.  Every  part  and  path  of  the  uni- 
verse is  known  to  him.  Every  nation  is  known  to  him — its  national  history,  its  national 
sins.  Every  fimily  is  known  to  him.  The  joys  and  sorrows  of  every  home,  he  knows 
them  all.  The  secret  thoughts,  the  secret  motives,  the  secret  plans  of  every  hfe,  he 
knows  them  all.  This  thought  carries  with  it  great  comfort.  "  Your  heavenly  Father 
knoweth  what  things  .ye  have  need  of,  Ik  fore  ye  ask  him."  He  knows  all  our  difficulties 
and  all  our  wants.  And  as  we  look  forward  to  the  future,  to  the  judgment-seat,  is 
there  not  a  comfort  in  feeling  that  God's  judgment  upon  us  will  be  a  perfectly  fair  one, 
because  it  will  be  based  upon  a  complete  and  accurate  and  perfect  knowledge  of  our 
lives?  Our  motives  may  be  misunderstood  by  men;  but  God  knows  all  about  them. 
"  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father." 
It  carries  with  it  also  solemn  warning.  If  Gud  knows  all  about  me,  how  careful  I  should 
be  to  live  as  in  his  sight!  How  careful  I  should  be  to  live  as  in  the  presence  of  the 
judjiment-seat!  "For  there  is  nothing  covered,  that  shall  not  be  revealed;  nor  hid, 
that  shall  not  be  known." 

III.  His  unsearchable  mercy.  "  For  God  hath  concluded  them  all  in  unhelief, 
that  he  might  have  mercy  upon  all.  Oh  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom 
and  knowledge  of  God!"  Here  God's  unsearchable  wisdom  and  knowledge  are  repre- 
sented as  co-operating  in  his  plan  of  universal  mercy.  Here  again  what  depths  there 
are  that  we  cannot  fathom !  How  very  unmerciful  men  are  at  the  best !  How  harsh 
the  judgments  even  of  professing  Christians !  and  how  limited  and  narrow  are  some- 
times their  views  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  salvation  of  others!  But  the 'mercy  of 
God  is  wider  than  all  our  creeds,  and  broader  than  the  judgments  of  individual 
Christians.  What  a  depth,  what  a  breadth  of  mercy  is  revealed  in  those  words  o( 
Christ,  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 


830  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  jx  1— 36. 

believeth  on  him  should  uot  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life  "  I  Whosoever  I  In  that 
word  there  is  hope  for  the  guiltiest  of  sinners  who  will  repent  of  his  sin,  and  believe  un 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  So,  while  we  speaJe  of  the  unsearchable  things  of  God,  we  do  not 
take  the  agnostic  position.  We  do  not  say  that  God  is  unknown  and  unknowable. 
We  do  not  know  the  depth  of  his  wisdom  and  knowledge  and  mercy ;  but  we  do  know 
that  he  possesses  and  manifests  all  these  sublime  qualities  in  his  dealings  with  men. 
There  are  mysteries  in  God's  providences,  but  there  is  one  great  truth  which  will  bring 
peace  to  every  soul  that  acts  upon  it;  which  will  bring  every  soul  that  acts  upon  it 
into  the  eternal  presence  and  fellowship  of  God :  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  Tljere  are  thoughts  that  are  unsearchable  about  God,  and 
yet  they  are  thoughts  that  we  can  feel  within  our  spirits  as  the  very  power  of  God 
unto  salvation,  even  as  we  can  feel  the  warm  sunshine  on  our  faces  tliouih  we  cannot 
walk  along  the  bright  pathway  by  which  it  comes.  Jesus  Christ  is  God's  "  unspeak- 
able Gift;"  yet  many  can  say  of  him, "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded 
that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  whioli  I  have  committed  unto  him  against  that  day."  The 
love  of  God  is  called  "  the  love  of  God,  that  passeth  knowledge ; "  and  yet  many  have 
experienced  its  power  in  their  hearts.  The  peace  of  God  is  a  peace  "  that  passeth 
all  understanding ;  "  yet  many  have  known  how,  in  a  time  of  disquietude  or  trial,  that 
peace,  like  a  sentinel,  has  kept  our  hearts  and  minds  in  quiet  confidence  and  calm 
security.  "  Now  we  know  in  part ;  but  then  shall  we  know  even  as  also  wo  are 
known."— C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Grace  and  unbelief.  The  apostle  has  shown  (ch.  ii.  1 — 29)  that 
God  has  the  right,  in  his  governance  of  human  affairs,  to  take  an  instrument  or  lay 
it  aside  as  he  will ;  and  (ch.  ix.  30 — x.  21)  that,  in  using  this  right,  he  acts,  not 
arbitrarily,  but  according  to  reasons  which  approve  themselves  to  his  infinite  wis.lom. 
He  will  now  show  that  even  the  unbelief  of  the  elect  people,  and  their  consequent 
rejection  by  God,  shall  be  made  to  contribute  to  the  consummation  of  his  purposes  in 
the  salvation  of  the  Gentiles  and  the  final  salvation  of  the  Jews  themselves.  But  are 
the  Jews  even  now  wholly  rajected  ?  No,  in  truth,  but  only  partially.  As  a  people 
they  are,  though  this  only  for  the  present,  but  not  indiscriminately  and  totally.  For 
the  apostle  himself  is  an  Israelite ;  there  is  also  a  remnant  of  Christian  Jews,  as  in  the 
ancient  days  a  remnant  were  true  to  God ;  and  as  for  the  majority,  they  are  blinded  in 
their  unbelief,  and  hence  self-excluded  from  the  election  of  grace. 

I.  The  election  of  gbaob.  1.  There  had  been  times  of  national  reprobation  in  the 
past,  but  in  the  darkest  day  there  had  been  gleams  of  light.  For  example,  the  times 
of  Ahab :  Elijah's  despair,  and  the  seven  thousand.  So  at  intervals,  more  or  less, 
throughout  their  history,  from  Moses  onwards.  And  yet  in  the  worst  times  some  were 
true  to  God.  2.  So  it  was  even  now.  Truly  the  Jewish  people  had  forfeited  the 
privilege  of  its  election,  viz.  its  mission  to  the  Gentiles  as  heralding  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
But  while  the  people  was  "  cast  off,"  as  it  might  seem,  in  its  collective  capacity,  it  was 
not  reprobated  in  its  totality  as  consisting  of  individuals.  Still  there  was  the  remnant. 
And  in  these  latter  days  of  Christian  history  have  not  individual  Israelites  played  a 
distinguished  part  ?  e.g.  Neander.  3.  Yea,  even  the  apostle  of  the  Geutiles  himself  was 
an  Israelite,  of  the  purest  blood ;  and  the  very  fact  that  he,  an  Israelite,  was  "  a  chosen 
vessel"  was  sufficient  to  show  that  God  had  not  "cast  off"  his  people.  And  in  him 
the  Jewish  people  might  almost  be  said  to  be  fulfilling  its  office  of  heralding  to  the 
Gentiles  the  gospel  of  Christ.     He  did  their  work,  and  right  well. 

II.  The  beprobation  op  unbelief.  While  the  election,  then,  was  very  true,  and 
never  withheld  from  Israelites  as  such — how  could  God  deal  so  with  them  ? — yet  there 
was  a  very  terrible  reprobation  of  Israelites  alongside  the  election.  1.  Had  it  not  been 
Bo  in  the  past  ?  The  wilderness-history ;  the  monarchy ;  the  captivities.  Yes,  truly, 
reprobation  was  no  new  thing.  2.  And  now :  priests,  people.  Yes,  alas !  "  He  came 
unto  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not."  But  this  gives  us  the  secret  of  the 
reprobation ;  it  was  their  unbelief.  It  had  been  so  from  the  beginning :  "  An  evil 
heart  of  unbelief,  in  departing  from  the  living  God  "  (Heb.  iii.  12).  And  this  unbelief 
had  blinded  them,  and  hardened  them  ;  it  had  been  as  a  stupor.  And  the  very  things 
in  which  they  boasted  themselves,  their  spiritual  privileges,  these  had  been  tc  them  a 
snare.     "  Now  ye  say.  We  see ;  therefore  your  sin  remaiueth." 


0&.XI.  1— 36.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAtL  tO  THE  B0MAN3.  Ml 

Let  us  remember  that  we  may  frustrate  by  our  unbelief  God's  best  purposes  con- 
cerning us.  And  also  that  we  do  not  merely  lose  the  blessing  which  our  privileges  are 
designed  to  give,  but  they  themselves  are  perverted  to  our  blindness  and  spiritual  ruin. 
Our  "  table  "  is  '•  made  a  snare,  and  a  trap."— T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — Bow  much  morel  Blindness  and  hardness  have  come  upon  Israel, 
80  that  they  have  rejected  their  Christ,  and  consequently  God  has  rejected  them. 
They  have  stumbled,  and  have  missed  the  way  of  life.  But  have  they  stumbled  that 
they  might  permanently  fall  ?  Can  God  not  work  to  some  other,  some  better  end 
than  this?  Shall  not  even  their  evil  be  overruled  for  good?  Such  is  the  question 
propounded  by  the  apostle  here ;  and  in  the  following  verses,  glancing  with  prophetic 
insight  into  the  promise  of  the  future,  he  sees  and  declares  the  answer.  Israel  may 
still  be  the  elect  people ;  its  very  reprobation  works  for  the  world's  salvation ;  how 
much  more  shall -its  re-election  I 

L  Israel  may  still  be  the  elect  people.  God  chose  them  from  the  first,  doubtless  for 
some  special  fitness  of  spiritual  temperament,  to  be  his  chief  workers  in  the  world. 
In  Abraham  he  called  them  forth ;  in  Isaac,  in  Jacob,  he  blessed  them.  The  fathers 
of  the  race  had  worked  for  him,  responding  to  his  election:  they  were  thus  holy  unto 
the  Lord.  But  they  were  only  the  firstfruits ;  they  were  the  root.  The  whole  portion 
of  the  human  race  represented  by  them  were  to  be  similarly  set  apart  for  God's  pui'poses; 
the  branches  springing  from  that  root  were  to  blossom  and  bear  fruit  likewise.  And 
BO,  even  in  the  future,  this  now  unbelieving  people  might  fulfil  their  primal  mission, 
turning  unto  the  Lord. 

II.  Israel's  reprobation  works  for  the  world's  salvation.  So  close  is  the  connection 
in  which  Israel  stands  to  the  world's  salvation,  that  even  now,  reprobate  people  as  they 
are,  salvation  springs  from  them,  and  from  the  very  facts  which  occasioned  their  own 
stumbling.  The  cross — oh,  how  has  that  symbol  of  shame  become  the  object  towards 
which  all  the  nations  turn  I  "  To  the  Jews  a  stumbling-block  : "  nevertheless,  Christ 
crucified  draws  all  men  unto  him !  Their  very  fall,  then,  is  the  riches  of  the  world  ; 
their  loss  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles.  Out  of  them,  even  in  their  ruin,  must  the  world's 
deliverance  come;  for  "  salvation  is  of  the  Jews." 

III.  What  sort  of  salvation,  then,  shall  be  for  the  world  when  all  Israel  shall  be 
saved?  This  is  the  final  outlook  of  the  apostle's  prophecy.  And  for  this  he  does  so 
glory  in  his  apostleship.  For  the  very  salvation  of  the  Gentiles  now,  without  tho 
Jews,  must  in  time  provoke  the  Jews  to  jealousy ;  they  must  one  day  look  on  \\  ith 
hungry,  wistful  eyes  as  they  see  the  multitudes  that  have  come  from  the  east  and  west, 
and  north  and  south,  sitting  down  at  the  table  of  God.  And  when  they  turn  unto  their 
own  Christ,  and  receive  the  new  life  of  his  gospel,  oh,  what  an  electric  thrill  shall 
pass  through  the  whole  world  I  It  shall  be,  even  to  the  converted  Gentile  nations, 
as  life  from  the  dead.  "  The  light  which  converted  Jews  bring  to  the  Church,  and 
the  power  of  life  which  they  have  sometimes  awakened  in  it,  are  the  pledge  of  that 
spiritual  renovation  which  will  be  produced  in  Gentile  Christendom  by  their  entrance 
en  masse."  Think,  for  example,  again,  of  the  laboura  of  such  men  as  Neander  (see 
Godet,  in  loc.}. 

The  future  is  full  of  glorious  hope.  But  meanwhile  how  much  loss  is  occasioned  by 
their  continued  unbelief!  Let  us  beware  that  the  purposes  of  God  through  us  are  not 
in  like  manner  frustrated ;  that,  being  designed  to  some  high  mission  for  the  world's 
good,  we  do  not  make  void  the  election  of  God.— T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  17 — 24. — The  solemn  warning.  It  may  be  difficult,  in  such  a  passage 
as  this,  to  keep  the  matters  of  individual  salvation  and  election  to  privileges  and 
responsibilities  in  the  kingdom  of  God  distinct.  They  do  naturally  bear  an  intimate 
relation  the  one  to  the  other.  But  we  shall  be  on  safer  ground  in  following  the  tenor 
of  the  entire  argument  here  also,  and  seeing  both  the  Jews  of  whom  ho  speaks  and 
the  Gentiles  to  whom  he  speaks  as  related  to  God's  great  world-purposes  of  salvation. 
For  though  it  is  true  that  the  Jews  who  believed  not  forfeited  their  individual  part 
in  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  well  as  the  honour  of  extending  that  kingdom  in  the  world ; 
and  that  the  Gentiles  who  believed  became  first  partakers  of  a  personal  salvation,  and 
then  agents  in  disseminating  God's  truth  in  Christ ;  yet  it  is  the  objective  kingdom 


832  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,     [en.  xi.  1—36. 

of  Christ,  and  its  extension,  to  wtich  the  apostle  looks,  and  to  which  he  would  have 
them  look.  They,  his  readers,  were  now,  in  place,  as  it  were,  of  the  unbelieving 
Israelites,  entrusted  with  the  living  power ;  it  was  for  them,  in  conjunction  with  the 
believing  Jews,  to  make  known  salvation  to  the  world.  We  have  here — their  position 
in  the  kingdom  of  God,  their  danger,  and  the  ultimate  aspect  of  the  kingdom. 

I.  First,  the  position  of  these  Gentiles  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  "  Grafted  in  among 
them."  They  had  been  "without  God  in  the  world;"  but  now,  what  a  glory  was 
theirs !  made  "  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  "  1  And,  being  saved,  charged  as  the 
heralds  of  God  to  carry  this  salvation  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  I  Truly,  they  had 
become  "  partaker  of  the  fatness  of  the  olive  tree."  And  so  they  seemed  to  be  in  the 
place  of  the  broken-off  branches ;  they  were  "  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the 
apostles  and  prophets."  Out  of  the  very  ruin  of  the  Israelites  had  come  their  salva- 
tion ;  in  the  very  room  of  the  rejected  Israelites  they  stood.  Here  was  a  transfer  of  - 
blessing. 

II.  But  this  very  position  was  fraught  with  danger.  "  Glory  not ;  "  "  Thou  stanrlest 
by  thy  faith."  The  danger  of  false  pride  was  not  an  imaginary  one ;  Gentiles  probably 
did  glory  over  the  Jews.  Nay,  do  they  not  glory  still  over  these  "  unbelievers  "  ?  Do 
they  not  sometimes  persecute  them  even  to  death?  But  how  false  was  the  pride! 
They  were  only  grafted  branches,  borne  by  the  ancient  root  of  Israel.  And  yet  they 
deported  themselves  with  such  consequence,  and  affected  to  despise  their  neighbour 
branches,  as  well  as  those  that  had  been  broken  off.  Another  danpjer  was  involved  in 
this  :  false,  uncharitable  pride  was  perilously  near  to  a  damnable  unbelief;  it  was 
indeed  that  unbelief  begun.  Why  had  these  branches  been  brokeu  from  the  ancient 
tree  ?  "  Because  of  their  unbelief."  Was  not  the  same  excision  impending  over 
unbelief  si  ill?  Instead,  then,  of  pride,  let  -them  cherish  a  holy  fear,  and  walk  humbly 
with  their  God.  For  most  surely,  if  God  spared  not  the  natural  branches,  neither 
would  he  spare  tliem. 

'  III.  Once  again,  if  faith  was  the  condition  of  a  pirt  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
unbelief  alone  incurred  exclusion  from  its  benefits  and  work,  then  these  very  Jews, 
unbelieving  as  they  now  were,  might,  in  the  time  to  come,  by  faith  become  again 
partakers :  "  God  is  able  to  graft  them  in  again."  God  is  severe  indeed,  and  all 
wilfully  wicked  ones  incur  his  wrath ;  he  cuts  off  his  very  chosen  ones  if  they  cherish 
an  evil  heart  of  unbelief.  But  God  is  good,  and  none  shall  ever  seek  his  face  in  vain. 
And  seeking  him,  and  finding  him,  they  shall  surely  be  restored  to  their  forfeited  place. 
Think  of  the  history  of  the  Gentiles— their  long  abandonment  because  of  unbelief. 
But  God  receives  them  freely  as  instruments  for  his  work.  "  Much  more  shall  the 
natural  branches  he  grafted  into  their  own  olive  tree." 

Let  us  learn  how  terribly  we  may  fall,  and  therefore  be  not  high-minded.  But  let 
us  also  learn  how  gracious  and  forgiving  is  the  God  of  love,  and  how  he  will  heal  our 
backslidings,  and  wdl  not  remember  our  sins. — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  25 — 32. — The  Divine  philosophy  of  history.  The  apostle  has  cautioned  them  not 
to  be  high-minded  because  of  any  seeming  preference  shown  to  them  ;  he  now  guards 
against  their  gross  speculations  as  to  the  nature  of  Israel's  rejection  by  setting  forth 
emphatically  its  true  character  and  intent.  And  in  so  doing  he  takes  also  a  bird's-eye 
view  of  the  religious  history  and  destinies  of  the  world,  especially  as  regards  tie 
mutnal  relations  of  Jews  and  Gentiles.  We  have  here  the  religious  dualism  and 
universalism  of  the  natural  history  of  mankind. 

I.  The  D0ALISM.  As  Godet  very  strikingly  says,  "  The  entire  course  of  the  religious 
history  of  the  world  is  determined  by  the  antagonism  created  among  mankind  by  the 
calling  of  Abraham,  between  a  people  specially  destined  by  God  to  receive  his  revela- 
iions,  and  the  other  nations  given  over  to  themselves.  From  that  moment  (Gen.  xii.) 
there  begin  to  be  described  those  two  immense  curves  which  traverse  the  ages  of 
antiquity  in  opposite  directions,  and  which,  crossing  one  another  at  the  advent  of 
Christianity,  are  prolonged  from  that  period  in  invei'se  directions,  and  shall  terminate 
by  uniting  and  losing  themselves  in  one  another  at)  the  goal  of  liistmy."  1.  The  early 
period  of  the  history  of  the  world,  after  the  call  of  Abraham,  consisted  of  the  contrast 
between  believing  Israel  ami  the  unbelieving  nations.  The  Gentiles,  as  the  beginning 
of  the  Epistle  reminded  u^,  were  given  over  to  their  ignorance  and  sin.    Why  ?   Jiecause 


OH.  XI.  1—36.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS.  333 

tliey  "were  di.-obedieiit  to  God."  Theirs  was  a  negative  discipline  to  fit  them  for  the 
reception  of  the  truth.  They  were  "  shut  up  unto  disobedience,"  that  they  might  be 
prepared  to  receive  unmerited  mercy  at  the  hands  of  God.  And  the  discipline  did  its 
work.  For  them  there  came  a  "  fulness  of  the  times."  They  became  sick  of  their 
own  endeavours  after  wisdom  and  righteousness,  and  when  Christ  was  preached  unto 
them  they  received  him.  How  had  it  been  with  the  Jews?  They  were  chosen  by 
God  to  receive  his  truth,  and  the  preparations  for  his  salvation,  in  trust  for  the  world. 
Theirs  was  a  positive  discipline.  But  the  same  sinful  nature  was  in  them  as  in  the 
Gentiles,  and  it  operated  against  the  truth.  They  became  hardened.  'I'heir  very 
privileges  became  a  SI  are  to  them.  And  at  last,  the  "fulness  of  the  times"  having 
arrived  for  them  also,  when  their  own  Chiist  came  unto  them,  they  received  him  not! 
2.  The  later  period  of  the  world's  history,  alter  Christ,  consisted  of  a  contrast,  which 
itself  was  in  contrast  with  the  former  one.  The  Jews  were  given  over,  are  given  over 
still,  to  their  hardness  of  unbelief.  They  are  the  stoutest  opponents  of  the  gospel. 
They  are  "enemies."  God  was  compelled  to  cast  them  off,  that  the  gospel  which  they 
n  fused  might  be  set  free  for  the  acceptance  of  the  world.  And  the  Gentiles  are 
reaping  the  benefits  of  their  rejection  still.  Not  as  dof;s,  eating  the  crumbs  from  the 
children's  table,  but  themselves  admitted  to  the  forsaken  festal  board. 

II.  The  universalism.  The  dualism  shall  not  always  last;  God  is  preparing  the 
\/aj'  for  the  religious  fusion  of  all  the  peoples  of  the  world  ;  they  shall  become  one  in 
Chri-^t.  1.  The  gospel  which  the  Jews  despised,  and  the  salvation  of  their  own  Saviour, 
is  leavenins  the  Gentile  world ;  the  nations,  one  by  one,  are  passing  out  of  heathendom 
into  Christendom.  Apart  Irom  the  question  of  the  conversion  to  true  spiritual  religion 
of  individuals,  the  world  is  being  won  for  Christ.  2.  But  what  of  Israel  ?  "  The  ful- 
ness of  the  Gentiles"  shall  "come  in;  and  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved."  Oh,  the 
strange  irony  of  history  I  By  the  agency  of  the  Israelites  the  world  should  have  been 
won ;  now  by  the  example  and  agency  of  Gentiles  the  Israelites  shall  be  won.  Yes; 
the  hardening  was  but  "  in  part,"  some  being  believers  from  the  first ;  but  likewise 
only  temporary — "  until."  For  they  are  still  the  people  fitted  by  their  gifts  for  God's 
great  work,  and  therefore  his  call  is  not  revoked.  And  the  very  working  of  their  dis- 
obedience, as  iu  the  case  of  the  heathen  nations  once,  is  but  to  fit  them  to  receive  his 
grace.  And  according  to  their  own  prophecies  the  Deliverer  shall  come,  and  "  from 
Jacob  "  ungodliness  shall  be  turned  away.     So  then  God  will  "  have  mercy  upon  all." 

Let  us  learu  his  ways  of  jidgment.  He  will  give  us  up  to  our  sins,  if  we  persist  in 
cherishing  them,  till  we  repent.  But  let  us  learn  also  his  marvellous  love :  repenting, 
he  will  receive  us  freely! — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  33 — 36. — A  hymn  of  praise.  The  apostle  ias  reached  the  height  of  his  great 
argument,  and  now  he  will  take  one  eagle  glance  at  the  whole  way  by  which  he  has 
led  his  readers — nay,  at  all  the  ways  of  Gud.  We  may  not  coldly  dissect  such  glowing 
words  as  these,  but  pause  with  reverence  to  listen  to  his  adoring  wonder,  his  challenge, 
and  his  ascription  of  praise. 

L  He  has  shown  forth  the  belief  and  unbelief  of  man,  and  the  marvellous  way  in 
which  God,  foreknowing  all,  has  yet  woven  the  web  of  history  so  that  the  wrath  of 
man  shall  praise  him.  But  nflan  is  lost  in  awe  and  wonder  in  presence  of  such  know- 
ledge and  wisdom  as  are  here — 

"  A  vast,  unfathomable  sea. 

Where  all  oui-  thoughts  are  drowned." 

The  judgments  by  which  Gud  manifests  his  knowledge,  and  the  ways  by  which  hig 
wisdom  marches  "on  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  designs,  are  beyond  our  searching  and 
tracing  out.  We  may  know  the  fact,  but  not  always  the  cause ;  we  may  discern  some- 
what of  the  tendency  and  drift  of  his  dispensations,  but  not  all  their  force.  And  when 
the  end  breiiks  upon  us  at  last,  in  the  time  of  the  accomplishment  of  all  things,  we  shall 
»ee  that  what  we  forn  evly  discerned  was  but  a  part  of  his  ways,  and  our  intensified 
astonishment  must  still  exclaim,  "  0  the  depth  of  the  riches  I " 

n.  Man,  then,  has  not  had,  cannot  have,  fellowship  with  God  in  the  working  out  of 
such  a  hij^h  history.  Man  may  indeed  have  worked,  but  God  has  overworked.  And 
even  man's  wickedness  has  been  caught  up  into  the  general  procession  of  God's  designs. 


334  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,     [ch.  xi.  1—36. 

But  man  has  neither  known  his  Maker's  mind,  nor  certainly  has  he  counselled  him  with 
wisdom.  And  yet  did  the  arrogant  Israelite  think  to  have  merited  aught  from  Grod? 
as  though  he  had  given  him,  forsooth,  hy  his  vain  services,  that  it  must  be  recompensed 
him  again  ?  This  was  indeed  to  arrogate  to  himself  that  knowledge  of  God's  mind, 
and  oounsellorship  of  his  ways,  which  were  impossible,  and  to  affect  which  was  pre- 
posterous, and  darkly  like  blasphemy.  But  the  apostle  has  already  cast  these  pre- 
sumptions down,  even  to  the  dust. 

III.  It  only  needs  now  that  he  reassert,  once  for  all,  the  utter  freedom  of  the  actions 
of  Grod,  which  he  has  argued,  and  at  the  same  time  the  almightiness  and  goodness  of 
his  ways,  as  also  previously  set  forth.  "  Of  him."  He  is  the  primal  Fount  of  creation 
and  of  history.  All  things  proceed  forth  from  him,  therefore  surely  he  may  put  down 
one  and  set  up  another.  "  Through  him."  The  very  sins  of  men  are  open  to  his  pre- 
vision, and  their  folly  and  blindness,  and  the  results  therefore  do  not  take  him  by 
surprise ;  but  rather  they  are  allowed  for  in  the  great  plan  of  his  world-kingdom,  and 
therefore  through  him  they  may  be  said  to  work  their  way.  "  To  him."  The  very 
sins  which  he  allows,  and  their  consequences,  adverse  as  they  may  seem  to  he  to  his 
plans,  he  can  so  control  that  they  shall  work  for  ultimate  good.  To  him  ?  Yes,  to 
the  perfecting  of  his  wise  plans.  And  these  plans  of  his  wisdom  ?  They  are  all  In 
lore.    Therefore  to  him  we  will  ascribe  the  glory  evermore.     Amen. 

Oh  how  utterly  we  may  trust  him,  if  we  will  I  For  only  our  persistent  sin  can  shut 
ua  out  from  the  might  of  his  marvellous  love. 

"  Here,  then,  I  doubt  no  more. 

But  In  bis  pleasure  rest, 
Whose  wisdom,  love,  and  truth,  and  power 

Engage  to  make  me  blest." 

T.  F.  L. 

Ver.  13. — Magnifying  one*s  office.  The  Epistles  are  prevented  from  being  a  dry 
compendium  of  doctrine  by  the  personal  notices  scattered  through  them,  and  by  the 
apostle's  open-hearted  references  to  his  plans  and  feelings.  The  human  element  is 
strong  and  interesting.  What  a  liglit  is  thrown  on  the  apostle's  self-denying  labours 
by  the  declaration,  "  I  magnify  my  olEoe  "  I  He  gloried  in  his  ministry,  in  his  deacon- 
ship. 

I.  Thbt  woek  best  who  ABE  PROTJD  OF  THBiE  OFFICE.  Such  freely  devote  the 
necessary  time,  thought,  and  energy  to  the  efScient  discharge  of  their  duties.  It 
becomes  a  "  labour  of  love ;  "  the  heart  quickens  the  circulation  of  the  blood  for  all  the 
activity  requisite  to  faithful  stewardship.  Men  can  grow  to  like  what  at  first  was 
irksome,  as  we  often  see  in  prosecuting  any  study  in  science  or  art,  till  the  subject 
and  pursuit  fascinate.  We  get  clearer  and  more  extensive  views  of  the  achievements 
possible.  The  apostle  saw  that  the  reception  of  the  Gentiles  might  provoke  the  Jews 
to  godly  jealousy  and  fruitful  emulation,  and  that  the  entry  of  the  Jews  into  the 
Christian  Church  would  prove  a  stimulus  and  revival  to  all.  It  is  the  office,  not  the 
holder,  which  is  to  be  magnified.  Where  men  have  strutted  like  peacocks,  airing  their 
vanity ;  where  Bumbledom  has  been  harsh  and  overbearing,  and  man,  "  drest  in  a  little 
brief  authority,  has  played  fantastic  tricks,"  the  chief  regard  has  been  paid  to  self 
instead  of  to  the  service  rendered.  To  glorify  our  ministry  Is  to  remain  humble,  and 
tender  in  heart,  lest  the  ministry  should  be  discredited  and  its  use  diminished. 

II.  All  woek  is  honourable  to  which  God  has  appointed  us.  To  receive 
a  commission  from  an  illustrious  sovereign  lends  dignity  to  a  task,  and  it  is  this 
thought  of  a  Divine  mission  which  has  upheld  many  a  hero  at  his  post  of  toil  and 
peril.  In  the  great  house  of  God  vessels  of  every  capacity  and  form  and  texture  are 
needed,  and  whilst  we  may  covet  the  best  gifts  and  the  noblest  service,  no  department 
is  despicable.  Said  Lincoln  the  president,  when  taunted  with  his  former  menial 
occupation,  "  Didn't  I  do  it  well  ?  "  Enw  may  we  know  that  we  are  in  the  right  place  t 
By  the  character  of  our  work.  Does  it  tend  to  happiness  and  usefulness,  lessening 
misery  and  vice,  supplying  real  wants,  and  elevating  not  degrading  mankind,  not 
ministering  to  base  passions  and  low  appetites?  £y  sztccess  therein.  Paul  could  point 
t«  the  "  signs  of  an  apostleship."  Though  some  honest  labourers  may  have  to  wait  for 
the  crowning  harvest,  they  can  yet  discern  tokens  of  its  advent,  which  forbid  denpoa- 


CH.  XI.  1—36.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  335 

dency.  By  the  strength,  of  the  inward  impulse.  There  must  be  a  "call,"  a  necessity 
within  ratified  by  compulsion  without.  £1/  the  way  they  have  been  led.  Has  not  the 
cloudy  pillar  guided  pur  steps,  the  road  being  blocked  in  other  directions?  Our  posl 
is  to  be  abandoned  only  when  a  higher  position  manifestly  offers  itself. 

in.  Work  dikected  to  the  salvation  op  men  cannot  be  too  highly  esteemed. 
As  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  PhuI  was  char.;ed  with  a  splendid  embassage.  What  hearts 
were  cheered,  what  minds  illumined,  what  consciences  freed  from  gloom,  what  holiness 
and  philanthropy  effected,  by  the  preaching  of  Christ  crucified  and  exalted  for  the 
redemption  of  men!  We  do  not  disparage  aught  that  ministers  to  men's  temporal 
comfort,  that  enlarges  their  knowledge  of  this  present  world  and  their  mastery  over  its 
varied  contents,  that  embellishes  their  homes  and  quickens  their  sensibility  to  pure 
sources  of  delight ;  yet  to  turn  a  soul  from  the  error  of  his  ways,  to  save  from  spiritual 
death,  to  instil  into  the  breast  enthusiastic  loyalty  to  the  cause  of  God,  this  connecling 
as  it  does  the  transitory  with  the  eternal,  preparing  the  spirit  for  a  nobler  exercise  of 
capacity  in  a  boundless  congenial  sphere  hereafter,  making  earth  the  pathway  to 
heaven,  this  must  be  allowed  to  be  the  highest,  most  awe-stirring  mission  that  can 
engage  our  attention  and  engross  our  powers.  Let  those  set  apart  to  this  work  entirely 
or  partially,  prize  their  functions!  Pastors,  deacons,  teachers,  visitors,  members  of 
committees,  etc.,  down  to  the  very  doorkeepers  of  God's  house,  may  exult  in  all  that 
appertains  to  this  vocation,  may  be  conscious  that  therein  they  are  co-operating  with 
God  and  the  aogels.  If  great  thoughts  and  little  souls  do  not  harmonize,  neither  does 
it  become  us  to  ally  grand  endeavours  with  mean  conceptions.  Behold  this  title 
glittering  with  heavenly  radiance,  "  the  work  of  the  Lord."  This  enterprise  occupies 
the  heart  of  the  ascended  Saviour,  as  it  filled  his  life  here  below. — S.  K.  A. 

Ver.  16. — The  dedication  of  a  part  the  consecration  of  the  whole.  The  reference  is 
to  Numb.  XV.,  where  the  ordinance  is  given  that  before  the  Israelites  ate  of  the  food  of 
Canaan  a  portion  of  the  dough  should  be  taken  as  a  cake  offering  to  the  priests.  This 
was  a  recognition  of  God's  sovereignty,  of  his  care  and  goodness,  and  by  this  acknow- 
ledgment the  entire  food  was  hallowed. 

I.  The  application  to  the  apostolic  akgument  concerning  the  rnTUBB  of 
Israel.  The  Jews  as  a  notion  seemed  cast  away,  stripped  of  former  privilege  and 
dignity.  Yet,  since  the  patriarchs  and  prophets  and  priests  had  been  declared  holy 
unto  the  Lord,  and  had  served  him  according  to  his  appointment,  the  remainder  of  the 
people  must  be  accounted  sacred,  and  thus  the  apostle  was  led  to  expect  the  future 
salvation  of  Israel  when  it  should  turn  to  the  Lord.  The  inner  life  of  the  tree  should 
be  restored  and  invigorated,  and  then  the  branches  should  again  acquire  beauty  and 
fruitfulnt'ss.     They  were  still  "  beloved  for  the  fathers'  sakes." 

II.  The  same  metaphor  applies  to  the  relationship  of  Christ  to  his  people. 
His  holiness  wraps  them  round.  Not  only  were  individual  institutions  and  officers 
symbolical  and  prophetical  of  the  Messiah,  but  the  nation  as  a  whole  typified  the  Son 
of  promise.  "  When  Israel  was  a  child,  then  I  loved  him,  and  called  my  son  out  of 
Egypt."  This  explains  many  references  of  Old  Testament  passages  to  Christ  by  the 
evangelists  and  apostles.  The  nation  was  the  "  servant "  of  God,  by  which  title,  there- 
fore, Jesus  Christ  is  constantly  designated.  Israel  as  a  whole  was  claimed  as  God's 
peculiar  possession.  By  right  of  redemption,  and  the  death  of  the  firstborn  in  Egypt, 
the  tribe  of  Levi  was  allotted  to  Jehovah  in  recognition  of  his  lien  upon  Israel,  and  the 
number  of  the  firstborn  over  and  above  the  number  of  that  tribe  was  balauced  by  a 
money  payment.  Yet  Israel  was  "  a  holy  nation  unto  the  Lord,"  and  the  service  of 
the  priesthood  represented,  not  superseded,  the  service  of  the  nation.  So  is  Jesus 
Christ  termed  "  the  Firstborn  from  the  dead,"  and  the  Christian  Church  is  "  the  general 
assembly  of  the  Firstborn."  Christ  sanctified  himself  far  his  people,  that  his  meritf 
might  attach  to  them.  We  talk  much  to-day  of  the  solidarity  of  the  race,  and  this 
hel|)s  us  to  realize  how  the  leaven  leaveneth  the  lump.  Great  men  are  seen  to  be 
universal  property ;  the  use  of  their  gifts  blesseth  all  mankind.  As  one  takes  a  common 
tool  and  by  deft  handling  convinces  us  of  what  it  is  capable ;  as  one  cultivates  his  estate 
as  a  nursery  and  pattern  for  all  gardens ;  as  another  enlarges  the  domain  of  science 
whereby  the  navigator,  the  manufacturer,  the  thinker,  and  the  consumer  all  reap  a 
benefit ;  so  did  our  Saviour  teach  us  how  much  may  be  made  of  human  life,  how  grand 


336  THE  EPlSTLB  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [ch.  xi.  1—36. 

and  pure  and  beneficent  it  may  become,  and  by  his  sacrifice  opened  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  to  all  believers.  Well  may  we  rejoice  in  his  work!  Our  High  Priest  befoie 
the  throne  sanctifies  all  who  come  to  God  through  him.  At  the  jubilee  festivities  the 
Queen  of  Hawaii  claime'l  precedence  as  a  sovereign,  and,  her  credentials  being  authenti- 
cated, her  claim  was  granted  ;  so  may  we,  as  the  brethren  of  Christ,  lift  up  our  heads, 
teing  made  "  kings  and  priests  unto  G-od."  It  is  our  connection  with  him  that 
ennobles  our  condition. 

III.  Some  pkactical  applications  to  conduct  and  property.  To  consecrate  the 
heart  to  Ood  covers  all  the  life,  sanctifies  all  the  issues  which  flow  from  it.  Here  is  the 
difference  between  religion  and  morality ;  here  is  the  reason  why  some  of  the  characters 
of  Scripture  are  called  "  saints,"  in  spite  of  infirmities  and  lapses.  The  setting  apart  of 
Sunday  as  the  Lord's  day  hallows  all  the  week.  We  arw  then  what  we  are  not  able  to 
be  at  other  times,  free  from  secular  engagements  and  absorbed  in  devotion.  And  like 
a  garden  well  watered  in  the  early  morn,  the  busy  life  retains  its  vigour  and  freshness 
throu-jh  the  heated  hours  which  follow.  The  dedication  of  youth  is  a  consecration  of 
the  after-life.  Youth  is  like  the  morning  of  the  day,  and  should  be  watered  betimes 
with  the  dews  of  prayer.  Prayer  should  bo  tho  foundation-stone  of  each  enterprise. 
"  When  first  thy  eyes  unveil,  give  thy  soul  leave  to  do  the  like ;  give  God  thy  first 
thoughts  then,  so  shalt  thou  walk  with  him  all  day,  and  in  him  sleep."  The  devotion 
of  a  tithe  or  gift  Messes  all  the  increase.  The  beauty  of  recurring  seasons  may  fail  to 
arouse  because  of  the  very  regularity  of  their  succession.  Nature's  constant  stream  of 
blessings  may  lull  the  soul  into  forgetfulness  of  the  Giver.  Hence  the  rites  prescribed 
to  Israel.  "  The  altar  unlocks  the  reaping  gate."  The  first  grains  feed  the  altar,  the 
first  sickle  cuts  an  offering  for  God.  The  common  household  routine  of  baking  ig 
transfigured  by  the  appropriation  of  a  part  of  the  dough  to  religious  uses.  And  this, 
not  as  a  burden,  a  hateful  tax,  but  a  task  of  love.  Not  instead  of  hearty  devotion,  but 
as  an  outward  emblem  of  gratitude.  The  followers  of  Christ  are  to  bless  the  world. 
They  are  "  begotten  through  the  Word  of  truth  to  be  a  kind  of  firstfrnits  of  God's 
creatures."  'i'hey  are  as  salt  to  preserve,  as  light  to  illumine.  All  brought  into  contact 
with  them  should  be  the  better  because  they  were  called  with  a  holy  cnliing. 

Conclusion.  The  topic  reminds  us  of  our  certain  resurrection  to  heavenly  activity 
and  glory.  Christ  was  the  Firstfruits  of  them  that  sleep.  Sad  to  us  the  interval  when 
we  see  our  friends  no  more ;  death's  icy  hand  has  grasped  them,  and  the  worms  do  their 
work.  Yet  as  Christ  rose,  so  shall  the  seed  spring  up,  we  know  not  how.  Death's 
seeming  triumph  is  a  defeat.  They  shall  be  changed  and  glorified;  the  crumbling  dust 
shall  shine  brighter  than  the  noonday  sun. — S.  R.  A. 

Vers.  20,  21. — Spiritual  pride  rebuJced.  The  pride  of  man  is  a  bladder  easily 
inflated,  and  the  apostle  performed  a  salutary  service  when  he  showed  how  readily  it 
might  be  pricked.  The  throwing  open  to  the  Gentile  world,  with  additional  advantages, 
of  the  religious  privileges  formerly  confined  to  the  Jews,  begot  in  many  converts  an 
undue  elation.  Christianity  inspires  men  with  such  expansive  hopes  that  there  is  a 
danger  of  overweening  vanity  and  presumption  leading  to  a  neglect  of  the  conditions 
under  which  alone  these  hopes  can  be  realized.  The  mercy  ol  God  may  be  illegiti- 
mately strained;  the  consciousness  of  spiritual  freedom  has  often  degenerated  into 
licence  of  behaviour,  and  the  "goodness"  of  God  has  made  men  unmindful  of  his 
"severity."  Hence  the  useful  caution  of  the  text.  Distinguish,  however,  between 
"fear"  and  "dread."  Beverential,  humble  fear  is  quite  compatible  with  gladness  of 
s/m\  ar.d  with  unwavering  trust  in  the  promise  of  a  free  and  full  salvation.  Let  us 
adduce  considerations  that  justify  the  caution  of  these  verses. 

I.  We  have  an  impartial  God  to  deal  with.  An  arbitrary  capricious  monarch 
may  select  favourites,  and  dispense  his  gifts  without  regard  to  the  moral  worth  of  the 
recipients.  Gentiles  receiving  an  account  of  the  river  of  Divine  love  abandoning  its 
previous  channel  and  inundating  with  a  flood  of  blessing  the  surrounding  parched 
lands,  might  be  lapped  into  a  false  security,  as  if  this  blessing  once  granted  could  not 
again  be  withheld,  no  matter  what  the  use  made  of  the  fertilizing  influences  vouchsafed. 
This  would  be  to  overlook  the  fact  that  it  was  for  reasons  the  Jews  were  stripped  of 
their  exclusive  advantages,  and  that  the  same  reasons  of  abuse  and  ingratitude  might 
cause  'the  story  to  be  repeated  in  the  case  of  Christians,  boastful  of  their  position  of 


CH.  XI.  1—36.]    THE  EPISTLE   OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS.  337 

knowledge  and  close  access  to  God,  and  omitting  to  cultivate  the  appropriate  graces 
and  duties. 

II.  The  law  and  aim  of  God's  government  is  kiohtbousness.  Here  we  ascend 
to  that  essential  attribute  of  God  which  is  the  guide  and  end  of  his  dealings  with  bis 
creatures.  Well-being  cannot  be  separated  from  well-doing.  In  no  other  way  can  the 
Almighty  make  his  people  happy  than  by  inducing  them  to  practise  what  is  "  lovely 
and  of  good  report,"  Christ  died  to  save  men  from  their  sins.  His  offering  frees  men 
from  the  overwhelming  burden  of  their  past  enormities,  wipes  off  the  score  against 
them,  but  requires  the  pursuit  of  holiness  as  the  consequence  and  token  of  their  for- 
giveness. The  bearing  of  good  fruit  is  the  sure  criterion  of  the  improved  condition  of 
the  tree.  The  rose  which  blooms  not  tells  not  of  proper  grafting.  Faith  in  Christ 
admits  to  his  kingdam,  and  continued  faith  showing  itself  by  works  of  obedience  keeps 
us  united  to  the  source  of  prosperity  and  progress.  Heaven  needs  a  prepared  people 
to  enter  into  its  bliss  and  service.  Greatly  do  men  err,  therefore,  who  plume  them- 
selves on  their  conversion  and  go  not  on  unto  sanctifioation  of  life. 

III.  HiSTOBY  TEACHES  US  HUMiLiTT,  History  is  God  in  action.  The  facts  of 
history  are  naught  apart  from  the  revelation  of  a  Divine  order  they  bring  to  the 
illniiiined  mind.  The  fate  of  Israel  is  a  tablet  whose  letters  of  fire  should  brand  them- 
selves on  the  memory  as  a  declaration  of  the  forbearing  goodness  of  God  to  the 
faithful,  and  bis  ultimate  severity  to  the  disobedietit.  God  changes  not;  what  he  has 
done  he  may  do  again.  If  "the  natural  blanches"  were  not  spared,  why  should  he 
spare  the  objects  of  his  after-clemency  when  they  too  turn  aside  to  rebel  counsels  ? 
The  story  of  the  antediluvians  swept  away  by  a  torrent  of  righteous  indignation ;  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Sodom  smitten  in  their  pride  and  idleness;  of  the  Canaanites  •' spued 
out "  of  the  land  fur  their  wickedness ;  of  Babylon  and  Xineveh,  where  civilization  was 
a  hot-bed  of  vice,  its  riot  and  fumes  extinguished  by  the  desert  sands ;  of  Judas,  who  by 
transgression  fell  from  bis  apostleship ;  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  prufaned  by  its 
guardians  and  then  "iveu  over  to  the  flames ;  of  the  candlesticks  removed  when  the 
Churches  of  Asia  "  lost  their  first  love ; " — all  these  are  so  many  voices  echoing  the 
warning  of  the  text,  "  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear."  God  spares  long,  but  at  last 
the  thunderbolt  falls.     Sin  marches  to  its  destined  grave. 

ly.  The  degeitfulness  of  ottb  hearts  calls  for  constant  vtgilancb.  Human 
nature  remains  true  to  itself,  brings  forth  the  same  fruit  in  all  ages.  Even  in  the 
renewed  nature  of  the  Christian,  "  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit."  The  serpent 
of  evil  ig  scotched,  not  killed.  Our  environment  exposes  us  to  unceasing  attacks.  At 
any  moment  of  relaxed  tension,  the  foe  may  assault  and  carry  the  fortress.  "  Let  him 
that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall,"  The  Saviour  emphasized  the  caution, 
"  What  I  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all,  Watch !  "  Children  are  often  reckless  because 
they  [lerceive  not  the  danger ;  wise  men  neglect  no  precautions.  Our  safest  course  is  to 
be  intent  on  "  the  things  that  accompany  salvation,"  to  fill  the  hands  with  beneficent 
activities,  to  engage  the  thoughts  on  noblest  themes.  Fre^s  toward  the  goal,  and  no 
enchanted  meadow  shall  beguile  our  steps.  Like  earnest  competitors,  read  the  rules 
carifully  and  sedulously  conform  to  them.  Prayerful  meditation  on  the  Scriptures, 
bumble  confidence  in  God,  and  the  opening  of  the  heart  to  the  sway  of  the  blessed 
Spirit,  will  correct  any  wrong  attitude,  and  enable  us  to  persevere  to  the  end.  "  Let  us 
therefore  fear,  lest  a  promise  being  left  us,"  etc. — S.  R.  A. 

Vers.l — 10. — The  election  of  grace.  We  saw  in  last  chapter  how  the  Jews,  absorbed 
In  the  task  of  working  out  their  own  self-righteousness,  had  not  as  a  nation  submitted 
themselves  to  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God,  The  Gentiles  were  accordingly  appealed 
to,  and  their  reception  of  the  gospel  is  being  used  to  provoke  the  Jews  to  jealousy, 
and  lead  them  ultimately  to  a  better  mind.  In  the  chapter  now  before  us  the  apostle 
pursues  the  argument,  and  exhibits  more  in  detail  the  Divine  plan  in  Israel's  rejection. 
The  section  now  to  be  considered  emphasizes  the  fact  that,  notwithstanding  the  general 
Jewish  rejection  of  the  gospel,  there  is  an  election  of  grace.     And — 

1.  Paul  is  himself  an  exception  to  the  general  rejection  or  the  oosfkl 
ON  THE  part  of  the  Jews.  (Ver.  1.)  To  the  question  which  in  the  Revised  Version 
is  put,  "  Did  God  oast  off  his  people?"  the  apostle  virtually  answers,  "By  no  means;  I 
ira  myself  a  proof  to  the  contrary."    Paul  had,  like  his  compatriots,  gone  about  to 

ROMAKS.  ■ 


«38  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,  [ch.  xi.  1— 36. 

establish  his  own  righteousness ;  for  years  he  had  been  taking  that "  roundabout  way ; " 
but  he  had  been  led  by  his  interview  with  his  risen  Lord  to  see  in  the  crucified  Nazarene 
the  Messiah  of  promise,  and  he  had  accepted  salvation  from  his  holy  hands.  No 
arrangement  of  Q-od  prevented  any  Jew  from  entering  the  charmed  circle  of  Christ'* 
fellowship  and  identifying  himself  with  the  Christian  Church.  The  once-despised 
Messiah  was  waiting  to  receive  all  that  cared  to  call  upon  him  for  his  help.  It  was,  of 
course,  a  salvation  all  of  grace.  Self-righteousness  was  sacrificed  in  the  process ;  but  it 
was  in  consequence  the  more  thoroughly  Divine.  Consequently,  it  was  the  Jews  who 
kept  themselves  out  of  the  promise  and  the  blessing,  and  no  preventive  ordinance  of 
God. 

II.  The  saved  exceptions  abb  always  more  numerous  than  we  in  cub  down- 
cast CONDITION  IMAGINE.  (Vers.  2 — 5.)  The  apostle  goes  back  for  comfort  to  the 
case  of  Elijah.  In  his  days  religion  was  in  a  desperate  condition.  One  by  one  had 
Jezebel  cut  off  God's  prophets,  so  that  Elijah,  as  he  looked  over  the  doomed  land, 
fancied  he  was  the  only  witness  left.  The  whole  nation,  in  his  judgment,  had  con- 
formed to  the  idolatry  of  the  court,  and  his  were  the  only  knees  which  had  not  bowed 
to  Baal.  It  was  this  view  of  things  which  Elijah  laid  before  the  Lord.  But  to  his 
surprise  he  is  informed  that  God  has  still  seven  thousand  worshippers  who  have  not 
bowed  to  Bail  nor  kissed  the  idol.  Matters  were  batter  than  Elijah  imagined.  There 
was  s  larger  remnant,  according  to  the  election  of  grace,  than  he  could  have  anticipated. 
The  same  lesson  is  to  be  learned  at  a  later  period  in  Hebrew  history,  in  connection  with 
the  restoration  of  the  exiles  to  Canaan.  In  the  restored  remnant  God  had  a  larger  pro- 
portion of  faithful  witnesses  than  to  the  outward  eye  was  apparent ;  and  they  became 
a  seed  of  blessing  in  the  promised  land.  It  is  so,  let  us  believe,  always.  We  cannot 
see  all  the  good  which  has  been  accomplished  through  the  gospel.  We  must  let  God 
"  write  up  the  people,"  and  make  out  his  own  statistics.  Our  reckoning,  like  Elijah's, 
will  usually  be  astray.  God  has  "hidden  ones,"  unknown  to  most,  and  his  cause  is  not 
the  hopeless  one  which  pessimists  suggest. 

III.  The  bemnant  saved  owes  all  to  Divinb  geace.  (Ver.  6.)  For  the  gospel 
IS  a  way  of  salvation  by  free,  unmerited  favour,  as  opposed  to  all  self-righteoiisness.  It 
may  be  humiliating  to  be  able  to  contribute  nothing  to  our  own  salvation,  but  to  have 
to  accept  it  full  and  free  from  a  risen  Lord ;  yet  salvation  through  humiliation  is  better, 
•urely,  than  being  lost.  "Grace,"  says  Dr.  E.  W.  Hamilton,  "  is  free  favour ;  it  can  be 
related  to  no  right,  and  contained  in  no  law.  It  is  extra-judicial :  whenever  bestowed, 
it  depends  upon  the  mere  will  of  him  who  exercises  it,  or,  upon  what  is  the  same  thing, 
his  voluntary  pledge  and  agreement.  If  this  latter  be  withdrawn,  there  may  be  a 
forfeiture  of  integrity  and  fidelity,  but  it  is  only  so  far  unjust  to  those  deprived  of  it, 
that  a  claim  arose  out  of  it;  but  no  injustice  accrues  to  them,  considered  in  their 
original  circumstances.  A  simple  test  of  grace  is  presented  by  the  following  inquiries : 
Ought  it  to  be  exercised  ?  Can  it  be  righteously  withheld  f  If  we  affirm  the  one,  if  we 
deny  the  other,  it  may  be  obligation,  debt,  reason,  it  cannot  be  grace,  for  this  principle 
never  owes  itself  to  its  object ;  and  in  not  showing  it,  the  person  still  is  just.  If  there 
is  any  necessity  for  it,  save  that  of  demerit  and  its  misery,  it '  is  no  more  grace.' "  ^  By 
keeping  the  meaning  of  the  term  steadily  in  view,  then,  it  will  be  seen  that  no  injustice 
is  done  any  who  decline  salvation  by  free  grace  and  insist  on  some  form  of  self- 
righteousness.  For  the  latter  is  pure  favouritism,  and  the  former  can  alone  be  adopted 
by  a  God  who  is  no  respecter  of  persons. 

IV.  The  eejeoted  Jews  were  judicially  blinded.  (Vers.  7 — 10.)  Now,  when 
we  consider  what  the  Jews  generally  were  seeking  after,  we  can  see  justice  in  their 
rejection.  Their  idea  was  essentially  ambitious ;  they  wanted  a  military  and  worliUy 
Messiah  to  put  them  at  the  head  of  the  nations  of  the  earth.  This  vaulting  ambition 
overleaped  itself  and  fell  on  the  other  side.  They  obtained  not  what  they  were  seeking 
for.  But  the  election,  the  humble-minded  who  were  ready  to  be  saved  by  grace,  got 
their  salvation  and  their  place  in  Messiah's  spiritual  kingdom.  A  spiritual  Messiah 
satisfied  their  longings,  while  the  proud,  self-righteous  worldlings  were  sent  empty 
away.  Now,  what  the  apostle  here  notices  is  that  their  worldly  spirit  led  to  spiritual 
blindness.  They  were  so  engrossed  with  the  table  of  self-righteousness  and  ambition 
I  hitt  they  could  not  see  the  offers  and  education  of  God's  grace.     This  blindness  come* 

'  6«e  the  whole  diacourse  on  ver.  6  in  '  Sermons,'  voL  i.  pp.  280 — 312. 


OH.  XI.  1—36.]    THE   EPISTLE  OP   PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  339 

in  the  very  order  of  nature,  and  is  judicial.  Engrossed  with  purely  worldly  ideas,  they 
get  unable  to  see  the  gracious  opportunities  or  to  appreciate  them.  And  so  they 
experience  a  fate  which  they  richly  deserve*  May  God  preserve  us  all  from  judicial 
bliudness  I— B.  M.  E. 

Vers.  11 — 32. — Itrad's future.  In  the  section  now  before  ua  we  find  the  apostle 
passing  from  the  judicial  blindness  which  had  come  upon  his  countrymen  to  its  provi- 
dential purpose.  For  God  can  make  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him,  and  the  remainder 
of  that  wrath  he  can  restrain  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).  Hence  the  blind  course  pursued  by  the 
Jews  is  made  the  opportunity  for  the  Gentiles.  Paul,  when  the  Jews  would  not  receive 
the  gospel,  turned  to  the  Gentiles,  and  had  his  success  as  apostle  to  the  heathen.  But 
the  Gentiles,  in  their  turn,  are  to  contemplate  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  God's 
favour,  and  to  work  for  it.  Israel  is  to  be  yet  gathered  into  God,  and  when  this  desir- 
able consummation  comes,  it  will  be  as  life  unto  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  future  of 
Israel  is  what  the  apostle  consequently  in  this  paragraph  discusses.'     And — 

I.  The  fall  of  Israel  opened  up  a  way  fob  the  balvation  of  the  Gentiles. 
(Vers.  11, 12.)  There  is  a  strange  unity  in  the  human  organism,  so  that  when  one 
part  suffers  another  part  is  saved.  How  often,  by  applying  a  blister  to  an  external 
part,  the  inflammation  of  an  internal  part  is  relieved!  We  have  the  same  law  of 
vicaiious  suffering  obtaining  in  the  human  race.  It  is  an  organic  whole  on  a  vastly 
larger  scale.  And  so  we  find  one  race  suffering  lor  the  benefit  of  the  others.  Take  the 
case  of  France,  for  example,  and  do  we  not  see  in  it  a  nation  which  has  been  suffering 
from  governmental  experiments  since  before  the  Revolution,  and  becoming  thereby  a 
beacon  and  a  blessing  to  the  other  nations  of  the  earth  ?  In  the  very  same  way,  the 
Jewish  nation,  through  rejecting  Jesus,  led  to  the  evangelization  of  the  Gentiles;  and, 
as  the  "  tribes  of  the  wandering  foot  and  wt  ary  breast,"  the  children  of  Israel  have  been 
among  the  most  precious  proofs  of  the  Divinity  of  our  Scriptures.  Their  fall  has  thus 
been  the  riches  of  the  world ;  the  diminishing  of  them  has  been  the  riches  of  the 
Gentiles.  The  sad  fate  which  made  exiles  and  aliens  of  Israel  has  led  to  the  acceptance 
and  sonship  of  the  Gentiles.  Moreover,  the  apostle  argues  that  the  fulness  of  the  Jews, 
when  this  comes  round,  will  be  the  condition  of  still  more  abundant  blessing  to  the 
Gentile  nations.  A  suffering  nation  leads  to  the  blessing  of  other  nations ;  when  the 
suffering  shall  cease,  still  more  abundant  blessing  shall  be  the  result. 

II.  The  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  holds  before  them  the  hope  of  still  mobb 

ABUNDANT   BLESSING   WHEN   THE   JbWS    ABB    GATHBBED    IN.       (VcrS.    13 15.)       As    » 

skilful  apostle,  he  wants  to  play  the  one  against  the  other.  He  would  stir  up  the  Jews 
to  jealousy  by  showing  them  how  much  the  gospel  has  benefited  the  Gentiles ;  in  this 
way  he  would  try  to  save  some  of  them.  On  the  other  hand,  he  would  hold  before 
the  Gentiles  the  hope  of  far  greater  blessing  when  the  Jews  would  be  gathered  in,  and 
so  set  the  Gentiles  upon  the  enterprise  of  saving  the  Jews.  Israel  will  thus  be  a, 
stimulus  to  missionary  enterprise.  A  great  revival  of  spiritual  life  is  to  be  expected 
through  the  ingathering  of  the  Jews.  So  great  will  it  be  as  to  be  properly  compared 
to  a  resurrection,  "life  from  the  dead;"  consequently  the  Gentiles,  as  a  matler  of 
spiritual  profit,  should  seek  the  salvation  of  Israel.  In  this  way  Paul  promotes  the 
•mlty  of  the  nations.  He  shows  that  in  mutual  good  will  is  to  be  found  their  very 
highest  good. 
in.  From  thb   holiness  of  the  Jewish    firstfruits,  and  of   the  Jewish 

BOOT,   THE    apostle    FURTHER    ARGUES    TO    THB    HOLINESS    OF     THB     LUMP    AND    THB 

BBAN0HE8.  (Ver.  16.)  Now,  the  apostle  here  speaks  of  the  benefit  and  blessing  which 
the  Jewish  stock  had  already  been  to  the  world.  Some  take  the  reference  in  the  first- 
fruits  and  root  to  be  to  the  fathers  referred  to  in  ver.  28 ;  the  idea  being  that  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob  were  "  holy,"  that  is,  set  apart,  and  so  are  their  descendants  to  be. 
Others  take  it  as  referring  to  the  elect  Jews,  such  as  Paul  and  the  eleven,  who,  being 
saved,  rendered  hopeful  the  salvation  of  their  fellows.  But  we  think  the  firstfruits  and 
root  can  only  apply /«%  to  him  who  was  the  real  Firstfruits  and  "the  Root  out  of  th« 
dry  ground."  The  apostle's  argument  in  this  case  would  be  this :  If  Jesus,  the  seed  of 
Abraham  and  real  root  of  the  true  Israelitish  race,  has  been  such  a  pre-eminent  blessing 
tc  the  race,  how  much  may  we  expect  when  the  Jewish  lump  and  the  Jewish  bianchw 
'  Of.  Luthardt's  'Die  Lehre  von  den  letzten  Dingen,'  ss.  106 — 123. 


340  THE  KPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  E0MAN8.    [ch.  xi.  1— 36. 

get  consecrated  to  God  as  he  has  been  1  In  this  way  the  apostle  followg  up  his 
suggested  hope,  enlarges  it,  and  makes  it  the  fountain  of  enterprise,  with  a  view  to 
the  conversion  of  the  Jew  ish  race.  We  should  not  forget  that  the  moat  influential 
and  life-giving  individual  who  ever  lived  in  this  world  was  a  Jew;  and,  while  we  can 
never  expect  any  of  his  countrymen  to  come  up  to  his  standard  of  blessing,  we  may 
and  ought  to  expect  that  the  conversion  of  Christ's  race  to  God  must  be  of  pre-eminent 
service  to  all  the  other  nations  of  the  earth.  And  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Jews  like 
Neander,  who  have  got  converted  and  consecrated,  have  become  mighty  blessings  to 
their  fellow-men.     And  so  we  hope  great  things  from  the  first  fruits  and  the  root. 

IV.  The  apostle  warns  the  Gentiles  that  their  engeaftino  into  the  olive 
TBBE  of  Christianity  cakrtes  with  it  serious  responsibilities.  (Vers.  17—24.) 
The  Jews  who  have  rejected  Christ  are  branches  broken  off  the  real  Root.  In  their 
place  the  Gentiles  have  been  engrafted,  so  that  the  "eternal  sap"  proceeding* from 
Christ  the  Root,  and  which  should  otherwise  have  sustained  these  Jews,  passes  over  to 
the  Gentiles.  But  now  a  fact  about  the  olive  tree  is  utilized  by  the  apostle.  Van 
Lennep  tells  us,  in  his  work  on  the  Holy  Land,  that  "the  olive  tree  grows  to  so  great 
an  age  that  the  old  wild  root  sometimes  conquers  the  better  graft,  so  that  the  fruit 
deteriorates,  and  the  tree  must  needs  be  grafted  anew  "  (p..  125).  It  is  this  fact  which 
the  apostle  makes  the  grouud  of  his  warning.  If  the  Gentiles,  forgetting  that  it  was 
solely  through  God's  grace  they  had  been  grafted  in,  got  infected  with  Jewish  pride 
and  self-righteousness,  so  that  their  fruit-bearing  deteriorated,  there  would  be  nothing 
for  it  but  through  a  new  engrafting  of  the  better  Jewish  stock  to  restore  the  olive  tree 
to  fruitfulness.  God's  severity  to  the  broken-off  Jewish  branches  should  make  the 
Gentiles  very  humble  and  very  earnest,  lest  it  come  round  upon  themselves.  They 
should  continue  in  the  enjoyment  of  God's  goodness  by  exercising  humble  faith  and 
ardent  effort.  If  they  will  not  discharge  their  responsibilities,  they  may  expect  like- 
wise to  be  broken  off.  Unfaithful  nations  have  been  out  off — the  candlesticks  and 
Churches  have  been  removed. 

V.  Israel's  partial  blindness  is  permitted  until  the  fulness  of  thh 
Gentiles  is  come  in.  (Ver.  25.)  To  prevent  the  Gentiles  being  wise  in  their  own 
conceits,  the  apostle  explains  the  mystery  that  Israel's  blindness  has  been  permitted 
that  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  should  be  gathered  in.  The  Gentiles  have  now  their 
chance  supplied.  Their  ingathering  into  Christ's  kingdom  is  God's  great  present  pur- 
pose. Missions  to  the  heathen,  the  continuance  of  Paul's  work,  are  to  be  prosecuted  in 
the  hope  of  abundant  ingathering.  The  privileges  of  the  gospel  are  thus  laid  at  the 
door  of  the  heathen.  In  this  way  the  great  pioneer  missionary,  St.  Paul,  would  foster 
the  twofold  missionary  enterprise ;  he  would  have  the  most  earnest  effort  put  forth  that 
the  heathen  nations  should  be  gathered  in ;  he  would  also  have  the  saved  Gentiles  to 
suck  still  greater  blessing  through  the  ingathering  of  the  Jew. 

VI.  Israel  as  a  nation  is  to  be  saved  as  the  OBOWNiNa  act  op  God's  mercy. 
(Vers.  26—32.)  Whuii  it  is  said,  "All  Israel  shall  be  saved,"  it  oanuot  mean  that 
every  individual  Jew  is  to  come  right  at  last.     Paul's  doctrine  is  nut 

"  That  not  one  life  shall  be  destroyed. 

Or  oast  as  rubbish  to  the  void, 
When  God  hath  made  the  pile  complete ; " 

but  evidently  that  Israel  in  its  national  capacity  shall  yet  be  gathered  home  to  God.' 
As  touching  the  election,  the  Jewish  nation  or  race  is  beloved  for  the  fathers' sakes. 
And  God's  gifts  and  callings  are  without  repentance.  Consequently,  we  ought  to  enter- 
tain the  hope  that  the  Jewish  nation  shall  yet  be  restored  to  God's  favour  and  be  saved. 
And  this  is  to  be  done  through  the  mercy  extended  to  the  Jews  by  the  saved  Gentiles. 
In  other  words,  the  Jewish  problem  is  to  be  solved  by  a  mission  to  them  from  the 
Gentiles."  In  this  way  God  has  overruled  the  unbelief  of  Jews  to  the  conversion  of 
the  Gentiles,  and  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  is  next  to  be  utilized  for  the  ingathering 
of  the  Jews.  When  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  is  followed  by  the  conversion  of  the 
Jewish  people,  we  may  expect  that  unprecedented  spiritual  life  and  power  and  energy 
shall  then  be  experienced  over  aniversal  Christendom,  May  the  consummation  so 
des'rable  be  hastened! — R.  M.  E. 

'  Of.  Luthardt,  ut  aupra.  •  Cf.  Godut's  '  Etudes  Bibliques,'  tome  ii.  p.  165. 


OH.  XI.  1—36.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  8H 

Vers.  33 — 36. — Qod,  his  omn  last  End  in  everything.  The  apostle  has  been  throwing 
a  very  clear  providential  light  upon  God's  dealings  with  his  ancient  people.  He  has 
shown  how  their  unbelief  and  fall  were  permitted  in  order  to  the  gathering  in  of  the 
GentiK'B;  and  that  the  Gentiles  thus  brought  in  are  to  gird  themselves  for  the 
ingnthering  of  the  Jews.  But  he  does  not  profess  to  have  sounded  the  depths  of 
the  Divine  wisdom  and  knowledge  by  these  suggestions.  Before  that  mighty  ocean  he 
stands  in  unfeigned  humility.  He  may  have  picked  up  one  or  two  pebbles  on  the 
strand,  but  he  has  not  explored  the  caves  of  ocean  that  lie  before  him.  Yet  amid 
the  unsearchable  character  of  God's  judgments,  he  can  see  one  supreme  end  in  every- 
thing, and  this  is  God  himself;  "  For  of  him,  and  through  him,  and  to  him,  are  all 
things." 

I.  While  God  is  knowablb,  he  surpasses  all  ottr  conceptions  in  his  wisdom 
AND  HIS  ways.  (Ver.  83.)  While  believing  in  the  radical  error  which  underlies  the 
agnostic  philosophy,  we  must  at  the  same  time  admit  that  God's  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge, his  judgments  and  his  ways,  are  past  our  comprehension.  Just  as  a  child  may 
know,  that  is,  be  acquainted  with,  his  parent,  while  at  the  same  time  he  is  utterly 
unalile  to  follow  him  into  the  regions  of  pure  mathematics,  comprehend  the  differential 
or  integral  calculus,  or  the  new  department  of  quaternions;  so  a  Christian  may  know 
God  lis  he  reveals  himself  in  Christ,  and  yet  stand  in  awe  before  his  unsearchable 
judgments.  It  is  God's  glory  to  conceal  a  thing.  If  we  saw  through  the  whole  adminis- 
tration of  God,  if  there  were  no  mystery  or  perplexity  in  his  dealings,  we  should  be 
living  by  reason  and  not  hy  faith.  It  is  more  consonant  with  our  finiteness  in  its 
relation  to  the  infinite  God  that  we  should  be  asked  to  trust  God,  even  when  we  see  no 
reason  for  his  action,  when  clouds  and  darkness  may  be  round  about  his  throne.  What 
WG  have  to  consider,  therefore,  is  the  proper  attitude  of  the  Christian  before  the  profun- 
dities of  God.  It  surely  should  be  one  of  humility,  of  reverence,  and  of  thankful  praise.* 
Now,  the  partiality  of  Paul's  revelation  may  be  profitably  contrasted  with  the  fulness  of 
revelation  as  claimed  by  Christ.  For  he  claimed  to  have  all  that  the  Father  doeth 
shown  to  him  (John  v.  20).  Nothing  was  or  is  concealed  from  Jesus.  God's  ways 
were  not  unsearchable  to  him.* 

II.  Men  SHOULD  not  in  consequence  dictate  to  God,  oe  try  to  be  beforehand 
WITH  HIM.  (Vers.  34,  35.)  Now,  when  the  matter  is  put  broadly  in  this  way,  it 
seems  shocking  presumption  for  men  to  set  themselves  up  as  superior  persons,  capable 
of  dictating  to  the  Eternal.  Yet  is  this  not  the  meaning  of  a  large  amount  of  the 
pessimistic  literature  of  our  time?  If  the  pessimists  had  only  been  consulted,  they 
could  have  planned  a  much  better  world  than  Qod  has  given  us  1  His  management 
has  been,  in  their  view,  a  mistake ;  and  the  only  redeeming  feature  in  the  business  is 
that  he  has  somehow  created  the  pessimists  with  judgments  and  powers  superior  to  his 
own  I  It  is  time,  surely,  that  these  lamentations  over  a  system  of  things  so  very 
im|  erfectly  understood  as  yet  should  cease,  and  that  creatures  so  finite  should  humble 
themselves  before  the  Infinite,  and  acknowledge  his  superiority  in  all  things. 

III.  At   THE   SAME   TIME,   THE   APOSTLE    CONOLUDEB    THAT    GoD    13    HIS    OWN    LAST 

End  IN  EVERYTHING.  (Ver.  36.)  It  seems  a  hard  thing  to  take  in,  yet  the  more  it  is 
pondered  the  truer  it  ap|.cars.  "The  supreme  Sun  of  the  spiritual  universe,  the 
ultimate  Reason  of  everything  in  the  world  and  work  of  grace,  is  the  glory  of  Ood. 
Whole  systems  of  truth  move  in  subordinate  relation  to  this ;  this  is  subordinate  to 
nothing."  '  "  There  was  nothing,"  wrote  Robert  Haldane  to  M.  CheneviSre  of  Geneva, 
"  brought  under  the  consideration  of  the  students  which  appeared  to  contribute  so 
effectually  to  overthrow  their  false  system  of  religion  founded  on  philosophy  and  vain 
deceit,  as  the  sublime  view  of  the  majesty  of  God,  which  is  presented  in  these  concluding 
verses  of  the  first  part  of  the  Epistle,  '  Of  him,  and  through  him,  and  to  him,  are  all 
things.'   Here  God  is  described  as  his  own  last  End  in  everything  that  he  does.  Judging 

'  Cf.  Caspari's  sermon  on  "The  Christian  before  the  Depths  of  Deity,"  in  his  'Von  Jenseit 
des  Grabeg,'  band  li.  s.  94 ;  also  Barrow's  sermon  on  "  The  Unsearchableness  of  God's  Judg- 
ments," vol.  i.  p.  498.  Sauriu  has  aloo  a  fine  sermon  on  "  Profondeurs  Divines,"  in  hii 
tomo  i.  p.  176 ;  and  South  has  also  a  suggestive  one  on  this  passage,  folio  edition,  vol.  ii 
p.  260. 

«  Of.  Gess's  '  Christi  Selbstzeugniss,'  bs.  2H,  30. 

•  Cf.  Moule'a  '  Union  with  Christ,'  p.  10. 


842 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.    [cH.  xii.  1— 21. 


of  God  as  such  a  one  as  themselves,  they  were  a;  first  startled  at  the  idea  that  he  must 
love  himself  supremely,  infinitely  more  tliaa  the  whole  universe,  and  consequently  must 
prefer  his  own  glory  to  everything  besides.  But  when  they  were  reminded  that  God  in 
reality  is  infinitely  more  amiable  and  mure  valuable  than  the  whole  creation,  and  that 
consequently,  if  he  views  things  as  they  really  are,  he  must  regard  himself  as  infinitely 
worthy  of  being  most  valued  and  loved,  they  saw  thaf  this  truth  was  incontrovertible. 
Their  attention  was  at  the  same  time  turned  to  numerous  passnges  of  Scripture,  which 
assert  that  the  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God  is  the  great  end  of  creation ;  that  he 
has  himself  chiefly  in  view  in  all  his  works  and  dispensations  ;  and  that  it  is  a  purpose 
in  which  he  requires  that  all  his  intelligent  creatures  should  acquiesce,  and  seek  to 
promote  as  their  first  and  paramount  duty.  Passages  to  this  effect,  both  in  the  Old  and 
New  Testaments,  far  exceed  in  number  what  an3'  one  who  has  not  examined  the  subject 
is  at  all  aware  of."  ^  Now,  if  our  idea  of  God  is  high  enough,  we  shall  conclude  that  he 
stands  in  such  perfect  relations  to  his  creatures  that  in  seeking  his  own  glory  he  is  at 
the  same  time  seeking  their  highest  good.  Of  course,  we  have  the  power  of  resisting 
this  claim  of  God,  and  setting  ourselves  in  opposition  to  his  glory;  yet  this  will  not 
defeat  his  purpose,  but  be  overruled  for  his  praise.  It  is  not  selfishness  in  the  most 
high  God  to  seek  his  own  glory ;  he  is  so  perfect  in  his  love  as  to  be  incapable  of  selfish- 
ness.    His  glory  conflicts  with  the  real  good  of  none  of  his  creatures. 

IT.  We  ought  in  consequence,  like  the  apostle,  to  raise  our  doxologt.  It 
Is  when  from  the  heart  we  sing  our  doxology  to  this  perfect  Being  that  we  are  rising  up 
into  our  spiritual  birthright  and  joy.  How  different  Paul's  doxology  from  the  agnostic 
deliverances  before  the  unknown  God  I  It  is  possible  to  adore  and  praise  a  God  whose 
judgments  are  unsearchable,  because  the  guiding  principle  of  his  perfect  nature  is  love. 
May  we  all  be  led  to  praise  him ! — R.  M.  E. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Xn. 


Ver.  1 — ch.xiv.23. — III.  Hoktatort.  (See 
summary  of  contents,  p.  xvii.)  It  is  St.  Paul's 
way  to  supplement  his  doctrinal  treatises 
with  detailed  practical  directions  as  to  the 
conduct  that  should  of  necessity  ensue  on 
belief  in  the  doctrines  propounded.  So  also 
in  Bph.  iv.  1,  etc.,  where,  as  here,  he  con- 
nects his  exhortations  with  what  lias  gone 
before  by  the  initiatory  irapaKoKa  oSv.  Beyond 
Ms  exposition  of  the  truth  for  its  own  sake, 
he  has  always  a  further  practical  aim.  Saving 
faith  is  ever  with  him  a  living  faith,  to  be 
shown  by  its  fruits.  Nor,  according  to  him, 
wiU  these  fruits  follow,  unless  the  believer 
himself  does  his  part  in  cultivating  them : 
else  were  these  earnest  and  particular 
exhortations  needless.  If,  on  the  one  liand, 
he  is  the  great  assertor  of  our  salvation  being 
through  faith  and  all  of  grace,  be  is  no  less 
distinct  for  the  necessity  of  worlrs  following, 
and  of  the  power  of  man's  free- will  to  use 
or  resist  grace;   of.  1  Cor.  xv.  10,  where. 


speaking  of  himself,  he  does  not  mean  to  say 
that  grace  had  made  him  what  he  was  in 
spite  of  himself,  but  that  grace  hud  not 
been  in  vain,  because  he  himself  had  worked 
with  grace.  All  was  of  grace,  but  he  him- 
self had  labourud,  assisted  by  grace  working 
with  him.  It  will  be  observed  how  com- 
prehensive is  the  survey  of  Christian  duty 
that  here  follows,  reaching  to  all  the  rela- 
tions of  life,  as  well  as  to  internal  disposi- 
tion. 


Ver.  1 — ch.  xiii.  14.- 
duties  enforced. 


-E.  Various  practical 


Ver.  1. — I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren 
(he  does  not  command,  as  did  Moses  in  the 
Law;  he  beseeches;  he  is  but  a  fellow - 
servant,  with  his  brethren,  of  Christ ;  he  iloes 
not  "lord  it  over  God's  heritage"  (of.  1  Pet. 
V.  3),  but  trusts  that  they  will  of  their  own 
accord  respond  to  "  the  mercies  of  God  "  in 
Christ,  which  he  has  set  before  them),  by 
the  mercies  of  God  ("  Qui  misericordia  Del 
recte  raovetur  in  omnem  Dei  voluntatem 
ingreditur.    At  anima  irse  obnoxia  uix  quid- 


'  'Letter  from  Robert  Haldane,  Esq.,  to  M.  J.  J.  Ohenevifere,  Pastor  and  Professor  of 
Divinity  at  Geneva,'  pp.  3S,  HO. 


CH.  xti.  1— 2l.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


343 


dam  juvatur  adliortationibua,"  Bengelj^  that 
ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacnfice, 
holy,  acceptable  unto  Ood,  which  is  yotir 
reasonable  service.  The  verb  Tapao-Tijo-oi  is 
the  usual  one  for  the  presenting  of  saorifloial 
animals  at  the  altar  (Xen., '  Anab.,'  vi.  1. 22 ; 
Lucian,  'De  Sacrif.,'  13.  The  LXX  in  Lev. 
xvi7, 10,  haso-T^o-ci.  Of.  Luke  ii.  22  ;  Ool.i. 
22,  28,  and  supra,  vi.  13).  Our  bodies  are 
here  specified,  with  probable  reference  to  the 
bodies  of  victims  which  were  offered  in  the 
old  ritual.  But  our  offering  differs  fiom 
them  in  being  "  a  living  sacrifice,"  replete 
with  life  and  energy  to  do  God's  will  (cf. 
Ps.  xl.  6,  7,  8,  and  Heb.  x.  5,  6,  7),  yea,  and 
even  inspired  with  a  new  life — a  life  from 
the  dead  (oh.  vi.  13).  Further,  the  thought 
is  suggested  of  the  abuse  of  the  body  to  un- 
cleanness  prevalent  in  heathen  society  (cf. 
ch.  i.  24).  The  bodies  of  Christians  are 
"  members  of  Ohiist,"  "  temples  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,"  consecrated  to  God,  and  to  be  devoted 
to  his  service  (cf.  1  Cor.  vi.  1.5,  etc.) ;  and 
not  in  heart  only,  but  in  actual  life,  of 
which  tlie  body  is  the  agent,  we  are  to  offer 
ourselves,  after  the  example  of  Christ.  Your 
reasonable  service(T^v  KoytKrjv hCtTpeiav  vfiuv) 
must  be  taken  in  apposition  to  "present  your 
bodies,"  rather  than  to  "  sacrifice,"  it  being 
the  act  of  offering,  and  not  the  thing  offered, 
that  constitutes  the  \aTpeta.  This  word  ia 
especially  used  for  the  ceremonial  worship 
of  the  Old  Testament  (of.  Exod.  xli.  25,  26  ; 
liii.  5 ;  ch.  ix.  4 ;  Heb.  viii.  5 ;  ix.  1,  6,  9  ; 
X.  2 ;  xiii.  10),  the  counterpart  of  which  in 
Christians  is,  according  to  St.  Paul,  not 
ceremonial  service,  but  rather  that  of  a 
devoted  life  (cf.  Acts  xxvii.  23 ;  ch.  i.  9 ; 
Phil.  iu.  3;  2  Tim.  i.  3;  Heb.  xii.  28).  The 
epithet  Kojik^v  has  been  variously  under- 
stood. It  probably  means  rational,  denoting 
a  moral  and  spiritual  serving  of  God,  in 
implied  opposition  to  mechanical  acts  of 
outward  worship.  "Keapectu  intellectus  et 
voluntatis"  (Bengel).  It  may  be  taken  to 
express  the  same  idea  as  oi  Uviviian  @€ip 
\aTpeiovTes  (Phil.  iii.  3),  and  wev/xaT ik^v 
eualav  (1  Pet.  ii.  7;  cf.  John  iv.  24).  Though 
the  offering  of  the  body  is  being  spoken  of, 
yet  "bodily  self-sacrifice  is  an  ethical  aoi" 
(Meyer).  Cf.  1  Cor.  vi.  20.  The  word  itself 
occurs  in  the  New  Testament  only  here  and 
in  1  Pet.  ii.  2,  where  Its  meaning,  though 
obscure,  may  be  similar. 

Ver.  2. — And  be  not  conformed  to  (rather, 
fashioned  after;  the  verb  is  (ru(rxw''''Cf<''" 
flai)  this  world ;  but  be  ye  transformed  (the 
verb  here  is  iieTa/jiop<l>ova-6ai)  by  the  renew- 
ing of  your  mind,  that  ye  may  prove  (or, 
discern)  what  is  the  will  of  Ood,  that  whioh 
is  good  and  acceptable  and  perfect.  (So, 
rather  than  as  in  the  Autliorized  Version ; 
the  epithets  acceptable  and  perfect  not  being 
properly  applicable  to  the  will  of  Ood}  and 


the  translation  given  above  being  close  to 
the  original.)  It  is  a  matter  of  no  importance 
for  exegesis  that  ancient  authorities  leave  it 
uncertain  whether  the  verbs  at  the  beginning 
of  this  verse  should  be  read  aa  imperatives 
((rutrxi/taT/fecr^e  and  /xeTafioptpovfrQe)  or  as 
infinitives  (^truffxnip-at  IC^o'^at  and  fiera/iop- 
(povireai).  In  the  latter  case  they.depend,  with 
•jrapcurTTJiTaL  in  ver.  1,  on  leapaKaKio.  The  mean- 
ing remains  unaffected.  As  to  the  words 
themselves,  Meyer's  assertion  that  they  stand 
in  contrast  only  through  the  prepositions, 
without  any  difference  of  sense  in  the  stem- 
words,  is  surely  wrong.  St.  Paul  is  not  in 
the  habit  of  varying  his  expressions  without 
a  meaning;  and  he  might  have  written  ^etb- 
(TXwaTifeirfle  (of.  1  Cor.  iv.  6 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  13, 
14 ;  Phil.  iii".  21)  instead  of  fieranopipovirBe 
or  trvniiop<j)ovaB6  (cf.  Phil.  iii.  10)  instead  of 
(Tuo'X'j/i'OTifeo-fle.  And  there  is  an  essen- 
tial difference  between  the  senses  in  which 
<7XV«  ^I'i  l^op^'fi  may  be  used.  The  former 
denotes  outward  fashion,  which  may  be 
fleeting,  and  belonging  to  accident  and  cir- 
cumstance ;  the  latter  is  used  to  express 
essential  form,  in  virtue  of  which  a  thing  is 
what  it  is ;  cf  Phil.  iii.  21,  and  also  (though 
Meyer  denies  any  distinction  here)  Phil.  ii. 
6,  7.  The  apostle  warns  his  readers  not  to 
follow  in  their  ways  of  life  the  fashions  of 
this  present  world,  which  are  botii  false  and 
fleeting  (cf.  1  Cor.  vii.  31,  TlapJiyei  yap  ri 
(TxvtJ^  ToS  Kifffiov  toiJtou),  but  to  Undergo 
such  a  change  of  essential  form  as  to  pre- 
clude their  doing  so.  If  they  become  av/i- 
li6p<poi  with  Christ  (cf.  ch.  viii.  29),  the 
world's  fashions  will  not  affect  them.  The 
phr  ase,"  this  world  "  or  "  age"(T9  cuavi  Toirtf), 
may  be  understood  with  reference  to  the 
rabbinical  division  of  time  into  aXliiv  oStoj, 
and  aliiiv  fiehXaiv,  or  4pxifJ-et'os ;  the  latter 
denoting  ,the  age  of  the  Messiah.  The  New 
Testament  writers  seem  to  regard  them- 
selves as  still  in  the  former,  though  to  them 
it  is  iiTadiated  by  beams  from  the  latter, 
which  had  already  dawned  in  Christ,  though 
not  to  be  fully  realized  till  the  irapoiata  (see 
note  on  Heb.  i.  2).  The  transformation  here 
spoken  of  consists  in  the  renewal  of  the  mind 
(toC  vohs"),  which  denotei  the  understanding, 
or  thinking  power,  regarded  as  to  its  moral 
activity.  And  Christian  renewal  imparts 
not  only  the  will  and  power  to  do  God's 
will,  but  also  intelligence  to  discern  it. 
Hence  follows  eij  rh  SoHipid^eir  v/i,A,  etc.  (cf. 
Eph.  iv.  17,  23;  1  Tim.  vi.  5;  2  Tim.  iii.  8  ; 
and  also  supra  ch.  i.  28,  where  the  Gentiles 
were  said  to  have  been  given  up,  in  judg- 
ement, eis  aZiKLpLov  vovv,  when  aS6KtpLov  may 
possibly  mean  undisceming.  See  note  on 
that  passage).  It  is  to  be  observed,  lastly, 
that  the  present  tenses  of  the  verbs  o-u- 
ffxnf^^'riC^i^Be  and  fierapioptpovffde,  unlike  the 
previous  aorist    vapaarriaai,  intimate  pro- 


314 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  xii.  1-21 


grcssive  habits.  The  perfect  Christian  cha- 
tacter  is  not  farmed  all  at  once  on  conversion 
(c£  Phil,  iii.  12,  teq. ;  see  alao  previous  note 
on  ch.  vi.  18,  with  reference  to  irapurfiiiiftf 
•nd  irapatrniiaa'rt). 

So  far  the  exhortotion  has  been  general. 
The  apostle  now  passes  to  particular  direc- 
tions ;  and  first  (vers.  3-^9)  as  to  the  use  of 
gifts. 

Ver.  a.^ror  I  say,  thrflngh  the  grace 
given  unto  me  (the  giaoe  of  apostleship  to 
tlie  Gentiles  (of.  oh.  i.  5;  xv.  15),  lie  is 
febout  to  warn  against  either  neglecting  or 
exceeding  the  special  graces  given  to  each 
persvih;  and  he  may,  perhaps,  mean  to 
imply  licre  that  he  himself,  in  giving  these 
admonitions,  is  exercising,  without  exceed- 
ing, his  own  Bpeoial  grace)  to  every  man 
that  is  among  jrou  (this  is  emphatic.  The 
prutenaioUB  to  superiority  of  some  at  Corinth 
■who  possessed  more  showy  gifts  than  others 
had  shown  how  the  admonition  might  need 
to  be  pressed  on  all;  and  in  a  community 
like  that  of  the  Bomans  there  might  well 
be  a  tpecial  tendency  to  assumption  on  the 
part  of  some),  not  to  think  of  himself  more 
highly  th&n  he  ought  to  think ;  but  to  think 
•oberly  (rather,  as  in  the  Revised  Version, 
to  to  think  at  to  think  toierly,  or,  more 
literally,  to  be  minded  to  as  id  be  sober- 
minded),  according  as  God  hath  de^t  to 
every  man  the  measure  of  faith.  Why  of 
faith  f  One  might  have  expected  the  ex- 
pression to  be,  "  of  grace,"  as  in  ver.  6,  "  ac- 
cording to  the  grace  that  is  given  to  us  J "  or 
&s  in  Bph.  U  7,  "  according  to  the  measure 
IJueVpoi',  as  here]  of  the  gift  of  Christ."  It 
seems  to  be  because  by  faith  we  become 
teeeptive  of  the  grace  given  to  each  of  us. 
Hence  the  faith  assigned  by  G-od  to  each  is 
regarded  as  "  the  regulative  standard ;  tlie 
subjective  condition  "  (Meyer)  of  the  several 
gifts  or  graces.  Of  also  Matt.  ivii.  20  and 
1  Cor,  Xiii.  8,  where  miraculous  powers  are 
spoken  of  as  dependent  on  the  amount  of 
faith.  Tholuok  eSpUiins  thus  :  "  Faith  in 
an  unseen  Christ  brings  man  into  connection 
with  a  world  unseen,  in  Which  he  moves 
without  distinctly  apprehending  it ;  and  in 
proportion  as  he  learns  to  look  with  faith 
to  that  world,  the  more  is  the  measure  of  his 
epiritual  powers  elevated." 

Vers.  4,  S.^For  as  in  one  body  We  have 
many  members,  1:at  all  the  members  have 
tot  the  same  office;  so  we,  the  many,  are 
•ne  body  in  Christ,  and  every  one  members 
cue  of  another.  Tlie  illustration  of  the  body 
.with  its  members  to  set  forth  the  mutual 
dependence  on  each  other  of  tne  several 
members  of  the  Church  with  their  several 
gifts  and  fnnotions,  and  the  importance  of 
bU  for  tlie  well-being  of  the  whole,  is  fi»rthpi 


carried  out  in  1  Cor.  lii.  12,  teq.  In  Eph 
i.  22  and  iv.  15,  16,  Christ  is  regardeii, 
somewhat  differently,  as  the  exiilted  Head 
ooer  the  Church  whieh  is  his  body.  Here 
and  in  X  Cor,  xii,,  the  head  is  not  thus 
distinguished  from  the  rest  of  the  body  (see 
1  Cor.  xii.  21);  the  Whole  is  "one  body  in 
Christ,"  who  is  the  living  Person  who 
unites  and  animates  it. 

Vers.  6— 8.— Having  then  gifts  differing 
according  to  the  grace  that  is  given  to  us, 
whether  prophecy,  according  to  the  pro- 
portion of  our  faith;  or  ministry,  in  oar 
ministry ;  or  he  that  teaoheth,  in  his  teach- 
ing; or  he  that  exhorteth,  in  his  exhorta- 
tion; he  that  giveth,  in  simplicity;  he 
that  rnleth,  with  (literally,  in)  diligence; 
he  that  showeth  mercy,  with  (literally,  in) 
cheerfulness.  The  elliptical  form  of  the 
original  has  been  retained  in  the  above 
translation,  without  the  words  interposed 
for  elucidation  in  the  Authorized  Version. 
There  are  two  ways  in  which  the  construc- 
tion of  the  passage  might  possibly  be 
understood.  (1)  Taking  l^xwres  Se  in  ver. 
6  as  dependent  on  iirntv  in  ver.  5,  and 
KciTct  TJjc  iimKoyiav  Tr)s  irim-eais,  not  aa 
hortatory,  but  as  parallel  to  kotA  t^v  x^f>'>' 
riiv  SoSetirav  i)nti>,  and  understanding  in  a 
like  sense  the  clauses  that  follow.  Thus 
the  general  meaning  would  "be— we  are  all 
one  body,  etc.,  but  having  our  several  gifts, 
to  be  Used  in  accordance  with  the  purpose 
for  which  they  are  severally  given.  (2) 
As  in  the  Authorized  Version,  which  is 
decidedly  preferable,  hortation  being  evi- 
dently intended  from  the  beginning  of  ver. 
6.  The  drift  is  that  the  various  membew 
of  the  body  having  various  gifts,  each  is  to 
be  content  to  exereise  his  own  gift  in  the 
line  of  usefulness  it  tits  him  for,  and  to  do 
so  well.  The  references  are  not  to  distinct 
orders  of  ministry  in  the  Church,  but  rathei 
to  gifts  and  consequent  capacities  of  all 
Christians.  The  gift  of  prophecy,  which  ii 
mentioned  first,  being  of  especial  value  aud 
importaace  (of.  1  Cor.  xiv.  1,  seq.),  was  the 
gift  of  inspired  utterance,  not  of  necessity 
in  the  way  of  prediotiun,  but  also,  and 
especially,  for  "  edification,  aud  exhortation. 
and  comfort"  (1  Cor.  xiv.  3),  for  "con- 
vincing," and  for  "making  manifest  the 
secrets  of  the  heart"  (1  Cor.  xiv.  24,  25). 
He  that  has  this  special  gift  is  to  use  it 
"  according  to  the  proportion  of  his  faith ; " 
for  the  meaning  of  whicli  expression  see  on 
/ufVpov  wicTTfios  above  (ver.  3).  According 
to  the  prophet's  power  of  faith  to  be  receptive 
of  this  special  gift,  and  to  apprehend  it  if 
granted  to  him,  would  be  the  intensity  and 
truth  of  its  maiiifebtation.  It  would  seem 
that  prophets  might  be  in  danger  of  mis- 
takirtg  their  own  ideas  for  a  true  Divine 
revelation  (cf.  Ja»-  utiii.  28)  j  and  also  that 


OH.  XII.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS. 


845 


they  mlgjht  speak  hastily  and  with  a  view 
to  self-display  (see  1  Cor.  xiv.  29 — 33),  and 
that  there  was  a  further  gift  of  Sioucpuris 
Ti/fuixaTar  required  for  distinguishing  be- 
tween true  and  imagined  inspirotion  (see 
1  Cor.  xii.  10;  xiv.  29).  Further,  the 
spirits  of  the  prophets  were  subject  to  the 
prophets  (1  Cor.  xiv.  32);  they  were  not 
carried  away,  as  the  heathen  h&vtis  was 
supposed  to  be,  by  an  irresistible  Divine 
impulse ;  they  retained  their  reason  and 
consciousness,  and  were  responsible  for 
riglitly  estimating  and  faithfully  rendering 
any  revelation  {airoKiXv^is,  1  Cor.  v.  30) 
granted  to  them.  Delusion,  inconsiderate 
utterance,  extravagance,  as  well  as  repres- 
sion of  any  real  inspiration  may  be  meant 
to  be  forbidden  in  the  phrase.  (The  view 
of  T^i  ttliTTitas  being  meant  objectively  of 
the  general  Christian  doctrine,  from  which 
the  prophecy  was  nut  to  deviate — whence 
the  common  use  of  the  expression,  analogia 
Jidei — is  precluded  by  the  whole  drift  of  the 
passage.  It  is  not  found  in  the  Greek 
Fathers,  having  been  apparently  suggested 
first  by  Thomas  Aquinas.)  The  gift  of 
ministry  (StaKovla)  must  be  understood  in  a 
general  sense,  and  not  as  having  exclusive 
reference  to  the  order  of  duacons  (Acts  vi 
1—6;  Phil,  i,  1;  1  Tim.  iii.  8;  ch.  xvi.  1), 
wlio  were  so  called  specifically  because  their 
office  was  one  of  SiaKovia,  The  words 
StaKovety,  SiaKovlot  didKoyos^  though  some- 
times denoting  any  kind  of  ministry,  even 
of  the  highest  kind,  were  used  and  under- 
stood in  a  more  specific  sense  with  reference 
to  subordinate  ministrations,  especially  in 
temporal  matters  (of.  Acts  vl.  2,  "It  is 
not  reason  that  we  should  leave  the  Word  of 
God,  and  servA  tables  (Stafcoi/civ  Tpairef**")  ")• 
If  any  had  a  gift  for  any  such  kind  of  ad- 
irinistrative  work  under  others,  they  were 
to  devote  themselves  to  it,  and  be  content  if 
they  could  do  it  well.  Teaching  (SiSaiTKaKia) 
may  denote  a  gift  for  mere  instruction  in 
facts  or  doctrines,  catechetical  or  otherwise, 
different  from  that  of  the  inspired  eloquence 
of  prophec}/:  Exhortation  (as  TfapdK\n<ns, 
which  bears  also  the  sense  of  consolation, 
seems  here  to  be  rightly  rendered)  may 
be  understood  with  reference  to  admonitory 
addresses,  in  the  congregation  or  in  private, 
less  inspired  and  rousing  than  prophetic 
utterances.  In  Acts  ziii.  15  the  word 
irapiiK\ri<ris  denotes  tlie  exhortation  which 
any  person  in  the  synagogue  might  be  culled 
upon  by  tlie  rulers  to  address  to  the  people 
after  the  reading  (aviyvaaiv)  of  the  Law 
and  the  prophets  ;  of.  1  Tim.  iv.  13, 
where  Timothy  is  told  to  give  attendance 
to  reading  (^&i'dyva<rtp),  to  exhoriation  (irapd- 
KArjcrii'),  and  to  teaching  (SiSaaicaXlav).  Be 
that  giveth  {6  /i^TaSiSobs)  points  to  the  gift 
of  liberality,  to  the  endowment  with  which 


both  means  supplied  by  ProtiJcnce  and  a 
spirit  of  generosity  might  contribute.  The 
almsgivers  of  the  Church  had  their  special 
gift  and  function;  and  they  must  exercise 
them  in  simplicity  (^iv  o7rAi(T7)Ti),  which  may 
perhaps  mean  singleness  of  heart,  without 
partiality,  or  ostentation,  or  secondary  aims, 
But  in  2  Cor.  viii.  2;  ix.  11,  13,  the  word 
seems  to  have  the  sense  of  liberality,  and 
this  may  be  the  meaning  here.  "  XJti  Deus 
dat,  Jac.  i.  5  "  (Bengel).  In  the  '  Shepherd  of 
Hermas'  (written,  it  is  supposed,  not  later 
than  the  first  half  of  the  second  century) 
airXSis  is  explained  thus :  Hamv  va-rspovfi^i/ois 
SiSov  av\us,  ^^  Siffrd^tav  rivi  S^s  ij  rifL  fiij 
8mi"  a-oo-i  SlSou  ('  Hermse  Pastor,'  mandatum 
11.).  Possibly  this  gives  the  true  original  con- 
ception, from  which  that  of  general  liberality 
would  follow.  [The  idea  that  the  almuners 
of  the  Church,  rather  than  the  almsgivers. 
are  intended,  viz.  the  deacons  (Acts  vi.  3, 
seq.%  is  inconsistent  with  the  general  pur- 
port of  the  passage,  as  explained  above. 
Besides,  fiSTaSiSij/ai  means  elsewhere  to  give 
up  what  is  one's  own,  not  to  distribute  the 
funds  of  others.  'O  SimSiSoiis  might  lather 
have  been  expected  in  the  latter  case  (cf. 
Acts.  iv.  35).]  He  that  ruleth  (_d  irpouTTdiievos) 
Kwjunff,  according  to  our  view  all  along,  any 
one  in  a  leading  position,  with  au  Ihority  over 
others ;  and  not,  as  some  have  thought,  exclu- 
sively the  presbyters.  Such  are  not  to  presume 
on  their  position  of  superiority  so  as  to  relax 
in  zealous  attention  to  its  duties.  He  that 
thoweth  mercy  (S  eKeS,v)  is  one  who  is  moved 
by  the  Spirit  to  devote  himeelf  especially  to 
works  of  mercy,  such  as  visiting  the  sick 
and  succouring  the  distressed.  Such  a  one 
is  to  allnw  no  austerity  or  gloominess  of 
demeanour  to  mar  the  sweetness  of  his 
charity.  On  the  general  subject  of  these 
gifts  for  various  administrations  (of.  1  Cor. 
xii,,  eeq.  {  xiv. ;  Eph.  iv.  11,  teq.)  it  is  to  be 
observed  that  in  the  apostolic  period,  though 
presbyters  and  deacons,  under  the  general 
superintendence  of  the  apostles,  seem  to  have 
been  appointed  in  all  organized  Churches  for 
ordinary  ministrations  (Acts  xi.  30 ;  xiv. 
23;  XV.  2,  seq.;  xvi.  4;  xx,  17;  xxi.  18; 
Phil.  i.  1;  1  Tim,  iii,  1,  8;  v,  17;  TitiM  i, 
5),  yet  there  were  other  spiritual  agencies  in 
activity,  recognized  as  divinely  empowered. 
The  "  prophets  and  teachers "  at  Antiooh 
(Acts  xiii,  1)  who,  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  separated  and  ordained  Barnabas  and 
Saul  for  apostolic  ministry,  do  not  appear  to 
have  been  what  we  should  now  call  the 
regular  cleigy  of  the  place,  but  persons, 
whether  in  any  definite  office  or  not,  divinely 
inspired  with  the  gifts  of  trpoiprireia  and 
SiSa<rKa\la.  In  like  manner,  the  appoint- 
ment of  Timothy  to  the  office  he  was  com- 
missioned to  fill,  though  he  was  formally 
oi-dained  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  of  St, 


346 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  SOMANS.    [oil.  xii.  1— 2L 


Paul  himself  (2  Tim.  i.  6)  and  of  the 
presbyters  (1  Tim.  iv.  14),  appears  to  have 
been  accompanied — perhaps  sanctioned — by 
propheay  (1  Tim.  iv.  14).  Persons  thus 
divinely  inspired,  or  supposed  to  be  so, 
appear,  as  time  went  on,  to  have  visited  the 
various  Churches,  claiming  authority— some, 
it  would  seem,  even  the  authority  of 
apostles;  the  term  "apostle"  not  being  then 
confined  exclusively  to  the  original  twelve ; 
else  Barnabas  could  not  have  been  ealleil  one, 
as  he  is  (Acts  xiv.  14),  or  indeed  even  Paul 
himself.  But  such  claims  to  inspiration  were 
not  always  genuine;  and  against  false 
prophets  we  find  various  warnings  (cf. 
2  Cor.  xi.  3,  seq. ;  Gal.  i.  6,  seq. ;  iii.  1  ; 
1  John  iv.  1,  seq. ;  2  John  1 0 ;  Eev.  ii. 
2).  Still,  these  extraordinary  agencies  and 
ministrations,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary 
ministry  of  the  presbyters  and  deacons,  were 
recognized  as  part  of  tlie  Divine  order  for  the 
edification  of  the  Church  as  long  as  the 
special  charismata  of  the  apostolio  age  con- 
tinued. Afterwards,  as  is  well  know)i,  the 
episcopate,  in  the  later  sense  of  the  word  as 
denoting  an  order  above  the  general  pres- 
bytery, succeeded  the  apostolate,  though  liow 
soon  this  system  of  Church  government  be- 
came universal  is  still  a  subject  of  controversy. 
It  appears,  however,  from  '  The  Teaching  of 
the  Twelve  Apostles '  (AiSax?)  r£i>  AeiiSe/ca 
' ATToa-TSKcav),  recently  brought  to  light  by 
Archbishop  Bryennius  (the  date  of  which 
appears  to  have  been  towards  tlie  end  of  the 
first  century  or  the  beginning  of  the  second), 
that  the  earlier  and  less  regular  system  con- 
tinued, in  some  regions  at  least  (it  does  not 
follow  that  it  was  so  everywhere),  after  the 
original  apostles  had  passed  away.  For  in 
this  early  and  interesting  document,  while 
directions  are  given  for  the  ordination  (or 
election ;  the  word  is  xf'P'"'oy^o'aT6,  the 
same  as  in  Acts  xiv.  23)  of  bishops  and 
deacons  in  the  several  Churches,  there  is  no 
allusion  to  an  episcopate  of  a  higher  order 
above  them,  but  marked  mention  of  tea/ihers, 
apostles,  and  prophets  (especially  the  last 
two,  apostles  being  also  spoken  of  as 
propheU),  who  appear  to  have  been  itinerant, 
visiting  the  various  Churches  from  time  to 
time,  and  claiming  authority  as  "  speaking 
in  the  Spirit."  To  these  prophets  great 
deference  is  to  be  paid;  they  are  to  be 
maintained  during  tlieir  sojourn ;  they  are 
to  be  allowed  to  celebrate  the  Eucharist  in 
such  words  as  they  will  (cf.  1  Cor.  xiv.  16) ; 
while  speaking  in  the  Spirit  they  are  not  1o 
be  tried  or  proved  (_oOSh  SiaKpiveire  ;  cf.  'm 
Kptireis  irvevfidrav,  1  Cor.  xiv.  10 ;  and  oi  &\Koi 
SiaKpiveTutrcw,  ch.  xiv.  29),  lest  risk  be  run 
of  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Still,  among  these  itinerants  there  might 
often  be  false  prophets  (^evSoirpo<pT)Tai ;  cf. 
Mfttl  vu.  15  ;  xxiv.  11,  24 ;  Mark  xiii.  22 


1  John  iv.  1),  and  the  Churches  are  to 
exercise  judgment  iu  testing  them.  If  they 
taught  anything  contrary  to  the  received 
doctrine ;  if  they  remained  for  the  sake  of 
maintenance  without  working  for  more  than 
two  days;  if  they  asked  in  the  Spirit  for 
worldly  goods  for  themselves;  if  their 
manner  of  life  was  not  what  it  should  be ; — 
they  were  false  prophets,  and  to  be  rejected. 
Similarly,  in  the  'Shepherd  of  Hermas' 
(apparently  a  document  of  the  first  half  of 
the  second  century,  and  in  some  parts  cor- 
responding closely  with  the  Teaching,  from 
which  such  parts  may  have  been  derived) 
like  directions  are  given  for  distinguishing 
between  true  and  false  prophets,  between 
those  who  had  rd  Tlveifia  tA  0ciav  and  those 
whose  wev/j-a  was  iTrlyeioy  (mandatum  xi.). 
And  even  in  the  '  Apostolical  Constitutions ' 
(a  compilation  supposed  to  date  from  the 
middle  of  the  third  to  the  middle  of  the 
fourth  century)  there  is  a  passage  corre- 
sponding to  what  is  said  in  the  leaching 
about  distinguishing  between  true  and  false 
prophets  or  teachers  who  might  visit 
Churches  (ch.  vii.  28).  The  Teaching  seems 
to  denote  a  state  of  things,  after  the  apostolio 
period,  in  which  the  special  charismata  of 
that  period  were  believed  to  be  still  in 
activity,  though  with  growing  doubts  as  to 
their  genuineness  in  all  cases.  As  has  been 
said  above,  it  does  not  follow  that  this  order 
of  things  continued  everywhere  at  the  time 
of  the  compilation  of  the  Teaching ;  but  that 
it  was  so,  at  any  rate  iu  some  parts,  seems 
evident ;  and  hence  some  light  is  thrown  on 
the  system  of  things  alluded  to  in  the 
apostolical  Epistles.  It  is  quite  consistent 
with  the  evidence  of  the  Teaching  to  suppose 
that  in  Churches  which  had  been  organized 
by  St.  Paul  or  other  true  apostles,  the  more 
settled  order  of  government  which  soon 
afterwards  became  universal,  and  the  tran- 
sition to  which  bjems  to  be  plainly  marked 
iu  the  pastoral  Ej)istles,  already  prevailed. 

Vers.  9 — 21. — Various  admonitions,  appli- 
cable to  all ;  headed  by  inculcation  of  the  all- 
pemading  principle  of  love. 

Ver.  9. — Let  love  be  unfeigned  (so  i«  ren- 
dered elsewhere  kvvir6KpiTos  in  the  Autho- 
rized Version,  cf.  2  Cor.  vi.  6 ;  1  Tim.  i.  5 ; 

2  Tim.  i.  5 ;  1  Pet.  i  22).  Abhor  (literally, 
abhorring)  that  which  is  evil ;  cleave  (lite- 
i-ally,  cleaving)  to  that  which  is  good.  The 
participles  i.7rotTTvyovpTes,  etc.,  here  and 
afterwards,  may  be  understood  as  mildly 
imperative.  Or  perhaps  tl  le  apostle  connected 
them  in  thought  with  ri  aydirt],  dvvTr6itpiroSy 
as  if  he  had  said.  Love  ye  unfeignedly. 

Ver.  10.— In  brotherly  love  {i^tKaSeKipla) 
be  kindly  affeotioned  (</)i\(Jo-Top7oi)  one  to 
another  (jpi>  tScA^io,  expressing  the  love  o< 


OH.  xli.  1— 21.]    tllE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


U1 


Christians  fir  -;aeh  other,  ig  a  special  form  or 
manifestation  of  general  dyiiTft).  In  it.  there 
should  be  ever  the  warmth  of  family  affec- 
tion, aropyli) ;  in  honour  preferring  one 
another;  literally,  accorriing  to  the  proper 
sense  of  irfiujiyoviievoi,  talcing  the  lead  of  each 
other  in  honour — i.e.  in  showing  honour, 
rather  than  equivalent  to  a\Xii\ovs  jiyoiiievoi 
imp4xovTus  eauTwi'  in  Phil.  ii.  3. 

Ver.  11. — In  business  (rather,  diligenee) 
not  slothful ;  in  spirit  fervent  (we  are  to 
do  with  our  might  whatever  our  hand  finds 
to  do ;  yea,  with  fervent  zeal) ;  serving  the 
Lord.  For  riy  Kvpttf  (the  Lord),  some  manu- 
scripts have  Tip  Kctip^  (the  time,  or  the 
opportunity),  which  reading  is  preferred  by 
some  commentators  on  the  ground  tliat  it  is 
loss  likely  to  have  been  instituted  for  the 
iuniliar  t^  Kvpi^>  than  viee  versa.  But  r^ 
Kvpltji  is  best  supported,  and  has  an  obvious 
meaning,  viz.  that  in  the  zealous  performance 
of  all  our  duties  we  are  to  feel  that  we  are 
serving  the  Lord. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — in.  hope  rejoicing;  in 
tribulation  enduring  ;  in  prayer  continuing 
instant ;  communicating  to  the  necessities 
of  the  saints  (i.e.  Christians);  given  to 
(literally,  pursMing)  hospitality.  Bless  them 
which  persecute  you :  bless,  and  curse  not. 
Vn  ver.  14  the  form  of  the  admonition  passes 
from  participles  to  direct  imperatives,  a 
positive  command  of  Christ  being  adduced. 
In  ver.  15  the  gentler  admonitory  form  of 
in  the  infinitive  is  taken  up,  passing  to 
participles,  as  before  in  ver.  16. 

Vera.  15 — 17. — Eejoice  with  them  that  do 
rejoice,  and  weep  with  them  that  weep.  Be  of 
'  the  same  mind  one  toward  another  (denoting 
mutual  good  feeling  and  unanimity  of  senti- 
ment ;  not,  of  course,  agreement  in  opinion 
on  all  subjects).  Mind  not  high  things,  but 
condescend  to  (literally,  being  led  away  with) 
men  of  low  estate.  It  is  a  question  whether 
-rors  TOTreii'ors  should  not  be  understood  as 
neuter,  so  as  to  correspond  with  to  b'^-i]\a ; 
the  meaning  thus  being  that,  instead  of 
being  ambitious,  we  should  let  ourselves  be 
drawn  willingly  to  the  lowlier  spheres  of 
usefulness  to  which  we  may  be  called.  The 
main  objection  to  this  view  is  that  the 
adjective  Toirewhs  is  not  elsewhere  applied 
to  things,  but  to  persons.  Be  not  wise  in 
your  own  conceits.  Becompense  to  no  man 
evil  for  evil.  Provide  (in  the  sense  of  take 
forethought  for)  things  honest  (or  fair,  or 
honourable)  in  the  sight  of  all  men.  This  ia 
a  citation  from  Prov.  iii.  4,  where  the  LXX. 
has,  Ylpovoov  Ka\ct  ivdirtov'  Kupi6v  Kal  av&pd- 
vav.  Wo  are  not  only  to  do  what  we  know 
to  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God,  but  also  to 
have  regard  to  the  view  that  will  be  taken 
of  our  conduct  by  other  men  ;  we  must  not 
give  any  jtist  cause  for  our  good  being  evil 
ipoken  of  (of.  ver.  16  and  1  Pet.  ii.  12). 


Vers.  18 — 21. — If  it  be  possible,  as  much 
as  lieth  in  you,  live  peaceably  with  all  men. 
Avenge  not  yourselves,  beloved,  but  give 
place  unto  wrath.  The  thought  in  ver.  19 
seems  to  follow  from  what  precedes.  It  may 
sometimes  be  impossible  to  be  at  peace  with 
all ;  but  at  any  rate,  do  not  increase  bitter- 
ness by  avenging  yourselves.  Qive  plaoe 
unto  wrath  (rrj  opyy),  has  been  taken  by 
some  to  mean  that  we  are  to  give  scope  to 
the  wrath  of  otir  enemy,  instead  of  being 
exasperated  to  resist  it  (of.  Matt.  v.  39,  etc.). 
But  there  has  been  no  particular  reference 
to  a  wrathful  adversary.  Another  view  is 
that  our  own  wrath  is  intended,  to  which 
we  are  to  allow  time  to  expend  itself  before 
following  its  impulse;  SiStc  T6irov  being 
taken  as  equivalent  to  data  spatinm  in 
Latin  (cf.  Laotantius,  '  De  Ira,'  18,  "  Ego 
vero  laudarem,  si,  cum  fuisset  iratus,  dedis- 
tet  irse  suse  spatium,  ut,  residente  per  inter- 
vallum  tempuria  animi  tumore,  haberet 
modum  oastigatio."  Also  Livy,  viii.  32, 
"  Legati  ciroumstantes  sellam  orabaut,  ut 
rem  in  posterum  diem  differret,  et  irie  stut 
$patium,  et  consilio  tempos  daret."  There 
seems,  however,  to  be  no  known  instance 
elsewhere  of  this  use  of  the  Greek  phrase. 
Chrysostom,  Augustine,  Theodoret,  and 
most  commentators,  understand  the  mean- 
ing to  be  that  we  are  to  give  place  to  the 
wrath  of  Ood,  not  presuming  to  forestall  it. 
The  wrath,  used  absolutely,  might  be  an 
understood  expression  for  the  Divine  wrath 
against  sin  (cf.  ch.  v.  9 ;  1  Tliess.  i.  10 ;  ii. 
16) ;  and  this  interpretation  suits  the  usual 
sense  of  BiSte  T6Trov.  It  is  not  thus  implied 
that  the  falling  of  Divine  vengeance  on  our 
enemy  should  be  our  desire  and  purpose, 
but  only  this — that,  if  punishment  i«  due, 
we  must  leave  it  to  the  rigliteous  God  to 
inflict  it ;  it  is  not  for  us  to  do  so.  And  this  in- 
terpretation suits  what  immediately  follows. 
For  it  ia  written,  Vengeance  is  mine ;  I  will 
repay,  saith  the  Lord  (Deut.  xxxii.  3d, 
quoted  freely  from  the  Hebrew,  but  with 
the  words  eKSUria-is  and  avTOKoS^crw  as 
found  in  the  LXX.  The  fact  that  the 
same  form  of  quotation  occurs  also  in  Heb. 
x.  30  seems  to  show  that  it  was  one  in 
current  use).  But  (so  rather  than  where- 
fore, as  in  the  Authorized  Version)  if  thine 
enemy  hunger,  feed  him ;  if  he  thirst,  give 
him  drink ;  for  in  so  doing  thou  shalt  heap 
coals  of  fire  on  his  head.  This  hole  verse 
is  from  Prov.  ixv.  21,  22,  where  is  added, 
"  and  the  Lord  shall  reward  thee."  What 
is  meant  by  the  "  coals  of  fire,"  both  in  the 
original  and  in  St.  Paul's  citation,  has  been 
much  discussed.  Undoubtedly,  the  expres- 
sion in  itself,  in  view  of  its  usual  significance 
in  the  Old  Testament,  suggests  only  the 
idea  of  Divine  vengeance  (see  Ps.  xviii.  12; 
cxx.  4;  0x1.   10;   and  especially   2    Esdr, 


348 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xn.  1—21. 


XTi.  53.  Cf.  also  Ps.  xi.  6;  Hab.  iii.  5); 
and  thia  especially  os  it  oocurs  here  almost 
immediately  after  "Vengeance  is  mine." 
Hence  Ohrysostom  and  other  Fathers,  as 
well  as  some  moderns,  have  taken  it  to 
mean  that  by  heaping  benefits  on  our 
enemy  we  shall  aggravate  his  guilt,  and 
expoae  him  to  severer  punisliment  from 
God.  But  it  is  surely  incredible  that  the 
apostle  should  have  meant  to  suggest  such  a 
motive  for  beneficence ;  and  the  whole  tone 
of  the  context  is  against  it,  including  that 
of  ver.  21,  which  follows.  Jerome  saw  this,, 
writing, "  Carbones  igitur  congrcgabis  super 
caput  ejus,  non  in  malediotum  et  condemna- 
ti.onem,  ut  plerique  existimant,  sed  in  correc- 
tionera  et  poenitudinem."  But  if  the  "coals 
of  fire  "moan  the  Divine  judgment  on  our 
enemy;  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  a  cor- 
rective purpose.  The  view',  held  by  some, 
that  the  softening  efi'ect  of  fire  on  metals 


is  intended,  ii  hardly  tenable.  Heaping 
coals  of  fire  on  a  person's  head  would 
be  an  unnatural  way  of  denoting  the 
softening  of  his  heart.  More  likely  is  the 
view  whioh  retains  the  idea  of  coals  of  fire 
carrying  with  it,  as  elsewhere,  that  of 
punishment  and  the  infliction  of  pain,  but 
regards  the  pain  as  tljat  of  shame  and 
compunction,  which  may  induce  penitence. 
This  appears  to  be  the  most  generally 
received  view.  It  is,  however,  a  question 
whether  any  such  effect  is  definitely  in  the 
writer's  view.  He  may  mean  simply  this : 
Men  in  general  desire  vengeance  on  their 
enemies,  expressed  proverbially  by  heaping 
coals  of  fire  on  the  head.  Hast  thou  an 
enemy  ?  Do  him  good.  This  ia  the  only 
vengeance,  the  only  coals  of  fire,  allowed 
to  a  Christian.  Then  follows  naturally.  Be 
not  overcome  of  evil,  hut  overcome  aril  with 
good. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vtr.  1. — Gliristian  sacrifice  and  worship.  In  commienoing  the  practical  part  of  this 
Epistle,  St.  Paul  adopts  a  tone  of  gentle  and  affectionate  persuasion.  He  might  have 
addressed  his  readers  as  disciples,  and  have  used  towards  them  the  langujige  of  authority 
and  command.  But,  on  the  contrary,  he  calls  them  his  "  brethren,"  and  he  "beseeches," 
entreats  them,  as  employing  the  appeals  of  love  to  enforce  the  precepts  of  duty.  At  the 
same  time,  his  language  implies  that  compliance  with  his  admonitions  is  not  a  matter 
optional  and  iudifi'erent.  lie  beseeches  them  because  they  are  brethren,  and  because 
he, has  a  right  to  expect  that  they  will  not  only  listen  with  respect,  but  obey  with 
alacrity.  Before  entering  upon  the  specific  duties  of  the  Christian  life,  and  depicting 
in  detail  the  Christian  character,  the  apostle  exhibits  in  this  verse  the  general  .ind  com- 
prehensive principle  of  practical  Ohristianity.  As  religious  men,  these  Roman  Chris-, 
tians  must,  as  a  matter  of  course,  offer  a  sacrifice  and  a  service  of  worship.  And  they 
are  here  told  that  the  presentation  to  God  of  themselves  is  the  one  great  act  in  which 
all  specific  acts  of  obedience  are  summed  up  and  involved.  Let  them  enter  into  the 
.temple  of  God,  and  bring  with  them  a  living  sacrifice ;  let  them  join  in  otfering  to 
Heaven  a  reasonable,  a^  spiritual  worship;  for  with  such  the  Father  wUl  be  well 
pleased.   ' 

I.  Consider  the  motive  which  the  apostle  urges  in  order  to  induce  to  consecra- 
tion. "By  the  mercies  of  Gud."  To  every  sensitive  and  appreciative  mind  this  is  a 
cogent  motive.  The  mercies  of  God  have  been,  and  are,  so  many,  so  varied,  so  suited 
to  our  case,  so  unfailing,  tliat  we  cannot  meditate  upon  them  without  acknowledging 
the  claim  they  constitute  upon  us.  The  word  used  here  is  peculiar;  the  apostle  speaks 
of  the  pity,  the  compassions,  of  the  Lord.  Language  this  which  brings  out  our  condi- 
tion as  one  of  dependence,  helplessness,  and  even  misery,  and  which  brings  out  also  the 
condescension  and  loving-kindness  of  our  heavenly  Father.  There  is,  no  doubt,  an 
especial  reference  to  the  spiritual  favours  which  have  bt'en  so  fully  and  powerfully 
described  in  the  earlier  portion  of  the  Epistle.  The  mercies  of  God  are  nowhere  so 
apparent  as  in  redemption;  and  human  sin  requires  a  great  salvation.  In  exhifiiting 
the  marvellous  interposition  of  Divine  grace  on  behalf  of  sinful  humanity,  in  explaining 
the  reconciling  work  of  Christ,  in  depicting  the  immunities,  privileges,  and  hopes  of 
those  who  receive  the  gospel,  the  apostle  has  laid  a  good  foundation  for  the  appeal  of 
the  text.  Mercies  may  well  excite  gratitude,  for  thoy  arc  undeserved,  sovereign,  and 
free ;  and  gratitude  in  the  mind  of  the  Christian,  who  is  under  the  influence  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  is  a  motive  of  no  mean  order.  And  gratitude  to  such  a  God,  and  for  such 
gifts,  can  only  be  a  motive  to  virtue  and  holiness. 

IL  Consider  what  the  apostle  enjoins  us  to  pbesent  to  God.    "  Your  bodies^" 


CH.  XII.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  348 

The  vigorous  understanding  of  St.  Paul  preserved  him  from  that  sentimental  form  o! 
religion  which  many,  professing  to  be  his  followers,  have  adopted  and  advocated.  If 
will  not  do  to  treat  men,  to  regard  ourselves,  as  possesain?;  only  a  spiritual  nature.  We 
have  body  as  well  as  soul.  The  most  ethereal  and  ecstatic  spiritual  experiences  do  not 
prove  a  man  to  he  a  true  Christian.  God  requires  that  body,  soul,  and  spirit  should  be 
consecrated  to  him.  For  the  bodily  nature  is  intended  to  express  and  manifest  the 
character,  the  spiritual  life,  the  true  man.  If  the  spirit  be  renewed  and  purified,  the 
effect  of  this  Divine  work  within  will  be  apparent  in  tlie  outer  life.  Thus  it  is  that 
the  new  creation,  which  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  extends  to  the  whole  nature 
and  life.  The  body,  therefore,  shares  in  the  death  unto  sin,  and  in  the  new  life  unto 
righteousness  and  holiness.  The  body  is  consecrated  to  him  who  has  redeemed  the 
body  as  well  as  the  soul ;  and  its  members  are  employed  as  weapons  or  instruments, 
•not  of  sin,  but  of  righteousness.  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  apostle  intends  us  to 
understand  that  bodily  service  alone  is  sufBcient.  Nothing  would  have  been  more 
alien  from  his  whole  teaching,  or  from  the  spirit  of  the  New  Testament,  than  such  a 
doctrine.  Christ  has  taught  us  that  worship,  in  order  to  being  acceptable,  must  be  in 
spirit  and  in  truth ;  and  St.  Paul  himself  has  assured  us  that  bodily  exercise  proflteth 
nothing,  that  circumcision  availeth  nothing,  but  a  new  creation.  In  presenting  our 
bodies  unto  Gud,  we  offer  the  praises  of  our  lips  and  the  service  of  our  hands.  The 
body  is  the  instrument  of  toil.  The  Christian's  daily  activity  is  consecrated  to  his 
redeeming  God ;  and  this  is  so,  whatever  be  the  employment  to  which  Providence  has 
called  him.  The  body  is  also  the  agent  of  spiritual  ministry.  Accordingly,  the  Chris- 
tian's special  efforts  to  do  good,  his  teaching  and  preaching,  his  ministering  to  the  wants 
of  his-  fellow-men  and  relieving  them  from  their  sufferings,  his  evangelistic  journeys  in 
order  to  seek  the  lost  and  to  proclaim  the  gospel, — all  are  instances  of  his  consecration 
of  the  body  as  wi41  as  of  the  soul  to  his  redeeming  Lord. 

m.  Remark  that  such  presentation  on  the  part  of  the  Christian  is  eegarded 
AS  sacrifice.  Prom  a  study  of  the  religions  of  mankind,  we  learn  that  the  sacrifices, 
alike  of  the  heathen  and  of  the  .lews,  may  be  regarded  as  (1)  offering,  and  (2)  propitia- 
tion. Now,  as  far  as  expiation,  propitiation,  is  concerned,  we,  as  Christians,  know  that 
there  has  been  one,  and  only  one,  real  and  acceptable  sacrifice  of  this  kind — the  sacrifice 
of  himself  offered  to  the  Father  by  our  Lurd  Jesus  Christ.  This  was  the  substance  of 
which  all  that  went  before  was  merely  the  shadow,  and  which  -can  neither  be  repeated 
nor  imitated.  But  as  far  as  the  tribute  of  thanksgiving,  adoration,  and  obedience  is 
concerned,  we  are  taught  that  this  is  to  be  offered  to  God  continually  (Heb.  xiii.  15, 16). 
It  is  in  this  respect  that  all  Chrisiiaus  are  priests  unto  God;  oM,  irrespective  of  the 
position  they  hold  in  the  Church,  or  the  special  services  they  render  in  the  congrega- 
tions of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  Jewish  sacrifice,  which  this  perpetual  offering  most 
closely  resembles,  is  the  burnt  offering,  which  the  Hebrew  worshipper  brought  to 
Jehovah  as  tlie  expression  of  his  personal  devotion  and  consecration  to  Heaven,  as  the 
public  declaration  that  he  owed  everything  to  the  Lord,  and  that  he  withheld  from  him 
nothing  which  he  possessed.  In  like  manner  Christians  present  their  bodies — their 
whole  nature  and  life — to  him  who  gave  himself  for  them.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own  ;  ye 
are  bought  with  a  price ;  therefore  glorify  God  with  your  bodies,  which  are  his."  Of 
this  sacrifice,  in  which  all  Christians  unite,  the  apostle  reminds  us  that  it  possesses 
three  qualities.  1.  It  is  living.  The  sacrifices  which  the  Jews  oflfered  were  either 
living  creatures,  or  substances  which  by  their  nature  ministered  to  life ;  and  in  offering 
such  gifts  the  worshipper  was  presenting  a  symbol  of  his  own  life.  But  ordinary  sacri- 
fices were  slain ;  the  life  was  consumed  in  the  offering.  The  Christian's  life  is  not 
forfeited  in  being  presented  to  God.  Yet  in  the  presentation  there  is  both  death  and 
life. .  It  has  been  said,  "  There  is  in  every  sacrifice  a  death,  and  in  this  sacrifice  a 
death  unto  sin,  out  of  which  there  arises  a  new  life  of  righteousness  unto  God.  Thus 
the  living  sacrifice  is  that  in  which,  though  the  natural  life  is  not  lost,  a  new  life  of 
holiness  is  gained."  What  a  privilege  is  ours,  who  are  expected  to  bring  unto  God, 
not  the  bodies  of  brute  animals,  not  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats,  but  our  own  bodies — 
our  very  selves,  our  living  nature— and  gratefully  and  willingly  to  lay  this  sacrifice 
upon  the  altar  of  God  1  2.  It  is  holy.  The  animals  which  were  presented  under  the 
Jlosaic  economy  were,  according  to  the  prescribed  regulations,  to  be  free  from  blemish. 
This  was  doubtless  an  ordinance  intended  to  impress  upon  the  mind  of  the  worshipper 


850  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [ch.  xii.  1—21. 

a  sense  of  the  holiness  of  the  Being  who  was  approached.  All  who  officiated  were  to 
be  ceremonially  clean.  The  substance,  of  which  those  symbols  were  the  shadow,  was 
holiness,  spiritual  purity,  freedom  from  iniquity.  There  is  nothing  upon  which  greater 
stress  is  laid  than  the  requirement  that  every  offering  to  God  shall  be  such  as  a  Being 
of  perfect  purity  can  accept.  A  sprinkled,  body  is  not  sufficient;  a  pure  heart  is  the 
demand  of  him  who  is  himself  the  all-holy  Lord.  3.  And  such  an  offering  is  well 
pleasing  to  God.  This,  indeed,  may  be  inferred  from  a  consideration  of  God's  moral 
character  as  a  truth-loving  and  holy  Governor,  who  cannot  endure  dissimulation  and 
hypocrisy.  The  enlightened  among  the  ancient  Hebrews  saw  clearly  enough  that 
ceiemonial  purity  and  ritual  correctness  were  not  enough  to  secure  Divine  acceptance 
and  favour.  And  none  who  enters  into  the  teaching  of  our  Saviour,  and  sympathizes 
with  the  spirit  of  his  religion,  can  fail  to  discern  the  necessity  of  a  living  and  holy 
sacrifice  in  order  to  please  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  and  satisfy  the  requirements  of 
Christ. 

IV.  The  offering  of  the  Christian  is  further  represented  as  a  ebasonablb  service  ok 
WORSHIP.  The  Eevisers  have,  in  the  margin,  "  spiritual."  It  is  a  service  rendered  by 
the  intelligent,  reasonable,  spiritual  part  of  our  nature.  Though  the  body  is  presented, 
tlie  presentation  of  the  body  is  the  expression  of  inner,  spiritual  worship.  For  the 
word  means  "  worship  " — "  an  outward  act  of  religious  worship."  Worship  is  a  universal 
expression  of  the  religious  nature  of  man.  The  heathen  practised  their  ritual  of  cere- 
mony, sacrifice,  prayer,  adoration;  and  the  Jewish  religion  imposed  an  elaborate  system 
of  public  worship.  The  superiority  of  Christian  worship  is  marked.  Obedience  is  the 
highest  and  most  acceptable  form  of  worship  which  can  be  offered  to  God.  This 
"  reasonable  worship  "  is  distinguished  from  worship  that  is  merely  mechanical  and 
formal.  It  is  similarly  distinguished  from  all  substitutionary  worship.  It  is  personal, 
not  representative;  not  by  a  priest  who  worships  for  the  congregation,  and  professes  to 
ofler  sacrifice  as  their  representative,  but  by  each  individual  Christian  who  has  his  own 
tribute  to  offer,  his  own  service  to  render. 

Application.  The  language  of  the  text  appeals  to  those  who  neglect  or  withhold 
this  sacrifice,  this  service,  and  reproaches  them  as  unreasonable,  ungrateful,  indefen- 
sible, disobedient,  self-destructive.  It  urges  them  to  yield  what  God  asks,  through 
Christ,  who  makes  obedience  and  praise  acceptable  offerings  to  God. 

Ver.  2. — Spiritual  transformation.  The  Apostle  Paul  was  great  both  in  theoretical 
and  in  practical  thought.  Truth  and  duty  were  equally  his  themes.  He  could  intro- 
duce new  ideas  into  men's  minds,  and  that  with  a  force  which  made  the  ideas  part  of 
the  minds  into  which  they  were  introduced.  And,  at  the  same  time,  he  could  show 
the  bearing  of  the  grandest  ideas  upon  the  commonest  actions  and  the  homeliest  life. 
This  is  a  combination  of  qualities  not  always  found  even  in  the  greatest  of  men.  It 
was  found  in  Paul;  and  accordingly  we  go  to  him  for  the  loftiest  representations  of 
Christian  truth,  for  the  most  elaborate  expositions  of  Christian  doctrine,  and  also  for 
the  counsel  we  need  in  circumstances  of  difficulty,  and  the  instructions  we  need  in  the 
development  of  social  and  individual  life.  It  was  a  grand  conception,  that  with  which 
the  apostle  begins  the  practical  part  of  this  treatise.  What  devout  heart  does  not,  upon 
having  this  conception  brought  before  it,  burn  with  an  ardent  desire  to  realize  it — to 
present  the  body,  the  self,  the  all,  a  living  and  holy  sacrifice  unto  God  ?  But  then 
comes  the  question — How  is  it  to  be  done?  And,  indeed,  what  is  it,  precisely  and 
actually,  which  is  to  be  done  ?  The  apostle  proceeds  to  show  us.  And  in  translating 
the  noble  idea  of  the  first  verse  into  the  language  of  practical  life,  he  proceeds  wisely 
and  carefully,  first  giving  us  the  general  rule  and  law,  and  then  drawing  out  from  it  the 
special  applications  in  detailed  duties  of  Christian  morality.  In  studying  this  chapter 
we  must  ever  and  anon  revert  to  the  great  principles  contained  in  the  first  and  second 
verses.  The  principle  Is  barren  without  the  precepts ;  the  precepts  are  lifeless,  flavour- 
less, and  impossible  without  the  principle.    The  verse  contains — 

I.  A  DISSUASION ;  i.e.  from  conformity  to  the  world.  Human  character  and  life  are 
treated  as  something  to  be  formed  and  fashioned  by  the  personal  will.  We  are  dealt 
with  as  beings  responsible  for  the  form  and  fashion  we  impart  to  character  and  Ufa, 
The  apostle  does  not  take  it  for  granted  that  those  living  in  a  Christian  community 
must,  as  a  matter  of  course  and  necessity,  attain  to  the  Divine  id^al.    There  i^  a  temp- 


CH.  xn.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  361 

tation,  a  danger,  against  whicli  it  is  prudent  to  be  warned.  It  was,  no  doubt,  easier  to 
understand  this  dissuasion  in  the  earliest  days  of  Christianity  than  it  is  now.  "  This 
world  I "  "this  age ! " — what  a  fulness,  an  awful  fulness  of  meaning  this  expression  must 
have  had  for  a  Christian  of  the  first  century  1  Not  the  material  world,  of  course,  but  the 
world  of  human  society,  of  pagan  idolatry,  and  sensuality,  and  cruelty,  and  scepticism, 
and  despair,  was  the  world  present  to  the  apostle's  mind.  Satan  is  termed  in  the  New 
Testament  "  the  prince  of  this  world ; "  the  unbelieving,  unchristian  population  are 
designated  "  the  children  of  this  world."  "  The  disputer  of  this  world,"  "  the  wisdom 
of  this  world,"  apply  to  what  is  unspiritual  and  godless.  The  distinction  between  the 
heathen  world  and  the  Church  of  Christ  must  then  have  been  sharp  indeed.  And  no 
reader  could  be  at  a  loss  to  understand  Paul's  advice  to  the  Roman  Christians  not  to 
be  fashioned  according  to  this  world.  For  in  Rome,  perhaps  above  all  other  places,  this 
world  was  the  acknowledged  mistress  and  sovereign  of  human  society.  And,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  Christian  community  in  this  and  in  other  cities  of  the  empire  did 
live  a  life  in  utter,  manifest,  obtrusive  contrast  to  that  lived  by  the  multitude  of 
ambitious,  pleasure-loving,  superstitious,  cynical  citizens,  by  whom  they  were  sur- 
rounded. To  make  this  a  practical  matter,  let  us  ask — How  does  this  dissuasion  apply 
to  us  ?  What  is  the  world  of  which  we  are  to  beware  ?  Is  there  such  a  world  in  our 
England  to-day  ?  We  meet  with  narrow  and  prejudiced  opinion  on  these  questions. 
Some  people  think  it  worldly  to  have  anything  to  do  with  politics — especially  on  one 
side ;  others,  to  mix  with  general  society ;  others,  to  take  an  interest  in  painting,  archi- 
tecture, music,  and  even  literature.  To  such  objections  it  is  enough  to  answer  that,  in 
becoming  a  Christian,  one  does  not  cease  to  be  a  man,  but  rather  learns  to  bring  to 
bear  upon  human  interests  and  occupations  the  principles  of  the  highest  life  and  calling. 
We  must  beware  of  narrow  and  merely  technical  definitions  of  "  the  world."  In  truth, 
to  be  "  fashioned  according  to  the  world  "  is  to  conform  to  sinful  and  prevalent  prac- 
tices. What  is  worldliness?  It  is  injustice,  untruthfulness,  impurity,  avarice,  slander. 
Some  of  these  vices  and  sins  are  to  be  found  amongst  those  who  are  very  scrupulous 
in  preserving  what  they  call  the  line  between  the  Church  and  the  world.  But  bear  in 
mind  that  a  life  devoted  to  selfish  aggrandizement  or  pleasure,  a  life  lacking  in  love 
and  sympathy,  is  a  worldly  life.  The  same  idea  is  dwelt  upon  with  urgency  by  the 
other  apostles.  John  admonishes,  "Love  not  the  world;"  and  Peter  requires  Christians 
"  not  to  be  fashioned  according  to  their  former  lusts  in  their  ignorance." 

II.  A  direction;  i.e.  to  spiritual  renewal.  That  the  followers  of  Christ  might 
present  themselves  "a  living  sacrifice"  to  God,  they  were  taught  that  they  must 
become  something  very  different  from  what  they  had  .been  in  their  unbelieving, 
unregenerate  days.  The  admonition  of  the  apostle  is  very  full  and  strong.  1.  It  is  to 
a  change.  "  Repent ! "  was  the  first  Divine  message  to  men — alike  from  the  forerunner 
and  from  the  Messiah.  Christians  they  could  not  be,  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles, 
until  changed.  Religion  cannot  flatter,  though  priests  may.  2.  It  is  to  renewal. 
How  characteristic  of  the  religion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  this  counsel  I  We  have  a  new 
covenant,  and  we  need  a  new  nature ;  we  need  to  become  a  new  creation,  that  we  may 
live  in  newness  of  life,  and  so  prepare  to  dwell  in  the  new  heavens  and  to  join  in  the 
new  song.  Christianity  is  a  gospel  of  renewal.  The  fact  implies  the  abandonment 
and  death  and  crucifixion  of  the  old — the  old  nature,  "  the  old  man,"  as  Paul  calls  it. 
Christ  takes  the  individual,  the  society,  in  hand,  and  moulds  all  afresh  from  the 
beginning;  implants  new  principles,  new  laws,  new  aims,  new  hopes.  He  makes  one 
new  man,  one  new  humanity.  What  a  gospel  it  is!  It  invites  men  to  turn  their  back 
upon  their  old  and  sinful  ways,  to  abjure  their  old  and  sinful  self;  to  enter  upon  a 
new  course — to  become  a  new  creation.  Here,  surely,  is  hope  and  promise  for  the 
downcast.  Amendment  may  be  impossible,  but  not  renewal  and  regeneration ;  for  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  the  mightiest  of  all  powers  to  transform.  3.  It  is  to  a  mental,  a 
spiritual  renewal.  We  are  invited  to  a  renovation,  which  shall  be  not  merely  outward 
»nd  bodily,  but  shall  commence  with  the  very  centre  and  spring  and  root  of  our  being. 
There  is  wisdom  in  this  provision.  It  originates  in  the  Author  and  Pramer  of  our 
being,  who  knew  what  was  in  man.  Let  the  heart  be  renewed,  and,  the  fountain 
being  cleansed,  sweet  water  shall  flow  from  it;  and,  the  tree  being  made  goed,  fruit 
rip«  and  wholesome  shall  be  borne.  Our  Lord  asks  for  the  heart,  and  the  heart  only 
will  he  accept.    "  13e  renewed,"  says  the  apostle  elsewhere, "  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind.' 


C52  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xii.  1-21. 

The  Holy  Spirit  imparts  new  affections,  new  principles,  new  desires;  encourages  to 
now  associations,  and  inspires  with  new  aims  and  hopes. 

in.  Ah  induoembnt;  viz.  by  following  the  apostolic  instructions  the  Christian 
will  prove  what  God's  will  is.  It  seems  a  somewhat  singular  motive  to  present.  Yet, 
to  a  believer  in  God,  it  must  be  a  very  powerful  motive.  The  great  question  whicli 
interests  men's  minds  to-day  is  just  this — Are  there  in  the  universe  signs  of  the  presence, 
anA  energy,  the  moral  character,  and  conscious  purpose  of  Deity?  Is  there,  in  a 
word,  such  a  thing  as  God's  will?  and,  if  so,  what  is  it?  According  to  the  apostle, 
the  consecrated  and  obedient  Christian  is  in  the  way  to  settle  this  question  in  his  owa 
experience.  It  seems  almost  presumptuous  to  propose  the  testing  of  Qtoi'a  will.  The 
boy  proves  the  calculation  he  has  made  with  figures ;  the  armourer  proves  the  temper 
of  the  gun  or  sword ;  the  steel-maker,  the  strength  of  the  spring ;  the  machinist,  the 
resisting  power  of  his  boiler.  The  vessel  is  sent  upon  a  trial  trip ;  the  electrician  tries 
his  principle  practically  in  the  working  of  a  railway.  So  in  the  moral  realm.  The 
apostle  bids  us  "  prove  all  things."  Still,  to  speak  of  proving  God's  will  does  seem 
marvellous,  and  scarcely  reverent.  But  it  must  be  borne  in  miad  that  Paul  speaks 
of  that  will,  not  so  much  as  the,  action  of  the  Divine  mind,  as  the  Divine  law  of  the 
human  life,  of  that  will  to  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.  Now,  it  is  one  thing 
to  look  at  the  Divine  will  as  something  to  be  admired  and  reverenced,  and  another 
thing  to  regard  it  as  something  to  be  done.  And  by  doing  it,  we,  as  Christians,  prove 
it ;  we  discover  for  ourselves  what  it  is,  what  are  its  qualities.  It  is  good.  The  old 
Greek  idea  of  what,  in  moral  life,  is  to  be  sought,  was  summed  up  in  this  word — the 
good,  the  truly  good,  the  highest  good.  This  is  equivalent  to  the  natiure,  expressed 
in  the  will,  of  the  Supreme.  It  is  aQceptable,  or  well-pleasing.  That  is  to  say,  the 
performance  of  the  Divine  wUl  by  man  is  well-pleasing  to  him  who  has  revealed  the 
law  of  human  life,  and  who  is  gratified  when  his  own  idea  is  taken  up,  and  wrought 
out  into  practice  with  vigour  and  sympathy.  It  is  perfect,  admitting  of  no  amendment, 
no  censure,  no  improvement.  To  attain  to  it  is  to  reach  a  moral  height  above  which 
nothing  towers.  The  connection  between  the  will  of  God  and  the  consecration  and 
sacrifice  commended  in  the  previous  verse  is  obvious.  As  the  apostle  elsewhere  says, 
"  This  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification."  Walking  as  children  of  the'liglit, 
we  "  prove  what  is  acceptable  unto  the  Lord."  It  is  only  thus  that  we  show  ourselves 
to  "  understand  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is."'  To  understand  it  as  a  mere  matter  of 
theory  is  valueless  and  vain. 

Application.  1.  The  motive  to  this  new  life  is  to  be  found  in  the  love  and  sacrifice 
of  the  Eedeemer.  2.  The  power  for  this  new  life  is  to  be  found  in  the  gracious 
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  Let  this  motive  have  force  and  sway  in  your 
nature;  lot  this  power  be  sought,  to  control,  transform,  and  renew  your  life. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — Membership  in  Christ.  The  great  principles  laid  down  at  the  outset 
of  this  chapter  have  to  be  followed  out  into  practice.  Paul  shows  how  consecration 
and  renewal  are  to  manifest  themselves  in  actual  life,  and  how  the  will  of  God  is  to  be 
practically  proved.  In  so  doing — perhaps  because  he  is  writing  to  a  Church,  and  not 
to  an  individuals-he  first  treats  of  the  obligations  of  social  Christianity,  and  shows 
how  members  of  a  brotherhood  ought  to  act  in  their  association  with  one  another,  in 
their  Church-life.  Yet  he  does  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  a  congregation,  a  com- 
munity, is  composed  of  individuals;  accordingly,  the  message  he  delivers  he  delivers 
expressly  to  "  every  man  that  is  among  you."  His  first  caution  is  against  self-exaltation 
and  self-praise ;  bis  first  counsel  is  to  unity  and  mutual  consideration.  This  is  very 
natural ;  for  the  early  Christians  were  but  few  in  number,  and,  being  so  decidedly 
distinguished  from  the  world  around,  they  were  thrown  very  much  into  one  another's 
society,  and  their  Christian  life  had  both  the  advantages  and  dangers  attaching  to  its 
social  character. 

I.  Pride  is  condemned  and  sobribtt  of  judgment  enjoined.  1.  This  was  a 
necessary  caution  and  admonition.  It  is  a  besetting  temptation  of  human  nature  to 
think  too  highly  of  ourselves.  Men  are  prone  to  exaggerate  their  own  abilities  and 
merits,  and  to  extenuate  their  own  faults ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  alas  I  to  depreciate 
the  gifts  and  deserts  of  their  neighbours,  and  to  magnify  their  failings.  It  is  the 
infirmity  of  selfishness,  of  self-importance,  of  self-glorification.     In  old  times,  the 


OH.  xn.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  85S 

Christian  moralists  reckoned  pride  among  the  Beven  deadly  sina.  There  was  an 
additional  re  ison  for  this  apostolic  caution  in  the  case  of  the  eavly  Christians.  There 
were  imparted  to  many  of  tliem  very  remarkable  and  striking  gifts,  in  some  instances 
of  a  miraculous  character.  Within  the  boundary  of  these  societies,  these  gifts  were 
lield  in  high  esteem,  and  were  often  unduly  prized  and  even  coveted.  The  possessors 
of  supernatural  powers,  gifts  of  tongues  or  of  healing,  may  have  been  persona  of  no 
more  than  average  Christian  character,  and  may  have  been  specially  in  danger  of 
being  puffed  up  by  spiritual  pride.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  there  is  scarcely  any 
possession  or  endowment  wMch  may  not  furnish  occasion  for  sinful  pride.  2.  There 
is  a  special  propriety  in  modesty,  in  sobriety  of  Judgment  concerning  ourselves.  What 
we  have  we  received  from  the  Giver  of  every  good  gift,  ami  every  perfect  boon.  Our 
"measure  of  faith"  he  bestowed.  Who,  then,  made  us  to  differ?  In  fact,  what. are 
we,  the  best  of  us,  but  poor  helpless  sinners,  saved  by  sovereign  grace?  The  more 
we  reflect,  the  more  we  shall  see  how  unreasonable,  indefensible,  and  absurd  it  is  to 
indulge  sentiments  of  self-importance  and  self-esteem.  Humiliation  and  contrition 
are  far  more  appropriate  to  all.  3.  This  is  an  admonition  easy  to  misconstrue. 
Insincere  professions  of  humility  are  repugnant  to  the  Searcher  of  hearts ;  yet  there 
is  reason  to  believe  that  they  are  frequent.  There  is  a  "  pride  that  apes  humility." 
And  there  are  those  who  reed  to  be  put  upon  their  guard  against  undue  depreciation 
of  themselves  and  their  abilitioa ;  such  persons  do  little  good,  because  they  have  a 
rooted  conviction  that  they  have  no  power  for  service.  It  is  desirable,  neither  to 
neglect  the  one  talent,  nor  to  boast  of  the  five.  4.  We  have  an  exami-le  of  the  virtue 
of  sobriety  in  Paul's  own  case.  Even  here,  instead  of  commanding  or  dictating,  he 
words  his  counsel  modestly :  "  I  say,  through  the  grace  given  to  me."  Not  that  he 
doubted  his  apostulic  authority,  but  that  he  disclaimed  any  personal  merit  or  claim. 
For  he  could  sincerely  speak  of  himself  as  "  the  least  of  the  apostles ; "  "  not  worthy 
to  be  calleil  an  apostle;"  "less  than  the  least  of  all  saints."  He,  therefore,  may 
justly  be  said  to  have  enforced  his  precepts  by  his  own  personal,  living  example. 

II.  Membership  in  Christ  is  shown  to  be  the  hoot  of  humility  and  mutctai. 
CONSIDERATION.  How  can  we  enough  admire  in  the  apostle  his  habit  of  laying  the 
foundation  of  every  duty  and  virtue  in  Christ?  In  order  to  thiuk  modestly  of  our.-elves, 
and  kindly  and  respectfully  of  our  Christian  brethren,  we  should  bear  in  mind  our 
common  dependence  upon  the  same  Saviour,  and  our  mutual  relation  one  to  another. 
The  principle  here  stated  was  one  very  familiar  to  Paul's  mind ;  for  it  is  propounded 
in  several  of  his  Epistles,  and  enforced  with  great  beauty,  anr!  at  some  length,  in  the 
First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.  1.  Christians  are  in  common  members  of  the  Lord 
Christ.  He  is  the  Head ;  the  Divine  Personality,  revealing  himself  through  the  body. 
Ho  himself  had  taught  this  great  and  precious  doctrine.  "  Abide  in  me,"  said  Christ, 
"  aud  I  in  you."  He  dwells  in  and  inspires  his  body,  the  Church,  by  his  own  gracious 
and  mighty  Spirit.  It  is  his  presence  that  giTes  life  and  guidance,  energy  and 
blessing,  to  the  body.  Now,  if  this  be  so,  surely  it  is  obvious  that  to  exalt  ourselves 
and  to  despise  others  is  inconsistent  with  such  a  relatiun.  Can  we  regard  with  neglect, 
or  with  scorn,  those  whom  the  Lord  terms  members  of  his  own  mystical  body?  2. 
There  is  diversity  among  the  members  of  the  siiiritual  body.  As  in  the  human  frame, 
so  in  the  Church,  every  member  has  its  own  office.  In  subsequent  verses  Paul  explains 
what  some  of  these  offices  are.  It  is  an  instructive  thought,  impressing  lessons  of 
modesty  and  mutual  esteem,  that  Chiist  has  a  use  for  every  one  of  us.  Instead  of 
fretting  that  you  have  not  your  neighbour's  gift,  rather  rejoice  that  he  has  it.  Instead 
of  thinking  so  much  of  your  own  work  as  to  fill  up  the  whole  horizon  of  your  vision 
with  what  is  yours,  turn  an  interested  and  kindly  eye  upon  the  ministry  of  your 
neighbour.  Almost  all  men  are  prone  to  be  one-sided.  Eeoeive  inspired  counsel : 
"  Look  every  man  also  upon  the  things  of  others."  There  is  room  in  the  Church  for 
the  Christian  scholar,  the  Christian  philosopher,  the  Christian  preacher,  the  Christian 
man  of  business,  the  Christian  man  of  science,  the  Christian  workman ;  for  those  who 
give  themselves  to  healing,  to  education,  to  domestic  life,  to  civil  government,  to  social 
amelioration ;  in  fact,  there  is  room  for  all  whom  Christ  has  called  and  qualified  for 
his  own  serTice.  The  great  Maker  has  fashioned  no  two  alike ;  let  each  be  content  to 
be  himself — ^to  be  just  what  the  Lord  of  the  body  intended  him  to  be.  3.  There  i« 
iinity  and  harmony  among  the  members  of  Christ's  body.    The  inapired  view  is  thi*  • 

BOMANS.  2  A 


354  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xn.  1—21 

We  cannot  b«  all  Christ's  without  coming  into  relation  with  one  another,  yery  close 
and  vital.  Common  dependence  upon  the  Head  creates  mutual  affections,  and  calls  for 
mutual  services.  Huw  destructive  is  this  teaching  of  that  pride,  from  which  the 
apostle  dissuades  1  The  health  of  each  member,  and  bis  efficiency  for  service,  depends 
upon  the  condition  of  the  other  members  of  the  spiritual  organism  and  structure.  It 
is  not  uniformity  which  is  to  be  cultivated  and  expected ;  it  is  organic  unity,  which 
implies  unity  in  diversity.  Subordination  to  the  one  Head,  the  indwelling  of  the 
one  Spirit,  will  produce  this  happy  result.  Thus  are  secured  the  growth  of  the  body 
and  the  glory  of  Christ. 

Vers.  6—8. — Orace  and  gifts.  It  is  presumed  that  every  member  not  only  refrains 
from  disparaging  or  envying  the  offices  of  fellow-members,  but  fulfils  his  own  office. 
And  it  is  also  presumed  that,  as  there  is  no  member  in  the  human  body  without  a 
function,  so,  in  Christian  society,  the  Creator  and  Lord  has  assigned  to  every  individual 
a  place  to  fill,  a  work  to  do,  and  service  to  render  as  well  as  to  receive.  In  this  com- 
prehensive passage  several  great  principles  are  explicitly  or  implicitly  presented. 

I.  God's  grace  AccotrNTS  fob  human  gifts.  We  speak  of  our  fellow-creatures' 
"gifts,"  and  say  of  some  that  they  are  " gifted,"  that  they  " have  talents; "  but  what 
is  involved  in  this  language  does  not  always  come  before  our  minds.  Yet,  if  from  the 
Father  of  lights  cometh  down  every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  boon,  surely  the  gifts 
of  intellect  and  heart,  the  gifts  of  sympathy  and  ministration,  are  as  truly  and  really 
from  above,  as  are  those  we  term  the  gifts  of  Providence.  The  risen  and  glorified 
Bedeemer  bestows  gifts  upon  men.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  given,  and  that  Spirit's  presence 
imparts  moral  power  and  adaptation  and  influence.  Freely,  and  not  of  constraint,  or 
because  of  our  desert,  is  the  Spirit  given.  It  is  ours  to  receive  with  gratitude,  and  to 
use  with  fidelity ;  but  our  receiving  and  employing  are  only  possible  through  Divine 
grace  and  liberality. 

n.   Gk)D'S    INPINITB    BBSOUBCBS    SUPPLY    MAN's    MANIFOLD    NEED.         We     may    Well 

admire  the  goodness  of  our  Father  in  heaven,  in  the  bestowal  of  his  gifts ;  his  bounty, 
manifest  in  the  universal  diffusion  of  those  gifts ;  and  his  wisdom,  conspicuous  in  their 
endless  variety.  God  has  created  man  with  many  wants,  and  has  so  constituted 
human  society  that  "no  man  liveth  unto  himself;"  that  we  are  mutually  dependent 
one  upon  another  for  all  our  knowledge,  happiness,  and  means  of  usefulness.  Every 
congregation  of  Christians  may  be  regarded  as  a  collection  of  spiritual,  as  well  as  of 
more  obvious  and  physical,  necessities.  The  young  need  to  be  taught  and  trained ;  the 
misled  need  to  be  recovered ;  the  feeble  need  to  be  confirmed ;  the  sorrowful  need  to  be 
comforted;  the  presumptuous  need  to  be  repressed ;  the  petulant  and  quarrelsome  need 
to  be  corrected ;  the  inexperienced  need  to  be  advised.  These,  and  other  cases,  can 
only  be  met  by  a  provision  inexhaustible  in  quantity  and  exquisitely  adapted  in 
character.  In  this  and  parallel  passages  the  apostle  takes  pleasure  in  dwelling  upon 
the  vastness  and  variety  of  the  resources  which  the  Lord  of  all  places  at  the  disposal  of 
his  people.    It  is  indeed  a  delightful  thought :  "  All  things  are  yours,"  etc. 

in.  The  work  of  Christians  in  this  world  is  the  fulfillinq  a  trust  from 
QoD.  We  live,  not  certainly  to  seek  our  own  pleasure,  not  certainly  to  respond  to 
every  passing  social  impulse,  not  even  merely  to  develop  our  own  nature  and  cultivate 
our  own  powers.  We  are  summoned  to  take  a  higher  view  of  life  and  its  opportunities. 
As  St.  Peter  expresses  it,  "According  as  each  hath  received  a  gift,  ministering  it 
among  yourselves,  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  Ctoi."  It  is  good  for  the 
young  and  unformed  to  come  under  the  control  of  a  superior  human  mind  and  will,  and 
so  to  shape  life  as  to  secure  approval  and  commendation  from  a  master,  a  leader.  How 
much  better  for  us  all  to  live  as  those  whose  fidelity  the  Master  in  heaven  is  testing, 
and  who  are  held  responsible  to  him  1  When  we  read  of  God's  gifts,  we  are  not  to 
infer  that  we  possess  them  absolutely,  in  such  a  sense  that  it  is  in  our  option  either  to 
use  or  neglect  them,  that  we  are  at  liberty  to  treat  them  otherwise  than  as  a  sacred 
trust.  On  the  contrary,  "  every  one  of  us  must  give  an  account  of  himself  to  God." 
The  talents  the  Lord  has  entrusted  to  his  servants  are  for  them  so  to  employ  that, 
when  he  comes  in  judgment,  they  may  give  in  their  account  with  joy  and  not  with 
grief. 

lY.  EvxBT  Chbibtian  is  oallxd  to  uim  hu  aira  fob  the  BuntnT  or  his 


OH.  xiL  1— 21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  365 

FELLOWS.  It  is  observable  that  every  several  admonition  in  this  passage  has  referencs 
to  benefits  to  be  conferred  upon  othors.  The  Christian  is  called  to  look,  not  upon  his 
own  things,  but  also  upon  the  things  of  others.  This  is  the  lesson  which  Christianity 
has  from  the  beginning  been  inculcating ;  and  modem  society  is  for  it  under  a  debt, 
which  is  not  always  frankly  and  fully  acknowledged.  Some  modem  systems  of 
morality  and  schemes  of  human  life,  as  positivism,  make  the  whole  of  religion  consist 
in  living  for  others  (altruism).  But  it  is  vain  to  rear  a  superstructure  without  first 
lajing  the  foundation.  To  induce  and  sustain  an  unselfish  life,  it  is  needful  to  begin 
with  the  counsels  of  God ;  to  feel  the  one,  sacred  motive  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  to  seek 
the  guidance  and  aid  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  A.t  the  same  time,  unselfishness  and  self- 
denying  benevolence  are  one  great  evidence  of  a  renewed  nature,  and  of  the  action  of 
Chiistiata  principle. 

v.   ChEISTIAN    MINISTBATION    IB    CONPINBD    TO    KO    CLASS,   BUT   DEVOLVES   UPON   THE 

WHOLE  Chuboh.  The  apostle  is  not  writing  to  the  officers  of  the  society  at  Rome,  biK 
to  all  in  the  city,  who  are  "  beloved  of  God,  and  called  to  be  saints."  The  duties  here 
enumerated  are  diffused  amongst  the  community,  amongst  whom  the  gifts  necessary  for 
their  discharge  are  graciously  and  wisely  distributed.  There  is  a  mischievous  tendency  in 
human  nature  towards  doing  good  by  deputy.  It  is,  indeed,  right  that  a  man  should  not 
meddle  with  work  which  is  not  his ;  but  some,  who  profess  to  act  upon  this  principle,  not 
only  neglect  other  people's  business,  but  neglect  their  own.  You  may  not  be  gifted  with 
much  power  of  teaching,  but  you  may  be  able  to  show  mercy.  You  may  have  little  to 
give,  but  you  may,  if  you  will  exercise  your  gift,  prove  able  to  console  and  sympathize. 
In  any  case,  let  us  not  fall  into  the  error  of  supposing  that,  because  we  cannot  do 
everything,  therefore  we  can  do  nothing.  One  of  the  disadvantages  attending  a 
professional  ministry  is  this — that  many  suppose  that  it  is  the  exclusive  business  of  the 
clergy  to  attend  to  the  consolation  of  the  saints  and  to  labour  for  the  evangelization 
of  the  world.  The  fact  is  that,  wherever  the  gift  has  been  bestowed  and  the  oppor- 
timity  for  its  exercise  provided,  there  the  responsibility  lies,  and  there  the  service  is 
required. 

Application.  1.  Let  us  ask,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  2.  Let  \i» 
cultivate  the  spirit  of  mutual  respect  and  consideration  as  fellow-members  of  Christ. 
3.  Let  us  co-operate  for  the  great  ends  which  the  Divine  Head  of  the  Church  has  set 
before  us,  viz.  the  increase  and  the  harmony  of  the  body  of  Christ. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — Gifts  (second  homily).  In  enumerating  the  various  gifts  Imparted  by 
the  Lord  to  his  Church,  the  various  services  its  members  are  called  to  render  to  one 
another,  the  apostle  writes  for  all  time.  In  the  primitive  congregations  there  were 
persons  endowed  with  special  and  supernatural  gifts ;  but  these,  with  one  exception, 
the  apostle  does  not  include  in  this  instructive  catalogue;  he  rather  chooses  to  put  upon 
record  his  own  judgment  as  to  the  graces  and  qualifications  necessary,  through  all 
ages,  for  the  edification  of  the  Church  and  the  evangelization  of  mankind.  We 
observe  — 

I.  Gifts  ihtellectual  and  instbuctivb.  The  trath  is  the  great  gift  and  deposit 
entrusted  by  the  Head  of  the  Church.  The  truth  is  first  apprehended  and  appropriated ; 
and  then,  as  a  natxural  result,  is  communicated  and  propagated.  And  this  has  been 
and  is  done  in  various  methods.  1.  By  prophecy.  This  is,  in  the  strictest  sense  of 
the  term,  a  supernatural  gift ;  the  word  designates  the  power  of  uttering  forth  the  mind 
and  win  of  God,  and  implies  a  special  illumination  from  above.  There  are  traces,  in 
the  Book  of  the  Acts,  of  the  existence  and  ministry  of  such  a  class,  who  authoritatively 
announced  the  will  of  Heaven,  and  sometimes  foretold  events  to  come.  We  may  justly 
regard  the  apostles  as  themselves  prophetically  endowed ;  so  that  we,  and  the  whole 
Church,  are  benefited  through  the  impartation  of  this  gift.  2.  By  teaching.  Christianity 
18  a  teaching  religion,  and  commits  to  every  generation  the  sacred  duties  of  instructing 
the  succeeding  race,  and  assigns  to  the  enlightened  the  oflice  of  evangelizing  those  who 
are  in  spiritual  darkness  and  ignorance.  When  the  Son  of  God  became  incarnate,  he 
condescended  to  live  the  life  of  a  Teacher ;  and  when  he  committed  to  his  apostles  the 
final  trust,  he  bade  them  go  forth  and  teach  all  nations.  In  the  early  Church  the  office 
of  the  teacher  was  magnified  ;  and  it  was  an  evil  time  for  Christianity  when  the  teacher 
became  a  priest.     It  in  true  that  not  every  Christian  has  the  qualifications  of  the  teacher. 


S56  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PATJL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xu.  1—21. 

Tet  there  is  a  vast  amount  of  teaching  power  in  many  Chriatian  congregationB,  which 
needs  to  be  called  out,  Banotifled,  and  employed  in  the  holy  cause  of  reUgion.  3.  By 
tahortation,  or  consolation.  Teaching  appeals  to  the  understanding;  exhortation  to 
the  heart,  the  conscience,  the  will.  We  are  reminded  that  human  nature  is  reached  in 
various  ways.  Teaching  alone  is  apt  to  become  dull  and  mechanical;  exhortation, 
unless  based  upon  sound,  sober  instruction,  is  vapid  and  unpractical.  It  is  in  the 
combination  of  the  two  that  a  spiritual  ministry  reaches  its  perfection. 

II.  Gifts  pbaotioal  and  administbativb.  1.  By  ministry  seems  to  be  mtant  all 
practical  service.  The  deacons  or  ministers  of  the  early  Churches  were  no  doubt 
entrusted  with  the  charge  of  the  poor,  aud  the  administraticKi  of  the  secular  affairs  of 
the  Christian  community ;  yet  their  service  seems  to  have  been  varied  and  general,  and 
was  limited  only  by  their  own  powers  aud  the  several  opportunities  of  their  lives.  The 
apostle  here  specifies  several  forms  of  ministry,  as  samples  of  the  rest,  and  as  of 
peculiar  interest  and  value.  2.  These  gifts  may  take  the  practical  form  of  government, 
Bule  is  a  Divine  idea,  just  as  is  teaching;  aud  without  rule,  in  some  form  and  to  some 
extent,  no  society  of  imperfect  human  beings  cun  be  held  together.  There  is  order  and 
rule  ia  the  Church,  which  fails  to  answer  its  Founder's  ends,  and  fails  to  produce  a  right 
impression  upon  the  world,  unless  decency  aud  order  and  harmony  are  maintained. 
There  must  be  rule  in  the  State,  which  is  an  organism  in  which  the  bead  must  needs 
direct  and  control  the  members.  And  there  should  be  order  and  law  in  the  household, 
which  should  be  the  Church  in  miniature.  3.  Some  possess  the  gift,  and  are  entrusted 
with  the  privilege  of  giving,  of  liberality.  It  is  obvious  that  there  is  propriety  ia 
refi;arding  this  as  a  proper  consequence  of  receiving  from  Heaven.  "  Freely  ye  have 
received ;  freely  give."  Gifts  may  be  either  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  and  needy,  or  for 
the  promotion  of  evangelization.  In  any  case,  we  are  here  taught  that  giving  should 
be  with  simplicity,  without  ostentation,  and  with  a  single  eye  to  the  glory  of  God. 
4.  Closely  allied  to  this  gift  is  that  of  showing  mercy.  Whether  in  ministrations  to 
the  aged,  the  sick,  and  the  dying,  in  the  release  or  ransom  of  captives,  in  the  instruc- 
tion of  the  young,  or  in  the  recovery  of  the  degraded  and  the  lost,  there  has  ever  been, 
and  there  still  is,  abundant  room  in  sinful  human  society  for  the  showing  of  mercy.  We 
are  admonished  that  this  gift — that  of  compassion  and  kindness — should  be  exercised  with 
cheerfulness.  There  should  be  a  sense  of  the  dignity  and  privilege  of  being  called  to 
so  Christ-like,  so  God-like,  a  vocation.  Not  grudgingly,  not  even  from  a  constraining 
sense  of  duty,  merely;  but  with  the  spirit  of  the  Divine  Physician,  the  Divine 
Liberator,  should  the  followers  of  Jesus  engage  in  these  sacred  and  beautiful  minis- 
trations. 

Vers.  9,  10. — "Love  unfeigned."  Church-life  is  very  important;  but  human  life  is 
wider  and  more  important  still.  In  the  first  age,  and  when  Christian  communities 
were  few  and  small  and  persecuted,  the  life  the  followers  of  Jesus  led  was  very  much  a 
life  in  common,  and  very  distinct  from  that  of  the  world  around.  We  cannot  wonder 
that  so  mnny  of  the  apostolic  counsels  and  injunctions  referred  to  the  conduct  of 
Church-members  towards  one  another,  and  towards  one  another  as  connected  with 
actually  existing  societies.  Still,  many  admonitions  were  given  to  Christians  as  men 
and  women  moving  more  or  less  in  general  society.  They  were  bidden  to  "honour  all 
men,"  to  "  walk  in  wisdom  towards  those  without."  So,  in  this  practical  chapter, 
when  Paul  has  instructed  the  Roman  Christians  in  their  mutual  duties  as  members  of 
a  society,  and  has  shown  how  each  ministry  is  to  be  discharged,  how  each  office  is  to  be 
filled,  and  how  each  gift  is  to  be  employed,  he  proceeds  to  more  general  counsels.  He 
describes  the  spirit  which  is  to  be  displayed  in  the  common  intercourse  of  life,  both 
amongst  themselves  and  in  their  association  with  the  unchristian  world.  First  and 
foremost  among  his  exhortations  is  this  to  brotherly  love  and  kindness.  For  all  pre- 
cepts beside  are  merely  the  unfolding  of  that  Divine  law  of  charity  which  is  designated 
"  the  bond  of  perfeotness." 

I.  Consider  the  Divims  pmnoiplb  and  motive  of  Christian  ienkvolenck  and 
LOVE.  We  are  sometimes  told  that  mutual  good  will  is  evolved  in  settled  society, 
being  found  advantageous  to  all,  and  preferable  to  suspicion,  distrust,  and  malevolence. 
But  the  fact  is  that  this  is  very  much  a  matter  of  individual  character,  and  that  in 
Tftry  primitive  societies  there  are  found  Christians  who  are  superior  to  the  malice  and 


OH.  xn.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE   OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  367 

hatred  wWoh  prevail  around  them ;  whilst  in  the  most  civilized  communities  there  art 
multitudes  who  prefer  their  own  pleasure  and  interest  to  all  beside.  Christianity 
reveals  to  us  the  true  principle  of  universal  brotherhood,  basing  it  upon  the  Fatherhood 
of  Glod  and  the  redemption  of  Christ.  The  apostle  of  love,  St.  John,  tells  us  that 
"  God  is  love,"  and  makes  this  the  Christian's  motive  to  the  love  of  his  brother.  And 
Paul,  writing  to  the  Ephesiaas,  says,  "  Walk  in  love,  even  as  Christ  also  loved  us, 
and  gave  himself  up  for  us,  au  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God."  And  here  the  precepts 
of  the  apostle  must  be  taken  along  with  what  goes  before  in  this  Epistle,  and  it  must 
be  remembered  that  the  entreaty  is  urged  "by  the  mercies  of  God."  All  earthly  duties 
have  a  heavenly  origin.  Religion  is  designed  to  govern  onr  whole  spirit  and  life.  The 
man  who  believes  in  the  infinite  love,  in  the  fatherly  heart,  of  God,  who  believes  that 
God  sent  his  Son  to  save  us  from  hatred  and  all  other  sins,  has  a  root  for  his  renewed 
dispositions  and  his  changed  habits  of  regarding  and  treating  his  fellow-creatures ;  it 
becomes  natural  to  him  to  live  a  life  of  love. 

IL  Love  involves  all  virtue,  and  is  the  compendium  op  the  moral  Law. 
We  have  the  unquestioned  authority  of  our  Lord  for  this  vibw  of  love;  for  Jeuus 
approved  of  the  summing-up  of  all  duty,  of  the  whole  Decalogue,  in  both  tables,  in  the 
two  precepts,  "Love  God,"  and  "Love  thy  neighbour."  Where  there  is  true  love, 
vice  and  crime  are  banished.  And  every  virtue  and  grace  may  be  regarded  in  practice 
as  the  fruit  of  this  plant.  Even  justice,  the  first  of  the  virtues,  is  not  above  this 
alliance ;  for  how  can  we  wrong  those  whom  we  love  ?  It  is  thus  we  must  account 
for  the  exhortation,  with  which  ver.  9  closes,  coming  in  this  place.  Evil  is  hatred,  and 
is  therefore  abhorred ;  good  is  love,  and  is  therefore  so  ught  and  held  fast  with  a  firm 
grasp.  Some,  indeed,  interpret  this  clause, "  Cleave  to  the  Good  One,  i.e.  Christ,"  bringi  iig 
the  motive  of  a  personal  attachment  to  the  Saviour  to  bear  upon  the  redeemed  nature. 
Let  us  not  neglect  the  Divine  method,  or  spurn  the  aid  which  infinite  wisdom  and 
grace  have  preferred.  Is  it  in  any  respect  hard  for  us  to  obey  God,  and  follow  in  the 
steps  of  Christ?  Then  let  us  call  to  mind  the  love  of  God  revealed  in  his  dear  Son, 
and  allow  that  love  to  prompt  us  to  obedience,  gratitude,  and  consecration.  And  let 
us,  adopting  Christ's  new  commandment,  live  in  the  spirit  of  love  and  kindness.  This, 
by  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  will  render  difficult  duties  easy,  and  will  enable  us  to 
fulfil,  in  the  right  spirit  and  in  the  right  way,  the  will  of  God  concerning  us,  in  all 
our  relations  with  our  fellow-creatures. 

III.  Christian  love  shottld  be  unfeigned.  As  variously  rendered,  "  without 
dissimulation,"  "  without  hypocrisy."  There  were  hypocrites,  not  only  among  the 
Jewish  Pharisees,  whom  Christ  denounced  for  their  pretences  and  insincerity,  but  also 
among  the  Christian  communities.  Thus  Ananias  and  Sapphira  professed  love  and 
generosity,  but  there  was  no  reality  corresponding  to  the  profession.  It  is  hard  to 
understand  how,  in  those  times,  there  could  have  been  any  inducement  to  hypocrisy. 
However,  the  language  of  the  apostle  here  seems  to  imply  that  there  was  a  danger  of 
some  professing  disciples  of  Christ  avowing  a  love  which  they  did  not  really  feeL  There 
is  certainly  such  danger  now.  Public  sentiment  requires  that  charity  should  be  pro- 
fessed among  Christians.  Yet  there  obtains  very  much  which  is  inconsistent  with  such 
profession.  There  are  those  who  call  one  another  "  dear  brethren,"  who  nevertheless 
slander  and  injure  one  another  when  opportunity  occurs.  It  is  the  curse  of  the 
so-called  rehgious  world ;  and  it  would  be  well  for  a  while  to  have  in  this  matter  a  little 
less  profession  and  a  little  more  practice.  The  pretence  of  brotherly  love  without  the 
reality  is  self-delusion,  and  it  is  most  pernicious  in  its  influence  over  the  unbelieving  ^ 
world. 

IV.  Christian  love  should  be  charactbbizbd  by  sympathy  and  tenderness. 
The  language  used  by  the  apostle  here  is  very  remarkable :  "  Be  tenderly  affectioned  one 
to  another."  There  is  a  quality  in  Christian  love  which  is  peculiar  to  our  religion, 
which  was  but  little  known  previously  to  our  Saviour's  coming,  and  which  may  be 
sought  almost  in  vain  in  the  heathen  world  to-day.  We  are  not  to  show  kindness 
merely  from  a  sense  of  duty ;  but  to  do  so  in  the  spirit  of  him  who  brake  not  the 
bruised  reed,  who  was  often  moved  with  compassion,  who,  even  on  the  cross,  was 
meek  and  gentle,  considerate  and  forgiving.  Paul  had  much  of  the  same  spirit.  A 
keen  logical  mind,  a  rhetorical  style,  a  commanding  will,  were  in  him  united  with  the 
tenderness  uf  the  nurse,  the  mother.    His  was  the  love  of  forbearance  and  patience,  '  1 


359  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xu.  1— 2L 

sympathy  and  pity.  Now,  there  are  many  classeg  whom  it  is  especially  desirable  that 
we,  as  Christians,  should  deal  with  in  this  spirit  and  temper.  For  instance,  the  young, 
the  destitute,  the  afflicted,  the  wayward.  AH  of  these  need  to  be  approached  in  the 
spirit  commended  in  this  passage ;  not  in  »  hard,  cold,  mechanical  manner,  such  as 
seems  habitual  with  some  people,  who  in  some  respects  might  be  called  good ;  hut  in 
a  Christ-like  attitude,  and  with  Christ-like  tones,  such  as  are  proper  to  disciples  of 
him  who  is  touched  with  a  feeling  of  human  infirmities. 

V.   CHBIBTIAN   LOVB    should    display    rrSBLF    IN    MTTTlTAIi    EBSPEOT  AND    HONOUB. 

Brotherly  affection  is  opposed  to  self-seeking,  pride,  and  arrogance,  as  pole  to  pole. 
It  fosters  humility  as  regards  self.and  it  prompts  to  put  honour  upon  others.  In 
both  these  respects  the  Christian  spirit  is  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  the  world,  which 
impels  men  to  push  themselves  forward,  to  urge  their  own  claims,  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  to  depreciate  their  neighbours  and  to  thrust  them  into  obscurity.  It  is  a 
precept  of  Christianity,  "Be  courteous."  And  true  courtesy  has  its  deep,  Divin* 
root  in  brotherly  love,  springing  from  the  soil  of  fellowship  with  God  in  Christ. 

Application.  1,  Let  any  one  who  may  be  living  in  hatred  and  malice  towards  any 
fellow-creature  learn  to  suspect  the  reality  of  his  Christianity ;  for  such  dispositions 
are  not  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  2.  Let  those  whose  demeanour  towards  their  neighbours 
is  hard  and  unsympathetic,  consider  whether  this  is  the  temper  of  mind  which  their 
Lord  exemplified  in  himself  and  approves  in  his  followers.  3.  Let  all  Christians 
cultivate  that  spirit  of  love  which  will  fit  for  the  immortal  fellowship  of  heaven,  the 
•bode  of  harmony  and  charity. 

Ver.  11. — The  spirit  of  Christian  service.  Eellgion  is  a  personal,  individual  matter. 
Its  seat  is  in  the  heart.  Christianity  is  both  an  intelligible  truth  and  a  living  power. 
It  enters  into  and  takes  possession  of  a  man's  spiritual  nature;  and  controls  and 
governs  his  life,  and  affects  his  social  relations.  Christ  dwells  in  the  heart  by  faith, 
and  rules  in  the  heart  by  the  energy  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  It  is  in  this  light  that  the 
apostle  in  this  verse  regards  the  religion  which  he  authoritatively  teaches  and  enforces. 
Let  us  look  at  the  matter  thus,  and  consider  what  Christianity  proposes  to  do  in  the 
character  and  life  of  every  person  who  truly  receives  it. 

I.  We  have  here  described  thk  gbnbbal  character  oi'  thb  Christian  utb.    It 
Is  lervice,  rendered  to  Christ.     Several  very  important  views  of  our  existence  and 
vocation  are  afibrded  by  this  language.     1.  Life  should  be  neither  aimless  nor  selfish. 
A  desultory  way  of  spending  time,  with  no  definite  purpose,  no  unity,  is  most  unsuit- 
able to  the  professed  Christian.    To  seek  simply  the  satisfaction  of  one's  own  wants, 
the  gratification  of  one's  own  appetites  and  tastes,  is  flagrant  violation  of  the  Divine 
law.    How  can  such  a  life  be  termed  a  service  ?    The  bondman  has  one  occupation, 
doing  his  master's  will ;  and  one  aim,  securing  his  master's  approval.    So  with  the 
Christian ;  the  life  which  is  not  service  cannot  be  his.     2.  Life  should  be,  consciously 
and  deliberately,  a  service  rendered  to  the  Lord  Jesus.    This  is  what  our  Divine  Master 
expects.  "  Ye  call  me,"  says  he,  "  Master  and  Lord  :  and  ye  say  well ;  for  so  I  am." 
This  is  what  his  inspired  servants  acknowledge  to  be  right.     "We  serve  the  Lord 
Christ."    This  is,  in  fact,  the  proper  designation  of  all  true  Christians — servants  of  the 
Lord.    The  will  of  God,  revealed  ia  Christ  Jesus,  is  our  proper  law.    The  glory  of 
God,  in  the  advancement  of  the  kingdom  of  righteousness,  is  our  proper  aim.    The 
disciples  of  Christ  are  our  congenial  fellow-servants.     The  wages  of  our  service,  what 
•re  they?    "The  gift  of  God -is  eternal  life."    3.  Our  service  rendered  to  Christ 
should  be  an  acknowledgment  of  his  incomparable  service  rendered  to  us.    Jesus  was 
the  Servant  as  well  as  the  Son  of  God.    He  was  the  Servant  of  God /or  us.    Such  was 
his  own  declaration :  "  The  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to 
minister."    And  the  apostle  says  of  him,  "  He  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant." 
This  amazing  condescension,  perfected  in  his  sacrificial  death,  demands  a  grateful 
recognition  and  return  from  us ;  and  is,  indeed,  divinely  adapted  to  awaken  within  us 
the  purpose  and  resolve  to  devote  all  our  powers  to  him  who  withheld  not  his  labours 
and  hii  life  from  us.    Hence  we  draw  the  motive  and  the  power  to  obey  and  serve. 
To  express  our  gratitude  and  love  and  consecration  to  him,  no  devotion  can  be  too 
unqualified,  no  effort  too  strenuous,  no  sacrifice  too  great. 

U.  We  have  here  described  the  fbaotioai.  diliobhok  which  bhocld  DisTiNauuH 


OH.  xn.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  KOMANa  859 

THE  Cheistian's  SERVICE.  "  Not  slothful  [or,  •  remiss  *]  In  diligence."  "  Business  "  ii 
a  misleading  term,  as  it  seems  to  refer  to  the  occupation  by  which  a  man  gains  his 
livelihood.  It  is  a  quality  or  habit  which  is  thus  designated.  1.  With  regard  to  the 
icope  for  diligence,  there  is  no  limitation ;  except  that,  as  a  matter  of  course,  the 
employment  in  which  we  are  to  be  diligent  is  to  be  one  which  conscience  and  the  God 
of  conscience  approve.  The  Christian  should  be  diligent  in  the  discharge  of  the  common 
duties  of  life.  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might."  Whether 
the  sphere  of  your  activity  be  in  the  family  and  household,  in  the  Church,  or  in  what 
is  called  secular  life,  the  same  rule  applies.  Let  young  people  especially  take  advice 
in  this  matter,  and,  remembering  the  flight  of  time,  and  their  responsibility  to  Heaven, 
be  alert  and  active.  2.  How  needful  is  this  admonition  I  All  men  have  some,  and 
there  are  those  who  have  many,  temptations  to  indolence.  Natural  disposition  or  the 
example  of  idle  companions  may  induce  some  to  remit  their  efforts.  Others  may 
become  weary  in  well-doing,  or  may  be  discouraged  because  all  their  glowing  expecta- 
tions are  not  fulfilled ;  or  because  they  are  left,  they  fancy,  to  work  without  sympathy 
and  alone.  The  work  of  the  Lord  may  seem  so  vast,  and  your  powers  may  seem  so 
limited,  that  you  may  be  tempted  to  say,  "  My  exertions  are  worthless,  and  can  issue 
in  no  result ;  I  may  as  well  fold  my  hands,  and  wait  for  some  supernatural  interposi- 
tion." But  the  right  spirit  is  this — Work  as  if  all  depended  upon  you ;  pray  as  if  all 
depended  upon  God.  3.  We  have  in  Jesus  Christ  the  motive  and  the  example  of 
diligence.  Who  can  do  too  much,  who  can  do  enough,  for  him  who  has  done  and 
suffered  all  for  us?  His  meat  and  drink  were  to  do  the  will  of  him  who  sent  him. 
Strenuous  were  his  exertions  in  his  earthly  ministry;  limitless  his  devotion.  "It  ia 
enough  for  the  servant  that  he  be  as  his  Master."    Learn,  therefore,  of  him. 

III.  We  have  here  described  the  fbbvbht  spieit  in  which  the  Christian's 
8BEVICE  SHOULD  BE  DiscHAEGBD.  The  Same  expression,  here  used  with  regard  to  the 
servants  of  the  Lord  Jesus  generally,  is  used  regarding  that  remarkable  man  named 
ApoUos  (Acts  xviii.  25).  It  may  be  objected  to  this  admonition  that  fervour  is  very 
much  a  matter  of  temperament ;  and  that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  that 
persons  of  a  calm  and  equable  character  should  display  the  same  warmth  as  persons 
naturally  excitable  and  emotional.  In  this  there  is  some  truth ;  yet  there  may  be  true 
fervour  without  demonstration  and  noise.  A  glow  of  love  in  the  heart  may  animate 
the  conduct  and  inspire  the  efforts  even  of  the  tranquil  and  quiet.  It  may  further  be 
objected  that  fervent  people  seldom  wear  well.  We  all  know  persons  who  have  been 
-  fuU  of  feeling,  eager  to  find  fault  with  methodical  and  steady  hard-workers,  loud  in 
their  professions  of  zeal,  and  abundant  in  schemes  for  its  display.  And  we  have  all 
known  Such  persons  as  quick  to  cool  down  as  to  warm  up.  We  have  watched  their 
ways,  and  have  found  them  volatile  and  fickle ;  their  fine  schemes  come  to  nothing ; 
they  themselves  perhaps  make  shipwreck ;  or,  at  the  best,  they  weary  of  one  plan  only 
to  be  hot  for  a  season  in  promoting  another.  And  perhaps  experience  has  led  us  to 
undervalue  ardour,  to  place  no  reliance  upon  the  professions  of  the  fervent,  and  to 
regard  with  no  confidence  the  glowing  projects  of  the  sanguine.  But  let  us  bear  in 
mind  that  it  is  not  the  fervour  that  is  at  fault,  but  the  uncertainty  of  the  fiame,  and 
the  haste  with  which  it  bums  out  and  dies  down.  The  metaphor  of  the  text  may  give 
us  a  hint  as  to  the  real  truth  of  the  matter.  The  word  used  applies  to  water  which  is 
heated  to  the  boiling  point.  Now,  if  water  be  placed  in  an  open  vessel,  and  if  heat  be 
applied  to  it,  it  soon  evaporates  in  the  air — ^in  homely  language,  it  boils  away ;  and  the 
heat  applied,  the  fuel  consumed,  have  served  no  useful  purpose.  But  let  the  water  be 
poured  into  the  boiler  of  a  steam-engine,  and  then  let  the  furnace  be  heated.  What 
now  will  be  the  result?  The  fervour  becomes  power,  the  expansion  of  the  steam 
occasions  motion  ;  the  machinery  begins  to  act,  and  some  useful  result  is  secured.  So  in 
the  spiritual  realm.  Let  us  have  warmth  of  devotion,  love  to  Christ  the  Saviour,  zeal 
in  the  service  of  God.  But  let  them  be  under  the  control  of  Christian  wisdom.  Let 
them  be  applied  to  purposes  of  practical  piety  and  benevolence.  Let  them,  instead  of 
«vaix>rating  in  words,  whether  of  insincere  profession  or  of  insincere  devotion,  be  used 
BCCurdmg  to  the  counsels  of  inspiration,  the  dictates  of  sober  experience,  and  the  holy 
prompvings  oi  the  Spirit  of  God.  What  counsel  shall  be  given  to  those  professed 
followers  of  ihe  baviour  who  are  deficient  in  spiritual  fervour?  In  every  Christian 
•eciety  there  ait>>  it  is  to  be  feared,  some  who,  in  the  judgment  even  of  charity,  must 


»«0  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.    [oH.xn.1— 2L 

be  acooiinted  lukewann.  How  displeasing  to  the  great  Head  of  the  Ohuroh  are  cuch 
eharacters  need  scarcely  be  said ;  his  word  to  them  is,  "  I  would  thou  wert  cold  ot 
hot  1 "  When  you  are  careleag  as  to  your  spiritual  state,  indifferent  to  God's  Word  and 
to  the  exercises  of  prayer  and  praise,  negligent  and  irregular  in  attendance  upon  the 
publio  means  of  grace,  slow  to  reform  yourself  and  quick  to  censure  your  neighbours, 
Illiberal  in  your  gifts  and  slothful  in  your  serrices  to  Christ  and  his  cause,  it  cannot 
but  be  presumed  that  you  are  wanting  in  fervour  of  spirit.  ITiere  is  but  one  remedy. 
You  must  draw  near  to  that  Saviour  from  whom  you  have  wandered.  You  must 
repent,  renew  your  first  love,  and  do  your  first  works.  Seeking  forgiveness  for  culpable 
lukewarmness,  you  must  revive  the  flame  of  piety  by  kindling  it  anew  at  the  sacred 
altar  of  Divine  love.  Contemplate  the  grace  and  compassion  of  the  Redeemer  as 
evinced  in  the  anguish  of  Gethsemane  and  the  woe  of  Calvary,  Call  to  mind  th« 
fervour  he  displayed  when,  in  the  anticipation  of  his  sacrifice,  he  exclaimed,  "  Father, 
glorify  thy  Name  1 "  "  Thy  wiU  be  done  I "  Thus  shall  your  languid  zeal  be  revived, 
thus  shall  your  flagging  devotion  be  reanimated.  And  your  service  shall  no  longer  be 
cold  and  mechanical,  but  it  shall  bo  rendered  gratefully  and  joyfully ;  it  shall  be  the 
tribute  of  a  loyal  subject,  and  the  offering  of  a  loving  child. 

Applioatioh.  1.  Let  all  heareis  of  the  gospel  clearly  understand  what  are  tha 
claims  of  Christ  upon  them.  A  profession  of  faith  in  itself  is  of  little  valne.  What 
the  Lord  Jesus  asks  is  the  devotion  of  the  heart,  and  the  service  of  all  the  powers. 
2.  Let  members  of  Christian  Churches  ask  themselves  how  far  the  tone  of  their  piety 
and  the  conduct  of  their  life  agree  with  the  language  of  the  text.  And  let  them  be 
on  their  guard  against  the  insidious  approach  of  lukewarmness.  3.  Let  communicant! 
approach  the  Lord's  table  with  the  desire  of  so  meeting  with  Christ  that  the  fervour 
tt  their  love  may  be  renewed,  and  that  they  may  be  led  to  consecrate  all  their  ener^ea 
anew  unto  the  hallowed  service  of  their  Saviour  and  their  Lord. 

Ver.  12. — Patience,  hope,  and  prayer.  In  the  preceding  verse  the  active,  energetic 
nde  of  religion  is  presented  with  vivacity  and  completeness.  And  this  is  peihaps  the 
most  important  of  all  the  trustful  results  of  true  Christianity.  It  was  an  end  worthy 
of  the  Divine  interposition  to  introduce  amongst  men  the  purpose  and  the  power  to 
serve  the  Lord  with  fervour  and  with  diligence.  Yet  this  is  not  all  which  our  religion 
does  for  us.  Our  life  is  not  altogether  in  our  own  hands ;  we  cannot  control  and 
govern  all  that  concerns  us.  We  have  all  to  learn  the  lesson  that  Divine  providence 
hag  appointed  for  us  ^  not  only  to  work,  but  to  submit ;  that  we  have  not  oaly  to  serve, 
but  to  suffer.  True  religion  must  give  us,  not  only  a  law  and  impulse  for  fulfilling 
life's  duties,  but  also  a  power  by  which  we  shall  endure  life's  calamities  and  weakness. 
However  our  natural  character  may  make  active  exertion  congenial,  however  our  lot 
may  be,  on  the  whole,  one  of  cheerful  and  devoted  service ;  there  comes  a  time  to  all— 
a  time,  it  may  be,  of  sickness,  or  of  infirmity,  of  calamity,  or  of  old  age — when  another 
aspect  of  religion  must  be  realized  ;  when  we  must  turn  to  Christ  for  grace,  that  we 
may  be  found  "  in  hope  joyful,  in  trial  patient,  in  prayer  unwearied." 

I.  To  Cheistians  tbibulation  is  Divine  disoiplini.  The  text  implies,  not  only 
that  the  human  lot  is  characterized  by  affliction,  but  that  affliction  is  the  occasion  of 
the  calling  forth  of  Christian  virtues.  There  would  scarcely  be  such  an  emotion  ai 
hope  unless  the  present  were  a  condition  from  which  (in  some  respects)  it  is  desirable 
to  De  released,  or,  at  all  events,  a  condition  susceptible  of  great  improvement.  Unleai 
we  had  something  to  bear,  there  would  be  no  scope  for  the  virtue  of  patience.  If  all 
things  were  as  we  could  wish  them,  if  we  had  nothing  to  contend  with,  if  nothing 
occurred  to  make  us  feel  our  own  helplessness — in  such  case  prayer  would  scarcely  be 
felt  to  be  urgently,  or  at  all  events  constantly,  necessary.  Life  is  a  very  different  thing 
to  those  who  are  enlightened  by  revelation,  as  this  verse  conclusively  shows  us.  How 
truly  Christian  are  these  precepts,  and  how  truly  Christians  those  who  fulBl  them, 
appears,  if  we  think  of  the  heathen,  and  realize  how  they  failed  alike  in  patience,  in 
hope,  and  in  prayer.  Philosophers  inculcated  patience  in  adversity,  but  they  imparted 
no  principle  or  power  which  enabled  people  generally  to  cheiish  this  disposition.  The 
hope  which  the  unenlightened  pagans  cherished  respected  this  life  alone,  and  even  the 
wisest  and  best  knew  nothing  of  a  hope  of  immortality  so  vivid  and  powerful  as  to 
awaken  joy.     Their  prayers  were  either  purely  matter  of  custom  and  form,  or,  being 


OH.xn.  1— 21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  861 

addressed  to  deities  tsoraUy  imperfect  and  capriclona,  were  faithless,  fitful,  and  unin- 
flueutial  even  upon  their  own  nature.  It  is  the  glory  of  Ohristianity  to  have  changed 
all  this.  Among  the  lowliest  of  the  Saviour's  followers  we  find  fortitude  in  the 
endurance  of  afiSiction,  arising  from  the  conviction  that  it  is  the  chastening  of  a 
Divine  Father.  Hope — especially  as  reaching  beyond  this  brief  existence,  and  as  a 
mighty  sustaining  power — is  a  virtue  distinctively  Christian.  Whilst  prayer,  instead  of 
being  an  occasional,  doubting,  and  unprofitable  exercia-i,  is  the  atmosphere  the  Christian 
breathes,  the  power  which  sustains  him  in  all  trouble,  nnd  which  inspires  within  him 
a  hope  founded  upon  the  faithfulness  and  the  promises  of  his  redeeming  Gt>d. 

IL   As  RESPECTS  THE  PEESBNT,  THE  CHRISTIAN  18  SUPPORTED  BY  PATIENCE.      Patience 

suffers  without  murmuring  the  ills  which  Providence  permits.  Patience  waits  for  the 
relief  which,  in  due  time.  Providence  will  send.  Suffering  and  waiting  complete  this 
unusual  virtue.  It  is  not  easy  for  any  one  to  be  patient ;  it  is  easier  to  work  with 
diligence  and  stronuousness  than  to  endure  trial  without  complaint — than  to  wait  until 
a  power  not  our  own  shall  bring  the  trial  to  a  close.  Christian  patience  is  not  a  stoical 
aquiescence  in  the  inevitable,  upon  the  principle  "What  can't  be  cured  must  be 
endured."  1,  It  is  the  result  </  a  heliefin  a  wiu  and  merciful  Providence.  We  do  not 
bow  to  fate ;  we  submit  to  a  Father  in  heaven.  Often  we  cannot  understand  why  he 
should  permit  all  that  befalls  us.  But  faith  assures  us  that  the  counsels  of  Qvd 
towards  us  are  counsels  of  love.  We  cannot  shut  out  firom  the  universe  the  unseeli 
hand  that  guides  and  governs  all  for  our  highest  and  eternal  good.  We  believed  in  our 
own  earthly  father's  heart,  though  sense  could  never  have  told  us  of  it ;  and  similarly 
OUT  souls  are  patient^  because  we  are  assured  that  a  heavenly  Parent  cares  for  ua, 
and  strengthens  and  heals  as  well  as  smites.  2.  It  is  the  fruit  of  fellowship  with  Jesut, 
There  was  no  quality  for  which  our  Saviour  was  more  to  be  admired  than  for  his 
patience.  He  was  [>atient  with  the  misunderstandings  of  his  own  disciples ;  he  was 
patient  with  his  enemies  and  murderers ;  he  was  patient  under  insult  and  agony.  In 
all  this  he  left  us  an  example ;  and  an  apostle  prays  that  God  may  direct  our  hearts 
into  the  patience  of  Clirist.  Many,  through  faith  in  the  meek  and  patient  Saviour, 
have  been  enabled  by  Divine  grace  to  overcome  a  naturally  impatient  and  imperious, 
hnsty  and  violent  temper.  3.  It  is  a  virtue  in  which  we  are  instructed  and practieally 
ditciplined  by  the  Spirit  of  Ood.  "  Tribulation  worketh  patience."  The  lesson  is  not 
learned  all  at  once.  Let  not  those  dispositions  to  which  it  is  not  naturally  easy  be 
discouraged.  "Let  patience  have  its  perfect  work."  Patience  is  tried,  not  that  it  may 
give  way,  but  that  it  may  be  established.  It  is  the  handiwork  of  the  living  Spirit ; 
and  the  day  shall  come  when  the  Maker  shall  pronounce  this  and  all  his  works  to  be 
very  good. 

III.  As  RESPECTS  THE  FUTURE,  THE  CHRISTIAN  IS  INSPIRED  BY  HOPE.      NoW,  hope  {■ 

an  easier  and  more  natural  exercise  of  the  human  spirit  than  is  patience.  A  person 
may  rebel  and  fret  under  present  discipline,  and  yet  may  hope  for  better  times. 

" .  .  .  .  the  darkest  day, 
Live  till  to-morrow,  will  have  passed  away." 

The  Christian's  liope  is,  however,  far  superior  to  any  other.  Whilst  he  has  higber 
pleasures  and  stronger  supports  now,  he  has  brighter  prospects  for  the  great  hereafter. 
There  are  several  elements  of  superiority  in  this  hope.  1.  It  is  well-founded,  resting 
as  it  does  upon  the  faithful  promises  of  God.  God  is  designated  "  the  God  of  hope." 
Hence  the  Christian's  hope  is  not  vague,  but  definite ;  it  is  not  hesitating,  but  sure. 
2.  It  is  hope  of  grace  for  all  the  needs  that  are  to  come.  This  means  hope  of  deliverance 
from  all  dangers,  support  un'ler  all  difficulties,  consolation  under  all  troubles,  guidance 
in  all  perplexities.  3.  It  is  hope  which  reaches  leyond  this  present  life ;  such  hope 
as  none  has  been  able  to  inspire  but  he  who  "  abolished  death,  and  brought  life  and 
immortality  to  light  by  the  gospel."  Hope  of  rest,  of  victory,  of  a  kingdom ;  a  hope 
as  "  an  anchor  unto  the  soul,  sure  and  steadfast,  which  entereth  into  that  within  the 
veil."  4.  It  is  ?iope  which  brings  Joy,  Making  the  future  real,  bringing  the  future 
near,  hope  chases  away  the  gloom  and  darkness,  and  creates  a  spiritual  joy,  pure, 
serene,  and  unspeakable.  Thus,  in  the  night,  songs  of  joy  and  gladness  ascend  to 
heaven.     "  Patience  worketh  experience,  and  experience  hope." 

IV.  By  fbayub,  patience  is  perfected  and  hope  inspired.    It  ii  evident  that 


862  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  xrr.  1—21. 

the  admonition  to  prayer  is  introduced  here  with  a  special  purpose  in  view.  It  is 
intended  to  point  out  to  us  that  the  demeanour  here  commended  can  only  he  main- 
tained through  cultivating  a  prayerful  spirit.  It  is  not  easy,  whilst  pursuing  this 
pilgrimage,  to  be  patient  amidst  its  difficulties,  to  he  joyful  when  the  present  is  dark, 
and  the  ray  of  hope  alone  illuminates  the  night.  Still,  though  not  easy,  it  is  possible. 
That  is  to  say,  it  becomes  possible  by  prayer.  Grace  can  be  obtained,  if  sought  in 
God's  appointed  way;  but  it  must  be  sought,  not  occasionally  or  fitfully,  but  stead- 
fastly, perseveringly,  constantly,  habitually.  This  is  reasonable  enough.  There  is 
nothing  in  our  condition  that  should  put  a  close  to  our  prayers,  and  nothing  in  our 
hearts.  We  do  not  become  independent  of  the  aid  which  such  fellowship  with  Heaven 
alone  can  bring.  There  is  every  inducement,  in  the  declarations  and  promises  of  God's 
Word,  to  "  pray  without  ceasing,"  "  always  to  pray  and  not  to  faint."  God's  fatherly 
heart  does  not  cease  to  pity ;  Christ  does  not  cease  to  intercede  for  his  people.  As 
long  as  our  Lord  is  on  the  throne  of  power,  and  we  are  in  poverty  and  need  and  help- 
lessness, we  may  well  continue  our  prayers.  Private,  domestic,  and  public ;  silent  and 
uttered ;  stated  and  ejaculatory ; — the  prayers  of  Go>d's  people  are  acceptable,  and  are 
heard. 

Application.  1.  The  tribulations  of  life  are  common  to  all  mankind.  Why  should 
any  hearer  of  the  gospel  endure  those  tribulations  without  the  grace  that  can  sustain 
and  comfort,  the  hopes  that  can  animate  and  inspire?  2.  If  Christians  are  weighed 
down  and  distressed  by  the  trials  of  life,  is  it  not  because  they  fail  to  give  heed  to  the 
admonitions  of  God's  Word,  because  they  neglect  to  use  the  means  of  grace  and  help 
which  are  placed  within  their  reach  ?  Tribulation  will  come.  We  can  be  sustained 
under  it  only  by  patience  and  by  hope ;  and  these  virtues  are  the  fruits  of  prayer. 

Vers.  13, 14. — Treatment  of  friends  and  foes.  Christianity  is  a  practical  reli^on. 
The  New  Testament  is  not  simply  a  repertory  of  general  principles ;  it  draws  out  those 
Divine  principles  into  the  detailed  duties  and  difficulties  of  daily  life.  For  example, 
whilst  love  is  the  new  commandment  of  Jesus  to  his  disciples,  and  whilst  love  is 
described  as  the  sum  of  the  Divine  Law,  as  the  greatest  of  the  virtues,  as  the  bond  of 
perfectness,  we  are  shown  how  to  manifest  love  in  the  occupations  and  relationships 
of  daily  existence.  In  this  passage  we  learn  how  the  Spirit  of  Christ  will  govern  our 
conduct  both  to  friends  and  to  foes. 

I.  Christian  teeatment  of  Christian  friends.  In  the  first  age  of  the  gospel 
there  were  formed,  in  the  cities  of  the  empire,  societies  professing  to  trust  Christ  as  the 
Divine  Saviour,  and  to  obey  Christ  as  the  Divine  Lord.  In  many  respects  the  pro- 
ceedings and  habits  of  the  members  of  these  societies  differed  from  those  of  the  people 
around,  and  this  with  a  profound  and  wide  difference.  This  is  exemplified  in  these 
admonitions.  1.  Charity  should  be  exhibited  to  those  in  need.  In  every  community 
there  were  the  very  poor,  the  aged,  the  infirm  and  disabled,  the  oppressed  and  persecuted, 
the  widows  and  orphans.  "  The  poor  ye  have  always  with  you."  Among  the  heathen 
it  was  too  common  to  treat  these  classes  with  contempt  and  neglect.  Christianity  intro- 
duced a  better  mode  of  dealing  with  the  necessitous.  Teaching  the  brotherhood  of 
men  in  Christ,  it  encouraged  the  sentiment  of  community,  and  led  each  practically  to 
share  with  his  neighbour  the  good  of  this  world.  2.  Hospitality  is  another  form  of  tli« 
same  virtue.  By  this  is  not  meant  sumptuous  banquets,  often  given  for  ostentation  and 
for  purposes  of  policy.  But  in  early  times  Christians  would  often  come  as  strangers  to 
a  town,  it  might  he  in  pursuit  cf  work,  it  might  be  to  escape  from  persecution,  it  might 
be  as  the  bearers  of  messages  of  greeting  and  sympathy.  Accordingly,  we  find  some 
Christians  commended  for  receiving  such  into  their  houses  and  entertaining  them,  and 
wo  find  admonitions  to  others  to  adopt  such  a  practice — the  encouragement  being 
added,  "  Forget  not  to  entertain  strangers :  for  thereby  some  have  entertained  angels 
unawares."  3.  The  motive  and  model  of  such  conduct  are  to  he  found  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
himself.  His  very  coming  to  this  world  was  occasioned  by  his  compassion  upon  our 
necessities  :  how  much  more  his  sacrifice  and  redemption  1  Look  at  his  example ;  and 
you  find  him  and  his  disciples  keeping  a  bag,  and  from  their  slender  store  relieving  the 
poor;  you  find  him  providing  bread  for  hungering  multitudes;  you  find  him  healing 
the  sick  and  helpless ;  you  find  him  inviting  young  men  to  visit  and  to  converse  with 
bim.    After  his  ascension,  Christ's  followers,  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  poured 


CM.  xn.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  863 

out  from  on  high,  Imitated  their  Lord's  example.  06Scerg  were  appointed  in  the  socie- 
ties for  the  minlst  ation  of  alma ;  gifts  were  voluntarily  made  for  the  support  of  the 
poor ;  coUeotiona  were  made  for  indigent  fellow-Ohrlstiaas ;  men  were  raised  up  whose 
ministry  as  hosts  was  deemed  worthy  of  apostolic  approval.  AU  this  was  the  working 
of  Christ  in  the  community ;  and  in  proportion  as  Christ  lives  in  your  hearts  will  you 
follow  these  examples.  4.  Wisdom  and  discretion  are  needed  in  the  fidfilmsnt  of  these 
honourable  duties.  Circumstances  differ  as  the  state  of  society  changes.  Impostors 
abound.  Indolence  must  not  be  countenanced.  Each  Christian  must  be  guided  in  the 
exercise  of  charity  and  hospitality  by  his  means  and  by  his  opportunities. 

II.  Christian  tbeatment  op  fobs.  Those  who  curse,  revile,  calumniate,  injure 
them,  Ohristians  are  bound,  as  followers  of  Christ,  to  bless,  to  pray  for,  and  to  benefit. 

1.  Christ  himself  has  commanded  such  conduct.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
sermon  on  the  mount  was  well  known  to  Paul,  and  that  he  was  quoting  from  it  here. 

2.  Christ  himself  has  exemplified  it.  In  his  life  he  never  injured  those  who  hated  him, 
but  rendered,  contrariwise,  blessing.  When  he  came  to  die,  he  furnished  the  most 
amazing  and  Divine  instance  the  world  has  ever  known  of  returning  good  for  evil.  He 
prayed  for  and  forgave  his  murderers ;  further  than  this  he  could  not  have  gone.  And 
"  he  has  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  in  his  steps." 

Ver.  15. — Christian  sympathy.  Joy  and  sorrow  are  great  facts  of  human  life.  If 
there  is  such  an  element  as  purpose  in  the  universe,  it  is  clear  that  men  were  made  to 
experience  gladness  and  grief,  and  that  both  experiences  are  intended  to  act  as  discipline 
by  which  human  character  may  be  tested  and  trained.  Both  emotions  are  experienced 
in  childhood,  and  manifest  themselves  most  strikingly  in  early  life,  when,  what  the 
mature  think  trivial  causes  are  wont  to  awaken  feeling.  In  manhood,  feeling  is  less 
easily  enkindled,  and  it  less  easily  dies  away.  To  the  selfish,  causes  of  rejoicing  must 
diminish,  both  in  frequency  and  in  force,  with  advancing  years ;  whilst,  probably  to 
most,  occasions  of  sorrow  are  multiplied,  for  bereavements,  the  causes  of  bitterest 
sorrow,  naturally  befall  the  most  frequently  those  who  have  trodden  the  path  of  life 
the  longest.  The  religion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  does  not  seek  either  to  subdue  or  to  blame 
these  natural  emotions ;  it  aims  at  controlling  them,  at  enlarging  their  scope,  at 
puiifying  them,  at  making  them  all  minister  to  our  spiritual  good.  To  quote  from  the 
Old  Testament,  "  There  is  a  time  to  weep,  and  a  time  to  laugh."  To  quote  from  the 
New  Testament,  "  Is  any  among  you  suffering  ?  let  him  pray.  Is  any  cheerful  ?  let 
him  sing  praise."  And,  to  bring  out  the  special  lesson  of  the  text,  Christianity  teache* 
us  that  both  joy  and  sorrow  are  to  be  shared,  and  yet  extended ;  to  be  heightened, 
sanctified,  and  blessed,  by  true  Christian  sympathy. 

I.  The  natube  of  sympathy.  This  habit  of  mind  is  simply  sharing  the  feelings  of 
others,  enteriug  into  the  experiences  of  their  hearts,  making  them  our  own.  We  do 
this  by  virtue  of  a  natural  principle.  Sinful  selfishness  often  overcomes  this  prin- 
ciple, checks  it,  and  prevents  it  from  displaying  itself.  Yet  sympathy  may  sometimes 
be  observed  where  there  is  no  reverence  or  faith  toward  our  Saviour ;  and,  alas !  is 
sometimes  absent  where  there  is  a  loud  profession  of  such  faith.  When  we  participate 
in  a  brother's  feelings,  a  Divine  law  appoints  that  such  participation  shall  be  for  his 
good ;  we  relieve  him  of  some  of  the  burden  of  his  grief  and  anxiety,  or  we  heighten 
his  happiness.  This  quality  of  sympathy  is,  perhaps,  inore  natural  to  some  minds  than 
to  others ;  yet  it  may  be  either  cultivated  or  repressed.  It  may  be  manifested  in 
various  ways — by  the  expression  of  the  countenance,  by  the  language  of  congratulation 
or  condolence,  by  the  tones  of  the  voice,  by  the  offer  of  companionship,  by  the  exten- 
sion of  such  assistance  as  the  case  may  render  possible.  If  there  be  two  stringed  instru- 
ments in  a  room,  and  a  note  of  one  be  struck,  it  is  said  that  the  correspondiug  string 
of  the  neighbouring  instrument  responds  to  the  sister  tone.  When  the  horn  is  wound 
among  the  rocks  of  the  winding  river,  the  cliffs  give  back  the  music  in  repeated  and 
orderly  response. 

"  Our  echoes  roll  from  soul  to  soul. 
And  grow  for  ever  and  for  ever ; 

Blow,  bugles,  blow  I  set  the  wild  echo  flying; 

And  answer,  echo  I  answer,  dying,  dying,  dying  I" 

*  As  in  water  face  answereth  to  face,  so  the  heart  of  man  to  man." 


364  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANa    [oh.  m.  1—21. 

IL  The  foundation  of  Christian  btmpatht.    Out  religion  lays  the  deep  basis  of 
all  firtues  in  the  character  of  Grod  and  in  the  redemption  of  Christ.     The  New  Testa- 
ment always,  in  admonitions  as  to  conduct,  either  states  or  assumes  this  principle. 
Whatever  is  right  is  commended  to  us  as  the  will  of  God.     Christ  died  to  redeem  ua 
from  iniquity,  and  to  sanctify  us  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of  good  works ; 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  power  of  life  whose  fruit  is  holiness.     1.  In  Christ's  media- 
tion we  have  an  instance — the  highest  and  most  wonderful  of  all  instances — of  true 
sympathy.     Why  did  our  Lord  visit  this  world?     Why  did  he  take  the  form   of  a 
servant,  and  become  obedient  unto  death  ?    It  was  because  he  was  impelled  by  Divine 
compassion,  which  is  one  part  of  sympathy.    He  wept  with  those  who  weep  because  of 
sin  and  misery  and  helplessness.     He  "  bore  our  sins  and  carried  our  sorrows : "  was 
not  that  practical  sympathy  ?     He  "  tasted  death  for  every  man,"  and  "  gave  himself 
for  us  : "  what  more  could  he  have  done  ?    Yet  the  other  side  of  sympathy  was  present 
in  his  nature.     He  rejoiced  in  the  joy  of  our  deliverance,  in  the  prospect  of  our  partici- 
pation in  the  blessings  of  life  eternal.     For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him — which  was 
joy  ovei  us — he  endured  the  cross  1    2.  In  Christ's  ministry  we  have  beautiful  examples 
of  sympathy.    He  pitied  the  widow  of  Nain ;  he  wept  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus ;  he  shed 
tears  over  the  doomed  Jerusalem ;  he  commiserated  the  distressed  daughters  of  the 
city.     On  the  other  hand,  he  rejoiced  with  those  who  rejoiced;  he  came  eating  and 
drinking ;  he  was  present  at  a  marriage-feast,  and  contributed  to  ifs  festivity.     And 
when  any  poor  wandering  sinner  was  by  his  compassion  recovered  to  the  fold,  the 
language  of  bis  heart  was  this :  "  Rejoice  with  me ;  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  which 
was  lost."    3.  The  religion  of  Christ  provides  for  mutual  sympathy  among  those  who 
in  common  acknowledge  him.    In  restoring  peace  between  man  and  God,  Jesus  has 
virtually  restored  peace  between  man  and  man.     As  the  Head,  he  brings  all  the 
members  into  a  unity — living,  organic,  mutually  helpful,  and  mutually  sympathetic 
Hence  one  great  peculiarity  of  his  Church,  -"  Whether  one  member  suffer,  all  the 
members  suffer  with  it;  or  one  member  be  honoured,  all  the  members  rejoice  with  it." 

III.  The  rangb  of  Christian  btmpatht.  We  may  sympathize  with  another's 
anxieties,  fears,  faith,  fortitude,  or  hopes.  But  the  apostle  here  refers  to  the  two 
widest  and  commonest  forms  of  emotion — joy  and  sorrow.  1.  We  are  admonished  to 
participale  in  one  another's  rejoicing.  Thank  God,  there  are  very  many  occasions  on 
which  this  is  possible ;  the  cup  of  gladness  is  handed  round,  and  few  are  those  who 
have  not  tasted.  Whfn  our  neighbour  experiences  some  piece  of  good  fortune,  when 
after  sickness  he  is  restored  to  health,  when  he  is  spared  in  the  midst  of  danger,  when 
he  is  happy  in  his  family  life,  prosperous  in  his  business,  honoured  among  his 
associates,  let  us  rejoice  vrith  him.  The  mind  that  cannot  so  rejoice  must  indeed  ba 
grudging  and  envious.  Of  all  vices,  envy  and  jealousy  are  the  pettiest  and  vulgarest, 
the  remotest  from  a  liberal,  generous,  Christian  nature.  No  excuse  or  extenuation 
can  be  imagined  for  these  faults,  as  for  some  others.  And  how  shall  we  rejoice  over 
the  spiritual  happiness  of  our  fellow-men !  When  an  undecided  friend  has  yielded  heart 
and  life  to  the  Saviour,  when  a  disobedient  one  has  been  brought  to  contrition  and 
repentance,  when  a  brother  has  been  enabled  to  exercise  some  Christian  virtue  by  which 
good  haa  been  done  to  others,  on  such  occasions  it  is  meet  and  right,  divinely  natural 
and  beautiful,  to  rejoice  in  our  brother's  joy.  Paul  would  say,  "I  joy  and  rejoice  with 
you  all,"  and  John  had  "  no  greater  joy  than  to  see  his  children  walk  in  the  truth." 
2.  We  are  admonished  to  participate  in  one  another's  grief — to  "  weep  with  those  who 
weep."  This  is  said  to  be  easier  than  the  former  exercise  of  sympathy ;  for  the  other 
seems  to  imply  our  inferiority ;  this,  our  superiority.  We  are  said  t»  sympathize  more 
easily  with  the  greater  sorrows,  and  with  the  lesser  joys,  of  our  neighbours.  If  envy 
refuses  to  rejoice  with  the  happy,  inhumanity  refuses  to  sorrow  with  the  afflicted. 
What  a  depth  of  malice  does  that  heart  reveal  which  can  rejoice  in  the  misfortunes  and 
griefs  of  others !  Yet,  though  this  extreme  of  malignity  is  uncommon,  it  is  not  an 
uncorramon  thing  even  for  Christians  to  be  unmoved  by  others'  woes.  Naturally, 
sympathy  will  be  more  intense  towards  those  in  closest  association  with  ourselves; 
those  of  widest  sympathies  can  with  difBculty  weep  for  the  woes  of  the  distant  and 
unkno\vn.  Vith  our  own  family  and  congregation,  with  our  own  circle  of  friends^ 
sympathy  vill,  in  time  of  trial,  be  ready,  tender,  and  warm.  With  the  widow  and  th« 
fatherless,  the  aged  and  the  infirm,  the  unfortimate  and  the  deserted,  the  oppressed  and 


«i.xn.l— 21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMAN!  WS 

the  persecuted,  with  the  sous  and  daughters  of  affliction,  let  ns  sympathize  with 
Christian  forwardness  and  sincerity.  And  let  it  not  be  forgotten  that  sympathy  will, 
in  many  cases,  evince  itself  in  practical  forms.  There  are  some,  who  are  in  elevated 
positions,  towards  whom  we  can  show,  when  they  are  in  grief,  no  other  sympathy  than 
such  as  expresses  itself  in  demeanour  and  in  words.  But  there  are  others,  in  poverty 
and  in  need,  with  whom  it  would  be  a  mockery  to  express  sympathy  and  yet  to  with- 
hold from  them  relief  and  help. 

IV.  The  blessings  of  Christian  sympathy.  Not  Only  is  such  a  disposition,  as 
is  commended  here,  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  will,  and  in  itself  beautiful  and 
admirable,  but  it  is  contiibutive  to  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  all  concerned.  1.  Sym- 
pathy is  the  occasion  of  happiness  to  those  who  exercise  it.  Those  who  are  sympathetic 
need  not  be  told  this ;  those  who  are  not,  and  are  incredulous,  may  make  the  trial. 
To  lose  sight,  as  far  as  may  be,  of  pet  sonal  pleasure  and  trouble ;  to  interest  ourselves 
in  the  emotions  of  our  neighbours ; — this  is  the  sure  way  to  happiness.  2.  Sympathy 
is  the  occasion  of  relief  and  of  profit  to  those  to  whom  it  it  extended.  The  burdened 
spirit  parts  with  half  its  load  when  a  kindly  friend  extends  a  ready  and  tender  sym- 
pathy. The  tear  is  dried,  the  heart  is  cheered,  when  the  sufferer  feels  that  he  is  not 
left  to  suffer  all  alone.  And  joy,  when  the  rejoicing  spreads,  is  purified  from  selfishness, 
and  is  heightened  tenfold.'  A  torch  bums  brightly ;  but  let  ten  torches  be  applied  to 
it,  and  you  have  eleven  flames  instead  of  one.  Thus  gladness  spreads  from  heart  to 
heart.  And  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  what  is  more  beautiful  than  to  behold  the  gleam 
of  gladness  on  a  hundred  faces,  to  hear  the  song  of  gladness  from  a  hundred  harmonious 
lips  I  One  soul  afire  with  love  to  Jesus  calls  upon  other  sotils  to  share  the  devotion 
and  the  praise ;  sympathy  spreads,  and  general  joy  prevails.  3.  Thus  the  Ghtvrch  of 
Christ  is  edified.  The  purposes  of  Divine  grace  in  appointing  Christian  fellowship  are 
fulfilled  when  each  bears  his  brother's  burdens  and  joins  his  brother's  song.  'There 
is  no  surer  sign  of  the  Saviour's  spiritual  presence,  of  his  gracious  work,  than  the  preva- 
lence of  such  sympathy.  4,  What  a  testimony  is  thus  offered  to  the  world!  Men 
complain  of  the  world  that  it  is  heartless ;  that  every  one  is  engrossed  in  his  own 
pursuits,  his  own  interests,  his  own  pleasures,  his  own  troubles.  It  should  be  other- 
wise in  the  Church,  And  when  it  is  otherwise,  a  proof  is  given  of  a  Divine  presence, 
a  superhuman  power.  An  energy  of  attraction  is  recognized ;  and  men  are  drawn  to 
the  society  of  those  who  feel  the  winning  and  consolatory  power  of  the  emphatically 
Christian  spirit  of  love  and  mutual  sympathy. 

Ven.  17, 18. — Honourahleness  and  peaceablenes$.  Men  do  and  must  live  in  society. 
And  all  civilized  communities  have  their  own  codes  of  conduct,  which  must  be  observed 
by  those  who  wish  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  social  life  and  the  protection  of  political 
governm  nt.  Civil  society  enjoins  the  observance  of  justice  and  the  maintenance  of 
peace.  But  public  opinion  often  requires  simply  a  compliance  with  the  letter  of  the 
law,  and  is  very  tolerant  as  to  infractions  of  its  spirit.  The  code  of  society  or  the  laws 
of  honour  require  that  a  man  shall  deal  honourably  with  his  equals,  but  in  some 
mstances  allow  him  to  act,  within  the  limits  of  the  law,  dishonestly  towards  hi* 
inferiors;  thus  he  must  pay  his  gambling  debts,  but  he  may  cheat  his  tradesmen  if  he 
can.  The  same  rules  prohibit  murder,  but  in  some  places  admit  of  duelling,  and 
generally  sanction  resentment  and  revenge.  Christianity  requires  that  honourable  and 
peaceable  conduct  should  be  distinctive  of  our  life  in  our  relations  to  all  men. 

I.  HoNOUBABLEiTESs.  The  word  means  more  than  honesty.  It  was  not  a  very  lofty 
morality  which  dictated  the  saying,  "  An  honest  man's  the  noblest  work  of  God." 
Bare  honesty  is  a  small  part  of  religion;  it  may  keep  a  man  out  of  jail,  but  it  cannot 
fit  a  man  for  the  Church  of  Christ.  The  apostle  enjoins  honourable,  fair,  praiseworthy, 
noble  conduct.  Deceitful,  shifty,  tortuous  ways  of  acting  should  be  far  from  the 
Christian's  souL  Sincerity,  straightforwardness,  truthfulness,  fairness,  should  dwell  in 
his  soul  and  speak  from  his  lips.  In  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation 
he  should  shine.  That  the  Christian  should  provide  or  take  thought  for  such  a  course 
of  action  is  in  harmony  with  our  reasonable  and  reflective  nature.  DeUberate  pre- 
ference, diligent  pursuit,  steadfast  adherence  to  things  honourable,  are  thus  enjoined. 
Impulse  is  good  when  directed  to  what  is  right;  but  principle  is  better,  for  it  is  moie 
tiuat worthy.    When  the  apostle  eom^iendi  such  conduct  towards  all  men,  ha  provides 


368  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  dl  1—21. 

for  the  social  influence  of  Christians  heing  felt  by  all  around.  Not  merely  within  the 
pale  of  Christian  society,  not  merely  amongst  personal  friends  and  associates,  but  in 
the  sight  of  all  men,  uprightness  and  honour  should  express  the  power  of  religion. 
The  advantages  accruing  to  the  world  in  consequence  of  such  a  practice  as  is  here 
commended  are  manifest.  The  credit  of  religion  will  be  promoted,  and  the  favour  of 
men  conciliated  towards  doctrines  so  fruitful  of  good  works.  Christianity  and  morality 
will  appear  as  twin  sisters,  bringing  congenial  blessings  to  an  ignorant  and  misguided 
world. 

IL  Pbaoeableness.  The  New  Testament  makes  it  evident  that  the  introduction 
of  peace  to  \  distracted  and  discordant  humanity  was  one  of  the  great  ends  of 
Christianity.  Christ  is  the  "  Prince  of  peace ; "  his  coming  was  the  advent  of  peace ; 
his  kingdom  is  the  reign  of  peace.  From  enjoyment  of  peace  with  God,  and  of  peace 
of  conscience  within,  the  Christian  passes  to  a  wider  sphere ;  cultivates  peace  as  a  mark 
of  the  Divine  presence  within  the  Church,  and  seeks  its  dififusion  throughout  human 
society  generally.  Amongst  Christians  there  should  prevail  mutual  forbearance, 
sympathy,  and  co-operation.  But  in  saying  this  we  do  not  exhaust  the  reference  of 
this  passage.  "  All  men  "  are  contemplated  by  the  inspired  writer.  Men  of  all  stations 
— superiors,  equals,  and  inferiors ;  men  of  all  characters — the  litigious  and  quarrelsome 
as  well  as  the  meek  and  yielding — are  all  to  be  treated  in  the  distinctively  Christian 
temper.  Sometimes  opinions  and  interests  conflict,  sometimes  natural  temperaments 
differ ;  still  the  peace  is  to  be  maintained.  Yet  the  apostle,  who  was  both  a  reasonable 
man,  and  a  man  who  had  large  experience  of  life,  mentions  a  condition.  It  may  not 
always  be  possible  to  live  peaceably.  But  the  impossibility  must  not  be  upon  our 
part;  we  must  not  make  such  excuses  as,  "I  could  not  keep  my  temper ; "  "  I  could 
not  treat  such  and  such  a  person  with  my  usual  self-possession."  But  there  will 
sometimes  arise  an  impossibility  on  the  part  of  others.  The  enemies  of  religion  may 
resolve  upon  breaking  the  peace ;  persecutors  may  rage  and  imagine  a  vain  thing ;  aa 
we  see  from  passages  in  the  life  of  our  Lord  and  his  apostles,  and  in  abundance  at  later 
periods  of  history.  Violent  and  unreasonable  professors  of  Christianity  may  resent  the 
exposure  of  their  errors,  or  the  rebuke  of  their  sins  and  follies.  There  is  a  higher  duty 
even  than  that  of  peaceableness ;  peace  must  not  be  sought  at  any  price ;  we  must  not, 
for  its  sake,  sacrifice  conscience  and  displease  God. 

Happy  is  the  society  in  which  this  picture  is  realized  I  Let  not  our  spirit  and  habits 
prevent  or  delay  the  delightful  realization. 

Ver.  21. — The  way  to  victory.  Although  the  world  is  full  of  strife,  and  although  the 
Scriptures  constantly  represent  the  good  man  as  engaged  in  conflict,  still  we  cannot 
regard  warfare,  either  physical  or  moral,  as  the  true  occupation  and  the  final  satisfaction 
of  man.  The  state  of  humanity  is,  however,  such  that  only  through  the  battling  of 
opposed  principles  can  true  peace  be  gained  and  the  ideal  condition  be  reached.  We 
are  accordingly  accustomed  to  think  of  resistance  as  the  necessary  incident  and  of 
victory  as  the  hard-won  eml  of  the  moral  life.  And,  for  us,  the  good  man  is  the  man 
who  spends  bis  strength,  and  passes  his  time,  in  antagonism  to  error  and  to  eviL 

I.  There  is  a  great  conflict  and  warp  abb  upon  earth  carried  on  between 
BViii  AND  GOOD.  Truth  contends  with  error,  reason  with  superstition,  conscience  with 
passion,  virtue  with  vice,  law  with  crime,  order  with  turbulence,  religion  wiih  infidelity. 
There  are  wars  and  fightings  in  which  it  may  be  said  that  light  contends  with  darkness. 
But  for  the  most  part  the  campaign  is  not  so  simple,  so  intelligible;  the  combatants 
aie  not  on  the  one  side  all  good,  nor  on  the  other  all  evil ;  opposing  principles  are  dis- 
tributed irregularly  through  the  armies. 

II.  NoNK  CAN  BE  NEUTRAL  IN  THIS  STRUGGLE.  Whether  Or  not  WO  consoiously 
and  deliberately  engage  in  the  moral  war,  it  is  ever  raging.  Not  only  so ;  we  are 
constrained  to  take  a  side.  He  who  professedly  withdraws  from  the  moral  conflict 
does  in  reality  side  with  the  enemy  of  God.  For  to  deem  the  war  one  of  no  interest, 
one  which  has  no  moral  clainl  upon  us,  is  to  fail  to  respond  to  the  trumpet-call  of  duty, 
and  to  decline  the  noblest  of  all  careers — that  of  the  soldier  of  the  cross.  "  He  that  is 
not  with  me,"  says  our  Lord,  "  is  against  me." 

IIL  The  forces  of  evil  abb  powBBruL  and  often  viotobious.  Christiana  do 
Ul  to  despise  the  power  of  their  spiritual  foe ;  for  such  an  estimate  may  lead  tibem  to 


OH.  m.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMAUa  867 

oTer-confidence,  and  to  the  neglect  of  necessary  means  of  defence.  They  may  then  be 
taken  unawares,  and  being  surprised  may  succumb  to  their  foe ;  or  in  any  case  the  foe 
may  in  all  likelihood  gain  an  advantage  over  them.  An  example  is  ^ven  by  St.  Paul 
in  this  passage.  There  is  a  natural  tendency  to  revenge.  A  Christian  who  has  been 
wronged  is  urged  by  the  surging  of  resentful  passion  within  to  turn  upon  his  injurer, 
to  retaliate,  to  inflict  evil  for  evil.  But,  if  he  do  so,  in  such  case  he  will  in  fact  be 
overcome  by  evil.  Many  are  the  cases  in  which  the  unspiritual  principle  or  impxilse 
gains  the  mystery  in  the  heart  and  in  the  actions  of  the  individual.  Who  is  there  who 
cannot  from  his  own  experience  bear  witness  to  this  ?  And  what  state  of  society, 
what  age  of  the  world,  can  be  pointed  out  which  has  been  exempt  from  such  spectacles 
as  the  temporary  defeat  of  truth,  justice,  and  goodness  ?  Apart  from  Christianity,  it 
does  not  seem  that  things  have  a  natural  tendency  to  improve.  He  who  studies  the 
history  of  any  unchristian  community  will  observe  forms  of  sin  continually  varying, 
sometimes  more  and  sometimes  less  repulsive,  but  he  will  not  find  truth  and  righteous- 
ness progressively  powerful  and  finally  triumphant.  Now  and  again  the  snow-white 
standard  sinks  in  the  tumult  of  the  strife. 

IV.  Chbist,  as  the  Captain  of  the  eiohteous  host,  took  pabt  in  the  conflict, 
AND  OONCJUEBED  EVIL  WITH  GOOD.  It  is  truc  that  the  Lord  Jesus  was  the  Prince  of 
peace,  yet  his  whole  life  was  one  long  struggle  with  sin  and  error.  He  knew  well  that 
there  was  but  one  way  to  a  peace  which  should  be  acceptable  to  God  and  serviceable 
to  man ;  and  that  that  way  was  the  way  of  spiritual  conflict.  It  was  in  this  sense  that 
he  came  to  send,  not  peace,  but  a  sword,  upon  earth.  Now,  the  supreme  illustration 
of  the  method  enjoined  in  the  text,  where  we  are  bidden  to  overcome  evil  with  good, 
is  that  furnished  in  the  ministry  of  our  Lord  and  Leader.  He  has  proved  himself  the 
Conqueror,  and  if  the  world's  sin  is  finally  to  be  vanquished,  it  will  be  through  Christ, 
And  what  were  the  tactics  of  the  Divine  Commander  7  He  did  not  turn  against  his 
foes  the  weapons  with  which  they  attacked  him.  He  did  not  render  injury  for  Injury, 
slander  for  slander,  hatred  for  hatred.  He  relied  upon  the  power  of  the  highest  and 
purest  morality.  Such  strategy,  if  the  word  may  be  used  in  a  good  and  not  an  evil 
sense,  was  not  likely  to  be  immediately  successful;  but  under  the  government  of  God 
it  cannot  ultimately  fail.  By  the  compassion  of  his  heart,  by  the  ungrudging  sympathy 
he  ever  showed  to  sufferers,  by  the  patience  with  which  he  endured  the  contradiction 
of  sinners  against  himself,  by  his  forgiving  spirit,  by  his  voluntary  sacrifice, — by  these 
means  Christ  procured  his  victory.  Oar  Saviour's  ministry  was  a  conflict  with  the 
powers  of  darkness  and  of  iniquity.  In  this  conflict  he  was  never  really  worsted.  And 
that  he  was  at  last  victorious  was  made  manifest  when  he  arose  from  the  dead  and 
ascended  to  the  Father. 

v.    ChBISTIANS   are    summoned    TO    FOLLOW     THEIB    MASTBB    IN    THIS    HOLY    WAB. 

Have  not  their  own  hearts  been  the  battle-field  upon  which  the  Saviour  has  fought  and 
conquered?  Has  not  their  evil  been  overcome  by  his  good  ?  Such  being  the  case,  if 
they  now  yield  to  the  adversary  and  espouse  his  cause,  how  inconsistent  and  indefensible 
will  be  such  a  course !  And  it  must  needs  be  that  their  own  nature  and  character 
must  be  the  field  upon  which  the  struggle  is  to  be  maintained  even  to  the  end.  Nor 
ia  this  all.  We  have  as  Christians  a  battle  to  wage  with  the  ungodly  world  around. 
In  every  condition  of  life,  in  every  relation,  in  every  calling  and  service,  there  occur 
opportunities  for  us  to  withstand  the  forces  of  evil.  And  this  we  are  called  upon  to 
do  in  the  Saviour's  Name,  and  by  the  might  of  the  Savioiir's  cross.  It  is  by  honour 
and  integrity,  by  purity  and  truth,  by  courage  and  patience,  by  meekness  and  love, 
that  this  holy  war  is  to  be  waged.    "  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith." 

VL   ViOTOBT    MAT   BE    DEFEBBBD,   BUT   IT    18  ASSUBBD    AND   CERTAIN    TO   THE    ABMY 

OF  THE  LoBD.  It  is  uot  denied  that  the  conflict  will  certainly  be  arduous,  will  pro- 
bably be  long.  Why,  we  cannot  tell ;  yet  we  can  see  that  the  protracted  moral  strife 
is  a  means  of  testing  the  faith  and  zeal  of  those  combatants  who  have  vowed  to  follow 
the  banner  of  the  Son  of  God.  But  the  attributes  and  the  promises  of  God  himself, 
the  glorious  work  of  Christ,  the  precious  and  faithful  declarations  of  Scripture,  all  assure 
us  that  the  issue  of  the  strife  is  in  no  way  doubtfuL  Yictory  is  pledged  to  the  followers 
of  the  Lamb.  We  may  unfalteringly  rely  upon  the  express  assurance  of  the  great 
Captain  of  our  salvation :  "  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  down  with  me 
upon  my  throne." 


868  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS.    [oh.  xn.  1—21. 


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHOBa 

Ver.  l.—The  living  sacrifice.  In  the  oldest  records  that  can  be  found  of  the  varioas 
nations  of  the  earth,  sacrifice  is  always  found  to  hare  formed  part  of  their  religioui 
lervices.  Thus  we  find  an  idea  universally  existing  that  something  was  needed  to 
obtain  pardon  for  guilt,  and  to  express  gratitude  to  the  supreme  being  or  beings  whom 
they  regarded  as  the  givers  and  benefactors  of  their  life.  But  it  is  only  when  we  come 
to  the  religion  of  Israel  that  we  find  the  idea  of  sacrifice  having  any  influence  upon  the 
life.  Tlie  other  nations  offered  sacrifices,  but  there  was  no  turning  away  from  eril. 
Nay,  in  the  case  of  many  heathen  countries,  their  acts  of  religious  worship  became, 
and  have  become,  associated  with  immoral  and  degrading  practices.  The  religion  of 
Israel,  however,  taught  the  necessity  of  personal  holiness.  True,  their  religion  wm 
largely  composed  of  rites  and  ceremonies,  but  it  was  a  religion  of  practical  morality 
also.  Very  plainly  the  Jewish  psalmist  recognizes  that  it  is  the  sacrifice  of  a  broken 
and  contrite  heart  that  is  most  acceptable  to  Qod,  and  that  without  this  it  is  vain  to 
offer  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats.  But  the  high  precepts  of  their  religion  were  sadly 
neglected  by  the  Jews  in  later  years.  In  the  time  of  Jesus  Christ  on  earth,  the  religion 
of  most  of  them  was  a  religion  of  ritual  and  routine.  He  told  the  Pharisees  that 
though  they  outwardly  appeared  righteous  unto  men,  within  they  were  full  of  hypocrisy 
and  iniquity.  But  Jesus  came  to  teach  men  true  religion.  The  worship  that  he 
demands  is  a  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  The  sacrifice  that  he  requires  is  a 
sacrifice  of  our  life.  He  wants  the  activities  and  energies  of  body,  soul,  and  spirit  to 
be  consecrated  to  his  service.  This  is  what  the  apostle  means  when  he  speaks  of  pre- 
senting our  bodies  as  a  living  sacrifice. 

I.  It  is  to  be  a  sacbificb  op  ouk  feelings.  The  whole  heart  must  be  given 
np  to  God,  so  that  whatever  is  right  may  be  strengthened,  and  that  whatever  Is  wrong 
may  be  talien  away.  Many  Christians  render  to  Christ  an  imperfect  sacrifice  in  this 
respect.  They  keep  back  part  of  their  life  from  him.  They  allow  themselves  to  be 
dominated  by  feelings  which  are  inconsistent  with  his  spirit  and  precepts.  They  will 
excuse  themselves  for  some  besetting  sin  by  saying,  "  That  is  my  nature ;  I  can't  help 
it."  The  evil  nature  is  still  with  us,  it  is  true ;  but  it  is  our  duty  to  strive  against  it, 
to  overcome  it.  Moses  appears  to  have  been  at  first  a  man  of  hasty  and  violent 
temper.  Tet  the  Divine  discipline,  and  no  doubt  also  his  own  obedience  to  the  Divine 
will,  produced  such  a  change  in  his  character  that  it  is  afterwards  recorded  of  him, 
"  Now  the  man  Moses  was  very  meek,  above  all  the  men  who  were  upon  the  face  of 
the  earth."  It  is  a  natural  thing  to  be  angry  when  things  are  said  or  done  to  provoke 
us ;  but  is  it  Christian  ?  So  with  the  other  feelings  of  envy,  of  pride,  of  revenge,  of 
hatred — instead  of  yielding  to  them  or  excusing  them,  the  true  Christian  will  be 
ashamed  of  them  and  sorry  for  them,  and  will  do  his  best  to  overcome  their  influence 
in  his  heart. 

II.  It  is  to  bb  a  baorikok  of  oub  affections.  The  love  of  Gbd  should  ever  be 
the  chief  affection  of  our  heart.  Not  that  we  are  to  love  our  friends  less,  but  we  are 
to  love  God  more.  Hence,  when  our  natural  affections  become  hindrances  in  the 
Christian  life,  they  must  be  restrained  and  subdued.  The  strongest  temptations  to 
the  Christian  are  not  always  those  that  come  from  the  biser  part  of  his  nature,  but 
sometimes  those  that  come  from  the  purer  and  better  emotions  of  the  soul.  The  love 
of  a  friend — it  might  seem  strange  that  there  should  be  anything  wrong  in  that.  Yet 
even  this  affection,  right  and  natural  in  itself,  becomes  wrong;  when  it  interferes  with 
love  to  God.  The  love  of  home — how  can  there  be  anything  wrong  in  that  ?  Yet 
there  is  wrong  in  it  when  it  interferes  with  the  call  of  duty.  "  He  that  loveth  father 
or  mother  more  than  rae,"  says  Christ,  "  is  not  worthy  of  me ;  and  he  that  loveth  son 
or  daughter  more  than  me  is  not  worthy  of  me."  When  the  din  of  war  begins  to 
resound  throughout  a  land,  the  man  who  has  dedicated  himself  to  the  military  service 
of  his  country  does  not  hesitate  to  obey  the  trumpet-call.  His  farm  or  his  busineai 
may  require  his  presence,  and  may  suffer  seriously  by  his  absence.  It  is  a  sore  trial 
to  tear  himself  away  from  his  wife,  from  his  family,  and  from  his  friends,  whose  faces 
he  may  never  see  again  in  this  world.  But  however  pressing  the  claims  of  his  daily 
work  may  be,  however  strong  hia  domestic  ties,  all  these  considerations  must  now  giva 


OH.  xn.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  369 

way  to  the  demand  of  patriotism  and  of  duty.  And  shall  not  the  Christian  soldier 
sacrifice  all  earthly  affections  rather  than  he  unfaithful  to  Christ  ?  Shall  he  not  hear 
the  voice  of  Jesus  above  all  earthly  voices?  Of  such  complete  self-denial  Christ  him- 
self has  given  us  the  best  example.  "  He  pleased  not  himself."  Not  mereJv  in  his 
death,  but  in  his  life,  he  gave  himself  a  living  sacrifice.  When  we  think  of  how  much 
we  owe  to  Christ,  any  sacrifice  that  we  can  make  will  seem  but  a  poor  and  feeble  effort 
to  show  our  gratitude  and  our  love.  Yet  we  are  encouraged  to  present  even  our  poor 
sacrifice  by  the  assurance  that  it  will  be  "  acceptable  iinto  God." — 0.  H.  I. 

Ver.  2. — The  two  likenesses.  The  exhortation  contained  in  this  verse  regards  the 
human  mind  as  impressionable,  pliable,  susceptible.  It  is  especially  addressed  to 
Christians.  There  are  two  forms  which  seek  to  impress  themselves  upon  the  Christian, 
and  the  image  of  which  every  Christian  bears  in  greater  or  less  degree.  The  one  is 
likeness  to  the  world  ;  the  other  is  likeness  to  God. 

I.  Likeness  to  the  wokld.  Against  this  the  apostle  warns  the  Christian:  "Be 
not  conformed  to  this  world."  1.  The  exhortation  is  much  needed.  The  ambition  of 
many  Christians  is  to  be  as  like  the  world  as  possible.  They  talk  of  the  extreme  of 
Puritanism,  and  speak  of  being  too  strict.  The  danger  now  is  from  the  eitrem- 
of  worldliness.  If  I  am  to  choose,  let  me  have  the  extreme  of  being  too  scrupulous 
rather  than  too  careless,  ultra-conscientious  rather  than  having  a  conscience  that  sees 
no  harm  in  anything.  Let  me  be  like  Abraham,  who  would  not  take  from  a  thread 
even  to  a  shoe-latchet  from  the  King  of  Sodom,  rather  than  like  worldly  minded  Lot, 
who  pitched  his  tent  toward  Sodom,  and  by-and-by  came  and  dwelt  in  Sodom,  though 
he  vexed  his  righteous  soul  from  day  to  day  with  the  filthy  conversation  and  unlawful 
deeds  of  the  people  among  whom  he  had  chosen  to  dwell.  Let  me  be  like  Elisha  rather 
than  Gehazi,  like  Daniel  rather  than  Belshazzar.  2.  Conformity  to  the  world  is 
injurious  to  the  Church.  When  the  Jewish  people  came  in  contact  with  the  heathen 
nations,  they  began  to  imitate  them,  to  cont'orm  to  their  customs.  The  result  was 
disastrous  to  the  spiritual  life,  and  ultimately  to  the  temporal  prosperity  of  Israel.  So 
it  was  with  the  Churches  of  Asia.  Their  worldliness  proved  their  ruin.  Sardis  had 
a  name  to  live,  but  it  was  dead.  Laodicea  was  lukewarm,  and  neither  cold  nor  hot. 
We  may  try  as  Christians  to  please  the  world  by  conforming  to  it,  but  in  proportion 
as  we  do  so  we  are  unfaithful  to  our  Master,  and  we  are  displeasing  hira.  "  The 
friendship  of  this  world  is  enmity  against  God,"  3.  The  conformity  of  Christians  to 
the  world  is  injurious  to  the  world.  Some  Christians  imagine  that  they  will  have  more 
influence  on  the  world  by  becoming  more  like  it.  It  is  a  great  mistake.  If  we  want 
to  teach  children  to  write,  we  don't  set  them  imperfect  copies.  Tbe  world  was  never 
made  better  by  low  ideals.  The  deities  of  paganism  did  not  elevate  humanity.  It  is 
not  the  half-and-half  Christian,  the  worldly  minded  Christian,  whose  influence  will 
tell  for  good  upon  those  around  him.  If  we  are  to  make  the  world  better,  it  can  only 
be  by  keeping  before  us  as  Christians  a  high  ideal  of  what  the  Christian  life  ought  to 
be,  and  by  striving  faithfully,  and  with  the  help  of  Divine  grace,  to  live  up  to  it. 
Christians  are  living  epistles,  known  and  read  of  all  men.  What  kind  of  copy  are  we 
setting  to  the  world  ?  4.  We  are  not  to  imitate  the  world  in  its  estimate  of  religion. 
The  world's  idea  of  religion  is  that  it  is  a  thing  of  gloom,  an  irksome  restraint,  a  weary 
bondage,  something  that  it  would  be  desirable  to  have  when  death  is  approaching,  but 
which  it  would  be  well  to  live  without  as  long  as  possible.  Too  often  Christians  give 
encouragement  to  this  idea.  Their  religion  has  too  little  relation  to  their  daily  life,  or 
*  relation  of  routine  form  rather  than  of  living  and  pleasant  association.  6.  We  are 
not  to  imitate  the  world  in  its  estimate  of  the  soul.  In  the  popular  estimation,  and  in 
everyday  life,  the  soul  is  thrust  into  the  background.    The  chief  concern  is  how  to 

Erovide  comfort  and  luxury  for  the  body.  No  expense  is  grudged  for  these  objects, 
lodily  health  is  scrupulously  guarded,  and  rightly  so.  Education  is  carefully  attended 
to.  How  anxious  parents  are,  and  rightly  so,  to  secure  a  good  education  for  their 
children !  But  how  little  trouble  is  taken  to  instruct  them  or  have  them  instructed  in 
eternal  things !  How  little  care,  generally,  is  devoted  to  the  concerns  of  the  immortal 
soul  1  In  this  respect  professing  Christians  are  too  liable  to  be  conformed  to  the  world. 
They  become  too  much  absorbed  in  the  world's  business  to  think  as  much  as  they 
ought  of  their  own  spiritual  life  and  of  the  souls  of  others.    Christian  parents  are  often 

BOMAHB.  2  B 


370  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  xii.  1— 21. 

very  careless  in  regard  to  th«  spiritual  instruction  of  their  children.  Let  us  not  bear 
the  world's  likeness.  " Come  ye  out  from  among  them, and  be  ye  separate ; "  "Be  not 
conformed  to  this  world." 

IL  LiKBNBSB  TO  GoD.  "  But  be  ye  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  your  mind." 
1.  Z%»s  it  tht  way  to  drive  out  likeness  to  the  world.  Likeness  to  God  will  exclude 
likeness  to  the  world.  The  more  desire  we  have  for  God,  the  less  we  shall  have  for 
the  world ;  the  more  we  think  of  the  soul,  the  less  we  shall  be  anxious  about  the 
body ;  the  more  we  think  of  eternity,  the  less  we  shall  think  of  this  present  world ; 
the  more  we  think  of  the  judgment  of  God,  the  less  we  shall  think  of  the  judgment  of 
men.  2.  The  first  step  is  the  renewing  of  yow  mind.  An  external  influence  is  here 
implied.  We  cannot  renew  our  own  minds.  "  Except  a  man  be  born  from  above,  he 
cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  This  is  rightly  called  the  saving  change.  To 
experience  this  change  is  the  starting-point  of  the  Christian  life.  It  is  to  pass  from 
death  to  life.  Old  things  pass  away ;  all  things  become  new.  There  is  a  new  way 
of  looking  at  things.  Things  which  we  once  took  pleasure  in  have  no  attraction 
for  us  now ;  duties  which  we  once  thought  irksome  now  become  our  delight.  This  is 
the  result  of  the  Holy  Spirit  working  in  us,  producing  in  us  likeness  to  God,  transform- 
ing us  into  his  image,  bringing  every  thought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Jesus 
Christ.  3.  This  transformation  will  soon  affect  your  whole  life.  (1)  Jt  will  affect 
your  business.  You  will  no  longer  regard  your  business  dealings  from  the  merely 
worldly,  but  from  the  Christian  standpoint.  Tour  question  will  not  be  merely — Will 
it  pay?  but — Is  it  right?  (2)  It  wHl  affect  your  companionships.  The  question 
will  be,  not — Are  they  pleasant  ?  but — Are  they  pleasing  to  God  ?  are  they  helpful 
to  my  spiritual  life?  (3)  It  will  affect  your  amusements.  The  question  will  be,  not 
— ^May  I?  but — Ought  I?  Not — Is  there  any  harm  in  this?  but— Is  there  any  good 
in  it  ?  Is  it  the  way  in  which  I  would  enjoy  myself  if  I  knew  that  I  was  to  die  to- 
morrow ?  When  Achilles  Daunt,  late  Dean  of  Cork,  was  a  student  at  Trinity  Collie, 
Dublin,  he  was  passionately  fond  of  the  drama,  and  used  to  go  often  to  the  theatre. 
One  evening,  after  coming  home  and  taking  up  his  Bible  for  his  usual  evening  reading 
—feeling  that  the  scenes  he  had  just  witnessed  made  it  a  little  irksome  to  do  so — hii 
eye  lit  on  our  Lord's  words,  "  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me."  The  passage 
leemed  to  seize  him  with  an  iron  grip.  He  then  and  there  battled  out  the  matter  with 
his  own  heart,  and  did  not  rise  from  his  knees  till  he  hadresolved  to  dedicate  himself  to 
the  Lord,  to  take  his  stand  boldly  as  his  servant,  and  never  again  to  enter  a  theatre. 
4.  Thi$  transformation  is  to  he  developed  hy  living  near  to  Ood.  Prayer,  and  the 
study  of  Chad's  Word,  are  the  means  of  obtaining  this  likeness  to  God.  It  is  note- 
worthy that  the  same  Greek  word  which  is  here  translated  "transformed"  is  the  word 
which  is, used  to  describe  the  transfiguration  of  Christ:  "And  he  was  transfigured 
before  them."  And  when  did  Christ's  transfiguration  come  to  liim?  When  he  was 
on  the  mountain-top  in  prayer.  "  And  as  he  prayed,  the  fashion  of  his  countenance 
was  altered,  and  his  raiment  was  white  and  glistering  "  (Luke  ix.  29).  Prayer  is  the 
true  transformation,  the  true  transfiguration,  of  the  soul.  Thus  here  on  earth  we  shall 
reflect  in  some  measure  the  image  of  God  until  we  reach  that  land  where  "  we  shall  be 
like  him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is." — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  3 — 8. — Diversity  and  unity  in  the  Church  of  Christ  The  subject  of  union 
among  the  various  branches  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  one  to  which  much  attention  has 
of  late  years  been  turned.  The  efforts  of  the  Evangelical  Alliance  have  been  largely 
directed  to  secure  a  more  brotherly  relationship  and  more  hearty  co-operation  between 
the  different  denominations  of  Christians.  Some  Christians  desire  an  organic  union  of 
all  sections  of  the  Church,  but  the  passage  before  us  indicates  that  there  may  be  outward 
diversity  along  with  inward  and  real  unity. 

I.  DrvBRSiTT  AKD  UNITY  IN  THE  BODY.  "  We  have  many  members  in  one  body, 
•nd  all  members  have  not  the  same  ofiBce  "  (ver.  4).  There  we  have  diversity.  Wliat 
diversity  there  is  between  the  organs  of  hearing  and  seeing,  tasting  and  touching, 
■peaking  and  smelling  I  What  a  complex  organism  is  that  of  heart  and  brain,  and 
▼eins  and  arteries,  and  nerves  and  sinew*  I  Tet  there  too  we  have  unity.  There  is  one 
body.    One  life  throbs  in  all  the  parts. 

II.  Diversity  and  unity  in  the  Chubch.    "So  we,  being  many,  are  one  hAj 


OH.  xn.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  371 

in  Christ,  and  every  one  members  one  of  another  "  (ver.  5).  There  we  have  diversity. 
There  is  room  for  diversity  in  the  Church  of  Christ — for  varied  forms  of  worship,  for 
varied  views  of  doctrine,  for  varied  methods  of  Church  government.  A  dull  uniformity 
is  undesirable.  "  Acts  of  Uniformity  "  only  made  more  diversity,  and  produced  discord 
instead  of  unity.  When  the  Church  of  England  had  no  room  for  John  Wesley,  she 
only  prepared  the  way  for  a  larger  secession  from  the  ranks  of  her  membership.  So, 
too,  in  individual  congregations,  there  is  room  for  varied  gifts  and  activities.  There, 
also,  we  have  unity.  "  One  body,  and  every  one  members  one  of  another."  There  is 
the  unity  of  the  Spirit,  the  unity  that  arises  from  the  common  bond  of  faith  in  Christ 
and  love  to  him,  of  obedience  to  the  same  Divine  law,  and  of  the  inspiring  hope  of  the 
same  heaven. 

III.  Two  PBAOTIOAL  LESSONS.  1.  A  lessoti  of  humility.  "  For  I  say,  through  the 
grace  given  unto  me,  to  every  man  that  is  among  you,  not  to  think  of  himself  more 
highly  than  he  ought  to  think ;  but  to  think  soberly  "  (ver.  3).  The  recognition  of 
the  fact  that  there  are  varied  gifts  in  the  Church  of  Christ  will  prevent  any  one  from 
being  unduly  proud  of  any  gifts  he  may  possess,  or  any  work  he  may  have  done.  All 
the  members  of  the  body  have  need  of  one  another.  There  is  a  place  for  the  humble 
and  unlearned  workers  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  just  as  much  as  for  the  wealthy  and  the 
cultured  and  the  learned.  2.  A  lesson  of  concentration.  Division  of  labour  and  con- 
centration of  individuals  upon  particular  branches  is  one  of  the  great  principles  of 
modern  manufacturing  and  commerce.  St.  Paul  applies  the  same  principle  to  Christian 
work.  "  Having  then  gifts  differing  according  to  the  grace  that  is  given  to  us,  whether 
prophecy,  let  us  prophesy  according  to  the  proportion  of  faith ;  or  ministry,  let  us  wait 
on  our  ministering ;  or  he  that  teacheth,  on  teaching ;  or  he  that  exhorteth,  on  exhor- 
tation; he  that  giveth,  let  him  doit  with  liberality ;  he  that  ruleth,  with  diligence ;  ho 
that  showeth  mercy,  with  cheerfulness."  There  are  three  special  spheres  of  Christian 
work.  (1)  Teaching.  Under  this  head  may  be  comprised  what  the  apostle  speaks  of 
as  "prophecy,"  "teaching,"  "exhortation."  This  is  the  work  of  ministers  of  the 
gospel,  of  professors  in  colleges,  of  teachers  in  daily  schools  and  in  Sunday  schools. 
There  could  be  no  more  important  work  than  that  of  instructing  others,  moulding 
immortal  souls,  inspiring  old  and  young  with  the  power  of  great  principles.  When 
Socrates  was  asked  why  he  did  not  commit  to  writing  his  philosophic  opinions  and 
teachings,  his  answer  was,  "I  write  upon  human  souls.  That  writing  will  last 
eternally."  How  important  that  all  who  engage  in  any  department  of  teaching  should 
realize  the  abiding  consequences  of  their  work,  and  should  devote  their  best  energies 
to  it !  (2)  Ruling.  There  must  of  necessity  be  authority  and  discipline  in  the 
Christian  Church.  Impenitent  offenders  t^ainst  Christian  morality  need  to  be  excluded. 
Differences  of  opinion  or  quarrels  between  brethren  need  to  be  wisely  considered,  and 
breaches  healed.  How  necessary  that  those  who  are  placed  in  positions  of  authority 
should  rule  "  with  diligence,"  realizing  their  high  responsibility  to  preserve  the  peace 
and  maintain  the  purity  of  the  Church  of  Christ !  (3)  Giving.  Under  this  head  may 
be  included  not  only  what  is  here  called  "  giving,"  but  also  those  branches  spoken  of 
88  "  ministering  "  and  "  showing  mercy."  Christians  who  are  not  teachers  or  rulers 
ought  at  least  to  be  givers.  If  they  have  money  to  give  for  Christ's  cause,  let  them  give 
it,  and  give  it,  too,  with  liberality,  in  no  selfish  and  in  no  niggard  spirit.  Every 
Christian  can  give  something  for  the  building  up  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  We  can 
give  our  time.  We  can  give  our  attention  to  the  poor,  to  the  sick,  to  the  stranger. 
Let  Christians  remember  that  in  the  natural  body  there  are  no  useless  or  idle  members. 
Each  member  has  its  own  distinct  function.  So  is  it  in  the  Christian  Church.  There 
is  some  special  work  for  every  one  to  do. — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  9 — 21  (omitting  vers.  11  and  12,  for  whioh  sm  bekrw). — The  Christian^*  dtety 
to  his  fellow-men.  In  these  closing  verses  of  this  chapter  the  apostle  sets  before  us  tha 
duty  of  a  Christian  man.  It  is  a  picture  of  what  the  Christian  ought  to  be.  What 
a  world  it  would  be  if  these  precepts  were  carried  out,  if  even  every  Christian  was 
careful  to  observe  them  I  Six  features  the  apostle  mentions  which  should  characterize 
our  dealings  with  others. 

I.  Sincerity.  "  Let  love  be  without  dissimulation  "  (ver.  9).  Unreality,  falsehood, 
insincerity,  untruthfulness, — these  are  prevalent  evils  in  our  day.    They  weaken  all 


371  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  E0MAN8.    [ch.  Jtii.  1-21. 

confidence  between  man  and  man.  They  dentroy  domestic  peace,  social  intercoune, 
and  commercial  morality.    Truthfulness  and  sincerity  are  much  needed. 

IL  DiscEiMiNATioN.  "  Abhor  that  which  is  evil ;  cleave  to  that  which  is  good " 
(ver.  9).  The  spirit  of  indifference  is  another  prevalent  evil  of  our  time.  "  Woe  unto 
them  that  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil."  Dr.  Arnold  at  Eugby,  trying  to  elevate  the 
standard  of  character  there,  found  this  difficulty — indifference  about  evil.  He  said, 
"  What  I  want  to  see  in  the  school,  and  what  I  cannot  find,  is  an  abhorrence  of  evil ; 
I  always  think  of  the  psalm, '  Neither  doth  he  abhor  that  which  is  evil.' "  We  want 
more  discrimination.  The  young  especially  need  to  discriminate  in  their  friendships, 
and  to  choose  the  society  of  good  men  and  good  women. 

IIL  Generosity.  "  Distributing  to  the  necessity  of  saints  "  (ver.  13).  In  exer- 
cising generosity,  God's  people,  ouf  brethren  in  Christ,  should  have  the  first  claim  upon 
us.  But  we  are  not  to  limit  our  attentions  to  them.  "Given  to  hospitality,"  we 
shall  show  kindness  to  strangers,  just  because  they  are  strangers  and  are  away  from 
home  and  friends.  How  truly  the  Gbristian  religion  teaches  men  consideration  for 
others ! 

IV.  Sympathy.  "Rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  and  weep  with  them  that 
weep "  (ver.  15).  Sympathy  is  a  Christ-like  quality.  Sympathy  for  the  perishing 
brought  Jesus  Christ  to  earth.  Sympathy  sent  Henry  Martyn  to  Persia,  Adoniram 
Judson  to  Burmah,  David  Brainerd  to  the  Bed  Indians,  David  Livingstone  and  Bishop 
Hannington  to  Africa.  Sympathy  led  Mr.  E.  J.  Mather  to  brave  the  dangers  of  the 
deep  in  order  to  do  something  for  the  temporal  and  spiritual  welfare  of  the  deep-sea 
fishermen  of  the  North  Sea.  We  want  more  sympathy  for  those  near  us — for  the  poor, 
the  sick,  the  suffering,  the  careless,  at  our  own  doors.  We  need  to  learn  also  how  to 
sympathize  with  innocent  enjoyment.  The  mission  of  the  Christian  Church  is  not  a 
mis^on  of  amusement,  but  it  can  show  that  it  does  not  frown  upon,  and  can  thoroughly 
enter  into,  the  innocent  pleasures  and  recreations  of  life.  We  are  not  only  to  "  weep 
with  them  that  weep,"  but  also  "  rejoics  with  them  that  do  rejoice." 

V.  Humility.  "Mind  not  high  things,  but  condescend  to  man  of  low  estate.  Be 
not  wise  in  your  own  conceits."  There  is  too  much  pride  even  in  the  Church  of 
Christ — pride  of  rank,  pride  of  wealth,  pride  of  learning.  The  condition  of  things  so 
severely  satirized  and  rebuked  in  the  second  chapter  of  James  is  still  too  common  in 
the  Christian  Church.  The  Church  of  Christ  needs  to  condescend  a  little  more  than  it 
does  "to  men  of  low  estate."  Christian  ministers  need  to  think  more  of  the  humbler 
members  of  their  congregations,  while  they  do  not  neglect  the  spiritual  welfare  of  the 
rich.  A  little  more  vf  the  humility  of  Christ  would  make  the  Church  of  Christ  and 
the  ministers  of  religion  more  respected  among  the  working  classes  and  the  poor. 

VI.  Pbacbfdlness.  "  If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  lieth  in  you,  live  peaceably 
with  all  men  "  (ver.  18).  This  peaceful  relation  may  be  secured :  1.  By  not  cherishing 
a  vindictive  spirit.  "  Recompense  to  no  man  evil  for  evil"  (ver.  17).  "  Dearly  beloved, 
avenge  not  yourselves"  (ver.  19).  Offenders  against  peace  would  do  little  harm  if 
they  did  not  find  others  only  too  ready  to  take  uffence.  What  an  example  ia  that  of 
Cranmer  1 — 

"  To  do  him  any  wrong  was  to  beget 
A  kindness  from  him ;  for  his  heart  was  rich. 
Of  such  fine  mould,  that  if  yon  sowed  therein 
Tha  seed  of  hate,  it  blossomed  charity." 

2,  By  meeting  enmity  with  kindness.  "  Bless  them  which  persecute  you :  bless,  and 
curse  not "  (ver.  14).  "  Therefore  if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him ;  if  he  thirst,  give 
him  drink :  for  in  so  doing  thou  shnlt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head."  Your  kindness 
will  be  like  coals  of  fire  to  melt  his  hardened  heart,  just  as  Jacob's  prudent  act  of  kind* 
ness,  following  on  his  prayer,  turned  away  the  anger  of  his  injured  brother  Esau.  So 
we  may  destroy  our  enemies,  aa  the  Chinese  emperor  is  said  to  have  done,  by  making 
them  our  frieuds.    Thus  we  shall  "  overcome  evil  with  good."— C.  H.  L 

Vers.  11,  12. — The  Christian'/:  duty  to  himself.  While  we  are  to  think  of  others,  we 
are  to  think  of  ourselves  also.  Herbert  Spencer  has  contrasted  the  "  religion  of  enmity," 
or  the  religion  of  heathenism,  with  what  he  calls  the  "  religion  of  amity,"  or  the 
religion  of  Christianity.     But  he  speaks  as  if  the  Christian  precept  was,  "  Thou  ahalt 


«H.  XII.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  873 

loTo  thy  neighbour  better  than  thyself."    It  is  not  so.    The  command  is,  "  Thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself." 

"  To  thine  own  self  be  true. 

And  it  must  follow,  as  the  night  the  day. 

Thou  canst  not  then  be  false  to  any  man." 

The  apostle  enumerates  some  duties  wbich  the  Christian  owes  to  himselF. 

I.  UlLlSRNOB  IN  BUSINESS.  Each  man  should  have  some  definite  work  or  business 
in  life.  Especially  should  the  Christian  be  free  from  the  sin  of  idleness.  Whatever 
our  work  is,  let  us  be  diligent  in  the  performance  of  it.  "The  hand  of  the  diligent 
maketh  rich."  "Seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  business?  he  shall  stand  before 
kings ;  he  shall  not  stand  before  mean  men." 

II.  Earnestness  or  spirit.  "  Fervent  in  spirit."  It  is  a  strong  phrase.  Fervent 
means  "  burning,"  "on  fire."  Yes,  we  need  more  Christians  who  are  on  tire.  It  is  the 
enthusiasts  who  have  done  the  best  and  most  lasting  work  in  the  world.  They  are 
usually  called  fanatics  at  first,  but  the  day  comes  when  their  memory  is  blessed.  St. 
Paul  was  a  fanatic  to  Festus.  Festus  could  not  uaderstand  the  fire  that  burned  in 
Paul's  heart  and  in  his  words.  "  Paul,  thou  art  beside  thyself;  much  learning  doth 
make  thee  mad."  William  Wilberforce,  the  emancipator  of  the  slaves ;  John  Howard, 
the  prisoner's  friend;  Samuel  Plimsoll,  the  sailor's  friead;  Lord  Shaftesbuiy,  the 
friend  of  the  overworked  artisan ; — ^all  these  men  at  first  were  sneered  at  and  ridiculed 
by  the  multitude  of  indifferent  and  interested  men.  Earnestness  and  enthusiasm 
may  be  incomprehensible  to  the  world,  but  they  are  indispensable  to  the  true 
Christian. 

III.  A  RBLioious  SPIRIT.  "Serving  the  Lord."  That  spirit  consecrates  life, 
sweetens  life,  saves  life.  Serving  the  Lord  does  not  lead  us  to  the  drunkard's  degra- 
dation, the  disgrace  of  the  dishonest  or  fraudulent,  the  cell  of  the  murderer  or  the 
grave  of  the  suicide.  The  Christian  will  serve  the  Lord  in  every  relationship  of  life — 
in  his  home,  in  his  business,  in  his  amusements.  Can  we  all  say  as  St.  Paul  did  (Acts 
zxvii.  23),  "  Whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve  "  ? 

IV.  Hopefulness  and  jot.  "  Rejoicing  in  hope."  The  apostle  elsewhere  in  this 
Epistle  uses  the  same  phrase,  "  And  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God  "  (ch.  v.  2). 
Dr.  Chalmers  has  somewhere  said,  "  That  which  distinguishes  wisdom  from  folly  is  the 
power  and  habit  of  anticipation."  The  Saviour  himself,  in  his  earthly  life,  was  sus- 
tained by  the  hope  of  what  lay  beyond.  "  Who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him 
endured  the  cross"  (Heb.  xii.  2).  So  it  was  with  St.  Paul.  He  looked  forward  to  the 
crown  of  righteousness.  Therefore  the  Christian  should  be  full  of  joyousness.  Why 
should  we  groan  under  life's  heavy  burdens  when  we  think  of  the  rest  that  remaineth  to 
the  people  of  God  ?  Why  should  we  be  unduly  distressed  by  life's  trials  when  we 
remember  that  they  that  are  tried  shall  receive  the  crowu  of  life?  This,  too,  is  a 
duty  the  Christian  owes  to  himself.  Work  becomes  no  longer  a  burden  when  it  is 
done  with  hopefulness  and  joy. 

V.  Patience  under  trouble.  "  Patient  in  tribulation."  The  true  Christian  will 
know  how  to  suffer.  He  knows  that  trials  have  their  meaning  aud  their  place  in  the 
discipline  of  the  children  of  Q-od.  He  knows  that  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chas- 
teneth,  and  that  "  though  no  chastisement  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but 
grievous,  nevertheless  afterward  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  to  them 
that  are  exercised  thereby." 

VI.  Perseverance  in  prater.  "Continuing  instant  in  prayer."  Prayer  is  the 
beginning  and  the  end  of  the  Christian  life.  We  should  ever  go  forth  to  the  discharge 
of  our  duties,  humbly  asking  for  the  Divine  guidance  and  the  Divine  help.  And  then, 
when  the  duties  are  performed,  we  should  not  forget  to  pray  that  the  Divine  blessing 
should  follow  the  work  that  we  have  done.  This  thought  is  well  brought  out  by  Sf. 
Paul  in  his  description  of  the  Christian's  armour  (Bph.  vi.  11—18).  Having  exhorted 
his  readers  to  put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God — the  girdle  of  truth,  the  breastplate  of 
righteousness,  the  sandals  of  the  gospel  of  peace,  the  shield  of  faith,  the  helmet  of 
salvation,  and  the  sword  of  the  Spirit— he  adds,  "  Praying  always  with  all  prayer  and 
supplication  in  the  Spirit."  This  is  the  fitting  climax  of  the  whole.  It  is  the  fitting 
conclusion  of  any  exhortation  about  Christian  warfare  or  Christian  work.  "  Except 
the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it." 


374  THE  EPISTLE  OF   PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [en.  xii.  1—21. 

Such,  then,  are  the  Christian's  duties  to  himself.  Diligence.  Earnestness.  Beligious 
spirit.    Hopefulness.    Patience.    Prayerfulness.    Let  us  cultivate  them. — 0.  H.  L 

Ver.  21. — The  Chriatian's  assurance  and  the  Christian's  duty.  "  Be  not  overcome 
of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good."  There  is  a  great  danger  to  the  spiritual  life  of 
many,  which  arises  from  undervaluing  the  power  of  sin.  But  there  is  another  danger. 
It  is  the  danger  of  thinking  too  much  of  the  power  of  evil.  A  Christian  may  be  over- 
come by  evil,  not  because  he  thinks  too  little  of  it,  but  because  he  thinks  so  much  of 
its  power  that  he  regards  the  struggle  as  hopeless,  and  gives  up  striving  against  it. 
Against  this  spirit  of  pessimism  or  despondency  the  exhortation  of  this  verse  is  well 
fitted  to  fortify  us.  ' 

I.  The  Christian's  ass0kanok.  When  the  apostle  says,  "Overcome  evil  with 
good,"  he  implies  that  the  good  has  power  to  overcome  the  evil.  He  implies  even  more 
than  this;  he  implies  that  the  good,  as  manifested  and  practised  hy  the  Christian, 
will  prove  a  sufficient  weapon  with  which  to  vanquish  the  forces  of  sin.  It  is  not 
merely  that  the  good,  in  some  general  or  abstract  sense,  will  overcome  the  evil,  but  that 
you  Christians,  men  and  women,  flesh  and  blood  though  you  be,  may  overcome  the 
evil  by  the  good  which  you  can  exhibit  and  exercise.  Is  not  this  something  worth 
having  the  assurance  of?  Is  not  this  something  worth  living  for?  My  life,  if  it  be 
a  good  one,  shall  not  then  be  in  vain.  Humble  though  my  position,  my  talents,  my 
influence,  I  may,  nevertheless,  be  a  part  of  the  Divine  power  against  evil,  a  labourer 
together  with  God,  and  a  partaker  of  the  great  and  final  triumph  of  righteousness  over 
sin.  This  is  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  in  its  practical  side.  In  ourselves  we  could  not 
vanquish  sin.  But  we  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  who  strengtheneth  us.  This 
is  the  Christian's  assurance.  Ever  afraid  of  evil,  yet  never  afraid  of  it.  Ever  on  the 
watch  against  sin,  yet  never  disheartened  by  its  power.  Ever  distrustful  of  self,  yet 
never  distrustful  of  God,  never  wavering  in  our  confidence  that  when  God  is  on  our 
side  success  and  victory  are  sure.  If  men  had  only  this  trust  in  God,  they  would  never 
transgress  his  law  to  obtain  a  temporal  blessing  or  a  teniporary  success.  They  would 
not  be  so  impatient  to  ■  vindicate  themselves.  Committing  their  character  and  their 
cause  into  God's  hands,  they  would  not  be  so  ready  to  revenge  themselves  on  those 
who  do  them  injury  or  wrong.  Let  this,  then,  be  our  confidence,  that  the  good  is  always 
better  than  the  evil;  that  it  is  always  lest  to  do  the  right,  no  matter  how  hard  it  may 
he ;  and  that  the  day  is  coming  when  evil  shall  be  entirely  vatnguished  and  overthrown, 
and  righteousness  shall  prevail  throughout  the  earth.  "  Fret  not  thyself  because  of 
•vil-doers,  neither  be  thou  envious  ,of  the  workers  of  iniquity.  For  they  shall  soon  be 
cut  down  like  the  grass,  and  wither  as  the  green  herb.  Trust  in  the  Lord,  and  do  good. 
.  .  .  Commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord ;  trust  also  in  him ;  and  he  shall  bring  it  to  pass." 

II.  The  Christian's  duty.  "Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with 
good."  Not  only  is  there  a  warfare  between  the  evil  and  the  good,  a  warfare  which 
ghall  ultimately  result  in  the  triumph  of  what  is  good ;  but  it  is  the  duty  of  every 
Christian  to  take  part  in  that  warfare.  This  duty  applies  first  to  his  own  character  and 
life.  The  best  way  to  drive  out  evil  thoughts,  evil  passions,  is  to  fill  your  mind  with 
what  is  good.  Seek  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Be  filled  with  all  the  fulness 
of  God.  Let  your  thoughts  be  much  occupied  with  the  precepts  and  promises  of  God's 
Word,  and  then  sin  will  not  easily  gain  dominion  over  you.  Those  who  occupy  their 
days  with  all  the  good  they  may  do  will  not  have  time  to  think  of  what  things  they 
may  not  do.  The  same  rule  of  duty  holds  good  in  regard  to  others,  in  our  relations  to 
the  world  without  us.  When  evil  things  are  said  of  us,  when  unkind  or  angry  words 
are  spoken  to  us,  it  is  hard  not  to  feel  provoked,  it  is  hard  not  to  answer  back,  it  is 
hard  to  keep  down  the  desire  for  revenge.  But  here  again  we  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ  who  strengtheneth  us.  Divine  grace  can  wonderfully  restrain  such  tendencies 
of  our  human  nature.  To  feel  anger, or  to  exhibit  anger  in  such  a  case,  is  to  be  "over- 
come of  evil."  To  look  upwards  for  help,  ami  in  the  strength  of  Divine  grace  to 
restrain  our  anger — this  is  to  "  overcome  evil  with  good."  To  crucify  the  flesh,  this  ii 
the  Christian's  work.  This  to  so  show  that  Christ  is  our  Life,  when  we  try  to  act  as  he 
would  have  acted,  and  speak  as  he  would  have  spoken.  Christians  may  overcome  the 
evil  in  the  world  both  by  h'Ang  good  and  by  doing  good.  By  being  good.  For  every  con- 
sistent Christian  life  tolls  upon  the  world.     It  is  a  light  shining  in  the  darkness.    It 


CH.  XII.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  875 

bears  witness  to  the  power  of  Divine  grace.  It  is  a  protest  against  worldliness,  ungod- 
liness, and  sin.  If  the  personal  character  of  every  professing  Christian  was  what  it 
ought  to  be,  what  a  power  for  good  the  Church  of  Christ  would  exercise  1  Ey  doing 
good  also.  Ignorance  and  error  are  to  be  overcome  by  the  activity  of  Christians  in 
educational  and  evangelistic  effort.  Unkindness  and  uncharitableness  are  to  be  over- 
come by  the  active  manifestation  of  kindness,  charity,  and  love.  "  He  that  overcometh 
shall  inherit  all  things." — 0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  1,  2. — 2%e  living  sacrifice.  The  great  argument  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans 
is  to  the  effect  that  God's  favour  is  not  to  be  earned,  but  accepted,  and  this  is  justifi- 
cation by  faith.  The  earlier  chapters  dealt  with  this ;  and  the  apostle  now  proceeds 
to  a  development  of  the  doctrine  which  completely  reverses  the  old  ideas.  Judaism 
sought  mercy  by  sacrifice  and  service ;  St.  Paul  teaches  that  God  seeks  man's  true 
sacrifice  and  service  by  showing  mercy.  We  are  to  come  to  him,  not  that  he  may 
love  us  in  the  end,  but  because  he  loves  us  from  the  beginning.  Our  obedience  to  God 
is  to  be,  therefore,  no  task-work,  but  love-work ;  not  servitude,  but  sonship.  God's  love 
is  the  great  motive-power  of  the  new  life.  We  consider  here  the  results  which  such  love 
should  produce :  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  the  body ;  the  renewing  of  the  mind. 

I.  The  saokifiob  and  service  op  the  body.  There  was  a  total  change  from 
Judaism  to  Christianity  in  the  point  of  sacrifice.  The  old  dispensation  was  one  of 
blood  and  death.  Daily,  weekly,  monthly,  and  yearly,  on  various  ever-recurring  occa- 
sions, the  altars  of  the  temple  ran  with  blood  from  the  dead  bodies  of  slain  beasts  and 
birds.  The  temple  was  one  vast  slaughter-house.  But  Christianity  said,  "  This  no 
more ! "  For  there  his  been  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever ;  and  what  is  wanted 
now,  says  the  apostle,  is  your  bodies,  not  the  bodies  of  beasts  and  birds,  and  these  bodies 
living,  not  dead.  There  was  a  vast  change  in  the  point  of  service  (\arpila)  also.  What 
an  elaborate  ritual  of  service  had  gathered  round  the  sacrifice !  part  ordained  by  God, 
part  added  by  man.  There  were  feasting  and  fasting ;  times  and  seasons,  days  and 
years  ;  meats  and  drinks ;  purifyings ;  prayers.  Christianity  swept  this  away  too,  in 
all  its  ceremonial  character.  And  what  is  wan  ted.  now,  says  the  apostle,  is  not  an 
elaborate  ritual  and  minute  observance,  but  the  life ;  a  service,  not  mechanical  and 
befitting  children,  but  rational  and  befitting  men.  All  this  the  apostle  points  to  by 
his  words.  Your  own  living  bodies  are  to  be  the  sacrifice ;  the  holy,  consecrated  life 
of  your  bodies  is  to  be  the  service.  But  let  us  gather  the  significance  of  his  words  more 
fully.  The  body  is  an  integral  part  of  man  :  consider  in  this  connection  the  creation, 
death,  and  the  resurrection.  The  body  is  sacred:  consider  old  dualistic  heresy, leading 
to  severe  repression  or  gross  sin ;  also  the  modern  error  of  despising  the  body  now,  and 
hoping  to  be  freed  from  it  as  from  a  burden  by-and-by.  The  body?  it  is  the  instrument 
of  our  active  life  in  God's  creation — deed,  speech,  thought.  The  spirit  in  itself  may  live 
towards  God;  but  only  by  the  medium  of  the  body  can  it  live  for  God  amongst  men. 
And  to  present  the  body  a  living  sacrifice  is  thus  to  offer  the  whole  life  to  God.  ,  Think, 
then,  of  the  meaning  of  this.  Think  of  your  life :  busy  work,  with  manifold  industries 
of  limb,  or  speech,  or  brain,  and  intervals  of  rest  which  continually  re-create  you  for 
new  work;  social  relationships,  with  all  the  continuous  interchange  of  affection  and 
thought  which  they  involve;  of  the  life  of  your  own  mind,  your  reasonings,  your 
beliefs,  your  fancies,  your  memories,  your  hopes :  think  of  all  these  things,  and  a 
thousand  others ;  and  then  remember  that  all  this  is  to  be  offered  up  to  God,  a  living 
sacrifice.  This  demands  that  the  life  be  pure.  Jewish  sacrifices  without  spot.  So 
conduct,  words,  imaginings,  must  be  undefiled.  Demands  also  that  the  life  be  conse- 
crated. Just  as  sacrifice,  when  pronounced  pure,  was  offered  on  altar,  so  our  activities, 
being  undefiled,  are  to  be  all  given  to  God,  that  they  may  be  employed  for  him. 
Nothing  neutral:  activities  of  brain,  of  tongue,  of  hand,  having  many  subordinate  ends, 
must  be  goverued  by  the  great  controlling  purpose  to  please  God  and  do  his  will.  Is  it 
go  ?  Is  the  undefiled  life  God's  life  ?  Do  you  make  everything  inexorably  bend  to 
this  ?  Is  your  great  "  sacrifice  "  the  sacrifice  of  the  life  ?  your  great  "  service  "  the 
■ervice  of  the  life  ?    All  else  is  as  nothing  compared  with  this. 

II.  The  renewing  of  the  mind.  But  how  ?  The  "  age  "  is  against  us.  Whether 
or  not  conspicuously  an  age  of  impurity,  certainly  an  age  of  greed  and  self-worship. 
Consider  the  plastic  and  binding  influences  exerted  by  the  world:  it  imperceptibly 


376  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xii.  1—21 

educates  us  to  itself  if  we  yield ;  it  restrains  us  as  with  iron  bands  if  we  attempt  to 
break  away.  And  tlie  current  of  our  own  nature  sets  with  the  stream  (Eph.  ii.  2,  3). 
Self-seeking ;  self-pleasitig.  Not  only  are  the  lusts  QTriBu/ilai)  of  the  flesh  worldwwds, 
themselves  controllable  if  the  inner  life  were  right;  but  the  desire  (fle\i)/»o)  of  the  mfnd 
is  worldwards  too.  The  interior  springs  of  life  are  bad ;  the  "  willing  "  nature  (mvs)  is 
diseased.  And  the  secret  of  all  this  is  that  the  inward  life  is  wrong  with  God  ;  there  is 
death,  not  life  (Eph.  ii,  1).  For  this  reason,  God's  governance  and  succour  being  lost, 
the  will  is  sunk  in  tlie  lusts  that  it  should  control,  and  it  is  thus  that  the  desires  of  the 
flesh  (iirtSv/iiai.)  have  become  actually  volitions  (ScX^/iara)  of  the  flesh  (see  Eph,  iL  3 
again).  Hence  "be  not  conformed"  is  immediately  followed  by  "be  transformed." 
This  is  the  great  doctrine  of  the  new  birth :  a  re-attaohment  to  the  life  of  God,  which 
shall  make  all  things  new.  Has  been  fully  elaborated  in  ch.  vi. — viii.,  in  which  the 
apostle  sets  forth  regeneration  as  the  natural  and  necessary  accompaniment  of  true 
justification.  It  is  here  insisted  upon  once  more,  as  the  only  guarantee  of  a  life  of 
consecration  such  as  he  is  about  to  set  before  his  readers  in  the  following  chapters, 
which  are  an  unfolding  of  the  principle  of  the  first  verse  of  this  chapter.  The  Spirit  of 
God  is  the  regenerating  power:  what  is  the  regenerating  principle?  Love — ^love 
evoked,  fed,  perfected  by  the  mighty,  changeless  love  of  God,  An  enthusiasm  for 
the  highest  good,  which  wings  its  way  through  all  that  obstructs  a  lower  energy  of  life, 
and  triumphs  evermore.  So  now  the  koBs  is  renewed,  the  SeA^/taro  set  with  the  current 
of  the  new  life,  and  the  irt$ufi.lai  of  the  flesh  fall  into  their  proper  place.  Thus  a  power 
of  nonconformity  to  the  "  course  of  this  world  "  is  ours ;  the  bonds  are  broken,  and  the 
plastic  influences  break  like  spray  upon  a  rocky  shore.  And  so,  with  the  altar  set  in 
order,  the  sacrifice  is  offered  up ;  with  the  worshipful  heart  restored,  a  living  service  is 
rendered.  We  "  prove  "  what  is  that  good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  God ;  it  is 
known,  loved,  obeyed. 

In  conclusion,  let  us  remember  that  we  are  besought  to  this  renewal  and  consecration 
by  the  yearning  pity  (oUTip/iSiv)  of  our  God.  His  tears !  Ob,  let  us  be  persuaded  to 
accept  our  healing  at  his  hands ! — eyesight  for  blindness,  love  for  our  dead,  cold,  barren 
selfishness.  And  being  alive  unto  God  within,  let  us  live  to  God  without.  Away  with 
fictitious  sacrifices  and  fictitious  service !  The  sacrifice  is  to  be  the  living  sacrifice  of 
ourselves ;  the  service  the  rational  service  of  a  pure  and  consecrated  deed  and  speech 
and  thought,— T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  3 — 8. — Christian  humility.  The  life  of  Christian  consecration  is  now  set  forth 
in  its  practical  bearings.  We  have  life  in  the  Church,  including  its  attitude  towards 
those  that  are  without  (ch.  xii.),  and  life  in  the  state  (ch.  xiii.).  The  life  of  members 
of  the  Church,  as  such,  is  set  forth  as  controlled  by  two  great  vital  principles:  humility, 
as  regards  one's  self;  love,  as  regards  others.  Here  the  grace  of  humility  is  insisted 
on,  as  regulating  each  one's  thoughts  and  work. 

I.  First,  we  are  to  have  a  sober  and  proper  estimate  of  ourselves  and  our  aptitudes. 
1.  The  tendency  amongst  men  is  to  exalt  themselves  in  their  own  thoughts  as  com- 
pared with.others.  An  unholy  rivalry  of  heart  is  easily  possible  even  in  the  Christian 
brotherhood.  We  magnify  our  own  importance  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  actual  place 
we  fill.  How  contrary  to  the  very  initial  requisite  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven:  "Blessed 
are  the  poor  in  spirit/"!  We  must,  on  the  contrary,  think  soberly.  We  must  in  all 
seriousness  know  ourselves  and  our  place.  We  must  indeed  gauge  and  estimate  our 
sanctified  powers,  but  only  that  we  may  know  to  what  holy  purpose  we  shall  put  them — 
"according  to  the  capacity,  in  the  realm  of  faith,  which  God  has  given  us"  (see 
Godot).  2.  And  so  we  must  think  of  our  various  gifts,  not  as  in  rivalry,  but  as  supple- 
menting one  another.  The  figure  of  the  many  members,  and  their  diverse  offices :  so 
the  body  of  Christ.  Variety  in  unity  :  this  the  lesson  taught  us  by  God's  works,  and 
by  his  constitution  of  human  society  in  general ;  we  Christians  must  learn  the  lesson, 
as  teaching  us  that  we  all  are  "  members  one  of  another." 

II.  Secondly,  we  are  to  give  ourselves  with  all  diligence  to  the  fulfilment  of  our 
several  works.  We  trench  here  upon  the  second  principle.  If  humility  teaches  us  to 
confine  ourselves  soberly  to  our  own  God-appointed  labour,  love  teaches  us  to  throw 
ourselves  with  holy  seal  into  such  labour  that  the  several  members  may  all  profit  by 
our  diligence.    And  the  great  truth  brought  out  prominently  here  is  that  the  cause  of 


OH.xii.  1— 21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  377 


Christ  is  best  advanced  when  each  one  does  earnestly  what  he  can  do  best.  The  apostle 
says,  "Use  your  own  sanctified  gifts  to  the  best  of  your  ability,  so  will  God  be  well- 
pleased,  and  your  brethren  and  the  world  be  blessed."  1.  Prophecy :  the  spiritual  insight 
that  apprehends  with  increasing  clearness  Grod's  purposes  of  saving  grace.  Ministry : 
the  official  attention  to  financial  and  business  matters  of  the  Church,  in  which  the 
"deacon"  wins  his  good  degree.  Teaching:  the  assiduous  inculcation  of  received 
truth,  that  the  people  of  God  may  be  built  up  in  the  faith.  Exhorting :  the  earnest 
pleading  with  men,  that  their  hearts  may  be  won,  or  more  fully  won,  to  that  which  ii 
Divine  and  good.  Such  the  more  ofiBcial  duties.  2.  Tlie  more  private  and  spontaneous 
duties  are  to  be  similarly  performed.  Giving :  for  some  who  are  so  favoured  have  it 
as  their  special  work  to  hold  in  trust  for  others,  and  to  bestow  as  they  have  opportunity, 
the  good  things  of  this  world.  Let  this  be  with  all  liberality  of  heart.  Buling :  there 
will  be  committees  for  snch  philanthropic  work,  and  men  of  enterprise  will  have  it  as 
their  special  business  to  lead  the  way.  Let  this  be  with  diligence,  for  success  or  failure 
will  follow  according  to  their  devotion  or  half-heartedness.  Showing  mercy :  some 
wiU  have  it  for  their  work  personally  to  dispense  the  help  which  perhaps  the  liberality 
of  others  affords.  Lot  it  be  with  a  cheerfulness  that  shall  make  the  blessing  doubly 
blessed ;  let  their  presence  be  hailed  everywhere  as  it  were  sunshine  in  the  gloom. 

Such  is  the  principle  of  a  true  Christian  humility,  merging  into  love.  The  old  Greek 
wisdom  urged  upon  its  students,  "  Know  thyself."  Our  Christian  faith  inculcates  the 
same  lesson  upon  us.  Not  by  our  seeking  to  do  others'  work,  but  by  our  fulfilling,  as 
best  we  may,  our  own,  will  the  common  weal  be  advanced.  Yes,  know  thyself,  and 
know  thy  Saviour ;  so  shalt  thou  save  thyself  and  promote  the  salvation  of  the  world. 
— T.  I!\  L. 

Vers.  9 — 21. — Christian  love.  Now  we  come  to  the  great  central  principle  of  the 
Chi  isuan  liie  in  its  social  relations  among  men — true  love.  And,  as  the  apostle  addresses 
Church-members,  he  paints  this  love,  by  a  few  vivid  strokes,  as  they  owe  it  to  their 
fellow-members,  and  also  to  those  that  are  without. 

L  First,  as  members  of  Christ,  they  are  to  love  one  another.  1.  The  ethical  character 
of  this  love.  It  is  holy.  Not  a  mere  sentimental  tenderness,  but  a  love  that  abhors 
the  evil,  in  whomsoever  found,  and  cleaves  only  to  the  good  (comp.  Jas.  iii.  17,  "  first 
pure,"  etc.).  2.  The  manifestations  of  the  love.  Tender  affection,  as  of  the  members  of 
one  loving  family  ;  self-sacrificing  respect,  so  contrary  to  the  spirit  which  asks,  "  Who 
is  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?  " — zealous  to  practise  this  regard  for  others 
with  a  diligent  industry;  animated  to  this  diligence  by  the  fervour  of  the  spiritual  life; 
sanctifying  the  love  and  service  by  loving  and  serving  them  in  Christ.  3.  The  support* 
of  such  love.  The  exultant  joy  of  Christian  hope,  in  view  of  that  appearing  of  our 
Lord ;  the  jiatient  endurance  of  trial  and  pain,  by  the  power  of  that  hope ;  the  abiding 
fellowship  with  God,  which  ever  rekindles  the  hope  and  makes  it  holy.  4.  The  practical 
working  of  this  love  in  the  matters  of  the  life  that  now  is.  Eelief  of  needy  ones,  as 
being  the  needy  ones  of  God's  household ;  hospitaUty  to  all  who  for  the  Lord's  sake 
have  left  their  l^ome  and  rest.  5.  The  forbearance  of  this  love.  When,  unhappily,  even 
Christian  brethren  misunderstand  and  strive  and  persecute,  they  are  still  to  be  loved 
and  blessed ;  not  for  any  provocation  is  cursing  to  be  rendered  back.  6.  The  sympa- 
thies of  the  love.  A  real  and  manifested  joy,  in  sympathy  with  rejoicing  ones ;  a  real 
and  manifested  sorrow,  in  sympathy  with  sorrowing  ones.  7.  The  unity  of  love.  Of 
the  same  mind.  8.  The  humility  of  love.  Not  high,  ambitious  aspirations,  but  willing- 
ness for  lowly  work ;  and  to  this  end,  not  self-conceited  wisdom,  but  the  heart  of  a 
little  child. 

II.  Secondly,  as  showing  forth  Christ  to  men,  they  are  to  love  even  those  t  lat  are 
without.  1.  No  revenge  to  be  allowed.  Think  of  their  temptations  to  old  habits  and 
practices.  2.  Honourable  cond-uct  to  be  strictly  maintained.  Yes,  even  with  the 
emphatically  "  heathen  "  man.  3.  Peace  to  be  sought  with  all.  On  our  side  at  least  it 
is  possible,  and  so  the  sanctities  of  the  Christian's  own  lieart  shall  not  be  violated.  4. 
Again,  no  vengeance  towards  those  whose  crimes  may  seem  to  cry  for  vengeance  upon  them. 
No,  not  even  in  the  way  of  justice,  for  a  higher  One  is  Judge,  and  all  wrath  must  be 
left  to  him,  whose  very  wratji  is  love ;  and;  in  truth,  our  rising  wrath  itself  must  be 
transformed  to  love,  a  love  which  shall  even  feed  and  give  drink  to  the  enemy  in  hii 


378  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  xii.  1—21. 

distress.    And  sliall  not  this  shame  his  heart?  and  his  shame  may  be  to  him  for  salva- 
tion.   So  shall  the  evil  not  conquer  us,  but  be  itself  conquered  by  the  good. 

"Who  is  sufBcient  for  these  things?"  The  high  perfection  of  this  Christian  love 
seems  far  beyond  our  reach.  But  it  has  been  shown  forth  once,  in  him  who  said,  "  I 
have  overcome  the  world."  Yea,  its  evil  was  vanquished  by  his  sacrifice  of  love.  And, 
through  him,  we  may  conquer  too.  May  the  living  Christ  be  ours,  and  his  grace  shall 
be  sulflcient  I— T.  P.  L. 

Ver.  1. — "  A  living  sacrifice,"  The  text  suggests  to  us  the  spiritual  teacher's  plat- 
form. He  does  not  so  much  command  or  threaten  as  "  beseech  his  brethren."  Various 
terms  are,  iudeed,  used  in  the  Authorized  Version  to  translate  the  word  vapaKoXfa.  But 
the  feature  of  the  word  is  speaking  to  some  one  for  a  particular  purpose,  to  get  him  to 
do  or  refrain  from  something,  to  help  him  in  difficulty  or  console  him  under  trouble. 
The  Saviour  is  spoken  of  in  John's  Epistle  as  our  "  Advocate,"  our  Paraclete,  accord- 
ing to  our  Lord's  own  description  of  himself  when  he  promised, "  I  will  send  you  another 
Comforter."  And  who  has  so  great  a  right  to  speak  faithfully  as  a  brother?  The  very 
nearness  of  kin  implies  affectionate  solicitude,  precludes  evil  suspicions.  As  brethren 
should  the  members  of  Churches  stimulate  each  other  with  kindly  jealousy  for  each 
other's  welfare. 

I.  The  dedication  dbsoribbd.  "  Present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice."  The  law 
of  offerings  is  not  abrogated,  is  spiritually  fulfilled.  The  daily  Cliristian  sacrifice  is  not 
propitiatory  like  the  Saviour's,  but  consequent  upon  that  one  efficacious  atonement, 
and  intended  in  like  manner  to  glorify  the  righteousness  and  goodness  of  God,  and  to 
redeem  man  from  evil.  Sin  has  corrupted  the  entire  organism,  and  the  sacrifice  is  to 
consist  of  the  whole  being.  The  body  is  expressly  named  as  the  part  which  visibly 
was  immersed  in  sin,  and  bowed  under  idolatry.  But  as  the  organ  and  symbol  of  the 
life,  and  the  vehicle  of  information  and  action,  bringing  the  powers  of  the  soul  into 
exercise,  the  surrender  of  the  body  to  Christian  principle  means  that  the  entire  self  is 
yielded  to  God.  If  sacrifice  signifies  selt-denial,  there  is  yet  a  joy  that  swallows  up  the 
pain  of  privation  in  the  thought  of  the  honour  conferred  on  the  garlanded  victim 
accepted  by  the  Most  High  as  an  act  of  worship  and  praise.  Note  some  of  the  qualities 
of  this  sacrifice.  It  is  "  living,"  as  contrasted  with  the  dead  sacrifices  of  Jewish  rites. 
True  religion  is  not  a  galvanized  life,  but  an  inward  principle  that  vivifies  the  entire 
frame.  The  mere  saying  of  prayers,  attendance  at  God's  house,  the  avoidance  of  ill 
places  and  company,  is  a  dead  and  worthless  sacrifice  if  unaccompanied  by  love  and 
devotion.  The  love  of  Christ  flaming  within  the  body  makes  it  no  longer  a  dull  lump 
of  clay,  but  an  illumined  spiritual  temple.  It  is  a  "  holy  "  sacrifice ;  the  sacredness  of 
consecration  to  a  holy  Being  rests  upon  it,  and  there  is  real  and  actual  holiness  of  heart 
and  life.  It  is  "  acceptable,"  well-pleasing  to  him  who  despises  not  the  weak,  but 
rejoices  in  humble,  devout  sincerity,  where  the  leaven  is  cast  out  in  order  to  a  true 
celebration  of  the  feast.  We  need  not  fear  the  rejection  of  our  offering,  since  to  us  has 
been  revealed  the  proper  mode  of  approach  ;  nor  will  the  shortcomings  and  sinful 
accompaniments  that  in  spite  of  our  best  attempts  mingle  with  our  words  and  deeds 
cause  them  to  be  abhorred  of  him  who  perceives  therein  the  sweet  savour  of  Christ  and 
incense  of  the  Spirit.  The  "  calves  of  our  lips  "  will  not  pollute  his  courts,  nor  our 
"doing  good  and  communicating"  pollute  his  holy  altar.  We  have  also  a  general 
characterization  of  the  sacrifice.  It  is  a  "reasonable  service"  It  is  engaged  in  and 
ratified  by  the  highest  powers,  the  enlightened  intellect  and  the  quickened  spirit.  Unlike 
an  unmeaning  ritual,  the  service  of  the  Christian  is  to  him  emblematic  of  deepest  truths. 
He  sees  himself  not  an  isolated  unit  which  has  itself  merely  to  please  and  cherish,  but 
a  child  of  God,  a  constituent  of  society,  with  the  obligation  and  dignity  of  obedience 
and  self-abnegation  for  the  service  of  God  and  man.  And  there  is  great  meaning  in  the  • 
word  employed  to  denote  our  "  service."  It  compares  our  lives  to  the  ministrations  of 
the  priests  in  the  temple.  When  we  raise  our  voices  in  supplication  to  the  throne, 
when  we  seek  to  lead  others  to  the  Saviour  of  our  choice,  when  we  strive  to  discharge 
the  duties  of  our  calling  as  unto  the  Lord,  when  we  relieve  the  distressed  or  comfort 
the  afflicted,  we  are  as  much  employed  in  temple-worship  as  if,  like  Aaron,  we  wore 
the  high  priest's  robes,  or,  like  Zacharias,  offered  incense  before  the  veil.  What  a 
aoble  idea  of  the  vocation  of  the  people  of  God  this  metaphor  conveys  I    Expect  not  • 


OH.  xu.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  379 

path  of  flowery  ease — that  the  mountains  should  be  levelled  and  the  valleys  raised  to 
facilitate  your  progress !  At  the  altar  say,  ','  I  feel  the  cord  that  binds  me ;  the  knife  is 
keen  that  severs  the  tender  flesh ;  the  flames  are  hard  to  bear ;  but  withal  I  can  rejoice 
that  I  am  exalted  to  the  honour  of  a  holocaust  accepted  of  God,  aad  not  consumed  but 
purified  by  the  sacrifice." 

II.  The  weighty  abgttmbnt  to  ukgb  the  dedicatios.  There  is  a  "  (h«r»fore  "  in 
the  text;  the  exhortation  is  grounded  on  previous  reasoning  and  previously  stated  facta. 
Herein  lies  the  strength  of  the  religious  teacher.  He  may  have  no  excommunication 
with  bell,  book,  and  candle  to  pronounce,  no  fire  and  sword  with  which  to  wring 
reluctant  assent ;  but  he  has  decisions  of  a  recognized  court  to  allege,  and  motives  of 
unequalled  potency  to  appeal  to.  Every  one  who  has  to  do  with  machinery  knows  the 
Importance  of  motive-power.  And  Christianity  is  strong  where  philosophical  systems 
of  ethics  are  weak.  "Tou  admit,"  the  apostle  seems  to  say,  "these  premisses;  now  supply 
the  practical  conclusion."  He  has  been  rehearsing  the  "  mercies  of  Ood  "  to  Jews  and 
Gentiles.  Gratitude  for  the  Divine  goodness  impels  to  his  service,  and  the  hope  of 
future  benefits  is  a  lawful  constraining  force.  Surely  the  grace  that  has  granted  pardon, 
peace,  eternal  life.  Is  a  voice  to  demand,  a  magnet  to  attract  to,  such  a  sacrifice  as  that 
entreated.  Providential  mercies  cry  aloud,  "  Yield  yourselves  unto  God."  Where  shall 
we  begin,  how  end  their  recital  ?  There  are  seasons,  such  as  the  beginning  of  a  new 
fear,  or  the  anniversary  of  a  birthday,  when  the  remembrance  of  the  Divine  forethought 
and  loving-kindness  overwhelms  the  soul  with  thankfulness  and  praise.  The  darkest 
night  has  had  its  star ;  in  the  coldest  day  some  gleam  of  sunshine  has  cheered  our 
landscape.  Family  and  household  mercies,  blessings  bestowed  on  Church  and  town 
and  country,  fresh  discoveries  in  nature  or  art,  "  sweet  voices  from  the  distant  hills," — 
all  these  renewed  compassions  of  a  benevolent  God  evoke  the  old  inquiry,  "  What  shall 
I  render  to  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  toward  me  ?  "  The  text  furnishes  the  answer, 
■>he  full  New  Testament  programme,  outlined  in  the  psalmist's  "  cup  of  salvation  "  and 
'  thanksgiving,"  and  "  payment  of  vows  "  and  "  prayer." — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  2. — Christian  character  a  metamorphosis.  Advice  as  to  conduct,  in  order  to  be 
complete,  should  be  both  negative  and  positive  in  exhortation;  it  should  say  what 
ought  to  be  done  as  well  as  what  ought  to  be  avoided.  Christianity  repels  from  evil 
and  attracts  to  goodness.  He  runs  best  who  not  only  fiees  from  peril,  but  knows  the 
refuge  for  which  to  shape  his  course. 

I.  Not  the  tashion  of  the  age,  but  the  will  oe  God,  is  the  true  standakd  op 
duty.  The  Scriptures  contrast  this  world  with  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  one  is 
fleeting,  the  other  eternal.  The  one  is  carnal,  the  other  spiritual ;  the  one  appeals  to 
the  bodily  senses,  the  other  is  a  vision  of  faith.  The  kingdom  which  Christ  has 
established  realizes  the  desire  and  purpose  of  God's  heart.  Those  who  enter  it  are  not 
thereby  removed  from  the  sphere  of  worldly  need  and  influence  and  activity,  but  there 
is  a  difference  in  the  spirit  with  which  these  temporal  objects  are  pursued.  A  touch- 
stone of  value  is  introduced,  and  occupations  and  possessions  are  appraised  according 
to  its  decisions.  The  will  of  God  is  the  Ariadne  clew  which  guides  the  traveller  safely 
through  the  maze  of  shifting  opinions  and  bewildering  dictates.  The  disciple  of  Christ 
asks  not — What  will  my  companions  say  ?  what  is  the  prevailing  etiquette '/  what  is  the 
code  of  honour  prescribed  by  the  circle  to  which  I  belong  ?  or  what  is  the  amount  of 
kindness,  purity,  and  justice  which  will  save  me  from  public  censure?  but — What  would 
God  have  me  do?  what  will  he  approve?  what  is  his  Divine  intent  in  my  upbringing 
and  redemption  ?  From  how  many  petty  anxieties  is  such  a  man  freed,  and  what 
noble  cares  supplant  his  former  subservience  to  custom  1  Commerce,  politics,  the 
Church,  every  arena  needs  such  men.  The  face  of  Gtod  is  not  reflected  in  his  servants 
like  coins  stamped  with  the  sovereign's  identical  image,  but  varies  like  the  reflection 
of  the  sky,  according  to  the  lake,  river,  or  sea  that  mirrors  its  glory. 

II.  A  benewed  mine  is  the  channel  of  transformation.  God  has  created  man 
intelligent,  and  men  act  generally  according  to  their  perception  of  the  fitness  ot  things. 
Alter  their  views,  modify  their  tastes,  direct  their  inclinations,  and  their  career  is 
changed.  If  they  do  the  same  things,  they  do  them  with  reference  to  a  higher  Being 
and  a  wider  landscape.  Some  things  loved  before  appear  loathsome  now ;  the  eyes  art- 
opened,  and  the  old  order  is  deserted  for  tl'e  beauties  and  satisfactions  ol  the  uew  state. 


880  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  B0MAN3.    [oh.  xn.  1—21 

The  wlW  of  God  may  be  traced  in  his  works  and  ways,  in  creation  and  providence ; 
but  JeoUB  Christ  in  the  Scriptures  is  to  us  the  fullest  revelation  granted  of  the  mind 
of  God,  and  by  studying  him  is  the  conscience  quickened,  the  reason  enlightened,  the 
affection  sanctified.  Christianity  thus  works  from  within  outward.  It  does  not  try 
to  transfigure  appearances  by  gilding  the  apples  of  the  tree,  or  appending  fruit  to  its 
boughs,  but  it  transforms  the  sap,  and  lets  the  new  life  produce  its  appropriate  harvest. 
The  renewing  of  the  judgment  implies  a  restoiation  of  man  to  a  primitive  condition 
from  which  he  has  fallen.  The  lineaments  of  God  in  human  nature  which  had  grown 
dull,  almost  obliterated  by  the  wear  and  tear  of  a  godless  existence,  are  made  vivid 
again.  Like  the  whitewash  removed  from  the  walls  of  an  ancient  edifice,  and  no  longer 
allowed  to  conceal  the  glorious  frescoes  or  carving  beneath,  so  the  chamber  of  the  heart 
is  renovated  by  the  reception  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  the  defilements  and  deceptions 
give  place  to  the  pristine  conception  of  man  in  the  likeness  of  God,  retouched, 
remodelled  by  him  who  maketh  all  things  new.  The  blood-stained  cross  is  the  measure 
of  devotion  to  the  will  of  God  and  of  self-sacrifice  for  the  common  good.  The  risen 
Christ  is  the  ideal  of  the  future  to  which  Christian  hopes  turn  and  to  which  conformity 
•  is  lovingly  sought. 

III.  The  completer  the  transfobmation,  the  mobb  surely  is  the  will  of  God 
DISCERNED,  AND  THE  MOBE  INTENSELY  IS  IT  PRIZED.  It  is  the  universal  law  condensed 
into  a  proverb  that  "experience  teaches."  Not  all  at  once  can  tiie  eai-  distinguish 
sounds,  or  the  eye  form  and  colours.  Not  immediately  does  the  reason  discriminate 
between  logical  and  illogical  arguments  and  procedures,  nor  the  taste  discover  and 
apply  its  canons  of  judgment.  Practice  and  discipline  are  required.  And  it  were 
absurd  to  expect  that  in  the  regenerated  man  the  old  habits  of  liking  and  behaviour 
could  be  thrown  off  by  one  effort  like  a  worn-out  garment.  The  man  rescued  from 
drowning  slowly  comes  to  himself,  and  gradually  does  the  eye  of  the  saved  believer 
learn  to  recognize  in  every  place  the  presence  of  his  Lord,  and  his  ear  to  at  all  times 
catch  the  faintest  whisper  of  his  voice.  The  early  converts  made  sad  blunders  in  their 
celebration  of  Christian  ordinances,  in  their  governance  of  the  gifts  with  which  they 
were  endowed,  and  in  their  application  of  Divine  morality  to  the  questions  of  the  day. 
But  they  were  in  the  school  of  Christ,  and  made  steady  progress.  And  every  advance 
in  knowledge  and  life  has  confirmed  our  appreciation  of  the  will  of  God  as  being  good, 
and  worthy  of  the  utmost  maturity  of  ethical  manhood.  The  Saviour's  prayer  is  the 
verdict  of  the  saintliest  lives,  the  last  word  of  Christian  judgment:  "Thy  will,  not 
mine,  be  done."  As  an  encouragement  it  may  be  noted  that  our  standard  of  duty  ever 
rises  as  we  understand  better  the  mind  of  God  and  approximate  to  its  requirements. 
And  we  must  not  be  disappointed  if  to  ourselves  we  seem  as  far  off  as  ever  from  the 
ideal  development.  This  is  only  as,  in  climbing  to  some  mountain  summit,  the  top 
appears  more  distant  because  progress  reveals  more  accurately  the  total  height. — S.  E.  A. 

Ver.  3. — A  proper  estimate  of  self.  The  fount  of  knowledge  and  utterance  is  the 
"  grace "  of  God.  The  apostle  claims  to  be  heard  as  one  who  has  received  a  message, 
not  excogitated  a  thought,  which  it  is  his  business  to  deliver  aud  enforce.  This  is  ever 
the  propliet's  function,  to  announce  the  mind  of  God,  and  he  needs  continual  "  grace  " 
to  1)0  faithful  to  the  truth,  not  to  hide  nor  to  alter  nor  to  add. 

I.   It  IS  NOT  BELF-DEPBEOIATION  WHICH  IS  HERE   COMMANDED.      Aristotle's  dictUm  of 

right  action  is  that  -virtuous  behaviour  lies  in  a  mean  between  two  extremes.  And 
whilst  not  a  sufficient  account,  this  often  serves  as  a  ready  criterion.  Proper  humility 
is  not  to  be  confounded  with  mock  modesty  and  diflidence  on  the  one  hand,  nor  on  the 
other  hand  with  arrogance  and  pride.  He  acts  injuriously  to  himself  who,  comparing 
himself  with  others,  despises  what  he  is  and  can  do,  because  higher  and  larger  gifts 
have  been  bestowed  on  his  fellows.  Such  self-despising  is  ingratitude  lO  God,  and 
casts  a  slur  on  the  Divine  equity.  We  dare  not  make  light  of  any  post  he  enables  us 
to  fill,  or  of  the  simplest  service  he  permits  us  to  render.  He  who  has  dignified 
humanity,  first  by  creating  it  "in  his  own  image  after  his  likeness,"  and  then  by  th* 
incarnation  of  his  beloved  Son,  may  expect  in  every  man  a  certain  reasonable  degrea 
of  self-Tespect.  And  the  apostle  implies  that  there  is  a  way  in  which  each  "  ought  to 
think  "  of  himself,  ought  to  honour  his  position  and  abilities.  Shall  the  lark  refuse  to 
(rill  forth  melody  in  his  upward  flight  because  he  cannot  pour  forth  the  lus«iuui 


OH.  xiL  1-21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  881 

cTiangeful  notes  of  the  nig!itingale  7  or  the  robin  refuse  to  chirp  merrily  In  the  winter 
because  he  cannot  undertake  the  long  flight  of  the  swallow?  Shall  the  violet  with- 
iioli  its  delicious  fragrance  because  the  sunflower  is  so  conspicuously  gorgeous  ?  or  the 
lofty  elm  not  clap  its  hands  in  praise  of  God  because  of  its  nearness  to  the  wide- 
jpreading  beech  ?  That  is  not  true  humility,  but  scornful  indolence,  which  buries  its 
talent  in  the  earth.  Of  a  lowly  beast  of  burden  it  was  said,  "  The  Lord  hath  need  of 
him." 

II.  It  is  undue  self-esteem  which  is  bbphoved.  An  immoderate  estimate  of  our 
personal  worth  is  unmindful  of  obvious  facts.  It  forgets  that  God  regards  quality 
rather  than  quantity,  and  that  all  we  possess  we  have  received,  even  the  ability  to  use 
our  gifts,  and  by  use  to  augment  and  perfect  our  capacity.  We  gain  a  humble  estimate 
of  our  powers  by  coming  into  the  society  of  truly  great  men.  As  we  measure  little 
hills  by  the  sky-piercing  mountains,  so  we  may  profitably  turn  our  thoughts  to  the 
almighty  and  all-wise,  the  ever-living  and  holy  God.  And,  to  assist  us  in  our 
judgments,  his  grace  has  sent  a  pattern  of  merit  in  the  character  and  life  of  bis  Son, 
attempering  the  glory  of  the  Most  High  to  our  weak  vision,  and  allowing  us  to  »ee 
Divine  greatness  humbling  itself  to  the  form  of  a  servant  and  the  death  of  a  criminal. 
We  have  to  own  our  imperfect  rectitude  when  we  place  it  side  by  side  with  the 
obedience  and  righteousness  of  Christ.  As  with  a  douche  of  cold  water,  is  the  most 
intoxicated  with  his  own  grandeur  sobered  into  due  modesty.  Through  pride  the 
angels  "  kept  not  their  first  estate,"  and  it  is  a  favourite  device  of  the  tempter  to  allure 
men  into  a  sense  of  self-sufficiency  and  importance.  "  Look  unto  the  rock  whence  ye 
were  hewn,  and  to  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  ye  were  digged."  Wounded  vanity 
pi'events  many  a  member  of  the  Church  from  seeking  to  glorify  a  lowly  position ;  the 
foot  wants  to  be  where  the  eye  is,  and  the  hand  objects  to  serve  the  head.  The  elder 
brother  loses  the  joy  of  the  prodigal's  return.  Bemember  that  in  the  Saviour's  reckon- 
ing the  widow's  offering  far  outweighed  the  costly  contributions  of  the  wealthy. 

III,  The  bulb  is  to  bb  ukivebsallv  applied.  "  I  say  to  every  man  that  is  among 
you."  Every  man  needs  this  regulation.  The  precepts  and  promises  of  Scripture 
addressed  to  all  are  only  effective  as  each  severally  appropriates  them.  We  are 
individualized  in  God's  sight,  not  lumped  together  in  the  mass.  The  danger  lies  at 
the  door  of  each,  and  each  must  calculate  his  proper  worth  and  position.  We  cannot 
do  this  for  one  another ;  to  his  own  Master  does  each  stand  or  fall.  Every  Christian 
has  obtained  some  amount  of  faith.  There  are  gradations  in  spiritual  as  in  temporal 
life,  and  the  rank  of  honour  is  according  to  the  service  rendered  to  the  body  to  which 
we  belong.  But  none  is  entirely  destitute;  let  none,  therefore,  be  despised  or  down- 
hem  ted.  All  Christians  are  landed  proprietors;  an  estate  large  or  small  is  allotted  to 
them  to  occupy  and  cultivate.  The  Spirit  distributeth  as  he  will.  Our  business  is 
not  to  quarrel  with  the  distribution,  but  to  be  diligent  stewards  of  the  deposit  entrusted 
to  our  care.  He  that  is  faithful  in  little  or  in  much  shall  be  rewarded.  Such  a  con- 
sideration abates  envy  and  discontent,  abolishes  boasting  and  self-complacency. — S.  B.  A. 

Ver.  15. — Sympathy.  The  two  clauses  of  this  verse  remind  us  of  the  two  main 
emotions  of  the  human  breast,  of  their  diverse  nature,  and  their  common  association. 
Sorrow  ever  treads  at  the  heels  of  joy.  The  sigh  and  the  laugh  may  be  heard  at  once. 
Scarce  has  prosperity  brightened  one  threshold  than  adversity  overshadows  another. 
As  in  the  plagues,  there  is  light  in  Goshen  and  darkness  in  Egypt.  If  every  house 
were  painted  to  reveal  the  condition  of  the  inmates,  what  startling  contrasts  would  be 
seen  side  by  side  1  It  is  of  little  use  to  try  and  measure  the  sum  of  happiness  and  of 
misery,  to  calculate  which  preponderates  in  life ;  better  is  it  to  adapt  ourselves  to  these 
two  prevailing  states,  and  by  appropriate  words  and  deeds  to  evince  our  sympathy 
both  with  those  who  mourn  and  those  who  exult,  not  shrinking  from  distress  nor 
envying  the  fortunate.    Many  reasons  concur  in  recommending  the  apostle's  injunction. 

I.  God  has  made  man  a  social  beino.  He  is  the  "God  of  the  families  of  Israel." 
The  Law  commanded  convocations,  social  observances ;  the  people  encamped  not  as 
individuals,  but  as  households  and  tribes.  Besides  the  appetites  and  affections  that 
concern  ourselves  personally,  there  are  others  which  respect  our  fellows  and  cannot  be 
gratified  without  their  presence.  Love,  gratitude,  pity,  all  suppose  their  existent 
objects,  so  that  the  moral  constitution  of  man  exhibits  the  social  capacities  with  which 


382  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xii.  1— 21. 

he  has  been  endowed.  There  is  a  basis  for  sympathy  in  our  physical  nature.  The 
appearance  of  one  man  acts  and  reacts  on  his  companions.  The  mirthful  induces 
merriment  in  the  company,  and  the  entrance  of  a  gloomy  countenance  damps  the 
spirits  of  a  whole  party.  Infants  are  quickly  affected  by  the  attitude  of  those  near 
them;  and  the  lower  animals  are  prone  to  frisk  and  leap  when  their  masters  are  glad, 
and  to  be  depressed  by  their  melancholy.  To  shut  one's  self  up  in  solitude,  to  take 
DO  notice  of  the  circumstances  of  others,  is  therefore  to  sin  against  the  laws  of  our 
being. 

II.  Jksus  Christ  has  provided  fob  thbsb  sooial  instincts  in  the  establish- 
ment OF  his  Ghobch.  He  has  instituted  a  community  of  believers,  united  for  mutual 
counsel  and  support.  One  by  one  we  resort  to  the  Saviour  for  individual  teaching  and 
healing,  but  "  those  that  are  being  saved  "  are  "  added  to  the  Church,"  and  the  visibility 
of  the  fact  assists  in  that  redemption  from  selfishness  which  is  the  essence  of  sin. 
"  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens "  is  the  recognition  of  our  unity.  The  limb  which 
shares  not  in  the  thrill  of  pain  or  pleasure  is  on  the  way  to  atrophy,  disunion,  death. 
Love  and  service  to  the  Head  of  the  body  bind  the  members  together  as  an  organism, 
and  love  ministers  to  trouble  and  enhances  joy.  Such  sympathy  cannot,  however,  be 
restricted  to  the  members  of  the  Church.  Family  ties  lead  to  efforts  for  the  salvation 
of  outsiders,  and  a  desire  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord -and  the  enlarging  usefulness  of  his 
kingdom  prompts  to  imitation  of  his  beneficence  who  came  to  lighten  our  woes  and  to 
augment  our  gladness. 

III.  OUE  DEVELOPMENT  UNTO  PEErBCTION  DEMANDS  THE  CULTIVATION  OF  SYMPATHY. 

It  was  not  "good"  for  Adam  to  be  alone.  A  high  pitch  of  civilization  cannot  be 
reached  or  maintained  in  isolation.  Left  to  ourselves,  we  grow  careless  of  refinement 
or  progress.  To  shut  ourselves  up  like  flowers  that  close  their  petals  at  the  rude  blast, 
to  crawl  inside  our  shell,  and,  closing  the  aperture,  to  dwell  simply  on  our  own  satis- 
factions and  uneasinesses,  is  the  pleading  of  mistaken  self-love  that  overreaches  itself 
and  misses  the  pure  happiness  of  sharing  others'  delights  and  of  doing  good.  Spiritual 
growth  is  not  attainable  any  more  than  physical  strength  by  a  life  within-doors. 
Avoid  the  heat  and  the  icy  wind,  and  health  suffers  by  too-great  confinement.  What 
lessons  may  be  learnt  from  the  successes  and  misfortunes  of  our  neighbours !  Their 
lot  may  be  ours  soon ;  it  were  well  to  be  wise  betimes.  To  look  on  others  is  to  gaze 
at  a  mirror  that  reflects  our  own  image. 

IV.  The  fulfilment  of  this  pbbobpt  would  matebiallt  lighten  the  wbetched- 
NESS  OF  THE  WORLD.  The  savageucss  of  unrestricted  coKpetition  vanishes  where  a 
due  regard  is  paid  to  the  happiness  or  suffering  of  our  companions.  Nothing  like  a 
visit  from  the  employer  to  the  homes  of  his  servants,  or  a  sight  by  the  speculator  of 
the  misery  his  unjust  gains  have  entailed,  to  abate  the  fierceness  of  greed  and  to 
remedy  grievances  and  wrongs.  The  world  sorely  needs  brotherly  kindness.  Then 
would  men  and  nations  realize  that  what  elevates  one  raises  all,  what  depresses  one 
truly  enriches  none.  We  may  note  that  obedience  to  the  latter  clause  of  the  text  is 
perhaps  more  needful  than  compliance  with  the  former.  The  distressed  require  help, 
the  prosperous  can  do  without  it.  But  any  separation  of  the  two  duties  weakens  both. 
It  is  not  always  easy  to  congratulate  a  fortunate  compeer,  any  more  than  to  assist  the 
unlucky.  No  doubt  we  like  to  bask  in  the  sunshine,  and  to  withdraw  from  gloom. 
But  the  "  elder  brother  "  refused  to  join  in  the  household  felicitations,  and  the  Levite 
and  the  Pharisee  "passed  by"  the  wounded  traveller.  Guard  against  the  mere 
indulgence  of  passive  sympathy.  The  rejoicing  and  mourning  of  the  text  imply  an 
active  sympathy,  and  action  forms  habits  of  good  will  and  benevolence  as  Butler  has 
described.  Copy  the  Eedeemer.  No  ascetic  or  misanthrope  was  he,  who  multiplied  the 
innocent  gaiety  of  the  marriage  feast,  and  mingled  his  tears  with  those  of  the  weeping 
sisters  of  Lazarus.  Even  a  hearty  grasp  of  the  hand  adds  to  joy,  and  a  moistened  eye 
comforts  those  that  mourn.  The  poorest  in  point  of  worldly  goods  may  be  rich  in 
God-like  sympathy.  Many  a  man  has  been  saved  from  utter  despair  by  the  knowledge 
that  another  was  interested  in  his  welfare. — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  21. — Vietorg  tJuit  ble$set  hoth  the  conqueror  and  the  conquered.  No  chapter  la 
the  Bible  is  richer  and  more  benign  than  this  in  practical  exhortation.  It  breathes 
the  spirit  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  and  the  apostolic  teaching  has  the  advantage 


BB.  XII.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  38S 

of  the  illustration  and  commentary  filnushed  by  the  beneficent  life  and  self-sacriflcing 
death  of  the  great  Preacher.. 

I.  The  momentous  conflict.  "  Be  not  overcome  of  evil."  A  man  has  been  wronged 
by  his  neighbour.  The  feeling  of  injury  begets  a  desire  for  retaliation.  The  resent- 
ment is  just,  is  a  testimony  to  the  sense  of  righteousness  imbedded  in  the  conscience. 
But  the  feeling  tends  to  go  too  far,  and  to  beuome  a  longing  for  revenge  in  any  shape 
that  may  present  itself.  Here  is  the  subtlety  of  temptation,  making  evil  appear  as  good. 
Undisguised  ^ce  is  easy  to  repel,  but  a  righteous  indignation  may  open  the  gate 
through  which  unrighteous  passion  enters  like  a  flood.  This  is  one  form  of  the  universal 
battle  against  sin,  which  is  ever  ready  to  take  advantage  of  lawful  natural  impulses 
and  to  push  them  to  excess.  The  warning  of  the  text  applies,  therefore,  to  the  whole 
sphere  of  life.  All  good  conduct  implies  the  possibility  of  the  reverse.  Solicitations 
to  evil  are  everywhere  about  us.  Physical  evil,  such  as  a  painful  disease,  may  become 
moral  evil  when  it  produces  murmuring,  peevishness,  utter  idleness,  and  blasphemy. 
The  struggle  is  fierce  and  prolonged,  for  "we  wrestle  against  powers,  against  spiritual 
wickedness  in  high  places."  As  the  gifts  of  God  in  the  material  universe  are  secured 
at  the  expense  of  painful  thought  and  toil,  so  the  blessings  of  the  spiritual  life  are  not 
to  be  had  at  our  ease,  but  only  by  strenuous  wrestling. 

IL  The  method  of  wabfarb.  "Overcome  evil  with  good."  To  resist  the  evil 
Inclination  is  the  first  part  of  the  duty,  but  it  is  not  alone  a  sufficient  maxim.  We 
have  a  weapon  to  wield ;  we  must  occupy  ourselves  in  the  practice  of  what  is  good. 
Not  only  arrest  the  hand  that  is  about  to  strike  an  angry  blow,  but  find  some  service 
for  the  hand  to  render  to  our  opponent.  They  sin  least,  are  least  subject  to  temptation, 
who  are  engrossed  like  the  Saviour  in  "  doing  good."  He  could  move  uncontaminated 
in  the  presence  of  "  publicans  and  sinners."  The  outrush  of  active  benevolence  barred 
the  influx  of  eviL  The  moment  we  try  to  see  if  we  cannot  benefit  a  would-be  foe,  we 
are  conscious  of  a  changed  sentiment  within ;  we  pity  instead  of  hating  and  condemn- 
ing ;  we  lose  our  worse  to  find  our  better  self.  This  is  a  law  to  be  remembered  in  all 
attempts  to  combat  the  forces  of  evil.  "  Resist  the  devil ;  draw  nigh  to  God."  The 
drunkard  may  sign  the  pledge  of  abstinence,  but  he  needs  meetings,  society,  efforts  for 
others,  to  occupy  his  leisure  moments.  Do  not  gaze  at  the  Sirens,  but  make  for  the 
home  whose  pure  pleasures  will  profitably  engage  your  energies.  Let  the  young  man 
have  his  study,  and  his  proper  recreation,  and  thus  by  the  pursmt  of  what  is  elevating 
rise  above  petty  meannesses  and  degrading  amusements. 

III.  The  INSPIBING  Pattern.  Christ  is  our  Exemplar,  "  who,  when  he  was  reviled, 
reviled  not  again."  He  "  committed  his  cause  to  him  that  judgeth  righteously,"  and 
instead  of  heaping  reproaches  on  his  persecutors,  prayed  for  their  forgiveness,  died  for 
their  salvation.  The  spurious  Gospels,  with  their  narrative  of  the  Saviour's  boyhood  as 
k  scene  of  vengeance  wreaked  on  his  youthful  companions  for  their  opposition  and 
insult,  condemn  themselves  as  contradictory  to  the  after-life  of  the  "  meek  and  lowly  " 
One.  He  never  exerted  his  power  to  harm  his  foes.  His  only  miracles  of  judgment 
were  on  the  swine  and  the  barren  fig  tree.  In  Getbsemane  the  band  of  traitors  were 
awed  to  the  ground,  but  not  injured.  He  knew  that  "  to  whomsoever  much  is  forgiven, 
the  same  loveth  much."  Afterwards  "  a  great  company  of  priests  became  obedient  to 
the  faith."  Saul  the  persecutor  was  changed  by  appealing  love  into  Paul  the 
missionary.  The  Lamb  "  led  to  the  slaughter "  unresistingly  has  proved  himself  in 
victorious  submission  the  "Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah."  "Arm  yourselves  likewise 
with  the  same  mind." 

IV.  The  success  of  this  method.  Good  is  stronger  than  evil  because  it  is  on  the 
side  of  God  and  the  angels ;  it  is  backed  by  eternal  laws.  Like  produces  like.  Strife 
leads  to  more  strife ;  war  sows  a  crop  of  dragons'  teeth  that  yield  a  harvest  of  future 
enmities  and  battles.  Germany,  exacting  a  heavy  indemnity  from  France  and  seizing 
two  fair  provinces,  has  laid  herself  under  crushing  armaments  and  ceaseless  fears  of 
coming  reprisals.  The  peace  principles  of  Christ,  wherever  faithfully  adhered  to,  prove 
their  soundness  and  fruitfulness.  The  man  who  resists  not  tames  the  spirit  of  his 
opponent.  Obstinacy  that  defies  the  chilling  blast  is  forced  to  relax  when  the  warmth 
of  Christian  kindness  shines  on  its  outer  crust.  The  coals  of  such  a  fire  do  not  fiercely 
bum,  but  they  melt  the  unjust  into  contrition  and  confession.  The  disuse  of  duelling 
has  contributed  to  courtesy  amongst  men.     We  are  not  fit  to  take  the  law  into  oar 


384  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xn.  1— 2L 

own  hands  and  mete  out  justice,  but  we  cannot  do  wrong  in  cultivating  mercy  and 
generosity.  The  observance  of  what  is  good  works  no  mischief,  whereas  we  may  run 
into  many  an  error  if  we  fight  evil  with  evil  either  in  ourselves  or  others,  and  fancy 
that  the  end  may  justify  the  means. — S.  B.  A. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Individ'uaUtm.  After  the  lengthened  exposition  of  the  Divine  "  mercies  " 
ginm  in  the  preceding  eleven  chapters,  the  apostle  feels  himself  in  a  position  to  apply 
the  truth  and  enforce  Christian  morals.  He  acconUngly  proceeds*to  base  his  exhorta- 
tion upon  the  "  mercies  of  God,"  and  the  first  matter  he  urges  is  becoming  individuality. 
These  brethren  at  Rome  ought  to  dedicate  themselves  as  living  sacriSces  unto  God, 
realizing  how  reasonable  such  a  service  is,  and  exhibiting  due  unworldlineas  of 
character  in  all  things.  Let  us,  then,  with  Paul  as  guide,  consider  the  elements  of 
Christian  individualism  as  here  set  before  us. 

L  Our  bodies  abb  to  be  laid  as  livino  sacrifices  on  God's  altab.  (Ver.  1.) 
If  we  have  been  called  with  a  holy  calling,  if  the  risen  Saviour  has  given  us  the 
needed  helping  hand,  then  we  are  bound  to  realize  our  obligation  to  him  in  dedicating 
our  bodies  as  "living  sacriflces"  tmto  him.  The  reason  why  we  can  dedicate  them  as 
living  sacrifices  is  that  he  has  offered  the  atoning  sacrifice  our  pardon  and  acceptance 
require,  and  we  can  consequently  dedicate  ourselves  living  to  his  glory,  ^ow,  when 
we  look  into  the  order  of  the  Jewish  sacrifices,  we  find  that  the  sin  offering  came  first, 
then  the  burnt  offering,  and  then  the  peace  offering.  The  leading  idea  in  each  was 
atonement,  consecration,  and  fellowship.  The  sin  offering  emphasized  atonement,  the 
burnt  offering  or  holocaust  emphasized  consecration,  and  the  peace  offering  emphasized 
fellowship.  Now,  the  seK-dedication  to  which  the  apostle  here  calls  us  corresponds  in 
the  ritual  to  the  burnt  offering ;  and  just  as  in  this  particular  sacrifice  the  entire 
carcase  was  consumed  in  the  sacred  fire,  so  the  idea  is  that  our  whole  personality,  body, 
soul,  and  spirit,  is  to  be  consecrated  by  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  service  of  our 
Lord  and  Master.  The  idea,  in  short,  is  that  our  bodies  should  be  organs  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  What  a  holy  and  blessed  thought  is  thus  associated  with  the  body  of  the 
believer  I  It  dare  not  be  dedicated  to  any  profane  use.  It  is  a  holy  thin^,  and  is  to 
be  laid  on  God's  altar  and  thus  dedicated  in  its  entirety  to  him.  Miss  Havergal's 
"  Hymn  of  Consecration  "  will  occur  to  every  one,  with  the  dedication  of  "  hands,"  and 
"  feet,"  and  "  voice,"  and  "  lips,"  and,  in  a  word, "  all "  we  are,  to  the  glory  of  our  Lord. 
Dean  Goulburn,  in  his  suggestive  work  on  the  '  Study  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,'  gives  a 
sketch  upon  this  passage,  from  which  the  following  will  be  found  useful :  "  Consider  the 
members  of  the  body  which  must  thus  be  yielded :  (1)  The  eyes.  The  lust  of  the  eye 
must  be  mortified,  and  the  eye  employed  in  reading  God's  Word,  or  surveying  his 
works.  (2).  The  ears.  We  must  be  '  swift  to  hear '  the  voice  of  instruction,  and  must 
turn  away  the  ear  from  temptation  and  from  flattery  (see  Acts  xii.  22,  23).  (3)  The 
hands.  '  Let  him  that  stole  steal  no  more ;  but  rather  let  him  labour,  working  with  hit 
hands  the  thing  which  is  good,  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth '  (Eph. 
iv.  28).  (4)  The  feet.  '  I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me ;  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  came 
unto  me'  (Matt.  xxv.  36).  (5)  The  mouth.  '  Let  no  corrupt  communication  proceed 
out  of  your  mouth,  but  that  which  is  good  to  the  use  of  edifying,  that  it  may  minister 
grace  unto  the  hearers '  (Eph.  iv.  29).  '  Let  your  speech  be  alway  with  grace,  seasoned 
with  salt' (Col. iv.  6)."  1 

II.  We  are  to  ebalize  that  this  entire  dedication  is  only  our  bbasonablb 
SBBViCB.  (Ver.  1.)  It  seems  at  fiist  a  large  demand.  But  it  becomes  reasonable  th» 
moment  we  consider  our  obligation.  If  Jesus  has  dedicated  his  body  in  life  and  in 
death  to  our  interests  and  salvation,  the  dedication  of  our  living  bodies  in  return  to 
him  is  surely  a  reasonable  service.  M.  de  Rougemont  has  brought  out  the  reasonable 
character  of  this  self-dedication  in  his  own  pointed  fashion.  Writing  in  his  '  La  Vie 
Humaine  avec  et  sans  la  Foi'  upon  this  passage,  he  says,  "The  word  body  signifies 
here  the  complete  man  ;  the  victim,  it  is  ourselves,  and  the  sacrifice,  to  which  St.  Paul 
exhorts  us,  is  that  of  our  soul,  of  our  will,  of  our  thought,  of  our  heart,  without  which 
that  of  our  flesh  would  be  impossible.     But  on  hearing  this  term  '  sacrifice,'  the  vicious 

'  See  also  a  fine  sermon  on  "  Self-Dedication,"  by  John  Howe,  Bohn's  edition  in  one 
volume,  p.  412,  etc. ;  and  a  suggestive  sermou  ou  "  The  Sclf-Saoiifice,"  in  Baldwin  Brown's 
'  Divine  Life  in  Man,'  2nd  edit.,  p.  13d, 


OH.  XII.  1—21.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  886 

tal^es  to  flight,  the  honest  man  is  up  in  arms  (rdsiste),  the  semi-Christian  frets.  All 
say  it  is  impossible,  or  at  least  it  is  too  difficult.  And  St.  Paul  contends  that  it  is 
reasonable !  Yes,  reasonable,  ami  iirational,  senseless,  absurd,  to  refuse  God  such  a 
worship  (culte).  In  fact,  to  refuse  it  to  him  is  to  refuse  him  all  worship ;  it  is  to  condemn 
ourselves  to  a  life  of  worldliness  and  irreligion.  Is  it  a  true  religion  which  consists  in 
giving  to  prayer  a  half-hour  a  day,  to  the  Divine  sei'vice  two  or  three  hours  on  Sunday, 
when,  even  during  those  hours,  one  says  to  God,  '  I  give  thee,  indeed,  a  part  of  my 
time;  but  my  heart? — no,  I  keep  that  for  myself'?  If  at  least,  by  guarding  thus  for 
ourselves  our  heart,  we  were  happy !  Let  us  leave  aside  here  the  lusts  and  passions 
which  enslave  and  shame  us.  Let  us  speak  only  of  our  plans  of  happiness,  of  our 
favourite  occupations,  of  our  legitimate  affections.  We  cannot  bring  ourselves  to  lay 
them  on  the  altar,  to  present  them  to  God,  and  minus  these  to  sacrifice  ourselves  to 
him.  But  are  we  then  our  masters?  do  we  di-spose  events  according  to  our  will?  do 
we  hold  in  our  hands  the  threads  of  our  life  and  of  the  life  of  our  relatives  (Ja  vie  des 
n6tres')1  Can  we  do  anything  against  God  ?  If  he  wishes  to  take  away  from  us  the 
objects  of  our  affections,  to  snatch  us  away  from  our  labour  or  our  pleasures,  to  over- 
turn all  our  projects,  who  are  we  to  struggle  against  him  ?  Is  it  not  more  reasonable 
to  offer  ourselves  altogether  unto  him,  like  docile  and  trustful  lambs,  and  to  say  to  him, 
*  Here  we  are ;  make  us  what  thou  pleasest :  thou  canst  take  no  more  from  us,  since  we 
have  given  all  to  thee ;  we  are  besides  without  fear,  because  we  know  by  Jesus  Christ 
how  great  are  thy  mercies '  .*  Can  such  living  and  holy  victims  be  anything  but  acceptable 
to  Ood  f  and  is  not  this  worship  the  only  reasonable  one,  as  it  is  also  the  only  loyal, 
free,  and  joyous  one  ?  "  (pp.  122 — 124). 

III.  Such  a  self-dedication  implies  nonconpormitt  to  the  world  and  trans- 
FiouRATiON  INTO  THE  DiviNE  WILL.  (Vcr.  2.)  The  couduct  of  others  is  not  to  he 
our  standard,  but  the  will  of  God.  Worldliness  consists  essentially  in  this — making  the 
fashion  our  standard  of  life.  Now,  in  this  respect  we  are  not  to  conform  to  the  worldly 
and  prevailing  ideas.  Saurin  has  a  fine  sermon  on  this  verse,  in  which  he  exhorts  his 
hearers  not  to  conform  to  the  multitude  iu/aith,  or  in  worship,  or  in  morals,  or  in  our 
exodus  at  death.^  And  then,  if  we  take  the  Divine  will  as  our  proper  standard,  we  shall 
find  ourselves  "  transfigured"  (fi.eTanop(t>od(r6i)  by  the  renewing  of  our  minds,  so  that 
we  shall  "  test  "(SoKi/itffeii')  and  so  come  to  understand  what  is  that  good  and  acceptable 
and  perfect  will  of  God  (of.  Shedd,  in  loc).  Now,  it  is  in  this  way,  by  surrendering 
ourselves  to  the  Divine  idea  concerning  us,  that  we  shall  realize  that  individuality  and 
influence  among  men  which  is  so  desirable.  In  fact,  we  become  most  original,  in  the 
best  sense  of  that  term,  when  we  do  not  try  to  be  original,  but  simply  to  be  and  do 
what  is  God's  will  concerning  us.  It  was  the  same  with  our  blessed  Master.  He 
professed  to  do  nothing  of  himself,  but  simply  to  mediate  to  men  what  the  Father 
gave  him  (John  v.  19) ;  and  yet  he  has  been  out  of  sight  the  most  original  personality 
which  has  ever  appeared  in  this  world.  So  will  it  be  with  us  in  our  little  spheres  if 
we  will  only  allow  God  to  transfigure  us. 

IV.  Such  abandonment  to  the  Divine  will  sbodres  due  soBurETr  in  oub 
ESTIMATE  OP  OURSELVES.  (Ver.  3.)  The  gospel  delivers  us  from  egotism ;  we  dare 
not  think  highly  of  ourselves ;  we  can  only  think  of  how  we  are  realizing  God's  will 
concerning  us.  And  so,  as  merely  mediating  God's  wiser  vnll,  we  think  soberly  and 
humbly  of  ourselves.  The  apostle  thus  commends  to  the  Romans  and  to  all  men  what 
Leighton  calls  that  "  gracing  grace  of  humility,  the  ornament  and  safety  of  all  other 
graces,  and  what  is  so  peculiarly  Christian."  Our  individualism  will  thus  be  found 
delivered  from  the  egotism  and  self-esteem  of  worldly  men,  and  projected  along  thf 
path  of  meekness  and  lowliness  of  heart  which  the  Master  trod  before  us.  Such  sobei 
self-knowledge  makes  the  Christian  life  a  wondrous  power.  Contrasting  with  the 
self-assertion  and  self-esteem  which  are  so  valuable  in  the  world's  regard,  the  humility 
of  the  Christian  becomes  a  power  and  influence  radically  different  in  kind  from,  but  far 
more  fruitful  in  results  than,  the  noisy  efforts  of  the  world.  May  the  Master  help  us 
all  to  follow  in  his  meek  and  lowly  steps  1 — E.  M.  E. 

Vers.  4r^. — Churchmanship.    Having  seen  what  Christian  individualism  is  meant 
to  be  in  the  preceding  verses,  we  now  enter  upon  the  wider  relation  of  'Viurchmanship. 
> '  SermouB,'  tome  vt  p.  8M,  eta 

BOVAMB.  S  O 


386  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xii.  1—21. 

For  the  apostle  is  not  here  speaking  of  human  nature  in  it8  social  aspocts,  as  we  find 
it  so  powerfully  expounded  for  us  in  Bishop  Butler's  '  Sermons  upon  Human  Nature,' 
hut  in  its  Church  aspect,  the  relation  of  the  individual  to  the  one  body  which  has  its 
organic  existence  "  in  Christ."  The  apostle  would  have  us  to  believe  that  we  ars 
united  as  clesely  to  our  fellow-believers  as  the  members  of  one  body  are  to  one  another. 
Im  fact,  we  are  members  one  of  another.  A  selfish  individualism  is  out  of  the  question  ; 
we  are  bound  to  the  body  of  believers  by  vital  and  eternal  ties.  Hence  we  are  to 
consider  in  this  section  the  constitution  of  the  body  of  Christ,  that  is  the  Church. 
And— 

L  Believers  abb  to  beqabd  themselves  ab  ORaANiOALLT  united,  and  are 
CONSEQUENTLY  TO  00-oPEEATE  FOR  THE  COMMON  END.  (Vers.  4,  5.)  We  are  not  meant 
to  be  isolated  units,  but  members  in  sympathy.  We  are  "joint-heirs"  with  Jesus 
Christ ;  we  are  consequently  partnert  with  one  another  in  the  great  Christian  enterprise. 
Co-operation,  rather  than  competition,  should  be  the  guiding  star  of  Christian  people. 
We  are  distinctly  made  for  the  Christian  Church,  and  it  is  our  duty  to  promote  the 
happiness  and  welfare  of  all  our  fellow-believers.  Organic  connection  implies  co-opera- 
tion and  sympathy  of  the  sincerest  character. 

IL  As  MEMBERS  ONE  OF  ANOTHER,  BELIEVERS  WILL  FIND  THEMSELVES  DIBTRIBDTED 
IN  A  VARIETY  OF  POSITIONS,  JUST  AS  THE  MEMBERS  OF  THE  BODY.     (Vers.  6 — 8.)      While    • 

believers  are  members  one  of  another,  we  are  not  reduced  to  a  dead  level  of  uniformity. 
Edification  is  doubtless  to  be  in  the  body  as  every  joint  supplieth  it,  but  the  joints  are 
not  all  alike;  if  they  were,  it  would  be  a  curious  medley — a  conglomeration  of  mere  atoms, 
which  we  should  have  in  place  of  a  body.  In  the  body  there  is  subordination  of  member 
to  member,  and  part  to  part.  The  foot  is  not  to  usurp  the  place  of  the  head,  nor  the 
hand  that  of  the  eye,  else  will  the  body  be  turned  upside  down,  and  become  a  monstro- 
sity instead  of  a  thing  and  form  of  beauty.  Consequently,  we  find  that  in  the  apostolic 
Church  there  were  a  variety  of  offices,  and  the  apostle  here  specifies  the  spirit  in  which 
they  should  be  filled  and  their  duties  discharged.  Let  us  briefiy  notice  the  oflSces  as 
here  described.  1.  Prophecy.  The  apostle  puts  this  in  the  very  forefront.  Parallel 
passages  go  to  prove  that  it  was  most  highly  esteemed  in  the  apostolic  Church.  Thus 
it  is  placed  immediately  after  the  working  of  miracles  (1  Cor.  xii.  10).  In  another  place 
it  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  gift  of  prophecy,"  and  is  associated  with  the  "  understanding  of 
aH  mysteries,  and  of  all  knowledge  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  2).  It  is  further  represented  as  the 
necessary  adjunct  to  speaking  with  tongues  (1  Cor.  xiv.  6,  22).  And  it  was  evidently 
regarded  as  the  prime  requisite  in  the  edification  of  the  public  congregation ;  for  St. 
Paul  declares,  "  If  all  prophesy,  and  there  come  in  one  that  believeth  not,  or  one 
unlearned,  he  is  convinced  of  all,  he  is  judged  of  all :  and  thus  are  the  secrets  of  his 
heart  made  manifest ;  and  so  falling  down  on  his  face  he  will  worship  God,  and  report 
that  God  is  in  you  of  a  truth "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  24,  25).  Now,  the  more  this  matter  is 
looked  into,  the  more  clearly  are  we  landed  in  the  conclusion  that  we  have  the  pro- 
phetical office  continued  in  Christ's  Church  in  the  ministry  of  the  Word.  Every 
minister  who  is  called  by  Christ  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  endowed  by  him 
for  the  work,  is  a  prophet  of  the  Highest  just  as  really  as  Elijah  or  John  the  Baptist. 
If,  then,  to  any  of  us  this  grace  of  prophecy  has  been  committed,  we  must  exercise  it 
"  according  to  the  proportion  of  faith  "  (wa\07fai'  t^i  irfo-Teai).  That  is,  "  the  prophet 
must  be  true  and  sincere,  communicating  only  what  God  has  given  him."  Moreover, 
and  chiefly,  must  he  show  no  disposition  to  exaggerations  in  the  exposition  of  religion, 
but  must  give  to  each  subject  its  due  place  and  proportion.*  Hence  Dr.  Shedd,  in  his 
'  Commentary '  upon  the  passage,  declares,  "  This  injunction  of  St.  Paul  is  the  key  to 
systematic  theology.  No  alleged  Christian  tenet  can  be  correct  which  conflicts  with 
other  Christian  tenets.  All  Christian  truth  must  be  consistent  with  Christianity.  For 
example,  the  Deity  of  Christ  supposes  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity;  monergistic  regene- 
ration involves  the  doctrine  of  election ;  and  an  infinite  atonement  for  sin,  by  God 
incarnate,  logically  implies  an  infinite  penalty  for  sin."  2.  The  diaconate.  For  it  is 
evidently  to  this  particular  ministry  {Smicoylaii)  the  apostle  is  here  referring.  To  the 
apostolic  Church  this  set  of  ofBcers  was  given  to  attend  to  the  temporalities  of  the 
Church,  especially  the  care  of  the  poor,  the  sick,  and  such  like.    The  idea,  then,  is  that 

'  Ct  Qonlbum's  '  Thoughts  on  Personal  Beligion,'  part  It.  oh.  vil.,  "  Of  the  Mischiel 
and  Danger  of  Exaggerations  in  Beligion." 


OH.  XII.  1—21.]    THE  BPISTLB  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  S87 

thorongliness  should  characterize  tho  diaoonate  just  as  well  as  the  prophetical  oflSce. 
3.  Teaching.  Now,  the  office  of  teacher  is  distinguished  from  that  of  prophet  in  such 
passages  as  1  Cor.  xii.  28 ;  Bph.  iv.  11.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  prophetical 
oSioe  implies  inspiration,  while  the  teacher's  only  the  common  knowledge  of  a  devout 
and  disciplined  Christian  mind  (Shedd,  in  he.).  There  is  evidently  need  of  a  teaching 
order  in  the  Church  as  well  as  of  a  preaching  or  prophetical  order.  If  any  is  called  to 
teach,  let  him  be  thorough  in  his  teaching.  4.  Exhortation.  This  is  a  gift  which  can 
be  exercised  by  men  who  do  not  aspire  to  either  the  prophetical  or  the  teaching  office. 
It  deals  with  the  heart  and  will.  "Evangelists"  are  for  the  most  part  of  this  character; 
they  go  about  to  stir  up  the  souls  of  men  to  decision  and  activity,  while  their  teaching 
is  of  necessity  of  a  very  limited  description.  5.  Giving.  This  applies  to  the  distribu- 
tion by  the  deacon  of  the  Church's  charity,  and  it  may  also  apply  to  the  private  benefi- 
cence of  the  Church-member.  In  either  case  simplicity  of  motive  and  of  aim  is  to 
characterize  the  giver.  Charity  should  be  exercised  without  parade  and  without  any 
ulterior  or  selfish  end.  6.  Billing.  This  undoubtedly  refers  to  the  function  exercised 
by  the  officers  of  the  Church,  and  it  implies  that  nothing  but  diligence  can  succeed. 
Zeal  (o-irowS^)  for  the  Church's  purity  and  honour,  and  for  the  glory  of  the  Church's 
Head,  should  characterize  all  who  have  authority  in  the  Church.  7.  Showing  mercy. 
This  applies  to  the  attention  the  deacons  and  private  Christians  show  to  the  sick  and 
the  Buffering.  Well,  it  is  to  be  exercised  "  with  hilarity  "  (iKapSrriTi).  What  a  differ- 
ence it  often  makes  when  we  set  cheerfully  about  our  merciful  ministrations,  entering 
with  alacrity  into  them,  and  not  doing  them  "  against  the  grain" !  Our  "  pity,"  as  it 
has  been  very  properly  said,  "  should  be  impulsive,  and  not  an  effort ;  an  inclination, 
and  not  a  volition  "  (so  Shedd,  in  loc).  Now,  if  Churchmanship  were  entered  into  in 
this  noble  and  sympathetic  spirit,  what  a  different  tale  would  our  different  Churches 
have  to  tell  I  It  would  be  a  tale  of  tender  and  gracious  ministration,  a  tale  of  real 
because  spiritual  success !     May  the  merciful  Master  grant  it  1 — R.  M.  E. 

Vers.  9 — 21. — Ohristian  socialism.  From  Ohurchmanship,  which  was  discussed  by 
the  apostle  in  the  preceding  verses,  we  now  pass  to  the  Christian  in  society ;  and  our 
endeavour  will  be  to  appreciate  the  Christian  socialism  which  Paul  here  inculcates. 
The  great  error  of  the  Ohristless  socialism  which  prevails,  alas !  in  many  lands,  is  that 
it  tries  to  do  from  without  and  by  mere  material  manipulation  what  can  only  come 
from  within  through  the  Christian  spirit.  Into  the  various  forms  which  socialism  has 
assumed  it  would  be  improper  here  to  enter ;  but  any  who  wish  to  get  some  idea  of 
the  subject  will  do  well  to  get  the  late  Dr.  Roswell  D.  Hitchcock's  powerful  and  com- 
pendious treatise  on  '  Socialism,'  where,  after  treating  of  "  Socialism  in  General,"  "  Com- 
munistic Socialism,"  and  "Anti-Communistic  Socialism,"  he  reaches  his  climax  in 
expounding  the  meaning  of  "Christian  Socialism." '  Our  duty  just  now  is  to  appre- 
ciate the  spirit  of  love  which  Christianity  infuses  into  society,  thereby  securing  all  that 
socialism  could  possibly  reach  by  its  coarse  materialistic  methods,  and  infinitely  more. 

I.  Consider  the  charactbb  of  love.  (Vers.  9,  10.)  For  this  is  the  one  thing 
needful  (1  Cor.  xiii.).  Well,  the  apostle  tells  us  it  is  not  to  be  hypocritical  (avmiKpiros)} 
not  to  be  a  profession,  but  the  reality  of  love.  It  is  from  this  loving  spirit  that  Chris- 
tianity proceeds  to  the  regeneration  of  society.  If,  then,  we  start  with  a  genuine  spirit 
of  love,  we  shall  not  be  found  rejoicing  at  evil,  but  always  abhorring  it ;  while  to  good 
at  all  costs  we  shall  ever  cleave.  Thus  "  pure  Christian  love  manifests  itself  in  two 
phases — the  ethical  recoil  from  moral  evil,  and  the  cleaving  to  moral  good.  The  former, 
full  as  much  as  the  latter,  evinces  the  sincerity  of  the  affection.  Indifference  towards 
sin,  and  especially  an  indulgent  temper  towards  it,  proves  that  there  is  no  real  love  of 
holiness.  The  true  measurement  of  a  man's  love  of  God  is  the  intensity  with  which  ho 
hates  evil  (cf.  Ps.  xcvii.  10).  The  ethics  produced  by  the  sentimental  idea  of  God  and 
of  moral  evil,  is  'easy  virtue'"  (so  Shedd,  in  loc).  Such  love,  then,  will  bloom  into 
the  intense  "  brotherly  love  "  ((i>i\aSe?i.(pl(f),  which  is  the  great  evidence  of  the  Christian 
spirit  (John  xiii.  35).  And  when  brotherly  love  is  entertained,  instead  of  a  selfish  race 
for  honours,  there  will  be  a  pushing  of  worthy  brethren  forwards — a  contest  not /or 
the  first  rank,  but  for  worthier  men  than  we  are  to  put  therein.    How  striking  a  Chris- 

>  <  Bocialism,'  published  by  Bandolph  and  Co.  of  New  York.  See  also  Eaufmann's 
'  Socialism,'  and  Peek's  '  Social  Wrecka^^e.' 


888  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xii.  1— 21. 


tian  spirit  becomes  in  presence  of  the  severe  competition  going  on  around  it,  ■when  it  is 
seen  exerting  itself  to  honour  others  rather  than  to  honour  itself!  It  is  this  self- 
effacement  which  the  world  cannot  understand. 

II.  Life  in  earnest.  (Vers.  11 — 13.)  Now,  when  a  Christian  declines  honour,  and 
seeks  to  put  the  better  man  thereinto,  it  is  not  that  he  may  shirk  work.  For,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  hard  work  and  honour  are  not  inseparably  associated  in  this  world. 
Hence  tfie  Christian  can  show  his  "zeal  for  the  Lord"  while  setting  no  store  by  honour 
for  it.  The  next  element,  therefore,  in  the  Christian  life  and  spirit  is  earnestness.  As 
Luther  puts  it,  "  In  regard  to  zeal,  be  not  lazy."  The  Christian  will  show  a  zealous 
spirit  in  all  legitimate  lines  of  effort.*  His  life  will  be  intense.  And  to  maintain  it  in 
intensity,  it  will  require  to  be  "  fervent  in  spirit,"  and  in  all  "  serving  the  Lord."  The 
serving  of  the  opportunity,  as  in  some  ancient  manuscripts,  is  not  so  likely,  nor  so 
emphatic,  as  "  serving  the  Lord ;"  for  the  Christian  is  one  who  has  learned  to  serve  God 
in  everything — to  "do  everything  as  unto  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men,  knowing  that  of 
the  Lord  he  shall  receive  the  reward  of  the  inheritance  as  he  serves  the  Lord  Christ " 
(Col.  iii.  23,  24).  Moreover,  with  this  fervent,  faithful  spirit  there  will  come  a  buoy- 
ancy and  hopefulness  which  is  most  important  in  all  Christian  work ;  a  patience  too  in 
tribulation ;  a  prayerfulness  at  all  times ;  a  liberality  towards  the  saints ;  a  hospitality 
towards  all  men.  The  Christian  keeps  "open  house"  because  he  is  open-hearted. 
Now,  if  such  an  earnestness  were  infused  into  all  Christian  living,  society  would  soon  be 
regenerated. 

in.  Life  magnanimous  and  sympathetic.  (Vers.  14 — 16.)  Jesus  set  the  great 
example  of  magnanimity.  He  blessed  his  persecutors ;  he  prayed  for  his  murderers ; 
he  converted  some  of  them  at  Pentecost.  Hence,  if  we  would  carry  out  his  spirit,  we 
must  bless  them  that  persecute  us ;  we  must  meet  the  weak  spirit  which  descends  to 
intolerance  and  persecution  with  the  one  weapon  of  blessing.  The  Christian  martyrs  have 
crushed  the  opposition  to  the  gospel  by  blessing  their  persecutors.  But  we  must  show 
sympathy  as  well  as  magnanimity,  prepared  to  congratulate  those  in  joy,  to  weep  along 
with  those  in  tears.  Sympathy  adds  largely  to  the  experience  and  benefit  of  life.'  And 
this  sympathy  is  to  be  genuine  all  round;  we  are  to  be  "of  the  same  mind  one  towards 
another."  We  are  not  to  be  selecting  for  our  sympathy  those  in  good  positions,  but  we 
are  to  "  condescend  to  men  of  low  estate."  This  is,  indeed,  the  luxury  of  the  Christian 
spirit  to  be  able  to  take  men  up  in  a  low  condition,  and  treat  them  as  God  has  treated  us. 
We  are  also  to  avoid  being  "  wise  in  our  own  conceits."  In  this  way  the  Christian  will 
exhibit  large-heartedness ;  there  will  be  nothing  small  or  petty  about  his  movements ; 
he  will  be  the  noble  brother-man  in  his  little  sphere  that  Christ,  has  been  and  is  in 
the  wide  sphere  of  the  Church. 

IV.  Life  lovingly  aggressive.  (Vers.  17 — 21.)  We  pass,  lastly,  to  love  encounter- 
ing opposition,  yet  triumphing  over  it.  And  first  we  are  not  to  take  the  law  into  our 
own  hand  and  recompense  evil  for  evil.  Now,  the  world  cannot  well  understand  this 
Christian  spirit.  It  can  appreciate  better  "  the  blow  for  blow ''  which  characterized 
the  early  ages.  "  Thomas  Paine,  in  reference  to  our  Lord's  injunction  to  turn  the  other 
cheek  to  the  smiter,  charges  Christianity  with  the  '  spirit  of  a  spaniel,'  asserting  that 
it  destroys  proper  self-respect,  and  renders  man  indifferent  to  insult  and  affront "  (see 
Shedd,  in  loc).  But  when  the  Christian  is  charged  to  "  provide  things  honest  in  the 
sight  of  all  men,"  the  meaning  being  "things  honourable " (Revised  Version),  then  it 
couples  with  forbearance  true  Christian  dignity.*  In  strict  accordance  with  this  Chris- 
tian dignity  is  to  be  our  living  peaceablj'  with  all  men,  if  possible.  It  may  be  necessary 
by  Christian  testimony  sometimes  to  provoke  and  exasperate  worldlings ;  but,  at  the 
same  time,  pugnacity  will  be  seen  not  to  belong  to  the  Christian  spirit.  And  as  for 
vengeance,  let  us  leave  all  that  with  God.  He  will  do  justly  at  last.  Meanwhile  it 
is  our  prerogative  to  feed  and  give  drink  to  an  enemy;  and  by  every  means  in  our 
power  to  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head.  The  only  vengeance  allowed  in  the  code  of 
love  is  to  kill  our  enemy  with  kindness.     As  the  king  was  directed  by  Elisha  to  feed 

'  See  Dr.  James  Hamilton's  '  Life  in  Earnest,'  Works,  voL  i.  pp.  1 — 98  ;  also  Bariow'l 
'  Sermons,'  voL  i.  p.  479,  etc. 

»  See  Butler's  sermons  on  '  Compassion,'  based  on  ver.  15. 

•  See  Mozley'a  remarlable  sermon,  "  Our  Duty  to  Equals,"  in  his  '  University  Sermons,' 
2Bd  edit.,  p.  183,  etc 


OH.  xm.  1—14.]    THE  EPISTLE   OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  888 

the  Syrian  soldiers  and  send  them  home  in  peace,  and  as  they  came  not  in  that  genera- 
tion into  Palestine  again,  so  we  are  to  avenge  ourselves  by  kindness.'  The  apostle 
leaves  us  here  in  the  last  verse  with  the  great  principle  in  the  aggressive  Christian  life. 
Evil  can  only  be  overcome  by  good.  We  are  not  to  be  exasperated  by  the  enemy ; 
we  are  to  turn  the  tables  on  him  by  l«ve.  And  has  not  this  been  God's  own  plan  ? 
Is  not  his  government  and  administration  to  overcome  evil  by  good  ?  Even  "  everlast- 
ing punishment "  will  be  covered  by  the  principle  of  good.  May  we  entertain  and 
practise  the  Christian  spirit  in  all  our  intercourse  with  men  I — R.  M.  B. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Xm. 


Vers.  1 — 8. — From  admonitiouB  to  keep 
peace,  if  possible,  with  all  men,  whether  or 
not  wit*iiu  the  Christian  circle,  and  to  act 
honourably  and  benevolently  towards  all, 
the  apostle  now  passes  to  the  duty  of 
Christians  towards  the  civil  government  and 
the  laws  of  (he  country  in  which  they  lived. 
It  is  well  known  that  the  Jews  were  im- 
patient of  the  Roman  dominion,  and  that 
some  held  it  to  be  unlawful,  on  religious 
grounds,  to  pay  tribute  to  Csasar  (Matt, 
xxii.  1 7).  Insurrections  against  the  govern- 
ment had  consequently  been  frequent.  There 
had  been  the  notable  one  under  Judas  the 
Gaulonite  of  Gamala  (called  &  VaKiXaios, 
Acts  V.  37),  who  left  followers  behind  him, 
called  Gaulonites,  and  to  whose  tenets 
Josephus  attributes  all  subsequent  insurrec- 
tions of  the  Jews  ('Ant.,'  xviii.  1.  §  1). 
Recently  one  had  broken  out  in  Rome, 
which  had  caused  Claudius  to  order  the 
expulsion  of  all  Jews  from  the  city  (Acts 
xvii.  2 ;  of.  Suetonius,  '  Claud.,'  25 ;  Dio 
Cassius,  Ix.  6).  The  Christians,  being  re- 
garded as  a  Jewish  sect,  and  known  for 
their  acknowledgment  of  a  Messiah  and 
their  refusal  to  comply  with  heathen  usages, 
were  not  unnaturally  confounded  with  such 
disturbers  of  the  peace  (of.  Acts  xvii.  6,  7; 
xxi.  37).  It  was,  therefore,  peculiarly  need- 
ful that  the  Christian  communities  should 
be  cautioned  to  disprove  such  accusations 
by  showing  themselves  in  all  respects  good 
law-abiding  subjects.  They  might  easily  be 
under  a  temptation  to  be  otherwise.  Feel- 
ing themselves  already  subjects  of  Clirist's 
new  kingdom,  and  regarding  the  second 
advent  as  probably  near  at  hand,  they  might 


seem  to  themselves  above  the  powen  and 
institutions  of  the  unbelieving  world,  wh  ioh 
were  so  soon  to  pass  away.  St.  Paul  him- 
self condemned  resort  to  heathen  tribunals 
in  matters  which  Christians  might  settle 
among  themselves  (1  Cor.  vi.  1,  etc.);  and 
many  might  go  so  far  as  to  ignore  the 
authority  of  such  tribunals  over  the  saints 
at  all.  Peter  and  John  had  at  the  first 
defied  the  authority  even  of  the  Sanhedriii 
in  matters  touching  conscience  (Acts  iv. 
19) ;  and  many  might  be  slow  to  distinguish 
between  temporal  and  spiritual  spheres  of 
jurisdiction.  St.  Paul,  therefore,  lays  down 
the  rule  that  the  civil  government,  in  what- 
soever hands  it  might  be,  was,  no  less  than 
the  Church,  a  Divine  institution  for  the 
maintenance  of  order  in  the  world,  to  be 
submitted  to  and  obeyed  by  Christiaus 
within  the  whole  sphere  of  its  legitimate 
authority.  He  does  not  refer  to  cases  in 
which  it  might  become  necessary  to  obey 
God  rather  than  man:  his  purpose  here 
does  not  call  on  him  to  do  so;  nor  were 
the  circumstances  so  far  such  as  to  bring 
such  cases  into  prominence;  for  he  was 
writing  in  the  earlier  part  of  Nero's  reign, 
before  any  general  persecution  of  Christians 
had  begun.  Nor  does  be  touch  on  the 
question  whether  it  may  be  riglit  in  some 
cases  for  subjects  to  resist  usurped  power  or 
tyranny,  or  to  take  part  in  political  revolu- 
tions, and  even  fight  for  freedom.  Such  a 
question  was  apart  from  his  subject,  which 
is  the  general  duty  of  obedience  to  the  law 
and  government  under  which  we  are  placed 
by  Providence.  This  is  the  only  passage 
in  which  he  treats  the  subject  at  length 
and  definitely.  In  a  doctrinal  and  practical 
treatise  like  this  Epistle,  addressed  aa  an 


'  On  this  "  Christians'  Conflict  with  Life,"  see  Rothe's  '  Sermons  for  the  Christian  Year,' 
p.  137 ;  also  Beck's  '  Christliche  Reden,'  ii.  s.  326 ;  Caspari's  '  Von  Jenseit  des  Grabes,'  L  a. 
114  ;  Hofaoker'a  '  Predigten,'  g.  783  ;  and  Bariow's  '  Sia'mons,'  vol.  L  pp.  258,  553,  etc 


390 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [cw.  xin.  1—14 


apologia  pro  fide  suS  to  the  metropolis  of 
the  world  and  the  seat  of  government,  it 
was  fitting  that  he  should  express  clearly 
the  attitude  of  the  Church  with  regard  to 
the  civil  order.  But  his  teaching  in  other 
Epistles  is  in  accordance  with  this ;  as  where 
(1  Cor.  vii.  21)  he  bids  slaves  acquiesce  in 
the  existing  law  of  slavery,  and  (1  Tim.  ii. 
1,  etc.)  he  desires  especially  prayers  to  be 
made  in  behalf  of  kings  and  rulers.  And 
he  himself  notably  carried  out  his  Jvinciples 
in  this  regard  (of.  Acts  xxiii.  5 ;  xxv.  8 — 
11).  There  is  a  closely  similar  passage 
in  the  First  Epistle  of  St.  Peter  (1  Pet.  ii. 
12—18). 

Ver.  1. — let  every  soul  be  subject  unto 
the  higher  powers.  For  there  is  no  power 
but  of  (rather,  from)  God ;  the  powers  that 
be  are  ordained  of  God.  It  is  of  God's 
ordering  that  there  should  be  human  govern- 
ments and  human  laws.  Without  them  there 
could  be  no  order,  security,  or  progress 
among  mankind.  Imperfect  as  they  may 
often  be,  and  in  some  instances  oppressive 
and  unjust,  still  they  exist  for  a  purpose  of 
good,  and  form  part  of  the  Divine  order  for 
the  government  of  the  world.  In  this  sense 
all  are  from  Qod, and  ordained  of  God;  and 
in  submitting  to  them  we  are  submitting  to 
God. 

Vers.  2 — 5. — Whosoever  therefore  resisteth 
the  power,  withstandeth  the  ordinance  of 
God :  and  they  which  withstand  shall  receive 
to  themselves  condemnation  (i.e.  really  God's, 
operating  through  the  human  "  power ; " 
not  meaning  damnation  in  tlie  common 
sense  of  the  word).  For  rulers  are  not  a 
terror  to  good  works,  but  to  the  evil.  Wilt 
thou  then  not  be  afraid  of  the  power?  do 
that  which  is  good,  and  thou  shalt  have 
praise  of  the  same.  It  is  the  theory  of  the 
laws  of  all  civilized  governments  to  uphold 
justice,  and  only  to  punish  what  is  wrong ; 
and  in  the  main  they  do  so.  The  principles 
of  the  Roman  law  were  just,  and  Paul  him- 
self found  protection  from  its  ofScers  and 
tribunals,  whose  fairness  he  had,  and  had 
reason  to  have,  more  confidence  in  than  in 
the  tender  mercy  of  eitlier  Gentile  or  Jewish 
zealots  (of.  Acts  xix.  35,  <eg. ;  xxi.  31,  leq. ; 
xxii.  30 ;  xxiv.  10 ;  xxv.  10, 11 ;  xxvi.  30,  seq.). 
As  has  been  observed  already,  the  Neronian 
persecutions  had  not  yet  begun.  For  he  is 
the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good.  But 
if  thou  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  afraid ;  for 
he  beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain  (though 
"  the  sword  "  might  possibly  be  understood 
as  only  the  familiar  symbol  of  power,  yet 
the  mention  of  it  may  be  taken  to  imply 
the  apostle's  recognition  of  the  legitimacy 


of  capital  punishment,  anoh  as  he  also  ex- 
pressed distinctly,  Acts  xxv,  11) :  for  he  is 
the  minister  of  God,  an  avenger  to  execute 
wrath  upon  him  that  doeth  evil.  Wrath 
here  expresses  the  familiar  idea  of  the 
Divine  wrath  against  evil-doing,  for  the 
execution  of  which,  in  the  sphere  of  human 
law,  the  magistrate  is  the  appointed  instru- 
ment (see  note  on  ch.  xii.  19).  Wherefore  ye 
must  needs  be  subject,  not  only  for  wrath, 
but  also  for  conscience'  sake,  Not  only  for 
fear  of  penal  consequences,  but  because  it 
is  your  duty,  whatever  might  ensue,  to 
submit  to  the  ordinance  of  God.  Similarly, 
in  1  Pet.  ii.  13,  submission  to  every  ordi- 
nance of  man  is  enjoined  "for  the  Lord's 
sake  (5m  rhv  Kiptony 

Ver.  6.— For  for  this  cause  ye  pay  (so, 
rather  than,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version, 
pay  ye.  The  ycip  suggests  this  interpreta- 
tion. So  in  the  Vulgate,  Idea  enim  et  tributa 
preestatis.  The  Christians,  we  may  suppose, 
did  pay  all  legal  dues  and  taxes;  it  was  a 
recognized  principle  that  they  were  bound 
to  do  so ;  perhaps  because  of  Christ  himself 
having  settled  the  question  in  his  dictum 
about  the  tribute-money  (Matt.  xxii.  21). 
And  what  the  apostle  means  may  be  that 
the  same  principle  on  whioli  they  paid 
their  taxes  extended  to  aU  legal  require- 
ments) tribute  also :  for  they  (t.e.  the  officers 
who  exact  tribute)  are  God's  ministers  (not, 
as  in  ver.  4,  SiaK6voi,  but  \eiT0up70l.  This 
word,  with  its  correlatives,  is  used  in  the 
New  Testament  especially  with  reference  to 
the  ceremonial  services  of  the  temple,  and 
to  their  counterpart  in  Christian  devotion ; 
but  not  exclusively  so  (see  ch.  xv.  27 ;  PhiL 
ii.  25).  Ill  classical  Greek  it  denotes  pecu- 
liarly persons  perfonning  public  duties,  or 
works  of  public  use.  This  well-known  use 
of  the  word  may  have  suggested  it  here,  the 
apostle  meaning  to  say  that  such  as  in  any 
such  way  served  the  state  were  in  fact 
serving  God),  attending  continually  upon 
this  very  thing ;  i.e.  on  AeiToupyfo  for  God. 

Ver.  7. — Render  to  all  their  dues ;  tribute 
to  whom  tribute  is  due;  custom  to  whom 
custom;  fear  to  whom  fear;  honour  to 
whom  honour.  Whatever,  either  by  law 
or  by  the  constituted  order  of  society,  may 
be  due  to  any,  in  the  way  of  deference  and 
honour,  as  well  as  payments.  Christians,  as 
members  of  society,  are  Ijound  to  render. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — From  specific  admonitions 
on  this  subject,  the  apostle  passes  naturally 
to  the  principle  which,  in  these  regards  as 
well  as  others,  should  inspire  all  our  dealings 
with  our  fellow-men.  Owe  no  man  any- 
thing, but  to  love  one  another :  for  he  that 
loveth  another  (literally,  the  other,  meaning 
the  same  as  hi»  neighlMur)  hath  fulfilled 
law.  U6110V  here  in  anarthrous,  denoting 
law  in  general,  not  the  Mosiic  Law  in  par- 


cm.  xm.  1—14,]    THE  E?ISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE    BOMATv^S. 


391 


ticalar,  though  the  instances  of  tranBgression 
that  follow  are  from  the  Decalogue.  The 
idea  of  the  passage  is  but  a  carrying  out 
of  OUT  Lord's  saying.  Matt.  xxii.  39,  40. 
We  find  it  also  in  Gal.  v.  14  more  shortly 
expressed.  Toi  this,  Thou  shalt  not  oom- 
mit  adultery,  Thou  shalt  not  kill,  Then 
Shalt  not  steal,  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false 
witness,  Thou  shalt  not  oovet ;  and  if  there 
be  any  other  oommandment,  it  is  briefly 
comprehended  (nr,  mmmed  up)  in  this  saying, 
namely,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as 
thyself,  Love  worketh  no  ill  to  Us  neigh- 
bour: therefore  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  law. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — There  is  now  interposed 
among  the  particular  admonitions  a  call  to 
watchfulness,  with  a  view  to  holiness  in  all 
relations  of  life,  oo  the  ground  that  the  day 
is  at  hand.  There  can  be  little,  if  any, 
doubt  that  the  apostle  had  in  view  the 
second  coming  of  Christ,  which  he  with 
others  supposed  might  be  close  at  hand. 
Our  Lord  had  said  that  of  that  day  none 
knew  but  the  Father  (Matt.  xxiv.  36 ;  Mark 
xiii.  32;  cf.  Acts  i.  7),  and  that  it  would 
come  unexpectedly  (Matt.  xxiv.  27,  37 — 44 ; 
Mark  xiii.  36).  Further,  in  the  same 
addresses  to  the  disciples  before  his  death 
in  which  these  things  were  said,  he  seems 
to  have  disclosed  a  vista  of  the  future, 
after  the  mauner  of  the  ancient  prophets, 
in  which  more  immediate  and  more  distant 
fulfilments  of  the  prophetic  vision  were  not 
clearly  distinguished ;  so  that  words  which 
we  now  perceive  to  have  pointed  to  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  which  was  typical 
of  the  final  judgments,  might  easily  have 
been  understood  as  referring  to  the  latter. 
Such  are,  "This  generation  shall  not  pass 
till  all  these  things  be  fulfilled"  (Matt, 
xxiv.  34 ;  Mark  xiii.  30  ;  cf.  also  John  xxi. 
22,  23).  Hence  it  was  natural  that  the 
apostolic  Church  should  regard  the  second 
iKlvent  as  probably  imminent.  We  find  in 
the  apostolic  Epistles  several  intimations  of 
this  expectation  (of.  1  Thess.  iv.  13,  »eq. ; 
2  Cor.  V.  2—5;  Phil.  iv.  5;  Heb.  x.  25; 
1  Pet.  iv.  7;  1  John  li.  18,  28;  Eev.  xxii. 
20) ;  and  though  it  was  not  realized  in  the 
event,  the  authority  of  the  apostles  as 
inspired  teachers  is  not  thus  disparaged, 
this  being  the  very  thing  which  Christ  had 
said  must  remain  unknown  to  all.  Nor 
does  their  teaching,  enforced  by  this  ex- 
pectation, lose  its  force  to  us;  for,  though 


"  the  Lord  delayeth  his  coming,"  and  may 
still  delay  it,  yet  to  each  of  us  at  least  this 
present  world  is  fast  passing  away,  and  the 
Lord  may  be  close  at  hand  to  call  us  out 
of  it.  The  duty  of  watolifulnesa  and  pre- 
paredness remains  unohanged.  The  Par- 
ousia,  or,  aa  it  ia  called  in  the  pastoral 
Epistles,  the  Epiphany  (in  2  Theas.  ii.  8, 
ivKpavela  T^y  trapouffias)  of  Christ  is  here,  as 
elsewhere,  presented  under  the  figure  of  the 
day  appearing  (cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  13;  Bph.  v. 
14 ;  1  Thess.  v.  4 ;  Heb.  x.  25 ;  2  Pet.  i.  19), 
the  previous  ages  of  the  world  being  re- 
garded as  the  time  of  night.  The  figure 
is  found  in  the  prophets  with  reference  to 
that  day — the  coming  day  of  the  Lord  (cf. 
«.gf.  Isa.  ix.  2 ;  Ix.  1—3 ;  Mai.  iv.  2).  But 
though  the  day  has  not  yet  come,  Christians 
are  viewed  as  already  in  the  radiance  of  it* 
dawn,  in  which  they  can  walk  as  children 
of  the  day,  and  be  on  the  watch,  and  not 
be  surprised  asleep,  or  doing  the  deeds  of 
darkness,  when  the  full  daylight  bnrgts 
upon  them.  For  in  the  first  advent  of 
Christ  the  day  dawned,  though,  to  those 
who  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  but 
aa  a  light  that  shineth  in  darkness,  and  the 
darkness  comprehended  it  not  (John  i.  5, 
leg.;  iii.  19,  seq.  ;  cf.  2  Pet.  i.  19;  1  John 
ii.  8 ;  and  also  Luke  i.  78,  seq. ;  ii.  32). 

Vers.  11, 12. — And  that  (for  a  similar  use 
of  «ol  TouTo,  or  Kal  ToDra,  cf.  1  Cor.  vi,  8 ; 
Bph.  ii.  8;  Phil.  i.  28;  Hub.  x.  25;  xi. 
12),  knowing  that  it  is  high  time  for  you 
to  awake  out  of  sleep  (more  literally,  that 
it  is  the  hour  for  you  to  he  already  roused  out 
of  sleep');  for  now  is  our  salvation  nearer 
(or,  now  is  salvation  nearer  to  us.  The 
salvation  here  meant  is  "  the  restitution  of 
all  things"  (Acta  iii.  21),  the  "manifesta- 
tion of  the  sons  of  God"  (oh.  viii.  19),  "the 
regeneration"  (Matt.  xix.  28),  the  "gather- 
ing together  in  one  of  all  things  in  Christ" 
(Eph.  i.  10),  which  is  yet  to  come)  than 
when  we  believed  (i.e.  than  when  we  first 
became  believers;  cf.  Acts  xix.  2;  1  Cor. 
iii.  5;  xv.  2;  Gal.  ii.  16.  Time  ha«  been 
gradually  advancing  since  then,  bringing 
the  consummation  we  look  for  ever  nearer). 
The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand : 
let  us  therefore  put  off  the  works  of 
darkness,  and  let  us  put  on  the  armour 
of  light.  Former  habits  of  life  are  here, 
as  elsewhere,  regarded  aa  clothing  once 
worn — a  man's  habitual  investment,  though 
not  part  of  his  real  self — which  is  to  be  put 
off  (cf.  Eph.  iv.  22;  Oul.  iii.  8,  9);  instead 


S99 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xin.  1—14* 


whereof  are  to  be  put  on,  as  a  new  inveBt- 
ment,  tlie  graces  and  virtues,  supplied  to  us 
from  tlie  region  of  light,  which  constitute 
the  Christian  character  (cf.  1  Thess.  v.  8; 
2  Oor.  vi.  7 ;  Eph.  vi.  11,  «ej.).     In  all  these 

Sassages  the  new  clothing  to  be  put  on  is 
esignated  as  armour,  the  idea  being 
carried  out  in  detail  in  Eph.  vi,  11,  etc. ; 
and  thus  the  further  conception  is  intro- 
duced of  Christians  being  as  soldiers  on 
the  watch  during  the  watches  of  the  night, 
awaiting  daybreak,  equipped  With  arms  of 
heavenly  proof,  careful  not  to  sleep  on  their 
post,  or  to  allow  themselves  in  revelry  or 
any  deeds  of  shame,  such  as  are  done  in  the 
night  under  the  cover  of  darkness. 

Vers.  13, 14. — As  in  the  day,  let  ns  walk 
honestly  (in  the  sense  which  Koneste  bears 
in  Latin  of  decently,  becomingly,  with  de- 
eorum.  The  woid  eia'xi/iuii'vs  occurs  also 
in  1  Thess.  iv.  12;  1  Oor.  vii.  35;  liv.  40. 
It  denotes  here  a  walk  of  life  the  entire 
opposite  of  a(rxvi^i>(rii/ri  (oh.  i.  27),  and  of 
the  things  done  in' secret  of  which  it  is 
a  shame  to  speak;  cf.  £ph.  v.  11,  12);  not 


in  rioting  and  drunkenness,  not  in  chamber- 
ing and  wantonness,  not  in  strife  and 
envying  (raihei,  jealousy,  denoting  jealous 
wrath,  of.  Acts  ziii.  45).  Bat  put  ye  on 
the  Lord  Tesns  Christ.  The  figure  of  a  new 
investment  being  renewed  from  ver.  12,  it 
is  here  Christ  himself  who  is  to  be  put  on. 
So  also  Gal.  iii.  27.  For  the  idea  implied, 
cf.  Eph.  iv.  23,  24;  Col.  iii.  12;  ch.  viii. 
9,  10 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  15,  17.  "  Induere  autem 
Chvistum  bio  signifioat  virtute  Spiritus  ejus 
undique  nos  muniri,  qua  idonei  ad  omnes 
sanctitatis  partes  reddamur.  Sio  enim 
instauratur  in  nobis  imago  Dei,  quis  unl- 
cum  est  animae  omamentum  "  (Calvin).  It 
may  be  observed  that  in  Gal.  iii  27 
Christians  are  said  to  have  already  put  on 
Christ  in  their  baptism;  here  they  are  ex- 
horted still  to  do  BO.  There  ia  no  real 
contradiction;  they  are  but  exhorted  to 
realize  in  actual  lUia  the  meaning  of  their 
baptism.  And  make  not  provision  for  th* 
flesh,  to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof  (literally, 
unto  lusts). 


H0MILETIG3. 

Verg.  1 — 7. — Loyalty.  There  was  danger,  in  the  first  age  of  Christianity,  lest  the 
nature  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Lord  Jesus  should  be  misunderstood  even  by  its  subjects, 
and  misrepresc  nted  by  those  without.  A  spiritual  empire  was  a  new  conception,  and 
carnal  minds  were  prone  to  confound  the  dominion  over  souls  with  civil  and  political 
authority.  Hence  the  importance  and  appropriateness  of  the  admonitions  so  emphati- 
cally addressed  by  the  apostle  to  the  Christians  of  Eome. 

L  The  inspired  conception  op  civil  authority.  By  this  the  apostle  understood 
the  actually  constituted  power  of  the  state.  The  Roman  emperor  was  the  head  and 
chief  of  the  greater  pa'rt  of  the  population  of  the  then  known  world,  and  Rome  was  the 
centre  of  political  rule  and  authority.  The  proconsuls  and  propraetors  represented  in 
the  provinces  the  imperial  majesty  and  sway  of  senate  and  of  emperor.  But  it  is 
evident  that  the  view  of  civil  power  taken  by  the  apostle  was  equally  applicable  to 
monarchies  and  to  republics.  Whatever  the  form  of  government,  whatever  the  designa- 
tion of  the  ruler,  whatever  the  rank  of  the  administrator  of  the  law,  authority  was 
recognized  as  of  Divine  origin  and  right.  It  has  sometimes  been  deemed  a  reproach 
to  the  apostle  that  he  should  have  written  thus  when  Nero  was  on  the  throne.  But 
this  fact  rather  emphasizes  the  principle  that  the  authority  is  Divine,  although  the 
person  or  persons  who  wield  it  may  be  unworthy  of  the  trust.  Nero  was  at  this  time 
under  the  influence  of  the  wise  and  moderate  counsels  of  Seneca  and  of  Burrhus,  yet 
this  language  which  Paul  employed  would  probably  have  been  unaltered  had  the 
apostle  been  writirig  during  the  subsequent  and  infamous  period  of  the  tyrant's  sway. 
It  would  be  straining  this  passage  to  deduce  from  it 

"  The  light  Divine  of  kings  to  govern  wrong," 

and  it  would  be  unjust  to  argue  from  it  that  it  is  always  unlawful  to  resist  and  t« 
dethrone  a  tyrant.  But  we  may  learn  to  regard  subordination,  rule,  subjection,  loyalty, 
as  all  part  of  a  Divine  order  imposed  upon  human  society  by  the  Lord  of  all. 

II.  The  scope  of  iotaltt.  1.  Respect  and  honour  are  due  from  the  governed  to 
the  governor.  Even  where  there  is  a  lack  of  those  qualities  which  command  personal 
respect,  honour  may  be  rendered  to  the  ofBce  which  is  held,  and  the  duties  of  which 
*re  faithfully  fulfilled.  2.  JTie  payment  of  taxes  and  tributes  is  required.  In  this 
precept  Paul  followed  the  teaching  of  his  Master,  "  Render  unto  Cffisar  the  things  that 


CH.  xm.  1— 14.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  E0MA2TS.  S93 

are  Ctesar's."  Subjects  are  not  responsible  for  the  use  maile  of  the  money  which  is 
exacted  from  them  by  just  authority.  When  a  king  who  has  no  constitutional  right  to 
leTy  taxes  without  the  consent  of  a  parliament  demands  money  upon  his  own  authority, 
Buch  a  demand  may  be  refused  without  disobedience  to  the  injunction  of  the  text. 
3.  Obedience  and  svibjection  are  enjoined.  The  extent  and  range  of  this  injunction  are 
very  large.  "  Every  soul " — every  intelligent  member  of  society — is  under  an  obligation 
to  obey ;  and  resistance  to  the  ruler  is  resistance  to  God,  and  entails  just  punishment 
and  retribution.  4.  Virtue  generally  is  commended  as  contributive  to  the  well-being 
of  society.  Good  works  are  to  evince  the  sincerity  of  the  Ohristian's  faith.  The 
Soman  law  was  the  highest  expression  the  ancient  world  attained  of  justice  in  the 
relations  subsisting  between  man  and  man.  It  has  been  the  foundation  of  the  codes 
of  many  civilized  Christian  nations  in  modern  times.  Obedience  to  the  law  was  the 
duty  of  every  good  citizen,  every  well-wisher  of  society,  every  true  member  of  the 
human  family.  For  the  law  was  the  sanction  of  virtue  and  righteousness.  Doubtless 
there  have  been  and  are  unjust  laws ;  yet  it  is  the  duty  of  the  citizen  to  obey  them 
when  obedience  does  not  come  into  conflict  with  the  higher  duty  to  God. 

III.  The  GKOtTNDS  OF  LOYALTY..  These,  as  adduced  by  St.  Paul,  are  two.  1.  Personal 
considerations  are  advanced.  The  wrath  of  the  magistrate- is  to  be  feared;  rulers  are 
a  terror  to  the  evil;  they  that  resist  shall  receive  retribution ;  the  ruler  bears  not  the 
8Word  in  vain.  Such  motives  are  almost  the  only  motives  to  which  the  coarse  and 
vicious  are  accessible.  They  are  motives  to  which  none  are  altogether  superior.  The 
consequences  of  injustice  have  to  be  borne  in  mind  by  those  who  are  liable  to  the 
passions  of  cupidity  or  of  revenge.  2.  Religious  motives  are  presented.  Government 
is  an  ordinance  of  God,  and  rulers  are  the  ministers  of  God.  A  bad  subject,  then, 
cannot  be  a  good  Christian.  In  our  own  days,  individualism  is  carried  to  such  an 
extent  that  authority  is  often  disdained  and  defied,  even  by  those  who  are  by  no 
means  the  dregs  of  society,  who  make  pretensions  to  intelligence  and  virtue.  It  ii 
well,  therefore,  that  the  inspired  teaching  should  be  pondered  which  attaches  importance 
80  great  to_  order,  patriotism,  and  loyalty. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — Love  and  law.  To  the  unthinking,  and  at  first  sight,  there  seems  a 
contradiction  between  lavo,  which  expresses  authority,  and  is  sanctioned  by  force,  and 
love,  which  is  spontaneous,  and  is  of  the  heart.  Christ  himself,  however,  brought  the 
two  into  harmony  when  he  said,  "If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments;"  and 
the  apostle,  in  this  passage,  shows  that,  really  and  essentially,  the  two  are  one. 

I.  The  tbub  principle  of  social  life  is  love.  The  new  commandment  which 
Christ  gave  was,  "Love  one  another;  "  and  his  peculiar  canon  of  conduct  was,  "Thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Of  this  principle  we  may  remark  that :  1.  It 
is  in  harmony  with  our  own  constitution.  Our  true  nature  is  to  live  in  mutual 
affection  and  confidence ;  it  is  the  depraved  nature  that  develops  hatred,  malice,  and 
uucharitableness.  2.  It  is  imposed  and  sanctioned  by  the  Divine  Head  of  the  new 
humanity,  the  Lawgiver  of  the  spiritual  kingdom.  3.  It  provides  the  radical  cure  for 
human  iUs.  4.  It  has  not  only  a  negative,  it  has  also  a  positive  virtue ;  it  is  the 
proper  and  natural  origin  of  the  several  virtues,  supplying  their  motive,  prompting  to 
their  exercise. 

II.  The  application  or  this  principle  in  pbaotioe.  The  apostle,  whose  mind  was 
as  thoroughly  ethical  and  practical  as  it  was  theological  and  doctrinal,  traced  the 
working  of  this  principle  of  love,  in  preserving  human  nature  and  protecting  human 
society  from  the  vices,  crimes,  and  sins  which  have  cursed  the  world.  In  this  passage 
he  teaches  us  that  love  must  act  in  keeping  Christians  from  wronging  their  neighbours. 
He  whose  heart  is  filled  with  true  love  will  neither  covet  nor  steal  his  neighbour's 
goods,  nor  take  his  neighbour's  life,  nor  make  inroads  upon  his  neighbour's  domestic 
happiness,  nor  in  any  way  inflict  injury  upon  his  neighbour's  interests,  or  deprive  him 
of  his  rights.  For  to  love  our  fellow-men  is  to  count  their  welfare  our  own,  and  to  do 
to  them  as  we  would  they  should  do  to  us. 

III.  The  acquisition  op  this  pbinoiplb.  It  may  be  argued  that  the  counsels  of 
the  apostle  are  unpractical ;  that  whilst  love  is  a  cure  for  human  ills,  it  is  not  shown 
how  love  may  be  acquired,  any  more  than  it  is  how  sin  may  be  avoided.  But  the  fact 
is  that  revelation  links  together  the  love  of  man  and  the  love  of  God,  and  teaches  U8 


394  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  E0MAN8.    [ch.  xiii.  1—14. 

that  the  one  way  to  the  cherishing  of  Divine  love  is  the  reception  of  the  gospel  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  Manifestation  of  Divine  love  to  human  hearts.  "  We 
love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us ; "  "  He  that  loveth  God  loveth  his  brother  also." 

Vers.  11 — 14. — A  startling  tummons.  The  admonition  of  this  passage  is  especially 
addressed  to  Christians;  yet  to  Christians  who  stand  peculiarly  in  need  of  a  rousing 
appeal  and  summons,  to  call  them  to  a  more  spiritual  and  a  more  watchful  life. 

I.  The  crisis  op  life.  1.  The  night  is  well-nigh  gone.  Between  our  Lord's  first  and 
second  comings  stretches  the  dawn  of  the  world.  Behind  his  first  coming  lay  the  night 
of  humanity.  Beyond  his  second  advent  the  daylight  beams,  with  the  brightness  of 
knowledge,  of  holiness,  of  happiness,  of  glory.  2,  Salvation  is  nearer  than  ever.  In 
one  sense,  indeed,  salvation  is  a  present  blessing ;  for  we  are  delivered  from  condemna- 
tion if  we  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  In  another  sense  it  is  future ;  for  we  shall  hereafter 
receive  the  end  of  our  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  our  souls.  It  is  something  to  be 
looked  forward  to  with  keenest  joy  of  hope,  something  the  prospect  of  which  may  well 
inspire  us  to  endurance  and  to  toil. 

II.  The  summons  of  God.  1.  To  spiritual  energy.  To  such  a  period,  drowsy, 
slumberous  inactivity  is  utterly  inappropriate.  2.  To  the  renunciation  of  all  that 
interferes  with  the  fulfilment  of  our  calling  aud  the  realization  of  our  hope.  3.  To 
a  spiritual  warfare  and  campaign.  4.  To  purity  of  hody  and  of  mind,  as  those 
who  are  in  their  whole  nature  redeemed,  that  in  their  whole  nature  they  may  be 
consecrated. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — Night  and  day.  Christian  motives  are  brought  forward  to  incite 
to  moral  duties.  We  are  called  upon  to  do  right,  not  only  by  the  voices  of  expediency 
and  of  authority,  but  by  the  voice  of  revelation.  Christians  are  addressed  as  those 
who  know  the  seasons,  who  discern  the  signs  of  the  times,  who  regard  the  present  as 
a  period  of  probation,  of  discipline,  of  education,  and  whose  gaze  is  ever  forwards, 
whose  hope  is  in  their  Lord's  return  to  judge  and  to  save. 

L  The  eeteospect  of  the  past.  "  The  night  is  far  spent."  1.  The  spiritual  night 
of  the  world  is  passing  away.  The  true  Light  is  shining,  and  the  radiance  of  his  beams 
is  illumining  the  darkest  and  most  distant  shores.  2.  The  night  of  time  is  departing, 
and  eternity,  resurrection,  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  are  about  to  dawn. 
3.  The  night  of  life  is  nearly  spent,  and  the  day  of  immortality  approaches.  If  this 
is  the  case  with  all,  how  manifestly  is  it  so  with  the  aged  I 

II.  The  prospect  of  the  future.  1.  "The  day  is  at  hand."  So  far  as  the 
opportunity  for  labour  is  concerned,  we  may  admit  that  "  the  night  cometh,  when  no 
man  can  work."  But,  in  another  sense,  it  is  a  welcome  truth  that  "  the  day  dawns, 
and  the  shadows  flee  away."  Full  light  shall  soon  be  shed  upon  our  intellectual  and 
spiritual  darkness.  The  fears,  the  ignorance,  the  doubts  of  the  present  shall  cease  to 
be ;  we  shall  see  Christ  as  he  is,  and  we  shall  know  even  as  we  are  known.  2.  "  Salvation 
is  nearer  to  us  than  when  we  first  believed."  A  fortress  is  belea;;uered  by  the  forces  of 
the  foe.  The  garrison,  long  besieged,  is  feeble,  weary,  and  all  but  exhausted,  ill  supplied 
with  provisions  and  ammunition,  and  in  great  straits.  But  relief  is  planned,  and  is 
approaching.  At  night  the  prospect  seemed  dark.  But  now,  when  the  morning 
breaks,  the  besieged,  looking  from  their  walls,  behold  the  banners  of  the  deliverer 
drawing  near,  and  hear  the  welcome  music  of  his  march.  Salvation  is  at  hand ! 
It  is  in  this  light  that  we  are  encouraged  to  look  at  life,  at  time.  Now  we  are  besieged 
by  our  spiritual  foe,  and  our  condition  is  often  apparently  desperate.  But  our 
redemption  draweih  nigh,  and  our  salvation  is  nearer.  The  perfection  of  our  salvation, 
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  victory, — this  is  in  the  future. 

'  III.  The  duty  of  the  present.  This  is  not  the  time  to  indulge  mere  sentiment, 
whether  of  retrospect  or  of  anticipation.  The  living  present  demands  all  our  energy. 
1.  "  It  is  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep ; "  to  arouse  ourselves  from  indifference  to  concern, 
from  half-belief  to  earnest  faith,  from  inactivity  to  zeal.  2.  To  "  cast  off  the  works 
of  darkness."  By  the  clothing,  the  impediments  thus  designated,  we  understand  the 
negligences,  the  sing,  which  are  inconsistent  with  true  Bpirituality.  3.  To  "  put  on 
the  armour  of  light."  Holiness  and  diligence,  patience  and  devotedness, — these  are 
the  spiritual  exercises  appropriate  to  those  who  have  a  hope  so  glorious  and  promises 


CH.  xm.  1—14.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  395 

so  sure  as  ours.     Let  the  soldier  see  to  his  weapoas,  the  servant  to  his  work,  the 
steward  to  his  trust ! 

Applioation.  Every  crisis  of  human  life,  of  Church  history ;  every  day  which  tells 
of  the  flight  of  time;  every  instance  of  human  mortality, — speaks  loudly  to  us,  summoning 
us,  as  children  of  the  day,  to  live  as  in  anticipation  of  the  Divine  Deliverer's  speedy 
and  welcome  approach. 

Vers.  11 — ^14. — Awalce  and  arm  I  It  is  strange  that,  at  the  very  commencement  of 
a  new  dispensation,  the  prospect  of  its  close  should  be  so  often  presented  to  the  view. 
No  sooner  had  Christ's  first  coming  ended,  than  his  people  were  taught  to  anticipate 
his  second  coming.  Thus  the  thoughts  and  afiections  of  Christians  are  clustered  around 
their  Lord,  and  the  revelation  of  the  past  suggests  the  approaching  epiphany.  The 
contrasts  of  this  passage  are  very  striking.     When  carefully  analyzed,  they  appear — 

I.  As  applied  to  condition.  1.  The  night  of  danger  is  nearly  over.  This  applies 
to  the  individual,  to  any  community,  to  the  whole  Church.  2.  The  morning  of 
deliverance  is  dawning.  An  inspiration  and  comfort  to  the  pilgrims,  the  soldiers,  who 
are  often  oppressed  by  the  gloom  of  the  present  perils. 

n.  As  applied  to  character.  1.  The  works  of  night  are  to  he  abandoned.  These 
belong  to  the  era  which  now  lies  in  the  remote  distance,  and  from  which  Christ  has 
emancipated  his  people.  2.  The  life  of  the  spiritual  day  is  to  be  adopted.  If  the  flesh 
and  its  lusts  are  to  be  crucified,  what  is  to  be  crowned  ?  The  Lord  Jesus  is  to  be 
"  put  on,"  the  armoiir  of  light  is  to  be  taken  and  worn ;  and  the  Christian  soldier  is 
to  go  forth  to  meet  the  coming  day,  with  his  face  towards  the  rising  sun,  with  his 
heart  bounding  with  delight  at  his  great  Captain's  long-expected  appearance. 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  Christian  as  citizen.  The  duty  of  Christians  as  citizens  is  in  our 
day  not  sufficiently  recognized.  Many  Christians  keep  aloof  from  public  life  and  the 
duties  of  citizenship  because  of  the  political  corruption  and  party  strife  which  are  so 
common.  Others,  again,  enter  into  public  duties,  but  seem  to  leave  their  religion 
behind  them.  The  result  is  a  sad  want  of  Christian  statesmanship  and  of  Christian 
legislation. 

I.  The  Cheistian  KEcoaNiZBS  the  necessity  of  government.  "  There  is  no  power 
but  of  God :  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  Grod "  (ver.  1).  This  is  not  to  be 
understood  as  meaning  that  every  individual  ruler  is  ordained  of  God.  That  would 
make  the  Divine  Being  responsible  for  many  acts  of  despotism  and  oppression.  We 
might  as  well  say  that  every  minister  of  religion  who  had  received  the  form  of  ordina- 
tion was  therefore  chosen  of  God,  no  matter  what  his  personal  character  might  be. 
The  meaning  rather  is  that  government  is  an  ordinance  of  God — that  God  has  ordained 
or  appointed  it,  that  there  should  be  authority  and  rulers.  Government  is  necessary  : 
1.  For  the  protection  of  life  and  property.'  2.  For  the  repression  of  crime,  "Rulers 
are  not  a  terror  to  good  works,  but  to  the  evil "  (ver.  3).  Governors,  says  St.  Peter, 
are  appointed  "  for  the  punishment  of  evil-doers  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  14).  3.  For  the  rewarding 
and  encouraging  of  virtue.  "  Wilt  thou  then  not  be  afraid  of  the  power  ?  do  that 
which  is  good,  and  thou  shalt  have  praise  of  the  same"  (ver.  3).  So  St.  Peter  also 
speaks  of  governors  as  "  a  praise  to  them  that  do  well."  Wise  rulers  will  not  only 
repress  crime,  but  they  will  seek  to  encourage  well-doing.  They  will  show  special 
favour  to  those  who,  by  their  own  character  and  efforts,  promote  morality  and 
temperance  and  honesty,  and  thus  help  to  make  government  easy.  How  often  do 
rulers  forget  this !  How  often  the  Christian  people  of  a  nation  are  ignored  or  even 
discouraged,  while  the  godless  and  the  immoral  are  high  in  place  and  favour! 

II.  The  Christian  keooqnizbs  the  bbsponsibilities  of  eulbbb.  Rulers  are  here 
called  "  ministers  of  God  "  (vers.  4,  6).  Our  sovereign  entitles  herself  "  Victoria,  by 
the  grace  of  God."  All  who  are  concerned  in  government  have  a  solemn  responsibility, 
whether  they  be  kings  or  queens,  ministers  of  state,  members  of  the  legislature,  judges, 
magistrates,  or  jurymen.  All  must  appear  one  day  before  a  higher  tribunal.  Then 
the  judge  will  he  asked,  "  Have  you  done  justice  as  between  man  and  man  ?  "    Tho 


396  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xnt.  1— 14. 

juryman  will  be  asked,  "  Have  you  rendered  a  verdict  according  to  the  evidence?" 
The  sovereign  vrill  be  asked,  "Have  you  been  faithful  to  your  coronation  vows?" 
Therefore  the  Ohnntian  should  pray  for  rulers.  "  For  kings,  and  for  all  that  are  in 
authority ;  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life  in  all  godliness  and  honesty  " 
(I  Tim.  ii.  2).  The  Christian  should  do  all  he  can  to  secure  good  rulers.  What  we 
need  in  our  day  is  less  of  party  politics!,  and  more  of  Christian  politics.  Christian 
people,  Christian  Churches,  should  band  themselves  together,  laying  aside  all  political 
and  all  ecclesiastical  differences,  to  secure  Christian  representatives.  Christian  law- 
makers for  our  professedly  Christian  nation. 

in.  The  Christian  beooonizes  his  own  ebsponsibilitt.  There  are  two  duties 
distinctly  specified  here  for  the  Christian  citizen.  1.  Obedience.  "  Let  every  soul  be 
subject  unto  the  higher  powers  "  (ver.  1) ;  "  Whosoever  resisteth  the  power,  resisteth 
the  ordinance  of  God  "  (ver.  2)  ;  "  Wherefore  ya  must  needs  be  subject "  (ver.  5).  If 
the  law  is  to  be  upheld,  there  must  be  an  obedient  and  submissive  spirit  on  the  part 
of  every  good  citizen.  Yet  there  are  limits  to  all  this.  We  are  to  interpret  this 
passage  in  the  light  of  other  Bible  teaching  and  the  examples  which  it  sets  before  us. 
The  Bible  does  not  teach  the  doctrine  of  passive  obedience  or  non-resistance.  At 
Babylon,  Daniel  resisted  the  reigning  power.  The  royal  mandate  was  Issued,  but 
Daniel  did  not  obey  it.  "  He  kneeled  upon  his  knees  three  times  a  day,  and  prayed, 
and  gave  thanks  before  his  God,  as  he  did  aforetime."  The  Apostles  Peter  and  John 
declined  to  obey  the  Jewish  council  at  Jerusalem  when  they  were  commanded  to  speak 
no  more  in  the  Name  of  Jesus.  They  boldly  answered,  "  Whether  it  be  right  in  the 
sight  of  God  to  hearken  unto  you  more  than  unto  God,  judge  ye.  For  we  cannot  but 
speak  the  things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard."  Where  the  law  of  a  nation  or  the 
command  of  an  earthly  ruler  conflicts  with  the  law  of  God,  then  it  is  clearly  the 
Christian's  duty  to  obey  God  rather  than  men.  The  English  people  in  their  past 
history  have  acted  upon  this  principle.  Twice  under  the  reign  of  the  Stuart  sovereigns 
the  subjects  of  the  realm  asserted,  on  conscientious  grounds,  their  right  of  revolution 
and  resistance.  So  also  did  the  Covenanters  of  Scotland.  Yet  resistance  to  constituted 
authority  should  ever  be  a  last  resort,  and  is  only  to  he  resorted  to  when  all  more 
peaceful  means  have  utterly  failed  to  obtain  justice  and  redress  of  wrongs.  2.  Taxatiori. 
"  For  this  cnuse  pay  ye  tribute  also"  (ver.  6).  This  also  was  the  teaching  of  Christ. 
No  government  can  be  maintained  without  expense.  National  defences,  public 
institutions,  all  of  which  have  for  their  object  the  protection  and  the  well-being  of  all 
the  citizens,  require  to  be  kept  up.  Every  citizen  is  responsible  for  bearing  his  share 
in  meeting  expenditure  for  the  common  good.  He  may  not  approve  of  every  item  of 
expenditure,  but  that  is  no  valid  reason  for  refusing  to  contribute  his  share  of  taxation, 
where  the  representatives  of  the  nation  have  decreed  that  the  expenditure  is  wise  and 
necessary.  This  rule,  of  course,  has  its  exception  also  in  the  case  of  any  expenditure 
which  would  do  violence  to  the  individual  conscience.  3.  There  are  other  practical 
duties.  The  Christian  will  ever  co-operate  with  rulers  in  securing  and  promoting  peace 
and  temperance,  morality  and  honesty,  truthfulness  and  justice.  All  these  virtues 
are  necessary  to  national  well-being.  Government  would  be  easy  if  every  citizen  was 
a  Christian,  and  if  every  Christian  would  realize  his  duties  as  a  citizen.  The  words 
of  Sir  Arthur  Helps  ('Friends  in  Council')  may  be  fittingly  quoted  here:  "He  who 
does  not  bring  into  government,  whether  as  governor  or  subject,  some  religious  feeling, 
some  higher  motive  than  expediency,  is  likely  to  make  but  an  indifferent  governor  or  an 
indifferent  subject.  .  .  .  Without  piety  there  will  be  no  good  government." — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — The  Christian's  duty  in  the  present  age.  The  Christian  is  not  to  be 
insensible  to  the  movements  of  the  world.  "Knowing  the  time,"  says  the  apostle 
(ver.  11).  Mr.  Spurgeon  says  he  reads  the  newspapers  to  see  how  God  is  governing 
the  world.  It  is  well  for  us  to  know  what  are  the  current  beliefs  and  motives  of  our 
fellow-men. 

I.  The  Christian's  conpidencb.  1.  "  2%e  night  is  far  spent."  (1)  The  forces  of 
mil  are  far  spent.  Some  Christians  are  always  looking  on  the  dark  side  of  things. 
They  see  no  traces  of  the  breaking  day.  With  them  it  is  always  night.  They  would 
have  us  believe,  with  Canon  Taylor,  that  missions  are  a  failure.  They  would  have  us 
believe,  with  Lord  Wemyss,  that  prohibition  of  the  liquor  traffic  is  a  failure.    They 


CH.  xm.  1— 14.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  397 

would  have  us  believe  that  Sunday  closing  is  a  failure.  But  it  is  those  who  want 
such  movements  to  fail  that  usually  originate  such  a  cry.  There  is  no  failure  in  the 
forces  of  right.  Failure  is  written  on  the  forces  of  sin.  Its  night  is  far  spent.  (2) 
The  clouds  of  mystery  will  soon  he  lifted.  There  are  difficulties  in  reconciling  religion 
and  science.  Yet  the  difficulties  are  only' apparent.  They  are  only  temporary  clouds. 
There  are  diificulties  in  God's  providence  that  we  cannot  understand.  But  by-and-by 
they  will  all  be  made  plain.  Every  mystery  will  be  solved.  "  Now  we  know  in  part  j 
but  then  shall  we  know  even  as  also  we  are  known."  (3)  Hie  dark  howrs  of  pain 
and  sorrow  will  soon  he  over.  How  dark  is  tbo  hour  of  sickness  I  how  dark  the  hour  of 
bereavement !  What  shadows  disappointment  causes  to  pass  over  our  lives !  But  the 
night  is  far  spent.  "  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning." 
2.  "  Tlie  day  is  at  hand."  The  day  of  our  Saviour's  coming  is  rapidly  drawing  nearer. 
Already  we  may  hear  the  sound  of  his  chariot-wheels.  Gradually  his  kingdom  has 
been  making  progress  in  the  earth,  his  truth  has  been  gaining  the  victory  over  error. 
The  Eeformation  shook  off  the  dust  of  centuries  from  the  Word  of  God.  The  discovery 
of  printing  had  already  prepared  the  way  for  the  spread  of  the  emancipated  Bible. 
Old  kingdoms  that  encouraged  error  and  fostered  ecclesiastical  despotism  have  been 
falling.  New  nations  have  arisen  to  sway  the  destinies  of  the  world — the  nations  of 
the  Bible-loving,  liberty-loving,  Anglo-Saxon  race.  Old  wrongs  have  been  redressed. 
Our  King  is  coming.     "  The  day  is  at  hand." 

II.  The  Christian's  call.  1.  A  call  to  activity.  "  Now  it  is  high  time  to  awake 
out  of  sleep  "  (ver.  11).  It  is  plain  that  this  exhortation  is  addressed  to  Christians, 
for  the  writer  adds,  "  for  now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we  believed."  Many 
Christians  are  asleep.  They  are  inactive  and  idle,  and  are  doing  nothing  to  prepare 
the  way  of  the  Lord.  It  may  be  addressed  also  to  the  unconverted.  This  very  passage, 
the  closing  part  of  this  thirteenth  chapter,  was  the  means  of  converting  St.  Augustine. 
2.  A  call  to  amendment.  "  Let  us  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness  "  (ver.  12).  Some 
works  are  literally  works  of  darkness,  as  for  example  those  specified  in  the  thirteenth 
verse.  Drunkenness  and  impurity  are  most  practised  in  the  night.  "  They  that  b« 
drunken  are  drunken  in  the  night."  But  "works  of  darkness"  may  be  regarded  as 
including  all  sinful  works.  Sin  loves  concealment.  The  Christian  is  to  oast  off  every- 
thing that  will  not  bear  the  light,  to  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of 
darkness.  "  The  day  is  at  hand."  How  shall  we  abide  the  day  of  our  Lord's  coming 
if  we  do  not,  by  Divine  help,  separate  ourselves  from  sin  ?  S.  A  call  to  conflict.  "  Let 
us  put  on  the  armour  of  light "  (ver.  12).  We  arn  to  wage  war  with  our  own  tempta- 
tions, and  with  the  evil  that  is  in  the  world.  Let  our  armour  be  the  armour  of  light. 
Let  us  not  fight  the  world  with  its  own  weapons — with  hatred,  or  bitterness,  or  deceit. 
Let  our  weapons  be  good  weapons — the  weapons  of  truth,  justice,  love.  They  will 
conquer.  Let  us  never  do  evil  that  good  may  come.  4.  A  call  to  Christ-likeness. 
"Put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (ver.  14).  That  is  to  say,  "Beolothed  with  his 
spirit."  This  is  the  secret  of  strength.  Like  Sir  Galahad,  whose  strength  was  as  the 
strength  of  ten  because  his  heart  was  pure,  the  man  who  is  Christ-like  in  spirit  will 
overcome  all  temptations,  and  will  grapple  victoriously  with  all  difficulties.  This  it 
emphatically  a  call  which  the  Christian  needs  to  hear  in  the  present  age,  when  there 
is  so  much  in  the  Church  as  well  as  in  the  world  that  is  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  Christ, 
Let  us,  then,  hear  the  trumpet-call  of  duty,  and,  as  we  go  forth,  let  us  brace  up  our 
spirits  with  the  inspiring  thought  that  "  the  night  is  far  spent,  and  the  day  is  at 
hand."— C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Christian  suhmiasion.  We  now  pass  from  ecclesiastical  to  civil  relations. 
Because  the  Christian  has  entered  upon  a  new  brotherhood  in  Christ,  he  does  not 
cease  to  belong  to  the  old  brotherhood  of  natural  society.  And  as  in  the  spiritual 
brotherhood  humility  and  love  are  the  twin  principles  that  should  regulate  all  our 
conduct,  so  in  the  natural  commonwealth  of  the  state  there  should  be,  analogously, 
submission  towards  the  powers,  and  a  love-inspired  justice  towards  private  members 
of  the  same.  In  these  verses  is  inculcated  the  duty  of  conscientious  submission  to 
state  authorities. 

I.  The  ebasonablbness  of  strsMissiON.  The  submission  to  authority  is  spoken  of 
u  of  a  twofold  nature— obedience  to  law  generally,  and  payment  of  aU  dues.     And 


398  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xm.  1—14 

the  spirit  in  which  such  ohedient  and  loyal  conduct  should  be  exercised  is  the  spirit  of 
reverence  and  honour.  For  even  in  state  duties  the  heart  should  be  concerned  equally 
with  the  life.  1.  It  is  reasonahle,  then,  that  we :  (1)  Obey  the  laws  in  general  well- 
doing. For  viewed  merely  as  a  human  institution  of  a  utilitarian  nature,  the  authority 
of  law  is  for  our  good,  if  we  obey.  "  Do  that  which  is  good,  and  thou  shalt  have  praise 
from  the  same."  (2)  And  is  it  not  equally  reasonable  that  we  pay  the  dues  to 
constituted  authorities? — tribute,  custom.  For  here  again  we  are  only  contributing 
towards  the  expenses  of  our  own  protection.  2.  But  our  obedience  and  payment  of 
dues  will  only  be  properly  rendered  by  us,  and  will  only  tend  to  the  proper  rendering 
of  the  same  by  others,  if  our  heart  go  with  our  deed.  Let  there  then,  as  is  reasonable, 
te  fear,  let  there  be  honour,  towards  those  to  whom  fear,  to  whom  honour  is  due. 

n.  The  bightness  of  submission.  The  natural  man,  on  the  grounds  of  mere 
reason,  then,  should  submit  to  authority,  with  deed  and  with  heart.  But  surely  tha 
Christian  man  should  submit  on  some  higher  ground  than  this?  It  is  not  only 
reasonable,  it  is  divinely  right,  that  such  submission  be  rendered  to  the  powers.  1. 
It  is  right  that  we :  (1)  Obey  law.  For  the  authority  which  gives  the  law  is  not 
arbitrarily  instituted  by  man ;  it  is  of  God's  appointment.  Generally :  for  "  there  is 
no  power  but  of  God;"  i.e.  whenever  the  exigencies  of  society  demand  that  one  shall 
exercise  power  over  others,  these  very  exigencies  show  that  the  exercise  of  some  such 
power  is  divinely  purposed.  Specially:  for  in  his  providential  governance  of  the 
world  he  has  foreseen  and  ordained  the  exercise  of  the  power  by  these  very  individuals 
who  for  the  time  have  authority  committed  to  them.  And  can  a  Christian  resist  God's 
ordinance?  In  so  doing  he  will  not  merely  be  punished  by  man,  but  judged  by  God. 
The  sword  is  God's  sword ;  the  wrath,  God's  wrath.  (2)  And  so  of  tribute  and  custom. 
This  is  not  merely  a  payment  because  of  personal  interest  accruing,  but  in  recognition 
of  their  high  ofBce  as  "  ministers  of  God's  service."  They  fulfil  a  Divine  vocation, 
and,  like  the  priests  in  the  temple,  must  be  supported  as  servants  of  God.  2.  So  the 
lipirit  in  which  we  obey  and  pay  tribute  is  to  be  one  of  reverence  and  honour,  not  only 
on  the  lower  ground  of  the  reasonableness  of  the  same,  but  because  in  these  human 
powers  we  discern  God. 

Here^  then,  as  in  the  whole  of  life,  the  religious  penetrates  and  sanctifies  the  naturaL 
There  is  to  be  a  perpetual  transfiguration,  in  our  eyes,  of  the  human  with  the  Divine. 
This  is  but  an  application  of  the  injunction,  "  Whether  therefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or 
-whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God." — ^T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  8—10. — Christian  righteousness.  We  here  pass  from  public  to  private 
relations.  Still  in  the  civic  sphere,  viewing  men  as  men,  not  as  Christian  brethren. 
And  reminded  by  thought  just  advanced,  the  thought  of  tribute,  custom,  etc.,  as  being 
"due"  to  those  in  power,  that  there  are  dues  also  which  we  owe  each  one  to  his 
neighbour.  And  it  is  of  the  very  essence  of  justice  that  we  "  render  to  all  their  dues ; " 
or,  in  the  words  of  the  eighth  verse,  that  we  "  owe  no  man  anything."  Here,  then, 
we  may  consider  the  justice  which  binds  together  human  society ;  and  the  love  by 
which  the  justice  is  fulfilled. 

L  Justice.  Justice  is  the  bond  of  human  society.  To  do  to  others  as  we  may 
reasonably  expect  them  to  do  to  us  is  indeed  the  golden  rule  which  conserves  all 
security  and  peace  among  men.  To  be  just  towards  them  is  to  respect  their  rights. 
And  what  are  the  rights  of  man  ?  God  has  set  them  forth  strongly,  iu  their  essentials, 
in  that  Decalogue  which  was  the  Divine  code  of  justice  for  a  barbarous  nation.  Think 
of  them — rights  without  which  life  amongst  others  would  be  intolerable.  1.  The 
right  of  life,  "Thou  shalt  not  kill."  Saoredness  of  existence;  but  frailty.  So 
precious,  and  yet  so  easily  destroyed.  And  in  wantonness,  or  in  malice,  man  may 
destroy  bis  brother-man.  But  the  "Thou  shalt  not  kill "  sounds  in  his  ears,  a  spoken 
law  of  God :  the  right  of  life  must  be  conserved.  2.  The  right  of  sacred  relationship, 
dearer  than  the  right  of  life.  "  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery."  Organic  union  of 
men.  Relationships  interwoven  into  human  nature — ^husband  and  wife,  parent  and 
child,  brother  and  brother.  The  conjugal  relation  the  foundation  of  the  rest.  Any 
tampering  with  this  relation  is,  in  its  degree,  adultery,  and  loosens  the  whole  relational 
fabric ;  any  violation  of  the  sacrament  of  this  relation,  "  They  twain  shall  be  one  flesh," 
la  in  the  highest  degree  adultery,  and  gow  far  to  destroy  the  whole  relational  fabrio, 


OH.  xui.  1— 14.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  399 

But  the  "  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery  "  sounds  in  our  ears,  a  spoken  law  of  God : 
the  rights  of  sacred  relationship  must  be  consenred.  3.  The  right  of  property.  "  Thou 
shalt  not  steal."  An  instinctive  acquisitiveness  in  man ;  he  lords  it  over  the  world. 
This  acquisitiveness  sanctioned  by  Q-od:  "have  dominion."  Same  acquisitiveness, 
perverted  from  its  proper  use,  may  lead  us  to  acquire  that  to  which  we  have  no  right, 
to  "steal"  the  property  of  our  brother.  But  the  "Thou  shalt  not  steal"  sounds  in 
our  ears :  God  utters  his  sanction  of  the  saoredness  of  property.  4.  Fundamental  to 
all  these  main  rights  of  man  is  the  right  to  be  secure  from  even  the  unlawful  desire  of  a 
brother.  "Thou  shalt  not  covet."  For  "out  of  the  heart  proceed,"  etc.  (Matt.  xv. 
19).  So  to  covet  another's  life,  or  wife,  or  property,  even  in  the  first  faint  beginning 
of  desire,  is  to  allow  the  lust  from  which  all  evil  flows ;  and,  as  against  "  sin  in  its ' 
beginning,"  the  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet"  of  God  is  uttered  with  solemn  emphasis  as 
the  last  commandment. 

IL  Love.  The  last  commandment?  Nay,  for  Christ  has  said,  "  A  new  command- 
ment I  give  unto  you,  That  ye  love  one  another."  We  have  seen  how  this  is  the  bond 
of  the  new  brotherhood  in  Christ ;  it  is  set  forth  here  as  the  Christian's  own  safeguard 
of  the  rights  of  man.  As  a  man  amongst  men  you  must  respect  the  rights  of  men, 
i.e.  you  must  fulfil  the  law ;  as  a  Christian 'amongst  men  you  must  love  them  for  the 
Lord's  sake,  and  so  you  assure  your  respect  for  all  their  rights,  for  "  love  is  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  Law."  Need  this  be  proved  ?  Law  says  sternly, "  No  ill  to  one's  neighbour ; " 
love  says,  "  Give  all  good."  Ah !  here  is  a  yet  Diviner  impulse,  and  covering  a  broader 
ground.  And  the  Christian  will  be  content  with  nothing  less  than  this  Diviner 
impulse  and  broader  ground.  But  if  there  be  the  higher  impulse,  the  lower  shall  be 
secure ;  if  there  be  the  wider  range,  the  narrower  shall  be  covered.  Yes ;  love  men, 
and  you  will  work  no  ill. 

The  importance  ef  justice  amongst  men  demands  that,  as  good  citizens,  we  see  to 
it  that  justice  is  everywhere  advanced ;  hence  our  parliaments,  our  courts.  But  that 
justice  may  be  advanced,  to  say  nothing  of  yet  higher  ends,  let  us,  as  Christians, 
cherish  this  principle  which  constitutes  the  second  great  commandment,  "  Thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself." — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — The  day  breaheth  1  "  And  this  " — the  work  of  progressive  sanctifi- 
oation,  in  all  its  aspects  and  relations — this  surely  claims  our  strong  attention  now, 
when  the  day  of  God  is  nigh  unto  dawning  1  For,  visibly  to  us,  the  shadows  pass  and 
the  morning  breaks.  It  is  the  night-watch  still,  but  the  day  is  at  hand.  We  have 
here  to  consider — the  nearness  of  the  day  of  God ;  our  full  awaking. 

I.  The  DAT  OF  God.  In  and  through  all  the  declarations  of  the  Scriptures  there 
mingles  this  warning  note — ^the  day  of  God  will  come  1  Men  seem  to  have  their  day, 
and  work  their  will ;  God  will  have  his  day,  and  will  work  his  will.  We  must  not 
narrow  the  meaning  of  this  presentment  of  the  Scriptures :  whenever  God  interferes 
amid  the  doings  of  men  to  show  forth  his  power,  his  day  has  come.  In  our  individual 
life-histories,  in  the  histories  of  nations,  as  well  as  in  the  larger  history  of  the  race,  God 
has  come,  does  come,  many  times  and  in  many  ways.  For  mercy  ?  Yes ;  to  deliver 
those  who  trust  in  him  and  seek  to  work  his  will.  And  for  judgment :  for  "  whereso- 
ever the  carcase  is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together."  But  amid  these  many 
manifestations  of  God's  power,  there  are  some  which  stand  out  conspicuously,  like  the 
mountain-peaks  among  the  lower  hills.  Such  was  the  advent  of  the  Christ,  looming 
large  before  the  vision  of  Old  Testament  seers,  Such  is  the  second  advent  of  the 
Christ,  looming  large  to  the  view  of  the  apostles  and  to  us.  For  mercy  and  for  judg- 
ment was  the  former ;  for  mercy  and  for  judgment  shall  be  the  latter.  To  the  Christian 
believer,  for  full  salvation!  Oh,  what  a  hope  is  this!  It  has  glowed  before  us  as  we 
have  traced  God's  purposes  declared  in  foregoing  chapters ;  Paul  would  have  it  bum  as 
our  beacon-light,  ever  brighter  and  more  near!  A  beacon-light?  Nay,  rather  it  is  the 
dawn  of  the  new  day,  when  the  shining  of  God's  full-orbed  love  shall  scatter  for  ever 
all  the  lingering  shades  of  night. 

II.  OuK  FULL  AWAKING.  But  what  shall  be  our  attitude  in  view  of  such  a  day- 
break ?  We  must  surely  be  watchers  for  the  morning,  children  of  light !  The  very 
regeneration  of  those  to  whom  he  writes  was  truly  an  awaking  out  of  sleep;  but  there 
might  be  need  still  for  a  more  thorough  arousal  and  readiness.    Nay,  is  there  not,  in 


400  THK  EPISTLE  OP   PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,     [oh.  xiii.  1— 14, 

each  one,  this  need?  The  works  of  darkness  will  cling  to  us,  if  we  do  not  ever  reso- 
lutely cast  them  off.  We  may  forget  that  the  day  is  shining,  and  sink  back  into  our 
sleep.  1,  The  works  of  darkness  ?  Yes,  such  works  as  pertain  to  the  corruption  of 
the  night-time  of  the  world — base  revelry,  impure  pleasures,  passion,  and  strife.  The 
works  of  the  flesh,  which  are  manifest  (Gral.  v.  19 — 21).  And  oh,  what  a  night-time 
the  world  has  had !  what  a  night-time  has  been  ours  I  We  have  loved  the  darkness, 
because  our  deeds  were  evil.  2.  But  we,  as  children  of  light,  are  to  put  on  the  armour 
of  light,  to  walk  honestly,  as  in  the  day.  The  gleam  of  that  dayspring  has  already 
caught  our  vision  and  lit  up  our  brow;  it  is  to  irradiate  all  our  path.  We  are  to  walk 
as  though  the  cloudless  eternity  were  about  us  now.  Your  citizenship  is  in  heaven  ! 
So  then,  while  the  children  of  the  darkness  "  make  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  the 
lusts  thereof,"  seek  ever  to  gratify  their  low  desires,  and  make  their  whole  life  subser- 
vient to  this,  we  are  to  "  put  on  the  Lord  Jesiis  Christ."  He  is  to  be  our  clothing  and 
adornment ;  the  pure,  spiritual  nature  which  he  showed  to  the  world  is  to  be  our  array- 
ing for  the  new  sunrise,  bringing  the  world's  new  year ! 

And  that  glorious  goal  of  our  best  hopes,  "  salvation  "  in  its  fullest  scope  and  work- 
ing, is  "nearer  to  us  than  when  we  first  believed."  Let  us  gladden  our  hearts  and 
rekindle  all  cur  longings.  We  are  not  to  be-ever  battling,  weary,  sad;  but  he  whom  we 
look  for  shall  come ;  yes,  "  the  second  time,  unto  salvation ! " — T.  ¥.  L. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Submission  to  constituted  authority.  The  reception  of  a  new  truth 
requires  its  adjustment  to  previously  accepted  truths.  The  introduction  of  a  new 
system  like  Christianity  necessitated  an  examination  of  its  relationship  to  existing 
systems  of  government.  There  was  a  danger  of  Jewish  fanaticism  being  fanned  into 
heated  sedition  in  Jewish  converts  to  the  gospel  by  the  very  joy  of  finding  the  Messiah 
and  of  hopes  concerning  a  literal  temporal  kingdom.  And  the  novelty  of  the  views 
opened  up  before  Gentile  converts  might  easily  beget  in  them  a  feeling  of  freedom  from 
and  superiority  to  all  law  and  custom.  Yet  the  advice  to  such,  in  order  to  be  practical 
and  effective,  must  be  simple  and  concise.  The  apostle,  therefore,  enunciates  a  principle, 
and  leaves  its  limitations  to  be  afterwards  discovered. 

I.  The  Divine  Fount  of  authority.  Government  is  traced  to  its  source  in  God. 
"Order  is  Heaven's  first  law."  Where  no  order  reigns,  there  is  no  security,  no  progress 
to  better  things.  Absolute  equality  is  impossible  amongst  men;  society  has  no  safe- 
guards, no  cohesion,  without  a  recognized  tribunal  of  authority.  Whether  this  authority 
is  taken  and  exercised  as  a  matter  of  course  by  the  wisest  or  strongest,  or  is  the  acknow- 
ledged result  of  station  conferred  by  the  community,  the  necessity  for  such  leadership 
and  oversight  manifests  the  will  of  God,  and  authority  as  such  is  seen  to  emanate  from 
him.  The  Creator  controls  the  works  of  his  hands.  The  camp  of  Israel  maintained 
a  certain  disposition  of  tents  and  tribes  at  rest  and  on  the  march,  because  of  a  Divine 
ordinance.  Disorder  would  ill  have  befitted  the  presence  of  the  Monarch  Jehovah. 
Whatever  the  forms  which  government  assumes,  we  are  compelled  to  ascend  in  thought 
by  rising  steps  and  hierarchies  up  to  him  who  sitteth  on  the  great  white  throne,  the 
mighty  Arbitu  of  all  events,  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead.  Recall  the  majestic 
passage  from  Hooker  :  "  Of  Law  there  can  be  no  less  acknowledged  than  that  her  seat 
is  the  bosom  of  God,  her  voice  the  harmony  of  the  world :  all  things  in  heaven  and 
earth  do  her  homage,  the  very  least  as  feeling  her  care,  and  the  greatest  as  not  exempted 
from  her  power :  both  angels  and  men  aud  creatures  of  what  condition  soever,  though 
each  in  different  sort  and  manner,  yet  all  with  uniform  consent,  admiring  her  as  the 
mother  of  their  peace  and  joy." 

II.  The  human  adminibtratobs  op  justice.  "The  powers  that  be  are  ordained 
of  God."  Not  that  he  has  placed  each  ruler  in  office  or  assents  to  each  judicial  func- 
tion. But  the  leaders  of  human  society  represent  the  authority  of  God  on  earth.  They 
are  the  "ministers  "  of  God,  acting  in  subordination  to  him;  at  least  this  is  the  funda- 
mental idea  of  their  position,  however  overlooked  in  practice.  "They  bear  the  sword  " 
for  God,  are  his  vicegerents,  and  herein  lies  the  honour  and  accountability  of  their 
decisions.  Let  them  recollect  that  "  One  higher  than  the  highest  regardeth."  "  H« 
that  mleth  over  men  righteously,  ruling  in  the  fear  of  God,  he  shall  be  as  the  sunny 
light  of  a  cloudless  morning."  Cf.  Samuel's  account  of  his  judgeship,  that  he  had 
defrAuded  none,  oppressed  none,  nor  taken  a  ransom  from  any^    As  families  are  goYernad 


ou.  xm.  1— 14.]    THE  ^JPISTLB  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  B0MAN8.  401 

by  tlieir  natural  head,  the  father,  so  is  the  universal  family  named  after  aad  ruled  by 
the  great  Father  in  heaven,  whom  earthly  parents  are  to  copy.  The  fact  that  parents 
use  delegated  authority  lends  weight  and  responsibility  to  their  behaviour.  For  the 
superintendence  of  Israel  the  seventy  elders  received  a  special  donation  of  the  spirit  of 
Moses.  How  needful  that  rulers  in  Church  and  state,  in  households  and  in  munici- 
palities, should  seek  wisdom  from  him  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally  I  Many  a 
riotous  subject  has  become  a  thoughtful,  self-restrained  governor  when  realizing  the 
momentous  grandeur  and  obligations  of  his  ofBce. 

III.  The  oekehal  bule  of  obedience.  Submission  follows  the  recognition  of  the 
Divine  authority  at  the  back  of  magistrates.  To  rebel,  to  disobey,  is  to  cast  off  alle- 
giance to  Grod.  Even  the  apostle,  smarting  under  the  illegal  order  of  Ananias,  regretted 
his  strong  language  when  informed  that  he  had  reviled  the  high  priest.  To  refuse  due 
honour  to  rulers  and  parents  is  to  demoralize  society.  The  Saviour  resisted  not  the 
ofSoers  of  justice,  though  he  was  unjustly  condemned  to  death.  The  apostle  urged 
slaves  to  be  quiet,  and  subject  to  their  froward  masters,  that  by  well-doing  they 
might  silence  malicious  accusers  of  Christianity.  This  did  not  signify  that  the  gospel 
sanctioned  slavery  and  despotism  when  the  time  arrived  for  their  peaceful  overthrow. 
Submission  to  persecution  has  been  mightier,  more  lasting  in  its  effects  than  an  armed 
resistance,  for  it  enlightens  public  opinion  without  kindling  strife,  and  prepares  for  a 
change  that  shall  be  virtually  unanimous.  The  two  sanctions  of  the  magistrate's 
authority  are  mentioned  in  ver.  5,  viz.  "  wrath,"  that  is, punishment,  and  "conscience," 
that  is,  the  assurance  which  the  peaceable  subject  has  that  he  has  acted  in  accordance 
with  the  mind  of  God. 

IV.  Pabticular  bxoeptionb.  No  public  edict  has  a  right  to  coerce  any  man's  con- 
science. Let  the  ruler  attempt  to  promulgate  a  law  that  sins  against  morality,  and 
obedience  must  be  refused  at  all  hazards.  When  Caesar  steps  out  of  his  province  into 
the  realm  of  religion,  no  regard  for  the  "  powers  that  be  "  can  for  a  moment  be  suffered 
to  suspend  compliance  with  the  felt  dictates  of  the  Almighty.  The  proclamations  of 
Nebuchadnezzar  commanding  to  worship  the  golden  image,  and  of  Darius  prohibiting 
prayer  to  any  save  the  king,  were  rightly  unheeded  by  God-fearing  men.  But  let 
each  protester  take  great  care  to  have  his  conscience  illumined,  lest  he  erect  his  indi- 
vidual judgment  into  a  law  of  God.  Again,  when  a  government  has  shown  itself 
incapable  of  protecting  the  good  and  punishing  the  transgressors,  and  is  notorious  for 
its  reversal  of  the  true  principles  which  should  guide  its  action  and  for  its  forgetfulness 
of  the  intent  of  its  functions,  it  has  put  itself  outside  the  pale  of  respect  and  submission  ; 
it  may  lawfully  be  overthrown  and  another  substituted.  Allowance  must,  however,  be 
made  for  the  human  infirmities  even  of  kings  and  councillors.  In  modern  states 
agitation  can  effect  needed  reforms  in  public  administration.  It  behoves  each  citizen 
to  think,  speak,  and  vote  as  he  deems  will  best  promote  the  interests  of  the  state. 
Indifference,  on  whatever  spiritual  grounds,  to  evils  which  he  can  remedy,  carelessness 
respecting  the  general  welfare, — this  is  a  crime.  It  is  a  refusal  to  employ  a  talent  which 
Providence  has  committed  to  his  care.  Modern  legislation  does  not  hesitate  to  with- 
draw children  from  the  custody  of  parents  who  act  with  cruelty  or  surround  their 
offspring  with  deleterious  influences. — S.  B.  A. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — Love,  the  fulfilment  of  the  Law.  The  Lord's  Prayer  speaks  of  forgiving 
"  our  debtors."  But  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  every  man  to  strive  to  discharge  hig 
pecuniary  obligations,  otherwise  he  is  guilty  of  living  contentedly  on  stolen  goods. 
The  command,  "Owe  no  man  anything,"  if  obeyed,  would  hinder  many  a  bankruptcy 
and  prevent  many  a  business  scandal.  The  apostle  proceeds,  with  one  of  his  skilful 
turns  of  thought,  to  speak  of  that  debt  which  nevercan  be  entirely  liquidated — ^a  debt 
under  which  we  must  be  content  to  rest,  paying  portions  of  it  as  opportunity  occurs ; 
only  to  discover,  and  that  with  gladness,  that  the  obligation  magnifies  with  every 
attention  to  it.  Could  a  man  by  love  so  serve  his  neighbour  as  not  to  owe  him  any 
more  love,  then  might  he  feel  free  to  disregard  in  future  the  interests  of  his  neighbour, 
and  he  would  thus  sin  against  the  second  table  of  the  Law.  Love  alone  fulfils  the 
Law,  yet  never  exhausts  the  Law's  reiiuirements. 

I.    OfFBNCBS    against     OUB    NBIGHB0UB3     ABB   VIOLATIONS   OF     THE   LAW  OF    LOVB. 

The  ten  commandments  are  mainly  prohibitory.     The  Levitioal  statutes,  howevtr, 

B0MAH8.  2   D 


402  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [ch.  xm.  1—14. 

enjoined  many  kindly  and  beneficent  acts,  these  positive  precepts  filling  tip  the  outline 
thundered  forth  from  the  mount.  The  Saviour  educed  from  the  lawyer  the  statement 
that  the  Mosaic  Law  clearly  enunciated  the  one  principle  underlying  every  regulation  of 
locial  conduct,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Grod  has  committed  to 
each  man  specially  the  care  of  himself,  to  preserve  and  develop  his  various  faculties. 
And  just  as  no  sane  man  voluntarily  injures  himself,  so  must  he  guard  against  damaging 
the  well-being  of  his  fellows.  Cynicism,  greed,  tyranny,  cannot  survive  the  entrance 
of  this  humanizing  agent,  love,  which  evokes  compassion,  benevolence,  philanthropy, 
as  set  forth  so  beautifully  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  Adultery,  murder,  coveteousness,  in  all 
degrees  of  desire  and  behaviour,  imply  that  men  are  careless  of  another's  happiness  if 
they  can  secure  some  additional  gratification  for  themselves. 

II.  CONTBAST   LOVE   AS   A    MOTIVE   WITH   A   BBKSE     OF   DUTY.        The   Only  aUSWCr  to 

the  question,  "Why  should  altruism  be  a  regulating  principle,  in  my  life?  "is  that 
God  has  made  us  "  members  one  of  another ; "  that  he  has  implanted  in  our  nature, 
together  with  the  instinct  of  self-preservation,  certain  affections  towards  others ;  that 
God's  intention  is  thus  plainly  indicated  in  our  constitution ;  and  that  experience  shows 
that  to  make  self  the  sole  factor  in  our  consideration  is  to  rend  the  ties  of  society,  and 
ultimately  to  ruin  our  own  welfare  and  enjoyment.  Congregation,  not  segregation,  is 
the  law  of  human  life.  Nevertheless,  even  this  conviction,  "  I  ought  to  pay  respect  to 
my  neighbour's  interests  and  needs,"  may  stop  far  short  of  that  proper  care  for  others 
which  the  perfect  law  expects.  The  house  of  duty  is  a  dark  temple  if  unlit  by  the 
Shechinah  of  love.  Obligation  may  lead  some  citizens  to  pay  the  taxes  claimed;  it 
never  suggests  willing  offers  of  further  help  to  the  body  politic  to  which  they  belong. 
Duty  draws  rigid  lines,  examines  each  article  of  a  bond  for  fear  of  excess.  Love 
delights  in  all  extra  occasions  of  service.  Duty  is  cool  and  calculating ;  love  rises  to 
boiling  pitch,  and  its  energy  longs  for  work,  like  the  pressure  of  steam.  Duty  moves 
with  measured  tread ;  love  runs  upon  its  errands,  takes  pleasure  in  obedience,  whereas 
duty  is  glad  when  the  business  is  accomplished.  The  law  of  obligation  is  a  huge 
skeleton ;  love  clothes  it  with  flesh  and  sinew,  endues  it  with  life  and  beauty. 

III.  The  btbbnoth  which  Jesus  Christ  has  given  to  the  law  of  love.  He 
has  furnished  a  unique  example  of  love  in  his  incarnate  condescension,  in  his  words 
and  deeds  of  grace,  helping  and  healing  men,  and  like  a  good  Shepherd  yielding  up  his 
own  life  to  save  his  flock.  His  miracle  of  love  sheds  love  abroad — love  to  God  and  man, 
in  the  hearts  of  his  disciples.  Gratitude  to  Christ  fills  the  soul  with  generous  emotion. 
A  spark  of  Divine  generosity  is  cufficient  to  kindle  the  inflammable  material  in  the 
human  heart,  diffusing  light  and  warmth.  Christ  has  emphasized  the  worth  of 
humanity.  He  came  to  redeem  not  a  particular  race  or  sect,  but  men.  Hb  despised 
none,  taught  the  salvability  of  all  except  wilful  rejectors.  How  can  we  treat  contemp- 
tuously the  "brother  for  whom  Christ  died"?  Under  the  dark  skin  of  the  negro, 
under  the  barbarous  superstition  of  the  African,  under  the  stolid  impassiveness  of  the 
Chinaman,  under  the  rags  of  the  English  beggar,  love  discerns  a  possible  regenerated 
member  of  the  Christian  family,  a  child  of  God,  a  jewel  in  the  Saviour's  crown.  Christ 
has  exalted  self-sacrifice  into  a  heroism  that  charms  the  beholder,  as  he  realizes  the  true 
glory  of  an  intelligent  will,  that  wins  life  by  losing  it,  and  imparts  instead  of  egoistic 
happiness  a  Divine  blessedness. — S.  B.  A. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — The  approach  of  day.  Sin  has  been  defined  as  "an  act  or  state 
inconsistent  with  the  relations  "  in  which  we  stand.  To  act  as  our  position  demands 
is  to  act  rightly.  The  apostle  appeals  to  Christians  as  reasonable  individuals  desiring 
to  behave  ag  befits  their  condition.  Incongruities  excite  ridicule,  as  when  the  sailor 
walks  on  land  as  if  he  had  to  steady  himself  against  the  tossing  of  his  ship.  Who  has 
not  dreamed  of  being  foimd  in  daylight  in  the  street  attired  in  the  garments  of  sleep, 
and  felt  the  peculiar  shame  of  such  an  incident  ?  How  different  the  decorations  that 
look  well  enough  by  gaslight  appear  when  the  scene  is  surveyed  in  sunshine  t  the  tinsel 
and  gaudy  brilliancy  disgust  a  healthy  eye. 

I.  A  OEiTiCAL  SEASON.  The  daybreak  is  at  hand,  when  the  labourer  should  be  found 
at  work,  the  soldier  engaged  in  conflict,  and  the  traveller  started  on  his  journey.  Night 
is  the  time  in  which  Christianity  has  to  struggle  for  existence,  its  adherents  sometime* 
lorced  to  resort  to  obscurity  for  fear  of  persecution.    Christ's  departure  was  the  setting 


OH.  XIII.  1—14,]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS.  403 

M  his  advent  shall  be  the  rising  again  of  the  sun ;  the  interval  is  summer  night.  Ovir 
ialvation  is  nearer  than  when  we  began  to  believe.  Faith  commenced  the  process  of 
sanctifloation,  ushered  us  into  that  kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  whose  consummation, ' 
whose  outward  triumph  and  glory,  are  approaching.  The  apostle  may  have  deemed 
Christ's  appearance  nigh.  Like  the  ancient  seers,  he  viewed  coming  events  in  a  picture, 
where  the  distinction  could  not  always  be  accurately  perceived  between  the  background 
and  the  foreground.  He  knew,  however,  that  certain  occurrences  must  precede  the 
Farousia.  Surely  this  incentive  to  vigilance  should  be  operative  with  us,  to  whom 
later  centuries  have  rolled.  Who  shall  say  when  the  cry  may  resound,  "  Behold,  the 
Bridegroom  cometh "  ?  No  doubt,  too,  that  the  apostle  foresaw  a  rapid  extension  of 
evangelistic  endeavours.  The  n  earing  downfall  of  Jewish  hopes  would  cause  many  to 
turn  to  the  gospel  as  the  only  possible  fulfilment  of  their  Messianic  aspirations.  Such 
times  of  potency  are  ever  occurring  to  us  individually  and  collectively.  Like  ardent 
men  of  business,  we  should  be  on  the  look-out  to  seize  our  opportunities.  Both  at  home 
and  abroad  this  is  an  unequalled  season  for  missionary  effort;  doors  are  being  opened  on 
every  side.  To  spend  the  night  in  rioting  is  to  slumber  during  the  day :  the  morning 
will  find  us  heavy-eyed  and  dull  of  brain.  And  to  each  one  the  day  of  death  is  drawing 
near — a  day  of  deliverance,  of  full  salvation  to  the  faithful.  Who  would  indulge  the 
ambition  of  standing  before  the  blaze  of  glory  from  the  throne  in  filthy  garments,  with 
marks  of  sin  upon  the  brow,  and  defiling  stains  upon  tiie  person  ?  This  night  is  our 
earthly  day  of  seivice  and  opportunity.  The  day  of  heaven  closes  for  ever  the  night 
of  earth.  The  remembrance  of  wasted  moments  will  diminish  the  splendour  of  the 
heavenly  reward.  "Work,  for  the  day  is  coming!  "  The  anticipation  of  such  a  season 
of  disclosure  is  calculated  to  melt  the  stoniest  heart  into  contrition.  All  deeds  will 
stand  confessed. 

"  My  conscience  hath  a  thousand  several  tongues. 
And  every  tongue  brings  in  a  several  tale." 

n.  The  conduct  requisite  in  such  a  crisis.  1.  Cultivate  a  spirit  of  wakefulness. 
"  When  the  sun  ariseth,  man  goeth  forth  to  his  labour."  Those  who  sleep  heavily, 
like  the  drunken,  know  nothing  of  the  signs  of  dawn,  and  are  surprised  that  the  morn- 
ing could  come  without  their  noting  its  approach.  "  Awake  thou  that  sleepest,"  for 
thy  sleep  is  that  of  death  1  His  voice  sounding  through  the  cavern  shall  give  thee 
strength  to  arise,  and  in  his  light  thou  shalt  see  all  things  clearly.  It  is  death  to  the 
sentinel  to  sleep  at  his  post.  The  lover  cannot  rest  when  he  pictures  the  joy  of  the 
morrow,  and  the  bride  of  Christ  may  well  watch  with  intense  delight  the  multiplying 
tokens  of  her  Lord's  arrival.  2.  Indue  the  appropriate  attire.  This  involves,  first,  the 
"  casting  off"  of  the  vestments  of  the  night,  and  secondly,  the  "  putting  on  "  of  the 
costume  of  day.  The  works  of  darkness  are  like  an  infected  garment,  which  the 
instructed  wearer  throws  aside  as  worse  than  no  covering  at  all.  The  panoply  of  light, 
the  faith,  hope,  and  love  in  which  Christ  arrays  his  followers, — this  is  the  armour  which 
will  bear  the  scrutiny  of  the  Captain,  and  prove  a  sure  defence  against  the  powers  of 
evil.  This  negative  and  positive  preparation  is  in  essence  one  and  the  same,  as  the 
entrance  of  light  scatters  the  darkness.  Armour  was  the  favourite  dress  of  Bomans, 
and  though  they  would  doff  it  for  night  revels,  they  would  scorn  to  lack  their  accoutre- 
ments in  the  daytime.  The'  cross  of  Christ  is  the  tiring-room  of  his  servants ;  there 
they  die  to  sin  and  live  unto  righteousness ;  there  they  "  put  on  Christ,"  imbibe  his 
spirit,  and  receive  his  colours.  The  Northumbrian  earl,  conscious  of  the  advent  of 
death,  desired  to  be  clothed  in  the  suit  of  mail  in  which  he  had  won  so  many  fights ; 
but  the  eye  became  glazed,  the  nerveless  hand  could  not  grasp  the  spear,  the  ashen  hue 
of  mortality  overspread  his  face.  The  Christian  dons  his  equipment,  never  to  lay  it 
aside ;  in  it  he  shall  joia  the  throng  of  those  who  have  overcome.  S.  Exert  a  decorous 
activity.  Avoid  evil  by  pursuing  good.  "  Walk  honestly,"  not  indulging  in  intem- 
perance, impurity,  and  discord,  but  leading  a  righteous,  sober,  godly  life.  Deeds  of 
darkness  are  condemned  \>y  the  light,  revealing  their  hideousness,  whilst  habits  of 
integrity  and  virtue  shrink  not  from  any  scrutiny;  they  shine  most  lustrous  in  the 
brightest  rays.  Attain  "  to  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ,"  "  grow- 
ing up  into  him  who  is  the  Head  in  all  things."  We  are  now  weaving  and  sewing  and 
donning  the  vestments  that  shall  be  our  glory  or  our  shame  through  eternity. — S.  B.  A. 


404  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xm.  1—14 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Citizenship.  From  the  admirable  spirit  which  Christianity  infuses  into 
society,  the  apostle  next  takes  us  to  the  spirit  which  should  regulate  the  believer's 
relations  to  the  civil  magistrate.  It  is  most  important  that  Christianity  should  leaven 
all  these  relations  to  the  powers  that  be.  "  I  could  not,"  says  Dr.  Arnold,  "  name 
easily  any  branch  of  human  conduct  from  which  the  influence  of  the  gospel  has  been 
more  completely  shut  out  than  this ;  any  one  on  which  worldly  motives  are  avowed 
more  boldly  and  more  exclusively.  In  fact,  many  men  seem  to  have  vaguely  con- 
founded the  gospel  and  the  clergy  in  their  notions  about  these  matters ;  and  because 
clergymen,  like  other  men,  have  often  interfered  in  them  in  the  worst  possible  spirit, 
uot  setting  an  example  of  Christian  conduct,  but  plunging  into  the  lowest  motives  of 
passion  or  interest  by  which  other  men  are  actuated,  there  seems  a  sort  of  fear  that  the 
gospel  itself  will  teach  something  mischievous  to  the  public  welfare  or  liberty.  But, 
indeed,  in  all  moral  wisdom,  in  all  duty,  whether  as  private  men  or  citiaens,  there  is 
but  one  Master,  even  Christ,  from  whom  we  can  draw  nothing  but  what  is  pure  and 
upright." '  It  is  most  important,  then,  to  see  how  the  gospel  handles  the  question  of 
citizenship. 

I.  Civil  GOVERNMENT  IS  AN  ORDINANCE  OF  GoD.  (Ver.  1.)  We  are  tempted,  in 
thinking  on  civil  society,  to  look  upon  it  "  either  as  a  matter  of  mutual  convenience 
between  man  and  man,  or  else  as  an  injustice  and  encroachment  made  by  the  rich  and 
powerful  on  the  rights  and  welfare  of  others."  But  in  this  we  are  mistaken.  It  has 
grown  up  as  a  Divine  ordinance,  and  we  are  not  in  right  relation  to  it  until  we  recognize 
this.  And  this  is  true  not  merely  of  the  Jewish  commonwealth,  where  Divine  ideas 
were  more  or  less  regarded  and  embodied,  but  also  of  the  other  nations  of  the  world. 
They  have  organized  themselves  and  performed  a  certain  mission,  and  passed,  it  may 
be,  from  the  stage,  in  fulfilment  of  a  Divine  purpose.  For  each  of  these  nations,  as  it 
has  been  recently  said,  "  he  had  an  office ;  for  each  he  had  appointed  a  beginning  and 
an  end.  One  by  one  they  rose  in  orderly  succession,  those  stupendous  kingdoms  of  the 
East.  Babylonian  and  Persian,  Egyptian  and  Greelj,  God  had  required  their  armies ; 
he  had  laid  his  hand  upon  their  captains ;  Assyria  was  his  hammer,  Cyrus  was  his 
shepherd,  Egypt  was  his  garden.  Tyre  was  his  jewel;  everywhere  he  was  felt;  every- 
where the  Divine  destiny  directed  and  controlled;  .  .  .  the  shuttle  of  God  passes  in 
and  out,  weaving  into  its  web  a  thousand  threads  of  natural  bumati  life.  All  history 
is  put  to  ihe  uses  of  God's  holier  manifestation ;  he  works  under  the  pressure  laid  upon 
him  by  the  wants  and  necessities  of  social  and  political  progress."'  Of  course,  this 
does  not  imply  that  we  are  calmly  to  accept  of  all  a  government  chooses  to  inflict ;  but 
simply  that,  speaking  generally,  civil  society  and  civil  government  are  ordained  of  God 
to  prevent  us  descending  to  beastly  levels  again. 

II.  Civil  government  is  established  as  a  terror  to  evil-dobbs.  (Vers.  2,  3.) 
This  is  the  rough  yet  salutary  morality  it  undertakes.  If  we  will  only  consider  what 
a  state  of  society  we  should  have  if  there  were  no  public  government  to  punish  crimes, 
we  can  have  no  difficulty  in  recognizing  in  it  a  Divine  institution.  The  anani^ement 
about  the  manslayer  in  the  olden  time  was  to  reinforce  the  rude  justice  of  the  early  age 
before  public  justice  had  grown  up  into  the  recognized  power  which  in  civil  government 
it  has  now  assumed.'  We  thus  see  that  civil  government  is  an  institution  which  pro- 
fesses to  favour  morality,  and,  if  it  professed  anything  else,  it  would  break  down.  It 
may  not  always  succeed,  but  this  is  its  profession.  We  are  bound  to  give  it  a  loyal 
trial,  and  to  submit  to  it,  so  far  as  it  dbes  not  dictate  anything  to  its  subjects  contrary 
to  the  clear  command  of  God.  "  The  fact  that  an  earthly  government  may  be  corrupt 
and  tyrannical  does  not  disprove  the  Divine  origin  of  government ;  any  more  than  the 
fact  that  parents  maybe  unfaithful  to  their  duties  proves  that  the  family  is  not  divinely 
originated ;  or  the  fact  that  a  particular  Church  may  become  corrupt  proves  that  the 
Church  is  not  Divine  in  its  source.  St.  Paul,  however,  does  not  teach  here  that  any 
degree  of  tyranny  whatever  is  to  be  submitted  to  by  a  Christian.  If  the  government 
attempt  to  force  him  to  violate  a  Divine  command — for  example,  to  desist  from  preaching 

'  '  Sermons  on  Interpretation  of  Scripture,'  p.  534. 

•  See  Canon  Holland's  sermon  on  "The  Powers  that  be,"  iff  his  'Logic  and  Life,' 
pp.  241,  242. 

»  Of.  Mozley's  'Euling  Ideas  in  Early  Ages:'  "The  Law  of  Eotaliation,"  and  "The 
I,aw  of  Goel." 


OH.  XIII.  1—14.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  405 

the  gospel,  or  to  ta^e  part  in  pagan  worship — >he  must  resist  eren  nnto  death  (see  Acts 
iv.  19 ;  T.  29).  Most  of  the  apostles  suffered  martyrdom  for  this  principle  "  (so  Shedd, 
in  loc.). 

III.   ThB   believer    18  EXPECTED   TO   BE   LOYAL  TO  THE  EXISTIFO  GOVBBNMBNT  AS  A 

MATTER  OF  CONSCIENCE.  (Ver.  6.)  We  have  already  seen  where  the  duty  of  resistance 
to  the  civil  magistrate  comes  in — where  he  interferes  with  God's  province  and  assumes 
the  lordship  of  the  conscience.  But  when  he  keeps  clear  of  this  we  are  to  yield  him 
obedience  as  a  matter  of  conscience,  and  not  as  a  matter  of  fear.  Treason  is  a  business 
outside  a  believer's  functions  altogether.  His  simple  duty  is  submission ;  under  protest, 
sometimes,  it  may  be ;  but  he  should  not  incur  the  curse  of  taking  the  sword  and  perish- 
ing by  it.  "  In  respect  to  things  pertaining  only  to  this  life,"  says  Dr.  Shedd,  "  and  in 
cases  in  which  the  rights  of  conscience  and  religious  convictions  are  not  infringed  upon, 
both  Christ  and  his  apostles  taught  that  injustice,  and  even  tyranny,  should  be  sub- 
mitted to,  rather  than  that  revolutionary  resistance  be  made.  And  this,  because  merely 
earthly  liberty,  and  the  rights  of  property,  are  of  secondary  consideration.  The  same 
rule  applies  to  the  relation  of  the  individual  to  the  stale,  in  this  case,  that  applies  to 
the  relation  between  man  and  man.  If  a  Christian  is  defrauded  of  his  property  by  a 
fellow-believer,  he  ought  to  "  take  the  wrong,  and  suffer  himself  to  be  defrauded,"  rather 
than  "  go  to  law  one  with  another  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  7).  In  like  manner,  in  regard  to  merely 
worldly  good,  the  Christian  should  forego  his  rights,  and  allow  himself  to  be  ill  treated 
even  by  the  government  under  which  he  lives,  rather  than  organize  a  rebellion  and 
bring  on  war  with  its  untold  evils." 

IV.  Taxation  is  the  support  of  a  Divine  okdinancb.  (Ver.  6.)  It  may  be  hard 
to  believe  that  ministers  of  state  are  at  the  same  time  ministers  of  God,  and  that  heavy 
taxation  for  government  extravagance  is  stipend  to  God's  officers ;  yet  so  it  is.  They 
are  "  servants  of  the  people  appointed  of  God,"  and  so  must  get  their  tribute.  Of  course, 
it  is  open  to  the  Christian  citizen  to  criticize  the  government  management,  and  seek 
that  the  ordinance  of  civil  government  do  not  become  a  tax  such  as  no  citizen  will  be 
able  to  bear.  When  the  Church  and  the  state  are  compared,  the  Church  is  out  of  sight 
the  cheaper  institution.  Still,  it  does  not  become  the  Christian,  any  more  than  his 
Master,  to  be  haggling  about  tribute ;  and  there  will  usually  be  some  way,  though  not 
perhaps  through  a  fish's  mouth,  of  meeting  the  tax-gatherer's  demands. 

v.  The  becognition  of  state  claims  and  honours  becomes,  in  fact,  BBLiaiotrs. 
(Ver.  7.)  All  are  to  g^t  their  due,  whether  direct  taxes,  or  duties  of  excise,  or  fear  and 
honour ;  for  these  arrangements  of  state  are,  as  a  rule,  favourable  to  good  morals,  and 
deserve  to  be  respected.  Now,  there  are  one  or  two  objections  to  the  principle  of 
Christian  citizenship  as  here  laid  down  which,  before  concluding  this  homily,  we  may 
dispose  of.  1.  How  about  a  state  when  it  proceeds  to  persecution  and  injustice  f 
Answer :  The  believer  in  such  a  case  nmst  protest  against  the  injustice,  and  patiently 
bear  it,  while  he  respects  the  Divine  principle  embodied  in  the  persecuting  state.  He 
avoids  disloyalty,  yet  advocates  reform.  2.  Is  the  Church  to  be  the  tool  of  the  state  f 
Answer:  By  no  means.  They  have  distinct  spheres.  It  is  as  false  to  put  the  Church 
against  the  state,  as  to  confound  the  Church  and  the  state.  The  Church  recognizes 
the  state  as  a  moral  institution  for  securing  Justice,  and  the  state  should  recognize  the 
Church  as  a  Divine  institution  for  securing  love.  The  state  enforces  justice  by  penal- 
ties; the  Church  promotes  love  by  persuasion.  There  need  be,  and  should  be,  no 
confusion  between  them. — E.  M.  E.  ' 

Vers.  8 — 14. — Christ-likeness.  From  citizenship,  which  is  disposed  of  in  the  preceding 
verses,  the  apostle  passes  on  to  the  Christian  spirit  as  manifested  in  neighbourly  rela- 
tions. He  here  enters  into  the  very  spirit  and  essence  of  God's  law,  showing  it  to  be 
love.     And  here  we  have — 

I.  The  debt  which  can  nbvbb  be  discharged.  (Ver.  8.)  We  may  pay  all  othei 
debts,  and  should  owe  no  man  anything ;  but  love  is  a  debt  that  can  never  be  dis- 
charged, an  obligation  which  abides,  a  blessed  law  laid  on  us  in  perpetuity.  All  the 
commandments  of  the  second  table  are  covered  by  this  one  law  of  love.  No  one  in  his 
senses  would  ever  seek  discharge  from  such  a  law.  Could  it  be  a  privilege  to  hate  one's 
neighbour  ?  "Good  haters,"  as  they  are  pleased  to  call  themselves,  are  usually  piiblio 
nuisances.     We  are  under  this  law  of  love  for  ever,  because  we  are  under  grace.    It  is 


406  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xni  1—14. 

here  that  our  Divine  Bonship  is  realized ;  it  is  here  that  Christ-likeness  begins.  GtoA  is 
love ;  and  in  proportion  as  we  are  loving  are  we  like  Christ  and  his  Father  above.' 

IL  With  the  Christ-like  life  hab  ceased  to  be  a  dream.  (Ver.  11.)  This  is  the 
case  with  the  worldly ;  they  fancy  they  are  "  wide  awake,"  and  yet  they  are  asleep  so 
far  as  eternal  realities  are  concerned.  How  time  slips  through  their  fingers,  as  it  does 
with  those  in  sleep  I  Life  is  not  in  earnest ;  they  have  pillowed  themselves  upon 
success,  and  are  dead  to  things  Divine.  But  when  Christ  comes,  then  we  awake  and 
find  ourselves  in  the  morning  hours.  That  Sun  of  Righteousness  arises  and  our  dream 
and  night  are  over,  and  the  activities  of  the  new  day  are  come.  The  Christ-like  feel 
that  life  is  earnest,  and  no  time  should  be  lost  in  dreams.  As  Feuchtersleben  has 
pointedly  said,  "  Life  is  no  dream.  It  only  becomes  so  by  the  fault  of  man,  and  when 
his  mind  disobeys  the  summons  to  awake."  * 

in.  The  works  of  darkness  and  the  lusts  op  the  flesh  are  out  of  date. 
(Vers.  12 — 14.)  While  life  is  only  a  dream,  while  the  night  of  indifference  and  neglect 
is  around  the  soul,  indulgence  will  be  tolerated  and  provision  made  for  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh.  Pleasure  will  be  the  pole-star  of  life,  and  decency  will  not  deter  the  soul  from 
its  satisfactions.  Of  course,  the  primitive  Church  had  to  deal  more  with  the  lusts  of 
the  flesh  than  we  have ;  or  perhaps  they  went  more  thoroughly  into  the  morals  of  their 
members.  "The  primitive  Church,"  it  has  been  said,  "was  more  under  the  influence 
of  the  'lust  of  the  flesh'  than  of  the  'pride  of  life;'  the  modem  Church  ismore  un'ier 
the  influence  of  the  '  pride  of  life '  than  of  the  'lust  of  the  flesh.'  But  pride  is  as  great 
•  sin,  in  the  sight  of  God,  as  sensuality.  This  should  be  considered  in  forming  an 
estimate  of  the  modern  missionary  Church"  (Shedd,  in  loc).  But  the  soul  which  has 
awaked  through  the  advent  of  Jesus  regards  these  deeds  of  darkness  as  out  of  date. 
They  would  be  anachronisms  of  the  day.  The  light  has  come  and  put  to  flight  tlie 
darkness. 

IV.  The  armoue  op  lmht  alone  befits  the  day.  (Vers.  12,  13.)  Now,  it  is 
wonderful  what  a  protection  light,  even  in  its  physical  form,  is  against  pollution. 
There  are  deeds  which  can  only  be  done  in  darkness.  Turn  the  light  upon  them,  and 
they  are  annihilated  through  sheer  shame.  In  the  same  way,  when  the  full  spiritual 
light  which  Jesus  Christ,  our  Sun,  embodies,  plays  upon  our  life,  we  are  instantly 
aroused  and  elevatedj  and  the  tone  of  life  improves.  This  is  our  panoply  in  the  morning 
kours.  Christ  with  us,  near  us,  observing  us,  encircling  us  with  his  light,  becomes 
our  great  protection. 

V.  Christ-likeness  through  oLOTHiNa  ourselves  with  him  is  the  great  secret 
OP  A  useful  and  happy  life.  (Ver.  14.)  As  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  shines  around 
us  we  contract  a  luminosity  like  his.  We  get  sanctified  through  contemplating  him. 
The  same  image  that  is  in  him  becomes  ours  from  glory  to  glory,  as  with  unveiled  face 
we  behold  the  face  of  God  (2  Cor.  iii.  17).  It  is  this  likeness  to  our  Lord  which  makes 
us  increasingly  earnest  and  useful  and  happy  in  life's  young  day.  We  feel  that  salva- 
tion, in  all  its  length  and  breadth,  is  nearer  realization  than  when  we  first  believed. 
The  morning  hours  give  promise  of  the  perfect  day.'  As  one  has  well  put  it,  "  ITie 
pilgrims  of  the  dawn  tolerate  nothing  in  themselves  that  the  light  of  day  would  rebuke. 
Hence  it  is  the  counterpart  of  this  that  they  make  no  provision  for  the  flesh;  whatever 
provision  they  take  for  their  heavenly  journey,  the  flesh  has  no  share  in  it.  The  sin 
adhering  to  their  nature,  the  old  man  not  yet  dead,  is  an  enemy  whose  hunger  they  do  not 
feed,  to  whose  thirst  they  do  not  administer  drink,  whose  dying  solicitations  they  regard 
not,  but  leave  him  to  perish  hy  the  way.  But  the  supreme  preparation — uniting  all  others 
in  one — is  the  putting  on  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  In  him  alone  the  dignity  and 
the  purity  of  our  nature  meet ;  transformed  into  his  character,  we  need  nothing  more 
to  fit  us  for  the  holiest  heavens;  but  nothing  less  will  sufiBce  his  expectation  at  his 
coming.  He  will  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints — already  the  likeness  in  ten  thousand 
reproductions  of  himself;  and  they  shall  in  turn  he  glorified  in  him.     Hence  the  great 

•  See  Butler's  sermon  on  "  The  Love  of  our  Neighbour ;  "  also  A.  W.  Hare's  on  "  Love 
the  Fulfilling  of  the  Law,"  in  '  Sermons,'  vol.  ji.  p.  393  ;  and  Hofacker's  '  Predigten,'  b.  183, 
on  "  Brotherly  Love." 

'  '  Dietetics  of  the  Soul,'  p.  194. 

•  See  Newman's  sermon  on  "  Self-denial  tl  e  Test  of  Religious  Earnestness,"  in  vol.  I 
jp.  57,  etc. 


OH.  XIV.  1—23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


407 


business  of  the  pilgrims  is  to  occupy  the  precious  moments  of  the  morning  in  weaving 
into  their  nature  the  character  of  Christ  as  the  apparel  of  the  eternal  day.  And  if  ia 
faith  that  worketh  by  love — the  love  that  fullilleth  the  Law — they  diligently  co-operata 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  will  be  his  blessed  function  to  see  to  it  that  before  the  Bride- 
groom cometh,  his  bride,  and  every  individual  soul  that  makes  up  her  mystical  person, 
shall  be  found  clothed  in  his  spiritual  perfection  as  with  a  garment  without  seam,  woven 
from  the  top  throughout.  Beyond  this  we  cannot  go.  This  is  the  close  and  the  secret 
of  the  whole  exhortation  to  the  pilgrims  of  the  dawn.  They  have  come  up  out  of  the 
night  at  the  sound  of  his  awakening  voice,  and  have  left  their  Egyptian  darkness  for 
ever.  They  are  wrestling  with  the  dangers  of  the  morning,  rejoicing  in  its  partial 
satisfactions.  But  supremely  and  above  all  they  are  intent  upon  the  coming  day ;  in 
their  pathway  there  is  no  death,  but  they  wait  for  the  more  abundant  life ;  they  are  full 
of  trembling- and  solemn  expectation  of  all  that  the  day  will  pour  out  of  its  unfathom- 
able mysteries.  But  the  end  of  all  their  expectation  is  the  Person  of  their  Lord.  And 
to  prepare  for  him  by  being  like  himself  is  the  sum  of  all  their  preparation."*  May 
we  all  thus  put  on  Christ  and  be  like  him  I — B.  M.  E. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  XIV. 


Vers.  1 — 23. — P.  IVie  duty  of  enlightened 
Christiana  towards  weak  brethren.  From 
moral  duties  in  general  of  Christians  to- 
wards each  other  and  towards  all  the  apostle 
now  passes -to  such  as  they  owe  peculiarly 
to  each  other  as  members  of  a  religious 
community,  united  by  a  common  faith.  He 
has  already  (ch.  xii.  16)  admonished  his 
readers  to  be  "  of  the  same  mind  one  toward 
another ; "  but,  as  was  remarked  under  that 
verse,  this  did  not  imply  agreement  of  view 
on  all  subjects,  such  as  is  impossible  where 
there  are  many  minds.  In  this  chapter  he 
recognizes  the  impossibility,  having  imme- 
diately before  him  what  was  then  patent,  the 
inability  of  some,  through  prejudice  or  slow- 
ness of  conception,  to  enter  into  views  of 
the  meaning  of  the  gospel  which  to  himself 
and  the  more  enlightened  were  apparent. 
He  by  no  means  departs  from  what  he  says 
elsewhere  (cf.  Gal.  i.  6 — 10)  about  no  denial 
of  fundamental  doctrine  being  allowable  in 
the  communion  of  the  Church;  but  in  matters 
not  touching  the  foundation  he  does  here 
inculcate  a  large  and  generous  tolerance. 
In  these,  as  in  all  other  relations  between 
men  on  the  earth  together,  the  all-inspiring 
principle  of  eharity  is  to  rule.  Who  the 
"weak  brethren"  were  whose  scruples  he 
especially  inculcates  tolerance  of  in  this 
chapter  cannot  be  decided  positively.  It 
will  be  seen  that  tliey  were  persons  who 


thought  it  their  duty  to  abstain  from  animal 
food,  and  perhaps  also  from  wine  (vers.  2,, 
21);  and  there  is  allusion  also  to  observance 
of  certain  days  (ver.  5).  The  views  that 
have  been  taken  are  as  follows : — 

(1)  That  they  were  the  same  class  of 
Jewish  Christians  as  are  spoken  of  in  1 
Cor.  viii.  as  over-scrupulous  about  eating  of 
things  that  had  been  offered  in  sacrifice  to 
idols. 

(2)  That  they  were  such  as  were  scrupu- 
lous in  avoiding  unclean  meats,  forbidden 
in  the  Mosaic  Law.  (Or,  as  Erasmus  and 
others  suggest,  views  (1)  and  (2)  may  be 
combined.) 

(3)  That  they  were  ascetics. 

In  favour  of  view  (1)  is  the  fact  that  the 
drift  and  tone  of  the  exhortation  is  exactly 
the  same  here  as  in  1  Cor.  viii.,  with  simi- 
larity also  of  expressions,  such  as  S  kaBfv&v, 
i  iffBiteVj  fipaats,  ^pa^Ot  awoKieiv,  irpotrKo/xfia, 
(TKavSdKtCeiv.  Against  it  are  the  facts  (a) 
that  in  the  chapter  before  us  there  is  no 
allusion  whatever  to  idol-meats,  as  there  is 
throughout  so  markedly  in  1  Cor.  viii. ;  and 
(6)  that  abstinence  from  all  animal  food 
whatever  (and  apparently  from  wine  t»o) 
is  spoken  of  in  this  chapter.  Objection  (u) 
has  been  met  by  saying  that  the  ground  of 
the  scrupulosity  referred  to  might  be  so  well 
known  that  St.  Paul  did  not  think  it  neces- 
sary to  mention  it  when  he  wrote  to  the 
Romans.  To  objection  (6)  it  is  replied  that 
there  might  be  some  who,  in  order  to  guard 


•  Pope'i  'Kingdom  of  Christ,'  pp.  376,  377. 


408 


THK  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  xnr.  1—23. 


against  the  rtel?  of  buying  at  the  shaniblea, 
or  partaking  in  general  society  of  viands 
connected  with  heathen  sacrifices,  made  a 
point  of  abstaining  from  meat  altogether, 
and  (it  has  been  suggested)  from  wine  too, 
which  might  have  been  used  in  libations. 
This  is  the  view  of  Clement  of  Alexandria, 
Ambrosiaster,  and  Augustine,  among  the 
ancients. 

View  (2)  is  that  of  Origen,  Chrysostom, 
Theodoret,  Jerome,  and  others,  among  whom 
Chrysostom  accounts  for  the  total  abstinence 
from  meat  as  follows :  "  There  were  many  of 
the  Jews  that  believed,  who,  being  still 
bound  in  conscience  to  the  Law,  even  after 
believing  still  observed  the  ordinances  about 
meats,  not  as  yet  venturing  to  depart  from 
the  Law ;  and  then,  in  order  not  to  be  con- 
ipicuous  in  abstaining  from  swine's  flesh 
only,  they  abstained  from  all  flesh,  and  ate 
■  herbs  only,  that  their  practice  might  seem 
to  be  rather  fasting,  and  not  observance  of 
the  Law  "  (so  also  fficumenius  and  Theophy- 
lact).  But  this  seems  tu  be  a  conjecture 
•nly,  and  hardly  a.  likely  one.  And  further, 
it  fails  to  account  for  abstinence  from  wine, 
which  seems  to  be  implied,  on  the  part  of 
some  at  least,  in  ver.  21.  (It  may  be  ob- 
served, howeyer,  that  this  is  not  of  necessity 
implied.  Abstinence  from  meat  is  all  that 
has  been  spoken  of  before,  and  again  in 
Ter.  23;  and  St.  Paul  may  possibly  mean 
only  to  Bay,  in  ver.  21,  that  if  by  abstaining 
from  wine  also  he  could  avoid  offence  to  a 
weak  brother,  he  would  willingly  so  abstain. 
Still,  the  natural  inference  is  that  he  would 
not  have  mentioned  wine  had  there  not 
been  some  who  made  it  a  point  of  conscience 
to  abstain  from  it.) 

If  the  weak  brethren  were  ascetics,  accord- 
ing to  Tiew  (3),  it  is  most  probable  that 
they  were  Jewish  Christians  who  had  im- 
bibed the  principles  of  the  Essenes.  These 
were  a  Jewish  sect,  spoken  of  especially  by 
Josephus,  who  aimed  at  scrupulous  observ- 
ance of  the  Law  of  Moses,  and  strict  per- 
Ronal  purity.  With  tliis  view  they  lived  in 
communities  under  rule,  partaking  of  the 
simplest  fare,  and  some  abstaining  from 
marriage.  It  docs  not  appear  tliat  they 
were  strict  vegetarians  when  living  in  com- 
munity ;  but  we  are  told  that  they  might 
only  eat  such  meat  as  had  been  prepared  by 
their  own  members,  so  as  to  be  secure  against 


any  pollution,  and  that,  If  excommunicated, 
they  were  consequently  compelled  to  eat 
herbs.  (For  what  is  known  of  them,  see 
Josephus, '  Bell.  Jud.,'  ii ;  viii.  2— 5j  *  Ant.,' 
xiii.  5.  9;  xv.  10.  4,  5;  iviii.  1.  2,  etc.; 
Philo, '  Quod  Omnis  Probus  Liber,'  sec.  xii., 
etc.;  Pliny,  'Hist.  Nat.,'  v.  16,  17.)  It  is 
far  from  unlikely  that  some  of  these  would 
be  attracted  to  Christianity ;  and  this  especi- 
ally as  some  of  their  principles,  as  described 
by  Josephus,  seem  to  have  been  endorsed 
by  Christ  himself  (see  art.  on  "Essenes," 
in  '  Diet,  of  Christian  Biog.,'  vol.  u.  p.  202) ; 
and,  if  so,  they  would  be  likely  to  carry 
their  prejudices  with  them  into  the  Church, 
and,  when  living  outside  their  original  com- 
munities, they  might  abstain  entirely  &om 
flesh  as  well  as  wine.  Or  it  might  be  that 
other  Jews,  Essenic  in  principle  and  feeling, 
had  sought  admission  into  the  Church. 
Philo,  in  Ensebius, '  Prsep.  Evan.,'  viii.  fin., 
and  Josephus,  'Vit.,'  2.  8,  intimate  that 
Bupra^legal  asceticism,  under  the  influence 
of  Essenic  principles,  was  not  uncommon  in 
Judaism  in  their  time.  The  latter  (o.  3) 
speaks  of  certain  priests,  his  friends,  who 
were  so  God-fearing  that  they  subsisted  on 
fi^s  and  nuts,  and  (o.  2)  of  one  Banns,  who 
had  been  his  master,  who  ate  no  food  but 
vegetables.  What  is  still  more  to  our  pur- 
pose is  that  we  find  evidence  of  pious 
ascetics  of  the  same  type  subsequently 
among  Christians.  Origen  ('Contra  Cels.,' 
v.  49)  speaks  of  some  as  living  in  his 
time ;  and  even  the  apostle  St.  Matthew, 
and  James  the  Lord's  brother,  were  after- 
wards credited  with  a  corresponding  mode 
of  life.  Clement  of  Alexandria  ('  Pssdag.,' 
ii.  1)  says  of  the  former,  "Matthew  the 
apostle  partook  of  seeds  and  acoms  and 
herbs,  without  flesh."  Hegesippus,  quoted 
by  Eusebius  (ii.  23),  says  of  the  latter  that 
"  he  drank  not  wine  or  strong  drinks,  nor  did 
he  eat  animal  food ;  a  razor  came  not  upon 
his  head;  he  did  not  anoint  himself  with 
oil ;  he  did  not  use  the  bath."  It  is  to  be 
observed  that  abstinence  from  ointments 
was  one  of  the  practices  of  the  Essenes  (Jo- 
sephus, '  Bell.  Jud.,'  viii.  2.  3).  Augustine 
('  Ad  Faust.,'  xxii.  3)  transmits  the  game 
tradition  as  to  the  abstinence  of  James  from 
flesh  and  wine.  Whatever  foundation  thei« 
might  be  for  these  traditions,  they  at  any 
rate  show  that  in  the  second  century,  when 


OH.  XIV.  1—23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS. 


409 


Hi'goaippus  wrote,  abstinence  such  as  is 
intimated  in  this  chapter  was  regarded  as 
a  mark  of  superior  sanctity  by  some  Chris- 
tiana. Further,  in  the  '  Apostolical  Canons ' 
(Canon  li.).  Christians  who  abstained  from 
marriage,  or  flesh,  or  wine,  are  allowed  to 
be  retained  in  the  communion  of  the  Church 
as  long  as  they  did  so  by  way  of  religious 
restraint  only.  Against  the  above  view  of 
the  weak  brethren  of  the  chapter  before  us 
having  been  ascetics  of  the  Bssenio  type,  is 
Alleged  the  strong  condemnation  of  persons 
supposed  to  have  been  of  the  same  sort  in 
Col.  ii.  8,  16,  seq.,  and  1  Tim.  iv.  1 — 5, 
which  is  said  to  be  inconsistent  with  the 
temler  tolerance  recommended  here.  But  the 
teachers  referred  to  in  the  later  Epistles, 
though  inculcating  practices  similar  to  those 
of  the  "weak  brethren,"  appear  to  have 
been  heretical  theosophists,  the  germ  prob- 
ably of  later  Gnosticism.  Their  tenets  may 
indeed,  in  part  at  least,  have  been  developed 
from  Essenism ;  but  it  was  no  longer  mere 
conscientious  scrupulosity,  but  principles 
subversive  of  the  faith,  that  St.  Paul  set  his 
face  against  in  writing  to  the  Colossians,  and 
to  Timothy.  Canon  li.  in  the  '  Apostolical 
Canons '  above  referred  to  may  be  adduced 
as  distinguishing  between  the  principles  on 
which  asceticism  might  be  practised  allow- 
ably or  olherwise;  it  being  therein  laid 
down  that  any  who  abstained  from  marriage, 
flesh,  or  wine,  not  by  way  of  religious  re- 
straint, but  as  abhorring  them,  forgetting 
that  God  made  all  things  very  good,  and 
that  he  made  man  male  and  female,  and 
blaspheming  the  work  of  creation,  should 
be  cast  out  of  the  Churoli. 

It  remains  to  be  observed  that  there  was 
diffused  among  the  Gentiles  also,  through  the 
influence  of  the  Neo-Pythagorean  philosophy, 
an  asceticism  similar  to  the  Essenic  (see 
Senec,  'Bp.,'  108,  and  Porphyr.,  'De  Ab- 
stin.'),  which  Eiohhom  supposes  the  "  weak 
bretliren"  of  this  chapter  to  have  been 
affected  by,  regarding  them  as  mostly  Gen- 
tile Christians.  But  Jewish  influences  are 
much  more  probable;  the  scruples  referred 
to  iu  1  Cor.  viii.  were  certainly  due  to  them ; 
and  observe  ver.  5  in  this  chapter,  which 
cannot  but  refer  to  Jewish  observances. 
Further,  Origen,  in  the  treatise  above  re- 
ferred to,  expressly  distinguishes  between 
Chri8ti.an  and  Pythagorean  asceticism.    His 


words  are,  "  But  see  also  the  difference  of 
the  cause  of  the  abstinence  from  creatures 
having  life  as  practised  by  the  Pythagoreans 
and  by  the  ascetics  among  ourselves.  For 
they  abstain  because  of  the  fable  concerning 
the  transmigration  of  souls;  .  .  .  but  we, 
though  we  may  practise  the  like,  do  it 
when  we  keep  under  tho  flesh  and  bring  it 
into  subjection  "  ('  Contra  Cels.,'  4). 

Ver.  1.— Him  that  is  weak  in  the  faith 
(rather,  in  faith,  or  in  his  faith).  The  article 
before  iriffT^i  does  not  denote  the  faith  ob- 
jectively. Cf.  ch.  iv.  19,  /lii  curSeirtia-as  t^ 
■ir'unei.  In  1  Cor.  viii.  12  it  is  the  conseienee 
that  is  spoken  of  as  weak,  riiv  <rvveiS-i)(Tiv 
aadiVoSaav.  Persons  are  meant  whose  faith 
is  not  sufficiently  strong  and  enlightened 
for  entering  fully  into  the  true  spirit  of  tho 
gospel  so  as  to  distinguish  between  essentials 
and  non-essentials.  Beceive  ye  (i.e.  take  to 
yourselves  with  kindness — with  reference,  it 
may  be,  both  to  persons  seeking  admission 
into  the  Church  and  to  those  already  in  it 
who  could  not  get  rid  of  their  scruples. 
The  verb,  which  is  irpoaXaiiPiveaBe,  occurs 
iu  a  like  sense  in  Acts  xxviii.  2,  and  Philem. 
12,  17.  It  may  be  regarded  here  as  the 
opposite  of  4KK\eT<rai  fle'Aeii'  of  Gal.  iv.  17), 
but  not  to  doubtful  disputations;  rither, 
unto — i.e.  so  as  to  result  in— judgments  of 
thoughts.  The  Authorized  Version  has  in 
margin, "  to  judge  his  doubtful  thoughts,"  which 
is  probably  nearer  the  true  meaning  than 
the  text.  AiaKplais  mea.jia  elBeyfheie  (Hjudi- 
caiio  (1  Cor.  xii.  10 ;  Heb.  v.  14),  not  "  dis- 
putation "  or  "  doubt "  (as  has  been  supposed 
from  the  verb  Siaxplvea-Sai ,  meaning  "  to 
doubt ").  "  Non  dijudicemus  cogitationes 
iufirmorum,  quasi  ferre  audeamus  sonten- 
tiam  de  alieno  corde,  quod  non  videtur" 
(Augustin, '  Prepos.,'  78). 

Vers.  2,  3.— One  believeth  that  he  may  eat 
all  things  (literally,  believeth  to— oi,  hath 
faith  to — eat  all  things'),  but  he  that  is  weak 
eateth  herbs.  Let  not  him  that  eateth 
despise  him  that  eateth  not ;  and  let  not  hint 
which  eateth  not  judge  him  that  eateth: 
for  God  hath  received  him.  "  He  that  eateth  " 
is  the  one  that  has  faith  to  eat  all  things; 
and  it  is  against  contempt  on  his  part  of  the 
weak  in  faith  that  the  admonition  is  mainly 
directed  throughout  the  chapter  (cf.  also  ch. 
XV.  1).  But  the  weak  require  an  admonition 
too.  Their  temptation  was  to  judge  those  who 
indulged  in  freedom  which  to  themselves 
appeared  unlawful ;  and  here,  in  ver.  5,  the 
apostle  gives  such  as  did  so  a  sharp  reproof. 
There  is  a  tone  of  indignation  in  his  trii  tIs 
•T  6  Kplvav ;  reminding  us  of  his  tone  towards 
the  Judaists  in  Galatia,  who  would  have 
crippled  Christian  liberty.  "God  hath 
received  him"  refers  evidently,  as  appears 


410 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  xir,  1— 23. 


firom  its  position  and  from  the  following 
Terse,  to  him  that  eateth.  God  hath  re- 
ceived him  to  himself  in  Christ,  whosoever 
may  sit  in  judgment  on  him.  We  observe 
that  the  verb  irpocreXiBeTo  is  the  same  as  in 
▼er.  1  and  in  ch.  xv.  7. 

Ver.  4. — Who  art  then  that  jndgest  an- 
other man's  servant  t  (observe  the  emphatic 
position  of  <ri>)  to  his  own  lord  he  standeth 
or  falleth.  Yea,  he  shall  he  made  to  stand : 
for  the  Lord  (better  supported  than  God,  as 
in  the  Textus  Beceptus)  is  able  (or,  has 
power)  to  make  him  stand.  The  itanding  or 
falling  here  spoken  of  may  be  taken  to  mean 
standing  firm  in,  or  falling  from,  a  state  of 
grace  (cf.  ch.  xi.  20,  22),  rather  than  accept- 
ance or  rejection  at  the  last  judgment  "  For 
God  is  able,"  eto.,  seems  to  require  this 
meaning.  The  non-abstainer's  freedom  does 
not  endanger  his  position;  for  God  is 
powerful  to  sustain  him,  and  to  God  alone 
he  is  accountable. 

Yer.  5. — One  man  esteemeth  one  day 
above  another:  another  esteemeth  every 
day  alike  (literally,  one  judgethdayheyond — 
or,  in  comparison  with — day :  anotherjudgeth 
every  day.  For  xplveiv  in  the  sense  of 
**  estimate,"  cf.  Acts  xiii.  46;  zvi.  IS ;  xxvi. 
8.  For  sense  of  itapii  with  accusative,  cf. 
i.  25 ;  Luke  xiii.  2.  Days  being  here  only 
briefly  referred  to  in  a  chapter  the  main 
subject  of  which  is  meats,  some  have  sup- 
posed/<Mi-do!/s  only  to  be  meant ;  in  which 
ease  the  sense  might  be  that  some  make  it 
a  necessary  point  of  conscience  to  abstain 
from  food,  or  from  certain  kinds  of  food,  on 
particular  days,  while  others  make  no  such 
distinction  between  days  as  a  matter  of 
essential  import.  But  a  comparison  with 
Gal.  iv.  10  and  Col.  iL  16  suggests  rather 
a  general  reference  to  days  of  observance 
nnder  the  Jewish  Law.  The  same  class  of 
weak  brethren  with  Jewish  prejudices  that 
was  scrupulous  about  meats  would  be  likely 
to  be  also  scrupulous  about  days  and  seasons ; 
and  if  scruples  on  the  latter  head  seem  to 
be  mentioned  only  incidentally  in  this 
chapter,  it  may  be  because  the  others  were 
at  that  time  mainly  conspicuous,  and 
threatening  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the 
Church.  One  view  that  has  been  taken 
is  that  this  short  allusion  to  observance  of 
days  is  introduced  only  in  the  way  of  illus- 
tration and  argument;  it  being  supposed 
that  difference  of  practice  with  regard  to 
days  was  allowed  without  dispute,  and  that 
what  St.  Paul  means  to  say  is,  "  You  do 
exercise  mutual  tolerance  in  this  matter; 
extend  the  same  principle  to  the  matter  of 
meats,  to  which  it  is  equally  applicable. 
This  view  of  the  meaning  of  the  passage 
would  derive  support  from  the  reading  of 
yip  at  the  beginning  of  ver.  5,  which  rests 
OB  fair  authority.    The  supposed  reference 


to  Jewish  days  of  obligation  in  general  is 
not  inconsistent  with  the  apparent  condem- 
nation of  the  observance  of  such  days  by 
Christians  in  Gal.  iv.  and  Col.  ii.  For  see 
what  has  been  said  above  about  the  drift  of 
CoL  ii.  16  and  of  1  Tim.  iv.  3,  etc.  When 
the  observances  came  to  be  insisted  on  a» 
obligatory  on  principle,  it  was  a  different 
thing  from  mere  conscientious  scrupulosity, 
let  every  man  be  folly  persnaded  (for  the 
verb  in  this  sense,  of.  oh.  iv.  21)  in  his  own 
mind.  To  St.  Paul  himself  the  observanos 
or  non-observance  of  the  days  referred  to 
was  a  matter  in  itself  of  no  importance. 
He  was  content  that  eacli  person  should  act 
up  to  his  own  conscientious  convictions  on 
the  subject. 

Yer.  6. — He  that  regardeth  the  day,  re- 
gardeth  it  nnto  the  Lord  (omit,  as  ill- 
supported,  as  well  as  unnecessaiy,  and  h» 
that  regardeth  not,  etc.);  he  that  eateth, 
eateth  onto  the  Lord,  for  he  giveth  God 
thanks ;  and  he  that  eateth  not,  to  the  Lord 
he  eateth  not,  and  giveth  God  thanks.  Both 
parties  are  supposed  to  be  equally  desirous 
of  serving  God.  The  eater  of  whatsoever 
is  set  before  him  is  so,  as  is  shown  by 
his  tlianking  God  for  it— 'observe  "for  he 
giveth,"  etc. — and  no  creature  of  God  can 
be  polluting  "if  received  with  thanks- 
giving "  (1  Tim.  iv.  5) ;  the  abstainer  gives 
thanks  too;  and  so  his  dinner  of  herbs  is 
also  hallowed  to  him.  (Though  it  is  not 
necessary  to  confine  the  thought  to  the 
practice  of  saying  grace  before  meat,  this  is 
doubtless  in  view  as  expressing  the  asserted 
thaTikfulness.  For  proof  of  the  custom,  ct 
Matt.  XT.  36;  Acts  xxvii.  35 ;  1  Cor.  x.  30; 
xi.  24 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  4,  5.)  The  general  prin- 
ciple on  which,  in  eating  and  drinking,  as 
in  all  beside.  Christians  are  of  necessity 
supposed  to  act,  and  which  both  parties  are 
to  be  credited  with  desiring  to  carry  out,  is 
set  forth  in  vers.  7,  8,  9,  which  follow. 

Yers.  7,  8. — For  none  of  ns  liveth  to  him- 
self, and  none  dieth  to  himself.  For  whether 
we  live,  we  live  nnto  the  Lord ;  and  whether 
we  die,  we  die  unto  the  Lord :  whether  wa 
live  therefore,  <r  die,  we  are  the  Lord's. 
The  mention  of  dying  as  well  as  living  unto 
the  Lord,  though  it  does  not  seem  needed 
by  the  context,  makes  complete  the  view  of 
the  entire  devotion  of  redeemed  Christians 
to  him;  and  introduces  the  thought,  which 
follows,  of  their  union  with  him  in  his  own 
death  as  well  as  in  his  life. 

Yer.  9.— For  to  this  end  Christ  btth  died 
and  lived  (so  certainly,  rather  than,  as  in  the 
Textus  Keceptns,  died,  and  rose,  and  revived. 
His  living  means  here  his  entering  on  the 
heavenly  life  after  the  human  death),  that 
he  might  be  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  living. 
"Nam  mortem  pro  salute  nostra  obeundo 
dominium  sibi  acquisivit  quod  neo  mort* 


OH,  XIV.  1—23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


411 


solveretur;  resurgendo  antem  totam  vitam 
nostram  in  peculium  accepit;  morte  igitur 
et  resurrectione  sua  promeritus  est  ut  tarn 
in  morfce  quam  in  vita  gloriaa  nominis  ejus 
seiviamus "  (Calvin),  fl'or  the  idea  of  tMs 
whole  passage  (vers.  7 — 9),  of.  1  Oor.  vi. 
20;  vii.  23;  2  Cor.  v.  15. 

The  apostle  now  returns  to  his  immediate 
subject,  warning  (as  in  ver.  3)  the  one  party 
against  judging  and  the  other  against  de- 
fpimig,  on  the  ground  of  all  alike  having  to 
abide  hereafter  Jhe  Divine  judgment  (of. 
Matt.  vii.  1,  teq.;  1  Cor.  iv.  3,  5).  The  dis- 
tinction in  ver.  10  between  the  two  parties, 
marked  in  the  original  by  the  initial  2i  S^ 
and  the  following  i)  /cal  orb,  is  somewhat  lost 
in  our  Authorized  Version. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — Butthon,  whyjndgest  thou 
thy  brother  ?  or  thou  too,  why  settest  thou 
at  nought  thy  brother  1  For  we  shall  all 
stand  before  the  judgment-seat  of  God  (so, 
rather  than  of  Christ,  as  in  the  Textus 
Keceptus).  For  it  is  written,  As  I  live, 
saith  the  Lord,  every  knee  shall  bow  to  me, 
and  every  tongue  shall  confess  to  God  (Isa. 
xlv.  23,  quoted  very  freely  from  the  LXX.). 
So  then  every  one  of  us  shall  give  account 
of  himself  to  God.  Let  us  therefore  no  longer 
judge  one  another.  This  concluding  appeal 
is  addressed  to  both  parties.  In  all  that 
follows  St.  Paul  returns  exclusively  to  the 
more  enlightened  ones,  whose  feelings  were 
in  accordance  with  his  own;  and  he  now 
presses  a  further  thought  upon  them,  namely 
of  the  harm  they  might  be  doing  to  the 
very  souls  of  the  weak  ones  by  tempting 
them,  either  by  word  or  example,  to  disobey 
tlieir  own  consciences.  But  judge  ye  th6 
rather,  that  no  man  put  a  stumbling-block  in 
his  brother's  way,  or  an  occasion  of  falling 
(o-)ci£j/5aA.oc).  For  the  meaning  of  the  word, 
cf.  Luke  xvii.  1 ;  oh.  ix.  33 ;  xvi.  17 ;  1  Cor. 
i.  23 ;  Eev.  ii.  14. 

Ver.  14. — I  know,  and  am  persuaded  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  (I  myself  know  it ;  my  very 
faith  in  Jesus  carries  to  me  the  conviction 
of  it ;  I  do  not  hesitate  to  declare  my  own 
decided  view,  that  tho  scruples  of  these 
weak  brethren  are  unfounded)  that  there  is 
nothing  unclean  of  itself  (of.  Matt.  xv.  11 ; 
Mark  vii.  18 ;  Acts  x.  15 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  4) ; 
save  that  to  him  who  accounteth  anything 
to  be  unclean,  to  him  it  is  unclean.  To  him 
it  becomes  defiling,  because  partaking  of  it 
defiles  his  conscience  (of.  1  Cor.  viii.  7). 

Ver.  15. — ^For  (yap  here  certainly,  rather 
than  5e  as  in  the  Textus  Eeceptus.  It  in- 
troduces a  reason  for  the  general  admonition 
beginning  at  ver.  13)  if  on  account  of  meat 
(not  here,  thy  meat,  as  in  the  Authorized 
Yerslon)  thy  brother  is  grieved,  thou  no 


longer  walkest  charitably  (literally,  accord- 
ing to  love,  or  charity ;  i.e.  in  continuing  to  set 
at  naught  his  conscientious  scruples).  With 
thy  meat  destroy  not  him,  for  whom  Christ 
died  (cf.  1  Cor.  viii.  11,  Kal  &iro\eiTai  i  turde- 
vSni  hSiK^hs  ...  Si'  %v  Xpiffrhs  iireBavev). 
"  Destroy "  seems  to  denote  causing  his 
moral  and  religious  ruin  by  shaking  his 
conscientiousness,  and  perhaps  upsetting 
altogether  the  faith  he  has,  which,  though 
weak,  is  real. 

Ver.  16. — Let  not  then  your  good  be  evil 
spoken  of.  "  Your  good  "  is  your  enlighten- 
ment, which  is  in  itself  a  good  thing;  but  it 
will  be  "evil  spoken  of"  as  a  bad  thing,  if 
it  leads  to  superciliousness  and  uncharitable- 
ness. 

Vers.  17, 18. — For  the  kingdom  of  God  is 
not  eating  and  drinking,  but  righteousness 
and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost..  For 
he  that  in  these  things  serveth  Christ  is 
acceptable  to  God,  and  approved  of  men. 
The  oondudiug  clause  here  has  reference  to 
"  let  not  your  good,"  etc.,  preceding.  It  is 
the  practical  fruits  of  faith  that  commend 
it  to  men,  as  well  as  being  the  test  of  its 
genuineness  before  God. 

Vers.  19 — 21. — Let  us  therefore  foUow 
after  the  things  that  make  for  (literally, 
the  things  of)  peace,  and  the  things  where- 
with one  may  edify  another  (literally,  «Ae 
things  of  the  edification  of  one  another). 
For  meat's  sake  destroy  not  the  work  of  God. 
"Destroy,"  or  rather,  overthrow — the  word 
is  KaT(£xue,  not  ImSWvs  as  in  ver.  15 — ^is 
connected  in  thought  with  the  edification, 
or  building  up  (oIkoSoh-Iiv')  before  spoken  of. 
"  The  work  of  God  "  is  that  of  his  grace  in 
the  weak  Christian's  soul,  growing,  it  may 
be,  to  full  assurance  of  faith  (of.  1  Cor.  iii. 
9, "  ye  are  God's  building  ").  Upset  not  the 
rising  structure,  which  is  God's  own,  as  ye 
may  do  by  putting  a  stumbling-block  in  the 
weak  brother's  way.  All  things  indeed  are 
pure  (i.e.  in  themselves  all  God's  gifts  given 
for  man's  service  are  so) ;  but  it  is  evil  to 
that  man  who  eateth  with  offence  (i.e. 
if  the  eating  be  to  himself  a  stumbling- 
block.  The  idea  is  the  same  as  in  ver.  14). 
It  is  good  (noXbi/,  not  of  indispensable  obli- 
gation, but  a  right  and  noble  thing  to  do) 
neither  to  eat  flesh,  nor  to  drink  wine,  nor 
anything  whersby  thy  brother  stumbleth, 
or  is  offended,  or  is  made  weak.  The  con- 
cluding words  in  italics  are  of  doubtful 
authority :  they  are  not  required  for  the 
sense.  For  St.  Paul's  expression  of  his  own 
readiness  to  deny  hiitself  lawful  things,  if 
he  might  so  avoid  offence  to  weak  brethren, 
of.  1  Oor.  viii.  13. 

Ver.  22. — Hast  thou  faith  1  have  it  to  thy- 
self before  God.  Hast  thou  an  enlightened 
faith,  showing  thee  the  unimportance  of 
these  observanoeB  ?    Do  not  parade  it  need- 


412 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xiv.  1— 23. 


leBsIy  before  men.  eiKtis  iioi  SE7{ai  in 
riKfios  cl  Kol  irniprur/iivot ;  fiii  i/iol  Selie- 
vof  iw'  dpKeira  rh  <TvvftS6s  (ChryBostom). 
Happy  is  he  that  jndgeth  not  himself  in 
that  thin^  which  he  alloweth.  Thy  weak 
bi'otheT,  if  he  obstains  oonsoientiously,  is 
thus  happy ;  take  care  that  thou  ait  equally 
80  in  the  exercise  of  thy  freedom;  for  he 
that  alloweth  himself  in  anything  that  he 
is  not  fully  oonviDced  is  lawful  passes,  ipso 
facto,  judgment  on  himself. 

Yer.  23. — But  he  that  doubteth  (or,  wa- 
Tereth)  is  condemned  if  he  eat,  because  he 


eateth  not  of  faith :  for  vhatsoever  is  not  of 
faith  is  sin.  For  sense  of  SiaKphetrBai,  cf. 
oh.  iv.  20;  Matt.  xxi.  21;  Mark  xi.  23; 
Jas.  i.  6.  Faith  here  denotes  an  assured 
belief  that  what  one  does  is  right;  nor  is  it 
necessary  to  give  the  word  a  wider  or  dif- 
ferent sense  in  the  concluding  clause  (Tavra 
5J  TrdtfTa  vepl  t^s  irpoKei^ei/ris  inroBeffews  efjMj- 
Tot  T$  nav\<jp,  o6  irepl  it&vTuv,  Ghrysostom), 
Hence  to  see  in  it  (as  has  been  done)  the 
doctrine  of  the  sinfulness  of  all  works  done 
apart  fioiu  faith  in  Christ  is  to  introduce  mi 
idea  that  is  not  there. 


HOMILBTICa 

Vers.  1  —  6. — Ceremonial  and  spiritual  religion.  This  passage  is  one  of  many 
instances  occurring  in  St.  Paul's  writings  in  which  circumstances  of  local  and  temporary 
interest  suggest  the  statement  of  great  moral  truths  and  principles,  applicable  over  a 
far  wider  area.  To  us  these  questions — as  to  whether  certain  food  should  be  eaten, 
and  certain  days  should  be  observed — seem  trifling  enough ;  yet  to  how  grand  and 
comprehensive  a  law  of  Christian  action  do  these  considerations  lead  the  mind  of  the 
deep-thinking  and  far-seeing  apostle ! 

I.  The  PEiNciPLB.  Our  actions  should  be  with  a  view  to  the  Lord  Christ.  The 
motive  of  Christian  conduct  is  the  love  of  Christ ;  its  aim  is  the  glory  of  Christ.  The 
personal  relation  between  the  Saviour  and  his  people  is  not  such  as  to  lose  anything 
of  its  dignity  and  sacredness,  when  introduced  as  a  motive  into  the  ordinary  activity 
of  Christian  people.  And  this  principle,  so  lofty  on  its  Divine  side,  is  most  practical 
upon  the  human  side.  Love  to  Christ,  and  sympathy  with  his  self-denial,  leads  his 
followers  to  regard  the  welfare  of  their  brethren,  for  whom  Christ  died-  Thus  Christ's 
sacrifice  becomes  the  inspiration  and  the  model  of  ours. 

IL  The  outworking  op  the  peinciplb.  Two  special  illustrations  are  mentioned  in 
this  passage,  from  which  we  may  learn  how  to  apply  the  great  Christian  law  to  the 
varying  circumstances  of  human  life.  1.  Eating  and  drinking  are  necessary  acts;  but 
the  manner  of  eating  and  drinking  have  often  been  regarded  as  associated  with  religion. 
Some  of  the  early  Christians  were  so  scrupulous  that  they  would  eat  no  flesh,  lest  they 
should  inadvertently  eat  what  had  been  offered  to  idols;  others  never  troubled  them- 
selves to  inquire  about  their  food.  The  apostle  decides  that  neither  flesh-eater  nor 
herb-eater  must  despise  the  other.  If  each  is  animated  by  a  regard  to  God's  glory  and 
to  Christ's  kingdom,  each  deserves  respect  and  esteem.  2.  The  observance  of  sacred 
days  has  usually  been  an  outward  mark  of  the  religious.  Of  the  primitive  Christians 
some  regarded  and  others  disregarded  such  days.  The  apostle  blamed  neither  party ; 
if  they  did  what  they  did  conscientiously,  and  unto  the  Lonl,  this  was  enough.  It  is 
not  in  such  observances  that  true  religion  consists ;  but  in  the  spirit  that  governs 
actions,  and  the  intention  with  which  they  are  undertaken. 

III.  The  universal  applicability  of  the  principle.  Occasions  are  continually 
arising  for  remembering  the  wise  counsel  of  St.  Paul.  Zealous  religionists  are  wont  to 
push  their  own  views,  and  zealous  controversialists  are  given  to  attacking  the  doctrines 
and  practices  of  others.  Men  substitute  human  dogmas,  human  fancies,  and  human 
remedies  for  moral  and  social  ills,  for  the  great  principles  of  Christianity.  But  we 
shall  do  well  to  be  guided  by  liberty  for  one's  self,  by  conMeration  for  one's  neighbours, 
and  by  charity  with  reference  to  the  conduct  of  our  fellow-Christians. 

Ver.  7. — Life  a  trust.  Our  life  is  not  a  possession  to  do  as  we  like  with.  Yet  many 
act  as  if  it  were ;  as  if  they  were  at  liberty  to  be  idle  or  to  work,  to  employ  their  time 
aiid  their  powers  in  one  way  or  in  another,  without  giving  account  to  any.  Christians 
•re  summoned  to  take  a  different  and  a  nobler  view  of  this  earthly  existence. 

I.  What  is  entrusted  by  the  Creator.  1.  Life  itself;  the  successive  yars  and 
stages  of  which  it  is  composed.   2.  Its  advantages;  both  the  capacities  and    ■  low- 


CH.  XIV.  1—23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  413 

ments  which  are  natural,  and  the  education  and  associations  which  Providence  has 
secured  to  us.  3.  Its  opportunities ;  both  of  acqiuiing  good  and  of  doing  good.  It  is 
to  he  remembered  that,  strictly  speaking,  it  is  not  for  these,  but  for  the  use  we  make 
of  them,  that  we  are  responsible.  We  are  to  bear  iu  mind  that,  though  we  live,  we  do 
not  live  unto  ourselves. 

II.  How  THE  TRUST  SHOTOD  BE  DiscHAHGED.  1.  The  motive  and  law  of  this  dis- 
charge and  fulfilment  of  trust  we  are  to  find  in  Christ.  Our  life  will  be  lived  aright, 
if  its  principle  be  grateful  love  to  him  who  loved  us ;  if  his  Spirit  and  example  be  our 
inspiration,  if  his  glory  and  approval  be  our  aim  and  hope.  2.  The  range  within 
which  this  trust  should  be  fulfilled  is  a  wide  one,  including  our  fellow-men,  for  whom 
Christ  died.  In  the  household,  in  professional  and  business  life,  in  the  Church,  in  the 
nation,  the  Christian  finds  a  sphere  for  consistent  and  unselfish  service.  The  lessons 
of  the  parable  of  the  talents  may  be  appropriately  studied  in  this  connection. 
,111.  That  the  trust  involves  ketribution.  Christ  is  a  Judge  as  well  as  a  Lord. 
Our  life  must  be  tested  by  his  scrutinizing,  searching  eye,  his  just  and  faithful 
judgment.  Fidelity  will  be  rewarded,  unfaithfulness  will  be  condemned,  by  him.  For 
the  faithful,  the  unselfish,  the  benevolent,  the  serviceable,  there  is  secured  the  blessed 
prospect  of  sharing  "  the  joy  of  their  Lord." 

Vers.  7 — 9. — Life  unto  the  Lord.  This  is  language  which  is  doubtless  deemed  by 
some  the  language  of  extravagance  and  enthusiasm.  But,  in  fact,  it  is  sober  enough. 
Nothing  inferior  to  the  law  and  principle  here  enounced  can  be  accepted  by  the  Lord 
Christ  as  the  law  and  principle  of  his  people's  life.  And  that  the  standard  is  oue 
which  maybe  attained  is  undeniable;  St.  Paul  himself  was  a  living  exemplification 
of  its  practicability.    What  he  taught  that  others  should  be,  he  was  himself. 

I.  The  pbinoiplb  of  the  Christian  life.  We  "live  unto  the  Lord."  This 
personal  relation  between  the  Saviour  and  those  who  are  saved  by  him  is  a  distinctive 
feature  of  the  new  and  Christian  life.  When  we  consider  this  expression,  what  do  we 
find  it  to  involve  ?  1.  We  live  as  in  the  Lord's  sight,  with  his  wise,  observant,  just, 
and  yet  friendly  eye  upon  us.  2.  We  live  under  the  motive  and  inspiration  of  the 
Lord's  love  and  sacrifice.  He  has  lived  and  died  for  us ;  we  live  and  die  unto  him. 
3.  We  live  in  obedience  to  his  will;  as  the  scholar  lives  to  his  master,  the  soldier  to 
his  general,  the  statesman  to  his  country  or  his  king.  4.  We  live  with  the  help  of 
his  Spirit.  5.  We  live  to  our  Lord's  glory ;  losing  sight  of  all  that  concerns  ourselves, 
and  become  absorbed  in  ani  devoted  to  the  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom,  and  the 
honour  of  Christ's  name.  Even  thus  we  do  not  exhaust  the  fulness  of  this  noble 
utterance,  "  We  live  unto  the  Lord." 

II.  The  bakge  of  the  Christian  peinciplb.  1.  Life,  in  all  its  varied  experiences, 
in  all  its  successive  stages,  is  to  the  Christian  life  unto  the  Lord.  No  aspect,  no  period, 
no  interest,  is  exempt ;  it  is  the  joy  of  Christ's  servant  to  devote  all  energies,  and  to 
consecrate  all  influence,  that  life  confers,  unto  him  who  redeemed  life  and  made  it  a  new 
and  blessed  thing.  2.  Death  is  embraced  within  the  wide  range  of  this  principle.  An 
uninspired  writer  would  not  have  ventured  upon  so  sublime  a  representation  as  this. 
But  Paul,  who  said,  "To  me  to  live  is  Christ,"  was  constrained  to  add,  "To  die  is 
gain."  So  here  he  says,  "  We  die  unto  the  Lord."  This  was  obviously  and  beautifully 
true  of  those  who  perished  in  the  discharge  of  offices  suggested  by  Christian  benevolence, 
and  of  those  who  "resisted  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin,"  who  died  as  martyrs,  as 
witnesses  to  the  truth.  Yet  none  of  any  age  or-  condition  of  life,  who  died  in  the 
discharge  of  duty  however  ordinary,  were  exempt  from  this  privilege  of  dying  unto 
Christ.  It  was  doubtless  often  asked  concerning  a  departed  brother,  "  By  what  death 
did  he  glorify  God?" 

III.  The  Divine  power  undbrltino  this  principlb.  A  principle  so  contrary  to 
selfish  human  natiu-e  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  a  Divine  interposition  and  provision. 
The  apostle  traces  this :  1.  In  Christ's  death,  and :  2.  In  his  resurrection,  in  virtue  of 
which  he  has  become  to  man  not  only  the  universal  Saviour,  but  the  universal  Lord. 

Ver.  12. — Individual  responsibUity.  Men  are  prone  to  pass  judgment  one  upon 
another.  It  is  a  tendency  against  which  we  have  all  occasion  to  watch.  For  our 
habit  is  to  be  lenient  to  ourselves  and  severe  towards  others.     A  corrective  to  thii 


414  THE  EPISTLE  OV  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xiv.  1—23. 

tendency  is  to  be  found  in  the  great  fact  that  all  are  accountable  to  God.  Bemember- 
ing  this,  we  shall  not,  except  where  the  authoritative  society,  the  ordinance  of  Heaven, 
requires  it,  be  willing  to  pass  sentence  upon  our  fellow-men. 

I.  The  pact  op  judoment.  It  is  a  fact  to  which  conscience,  and  the  constitution 
of  human  nature  and  human  society,  nndeviatingly  testify.  Men  sometimes  strive  to 
forget  it,  but  seldom  venture  to  deny  it.  1.  Judgment  involves  a  Divine  Judge.  God 
will  judge  the  world  by  Jesus  Christ,  a  Judge  qualified,  both  by  his  Divine  knowledge 
and  his  human  sypipathy,  for  fulfilling  this  awful  ofBoe.  2.  Judgment  involves  an 
accountable  moral  nature  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  subjected  to  it.  Man  is  so 
fashioned  that  it  is  just  that  he  should  be  judged.  He  has  knowledge  of  right  and 
wrong,  power  of  independent  action  arising  from  his  voluntary  nature,  and  the  sapacity 
to  appreciate  inducements  to  righteousness.  3.  Judgment,  always  a  fact,  will  in  the 
future  be  explicit,  pronounced,  and  manifested.  Doubtless  the  Judge  observes, 
approves,  and  censures  every  day;  but  there  will  be  a  period  in  which  this  shall  be 
apparent.     "  The  day  will  declare  it ! " 

II.  The  universality  op  judgment.  Wherever  is  a  moral  nature,  amenable  to 
law,  there  responsibility  exists,  and  there  the  judicial  exercise  of  Divine  authority  shall 
take  place.  Babes,  idiots,  madmen,  are  not  subject  to  moral  accountability ;  but  all 
beside— according  to  light  and  privilege— must  appear  for  retribution  before  the  bar  of 
God.  None  is  so  high  in  this  world  as  to  be  superior  to  justice;  none  is  so  low  as  to 
escape  it.  The  omniscience  of  Deity  cannot  be  deceived ;  the  justice  of  Deity  cannot 
be  evaded. 

III.  The  inbividualitt  or.  judgment.  1.  Bach  shall  stand  alone  at  the  bar; 
every  one  shall  give  account  of  himself.  In  this  sense,  "  every  man  shall  bear  hi* 
own  burden."  For  his  own  charactei,  and  for  his  own  acts,  shall  each  separate  person 
be  held  responsible.  2.  None  shall  escape  responsibility  by  casting  blame  upon 
Providence,  by  pleading  that  he  was  not  favourably  circumstanced,  that  he  was  not 
one  of  "  the  elect."  3.  Nor  can  any  evade  judgment  by  throwing  the  blame  of  his 
sin  upon  society.  The  influence  of  others  makes  human  life  a  discipline,  but  it  does 
not  reduce  it  to  irresponsible  mechanism.  4.  Nor  can  any  escape  by  casting  censure 
upon  the  Church.  Whether  or  not  professing  Christians  have  done  their  duty  by  one 
another,  the  fact  of  individual  responsibility  remains  unaffected. 

Application.  1.  To  all  hearers  of  the  gospel  this  fact  is  a  reason  for  accepting  the 
good  tidings  of  reconciliation.  2.  To  all  Christians  it  supplies  a  motive  to  watchful- 
ness and  diligerice. 

Vers.  17,  18. — The  kingdom  of  God.  Christianity  furnishes  a  moral  perspective. 
It  throws  aU  things  into  their  proper  relations  to  one  another,  and  elevates  those  things 
which  are  of  supreme  importance  to  the  loftiest  position  of  eminence.  Instead  of 
occupying  themselves  about  outward  actions,  ceremonial  observances,  and  ritual 
distinctions,  Christians  are  in  this  passage  recommended  to  aspire  to  those  virtues 
which  are  of  highest  importance  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  which  bear  the  most  power- 
fully upon  the  welfare  of  human  society. 

I.  Chbibtianity  creates  a  bpibitual  kingdom.  It  is  not,  like  many  human 
religions,  a  system  of  regulations  as  to  conduct  or  observances.  It  is  not  "  eating  and 
drinking."  It  is  a  kingdom  conceived  in  the  Divine  mind,  and  worthy  of  its  Divine 
Author;  a  kingdom  established  upon  the  mediation  of  a  Divine  Saviour;  a  kingdom 
consisting  in  the  rule  of  spiritual  powers  and  principles.  It  is  a  kingdom  over  spiritual 
natures,  acting  by  spiritual  agencies,  and  issuing  in  spiritual  subjection  and  obedience. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  a  kingdom  whose  subjects  are  governed  in  their  whole  life  by 
the  power  it  introduces  and  applies  to  the  inner  nature.  It  is  a  kingdom  in  a  measure 
realized  in  human  society,  and  destined  to  be  perfected  in  the  glorious  future. 

IL  The  special  ohabaotbes  op  this  kingdom.  1.  In  relation  to  God — righteoui- 
ness.  His  law  of  justice  is  obeyed.  Introduced  into  right  and  harmonious  relations 
with  the  supreme  Ruler,  the  subject  of  the  kingdom  practises  rij^hteousness  in  human 
relationships.  Righteousness  is  what  man  was  made  for,  or  is  what  the  Christian 
attains  to.  2.  In  relation  to  men — -peace.  Strife  and  hatred  are  the  curse  of  human 
society.  Christianity  alone  has  discovered  and  applied  the  principle  which  remedies 
tbia  eviJ.     True  peace  is  based  on  righteousness,  on  the  prevalence  of  those  principles 


OH.  XIV.  1—23.]    THE   EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS.  415 

which  are  in  harmony  with  the  nature  of  God  and  the  constitution  of  human  society. 
3.  In  the  heart  of  the  subject — ^oy.  Cheerfulness,  serenity,  happiness, — these  are  the 
portion  of  the  sincere  believer  in  Christ,  the  loyal  subject  of  Christ.  "  Rejoice  ever- 
more 1 "  is  the  Christian  admonition ;  "  alway  rejoicing !  "  is  the  Christian  motto.  The 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  accounts  for  this  change  from  the  forced  gaiety  of  the 
worldling,  and  the  cold  gloom  of  the  sceptic,  to  the  gladness  of  him  who  is  at  peace 
with  God,  and  who  cherishes  a  good  hope  of  eternal  life. 

IIL  The  results  of  this  kingdom.  These  are  very  fully  stated  in  ver.  18.  1. 
Christ  is  served.  If  he  is  the  Lord  and  Head  of  the  kingdom,  this  must  be  so.  His 
Name  is  honoured  and  his  cause  promoted  where  truly  Christian  virtues  prevail.  2. 
God  is  pleased.  For  the  purposes  of  his  holy  benevolence  are  fulfilled,  and  his  Son  is 
glorified  and  his  creatures  blessed.  3.  The  approval  of  men  is  secured.  It  cannot  be 
otherwise  when  dispositions  and  practices  prevail  which  are  corrective  of  human  ills 
and  promotive  of  human  rectitude,  concord,  and  happiness. 

Ver.  18. — The  douhlt  aspect  of  Christian  service.  The  apostle's  mind  was  as  powerful 
and  active  in  a  practical  as  in  a  speculative  direction.  Christ's  law  had  been,  "  By 
their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  And  in  this  verse,  Paul,  reiterating  his  Master's 
principles,  vindicates  the  principles  of  the  new  faith  by  appealing  to  the  excellence  of 
the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  ' 

I.  What  Christian  sbeviok  is.  1.  It  involves  a  personal  relation  between  Master 
and  servant.  2.  It  involves  an  acknowledgment  of  Divine  authority.  3.  It  involves 
a  powerful  motive  to  a  consecrated  life.  4.  It  involves  the  inclusion  of  all  activities 
and  relationships  within  its  sphere. 

II.  Such  bebvioe  is  wbll  pusAsma  to  God.  1.  For  it  resembles  that  of  Christ 
himself,  who  came  to  do  the  will  of  him  who  sent  him,  and  who  "  pleased  the  Father 
alway,"  in  whom  the  Father  was  "Well  pleased."  2.  It  is  in  conformity  to  the  Divine 
will.  It  is  the  prerogative  of  the  spiritual  nature  of  man  that  it  is  capable  of  appre- 
hending and  voluntarily  accepting  and  obeying  the  perfect  will  of  God.  3.  It  tends 
to  the  Divine  glory.  This  is  by  no  other  means  so  effectively  promoted  as  by  the 
willing  consecration  to  the  Lord  of  all  intelligent  and  moral  natures. 

III.  Such  service  is  approved  of  meh.  1.  Even  those  who  do  not  render  it 
themselves,  approve  it  in  others.  2.  Even  those  who  verbally  censure,  in  their  inner 
conscience  commend  it.  3.  Legislators  and  rulers  approve  it,  as  contributive  to  the 
harmony  and  just  development  of  human  society  at  large. 


HOMILIES  BY   VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  Christian's  dependence  and  the  Christian's  independence.  The 
composite  character  of  the  Christian  community  at  Rome — the  Jewish  origin  of  many 
of  its  members  on  the  one  band,  and  contact  with  heathenism  on  the  other — had 
doubtless  given  rise  to  differences  of  opinion.  Some  there  were  who  still  retained 
their  Jewish  prejudices  and  ideas.  They  abstained  from  meats.  They  observed  special 
days.  They  were  inclined  to  judge  harshly  and  even  to  look  down  upon  those  who 
did  not  think  and  act  as  they  did  (ver.  3).  And,  on  the  other  hand,  those  who  partook 
of  aU  meats,  and  regarded  all  days  as  alike,  were  disposed  to  find  fault  with  those  who 
attached  a  religious  significance  to  the  partaking  of  food  and  the  observing  of  days. 
The  apostle  here  lays  down  some  general  principles  which  are  of  use  in  all  such  cases 
where  differences  of  opinion  arise  about  non-essentials. 

I.  The  Christian's  dependence.  "None  of  us  liveth  to  himself,  and  no  man 
dieth  to  himself.  For  whether  we  live,  we  live  unto  the  Lord ;  and  whether  we  die, 
we  die  unto  the  Lord :  whether  we  live  therefore,  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's.  For  to 
this  end  Christ  both  died,  and  rose,  and  revived,  that  ho  might  be  Lord  both  of  the 
dead  and  living"  (vers.  7—9).  There  is  no  such  thing  as  absolute  independence. 
The  relation  of  each  individual  to  Christ,  dependence  on  him  and  responsibility  to 
him  is  here  asserted.  1.  We  depend  upon  the  LerePi  death.  In  the  cross  is  our  hope 
of  forgiveness,  pardon,  cleansing.  2.  We  depend  upon  the  iorefs  resurrection.  In  his 
resurrection  is  our  hope  and  assurance  of  the  life  Mid  immortality  beyond.    "  Because 


416  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  xiv.  1—23. 

I  lire,  ye  shall  live  also."  3.  We  depend  upon  the  Lord's  continual  intercession.  In 
his  intercession  is  our  hope  and  assurance  of  answered  prayer.  4.  We  depend  upon 
the  Lord^s  continued  gifts  to  us.  The  Lord's  day ;  the  Word  of  the  Lord ;  the  Lord's 
house ;  the  Lord's  Supper ; — how  much  our  spiritual  life  is  dependent  upon  these  precious 
blessings  provided  for  us  by  our  Lord  and  Master  I  "  Whether  we  live  therefore,  or 
die,  we  are  the  Lord's."  5.  This  dependence  upon  Christ  brings  with  it  corresponding 
obligations.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price ;  therefore  glorify 
God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's"  (1  Cor.  vi.  20). 

IL  The  Christian's  indkpendencb.  The  independence  of  the  Christian  is  the 
correlative  of  his  dependence.  He  is  dependent  upon  Christ,  and  therefore  he  is :  1. 
Independent  of  external  circumstances.  "I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I  am, 
therewith  to  be  content."  And  again,  "We  are  troubled  on  every  side,  yet  not  dis- 
tressed; we  are  perplexed,  but  not  in  despair;  persecuted,  iDut  not  forsaken;  cast 
down,  but  not  destioyed."  Even  death  can  bring  no  alarm  to  those  who  can  say, 
"  We  are  the  Lord's ; "  for  Christ  is  the  Conqueror  of  death.  2.  Independent  of  human 
criticism.  "  Let  not  him  that  eateth  despise  him  that  eateth  not ;  and  let  not  him 
which  eateth  not  judge  him  that  eateth :  for  God  hath  received  him  "  (ver.  3) ;  "  Who 
art  thou  that  judgest  another  man's  servant  ?  to  his  own  master  he  standeth  or  falleth  " 
(ver.  4) ;  "  Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind  "  (ver.  6).  Here  the 
apostle  asserts  the  great  principle  of  liberty  of  conscience,  and  inculcates  the  great 
duty  of  charity  and  toleration.  Alas  1  how  often  the  principle  and  the  duty  have  been 
forgotten  in  the  Christian  Church !  Christian  men  have  excommunicated  one  another 
and  treated  one  another  as  enemies  because  they  differed  on  some  minor  detail  of 
doctrine,  of  government,  or  of  worship.  Even  the  Protestant  Churches,  and  Protestant 
Christians,  one  of  whose  distinctive  principles  is  liberty  of  conscience,  have  sometimes 
failed  to  extend  to  others  that  toleration  which  they  claim  for  themselves.  "  God 
alone  is  Lord  of  the  conscience,"  says  the  Westminster  Confession  of  Faith,  "and  hath 
left  it  free  from  the  doctrines  and  commandments  of  men." — 0.  H.  L 

Ver.  7. — 3V(e  influence  of  our  lives  upon  others.  "None  of  us  liveth  to  himself." 
The  apostle,  as  we  have  seen,  was  here  enforcing  certain  Christian  duties,  and  he 
strengthened  his  exhortation  by  reminding  his  readers  that  they  were  not  their  own, 
but  Christ's.     But  the  words  are  capable  of  a  wider  application. 

L  The  influence  which  one  man  mat  exbroisb  fob  good.  Many  who  would  like 
to  do  good  are  sometimes  disposed  to  say,  "  What  use  can  I  be  in  the  world?  What 
influence  can  my  life  have  upon  others  ?  What  good  can  I  do  to  others  ?  I  am  too 
young.  I  am  too  humble.  I  have  no  intellectual  gifts.  I  have  no  opportunities  such 
as  some  people  have  of  exercising  influence  upon  others."  This  is  to  underestimate 
the  influence  of  the  individual  life.  Whether  wo  are  conscious  of  it  or  not,  the  life  of 
each  of  us,  whether  we  are  rich  or  poor,  learned  or  unlearned,  young  or  old,  is  exercising 
some  influence  upon  others.  It  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  know  another  in  order 
to  exercise  an  influence  upon  him.  Thousands  of  men  are  influenced  by  persons  whom 
they  never  saw.  The  Eeformation  began  at  Cambridge  University  very  early  in  the 
sixteenth  century  by  Bilney,  a  solitary  student,  reading  a  Greek  Testament  with  Latin 
translation  and  notes,  which  Erasmus  had  published.  Bilney  had  never  seen  Erasmus, 
but  the  quiet  work  of  Erasmus  was  the  means  of  bringing  Bilney  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Bilney,  again,  influenced  Latimer,  who  was  one  of  the 
fathers  of  the  English  Reformation,  and  who  suffered  martyrdom  for  the  truth.  Thus 
the  Reformation  in  England  may  be  largely  traced  to  the  quiet  work  of  Erasmus  as  he 
sat  at  his  desk,  and  used  his  vast  learning  and  intellect  to  make  the  Word  of  God  more 
f  imiliar  to  the  people  of  his  time.  A  young  American  student,  more  than  seventy 
years  ago,  happened  to  read  a  printed  sermon  which  had  fallen  into  his  hands.  The 
sermon  was  entitled  "  The  Star  in  the  East,"  by  Dr.  Claudius  Buchanan,  and  described 
the  progress  of  the  gospel  in  India,  and  the  evidence  there  afforded  of  its  Divine  power. 
That  sermon,  by  a  man  whom  he  had  never  seen,  fell  into  the  young  student's  soul  like 
a  spark  into  tinder,  and  in  six  months  Adoniram  Judson  resolved  to  become  a  mis- 
sionary to  the  heathen.  That  little  printed  sermon,  preached  in  England,  perhaps, 
with  no  apparent  fruit,  became,  through  God's  blessing,  the  beginning  of  the  great  work 
of  American  foreign  missions.  '  You  may  not  be  an  Erasmus  or  a  Claudius  Buchanan. 


CH.  nv.  1— 23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  417 

But  (lod  may  have  as  great  a  work  for  you  to  do  as  he  had  for  them.  What  an  influ- 
ence for  good  Christian  parents  may  eiercise  upon  their  children,  with  far-reaching 
results  to  the  world !  The  faithful  sahbath-school  teacher  may  leaven  with  gospel  truth 
young  minds  that  may  yet  control  the  destinies  of  a  nation.  Young  women,  by  the 
power  of  their  own  Christian  character,  may  change  for  the  better  the  muddy  current 
of  many  a  godless  life.  The  great  matter  is  for  every  one  of  us  to  live  near  to  God,  to 
cultivate  a  Christ-lilie  character,  and  then  our  hfe  is  sure  to  be  a  blessing.  Tou  must 
walk  with  God  if  you  would  have  weight  with  men.  Personal  holiness  is  the  key  to 
personal  influence  for  good. 

IL  Thk  iNrLUENOB  WHICH  ONE  MAN  MAY  ExuBciSE  FOB  EVIL.  The  wise  man  says, 
"  One  sinner  destroyeth  much  good."  Everyday  experience  will  supply  many  illustra- 
tions of  this  truth.  One  bad  man,  one  bad  woman,  will  be  a  centre  of  corruption  to 
the  whole  circle  in  which  they  move.  One  bad  boy  often  corrupts  a  whole  school 
How  terrible  is  the  power  of  evil  to  propagate  it.self  1  How  terrible  is  the  guilt  of  those 
who  have  become  the  corrupters  of  others  1  The  evil  that  we  do  has  conseciueuces  fai 
beyond  the  injury  that  we  may  do  to  ourselves. 

"  Unto  a  loving  mother  oft 

We  all  have  sent,  without  a  doubt, 
Full  many  a  hard  and  careless  word, 

That  now  we  never  can  rub  out ; 
Fur  cruel  words  cut  deeper  far 

Than  diamond  on  the  window-pane ; 
And,  oft  recalled  in  after-years, 

They  wound  her  o'er  and  o'er  again. 

"  So,  in  our  daily  walk  and  life, 

We  write  and  do  and  say  the  thing 
We  never  can  undo  nor  stay 

With,  any  future  soiTowing. 
We  carve  ourselves  on  beating  hearts  f 

Ah  I  then,  how  wise  to  pause  and  doubt, 
To  blend  with  love  and  thought  our  words, 

Because  we  cannot  rub  them  out  1 " 

The  great  poet  of  Scotland,  Eobert  Burns,  on  his  dying  bed  wished  that  he  could  have 
recalled  some  of  the  foolish  things  that  he  had  written.  But  it  was  too  late.  Better 
far  to  leave  the  vrrong  undone  than  afterwards  to  regret  the  doing  of  it.  "  None  of  us 
iiveth  to  himself,"  should  be  constantly  before  our  minds  as  a  restraining  memory  to 
keep  us  from  evil,  and  an  inspiring  memory  that  will  cheer  us  on  to  make  the  world 
better  than  we  have  found  it— -0.  H.  L 

Vers.  10 — 23  (with  ch.  iv.  1 — 3). — Three  laws  of  Christian  life.  In  these  closing 
verses  of  the  fourteenth  chapter  and  the  opening  verses  of  the  fifteenth,  three  principles 
are  laid  down,  one  or  other  or  all  of  which  would  cover  almost  every  case  of  difference 
between  fellow-Christians.     These  are — 

I.  The  law  or  Christian  charity.  Where  we  differ  from  our  fellow-Christians  Id 
details  of  doctrine,  worship,  or  practice,  we  are  very  prone  to  be  uncharitable  in  our 
judgments.  We  are  inclined  to  doubt  their  Christianity  because  they  do  not  just  see 
as  we  do  on  such  matters.  One  great  fact  the  apostle  would  have  us  remember  when 
we  are  tempted  to  condemn  our  brethren.  It  is  the  fact  of  the  judgment  to  come. 
"  Why  dost  thou  judge  tliy  brother  ?  or  why  dost  thou  set  at  nought  thy  brother?  for 
we  shall  all  stand  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ "  (ver.  10).  "  So  then  every  one 
of  us  shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God.  Let  us  not  therefore  judge  one  mnother 
any  more  "  (vers.  12, 13).  It  is  not  we  who  are  to  be  the  judges  of  our  fellow-Chris- 
tians, but  God.  We  should  not  like  that  they  would  be  our  judges :  then  why  should 
we  judge  them  1  The  thought  that  we  ourselves  muft  stand  before  a  higher  judgment- 
seat,  where  all  our  sins  and  secret  thoughts  and  unchristian  motives  shall  be  known. 
should  make  us  more  cautious  in  our  condemnation  of  others.  And,  as  regards  our 
fellow-Christians,  is  it  not  enough  for  us  that  God  will  judge  them  ?  Surely  we  may 
leave  their  trial  with  confidence  in  his  hands. 

II.  The  law  of  Chbistian  self-denial.    There  is  a  gradual  progress  in  the  priu- 

BOMANS.  2  B 


418  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xiv.  1— 23, 

ciples  here  laid  down.  First  of  all,  it  is  shown  that  we  ought  not  to  judge  our  hrethren. 
This  is  a  purely  negative  command.  The  next  command  is  somewhat  more  positive. 
"  But  judge  this  rather,  that  no  man  put  a  stumhling-block  or  an  occasion  to  fall  in  his 
brother's  way  "  (ver.  13).  The  apostle  enforces  the  exhortation  to  Christian  self-denial 
by  three  special  reasons.  1.  The  Christian  should  not  injure  those  whom  Christ  has 
died  to  save.  "  Destroy  not  him  with  thy  meat,  for  whom  Christ  died"  (ver.  15).  This 
is  the  true  lasts  of  total  abstinence.  "  It  is  good  neither  to  eat  flesh,  nor  to  drink  wine, 
nor  anything  whereby  thy  brother  stumbleth,  or  is  offended,  or  is  made  weak"  (ver. 
21).  2.  The  Christian  has  higher  enjoyments  than  those  of  selfish  itidulgence.  "  For 
the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink  ;  but  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in 
the  Holy  Ghost"  (ver.  17).  The  giving  up  of  a  merely  bodily  comfort  or  enjoyment 
should  not  be  a  great  hardship  to  the  Christian.  God  is  able  to  give  us  much  more 
than  this.  3.  The  example  of  Christ  is  an  example  of  self -denial.  "  For  even  Christ 
pleased  not  himself"  (ch.  xv.  3).  Self-denial  is  an  essential  part  of  truly  following  Christ. 
"  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross  daily,  and 
follow  me."  This  law  of  Christian  self-denial  covers  a  wide  field.  Not  merely  absti- 
nence from  meats  and  drinks,  from  bodily  indulgences  which  do  harm  to  others ;  but 
also  to  put  a  bridle  on  our  tongues,  lest  by  our  words  we  should  give  offence  to  others ; 
to  abstain  from  gratifying  even  lawful  desires  and  wishes  where  the  attainment  of  our 
purpose  would  cause  pain  or  injury  to  others ; — this  is  self-denial,  this  is  to  follow  the 
example  of  Christ.     Self-pleasing  is  a  besetting  sin  with  most  of  us. 

in.  The  law  of  Christian  helpfulness.  Here  the  appstle  takes  another  forward 
step.  Here  he  states  a  still  higher  principle.  "  Let  us  therefore  follow  after  the  things 
which  make  for  peace,  and  things  wherewith  one  may  edify  another"  (ver.  19);  "Let 
every  one  of  us  please  his  neighbour  for  his  good  to  edification  "  (ch.  iv.  2).  Here  ii 
the  truly  positive  principle  of  Christian  life.  The  Christian  life  should  not  be  merely 
an  abstinence  from  evil,  but  a  positive  doing  of  what  is  good.  We  should  not  merely 
refrain  from  injuring  our  neighbours,  but  we  should  be  actively  engaged,  as  Christians, 
in  rendering  them  all  the  spiritual  help  we  can.  As  a  rule,  our  Christianity  is  negativs 
rather  than  positive.  It  is  too  selfish.  Many  Christians  are  perfectly  content  with 
attaining  the  salvation  of  their  own  souls,  and  going  through  the  world  as  harmlessly 
as  possible.  This,  after  all,  is  but  a  low  type  of  Christianity  True  Christianity,  the 
Christianity  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  is  as  the  salt,  the  light,  the  leaven;  an 
active,  helpful,  beneficent  influence  upon  those  around  us.— -0.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 23. — Christian  liberty.  The  general  treatment  of  the  ethics  of  the  gospel 
is  concluded,  and  now  the  apostle  deals  with  a  particular  application  which  the 
condition  of  the  Church  at  Rume  required.  There  were  some  there,  a  minority  prob- 
ably, who  were  more  or  less  in  subjection  to  the  spirit  of  the  old  Judaic  economy, 
making  distinctions  of  meats  and  of  days.  And  when  they  came  together  for  the 
Christian  love-feasts,  the  differences  were  of  awkward  consequence.  The  stronger  ones 
doubted  whether  they  should  admit  these,  so  weak  in  the  faith,  as  they  deemed  them ; 
the  weaker  ones  were  scandalized  at  the  unscrupulousness,  as  they  thought  it,  of  the 
strong,  or  perhaps,  overborne  by  the  weight  of  their  example,  against  their  own  con- 
victions they  joined  in  the  common  meal.  Was  there  not  grievous  wrong  in  this  ? 
The  stronger  ones  despising  the  weak,  and  overbearing  their  scruples,  by  disputations, 
perhaps  by  ridicule;  the  weaker  ones,  grieved  in  their  hearts,  and  judging  the  strong, 
or  otherwise,  to  their  own  condemnation,  sinking  their  scruples  and  joining  in  the  feast  ? 
But  surely  the  Divine  ethics  of  the  gospel  can  meet  this  case :  the  apostle  applies  them. 
He  will  espouse,  not  the  scruples  of  the  weak,  but  their  weakness,  as  against  the  over- 
bearing ridicule  of  the  strong ;  but  first,  to  guard  himself  and  them,  he  will  defend  the 
liberty  of  the  strong  as  against  the  censorious  judgments  of  the  weak. 

I.  The  ddtt  of  the  weak.  The  weaker  man  had  his  scruples ;  his  strong  judgments 
as  to  this  or  that  mode  of  outward  living  being  right,  nnd  this  or  that  wrong.  And  he 
was  quick  to  condemn  the  man  whose  opinions  and  practices  were  unlike  his  own. 
Not  so,  says  the  apostle.  1.  He  has  another  Master.  Certainly  he  has  yielded  him- 
self to  Christ,  and  Christ,  not  another,  must  measure  the  fidelity  of  his  service.  If 
faithful,  he  abides  his  servant ;  if  unfaithful,  he  falls.  But  he  shall  not  fall.  The 
heart  is  right,  and  even  if  the  freedom  of  outward  observance  were  a  mistaken  freedom, 


on.  XIV.  1—23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  419 


Christ  is  not  such  a  Master  as  to  cast  him  off  for  a  mistake.  No ;  "  he  shall  he  made 
to  stand."  Is  not  this  the  determining  principle  of  the  Christian  life  ?  Not  the  minute 
observance,  right  or  wrong,  but  the  motive,  makes  the  Chrlstiaa  man.  It  matters 
nothing  comparatively  whether  we  eat  or  do  not  eat,  whether  we  observe  days  or 
observe  them  not,  whether  we  live  or  die :  "  none  of  us  liveth  to  himself,  and  none 
dieth  to  himself."  The  aim  of  the  whole  life  is  Christ-wards,  and  the  aim,  not  the 
details,  determines  the  life.  2.  Ee  has  another  Judge.  This  follows  from  the  former. 
If  Christ  be  the  Master  now,  he  shall  judge  the  service  itself  at  the  last.  And  if  we 
may  not  measure  the  fidelity  of  another's  servant,  neither  may  we  pass  sentence  on  his 
deeds.  No ;  "  the  day  shall  declare  it,  and  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work  of  what 
sort  it  is  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  13).  For  it  is  true  that  the  details  of  the  life  will  be  taken  into 
account,  but  not  by  our  brethren :  "  Each  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of  himself  to 
God." 

II.  The  duty  of  the  stbono.  So,  then,  the  weak  are  warned  not  to  judge  the  men 
of  liberty ;  and  the  men  of  liberty,  men  of  strength  as  they  thought  themselves,  are  to 
show  their  strength  by  gentleness,  and  their  liberty  by  self-sacrifice.  For  the  con- 
science of  the  weak,  if  erring,  was  to  be  respected,  and  neither  were  they  to  be  grieved 
by  a  needless  exhibition  of  the  liberty  of  the  strong,  nor  above  all  led  to  sin  against 
their  convictions  by  the  example  or  ridicule  of  the  preponderant  party.  1.  They  were 
not  to  be  grieved.  Could  the  stronger  ones  ruthlessly  cause  pain  to  the  scrupulous  ones 
by  their  own  seeming  unscrupulousness  ?  That  was  not  walking  in  love.  And  for 
the  sake  of  showing  that  they  could  eat  meat !  Away  the  thought :  this  was  not  God's 
kingdom.  Let  them  rather  know  that,  eating  or  not  eating,  to  respect  the  rights  of 
others,  to  have  peace  with  all,  and  to  rejoice  with  a  common  joy  in  God, — this  was  God's 
kingdom.  So  also  would  their  spirit  commend  itself  to  men  and  to  God.  Christians 
then  indeed ;  as  Christ  died  for  the  weaker  ones,  so  they  sacrificing  their  liberty  for 
them.  2.  ITiey  were  not  to  he  made  to  fall.  Let  them  know  that,  innocent  as  their 
eating  of  flesh  might  be,  it  was  not  innocent  to  the  doubting  man,  and  each  one's  con- 
science must  approve  his  own  deeds,  or  he  is  condemned.  Nay,  lie  falls !  Oh,  surely 
they  were  not  prepared  for  that?  For  this  was,  not  merely  to  destroy  the  weak 
brother's  peace  and  charity  of  heart,  but  to  overthrow  the  work  of  God  in  him  I  And 
all  for  the  sake  of  meat !  Better  sacrifice  all  your  liberty  than  this.  Have  your  faith 
to  yourself;  have  all  tender  solicitude  for  your  weak  brother's  conscience. 

Then  receive  the  brother,  care  for  him,  sacrifice  your  freedom  for  him.  For  while 
faith,  liberty,  strength,  are  good,  the  best  of  all  is  love ! — T.  F.  L. 

Ver.  5. — Individual  decision.  Questions  concerning  conduct  greatly  interest  and 
occupy  the  minds  of  the  majority.  They  involve  the  translation  of  abstract  principle 
into  concrete  rules,  and  the  visible  concrete  stirs  us  more  deeply  than  abstractions. 
Yet  it  is  these  matters  of  application  and  detail  which  have  often  rent  and  grievously 
damaged  the  fellowship  of  the  saints.  The  wise,  magnanimous  prudence  of  the  apostle 
lays  down  one  duty  in  relation  to  these  vexed  questions,  which  crop  up  to-day  in 
modern  forms.  For  instance,  many  are  perplexed  as  to  the  rigid  obligatoriness  of 
sabbath  observance,  as  to  what  is  implied  in  keeping  a  day  of  rest  as  "  the  Lord's  day." 
Others  moot  the  topic  of  contributions  for  religious  purposes,  whether  a  tithe  is  the 
scriptural  proportion,  and  how  far  this  is  compulsory.  Other  subjects  coming  under 
the  same  category  are  amusements,  abstinence  from  spirituous  liquors,  business  policy, 
and  politics. 

I.  Bach  has  to  settle  such  qubbtions  fob  HiMSBLr.  "  Let  each  be  assured  in  hit 
own  mind."  Others  cannot  do  our  part  in  investigation  and  decision.  No  one  is 
authorized  to  come  between  us  and  God  in  such  matters ;  even  the  apostle  does  not 
intrude  on  the  province  of  several  judgment.  We  must  decide  what  our  conscience 
prescribes,  and  where  our  conception  of  Christian  service  requires  us  to  draw  the  line. 
Only  let  each  see  to  it  that  he  be  not  satisfied  with  giving  the  least  amount  or  render- 
ing the  slightest  obedience  possible.  He  is  wrong  and  condemns  himself  who  asks, 
"  How  near  the  dangerous  cliff  can  I  walk  without  peril  ?  "  or, "  What  is  the  minimum 
religious  work  I  can  undertake  as  a  servant  of  Christ?"  We  need  to  study  Scripture, 
to  prayerfully  ponder  on  its  law  of  life,  its  principles,  and  the  illustrations  afforded  by 
the  lives  and  acts  of  the  noblest  heroes.    Nor  are  we  precluded  from  seeking  the  help 


420  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EG  MANS.    [cii.  xiv.  1— 23. 

and  enlightenment  which  other  boots  and  companions  may  furnish.  Yet  the  conclusion 
come  to  must  he  felt  to  be  our  own,  in  harmony  with  the  dictates  of  our  conscience, 
and  ratified  by  our  independent  judgment.  Then  we  may  go  fearlessly  forward.  Men 
differ  in  the  conclusions  they  reach  honestly  enough,  according  to  their  breadth  of 
intellect,  their  natural  temperament,  their  surroundings,  and  their  education,  mental 
and  experimental. 

II.  We  cannot  be  endlessly  aequinq  these  questions.  He  who  is  ever  debating 
with  himself  settles  nothing.  He  wastes  his  brief  moments  in  deciding  what  to  think 
and  do,  instead  of  beginning  at  once  the  discharge  of  his  duties  and  the  exercise  of  big 
gifts.  Much  in  Christian  doctrine  and  practice  is  unambiguous.  To  cultivate  love, 
peace,  godliness,  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  activity,  benevolence,  holiness, 
— the  Tightness  of  this  needs  no  process  of  reasoning.  The  man  possessed  by  an  idea  is 
the  man  who  influences  his  fellows ;  not  he  who  is  sure  of  nothing,  who  has  only  conun- 
drums to  propound  instead  of  a  way  of  salvation  to  proclaim  and  suggestions  for  useful- 
ness to  enforce.  The  ring  of  conviction  in  the  voice  begets  assent  and  confidence  in  the 
hearers.  "  We  believe,  and  therefore  we  speak,"  this  is  the  preaching  which  is  mighty 
unto  conversion.  A  dainty  scepticism  has  but  negative  chilling  power.  Doubters  can 
hardly  be  fruit-bearers.  Once  a  decision  has  been  arrived  at,  the  reasons  on  which  it 
was  founded  may  not  be  always  present  to  the  mind,  but  the  impression  remains.  This 
does  not  forbid  a  growth  of  opinion,  the  gaining  of  a  wider  outlook  and  clearer  penetra- 
tion modifying  previous  conclusions.  Time  and  experience  confirm  or  alter  views  by 
imperceptible  degrees,  without  the  ferment  that  attends  constant  restlessness  of  debate. 

III.  Wb  have  no  right  to  impose  otje  paeticulae  judgment  and  example  as 
AETICLES  OF  FAITH  ON  ouB  FELLOW-MEMBEES.  There  must  be  mutual  concessions. 
Let  not  the  strong  contemn  the  weak  as  narrow-minded,  nor  the  scrupulous  censure  the 
liberty  of  others  as  an  infraction  of  Christian  morals.  Teetotallers  err  when  they  pass 
strictures  on  non-abstainers,  and  the  latter  are  eq\ially  guilty  when  they  ridicule  the 
former's  self-denial.  The  good  of  the  society,  though  best  secured  by  the  welfare  of 
each  unit  composing  the  alliance,  is  yet  of  greater  worth  than  the  satisfaction  and 
triumph  of  any  separate  section.  "  Follow  after  the  things  which  make  for  peace." 
Divine  charity,  which  bears  long  with  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men.  Is  reflected  in 
the  membership  which  knows  how  to  be  tolerant  without  laxity,  and  comprehensive 
without  indefiniteness.  The  building  up  of  the  temple  of  God  will  take  long  if  we  are 
always  deliberating  on  the  right  of  individual  stones  to  a  place  in  the  structure.  Is 
the  mark  of  the  Master-mason  on  the  stone  ?  Has  God  received  such  ?  Then  it  is  not 
for  us  to  question  or  exclude. — S.  E.  A. 

Ver.  9. — The  domihion  of  Christ.  It  is  characteristic  of  apostolic  ethics  to  turn  from 
details  of  conduct  to  the  main  principles  which  should  permeate  every  Christian  life. 
The  central  truth  governing  all  religious  behaviour  is  our  relationship  to  God,  as  mani- 
fested and  actualized  in  Christ  Jesus.  Thus  the  historical  facts  of  Christ's  death  and 
resurrection  necessarily  give  rise  to  doctrine,  and  they  cannot  be  separated  from  our 
belief  without  tending  to  overthrow  the  whole  ediflce  of  Christian  living  based  on 
Christ  as  its  Foundation.  It  matters  comparatively  little  whether  a  man  eats  meat  or 
abstains  from  it,  observes  certain  days  or  disregards  their  special  sanctity,  provided  that 
the  scruple  alleged  or  the  freedom  enjnycd  is  conscientious,  springing  out  of  his  con- 
ception of  the  nature  of  the  religion  Jesus  Christ  has  revealed.  It  is  not  for  others  to 
despise  the  punctilious  or  to  blame  the  informal.  Each  will  be  judged  by  his  Master. 
That  Master  is  Lord  of  both  quick  and  dead ;  he  presides  not  only  over  our  earthly 
life,  but  over  our  departure  to  the  larger  life.  Christians  may  differ  in  point  of  intel- 
lectual attainment  and  particular  opinion,  but  every  face  believiugly  turned  to  the 
Sun  of  Eightcousness  reflects  some  of  its  glory;  every  worshipper  is  brought  near  to 
every  other  as  he  gathers  at  the  feet  of  the  Infinite  Object  of  adoration  and  praise. 

I.  The  Lordship  of  Christ.  1.  Christian  freedom  is  not  unconditioned  liberty. 
"Ye  are  not  your  own  "  is  the  watchword  of  grateful  service.  The  emancipation  of  a 
slave  does  not  set  him  free  from  all  law;  he  is  released  from  degrading  servitude  to 
be  useful  to  his  country  and  king.  Modern  civilization  teaches  the  compatibility  of 
numerous  statutes  with  true  essential  freedom.  The  rule  of  Christ  is  recognized  and 
illustrated  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.    "  Thou,  Lord,  show  which  of  these  two  thou 


CH.  XIV.  1— 23.J     THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  421 

hast  chosen ; "  "  The  Lord  added  to  them  daily."  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to 
do  ?  "  is  the  first  question  of  the  new  life.  There  woiild  be  no  difficulty  in  any  depart- 
ment of  Church-fellowship  if  the  authority  of  Christ  were  fully  recognized.  "  One  ia 
your  Master,  even  Christ,  and  all  ye  are  brethren."  Finances,  activity,  brotherly  regard, 
all  flourish  where  hearts  are  surrendered  in  entirety  to  the  sway  of  Christ.  2.  This 
Lordship  means  protection  as  well  as  government.  As  under  Eoman  law  each  noble 
patrician  had  his  clients,  whose  wrongs  he  redressed  and  whose  interests  he  promoted, 
so  the  Saviour  throws  the  ajgis  of  his  love  over  his  subjects,  directing  them  by  his 
wisdom,'  shielding  them  by  his  interposition.  "  Fear  not ;  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to 
harm  thee."  The  very  end  of  government  is  the  welfare  of  the  governed.  Old  ideas 
that  the  monarch  has  no  duties  and  the  people  no  rights  have  passed  for  ever ;  and  we 
are  warranted  in  seizing  nobler  conceptions  of  the  sovereignty  of  God  than  prevailed 
when  despotism  reigned  unquestioned.  Let  men  beware  lest  they  lop  off  limbs  from 
the  body  of  Chiist,  and  by  their  divisions  and  excommunications  rend  his  seamless 
garment.  3.  The  dominion  of  Christ  may  well  console  us  as  we  think  of  the  dead.  He 
is  the  Lord  of  all  worlds,  has  "  all  authority  in  heaven  and  earth."  His  voice  comforts 
the  bereaved,  sounding  amid  the  stillness  of  the  sepulchre,  "  Fear  not:  I  have  the  keys 
of  death  and  of  Hades."  "He  is  not  the  Lord  of  the'  dead,  but  of  the  living."  The 
dead  pass  not  into  a  dreary  unillumined  state;  they  "depart  to  be  with  Christ."  And 
where  mournful  reflections  on  wasted  lives,  sudden  departures,  check  hopeful  sorrow, 
and  memory  emits  little  fragrance  from  the  past ;  yet  we  may  leave  all  in  his  hands 
who,  as  the  supreme  Architect  of  humanity,  rejoices  in  restoration  rather  than  destruc- 
tion.   "  Shall  not  the  Judge  ...  do  right  ?  " 

n.  The  manner  in  which  this  Lordship  was  won.  1.  By  stooping  to  the  condition 
of  his  subjects.  He  is  Lord  by  creation,  but  stUl  more  by  virtue  of  his  redemptive  work. 
Well  has  he  earned  his  title  who  entered  into  our  humbling  nature,  tasted  our  sorrows, 
and  drank  the  cup  of  bitterness  as  our  Sin  Offering.  He  himself  passed  through  the 
gloomy  portals  of  death,  and  in  rising  again  revealed  both  the  love  and  the  might  of 
God,  Only  he  can  be  a  true  Master  who  first  subordinated  himself  to  service.  For 
the  suffering  of  death  is  he  crowned  with  glory  and  honour.  He  can  declare,  "  I  am 
he  that  liveth,  and  was  dead ;  and,  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore."  "  Because  I  live, 
ye  shall  live  also."  2.  After  this  model,  service  to  the  Church  becomes  the  stepping-stone 
to  honour.  Christ  has  furnished  the  pattern  to  his  followers  according  to  which  office 
and  rank  are  conferred.  He  who  is  most  profitable  to  the  body  is  to  be  most  esteemed 
by  the  members.  Empty  sinecures  are  imknown  in  his  kingdom.  And  if  we  would 
benefit  our  fellows,  we  must  by  real  sympathy  share  their  need  and  trouble.  "  He  that 
will  be  greatest,  let  him  be  your  minister."  Christ  rose  as  the  Pirstfruits,  and  in  Christ 
shall  all  be  made  alive,  but  every  man  in  his  own  rank. — S.  B.  A. 

Ver.  17. — Essentials  of  the  king/Jom  of  Ood.  Differences  of  opinion  respecting 
festivals  to  be  observed  and  foods  to  be  abstained  from  were  certain  to  arise  in  commu- 
nities composed  of  Jews  of  every  sect  and  Gentiles  of  every  race.  And  we  may  be 
thankful  that  these  differences  manifested  themselves  so  early  in  the  primitive  Church, 
since  they  furnished  an  occasion  for  a  deliverance  by  the  apostle  on  such  a  theme.  We 
arc  glad  to  have  such  a  valuable  weighty  aphorism  as  that  of  the  text.  The  apostle's 
firmness  and  meekness  equally  diplay  themselves.  He  wants  none  to  suffer  bondage, 
nor  yet  does  he  permit  their  liberty  in  Christ  to  be  harmful  to  their  brethren,  and  thus 
a  topic  of  reproach  in  the  world  outside.  And  he  makes  the  position  clear  by  dis- 
tinguishing between  what  is  fundamental  in  religion,  and  what  is  temporary,  local,  and 
adventitious. 

L  The  non-essentiai.s  of  the  Christian  life.  The  "kingdom  of  God"  is  a  com- 
prehensive phrase,  denotmg  the  new  sovereignty  established  by  Christ  in  the  hearts  of 
individuals  where  he  rules  in  power  and  grace,  and  likewise  embracing  the  whole  com- 
pany of  those  throughout  the  globe  who,  by  personal  reception  of  the  truth,  have  entered 
into  a  society  with  duties  and  privileges  emanating  from  the  Kingship  of  the  Redeemer. 
The  code  of  life  lays  down  no  hard  specific  rules  of  abstinence  or  conformity.  "  Eating 
and  drinking "  are  no  necessary  part  of  Christian  living.  It  is  the  spirit  in  which 
certain  actions  are  performed  or  certain  privations  submitte<i  to  rather  than  the  thingt 
thsmselves  which  make  men  Christians,    lixternal  observances  do  not  constitute  religion. 


422  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [ch.  xiv.  1— 2^ 

Tbey  are  a  visible  embodiment  of  it,  but  not  its  vital  principle.  Let  us  not  set  too 
high  an  estimate  on  rites  and  ceremonies  and  forms  of  worship,  or  we  may  glorify  the 
husk  to  the  neglect  of  the  kernel,  and  the  shapely  bark  may  conceal  a  rotten  tre<b 
Ordinances  of  touching,  tasting,  handling,  concern  things  that  perish  in  the  using. 
Discussions  respecting  amusements,  pleasures,  occupations,  as  to  which  may  lawfully 
be  enjoyed  and  which  not,  seldom  advance  any  man's  obedience  to  Christ;  they  are  the 
fringe,  not  the  vesture,  of  religion,  and  talk  concerning  them  is  apt  to  degenerate  into 
trifling  and  casuistry.  Let  each  decide  for  himself  with  prayerful  meditation  what  hia 
course  shall  be,  and  try  to  secure  the  best,  most  lasting  possessions.  He  who  is  always 
deliberating  about  the  necessary  outworks  will  never  reach  the  heart  of  the  palace  of 
truth. 

IL  "Wherein  thk  kingdom  of  God  consists.  Having  dismissed  the  negative  aspect 
of  Christianity,  the  apostle  proceeds  to  set  forth  the  main  qualities  of  the  Christian  life. 
These  are  "  righteousness,"  just,  honourable  dealing,  keeping  the  commandments  of  Gbd 
with  a  pure  conscience,  mindful  of  the  claims  of  God  and  our  neighbours.  Also  "peace," 
the  tranquillity  of  the  child  resting  on  the  Father's  bosom,  unruffled  by  storms  with- 
out, not  over-anxious  about  daily  cares,  nor  depressed  by  bereavements  or  affliction. 
And  "joy,"  which  is  peace  brimming  over  into  exultation,  triumphant  like  snow 
brightened  by  the  sunlight,  even  made  rosy  by  the  setting  rays.  Thesi  are  spirituai 
qualities.  They  are  spiritual  in  source  and  nature,  are  "fruits  of  the  Indwelling  Spirit," 
■re  enjoyed  and  perfected  "  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  Righteousness  is  not  the  laborious 
toil  of  the  legalist;  nor  is  peace  the  apathy  of  the  stoic  or  the  sleepy  contentment  of 
the  epicurean ;  nor  is  joy  the  momentary  excitement  of  the  sensualist.  They  are  pure 
inward  feelings,  springs  that  flow  spontaneously  into  outward  behaviour.  They  are 
very  practical,  dealing  not  with  abstruse  or  knotty  points  of  conduct,  but  with  qualifi- 
cations easily  understood,  and  unambiguous  as  to  the  method  of  attainment.  It  is  not 
holding  a  certain  creed,  but  cultivating  a  certain  disposition  and  character.  They  tend 
to  the  harmony  and  usefulneu  of  the  Church.  Dissension  is  impossible  where  these 
graces  prevail.  Unprofitable  arguing  is  abandoned  for  mutual  comfort  and  service. 
Engaged,  upon  the  higher  business  of  the  kingdom,  petty  details  sink  into  their  rightful 
insignificance,  minor  matters  settle  themselves.  Would  that  the  Church  had  attended 
to  this  dictum  of  the  apostle,  and  been  ever  distinguished  by  these  amiable  virtues, 
instead  of  one  section  quarrelling  with  and  persecuting  another,  making  Church  history 
a  weariness  to  read,  and  confirming  rather  than  quieting  the  doubts  of  the  sceptical  1 
Volumes  of  theology  are  not  so  powerful  to  convince  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  as  • 
holy  life.  Men  quickly  discriminate  between  ritualism  and  religion,  and  detect  the 
asceticism  which  mortifies  the  body,  yet  nourishes  the  pride  of  the  sold. — S.  B.  A. 

Ver.  21. — A  tdf-denying  ordinance.  A  society  is  formed  for  mutual  help.  The 
prosperity  of  the  whole  is  a  prime  factor  in  all  our  working  and  living.  Wondrous  the 
effect  of  the  gospel  in  levelling  distinctions  of  class,  in  banishing  national  enmities,  and 
in  making  Jew  and  Gentile  realize  their  adoption  into  the  same  family  of  God,  their 
oneness  of  blood,  their  community  of  interests. 

I.  The  btbongbb  can  help  the  weaker,  and  the  higher  stoop  to  the  positio* 
or  THE  lower,  more  easily  than  vice  versa.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  greater  to  include 
the  less.  And  the  man  of  far-reaching  spiritual  views  can  accommodate  himself  to  his 
less  intellectual  brother  more  readily  than  the  latter  can  lay  aside  his  prejudices  and 
rejoice  in  the  removal  of  all  restrictions.  Hence  those  in  our  assemblies  capable  of 
assimilating  the  richest  food  placed  before  them  are  called  upon  to  remember  the  plainer 
fare  that  suits  the  spiritual  digestion  of  their  brethren.  Those  who  delight  in  climbing 
to  the  peaks  of  spiritual  knowledge  can  learn  to  moderate  their  ardour,  and  sit  with 
their  fellows  in  happy  concord  in  the  plain,  because  otherwise  there  can  be  no  general 
assembly,  many  being  devoid  of  the  strength  and  agility  needful  for  an  ascent  to  the 
summit.  Our  exhortation  and  worship  must  ever,  though  not  exclusively,  take  account 
of  the  weaker  and  less  educated,  the  children  and  the  simple. 

II.  It  is  safer  to  err  on  the  side  op  selp-rbpbession  bather  than  of  liberty. 
Every  man  endowed  by  the  Spirit  with  a  clearness  and  amplitude  of  vision  that  dis- 
criminates between  the  essential  and  the  non-essential  may  refuse  to  have  his  freedom 
aompulsorily  narrowed  by  others.    But  he  does  well,  and  acts  in  the  spirit  of  Christ 


0H.MT.1— 23.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  423 


who  "  pleased  not  himself,"  if  he  spontaneously  renounces  part  of  his  privileges,  in 
order  that  he  may  remove  a  possible  stumbling-block  from  his  brother's  path.  And 
there  is  a  danger  of  man's  natural  tendency  to  self-assertion  leading  him  to  a  violation 
of  conscience.  "  Happy  is  he  that  conderaneth  not  himself  in  the  thing  which  he 
alloweth"  implies  the  possibility  of  insisting  on  freedom  with  low  motives.  An  instruc- 
tive tradition  of  Christ  is  recorded  by  Codex  Bezae  after  ver.  4  in  Luke  vi. :  "  On  the 
same  day  he  beheld  a  man  working  on  the  sabbath,  and  said  unto  him.  Blessed  art 
thou  if  thou  knowest  what  thou  doest :  but  if  thou  knowest  not,  thou  art  cursed  and  a 
transgressor  of  the  Law."  To  disregard  days  and  unclean  food  without  a  perception  of 
the  reason  found  in  Christ's  universal  cleansing  and  sanotifioation  is  not  to  justify,  but 
to  aggravate,  the  offence.  To  act  against  a  conscientious  feeling  is  always  wrong.  Many 
a  man  who  boasts  of  his  ability  to  pass  unscathed  through  a  fiery  ordeal  is  being  singed 
and  maimed  by  his  reckless  uess. 

III.  To  HARM  A  BBOTHBB  IS  TO  WOUND  Chbibt.  "Destroy  not  thy  brother,  for  whom 
Christ  died."  See  in  the  weakest  member  of  the  community  the  face  and  form  of  thy 
Lord !  The  essence  of  Christianity  is  self-abnegation;  love  makes  the  sacrifice  welcome. 
Christ  in  us  is  our  better  self,  and  self-love  wards  off  self-injury.  The  leader  of  a  band 
anxious  for  its  prosperity  and  progress  feels  a  pang  when  any  element  of  discord  or 
weakness  is  introduced.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  sensitive  Head  of  the  Church,  and  the 
inefficiency  of  any  member  is  a  grief  to  him ;  the  suffering  of  any  limb  impairs  his  joy. 
Could  we  more  often  place  ourselves  in  thought  in  his  position,  we  should  quickly  abate 
aught  that  lessens  the  unity  and  power  of  the  body  of  Christ.  Every  pastor  of  a  flock, 
every  teacher  of  a  class,  has  to  think  of  the  effect  of  his  example,  lest  what  he  might 
enjoy  without  risk  himself  should  exert  a  dangerous  influence  on  otlieis.  It  is  more 
blessed  to  yield  than  to  receive  a  concession. — S.  B.  A. 

Vers.  I — 12. — The  risen  Saviow  as  Lord  of  the  conscience.  The  apostle,  as  we  have 
just  seen,  has  been  discussing  the  neighbourly  character  of  Christian  living,  and  show- 
ing that  the  Christ-like  soul  will  love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  and  do  no  ill  to  him. 
A.nd  this  leads  by  an  easy  transition  to  the  whole  class  of  weak  consciences,  and  how 
they  are  to  be  dealt  with.  For  there  are  people  painfully  scrupulous,  who  have  come, 
for  example,  to  fancy  that  vegetarianism  is  the  only  lawful  system  of  diet ;  or  to  fancy 
that  holy  days  ought  to  be  strictly  kept ;  and  there  is  a  terrible  temptation  for  strong- 
minded  people  to  judge  harshly  the  weaker  brethren,  and  so  to  bring  about  endless 
friction  in  Church  and  private  relations.  It  is  with  this  whole  practical  qusstion  that 
the  apostle  here  deals.  Differences  of  opinion  upon  non-essentials  must  not  break  up 
the  brotherly  feeling ;  and  Paul  shows  with  wonderful  power  where  the  safety  lies.  It 
is  in  the  assertion  of  Christ's  Lordship  over  the  conscience. 

I.  Let  us  be  oleab  about  who  abb  the  weak  and  who  abb  thb  strono.  (Vers. 
1 — 6.)  We  are  all  creatures  of  association,  and  so  some  of  these  primitive  Christians 
came  to  think  that  meat  which  had  been  offered  to  an  idol  was  thereby  polluted,  and 
so  unfit  for  Christian  use.  Not  knowing,  therefore,  where  the  meat  offered  for  sale  in 
the  shambles  had  previously  been,  and  naturally  suspecting  that  it  may  have  been  io 
the  idol's  temple,  they  thought  it  prudent  to  become  strict  vegetarians,  rather  than  run 
the  risk  of  defilement.  They  would  not  touch,  taste,  or  handle  flesh-meat,  but  confined 
themselves  to  vegetables.  Others  had  no  such  scruples,  but  ate  whatever  was  laid 
before  them,  asking  no  questions  for  conscience'  sake.  Now,  the  apostle  manifestly 
regards  the  scrupulous  vegetarians  as  weaker  in  conscience  than  the  Christian  who 
allowed  none  of  these  scruples  to  affect  him.  Again,  some  were  scrupulous  about  holy 
days.  New  moons  and  set  feasts,  characteristic  of  paganism  as  well  as  of  Judaism, 
claimed  regard  from  weak  and  uncertain  consciences ;  while  others  of  stronger  make 
regarded  all  days  as  alike.  The  question  as  to  the  Lord's  day  does  not  seem  to  be  here 
involved  at  all,  though  Eobertson  of  Brighton  has  based  a  whole  sermon  on  the  sup- 
position.' The  over-scrupulous  in  these  instances  were  the  weak ;  the  others,  more 
certain  of  their  line  of  action,  were  the  strong. 

II.  Thbbb  ia  a  geeat  temptation  in  the  btbong  to  ridicule  thb  weak.  The 
strong  are  tempted  to  despise  the  weak,  to  judge  and  ridicule  their  scruples ;  and,  if 

'  See  '  The  Sydenham  Palace  and  the  Beligious  Non-Observance  of  the  Sabbath,'  in  th» 
2nd  seriei.  No.  xiv. 


424  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [ch.  xiv.  1— 23. 

there  is  not  watclifulness,  there  will  be  constant  friction  between  them.  Now,  this  is  a 
menace  to  the  peace  of  the  Church  ;  and  Paul  has  here  to  guard  against  it.  There  is  a 
great  danger  in  the  indulgince  of  scorn.  A  weak  brother,  if  " roasted "  and  ridiculed 
by  the  stronger,  may  be  made  a  burden  to  himself,  and  his  personal  peace  be  sacrificed 
on  the  altar  of  his  neighbour's  criticism.  Hence  in  this  passage  Paul  argues:  1.  There 
should  he  as  little  controversy  as  possible  within  the  Ohurch.  The  weak  brother  is  to  be 
received,  but  not  to  doubtful  disputations.  He  is  not  to  be  involved  in  profitless 
disputes.  The  Church  is  wise  which  discourages  debates  between  brethren.  2.  There 
should  he  mutual  respect  for  conscientious  differenoti,  of  opinion.  If  each  man  is  fully 
persuaded  in  his  own  mind,  as  Paul  declares  he  ought  to  be,  then  let  the  weak  brother 
admit  that  his  less  scrupulous  brother  has  reached  his  opinion  befoie  God,  and  that 
God  is  the  only  competent  Judge  of  his  conduct,  while  the  strong  brother  is  to  give  the 
weak  one  credit  for  similar  conscientiousness.  It  is  a  great  matter  gained  if  each  lays 
his  brother's  case  before  the  Lord,  and  prays  and  hopes  that  God  will  enable  him  to 
stand.  It  is  a  great  thing  gained  when  we  are  able  to  see  guilt  in  contemptuous 
judgment.' 

III.  In  the  risen  Saviour  each  one  must  recosnize  the  Lord  of  his  conscienob. 
(Vers.  7 — 9.)  To  Jesus,  our  risen  Saviour,  and  to  him  alone,  are  we  responsible,  and  so 
let  us  live,  and  die  unto  him.  Now,  it  is  important  for  us  to  appreciate  the  purpose  of 
Christ's  death  and  resiffrection.  It  was  no  less  than  this,  to  secure  universal  dominion 
•ver  man  both  here  and  hereafter.  "  The  Redeemer's  dominion  over  men  is  forcibly 
declared  to  have  been  the  end  of  his  ministry  on  earth.  The  apostle's  words  are  very 
express  and  emphatic.  To  this  end  that  signifies,  in  lanj;uage  as  strong  as  could  be 
used  to  note  design,  that  the  purpose  of  the  Passion  was  the  attainment  of  universal 
dominion  over  the  human  race  in  time  and  in  eternity.  To  this  end,  and  no  other ;  for 
this  purpose,  and  nothing  short  of  it ;  with  this  design,  embracing  and  consummating 
all  other  designs.  But  we  must  view  it  under  two  aspects — it  was  a  purpose  aimed  at 
before  the  death ;  in  the  Resurrection  it  was  a  purpose  reached.  He  died  that  he  might 
have  the  dominion;  he  lived  that  he  might  exercise  it."  ^  Now,  of  this  mighty  realm  of 
the  risen  Chiist,  the  dead  constitute  the  vast  majority.  "  What,  in  comparison  of  the 
uncounted  hosts,  numbered  only  by  the  Infinite  Mind,  are  the  few  hundreds  of  millions 
that  any  moment  are  called  the  living  f  It  is  in  the  realm  of  the  sliades  that  we  con- 
template our  gieat  family  in  its  vastest  dimensions,  as  it  has  from  the  first  generation 
been  gaining  on  the  numbers  of  the  living,  and  swelling  onwards  to  the  siupen  lous 
whole  bound  up  in  the  federal  headship  of  the  first  and  second  Adam."'  Now,  in  all 
this  vast  domain,  there  is  but  one  rightful  Lord  of  the  conscience  ;  there  may  be  other 
lords  with  dominion,  and  they  may  be  many ;  but  in  the  realm  of  conscience  there  is 
only  one  Lord,  and  he  is  the  risen  Saviour  1  * 

IV.  This  Lordship  op  Jesus  leads  directly  to  the  Cheistian  idea  or  life  as  a 
life  unto  our  Lord.  (Ver.  8.)  We  cannot  live  unto  ourselves,  even  if  we  tried.  We 
cannot  coop  up  our  life  so  as  that  it  should  have  no  relations  to  any  but  ourselves.  We 
must  live  to  influence  otliers ;  we  ou^ht  to  live  for  the  glory  of  our  risen  Lord.  In  the 
Christian  idea  of  life  "  nothing  is  indifferent,  nothing  self-willed ;  all  is  consecrated  to 
Heaven.  The  scruples  of  the  weak  rise  from  tlie  fear  of  God,  and  are,  therefore,  to  be 
confiidered  sacred ;  the  freedom  of  the  strong  rises  from  tlie  dedication  to  the  Lord,  and 
b,  therefore,  equally  sacred.  Life,  with  its  energies  and  purposes,  is  oie  prolonged  act  of 
consecration.  Death,  with  its  silent  endurance  and  great  transition,  is  a  consecration 
too.'"  As  another  has  faithfully  put  it,  "As  he  always  exists, as  a  Christian, in  and  by 
his  Master,  so  he  always  exists  for  his  Master.  He  has,  in  the  reality  of  the  matter, 
no  dissociated  and  independent  interest.  Not  only  in  preaching  and  teaching,  and 
bearing  articulate  witness  to  Jesus  Christ,  does  he,  if  his  life  is  true  to  its  idea  and  its 
secret,  '  live  not  unto  himself ; '  not  with  aims  which  terminate  for  one  moment  in  his 

'  See  Eobertsou's  sermon  on  the  "  Guilt  of  Judging — Contemptuousness,"  in  his  '  Human 
Eace  and  other  Sermons,'  No.  xv. 

'  Pope's  '  Kingdom  of  Christ,'  p.  134.  •  Ibid.,  p.  141. 

•  See  Saurin's  sermon  on  "  The  Empire  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  Church, "  in  torn.  viii.  f, 
S4,  etc. 

'  See  the  fine  fragment  by  Mr.  Hull  of  Eing'g  Lynn  on  "  The  Ohriatian  Idea  of  Lifa^* 
'  Sermons,'  ii.  p.  76. 


OH.  Mv.  1—23.]    THE   EPISTLB  OF   PADL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  425 


own  credit,  for  example,  or  his  own  comfort.  Equally  in  the  engagements  of  domestic 
life,  of  business  life,  of  public  affairs;  equally  (to  look  towards  the  humbler  walks  of 
duty)  in  the  day's  work  of  the  Christian  servant,  or  peasant,  or  artisan  ;  '  whether  he 
lives,  he  lives  unto  the  Master,  or  whether  he  dies,  he  dies  unto  the  Master ; '  whether 
he  wakes  or  sleeps,  whether  he  toils  or  rests,  whether  it  be  the  term  or  the  vacation 
of  life,  '  whether  he  eats  or  drinks,  or  whatsoever  he  does,'  he  is  the  Master's  property 
for  the  Master's  use. 

"  '  Teaoli  me,  my  Goil  and  King, 

In  all  things  thee  to  see, 
And  what  I  do  in  anything 

To  do  it  as  to  thee. 

" '  A  servant  with  this  clause 
Makes  drudgery  divine ; 
Who  sweeps  a  room  as  for  thy  laws 
Makes  that  and  th'  action  fine.'" 
(Monies  ' Thoughts  on  the  Spiritual  Life,'  pp.  150, 151 .) 

v.  Instead  of  jtjtqino  others,  we  ought  to  think  op  being  judged  at  thb 
JUDQMENT-BAB  OF  Jesus  ouLisELVES.  (Vers.  10 — 12.)  Paul  points  the  lesson  home. 
He  would  have  his  readers  to  give  up  the  judgment-seat  and  think  of  the  judgment- 
bar.  Better  to  think  how  we  shall  meet  Christ's  scrutiny  ourselves  than  be  contemp- 
tuously condemning  weak  brethren  around  us.  Leave  the  weak  and  the  strong  with 
the  Lord,  who  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  and  let  ua  judge  ourselves  only,  and  make 
sure  of  a  proper  appearing  at  the  judgment-bar  of  Christ.  Thus,  when  all  relations  are 
carried  up  to  the  feet  of  Christ,  peace  is  preserved  and  progress  through  self-knowledge 
secured !— E.  M.  E. 

Vers.  1.3 — 23. — Deference  to  weak  consciences,  not  condemnation  of  them.  Having 
taken  his  readers  up  to  the  judgment-bar  of  Jesus,  the  only  Lord  of  the  conscience,  he 
now  proceeds  to  show  how  we  are  to  help  weak  brethren.  It  will  not  be  by  condemn- 
ing their  scruples,  but  by  following  Christ  in  seeking  their  salvation.  We  are  to  defer 
to  conscience  so  far  as  our  weaker  brother's  spiritual  interests  are  concerned,  and  sur- 
render meat  or  wine,  if  by  our  total  abstinence  we  can  promote  his  salvation. 

L  We  are  bound  to  consider  whether  our  manner  of  lfvino  mat  not  bk  a 
BTOMBUNG-BLOCK  TO  OUR  WEAK  BROTHER.  Having  taken  his  readers  to  Christ's  judg- 
ment-bar, he  now  asks  them  to  examine  themselves  as  to  the  influence  of  their  mode  of 
living.  Is  their  freedom  an  offence  to  the  weak  ?  Then  in  the  spirit  of  the  Master, 
who  gave  his  life  to  save  the  weak  brother,  they  ought  to  surrender  their  freedom  in 
deference  to  their  scruples.  Surely,  if  Jesus  surrendered  life  for  the  weak  brother,  dying 
to  redeem  him,  we  ought  to  be  ready  to  surrender  meat  or  to  surrender  wine,  if  by 
so  doing  we  can  promote  our  weaker  brother's  welfare.  Paul's  position  was  a  noble 
one.  He  knew  that  nothing  was  unclean  of  itself.  He  was  none  of  your  squeamish 
and  scrupulous  individuals.  He  could  eat  whatever  was  set  before  him;  he  could  drink 
without  the  least  excess.  But  he  was  ready  to  surrender  both  meat  and  wine  for  the 
weak  brother's  sake.  And  this  is  the  very  spirit  of  Christ.  It  is  here  that  we  base 
our  temperance  reformation ;  not  on  partaking  being  a  sin,  but  being  inexpedient  in 
view  of  the  weak  brother's  dangers.^ 

II.  Doubt  as  to  oub  duty  should  lead  us  to  abstain  bather  than  indulqb 
UNTIL  WE  ABE  FULLT  PERSUADED  IN  OUR  OWN  MINDS.  The  apostle  wauts  evory  man  to 
be  fully  per.suaded  in  his  own  mind  as  to  his  course  of  action.  One  who  is  not,  one 
who  has  no  real  faith  in  the  course  of  action  he  is  pursuing,  is  selt-condemned.  Paul 
wishes  to  bring  all  such  to  the  side  of  abstinence.  Better  abstain  from  meat  or  drink 
until  such  times  as  the  path  of  duty  is  clear.  Now,  there  are  multitudes  that  act  quite 
differently.  They  go  on  indulging  themselves  because  they  have  not  made  up  their 
minds.    Now,  this  is  moral  indifference,  and  deserves  reprobation. 

III.  The  DEATH  OP  Christ  is  the  great  moral  lever  with  conscientious  rouls. 
The  apostle  bases  his  whole  plea  for  the  endangered  bi'other  on  the  death  of  Christ  for 
him.     If  Christ  died  for  him,  we  should  surely  abstain  for  him.     The  death  of  Jesuf 

•  See  Sortain's  sermon  on  "  Deference  to  Consoieuoe,"  in  his  '  Sermons,'  p.  352,  eta. 


428 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [en.  iv.  1— 3». 


is  thus  seen  to  be  the  great  moral  leverage  for  the  world.  Into  the  midst  of  tkingi 
indifferent — for  "  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink ;  but  righteousness,  and 
peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost" — the  self-sacrifice  of  our  Master  enters  and  compels 
conscientious  souls  to  make  some  sacrifices  for  the  sake  of  the  brethren.  J^eir  edifica- 
tion becomes  our  aim,  since  the  things  are  indifferent.  We  are  not  selfishly  to  assert 
our  liberty,  but  self-den yinj;ly  we  are  to  forego  it,  and  bind  ourselves  to  abstinence  for 
whatever  may  be  a  brother's  snare.  If  we  could  get  such  a  deference  to  conscience 
practised  in  the  Christian  Church,  society  would  very  soon  be  regenerated, — K.  M.  E. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Ver.  1 — oh.  xvi.  24. — rv.  Supplekentart. 
(See  summary  of  contents,  p.  xvi.)  Ques- 
tions have  been  raised  and  much  discussed 
as  to  the  connection  of  the  last  two  chapters, 
XV.  and  xvi.,  with  the  rest  of  the  Epistle. 
The  facte  and  the  opinions  founded  on  them 
may  be  summarized  as  follows. 

(1)  There  is  sufficient  proof  that  in  early 
times  copies  of  the  Epistle  existed  with- 
out these  two  chapters.  The  evidence  is 
tliis— 

(a)  Origen  (on  ch.  xvi.  25 — 27)  speaks 
of  some  copies  in  his  time  being  without 
the  concluding  doxology,  and  also  with- 
out any  part  of  these  two  chapters,  attri- 
buting the  omission  to  Marcion,  for  his 
own  purposes,  having  mutilated  the  Epistle. 
His  words  are,  "Caput  hoc  (t.».  oh.  xvi. 
25 — 27)  Marcion,  a  quo  soripturse  evange- 
licse  et  apostolic*  interpolatse  sunt,  de  hao 
Epistola  penitus  abstulit;  et  non  solum 
hoc,  sed  ab  hoc  loco  ubi  soriptum  est,  Omne 
autem  quod  non  ex  fide  est  peccatum  est 
(i.e.  ch.  xiv.  23)  usque  ad  finem  cuucta  dis- 
eecuit."  Tertullian  also  ('  Contra  Marcion ') 
speaks  of  Marcion  having  mutilated  this 
Epistle,  though  not  specifying  these  two 
chapters. 

(6)  In  Codex  Amiatinus  (a  manuscript  of 
the  Latin  Bible  of  the  sixth  century)  there 
is  a  prefixed  table  of  contents,  referring 
by  numbers  to  the  sections  into  which 
the  Epistle  was  divided,  and  describing  the 
subject  of  each  section.  In  this  table  the 
fiftieth  section  is  thus  described:  "On  the 
peril  of  one  who  grieves  his  brother  by  his 
meat,"  plainly  denoting  ch.  xiv.  ]5 — 23; 
and  the  next  and  concluding  section  is 
described  thus:  "On  the  mystery  of  the 
Lord  kept  secret  before  his  Passion,  but 
after  hiiPaasiou  revealed,"  which  description 


can  only  refer  to  the  doxology  of  ch.  xvi. 
25 — 27.  Hence  it  would  seem  that  in  some 
Latin  copy  of  the  Epistle  to  which  the  table 
of  contents  referred,  the  doxology  followed 
ch.  xiv.  23  with  nothing  between. 

(fl)  Tertullian,  Irenseus,  and  Cyprian, 
who  quote  largely  from  the  Epistle,  have  no 
references  to  oh.  xv.  and  xvi.  It  may  be 
observed,  however,  tliat  mere  omission  to 
quote  is  not  in  itself  conclusive,  though  it 
may  be  coiToborative  of  other  evidence. 

(2)  The  concluding  doxology  (ch.  xvi. 
25 — 27),  though  placed,  as  in  the  Textus 
Beceptus,  at  the  end  of  ch.  xvi.  in  the 
nacials  generally  and  by  the  Latin  Fathers, 
is  found  at  the  end  of  ch.  xiv.  in  the  uncial 
L,  in  most  cursives,  in  the  Greek  Lection- 
aries,  and  ia  so  referred  to  by  the  Greek 
commentators.  Some  few  manuscripts  have 
it  in  both  places,  and  some  few  omit  it 
altogether.  Origen  also  (loo.  cj<.)  says  that 
in  some  copies  of  the  Epistle  wliieh  con- 
tained ch.  XV.  and  xvi.,  the  doxology  was 
placed  at  the  end  of  ch.  xvi.,  and  in  others 
at  the  end  of  ch.  xiv. 

(3)  In  one  manuscript  (G)  all  mention  of 
Rome  in  the  Epistle  is  omitted ;  and  in  one 
cursive  (47)  there  is  a  marginal  note  to  the 
effect  that  "  some  one  "  (i.e.  probably,  some 
commentator)  makes  no  mention  of  the 
words  if  V^iiri  either  in  the  interpretation 
or  the  text 

In  view  of  these  facts,  it  may  be  held  that 
the  Epistle,  as  first  written,  ended  at  ch. 
xiv.  with  the  doxology  appended,  oh.  xv 
and  xvi.  (ending  at  ver.  24  with  the  usual 
concluding  benediction,  "  The  grace,"  etc.) 
having  been  an  addition,  Baur,  after  hi) 
manner— and  this  partly  on  supposed  in- 
ternal evidence  —  disputes  the  two  last 
chapters  liaving  been  written  by  St.  Paul  at 
all,  regarding  them  as  an  addition  by  a 
Liter  hand.    But  his  reasons  are  too  arbitrary 


CH.  XV.  1—38.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


427 


to  stand  against  the  authority  of  existing 
manusoiipts,  to  say  nothing  of  tlie  internal 
evidence  itself,  which  leally  appears  to  ua 
to  tell  the  other  way.  Such  internal  evi- 
dence will  appear  in  the  course  of  the  Expo- 
Bition.  One  view,  put  forth  hy  Eiickert, 
and  recently  supported  by  Bishop  Lightfoot 
(Journal  of  Philology,  1871,  No.  6),  is  that 
St.  Paul,  having  originally  written  the  whole 
Bpistle,  including  the  two  chapters,  hut 
without  the  doxology,  reissued  it  at  a  later 
period  of  his  life  in  a  shortened  form  for 
general  oiiculation,  having  then  appended 
the  doxology.  This  theory,  however,  is  but 
a  conjecture,  put  forward  as  best  accounting 
for  all  the  facts  of  the  case,  including 
that  of  all  mention  of  Borne  having  been 
apparently  absent  from  some  copies.  This, 
however,  might  be  accounted  for  by  the 
Epistle  having  been  issued,  after  St.  Paul's 
time,  in  a  form  suited  for  general  circulation. 
On  the  whole,  we  may  take  it  as  probable 
that  the  apostle,  having  first  concluded  his 
Epistle  with  ch.  xiv.  and  the  doxology,  felt 
himself  urged  to  resume  a  subject  which 
lay  so  near  his  heart,  and  so  appended  oh. 
XV.,  and  then  the  salutations,  etc.,  in  oh.  xvi, 
before  the  letter  was  sent. 

This  supposition  would  in  itself  account 
for  copies  of  the  Epistle  having  got  into 
circulation  without  the  additions  to  it. 
Possibly  Maroion  took  advantage  of  finding 
some  such  copies  to  deny  the  genuineness 
of  the  two  final  chapters  altogether;  and 
his  doing  so  would  he  likely  to  promote 
circulation  of  the  shorter  copies.  It  will  be 
observed  that  the  Epistle,  as  a  doctrinal 
treatise  practically  applied,  is  complete 
without  the  last  two  chapters ;  and  also  that 
ch.  IV.,  though  connected  in  thought  with 
the  end  of  ch.  xiv.,  might  be,  and  indeed 
reads  like,  a  resumption  and  further  enforce- 
ment of  its  ideas.  It  seems,  indeed,  as  if  three 
appendices,  or  postscripts,  had  been  added 
by  the  apostle;  the  first  ending  with  tlie 
benediction  of  ch.  xv.  33 ;  the  second  (com- 
mending PhcBbe,  who  was  to  be  the  bearer 
of  the  letter,  and  sending  salutations  to 
persons  at  Rome)  with  the  benediction  of 
ch.  xvi.  20 ;  and  the  third  (which  might  be 
»ddod  at  the  last  moment)  with  that  of  ch. 
xvi.  24.  All  the  benedictions  are  thus 
accounted   for,  being  the  apostle's    usual 


concluding  authentications  (cf.  2  Tliess.  iii. 
17;  Col.  iv.  18). 

As  to  the  proper  position  of  the  doxology, 
if  the  view  lust  given  be  correct,  its  original 
one  would  be  most  naturally  at  the  end  of 
ch.  xiv. ;  since  otherwise  the  Epistle,  as  first 
completed,  wduld  have  nothing  answering 
to  the  usual  benedictions  in  conclusion. 
And  though  this  is  not  a  benediction,  but  a 
doxology,  embodying  in  solemn  terms  the 
main  idea  of  the  preceding  treatise,  such  a 
conclusion  is  in  keeping  with  the  peculiar 
character  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Bomans. 

Finally,  though  uncial  authority  is  de- 
cidedly in  favour  of  the  position  of  the 
doxology  at  the  end  of  ch.  xvi.,  this  does 
not  seem  to  be  a  sufScient  reason  for  con- 
cluding it  to  have  been  originally  there.  If 
there  existed  anciently  two  editions,  one  with, 
and  the  other  without,  the  two  chapters 
appended,  transcribers  of  the  longer  edition 
would  be  likely  to  place  the  doxology  at 
the  end  of  what  they  believed  to  be  the 
true  conclusion  of  the  original  Epistle. 

After  all,  the  question  cannot  be  con- 
sidered as  settled.  It  has  been  deemed 
sufficient  here  to  state  the  main  arguments 
for  or  against  the  various  views  that  have 
been  taken. 

Vers.  1 — 13. — H.  Benewed  admonition  to 
bear  with  the  weak,  enforced  by  Seripture 
and  the  example  of  Chritt. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — We  then  (rather,  but  we,  or 
now  we.  The  Sh  here  certainly  seems  to 
link  this  chapter  to  the  preceding  section ; 
but  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  chapter 
being  an  addition  to  a  completed  letter,  of 
which  it  takes  up  the  concluding  thought) 
that  are  strong  (St.  Paul,  here  as  elsewhere, 
identifies  himself  with  the  more  enlightened 
party)  ought  {d<p€i\oiJiev  expresses  obligation 
of  duty)  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak 
(cf.  Gal.  vi.  2),  and  not  to  please  ourselves. 
Let  every  one  of  us  please  his  neighbour  for 
his  good  (rather,  for  thai  which  is  good)  to 
edification.  For  Christ  also  pleased  not 
himself;  but,  as  it  is  written.  The  reproaches 
of  them  that  reproached  thee  fell  on  me. 
The  quotation  is  from  Ps.  Ixix.  9;  one  in 
which  a  righteous  sufferer  under  persecution 
calls  on  God  for  deliverance,  and  to  some 
parts  of  which  even  the  details  of  Christ's 
Passion  strikingly  correspond.  The  first 
part  of  the  verse  here  quoted,  "  The  zeal  of 
thine  house,"  etc.,  is  applied  to  him  in  John 
1117. 


428 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xv.  1—33. 


Vei.  4. — Tor  whatsoever  tliingB  were 
written  aforetime  were  written  for  our 
learning  (in  the  old  sense  of  teaching,  or 
instruction),  that  we  through  patience  and 
comfort  of  the  Scriptures  (or,  as  the  form 
of  the  Greek  rather  suggests,  and  as  is 
confirmed  by  the  repetition  of  the  words 
conjoined  in  ver.  5,  through  the  patience  oTid 
the  comfort  of  the  Scriptures)  might  have 
hope.  This  verse,  introduced  by  yip,  gives 
the  reason  why  the  words  of  the  ancient 
psalmist  are  adduced  for  the  instruction  of 
Christians.  Christ,  it  is  said,  exemplified 
the  pi'inciple  of  it,  and  it  is  for  us  to  do  so 
too.  By  bearing  the  infirmities  of  the  weak, 
Bnd  submitting,  if  need  be,  to  reproach,  we 
exhibit  Christ-like  endurance  (mo/iovh),  such 
as  Scripture  inculcates ;  and  therewith  will 
come  cmnfort,  suoh  as  Scripture  contains  and 
gives,  and  so  a  strengthening  of  our  hope 
beyond  these  present  troubles.  The  psalm 
quoted  was  peculiarly  one  of  endurance  and 
comfurt  umler  vexations  and  reproaches,  and 
of  hope  beyond  them.  It  was  written  afore- 
time for  our  instruction,  that  so  it  may  be 
with  us,  as  it  was  with  Christ.  In  the  next 
verse  the  apostle  returns  definitely  to  the 
subject  in  hand. 

Vers.  5 — 7.— Now  the  God  of  patience  and 
comfort  (the  same  word  as  before,  though 
here  in  the  Authorized  Version  rendered 
consolation)  grant  yon  to  be  like-minded  (see 
on  ch.  xii.  16),  one  with  another  according 
to  Christ  Jesus :  that  ye  may  with  one 
accord  with  one  month  glorify  the  Ood  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (so  cer- 
tainly, rather  than,  as  in  the  Authorized 
Version,  "God,  even  the  Father  of,"  etc.). 
Wherefore  receive  ye  one  another  (cf.  oh. 
xiv.  1,  and  nole),  even  as  Christ  also  re- 
ceived us  (or  you,  which  is  better  suppoited, 
and,  for  a  n  ason  to  be  given  below,  more 
likely)  to  the  glory  of  God.  As  in  ver.  3, 
the  example  of  Christ  is  again  adduced. 
The  connection  of  thought  becomes  plain 
ii'  we  take  the  admonition,  "Eeceive  ye  one 
another,"  to  be  mainly  addressed  to  "the 
strong,"  and  tlicse  to  consist  principally  of 
Gentile  believers,  the  "weak  brethren" 
being  (as  above  supposed)  prejudiced  Jew- 
ish Christians.  To  the  former  the  apostle 
says,  "  Eeceive  to  yourselves  with  full  sym- 
[lathy  those  Jewish  weak  ones,  even  as 
Christ,  though  sent  primarily  to  fulfil  the 
ancient  promises  to  the  house  of  Israel  only 
(see  ver.  8),  embraced  you  Gentiles  (u/i5s) 
also  within  the  arms  of  mercy."  Tlius  the 
sequence  of  thouglit  in  ver.  8,  eeq.,  appears. 
"  Unto  the  glory  of  God  "  means  "  so  as  to 
ledound  to  his  glory."  Christ's  receiving 
the  Gentiles  was  unto  his  glory;  and  it  is 
implied  that  the  mutual  receiving  of  each 
other  by  believers  would  be  so  too.  The 
idea  of  Gud's  glory   being  the  end  of  all 


runs  through  the  whole  passage  (o£  vers. 
6,  9, 11). 

Vers.  8,  9. — For  (the  reading  yip  is  much 
better  supported  than  Si.  The  essential 
meaning,  however,  of  Keya  yip  is  the  same 
as  of  Aeya  Se)  I  say  (i.e.  mhat  I  mean  to 
say  is  this;  cf.  1  Cor.  i,  12 ;  Gal.  iv.  1 ;  v. 
16)  that  Jesus  Christ  was  (rather,  has  been 
made,  yeyevria-Oai  being  tlie  more  probable 
reading  than  yevdtrBat)  a  minister  of  the 
circumcision  (i.e.  of  the  Jews)  for  the  truth 
of  God,  to  confirm  the  promises  made  unto 
the  fathers  (literally,  the  promises  of  th« 
fathers) :  and  that  the  Gentiles  might 
glorify  God  for  >  his  mercy.  Observe  the 
expressions,  inrhp  aKnBelas  &sov,  etc.,  and 
iirfp  i\eovs,  with  reference  respectively  to 
the  Jews  and  Gentiles.  Christ's  primary 
ministry  was  to  "  the  house  of  Israel "  (of. 
Matt.  XV.  24),  in  vindication  of  God's  truth, 
or  faithfulness  to  his  promises  made  through 
the  patriarchs  to  the  chosen  race :  his  tak- 
ing in  of  the  Gentiles  was  an  extension  of 
the  Divine  mercy,  to  his  greater  glory.  The 
infinitive  So^iiiTat,  in  ver.  9,  seems  best 
taken  in  the  same  construction  with  jBe^ai- 
wffoi  in  ver.  8,  both  being  dependent  on  cii 
T^.  As  it  is  written.  For  this  cause  I  will 
confess  to  thee  among  the  Gentiles,  and  sing 
unto  thy  Kame.  This  quotation  from  Ps. 
xviii.  49  or  2  Sum.  xxU.  50,  with  those 
that  follow,  are  for  scriptural  confirmation 
of  God's  purpose,  which  has  just  been 
spoken  of,  to  include  the  Gentiles  in  his 
covenanted  mercies  to  Israel,  so  that  they 
too  might  glorify  him.  St.  Paul,  after  a 
manner  usual  with  him,  follows  out  a 
thought  suggested  in  the  course  of  his 
argument,  so  as  to  interrupt  the  latter  for 
a  while,  but  to  return  to  it  in  ver.  13. 
■  All,  in  fact,  from  the  beginning  of  ver.  8 
to  the  end  of  ver.  12,  is  parenthetical,  sug- 
gested by  "even  as  Christ  received  you," 
at  the  end  of  ver.  7.  All  this,  it  may  be 
observed,  is  confirmatory  of  Pauline  author- 
ship. The  first  quotation  introduces  David, 
the  theocratic  king,  confessing  and  praising 
God,  not  apart  from  the  Gentiles,but  among 
them.  The  second,  from  Deut.  xxxiL  43, 
calls  on  the  Gentiles  themselves  to  join  in 
Israel's  rejoicing ;  the  third,  from  Ps.  oxvii. 
1,  does  the  same;  the  last,  from  Isa.  xi.  10, 
foretells  definitely  the  reign  of  the  Messiah 
over  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews,  and  the  hope 
also  of  the  Gentiles  in  him. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — And  again  he  saith,  Be- 
joice,  ye  Gentiles,  with  his  people.  And 
again,  Praise  the  Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles;  and 
laud  him,  all  ye  peoples.  And  again,  Esaias 
saith,  There  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse,  and  he 
that  shall  rise  to  reign  over  the  Gentiles ; 
in  him  shall  the  Gentiles  trust  (rather, 
hooe — 4\iriou(ri — which  is  the  word  in  the 
LXX.  ;  thus  bringing  back  the  thought  of 


OH.  XV.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF   PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


429 


the  hope  spoken  of  in  ver.  4,  with  a  prayer 
for  the  abundance  of  which  to  his  readers, 
aa  the  result  of  peace  in  the  faith  among 
each  other,  the  apostle  now  concludes  his 
exhortation).  Now  the  God  of  hope  fill  you 
with  all  joy  and  peaoo  in  believing,  that 
ye  may  abound  in  hope,  through  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Vers.  14 — 33. — I.  Expression  of  confidence 
in  the  general  disposition  of  the  Boman 
Christians,  and  of  the  writer's  desire  to  visit 
them,  and  his  intentions  in- accordance  vnth 
that  desire. 

Ver.  14. — And  I  myself  also  am  persuaded 
of  you,  my  brethren,  that  ye  yourselves  also 
are  full  of  goodness,  filled  with  all  know- 
ledge, able  also  to  admonish  one  another. 
It  is  St.  Paul's  courteous  as  well  as  kindly 
way  to  compliment  those  to  whom  he  writes 
on  what  he  believes  to  be  good  In  them,  and 
to  cling  to  a  good  opinion  of  them,  even 
where  he  has  some  misgivings,  or  has  had 
reason  to  find  fault  (of.  1  Cor.  i.  4,  «eg.  ; 
2  Cor.  i.  7;  iii.  1,  seq.;  vii.  3,  seq.).  Here 
"I  myself  also"  (koI  avrbs  eyi)  may  have 
tacit  reference  to  the  general  good  report 
ol  the  Roman  Church  (cf.  oh.  i.  8  and  xvi. 
19),  which  he  means  to  say  he  himself  by 
no  means  doubts  the  truth  of,  notwithstand- 
ing his  previous  warnings.  "  Ye  yourselves 
also"  (icai  al/ToX)  implies  his  trust  that  even 
without  such  warnings  they  would  of  them- 
selves be  as  he  would  wish  them  to  be ;  "  full 
of  goodness  "  (ayaflwo^vijs),  so  as  to  be  kind 
to  one  another,  as  they  were  enlightened 
and  replete  with  knowledge  (yriiiTeas). 

Ver.  15.— But  I  have  written  unto  yon 
the  more  boldly,  brethren,  in  some  measure 
(bo,  as  in  the  Revised  Version,  or,  tn  part 
(airb  fiipovs),  rather  than  in  some  sort,  as 
in  the  Authorized  Version.  The  allusion 
seems  to  be  to  the  passages  in  the  Epistle 
iu  which  he  has  been  bold  to  admonish 
ui'gently ;  such  as  ch.  xi.  17,  seq. ;  xii.  3 ; 
and  especially  ch.  xiv.),  as  puttug  you  in 
mind  (reminding  you  only  of  what  you 
doubtless  know),  because  of  the  grace  given 
me  of  God;  >'.«.,  as  appears  from  what  follows, 
of  apostleship  to  the  Gentiles  (cf.  ch.  i.  5, 
14;  also  Acts  zxii.  21;  Gal.  ii.  9).  Though 
the  Church  of  Borne  was  not  one  of  his 
own  foundation,  and  he  had  no  desire, 
there  or  elsewhere,  to  build  on  another 
man's  foundation  (ver.  20),  yet  his  peculiar 
mission  as  apostle  to  the  Gentiles  gave  him 
a  claim  to  admonish  them. '  The  reason 
thus  given  is,  it  will  be  observed,  a  con- 
firmation of  the  view,  otherwise  apparent, 
that  the  Boman  Ciiureh  consisted  princi- 
pally of  Gentile  believers. 

Ver.  16.— That  I  should  be  the  minister 


(\etToupyhv)  Of  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  Gentiles, 
ministering  (KenovpyovvTo.)  the  gospel  of  God, 
that  the  offering  up  of  the  Gentiles  might 
be  acceptable,  being  sanctified  iu  the  Holy 
Ghost.  As  to  the  words  \eiTovpyiis  and 
KeiToupyeiv,  see  on  ch.  xiii.  6;  and  on  Xarpeva, 
A,OTpe(o,  on  ch.  i.  9  and  xii.  1.  Here  they 
are  evidently  used  in  their  sacrificial  mean- 
ing, but  applied  metaphorically ;  the  "  ac- 
ceptable offering  "  which  Paul  offers  to  God 
is  that  of  the  Gentiles  whom  he  brings  to 
the  faith.  "  The  preaching  of  the  gospel 
he  calls  a  sacrificial  service  Qepovpyidv), 
and  genuine  faith  an  acceptable  offering" 
(Theodoret).  "This  is  my  priesthood,  to 
preach  and  to  proclaim"  (Chrysostom);  cf. 
Phil.  ii.  17. 

Ver.  17. — I  have  therefore  whereof  I  may 
glory  through  (rather,  I  have  my  boasting 
in)  Christ  Jesus  in  the  things  that  pertain 
unto  God  (tH  irphs  @e6r — the  same  phrase 
as  is  used  in  Heb.  v.  1  with  reference  to 
priestly  service).  St.  Paul's  purpose  in 
this  and  the  four  following  verses  is  to 
allege  proof  of  his  being  a  true  apostle  with 
a  right  to  speak  with  authority  to  the 
Gentiles.  It  is  evident,  he  says,  from  the 
extent  and  success  of  my  apostolic  labours, 
and  the  power  of  God  that  has  accompanied 
them.  So  also,  still  more  earnestly  and  at 
length,  in  2  Cor.  xi.  and  xii.  As  to  his 
reason  for  frequently  thus  insisting  on  his 
true  apostleship,  and  for  asserting  it  in 
writing  to  the  Romans,  see  note  on  ch.  i.  1. 

Vers.  18,  19. — For  I  will  not  dare  to 
speak  of  any  of  those  things  which  Christ 
hath  not  wrought  through  me  unto  the 
obedience  of  the  Gentiles  (meaning,  I  will 
not  dare  to  speak  of  any  mere  doings  of  my 
bwn,  but  only  of  those  in  which  the  power 
of  Christ  working  through  my  ministry  has 
been  displayed)  by  word  and  deed,  by  the 
power  of  signs  and  wonders  (i.e.  displays 
of  miraculous  power.  It  is  noteworthy  how 
St.  Paul  alludes  incidentally  in  his  letters 
to  such  "  signs  and  wonders  "  having  accom- 
panied his  ministry,  as  to  something  familiar 
and  acknowledged,  so  as  to  suggest  the 
idea  of  their  having  been  more  frequent 
than  we  might  gather  from  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles.  Had  the  alleged  "  signs  and 
wonders"  been  unreal,  we  might  have 
expected  them  to  be  made  more  of  in  the 
subsequent  narrative  of  an  admirer  than  in 
contemporary  letters),  by  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  (al.  the  Holy  Spirit.  This 
power,  if  taken  as  distinct  from  that  of  signs 
and  wonders,  may  denote  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  displayed  in  the  conversion  of 
believers,  and  the  gifts  bestowed  upon 
them);  so  that  from  Jerusalem,  and  round 
about  as  far  as  Qlyrionm,  I  have  folly 
preached  (literally,  I  have  fulfilled)  th* 
gospel  of  Christ.    In  thus  designatinj;  th« 


430 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xv.  1—33 


sphere  of  bis  minietry  the  apostle  is  denoting 
its  local  extent,  rather  than  the  course  he 
bad  taken.  He  had,  In  fact,  preached  first 
at  DamaBCus  (Acts  ix.  20),  and  afterwards 
at  Jemsalem  (Acts  ix.  29)  ;  but  he  mentions 
Jemsalem  first,  as  being  the  original  home 
of  the  gospel  in  the  East,  and,  indeed,  the 
first  scene  of  his  own  preaching  in  fellow 
ship  with  the  original  apostles.  Thence 
be  bad  extended  it  in  various  quarters 
(for  the  meaning  of  k^kX^i — ^trans.  "round 
about" — of.  Mark  vi.  6;  Luke  ix.  12),  and 
carried  it  into  Europe,  Illyricum  being  the 
western  limit  so  far  reached.  It  is  true 
that  there  is  no  mention  in  the  Acts  of 
his  having  actually  visited  Illyria.  In  the 
journey  of  Acts  xvii.  he  plainly  got  no 
further  west  than  Beroea,  which  is,  how- 
ever, not  far  off;  and  he  might  possibly 
mean  here  only  to  say  that  be  had  extended 
the  gospel  to  the  borders  of  lUyrieum,  but 
for  the  word  TreirKrjpwKevat,  and  his  seeming 
to  imply  afterwards  (ver.  23)  that  he  had 
gone  as  far  as  he  could  in  those  regions, 
and  consequently  contemplated  a  journey 
to  Spain.  Hence,  the  narrative  of  Acts 
not  being  an  exhaustive  history,  it  may  be 
supposed  that  he  had  on  some  occasion 
extended  his  operations  from  Macedonia  to 
Illyricum,  as  be  may  well  have  done  on  his 
visit  to  the  latter  mentioned  in  Acts  xx. 
i — 3,  where  Sie\Biiv  tA  ^epjj  ^Ketva  allows 
for  a  visit  into  Illyricum. 

Ver.  20. — Yea  (or,  but),  so  striving  (or, 
eameslly  detiring,  or  malting  it  my  aim. 
The  word  is  tpiKonnov/ievop;  cf.  2  Cor.  v. 
9;  1  Thess.  iv.  11)  to  preach  the  gospel, 
not  where  Christ  was  named,  lest  I  should 
build  upon  another  man's  foundation.  In 
the  compact  between  St.  Paul  and  the 
apostles  of  the  circumcision  referred  to  in 
Gal.  ii.  1 — 7,  it  was  agreed  that  be  should 
confine  bis  apostolic  ministry  to  the  Gentiles. 
Consequently,  we  find  him  selecting  as  centres 
of  his  work  the  principal  cities  of  the 
heathen  world.  But  lie  was  further  careful 
to  avoid  places,  wherever  they  might  be, 
in  which  Churches  were  already  founded. 
It  was  the  function  of  an  apostle  to  extend 
the  gospel  by  founding  new  Churches,  rather 
than  to  invade  the  provinces  of  others. 
Those  founded  by  himself,  and  thug  under 
his  immediate  jurisdiction,  as  e.g.  the 
Corinthian  Church,  he  visited  as  need 
arose,  and  addressed  them  in  authoritative 
letters,  commanding  as  well  as  exhorting. 
But  his  rule  in  this  respect  did  not  preclude 
his  writing  also  letters  of  general  encourage- 
ment and  admonition  to  any  whom  his 
peculiar  commission  as  apostle  of  the  Gen- 
tiles gave  him  a  claim  to  be  heard  by. 
Thus  he  wrote  to  the  Colossians,  though 
he  had  never  seen  them  (Col.  1.  4 ;  ii.  1) ; 
and  thus  also  to  the  Bomans,  at  the  same 


time  (as  we  have  seen,  eh.  xt.  15,  ««}.) 

almost  apologizing  for  doing  so;  and,  though 
he  proposes  visiting  them,  it  is  not  with 
the  view  of  staying  among  them  long,  so 
as  to  take  up  the  superintendence  of  them, 
but  only  on  his  way  to  Spain  for  mutual 
comfort  and  edification  (see  ch.  i.  11,  12; 
XV.  24). 

Vers.  21 — 24. — But  as  it  is  written,  To 
whom  he  was  not  spoken  of,  they  shall  see : 
and  they  that  have  not  heard  shall  under- 
stand (Isa.  lii.  15,  as  in  the  LXX.  The 
passage  is  Messianic;  but  St.  Paul  need 
be  understood  te  be  quoting  it  as  predictive 
or  directive  of  the  rule  he  follows.  Enough 
if  it  expresses  his  meaning  well).  Tor 
which  cause  also  I  have  been  much  hindered 
(or,  wat  for  <fie  most  part,  or  many  times 
hindered)  &om  coming  to  you.  The  hin- 
drance had  been,  mainly  at  least,  as  is  evi- 
dent from  Alb  (ver.  22),  the  obligation  he  was 
under  of  completing  his  ministry  in  the  first 
place  in  other  quarters  (see  on  ch.  i.  13). 
But  now  having  no  longer  place  In  these 
regions  (i.e.,  according  to  the  context,  there 
being  no  additional  sphere  for  my  activity 
there.  He  had  now  planted  the  gospel  in 
all  the  principal  centres,  leaving  disciples 
and  converts,  and  probably  an  ordained 
ministry,  to  carry  on  the  work  and  extend 
it  in  the  regions  round.  In  this  his  proper 
apostolic  work  consisted ;  cf.  1  Cor.  i.  14 — 
17),  and  having  a  great  desire  these  many 
years  to  come  unto  you ;  whensoever  I  take 
my  journey  into  Spain,  I  will  come  to  you : 
for  I  hope  to  see  you  on  my  journey,  and 
to  be  brought  on  my  way  thitherward  by 
yon.  If  first  I  be  somewhat  filled  with  your 
company.  The  sense  of  this  verse  is  no  way 
affected  by  the  omission  of  "  I  wUl  come 
unto  you,"  which  authorities  are  against 
retaining.  If  "  for,"  after  this  omission,  be 
retained,  the  sentence  is  incomplete,  as  St. 
Paul's  sometimes  are.  The  omission  of  "  for" 
(for  which  there  is  some  little  authority) 
leaves  the  sentence  improved.  The  apostle's 
selection  of  Spain  as  his  next  intended  sphere 
of  labour  might  be  duo  to  the  notoriety  of 
that  Boman  province,  and  the  facility  of 
communication  with  it  by  sea.  His  omission 
of  Italy,  except  for  a  passing  visit,  is 
accounted  for  by  his  principle,  already 
enunciated,  of  not  building  on  other  men's 
foundation,  there  being  already  a  flourishing 
Chuvch  at  any  rate  at  Eome.  He  hoped,  as 
appears  from  this  verse,  that  some  of  the 
members  of  it  might  join  him  in  his  mission 
to  Spain.  For  the  word  irpoirfjtujifliji'ai  would 
imply  their  going  all  the  way  in  the  case  of 
a  sea-voyage.  For  the  use  of  the  word,  of. 
Acts  XT.  3;  XX.  38;  xxi.  5;  1  Cor.  xvi.  6; 
2  Cor.  i.  16.  Observe  the  obaraoterLstio 
courtesy  of  the  concluding  clause,  which  is 
literally,  "  should  I  be  first  in  part "  (i.«.  not 


CH.  XV.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE   ROMANS. 


431 


as  much  as  I  should  wish,  but  to  such  extent 
as  my  short  stay  ■with  you  will  allow)  "  filled 
with  you,"  i.e.  enjoy  you. 

Vers.  25 — 27. — ^But  now  I  go  to  Jeru- 
salem ministering  unto  the  saints.  ?or  it 
bath  pleased  (^fiSOKiitrav,  implying  good  will) 
Achaia  and  Macedonia  to  make  a  certain 
contribution  (^Koivayiav,  intimating  the  com- 
munion of  Christians  with  each  other, 
evinced  by  making  others  partakers  of  their 
own  blessings;  of.  ch.  xii.  13 ;  2 Cor.  iz.  13; 

1  Tim.  vi.  18 ;  Heb.  xiii.  16)  to  the  poor  of 
the  saints  which  are  at  Jerusalem.  As  to 
this  collection  for  the  poor  Christians  at 
Jerusalem,  which  8t.  Paul  seems  to  hare 
been  intent  on  during  his  joumeyi,  and 
which  he  was  now  on  the  point  of  carrying 
to  its  destination,  cf.  Acts  xix.  21 ;  xxiv.  17 ; 

2  Cor.  viii.  1 — ix.  15.  It  hath  pleased 
them  Terily;  and  their  debtors  they  are. 
For  if  the  GentUes  have  been  made  par- 
takers of  their  spiritual  things,  their  duty 
is  also  to  minister  (AeiTovpyfiirai;  here  in 
the  general  sense  of  ministry;  see  on 
ch.  xiii.  6)  to  them  in  carnal  things.  Here 
we  hare  the  same  idea  of  salvation  being 
derived  to  the  Gentiles  from  the  Jews  as 
is  prominent  in  ch.  xi.  17,  18,  and  apparent 
in  ch.  XV.  7,  seq. 

Vers.  28,  29.— When  therefore  I  have 
accomplished  this,  and  sealed  to  them  (i.e. 
ratified  and  assured  to  them)  this  ficuit,  I 
will  come  away  by  you  into  Spain.  And 
I  know  that  when  I  come  to  you  (i/ias 
here  is  intended  emphatically)  I  shall  come 
in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  Christ. 
How  different  from  his  anticipations  were 
the  circumstances  of  his  first  visit  to  Bome 
we  know  from  the  Acts.  So  man  proposes, 
but  God  disposes,  and  all  for  final  good 
(cf.  Phil.  i.  12,  seq.).  That  he  afterwards 
carried  out  his  intention  of  visiting  Spain 
cannot  be  alleged  with  certainty,  though 
there  is  distinct  evidence  of  an  early 
tradition  that  he  did  so  (Canon  Muratori, 
Eusebius,  Jerome,  Theodoret.  Cf.  Clem. 
Rom.,  Ep.  1,  who  speaks  of  St.  Paul  having 
gone  to  "  the  boundaries  of  the  West "). 
Certainly  before  the  end  of  his  delention  at 
Bome  he  had  given  up  any  idea  he  might 
have  had  of  going  thence  at  onoe  to  Spain; 


for  cf.  Phil.  ii.  19;  Philem.  22;  which 
Epistles  are  believed,  on  good  grounds,  to 
have  been  written  during  that  detention. 
Still,  he  may  have  gone  during  the  interval 
between  his  release  and  his  final  captivity 
at  Bome,  during  which  the  pastoral  Epistles 
were  probably  written. 

In  what  follows  (vert.  80—32)  some 
apprehension  of  dangers  attending  his  visit 
to  Jerusalem,  which  might  possibly  thwart 
his  intentions,  already  appears;  sounding 
like  an  undertone  allaying  the  confidence 
of  the  hope  previously  expressed.  In  the 
course  of  his  progress  to  Jerusalem  this 
apprehension  appears  to  have  grown  npon 
him ;  for  see  Acts  xx.  22,  23,  28 ;  xxi.  4, 
11 — 14).  It  may  be  here  observed  that 
such  signs,  evidently  unintentional,  of  con- 
flicting feelings  in  the  letter,  and  such 
consistency  between  the  letter  and  the 
narrative,  are  strong  confirmations  of  the 
genuineness  of  both. 

Vers.  80  —  33.  —  How  I  beseech  you, 
brethren,  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  by 
the  love  of  the  Spirit,  that  ye  strive  to- 
gether with  me  in  your  prayers  to  Qod  for 
me;  that  I  may  be  delivered  from  them 
that  do  not  believe  in  Judsea ;  and  that  my 
service  which  I  have  for  Jerusalem  may 
be  acceptable  to  the  saints.  Here  he  seems 
to  imply  a  possibility  of  even  the  Jewish 
Christians  not  receiving  him,  with  the  alms 
he  brought  them,  kindly.  In  2  Cor.  viii.  18, 
teq.,  he  had  shown  signs  of  being  anxious 
to  avoid  any  possible  suspicion  of  malversa- 
tion with  regard  to  the  contribution.  The 
danger  probably  arose  from  the  suspicions 
against  himself,  his  authority,  and  his 
motives,  entertained  by  the  Judaistio  faction. 
That  this  faction  was  then  strong  at  Jeru- 
salem appears  from  the  precautions  he  was 
advised  to  take  on  his  arrival  there  (see 
Acts  xxi.  20 — 24).  That  I  may  come  unto 
you  with  joy  by  the  will  of  Ood,  and  may 
with  yon  be  refreshed.  Kow  the  Qod  of 
peace  be  with  yon  all.    Amen. 


HOMILETIGS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Self-pleasing  and  self-denial.  The  controversy  which  gave  rise  to  this 
statement  of  Christian  principle  was  local  and  temporary,  and  seems  to  us  somewhat 
trivial.  It  was,  however,][the  occasion  for  an  inspired  publication  of  important,  prac- 
tical moral  truths  and  precepts,  of  world-wide  and  lasting  application.  When  a  differ- 
ence arises  between  two  parties,  who  are  accustomed  to  think  and  act  together,  there  is 
danger  of  each  party  becoming  bitter  and  overbearing,  and  resolving  to  thrust  its  own 
convictions  and  preferences  npon  the  other.  Paul  teaches  us  that  the  true  remedy  for 
this  evil  is  unselfishness,  and  that  the  true  motiTO  to  unselfishness  is  to  be  found  i& 
the  cross  of  Christ. 


432  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xv.  1—33. 

L  The  moral  precept.  The  authoritative  counsel  of  the  apostle  is  hofti  negative 
and  positive,  dissuasive  and  persuasive.  1.  Selfishness  is  forbidden.  It  need  scarcely 
be  said  that  undue  opinion  of  self,  an  undue  confidence  in  one's  own  judgment,  an 
undue  regard  to  one's  own  interest,  are  common  faults.  We  are  all  naturally  prone  to 
please  self,  even  when  to  do  so  is  injurious  to  others  and  displeasing  to  God.  The 
unrenewed  man  is  in  the  habit  of  following  the  lead  of  his  own  appetites,  tastes,  and 
inclinations,  thongli  these  be  worldly  and  sinful.  This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  Of  the 
wandering  sheep  it  is  snid,  "They  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way."  Few  are  the 
gins,  vices,  crimes,  which  cannot  be  traced  to  the  action  of  this  powerful  principle,  which 
induces  men  to  prefer  their  own  gratification  to  all  beside.  But  it  must  not  be  sup- 
posed that  this  is  a  fault  from  which  the  disciples  of  Christ  are  universally  or  generally 
free.  They  are  not  only  tempted  to  please  themselves  in  worldly  pursuits;  they  are  in 
danger  of  carrying  selfishness  into  their  very  religion.  How  often  do  we  find  Christians 
trj'ing  to  thrust  their  own  views,  their  own  tastes,  their  own  practices,  upon  their  neigh- 
bours, whether  these  are  willing  or  unwilling  I  There  may  be  a  want  of  consideration 
and  forbearance  within  Christian  societies,  and  in  the  relation  of  such  societies  to  one 
knottier.  And  there  are  too  many  whose  one  idea  of  religion  is  this — how  they  may 
themselves  be  saved  and  saade  happy.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  the  admonition  of 
the  text  was  addressed  to  Christians.  If  these  Romans  needed  it,  perhaps  we  may  like- 
wise. 2.  Unsel/ishnesa  is  enjoined.  This  passage  reminds  us  that  this  self-denying 
posture  of  mind  is  to  be  maintained  with  regard  to  a  special  class.  Suppose  that  you 
are  strong;  yet  ifc  must  not  be  lost  sight  of  that  some  are  weak.  Are  their  infirmities 
to  be  despised?  The  apostle  enjoins  us  to  consider  them,  and  to  bear  with  them. 
There  may  be  those  whose  infirmity  is  owing  to  youth  and  inexperience,  and  those 
whose  infirmity  is  that  of  age.  Tliere  are  some  who  are  weak  physically,  and  who 
perhaps  are  therefore  irritable.  Many  are  weak  mentally ;  their  ability  is  small,  their 
education  has  been  neglected.  And  some  are  weak  spiritually — babes  in  Christ,  though 
perhaps  men  in  years.  Such  are  not  to  be  despised  or  derided  by  such  as  are  strong. 
Deal  patiently,  tenderly,  forbearingly  with  such  as  these.  The  admonition  is  more 
general.  We  are  to  please  our  neighbour,  i.e.  every  one  we  have  to  do  with,  whether 
weak  or  strong.  This  does  not  mean  that  we  ate  to  gratify  all  his  foolish  whims  and 
caprices — to  try,  as  some  do,  to  please  everybody,  at  all  costs ;  to  flatter  the  vain,  and 
cajole  the  ignorant,  and  humour  the  petulant.  By  "  pleasing  "  here  we  may  under- 
stand benefiting  and  serving.  If  there  be  any  doubt  about  this,  the  limitation  here 
introduced  by  the  apostle  solves  such  doubt ;  it  is  "  for  that  which  is  good,"  and  "  unto 
edifying."  As  regards  our  fellow-Christians,  our  service  will  naturally  take  the  form  of 
heliifulness  to  them  in  their  need,  and  spiritual  ministrations  according  to  our  capacity 
and  opportunity,  with  effort  for  their  elevation  and  happiness.  As  regards  our  irre- 
lii^ious  neighbours,  our  unselfish  service  will  be  mainly  effort  for  their  enlightenment 
ami  salvation.  Probably  such  effort  will  displease,  rather  than  please,  the  careless  and 
self-indulgent,  whom  we  seek  to  awaken  to  a  better  life.  Yet  the  time  may  come  when 
even  such  will  look  back  with  thankfulness  and  delight  upon  benevolent  effort  and 
earnest  prayer,  by  which  they  liave  received  imperishable  good.  Selfishness,  then,  ii 
the  curse  of  the  world  and  the  Isane  of  the  Church ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  they 
obey  their  Lord,  and  promote  their  own  welfare  and  that  of  society,  who  are  considerate 
and  forbearing  towards  the  weak,  and  who  aim  at  pleasing  and  benefiting  all  who  come 
wilhin  tlie  range  of  their  influence. 

II.  The  bblioious  ground  fob  the  precept.  Christianity  bases  every  duty  upon 
a  Divine  foundation.  1.  Tlie  virtue  of  unselfishness  is  for  Christians  a  virtue  springing 
from  their  relation  to  their  Lord.  Sympathy  is  in  its  rudiments  a  natural  principle; 
but  tliis  stands  a  poor  chance  when  it  comes  into  conflict  with  natural  self-love.  Both 
these  principles  are  good,  and  virtue  lies  in  their  proper  adjustment.  It  is  the  sacrifice, 
the  spirit,  the  example  of  our  Divine  Saviour,  which  assure  victory  to  unselfish  benoTO- 
lence.  2.  In  Christ  we  observe  the  suUimest  illustration  of  self-denial  and  self-sacrifice. 
We  cannot  fail  to  see  these  qualities  in  his  giving  up  his  own  ease  and  pleasure,  and 
accepting  a  life  of  poverty  and  homelcssncss.  He  would  not  accept  an  earthly  kingdom 
or  worldly  honours.  In  carrying  out  the  purposes  of  his  mission,  he  set  himself  against 
the  powerful  and  the  influential  among  his  countrymen.  There  was  no  day  and  no 
act  of  hii  public  ministry  which  was  not  a  proof  of  the  assertion,  "Even  Christ 


CH.  sv.  1— 33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  483 

pleased  not  himself."  3.  We  remark  in  the  Lord  Jeeaa  perfect  obedience  to  the  Fither. 
Prophecy  put  into  his  lips  the  language,  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God." 
He  hinist'lf  declared  that  he  came  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  him,  and  he  was 
conscious  that  this  puri^ose  was  carried  out.  "  I  do  always  those  things  that  please 
him."  He  even  shaped  this  principle  into  the  remarkable  prayer,  "  Not  my  will,  but 
thine,  he  done."  Consider  that  the  only  way  to  make  sure  that  life  is  not  self-seeking 
and  self-pleasing  is  to  consecrate  it  to  the  high  end  of  pleasing  God.  4.  Our  Saviour 
endured  reproaches  and  wrongs  in  the  procuring  of  human  salvation.  These  revilings 
and  injuries  were  inflicted  by  sinners,  and  they  came  upon  the  innocent.  He  "endured 
the  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself;"  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the 
shanife."  And  this  he  did  willingly  and  without  a  murmur.  For  "with  his  stripes 
we  are  healed."  The  "joy  that  was  set  before  him  "  reconciled  him  to  hardship  and 
privation,  to  insult  and  mocking,  to  anguish  and  death.  Thus  the  pleasing  of  self 
was  utterly  absent;  the  mortification  and  crucifixion  of  self  were  conspicuously  pre- 
sent; reproaches  were  weloom'ed,  that  the  reproachers  might  be  redeemed.  5.  The 
passage  presumes  the  action  of  the  distinctively  Christian  principle  in  such  a  vxty  as 
to  influence  the  conduct  of  Christ's  people.  Not  only  have  we,  in  our  Lord's  spirit 
and  conduct,  the  one  perfect  example  of  self-denial  and  of  devotion  to  the  cause  of 
human  welfare.  Wo  have  a  provision  for  .securing  that  Christ's  people  shall  resemble 
their  Lord.  His  love,  personally  apprehended  and  experienced,  becomes  the  motive  to 
their  gratitude,  affection,  and  consnoration ;  and  is  the  seed  of  its  own  reproduction  and 
growth  in  their  renewed  nature.  His  Spirit  is  the  Agent  by  whose  energy  men's  natural 
selfishness  is  vanquished,  and  the  new  life  is  fostered  and  sustained. 

Pkaotioal  lessons.  1.  Admire  the  Divine  wisdom  in  the  provision  made  for  over- 
coming the  natural  selfishness  of  mankind.  What  inferior  agency  could  suffice  for 
such  a  task  ?  2.  If  unhappy,  consider  whether  self-seeking  is  not  at  the  root  of  rest- 
lessiness  and  dissatisfaction;  and  fall  in  with  the  Divine  plan,  by  seeking  earnestly  the 
welfare  of  your  neighbours.  And  you  shall  find  such  action  will  bring  its  own  reward. 
3.  Cherish  the  divinely  justified  hope  for  the  world's  future  welfare.  Neither  interest 
nor  philosophy  can  eifect  what  Christianity  is  capable  of  doing.  The  prospects  of 
humanity  are  bound  up  with  the  rule  and  thie  grace  of  him  of  whom  we  read,  "  Even 
Christ  pleased  not  iiimself."  4.  Let  the  strong  please,  and  bear  with  the  infirmities  of, 
the  weak,  by  supporting  such  institutions  as  are  designed  to  relieve  suffering  and  to 
supply  need. 

Ver.  4.' — The  Scriptures.  In  many  ways  the  New  Testament  lends  its  support  and 
sanction  to  the  Old.  Our  Lord  himself  bade  his  auditors  and  disciples  "search  the 
Scriptures."  The  evangelists  support  the  Divine  authority  of  Christ's  ministry,  by 
exhihiting  many  of  its  incidents  as  the  fulfilment  of  Old  Testament  prophecy.  And 
the  ICpistles  abound  with  quotations  frum  the  ancient  Hebrew  writings  which  they 
approve  as  of  inspired  authority.  In  this  passage,  Paul  records  in  explicit  language 
his  own  view  of  the  character  and  purposes  of  Old  Testament  Scripture. 

I.  The  intention  that  the  Scriptubes  should  be  ov  perpetual  use.  "  These 
things  were  written  for  our  learning,"  i.e.  for  our  instruction  and  improvement.  This 
may  be  shown  to  be  the  case  with  the  historical  lessons,  the  biograpiiical  examples  and 
warnings,  the  moral  precepts,  the  prophetic  promises,  of  the  Word  of  God.  Nothing 
is  purposeless  or  valueless. 

II.  The  method  in  which  the  Sokiptubes  prove  sbbvioeable.  They  are  not 
like  an  amulet,  a  charm,  the  mere  possession  of  which  is  supposed  to  be  advantageous,. 
They  are  to  be  used  in  conformity  with  our  intellectual  and  moral  nature.  Only  by 
entering  into  the  soul,  and  acting  upon  its  passions,  principles,  and  powers,  can  the 
teachings  of  inspiration  profit  and  help  us.  The  apostle  mentions  two  ways  in  which 
the  Scriptures  thus  act.  1.  By  patience.  That  is  to  say,  the  Scriptures  represent  our 
human  nature  and  life  as  exposed  to  suffering,  temptation,  and  many  evils,  against 
which  the  power  of  religion  alone  can  fortify,  and  from  which  it  alone  can  deliver. 
The  Scriptures  contain  representations  of  God  himself  which  are  fitted  to  sustain  his 
people  to  endure,  and  to  inspire  them  to  persevere.  They  contain  actual  illustrations 
of  the  power  of  patience  exhibited  in  the  life  of  many  of  the  saints  of  God.  2.  By 
comfort.     If  patience  is  exercised  by  man,  consolation  is  afforded  by  God.     The 

BOMANS.  2  F 


484  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xv.  1—33. 

Btrengthening  and  consolatory  power  of  Divine  grace  ia  exhibited  both  in  the  declara- 
tions and  doctrines,  and  also  in  the  practical  and  living  exhibitions  and  manifestations 
of  piety,  which  abound  in  Holy  Scripture. 

III.  The  ultimate  and  exact  pubpose  for  which  the  Scriptuebs  have  been 
GIVEN.  That  is,  that  we  may  have  hope.  1.  Why  is  this  needed  ?  Because  in  this 
life,  and  in  our  experience,  there  is  very  much  to  occasion  depression  and  despondency. 
Our  own  weakness  and  liability  to  error  and  to  sin,  and  the  ills  of  human  society,  are 
such  as  to  account  for  frequent  discouragement.  2.  How  is  hope  awakened  and  fostered 
by  the  Scriptures  ?  By  their  express  declarations  of  Divine  mercy,  and  their  explicit 
promises  of  succour  and  guidance  and  blessing.  3.  Whither  are  our  hopes  directed  1 
Primarily  to  God :  "  Hope  thou  in  God."  And  then  also  to  earthly  deliverance  and  to 
heavenly  rest.  4.  What  is  the  moral  power  of  hope  ?  It  both  cheers  and  sustains 
the  soul,  and  makes  it  brighter  and  more  confident  in  fulfilling  Christian  service. 

Vers.  5,  6. —  Unity.  Mutual  forbearance  and  oonsiderateness  tend  to  true  spiritual 
unity.  In  the  presence  of  a  hostile  world,  it  was  evidently  of  the  highest  practical 
importance  that  the  early  Christians  should  exhibit  the  power  of  the  truth  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  draw  them  together,  and  to  make  them  one.  How  dear  this  aim  was 
to  the  heart  of  Clirist,  is  evident  alike  from  his  frequent  admonitions  and  from  an 
urgent  petition  in  his  great  intercessory  prayer. 

I.  The  Divine  Soukce  or  unity.  That  true  unity  is  from  God  appears :  1.  From 
the  nature  and  character  of  God,  as  "  the  God  of  patience  and  of  comfort."  2.  From 
the  apostolic  pray'er,  "  grant  you  to  be  like-minded,"  etc.,  from  which  it  is  apparent 
that,  in  the  view  of  the  inspired  apostle,  the  true  fountain  of  concord  and  brotherly 
love  is  in  heaven,  in  the  heart  of  the  infinite  Father.  3.  From  the  mediation  of  Jesus 
Christ,  whose  design  iu  re'demption  was  first  to  "  make  peace "  between  a  righteous 
Ruler  and  rebellious  subjects;  and  then  to  break  down  every  wall  of  partition  that 
divided  man  from  man,  and  to  constitute  one  new,  unbroken  humanity  in  himself — the 
glorious  Head. 

II.  The  manifestations  op  unity.  1.  Where  this  grace  exists,  there  Is  one  mind, 
with  mutual  love.  By  "the  same  mind"  the  apostle  does  not  mean  "of  the  same 
opinion."  This  is  not  possible  where  men  think  freely  and  independently.  But  he 
means  "  of  similar  disposition  towards  Christ,"  "  of  like  sentiments  of  brotherly  love 
one  towards  another."  This  is  pleasing  to  the  God  of  peace  and  love.  2.  Where  this 
grace  exists  there  is  "  one  mouth,"  with  common  praise.  There  is  a  sacrifice  in  which 
all  devout  souls,  all  holy  assemblies,  constantly  unite — it  is  the  sacrifice  of  gratitude 
and  praise.  The  several  voices  in  this  offering  to  Heaven  blend  in  sweetest  concord, 
and  form  a  Divine  and  exquisite  harmony.  The  more  the  notes,  the  vaster  the  variety, 
the  more  marvellous  and  beautiful  is  the  spiritual  conceit.  As  with  one  only  mouth, 
■the  living  Church  offers  to  the  "  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  the 
anthem  of  spiritual,  acceptable,  and  unending  praise — the  Church  on  earth  herein  pre- 
paring for  the  eternal  soug  of  heaven. 

Application.  Unity  must  be,  not  merely  in  word  or  in  outward  association,  but 
in  the  spirit  of  love  and  in  the  tribute  of  grateful  adoration. 

Ver.  13. — The  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Paul  was  not  one  of  those  upon  whom  the 
Spirit  fell  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  He  was  at  that  time  a  scholar ;  living  probably 
in  Jerusalem,  and  certainly  studying  the  Law  and  the  traditions  of  his  nation,  with 
all  the  energy  of  an  ardent,  zealous,  and  persevering  mind.  He  may  have  known  at 
the  time  of  the  remarkable  events  which  occurred;  but  if  he  did,  they  made  no  great 
impression  on  him.  For  only  two  or  three  years  afterwards,  when  Stephen  was  stoned, 
Saul  was  one  of  those  who  "  consented  to  his  death."  And,  as  we  read,  he  "  made 
havoc  of  the  Church,"  and  "  breathed  out  threatenings  and  slaughter  "  against  the 
disciples  of  the  Lord.  But  if  for  a  while  neither  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  nor  the 
descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  had  any  effect  upon  the  Pharisee  who  boasted  himself  to 
be  of  the  school  of  Gamaliel,  the  time  came  when  the  faith  which  he  despised  and 
persecuted  laid  hold  upon  his  great  heart,  and  assumed  the  lordship' over  his  active 
life.  And  now  observe  two  things  very  noticeable  in  Saul's  history.  First,  when 
Ananias  was  aent  to  the  smitten  and  blinded  persecutor,  to  release  him,  in  the  nt^me 


CH.XV.  1— 33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  435 

of  Jesus,  from  his  privation  and  doubt,  and,  in  the  same  name,  to  commission  him  as 
the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  the  servant  of  the  Lord  declared  the  purport  of  his  visit 
to  be  that,  Saul  might  be  "filled  with  the  Holy  Ohost  I  "  And  secondly,  when,  at 
Antiooh,  the  Holy  Ghost  called  Barnabas  and  Saul  to  a  missionary  enterprise,  they 
are  said  by  the  inspired  historian  to  have  been  "  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  So, 
although  Paul  was  not  present  when  Peter  and  the  rest  of  the  brethren  were  made 
partakers  of  the  spiritual  outpouring  by  which  the  new  dispensation  was  inaugurated, 
it  is  clear  that  he  received,  and  that  he  knew  that  he  received,  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well 
•&  they.  In  his  conversion,  his  whole  nature  was  influenced  by  the  Divine  enlighten- 
ment and  quickening ;  in  his  commission,  the  impulse  and  the  authority  of  his  missionary 
life  were  conferred  by  the  living  Spiiit  of  God.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  then,  that 
the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  in  his  preaching  and  his  writings,  laid  stress  upon  the 
office  of  the  Divine  Comforter.  He  could  not  have  exalted  the  Spirit  more  constantly 
and  gratefully  even  if  he  had  listened  to  the  Master's  discourses  in  which  the  Paraclete 
was  promised ;  even  if  he  had  been  amongst  the  favoured  company  on  the  Day  of 
Pentecost,  when  cloven  tongues  of  fire  sat  upon  the  heads  of  the  disciples  of  the  Lord. 
In  fact,  just  as  the  mediatorial  work  of  Christ  is  at  least  as  fully  stated  and  explained 
by  Paul  as  by  the  other  apostles,  so  is  he  not  behind  them  in  the  exposition  of  tna 
offices  of  the  Comforter,  and  the  results  of  his  perpetual  indwelling  in  Christian  hearts, 
in  Christian  society.  It  needs  not  be  said  that  <Ae  oj^ces  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  not 
only  precious,  hut  manifold.  Paul  was  well  aware  of  this  fact.  But  attention  is  asked 
especially  to  one  result  of  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit ;  to  one  valuable  fruit  which 
all  Christians  growingly  appreciate.  Tbe  Divine  Spirit  is  set  before  us  in  the  text 
as  the  Author  and  Inspirer  of  a  cheerful  and  hopeful  disposition  of  the  mind:  "Now 
the  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  that  ye  may  abound  in 
hope,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  It  is  often  observed  that,  in  a  cultivated 
and  reflective  state  of  society,  there  is  a  tendency  to  a  mournful  and  even  desponding 
disposition.  When  people  have  much  leisure  to  think,  and  large  knowledge  of  human 
hfe  and  history,  they  often  cherish  gloomy  and  hopeless  forebodings.  Unable  to  resolve 
their  own  difficulties,  disappointed  with  efforts  made  to  improve  society,  they  are 
prone  to  abandon  themselves  to  scepticism,  and  to  ask  whether  all  things  do  not  exist 
in  vain,  and  whether  the  philosophy  of  the  royal  sage  is  not  sound  and  just :  "  Vanity 
of  vanities,"  saith  the  preacher ;  "  all  is  vanity  1 "  The  Holy  Spirit  was  given  to 
banish  such  a  temper  of  mind,  and  to  inspire  us  with  cheerfulness  and  with  hope.  He 
is  the  Spirit  of  life,  quickening  the  spiritually  dead ;  the  Spirit  of  truth,  revealing  the 
realities  of  the  Divine  character  and  government ;  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  fostering  in 
the  soul  of  man  all  pure  thoughts  and  purposes.  And  our  text  brings  before  us  the 
welcome  truth  that  the  Spirit  of  God  has  power  to  fill  us  with  "joy  and  peace  in 
believing,"  and  to  cause  us  to  "abound  in  hope."  There  is  no  broader  and  more 
obvious  distinction  between  Christians  and  unbelievers  than  that  which  is  suggested 
by  our  text.  The  Christian,  speaking  generally,  is  the  man  who  hopes ;  the  infidel  is 
the  man  who  is  hopeless.  The  lueaoher  has  known  in  the  course  of  his  life,  and  has 
conversed  with,  many  unbelievers — some  of  them  honourable,  virtuous,  and,  within 
limits,  benevolent  men.  But  they  have  been,  without  exception,  neither  happy  nor 
hopeful.  Their  view  of  human  life  is  invariably  melancholy,  and  their  forebodings  for 
humanity's  future  are  usually  dark  and  despondent.  At  the  time  when  our  Divine 
faith  was  first  preached  in  the  world,  observant  and  thoughtful  men  were  under  a 
cloud  of  depression.  Dissatisfied  with  the  superstitions  of  their  fathers,  disgusted 
with  the  corruptions  of  society,  they  were  without  any  faith  that  could  sustain  and 
cherish  a  lofty  hope  for  the  race.  It  did  not  enter  into  their  minds  that  any  moral 
power  could  be  introduced  into  the  world  capable  of  even  attempting,  far  less  achieving, 
the  regeneiation  of  society — of  raising  the  uncivilized,  and  redeeming  those  who  were 
civilized  and  cultivated,  but  corrupt  and  cynical  and  selfish.  What  a  revelation  must 
Christians — not  merely  Christianity,  biit  Christians — have  brought  to  the  ancient 
society  1  Here  was  a  sect  of  men,  distinguished,  indeed,  by  their  beliefs  and  practices, 
their  pure  and  beneficent  life,  from  those  around  them,  but  in  nothing  more  distin- 
guished than  in  this— they  were  the  men  in  the  world  who  hoped t  Whilst  the 
multitude,  and  even  many  of  the  philosophers,  were  saying,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink ; 
for  to-morrow  we  die ; "  whilst  the  thoughtful  and  high-minded  mourned  the  corrup- 


436  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  iv.  1—33, 

tioDS  of  the  times,  and  despised  their  drgraded  fellow-creatures,  and  saw  no  prospect 
of  the  salvation  of  society ;  the  followers  of  Christ  appeared,  each  one  with  a  hope 
which  death  could  not  tear  from  him,  for  himself;  each  one  with  a  yet  sublimer  hope, 
that  no  disappointment  could  quench,  for  the  unhajipy  but  not  forsaken  race  of  which 
he  was  a  member.  You  remember  the  honour  which  was  bestowed  upon  a  patriot — 
that,  in  days  of  darkness  and  of  threatening,  he  did  not  despair  of  his  country.  Of 
every  lowly  Christian  the  yet  more  remarkable  eulogy  would  have  been  true,  that 
he  did  not  despair  of  his  race.  And  this,  in  days  wlien  Christianity  had  yet  its 
triumphs  to  win,  its  great  renown  to  achieve !  Tlie  Holy  Spirit  was  given  to  reveal 
to  the  disciples  of  Christ  a  "  Ood  of  hope."  Men's  dejection  and  despair  arise  from 
their  want  of  faith  in  God.  And  nothing  but  a  sound  and  rational  belief  in  God  can 
bring  them  to  a  better  mind.  What  so  fitted  to  inspire  with  cheerfulness  as  the 
conviction  that  a  God  of  righteousness  and  of  grace  lives  and  reigns,  takes  the  deepest 
interest  in  men,  and  provides  for  their  true  well-being  ?  Now,  when  the  Holy  Ghost 
was  given,  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  he  was  given  as  "  the  promise  of  the  Father,"  as 
the  bestowal  of  a  gracious  God.  Let  the  truth  be  recognized  that  a  good  hope 
must  begin  in  God.  The  counsel  of  the  ancient  psalmist  was  sound  as  well  as  pious : 
"  Hope  thou  in  God."  Fix  your  hopes,  as  many  do,  upon  human  beings,  upon  human 
institutions,  upon  human  plans,  and  their  failure  will  involve  you  in  cruel  disappoint- 
ment. But  if  for  you  the  Lord  liveth  and  leigneth,  if  he  be  the  God  of  man,  the  God 
of  salvation,  then  there  is  a  sound  basis  for  your  hopes — a  basis  which  no  power  on 
earth,  and  no  power  from  hell,  can  overturn  or  even  shake.  It  was  tlie  power  of  the 
Spirit  that  ratified  the  words  and  sealed  the  authority  and  authenticated  the  mission 
of  Christ.  Jesus  had  promised  tliat,  if  he  went  away,  he  would  "  send  the  Comforter." 
He  knew  that  the  approach  of  his  departure  filled  their  hearts  with  sorrow,  and  he  bade 
them  rather  rejoice,  inasmuch  as  this  was  the  condition  of  the  gift  of  the  Comforter. 
And  when,  in  ftilfllment  of  his  assurance,  he  shed  forth  the  gifts  they  needed  for  their 
spiritual  quickening  and  for  their  qualification  for  apostolic  service,  the  friends  of 
Christ  must  have  felt  the  encouraging  and  inspiring  influence  of  the  faithfulness  and 
grace  of  their  Lord.  After  his  resurrection,  the  disciples  were  "  glad  when  they  saw 
the  Lord."  After  his  ascension,  "  they  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great  joy."  And 
when  the  Spirit  was  poured  out,  their  confidence  in  their  Saviour  was  miturally 
confirmed;  and  their  habitual  demeanour  was  that  of  happy  and  hopeful  spirits.  They 
"  ate  their  meat  with  gladness  and  singleness  of  heart,  praising  God  ; "  and,  when 
persecuted,  they  "rejoiced  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  his 
Name."  It  was  Jesus  Christ  who  brought  hope,  even  as  he  brought  every  other 
blessing,  to  this  benighted  and  unhappy  world.  That  he  cheri^hed  hope,  is  known 
full  well.  His  parables  regarding  the  progress  of  his  kingdom,  his  assurance  that 
when  lifted  up  he  would  draw  all  men  unto  him,  his  prediction  of  his  reign  and  his 
return — all  show  an  unwavering  confidence  and  a  calm  expectation  regarding  the 
future.  And  in  order  that  this  attitude  might  be  shared  by  his  disciples,  he  provided 
for  the  descent  of  his  Spirit,  by  whose  influences  they  should  be  brought  into  living 
sympathy  with  himself.  Our  hope  may  be  said  to  have  three  main  outlooks :  (1) 
towards  our  personal  future ;  (2)  towards  the  prospects  of  Christianity  and  Christ's 
Church ;  and  (3)  towards  the  progress  and  destiny  of  humanity.  In  all  these  respects 
is  apparent  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  inspire  us  with,  and  to  cause  us  to  rejoice 
in,  hope, 

L  tioPE  CONCERNING  one's  SELF — Concerning  one's  own  future — is  generally  supposed 
to  be  matter  of  temperament.  There  are  persons  of  a  sanguine  temperament,  who 
always  expect  the  best  possible,  and  sometimes  are  confident  in  hope,  though  on  the 
slightest  ground.  And  others  are  given  rather  to  foreboding,  and  their  forecasts  are 
of  evil.  Now,  Christianity  does  not  destroy  temperament;  but  it  gives  a  just  bent  to 
the  outlook  of  the  hopeful,  and  instils  into  the  despondent  a  different  spirit.  Based, 
as  the  Christian  life  is,  upon  I'aith,  it  must  proceed  to  hope.  The  God  who  has  loved 
us  with  an  everlasting  love  will  "never  leave  and  never  forsake  ns."  The  Saviour 
who  has  "loved  his  own"  will  "love  them  unto  the  end."  The  Word  in  which  we 
trust  is  a  "Word  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever."  It  is  the  office  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  to  bring  these  great  and  inspiriting  truths  home  to  the  minds  of  Christians,  to 
make  them  a  power  real  and  effective.     If  hope  were  based  upon  confidence  iu  chance 


OH.  X7. 1—33.]     THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  45, 


and  good  fortune,  or  if  it  were  based  upon  the  character  and  promises  of  fallible 
fellow-men,  it  would  in  such  cases  need  rather  to  be  cliecked  and  sobered  than  to  be 
encouraged.  But  just  as  faith  depends  for  its  value  upon  the  person  on  whom  it  rests, 
so  is  hope  justifiable  and  wise  only  when  based  Vfpon  the  promises  of  the  Being  whose 
character  is  unchanginjr,  and  whose  word  is  never  broken.  The  Christian's  hope 
extends  heyond  this  earthly  life.  There  have  been  cases  in  which  the  followers  of 
Jesus  have  been  tempted  to  exclaim,  "  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ, 
we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  But  nothing  is  more  distinctive  of  the  Christian 
revelation  than  the  clearness  with  which  it  speaks  of  a  life  to  come.  By  the  resur- 
rection of  our  Lord  Jesus  from  the  dead,  we  are  begotten  "  unto  a  living  hope,  of  an 
-inheritance  incorruptible,  and  undeflled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away."  And  the  hope 
which  we  have  is  "  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  sure  and  steadfast,  that  entereth  into  that 
within  the  veil."  By  the  power  of  the  Boly  Spirit,  this  Messed  hope  is  awakened  and 
fostered.  His  gracious  influences  counteract  the  earthly  and  ilepressing  powers  by 
which  we  are  all  beset,  and  make  the  mediation  and  the  promises  of  our  Saviour 
effective  and  helpful  to  us ;  so  that  we  are  led  to  abound  in  hope.  The  text  reminds 
us  th&t  faith,  and  the  joy  and  peace  which  faith  brings,  and  these  in  Divine  fulness, 
are  the  antecedents  of  the  abundant  hope  of  the  Christian.  And  this  is  so.  The  heart 
that  knows  nothing  of  the  cheerful  gladness  which  religion  imparts  to  the  present  can 
know  nothing  of  the  glowing  anticipations  which  religion  iDS|dres  with  reference  to  the 
future.  If  we  are  to  judge  the  future  merely  by  what  we  see  now,  our  outlook  might 
be  dim  and  cheerless.  But  the  present  is  beheld  by  the  medium  of  faith  ;  and  the 
same  glass,  when  turned  ■  towards  the  coming  ages,  affords  to  us  the  blessed  prospect 
of  Christian  hope.  It  is  instructive  to  observe  the  close  connection  between  the  joy 
and  peace  which  Christians  now  have  in  believing,  and  the  hope  to  which  they  are 
introduced  by  the  gospel.  The  cheerful  mind  is  likely  to  be  the  hopeful  mind.  The 
rule  and  the  love  of  God  have  reference  alike  to  the  present  and  to  the  future.  Our 
earthly  privileges  are  the  earnest  of  our  immortal  prospects.  And  these,  in  turn,  cast 
something  of  their  inspiring  radiance  upon  the  difficulties  and  the  sorrows  of  the 
present. 

"  Oh,  who,  in  such  a  world  as  this, 
Could  bear  his  lot  of  pain, 

Did  not  one  radiant  hope  of  bliss 
Unclouded  yet  remain  1 

That  hope  the  Sovereign  Lord  has  given. 
Who  reigns  above  the  skies  ; 

Hope  that  unites  the  soul  to  heaven 
By  faith's  endearing  ties." 

II.   But   HOPE,   THAT   IS   WOKTHT   OF   THE   NAME,    WILL   TRANSCEND  OtJB  INDTVIDtrAL 

PROSPECTS.  We  are  united,  by  innumerable  bonds,  to  our  fellow-Christians  and  to  our 
fellow-men ;  and  our  hopes  must  include  others  within  their  scope  and  range.  Nothing 
was  further  from  the  generous  heart  and  expansive  chiirity  of  the  apostle  than  any 
thought  of  limiting  within  narrow  bounds  the  prospects  and  the  hopes  born  of 
Christianity.  Our  religion  is  emphatically  unselfish.  And  being  so,  those  who  come 
under  its  sway  and  share  its  spirit  are  constrained  to  take  a  wide,  expansive  view. 
They  are  members  of  a  mystical  body,  and  are  concerned  for  the  health  and  well-being 
of  the  whole.  It  is  not  enough  to  have  a  good  hope  of  our  own  salvation ;  if  the  mind 
of  Christ  is  in  us,  we  shall  desire  "  the  edification  of  the  body,"  as  St.  Paul  phrases 
it.  Enlightened  and  large-hearted  Christians  are  more  interested  in  the  spread  of 
Christianity  than  in  anything  beside  on  earth.  It  is  their  hope  and  prayer  that  tha 
holy  leaven  may  penetrate  and  vivify  the  w  hole  mass  of  human  society ;  that  the  tree 
of  life  may  grow  and  spread,  until  all  nations  shall  sit  with  delight  beneath  its  shadow. 
Taught  by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  they  rely  upon  the  faithful  word  of  Christ,  who  has 
unfolded  before  hnaiianity  hopes  so  bright  and  glorious.  Error  may  seem  to  prevail, 
and  we  may  tremble  for  the  truth.  Superstition  may  encroach  upon  the  simplicity  of 
the  gospel,  and  we  may  ask — Is  the  old  paganism  to  revive?  Luhewarmness  may 
seem  to  steal  over  nominal  Christians,  and  to  paralyze  the  activities  of  the  Churches. 
Yet  the  Christian  is  not  daunted  by  these  "  signs  of  the  times,"  distressing  though 
they  be.    He  can  join  in  the  triumphant  chant,  "  Vv'e  will  not  fear,  though  the  earth 


438  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ECMANS.    |  ch.  xv.  1— 31 

be  removed,  and  though  the  mountains  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  sea.  The  Lord 
of  hosts  is  with  us ;  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  Refuge ! "  When  the  infidel  rejoices  over 
what  seem  to  him  tokens  of  the  decrepitude  of  the  Church  of  Christ;  when  .the  atheist 
foretells  the  destruction  of  all  religion,  and  the  approach  of  the  milknnium  of  animalism ; 
Christ's  followers  do  not  yield  to  fear.  They  remember  that  their  Divine  Lord  ha» 
promised  that  "  the  gates  of  Hades  shall  not  prevail  a^iainst "  his  Church.  Its  dead 
branches  may  be  lopped  off,  and  its  living  branches  may  be  pruned;  but  life  shall  only 
be  the  more  vigorous,  and  fruit  the  more  abundant.  The  gold  may  be  cast  into  the 
furnace,  and  the  dross  be  consumed ;  but  the  precious  metal  shall  only  be  refined  and 
purified,  and  shall  shine  with  brighter  lustre,  and  be  fitter  for  the  Master's  use. 

III.  Is  there  hope  fob  humanity?  Is  this  race  of  man  destined  to  deteriorate; 
is  it  doomed  to  remain  for  ever  a  prey  to  strife,  to  vice,  to  sin  ;  or  is  it  appointed  to 
sure  progress  and  to  final  happiness?  Questions  these  which  have  disturbed  many  a 
sensitive  and  philanthropic  mind ;  clouded  many  a  generous,  disinterested  life  with 
sorrow  and  with  gloom.  The  pessimism  which  is  a  sort  of  fashion  in  some  circles 
refuses  to  take  any  comfort  in  looking  forward  to  the  future  of  mankind.  As  the 
individual  is  of  necessity  unhappy,  as  life  is  of  necessity  a  calamity,  a  disaster,  and 
death  the  only  alleviation,  annihilation  the  only  thing  worth  looking  forward  to;  so 
for  the  race,  composed  of  units  thus  unhappy,  no  destiny  that  is  desirable  can  be  in 
reserve.  Progress  is  an  illusion,  and  the  general  happiness  a  baseless  dream.  The 
Spirit  of  God — the  God  of  hope — has  taught  the  Christian  a  very  diflferent  lesson  from 
this.  That  Spirit  encouraged  Hebrew  prophets  of  old  to  anticipate  a  universal  reign 
of  righteousness,  knowledge,  and  peace.  That  Spirit  directed  evangelists  and  apostles 
to  base,  upon  the  incarnation  and  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  broadest  of  all 
beliefs  and  the  brightest  of  all  hopes.  That  Spirit  has  sustained  the  faith  and 
inspired  the  energy  of  Christ's  people,  amid  tlie  darkness  of  humau  ignorance,  the  din 
of  human  conflict,  and  the  desolation  of  human  despair.  Tiie  omen  of  the  birth  cf 
Christ  and  Christianity  has  not  been  falsified.  The  progress  of  the  truth  has  been 
slow,  the  hindrances  have  been  many,  the  corruptions  and  distortions  have  been 
serious.  War,  cruelty,  slavery,  vice,  ignorance,  brutality,  are  still  scourging  this 
human  race.  But  no  candid  observer  can  say  that  the  religion  of  Christ  has  attacked 
these  evils  in  vain.  And  no  Christian,  convinced  of  the  supernntural  powers  of  his 
religion,  can  do  other  than  bravely  hope  in  the  progress  of  enlightenment,  the  victory 
of  righteousness,  the  reign  of  Christ. 

"  Yet  with  the  woes  of  sin  and  strife 
The  world  has  suffered  long ; 
Beneath  the  angel-strain  have  rolled 

Two  thousand  years  of  wrong ; 
And  man  at  war  with  man,  hears  not 

The  love-song  which  they  bring  I 
Oh  hush  the  noise,  ye  men  of  strife. 
And  hear  the  angels  sing  I 

"Tlie  promised  time  is  hastening  on. 

By  prophet-bnrds  foretold, 
When  with  the  ever-circling  years 

Comes  round  the  age  of  gold ; 
When  peace  shall  over  all  the  earth 

Its  undimmed  splendours  fling, 
And  the  whole  world  send  back  the  song 

Which  now  the  angels  sing  I" 

Observe  the  richness  and  fulness  of  the  apostle's  prayer:  "Tliat  ye  may  abound  In 
hope."  This  is  an  emotion  which  admits  of  many  degrees.  There  are  casus  in  which 
men  say,  "  There  is  no  hope  I "  and  melancholy  indeed  was  the  inscription  which  the 
poet  read  over  the  infernal  portals :  "  Leave  every  hope  behind,  all  ye  who  enter  here." 
Sometimes  there  is  a  little  hope,  a  faint  glimmer,  as  it  were,  to  relieve  the  darkness. 
Hope  can  grow,  as  the  dawn  brightens  mto  the  morning.  And  hope  can  become  a 
strong,  happy,  unhesitating  persuasion,  with  no  sliade  of  anxiety,  fear,  or  doubt. 
When  the  wish  is  uttered  that  we  may  "  abound  in  hope,"  it  is  implied  that  hope  is 
good,  and  so  good  that  there  is  no  possibility  of  our  having  too  strong  a  hope 


OB.  XV.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  439 

Abundance  is  "  more  than  enough ; "  and  what  is  besought  for  Christ's  people  is  the 
"  full  assurance  of  hope."  This  is  a  "  living  hope,"  a  hope  whose  life  is  vigorous  and 
vital;  a  "hope  which  maketh  not  ashamed,"  which  is  confident,  and  which  produces 
happiness  and  peace.  The  Christian  should  be  the  possessor  of  such  a  hope.  Let  the 
unbeliever  walk,  if  he  will,  in  the  twilight;  it  is  for  us  to  come  out  into  the  fulness 
of  the  noonday  light.  This  we  may  enjoy,  not  through  the  power  of  reason,  or  of 
fancy,  or  of  public  opinion ;  but  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  the  Divine 
Spirit,  and  not  a  spirit  of  error^  illusion,  that  prompts  our  hope.  Hope  is  of  God, 
and  is  in  God  ;  and  such  a  hope  may  well  be  abundant.  For  there  is  no  hope  which 
he  inspires  which  he  cannot  and  will  not  satisfy ;  and  when  Divine  fulness  meets  with 
human  hope,  our  vessel  is  filled,  and  filled  to  overflowing,  from  the  heavenly,  the 
perennial  spring. 

Ver.  13. — Bope.  Perhaps  ordinary  and  even  Christian  moralists  would  not  assign 
to  hope  the  place  which  it  occupies  in  the  teaching  of  the  apostle.  But  Paul  had  good 
reason  for  extolling  and  enjoining  this  beautiful  and  most  inspiring  and  influential 
virtue.     In  this  verse  he  sets  forth — 

I.  The  Soukob  op  hope.  His  language  is  a  prayer,  and  the  prayer  is  addressed  to 
"  the  God  of  hope."  He  is  so  called  because  there  can  be  no  true,  well-founded,  far- 
reaching  hope  which  is  not  fixed  on  God,  on  his  providential  rule,  on  his  gracious 
purposes,  on  his  consolatory  promises.  He  suggests  and  inspires  hope ;  he  justifies 
and  expects  hope ;  he  approves  and  rewards  hope.  All  true  and  worthy  hope  for  our- 
selves and  for  others  is  fixed  on  God,  centres  in  God. 

II.  The  powek  of  hope.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  represented  as  the  Agent  by  whose  aid 
hope  is  experienced  and  enjoyed.  When  the  spirit  is  downcast  and  sad,  when  the 
prospect  is  gloomy  and  dark,  when  human  help  seems  far  and  feeble,  then  the  Com- 
forter brings  near  the  grace  of  God,  unveils  a  glorious  prospect,  and  inspires  a  blessed 
confidence. 

III.  The  means  op  hops.  If  any  one  is  bidden  to  cherish  hope,  he  will  reply, 
"  Where  is  the  ground  upon  which  I  may  hope  ?  By  what  means  can  I  arise  from  the 
Slough  of  Despair?"  The  steps  by  which  rational  hope  can  be  fostered  are  here 
described.  1.  Believing ;  i.e.  in  Christ  as  the  true  Object  of  hope — "  Christ  our  Hope." 
2.  Joy ;  i.e.  the  emotion  produced  by  a  believing  appropriation  of  the  blessings  of  the 
gospel — joy  which  may  even  rise  to  be  "  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory."  3.  Peace ;  %,g. 
another  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  the  growth  from  the  root  of  Christian  faith.  A 
disturbed  mind  is  a  mind  uncongenial  to  hope;  tranquillity  in  the  present  is  con- 
tributive  to  hopefulness  as  to  the  future. 

IV.  The  abundance  op  hope.  When  God  gives,  he  gives  liberally,  royally. 
Observe  in  what  respects  the  Christian's  hope  abounds.  1.  For  himself,  his  personal 
future  being  gilded  with  radiant,  celestial  light.  2.  For  the  Church,  that  it  shall  arise 
and  shine  and  fulfil  the  ministry  it  has  received.  3.  For  the  world,  that  it  shall  be 
filled  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord.    4.  For  both  time  and  eternity. 

Ver.  29. — Fulness  of  Messing.  Commissioned  and  endowed  as  he  was,  the  apostle 
might  lawfully  and  confidently  speak  thus.  Yet  every  minister  of  Christ  may,  in  his 
measure,  cherish  the  same  assurance,  and  look  forward  to  intercourse  with  those  to 
whom  he  ministers  with  a  similar  expectation  and  bope. 

I.  The  origin  and  Givbe  of  blbssino.  The  word  "  blessing  "  has  something  vague 
in  it ;  yet  this  is'  because  of  its  comprehensiveness.  We  cannot  always  be  sm:6  what 
is  best  to  wish  for  on  behalf  of  others ;  but  we  cannot  err  in  seeking  for  them  blessing 
from  God.  Poor  and  few  are  the  gifts  man  can  bestow  upon  his  fellow-men ;  but  "  the 
blessing  of  God  maketh  rich,  and  with  it  he  addeth  no  sorrow." 

II.  The  chabactbr  and  import  of  Br.BssiNG.  What  the  apostle  anticipates  is 
"  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Christ."  Here  there  opens  up  to  us  a  boundless  field, 
for  in  this  are  comprehended  all  that  Christ  can  bestow,  all  that  man  can  receive;  e.g. 
Christ's  blessing  of  peace,  of  life,  spiritual  and  eternal,  of  confidence  and  hope,  of 
purity  and  strength,  of  fellowship,  of  service. 

III.  The  measure  of  blessing.  1.  Fulness  corresponding  to  the  Giver,  whose 
riches  and  resources  are  inexhaustible.     The  expression  "fulness"  is  a  favourite  ona 


440  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xv.  1—33. 

with  the  apostle,  and  indicates  his  sense  of  the  ahundance  of  the  gifts  and  promises  of 
that  new  covenant  which  it  was  his  privilege  to  explain  to  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles. 
2.  Fulness  for  every  applicant  and  partaker.  The  nature  of  each  Christian  is  such 
that  he  is  capable  of  receiving  from  the  fulness  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ.  Consider  the 
multitudes  who  have  sought  and  found  in  the  Mediator  the  supply  for  all  their  spiritual 
wants ;  and  you  Will  feel  what  a  witness  is  such  a  fact  to  the  infinite  provision  of  Divine 
mercy  and  beneficence.  3.  Fulness  unexhausted  and  inexhaustible  for  each  participant. 
When  Paul  came  to  a  city,  he  had  some  conception||t  the  immense  variety  of  human 
need ;  and  when  he  ministered  to  a  congregation,  heaid  so  knowing  that  it  contained 
individuals  with  many,  varied,  urgent,  incessant  needs — all  to  be  supplied  from  the 
fulness  which  is  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  a  most  encouraging  and  inspiring  thought  that, 
whatever  the  heart  may  crave  of  blessing,  may  be  surely  appropriated  and  enjoyed 
upon  application  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  The  preacher  may  be  but  an  earthen 
vessel ;  but  the  treasure  he  conveys  is  both  priceless  and  inexhaustible. 

IV,  The  condition  and  oooasion  of  blessing.  "  When  I  come  unto  you."  It 
appears  that  Christians  meeting  in  fellowship  are  the  means  of  such  mercy  to  human 
souls.  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  the  faithful  preacher  and  teacher  of  the  Word  j  on 
the  other  hand,  there  are  receptive  and  believing  hearers  of  the  Word.  The  Lord 
gives  to  the  disciples,  and  the  disciples  distribute  to  the  multitude. 

V.  The  assukanoe  of  blessing.  The  language  of  Paul  is  very  confident :  "  I  am 
Bure.*"  Such  a  conviction  must  be  "based  upon  confidence  in  Divine  declarations  and 
promises,  and  upon  past  experience  of  Divine  faithfulness  and  grace.  Such  persuasion, 
and  the  sober  yet  confident  expression  of  it,  are  honouring  to  God. 

Application.  1.  Here  is  an  example  of  the  spirit  in  which  bishops,  pastors,  and 
evangelists  shoidd  approach  those  whose  spiritual  welfare  is  entrusted  to  their  charge. 
2.  Here  is  titso  an  example  of  the  expectations  which  Christians  should  cherish  when 
they  place  themselves  under  the  influence  of  an  enlightened  and  spiritual  ministry. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  6,  13,  33. — The  Divine  character  in  relation  to  the  human.  "The  God  ol 
patience  and  consolation ; "  "  the  God  of  hope ; "  "  the  God  'of  peace."  The  great 
object  of  Christ's  coming  into  the  world  was  to  save  sinners.  He  does  this  hy  revealing 
Qod.  He  is  Emmanuel,  "  God  with  us."  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the 
only  begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared  him."  Christ 
reveals  the  Divine  character.  He  reveals  it  in  his  teaching — the  Divine  holiness.  He 
reveals  it  in  his  cross — the  Divine  mercy.  He  reveals  it  in  his  resurrection — the  Divine 
power.  Christ  saves  us  also  hy  reproducing  or  restoring  in  us  the  image  qf  Qod.  In 
the  renewed  nature  God  becomes  part  of  us.  He  dwells  in  us  and  we  in  him.  The 
law  of  heredity  emphasizes  the  fact  that  children  bear  not  only  the  bodily,  but  the 
mental  and  moral  characteristics  of  their  parents.  The  character  of  the  parent 
reappears  in  the  child.  So  the  character  of  God  reappears  in  his  people.  Three 
features  of  God's  character  St,  Paul  speaks  of  here,  and  wants  his  readers  to  think  of 
them  in  relation  to  their  own  character  and  life. 

I.  The  God  of  patience.  1.  Tlie  Divine  Being  manifests  patience  in  waiting. 
He  waits  patiently  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  plans.  Thousands  of  years  he  waited  for 
the  sending  of  the  Saviour.  All  that  time  he  occupied  in  the  training  of  Israel,  and 
in  the  preparing  of  the  nations,  till,  at  the  time  when  Jesus  came,  the  world  was  ripe 
and  ready  for  his  coming.  What  a  lesson  for  us !  How  impatient  we  are  1  If  we  do 
not  see  immediate  results,  we  think  our  work  is  a  failure.  "  Let  us  not  be  weary  in 
well-doing :  for  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not,"  2.  The  Divine  Being  is 
patient  in  enduring.  How  he  bore  with  Israel,  with  all  Israel's  backsliding  and 
repeated  sins  I  How  he  bears  with  us,  with  our  disobedience  and  our  inconsistencies! 
His  patience  with  us  is  in  marked  contrast  with  our  impatience  toward  our  fellow- 
men.  How  impatient  we  are  with  our  subordinates  or  our  fellow-workers,  with  the 
slowness  and  stupidity  which  they  sometimes  manifest  I  Let  us  imitate  the  patience  of 
Qod.  We  need  to  learn  how  to  bear  with  others.  Strife  is  the  result  of  impatience, 
cf  intolerance.    Unity  is  the  result  of  patience.    This  was  the  apostle's  idea,  and  hia 


OH.  XV.  1—33.]    THE  El'IBTLE  01   PAUL  TO  THE  KOMANS.  441 

practical  purpose  In  referring  to  the  patience  of  God.  "  The  God  of  patience  and 
consolation  grant  you  to  he  like-minded  one  toward  another  according  to  Christ  Jesud" 
(ver.  5).    Let  U8  he  patient  in  enduring  all  Buffering  and  trial. 

•'  Angel  of  patience  I  sent  to  calm 
Our  feveriah  brows  with  cooling  palm , 
To  lay  the  storms  of  hope  and  fear, 
And  reconcile  life's  smile  and  tear; 
The  throbs  of  wounded  pride  to  still, 
And  make  our  own  our  Father's  will  I 

"  There's  quiet  in  tliat  angel's  glance. 
There's  rest  In  his  still  countenance  I 
He  mocks  no  grief  with  idle  cheer, 
Nor  wounds  with  words  the  mourner's  ear ; 
But  ills  and  woes  he  may  not  cure, 
He  kindly  trains  ns  io  endure. 

"  O  thou  who  moumest  on  the  way 
With  longings  for  the  close  of  day; 
He  walks  with  thee,  that  angel  kind. 
And  gently  whispers ;  '  Be  resigned ; 
Benr  up ;  bear  on ;  the  end  shall  tell 
The  dear  Lord  ordereth  all  things  well.' " 

n.  Thb  Gob  or  hopb.    Nature  is/uU  of  hope.    Day  follows  night.    Spring  follow! 
winter. 

"And  ever  upon  old  decay 
The  greenest  mosses  cling." 

TTie  life  of  humanity  is  a  life  of  hope.  We  are  always  looking  forward.  The  little 
child  looks  forward  eagerly  to  its  school-days.  The  boy  or  girl  at  school  looks  forward 
to  the  time  of  manhood  or  womanhood.  In  hope  the  young  man  leaves  his  father's 
roof.  Hope  leads  the  emigrant  across  the  seas.  Tet  nature  and  humanity  unaided 
have  no  hope  beyond  the  grave.  The  ancient  heathen  had  indeed  their  goddess  of 
hope.  But  the  lamp  of  hope  flickered  as  old  age  came  on,  and  expired  with  the  last 
breath  that  left  the  body.  The  heathen  symbol  of  death  is  the  broken  column,  or  the 
torch  of  life  turned  upside  down.  But  our  God  is  in  truth  the  God  of  hope.  Do  we 
enjoy  life?  He  tells  us  of  a  better  life  beyond.  Is  this  world  fair  and  beautiful  ?  He 
tells  us  of  a  better  country,  even  an  heavenly.  Are  we  weary  with  the  toils  and 
burdens  of  this  life?  He  tells  us  that  there  remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God. 
Hope  in  itself  can  hardly  with  strictness  be  called  a  part  of  the  Divine  character,  any 
more  than  faith.  But  it  is  part  of  the  Divine  character,  and  peculiar  to  it,  that  he 
produces  in  the  human  heart  hope  of  the  life  to  come.  Hence  he  is  truly  called  "  the 
God  of  hope."  We  see  the  impress  and  influence  of  his  Divine  hope  on  God's  people 
in  all  ag  s.  Abraham  and  the  patriarchs  "confessed  that  they  were  strangers  and 
pilgrims  on  the  earth."  And  "  they  that  say  such  things  declare  plainly  that  they  seek 
a  country."  The  prophets  in  Israel's  exile  spoke  of  a  hope  which  they  knew  they 
would  never  see  fulfilled.  The  apostles  and  martyrs,  and  the  missionaries  of  to-day, 
have  laboured  and  suffered  in  hope.  Here  also  is  the  practical  influence  of  the  Divine 
character  in  relation  to  the  human.  "  The  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace 
■  in  believing,  that  ye  may  abound  in  hope  "  (ver.  13).  In  sorrow ;  in  adversity ;  in  the 
day  when  the  wicked  seem  to  triumph,  and  injustice  and  oppression  seem  to  gain  the 
upper  hand — Christians,  hope  on !  The  truth  will  prevail  over  falsehood  and  error  ; 
purity  over  impurity ;  righteousness  over  wickedness.    Abound  in  hope  1 

"  We  hope  in  thee,  O  God, 

In  whom  none  hope  in  vain ; 
We  cling  to  thee  in  love  and  trust, 
And  joy  succeeds  to  pain." 

To  the  sinner  alto  the  message  of  Divine  hope  extendi.    '•  Whosoever  will,  let  him  tak« 

the  water  of  life  freely." 


442  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.    Loh.  xv.  1—33. 

in.  The  God  of  peace.  "  The  God  of  peace  be  with  you  all "  (ver.  38).  Peace  is 
essentially  a  part  of  the  Divine  character.  No  storms  disturb  his  rest.  No  sinfulness 
is  in  his  being,  and  therefore  no  conflict  in  his  moral  nature.  If  the  God  of  peace  is 
with  us,  then  peace  will  pervade  our  own  spirit  and  life.  There  will  be  not  only  the 
peace  that  comes  from  pardon,  but  also  the  peace  that  comes  from  the  victory  over 
indwelling  and  besetting  sin.  There  is  a  striking  plirase  in  the  next  chapter  :  "  The 
God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly  "  (ch.  xvi.  20).  If  the  God  of 
peace  is  in  our  hearti,  we  shall  cultivate  peace  with  our  fellow-men.  "Live  in  peace; 
and  the  God  of  love  and  peace  shall  be  with  you  "  (2  Cor.  xiii.  11).  Thus  we  see  how 
profitable  it  is  to  contemplate  the  character  of  God,  the  God  of  patience,  the  God  of 
hope,  the  God  of  peace,  so  that  endurance  and  forbearance,  hopefulness  and  joy,  unity 
and  peace,  may  be  manifest  in  our  lives. — 0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  7 — 27. — The  mutual  relationship  of  Jews  and  Q entiles.  The  apostle  ,trie8 
further  to  heal  any  existing  differences  between  the  various  sections  of  the  Christian 
community  at  Eome,  and  still  further  to  enfoice  the  duties  of  charity,  self-denial,  and 
mutual  helpfulness,  by  reminding  them  of , how  much  they  have  in  common.  This  is 
the  true  method  of  uniting  Christians.  Some  Christians  think  they  will  succeed  in 
bringing  others  to  their  view  of  the  truth  by  exposing  the  errors  of  those  who  differ 
from  them.  Consequently,  we  have  bitter  controversies  between  the  various  denomi- 
nations, because  Christians  will  persist  in  emphasizing  the  points  on  which  they  differ, 
rather  than  the  points — often  far  more  numerous  and  more  important — on  which  they 
agree.  To  draw  nearer  to  Christ,  and  to  draw  one  another  nearer  to  Christ,  this  is  the 
true  eirenicon. 

I.  Thbie  mutuai.  kelationship  to  Christ.  "  Wherefore  receive  ye  one  another,  as 
Christ  also  received  us"  (ver.  7).  Both  have  been  received  by  Christ:  why  not,  then, 
by  one  another?  Why  should  our  views  of  Episcopacy  or  Presbytery,  Calvinism  or 
Arniinianism,  interfere  with  our  relationship  as  brethren  in  Christ  ?  St.  Paul  shows 
that  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  have  a  direct  personal  interest  in  Chri-^t  and  relationship 
to  him.  "Jesus  Christ  was  a  Minister  of  the  circumcision"  (ver.  8).  Therefore  the 
Jew  should  not  look  upon  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  an  alien,  but  as  his  kinsman  according 
to  the  flesh.  He  came  not  to  destroy  the  Law,  but  to  fulfil.  But  because  he  is  a  Jew, 
he  is  not,  therefore,  without  an  interest  in  the  Gentiles.  The  a[)ostle  shows  how  even 
the  Jewish  writings  loo^d  forward  to  an  incorporation  of  the  Gentiles  with  the  people 
of  God,  and  to  their  sharing  the  blessings  which  the  Messiab  was  to  confer  (vers. 
10 — 12).  "  In  him  shall  the  Gentiles  trust."  How  precious,  then,  should  be  the  Name 
of  Jesus  to  all  the  children  of  humanity  1  How  the  universal  brotherhood  of  Christians 
is  here  enforced  1 

II.  Thbib  mutuai.  relationship  to  the  gospel.  Not  only  was  it  predicted  that 
both  Jews  and  Gentiles  would  be  joint  partakers  in  the  benefits  uf  the  Messiah's  king- 
dom, but  in  actual  fact  the  gospel  has  come  to  both.  St.  Paul,  who  was  himself  a  Jew, 
experienced  the  blessings  of  the  gospel.  He,  in  his  turn,  communicated  those  blessings 
to  the  Gentiles.  He  was  "  the  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Gentiles,  ministering 
the  gospel  of  God  "  (ver.  16).  Truly,  the  gospel  is  a  great  reconciler.  How  it  breaks 
down  the  prejudices  of  race  and  class  and  caste !  Let  the  gospel  only  become  a  real, 
living  power  in  our  own  heart  and  life,  and  we  shall  go  forth,  like  St.  Paul,  to  share  its 
blessings  with  others,  winning  them  by  a  spirit  of  love,  no  matter  what  our  prejudices 
against  them  may  have  been. 

III.  Theie  duty  of  mutual  helpfulness.  At  the  time  of  wrilmg  this  Epistle  St. 
Paul  was  on  an  errand  which  gave  practical  proof  of  the  mutual  sympathy  between 
Gentile  and  Jewish  Christians.  He  was  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem  (ver.  25).  He  was 
taking  with  him  a  contribution  which  the  Gentile  Christians  of  Macedonia  and  Achaia 
had  made  for  their  Jewish  brethren  at  Jerusalem,  who  at  this  time  were  in  poverty 
(ver.  26).  He  takes  the  occasion  to  say  that  this  act  of  generosity,  cheerfully  per- 
formed, was  indeed  a  Christian  duty.  "For  if  the  Gentiles  have  been  partakers  of 
their  spiritual  things,  their  duty  is  also  to  ministd'  unto  them  in  carnal  things  "  (ver. 
27).  Here  is  a  reason  for  missionary  efforts  among  the  Jews.  They  have  been  the 
channel  through  which  blessings  have  flowed  to  us:  shall  we  not  be  the  channel 
through  which  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  shall  flow  to  them  ?    Here  it  a  reason  for  tlie 


cH.  XV.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  443 

support  of  the  Christian  ministry.  It  is  wise  and  prudent  that  those  who  are  to  be 
teachers  and  preachers  of  the  Word,  and  pastors  of  the  flock,  should  devote  themselves 
to  that  work  only.  How,  then,  are  they  to  be  supported  ?  By  the  generosity  of  those 
to  whom  they  minister.  If  the  latter  aro  "  partakers  of  their  spiritual  things,  their 
duty  is  also  to  minister  unto  them  in  carnal  things."  Such  mutual  helpfulness  all 
Christians  ought  to  cultivate  towards  one  another. — C.  H.  I. 

Ver.  29. — An  apostle's  confidence.  St.  Paul  has  been  stating  his  plans  as  regards  the 
future,  and  especially  regarding  his  intended  visit  to  Eome.  There  is  much  that  is 
uncertain.  But  one  thing  was  a  certainty  to  him.  "  I  am  sure  that,  when  I  come  to 
you,  I  shall  come  in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Christ."  Had  Paul 
any  grounds  for  this  expectation  ?  Was  his  confidence  warranted  by  facts  ?  Let  us 
see.  About  two  years  after  this  he  came  to  Eome  a  prisoner.  What  was  his  chief 
occupation  then  ?  Preparing  his  defence  ?  No.  "  Preaching  the  kingdom  of  God, 
and  teaching  those  things  which  concern  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  with  all  confidence, 
no  man  forbidding  him  "  (Acts  xxviii.  31).  There  were  two  elements  in  his  confident 
expectation. 

I.  His  ooNFiDBNOB  IN  THE  BLESSING  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  "  The  f ulness  of  the  blessing 
of  the  gospel  of  Christ."  St.  Paul  felt  that  the  best  blessing  he  could  bring  to  any  city, 
or  any  people  whom  he  visited,  was  the  blessing  of  the  gospel.  Four  features  in  the 
gospel  have  made  it  a  blessing  to  the  world.  1.  It  is  a  gospel  of  love  and  mercy.  This 
was  a  new  message  to  the  world.  What  a  contrast  to  the  cruel  gods  of  heathenism  is 
the  merciful  God  whom  the  gospel  proclaims !  2.  It  is  a  gospel  of  salvation.  It  not 
only  shows  us  the  evil  of  sin  and  the  guilt  of  it,  but  it  tells  us  of  a  Saviour.  Here  is 
its  transcendent  superiority  over  the  best  of  the  heathen  religions.  Not  only  so,  but 
the  Saviour  of  whom  it  speaks  is  a  Divine  Saviour.  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  utter- 
most all  who  come  unto  God  through  him.  3.  It  is  a  gospel  of  everlasting  life.  What 
hopes  it  opens  up!  What  a  stimulus  it  gives  us  to  exertion  to  remember  that  they 
that  are  faithful  unto  death  shall  receive  the  crown  of  life  that  fadeth  not  away !  It 
teaches  us  that  this  life  is  eternal  in  its  consequences,  and  thus  exercises  a  purifying 
and  elevating  influence  upon  the  lives  of  men.  What  comfort  it  brings  to  the  bereaved 
to  know  that  the  grave  does  not  end  all,  but  that  there  is  another  and  a  better  life 
beyond !  The  hope  of  the  agnostic  has  recently  been  expressed  in  a  popular  novel, 
'  John  Ward,  Preacher.'  The  heroine  expresses  her  hope  for  the  future  by  speaking 
of  it  as  "  an  eternal  sleep."  Where  is  the  stimulus  to  exertion  there  ?  Where  is  there 
any  comfort  for  the  bereaved?  When  death  is  drawing  nigh,  the  dying  Christian  and 
those  who  are  to  be  left  behind  can  appreciate  the  blessing  of  that  gospel  which  has  brought 
life  and  immortality  to  light.  4.  It  is  a  gospel  of  light  and  guidance.  It  points  out  to 
us  the  path  of  duty.  It  gives  us  not  only  wise  precepts,  but  the  personal  example  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Here  also  it  transcends  all  human  systems  of  religion  and 
morality.  The  best  of  human  teachers  have  not  been  free  from  iraperfectiou  and  sin. 
Christ  alone  can  truly  say,  "  I  am  the  Way,  and  the  Truth,  and  the  Life."  He  alone 
has  the  right  to  say  to  us— a  right  vindicated  not  only  by  his  Divine  authority,  but  by 
his  perfect  character — "  Follow  me."  The  influence  of  Jesus  Christ  and  his  example 
is  one  of  the  most  precious  blessings  of  the  gospel.  In  the  year  1876  the  centennial  of 
the  United  States  was  celebrated.  General  Grant  was  then  president.  The  editors  of 
the  Sunday  School  Times  wrote  to  him,  requesting  him  to  give  them  a  message  for 
childien  and  youth  in  their  centennial  number.  In  his  reply  he  said,  "  My  advice  td 
Sunday  schools,  no  matter  of  what  denomination,  is — Hold  fast  to  the  Bible  as  the 
iheet-anchor  of  your  liberties,  write  its  precepts  on  your  hearts,  and  practise  them  in 
your  lives.  To  the  influence  of  this  book  are  we  indebted  for  all  the  progress  made  in 
true  civilization,  and  to  this  we  must  look  as  our  guide  in  the  future."  He,  too,  had 
confidence  in  the  gospel,  and  in  the  blessings  which  it  brings  to  the  individual  and  the 
nation. 

II.  His  oonfidbncb  in  the  Christian's  power  to  oommunioate  this  blessing. 


The  apostle's  words  express  not  only  his  belief  in  the  blessing  of  the  gospel,  but  also 
his  confidence  that  he  can  and  will  communicate  that  blessing.  "  I  am  sure  that« 
when  I  come  to  you,  I  shall  come  in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Christ." 
And  yet  it  was  not  a  confidence  in  self,  in  his  own  learning  or  eloquence.    It  was  • 


444  THE  EPISTLK  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xv.  1— 3a 


confidence  in  Christ.  He  knew  whom  he  had  believed.  Twenty-five  years  he  had 
been  serving  him,  and  he  had  more  than  once  proved  the  Divine  power  of  Christ'e 
presence  and  help.  Our  power  to  communicate  the  blessings  (f  the  gospel  depends  on 
two  things.  1.  A  personal  knowledge  of  the  gospel.  2.  Constant  communion  with 
Christ.  A  life  of  prayer  is  indispensable  if  we  would  live  a  life  of  usefulness.  These 
two  things,  personal  knowledge  of  the  gospel  and  personal  communion  with  Christ,  will 
make  us  independent  of  time  and  circumstances.  They  impart  strength  and  confi- 
dence. It  was  all  the  same  to  St.  Paul  how  or  when  he  went  to  Eome.  As  if  he  said, 
"  No  matter  how,  no  matter  when  I  come  to  you,  one  thing  I  am  sure  of,  that  I  shall 
bring  the  rich  blessing  of  Christ's  gospel  with  me."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  came  there 
as  a  prisoner,  but  even  thus  he  brought  a  blessing.  Whether  we  are  rich  or  poor, 
learned  or  unlearned,  we  shall  be  sure  to  carry  a  blessing  to  the  circles  in  which  we 
move,  if  only  we  have  first  of  all  experienced  the  power  of  the  gospel  in  our  own 
hearts,  and  then  realize  our  constant  de|)endonce  upon  Christ.  Tliere  are  two  ways  in, 
which  we  can  communicate  this  hlissing.  1.  By  our  Christian  character.  The  Corin- 
thian Christians  became  living  epistles  (2  Cor.  iii.  2,  3).  Their  changed  life  was  a 
remarkable  testimony  to  the  power  of  the  gospel.  2.  By  our  personal  testimony.  If 
we  know  by  personal  experience  the  preoiousness  of  Christ  and  the  blessings  of  the 
gospel,  let  us  be  more  ready  to  proclaim  them  to  others. — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  1 — 13. — Union  in  Cod.  Here,  as  Godet  says,  "  the  particular  question 
treated  in  oh.  xiv.  broadens;  the  point  of  view  rises,  and  the  tone  is  gradually 
heightened  even  to  the  elevation  of  a  hymn,  as  at  the  end  of  all  the  great  parts  pre- 
ceding (oil.  V.  12,  et  seq. ;  viii.  31,  et  seq. ;  xi.  33,  et  seq.).  Paul  first  exhorts,  by  the 
example  of  Christ,  to  mutual  condescension  (vers.  1 — 3);  he  points  out  (vers.  4 — 7), 
as  an  end  to  be  reached,  the  common  adoration  to  which  sucli  conduct  will  bring  the 
Church  ;  finally  (vers.  8 — 13),  he  indicates  the  special  part  given  to  Jews  and  to  Gentiles 
in  this  song  of  the  whole  redeemed  race."  It  is  not  now  so  much  the  particular 
question  which  has  just  been  dealt  with,  as  the  whole  question  of  which  that  was  but 
a  pa't,  viz.  the  relation  of  a  free,  spiritual  Christianity  to  the  more  or  less  Judaic  Chris- 
tianity of  some,  to  which  the  apostle  here  directs  his  words.  They  are  to  be  of  one 
mind,  that  they  may  with  one  mouth  glorify  God. 

I.  A  MUTUAL  LOVE.  The  strong  ought  to  show  their  strength  by  bearing  the  infirmi- 
ties of  the  weak.  And  not  only  will  their  strength  thus  be  m<ist  perfectly  shown,  but 
the  love,  which  is  more  than  strength.  For  this  love  is  the  law  of  the  new  life.  Shall 
we  then  please  ourselves,  by  pluming  ourselves  on  our  liberty,  our  superior  faith  ? 
Nay,  rather,  we  must  seek,  in  love,  to  please  our  neighbour.  But  not  merely  as 
pleasing  him,  though  this  is  an  end  to  be  sought ;  but  as  pleasing  him  in  harmony  with 
all  right  principle,  viz.  for  his  good,  unto  edifying.  There  must  be  the  desire  to  con- 
tribute comfoi  t,  joy ;  but,  above  this,  and  as  controlling  all  else,  the  desire  to  contribute 
to  his  building  up  in  holiness  and  love.  And  what  is  our  great  inspiration  to  this  help- 
fulness of  sacrificing  love?  We  have  the  mind  of  Christ!  Did  he  phase  himself? 
How,  then,  had  we  been  saved?  Nay,  rather,  for  our  sake  he  gave  up  all.  In  him 
was  seen  pre-eminently  the  spirit  of  sacrifice  expressed  in  the  ancient  words,  "  The 
reproaches  of  them  that  reproached  thee  lell  upon  me."  And  as  generally  the  ancient 
Scriptures  were  written  that  we  might  also  endure  all  things  for  God's  sake,  being  com- 
forted of  God,  and  so  have  hope  of  the  perfect  salvation  at  last,  ought  we  not  in  this 
particular  respect  to  make  the  sacrifice  required,  bearing  even  the  weak  scruples  of  our 
brethren,  that  together,  through  God's  comfort,  we  may  have  hope  of  heaven?  Yes, 
we  must  be  "  of  the  same  mind  one  with  another  according  to  Christ  Jesus." 

II.  A  COMMON  PBAI8B.  Wljat  shall  be  the  result  of  loving  like-niindedneas,  in  which 
all  differences  are  sunk?  A  glorifying  of  God,  with  one  accord.  And  the  one  united 
psalm  shall  be  but  the  expression  of  one  common  thanksgiving,  filling  the  hearts  of  all, 
for  the  love  wherewith  God  hath  loved  them.  Is  not  this  the  end  of  all  God's  redeem- 
ing work,  that  all  should  join  in  loving  praise  to  God,  being  redeemed  with  one  common 
redemption — a  praise  shown  forth,  not  only  with  the  lips,  but  in  the  lives  ?  So  should 
all  things  be  made  new.  To  this  end  was  Christ's  work,  that  Jew  and  Gentile  together 
might  be  saved  by  a  true  and  merciful  God.  The  ancient  Scriptures  foresaw  this  grand 
result,  the  blending  of  Gentile  and  Jewish  praise  in  one  large  harmony.     So  David's 


CH.  XV.  1—33.]    THE  BPISTLB  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  BOMANS.  445 

declaration  (Ps.  xviH.  49);  so  the  invitation  of  Moses  (Deut.  ixxii.  43);  so  again  the 
psalmist  (Ps.  cxvii.  1) ;  and  so  Isaiah's  prophecy  of  hope :  all  of  which  could  find  their 
true  fulfilment  only  in  such  a  loving  union  of  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  world  in  the 
glad  service  of  their  one  God  and  Christ  as  now  filled  the  apostle's  view. 

One  chief  guarantee  of  the  mutual  love  and  common  praise  shall  be  the  united  hope 
of  a  perfect  salvation.  Let  them  look  to  God  for  this,  and  he  shall  grant  them  a  faith, 
and  a  realized  power  of  God  through  faith,  which  shall  give  them  joy  and  peace  now, 
amid  whatever  outward  disturbances,  as  being  the  pledge  of  all  things  good  guaranteed 
to  us  for  that  future.  So  should  their  songs  abound;  so  should  their  heiirts  be  one: 
praise  helping  love,  and  love  helping  praise,  and  God  all  in  all  1 — T.  F.  L. 

Vera.  14 — 33. — Farewell  words.  The  apostle  in  these  verses  touches,  as  at  the 
first  (see  ch.  i.  1 — 15),  on  his  personal  relations  to  the  Church  at  Rome.  And  he 
reintroduces  the  subject  with  much  delicate  courtesy.  He  may  have  seemed  to  be 
speaking  somewhat  boldly,  to  have  assumed  a  knowledge  and  gooilness  superior  to 
theirs  :  not  so  I  They,  he  was  sure,  were  "  full  of  goodness,  filled  with  all  knowledge," 
and  therefore  "  able  to  admonish  one  another."  But  he  might  at  h'ast  remind  them  of 
what  they  knew ;  and  this,  not  by  any  superiority  of  himself  to  them,  but  only  by 
the  grace  of  God ;  not  as  a  better  or  wiser  Christian  man,  but  as  an  apostle  com- 
missioned by  God.  We  have  here  set  forth,  then,  much  as  before,  his  apostleship,  his 
purpose  respecting  them,  and  his  request  for  their  prayers  on  his  behalf.  By  this  last, 
again,  with  much  delicacy,  making  prominent  his  dependence  on  them,  rather  than 
theirs  on  him. 

I.  His  apostleship.  He  was  put  in  trust  by  God  with  the  gospel  for  the  Gentiles. 
And  his  fulfilment  of  this  trust  was  as  a  priestly  service,  which  he  should  perform, 
not  proudly,  but  faithfully.  And  what  a  service  I  ministering  the  gospel  in  tliis  great 
temple  of  the  new  kingdom,  that  he  might  offer  up  as  a  sacrifice  the  whole  Gentile 
world!  His  thoughts,  perhaps,  revert  to  the  words  he  has  used  in  ch.  xii.  1 ;  and  what 
a  vision  greets  his  view  as  he  looks  into  the  future — all  the  kindreds,  and  tribes,  and 
peoples,  and  tongues  of  this  manifold  world,  praising  God  with  the  harmonious  psalm 
of  a  consecrated  life,  offering  themselves  a  living  sacrifice !  Better  this  than  all  the 
bleeding  victims  of  the  older  dispensation ;  all  man's  inteUeot  and  affection  and  energy 
of  action,  all  science  and  art,  all  industry  and  commerce,  all  the  multifarious  activities 
of  all  lives,  offered  to  God  !  And  this  was  his  work,  to  minister  the  gospel  that  the 
offering  might  be  made,  acceptable  because  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  would 
glory  in  such  a  work  as  this,  for  Christ's  sake  1  For  all  was  through  Christ,  and  the 
great  work  already  done  was  only  Christ's  worL 

II.  His  purpose.  Now,  there  was  one  aim  which  governed  him  in  the  fulfilment  of 
this  work — he  would  preach  the  gospel  only  where  it  was  not  known  before.  Thus 
from  place  to  place  be  went,  proclaiming  the  glad  tidings  to  those  who  had  not  heard. 
And  hence  to  this  present,  having  so  much  room  for  such  work  in  those  eastward  parts, 
he  had  been  hindered  from  visiting  Rome.  Now  the  hindrance  was  removed  :  he  had 
"  no  more  any  place  in  these  regions."  And  still  impelled  by  the  constraining  purpose 
to  preach  the  gospel  to  those  "  to  whom  no  tidings  of  him  came,"  he  must  now  turn 
westwards,  even  to  Spain.  And,  in  passing  to  Spain,  there  is  every  reason  why  he 
should  pause  for  mutual  refreshment,  as  he  delicately  puts  it,  amongst  a  people  who 
were,  indirectly  at  least,  the  fruit  of  his  labours — the  Christians  at  Home.  And  coming 
to  them,  he  would  come  in  the  fqlness  of  the  blessing  of  Christ. 

III.  His  ueqdbst.  But,  meanwhile,  there  is  another  mission  to  fulfil — the  mission 
of  charity  to  the  poor  saints  at  Jerusalem.  Prominence  of  this  matter  among  the 
Churches  (see  1  Cor.  xvi. ;  Acts  xx.  4).  Probable  cause  of  necessity,  withholding 
of  custom  from  Christians  on  the  part  of  their  fellow-Jews.  Mere  charity  demanded 
that  help  should  be  given ;  and  not  only  so,  the  Gentiles  were  bound  in  honour  to  pay, 
as  it  were,  in  this  way,  a  debt  they  owed ;  for  their  salvation  was  "  of  the  Jews."  But 
what  further  constrained  Paul  to  be  uigent  in  this  matter  was  his  desire  that  the 
charity  of  the  Gentile  Churches  might  overcome  all  the  prejudices  that  still  subristed 
amongst  the  Jewish  Christians  against  the  full  and  free  admission  of  the  Gentiles  into 
the  Christian  Church.  And  for  this,  and  also  for  his  own  security  amongst  many 
enemies,  he  asks  the  prayers  of  the  Christians  at  Rome.     Then  he  shall  come  to  them 


446  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xv.  1—33. 

in  joy,  and  find  rest.    In  any  case,  b«  he  troubled  or  not,  may  the  God  of  peace  be 
with  them ! 

So  does  he  exemplify,  by  his  yearning  love  and  courtesy  of  love,  the  spirit  which  he 
seeks  to  foster  in  them ;  so  does  he,  as  he  would  have  them  do,  refer  all  his  doings  to 
tiie  Lord  Christ  and  the  will  of  God.  Most  surely  the  God  of  peace  was  with  him  1 — 
T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  3,  4. — Unselfishness.  That  alliance  is  beneficial  which  lends  the  aid  of  the 
strong  to  bear  the  burdens  of  the  weak.  Sympathy  renders  this  possible  by  its  real 
participation  in  another's  distress.  Sometimes  the  infirmities  of  others  are  succoured  by 
yielding  up  our  own  gratification,  or  by  restricting  our  own  liberty  in  order  not  to 
shock  the  scruples  of  the  less  enlightened.  What  is  our  guide  in  such  cases?  The 
reply  is — To  live  in  the  spirit  of  Christ,  to  walk  as  he  walked. 

I.  Christ  has  introduced  into  morals  a  beautiful  model  and  a  powerful 
MOTIVE.  His  pattern  life  is  best  appreciated  by  comparing  it  with  ancient  heathen 
manners.  The  impossibility  of  inventing  such  an  ideal  is  the  proof  of  the  genuineness 
of  the  Gospel  narratives.  The  story  is  vivid  and  consistent  because  a  record  of  fact. 
An  example  instructs  more  than  any  prolixity  of  statement  or  precept.  Lecturers 
know  tills  by  their  illustrations  and  experiments.  It  is  one  thing  to  hear  of  truth, 
goodness,  beauty,  from  the  lips  of  Plato ;  quite  another  to  see  it  live  and  breathe  before 
our  eyes.  Cicero  could  describe  the  "  perfect  man "  according  to  his  conceptions  of 
perfection;  Christ  alone  exemplified  it.  And  the  relationship  of  Christ  to  his  followers, 
as  not  only  Teacher  but  Saviour,  imparts  tenfold  force  to  his  example.  He  has  definite 
claims  upon  our  obedience,  and  dearest  links  of  love  bind  us  to  the  imitation  of  our 
Master.  His  life  on  earth  has  been  a  stream  irrigating  the  parched  desert,  and  has 
taught  us  how  to  make  canals  of  philanthropic  benevolence,  deriving  their  idea  and 
element  from  the  river  of  his  love.  In  fanatical  Jerusalem  and  luxurious  Antioch,  in 
philosophic  Athens  and  pleasure-loving  Corinth,  in  colonial  Philippi  and  imperial  Rome, 
this  river  of  grace  proved  its  power  to  fertihze  and  beautify.  And  to-day  we  trace  a 
likeness  to  Christ  in  the  missionary,  content  to  dwell  in  malarial  swamps,  and  yield 
his  life  for  the  salvation  of  the  degraded ;  in  the  tired  mother  cheerfully  continuing  at 
her  household  toil  whilst  she  uplifts  her  thoughts  to  the  Redeemer ;  and  in  the  Church 
oflicer  leaving  liis  comfortable  fireside  after  his  day's  work  is  done  to  minister  to  a 
brother  in  sickness.  In  the  repression  of  a  hasty  word  and  biting  sarcasm,  in  the  gift 
unostentatiously  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  poor,  we  beliold  reflected  the  self-sacrifice 
ot  Christ. 

II.  The  fkatdbb  op  Christ's  life  on  which  stress  is  here  laid.  He  was 
unselfish ;  he  "  pleased  not  himself."  This  does  not  imply  that  he  felt  no  personal 
pleasure  in  his  mission  of  mercy.  "I  delight  to  do  tliy  will,  0  my  God."  But:  1. 
He  sought  not  to  promote  his  own  ease  and  comfort,  hut  the  edification  of  others.  He 
would  not  pander  to  vitiated  taste ;  he  taught  what  men  most  needed  to  know,  not 
what  gratified  the  vanity  of  his  hearers,  though  he.  thereby  aroused  their  enmity  and 
created  the  storm  which  burst  in  wrath  upon  his  head.  At  great  cost  of  physical 
labour  and  spiritual  weariness  he  performed  works  of  love.  See  him  asleep  from  fatigue 
in  the  heaving  vessel,  and  fainting  under  the  load  of  his  cross.  2.  He  glorified  not 
himself,  hut  the  work  he  came  to  accomplish.  He  might  have  summoned  angels  to  his 
side,  he  might  have  led  an  uprising  of  the  populace,  have  overawed  the  rulers,  and 
selected  the  wisest  and  wealthiest  as  his  companions  and  disciples.  But  the  truth  was 
more  than  all  to  him.  His  meat  and  drink  were  to  do  the  will  of  his  Father.  He 
had  left  for  this  the  splendour  of  the  upper  realms,  and  stooped  tothe  form  of  a  servant, 
and  the  obedience  of  a  shameful,  agonizing  death. 

III.  To  FOLLOW  Christ  is  to  make  the  Old  Testament  a  wellsprinq  of 
PATIENCE  and  HOPE.  The  persecution  wliich  Christ  met  with  showed  him  treading  in 
the  steps  of  Scripture  heroes.  The  language  of  the  psalmist  is  quoted  by  the  apostle 
as  typically  expressing  the  lot  of  Christ.  The  chief  pangs  of  a  devoted  life  are  caused 
by  the  opposition  of  an  ungodly  world.  Our  Lord  exposed  the  hollow  pretensions  of 
the  Jewish  religionists  by  declaring  that  true  love  to  God  in  the  heart  would  listen  to 
the  teachings  of  his  Son,  would  acknowledge  in  him  the  promised  Messiah,  and  would 
recognize  in  his  deedB  the  echo  of  the  Scriptures.    It  fortifies  Christian  sufi'erers  lu 


OH.  XT.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANa  447 

know  that  they  are  in  the  line  of  the  faithful.  No  new  thing  hath  happened,  for  the 
same  afflictions  were  accomplished  in  our  brethren  before.  If,  then,  others  have  bravely 
endured  and  maintained  their  oonfideuce,  so  may  we.  And  the  ancient  writings  testify 
that  men,  in  pleasing  God  and  serving  their  day  and  generation,  realized  true  satisfac- 
tion, an  inward  peace  and  joy  indestructible.  So  we,  too,  may  discover  that  the  road 
to  happiness  is  holy  self-denial.  We  are  slow  to  learn  that  the  bitter  rind  covers 
grateful  fruit,  that  death  is  the  gate  to  life,  and  humility  the  stepping-stone  to  honour. 
Obedience  prepares  us  to  wield  authority ;  and  to  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all 
pleasing  is  to  prove  how  inseparably  the  kingdom  of  God  and  our  own  good  are  com- 
bined. Miserly  selfishness  overreaches  itself ;  the  restricted  heart  dies  of  inanition.  He 
who  will  always  get  from  others  knows  not  the  blessedness  of  giving.  The  wine  of 
Christian  charity  flushes  the  spirit  with  a  generous  emotion,  pure  and  God-like,  the 
nectar  of  the  skies. — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  7. —  Wcmn-hearted  Christian  courtesy.  Many  points  of  dispute  arose  in  Churches 
composed  of  Jews  and  Gentiles.  J!^ot  easily  or  joyfully  could  Jewish  Christians  throw 
off  the  trammels  formed  by  the  habits  and  traditions  of  ages,  and  welcome  the  admis- 
sion into  the  new  brotherhood  on  equal  terms  of  men  who  had  never  been  trained  to 
compunction  on  account  of  ceremonial  regulations  neglected.  Like  the  mother  in  the 
days  of  Solomon,  more  anxious  for  the  safety  of  her  child  than  for  the  strict  settlement 
of  a  legal  problem,  the  apostle  was  concerned  for  the  welfare  and  peace  of  the  commu- 
nity. He  would  have  both  parties  waive  their  rights,  and  unite  in  holy  fellowship 
instead  of  holding  aloof.  A  chief  part  of  our  modern  difficulties  consists  in  the  proper 
treatment  of  others,  especially  of  our  fellow-Christians.  More  anxiety,  embarrassment, 
sin,  is  displayed  here  than  in  any  other  direction.  The  ancient  matters  of  controversy 
do  not  perhaps- trouble  us,  though  signs  are  not  wanting  on  the  horizon  of  clouds  no 
bigger  than  a  man's  hand  which  may  at  any  time  overspread  the  sky  and  disturb  the 
harmony  of  the  Churches.  We  still  need  guidance  lest  trivial  differences  in  thought 
and  behaviour  should  estrange  us  from  one  another.  Let  us  look  at  the  rule  of  beha- 
viour laid  down.  It  is  contained  in  those  golden  words,  the  pivot  of  Christian  conduct, 
"  Even  as  Christ  also."  Our  treatment  of  others  is  to  resemble  Christ's  behaviour 
towards  us.  Here  is  the  path  we  are  to  tread,  and  the  source  of  skill  and  strength  to 
enable  us  to  proceed  therein, 

I.  Christ  receives  men  gladly.  Not  reluctantly,  hut  heartily,  with  outstretched 
arms  and  promise  of  blessing.  See  this  evinced  in  the  Gospel  narratives.  He  was 
moved  with  compassion  toward  the  multitudes;  gave  royal  Invitations — "If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me,  and  drink ; "  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour."  This 
can  be  verified  in  our  own  experience ;  for  Christ  lives  and  rules  over  our  hearts  and 
lives,  dispenses  his  favours  freely;  and  the  peace  and  joy  that  filled  our  hearts  in  trust- 
ing him  were  the  testimony  of  his  delight,  the  fire  descending  from  heaven  to  certify 
the  acceptance  of  our  sacrifice.  Contrast  Christ's  interest  in  Saul's  conversion  with  the 
letter's  cool  reception  by  the  Church  at  Jerusalem,  where  the  apostle  had  been  aban- 
doned to  utter  neglect  but  for  Barnabas.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  no  close  corporation, 
like  a  city  company,  afraid  of  its  membership  growing  too  large  for  the  spoils  to  be 
divided ;  or  a  House  of  Lords,  where  a  large  influx  lessens  individual  importance.  But 
our  desire  must  be  for  the  Church  to  increase  till  it  sways  the  globe.  Our  Christian 
societies  should  be  as  a  fostering  greenhouse  to  young  life,  or  as  a  warm  bath  that  dissi- 
pates spiritual  rheumatism,  where  the  outside  chill  may  be  forgotten,  and  men  may  flee 
from  a  hostile  crowd  to  a  sanctuary  of  peace  and  love. 

II.  Christ  receives  men  in  spite  of  their  imperfections  Though  sin-staitjed 
and  despairing  of  righteousness,  helpless  with  frequent  falls,  ignorant  with  a  dulness 
which  is  realized  more  each  day,  yet  our  worthlessness  was  not  spurned  by  the  Saviour. 
For  this  reason  he  drew  us  to  himself,  to  heal  and  save  us,  to  instruct  and  improve  us, 
to  develop  into  maturity  any  latent  germ  pf  good.  He  sees  what  men  may  become 
under  genial  influences — the  image  of  God  renewed ;  the  dry  stick  swelling  into  life  and 
blossom ;  the  plot  of  barren  ground  a  garden.  If  we  wait  till  our  brethren  are  faultless, 
we  shall  have  little  communion  this  side  of  heaven.  If  they  are  not  as  cultured  or  as 
large-hearted,  all  the  more  do  they  need  our  stimulating  converse ;  and  jf  not  doctrinally 
perfect,  thoy  will  learn, 


448  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  E0MAN8.    [ch.  xv.  1— 33. 

IlL  Christ  receives  men  impartiallt,  making  no  invidious  distinctions.  Tliis 
was  Peter's  argument  for  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles  (Acts  xi.  17;  xv.  9),  One 
presented  at  court  may  demand  the  countenance  of  any  ambassador;  for  whom  the 
sovereign  hath  received,  all  her  servants  must  honour.  Whom  Christ  hath  admitted 
to  his  grace  we  are  bound  to  acknowledge.  TTie  Saviour  on  earth  demanded  sineeriti/ 
in  would-be  followers.  This  is  the  explanation  of  any  apparent  sternness.  He  would 
have  none  enter  on  a  Christian  career  without  counting  the  cost,  and  showing  a  whole- 
hearted readiness  to  obey.  Feeble  faith,  if  genuine,  he  never  refused  to  bless.  Hypo- 
crisy, delusion,  he  pitilessly  unmasked;  but  trembling  seekers  he  smiled  upon  with 
Divine  encouragement.  Why  distrust  his  magnanimity  now  ?  Why  fear  a  scornful 
rejection  of  your  prajers  and  service  ? 

IV.  Christ  regards  in  all  things  the  qlort  of  God.  Note  his  constant  reference 
to  the  Father's  will.  He  preached  that  misunderstandings  respecting  God  might  be 
cleared  away.  He  relieved  and  cheered  the  suffering  that  they  might  know  and  praise 
the  mercy  of  God.  He  gave  his  life  that  the  dark  shadow  of  human  guilt  might  no 
longer  eclipse  the  glory  of  the  Divine  government.  The  end  cometh,  when  Christ  shall 
deliver  up  the  kingdom  to  the  Father,  having  subjected  all  things  to  God.  And 
through  him  the  same  principle  actuates  his  disciples.  It  is  men  who  have  some  noble 
end  in  view  that  can  rise  above  petty  meannesses  and  jealousies,  caring  no  longer  for 
personal  rank  and  power,  content  to  be  abased  if  thereby  the  kingdom  of  God  may  be 
advanced.  The  zeal  of  God's  house  consumes  the  fleshly,  ease-loving,  envious  "  me," 
and  substitutes  a  bright  blaze  of  pure,  affectionate  solicitude  for  God  and  man.  There 
are  doubtless  seasons  when  individual  dignity  must  be  asserted;  there  is  no  season  when 
it  is  not  in  place  to  consider  the  glory  of  God.  That  glory  includes  our  own  highest 
good.  It  is  no  car  of  Juggernaut  trampling  on  the  devotees ;  any  contradiction  is  on 
the  surface  merely,  and  in  the  future  life  a  lasting  reconciliation  shall  be  seen  established 
between  man's  satisfaction  and  the  authority  of  his  Maker. — S.  R.  A. 

Ver.  13. — Hopefulness  prayed  for.  The  "sense  of  a  passage  is  clearer  if  the  connection 
with  the  context  be  ascertained.  The  Eevised  Version,  by  translating  the  same  root- 
word  in  the  same  manner,  enables  the  reader  to  take  up  the  thread  of  thought  from  the 
twelfth  verse.  Guests  introduced  to  the  same  host  are  placed  on  terms  of  fellowship 
with  each  other.  So  Jew  and  Gentile  had  been  received  by  Jesus  Christ,  in  whom  the 
veracity  of  God  towards  the  Jews  had  been  confirmed,  and  his  mercy  displayed  towards 
the  Gentiles.  Thus  both  could  unite  in  praising  God,  as  had  been  predicted  by  the 
Law,  the  Psalms,  and  the  prophets.  "  In  him  shall  the  Gentiles  hope."  And  this  leads 
the  apostle  to  utter  the  supplication  of  the  text. 

I.  The  title  given  to  God.  "  The  God  of  hope."  The  names  of  God  in  the  Scrip- 
tures emphasize  his  personality  and  close  relationship  with  his  creatures  more  than 
any  designations  in  philosophy  or  mythology.  He  has  established  a  plan  of  salvation 
which  is  the  substantial  warrant  for  hope,  and,  besides  this  objective  provision,  does 
himself  inspire  hope  subjectively  in  his  people.  The  bestowment  of  every  grace  is 
attributed  to  him.  Naturally  does  the  apostle,  in  his  anxiety  for  the  hopefulness  of 
Christians,  invoke  a  blessing  from  the  God  of  hope.  Our  prayers  are  fashioned  according 
to  our  conception  of  the  Hearer  of  prayer.  Hope  concerns  two  things — what  we  desire, 
and  what  we  anticipate.  When  either  of  those  characteristics  is  absent,  hope  fails.  And 
we  are  not  to  imagine  that  hope  belongs  only  to  us  limited  beings ;  for  though  to  the 
omniscient  eye  the  future  is  visible,  God,  like  ourselves,  cherishes  confident  expecta- 
tions. He,  too,  welcomes  the  era  when  his  fair  dominions  shall  not  be  defiled  with  sin. 
He  is  as  much  delighted  with  the  prospect  of  triumphant  grace  as  any  of  us  can  be.  If 
we  wonder  why  the  period  is  not  hastened,  the  solution  is  to  be  found  in  the  nature  of 
man.  Forcibly  to  overcome  man's  power  of  resistance  would  be  to  destroy  the  plant  in 
the  moment  of  its  flowering,  or  to  crush  the  drowning  in  the  very  act  of  rescue.  The 
trophies  of  redemption  are  to  be  monuments  of  moral  suasion.  The  kingdom  spreads 
not  by  sword  and  garments  rolled  in  blood,  but  by  the  kindling  of  the  fuel  of  love  in 
the  heart  of  man.  What  an  idea  of  the  patience  of  the  Almighty  is  presentrd  in  thr 
myriad  ages  through  which  this  earth  has  been  slowly  prepared  for  the  residence  ol 
man  1  We  are  like  children,  who  cannot  wait  cheerfully  for  the  coming  feast;  we  lose 
heart  if  the  chariot  delays. 


OH.  XV.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLK  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  449 

II.  The  pratee.  "  Fill  yoii  with  all  Joy  and  peace  in  believing.''  We  may  lawfiflly 
seek,  not  only  to  obey  the  precept.s,  but  to  ery'oy  the  comforts  of  the  gospel.  True,  tho 
gospel  ideal  is  blessedness  rather  than  happiness;  yet  its  intent  is  to  bring  present 
serenity  and  gladness,  not  to  leave  us  all  our  life  trembliug  in  doubt.  It  is  a  remedy 
for  present  ills,  a  foretaste  of  coming  bliss.  Peace  and  joy  are  virtues;  there  is  ao 
merit  attached  to  disquiet  and  mournfulness.  Faith  is  the  (/round  of  peace  and  Joy,  or 
the  iiustrument  through  which  God  communicates  these  blessings.  "In  believing  "is 
put  for  the  whole  of  Christian  conduct.  Expect  peace  and  joy  whilst  you  hold  fast  to 
the  message  which  imparled  glad  tranquillity  at  the  first,  whilst  you  remember  the 
obligations  and  partake  of  the  privileges  of  the  gospel.  Without  faith,  joy  and  peace 
can  no  isnore  enter  the  soul  than  hunger  and  thirst  can  be  relieved  without  eating  and 
drinking.  Faith  grows  by  exercise,  mounts  aloft  on  experience  like  the  vine  on  the 
trellis.  It  is  not  honourable  to  be  for  ever  questioning  the  credibility  of  Christ.  Faith 
knocks  at  the  door  and  gains  admittance  into  the  mansion  of  light  and  song ;  unbelief 
examines  the  door,  and  questions  the  resources  of  the  palace.  When  our  right  to  ow 
inheritance  is  challenged,  we  may  examine  again  the  title-deeds;  but  it  is  not  in  the 
law  courts  that  we  learn  to  prize  our  possessions.  The  prayer  of  the  text  teaches  not  to 
rest  content  with  meagre  supplies.  How  exuberant  the  apostle's  language  I  "  Fill  you 
with  all  peace,"  etc.  There  is  joy  of  every  kind  arising  from  service  and  communion — 
joy  intellectual  and  emotional ;  joy  in  our  own  advance  and  in  the  widening  bounds  of 
the  kingdom  of  Christ.  We  are  too  apt  to  sink  to  a  certain  level  of  monotony.  Our 
course  is  circular,  too  seldom  spiral  reaching  upwards. 

III.  The  end  in  view.  "  That  ye  may  abound  in  hope."  Here  again  see  the 
spiritual  vehemence  of  the  apostle.  He  knew  that  every  Gentile  believer  cherished 
hope ;  but  he  would  have  this  hope  to  abound  in  every  season,  under  every  circum- 
stance. Borne  Christians,  like  birds  in  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  are  sure  that  the  shades 
betoken  night.  Now,  the  Christian  who  is  rich  in  peace  and  joy  cannot  help  reasoning 
from  the  present  to  the  future;  his  ecstasy  tints  every  cloud  with  roseate  hueii.  He  is 
youthful  in  spirit,  lives  in  a 

"...  boyhood  of  wonder  and  hope, 
Present  promise  and  wealth  of  the  future  beyond  the  eye's  scope." 

Hope  is  imprinted  on  his  countenance,  radiates  from  every  action.  Advancing  age 
brings  him  nearer  the  westering  sun;  there  is  a  rich  ripeness  of  harvest  glory.  Two 
old  men,  alike  in  everything  else  but  in  the  possession  of  this  buoyant  expectancy,  are 
really  wide  as  the  poles  asunder.  The  one  laments  that  he  has  seen  the  best  of  his 
days;  the  other  has  something  better  than  the  best  to  prepare  for.  Christian  hope  is 
set  on  an  excellent  object,  rests  on  a  stable  foundation,  works  a  purifying,  elevating 
gladness.  The  hope  desired  for  ths  Romans  was  a  collective  hope,  to  be  fostered  as  a 
common  solaqe  and  strength.  Only  by  dwelling  in  harmony  could  it  produce  its  proper 
fruits.  -  There  should  be  no  panic  amongst  the  followers  of  Christ — hence  the  impor- 
tance of  the  prayer. 

IV.  The  condition  expressed.  "Through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  The 
human  condition  was  "  believing ; "  the  Divine  is  the  energy  of  the  Spirit.  And  since 
he  dwells  in  believers,  his  aid  may  surely  be  reckoned  on.  This  hope,  therefore,  is 
neither  painted  in  water  nor  written  in  dust.  It  is  not  made  so  much  dependent  on 
our  reasonings  or  struggles  as  on  that  life  from  God  which  is  the  answer  to  all  man's 
pleas  and  excuses.  He  says,  "  I  am  weak,  I  cannot,"  God  says,  "  I  will  pour  my 
Spirit  upon  you."  How  vast  the  difference  between  the  dull,  timid  disciples  and  the 
same  when  "  filled  with  the  Spirit " — enthusiastic,  vigorous,  ready  to  preach  and  to 
take  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  their  persons  and  property  1  Let  our  cry  be,  "  Come,  Holy 
Spirit,  come ! "  Breathe  about  our  wintry  chills,  scatter  our  darkness,  raise  our  plane 
of  thought  and  feeling  I — ^S,  R.  A. 

Vi-r.  27. — Debts  pleasurally  paid.  The  ties  formed  by  the  reception  of  the  gospel 
exhibited  the  expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection  to  cast  out  national  jealousies  and 
antipathies.  Macedonians  and  Aohaians  united  in  solicitude  for  their  destitute  fellow- 
believers  in  Jerusalem  and  in  an  active  endeavour  to  send  them  relief.  Stronger  than 
the  bonds  of  kinship  and  race  were  the  new  feelings  of  attraction  to  each  other  through 
their  relationship  to  the  one  Saviour. 

BOMANS.  2  a 


450  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.      [ch.  xv.  1— 33. 

L  Evert  benefit  received  lays  us  under  an  obligation  to  our  benefactors. 
As  stewards  of  the  gospel  the  saints  in  Judsea  liad  betrayed  their  trust  if  guilty  silence 
restrained  their  lips  from  communicating  to  the  world  the  panacea  revealed  for  human 
ill.  But  this  fact  did  not  set  the  Greeks  free  from  indebtedness  to  the  Churches  which, 
recognizing  their  responsibility,  had  sent  to  them  the  message  of  life.  Whatever  the 
reason  that  has  procured  us  some  kindness  or  favour,  gratitude  is  incumbent  upon  us. 
Not  to  acknowledge  it  betrays  baseness  of  soul.  And  the  greatest  benefits  are  those 
pertaining  to  our  spiritual  well-being.  These  are  nobler,  more  satisfying,  more  lasting 
than  any  treasures  of  gold  or  marble,  any  appeasing  of  temporal  hunger  or  nakedness, 
or  any  rescue  from  earthly  distress  or  danger.  The  knowledge,  the  consolation,  the 
stimulus  which  a  missionary,  a  teacher,  or  a  pastor  imparts  are  of  incomparable  value. 
Is  it  a  matter  for  wonder  that,  in  return  for  spiritual  gifts,  men  bestow  of  their  carnal 
things  ?  Those  who  clamour  for  a  cheap  ministry  display  woeful  inappreciation  of  the 
riches  of  Christ.  The  return  which  our  Lord  demands  for  his  own  self-sacrifice  is  that 
his  servants  and  brethren  be  honourably  treated  and  succoured.  He  still  regards  his 
poor ;  hence  our  collections  at  tlie  Lord's  Supper. 

II.  To  THE  RIGHT-MINDED  THE  DISCHARGE   OP  SUCH  AN  OBLIGATION  18  A  80UB0B  OF 

plbasure.  Not  in  order  to  get  rid  of  any  sense  of  liability ;  this  would  be  mean,  even 
if  possible ;  but  we  are  glad  of  an  opportunity  of  visibly  certifying  our  gratitude.  Tho 
outward  expression  of  any  inward  feeling  is  a  delight.  A  generous  emotion  ministers 
a  pure  joy,  which  ever  seeks  for  ways  and  means  of  demonstration.  The  memory  of 
Christ's  gift  of  himself  to  us  bestirs  us  to  seek  out  worthy  objects,  needy  souls  on 
whom  the  mantle  of  charity  may  fittingly  fall.  "He  became  poor  for  our  sakes."  The 
disinclination  to  give  liberally  melts  away  under  the  impulse  of  Divine  love.  Men  who 
grudge  the  demands  of  the  tax-collector  will  voluntarily,  cheerfully  contribute  to  the 
(lissemiuation  of  Christian  truth. 

"  The  poorest  poor 
Long  for  some  moments  in  a  weary  life 
When  they  can  know  and  feel  that  they  have  been 
Themselves,  the  fatliers  and  the  dealers  out 
Of  some  small  blessings ;  have  been  kind  to  such 
As  needed  kindness ;  for  this  single  cause. 
That  we  have  all  of  us  one  human  heart." 

That  is  the  office  of  religion  to  make  the  stern  face  of  duty  break  forth  into  a  smile. 
The  task  blossoms  into  a  joy ;  one  kind  act  prompts  to  further  and  larger  benevolence. 

III.  The  nature  and  extent  op  thb  requital  must  be  measured  by  oub 
RESOURCES  AND  THE  WANTS  OF  OTHERS.  God  provides  for  his  family  by  the  mutual 
interdependence  and  assistance  of  the  members  thereof.  Whilst  unlimited  competition 
and  the  survival  of  the  strongest  tend  to  make  life  a  battle  of  hell,  unrestricted  help- 
fulness blesses  every  heart  and  land.  The  Christian  law  of  supply  and  demand  is 
designed  to  correct  the  injuries  and  supplement  the  deficiencies  of  close-fisted  political 
economy.  Power  is,  rightly  understood,  a  capacity  to  help,  not  a  weapon  of  destruction 
to  the  weak.  The  men  of  leisure  can  visit  the  sick  and  suffering ;  the  rich  have  ability 
to  relieve  the  needy;  and  the  cultured  may  bestow  on  others  the  results  of  their  mental 
diligence.  "  Such  as  I  have  give  I  you."  "  It  is  accepted  according  to  that  a  man 
hath."  As  the  world  is  one  great  market  supplied  by  every  land,  so  the  special  dis- 
tress of  one  country  appeals  to  all  fcr  relief.  "  We  do  not  well,  if  this  be  a  day  of  good 
tidings,  and  we  hold  our  peace." — S.  B.  A. 

Ver.  29. — A  promised  visit.  A  great  writer  in  her  preface  to  a  story  of  Florence 
pictures  an  inhabitant  revisiting  his  city  after  four  centuries.  He  notes  many  changes. 
The  towers  and  walls  are  gone ;  different  questions  are  mooted  in  trade,  scholarship,  and 
politics;  garments  of  altered  texture  and  form  are  worn.  But  as  the  sunlight  and 
shadows  are  the  same,  so  the  dawn  still  breaks  upon  rosy  sleeping  children  and  hard- 
handed  labourers  aiising  to  their  toil ;  the  .same  chants  are  sung  in  the  churches,  and 
the  faces  of  worshippers  still  turn  to  the  same  image  of  Divine  anguish  for  a  beneficent 
end.  Like  the  river-courses  which  shape  the  lives  of  men,  so  those  other  currents 
which  ebb  and  flow  in  human  hearts  have  scarcely  altered,  pulsating  to  the  same 
needs,  the  same  great  loves  and  terrors.     The  broad  features  of  the  moral  landscape 


CH.  XV.  1—33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  i51 

alter  not.  It  is  this  essential  sameness  of  tbe  human  lot  which  lends  to  the  Bibla 
perennial  interest.  We  have  the  same  battle  to  fight,  the  same  need  of  divinely 
iustructed  wisdom  and  divinely  furbished  weapons.  We  are  taking  the  same  journey 
as  ancient  heroes,  and  share  their  perplexities  and  convictions. 

I.  An  intense  LONGiNa.  The  apostle  frequently  alluded  to  his  desire  to  visit  Roma 
and  see  the  brethren  there.  Aquila  and  Priscilla  must  often  have  conversed  with  him 
respecting  the  famous  city,  and  the  vast  influx  of  strangers  to  be  witnessed  there 
continually.  The  apostle  had  high  hopes  kindled  in  his  breast,  thoughts  of  the 
metropolis  as  the  "  pulpit "  of  the  world.  The  words  of  a  speaker  amid  the  seven  hills 
would,  like  the  faith  of  the  disciples  there,  be  trumpeted  to  every  part  of  the  globe. 
After  some  yeais  the  apostle  resolved  to  carry  his  desire  into  effect  (see  Acts  six.). 
This  Epistle  offers  explanations  of  the  circumstances  which  had  hitherto  prevented  tlie 
realization  of  the  wish.  Here  is  a  lesaon  of  patient  submission  to  the  guidance  of  Ood. 
Whilst  doors  of  entrance  and  utterance  were  opening  in  the  East,  and  the  Gentilta 
were  becoming  obedient  by  word  and  deed,  the  Holy  Spirit  plainly  signified  that  fields 
BO  ripe  for  the  sickle  must  not  be  deserted.  Let  those  impatient  for  another  sphere  of 
labour  beware  lest  through  some  burning  impulse  they  neglect  the  crops  ready  to  the 
reaper's  hands.  The  wider  scope  may  be  presented  hereafter.  We  learn,  too,  the 
apostle's  missionary  methud.  He  liked  not  to  build  on  another's  foundation.  He 
chose  of  two  regions  the  one  most  like  fallow  ground.  He  loved  to  evangelize  rather 
than  proselytize,  and  whilst  unoccupied  territory  was  near  it  did  not  seem  right  to 
visit  a  Church  where  Christ  had  been  already  proclaimed.  It  is  matter  for  thankfulness 
that  denominations  and  missionary  societies  are  beginning  to  recognize  the  evil  and  sin 
of  overlapping  agencies  and  districts.  Note  the  apostle's  justification  of  his  desire  to 
see  Rome.  He  inteniled  to  make  it  not  his  terminus,  but  a  temporary  resting-place, 
and  a  starting-point  for  further  excursions.  His  eager  vision  beheld  Churches  rising 
in  the  furthest  western  limits  of  Europe,  his  ear  caught  the  sounds  of  prayer  and  praise 
soon  to  ascend  from  countries  debased  by  superstition  and  vice.  The  victories  won 
over  Satan  in  Asia  Minor  and  Greece  he  hoped  to  repeat  in  Italy  and  Spain.  He 
perhaps  projected  tours  through  France,  for  to  this  Christian  warrior,  as  to  Alexander 
of  Macedon,  there  could  be  no  rest  as  long  as  there  were  kingdoms,  if  not  conquered, 
at  least  unassailed.     Oh  for  more  of  this  crusading  spirit,  this  holy  ambition  I 

II.  An  uncertainty  as  to  the  time  of  the  expected  visit.  "  When  I  come." 
There  seemed  no  reason  why  Paul  should  not  proceed  to  Rome  immediately  after  the 
Pentecostal  feast  at  Jerusalem.  But  he  saw  a  cloud  arising  which  contained  the 
materials  for  a  storm,  though  in  what  way  it  would  burst,  or  whether  it  might  not  pass 
over,  he  could  not  foresee.  He  knew  the  vindictive  watchfulness  of  "them  that  did 
not  believe  in  Judsea,"  enemies  who  never  forgave  his  desertion  of  their  cause.  The 
■tory  in  the  Acts  tells  how  his  suspicions  were  confirmed  by  the  predictions  of  Agabus, 
and  how  the  apostle's  yielding  to  the  excessive  caution  of  the  saints  furnished  an 
occasion  for  the  fury  of  the  fanatical  Jews.  Imprisonment  and  shipwreck  lay  on  the 
apostle's  course,  and  when  ultimately  his  wish  to  visit  the  metropolis  was  gratified,  he 
entered  as  a  prisoner  with  a  prospect  of  a  wearisome  captivity.  How  strangely  the 
hoped-for  differed  from  the  actual !  Nor  is  it  by  any  means  rare  to  find  the  fruition 
of  our  hopes  attended  with  far  other  than  the  bright-hued  environment  imagination 
forecasted.  Plans  are  executed,  the  projected  castles  built,  the  rank  secured,  the  home 
obtained,  yet  the  accompaniments  vary  in  toto  from  those  anticipated.  Sometimes  we 
have  asked  selfishly,  and  the  cup  petitioned  has  held  a  bitter  potion  indeed.  Yet  the 
Christian  may  say  confidently,  "  The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done."  There  are  times 
Trhen  oilr  Master  leads  his  servants  purposely  through  flood  and  flame.  Then  be  it 
ours  like  Paul  to  accept  the  post  of  honour  and  bravely  do  our  best. 

III.  A  FULL  ASSURANCE  that  his  arrival  would  be  fraught  with  good.  "I  know 
that  I  shall  come  in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  Christ."  1.  He  would  enter  the  city 
as  a  messenger  of  Christ.  Not  for  purposes  of  pleasure  and  sight-seeing,  but  as  the 
bearer  of  sacred  tidings  would  he  in  any  case  approach  Rome.  Along  the  Appian  Way 
had  many  a  renowned  general  returned  laden  with  the  spoils  of  conflict,  many  an  orator 
and  philosopher  had  passed  through  the  gates,  but  none  more  honoured  by  posterity 
than  this  servant  of  Christ.  When  seeking  our  own  ends  we  may  ever  doubt  of  a 
celestial  convoy,  but  when  seeking  the  things  of  Christ,  the  ambassador  of  Christ  sliall 


452  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xv.  1—33. 

be  treated  as  Buch.  2.  JEk  could  not  conceive  of  the  absence  of  that  spiritual  power 
which  had  thus  far  attended  him.  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,"  was  the  piomise. 
Like  Joseph  in  Potiphar's  house,  and  the  ark  in  the  house  of  Obed-Bdom,  a  true  man 
of  God  brings  a  blessing  where'er  he  sojourns.  Who  should  separate  the  apostle  from 
the  love  and  equipment  of  his  Lord  ?  To  rely  on  this  is  not  presumption,  but  God- 
honouring  confidence.  3.  No  scanty  measure  of  spiritual  gifts  ever  satisfied  or  was 
expected  by  this  devoted  labourer.  He  made  little  mention  of  tongues  and  healing,  of 
priestly  functions  and  intellectual  displays;  he  looked  to  the  blessing  which  maketh 
endlessly,  joyously  rich ;  that  knowledge,  proclamation,  and  practice  of  the  gospel  which 
bears  fruit  unto  eternal  life.  Next  to  the  presence  of  the  Lord  himself  the  advent  of  a 
faithful  minister  profits  our  gatherings.  With  what  delight,  like  members  of  a  family 
long  separated,  would  these  primitive  Christians  confer  on  the  holy  theme  of  the  new 
faith !  Let  our  anxiety  be  not  to  fritter  away  time  in  idle  gossip,  but  to  make  each 
other  wiser  and  better  for  the  meeting.  If  we  more  often  expected  seasons  when,  like 
the  river  Jordan  in  harvest-time,  our  hearts  should  be  filled  to  overflowing,  the 
testimony  would  more  frequently  rejoice  us :  "  It  was  good  to  be  there."  Prepare  the 
vessels  for  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  which  alone  can  banish  poverty  and  weakness  of 
the  spirit.  This  conviction  did  not  preclude  the  apostle  from  requesting  the  prayers 
of  the  Church  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  beloved  project.  To  our  short-sighted  reason 
it  is  unnecessary  to  pray  to  the  Father  who  orders  all  things  aright.  But  our  conclusion 
is  based  on  too  narrow  premisses ;  there  are  other  ends  subserved  by  prayer.  It  has 
respect  to  the  plans  of  the  Almighty  and  the  character  of  his  creatures.  Prayer  is  one 
of  the  laws  of  the  kingdom,  and  "  effectual  fervent  prayer  availeth  much." — S.  E.  A. 

Vers.  1 — 13. —  The  Ohrist-like  duty  of  pleasing  our  neighbour.  Having  just  counselled 
the  strong  to  defer  as  far  as  possible  to  the  consciences  of  the  weak,  the  apostla 
continues  the  subject  in  the  thirteen  verses  now  before  us.  He  urges  as  the  principle 
of  the  Christian  life, 'not  self-pleasing,  but  neighbour-pleasing.  He  limits  this,  of  course, 
by  the  condition  of  edification.  In  short,  a  Christian  is  to  be  a  public  character, 
regulating  his  life  by  the  spiritual  interests  of  all  around  him.  In  this  respect  he  will 
be  following  Christ. 

I.  The  pleasing  op  others,  not  the  pleasing  of  ourselves,  is  to  be  the  buls 
OF  our  Christian  living.  Now,  this  does  not  mean :  1.  Popularity-hunting.  For 
this  is  securing  a  selfish  end  by  means  of  gratifying  our  neighbours.  It  is  self-pleasing 
in  a  subtle  and  deceptive  shape.  It  is  self-pleasing,  even  though  it  may  involve  the 
degradation  of  our  neighbour.  Aud  it  does  mean :  2.  The  conciliation  and  even 
humouring  of  our  neighbour  with  a  view  to  his  edification.  This  is  real  love,  going  all 
lengths  to  serve  and  edify  a  neighbour.  We  will  bear  with  him,  even  humour  him, 
with  the  thoroughly  unselfish  end  of  securing  his  edification.  It  is  the  very  essence 
of  public  service.  What  a  contrast  it  presents  to  the  self-seeking  which,  alas  1  goes  on 
among  men  under  the  name  of  public  services  1 

II.  In  this  lifting  up  of  oub  fellows  we  shall  be  strengthened  by  looking 
UP  to  Christ.  For  the  whole  spirit  of  our  Master's  ministry  consisted  in  pleasing 
others  and  not  himself.  Not,  indeed,  that  men  understood  his  plan.  The  gospel  does 
not  appear  at  first  to  promote  men's  pleasure.  It  humiliates,  it  breaks  them  down, 
it  calls  for  penitential  tenderness ;  but  it  secures  peace  through  pardon,  and  the  joy 
which  comes  through  believing.  Our  Lord's  sufferings  were  consequently  in  the  long 
run  with  a  view  to  the  real  and  abiding  pleasure  of  men.  And  so  he  was  constantly 
lifting  them  up,  sc  far  as  they  would  allow  him.  His  very  crucifixion  was  to  please 
others,  and  secure  their  edification.  A  broad  view  of  Christ's  history,  therefore,  shows 
it  to  have  been  a  pleasing  of  others,  not  of  himself.  He  became  a  servant  of  the 
circumcision  that  the  Jews  might  be  brought  to  peace  and  joy ;  he  became  the  Saviour 
and  so  the  Joy  of  the  Gentiles.  In  both  respects  he  was  pleasing  and  edifying  others, 
not  pleasing  himself.  His  self-sacrificing  life  becomes  thug  the  fountain-head  for 
public  service. 

III.  The  gospel  thus  distinguishes  itself  from  utilitarian  teaching.  For 
instead  of  directing  us  to  regulate  our  conduct  by  self-pleasinj;,  which  is  at  bottom  the 
utilitarian  principle,  it  directs  us  to  please  our  neighbour  unto  edification,  and  in  the 
spirit  of  Christ.     A  or  is  our  pleasing  of  om'  neighbour  to  secure  personal  comfort ;  this 


OH.XV.  1— 33.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANa  453 

may  ultimately  be  given  into  the  baigain,  but  it  will  assuredly  be  missed  if  made  our 
•nd,  "A  great  German  poet  and  philosopher,"  says  Dr.  Marfcineau,  "was  fond  ol 
defining  religion  as  consisting  in  a  reverence  for  wferior  beings.  The  definition  is 
paradoxical;  but  though  it  does  not  express  the  essence  bi  religinn,  it  assuredly 
designates  one  of  its  effects.  True,  there  could  be  no  reverence  for  lower  natures,  were 
there  not,  to  begin  with^  the  recognition  of  a  Supreme  Miad ;  but  the  moment  that 
recognition  exists,  we  certainly  look  on  all  that  is  beneath  with  a  different  eye.  It 
becomes  an  object,  not  of  pity  and  protection  only,  but  of  sacred  respect ;  and  our 
sympathy,  which  had  been  that  of  a  humane  fellow-creature,  is  converted  into  tlie 
deferential  help  of  a  devout  worker  of  God's  will.  And  so  the  loving  service  of  the 
weak  and  wanting  is  an  essential  part  of  the  discipline  of  the  Christian  life.  Some 
habitual  association  with  the  poor,  the  dependent,  the  sorrowful,  is  an  indispensable 
source  of  the  highest  elements  of  character."  • 

IV.   A   BUOYANT,  HOPEFUL  SPIBIT  SHOULD  BE   CUBS  IN   ALL  OUR   PUBLIC  WORK.      Por 

it  is  "  the  God  of  hope  "  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  And  humanity  is  being  lifted  up 
by  the  Christian  spirit  of  service.  And  great  things  are  in  store  for  the  earth.  Peace, 
joy,  hope,  should  in  consequence  characterize  every  one  who  names  the  name  of  Jesus 
and  professes  to  follow  him  in  service.     God  grant  it  to  us  all ! — B.  M.  E. 

Vers.  14 — 33. — T/ie  apostle's  programme.  The  didactic  and  hortatory  portions  of 
the  Epistle  are  now  over,  and  a  few  personal  explanations  and  salutations  are  all  that 
remain.     They  need  not  detain  us  long.     And  here  we  have — 

I.  Paul's  reasons  foe  writing  to  the  Eomans.  (Vers.  14 — 21.)  It  is  not  because 
the  Church  at  Kume  is  deficient  in  either  khowhdge  or  preaching  power.  The  list  in 
last  chapter  shows  how  many  able  men  and  women  composed  the  Church.  But  the 
reason  is :  1.  Because  Paul  is  apostle  to  the  Qentiles.  The  Church  at  Borne  should 
enjoy  his  care  as  well  as  the  other  Gentiles.  The  only  difference  is  that  in  this  case 
he  has  not  been  the  pioneer,  as  he  had  been  in  so  many  other  Gentile  Churches.  And 
regarding  this  apostleship  he  is  careful  to  speak  of:  (1)  Its  sacred  character.  He  has 
not  only  been  a  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  (\inovpy})s),  but  has  also  been  "  doing  holy 
service  "  Q^povpyovvroi)  in  the  matter  of  the  gospel  of  God,  that  the  Gentiles  might  ba 
got  ready  as  an  offering.  It  is  a  pre-eminently  holy  office  which  the  apostle  has  been 
exercising,  (2)  The  means  employed  have  teen  the  gospel  of  Ood.  Paul  carried  "  good 
tidings  "  from  God  to  the  Gentiles,  and  this  splendid  Epistle  shows  how  full  a  message 
he  brought.  Then :  (3)  Its  end  was  that  the  Gentiles  should  become  an  acceptable  offering. 
Consecration  is  the  great  purpose  of  salvation,  to  make  them  obedient  in  word  and  deed 
ami  dedicated  in  heart  and  life  to  Gud's  glory.  (4)  He  has  had  a  wide  success  in  his 
tnttrprise.  Signs  and  wonders  have  been  wrought  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
round  a  large  district  of  the  heathen  world.  2.  But  having  been  prevented  hitherto 
from  coming  to  Rome,  he  indites  this  Epistle  to  them.  It  is  as  a  token  from  the 
unavoidably  absent  apostle  that  he  writes  the  Epistle. 

II.  He  sketches  his  programme  for  them.  (Vers.  22 — 28.)  And  first  he  has 
to  go  up  from  Corinth  with  money  for  the  poor  saints  of  the  mother  Church  at 
Jerusalem.  From  that  Church  the  gospel  has  come  to  the  Gentiles,  and  it  is  only 
reasonable  that  there  should  be  now  a  return  in  the  time  of  their  need.  A  return  in 
carnal  things  is  to  be  expected  after  the  reception  of  spiritual  things.  He  hopes  when 
he  has  got  through  this  service  at  Jerusalem  to  come  by  Home  to  Spain.  He  hoped 
to  make  his  advent  to  Rome  as  a  free  man — he  did  not  then  think  it  would  be  as  a 
prisoner. 

III.  He  is  certain  he  will  come  as  a  blessing  to  them.  (Ver.  29.)  He  is 
inspiied  with  moral  certainty  that  his  advent  will  not  be  in  vain.  It  is  such  an 
assurance  of  blessing  through  us  that  should  animate  every  worker  for  the  Master. 
Kome  was  to  feel  the  effects  of  Paul's  visit  for  years.     And  so  it  did. 

IV.  Paul's  REQUEST  FOR  intercession.  (Vers.  30 — 32.)  His  assurance  of  blessing, 
instead  of  minimizing,  only  intensified  his  prayer,  and  led  him  to  ask  others  to 
intercede  for  him.  And  here  we  notice:  1,  The  ground  of  the  request.  It  is  "for 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  and  for  the  love  of  the  Spirit."  By  all  that  Christ  bai 
been  for  them  and  the  Spirit  has  been  with  them  and  in  them,  he  asks  them  to  iuter- 

'  '  Endeavours  after  the  Christian  Lif%'  4th  edit.,  p.  434. 


464 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.    [CH.  xvi.  1—27. 


cede.  2.  Tke  substance  of  the  request.  For  deliverance  from  unbelievers  in  Judsea, 
for  acceptance  among  the  poor  saints,  and  for  a  joyful  and  refreshing  advent  to  Eome. 
Of  these  the  last  two  were  answered  and  the  first  was  denied.  Yet  his  apprehenaion 
by  the  unbelievers  was  overruled  for  great  spiritual  good. 

V.  The  benediction.  (Ver.  33.)  The  God  of  peace,  the  great  Peace-maker,  is 
asked  to  be  with  them,  making  them  a  peaceful,  happy  Church  at  Rome.  It  is  a 
message  of  peace  that  an  apostle  brings. — R.  M.  E. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


Vera.  1 — 20. — K.  Commendation  of  Fhoehe, 
and  salutations  to  Christians  at  Some. 

Vers.  1,  2. — I  commend  unto  you  Phoebe 
our  »ister  (i.e.  fellow-Christian),  who  is  a 
servant  of  the  Church  that  is  in  Cenchrea ; 
that  ye  receive  her  in  the  Lord,  worthily 
of  the  saints,  and  assist  her  (TrapaffTTJre, 
literally,  stand  by  her)  in  whatsoever  busi- 
ness she  hath  need  of  you :  for  she  too  hath 
been  a  suocourer  (rpoffTdTis,  corresponding 
to  TrapaffTTiTe)  of  many,  and  of  mine  own 
self.  This  Phoebe  was  probably  the  bearer 
of  the  Epistle.  She  appears  to  have  had 
business,  perhaps  of  a  legal  kind,  that  took 
her  to  Eome;  and  St.  Paul  took  advantage 
of  her  going  to  send  the  letter  by  her, 
desiring  also  to  enlist  the  aid  of  her  fellow- 
Christians  at  Eome  in  furtherance  of  her 
business,  whatever  it  might  be.  Her  having 
business  at  Eome,  and  her  having  been 
"  a  suocourer  of  many,"  suggests  the  idea 
of  her  being  a  lady  of  means.  Her  designa- 
tion as  SidKoros  of  the  Church  at  Cenchrea 
probably  implies  that  she  held  an  office 
tliere  corresponding  to  that  of  deaconess, 
though  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  the 
distinguishing  term  Sm/ctivKro-a  to  have  been 
as  yet  in  use.  Her  function,  and  that  of 
others  (as  perhaps  of  Tryphena  and  Try- 
phosa,  mentioned  in  ver.  12  as  "  labouring 
nrnoh  in  the  Lord  "),  might  be  to  minister 
to  the  sick  and  poor,  and  to  fulfil  such 
charitable  offices  as  women  could  best  dis- 
charge. Of.  1  Tim.  iii.  11,  wliere  ymoiKas, 
mentioned  in  the  midst  of  directions  as  to 
the  qualifications  of  men  for  the  office  of 
deacons,  probably  denotes  women  who  ful- 
filled similar  duties.  Of.  also  Pliny's  cele- 
brated letter  to  Trajan  (oirc.  A.r.  107),  in 
which  he  says  that  he  Had  extorted  informa- 
tion as  to  the  doings  of  Christians,  "  ox 
duabus  ancillis,  qufB  ministrse  dioebautur." 
The  Latin  ministra  answers  exactly  to  the 
Greek  SidKoyos.  Cenchrea  was  tlie  port  of 
Corinth  on  the  SaronioGulf ;  and  it  appears 
from  this  passage  that  there  was  a  Church 
or  congregation  there,  as  well  as  one  or 
more  in  Corinth  itself.  It  is  an  interesting 
conjecture  that  St.  Paul,  in  speaking  of 
Phoobe  having  been  a  suocourer  of  himself 


as  well  as  of  otherg,  may  refer  to  an  illness 
of  his  own  at  Cenchrea,  during  which  she 
had  ministered  to  him,  and  that  his  shaving 
his  head  at  Cenchrea  because  he  had  a  vow 
(Acts  xviii.  18)  may  have  been  during,  or 
on  Ills  recovery  from,  that  illness. 

Vers.  3— .5.— Greet  Prisoilla  (al.  Prisca, 
wliich  is  but  another  form  of  the  same  name) 
and  Aquila  my  fellow-workers  in  Christ 
Jeans :  who  have  for  my  life  laid  down  their 
own  neck :  unto  whom  not  only  I  give 
thanks,  but  also  all  the  Churches  of  the 
Gentiles.  And  greet  the  Church  that  is  in 
their  house.  For  other  notices  of  tliem,  of. 
Acts  xviii.  2, 18,  26  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  19 ;  2  Tim. 
iv.  19 ;  whence  we  learn  that  Aquila  was  a 
Jew  of  Pontus,  wlio,  with  his  wife  Priseilla, 
had  been  settled  at  Eome,  whence,  when 
the  Jews  were  expelled  by  Claudius,  they 
had  gone  to  Corinth,  where  St.  Paul  found 
them  on  his  first  visit  to  that  city ;  that  St. 
Paul  abode  with  them  there,  working  with 
Aquila  at  tent-making,  which  was  the  craft 
of  both;  that  they  left  Corinth  with  St. 
Paul  for  Syria,  and  were  for  a  time  left  by 
him  at  Ephesus,  where  they  instructed 
ApoUos  on  his  arrival  there ;  that,  when  St. 
Paul  wrote  from  Ephesus  his  First  Epistle 
to  the  Corinthians,  they  sent  greetings  by 
it,  having  then  a  congregation  of  Christians 
which  assembled  at  their  house ;  that,  having 
returned  to  Eome  when  the  Epistle  to  the 
Eomans  was  written,  their  house  there  also 
was  made  available  for  the  same  purpose; 
and  that,  when  St.  Paul  was  for  the  last 
time  a  prisoner  at  Rome  before  his  martyr- 
dom, they  were  once  more  living  at  Ephesus. 
They  were  probably  in  good  oircumstanoee, 
havifig  had  both  at  Eome  and  Bphesua 
houses  large  enough  to  be  used  as  churches  ; 
and  they  were  evidently  loading  and  active 
members  of  the  Christian  community.  It 
would  seem  that  Prisoilla,  the  wife,  was 
especially  so,  and  she  may  have  been,  like 
Plioebe,  officially  employed ;  for  though, 
when  they  are  first  mentioned  (Acts  xviii. 
2)  as  having  lately  come  to  Corinth,  and 
when  they  themselves  send  greetiugs  to 
Corinth  (1  Cor.  xvi.  19),  Aquila's  name 
naturally  comes  first,  yet  St.  Paul  in  all 
other  mention  of  them  reverses  the  order. 
The  occasion  of  their  liaving  apparently 
risked  their  own  lives  in  defence  of  Bt, 


OH.  XVI.  1—27.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP   PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANa 


455 


Paul  ia  unknown.  It  may  have  been  at 
Corinth  at  the  time  of  the  Jewish  insur- 
rection against  him  (Acts  xviii.  12),  or  at 
EphesuB  at  the  time  of  the  tumult  raisrd 
by  Demetrius  the  silversmith  (Acts  xix.  23, 
etc.),  when  St.  Paul  had  been  in  imminent 
danger.  The  phrase,  "  laid  down  their 
neck"  (not,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version, 
"  necks  "),  seems  only  to  denote,  figuratively, 
"exposed  thrir  lives  to  danger."  It  ap- 
pears, from  the  large  number  of  greetings 
which  follow,  that  there  were  now  many 
Christians  at  Koine  known  to,  or  any  rate 
known  of  by,  the  apostle.  It  does  not 
follow  that  he  was  acquainted  with  all  of 
them  personally.  He  may  have  heard  of 
tliem  in  the  frequent  inquiries  he  had 
doubtless  made  about  the  Roman  Church 
(of.  ch.  i.  8).  Many  of  them,  however,  he 
evidently  knew,  and  with  some  had  been 
•Bsociated.  It  was  likely  that  many  known 
to  him  in  various  quarters  might  have  had 
occasion  to  resort  to  Rome.  There  are  in 
all  twenty-six  individuals  to  whom  greet- 
ings are  sent,  together  with  two  households 
of  slaves,  and  probably  three  congregations, 
as  will  appear  below.  Salute  (or,  as  before, 
greet.  Tlie  verb  is  the  same  as  before,  and 
•0  throughout  the  chapter)  my  beloved  Epse- 
natus,  who  is  the  flrstfruits  of  Asia  (certainly 
so,  rather  than  Achaia,  probably  introduced 
into  the  text  from  1  Cor.  xvi.  15)  unto 
Christ,  Asia  means  the  proconsular  pro- 
vince so  called,  being  the  western  part  of 
Asia  Minor,  of  which  the  capital  was  Ephe- 
Bus.  EpsBuetus  may  have  been  St.  Paul's 
own  first  convert  there  during  his  second 
missionary  journey  (cf.  Acts  xvi.  6).  The 
fact  of  the  apostle  having  been  then  "  for- 
bidden of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  preach  the 
Word  in  Asia"  does  not  preclude  there 
having  been  converts  thence. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Greet  Mary,  who  bestowed 
much  labour  on  yon  (^v/ias,  rather  than,  as  in 
the  Textus  Eeoeptus,  r/juSs).  Salute  Audro- 
nicus  and  Junia  (or  Junias :  it  is  uncertain 
whether  this  is  masculine  or  feminine;  if 
the  latter,  Junia  miglit  be  the  wife  of  An- 
dronicus),  my  Mnsmen,  and  my  fellow- 
prisoners,  who"  are  of  note  among  the 
apostles  who  also  were  in  Christ  before  me. 
It  is  a  question  whether  by  "  my  kinsmen" 
(rotis  (TvyyeyeTs  /j,ov)  here  and  afterwards  St. 
Paul  means  that  the  persons  so  called  were 
his  relations,  or  only  that  they  were  Jews 
(of.  ch.  ix.  3,  where  he  speaks  of  the  Jews 
generally  as  r&v  ffvyyey&v  fj.ov  Karit  iToipKa. 
There  are  in  all  five  persons  so  designated 
in  this  chapter.  The  designation  "  fellow- 
prisoners"  implies  that  these  two  had  been, 
like  himself,  at  some  time  imprisoned  for 
the  faith,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  he 
and  they  liad  been  in  prison  together.  If, 
in  speaking  of  them  as  "  of  nol^e  among  the 


apostles  (^iritrq/toi  iy  rots  diro<rT((A»«0>"  he 
means  to  designate  them  as  themselves 
apostles,  this  is  an  instance  of  a  wider  use 
of  the  term  "apostle"  than  is  generally 
understood  (see  note  under  ch.  xii.  6,  etc.). 
The  phrase,  however,  will  bear  the  Inter- 
pretation that  they  were  persons  held  in 
honour  in  the  circle  of  the  original  twelve. 
The  term,  ol  ci.Tro<rr6\oi,  is  certainly'  often 
used  distinctively  of  them,  as  in  Acts  ix.  27 
and  in  Gal.  i.  19,  by  St.  Paul  himself,  the 
reference  in  both  texts  being  to  his  own 
relations  to  them ;  and  so  here,  speaking  of 
two  persons,  who  he  also  says  had  been  in 
Christ  before  himself,  he  may  only  mean  to 
point  to  their  having  been,  as  they  still 
were,  distinguished  in  association  with  the 
original  apostles  even  before  his  own  con- 
version. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — Greet  Amplias  (or,  Amplia- 
tu8)  my  beloved  in  the  Lord.  Salute  Urban 
(i.e.  Urbarms)  our  feUow-worker  in  Christ, 
and  Stachys  my  beloved.  Salute  Apelles 
approved  in  Christ.  Salute  them  which  are 
of  Aristobnlns'  hoosehold.  As  to  who  Aris- 
tobulus  might  be  (viz.  a  grandson  of  Herod 
the  Great,  mentioned  by  Josephus, '  Ant.,* 
XX.  1,  2,  as  being  at  Some  in  a  private 
station),  see  Lightfoot  on  '  Philippians,' 
p.  172,  and  '  Diet,  of  Gr.  and  Eom.  Biog,' 
under  "  Aristobulus,"  5.  "  Those  of  Aristo- 
bulus  "  (rav  ' hpiffrofioiKov)  would  probably 
be  his  fumilia  of  slaves  (cf.  TtSv  Xk6-i)s,  1 
Cor.  i.  11,  and  below,  rail'  NapKicnrou).  The 
salutation  is  not  to  the  whole  household, 
but  to  the  Christians  among  them,  as  in- 
timated by  rohs  ck  tSv,  and  more  definitely 
expressed  below  in  the  case  of  the  house- 
hold of  Narcissus. 

Ver.  II. — Salute  Herodion  my  kinsman. 
Greet  them  of  the  household  of  Narcissus 
that  are  in  the  lord.  This  Narcissus  may 
possibly  have  been  the  powerful  freedman 
of  Claudius,  mentioned  by  Tacitns, '  Ann.,' 
xi.  29,  teq.;  xii.  57;  and  by  Suetonius, 
'Claud.,'  28.  The  fact  that  he  appeiira 
from  '  Ann.,'  xiii.  1,  to  have  been  put  to 
death  on  the  accession  of  Nero,  a.d.  54,  is 
not  inconsistent  with  the  supposition.  For 
his  liuman  chattels  would  be  likely  to  pass 
into  the  possession  of  Nero,  and  so  become 
part  of  Csesar's  household,  and  might  still 
be  called  by  their  late  master's  name.  This 
may  also  have  been  the  case  with  the  house- 
hold of  Aristobulus  above  referred  to.  It  ia 
observable  that, at  a  later  period,  the  apostle, 
writing  from  Rome  to  the  Philippians,  sends 
special  greetings  from  them  "that  are  of 
Csesar's  household  "  (Phil.  Iv.  23> 

Ver.  12.— Salute  Tryphena  and  Tryphosa, 
who  labour  in  the  Lord.  Salute  the  beloved 
Fersis,  which  laboured  mnoh  in  the  Lord. 
All  these  seem  to  have  been  Church  workers  ; 
and  the  last  at  least,  from  the  way  St.  Paul 


456 


THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xvi.  1-27. 


apeaks  of  her,  must  have  been  known  by 
him  pereonally,  and  done  work  of  which  he 
was  cognizant.  It  is  to  be  observed  how, 
in  calling  her  "the  beloved,"  be  avoids, 
with  delicate  propriety,  adding  "  my,"  as  he 
does  in  speaking  of  his  male  friends. 

Ver.  13.— Salute  Bnfns  chosen  in  the 
Iiord,  and  his  mother  and  mine.  Observe 
the  graceful  way  in  which  St.  Paul  intimates 
his  obligation  to  tlie  mother  of  Rufus,  who 
ftt  some  time  (though  when  and  where  we 
know  not)  had  been  as  a  mother  to  himself. 
Similar  delicate  courtesy  of  language  is 
eapeoially  observable  in  the  Epistle  to  Fhi- 
lermon. 

Yei«.  11,  15. — Salute  Asyncritns,  Fhlegon, 
Hennas  (not,  surely,  as  Origen  supposed, 
the  author  of  'The  Shepherd  of  Hermas,' 
which  ia  said  in  '  Canon  Muratori '  to  have 
teen  writbin  by  a  brother  of  Pius  I.,  and 
oannot  well  have  been  of  earlier  date  than 
the  second  century),  Fatrobas,  Hermes,  and 
the  brethren  that  are  with  them.  Salute 
Philolbgus,  and  Julia  (these,  being  coupled 
tpgetlier,  may  have  been  man  and  wife,  or 
bjother  and  sister),  Nerens,  and  bis  sister, 
•ud  Olympas,  and  all  the  saints  which  are 
with  them.  The  "brethren"  in  ver.  14, 
and  the  "  saints  "  in  ver.  15,  saluted  in  con- 
nection with  the  groups  of  persons  named, 
may  possibly  mean  the  congregations  that 
assembled  under  the  leadership,  or  perhaps 
at  the  houses,  of  those  persons.  If  so,  there 
would  appear  to  have  been  three  congrega- 
tions inEome  known  of  by  St.  Paul ;  for  see 
ver.  S,  which,  indeed,  seems  in  itself  to 
imply  that  the  Church  that  was  iu  the 
house  of  Friscilla  and  Aquila  wais  not  the 
only  one. 

Ver.  16. — Salute  one  another  with  an  holy 
kiss.  All  the  Churches  of  Christ  salute  you. 
For  allusions  to  the  kiss  of  peace  among 
Christians,  of.  1  Thess.  v.  26;  1  Cor.  xvi.  20; 
2  Cor.  xiii.  12;  1  Pet.  v.  14.  Justin  Martyr 
('  Apol.,'  85)  speaks  of  it  as  exchanged  before 
the  Bucharist,  and  it  is  alluded  to  l>y  many 
Fathers,  directed  in  the  '  Apostolical  Consti- 
tutions,' and  has  its  place  in  ancient  liturgies 
(see  Bingham,  xv.  iii.  3).  St.  Paul,  of 
course,  in  enjoining  it  here  and  in  other 
Epistles,  has  in  view  the  concord  which  it 
expressed.  In  sending  salutations  from 
"  all  the  Churches  of  Christ "  (irSiroij  omitted 
in  the  Toxtus  Eeceptus,  having  authority 
decidedly  in  its  favour),  he  may  be  under- 
stood as  conveying  to  the  Roman  Cliristinns 
the  feeling  towards  tliem  Ihat  hail  been  ex- 
pressed generally  by  the  Olmrclies  ho  had 
visited.  He  may  hiivo  bpokon  whri'ever  he 
went  of  his  intenlinn  of  visiting  Rome,  and 
porliapg  of  nieanwliilo  ^en(l^ng  a  letter 
thither;  and  tlie  several  Churches  aayhave 
chiirgeil  him  with  kind  messages.  Before 
«uthenlio.iting   these    salutations   with   his 


usual  autographic  benediction,  he  feels 
bound  to  add  one  additional  warning.  The 
thought  ooeurs  to  him,  and  he  cannot  but 
give  expression  to  it.  The  warning  is 
against  a  cLiss  of  persons  whose  mischievous 
activity  he  had  hail  experience  of  elsewhere, 
and  attempts  by  some  of  whom  to  disturb 
the  peace  of  the  Roman  Church  he  may 
possibly  have  heard  of.  They  may  have 
been  Judaists,  or  others  who  tauglit  views 
contrary  to  the  received  faith,  and  so  caused 
divisions  and  offei  ices  iu  the  Churches.  Fur 
allusions  to  such  elsewhere,  cf.  Gal.  i.  6,  teq. ; 
iii.  1,  eeq.;  Col.  ii.  8,  teq.;  2  Cor.  xi.  13,  $eq. 
For  proof  of  such  having  been  at  work  after- 
wards at  Rome,  cf.  PhU.  i.  15,  eeq. ;  iii.  2, 
17,  seq. 

Ver.  17. — Now  I  beseech  yon,  brethren, 
mark  them  which  cause  the  divisions  and 
oifenoes  (ret  (rKdi/SaXa,  meaning  "causes  of 
stumbling."  Both  the  words  have  the 
article,  so  as  to  denote  things  known  of) 
contrary  to  the  doctrine  which  ye  learned; 
and  avoid  them;  rather,  turn  away  from 
them;  i.e.  shun  them;  have  nothing  to  do 
with  them.  The  allusion  seems  to  be,  not 
to  persons  within  the  Churoli,  but  rather  to 
outsiders,  who  come  with  new  notions  to 
disturb  its  peace. 

Vers.  18—20. — For  they  that  are  such 
serve  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  their 
own  belly  (of.  PhU.  iii.  18, 19).  Hart  St.  Paul 
thought  these  people  sincere  though  mis- 
taken, he  would  doubtless  have  treated  them 
with  the  tenderness  he  shows  towards  the 
weak  brethren.  But  he  regards  them  as 
self-interested,  and  of  the  Hesh  ;  and  against 
such  disturbers  of  the  Church's  peace  he  is, 
here  as  elsewhere,  indignant  (cf.  Gal.  i.  7, 
8;  ii.  4;  iii.  1;  v.  11,  12).  In  speaking  of 
them  as  serving,  or  being  slaves  to,  their  own 
belly,  it  cannot  be  concluded  certainly  that 
he  attributed  to  them  habits  of  sensuality. 
He  may  only  mean  that  it  is  the  gratifica- 
tion of  the  lower  part  of  their  nature  that 
they  have  in  view ;  and  there  may  be 
allusion  to  the  motive  of  such  persons  being 
the  desire  of  eating  aud  drinking  at  the  cost 
of  the  Churches.  In  '  The  Teaching  of  the 
Twelve  Apostles  '  (alluded  to  under  cli.  xii. 
6,  teq.)  the  desire  to  live  witliout  working  at 
the  cost  of  the  Church  is  set  down  as  one 
of  the  marks  of  a  false  apostle  «•  a  false 
propiiot.  And  by  good  words  and  fair 
speeches  deceive  the  hearts  of  the  simple 
(rather,  inno  ent,  or  harmleu.  So  the  word 
iixaicos  is  1 1  an  slated  in  Heb.  vii.  26.  It  ia 
dillerent  from  aKepaios  in  ver.  19,  though  the 
Autliorized  Version  makes  no  difference). 
For  your  obedience  is  come  abroad  unto  all 
men.  This  is  apparently  adduced  as  a 
reason  for  his  exhorting  ihem  to  beware  of 
those  seducers,  with  a  confidence  that  they 
will  not  bo  seduced  by  them,  ver.  19  being 


CH.  XVI.  1—27.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO   THE  ROMANS. 


457 


thus  dependent  on  ver.  17.  I  am  glad 
therefore  on  your  behalf:  but  yet  I  would 
have  yon  wise  unto  that  which  is  good,  but 
simple  (ixepatovs)  concerning  evil.  And  the 
God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your 
feet  shortly.  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  be  with  yon  all.    Amen. 

Vers.  21 — 24. — L.  Greetings  from  Corinth. 

Vers.  21,  22. — Timotheus  my  workfellow 
(Timothy  may  have  joined  St.  Paul  at 
Corinth  before  the  letter  was  finally  sent, 
not  having  been  with  him  when  it  was 
begun.  For  his  name  is  not  conjoined  with 
St.  Paul's  in  the  opening  salutation,  as  it  is 
in  2  Oor.  i.  1 ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  Ool.  i.  1 ;  1  Thess. 
i.  1 ;  2  Thess.  i.  1.  Still,  it  does  not  of 
necessity  follow  that  this  would  have  been 
so  in  the  case  of  a  doctrinal  treatise  such  as 
this  Epistle  mainly  is),  and  Lucius  (not  to 
be  identified  with  St.  Luke),  and  Jason,  and 
Sosipater,  my  kinsmen,  salute  you.  I 
Tertius,  who  wrote  this  Epistle,  salute  you 
in  the  Lord.  It  was  St.  Paul's  habit  to 
dictate  his  letters  to  an  amanuensis  (of. 
Gal.  vi.  11;  Col.  iv.  18;  2  Thess.  iii.  17). 
Here  the  amanuensis  interposes  his  own 
greeting  in  his  own  person. 

Vers.  23,  24.— Gaius  mine  host,  and  of  the 
whole  Church,  saluteth  you.  Probably  the 
person  mentioned  in  1  Cor.  i.  14  as  baptized 
by  St.  Paul  himself  at  Corinth.  There  ia  no 
reason  for  identifying  him  with  those  of  the 
same  name  mentioned  in  Acts  xix.  29 ;  x.\.  4 ; 
3  John  1.  Gains  was  a  common  name.  He 
appears  to  have  been  one  who  exercised 
extensive  hospitality  to  Christians,  which 
the  apostle  was  enjoying  at  the  time  of 
writing.  Erastus  the  chamberlain  (rather, 
treasurer)  of  the  city  (not  to  be  identified 
witl\  the  Erastus  of  Acts  xix.  22  and  2  Tim. 
iv.  20),  and  Qnartus  the  brother.  The  grace 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all. 
Amen. 

Vers.  25— 27.— G.  Doxology.  (For  its  ori- 
ginal position,  see  above.)  It  may  have  been 
written  by  the  apostle  with  his  own  hand. 
It  differs,  indeed,  in  form  as  well  as  fulness, 
from  other  autograpliio  conclusions  of  his 
Epistles ;  but  it  is  a  suitable  and  grand 
ending  of  an  Epistle  of  the  peculiar  character 


of  this  ;  summing  up  pregnantly  in  the  form 
of  a  glowing  thanksgiving  the  essential 
ideas  of  the  whole  Epistle,  which  had  been 
more  or  less  intimated  in  its  prefeuse. 

Vers.  25,  26. — Kow  to  him  that  is  of 
power  to  stablish  you  according  to  my  gospel 
(i.e.  the  gospel  committed  unto  me  to  preach  , 
of.  oh.  ii.  16 ;  1  Tim.  i.  11 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  8),  and 
the  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ  (t.e.,  as  appears 
from  the  use  of  K-fipvy/ia  elsewhere,  concern- 
ing Jesus  Christ,  or  the  announcement  of 
Jesus  Christ.  The  phrase  seems  to  be  added 
as  declaring  what  Paul's  gospel  was,  rather 
than  as  referring  back  to  Christ's  personal 
preaching),  according  to  the  revelation  of 
the  mystery  (on  the  meaning  of  itvariipiov, 
see  note  on  ch.  xi.  25),  which  was  kept 
secret  (literally,  Ttept  in  silence)  since  the 
world  began  (literally,  in  timxs  eternal), 
hut  is  now  made  manifest,  and  through  the 
Scriptures  of  the  prophets  (literally,  pro- 
phetic Scriptures),  according  to  the  command- 
ment of  the  eternal  God,  made  known  unto 
all  the  nations  unto  the  obedience  of  faith. 
We  have  seen  throughout  the  Epistle  how 
the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  are 
referred  to  as  foretelling  the  revelation  in 
Christ  of  the  long-hidden  mystery  (of.  also 
ch.  i.  2) ;  and  it  was  through  showing  them 
to  be  fulfilled  that,  in  all  the  apostolic 
preaching,  tlie  mystery,  now  manifested,  was 
made  krunm  to  all  the  nations ;  and  this 
according  to  the  commandment  or  appoint- 
ment of  God,  that  the  mystery  should  thus 
be  now  at  last  made  known. 

Ver.  27. — To  God  only  wise,  through  Jesus 
Christ,  be  glory  for  ever.  Amen.  The 
great  preponderance  of  ancient  authorities, 
including  all  uncials  but  B,  have  "  to 
whom"  (^)  after  "to  God  only  wise."  But 
the  intended  sense  is  not  affected  by  the 
insertion,  the  ascription  of  glory  being  still 
to  the  only  wise  Gud,  and  not  to  Jesus  Christ. 
Otherwise  there  would  be  no  sequence  to 
T(^  ^vvaiiivtf  and  ^6vtp  ffo<p(^  0e^.  *'  In  the 
lively  pressure  of  the  great  intermediate 
thoughts  connected  with  the  mention  of  the 
gospel,  vers.  25,  26,  the  syntactic  connection 
has  escaped  the  apostle  "  (Meyei). 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — A  ministering  woman.  Although  we  know  of  Phoebe  no  more  than  is 
recorded  here,  we  know  enough  to  feel  an  interest  in  her;  for  she  was  a  friend  and 
helper  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  and  she  was  probably  the  bearer  of  this  Epistle  to  the 
Roman  Church.     Observe — 

L  The  commendation  op  Ph(ebb,  by  Paul,  to  the  Christians  of  Rome.  She  is 
described  in  this  passage  by  three  several  designations,  which  could  not  but  favourably 
introduce  her  to  the  notice  and  regard  of  the  Christian  community  in  the  great 
metropolis  ot  the  world.     1.  She  is  described  as  "a  sister."     Christianity  taught  man- 


458  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [an.  xvl  1—27. 

kind  that  a  true  relationship  might  exist  amongst  those  widely  sundered  by  time  and 
space,  and  widely  severed  by  education  and  social  position.  The  followers  of  Jesus 
learned  to  regard  one  another  as  brothers  and  sisters  in  the  great  spiritual  family,  of 
which  God  is  the  Father,  and  Christ  the  elder  Brother  and  Saviour.  Coming  from  afar, 
even  in  the  vast  and  populous  city  of  Rome,  this  godly  matron  would  find  brethren  in 
Chiist,  would  be  recognized  as  a  sister.  2.  "  A  servant  of  the  Church  at  Cenchrea." 
Literally,  a  deacon,  or  deaconess.  This  shows  us  how,  from  the  beginning  of  Chris- 
tianity, woman's  position  was  recognized  and  honoured.  Christ  has  taught  humanity 
the  dignity  of  service ;  and  as  when  on  earth  he  accepted  the  ministrations  of  devout 
and  attached  women,  so  now  he  delights  in  their  labours  and  self-sacrifloe  in  his  cause 
on  earth,  3.  The  form  of  her  service  is  mentioned  ;  she  was  "  a  sticcourer  of  many." 
Probably  a  matron  of  means  and  social  consideration,  she  had,  and  used,  the  oppor- 
tunity to  show  kindness  to  her  kindred  in  the  faith,  and  to  others  in  necessity.  She 
may  have  shown  hospitality  to  Christian  ministers,  have  visited  and  relieved  the  sick 
poor,  have  rescued  the  fallen  and  neglected.  "Of  myself  also,"  says  the  apostle, 
gratefully  and  gracefully  acknowledging  gentle  and  kindly  miuistrations.  Possibly  ha 
had  been  sick  at  Cenchrea,  upon  the  occasion  when  he  is  recorded  to  have  made  a  vow, 
and  Phoebe  may  have  entertained  and  nursed  him. 

II.  The  bequest  made  by  Paul  to  the  Eomaks  on  her  behalf.  1.  The  footing 
is  described  upon  which  they  were  enjoined  to  receive  her — "  in  the  Lord,"  i.e.  in  the 
Lord's  Name,  and  for  the  Lord's  sake.  This  was  the  light  in  which  Jesus  himself  had 
taught  his  disciples  to  regard  one  another.  In  receiving  any  in  Christ's  Name,  we 
receive  Christ  himself.  The  Romans  were  to  consider  that  the  Divine  Lord  did,  in  a 
sense,  in  the  person  of  his  faithful  disciples,  come  amongst  them.  2.  The  law  of  treat- 
ment is  laid  down — "  as  saints."  That  is  to  say,  it  was  to  be  borne  in  mind,  in  their 
social  and  religious  intercourse,  that  they  were  not  as  the  heathen  around,  that  they 
were  a  select  and  consecrated  people.  Going  into  this  great  sinful  city,  this  Cenchrean 
matron  might  look  for  treatment  and  conversation  becoming  to  saints;  she  might 
expect  religious  privileges,  and  something  more  than  courtesy — even  Christian  cor- 
diality and  kindness.  3.  Such  being  the  sentiments  enjoined,  it  is  interesting  to  see 
that  Paul  expected  such  feelings  to  prompt  to  corresponding  action.  The  Roman 
Christians  are  desired  to  assist  Phoebe  in  her  business.  Whether  this  was  domestic, 
commercial,  or  legal,  we  do  not  know.  In  any  case,  she  might  weU  be  grateful  for  an 
introduction  which  would  secure  for  her  the  countenance,  counsel,  sympathy,  and  aid 
of  men  of  wisdom  and  experience,  of  character  and  position.  Scripture  constantly 
warns  us  against  allowing  good  feeling  to  pass  away  without  leading  to  suitable 
expression  in  action.  It  is  a  lesson  which  even  religious  and  well-meaning  people  need 
to  have  inculcated  and  repeated. 

Application.  1.  Let  Christian  communities  aim  at  realizing  the  fellowship  which 
such  passages  as  this  imply  and  commend.  2.  Let  Christian  women  seek,  according 
to  their  station,  opportunity,  and  ability,  to  live  as  servants  of  Christ  and  of  Christ's 
Church.  3.  Let  all  Christian  people  hold  in  honour  those  godly  women  who  devota 
themselves  to  the  succouring  of  the  needy,  the  neglected,  and  the  sinfuL 

Vers.  3 — 5. — Fellowship  in  toil  and  suffering.  Paul  had  a  marvellous  power  of 
drawing  around  him  like-minded  natures,  to  whom,  by  God's  grace,  he  imparted  much 
of  his  own  spirit,  and  whose  assistance  vastly  increased  the  effect  of  his  benevolent 
ministry.  Among  these  were  Aquila  and  bis  wife  Prisca,  or  Priscilla,  whom  he  first 
met  at  Corinth,  and  to  whom  he  was  drawn  by  their  common  occupation  as  tent- 
makers.  If  not  at  that  time  Christians,  they  evidently  became  so  through  his 
instruction  and  influence.  They  laboured  with  Paul  in  the  gospel,  first  at  Corinth 
and  then  at  Ephesus.  They  returned,  at  a  later  period,  to  Rome,  whence,  in  common 
with  the  Jews  generally,  they  had  been  expelled  by  Claudius.  And  they  were  at  Rome, 
carrying  on  the  same  work  of  evangelization  and  promoting  Christian  fellowship,  when 
Paul  wrote  this  Epistle  to  the  Romans.     Hence  the  salutation  which  occurs  in  this  place, 

I.  Examine  the  services,  merits,  and  claims,  of  this  Christian  couple.  They 
are  commended  for :  1.  Their  fellowship  with  Paid  in  work.  The  Christian  life,  and 
emphatically  the  life  of  the  Christian  evangelist,  is  a  life  of  labour.  Not  mme  activity 
or  business-like  effort  and  assiduity ;  but  labour  "  in  Christ  Jesus ;  "  which  means,  for 


CE,  XVI.  1—27.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  459 

the  sake  of  Christ,  upon  the  model  of  Christ,  in  the  Name  of  Christ,  with  a  view  to 
the  approval  of  Christ.  The  Lord  is  himself  the  bond  binding  true  workers  in  one. 
2.  They  had  endangered  life  for  Ms  safety.  Whether  in  Corinth,  or  amidst  the  tumult 
at  Ephesus,  these  two  faithful  friends  had  shielded  the  apostle  from  the  wrath  and 
violence  of  the  enemies  of  the  faith,  and  this  at  the  risk  of  their  own  life.  This  was 
a  practical  exemplification  of  the  duty  and  excellence  of  brotherly  love.  Thus  Paul 
learned  to  say,  "  For  a  good  man  some  would  even  dare  to  die."  Thus  St.  John  could 
teach,  knowing  that  the  advice  was  not  impracticable,  "  We  also  ought  to  lay  down  our 
life  for  the  brethren."  3.  They  had  cultivated  social  religion.  Wherever  they  went, 
these  devoted  Christians  consecrated  part  of  their  dwelling  to  Christian  assembly  and 
worship.  Being  teut-makers,  needing  large  premises,  and  probably  employing  many 
work-people,  they  had  accommodation  for  such  gatherings.  Often  in  the  New  Tes la- 
ment we  read  of  the  "  Church  in  the  house."  The  expression  not  only  reminds  us  of 
the  duty  and  privilege  of  family  religion,  and  household  worship ;  it  also  teaches  us  that 
all  our  possessions  and  circumstances  should  be  turned  to  account  in  the  service  of 
Christ,  and  especially  that  we  should  bring  neighbours  together  to  hear  the  gospel, 
and  fellow-Christians  to  realize  Christian  fellowship  and  to  cultivate  brotherly  love. 

IL  Obsebvk  the  recognition  by  the  apostle  of  these  services  and  claims. 
"  Honour  to  whom  honour  " — a  maxim  nowhere  better  justified  than  in  cases  like  this 
before  us.  1.  Paid  shows  gratitude.  Although  tlieir  ministrations  and  self-sacrifice 
were  now  events  of  the  past,  the  recollection  of  them  was  fresh  in  the  apostle's  mind. 
There  are  those  who  think  it  unwise  to  express  gratitude  and  admiration ;  the  apostle 
was  not  one  of  these.  He  gave  thanks.  And  he  tendered  the  thanks,  not  only  of  his 
own  heart,,  but  of  "  all  the  Churches  of  the  Gentiles  " — an  expression  this,  all  the 
more  graceful,  in  that  Aquila  and  liis  wife  were  themselves  Jews.  But  they  had 
laboured  largely  among  the  Gentiles,  who  were  very  sensible  of  their  services.  And 
they  had  probably  saved  the  life  of  "  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,"  on  which  account 
those  for  whom  Paul  especially  laboured  owed  them  a  special  measure  of  gratitude. 
2.  Paul  sends  greeting.  Among  the  worthies  of  the  Christian  community  at  Borne, 
the  names  of  these  natives  of  Pontus  were  includud,  and  amongst  them  have  come  down 
to  posterity.  Paul  obeyed  the  gospel  admonition,  "  Be  courteous,"  and  often  set  an 
example  of  that  kind  and  sympathetic  consideration  which  goes  far  to  ease  the  working 
and  promote  the  happiness  of  human  life. 

Practical  lessons.  1.  Be  devoted  in  Christian  labour,  2.  Delight  in  Christian 
fellowship.  3.  Employ  social  influence  for  Christ's  glory.  4.  In  Christian  intercourse 
display  Christian  courtesy. 

Ver.  5. —  The  twofold  lond.  Some  men  are  known  and  remembered  for  what  they 
have  done  ;  others  for  the  position  they  have  occupied  in  some  great  movement,  or  the 
friendships  they  have  formed  with  some  great  characters.  Paul's  was  a  name  which 
overshadowed  most  of  his  contemporary  fellow-labourers  in  the  cause  of  Christian 
evangelization;  yet  there  were  those,  e.g.  Thnothy  and  Aquila,  among  those  men- 
tioned in  this  chapter  who  had  no  mean  title  to  an  independent  position  and  memorial. 
On  the  other  hand,  some,  like  Epssnetus,  would  never  have  been  remembered  except 
through  association  with  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  It  is  a  beautiful  trait  in  Paul's 
character  that  his  heart  cherished  warm,  affectionate  recollections  of  some  persons, 
who,  by  reason  of  the  obscurity  of  their  position  and  the  slenderness  of  their  abilities, 
could  add  no  lustre  to  the  apostle's  fame,  and  perhaps  little  efficacy  to  his  mission. 
From  this  verse  we  learn  that  a  twofold  bond  united  Paul  to  Epsenetus. 

I.  The  bond  of  personal  friendship  and  love.  The  Lord  Jesus  had  himself,  by 
his  example  and  by  his  precepts,  constituted  Christianity  a  religion  of  love.  Speaking 
to  his  disciples,  he  said,  "  Love  one  another,  even  as  I  have  loved  you."  "  Having 
loved  his  own,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end."  He  even  countenanced  a  tender,  personal, 
and  special  friendship ;  for  St.  John  is  often  described  as  "  the  disciple  whom  Jesus 
loved."  Now,  the  Apostle  Paul  inculcated,  with  frequency  and  urgency,  the  Divine 
lesson,  saying, "  Let  brotherly  love  continue ; "  and  eulogizing,  especially  in  his  Epistle 
to  the  Corinthians,  the  grace  of  charity.  And  he  also  exemplified  the  virtue  of  Chris- 
tian love  in  his  own  spirit,  and  in  the  many  friendships  which  he  formed.  His  attach- 
ment to  Epsenetus  was  undoubtedly  sincere  and  unfeigned;  and  what  more  natural 


460  THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xvi.  1— 27. 

than  that,  when  his  friend  was  at  so  great  a  distance  from  him,  Pan],  in  writing  to  the 
Romans,  should  send  a  greeting  of  affection  to  the  beloved  associate  of  bygone  days  ? 
Christianity  sanctifies  and  elevates  human  affection. 

II.  Thb  bond  of  UINI3TKRIAL  INTEREST.  EpEBnetus  was  the  firstfruits  of  Asia's 
offering  unto  Christ.  This  being  the  case,  it  is  somewhat  singular  that  we  know 
nothing  more  regarding  him.  Paul  has  spoken  of  himself  as  ministering  the  gospel  of 
Grod,  that  the  offering  up  of  the  Gentiles  might  be  acceptable.  The  conversion  of  the 
Gentiles  was  a  harvest,  a  sacrifice ;  and  the  firsbfruits  accordingly  must  have  been  to 
the  apostle's  mind  peculiarly  precious.  The  expression  is  very  suggestive.  1.  Of  what 
toil  and  sowing  was  this  convtrsion  the  result  I  There  is  no  crop  without  foregoing 
labour ;  and  the  Book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  shows  us  at  what  expenditure  of 
labour  and  suffering  the  harvest  was  secured.  When  the  parent  instils  into  the  mind 
of  his  children  from  infancy  the  doctrines  and  precepts  of  religion ;  when  the  teacher 
endeavours  to  bring  the  youthful  mind,  otherwise  perhaps  uncultivated  and  uncared- 
for,  under  Christian  training  and  influence;  when  the  pastor  faithfully  and  continuously 
scntters  the  seed  of  the  kingdom  in  men's  hearts,  sowing  beside  all  waters ;  when  the 
evangelist  and  missionary  toil,  in  uncongenial  circumstances  and  amidst  many  dis- 
couragements, for  the  salvation  of  human  souls ; — all  such  effort  is  seed-sowing,  of 
which  sometimes  only  the  springing  blade  may  be  discerned  by  the  labourer,  who  is 
happy  indeed  if  he  be  suffered  to  see  here  and  there  the  firstfruits  of  his  endeavours. 

2.  How  rich,  ripe,  and  promising  were  these  flrstrruits !  It  is  proof  enough  of  the 
Christian  character  of  Epeenetus,  that  the  apostle  regarded  him  as  a  beloved  friend. 
In  this  case  Paul's  labours  had  proved  manifestly  not  in  vain.  Here  was  doubtless  a 
renewed  and  holy  person,  adorning  the  Christian  profession,  and  by  ripeness  and  beauty 
and  serviceableness  of  character  fitted  to  be  regarded  as  the  firstfruits  of  a  province. 
Now,  the  firstfruits  may  be  as  good  in  quality  as  the  harvest  which  follows.  In  fact. 
Christian  ministers  are  justified  in  looking  for  such  results  to  follow  their  patient  and 
prayerful  toil.  Nothing  else  can  reward  them ;  spiritual  results,  and  these  only,  are 
the  desired  recompense.  3.  Of  a  harvest  how  wealthy  and  glorious  was  this  individual 
Christian  the  earnest  and  promise  I  Genius  and  faith  can  see  in  the  firstfruits,  insig- 
nificant, it  may  be,  in  themselves,  the  promise  of  vast  results,  extending  throughout 
spacious  regions  and  enduring  throughout  long  ages.  So,  doubtless,  it  was  in  this 
case ;  the  Apostle  Paul  felt  the  image  of  Epzeuetus  revived  in  his  memory,  nay,  his 
very  name  awakened  in  his  mind  a  glorious  vision  of  the  future  evangelization  of  a  vast 
and  populous  province,  of  the  formation  of  large  and  flourishing  Churches,  of  the  final 
salvation  of  a  multitude  of  precious  souls.  Such  associations,  such  expectations,  would 
naturally  lend  an  additional  interest  and  sweetness  to  this  warin-hearted  greeting  com- 
municated from  afar. 

Afplioation.  1.  Remark  the  beauty  of  Christian  courtesy.  It  is  right  to  remember 
and  to  greet  ancient  comrades  in  Christian  toil,  and  all  who  are  bound  to  us  by  ties 
of  former  fellowship.  2.  Learn  the  lesson  of  Christian  love — love  unfeigned.  Love 
should  be  not  only  of  a  general,  a  sentimental  kind ;  it  should  be  personal  and  faithful, 
love  to  individual  souls  with  whom  Providence  may  have  brought  you  into  contact. 

3.  Cultivate  the  disposition  of  hope.  Regard  in  every  convert  to  the  faith  of  Christ 
the  proof  of  Divine  power  and  grace ;  and  see  in  such  the  happy  omen  of  a  recovered 
and  regenerated  world. 

Ver.  6. — A  woman's  labours  for  Christ.  During  our  Saviour's  earthly  ministry, 
many  devout  and  grateful  women  devoted  their  time,  their  substance,  and  their  per- 
sonal ministrations  to  the  Lord.  And  Christ's  apostles,  as  we  may  judge  fi:om  the 
record  in  the  Acts,  were  also  frequently  indebted  to  the  hospitality,  the  zealous 
co-operation,  and  the  sympathizing  and  generous  spirit,  of  consecrated  Christian 
women.  From  this  chapter  it  appears  that  ihe  early  Churches  were,  in  some  cases, 
assisted  in  their  benevolent  and  evangelistic  work  by  feminine  ministrations.  Of 
Mary  we  know  nothing  but  what  is  recorded  to  her  honour  and  remembrance  in  this 
passage,  that  she  bestowed  much  labour  upon  the  Christians  of  the  imperial  city.  If 
she  be  taken  as  a  representative  of  pious  and  benevolent  and  laborious  Christian  women, 
the  record  concerning  her  may  suggest  reflections  regarding  the  vocation  of  such  persona 
in  the  Church  of  Christ. 


on.  XVI.  1—27.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP   PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  401 

I.  This  naturb  ok  woman's  wobk  fob  thb  Savioob.  This  is  very  yaried.  It  may 
be  more  public,  or  more  private ;  it  may  be  domestic,  or  official.  Some  are  called  to 
nurse  in  homes  or  hospitals;  some  to  teaoh  io  classes  or  schools;  some  to  visit  the 
neglected,  the  dying,  the  bereaved  ;  some  to  restore  the  lapsed  to  the  paths  of  industry 
and  virtue ;  some  to  show  hospitality. 

II.  The  qualitt  of  woman's  work  fob  thb  SAVions.  It  is  often  found  to  be 
characterized  by  tenderness  and  sympathy,  by  constancy  and  patience,  by  sobriety 
and  diligence,  by  fervour  and  self-denial. 

III.  The  measure  of  woman's  work  for  Christ.  Mary  laboured  much  ;  and  many 
resemble  her — directing  their  energies  into  various  channels,  spending  strength  of  body 
and  mind  in  holy  service,  continuing  even  amidst  many  interruptions,  and  misrepre- 
sentation and  ingratitude,  and  labouring  even  to  old  age. 

IV.  The  motive  to  woman's  work  fob  Christ.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  done  much 
'  for  the  elevation  and  happiness  of  the  female  sex,  and  gratitude  for  mercy  received  is 

in  many  women's  hearts  a  powerful  motive  to  zealous  services.    Means  are  sought  by 
which  the  thankful  may  show  the  sincerity  of  their  love. 

V.  The  recognition  of  woman's  work  fob  the  Saviour.  This  should  be  spon- 
taneous and  ungrudging,  generous  and  expressed.  Paul  acknowledged  the  merits  of 
this  excellent  woman,  and  by  his  written  salutations  admonished  the  Boman  Christians 
to  hold  her  in  honour,  and  display  their  gratitude.  Yet  the  best  and  most  desired 
recognition  valued  by  devout  women  is  the  approval  and  the  recompense  promised  by 
the  Lord  himself  to  every  good  and  faithful  servant. 

Ver.  7. — A  special  salutation.  It  is  somewhat  singular  that,  the  description  of  these 
brothers,  Andronicus  and  Jvmias,  being  so  full  and  detailed,  we  should  not  meet  with 
any  other  mention  of  them,  either  in  the  Acts  or  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles.  The  con- 
nection between  them  and  the  apostle  was  close  and  manifold,  and  their  claims  to 
consideration  were  remarkably  high. 

I.  There  was  fellowship  in  blood  between  these  brothers  and  St,  Paul.  Whether 
this  was  a  close  kindred,  or  simply  consanguinity  of  race,  the  term  does  not  make 
certain.  In  either  case  there  is  a  recognition  of  the  claims  of  kindred.  Our  blood- 
relationships,  and  even  our  ties  of  nationality  and  race,  are  of  Divine  appointment, 
and  should  not  be  disparaged  or  overlooked.  When  our  kindred  have  a  spiritual  as 
well  as  a  natural  affinity  with  us,  they  should  be  doubly  dear,  and  should  be  treated 
with  special  distinction  and  affection. 

II.  There  was  fellowship  in  suffering  for  Christ.  Paul  was  often  in  prison,  and 
sometimes  in  companionship  with  those  engaged  in  the  same  service,  and  therefore 
knowingly  exposed  to  the  same  risks.  It  must  have  been  a  happy  and  honourable 
experience  to  be  associated  with  such  a  man,  even  in  bonds  and  imprisonment.  Silas 
had  joined  him  in  his  midnight  hymns  in  the  Philippian  jail;  Luke  shared  his 
imprisonment  both  on  land  and  by  sea ;  Aristarchus,  Andronicus,  and  Junias  had  in 
some  place  unknown  to  us,  been  his  fellow-prisoners.  Snch  community  was  not  to  be 
forgotten.  It  is  a  distinction  to  suffer  for  Christ,  and  with  Christ's  people.  "  If  we 
suffer  with  Christ" — and  this  we  do  when  we  suffer  with  his  people,  and  for  his  sake — 
"  we  shall  also  reign  with  him." 

III.  These  men  were  in  the  conpidenob  and  esteem  of  the  apostles.  Some 
have  inferred  from  the  language  used  that  Andronicus  and  Junias  were  numbered 
among  the  apostles,  in  the  wider  sense  of  that  term.  But  it  is  more  probable  that 
they  are  mentioned  as  held  in  high  respect  and  honour  among  the  apostles  generally. 
It  is  sufficient  commendation  for  a  man  to  be  known  as  the  trusted  friend  of  the  great 
and  good.  It  is  well  to  ask  concerning  any  Christian— Who  are  his  friends  ?  Not — 
How  is  he  regarded  by  the  titled  and  the  opulent  ?  but — Is  he  in  the  confidence  of 
those  who  are  venerated  and  trusted  servants  of  the  Lord  ?  "  He  that  walketh  with 
wise  men  shall  be  wise." 

IV.  There  was  perseverance  and  lonq-standino  consistenot  of  Christiah  cha- 
BACTER.  The  Apostle  Paul,  when  writing  to  the  Romans,  had  himself  been  "in 
Christ "  for  very  many  years.  But  these  brothers  are  mentioned  by  him  as  having 
been  Christians  before  he  himself  had  been  brought  to  subjection  to  the  Lord.  As 
"  old  discijples,"  whose  witness  to  Chriot  had  been  long  and  foithful.  and  who  remained 


463  TBE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  xvi.  1— 27, 

what  they  had  been,  Andronicus  and  Junias  deserved  greeting  and  commendation. 
"  Time  tries  all ; "  and  time  Bets  an  approving  seal  upon  those  vfho  for  a  lifetime  have 
adorned  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour.  Respect  is  due  to  our  seniors  in  the  spiritual 
life.    "  Better  is  the  end  uf  a  thing  than  the  beginning." 

Application.  1.  Learn  a  generous  appreciation  of  the  character  and  services  of 
brethren  in  Christ.  2.  Forget  not  the  ties  of  Christian  fellowship  dating  from  distant 
years.  3.  Admire  the  power  of  Christianity  to  sanctify  the  social  nature ;  and  seek  to 
afford  in  social  intercourse  a  living  example  of  this  benign  influence. 

Vers.  8 — 15. — Grounds  for  greeting.  Salutations  are  often  empty  forms.  Yet  the 
original  meaning  is  often  very  deep  and  beautiful  and  appropriate.  Our  "  Grod  bless 
you ! "  and  "  Q-ood-bye  1 "  and  "  Adieu ! "  are  instances.  If  we  sincerely  send  "  respects  " 
and  "kind  regards," it  is  well.  Salutations  are  not  to  be  neglected  or  despised  because 
they  are  often  meaningless  or  insincere.  See  in  this  passage  how  Paul  greeted  his  ■ 
friends  in  Christ.  Even  as  Christ  himself,  coming  to  his  own  disciples,  addressed  them 
thus,  "  Peace  be  with  you ! "  so  the  apostle,  even  in  this  important  Epistle,  did  not 
think  it  beneath  him  to  salute  his  friends. 

I.  ChEISTIANITT   18   A     BOND   WHICH   UNITHS    TOGBTHEB   PERSONS   OP    MOST   VABIOTTS 

CONDITIONS  AND  EMPLOTMBNTS.  Of  the  persous  greeted,  some  were  Jews  and  some 
were  Gentiles.  Some  were  persons  who  had,  to  some  extent,  the  command  of  their 
own  time ;  for  they  are  mentioned  as  having  laboured  much  with  the  apostle,  or  as 
having  entertained  him  with  hospitality.  Some  undoubtedly  were  slaves.  From  the 
Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  written  a  very  few  years  after  this,  it  appears  that  members 
of  Ceesar's  household  were  numbered  among  the  Christian  community  at  Eome. 
Eecent  explorations  near  the  old  metropolis  of  the  world  have  brought  to  light  tomb- 
inscriptions,  including  many  of  the  names  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  in  memory  of 
persons  in  the  imperial  household.  It  is  all  but  certain  that  some  of  these  friends  of 
Paul  held  such  positions,  it  may  be  honourable  and  important,  but  probably  of  an  ordi- 
nary kind.  They  may  have  been  artificers  and  craftsmen  and  household  attendants. 
Two  other  households  are  mentioned  here — those  of  Aristobulus  and  of  Narcissus. 
There  seems  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  heads  of  these  households  were  Christians. 
They  may  themselves  have  been  dead  at  this  time,  and  their  bondmen  may  have 
passed  over  by  bequest  to  the  emperor.  The  list  includes  some  Christian  Jews,  now 
permitted  to  return  to  Rome — persons  whom,  in  their  wanderings,  Paul  had  met  in 
various  cities  of  Asia  and  of  Europe,  and  whose  memory  he  retained  in  his  capacious 
and  affectionate  heart. 

II.  CflKISTIANITY  CONFERS  HONOUR   UPON   THOSE  WHO  ARE   LITTLE  ESTEEMED   IN  THE 

WORLD.  The  names  mentioned  in  these  verses  are  all,  and  utterly,  unknown  to  fame. 
They  here  glint  across  our  vision,  like  meteors  in  the  midnight  sky,  which  appear  for 
a  moment,  only  to  vanish  for  ever.  Yet  Paul  esteemed  and  loved  them,  and  put  their 
names  upon  this  imperishable  roll — more  glorious  and  more  lasting  than  the  blazoned 
records  of  heraldry  or  the  splendid  memorials  of  the  historian.  It  is  better  to  be 
enrolled  among  the  friends  of  Christ  than  to  occupy  the  highest  station  in  the  regard 
of  worldly  minded  men.  To  be  his  when  he  makes  up  his  jewels,  this  will  be  honour 
and  happiness  indeed. 

III.  Chmstianitt  puts  its  own  marks  upon  its  ADHERENTS.  For  example,  in 
this  passage,  one  is  described  as  "  in  the  Lord,"  implying  spiritual  union  with  the 
Saviour.  Another  is  said  to  be  "  chosen  in  the  Lord,"  and  yet  another  "  approved  in 
the  Lord  " — language  which  denotes  those  congenial  in  character,  and  obedient  in  life, 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  which  points  on  to  a  coming  and  glorious  reward.  Again, 
some  are  described  as  "  brethren  "  and  others  as  "  saints,"  implying  their  incorporation 
into  the  spiritual  family  of  God,  and  their  holy  character  and  devotion  to  the  Lord's 
service.  Such  language  assures  us  that,  amidst  many  faulty  and  some  unworthy  Chris- 
tians, there  were  not  a  few  amongst  the  primitive  belitvers  who,  by  their  principles  and 
life,  must  have  commended  the  gospel,  and  have  yielded  the  truest  satisfaction  to  the 
apostle's  pure  and  benevolent  heart. 

IV.  Observe,  further,  sundry  rbcoonitions  of  Christian  servick.  One  is  com- 
mended for  his  "  labour  in  the  Lord,"  and  another  as  having  "  laboured  much  in  the 
Lord,"  whilst  a  third  is  described  as  a  "  fellow- worker."     That  Paul  laboured  mor» 


OH.  xvL  1—27.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  4G3 

abundantly  than  all  his  brethren,  he  himself  has  recorded;  and  such  being  the  habit  of 
his  spiritual  ministry,  he  was  able  and  disposed  to  appreciate  the  work  of  his  diligent 
and  effective  colleagues.  There  is  great  discrimination  in  his  language  of  approbation, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  great  generosity.  We  should  learu  the  wholesome  lesson,  that 
it  is  right  to  appreciate  the  services  of  our  fellow-Ohristians,  and  gratefully  to  recognize 
and  remember  their  co-operation. 

V.  It  must  sti'ike  every  reader  of  this  passage  that  we  have  here  illustrations  of  the 
way  in  which  Ohkistian  appreciation  is  intensified  by  pbrsonal  relation  and 
FBELINO.  One  member  of  the  Roman  Church  he  designates  "  my  beloved."  In  another 
he  recognizes  a  "  kinsman."  A  third — an  aged  Christian  matron — he  designates  his 
own  "  mother,"  referring,  no  doubt,  to  her  tender  and  hospitable  ministrations  in 
former  days.  Beautiful  indeed  is  natural  ft-eling  when  thus  sanctified  by  true  piety. 
The  Christian  family,  and  the  friendly  circle,  penetrated  by  Christian  principle  aud 
sentiment,  are  nothing  less  than  an  earnest  of  the  sacred  fellowship  of  heaven.  The 
Church  below  thus  resembles  and  prepares  for  the  Church  of  the  Firstborn  above. 

Application.  1.  The  strongest  of  all  social  bonds  are  those  of  our  common  Chris- 
tianity, which,  binding  hearts  to  Christ,  binds  hearts  to  hearts.  Cultivate  these  bonds. 
2.  Christian  labourers  should  never  forget  those  who  in  former  days  have  shared  their 
toils  and  sacrifices.  3.  Courtesy  is  a  Christian  grace,  and  its  exercise  smooths  the 
path  of  social  life.  4.  Sympathy  and  brotherliness  on  earth  will  prepare  for  the  sweet 
and  immortal  fellowship  of  heaven. 

Ver.  20. — Vietory  assured.  In  viewing  onr  human  life,  we  are  tempted  into  one  or 
other  of  two  extremes.  To  the  worldly  and  the  careless,  especially  when  young  and 
prosperous,  life  seems  easy.  They  are  conscious  of  no  temptation,  for  they  yield  at 
once  to  each  congenial  suggestion.  They  are  ignorant  of  struggles,  for  to  them  life  has 
never  shaped  itself  as  a  moral  warfare.  But  there  are  those  who  are  ever  oppressed 
by  a  constant  sense  of  the  solemnity  of  life.  To  such  the  conflict  is  a  daily  and  inevi- 
table fact.  They  cannot  drift  adown  the  current ;  yet,  strike  out  as  bravely  as  they 
will,  they  feel  as  though  they  made  no  headway  agaiast  the  waters,  as  though  they 
could  never  reach  the  shore.  Struggle  .they  must,  they  do ;  yet  with  many  failures 
and  with  faint  hope  of  final  success.  Now,  Christianity  rebukes  the  first  of  these 
classes  for  frivolity,  the  second  for  faithlessness.  The  Scriptures  ever  represent  our  life 
as  a  spiritual  couflict;  yet  they  ever  summon  us  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith  with 
hopeful  hearts ;  the  battle  is  fierce,  but  to  the  brave  the  victory  is  sure. 

I.  The  conflict  and  the  fob.  There  is  a  power  of  evil,  a  personal  and  mighty 
power.  Satan  seeks  to  carry  captive  human  souls;  and  in  the  effort  employs  every 
resource — the  fiercest  assaults,  and  the  most  unscrupulous,  insidious  wiles.  In  this 
Satan  deals  with  men  according  to  their  circumstances,  their  character,  their  tempera- 
ment. Over  multitudes  he  triumphs  openly.  Yet  there  are  those  who  resist  him,  who 
regard  him  as  their  deadly  foe.  Well  is  it  for  you  if  you  are  aware  of  your  position, 
your  danger,  the  attempts  of  the  adversary,  and  your  own  weakness  and  insulBciency 
for  a  struggle  so  unequal.  Faithful,  consistent,  experienced  Christian  I  you  have  not 
yet  finished  the  campaign ;  you  are  not  yet  beyond  the  reach  of  the  fiery  darts.  Young 
and  ardent  Christian  1  dare  not  to  indulge  in  boasting  or  to  self-satisfaction.  Just  where 
and  when  you  least  expect  it,  then  and  there  the  attack  may  be  made.  "  Resist  the 
devil ; "  "  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation ;  "  "  Take  to  you  the  whole 
armour  of  God." 

II.  The  Helper  and  Dblivereb.  In  a  conflict  such  as  human  life,  how  can  we  be 
blind  to  our  own  helplessness  and  need  ?  Whither  shall  the  assaulted  and  imperilled 
turn?  Upon  whom  shall  they  call  ?  The  Christian  cannot  answer  these  questions  amiss ; 
for  he  has  already  sought  and  experienced  the  saving  strength  of  God's  right  hand. 
Yet  he  may  well  need  to  be  reminded  of  his  only  hope  and  refuge.  _  Let  us  lift  up  our 
eyes  unto  the  hills,  whence  cometh  our  help.  The  God  of  peace  is,  in  the  text,  set 
before  us  as  our  Saviour,  Does  it  strike  you  as  strange  that  the  Most  High  should  be 
so  described  in  such  a  connection  ?  Do  you  ask — Why  is  the  God  of  peace  invoked,  to 
oppose  and  to  vanquish  the  foe  of  souls  ?  The  answer  is  plain.  God's  nature  is  peace ; 
his  aim  is  peace ;  his  rule  is  peace.  But  his  is  not  the  peace  of  compromise  with  sin 
His  is  the  peace  which  comes  with  righteousness  and  with  the  reign  of  holy  law 


464  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xvi.  1— 27. 

Such  peace  presupposes  conflict.  War  with  evil,  until  evil  is  vanquished,  dethroned, 
and  silent;  and  then  peace,  and  only  then;— such  is  the  principle  of  the  gospel,  such 
is  the  purpose  of  God,  such  is  the  law  of  the  Christian's  life.  Divine  peace  is  pure 
and  sincere  and  lasting.  Kememher  that  word  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  "  I  am  not  come  to 
send  peace,  but  a  sword." 

III.  The  ebsistanck  and  the  victokt.  Here  we  are,  as  Christians,  membera  of  the 
Church  militant.  But  Christ  is  the  Captain  of  our  salvation ;  and  the  language  of  the 
apostle  implies  that,  through  the  might  and  grace  of  our  Leader,  we  shall  conquer  in 
the  holy  war.  Christ  is  the  Victor,  who  has  conquered /or  us.  The  history  of  our 
Saviour's  earthly  career  is  a  history  of  conflict.  The  ministry  of  the  Hedeeraer  was 
a  struggle  with  the  prince  of  darkness.  Witneas  his  temptation,  in  which  he 
encountered  the  foe  in  various  guises,  and  ever  vanquished  his  adversary  and  ours  by 
the  "  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God."  Witness  the  crisis  of  his  humili- 
ation and  suffering :  "  This  is  your  hour,  and  the  power  of  darkness."  Yet  in  that 
crisis  the  Lord  Jesus  beheld  Satan  as  lightning  cast  from  heaven,  and  he  spoiled  prin- 
cipalities and  powers,  making  a  show  of  them  openly.  Then  was  fulfilled  the  promise, 
"  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head."  Christ  is  the  Victor,  who 
conquers  in  us.  For  it  is  in  our  own  hearts  that  the  real  conflict  is  waged,  that  the 
true  victory  must  be  won.  By  the  cross  of  Christ,  through  the  presence  and  strengthen- 
ing of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  the  soldier  who  follows  his  Captain  miist  come  to  share  the 
Captain's  triumph.  He  himself  has  promised  that  it  shall  be  so.  In  his  humiliation 
he  encouraged  his  ditsciples,  saying,  "  Be  of  good  cheer ;  I  have  overcome  the  world." 
From  his  glory  he  cheers  them  on,  saying,  "  He  that  overcometh  shall  sit  down  with 
me  in  ray  throne."  The  individual  Christian  shall,  by  Divine  grace,  be  victorious  over 
the  tempter  who  is  the  foe  of  his  soul.  He  shall  not  yield  to  the  blandishments  or 
fall  before  the  onsets  of  Satan ;  he  shall  learn  submission  to  God's  will  without  mur- 
muring; he  shall  serve  without  fainting;  he  shall  rebuke  without  harshness;  he  shall 
trust  without  doubting.  The  world  shall  have  less  hold  upon  his  affeci  ions,  and  heaven 
shall  have  more  power  to  attract  and  charm.  "  We  are  more  than  conquerors  through 
him  that  loved  us."  The  Church,  too,  shall  go,  with  the  Lord  himself,  from  conquest 
to  conquest.  It  shall  shake  off  dependence  upon  earthly  and  carnal  weapons ;  it  .shall 
learn  the  hard  lesson  of  charity ;  its  pity  shall  be  practical,  and  its  purity  shall  be 
glorious ;  and  it  shall  realize  the  picture  painted  by  the  glowing  imagination  of  the 
inspired  artist. 

IV.  Tbb  character  and  thb  time  of  tbiumph.  On  these  points  the  text  is  espe- 
cially explicit.  God  shall  "  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet."  From  this  it  appears  that 
the  victory  shall  bo  complete.  Human  wisdom  is  prone  to  pronounce  this  impossible, 
and  represents  the  moral  conflict  as  one  most  uncertain  in  its  issues,  in  which  the 
advantage  seems  now  to  be  with  this  party,  and  anon  with  that.  And  so  far  as  this 
life  is  concerned,  we  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  we  shall  reach  a  position  from 
which  we  look  down  and  back  upon  the  battle-field,  as  those  superior  to  Satan's 
assaults,  delivered  altogether  from  danger  and  from  fear.  Yet  hero  we  have  an 
assurance  of  complete  and  lasting  victory.  If  Satan  is  to  be  bruised  beneath  our  feet, 
that  implies  that  he  shall  be  crushed.  The  figurative  language  depicts  a  conqueror, 
with  his  foe  at  his  mercy,  possessing  no  further  power  for  resistance  and  mischief.  "  Is 
it  possible,"  you  ask,  who  have  wrestled  long  and  hard  with  the  foe  of  souls — "  is  it  pos- 
sible that,  over  such  an  adversary,  so  feeble  a  soldier  of  righteousness  as  I  shall  ever 
triumph  ?  "  Here  is  the  answer :  "  They  overcame  the  accuser  of  the  brethren  by  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb."  Nor  have  you  long  to  wait;  for  this  shall  happen  "shortly." 
The  rtrife  is  fierce,  but  it  shall  not  be  protracted.  When  your  fidelity  is  tried  and 
proved,  the  power  of  the  enemy  shall  be  crippled,  and  he  himself  shall  be  thrust  down, 
*nd  you  shall  have  the  crown  of  life. 

"  'Tis  but  a  little  while, 

And  he  shall  come  again, 
Who  died  that  we  might  live,  who  lives 
That  we  with  him  may  reign  I " 

Vers.  25 — 27. — A  comprehensive  doxology.     It  haB  often  been  noticed  that  the 
thoughts  of  the  Apostle  Paul  rushed  with  such  swiftness  through  his  mind  that  they 


OH.  XVI.  1—27.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  PAUL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  465 

could  scarcely  find  coherent  expression ;  one  seems  to  follow  and  to  efface  that  which 
precedes ;  and  the  unity  of  the  whole  is  with  difficulty  discernible  because  of  the 
pressure  upon  the  attention  of  the  several  paits.  It  is  so  with  these  closing  versea  o'f 
the  Epistle  to  the  Romans;  they  introduce  to  the  reader's  mind  so  very  many  subjects, 
and  they  contain  so  many  memorable  observations,  that  he  is  likely  to  forget  that  they 
constitute  a  doxology.  But  to  the  mind  of  the  writer  the  intention  to  utter  closing 
words  of  praise  was  present  and  powerful;  and  the  reasons  and  motives  for  praise 
crowded  in  upon  his  mind  with  such  rapidity  and  force  that  he  could  hardly  bring  his 
Epistle  to  its  conclusion.  Let  us  endeavour  to  appreciate  the  comprehensiveness  of  this 
great  doxology. 

I.  This  doxology  contains  a  cblebbation  oi'  Divine  attributes.  Three  are 
brought  forward,  two  of  them  explicitly,  and  one  implicitly,  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
enhance  our  conception  of  God's  character,  and  to  summon  the  Church  of  Christ  to 
the  congenial  exercise  of  lowly  and  adoring  praise.  1.  Power.  2.  Wisdom.  3.  Bene- 
volence. All  these  attributes  are  connected  with  the  gospel  which  Christians  have 
received,  and  which  is  intended  for  the  illumination  and  salvation  of  all  men.  Though 
benevolence  is  not  mentioned,  it  is  implied  in  the  statements  of  God's  designs  of  mercy 
towards  all  nations,  made  at  the  close  of  ver.  26. 

II.  This  doxology  contains  a  compendium  oj  Christian  doctbine.  1.  The 
substance  of  Christian  truth  is  contained  in  the  Person  and  ministry  of  Jesus  Christ. 
2.  This  is  represented  as  a  gospel,  or  glad  tidings  from  God  to  men.  3.  And  as  a 
revealed  mystery,  something  which  existed  in  the  mind  and  counsels  of  God  ftom 
eternity,  which  was  treated  throughout  the  earlier  ages  of  human  history  as  a  secret, 
concealed  beneath  promises  and  types  and  sacrifices,  but  only  made  manifest  upon  the 
institution  of  the  new  and  spiritual  kingdom  of  truth  and  righteousness. 

III.  This  doxology  contains  a  pkomisb  of  wobld-widb  blessings  to  man.  The 
large  heart  of  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  was  in  perfect  sympathy  with  the  love 
of  God  revealed  in  Christ,  and  with  the  vast  scheme  of  human  redemption.  It  is  like 
himself — the  unselfish,  compassionate,  truly  heroic  nature  that  he  was — that,  in  closing 
this  Epistle,  which  has  sometimes  been  misrepresented  as  teaching  the  limitation  pif 
Divine  mercy  and  the  substitution  of  arbitrariness  for  pity,  St.  Paul  should  thus  refer 
to  the  glorious  future  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Saviour  upon  earth.  He  glorified  God 
that  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God  should  be  published  to  all  nations,  thiit 
this  should  be  by  Divine  prediction  and  by  Divine  command,  and  that  the  purpose  of 
such  publication  was,  not  the  condemnation  of  the  sons  of  men,  but  salvation,  as 
explained  in  that  elevated  and  truly  Christian  phrase,  "  the  obedience  of  faith." 

IV.  This  doxology  implies  a  wish  and  prayer  for  the  stability  in  faith 
and  holiness  of  those  to  whom   and  fob   whose  benefit  the  Epistle  was 

WRITTEN. 

V.  This  doxology  concludes  the  Epistle  with  an  aboeiption  op  fbaisb  and 
honour  to  the  God  of  all  obaob  and  salvation.  The  whole  treatise  is  inspiTed 
by  a  reverent  and  grateful  spirit,  and  is  evidently  an  effort  to  represent  the  true  moral 
glory  of  the  Lord  of  all;  and  it  is  appropriate  that  it  should  close  as  it  does  with 
ascribing  glory,  through  Jesus  Christ,  to  God  the  only  wise. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — "  Fhoete  our  sister : "  a  sermon  to  young  women.  The  Rev.  W.  S.  Swan- 
son,  speaking  some  time  ago  at  Manchester,  showed  that  the  religions  of  the  East  were 
powerless  to  regenerate  the  heart  and  purify  the  life,  and  that,  however  excellent  some 
of  them  may  appear  in  theory,  they  utterly  failed  in  practice.  Among  other  things 
he  said,  "  I  ask  what  ailaptation  have  we  found  in  these  religions  to  meet  the  wants, 
to  heal  the  wounds  of  woman,  and  to  give  her  her  proper  and  rightful  position  ? 
What  have  they  done  to  free  her  from  the  oppression  that  imprisons,  degrades,  and 
brutalizes  her?  What  has  'the  light  of  Asia'  done  to  brighten  her  lot?  What 
ray  of  comfort  have  these  religions  shed  into  the  shambles  where  she  is  bought  and 
sold  ?  What  have  they  done  to  sweeten  and  purify  life  for  her  ?  Why  I  her  place 
in  the  so-called  paradises  of  some  of  them,  in  the  way  ia  which  it  is  painted,  only  bums 

ROMANS.  2  h 


466  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xvi.  1— 27. 


the  brand  of  shame  more  deeply  on  her  brow."  Christianity  alone  has  given  woman 
her  rightful  place.  Woman  occupies  an  honourable  position  in  the  Bible,  and  every 
wise  provision  is  made  for  her,  especially  for  the  widow  in  her  helplessness  and  loneli- 
ness. In  the  Old  Testament  we  have  such  noble  women  as  Deborah  and  Hannah 
Euth  and  Esther.  In  the  New  Testament  we  have  Mary  the  mother  of  our  Satiourj 
Mary  of  Bethany,  Lydia,  Dorcas,  and  many  others.  Women  occupied  an  important 
place  in  the  early  Christian  Church.  At  Philippi,  for  example,  when  St.  Paul  went  to 
the  place  "where  prayer  was  wont  to  be  made,"  he  found  that  little  prayer-meeting 
entirely  composed  of  women.  In  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  we  find  him  sending  many 
messages  to  the  Christian  women  of  various  Churches,  and  commending  many  of  them 
for  their  faithfulness  and  devotion  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  Among  those  whom  he 
thus  mentions  is  Phoebe.  We  know  nothing  of  Phoebe's  history  beyond  what  is  stated 
here,  and  the  additional  fact  mentioned  in  a  note  at  the  end  ot  this  Epistle  that  she  was 
flie  bearer  of  this  letter  to  the  Christians  at  Rome. 

I.  Ph(EBe  was  a  sbevant.  It  would  appear  that  she  was  a  lady  of  some  means. 
She  devoted  her  means  and  her  time  to  assisting  the  poor  and  the  helpless.  She  had 
been  "  a  succourer  of  many"  (ver.  2).  But  whatever  position  she  occupied,  she  bears 
the  name  of  servant.  Now,  there  is  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of  in  the  name  of  servant. 
Every  one  who  is  worth  anything  is  a  servant  in  some  sense.  The  less  service  any 
one  renders,  the  more  useless  he  or  she  is  in  the  world.  The  sovereign  upon  the 
throne,  the  judges  and  magistrates,  lawyers,  medical  men,  men  of  business,  ministers 
of  the  gospel,  all  are  the  servants  of  others.  Be  faithful  in  yowr  service.  The  maxim 
of  many  in  our  time  seems  to  be  to  take  all  the  pay  they  can  and  render  as  little 
service  as  possible.  That  is  not  honest.  Nor  is  it  honest  to  work  only  when  the  eyes 
6f  your  employer  are  upon  you.  "  Servants,  be  obedient  to  your  masters  according  to 
the  flesh,  with  fear  and  trembling,  in  singleness  of  your  heart,  as  unto  Christ ;  not  with 
eye-service,  as  men-pleasers ;  but  as  the  servants  of  Christ,  doing  the  will  of  God  from 
the  heart ;  with  good  will  doing  service,  as  to  the  Lord  and  not  to  men."  Be  trust- 
worthy. Regard  what  belongs  to  your  master  or  your  mistress  with  as  much  care  aa 
if  it  were  your  own.  If  your  employer's  children  are  committed  to  your  care,  how 
scrupulous  you  should  be  regarding  theml  Never  let  them  hear  from  your  Ups  a 
profane  or  evil  word.  If  you  are  teaching  them,  seek  to  communicate  to  their  youth- 
ful minds  all  the  good  principles  that  you  can.  Tour  work  may  be  a  quiet  work, 
but  it'  it  is  done  faithfully  it  is  a  lasting  work.  You  may  not  receive  much  notice  or 
much  thanks  from  your  employer,  but  he  that  seeth  in  secret  himself  shall  reward  you 
openly. 

II.  Phcebb  wab  a  seevant  of  God.  That  was  the  secret  of  her  useful  and 
honoured  life.  It  is  the  highest  thing  that  could  be  said  of  any  one.  Employers  are 
beginning  to  find  out  that  God-fearing  men  and  God-fearing  women  are  not  the  worst 
servants.  1.  A  servant  of  Ood  will  not  be  the  servant  of  this  world.  Many  young 
ladies  who  call  themselves  Christians  seem  to  spend  their  life  altogether  in  the  service 
of  selfish  pleasure  and  worldly  amusement.  2.  A  servant  of  God  mil  not  keep  the 
company  of  the  godless.  There  is  no  subject  on  which  young  women  in  our  towns  and 
cities  need  to  be  more  plainly  warned  than  the  choice  of  their  companions  of  both 
sexes.  How  many  happy  and  promising  young  lives  have  been  blighted,  how  many 
hearts  have  been  broken,  by  foolish  companionships  and  too  hasty  intimacy !  The 
casual  knowledge  obtained  of  any  one  at  an  evening  party  or  a  pleasure  excursion  is 
no  basis  on  which  to  form  an  engagement  on  which  depends  the  happiness  of  a  lifetime. 

"  Thrice  blest  whose  lives  are  faithful  prayers. 
Whose  loves  in  higher  love  endure. 
What  souls  possess  themselves  so  pure? 
Or  is  there  blessedness  like  theirs  ?  " 

in.  Ph<bbb  was  a  servant  of  the  Churoh.  That  is  to  say,  she  was  a  helper  of 
God's  people.  She  was  a  helper  in  Christian  work.  There  are  many  young  women 
whose  lives  are  absolutely  wasted,  who  are  utterly  wretched  and  miserable,  for  want  of 
something  to  do.  How  many  forms  of  useful  service  there  are  in  which  a  young 
woman  may  engage  1  She  may  teach  in  the  Sunday  school;  visit  the  aged  and  the  sick, 
ai;d  minister  unto  them  in  spiritual  things,  and  perhaps  also  to  their  bodily  comfort 


OH.  XVI.  1—27.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  467 

and  relief;  slie  may  invite  the  careless  to  the  house  of  God.  And  a  woman's  influence 
ia  often  powerful  for  good  where  even  a  Christian  man  would  utterly  fail  to  reach  tha 
hardened  heart. — C.  H.  L 

Vera.  1 — 19.-^Words  of  counsel  for  a  Ohristian  Chweh.  The  practical  exhortations 
given  in  most  of  these  closing  chapters  of  this  Epistle  have  reference  mainly  to  the 
duties  of  individual  Christians.  The  exhortations  of  this  last  chapter  refer  specially  to 
the  duty  of  the  local  Church  in  its  corporate  capacity. 

I.  Attention  to  strangers.  Consideration  for  strangers  was  constantly  impressed 
upon  the  Jewish  people  in  ancient  times.  "  Oppress  not  the  stranger "  (Exod.  xxii.  21 ; 
xxiii.  9,  etc.) ;  "The  stranger  that  dwelleth  among  you  shall  be  unto  you  as  one  born 
among  you,  and  thou  shalt  love  him  as  thyself"  (Lev.  xix.  34).  And  Malachi 
denounces  judgments  upon  those  "  that  turn  aside  the  stranger  from  his  right " 
(iii.  5).  So  here  Paul  enjoins  it  upon  the  Church  at  Eome.  "  I  commend  unto 
you  Phoebe  our  sister  .  .  .  that  ye  receive  her  in  the  Lord,  as  becometh  saints,  and 
that  ye  assist  her  in  whatsoever  business  she  hath  need  of  you  "  (vers.  1,  2).  There 
is  much  need  for  such  an  exhortation  in  the  Ohristian  Churches  of  to-day.  Strangers 
go  in  and  out  of  our  Churches  unnoticed  and  uncared  for.  False  modesty  or  excessive 
etiquette  prevents  the  members  of  the  Church  from  spealting  to  them.  Consider  the 
possible  effects  of  such  neglect.  A  young  man,  far  from  home,  exposed  to  many 
temptations  and  godless  surroundings,  enters  a  church.  No  one  speaks  to  him.  He 
drifts  away.  He  knows  that  in  the  drinking-saloon,  perhaps,  he  will  find  a  welcome 
and  a  friendly  shake  of  the  hand.  "  The  children  of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their 
generation  than  the  children  of  light."  Why  should  not  Christians  be  as  anxious  to 
welcome  the  stranger  to  the  house  of  God  as  the  godless  are  to  welcome  him  to  their 
haunts  of  giddy  pleasure  and  sin?  Another,  hovering  on  the  verge  of  unbelief, 
unsettled  by  the  silly  popular  literature  of  our  day,  enters  a  Christian  church.  He 
sees  an  element  of  unreality  and  of  selfishness  strongly  marked.  He  too  drifts  away. 
Or  some  stranger  enters  a  Christian  church  who  is  in  trouble  or  in  perplexity,  and 
to  whom  a  word  of  sympathy  or  guidance  would  be  welcome.  But  from  the  self- 
absorbed  and  stand-off  Christians  no  encouragement  is  received.  Can  we  wonder 
that  such  persons  are  alienated  from  the  Church,  are  often  alienated  from  Christ? 
And  what  does  Christ  think  of  all  this?  Listen  to  his  words  on  the  great  day: 
"  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  not  in."  And  when  those  whom  he  shall 
thus  address  shall  say,  "Lord,  when  saw  we  thee  a  stranger,  and  took  thee  not  in?" 
then  shall  he  answer  them,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  to  one  of  the  least  of  these 
my  brethren,  ye  did  it  not  to  me."  Attention  shown  to  the  stranger  is  regarded  by 
the  Saviour  as  attention  shown  to  himself.  Such  attention  "  becometh  saints  "  (ver.  2). 
But  however  the  Church  may  treat  strangers,  they  need  not  remain  strangers  to  Christ. 
He  has  a  word  and  a  welcome  for  all. 

II.  Attention  to  one  another.  While  we  are  to  think  of  strangers  we  must  not 
forget  our  own  brethren. 

"  We  have  careful  thought  for  the  stranger, 
And  smiles  for  the  sometime  guest; 
Bat  oft  for  our  own 
The  bitter  tone. 
Though  we  love  our  own  the  best." 

St.  Paul  here  exhorts  that  they  should  greet  one  another  as  brethren.  "  Salute  one 
another  with  an  holy  kiss  "  (ver.  16) — the  customary  mode  of  salutation  at  the  time. 
Is  not  this  exhortation  also — namely,  of  friendliness  and  brotherly  kindness  among 
Christians — much  needed  in  the  Christian  Church  of  to-day  ?  How  many  professing 
Christians  pass  in  and  out  of  the  same  church,  sit  down  at  the  same  communion-table, 
and  never  exchange  greetings  with  one  another !  Alas !  after  centuries  of  Christianity, 
we  are  but  beginners  in  the  school  of  Christ !  Our  profession  of  fHendship  for  Christ 
is  not  worth  much  if  we  are  not  willing  to  make  friends  of  his  brethren.  But  it  may 
be  said,  "  We  cannot  ignore  social  differences.  Howr  am  I  to  recognize  in  the  street  as 
a  friend,  how  am  I  to  shake  hands  with,  one  of  lower  social  position  ?  "  Ah,  yen  1  nrid* 
i$  the  difficulty.    Missionaries  tell  us  that  caste  in  Eastern  countries  is  one  of  the 


468  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS,    [oh.  xvi.  1— 27. 

great  hindrances  to  the  spread  of  the  gospeL  It  is  the  same  at  home.  There  ia  caste 
in  Christian  nations  as' well  as  in  heathen  lands.  Tet  It  ought  not  to  he  so.  Kowhere 
were  such  differences  more  marked  than  at  Borne.  There  were  the  well-defined  and 
sharply  marked  classes  of  patricians  and  plebeians.  Yet  Paul  ignores  them.  Many 
of  the  persons  whom  he  mentions  by  name  in  his  salutations  in  this  chapter  were 
slaves.  Yet  they  also  were  to  be  included  in  the  attention  of  the  other  members  of 
the  Church.  Some  one  may  say,  "This  is  quite  revolutionary.  It  would  upset  all  our 
social  arrangements."  Perhaps  so.  And  Christianity  must  make  greater  revolutions 
yet  in  the  character  and  habits  of  professing  Christians  if  it  is  to  win  the  world  for 
Christ.  More  attention  and  kindness  should  be  shown  by  one  Christian  to  another  than 
is  commonly  the  case. 

III.  Avoidance  of  the  quahbelsohk.  "  How  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  mark  them 
who  cause  divisions  and  ofiences  contrary  to  the  doctrine  which  ye  have  learned ;  and 
avoid  them"  (ver.  17).  And  then  he  describes  the  character  and  motives  of  tha 
qua/rrehome.  "  For  they  that  are  such  serve  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  theu  own 
belly  "  (ver.  18).  That  is  to  say,  those  who  are  quarrelsome  in  disposition  are  those 
who  put  their  own  ideas,  their  own  comfort,  their  own  selfish  desires  or  feelings,  in 
the  forefront.  Interfere  with  their  plans,  thwart  their  ambition,  fail  to  respect  their 
pride,  and  they  are  ready  to  take  offence.  The  duty  of  the  Christian  is  to  avoid  such 
persons.  Such  is  the  advice  St.  Paul  gives  here.  Such  advice  he  gave  elsewhere. 
Speaking  in  his  letter  to  Timothy  of  disputatious  persons,  he  says,  "  From  such  with- 
draw thyself"  (1  Tim.  vi.  6).  Writing -to  the  Thessalonians,  he  says,  "Now  we 
commaikd  you,  brethren,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  ye  withdraw 
yourselves  from  every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly  "  (2  Thess.  iii.  6).  The  reason 
of  this  is  obvious.  If  quarrelsome  persons  are  left  to  themselves,  they  will  soon  have 
nobody  to  quarrel  with.  It  is  an  old  saying  that  it  takes  two  to  make  a  quarrel.  It 
might  be  added  that  it  takes  three  to  keep  it  up.  A  third  party  often  fans  the  flame. 
If  the  Christian  is  brought  into  contact  with  quarrels  at  all,  it  should  only  be  as  a 
reconciler.  "  It  is  an  honour  to  a  man  to  cease  from  strife ; "  •'  Blessed  are  the  peace- 
makers :  for  they  shall  be  called  the  children  of  God." — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  20—27. — The  obfectand  the  strength  of  a  Christian  Church.  With  these  two 
important  thou^ts  St.  Paul  closes  his  Epistle. 

L  The  Chuboh'b  objbct.  The  Epistle  ends  with  an  ascription  of  glory  to  Gtod 
(vers.  25 — 27).  This  was  the  great  end  the  apostle  had  in  view  in  writing  his  Epistle. 
And  he  would  have  his  readers  remember  that  this,  too,  is  the  great  end  for  which  a 
Church  of  Christ  exists.  "  Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God  and  enjoy  him  for  ever." 
We  should  glorify  the  love  of  the  Father.  This  is  the  potent  influence  to  draw  men's 
hearts  from  sin.  "  God  so  loved  the  world ; "  "  Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the 
Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us ! "  We  should  glorify  the  saving  power  of  Jesus  Christ 
the  Son.  This  gives  the  sinner  confidence  to  come  to  him.  "  Believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved;"  "I  give  unto  them  eternal  life;  and  they  shall 
never  perish."  We  should  glorify  the  samcttfying  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  Ye  shall 
receive  power  af&gjthat  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you ; "  "  When  he,  the  Spirit  of 
truth  is  come,  h^wall  guide  you  into  all  truth." 

II.  The  Chuboh's  strength.  "  The  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your 
feet  shortly  "  (ver.  20) ;  "Now  to  him  that  is  of  power  to  stablish  you"  (ver.  25). 
The  Church's  strength  it  not  necessarily  in  its  numbers.  Gideon's  army  was  at  one  time 
too  numerous.  "  The  people  that  are  with  thee  are  too  many  "  (Judg.  vii.  2,  4).  Nor 
in  its  wealth.  Wealth  has  often  been  the  weakness  rather  than  the  strength  of  the 
Christian  Church.  Our  strength  is  in  having  Ood  in  the  midst  of  ut,  and  in  our 
living  near  to  him.  'This  truth  is  wonderfully  verified  In  the  history  of  the  little 
Church  of  the  Vaudois.  Through  seven  centuries  of  almost  incessant  persecution,  that 
faithful  and  primitive  little  band — sometimes  not  exceeding  a  thousand  in  number — 
withstood  the  attacks  of  popes  and  princes,  defied  and  defeated  mighty  armies,  "  out 
of  weakness  were  made  strong."  Their  strength  was  unquestionably  in  the  presence 
of  God  with  them,  and  in  their  unfaltering  fidelity  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  "  God 
hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confoimd  the  things  which  are  mighty." 
-O.H.I. 


CB.  XTL  1—27.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANa  469 

Vers.  1—16,  21 — 23. — Christian  idlutaUons.  There  remain  now  only  salatations 
and  conclusions.  But  the  same  courteous  love  shall  be  manifested  to  the  end.  Nowhere 
do  the  ethics  of  the  new  life  come  out  more  delicately  than  in  these  trivialities,  as  soma 
would  deem  them,  of  epistolary  correspondence.    They  are  as  the  fragrance  of  the  rose. 

I,  First,  the  letter-bearer  is  commended  to  their  care.  "  Phoebe  our  sister,  who  is 
a  servant  of  the  Ohuroh."  The  mere  sisterhood  in  Christ  should  be  enough,  but  she 
was  one  in  honour,  the  honour  that  comes  of  loving  service,  being  a  "  deaconess  "  of  the 
Church.  How  many  offices  of  mercy  conld  be  filled  then,  as  now,  by  the  ministrations 
of  gentle  women  t  Some  such  office  she  fulfilled — she  had  been  "  a  succourer  of  many." 
Nay,  even  of  Paid  also,  perhaps  in  some  illness.  Surely  here  was  an  additional  reason 
why  they  should  receive  her,  and  assist  her  in  whatsoever  matter  she  might  have  need 
of  them. 

II.  Next,  many  Christians  at  Borne  whom  he  knew  are  saluted  by  name — such  doubtless 
as  had  removed  thither  from  scenes  of  his  former  work,  and  through  some  of  whom,  per- 
haps, the  gospel  had  first  been  made  known  at  Borne :  Prisca  and  Aquila,  those  earnest 
workers,  througii  whom  also,  in  some  great  peril,  his  life  had  been  spared  at  the  peril 
of  their  own;  Epsenetiis  the  beloved;  Mary,  who  in  some  way  had  wrought  muoh  for 
them  i  Andronicus  and  Junias,  kinsmen,  who  had  also  shared  his  bonds,  and  were  earlier 
than  himself  in  the  faith  of  Christ ;  Ampliatus  the  beloved  in  Christ ;  Urbanus  the 
fellow-worker,  and  Stachys  the  beloved ;  Apelles,  whose  Christian  faith  had  been  sorely 
tested,  but  who  had  come  forth  approved  from  the  fire ;  the  household  of  Aristobulns, 
who  himself  perchance  was  not  in  Christ ;  Herodion,  a  kinsman ;  those  of  the  house- 
hold of  Narcissus  who  were  in  the  Lord;  Tryphasna  and  Tryphosa,  and  Persis  the 
beloved, earnest  workers  in  Christ;  Bufiis  the  elect,  and  his  mother,  who  had  also  acted 
a  mother's  part  to  Paul;  Asyncritus,  Phlegon,  Hermes,  Patrobas,  Hermas,  and  the 
brethren  among  whom  they  worked ;  Philologus  and  Julia,  Nereus  and  his  sister,  and 

,  Olympas,  and  all  the  saints  with  them.  And  also,  to  those  whom  he  knew  not,  but 
who  were  in  Christ,  as  well  as  to  those  mentioned,  whom  he  knew,  he  would  have  the 
salutation  given :  "  Salute  one  another."  And  not  on  his  behalf  alone,  but  on  behalf  of 
all  amongst  whom  he  had  preached  Christ,  and  who,  knowing  his  intent  to  visit  Borne, 
had  charged  him  with  their  love. 

III.  Tet,  again,  there  are  special  ones  who  join  him  more  formally  in  these  salutings : 
Timothy,  his  fellow-worker,  joined  expressly  with  him  in  some  Epistles  (see  1  and  2 
Thessalonians,  2  Corinthians,  Colossians,  Philippians,  Philemon),  but  not  in  this,  an 
authoritative  exposition  of  the  gospel,  for  which  he,  under  Christ,  must  be  alone  respon- 
sible ;  Lucius,  Jason,  and  Sosipater,  kinsmen ;  Tertius,  the  writer,  suffered,  by  Paul's 
exquisite  delicacy,  to  give  his  salutation  in  his  own  name;  Gains,  the  host  of  the 
Church ;  Erastus  the  treasurer ;  and  brother  Quartus. 

It  was  done.  The  interchange  of  love  was  made.  An  illustration  was  given  of  that 
like-mindedness  of  love  which  he  wished  to  see  characterize  the  Churches  of  God.  It 
only  remained  now  that  he  should  commend  them  to  the  grace  of  God. — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  17 — 20. — A  last  warning.  There  might,  however,  be  some  advent  amongst 
them  of  a  malign  influence  that  should  mar  this  brotherly  love,  and  he  must  say  one 
warning  word.  How  had  the  trail  of  the  serpent  been  on  his  path  1  At  Galatia,  in 
Corinth,  and  elsewhere,  false  teachers  had  come  in,  seeking  to  undo  his  work ;  those 
Judaizers,  who  sought  to  corrupt  the  young  believers  from  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel. 
And  would  they  not  seek  to  undo  the  work  at  Bome  ?  Yes,  verily ;  for  the  obedience  of 
the  Boman  Christians  had  come  abroad  unto  all  men,  and  the  tidings  of  their  obedience 
of  faith  would  be  but  the  signal  to  these  destroyers  for  a  new  errand  of  cunning  and 
greed.    He  warns  them. 

I.  The  wabnino.  The  work  of  these  false  teachers  is  spoken  of  first  in  Acts  xv.  1, 
where  we  read,  "  And  certain  men  which  came  down  from  Judsea  taught  the  brethren. 
Except  ye  be  circumcised  after  the  manner  of  Moses,  ye  cannot  be  saved;"  "false 
brethren,"  the  apostle  calls  them  in  Gal.  ii.  4, "  who  came  in  privily  to  spy  out  our 
liberty  which  we  have  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  they  might  bring  us  into  bondage."  And 
the  whole  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  and  large  part  of  the  Second  Epistle  to  Aha 
Corinthians,  were  occupied  in  the  endeavour  to  counteract  their  poisonous  represetn**- 
tions.    Their  aim  was  to  make  the  Gentiles  enter  the  Christian  Church  by  the  Jew  iv 


470  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAtJL  TO  THE  ROMANS.    IcB.  xn.  1—21. 

door,  becoming  indeed  but  an  appanage  of  Judaic  Christiaaity.  A  yet  baser  aim,  as  we 
learn  here,  and  from  2  Cor.  xi.  20  and  Fhil.  iii.  2, 19,  was  their  own  sensual  aggrandize- 
ment :  they  served  their  own  belly.  They  would  come  to  Rome,  for  they  possessed 
truly  a  missionary  zeal,  without  missionary  love ;  they  would  come  to  Borne,  and 
"their  smooth  and  fair  speech"  might  easily  "beguile  the  hearts  of  the  innocent." 
That  these  presentiments  were  sadly  fulfilled,  we  learn  from  Phil.  i.  15 — 17,  and  over 
these  false  teachers  he  weeps,  as  he  tells  us,  in  Phil.  iii.  18, 19.  What  was  to  be  the  alti- 
tude and  action  of  the  Romans  ?  The  prescription  was  a  simple  one  :  they  could  tell 
from  their  observance  of  other  Churches  the  fruit  of  their  teaching,  viz.  "  divisions  and 
occasions  of  stumbling,"  and  by  their  fruits  they  were  to  know  them.  And  knowing 
them  ?  to  "  turn  from  them."  There  was  to  be  no  parleying,  no  disputation ;  the  bird 
was  not  to  catch  the  glare  of  the  serpent's  eye,  lest  it  be  fascinated  and  drawn  into  the 
jaws  of  death !  "  Wise  unto  that  which  is  good  "  they  might  be,  using  their  powers  of 
thought  to  advance  themselves  in  all  well-doing.  But  "  simple  unto  that  which  is  evil ; " 
for  any  argumentation  here  is  fatal,  aud  a  strong,  sharp,  unhesitating  stroke  is  needed, 
that  shall  sunder  us  for  ever  from  the  deadly  peril.  Such  was  to  be  their  action  :  an 
absolute  avoidance  of  him  who  was  obviously,  at  first  sight,  Satan,  but  who,  if  they 
tarried  to  gaze  and  hearken,  might  soon  be  "transformed  into  an  angel  of  light" 
(2  Cor.  xi.  14). 

n.  The  promise.  What!  was  he  against  them?  Yes,  the  great  foe.  They  well 
might  tremble.  But  there  was  a  greater  One  for  them,  even  God  himself;  and  the 
ancient  promise  of  Gen.  iii.  15  should  be  fulfilled  to  them,  if  they  had  faith  in  God. 
"  The  God  of  peace,"  who  will  conserve  the  harmony  of  his  people,  and  the  peace  of 
the  believer's  heart,  if  there  be  faith  in  him ;  who  can  control  all  the  confusions  and 
malice  of  his  foes,  to  work  out  his  designs  of  good — he  shall  soon  bruise  Satan  under 
them !  The  battle  now  may  seem  long,  but  when  we  look  back  from  the  heights  of 
our  triumph,  it  will  be  "  but  as  yesterday  when  it  is  past,  and  as  a  watch  in  the  night." 
Then 

"  Fight,  nor  think  the  battle  long ; 
Soon  shall  victory  tune  your  song  I " 

And  meanwhile,  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you." — ^T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  25 — 27. — The  final  commendation.  The  final  commendation,  left  imperfect 
as  regards  mere  form ;  but  hearts  were  full,  his  and  theirs,  and  full  hearts  do  not  utter 
all  they  feel.  "  I  commend  you " — so  in  Acts  xx.  32.  But  they  will  understand  his 
meaning,  without  the  utterance  of  the  words,  and  he  need  but  point  upwards,  and  say, 
••  To  him,"  etc.  Shall  we  reverently  gaze  on  this  prayer  of  an  apostle's  full  heart  ?  So 
we  note — the  power  of  God;  the  principles  of  the  exercise  of  God's  power;  the  glad 
committal  to  that  wise  power  through  Jesus  Christ. 

L  God  was  "able  to  stablish"  them.  Paul  had  expressed  the  desire  in  ch.  i.  11  to 
impart  to  them  some  spiritual  gift,  that  they  might  be  established.  He  yet  hopes  to 
iee  them  with  that  intent.  And  surely  he  may  well  trust  that  this  letter,  written  in 
fulfilment  of  his  mission  from  Christ,  may  have  such  result.  But  only  God's  power 
can  effect  the  result,  when  man  has  done  his  best.  And  God's  power  can  accomplish 
all  things;  he  is  "able  to  stablish."  The  manifold  stablishment :  we  need  but  glance 
along  the  line  of  the  Epistle  to  determine  that.  In  their  faith,  surely,  in  God's  for- 
giving love,  which  was  the  basis  of  the  new  life ;  in  their  death  to  sin,  and  new  life 
unto  God,  which  such  true  faith  in  God's  love  through  Christ  must  work ;  in  their 
humility  and  love  amongst  one  another  as  Christians;  in  their  submission  to  the 
rightful  powers  of  the  state,  and  their  true,  love-inspired  justice  towards  their  fellow- 
citizens;  in  their  hope  of  the  coming  of  God's  perfect  kingdom;  and  in  their  determined 
resistance  of  all  incoming  evil :  in  this  God  could  stablish  them,  and  God  alone. 

II.  And,  "according  to  my  gospel."  The  reception  of  God's  power  was  conditioned 
upon  the  reception  of  God's  truth,  for  "  the  power  of  God  can  act  only  in  agreement 
with  the  thought  of  God  "  (Godet).  If  they  would  be  firm  in  the  faith,  and  in  the  new 
life  of  faith,  they  must  intelligently  believe  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Yes,  for  Paul's  gospel 
was  Christ's  gospel,  and  he  preached  not  himself,  but  Christ  Jesus.  And  this  preaching 
of  Christ  was  not  according  to  his  own  skill  and  wisdom;  it  had  been  revealed  from 
heaven  (see  Gal.  i.  11, 12, 16).    It  had  not  been  always  revealed ;  a  "  mystery  "  oncej 


CH.  xvLi-2t.]    THE  EPISTLE  OP  tATJL  TO  THE  EOMANS.  4?! 

"kept  in  silence  through  times  eternal :"  hidden  in  the  thought  of  God  from  the  begin- 
ning, and  through  the  earlier  ages  of  the  world's  history.  Oh,  these  blessed  secrets  of 
God,  ready  to  burst  upon  us  with  a  shock  of  surprise  I  This  secret  had  broken  on  the 
world ;  the  mystery  was  "  manifested,"  and  "  made  known  unto  all  the  nations : " 
manifested  to  the  apostles,  pre-eminently  to  Paul,  and  made  known  by  them,  not  as 
an  absolutely  new  thing,  but  as  hinted  at  in  earlier  prophecies ;  made  known  in  tfieir 
teaching  and  writing,  that  all  the  world  might  know.  And  the  end,  as  before,  "  obe- 
dience of  faith  " — the  yielding  of  the  whole  mind  and  heart  to  the  message  an*  grace  of 
the  eternal  God,  that  so  his  power  might  work  in  them  to  their  salvation  and  eterflal 
Btablishment. 

III.  To  such  a  One  he  commends  them,  and  to  the  word  of  his  grace.  He  had 
taught  them  according  to  his  best  wisdom  ;  should  he  see  them,  he  will  build  them  up 
according  to  his  best  power.  But  his  wisdom  and  power  are  nothing  apart  from  the 
power  of  God  "  only  wise ; "  and  when  his  wisdom  and"  power  have  done  their  best, 
Btill  God's  wise  power  must  work  all.  He  may  see  them ;  he  may  not :  but,  in  any 
case,  tiie  eternal  God  is  their  Befuge,  and  round  and  underneath  are  the  everlasting 
arms ! 

To  him  be  the  glory,  through  Christ!  "For  of  him,  and  through  him,  and  to  hira 
are  all  things.     Amen." — ^T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  1,  2. — A  Christian  commendatiun.  It  is  an  honour  and  a  help  to  receive 
an  introduction  from  one  high  in  authority.  Men  of  exalted  station  incur  a  serious 
responsibility  in  the  matter  of  granting  or  withholding  letters  of  recommendation.  The 
Apostle  Paul  had  known  what  it  was  to  be  treated  with  scant  courtesy  by  the  Chm'ch 
at  Jerusalem,  until  he  was  warmly  taken  by  the  hand  by  Barnabas.  Doubtless  this 
remembrance  quickened  his  desire  to  support  and  shield  others  in  a  similar  position. 
How  strongly  he  advocates  the  cause  of  Phoebe  ! 

I.  Claims  to  the  eeoard  of  a  Chdech.  1.  As  a  fillovi-leliever,  a  "  sister "  in 
Christ.  To  the  instinctive  sympathy  which  nature  fosters,  grace  adds  a  further  reason 
in  the  reminder  of  the  one  communion  to  which  all  belong  who  have  professed  loyalty 
to  the  one  Lord.  "  Work  good  toward  all  men,  and  especially  toward  them  that  are  of 
the  household  of  faith."  This  mark  of  distinction  is  of  necessity  more  visible  where 
the  surroundings  are  not  even  nominally  Christian,  and  where  a  confession  of  faith  in 
the  new  doctrine  is  a  signal  for  tribulation  and  persecution.  2.  As  an  officer  of  a  sister 
Church.  She  was  a  deaconess,  a  servant  of  the  Church,  set  apart  for  special  ministra- 
tion to  the  female  portion  of  the  community,  "Eender  honour  to  whom  honour  is 
due."  Office  is  prima  facie  an  indication  of  worth,  of  high  estimation  by  the  electing 
body.  There  are  ranks  and  orders  in  the  heavenly  hierarchy,  as  on  earth.  3.  As  one 
in  need  of  hospitable  succowr.  Need  is  itself  an  argument  for  attention  and  aid.  Other 
things  being  equal,  the  call  of  the  necessitous  is  paramount.  The  prosperous  can 
manage  well  enough,  whereas  the  situation  of  the  distressed  is  an  opportunity  for 
benevolence.  Phoebe's  errand  to  Rome  impUed  difficulty  and  insufficiency,  whether 
she  sought  redress  in  an  imperial  court  of  law,  or  the  discovery  of  some  lost  relations, 
or  the  pursuit  of  some  handicraft,  or  surgical  assistance.  4.  As  having  herself  con- 
tributed to  the  relief  of  the  suffering.  This  is  the  lex  talionis  in  its  benignant  form. 
Who  is  such  a  proper  recipient  of  charity  as  the  man  who  has  done  good  according  to 
his  means  ?  With  the  merciful  does  God  show  himself  merciful.  "  Give,  and  it  shall 
be  given  unto  you."  The  idle  vagabonds  are  not  the  deserving  poor.  Charity  organi- 
zation can  alone  bestow  alms  without  pauperizing.  5.  As  having  ministered  to  the 
writer.  Though  Phoebe's  privilege  of  tending  the  apostle  in  one  of  his  sicknesses  was 
»lso  a  duty,  the  grateful  invalid  by  no  means  forgets  her  services.  What  is  done  to 
ourselves  strikes  us  more  forcibly  than  the  aid  we  witness  rendered  to  our  neighbotirs. 
It  is  like  a  lantern  whose  rays  are  turned  full  upon  our  face ;  we  perceive  its  brightness. 
Hence  the  impulse  to  Christian  devotedness  felt  when  with  individual  consciousness  of 
indebtedness  to  Christ  we  say,  not  only,  "  He  died  to  save  sinners,"  but  also,  "  He  loved 
me,  and  gave  himself  for  me." 

II.  The  reception  bbfittino  the  Church.  This  is  an  illustration  of  the  general 
maxim  insisted  on  in  ch.  xv.  7.  1.  A  hearty  welcome  beseems  the  saints.  Eeserve  and 
coldness  melt  away  under  the  inspiring  beams  of  kinship  to  the  Saviour.    The  deeps  ef 


472  THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO   THE  EOMANS.    [oh.  xvi.  1-27- 

apathy  are  for  ever  broken  up  by  the  entrance'  of  Christ  into  the  heart.  To  receive  s 
a  fellow-member  "  in  the  Lord"  is  to  display  some  of  the  love  and  tenderness  which 
Olirist  manifested  towards  his  disciples.  It  is  quite  incompatible  with  that  frigid 
etiquette  which  suspects  new-comers,  and  resents  as  "valvar  every  outward  token  ol 
emotion.  2.  To  render  aid  to  the  whole  body  of  Ohrist  is  an  essential  part  of  every 
Ohureh'a  fv/nationa.  A  Church  exists,  not  for  its  own  aggrandizement  and  glorification, 
but  as  an  instrument  for  strengthening  and  enlarging  the  one  kingdom  of  Christ.  And 
every  power  at  its  command  must  be  utilized  as  the  very  law  of  its  life.  Where  a 
community  or  an  individual  wraps  itself  up  in  seclusion,  indifferent  to  the  welfare  of 
others,  there  the  process  of  decay  and  death  has  begun.  And  it  is  not  in  the  mass,  but 
by  single  persons,  that  the  world  is  regenerated  and  service  rendered.  The  recognition 
of  the  real  brotherhood  of  Christians  will  usher  in  millennial  days.  Affection  is  the 
central  fire  of  sainthood,  burning  up  what  is  mean  and  selfish,  and  glowing  like  a  coal 
ftom  the  altar  of  him  whose  incarnate  love  is  our  clearest  revelation  of  Deity.  3.  J^at 
is  poor  admiration  of  an  apostle  which  is  content  with  a  grudging  compliance  with  his 
lading.  Here  was  a  chance  presented  to  the  Roman  Christians  at  once  to  be  generous 
to  a  visitor,  and  to  fill  the  apostle's  heart  with  thankfulness.  And  we  to-day  do  best 
mark  our  reverence  for  apostolic  authority  and  for  the  Master  whose  instructions  are 
thus  communicated  by  a  whole-hearted  endeavour  to  carry  out  the  principles  of  New 
Testament  liberality  and  beneficence.  They  have  good  security  who  lend  unto  the 
Lord.  4.  To  honour  woman  for  her  place  and  work  is  a  sign  of  high  civilization.  It 
may  not  be  true  that  only  Christianity  has  treated  woman  with  befitting  dignity,  but 
it  is  certain  that  Christ  paid  her  signal  respect,  and  that  she  has  been  foremost  in  the 
apceptanoe  and  promulgation  of  the  faith.  The  prominence  of  woman  in  the  primitive 
Church  was  succeeded  by  somewhat  of  obscurity  and  depreciation ;  but  the  Christian 
idea  has  again  triumphed,  and  woman's  special  mission  to  soothe  the  aching  head,  and 
succour  the  weary,  and  to  minister  to  distress  as  an  angel  of  Qod,  was  never  so  fully 
discerned  and  so  warmly  appraised  as  now. 

"  Kise  I  woman,  rise 
To  thy  peculiar  and  best  altitudes 
Of  doing  good  and  of  enduring  ill — • 
Of  comforting  for  ill,  and  teaching  good. 
And  reconciling  all  that  ill  and  good 
Unto  the  patience  of  a  constant  hope." 

Female  labour  in  schools  and  missions  affords  the  brightest  prospects  of  evangelizing 
the  world.— S.  E.  A. 

Ver.  7. — A  noble  encomium.  It  is  not  without  significance  that  this,  the  most  abstruse 
aad  difficult  of  all  the  Epistles,  should  have  appended  to  it  the  longest  list  of  friendly 
greetings.  Doctrine  and  argument  are  not  necessarily  productive  of  coldness  of  heart. 
The  apostle  was  a  beautiful  examjile  of  the  blending  of  the  philosopher  and  the  gentle- 
man. Deep  thought  and  elevated  diction  were  not  joined  to  forgetfulness  of  the  cour- 
tesies of  life.  The  true  refinements  of  society  are  worthy  of  attention ;  they  lessen  the 
friction  and  harsh  grating  of  the  wheels  of  the  machinery.  Lofty  pillars  and  strong 
buttresses  may  be  graceful  as  well  as  useful.  Of  course,  reality  is  ever  preferable  to 
mere  show,  and  a  rough  demeanour  covering  sincere  affection  is  better  than  superficial 
politeness.  The  tribute  of  respect  which  is  here  paid  to  Andronious  and  Junias  suggests 
several  considerations. 

I.  The  bond  op  natural  kinship  is  immensely  strenothenkd  by  a  common 
BBLioioua  faith,  a  philosophical  Utopia  which  annuls  special  forms  of  alliance  over- 
looks a  fundamental  element  of  our  human  constitution.  A  man's  regard  for  his  own 
family  is  the  first  fulfilment  of  the  law  to  love  his  neighbour.  From  this  starting-point 
affection  may  branch  out  in  all  directions.  The  apostle  noted  as  one  of  the  signs  of  a 
corrupt  condition  that  men  were  "  without  natural  affection."  And  though  our  Lord 
would  not  permit  family  claims  to  interfere  with  disoipleship,  he  yet  rebuked  the 
Pharisees  for  encouraging  gifts  to  the  temple  from  men  who  left  their  own  parents  in 
want.  The  Saviour  made  provision  for  his  mother's  comfort  even  amid  the  agony  o( 
the  cross.    Christianity  may  divide  some  households  like  a  sword  and  fire,  but  wherf 


OH.  XVI.  1—27.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  473 

the  members  all  receive  the  gospel,  their  earthly  love  is  cemented,  transfigured,  eter- 
nalized by  loyalty  to  the  same  Lord,  and  participation  in  the  same  heavenly  hopes  and 
aims.  Like  Andrew,  who  brought  his  own  brother  to  Christ,  should  our  efforts  first  be 
directed  to  the  salvation  of  our  own  relatives  and  countrymen. 

IL  The  sincerity  of  our  religion  is  pkoved  by  fellowship  in  supfebino. 
Andronicus  and  Junias  had  shown,  by  sharing  the  imprisonment  of  the  apostle,  that 
they  were  more  than  faii-weather  Christians.  Their  fortitude  increased  the  apostle's 
affection  and  esteem.  They  had  flinched  not  when  trial  came,  but  underwent  shame 
and  loss  for  Jesus  Christ.  The  Church  has  always  need  of  stout-hearted  disciples, 
ready  to  face  obloquy,  ridicule,  poverty,  rather  than  sacrifice  principle.  We  could  envy 
these  Christians  their  imprisonment  with  the  apostle.  Who  could  not  wish  to  be  Silas 
to  join  Paul  in  his  hymns  and  prayers  in  the  stocks  ?  One  of  the  inmates  of  Bunyan's 
jail  was  permitted  to  take  the  manuscript  of  the  immortal  '  Pilgrim's  Progress '  and 
peruse  it  quietly  in  his  own  cell.  Fancy  being  the  first  reader,  permitted  to  pass 
judgment  upon  the  work  and  to  urge  its  publication  I  To  suffer  together  in  a  righteous 
cause  hi\s  ever  bound  men  to  each  other  in  mutual  respect  and  sympathy.  Even  the 
Peninsular  and  the  Crimean  veterans  have  liked  to  commemorate  their  common  deeds 
of  prowess  by  annual  celebrations.  If  the  apostle  was  not  oblivious  of  the  endurance 
of  these  Christians,  we  may  be  sure  that  One  on  high  has  never  forgotten  them.  No 
act  of  heroism  is  unregistered  in  heaven.  "  Ye  are  they  who  have  continued  with  me 
in  my  temptations." 

III.  It  was  no  obdinaet  honodk  to  be  of  high  repute  among  the  leaders 
or  THE  Church.  From  a  passage  in  the  Acts  we  learn  that  Paul  had  relatives  at 
Jerusalem  who  were  interested  in  him,  and  these  mentioned  in  the  text  may  have 
belonged  to  that  family  well  known  at  the  apostolic  head-quarters.  No  true  man  is 
insensible  to  the  good  opinion  of  men  of  acknowledged  worth.  It  was  one  of  the 
qualifications  of  a  bishop  that  he  should  "  have  a  good  report  of  them  that  are  with- 
out." How  easy  is  it  to  value  the  suffrages  of  worldly  society  more  than  the  esteem  of 
the  followers  of  Jesus !  Yet  the  applause  of  the  world  is  an  empty  breath,  the  praise 
of  the  newspapers  soon  dies  away, military  glory  is  a  "bubble  reputation."  The  desire 
of  fame  is  one  of  the  strongest  passions.  Eratostratus  burnt  the  temple  at  Bphesus 
to  secure  notoriety.  The  gospel  does  not  scorn  these  natural  forces,  but  utilizes  them 
by  refining  and  purifying  our  motives.  It  persuades  us  to  approve  ourselves  to  him 
who  searches  the  heart  and  tries  the  reins,  whose  eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire.  "  I  know 
thy  works  and  thy  charity,  thy  service,  and  faith,  and  patience."  Voltaire  lamented 
on  his  death-bed,  "  I  have  swallowed  nothing  but  smoke;  I  have  intoxicated  myself 
with  the  incense  that  turned  my  head."  "  A  good  naine  is  rather  to  be  chosen  than 
great  riches." 

IV.  Theib  profession  STOOD  THE  TEST  OP  YEARS.  The  apostle  does  not  omit  to 
notice  their  early  conversion.  They  "  were  in  Christ  before"  him.  In  any  case  disciple- 
ship  signified  a  sharp  struggle,  and  a  wrench  from  old  associations.  One's  real  age 
is  determined  ethically,  not  physically.  Seniority  in  Church-membership  is  not  to  take 
precedence  of  spiritual  gifts,  but  demands  courteous  recognition.  "  Ye  younger,  submit 
yourselves  unto  the  elder."  Age  is  doubly  venerable  when  like  a  mellow  sunset  it 
crowns  a  Christian  day.  We  may  well  ask  whether  we  have  advanced  in  knowledge, 
■piritaality,  and  usefulness,  as  others  have  who  commenced  with  us  the  Christian  race. 
Are  we  lagging  behind,  whilst  they  have  marched  to  the  front  ?  That  is  a  happy 
competition  to  be  "  first  in  Chrbt."  There  is  room  for  all ;  there  need  be  no  disappointed 
competitors.  To  be  "  out  of  Christ "  is  to  be  hopeless  and  undone.  Shall  parents 
•nd  friends  press  forward  to  the  Master's  feet  while  we  remain  irresolute,  undecided? 
The  law  is,  "  He  that  asketh,  receiveth,"  Paul  outstripped  many  apostolic  compeers. 
— S.E.A. 

Vers.  17,  18. — Fomenters  ofdmord.  A  bright  galaxy  of  Christian  stars  has  been 
enumerated  in  this  chapter.  In  contrast  with  these  "  lights  of  the  sky  "  are  those 
wandering  will-o'-the-wisps  which  lead  men  astray  in  the  darkness ;  marshy  exhalation! 
conducting  to  quagmires  of  destruction.  The  only  course  to  be  pursued  in  relation 
to  the  latter  is  to  avoid  them  as  a  plague,  as  moral  lepers  whose  presence  brings 
contagion. 


474  THE   EPISTLE  01*  PAUL  TO  THfi  ROMANS,    [oh.  xvi.  1—27 

I.  Persons  to  be  shunned.  Those  "who  cause  divisions  and  offences."  True 
Christianity  ever  makes  for  peace.  There  may  be  rending  and  outcries  vphilst  thf 
former  evil  spirit  is  undergoing  expulsion;  there  are  often  searchings  of  heart  and 
a  forsaking  of  old  cotiipanions  aad  practices ;  but  when  Christ  is  acknowledged  as  King, 
tranquillity  reigns  in  the  breast,  and  peace  and  love  spread  their  pinions  over  Christian 
fellowship.  To  break  up  "  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace  "  is  a  sure 
method  of  placing  stumbling-blocks  in  the  path  of  the  unwary.  More  harm  has 
proceeded  from  this  source  to  the  body  of  Christ  than  has  ever  resulted  from  outside 
attacks.  Safety  lies  in  withdrawal  from  those  who  walk  disorderly,  rudely  disturbing 
the  peace  of  the  Church. 

IL  Wanton  promotees  op  strife  have  a  personal  end  to  gain.  They  "  serve 
their  own  belly."  Thus  ruthlessly  does  the  apo-stle  analyze  their  motives,  and  he 
hesitates  not  to  impute  their  action  to  a  base  desire  for  self-gratification.  Perhaps 
they  aim  at  notoriety,  or  they  are  jealous  of  the  accepted  leaders  of  religious  life. 
The  pugnacious  see  little  chance  of  distinguishing  themselves  in  seasons  of  serenity. 
The  arm  rebels  against  the  governing  head,  and  instead  of  counting  it  an  honour  to 
minister  according  to  its  functions,  would  rather  force  the  rest  of  the  frame  to  pander 
to  its  single  indulgence.  The  simple  are  easily  imposed  on  by  specious  professions  and 
plausible  protestations  of  a  regard  for  the  common  weal. 

in.   JUDQE   the   conduct  OF   MEN   BY   THE   STANDARD   OF  TRUTH.      We  »re  not  left 

to  our  intuitive  discernment.  What  is  "  contrary  to  the  doctrine  "  of  the  apostles  can 
never  be  allowed  as  a  basis  of  division.  Heavy  is  the  responsibility  those  incur  who 
initiate  strife  among  Christians.  Let  them  be  certain  first  that  what  they  bring  forward 
as  a  test  is  truth,  important  fundamental  truth.  If  it  opposes  the  ethical  rules  or  the 
elementary  teachings  on  which  the  gospel  is  established,  it  carries  its  own  condemna- 
tion. A  speculative  theory  is  not  a  sufficient  reason  for  throwing  a  firebrand  amongst 
the  articles  of  faith.  Such  behaviour  differs  radically  from  a  religious  reformation  like 
that  of  Luther,  where  it  is  a  return  to  gospel  simplicity  that  is  contended  for,  and  not 
an  overlaying  of  sound  words  with  superstition  and  ceremony.  The  apostle's  warning 
applies,  not  to  genuine  seekers  after  truth,  but  to  those  who  delight  in  making  breaches 
in  the  Christian  fortress.    Discriminate  between  schismatics  and  dissenters ! 

IV.  The  main  seoukitt  against  evil  influence  and  the  chief  preservative 
OF  harmony  is  an  earnest  desire  foe  the  glory  of  Christ.  "  Serve  our  Lord 
Christ."  As  a  wire  introduced  into  a  solution  promotes  crystallization,  so  really 
Christian  thoughts  and  purposes  and  acts  group  themselves  around  the  Person  of  the 
Saviour.  Petty  longings  are  subordinated  to  the  one  grand  idea  of  doing  the  will  of 
the  Lord.  The  foe  cares  little  about  the  damage  inflicted  on  the  kingdom ;  the  servant 
grieves  over  every  disruption  of  its  peace  and  power.  Even  necessary  departures  from 
a  corrupt  Christian  society  have  been  deplored  as  evil  in  themselves  by  the  good  men 
who  have  felt  constrained  thus  to  prove  their  loyalty  to  conviction. — S.  B.  A. 

Vers.  1 — 27. — Salutations  and  henedictions.  The  programme  being  sketched,  the 
apostle  now  proceeds  to  the  salutations  and  benedictions  with  which  his  Epistles  usually 
end.    And  here  notice — 

I.  The  distinguished  place  occupied  in  the  pbimitivb  Church  by  women. 
There  are  no  less  than  nine  women  specially  referred  to  in  this  list,  and  all  are  active  in 
the  Church.  Some  were  deaconesses ;  for  instance,  Phcebe,  Mary,  Tryphena  and  Try- 
phosa,  and  Persis.  Oriental  society  separates  the  sexes  in  a  way  we  do  not  in  the  West ; 
hence  the  need  of  such  ofiScials  there,  and  in  zenana  mission  work  still.  Why  should 
they  not  exist  ?  Many  a  work  which  the  Church  should  undertake  can  be  better  done  by 
women  than  by  men.  But  notice  briefly ;  1.  Phoebe.  She  was  a  deaconess  of  Cenchrea, 
the  port  of  Corinth.  It  was  she  who  carried  the  precious  Epistle  to  Rome.  Some 
business  led  her  thither.  She  is  the  bearer  of  the  finest  Epistle  ever  written  to  a 
Christian  Church,  and  in  it  she  has  a  magnificent  introduction.  2.  Prisca.  Called 
Priscilla,  and  mentioned  before  her  husband  Aquila.  Perhaps  she  was  the  better 
Christian.  At  all  events,  they  had  a  "  Church  in  their  house."  They  had  been  very 
kind  to  the  apostle,  and  had  prosecuted  with  him  their  tent-making  trade.  3.  Tryphena 
and  Tryphosa.  Their  names  suggest  voluptuous  livina — but  they  had  been  transformed 
by  grace  into  hard  workers  (of.  Godet,  in  he).    4.  Pertig.    Likely  an  aged  deaconess. 


OH.  XVI.  1—27.]    THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.  475 

Her  work  is  over.  She  had  done  much — had  doubtleBS  done  what  she  could,  and  did 
not  need  to  go  to  her  work  in  company,  like  the  preceding  pair,  but  could  face  it  alon  e. 
5.  Mother  of  Bufus.  She  seems  to  have  been  the  widow  of  Simon  the  Cyrenian,  as 
Mark  xv.  21  suggests.  Paul  had  likely  lodged  with  them  when  in  Jerusalem,  and 
received  maternal  sympathy  from  the  good  lady.  Hence  he  speaks  of  her  as  his 
mother  too. 

II.  Notice  the  PAKTictrLAB  KNOwLEnaE  Paul  possesses  of  the  mbmbebs  of  the 
Chuboh  in  Rome.  This  long  list  is  a  very  particular  one,  and  shows  how  the  apostle 
has  them  all  at  his  fingers'  ends.  He  seems  to  have  had  that  very  enviable  faculty 
for  remembering  names.  And  his  particularity  in  the  matter  was  from  the  love  he 
bore  them,  as  references  in  the  words  used  over  and  over  suggest. 

III.  The  salutation  with  the  kiss  of  holiness.  The  arrangement  was  men 
kissed  men,  and  women  women,  as  is  the  Oriental  fashion.  It  indicated  a  deeper 
interest  in  one  another's  welfare  than  we  are  inclined  for  in  the  West. 

IV.  The  advice  to  avoid  troubles  of  the  Chuech.  (Vers.  17 — ^20.)  Prudence 
was  necessary  in  the  doing  of  good  and  a  desire  to  avoid  all  pugnacity.  On  peaceful 
lines  they  might  expect  the  victory  over  the  evil  one. 

V.  Paul's  fellow-workbbs  at  Coeinth  send  gbeetings  to  the  Chueoh  at 
BoKE.  (Vers.  21 — 23.)  The  apostle  had  made  good  way  at  Corinth,  from  the 
greetings  he  was  here  enabled  to  send. 

VI.  The  doxoloot.  (Vers.  24 — 27.)  He  carries  his  praise  and  hope  upwards,  and 
la^a  all  at  the  feet  of  God.    So  should  it  be  always.- >B.  M.  E. 


HOMILETIOAL  INDEX 


TIE  EPISTLE  OE  PAUL  TO  THE  KOIANS. 


CHAPTER  L 

ApoBtoIio  CredentisU         ...  ...  14 

▲  Promiged  Qospel  ...  ,,.  15 

The  Theme  of  the  GoBpel  ...  ...  17 

The  Apostolio  Aim  „,  „,  18 

The  Roman  Christiani        ...  ...  19 

A  Yearning  Heart  ...  ...  19 

Glorying  in  the  Gospel      ...  ...  20 

The  New  Bighteousnesi     ...  „.  22 

Evil  Passion         ...  ...  ...  23 

Paul's  Description  of  himself;  or,  the 

Story  of  a  Noble  Life      ...  ...  23 

The  ^>ospel  a  Message  for  Every  One  25 
«  Not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel "         ...  27 
The  InezcnsablenesB  of  the  Heathen  28 
Paul's  First  Contact  with  the  Metro- 
polis of  the  World          ...            ...  30 

The  Characterization  of  "  the  Gospel 
of  God,"  to  which  Paul  was  sepa- 
rated  ...  ...  ...  ...  81 

Ministerial  Sympathy        ...  „.  32 

Not  ashamed  I      ...  ...  ...  33 

Tlie  Bevelation  of  Wrath  ...  ...  84 

The  Gospel  a  Fnlfllled  Propheey     ...  35 

An  Honourable  Class         ...  ...  36 

An  Appeal  and  a  Parenthesis  ...  87 

Longing  to  meet  ...  ...  ...  38 

Gloryiug  in  the  Gospel      ...  ...  39 

The  Bevelation  of  God  in  Nature     ...  40 

DowDw&rd  Evolution         ...  ...  41 

The  Author  ...  ...  ...  42 

The  Church  at  Home  ...  ...  41 

The  Policy  to  be  pursued  in  Case 

Paul  camo  to  Borne         ...  ...  46 


TBH»  rASI 

God's  Wrath  h  lerealed  among  Ute 
Gentile*  ...  ...  ...      IS 


CHAFTEB  n. 

Judgment,  Human  and  Divine         ...  57 

Long-suffering     ...            ...            »,  58 

Divine  Impartiality            ...           ».  59 

Hearers  and  Doers              ...            ...  60 

Tuquoquet           ...            ...            ...  60 

The  Beligion  of  the  Flesh  exchanged 

for  the  Beligion  of  the  Spirit        ...  61 

The  Goodness  of  God         ...            ...  63 

."The  Righteous  Judgment  of  God"  65 

True  Beligion      ...            ...            ...  66 

Without  Excuse   ...            ...            ...  69 

Law  and  Guilt     ...            ...             ..  69 

Symbolic  Beligion              ...           ...  70 

Long-suffering  abused        ...           ...  71 

A  Bighteous  Judge            ...           ...  72 

A  Sermon  to  Teachers        ...           ...  78 

Heartfelt  Beligion              ...           ...  74 

The  Leading  Principles  regnlating  the 

General  Judgment          ...           ...  75 

The  Jewish  World             77 


OHAPTEB  m. 

Prerogative  ...  ...  ...  88 

The  Purpose  of  Law  ...  ...  87 

The  distinctively  Christian  Bighteons- 

ness     ...  ...  ...  ...  88 

The  Difficulties  of  Divine  Bevelation, 

Jewish  Unbelief,  and  Divine  Justice  88 


INDEX. 


THEUK  PAOB 

Total  Depravity  of  Human  Natnie  ...  90 

"No  Difference "  ...            ...  ...  91 

Faith  and  Works  ...            ...  ...  93 

Beliglous  Advantages,  their  Use  aud 

Abuse. ,,            ...            ...  ...  95 

Every  Mouth  stopped         ...  ...  96 

Bedumptiou  working  BlghteousnesB ...  97 

"  Where  is  the  Glorying  ?  "  ...  98 

Tlie  Harmony  of  Law  and  Faith  ...  98 

A  Sacred  Trust    ...            ...  ...  99 

False  Conclusions  concerning  Sin  ...  100 
A  Bemedy  for  a  Universal  Need  ...  101 
Jewish  Privileges  and  Divine  Judg- 
ment ...           ...           ...  ...  102 

Knowledge  of  Sin  through  the  Law ...  104 

Justification  through  Faith  in  Chiiat  105 

CHAPTEE  IV. 

The  Fatherhood  of  Abraham  ...  Ill 

Hope  against  Hope             ...  ...  112 

"  Strong  in  Faith  "             ...  ...  112 

Promise  and  Performance  ...  ...  114 

Abraham's  Faith ...            ...  ...  114 

A  Test  Case         ...            ...  ...  116 

All  Thiugs  are  of  Faith      ...  ...  117 

Our  Faith  and  Bighteonsnesi  ...  117 

A  Happy  Man      ...            ...  ...  118 

Obtaining  an  Inheritance  ...  .„  119 

The  Gospel  in  Genesis        ...  ...  119 

Abraham  justified  by  Faith  alone  ...  120 

CHAPTER  V. 

Christian  t^rivilege             ...  „.  130 

Christian  Discipline           ...  ...  131 

God's  Love  in  the  Heart     ...  ...  134 

Beconciliation  and  Salvation  ...  135 

"Joy  in  God"      ...           ...  ...  136 

Grace  abounding  ...            ...  136,  144 

Justification  and  its  Consequences  ...  137 

Blessed  Fruit  offa  Bitter  Tree  ...  139 

Tlie  Love  of  God  commended  ...  142 

The  Christian  Privilege     ...  ...  144 

The  Joy  of  Tribulation       ...  ...  145 

The  Great  Love   ...            ...  ...  145 

The  Assurance  of  Bedemption  ...  146 

Tlie  Beign  of  Death            ...  ...  147 

The  Abounding  Life           ...  ...  147 

The  Two  Antitheses           ...  ...  148 

The  Economy  of  Law         ...  ...  148 

A  State  of  Privilege            ...  ...  148 

Tribulf^tiou  made  Subsidit^  to  Hope  149 


THISVS  PAOB 

The  Certainty  of  Salvation ...           ...  150 

Bnin  and  Bedemption        ,„           „.  151 

The  State  of  the  Justified 152 

Bepresentative  Besponsibility          ...  153 


CHAPTEB  TL 

The  Meaning  of  Christ's  Besnrreotion  163 
"  Newness  of  Life : "  a  New  Year's 

Sermon              ...            ...            ...  164 

The  Enfranchisement  by  Grace        ...  166 

The  Mould  of  Christian  Doctrine  ...  167 
Tho  Practical  Power  of  the  Besurreo- 

tion     ...           ...           ...            ...  167 

The  Two  Services  and  their  Bewards  169 

Buried  and  Bisen  with  Christ           ...  171 

The  Two  Dominions           ...            ...  172 

Servants  to  obey  ...            ...            ...  172 

The  Significance  of  Baptism             ...  174 

Not  Masters,  but  Servants ...            ...  174 

The  Gospel  a  Mould  of  Obedience    ...  175 

Covet  the  Best  Gift  I          ...            ...  176 

Justification  securing  Sanctification  ...  177 

The  Beign  of  Grace           ...            ...  179 

CHAPTEB  Vn. 

The  New  Spirit  of  Christian  Service  190 
Knowledge  of  Sin  by  the  Law  191, 198 
The  Position  of  the  Law  under  the 

New  Testament...           ...           ...  192 

The  Inward  Conflict  of  the  Christian 

Heart ...            ...            ...            ...  193 

The  Two  Unions  ...           ...           ...  195 

Is  the  Law  Sin  ?  ...           ...           ...  195 

"  Sold  under  Sin  I "            196 

"Newness  of  Spirit"          ...           ...  197 

The  Inner  Warfare             ...           ...  199 

A  Cry  and  its  Answer        ...            ...  199 

The  Two  Marriages  of  the  Soul  ...  201 
The  Work  of  the  Law  in  Awakening 

the  Soul             ...            ...            ...  20a 

The  Principle  of   Progress  through 

Antagonism      ...            ...            ...  203 

CHAPTEB  Vm 

"  No  Condemnation  "  ...  216,  245 

"The  Spirit  of  Life"         ...           ...  217 

The  Spirit  received  by  Christians    ...  220 

The  Twofold  Fellowship 221 

Suffering  quenched  in  Glory             ...  222 

"Saved  by  Hope"              ...           ...  2U 


INDEX. 


ui 


THKHS  FAOK 

Overruling  Provldenoo       ...            ...  225 

The  Gift  which  implies  all  Gift»      ...  226 

Spiritual  Victory  ...           ...           ...  226 

The  Judgment-Day,  and  how  to  pre- 
pare for  it          ...            ...            ...  227 

The  Privileges  and  Responsibilities  of 

the  Children  of  God        ...            ...  229 

.God's Mingled  Providences...            ...  230 

The  Uncertainties  nnd  Certainties  of 

a  New  Year :  a  New  Year's  Sermon  232 

What  the  Law  could  not  do              ...  233 

The  Flesh  and  the  Spirit  ...            ...  231 

The  Spirit  of  Christ            ...            ...  2:^5 

The  Eedemption  of  the  Body            ...  236 

The  Adoption  in  Christ      ...            ...  238 

The  Redemption  of  the  Creation       ...  239 

Helping  our  Infirmity         ...            ...  240 

God's  Purpose  in  Christ     ...            ...  241 

Supplying  all  our  Need      ...            ...  242 

The  Triumphant  Challenge              ...  243 

The  Great  Persuasion         ...            ...  244 

The  Spiritual  ami  the  Carnal  Man  ...  246 

An  Indwelling  Saviour       ...            ...  247 

The  Guidance  of  the  Spirit...            ...  248 

The  Christian  Apocalypse  ...            ...  249 

Hopeful  Patience',..            ...            ...  250 

Inarticulate  Prayer             ...            ...  251 

A  Consolatory  Argument   ...            ...  252 

Victorious  Love    ...            ...            ...  253 

"Paradise  regained"           ...            ...  254 

The  Spirit  of  Adoption       ...            ...  256 

Salvation  in  Spite  of  Suffering          ...  258 

Faith  rising  into  Assurance              ...  260 

CHAPTER  IX. 

The  True  Israel    ...            ...            ...  272 

A  Great  Reversal ...            ...            ...  272 

The  Rock  of  Offence           273 

The  Sympathy  of  a  Christian  Patriot  273 
Israel's  Rejection  no  Violation  of  the 

Divine  Promise...            ...            ...  274 

God's  Sovereignty  and  Man's  Respon- 
sibility              ...            ...            ...  ,  275 

Jesus  as  the  Stumbling-Stone           ...  275 

The  Honour  of  Israel          ...            ...  278 

The  Freedom  of  God's  Election        ...  279 

Moses  and  Pharaoh             ...            ...  279 

The  Rebuke  of  Presumption             ...  280 

The  Reasonableness  of  God's  ■Working  281 

The  Eight  Use  of  Privileges              ,.  282 

The  Sovereign  Right  of  God            ...  283 

Either  «q  Offeree  or  a  Refuge          ...  284 


THBire  PAOK 

Christian  Patriotism            ...            ...  285 

The  Children  of  the  Promise            ...  287 

Vessels  of  Wrath  and  Vessels  of  Mercy  289 

CHAPTER  X. 

Solicitude  and   Supplication  for   the 

Salvation  of  Sinners        ...            ...  296 

False  Righteousness  and  True          ...  296 

Gracious  Terms  of  Salvation             ...  297 

Lordship  and  Riches           ...            ...  298 

Spiritual  Enrichment         ...            ...  299 

Preaching             ...            ...            ...  299 

Israel's  Unbplief  ...             ...             ...  302 

Israel's  Strength  and  Weakness        ...  303 

The  Simplicity  of  the  Gospel            ...  304 

Four  Questions  for  every  Christian  ...  305 

The  Beauty  of  the  Gospel  ...            ...  306 

The  Lesson  of  Neglected  Opportunities  308 

The  Freeness  of  Salvation  ...            ...  309 

The  Universality  of  the  Gospel        ...  309 
Anxiety    for    the   Salvation   of    our 

Fellows              ...            ...            ...  310 

The  End  of  the  Law          ...            ...  311 

The  Word  of  Faith             312 

The  Nature  and  Beneficence  of  God...  313 

Confession  of  a  Risen  Saviour            ...  315 

The  Natural  Histoiy  of  Faith           ...  317 

CHAPTER  XL 

"Life  from  the  Dead"        ...            ...  325 

Israel  not  utterly  Rejected  ...            ...  326 

The  Jewish  People:   their  Past  His- 
tory and  their  Future  Prospects    ...  327 
The  Unsearchable  Things  of  God    ...  329 
Grace  and  Unbelief            ...            ...  330 

How  much  more!...             ...            ...  331 

The  Solemn  Warning         ...            ...  331 

The  Divine  Philosophy  of  History   ...  332 

A  Hymn  of  Praise               ...            ...  333 

Magnifying  One's  Office     ...            ...  334 

The  Dedication  of  a  Part  the  Con- 
secration of  the  Whole    ...            ...  335 

Spiritual  Pride  rebuked      ...            ...  336 

The  Election  of  Grace        ...            ...  337 

Israel's  Future      ...            ...            ...  339 

God,  his  own  Last  End  in  Everything  341 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Christian  Sacrifice  and  Worship       ...  348 

Spiritual  Transformation    ...            ^.  350 


INDEX. 


rHBUE  rAai 

Membership  in  Christ         ...            ...  352 

Grace  and  GiftB 354 

Gifts       355 

"  Love  Unfeigned "             ...            ...  356 

The  Spirit  of  Christian  Service         ...  358 

Patience,  Hope,  and  Prayer              ...  360 

Treatment  of  Friends  and  Foes        ...  362 

Christian  Sympathy            ...            ...  363 

llonourableness  and  Peaceableness  ...  365 

The  "Way  to  Victory            ...            ...  366 

The  Living  Sacrifice  ...    368,  375,  378 

The  Two  Likenesses           ...            ...  36'J 

Diversity  and  Unity  in  the  Ohnroh  of 

Christ...            370 

The  Christian's  Duty  to  his  Fellow- 
Men    371 

The  Christian's  Duty  to  himself      ...  372 
The  Christian's  Assurance  and    the 

Christian's  Duty              ...            ...  374 

Christian  Humility             ...            ...  376 

Christian  Love      ...            ...            ...  377 

Oliristian  Character  a  Metamorphosis  379 

A  Proper  Estimate  of  Self  ...            ...  380 

Sympathy              ...            ...            ...  381 

Victory  that  blesses    both  the  Con- 
queror and  the  Conquered             ...  382 
Individualism       ...            ...            ...  384 

Cliurchmauship    ...            ...            ...  385 

Christian  Socialism             ...            ...  387 

CHAPTER  XIII. 


Loyalty  ... 

■•• 

...     392 

Love  and  Law 

••« 

...    393 

A  Startling  SummonB 

»•• 

•••    oy4 

Night  and  Day     ... 

••• 

...    394 

Awake  and  arm!  ... 

■•« 

•••     ouo 

The  Christian  as  Citizen 

••• 

...    395 

The  Christian's  Duty  in  the  Present 

Age     ...  396 

Christian  Submission  ...  ...  397 

Christian  Bighteonsness     ...  ...  398 

TheDay  breakethi  ...  ...  399 

Submission  to  Constituted  Authority  400 

Love,  the  Fulfilment  of  the  Law       ...  401 

The  Approach  of  Day         ...  ...  402 

Citizunsliip  ...  ...  ,,.  404 

Cbrist-llkeness      ...  ...  ...  405 


CHAPTER   XIV. 

Ceremonial  and  Spiritual  Religion    ...    412 
Life  a  Trust         ...  ...  ...    412 


THEME 

Life  unto  the  Lord 
Individual  Responsibility 
The  Kingdom  of  God 


FASX 

413 
413 
114 


The  Double  Aspect  of  Christian  Ser- 
vice    ...           ...           ...           ,..  415 

The  Christian's  Dependence  and  the 

Cliristian's  Independence               ...  415 
The    Influence   of  our    Lives    upon 

others...            ...            ...            ...  416 

Three  Laws  of  Oliristian  Life          ...  417 

Christian  Liberty ...            ...            ...  418 

Individual  Decision            ...           ...  419 

The  Dominion  of  Christ     ...            ...  420 

Essentials  of  the  Kingdom  of  God    ...  421 

A  Self-denying  Ordinance  ...            ...  422 

The  Risen  Saviour  as   Lord  of  the 

Conscience         ..,            ...            ...  423 

Deference  to  Weak  Consciences,  not 

Condemnation  of  them    ...            ...  429 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Self-pleasing  and  Self-denial 

...    431 

The  Scriptures      ... 

...    433 

Unity      ... 

...     434 

The  Office  of  the  Holy  Spirit 

...     434 

Hope 

...    439 

Fulness  of  Blessing 

...    439 

The  Divine  Character  in  Relation  to 

the  Human        ...            ...  ...  440 

The  Mutual  Relationship  of  Jews  and 

Gentiles             ...            ...  ...  442 

An  Apostle's  Confidence    ...  ...  443 

Union  in  God       ...            ...  ...  444 

Farewell  Words    ...            ...  ...  445 

Unselfishness        ...            ...  ...  446 

Warm-hearted  Christian  Courtesy  ...  447 

Hopefulness  prayed  for       ...  ...  443 

Debts  pleasurably  paid       ...  ...  t49 

A  Promised  Visit...            ...  ...  450 

The  Christ-like  Duty  of  Pleasing  our 

Neighbour         ...            ...  ...  452 

The_ Apostle's  Programme  ...  ...  453 

CHAPTER  XVL 

A  Ministering  Woman        ...  ,..  457 

Fellowship  in  Toil  and  Suffering  ...  458 

The  Twofold  Bond             ...  ...  459 

A  Woman's  Labours  for  Christ  ...  460 

A  Special  Salutation           ...  ...  461 

Grounds  for  Greeting          ...  ...  462 

Victory  assured    ...            ...  .„  463 


INDEX. 


A  OompreheaBive  Doxology  ^.    464 

**  Phoebe  our  Sinter : "  a  Sermon  to 

Young  Women  ...  ...  ...    465 

Words   of   Oonnsel    for   ■   Ohristian 

Church  467 

The  Object  and  the   Btiengtb  of  a 

Qhriatian  Ohurob  •»  —    468 


THKKE 

pAsa 

Christian  Salutation*         ... 

...    469 

A  Last  Warning  ...           ... 

...     469 

The  Final  Commendation  .^ 

...    470 

A  Ohristian  Oommendation... 

...    471 

A  Noble  FmRominm            ... 

...    472 

Fomenters  of  Discord          ... 

«.    473 

Salutations  and  Benediotioiui 

«    474 

